1 

 

Ligand additivity relationships enable efficient 

exploration of transition metal chemical space  

Naveen Arunachalam1,#, Stefan Gugler1,#, Michael G. Taylor1,#, Chenru Duan1,2, Aditya 

Nandy1,2, Jon Paul Janet1, Ralf Meyer1, Jonas Oldenstaedt1, Daniel B. K. Chu1, and Heather J. 

Kulik1,*  

1Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 

02139, USA 

2Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 

#These authors contributed equally 

ABSTRACT: To accelerate exploration of chemical space, it is necessary to identify the 
compounds that will provide the most additional information or value. A large-scale analysis of 
mononuclear octahedral transition metal complexes deposited in an experimental database 
confirms an under-representation of lower-symmetry complexes. From a set of around 1000 
previously studied Fe(II) complexes, we show that the theoretical space of synthetically accessible 
complexes formed from the relatively small number of unique ligands is significantly (ca. 816k) 
larger. For the properties of these complexes, we validate the concept of ligand additivity by 
inferring heteroleptic properties from a stoichiometric combination of homoleptic complexes. An 
improved interpolation scheme that incorporates information about cis and trans isomer effects 
predicts the adiabatic spin-splitting energy to around 2 kcal/mol and the HOMO level to less than 
0.2 eV. We demonstrate a multi-stage strategy to discover leads from the 816k Fe(II) complexes 
within a targeted property region. We carry out a coarse interpolation from homoleptic complexes 
that we refine over a subspace of ligands based on the likelihood of generating complexes with 
targeted properties. We validate our approach on 9 new binary and ternary complexes predicted to 
be in a targeted zone of discovery, suggesting opportunities for efficient transition metal complex 
discovery.  

 


2 

 

1. Introduction. 

 
In recent years, virtual high-throughput screening (VHTS)1-8 with first-principles density 

functional theory (DFT) and machine learning (ML) models9-17 has greatly accelerated the 

discovery of new molecules and materials18-23. Nevertheless, the theoretical space of all possible 

compounds or materials is so large as to challenge even the most accelerated methods, with 1030 

to 1060 theoretical drug-like molecules being enumerated24-29 from a relatively small number of 

elements and atoms.30, 31 Within the space of theoretical transition metal complexes, additional 

variables emerge, such as the metal identity, spin, and oxidation state, as well as denticity of the 

ligands.4, 9 Indeed, significant analysis has been carried out by Fey and coworkers in understanding 

the role of privileged (e.g., phosphine) ligands in determining transition metal complex 

properties.32-34 Jensen and coworkers have devised elegant strategies to explore the space of 

favored complexes, e.g., by adjusting the denticity during complex optimization carried out with 

efficient semi-empirical or force-field based scoring.35-38 One key challenge for high-throughput 

screening with density functional theory of transition metal complex space is that the smallest non-

trivial mononuclear octahedral complex consists of at least seven heavy atoms and nearly 100 

electrons, also challenging the speed of conventional simulation techniques in comparison to 

readily computed data sets of closed-shell transition metal39 and organic molecules40, 41. Further 

compounding the challenges of exploring transition metal chemical space are potential issues with 

convergence success or the presence of multi-reference character.42-44 Thus, it is attractive to 

identify the minimal set of explicit first-principles calculations that can be used to build a model 

of the properties of the full data set.45-47 

 
Recently, toward the goal of exploring a more diverse transition metal chemical space in 

comparison to complexes of frequently studied ligands, we devised a strategy for enumerating 


3 

 

hypothetical, small (i.e., 1–2 heavy atoms per coordination site) ligands for mononuclear 

octahedral transition metal complexes48. These ligands sampled a diverse combination of 

coordinating atoms and their bonding environments48, and only a small fraction were represented 

in prior databases of organic molecules.25, 49, 50 We showed how incorporating these molecules 

could improve the fidelity of artificial neural network (ANN) models48, 51 when applied to larger, 

realistic complexes present in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD)52. That study was limited 

to the properties of homoleptic combinations of those ligands (i.e., all ligands equal), and therefore 

did not capture effects of mixing ligands that give rise to the compelling properties of many 

heteroleptic complexes and catalysts. Enumerating combinations of these ligands, however, would 

give rise to a combinatorial explosion, motivating strategies to understand which combinations are 

likely to be valuable or informative for a specific application.  

 
Despite the challenge of combinatorial explosion, there are some established precedents of 

ligand additivity53 that suggest that the properties of heteroleptic complexes can be inferred from 

combinations of homoleptic complexes54. For example, ligand additivity has been demonstrated 

in force field and DFT energetics54 as well as DFT errors55. It has also been used in correction 

schemes, such as the DBLOC method.56-59 We also recently exploited additivity to learn the degree 

of multireference character in a complex from the multireference character in its constituent 

ligands60. Additivity is also exploited heavily in fragmentation methods61, 62 and in local correlated 

methods63, 64. In the present work, we carry out a survey of the symmetry classes and ligand 

diversity present in the CSD to confirm that the theoretical chemical space is orders of magnitude 

larger than the number that have been characterized. Motivated by the need to devise efficient but 

accurate methods for exploration of chemical space, we introduce improved interpolation schemes 

for heteroleptic compounds to incorporate cis and trans effects. Finally, we demonstrate how these 


4 

 

approaches can be used for efficient but accurate discovery of transition metal complexes with 

targeted properties. 

2. Computational Details. 

2a. Curation from the Cambridge Structural Database.  

 
A set of 85,575 mononuclear octahedral transition metal complexes was curated from the 

Cambridge Structural Database52 (CSD) version 5.41 (Nov 2019). This procedure employed both 

the Conquest graphical interface to the CSD as well as the Python application programming 

interface, in all cases applied to the v5.41 data set with complexes from the November 2019 data 

set with both the March 2020 and May 2020 data updates (Supporting Information Text S1). For 

the complexes identified as octahedral, equatorial planes and axial positions were assigned based 

on prior reported rules.65 To identify the symmetry of the ligands, unique ligands were identified 

by removing the metal atom to create independent molecular graphs for each ligand. Each ligand 

was identified as chemically unique within a given octahedral complex if it differed from all other 

ligands in the complex by: 1) heavy atom chemical symbols, 2) metal-connecting-atom element or 

3) more than three hydrogens (Supporting Information Text S2). The symmetry of the complex 

was identified by distinguishing ligand denticity overall and in the equatorial plane along with the 

total number of unique ligands and whether ligands that were trans to each other were identical 

(Supporting Information Text S2). This led to a nomenclature for 66 ligand symmetry classes 

(Supporting Information Text S2).  

To identify the set of unique ligands in each complex, a dummy atom with identical 

connectivity to the metal with atomic number of 0 was introduced to preserve the connectivity of 

the ligands to the metal without preserving metal identity. For this ligand and dummy atom 

combination, the atomic-number and bond-order weighted connectivity matrix determinant was 


5 

 

calculated as described in Ref. 65. We also computed the determinant of the atomic-number 

weighted bond-order weighted connectivity matrix where the off-diagonal elements, ZiZj  (i ≠j), 

were set to the CSD-derived bond order for each ligand. Ligands with both distinct atomic-number-

weighted connectivity matrix determinants and bond-order-weighted connectivity matrix 

determinants were identified as distinct ligands across monometallic transition metal complexes 

in the CSD. A second search was carried out by requiring that oxidation states and charges be 

assigned by the user along with no obvious disorder or missing hydrogen atoms in the structure, 

leading to 17,085 unique "computation-ready" complexes. Finally, we curated a subset of 1,202 

Fe(II)-containing "computation-ready" complexes, based on the oxidation state reported by the 

user. From the ligands identified in this Fe(II) complex set, heteroleptic calculations from CSD 

ligands were carried out using a previously developed procedure60 that enabled the assignment of 

the per-ligand charge.    

2b. Electronic Structure Calculations. 

DFT geometry optimizations were performed using a development version of TeraChem 

v1.9.66, 67 The B3LYP68-70 global hybrid functional was employed with the LANL2DZ71 effective 

core potential for transition metals and the 6-31G* basis72 for all other atoms. All transition metal 

complexes were studied with Fe(II) centers in low-spin singlet and high-spin quintet multiplicities. 

Singlet calculations were carried out in a spin-restricted formalism, while quintet calculations were 

unrestricted. Level shifting73 was employed to aid self-consistent field convergence with the 

majority-spin and minority-spin virtual orbitals each shifted by 0.25 Ha. Geometry optimizations 

were carried out in the gas phase in translation rotation internal coordinates74 using the BFGS 

algorithm. Default tolerances of 4.5x10-4 hartree/bohr and 10-6 hartree were applied in the 

convergence criteria for the maximum gradient and energy difference between steps, respectively.  


6 

 

 
For the representative model complexes of CH3CN, H2O, CO, and NH3, initial structures 

were generated with molSimplify51, 75, 76, which uses OpenBabel77, 78 as a backend. The same 

protocol was applied to generate homoleptic complexes of the 20 neutral ligands derived from 

monodentate-only, non-homoleptic Fe(II) complexes obtained from the CSD52 after discarding 

one bulky ligand, OP(Ph)3, that could not form a stable homoleptic structure for steric reasons. For 

the 36 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes in the CSD, the structures were directly extracted for 

subsequent geometry optimization. Heteroleptic complexes of the 12 representative ligands were 

also generated with molSimplify and optimized following the same procedure. A pickle file of the 

curated CSD database and structures and properties of all transition metal complexes studied with 

DFT is provided in the Supporting Information .zip file. 

3. Results and Discussion. 

3a. Symmetry Classes and Theoretical Complex Space. 

 
The diversity present in the chemical space of transition metal complexes is derived from 

variability in the metal, its oxidation and spin state, as well as the chemistry of the coordinating 

ligands. Our experimental knowledge of this chemical space is unevenly distributed. We thus first 

examined the structures deposited in the CSD to uncover trends in the arrangement of ligands in 

previously characterized complexes (see Computational Details). From 85,575 mononuclear 

octahedral transition metal complexes of which 17,085 are identified as unique and computation-

ready (e.g, have user-defined charges), the vast majority (95–98%) contain no more than three 

unique ligands (Figure 1 and Supporting Information Table S1). In fact, 28% of all unique 

computation-ready complexes are homoleptic, and a majority (76%) contain no more than two 

ligand types (Figure 1 and Supporting Information Table S1). Because metal identity and ligand 

diversity are expected to be coupled, we also evaluated statistics on a subset of 1,202 unique Fe(II) 


7 

 

complexes and confirm that the preference for complexes with no more than two ligands is 

preserved and even strengthened (Figure 1 and Supporting Information Table S1).  

 

Figure 1. Stacked, unnormalized histogram of the number of complexes in the CSD grouped by 
number of unique ligand types and by the highest denticity of ligands in the complex (monodentate 
in brown, bidentate in gray, tridentate in orange, tetradentate in blue, pentadentate in green, and 
hexadentate in red, as indicated in inset legend). These counts are shown for all complexes (top), 
unique and computation-ready complexes (middle), and the Fe(II) unique, computation-ready 
subset (bottom). 
 

 
To identify how the structures sampled in the CSD compare to the theoretical space of all 

hypothetical complexes, we enumerate the overall pool of theoretical complexes and the number 

in each symmetry class to compare to the most frequently characterized symmetry classes in the 

CSD. We applied Pólya’s enumeration theorem to octahedral coordination geometries to obtain 

all possible symmetry classes from the cycle index (i.e., theoretical sum) of a symmetry group.79-

81 The cycle index for all possible octahedral complexes is 

𝑍(O!) =

"

#$ &𝑓"

% + 8𝑓&

' + 7𝑓'

& + 6𝑓"

'𝑓# + 9𝑓"

'𝑓'

' + 8𝑓% + 3𝑓"

#𝑓' + 6𝑓# 𝑓'. 
(1) 

where the subscript, j, on f indicates the number of unique sites (e.g., 2 for M(L1)5(L2)1) up to a 

theoretical maximum of 6. Each individual term in the cycle index is computed as: 

𝑓(
= 𝑥"

( + ⋯ + 𝑥)

(  
(2) 

0

10000

20000

30000

40000

0

2000
4000
6000
8000

1
2
3
4
5

number of unique ligands

0

200

400

600

6
5
4

3
2
1

max. denticity

counts

6

Fe(II)

all

computation-ready


8 

 

where N is the total number of unique ligands that can occupy the sites, and each xi corresponds to 

one unique ligand set choice.  

For a worked example of N = 12 unique ligands, we determine the theoretical number of 

complexes, the cardinality, as  

)!

(),-) ∏
(∑
𝕀|"#|$%)!
&
#$'

(
%$'
 
(3) 

where its respective symmetry class C = {L1, …, LM} is built from M distinguishable sites, j, and 

N are the ligand index and number of ligands as before. The indicator function, 𝕀|3#|45, where e.g., 

|L1| would be 6 for (L1)6, counts how many occurrences of each substituent combination exist. For 

example, in (L1)4(L2)2 there is one occurrence of a 4-substitution site and 1 occurrence of a 2-

substitution site, whereas in (L1)2(L2)2(L3)2, there are 3 occurrences of a 2-substitution site. For 

low-symmetry cases, this generalized equation simplifies significantly (Table 1).  

Table 1. The number of theoretical complexes for each octahedral symmetry class considered in 
this work as well as the full octahedral space for an example single metal/oxidation/spin state (m 
= 1) with an N = 12 ligand pool. The configurations and isomers indicate the number of ways 
unique ligands can be arranged, and the cardinality indicates how many theoretical complexes can 
be enumerated. 
Name 
Configuration Isomers 
Cardinality 
Complexes 

HO 
x6 
1 
N 
12 

5+1 
x1x5 
1 
N(N-1) 
132 

TS/CS 
x4x2 
2 
N(N-1) 
264 

FS/MS 
x3x3 
2 
N(N-1)/2! 
132 

CA/TA 
x4x1x1 
2 
N(N-1)(N-2)/2! 
1,320 

FA/MAC/MAT
x3x2x1 
6 
N(N-1)(N-2)/2! 
3,960 

EA/DCS/DTS 
x2x2x2 
5 
N(N-1)(N-2)/3! 
1,100 

Up 
to 
two 

ligands 
540 


9 

 

Up 
to 
three 

ligands 
6,920 

Full 
1/48 (N6 + 3N5 + 9N4 + 13N3 + 14N
2 + 8N) 
82,160 

 
For the trivial case of homoleptic (HO) complexes, N ligands produce N complexes (i.e., 

12 for N = 12, Table 1). For up to two unique ligand types, the five unique symmetry classes 

consist of monoheteroleptic (5+1) M(L1)5(L2)1 complexes, trans symmetric (TS) or cis symmetric 

(CS) M(L1)4(L2)2 complexes,  as well as fac symmetric (FS) or mer symmetric (MS) M(L1)3(L2)3 

complexes (Figure 2 and Table 1). Both 5+1 and CS/TS complexes each form N(N-1) complexes 

for N ligands (i.e., 132 each for N = 12, Table 1). The degeneracy of the stoichiometry in FS and 

MS complexes gives rise to N(N-1)/2! complexes (i.e., 66 each for N = 12, Table 1). Thus, from N 

= 12 ligands, a total of 540 complexes may be formed with up to two unique ligand types. 

 

Figure 2. Symmetry classes for transition metal complexes with up to two unique ligands, L1 and 
L2 from left to right and top to bottom: homoleptic (HO) M(L1)6, monoheteroleptic (5+1) 
M(L1)5L2,  trans symmetric (TS) M(L1)4(L2)2, cis symmetric (CS) M(L1)4(L2)2, fac symmetric (FS) 
M(L1)3(L2)3, and mer symmetric (MS) M(L1)3(L2)3. For each pair of ligands, a total of two 
homoleptic and eight two-ligand isomers can be obtained because the 5+1, trans symmetric, and 
cis symmetric complexes are unique if the stoichiometry of L1 and L2 are swapped. 
 

 
Expanding to up to three unique ligand types introduces eight additional symmetry classes 

(Figure 3). These include M(L1)4L2L3 cis asymmetric (CA) and trans asymmetric (TA) complexes, 

the three types of M(L1)2(L2)2(L3)2 configurations in equatorial asymmetric (EA), double cis 

symmetric (DCS), or double trans symmetric (DTS)  symmetries, and three M(L1)2(L2)3L3 in fac 


10 

 

asymmetric (FA), mer asymmetric trans (MAT), or mer asymmetric cis (MAC) symmetries 

(Figure 3). For the EA complexes, there are 3 occurrences of a 2-substitution site that fulfill the 

EA definition. This combines with the DCS and DTS isomers to form a total of 5 isomers with 

N(N-1)(N-2)/3! possible combinations of ligands (i.e., 1100 for N = 12, Table 1). The less 

degenerate CA/TA complexes form a total of N(N-1)(N-2)/2! complexes for each of the two 

isomers (i.e., 1320 for N = 12, Table 1). Similarly, FA/MAC/MAT complexes can each form N(N-

1)(N-2)/2! complexes in two isomers each (i.e., 3960 for N = 12, Table 1).  

 

Figure 3. Symmetry classes for transition metal complexes with three unique ligands, L1,L2, and 
L3, from left to right and top to bottom: cis asymmetric (CA) M(L1)4L2L3, double cis symmetric 
(DCS) M(L1)2(L2)2(L3)2, trans asymmetric (TA) M(L1)4L2L3, double trans symmetric (DTS) 
M(L1)2(L2)2(L3)2, equatorial asymmetric (EA) M(L1)2(L2)2(L3)2, fac asymmetric (FA) 
M(L1)2(L2)3L3, trans mer asymmetric (MAT) M(L1)2(L2)3L3, and cis mer asymmetric (MAC) 
M(L1)2(L2)3L3. A total of 29 complexes can be obtained for any combination of three ligands due 
to additional isomers of the equatorial asymmetric type as well as those for which the stoichiometry 
of each ligand type is not equal.  
 

 
In total, 6,920 complexes can be formed from N = 12 ligands for the three symmetry classes 

considered here. For the same ligand pool, there is a much larger set of 82,160 theoretical 

complexes that could be created from a greater number of unique ligands. This analysis does not 

consider cases where the ligand chemistry prevents formation of a complex, e.g., only monodentate 

and pentadentate ligands can form the 5+1 symmetry class, whereas monodentate, bidentate, 

tridentate, or hexadentate ligands can form HO complexes.  


11 

 

 
Returning to the diversity observed in complexes deposited in the CSD, we can 

qualitatively observe that relatively little of the theoretical space has been sampled. As we have 

shown for a representative example, for any set of unique ligands a much larger theoretical number 

of binary and ternary complexes can be formed in comparison to homoleptic complexes. 

Nevertheless, there are far fewer binary and especially ternary complexes in the CSD (Supporting 

Information Table S1). Within the binary complexes, 5+1 and TS complexes are overrepresented 

in comparison to those for FS,  MS, or CS based on our theoretical enumeration (Figure 4 and 

Supporting Information Table S2). All ternary complexes are underrepresented, but those with 

equal stoichiometry (i.e., EA, DCS, or DTS) have very few examples in the CSD (Figure 4 and 

Supporting Information Table S2). If we simplify our analysis by focusing only on Fe(II) 

complexes, the same trends hold, although Fe(II) complexes have an even greater relative number 

of 5+1 and TS complexes and lower number of CS complexes (Figure 4 and Supporting 

Information Table S2).  


12 

 

 

Figure 4. Percent of all unique mononuclear octahedral transition metal complexes in the CSD 
with user-defined charges (top, computation-ready) as well as the Fe(II) subset (middle, Fe(II)), 
grouped by symmetry class for cases with two unique ligands (left: 5+1, cis symmetric, CS, trans 
symmetric, TS, fac, or mer) or three unique ligands (right: cis asymmetric, CA, double cis 
symmetric, DCS, trans asymmetric, TA, double trans symmetric, DTS, equatorial asymmetric, 
EA, fac asymmetric, FA, cis mer asymmetric, MAC, or trans mer asymmetric, MAT). The ratio 
of symmetry classes for the theoretical complexes from enumeration are shown at bottom for 
comparison. 
 

 
An additional factor in analysis of symmetry classes is the extent to which ligand denticity 

plays a role. While enumeration is straightforward for monodentate ligands, higher-denticity 

ligands (e.g., pentadentates) may only be compatible with some of the symmetry classes. Indeed, 

over both the computation-ready CSD set and the Fe(II) subset, a significant number of complexes 


13 

 

consist of higher-denticity ligands that would be incompatible with full enumeration (Figure 1 and 

Supporting Information Tables S3–S4). Some multidentate ligands are also restricted in which 

symmetry classes they can form due to rigidity, while other more flexible ligands are less 

restricted. Nevertheless, we can still conclude there is vastly higher sampling of homoleptic 

structures. For example, tridentate ligands can be present in a homoleptic complex as well as any 

binary FS/MS or ternary TA/FA/MAC/MAT complex. Nearly an order-of-magnitude more unique 

tridentate ligands have been characterized in homoleptic Fe(II) complexes in comparison to either 

the binary or ternary cases (Supporting Information Table S4). Similar trends hold for all unique 

computation-ready complexes (Supporting Information Table S3). Overall, the number of unique 

ligands for binary or ternary complexes is still lower than the number of unique complexes, but 

the gap is smaller than could be expected from enumeration alone (Supporting Information Tables 

S3–S4). 

 
To simplify a quantitative comparison between the theoretical space and the enumerated 

space, we focus on Fe(II) complexes with only monodentate ligands in any of the fourteen 

symmetry classes considered. For this set, we identify 40 unique monodentate ligands present in 

40 HO complexes (Supporting Information Table S5). There are an additional 48 ligands present 

in binary or ternary complexes not observed in homoleptics for which we can confidently assign a 

charge to the ligand (Supporting Information Table S5). While the majority of HO complex 

monodentate ligands were neutral in charge, over half of the additional binary or ternary ligands 

have a non-zero charge (Supporting Information Table S6). Thus, although we identify 88 unique 

monodentate ligands in previously synthesized Fe(II) complexes, ligands not sampled in HO 

complexes may be incompatible with the HO symmetry class if they give rise to high overall 

complex charges.  


14 

 

 
Taking the set of 88 ligands from any HO, binary, or ternary Fe(II) complex as the 

theoretical space for which compatibility across symmetry classes should be maximal, we then 

quantified the theoretical versus actual coverage of Fe(II) complex chemical space. A significant 

number (39%) of all HO complexes have been characterized. In comparison, the binary symmetry 

classes have not been as well explored, with TS complexes the highest at 0.3% (i.e., 26 of 7,656 

theoretical complexes and Supporting Information Table S6). The number of theoretical ternary 

complexes grows rapidly with this ligand pool, ranging from 109,736 theoretical DTS/DCS 

complexes to 329,208 FA/MAC/MAT/CA/TA complexes (Supporting Information Table S6). In 

total, the 1,202 Fe(II) complexes represent a tiny fraction of the theoretical 3,213,056 homoleptic, 

binary, or ternary complexes that could form from 88 experimentally synthesized ligands. Of the 

88 ligands, we exclude one (i.e., OP(Ph)3) from further analysis due to its large bulk that prevents 

building a homoleptic complex that remains intact after geometry optimization. Even if we restrict 

ourselves to the 56 ligands that are neutral, closed-shell singlets, and amenable to homoleptic 

complex construction, the theoretical space of homoleptic, binary, or ternary complexes is still 

large (i.e., 816,256 complexes). Thus, we conclude that efficient strategies to infer heteroleptic 

properties from homoleptic properties are necessary to "fill in" the remainder of this unexplored 

space. 

3b. Ligand Additivity for Interpolating Properties of Transition Metal Complexes. 

 
We next aimed to determine the extent to which the properties of lower-symmetry 

heteroleptic transition metal complexes could be inferred from those of higher-symmetry 

complexes. We constructed complexes with two to three unique ligand types from small sets of 

ligands that spanned a large range of ligand field strengths: weak-field water, strong-field carbonyl, 

and either strong-field methylisocyanide or weak-field ammonia. For calculation of the adiabatic 


15 

 

high-spin (e.g., quintet Fe(II)) to low-spin (e.g., singlet Fe(II)) splitting, DEH-L, it can be expected 

that the weak-field ligands will lead to homoleptic complexes that favor high-spin states, whereas 

strong-field ligands will make homoleptic complexes that favor low-spin states. Thus, heteroleptic 

combinations of these ligands are expected to reside between the two limits. One simple way to 

obtain estimates of the spin splitting of the heteroleptic complexes (e.g., with up to three unique 

ligand types) is to take a weighted average of the spin splitting of the parent homoleptic complexes: 

𝐸(𝑀(𝐿")6(𝐿')7(𝐿&)%,6,7) =

6

% 𝐸(𝑀(𝐿")%) +

7

% 𝐸(𝑀(𝐿')%) +

%,6,7

%
𝐸(𝑀(𝐿&)%) 
(4) 

Indeed, we observe that heteroleptics reside between the homoleptic limits for spin splitting, and 

the linear averaging roughly holds for complexes with methyl isocyanide (CH3CN), H2O, and CO 

ligands (Figure 5 and Supporting Information Table S7).  Similar observations can be made on 

combinations with H2O, CO, and NH3 (Supporting Information Figure S1). Nevertheless, there are 

significant outliers in the interpolated versus actual DEH-L, which are particularly evident when 

comparing heteroleptic complexes with the same stoichiometry, and therefore the same prediction 

from a simple linear model, but distinct ligand symmetry (Figure 5). For example, the CS complex 

Fe(II)(H2O)4(CO)2 DEH-L is predicted accurately (predicted: -7.9 kcal/mol vs calculated: -9.9 

kcal/mol) from homoleptic interpolation (Figure 5 and Supporting Information Table S8). The 

same prediction significantly overestimates the TS complex with the same stoichiometry 

(predicted: -7.9 kcal/mol vs calculated: -19.3 kcal/mol), which instead behaves much more 

similarly to the 5+1 complex, as observed in prior work82 (Figure 5). Overall, for this combination 

of ligands, CS or FS complexes that have one minority ligand in the axial position and another in 

the equatorial plane are much better predicted than the equivalent MS or TS complexes (Figure 5).  

For the case of CO, H2O, and NH3, mixing between weak-field NH3 and H2O is relatively 

accurately predicted from homoleptic averaging, whereas for NH3 and CO, it is the MS and TS 


16 

 

complexes that are more accurately predicted than the FS or CS counterparts (Supporting 

Information Figure S2 and Tables S8–S9).  

 

Figure 5. Calculated vs. linearly interpolated DEH-L (kcal/mol) for Fe(II) complexes with pairs of 
any of the three ligands: CH3CN, H2O, and CO. From left to right: interpolation between 
homoleptic complexes (HO only), interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as CS and TS 
complex energies (CS+TS), or interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as FS and MS 
complex energies (FS+MS). Points are colored according to the pair of ligands they correspond 
to: CH3CN-H2O (green circles), CH3CN-CO (red squares), and CO-H2O (blue triangles), as 
indicated in inset legend. Key isomers are annotated. Points provided for the fit are translucent, 
whereas the remaining points are opaque. In all panes, a black dotted parity line is shown.   
 

 
Because adiabatic spin splitting involves geometry optimizations in two distinct spin states, 

we also evaluated HOMO levels of each singlet complex as a property that depends only on a 

single geometry. Overall, interpolation of HOMO energies of heteroleptic complexes of CH3CN, 

CO, and H2O from homoleptic complexes reproduces trends between the homoleptic limits (Figure 

6 and Supporting Information Tables S7, S10–S11). As with spin splitting, there are key 

differences for complexes with identical stoichiometry that cannot be captured by interpolation 

from homoleptic complexes alone (Figure 6). Interestingly, for the same complexes for which the 

CS complex had a higher (i.e., more off-parity) DEH-L and the TS complex was more like the 

equivalent 5+1 complex, we find more varied results for the HOMO level, with some cases 

occurring where the TS and FS complexes are less accurately predicted (Figure 6 and Supporting 


17 

 

Information Table S10). Nevertheless, over the full range of data, the outliers in the HOMO level 

prediction are more modest than was observed for DEH-L. These trends also hold for the complexes 

with NH3, H2O, and CO (Supporting Information Figure S2 and Tables S10–S11). 

 

Figure 6. Calculated vs. linearly interpolated HOMO level (eV) for singlet Fe(II) complexes with 
pairs of any of the three ligands: CH3CN, H2O, and CO. From left to right: interpolation between 
homoleptic complexes (HO only), interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as CS and TS 
complex energies (CS+TS), or interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as FS and MS 
complex energies (FS+MS). Points are colored according to the pair of ligands they correspond 
to: CH3CN-H2O (green circles), CH3CN-CO (red squares), and CO-H2O (blue triangles), as 
indicated in inset legend. Key isomers are annotated. Points provided for the fit are translucent, 
whereas the remaining points are opaque. In all panes, a black dotted parity line is shown.   
 

 
Given the differences between CS and TS complexes despite having identical 

stoichiometry, we next identified strategies for improving the interpolation. First, we employed 

CS and TS complexes along with homoleptic complexes to predict the spin-splitting energetics of 

the other binary heteroleptic complexes as follows: 

𝐸(5 + 1) =

"

' (𝐸(𝐻𝑂) + 𝐸(𝑇𝑆)) 
(5) 

where E(5+1) is the interpolated energy of the M(L1)5L2 complex from the M(L1)6 HO energy and 

the M(L1)4(L2)2 TS energy.  

Similarly, we estimate the FS and MS energies as: 

𝐸(𝐹𝑆) =

"

' (𝐸(𝐶𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")#(𝐿')') + 𝐸(𝐶𝑆 𝑀(𝐿')#(𝐿")')) 
(6) 


18 

 

𝐸(𝑀𝑆) =

"

' (𝐸(𝑇𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")#(𝐿')') + 𝐸(𝑇𝑆 𝑀(𝐿')#(𝐿")')) 
(7) 

In practice this corresponds to computing six energies and interpolating four remaining energies 

for each pair of ligands for a computational savings of 40%. Indeed, we observe reduced mean 

absolute error (MAE) over the remaining points that are interpolated (2.4 kcal/mol vs 5.1 kcal/mol) 

in comparison to the HO-only interpolation (Figure 5 and Supporting Information Tables S8–S9). 

In particular, FS complexes of CO and H2O are now correctly predicted to be much more low-

spin-directing than the MS complex of the same stoichiometry (Figure 5). The HOMO levels for 

these and other complexes are also improved (Supporting Information Tables S10–S11). For 

example, the modified interpolation is able to capture the fact that MS Fe(II)(CO)4(H2O)2 has a 

shallower HOMO level than its FS counterpart (Figure 6). Nevertheless, not all points are 

uniformly improved by this interpolation. For the case of NH3, CO, and H2O where the 

interpolation already performed well, some points such as the DEH-L for 5+1 Fe(II)(CO)5NH3 are 

slightly worsened in the modified interpolation (Supporting Information Figure S1). For the same 

complex, the HOMO level is equivalently predicted by both interpolation schemes, and most 

HOMO level estimates are improved (Supporting Information Figure S2). Overall, errors are on 

average significantly lower for all properties and sets of ligands considered when the modified 

interpolation expressions are employed. 

 
Although the CS/TS-derived interpolation schemes greatly reduce errors in estimating the 

energetics of heteroleptic complexes, they still require significant computational overhead. Thus, 

we next aimed to identify if FS and MS complexes, which contain three ligands cis to each other 

or two ligands cis and two sets of ligands trans, respectively, could be used instead in the 

interpolation (see Figure 2). If the FS and MS complexes impart sufficient information, using them 

in an interpolation scheme along with homoleptic complex properties corresponds to evaluating 


19 

 

four properties (e.g., energies) to predict six properties for a computational savings of 60%. In this 

interpolation scheme, we estimated the complex properties from FS and MS complexes as follows: 

𝐸(5 + 1) =

'

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂) +

"

& 𝐸(𝐹𝑆) 
(8) 

where E(5+1) is the interpolated energy of the M(L1)5L1 complex from the M(L1)6 HO energy and 

the M(L1)3(L2)3 FS energy.  Similarly, we obtain expressions for the CS and TS complexes as: 

𝐸(𝐶𝑆) =

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂) +

'

& 𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) 
(9) 

𝐸(𝑇𝑆) =

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂) +

'

& 𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) 
(10) 

 
Indeed, using this approach we achieve errors only slightly larger than that for the CS/TS 

averaging scheme, with the added benefit of requiring fewer energies to obtain the same fidelity 

of the interpolation (Figure 5). For example, the higher spin-splitting energy of CS complexes 

relative to TS complexes is captured here because it can be directly derived from the strength of 

the high-spin directing character of the FS complex relative to that of the MS complex (Figure 5). 

Mixing of the weak-field NH3 and H2O ligands, which had slightly worsened with CS/TS 

interpolation, is also significantly improved in this scheme, and the other sets of complexes are of 

comparable accuracy (Supporting Information Figure S1 and Tables S8–S9). While for the HOMO 

level, CS/TS interpolation tended to underestimate the HOMO level, FS/MS interpolation slightly 

overestimates HOMO levels, but errors are much smaller than for the HO-only interpolation 

(Figure 6 and Supporting Information Tables S10–S11). For the set of ligands including ammonia, 

almost all points are predicted to comparable or slightly improved values (Supporting Information 

Figure S2). Thus, HO-only interpolation provides a highly efficient scheme for predicting 

heteroleptic transition metal complexes, but the best trade-off in accuracy and computational cost 

for interpolation is likely achieved through estimating properties using information from FS and 

MS complexes. 


20 

 

 
We next investigated whether we could generalize our observations to heteroleptics with 

three unique ligand types (Figure 3). This extension is motivated by the fact that 96% of all 

mononuclear transition metal complexes in the CSD contain no more than three ligand types, and 

over 99% of Fe(II) complexes contain three or fewer ligand types (Figure 1 and Supporting 

Information Table S1). Expansion to three ligand types introduces 29 complex energies that need 

computation for any set of three ligands. Homoleptic-only averaging performs poorly here for 

complexes that are mixtures of CH3CN, CO, and H2O, with a large difference between CA and 

TA complexes of H2O and CO being treated completely equivalently in this scheme (Figure 7). 

Similar differences in TA and CA HOMO levels are also missed in this averaging scheme (Figure 

8). Generally, the CA complex spin-splitting energies are better predicted by the homoleptic 

averaging than the TA are for both ternary complexes with CH3CN and with NH3 (Figure 7 and 

Supporting Information Figure S3 and Tables S12–S13). For the HOMO level, results are more 

varied, with the HOMO energies of the CH3CN ternary complexes being underestimated while 

those of NH3 ternary complexes are overestimated (Figure 8 and Supporting Information Figure 

S4 and Tables S14–S15). 

 

Figure 7. Calculated vs. linearly interpolated DEH-L (kcal/mol) for Fe(II) complexes with at least 
one each of three ligands: CH3CN, H2O, and CO. From left to right: interpolation from homoleptic 
complexes (HO only), interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as CS and TS complex 
energies derived from pairs of ligands (CS+TS), or interpolation using homoleptic complexes as 


21 

 

well as FS and MS complex energies derived from pairs of ligands (FS+MS). Points are colored 
according to the ligand with the highest stoichiometric coefficient: H2O (red circles), CO (gray 
squares), and CH3CN (blue diamonds), or equal weight of all ligands (Green triangles), as 
indicated in inset legend. Key isomers are annotated. In all panes, a black dotted parity line is 
shown.   
 

Figure 8. Calculated vs. linearly interpolated HOMO level (eV) for singlet Fe(II) complexes with 
at least one each of three ligands: CH3CN, H2O, and CO. From left to right: interpolation from 
homoleptic complexes (HO only), interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as CS and TS 
complex energies derived from pairs of ligands (CS+TS), or interpolation using homoleptic 
complexes as well as FS and MS complex energies derived from pairs of ligands (FS+MS). Points 
are colored according to the ligand with the highest stoichiometric coefficient: H2O (red circles), 
CO (gray squares), and CH3CN (blue diamonds), or equal weight of all ligands (green triangles), 
as indicated in inset legend. Key isomers are annotated. In all panes, a black dotted parity line is 
shown.   
 

 
Thus, we next investigated interpolation schemes that reincorporated CS/TS or FS/MS 

complex energies of the binary heteroleptics. Interpolation of these 29 energies from 12 CS/TS 

and 3 HO energies or 6 FS/MS and 3 HO energies would still represent significant computational 

savings. The binary complex energies can also be reused for ternary complexes that share a pair 

of ligand types, as is the case in the two worked examples presented here. Next, we obtained 

expressions for all eight symmetry classes of heteroleptics with three ligand types from energies 

derived from only either FS/MS or CS/TS complexes. Specifically, the FS/MS-interpolated 

expressions for these heteroleptics are as follows: 


22 

 

𝐸(𝐶𝐴 𝑀(𝐿")#(𝐿')"(𝐿&)") =

"

& (𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿")%) + 𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) + 𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿&)&)) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(11) 

𝐸(𝑇𝐴 𝑀(𝐿")#(𝐿')"(𝐿&)") =

"

& (𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿")%) + 𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) +

𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿&)&))  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(12) 

𝐸(𝐹𝐴 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')'(𝐿&)") =

"

& (

"

' 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿")%) +

"

' 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿')%) + 𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) +

𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿&)&))  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) 

𝐸(𝑀𝐴𝐶 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')'(𝐿&)") =

"

& (

"

' 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿")%) +

"

' 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿')%) +

𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) + 𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿&)&)) 
 
 
 
 
 
(14) 

𝐸(𝑀𝐴𝑇 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')'(𝐿&)") =

"

& (

"

' 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿")%) +

"

' 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿')%) +

𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) + 𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿&)&)) 
 
 
 
 
 
(15) 

𝐸(𝐷𝐶𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")'(𝐿')'(𝐿&)') =

"

& (

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿")%) +

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿')%) +

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿&)%) +

'

& 𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) +

'

& 𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿&)&) +

'

& 𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿')&(𝐿&)&))  
 
(16) 

𝐸(𝐷𝑇𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")'(𝐿')'(𝐿&)') =

"

& (

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿")%) +

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿')%) +

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿&)%) +

'

& 𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) +

'

& 𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿&)&) +

'

& 𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿')&(𝐿&)&)) 
 
(17) 

𝐸(𝐸𝐴 𝑀(𝐿")'(𝐿')'(𝐿&)') =

"

& (

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿")%) +

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿')%) +

"

& 𝐸(𝐻𝑂 𝑀(𝐿&)%) +

'

& 𝐸(𝐹𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿')&) +

'

& 𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿")&(𝐿&)&) +

'

& 𝐸(𝑀𝑆 𝑀(𝐿')&(𝐿&)&)) 
 
(18) 

where the third ligand in the EA complex is the one that is trans to itself so energies involving that 

ligand are derived from the binary MS complexes, whereas the remaining components are derived 

from FS complexes. Analogous expressions were also obtained for the CS/TS energetics 

(Supporting Information Text S3). Overall, both interpolation schemes significantly improve the 

estimation of both spin splitting and HOMO level energies for both sets of ternary complexes in 


23 

 

comparison to HO-only interpolation (Figures 5 and 6 and Supporting Information Figures S3 and 

S4 and Tables S14–S16). Differences in CA and TA complex properties are much better predicted 

by both interpolation schemes, with the CS/TS scheme performing best for the combination that 

includes CH3CN (Figures 5 and 6). While this may be expected as a generalization of observations 

on the binary heteroleptics, it is noteworthy that trends in the fully equivalent stoichiometries (i.e., 

all three EA isomers, DCS, or DTS complexes) are reasonably well predicted by the improved 

schemes, whereas they were indistinguishable with simple linear interpolation because they differ 

solely by cis versus trans positioning effects (Figures 5 and 6). Overall, errors for the interpolation 

scheme using FS/MS ligands are sufficiently low to warrant its use in chemical space exploration 

(Supporting Information Table S16). We have thus demonstrated how over a set of three ligands, 

nine explicit calculations can be used to interpolate the properties of 18 binary and 29 ternary 

complexes to around 2 kcal/mol accuracy in spin-splitting energies or 0.1–0.2 eV accuracy in 

orbital energy levels.   

3c. Interpolation of Chemical Space from Experimentally Characterized Complexes. 

 
Given the strength of the interpolative trends we observed, we chose Fe(II) complexes from 

the CSD to explore the potential of interpolation from previously synthesized complexes. For these 

1202 complexes, the majority (661) are homoleptics, followed closely by binary complexes (407) 

and ternary complexes (129), with only six having more ligand types (Figure 4 and Supporting 

Information Table S4).We restrict our analysis of chemical space interpolation to monodentate 

ligands from complexes of each symmetry type that only contain monodentate ligands to simplify 

the interpolation process because higher-denticity ligands impose geometric constraints that make 

them incompatible with certain symmetry types. Nevertheless, we note that there are a significant 

number of monodentate ligands that only appear in combination with higher-denticity ligands 


24 

 

(Supporting Information Tables S4–S5). From the set of monodentate-only complexes, we 

identified 40 unique ligands already present in homoleptic complexes along with 48 additional 

unique ligands present in monodentate-only binary and ternary complexes for which we could 

assign a charge following the scheme introduced in Ref. 60.  Of the set of 88 ligands, only 56 are 

assigned a neutral charge, closed-shell electronic structure, and deemed sterically feasible for 

homoleptic calculations (i.e., excluding only the neutral OP(Ph)3 ligand).  

 
We then computed the adiabatic spin-splitting energies and singlet HOMO levels of all 56 

homoleptic Fe(II) complexes (see Computational Details). This set is strongly biased toward high-

spin structures, with only a few ligands giving rise to low-spin ground states (Figure 9 and 

Supporting Information Figure S5 and Table S17). The majority of spin-splitting energies are in 

the range of -30 to 0 kcal/mol, whereas a minority of complexes are low-spin (Figure 9). Only one 

complex Fe(II)(CO)6, which was present in our study in Sec. 3b, has a HOMO level deeper than -

16 eV, and no complexes have intermediate HOMO levels (ca. -14 eV) while also sampling near 

degenerate spin states  (Figure 9).    


25 

 

 

Figure 9. The DEH-L (in kcal/mol) vs. singlet HOMO level (in eV) for 56 homoleptic complexes 
(orange circles) as well as HO-only interpolation of all possible binary and ternary complexes 
colored by frequency from purple (low) to yellow (high). 1D histograms of each property are 
shown at top and right with bin widths of 2 kcal/mol and 0.25 eV, respectively, along with a kernel 
density estimate of the interpolated space shown as a dark blue line. A targeted zone of -4 to 4 
kcal/mol for DEH-L and -14.0 to -13.0 eV for the HOMO is annotated as a light blue square. 
 

 
We next interpolated estimates for the 816,200 binary and ternary complexes from the 56 

homoleptic complexes using the HO-only averaging scheme (Figure 9). By definition, this 

interpolation scheme provides rough estimates of which ligand combinations will enrich DEH-

L/HOMO energetic pairings not observed in the homoleptic set (Figure 9). Nevertheless, this 

approach provides only a coarse estimate of the energetics in comparison to interpolation schemes 

that use knowledge of binary complex energetics. However, even for the most data-efficient 

approach of FS/MS-derived interpolation, for a pool of 56 ligands, the most data-efficient approach 

would require 3,080 explicit FS/MS calculations to achieve high fidelity predictions for 816,200 

complexes (see Table 1). Thus, we identified a way to use the HO-only interpolation to reduce the 

number of unique complexes required to achieve high fidelity within a target region.  


26 

 

 
First, we select a targeted region of DEH-L values in the range of -4.0 to 4.0 kcal/mol and 

HOMO levels in the range of -14 to -13 eV. This region was selected because no homoleptic 

complexes were present in this range, but interpolation of the space predicted that heteroleptic 

complexes would be found there. These complexes could be of interest in chemical discovery 

applications that target spin-crossover candidates (i.e., with near-degenerate spin states) with good 

oxidative stability (i.e., deep HOMO levels). Next, we identify 12 common ligands from the parent 

homoleptic complexes that are predicted to give rise most frequently to binary and ternary 

complexes in the targeted zone on the basis of the simple HO-only model (Figure 10 and 

Supporting Information Table S18 and Figure S6). These ligands consist of common ligands from 

our original set (i.e., CO, H2O, CH3CN, and NH3) but also introduce new chemistry (e.g, S-

coordinating dimethylthioformamide, DMTF, and 2-chloropyrazine, ClPyz, Supporting 

Information Table S18). From this set, only 132 additional FS/MS complexes need to be studied 

beyond the 12 homoleptic complexes we already computed, to infer 6,776 additional HOMO level 

or DEH-L properties at higher fidelity than HO-only averaging (see Table 1).  We carried out 

geometry optimizations of these 132 complexes and used their properties to evaluate the revised 

interpolated HOMO level and DEH-L values over this subset. Evaluating this subset also provides 

a validation of the accuracy of the homoleptic averaging over a larger set of ligands. Over this set, 

we observe that errors are comparable to the earlier tests (i.e., MAE of 4 kcal/mol), and homoleptic 

averaging is generally a good predictor of DEH-L (Supporting Information Figure S7 and Table 

S19). For HOMO level predictions, there are more points that differ from the interpolated values, 

leading to higher MAEs (0.8 eV) than observed over our representative test ligands (Supporting 

Information Figure S7 and Table S19).  


27 

 

 

Figure 10. (Left and middle) The DEH-L (in kcal/mol) vs. singlet HOMO level (in eV) for 12 
homoleptic complexes (orange circles) as well as HO-only (left) or FS/MS-based (middle) 
interpolation of all possible binary and ternary complexes colored by frequency from purple (low) 
to yellow (high). The FS/MS complex energies are shown as pink circles. (Right) The difference 
(i.e., HO-only minus FS/MS-based interpolation) of the two 2D histograms plotted from negative 
(blue, -81) to positive (red, 81). A targeted zone of -4 to 4 kcal/mol for DEH-L and -14.0 to -13.0 
eV for the HOMO is annotated as a light blue square.  
 

 
Nevertheless, the calculations on FS and MS complexes also highlight the limits of 

homoleptic averaging for seeking targeted properties. Of the 132 FS or MS calculations carried 

out, three are found to be in our targeted zone, MS Fe(II)(MeCN)3(NH3)3 and both FS and MS 

Fe(II)(CH3CN)3(MeOH)3 (Supporting Information Table S20). None of these three complexes 

were predicted to be in the zone from homoleptic averaging alone, with the  MS 

Fe(II)(MeCN)3(NH3)3 DEH-L underestimated (predicted: -7.3 kcal/mol vs. actual -3.6 kcal/mol) 

while the FS/MS Fe(II)(CH3CN)3(MeOH)3 DEH-L was overestimated (predicted: 9.0 kcal/mol vs 

2.9 and -0.8 kcal/mol, respectively, Supporting Information Table S20). For these same 

complexes, the homoleptic averaging predicted HOMO levels very well, within around 0.1 eV 

(i.e., lower error than for DEH-L, Supporting Information Table S20). 

 
Returning to the properties predicted from FS/MS-interpolation, we identified a total of 

three additional binary complexes predicted to be in the targeted zone from FS/MS-interpolation 

but not in the targeted zone according to HO-only interpolation and we computed their properties 


28 

 

(Figure 10). These complexes are 5+1 Fe(II)(MeCN)5(CO) and CS/TS Fe(II)(ClPyz)4(CO)2 

(Figure 11 and Supporting Information Table S20). Indeed, all three of these complexes have 

HOMO levels in the targeted zone, while the DEH-L values are close to (4.9–5.7 kcal/mol for CS/TS 

Fe(II)(ClPyz)4(CO)2) or in the targeted zone (1.5 kcal/mol for 5+1 Fe(II)(MeCN)5(CO), 

Supporting Information Table S20). For CS/TS Fe(II)(ClPyz)4(CO)2, homoleptic averaging had 

underestimated both the DEH-L and HOMO level (i.e., out of the zone at -15.32 eV) and could not 

distinguish between CS and TS isomers (Supporting Information Table S20). Although FS/MS 

interpolation slightly underestimated the DEH-L values for CS/TS Fe(II)(ClPyz)4(CO)2, the errors 

are within what we had observed over other sets. In addition to shifting which compounds are 

predicted to fall within the target zone, the difference between the HO-only to FS/MS interpolation 

schemes causes some regions of property space to be predicted to be enriched while others are 

predicted to be depleted (Figure 10).  

 

Figure 11. Properties of 8 binary (red or green) and 6 ternary (orange or blue) complexes in 
validation set for HO-interpolation (circles) and FS/MS-augmented interpolation (squares) for 
DEH-L (in kcal/mol, left) and HOMO level (in eV, right). The targeted zone for each quantity is 
shown as a turquoise square, and three representative complexes are shown in inset with their 
symmetry class and the associated points are indicated with gray arrows. Structures are colored as 
follows: brown for Fe, gray for C, blue for N, white for H, green for Cl, red for O, and yellow for 
S. A dotted parity line is also shown. 
 


29 

 

 
As a control, we also identified two complexes predicted to be in zone by the HO-only 

interpolation but out of zone by FS/MS-interpolation, CS/TS Fe(II)(MeOH)4(CH3CN)2 

(Supporting Information Table S20). The homoleptic averaging predicts the DEH-L value for both 

complexes to be -2.6 kcal/mol, while calculated DEH-L values are significantly lower (-9.1 and -

13.9 kcal/mol). The FS/MS interpolation captures well the relative CS/TS energetics in both this 

case and the in-zone example and only slightly overestimates the DEH-L value (Supporting 

Information Table S20). Overall, FS/MS-interpolation MAEs for these binary complexes is low 

(2.5 kcal/mol for DEH-L and 0.1 eV for HOMO levels) and less than half that observed from HO-

only averaging (Supporting Information Table S20).  

 
As a more stringent test of our FS/MS interpolation scheme, we also selected six 

representative ternary complexes predicted to be in the targeted zone from FS/MS interpolation 

but out of the targeted zone when estimated with homoleptic interpolation (Figure 11 and 

Supporting Information Table S21). All complexes were generally predicted to be more high-spin 

favoring by homoleptic averaging than predicted from FS/MS interpolation, and several were also 

predicted to have deeper HOMO levels than the targeted region (Supporting Information Table 

S21). Over this set, explicit DFT calculations show that five of the complexes have DEH-L values 

in the targeted zone and four have HOMO levels in the targeted zone (Supporting Information 

Table S21). These include FA Fe(II)(ClPyz)3(CO)2(DMTF), which was predicted to be strongly 

HS by homoleptic averaging (DEH-L = -9.0 kcal/mol) but was much closer to the FS/MS-

interpolated value (calculated DEH-L = -2.2 kcal/mol vs FS/MS DEH-L = -0.1 kcal/mol, Supporting 

Information Table S21). For the worst-performing example, FA Fe(II)(DMTF)3(CO)2(H2O), 

FS/MS interpolation overestimates DEH-L by 5 kcal/mol (-3.0 kcal/mol vs -8.2 kcal/mol) and 

predicts a deeper HOMO level (-13.20 eV vs. -12.55 eV, Supporting Information Table S21). This 


30 

 

could be due to weak coordination of the metal by water which leads to a more stabilized high-

spin state. Performance of FS/MS interpolation on the remaining CA and TA complexes ranges 

from good (ca. 2–3 kcal/mol errors) to exceptional in the case of CA Fe(II)(ClPyz)4(CNH)(NH3) 

where errors on DEH-L are below 0.1 kcal/mol and HOMO level are around 0.05 eV (Supporting 

Information Table S21). Overall errors are low from FS/MS interpolation at around 2.5 kcal/mol 

for DEH-L and 0.4 eV for the HOMO level, roughly half their values from homoleptic averaging. 

These results demonstrate that coarse interpolation of large spaces with homoleptic complexes can 

be followed up by improved interpolation using selected FS/MS compounds to identify the most 

promising binary or ternary complexes for explicit calculation. Overall, the demonstrated approach 

represents a data-efficient strategy to infer properties across large compound spaces with 

systematically improvable fidelity.  

4. Conclusions 

 
A large-scale analysis of the mononuclear octahedral complexes deposited in the 

Cambridge Structural Database revealed a propensity towards specific, higher-symmetry classes. 

In addition, few complexes contained more than three unique ligand types. To assess the relative 

diversity of these complexes compared to the enumerated chemical space, we obtained expressions 

for the theoretical number of complexes of the five binary and eight ternary symmetry classes for 

octahedral complexes. We showed that even for a relatively small number of neutral, monodentate 

ligands present in Fe(II) complexes, the total theoretical space of 816,200 binary and ternary 

complexes far exceeded those that had been characterized in the CSD.  

 
An aim of identifying which uncharacterized compounds are most likely to be valuable or 

informative motivated our evaluation of interpolative schemes to determine the extent to which 

heteroleptic complex properties could be inferred from parent homoleptic complexes. Over 


31 

 

representative test cases, we observed that a linear weighted averaging of homoleptic properties 

could reasonably (to ca. 4 kcal/mol for DEH-L and 0.24 eV for the HOMO level) predict properties 

of binary and ternary heteroleptic complexes. We demonstrated a refinement of the approach to be 

able to distinguish isomers (e.g., CS vs. TS or CA vs. TA) by using expressions that also 

incorporated either CS/TS or FS/MS binary complexes at a slightly higher computational cost but 

with errors that were half as large  (ca. 2 kcal/mol for DEH-L and 0.15 eV for the HOMO level). 

The most data-efficient approach required four FS/MS and three homoleptic energies (i.e., 7 total) 

to infer 18 binary and 29 ternary complex properties.   

 
Finally, we demonstrated a two-stage discovery approach to leverage and validate our 

interpolative schemes. We first  used 56 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes composed of neutral, closed-

shell monodentate ligands to infer the properties of 816,200 binary or ternary complexes of these 

ligands using HO-only averaging. We then defined a targeted zone of HOMO level and DEH-L that 

contained none of the homoleptic complexes. To avoid explicit calculations for all (ca. 3,000) of 

FS/MS complexes needed to achieve high fidelity over the full range of ligands, we then refined 

our analysis to the top 12 most frequently occurring ligands predicted to be in the targeted zone. 

From this set, we studied 66 each of FS and MS complexes to refine our interpolation of 6,776 

complexes. This approach helped us to identify 3 FS/MS complexes in the targeted zone that had 

not been predicted by homoleptic averaging alone. It also had a higher validation rate for binary 

and ternary complexes than homoleptic averaging, with all FS/MS-interpolation predicted 

complexes residing in the targeted zone or just outside it. Overall, errors for DEH-L of around 5 

kcal/mol with homoleptic averaging and 2 kcal/mol with FS/MS-interpolation are also comparable 

to prior machine learning (i.e., artificial neural network) model predictions on similar data sets51. 

Thus, this approach represents a promising multi-stage strategy for efficient chemical space 


32 

 

exploration at low cost: an initial coarse interpolation from homoleptic complexes can be 

systematically refined by incorporating cis and trans isomer effects over a smaller subspace of 

ligands. While demonstrated here for magnetic and orbital energy properties, this approach is 

expected to have similar applicability in predicting other properties where ligands can be expected 

to behave in an approximately additive manner, such as in redox potentials or catalysis. This 

observed additivity could also be integrated into machine learning model property predictions or 

used synergistically to augment datasets for machine learning. 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 

Supporting Information. Details of mononuclear octahedral complex curation from the CSD; 
Details of complex symmetry class assignment; Statistics of CSD complexes by number of unique 
ligands; Statistics of CSD complexes by symmetry classes; Denticity of ligands in UT&C CSD 
complexes by symmetry classes; Denticity of ligands in Fe(II) CSD complexes by symmetry 
classes; Number of unique monodentate ligands in Fe(II) complexes; Sampled vs theoretical 
number of complexes with monodentate ligands; Homoleptic complex properties, DEH-L and 
HOMO level; Interpolated vs calc'd DEH-L for transition metal complexes with pairs of 
NH3/H2O/CO; Interpolated and actual DEH-L for pairs of H2O/CO and NH3 or CH3CN; Interpolated 
vs calc'd HOMO for transition metal complexes with pairs of NH3/H2O/ CO; MAEs for DEH-L 
binary complex estimates from interpolation schemes; Interpolated and actual HOMO for pairs of 
H2O/CO and NH3 or CH3CN; MAEs for HOMO binary complex estimates from interpolation 
schemes; Interpolated vs calc'd DEH-L for transition metal complexes with three ligands: 
NH3/H2O/CO; Interpolated and actual DEH-L for ternary H2O/CO/CH3CN complexes; Interpolated 
and actual DEH-L for ternary H2O/CO/NH3 complexes; Interpolated vs calc'd HOMO for transition 
metal complexes with three ligands: NH3/H2O/CO; Interpolated and actual HOMO for ternary 
H2O/CO/CH3CN complexes; Interpolated and actual HOMO for ternary H2O/CO/NH3 complexes; 
CS/TS-derived interpolation expressions for ternary complexes; MAEs of HOMO and DEH-L for 
ternary complexes; Properties of 52 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes; Scatter of HOMO and DEH-L 
for 52 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes; 12 most common ligands in target zone for Fe(II) complexes; 
Homoleptic-only interpolated target zone for Fe(II) complexes; Parity plot for predicted vs 
calculated 132 FS/MS Fe(II) complexes; MAEs for FS and MS complexes from HO-only 
averaging; Binary complexes in validation set for interpolation; Ternary complexes in validation 
set for interpolation. (PDF) 
 

Pickle file of CSD structures; xyz files of all structures studied; csv file of energies and properties 
of complexes studied. (ZIP) 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 


33 

 

Corresponding Author 

*email:hjkulik@mit.edu 

Notes 

The authors declare no competing financial interest.  

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was primarily supported by the Office of Naval Research under grant number N00014-

20-1-2150. A.N., N.A., and D.B.K.C. were partially supported by National Science Foundation 

Graduate Research Fellowships under Grants #1122374 (to A.N.) and #1745302 (to N.A. and 

D.B.K.C). C.D. was partially supported by a seed fellowship from the Molecular Sciences 

Software Institute under NSF grant OAC-1547580. The authors acknowledge Adam H. Steeves 

for a critical reading of the manuscript. 

REFERENCES 

1. 
Y. N. Shu and B. G. Levine, J Chem Phys 142 (10), 104104 (2015). 

2. 
R. Gomez-Bombarelli, J. Aguilera-Iparraguirre, T. D. Hirzel, D. Duvenaud, D. 

Maclaurin, M. A. Blood-Forsythe, H. S. Chae, M. Einzinger, D. G. Ha, T. Wu, G. Markopoulos, 
S. Jeon, H. Kang, H. Miyazaki, M. Numata, S. Kim, W. L. Huang, S. I. Hong, M. Baldo, R. P. 
Adams and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Nat Mater 15 (10), 1120-+ (2016). 
3. 
I. Y. Kanal, S. G. Owens, J. S. Bechtel and G. R. Hutchison, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 4 (10), 

1613-1623 (2013). 
4. 
K. D. Vogiatzis, M. V. Polynski, J. K. Kirkland, J. Townsend, A. Hashemi, C. Liu and E. 

A. Pidko, Chemical Reviews 119, 2453-2523 (2018). 
5. 
M. Foscato and V. R. Jensen, ACS Catal. 10 (3), 2354-2377 (2020). 

6. 
S. Curtarolo, G. L. Hart, M. B. Nardelli, N. Mingo, S. Sanvito and O. Levy, Nat Mater 12 

(3), 191-201 (2013). 
7. 
S. P. Ong, W. D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier, M. Kocher, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, V. L. 

Chevrier, K. A. Persson and G. Ceder, Computational Materials Science 68, 314-319 (2013). 
8. 
J. K. Nørskov and T. Bligaard, Angewandte Chemie International Edition 52 (3), 776-

777 (2013). 
9. 
J. P. Janet, C. Duan, A. Nandy, F. Liu and H. J. Kulik, Accounts of Chemical Research 

54 (3), 532-545 (2021). 


34 

 

10. 
M. Ceriotti, C. Clementi and O. A. von Lilienfeld, Chemical Reviews 121 (16), 9719-

9721 (2021). 
11. 
J. A. Keith, V. Vassilev-Galindo, B. Q. Cheng, S. Chmiela, M. Gastegger, K. R. Mueller 

and A. Tkatchenko, Chemical Reviews 121 (16), 9816-9872 (2021). 
12. 
M. Ceriotti, J Chem Phys 150 (15), 150901 (2019). 

13. 
A. Grisafi, A. Fabrizio, B. Meyer, D. M. Wilkins, C. Corminboeuf and M. Ceriotti, ACS 

Central Science 5, 57-64 (2018). 
14. 
K. Jorner, A. Tomberg, C. Bauer, C. Skold and P. O. Norrby, Nat Rev Chem 5 (4), 240-

255 (2021). 
15. 
M. F. Kasim and S. M. Vinko, Phys Rev Lett 127 (12), 126403 (2021). 

16. 
J. Westermayr, M. Gastegger, K. T. Schutt and R. J. Maurer, J Chem Phys 154 (23), 

230903 (2021). 
17. 
J. P. Coe, J Chem Theory Comput 14 (11), 5739-5749 (2018). 

18. 
A. S. Rosen, S. M. Iyer, D. Ray, Z. P. Yao, A. Aspuru-Guzik, L. Gagliardi, J. M. 

Notestein and R. Q. Snurr, Matter-Us 4 (5), 1578-1597 (2021). 
19. 
T. Dimitrov, C. Kreisbeck, J. S. Becker, A. Aspuru-Guzik and S. K. Saikin, ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces 11 (28), 24825-24836 (2019). 
20. 
A. Glielmo, B. E. Husic, A. Rodriguez, C. Clementi, F. Noe and A. Laio, Chemical 

Reviews 121 (16), 9722-9758 (2021). 
21. 
L. Chanussot, A. Das, S. Goyal, T. Lavril, M. Shuaibi, M. Riviere, K. Tran, J. Heras-

Domingo, C. Ho, W. H. Hu, A. Palizhati, A. Sriram, B. Wood, J. Yoon, D. Parikh, C. L. Zitnick 
and Z. Ulissi, Acs Catalysis 11 (10), 6059-6072 (2021). 
22. 
M. Christensen, L. P. E. Yunker, F. Adedeji, F. Hase, L. M. Roch, T. Gensch, G. D. 

Gomes, T. Zepel, M. S. Sigman, A. Aspuru-Guzik and J. E. Hein, Commun Chem 4 (1), 112 
(2021). 
23. 
T. Gensch, G. D. Gomes, P. Friederich, E. Peters, T. Gaudin, R. Pollice, K. Jorner, A. 

Nigam, M. Lindner-D'Addario, M. S. Sigman and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J Am Chem Soc 144 (3), 
1205-1217 (2022). 
24. 
A. M. Virshup, J. Contreras-García, P. Wipf, W. Yang and D. N. Beratan, J. Am. Chem. 

Soc. 135 (19), 7296-7303 (2013). 
25. 
L. Ruddigkeit, R. van Deursen, L. C. Blum and J.-L. Reymond, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 52 

(11), 2864-2875 (2012). 
26. 
R. W. Sterner and J. J. Elser, Ecological stoichiometry: the biology of elements from 

molecules to the biosphere. (Princeton University Press, 2002). 
27. 
H. J. M. Bowen, Environmental chemistry of the elements. (Academic Press., 1979). 

28. 
T. Fink, H. Bruggesser and J.-L. Reymond, Angewandte Chemie International Edition 44 

(10), 1504-1508 (2005). 
29. 
M. J. Wester, S. N. Pollock, E. A. Coutsias, T. K. Allu, S. Muresan and T. I. Oprea, J. 

Chem. Inf. Model. 48 (7), 1311-1324 (2008). 
30. 
P. G. Polishchuk, T. I. Madzhidov and A. Varnek, Journal of computer-aided molecular 

design 27 (8), 675-679 (2013). 
31. 
R. S. Bohacek, C. McMartin and W. C. Guida, Medicinal research reviews 16 (1), 3-50 

(1996). 
32. 
N. Fey, S. E. Harris, J. N. Harvey and A. G. Orpen, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 46 (2), 912-929 

(2006). 


35 

 

33. 
N. Fey, A. C. Tsipis, S. E. Harris, J. N. Harvey, A. G. Orpen and R. A. Mansson, Chem. - 

Eur. J. 12 (1), 291-302 (2006). 
34. 
D. J. Durand and N. Fey, Chem. Rev. 119 (11), 6561-6594 (2019). 

35. 
M. Foscato, G. Occhipinti, V. Venkatraman, B. K. Alsberg and V. R. Jensen, J. Chem. 

Inf. Model. 54 (3), 767-780 (2014). 
36. 
M. Foscato, V. Venkatraman, G. Occhipinti, B. K. Alsberg and V. R. Jensen, J. Chem. 

Inf. Model. 54 (7), 1919-1931 (2014). 
37. 
M. Foscato, R. J. Deeth and V. R. Jensen, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 55 (6), 1282-1290 (2015). 

38. 
M. Foscato, B. J. Houghton, G. Occhipinti, R. J. Deeth and V. R. Jensen, J. Chem. Inf. 

Model. 55 (9), 1844-1856 (2015). 
39. 
D. Balcells and B. B. Skjelstad, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 60 (12), 6135-6146 (2020). 

40. 
J. S. Smith, O. Isayev and A. E. Roitberg, Sci. Data 4, 170193 (2017). 

41. 
R. Ramakrishnan, P. O. Dral, M. Rupp and O. A. Von Lilienfeld, Sci. Data 1, 140022 

(2014). 
42. 
C. A. Gaggioli, S. J. Stoneburner, C. J. Cramer and L. Gagliardi, ACS catalysis 9 (9), 

8481-8502 (2019). 
43. 
W. Jiang, N. J. DeYonker and A. K. Wilson, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8 (2), 460-468 

(2012). 
44. 
F. Liu, C. Duan and H. J. Kulik, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 11, 8067-8076 (2020). 

45. 
C. Duan, D. B. K. Chu, A. Nandy and H. J. Kulik, Chem. Sci. 13, 4962-4971 (2022). 

46. 
M. Feldt, Q. M. Phung, K. Pierloot, R. A. Mata and J. N. Harvey, J. Chem. Theory 

Comput. 15 (2), 922-937 (2019). 
47. 
Q. M. Phung, M. Feldt, J. N. Harvey and K. Pierloot, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 14 (5), 

2446-2455 (2018). 
48. 
S. Gugler, J. P. Janet and H. J. Kulik, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 5, 139-152 (2020). 

49. 
A. Gaulton, A. Hersey, M. Nowotka, A. P. Bento, J. Chambers, D. Mendez, P. Mutowo, 

F. Atkinson, L. J. Bellis, E. Cibrián-Uhalte, M. Davies, N. Dedman, A. Karlsson, M. P. 
Magariños, J. P. Overington, G. Papadatos, I. Smit and A. R. Leach, Nucleic Acids Res 45 (D1), 
D945-D954 (2017). 
50. 
P. F. Bernath and S. McLeod, J Mol Spectrosc 207 (2), 287 (2001). 

51. 
J. P. Janet, C. Duan, T. Yang, A. Nandy and H. J. Kulik, Chem. Sci. 10, 7913-7922 

(2019). 
52. 
C. R. Groom, I. J. Bruno, M. P. Lightfoot and S. C. Ward, Acta Crystallographica Section 

B Structural Science, Crystal Engineering and Materials 72 (2), 171-179 (2016). 
53. 
J. Glerup, O. Monsted and C. E. Schaffer, Inorg Chem 15 (6), 1399-1407 (1976). 

54. 
R. J. Deeth, D. L. Foulis and B. J. Williams-Hubbard, Dalton Trans. (20), 3949-3955 

(2003). 
55. 
Y. Cytter, A. Nandy, A. Bajaj and H. J. Kulik, The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 

13, 4549-4555 (2022). 
56. 
R. A. Friesner, E. H. Knoll and Y. Cao, J. Chem. Phys. 125 (12), 124107 (2006). 

57. 
D. Rinaldo, L. Tian, J. N. Harvey and R. A. Friesner, J. Chem. Phys. 129 (16), 164108 

(2008). 
58. 
T. F. Hughes and R. A. Friesner, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7 (1), 19-32 (2011). 

59. 
R. A. Friesner and S. V. Jerome, Coord. Chem. Rev. 344, 205-213 (2017). 

60. 
C. Duan, A. J. Ladera, J. C.-L. Liu, M. G. Taylor, I. R. Ariyarathna and H. J. Kulik, J 

Chem Theory Comput (in press). 


36 

 

61. 
K. U. Lao and J. M. Herbert, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 119 (2), 235-252 

(2015). 
62. 
M. S. Gordon, L. Slipchenko, H. Li and J. H. Jensen, Annual reports in computational 

chemistry 3, 177-193 (2007). 
63. 
F. Neese, A. Hansen and D. G. Liakos, The Journal of chemical physics 131 (6), 064103 

(2009). 
64. 
Q. Ma and H. J. Werner, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular 

Science 8 (6), e1371 (2018). 
65. 
M. G. Taylor, T. Yang, S. Lin, A. Nandy, J. P. Janet, C. Duan and H. J. Kulik, The 

Journal of Physical Chemistry A 124 (16), 3286-3299 (2020). 
66. 
S. Seritan, C. Bannwarth, B. S. Fales, E. G. Hohenstein, S. I. Kokkila-Schumacher, N. 

Luehr, J. W. Snyder Jr, C. Song, A. V. Titov and I. S. Ufimtsev, The Journal of chemical physics 
152 (22), 224110 (2020). 
67. 
S. Seritan, C. Bannwarth, B. S. Fales, E. G. Hohenstein, C. M. Isborn, S. I. Kokkila-

Schumacher, X. Li, F. Liu, N. Luehr and J. W. Snyder Jr, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 
Computational Molecular Science 11 (2), e1494 (2021). 
68. 
A. D. Becke, The Journal of Chemical Physics 98 (7), 5648-5652 (1993). 

69. 
C. Lee, W. Yang and R. G. Parr, Physical Review B 37, 785--789 (1988). 

70. 
P. J. Stephens, F. J. Devlin, C. F. Chabalowski and M. J. Frisch, The Journal of Physical 

Chemistry 98 (45), 11623-11627 (1994). 
71. 
P. J. Hay and W. R. Wadt, The Journal of Chemical Physics 82 (1), 270-283 (1985). 

72. 
R. Ditchfield, W. J. Hehre and J. A. Pople, J Chem Phys 54 (2), 724 (1971). 

73. 
V. R. Saunders and I. H. Hillier, International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 7 (4), 699-

705 (1973). 
74. 
L.-P. Wang and C. Song, The Journal of Chemical Physics 144 (21), 214108 (2016). 

75. 
E. I. Ioannidis, T. Z. H. Gani and H. J. Kulik, J. Comput. Chem. 37, 2106-2117 (2016). 

76. 
KulikGroup. 

77. 
N. M. O'Boyle, M. Banck, C. A. James, C. Morley, T. Vandermeersch and G. R. 

Hutchison, J Cheminformatics 3, 33 (2011). 
78. 
N. M. O'Boyle, C. Morley and G. R. Hutchison, Chemistry Central Journal 2, 5 (2008). 

79. 
G. Pólya and R. C. Read,  (1987). 

80. 
I. Baraldi, C. Fiori and D. Vanossi, 8. 

81. 
B. A. Kennedy, D. A. McQuarrie and C. H. Brubaker, Inorg Chem 3 (2), 265-268 (1964). 

82. 
A. Nandy, D. B. K. Chu, D. R. Harper, C. Duan, N. Arunachalam, Y. Cytter and H. J. 

Kulik, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 22, 19326-19341 (2020). 

 


Page S1 

Supporting Information for 

Ligand additivity relationships enable efficient exploration of transition metal chemical space  

Naveen Arunachalam1,#, Stefan Gugler1,#, Michael G. Taylor1,#, Chenru Duan1,2, Aditya 

Nandy1,2, Jon Paul Janet1, Ralf Meyer1, Jonas Oldenstaedt1, Daniel B. K. Chu1, and Heather J. 

Kulik1,*  

1Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 

02139, USA  

2Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA  

*email: hjkulik@mit.edu 

 

 
Contents 
Text S1 Details of mononuclear octahedral complex curation from the CSD 
Page S2 

Text S2 Details of complex symmetry class assignment 
Page S2 

Table S1 Statistics of CSD complexes by number of unique ligands 
Page S3 

Table S2 Statistics of CSD complexes by symmetry classes 
Page S3 

Table S3 Denticity of ligands in computation-ready CSD complexes by symmetry 
Page S4 

Table S4 Denticity of ligands in Fe(II) CSD complexes by symmetry classes 
Page S4 

Table S5 Number of unique monodentate ligands in Fe(II) complexes 
Page S5 

Table S6 Sampled vs theoretical number of complexes with monodentate ligands 
Page S5 

Table S7 Homoleptic complex properties, DEH-L and HOMO level 
Page S6 

Figure S1 Interpolated vs calc'd DEH-L for TMCs with pairs of NH3/H2O/ CO  
Page S6 

Table S8 Interpolated and actual DEH-L for pairs of H2O/CO and NH3 or CH3CN 
Page S7 

Figure S2 Interpolated vs calc'd HOMO for TMCs with pairs of NH3/H2O/ CO 
Page S8 

Table S9 MAEs for DEH-L binary complex estimates from interpolation schemes 
Page S8 

Table S10 Interpolated and actual HOMO for pairs of H2O/CO and NH3 or CH3CN 
Page S9 

Table S11 MAEs for HOMO binary complex estimates from interpolation schemes 
Page S10 

Figure S3 Interpolated vs calc'd DEH-L for TMCs with three ligands: NH3/H2O/CO 
Page S10 

Table S12 Interpolated and actual DEH-L for ternary H2O/CO/CH3CN complexes 
Page S11 

Table S13 Interpolated and actual DEH-L for ternary H2O/CO/NH3 complexes 
Page S12 

Figure S4 Interpolated vs calc'd HOMO for TMCs with three ligands: NH3/H2O/CO 
Page S13 

Table S14 Interpolated and actual HOMO for ternary H2O/CO/CH3CN complexes 
Page S14 

Table S15 Interpolated and actual HOMO for ternary H2O/CO/NH3 complexes 
Page S15 

Text S3 CS/TS-derived interpolation expressions for ternary complexes 
Page S16 

Table S16 MAEs of HOMO and DEH-L for ternary complexes 
Page S16 

Table S17 Properties of 52 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes 
Page S17 

Figure S5 Scatter of HOMO and DEH-L for 52 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes 
Page S18 

Table S18 12 most common ligands in target zone for Fe(II) complexes 
Page S18 

Figure S6 Homoleptic-only interpolated target zone for Fe(II) complexes 
Page S19 

Figure S7 Parity plot for predicted vs calculated 132 FS/MS Fe(II) complexes 
Page S19 

Table S19 MAEs for FS and MS complexes from HO-only averaging 
Page S20 

Table S20 Binary complexes in validation set for interpolation 
Page S20 

Table S21 Ternary complexes in validation set for interpolation 
Page S20 

References 
Page S21 


Page S2 

Text S1. Description of mononuclear complex curation. 
The Conquest interface was used to query for structures containing a transition metal atom (here, 
groups 3–12, periods 4–6, excluding La) that forms at least 4 bonds with either p-block (here, the 
first five rows of groups 13−17), noble gas, or group 1 or 2 elements. The only constraint imposed 
on the search was that 3D coordinates were determined. This initial query produced 462,012 
Refcodes for unique structures. The CSD Python API was then used to iterate through every 
“component” molecule in each x-ray crystallographic structure to identify all non-polymeric 
molecules with distinct molecular weight (within the same crystal structure) and only one 
transition metal atom. For each of the resulting 240,117 mononuclear transition metal complexes 
the CSD mol2 files were saved after adding any missing hydrogen atoms, preserving both the 
connectivity and bond orders present in the CSD. From this diverse set, 6-coordinate metal centers 
without edge-bound or sandwich-type ligands were evaluated for deviation of the angles (as 
defined in Ref. 1) between the metal-connecting atoms from the VSEPR ideal angles for 
octahedral, pentagonal pyramidal, or trigonal prismatic structures. Structures with lowest angular 
deviation from ideal octahedral molecular structure over other geometries were identified as 
octahedral.  
 
Text S2. Description of complex symmetry identification.  
 
Within each complex, a 3-hydrogen difference criterion was introduced to heuristically 

capture ligands that only differed in protonation state. If none of the equivalence conditions were 
met the ligands were identified as chemically identical. Ligand symmetry was identified by 
binning the octahedral structures by: (1) Ligand denticities (e.g., 5-denticity + 1-denticity) (2) 
maximum number of connecting atoms from a single ligand in the equatorial plane (e.g., 3-
denticity + 3-denticity has at most 2 connecting atoms from the same ligand in the equatorial plane 
-> fac binding) (3) total number of unique ligands (e.g., for a monodentate-only complex with 5 
unique ligands, two must be duplicates) and (4) for lower denticities, counts of pairs of trans 
ligands that are identical (e.g., for a monodentate-only complex with 3 pairs of identical ligands, 
if only 1 pair of trans ligands are identical -> other unique pairs must be cis). A nomenclature for 
ligand symmetry was created to describe the observed symmetries following these rules (1) 
Denticities are denoted by numbers as the base of the ligand symmetry representation with higher 
denticities listed first. (2) If ligands are identical they are surrounded by "||" markers, with ligands 
with the highest number of identical copies of the same denticity listed first.  (3) Tridentate ligands 
are identified as either fac- or mer- by f/m labels, and corresponding sets of three identical 
monodentate ligands are given equivalent f/m labels. (4) Pairs of identical monodentate ligands 
are identified as either cis- or trans- with c/t labels, pairs of non-identical monodentate ligands are 
given c/t labels only when there is one pair of non-identical monodentate ligands, and the ligand 
symmetry of identical pairs is ambiguous. Examples of ligand symmetry using this nomenclature 
are “|111111|” for a homoleptic monodentate-only complex, “4|11|t” for an equatorial tetradentate 
with trans identical monodentate ligands, and “2|11|c11” for a complex with a bidentate and 2 
identical monodentate ligands in the equatorial plane with 2 chemically-distinct monodentate 
ligands in the axial positions. 
 
 
 
 
 


Page S3 

Table S1. Number of complexes grouped by number of unique ligands for all (all) mononuclear 
octahedral transition metal complexes, all unique complexes with user-defined charges and non-
disordered structures ("computation-ready"), and the subset of unique complexes with Fe(II) 
centers (Fe(II)). The percent of each category is also shown. 

# ligands 
all 
percent 

computation-
ready 
percent 
Fe(II) 
percent 

1
19324
22.6%
4830
28.3%
661
55.0%

2
38780
45.3%
8191
47.9%
407
33.8%

3
22655
26.5%
3701
21.7%
129
10.7%

4
4530
5.3%
350
2.1%
5
0.4%

5
283
0.3%
13
0.1%
0
0.0%

6
3
0.0%
0
0.0%
0
0.0%

total 
85575
17085
1202

  
Table S2. Number of complexes grouped by symmetry class for all mononuclear octahedral 
transition metal complexes, all complexes with user-defined charges and non-disordered structures 
("computation-ready"), and the subset of complexes with Fe(II) centers. The percent of each 
category is also shown. 

Symmetry class
All 
percent

computation- 
ready 
percent
Fe(II)
percent

HO 
19324
24%
4830
29%
661
55%

5+1 
4881
6%
1216
7%
128
11%

CS 
15138
19%
2447
15%
74
6%

TS 
14861
18%
3745
22%
151
13%

FS 
2184
3%
426
3%
36
3%

MS 
1716
2%
357
2%
18
2%

CA 
2571
3%
793
5%
26
2%

TA 
3691
5%
760
5%
41
3%

FA 
5828
7%
772
5%
21
2%

MAC 
4706
6%
826
5%
17
1%

MAT 
1821
2%
205
1%
14
1%

DCS 
802
1%
113
1%
2
0%

DTS 
1011
1%
96
1%
4
0%

EA 
2225
3%
136
1%
4
0%

Total 
80759
16722
1197

 
 
 


Page S4 

Table S3. Number of unique ligands of each denticity grouped by symmetry class for all 
complexes with user-defined charges and non-disordered structures. 

# unique ligands by denticity 

# complexes
1
2
3
4
5
6
total 

HO 
4830
150
528
1719
0
0
813
3210

5+1 
1216
242
0
0
0
507
0
749

TS 
3745
677
786
0
700
0
0
2163

CS 
2447
109
1342
0
295
0
0
1746

FS 
426
48
0
275
0
0
0
323

MS 
357
35
0
318
0
0
0
353

CA 
793
302
119
0
206
0
0
627

DCS 
113
27
105
0
0
0
0
132

TA 
760
321
66
165
0
0
0
552

DTS 
96
111
0
0
0
0
0
111

EA 
136
66
118
0
0
0
0
184

FA 
772
225
226
168
0
0
0
619

MAC
826
195
266
252
0
0
0
713

MAT 
205
98
1
121
0
0
0
220

 
Table S4. Number of unique ligands of each denticity grouped by symmetry class for all 
complexes with user-defined Fe(II) centers. 

# unique ligands by denticity 

# complexes
1
2
3
4
5
6
total

HO 
661
40
142
355
0
0
124
661

5+1 
128
29
0
0
0
81
0
110

TS 
151
53
71
0
49
0
0
173

CS 
74
18
27
0
44
0
0
89

FS 
36
11
0
24
0
0
0
35

MS 
18
6
0
22
0
0
0
28

CA 
26
18
6
0
17
0
0
41

DCS 
2
3
3
0
0
0
0
6

TA 
41
34
7
0
10
0
0
51

DTS 
4
8
0
0
0
0
0
8

EA 
4
5
3
0
0
0
0
8

FA 
21
16
9
14
0
0
0
39

MAC
17
14
6
9
0
0
0
29

MAT 
14
13
0
11
0
0
0
24

 
 
 


Page S5 

Table S5. Number of monodentate ligands of each category from Fe(II) monodentate-only 
structures for the case where user defined charges and trustworthy structures were obtained ("All 
computation-ready") as well as the more stringent test where ligand charges were assigned as 
neutral. The bolded categories correspond to those used to study HO Fe(II) complexes as described 
in the main text. 

Category 

All 

computation-

ready

neutral 
ligand 
charge

HO 
40
36

2, or 3 type but not HO 
48
21

Total 1, 2, or 3 types 
88
57

only in 4-5-6-types 
3
1

 
Table S6. Number of complexes from monodentate-only configurations for each symmetry from 
the total user defined charges and trustworthy structures ("computation-ready") or for Fe(II) only. 
For Fe(II) complexes, theoretical spaces of N = 56 and N = 88 ligands are compared for each 
symmetry class along with the % of that space present in the CSD. The relevant symmetry class 
and notation is also provided. 

N = 88 
N = 56 

Computation-
ready 
Percent 
Fe(II) 
Percent 
# 
%  
# 
%  
Symmetry class 

HO 
150 
7% 
40 
39% 
88 
45.45% 
56 
71.43% 
|111111| 

5+1 
330 
16% 
9 
9% 
7656 
0.12% 
3080 
0.29% 
|11111|1 

TS 
944 
46% 
26 
25% 
7656 
0.34% 
3080 
0.84% 
|1111||11|t 

CS 
92 
5% 
5 
5% 
7656 
0.07% 
3080 
0.16% 
|1111||11|c 

FS 
48 
2% 
5 
5% 
3828 
0.13% 
1540 
0.32% 
|111|f|111| 

MS 
23 
1% 
0 
0% 
3828 
0.00% 
1540 
0.00% 
|111|m|111| 

CA 
46 
2% 
0 
0% 
329208 
0.00% 
83160 
0.00% 
|1111|11c 

DCS 
0 
0% 
0 
0% 
109736 
0.00% 
27720 
0.00% 
|11|c|11|c|11|c 

TA 
183 
9% 
3 
3% 
329208 
0.00% 
83160 
0.00% 
|1111|11t 

DTS 
96 
5% 
4 
4% 
109736 
0.00% 
27720 
0.01% 
|11|t|11|t|11|t 

EA 
17 
1% 
1 
1% 
329208 
0.00% 
83160 
0.00% 
|11|c|11|c|11|t 

FA 
36 
2% 
4 
4% 
658416 
0.00% 
166,320 
0.00% 
|111|f|11|1 

MAC 
35 
2% 
3 
3% 
658416 
0.00% 
166,320 
0.00% 
|111|m|11|c1 

MAT 
39 
2% 
2 
2% 
658416 
0.00% 
166,320 
0.00% 
|111|m|11|t1 

Total 
2039 
102 
3213056 
0.00% 
816,256 
0.02% 

 
 
 
Table S7. Homoleptic Fe(II) transition metal complex properties, DEH-L (in kcal/mol) and singlet 
HOMO level (in eV) for the ligands NH3, CH3CN, CO, and H2O obtained with B3LYP/LACVP* 
calculations.  
Ligand 
DEH-L (kcal/mol) 
HOMO level (eV) 

CH3CN 
43.67 
-13.35 

CO 
30.34 
-19.46 

H2O 
-27.04 
-15.16 

NH3 
-9.64 
-13.58 

 
 


Page S6 

 

Figure S1. Calculated vs. linearly interpolated DEH-L (kcal/mol) for Fe(II) complexes with pairs 
of any of the three ligands: NH3, H2O, and CO. From left to right: interpolation between 
homoleptic complexes (HO only), interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as cis 
symmetric and trans symmetric complex energies (CS+TS), or interpolation using homoleptic 
complexes as well as fac and mer symmetric complex energies (FS+MS). Points are colored 
according to the pair of ligands they correspond to: NH3-H2O (green squares), NH3-CO (gray 
circles), and CO-H2O (blue triangles), as indicated in inset legend. Key isomers are annotated. 
Points provided for the fit are translucent, whereas the remaining points are opaque. In all panes, 
a black dotted parity line is shown.   
 


Page S7 

Table S8. DEH-L values for pairs of two ligand types in Fe(II) complexes (in kcal/mol) along 
with interpolated values using only HO complexes, HO+CS/TS complexes, or HO+FS/MS 
complexes. 

Number of ligands 
interpolated 

L1 
L2 
Symmetry
CO 
H2O
CH3CN
NH3
splitting
HO 
CS/TS
FS/MS

H2O 
CH3CN
5+1 
0
5
1
0
-18.4
-15.3
-19.9
-16.2

H2O 
CH3CN
CS 
0
4
2
0
-7.8
-3.5
-7.8
-5.4

H2O 
CH3CN
TS 
0
4
2
0
-12.8
-3.5
-12.8
-9.6

H2O 
CH3CN
FS 
0
3
3
0
5.4
8.3
2.8
5.4

H2O 
CH3CN
MS 
0
3
3
0
-0.9
8.3
-1.2
-0.9

CH3CN
H2O 
CS 
0
2
4
0
13.4
20.1
13.4
18.2

CH3CN
H2O 
TS 
0
2
4
0
10.5
20.1
10.5
14.0

CH3CN
H2O 
5+1 
0
1
5
0
26.3
31.9
27.1
30.9

CH3CN
CO 
5+1 
1
0
5
0
42.6
41.4
42.5
41.9

CH3CN
CO 
CS 
2
0
4
0
39.2
39.2
39.2
40.1

CH3CN
CO 
TS 
2
0
4
0
41.2
39.2
41.2
40.0

CO 
CH3CN
FS 
3
0
3
0
38.4
37.0
39.0
38.4

CO 
CH3CN
MS 
3
0
3
0
38.2
37.0
40.2
38.2

CO 
CH3CN
CS 
4
0
2
0
38.8
34.8
38.8
35.7

CO 
CH3CN
TS 
4
0
2
0
39.1
34.8
39.1
35.6

CO 
CH3CN
5+1 
5
0
1
0
35.0
32.6
34.7
33.0

H2O 
CO 
5+1 
1
5
0
0
-19.2
-17.5
-23.2
-17.9

H2O 
CO 
CS 
2
4
0
0
-9.9
-7.9
-9.9
-8.7

H2O 
CO 
TS 
2
4
0
0
-19.3
-7.9
-19.3
-13.3

H2O 
CO 
FS 
3
3
0
0
0.5
1.6
-2.6
0.5

H2O 
CO 
MS 
3
3
0
0
-6.4
1.6
-7.8
-6.4

CO 
H2O 
CS 
4
2
0
0
4.6
11.2
4.6
10.4

CO 
H2O 
TS 
4
2
0
0
3.6
11.2
3.6
5.8

CO 
H2O 
5+1 
5
1
0
0
18.4
20.8
17.0
20.4

NH3 
H2O 
5+1 
0
1
0
5
-13.3
-12.5
-13.3
-12.4

NH3 
H2O 
CS 
0
2
0
4
-17.1
-15.4
-17.1
-15.2

NH3 
H2O 
TS 
0
2
0
4
-16.9
-15.4
-16.9
-16.6

H2O 
NH3 
FS 
0
3
0
3
-18.0
-18.3
-19.3
-18.0

H2O 
NH3 
MS 
0
3
0
3
-20.1
-18.3
-18.4
-20.1

H2O 
NH3 
CS 
0
4
0
2
-21.5
-21.2
-21.5
-22.4

H2O 
NH3 
TS 
0
4
0
2
-20.0
-21.2
-20.0
-21.0

H2O 
NH3 
5+1 
0
5
0
1
-25.1
-24.1
-23.5
-24.0

NH3 
CO 
5+1 
1
0
0
5
-0.6
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0

NH3 
CO 
CS 
2
0
0
4
5.7
3.7
5.7
5.6

NH3 
CO 
TS 
2
0
0
4
4.7
3.7
4.7
3.7

CO 
NH3 
FS 
3
0
0
3
13.3
10.4
14.1
13.3

CO 
NH3 
MS 
3
0
0
3
10.3
10.4
9.7
10.3

CO 
NH3 
CS 
4
0
0
2
22.4
17.0
22.4
19.0

CO 
NH3 
TS 
4
0
0
2
14.6
17.0
14.6
17.0

CO 
NH3 
5+1 
5
0
0
1
26.4
23.7
22.5
24.6

 
 


Page S8 

 

Figure S2. Calculated vs. linearly interpolated HOMO level (eV) for singlet Fe(II) complexes with 
pairs of any of the three ligands: NH3, H2O, and CO. From left to right: interpolation between 
homoleptic complexes (HO only), interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as cis 
symmetric and trans symmetric complex energies (CS+TS), or interpolation using homoleptic 
complexes as well as fac and mer symmetric complex energies (FS+MS). Points are colored 
according to the pair of ligands they correspond to: NH3-H2O (green squares), NH3-CO (gray 
circles), and CO-H2O (blue triangles), as indicated in inset legend. Key isomers are annotated. 
Points provided for the fit are translucent, whereas the remaining points are opaque. In all panes, 
a black dotted parity line is shown.   
 
Table S9. Mean absolute errors (MAE) in kcal/mol for Fe(II) complex DEH-L estimates from HO-
only averaging, including CS/TS in the averaging, and including FS/MS averaging for pairs of 
ligands, L1 and L2. The CS/TS and FS/MS errors are both averaged over only the points for which 
exact energies were not provided (interp.) as well as over all (all) points. 

DEH-L MAE  (kcal/mol) 

L1 
L2
HO 
CS+TS all 
CS+TS 
interp. 

FS+MS 
all 

FS+MS 
interp. 

H2O 
CH3CN 
6.3 
0.7 
1.4 
2.6 
3.5 

CH3CN 
CO 
2.1 
0.4 
0.8 
1.4 
1.9 

H2O 
CO 
5.1 
1.2 
2.4 
2.3 
3.1 

NH3 
H2O 
1.0 
0.6 
1.2 
0.8 
1.1 

NH3 
CO 
2.5 
1.1 
2.2 
1.3 
1.7 

Overall 
3.4 
0.8 
1.6 
1.7 
2.3 

 
 
 


Page S9 

Table S10. Singlet HOMO level values for pairs of two ligand types in Fe(II) complexes (in eV) 
along with interpolated values using only HO complexes, HO+CS/TS complexes, or HO+FS/MS 
complexes. 

Number of ligands 
Interpolated 

L1 
L2 
Symmetry
CO
H2O
CH3CN
NH3
HOMO
HO 
CS/TS
FS/MS

CH3CN
H2O 
5+1 
0
1
5
0
-13.56
-13.65
-13.57
-13.63

CH3CN
H2O 
CS 
0
2
4
0
-13.82
-13.95
-13.82
-13.88

CH3CN
H2O 
TS 
0
2
4
0
-13.80
-13.95
-13.80
-13.85

H2O 
CH3CN
FS 
0
3
3
0
-14.19
-14.25
-14.15
-14.19

H2O 
CH3CN
MS 
0
3
3
0
-14.08
-14.25
-14.11
-14.08

H2O 
CH3CN
CS 
0
4
2
0
-14.48
-14.56
-14.48
-14.49

H2O 
CH3CN
TS 
0
4
2
0
-14.41
-14.56
-14.41
-14.46

H2O 
CH3CN
5+1 
0
5
1
0
-14.82
-14.86
-14.79
-14.84

CO 
CH3CN
5+1 
5
0
1
0
-17.80
-18.44
-18.10
-18.32

CO 
CH3CN
CS 
4
0
2
0
-16.82
-17.42
-16.82
-17.10

CO 
CH3CN
TS 
4
0
2
0
-16.75
-17.42
-16.75
-17.02

CO 
CH3CN
FS 
3
0
3
0
-16.02
-16.40
-15.92
-16.02

CO 
CH3CN
MS 
3
0
3
0
-15.82
-16.40
-15.80
-15.82

CH3CN
CO 
CS 
2
0
4
0
-15.02
-15.38
-15.02
-15.06

CH3CN
CO 
TS 
2
0
4
0
-14.86
-15.38
-14.86
-14.98

CH3CN
CO 
5+1 
1
0
5
0
-14.11
-14.37
-14.10
-14.24

CO 
H2O 
5+1 
5
1
0
0
-18.54
-18.75
-18.63
-18.89

CO 
H2O 
CS 
4
2
0
0
-18.10
-18.03
-18.10
-18.15

CO 
H2O 
TS 
4
2
0
0
-17.81
-18.03
-17.81
-17.94

H2O 
CO 
FS 
3
3
0
0
-17.75
-17.31
-17.50
-17.75

H2O 
CO 
MS 
3
3
0
0
-17.39
-17.31
-17.18
-17.39

H2O 
CO 
CS 
2
4
0
0
-16.90
-16.60
-16.90
-16.72

H2O 
CO 
TS 
2
4
0
0
-16.56
-16.60
-16.56
-16.51

H2O 
CO 
5+1 
1
5
0
0
-16.16
-15.88
-15.86
-16.03

H2O 
NH3 
5+1 
0
5
0
1
-14.74
-14.90
-14.90
-14.86

H2O 
NH3 
CS 
0
4
0
2
-14.59
-14.64
-14.59
-14.58

H2O 
NH3 
TS 
0
4
0
2
-14.64
-14.64
-14.64
-14.62

H2O 
NH3 
FS 
0
3
0
3
-14.24
-14.37
-14.29
-14.24

H2O 
NH3 
MS 
0
3
0
3
-14.28
-14.37
-14.35
-14.28

NH3 
H2O 
CS 
0
2
0
4
-13.99
-14.11
-13.99
-14.05

NH3 
H2O 
TS 
0
2
0
4
-14.05
-14.11
-14.05
-14.09

NH3 
H2O 
5+1 
0
1
0
5
-13.79
-13.85
-13.82
-13.80

CO 
NH3 
5+1 
5
0
0
1
-18.62
-18.48
-18.58
-18.66

CO 
NH3 
CS 
4
0
0
2
-17.77
-17.50
-17.77
-17.75

CO 
NH3 
TS 
4
0
0
2
-17.69
-17.50
-17.69
-17.63

CO 
NH3 
FS 
3
0
0
3
-17.04
-16.52
-16.90
-17.04

CO 
NH3 
MS 
3
0
0
3
-16.80
-16.52
-16.71
-16.80

NH3 
CO 
CS 
2
0
0
4
-16.03
-15.54
-16.03
-15.79

NH3 
CO 
TS 
2
0
0
4
-15.73
-15.54
-15.73
-15.67

NH3 
CO 
5+1 
1
0
0
5
-14.90
-14.56
-14.65
-14.74

 
 


Page S10 

Table S11. Mean absolute errors (MAE) in eV for singlet complex HOMO levels from HO-only 
averaging, including CS/TS in the averaging, and including FS/MS averaging for pairs of ligands, 
L1 and L2. The CS/TS and FS/MS errors are both averaged over only the points for which exact 
energies were not provided (interp.) as well as over all (all) points. 

HOMO MAE  (eV) 

L1 
L2
HO 
CS+TS all 
CS+TS 
interp. 

FS+MS 
all 

FS+MS 
interp. 

H2O 
CH3CN 
0.11 
0.01 
0.02 
0.03 
0.04 

CH3CN 
CO 
0.51 
0.05 
0.10 
0.17 
0.23 

H2O 
CO 
0.20 
0.11 
0.22 
0.11 
0.15 

NH3 
H2O 
0.09 
0.04 
0.08 
0.03 
0.04 

NH3 
CO 
0.30 
0.25 
0.50 
0.07 
0.09 

Overall 
0.24 
0.09 
0.18 
0.08 
0.11 

  
 

 

Figure S3. Calculated vs. linearly interpolated DEH-L (kcal/mol) for Fe(II) complexes with at least 
one each of three ligands: NH3, H2O, and CO. From left to right: interpolation from homoleptic 
complexes (HO only), interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as cis symmetric and 
trans symmetric complex energies derived from pairs of ligands (CS+TS), or interpolation using 
homoleptic complexes as well as fac and mer symmetric complex energies derived from pairs of 
ligands (FS+MS). Points are colored according to the ligand with the highest stoichiometric 
coefficient: H2O (red circles), CO (gray squares), and NH3 (blue down triangles), or equal weight 
of all ligands (green up triangles), as indicated in inset legend. Key isomers are annotated. In all 
panes, a black dotted parity line is shown.   
 
 
 


Page S11 

Table S12. DEH-L values for Fe(II) complexes (in kcal/mol) with a combination of three ligand 
types, H2O, CO, and CH3CN, in Fe(II) complexes along with interpolated values using only HO 
complexes, HO+CS/TS complexes, or HO+FS/MS complexes. For the three EA isomers, L3 is the 
ligand in the trans position as indicated in the main text. 

Number of ligands
Interpolated 

L1 
L2 
L3 
Symmetry
CH3CN
CO
H2O
splitting
HO 
CS/TS
FS/MS

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
TA 
1
1
4
-15.7
-5.7
-16.1
-11.5

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
CA 
1
1
4
-7.7
-5.7
-8.8
-7.0

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
FA 
1
2
3
3.2
3.9
-1.6
2.5

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
MAC 
1
2
3
-4.6
3.9
-4.1
0.4

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
MAT 
1
2
3
-5.5
3.9
-4.6
-1.9

CH3CN
H2O 
CO 
FA 
2
1
3
5.2
6.1
1.8
4.7

CH3CN
H2O 
CO 
MAC 
2
1
3
-2.3
6.1
-2.9
2.4

CH3CN
H2O 
CO 
MAT 
2
1
3
-1.7
6.1
-4.4
0.3

CO 
CH3CN
H2O 
EA 
2
2
2
6.1
15.7
10.0
12.1

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
DTS 
2
2
2
6.2
15.7
10.4
12.1

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
DCS 
2
2
2
10.9
15.7
13.1
15.1

H2O 
CH3CN
CO 
EA 
2
2
2
12.0
15.7
11.7
13.5

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
EA 
2
2
2
12.9
15.7
12.1
13.6

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
FA 
1
3
2
9.0
13.4
14.5
13.5

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
MAC 
1
3
2
8.4
13.4
14.6
13.4

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
MAT 
1
3
2
3.5
13.4
9.9
11.1

CH3CN
CO 
H2O 
FA 
2
3
1
22.9
25.2
21.9
25.3

CH3CN
CO 
H2O 
MAC 
2
3
1
21.0
25.2
21.4
23.0

CH3CN
CO 
H2O 
MAT 
2
3
1
23.1
25.2
22.4
22.9

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
TA 
1
4
1
15.7
23.0
21.4
20.7

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
CA 
1
4
1
19.4
23.0
21.7
23.1

H2O 
CH3CN
CO 
FA 
3
1
2
12.1
17.9
15.7
17.4

H2O 
CH3CN
CO 
MAC 
3
1
2
13.8
17.9
16.7
17.3

H2O 
CH3CN
CO 
MAT 
3
1
2
9.7
17.9
14.2
15.2

CO 
CH3CN
H2O 
FA 
3
2
1
23.6
27.4
26.1
26.9

CO 
CH3CN
H2O 
MAC 
3
2
1
25.2
27.4
24.7
24.8

CO 
CH3CN
H2O 
MAT 
3
2
1
23.8
27.4
24.8
24.8

CH3CN
H2O 
CO 
CA 
4
1
1
25.2
29.7
26.3
29.2

CH3CN
CO 
H2O 
TA 
4
1
1
26.9
29.7
25.9
27.0

 
 
 


Page S12 

Table S13. DEH-L values for Fe(II) complexes (in kcal/mol) with a combination of three ligand 
types, H2O, CO, and NH3, in Fe(II) complexes along with interpolated values using only HO 
complexes, HO+CS/TS complexes, or HO+FS/MS complexes. For the three EA isomers, L3 is the 
ligand in the trans position as indicated in the main text. 

Number of ligands
Interpolated 

L1 
L2 
L3 
symmetry
NH3 
CO 
H2O 
splitting
HO 
CS/TS
FS/MS

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
CA 
1
1
4
-15.0
-14.6
-15.7
-15.5

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
TA 
1
1
4
-17.5
-14.6
-19.6
-17.2

CO 
H2O
NH3 
FA 
1
2
3
-5.7
-5.0
-8.4
-6.0

CO 
H2O
NH3 
MAC 
1
2
3
-7.2
-5.0
-7.7
-5.3

CO 
H2O
NH3 
MAT 
1
2
3
-11.5
-5.0
-8.2
-7.6

NH3 
H2O
CO 
FA 
2
1
3
-9.3
-11.7
-13.5
-12.0

NH3 
H2O
CO 
MAC 
2
1
3
-12.8
-11.7
-18.2
-14.3

NH3 
H2O
CO 
MAT 
2
1
3
-12.0
-11.7
-19.3
-14.9

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
DCS 
2
2
2
1.3
-2.1
-2.6
-1.9

H2O
CO 
NH3 
DTS 
2
2
2
-4.7
-2.1
-5.9
-4.1

CO 
NH3 
H2O
EA 
2
2
2
-1.4
-2.1
-4.5
-3.4

H2O
NH3 
CO 
EA 
2
2
2
-6.2
-2.1
-5.8
-4.1

CO 
H2O
NH3 
EA 
2
2
2
-1.9
-2.1
-4.2
-2.5

H2O
CO 
NH3 
FA 
1
3
2
3.5
4.5
6.3
5.1

H2O
CO 
NH3 
MAC 
1
3
2
-1.8
4.5
2.4
4.1

H2O
CO 
NH3 
MAT 
1
3
2
-1.0
4.5
-2.3
1.8

NH3 
CO 
H2O
FA 
2
3
1
8.7
7.4
5.2
8.0

NH3 
CO 
H2O
MAC 
2
3
1
5.9
7.4
4.7
5.7

NH3 
CO 
H2O
MAT 
2
3
1
4.2
7.4
4.2
4.7

CO 
H2O
NH3 
CA 
1
4
1
11.8
14.1
13.5
14.7

CO 
H2O
NH3 
TA 
1
4
1
7.1
14.1
9.1
11.4

H2O
NH3 
CO 
FA 
3
1
2
-7.8
-8.8
-7.9
-8.4

H2O
NH3 
CO 
MAC 
3
1
2
-7.4
-8.8
-8.4
-9.4

H2O
NH3 
CO 
MAT 
3
1
2
-9.5
-8.8
-7.6
-8.7

CO 
NH3 
H2O
FA 
3
2
1
3.6
0.8
2.7
1.9

CO 
NH3 
H2O
MAC 
3
2
1
1.2
0.8
1.6
1.2

CO 
NH3 
H2O
MAT 
3
2
1
0.9
0.8
-2.3
0.2

NH3 
H2O
CO 
CA 
4
1
1
-3.1
-5.9
-5.7
-4.8

NH3 
CO 
H2O
TA 
4
1
1
-3.8
-5.9
-7.3
-6.5

 
 


Page S13 

 

Figure S4. Calculated vs. linearly interpolated HOMO level (eV) for singlet Fe(II) complexes with 
at least one each of three ligands: NH3, H2O, and CO. From left to right: interpolation from 
homoleptic complexes (HO only), interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as cis 
symmetric and trans symmetric complex energies derived from pairs of ligands (CS+TS), or 
interpolation using homoleptic complexes as well as fac and mer symmetric complex energies 
derived from pairs of ligands (FS+MS). Points are colored according to the ligand with the highest 
stoichiometric coefficient: H2O (red circles), CO (gray squares), and NH3 (blue down triangles), 
or equal weight of all ligands (green up triangles), as indicated in inset legend. Key isomers are 
annotated. In all panes, a black dotted parity line is shown.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Page S14 

Table S14. Singlet HOMO level values with a combination of three ligand types, H2O, CO, and 
CH3CN, in Fe(II) complexes (in eV) along with interpolated values using only HO complexes, 
HO+CS/TS complexes, or HO+FS/MS complexes. For the three EA isomers, L3 is the ligand in 
the trans position as indicated in the main text. 

Number of ligands 
Interpolated 

L1 
L2 
L3 
symmetry
CH3CN 
CO
H2O 
HOMO
HO 
CS/TS
FS/MS

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
CA 
1
1
4
-15.71
-15.58
-15.54
-15.60

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
TA 
1
1
4
-15.50
-15.58
-15.69
-15.48

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
FA 
1
2
3
-16.40
-16.29
-16.14
-16.32

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
MAC 
1
2
3
-16.34
-16.29
-16.46
-16.31

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
MAT 
1
2
3
-16.13
-16.29
-16.31
-16.20

CH3CN
H2O 
CO 
FA 
2
1
3
-15.23
-15.27
-15.23
-15.30

CH3CN
H2O 
CO 
MAC 
2
1
3
-15.13
-15.27
-15.06
-15.20

CH3CN
H2O 
CO 
MAT 
2
1
3
-15.30
-15.27
-15.18
-15.18

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
DCS 
2
2
2
-15.89
-15.99
-15.76
-15.90

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
DTS 
2
2
2
-15.75
-15.99
-15.77
-15.80

CO 
CH3CN
H2O 
EA 
2
2
2
-15.76
-15.99
-15.80
-15.82

H2O 
CH3CN
CO 
EA 
2
2
2
-15.65
-15.99
-15.62
-15.81

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
EA 
2
2
2
-15.87
-15.99
-15.87
-15.87

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
FA 
1
3
2
-16.96
-17.01
-16.86
-16.91

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
MAC 
1
3
2
-16.77
-17.01
-16.82
-16.87

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN
MAT 
1
3
2
-16.76
-17.01
-16.65
-16.77

CH3CN
CO 
H2O 
FA 
2
3
1
-16.43
-16.71
-16.56
-16.61

CH3CN
CO 
H2O 
MAC 
2
3
1
-16.29
-16.71
-16.41
-16.50

CH3CN
CO 
H2O 
MAT 
2
3
1
-16.35
-16.71
-16.33
-16.46

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
CA 
1
4
1
-17.46
-17.73
-17.46
-17.63

CO 
H2O 
CH3CN
TA 
1
4
1
-17.14
-17.73
-17.28
-17.48

H2O 
CH3CN
CO 
FA 
3
1
2
-14.77
-14.97
-14.60
-14.77

H2O 
CH3CN
CO 
MAC 
3
1
2
-14.85
-14.97
-14.92
-14.76

H2O 
CH3CN
CO 
MAT 
3
1
2
-14.80
-14.97
-14.84
-14.72

CO 
CH3CN
H2O 
FA 
3
2
1
-15.38
-15.69
-15.19
-15.49

CO 
CH3CN
H2O 
MAC 
3
2
1
-15.38
-15.69
-15.15
-15.45

CO 
CH3CN
H2O 
MAT 
3
2
1
-15.27
-15.69
-15.28
-15.44

CH3CN
H2O 
CO 
CA 
4
1
1
-14.45
-14.67
-14.29
-14.47

CH3CN
CO 
H2O 
TA 
4
1
1
-14.42
-14.67
-14.33
-14.42

 
 
 
 


Page S15 

Table S15. Singlet HOMO level values with a combination of three ligand types, H2O, CO, and 
NH3, in Fe(II) complexes (in eV) along with interpolated values using only HO complexes, 
HO+CS/TS complexes, or HO+FS/MS complexes. For the three EA isomers, L3 is the ligand in 
the trans position as indicated in the main text. 

Number of ligands 
Interpolated 

L1 
L2 
L3 
Symmetry
NH3 
CO 
H2O 
HOMO
HO 
CS/TS
FS/MS

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
CA 
1
1
4
-15.87
-15.62
-15.74
-15.65

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
TA 
1
1
4
-15.92
-15.62
-15.60
-15.56

NH3 
H2O 
CO 
FA 
2
1
3
-15.64
-15.35
-15.44
-15.39

NH3 
H2O 
CO 
MAC 
2
1
3
-15.65
-15.35
-15.27
-15.28

NH3 
H2O 
CO 
MAT 
2
1
3
-15.67
-15.35
-15.31
-15.30

CO 
H2O 
NH3 
FA 
1
2
3
-16.73
-16.33
-16.34
-16.37

CO 
H2O 
NH3 
MAC 
1
2
3
-16.77
-16.33
-16.20
-16.26

CO 
H2O 
NH3 
MAT 
1
2
3
-16.33
-16.33
-16.22
-16.28

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
DCS 
2
2
2
-16.47
-16.07
-16.23
-16.17

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
DTS 
2
2
2
-16.10
-16.07
-16.08
-16.08

CO 
NH3 
H2O 
EA 
2
2
2
-16.44
-16.07
-16.14
-16.12

H2O 
NH3 
CO 
EA 
2
2
2
-16.10
-16.07
-16.06
-16.06

CO 
H2O 
NH3 
EA 
2
2
2
-16.50
-16.07
-16.18
-16.15

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
FA 
1
3
2
-17.42
-17.05
-17.33
-17.24

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
MAC 
1
3
2
-17.16
-17.05
-17.29
-17.17

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
MAT 
1
3
2
-17.10
-17.05
-17.12
-17.07

NH3 
CO 
H2O 
FA 
2
3
1
-17.24
-16.79
-17.06
-16.97

NH3 
CO 
H2O 
MAC 
2
3
1
-16.93
-16.79
-16.92
-16.87

NH3 
CO 
H2O 
MAT 
2
3
1
-16.98
-16.79
-16.77
-16.80

CO 
H2O 
NH3 
CA 
1
4
1
-17.90
-17.77
-17.93
-17.95

CO 
H2O 
NH3 
TA 
1
4
1
-17.70
-17.77
-17.75
-17.78

H2O 
NH3 
CO 
FA 
3
1
2
-15.36
-15.09
-15.31
-15.19

H2O 
NH3 
CO 
MAC 
3
1
2
-15.39
-15.09
-15.33
-15.21

H2O 
NH3 
CO 
MAT 
3
1
2
-15.41
-15.09
-15.18
-15.14

CO 
NH3 
H2O 
FA 
3
2
1
-16.23
-15.81
-15.88
-15.90

CO 
NH3 
H2O 
MAC 
3
2
1
-16.27
-15.81
-15.84
-15.84

CO 
NH3 
H2O 
MAT 
3
2
1
-15.90
-15.81
-15.87
-15.86

NH3 
H2O 
CO 
CA 
4
1
1
-15.12
-14.83
-15.01
-14.92

NH3 
CO 
H2O 
TA 
4
1
1
-15.13
-14.83
-14.89
-14.88

 
 
 


Page S16 

Text S3. Expressions for interpolating ternary complex energies from CS/TS binary complexes. 
We indicate the stoichiometry in the complex to distinguish where the energies are derived from: 

E(CA-(L1)4(L2)1(L3)1) = ½(E(CS (L1)4(L2)2)+E(CS (L1)4(L3)2)) 
E(TA-(L1)4(L2)1(L3)1) = ½(E(TS (L1)4(L2)2)+E(TS (L1)4(L3)2)) 
E(FA-(L1)3(L2)2(L3)1) = ½(E(CS (L1)4(L3)2)+E(CS (L2)4(L1)2)) 
E(MAC-(L1)3(L2)2(L3)1) = ½(E(TS (L1)4(L3)2)+E(CS (L2)4(L1)2)) 
E(MAT-(L1)3(L2)2(L3)1) = ½(E(TS (L1)4(L3)2)+E(TS (L2)4(L1)2)) 

E(DCS-(L1)2(L2)2(L3)2) = 1/6(E(CS (L1)4(L2)2+ E(CS (L2)4(L1)2+ E(CS (L1)4(L3)2 + 

 E(CS (L3)4(L1)2 + E(CS (L2)4(L3)2 + E(CS (L3)4(L2)2) 

E(DCS-(L1)2(L2)2(L3)2) = 1/6(E(TS (L1)4(L2)2+ E(TS (L2)4(L1)2+ E(TS (L1)4(L3)2 + 

 E(TS (L3)4(L1)2 + E(TS (L2)4(L3)2 + E(TS (L3)4(L2)2) 

E(EA-(L1)2(L2)2(L3)2) = 1/6(E(CS (L1)4(L2)2+ E(CS (L2)4(L1)2+ E(TS (L1)4(L3)2 + 

 E(TS (L3)4(L1)2 + E(TS (L2)4(L3)2 + E(TS (L3)4(L2)2) 

where the third ligand in the EA complex is the one that is trans to itself so energies involving that 
ligand are derived from the binary TS complexes, whereas the remainder are derived from CS 
complexes.  
 
 
Table S16. Mean absolute error (MAE) for singlet complex HOMO levels (in eV) and Fe(II) 
complex DEH-L (in kcal/mol) for combinations of ligands, L1, L2, and L3 evaluated with three 
averaging schemes: HO-only, CS/TS-derived averaging, and FS/MS-derived averaging.  

HOMO MAE  (eV) 
DEH-L MAE  (kcal/mol) 

L1 
L2
L3 
HO 
CS+TS 
FS+MS HO 
CS+TS 
FS+MS

H2O 
CO 
NH3 
0.26 
0.19 
0.22 
2.31 
2.30 
1.78 

H2O 
CO 
CH3CN 
0.21 
0.10 
0.09 
5.23 
2.45 
3.22 

Overall 
0.24 
0.15 
0.16 
3.77 
2.38 
2.50 

 
 
 


Page S17 

Table S17. Properties of 56 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes derived from either homoleptic examples 
in the CSD (36 "HO") with neutral ligands or from neutral ligands only present in binary and 
ternary Fe(II) complexes (20 "B or T") from DFT. Both the DEH-L (in kcal/mol) and the HOMO 
level of the singlet complex (in eV) are shown. Complexes are distinguished by stoichiometry. 

# atoms 
Stoichiometry 
Source 
refcode 

DEH-L 
(kcal/mol) 

HOMO level 
(eV) 

37 
Fe1C12N6H18 
HO 
ACEYOW01 
-4.98 
-12.97 

19 
Fe1O6H12 
HO 
AMAVOB 
-26.78 
-15.11 

55 
Fe1C18N12H24 
HO 
AXAKIT01 
-9.06 
-10.90 

97 
Fe1C30N6O6H54 
HO 
BIRSAZ 
-30.77 
-10.48 

67 
Fe1C30N6H30 
HO 
BUSVAO 
-16.02 
-11.82 

79 
Fe1C24O6H48 
HO 
BUSVES 
-33.88 
-12.51 

25 
Fe1N6H18 
HO 
CACDIW 
-9.64 
-13.58 

73 
Fe1C18N6O6H42 
HO 
CALMOS01 
-21.32 
-10.50 

13 
Fe1C6O6 
HO 
CEHHON 
30.03 
-19.46 

61 
Fe1C18N6O6H30 
HO 
CEMGUX 
-23.44 
-11.38 

121 
Fe1C42N6O6H66 
HO 
DECRAE 
45.81 
-10.93 

67 
Fe1C18N18H30 
HO 
DEDLAB 
-8.03 
-11.66 

73 
Fe1C18N6S6H42 
HO 
FAVDOV 
-17.25 
-10.27 

85 
Fe1C18N12S6H48 
HO 
FEGGAZ 
-24.89 
-10.13 

73 
Fe1C30N6O6H30 
HO 
FEHPYO 
-26.10 
-9.91 

49 
Fe1C18N6O6H18 
HO 
FEISXC01 
-5.02 
-12.21 

73 
Fe1C24N12H36 
HO 
FIWQUY 
-8.06 
-10.44 

169 
Fe1C84N24O12H48 
HO 
GOGSAZ01 
-0.40 
-9.19 

61 
Fe1C12N24H24 
HO 
HIPXOW 
-5.43 
-11.37 

127 
Fe1C36N6O6H78 
HO 
HUGVIQ 
-30.16 
-10.36 

97 
Fe1C24N24H48 
HO 
JANSAS01 
-1.77 
-11.43 

61 
Fe1C12O6S6H36 
HO 
JOHCOZ 
-30.25 
-10.56 

61 
Fe1C12N24H24 
HO 
JUVHEN 
-1.95 
-11.81 

37 
Fe1C12N6H18 
HO 
MICYFE10 
43.67 
-13.35 

115 
Fe1C30N24H60 
HO 
NIGXUY01 
-1.83 
-11.32 

79 
Fe1C18N24Cl6H30 
HO 
PEJQIF01 
-1.93 
-11.57 

55 
Fe1C6N30H18 
HO 
SIDMAW 
-2.30 
-12.01 

55 
Fe1C6N30H18 
HO 
SIDMEA 
-7.85 
-12.17 

79 
Fe1C18N24H36 
HO 
TUNBIN 
-1.14 
-11.55 

37 
Fe1C6O6H24 
HO 
USIMOA 
-25.75 
-13.70 

97 
Fe1C24N24Cl6H42 
HO 
VIFNAC01 
-2.71 
-11.82 

115 
Fe1C30N24H60 
HO 
VOJPAM 
-1.60 
-11.35 

91 
Fe1C18N42H30 
HO 
XOJCIL 
-1.79 
-11.14 

79 
Fe1C18N24Br6H30 
HO 
YAGYIP01 
-1.49 
-11.69 

79 
Fe1C18N24I6H30 
HO 
YAGYUB01 
-1.66 
-11.28 

97 
Fe1C24N24H48 
HO 
YEQKIR 
-1.43 
-11.32 

97 
Fe1C18O18P6H54 
B or T 
-- 
6.37 
-12.08 

115 
Fe1C42N24H48 
B or T 
-- 
-19.67 
-10.27 

79 
Fe1C18P6H54 
B or T 
-- 
-16.94 
-12.36 

61 
Fe1C12N6O12H30 
B or T 
-- 
-38.56 
-10.26 

121 
Fe1C60N12H48 
B or T 
-- 
-17.54 
-10.69 

145 
Fe1C72N12H60 
B or T 
-- 
-16.08 
-10.04 

91 
Fe1C36N12O6H36 
B or T 
-- 
-17.00 
-11.21 

151 
Fe1C36O18P6H90 
B or T 
-- 
9.61 
-11.51 

169 
Fe1C60O12P6H90 
B or T 
-- 
-10.82 
-10.68 

151 
Fe1C72N24O6H48 
B or T 
-- 
-16.64 
-10.11 

61 
Fe1C24N12Cl6H18 
B or T 
-- 
-16.56 
-13.24 

73 
Fe1C24N18H30 
B or T 
-- 
-15.67 
-11.23 

97 
Fe1C48N6H42 
B or T 
-- 
43.43 
-10.79 

139 
Fe1C54N42H42 
B or T 
-- 
-4.66 
-10.19 

133 
Fe1C60N12O12H48 
B or T 
-- 
-22.25 
-9.33 

73 
Fe1C12N12H48 
B or T 
-- 
-9.36 
-11.36 

103 
Fe1C42N24H36 
B or T 
-- 
-5.43 
-10.10 

19 
Fe1C6N6H6 
B or T 
-- 
43.66 
-15.08 

127 
Fe1C60N12O6H48 
B or T 
-- 
-25.06 
-9.85 

97 
Fe1C24N24H48 
B or T 
-- 
-1.13 
-11.32 


Page S18 

 

Figure S5. The DEH-L (in kcal/mol) vs. singlet HOMO level (in eV) for 56 homoleptic Fe(II) 
complexes shown as a scatter plot (middle) with normalized marginal 1D histograms at top and 
right, respectively. 
 
Table S18. Twelve most common ligands in target zone (i.e., DEH-L from -4 to +4 kcal/mol and 
singlet HOMO level from -14.0 to -13.0 eV) for Fe(II) complexes and the number of times the 
homoleptic-only averaging predicts that a complex in the zone will have that ligand in a binary 
complex or both binary and ternary complexes. Refcodes in italics refer to any complex that 
contains that ligand, whereas the remainder are the precise homoleptic Fe(II) complexes. The top 
10 most frequent ligands were selected along with two high-frequency ligands (MeCN and ClPyz) 
for added diversity.  

Refcode 
Description 
Short 
name 

# 

binary 

# binary 

or 

ternary 

DEH-L 

(kcal/mol) 

HOMO 

(eV) 

CEHHON 
CO 
CO 
23 
5071 
30.0 
-19.46 

AMAVOB 
H2O 
H2O 
4 
671 
-26.8 
-15.11 

RIFLEY 
hydrogen isocyanide 
CNH 
6 
1016 
43.7 
-15.08 

GOVKEK_comp_

0 
4,4'-bipyridine 
bpy20 
2 
364 
-17.5 
-10.69 

USIMOA 
methanol 
MeOH 
2 
484 
-25.7 
-13.70 

FAVDOV 
dimethylthioformamide 
DMTF 
2 
374 
-17.3 
-10.27 

CACDIW 
ammonia 
NH3 
4 
532 
-9.6 
-13.58 

BOYWEU_comp_

0 
dimethyltriazolopyrimidine 
DMTP 
2 
348 
-19.7 
-10.27 

ARENUG_comp_

0 
2-chloropyrazine 
ClPyz 
4 
377 
-16.6 
-13.24 

MICYFE_10 
methyl isocyanide 
CH3CN 
(misc) 
6 
536 
43.7 
-13.35 

ACEYOW01 
NCCH3 (acetonitrile) 
MeCN 
2 
439 
-5.0 
-12.97 

AMUZEP_comp_

0 

4-(5-(pyridine-4-yl)-1,3,4-oxadiazol-2-yl 

pyridine 
bpy25 
2 
369 
-16.6 
-10.11 

 


Page S19 

 

Figure S6. Homoleptic-only interpolation for Fe(II) complexes: the DEH-L (in kcal/mol) vs. singlet 
HOMO level (in eV) for 12 homoleptic Fe(II) complexes shown as both a scatter plot (middle, 
orange) and with normalized marginal 1D histograms at top and right (orange bars), respectively. 
The interpolated values are shown as a 2D histogram colored from low (purple) to high (yellow) 
density, and the same data is shown as a kernel density estimate on the histogram panes. 
 

 

Figure S7. Parity plot of calculated vs. HO-only interpolated DEH-L (in kcal/mol, left) and HOMO 
level (in eV, right) for 66 fac (blue circles) and mer (red circles) derived from 12 homoleptic Fe(II) 
complexes. A black solid parity line is also shown. 
 


Page S20 

Table S19. MAEs of homoleptic-only interpolation over the FS/MS 132 complex subset with 
respect to calculated values. 

spin 
(kcal/mol) 
HOMO (eV) 

MS 
3.88
0.78

FS 
4.02
0.77

 
Table S20. Binary complexes with their chemical formula and symmetry along with DEH-L (in 
kcal/mol) and HOMO level (in eV) obtained through three approaches: homoleptic-only 
interpolation, FS/MS-augmented interpolation, and explicit calculation. For the cases that are FS 
or MS complexes, FS/MS-augmented interpolation refers to the explicitly calculated property. As 
a result, the reported MAEs are obtained over 5 complexes for FS/MS-interpolation but 8 
complexes for HO-interpolation. The resulting calculated properties that are in the targeted zone 
are shown in bold. 

Complex 
Sym.HO-interpolation 
FS/MS-interpolation 
Calculation

spin (kcal/mol)HOMO (eV)spin (kcal/mol)HOMO (eV)spin (kcal/mol)HOMO (eV)

Fe(II)(MeCN)5(CO) 
5+1
0.9
-14.05
1.6
-13.95
1.5
-13.84

Fe(II)(MeCN)3(NH3)3 
MS
-7.3
-13.28
-3.6
-13.17
-3.6
-13.17

Fe(II)(CH3CN)3(MeOH)3 
FS
9.0
-13.52
2.9
-13.67
2.9
-13.67

Fe(II)(CH3CN)3(MeOH)3 
MS
9.0
-13.52
-0.8
-13.65
-0.8
-13.65

Fe(II)(ClPyz)4(CO)2 
CS
-1.0
-15.32
2.7
-13.73
4.9
-13.63

Fe(II)(ClPyz)4(CO)2 
TS
-1.0
-15.32
3.1
-13.70
5.7
-13.62

Fe(II)(MeOH)4(CH3CN)2  
CS
-2.6
-13.58
-6.6
-13.56
-9.1
-13.80

Fe(II)(MeOH)4(CH3CN)2  
TS
-2.6
-13.58
-9.1
-13.66
-13.9
-13.67

MAE 
6.3
0.54
2.5
0.11

 
Table S21. Ternary complexes with their chemical formula and symmetry along with DEH-L (in 
kcal/mol) and HOMO level (in eV) obtained through three approaches: homoleptic-only 
interpolation, FS/MS-augmented interpolation, and explicit calculation. The resulting calculated 
properties that are in the targeted zone are shown in bold. 
Complex 
Sym HO-interpolation 
FS/MS-interpolation 
Calculation

spin 
(kcal/mol)

HOMO 
(eV) 

spin 
(kcal/mol) 
HOMO (eV)
spin (kcal/mol)
HOMO (eV)

Fe(II)(ClPyz)4(CNH)1(NH3)1 
CA 
-5.4 -13.60
-3.8
-13.32
-3.8
-13.37

Fe(II)(DMTF)3(CO)2(H2O)1 
FA 
-3.1 -14.14
-3.0
-13.20
-8.2
-12.55

Fe(II)(NH3)4(DMTF)1(CO)1 
TA 
-4.3 -14.01
-3.2
-13.94
-0.2
-13.40

Fe(II)(ClPyz)4(MeCN)1(CO)1 
CA 
-6.9 -14.23
-3.8
-13.38
-0.5
-13.33

Fe(II)(MeCN)4(ClPyz)1(NH3)1 
TA 
-7.7 -13.12
-3.6
-13.03
-2.7
-12.83

Fe(II)(ClPyz)3(CO)2(DMTF)1 
FA 
-9.0 -13.29
-0.1
-13.96
-2.2
-13.20

MAE 
4.8
0.62
2.5
0.37

 
 
 


Page S21 

References 
 
1. 
C. Duan, J. P. Janet, F. Liu, A. Nandy and H. J. Kulik, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15 (4), 

2331-2345 (2019). 
 


