1

Local inversion-symmetry breaking in a bismuthate high-Tc superconductor

S. Griffitt1*, M. Spaić2*, J. Joe1, Z. Anderson1, D. Zhai1, M. J. Krogstad3, R. Osborn3, 

D. Pelc1,2†, and M. Greven1†

1School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

2Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia

3Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, USA

*authors contributed equally

†correspondence to: dpelc@phy.hr, greven@umn.edu

The doped perovskite BaBiO3 exhibits a maximum superconducting transition temperature 
(Tc) of 34 K and was the first high-Tc oxide to be discovered, yet pivotal questions regarding 
the nature of both the metallic and superconducting states remain unresolved. Although it is 
generally thought that superconductivity in the bismuthates is of the conventional s-wave 
type, the pairing mechanism is still debated, with strong electron-phonon coupling and 
bismuth valence or bond disproportionation possibly playing a role. Here we use diffuse x-
ray scattering and Monte Carlo modeling to study the local structure of Ba1-xKxBiO3 across 
its insulator-metal boundary. We find no evidence for either long- or short-range 
disproportionation, which resolves a major conundrum, as disproportionation and the 
related polaronic effects are likely not relevant for the metallic and superconducting states.
Instead, we uncover nanoscale structural correlations that break inversion symmetry, which 
has far-reaching implications for the electronic physics, including the pairing mechanism.
This unexpected finding furthermore establishes that the bismuthates belong to the broader 
classes of materials with hidden spin-orbit coupling and a tendency towards inversion-
breaking displacements.

Similar to other perovskite and perovskite-derived superconducting oxides, such as strontium 
titanate, strontium ruthenate and the high-Tc cuprates, the basic structural unit in the (nearly) cubic 
bismuthates is a metal-oxygen octahedron (Fig. 1) [1,2]. The parent compound BaBiO3 is an 
insulator with commensurate charge-density-wave (CDW) order that is thought to be caused by 
either a periodic modulation of the effective bismuth valence [2] or a Bi-O charge-transfer 
mechanism with charge localization on the oxygen orbitals [3,4]. With hole doping, this modulated 
phase quickly disappears, and a superconducting metal appears at sufficiently high hole 
concentrations. Due to strong electron-lattice coupling, the CDW in the parent compound involves 
three-dimensional oxygen breathing distortions of the octahedra (Fig. 1d). One of the prevailing 
hypotheses regarding the doped bismuthates is that short-range CDW correlations survive at high 
doping levels [3,5,6,7], and that these can be viewed as polarons – complex bound states of charge 
carriers and oxygen breathing distortions [8]. The metallic phase would then amount to a polaronic 
liquid, with the polarons binding into bipolarons that, in turn, condense to form a superfluid at Tc
[3,9]. On the other hand, it has been argued that superconductivity arises through a conventional 


2

electron-phonon pairing mechanism [10,11], from a homogeneous metallic state well-described 
by Fermi-liquid theory. Microscopically, the two pictures are radically different, yet conclusive 
experimental evidence for either scenario is lacking. 

Here we use diffuse x-ray scattering and Monte Carlo modeling to study short-range structural 
correlations in Ba1-xKxBiO3 (BKBO). We find that static and low-energy breathing distortions are
absent in samples with a sufficiently high potassium (and, hence, hole) concentration, on either 
side of the insulator-metal boundary. This places strong constraints on any local CDW scenario 
and the associated polaronic effects. However, we uncover correlations of a different nature that 
involve anticorrelated bismuth and oxygen shifts and break inversion symmetry (Fig. 1c). We 
show that these distortions are the result of a complex energy balance that involves screened ionic 
interactions, precipitated by random potassium-barium substitution. The short-range structural 
symmetry is therefore considerably lower than the average symmetry, implying that BKBO is a 
locally non-centrosymmetric superconductor. This finding raises the possibility of unanticipated 
channels for electron-lattice interactions, with similarities to materials with hidden spin-orbit 
coupling [12,13] and systems without global inversion symmetry [14] or close to an inversion-
breaking instability [15,16,17].

Figure 2 shows representative diffuse scattering data for two BKBO samples on either side of the 
metal-insulator transition. Qualitatively, the insulating samples show remarkably little diffuse 
scattering overall, indicative of nearly absent short-range correlations. In contrast, distinct features 
are immediately obvious in the metallic sample, with a notable asymmetry of the diffuse intensities 
around the Bragg peaks – the scattering is always stronger on the low-wavevector side of the peaks. 
This is a signature of distortions induced by local lattice contraction or expansion, known 
generically as size-effect scattering [18]. Yet in our case this is not simply due to Ba-K 
substitutional disorder, since the ionic radii of Ba and K are nearly the same. In fact, the K+ ion is 
slightly larger than Ba2+ while having a smaller x-ray form factor, which should lead to size-effect 
scattering that is stronger on the high-wavevector side [18]. Moreover, the asymmetric scattering 
shows a nontrivial doping dependence, with a strong increase in the metallic phase, and weak 
temperature dependence in the studied range (Fig. 2e). In contrast to Pb-doped BaBiO3, which
displays metastable structures and structural phase separation on the 10-20 nm scale [2,19], BKBO 
is thought to be single-phase in the metallic/superconducting state [2,20]. We note that the intensity 
maximum around x ≈ 45% could be partially due to experimental uncertainties (see Methods), and 
that the x ≈ 38% sample, which lies close to the insulator-metal boundary, might have a nonzero
insulating volume fraction, which would decrease the integrated intensity.

Importantly, no diffuse signal is present around (½ ½ ½) and equivalent positions in any of the 
studied samples (Extended Data Fig. S1). This demonstrates, within our experimental sensitivity,
the absence of short-range breathing distortions that double the quasi-cubic unit cell. Instead, we 
observe sharp, weak superstructure peaks that originate from a qualitatively different structural 
distortion – small long-range octahedral tilts – known from previous work [20]. Diffuse x-ray 
scattering is an energy-integrating probe and, in principle, sensitive to distortions at any energy 
scale. Yet the corresponding structure factors decay fairly quickly with the energy of lattice 
excitations [21], and dynamic distortions therefore become difficult to observe above 10-20 meV. 


3

We therefore cannot rule out the presence of breathing distortions at higher energies, and breathing
phonon modes are certainly present (between 70 and 80 meV [10]). However, the absence of low-
energy distortions still places stringent constraints on polaronic theories of the metallic state, 
especially for small polarons with high binding energies and low mobilities, where significant 
distortions would be expected [8]. Moreover, our result for the insulating phase is certainly not 
consistent with a frozen polaronic state. 

We can achieve a more refined understanding of the local structure by generating a three-
dimensional vector pair distribution function (3D-ΔPDF) using established punch-and-fill methods 
to eliminate contributions from the average structure (see Methods). The 3D-ΔPDF therefore only 
shows short-range pair correlations that deviate from the average structure and enables model-free 
insight into the real-space local structure [22,23]. Two representative planes are shown in Fig. 2
for the x ≈ 45% sample, with distinct pair correlations annotated. It is immediately clear that the 
characteristic length of the correlated displacements is short: the signals decay significantly within 
2-3 unit-cell distances, i.e., about 1-2 nm (see also Extended Data Fig. S2). Due to the simple 
crystal structure, it is straightforward to identify most of the features in the 3D-ΔPDF, especially 
at non-integer positions where there is no multiplicity. In the z = 0 plane, Ba-O correlation peaks 
are clearly visible, and the dipolar shape of the features shows that Ba and O atoms are more likely 
to be closer to each other than in the average structure. Note that K-O correlations would appear 
at the same positions, but the Ba-O signal dominates due to the much larger form factor of Ba. In 
contrast, Bi-Ba correlations (visible in the z = ½ plane) show that Bi and Ba are more likely to be 
further apart. Finally, Bi-O correlations do not involve appreciable changes of the interatomic 
distance, but rather a displacement of oxygen perpendicular to the average Bi-Bi line. This is seen 
as a four-fold symmetric pattern around (0 0 ½) and also quite clearly in the next-nearest-neighbour 
Bi-O correlations around (0 1 ½) and equivalent positions.

Two important conclusions can be drawn from the 3D-ΔPDF. First, features that would correspond 
to breathing distortions of the Bi-O bonds are absent, as already seen from the reciprocal space 
data (Extended Data Fig. S1). Second, the only way to reconcile the Bi-O correlations with the
opposite signs of the Ba-O and Ba-Bi correlations is a displacement pattern that breaks inversion 
symmetry. In local environments where Ba and K are not symmetrically arranged, the inversion-
breaking Bi-O distortion of Fig. 1c occurs, with the oxygen atoms shifting toward the Ba-rich side 
of the unit cell, and the Bi atoms shifting away from it (but with a much smaller amplitude). The 
Ba ions then adjust their positions to be further away from Bi, but the oxygen shift is larger than 
the Ba shift, so the Ba-O distance is still smaller than in the average structure. Importantly, a purely 
rigid BiO6 octahedra tilts would not lead to pronounced Ba-O size-effect features (that are even 
visible, e.g., in the next-nearest-neighbor Ba-O peaks around (1 ½ ½)), but yield a symmetric 
Mexican-hat feature centered at the origin in the 3D-ΔPDF [22]. Yet it is possible that a local rigid 
tilt component is superposed with the inversion-breaking displacement.

We obtain further microscopic insight through classical Monte Carlo modeling of the local 
structure, and first explore a toy model of (static) short-range CDW correlations using an effective 
Ising-type Hamiltonian based on Bi valence disproportionation. The bismuth valences +3 and +5 
play the role of Ising spins, and K substitution disrupts the CDW, since it locally favors the +5 


4

state. Free parameters of the model (see Methods) can be adjusted so that long-range CDW order 
disappears at low K concentrations, as expected, but short-range correlations survive up to higher 
K concentrations. We also introduce the accompanying breathing distortion by using a valence-
dependent interaction and relaxing the Bi-O distances using Monte Carlo importance sampling. 
This invariably generates superstructure peaks at (½ ½ ½) and equivalent reciprocal space 
positions even for weak short-range correlations (Extended Data Fig. S1), i.e., a signature of local
CDW correlations that is clearly absent in our data. 

In order to capture the observed diffuse scattering features, we then construct a minimal model
that only includes Bi and Ba/K displacements, under the assumption that all Bi atoms are 
equivalent. Furthermore, it is assumed that local lattice distortions are caused by incomplete
screening of the local ionic charges, which leads to electrostatic repulsion that is stronger for Bi-
Ba pairs than for Bi-K pairs. This is achieved with a screened Coulomb (i.e., Yukawa) potential to 
describe ionic interactions (see Methods). In the relaxed structure, Ba and Bi then prefer to be 
further apart than K and Bi (Fig. 3b). Since the scattering is dominated by the heavy atoms, the 
main reciprocal space features are well reproduced (Fig. 3a), with stronger diffuse scattering on 
the low-wavevector side of the Bragg peaks.

We further investigate the role of oxygen by extending the minimal model to include oxygen 
displacements perpendicular to the Bi-Bi direction. Using the bond valence sum method to 
estimate the oxidation states of Bi, Ba and K (see Methods), we find Bi and K oxidation states in 
reasonable agreement with their nominal values, whereas Ba is significantly underbonded. At low 
K concentrations, the system compensates for this through symmetry-lowering structural 
transitions [7], as permitted by the known size mismatch of Ba to the surrounding oxygen cage 
(Extended Data Fig. S3). On the other hand, at sufficiently high K concentrations, long-range tilt 
formation is disrupted by randomly distributed K atoms. Inversion-breaking oxygen displacements 
then become an alternative way to compensate for the underbonding of Ba in unit cells with an 
asymmetric arrangement of Ba and K. We include this in the Monte Carlo modeling by employing
the squared bond valence mismatch to penalize chemically unstable coordination environments
(see Methods). The obtained local structure contains a mixture of rigid tilts and inversion-breaking 
displacements that decrease the Ba-O distances (Fig. 3c), in agreement with the 3D-ΔPDF analysis.
The inversion-breaking distortions are found to increase with increasing K concentration
(Extended Data Fig. S5). We emphasize that the random K/Ba substitution and short-range 
electrostatic interactions are crucial in generating the distortions.

Our results establish that bismuth valence disproportionation and oxygen breathing-mode polarons 
are likely not relevant to superconducting BKBO. However, other electron-phonon composite 
states could be present, particularly states that involve the inversion-breaking Bi-O phonon mode. 
Ab initio studies suggest that the coupling of electrons to the longitudinal Bi-O mode around 20 
meV is in fact stronger than the coupling to high-energy oxygen breathing modes [10], which may
lead to polaronic physics. The appearance of a broad infrared peak in the optical conductivity [24]
is consistent with electron-phonon bound states. However, it is also possible that the local 
inversion-breaking distortions are predominantly precipitated by structural properties, with
electron-phonon coupling playing a secondary role and the metallic state more conventional. This 


5

is supported by the increase of inversion-breaking correlations with doping in our simulations, 
which do not explicitly include electron-phonon coupling. A related, important question is the 
interplay between the inversion-breaking displacements and rigid octahedral tilts – the latter are 
caused by atomic-size mismatch and decrease with doping, whereas the former clearly increase 
substantially in the metallic phase (Fig. 2e). It is therefore possible that the rigid tilts compete with
the polar displacements, which might then only proliferate below a critical tilt value, with a direct 
relation to the insulator-metal transition. An analogous interplay between octahedral tilts and 
electronic properties has been observed in, e.g., certain cuprates [25]. Targeted uniaxial-strain 
experiments to influence the tilts, as recently demonstrated in rare-earth titanates [26], might 
provide more information about this aspect of bismuthate physics, especially given the possible 
role of tilts in enhancing electron-phonon coupling [27]. Another interesting possibility is that 
screening by mobile carriers is essential to obtain the local distortions. Our calculations use the 
screened Yukawa potential for electrostatic interactions, which severely limits their spatial range
and permits inhomogeneity on the scale of the screening length. This is appropriate in the metallic 
phase, but not in the insulating phase, where long-range Coulomb interactions likely favour 
configurations with significantly less short-range charge disorder, which might explain the 
enhancement of diffuse scattering for metallic compositions. 

The existence of local correlated inhomogeneity has profound implications for both the metallic 
and the superconducting states. Similar to other prominent metallic perovskites, such as titanates 
[28], nickelates [29], and vanadates [30], the resistivity of the bismuthates is approximately 
proportional to the temperature squared, consistent with Fermi-liquid physics, but with a 
magnitude that is unrealistically large for electron-electron scattering [31]. It has been proposed 
that this might generically be understood through the interaction of small polarons with low-lying 
phonon modes [30]. The phonon spectrum of the bismuthates contains several optical modes in 
the 10-20 meV range [10] that could lead to such behaviour, but the polarons would probably
involve the inversion-breaking displacements instead of breathing distortions. Moreover, local
inversion-symmetry breaking can cause electron-lattice interactions that are forbidden in the 
average high-symmetry structure; electron-phonon coupling in a conventional Fermi liquid can 
also enhance T2 resistivity [32]. Importantly, the Thomas-Fermi screening length in metallic 
BKBO is about 4 Å [7] and likely sets the structural correlation length, implying that the dipole 
moment associated with the inversion-breaking distortions is not completely screened. A Rashba-
type electron-phonon coupling that is linear in phonon amplitudes might be important for both 
normal-state properties and superconducting pairing, as proposed for materials close to a polar 
instability such as strontium titanate [15,33]. Moreover, since the inversion-symmetry breaking 
appears at length scales comparable to the superconducting coherence length of 30-60 Å [2], the 
bismuthates can be viewed as locally non-centrosymmetric superconductors. This indicates that 
the pairing might be more exotic than just simple s-wave, with admixtures of odd-momentum gap 
functions allowed by symmetry [14], and the appearance of local time-reversal symmetry 
breaking. Finally, it will be interesting to see if similar effects are present in BaPb1-xBixO3 and the 
newly discovered isostructural antimony-based superconductor (Ba,K)SbO3 [34], as well as in 
substitutionally-doped oxides more broadly.


6

Methods

Samples. Ba1-xKxBiO3 crystals were grown using a low-temperature electrocrystallization method 
similar to previous work [35,36]. The growth precursor consisted of 140 g KOH, which acts as
flux, 10.5 g Bi2O3, and 3.5-20 g Ba(OH)2 ∙ 8H2O. The precursor materials were combined in a 
PTFE crucible, melted at 400 °C and homogenized by a magnetic stirrer at 60 rpm in a humid 
nitrogen atmosphere. A small amount (2 - 4 g) of KNO3 was added to counteract the degradation 
of the crucible [36]. Platinum electrodes were inserted into the molten solution and a constant 
current between 0.1-1 mA was supplied for 18 hours. BKBO crystals deposit on the anode, and 
excess bismuth deposits on the cathode. The amount of Bi2O3 far exceeds the solubility limit of 
KOH at the beginning of a growth, enabling the Bi2O3 concentration to remain constant for the 
duration of the growth. The ratio of Ba(OH)2∙ 8H2O to KOH controls the doping level of the 
deposited crystal. Using this method, crystals with potassium content between x = 0.25 and 0.51 
were grown.

Sharp superconducting transitions from dc magnetization and ac susceptibility (including 
nonlinear susceptibility [37]) measurements were used as an indicator to select metallic samples. 
For both metallic and insulating samples, high crystalline quality was established from sharp, well-
defined Bragg peaks in the x-ray data. The potassium concentration was estimated from lattice 
parameter values obtained during the refinement of the diffuse x-ray scattering data, and by 
employing the known linear relation between doping and unit cell size at 300 K [7]. In the case of 
metallic samples, these values were found to be consistent with those determined from the well-
defined relationship between Tc and doping [7].

Diffuse x-ray scattering. The measurements were performed on beamline 6-ID-D of the Advanced 
Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. The beamline uses a superconducting magnet 
undulator insertion device and a double-crystal monochromator to produce a monochromatic high-
energy x-ray beam. We used a photon energy of 87 keV, slightly below the Bi K-edge at 90.526
keV, which likely suppresses the relative intensities of the diffuse scattering/PDF peaks that 
involve Bi. A Pilatus 2M CdTe detector with sensor layer optimized for high energies was used to 
collect frames with 0.1 s exposure time, while samples were continuously rotated at 1° s−1 about a 
horizontal axis. Three sets of rotations were performed in each measurement, between which (i) 
the detector was translated by 5 mm in both the horizontal and vertical directions to cover gaps 
between detector chips, and (ii) the sample rotation axis was offset by ±15° from perpendicular to 
the beam to allow masking of artefacts caused by scattering in the sensor layer. The overall 
counting time at each temperature setting was 20 min. See Supplementary Material in [23] for 
more details. Data covering a range of about ± 15 Å−1 in all directions were collected down to 30 K 
using an Oxford N-Helix helium cryocooler, and transformed to S(Q) using the software package 
CCTW (https://sourceforge.net/projects/cctw/).

3D-ΔPDF.
The 3D-ΔPDF shown in Fig. 2 was generated similar to [23] by symmetrizing the x

= 45% data with all operations included in the 𝑚3̅𝑚 point group, “punching” out spheres of 
reciprocal space of radius 0.2 r.l.u. around each Bragg position, and “filling” the removed spheres 


7

by interpolating with a three-dimensional Gaussian kernel. A Tukey window (α = 0.5) was applied 
to the “filled” data to reduce leakage artifacts in the Fourier transform, and a discrete Fourier 
transform was then applied to the data. The 3D-ΔPDF shown is the real part of this Fourier 
transform.

The real-space correlation length of the displacement was obtained from a representative linecut 
(0.5 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 6, y = 0, and z = 0) of the 3D-ΔPDF. The absolute values of the signal peaks along the
linecut were fit to an exponential function (Extended Data Fig. S2). The decay constant was found 
to be 1.1 unit cells, which indicates a significant decay within about 2 unit cells (about 1 nm). 

Temperature and doping dependences of diffuse scattering. The temperature and doping 
dependence of the asymmetric component of the diffuse signal was obtained as follows. First, a 
Bragg peak free of any artefacts such as streaking (due to Compton scattering) or powder rings
was chosen. For a comparison of relative scattering intensities among different samples, it is 
essential that the same Bragg peak and Brillouin zone be used, as there exists considerable intensity 
variation across different zones. Because BKBO is nearly cubic at the measured temperatures, 
there are 8 equivalent sites for each hkl position in reciprocal space, and the positions (±4 0 ± 6)
were chosen. A one-dimensional (1D) intensity profile along [100] was obtained by summing 
between ± 0.04 r.l.u. along [010] and ± 0.08 r.l.u. along [001]. The result in Fig. 2(e) was obtained 
from fast-Fourier transformations of these 1D datasets, centered on the respective Bragg peak, via

𝑦(𝑘) = ∑ e−2𝜋𝑖𝑘𝑛

𝑁 𝑥(𝑛)

𝑁−1

𝑛=0

,

where N is the length of the 1D array, x the intensity at index n, and 0 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 41 (this is well into 
the range of k where the contribution of each higher value becomes vanishingly small). This 
transformation returns both real values, which correspond to the amplitudes of the symmetric parts 
of the signal, and imaginary values, which correspond to the asymmetric scattering intensities. For 
each sample at each temperature, the asymmetric intensities were summed and normalized by the 
maximum value in the 1D dataset to obtain a ‘temperature factor’. This normalization functioned
quite well for a comparison of datasets for the same sample; however, a second normalization was
required to compare results for different samples to account for differences in illuminated sample 
volumes and background levels. This normalization consisted of finding the Bragg peak intensity 
at the same temperature for each sample and scaling each sample’s temperature factors by the ratio 
of its Bragg peak intensity to that of the sample with the strongest Bragg peak intensity. Notably, 
this procedure involved uncertainties that were difficult to quantify, most importantly possible 
partial saturation (nonlinearity) of the detector at the Bragg peaks for the largest samples, which 
might affect the comparison in Fig. 2e. The relative intensities should therefore be taken as semi-
quantitative, with the main, robust result that the diffuse intensity increases in the metallic phase.

Monte Carlo modeling. We used classical Monte Carlo (MC) to simulate short-range ordered 
structures [38], with K randomly substituted for Ba. As a first step, a clear diffuse scattering 

(1)


8

signature of short-range CDW correlations was established by constructing a simple, yet robust 
Ising-type model with the Hamiltonian

𝐻 = 𝐽1 ∑

⟨𝑖𝑗⟩

𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑗 + 𝐽2 ∑

⟨𝑖𝑗⟩

𝜎𝑖𝑠𝑗,

where bismuth oxidation states +3 and +5 are mapped to the respective values +1 and − 1 of the 
spin variable 𝑠, the chemical species of nearest-neighbor A-site cations are encoded as 𝜎=+1 (K)
and 0 (Ba), the indices 𝑖 and 𝑗 label different unit cells, and the sums are restricted to the nearest-
neighbor pairs. Since we aim for a phenomenological model of short-range CDW formation, the 
coupling constants 𝐽1,2 can be estimated from the requirement that long-range order disappears for 
K concentrations above ~0.1 [15,20], while short-range CDW correlations persist at higher 
doping. Long-range CDW order corresponds to a nonzero expectation value of the staggered 
magnetization 

𝑚 =

1

𝑁 ⟨∑𝑖𝑗𝑘 (−1)𝑖+𝑗+𝑘𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑘⟩,

where 𝑁 is the total number of unit cells, and the brackets denote the ensemble obtained via MC 
importance sampling. Similarly, short-range order is captured by the chemical correlation 
coefficient [39] 

𝑐𝑖𝑗 = 𝑃𝑖𝑗 − 𝜃2

𝜃(1 − 𝜃)

where 𝑃𝑖𝑗 is the joint probability that bismuth sites 𝑖 and 𝑗 are occupied by the same oxidation state 
+3 (+5), and θ is the overall concentration of +3 (+5) atoms. Negative values of 𝑐𝑖𝑗 correspond to 
situations where the two sites tend to be occupied by different oxidation states, which is used to 
quantify remnant CDW correlations. For the sake of computational efficiency, the model neglects 
the possibility of partial charge transfer between different BiO6 octahedra and operates only with 
discrete values of charge perfectly localized on Bi atoms. Though likely unrealistic, this 
assumption still serves our purpose, since the relevant diffuse features will mostly be determined 
by the range of CDW correlations and the octahedral breathing amplitude, and not by the exact Bi 
oxidation states. The charge should thus be viewed as an effective charge variable. The first term 
in the Hamiltonian (𝐽1 > 0) models the Coulomb interaction between nearest-neighbor charges 
localized on Bi atoms and is thus responsible for CDW formation. The second term (𝐽2 < 0)
captures the disruption of the CDW order by the presence of K atoms, which play the role of 
effectively negatively charged impurities and locally favor the +5 state. A representative statistical 
ensemble of equilibrium configurations was obtained by simulating
many 20 × 20 ×

20 supercells with periodic boundary conditions, such that the basic move involves a swap of +3 
and +5 atoms in order to preserve the effective charge balance, and by using simulated annealing 
[40] to prevent the simulation from getting stuck in local minima. Furthermore, we used the 
coupling between the local charge and octahedral breathing amplitude [41,42] that is responsible 
for stabilizing the charge modulation, through the valence-dependent harmonic interaction 
between Bi and O atoms,

(2)

(3)

(4)


9

𝑈𝑖(𝑟) =

1

2 𝐾[𝑟 − 𝑟0(𝑠𝑖)]2,

where 𝐾 is the effective spring constant and 𝑟0(𝑠𝑖) the Bi-O equilibrium distance for two different 
oxidation states 𝑖. The value of the spring constant 𝐾 ≈ 19 eV/Å2 can be estimated by fitting the 
Raman-active 70 meV breathing mode [42,43], and the average values of 𝑟0(+5) and 𝑟0(+3) in 
the parent compound are known from previous studies [2,7,20] to be ~ 2.11 Å and ~ 2.29 Å, 
respectively. Since we aimed to reproduce the local structure that would result from short-range 
CDW, the above valence-dependent potential was sufficient to reproduce the relevant effects and 
avoided microscopic details of electron-phonon coupling and the intricacies of stability of 
polaronic and bipolaronic solutions [3,5]. Using MC sampling with positional displacements as 
the basic move to relax the Bi-O bonds, and subsequently calculating diffuse scattering [44], we
found diffuse superstructure peaks at specific half-integer positions in reciprocal space, which are 
absent in the experiment (Extended Data Fig. S1). The configuration and diffuse scattering shown 
in Extended Data Fig. S1 were obtained using |𝐽2 𝐽1
⁄ | = 4 and J1 equal to the effective Monte 

Carlo temperature. For this choice of parameters, no long-range order is present, but short-range 
correlations persist (Extended Data Fig. S1). The results do not significantly depend on the ratio 
of J1 to the temperature, if the ratio is smaller than or close to one.

The second part of the analysis involved a minimal model that captures the essential features of 
the observed diffuse scattering (Fig. 2). First, since we find no evidence of charge modulation in 
the studied K concentration range, we assumed a homogenous charge distribution on the Bi 
sublattice, with the oxidation state of Bi fixed by charge neutrality (𝑉𝐵𝑖 = 4 + 𝑥). The pseudo-
cubic lattice constant obtained from this assignment using bond valence sum rules [45] for the
BiO6 octahedral complex is consistent with 𝑎 = 4.35 − 0.17𝑥 known from structural studies [7], 
which indicates that the unit cell size is mainly controlled by the strength of the Bi-O bonds and 
gives credibility to our assumption. Also, the asymmetry of the observed diffuse features indicates 
that the local lattice distortion is not simply due to slight differences in the ionic sizes of Ba2+ (∼
1.49 Å) and K+ (∼ 1.52 Å) (Shannon-Prewitt ionic radii) [46]. Therefore, we assumed that the 
effect is caused by residual electrostatic interactions between different non-bonded ions, where the 
static screening in the metallic regime is approximately accounted for by the familiar Yukawa 
potential 

𝜙𝑖𝑗(r) =

𝑄𝑖𝑄𝑗

r 𝑒−𝑘𝑆r, 

where 𝑄𝑖 represents the ionic charge of the i-th ion and 𝑘𝑆 ≈ 0.49 Å−1 [20] the screening 
wavenumber, which sets the length scale of the local lattice distortion. In the insulating state, the 
screened potential is likely not appropriate, and long-range Coulomb interactions might drastically 
change the overall energy balance; this is, however, significantly more difficult to simulate, and 
was not been attempted. The ionic charges were assumed to be equal to atomic oxidation states,
which suffices for the desired semi-quantitative insights that we aimed for. To make the model 
more realistic, we introduced Bi-O, Ba-O and K-O covalent bonds via the Morse pair potential 

𝑈(𝑟) = 𝐷(1 − 𝑒−(𝑟−𝑟0)/𝑏)

2,

(6)

(7)

(5)


10

where the equilibrium distance between atoms 𝑟0 is determined by the size of the unit cell. The 
constant 𝑏 determines the “softness” of the bond and was taken from [47]. 𝐷 was obtained by 
comparing to the known values of atomic displacement parameters (thermal factors) [7,20];
𝐷𝐵𝑖−𝑂 = 10 and 𝐷𝐵𝑎−𝑂 = 𝐷𝐾−𝑂 = 2 in units of MC temperature. The structure was relaxed by 
performing the MC thermalization on an ensemble of 15 × 15 × 15 supercells. We found that the 
calculated diffuse scattering averaged over many equilibrium configurations and symmetrized in 
the m3m point group agreed well with the data, with the asymmetry on the low-wavevector side 
of the Bragg peaks reproduced well (Fig. 3a).

To complete the picture, we constructed a model of the local structure of oxygen octahedra, whose 
features are not obvious in reciprocal-space data, but can be inferred from the 3D-ΔPDF. We used
the well-known perovskite (𝐴𝐵𝑂3) tolerance factor

𝑡 =
𝑟𝐴 + 𝑟𝑂

√2(𝑟𝐵 + 𝑟𝑂)

as an indicator of structural stability, where 𝑟𝑂 = 1.26 Å [46] is the ionic radius of O2-. For 𝑟𝐵 +
𝑟𝑂, we used half the lattice constant, since the size of the unit cell is controlled by the covalent 
Bi-O bond whose length depends on doping through the effective valence of Bi. Using tabulated
values of ionic radii of K+ and Ba2+ in place of 𝑟𝐴 we obtained the doping dependences of 𝑡𝐵𝑎 and 
𝑡𝐾
(Extended Data Fig. S3), and hence an indication of how well the A-site cations are 

accommodated by the lattice. 𝑡𝐾 is in the “ideal” range for all K concentrations, whereas Ba is too 
small for the ideal cubic lattice, which can be compensated for by the formation of long-range rigid 
octahedral tilts that lead to the sequence of structural transitions (𝑃𝑚3𝑚 → 𝐼4|𝑚𝑐𝑚 → 𝐼𝑏𝑚𝑚 →
𝐼21𝑚) [7,20] as the K concentration decreases toward zero. However, for higher K concentrations, 
formation of long-range ordered tilts is significantly disrupted by the presence of randomly 
distributed K atoms. The barium size mismatch and the disorder introduced by potassium doping 
thus lead to an interplay between short-range tilts and inversion-breaking displacements. This is 
also reflected in the unusually large anisotropic thermal ellipsoids of oxygen [7], indicating the 
propensity for large oxygen displacements perpendicular to the Bi-O bond to accommodate the
size discrepancy. Similar conclusions can be drawn if we use the bond valence sum (BVS) method 
[45,48] to estimate the empirical valence 𝑣 of a given atom as a sum of contributions of each bond 
that it forms (bond valences 𝑠𝑗) in each bonding environment, with 𝑣 = ∑𝑗 𝑠𝑗 the scalar and 𝐯 =
∑𝑗 𝑠𝑗𝐞𝑗 the vector bond valence sum, where ej are unit vectors along the bonds, and the summation 
is over bonds. The bond valences are best understood in the context of (mostly) ionic bonds where 
bond valence plays the role of electric flux, so that the BVS rule above simply becomes Gauss’
law. Using the known correlation between bond valence and bond length 

𝑠𝑗 = 𝑒

𝑅0−𝑟

𝑏 ,

where r is the bond length and R0 and b are parameters tabulated in [47], we calculated the doping 
dependence of the empirical Ba and K valences in the average structure. In the doping range of 
interest (𝑥 ∼ 0.35 − 0.45), we found K to be fully bonded (𝑣𝐾 close to nominal valence +1 of K), 

(8)

(9)


11

and Ba to be significantly underbonded (𝑣𝐵𝑎 smaller than nominal valence +2 of Ba) (Extended 
Data Fig. S3). This correlates with our previous geometric analysis, but also allowed us to 
formulate a semi-quantitative model where we use the (squared) valence mismatch, also referred 
to as the global instability index, defined by [45]

𝑔 = 𝑤𝑠 ∑

𝑖

(𝑣𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖)2 + 𝑤𝑣 ∑(𝐯𝑖

2 − 𝐕𝑖

2)2

𝑖

as a measure of structural instability [48,49]. The two right-hand side terms correspond to scalar 
and vector contributions, respectively [49], with weights 𝑤𝑠 = 2 and 𝑤𝑠 = 1. Vi and vi are the
scalar nominal and empirical valences of an atom, respectively, while Vi and vi are the respective
vectors. The nominal vector valences Vi are taken to be zero [45,49]. Using 𝑔 in the calculations 
naturally captures multi-body atomic correlations and the tendency of oxygen displacements to 
compensate for the valence mismatch of Ba. To constrain the model, we implemented soft volume 
exclusion using the Lennard-Jones repulsive term 𝐴(𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑛/𝑟)12, where rion is the tabulated ionic 
radius of a given atom [46], and A = 6 in units of MC temperature. Furthermore, the interplay of 
tilts and polar displacements required the inclusion of an effective octahedral rigidity constraint, 
for which we used a harmonic spring potential between neighboring oxygen atoms as the simplest 
option,

𝑈𝑅(𝑟) =

1

2 𝑘(𝑟 − 𝑟𝑂)2,

where r is the O-O distance, 𝑟𝑒𝑞 is their distance in the average structure, and the spring constant 
𝑘 = 10 (in MC temperature units) was chosen to be sufficiently large, thus penalizing, but not 
precluding non-rigid displacement patterns of the oxygen octahedra. Given the qualitative nature 
of the model, the exact proportion of rigid tilts as opposed to non-rigid polar distortions is hard to 
estimate, as it heavily depends on the relative weights of 𝑔 and 𝑈𝑅(𝑟). Still, overall trends in the 
doping dependence can be discerned either by looking at the distribution of O-O distances
(Extended Data Fig. S4) or the doping dependence of the local centrosymmetry parameter, defined 
as [50]

𝑝𝐶𝑆𝑃 = ∑|𝐫𝑖 + 𝐫𝑖+𝑁 2
⁄ |

2

𝑁/2

1

where N is the number of nearest neighbours of a given atom, and r are vectors from this central 
atom to a pair of opposite neighbours. This parameter is a convenient measure of deviations from 
centrosymmetry, and it increases with K concentration (Extended Data Fig. S5).

(10)

(11)

(12)


12

Acknowledgements

We thank D. Robinson and S. Rosenkranz for assistance with x-ray scattering experiments, and T. 
Birol, A. Klein, and S. Johnston for discussions and comments. The work at the University of 
Minnesota was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy through the University of Minnesota 
Center for Quantum Materials, under Grant No. DE-SC0016371. The work in Zagreb was 
supported by Croatian Science Foundation Grant No. UIP-2020-02-9494. The work at Argonne 
was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, 
Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. This research used resources of the Advanced 
Photon Source, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for 
the DOE Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02-
06CH11357.

Author Contributions

MG and DP conceived the work. SG, JJ, DZ and DP grew and characterized samples. SG, JJ, ZA, 
MJK, DP and RO performed x-ray scattering experiments and analysed data. MS performed model 
calculations. DP, MG, SG and MS wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.

Competing Interests

The authors declare no competing financial or non-financial interest. 

Data availability

All data, materials and computer code used to generate the results in the paper are available from the 
corresponding authors upon request.


13

Fig. 1 | Phase diagram and unit-cell distortions in Ba1-xKxBiO3. a, Schematic phase diagram 
based on [2,7,20]. In the insulating (I) phase, there exists a commensurate charge-density wave (I-
CDW) up to x ~ 10-15%. Metallic (M) and superconducting (SC) phases appear above x ~ 35%.
At intermediate K concentrations, long-range CDW correlations are absent [7]; the high-
temperature structure (I-HS) is cubic, whereas long-range rigid octahedral tilts lead to tetragonal 
and orthorhombic distortions at low temperatures (I-LS; see Methods and [7,20] for details). The
long-range tilts persist in the metallic phase (green dotted line). Shaded bands indicate estimated 
potassium concentrations for the samples studied in this work. b, Cubic unit cell. c, Schematic 
inversion-breaking distortion; two of the six oxygen atoms do not change position. d, Schematic 
oxygen-breathing distortion.


14

Fig. 2 | Local structure of Ba1-xKxBiO3. a,b, Normalized diffuse x-ray intensity in the L = 0 plane 
at 30 K for (a) x ≈ 0.25, in the insulating state, and (b) x ≈ 0.45, in the metallic state. Structured 
diffuse scattering that is asymmetric around the Bragg peaks is clearly seen in the metallic sample. 
c,d, Vector pair distribution functions (3D-ΔPDF) obtained for the sample with x ≈ 0.45 (same as 
in (b)), shown in two representative planes (z = 0 in c and z = 0.5 in d), with a number of Ba-O, 
Ba-Bi and Bi-O correlation peaks annotated. Correlations involving K are suppressed compared 
to Ba because of the significantly smaller x-ray form factor of K. e, Temperature dependence of 
the asymmetric component of the diffuse scattering across the insulator-metal boundary. Open and 
full symbols indicate insulating and metallic compositions, respectively; the x ≈ 38% sample is 
close to the phase boundary. The intensities in (a,b,e) are normalized to nearby Bragg peaks; 
although it is difficult to extract absolute intensities from x-ray data, a strong increase in relative 
intensity is clearly seen in the metallic phase (see Methods).


15

Fig. 3 | Monte Carlo modeling of the local structure. a, Calculated reciprocal-space image (left 
half) from a simple model (see Methods) that only includes negative Bi-Ba and positive Bi-K 
correlations. The model captures the main features observed in the experiment, in particular the 
diagonal rods of scattering and the asymmetry of the diffuse intensity around Bragg peaks (right 
half). b, Distribution of Bi-Ba and Bi-K distances within the model, showing a significant 
difference, which is the microscopic origin of the observed asymmetric diffuse features. Vertical 
dashed lines indicate the distances in the average structure. c, Distribution of nearest-neighbour 
Ba-O and K-O distances in an expanded model that includes oxygen displacements (see Methods).
Due to inversion-breaking distortions, the Ba-O distances are shorter than average, in agreement 
with the experimental 3D-ΔPDF result. The calculated O-O distance distribution, which is not 
directly observable in the experiment due to small oxygen x-ray form factors, is shown in Extended 
Data Fig. S4.


16

Extended Data

Extended Data Fig. S1 | Short-range charge-density-wave features. a,b, X-ray scattering data 
for BKBO with doping levels x ≈ 25% and 45%, respectively, in the L = ½ plane. If short-range 
CDW correlations were present, broad diffuse peaks at half-integer positions would be observed. 
Such features are absent in both insulating (a) and metallic (b) samples. Instead, sharp superstructure 
peaks are seen in (a) due to a known long-range tilt distortion that is unrelated to the CDW and
becomes very weak in the metallic/superconducting doping range [20]. The superstructure peaks 
appear at (½ ½ ½ ) and all equivalent positions due to the presence of tetragonal domains in the tilted 
phase; the tilt distortion in a single domain intrinsically does not double the lattice parameter, in 
contrast to the CDW. c, Typical equilibrium distribution of effective Ba3+ and Ba5+ ions in a simple 
Bi valence Ising model with frustration (one Monte Carlo relaxed configuration – see Methods for 
details). The K concentration is 30%. d, Diffuse scattering for the same plane as in a and b, 
calculated from Monte Carlo simulations of the Ising model with included oxygen breathing 
distortions, with effective K concentration of 35%. The model contains short-range CDW 
correlations which clearly lead to diffuse features, in stark contrast to the measured diffuse 
scattering. 


17

Extended Data Fig. S2 | Structural correlation length. The characteristic length for short-range 
correlations is obtained by fitting a simple exponential decay to the absolute value of the 3D-ΔPDF 
in Fig. 2 (sample with x ~ 0.45, 30 K). The representative cut shown here is y/a = 0, z/a = 0, and 
the decay constant from the fit is 1.1 ± 0.1 (error from fit), implying that the signal decays 
significantly within 2-3 unit cells (about 1 nm).


18

Extended Data Fig. S3 | Structural and chemical parameters of Ba and K in the local-
structure model. a, Perovskite tolerance factor t (see Methods), showing that the K ion size 
matches the ideal perovskite structure (t = 1) better than Ba, with further improvement upon 
doping. The shaded ‘ideal range’ is the approximate range where the cubic perovskite structure 
can be stabilized. The Ba size mismatch predominantly leads to rigid tilt distortions, which 
decrease with increasing K concentration. b, Empirical valence of Ba and K (see Methods), 
demonstrating that K is very close to the nominal valence of +1, whereas Ba is quite strongly 
underbonded. This leads to an effective attraction between Ba and O, which results in inversion-
breaking displacements of the oxygen atoms in local environments with an asymmetric 
arrangement of Ba and K.


19

Extended Data Fig. S4 | Calculated oxygen-oxygen correlations. Distances between nearest-
neighbour pairs of oxygen atoms obtained from Monte Carlo simulations (see Methods for details), 
similar to Fig. 3b,c. The vertical dashed line indicates the distance in the average structure. The 
individual peaks roughly correspond to inversion-breaking distortions in different local 
environments, e.g., with different local Ba/K ratios and spatial configurations.


20

Extended Data Fig. S5 | Calculated K concentration dependence of the inversion-breaking 
distortion. The centrosymmetry parameter (see Methods), used as a direct measure of the 
inversion-breaking displacements, shows a substantial increase with K concentration, in 
qualitative agreement with the experimental results. The modeling does not take the insulator-
metal transition into account, i.e., we use screened electrostatic interactions appropriate for the 
metallic phase throughout.


21

References

1 Cava, R. J. et al. Superconductivity near 30 K without copper: the Ba0.6K0.4BiO3 perovskite. 
Nature 332, 814 (1988).

2 Sleight, A. W. Bismuthates: BaBiO3 and related superconducting phases. Physica C 514, 152 
(2015).

3 Jiang, M., Sawatzky, G. A., Berciu, M. & Johnston, S. Polaron and bipolaron tendencies in a 
semiclassical model for hole-doped bismuthates. Phys. Rev. B 103, 115129 (2021).

4 Plumb, N. C. et al., Momentum-resolved electronic structure of the high-Tc superconductor 
parent compound BaBiO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 037002 (2016).

5 Li, S.& Johnston, S. Quantum Monte Carlo study of lattice polarons in the two-dimensional 
three-orbital Su–Schrieffer–Heeger model. Quantum Mater. 5, 40 (2020).

6 Jurczek, E. & Rice, T. M. A charge-density-wave instability in BaBi1-xPbxO3 caused by strong 
electron-phonon coupling. Europhys. Lett. 1, 225 (1986).

7 Pei, S. et al., Structural phase diagram of the Ba1-xKxBiO3 system. Phys. Rev. B 41, 4126 
(1990).

8 Franchini, C., Reticcioli, M., Setvin, M. & Diebold, U. Polarons in materials. Nat. Rev. Mater. 
6, 560 (2021).

9 Micnas, R., Ranninger, J. & Robaszkiewicz, S. Superconductivity in narrow-band systems with 
local nonretarded attractive interactions. Rev. Mod. Phys. 62, 113 (1990).

10 Yin, Z. P., Kutepov, A. & Kotliar, G. Correlation-enhanced electron-phonon coupling: 
applications of GW and screened hybrid functional to bismuthates, chloronitrides, and other 
high-Tc superconductors. Phys. Rev. X 3, 021011 (2013).

11 Wen, C. H. P. et al. Unveiling the superconducting mechanism of Ba0.51K0.49BiO3. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 121, 117002 (2018).

12 Gotlieb, K. et al. Revealing hidden spin-momentum locking in a high-temperature cuprate 
superconductor. Science 362, 1271 (2018).

13 Yuan, L. et al. Uncovering and tailoring hidden Rashba spin-orbit splitting in centrosymmetric 
crystals. Nat. Commun. 10, 906 (2019).

14 Smidman, M., Salamon, M. B., Yuan, H. Q. & Agterberg, D. F. Superconductivity and spin-
orbit coupling in non-centrosymmetric materials: a review. Rep. Prog. Phys. 80, 036501 (2017).

15 Gastiasoro, M. N., Ruhman, J. & Fernandes, R. Superconductivity in dilute SrTiO3: a review. 
Annals of Physics 417, 168107 (2020).

16 Kozii, V., Bi, B. & Ruhman, J. Superconductivity near a ferroelectric quantum critical point in 
ultralow-density Dirac materials, Phys. Rev. X 9, 031046 (2019).

17 Salmani-Rezaie, S., Ahadi, K. & Stemmer, S. Polar nanodomains in a ferroelectric 
superconductor. Nano Lett. 20, 6542 (2020).


22

18 Welberry, T. R. & Butler, B. D. Diffuse X-ray scattering from disordered crystals. Chem. Rev. 
95, 2369 (1995).

19 Giraldo-Gallo, P. et al., Stripe-like nanoscale structural phase separation in superconducting 
BaPb1−xBixO3. Nat. Commun. 6, 8231 (2016).

20 Braden, M., Reichardt, W., Elkaim, E., Lauriat, J. P., Shiryaev, S. & Barilo, S. N. Structural 
distortion in superconducting Ba1-xKxBiO3. Phys. Rev. B 62, 6708 (2000).

21 Xu, R. & Chiang, T. C. Determination of phonon dispersion relations by X-ray thermal diffuse 
scattering. Z. Kristallogr. 220, 1009 (2005).

22 Weber, T. & Simonov, A. The three-dimensional pair distribution function analysis of 
disordered single crystals: basic concepts. Z. Kristallogr. 227, 238 (2012).

23 Krogstad, M. J. et al. Reciprocal space imaging of ionic correlations in intercalation 
compounds. Nat. Mater. 19, 63 (2020).

24 Blanton, S. H. et al. Infrared study of Ba1−xKxBiO3 from charge-density-wave insulator to 
superconductor. Phys. Rev. B 47, 996 (1993).

25 Büchner, B., Breuer, M., Freimuth, A. & Kampf, A. P. Critical buckling for the disappearance 
of superconductivity in rare-earth-doped La2-xSrxCuO4. Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1841 (1994)

26 Najev, A. et al., Uniaxial strain control of bulk ferromagnetism in rare-earth titanates. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 128, 167201 (2022).

27 Bazhirov, T., Coh, S., Louie, S. G. & Cohen, M. L. Importance of oxygen octahedra tilts for 
the electron-phonon coupling in K-doped BaBiO3. Phys. Rev. B 88, 224509 (2013).

28 Lin, X. Fauqué, B. & Behnia, K. Scalable T2 resistivity in a small single-component Fermi 
surface. Science 349, 945 (2015).

29 Zahng, J., Zheng, H., Ren, Y. & Mitchell, J. F. High-pressure floating-zone growth of 
perovskite nickelate LaNiO3 single crystals. Cryst. Growth Des. 17, 2730 (2017).

30 Mirjolet, M., Rivadulla, F., Marsik, P., Borisov, V., Valentí, R. & Fontcuberta, J. Electron-
phonon coupling and electron-phonon scattering in SrVO3. Adv. Sci. 8, 2004207 (2021).

31 Lee, S. F., Wei, J. Y. T., Tang, H. Y., Chien, T. R., Wu, M. K. & Guan, W. Y. Hall effect and 
resistivity in metallic Ba1-xKxBiO3 crystals: absence of 1/T dependence in Rh and linear-to-
quadratic evolution of ρ(T). Physica C 209, 141 (1993).

32 MacDonald, A. H. Electron-phonon enhancement of electron-electron scattering in Al. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 44, 489 (1980).

33 Gastiasoro, M. N., Temperini, M. E., Barone, P. & Lorenzana, J. Theory of Rashba coupling 
mediated superconductivity in incipient ferroelectrics. arxiv:2109.13207 (202).

34 Kim, M. et al., Superconductivity in (Ba,K)SbO3. Nat. Mater. 21, 627 (2022).

35 Nishio, T., Minami, H. & Uwe, H. Large single crystals of Ba1−xKxBiO3 grown by 
electrochemical technique. Physica C 357–360, 376 (2001).

36 Barilo, S. N. et al. A new method for growing Ba1−xKxBiO3 single crystals and investigation of 
their properties. J. Cryst. Growth 198–199, 636 (1999).


23

37 Pelc, D., Anderson, Z., Yu, B., Leighton, C. & Greven, M. Universal superconducting 
precursor in three classes of unconventional superconductors. Nat. Commun. 10, 2729 (2019).

38 Welberry, T. R. & Goossens, D. J. The interpretation and analysis of diffuse scattering using 
Monte Carlo simulation methods. Acta Cryst. A 64, 23-32, (2008).

39 Neder, R. B. & Proffen, T. Diffuse scattering and defect structure simulations: A cook book 
using the program DISCUS. Oxford, Oxford University Press (2008)

40 Newman, M. E. J. & Barkema, G. T. Monte Carlo methods in statistical physics. Oxford, 
Clarendon Press (1999).

41 Rice, T. M. & Sneddon, L. Real space and k-space electron pairing in BaBi1-xPbxO3. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 47, 689 (1982).

42 Bischofs, I., Allen, P., Kostur, V. & Bhargava, R. Topological doping of a three-dimensional 
Peierls system: Predicted structure of doped BaBiO3. Phys. Rev. B 66, 174-108 (2002).

43 Tajima, S., Yoshida, M., Koshizuka, N., Sato, H., Uchida, S. Raman scattering study of metal-
insulator transition in Ba1−xKxBiO3. Phys. Rev. B 46, 1232 (1992).

44 Paddison, J. A. M. Ultrafast calculation of diffuse scattering from atomistic models.  Acta 
Cryst. A 75, 14-24 (2019).

45 Brown, I. D. Recent developements in the methods and applications of the bond valence 
model. Chem. Rev. 109, 6858–6919 (2009).

46 Shannon, R. D. Revised effective ionic radii and systematic studies of interatomic distances in 
halides and chalcogenides. Acta Cryst. A 32, 751–767 (1976).

47 Gagne, O. C. & Hawthorne, F. C. Comprehensive derivation of bond-valence parameters for 
ion pairs involving oxygen. Acta Cryst. B 71, 562 (2015).

48 Whitfield, R. E., Welberry, T. R., Pasciak, M. & Goossens, D. J. Use of bond-valence sums in 
modelling the diffuse scattering from PZN (PbZn1/3Nb2/3O3). Acta Cryst. A 70, 626 (2014).

49 Liu, S., Grinberg, I. & Rappe, A. M. Development of a bond-valence based interatomic 
potential for BiFeO3 for accurate molecular dynamics simulations. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 25, 
102202 (2012).

50 Kelchner, C. L., Plimpton, S. J. & Hamilton, J. C. Dislocation nucleation and defect structure 
during surface indentation. Phys. Rev. B 58, 11085 (1998).


