1

Compact modeling technology for the simulation of integrated circuits based on 

graphene field-effect transistors

Francisco Pasadas, Pedro C. Feijoo, Nikolaos Mavredakis, Aníbal Pacheco-Sanchez, Ferney 

A. Chaves, and David Jiménez* 

F. Pasadas, P. C. Feijoo, N. Mavredakis, A. Pacheco-Sanchez, F. A. Chaves, D. Jiménez*

Departament d’Enginyeria Electrònica, Escola d’Enginyeria, Universitat Autònoma de 

Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain

E-mail: David.jimenez@uab.cat

F. Pasadas

Departamento de Electrónica y Tecnología de Computadores, Universidad de Granada, 18071 

Granada, Spain.

Keywords: 2D materials, graphene, transistor, radio-frequency, compact modeling, hybrid 

integrated circuit, monolithic integrated circuit.

In this study, we report the progress made towards the definition of a modular compact 

modeling technology for graphene field-effect transistors (GFET) that enables the electrical 

analysis of arbitrary GFET-based integrated circuits. A set of primary models embracing the 

main physical principles defines the ideal GFET response under DC, transient (time domain), 

AC (frequency domain), and noise (frequency domain) analysis. Other set of secondary

models accounts for the GFET non-idealities,
such as extrinsic-, short-channel-, 

trapping/detrapping-, self-heating-, and non-quasi static-effects, which could have a 

significant impact under static and/or dynamic operation. At both device and circuit levels, 

significant consistency is demonstrated between the simulation output and experimental data 

for relevant operating conditions. Additionally, we provide a perspective of the challenges 

during the scale up of the GFET modeling technology towards higher technology readiness 

levels while drawing a collaborative scenario among fabrication technology groups, modeling 

groups, and circuit designers. 


2

1. Introduction

By combining graphene devices with interconnects and other components, innumerable 

circuits can be designed for analog and radio-frequency (RF) applications[1], preferably in the 

form of an integrated circuit (IC). The graphene-based circuits could be integrated with the 

silicon CMOS IC to increase the IC functionality. A possible realization of a hybrid graphene-

silicon IC could consist of a silicon platform that would implement digital circuits according 

to the CMOS process. In addition to the silicon platform, a graphene platform (e.g., based on 

graphene transistor technology) for making RF functions exploiting the unique properties of 

graphene could be fabricated, combining the best of two technologies in a single IC (Figure 

1a).[2] The graphene platform could be monolithically integrated on a convenient substrate 

(Figure 1b) such as silicon carbide[3] or a flexible polymer[4] to exploit the functionality of 

graphene in specific applications.[5] Regardless of the choice between hybrid or monolithic, a 

compact modeling technology for the graphene platform is required to make predictions of the 

electrical behavior of arbitrary circuits for DC, transient (time domain), AC (frequency 

domain), and noise (frequency domain) analysis. Every type of analysis requires a tailored set 

of models that capture the physics involved in a consistent way with experimental 

measurements for the relevant device operating conditions, which form the basis for a 

technology computer aided design (TCAD). Moreover, the mathematical complexity of the 

model should be kept low because various devices could be involved in a simulation. A 

TCAD tool is required during manufacturing to make the circuit design-fabrication cycle 

more efficient. 

Figure 1. a) Schematic cross-section of a hybrid IC combining silicon and graphene 


3

platforms, where the former implements the digital part of the mixed-signal circuit and the 
latter implements the RF part. Reproduced with permission.[2] 2016, ACS. b) A wafer-scale 
graphene circuit in which all circuit components, including GFET and inductors, are 
monolithically integrated on a single silicon carbide wafer. Reproduced with permission.[6]

2012, Elsevier.

In this study, we present the progress made towards the definition of a modular compact 

modeling technology for the graphene field-effect transistor (GFET), which is considered as 

the building block of the graphene platform in the IC. For a circuit simulation to be realistic, 

various non-idealities must be modeled at the device level. They include the effect caused by 

the parasitic network (parasitic resistances, capacitances, and inductances) associated to the 

contact pads and interconnections, as well as the effect of extrinsic resistances (contact and 

gate resistance), which significantly reduce the expected device performance. Additionally, 

the effect of the charges trapped/detrapped in the dielectric materials and interfaces must be 

included, which are related with the observed time-dependent drift of the operating bias point. 

In contrast, as short-channel length devices are needed to upscale the RF performance of 

graphene devices and circuits, short-channel effects (SCE) must be properly accounted by 

considering the two-dimensional (2D) electrostatics and velocity saturation effect. It is also 

important to consider the self-heating effects (SHE) at high fields that might produce an 

important reduction of the drain current. In addition, if the excitation frequency is close or 

above the device intrinsic cutoff frequency, the effect of carrier inertia should be considered, 

which requires a non-quasi static (NQS) model. For the noise, the relevant physics must be 

collected into an appropriate compact model to obtain the noise indicators at the circuit level. 

This requires an analysis of the different noise sources and their dependence on the substrate, 

dielectric environment, as well as contact technology. A deep understanding of the 

mechanisms of local noise propagation to terminal currents and voltages is necessary. At 

high-frequency (HF) range, a careful analysis of the coupling mechanisms between the 

channel and the gate(s) is required. These efforts are relevant because figures of merit are 

limited by noise. 

A set of models capturing the relevant physics is needed to deal with the different types of 

electrical analysis, which forms the basis for a compact modeling technology targeting the 

simulation of ICs based on GFETs. As shown in Figure 2, they can be categorized into 

primary models defining the ideal device response and secondary models accounting for non-

ideal effects to provide the necessary refinement to perform realistic circuit simulations. An 

in-depth explanation of relevant model details and main results for each type of analysis will 

be given along the Sections of the manuscript, namely DC (§2), transient (§3), AC (§4), and 


4

noise analysis (§5). In addition, we have benchmarked each model with experimental results 

to demonstrate its predictive capability. 

Figure 2. Modular compact modeling GFET technology presented in this study. The primary
models describing the ideal device are represented by black solid lines, whereas the secondary 
models describing the device non-idealities are represented by black dashed lines. Acronyms 
used - SHE: self-heating effects, SCE: short-channel effects, QS: quasi-static, NQS: non-
quasi-static, MF: medium frequency, HF: high frequency, LFN: low-frequency noise, HFN: 
high-frequency noise.

2. DC analysis

Here, a model accounting for the DC behavior of GFETs is presented. §2.1 introduces the 

intrinsic GFET core DC model, which is based on the Poisson’s equation coupled with a drift-

diffusion current equation, the former describing the device electrostatics (§2.1.1) and the 

latter describing the electron transport along the graphene channel (§2.1.2). In §2.2, various

non-ideal effects affecting the operation of a GFET are added to the intrinsic model; thus, 

their inclusion is proven to be necessary to get consistency with experimental results from real 

devices. Those encompass charges trapped in the dielectric materials and interfaces (§2.2.1); 

SHE (§2.2.2); SCE (§2.2.3). Finally, some relevant analytical models for the contact 

resistance, which can be used towards extending the intrinsic model with the obtained values 

of this parameter, have been presented (§2.2.4).

2.1. Core DC Model

Here, we present the model for the electrostatics of a four-terminal GFET in §2.1.1, which 

sets the basis for the later formulation of a drain current model in §2.1.2.


5

Figure 3. a) Schematic depiction of a four-terminal GFET. b) Cross-section of the GFET and 
the domain where the Poisson’s equation is evaluated to solve the electrostatics. This area 
corresponds to the dashed rectangle in a). c) Equivalent capacitive circuit of the GFET. d)
Schematic of the band diagram of the intrinsic device:[7,8] Energy, 𝐸, versus longitudinal 
position, 𝑦 . The quasi-Fermi level 𝐸𝐹 = −𝑞𝑉(𝑦) and the Dirac energy 𝐸𝐷 = −𝑞𝜓(𝑦) =
−𝑞(𝑉(𝑦) − 𝑉𝑐(𝑦)) are shown. When the quasi-Fermi level is located at the Dirac energy, the 
dubbed Dirac point or charge neutrality point is reached. 𝑉𝐷 and 𝑉𝑆 are the drain and source 
biases, respectively; 𝑉𝑐𝑑 and 𝑉𝑐𝑠 are the channel potentials at the drain and source sides, 
respectively. Two Dirac cones illustrate the mixed n/p-type channel of this example.
Reproduced with permission.[8] 2014, IEEE.[9] 2016, IOP.

2.1.1. Electrostatics of a Four-Terminal FET

Let us consider a general GFET as that depicted in Figure 3a. The graphene sheet under the 

electric control of the gate electrodes plays the role of the active channel. The electrostatic 

modulation of the carrier concentration in the 2D channel is achieved via a double-gate stack 

consisting of top- and back-gate dielectrics and corresponding metal gates (Figure 3b). The 

graphene sheet is contacted with both a drain and source terminal; carrier transport is 

produced between both terminals when a non-zero bias is applied. The direction of current

transport defines the longitudinal direction (𝑦). The transversal direction (𝑥) goes from the top 

gate to the bottom gate, whereas the 𝑧-direction goes across the width of the device (𝑊), 

a)

b)

VB – VB0

VG – VG0

V(y)
-Vc(y)
Cb

Ct
Cq

c)

y

y

y
y

y

d)

VD

VS


6

where 𝑊 is sufficiently large such that the transistor can be considered uniform along the 𝑧

axis. The electrostatics of the GFET can be evaluated by applying the Poisson’s equation 

across its structure

∇ · [𝜖(𝑥, 𝑦)∇𝜓(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑇)] = 𝜌𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑇),
(1)

where 𝑇 is the temperature, 𝜖 is the permittivity, 𝜓 is the electrostatic potential, and 𝜌𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒 is 

the free charge density. Considering a one-dimensional (1D) approximation for the GFET 

electrostatics along a transversal cut, the following charge-balance equation, which can be 

represented by the equivalent capacitive circuit shown in Figure 3c, can be obtained[10,11]: 

𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑦, 𝑇) = −𝐶𝑡(𝑉𝐺 − 𝑉𝐺0 − 𝑉(𝑦, 𝑇) + 𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇))

−𝐶𝑏(𝑉𝐵 − 𝑉𝐵0 − 𝑉(𝑦, 𝑇) + 𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇)),

(2)

where 𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑦, 𝑇) = 𝑞[𝑝(𝑦, 𝑇) − 𝑛(𝑦, 𝑇)] is the net sheet charge density; 𝑞 is the elementary 

charge; 𝑝 and 𝑛 are the hole and electron carrier densities, respectively. 𝐶𝑡 = 𝜖𝑡/𝑡𝑡 (𝐶𝑏 =

𝜖𝑏/𝑡𝑏) is the top- (back-) oxide capacitance per unit area, with 𝜖𝑡 (𝜖𝑏) the top (back) dielectric 

constant and 𝑡𝑡 (𝑡𝑏) the top- (back-) oxide thickness. The top (back) overdrive voltage is 𝑉𝐺 −

𝑉𝐺0 (𝑉𝐵 − 𝑉𝐵0), where 𝑉𝐺 (𝑉𝐵) is the top- (back-) gate potential, and 𝑉𝐺0 (𝑉𝐵0) comprises the 

work-function difference between the top (back) gate and the graphene channel as well as the 

effect of additional fixed charge owing to impurities or doping. Because of the presence of 

non-negligible contact resistances in GFETs (§2.2.4), the intrinsic source and drain potentials 

(𝑉𝑆 and 𝑉𝐷 at the active channel edges) cannot be shorted to reference in practice; therefore, 

we adopted a general formulation where none of the terminals are grounded. Thus, the GFET 

is driven by terminal voltages defined with respect to some arbitrary reference point. 𝑉(𝑦, 𝑇)

is the quasi-Fermi level along the graphene channel, i.e., the electrochemical potential, and it 

must fulfill the following boundary conditions: (i) 𝑉(𝑦 = 0, 𝑇) = 𝑉𝑆 and (ii) 𝑉(𝑦 = 𝐿, 𝑇) =

𝑉𝐷 at the source and drain edge-sides, respectively, where 𝐿 is the gate length. 𝑉(𝑦, 𝑇) is 

assumed to be the same for both electrons and holes because the generation/recombination 

times for carriers in graphene are very short (1100 ps-)[12–14]; therefore, electron and hole 

quasi-Fermi levels do not deviate significantly from each other.[7] 𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇) represents the 

position-dependent chemical potential, i.e. the shift of the Dirac potential (𝜓(𝑦, 𝑇)) with 

respect to the quasi-Fermi level. Figure 3d shows a scheme of the electrostatic, 

electrochemical, and chemical potentials along the channel at an arbitrary bias. Electron and 

hole concentrations can be calculated as a function of 𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇) using the following equations, 

which are a result of the density of states of graphene (deduced from its linear dispersion 

relation), where the electronic states are occupied according to the Fermi–Dirac statistics:


7

𝑝(𝑦, 𝑇) =
Δ2

2𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2 + 2

𝜋 (𝑘𝐵𝑇

ℏ𝑣𝐹

)

2

𝔉1 [𝑞𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇)

𝑘𝐵𝑇
]

𝑛(𝑦, 𝑇) =

Δ2

2𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2 +

2

𝜋 (

𝑘𝐵𝑇

ℏ𝑣𝐹)

2

𝔉1 [−

𝑞𝑉𝑐(𝑦,𝑇)

𝑘𝐵𝑇 ],

(3)

where Δ is the amplitude of the electrostatic potential inhomogeneity that causes the electron-

hole puddles;[15] 𝔉1 is the Fermi–Dirac integral of first-order; 𝑘𝐵 is the Boltzmann constant, ℏ

is the reduced Planck constant, 𝑣𝐹 = √3𝑎𝛾0 2ℏ
⁄
is the Fermi velocity; where 𝑎 = 2.49 Å is 

the graphene lattice constant[16] and 𝛾0 = 3.16 eV is the interlayer coupling.[17] The term 

Δ2 (2𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2)
⁄
accounts for the contribution of the puddles to the carrier concentration. The 

net sheet charge density and the quantum capacitance of graphene, which is defined as 

𝐶𝑞(𝑦, 𝑇) = 𝜕𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡 𝜕𝑉𝑐
⁄
, result in[8]

𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑦, 𝑇) = 2𝑞(𝑘𝐵𝑇)2

𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2 (𝔉1 [𝑞𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇)

𝑘𝐵𝑇
] − 𝔉1 [− 𝑞𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇)

𝑘𝐵𝑇
])

𝐶𝑞(𝑦, 𝑇) = 2𝑞2𝑘𝐵𝑇

𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2 ln [2 (1 + cosh [𝑞𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇)

𝑘𝐵𝑇
])]

(4)

𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇) could be calculated as a function of the terminal biases (𝑉𝐺 , 𝑉𝐵 , 𝑉𝐷 , 𝑉𝑆 ) from 

Equation 2 and 4. However, this formulation is not convenient for a compact model 

compatible with circuit simulators. Using a square-root-based approximation for 𝐶𝑞,[18] it is 

possible to get an implicit expression for 𝑉𝑐 that can be written in terms of elemental functions, 

which is more suitable for compact modeling purposes

𝐶𝑞(𝑦, 𝑇) ≈ 𝑘𝑐1√1 + (𝑉𝑐 𝑐1
⁄
)2

𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡 = ∫
𝑉𝑐 𝐶𝑞(𝑉̃) 𝑑𝑉̃
0
=

𝑘𝑐1

2 (𝑉𝑐√1 + (𝑉𝑐 𝑐1
⁄
)2 + 𝑐1 asinh[𝑉𝑐 𝑐1
⁄
]),

(5)

where 𝑘 = 2𝑞3 (𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2)
⁄
and 𝑐1 = (𝑘𝐵𝑇 𝑞
⁄ ) ln(4).

The chemical potentials at the source 𝑉𝑐𝑠 = 𝑉𝑐(0, 𝑇)|𝑉=𝑉𝑆 and drain 𝑉𝑐𝑑 = 𝑉𝑐(𝐿, 𝑇)|𝑉=𝑉𝐷 side-

edges are the relevant quantities required to calculate the drain current. They can be easily 

determined by implementing the Verilog-A algorithm reported in,[8,19] which allows the 

circuit simulator to solve Equation 2 and 5, favoring a circuit-compatible model.

2.1.2. Drain Current Model

Here, we deal with the development of a compact model for the GFET drain current. For such 

purpose, we assumed that the drift-diffusion theory is applicable. That implies that the carrier 

mean free path (MFP) is significantly shorter than 𝐿. The MFP is related to the graphene 

quality and values below 100 nm have been reported at room temperature.[15] Electrons and 

holes in graphene tend to present mobilities in the same order of magnitude in both 


8

experiments and simulations[20–22]. Here, we assume an equal mobility for both types of 

carriers for simplicity, but the models could be easily extended for non-equal mobilities. The 

drain current of a GFET according to the drift-diffusion theory can then be evaluated as

𝐼𝐷𝑆 = 𝑞𝑊𝜌𝑠ℎ(𝑦, 𝑇)𝜇(𝑦, 𝑇) ∂𝑉(𝑦,𝑇)

∂𝑦
,
(6)

where 𝜌𝑠ℎ(𝑦, 𝑇) = 𝑝(𝑦, 𝑇) + 𝑛(𝑦, 𝑇) is the transport carrier sheet density and 𝜇(𝑦, 𝑇) is the 

field-dependent carrier mobility that reads as[9]

𝜇(𝑦, 𝑇) =

𝜇𝐿𝐹

√1+(
𝜇𝐿𝐹

𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡(𝑦,𝑇)|𝜕𝜓(0,𝑦,𝑇)

𝜕𝑦
|)

𝛽
𝛽
,

(7)

where 𝛽 is a parameter of the model describing how sharp the transition between low- and 

high-field mobilities is and 𝜇𝐿𝐹 refers to the low-field carrier mobility. Saturation velocity 

𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡(𝑦, 𝑇) is limited by optical phonon scattering according to the following equation:[23,24]

𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡(𝑦, 𝑇) =
2Ω

𝜋√𝜋𝜌𝑠ℎ(𝑦, 𝑇)

1

𝑁𝑂𝑃(𝑇) + 1 √1 −
Ω2

4𝜋𝑣𝐹

2𝜌𝑠ℎ(𝑦, 𝑇)

𝑁𝑂𝑃(𝑇) =

1

exp[ ℏΩ

𝑘𝐵𝑇]−1,

(8)

where 𝑁𝑂𝑃(𝑇) and ℏΩ are the optical phonon occupation and energy, respectively. Low-field 

mobility and saturation velocity strongly depend on the dielectric materials surrounding the

graphene layer, namely on the substrate and top-gate insulator used for the specific GFET 

geometry. These parameters depend on various scattering mechanisms that drive the carrier 

transport. 

To obtain an explicit expression for Equation 6 in terms of the chemical potential, 𝑉𝑐, the 

following simplifications are needed: (i) under the condition of identical electron and hole 

mobilities, 𝜌𝑠ℎ(𝑦, 𝑇) is approximated to its second-order Taylor expansion[8,18]

𝜌𝑠ℎ(𝑦, 𝑇) ≈
Δ2

𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2 + 𝜋(𝑘𝐵𝑇)2

3(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2 + 𝑞2𝑉𝑐

2(𝑦, 𝑇)

𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2
(9)

(ii) A soft-saturation model (𝛽 = 1) is adopted. This value is consistent with numerical 

studies of electronic transport based on the Monte Carlo simulations;[25] (iii) 𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡 is assumed 

to be constant (𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡,0), instead of using Equation 8. This is because the implementation of 

Equation 8 together with (ii) has been found to produce some artifacts that can result in 

harmonic distortion when large-signal transient simulations are performed. Considering all the 

simplifications, the following closed-form drain current equation is achieved:

𝐼𝐷𝑆 =

𝑊𝜇𝐿𝐹
𝐿𝑒𝑓𝑓 {

𝑘

2 (

𝑘𝑐1𝑉𝑐(𝑐12+2𝑉𝑐+4𝑐2)√1+(𝑉𝑐 𝑐1
⁄
)2

8(𝐶𝑡+𝐶𝑏)
−

𝑘𝑐12(𝑐12−4𝑐2) asinh[𝑉𝑐 𝑐1
⁄
]

8(𝐶𝑡+𝐶𝑏)
+

𝑉𝑐3

3 + 𝑐2𝑉𝑐)}

𝑉𝑐𝑠

𝑉𝑐𝑑

,
(10)


9

where 𝑐2 = (𝜋𝑘𝐵𝑇)2 3𝑞2
⁄
+ Δ2 𝑞2
⁄
. An effective electrical length, 𝐿𝑒𝑓𝑓 , incorporating 

velocity saturation effects can be defined as

𝐿𝑒𝑓𝑓 = 𝐿 +
1

𝐶𝑡 + 𝐶𝑏

𝜇𝐿𝐹
𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡,0

{𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡}𝑉𝑐𝑠

𝑉𝑐𝑑
(11)

2.2. Non-Ideal Effects for Enhancing the Prediction Capability of the Core DC Model

To achieve high-yield technology generations as well as reproducible electrical device 

characteristics towards exploiting GFETs at a circuit level, the trap mechanisms taking place 

within the device should be understood. Traps are material- or energetic-dependent 

imperfections within the channel or its surroundings, e.g., interfaces and oxide, able to capture 

and release carriers at different rates. Fast capture occurs within the channel and interfaces 

close to it, whereas the release of these trapped carriers is fast in the channel region and slow 

at the interfaces. In contrast, traps within the oxide region far from the channel have slow 

capture and emission time constants.[26] Graphene channels and their associated interfaces 

have been optimized towards a significant reduction of traps and defects in transistor 

architectures e.g., through passivation[27,28] and/or encapsulation techniques.[29,30] However, 

gate oxide has been a major issue in graphene transistors as well as in other emerging[26] and 

mature[31] FET technologies owing to scalability limitations;[26] thus, deep oxide (border) traps 

still affect the device performance.[32–35] High-κ insulators, such as HfO2 and Al2O3, as well as 

layered 2D insulators, such as hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), have been used to fabricate 

high-performance GFETs.[36,37] Trap-related phenomena in the aforementioned bulk high-κ 

oxides have been observed and studied in silicon devices[38] as well as in emerging transistor 

technologies.[39] hBN has been suggested as the optimal dielectric for GFETs owing to the 

good lattice matching between the 2D channel and the 2D dielectric and minimized dangling 

bonds.[40–42] However, in addition to the low-κ of hBN (κ ≈ 3–4),[40,43] which limits the 

equivalent oxide thickness scalability,[26] causing wafer-scale integration issues,[36] few works 

have reported on HF GFETs with hBN as the true gate oxide,[29,44,45] which exhibit poor HF 

performance, in stark contrast to GFETs with high-κ oxides.[46–52] Furthermore, in contrast to 

the demonstrated low density of interface traps in hBN/graphene interfaces,[29,41] the 

temperature- and field-dependent carrier capture and emission processes owing to border traps 

within this 2D dielectric in 2D FETs,[26] specifically in GFETs, are not yet understood despite

the recent characterization efforts.[53–55] A correct description of trap-related effects and their 

impact on the static and dynamic performance of graphene transistors can reveal true features 

of a corresponding technology.[34,35,56–58] The impact of traps on the transfer device


10

characteristics is described by the static trap model module presented in §2.2.1, whereas the 

dynamic aspects of traps are introduced in §3.3.1 to complete the discussion.

The upscaling of RF performance in GFETs can be achieved by the progressive reduction of 

the channel length. When analyzing a short-channel GFET, velocity saturation is an important

factor, but 2D electrostatics should also be considered. The strong electric fields caused at 

high bias affect the charge distribution along the graphene channel; thus, the 2D electrostatics

across the plane perpendicular to graphene must be analyzed. Therefore, we developed a 

model that solves the 2D Poisson’s equation coupled with the drift-diffusion equation, which 

includes the velocity saturation effect, to consider SCE effectively. In contrast, power 

dissipation in the graphene channel imperfectly spread out of the device increases its 

temperature,[59–61] triggering SHE. Temperature strongly affects charge transport through 

carrier concentration and saturation velocity. SHE and SCE will be modeled in §2.2.2 and 

§2.2.3, respectively.

Finally, in §2.2.4, we studied the bias-dependent contact resistance, which embraces the 

phenomena at the metal-graphene interface as well as the junction formed between the 

graphene layer under the metal electrode and the graphene channel.

Figure 4. a) Top: schematic cross-section of a GFET indicating (i) channel, (ii) interface, and 
(iii) deep oxide traps. Bottom: sketch of the conduction energy band and channel potential 
under trap-free (𝐸𝐶, 𝜓) and trap-affected (𝐸𝐶,𝑡𝑟, 𝜓𝑡𝑟) conditions. Schematic representation of 
the gated device region showing traps (squares) and carriers (circles) under b) trap-free and c)
trap-affected conditions.

2.2.1. Static Trap Model

The actual performance of GFETs can be revealed by a device model correctly describing the 

hysteresis in both trap-affected and trap-reduced scenarios. In the literature, graphene 

transistor models including trap-effects have been reported;[34,58] however, their use has been 

limited either to observe the impact of the traps on the transport properties within a specific 


11

trap-affected scenario (forward bias sweep)[34] or without considering drain-to-source voltage 

dependence of the traps.[58] Next, we describe our model[35] that overcomes the latter issues.

The density of trap centers in a high-κ device, including GFETs, is higher in the gated region 

because all types of traps are present, i.e., material, interface, and border traps. Hence, the 

modeling approach reviewed next focuses on the specific device region. A high-κ oxide has 

been considered without loss of generality, i.e., trapping mechanisms in 2D oxides are 

qualitatively similar to the ones in 3D oxides but differ in temperature and vertical field 

dependence. Trapping mechanisms in ungated regions can be implicitly included in 

scattering-related parameters.

Figure 4a shows a schematic cross-section of a top-gated graphene transistor with high-κ 

oxide where trap centers are pointed out (top), and a sketch of the conduction band at a given 

𝑉𝐺𝑆 in the linear regime is also illustrated (bottom). At a hypothetical state of the traps not 

affecting the device performance, i.e., a trap-free state, the traps under the gate are empty;

thus, the field lines emitted from the gate contact affect the channel carriers directly (cf. 

Figure 4b). Notably, a trap-free state is not possible in real conditions. However, a reduced 

impact of the charged traps on the I-V characteristics, i.e., minimum hysteresis window, can 

be obtained by controlling the measurement conditions with sophisticated characterization 

techniques, e.g., pulsed measurements.[32,35,56] In this study, the latter scenario is considered as 

a trap-reduced device performance. In a more practical scenario, the traps within the oxide are 

filled up so that the electrical field lines from the gate end on the traps, causing the channel 

potential to be shielded from the gate (cf. Figure 4c) and impacting the transport conditions, 

i.e., the operating bias point is shifted leading to a hysteretic device performance. Herein, the 

latter is named as a trap-affected performance.

To reproduce and understand the impact of traps on critical device figures of merit towards 

using the devices in circuits, a compact model describing the behavior of trap-affected and 

trap-reduced device performance accurately is required. The former characteristics can be 

obtained with a staircase characterization whereas an opposing-pulse technique can be used 

for the latter as shown in Ref.[35] Forward (increasing extrinsic, 𝑉𝐺𝑆,𝑒 ) and backward 

(decreasing 𝑉𝐺𝑆,𝑒) sweeps are applied in both characterization approaches to show a hysteresis 

window in the transfer characteristics. An analytical I-V compact model based on Equation 2 

and 6,[10] under the condition of one active gate, has been used to describe the experimental 

data of GFETs by considering the impact of traps on the net charge within the graphene 

channel. The electrostatic equation of a practical one-gate GFET yields a net charge, 

𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡,𝑡𝑟(𝑦, 𝑇), description with the impact of traps given as[35]


12

𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡,𝑡𝑟(𝑦, 𝑇) = −𝐶𝑡[𝑉𝐺 − 𝑉𝐺0 − 𝑉(𝑦, 𝑇) + 𝑉𝑐(𝑦, 𝑇)] + 𝑞𝑁𝑡𝑟,
(12)

where 𝑁𝑡𝑟 = 𝐶𝑡(𝐷𝑉𝑡𝑟 − 𝐾𝑡𝑟𝑉𝐷𝑆/2)/𝑞 is the trap density with the trap-induced potential term 

𝐷𝑉𝑡𝑟 − 𝐾𝑡𝑟𝑉𝐷𝑆/2. DVtr and Ktr are the phenomenological model parameters accounting for the 

shift of VDirac owing to traps impact and the 𝑉𝐷𝑆 dependence of this shift, respectively. The 

Dirac voltage, considering both the trap-reduced and trap-affected scenarios, is calculated by 

considering straightforward conditions such as 𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡,𝑡𝑟(𝑦, 𝑇) → 0 at the charge neutrality point 

(CNP) as well as an average channel potential over the channel, i.e., 𝑉(𝑦, 𝑇)~𝑉𝐷𝑆/2 at similar 

bias conditions, which yields[35]

𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐 ≈ {

𝑉𝐺0 + 𝑉𝐷𝑆

2 ,
trap-reduced,

𝑉𝐺0 − 𝐷𝑉𝑡𝑟 + (𝐾𝑡𝑟 + 1)𝑉𝐷𝑆

2
, trap-affected,

(13)

To reproduce the traps impact on the performance, the net charge expression in the model 

should account the corresponding scenario, i.e., Equation 2 for the trap-reduced characteristics 

and Equation 12 for the trap-affected characteristics. Notably, the 𝑉𝐷𝑆-dependence of a trap-

affected Dirac voltage owing to hot-carriers[32,62] has been considered in this model,[35] which 

is an innovation with respect to other compact models including the impact of traps but 

neglecting such important effect.[58]

Both trap-affected and trap-reduced experimental transfer characteristics of a back-gated 

GFET technology with a gate width of 2 × 12 μm and a gate length of 300 nm (fabrication 

details in Ref.[63]), obtained via staircase sweep and an opposing sweep characterization, 

respectively,[35] have been correctly described by the model in the p-type region, as shown in 

Figure 5a-b (model parameters are listed in Table II of Ref.[35]). The hole dominant branch of 

the experimental data has been selected as the reference in the symmetric model, around 

𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐, because better RF-related figures of merit are reported in this operation regime for this 

technology, in contrast to the n-type region.[35,64]

The model is valid for various 𝑉𝐷𝑆 values, from low to higher ones, at different trap-affected 

states (Figures 2 and 3 in Ref.[35]), as indicated by the correct 𝑉𝐷𝑆-dependence of 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐

observed in Figure 5c. The lower slope of the trap-reduced 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐 versus 𝑉𝐷𝑆 plot (~1/2) 

with respect to the one obtained for the trap-affected data (~(𝐾𝑡𝑟 + 1)/2) suggests a trap-

induced overestimation of 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐 at high fields, in contrast to a reproducible performance with 

the traps impact highly suppressed, i.e., trap-reduced data. This is a crucial insight to be 

considered for the GFET performance in circuit applications. 


13

Figure 5. Experimental (markers) and modeling (lines) data of a 300 nm-long GFET: transfer 
characteristics with forward and backward sweeps showing a) trap-affected and b) trap-
reduced behavior at 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 0.3 V. Insets: transconductance plots at similar bias and conditions. 
c) 𝑉𝐷𝑆-dependence of the Dirac voltage under different conditions. Inset: absolute value of the 
trap density for different 𝑉𝐷𝑆 . d) Intrinsic transistor gain at 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = −1 V. Adapted with 
permission.[35] 2020, IEEE.

Additionally, the trap density of the studied device is obtained for the different measurement 

sweeps from experimental data (see Ref.[35] for the procedure) and the model parameters. The 

model can describe the 𝑉𝐷𝑆 dependence of 𝑁tr, as shown in the inset of Figure 5c. Trapping 

and detrapping mechanisms can be elucidated from the curves for voltages lower and higher 

than the minimum point, respectively, which corresponds to a change of polarity of the trap-

induced potential term. For instance, as indicated by the model curve, trapping processes are 

active for the forward staircase sweep at 0.3 V < 𝑉𝐷𝑆 < 0.5 V, whereas traps are enabled by 

the release of previous trapped carriers for the backward sweep case at the same bias range, as 

suggested by the increase of 𝑁tr for the model curve. A correct description of 𝑁tr at different 

biases, such as the one obtained with this model, enables the obtaining of improved insights in 

the device physics, e.g., on low-frequency noise (LFN) characterization of GFETs.[64]

The intrinsic gain, 𝐴𝑣,𝑖 = 𝑔𝑚/𝑔𝑑𝑠, calculated from both the intrinsic transconductance (𝑔𝑚 =

𝜕𝐼𝐷𝑆 𝜕𝑉𝐺
⁄
) and output conductance (𝑔𝑑𝑠 = 𝜕𝐼𝐷𝑆 𝜕𝑉𝐷
⁄
), has been shown with the model 

calibrated with trap-affected and trap-reduced data (cf. Figure 5d) of the device under 


14

study.[35] The result indicates higher 𝐴𝑣,𝑖 and different 𝑉𝐺𝑆 dependence of this parameter for 

the trap-affected data than in the trap-reduced scenario. This is attributed to the trap-induced 

shielding of the channel potential because the changes of the current with respect to the 

different applied voltages, i.e., 𝑔𝑚 and 𝑔𝑑𝑠, are affected differently depending on the traps 

state (measurement history). In addition to the experimental observations at different 

scenarios,[35] this model has shown the largely overlooked impact of traps on the performance 

of the graphene transistor. The approach used here enables a correct description of 

reproducible (trap-reduced) characteristics at room temperature towards exploiting such 

features in GFET-based circuit applications. 

2.2.2. Static Self-Heating Model

Source-to-drain current within the graphene channel generates energy by the Joule effect,

which can increase the temperature of the device considerably if the heat is not properly 

dissipated. The increase in graphene temperature, 𝑇, with respect to the ambient temperature,

𝑇𝐴, can be expressed as

𝑇 − 𝑇𝐴 = ℜ𝑡ℎ𝑃𝑑𝑖𝑠,
(14)

where 𝑃𝑑𝑖𝑠 = |𝐼𝐷𝑆𝑉𝐷𝑆| corresponds to the power dissipated in the graphene channel and ℜ𝑡ℎ is 

the effective thermal resistance, which embraces all the paths through which the heat can be 

dissipated out of the channel. ℜ𝑡ℎ can be estimated according to the methodology proposed in 

Ref.[23,65]. The method considers the combined effect produced by the graphene/dielectric 

interface, dielectric layer, and substrate thermal conductance. The thermal conductance 

contributed by the contacts is neglected. 

To demonstrate the impact of SHE, we simulated the device described in Ref.[51], assuming a 

high thermal resistance of 3·104 K W-1. Figure 6a shows the temperature distribution as a 

function of the bias. Temperatures can reach high values at large supply biases, in the order of 

the temperatures estimated for similar GFETs.[66] Moreover, experimental observations show 

that self-heating can increase the temperatures of graphene significantly when thermal 

resistances are large (for example, with thin insulators).[67] The transfer and output 

characteristics either neglecting SHE (solid lines) or considering SHE (dashed lines) are 

presented in Figure 6b-c. From the figure, it can be observed that temperature affects the 

drain current in different ways. The drain current increases in polarizations near 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐 ,

whereas it decreases for large gate voltages. Near 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐, the increase in drain current is 

caused by a higher thermal carrier concentration. However, the temperature reduces carrier 

mobility and saturation velocity, whose effect dominates for biases far from 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐. Moreover, 


15

current tends to saturate because of self-heating.[24] Despite the current saturation, §3.3.2

shows that the performance of the SHE-affected device observed in DC does not imply an 

improvement in the RF figures of merit, as the actual AC small-signal output conductance is 

larger than the one observed at DC.

Figure 6. a) Temperature distribution as a function of the intrinsic bias voltage for a 
self-heated GFET. b) Transfer characteristics and c) output characteristics of a GFET at 
300 K non-affected by SHE (solid) and affected by SHE (dashed).


16

Figure 7. Comparison between the compact model (solid lines) and the numerical model that 
accounts for SCE (circles) for a-c) a 1 µm-long channel GFET and d-f) a 100 nm-long 
channel GFET. a) and d) Chemical potential along the channel. b) and e) Transfer 
characteristics. c) and f) Output characteristics.

2.2.3. Short-Channel Model

To study the performance of short-channel GFET, we developed a numerical model that aims 

to find the self-consistent solution of the 2D Poisson’s equation (Equation 1) in the domain 

represented in Figure 3a and the current continuity equation (Equation 6). In addition to 

velocity saturation, this model accounts for the 2D electrostatics to consider SCE. Because 

Equation 6 assumes a drift-diffusion scheme, the short-channel model is valid when the GFET 

operates in this transport regime. Hence, the model cannot be applied to the pure ballistic 

regime.[68] This implies that the considered channel lengths should be significantly greater 

than the MFP of carriers in graphene, which is in the10–100 nm range.[15,69,70]

We thoroughly studied SCE for the reference device reported in Ref.[51] by varying the 

channel length. Figure 7 compares the compact model of §2.1 (solid lines) with the self-

consistent model, which considers 2D electrostatics, (symbols). The figure shows the 


17

chemical potential and I-V curves for the cases of channel lengths of 1 µm, where both 

models give similar results, and 100 nm where models clearly diverge. The results of the 

short-channel device indicate that SCE imply a redistribution of carriers caused by 2D 

electrostatic effects:[9] carrier concentration close to source and drain edges increases as 

compared with the long device, as can be observed in the chemical potential distribution along 

the channel shown in Figure 7a and d. Additionally, the chemical potential slope becomes 

steeper, and the charge neutrality point (defined by the condition 𝑉𝑐 = 0) is slightly displaced 

towards the middle of the channel.[9]

Figure 7 also shows the differences between the compact model and the self-consistent model 

in predicting the transfer (Figure 7b and e) and output curves (Figure 7c and f). As for the 1 

µm-long GFET, the differences between both models mainly come from the velocity 

saturation effect, where 𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡,0 is kept constant in the compact model whereas it follows the 

more complex model described by Equation 8 in the self-consistent model. However, the 

predicted trends are analogous. In contrast, the predictions of both methods differ 

considerably for the 100 nm-long GFET. For this case, a significant degradation in the 

transconductance can be observed, which has a direct impact on the RF performance scaling.

2.2.4. Metal-Graphene Contact Resistance

Although GFET has emerged as a promising device for analog/RF applications, the contact 

resistance (𝑅𝑐) embracing the phenomena arising at the interface between graphene and 

source/drain metal electrodes remains a major limiting factor that affects the electronic 

transport properties.[71–80] For RF electronic applications, it is a relevant issue with a strong 

impact on figures of merit such as the maximum frequency of oscillation (𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥), intrinsic cut-

off frequency (𝑓𝑇), and 𝐴𝑣,𝑖.[9,81,82] Despite the considerable number of experimental and 

theoretical studies, the origin of 𝑅𝑐 is still unclear owing to the multiple intrinsic and extrinsic 

factors affecting it, namely the nature of metals (chemisorbed or physisorbed), geometry of 

the contact (planar or edge), number of graphene layers, as well as impact of the fabrication 

process and bias. Therefore, a broad range of experimental values of 𝑅𝑐 have been reported in 

the literature even though the same contact metal has been considered.[83–93] In a metal-

semiconductor junction (Schottky contact), a potential barrier (Schottky barrier) is formed at 

the interface. In an ideal case, the Schottky barrier height is given by the difference between 

the metal work function and the semiconductor electron affinity (Schottky–Mott approach). 

For conventional (3D) semiconductors, a Schottky contact can be turned into an ohmic 

contact by lowering the Schottky barrier height with opportune metal choice or lowering the 


18

barrier thickness sufficiently, in the order of few nanometers, by heavily doping the 

semiconductor. Therefore, electrons can go through the barrier driven by the quantum 

tunneling effect. However, for metal-graphene (MG) junction, the difference between the 

dimensional nature of the metal (3D) and graphene (2D) as well as the strong influence of the 

contact metal and the impact of the device fabrication details on the graphene properties 

hinder its description by the conventional Schottky–Mott picture. Furthermore, graphene zero 

energy bandgap prevents the formation of conventional Schottky contact and its small density 

of states near the Dirac point strongly limits the current injection from the metal.[94]

Figure 8. a) Sketch of the MG contact on a back-gate structure and the corresponding 
potential step formed between graphene under the metal and graphene in the channel. Red 
lines denote the current crowding effects near the contact edge. b) Graphene Fermi level shifts 
with respect to the Dirac point for different values of doping (𝑄0/𝑞), with palladium as a 
metal contact. c) Predicted 𝑅𝑐 and its components, 𝑅𝑚𝑔 and 𝑅𝑔𝑔, considering titanium as a 
metal. Reproduced with permission.[95] 2015, IOP.

When a finite metal electrode is deposited to cover part of a graphene sheet as in the GFET 

contact shown in Figure 8a, the following electrostatic effects appear: (i) there is a charge 

transfer through the interface producing a doping of the graphene underneath, which is 

characterized by a significant shift Δ𝐸𝑚 of the graphene Fermi level respect to its Dirac point. 

This is owing to the small density of states near the Dirac energy. Not only the difference 

between metal and graphene work functions should be considered in the process, but also the 

type of chemical interaction at the surface, namely physisorption or chemisorption.[96,97] (ii) A 

potential step is established between graphene under the metal and the graphene channel,[98,99]

which is produced by a charge transfer between the two graphene regions. As shown in 

Figure 8a, the potential step is characterized by an effective length, 𝜆, and energy shifts Δ𝐸𝑚

and Δ𝐸𝑔 in the graphene under the metal and graphene channel, respectively. In the limit 

where the contact length is larger than the transfer length, 𝐿𝑇, which is defined as the effective 

contact length contributing to the injection of carriers in graphene, there is a current crowding 

effect indicative of an 𝑅𝑐 dependence on the contact width instead of the contact area.[100,101]


19

Evidence of the current crowding has been reported by photocurrent spectroscopy experiment 

for graphene-gold contact.[102]

Apart from the above-mentioned electrostatics, several theoretical studies have been 

conducted to understand both intrinsic and extrinsic factors in controlling the values of 𝑅𝑐in 

graphene-based devices. We can classify the theoretical studies as (i) ab-initio 

calculations[87,91,103–109] and (ii) analytical models.[78,95,96,101]. The ab-initio calculations have 

helped to comprehend the nature of the MG interface at the microscopic level and to suggest 

ways to engineer contact resistance. For example, they have been useful to explain the spread

of 𝑅𝑐 measurements as due to uncontrolled graphene doping and/or the chemistry of the 

interface. However, these types of models have an extremely high computational cost. In 

contrast, for the analytical models, as proposed in Ref.[101], the transport in the MG junction is 

described as carrier injection from metal to graphene underneath with probability 𝒯𝑚𝑔

followed by injection to the graphene channel with probability 𝒯𝑔𝑔. The conductance of MG 

contact is expressed in terms of the conduction modes in graphene and the transmission 

probabilities following the Landauer approach. However, in this model, the mechanism of 

𝒯𝑚𝑔 is ambiguous and it does not consider the 3D and 2D nature of the metal electrode and 

graphene sheet, respectively. Moreover, a theoretical model of carrier transport considering 

the dimensional nature has been developed in Ref.[95]. The physical model is based on the 

Bardeen transfer Hamiltonian (BTH) method for the calculation of the resistance, 𝑅𝑚𝑔 ,

between the metal and graphene underneath and on the Landauer approach to calculate the 

resistance, 𝑅𝑔𝑔, arising at the potential step across the junction formed between the graphene 

under the metal and the graphene channel. The total contact resistance can be calculated as 

𝑅𝑐 = 𝑅𝑚𝑔 + 𝑅𝑔𝑔. Here, the gate voltage dependence of ∆𝐸𝑚 and ∆𝐸𝑔, in a standard back-gate 

GFET configuration, is conveniently solved using a 1D model, as illustrated in Figure 8b, 

where palladium was assumed as the metal electrode. These two quantities are key factors to 

determine 𝑅𝑐 as a function of the gate voltage. Different types of junctions could be 

developed depending on the back-gate bias, namely pp-type, pn-type, and nn-type junctions. 

By assuming a chemical doping of the graphene channel 𝑄0/𝑞 = -5.4 × 1012 cm-2, the 

transitions from pp- to pn-type at 𝑉𝐺 ~ 23 V and from pn- to nn-type at 𝑉𝐺 ~ 46 V were 

captured in accordance with reported measurements.[101] Moreover, by combining the BTH 

method for calculating the specific contact resistivity,[96] 𝜌𝑐 , with the transmission line 

model,[110] the simple analytical expression

𝑅𝑚𝑔(∆𝐸𝑚) = √𝜌𝑐𝑅𝑠ℎ

𝑚 coth (𝐿𝑐

𝐿𝑇

) /𝑊𝑐
(15)


20

is found; thus, its gate voltage dependence for arbitrary metals is predicted. Here, 𝑅𝑠ℎ

𝑚 is the 

sheet resistance of graphene under the metal; 𝐿𝑐 and 𝑊𝑐 are the contact dimensions. 

Additionally, 𝑅𝑔𝑔 strictly depends on the effective length, 𝜆, of the potential step that builds 

up between the graphene under the metal and the graphene channel, which can be calculated 

as

𝑅𝑔𝑔

−1(∆𝐸𝑚, ∆𝐸𝑔) = 2𝑒2𝑊𝑐(ℎ𝜋)−1 ∫
𝒯𝑔𝑔 𝑑𝑘𝑦

𝑘𝐹
−𝑘𝐹
,
(16)

where 𝑘𝐹 = min(|∆𝐸𝑚|, |∆𝐸𝑔|) /ℏ𝑣𝐹 and 𝒯𝑔𝑔 is the transmission probability of Dirac 

fermions across the potential step given by Cayssol et al.[98] According to this model, 

depending on the metal electrode and a possible chemical doping of the graphene channel, the 

two components of 𝑅𝑐 could be either similar in magnitude or of very different orders. It has 

been established that 𝑅𝑔𝑔 is the dominant component for nickel and titanium electrodes, 

whereas there is a competition between both components for palladium. For illustrative 

purposes, the breakdown of 𝑅𝑐 in its two components for a titanium-contacted GFET is 

reproduced in Figure 8c. 

Recently, a physical model of 𝑅𝑐 in titanium-contacted graphene-based FETs[78] has been 

developed considering an interfacial layer including oxidized Ti and polymethyl methacrylate 

(PMMA) residues at the Ti-G interface from the processing conditions of the contact. The 

study indicates that 𝑅𝑐 is highly dependent on the properties of the interfacial layer. Similar to

Ref.[101], 𝑅𝑐 is calculated as

𝑅𝑐

−1 ∝ ∫ 𝑑𝐸1 𝐺(𝑞𝐸1 − ∆𝐸𝑚, 𝑡1)

∞

−∞

∫
𝑑𝐸2 𝐺(𝑞𝐸2 − ∆𝐸𝑔, 𝑡2)

∞

−∞

∫
𝑑𝑘𝑦 𝒯𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙

𝑘𝐹

−𝑘𝐹

(17)

where

𝒯𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝒯𝑚𝑔𝒯𝑔𝑔/[1 − (1 − 𝒯𝑚𝑔)(1 − 𝒯𝑔𝑔)]
(18)

is the total carrier transmission probability and the Gaussian functions 𝐺(𝐸, 𝑡) with effectives 

broadening 𝑡1 and 𝑡2 have been considered to get a more realistic model. Parameter 𝑡1

considers the coupling between the metal and the quasi-bound graphene states underneath; 𝑡2

is a parameter embedding information of the random disorder potential in the graphene 

channel, which depends on the minimum sheet carrier concentration.

The probability of carrier transmission through the potential is given in Ref.[98] The carrier 

transmission, 𝒯𝑚𝑔, through Ti-TiOx-graphene interface depends on the tunneling mechanisms 

and it has been modeled based on quantum-mechanical tunneling theory using the WKB 

approximation.


21

The above comprehensive physics-based calculation of 𝑅𝑐 can be used as a confident 

reference for the values of this parameter in a device model. For compact modeling 

approaches, however, 𝑅𝑐 in GFETs has been either extracted from experimental data-based 

methodologies[75–77,79] (cf. §4.2.3) or been considered as a model parameter whose value is 

obtained by fitting the experimental I-V curves (cf. §3.2). Furthermore, parameter extraction 

techniques based on test-structures or analysis of transport experimental data[81,89,111,112] have 

been developed towards obtaining an immediate 𝑅𝑐 value. Further details of these extraction 

methodologies are provided in §4.2.3.

3. Transient Analysis

When a time-varying signal is applied to a GFET terminal, the dynamic operation of the 

device is strongly influenced by internal capacitive effects. Therefore, it is necessary to 

develop a large-signal model of intrinsic GFET capacitances. Various capacitive models for 

general FETs have been developed over the years. Basically, they can be categorized into two 

groups: (i) Meyer-like[113] and (ii) charge-based capacitance models. The advantages and 

shortcomings of both model groups applied to conventional FETs have been widely discussed 

and implemented in circuit simulators.[114,115]

Meyer-like models are widely used in incumbent technologies because of their simplicity and 

fast computation. They assume that the intrinsic capacitances are reciprocal (i.e., 𝐶𝑖𝑗 = 𝐶𝑗𝑖). 

Notably, this hypothesis might give unphysical results when dealing with some class of 

circuits (such as switched capacitor filters); furthermore, earlier models based on this 

assumption could not ensure charge conservation.[116,117]

Conversely, the charge-based models ensure both charge conservation and nonreciprocity of 

intrinsic capacitances in a FET. Owing to some corrections assembled by Ward and 

Dutton,[118] the charge-conservation issue was solved by introducing a capacitive matrix, 

which adds a bit of complexity. In Ref.[11,119–121], we have provided graphs of bias-dependent 

𝐶𝑑𝑔 and 𝐶𝑔𝑑 for graphene- and MoS2-based FETs, showing that the reciprocity of 

capacitances in emergent 2D technologies cannot be assumed for all transistor operation 

regimes. However, most of the GFET capacitance models reported so far rely on the Meyer’s 

reciprocity assumption without evaluating the implications of adopting it.[122–126] Therefore, a 

comparison of the RF performance prediction between the Meyer-like models against a 

charge-based approach is provided in Ref.[119], indicating that significant errors could arise.

Considering all the aforementioned, we presented a large-signal model for the GFET 

elsewhere and summarized it in §3.1.[11,127] Thereafter, to illustrate the working of the model, 


22

we have presented the dynamic response of several circuits exploiting the graphene 

ambipolarity in §3.2. Later in §3.3, we considered significant non-ideal effects that must be 

modeled to enhance the predictive capability of the large-signal model. The effects include 

the effect of the trapped charges in §3.3.1 and the NQS effects owing to carrier inertia in 

§3.3.2. Dynamic SHE will be treated in the context of small-signal analysis later in §4.2.2. As 

for the large-signal case, dynamic SHE would need some adaptation, which is not yet 

investigated. Finally, to account for the impact of parasitic elements when a transient circuit 

analysis is performed, a parasitic network model of the GFET should be considered in the 

simulation. That will be discussed in the context of AC analysis in §4.2.3.

3.1. Large-Signal Model

Assuming a quasi-static (QS) operation, the entering terminal currents in the time domain can 

be expressed by considering that the charges per unit area at any time controlled by the time-

varying terminal voltages, (𝑣𝐺(𝑡), 𝑣𝐵(𝑡), 𝑣𝐷(𝑡), and 𝑣𝑆(𝑡)), are identical to those found if DC 

voltages (𝑉𝐺, 𝑉𝐵, 𝑉𝐷, and 𝑉𝑆) were used.

𝑖𝑚(𝑡) =

𝑑𝑄𝑚

𝑑𝑡 + 𝐼𝑚,
(19)

where 𝑚 stands for 𝐺, 𝐷, 𝑆, and 𝐵, and they denote the top gate, drain, source, and back gate, 

respectively. The possible leakage current through the top and back insulators is neglected,

that is, 𝐼𝐺 = 𝐼𝐵 = 0. In addition, to guarantee charge conservation, 𝐼𝐷 = −𝐼𝑆 = 𝐼𝐷𝑆, where 𝐼𝐷𝑆

is calculated according to Equation 10. A four-terminal FET can be modeled using a set of 16 

intrinsic capacitances,
including 4 self-capacitances and 12 transcapacitances. The 

capacitance matrix is formed by these capacitances, where each element, 𝐶𝑖𝑗, describes the 

dependence of the charge at terminal 𝑖 with respect to a varying voltage applied to terminal 𝑗,

assuming that the voltage at any other terminal remains constant. Therefore, Equation 19 can 

be written as 

[

𝑖𝐺
𝑖𝐷
𝑖𝑆
𝑖𝐵

] =

[
 
 
 
 𝐶𝑔𝑔
−𝐶𝑔𝑑

−𝐶𝑑𝑔
𝐶𝑑𝑑

−𝐶𝑔𝑠
−𝐶𝑔𝑏

−𝐶𝑑𝑠
−𝐶𝑑𝑏

−𝐶𝑠𝑔
−𝐶𝑠𝑑

−𝐶𝑏𝑔
−𝐶𝑏𝑑

𝐶𝑠𝑠
−𝐶𝑠𝑏

−𝐶𝑏𝑠
𝐶𝑏𝑏 ]

 
 
 
 

[
 
 
 𝑑𝑣𝐺 𝑑𝑡
⁄

𝑑𝑣𝐷 𝑑𝑡
⁄

𝑑𝑣𝑆 𝑑𝑡
⁄

𝑑𝑣𝐵 𝑑𝑡
⁄
]
 
 
 

+ [

0
𝐼𝐷𝑆
−𝐼𝐷𝑆

0

],

𝐶𝑖𝑗 = − 𝜕𝑄𝑖

𝜕𝑉𝑗

, 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗;
𝐶𝑖𝑗 = 𝜕𝑄𝑖

𝜕𝑉𝑗

, 𝑖 = 𝑗.
𝑖, 𝑗 = 𝐺, 𝐷, 𝑆, 𝐵

(20)

Each row must sum to zero for the matrix to be reference-independent, and each column must 

sum to zero for the device description to be charge-conservative.[128] Notably, only 9 out of 

the 16 intrinsic capacitances are independent. In addition, we can take advantage of the 


23

relations between top- and back-gate capacitances,[11,129] namely 𝐶𝑏𝑑 = 𝐶𝑔𝑑(𝐶𝑏 𝐶𝑡
⁄
); 𝐶𝑏𝑠 =

𝐶𝑔𝑠(𝐶𝑏 𝐶𝑡
⁄
) ; 𝐶𝑑𝑏 = 𝐶𝑑𝑔(𝐶𝑏 𝐶𝑡
⁄
) ; 𝐶𝑠𝑏 = 𝐶𝑠𝑔(𝐶𝑏 𝐶𝑡
⁄
) ; 𝐶𝑔𝑔 = −𝐶𝑏𝑔(𝐶𝑡 𝐶𝑏
⁄
) + 𝐶𝑡𝑊𝐿 ; 𝐶𝑏𝑔 =

𝐶𝑔𝑏 = −𝐶𝑏𝑏(𝐶𝑡 𝐶𝑏
⁄
) + 𝐶𝑡𝑊𝐿; reducing the independent set of intrinsic capacitances of a 

four-terminal GFET to only four; for instance, 𝐶𝑔𝑠, 𝐶𝑔𝑑, 𝐶𝑑𝑔, and 𝐶𝑠𝑑. 

Considering all the aforementioned, the modeling of the dynamic response of a GFET 

requires a charge model relating the terminal charges to the terminal voltages. From the 

electrostatics given in Equation 2, the following relations are derived:[11]

𝑄𝐺 + 𝑄𝐵 = −𝑊 ∫ 𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑦)𝑑𝑦

𝐿
0
; {

𝑄𝐺 = 𝑄0 −

𝐶𝑡𝑊

𝐶𝑡+𝐶𝑏 ∫ 𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑦)𝑑𝑦

𝐿
0

−𝑄𝐵 = 𝑄0 +

𝐶𝑏𝑊

𝐶𝑡+𝐶𝑏 ∫ 𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑦)𝑑𝑦

𝐿
0

,
(21)

where 𝑄0 = 𝑊𝐿𝐶𝑡𝐶𝑏(𝑉𝐺 − 𝑉𝐺0 − 𝑉𝐵 + 𝑉𝐵0) (𝐶𝑡 + 𝐶𝑏)
⁄
. The charge controlled by the drain 

and source terminals is calculated based on the Ward–Dutton linear charge partition scheme,

which guarantees charge conservation[118]

𝑄𝐷 = 𝑊 ∫ 𝑦

𝐿 𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑦)𝑑𝑦

𝐿

0

𝑄𝑆 = −(𝑄𝐺 + 𝑄𝐵 + 𝑄𝐷) = 𝑊 ∫ (1 − 𝑦

𝐿) 𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑦)𝑑𝑦

𝐿

0

(22)

Both terminal charges and intrinsic capacitances can conveniently be written using 𝑉𝑐 as the 

integration variable, as it was done to model 𝐼𝐷𝑆 (cf. §2.1.2). Because 𝐼𝐷𝑆 is the same at any 

point 𝑦 in the channel (by considering compensated generation/recombination processes), the 

equations required to evaluate the terminal charges and intrinsic capacitances are obtained 

from the drift-diffusion transport model as follows:

𝑑𝑦 = 𝜇𝐿𝐹𝑊

𝐼𝐷𝑆

𝜌𝑠ℎ(𝑉𝑐) 𝑑𝑉

𝑑𝑉𝑐

𝑑𝑉𝑐 − 𝜇𝐿𝐹

𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡

𝑑𝜓
𝑑𝑉𝑐

|𝑑𝑉𝑐|

𝑦 =

𝜇𝐿𝐹𝑊

𝐼𝐷𝑆 (∫
𝜌𝑠ℎ(𝑉𝑐) 𝑑𝑉

𝑑𝑉𝑐 𝑑𝑉𝑐

𝑉𝑐
𝑉𝑐𝑠
) −

𝜇𝐿𝐹
𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡 |∫

𝑑𝜓

𝑑𝑉𝑐 𝑑𝑉𝑐

𝑉𝑐
𝑉𝑐𝑠
|,

(23)

where 

𝑑𝑉

𝑑𝑉𝑐 = 1 +

𝑑𝜓

𝑑𝑉𝑐 = 1 +

𝐶𝑞(𝑉𝑐)

𝐶𝑡+𝐶𝑏. 

The drain current model presented in §2.1.2 is combined with the charge-based compact 

intrinsic capacitance description as shown in Equation 20 to assemble a large-signal model of 

GFETs. The modeling approach presented here has been validated against numerical 

simulations (Figure 9c)[11] as well as with experimental data from fabricated GFETs.[127]


24

Figure 9. Input parameters used to describe the GFETs reported in a)[130] (Device A) and 
b)[131] (Device B). Contact resistances, 𝑅𝑑 and 𝑅𝑠, have been considered bias-independent. 𝑅𝑔
is the gate resistance. c) Compact model (solid lines) and numerical (symbols) calculation of 
the intrinsic capacitances versus 𝑉𝐺𝑆 for Device A at 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 1 V. d) Schematic circuit of a 
GFET-based frequency doubler based on Device A.[130] e) Schematic circuit of a subharmonic 
resistive GFET mixer based on Device B.[131] A bias tee is used for setting the DC bias point. 
The characteristic impedance is 50 Ω. Reproduced with permission.[11,127] 2016, IEEE.

Input parameters of the GFET - Device A

T
300 K
L
500 nm

µLF
1300 cm2/Vs
W
840 nm

VG0
-1.062 V
tt
5 nm

VB0
0 V
tb
300 nm

Δ
0.140 eV
εt
12

vsat
6.6·105 m/s
εb
3.9

RsW, RdW
1.1 kΩ·µm
Rg
20 Ω

Input parameters of the GFET - Device B

T
300 K
L
1 µm

µLF
2200 cm2/Vs
W
20 µm

VG0
1 V
tt
5 nm

VB0
0 V
tb
300 nm

Δ
0.116 eV
εt
12

vsat
6.6·105 m/s
εb
3.9

RsW, RdW
560 Ω·µm
Rg
20 Ω

VGS (V)

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

A

B


25

Figure 10. a) Experimental measurements (symbols) and simulations (solid lines) of the DC 
transfer characteristics and the extrinsic transconductance of a GFET-based frequency 
doubler.[130] The device is biased at 𝑉𝐷𝑆,𝑒 = 1 V, 𝑉𝐵𝑆,𝑒 = 40 V, and 𝑉𝐺𝑆,𝑒 = −1.15 V. b) Input 
and output waveforms considering an input frequency of 𝑓𝑖𝑛 = 10 kHz and amplitude 𝐴 =
400 mV. c) Input and output waveforms considering an input frequency of 𝑓𝑖𝑛 = 200 kHz
and amplitude of 𝐴 = 300 mV. A thicker solid line shows the output waveform when a 
parasitic capacitance (𝐶𝑝𝑎𝑑 = 600 pF) is placed between the drain/source and the back gate, 
considering the effect of the electrode pads. d) Input and output waveforms considering an 
input frequency of 𝑓𝑖𝑛 = 2 GHz and amplitude of 𝐴 = 300 mV. e) Power spectrum obtained 
via Fourier transforming the output signal shown in b). f) Group delay vs. frequency of the 
GFET-based frequency doubler. Reproduced with permission.[127] 2016, IEEE.

e)

f)

IDS (µA)

VGS,e (V)


26

Figure 11. a) Drain-to-source resistance, 𝑅𝐷𝑆, versus the overdrive gate voltage, with 𝑅𝐷𝑆 =
𝑅𝑑 + 𝑅𝑠 + 𝑅𝑐ℎ , where 𝑅𝑐ℎ is the channel resistance; 𝑅𝑑 and 𝑅𝑠 are the extrinsic contact 
resistances at the drain and source sides, respectively. Solid lines correspond to simulations 
and the symbols to the experimental results.[131] b) IF output power as a function of the RF 
input power. The device is biased at the Dirac voltage 𝑉𝐺𝑆,𝑒 = 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐 and 𝑃𝐿𝑂 = 15 dBm. c)
Transient evolution of the signal collected at the drain at 𝑉𝐺𝑆,𝑒 = 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐 . The following 
conditions have been assumed: 𝑃𝐿𝑂 = 15 dBm and 𝑓𝐿𝑂 = 1.01 GHz; 𝑃𝑅𝐹 = −20 dBm and 
𝑓𝑅𝐹 = 2 GHz. d) Transient evolution of the IF signal collected at the IF port under the same 
conditions as in c). The separation between peaks is 50 ns, which corresponds to 𝑓𝐼𝐹 =
|𝑓𝑅𝐹 − 2𝑓𝐿𝑂| = 20 MHz. e) Simulated spectrum (solid lines) of the signal collected at the 
drain (shown in c) and the measured power peaks (blue circles) reported in Ref.[131] The stars 
correspond to the simulation results of power peaks of the signal collected at the IF port 
(shown in d). Reproduced with permission.[127] 2016, IEEE.

3.2. Dynamic Response of GFET-based RF Applications

To demonstrate the predictive capabilities of the large-signal model presented,[127] we 

consider various exemplary circuits, namely: the frequency doubler and the subharmonic 

mixer.[130,131] The GFET used in each of the circuits is referred as device A and B (with their 

e)

VGS,e-VDirac (V)


27

corresponding parameters given in Figure 9a-b), respectively. In Figure 9c, a set of 

independent intrinsic capacitances for the device A is plotted as a function of the gate voltage, 

showing a clear non-linear behavior of the GFET around the Dirac voltage. It can be observed 

that the Meyer’s reciprocity does not hold.[11]

A graphene-based frequency doubler leverages the quadratic-like transfer characteristic (𝐼𝐷𝑆

vs. 𝑉𝐺𝑆,𝑒 curve) of a GFET. If such a transfer characteristic is not perfectly parabolic and/or 

symmetric, which is the practical case, the output voltage contains the doubled frequency and 

other higher-order harmonics, resulting in harmonic distortion. As for device A configured in 

the topology depicted in Figure 9d, with the nearly symmetric transfer characteristic around 

𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐 = −1.15 V shown in Figure 10a, the output waveforms after considering different 

input frequencies are shown in Figure 10b-d. For the input signal with amplitude 𝐴 and 

lowest frequency, 𝑓𝑖𝑛 = 10 kHz, the output waveform consists of the doubled frequency with 

amplitude ~𝐴/10, with a clear distortion coming from other higher order harmonics (Figure 

10b). A Fourier transform of such waveform is shown in Figure 10e, revealing that 60% of 

the output RF power is concentrated at the doubled frequency of 20 kHz. 

When the input signal is increased up to 𝑓𝑖𝑛 = 200 kHz and beyond, a significant decay of the 

output signal amplitude was observed in the experiment,[130] with a voltage gain of ~𝐴/100

likely because of the presence of a parasitic capacitance (estimated in 𝐶𝑝𝑎𝑑 = 600 pF) 

between the GFET source-drain terminals and its back gate. When including the 𝐶𝑝𝑎𝑑, the 

predicted output waveform is similar to that in the experiment for an input frequency of 

200 kHz (Figure 10c). If the input frequency is increased further to 2 GHz, as shown in 

Figure 10d, the output waveform displays the doubled frequency, although with a greater 

distortion because the group delay is not constant with the frequency according to Figure 10f, 

indicating that the phase is not linear with the frequency.

Furthermore, with the use of a single GFET (Figure 9e), a subharmonic mixer can be 

designed to take advantage of the device nonlinearity. This way, the device is fed with two 

different frequencies (the local oscillator, LO, signal at 𝑓𝐿𝑂 and the RF signal at 𝑓𝑅𝐹) and a 

mixture of several frequencies appears at the output port, including both original input 

frequencies; the sum of the input frequencies; the difference between the input frequencies; 

the intermediate frequency (IF), 𝑓𝐼𝐹 ; and other intermodulations.[132] According to the 

graphene-based mixer topology shown in Figure 9e, the LO signal and DC bias are applied to 

the gate port through a bias-tee, whereas the RF signal is applied to the drain of the GFET 

through a high-pass filter, and the IF is extracted with a low-pass filter, both assumed with 

cut-off frequencies of 800 and 30 MHz, respectively. 


28

The drain-to-source resistance, 𝑅𝐷𝑆 = 𝑉𝐷𝑆,𝑒 𝐼𝐷𝑆
⁄
, versus the gate bias is shown in Figure 11a. 

To reach subharmonic operation, the device is biased at 𝑉𝐺𝑆,𝑒 = 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐 = 1 V through a bias 

tee. In contrast, Figure 11b shows the mixer IF output power versus the RF input power, 

where a near constant conversion loss rate of ~25 dB is obtained. The transient evolution of 

the signal collected at the drain is shown in Figure 11c, as well as the signal collected at the 

IF port (Figure 11d), which oscillates as expected at 𝑓𝐼𝐹 = |𝑓𝑅𝐹 − 2𝑓𝐿𝑂| = 20 MHz given that 

𝑓𝐿𝑂 = 1.01 GHz and 𝑓𝑅𝐹 = 2 GHz. Finally, the spectrum of the signal collected at the drain is 

presented in Figure 11e, with an output power of ~ − 49 dBm . Lower levels of odd 

harmonics are observed as well, which are attributed to the non-perfect symmetry of 𝑅𝐷𝑆

versus 𝑉𝐺𝑆,𝑒.

3.3. Non-Ideal Effects for Enhancing the Large-Signal Model Prediction Capability

A brief description of the dynamic trap-related phenomenon in GFETs is presented in §3.3.1. 

The implementation of this module into the GFET modeling framework presented in this 

work is still an ongoing effort; hence, the corresponding subsection should be considered a 

useful guide for approaching this development. A systematic study on NQS effects in GFETs 

is provided in §3.3.2. 

3.3.1. Dynamic Trap Model

Trapping and detrapping dynamic processes in MOS-like transistors can be characterized by 

their corresponding capture and emission time constants, 𝜏𝑐 and 𝜏𝑒 , respectively. These 

phenomena can occur over a wide time span depending on the location of the traps centers 

within the device (cf. §2.2.1), as well as on the bias and temperature conditions.[133,134] In 

devices with high-κ oxides, e.g., GFETs, the dynamic performance is strongly affected by the 

capture and release of carriers,[35,135,136] mainly located at the gate oxide and channel 

interfaces, because the trap-induced shift of the channel potential modify the bias conditions 

(transfer curve hysteresis) to achieve specific dynamic characteristics.[35,136] Additionally, 

trapping phenomena have an impact on the device measurement history, i.e., on the initial 

state of shielding of the channel potential from the gate-source voltage. This impact could not 

be reduced by a technology-dependent quiescent time approach,[51,81] if either 𝜏𝑐 or 𝜏𝑒 (or a 

combination of both) is larger than the quiescent pulse duration. Hence, the dynamic 

modeling approach for graphene transistors should consider the trap time constants for a 

correct description and projection of the device performance. Furthermore, a reliable compact 

model considering a description for trap mechanisms can aid the technology development by 


29

revealing the device dynamic performance affected by traps under different pulse biasing 

conditions, as demonstrated in other emerging technologies.[137,138] The latter can be 

immediately exploited in specific application scenarios, e.g., high-speed GFET-based 

modulators designs,[139,140] and it can be boosted by an accurate modeling of the dependence 

of the trap-affected/reduced device performance on the pulse biasing conditions.

Trap dynamics in graphene transistors have been systematically characterized[141,142] using

silicon technology-based models[143] yielding the traps activation energy distributions and trap 

time constant distributions of the capture and emission processes. Individual values of trap-

related time constants have been experimentally characterized in different GFET technologies 

ranging from few nanoseconds to the order of few hours.[32,33,144–146] Trap time constants have 

been obtained by fitting the transient current response over specific non-quiescent conditions

with constant pulse widths using empirical exponential models.[32,33,144,145] A capture process 

is usually related to such extracted trap time constants in these cases; hence, the emission time 

constants are ignored. Studies with different pulse duration reveal both 𝜏𝑐 and 𝜏𝑒 , as 

demonstrated in Ref.[146], where the latter is obtained with pulses larger than the time required 

for an apparent initial steady-state of the current. 

Currently, physics-based models for 𝜏𝑐 and 𝜏𝑒 in GFETs have not been reported in the 

literature. However, previously developed high-κ dielectric MOS-models of oxide traps, e.g., 

a non-radiative multi-phonon model[147]
(already applied to other 2D transistor 

technologies),[148] can be adapted to GFETs because statistical similarities between trapping 

processes in the latter and in incumbent technologies have already been observed.[141,142] This 

model predicts 𝜏𝑐 and 𝜏𝑒 as a function of the position and energy of the trap, applied bias, and 

temperature.

A numerical device simulation solution, enabled by the drift-diffusion-based description of 

transport in graphene transistors,[149,150] can be developed by considering the trap-assisted 

phenomena, including 𝜏𝑐/𝑒 –dependent capture and emission rates, in both the Poisson’s 

equation and the continuity equation[151,152] as already implemented in other drift-diffusion-

based simulators describing different transistor technologies.[152–155] In contrast, an immediate 

approach to adapt the compact graphene transistor model considering traps in a static regime 

described in §2.2.1 for the dynamic description can be conducted by defining the trap density 

𝑁𝑡𝑟 in Equation 12 in terms of the steady-state trap density 𝑁𝑡𝑟,𝑠𝑠 along with 𝜏𝑐 or 𝜏𝑒, as 

implemented previously in a different compact model.[156] The challenging characterization of 

𝑁𝑡𝑟,𝑠𝑠 has been overcome in Ref.[156] using an empirical function depending on the vertical 

fields and some fitting parameters. An improvement of the compact GFET model discussed in 


30

this work (cf. §2.1), including the dependence of both lateral and vertical fields as well as 𝜏𝑐

and 𝜏𝑒 in the definition of 𝑁𝑡𝑟 is left for future studies. Alternatively, for circuit design 

purposes, a practical approach considering an adjunct trap network, as demonstrated in studies 

of emerging transistor technologies,[58,137,138,157] with different time constants defined by RC

networks can be an option to include directly in the compact model the impact of the different 

capture and emission trapping processes within the device.[39,137,138]

3.3.2. Non-Quasi-Static Large-Signal Model

Depending on the input frequency of the time-varying signal, two operating regimes can be 

distinguished, QS and NQS. In the QS regime, the fluctuation of the varying terminal voltages 

is sufficiently slow such that the channel charge can follow the voltage variations. This 

regime applies whenever the transition time for the voltage to change is larger than the transit 

time of the carriers from source to drain. Contrarily, the NQS regime where carrier inertia 

effects are important should be considered. When dealing with circuit simulations, assuming a 

QS regime is not appropriate for long-channel GFETs operating at HFs or when the load 

capacitance is extremely small.[128,158] Applications of QS approach could result in important 

errors when predicting phase margins or the stability of wideband amplifiers.[159]

A straightforward approach for modeling a transistor at speeds where the QS regime breaks 

down involves splitting the channel length in many shorter sections; thus, the QS approach 

still holds within each section.[128,160,161] To track the breakdown of the QS regime, we 

consider the frequency-dependent admittance 𝑦𝑚 = 𝑦𝑑𝑔 − 𝑦𝑔𝑑 as a convenient indicator of 

the electrical gate control on the transistor channel over frequency. Thus, a decrease of |𝑦𝑚| is 

interpreted as the loss of the gate control over the channel charge because of the significant

carrier inertia originated at HF.[128,162] Considering the 1 𝜇m-long prototype GFET described 

in Figure 12a, a simulation of normalized |𝑦𝑚| from the QS model is shown in Figure 13f. 

The selected bias to perform the calculation is 𝑉𝐺 = 1.5 V, 𝑉𝐷 = 1 V and 𝑉𝐵 = 𝑉𝑆 = 0 V. The 

result is compared with that obtained after connecting 20 identical GFETs of length 𝐿/20 =

50 nm in series (sharing all the same gate, as shown in the inset of Figure 13f), where the 

array effectively allows the capture of NQS effects. At medium frequencies (MF), both 

approaches, QS and NQS, predict the same normalized |𝑦𝑚|. However, the upward-going 

magnitude of normalized |𝑦𝑚| predicted by the QS model for the 1 𝜇m-long GFET working at 

HF is clearly unrealistic, as it suggests an enhancement in the forward gate-to-drain action. 

This behavior results are contrary to the expectation that, at such frequencies, control of the 

gate on the drain current is gradually lost due to the carrier inertia in the graphene channel. 


31

These predictions for GFETs are in qualitative agreement with the NQS studies that have 

been conducted for conventional silicon-based MOSFETs.[128,159]

Figure 12. a) Input parameters used to describe a prototype GFET. b) Schematic of a four-
terminal FET operating under small-signal regime showing the terminal DC and AC voltages 
as well as currents. To guarantee charge conservation, the sum of the terminal currents must 
be zero; thus, 𝐼𝐷 = −𝐼𝑆, where the DC top- and back-gate currents are 𝐼𝐺 = 𝐼𝐵 = 0; and 
𝑖𝑔(𝑡) + 𝑖𝑏(𝑡) + 𝑖𝑑(𝑡) + 𝑖𝑠(𝑡) = 0. c) QS charge-based small-signal model suited to three-
terminal GFETs. The equivalent circuit of the intrinsic device is framed in blue. d) Equivalent 
circuit of a GFET in two-port configuration describing the first-order NQS behavior using
lumped elements. Reproduced with permission.[119,162] 2017 and 2020, IEEE.

4. AC Analysis

When considering analog and RF electronic applications, FET terminals are polarized with a 

DC bias over which a time-varying voltage is superimposed (Figure 12b). If the voltage 

amplitude is sufficiently small, the resulting AC components of terminal currents and charges 

can be linearly related to the AC voltage.[128] Therefore, the nonlinear FET can be treated as a 

linear circuit formed by lumped elements, known as the FET small-signal equivalent circuit. 

In §4.1, we derive a small-signal equivalent circuit for the GFET assuming the QS hypothesis 

b)

GFET - Device C

T
300 K

µLF
2000 cm2/Vs

VG0
0 V

VB0
0 V

L
1 µm

W
10 µm

Ct
8 mF/m2

Cb
115 µF/m2

c)

a)

d)


32

valid in the MF range. Later in §4.2, we introduce some important non-ideal effects. 

Specifically, the small-signal model derivation has been extended to cover the NQS regime at 

HF in §4.2.1. A brief review of the dynamic self-heating model in GFETs is presented in 

§4.2.2. Finally, in §4.2.3, we discuss a procedure adapted to GFETs to go from the extrinsic to 

the intrinsic AC frequency response, which requires a model for the parasitic network that 

should include the effect of the contact pads, metal interconnections, and substrate.

4.1. Quasi-Static Small-Signal Model

Currently, many small-signal models proposed for GFETs have been directly imported from 

Meyer-like capacitance models.[123,124,126,163,164] They assume that the intrinsic capacitances 

are reciprocal, which has been proven to result in inaccuracies when predicting the RF figures 

of merit, as demonstrated in Ref.[119] for GFETs. Moreover, these models do not ensure 

charge conservation, which is crucial not only for accurate device modeling and circuit 

simulation, but also for proper parameter extraction. To ensure both capacitance reciprocity 

and charge conservation, the charge-based small-signal model shown in Figure 12c is 

adopted, where the intrinsic part has been framed in blue. We considered a three-terminal 

GFET configuration, where the back gate is considered AC disconnected (𝑖𝐵(𝑡) = 0). The 

small-signal parameters include 𝑔𝑚; 𝑔𝑑𝑠; and a set of independent capacitances, including 𝐶𝑔𝑑, 

𝐶𝑔𝑠, 𝐶𝑠𝑑, and 𝐶𝑑𝑔, are calculated according to the procedure described in §3.1. The intrinsic 

model must be augmented with the extrinsic resistances, 𝑅𝑑 and 𝑅𝑠, after linearization around 

the operating bias point, and the gate resistance, 𝑅𝑔 (Figure 12c), if the extrinsic RF 

performance is intended.

The small-signal model parameters could be either extracted by applying a direct 

methodology based on S-parameter measurements[119] or numerically computed with a DC 

simulator (optionally including SCE and/or SHE), allowing the prediction of RF performance 

for different embodiments of GFETs at arbitrary bias.[24,120,150]

4.2. Non-Ideal Effects for Enhancing the Prediction Capability of the Small-Signal Model

Here, we present a set of secondary models to enhance the prediction capability of the small-

signal model presented in §4.1 by including some relevant non-idealities. We first describe a 

NQS small-signal model suitable for HF simulations in §4.2.1. Thereafter, a dynamic SHE 

model, developed in the context of small-signal analysis, is presented in §4.2.2. Finally, a 

parasitic network model that considers the effect of contact pads, metal interconnections, and 

the substrate is discussed in §4.2.3.


33

Figure 13. a) Modulus of the AC current at the drain (𝑖𝑑) and source (𝑖𝑠) edges computed in 
analytical (symbols) and numerical (dotted line) ways. The former is computed by truncating 
the modified Bessel functions of the first kind to 𝑛 = 10 (Ref.[162]). b) Modulus of the AC 
current along the normalized position in the channel for different frequencies. c) Normalized 
magnitude and d) phase of 𝑦𝑚 = 𝑦𝑑𝑔 − 𝑦𝑔𝑑 versus frequency at 𝑉𝐺 = 1.5 V, 𝑉𝐷 = 1 V, 𝑉𝐵 =
𝑉𝑆 = 0 V. Four types of models are considered: zero-order model (solid black lines); charge-
based QS model described in §4.1; first-order NQS model described in §4.2 (dashed lines); 
numerical NQS model (dotted lines). e) Small-signal current gain (ℎ21), unilateral power gain 
(𝑈, Mason’s invariant)[165] and maximum stable gain / maximum available gain (MSG/MAG) 
versus frequency of the GFET under test predicted by the QS (solid lines), first-order NQS 
(dashed lines), and numerical NQS (dotted lines) models. The RF figures of merit 𝑓𝑇 and 
𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥 are obtained when the gains are reduced to unity (0 dB). f) Normalized magnitude of 𝑦𝑚
versus frequency under the operating bias point 𝑉𝐺 = 1.5 V, 𝑉𝐷 = 1 V, 𝑉𝐵 = 𝑉𝑆 = 0 V for a 
single 1 µm-length GFET compared against a two-port configuration of a cascade of 20 
GFETs, 50 nm-length each, connected in series. (inset) Schematics of the multi-segment 
approach applied to a GFET. Reproduced with permission.[162] 2020, IEEE.

4.2.1. Non-Quasi-Static Small-Signal Model

Here, we discuss ways for expanding the frequency range that can be reached with the small-

signal model while keeping the accuracy to acceptable levels. Therefore, NQS effects arising

at HF should be incorporated into the model. A small-signal NQS model can be derived from 

the analytical solution of the drift-diffusion equation coupled with the continuity equation, 

which can be expressed in terms of the modified Bessel functions of the first kind.[162] The 

model can be conveniently simplified to provide an equivalent circuit of lumped elements that 

can be used in circuit simulators. For instance, if second- and higher-order terms in 𝜔

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)


34

(angular frequency) are neglected in the GFET 𝜔-dependent admittances, a first-order NQS 

equivalent circuit of the GFET can be obtained (Figure 12d), which is fully described by the 

following bias-dependent small-signal parameters:[162]

𝐶1 = 𝑔𝑚0(𝛾𝜏4 − 𝜏2);
𝐶2 = 𝑔𝑚0𝜏2;
𝐶3 = 𝑔𝑑𝑠0𝜏3(1 − 𝛾)

𝑟1 = 𝜏1/𝐶1;
𝑟2 = 𝜏1/𝐶2;
𝑟3 = 𝜏1/𝐶3

𝐿0 = 𝜏1/𝑔𝑑𝑠0;
𝑟0 = 1/𝑔𝑑𝑠0;
𝑦𝑚 = 𝑔𝑚0 (1 + 𝑗𝜔𝜏1)
⁄

(24)

where:

𝑔𝑚0 = −𝜇𝐿𝐹

𝑊
𝐿

𝑘2

2(𝐶𝑡 + 𝐶𝑏) (Sign[𝑉𝑐𝑑0]ℎ𝐺𝐷𝑉𝑐𝑑0

3 − Sign[𝑉𝑐𝑠0]ℎ𝐺𝑆𝑉𝑐𝑠0

3)

𝑔𝑑𝑠0 = 𝜇𝐿𝐹

𝑊
𝐿

𝑘2

2(𝐶𝑡 + 𝐶𝑏) (ℎ𝐺𝐷 + ℎ𝐵𝐷)|𝑉𝑐𝑑0|3

𝑉𝑐𝑥0 =

(𝐶𝑡+𝐶𝑏)−√(𝐶𝑡+𝐶𝑏)2±2𝑘[𝐶𝑡(𝑉𝐺−𝑉𝐺0−𝑉𝑋)+𝐶𝑏(𝑉𝐵−𝑉𝐵0−𝑉𝑋)]

±𝑘

ℎ𝐺𝑋 = −

𝐶𝑡

(−𝐶𝑡−𝐶𝑏±𝑘𝑉𝑐𝑥0) ;
ℎ𝐵𝑋 =

𝐶𝑏
𝐶𝑡 ℎ𝐺𝑋,

(25)

where the positive (negative) sign applies when 𝐶𝑡[𝑉𝐺 − 𝑉𝐺0 − 𝑉𝑋] + 𝐶𝑏[𝑉𝐵 − 𝑉𝐵0 − 𝑉𝑋] <

0(> 0) and the subscript 𝑋 stands for drain (𝐷) and source (𝑆). The time constants 𝜏1, 𝜏2, 𝜏3,

and 𝜏4 from Equation 24 are

𝜏1 = − 𝐷′

12

𝑉𝑐𝑑0

4𝑉𝑐𝑠0

4

𝑉𝑐𝑑0

2 + 𝑉𝑐𝑠0

2 ;

𝜏2 = 𝐷′

24

(𝑉𝑐𝑑0

6 − 3𝑉𝑐𝑑0

2𝑉𝑐𝑠0

4 + 2𝑉𝑐𝑠0

6)

ℎ𝐺𝐷𝑉𝑐𝑑0

3 − ℎ𝐺𝑆𝑉𝑐𝑠0

3
ℎ𝐺𝐷𝑉𝑐𝑑0

3;

𝜏3 = − 𝐷′

24 (𝑉𝑐𝑑0

6 − 3𝑉𝑐𝑑0

2𝑉𝑐𝑠0

4 + 2𝑉𝑐𝑠0

6);

𝜏4 = 𝐷′

24

(𝑉𝑐𝑑0

2 − 𝑉𝑐𝑠0

2)

2

ℎ𝐺𝐷𝑉𝑐𝑑0

3 − ℎ𝐺𝑆𝑉𝑐𝑠0

3 (ℎ𝐺𝐷𝑉𝑐𝑑0

3(𝑉𝑐𝑑0

2 + 2𝑉𝑐𝑠0

2)

+ ℎ𝐺𝑆𝑉𝑐𝑠0

3(2𝑉𝑐𝑑0

2 + 2𝑉𝑐𝑠0

2))

𝐷′ = Sign[𝑉𝑐𝑑0] 𝜇𝐿𝐹𝑊2𝑘3 (2𝐼𝐷𝑆0

2(𝐶𝑡 + 𝐶𝑏))
⁄

𝐼𝐷𝑆0 = 𝜇𝐿𝐹𝑊𝑘2(Sign[𝑉𝑐𝑑0]𝑉𝑐𝑑0

4 − Sign[𝑉𝑐𝑠0]𝑉𝑐𝑠0

4) (8𝐿(𝐶𝑡 + 𝐶𝑏))
⁄

(26)

with 𝛾 = 𝐶𝑡/(𝐶𝑡 + 𝐶𝑏). 

Because of the simplifications made in the model derivation, the selected bias point should be 

placed far enough from the Dirac voltage for the device to operate in the linear region. The 

assumption is 𝑉𝑐𝑥0

2 ≫ (𝜋𝑘𝐵𝑇 (√3𝑞)
⁄
)

2 + 2𝑞Δ2 (𝑘𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2)
⁄
. Although it is certainly a 

limitation of the model, the approach is useful for the important usage of GFET as an 


35

amplifier. In addition, the expressions shown in Equation 25 and 26 consider 𝑘|𝑉𝑐𝑥0| ≫

(𝐶𝑡 + 𝐶𝑏). The opposite case, (𝑘|𝑉𝑐𝑥,0| ≪ (𝐶𝑡 + 𝐶𝑏)), is provided in Ref.[162].

To demonstrate the impact of NQS effects on the RF performance of GFETs, we considered 

the device described in Figure 12a. It consists of a double-gated topology with 10 nm-Al2O3

and 300 nm-SiO2 dielectrics at the top and back gate stack, respectively. Figure 13a shows 

the absolute value of the small-signal current at the drain (𝑖𝑑) and source (𝑖𝑠) edges for several 

frequencies, as well as the calculated 𝑓𝑇 (= 38.8 GHz). Both 𝑖𝑑 and 𝑖𝑠 have been computed 

both in an analytical and numerical way through the evaluation of the modified Bessel 

functions of the first kind.[162] The analytical case consists of truncating the function to a tenth 

order. According to Figure 13a, |𝑖𝑑| and |𝑖𝑠| show same value for frequencies lower than 

~𝑓𝑇/4, which agrees with the QS assumption and with the behavior of silicon based FETs 

operating at MF.[128] For frequencies higher than 𝑓𝑇/4, |𝑖𝑑| and |𝑖𝑠| differ from the QS value 

adopting different values, which indicates that the channel charge in the graphene layer 

cannot follow the voltage variations for such frequencies. 

Figure 13b shows the modulus of the AC current, |𝑖|, along the normalized channel length for 

different frequencies. The solid orange line shown in Figure 13b corresponds to the 

frequency of 𝑓𝑇/4, which has been chosen to delimit the QS and NQS regimes.[128] For 

frequencies lower than 𝑓𝑇/4, e.g., 𝑓𝑇/10, the AC current is approximately the same along the 

channel length, which is consistent with the QS approximation. However, for frequencies 

higher than 𝑓𝑇/4, e.g., 𝑓𝑇 or 2𝑓𝑇, the carriers do not have enough time to move from drain to 

source in a signal period, resulting in a departure of 𝑖 from the QS value, which is in 

accordance with the behavior observed in Figure 13a.

Figure 13c-d show the normalized magnitude and phase of 𝑦𝑚 = 𝑦𝑑𝑔 − 𝑦𝑔𝑑. It is observed 

that from the zero-order model to the first-order, the NQS model produces a significant 

improvement in the region of validity (where we have assumed here that the numerical 

solution provides the reference solution). This is because 𝑦𝑚 contains a right-half-plane zero 

for this zero-order model[119] in contrast to the left-half-plane pole in 𝑦𝑚 for the first-order 

NQS model (Equation 24). The upward-going magnitude predicted by the QS model at HF is 

unrealistic, although the phase of 𝑦𝑚 is predicted better by the QS model than the first-order 

NQS model; therefore, a higher order correction would be needed if the phase of 𝑦𝑚 is crucial 

for the targeted range of frequency according to the intended application. This discussion as 

well as results shown in Figure 13c-d are in qualitative agreement with the NQS studies 

conducted for conventional silicon-based MOSFETs.[128,159]


36

The frequency dependence of the current and power gains predicted by the different models, 

namely |ℎ21|2, 𝑈, and MSG/MAG, are shown in Figure 13e. Differences between the QS and 

NQS model predictions are not significant below 𝑓𝑇, but the QS model overpredicts the gain 

for frequencies higher than 𝑓𝑇, highlighting the importance of including the NQS effects.

4.2.2. Dynamic Self-Heating Model

The equations we have presented so far to describe the drain current include a dependence on 

the bias point and the temperature. To analyze the impact of self-heating on HF performance, 

the dependence of the small-signal parameters on temperature must be studied. Here, we 

present a model valid for AC input voltages, assuming that the GFET presents a complex 

thermal impedance, 𝑍𝑡ℎ, that depends on the angular frequency, 𝜔 (= 2𝜋𝑓), and on the 

different thermal paths through which the power, 𝑃𝑑𝑖𝑠 , is dissipated from the graphene 

channel. This heat crosses the different device thermal boundaries defined by the interfaces 

between the materials. 𝑍𝑡ℎ can be represented by various thermal RC networks characterized 

by the values of thermal resistances, ℜ𝑡ℎ,𝑖, and thermal frequencies, 𝑓𝑡ℎ,𝑖, as follows:

𝑍𝑡ℎ(𝜔) = ∑
ℜ𝑡ℎ,𝑖

1 + 𝑗
𝜔

2𝜋𝑓𝑡ℎ,𝑖
𝑖

(27)

The sum of all thermal resistances gives the total thermal resistance, which causes the 

increase of graphene temperature owing to DC self-heating, as addressed in §2.2.2

ℜ𝑡ℎ = ∑ ℜ𝑡ℎ,𝑖

𝑖

(28)

Figure 14 shows the real and imaginary parts of 𝑍𝑡ℎ(𝜔) for the simple case of two thermal 

RC networks in series (two poles), one at a thermal frequency of 𝑓𝑡ℎ,1 = 1 kHz and the other 

at 𝑓𝑡ℎ,2 = 1 GHz. The thermal frequencies highly depend on the specific GFET technology

because they are a function of the heat dissipation paths. Although they have been arbitrarily 

chosen to illustrate dynamic SHE, they could be observed in the frequency range between 

~5 − 10 MHz according to experimental measurements performed elsewhere.[54,146]

Following the temperature-dependent two-port network approach developed by Rinaldi[166]

and assuming no leakage current through the gate oxides, the small-signal parameters are 

modified according to the following equations:

𝑦𝑔𝑔(𝜔) = 𝑦𝑔𝑔,𝑇(𝜔)

𝑦𝑔𝑑(𝜔) = 𝑦𝑔𝑑,𝑇(𝜔)

𝑦𝑑𝑔(𝜔) = 𝑦𝑑𝑔,𝑇(𝜔) + 𝑐𝑍𝑡ℎ(𝜔)𝑦𝑔𝑔,𝑇(𝜔)𝑉𝐺𝑆

1 − 𝑐𝑍𝑡ℎ(𝜔)𝑉𝐷𝑆

(29)


37

𝑦𝑑𝑑(𝜔) = 𝑦𝑑𝑑,𝑇(𝜔) + 𝑐𝑍𝑡ℎ(𝜔)(𝑦𝑔𝑑,𝑇(𝜔)𝑉𝐺𝑆 + 𝐼𝐷𝑆)

1 − 𝑐𝑍𝑡ℎ(𝜔)𝑉𝐷𝑆

where 𝑐 ≡ 𝜕𝐼𝐷𝑆 𝜕𝑇
⁄
is a coefficient describing the rate of change of the current with respect to 

the temperature and 𝑦𝑖𝑗,𝑇(𝜔) are the small-signal parameters calculated by the QS 

approximation at a constant temperature, that is, assuming that the frequency is sufficiently 

high so the device temperature cannot follow the rapid oscillations of the electrical signal. 

Figure 14. Complex thermal impedance of the graphene transistor showing two poles, each 
one corresponding to a heat dissipation path. a) Real part and b) imaginary part as a function 
of the applied frequency.

Figure 15 shows the simulated intrinsic small-signal parameters, 𝑦𝑑𝑔(𝜔) and 𝑦𝑑𝑑(𝜔), for the 

device described in Ref.[51] at selected bias points as a function of the frequency, and 

assuming a two-pole thermal impedance as that presented in Figure 14. Above the thermal 

frequencies, 𝑓𝑡ℎ,1 and 𝑓𝑡ℎ,2, the thermal impedance is 𝑍𝑡ℎ(𝜔) ≈ 0; therefore, the small-signal 

parameters are equal to the values at a constant temperature 𝑦𝑖𝑗(𝜔) ≈ 𝑦𝑖𝑗,𝑇(𝜔). On the 

contrary, for very low frequencies, the graphene temperature can follow the oscillation of the 

electrical signal. Notably, it is very important to consider the SHE in HF performance 

calculation, as the QS approximation directly applied to the DC current curves assumes that 

the temperature varies with the bias point.


38

Figure 15. Small-signal parameters affected by SHE at the biases 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 1 V, 𝑉𝐺𝑆 – 𝑉𝐺0 =
0, −1 and, −2 V. a) Real part and b) imaginary part of 𝑦𝑑𝑔. c) Real part and d) imaginary part 
of 𝑦𝑑𝑑.

4.2.3. Parasitic Network Model

Generally, the parasitic network plays a significant role in determining the GFET performance. 

For on-wafer RF FETs, it is determined by the contact pads, metal interconnections, and the 

substrate.[167] Figure 16a shows the complete GFET circuit with the parasitic network 

connected to the intrinsic FET equivalent circuit discussed previously, as well as the contact 

resistances.[168]

To obtain information on internal physical mechanisms in fabricated devices for a given 

intrinsic model parameter to be validated for a correct description of the GFET RF 

performance, de-embedding techniques should be applied to remove the effect of the parasitic 

network. This can be done by characterizing dummy test structures developed ad hoc, which 

are usually fabricated on the same wafer as the device under test. The common de-embedding 

procedure involves measuring the S-parameters of “open,” “short,” and “thru” test structures 

and applying a mathematical procedure to subtract the effect of certain elements of the 

parasitic network. Therefore, the small-signal parameters of the intrinsic FET can be isolated 

from the de-embedded S-parameters. However, the contact resistances, 𝑅𝑠 and 𝑅𝑑, cannot be 

de-embedded in Schottky-like transistors such as 2DM based FETs; therefore, the parasitic 

resistances extracted by this


39

Figure 16. a) Typical topology of the small-signal equivalent circuit for an RF GFET. b)
Parameters of the equivalent circuit for describing the experimental GFET reported in 
Ref.[119]. c) S-parameter measurements (circles) and simulations (lines) for the applied bias 
𝑉𝐺𝑆,𝑒 = 0.2 V and 𝑉𝐷𝑆,𝑒 = 1 V. d) RF performance of the experimental GFET. Measured 
(symbols) and simulated (solid line) small-signal current gain (|ℎ21|) and Mason’s invariant 
(𝑈) plotted versus frequency. Reproduced with permission.[119] 2017, IEEE.

method are 𝑅𝑠𝑎 and 𝑅𝑑𝑎 (cf. Figure 16a). As a result, 𝑅𝑠 and 𝑅𝑑 should be extracted 

separately, e.g., using the transfer length method technique or an adapted Y-function based 

method.[169] The first one involves the fabrication and characterization of back-gated devices 

Input parameters of the GFET - Device D

Cgs
6.5fF
gm
1.55mS

Cgd
9.5fF
gds
-6.5mS

Cdg
10.5fF
Rd
215Ω

Csd
-3.5fF
Rs
215Ω

Cgdp1
-
Rga
42Ω

Cgdp2
-
Rda
110Ω

Cdsp1
12fF
Rsa
110Ω

Cdsp2
-
Lga
-

Cgsp1
12fF
Lda
-

Cgsp2
-
Lb
-

a)

c)

b)

d)


40

with different channel lengths whereas the second one is a more general approach because it 

can be applied to individual devices regardless the gate architecture. Once the values of 𝑅𝑠

and 𝑅𝑑 are known, their impact can be removed from the dynamic characteristics by 

following a matrix algebra process as shown elsewhere.[168]

The outer parasitic capacitances (parasitic inductances) in Figure 16a, namely 𝐶𝑔𝑠𝑝1, 𝐶𝑔𝑑𝑝1, 

and 𝐶𝑑𝑠𝑝1 ( 𝐿𝑔𝑎 , 𝐿𝑑𝑎 , and 𝐿𝑠𝑎 ), correspond to the electrostatic couplings (magnetic 

inductances) of the access layout pads. These capacitive (inductive) effects are related to the 

“open” (“short”) test structure; hence, their values can be directly measured and/or removed 

from the device using the de-embedding method. In contrast, a special dedicated “open-pad-

dummy” (also called “mute”) structure[112,170,171] with identical layout as the active device, 

including the gate fingers, is required to extract and/or remove the inner parasitic capacitances,

𝐶𝑔𝑠𝑝2 , 𝐶𝑔𝑑𝑝2 , and 𝐶𝑑𝑠𝑝2 . These parameters are associated to the electrostatic couplings 

between gate-to-source and gate-to-drain metal interconnect fingers (also identified as 

extrinsic fringing capacitances) and finger overlaps capacitance effects owing to gates wider 

than the channel as well as to a spurious coupling between feed and connecting lines in a 

finger layout. Notably, for practical purposes, e.g., the design of a functional GFET-based RF 

circuit, the unavoidable inner parasitics should be considered. In addition to the experimental 

characterization via the HF admittance parameters of the test structures,[112,170,171] the 𝐶𝑥𝑥𝑝2

values have been obtained in the literature using numerical device simulations (of the dummy 

structure)[172–174] as well as with compact model fitting for a correct description of 

measurements.[24,119,175,176] Models embracing these parasitics in GFETs are still missing in 

the literature. A possible approach for the correct description of effects embraced by 𝐶𝑥𝑥𝑝2 is 

the conformal mapping technique,[177] accounting for the fringing fields and the solution of 

the parallel plate capacitances within the layout as suggested in studies of other FET 

technologies.[161,178,179]

Figure 16b shows the intrinsic small-signal parameters (blue color), parasitic network 

parameters (black color), and contact resistances describing the experimental GFET reported 

elsewhere.[119] The de-embedding procedure described in Ref.[167,170,180], involving “open” test 

structures, has been implemented to eliminate the contribution of the parasitic network. From 

the de-embedded S-parameters, the intrinsic elements have been obtained through the 

extraction methodology proposed in Ref.[119] As a novelty, the method considers 𝑅𝑠 and 𝑅𝑑 as 

a part of the (augmented) intrinsic GFET model; therefore, they can be extracted on equal 

footing with the rest of small-signal intrinsic parameters. Measured and modeled S-

parameters at 𝑉𝐺𝑆 = 0.2 V and 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 1 V plotted together in Figure 16c are in good 


41

agreement. In addition, Figure 16d shows the experimental extrinsic current gain (|ℎ21|) and 

extrinsic Mason’s invariant (𝑈), both obtained from the S-parameters measurements shown in 

Figure 16c, compared to the simulated ones obtained from the small-signal model (Figure 

16a-b).

5. Noise Analysis

Graphene-based FETs have proven to be excellent contestants for forthcoming RF 

applications owing to graphene’s exceptional characteristics that can ensure high speed 

performance.[181] In such circuits, noise can either be in the form of low-frequency noise 

(LFN) below the corner frequency 𝒇𝒄 or high-frequency noise (HFN) above the 

aforementioned frequency; thus, it is a crucial figure of merit.[161] LFN can deteriorate the 

performance of RF circuits by being up-converted to phase noise[182–185] and it can downgrade 

the sensitivity of chemical-biological sensors[186,187] or optoelectronic devices.[188] Conversely, 

HFN can be very critical for the sensitivity of an RF system and the signal-to-noise ratio at the

RF regime.[189] Thus, both low- and high- frequency noise should be investigated thoroughly 

and modeled correctly.

There are three major mechanisms responsible for the generation of LFN in transistors: (i) 

carrier number fluctuation effect (𝜟𝜨),[190–193] (ii) mobility fluctuation effect (𝜟𝝁),[194] and 

(iii) contact resistance contribution (𝜟𝑹).[161]𝜟𝜨 is formed by trapping/detrapping mechanism 

near the oxide interface. Each individual carrier that gets captured and then released by an 

active trap within a few 𝒌𝑩𝑻 from the Fermi level creates random telegraph noise (RTN),[191]

which demonstrates Lorentzian shape in the frequency domain. Although experimental RTN

has not been observed in GFETs, which could be because of the large area of the devices 

under test, the superposition of the Lorentzian spectra results in 1/f noise in longer gated 

channels, where the number of slow near-interfacial and border traps is adequate, if the 

distribution of their time constants is uniform on the logarithmic axis.[190,191] Moreover, a 

thermally activated process is assumed for the trapping/detrapping mechanism for 𝜟𝑵 1/f 

noise, where time constants follow a non-radiative multiphonon model.[190,191] Fluctuations of 

the carrier mobility are responsible for the generation of 𝜟𝝁 model, which is described by the 

empirical Hooge expression, and contact resistance can also contribute to LFN (𝜟𝑹).[161]

Regarding CMOS processes, a number of analytical models are available in literature, which 

mostly refer to the 𝜟𝜨 effect and consider a uniform channel. They are valid only in the linear 

region of operation and result in a squared transconductance-to-current ratio (𝒈𝒎/𝑰𝑫𝑺)𝟐 trend 

of normalized output noise ( 𝑺𝑰𝑫/𝑰𝑫𝑺

𝟐 ). Several recent works have indicated the same 


42

mechanisms (𝜟𝜨, 𝜟𝝁, 𝜟𝑹) responsible for the genesis of 1/f noise in GFETs.[64,195–203]

Moreover, 𝜟𝜨 prevails as the number of graphene layers reduce whereas 𝜟𝝁 is dominant in 

multilayer devices.[198] The same studies depict an M-shape dependence of normalized 1/f 

noise data vs. effective gate voltage (𝑽𝑮𝑬𝑭𝑭 = 𝑽𝑮(𝑩)𝑺 − 𝑽𝑮(𝑩)𝟎). Although most of the 1/f 

noise models in GFETs are derived based on the simplified approach of uniform channel 

mentioned before,[196–201]
we recently proposed a complete physics-based compact 

model,[64,202] which accounts for all the non-homogeneities as well as velocity saturation 

effect, that can affect 1/f noise in GFETs (§5.1). Additionally, a complete 1/f noise parameters 

extraction procedure has been introduced.[64,203] The model gives accurate results capturing 

both the M-shape dependence and the reduction of 1/f noise at high electric fields owing to

the velocity saturation mechanism[64,203] when validated with data from fabricated devices.[63]

The aforementioned experiments present a slightly ideal 1/f behavior (cf. Fig. 4 in Ref.[64]).

Moreover, the study of variability issues in currently immature GFET technologies is very 

critical for the transition to large-scale wafer fabrication and eventually to massive 

applications production. 1/f noise statistical deviation is a significant variable and it should be 

investigated thoroughly. Although low-frequency noise variance has been adequately 

researched in CMOS devices following empirical,[204]
simplified,[205] or complete 

approaches,[206] there is a lack of studies regarding GFETs. Recently, we designed a complete 

physics-based compact model[207] describing the bias dependence of the 1/f noise variance in 

GFETs accurately when compared to experimental data (§5.1).[208]

For high-frequency noise modeling in GFETs, very few studies have been reported. They are 

mainly based on simple long-channel approaches, straightforwardly adapted from CMOS, and 

neither do they focus on the bias dependence of noise, nor do they consider the degenerate 

nature of graphene.[175,209–211] Thus, we developed a novel physics-based compact model that 

accurately describes high-frequency noise drain current spectral density (𝑺𝑰𝑫) for various

operating conditions including the derivations in the velocity saturation effect and graphene’s 

degeneracy (§5.2).[212] Two short channel GFETs have been measured[63] in high-frequency 

range to extract intrinsic 𝑺𝑰𝑫 after appropriate de-embedding as well as 𝑹𝒈 and 𝑹𝒄 elimination 

procedures. The experimental data precisely validate the proposed model for a wide 𝑽𝑮𝑺 span

without using any fitting parameters and 𝑺𝑰𝑫 increases towards higher-carrier densities until it 

saturates, similarly to MOSFETs.[213] The model is also derived for the non-degenerate case,

where a significant overestimation of measurements is revealed, indicating that the degenerate 

nature of graphene significantly reduces high-frequency noise. In addition, noise excess factor 


43

γ, a crucial figure of merit of noise performance in RF circuits,[214] is first examined in GFETs 

and presented in Ref.[212].

In general, the noise models presented in §5 are extracted based on a methodology of dividing 

the device channel in very small slices where each one of them is a local noise source; all 

these local noise sources are considered uncorrelated and thus the integration of the local 

power spectral densities (PSDs) from source to drain results in the total channel 

noise.[64,189,202,203,207] Thereafter, the final compact expressions are obtained considering the 

chemical potential-based I-V model proposed in Equation 1 to 11 of §2.1. All the models are 

implemented in Verilog-A; thus, they can be easily integrated in circuit simulators.

5.1. Low-Frequency Noise Model

The proposed 1/f noise model’s compact expressions are presented in Equations A1-A5 in 

Supporting Information.[64,202] The precise performance of the model is verified in Figure 17a,

where normalized 1/f noise 𝑺𝑰𝑫𝒇/𝑰𝑫𝑺

𝟐
is shown vs. 𝑽𝑮𝑬𝑭𝑭 for a 𝑾/𝑳 = 𝟏𝟐 μm/𝟏𝟎𝟎 nm

short-channel GFET with round markers representing the measurements and lines the 

different contributors of the model. More specifically, 𝜟𝜨 and 𝜟𝝁 effects are illustrated with 

solid lines and they are calculated by the subtraction of long-channel terms, 𝜟𝜨𝑨 and 𝜟𝝁𝑨

(dashed lines),[202] with the velocity saturation related terms, 𝜟𝜨𝑩 and 𝜟𝝁𝑩 (dotted lines), 

respectively;[64] 𝜟𝜨 terms are denoted in red, 𝜟𝝁 are denoted in blue, and 𝜟𝑹 are denoted in 

green. Evidently, 𝜟𝑵 is responsible for the M-shape whereas 𝜟𝝁 presents a Λ-shape and 

contributes near CNP. In the left subplot, the low 𝑽𝑫𝑺 = 𝟔𝟎 mV regime is depicted and it is 

clear that the long-channel terms are dominant there, whereas the velocity saturation related 

ones are negligible owing to the low electric field value. On the contrary, the higher 𝑽𝑫𝑺 =

𝟎. 𝟑 V region shown in the right subplot confirms that as the electric field is heightened, 

velocity saturation effect becomes significant; thus, 𝜟𝜨 and 𝜟𝝁 mechanisms and 

consequently total 1/f noise are reduced. The experimental data confirm the above theoretical 

findings, which are of outstanding significance because the unavoidable usage of high-speed 

short-channel devices in graphene RF circuits makes it vital to model their low-frequency 

noise.


44

Figure 17. a) Drain current noise divided by squared drain current 𝑆𝐼𝐷𝑓/𝐼𝐷𝑆

2 , referred to 1 Hz, 

vs. gate voltage overdrive 𝑉𝐺𝐸𝐹𝐹 = 𝑉𝐺 − 𝑉𝐺0 at low 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 60 mV in left subplot and high 
𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 0.3 V in right subplot for a 𝑊/𝐿 = 12 μm/100 nm GFET. Data are shown with 
markers whereas different noise contributors are depicted with solid, dashed, and dotted lines 
as well as with different colours. b) Normalized 1/f noise 𝑊𝐿𝑆𝐼𝐷𝑓/𝐼𝐷𝑆

2
vs. 𝑉𝐺𝐸𝐹𝐹 , for a 

100 μm/100 μm GFET at 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 50 mV. Measured noise from all available samples: star 
markers, measured ln-mean noise and its ±2-sigma deviation: open circle markers, mean and 
±2-sigma deviation model: lines. (mean data and model: black, +2-sigma deviation data and 
model: purple, -2-sigma deviation data and model: green). Inset illustrates the variance of 
normalized 1/f noise Var[𝑊𝐿𝑆𝐼𝐷𝑓/𝐼𝐷𝑆

2 ] vs. 𝑉𝐺𝐸𝐹𝐹, for the same GFET. Markers: data, solid 

lines: total model, dashed lines: individual contributions ( 𝛥𝛮 , 𝛥𝜇 ). Reproduced with 
permission.[64] 2019, ACS.[207] 2020, RSC.

Regarding the 1/f noise variance model, Equations A6-A10 in Supporting Information are 

derived and presented.[207] 𝑊𝐿𝑆𝐼𝐷𝑓/𝐼𝐷𝑆

2 1/f noise vs. 𝑉𝐺𝐸𝐹𝐹 for a long-channel solution-gated 

𝑊/𝐿 = 100 μm/100 μm GFET is shown in Figure 17b. Mean 1/f noise data are depicted 

with black markers whereas the solid lines, accounting for the mean 1/f noise model, fit these 

data precisely. 1/f noise data from all the samples are shown with small red markers. For the 

validation of 1/f noise statistical model,[207] ±2𝜎 standard deviation of normalized 1/f noise 

are also presented both for the model and experimental data with purple (+2𝜎) and green 

(−2𝜎) solid lines and markers, respectively. The proposed statistical 1/f noise model captures 

the dispersion of the data and its bias dependence accurately,[207] and the general picture 

reveals the consistency between the mean value and variance 1/f noise models. The inset of 

Figure 17b shows the variance of normalized 1/f noise Var[𝑊𝐿𝑆𝐼𝐷𝑓/𝐼𝐷𝑆

2 ] vs. 𝑉𝐺𝐸𝐹𝐹 for the 

same GFET, where the agreement of the total model (solid lines) vs. data (markers) is 

a)

b)


45

consistent. Notably, the variance contributions, 𝛥𝛮 and 𝛥𝜇, shown with dashed and dotted 

lines, respectively, behave similarly as in the mean value 1/f noise case. Therefore, the 𝛥𝑁

model provides an M-shape to 1/f noise variance as it did for its mean value, whereas the 𝛥𝜇

model follows a Λ-shape, contributing to 1/f noise variance mainly at CNP, as it was the case 

for mean value 1/f noise.[207] Another important observation is that 1/f noise statistical 

dispersion in GFETs is not related with I-V quantities but it is caused by the deviations of the 

physical parameters of 𝛥𝛮 and 𝛥𝜇 mechanisms, which are the number of traps, 𝑛𝑡𝑟, and the 

Hooge parameter, 𝛼𝐻, respectively.[207]

Figure 18. a) Channel thermal noise, 𝑆𝐼𝐷, at 1 GHz vs. 𝑉𝐺𝑆 and b) noise excess factor 𝛾 vs. 
𝐼𝐷𝑆 for short channel GFETs with 𝑊 = 24 µm and 𝐿 = 200 nm (EG5-left subplots), 𝐿 = 300 
nm (EG8-right subplots), respectively at 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 0.5 V. markers: measured, solid lines: model, 
dashed lines: non-degenerate model in a) and long channel model in b). Reproduced with 
permission[212] 2021, IEEE.

5.2. High-Frequency Noise Model

The high-frequency noise 𝑆𝐼𝐷 , model is accurately defined in Equations A11-A14 in 

Supporting Information.[212] Contrary to the LFN, where velocity saturation effect has been

shown to decrease noise under high electric field conditions (cf. Figure 17a), it has an 

opposite additive effect on high-frequency noise.[209] High-frequency noise measurements 

have been conducted at 𝑓 = 1 GHz, which forces the GFETs under test to operate at the quasi-

static regime as their extrinsic 𝑓𝑇 is higher than 𝑓 = 1 GHz.[63] Therefore, 𝑆𝐼𝐷 is frequency-


46

independent under such operating conditions and the attention is concentrated on its bias-

dependence. Figure 18a presents intrinsic measured 𝑆𝐼𝐷 vs. 𝑉𝐺𝑆 at 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 0.5 V for a 𝑊/𝐿 = 

24 µm/200 nm (EG5) GFET in the left and a 𝑊/𝐿 = 24 µm/300 nm (EG8) one in the right 

subplot, respectively, with markers, whereas the complete model is depicted with solid lines. 

𝑉𝐺𝑆 extends from high p- to high n-type carrier densities’ area but the maximum 𝑔𝑚, recorded 

in p-type regime,[211,212] leads the attention to this specific region. Owing to the direct relation 

of 𝑔𝑚 with 𝑆𝐼𝐷,[212] the latter is also higher there; thus, the model, which presents a symmetric 

behavior, accurately follows the experiments in p-type regime. Non-degenerate models are 

also demonstrated with dashed lines for both devices and they overestimate the experiments 

almost one order of magnitude, indicating that using high-frequency noise CMOS models in 

GFETs is not accurate. As mentioned earlier, excess noise factor, 𝛾 , is first examined 

thoroughly in GFETs in Ref.[212]. Figure 18b illustrated both experimental (markers) and 

simulated (lines) 𝛾 for EG5 in the left and EG8 in the right subplot, respectively, at 𝑉𝐷𝑆 = 0.5 

V vs. 𝐼𝐷𝑆, which is now confined in the p-type region where the specific study is focused, as 

detailed earlier. The validation of the model with the measurements is reliable. A long-

channel case is also shown with dashed lines after ignoring the velocity saturation effect,

which results in a quite significant underestimation of 𝛾. In addition to 𝑆𝐼𝐷, which dominates 

above corner frequency 𝑓𝑐, the potential fluctuations within the channel are coupled with the 

gate through gate oxide capacitance resulting in induced gate noise, 𝑆𝐼𝐺, and its correlation 

with channel noise 𝑆𝐼𝐺𝐼𝐷, both important at frequencies close or above 𝑓𝑇 at non-quasi-static 

regime.[161,189] These two terms increase with frequency because 𝑆𝐼𝐺 is proportional to 𝑓2

whereas 𝑆𝐼𝐺𝐼𝐷 is proportional to 𝑓. Although there are some simple long-channel approaches 

to model the above two contributions, they are not valid in the non-quasi-static region of 

operation. Currently, our model predicts a frequency independent 𝑆𝐼𝐷 (white noise) that is 

valid for frequencies sufficiently below 𝑓𝑇, whereas 𝑆𝐼𝐺 and 𝑆𝐼𝐺𝐼𝐷 have a very small effect 

there. The characterization and compact modeling of 𝑆𝐼𝐺, 𝑆𝐼𝐺𝐼𝐷 are of critical importance for 

high-frequency noise at higher frequencies; this task is an ongoing research.

6. Conclusions

In this study, we have provided an updated report on the progress made towards the 

development of a modular compact modeling technology allowing DC, transient, AC, and 

noise analysis of arbitrary GFET-based circuits. The models have a strong physical basis and 

consider some non-idealities that have proven to impact in static and/or dynamic operation. 

The latter include extrinsic-, short-channel-, trapping/detrapping-, self-heating-, and non-quasi 


47

static-effects. The models have been validated against experimental results for the relevant 

operating conditions up to frequencies of some tens of GHz. We estimate that the presented 

modeling technology’s readiness level (TRL) is 4 (validation in laboratory environment). To 

push the technology towards higher TRLs, more efforts are needed in different directions. 

First, there are some relevant physics discussed along the manuscript that deserve further 

modeling and/or experimental validation, such as: (i) trapping/detrapping mechanisms under 

dynamic operation, (ii) self-heating effects at frequencies below and close to the thermal 

frequency, (iii) non-quasi-static effects at frequencies near and beyond the cut-off frequency, 

and (iv) high-frequency noise including the gate induced noise and its correlation with 

channel noise at frequencies close or beyond the cut-off frequency in the non-quasi static 

regime. Second, moving to higher TRLs requires the successful application of state-of-the-art 

modeling technology to integrated circuits working in a relevant/operational environment 

towards the improvement and strengthening of the GFET technology by a constant feedback 

between fabrication technology groups, modeling groups, and circuit designers. That requires 

a more systematic characterization of RF building blocks such as frequency multipliers, 

mixers, and low-noise amplifiers, to mention a few. This would allow the full demonstration 

of the consistency between simulation and experiment for the relevant operation conditions. 

Finally, statistical variability in device characteristics is an important aspect that should be 

addressed in future investigations, which is critical for the transition to the large-scale wafer 

fabrication and eventually to massive applications production.

Availability of compact modeling technology

The compact modeling technology reported in this manuscript is available from the 

corresponding author upon reasonable request. The compact models have been protected 

under the Benelux Office for Intellectual Property (BOIP) with i-DEPOT number: 118389.

Supporting Information

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.

Acknowledgements

This work has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and 

Innovation Programme under Grant Agreement No. GrapheneCore3 881603. It has also 

received partial funding from the Spanish Government under the project RTI2018-097876-B-

C21 (MCIU/AEI/FEDER, UE); partial funding from the European Union Regional 


48

Development Fund within the framework of the ERDF Operational Program of Catalonia 

2014-2020 with the support of the Department de Recerca i Universitat, with a grant of 50% 

of total cost eligible. GraphCAT project reference: 001-P-001702.

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

References

[1]
M. Saeed, P. Palacios, M.-D. Wei, E. Baskent, C. Fan, B. Uzlu, K. Wang, A. 

Hemmetter, Z. Wang, D. Neumaier, M. C. Lemme, R. Negra, Adv. Mater. 2021, 

2108473.

[2]
S. K. Hong, C. S. Kim, W. S. Hwang, B. J. Cho, ACS Nano 2016, 10, 7142.

[3]
Y.-M. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia, S.-J. Han, D. B. Farmer, I. Meric, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, C. 

Dimitrakopoulos, A. Grill, P. Avouris, K. A. Jenkins, Science 2011, 332, 1294.

[4]
W. Wei, E. Pallecchi, S. Haque, S. Borini, V. Avramovic, A. Centeno, Z. Amaia, H. 

Happy, Nanoscale 2016, 8, 14097.

[5]
M. Meister, A. Braun, B. Hünsing, U. Schmoch, T. Reiss, 2017, 547.

[6]
P. Avouris, C. Dimitrakopoulos, Mater. Today 2012, 15, 86.

[7]
J. G. Champlain, J. Appl. Phys. 2011, 109, 084515.

[8]
G. M. Landauer, D. Jiménez, J. L. González, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. 2014, 13, 895.

[9]
P. C. Feijoo, D. Jiménez, X. Cartoixà, 2D Mater. 2016, 3, 025036.

[10]
D. Jiménez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2011, 58, 4377.

[11]
F. Pasadas, D. Jiménez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2016, 63, 2936.

[12]
F. Rana, P. A. George, J. H. Strait, J. Dawlaty, S. Shivaraman, M. Chandrashekhar, M. 

G. Spencer, Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 115447.

[13]
F. Rana, Phys. Rev. B 2007, 76, 155431.

[14]
J. M. Dawlaty, S. Shivaraman, M. Chandrashekhar, F. Rana, M. G. Spencer, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 2008, 92, 042116.

[15]
W. Zhu, V. Perebeinos, M. Freitag, P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. B 2009, 80, 235402.

[16]
R. Saito, G. Dresselhaus, M. Dresselahus, Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes, 


49

World Scientific Publishing Co., Inc., 1998.

[17]
A. B. Kuzmenko, I. Crassee, D. van der Marel, P. Blake, K. S. Novoselov, Phys. Rev. B

2009, 80, 165406.

[18]
K. N. Parrish, M. E. Ramón, S. K. Banerjee, D. Akinwande, in 17th Int. Conf. Simul. 

Semicond. Process. Devices, 2012, pp. 75–78.

[19]
J. D. J. Deng, H.-S. P. Wong, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2007, 54, 3186.

[20]
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim, H. L. 

Stormer, Solid State Commun. 2008, 146, 351.

[21]
A. Shaffique, H. E. H., G. V M., D. S. S., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2007, 104, 18392.

[22] J. H. Gosling, O. Makarovsky, F. Wang, N. D. Cottam, M. T. Greenaway, A. Patanè, R. 

D. Wildman, C. J. Tuck, L. Turyanska, T. M. Fromhold, Commun. Phys. 2021, 4, 30.

[23]
V. E. E. Dorgan, M.-H. Bae, E. Pop, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 97, 082112.

[24]
P. C. Feijoo, F. Pasadas, M. Bonmann, M. Asad, X. Yang, A. Generalov, A. Vorobiev, 

L. Banszerus, C. Stampfer, M. Otto, D. Neumaier, J. Stake, D. Jiménez, Nanoscale Adv.

2020, 2, DOI 10.1039/c9na00733d.

[25]
J. Chauhan, J. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 95, 023120.

[26]
Y. Y. Illarionov, T. Knobloch, M. Jech, M. Lanza, D. Akinwande, M. I. Vexler, T. 

Mueller, M. C. Lemme, G. Fiori, F. Schwierz, T. Grasser, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 

DOI 10.1038/s41467-020-16640-8.

[27]
A. A. Sagade, D. Neumaier, D. Schall, M. Otto, A. Pesquera, A. Centeno, A. Z. Elorza, 

H. Kurz, Nanoscale 2015, 7, 3558.

[28]
Y. J. Kim, Y. G. Lee, U. Jung, S. Lee, S. K. Lee, B. H. Lee, Nanoscale 2015, 7, 4013.

[29]
H. Wang, T. Taychatanapat, A. Hsu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Jarillo-Herrero, T. 

Palacios, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2011, 32, 1209.

[30]
M. A. Stolyarov, G. Liu, S. L. Rumyantsev, M. Shur, A. A. Balandin, Appl. Phys. Lett.

2015, 107, DOI 10.1063/1.4926872.

[31]
M. Jenkins, D. Z. Austin, J. F. Conley, J. Fan, C. H. de Groot, L. Jiang, Y. Fan, R. Ali, 

G. Ghosh, M. Orlowski, S. W. King, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 2019, 8, N159.

[32]
E. A. Carrion, A. Y. Serov, S. Islam, A. Behnam, A. Malik, F. Xiong, M. Bianchi, R. 

Sordan, E. Pop, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2014, 61, 1583.

[33]
D. C. Mao, S. Q. Wang, S. A. Peng, D. Y. Zhang, J. Y. Shi, X. N. Huang, M. Asif, Z. 

Jin, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 2016, 27, 9847.

[34]
M. Bonmann, A. Vorobiev, J. Stake, O. Engström, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 

Nanotechnol. Microelectron. Mater. Process. Meas. Phenom. 2017, 35, 01A115.


50

[35]
A. Pacheco-Sanchez, N. Mavredakis, P. C. Feijoo, W. Wei, E. Pallecchi, H. Happy, D. 

Jiménez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2020, 67, 5790.

[36] D. Akinwande, C. Huyghebaert, C. H. Wang, M. I. Serna, S. Goossens, L. J. Li, H. S. P. 

Wong, F. H. L. Koppens, Nature 2019, 573, 507.

[37]
M. Bonmann, Graphene Field-Effect Transistors and Devices for Advanced High-

Frequency Applications Fabrication, Characterisation and Analysis of Limitations, 

Chalmers University of Technology, 2019.

[38]
G. Ribes, J. Mitard, M. Denais, S. Bruyere, F. Monsieur, C. Parthasarathy, E. Vincent, 

G. Ghibaudo, IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliab. 2005, 5, 5.

[39]
M. Haferlach, A. Pacheco, P. Sakalas, M. Alexandru, S. Hermann, T. Nardmann, M. 

Schröter, M. Claus, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. 2016, 15, 619.

[40]
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. 

Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard, J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5, 722.

[41]
I. Meric, C. R. Dean, N. Petrone, L. Wang, J. Hone, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard, Proc. IEEE

2013, 101, 1609.

[42]
M. Osada, T. Sasaki, APL Mater. 2019, 7, DOI 10.1063/1.5129447.

[43]
A. Laturia, M. L. Van de Put, W. G. Vandenberghe, npj 2D Mater. Appl. 2018, 2, DOI 

10.1038/s41699-018-0050-x.

[44]
I. Meric, C. R. Dean, S. J. Han, L. Wang, K. A. Jenkins, J. Hone, K. L. Shepard, Tech. 

Dig. - Int. Electron Devices Meet. IEDM 2011, 2.1.1.

[45]
C. Benz, M. Thürmer, F. Wu, Z. Ben Aziza, J. Mohrmann, H. V. Löhneysen, K. 

Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. Danneau, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 102, DOI 

10.1063/1.4788818.

[46]
Z. Guo, R. Dong, P. S. Chakraborty, N. Lourenco, J. Palmer, Y. Hu, M. Ruan, J. 

Hankinson, J. Kunc, J. D. Cressler, C. Berger, W. a. De Heer, Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 942.

[47]
C. Yu, Z. Z. He, Q. B. Liu, X. B. Song, P. Xu, T. T. Han, J. Li, Z. H. Feng, S. J. Cai, 

IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2016, 37, 684.

[48]
Y. Wu, X. Zou, M. Sun, Z. Cao, X. Wang, S. Huo, J. Zhou, Y. Yang, X. Yu, Y. Kong, 

G. Yu, L. Liao, T. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 25645.

[49]
C. Yu, Z. Z. He, X. B. Song, Q. B. Liu, T. T. Han, S. B. Dun, J. J. Wang, C. J. Zhou, J. 

C. Guo, Y. J. Lv, Z. H. Feng, S. J. Cai, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2017, 38, 1339.

[50]
E. Guerriero, P. Pedrinazzi, A. Mansouri, O. Habibpour, M. Winters, N. Rorsman, A. 

Behnam, E. A. Carrion, A. Pesquera, A. Centeno, A. Zurutuza, E. Pop, H. Zirath, R. 

Sordan, Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 2419.


51

[51]
M. Bonmann, M. Asad, X. Yang, A. Generalov, A. Vorobiev, L. Banszerus, C. 

Stampfer, M. Otto, D. Neumaier, J. Stake, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2019, 40, 131.

[52]
W. Wei, F. Dalal, S. Fregonese, W. Strupinski, E. Pallecchi, H. Happy, in 2020 IEEE 

Lat. Am. Electron Devices Conf., IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[53]
A. R. Cadore, E. Mania, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. G. Lacerda, L. C. Campos, 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016, 108, DOI 10.1063/1.4953162.

[54]
J. Nathawat, M. Zhao, C. P. Kwan, S. Yin, N. Arabchigavkani, M. Randle, H. 

Ramamoorthy, G. He, R. Somphonsane, N. Matsumoto, K. Sakanashi, M. Kida, N. 

Aoki, Z. Jin, Y. Kim, G. H. Kim, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. P. Bird, ACS Omega

2019, 4, 4082.

[55]
E. A. Quezada-Lopez, F. Joucken, H. Chen, A. Lara, J. L. Davenport, K. Hellier, T. 

Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, S. Carter, A. P. Ramirez, J. Velasco, J. Appl. Phys. 2020, 127, 

DOI 10.1063/1.5127770.

[56]
C. Mukherjee, S. Fregonese, T. Zimmer, C. Maneux, H. Happy, D. Mele, Eur. Solid-

State Device Res. Conf. 2014, 305.

[57]
A. Tries, N. Richter, Z. Chen, A. Narita, K. Müllen, H. I. Wang, M. Bonn, M. Klauï, 

Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2020, 22, 5667.

[58] S. Frégonèse, N. Meng, H.-N. N. Nguyen, C. Majek, C. Maneux, H. Happy, T. Zimmer, 

Solid. State. Electron. 2012, 73, 27.

[59]
E. Pop, Nano Res. 2010, 3, 147.

[60]
S. Islam, Z. Li, V. E. Dorgan, M. H. Bae, E. Pop, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2013, 34, 

166.

[61]
M. H. Bae, S. Islam, V. E. Dorgan, E. Pop, ACS Nano 2011, 5, 7936.

[62]
H.-Y. Y. Chiu, V. Perebeinos, Y.-M. M. Lin, P. Avouris, Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 4634.

[63]
W. Wei, X. Zhou, G. Deokar, H. Kim, M. Belhaj, E. Galopin, E. Pallecchi, D. Vignaud, 

H. Happy, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2015, 62, 2769.

[64]
N. Mavredakis, W. Wei, E. Pallecchi, D. Vignaud, H. Happy, R. G. Cortadella, A. B. 

Calia, J. A. Garrido, D. Jiménez, Appl. Electron. Mater. 2019, 1, 2626.

[65]
S. V. Suryavanshi, E. Pop, J. Appl. Phys. 2016, 120, 224503.

[66] M. Bonmann, M. Krivic, X. Yang, A. Vorobiev, L. Banszerus, C. Stampfer, M. Otto, D. 

Neumaier, J. Stake, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2020, 1.

[67]
M. Freitag, M. Steiner, Y. Martin, V. Perebeinos, Z. Chen, J. C. Tsang, P. Avouris, 

Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 1883.

[68]
S. O. Koswatta, A. Valdes-Garcia, M. B. Steiner, Y.-M. Lin, P. Avouris, IEEE Trans. 


52

Microw. Theory Tech. 2011, 59, 2739.

[69]
S. Weingart, C. Bock, U. Kunze, F. Speck, T. Seyller, L. Ley, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 

95, 262101.

[70]
W.-K. Tse, E. H. Hwang, S. Das Sarma, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2008, 93, 023128.

[71]
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. 

Grigorieva, A. A. Firsov, Science (80-. ). 2004, 306.

[72]
Y. M. Lin, C. Dimitrakopoulos, K. A. Jenkins, D. B. Farmer, H. Y. Chiu, A. Grill, P.

Avouris, Science (80-. ). 2010, 327, 662.

[73]
K. Nagashio, T. Nishimura, K. Kita, A. Toriumi, Int. Electron Devices Meet. IEDM

2009, 565.

[74]
A. Venugopal, L. Colombo, E. M. Vogel, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 96, DOI 

10.1063/1.3290248.

[75] F. Urban, G. Lupina, A. Grillo, N. Martucciello, A. Di Bartolomeo, Nano Express 2020, 

1, 010001.

[76]
F. Driussi, S. Venica, A. Gahoi, S. Kataria, M. C. Lemme, P. Palestri, IEEE Trans. 

Semicond. Manuf. 2020, 33, 210.

[77]
A. Gahoi, S. Kataria, F. Driussi, S. Venica, H. Pandey, D. Esseni, L. Selmi, M. C. 

Lemme, Adv. Electron. Mater. 2020, 6, 2000386.

[78]
B. Wang, M. W. Malik, Y. Yan, V. Kilchytska, Y. Zeng, D. Flandre, J.-P. Raskin, 

IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2021, 68, 892.

[79]
M. Zhu, J. Wu, Z. Du, S. Tsang, E. H. T. Teo, J. Appl. Phys. 2018, 124, 215302.

[80]
S. Peng, Z. Jin, D. Zhang, J. Shi, J. Niu, C. Zhu, Y. Zhang, G. Yu, Adv. Eng. Mater.

2021, 2100935, 1.

[81]
M. Asad, M. Bonmann, X. Yang, A. Vorobiev, K. Jeppson, L. Banszerus, M. Otto, C. 

Stampfer, D. Neumaier, J. Stake, IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc. 2020, 8, 457.

[82]
F. Schwierz, Proc. IEEE 2013, 101, 1567.

[83]
L. Anzi, A. Mansouri, P. Pedrinazzi, E. Guerriero, M. Fiocco, A. Pesquera, A. Centeno, 

A. Zurutuza, A. Behnam, E. A. Carrion, E. Pop, R. Sordan, 2D Mater. 2018, 5, DOI 

10.1088/2053-1583/aaab96.

[84]
A. Gahoi, S. Wagner, A. Bablich, S. Kataria, V. Passi, M. C. Lemme, Solid. State. 

Electron. 2016, 125, 234.

[85]
T. Chu, Z. Chen, ACS Nano 2014, 8, 3584.

[86]
W. S. Leong, H. Gong, J. T. L. Thong, ACS Nano 2014, 8, 994.

[87] T. Cusati, G. Fiori, A. Gahoi, V. Passi, M. C. Lemme, A. Fortunelli, G. Iannaccone, Sci. 


53

Rep. 2017, 7, 5109.

[88]
Y. Zhang, X. P. Qu, AIP Adv. 2019, 9, DOI 10.1063/1.5100198.

[89]
M. Konig, G. Ruhl, A. Gahoi, S. Wittmann, T. Preis, J. M. Batke, I. Costina, M. C. 

Lemme, IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc. 2019, 7, 227.

[90]
A. Quellmalz, A. D. Smith, K. Elgammal, X. Fan, A. Delin, M. Östling, M. Lemme, K. 

B. Gylfason, F. Niklaus, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 41738.

[91]
B. Kretz, C. S. Pedersen, D. Stradi, M. Brandbyge, A. Garcia-Lekue, Phys. Rev. Appl.

2018, 10, 1.

[92]
H. Liu, H. Kondo, T. Ohno, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2012, 86, 1.

[93]
Z. Chen, J. Appenzeller, Dig. Tech. Pap. - Symp. VLSI Technol. 2009, 128.

[94]
F. Giubileo, A. Di Bartolomeo, Prog. Surf. Sci. 2017, 92, 143.

[95]
F. A. Chaves, D. Jiménez, A. A. Sagade, W. Kim, J. Riikonen, H. Lipsanen, D. 

Neumaier, 2D Mater. 2015, 2, 025006.

[96]
F. A. Chaves, D. Jiménez, A. W. Cummings, S. Roche, J. Appl. Phys. 2014, 115, 

164513.

[97]
P. A. Khomyakov, G. Giovannetti, P. C. Rusu, G. Brocks, J. Van Den Brink, P. J. 

Kelly, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2009, 79, 1.

[98]
J. Cayssol, B. Huard, D. Goldhaber-Gordon, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. 

Phys. 2009, 79, 1.

[99]
F. A. Chaves, D. Jiménez, J. E. Santos, P. Bøggild, J. M. Caridad, Nanoscale 2019, 11, 

10273.

[100] K. Nagashio, T. Nishimura, K. Kita, A. Toriumi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 97, 143514.

[101] F. Xia, V. Perebeinos, Y. Lin, Y. Wu, P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2011, 6, 179.

[102] R. S. Sundaram, M. Steiner, H.-Y. Chiu, M. Engel, A. A. Bol, R. Krupke, M. Burghard, 

K. Kern, P. Avouris, Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 3833.

[103] X. Ji, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Qian, Z. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013, 15, 17883.

[104] J. Maassen, W. Ji, H. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 97, 142105.

[105] S. Barraza-Lopez, M. Vanević, M. Kindermann, M. Y. Chou, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 

104, 076807.

[106] C. Shen, J. Liu, N. Jiao, C. X. Zhang, H. Xiao, R. Z. Wang, L. Z. Sun, Phys. Lett. Sect. 

A Gen. At. Solid State Phys. 2014, 378, 1321.

[107] Q. Ran, M. Gao, X. Guan, Y. Wang, Z. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94, 103511.

[108] K. Stokbro, M. Engelund, A. Blom, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2012, 

85, 1.


54

[109] B. Ma, C. Gong, Y. Wen, R. Chen, K. Cho, B. Shan, J. Appl. Phys. 2014, 115, DOI 

10.1063/1.4876738.

[110] D. K. Schroder, Semiconductor Material and Device Characterization, 3rd Edition, 

Wiley-IEEE Press, 2015.

[111] S. Venica, F. Driussi, A. Gahoi, P. Palestri, M. C. Lemme, L. Selmi, IEEE Trans. 

Electron Devices 2018, 65, 1589.

[112] P. Nakkala, A. Martin, M. Campovecchio, H. Happy, M. S. Khenissa, M. M. Belhaj, D. 

Mele, I. Colambo, E. Pallecchi, D. Vignaud, in 2014 44th Eur. Microw. Conf., IEEE, 

2014, pp. 1452–1455.

[113] J. E. Meyer, RCA Rev. 1971, 32, 42.

[114] N. Arora, Mosfet Modeling for VLSI Simulation: Theory and Practice, World Scientific, 

2007.

[115] T. Ytterdal, Y. Cheng, T. Fjeldly, Device Modeling for Analog and RF CMOS Circuit 

Design, Wiley, 2003.

[116] Ping Yang, B. D. Epler, P. K. Chatterjee, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 1983, 18, 128.

[117] K. S. Kundert, The Designer’s Guide to Spice and Spectre, Springer, 1995.

[118] D. E. Ward, R. W. Dutton, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 1978, 13, 703.

[119] F. Pasadas, W. Wei, E. Pallecchi, H. Happy, D. Jiménez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices

2017, 64, 4715.

[120] P. C. Feijoo, F. Pasadas, J. M. Iglesias, M. J. Martin, R. Rengel, C. Li, W. Kim, J. 

Riikonen, H. Lipsanen, D. Jiménez, Nanotechnology 2017, 28, DOI 10.1088/1361-

6528/aa9094.

[121] F. Pasadas, E. G. Marin, A. Toral, F. G. Ruiz, A. Godoy, S. Park, D. Akinwande, D. 

Jiménez, npj 2D Mater. Appl. 2019, 3, 1.

[122] S. Rodriguez, S. Vaziri, A. Smith, S. Fregonese, M. Ostling, M. C. Lemme, A. Rusu, 

IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2014, 61, 1199.

[123] G. I. Zebrev, A. A. Tselykovskiy, D. K. Batmanova, E. V. Melnik, IEEE Trans. 

Electron Devices 2013, 60, 1799.

[124] J. G. Champlain, Solid. State. Electron. 2012, 67, 53.

[125] S. Fregonese, M. Magallo, C. Maneux, H. Happy, T. Zimmer, IEEE Trans. 

Nanotechnol. 2013, 12, 539.

[126] O. Habibpour, J. Vukusic, J. Stake, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2012, 59, 968.

[127] F. Pasadas, D. Jiménez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2016, 63, 2942.

[128] Y. Tsividis, Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor, New York ; Oxford : 


55

Oxford University Press, 1999.

[129] F. Pasadas, D. Jimenez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2019, 66, 2459.

[130] Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, H. Xu, L. Ding, S. Wang, L.-M. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 96, 

173104.

[131] O. Habibpour, S. Cherednichenko, J. Vukusic, K. Yhland, J. Stake, IEEE Electron 

Device Lett. 2012, 33, 71.

[132] Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Peng, Chinese Sci. Bull. 2012, 57, 2956.

[133] F. P. Heiman, G. Warfield, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 1965, 12, 167.

[134] C.-T. Sah, Proc. IEEE 1967, 55, 654.

[135] H. Madan, M. J. Hollander, J. A. Robinson, S. Datta, in 70th Device Res. Conf., 2012, 

pp. 181–182.

[136] Y. Tateno, F. Mitsuhashi, M. Adachi, T. Yonemura, Y. Saito, Y. Yamamoto, T. 

Nakabayashi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 2020, 59, 124001.

[137] M. Haferlach, M. Claus, T. Nardmann, A. Pacheco-Sanchez, P. Sakalas, M. Schröter, 

Tech. Proc. 2014 NSTI Nanotechnol. Conf. Expo, NSTI-Nanotech 2014 2014, 2, 512.

[138] M. Hellenbrand, E. Lind, O.-P. Kilpi, L.-E. Wernersson, Solid. State. Electron. 2020, 

171, 107840.

[139] O. Habibpour, Z. S. He, W. Strupinski, N. Rorsman, H. Zirath, Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 

41828.

[140] S. Lee, K. Lee, C.-H. Liu, G. S. Kulkarni, Z. Zhong, Nat. Commun. 2012, 3, 1018.

[141] Y. Y. Illarionov, A. D. Smith, S. Vaziri, M. Ostling, T. Mueller, M. C. Lemme, T. 

Grasser, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 105, 143507.

[142] Y. Illarionov, A. Smith, S. Vaziri, M. Ostling, T. Mueller, M. Lemme, T. Grasser, 

IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2015, 62, 3876.

[143] T. Grasser, P.-. Wagner, H. Reisinger, T. Aichinger, G. Pobegen, M. Nelhiebel, B. 

Kaczer, in 2011 Int. Electron Devices Meet., 2011, pp. 27.4.1-27.4.4.

[144] Y. G. Lee, C. G. Kang, U. J. Jung, J. J. Kim, H. J. Hwang, H.-J. Chung, S. Seo, R. Choi, 

B. H. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 98, 183508.

[145] A. Mishra, A. Meersha, S. Raghavan, M. Shrivastava, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2017, 111, 2.

[146] H. Ramamoorthy, R. Somphonsane, J. Radice, G. He, J. Nathawat, C.-P. Kwan, M. 

Zhao, J. P. Bird, Semicond. Sci. Technol. 2017, 32, 084005.

[147] T. Grasser, Microelectron. Reliab. 2012, 52, 39.

[148] T. Knobloch, G. Rzepa, Y. Y. Illarionov, M. Waltl, F. Schanovsky, B. Stampfer, M. M. 

Furchi, T. Mueller, T. Grasser, IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc. 2018, 6, 972.


56

[149] M. G. Ancona, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2010, 57, 681.

[150] P. C. Feijoo, F. Pasadas, J. M. Iglesias, E. M. Hamham, R. Rengel, D. Jiménez, IEEE 

Trans. Electron Devices 2019, 66, 1567.

[151] A. I. Rudenko, V. I. Arkhipov, Philos. Mag. B 1982, 45, 177.

[152] F. Bosisio, S. Micheletti, R. Sacco, J. Comput. Phys. 2000, 159, 197.

[153] S. Markov, L. Gerrer, F. Adamu-Lema, S. Amoroso, A. Asenov, Int. Conf. Simul. 

Semicond. Process. Devices, SISPAD 2012, 157.

[154] S. Mothes, Augmented Semiclassical Transport Models for Carbon Nanotube Field 

Effect Transistors, TUDpress, 2020.

[155] M. Mueller, S. Donnhäuser, S. Mothes, A. Pacheco-Sanchez, K. Haase, S. C. B. 

Mannsfeld, M. Claus, in 2020 27th Int. Conf. Mix. Des. Integr. Circuits Syst., 2020, pp. 

40–44.

[156] C. Mukherjee, J. D. Aguirre-Morales, S. Frégonése, T. Zimmer, C. Maneux, IEEE 

Trans. Electron Devices 2015, 62, 757.

[157] C. Weimer, A. Pacheco-Sanchez, J. Trommer, M. Schröter, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol.

2021.

[158] C. Turchetti, G. Masetti, Y. Tsividis, Solid. State. Electron. 1983, 26, 941.

[159] M. Bagheri, Y. Tsividis, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 1985, 32, 2383.

[160] A. J. Scholten, L. F. Tiemeijer, P. W. H. De Vreede, D. B. M. Klaassen, in Int. 

Electron Devices Meet. 1999. Tech. Dig. (Cat. No.99CH36318), IEEE, 1999, pp. 163–

166.

[161] C. C. Enz, E. A. Vittoz, Charge-Based MOS Transistor Modeling: The EKV Model for 

Low-Power and RF IC Design, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2006.

[162] F. Pasadas, D. Jiménez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2020, 67, 2188.

[163] G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. 

Banerjee, L. Colombo, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 768.

[164] H. Lyu, Q. Lu, J. Liu, X. Wu, J. Zhang, J. Li, J. Niu, Z. Yu, H. Wu, H. Qian, Sci. Rep.

2016, 6, 1.

[165] S. J. Mason, Trans. IRE Prof. Gr. Circuit Theory 1954, CT-1, 20.

[166] N. Rinaldi, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2001, 48, 323.

[167] G. Crupi, D. M. M. P. Schreurs, A. Caddemi, in Microw. De-Embedding From Theory 

to Appl., 2013.

[168] A. Pacheco-Sanchez, J. N. Ramos-Silva, E. Ramírez-García, D. Jiménez, IEEE Microw. 

Wirel. Components Lett. 2021, 31, 29.


57

[169] A. Pacheco-Sanchez, P. C. Feijoo, D. Jiménez, Solid. State. Electron. 2020, 172, 

107882.

[170] L. Nougaret, H. Happy, G. Dambrine, V. Derycke, J.-P. Bourgoin, A. A. Green, M. C. 

Hersam, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94, 243505.

[171] W. Wei, G. Deokar, M. Belhaj, D. Mele, E. Pallecchi, E. Pichonat, D. Vignaud, H. 

Happy, in 2014 44th Eur. Microw. Conf., IEEE, 2014, pp. 367–370.

[172] S. Han, S. Oida, K. A. Jenkins, D. Lu, Y. Zhu, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2013, 34, 

1340.

[173] K. D. Holland, N. Paydavosi, N. Neophytou, D. Kienle, M. Vaidyanathan, IEEE Trans. 

Nanotechnol. 2013, 12, 566.

[174] J.-D. Aguirre-Morales, S. Fregonese, C. Mukherjee, W. Wei, H. Happy, C. Maneux, T. 

Zimmer, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2017, 64, 4302.

[175] M. Tanzid, M. A. Andersson, J. Sun, J. Stake, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 104, 13502.

[176] L. Sang, Y. Xu, Y. Wu, R. Chen, IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Regul. Pap. 2018, 65, 

2559.

[177] R. E. Collin, R. Plonsey, Principles and Applications of Electromagnetic Fields, New 

York, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1961.

[178] B. C. Paul, S. Fujita, M. Okajima, T. Lee, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2006, 27, 380.

[179] J. Kim, M. Kang, J. Jeon, H. Shin, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2019, 66, 2446.

[180] N. Meng, J. F. Fernandez, D. Vignaud, G. Dambrine, H. Happy, IEEE Trans. Electron 

Devices 2011, 58, 1594.

[181] F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5, 487.

[182] J. S. Moon, D. Curtis, D. Zehnder, S. Kim, D. K. Gaskill, G. G. Jernigan, R. L. Myers-

Ward, C. R. Eddy, P. M. Campbell, K. M. Lee, P. Asbeck, IEEE Electron Device Lett.

2011, 32, 270.

[183] E. Kougianos, S. Joshi, S. P. Mohanty, Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Annu. Symp. VLSI, 

ISVLSI 2015, 07-10-July, 567.

[184] E. Guerriero, L. Polloni, M. Bianchi, A. Behnam, E. Carrion, L. G. Rizzi, E. Pop, R. 

Sordan, ACS Nano 2013, 7, 5588.

[185] L. Vicarelli, M. S. Vitiello, D. Coquillat, A. Lombardo, A. C. Ferrari, W. Knap, M. 

Polini, V. Pellegrini, A. Tredicucci, Nat. Mater. 2012, 11, 865.

[186] F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. 

Novoselov, Nat. Mater. 2007, 6, 652.

[187] L. H. Hess, M. Seifert, J. A. Garrido, Proc. IEEE 2013, 101, 1780.


58

[188] F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan, A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics 2010, 4, 611.

[189] C. H. Chen, M. J. Deen, Solid. State. Electron. 1998, 42, 2069.

[190] M. J. Uren, D. J. Day, M. J. Kirton, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1985, 47, 1195.

[191] M. J. Kirton, M. J. Uren, Adv. Phys. 1989, 38, 367.

[192] G. Reimbold, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 1984, 31, 1190.

[193] K. K. Hung, P. K. Ko, C. Hu, Y. C. Cheng, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 1990, 37, 

654.

[194] F. N. Hooge, Phys. B+C 1976, 83, 14.

[195] A. A. Balandin, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2013, 8, 549.

[196] I. Heller, S. Chatoor, J. Männik, M. A. G. Zevenbergen, J. B. Oostinga, A. F. 

Morpurgo, C. Dekker, S. G. Lemay, Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 1563.

[197] S. Rumyantsev, G. Liu, W. Stillman, M. Shur, A. A. Balandin, J. Phys. Condens. 

Matter 2010, 22, 395302.

[198] A. N. Pal, S. Ghatak, V. Kochat, E. S. Sneha, A. Sampathkumar, S. Raghavan, A. 

Ghosh, ACS Nano 2011, 5, 2075.

[199] G. Liu, S. Rumyantsev, M. S. Shur, A. A. Balandin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 102, 93111.

[200] M. Zahid Hossain, S. Rumyantsev, M. S. Shur, A. A. Balandin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 

102, 153512.

[201] M. Kayyalha, Y. P. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 107, 113101.

[202] N. Mavredakis, R. Garcia Cortadella, A. Bonaccini Calia, J. A. Garrido, D. Jiménez, 

Nanoscale 2018, 10, 14947.

[203] N. Mavredakis, W. Wei, E. Pallecchi, D. Vignaud, H. Happy, R. G. Cortadella, N. 

Schaefer, A. B. Calia, J. A. Garrido, D. Jiménez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2020, 

67, 2093.

[204] D. Lopez, S. Haendler, C. Leyris, G. Bidal, G. Ghibaudo, IEEE Trans. Electron 

Devices 2011, 58, 2310.

[205] M. B. da Silva, H. Tuinhout, A. Z. Duijnhoven, G. I. Wirth, A. Scholten, in 2014 IEEE 

Int. Electron Devices Meet., 2014, pp. 35.2.1-35.2.4.

[206] N. Mavredakis, N. Makris, P. Habas, M. Bucher, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2016, 

63, 4201.

[207] N. Mavredakis, R. G. Cortadella, X. Illa, N. Schaefer, A. B. Calia, Anton-Guimerà-

Brunet, J. A. Garrido, D. Jiménez, Nanoscale Adv. 2020, 2, 5450.

[208] R. Garcia-Cortadella, E. Masvidal-Codina, J. M. De la Cruz, N. Schäfer, G. Schwesig, 

C. Jeschke, J. Martinez-Aguilar, M. V Sanchez-Vives, R. Villa, X. Illa, A. Sirota, A. 


59

Guimerà, J. A. Garrido, Small 2020, 16, 1906640.

[209] D. Mele, S. Fregonese, S. Lepilliet, E. Pichonat, G. Dambrine, H. Happy, in 2013 IEEE 

MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., 2013, pp. 1–4.

[210] C. Yu, Z. Z. He, X. B. Song, Q. B. Liu, S. B. Dun, T. T. Han, J. J. Wang, C. J. Zhou, J. 

C. Guo, Y. J. Lv, S. J. Cai, Z. H. Feng, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2017, 111, 33502.

[211] M. Deng, D. Fadil, W. Wei, E. Pallecchi, H. Happy, G. Dambrine, M. De Matos, T. 

Zimmer, S. Fregonese, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 2020, 68, 2116.

[212] N. Mavredakis, A. Pacheco-Sanchez, P. Sakalas, W. Wei, E. Pallecchi, H. Happy, D. 

Jimenez, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 2021, 69, 4639.

[213] A. J. Scholten, L. F. Tiemeijer, R. van Langevelde, R. J. Havens, A. T. A. Zegers-van 

Duijnhoven, V. C. Venezia, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2003, 50, 618.

[214] A. van der Ziel, Noise in Solid State Devices and Circuits, Wiley, New York, 1986.

F. Pasadas received the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from 

Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Bellaterra, Spain, in 

2017. From 2017 to 2021, he was a Postodoctoral Research within 

the Departament d’Enginyeria Electrònica at UAB, where he carried 

out the development of physics-based models of devices based on 

graphene and related materials. He is currently with the 

Departamento de Electrónica y Tecnología de Computadores from 

Universidad de Granada (Spain). His current research interests include the modeling of 

flexible 2D devices and the design of novel radio-frequency applications based on emergent 

2D technologies.

Pedro C. Feijoo received the B.Sc. degrees in Physics and 

Electronic Engineering and the M.Sc. degree in Applied Physics 

from Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM), Spain. He 

obtained the Ph.D. degree in Physics from UCM in 2013, in the field 

of deposition of high-permittivity dielectrics for silicon transistors. 

In 2014, he joined Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), 

where he works on the simulation of graphene transistors. He was 


60

visiting researcher at Imec, Belgium, in 2010, where he worked in transistor reliability and at 

Aalto Yliopisto, Espoo, Finland, in 2017, where he worked in fabrication of 2D-

semiconductor transistors.

Nikolaos Mavredakis
obtained the Ph.D. on CMOS noise 

characterization and compact modeling from the School of 

Electronic & Computer Engineering, Technical University of Crete, 

Chania, Greece in 2016. He had been an invited researcher with 

AMS, Austria (2010) and with AdMOS, Germany (2012). He had 

been 
a 
member 
of 
the 
EKV3-MOSFET 
compact-model 

development team and he was in charge for EKV3 model extraction 

at many projects with industry. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Autonomous 

University of Barcelona and the focus of his research is the compact modeling of noise in 

Graphene and 2D-material devices on the Graphene-Flagship project.

Aníbal Pacheco-Sánchez received the Dr.-Ing degree in Electrical 

and Computer Engineering from the Technische Universität 

Dresden, Germany in 2019 and the M. Sc. degree in 

Telecommunications Engineering and B. Eng. degree in Electronics 

and Telecommunications from the National Polytechnic Institute, 

Mexico, in 2011 and 2008, respectively. Since April 2019, he works 

as a postdoctoral researcher at Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 

(Spain). His research activities embrace the characterization and modeling of emerging 

transistor technologies at static and dynamic operation. 

Ferney A. Chaves received the B.Sc. degree in Physics from the 

Universidad Nacional de Colombia, the Master Sc. degree from the 

Universidad de los Andes (Colombia) and the Ph.D in Electronic 

Engineering from Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) in 

1998, 2005 and 2012, respectively. From 2013 he has been working 

as a postdoctoral researcher at UAB mainly in the “Graphene 

Flagship Project” on modeling and simulation of Graphene-Metal 

contact resistance in graphene-based devices and electrical 

properties of 2D crystal-based devices such as barristors and pn heterojunctions.


61

David Jiménez received the Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering 

from the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona in 2000. He has been 

an Associate Professor with the Departament d’Enginyeria 

Electrònica, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, since 2004, and 

appointed Full Professor in 2020. His research activity is focused on 

compact modeling of nanoscale transistors. From October 2013 he is 

leading the compact modeling activities of graphene based 

electronic devices within the Graphene Flagship project (https://graphene-flagship.eu), which 

gathers over 160 academic and industrial partners from 23 countries, all exploring different 

aspects of graphene and related materials.


62

Supplementary Information: Compact modeling technology for the 
simulation of integrated circuits based on graphene field-effect transistors

Francisco Pasadas, Pedro C. Feijoo, Nikolaos Mavredakis, Aníbal Pacheco-Sanchez, Ferney

A. Chaves, and David Jiménez* 

F. Pasadas, P. C. Feijoo, N. Mavredakis, A. Pacheco-Sanchez, F. A. Chaves, D. Jiménez*

Departament d’Enginyeria Electrònica, Escola d’Enginyeria, Universitat Autònoma de 

Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain

E-mail: David.jimenez@uab.cat

F. Pasadas

Departamento de Electrónica y Tecnología de Computadores, Universidad de Granada, 18071 

Granada, Spain.

S1.- 1/f Noise model:

SID
IDS
2 = ΔN + Δμ + ΔR = ΔNA − ΔNB + ΔμA − ΔμB + ΔR
(A1)

ΔNA =

4q2(kBT)2Nit

2kCΔEαWLeff(αk+C2)gvc {−2C√αk atan [√k

α Vc] ± αk ln[α + kVc

2] ± 2C2 ln[C ± kVc]}

Vcd

Vcs

(A2)

ΔNB =
4q2(kBT)2NitμLFk

2CΔEαWLeff

2 (αk + C2)3vsat,0

{2C3(C2 + αk)

C ± kVc

+ α(C2 + αk)(C2 − αk ∓ 2CkVc)

α + kVc2

∓ 2C√αk (−3C2 + αk)atan [√k

α Vc] − (C4 − 3αkC2) ln [(C ± kVc)2

α + kVc2 ]}

Vcd

Vcs

(A3)

ΔμA =

2qaH

kCWLeffgvc {CVc ±

kVc2

2 }

Vcd

Vcs

ΔμB =

2qaHμLF

kCWLeff

2 vsat,0 {±

k

2 ln[α + kVc

2]}

Vcd

Vcs
(A4)

ΔR =

gms
2
+gmd

2

(1+Rc

2 (gms+gmd))

2 SΔR2,
gms,d =

μLFWk

2Leff

Ct,b

C Vcs,d

2
(A5)

where k is a constant (cf. Equation 5 of the main manuscript); NitkBT/ΔΕa is the slow interface 

trap density per unit energy [eV-1cm-2] used as a 1/f noise temperature-dependent model 

parameter where ΔΕa is the amplitude of the activation dispersion, gvc is a normalized drain 

current coefficient, C=Ct+Cb is the sum of top and back oxide capacitances; 𝛼 is a residual 

charge related term; 𝛼H is the unitless Hooge 1/f noise model parameter, S𝛥R2 is the ΔR 1/f 


63

noise model parameter [Ω2/Hz]; and gms,d are the source and drain transconductances, 

respectively [1], [2].

S2.- 1/f Noise Variance model:

Var [WL

SID
IDS
2 ] = Var[ΔN] + Var[Δμ] = Var[ΔNA] + Var[ΔNB] + Var[ΔμA] + Var[ΔμB]
(A6)

Var[ΔNA] = 16q4L2(kBT)2NitNtcoeff

ΔEαCWLeff

3 gvc

√k

8(C2 + αk)5 {∓ 4C4√k(C2 + αk)2

(C + kVc2)2
∓ 16C3√k(C2 − 2αk)(C2 + αk)

C ± kVc

∓ 2α√k(C2 + αk)2 (α2k ∓ C3Vc − 3αC(C ∓ kVc))

(α + kVc2)2

− √k(C2 + αk)(5C2Vc ± 2αC3(12C ∓ 17kVc) + 3αC2k(∓8C + 3kVc))

α + kVc2

+ 3C

√α

(C6 − 25αC4k + 35α2C2k2 − 3α3k3) atan [√k

α Vc]

± 24√k(C6 − 5αC4k + 2α2C2k2) ln[C ± kVc]

∓ 12√k(C6 − 5aC4k + 2α2C2k2) ln[α + kVc

2]}

Vcd

Vcs

(A7)

Var[ΔNB]

= 16q4L2(kBT)2NitμLFNtcoeff

ΔEαCWLeff

4

k2

12(αk + C2)7vsat,0

{4C5k(C2 + αk)3

(C ± kVc)3
+ 6k(C2 + αk)2(3C6 − 5αC4k)

(C ± kVc)2

+ 24C3k(C2 + αk)(3C4 − 12αkC2 + 5α2k2)

C ± kVc

− 2α2(C2 + αk)3(C4 − 6αkC2 + α2k2 ∓ 4C3kVc ± 4αk2CVc)

(α + kVc2)3

+ 2αC(C2 + αk)2(3C5 − 30αkC3 + 15Cα2k2 ∓ 13C4kVc ± 30αk2C2Vc ∓ 5Vc)

(a + kVc2)2

− 3C(C2 + αk)(2C7 − 48αkC5 + 90α2kC3 − 20α3k3C ∓ 11C6kVc ± 79αk2C4Vc ∓ 65α2k3C2Vc ± 5α3k4Vc)

α + kVc2

∓ 15C√k

√α

(C8 − 28αkC6 + 70α2kC4 − 28α3kC2 + α4k4) atan [√k

α Vc]

+ (−C8 + 7αkC6 − 7α2kC4 + α3k3C2) ln [(C ± kVc)2

α + kVc2 ]}

Vcd

Vcs

(A8)

Var[𝛥𝜇𝐴] =

4𝑞2𝐿2𝛼𝐻

𝑘2𝐶𝑊𝑁𝑎𝐻𝐿𝑒𝑓𝑓

3
𝑔𝑣𝑐 {

𝐶 atan[√𝑘

𝛼𝑉𝑐]

√𝛼𝑘
+ 0.5 ± (𝛼 + 𝑘𝑉𝑐

2)}

𝑉𝑐𝑑

𝑉𝑐𝑠

(A9)

Var[𝛥𝜇𝐵] =

4𝑞2𝐿2𝛼𝐻𝜇𝐿𝐹

𝑘2𝐶𝑊𝑁𝑎𝐻𝐿𝑒𝑓𝑓

4
𝑣𝑠𝑎𝑡,0 {∓

0.5𝑘

𝛼+𝑘𝑉𝑐2}

𝑉𝑐𝑑

𝑉𝑐𝑠
(A10)

where Ntcoeff and NαH are the 1/f noise variance model parameters [3].


64

S3.- Channel Thermal Noise model:

𝑆𝐼𝐷 = 𝑆𝐼𝐷𝐴1 + 𝑆𝐼𝐷𝐴2 + 𝑆𝐼𝐷𝐶
(A11)

SIDA1 = 4KBTUTkμLF

W

CgvcLeff [±

αCVc2

2k +

αVc3

3 ±

CVc4

4 +

kVc5

5 ]

Vcd

Vcs
(A12)           

SIDA2 = 4KBTUTkμLF

2
W

Cvsat,0Leff

2 |[

kVc3

3 ]

Vcd

Vcs

|
(A13)

SIDC = 4KBTUTkμLF

3
W

vsat,0
2
LC2Leff

2 (Vcs − Vcd) [±

k2Vc4

4 ]

Vcd

Vcs
(A14)

where SIDA1 is a long channel term and SIDA2, SIDC are the velocity saturation induced terms

[4].

References

[1]
N. Mavredakis, R. Garcia Cortadella, A. Bonaccini Calia, J. A. Garrido, and D. Jiménez, 

“Understanding the bias dependence of low frequency noise in single layer graphene FETs,” 

Nanoscale, vol. 10, no. 31, pp. 14947–14956, Aug. 2018.

[2]
N. Mavredakis et al., “Velocity saturation effect on low frequency noise in short channel single 

layer graphene FETs,” Appl. Electron. Mater., vol. 1, pp. 2626–2636, 2019.

[3]
N. Mavredakis et al., “Bias dependent variability of low-frequency noise in single-layer 

graphene FETs,” Nanoscale Adv., vol. 2, no. 11, pp. 5450–5460, 2020.

[4]
N. Mavredakis et al., “Bias-Dependent Intrinsic RF Thermal Noise Modeling and 

Characterization of Single-Layer Graphene FETs,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 69, 

no. 11, pp. 4639–4646, Nov. 2021.


