Object Storage, Persistent Memory, and Data
Infrastructure for HPC Materials Informatics

Stephanie R. Taylor

This report was prepared as a final deliverable from the author’s
participation in the 2022 GRIPS-Berlin (8-week) summer internship
program. For additional details, refer to the Acknowledgements section.
For a short, step-by-step sentence summary of the content in this report,
refer to the Conclusion section.

Introduction: What we can build is ultimately limited by the materials
that we have access to. The goal of materials science is to understand
and exercise control over the measureable, physical, tangible, macroscale
properties of a given material responding to a given environment.
Accordingly, materials scientists are concerned with what is known as the
“Process-Structure-Property” (PSP) relationship. Simply put: processing
conditions govern the development of material’s microstructure, which,
in turn, governs the properties that the material possesses. An Olson
diagram, such as that shown in Figure 1, provides one way of visualizing
the more general PSP relationships in materials. Because of the wide
range of time- and length-scales involved, the questions that materials
science strives to answer are inherently complex and multi-scale (see
Figure 2).

Fig. 1 Olson diagram depicting the various streams of data that contribute to
the process-structure-property (PSP) relationship.1

Fig. 2 Description of length scale dependence and modeling methods in
the context of Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME).
Note that modeling, simulation, and data-driven methods such as artificial
intelligence and machine learning may be included in all these stages.1

Materials informatics tackles these questions using computational,
data-driven methods. The tools of this field are (1) theoretical models,
(2) experimental data, and (3) computing power. These three pillars are
continually evolving in response to each other. Scientists across history
have always strived to leverage theoretical models and experimental
data, but it is only since the advent of the modern computer that the
third pillar – computing power – was truly unleashed. The Computer
Revolution has continued to present day, and it is transforming the fields
of science and engineering along with it, materials science included. The
prospect of being able to accurately model complex, multi-scale material
property phenomena finally appears to be within our grasp. However, it
is nascent territory. The data infrastructure required to realize this dream
is still being developed, and ascertaining the proper building blocks for
this infrastructure is of pertinent concern. High-performance computing
(HPC) is one of the primary tools, so developments in the HPC space
have a ripple effect within the field of materials informatics.
In this report, speculation is provided on how infrastructure choices
fit into the materials data ecosystem. Special attention is paid to object
storage, Intel’s DAOS API, storage-class memory (SCM), and the
prospect of non-von Neumann computing. (‘Persistent memory’ and
‘SCM’ are used interchangeably in this report.) Lastly, the hypothesized
implications of data infrastructure choices on a sample materials
informatics problem is discussed: computational materials discovery
of phase-change materials with properties tailored for phase-change
memory (PCM). The motivation for selecting PCM as a sample materials
informatics case study comes from its relevance to emerging SCM
hardware. Overall, this report touches on a variety of subjects, but they are
all woven together through the same underlying story, the plot of which
can be summarized as follows.

• Computational methods can vastly accelerate materials development
for ‘real-world’ use in industry, and investments in materials data
infrastructure greatly improve the efficacy and reach of such methods.

• One of the pillars of this infrastructure is data storage.
• Advances in the materials used for data storage hardware have not only
improved the capabilities of existing storage paradigms, but have also
enabled the development of new ones.

• By intelligently incorporating next-generation storage technologies
into the materials data infrastructure, materials scientists are able to
leverage enhanced computational workflows, which further accelerates
materials development.

Historical Context for Materials Data Infrastructure and ICME: The
infrastructure building blocks of a successful materials data ecosystem
is a topic that has received a significant amount of attention in the
materials research community in recent years, especially in the United
States. However, stakeholder interest in creating a robust materials data
infrastructure (MDI) is nothing new.
Consider a report from 2004, Materials Research Cyberscience
Enabled by Cyberinfrastructure,2 that summarizes the perspectives of
the 110 participants (including 44 PIs and co-PIs, 35 graduate students,
and 22 post-doctoral fellows) at the National Science Foundation (NSF)
Computational Materials Science Review. This report is vague on the
actual pillars that ought to comprise an implemented MDI, but clear
desire is expressed for the creation of database repositories, such as: “A
central repository for important computational materials results, similar
to protein data banks. It should be investigated whether this could be
done with the appropriate archival journals. ... A software repository
for materials algorithms and for materials software. To be efficient,
support for only one such repository should be funded.” The authors
appear to have possessed – among other things – a vision of a more
organized, centralized, government-funded materials database. Despite
the considerable challenges involved, they were optimistic in their tone.
They state: “The possibilities in theory that are dreams today may become
realities. ... It is entirely possible that advances in cyberinfrastructure
will create revolutionary advances that are not on anyone’s ‘radar screen’
today. That is one of the joys of research.”
Around
this
time,
the
concept
of
Integrated
Computational
Material Engineering (ICME) was gaining momentum as well. A
seminal document from 2008 defined “ICME cyberinfrastructure” as:
“the Internet-based collaborative materials science and engineering
research and development environments that support advanced data
acquisition, data and model storage, data and model management,
data and model mining, data and model visualization, and other
computing and information processing services required to develop an

GRIPS-BERLIN: INTERN PROJECT REPORT
August 2022

arXiv:2210.07929v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  6 Oct 2022


integrated computational materials engineering capability”.3 One of the
fundamental ideas of ICME is taking output data from one model is
and feeding it as input data into another model. This enables multi-
scale data flow, as well as the ability for materials data to respond much
more dynamically to the product design cycle. Successful case studies
of ICME had been demonstrated by companies such as Ford, General
Electric, Boeing, QuesTek, etc., piquing interest by others in the materials
science & engineering (MSE) community.3 For instance, Ford Motor
Company reported that its ICME-inspired implementation of a Virtual
Aluminum Casting process saved them millions of dollars in direct
cost savings or cost avoidance.4 The aforementioned 2008 document,
Integrated Computational Materials Engineering: A Transformational
Discipline for Improved Competitiveness and National Security, prepared
for the National Academy of Sciences, also detailed a clear vision for
the nascently-emerging field of ICME. Several key conclusions from the
report are as follows:

• (Conclusion 1) The materials development and optimization cycle
cannot operate at the rapid pace required by integrated product
development teams, and this potentially threatens U.S. competitiveness
in powerhouse industries such as electronics, automotive, and
aerospace, in which the synergy among product design, materials, and
manufacturing is a competitive advantage.

• (Conclusion 2) ICME is a technologically sound concept that has
demonstrated a positive return on investment and promises to improve
the efficient, timely, and robust development and production of new
materials and products.

• (Conclusion 3) While some aspects of ICME have been successfully
implemented, ICME as a discipline within materials science and
engineering does not yet truly exist.

• (Conclusion 4) For ICME to succeed, it must be embraced as a
discipline by the materials science and engineering community,
leading to requisite changes in education, research, and information
sharing. ICME will both require and promote a better connection
between the science of materials and the engineering of materials.
ICME will transform the field of materials science and engineering by
integrating more holistically the engineering and scientific endeavors.

• (Conclusion 5) Industrial acceptance of ICME is hindered by the
slow conversion of science-based materials computational tools to
engineering tools and by the scarcity of computational materials
engineers trained to use them.

• (Conclusion 6) A coordinated government program to support the
development of ICME tools, infrastructure, and education is lacking,
yet it is critical for the future of ICME.

• (Conclusion 7) Although there has been significant progress in the
development of physically based models and simulation tools, for
many key areas they are inadequate to support the widespread use
of ICME. However, in the near term, ICME can be advanced by use
of empirical models that fill the theoretical gaps. Thus experimental
efforts to calibrate both empirical and theoretical models and to
validate the ICME capability are paramount.

• (Conclusion 8) An ICME cyberinfrastructure will be the enabling
framework for ICME. Some of the elements of that cyberinfrastructure
are libraries of materials models, experimental data, software tools,
including integration tools, and computational hardware. An essential
“noncyber” part of the ICME infrastructure will be human expertise.

• (Conclusion 9) Creation of a widely accepted taxonomy, an informatics
technology, and materials databases openly accessible to members of
the materials research and development, design, and manufacturing
communities is essential for ICME.

• (Conclusion 10) The development of rapid characterization tools
alongside new information technology and materials databases will
allow speedy calibration of the empirical models required to fill gaps
in theoretical understanding.

However, this report also makes it clear that ICME is not cheap. The
authors speculate that “development of an ICME capability for a given

material system to solve a particular foundational engineering problem
will require an investment of $10 million to $40 million over 3 to 10
years, depending on the completeness and complexity desired.” Ford’s
Virtual Aluminum Casting program from 2006, for instance, required
about $15 million in expenditures over 5 years. This resulted in a
return-on-investment (ROI) of over 7:1 for Ford, illustrating that such
investments can indeed be worthwhile. Even so, they are not trivial
undertakings. Furthermore, the multi-year investment typically required
for ICME was one of the primary challenges of implementing ICME at
this point, since industry typically runs on a 1-year budget cycle. On the
other hand, the potential payoffs of ICME were enticing. According to the
2008 report, “ICME will be transformative for the materials discipline,
promising to shorten the materials development cycle from its current
10-20 years to 2 or 3 years in the best scenarios.”
A key milestone for MDI and ICME was the Materials Genome
Initiative (MGI), announced in 2011 by President Barack Obama.
The white paper for the MGI states:5 “This initiative offers a unique
opportunity for the United States to discover, develop, manufacture, and
deploy advanced materials at least twice as fast as possible today, at a
fraction of the cost.” For fiscal year 2012, the Obama Administration
requested $100M to fund multi-year DOE, NIST, NSF, and DOD
programs supporting various components of the MGI. The graphic used
to indicate the overarching vision of the MGI is shown in Figure 3.

Fig. 3 Graphic provided by the 2011 whitepaper to illustrate the goals of the
Materials Genome Initiative.5

A more detailed overview can be found in the 2014 Strategic Plan for
achieving four sets of MGI goals:6 (1) leading a culture shift in materials-
science research to encourage and facilitate an integrated team approach;
(2) integrating experiment, computation, and theory and equipping the
materials community with advanced tools and techniques; (3) making
digital data accessible; and (4) creating a world-class materials-science
and engineering workforce that is trained for careers in academia or
industry. These efforts have had far-reaching implications on the field of
computational materials science. The impact of the MGI has indeed been
transformative; its unleashed momentum has continued to present-day.
Even so, developing the visioned infrastructure has been slow.
The state of the situation in 2017 was well summarized in the TMS
report, Building a Materials Data Infrastructure.7 In this report, the
actual term ‘Materials Data Infrastructure’ (MDI) was formally defined
as consisting of “three core digital components – repositories, tools,
and e-collaboration platforms – as well as the technology, policies,
incentives, standards, people, and activities necessary to plan, acquire,
process, analyze, store, share, reuse, and dispose of materials data.”
The obstacles to MDI were also identified and grouped into four tiers,
depending on the potential impact and probability of successfully
overcoming them. These obstacles are reproduced below, and the items
with particular relevance to data storage – specifically object storage
(described in the next section) – are colored.

ii


‘Tier I’ problems: High potential impact, high probability of success

• No unified MSE community approach to its diverse challenges with
materials data.

• Mismatch between consumers and generators of specific materials
data.

• Lack of e-collaboration platforms.
• Lack of a qualified knowledge base on data management and analytics
in the MSE community.

• Inadequate awareness of options and best practices for data storage.
• Limited focus on sustainable long-term data storage strategies and
support.

• Insufficient participation of the computer science community in the
MDI.

• Many required elements and solution pathways for the MDI are not
defined in enough detail.

• Insufficient mechanisms for crediting data contributors.
• A pathway for industrial participation from large scale manufacturing
in the MDI is unclear.

• Scarcity of data sharing incentives.

‘Tier II’ problems: Low potential impact, high probability of success

• User interfaces for uploading and downloading data can be challenging
to design.

• Success stories and proofs of concept are needed to demonstrate the
value of data-driven materials science and engineering.

• Need for federated approaches to data sharing and storage.
• Resources among data infrastructure providers are poorly integrated.
• Insufficient options for long-term storage of ‘intermediate’ data.

‘Tier III’ problems: Low potential impact, low probability of success

• Lack of robust APIs of connected systems and instrumentation.
• Complexity and disparate nature of materials data.
• Inadequate understanding of cost associated with materials data in the
short- and long-term.

• Constraints of government technology export regulations.

‘Tier IV’ problems: High potential impact, low probability of success

• Retraining the existing workforce.
• Limited data repository usage and availability of tools.
• Lack of a clear, unified vision of how the MDI will benefit the
community.

• Insufficient consensus on uncertainty quantification methods in the
MSE community.

• Lack of developed, agreed-upon ontologies for materials domains.
• Underdeveloped data management approaches for MSE knowledge.
• Need for standardized components and documented workflows to
enable data extraction and reuse.

• Poor interconnectivity of data platforms, which inhibits creation of
materials data ecosystems.

• Lack of mechanisms or use-metrics to indicate when old data is
updated.

• Lack of existing long-term sustainable business models for individual
elements of the MDI.

• Inadequate IT security and outdated operating systems.
• Lack
of
funding
and
career
opportunities
for
materials
data
management.

• Ambiguity of federal agency data policies.
• Lack of well-defined data sharing norms among publishers and funding
agencies.

• Inadequate career incentives to share data.
• A data sharing culture is hindered by issues such as intellectual
property and privacy.

This short-term assessment of MDI needs conveys the conclusion that
there remains a great deal of work to be done. Along a similar vein,
the 2040 Vision report from NASA (published in 2018) provides a
an articulated roadmap of a vision to work towards.1 A summary
of the vision is shown in Table 1. Over 450 professionals from
industry, government, and academia contributed to the report. It is noted
that computational modeling in industry does not usually incorporate
materials modeling; simply investing in more ‘computational modeling’
does not necessarily help promote the MDI. Accordingly, the report

“Today” (2018)
2040 Vision

Design of materials and systems is
disconnected.

Design of materials and systems is
integrated.

Stages of the product development
lifecycle are segmented.

Stages of the product development
lifecycle are seamlessly joined.

Tools, ontologies, and methodologies
are domain-specific.

Tools, ontologies, and methodologies
are usable across the community.

Materials properties are based on
empiricism.

Materials properties are virtually
determined.

Product certification relies heavily on
physical testing.

Product certification relies heavily on
simulation.

Table 1: NASA 2040 Vision for the future materials data infrastructure.

.

states: “While significant progress has been made over the past 20 years
within industry to enhance and advance system/structural design and
analysis technologies, ... connection of this structural paradigm viewpoint
with that of the design of materials paradigm, with all its potential
impact, is still lacking and will require more work. Consequently, the
authors of this report purposefully focused more attention on the issues
surrounding multiscale modeling of materials and the infusion of the
associated technologies (e.g., model based definitions) into the systems
design/analysis paradigm. As a result, the content of this report is more
biased toward computational materials science and engineering than
systems/structural design and analysis.” The report then goes on to
identify nine key elements necessary for realizing the 2040 Vision and
discusses them in depth. The ninth element, computational infrastructure,
is of particular interest here, as it includes the needs of the data storage
infrastructure. Specifically, Key Element 9 is comprised of the following
three topics:

1. Computer
hardware
(storage,
CPU,
co-processors,
memory,
backplane), firmware, code base, operating systems, middleware,
application software, and the interoperability of these components
that enable the numerical simulation of physical phenomena in ways
that are useful for engineering purposes.

2. High-bandwidth
networks
and
software
platforms
to
support
simultaneous access to enable global collaborative engineering.

3. HPC architectures and frameworks that use parallel/distributed,
neuromorphic, quantum, cloud, machine learning, etc., processing
approaches to solve large scale, computationally and data-intensive
analysis and/or optimization problems.

This report is quite lengthy, and it is not the intention here to summarize
the report in its entirety. (However, the especially interested reader may
find the case studies detailed in Appendix A and B to be of particular
use.) Rather, the intention is to emphasize the point that the materials data
infrastructure remains far from established but that there also currently
exists a great deal of momentum in the materials community to pursue
its development. Highly experienced and respected members of the
community have already collaborated in a variety of instances across
academia and industry to produce roadmaps for what they envision the
necessary infrastructure to be capable of. There are common themes in all
of these. As far back as 2008, the aforementioned ICME report states:3

“The goal of a balanced, well-designed ICME cyberinfrastructure is to
give scientists and engineers the means to do a number of things:

• Link applications codes—for example, UniGraphics, PrecipiCalc, and
ANSYS.

• Develop models that accurately predict multiscale material behaviors.
• Store and retrieve analytical and experimental data in common
databases.

• Provide a repository for material models.
• Execute computational code anywhere computational resources are
available.

• Visualize large-scale data.
• Enable local or geographically disperse collaborative research.
• Measure the uncertainty in a given design and the contributions of
individual design parameters or sources.”

These goals of the MDI have not changed much from their inception to
present day. What has changed – in addition to the enabling technologies
themselves – is the sheer size of the community participating in these
efforts. Consider, for instance, the Materials Project database, launched in
2011 at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) to gather – and
make publicly available – data on a wide variety of material compounds.9

iii


Fig. 4 Growth in registered users of the Materials Project by usage and
demographic, between 2011-2021.8

Fig. 5 Growth in database entries of the Materials Project, from 2011-2021.9

Figure 4 shows the growth in Materials Project users, and Figure 5
shows the growth in number of database entries on material compounds
entered into the Materials Project database. According to the website,
the Materials Project currently contains over 131,000 compounds,
49,700 molecules, and 530,000 nanoporous materials. The emergence
of databases like this one have propelled the rise of the nascent field
of materials informatics. However, the MDI obstacles detailed on the
previous page are still salient. A decade after the 2011 launch of the
Materials Genome Initiative, present-day perspectives on the state and
direction of the MDI are discussed in the 2021 MGI Strategic Plan.8 This
report highlights the trends and issues that have emerged. Simply put, the
situation remains rather piecemeal; there are areas where computational
materials engineering has made its mark, but materials informatics and
its data-driven practitioners are still a niche subset of the materials
community. One of the consequences of this is, as the 2021 MGI Strategic
Plan remarks, “A sizeable fraction of the materials R&D community
does not yet see the entire value proposition in having a materials R&D
data infrastructure, and the community does not speak with a single
voice on the need for it.” However, a simple fact remains: whether
the need for MDI is acknowledged or not, the data is here... and is
growing. As the 2021 MGI Strategic Plan states, particularly urgent
motivation for investing in MDI comes from “the growing computational
power that will soon reach the exascale (1018 floating point operations
per second—flops), experiments that are producing massive data sets,
and automated synthesis techniques that can systematically produce
vast numbers of new materials.” Accordingly, one of the key strategic
objectives – for the next five years – discussed in the report is to establish
a National Materials Data Network (NMDN). It will be interesting to see
what comes from this effort. Technological advancements are funneling
us into a data-driven world, and the competitive edge will go to whoever
can leverage this data.

In many ways, the desired features of an MDI overlap with data
infrastructure needs in other scientific fields. What distinguishes the
needs of the materials science community is that materials data is
extremely heterogeneous. For instance:

• Materials data exists across a wide range of time- and length-scales.
(Consider the aforementioned PSP relationships.)

• Materials data has inherent uncertainty associated with it, which is both
difficult to quantify and capable of propagating through higher-level
analyses.

• Each measurement technique produces data with its own unique
nuances, and measurement techniques for obtaining materials data are
continually evolving.

• The theories are continually evolving as well, and our definitions of
what constitutes a property comes from these theories.

• Similarly, the labeling schema of materials classes is also in flux.
Our ideas of how to categorize materials have changed over time, as
theoretical understanding has evolved.

• The data itself is inherently incomplete, always a partial picture
colored with biases. If a researchers does not think to test for a given
property, it will not appear in the data.

• Data collected for the same material system can vary wildly depending
on the processing history of the material, the environmental conditions,
the measurement techniques employed, and even the local region of
material assessed.

• The phenomena that materials data aim to capture are extremely
diverse.

Many of the present-day obstacles of materials data are simply
reflections of this inherent heterogeneity. Likewise, Figure 6 shows
an overview of the wide diversity of computational representations for
materials data. Additional visualization schemes for materials data are
shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8. Trying to standardize materials data is
an upwards battle against entropy; even as the large centralized databases
grow, so do the number of smaller, more niche-focused ones. To work in
this space means using data from many different sources. Standardized
file formats would make this easier, but the heterogeneity of materials
also presents a hindrance towards broad community acceptance of such a
file format. File formats are a form of organization, and different research
groups are incentivized to organize their data differently. Regardless,
there are efforts underway for standardized file formats, such as the
Physical Information File (PIF) hierarchical schema proposed by Citrine
Informatics.11 Also, by choosing which file formats they support, large-
scale databases like the Materials Project can exert a great deal of
influence. An additional difficulty with materials data is that the needs
of academia (which desires free, open-source data widely shareable
across the community, for the purpose of advancing human knowledge)
often conflict with the needs of industry (where businesses rely on
keeping their materials data proprietary, for the purpose of profit and
market competitiveness). Having established the setting for which we
find ourselves in today, let us now discuss the building blocks of our
computational infrastructure in more detail.

Fig. 6 Schematic for four key features the define ICME data. A single dataset
often exhibits variation in all four features.10

iv


Fig. 7 Illustration of how materials data may be stored on any unit element
that comprises a given geometry.10

Fig. 8 Attribute matrices are a way to organize data that is associated with
geometries, features, and ensembles. To quote a paper from 2020: “Attribute
matrices themselves do not store heavy data; instead, they serve to define the
type of data being stored and its shape. Dense data are stored in attribute
array objects, which are contained within attribute matrices. There are three
general types of attribute matrices: element, which store data associated to
the unit elements of a geometry; feature, which store data for groups of
elements; and ensemble, which store data for groups of features. There are
four types of element attribute matrices, corresponding to the four basic unit
elements: vertex, edge, face, and cell.”10

Data Storage Infrastructure and Storage-Class Memory (SCM): At the
simplest conceptual level, all problem-solving workflows consist of:

• Accessing data.
• Performing operations with that data (creating new data).
• Recording data.

Accordingly, in the context of high performance computing (HPC)
for scientific applications such as materials informatics, the main
infrastructural building blocks are:

1. The data storage.
2. The compute nodes.
3. The intermediate software that facilitate information transfer between
the storage and the compute nodes.

The space of implementation choices for these building blocks is
innumerably vast, yet the choices have far-reaching implications on the
computing capabilities of the end system It is tempting for researchers
to become comfortable within a specific framework, taking the problem-
solving infrastructure for granted and choosing to expend their focus to
the problems themselves. Such disregard – however understandable that it
may be – is irresponsible, and particularly ill-advised for HPC resources.

There are well-documented tangible economic and environmental costs
to computing choices, and each researcher should strive to be aware of
these as they choose which tools and skills to invest in over the course of
their career.
Consider a recent 2020 study which examined the ecological impact
of high-performance computing in astrophysics.12 Figure 9 and Figure
10 show several takeaways from this study. In Figure 9, an N-body
solver code is run on a 96-core (192 hyperthreaded) workstation, using
a varying number of cores.* The green dots show the runs, while the red
and blue dots are tests from overclocking the processor. Using one core
is the most inefficient scenario. Increasing the number of cores increases
the energy efficiency, to a limit. The green star indicates the scenario
when all physical cores are occupied (96 physical cores in this case). The
workstation can run more cores due to its hyperthreading capability;†

however, performance continues to improve by adding more cores past
this point, but it does so at the cost of increased energy consumption.
As a takeaway, the author recommended: “For optimal operation, run a
few (∼1,000) cores on a supercomputer or a GPU-equipped workstation.
When running a workstation, use as many physical cores as possible,
but leave the virtual cores alone. Over-clocking reduces wall-clock time
but at a greater environmental impact.” Figure 10 shows the results
of implementing the N-body solver code in a variety of programming
languages. Python had the highest carbon footprint.

Fig. 9 Energy consumption vs. performance measured from using a variety of
workstation conditions to solve the N-body problem (a common astronomical
calculation). The region indicated near the star is most desirable, because it
gives the maximum performance for the minimum energy consumption.12

Fig. 10. Footprint of various languages used to solve the N-body problem.12

*The specific workstation used was the quad CPU 24-core (48 hyperthreaded) Intel
Xeon E7-8890 v4. A ‘quad 24-core CPU’ has 4 × 24 = 96 cores.
†Hyperthreading is when one physical core is split into multiple virtual cores.

v


Having established that computational workflow choices have
quantifiable environmental impacts and the necessity of due diligence in
this space, let us transition into considering different data architecture
choices, specifically for data storage. Three organizational schemes for
data storage – file, block, and object storage – are shown in Figure 11.
File storage organization is easy to visualize, since the concepts derive
from the precursor days of files (as physical sheets of paper) stored in
folders and cabinets. A key aspect of file storage is that it is hierarchical;
file storage systems present a directory hierarchy where files exist within
directories, which can exist within other directories, and so on. The
data for a particular task may be spread across many related files and
directories, and modern applications often build specific information
layers above these primitives.14 The file name includes the path through
the folders which one must follow in order to locate the file, as well
as a file extension type determined by the application used to create
it (such as .txt, .jpg, and so forth). Such a storage architecture works
well in many scenarios (particularly when the number of files is not
too large and when the location of the file is precisely known), which
is one of the reasons that it is so ubiquitous today. The vast majority of
personal computers, whether running MacOS, Windows, Linux, CentOS,
etc., leverage file storage. The experience of ‘seeing files on your desktop’
comes from filesystem-based storage. Storage allocated to hard drives is
usually filesystem-based, and network-attached storage (NAS) devices
typically run protocols that presume filesystem formats.
One of the main standards used for filesystem-based storage is POSIX,
the Portable Operating System Interface, specified by IEEE; the name
POSIX refers to IEEE Std 1003.n family of standards.15,16 POSIX is not
static; it is updated regularly by the Austin Common Standards Revision
Group (CSRG). The main reason for adhering to POSIX is portability;
if two systems are POSIX-compliant, data transfer between them is
presumed to be seamless (at least in theory). Most machine learning
applications rely on the POSIX framework; this enables companies like
Alluxio to provide the service illustrated in Figure 12. However, adhering
to POSIX has limitations associated with it, some of which have led to
significant critique.18,19 To quote a study from 2018:20 “POSIX-based
parallel filesystems provide strong consistency semantics, which many
modern HPC applications do not need and do not want.” Furthermore, a
question arises of whether file storage (POSIX-compliant or otherwise)
can scale to handle the enormous quantities of data able to be generated
currently and in the future. In an HPC context, high performance is
attained via distributed filesystems including, but not limited to: Lustre,21

HDFS,22 Spectrum Scale,23 BeeGFS.24 Yet, as filesystems scale, they
become excessively cumbersome to navigate through, and adding more
capacity has its limitations. The issues with scaling filesystems have
led the data science community to contemplate whether other storage
systems may perform better at scale. In moving beyond file storage, it
is necessary to ask, ‘what would files be without the filesystem?’

Fig. 11 High-level visualization of the three primary storage classes available
on the market: file, block, and object.13

Fig. 12 Graphic from Alluxio, indicating how they aim to fit into the deep
learning and data storage ecosystem. Note the dependence of the various deep
learning frameworks on the POSIX filesystem API.17

An alternative to file storage is block storage. With block storage,
the data is organized into fixed-sized ‘blocks’, each possessing a unique
identifier. The convenience of this approach is its flexibility; in a
distributed environment, applications need not be aware that blocks are
being served from different servers running different operating systems.
For instance, one block of data can be stored in a Windows environment,
while another block can be stored in a Linux environment. This allows
the freedom of tailoring the data across multiple environments. How the
data is broken up, and how it is reassembled when a user requests that
the data be retrieved, is determined by the block storage software. Since
block storage does not require navigating the metadata associated with
directories and file hierarchies, it can exhibit lower latency and greater
performance; as such, it is often used for business-critical enterprise
applications. Block storage is most commonly deployed as a storage area
network (SAN), which requires a server. RAID volumes, which combine
multiple disks through stripping or mirroring, use block storage. A key
caveat is that if the data is not highly structured, block storage loses
many of its advantages. Furthermore, the capability to handle metadata
is extremely limited at best.
Object storage is another alternative. (A pro/con list from IBM on
file, block, and object storage is consolidated below in Table 2.) With
object storage, data and its associated metadata are managed as ‘objects’
that are allocated unique identifiers in a flat namespace; i.e. without any
hierarchy of directories or sub-directories. Objects can contain any type

Pro
Con

File Storage

• Easy to access on a small scale.
• Becomes expensive at large scales.

• Users can manage their own files.
• Hard to work with unstructured data.

• Allows access rights / file sharing / file
locking to be set at user level.

• Challenging to manage and retrieve
large numbers of files.

• Familiar to most users.

Block Storage

• Fast (high performance with low
latency for data retrieval when blocks
are stored locally or close together).

• Lack of metadata (block storage does
not contain metadata, making it less
useful for unstructured data storage).

• Reliable (block storage has a low fail
rate, because blocks are stored in
self-contained units).

• Not searchable (large volumes of block
data become unmanageable because of
limited search capabilities).

• Easy to modify (changing a block does
not require creating a new block, only a
new version).

• High cost (purchasing additional block
storage is expensive and often
cost-prohibitive at a high scale).

Object Storage

• Handles large amounts of unstructured
data (which is increasingly important for
AI/ML and big data analytics).

• Cannot lock files (all users with access
to the cloud, network, or hardware can
access the objects stored there).

• Affordable consumption model
(instead of paying in advance for a set
amount of storage space, you pay only
for the object storage you need).

• Slower performance than other storage
types (the file format usually requires
more processing time than file storage
and block storage).

• Uses metadata (because metadata is
stored with the objects, users can
quickly gain value from data and more
easily retrieve the object they need).

• Cannot modify a single portion of a
file (once an object is created, you
cannot change the object, you can only
recreate a new object).

• Advanced search capabilities.

• Unlimited scalability (you can add as
much additional storage as you need,
even petabytes or more).

Table 2: Simplified overview of the pros and cons of various types of
storage, as described by IBM.25

vi


of data, structured or unstructured. This associated metadata provides
considerable flexibility for better indexing and management. However,
keeping the metadata consistent during updates may be expensive, so
many systems discourage or prohibit modifying an object once written.
To support updates, applications need to create new objects with adjusted
content and delete the old ones. As such, the ideal use of object storage
is in ‘write once, read many times’ situations, such as accessing video
and photo libraries. (Netflix, for instance, relies on Amazon’s ‘S3’
object storage to store their content.26) Resiliency and scalability are the
hallmarks of object storage; the hardware used by the object storage need
not be confined to one geographic location, and by adding more hardware
devices to the storage pools, object storage can scale without limit. When
dealing with Big Data, the failure of individual system components is not
an ‘if’, but rather a question of ‘when’ and ‘how often’. In addition to the
resiliency that arises from the geographic distribution of the data, object
storage can offer data-recovery features such as erasure coding, which
allows data to be reconstructed in the event of corruption or drive failure.
The desirable features of resiliency and scalability have led to object
storage’s rise as the predominant storage type in the cloud computing
space. Amazon was one of the earliest commercial object storage
providers, debuting its ‘S3’ storage in 2006.27,28 Other object storage
systems include: Microsoft Azure (‘Blob’ storage),29 Google Cloud,30

MinIO,31 Ceph,32 OpenStack Swift,33 and StorNext.34 Object storage
can also be made to mimic other types of storage, via use of appropriate
interfaces. The Ceph software stack, for instance (shown in Figure 13),
provides interfaces compatible with object, block, and file storage. While
object storage is relatively mainstream in the cloud computing space,
it has yet to gain a prominent role for HPC. This is because HPC is
generally concerned with performance above all else, and object stores
have a reputation of exhibiting higher latencies than file or block storage.
Considered unsuitable for intensive, continuous I/O, object storage has
been relatively confined to the role of archives, back-ups, and long-term
storage. However, its prominence in the realm of cloud computing has
motivated a push towards improved performance, and in leveraging the
technological advances made by present-day storage hardware, object
storage has been presented an opportunity to rebrand itself.
Consider the ‘Distributed Asynchronous Object Storage’ (DAOS)
system developed by Intel.36 DAOS is open-source; the first community
release was on June 18, 2020, and ‘DAOS version 2.0’ was released
April 20, 2021.37 DAOS provides a compelling contradiction to the
claim that object storage systems display low performance. The IO500
List is a community ranking of supercomputer performance and storage
technologies for submissions from around the world, organized by the
Virtual Institute for I/O (VI4IO).38 DAOS submissions have consistently
been among the top contenders on this list since 2020.39 It also came in
first prize for Bandwidth on the ‘10-node challenge’ in 2021, at nearly
400 GIB/s (almost twice as high as the second place contender).37 What
was the key to their success? The fact that DAOS is the culmination of
nearly a decade of work by Intel, focusing specifically on storage for
high-performance computing, is part of it.40 The fact that DAOS allows
operations to bypass the Linux kernel, saving time, is another part. But
the main reason DAOS performs so well is that it was built to leverage
next-generation storage hardware, like storage-class memory (SCM).

Fig. 13. Ceph software stack.35

Fig. 14. Simplified hierarchy of computer memory.41

In discussing next-generation storage technologies, some context on
the existing physical hardware can be helpful. In a computer, the central
processing unit (CPU) is what performs the computation and data
manipulation. One scheme for ranking the tiers of storage, displayed in
Figure 14, comes from the distance between the data storage device and
the CPU. The general trend is that the higher up in the pyramid (at the
so-called ‘hot tiers’ of memory), the faster the data can be accessed, but
the trade-off is less data stability and less storage size. The lower down
in the pyramid (at the so-called ‘cold tiers’ of memory), the slower it is
to access the data, but more data can be stored and with less likelihood of
data loss. Several types of computer memory devices (listed in order of
‘hot’ to ‘cold’) include, but are not limited to:

• Registers
• Cache
• RAM
• SCM (aka persistent memory)
• Flash memory
• Hard drive
• Tape

Registers are high-speed memory built directly into the CPU chip.
However, register memory has a very small capacity and is limited to
facilitating low-level instructions. The next tier, cache memory, has a
significant impact on the performance speeds of the CPU. Located in
close physical proximity to the CPU, the cache memory stores copies of
frequently-accessed data from the main memory. Since accessing data
stored in the cache is faster for the CPU to do than accessing memory
stored in the main memory, the cache memory helps to speed up the
computation done by the CPU. Cache memory is designated into three
tiers (L1, L2, L3), depending on the capacity and how close the chip is to
the CPU. A simplified visualization of these types of memory physically
mounted on a computer motherboard is shown in Figure 15.

Fig. 15 Schematic to illustrate the difference between cache and RAM chips
as implemented physically on a computer motherboard.42

vii


Demonstrating that the tiers of memory classification often overlap, the
physical implementation of most cache memory is static RAM (SRAM).
The terms ‘SRAM’ and ‘cache memory’ are often used interchangeably.
Random access memory (RAM) is a chip on the motherboard that
stores the temporary working data used by the CPU, i.e. the real-time
data being read and written by programs. The term ‘main memory’ of
a computer usually refers to RAM. Inside of a RAM chip, a technology
known as a dual in-line memory module (DIMM) is found. These are
printed electronic circuits that come in a variety of configurations. The
two main types of RAM that a DIMM provides are: static RAM (SRAM)
and dynamic RAM (DRAM). Cell diagrams illustrating the difference in
circuit configuration for SRAM and DRAM are shown in Figure 16.

Fig. 16. Cell diagrams of (a) SRAM and (b) DRAM.43

As shown in the figure, SRAM cells use multiple transistors, while
DRAM cells generally consist of a transistor and a capacitor.* The
data in SRAM is stored in an orchestrated communication between the
transistors, called a ‘flip flop’ gate. The data in DRAM is stored via the
charge on the capacitor. Since the capacitor will leak electric charge over
time, the charge needs to be periodically refreshed to prevent data loss.
An important aspect of SRAM and DRAM is that they both require a
power supply to function. When power is turned off, data stored in RAM
is lost. This is known as volatile memory.
Non-volatile memory retains its data even when power is removed.
This is not to say that non-volatile memory is invulnerable; the various
physical implementations of non-volatile memory have varying strengths
and weaknesses that affect their suitability for different use cases. One of
the main categories of non-volatile memory devices is flash. Solid state
drives (SSDs) usually use flash memory, as demonstrated in Figure 17.

Fig. 17 Deconstruction of a generic solid state drive (SSD), showing its usage
of flash memory, in the form of NAND memory chips.44

*The transistor type is usually a Metal-Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor
(MOSFET), but other types – such as the Bipolar Junction Transistor (BJT) – can also
be employed.

Fig. 18 Similarities between the MOSFET and the floating gate transistor. The
MOSFET is often used for RAM, while the floating gate transistor is used for
flash memory.45

Aside from SSDs, other devices that use flash memory include: multi-
media cards (MMCs), BIOS chips, and USB flash drives.
Flash memory relies on a ‘floating gate’ transistor that is essentially
a modified version of the MOSFET, as shown in Figure 18. Because
the gate is electrically insulated, the data (which is stored in the form of
the electrical charge on the gate) is protected even if an external power
source is absent. Placing electrons within the floating gate (charging
the gate) is a ‘write’ – aka ‘program’ – operation, and removing the
electrons (discharging the gate) is an ‘erase’ operation. Two main types
of flash memory are NAND and NOR, so named for their implemented
architectures within the memory cell – which resemble NAND (“not
AND”) and NOR (“not OR”) logic gates, respectively. Even though
it is non-volatile, flash memory can only withstand a finite number
of program/erase (P/E) cycles; the erase operation relies on electron
tunneling across the metal oxide layer, which has the side effect of
degrading the metal oxide over time. The lifetime of a flash storage device
is usually expressed in terms of the number of estimated P/E cycles that
can be performed before the charged state becomes indistinguishable
from the uncharged state. Although, it is noted that the P/E cycle-based
aging marker is not always a reliable wear indicator.46 SSD lifetimes have
been quoted at a wide range of values, from over a decade to as little as
a year, depending on P/E cycles and operating conditions.47,48,49 The
storage temperature also affects the data integrity, as the degradation of
the storage device can be drastically accelerated at warmer temperatures.
In extreme worst case scenarios, the data on an SSD might degrade after
only seven days.50 Humidity is particularly detrimental as well; a recent
study found that humidity significantly affected the degradation of SSDs,
even when operated at low temperature.51 For these reasons, SSDs should
be stored in climate-controlled environments, especially if implemented
for enterprise scale.
At a lower tier of the computer memory hierarchy, below flash storage,
lies the hard drive. Inside of a hard drive is a spinning, circular ‘platter’
with a thin magnetic coating. The surface of the platter can be allocated
into small, discrete individual regions that are either magnetized (to store
a 1) or demagnetized (to store a 0). These individual regions are small,
as a single platter can store over a trillion bits of magnetic memory on it.
Reading and writing data on a hard drive is also a mechanical process;
for the magnetically-stored data to be accessed, the disk needs to rapidly
spin, exposing each of the regions to the probe ‘head’ (mounted on an
actuator arm). This is visually similar to a needle on a record player.
On one hand, hard drives can retain their data at a much wider range of
temperature and humidity environments than flash memory. On the other
hand, hard drives are more susceptible to physical damage; for instance,
dropping an SSD or a flash drive is not likely to compromise the data,
but dropping a hard drive can destroy the integrity of the entire disk.
According to IBM:52 “The longevity under constant use for an internal
hard drive is three to five years. The lifespan can be longer if the device is
an external hard drive and stored in a controlled space ... HDDs [hard disk
drives] are a better long-term storage device. SDDs tend to be less reliable
for long-term storage because of data leaks that begin after a year of
being unpowered.” The magnetic memory in a hard drive is quite durable
and resilient to data loss; rather, it is the mechanical components that
are generally responsible for failures that occur. Another storage medium
that relies on magnetic memory is tape. Tape storage consists of a thin
plastic ribbon with a magnetic oxide coating (a mixture of powdered iron
oxide particles, lubricant, stabilizer, binder, and pigments), wound into
spools. Tape is one of the slowest types of storage to access, because
the data encoded onto the ribbon must be read in an entirely sequential
fashion. However, it has quite good longevity and happens to be fairly
inexpensive, making it a popular choice for long-term storage.

viii


Having provided a brief overview of several of the main tiers in the
memory hierarchy, let us now consider a relatively nascent tier that
has been interjected between DRAM (volatile) and flash memory (non-
volatile). This nascent tier is called storage class memory (SCM), but it
also goes by the name of ‘persistent memory’ (PMem). SCM has the
dual advantages of being non-volatile – like flash – and relatively quick
to access – like DRAM. The archetypal enabling physical medium for
this technology is a hardware design called ‘3D XPoint’ (pronounced
"3D cross-point"). 3D XPoint emerged after a decade-long collaboration
between the companies Micron and Intel; they began development on
it in 2006 and officially released it to market in 2016, under the name of
‘Intel Optane’.53 Figure 19 illustrates where Intel Optane was envisioned
to dwell within the memory hierarchy; it can be used for both working
memory (improving the performance of the CPU) and storage (improving
the overall capacity of the system).

Fig. 19 Location of Intel Optane persistent memory in the memory hierarchy.
Note the conceptual illustration of ‘hot memory’ and ‘cold memory’.54

An interesting aspect of Intel Optane is that it can be implemented
in a variety of ‘modes’: memory mode, app-direct mode, and mixed
mode.55,56 When used in memory mode, the Optane PMem device
acts as RAM, and (used in conjunction with actual RAM) the actual
RAM can act as cache. This has the benefit of greatly increasing the
working memory available. However, somewhat misleadingly, Optane in
memory mode is not persistent; it behaves as volatile memory. This is not
because the storage medium itself is physically volatile. Rather, it uses a
cryptographic key that gets flushed if the power turns off. Optane used
in app-direct mode, in contrast, does behave as non-volatile PMem. In
app-direct mode, the Optane PMem device does not act as RAM; it acts
as storage. As storage, it can have a namespace or a file system laid atop
it. The benefit of using Optane PMem here, in app-direct mode, is that it
provides an ultra-fast connection between the storage and the processor
(which is ideal for big data workloads, in-memory databases, and so
forth). Mixed mode is a combination of memory mode and app-direct
mode. Since Optane features can vary significantly depending on how the
hardware is implemented, the marketing around it has been exceedingly
vague, exceedingly broad, and – at the same time – highly technical. It
should be noted that Intel and Micron have been quite secretive on what
the physical medium that enables this technology actually is. A generic
graphic usually shown to illustrate 3D XPoint is shown in Figure 20.

Fig. 20. The 3-dimensional structure leveraged by 3D XPoint.57

Fig. 21 A labeled, simplified graphic of the 3-dimensional structure used by
Micron for their 3D XPoint technology.58

A labeled graphic presented at a conference (back in 2015) by one of
Micron’s executives is shown in Figure 21. Several features of 3D XPoint
are described as follows:59

• Perpendicular wires connect submicroscopic columns; an individual
memory cell can be addressed by selecting its top and bottom wire.

• The amount of voltage sent to each 3D XPoint ‘selector’ enables its
memory cell to be written to or read without requiring a transistor.

• 3D XPoint is not significantly impacted by the number of write cycles
it can endure, making it more durable.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the 3D XPoint structure
are shown in Figure 22 and Figure 23. Because Intel and Micron are
not particularly forthcoming with information surrounding the material
system or fabrication process, a lovely bit of controversy has arisen
over what terminology ought to be used to describe 3D XPoint; in
the years since Optane’s debut, a rather broad consensus has emerged
that 3D XPoint is a ‘phase-change memory’ (PCM) variant on resistive
random-access memory (ReRAM), although neither Intel or Micron will

Fig. 22 SEM images of 3D XPoint hardware, viewed along two directions.60

Fig. 23. Close-up of the SEM images of 3D XPoint hardware.61

ix


confirm this. An article from 2017 states: “An Intel Optane SSD [has
been reverse-engineered] to cross-section the XPoint cells within, so we
have confirmation that the devices use chalcogenide glasses for both the
switching layer and the selector diode. That the latter is labeled ‘OTS’
(for Ovonic Threshold Switch) explains the confusion over the last year
as to whether this device is a Phase-Change Memory (PCM) or Resistive
Random Access Memory (ReRAM)... it seems to be the special variant
of ReRAM using PCM material that has been branded Ovonic Unified
Memory or ‘OUM’... [XPoint Optane SSDs] are cross-bar architecture
ReRAM arrays of PCM materials, and had the term not been ruined
by 17-years of over-promising and under-delivering they would likely
have been called OUM (ovonic unified memory) chips.” As will be made
apparent from the discussion in the next section, those terms are worth
deconstructing briefly.
The concept of phase-change memory (PCM) has been around for
a while. As far back as 1968, it was observed that a chalcogenide-
based* glass (Si12Te48As30Ge10) exhibited a rapid and reversible phase-
change between a conductive state and a highly resistive state, and the
implications for memory were speculated upon.62 A detailed description
of how to use amorphous semiconductors (including chalcogenide
glasses) as devices for computer memory is even provided in a paper from
1973.63 Essentially, PCM can be summarized as follows. Certain types
of semiconducting glasses can undergo reversible transitions between
ordered (crystalline) and disordered (amorphous) states, upon application
of a voltage. This reversible transition is a useful feature, because it is also
accompanied by strong optoelectronic changes; the amorphous phase has
a high resistivity and low optical reflectivity, and the crystalline phase
has a low resistivity and a high optical reflectivity. The optical properties
of PCM materials are already widely exploited in CD, DVD, Blu-ray
technologies. In the context of electronic data storage, it is the electrical
resistance changes that are useful.† To quote a review article from 2020:65

“The stored data can be retrieved by measuring the electrical resistance
of the PCM device. An appealing attribute of PCM is that the stored data
is retained for a very long time (typically 10 years at room temperature),
but is written in only a few nanoseconds.” These appealing features of
PCM have led to decades of research: going from concept, to prototype,
to commercialization.
Along the way, a variety of insights have been gained. For instance,
in 2010, when a team of professors at UC San Diego unveiled their
‘Moneta’ prototype PCM storage system, they note:66 “Achieving high
performance in Moneta requires simultaneously optimizing its hardware
and software components.” In a press release, Steven Swanson, one of the
professors involved in its development, is quoted as follows:67 “We’ve
found that you can build a much faster storage device, but in order to
really make use of it, you have to change the software that manages it as
well. Storage systems have evolved over the last 40 years to cater to disks,
and disks are very, very slow. Designing storage systems that can fully
leverage technologies like PCM requires rethinking almost every aspect
of how a computer system’s software manages and accesses storage.”
Swanson’s group at UCSD continues working on software for persistent
memory to this day.‡,§

While PCM has been around for a while, there have historically been
a variety of factors that limited its widespread adoption. An article from
2020 provides a review of fifty years of PCM development.131 Several
insights of the article are summarized as follows:

• The first chalcogenide materials used to build PCM devices were not
appealing for commercialization, because they had slow transition
speeds and the cells required high programming currents.

*A chalcogenide is an ionic compound that contains at least one Group 16 element
(chalcogen) anion and at least one electropositive element (like a metal). While oxygen
is a chalcogen, the term ‘chalcogenide’ usually does not refer to oxides.
†Actually, in the overwhelming majority of solids, changing between amorphous
and crystalline states is accompanied with a pronounced change in electrical resistance.
What makes PCM materials unique is that the reversible recrystallization process can
occur at lower power. A review article from 2007 states:64 “The two key properties that
characterize phase-change materials are their remarkable crystallization kinetics and their
contrast between the amorphous and crystalline phases.”
‡The group website for the Non-Volatile Systems Lab states:68 “We built NOVA,
the world’s fastest persistent memory file system, Orion, the most capable distributed
file system for persistent memory, and Onyx, the world’s first phase change memory
SSD. Most recently, we described easy techniques to adapting existing programs to use
PMEM, provided the first independent characterization of Optane persistent memory
performance, and crafted simple rules for how programmers can maximize performance.”
§A variety of aspects about Intel Optane persistent memory are also described in
depth in a 2019 arXiv whitepaper from his group.69

Fig. 24 Comparison of various memory technologies, from a 2020 review.131

• The first two decades of PCM had little success; the density of
the solid-state memory was not very high. However, when Energy
Conversion Devices commercialized the Ge-Sb-Te (GST) phase-
change alloy and demonstrated its use for rewritable optical disks,
renewed interest arose around PCM.

• Significant effort was put into commercializing PCM to replace NOR
in cellular phones. Yet this might not have been the best business move;
“With the advent of ‘smart phones’, the cellular phone architecture
started to rapidly move from a NOR based ‘execute in place’
architecture to a NAND based ‘store and download’ architecture. ...
The NOR Flash market in cellular phones has decreased dramatically
over the past 12 years, and thus the PCM opportunity in this segment.”

• PCM-based SSDs were tested extensively but they ended up evading
production, because even though they did offer improvements, the
density was still not high enough to justify the cost of switching to
their adoption.

• In order for PCM to be successfully commercialized on the market, it
needs to be in an area with “overwhelming compelling value.” Smaller
performance improvements have not historically been enough.

• PCM can show “overwhelming compelling value” by targeting novel
memory paradigms, where it does not have to overcome the significant
difficulties of market competition with incumbent well-established
technology. For instance, it is considered to be particularly well-
suited for storage-class memory (SCM) and neuromorphic computing
applications. “The SCM arena represents the ideal realm for the PCM
technology.” “It has been shown that PCM devices can really reproduce
the synapse plasticity, fitting the biological behavior of synapses.”

An interesting note regarding PCM is that it has been entangled with
a vision of ‘universal’ memory, i.e. combining the best of DRAM with
the best of NAND. However, as the 2020 review states:131 “Instead
of becoming ‘universal’ in the sense of bundling all the advantages
of DRAM and NAND simultaneously, PCM turned out to have speed
and endurance worse than DRAM and a cost structure (density) not
as favourable as NAND.” Thus, instead of overhauling the system and
replacing the RAM (DRAM) and Flash (NAND) memory tiers, PCM
ends up settling between them at the nascent persistent memory tier.
The other terms mentioned in the context of Intel Optane’s 3D
XPoint were ‘ovonic unified memory’ (OUM) and resistive random-
access memory (ReRAM). These terms can overlap with PCM. PCM
refers to data storage that relies on a phase-change material. ReRAM
refers to data storage where the data is stored in a resistor. Thus, many
of the current PCM efforts are a subset of ReRAM. These terms should
not be used interchangeably, however, because ReRAM cells usually use
different materials. The most common ReRAM ‘memristor’ cell is a
metal-insulator-metal (MIM) device, in which a transition metal oxide
(such as TiO2) is sandwiched between two conductive metal electrodes.
The other term - OUM - can be understood as a variant of ReRAM that
uses PCM. Use of ‘ovonic’ in this context can be traced back as far
back as 1970, to a paper titled Chalcogenide Glass Bistable Resistivity
(Ovonic) Memories.70

x


Other emerging persistent memory technologies exist as well, such
as magnetoresistive RAM (MRAM) and ferroelectric RAM (FeRAM).
With MRAM, the data is stored in a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ)
instead of electrical charges; electric signals are still important though,
because they are used to detect and control the magnetic orientation.
FeRAM cells are similar to DRAM in that they consist of one transistor
and one capacitor; unlike DRAM, however, the capacitor is a ferroelectric
capacitor. Since ferroelectric capacitors can retain their polarity without
the need for power, this means that – unlike DRAM – FeRAM is non-
volatile. A theme that emerges when reviewing PCM, ReRAM, MRAM,
FeRAM, and so forth, is that using these technologies in the SCM niche
can enable the design of entirely new storage systems.
In discussing Optane and 3D XPoint, it would be remiss to overlook a
recent business development; over the summer, Intel executives recently
confirmed that they were dropping their Optane business.71 Micron had
already sold off its assets the previous year, in summer 2021, stating
that “it wanted to shift resources from 3D XPoint to CXL-enabled
memory products* ... [and was planning] to apply the knowledge [Micron
had] gained from the breakthroughs achieved through its 3D XPoint
initiative, as well as related engineering expertise and resources, to
new types of memory-centric products that target the memory-storage
hierarchy.”76 There was speculation that Intel would be next; a Forbes
article in February 2022 asked, “Is Intel Going To Drop Optane?”77

This speculation in the article came from the observation that Intel had
been selling off parts of the business and had not made any new Optane
announcements or talked about Optane during its investor calls for several
quarters. This is another instance of PCM having a difficult time on
the market; the technology itself is well-received, but profitability is
a fluctuating dance with market forces. Earlier successes – like being
awarded a $500 million contract to provide one of the United States’ first
exascale supercomputers to Argonne National Laboratory, incorporating
Optane memory78 – were unfortunately not sufficient. Optane might
still receive some attention; there is still an estimated 2-year supply
of available Optane chips that have already been produced.79 However,
for now, the dance with persistent memory must be continued at other
companies. Other companies that have announced comparable SCM
products include: Kioxia80,81 , Everspin82,83 , SK Hynix.84,85

Intel Optane ‘failed’ on the market, but it does not mean that these
storage technologies – or their implications – are going away anytime
soon. Data infrastructure needs to be scalable. The looming issue of the
currently implemented storage/memory paradigms is that they may not
be sufficient to handle the needs of future data workloads.

DAOS and Object Storage APIs: Another consequence of Intel’s Optane
efforts is DAOS – the Distributed Asynchronous Object Storage system –
(as mentioned briefly on page 7). Intel’s motivation in developing DAOS
was to create a ‘DAOS software ecosystem’, as shown in Figure 25.

Fig. 25. The DAOS ecosystem previously envisioned by Intel.86

*CXL (Compute Express Link) is a CPU-to-memory interconnect, that is built on
top of PCIe; it overlays the caching and memory protocol on top of the existing PCIe
protocol. One nice aspect is that it works with the same slots as PCIe; you can plug
in a PCIe chip and the slot will function as PCIe, or you can plug in a CXL chip and
the slot will function as CXL. CXL focuses on targeting the memory and heterogeneous
computing needs that have recently been driving the evolution of the compute landscape.
It facilitates extremely high bandwidth, low latencies, and pooled memory. (It also can
work in tandem with SCM hardware.) CXL is a very trendy topic at the moment, with a
simply overwhelming wave of industry support. All of the leading companies that work
in this space are involved with it. But this report is long enough as it is, so readers that
are interested in CXL are referred to the following citations.72,73,74,75

To truly leverage SCM hardware and to capitalize on the performance
gains that it can enable, the storage system and software architecture
need to be adapted, too. The idea of the DAOS ecosystem was that it
would enable the customers of Optane persistent memory to leverage
the high-performance potential of their devices, but it would also have
the dual benefit of expanding the customer base. By making DAOS
open-source, Intel was essentially providing a ‘free sample’ to a nice
object storage system. DAOS users might then be persuaded to invest
in more Optane devices, in order to improve their performance further.
The recent developments over the summer mean that Optane might
be receding from the market, but DAOS – on the other hand – will
still be around. The developers have stated that DAOS “continues to
be a strategic part of the Intel software portfolio.” They are quoted as
follows:87

“We remain committed to supporting our customers and the DAOS
community. In parallel, we are accelerating efforts that have already
been under way for DAOS to utilize other storage technologies to store
metadata on SSDs through NVMe and CXL interfaces. ... The DAOS
architecture won’t fundamentally change and the plan is to become
more flexible in the configurations we support. We will continue to store
metadata and data on different devices and use direct load/store for the
metadata. The DAOS metadata will be stored on either persistent (e.g.
apache/barlow/crow pass, battery-backed DRAM or future SSD products
supporting CXL.mem) or volatile (e.g. DRAM or CXL.mem) devices.
The persistent option is what DAOS supports today. As for the volatile
one, there will be an extra step on write operations to keep a copy of
the metadata in sync on CLX.io/NVMe SSDs. This work was already
underway with community partners and is going to be accelerated. ...
Once done, this change should allow DAOS to run on a wider range of
hardware while maintaining our performance leadership.”

Administrators can interact with DAOS (setting up pools, allocating
resources, etc.) via command line, but the user experience is primarily
through the API. As such, a brief introduction here to APIs is merited.
To access data using file storage, the user simply needs to specify the
file name and location. Object storage is a little more complicated, in
that a client application using an object storage scheme will access data
through use of a URL-based application programming interface (API).
An API is a software interface that facilitates the transfer of data between
a client (which requests the data) and a server (which provides the data).
A simplified analogy is shown in Figure 26.

Fig. 26 A simple restaurant analogy to explain the basic role of an API.88
(Bottom:) The customers request pizza. The kitchen has the pizza. The waiter
is the intermediary, passing pizza between the customers and the kitchen.
(Top:) The client requests data. The server has the data. The API is the
intermediary, passing data between the client and the server.

Stated otherwise, an API is a communication bridge. It connects the
requests from the front-end client to the back-end server.
There is a wide assortment of APIs that can be implemented. The term
itself is quite broad. To quote a review article from 2021:89 “Software
libraries, software frameworks, and Web services – either RESTful or
SOAP – have all been interchangeably referred to as APIs, because they
all allow pieces of software to communicate, albeit in different ways.” In
materials science, researchers are often exposed to (URL-based) APIs in

xi


the context of the large public data repositories that have been expanding
along with the nascent materials data infrastructure. Several example
databases are shown in Table 3, along with the relevant type of API that
is provided for programmatic access.*

Database Name
Website
Type of API

Materials Project
materialsproject.org
RESTful90,91

AFLOW Materials Property
Repository

aflowlib.org
RESTful92,93

Materials Cloud
materialscloud.org
REST94,95

NOMAD (Novel Materials
Discovery) Archive

nomad-lab.eu
RESTful96

Open Quantum Materials
Database

oqmd.org
RESTful97,98

Catalysis-Hub
www.catalysis-hub.org
(suncat.stanford.edu)

GraphQL99,100

Open Materials Database
openmaterialsdb.se
REST101,102

Theoretical Crystallography
Open Database

www.crystallography.net/tcod
RESTful103

Citrination Platform
citrination.com
HTTP104

Joint Automated Repository for
Various Integrated Simulations
(JARVIS)

jarvis.nist.gov
REST105

FIZ/NIST Inorganic Crystal
Structure Database

icsd.fiz-karlsruhe.de
RESTful106,107

(paid)

PAULING FILE
paulingfile.com
various108,109

PubChem
pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
SOAP,
REST110

Organic Materials Database
(OMDB)

omdb.mathub.io
web
interface111

NREL MatDB
materials.nrel.gov
web
interface112

Table 3: There is a dazzling array of materials databases on the internet.
This is a small sampling of some of them.

In Table 3, the ‘REST’ and ‘RESTful’ APIs appear quite predominantly.
Since REST APIs are also the predominant API used for object storage,
it is worth explaining what this means. A source of confusion arises,
because the terms ‘REST’ and ‘RESTful’ are used interchangeably in
many cases. They are different, though. A REST-based API (REST API)
follows some of the REST architectural principles, while a RESTful
API follows all of them, fully. The term ‘RESTful’ comes from a 2007
book.114 The term ‘REST’ (short for ‘Representative State Transfer’) was
introduced in a 2000 PhD thesis, and was presented again to the world in a
2002 literature article (same author).115,116 Several quotes from the 2002
article are as follows:116

• REST was originally referred to as the ‘HTTP object model,’ but that
name often led to its misinterpretation as the implementation model of
an HTTP server.

• The name ‘Representational State Transfer’ is intended to evoke an
image of how a well-designed Web application behaves: a network of
Web pages forms a virtual state machine, allowing a user to progress
through the application by selecting a link or submitting a short data-
entry form, with each action resulting in a transition to the next state of
the application by transferring a representation of that state to the user.

• The modern Web is one instance of a REST-style architecture.
• The central feature that distinguishes the REST architectural style
from other network-based styles is its emphasis on a uniform
interface between components. By applying the software engineering
principle of generality to the component interface, the overall system
architecture is simplified and the visibility of interactions is improved.
... The tradeoff, though, is that a uniform interface degrades efficiency,
since information is transferred in a standardized form rather than
one which is specific to an application’s needs. The REST interface
is designed to be efficient for largegrain hypermedia data transfer,
optimizing for the common case of the Web, but resulting in an
interface that is not optimal for other forms of architectural interaction.

• REST is defined by four interface constraints: identification of
resources; manipulation of resources through representations; self-
descriptive messages; and, hypermedia as the engine of application
state.

*Standardization efforts with the goal of enabling these materials database APIs
to communicate with each other are also underway. For instance, in August 2021, the
Open Databases Integration for Materials Design (OPTIMADE) consortium outlined a
“universal API to make materials databases accessible and interoperable... OPTIMADE
defines a RESTful API that is queried with URLs, with responses adhering to the
JSON:API specification.”113

• The key abstraction of information in REST is a resource. Any
information that can be named can be a resource.

• REST uses a resource identifier to identify the particular resource
involved in an interaction between components.

• REST components perform actions on a resource by using a
representation to capture the current or intended state of that
resource and transferring that representation between components. A
representation is a sequence of bytes, plus representation metadata to
describe those bytes.

• A representation consists of data, metadata describing the data, and,
on occasion, metadata to describe the metadata (usually for verifying
message integrity). Metadata is in the form of name-value pairs.

• All REST interactions are stateless. That is, each request contains all
of the information necessary for a connector to understand the request,
independent of any requests that may have preceded it.

• The primary connector types are client and server. The essential
difference between the two is that a client initiates communication by
making a request whereas a server listens for connections and responds
to requests in order to supply access to its services.

• The stateless nature of REST allows each interaction to be
independent of the others, removing the need for an awareness of the
overall component topology, an impossible task for an Internetscale
architecture, and allowing components to act as either destinations or
intermediaries, determined dynamically by the target of each request.
Connectors need only be aware of each other’s existence during the
scope of their communication.

• The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) has a special role in the
Web architecture as both the primary application-level protocol for
communication between Web components and the only protocol
designed specifically for the transfer of resource representations.
... REST has been used to limit the scope of standardized HTTP
extensions to those that fit within the architectural model.

In simpler words, a 2019 book provides the following summary:117

“The fundamental principle of REST is to use the HTTP protocol
for data communication (between distributed hypermedia systems), and
it revolves around the concept of resources where each and every
component considered as a resource, and those resources are accessed
by the common interfaces using HTTP methods.” These HTTP methods
include simple commands like ‘POST’ (to create a record), ‘PUT’
(to update a record), ‘GET’ (to retrieve a record), and ‘DELETE’ (to
remove a record). With object storage, ‘POST’ and ‘PUT’ are essentially
analogous, because objects cannot be modified; editing an object means
overwriting it. The REST architecture aligns well with the object storage
framework, which is one of the reasons for its ubiquity in this use case.
In the context of object storage APIs for high performance computing
(HPC), the back-end server is the object store database, and the front-
end client is the compute node on the HPC system; the API passes data
between them. Table 4 provides a higher-level summary regarding the
experience of incorporating object storage – and an object storage API –
into one’s workflow.

HPC Networked Filesystems
HPC Object Storage

Locating
data

Files exist within a hierarchy
of directories and are accessed
by path name.

Objects are stored in a flat
namespace and are accessed by
an unique identifier.

Reading and
writing data

Uses standard Linux
commands (cat, grep, vi,
emacs, etc.) to read and write
data. Programs can access files
by name.

Objects can only be accessed
by programs that call
specialized functions.

Data storage
and
resiliency

Data is stored on a more tightly
coupled group of disks within
the same data center. The
system is engineered such that
failures of individual disk
drives or other components
will not cause data loss.

Data is stored on many, loosely
coupled servers that may be
geographically distributed to
ensure very high reliability.
The system is engineered such
that multiple servers can fail
and data will not be lost.

Performance
Highly optimized for a parallel
computing workload. Uses
fast, high-quality components.

Favors a more distributed
workload. Components are
high-quality, but performance
is limited by network
bandwidth between storage
devices.

Table 4: Broad description of how an HPC user’s workflow differs between
networked filesystems and object storage, as deployed on the NIH Biowulf
supercomputer cluster. The NIH object store uses an API that is identical
to Amazon’s Simple Storage Service (S3) API.118

xii


DAOS has been marketed for a variety of use cases. Accordingly,
the developers have made it accessible through multiple APIs. Over the
summer, during the internship, the author had the opportunity to set up
an emulated version of DAOS (on a CentOS system) and interact with it,
first as an administrator and then as a user.* For interacting with DAOS
in the role of a user, the native DAOS API was selected. In contrast to the
higher-level object storage APIs discussed on the previous page (which
access data over a TCP/IP network), the native DAOS API is presented
as C library called ‘libdaos’ (visible in Figure 25).122 Several of the
available lower-level functions that the native DAOS API provides for
a key-value object were:123

• daos_kv_close()
• daos_kv_destroy()
• daos_kv_get()
• daos_kv_list()
• daos_kv_open()
• daos_kv_put()
• daos_kv_remove()

In addition to the key-value object type, the DAOS API also provides
functions for a key-array object type. A 2022 paper has the following
comments:124 “A DAOS object can be accessed through different APIs
but the multi-level key-array API, which is the DAOS native object
interface with locality feature, is of special interest. The key is split into
a distribution key (dkey) and an attribute key (akey). Both the dkey and
akey can be of variable length and type (i.e., a string, an integer or even a
complex data structure). All entries under the same dkey are guaranteed
to be colocated on the same storage target—this is a very important point
for the rest of the discussion. By being able to control locality, keys
for a given object can not only be accessed with minimum latency but
they can also be spread over multiple storage targets, increasing overall
bandwidth. The value associated with an akey can either be a single
variable-length value that cannot be partially overwritten or an array of
fixed-length values. Both the akeys and dkeys support enumeration.” A
screenshot of the online documentation for ‘libdaos’ is shown in Figure
27. DAOS and its APIs continue to be under development; the online
developer forum is cited thusly.126 DAOS has many compelling features,
but in the context of this report, it receives particular interest because
of its ability to leverage the persistent memory tier. There are a variety
of graphics describing the DAOS architecture; one of them is shown in
Figure 28. The developers state:39 “When the system is up and running,
DAOS can directly access persistent memory in user space by memory
instructions like load and store, instead of going through a thick storage
stack.” For this reason, and since it is open-source, DAOS is a promising
testbed for exploring the novel storage paradigms that persistent memory
and object storage may enable.

Fig. 27. Homepage of the online documentation for the DAOS API.125

*A brief comment about this experience: perhaps reflective of who DAOS has
been marketed to so far, the online documentation for the administrative functionalities
was much more understandable and easy to follow than the online documentation
for the downstream user functionalities; i.e. actually creating objects and accessing
their contents was a surprisingly nontrivial effort. Some sample scripts are cited
here.119,120,121

Fig. 28. Higher-level overview of the DAOS software stack.40

Novel Computing Enabled by SCM: Whenever computing limitations
are identified, efforts to circumvent them soon follow. SCM provides a
two-fold route to circumvent storage/memory limitations.
On one hand, SCM enables enhancements to existing HPC paradigms.
Consider data movement; it is expensive. As much as 25% of the
power consumption of a HPC supercomputing cluster comes from the
data movement itself.127 A report from 2016 states:128 “[dependent on
the application,] 18–40% of the energy of running an application is
spent in moving data up and down the memory hierarchy and that 19–
36% of the total energy is wasted waiting for data and control flow
dependencies to be solved (stalled cycles). The energy cost of moving
data already account for a large part of the total energy consumption
and, when combined with energy wasted while waiting, almost outweighs
the energy spend in computation. On average, only about 50% of
the total energy cost is actually spent performing computation.”
These estimates are somewhat dated, but scaling trends indicate that
these values are getting worse, not better, over time. More recent figures
quote these estimates even higher; a 2021 review stated that over 50%
of power consumption is on data movement.129 The report also raised
the concern:128 “The cost of executing a floating point operation has
been decreasing for decades at a much higher rate than that of moving
data. Bandwidth and latency, two key metrics that determine the cost
of moving data, have degraded significantly relative to processor cycle
time and execution rate. Despite the limitation of sub-micron processor
technology and the end of Dennard scaling, this trend will continue in the
short-term making data movement a performance-limiting factor and an
energy/power efficiency concern. Even more so in the context of large-
scale and data-intensive systems and workloads.” Since SCM fits between
RAM and Flash on the storage/memory hierarchy, it can be leveraged
to decrease data movement and improve computing efficiencies.130

As a 2020 review article points out:131 “Looking at the application
requirements, the so large gap between DRAM and NAND (several
orders of magnitude!) represents a big opportunity for any emerging
memory ... with properties in between DRAM and NAND, both in
term of latency (access time < 10 msec) and cost (cost < 1$/GB).” Of
course, if SCM was able to demonstrate improvements over both DRAM
and NAND, it could enable the coalescing off both tiers together into
‘universal’ memory. However, in practice, this is not going to be feasible
unless additional breakthroughs occur. For now, SCM can simply be
interjected into the memory hierarchy and – if leveraged properly –
enables reduced data movement.
On the other hand, rather than simply augmenting existing workflows,
SCM also enables the implementation of novel capabilities. Much of the
existing computational infrastructure leverages what is known as ‘von
Neumann’ architecture, shown in Figure 29. As widely implemented as

xiii


Fig. 29 In the von Neumann architecture, a clear distinction is made between
the CPU and the memory/storage.132

this architecture is, it has faced criticism. Two notable areas of critique
are the ‘von Neumann bottleneck’ and cybersecurity. The latter issue
is described thusly:133 “In 1945, Von Neumann and others described a
simple but powerful processor architecture with a single internal memory.
This architecture continues to dominate the architecture of processors in
billions of devices today. This single memory where instructions, data,
pointers, and all the data structures needed by an application are stored
with no way to tell what is what. It is this memory sometimes called
‘raw, seething bits’ that prevents the processor from cooperating with
the program to enforce security. ... As our processors became much
more powerful and sophisticated, people began to trust them to protect
increasingly valuable things. As processor power made more things
possible, people’s expectations also grew and so software size has grown
exponentially to keep up. All the while programming languages like C
and C++ continued to provide direct access to the ‘raw, seething bits’ of
memory without manifest identity, types, boundaries, or permissions to
help explain what each word in memory was for. ... When programming
in C/C++/Java, the default is unsafe. ... A buffer when allocated does
not protect itself from being overwritten; the programmer always has
to do extra work (write more code) to make it safe. This is not so
much the fault of the programming language as it is of things below the
level of the language the programmer is writing in. It is this undefined
behavior of the language, where most of the problems (which become
cyber vulnerabilities) arise.” The von Neumann architecture is inherently
designed without security or access permissions in mind, and as a result,
it takes extra work to incorporate security features at higher levels.
The other oft-discussed issue, the ‘von Neumann bottleneck’ refers to
the limitations that the data transfer between CPU and memory impose,
also referred to as the ‘memory wall’. According to the 2020 review
article, the von Neumann bottleneck not only limits the bandwidth, but
also leads to a 40% power waste.131 In particular, the three primary
factors that limit this data transfer are:129

1. High energy consumption.
2. Low bandwidth, where the bandwidth inside the memory chip is 100
times greater than the bus between CPU and memory unit such as
DRAM and SSD.

3. High latency, where memory access to storage in the SSD or HDD is
much slower than that of SRAM or DRAM.

These issues have been known for quite some time, and attention on
addressing them has existed for over a decade. A significant amount
of the hype that has been generated over the years for SCM comes
from its suitability to implement various non-von Neumann architectures.
Neuromorphic computing, driven in part by the observation that the
human brain operates at incredible energy efficiency (with power of
about 10-15 W),134 is one such idea; see Figure 30. As the 2020 article
states:131 “A unique feature of neuromorphic systems at the basis of
the brain learning is the process to modulate the connection strength
of the synapse linking two neurons (referred to as synaptic weight).
In particular, the spike-time-dependent-plasticity (STDP) is a form of
synaptic plasticity that updates the synaptic weight on the relative
timing between pre-synaptic and post-synaptic spikes in biological
systems. It has been shown that [phase-change memory] devices can
really reproduce the synapse plasticity, fitting the biological behavior of
synapses.” An assortment of papers reflecting the prototyped devices and
review articles in this research area are referenced.134,135,136,137

Fig. 30 Bio-inspired cross-point phase-change memory array, intended to
mimic neuron behavior for neuromorphic computing.131

An alternative route for SCM to bypass the von Neumann bottleneck
is via in-memory computing or in-storage computing. The enabling
factor for this paradigm shift is SCM’s ability to behave in a nonvolatile
fashion. Nonvolatile memory with a large capacity can be – for practical
purposes – essentially indistinguishable from storage. However, in
distributed computing (and especially in most object storage use cases),
there is still the matter that the physical hardware that comprises the
computing resources can be geographically dispersed. Here, SCM can
be implemented to extend client/server capabilities. While in-storage
computing has yet to be achieved in an HPC environment (to the best
of the author’s knowledge), three potential routes, using DAOS, are
proposed as follows: (1) Shipping code to the DAOS server (similar to
stored procedures); (2) Activating a software container deployed on the
DAOS server; (3) Lazy objects within DAOS. Each of these three routes
would rely on alterations to the DAOS API such that a user process can
trigger data processing on the DAOS server. One desired outcome of
the summer internship was to explore these routes in more depth; the
progress was ultimately limited due to time constraints, but the idea is
interesting regardless. In the context of HPC object storage, this ‘in-
storage computation’ refers to data processing performed locally at the
back-end server where the data is stored, rather than on the compute
nodes (the front-end clients). The implication is that some data processing
is offloaded, freeing up the resources of compute nodes and allowing
them to focus on additional, more intensive tasks. Not all computation
is created equal, so it would be an interesting question to explore the
extent of in-storage computing’s capabilities. It is noted that this term has
already been exposed to the world; observe in Figure 31, a graphic from
Intel marketing their DAOS architecture, that “in-storage computing” is
present, although they do not expand upon it further.

Fig. 31. Intel marketing graphic for showcasing the DAOS architecture.138

xiv


Fig. 32 Landscape of applications for in-memory computing, grouped into
categories.139

The concept of SCM-enabled ‘in-memory computing’ is still an active
area of research as well. Several notable application areas that have
been demonstrated are shown in Figure 32, grouped qualitatively by
the computational complexity, computational precision, and number of
data accesses involved in the computation required for that use case.
As a 2020 review article summarizes:139 “By blurring the boundary
between processing and memory units (an attribute that is also shared
with the highly energy-efficient mammalian brain where memory and
processing are deeply intertwined), we gain significant improvements in
computational efficiency. However, this is at the expense of the generality
afforded by the conventional approach where memory and processing
units are functionally distinct from each other.” An additional graphic
for visualization is shown in Figure 33. As the bottom row of the figure
illustrates, charge-based memory can – in fact – be implemented for
this as well. In-memory computing using non-volatile Flash memory
has been demonstrated too.140 However, as mentioned earlier when
discussing PCM, incumbent technologies are difficult to compete with;
to be commercially successful, emerging memory technologies need
to demonstrate “overwhelming compelling value”. By targeting less-
established niche areas like in-memory computing, SCM can attempt to
develop in tandem with these application fields and grow its influence.
It can also market itself as a good longer-term investment, since SCM
technologies have demonstrated scalability to nanometer dimensions.
(PCM, for instance, gets more energy efficient the smaller it is scaled, for
reasons that will be touched on in the following section.) A comparision
of off-memory learning vs. in-memory learning for neural networks is

Fig. 33 (a) An operation f is performed in the context of a conventional
von Neumann computing system. (b) Implementation of in-memory computing
alleviates the need to move data, D, to the processing unit, instead allowing
the operation f to be performed within the computational memory unit.139

described as follows:141 “Off-memory learning is a relatively simple
way to perform the learning of neural networks on the computer. Each
device is programmed to the target value so that the entire neural
network has the correct function for inference. After writing, the synaptic
weights are almost never changed. Therefore, off-memory learning is
currently limited to tasks that do not need [to] update the synaptic
weights after programming. This is a serious drawback that limits its
applications. In-memory learning involves training the entire neural
network on its hardware. The configuration of the entire network changes
during learning with new incoming samples. ... For in-memory learning,
there are two aspects need to be considered: how to efficiently calculate
weight update value, and how to efficiently tune the conductance in the
presence of device nonideal effects.” Furthermore, regarding the use of
nonvolatile SCM to the neural network training:141 “There is no doubt
that longer retention time would help both the synaptic weight update and
the inference after learning and avoid adverse effects caused by serious
conductance drift.” It is noted, however, that in-memory computing does
have additional complications associated with it. Consider Figure 34,
which shows a conventional computing architecture compared with a
sample processing-in-memory (PIM) architecture. In the PIM system,
data is handled by both the host processor and the PIM processor; if this
feature is not properly accounted for, it can lead to data coherence issues.
Figure 34 is certainly not representative of all in-memory computing
architectures, but it does make plain the need to properly coordinate the
data streams. Further articles on in-memory computing (also referred
to as ‘computational storage’, ‘in-storage processing’, ‘processing-in-
memory’, etc.) are referenced.139,141,143,144,145,146

Fig. 34 (a) Sample conventional (von Neumann) computing architecture. (b)
Sample Processing-In-Memory (in-memory computing) architecture.142

As an additional note for a truly unique computing approach, enabled
by PCM, consider the concept of hardware that could actively switch
between 1-bit and 2-bit (or even 4-bit) modes, depending on system
needs. The standard description of PCM is as a 1-bit single-level cell
(SLC). However, since the resistance difference between the crystalline
and amorphous states of the PCM is several orders of magnitude, and
since intermediate resistance values are able to be obtained depending
on the degree of crystallization, intermediate resistance levels can be
introduced to store additional data. A PCM multi-level cell (MLC) can be
designed for 2-bit, 3-bit, even 4-bit memory. Although MLC does come
with materials science challenges of its own (the device endurance is
significantly lessened), these unique aspects of the device physics have
some neat ramifications, as a 2015 article describes:147 “The memory
capacity of a traditional computing system is usually stronger than the
requirements of applications, in order to avoid performance loss caused
by memory missing. However, this scheme leads to a memory waste
since a large portion of the memory is not used in most periods of
running time. The SLC/MLC PCM memory architecture can greatly
improve the efficiency of the main memory by switching the mode of
PCM cells between the SLC and MLC modes. These existing SLC/MLC
memory methods can adjust the configuration based on the statistics
information acquired during the runtime.” Overall, it is clear that SCM
(and PCM) present opportunities for novel computing possibilities. These
technologies are often described as paradigm-shifting, but whether they
will experience commercial success is dependent on cost above all
else. As illustration: DAOS, combined with Intel Optane, has received
glowing reviews,148,149,150 yet Optane is being discontinued due to lack
of profitability. Still, it is helpful to be informed on the developments
in this space; should these visions come to fruition, they would have a
substantial impact on the computing landscape.

xv


Fig. 35 Generalized visualization of the ‘sweet spot’ that a given solution will
possess when it meets the desired criteria for implementation. Oftentimes,
in advocating for novel solutions, arguments are made that – despite being
quite compelling – may neglect simultaneous consideration of these areas. Of
course, any decision will carry some inherent degree of risk, but recognizing
how great that risk is and where it may come from is important for successful
decision-making.

Fig. 36 Visualization of the ‘sweet spot’ that materials scientists are targeting
when guiding the implementation of a given material for a given application.

Fig. 37 Visualization of the ‘sweet spot’ that computational materials
scientists target when deciding the modeling route to implement when
studying a specific property/phenomenon.

Sample Materials Engineering Problem: Since the point of leveraging
materials data infrastructure is to accelerate the pace at which tangible,
real-world problems are solved, let us consider an engineering problem
relevant to our previous discussion of PCM and SCM: phase-change
materials. How could we accelerate the design of a better phase-change
material? The questions to consider are: what methods could we use,
what properties would we need to target, and how could we implement
our strategies effectively to lessen the time and energy consumed by
the computation? These are not hypothetical questions; there are already
stakeholders working in this space. The first question to address is that of
the properties. Since there is yet to exist a comprehensive theory that links
properties across all length- and time-scales, we must identify the niche
that captures our needs most adequately, and select the computational
approach(es) that are most suited to this niche. Each computational
approach has its strengths and weaknesses; it is up to us to navigate
these choices. Having a clear grasp of the desirable properties for this
application is the first step towards efficacy in identifying (and designing)
suitable candidate materials.
A simplified framework for navigating this territory is shown in
its most generalized form in Figure 35. Applying this framework to
materials selection yields the Venn diagram shown in Figure 36. The
most compelling argument for implementing a material comes when the
material is situated at the center of the Venn diagram. Likewise, applying
this framework to selection of a computational method for modeling the
material yields the Venn diagram shown in Figure 37. Simplified though
these diagrams are, they do provide a map for identifying the bottlenecks
that limit successful implementation of a given solution.
To avoid spending unnecessary time and energy (and money) in
obtaining a solution for the wrong problem, it is necessary to clearly
define the objectives: what does a “better” phase-change material mean?
This is certainly going to be a device-specific question, but even without
optimizing for a specific application area (in which case materials
selection would be optimized for factors such as operating temperature,
lifetime requirements, intensity of the computational workload, etc.), the
first response to this question should be: what are the limitations of the
materials that we have? Perhaps a material that will suit our needs is
already available. So, is the material system itself one of the bottlenecks
that has prevented PCM from achieving more widespread commercial
success thus far? To some degree, yes. Consider the engineering criteria
of PCM devices:

• In order for PCM to compete with DRAM, displaying extremely low
latencies is crucial.

• In order for PCM to compete with Flash memory, the density of
information able to be stored on the device needs to be extremely high.

• In both these competitions, endurance remains important; a device
that performs well, only to degrade after a short amount of use, is not
desirable for the mainstream market.

• Power consumption also needs to be minimized; the performance
metrics need to be met without an excessive carbon footprint.

• Furthermore, many of the novel computing paradigms that have people
interested in PCM rely on its ability to store multiple bits in one cell;
this multi-level cell (MLC) architecture requires stable intermediate
states, which in turn requires sufficiently large differences between the
resistance of each state.

• Additionally, since PCM is marketed as nonvolatile, it needs to live up
to that image by maintaining its data integrity.

What this list makes clear is that simply building PCM devices that
‘work’ is not enough; these devices need to be competitive with other
technologies on the market. It is this competition that provides the
quantitative performance metrics that commercial PCM needs to target.
The criteria indicated above (in bold) hold for any emerging SCM
technology, not just PCM. If PCM cannot compete with those other
technologies, commercial success will be eluded once more. The ability
for a PCM device to meet these criteria is contingent on the processing
and properties of the materials within the device, as well as on the device
design itself. It is the perspective of the author that PCM limitations
appear to stem from the materials themselves; reviewing the literature,
the picture that has emerged over the past decades is that design engineers
in this space are remarkably ingenious and have – for their part – found
creative workarounds to a variety of the complications that have arisen.
Rather, much of the yet-to-be-resolved trouble of PCM comes from the
demands being placed upon the materials themselves. Finding solutions
for this is where the materials science comes in.

xvi


As described previously on page 10, the conceptual framework of
phase-change materials is simple: the crystalline phase has high electrical
conductivity, the amorphous phase has low electrical conductivity, and
a bit of information (0 or 1) is measured via probing the resistivity
differences between the two states. The conversion between these two
states is thermally achieved and controlled via electrical pulses to a
heating element adjacent to the phase-change material. An overview of
this conversion is shown in Figure 38 and Figure 39. The transition from
a Reset phase to a Set phase is accomplished with a current pulse that
heats the amorphous material to above its recrystallization temperature.
(For the material shown in Figure 38, the recrystallization temperature is
about 350 ◦C.) For the transition from the Set phase to the Reset phase,
a current pulse again heats the material. However, this time, the pulse
induces a higher temperature (to above the melting temperature, which
for the material in Figure 38 is about 620 ◦C) and then is abruptly cut off.
This rapid quenching limits the atomic mobility, essentially ‘freezing’
the atoms in place, and resulting in the disordered, amorphous, glassy
state. Since both transitions rely on heating, thermal management is a
key aspect of PCM. Not only is the presence of a heat sink implicit,
but the energy consumption required for thermally cycling the system
to sufficiently high temperatures can be a nontrivial sum (effectively
increasing the carbon footprint). The thermal demands of PCM are one of
the reasons that it actually performs better at smaller scales; the smaller
the material quantity within an individual memory element, the less
energy input required to achieve the desired temperature ranges.

Fig. 38 Phase change between high resistance and low resistance states,
emphasizing the microstructure and temperature/time profile.129

Fig. 39 Phase change between high resistance and low resistance states,
emphasizing the memory cell design and the amplitude of the SET/RESET
current pulses. Designs vary, but all PCM devices essentially consist of a
layer of phase-change material, sandwiched between two metal electrodes.65

This may sound like a simple concept. In practice, there is a great
deal of nuance, and even after 50 years of studying these materials, there
still remain important unsolved questions.131 A good 2020 paper that
summarizes what is known about the physics of phase-change materials
is referenced.65 They also provide the following metrics: “The key
requirements for a PCM device to be used for electrical data storage
is high endurance (typically >108 SET/RESET cycles before failure),
low RESET current (≤200 µA highly desirable), fast SET speed (≤100
ns), high retention (typically 10 years at 85 ◦C, but there are different
requirements for embedded memories), good scalability (<45 nm node)
and low intra- and inter-cell variability. While a single PCM device can
be designed to easily meet one of the above constraints, the challenge is
to build an array of devices that meets all of the above requirements.
Individual PCM devices have demonstrated >1012 endurance cycles,
<10 µA RESET current, ∼25 ns SET speed, projected 10 years retention
at 210 ◦C and sub-20 nm node scalability.”

Fig. 40 By adjusting the amplitude of the pulse power, the size of the
amorphous region can be controlled and therefore the resistance as well. This
is how intermediate resistance states can be introduced into PCM.65

While the initial description of PCM may sound binary (amorphous
phase and crystalline phase), the reality is that they exist in a continuous
spectrum of states, based on the degree of amorphization. The likelihood
that the phase-change material is fully crystalline or fully amorphous
is extremely low. On one hand, this can be a very useful feature; it
enables the existence of multiple resistance levels. Figure 40 shows how
variations to the pulse power results in different observed resistivity. (In
this case, the ‘mushroom’ shape results from the device configuration,
where the region near the bottom electrode experiences the greatest
heating.) Since the information is encoded in the resistivity levels,
introducing additional levels enables more information to be stored in the
same physical volume of material. This is the physical phenomenon that
MLC architecture leverages. The number of levels scales exponentially
with the bits; a 1-bit design needs 2 stable levels, a 2-bit design needs
4 stable levels, a 3-bit design needs 8 stable levels, a 4-bit design
needs 16 stable levels, and so forth. An example of one such 4-bit
architecture is shown in Figure 41. On the other hand, the primary
challenge issue of MLC is that the same physical basis that provides
a continuum of resistivity states also introduces instabilities. Storing
information through the extent of crystallization within the material is
well and good, as long as these the atoms truly behave as ‘frozen’
in place. However, PCM devices display a phenomenon known as
‘resistance drift’; the resistance of the cells tends to gradually increase
over time. A variety of theories have been proposed to explain this, but the
most commonly accepted explanation in the literature is that it orginates

Fig. 41 Demonstrated 4 bit/cell PCM architecture, obtained via 16-level
programming. Strong signals with a narrow distribution and measurement
sensitivity are particularly crucial for MLC use cases.151

xvii


from the instability of the amorphous regions. The amorphous regions
are non-equilibrium metastable states, so there exists a thermodynamic
driving force for the structure to rearrange towards more energetically
favorable configurations. According to the 2020 paper:65 “Resistance
drift in PCM devices has been mostly explained as a consequence
of spontaneous structural relaxation of the amorphous phase-change
material... When the molten phase-change material is quenched rapidly,
the atomic configurations are frozen into a highly stressed glass state.
Over time, the atomic configuration of this state will relax towards an
energetically more favorable ‘ideal glass’ configuration.” Note that the
spontaneous structural relaxation does not mean increased crystallization;
if that were the case, the resistance would presumably decrease over time
instead, because the crystalline state is lower resistance. Resistance drift
presents a significant problem for MLC architectures, as the ability to
reliably distinguish between states may deteriorate as drift progresses.
However, this does not pose a significant problem for two-tier PCM
(SLC architecture). Drift primarily affects the amorphous states, not the
crystalline states, and since the amorphous state is the high-resistance
state in SLC, it is not of significant practical concern that the high-
resistance state is increasing its resistance over time. In this case, drift
is actually somewhat beneficial for the device longevity.
Yet, if the goal is to build devices for neuromorphic computing
applications, the MLC architecture is relevant and drift ought to be
avoided at all costs. Over the years, a variety of explanations for drift
of the amorphous phase have been proposed, including stress release,
decrease in defect density, shift of the Fermi level, and increased
band gap.151 Unfortunately for materials selection purposes, the precise
mechanisms are still not fully understood. For instance, the Gibbs
relaxation model describes drift as the relaxation of structural defects;
the defects have a distribution of activation energies associated with their
removal, and defects with lower activation energies are removed first. The
implication here is that the defects increase the electrical conductivity,
and by removing them, the resistance increases.* Another model, the
‘collective relaxation’ model, describes drift as the entire amorphous
system collectively relaxing towards the energetically favorable ‘ideal
glass’ state via transitions between neighboring ‘unrelaxed’ amorphous
states. Both models account for the temperature dependence and
logarithmic behavior that drift exhibits; to quote the 2020 paper:65 “As
of now, it is not possible to discriminate between the two models
from existing experimental resistance drift data.” Consider the close fit
between experimental data and simulation data shown in Figure 42; the
simulation in question leveraged the collective relaxation model, but as
the 2020 paper states: “The dependencies of the resistance on time and
temperature from experimental measurements reported in [Figure 42]
can be equally well captured by both the collective relaxation model
and the two-state model for relaxation based on Gibbs approach.” In
fairness, this is not always a bottleneck for practical design purposes;
all models introduce assumptions and approximations, and if a given
model fits the data well enough for a certain regime, it may be sufficiently
accurate regardless. Rather, such uncertainties make materials screening
more difficult.

Fig. 42 Measurements of resistance drift of 90-nm doped Ge2Sb2Te5
mushroom-type PCM cells obtained under low-field (applied constant voltage
of 0.2 V to the cell), (a) across a variety of temperatures, (b) upon the
application of a time-varying temperature profile, shown on top.

*Note that, in general, defects can both increase or decrease the conductivity;
defects that act as ‘shallow traps’ can provide donor/acceptor levels to semiconductors,
which increases the conductivity, while defects that act as ‘deep traps’ can decrease the
conductivity by both pinning the Fermi level to the middle of the bandgap and by acting
as carrier recombination centers.

In addition to the myriad of questions pertaining to resistance drift
(even whether the bandgap stays constant or increases during drift is still
an open topic), other aspects of phase-change materials with unresolved
questions include:†

• Origin of the peculiar I-V curve of phase-change materials (i.e. origin
of the threshold switching mechanism). This is perhaps the most
prominent of all the open questions, since the threshold switching
behavior is the key distinguishing factor of phase-change materials.

• The Poole-Frenkel conduction model is often used to describe the
variation of conductivity with applied voltage (for small voltages, it
predicts a linear current, and for high voltages it predicts exponential
current), but the physical origin of the parameter δ used in the Poole-
Frenkel conduction model is not well-understood, nor is the influence
of different types of defect states on transport.

• Whether the crystallization kinetics of PCM at elevated temperatures
are nucleation-driven (a stochastic process) or growth-driven (a
deterministic process).

• The effect that the thermal cycling and the inhomogeneous temperature
distributions have on the nucleation and growth kinetics.

• Whether the Arrhenius-type temperature dependence of the growth
velocity occurs in the glass or supercooled liquid state remains an
open question. This is difficult to study because precisely measuring
the glass transition temperature of phase-change materials is difficult.

• The emergence of physical properties (like magnetoelectric behavior)
from the superlattice multilayer structure.

• Origin of 1

f noise in phase-change materials; noise was been one of
the least studied topics of PCM device physics.

• How to obtain desirable properties without the use of elements like
arsenic or tellurium, which are particularly unpleasant to work with.

• How physical properties of PCM materials change in the sub-15 nm
range (i.e. which mechanisms remain valid in ultra-scaled devices).

With such looming knowledge holes, it is evidently clear that the process
of designing “better” phase-change materials is not just an engineering
question; it is intimately intertwined with fundamental materials science
research as well. As the former is pursued, so too does the latter advance.
There have been plenty of papers published which attempt to address
these questions. However, such explanations do not appear to be unifying;
conflicting data often arises. A recurring theme that arises in PCM
research is that different material systems may have different mechanisms
that contribute to the overall observed behavior. Thus, tuning the features
of one system may need to be accomplished through different routes than
that for another system.
While lively debate continues to circulate regarding the theories that
govern the behavior of PCM materials, significant experimental data has
been gathered regardless. Focusing on what is known, we can overlay a
physical picture atop the desired engineering criteria as follows:

• Low latencies: The operating speed of PCM is limited by the speed
of crystallization in the material, specifically by the ‘SET’ operation;
typical figures for the SET pulse and RESET pulse are about 150 ns
and 120 ns, respectively.147 This is because — as shown in Figure 38
and Figure 39 — a short high pulse leads to the amorphous (RESET)
state, while a longer pulse leads to the crystalline (SET) state, i.e.
the write speed is constrained by how long it takes to crystallize
the amorphous region. Many of the commonly studied fast switching
phase-change materials have a simple cubic or rocksalt structure, so
switching between amorphous and crystalline states requires little
atomic movement. A physical quantity that counteracts the driving
force, limiting crystallization, is the viscosity. Fast switching phase-
change materials tend to exhibit low ionicity and low tendency towards
hybridization, and resonance bonding is believed to play an important
role.151 Furthermore, the SLC architecture has faster write operations
than MLC does, because MLC uses an iterative program-and-verify
procedure.147 Scaling appears to have a positive effect; for ultrascaled
devices, switching speeds as low as 1 ns have been demonstrated.151

• High memory density: MLC architecture increases the memory
density, but it is not the only way to do so. The other primary
approach that has been explored is three-dimensional device design.
The ‘crosspoint’ architecture is particularly popular in this regard. To
quote a 2020 paper:152 “The X-point structure has been thought of
as the most ideal structure for memory devices. It has an ultimate

†To avoid distraction, an in-depth discussion of each of these is not provided here.

xviii


OTS
MIEC
Doped α-Si

Material
AsTeGeSiN
Cu-based
As-SiO2

Ioff
10nA@0.5 Vth
100pA@0.5 Vth
20nA@0.7 Vth

Ion
100µA (CC)
10nA (w/o CC)
>100µA

Instability
RTN & drift
Small RTN
Huge RTN

Vth adjustability
Good
No
Limited

Endurance
> 108
> 105
> 105

Table 5: Pros and cons of three popular PCM selectors.152

.

cell areal density of 4F2 and requires only two photo-mask steps for
patterning, which makes it possible to minimize the overall number of
process steps. In addition, it is stackable, which enables 3-D structures.
Based on these advantages, intensive efforts have been made to achieve
this structure.” An integral aspect of this structure is the selector (in
Figure 21, the selector is the ‘diode,’ labeled underneath the ‘memory
element’). The selector is largely responsible for the device size, since
it occupies the most layout area in the memory cell. Aside from the
diode, other selectors include:152 “the stackable amorphous selectors,
such as the ovonic threshold switch (OTS) and mixed ion–electron
conductor (MIEC). After intensive study and research, Intel-Micron
announced the successful development and mass production for
stackable 3D X-point memory using an amorphous selector. SK-Hynix
also announced the successful development of stackable X-point PCM
using a novel two-terminal selector.” Table 5 compares the pros and
cons of three different selectors. While scaling of the memory cell
improves memory density, it is noted that – particularly below the
10 nm range – many properties of phase-change materials are size-
dependent, such as crystallization temperatures and times, activation
energies for crystallization, melting temperatures, resistances, and
optical and thermal properties.151 These nuances have not been fully
explored, but in a convenient twist of fate, it appears that the phase
change properties remain even at very small scales. Figure 43 shows
TEM images of two different sizes of GeTe nanoparticles; the paper
states:151 “These nanoparticles are as small as about two to three
times the lattice constant, so this will be close to the ultimate scaling
limit of phase-change technology as far as the phase-change materials
themselves are concerned.”

• High device longevity: One contributor to the high endurance generally
displayed by PCM is that – unlike with DRAM – reads with PCM
are non-destructive. Rather, the primary wear mechanism in PCM
is the writes (i.e. the thermal cycling between the SET and RESET
states). It is believed that the thermal expansion and contraction
that occurs during writes degrades the electrode-storage contact.151

The high cycling endurance of common PCM materials is generally
attributed to the crystal structure. For instance, the rocksalt structure
of the GST alloy (Ge2Sb2Te5) is shown in Figure 44. To quote a
review article:153 “The chemical short-range order of the ternary GST
system is almost the same in the two phases. It means that in the
amorphous state, interactions between different Ge2Sb2Te5 building
blocks are weakened. The structure is therefore allowed to relax, but
neither strong covalent bonds are broken nor atoms drastically change
their position in the lattice. The Te-sublattice is partially preserved as
well as the conservation of the local structure around the Sb atoms.
The original crystalline structure can be therefore quickly and reliably
recovered.” PCM materials do facilitate extensive cycling, but they are

Fig. 43 TEM images demonstrating the phase-change effect is still present in
nanoparticles of size (a) 1.8 ± 0.44 nm, and (6) 2.6 ± 0.39 nm. The scale bar
in the images is 10 nm.151

Fig. 44 Rocksalt structure of the GST crystal (Ge2Sb2Te5). One sub-lattice
is comprised of tellurium atoms, while the other sub-lattice is comprised of
antimony, germanium, and vacancies.153

not invulnerable to failure. The three main failure modes are:154

1. ‘cell-open’
2. ‘stuck-low’ (RESET failure)
3. ‘stuck-high’ (SET failure).

In cell-open failure, voids agglomerate and accumulate towards the
bottom electrode; when the voids are large enough to completely block
the current from reaching the bottom electrode, an ‘open’ cell will
result. The mechanical stress of thermal expansion/contraction helps
drive void formation. In stuck-low failure (for the GST system), the
repeated cycling promotes Sb enrichment in the active volume, which
decreases the resistance and increases the RESET current; this failure
mode is recognized by a ‘right-shift’ of R-I characteristics.154 The Sb
enrichment (phase segregation) is driven by incongruent melting and
recrystallization at the liquid-solid boundary. Cell designs that induce
complete melting help prevent stuck-low failure by suppressing phase
segregation. In stuck-high failure, a combination of void formation and
phase segregation increases the resistance. In the stuck-high situation,
the device stays in a high-resistance state and refuses to SET, while in
the stuck-low situation, the device stays in a low-resistance state and
refuses to RESET.155 All of these failure modes ultimately result from
undesired atomic migration. Atomic migration is – to some degree
– inevitable, but doping, materials selection, and design architecture
adjustments can yield orders of magnitude improvements.

• Minimal power consumption: The greatest power consumption is
generally attributed to the RESET operation, since the current
required to melt the material is higher than than the current required
for recrystallization. As a 2016 review article strongly states:154

“The higher temperatures needed for melting (600 or higher) cause
the RESET operation to dominate power considerations for PCM
technology.” Indeed, the commonly employed phase-change materials
have melting temperatures in the range of 500-700 ◦C.151 Materials
with lower cohesive energies (correlated to lower melting temperature)
will lead to lower power consumption, with the caveat that the device
stability may be lessened as well. Material characteristics that would
significantly reduce power consumption for the RESET operation
are:154 low heat capacity, low heat of fusion, low melting point, low
thermal conductivity, and high electrical resistance in the crystalline
phase. The device design can also have a great impact on the required
RESET current.* According to the 2016 review article:154 “A thermally
confined electrode (TaN/TiN/TaN) could drastically reduce the RESET
current compared to a solid TiN electrode.” While most of the efforts
towards decreasing power consumption focus on the RESET current,
a 2020 review article claims that – depending on the architecture –
as the devices scale:152 “What actually dominates the overall power
consumption is not the Reset write but the Set write. ... Below 2× nm
technodes with a C-type PCM, greater importance should be put on the
Set operation.”

*Furthermore, creative device architectures like interfacial PCM (iPCM) appear
to exhibit switching behaviors that depend on the short-range movement of atoms
through Te-Te conduction channels, instead of on the order-disorder transition.154

Being able to display threshold switching without melting would reduce the power
consumption and improve endurance. For instance, an iPCM-inspired device comprised
of Sn10Te90/Sb2Te3 superlattice displayed RESET current as small as 3 µA.156

xix


• Multiple bits per cell: The physical basis behind storing multiple
bits per cell is described on page 17. To recap: by varying the
ratio of amorphous/crystalline regions, intermediate resistance states
can be introduced, and additional information can be stored by
leveraging these additional tiers. The ratio can be adjusted in multiple
ways. Applying a RESET pulse that dissipates more power will
allow the melting temperature to be reached further away from
the bottom electrode, resulting in a larger amorphous region. Also,
varying the width of the SET pulse (or the length of its trailing
edge) will affect the proportion of the cell volume that is able to
recrystallize. Overall, successfully implementing this multi-level cell
(MLC) architecture requires sufficiently large differences in resistance
between the amorphous and crystalline states, tolerating or preventing
resistance drift, and sufficiently sensitive reads that can distinguish
between resistance levels.

• Nonvolatile: Nonvolatile memory retains its data even if the external
power supply is removed. For PCM to behave as nonvolatile,
the amorphous and crystalline microstructures (and, for MLC, the
continuum of states in-between) need to be sufficiently stable, such
that atomic mobility is minimized and the encoded resistance levels
are preserved. Thermodynamic instability can be acceptable if the
kinetics are sufficiently suppressed. The targets for data retention time
are usually quoted for 10 years at some specified temperature (such
as room temperature, 85◦C, 150◦C, 210◦C, etc.). It is noted that the
desired difference in response time for crystallization between the
actively-writing-data scenario (nanoseconds) and the dormant-storage
scenario (years) spans 17 orders of magnitude.151 While clever ways
to achieve both low latencies and long-term data retention do exist,
optimizing for either scenario tends to come at the expense of the
other.* One of the reasons the GST system has attracted so much
focus is that it has provided a good compromise between speed of
transformation and stability.131

Two key takeaways from this overview are that (1) tailoring materials
for application in PCM means navigating a complex, dynamic space
in which the theories themselves which govern the material properties
are still evolving, and that (2) implementing the desired engineering
specifications for PCM devices often leads to contradictory requirements
for the material properties. For instance, doping GST with extra
nitrogen decreases the RESET current (good for energy consumption)
and suppresses elemental segregation (good for endurance), but at the
cost of a slower SET speed (bad for latencies).154 To quote the 2010
review article:151 “It is clear that the search for the best phase-change
material is a multiparameter optimization process with some seemingly
contradictory requirements such as high stability of the amorphous
phase at operating temperature, but very fast crystallization of the
amorphous phase at switching temperature.” Accordingly, computational
tools and workflows can make the task of sifting through this complicated
landscape of design consideration much more manageable. For the
remainder of this case study, we consider a sample PCM materials
informatics workflow and discuss what the computational infrastructure
for implementing this workflow in accordance with the NASA 2040
Vision (Table 1) might look like.
A sample PCM materials informatics workflow is taken from the
following 2021 paper: High-Throughput Screening for Phase-Change
Memory Materials by Liu et al.157 The researchers claim that “the
work offers the first systematic high-throughput screening of PCM
materials from more than 120,000 inorganic crystal structures,” and they
provide a step-by-step description of their workflow in the Experimental
section. The objective was to accelerate discovery and development of
suitable material systems by data-mining the Material Project database
(described on page 4). They describe their motivation:157 “Currently,
the improvement of performances by searching new materials is mainly
based on experimental ‘trial-and-error’ methods. Such a systematic
searching is often limited by experimental conditions and often requires
very long development duration and high cost. For example, it has
been more than 20 years to the discovery of current mainstream
GST materials since PCM technology was proposed. In this work, we
employ 124,515 inorganic crystal structures in the Materials Project
(MP) database for high-throughput screening and mining PCM related

*The gallium antimonide (GaSb) system is interesting, in that it offers both fast
switching speed and good thermal stabilty, but it undergoes a decrease (about 5%) in
mass density upon crystallization (i.e. the amorphous phase is denser than the crystalline
phase); this is in contrast to typical phase-change materials like GST, which tend to
increase in mass density (about 5-6%) upon crystallization.154

Fig. 45 Computational screening approach taken by Liu et al. in their 2021
paper. 124515 material structures taken from the Materials Project database
were filtered.157

materials based on the structural and electronic-property descriptors.”
The four tiers of screening that they implemented are visualized in Figure
45 and described below; the elemental distribution of the 158 candidate
structures that made it through all four tiers is shown in Figure 46.

1. Noting that PCM materials tend to possess chemical compounds
containing elements in groups IVA, VA, and VIA (constructing a
p-orbital bonding network, with bonding character between ionic
and covalent), Liu et al. apply a preliminary screening of elemental
compositions. They chose to exclude the oxides, due to their tendency
to form stronger ionic bonds, destroying the p-bonding network.

2. Noting that PCM materials usually possess narrow bandgaps
(tellurides ∼0.2-0.9 eV, selenides ∼0.4-1.3 eV, sulfides ∼0.9-1.8
eV),158 Liu et al. apply a secondary screening based on the bandgap
data; specifically, only materials with calculated bandgap below 1
eV were considered. This cut-off metric is more qualitative than
quantitative, because the bandgap values listed in the Materials Project
database come from DFT calculations using the GGA and GGA+U
functionals (in which bandgaps tend to be underestimated by ∼40%,
compared to experimentally measured values).159 However, through
this 1 eV cut-off, materials with notably larger bandgaps are excluded.

3. Recognizing that the octahedral (O:6) and trigonal non-coplanar
(TY:3) structures facilitate the p-orbital bonding motif present in
the commonly studied phase-change materials, Liu et al. apply a
tertiary screening where materials that do not possess coordination
environments similar to O:6 or TY:3 are filtered out.

4. Choosing to leverage ‘energy above hull,’ ∆Ehull, as a convenient
proxy for thermodynamic stability (∆Ehull can be calculated via DFT
and, accordingly, is included within the scope of the Materials Project
data), Liu et al. apply a final screening where only materials with
∆Ehull <100 meV atom−1 are considered sufficiently stable. This
value was selected to mimic the cut-off previously employed in a 2011
paper published by several of the researchers intimately tied to the
Materials Project.160 In that context, the cut-off was selected due to its
noted relevance to battery materials. Regardless, ∆Ehull is relatively
well regarded in the computational materials community as a predictor
of energetic stability, with the caveat that neither temperature nor
pressure effects are accounted for in the DFT calculations.

Fig. 46 Distribution of elements present in the final, filtered 158 candidate
structures. Elements that did not appear in any of the final structures are
shown in grey.157

xx


After applying the four tiers of screening, 158 compounds remained.
Essentially, in lieu of a comprehensive theory that predicts the threshold
switching property, this screening served to identify compounds that are
likely to display similar bonding characteristics to the popular GST alloy
and would therefore be likely to exhibit the threshold switching behavior
as well. Next, the researchers calculated three metrics to narrow their
search further: (1) Born effective charge, Z*, (2) cohesive energy, EC,
and (3) ‘degree of 90◦ bond angle deviation’, DBAD.

• Z*: The Born effective charge was taken as a proxy descriptor
for the electronic polarizability, as the researchers noted that many
PCM materials display high values of the latter. Z* was obtained
via data from DFT calculations implemented in VASP. According
to the researchers: “The calculations of Z* for the selected 158
materials were performed using conventional unit cells. A unified
scheme called automatic_density in the Python Materials Genomics
(pymatgen) package was used to generate k-point grids for all of the
158 materials. The generated densities of the grids were 500 per atom
for structural relaxation and 1000 per atom for the Z* calculations.
the Z* for an atom was averaged by the diagonal elements of the Z*
tensor in which the values of all the elements are transformed to their
absolute values. Then, the final Z* for a material was averaged by all
atoms in the calculation models.”

• EC: Melting temperature is a difficult value to obtain computationally,
so the cohesive energy serves as a proxy descriptor for it. While the
researchers did not clarify whether this value was obtained directly
from the Materials Project database or obtained from their own DFT
calculations, EC is generally a simple value to obtain. For n atoms of
type i in the bulk structure (with Ei as the energy of an isolated atom
of type i),
EC = Ebulk −
�
niEi

• DBAD: The degree of 90◦ bond angle deviation is taken as a proxy
descriptor for the operating speed (conversion between crystalline and
amorphous phases). The premise is that 90◦ arises from pure p-orbital
bonding, which would presumably promote fast crystallization. On the
other hand, deviations from 90◦ would imply additional stability of
the amorphous phase, presumably promoting fast amorphization. The
researchers state: “A suitable DBAD could display a compatibility of
fast crystallization and fast amorphization in a PCM material. ... The
[bond angle deviation was] obtained by [averaging of] 1000 transient
structures that were intercepted from the trajectory of the 300 [Kelvin]
MD simulations.” DBAD is obtained from the following equation,
where Xi is the value of the bond angle with index i and n is the
total number of bond angles:

DBAD =

�
�
�
�
1

n − 1

n
�

i=1
(Xi − 90)2

The values that they obtained for Z*, EC, and DBAD for all 158 structures
are tabulated in the supplementary information for the paper. A graphical
mapping of the results is shown in Figure 47, with several of the common
phase-change materials indicated.

Fig. 47 3D plot of results from PCM materials screening. Materials with
values close to those of the GST system (5% threshold) are in red. Materials
(rare earth nitrides) of notably high cohesive energy (>6 eV atom−1) are in
yellow. The others are in blue. The ‘mp-*’ label is the ID of the material in
the Materials Project database.157

Fig. 48 Amorphous structures obtained for (a) reference GST structure, (b)
Ge2Bi2Te5, (c) CdPb3Se4, (d) TlBiTe2, (e) MnBi2Te4, (f) rare earth nitride
structure for comparison.157

Speculating that the materials with similar Born effective charge,
cohesive energy, and degree of 90◦ bond angle deviation to the GST
family of PCM materials would be likely desirable candidates for PCM,
the researchers proposed the 52 materials shown in red in Figure
47 as meriting further investigation. The vast majority are tellurium
compounds, but not all of them. For instance, InBi3Se6, CdPb3Se4,
AgBiSe2, KBiSe2, Pb2Bi2Se5, PbBi2Se4, Bi2Se3, and Bi8Se9 are all
selenium-based instead.The only material of the 52 that did not contain
selenium or tellurium was Sn4P3. Lastly, acknowledging the key role of
the amorphous phase in PCM, the researchers selected four candidate
structures (Ge2Bi2Te5, CdPb3Se4, TlBiTe2, and MnBi2Te4), performed
melt-quenching molecular dynamics (MD) on all four, and performed
ab-initio MD (AIMD) on just one, CdPb3Se4. The melt-quenching
MD provided the amorphous structures, and the AIMD simulated the
recrystallization process from amorphous to crystalline phases. The
reason for limiting these additional calculations to only a few materials
was the computational cost involved. The amorphous structures obtained
from melt-quenching MD are shown in Figure 48. Results from the
AIMD simulation of CdPb3Se4 are shown in Figure 49.

Fig. 49 Nucleation and recrystallization AIMD simulation of CdPb3Se4 from
0 to 390 picoseconds. (a) Tracking the number of four-fold ring motifs present
over time. (b) The structure at 0 ps. (c) The structure at 390 ps.157

xxi


Overall, the computational materials exploration workflow performed
by Liu et al. is summarized in Figure 50.

Fig. 50 Computational workflow carried out by Liu et al., as described
above. Tasks in red denote designer choices, tasks in green leverage compute
resources, and tasks in blue leverage database/storage resources. (Branching
of arrows implies that both tasks are performed simultaneously.)

While this workflow may have succeeded at identifying novel materials
for potential PCM application, it does illustrate many of the current
limitations of the materials data infrastructure (MDI). In Table 1, the
present-day description of the MDI is that the “design of materials
and systems is disconnected; stages of the product development
lifecycle are segmented; tools, ontologies, and methodologies are
domain-specific; materials properties are based on empiricism; product
certification relies heavily on physical testing.” This workflow matches
that description. In particular, the results obtained from this workflow
do not satisfy the desired criteria described in Figure 36. The property
predictions were heavily influenced by assumptions (assumptions that
stemmed from mostly empirical observations of the properties of other
PCM materials, rather than comprehensive theoretical understanding),
verification was extremely minimal (only a few materials simulated in
more detail, and no experimental testing), and an economics assessment
(materials accessibility, cost, fabrication routes) was entirely absent. This
workflow may be used to augment experimental discovery by providing
recommendations of material systems to investigate, but ultimately, it
remains significantly detached from the downstream implementation of
materials in real-world PCM devices.
In contrast, what might an accelerated, improved, future workflow
look like? Consider a workflow that fulfills the NASA 2040 Vision,
described in Table 1: the “design of materials and systems is integrated;
stages of the product development lifecycle are seamlessly joined;
tools, ontologies, and methodologies are usable across the community;
materials properties are virtually determined; product certification relies

heavily on simulation.” An example of how this vision can be overlaid
onto a materials engineering workflow is given in Figure 51.

Fig. 51 Generalized computational materials engineering workflow that
fulfills the NASA 2040 Vision (Table 1). Tasks that require decision-making
by the materials engineer are in red, tasks that leverage compute resources
are in green, tasks that leverage database/storage resources are in blue, a task
that would leverage non-Von-Neumann in-storage computing is in purple, and
non-computational-materials tasks are in grey.

xxii


At present, computational materials modeling is performed primarily
in academic environments and/or for research purposes; materials
modeling efforts in industry tend to be limited to a few niche areas. In
contrast, the workflow shown in Figure 51 describes a process where
simulation of materials is integrated directly into industrial product
development. The value of this is multifaceted:

• The process is highly adaptive and responsive to changes such as:
large or small design modifications, additional processing treatments,
alternative manufacturing routes, novel emerging materials, advances
in data-driven design optimization and analytics, fluctuations in the
supply chain, etc.

• The process is well-suited for high-throughput screening.
• Waste from trial-and-error prototyping is drastically reduced.
• Facilitates a high degree of design tailoring.
• Bottlenecks are simple to identify, quantify, and communicate.
• The process can be augmented with advanced tools and techniques.
• Risk management and uncertainty quantification are data-driven and
straightforward. As the project progresses through the process stages,
uncertainty is lessened and the degree to which the candidate materials
overlap with the implementation sweet spot (shown in Figure 35)
increases significantly.

• Transparency and record-keeping are inherent in the process. Clear
explanations for why specific design features were implemented
and brought to market are consolidated and accessible, enabling all
members of the design team with authorized access to the project
repository to perform professional due diligence (identifying issues
and communicating knowledge gaps that arise).

• Capability to probe Process-Structure-Property (PSP) relationships
(recall Figure 1) relevant to the candidate material systems is included.

The workflow can be scaled according to the project scope and needs;
depending on the complexity and desired extent of materials exploration
and optimization, the work can be undertaken by a single (well-trained)
computational materials engineer or distributed across a larger team.
Lastly, let us consider the application of the workflow in Figure 51 to
the accelerated design and implementation of phase-change materials for
PCM, as informed by the prior discussion. The first step is establishing
the specific PCM niche to target. A great deal of scientific computing
work requires solving systems of linear equations, however solving such
system iteratively can be computationally expensive. In a 2019 paper,
researchers from the University of California, Berkeley, proposed an
innovative approach; they state:161 “Linear algebra is involved in virtually
all scientific and engineering disciplines, e.g., physics, statistics, machine
learning, and signal processing. ... In-memory computing with analog
resistive memories has shown high efficiencies of time and energy,
through realizing matrix-vector multiplication in one step with Ohm’s
law and Kirchhoff’s law. However, solving matrix equations in a single
operation remains an open challenge. Here, we show that a feedback
circuit with cross-point resistive memories can solve algebraic problems
such as systems of linear equations, matrix eigenvectors, and differential
equations in just one step.” The prototype demonstrated in this paper
leveraged filamentary ReRAM, with a HfO2 dielectric as the memory
material. Perhaps Company X is interested in commercializing this
idea, in producing resistive computing devices that can solve a system
of linear equations in a single step. However, Company X wishes to
leverage PCM ReRAM instead of filamentary ReRAM. With this target
product objective specified, the design engineering team gets to work,
creating preliminary computational models of possible cross-point array
device architectures and product geometries. However, the engineers
recognize that their designs rely on the material behaving in a very
specific fashion, and furthermore, aspects of the design geometry –
such as size/placement of the heating elements – will be governed
by materials-specific features. They communicate their objectives to
their materials engineer (ME), describing which device metrics the
material ought to facilitate (e.g. low latencies, low power consumption,
nonvolatility) and which material properties they believe to be absolutely
crucial (e.g. a stable spectrum of distinguishable resistance states). They
provide tentative estimates of the environment in which the material
will dwell (e.g. 100–200◦C, with oxygen present), the scale of the part
geometries (e.g. memory cell is under 5 nm), and their targets for the
device longevity (e.g. 10 year lifetime). Furthermore, they note that they
are interested in testing out a titanium top electrode and a graphitic
carbon bottom electrode (since that configuration worked well in a
previous product), although they would be interested to hear what other

recommendations the ME may have for them if necessary. The ME mulls
over this information, considers the behavior of phase-change materials,
and recognizes that several of the device objectives lead to conflicting
material property requirements. Furthermore, while the ME has worked
with other phase-change chalcogenides in the past, the new proposed
designs are sufficiently ambitious that a novel materials system may be
necessary to implement. However, the sheer volume of data published
on potential PCM materials is immense. Combing through the literature
and hoping to stumble across a sufficiently studied materials system that
will satisfy all the criteria simultaneously would be like searching for a
needle in a haystack (and the papers the ME wants to read never seem to
be open-access anyway). Natural language processing tools might help,
but Company X has not purchased a subscription to these services, and
besides, the ME intends to take a more systematic approach. Fortunately,
the year is 2040 and the materials data infrastructure is sufficiently
evolved to enable the analysis that the ME is trained to perform.
The ME happily begins the materials design process by identifying
a set of preliminary screening criteria and selecting several databases to
query. By 2040, a dazzling array of materials databases have emerged,
each with their own unique motivations. Some databases are large,
others are small. Some databases are open-source, others are proprietary.
Some databases are well-maintained, others are not. Some databases
are populated primarily with experimental data, in which case the
measurement technique exerted significant influence over the recorded
value. Other databases solely contain computed data, in which case
the values are reflections of the computational techniques and input
assumptions employed. The data itself appears in a wide array of formats,
reflecting the wide array of use cases. The NASA 2040 Vision article
predicted that:1 “Unlike current databases which are largely textual
and tabulated, materials databases in the near future will also contain
spatial and temporally resolved microstructure information (potentially
from multiple imaging modalities), local (spatial) and global property
data, thermodynamic data, and metadata detailing the history of the
sample, etc. In addition, this is likely to be a blend of experimental
characterization and testing as well as modeling and simulation;” in the
hypothetical future scenario described here, this prediction has indeed
been realized. Of course, not all the data is usable. Ever-present and
lurking is the possibility that the databases contain outdated information,
falsified information, or misleading information. To avoid such dangers,
cross-validation is desired where possible. The ME understands how to
navigate this heterogeneous landscape of databases; rather than expecting
flawless, comprehensive property data that target the use case perfectly,
the ME focuses on targeting a few specific properties that will guide
the exploration, while curating both an open mind and a heavy dose of
skepticism.
For the preliminary screening, the ME decides on 7 main databases:
(1) a large open-source (national-lab-curated) database containing
computationally-generated chemical and electronic structure data; (2)
a large government-curated database of experimental thermodynamic
measurements; (3) a smaller proprietary database curated specifically
for the semiconductor industry that the ME convinced Company X to
purchase temporary access to; (4) a database of materials that Company X
has fabricated or obtained from vendors in the past; (5) an extremely large
(albeit much lower-quality) open-source database provided by a large
tech company and populated by automated natural language processing
and data-scraping of literature articles; (6) a “materials marketplace”
database where many materials supply and fabrication companies listed
their current product offerings to gain enhanced visibility to potential
customers; (7) an internationally collaborative database between industry,
government, and academia providing consolidated information on the
environmental hazards, processing concerns, and externality costs of
various materials. The data formats, reliability, relevance, data gathering
methods, breadth, and degree of structuring all vary among these
databases, but together, they form a large materials data pool that the
ME can leverage.* Fortunately, the ME is benefiting from previously
established community-adopted standards; each of these databases
supports common API interfaces, facilitating interoperability. As such,
much of the effort of consolidating multiple data streams has been
offloaded to the infrastructure, allowing the ME to focus their energy
primarily on the queries themselves.

*To expand the materials property offerings, several of these databases leverage in-
storage computing capabilities for providing data that are downstream derivatives of
other data within the database (similar to the concept of “schema-on-read”). However,
the in-storage compute functionality is not visible to the front-end database user.

xxiii


ME dutifully creates a ‘wish list’ of properties, as well as ‘deal-
breakers.’ The search begins.* First the ME eliminates any materials that
have been previously flagged in their respective database as unverifiable,
outdated, or falsified. Next, they filter results further by immediately
rejecting any material that matches at least one of the dealbreakers.
Many properties can be tuned later on through processing variations or
even design modifications. Such compromises can be made later, but
now is not the time. The ME’s queries slash through the candidates,
swiftly narrowing them down. Earlier in their career, the ME would
carefully and tentatively apply successfully targeted layers of criteria,
not wanting to accidentally filter something that might be helpful.
Now, a more seasoned veteran in their field, the ME takes relish in a
different approach: crafting variations upon extremely stringent criteria
and seeing if anything makes it through. In addition to personally
querying the databases, the ME deploys an artificial-intelligence tool
to identify potential candidates algorithmically as well. The ME has
found that this tool works best for exploring materials that are similar
to or derivatives of other previously specified materials, so they provide
it with a list of already well-known phase-change materials. Although
not strictly necessary, another artificial-intelligence tool that the ME
is fond of takes the ‘wishlist’ criteria as input and provides as
output recommendations for other related properties that (while not
previously specified) have a high likelihood of being linked to the
properties necessary for the final application. Such as tool is helpful
for identifying potential correlations as well as for assisting the ME in
staying up-to-date on experimental and computational techniques; as the
theory and characterization techniques evolve, so too do the properties
that researchers invest effort in collecting. Furthermore, the property
measurements and computed values present within the databases are
inherently – at their core – approximations correlated to the underlying
physics at play. The ME is, in a sense, leveraging the properties as a
communication bridge to the underlying, emergent complexity of the
physics below. Having sufficiently filtered the databases with respect to
electronic and thermodynamic properties, the ME examines the surviving
candidates, considers cost estimates and accessibility, and transfers the
list to the repository shared with the members of the design team.
After a meeting with the designers, the ME moves onto the next step:
property simulation, where properties deemed sufficiently important for
implementation are investigated computationally in greater depth.
At this stage of the workflow, the ME formulates questions for the
materials simulations to address. The role of simulation is to provide
targeted insights on pre-specified features, not to fully replicate the
material behaviors in its entirety; complex models are not necessarily
better, and in many cases they can obscure the physical relationships
present within the system. Rather, the ME assesses the extent of
the remaining knowledge gaps and selects computational techniques
that are well-suited for addressing these gaps. Conveniently, thanks to
further evolution of the materials data infrastructure, a government-
funded database has emerged to consolidate the modeling techniques
that can be employed at different length- and time-scales. Listings
are vetted by the community, metrics and uses cases are described,
and sample implementations are included (similar to the ‘AI-model
gardens’ repository concept pioneered by researchers from the University
of Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory).† Resources like this
have helped tools, ontologies, and methodologies to be usable across
the community (as the NASA 2040 Vision foretold). Leveraging these
techniques does still require training and nuance – naturally, there
remains a vibrant and flourishing community of specialist practitioners
– but much of the manual effort involved with setting up and deploying
a new simulation has been alleviated. Documentation is plentiful and
calibration tests are readily accessible. Furthermore, simulation inputs
can be stores and shared, enabling easy verification of results by
others. Conveniences like these save the ME a great deal of time,
helping them to focus their attention primarily on probing the materials

*In addition to simply having the technical ability to interact with the tools of
the materials data infrastructure and possessing a greater professional network, the
key distinguishing factor between a senior-career ME and a junior-career ME in this
hypothetical year-2040 scenario is the ability to formulate good questions (and good
queries). Adaptable, knowledge-informed interrogation (and understanding the limits of
a given information source) is a skill that can require significant practical experience.
†One of the researchers describes the ‘AI-model garden’ concept thusly:162 “The
Garden is a place where a community can be built around AI in science... We see Model
Gardens as places where models in similar domains are kept, tended, and shared, and
where researchers can discover a validated model that fits their needs and immediately
run it with four lines of code, turning what used to require months of effort into minutes
or seconds of effort.”

properties. Several of the well-established computational techniques have
established databases specifically for them (for example, the OpenKIM
repository for DFT potentials).163 The property simulations do require
compute resources, for which ME has been allocated a budget. The ME
considers the factors in Figure 37 and makes their selections accordingly.
Once the property simulation and screening is complete, the ME sends
the data to the shared repository location for the design team to access.
After another discussion with the design team, the virtual integration
testing begins. The property data of the remaining material candidates
is overlaid atop the design geometries, and tests probing the property
behavior at individual-feature-level and device-level are conducted. Just
as with the prior modeling, compute resources are necessary. Materials
that satisfy threshold criteria via virtual testing (using community
specifications, such as those curated by ASTM)164 are certified for the
next stage: prototyping, physical testing, and manufacturing integration.
Accordingly, the ME is involved in the collection, processing, and
interpretation of the physical data. These stages of the design cycle are
reminiscent of older workflows, prior to the shift towards virtual materials
design. The key distinction between those older workflows and the 2040
workflow employed by the ME is that the materials data infrastructure has
evolved such that in the 2040 workflow, the cost incurred by integrating
targeted, quality materials informatics and modeling efforts into the early
design stages is much more feasible.

Conclusion: This report covered a wide array of topics. It started
by introducing the historical development of ICME and material data
infrastructure in the United States, highlighting the unique needs of
this field, the growth of the community, present-day obstacles, and key
aspects that remain in development. Then, a brief overview of data
storage architectures (file, block, object) was provided. The physical
hardware of storage systems was touched on, describing the ‘hierarchy’
of computer storage/memory in the process. Emergent storage class
memory (SCM) was discussed in more depth, with a specific focus on
Intel Optane persistent memory devices and the PCM technology that
they use. The discussion of Optane transitioned into the introduction of
DAOS, a next-generation object storage system that can leverage SCM.
The experience of using object storage was described, including a brief
overview of APIs for this context. Several comments were included on
setting up and interacting with DAOS, as well. The literature on novel
computing and storage paradigms that SCM may enable is immense,
but a small sampling of examples was provided. Lastly, aspects of a
sample materials engineering problem (leveraging present-day and future
materials data infrastructure to accelerate the design of phase-change
materials in PCM devices) were discussed. In conclusion, the challenges
of the 21st century are nontrivial, but the tools that engineers can build
for addressing them are rapidly improving, and a robust materials data
infrastructure plays a crucial role in the development of these tools.
Providing attention to the technological building blocks that comprise
such infrastructure is a worthy endeavor.

Acknowledgement: This work was made possible through the author’s
participation in the 2022 GRIPS-Berlin summer program,165 funded by
the Institute of Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM) at the University
of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and hosted at the Zuse Institute
of Berlin (ZIB), which is part of the MODAL research campus166 and
home to a Tier-2 German supercomputing facility.167 GRIPS stands for
‘Graduate-level Research in Industrial Projects for Students.’ This is an
8-week summer program that provides participants with the experience
of working abroad on projects that exist at the intersection of industry
and academia. The 2022 program had three industrial sponsors, each
contributing their own project opportunity. The project that the author
worked on, originally titled ‘High performance computing (HPC) for
real-world simulations’, was sponsored by Hewlett Packard Enterprise
(HPE). In addition, the author was provided with mentorship, feedback,
and support by members of the Algorithms for Innovative Architectures
(A4IA) group at the ZIB. The author would like to express her gratitude
to the individuals Steffen Christgau, Utz-Uwe Haus, and Thomas Steinke
for their assistance on the project. Furthermore, the efforts of the GRIPS
program organizers and support staff at the ZIB and IPAM towards
facilitating such a rich experience are greatly appreciated.

Stephanie R. Taylor (University of California, Los Angeles, USA)

E-mail: stephformankind@ucla.edu

xxiv


References

1 Liu, X.; Furrer, D.; Kosters, J.; Holmes, J. “Vision 2040: A Roadmap for Integrated,
Multiscale Modeling and Simulation of Materials and Systems,” NASA, 2018,
CR—2018-219771.

2 Novotny, M.A.; Ceperley, D.; Jayanthi, C.S.; Martin, R.M. “Materials Research
Cyberscience Enabled by Cyberinfrastructure,” National Science Foundation, 2004.

3 “Integrated Computational Materials Engineering: A Transformational Discipline for
Improved Competitiveness and National Security,” National Research Council, 2008.
[doi.org/10.17226/12199].

4 Allison, J.; Li, M.; Wolverton, C.; Su, X. “Virtual aluminum castings: An industrial
application of ICME,” JOM, 2006, 58, pg. 28-35.

5 “Materials Genome Initiative for Global Competitiveness,” National Science and
Technology Council (NSTC), 2011.

6 “Materials Genome Initiative Strategic Plan (2014),” National Science and
Technology Council (NSTC), 2014.

7 “Building a Materials Data Infrastructure: Opening New Pathways to Discovery and
Innovation in Science and Engineering,” The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society
(TMS), 2017.

8 “Materials Genome Initiative Strategic Plan (2021),” National Science and
Technology Council (NSTC), 2021.

9 “The
Materials
Project,”
Lawrence
Berkeley
National
Laboratory,
2022.
[materialsproject.org].

10 Donegan, S.P.; Groeber, M.A. “Data Structures and Workflows for ICME,” (2020).
In: Ghosh, S.; Woodward, C.; Przybyla, C. (eds) “Integrated Computational Materials
Engineering (ICME)”, Springer, 2020.

11 Michel, K.; Meredig, B. “Beyond bulk single crystals: A data format for all materials
structure–property–processing relationships,” MRS Bulletin, 2016, 41, 617-623.

12 Zwart, S.P. “The ecological impact of high-performance computing in astrophysics,”
Nature Astronomy, 2020, 4, pg. 819-822.

13 “File
storage,
block
storage,
or
object
storage?”
Redhat.com,
2018.
[www.redhat.com/en/topics/data-storage/file-block-object-storage].

14 Harter, T.; Dragga, C.; Vaughn, M.; Arpaci-Dusseau, A.C.; Arpaci-Dusseau, R.H. “A
File is Not a File: Understanding the I/O Behavior of Apple Desktop Applications,”
ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, 2012, 30(3).

15 “IEEE Standard Portable Operating System Interface for Computer Environments,”
IEEE, 1988. [standards.ieee.org/ieee/1003.1/1388].

16 “IEEE Std 1003.1, 2017 Edition,” The Open Group, 2018.
[unix.org/version4/ieee_std.html].

17 Fan, B.; Zhao, B. “Speeding Up I/O for Machine Learning: Apple Case
Study
Using
Tensorflow
and
Alluxio,”
Alluxio
Online
Meetup,
2020.
[www.slideshare.net/Alluxio/speeding-up-io-for-machine-learning-ft-apple-case-
study-using-tensorflow-nfs-dc-os-alluxio].

18 Atlidakis, V.; Andrus, J.; Geambasu, R.; Mitropoulos, D.; Nieh, J. “POSIX Has
Become Outdated," login Usenix Mag., 2016, 41(3).

19 Lockwood, G. “What’s so bad about POSIX I/O?” The Next Platform, 2017.
[www.nextplatform.com/2017/09/11/whats-bad-posix-io].

20 J. Liu et al. “Evaluation of HPC Application I/O on Object Storage Systems,” 2018
IEEE/ACM 3rd International Workshop on Parallel Data Storage & Data Intensive
Scalable Computing Systems (PDSW-DISCS), 2018, pg. 24-34.

21 “About the Lustre File System,” Lustre, 2022. [www.lustre.org/about].
22 “HDFS Architecture,” Apache Hadoop, 2022.
[hadoop.apache.org/docs/stable/hadoop-project-dist/hadoop-
hdfs/HdfsDesign.html].

23 “IBM Spectrum Scale,” IBM, 2022. [www.ibm.com/products/spectrum-scale].
24 “BeeGFS - The Leading Parallel File System,” ThinkParQ, 2022.
[thinkparq.com/products/beegfs].

25 “Object vs. File vs. Block Storage: What’s the Difference?” IBM Cloud Education,
2021. [www.ibm.com/cloud/blog/object-vs-file-vs-block-storage].

26 “Migrating to Cloud - Lessons from Netflix, Brought Up to Date,” Amazon Web
Services Youtube Channel, 2018. [www.youtube.com/watch?v=XrWII4ewrXA].

27 “Cloud Storage on AWS,” Amazon Web Services, 2022.
[aws.amazon.com/products/storage]

28 “Amazon S3 Features,” Amazon Web Services, 2022. [aws.amazon.com/s3/features].
29 “Introduction to Azure Blob storage,” Microsoft Azure, 2022.
[docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/storage-blobs-introduction].

30 “Cloud storage,” Google Cloud, 2022. [cloud.google.com/storage].
31 “Multi-cloud object storage,” MinIO, 2022. [min.io].
32 “Ceph object storage,” Ceph, 2022. [ceph.io/en/discover/technology].
33 “Swift’s documentation,” Openstack, 2022. [docs.openstack.org/swift/latest].
34 “StorNext Shared Storage,” Quantum, 2022. [www.quantum.com/en/products/file-
system/stornext].

35 “Ceph Architecture,” Ceph, 2022. [docs.ceph.com/en/latest/architecture].
36 “DAOS
Storage
Revolutionizes
High-Performance
Storage,”
Intel,
2022.
[www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/high-performance-computing/daos.html].

37 Prantis, K. “Intel DAOS 2.0: Storage Software Stack and Ecosystem Update,” Tech
Field Day Youtube Channel, 2021. [www.youtube.com/watch?v=HELtx1GRnto].

38 “IO 500,” IO500 Foundation, 2022. [io500.org/about].
39 Liang, Z.; Lombardi, J.; Chaarawi, M.; Hennecke, M. “DAOS: A Scale-Out
High Performance Storage Stack for Storage Class Memory.” In: Panda, D. (eds)
“Supercomputing Frontiers” Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2020,
12082.

40 Mellor, C. “A brief overview of Intel DAOS high performance storage,” Blocks &
Files , 2019. [blocksandfiles.com/2019/11/28/intel-daos-high-performance-storage-
file-system-explainer].

41 Leng,
R.J.
“Computer
Memory
Hierarchy,”
bit-tech,
2007.
[www.bit-
tech.net/reviews/tech/memory/the_secrets_of_pc_memory_part_1/3].

42 Jenkov, J. “Modern Hardware,” jenkov.com, 2015. [jenkov.com/tutorials/java-
performance/modern-hardware.html].

43 Pal, S.K. “Different Types of RAM (Random Access Memory ),” GeeksForGeeks,
2021. [www.geeksforgeeks.org/different-types-ram-random-access-memory].

44 Persaud, C. “Everything you need to know about solid-state drives (SSD),”

University of Waterloo, 2018. [uwaterloo.ca/arts-computing-newsletter/winter-
2018/feature/everything-you-need-know-about-solid-state-drives-ssd].

45 Aravindan,
A.
“Flash
101:
Types
of
NAND
Flash,"
Embedded,
2018.
[www.embedded.com/flash-101-types-of-nand-flash].

46 Kim, M. et al. “RealWear: Improving performance and lifetime of SSDs using a
NAND aging marker,” Performance Evaluation, 2021, 145, pg. 102153.

47 “Understanding
Life
Expectancy
of
Flash
Storage
for
LabVIEW
Real-
Time
Systems,”
National
Instruments
Corporation,
2022.
[www.ni.com/en-
us/support/documentation/supplemental/12/understanding-life-expectancy-of-flash-
storage.html].

48 Holland, T. “SSD Lifespan: How Long do SSDs Really Last?” The Ontrack Data
Recovery Blog, 2020. [www.ontrack.com/en-us/blog/how-long-do-ssds-really-last].

49 Crider, M. “How Long Do Solid State Drives Really Last?” How-To Geek, 2017.
[www.howtogeek.com/322856/how-long-do-solid-state-drives-really-last].

50 Hruska, J. “SSDs can lose data in as little as 7 days without power,” ExtremeTech,
2015. [www.extremetech.com/computing/205382-ssds-can-lose-data-in-as-little-as-
7-days-without-power].

51 Maruf, A.; Brahmakshatriya, S.; Li, B.; Tiwari, D.; Quan, G.; Bhimani, J. “Do
Temperature and Humidity Exposures Hurt or Benefit Your SSDs?” 2022 Design,
Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), 2022, pg. 352-357

52 “Hard Disk Drive (HDD) vs. Solid State Drive (SSD): What’s the Difference?”
IBM Cloud Education, 2022. [www.ibm.com/cloud/blog/hard-disk-drive-vs-solid-
state-drive].

53 Alan. “What is 3D XPoint?” Utmel Electronic, 2021.
[www.utmel.com/blog/categories/memory%20chip/what-is-3d-xpoint].

54 Marko, K. “In the quest for faster storage, Intel hopes that Optane’s time has come,”
diginomica, 2020. [diginomica.com/quest-faster-storage-intel-hopes-optanes-time-
has-come].

55 Berrocal, E. “Operating Modes of Intel® Optane™ DC Persistent Memory,” Intel.
[www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/videos/operating-modes-of-intel-
optane-dc-persistent-memory.html]

56 Kennedy, P. “The Glorious Complexity of Intel Optane DIMMs and Why Micron
Quit,” ServeTheHome Youtube Channel, 2021.
[www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOV3gGncGU8].

57 Mellor, C. “Just ONE THOUSAND times BETTER than FLASH! Intel, Micron’s
amazing claim,” TheRegister, 2015.
[www.theregister.com/2015/07/28/intel_micron_3d_xpoint].

58 Mellor, C. “Peering closer at 3D XPoint memory: What are Intel, Micron up to?”
TheRegister, 2015.
[www.theregister.com/2015/07/29/having_a_looks_at_imtfs_crosspoint].

59 Hruska, J. “Intel, Micron reveal Xpoint, a new memory architecture that could
outclass DDR4 and NAND,” ExtremeTech, 2015.
[www.extremetech.com/extreme/211087-intel-micron-reveal-xpoint-a-new-memory-
architecture-that-claims-to-outclass-both-ddr4-and-nand].

60 Potoroaca, A. “Intel reveals Optane DIMMs for workstations, 665p SSD for
consumers, future roadmap,” TechSpot, 2019. [www.techspot.com/news/82088-intel-
reveals-optane-dimms-workstations-665p-ssd-consumers.html].

61 Tallis, B. “Intel Shares New Optane And 3D NAND Roadmap - Barlow Pass DIMMs
& 144L QLC NAND in 2020,” AnandTech, 2019.
[www.anandtech.com/show/14903/intel-shares-new-optane-and-3d-nand-roadmap].

62 Ovshinsky, S.R. “Reversible Electrical Switching Phenomena in Disordered
Structures,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 1968, 21, 1450.

63 Neale, R.G.; Aseltine, J.A. “The Application of Amorphous Materials to Computer
Memories,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 1973, 20(2), 195.

64 Wuttig, M.; Yamada, N. “Phase-change materials for rewriteable data storage,”
Nature Materials, 2007, 6, pg 824-832.

65 Gallo, M.L.; Sebastian, A. “An overview of phase-change memory device physics,”
J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 213002.

66 Caulfield, A.M.; De, A.; Coburn, J.; Mollow, T.I.; Gupta, R.K.; Swanson, S.
“Moneta: A High-Performance Storage Array Architecture for Next-Generation,
Non-volatile Memories,” 2010 43rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture, 2010, pp. 385-395.

67 “Phase Change Memory-Based ‘Moneta’system Points To The Future Of Computer
Storage,” UC San Diego, Jacobs School of Engineering, News Release, 2011.
[jacobsschool.ucsd.edu/news/release/1078].

68 Swanson, S. “Building software for persistent memory,” Steven Swanson Group
Website, 2022. [swanson.ucsd.edu].

69 Swanson et al. “Basic Performance Measurements of the Intel Optane DC Persistent
Memory Module,” arXiv, 2019. [arXiv:1903.05714].

70 Pohm, A.V.; Sie, C.H.; Uttecht, R.R.; Kao, V.; Agrawal, O. “Chalcogenide glass
bistable resistivity (Ovonic) memories,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 1970,
6(3), 592.

71 Coughlin, T. “Intel Winding Down Its Optane Memory Business,” Forbes, 2022.
[www.forbes.com/sites/tomcoughlin/2022/07/28/intel-winding-down-its-optane-
memory-business].

72 Bowman, K.; Sharma, D.D. “CXL Consortium Webinar: An introduction to
compute express LinkTM (CXL) technology,” CXL Webinars Youtube Channel,
2020. [www.youtube.com/watch?v=RpAshNmpqLQ].

73 “Compute Express Link: The Breakthrough CPU-to-Device Interconnect,” Compute
Express Link, 2022. [www.computeexpresslink.org].

74 Mann, T. “Will CXL spell the end for boutique composable infrastructure vendors?”
The Register, 2022.
[www.theregister.com/2022/07/10/cxl_composable_infrastructure].

75 Bai, E.L.; Raut, S.A. “An Analysis on Compute Express Link with Rich Protocols
and Use Cases for Data Centers,” ICIPCN 2022: Third International Conference on
Image Processing and Capsule Networks, 2022, pg 787–800.

76 Coughlin, T. “Micron Ends 3D XPoint Memory,” Forbes, 2019.
[www.forbes.com/sites/tomcoughlin/2021/03/16/micron-ends-3d-xpoint-memory].

77 Coughlin, T. “Is Intel Going To Drop Optane?” Forbes, 2022.
[www.forbes.com/sites/tomcoughlin/2022/02/28/is-intel-going-to-drop-optane].

78 “U.S. Department of Energy and Intel to Deliver First Exascale Supercomputer,”
Intel Press Releases, 2019. [www.intc.com/news-events/press-releases/detail/86/u-s-
department-of-energy-and-intel-to-deliver-first].

xxv


79 Mellor, C. “Intel has Optane chip hoard with no plans to develop tech,” Blocks &
Files, 2022. [blocksandfiles.com/2022/05/02/intel-optane-chip-inventory].

80 “Kioxia
Launches
Second
Generation
of
High-Performance,
Cost-Effective
XL-FLASH
Storage
Class
Memory
Solution,”
Business
Wire,
2022.
[www.businesswire.com/news/home/20220801005862/en/Kioxia-Launches-Second-
Generation-of-High-Performance-Cost-Effective-XL-FLASH%E2%84%A2-Storage-
Class-Memory-Solution].

81 “XL-FLASH Storage Class Memory (SCM),” KIOXIA America Inc., 2022.
[americas.kioxia.com/en-us/business/memory/xlflash.html].

82 “Everspin Announces New STT-MRAM EM128LX xSPI Memory,” Business
Wire,
2022.
[www.businesswire.com/news/home/20220801005856/en/Everspin-
Announces-New-STT-MRAM-EM128LX-xSPI-Memory].

83 “Spin-transfer
Torque
MRAM
Technology,”
Everspin
Technologies,
2022.
[www.everspin.com/spin-transfer-torque-mram-technology].

84 Clinton. “SK Hynix works on 3D Vertical XP memory as an alternative to 3D
XPoint,” Gadgetonus, 2022. [gadgetonus.com/tech/5845.html].

85 “Tomorrow Initiative: SK hynix’s New Roadmap for Tomorrow’s Tech Ecosystem,”
SK Hynix, 2022. [product.skhynix.com/support/forest.go].

86 ‘ISC’22 DAOS Intro Video,’ DAOS Youtube Channel, 2022.
[www.youtube.com/watch?v=q4iYRwW5Uhw].

87 Nabarro, T.; Lombardi, J. “Question about 3D Xpoint DIMM,” DAOS group, 2022.
[daos.groups.io/g/daos/topic/question_about_3d_xpoint_dimm/92723028].

88 Kothalawala, A. “What is an API? How does it work?” Medium, 2018.
[medium.com/@ama.thanu/what-is-an-api-how-does-it-work-f4ea552d741f].

89 Lamothe, M.; Gueheneuc, Y.G.; Shang, W. “A Systematic Review of API Evolution
Literature,” ACM Computing Surveys, 2021, 54(8), 171.

90 Ong S.P.; Cholia, S.; Jain, A.; Brafman, M.; Gunter, D.; Ceder, G.; Persson, K.A.
“The Materials Application Programming Interface (API): A simple, flexible and
efficient API for materials data based on REpresentational State Transfer (REST)
principles,” Comput. Mater. Sci., 2015, 91, pg 209-215.

91 Huck, P.; Jain, A.; Gunter, D.; Winston, D.; Persson, K. “A Community Contribution
Framework for Sharing Materials Data with Materials Project,” 2015 IEEE 11th
International Conference on e-Science, 2015, pg 535-541.

92 Taylor, R.H.; Rose, F.; Toher, C.; Levy, O.; Yang, K.; Nardelli, M.B.; Curtarolo, S.
“A RESTful API for exchanging materials data in the AFLOWLIB.org consortium,”
Comput. Mater. Sci., 2014, 93, pg 178-192.

93 Gossett et al. “AFLOW-ML: A RESTful API for machine-learning predictions of
materials properties,” Comput. Mater. Sci., 2018, 152, 134-145.

94 Talirz et al. “Materials Cloud, a platform for open computational science,” Scientific
Data, 2020, 7, 299.

95 Huber et al. “AiiDA 1.0, a scalable computational infrastructure for automated
reproducible workflows and data provenance,” Scientific Data, 2020, 7, 300.

96 “NOMAD Repository and Archive: Introduction,” NOvel Materials Discorvery
(NOMAD), 2014. [nomad-lab.eu/prod/rae/docs/introduction.html].

97 “OQMD RESTful API,” The OQMD development team, 2019.
[static.oqmd.org/static/docs/restful.html].

98 Saal, J.E.; Kirklin, S.; Aykol, M.; Meredig, B.; Wolverton, C. “Materials Design and
Discovery with High-Throughput Density Functional Theory: The Open Quantum
Materials Database (OQMD),” JOM, 2013, 65(11), 1501.

99 “CatApp Database API,” Catalysis-Hub, 2022.
[www.catalysis-hub.org/graphQLConsole].

100 Winther, K.T.; Hoffmann, M.J.; Boes, J.R.; Mamun, O.; Bajdich, M.; Bligaard,
T. “Catalysis-Hub.org, an open electronic structure database for surface reactions,”
Scientific Data, 2019, 6(75).

101 “OPTIMADE provider ‘Open Materials Database’,” Materials Consortia
OPTIMADE group, 2022.
[www.optimade.org/providers-dashboard/providers/omdb.html].

102 Armiento, R. “Full httk API documentation,” 2018.
[docs.httk.org/en/latest/httk_base.html].

103 “How to query the COD database,” Crystallography Open Database Wiki, 2022.
[wiki.crystallography.net/howtoquerycod].

104 O’Mara, J.; Meredig, B.; Michel, K. “Materials Data Infrastructure: A Case Study
of the Citrination Platform to Examine Data Import, Storage, and Access,” JOM,
2016, 68, 2031-2034.

105 Choudhary et al. “The joint automated repository for various integrated simulations
(JARVIS) for data-driven materials design,” npj Computational Materials, 2020,
6(173).

106 “ICSD Products: ICSD API Service,” Inorganic Crystal Structure Database, 2022.
[icsd.products.fiz-karlsruhe.de/en/products/icsd-products].

107 “NIST Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) SRD 3,” National Institute
of Standards and Technology, 2022. [www.nist.gov/srd/nist-standard-reference-
database-3].

108 Villars, P.; Cenzual, K.; Gladyshevskii, R.; Iwata, S. “PAULING FILE - towards a
holistic view,” Chem. Met. Alloys, 2018, 11, pg 43-76.

109 “Materials Platform for Data Science (MPDS) API,” Materials Phase Data System
and Tilde Materials Informatics, 2020. [mpds.io/developer].

110 “Programmatic Access,” PubChem, 2022.
[pubchemdocs.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/programmatic-access].

111 Borysov, S.S.; Geilhufe, R.M.; Balatsky, A.V. “Organic materials database: An
open-access online database for data mining.” Plos one, 2017, 12(2), 0171501.

112 “NREL Materials Database,” National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2022.
[materials.nrel.gov].

113 Anderson et al. “OPTIMADE, an API for exchanging materials data,” Sci Data,
2021, 8, 217.

114 Richardson, L.; Ruby, S. “RESTful Web Services,” O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2007.
115 Fielding,
R.T.
“Architectural
Styles
and
the
Design
of
Network-based
Software Architectures,” University of California, Irvine; PhD dissertation, 2000.
[www.ics.uci.edu/ fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm].

116 Fielding, R.T.; Taylor, R.N. “Principled design of the modern Web architecture,”
ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, 2002, 2(2), pg 115-150.

117 Subramanian, H.; Raj, P. “Hands-On RESTful API Design Patterns and Best
Practices,” Packt Publishing, 2019.

118 “The NIH HPC Systems object store,” Biowulf: High Performance Computing at

the NIH, 2022. [hpc.nih.gov/storage/object.html].

119 “daos/src/tests/simple_obj.c”, Github, 2022.
[github.com/daos-stack/daos/blob/master/src/tests/simple_obj.c]

120 “daos/src/tests/simple_array.c”, Github, 2022.
[github.com/daos-stack/daos/blob/master/src/tests/simple_array.c].

121 Lombardi, J. “Re: DAOS starting example in C++,” DAOS Groups, 2020.
[daos.groups.io/g/daos/message/1182].

122 “Native Object Interface,” DAOS v.2 website, 2022.
[docs.daos.io/v2.0/user/interface].

123 “DAOS API Functions” DAOS API Documentation, 2022.
[docs.daos.io/v2.0/doxygen/html/globals_func.html].

124 Soumagne et al. “Accelerating HDF5 I/O for Exascale Using DAOS,” IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 2022, 33(4), pg 903-914.

125 “DAOS
API
Documentation
(Version
2),”
DAOS
Developers,
2022.
[docs.daos.io/v2.0/doxygen/html].

126 “daos@daos.groups.io: Topics,” groups.io, 2022. [daos.groups.io/g/daos/topics].
127 Kestor, G.; Gioiosa, R.; Kerbyson, D.; Hoisie, A. “Data movement in scientific
applications,” Pacific Northwest National Laboratory; Workshop on Modeling &
Simulation of Systems and Applications, 2014.

128 Cicotti et al. “Data movement in data-intensive high performance computing,” In:
Conquering Big Data with High Performance Computing, 2016, pg 31-59.

129 Si, M.; Cheng, H.; Ando, T.; Hu, G.; Ye, P. “Overview and outlook of emerging
non-volatile memories,” MRS Bulletin, 2021, 46, 946.

130 Cheng et al. “3D cross-point phase-change memory for storage-class memory,” J.
Phys. D.: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52, 473002.

131 Fantini, P. “Phase change memory applications: the history, the present and the
future,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 283002.

132 “Von Neumann architecture,” Wikipedia, 2022.
[en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann_architecture].

133 Rosenburg, J. “Security in embedded systems,” Chapter 6 in: Rugged Embedded
Systems, Computing in Harsh Environments, 2017, pg 149–205.

134 Burr et al. “Neuromorphic computing using non-volatile memory,” Advances in
Physics: X, 2017, 2(1), pg 89–124.

135 Shi, Z. “Brain-like intelligence,” Chapter 14, In: Intelligence Science, Leading the
Age of Intelligence, 2021, pg 537-593.

136 Markovic, D.; Mizrahi, A.; Querlioz, D.; Grollier, J. “Physics for neuromorphic
computing,” Nat. Rev. Phys., 2020, 2, pg 499-510.

137 Zhu, J.; Zhang, T.; Yang, Y.; Huang, R. “A comprehensive review on emerging
artificial neuromorphic devices,” Applied Physics Reveiws, 2020, 7, 011312.

138 “DAOS:
Revolutionizing
High-Performance
Storage
with
Intel
Optane
Technology,” Intel, 2022.
[www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/solution-briefs/high-
performance-storage-brief.pdf].

139 Sebastian, A.; Gallo, M.; Khaddam-Aljameh, R.; Eleftheriou, E. “Memory devices
and applications for in-memory computing,” Nature Nanotechnology, 2020, 15, 529-
544.

140 Merrikh-Bayat et al. “High-performance mixed-signal neurocomputing with
nanoscale floating-gate memory cell arrays,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems, 2018, 29(10), pg 4782-4790.

141 Xi et al. “In-Memory Learning With Analog Resistive Switching Memory: A
Review and Perspective,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 2021, 109(1), 14.

142 Zou, X.; Xu, S.; Chen, X.; Yan, L.; Han, Y. “Breaking the von Neumann bottleneck:
Architecture-level processing-in-memory technology,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., 2021,
64(6), 160404.

143 Torabzadehkashi et al. “Accelerating HPC applications using computational storage
devices,” IEEE 21st International Conference on High Performance Computing and
Communications, 2019, pg 1878-1885.

144 Lukken, C.; Trivedi, A. “Past, Present, and Future of Computational Storage: A
Survey,” arXiv, 2021. [arxiv.org/pdf/2112.09691.pdf].

145 Khaddam-Aljameh et al. “HERMES-Core – A 1.59-TOPS/mm2 PCM on 14-
nm CMOS In-Memory Compute Core Using 300-ps/LSB Linearized CCO-Based
ADCs,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 2022, 57(4), 1027.

146 HeydariGorji et al. “In-storage Processing of I/O Intensive Applications on
Computational Storage Drives,” 23rd International Symposium on Quality Electronic
Design, 2022, pg 1-6.

147 Qiu, M.; Ming, Z.; Li, J.; Gai, K.; Zong, Z. “Phase-change memory optimization
for green cloud with genetic algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, 2015,
64(12), 3528.

148 Fridman et al. “Accessing the use cases of persistent memory in high-performance
scientific computing,” IEEE/ACM 11th Workshop on Fault Tolerance for HPC at
eXtreme Scale (FTXS), 2021.

149 Lopez-Gomez, G.; Blomer, J. “Exploring object stores for high-energy physics data
storage,” EPJ Web of Conferences, CHEP 2021, 2021, 251, 02066.

150 Manubens, N.; Quintino, T.; Smart, S.; Danovaro, E.; Jackson, A. “DAOS as HPC
storage, a view from numerical weather prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel
and Distributed Systems, 2022. Under review. [arxiv.org/pdf/2208.06752.pdf].

151 Wong et al. “Phase Change Memory,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 2010, 98(12), 2201.
152 Kim, T.; Lee, S. “Evolution of phase-change memory for the storage-class memory
and beyond,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 2020, 67(4), pg 1394-1406.

153 Lacaita,
A.L.
“Phase
change
memories:
State-of-the-art,
challenges
and
perspectives,” Solid-State Electronics, 2006, 50, pg 24-31.

154 Burr et al. “Recent progress in phase-change memory technology,” IEEE Journal
on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, 2016, 6(2), 146.

155 Kim, S.; Burr, G.W.; Kim, W.; Nam, S. “Phase-change memory cycling endurance,”
MRS Bulletin, 2019, 44, pg 710-714.

156 Soeya,
S.;
Shintani,
T.;
Odaka,
T.;
Kondou,
R.;
Tominaga,
J.
“Ultra-
low switching power, crystallographic analysis, and switching mechanism for
SnxTe100−x/Sb2Te3 diluted superlattice system,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103,
053103.

157 Liu, Y.; Li, X.; Zheng, H.; Chen, N.; Wang, X.; Zhang, X.; Sun, H.; Zhang,
S. “High-throughput screening for phase-change memory materials,” Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2021, 31, 2009803.

158 Xu et al. “Materials screening for disorder-controlled chalcogenide crystals for

xxvi


phase-change memory applications,” Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006221.

159 “Electronic Structure Calculation Details,” Materials Project Documentation,
2022.
[docs.materialsproject.org/methodology/materials-methodology/electronic-
structure].

160 Mueller, T.; Hautier, G.; Jain, A.; Ceder, G. “Evaluation of tavorite-structured
cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries using high-throughput computing,” Chem.
Mater., 2011, 23(17), 3854-3862.

161 Sun, Z.; Pedretti, G.; Ambrosi, E.; Bricalli, A.; Wang, W. “Solving matrix equations
in one step with cross-point resistive arrays,” PNAS, 2019, 116(10), pg 4123-4128.

162 “UChicago/Argonne Researchers Will Cultivate AI Model ‘Gardens’ With $3.5M
NSF Grant,” UChicago CS News, 2022. [cs.uchicago.edu/news/uchicago-argonne-
researchers-will-cultivate-ai-model-gardens-with-3-5m-nsf-grant].

163 “OpenKIM: Interatomic Potentials and Analytics for Molecular Simulation,”
OpenKIM, 2022. [openkim.org].

164 “Standards & Publications,” ASTM International, 2022. [www.astm.org/products-
services/standards-and-publications.html].

165 “Graduate-level Research in Industrial Projects for Students (GRIPS) – Berlin
2022 JUNE 20 - AUGUST 12, 2022,” IPAM, 2022.
[www.ipam.ucla.edu/programs/student-research-programs/graduate-level-research-
in-industrial-projects-for-students-grips-berlin-2022].

166 “Research Campus MODAL,” Zuse Institute Berlin, 2022.
[www.zib.de/features/research-campus-modal].

167 “NHR Center at ZIB,” Zuse Institute Berlin, 2022. [https://www.zib.de/nhr].

xxvii


