Low-loss silicon nitride photonic ICs 
for single-photon applications

KIRILL A. BUZAVEROV,1,2 ALEKSANDR S. BABURIN,1,2 EVGENY V.
SERGEEV,1 SERGEY S. AVDEEV,1 EVGENIY S. LOTKOV,1 MIHAIL 
ANDRONIK,1 VICTORIA E. STUKALOVA,1 DMITRY A. BAKLYKOV,1 IVAN V.
DYAKONOV,3 NIKOLAY N. SKRYABIN,3 MIKHAIL YU. SAYGIN,3 SERGEY P.
KULIK,3 ILYA A. RYZHIKOV,1 AND ILYA A. RODIONOV1,2,*

1FMN Laboratory, Bauman Moscow State Technical University, Moscow 105005, Russia
2Dukhov Research Institute of Automatics (VNIIA), Moscow 127055, Russia
3Quantum Technology Center, Faculty of Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow 
119991, Russia
*irodionov@bmstu.ru

Abstract: Low-loss photonic integrated circuits (PICs) are the key elements in future quantum 
technologies, nonlinear photonics and neural networks. The low-loss photonic circuits 
technology targeting C-band application is well established across multi-project wafer (MPW) 
fabs, whereas near-infrared (NIR) PICs suitable for the state-of-the-art single-photon sources 
are still underdeveloped. Here, we report the labs-scale process optimization and optical 
characterization of low-loss tunable photonic integrated circuits for single-photon applications. 
We demonstrate the lowest propagation losses to the date (as low as 0.55 dB/cm at 925 nm 
wavelength) in single-mode silicon nitride submicron waveguides (220x550 nm). This 
performance is achieved due to advanced e-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma 
reactive ion etching steps which yields waveguides vertical sidewalls with down to 0.85 nm 
sidewall roughness. These results provide a chip-scale low-loss PIC platform that could be even 
further improved with high quality SiO2 cladding, chemical-mechanical polishing and multistep 
annealing for extra-strict single-photon applications.

© 2022 Optica Publishing Group under the terms of the Optica Publishing Group Open Access Publishing 
Agreement

1.
Introduction

Photonic integrated circuits (PICs) are under focused attention due to their high potential for 
future applications in telecom and datacom [1-3], LiDAR [3, 4], biophotonics [5, 6], nonlinear 
photonics [8, 9], neural networks [10-12] and quantum technologies [13-19]. In a wide variety 
of material platforms suitable for photonic integration, scalable and power-efficient solutions 
nowadays are driven by Si [20, 21], InP [22, 23] and Si3N4 [24, 25]. Despite current technology 
limitations on active elements and modulation speeds, silicon nitride platform exploits the 
advantage of passive components with lowest losses in a wide wavelength range from visible 
to mid-IR in integrated circuits [26]. Using hybrid assembly, flip-chip integration and wafer 
bonding with A3B5 or SOI platforms [27, 28], silicon nitride photonic platform could be 
equipped with all the necessary tools for fully integrated optical signal processing.

Ultra-low (<0.01 dB/cm) propagation losses are the key to high-efficiency devices on PICs. 

To achieve such low values, three major origins of losses have to be considered. The origins 
are absorption, radiation and scattering losses. Using high quality wet and dry oxidation with 
LPCVD SiO2 and stoichiometric Si3N4 films together with high temperature annealing, 
absorption losses could be lowered down to less than 0.1 dB/m [29]. With advanced bends 
optimization techniques, radiation losses due to mode mismatch can be reduced to 0.012 dB/90º 
bend values [30, 31]. Thus, scattering losses from bottom, sidewalls and upper surfaces 
roughness are the main source of light attenuation in waveguides. Compared to upper and 


bottom surfaces roughness reduction methods (usually chemical-mechanical polishing [32]), 
reduction of waveguide sidewall roughness still remains the primary technological challenge 
[29, 33].

There are three main fabrication processes proposed for effective minimization of 

propagation losses in silicon nitride photonic integrated circuits. The first one is the photonic 
Damascene reflow process, which allows to fabricate circuits with crack-free silicon nitride 
films up to 1.5 μm thickness [33]. Using stress management, SiO2 preform reflow and high 
precision chemical-mechanical planarization, silicon nitride microresonators with quality 
factor up to 32·106 (equal to 1 dB/m at 1550 nm wavelength) were fabricated [34]. However, 
extremely high annealing temperatures lead to silicon diffusion in SiO2, degrading optical 
properties of both materials. Thicker layers of silicon dioxide are required to prevent absorption 
losses [34]. It was also found out that SiO2 preform reflow may introduce transition metals (Cr, 
Fe, Cu) impurities and enhance their diffusive redistribution [35], which causes wavelength-
independent absorption losses. The above limitations together with high requirements for
chemical-mechanical planarization constrain the application of the Damascene reflow process 
in R&D laboratories for experimental and small-scale batches of devices.

The second one is the classic subtractive process. It is an alternative to the photonic 

Damascene fabrication process [36]. Proper optimization of individual fabrication steps 
(mainly lithography and etching steps) results in circuits with low losses (microresonators with 
quality factor up to 70·106, equivalent to 0.4 dB/m at 1550 nm wavelength). The technology 
utilizes Si3N4 thicknesses up to 1 μm with multistep LPCVD deposition process without long 
extremely high-temperature annealing and high precision chemical-mechanical planarization 
steps.

The third one is the silicon nitride TriPleX® waveguide technology [37]. It is a variation of 

subtractive process for fabrication of ultralow-loss silicon nitride waveguides. Using 
waveguides with high-aspect ratio core (single or double stripe, up to 100 nm thickness, up to 
10 um width) record propagation losses in silicon nitride based photonic circuits are achieved 
(microresonators with quality factor up to 422·106, equivalent to 0.06 dB/m at 1550 nm 
wavelength [37]). The approach is characterized be very low mode confinement and weak 
interaction of mode with waveguide surfaces roughness [26]. However, low confinement 
requires very thick lower SiO2 layers (up to 15 μm) and also imposes restriction on critical 
bending radius of waveguides and microresonators (up to 1 cm), which limits scalability of the 
technology [38].

The above results are obtained at infrared C-band which is actively used in 

telecommunications, LiDAR, and quantum technologies. However, there are many applications 
where ultralow losses at wavelengths from 900 to 940 nm are crucial [17, 18, 39, 40]. In this 
wavelength range single-mode waveguides have to be significantly narrower down to 600 nm 
width with upper SiO2 cladding (versus several microns width at 1550 nm wavelength), leading 
to higher interaction of waveguide mode with inhomogeneities and surfaces roughness, and 
thus to higher propagation losses. The lowest propagation losses of 0.6-1.5 dB/cm have been 
reached in silicon nitride waveguides with the classic subtractive fabrication process [41-43]. 
With silicon nitride TriPleX® technology the first 12-mode quantum photonic processor was 
fabricated demonstrating propagation losses less than 0.3 dB/cm at 940 nm operation 
wavelength [17]. In [18] silicon nitride PICs with on-chip quantum single-photon source are 
fabricated, reaching the lowest propagation losses to date – 0.01 dB/cm at 920 nm wavelength. 
Despite ultralow losses, authors declared very low single-photon coupling efficiency due to 
low mode confinement. To achieve higher coupling efficiency with medium and high mode 
localization in silicon nitride waveguides, comparable to the C-band, further improvement of 
the fabrication processes is required with an emphasis on studying the effect of their parameters 
on the reduction of surface roughness.

In this work, we report on the fabrication and optical characterization of low-loss silicon 

nitride photonic integrated circuits, with propagation losses less than 0.6 dB/cm at 925 nm 


wavelength. We perform the first in-depth, to the best of our knowledge, study of the influence 
of e-beam lithography and reactive ion etching parameters on the roughness of waveguide 
sidewalls. The study formulates rules to fabricate low-loss waveguides with smooth sidewalls.  
Using classic subtractive fabrication process based on optimized e-beam lithography and 
inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE), we fabricated 550 nm-width single-
mode submicron waveguides with sidewall roughness less than 1 nm and near 90º sidewalls 
angle, directional couplers with a gap down to 100 nm, grating and 120 nm-width taper couplers 
with insertion losses less than 8 dB and 4 dB, respectively. In this paper we propose the 
numerical solution for Payne-Lacey model, which allows accurate modeling of propagation 
losses in waveguides taking into account all three standard sidewall roughness parameters 
(standard deviation, correlation length and roughness exponent).

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents modern methods for sidewall 

roughness measurement and explains the measurement technique used in this work. Section 3 
presents the fabrication process of low-loss silicon nitride photonic integrated circuits with in-
depth analysis of e-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching 
processes. Section 4 presents up-to-date approaches for propagation losses modeling in 
waveguides with proposed numerical solution taking into account roughness exponent in 
Payne-Lacey model. Finally, section 5 presents optical characterization of photonic integrated 
circuits elements – propagation and coupling losses are measured with “cut-back” technique.

2.
Sidewall roughness measurement

There are two commonly used methods for sidewall roughness measurements: specialized 
atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The first one with 
rotated scanning axis and customized AFM tips allows to carefully measure sidewall roughness 
with atomic-scale sensitivity and resolution approximately 0.1 nm [44]. However, this 
technique is very expensive, time consuming and nonstandard for most R&D laboratories. 
Recently, the method for direct sidewall roughness measurement of waveguides with standard 
AFM was presented. It is based on Bosch deep silicon etching to fabricate a tall and thin silicon 
pillar with waveguide on top [45]. The above techniques require specialized metrology tools or 
high precision fabrication process with optimization of several photolithography and deep 
silicon etching steps. We choose scanning electron microscopy for sidewall roughness 
measurement, as this is a straightforward and convenient method. It is less accurate compared 
to AFM due to noise, aberrations, and charge accumulation [46]. However, for SEM based 
sidewall roughness measurement, the only requirement is algorithm for edge detection and 
roughness parameters extraction (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. (a) SEM image of waveguide sidewall (with resist on top). (b) Detected edge on SEM 
image of e-beam resist (blue line). (c) Detected edge on SEM image of etched silicon nitride 
waveguide (blue line).

In this work, we develop the sidewall roughness measurement algorithm using MATLAB 

software and methodology from [47-50]. It includes waveguide edge detection based on SEM 


image which requires no image filtration and frequency-domain analysis of obtained data for 
eliminating noise and extraction of three main roughness parameters – root-mean-square 
(RMS) roughness σ, correlation length ξ and roughness exponent H (more information about 
roughness parameters measurement could be found in Supplementary materials). Figure 1 
demonstrates waveguide edges detection from SEM images with developed algorithm.

3.
Fabrication of low-loss silicon nitride photonic integrated circuits 

Fabrication process of low-loss silicon nitride photonic integrate circuits with light coupling 
through grating couplers is shown in Figure 2. Although grating couplers provide access to any 
location in the PIC and do not require complex post-fabrication processing, they provide 
coupling efficiency up to 60 % [51]. For higher coupling efficiency, which is critical for single-
photon applications, much more complicated fabrication process and optimized coupling 
structure can be used. This purpose requires developing optical grade quality multistep deep 
reactive ion etching techniques to form precise edge of waveguides for coupling to photonic 
integrated circuit. [36, 52-54].

Fig. 2. The fabrication process of silicon nitride photonic integrated circuits. Inset: Mode 
simulation of a single-mode 220 nm tall and 550 nm wide waveguide at 925 nm wavelength.

We use commercially available 525 um thick silicon wafers with 2.5 um thickness of wet 

SiO2 and 220 nm thickness of stoichiometric LPCVD Si3N4 from Silicon Materials Inc. (USA). 
In our circuits we use single-mode silicon nitride waveguides with 550 nm width and 220 nm 
height (Fig. 2). The wafers are diced into standard 25x25 mm2 dies, which are then cleaned 
from organic, mechanical and metal residues. After that, e-beam lithography and inductively 
coupled plasma reactive ion etching are used for waveguides patterning with subsequent upper 
SiO2 cladding deposition. For tunable beam splitters (Mach-Zehnder interferometers with 
thermo-optic phase shifters) we fabricate heaters and wiring with laser lithography and lift-off 
processes. After final cleaning, we bond the fabricated photonic integrated circuit to printed 
circuit board (PCB) and package for further testing. In next sections, we focus on in-depth study 
and optimization of e-beam lithography and ICP-RIE steps of the above fabrication process.

3.1 Electron-beam lithography and development

Electron-beam lithography was done using a beam with current of 400 pA to direct-write our 
circuits into a MaN-2403 negative resist. While direct writing by e-beam is a powerful and 
flexible method for fabricating features with the critical dimension less than 100 nm, its 
drawback is appearance of stitches at working fields boundaries due to lens aberrations and 


motorized stage instability. Also, due to statistical errors (fluctuations of beam current, 
vibrations, jitter), sidewall roughness of features could be increased [55, 56]. Using substrates 
with dielectric materials (SiO2, Si3N4), accumulation of charge leads to increased sidewall 
roughness and decreased resolution [57]. These limitations lead to topology defects (Fig. 3) and 
dramatic increase in PICs loss, thus requiring the optimization of e-beam lithography 
parameters.

Fig. 3. SEM images of defects in e-beam lithography patterned structures: (a) Stitching error in 
waveguide, leading to increase in propagation losses. (b) Overexposure of resist lines, leading 
to change in dimensions and increase in roughness.

For stitching error reduction, a multipass e-beam writing and conductive polymer are the 

most effective techniques [58, 59]. In this work we optimize number of writing passes, the size 
of working field (WF) and conductive polymer development temperature for stitching error and 
resist sidewalls roughness reduction. To estimate the stitching error, more than 200 
measurements for each specimen were carried out. Sidewall roughness was evaluated from 18 
SEM images of waveguide edges with a length of 1 μm. Figure 4 shows stitching error and 
resist sidewall RMS roughness dependence versus different exposure parameters (number of 
writing passes and WF size).

Fig. 4. Exposure parameters versus: (a) Stitching error. (b) RMS roughness. Average values are 
shown with solid orange line. Black solid boxes show interquartile range, within which 50% of 
measured values fall. Dashed lines show measured values outside the interquartile range with 
minimum and maximum values (horizontal lines).  Inset: SEM images of resist sidewalls with 
detected edges (blue line), fabricated with different exposure parameters (number of writing 
passes and WF size).

Difference between one pass and multipass writing is observed in reducing the average 

stitching error modulo from 55.17 ± 11.41 nm to 21.90 ± 6.00 nm. Decreasing working field 


allows further reduction of the stitching error modulo down to 1.04 ± 1.35 nm. Statistical 
exposure errors, such as current fluctuations, jitter and beam drift, as well as mechanical 
vibrations and positioning errors are reduced with above techniques, leading to a significant 
reduction of stitching error. Also, multipass writing lithography and decreased working field 
allowed to reduce average RMS roughness from 2.63 ± 0.34 nm to 2.15 ± 0.24 nm. Multipass 
writing reduces the beam dwell time, thereby reducing charge accumulation and primary 
electron beam deflection, which has a positive effect on the roughness. The choice of a reduced 
working field reduces the distortion of the electron beam as it deviates from the optical axis, 
which also improving RMS sidewall roughness of e-beam resist.

Fig. 5. RMS roughness dependence on conductive polymer development temperature. Average 
values are shown with solid orange line. Black solid boxes show interquartile range, within 
which 50% of measured values fall. Dashed lines show measured values outside the interquartile 
range with minimum and maximum values (horizontal lines).  Inset: SEM images of resist 
sidewalls with detected edges (blue line), fabricated with different conductive polymer 
development temperature and exposure parameters (number of writing passes and WF size).

Additionally, we studied RMS roughness changing from conductive polymer development 

temperature. In the experiments, we varied the development temperature in deionized water 
from 20 ºC to 60 ºC. As shown in Figure 5, the temperature change reduces the average RMS 
roughness from 2.63 ± 0.34 nm to as low as 1.17 ± 0.13 nm with one pass exposure with 
increased working field. We assume that conductive polymer development in warm deionized 
water leads to it complete removal from resist surface, thereby smoothing resist sidewalls. 
Multipass lithography with reduced working field and warm conductive polymer development 
significantly reduces stitching error and RMS sidewall roughness of e-beam resist, thus can be 
used for smooth and precise mask layers fabrication.

3.2 Inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching

Dry etching is one of the key technology issues for nanofabrication, capable to provide smooth 
surfaces and anisotropic etch profiles, with accurate control of process parameters [60]. In the 
reactive ion etching experiments RMS sidewall roughness, sidewall angle and Si3N4 to resist 
etching selectivity were optimized by varying RF bias power (HF), coil power (ICP), platen 
temperature (T), working pressure (p), and composition of gas mixture. In this case we first 
check the influence of parameters that directly affect the energy of particles in plasma. Figure 
6 shows experimental results for RMS sidewall roughness, sidewall angle and etching 
selectivity (defined as the ratio of the etch rate of Si3N4 to the etch rate of resist) with Si3N4 and 
resist etching rates versus HF power for different etching regimes. HF power reduction from 
250 W to 75 W shows a downwards trend for RMS roughness with sidewall angle improvement 
(blue and green line in Fig. 6a), due to lowering the energy of ions in discharge. Further 


reduction to 40 W leads to enhanced polymerization with formation of thin C(H,F)N 
passivation film [61] and increase in roughness (purple and orange line in Fig. 6a). We should 
note that more active isotropic etching occurs with higher platen temperature (purple line in 
Fig. 6a), leading to lateral etching of sidewalls and passivation film partial removal. This effect 
provides lower roughness and better angle of sidewalls compared to etching at lower 
temperatures. As shown in Figure 6b, change in platen power simultaneously changes etching 
rates of Si3N4 and resist with no change in etching selectivity for most regimes. One can see, 
that etching selectivity reaches higher values for lower platen temperature and HF power, 
possible due to higher plasma resistance of e-beam resist. Such an effect can stem from the 
formation of denser chemical bonds in the resist structure.

Fig. 6. Waveguides parameters versus platen power: (a) RMS sidewall roughness (solid lines) 
and sidewalls angle of inclination (dashed lines). (b) Etching selectivity (solid lines), Si3N4 and 
resist etching rates (dashed and dotted lines, respectively). Cross-section of waveguides, 
fabricated with various etching processes are shown on SEM images.

Results of optimization parameters on ICP power for various etch regimes are shown in 

Figure 7. Increasing ICP power from 300 W to 700 W at lower working pressures leads to 
higher RMS roughness with improved sidewalls angle due to higher energy ions and higher 
anisotropy of etching (green line in Fig. 7a). We observed strong damage of resist profile 
together with notching effect at ICP power above 500 W (SEM images inset in Fig. 7). At 
higher working pressures an opposite trend occurs with increase in roughness at lower ICP 
power (purple and orange lines in Fig. 7a) due to enhanced sidewalls passivation. Similar to 
selectivity dependence on HF power, there is no significant change in selectivity at lower 
pressure (Fig. 7b). At higher pressure selectivity decreases with higher ICP power as resist etch 
rate is higher compared to Si3N4 etch rate in discharge with high energy ions.


Fig. 7. Waveguide parameters versus on coil power: (a) RMS sidewall roughness (solid lines) 
and sidewalls angle of inclination (dashed lines). (b) Etching selectivity (solid lines), Si3N4 and 
resist etching rates (dashed and dotted lines, respectively). Cross-section of waveguides, 
fabricated with various etching processes are shown on SEM images.

At the next step platen temperature was varied (Fig. 8). Etching with lower temperature 

causes sidewalls with higher roughness and worse sidewall angle for all regimes. At lower 
pressure this effect is associated with higher temperature gradient and stronger ion 
bombardment. At higher pressure, deposited passivation film becomes more plasma resistant 
at low temperature and cause rough sidewalls formation. The selectivity also increases with 
low temperature etching for all regimes. As mentioned earlier, this effect may be associated 
with a change in the resist structure during cooling, which is confirmed by a decrease in the 
resist etching rate.

Fig. 8. Waveguide parameters versus platen temperature: (a) RMS sidewall roughness (solid 
lines) and sidewalls angle of inclination (dashed lines). (b) Etching selectivity, Si3N4 and resist 
etching rates (dashed and dotted lines, respectively). Cross-section of waveguides, fabricated 
with various etching processes are shown on SEM images.


It can be noticed that most etching processes, providing sidewall roughness decrease, have 

high etching rate, low selectivity and strong deviation of sidewalls angle from 90 º. For further 
Si3N4 ICP-RIE process optimization the variation of working pressure were carried out to 
increase etching selectivity. It was found, that RMS sidewall roughness dependence on working 
pressure has an extremum at 30 mTorr (Fig. 9a). This effect can be explained by the fact that 
with an increase in pressure, the amount of gas particles increases, while power fed in the 
discharge is sufficient to ensure bombardment. At pressures above 30 mTorr the input power 
becomes insufficient for effective bombardment, and reactive etching mechanism begins to 
dominate in the etching process. This is confirmed, firstly, by the appearance of a strong lateral 
etching during the process (SEM images inset in Fig. 9), and secondly, by a sharp increase in
the etching selectivity to 2.2 (Fig. 9b). In order to achieve low RMS sidewall roughness while 
keeping high selectivity and vertical sidewalls we carried out additional optimization of our 
etching process (see Supplementary materials).

Fig. 9. Waveguides parameters versus working pressure: (a) RMS sidewall roughness (solid 
lines) and sidewalls angle of inclination (dashed lines). (b) Etching selectivity, Si3N4 and resist 
etching rates (dashed and dotted lines, respectively). Cross-section of waveguides, fabricated 
with various etching processes are shown on SEM images.

Finally, we optimized etching chemistry. We used CF4 as the etchant. For slight passivation 

of sidewalls, we used CHF3. Unlike common chemicals for etching Si3N4 like CHF3/O2 or 
CHF3/O2/N2 [26, 43, 57], we removed oxygen as it limits selectivity to resist. Etching and 
passivation balance was achieved with optimized CF4 and CHF3 ratio at certain values of 
etching parameters. As a result of experiments, we developed ICP-RIE of Si3N4, which allows 
achieving almost vertical (89.5º) sidewalls with decrease in RMS sidewall roughness from 
1.85 ± 0.21 nm to 1.08 ± 0.06 nm and to as low as 0.85 ± 0.06 nm with optimized e-beam 
lithography. The selectivity of developed ICP-RIE process was increased from 0.8 to 1.4.


Fig. 10 Images of fabricated photonic circuits and structures: (a) Test photonic integrated circuit. 
(b) Single-mode submicron waveguide cross-section. (c) Top view of y-splitter. (d) Top view of  
microring resonator coupling section. (e) Top view of grating coupler. (f) Top view of taper 
coupler. (g) Multiport photonic integrated circuit. (h) Array of 6 tunable beam splitters (Mach-
Zehnder interferometers with thermo-optic phase shifters). (i) Top view of directional coupler.

With the optimized technology, we are able to fabricate photonic integrated circuits 

consisting of single-mode submicron waveguides, y-splitters, microring resonators, grating and 
taper couplers, tunable beam splitters (Mach-Zehnder interferometers with thermo-optic phase 
shifters) and directional couplers. Images of fabricated photonic circuits and structures are 
shown in Figure 10.

4.
Waveguide propagation losses modeling 

To obtain propagation losses due to scattering one commonly uses the analytical approach by 
Payne and Lacey and the following expression [62]:

𝛼 [𝑑𝐵

𝑐𝑚] = 4,34
𝜎2

𝑘0√2𝑑4𝑛1

𝑔𝑓,
(1)

where α is the waveguide scattering loss in dB per unit length, σ is the RMS deviation, k0 is the 
free space wave vector, d and n1 are the waveguide half width and refractive index of Si3N4
core, respectively. Function g is determined purely by the waveguide geometry, and f is a 
function of correlation length and other parameters as defined by Payne and Lacey [63].

Payne-Lacey model provides rapid calculation of losses having good agreement with fully 

three-dimensional FDTD simulation and experimental results [64, 65]. However, it is 
impossible to estimate the influence of the roughness exponent H on scattering losses with 
classical analytical approach. In this work, we propose the numerical solution for the Payne-
Lacey model, which provides estimation of the influence of three main roughness parameters, 
measured with AFM or SEM – root mean square roughness σ, correlation length ξ and 
roughness exponent H (more information about our numerical approach could be found in 
Supplementary materials).

Figure 11 shows the calculation results for propagation losses from scattering for single-

mode waveguides with 550 nm width at 925 nm wavelength.


Fig. 11. Influence of scattering propagation losses from: (a) RMS roughness and correlation 
length at H = 0.5. (b) RMS roughness and roughness exponent at ξ = 100 nm. (c) roughness 
exponent and correlation length at σ = 1.0 nm.

Based on the numerical simulation results, the following conclusions were made.

1.
High RMS roughness leads to increase of waveguide mode field interaction with sidewalls 
roughness, thus to higher scattering losses.

2.
As correlation length tends to zero, mode field is less sensitive to changes in roughness at 
this frequency and is less scattered, even at large values of σ, which leads to low 
propagation losses. However, at very short wavelengths, low correlation length can bring 
higher impact. With an increase in ξ, an extremum is observed, indicating an increase in 
the interaction of the mode field with sidewalls and an increase in losses. As ξ tends to 
infinity, implying no roughness, the loss tends to zero, since the frequency of the change 
in the roughness amplitude is also tends to zero.

3.
At higher roughness exponent values, the mode field sensitivity to amplitude roughness is 
at maximum, leading to high scattering losses. However, when roughness exponent is low, 
that corresponds to high-frequency sidewall roughness, at our wavelength of interest the 
mode field is insensitive to such high-frequency profile variations, leading to low 
propagation losses, even at high RMS roughness. Same as correlation length, roughness 
exponent can have a higher impact on propagation losses at shorter wavelengths.

5.
Optical characterization

The “cut-back” propagation loss analysis [66, 67] in fabricated Si3N4 waveguides has been 
performed using the optical characterization setup shown in Fig. 12a. The light from a 
continuous wave (CW) laser source at 925 nm wavelength was first coupled in single-mode 
fiber. TE-polarized light was formed with fiber polarization controller (FPC). Using 6-axis 
micrometer coupling stages, light from fiber was then coupled to waveguides through on-chip 
grating couplers. After propagating in photonic integrated circuit, the light was coupled out to 
power detector (PD). Propagation losses were measured on test photonic integrated circuits 
with various lengths of waveguides, fabricated with initial fabrication process, optimized e-
beam lithography and optimized fabrication process (optimized e-beam lithography and ICP-
RIE).


Fig. 12. Optical characterization of fabricated waveguides. (a) Optical characterization setup for 
“cut-back” propagation loss analysis in fabricated waveguides. (b) Measured propagation losses 
in fabricated Si3N4 waveguides with different length and fabrication process. (c) Demonstration 
of thermo-optic light switching with fabricated tunable beam splitters. (d) Theoretical scattering 
losses in fabricated waveguides, calculated with proposed numerical solution for the Payne-
Lacey model. (e) Top view optical microscope image of fabricated structures (grating couplers 
and waveguides) for propagation losses measurement. (f) Top view optical microscope image 
of fabricated tunable beam splitters. CW: continuous wave laser, FPC: fiber polarization 
controller, PD: photodetector, DAQ: data acquisition system.

Figure 12b shows measured propagation losses in waveguides versus waveguide length. 

With the initial fabrication technology, a large spread of losses is observed at measured 
waveguides due to the presence of large stitches between the working fields and high sidewall 
roughness (blue line in Fig. 12b). As a result of e-beam lithography optimization, stitching error 
was greatly reduced, leading to decrease in coupling losses from 10.92 dB to 7.27 dB. Resist 
roughness improvement with optimized lithography shows reduction in propagation losses 
from 3.08 dB/cm to 1.10 dB/cm (orange line in Fig. 12b). Optimization of the ICP-RIE further 
reduced the RMS sidewall roughness of the waveguides, leading to propagation losses as low 
as 0.55 dB/cm (green line in Fig.12b). This result confirms that the main contribution to the 
propagation losses at 925 nm wavelength is made by scattering from waveguides bottom, 
sidewalls and upper surfaces roughness. Fabrication process optimization leads to roughness of 
waveguide sidewalls reduction by factor of 2, resulting in 6 times improvement in losses. 
Thermo-optic light switching with fabricated tunable beam splitters is shown on Figure 12c, 
demonstrating high quality and energy-efficient heaters fabrication process. 

The results for scattering losses calculation with proposed numerical method are shown in 

Fig. 12d. Taking into account the roughness parameters measured on waveguides with initial 
fabrication process, the optimized e-beam lithography and the optimized fabrication process 
(for more information see Supplementary materials) we compared experimentally obtained 
propagation losses with calculated ones. The proposed numerical solution allows fairly accurate 
simulation of propagation losses in waveguides based on data from roughness parameters 
measurement, obtained with AFM or SEM with less than 10% deviation from experiment.

6.
Conclusion

In this work we developed the fabrication process of low-loss silicon nitride photonic integrated 
circuits with in-depth study of e-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma reactive ion 
etching steps for sidewalls roughness and profile angle improvement. The optimized multipass 


e-beam lithography process with reduced working field and warm development of conductive 
polymer results in stitching error reduction down to 1.04 ± 1.35 nm, vertical (89.5º) resist 
sidewalls and resist sidewall roughness as low as 1.17 ± 0.13 nm. The optimized ICP-RIE 
process based on the combination of etching and passivation effects of CF4 and CHF3 allows 
to reduce the final waveguide sidewalls roughness down to 0.85 ± 0.06 nm. With the optimized 
fabrication process, propagation losses in silicon nitride waveguides were reduced from 
3.1 dB/cm to 0.55 dB/cm at 925 nm wavelength, which is the lowest demonstrated to date losses 
for single-mode submicron waveguides [15, 16, 38, 39, 40]. We proposed the enhanced Payne-
Lacey analytical model for waveguide propagation losses modeling, which allows taking into 
account all the measured roughness parameters (σ, ξ and H) for much more accurate loss 
estimation. Our result demonstrates the high potential for further improvements of propagation 
losses below 0.1 dB/cm by employing high optical quality SiO2 cladding, chemical-mechanical 
polishing and multistep annealing of silicon nitride stack.

Acknowledgments

Samples were made at the BMSTU Nanofabrication Facility (FMN Laboratory, FMNS REC, 
ID 74300) and measured at MSU Quantum Technology Centre.

Disclosures

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Data availability

The data that supports the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request.

Supplemental document

See Supplement 1 for supporting content.

References

1.
J. Zhang, A. De Groote, A. Abbasi, R. Loi, J. O’Callaghan, B. Corbett, A. J. Trindade, C. A. Bower, and 
Gunther Roelkens, “Silicon photonics fiber-to-the-home transceiver array based on transfer-printing-based 
integration of III-V photodetectors,” Opt. Express 25, 14290-14299 (2017).

2.
Y. Liu, S. Wang, J. Wang, X. Li, M. Yu, Y. Cai, “Silicon photonic transceivers in the field of optical 
communication”, Nano Communication Networks 31, 100379 (2022).

3.
E. S. Lotkov, A. S. Baburin, I. A. Ryzhikov, O. S. Sorokina, A. I. Ivanov, A. V. Zverev, V. V. Ryzhkov, I. V. 
Bykov, A. V. Baryshev, Y. V. Panfilov, and I. A. Rodionov, “ITO film stack engineering for low-loss silicon 
optical modulators,” Sci Rep 12, 6321 (2022).

4.
C. Adamopoulos, A. Gharia, A. Niknejad, V. Stojanović, and M. Anwar, “Microfluidic Packaging Integration 
with Electronic-Photonic Biosensors Using 3D Printed Transfer Molding,” Biosensors 10(11), 177 (2020).

5.
E. A. Rank, R. Sentosa, D. J. Harper, M. Salas, A. Gaugutz, D. Seyringer, S. Nevlacsil, A. Maese-Novo, M.
Eggeling, P. Muellner, R. Hainberger, M.Sagmeister, J. Kraft, R. A. Leitgeb, and W. Drexler, “Toward optical 
coherence tomography on a chip: in vivo three-dimensional human retinal imaging using photonic integrated 
circuit-based arrayed waveguide gratings,” Light Sci. Appl. 10, 6 (2021).

6.
X. Sun, L. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and W. Zhang, “Si Photonics for Practical LiDAR Solutions,” Applied Sciences
9(20), 4225 (2019).

7.
Y. Guo, Y. Guo, C. Li, H. Zhang, X. Zhou, and L. Zhang, “Integrated Optical Phased Arrays for Beam Forming 
and Steering,” Applied Sciences 11(9), 4017 (2021).

8.
J. W. Choi, B. -U. Sohn, E. Sahin, G. F. R. Chen, P. Xing, D. K. T. Ng, B. J. Eggleton, and D. T. H. Tan, “An 
optical parametric Bragg amplifier on a CMOS chip,” Nanophotonics 10(13), pp. 3507-3518 (2021).

9.
P. Marin-Palomo, J. Kemal, M. Karpov, A. Kordts, J. Pfeifle, M. H. P. Pfeiffer, P. Trocha, S. Wolf, V. Brasch, 
M. H. Anderson, R. Rosenberger, K. Vijayan, W. Freude, T. J. Kippenberg, and C. Koos “Microresonator-
based solitons for massively parallel coherent optical communications,” Nature 546, 274-279 (2017).

10.
A. Katumba, M. Freiberger, F. Laporte, A. Lugnan, S. Sackesyn, C. Ma, J. Dambre, and P. Bienstman, 
“Neuromorphic Computing Based on Silicon Photonics and Reservoir Computing,” IEEE Journal of Selected 
Topics in Quantum Electronics, 24(6), pp. 1-10 (2018).

11.
Y. Shen, N. C. Harris, S. Skirlo, M. Prabhu, T. Baehr-Jones, M. Hochberg, X. Sun, S. Zhao, H. Larochelle, D.
Englund, and M. Soljačić, “Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits,” Nature Photon. 11, 441-446 
(2017).


12.
V. V. Kornienko, I. A. Nechepurenko, P. N. Tananaev, E. D. Chubchev, A. S. Baburin, V. V. Echeistov, A. V. 
Zverev, I. I. Novoselov, I. A. Kruglov, I. A. Rodionov, A. V. Baryshev, and A. V. Dorofeenko, “Machine 
Learning for Optical Gas Sensing: A leaky-mode humidity sensor as example,” IEEE Sensors Journal 20, 
6954–6963 (2020). 

13.
S. I. Bogdanov, O. A. Makarova, X. Xu, Z. O. Martin, A. S. Lagutchev, M. Olinde, D. Shah, S. N. Chowdhury, 
A. R. Gabidullin, I. A. Ryzhikov, I. A. Rodionov, A. V. Kildishev, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, A. Boltasseva, V. M. 
Shalaev, and J. B. Khurgin, “Ultrafast quantum photonics enabled by coupling plasmonic nanocavities to 
strongly radiative antennas,” Optica 7, 463-469 (2020).

14.
C. Taballione, T. A. W. Wolterink, J. Lugani, A. Eckstein, B. A. Bell, R. Grootjans, I. Visscher, D. Geskus, C. 
G. H. Roeloffzen, J. J. Renema, I. A. Walmsley, P. W. H. Pinkse, and K. -J. Boller, “8×8 reconfigurable 
quantum photonic processor based on silicon nitride waveguides,” Opt. Express 27, 26842-26857 (2019).

15.
C. Taballione, R.van der Meer, H. J. Snijders, P. Hooijschuur, J. P. Epping, M. de Goede, B. Kassenberg, P. 
Venderbosch., C. Toebes, H. van den Vlekkert, P. W. H. Pinkse, and J. J. Renema, “A universal fully 
reconfigurable 12-mode quantum photonic processor,” Mater. Quantum. Technol. 1, 035002 (2021).

16.
C. Taballione, M. Anguita, M. de Goede, P. Venderbosch, B. Kassenberg, H. Snijders, N. Kannan, D. Smith, J.
P. Epping, R. van der Meer, P. W. H. Pinkse, H. van den Vlekkert, and J. J. Renema, “20-Mode Universal 
Quantum Photonic Processor,” arXiv:2203.01801 [quant-ph] (2022).

17.
M. de Goede, H. Snijders, P. Venderbosch, B. Kassenberg, N. Kannan, D. H. Smith, C. Taballione, J. P. 
Epping, H. van den Vlekkert, and J. J. Renema, “High Fidelity 12-Mode Quantum Photonic Processor 
Operating at InGaAs Quantum Dot Wavelength,” arXiv:2204.05768 [quant-ph] (2022).

18.
A. Chanana, H. Larocque, R. Moreira, J. Carolan, B. Guha, V. Anant, J. D. Song, D. Englund, D. J. 
Blumenthal, K. Srinivasan, and M. Davanco “Triggered single-photon generation and resonance fluorescence in 
ultra-low loss integrated photonic circuits,” arXiv:2202.04615 [physics.optics] (2022).

19.
S. I. Bogdanov, M. Y. Shalaginov, A. S. Lagutchev, C.-C. Chiang, D. Shah, A. S. Baburin, I. A. Ryzhikov, I. A. 
Rodionov, A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva, and V. M. Shalaev, “Ultrabright Room-temperature sub-nanosecond 
emission from single nitrogen-vacancy centers coupled to Nanopatch antennas,” Nano Letters 18, 4837–4844 
(2018). 

20.
W. Bogaerts, and S.K. Selvaraja, “Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) technology for photonic integrated circuits 
(PICs),” Silicon-On-Insulator (SOI) Technology, O. Kononchuk, and B. -Y. Nguyen, eds. (Woodhead 
Publishing, 2014), pp. 395-434.

21.
S. Y. Siew, B. Li, F. Gao; H. Y. Zheng, W. Zhang, P. Guo, S. W. Xie, A. Song, B. Dong, L. W. Luo, C. Li, X. 
Luo, and G.-Q. Lo, “Review of Silicon Photonics Technology and Platform Development,” Journal of 
Lightwave Technology 39(13), pp. 4374-4389 (2021).

22.
Z. Yan, Y. Han, L. Lin, Y. Xue, C. Ma, W. K. Ng, K. Si. Wong, and K. M. Lau, “A monolithic InP/SOI 
platform for integrated photonics,” Light Sci. Appl. 10, 200 (2021).

23.
M. Smit, K. Williams, and J. van der Tol , “Past, present, and future of InP-based photonic integration”, APL 
Photonics 4, 050901 (2019).

24.
T. Sharma, J. Wang, B. K. Kaushik, Z. Cheng, R. Kumar, Z. Wei, and X. Li, “Review of Recent Progress on 
Silicon Nitride-Based Photonic Integrated Circuits,” IEEE Access 8, pp. 195436-195446 (2020).

25.
F. Gardes, A. Shooa, G. De Paoli, I. Skandalos, S. Ilie, T. Rutirawut, W. Talataisong, J. Faneca, V. Vitali, Y. 
Hou, T. D. Bucio, I. Zeimpekis, C. Lacava, and P. Petropoulos, “A Review of Capabilities and Scope for 
Hybrid Integration Offered by Silicon-Nitride-Based Photonic Integrated Circuits,” Sensors 22(11), 4227
(2022).

26.
M. W. Puckett, K. Liu, N. Chauhan, Q. Zhao, N. Jin, H. Cheng, J. Wu, R. O. Behunin, P. T. Rakich, K. D. 
Nelson, and D. J. Blumenthal, “422 Million intrinsic quality factor planar integrated all-waveguide resonator 
with sub-MHz linewidth,” Nat. Commun. 12, 934 (2021).

27.
M. Theurer, M. Moehrle, A. Sigmund, K.-O. Velthaus, R. M. Oldenbeuving, L. Wevers, F. M. Postma, R.
Mateman, F. Schreuder, D. Geskus, K. Wörhoff, R. Dekker, Rene G. Heideman, and M. Schell, “Flip-Chip 
Integration of InP to SiN Photonic Integrated Circuits,” Journal of Lightwave Technology 38(9), pp. 2630-2636
(2020).

28.
P. Wang, G. Luo, Y. Xu, Y. Li, Y. Su, J. Ma, R. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Zhou, Y. Zhang, and J. Pan, “Design and 
fabrication of a SiN-Si dual-layer optical phased array chip,” Photon. Res. 8, 912-919 (2020).

29.
X. Ji, F. A. S. Barbosa, S. P. Roberts, A. Dutt, J. Cardenas, Y. Okawachi, A. Bryant, A. L. Gaeta, and M. 
Lipson, “Ultra-low-loss on-chip resonators with sub-milliwatt parametric oscillation threshold,” Optica 4, 619-
624 (2017).

30.
J. Hwan Song, T. D. Kongnyuy, P. De Heyn, S. Lardenois, R. Jansen, and X. Rottenberg, “Low-Loss 
Waveguide Bends by Advanced Shape for Photonic Integrated Circuits,” Journal of Lightwave Technology
38(12), pp. 3273-3279 (2020).

31.
X. Ji, J. Liu, J. He, R. N. Wang, Z. Qiu, J. Riemensberger, and T. J. Kippenberg, “Compact, spatial-mode-
interaction-free, ultralow-loss, nonlinear photonic integrated circuits,” Commun. Phys. 5, 84 (2022).

32.
M. J. Shaw, J. Guo, G. A. Vawter, S. Habermehl, and C. T. Sullivan, “Fabrication techniques for low-loss 
silicon nitride waveguides,” Proc. SPIE 5720, 1 (2005).

33.
M. H. P. Pfeiffer, C. Herkommer, J. Liu, T. Morais, M. Zervas, M. Geiselmann, and T. J. Kippenberg, 
“Photonic Damascene Process for Low-Loss, High-Confinement Silicon Nitride Waveguides,” IEEE Journal of 
Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 24(4), pp. 1-11 (2018).


34.
H. El Dirani, M. Casale, S. Kerdiles, C. Socquet-Clerc, X. Letartre, C. Monat, and C. Sciancalepore. “Crack-
Free Silicon-Nitride-on-Insulator Nonlinear Circuits for Continuum Generation in the C-Band,” IEEE 
Photonics Technology Letters 30(4), pp. 355-358 (2018).

35.
M. H. P. Pfeiffer, J.Liu, A. S. Raja, T. Morais, B. Ghadiani, and T. J. Kippenberg, “Ultra-smooth silicon nitride 
waveguides based on the Damascene reflow process: fabrication and loss origins,” Optica 5, 884-892 (2018).

36.
X. Ji, S. Roberts, M. Corato-Zanarella, and M. Lipson, “Methods to achieve ultra-high quality factor silicon 
nitride resonators”, APL Photonics 6, 071101 (2021).

37.
C. G. H. Roeloffzen, M. Hoekman, E. J. Klein, L. S. Wevers, R. B. Timens, D. Marchenko, D. Geskus, R.
Dekker, A. Alippi, R. Grootjans, A. van Rees, R. M. Oldenbeuving, J. P. Epping, R. G. Heideman, K. Wörhoff, 
A. Leinse, D. Geuzebroek, E. Schreuder, P. W. L. van Dijk, I. Visscher, C. Taddei, Y. Fan, C. Taballione, Y.
Liu, D. Marpaung, L. Zhuang, M. Benelajla, and K.-J. Boller, “Low-Loss Si3N4 TriPleX Optical Waveguides: 
Technology and Applications Overview,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 24(4), pp. 
1-21 (2018).

38.
W. Jin, Q.-F. Yang, L. Chang, B. Shen, H. Wang, M. A. Leal, L. Wu, M. Gao, A. Feshali, M. Paniccia, K. J. 
Vahala, and J. E. Bowers, “Hertz-linewidth semiconductor lasers using CMOS-ready ultra-high-Q 
microresonators,” Nat. Photonics 15, 346–353 (2021).

39.
N. A. Tyler, D. Fowler, S. Malhouitre, S. Garcia, P. Grosse, W. Rabaud, and B. Szelag, “SiN integrated optical 
phased arrays for two-dimensional beam steering at a single near-infrared wavelength,” Opt. Express 27, 5851-
5858 (2019).

40.
K. Erotokritou, R. M. Heath, G. G. Taylor, C. Tian, A. Banerjee, A. Casaburi, C. M. Natarajan, S. Miki, H. 
Terai, and R. H. Hadfield, “Nano-optical photoresponse mapping of superconducting nanowires with enhanced 
near infrared absorption,” Supercond. Sci. Technol. 31, 125012 (2018).

41.
X. Lu, Q. Li, D. A. Westly, G. Moille, A. Singh, V. Anant, and K. Srinivasan, “Chip-integrated visible–telecom 
entangled photon pair source for quantum communication,” Nat. Phys. 15, 373–381 (2019).

42.
A. Z. Subramanian, P. Neutens, A. Dhakal, R. Jansen, T. Claes, X. Rottenberg, F. Peyskens, S. K. Selvaraja, P. 
Helin, B. Dubois, K. Leyssens, S. Severi, P. Deshpande, R. Baets, and P. Van Dorpe, “Low-Loss Singlemode 
PECVD Silicon Nitride Photonic Wire Waveguides for 532–900 nm Wavelength Window Fabricated Within a 
CMOS Pilot Line,” IEEE Photonics Journal, 5(6), pp. 2202809-2202809 (2013).

43.
Q. Wilmart, H. El Dirani, N. Tyler, D. Fowler, S. Malhouitre, S. Garcia, M. Casale, S. Kerdiles, K. Hassan, C. 
Monat, X. Letartre, A. Kamel, M. Pu, K. Yvind, L. K. Oxenløwe , W. Rabaud, C. Sciancalepore, B. Szelag, and 
S. Olivier, “A Versatile Silicon-Silicon Nitride Photonics Platform for Enhanced Functionalities and 
Applications,” Applied Sciences 9(2), 255 (2019).

44.
N. G. Orji, T. V. Vorburger, J. Fu, R. G. Dixson, C. V. Nguyen, and J. Raja, “Line edge roughness metrology 
using atomic force microscopes,” Meas. Sci. Technol. 16, 2147 (2005).

45.
S. Roberts, X. Ji, J. Cardenas, M. Corato-Zanarella, and M. Lipson, “Measurements and modeling of atomic-
scale sidewall roughness and losses in integrated photonic devices,” arXiv:2105.11477 [physics.optics] (2022).

46.
A. Yamaguchi, and J. Yamamoto, “Influence of image processing on line-edge roughness in CD-SEM 
measurement”, Proc. SPIE 6922, 1 (2008).

47.
T. Verduin, P. Kruit, and C. W. Hagen, “Determination of line edge roughness in low dose top-down scanning 
electron microscopy images,” Proc. SPIE 9050, 1 (2014).

48.
C. A. Mack, “Analytic form for the power spectral density in one, two, and three dimensions,” Journal of 
Micro/Nanolithography, MEMS, and MOEMS 10(4), 040501 (2011).

49.
C. A. Mack, “Systematic errors in the measurement of power spectral density,” Journal of 
Micro/Nanolithography, MEMS, and MOEMS 12(3), 033016 (2013). 

50.
C. A. Mack, “More systematic errors in the measurement of power spectral density”, Proc. SPIE 9424, 1 
(2015).

51.
E. W. Ong, N. M. Fahrenkopf, and D. D. Coolbaugh, “SiNx bilayer grating coupler for photonic systems,” OSA 
Continuum 1, 13-25 (2018)

52.
A. Begović, L. G. Carpenter, S. K. Binti, M. R. Uddin, A. Dikshit, C. Baiocco, G. Leake, Z. R. Huang, N. M. 
Fahrenkopf, and David Harame, “Facet optimization for edge-coupling of fiber to foundry fabricated SOI 
waveguides,” Proc. SPIE 12004, 2610538 (2022).

53.
A. S. Baburin, E. S. Lotkov, E. V. Sergeev, M. Andronic, D. A. Baklykov, V. E. Stukalova, K. A. Buzaverov, 
S. S. Avdeev, I. A. Ryzhikov, I. V. Dyakonov, N. Skryabin, M. Yu. Saygin, S. P. Kulik, and I. A. Rodionov, 
“Tunable low-loss silicon nitride integrated circuits,” in 2022 International Conference Laser Optics (ICLO)
(2022), pp. 1-1.

54.
D.A. Baklykov, M. Andronic, O. S. Sorokina, S. S. Avdeev, K. A. Buzaverov, I. A. Ryzhikov, and I. A. 
Rodionov, “Self-Controlled Cleaving Method for Silicon DRIE Process Cross-Section Characterization,” 
Micromachines 12(5), 534 (2021).

55.
A. L. Bogdanov, J. Lapointe, and J. H. Schmid, “Electron-beam lithography for photonic waveguide 
fabrication: Measurement of the effect of field stitching errors on optical performance and evaluation of a new 
compensation method,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 30, 031606 (2012).

56.
D. M. Tennant, R. Fullowan, H. Takemura, M. Isobe, and Y. Nakagawa, “Evaluation of a 100 kV thermal field 
emission electron-beam nanolithography system,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B: 
Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 18, 3089-3094 (2000).


57.
P. Muñoz, Y. S. Yong, M. Dijkstra, F. B. Segerink, and S. M. García-Blanco, “Double metal layer lift-off 
process for the robust fabrication of plasmonic nano-antenna arrays on dielectric substrates using e-beam 
lithography,” Opt. Mater. Express 9, 2046-2056 (2019).

58.
R. K. Dey, and B. Cui, “Stitching error reduction in electron beam lithography with in-situ feedback using self-
developing resist,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 31, 06F409 (2013).

59.
M. Muhammad, S. C. Buswell, S. K. Dew, and M. Stepanova, “Nanopatterning of PMMA on insulating 
surfaces with various anticharging schemes using 30 keV electron beam lithography,” Journal of Vacuum 
Science & Technology B 29, 06F304 (2011).

60.
A. A. Dobronosova, A. I. Ignatov, O. S. Sorokina, N. A. Orlikovskiy, M. Andronik, A. R. Matanin, K. O. 
Buzaverov, D. A. Ezenkova, S. A. Avdeev, D. A. Baklykov, V. V. Ryzhkov, A. M. Merzlikin, A. V. Baryshev, 
I. A. Ryzhikov, and I. A. Rodionov, “Low-damage reactive ion etching of nanoplasmonic waveguides with 
Ultrathin Noble Metal Films,” Applied Sciences 9, 4441 (2019).

61.
M. Schaepkens, T. E. F. M. Standaert, N. R. Rueger, P. G. M. Sebel, G. S. Oehrlein, and J. M. Cook, “Study of 
the SiO2-to-Si3N4 etch selectivity mechanism in inductively coupled fluorocarbon plasmas and a comparison 
with the SiO2-to-Si mechanism,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A 17, 26-37 (1999).

62.
F. Grillot, L. Vivien, S. Laval, and E. Cassan, “Propagation loss in single-mode ultrasmall square silicon-on-
insulator optical waveguides,” Journal of Lightwave Technology 24(2), pp. 891-896 (2006).

63.
F. P. Payne, and J. P. R. Lacey, “A theoretical analysis of scattering loss from planar optical waveguides,” Opt. 
Quant. Electron. 26, 977–986 (1994).

64.
K. P. Yap, A. Delage, J. Lapointe, B. Lamontagne, J. H. Schmid, P. Waldron, B. A. Syrett, and S. Janz, 
“Correlation of Scattering Loss, Sidewall Roughness and Waveguide Width in Silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) Ridge 
Waveguides,” Journal of Lightwave Technology 27(18), pp. 3999-4008 (2009).

65.
E. Jaberansary, T. M. B. Masaud, M. M. Milosevic, M. Nedeljkovic, G. Z. Mashanovich, and H. M. H. Chong, 
“Scattering Loss Estimation Using 2-D Fourier Analysis and Modeling of Sidewall Roughness on Optical 
Waveguides,” IEEE Photonics Journal 5(3), pp. 6601010-6601010 (2013).

66.
Z. Liao, and J. S. Aitchison, “Precision etching for multi-level AlGaAs waveguides,” Opt. Mater. Express 7, 
895-903 (2017).

67.
W. D. Sacher, X. Luo, Y. Yang, F.-D. Chen, T. Lordello, J. C. C. Mak, X. Liu, T. Hu, T. Xue, P. G.-Q. Lo, M. 
L. Roukes, and J. K. S. Poon, “Visible-light silicon nitride waveguide devices and implantable neurophotonic 
probes on thinned 200 mm silicon wafers,” Opt. Express 27, 37400-37418 (2019).


