Controlled Ordering of Room-Temperature Magnetic Skyrmions in a 

Polar Van der Waals Magnet

Peter Meisenheimer1,*,†, Hongrui Zhang1,*,†, David Raftrey2,3,†, Xiang Chen2,5,†, Ying-Ting 

Chan4, Rui Chen1, Reed Yalisove1, Mary C. Scott1,6, Jie Yao1, Weida Wu4, Peter 

Fischer2,3, Robert J. Birgeneau2,5, Ramamoorthy Ramesh1,2,5

† Authors contributed equally to this work

1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Univ. of California, Berkeley 

2 Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 

3 Department of Physics, Univ. of California, Santa Cruz

4 Department of Physics Rutgers University

5 Department of Physics Univ. of California, Berkeley

6 Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

* Corresponding Authors; meisep@berkeley.edu, hongruizhang@berkeley.edu

Abstract:

Control and understanding of ensembles of skyrmions is important for realization of future 

technologies. In particular, the order-disorder transition associated with the 2D lattice of 

magnetic skyrmions can have significant implications for transport and other dynamic 

functionalities. To date, skyrmion ensembles have been primarily studied in bulk crystals, 

or as isolated skyrmions in thin film devices. Here, we investigate the condensation of the 

skyrmion phase at room temperature and zero field in a polar, Van der Waals magnet. 

We demonstrate that we can engineer an ordered skyrmion crystal through structural 

confinement on the 𝜇m scale, showing control over this order-disorder transition on scales 

relevant for device applications.

1. Introduction

Skyrmions are topologically nontrivial quasiparticles made up of a collection of rotating 

magnetic spins[1–3] or, more recently, electric dipoles[4,5]. In many magnetic systems, this 

stems from broken inversion symmetry in the crystal, resulting in a Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya 


interaction (DMI), or at interfaces, leading to the Rashba effect, that can stabilize such 

topologically nontrivial spin configurations[2,6]. Due to the topological protection from weak 

fluctuations and the ability to manipulate them with a magnetic field or charge current, 

magnetic skyrmions are of significant interest for next generation information 

technologies[7–11]. Neuromorphic computing architectures based on skyrmions have been 

proposed, using the diffusion of skyrmions and the resulting magnetoresistance to carry 

out probabilistic computing[12–14]. Additionally, magnetic skyrmions can be used to control 

spins through the topological Hall effect, where an electron interacts with the Berry 

curvature of the skyrmion to generate a parallel spin current[15–17]. These phenomena, 

both skyrmion motion and the topological Hall effect, are sensitive to the ground state of 

the system, wherein the arrangement of the skyrmions can have significant 

consequences on the resulting properties[6,18–20]. A fundamental understanding and 

pathways to control such ensembles of skyrmions is then important for realization of 

advanced computational devices based on skyrmion kinetics or spin transport. In this vein, 

the arrangement of magnetic skyrmions becomes exciting from perspectives of both 

fundamental physics and device engineering.

Figure 1: Layered polar magnet. a The unit cell of FCGT, showing the AA’ stacking which breaks 

inversion symmetry and allows for a nonzero DMI. b Hexagonally packed lattice of Néel skyrmions 

which, if extended, shows the 2D solid phase. c In a real sample, these hexagonally packed domains 


are broken up by topological defects. Lattice vectors are shown in pink, which are bent by the 

presence of dislocations in the skyrmion lattice. The scale bar is 2 𝜇m.

Since their discovery, control of the shape[21–24] and long range ordering[25–27] of magnetic 

skyrmion ensembles has been an open challenge, often explored through magnetic field, 

temperature and thin film interactions. In two-dimensional (2D) systems, in the absence 

of structural defects or kinetic limitations, the behavior of such 2D ensembles can be 

described by the Hohenberg-Mermin-Wagner theorem, which states that true long-range, 

crystalline order cannot exist due to logarithmic fluctuations of the order parameter. This 

occurs because the energy associated with site displacement is small enough in 2D that 

the increase in entropy associated with the formation of density fluctuations becomes 

favorable[28–30]. An extension of this is the Kosterlitz–Thouless–Halperin–Nelson–Young 

(KTHNY) theory, which describes the melting of 2D objects with continuous symmetry 

through the unbinding of topological defects due to thermal fluctuations[31–33]. KTHNY 

melting is distinct from 3D phase transitions in that it proceeds from an ordered solid to a 

disordered liquid through a quasi-ordered hexatic phase that is present in 2D systems. 

The solid-to-hexatic phase transition is driven by the dissociation of dislocation pairs; 

when dislocations with opposite Burgers’ vectors are coupled, as in the 2D solid phase, 

the topology of the lattice of skyrmions remains invariant and order is preserved. Upon 

dissociation of the dislocations, long-range translational order is destroyed, but 

orientational order is preserved. The hexatic-to-liquid phase transition is then driven by 

thermal unbinding of these dislocations into disclinations, which destroys any remaining 

orientational order[25,31–35]. This quasi-long-range degree of crystallinity in the hexatic 

phase distinguishes it from the liquid phase quantitatively, as the orientational correlation 

function decays algebraically instead of exponentially (Sup Figure 1). 

As a 2D arrangement of quasi-particles, one could envision that the ensemble of magnetic 

skyrmions can be explained within the framework of the KTHNY theory. This has been 

observed in certain cases in magnetic skyrmions[25], as well as in other 2D systems such 

as colloids, liquid crystals, atomic monolayers, and superconducting vortices[34–39]. The 

presence of crystallographic and/or magnetic disorder, however, will interfere with the 


ideal KTHNY behavior. Pinning sites that can affect the thermal motion and 

(dis)association of dislocations and disclinations will prevent model KTHNY phase 

transitions, and subsequently limit ordering to short-range[40,41]. In this way, phase 

transitions will be suggestive of hexatic and ordered phases, but the ordered state may 

not be realized on experimental timescales[27,42]. Understanding the emergence of long 

range order in the FCGT skyrmion ensemble is the focus of this work.

It has been previously shown, using Lorentz transmission electron microscopy, that 

Bloch-type magnetic skyrmions in bulk, single crystal Cu2OSeO3 can undergo KTHNY-

type melting with magnetic field[25]. Additionally, skyrmion ordering has been studied in 

the ultrathin magnetic film Ta (5 nm)/Co20Fe60B20 (0.9 nm)/Ta (0.08 nm)/MgO (2 nm)/Ta 

(5 nm), but KTHNY behavior was only alluded to and not fully realized[27]. The authors 

claim that the increased size of orientational domains in the sample is indicative of a 

transition to the hexatic phase, but the timescales required for the system to fully relax 

kinetically are not reasonably achievable. With this as background, in this work, we study 

the formation and solidification of Néel-type magnetic skyrmions in a novel layered, polar 

magnetic metal, (Fe0.5Co0.5)GeTe2. We observe an exponential change in the order 

parameters through the phase transition, suggesting that an ordered phase may be 

achievable at room temperature, if the role of structural/chemical defects or kinetic 

obstacles can be overcome. If the phase is frozen due to quenched disorder, there is 

some energy associated with the pinning and we hypothesize that we can overcome it to 

stabilize an ordered phase. Through spatial confinement of the device which imposes an 

ordering director field, we are able to overcome this pinning energy and engineer an 

ordered skyrmion crystal at room temperature, demonstrating control over this order-

disorder transition on scales relevant for device applications.

Here, (Fe0.5Co0.5)GeTe2 (FCGT) is studied as a polar magnetic metal that hosts stable 

magnetic skyrmions at room temperature[43,44]. The parent material Fe5GeTe2 is a 

centrosymmetric ferromagnet[45,46], but breaking of spatial inversion symmetry emerges 

at 50% Co alloying, likely due to chemical ordering of the transition metal site and a switch 

from ABC to AA’ stacking of the layers[44] (Figure 1a). Broken inversion symmetry gives 


rise to a bulk Dzyalozhinski-Moriya interaction (DMI), allowing for stabilization of stripe 

helimagnetic domains and/or a Néel skyrmion phase at room temperature[2]. Both the 

stripe domains and skyrmions can be observed using magnetic force microscopy (MFM), 

which probes the magnetostatic force on a scanning probe tip. Here, we use this 

technique to study the quasi-static phase changes of the skyrmion ensemble as a function 

of temperature and to evaluate our control over their ordering (Figure 1b,c).

2. Formation of topological defects

Figure 2: Temperature dependence of topological defects. a MFM images of the FCGT 

skyrmion lattice at different temperatures. Scale bars are 2 𝜇m. b Voronoi polyhedra showing the 

number of nearest neighbors for each skyrmion in the image. Green(purple) sites have more(less) 

than 6 nearest neighbors. When the green and the purple sites neighbor one another, a 

dislocation is formed from bound topological defects, which is indicative of the disordering in the 


hexatic phase. c Magnified image of bound defects, illustrating the 5-7 pairs caused by 

displacement of a single line of skyrmions. The image corresponds to the box in b. d Histogram 

of the number of nearest neighbors per site per temperature. We see that that the variance of the 

Gaussian distribution increases as the temperature is increased. e Peak value of the probabilities 

of an “ideal” 6-fold site in d, showing exponential decay above ~306 K.  f Radial distribution 

function and, g, correlation length as a function of temperature, showing similar decay as 

temperature is increased. Inset of part g is the lattice constant calculated from the first peak in f. 

Correlation length is defined as the last peak in f before the intensity decays to 5% of the first 

peak.  

When slowly cooled below the stabilization temperature of ~314 K, the helimagnetic 

domains present at high temperature condense into an assembly of Néel skyrmions[44], 

when perturbed by a magnetic field. This assembly is initially disordered, but its 

correlation length progressively increases as the temperature is further decreased, 

reaching a stable, but still disordered, state at ~306 K (Figure 2a). It can be reversed with 

temperature, melting from the stable glassy state and increasing in disorder, until the 

skyrmions disappear into a uniform magnetic state (Sup Figure 3). In the 2D-solid phase, 

lattice sites should be largely 6-fold coordinated, disturbed only by pairs of correlated 

dislocations (neighboring pairs of neighboring 5- and 7-fold sites) with opposite Burgers’ 

vectors, preserving translational and orientational order[31–33]. In the hexatic phase, these 

dislocations should no longer be bound, and free dislocations allow only quasi-long range 

orientational order. In our system, where 5(7)-fold coordinated sites are shown in purple 

(green) in Figure 2a,b, free dislocations are still present in significant concentrations 

below the transition temperature at ~306 K, indicating that we are not reaching a 2D-solid 

phase. Additionally, we see an increase in the number of free 5- or 7-fold sites 

(disclinations), as we increase the temperature from 302 K to 314 K.  This is a hallmark 

of a 2D-liquid, as the presence of disclinations will destroy the quasi-long-range order. 

These phase changes are generally suggestive of KTHNY behavior, but the fact that we 

have never observed the 2D-solid phase may be indicative of magnetic or crystalline 

defects randomly perturbing the system, forcing the skyrmion lattice into a state of 

quenched disorder when measured at laboratory timescales[27]. In the low-temperature, 


frozen state, ~75% of sites are 6-fold coordinated, which decreases exponentially as 

temperature is increased, reaching ~40% of sites being 6-fold just before the complete 

dissolution of the skyrmion phase (Figure 2d,e). This exponential trend is mirrored in the 

correlation length extracted from the radial distribution function, which increases from 

melting to ~308 K, at which point it saturates to a finite value. This saturation of the 

exponential correlation length is again indicative of frozen translational disorder, as this 

parameter should otherwise diverge in a solid[47]. 


8

3. Orientational order

Figure 3: Orientational order parameter. a Bond orientational maps of skyrmions as a 

function of temperature, where the magnitude of the bond orientational parameter, |Ψ6(𝐫)|, is 

shown in blue. Qualitatively, the orientational order of the lattice decreases with increasing 

temperature. Scale bars are 2 𝜇m. b Orientational correlation function, 𝑔6(𝑟), as a function of 

temperature, which follows an exponential decay at all temperatures. Fits to 𝑒

−𝑟

𝜉 are shown as 

dotted lines. The critical exponent, 𝑟−1

4, is shown as a solid black line. c The exponent 𝜉 from 

panel b plotted as a function of temperature, showing a clear exponential decrease as 

temperature is increased. Inset is the temperature range above saturation. d Average |Ψ6(𝐫)|

as a function of temperature, that shows exponential decay of the orientational order with 

respect to temperature falling off quickly above ~304 K. Inset shows the temperature range of 

clear exponential behavior. Light green points in parts c and d are superimposed from low-

temperature MFM measurements. 

Quantitative assignment of phases is possible through the bond orientational 

parameter, which exhibit different behaviors in the solid, hexatic, and liquid phases[25]. 

The bond orientational parameter can be defined as:

Ψ6(𝐫) =
1

𝑁𝑛𝑛

∑ 𝑒−6𝑖𝜃𝑗

𝑁𝑛𝑛

,
(1)

where 𝑁𝑛𝑛 is the number of nearest neighbors for the site at position 𝐫 and 𝜃𝑗 is the 

angle between the bond and an arbitrary but fixed axis. This goes to 1 if the bonds to 


9

the nearest neighbor sites are arranged in a hexagonal array, and close to 0 the further 

away from hexagonality. This is shown graphically per site in Figure 3a, where the 

shade of blue indicates the value of |Ψ6(𝐫)|. The correlation function of Ψ6(𝐫),

𝑔6(𝑟) = 1

𝑁𝑟

∑ Ψ6(𝐫𝑖) Ψ6

∗(𝐫𝑗)

𝑁𝑟

𝑖,𝑗

,
(2)

where 𝑁𝑟 is the number of sites distance 𝑟 apart, can then be used to quantitatively 

define the phase of the system. A solid phase will have long range order and 𝑔6(𝐫) will 

not decay over distance, the hexatic phase will have short- but not long-range order 

and 𝑔6(𝐫) will decay algebraically, and a liquid phase will decay exponentially (Sup. 

Figure 1). Here, we observe exponential decay of 𝑔6(𝐫) at all temperatures (Figure 3). 

This indicates that our system is in the 2D liquid phase at all temperatures. The rate of 

decay, 𝜉 , however, follows the same exponential trend with temperature as the 

probability of nearest neighbors in Figure 2, implying a phase change at the saturation 

temperature. We hypothesize that this condensation process between ~314 and 304 

K, which seems to kinetically freeze the skyrmions into a glassy state with very-short-

range ordered domains, would be the liquid-to-hexatic phase transition described in 

KTHNY theory but is inhibited by kinetic pinning. This could be due to crystallographic 

defects which introduce defects into the magnetic or orbital lattices[40,41,48,49]. Defect-

driven quenching of phase transitions and order in magnetic systems is specifically 

reminiscent of the breakdown of long-range order in random field Ising magnets[41,42], 

where magnetic defects make ordering kinetics extremely slow and the disordered 

state becomes frozen at low temperatures[47]. In our study, this is indeed supported by 

the average of Ψ6(𝐫), in addition to the correlation length in Figure 2g, which saturates 

below ~304 K, instead of continuously increasing as is observed in typical hexatic 

transitions[3,25,27]. Our conclusion is also in agreement with the results in ref. [27], in 

which the authors also do not observe a true hexatic phase in a magnetic skyrmion 

lattice, indicated by exponential decay in 𝑔6(𝑟), but attribute it to the arbitrarily long 

timescales associated with condensation. This is qualitatively consistent with results 

which show that pinning from crystalline defects can impede skyrmion motion[1,8,50] and 

it is supported by our own observation of many metastable skyrmion configurations, 

where a magnetic scanning probe tip with a large stray field must be used to “agitate” 

the phase and produce a dense skyrmion lattice (Sup Figure 4). If this is true and 

condensation of the hexatic and solid phases is not achievable on a reasonable 


10

timescale, can we introduce a new energy term to overcome the kinetic limitations of 

the bulk system and influence formation of the ordered phase? Intuitively, this should 

be possible as it is analogous to other disordered functional systems such as relaxor 

ferroelectrics[51] and spin glasses[52], and has been demonstrated in other magnetic 

systems with quenched disorder, where a strong fields can force an otherwise frozen 

spin lattice into a long-range ordered state[53].

4. Spatial Confinement

Previous studies on magnetic skyrmion lattices have indicated that physical 

confinement may influence the formation of isolated skyrmions or skyrmion 

arrays[24,26,54,55]. It has been previously shown in FeGe nanowires fabricated from bulk, 

single crystals, that creating devices on the scale of ~4-5 skyrmion widths can force 

the skyrmions into a close packed array[26]. This is an important consideration for 

potential device-scale applications, as the skyrmion lattice will impact dynamics and 

transport[9]. This has, however, not been investigated when it comes to “bulk” skyrmion 

phases, and the stability of the skyrmion lattice. Here, we first simulate confinement 

using the boundary conditions of our micromagnetic simulations, which has previously 

been used to accurately describe the behavior of skyrmions in FCGT[43,44].


11

Figure 4: Simulations of ordering in confined structures. a Simulated real space images 

of the skyrmion lattices with periodic (left) and semi-periodic (right) boundary conditions. The 

fixed edges are shown in orange. Insets show the associated diffraction patterns. Cell edges 

are 10 𝜇m. b Nearest neighbor map of the same images, where greater(less)-than-6 nearest 

neighbor sites are shown in green(purple), and c bond orientational maps where the magnitude 

of |Ψ6(𝐫)| is shown in blue. d Euler angle of the skyrmion lattice sites from -30° to +30°, with 

respect to the x axis. Areas of similar color are mosaic domains which are rotationally uniform. 

e Radial distribution function, f, histogram of the number of nearest neighbors, and g,

orientational correlation function 𝑔6(𝑟), where the simulation with periodic boundary conditions 

shows liquid-like decay and the simulation with semi-periodic boundary conditions shows 

hexatic-like decay. Shaded regions correspond to standard deviation over 10 simulations. h,

Average orientational order as a function of aspect ratio and the space between the two 

aperiodic boundary conditions. 


12

We artificially create a confined stripe of material by fixing the left and right boundary 

conditions, while making the top and bottom periodic (hereafter semi-periodic). 

Compared to a cell with fully periodic boundary conditions, we see a clear difference 

where the skyrmions in the periodic cell find a disordered, liquid ground state, while 

the skyrmions in the confined, semi-periodic cell relax to a hexatic phase (Figure 4). 

This difference is also clearly seen qualitatively in the structure factor (inset in Figure 

4a) and in the number of dislocation sites, Figure 4b. In this simulation, we speculate 

that ordered skyrmions form at the fixed boundary, which allows for nucleation of larger, 

more uniform domains. We see this more directly in Figure 4d, showing the Euler 

angle Θ = arg(Ψ6(𝐫)) /6. Θ shows the average rotation of a skyrmion lattice site with 

respect to the x-axis and allows us to distinguish domains of uniform 

rotation/mosaicity[27]. Here, the color corresponds to the average rotation of the site, 

meaning areas of uniform color correspond to mosaic domains in the skyrmion lattice. 

With periodic boundary conditions, we see small, well-defined domains, which are 

largely absent in the simulated images with fixed boundaries. Additionally, looking at 

the average order parameter as a function of the spacing between the fixed boundary 

conditions, we see that in the smallest case, when the lattice is most confined, the 

skyrmions are most ordered, then approaching the liquid phase as the spacing is 

widened and the area becomes bulk-like (Sup Figure 6). We assert that the presence 

of the boundary exerts an orientating director field, conjugate to the orientational order 

parameter, making true long range orientational order of the skyrmions possible. This 

enhances both the orientational and positional orders of the skyrmion crystal.


13

Figure 5: Experimental observation of ordering. a MFM micrograph of a sample with two, 

monolayer FCGT flakes and a rectangular, bilayer region of overlap. The edges of this region 

are shown in orange. The calculated structure factors are shown at left. Scale bar is 2 𝜇m. b 

Nearest neighbor and c bond orientational maps of the same image. The monolayer regions 

can be characterized by long chains of topological defects, whereas the bilayer region forms 

an approximately single hexatic domain, commensurate with the direction of the confined 

edges. d Euler angle, Θ, showing the rotational order of the skyrmion lattice sites. The 

monolayer region shows clear mosaic domains, while the confined, bilayer region is much 

more uniform. e Radial distribution function showing the increased lattice parameter of the 

bilayer region, indicating that it behaves semi-classically as a thicker flake of FCGT. f

Histogram of the number of nearest neighbors. g 𝑔6(𝑟), where the monolayer regions show a 

2D liquid and the bilayer region shows hexatic behavior. Fits to exponential and algebraic 

decay are shown as dotted lines.

Experimentally, we achieve spatial confinement by overlapping two thick (114 nm and 

214 nm) FCGT flakes in a single rectangular region. The flakes do not interact 

electrically due to  a large thickness of flakes compared to the interface and the transfer 


14

process in the air, leading to ~5 nm of adsorbates at the interface. This implies their 

interaction is governed by long range magnetostatics and this overlapped bilayer 

region behaves like a thicker region within a semi-periodic, but finite, potential. This 

semi-classical interaction is supported by the fact that the skyrmions in the bilayer 

region are ~1.5x the size of those in the thinner regions (Figure 5e), which is consistent 

with the thickness dependent size changes in FCGT governed by Kittel’s law[44]. This 

is also illustrated in Sup. Figure 8, where the simulated bilayer hosts skyrmions that 

extend through the entire structure, effectively behaving as a thicker magnet. In the 

free monolayer and confined bilayer regions, the results parallel those of the simulation, 

where the monolayer region is stable in a 2D liquid phase, but the confined, bilayer 

region is in a hexatic phase. We consider the monolayer region to be bulk-like due to 

its lateral size compared to that of the skyrmions. This is quantified by the structure 

factor (Figure 5a), where we see clear differentiation between amorphous-like and 

crystalline behaviors, and the 𝑔6(𝑟) parameter (Figure 5f), which decays exponentially 

in the monolayer region and algebraically in the bilayer region. We posit that this is due 

to the imposition of a uniaxial director field at the boundary, which causes the 

skyrmions to line up and decreases the energy required to grow larger, more ordered 

domains. This appears to be purely an effect of the potential energy at the boundary, 

rather than any kind of stray magnetic field, because the stray field from the edge of 

the device is not accounted for in our simulation, which matches the experiment very 

well. In this case, where the device size is comparable to ~20x the skyrmion lattice 

constant, this director field is enough to override the kinetic limitations preventing 

stabilization of the ordered hexatic phase.

5. Conclusion

Here we investigate the stability of the lattice of Néel-type skyrmions in FCGT. We 

show that the system does not follow true KTHNY behavior and condense into a 2D 

solid, which we speculate is due to structural and magnetic defects present in the 

system. The lattice does undergo a freezing transition at ~302 K, significantly below 

the Tc, where the skyrmions nucleate in a disordered state and are frozen into a more 

ordered, but still glassy, lattice, down to cryogenic temperatures. We show that by 

confining the device, however, the fixed boundaries can serve as nucleation sites for 

ordered domains and can stabilize a hexatic phase, engineering the order-disorder 

transition.


15

6. Methods

6.1 Sample synthesis

Single crystals of (Fe0.5Co0.5)5–δGeTe2 were grown by the chemical vapor transfer 

method, with iodine used as the transport agent. Elemental Fe (99.99%), Co (99.99%), 

and Te (99.999%) powders and small Ge pieces (99.999%), and were used in

synthesis. The starting raw materials were mixed in the nominal molar ratio 

Fe:Co:Ge:Te = 3:3:1:2 inside a glovebox. The starting mixture was vacuumed and 

sealed inside a quartz tube, then reacted at 750 °C under isothermal conditions for 7 

to 10 days.

6.2 Magnetic force microscopy

Near-room-temperature MFM measurements were performed using an Asylum 

Research MFP-3D system. Low-temperature MFM measurements were performed 

with a homemade variable-temperature MFM (Rutgers University). The tips were 

coated with nominally 100-nm Co by magnetron sputtering. The MFM signal (the shift 

of resonant frequency) is proportional to the out-of-plane stray field gradient, which 

was extracted by a phase-locked loop (SPECS). MFM images were taken with 

constant-height noncontact mode. 

6.3 Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was done in python using a combination of original code and the 

Freud[56] numerical statistics python package. Skyrmion locations were found using the 

scikit-image python package after applying a Laplacian-of-Gaussian filter. Manual 

corrections were carried out where necessary. Voronoi tessellation was performed in 

the scipy python package.

Pair distribution functions (PDF) were calculated as: 

𝐺(𝐫) = 1

𝑁 ∑ 𝛿(𝐫 − 𝐫𝑖𝑗)

𝑖,𝑗

,

where 𝐫 is a vector in real space, 𝑁 is the total number of skyrmions and 𝐫𝑖𝑗 is the 

vector between skyrmions 𝑖 and 𝑗. The structure factor was calculated from the PDF:

𝑆𝑞(𝐪) = ∑ 𝑒−𝑖𝑞𝑟

𝑟

𝐺(𝐫),


16

where 𝐪 is a vector in reciprocal space. Orientation independent radial distribution 

functions were calculated as:

𝑔(𝑟) =
1

2𝜋𝑟

1
𝑁 ∑⟨𝛿(𝑟 − |𝐫𝑖𝑗|)⟩

𝑖,𝑗

,

where 𝑟 is a distance. The calculations of Ψ6(𝐫) and 𝑔6(𝑟) are defined in the text.

6.4 Simulation

Numerical results were found using the micromagnetic simulation package Mumax3 

running on the Lawrencium computing cluster at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab. 

The simulated area is a cuboid of dimensions 2500 nm × 2500 nm × 100 nm, divided 

into 5 nm × 5 nm × 5 nm cells. Effective medium material parameters used are A = 

5.5 × 10−12 J m-1, D = 0.7 mJ m-2, Ms = 301 kA m-1. The 5nm cell size is below the 

exchange length given by 𝑙𝑒𝑥 = √

2𝐴

𝜇°𝑚𝑠2 ≈ 9.8 nm. To model the hexagonal order 

parameter as a function of different geometries, simulations were run with a range of 

aspect ratios from (500 nm × 2500 nm) to (2500 nm × 2500 nm) these simulations 

were performed with both fixed and semi-periodic boundary conditions (periodic on y 

boundary, fixed on x boundary). To quantify hexatic order in a statistically significant 

way a sample size of N = 10 different random seeds were used as initial conditions to 

position the nucleation sites of the Skyrmions. Simulations were relaxed from the 

initial state to reach a near-ground state condition and then advanced for 1000 ns to 

incorporate thermal ordering effects. 

Acknowledgements

P.M. and R.R. acknowledge funding from the Department of Defense, ARO Grant 

No. W911NF-21-2-0162 (ETHOS). This work was primarily funded by the U.S. 

Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials 

Sciences and Engineering Division under Contract No. DE-AC02-05-CH11231 

(Quantum Materials program KC2202). H.Z. is supported by the Department of 

Defense, Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award FA9550-18-1-0480. D. 

R. and P. F. are supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, 

Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under 

Contract No. DE-AC02-05-CH11231 (Nonequilibrium magnetic materials program 

MSMAG). R. Y. is supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research 


17

Fellowship under Grant No. DGE 2146752. This research used the Lawrencium 

computational cluster resource provided by the IT Division at the Lawrence Berkeley 

National Laboratory, supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, 

Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231). The 

low-temperature MFM studies at Rutgers are supported by the Office of Basic Energy 

Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, U.S. Department of 

Energy under award no. DE-SC0018153.

References

[1]
F. Büttner, I. Lemesh, G. S. D. Beach, Sci Rep 2018, 8, 4464.

[2]
N. Kanazawa, S. Seki, Y. Tokura, Advanced Materials 2017, 29, 1603227.

[3]
M. Kläui, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2020, 15, 726.

[4]
S. Das, Y. L. Tang, Z. Hong, M. a. P. Gonçalves, M. R. McCarter, C. Klewe, K. 
X. Nguyen, F. Gómez-Ortiz, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, V. A. Stoica, S.-L. Hsu, B. 
Wang, C. Ophus, J. F. Liu, C. T. Nelson, S. Saremi, B. Prasad, A. B. Mei, D. G. 
Schlom, J. Íñiguez, P. García-Fernández, D. A. Muller, L. Q. Chen, J. Junquera, 
L. W. Martin, R. Ramesh, Nature 2019, 568, 368.

[5]
S. Das, Z. Hong, V. A. Stoica, M. a. P. Gonçalves, Y. T. Shao, E. Parsonnet, E. 
J. Marksz, S. Saremi, M. R. McCarter, A. Reynoso, C. J. Long, A. M. 
Hagerstrom, D. Meyers, V. Ravi, B. Prasad, H. Zhou, Z. Zhang, H. Wen, F. 
Gómez-Ortiz, P. García-Fernández, J. Bokor, J. Íñiguez, J. W. Freeland, N. D. 
Orloff, J. Junquera, L. Q. Chen, S. Salahuddin, D. A. Muller, L. W. Martin, R. 
Ramesh, Nature Materials 2021, 20, 194.

[6]
T. Kurumaji, T. Nakajima, M. Hirschberger, A. Kikkawa, Y. Yamasaki, H. 
Sagayama, H. Nakao, Y. Taguchi, T. Arima, Y. Tokura, Science 2019, 365, 914.

[7]
K. Litzius, I. Lemesh, B. Krüger, P. Bassirian, L. Caretta, K. Richter, F. Büttner, 
K. Sato, O. A. Tretiakov, J. Förster, R. M. Reeve, M. Weigand, I. Bykova, H. 
Stoll, G. Schütz, G. S. D. Beach, M. Kläui, Nature Phys 2017, 13, 170.

[8]
S. Woo, K. Litzius, B. Krüger, M.-Y. Im, L. Caretta, K. Richter, M. Mann, A. 
Krone, R. M. Reeve, M. Weigand, P. Agrawal, I. Lemesh, M.-A. Mawass, P. 
Fischer, M. Kläui, G. S. D. Beach, Nature Mater 2016, 15, 501.

[9]
R. Tomasello, E. Martinez, R. Zivieri, L. Torres, M. Carpentieri, G. Finocchio, Sci 
Rep 2014, 4, 6784.

[10] R. Brearton, L. A. Turnbull, J. a. T. Verezhak, G. Balakrishnan, P. D. Hatton, G. 

van der Laan, T. Hesjedal, Nat Commun 2021, 12, 2723.

[11] W. Jiang, X. Zhang, G. Yu, W. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Benjamin Jungfleisch, J. E. 

Pearson, X. Cheng, O. Heinonen, K. L. Wang, Y. Zhou, A. Hoffmann, S. G. E. te 
Velthuis, Nature Phys 2017, 13, 162.

[12] J. Zázvorka, F. Jakobs, D. Heinze, N. Keil, S. Kromin, S. Jaiswal, K. Litzius, G. 

Jakob, P. Virnau, D. Pinna, K. Everschor-Sitte, L. Rózsa, A. Donges, U. Nowak, 
M. Kläui, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2019, 14, 658.

[13] Y. Huang, W. Kang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, W. Zhao, Nanotechnology 2017, 28, 

08LT02.

[14] D. Prychynenko, M. Sitte, K. Litzius, B. Krüger, G. Bourianoff, M. Kläui, J. 

Sinova, K. Everschor-Sitte, Phys. Rev. Applied 2018, 9, 014034.


18

[15] P. Bruno, V. K. Dugaev, M. Taillefumier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, 096806.
[16] A. Karnieli, S. Tsesses, G. Bartal, A. Arie, Nat Commun 2021, 12, 1092.
[17] N. Kanazawa, Y. Onose, T. Arima, D. Okuyama, K. Ohoyama, S. Wakimoto, K. 

Kakurai, S. Ishiwata, Y. Tokura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 156603.

[18] A. Mook, B. Göbel, J. Henk, I. Mertig, Phys. Rev. B 2017, 95, 020401.
[19] M. Raju, A. P. Petrović, A. Yagil, K. S. Denisov, N. K. Duong, B. Göbel, E. 

Şaşıoğlu, O. M. Auslaender, I. Mertig, I. V. Rozhansky, C. Panagopoulos, Nat 
Commun 2021, 12, 2758.

[20] Y. Shiomi, N. Kanazawa, K. Shibata, Y. Onose, Y. Tokura, Phys. Rev. B 2013, 

88, 064409.

[21] R. Gruber, J. Zázvorka, M. A. Brems, D. R. Rodrigues, T. Dohi, N. Kerber, B. 

Seng, M. Vafaee, K. Everschor-Sitte, P. Virnau, M. Kläui, Nat Commun 2022, 
13, 3144.

[22] K. Litzius, J. Leliaert, P. Bassirian, D. Rodrigues, S. Kromin, I. Lemesh, J. 

Zazvorka, K.-J. Lee, J. Mulkers, N. Kerber, D. Heinze, N. Keil, R. M. Reeve, M. 
Weigand, B. Van Waeyenberge, G. Schütz, K. Everschor-Sitte, G. S. D. Beach, 
M. Kläui, Nat Electron 2020, 3, 30.

[23] N. Romming, A. Kubetzka, C. Hanneken, K. von Bergmann, R. Wiesendanger, 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 177203.

[24] C. Jin, Z.-A. Li, A. Kovács, J. Caron, F. Zheng, F. N. Rybakov, N. S. Kiselev, H. 

Du, S. Blügel, M. Tian, Y. Zhang, M. Farle, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Nat Commun
2017, 8, 15569.

[25] P. Huang, T. Schönenberger, M. Cantoni, L. Heinen, A. Magrez, A. Rosch, F. 

Carbone, H. M. Rønnow, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2020, 15, 761.

[26] H. Du, R. Che, L. Kong, X. Zhao, C. Jin, C. Wang, J. Yang, W. Ning, R. Li, C. 

Jin, X. Chen, J. Zang, Y. Zhang, M. Tian, Nat Commun 2015, 6, 8504.

[27] J. Zázvorka, F. Dittrich, Y. Ge, N. Kerber, K. Raab, T. Winkler, K. Litzius, M. 

Veis, P. Virnau, M. Kläui, Advanced Functional Materials 2020, 30, 2004037.

[28] P. C. Hohenberg, Phys. Rev. 1967, 158, 383.
[29] N. D. Mermin, H. Wagner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1966, 17, 1133.
[30] B. I. Halperin, J Stat Phys 2019, 175, 521.
[31] J. M. Kosterlitz, D. J. Thouless, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 1973, 6, 1181.
[32] B. I. Halperin, D. R. Nelson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1978, 41, 121.
[33] A. P. Young, Phys. Rev. B 1979, 19, 1855.
[34] I. Guillamón, R. Córdoba, J. Sesé, J. M. De Teresa, M. R. Ibarra, S. Vieira, H. 

Suderow, Nature Phys 2014, 10, 851.

[35] I. Guillamón, H. Suderow, A. Fernández-Pacheco, J. Sesé, R. Córdoba, J. M. 

De Teresa, M. R. Ibarra, S. Vieira, Nature Phys 2009, 5, 651.

[36] J. D. Brock, R. J. Birgeneau, D. Litster, A. Aharony, Contemporary Physics

1989, 30, 321.

[37] A. Aharony, R. J. Birgeneau, J. D. Brock, J. D. Litster, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1986, 57, 

1012.

[38] K. Takae, T. Kawasaki, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2022, 

119, e2118492119.

[39] N. N. Negulyaev, V. S. Stepanyuk, L. Niebergall, P. Bruno, M. Pivetta, M. 

Ternes, F. Patthey, W.-D. Schneider, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 246102.

[40] R. J. Birgeneau, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 1998, 177–181, 

1.

[41] J. P. Hill, Q. Feng, R. J. Birgeneau, T. R. Thurston, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 70, 

3655.


19

[42] R. J. Birgeneau, Q. Feng, Q. J. Harris, J. P. Hill, A. P. Ramirez, T. R. Thurston, 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 75, 1198.

[43] H. Zhang, Y.-T. Shao, R. Chen, X. Chen, S. Susarla, D. Raftrey, J. T. 

Reichanadter, L. Caretta, X. Huang, N. S. Settineri, Z. Chen, J. Zhou, E. 
Bourret-Courchesne, P. Ercius, J. Yao, P. Fischer, J. B. Neaton, D. A. Muller, R. 
J. Birgeneau, R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. Materials 2022, 6, 044403.

[44] H. Zhang, D. Raftrey, Y.-T. Chan, Y.-T. Shao, R. Chen, X. Chen, X. Huang, J. T. 

Reichanadter, K. Dong, S. Susarla, L. Caretta, Z. Chen, J. Yao, P. Fischer, J. B. 
Neaton, W. Wu, D. A. Muller, R. J. Birgeneau, R. Ramesh, Science Advances
2022, 8, eabm7103.

[45] H. Zhang, R. Chen, K. Zhai, X. Chen, L. Caretta, X. Huang, R. V. Chopdekar, J. 

Cao, J. Sun, J. Yao, R. Birgeneau, R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. B 2020, 102, 
064417.

[46] A. F. May, D. Ovchinnikov, Q. Zheng, R. Hermann, S. Calder, B. Huang, Z. Fei, 

Y. Liu, X. Xu, M. A. McGuire, ACS Nano 2019, 13, 4436.

[47] R. J. Birgeneau, H. Yoshizawa, R. A. Cowley, G. Shirane, H. Ikeda, Phys. Rev. 

B 1983, 28, 1438.

[48] G. S. Iannacchione, S. Park, C. W. Garland, R. J. Birgeneau, R. L. Leheny, 

Phys. Rev. E 2003, 67, 011709.

[49] M. Ramazanoglu, S. Larochelle, C. W. Garland, R. J. Birgeneau, Phys. Rev. E

2008, 77, 031702.

[50] C. T. Ma, Y. Xie, H. Sheng, A. W. Ghosh, S. J. Poon, Sci Rep 2019, 9, 9964.
[51] W. Kleemann, J. Dec, Ferroelectrics 2019, 553, 1.
[52] G. Parisi, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2006, 103, 7948.
[53] R. A. Cowley, A. Aharony, R. J. Birgeneau, R. A. Pelcovits, G. Shirane, T. R. 

Thurston, Z. Physik B - Condensed Matter 1993, 93, 5.

[54] Y. Zhou, M. Ezawa, Nat Commun 2014, 5, 4652.
[55] T. Schönenberger, P. Huang, L. D. Brun, L. Guanghao, A. Magrez, F. Carbone, 

H. M. Rønnow, Nanoscale Research Letters 2022, 17, 20.

[56] V. Ramasubramani, B. D. Dice, E. S. Harper, M. P. Spellings, J. A. Anderson, S. 

C. Glotzer, Computer Physics Communications 2020, 254, 107275.


20

Controlled Ordering of Room-Temperature Magnetic Skyrmions in a 
Polar, Layered Magnet.

Supplementary Figures

Sup. Figure 1 | Examples of solid, hexatic, and liquid phases. From top to bottom, 
real space images, nearest neighbor maps, |Ψ6| maps, Euler angle maps, and 𝑔6(𝑟)
showing skyrmion sites, topological defects, hexagonality, mosaic domains, and long-
range orientational correlation, respectively. Real space data adapted from [1]


21

Sup. Figure 2 | MFM images and structure factors. a MFM images of skyrmion 
lattices as a function of temperature and their corresponding topology, b, pair 
distribution function, c, and structure factors, d. We see that, as temperature increases, 
the number of topological defects increases, the pair distribution falls off more quickly, 
and the structure factor changes from being approximately hexagonal, to more circular 
and diffuse.


22

Sup. Figure 3 | Heating and cooling. Nearest neighbor, a, and bond orientational, b, 
maps of samples on both heating and cooling. c Histogram of nearest neighbor 
probabilities and, d, radial distribution function as a function of both cooling and heating.
6-nearest-neighbor probability, 𝑃6 (f), mean |Ψ6| (g), and 𝑔6(𝑟) decay 1/𝜉 (h) all as 
functions of temperature, all showing minimal hysteresis between cooling and heating.

Sup. Figure 4 | Metastability of the skyrmion lattice. From the left image, when the 
sample is cooled down below TC, the skyrmions are trapped into a low density, 
metastable configuration. We then perturb this with the stray field from the MFM tip, to 
produce the lower energy, high density skyrmion lattice. These results agree with those 
reported in ref. [2].


23

Sup. Figure 5 | Orientational domains with temperature. Real space MFM images, 
nearest neighbor Voronoi maps, bond orientational maps, and Euler angle maps 
showing several different temperatures through the phase transition. In the last column, 
the large domains that are present at low temperatures break up and become less 
coherent as the lattice melts.


24

Sup. Figure 6 | Skyrmion order with changing cell size. Increasing the aspect ratio 
of the simulated cell from 1:5 to 1:1, we see that the skyrmions become qualitatively 
less ordered. 


25

Sup. Figure 7 | Simulated stabilization of the skyrmion phase. Order parameters 
showing the evolution of the skyrmion phase as a function of arbitrary timesteps in the 
simulation. Also highlighted, are the differences between different aspect ratios in the 
semi-periodic case. The arrow shows increasing cell width corresponding to the plots 
in Sup. Figure 6.


26

Sup. Figure 8 | Skyrmions in the bilayer system. Simulation showing stable 
skyrmions in the bilayer system with a 5 nm gap between the layers, where skyrmions 
track from one layer to the other, indicating that the bilayer behaves as a single magnet. 

References

[1]
P. Huang, T. Schönenberger, M. Cantoni, L. Heinen, A. Magrez, A. Rosch, F. 
Carbone, H. M. Rønnow, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2020, 15, 761.

[2]
H. Zhang, D. Raftrey, Y.-T. Chan, Y.-T. Shao, R. Chen, X. Chen, X. Huang, J. T. 
Reichanadter, K. Dong, S. Susarla, L. Caretta, Z. Chen, J. Yao, P. Fischer, J. B. 
Neaton, W. Wu, D. A. Muller, R. J. Birgeneau, R. Ramesh, Science Advances
2022, 8, eabm7103.


