When not to use machine learning: a perspective on potential and limitations

Matthew R. Carbone∗

Computational Science Initiative, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973
(Dated: October 7, 2022)

The unparalleled success of artificial intelligence (AI) in the technology sector has catalyzed an
enormous amount of research in the scientific community. It has proven to be a powerful tool, but
as with any rapidly developing field, the deluge of information can be overwhelming, confusing and
sometimes misleading. This can make it easy to become lost in the same hype cycles that have
historically ended in the periods of scarce funding and depleted expectations known as AI Winters.
Furthermore, while the importance of innovative, high-risk research cannot be overstated, it is also
imperative to understand the fundamental limits of available techniques, especially in young fields
where the rules appear to be constantly rewritten and as the likelihood of application to high-stakes
scenarios increases. In this perspective, we highlight the guiding principles of data-driven modeling,
how these principles imbue models with almost magical predictive power, and how they also impose
limitations on the scope of problems they can address. Particularly, understanding when not to use
data-driven techniques, such as machine learning, is not something commonly explored, but is just as
important as knowing how to apply the techniques properly. We hope that the discussion to follow
provides researchers throughout the sciences with a better understanding of when said techniques
are appropriate, the pitfalls to watch for, and most importantly, the confidence to leverage the power
they can provide.

Keywords: artificial intelligence; computation/computing; machine learning; modeling

I.
INTRODUCTION

The story of artificial intelligence (AI) began in the
mid 1900’s, when computer scientists started considering
a simple question: “can machines think?” [1, 2]. Ever
since, the mythical goal of achieving true “human-like”
AI has framed decades of scientific conversation and has
motivated many key breakthroughs, including the back-
bone of modern machine learning (ML) algorithms: neu-
ral networks [3–5]. As the computational machinery re-
quired to realize the practical applications of ML would
come decades later [6], its full potential would not yet
be immediately understood. That time has come, and
despite the turbulence of multiple “AI winters” over the
past decades [7–9], we are currently living the AI/ML
revolution.
Broadly, AI and ML are two related families of meth-
ods that fall under the larger “data-driven” umbrella.
Built upon well established theory in the statistics and
applied mathematics communities [4], modern-day AI
and ML is best understood as the intersection of powerful
modeling paradigms with “big-data” and bleeding edge
hardware (e.g. graphics processing units; GPUs). The
general interpretation (though not the only one [10]) is
that AI is a superset of ML [11] and consists of techniques
that are used to mimic human cognition and decision-
making, whereas ML is more focused on the mathemati-
cal and numerical approaches. Often, ML is described as
the ability of a program to learn a task without being pro-
grammed with task-specific heuristics [12]. However, the
distinction between AI and ML is not germane to most

∗ mcarbone@bnl.gov

applications (and many applications use parts of both),
hence the blanket term “AI/ML” is used commonly as
a substitute for “data-driven” in many contexts. In this
perspective, we will focus primarily on supervised ML,
though many of the key points to come apply to data-
driven approaches in general.
Cruising behind the slipstream created by tremendous
success in the technology sector, ML has found wide ap-
plicability in the materials, chemical and physical sci-
ences. For example, the discovery, characterization and
design of new materials, molecules and nanoparticles [13–
24], surrogate models for spectroscopy and other proper-
ties [25–28], self-driving laboratories/autonomous experi-
mentation [29–34], and neural network potentials [35–39]
have all been powered by ML and related methods. The
current state of ML in materials science specifically has
also been thoroughly documented in many excellent re-
views [15, 40–42] that cover subject matter ranging from
applications to computational screening and interpreta-
tion. On a related note, for technical details and timely
tutorials, we refer those interested readers to Refs. 43
and 44. However, while the scope of ML-relevant prob-
lems is huge, not every problem can effectively leverage
the power ML provides. Worse still, sometimes ML may
seem to be a perfectly reasonable choice only to fail dra-
matically [45]; such failures can often be traced back to
the foundations of any ML tool: the data.
In this perspective, we ask and answer a foundational
question which ultimately has everything to do with
data: when should you not use machine learning? ML
is the jackhammer of the applied math world, and is
able to channel incredible power provided by the inter-
play of highly flexible models, large databases and GPU-
enabled supercomputers. But you wouldn’t use a jack-
hammer to do brain surgery. At least for the time being,

arXiv:2210.02666v1  [cs.LG]  6 Oct 2022


2

there are classes of problems for which ML is not well-
suited [43, 46].
We address this issue not to dissuade
researchers from using these methods, but rather to em-
power them to do so correctly, and to avoid wasting valu-
able time and resources. Understanding the limitations
and application spaces of our tools will help us build bet-
ter ones, and solve larger problems more confidently and
with more consistency.

II.
THE DEVIL’S IN THE DISTANCE

Newcomers to the field of ML will find themselves im-
mediately buried under an avalanche of enticing algo-
rithms applicable to their scientific problem [47]. Many of
these choices are so sophisticated that it is unreasonable
to expect any ML non-expert to understand their finer
nuances and how/why they can fail. The steep learning
curve combined with their intrinsic complexity, mythical
“black box” nature and stunning ability to make accurate
predictions can make ML appear almost magical. It may
come as a surprise then that in spite of said complexi-
ties, almost all supervised ML models are paradigmat-
ically the same and are built upon a familiar quantity:
distance.
The supervised ML problem is one of minimizing the
distance between predicted and true values mapped by
an approximate function on the appropriate inputs. A
distance can be a proper metric, such as the Euclidean
or Manhattan norms, or something less pedestrian, such
as a divergence (a distance measure between two dis-
tributions) or a cross-entropy loss function. Regardless,
the principle is the same: consider un-regularized, super-
vised ML, where given a source of ground truth F and
a ML model fθ, the goal is to find parameters θ such
that the distance between F(x) and fθ(x) is as small as
possible for all possible x in some use case. While this
is only one type of ML, most techniques share this com-
mon theme. For example, Deep Q reinforcement learn-
ing [48] leverages neural networks to map states (inputs)
to decisions (outputs), and unsupervised learning algo-
rithms rely on the same notion of distance to perform
clustering and dimensionality reduction that supervised
learning techniques use to minimize loss functions. Vari-
ational autoencoders [49–51] try not only to minimize re-
construction loss, but simultaneously keep a compressed,
latent representation as close to some target distribution
as possible (usually for use in generative applications).
Numerical optimization is the engine that systematically
tunes model parameters θ in gradient-based ML,1 and its
only objective is to minimize some measure of distance
between ground truth and model predictions.

1The classic numerical optimizer is gradient/stochastic gradi-
ent descent, with more recently established developments showing
systematic improvements in deep learning, e.g. Adam [52].

Additionally, in order to increase the confidence that
ML models will be successful for a given task, it helps
if the desired function is smooth: i.e. a small change in
a feature should ideally correspond to a relatively small
change in the target. This idea is more readily defined
for regression than for classification, and the data be-
ing amenable to gradient-based methods is is not strictly
required for ML to be successful. For example, e.g. Ran-
dom Forests are not generally trained using gradient-
based optimizers, but satisfying this requirement will
usually help models generalize more effectively. The dis-
tance between the features of any two points of data is
informed entirely by their numerical vector representa-
tion, and while these representations can be intuitive or
human-interpretable, they must be mathematically rig-
orous.
The devil here, so to speak, is that what might appear
intuitive to the experimenter may not be to the machine.
For example, consider the problem of discovering novel
molecules with certain properties. Molecules can be first
encoded in string format (e.g. SMILES [53]), and then
a numerical latent representation. The structure of this
latent space is informed by some target property [16], and
because any point in the latent space is just a numeric
vector living in a vector space, a distance can be easily
defined. This powerful encoding method can be used to
“interpolate between molecules” and thus discover new
ones that perhaps we haven’t previously considered, but
it still relies on the principle of distance, both between
molecules in the compressed latent space, and their target
properties.
Concretely, the length scales for differentiating be-
tween data points in the feature space are set by the
corresponding targets.
Large changes in target values
between data points can cause ML models to “focus” on
the changes in the input space that caused it, possibly
at the expense of failing to capture small changes. This
is often referred to as the bias-variance trade-off. Most
readers may be familiar with the concept of over-fitting:
for instance, essentially any set of observations can be
fit exactly by an arbitrarily high-order polynomial, but
doing so will produce wildly varying results during infer-
ence and be unlikely to have captured anything meaning-
ful about the underlying function. Conversely, a linear fit
will only capture the most simple trends to the point of
being useless for any nonlinear phenomena. Fig. 1 show-
cases a common middle ground, where the primary trend
of the data is captured by a Gaussian Process [54], and
smaller fluctuations are understood as noisy variations
around that trend.
Consider a more realistic example:
the Materials
Project [55] database contains many geometry-relaxed
structures,
each
with
different
compositions,
space
groups and local symmetries at 0 Kelvin. Thus, within
this database, changes in e.g. the optical properties of
these materials is primarily due to the aforementioned
structural differences and not due to thermal disorder
(i.e. distortions) one would find when running a molec-


3

FIG. 1.
A Gaussian Process, with a radial basis function
kernel, fit to example data F(x) = 5x2 + sin(50x)/3 + N(µ =
0, σ = 0.1). The small, noisy, high-frequency oscillations are
not well-fit by a Gaussian Process, as the primary length scale
in the data is defined by the distances between the three clus-
ters, not in between them. Sophisticated, non-isotropic ker-
nels could model both trends in principle, but the construc-
tion of such kernels often requires significant prior informa-
tion about the problem, the knowledge of which might make
modeling unnecessary.

ular dynamics simulation. A ML model trained on this
data could be limited in the sense that changes in cer-
tain structural motifs would be well-captured and oth-
ers would not, necessitating caution when scoping its ef-
fective use cases. Conversely, in data-driven modeling,
considering the distances between data points in both
the input and output spaces, and thus which changes in
your features are most contributing to the variance in
the targets, can be instrumental in constructing effective
training sets targeted to specific applications.

Inverse problems, and cases with extremely low signal-
to-noise ratios (SNR), are another case in which the use-
fulness of ML varies significantly problem-to-problem.
ML can only model functions: cases in which each in-
put maps to a unique output. Inverse problems, or those
in which a signal is used to resolve its source, are often
ill-posed, making it challenging if not impossible to repre-
sent them by functions. In these cases, ML is not imme-
diately appropriate, and the problem statement must be
refined until a “non-degenerate” subspace is found and
can be modeled by a function. Once this space is identi-
fied, ML can excel, because it can pick out subtle patterns
in this space where heuristics or human intuition may fail
to do so, but the developed mapping must be a function.
This can also be understood in the language of distance:
in the inverse problem, an “epsilon-small” change in the
input can result in an extremely large change in the out-

put.2 For example, consider phase retrieval in coherent
diffraction imaging [56]. If a detector measures only the
intensity of the signal, all phase information is lost by
definition, and unless correlations between the intensity
and phase exist (which are specific to the sub-problem of
interest) and permit such an inverse mapping [57], there
is no way to confidently retrieve the phase information.
The degree to which this is possible in general depends
entirely on the specific system and the data available.
The same issue can be found when the SNR is low or
close to 1: no data-driven technique will be useful if tar-
gets cannot be distinguished from each other. Relatedly,
if the uncertainty during inference on an inverse problem
can be accurately quantified, then it is possible to use
uncertainty-aware models to make predictions with error
estimations [58–60]. However, in cases where the inver-
sion is sufficiently ill-posed, the SNR will be so low that
different results cannot be resolved. So while it might be
possible to make predictions with error bars, they may
not be useful.
In summary, it is always an instructive exercise to
consider distances between the properties of entries in
your database when attempting any data-driven model-
ing. The key is to fully understand the property of in-
terest, and to choose a database and encoding such that
different data points are sufficiently discriminatory with
respect to the target property. If this is not possible, no
data-driven method will be able to perform effectively.
In these cases, utilization of other prior knowledge, more
effective data screening or simply another type of tech-
nique entirely might be required.
We note that there
is no harm in simply trying new techniques on e.g. in-
verse problems where it is unclear how much pertinent
information is present in a database that could allow an
inverse mapping to be learned. Such possibility, however,
should never be confused with certainty.

III.
ON THE IMPORTANCE OF DATA
DISTRIBUTIONS

To quantify the effectiveness of trained models, eval-
uation should always conclude with the presentation of
evaluation metrics collected on a “testing” subset of the
database. In order to avoid training and hyperparame-
ter tuning3 biases, the testing set should be disjoint from
the set of data that was used to train and tune the mod-
els (the training and cross-validation databases, respec-
tively). Put even more simply, the rule of thumb is to
“blind” yourself from bias as best you can: take a chunk

2In the inverse problem, an “input” might be an observable,
such as a spectrum, and the output, a structure, such as in the
structure refinement problem.
3Hyperparameters are un-trained parameters of the model and
training procedure, such as the choice of loss function, or the num-
ber of neurons in some layer of a neural network.


4

of data from the full space of data of interest, and not use
it, look at it, or otherwise glean any information from it
until you are ready to present results on a trained model
and completed pipeline. As long as information from the
testing set is not used during development, any approach
to model tuning is appropriate (though some, such as
using cross-validation, are highly recommended). These
are the best practices which are critical to any successful
ML project, and they are often highlighted in more tech-
nical tutorials [43, 44] (and in more technical detail than
presented here), but this is not the complete story.
The testing set is almost always discussed as an un-
biased sample, a litmus test for how the model will per-
form on data it hasn’t seen before.
However, there is
another use for the testing set: it should represent the
real-world deployment scenario. In other words, the test-
ing set should not only be disjoint from data the model
and pipeline have seen before, it should also ideally rep-
resent the data on which the model must be performant.
It is paramount to keep in mind that these two uses of
the testing set are not always the same.
If the training data comes from a different distribution
than data from your deployment scenario, it is highly
likely the trained model will fail. Human intuition can
actually take us far here, as there is a way to easily sanity-
check if any two sets of data do not come from the same
distribution. Simply re-combine them and sample ran-
domly. If you can easily tell the difference (i.e., deter-
mine from which distribution a sample originated), your
testing set is “out-of-sample” with respect to the training
set. This will not always be the case (see e.g. adversarial
examples, where human-imperceptible modifications to
images can cause otherwise highly accurate ML models
to go haywire [61]), but in many scientific problems, it is
a critical exercise to perform when planning a research
campaign. For example, this can often happen when at-
tempting to train a model on computer-simulated data
(which is relatively cheap to obtain) and then deploying
it on experimental data (which often requires expensive
and time-consuming experiments).
Such a use case is
common in science, since we tend to have much less data
available than in e.g. image recognition problems in com-
puter science (where more labeled data can be simply
bought). Indeed, there are some cases where the simu-
lation is sufficiently accurate when compared to exper-
imental measurements (e.g. predicting the space group
from pair distribution data [20] or nanoparticle sizes from
x-ray absorption spectra; XAS [14]). Other cases will not
work nearly as well, such as when comparing experimen-
tal and simulated XAS across a diverse crystal structure
database [19]. Fig. 2 showcases this possible failure sce-
nario.
While it is not a hard-and-fast rule, one should never
take for granted that data-driven models fit on one set of
data will perform well on another. On the contrary, ML
performs best (and is most powerful) when it is explicitly
fit on the same type of data it is expected to perform on.
This is a limitation that is often interpreted as weakness;

FIG. 2.
A possible failure scenario in data-driven modeling:
the model is fit to the training (including cross-validation)
data, and evaluated on a testing set. The testing set is sam-
pled (but is disjoint) from the same data as the training set,
resulting in strong distribution-wise overlap with the training
data and likely good performance. The deployment case is
sampled from a different database, the distribution of which
may only partially overlap with data the model is familiar
with.

on the contrary, this is actually a strength. For exam-
ple, one high-impact example demonstrating this feature
is that of neural network potentials [35–39], where the
space of possible atomic configurations is kept small (po-
tentials are fit on specific systems), and configurations
are revisited throughout long molecular dynamics simu-
lations. Potentials fit on one system are not expected to
perform well on another, but they do perform to desired
accuracy on the systems they’re trained on.
Ensuring proper data selection is not a technical chal-
lenge, it is a human one [45]. When considering if ML
is the right tool for your problem the real-world deploy-
ment scenario must be considered. When at all possible,
one should simply fit the model on data from the same
distribution as in said deployment. In cases where there
is not enough deployment data to fit models on (or to
do transfer learning [62]) it is unlikely ML methods will
perform well. If the scenario outlined in Fig. 2 is a pos-
sibility, sufficient labeled data from the deployment case
must be available to validate that the model is working
properly. If these criteria cannot be satisfied, then there
is no feasible way to validate the trained models in the
desired use cases. Consequently, if the model’s perfor-
mance cannot be verified, it cannot be used.

IV.
THE DATA-DRIVEN “NO FREE LUNCH
THEOREM”

The considerable flexibility and information capacity
of modern ML models (such as neural networks) comes
at a cost. While exceptional at “interpolating” within
and close to the “convex hull” defined by the boundaries
of the training set, they will often fail in spectacular


5

fashion when tasked with predicting outside of this re-
gion [36, 46]. This limitation can be partially addressed
by the encoding of prior belief, which can take many
forms, such as the functional form of the model, cor-
relation information between input features, or bound-
ary behavior.
The information content of prior belief
can be a game-changer: indeed, even the term “data-
driven” can be somewhat misleading [9] (though the de-
scription “information-driven”, while perhaps more accu-
rate, may be a bit too ambiguous). That said, no data-
driven model can make reliable predictions outside of the
union of the data and prior information it was trained
on. This information-theoretic perspective is tautolog-
ical, but is often overlooked despite its significant im-
plications: data-driven models generalize, they do not
extrapolate beyond the aforementioned union with any
reliability.
It is important to keep in mind that there is a dif-
ference between some trained ML model and an over-
head algorithm that is operating for a particular use case
which might be using one or more trained models. Often,
these algorithms will involve a re-training step in which
the inference or decision-making model is continuously
updated. For example, reinforcement learning involves
an “outer loop” in which the environment is probed and
feedback acquired through a reward function, decisions
are made, and the decision maker refined. Gaussian Pro-
cesses and ensemble methods are excellent choices for
sampling new data because they naturally quantify un-
certainty. Data can be sampled where uncertainty, and
thus the likelihood of out-of-sample data, is high. Com-
puter scientists already have a name for this: active learn-
ing. This can help the user understand where the model
is predicting outside of it’s information-theoretic inter-
polation window, and shore up the model’s weaknesses
by adding new data to the training set. Another way to
interpret active learning is that the algorithm itself is de-
tecting when it is extrapolating, and actively expanding
its interpolation window to compensate.
To demonstrate the point, consider the apparently sim-
ple 1-dimensional example in Fig. 3, where a neural net-
work and Gaussian Process are tasked with modeling the
function F(x) = sin(4x) with minimal observations. The
neural network was trained only to minimize the mean
squared error loss function on the provided data. Thus,
it ends up fitting the data quite well around where data
exists, but fails completely when far away from those
points.
These failures are essentially random and un-
predictable, and are due to the particular state of the
neural network’s weights. Even “within” the convex hull
of the training data, in the region x ∈ [−1, 1], the neural
network does not perform, because the optimizer has no
incentive to focus on that region (due to lack of ground
truth information).
On the other hand, the Gaussian
Process is trained using kernels that explicitly encode
correlation lengths, limiting the possible set of interpo-
lating functions in the region x ∈ [−1, 1]. This ultimately
results in a much better fit, consistent with the learned

FIG. 3.
A simple example of fitting example data (black)
with two models: a simple neural network (red) and Gaussian
Process with a periodic kernel (blue).

length scale of the kernel and the data used to fit it. That
said, any model that operates on the Bayesian paradigm
of starting with a prior belief which is then updated to a
posterior when fit on data will revert back to the mean
when sufficiently outside of the space of the data it is fit
on; this is clearly observed here (the mean of the prior is
0).
One other important observation is that despite the
natural human conclusion that the data is likely periodic
(which we reach by simply looking at the black markers
in Fig. 3), the neural network cannot intuit this with-
out prior knowledge. Thousands more data points could
be provided, spanning a much larger range in x, but no
amount of data will encode periodicity in a way that
a data-driven model understands. On the other hand,
when encoded as a prior belief, either in the form of a
kernel or perhaps even through explicit selection of a pe-
riodic function, only a handful of data points are neces-
sary to completely characterize it. Expecting the model
to understand periodicity without explicitly imbuing it
with said information is akin to information-theoretic ex-
trapolation: a non-starter.
Unfortunately, most modeling problems of interest are
not quite as simple as the 1-dimensional example in
Fig. 3. Often, they have much higher-dimensional inputs
and outputs, and display complicated non-linear behav-
ior. It is much harder to visualize and interpret results in
these situations (though tools are available, such as di-
mensionality reduction, e.g. Principal Component Anal-
ysis), and intuition derived from trial and error is usually
the go-to method for understanding when and why the
model is not performing well. At the least, care should be
taken when formulating data-driven solutions to ensure
that the information used to fit the models is carefully
thought through. If it is possible the deployment scenario
will include out-of-sample data, uncertainty quantifica-
tion and active learning should be considered. Most of
all, the way that humans understand and process data is


6

very different from the way ML algorithms do, and that
should never be overlooked.

V.
OUTLOOK: AVOIDING THE NEXT AI
WINTER

AI/ML has been transformative in our society over the
past decade. Especially in the technology sector, it has
been applied with unnervingly surgical accuracy in tar-
geted advertising, image recognition and neural trans-
lation, just to name a few examples.
In these prob-
lem spaces, AI/ML is massively successful because they
leverage its greatest strengths:
the ability to process
huge databases, and complex pattern recognition. Natu-
rally, the scientific community has taken note and applied
AI/ML to great effect in research acceleration and dis-
covery. However, these techniques are not a cure-all, and
cannot be applied to every problem. Without a doubt,
we should keep pushing the boundaries of how we can ap-
ply AI/ML in science, but expectations should be kept
appropriately measured.
The original AI Winters were caused by outrageously
inflated expectations, spurred on by the promise of true
AI, and while the actual winter always returns, it is hard
to say if another AI Winter is on the horizon [8, 63].
In retrospect, the original idea of creating a synthetic
autonomous thinker akin to a human was incredibly ar-
rogant. After all, we’re competing with millions of years
of evolutionary instinct and development, including the
most complex black box AI/ML algorithm we know of:
the human brain. We would pose a simple question: why

compete when we can collaborate?
One day, humanity will likely create sentient AI,4 but
we’re not there yet, and for better or for worse, we’re
not even close. What we do have is a wonderful suite of
data-driven tools, including those found in the domain
of AI/ML, which have the potential to significantly ac-
celerate scientific research and discovery. These tools are
meant to empower the experimenter, not to replace them.
For the foreseeable future, we must still rely on human
researchers to start problems with scientific hypotheses,
find appropriate use cases for data-driven tools, and to
apply them properly. AI/ML is not magic, and it is of
the utmost importance, not only for each individual re-
search project but also to the future of AI/ML in science,
that its potential is never taken for granted.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

MRC would like to thank Steven B. Torrisi, Marco
Baity-Jesi, Phillip M. Maffettone and Chuntian Cao, for
their critical feedback during the writing of this perspec-
tive.
This material is based upon work supported by
the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office
of Basic Energy Sciences, under Award Numbers FWP
PS-030 and DE-SC-0012704.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

MRC declares no conflicts of interest.

[1] A. M. Turing, Mind 59, 433 (1950).
[2] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, Science 349, 255 (2015).
[3] W. S. McCulloch and W. Pitts, Bull Math Biophys. 5,
115 (1943).

[4] W. S. Sarle, in Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual SAS
Users Groups International Conference (SAS Institute,
Inc., 1994) p. 1538–1550.

[5] M. Paliwal and U. A. Kumar, Expert Syst. Appl. 36, 2
(2009).

[6] C. M. Bishop and N. M. Nasrabadi, Pattern recognition
and machine learning, Vol. 4 (Springer, 2006).

[7] D. Crevier, AI: the tumultuous history of the search for
artificial intelligence (Basic Books, Inc., 1993).

[8] J. Hendler, IEEE Intell. Syst. 23, 2 (2008).
[9] K. G. Reyes and B. Maruyama, MRS Bull. 44, 530
(2019).

[10] P. Langley et al., Mach. Learn. 82, 275 (2011).
[11] A. Holzinger, P. Kieseberg, E. Weippl, and A. M. Tjoa,
in International Cross-Domain Conference for Machine

4For the sake of argument, we will take humanity’s survival for
granted.

Learning and Knowledge Extraction (Springer, 2018) pp.
1–8.

[12] J. B. Mitchell, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci.
4, 468 (2014).

[13] P. Juh´as, C. L. Farrow, X. Yang, K. R. Knox, and S. J.
Billinge, Acta Crystallogr. A 71, 562 (2015).

[14] J. Timoshenko, D. Lu, Y. Lin, and A. I. Frenkel, J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 8, 5091 (2017).

[15] K. T. Butler, D. W. Davies, H. Cartwright, O. Isayev,
and A. Walsh, Nature 559, 547 (2018).

[16] B. Sanchez-Lengeling and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Science 361,
360 (2018).

[17] C. W. Coley, W. H. Green, and K. F. Jensen, Acc. Chem.
Res. 51, 1281 (2018).

[18] R. G´omez-Bombarelli, J. N. Wei, D. Duvenaud, J. M.
Hern´andez-Lobato, B. S´anchez-Lengeling, D. Sheberla,
J. Aguilera-Iparraguirre, T. D. Hirzel, R. P. Adams, and
A. Aspuru-Guzik, ACS Cent. Sci. 4, 268 (2018).

[19] M. R. Carbone, S. Yoo, M. Topsakal, and D. Lu, Phys.
Rev. Mater. 3, 033604 (2019).

[20] C.-H. Liu, Y. Tao, D. Hsu, Q. Du,
and S. J. Billinge,
Acta Crystallogr. A 75, 633 (2019).

[21] Y. Zhang, X. He, Z. Chen, Q. Bai, A. M. Nolan, C. A.
Roberts, D. Banerjee, T. Matsunaga, Y. Mo,
and


7

C. Ling, Nat. Comm. 10, 1 (2019).

[22] S. B. Torrisi, M. R. Carbone, B. A. Rohr, J. H. Montoya,
Y. Ha, J. Yano, S. K. Suram, and L. Hung, npj Comput.
Mater. 6, 1 (2020).

[23] R. Mercado, T. Rastemo, E. Lindel¨of, G. Klambauer,
O. Engkvist, H. Chen, and E. J. Bjerrum, Mach. Learn.
Sci. Technol. 2, 025023 (2021).

[24] V. D. Mouchlis, A. Afantitis, A. Serra, M. Fratello, A. G.
Papadiamantis, V. Aidinis, I. Lynch, D. Greco,
and
G. Melagraki, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 1676 (2021).

[25] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and
G. E. Dahl, in International conference on machine learn-
ing (PMLR, 2017) pp. 1263–1272.

[26] T. Xie and J. C. Grossman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 145301
(2018).

[27] M. R. Carbone, M. Topsakal, D. Lu, and S. Yoo, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 124, 156401 (2020).

[28] C. D. Rankine and T. Penfold, J. Chem. Phys. 156,
164102 (2022).

[29] M. M. Noack, G. S. Doerk, R. Li, M. Fukuto, and K. G.
Yager, Sci. Rep. 10, 1 (2020).

[30] B. P. MacLeod, F. G. Parlane, T. D. Morrissey, F. H¨ase,
L. M. Roch, K. E. Dettelbach, R. Moreira, L. P. Yunker,
M. B. Rooney, J. R. Deeth, et al., Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz8867
(2020).

[31] R. W. Epps, M. S. Bowen, A. A. Volk, K. Abdel-Latif,
S. Han, K. G. Reyes, A. Amassian, and M. Abolhasani,
Adv. Mater. 32, 2001626 (2020).

[32] M. M. Noack, P. H. Zwart, D. M. Ushizima, M. Fukuto,
K. G. Yager, K. C. Elbert, C. B. Murray, A. Stein, G. S.
Doerk, E. H. Tsai, et al., Nat. Rev. Phys. 3, 685 (2021).

[33] F. Bateni, R. W. Epps, K. Antami, R. Dargis, J. A. Ben-
nett, K. G. Reyes, and M. Abolhasani, Adv. Intell. Syst.
, 2200017 (2022).

[34] T. Konstantinova, P. M. Maffettone, B. Ravel, S. I.
Campbell, A. M. Barbour,
and D. Olds, Digital Dis-
covery , (2022).

[35] J. Behler and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 146401
(2007).

[36] J. Behler, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 074106 (2011).
[37] J. Behler, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13, 17930 (2011).
[38] N. Artrith and A. Urban, Comput. Mater. Sci. 114, 135
(2016).

[39] J. Behler, Chem. Rev. 121, 10037 (2021).
[40] C. P. Gomes, B. Selman, and J. M. Gregoire, MRS Bull.
44, 538 (2019).

[41] J. Wei, X. Chu, X.-Y. Sun, K. Xu, H.-X. Deng, J. Chen,
Z. Wei, and M. Lei, InfoMat 1, 338 (2019).

[42] D. Morgan and R. Jacobs, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 50,
71 (2020).

[43] A. Y.-T. Wang, R. J. Murdock, S. K. Kauwe, A. O.
Oliynyk, A. Gurlo, J. Brgoch, K. A. Persson, and T. D.
Sparks, Chem. Mater. 32, 4954 (2020).

[44] N. Artrith,
K. T. Butler,
F.-X. Coudert,
S. Han,
O. Isayev, A. Jain, and A. Walsh, Nat. Chem. 13, 505

(2021).

[45] N. Sambasivan, S. Kapania, H. Highfill, D. Akrong,
P. Paritosh, and L. M. Aroyo, in proceedings of the 2021
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems (2021) pp. 1–15.

[46] F. Chollet, Deep learning with Python (Simon and Schus-
ter, 2021).

[47] T. O. Ayodele, New Advances in Machine Learning 3, 19
(2010).

[48] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Ve-
ness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K.
Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, et al., Nature 518, 529 (2015).

[49] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, in 2nd International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff,
AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Pro-
ceedings, edited by Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun (2014).

[50] I. Higgins, L. Matthey, A. Pal, C. Burgess, X. Glorot,
M. Botvinick, S. Mohamed,
and A. Lerchner, in 5th
International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Confer-
ence Track Proceedings (OpenReview.net, 2017).

[51] C. Miles, M. R. Carbone, E. J. Sturm, D. Lu, A. We-
ichselbaum, K. Barros, and R. M. Konik, Phys. Rev. B.
104, 235111 (2021).

[52] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980

(2014).

[53] D. Weininger, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 28, 31 (1988).
[54] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Pro-
cesses for Machine Learning (Cambridge: MIT Press,
2006).

[55] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards,
S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder,
and K. a. Persson, APL Mater. 1, 011002 (2013).

[56] F. Zhang, B. Chen, G. R. Morrison, J. Vila-Comamala,
M. Guizar-Sicairos, and I. K. Robinson, Nat. Comm. 7,
1 (2016).

[57] L. Wu, S. Yoo, A. F. Suzana, T. A. Assefa, J. Diao,
R. J. Harder, W. Cha, and I. K. Robinson, npj Comput.
Mater. 7, 1 (2021).

[58] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever,
and R. Salakhutdinov, JMLR 15, 1929 (2014).

[59] A. G. Wilson and P. Izmailov, Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems 33, 4697 (2020).

[60] L. V. Jospin, H. Laga, F. Boussaid, W. Buntine,
and
M. Bennamoun, IEEE Computational Intelligence Mag-
azine 17, 29 (2022).

[61] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, in Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
(2015).

[62] K. Weiss, T. M. Khoshgoftaar,
and D. Wang, J. Big
Data 3, 1 (2016).

[63] L. Floridi, Philos. Technol. 33, 1 (2020).


