Acoustic amplifying diode using non-reciprocal Willis coupling

Xinhua Wen1, Heung Kit Yip1, Choonlae Cho2, Jensen Li1*, Namkyoo Park2*

1Department of Physics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear 

Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

2Photonic Systems Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul 

National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea

We propose a concept called acoustic amplifying diode in combining both signal isolation and 

amplification in a single device. The signal is exponentially amplified in one direction with no 

reflection and is completely absorbed in another. In this case, the reflection is eliminated from the 

device in both directions due to impedance matching, preventing backscattering to the signal 

source. Here, we experimentally demonstrate the amplifying diode using an active metamaterial 

with non-reciprocal Willis coupling. We also discuss the situation with the presence of both 

reciprocal and non-reciprocal Willis couplings for more flexibility in implementation. The concept 

of acoustic amplifying diode will enable applications in sound isolation, sensing and 

communication, in which non-reciprocity can play an important role.

* jensenli@ust.hk, nkpark@snu.ac.kr


While bianisotropy is a well-known concept in electromagnetism to obtain asymmetric absorption, 

topological phenomena and power-efficient wavefront shaping [1-4], its counterpart in acoustics

being called Willis coupling has only been recently realized through the notion of acoustic 

metamaterials [5-7]. Consequently, asymmetric or unidirectional zero reflections, non-Hermitian 

exceptional points can be revealed using acoustic Willis coupling [7-9]. By using asymmetric 

metamaterial structures with strong local resonances, a significant size of Willis coupling can be 

achieved [5,6]. However, a maximum bound for such coupling exists for implementations 

constrained with passivity and reciprocity [10-13]. Breaking the time-reversal symmetry, with 

moving fluid [14,15] or active (non-Hermitian) components [16-19], can be a solution to generate 

non-reciprocal Willis coupling and to overcome these constraints. Specifically, programmable

metamaterial approach can implement tailor-made impulse response of metamaterials by 

connecting microphones and speakers through a digital feedback circuit at each meta-atom [20-

23]. These meta-atoms mimic how physically resonating metamaterials respond but now with 

programmable control on the constitutive parameters. By controlling the response of both 

monopolar and dipolar scattering, Willis coupling beyond the passivity bound can be achieved

[19]. The two Willis coupling terms in the constitutive matrix can be controlled to become either 

symmetric, antisymmetric or arbitrary, making non-reciprocal Willis coupling assessable.

Furthermore, the direct and very flexible specifications of the constitutive parameters using these 

programmable metamaterials, while leaving out the implementation details, may allow us to have 

an “inverse design” approach starting from effective medium description to formulate one-way 

acoustic devices, including non-reciprocal lenses and acoustic diodes [14]. In fact, acoustic diodes 

were demonstrated using nonlinear sonic crystals with frequency conversion [24-26] and using 

diffraction structures with transmission mode conversion  [27]. However, confining to a single 

channel, no matter regarding frequency or spatial mode, and with significant transmission and zero 

reflection will be beneficial in order to have an ideal acoustic isolation. Such a single-channel 

demonstration is still not reachable.

Here, we propose a concept called amplifying diode in combining acoustic isolation and 

amplification together. The transmitted signal in one propagation direction is exponentially 

amplified while the transmitted signal in the reverse direction is exponentially suppressed. At the 

same time, there will be zero reflection from both directions, i.e. an amplifier in one direction and 

an absorber in another. We design and realize an active and non-reciprocal Willis metamaterial by


first investigating the required constitutive parameters for such amplifying diode action and a 

realization scheme through programmable metamaterials. We will also discuss realization schemes 

with both the reciprocal and non-reciprocal Willis coupling present. The integration of amplifying 

action into an ideal diode will be potentially useful to enrich the applications of sound isolation 

and further enable ultrasensitive non-reciprocal sensing and non-reciprocal communication.

Figure 1 (a) Schematics of the conventional diode (left panel) and the amplifying diode (right panel). The 
conventional diode offers a unit transmission amplitude in the forward direction (red color), but a 
completely suppressed transmitted signal (black color) in the reverse direction. While the amplifying diode
offers an amplified forward transmitted signal (𝑡f > 1) but a zero transmission amplitude in the backward 
direction, exhibiting a significant isolation effect together with amplfiication. Meanwhile, the reflected 
signals in both the forward and backward directions are completely suppressed. (b) Schematic of the 
amplifying diode consisting of 9 meta-atoms in a 1D waveguide. The upper left inset shows the photograph 
of the inverse side of a homemade PCB sample integrated with two speakers and two microphones, and the 
lower right inset shows an assembled meta-atom connected to the microcontroller.

We begin with the conceptual relationship between a conventional diode and an amplifying 

diode. As shown in the left panel of Fig. 1(a), for the acoustic wave incident from the left-hand 

side (defined as the forward direction), the transmitted wave has a unit amplitude (|𝑡f| = 1), while 


the backward transmitted wave is completely suppressed (𝑡b = 0), exhibiting nonreciprocal wave 

propagation. The right panel of Fig. 1(a) shows the requirement of the proposed amplifying diode. 

For a forward incident wave, we have amplification in transmission and zero reflection

simultaneously. It has to be achieved by some active Huygens (secondary) sources in the middle 

to generate scattering waves only in the forward direction, while adding in-phase to the incident 

wave (|𝑡𝑓| > 1). The zero back-scattering generates no reflection (𝑟𝑓 = 0). For a backward 

incident wave, the same active Huygens sources still generate zero back-scattering (𝑟𝑏 = 0) while 

adding out-of-phase to the incident waves to suppress the backward transmission ideally to a value 

zero (𝑡𝑏 = 0). These Huygens sources have to be both active and asymmetric and are thus linked 

to the active Willis coupling in an acoustic effective medium setting for a one-dimensional (1D)

metamaterial.

Without losing generality, the 1D metamaterial is along the 𝑥-direction and has a 2 × 2

constitutive matrix {{𝛽, 𝑖𝜏}, {𝑖𝜏′, 𝜌}}. 𝛽 and 𝜌 represent the dimensionless compressibility and 

density in relative to air. 𝜏 and 𝜏′ are the required Willis coupling terms. Under an 𝑒−𝑖𝜔𝑡 time 

convention, the wave equation can be written as

𝜕𝑥 (𝑣

𝑝) = 𝑖𝜔

𝑐 (𝛽
𝑖𝜏

𝑖𝜏′
𝜌) (𝑝

𝑣),
(1)

where 𝑝 is the pressure field, 𝑣 is the velocity field multiplied by the acoustic impedance of air

and 𝑐 is the sound speed of air. To obtain an analytic insight, we first consider the scattering from 

only a small section of the metamaterial of thickness 𝐿 in air. In this case, the scattering matrix of 

the metamaterial can be obtained by integrating Eq. (1) with the Padé’s approximation [28] to

become

(𝑡f
𝑟b

𝑟f
𝑡b) ≅ (

1 + 𝑖𝜙0

2 (𝛽 + 𝜌 + 2𝑖𝜏nr)
𝑖𝜙0
2 (𝛽 − 𝜌 − 2𝑖𝜏r)

𝑖𝜙0
2 (𝛽 − 𝜌 + 2𝑖𝜏r)
1 + 𝑖𝜙0

2 (𝛽 + 𝜌 − 2𝑖𝜏nr)

),

(2)

where the subscript “f” (“b”) denotes the transmission and reflection coefficients in the forward 

(backward) direction. 𝜙0 = 𝜔𝐿/𝑐 is the phase elapse across air with the same thickness of the 

metamaterial (as one meta-atom later) and is much less than 2𝜋. We have also decomposed the 

Willis coupling terms into the reciprocal 𝜏r and non-reciprocal components 𝜏nr, so that 𝜏 = 𝜏r +

𝜏nr, and 𝜏′ = −𝜏r + 𝜏nr [10]. According to Eq. (2), a non-zero 𝜏r allows asymmetric reflections 


in the forward and backward directions, while a nonzero 𝜏nr offers us a tuning knob for non-

reciprocal transmission with 𝑡f − 𝑡b = −2𝜙0𝜏nr. To avoid potential disturbance back to the source 

or other devices from the reflected signal, we choose to set 𝑟𝑓 = 𝑟𝑏 = 0 in Eq. (2), which gives

rise to the impedance matching condition:

𝜏r = 0, 𝛽 = 𝜌.
(3)

More specifically, a non-zero 𝜏𝑟 means a non-zero 𝑟𝑓 − 𝑟𝑏 while 𝛽 ≠ 𝜌 means a non-zero 𝑟𝑓 + 𝑟𝑏. 

An impedance-matched metamaterial has thus a purely non-reciprocal Willis coupling 𝜏 = 𝜏′ =

𝜏nr, with transmission coefficients

𝑡f ≅ 1 + 𝑖𝜙0(𝑖𝜏nr + 𝛽),

𝑡b ≅ 1 + 𝑖𝜙0(−𝑖𝜏nr + 𝛽).

Since there is no reflections at each small section, cascading same copies of the section (or meta-

atoms) simply turns the scattering coefficients of the metamaterial into the following form:

𝑡f𝑒𝜏𝑛𝑟𝜙0 = 𝑡b𝑒−𝜏𝑛𝑟𝜙0 = 𝑒𝑖𝛽𝜙0,

𝑟𝑓 = 𝑟𝑏 = 0.
(4)

This gives further flexibility in controlling the amplification factor on the incident waves. By 

requesting a real value of 𝜏𝑛𝑟, the waves are exponentially amplifying and decaying in opposite 

directions with zero reflection. By cascading more atoms, it will approach the required amplifying 

diode operation.

Figure 2 (a) Schematic representation of the meta-atom consisting of two speakers (labeled as 𝑆1 and 𝑆2) 
and two microphones (𝐷1 and 𝐷2). The phase distance between two speakers (microphones) is 2Δ𝜙. 
Orange arrows connecting the microphone 𝐷𝑗 to a speaker 𝑆𝑖 represent the time-convolution labeled by 𝑌𝑖𝑗. 
(b) The transmittance and reflectance for both the forward and backward directions, validate the direction-


dependent amplification phenomenon and zero reflection. The symbols (lines) show the experimental 
(analytical) results. (c1-c4) The extracted four constitutive parameters from the scattering parameters in (b), 
verifying the target constitutive parameters: 𝜏 = 𝜏′ = 𝜏nr and 𝛽 = 𝜌. The solid (open) symbols represent 
the real (imaginary) part of the experimental results, and the solid (dashed) lines denote the real (imaginary) 
part of the analytical results.

To realize the amplifying diode, each meta-atom has to respond to both monopolar and 

dipolar incoming waves so that the monopolar and dipolar scattering waves behave as the 

described Huygens source. We adopt the programmable metamaterial approach shown in Fig. 1(b), 

with totally nine meta-atoms, with a period of 𝐿 =9 cm in a 1D waveguide. Each meta-atom 

consists of a pair of speakers and microphones interconnected by a microcontroller on an integrated 

unit (the two insets). It can at most carry out four different channels of time-convolution in 

connecting the two speakers (labeled as 𝑆1 and 𝑆2 in unit of pressure) to the two microphones

(labeled as 𝐷1 and 𝐷2 in unit of pressure) as a matrix multiplication in the time-harmonic 

representation:

(𝑆1
𝑆2) = (𝑌11
𝑌12

𝑌21
𝑌22) (𝐷1

𝐷2).
(5)

Such a representation is also schematically shown in Fig. 2(a). The distance between the two 

speakers or the two microphones is 4.5 cm in the actual implementation, labeled as 2Δ𝜙 in terms 

of phase elapse in air. In the following, we set 𝛽 = 𝜌 = 1 for simplification and 𝜏𝑛𝑟 = −0.09. It 

can be further proved that the required scattering coefficients (Eq. (4)) can be realized now by zero 

𝑌11 and 𝑌22, together with

𝑌12 = 𝑖𝑒𝜏𝑛𝑟𝜙0/2 sinh(𝜏𝑛𝑟𝜙0/2) csc 2Δ𝜙 ,

𝑌21 = −𝑖𝑒−𝜏𝑛𝑟𝜙0/2 sinh(𝜏𝑛𝑟𝜙0/2) csc 2Δ𝜙,

(6)

which are implemented within the microcontroller of each meta-atom through two time-domain 

convolutions or equivalently a Lorentzian-type resonance in the frequency domain [19,21]:

𝑌12/21(𝑓) =
𝑔12/21𝑓0

𝑓0

2 − (𝑓 + 𝑖𝛾)2.
(7)

Then, 𝑌12 and 𝑌21 can become almost purely imaginary if we choose the operation frequency at 𝑓0, 

the resonating frequency at 1350 Hz in this work. We also set the resonance linewidth 𝛾 = 50 Hz. 

Finally, the resonance strengths are set by 𝑔12 ≅ 2𝑖𝛾𝑌12(𝑓0) = −10.1 Hz and 𝑔21 ≅


2𝑖𝛾𝑌21(𝑓0) = 12.3 Hz. More details are given in Supplementary Material [ 29 ] for the 

implementation model.

The transmittance and reflectance for a single unit cell in both the forward and backward 

directions are measured and shown in Fig. 2(b) as symbols. They match well with the analytic

model results (given by Eq. (7)) shown as solid lines. Around the resonance frequency, the forward 

transmittance (red color) of the meta-atom is around 1.5, demonstrating that the forward 

transmitted signal is amplified. However, the backward transmittance (green color) is suppressed 

to around 0.68, exhibiting obvious transmission contrast resulted from non-reciprocity. In fact, for 

such a meta-atom, the forward transmission amplitude times the backward transmission amplitude

is approximately equal to one as expected in the model. In addition, the reflection coefficients for 

both the forward and backward directions (black and blue colors) are almost zero, validating our 

target design. To confirm the Willis coupling, we also extract the four constitutive parameters of 

the metamaterial from the complex transmission and reflection coefficients [29], as shown in Fig.

2(c). The real and imaginary parts of the experimental results are shown with solid and open 

symbols respectively, agreeing with the analytical results shown with solid and dashed lines. The

two measured Willis couplings 𝜏 and 𝜏′ are almost the same, i.e. purely non-reciprocal Willis 

coupling. At the resonance frequency 1350 Hz, the Willis couplings terms 𝑖𝜏 and 𝑖𝜏′ are well 

approximated to be purely imaginary numbers −0.09𝑖, resulting in the maximum contrast between 

the forward and backward transmission amplitude in the spectrum. In addition, the extracted 

constitutive parameters also satisfy the impedance matching condition: 𝛽 = 𝜌 ≅ 1 with zero 𝜏𝑟, 

giving us zero reflections in both the forward and backward directions. We also note that the 

constitutive parameters extracted for a single unit cell (of thickness 𝐿) can also be used for the 

situation when there are multiple unit cells as there is negligible near-field coupling between 

neighboring unit cells in this work.


Figure 3 The experimental results of (a) forward and (b) backward transmittance for the metamaterial 
amplifying diode consisting of 3 atoms (black symbols), 6 atoms (blue symbols) and 9 atoms (red symbols). 
(c) The forward (red color) and backward (black color) transmittance at the resonance frequency varies as 
the number of atoms increases from 1 to 9. (d) The measured reflectance at the resonance frequency for the 
forward and backward directions. The symbols (lines) represent the experimental (analytical) results.

Now, we cascade the same meta-atoms in the 1D waveguide to realize the amplifying diode. 

As shown in Fig. 1(b), 9 meta-atoms are equally spaced in the top cover of the 1D waveguide. In 

the experiment, we gradually increase the number of turned-on meta-atoms from 1 to 9, and then 

measure the scattering parameters for the 1D metamaterials consisting of the different number of 

meta-atoms. Figure 3(a) shows the forward transmittance of 1D metamaterials consisting of 3 

meta-atoms (red color), 6 meta-atoms (blue color) and 9 meta-atoms (black color). Both the 

experimental (symbols) and analytical (lines) results show that, as the number of meta-atoms 

increases, the forward transmitted signal has a larger amplification ratio around the resonance 

frequency. For a metamaterial consisting of 9 atoms, the transmission intensity in the forward 

direction can go up to around 35. In contrast, in the backward direction, the backward transmitted 

signal has a lower intensity as the number of meta-atoms increases, and is almost completely 

suppressed for the metamaterial consisting of 9 atoms, i.e. nearly perfect absorption occurs for the 


backward incident wave. The huge contrast between the forward and backward transmission 

intensity demonstrates a significant isolation effect using such an active metamaterial with 9 atoms.

To closely study the relationship between the transmission intensity and the number of meta-atoms, 

we focus on the transmittance at resonance frequency 1350 Hz (denoted by dashed lines in Figs. 

3(a) and (b)). Figure 3(c) plots the transmission intensity (in 10 log 𝑇) at the resonance frequency 

for the forward (red color) and backward directions (black color) against the number of meta-

atoms. The transmission intensity in the forward direction is exponentially amplified as the number 

of meta-atoms increases, while the transmission intensity in the backward direction is 

exponentially decayed. For the metamaterial with 𝜏 = 𝜏′ = 𝜏nr and 𝛽 = 𝜌 ≈ 1, the exponentially 

amplification or decay of the transmittance depends on the Willis parameter 𝜏 as ±8.686(−𝜙0𝜏)𝑛

where 𝑛 represents the number of meta-atoms. On the other hand, the measured intensity of 

reflected signals in both the forward and backward directions is independent of the number of 

meta-atoms, and keeps at low intensity (around -20 dB) as the number of meta-atoms increases, as 

shown in Fig. 3(d). Therefore, based on the active meta-atoms, we experimentally realize the 

amplifying diode with a giant amplification ratio for the forward transmitted signals. 

Figure 4 (a) The measured amplitude of the scattering coefficients (symbols) for a meta-atom with 𝜏 = 𝜏′
but 𝛽 ≠ 𝜌 , agreeing to the analytical results (lines). (b) The reflection amplitude |𝑟| and (c) the 
transmission amplitude contrast |𝑡f − 𝑡b| for a general Willis metamaterial with thickness 𝐿 against the 
parameter 𝑍 = √𝜌/𝛽 and the reciprocal Willis parameters 𝜏𝑟. The white lines indicate the FP resonance 
condition and the point at 𝑍 = 1 and 𝜏𝑟 = 0 indicates the amplifying diode working condition with 
impedance matching.

In the above implementation of the amplifying diode, we have only adopted a purely non-

reciprocal Willis coupling 𝜏nr with impedance matching: 𝛽 = 𝜌 and 𝜏𝑟 = 0. We provide further

analysis on the scattering properties for more general Willis metamaterials. As a simple example, 

we flip the sign of resonance strength of the kernel 𝑌12, i.e. 𝑔12 = 10 Hz. The small contrast 


between 𝑌12 and 𝑌21 results in a much smaller magnitude of 𝜏𝑛𝑟 and thus a smaller transmission 

contrast between the forward and backward directions, as shown in Fig. 4(a). There are also some 

reflections with 𝑟𝑓 = 𝑟𝑏 due to the deviation from the impedance matching condition as 𝛽 ≠ 𝜌

with 𝜏𝑟 = 0. In this case, the reflection coefficient can be expressed as

𝑟f = 𝑟b =
𝑍2 − 1

2𝑖𝑍 cot(𝑛𝑟𝜙0) + 1 + 𝑍2,
(8)

where 𝑛𝑟 = √𝜌𝛽 and 𝑍 = √𝜌/𝛽 are the refractive index and the impedance of the medium, being 

independent of the purely non-reciprocal Willis coupling term 𝜏𝑛𝑟. This is in contrast with the 

reciprocal Willis metamaterials where the Willis coupling affects the relative refractive index and 

split the impedance into two values depending on the direction.

Now we extend to a general Willis metamaterial with both the reciprocal and non-

reciprocal components of the Willis coupling present. Here, we fix 𝛽 = 1 and 𝜏𝑛𝑟 = −0.09 as 

before while we scan 𝑍 (in fact √𝜌) and 𝜏𝑟. In the current case with all real numbers for 𝛽, 𝜌, 𝜏𝑟

and 𝜏𝑛𝑟, a non-zero 𝜏𝑟 only causes the two reflection coefficients in opposite directions differ in 

phase but not in magnitude, we plot the reflection amplitude |𝑟| and the amplitude of the 

transmission contrast |𝑡f − 𝑡b|, against 𝑍 and 𝜏𝑟 in Fig. 4(b) and (c). At 𝜏r = 0, 𝑍 = 1, a clear dip 

in |𝑟| with a peak at |𝑡f − 𝑡b| indicates the demonstrated case of amplifying diode. In fact, the 

denominator in Eq. (8) suggests the possible occurrence of Fabry-Pérot (FP) resonance, which now 

becomes the discrete “parabolic” bands in getting |𝑟| = 0, whose positions are denoted as the 

white dashed curves in both Fig. 4(b) and 4(c). It is further noted that the transmission contrast 

|𝑡f − 𝑡b| also has a large amplitude at FP resonances.

Unlike the impedance matching approach (the demonstrated case), the FP resonance 

approach will be useful in a situation that we do not have a full control on the Willis couplings so 

that both reciprocal and non-reciprocal Willis couplings are present at the same time. The FP 

approach can only work at a chosen thickness to satisfy resonance condition (in a way similar to 

the wavelength sensitivity for a FP resonance). On the contrary, the impedance matching approach 

allows amplification cascaded as thickness grows, i.e. with a tunability on the amplification ratio

and a higher tolerance on the operation condition. It will be useful in a situation that the gain of 

individual metamaterial atom is limited by its power source. It is also interesting to note that the 

current implementation uses non-Hermitian components, which is also related to a concept called 

parity-time symmetric laser absorber [30-33]. An optical medium can act as a laser or a perfect 


absorber depending on different coherent wave excitations. In the current work, we have actually

demonstrated a similar concept in acoustics that the Willis medium acts as an amplifier or an 

absorber depending on the way of excitation.

In summary, we have proposed and demonstrated the concept of an acoustic amplifying 

diode from either impedance matching or from FP resonance using non-reciprocal and active

Willis coupling. An incident wave will be amplified without reflection in one direction while 

completely absorbed in another direction. The demonstrated diode action with zero reflection will 

be immediately useful for sound isolation. The additional amplifying effect in one direction helps 

to construct ultrasensitive sensors. Looking forward for applications in larger systems, the ability 

of distributing the amplification (without reflection) into different components and without using 

time-modulation will further enable non-reciprocal control of wave propagation in more general 

settings, such as control in two-dimensional setting for non-reciprocal communication and non-

Hermitian topology [34,35].

Acknowledgment

The work is supported by Hong Kong RGC project no. 16303019 and AoE/P-502/20.

Reference

[1] Lindell, I., Sihvola, A., Tretyakov, S., and Viitanen, A. J. Electromagnetic waves in chiral and 

bi-isotropic media. Artech House (1994).

[2] Yazdi, M. et al. A bianisotropic metasurface with resonant asymmetric absorption. IEEE Trans. 

Antennas Propag. 63, 3004-3015 (2015).

[3] Khanikaev, A. B., Hossein Mousavi, S., Tse, W. K., Kargarian, M., MacDonald, A. H., and

Shvets, G. Photonic topological insulators. Nat. Mater. 12, 233-239 (2013).

[4] Ra’di, Y., Sounas, D. L., and Alù, A. Metagratings: Beyond the limits of graded metasurfaces 

for wave front control. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 067404 (2017).

[5] Muhlestein, M. B., Sieck, C. F., Wilson, P. S., and Haberman, M. R. Experimental evidence of 

Willis coupling in a one-dimensional effective material element. Nat. Commun. 8, 15625 (2017).

[6] Koo, S., Cho, C., Jeong, J. H., and Park, N. Acoustic omni meta-atom for decoupled access to 

all octants of a wave parameter space. Nat. Commun. 7, 13012 (2016).

[7] Liu, Y. et al. Willis metamaterial on a structured beam. Phys. Rev. X 9, 011040 (2019).


[8] Meng, Y., Hao, Y., Guenneau, S., Wang, S., and Li, J. Willis coupling in water waves. New J. 

Phys. 23, 073004 (2021).

[9] Merkel, A., Romero-García, V., Groby, J. P., Li, J., and Christensen, J. Unidirectional zero 

sonic reflection in passive PT-symmetric Willis media. Phys. Rev. B 98, 201102 (2018).

[10] Muhlestein, M. B., Sieck, C. F., Alù, A., and& Haberman, M. R. Reciprocity, passivity and 

causality in Willis materials. Proc. R. Soc. A: Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. Proceedings of the Royal 

Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 472(2194), 20160604 (2016).

[11] Sieck, C. F., Alù, A., and& Haberman, M. R. Origins of Willis coupling and acoustic 

bianisotropy in acoustic metamaterials through source-driven homogenization. Phys.ical Rev.iew

B, 96(10), 104303 (2017).

[12] Quan, L., Ra’di, Y., Sounas, D. L., and& Alù, A. Maximum Willis coupling in acoustic 

scatterers. Phys.ical Rrev.iew Llett.ers, 120(25), 254301(2018).

[13] Melnikov, A. et al., Chiang, Y. K., Quan, L., Oberst, S., Alù, A., Marburg, S., & Powell, D. 

Acoustic meta-atom with experimentally verified maximum Willis coupling. Nat.ure

Ccommun.ications, 10(1), 3148 1-7(2019).

[14] Quan, L., Sounas, D. L., and Alù, A. Nonreciprocal Willis coupling in zero-index moving 

media. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 064301(2019).

[15] Quan, L., Yves, S., Peng, Y., Esfahlani, H., and Alù, A. Odd Willis coupling induced by 

broken time-reversal symmetry. Nat. Commun. 12, 1-9 (2021).

[16] Popa, B. I., Zhai, Y., and Kwon, H. S. Broadband sound barriers with bianisotropic 

metasurfaces. Nat. Commun. 9, 5299 (2018).

[17] Zhai, Y., Kwon, H. S., and Popa, B. I. Active Willis metamaterials for ultracompact 

nonreciprocal linear acoustic devices. Phys. Rev. B 99, 220301(2019).

[18] Chen, Y., Li, X., Hu, G., Haberman, M. R., and Huang, G. An active mechanical Willis meta-

layer with asymmetric polarizabilities. Nat. Commun. 11, 3681 (2020).

[19] Cho, C., Wen, X., Park, N., and Li, J. Acoustic Willis meta-atom beyond the bounds of 

passivity and reciprocity. Commun. Phys. 4, 82 (2021).

[20] Popa, B. I., Zigoneanu, L., and Cummer, S. A. Tunable active acoustic metamaterials. Phys. 

Rev. B 88, 024303 (2013).

[21] Cho, C., Wen, X., Park, N., and Li, J. Digitally virtualized atoms for acoustic metamaterials. 

Nat. Commun. 11, 251 (2020).


[22] Kovacevich, D. A., and Popa, B. I. Programmable bulk modulus in acoustic metamaterials 

composed of strongly interacting active cells. Appl. Phys. Lett. 121, 101701 (2022).

[23] Craig, S. R. et al. Extreme material parameters accessible by active acoustic metamaterials 

with Willis coupling. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 151, 1722-1729 (2022).

[24] Liang, B., Yuan, B., and Cheng, J. C. Acoustic diode: Rectification of acoustic energy flux in 

one-dimensional systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 104301 (2009).

[25] Liang, B., Guo, X. S., Tu, J., Zhang, D., and Cheng, J. C. An acoustic rectifier. Nat. Mater. 9, 

989-992 (2010).

[26] Boechler, N., Theocharis, G., and Daraio, C. Bifurcation-based acoustic switching and 

rectification. Nat. Mater. 10, 665-668 (2011).

[27] Li, X. F., Ni, X., Feng, L., Lu, M. H., He, C., and Chen, Y. F. Tunable unidirectional sound 

propagation through a sonic-crystal-based acoustic diode. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 084301(2011).

[28] T. Feng, F. Li, W. Y. Tam and J. Li, EPL (Europhy. Lett.) 102, 18003 (2013).

[29] See Supplemental Material for the derivation of implementation model and the effective 

medium extraction.

[30] Longhi, S., 2010. PT-symmetric laser absorber. Physical Review A, 82, p.031801.

[31] Chong, Y.D., Ge, L. and Stone, A.D., 2011. P t-symmetry breaking and laser-absorber modes

in optical scattering systems. Physical Review Letters, 106(9), p.093902.

[32] Sun, Y., Tan, W., Li, H.Q., Li, J. and Chen, H., 2014. Experimental demonstration of a 

coherent perfect absorber with PT phase transition. Physical review letters, 112(14), p.143903.

[33] Gu, Z., Zhang, N., Lyu, Q., Li, M., Xiao, S. and Song, Q., 2016. Experimental demonstration 

of PT‐symmetric stripe lasers. Laser & Photonics Reviews, 10(4), pp.588-594.

[34] Sounas, D. L. and Alu, A. Non-reciprocal photonics based on time modulation. Nature Photon. 

11, 774 (2017).

[35] Bergholtz, E.J., Budich, J.C. and Kunst, F.K. Exceptional topology of non-Hermitian systems. 

Rev. of Mod. Phys. 93, 015005 (2021).


