Planar bridging an Atomically Precise Surface Trench with a Single Molecular Wire on an 
Au(111) Surface

Umamahesh Thupakula,1 Xavier Bouju,1 Jesús Castro-Esteban,2 Erik Dujardina,1,3 Diego Peña,3
and Christian Joachim1,4

1 Centre d’Élaboration de Matériaux et d’Études Structurales (CEMES), Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Université de Toulouse, 29 Rue J. Marvig, BP 94347, 31055 
Toulouse Cedex, France.
2 Centro Singular de Investigación en Química Biolóxica e Materiais Moleculares (CiQUS) and 
Departamento de Química Orgánica, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, 15782-Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain.
3 Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire Carnot de Bourgogne, CNRS UMR 6303, Université de Bourgogne 
Franche-Comté, 9 Av. A. Savary, 21078 Dijon, France.
4 International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for 
Material Sciences (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan.

KEYWORDS: Molecular manipulation, single molecule contact, dI/dV mapping, LT-UHV
STM

Chem. Phys. Lett. 806 (2022) 140029
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2022.140029

Abstract

In a bridge configuration, a single graphene nanoribbon (GNR) is positioned with a picometer 
precision over a trench in between two monoatomic steps on an Au(111) surface. This GNR 
molecular wire adopts a deformed conformation towards the down terrace in between the two 
contact step edges. Using differential conductance dI/dV mapping from a low-temperature scanning 
tunneling microscope, it is demonstrated how the electronic delocalization along GNR is cut at each 
contact by its down curvature. It points out the need to bring conductive nanocontacts backside of 
the support for preserving the front side GNR planar conformation.

Graphical abstract


1. Introduction

For single molecule electronics where the complete electronic circuit is supposed to be embedded 
inside one single molecule [1], the planar interconnection of a given molecular wire end to a planar 
atomically defined metallic nanopads with a picometer precision is a difficult experimental problem 
[2]. It is also very challenging in terms of understanding the quantum contact conductance between 
the end of the wire and the surface of the corresponding nanopad [3]. The first vertical contact of a 
single and always the same molecule with a 20 pm precision [4] and later on a single atom [5] was 
obtained using the metallic tip of an ultra-high vacuum scanning tunneling microscope (UHV-STM) 
as a first electrode, while the second electrode was the supporting metallic surface prepared with at 
atomic precision in the UHV.

To reach a planar configuration with the same pm precision and, after the tentative using of electron 
beam nanolithography [6], pseudo-planar configurations have been explored with a single on-
purpose designed Lander molecule at a mono-atomic step edge of a metal surface [7]. Different 
step-edge chemical composition and configuration have also been attempted using, for example, 
ultra-thin insulator nano-islands [8-10]. Short atomic wires have been constructed atom-by-atom on 
a large gap nanomaterial deposited on a metal surface to demonstrate how such atomic scale 
connection can be implemented locally [11]. On-surface polymerization was also attempted to reach 
the single molecule to be wired [12]. Returning to the vertical UHV-STM configuration, the pulling 
technique of a molecular wire by the STM tip open the path to measure the conductance of a single 
armchair graphene nanoribbon (GNR) as a function of its length [13,14]. The supporting atomically 
prepared metallic surface was again the second electrode and the molecular wire maintained in a 
planar configuration on the surface at least at one end [15].

In this Letter, we report how a conjugated single molecular wire can be positioned in a bridge like 
configuration over a nanometer scale in width trench in between two monoatomic steps on an 
Au(111) surface. This configuration is reproducing the conformation of a molecular wire ideally 
contacted in a planar configuration and with a pm precision between two atomically well-defined 
metallic contacting nanopads [2]. We have selected the Au(111) surface because (1) on-surface 
synthesis of long molecular wires is now well mastered [15,16], (2) molecular wires are generally 
physisorbed on Au(111) as compared for example to the Ag(111) surface [17], and (3) atomically 
well-defined surface trenches are easily generated on an Au(111) surface [18]. Furthermore, the 
atomic structure of STM tip apex can be well recovered after nanoindentation.

In section 2, and starting from the diphenyl–10,10ʹ-dibromo-9,9ʹ-bianthracene (DP-DBBA) 
monomers (laterally extended derivative of DBBA), the on-surface synthesis of periodically 
modulated with 2 and 6 fused benzene ring wide armchair GNRs, known as 7-13-AGNRs (hereafter 
simply labeled DP-GNRs), is presented. After the on-surface polymerization and 
cyclodehydrogenation steps, the experimental conditions to generate mono-atomic in height 
trenches on the Au(111) surface are discussed. In section 3, low temperature UHV-STM images and 
molecular manipulations of DP-GNRs having a well selected length are described. With a pm 
precision and on Au(111), we position a single 7 monomer unit long DP-GNR (7-DP-GNR) in a 
bridge configuration in-between the two monoatomic step edges of a well selected trench width. 
Experimental dI/dV mappings were recorded to confirm the deformed conformation of the bridging 
7-DP-GNR molecular wire. In section 4 and to be more systematic on the passage from a non-
deformed DP-GNR planar to a liana bridge like conformation, a triangular shaped trench was used 
to slide a 9 monomer unit long DP-GNR (9-DP-GNR) step-by-step along the trench. A 
configuration is reached where one end of the 9-DP-GNR recovers its planar surface conformation 
on the Au(111) surface while its other end remains contacted atop at the trench step edge. Finally, in 
the discussion section, the liana bridge distorted conformation is analyzed using molecular 


mechanics calculations while comparing experimental and calculated constant current scans. It is 
shown that even in this very elementary bridge like configuration, an exact planar contact 
conformation of the molecular wire bridging two minimal in height metallic nanopads (relative to 
the supporting surface) is not possible. While contacted with a pm precision, this points out the 
urgent need for a Via like technology [19] pushed towards the atomic scale to preserve the exact 
planarity of the molecular wire on its supporting surface.

2. Experimental section

On the Au(111) surface, we have performed the on-surface synthesis of the DP-GNRs starting from 
DP-DBBA monomers (Fig.1a). These molecular wires were selected because their lateral phenyl 
groups are supposed to stabilize the end contact and also because its ground to first excited states 
energy separation (approximately equals to its HOMO-LUMO gap) is believed to be smaller than 
the well-known 7–GNRs resulting also from the on-surface polymerization of the DBBA monomers 
[16]. On-surface polymerization of the DP-DBBA monomers on an Au(111) surface was already 
described in the literature but a very high density of oligomers was reported [20]. To drastically 
reduce this density, we have limited the initial monomer precursor concentration on Au(111) surface 
and further carried out a two-step annealing approach.

Fig. 1. On-surface synthesis of DP-GNRs and generation of monoatomic height trenches on the Au(111) surface. (a) 
Schematic illustration showing the on-surface synthesis of DP-GNRs with the basic DP-DBBA monomer precursor (top 
left), the ball model of two such DP-DBBA monomers (top right frame labeled 1), the polymerization reaction (bottom 
right frame labeled 2) and finally the cyclodehydrogenation reaction (bottom left frame labeled 3). (b) Large scale 
constant-current STM image with different in length DP-GNRs on the Au(111) surface. (c) The STM image of a linear 
and the triangular sharp terraces and trenches reconstruction after a gentle STM tip nano-indentation process on the 
Au(111) surface. Scale bars 20 nm. STM set-parameters are +100 mV/100 pA.

2.1. Au(111) surface preparation

Single crystal (111) oriented Au surface (Mateck GmbH) was used as the atomically flat support for 
the on-surface synthesis and UHV-LT STM single molecule molecular manipulation experiments. 
Initially, the Au(111) surface was cleaned with repeated cycles of Ar+ ion sputtering (for 10 minutes 
at ∼1.0 keV and ∼10−6 mbar) and subsequent annealing under UHV conditions at about 750 K for 
1h. The quality of the Au(111) surface was checked for its cleanliness using any one STM head of 
our LT-UHV 4-STM instrument operating at a sample stage temperatures of ∼4.5 K [21]. A typical 
herringbone surface topography reconstruction and the characteristic Au(111) surface state were 
observed, indicative of atomically flat and clean Au(111) surface as well as the chemical 
composition of the STM tip apex. All the samples were prepared in UHV conditions, transferred 
and characterized in situ in our LT-UHV 4-STM instrument (base pressure <3×10−11 mbar, Scienta 
Omicron). A lock-in detection technique was used for recording the DP-GNR dI/dV maps in open 


feedback loop conditions (Vmod = 16 mV at ∼430 Hz). STM and STS data were acquired with 
electrochemically etched Pt/Ir (80/20) tips.

2.2. DP-DBBA polymerization and cyclodehydrogenation on Au(111)

The DP-DBBA monomers were thermally evaporated from a quartz crucible of a Knudsen-cell 
thermal evaporator (Kentax triple cell system) at 160 °C for 10 minutes onto the clean Au(111) 
surface maintained at room temperature in our UHV preparation chamber. Starting from a 1.0 ML 
of DP-DBBA coverage, a two-step on-surface synthesis was performed (as illustrated in Fig.1a) by 
annealing the sample first at ∼200 °C and then at 400 °C for 10 minutes at each temperature. It 
results first the formation of long DP-DBBA oligomer chains via an Ullmann type coupling reaction 
(at the bromine sites) and then the DP-GNRs via cyclodehydrogenation reaction, respectively. 
Figure1b presents a typical 100 nm × 100 nm STM image recorded in our LT-UHV 4-STM 
instrument. This on-surface synthesis strategy leads to a very low density of DP-GNRs with a 
length distribution ranging from the DP-DBBA monomer to ∼80 nm long DP-GNRs.

2.3. Creating the mono atomic high trenches on Au(111) after the DP-GNR 
synthesis

Directly after the DP-GNRs synthesis, a gentle STM tip apex indentation was performed 
maintaining the Au(111) surface on the LT-UHV 4-STM stage at liquid helium temperatures. For 
this purpose, the STM tip of the selected STM head was initially scanned in a constant current mode 
(set-point: V = +0.1 V and I = 100 pA) to identify a clean Au(111) surface region of at least 20 nm × 
20 nm with no molecules. This avoids a possible pickup of DP-GNRs by the STM tip apex during 
the indentation process. Next, the STM tip apex was positioned at the center of this clean Au(111) 
region and the nano-indentation performed using the STM atom manipulation mode with a targeted 
200 nA current at 4 mV bias voltage. This is equivalent to a 20 kΩ STM tunnel junction resistance, 
just below the quantum contact resistance regime of our 4-STM setup. At these conditions, 
approaching for few seconds the STM tip apex down to a minimum of 5 nm in ‘Δz’ relative to the 
Au(111) surface and sliding the tip <1 nm in the lateral x-y plane generates well defined dislocation 
emerging at the Au(111) surface [18]. This lateral tip apex displacement step is required to complete 
the nanoindentation procedure [18] in a reproducible manner to obtain long and well-defined atomic 
trenches as presented in Fig.1c. Then, the STM tip apex was reshaped at a different free of molecule 
location to re-define a metallic and artifact free tip apex (accessed by probing the Au(111) surface 
state). Thanks to this clean and gentle indentation procedure, dislocations emerge randomly on an 
Au(111) surface region of approximately 500 nm × 500 nm around the tip apex impact with a large 
distribution of mono atomic high triangular steps and linear trenches of different widths. After this 
indentation step, a systematic exploration of the resulting Au(111) reveals that the surface 
deformations take place without affecting the quality of DP-GNRs chemical structures. It allows 
selecting the DP-GNRs with the precise lengths suitable for bridging linear and triangular mono-
atomic in height trenches (Fig.1c).

2.4. Theory simulation details

Semi-empirical molecular mechanics calculations were performed using the ASED+ code including 
van der Waals interactions. It was parametrized using DFT calculations for small unit cell surface 
[22]. Constant current STM scans were calculated using the Elastic Scattering Quantum Chemistry 
semi-empirical (ESQC-EHMO) code [23] using the generalized Landauer-Buttiker formula to 
calculate the current intensity avoiding the Bardeen approximation and leading to a virtual STM 
like procedure, which is able to calculate the Δz constant current scan corrugation. A double zeta 
basis set was used at the tip apex end atom to reproduce the Au(111) work function.


3. Bridging the trench

After having located a linear trench with its two-parallel mono-atomic step edges on the Au(111) 
surface, a length compatible DP-GNR was selected and manipulated by STM in a bridge like 
configuration across the trench (Fig.2a). The width of the Fig.2a trench is ∼3.70±0.02 nm down the 
trench (Fig.2b and see supporting information Figure S1). Considering a planar non-deformed DP-
GNR bridging this trench, a DP-GNR with seven monomer moieties was selected corresponding to 
a ∼5.81 nm distance between edge-C to edge-C of the two terminal anthracene units of a 7-DP-
GNR. The corresponding experimental LT-UHV STM line profiles extracted along a given flat 7-
DP-GNR and across the selected linear trench (as presented in Fig2a and 2b) confirm that a 7-DP-
GNR is perfectly suitable for a bridge like configuration with one monomer unit physisorbed atop 
each mono-atomic step edge.

Fig. 2. (a) A large scale STM image showing the linear monoatomic height trench fabricated on Au(111) (marked with a 
red dotted circle) and a 7-DP-GNR (under the red dotted line down left). Corresponding STM images before (b) and 
after (c) the 7-DP-GNR manipulation in a bridge like conformation on the identified linear trench in (a). The 
experimental Δz line profiles recorded across a flat 7-DP-GNR (bottom left (a)), the linear trench (bottom middle (b)) 
and in the bridged conformation (bottom right (c)) are indicated with the corresponding colored dotted line on the STM 
images. Scale bars are 10 nm in (a) and 5 nm in (b,c). STM set-parameters are +100 mV/100 pA. The Δz 7-DP-GNR 
STM corrugation (red) is the same in (a) and (c) while taking the top terrace as a reference for (c).

Before its STM molecular manipulation [24], the selected 7-DP-GNR was STM imaged and its dI/
dV spectroscopy and maps were also recorded for reference as presented in Fig.3a and 3c (see also 
supporting information Figure S2). For STM molecular manipulation and to obtain the bridge 
configuration, the STM tunnel junction resistance was reduced from 1 GΩ to 1 MΩ. Starting from 


the Fig.3a planar physisorbed conformation, the 7-DP-GNR step-by-step constant current molecular 
manipulation sequence is presented in the supporting information Figure S3 leading to the bridged 
configuration. The same molecular manipulation conditions were also employed for the section 4 
experiments where this time a DP-GNR with 9 monomer units (9-DP-GNR) was positioned and 
then pushed step-by-step away from a triangle like trench (as discussed later in section 4 and Fig.4 
below). After molecular manipulations, the STM images and line profiles of the 7-DP-GNR in its 
bridged configuration confirm its exact matching with the selected linear trench width (Fig.3b, 3d 
and 3f). The corresponding optimized molecular mechanics conformation bridging the trench is also 
presented in Fig.3f (see discussion below and supporting information Figure S6).

Fig. 3. Comparison of electronic differential conductance. The experimental constant current STM images (left) and 
corresponding dI/dV maps (right) recorded on a 7-DP-GNR before (a,c) and after (b,d) bridged conformation 
respectively at +100 mV/100 pA (a,b) and at +2V/100 pA (c,d). All scan sizes are 4 nm × 8 nm. The corresponding line 
profiles indicated with dotted lines in (a) and (b) are presented in (e) and (f) with the same color, respectively. The 
theoretical optimized conformations of the 7-DP-GNR before and after bridging are presented below (e) and (f), 
respectively.


Fig. 4. Manipulation of 9-DP-GNR across a triangular trench. (a-h) the STM image sequence showcasing the 9-DP-
GNR, the triangular trench and the step-by-step manipulation sequence of 9-DP-GNR across the triangular trench. (i) 
Corresponding height profile change from (b) to (h) along the 9-DP-GNR at each manipulation step showing how the 9-
DP-GNR is conforming to a down planar configuration already from the very first step (b) at the narrowest trench. The 
line profiles are indicated with colored dotted arrow directions on the STM images. Scale bars are 5 nm. STM set-
parameters are +100 mV/100 pA.

The dI/dV maps were recorded at bias voltages of +0.1 V (Fig.3b) and +2.0 V (Fig.d) where we 
have identified the first two tunneling electronic resonances for DP-GNRs. The dI/dV map recorded 
at +0.1 V reveals a bright contrast for the planar GNR (Fig.3a) whereas a dark contrast is observed 
for the bridged 7-DP-GNR (Fig.3b). This bright contrast for the planar 7-DP-GNR comes from the 
known edge electronic states of a GNR [15] that appear at the Fermi level. In a bridging 
configuration, the 7-DP-GNR liana is strongly deformed (Fig.3f) resulting in a down shift in energy 
of this resonance hence a dark contrast is captured while mapping at +0.1 V.

Comparing now the dI/dV maps recorded at +2.0 V for the planar (Fig.3c) and bridged (Fig.3d) 
configurations reveals a small contrast change in the middle of the molecular wire corresponding to 
a central flat conformation. The interest of the +2.0 V resonance is that it corresponds to an 
electronic state delocalized along the 7-DP-GNR molecular structure with its multi-bay regions 


(formed by the periodic modulation of the 7– and 13–carbon atom–wide sections of DP-GNRs, see 
Fig.1a). The +0.1 V resonance corresponds to edge molecular states dying off exponentially along 
the molecular wire after the trench step edge. At +2.0 V, the number of differential conductance 
bumps and multi-bay nodes along the 7-DP-GNR are the same in both configurations. In first 
approximation, the number of bumps correspond to the maximum of differential conductance 
coming from the LUMO mono-electronic content of this +2.0 V tunneling resonance. Identical to a 
non-bridged 7-DP-GNR conformation for the central part, this central flatness is confirmed by 
comparing the experimental transverse light blue scans in Fig.3e and 3f (see also the comparison of 
experimental vs calculated line scans presented in supporting information Figure S4). Exactly at the 
step edges, the dI/dV map is affected by the step edge induced molecular deformation with a lower 
differential conductance resulting in smaller bump intensity as compared to the planar case. This 
comes from a local molecular structure deformation at each step edge which smears out the 
molecular orbital content of the +2.0 V resonance (see supporting information Figure S5). Notice 
also that there is a minor lateral deformation by comparing both dI/dV maps at + 2.0 V (planar and 
bridged) central. In Fig.3c dI/dV map, the lateral semi-circular extensions between the conductance 
bumps extending laterally outside the 7-DP-GNR central are absent on the Fig.3d dI/dV map 
central. For a flat Au(111) surface configuration, it is characteristic of the Au(111) 2D free electronic 
waves scattered by the multi-bay along the molecular wire. This phenomenon is absent in the 
constrained mono-atomic trench where laterally quantified Au(111) standing wave eigen modes are 
already existing.

4. Different configurations along a triangle like trench

In order to follow the progressive planarization of the central part of a bridged DP-GNR, a 9-DP-
GNR was selected to be slid step-by-step along a triangular trench as presented in Fig.4. Here, a 
large portion of this 9-DP-GNR is physisorbed and lays flat at one end on the Au(111) surface. For 
this experiment, a 9-DP-GNR was chosen instead of a 7-DP-GNR in order to completely 
electronically decouple the two edge states through the molecular wire [25] since no dI/dV 
tunneling resonance splitting can be measured for the edge states using a DP-GNR longer than the 
7-DP-GNR. In Fig.4a, we started with the 9-DP-GNR flat molecular wire, manipulated it towards 
by STM and then along a well identified and clean triangular trench (Fig.4b). At each step, from 
Fig.4b to 4h, corresponding constant current scan lines can be extracted for comparison along the 9-
DP-GNR. It was not possible along the manipulation sequence as shown in Fig.4 to respect the 
orthogonality of the 9-DP-GNR relative to the triangle axle (indicated by the dashed cyan line in 
Fig.4h) because of the [111] surface orientation which is imposing for each manipulation step a 
registry with the Au(111) surface. While sliding 9-DP-GNR step-by-step along the triangle, the 
molecular wire deformation identified in Fig.3 already takes place at the narrowest possible in this 
experiment trench width (Fig.4b). It settles down towards a central planar conformation as soon as 
the trench width is greater than two DP-DBBA monomer units (Fig.4c). The cumulative 
longitudinal constant current line scans presented in Fig.4i is indicative of the progressive central 
planarization of the 9-DP-GNR molecular structure. Particularly, when the trench width matches 
2-3 units of the 9-DP-GNR length (Fig.4c and 4d, and see supporting information Figure S6), the 
line scans extracted at the initial and intermediate steps of the 9-DP-GNR manipulation already 
demonstrate the flat conformation of the 9-DP-GNR down the trench. It matches with the line 
profile extracted at the flat end conformation of the 9-DP-GNR (Fig.4h).

5. Discussion

In a two nanopads like configuration, the conformation of a molecular wire bridging a trench as 
presented above depends on the width and depth of the trench. In addition, this conformation is also 
dictated by the mechanical flexibility of the wire above the trench. We assume here that the 


adsorption of the ends of the molecular wire at the step edges of Au(111) trench is strong enough for 
the wire not to slip and fall completely down at the bottom of the trench. Notice that the width of 
the trench is smaller than the molecule length. As studied here and for a wide enough trench, the 
molecular wire is settled down at the center of the trench to reach a flat conformation. This is 
counter balanced by the limited molecular structure flexibility of the molecular wire but favored by 
the trench step edge slope (for example a [111] facet will help the curvature as compared with a 
[100] one).

We have performed systematic semi-empirical ASED+ molecular mechanics optimizations [22] to 
quantify the competition between central attraction towards the surface and curvature limitation of 
the 7-DP-GNR molecular wire in the adsorption configuration constructed experimentally in Fig.2. 
The molecular side view models presented in Fig.3 are resulting from those optimizations. Starting 
from the flat Fig.3e one towards the Fig.3f conformation, all the details of studied configurations are 
presented in the supporting information Figure S6. We have systematically varied the width and the 
depth of the trench with always the same 7-DP-GNR length. The balance between van der Waals 
attractions down the trench and the molecular wire energy increase due to its resulting curvature is 
presented in Fig.5a. For an Au(111) down surface, the attraction of the down surface starts to 
operate and to deform the 7-DP-GNR when one DP-DBBA unit is free from the step edges as 
observed experimentally (see also supporting information Figure S6, trench width 17.59 Å). Then, 
increasing the trench depth accentuates the 7-DP-GNR edge curvature up to the point where a flat 
conformation is recovered for a too deep trench. Other chemical composition of the down surface or 
at the step edge will lead to a different balance. The effect is similar to what was already observed 
experimentally with a one-step edge molecular wire interactions [7-9].

Fig. 5. (a) Curvature (square data for model rigid osculator and circle data for model 7-DP-GNR) of a bridging 7-DP-
GNR as a function of the trench depth. The simple model of the black data is shown as inset: a rigid osculator (dotted 
red) circle (radius R) is inserted in a trench of length L and depth d (L = 51.93 Å and d is taken as a multiple of 2.36 Å). 
The curvature 1/R varies as 8d/(L2+4×d2). The more accurate calculation in the presence of the van der Waals (vdW) 
forces exerted by the lower surface on the suspended section the GNR also yields a curvature that initially increases 
curvature in supported conformation (full red circles) as the trench depth increased. However, when the vdW attraction 
is too small to pin the GNR at the bottom of the trench, the 7-DP-GNR switches to a flat (null curvature) suspended 
conformation (red dash arrow). The open green circles are calculated by artificially increasing the vdW attraction 


forces by 150%. This restores the contact with the lower surface for deeper trenches. (b) The calculated constant 
current scans along 7-DP-GNR in the optimized (A, orange scan), (C, green scan) and artificially suspended rigid 
planar bridging (B, red scan) conformations respectively. The contact bump [2] for B is followed by its 3 consecutive 
contrast maxima along the wire. ESQC-EHMO calculations are with 10 mV/100 pA.

Constant current line scans have been calculated using ESQC-EHMO [23] along the Fig.3 planar 
and bridged liana configurations using the optimized ASED+ surface conformations. For clarity, 
they are presented in Fig.5b for a scan longitudinal and running on the lateral phenyl rings, in the 
supporting information Figure S4 for transverse scans at a step edge contact and Figure S7 for a 
scan longitudinal and running at the center of the 7-DP-GNR. Calculated longitudinal scans are 
identical to the Fig.3 experimental ones. They confirm how the 7-DP-GNR is not adopting a planar 
rigid bridge like conformation but rather goes down center flat on the Au(111) lower terrace as 
quickly as one monomer unit per step edge. This phenomenon was also observed for different step 
edges or surface chemical structures, in particular, at insulating single step edge surfaces [7-9]. Such 
deformation is very damageable for the contact conductance on a molecular wire. For example, and 
calculating the longitudinal constant current scan along an artificially maintained planar 
conformation (Fig.5b, red line), the contact bump at both step edges is followed by a Δz corrugation 
decay of the molecular orbital like bump envelop along the wire [3]. In the optimized curved 
conformation, both-end contact bumps are down in corrugation (Fig.5b, green line) with now no 
decay along the molecular wire. As a consequence, and in this curved conformation, the electronic 
delocalization along the wire is cut by this curvature (compare the experimental Fig.3f and the red 
rigid Fig.5b calculated scans). This is drastically attenuating the way the metallic surface wave 
function coming from the two contact step edges through this molecular wire (compare the Fig.5b 
red and green scans). Notice that the calculated Δz constant current corrugation is different from the 
experimental one because in the semi-empirical mono-electronic ESQC-EHMO approximation, the 
HOMO-LUMO gap is under-estimated.

In conclusion, between two mono-atomic step edges mimicking a planar contact and using pm 
precision LT-UHV 4-STM scan lines and differential conductance mapping, we have experimentally 
demonstrated how a bridged molecular wire based on a GNR is adopting a deformed conformation 
towards the down terrace between the two step edges even for mono-atomic Au(111) step edges. 
This is reducing the way the metallic wave function coming from the contact step edges is 
penetrating through the molecular wire because the electronic delocalization along this wire is 
suppressed by the curvature of the molecular wire at each contact edge. To keep a good contact 
conductance [3], the planarity of a bridge between two contacting nanopads must be preserved. 
Therefore, it is now important to bring contact nanopads from the backside of the sample in a Via 
like technology [19] for preserving the exact planarity of the molecular wire on its top side 
supporting surface.

Author contributions

UT was responsible with CJ for planning and conducting the whole STM experiments XB for 
performing the calculations, JCE and DP for the synthesis of monomers and ED with UT for the on-
surface chemistry procedure.

Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships 
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


Acknowledgement

This work was supported in part by the World Premier International Center (WPI) Initiative on 
Nanoarchitectonics (MANA-NIMS), MEXT (Japan), by the European H2020 Marie Curie project 
“GNR Conductance” (Grant N° 895239) and by a granted access to the HPC resources of CALMIP 
supercomputing center under the allocation 2021-P0832. In addition, this work was supported by 
the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación (PID2019-107338RB-C62 and PCI2019-111933-2), 
Xunta de Galicia (Centro de Investigación de Galicia accreditation 2019–2022, ED431G 2019/03), 
and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF).

REFERENCES

[1] C. Joachim, J.K. Gimzewski, A. Aviram
Electronics using hybrid- molecular and mono- molecular devices
Nature, 408 (6812) (2000), pp. 541-548

[2] C. Joachim, D. Martrou, M. Rezeq, C. Troadec, D. Jie, N. Chandrasekhar, S. Gauthier
Multiple atomic scale solid surface interconnects for atom circuits and molecule logic gates
J. Phys. Cond. Mat., 22 (2010), Article 084025

[3] S. Stojkovic, C. Joachim, L. Grill, F. Moresco
The contact conductance on a molecular wire
Chem. Phys. Lett., 408 (2005), p. 134

[4] C. Joachim, J.K. Gimzewski, R.R. Schlittler, C. Chavy
Electronic transparence of a single C60 molecule
Phys. Rev. Lett., 74 (1995), p. 2102

[5] A. Yazdani, D.M. Eigler, N.D. Lang
Off-resonance conduction through atomic wires
Science, 272 (5270) (1996), pp. 1921-1924

[6] M.S.M. Saifullah, T. Ondarçuhu, D.F. Koltsov, C. Joachim, M. Welland
A reliable scheme for fabricating sub-5 nm co-planar junction for molecular electronics
Nanotechnology, 13 (2002), p. 659

[7] F. Moresco, L. Gross, M. Alemani, K.-H. Rieder, H. Tang, A. Gourdon, C. Joachim
Probing the Probing the different stages in contacting a single molecular wire
Phys. Rev. Lett., 91 (2003), Article 036601

[8] C. Bombis, F. Ample, L. Lafferentz, H. Yu, S. Hecht, C. Joachim, L. Grill
Single molecular wires connecting metallic and insulating surface areas
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 48 (2009), p. 9966

[9] P.H. Jacobse, M.J.J. Mangnus, S.J.M. Zevenhuizen, I. Swart
Mapping the conductance of electronically decoupled graphene nanoribbons
ACS Nano, 12 (7) (2018), pp. 7048-7056

[10] S. Wang, N. Kharche, E.C. Girão, X. Feng, K. Müllen, V. Meunier, R. Fasel, P. Ruffieux
Quantum dots in graphene nanoribbons


Nano Lett., 17 (2017), p. 4277

[11] G.V. Nazin, X.H. Qiu, W. Ho
Visualization and spectroscopy of a metal-molecule-metal bridge
Science, 302 (5642) (2003), pp. 77-81

[12] N. Nakuya, Y. Okawa, C. Joachim, M. Aono, T. Nakayama
Surface creation of nanojunction between fullerene and 1D conductive polymers
ACS Nano, 8 (2014), p. 12259

[13] L. Lafferentz, F. Ample, H. Yu, S. Hecht, C. Joachim, L. Grill
The conductance of a single conjugated polymer as a continuous function of its length
Science, 323 (5918) (2009), pp. 1193-1197

[14] G. Reecht, F. Scheurer, V. Speisser, Y.J. Dappe, F. Mathevet, G. Schull
Electroluminescence of a polythiophene molecular wire suspended between a metallic surface 
and the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope
Phys. Rev. Lett., 112 (2014), Article 047403

[15] M. Koch, F. Ample, C. Joachim, L. Grill
Voltage-dependent conductance of a single graphene nanoribbon
Nat. Nanotechnol., 7 (2012), p. 713

[16] J. Cai, P. Ruffieux, R. Jaafar, M. Bieri, T. Braun, S. Blankenburg, M. Muoth, A.P. Seitsonen, M. 
Saleh, X. Feng, K. Müllen, R. Fasel
Atomically precise bottom-up fabrication of graphene nanoribbons
Nature, 466 (7305) (2010), pp. 470-473

[17] K.A. Simonov, A.V. Generalov, A.S. Vinogradov, G.I. Svirskiy, A.A. Cafolla, C. McGuinness, 
T. Taketsugu, A. Lyalin, N. Mårtensson, A.B. Preobrajenski
Synthesis of armchair graphene nanoribbons from the 10,10ʹ-dibromo-9,9ʹ-bianthracene 
molecules on Ag(111): the role of organometallic intermediates
Sci. Rep., 8 (2018), p. 3506

[18] A. Asenjo, M. Jaafar, E. Carrasco, J.M. Rojo
Dislocation mechanisms in the first stage of plasticity of nanoindented Au(111) surfaces
Phys. Rev. B, 73 (2006), Article 075431

[19] D. Sordes, A.Thuaire, P. Reynaud, C. Rauer, J.-M. Hartmann, H. Moriceau, E. Rolland, M. 
Kolmer, M. Szymonski, C. Durand, C. Joachim, S. Chéramy and X. Baillin, Nanopackaging of 
Si(100)H wafer for atomic scale investigation. In “On-surface Atomic Wires and Logic Gates” 
Springer Series: Advances in Atom and Single Molecule Machines: Vol. IX, p. 25 (2017) ISBN 
978-3-319-51846-6

[20] C. Moreno, M. Vilas-Varela, B. Kretz, A. Garcia-Lekue, M.V. Costache, M. Paradinas, M. 
Panighel, G. Ceballos, S.O. Valenzuela, D. Peña, A. Mugarza
Bottom-up synthesis of multifunctional nanoporous graphene
Science, 360 (6385) (2018), pp. 199-203

[21] J. Yang, D. Sordes, M. Kolmer, D. Martrou, C. Joachim
Imaging Single atom contact and single Atom manipulation at Low Temperature using the 
new Scienta Omicron LT-UHV 4 STM


Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys., 73 (2016), p. 10702

[22] F. Ample, C. Joachim
A semi-empirical study of polyacene molecules adsorbed on a Cu(110) surface
Surf. Sci., 600 (2006), p. 3243

[23] P. Sautet, C. Joachim
Interpretation of STM image: Copper-Phthalocyanine on Copper
Surf. Sci., 271 (1992), p. 387

[24] S.-W. Hla
Scanning tunneling microscopy single atom/molecule manipulation and its application to 
nanoscience and technology
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 23 (4) (2005), p. 1351

[25] J.-P. Launay
Long-distance intervalence electron transfer
Chem. Soc. Rev., 30 (2001), p. 386


 

Fig. S1. Comparison of the experimental (blue open circles) and ESQC calculated (black line) 

constant current Δz line scans across the Au(111) monoatomic step edges nano-indented trench. The 

experimental line scan is from Fig. 2c of main manuscript and was recorded at 100 mV/100 pA. 

The calculated scan was obtained with 10 mV/100 pA conditions in ESQC with a pyramidal 5-layer 

[111] facet STM tip apex atomic structure. A lateral atomic view of the trench is also presented at 

the bottom of the figure confirming the number of Au atoms (19) in the width of the trench imaged 

in Fig. 2 of the main manuscript. 

 


Fig. S2. STM and STS of a 7-DP-GNR. (a) The experimental constant current STM image of a 

planar 7-DP-GNR (scan area is 4 nm × 8 nm and scan parameters are 100 mV/100 pA) and (b) the 

dI/dV spectra recorded at the edge (blue line) and center (red line) positions of the 7-DP-GNR 

revealing the characteristic tunneling electron resonances at +180 mV (R1) and +2.2 V (R2), 

respectively. We have selected the on-set positions of these two resonances located at ~+100 mV 

and ~+2.0 V for recording the dI/dV maps that are presented in Figure 3 of the main manuscript. A 

reference Au(111) dI/dV spectrum (cyan line) also presented in the figure for comparison. 

 


Fig. S3. Manipulation of 7-GNR into bridged conformation. (a) Large scale STM topograph 

showing the linear monoatomic high Au(111) trench (marked with a red dotted circle) and a 7-DP-

GNR (marked with a blue dotted circle) compatible for bridging experiments. Corresponding step-

by-step manipulation path of GNR to the linear Au(111) trench is indicated with the manipulation 

step number. The respective STM image recorded at each manipulation step is presented in the right 

panel images 1 to 4. (b) STM image showing the final 5th step after manipulating the 7-DP-GNR 

into a bridged conformation above the linear Au(111) trench.  Scale bars are 10 nm in (a), 5 nm in 

(b) and 2 nm for STM images presented in the right panel. STM set-parameters are +100 mV/100 

pA. 

 


Fig. S4. ESQC Calculated (a) and corresponding experimental (b) Δz constant current line scans 

transverse to the 7-DP-GNR at the different scan locations indicated with A, B, C, and D top view 

line on the 7-DP-GNR bridged conformation (top and lateral views of atomic model are also 

presented in the top left). The ESQC calculated scans were obtained with a low voltage +10 mV/

100 pA conditions. Experimental line scans were recorded with 100 mV/100 pA. Top and lateral 

experimental 3D views are presented top right showing nicely the central deformation of the 7-DP-

GNR. The ESQC calculated scans A, B, C and D are better resolved laterally than their 

experimental equivalents presented in (b). This is due to: (1) the perfect atomic structure of the tip 

apex in ESQC and (2) because ESQC is a mono-electronic calculation technique which is based on 

a description of the 7-DP-GNR molecular structure using a molecular orbitals description and not a 


full CI Slater like determinant superposition. Therefore, the ESQC mono-electronic calculations 

enhance the contribution of the corresponding molecular orbital (at 100 mV, the HOMO) as 

compared to the complete superposition of many molecular orbitals in a multi-electronic 

description.  

 

Fig. S5. The STM image (left) and the dI/dV map (right) of the 7-DP-GNR presented in main 

manuscript (a) before and (c) after bridged conformation recorded at +2 V/100 pA. The scan sizes 

are 4 nm × 8 nm. Corresponding differential conductance line profiles (across the dotted lines in 

STM images) extracted from the dI/dV maps at selected locations (b) before and (d) after bridged 

conformation indicate considerable impact of 7-DP-GNR bending conformation on the local dI/dV 

features. Off-set in the line profiles along y-scale are adjusted for clarity. 

 


Fig. S6. Molecular mechanics ASED+ optimized conformation of a 7-DP-GNR positioned over the 

Au(111) trench by varying the trench width (left panel) and trench depth (right panel) starting from 

its initial planar conformation (bottom).  

 


Fig.  

S7. ESQC calculated Δz constant current line scans longitudinal along the 7-DP-GNR molecular 

wire following the dotted black line in (a). (b) The 3 molecular configurations used for calculating 

the (c) line scans with (A) an artificial flat 7-DP-GNR conformation bridging the trench. (B) is the 

planar optimized standard conformation on the Au(111) fcc and (C) down-the-trench optimized 

conformation. As noticed in Fig. S4, the ESQC mono-electronic approximation enhances the 

molecular orbital contribution in calculated constant current line scan as evidenced for the 

calculated scan line (A) in (c) where the Δz  oscillations are coming from the number of phenyl 

along the scan. For comparison (d) is reproducing the experimental scans extracted from Fig. 3e and 

3f of the main manuscript. The comparison of the calculated and experimental blue scan variations 

(B) are satisfactory. There is a Δz  discrepancy between the calculated and experimental green scans 

for (C). ESQC constant current scans were calculated with low voltages at 10 mV/100 pA 

conditions. The red dotted line in (a) is to indicate the line scan for the Fig. 5b of main manuscript.


