Preservation of the harmonic overtones in the violin
family beyond Stradivari

Li Su,1 Chen-Chieh Chang,2 Yu-Ming Lin,3 Li-Chun Lu,4 Yi-Wen Liu,4

Ming-Sian Bai,5 Chyh-Hong Chern3,6,7∗

1Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan

2Institute of Education, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 202301, Taiwan

3String Bean Ltd.,12F, No. 101, Section 2nd, Nanjing E. Road, Taipei 10457, Taiwan

4Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan

5Department of Power Mechanical Engineering, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan

6Physics Division, National Center for Theoretical Sciences, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

7Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

∗To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: chern@alumni.stanford.edu.

Three hundred years ago, Antonio Stradivari enjoyed the golden period of

the violin making in the human history. Luthiers and researchers endeavor

to study his legendary legacy. Unfortunately, a consensus that the present

progress has reached his level remains lacking. Most of the instruments suffer

from low sounding power and enigmatic deficit of harmonic overtones. In fact,

there is significant energy dissipation in the acoustic couplings in the violin

family, completely unaware to luthiers and researchers. The current acoustic

mechanism is inefficient in resonance of the wooden plates and hence is the low

rate of mechanical energy conversion to the desired sound. We propose a new

method for the amelioration of the acoustic couplings to enhance the preserva-

1

arXiv:2210.08920v1  [physics.class-ph]  17 Oct 2022


tion of the overtone components up to 161% of the pristine and to reduce the

instrumental dissipation intensity up to 3.8 dB off (73% off). It results in the

tremendously improved sound projection, the shorter reaction time, the longer

reverberation time, and consequently the enrichment of the timbre complex-

ity. Our physical method is applicable to the violin family of all sizes and ages,

including the Stradivari, and extendable to all string instruments.

Music and the technology of musical instruments are one of the most important signatures

in human civilization. In particular, the making of violin family attracts tremendous interests in

music, science, engineering, and education (1, 2). In brief summary of recent studies, the free

plate tuning measures the resonance modes of the body plates before they are assembled (3).

The shape and position of the renowned f-holes make violin family unique among all string

instruments (4,5). The admittance of the artistic bridge and the acoustic characterization of the

resonance cavity have been actively studied (4,6–8). Very different from all other scientific and

engineering advances, the clock of progress in violin making seemingly forget to tick (9). Two

ancient Italian luthiers, Antonio Stradivari and Guarneri del Ges´u, remain the top benchmarks

in the sound quality of all time. In particular, their triumph is attributed to perceivable richness

of the harmonic overtones, namely timbre complexity (10), dominant sound projection, and

quality playability (11). Their instruments are the most favorable to musical soloists, and their

copies prevail the most popular models in the last three centuries. The research to unveil their

secrets spans an active field in music (12), physics (13), chemistry (14), material science (15),

and acoustic engineering.

Musical instruments can be viewed as the physical apparatus that transform the biological

energy from the players to the sound energy. In the violin family, the strings and the resonance

cavity are acoustically coupled by the accessories: pegs, a bridge, fine tuners, a tailpiece (16,17),

a tailgut, and an endpin (18). However, those complex acoustic couplings make the violin family

2


highly dissipative. A common and notorious problem among most of the instruments is the

deficit of the resolvable overtones, since they attenuate faster than the fundamental frequency

(19,20). The current coupling scheme suffers from inferior energy transferring mechanism. A

physical limit, completely unaware to the musical population, exists to hinder the progress in

the violin making. A new acoustic mechanism to improve the couplings is much needed to

transmit the energy efficiently.

In fact, the problem lies in that there is considerable energy draining to the rim of the body

through the tailpiece, the tailgut, and the endpin. Here, we propose a functional acoustic insu-

lation added between the strings and the tailpiece to reduce the energy loss to those accessories.

We fabricate the ball-shaped device with the diameter 12 millimeter and the weight less than

0.1 gram on the base of PU foam, called String Bean1 (SB), with the mechanical design for the

functional purpose. At the first glance, the spongy property of the PU foam might be thought to

blur the sound quality. On the contrary, our results demonstrate that the functionally-fabricated

SB reduces the energy dissipation effectively in all frequency domain, resulting in enormous

amplification of overtone intensity. In this paper, we use a cello, as an example, to show that the

proposed new acoustic mechanism promotes the violin family to a superior sounding instrument

overall. This physical method can be applied easily to the instruments of all sizes and ages, that

could benefit not only professional musicians but also musical children.

String bean installation and measurement

The string threaded with SB at the metal ball-end is mounted in the normal way, fixing

the SBs under the tailpiece or in the built-in fine tuner. They are sandwiched between the

string ball-end and the tailpiece/fine tuner naturally by the string tension as depicted in Fig.

1. The recording is conducted in a full anechoic chamber, including floor and ceiling. The

environmental noise is measured around 0.3 dB/Hz, corresponding to the background noise

1 琴弦四季豆

3


intensity 43.3 dB. The plucking measurement is performed by a professional cello soloist (one

of us, CCC) in the playing position on the 4 strings in the natural frequency C2(65.4 Hz), G2(98

Hz), D3(146.8 Hz), A3(220 Hz) using the standard pizzicato technique. 10 samples of single

pluck data are collected for each string without SB, and the same procedures are repeated after

4 SBs are installed in all the strings in the same cello. A directional microphone is always

kept 29 cm away from the bridge tip normal to the surface plate. The data collection was

taken in three hours successively. The measurement of calibration reads 0.074 sin(2πf0t) Pa

= 85.7 dB SPL at f0 = 1000 Hz, where SPL is the sound pressure level. The high precision

fast Fourier transformation is applied for the spectral analysis using the Python programming

package librosa (21).

Signal analysis

Figure 1: The structural diagram of the SB installation in the violin family. The SB is
sandwiched between the ball-end of the string and the accessories, so that the ball-end does not
contact directly with the accessories. In the inset, the structural diagram is illustrated that the
SB is threaded in the string at the metal ball-end and mounted to the tailpiece in the normal way.
By the natural string tension, the SB is fixed in the fine tuner or under the tailpiece.

4


Fig. 2a shows the total intensity (dB SPL) of the single pluck data as the function of time

(second) of the A string in the no SB (nSB) and the SB cases. A fast ramp-up in the intensity

is followed by an oscillatory exponential decay. The oscillatory decay, instead of monotonic,

indicates a coupled oscillation system (22). The data of different strings exhibit similar behav-

ior with different oscillatory patterns. The signals consist of three components: (1) the desired

string tonal sound of the fundamental frequency and the overtones, (2) the persistent undesired

sound from non-resonant shaking of the accessories and the instrument body, and (3) the back-

ground noise. The decay is followed by the floor-like hybrid of the undesired sound and the

background noise.

Several acoustic informations can be extracted in Fig. 2a. First, the average intensity of

the noise-like zone is computed to analyze the undesired sound. Second, the reverberation time

T60, defined by the time interval of the 60 dB reduction from the peak, encodes the dissipation

properties of the string signal. Third, the slope of the initial ramp-up is associated with the

responsiveness, namely the energy transferring rate from the strings to the plates. Defining the

slope (dB/second) as the string reaction rate (SSR), the larger SSR corresponds to the shorter

reaction time of sounding. Finally, the dynamic properties of the overtones are analyzed using

the fast Fourier transformation.

In Fig. 2b, the average intensity in the noise-like zone is illustrated for all strings of the

nSB and the SB cases over time interval T = 4 seconds. Different intervals of integration is

adopted for different cases to secure meaningful noise-like information beyond the background

noise. For example, on the A string in the Fig. 2a, T is taken from 5 to 9 seconds in the nSB

case and from 8 to 12 seconds in the SB case. The bars in the Fig. 2b represent the dB range

of the noise-like zone. All results include the standard deviation from the statistical averaging.

In the SB cases in Fig. 2b , the noise level decreases by 2.2 dB (A string), 2.4 dB (D), 2.7 dB

(G), and 3.8 dB (C), and the level distribution becomes more uniform over the strings, as well.

5


Figure 2: Signal analysis of the single pluck on the cello. a. The intensity of single pluck on
the A string in the nSB (orange) and the SB (green) cases. The inset shows the initial ramps
up in the intensity associated with the string reaction rate (SSR). The peak is followed by an
oscillatory exponential decay and merges into the noise-like zone. b. The noise level and range
in all strings. The bar length indicates the noise range. The standard deviation in the bar is
obtained by averaging over the 10 samples of the noise level. The noise level is lower in the SB
cases for all strings. c. The T60. The violin family is a complicate coupled system, where T60 is
distinct in different strings. d. The string reaction rate (SSR) for all strings. The SSR increases
noticeably for the A, D, and G strings.

6


As the background noise remains unaltered, the results suggest that the instrumental noise is

highly suppressed. The noise suppression manifests the dissipation reduction. In other words,

the instrumental dissipation intensity drops 61% off (A string), 60% off (D), 63% off (G), and

73% off (C) in the SB cases.

The dissipation reduction implies that more mechanical energy is preserved and transmit

to resonate the plates. In this case, the vibration amplitudes of the plates should increase cor-

respondently. Averaging the peak intensity, we indeed observe the peak gain by 3.3±1.0 dB

(A), 4.7±0.6 dB (D), 2.5±0.6 dB (G), and 3.5±0.4 dB (C) in the SB cases. Considering that

two (three) cellos playing simultaneously increase volume by 3.01 dB (4.77 dB) in comparison

to a solo cello, the intensity gain in the SB cases is a significant difference. The underlying

mechanism of the profound effect will be elaborated in detail in the later section.

In Fig. 2c, we compute the reverberation time T60 by extrapolation. First, we read out

directly the time interval of the 60 deduction from the peak in the natural logarithm scale and

obtain T60log10e, where e is the Euler’s number. Then, T60 is extrapolated by T60log10e ln 10. As

shown in Fig. 2c, the T60 increases by 1.79 seconds (A string), 0.22 seconds (D), 0.76 seconds

(G), and 1.26 seconds (C) in the SB cases. In the full anechoic chamber, the reverberation

time can represent the half-life time of instrument sounding. The longer T60 also supports the

enhanced preservation of the mechanical energy.

Next, let us discuss the responsiveness. In the Fig. 2d, the SSR is shown in positive correla-

tion with the string tension in both the nSB and the SB cases. It increases by 10 dB/second (A),

5 dB/second (D), 20 dB/second (G) in the SB cases. Since SSR is inversely proportional to the

reaction time, the results imply that the instrument becomes more responsive and is of better

playability in the modified acoustic couplings. Possibly due to the low tension, the SSR in the

C string does not increases noticeably over the error bar. A different mechanical specialization

of SB might be needed for better responsiveness in C string.

7


In brief summary, the dissipation intensity acquires substantial suppression in the applica-

tion of the SB. The peak amplification, the longer reverberation time, and the shorter reaction

time are the profound signatures for a sounding system of lesser dissipation. Furthermore, the

better intensity ratio of the higher string signal to the lower residual noise implies the enhance-

ment of the sound projection. To our best knowledge, it is the first time in the music history that

the energy efficiency is seriously studied in manifestation of the significant improvement.

Spectral analysis

In the following, we present the results of the spectral analysis using the high precision

fast Fourier transformation. A normal human ear can resolve up to 5 harmonics in a complex

tone (23–26), although some study revealed the trained musicians can resolve more, up to 7

harmonics (27). Here, we show the results of the 6 harmonics, f0 to f5, where f0 is the fun-

damental frequency and fi, i = 1 to 5, are the overtones. In A string, f0 is A3 (220 Hz), f1 is

A4 (440 Hz), f2 is E5 (660 Hz), and so on. The dynamics of the harmonics, for example, in

Fig. 3a shows the f0 of the A string in the nSB and the SB cases extracted from Fig. 2a. In the

spectral analysis, we are interested in (1) the T60 of the harmonics, (2) the relative intensity of

the overtone to f0, and (3) the spectral weight W5 defined by

W5 =

�5
i=1 Ei
Etotal
,
(1)

where Ei is the ith overtone energy and Etotal is the total energy of the signal. The spectral

weight decodes the overtone components in the total signal.

Fig. 3b shows the results of W5 as 13.7% (A), 7.4% (D), 13.8% (G), and 95.8% (C) in the

nSB cases and 20.9% (A), 11.9% (D), 19.0% (G), and 96.4% (C) in the SB cases. All strings

exhibit substantial increase in the overtone components. In particular, the spectral weight in the

D string of the SB case boosts to 161% of the one in the nSB cases. The 0.6% increment of W5

in the C string is highly salient, since the ratio E0/Etotal is only 0.8% in the nSB case, where E0

8


Figure 3: Spectral analysis of the single pluck on the cello. a. The intensity of the funda-
mental frequency f0 of the A string in the nSB (orange) and SB (green) cases. The dot line is
the shifted data of the nSB case by a constant to match the peak in the SB case for the better
visualization of the longer reverberation time in the SB case. b. The spectral weight of the
overtones in the logarithmic scale. c. The ratio of fi/f0 measured at the peak of f0 for i =1 to
5. pi are the intensity of fi at the moment of p0 the peak intensity of f0. The dot line indicates
the spectral profile. d. The reverberation time for all overtones in all strings.

9


is the f0 energy in the C string. In connection to perceivable hearing, we compute the intensity

ratios of the overtone to the f0. Since all harmonics are dynamical, we compute pi/p0, where pi

are the intensity of the ith harmonics at the moment of the f0 peak. In the Fig. 3c, most of the

pi/p0 for i = 1 to 5 exhibit substantial boost, in particular 15% more in the 5th overtone of the

A string and 4.3% in average of all.

Finally, the T60 of the overtones is extracted by fitting the linear slope numerically within

5% the asymptotic standard error. Fig. 3d shows the T60 of all 6 harmonics from f0 to f5

in the nSB and the SB cases. All six harmonics demonstrate slower decay in the SB cases.

Overall, the T60 increases by 29% in average. In summary, among the three components in

the sound signal mentioned above, the new acoustic couplings effectively enhance the desired

string harmonic sound and suppress the persistent undesired sound from non-resonant shaking

of the accessories. Those results indicate the enhancement of the harmonic resolvability in

manifestation of the timbre complexity.

The physical modeling

The underlying mechanism of sounding in the violin family can be easily understood as the

following. The violin family consists of two oscillation systems, the strings and the wooden

plates, coupled by the accessories. The strings are the first oscillation system that receives the

energy from the player. After the reaction time, the energy transmits thoroughly to resonate

the wooden plates. In the ideal case, the wooden plates should acquire all the mechanical

energy from the strings. However, in the real situation, the energy is partly absorbed by the

accessories and other non-resonant parts of the body. They are shaken along with the strings

and the plates. Their non-resonant vibrations also make sound. Unlike the resonant sound

from the plates, those undesired sounds does not propagate far in distance. The string harmonic

signals propagates distantly in space, since they are in resonance of the large-scaled collective

10


motion of plate vibrations.

Figure 4: A simple physical model explaining the sounding behavior of the violin family.
The charged spring system radiates the electromagnetic wave as it oscillates. In the ideal vac-
uum situation (left panel), all the mechanical energy transfers to the electromagnetic energy
(green wavy line). In the viscous media (right panel), the mechanical energy dissipates to gen-
erate the attenuating wave, and the amplitude of the oscillation shrinks quicker, resulting in
lower power and shorter half-life time of the EM radiation decay (orange wavy line).

The results of our analysis can be easily explained by a simple physical model of the charged

spring system as depicted in Fig. 4 (22). As the spring with the charged massive object oscil-

lates, electromagnetic radiation (EM) is generated because of the charge acceleration. The

radiation power averaged in a cycle can be computed approximately as (28)

PEM = αEMx2
c,
(2)

where αEM is the frequency-dependent coefficient and xc is the amplitude of the spring in the

cycle. The sound emission in the violin family follows the same relation of the plate vibration

amplitudes with different coefficients. The exponential decay of the electromagnetic radiation

can be derived from the Eq. 2. In the ideal case of vacuum, all the mechanical energy in

the spring eventually transfers to the electromagnetic energy. However, in the presence of the

viscous media, the attenuating wave is also generated as shown in the Fig. 4. The sounding

11


behavior of the ordinary violin family is in analogy to the charged spring system in the viscous

media, where the attenuating wave represents the undesired sounds from the non-resonant parts

of the body and the accessories, and the electromagnetic radiation represents the sound of the

harmonics. The results in the Fig. 2b indicates that the new acoustic couplings with the SB sup-

press the non-resonant shaking. In other words, the cello with the SB becomes less dissipative

similar to the spring system in vacuum with a longer half-life time. Concomitantly, the longer

reverberation time T60 in the SB cases in the Fig. 2c and Fig. 3d is in intimate relation to the

dissipation reduction in the Fig. 2b.

In this model, it is easy to understand the intensity amplification observed in the Fig. 2a

and the Fig. 3a. Transferring the mechanical energy from the strings to the wooden plates is

equivalent to triggering the oscillation in the charged spring system. Due to the suppression of

the non-resonant shaking in the SB cases, more energy is transferred to the plates, corresponding

to a larger initial amplitude xc of the oscillation in the charged spring system. According to Eq.

2, the larger initial xc implies higher peak intensity. In other words, the amelioration of the

acoustic couplings enhances the intensity of the harmonic signal, achieving higher efficiency in

energy conversion process from the biological to the sound.

Conclusion

In the traditional knowledge of the violin making, the SB might be regarded as a wrong thing

put in a wrong place. On the contrary, our approach systematically improves the efficiency in

the energy transmission, that completely changes the understanding in acoustics of the musical

instruments. The violin family becomes a better sounding instrument extensively in the ame-

liorated acoustic couplings, exhibiting the substantial enhancement of the sound projection and

the overtone components. In addition, its ultralight feature manifests itself to work silently to

release the sounding potential unknown to people for centuries. Shedding light on the advance

12


of human’s aspiration for better sound quality, the application of SB in string-based instruments

opens up the new research direction as well as the new phase of the sound quality in the music

history.

Acknowledgement

CHC deeply appreciates the stimulating discussions with the violinists Ray Chen, Chinn-Horng

Chen, Chien-Tai Hsu, I-Ching Li, Shien-Ta Su, Yu-Chien (Benny) Tseng, Ting-Yuh Wu, and

the luthiers David Lien, Ting-Ting Wang. LS is supported in part of the Thematic Research

Program AS-TP-111-M02 by Academia Sinica and in the 109-2221-E-001-018 -MY3 and the

110-2221-E-001-010-MY3 by Ministry of Science and Technology in Taiwan.

Author contributions

LS performed the calculation, including the high precision fast Fourier transformation in Python,

analyzed the data, and prepared all the figures in the manuscript. CCC plucked the cello. CHC

contributed to the fabrication and the mechanical design of the String Bean, the physical model

building, the data interpretation, and the manuscript writing and editing. YML contributed to

the fabrication of the String Bean, discussion on the results, and the manuscript proofreading.

LCL collected and sorted the data in the recording. YWL coordinated the recording and per-

formed some early test analysis in Matlab. MSB offers the full anechoic chamber under the

maintenance of his group.

Competing interests

CHC currently holds the patent in United States of America (No. 11205406) and in South Korea

(10-2020-0039584) associated with the functional locations where the String Bean is installed

13


and declares the patent pending in European Union (EP3882904A2) and China (CN113554995A).

Other authors declare no competing interests

References

1. L. Cremer, The Physics of the Violin (The MIT PRESS, 1983).

2. J. Woodhouse, Reports on Progress in Physics 77, 115901 (2014).

3. C. M. Hutchins, Journal of the Acoustic Society of America 73, 1421 (1983).

4. G. Bissinger, Catgut Acoustical Society 2, 2 (1992).

5. H. T. Nia, et al., Proc. R. Soc. A 471, 20140905 (2015).

6. E. V. Jansson, Acustica 83, 337 (1997).

7. J. Curtin, Journal of the Violin Society of America 22, 186 (2009).

8. C. E. Gough, Acta Acustica unitaed with Acustica 91, 229 (2005).

9. W. Kolneder, The Amaseus Book of the Violin, construction, history, and music (Amadeus

Press, Portland, Oregon, 1998).

10. H. L. F. Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Tone as a Physiological Basis for the Theory of

Music (Cambridge University Press, 2009).

11. P. M. Galluzzo, On the playability of Stringed Instruments (University of Cambridge,

2003).

12. S. F. Sacconi, The Secrets of Stradivari (Libreria del Convegno, Cremona, Italy, 1979).

13. C. Gough, Physics World 13, 27 (2000).

14


14. Brandmair, Brigitte, Greiner, Stefan-Peter, Stradivari Varnish (B. Brandmair, Munich,

2010).

15. H. C. Tai, et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 27 (2017).

16. J. Pigneret, Journal of the Violin Society of America 27, 54 (2018).

17. E. Fouilhe, G. Goli, A. Houssay, G. Stoppani, Archives of Acoustics 36, 713 (2011).

18. C. R. Fleming, C. R. Stypowany, R. D. Celmer, M. C. Vigeant, Journal of the Ascoustical

Society of America 130, 2429 (2011).

19. A. Chaigne, Catgut Acoustical Society Journal 1, 21 (1991).

20. A. Chaigne, A. Askenfelt, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 95, 1112 (1994).

21. B. McFee, et al., librosa/librosa: 0.9.1 (2022).

22. Halliday, Resnick, Principles of Physics (John Wiley and Sons, Inc, 2011), 11th edn.

23. R. Plomp, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 36, 1628 (1964).

24. R. Plomp, A. M. Mimpen, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 43, 764 (1968).

25. B. C. J. Moore, Hearing (Academic Press, 1995).

26. B. C. J. Moore, H. E. Gockel, Hearing Research 276, 88 (2011).

27. D. R. Soderquist, Psychonomic Science 21, 2 (1970).

28. J. Larmor, Philosophical Magazine 44, 63 (1897).

15


