Cavity-mediated thermal control of metal-to-insulator transition 
in 1T-TaS2

Giacomo Jarc1,2, Shahla Yasmin Mathengattil1,2, Angela Montanaro1,2,3, Francesca Giusti1,2, Enrico 
Maria Rigoni1,2, Rudi Sergo2, Francesca Fassioli3,4, Stephan Winnerl5, Simone Dal Zilio6, Dragan 
Mihailovic7, Peter Prelovšek7, Martin Eckstein8, and Daniele Fausti1,2,3.

1Department of Physics, Università degli Studi di Trieste, 34127 Trieste, Italy
2Elettra Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A., 34127 Basovizza Trieste, Italy
3Department of Physics, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
4International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Via Bonomea 265, I-34136 Trieste, Italy
5Institute of Ion Beam Physics and Materials Research, Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, 
Bautzner Landstrasse 400, 01328, Dresden, Germany 
6CNR-IOM TASC Laboratory, Trieste 34139, Italy 
7Jožef Stefan Institute, Jamova 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
8Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Hamburg, Notkestrasse 9, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

Correspondence: daniele.fausti@elettra.eu

Placing quantum materials into optical cavities provides a unique platform for controlling 
quantum cooperative properties of matter, via both weak and strong light-matter coupling
[1,2]. Here we report the experimental evidence of reversible cavity control of a metal-to-
insulator phase transition in a correlated solid-state material. We embed the charge density 
wave material 1T-TaS2 into cryogenic tunable terahertz cavities [3] and show that a switch 
between conductive and insulating behaviors, associated with a large change in the sample 
temperature, is obtained by mechanically tuning the distance between the cavity mirrors and 
their alignment. The large thermal modification observed is indicative of a Purcell-like scenario 
in which the spectral profile of the cavity modifies the energy exchange between the material 
and the external electromagnetic field. Our findings provide opportunities for controlling the 
thermodynamics and macroscopic transport properties of quantum materials by engineering 
their electromagnetic environment.

MAIN

Optical driving with ultrashort pulses has been extensively used to dynamically control the properties 
of complex quantum materials [4-9]. Yet, several theoretical proposals indicate that the control of 
materials functionalities can be obtained by modifying their electromagnetic environment, 
embedding the materials into optical cavities, even in absence of a driving field [1,2]. Predictions 
range from enhanced superconductivity through cavity-mediated electron pairing [10-15], cavity
control of the competing order between charge density wave and superconducting phases [16], cavity
control of excitons [17], enhanced ferroelectricity [18-20], and cavity control of magnetic orders [21]. 
Experimentally, it has been demonstrated that vacuum fields in the strong coupling regime [1] can 
change material functionalities as, for example, the magneto-transport in two-dimensional materials 
[22], the topological protection of the integer quantum Hall effect [23], or the ferromagnetic order in 
unconventional superconductors [24].


Cavity control of phase transformations in complex systems can be achieved via distinct physical 
mechanisms. On the one hand, the selective coupling of the cavity modes to the excitations of a given 
phase can renormalize its free energy with respect to that of other ones, thereby modifying the 
temperature at which the phase transition occurs. On the other hand, a cavity can reshape the exchange 
of energy between a material and the thermal reservoir of photons in which the material is immersed 
[25]. By engineering the density of states of the electromagnetic environment at the sample position 
through tunable optical cavities, it is therefore possible to modify the sample’s absorption and 
emission [26-29], and, in turn its temperature (Tint). Fig. 1A illustrates the two aforementioned cavity-
mediated mechanisms.

In this work, we investigate the metal-to-insulator phase transition in the transition metal 
dichalcogenide 1T-TaS2 embedded in low-energy terahertz (THz) and sub-THz cryogenic cavities 
(Fig. 1A). 1T-TaS2 exhibits a temperature-dependent charge order that originates from the 
competition of Coulomb repulsion, lattice strain, interlayer hopping, and Fermi surface nesting [30-
32]. At ambient temperature, 1T-TaS2 is in a nearly commensurate charge density wave (NC-CDW) 
phase with metallic character, featuring hexagonal-shaped polaron domains [30,33,34] forming a 
David’s star pattern [35-37] (Fig. 1C). By lowering the temperature below ~ 180 K, a transition to an 
insulating commensurate charge density wave (C-CDW) state occurs [31,38]. We note that the free 
energy landscape of 1T-TaS2 is much more complicated than the simple sketch in Fig. 1A: the phase 

Fig. 1: Mechanisms of cavity control of quantum material states and THz characterization of 1T-TaS2 metal-to-
insulator transition. A. Schematic of a material embedded in the middle of a tunable optical cavity with controllable 
fundamental frequency 𝜔𝑐 and alignment. Coupling of the material’s excitations with the cavity mode can act on the 
thermodynamics of the sample within two different scenarios. On the one hand, it can renormalize the free energy of one 
material phase with respect to the other (bottom left panel). On the other hand, as a function of 𝜔𝑐 the cavity can reshape 
the emission and absorption of the material, subsequently rescaling its local temperature Tint(𝜔𝑐) with respect to the 
temperature measured on the sample support (Text). B. THz linear transmission spectra in free space at different 
temperatures across 1T-TaS2 metal-to-insulator transition (temperature scans performed by cooling (upper panel) and 
heating (lower panel)). To highlight the phase transition, each spectrum has been subtracted from the 280 K THz 
transmission. C. Temperature dependence of the integrated low frequency transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz), marking 
the metal-to-insulator transition and its hysteresis. In the insets the time domain THz fields are shown for the metallic and 
the insulating phases, together with the illustration of the in-plane lattice modulations characteristic of the insulating C-
CDW phase and of the metallic NC-CDW phase.


transitions in 1T-TaS2 are multiple and sensitive to the thermal history of the sample. Upon heating 
from the C-CDW phase, an additional intermediate trigonal (T) phase with in-plane charge stripes 
occurs at around 220 K and persists up to around 280 K, when the NC-CDW is re-established [39]. 

THz spectroscopy is a powerful tool for tracking the metal-to-insulator transition since it is able to 
measure contactless the quasi-static dielectric response associated to the presence of conductive 
charges characteristic of a metallic state (see Methods and Ref. [3] for further details on the 
experimental set-up). Here we employ broadband time-domain THz spectroscopy to track the charge 
order in the sample for different cavity settings. We demonstrate that a bidirectional switch between 
the metallic and insulating phase can be obtained by tuning the cavity length and by adjusting the 
alignment of its mirrors while keeping the cryogenic temperature of the sample support and mirrors
fixed.

It is important to highlight that a simultaneous measurement of the actual sample’s temperature inside 
the cavity (Tint) and THz transmission is not viable. At a practical level, the placement of a physical 
thermometer within the cavity would absorb the THz pulses and make the transmission measurements 
unfeasible. At a fundamental level, any object placed within the optical cavity will perturb the cavity 
environment and therefore the response of the light-matter assembly. For this reason, we have 
designed an experimental protocol in which for the THz characterization we measure the temperature 
on the cold-finger support of the sample outside of the cavity, denoted by Text (Fig. 1A). This protocol 
allows us to identify an effective critical temperature Tc

eff for the phase transition which is defined as 

the temperature of the support at which the phase transition is observed. In a separate measurement 
campaign, we place a micrometric thermocouple, and we measure for different experimental 
configurations the temperature at the sample position (with and without the sample) which we denote 
as Tint, while simultaneously monitoring the external temperature Text.

THZ SPECTROSCOPY OF 1T-TaS2

Figure 1B shows the THz linear transmission of 1T-TaS2 in free space upon heating and cooling as a 
function of the temperature of the sample support (Text). This captures the first-order transition 
between the NC-CDW metallic phase and the C-CDW insulating phase. The phase transition results 
in: i) an increase of the low frequency transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz) below the effective 
critical temperature, which is consistent with a transition to an insulating behavior (Drude-like 
response of free carriers vanishes in the insulating phase [40,41]); and ii) the emergence below Tc

eff

of infrared-active optical phonons at 1.58 THz, 2.04 THz and 2.35 THz, which are screened by the 
free carriers and therefore not visible in the metallic phase (Fig. 1C, insets, report time-domain THz 
traces representative for the two phases). We will use the temperature dependence of the integrated 
low-frequency transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz) as a marker which tracks the charge order 
dynamics in 1T-TaS2 and hence the metal-to-insulator phase transition (Fig. 1C). The low frequency 
transmission is directly mapped into the evolution of the Drude optical conductivity 1() 
representative of the free carriers response (Supplementary Information). Analogous transition 
temperatures can be obtained by tracking the temperature dependence of the transmission at the 
phonon frequency (Methods). The temperature dependence of the integrated low-frequency 
transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz) for the material in free space is shown in Fig. 1C. The 
difference between the results obtained upon heating and cooling the sample in free space marks the 
hysteresis associated to the first-order phase transition. The phase transition in free space upon heating 
occurs at Text = 181 K and at 143 K upon cooling from the metallic phase. Note that the smooth 
transition observed can be ascribed to the presence of intrinsic inhomogeneities and strain in the 
system, which may smear out the first-order transition [42-44] (Methods). The effective critical 
temperature Tc

eff measured in our set-up differs from the literature value [31] by about 35 K. This 


discrepancy is attributed to the difference between the internal temperature of the sample (Tint) and 
the temperature of the cryostat’s cold finger (Text), as a consequence of the small thermal conductivity 
of the silicon nitride membranes holding the 1T-TaS2 sample [3]. A finite-elements simulation of the 
membrane’s thermal profile is in quantitative agreement with the measured temperature shift (details 
in the Methods section).

CHARACTERIZATION OF 1T-TaS2 IN CRYOGENIC THz FABRY PÉROT CAVITIES

Figure 2 presents the THz linear transmission as a function of the sample holder temperature (cooling 
in Fig. 2A, and heating in Fig. 2B) of 1T-TaS2 in free space and embedded in the center of an optical 
cavity with resonant frequency 𝜔𝑐 = 11.5 GHz and quality factor 𝑄 ∼ 4 (Methods). The placement 
of the sample in such a cavity results in a modification of Tc

eff for the metal-to-insulator transition, 

which is observed at 136 K on heating and at 109 K on cooling. The modification of Tc

eff depends 

also on the thermal cycle. Indeed, a change of Tc

eff of 44 K is observed if the critical temperature is 

approached from the insulating state (heating), while a shift of 33 K is obtained starting from the 
metallic phase (cooling), resulting in a shrinking of the hysteresis of about 11 K. We highlight that 
Tc

eff is independent from the input intensity of the THz field, which, therefore, acts only as a probe 

and does not introduce a detectable thermal load on the sample (see Supplementary Fig. S15 for 
measurements with different THz field strengths).

Next, we varied the cavity geometry and measure Tc

eff as a function of the alignment of the cavity 

mirrors. We quantify the cavity misalignment as the sum of the misalignment angles of the two cavity 
mirrors  with respect to the parallel mirrors configuration. The temperature dependence of the low-
frequency THz transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz integration range) at different mirror alignments 
is shown in Fig 3A for the temperature scans performed by heating and cooling the cold-finger sample 
holder. Misaligning the mirrors modifies Tc

eff, which approaches the free space value when the cavity 

is highly misaligned (Fig. 3A). In the inset of Fig. 3A, we show that a switch between the metallic 

Fig. 2: Renormalization of the effective critical temperature of the metal-to-insulator phase transition within the 
cavity. A, B. Temperature-dependent THz transmission upon cooling (A) and heating (B) for a sample held in free space 
(left) and one placed in the middle of the 11.5 GHz cavity (right). C. Comparison between the hysteresis in free space 
and within the 11.5 GHz cavity plotted as the integrated cavity transmission in the range 0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz. The 
free-space data have been arbitrarily translated along the horizontal axis to overlap with the cavity integrated transmission. 
In the cavity, a renormalization of the effective critical temperature of 44 K (33 K) towards lower temperatures is 
measured upon heating (cooling) the sample. This results in a shrinking of the effective phase-transition hysteresis of 11 
K within the cavity.


and the dielectric linear response is obtained at fixed Text by solely changing the cavity alignment. 
As any misalignment of the cavity mirrors reduces the photon lifetime within the cavity (and hence 
the quality factor), the sensitivity of Tc

eff not only to the presence of the cavity but also to the mirrors 

alignment, is suggestive of a cavity-mediated effect. This is further supported by the fact that 
misaligning the cavity mirrors not only changes the effective critical temperature, but also increases 
the effective hysteresis of the metal-to-insulator transition towards its free space value.

Figure 3B reports the THz transmission as a function of the cavity fundamental frequency at a fixed 
cold-finger temperature (Text = 150 K). The results reveal that the cavity-mediated change of Tc

eff

overcomes the free space hysteresis, thus enabling a reversible touchless control of the metal-to-
insulator phase transition. Upon reducing the distance between the mirrors, we detected the phase 

Fig. 3: Dependence of the effective critical temperature on the cavity geometry. A. Dependence of the effective metal-
to-insulator phase transition as a function of the cavity alignment for the 11.5 GHz cavity. The hysteresis is plotted for 
each misalignment angle  as the integrated low frequency transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz). In the inset panel, the 
THz fields detected at the output of the coupled 11.5 GHz cavity at fixed temperature (Text = 154 K) as a function of the 
mirrors alignment. Transition from the dielectric to the metallic behavior is detected passing from the misaligned to the 
aligned configuration. B. Reversible cavity control of the metal-to-insulator transition at fixed temperature (Text = 150 
K). The hysteresis as a function of the cavity fundamental mode is plotted as the evolution of the integrated low frequency 
THz transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz). The insets show the evolution of the time domain THz fields transmitted for 
different values of the cavity frequency ranging from 50.0 GHz to 11.5 GHz (opening cavity case) and from 11.5 GHz to 
50.0 GHz (closing cavity case), demonstrating the reversible switching between the two phases.


transition between the metallic and the insulating phase to occur at a cavity frequency of 25.0 GHz. 
This is highlighted in the THz time domain traces of the insets of Fig. 3B by the screening of the 
infrared-active phonon modes of the C-CDW insulating phase. After the system has fully switched to 
the insulating state, we decreased the cavity fundamental frequency and detected a switch to the 
metallic phase at a lower cavity frequency (13.6 GHz). This results in the cavity frequency-dependent 
hysteresis highlighted in Fig. 3B.

The detailed dependence of Tc

eff on the cavity fundamental mode is presented in Fig. 4A. We 

measured the effective transition temperature for cavity frequencies ranging from 11.5 GHz until 570 
GHz. Importantly, the maximum cavity frequency employed lies below the frequency of the lowest 
IR-active mode of the C-CDW phase (1.58 THz as shown in Fig. 1C). We made this choice in order 
to disentangle possible effects due to the coupling to the infrared-active optical phonons of the CDW.
Figure 4A summarizes the dependence of the measured Tc

eff (heating and cooling) on the cavity 

resonant frequency. The results show a non-monotonic trend of Tc

eff as a function of cavity resonant 

frequency with respect to the free-space condition. Indeed, while long wavelength cavities (up to ~ 
25 GHz) stabilize the nearly-commensurate metallic phase, higher energy cavities effectively favor
the insulating C-CDW phase with respect to the material in free space (represented in the figure as 
the zero-frequency point). Overall, we revealed a shift of Tc

eff of 75 K by moving from the lowest 

energy cavity employed in the experiment (11.5 GHz) towards the highest one (570 GHz). 

We note that the value of Tc

eff in the cavity with the lowest frequency achievable in our set-up is 

approximatively 30 K below the Tc

eff measured in free space (Fig. 4A). This anomalous behavior 

cannot be rationalized by incoherent radiation heating due to the presence of the mirrors. Crucially, 
the exclusion of an incoherent heating mechanism is confirmed by the fact that the dependence of 
Tc

eff on the cavity geometry is qualitatively similar for measurements with cavity mirrors at different 

temperatures (Supplementary Figs. S4 and S5). This is in stark contrast with a scenario in which 
thermal radiation is transmitted incoherently to the sample (incoherent radiation heating), which 
would give opposite trends with hot and cold cavity mirrors (see finite-elements simulation of 
incoherent radiation heating with hot and cold mirrors in Supplementary Figs. S6 and S7 and the 
discussion therein).

Having established that the observed effect cannot be rationalized by incoherent radiation heating, in 
the following we focus on understanding if the observation could be explained by a cavity-mediated 
heating (cooling) or by a free energy renormalization (the two scenarios presented in the introduction, 
Fig. 1A). To determine whether the cavity is influencing the temperature at the sample position (i.e., 
inside the cavity), we performed an independent measurement campaign to simultaneously measure 
Tint and Text. To this purpose, a micrometric Cr-Al junction custom-designed was used (Methods).

Figure 4B shows, for representative cavity frequencies, the difference between the temperature 
measured within the cavity (Tint, in thermal contact with the sample) and the temperature of the cold 
finger (Text) as a function of Tint. Upon changing the cavity mode, we revealed a non-monotonic 
trend of the differential temperature Tint − Text with respect to the free-space configuration. Whereas 
lower frequency cavities induce a coherent heating of the sample, the coupling with higher energy 
cavity modes decreases the temperature of the sample with respect to the free space conditions. By 
tracking the Text at which Tint = 210 K (nominal critical temperature of 1T-TaS2) we revealed a non-
monotonic trend as a function of the cavity frequency (Fig. 4B, inset), which is qualitatively
consistent with the observation in Fig. 4A. 
It is important to stress two aspects. i) The observed anomalous non-monotonic trend of Tint − Text, 
as well as its dependence on the cavity frequency, depends on the presence of the sample (the 


temperature difference is much smaller and monotonic when the thermocouple is mounted within the 
membranes without the sample (Supplementary Fig. S1A, B); ii) We repeated the measurements with 
mirrors at 290 K, revealing, apart from a rigid shift, a trend with cavity frequency analogous to the 
one observed with cryogenic mirrors (Supplementary Fig. S8). Crucially, a decrease in Tint on closing 
the cavity, regardless of the mirrors temperature, is incompatible with an incoherent radiative scenario 
and points towards a cavity-mediated effect.

In light of the temperature measurements of Fig. 4B, the cavity frequency-dependent hysteresis in 
Fig. 3B can be rediscussed in terms of an effective renormalization of the sample temperature in the 
presence of the cavity. By keeping fixed the cold-finger temperature (Text), the local temperature of 
the sample (Tint) decreases upon increasing the cavity frequency (see for example Fig. S8). Therefore, 
closing the cavity effectively corresponds to cooling down the sample that is thus driven to the 
insulating state (blue curve in Fig. 3B). The effect is reversed when, starting from the insulating state, 

Fig. 4: Cavity-mediated thermodynamics of the metal-to-insulator phase transition in 1T-TaS2. A. Dependence of 
the effective critical temperature on the cavity fundamental frequency for the heating and cooling temperature scans. The 
zero-frequency point represents the effective critical temperature measured in free space; the red (blue) dashed line 
indicates the literature critical temperature [31] for the heating (cooling) temperature scan. The error bar associated to 
each temperature is the standard deviation of the effective critical temperatures estimated for three consecutive scans. B.
Difference between the temperature measured on the sample (Tint) and on the cold finger (Text) as a function of the sample 
temperature for different values of the cavity fundamental frequency. Temperatures have been measured upon heating the 
sample from the C-CDW phase. In the inset, the effective critical temperature, defined as the cold-finger temperature at 
which the sample reaches the nominal critical temperature Tint = 215 K, as a function of the cavity mode. C. Comparison 
of the phase transition hysteresis of 1T-TaS2 within a low-frequency cavity (ωc

low = 16.7 GHz) and a high-frequency 

cavity (ωc

high = 337 GHz). D. Schematic temperature dependence of the free energy of the metallic (Fm) and the dielectric 

(Fd) phase at the cavity frequencies ωc

low and ωc

high employed in C. The activation energy for switching the phase is 

indicated with . The shift of the apparent transition temperature could be rationalized with a cavity-mediated 
renormalization of the free energy of the metallic state (black vertical arrow) or with a scaling of the sample effective 
temperature in analogy with the Purcell effect (blue horizontal arrow).


the cavity frequency is decreased (red curve). Closing and opening the cavity, leading to the hysteretic 
behavior in Fig. 3B, can then be interpreted as an effective change of the sample temperature induced 
by the cavity environment which is different in the two phases. Similarly, the alignment dependence 
of Fig. 3A can be linked to a mirror-controlled change of the temperature of the cavity-confined 
material (Supplementary Fig. S9).

Changing the cavity frequency leads not only to a renormalization of Tc

eff, but also to an effective 

shrinking of the hysteresis of the phase transition. This is demonstrated in Fig. 4C where we plot the 
comparison of the phase transition hysteresis for a low- and high-frequency cavity (ωc

low = 16.7 GHz,

and ωc

high = 337 GHz). The measured changes in the effective critical temperature upon heating and 

cooling depend therefore not only on the cavity length, but also on the sample’s thermal history (see
Supplementary Fig. S2 and related discussion in SM). The observed modification of the cavity 
hysteresis hints at a possible scenario in which the coupling between 1T-TaS2 and the cavity modes 
is the driving force of the effective renormalization of the transition temperature. Indeed, such 
coupling is expected to be different in the two phases, displaying a profoundly different dielectric 
response. 

DISCUSSION

The cavity-dependent effect on Tc

eff can be rationalized within a thermodynamical picture considering 

how the free energies of the metallic phase (Fm) and of the dielectric phase (Fd) vary with the external 
temperature for different cavities (Fig. 4D). The crossing temperature between the free energies of 
the two phases sets the critical temperature of the metal-to-insulator transition. For simplicity, we 
assume Fd to be weakly dependent on temperature and cavity geometry, and subsequently consider 
the temperature dependence of Fm to be responsible for the phase transition. Figure 4D shows the 
schematic temperature dependence of Fm and Fd in low- and high-frequency cavities, consistent with 
the experimental observation in Fig. 4C.

This thermodynamical picture can be connected to the two proposed mechanisms leading to a cavity-
induced modification of Tc

eff discussed in Fig. 1A. In the first scenario, the coupling of the cavity 

modes with the sample changes the energy spectrum of the collective modes in the sample. In this 
picture, the cavity induces a decrease of the free energy of the metallic phase with respect to the 
insulating one, resulting in an effective shift of the observed transition temperature (black vertical 
arrow in Fig. 4D). The experimental observation would thus suggest that lowering the cavity 
resonance could cause a decrease in the free energy of the metallic phase and a reduction in the slope 
of its temperature dependence, consistent with a cavity-driven shrinking of the hysteresis.

To test whether the free energy scenario could be consistent with the experimental trends, we resort 
to a Dicke-based model with a single cavity mode coupled to a continuum absorption spectrum within 
the GHz spectral range, where conductivity measurements suggest an increased dielectric response 
[45,46] (Methods). Importantly, under a harmonic approximation for the solid modes, the free energy 
difference Fm between the light-matter hybrid and the isolated systems can be understood solely in 
terms of the frequency-dependent polarizability of the solid, irrespective of the microscopic nature of 
its collective modes. The model indicates that the free energy of the metallic state Fm is lowered upon 
lowering the cavity frequency, which is qualitatively consistent with the decrease of the effective 
critical temperature upon reducing the cavity frequency observed experimentally (Fig. 4A). We stress 
that the coupling to a single cavity mode quantitatively gives only a non-extensive contribution to the 
free energy [47]. The total effect on the free energy depends on the phase space of the relevant cavity 
modes which can be shifted within the solid spectrum. Taking into account this phase space factor, 


extremely large couplings would be needed for the free energy changes to explain the observed shifts 
in the transition temperature (see Methods for quantitative estimations). 

In the second mechanism presented ù in Fig. 1A, the cavity controls the temperature of the sample 
and consequently the difference between the external (Text) and the sample temperature (Tint). The 
reshaping of the EM density of the states driven by the cavity can indeed induce a change in the 
emission spectrum of the sample and hence of its temperature [48] (this scenario is represented in 
Fig. 4D as a renormalization of the temperature axis, blue horizontal arrow). Shorter cavities move 
the electromagnetic modes to higher frequencies and could effectively decouple the optically active 
solid modes from the external field, analogously to the Purcell effect [49]. The sample is in thermal 
contact with the cold finger through the membranes, but it is also in contact with the external photon 
bath at Tph = 300 K (Fig. 1A, lower right panel). We assume that the thermal transfer from the cold 
finger to the sample depends only on the difference between Text and Tint through a cavity-
independent thermal coupling constant. Conversely, the thermal load on the sample due to the contact 
with the external photon bath is mediated by the cavity through a coupling constant depending on the 
cavity geometry (fundamental frequency 𝜔𝑐 and quality factor 𝑄) and on the sample dielectric loss 
within the employed cavity range. In order to qualitatively illustrate the mechanism, we model the 
infrared spectrum of 1T-TaS2 as a broad continuum absorption band lying in the GHz range, and 
exploit the Purcell-based model to extract an effective temperature of the sample Tint(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄)
depending on the cavity geometry (see Methods for further details). We show that upon increasing 
the cavity frequency, i.e. by decoupling the electromagnetic active transitions in the sample from the 
cavity fundamental mode, the cavity induces a cooling of the sample, whose effective temperature 
(Tint) reaches the cold-finger one (Text) at high cavity frequencies (Methods). This trend is 
qualitatively consistent with the effective critical temperature trend observed experimentally with 
both THz (Fig. 4A) and temperature measurements (Fig. 4B). 

In contrast to the first scenario, the phase space restriction is no longer valid in this second mechanism 
(Fig. 1A), in which an open system is considered and thermal exchanges between material, cold finger 
and photon bath are allowed. This, together with the experimental evidence that the cavity can 
coherently modify the sample temperature as a function of the frequency (Fig. 4B), suggests that the 
Purcell-based mechanism may be the dominant effect in the reported observation. Nevertheless, it is 
interesting to note that both mechanisms predict the correct dependence of the effective critical 
temperature on the cavity frequency. This may provide a useful guide for future quantitative theories, 
which should also take into account the open nature of the system as well as the non-linear interaction 
between the modes in the solid. 

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the metal-to-insulator transition in 1T-TaS2 embedded in 
low energy THz cavities can be reversibly controlled by the cavity geometry. The evidence points to 
a scenario in which the cavity electrodynamics modifies the effective sample temperature. Our results
provide a previously unknown control parameter in the rich phase diagram of quantum materials and 
enable tailoring the equilibrium collective properties in correlated materials by engineering their 
electromagnetic environment.


METHODS

1.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

1.
EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP

The set-up employed in the experiment [3] is sketched in Extended Data Fig.1A. The cryogenic THz 
cavity shown in the inset is composed of two cryo-cooled piezo-controlled semi-reflecting mirrors 
between which the sample is inserted. The movement of both cavity mirrors is ensured by three piezo-
actuators (N472-11V, Physik Instrumente) having a travel range of 7 mm and a minimum incremental 
motion of 50 nm with a designed resolution of 5 nm. The mirrors are mounted on copper holders, and 
they are cryo-cooled by means of copper braids directly connected to the cold finger of the cryostat. 
In order to ensure the tuning of the mirrors distance at cryogenic temperatures the piezo actuators are 
thermally decoupled from the mirrors supports. The thermal decoupling is realized by placing 
between the piezo actuators and the mirrors holders a PEEK disk, on which the piezoelectrics actually 
act, and three ceramic cylinders. The chamber shown in Extended Data Fig. 1A (inset) is mounted on 
a flow cryostat with a temperature feedback circuit enabling temperature scans at fixed cavity length. 
The temperature is read both on the sample holder and on the mirrors holders. The deviation in 
temperature is less than 1 K for a measurement at a fixed temperature.

The cavity semi-reflecting mirrors were fabricated by evaporating a thin bilayer of titanium-gold (2-
15 nm) on a 2 mm crystalline quartz substrate. We measured the transmission amplitude of a single 
cavity mirror to be 15 % in the THz spectral range of the experiment with no apparent spectral 
features. 
The approximatively 10-μm thick 1T-TaS2 sample is mounted between the two mirrors in a copper 
sample holder directly connected to the cold finger of the cryostat and sealed between two silicon 
nitride (Si3N4) membranes (grown by low-pressure chemical vapour deposition) with a window size 
of 11 x 11 mm2 and a 2 µm thickness. The membranes are supported on a 13 x 13 mm2 silicon frame 
and do not show any spectral dependence in the employed THz spectral range.

We employed broadband THz spectroscopy to characterize the metal-to-insulator transition for 
different cavity settings. Single-cycle THz pulses are generated via the acceleration of the 
photoinduced carriers in a large-area GaAs-based photoconductive antenna (PCA). The 
photoexcitation is achieved by pumping the PCA with an ultrashort laser pulse (50 fs pulse duration, 
745 nm central wavelength, 6 µJ/pulse energy) from a commercial 50 kHz pulsed laser + Optical 
Parametric Amplifier (OPA) system (Pharos + Orpheus-F, Light Conversion). The emitted collimated 
THz beam is then focused on the sample mounted inside the cavity (inset of Extended Data Fig. 1A). 
We estimated the THz spot diameter at the focus position to be ~ 1.5 mm, hence smaller than the 
lateral dimensions of the 1T-TaS2 crystal (4 mm x 4 mm). The field transmitted through the sample 
is probed by standard Electro-Optical-Sampling (EOS) in a 0.5 mm ZnTe crystal with a weak read-
out pulse (50 fs pulse duration, 745 nm central wavelength, < 100 nJ/pulse). We present in Extended 
Data Fig. 1B the measured electric field of the generated THz pulse and its calculated Fourier 
spectrum (Extended Data Fig. 1C). The input field is a nearly single-cycle THz pulse with a spectral 
content up to 6 THz, as highlighted in the logarithmic scale plot in the inset of Extended Data Fig. 
1C. We estimated the signal-to-noise of the detected THz field to be 4.6 x 104 and a temporal phase 
stability ≤ 30 fs.


2.
SAMPLE PREPARATION

The single crystals from which flakes are exfoliated are grown from the elements (purity of Ta: 
99.95% and S: 99.999%) by the vapor phase transport method at 850 °C with 1.5 mg/cm3 excess S, 
quenched from the growth temperature to a room temperature water bath to retain the 1T polytype. 
Single crystal XRD confirms that the pure single 1T phase is retained after the quench (a = b = 3.357, 
c = 5.91), with the Ta:S composition ratio determined by EDS to be 33:66 +/-1 atomic %. STM 
measurements show rare-earth impurity on the surface layer content consistent with the impurity 
concentrations given by the supplier (Alfa Aesar, Merck).

Extended Data Fig 1: Experimental set-up. A. Sketch of the THz time domain spectrometer. In the inset, the photograph 
of the tunable cryogenic cavity composed of two cryo-cooled moving mirrors within which the sample is embedded. B.
Free-space nearly single-cycle THz field employed in the experiments detected trough Electro-Optical Sampling (EOS) 
in a 0.5 mm ZnTe crystal. C. Fourier transform of the nearly single-cycle THz field in free space. In the inset, the Fourier 
spectrum is plotted in logarithmic scale to highlight the spectral content of the THz field up to approximatively 6 THz. 
The black dashed line in the logarithmic plot indicates the noise level.


2.
MEASUREMENT PROTOCOLS AND DATA ANALYSIS

1.
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE EMPTY CAVITY

To estimate the quality factor of the cavity, we characterized the response of the empty cavity, i.e. 
when the THz field passes only through the silicon nitride membranes within the mirrors. The quality 
factor quantifies the photon lifetime inside the cavity and, subsequently, the coupling strength 
between the cavity mode and the targeted material excitation, which is ruled by the bare cavity 
dissipations. 

The two cavity mirrors were set parallel to each other and perpendicular to the THz beam by aligning 
the multiple reflection of the pump optical beam, which propagates collinearly with the THz beam. 
In Extended Data Fig. 2 we plot the time domain THz field transmitted through the Fabry-Pérot cavity 
(Extended Data Fig. 2A) and the corresponding spectral content (Extended Data Fig. 2B) for three 
representative values of the cavity fundamental mode 𝜔𝑐 among the one used in the experiment (𝜔𝑐
= 53, 77, 106 GHz). The cavity transmission spectra plotted in Extended Data Fig. 2B were obtained 
by taking the ratio between the Fourier spectrum of the time domain traces shown in Extended Data 
Fig. 2A and the reference free space spectrum presented in Extended Data Fig. 1D. The cavity 

Extended Data Fig 2: THz characterization of the empty cavity. A. Time domain THz fields measured at the output 
of the empty cavity for three representative cavity frequencies 𝜔𝑐 indicated in legend. B. Cavity transmission spectra 
calculated from the fields shown in A. proving the tunability of the cavity fundamental mode.


transmission spectra exhibit the interference Fabry-Pérot modes with a tunable fundamental 
frequency set by the cavity length. 

For the three representative cavities shown in Extended Data Fig. 2 we estimated the quality factors 
𝑄 to be 3.3, 3.6 and 3.5 for the 53, 77, and 106 GHz cavity, respectively. The latter were calculated 
as the ratio between the fundamental cavity frequency and its bandwidth defined as the full width half 
maximum of the transmission peak of the fundamental mode. 
This estimation proves that, for all the cavity lengths that we studied, the bare quality factor (and 
hence the incoherent photon losses) can be considered independent on the cavity frequency.

2.
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE SAMPLE THERMALIZATION TIME

In order to prove that all the measurements have been performed in a stationary regime, we estimated 
the thermalization time of the sample by delaying the THz acquisition by different amounts of time. 
As shown in Extended Data Fig.3, no significant variation in the effective critical temperature and in 
the slope of the phase transition occurs for t ≥ 2 min. Since all the measured THz traces in the 
experiment are the result of a 20 minute integration time at each temperature step with a 5 minutes 
waiting time before the first THz acquisition. Therefore, we can safely rule out that the observed 
inhomogeneous-like feature of the phase transition is due to a measurement waiting time less than 
the sample thermalization and it can be instead likely ascribed to intrinsic inhomogeneities of the 
sample, which can smear out the phase transition [43]. Another factor which could be responsible for 
the smearing out of the metal-to-insulator transition in single crystal 1T-TaS2 samples is substrate 
strain. Strain plays indeed a large role in the metal-to-insulator transition and can shift and broader 
the transition temperature substantially [44]. Additionally, when mounted on membranes, 
homogeneity of the temperature, in particular the in-plane one, may also broaden the transition.

Extended Data Fig. 3: Dependence of the observed metal-to-insulator phase transition on the waiting time. The
temperature evolution of the low frequency transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz) is plotted for different waiting times 
before starting the THz acquisition.


3.
DETERMINATION OF THE EFFECTIVE CRITICAL TEMPERATURE

In this section we present the method used to extract from the THz transmission data the effective 
critical temperatures discussed in the main manuscript. 
We show in Extended Data Fig.4A the temperature evolution of the integrated low frequency 
transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz) associated to the onset of the metallicity. Extended Data Fig. 
4B shows instead the temperature evolution of the transmitted spectral weight around the 1.58 THz 
phonon integrated in the range 1.53 THz – 1.62 THz. This integration range corresponds to the 
phonon bandwidth. 
In order to estimate the effective critical temperature at each cavity length, we interpolated the 
metallic and phononic temperature response and calculated the derivative of the interpolated curve. 
The obtained temperature-derivative for the free space sample is presented in the lower panels of 
Extended Data Fig. 4A and Extended Data Fig. 4B for the metallic and phononic response, 
respectively. 
We set the effective critical temperature of the phase transition (Tc

eff) to be the maximum of the 

derivative of the interpolated curve. The error associated to each Tc

eff is the standard deviation of the 

effective critical temperatures estimated for three consecutive scans. The robustness of this procedure 
is validated by the fact that the effective critical temperatures estimated from the metallic response 
are compatible with the ones estimated from the phonon spectral response.

Extended Data Fig 4: Determination procedure of the effective critical temperature of the metal-to-insulator 
transition. A. In the top panel the temperature evolution of the integrated low frequency transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 
THz integration range) upon heating and cooling (circled markers). The solid line is the result of an interpolation. In the 
lower panel the derivative of the interpolated curve whose maximum sets the effective critical temperature of the phase 
transition. B. In the top panel the temperature evolution of the integrated 1.58 THz phonon transmission (1.53 THz < 
< 1.62 THz integration range) and its interpolation. In the lower panel the derivative of the interpolated phonon response 
across the phase transition.


3.
THEORETICAL MODELS

1.
FREE ENERGY PICTURE

In this section we introduce the phenomenological model providing a qualitative estimation of the 
renormalization of the free energy of the metallic NC state due to cavity electrodynamics. 
Let us consider a solid with given dielectric properties, characterized by the polarizability 𝛼(𝜔) which 
determines the response of the transverse polarization density to the electric field, 𝑃⃗ (𝜔) =
𝜖0𝛼(𝜔)𝐸⃗ (𝜔). The polarizability 𝛼(𝜔) is related to the relative dielectric function 𝜖(𝜔) as 𝜖(𝜔) =
1 + 𝛼(𝜔). A non-zero polarizability implies that there are modes in the solid which can hybridize 
with the electromagnetic field, which in turn leads to a change of the free energy when the system is 
put in the cavity. In order to understand the effect of the cavity on the free energy of the system, we 
evaluate the difference

𝛥𝐹 = 𝐹𝑡𝑜𝑡 − 𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑡 − 𝐹𝑐𝑎𝑣
(1)

between the total free energy of the coupled system (𝐹𝑡𝑜𝑡) and the free energies of the uncoupled solid 
(𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑡) and of the electromagnetic field (𝐹𝑐𝑎𝑣). A key observation is that as long as the solid is 
approximately described by a harmonic theory, 𝛥𝐹 can be determined from the knowledge of the 
experimentally accessible dielectric function alone, independent of microscopic details such as the 
precise nature of the electromagnetically active modes. In short, the reason is that in a harmonic 
theory one can exactly integrate out the modes of the solid, so that the resulting effective action of 
the cavity, which then determines 𝛥𝐹, is given in terms of the linear response functions of matter. 
We will make a further simplification in line with the present experimental setting, and assume that 
the volume 𝑉𝑚 of the solid is small compared to the cavity volume 𝑉, 𝑉𝑚/𝑉 ≪ 1. This approximation 
is valid for the experimental setting since the cavities employed have fundamental frequencies in the 
low THz region, while the sample thickness is ~ 10 µm. With this approximation, as we will show 
below, for a single cavity mode with fundamental frequency 𝜔𝑐 the free energy renormalization 𝛥𝐹
due to the light-matter coupling (Eq. 1) is given by 𝛥𝐹(𝜔𝑐, 𝑇) =

𝑉𝑚
𝑉 𝑓(𝜔𝑐, 𝑇), where 

𝑓(𝜔𝑐, 𝑇) = 1

𝜋 ∫
𝑑𝜔 𝛼′′(𝜔)𝜔 𝑏(𝜔𝑐, 𝑇)𝜔𝑐 − 𝑏(𝜔, 𝑇)𝜔

𝜔𝑐2 − 𝜔2

∞

0

.
(2)

2.

In the previous equation 𝑏(𝜔, 𝑇) = (𝑒𝜔/𝑇 − 1)−1 is the Bose function and 𝛼′′(𝜔) the imaginary part 
of the solid polarizability (dielectric loss). 
The total free energy change 𝛥𝐹 is a thermodynamically extensive quantity, which arises from the 
coupling to a continuum of cavity modes with transverse momentum 𝑞 and a discrete mode index 𝑛
(Extended Data Fig. 5A). For simplicity, instead of summing Eq. 2 over all cavity modes 𝜔𝑐 ≡ 𝜔𝑞,𝑛, 
we will first analyze the single mode result (Eq. 2) for the lowest cavity frequency (𝜔𝑐 = 𝜋𝑐/𝐿, with 
𝐿 the cavity length) to understand the qualitative functional dependence of 𝛥𝐹 on the temperature and 
on the cavity parameters. In order to estimate the order of magnitude of the total effect of all modes, 
the result will then be multiplied with a phase space factor that counts the number of modes 𝑁𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒
that are affected by the cavity.
To analyze the free energy renormalization (Eq. 2), we assume that the solid polarizability 𝛼(𝜔) gives 
rise to a broad continuum absorption band that can be fitted by the response of a strongly damped 
oscillator: 

𝛼(𝜔) = 𝛼(0)
𝛺2

𝛺2 − 𝜔2 − 𝑖𝜔𝛾.
(3)

3.


Here Ω corresponds to the central frequency of the material’s mode, 𝛾 is the linewidth, and 𝛼(0) is 
the contribution of the mode to the static polarizability. The latter also measures the total spectral 
weight in the absorption band and therefore serves as a phenomenological measure of the effective 
coupling strength. The dielectric loss 𝛼′′(𝜔) adopted for the estimations is presented in Extended 
Data Fig. 5B. We set a central frequency Ω = 15 GHz and a frequency damping 𝛾 = 20 GHz so that 
no significant contribution to the solid dielectric loss is present in the THz region (ω > 0.1 THz). 
We show in Extended Data Fig. 5C the dependence of the free energy renormalization of the metallic 
phase (Eq. 2) as a function of the cavity frequency 𝜔𝑐 when the latter is swept through the mode 
centered at Ω. The model indicates that the free energy of the metallic state is lowered upon lowering 
the cavity frequency, which is qualitatively consistent with the decrease of the effective critical 
temperature upon reducing the cavity frequency observed experimentally. The renormalization of the 
metallic free energy is larger for larger temperatures, indicating that it is related to the thermal 
population of the low energy mode. We stress that the temperature in the experiment is well above 
Ω. Extended Data Fig. 5D shows the free energy renormalization as a function of temperature for 
different cavity frequencies 𝜔𝑐 below and above the resonance 𝜔𝑐 = Ω. The free energy of the 
metallic phase is lowered and becomes steeper when the cavity frequency is lowered (i.e. opening the 

Extended Data Fig 5: Cavity-induced renormalization of the free energy of the metallic phase.  A. Free energy 
model setting. Upper panels: coplanar cavity with a thin slab of matter (thickness d) inside a cavity of length 𝐿. Lower 
panels: Sketch of the cavity modes dispersion and of the absorption solid band (green shaded region centered at 𝜔𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑠). 
As 𝐿 is increased, modes are pulled inside and below the absorption band of the solid. The cavity fundamental mode is 
indicated with 𝜔𝑐(𝐿). B. Dielectric loss spectrum 𝛼′′(𝜔) (Ω = 15 GHz, 𝛾 = 20 GHz) employed for the calculations. The 
spectrum has been normalized by the static contribution to the polarizability 𝛼(0). C. Renormalization of the metallic 
free energy 𝛥𝐹𝑚 as a function of the cavity frequency for different temperatures. The cavity frequencies 𝜔𝑐 are normalized 
by Ω = 15 GHz. D. Renormalization of the metallic free energy 𝛥𝐹𝑚 as a function of the temperature for different cavity 
frequencies above and below resonance 𝜔𝑐 = Ω. 


cavity). This trend is consistent with the interpretation of the experimental observation in the main 
text highlighted in Fig. 4D.
It should be stressed, however, that the absolute changes of the total free energy are expected to be 
rather small. As mentioned above, the single mode result 𝛥𝐹(𝜔𝑐, 𝑇) =

𝑉𝑚
𝑉 𝑓(𝜔𝑐, 𝑇) should be 

integrated over all modes or, for a simple estimate, multiplied with a phase space factor 𝑁𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠. If 
the latter is simply taken to account for all modes below a certain cutoff 𝜔𝑐𝑢𝑡 in a volume 𝑉, we have 
𝑁𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 = 𝑉/𝜆𝑐𝑢𝑡

3 , up to constants of order one. Hence the free energy change 𝑁𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 ×

𝑉𝑚
𝑉 𝑓(𝜔𝑐, 𝑇)

per volume 𝑉𝑚 is given by the amount 𝑓(𝜔𝑐, 𝑇) per volume 𝜆𝑐𝑢𝑡

3 . The changes of 𝑓(𝜔𝑐, 𝑇) upon 

modifying the cavity frequency are of the order of 𝛼(0)Ω (see Extended Data Fig. 5C, D), thus 
corresponding to an energy density 𝛼(0)Ω/𝜆𝑐𝑢𝑡

3 . This value has to be compared with the condensation 

energy density of the phase transition, which is 𝑄 ≈ 6 𝐽/𝑚𝑚3 ≈ 3.6 × 1010𝑒𝑉/𝜇𝑚3 [50]. With Ω in 
the sub-meV range, very large couplings 𝛼(0) would be needed, even with a cutoff 𝜆𝑐𝑢𝑡 in the optical 
range (which is clearly an upper bound, as optical frequencies are hardly affected by the present cavity 
setting). 
We therefore conclude that although the free energy renormalization in the cavity 𝛥𝐹 follows the 
correct trend (lowering the free energy of the nearly commensurate phase as the cavity is opened), it 
is not sufficient to explain the experimental observation. While it will certainly be also interesting to 
investigate future theoretical interpretations which go beyond the harmonic theory, this puts more 
emphasis on the second mechanism (Purcell-like effect) discussed in the present manuscript.
Finally, let us conclude with the derivation of Eq. 2. Let us start from a general harmonic model in 
which one mode of the electromagnetic field couples to a continuum of modes in the solid. The 
Hamiltonian is a general Dicke-type Hamiltonian:

𝐻 = 1

2 ∑ (𝛺𝑎

2 [𝑝𝑎 + 𝜅𝛾𝑎

𝛺𝑎2 𝛱]

2

+ 𝑥𝑎

2) + 1

2 (𝛱2𝜔𝑞

2 + 𝑋2)

𝑎

,
(4)

where 𝑋 and 𝛱 are the canonical quadratures of the electromagnetic field, and 𝑝𝑎 and 𝑥𝑎 the 
quadratures of the modes in the solid. The solid normal modes have frequencies 𝛺𝑎 in the absence of 
the coupling to the cavity field. The electromagnetic field quadrature 𝛱 is related to the vector 
potential (which is spatially homogeneous throughout the solid) by the relation

𝐴̂ = 𝑛̂√ 1

𝜖0𝑉 𝛱,
(5)

4.

where we have indicated with 𝑉 the cavity mode volume, and with 𝑛̂ the polarization direction. The 
electric field is connected to the vector potential by the temporal derivative 𝐸 = −𝐴̇. The complete 
square light-matter coupling in Eq. 4, with coupling constants 𝛾𝑎, corresponds to a minimal coupling 
of the modes in the solid to the vector potential. The coupling between the solid oscillators and the 
single cavity mode scales as 𝜅𝛾𝑎where 𝜅2 = 𝑉𝑚/𝑉 is the volume fraction of the cavity filled with the 
solid. Note that, as mentioned above, the final result for 𝛥𝐹 will be expressed in terms of the 
polarizability, so that the detailed choice of the parameters 𝛺𝑎 and 𝛾𝑎 does not enter.
The aim is now to calculate the free energy difference 𝛥𝐹 within this model. Denoting by 𝜂𝛼 and 𝜂𝛼

(0)

the normal modes energies of the coupled and uncoupled system, respectively, the free energy 
difference (Eq. 1) is simply given by 

𝛥𝐹 = 1

𝛽 ∑ [𝑙𝑛(1 − 𝑒−𝛽𝜂𝛼) − 𝑙𝑛 (1 − 𝑒−𝛽𝜂𝛼

(0))]

𝛼

,
(6)

5.


where 𝑙𝑛(1 − 𝑒−𝛽𝜂)/𝛽 is the free energy of an oscillator with frequency 𝜂. The 𝜂𝛼

2 are given by the 

eigenvalues of the dynamical matrix 𝒟 corresponding to the Hamiltonian (Eq. 4), 

6.

𝒟 =

(

 

𝜔̃𝑐

2
𝜅𝛾1
𝜅𝛾2
⋯

𝜅𝛾1

∗
Ω1

2
0

𝜅𝛾2

∗
0
Ω2

2

⋮
⋱
)

 .
(7)

Here 𝜔̃𝑐

2 is the shifted cavity frequency 𝜔̃𝑐

2 = 𝜔𝑐

2 + 𝜅2 ∑
|𝛾𝑎2|

𝑎 𝛺𝑎2
as a consequence of the coupling with 

the solid degrees of freedom. We determine these normal modes perturbatively in the solid volume 
fraction 𝜅2 ≪ 1. The perturbative expansion for the cavity mode (entry 0 in Eq. 7) reads

𝜂0

2 = 𝜔𝑐

2 + 𝜅2 ∑ |𝛾𝑎

2|

𝛺𝑎2

𝑎

+ 𝜅2 ∑
|𝛾𝑎

2|

𝜔𝑐2 − 𝛺𝑎2

𝑎

,
(8)

7.

while for the matter modes we have:

𝜂𝑎

2 = 𝛺𝑎

2 + 𝜅2
|𝛾𝑎

2|

𝛺𝑎2 − 𝜔𝑐2.
(9)

8.

One can then linearize Eq. 6 in 𝛿𝜂, leading to 𝛥𝐹 = 𝜅2 ∑ 𝑏(𝜂𝛼

(0))𝛿𝜂𝛼
𝛼
, and insert the perturbative 

expressions of the cavity (Eq. 8) and solid (Eq. 9) eigenmodes. With some straightforward 
manipulations, this gives the result of Eq. 2, with the function 𝛼′′(𝜔) of the form

𝛼′′(𝜔) = 𝜋 ∑ |𝛾𝑎|2

2𝛺𝑎

3 [𝛿(𝜔 − 𝛺𝑎) − 𝛿(𝜔 + 𝛺𝑎)]

𝑎

.
(10)

9.

Finally, we need to confirm that this expression (Eq. 10) is precisely the imaginary part of the 
polarizability within the model of Eq. 4. A simple link is made via the dielectric loss. When the system 
is driven with a time-dependent field, the absorbed energy per volume is the time-average of 
𝐸⃗ (𝑡)𝜕𝑡𝑃⃗ (𝑡). With the above definition of the polarizability, the loss under a field 𝐴(𝑡) = 𝑛̂𝐴𝜔𝑒−𝑖𝜔𝑡 +
ℎ. 𝑐. is 

10.

𝛤(𝜔) = 2𝜔3𝜖0𝛼′′(𝜔)|𝐴𝜔|2.
(11)

On the other hand, in the model (Eq. 4) we can calculate the energy absorption due to a time dependent 
classical vector potential, which by means of Eq. 5 is introduced by replacing 𝛱 → 𝛱 + √𝑉𝜖0𝐴(𝑡). 
Fermi’s golden rule (or equivalently the Kubo linear response formalism) gives 

11.

𝛤𝐴(𝜔) = |𝐴𝜔|22𝜔 ∑ |𝛾𝑎|2𝜒𝑎𝑎′′(𝜔)𝜖0𝑉𝜅2

𝑎

= 𝑉𝑚|𝐴𝜔|22𝜔 ∑ |𝛾𝑎|2𝜒𝑎𝑎

′′ (𝜔)𝜖0,

𝑎

(12)

12.

with the spectral function 

𝜒𝑎𝑎′′(𝜔) =
𝜋

2𝛺𝑎

[𝛿(𝜔 − 𝛺𝑎) − 𝛿(𝜔 + 𝛺𝑎)]
(13)


of the single mode 𝑎. Comparing the two expressions in Eq. 11 and Eq. 12 shows that Eq. 10 is the 
result for the polarizability.

2.
CONTROL OF DISSIPATIONS THROUGH CAVITY ELECTRODYNAMICS

In this section we discuss the Purcell-like scenario mentioned in the main manuscript, i.e. the 
mechanism in which the observed changes in the effective critical temperature could be related to a 
cavity control of the dissipations, analogously to the Purcell effect. In this scenario, the reshaping of 
the electromagnetic density of states at the sample position due to the cavity electrodynamics could 
result in a modification of the sample’s thermal load and subsequently of its temperature. 
In order to estimate this effect, we proceed as indicated in Extended Data Fig. 6A. The sample is in 
thermal contact with the cold finger through the membranes, but it is also in thermal contact with the 
external photon bath at Tph = 300 K. We assume that the thermal transfer from the cold finger to the 
sample depends only on the difference between the cold-finger temperature (Text) and the sample 
effective temperature (Tint). Conversely, we assume that the thermal load on the sample due to the 
contact with the external photon bath is mediated by the cavity, in analogy with the Purcell effect. 
Under these hypotheses, we can write two rate equations describing respectively the cavity-
independent heat flow between the cold finger and the sample:

𝑄𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 = 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 (𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡 − 𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑡),
(14)

1.

and the cavity-mediated heat transfer between the sample and the external photon bath:

𝑄𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄) = 𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄)(𝑇𝑝ℎ − 𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑡).
(15)

In the previous equations 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 represents the cavity-independent coupling constant between the 
cold finger and the sample, while 𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄) the coupling constant between the sample and the 
photon bath, which depends on the cavity geometry, i.e. on the fundamental frequency 𝜔𝑐 and on the 
quality factor 𝑄. 
The coupling constant 𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄) between the sample and the photon bath can be expressed as 
the joint density of states of the solid 𝜌𝑆𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑(𝜔) and of the cavity 𝜌𝐶𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄)(𝜔), with the latter 
multiplied by the Boltzmann distribution at the photon bath temperature Tph = 300 K:

𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄) = ∫
𝑑𝜔 𝜌𝐶𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄)(𝜔) 𝜌𝑆𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑(𝜔) 𝑒

−
𝜔

𝐾𝐵𝑇𝑝ℎ

∞

0

.
(16)

2.

Considering a continuum broad mode centered at Ω = 15 GHz and with a spectral linewidth 𝛾 = 20 
GHz (as for the free energy model described in the previous section), the solid density of states 
associated to the material’s excitations can be expressed through the dielectric loss per unit frequency 
as:

𝜌𝑆𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑(𝜔) = 𝛼′′(𝜔)

𝛺
= 𝛼(0)
𝛺𝛾𝜔

(𝜔2 − 𝛺2)2 + (𝛾𝜔)2.
(17)

Conversely, the multimode cavity density of states takes the form:


𝜌𝐶𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄)(𝜔) = ∑
𝛾𝑐𝑎𝑣

(𝜔 − 𝑛𝜔𝑐)2 + (𝛾𝑐𝑎𝑣)2

+∞

𝑛=0

,
(18)

where 𝛾𝑐𝑎𝑣 represents the linewidth of the bare cavity which is related to the quality factor 𝑄 by the 
relation 𝑄 = 𝜔𝑐/𝛾𝑐𝑎𝑣. The quality factor of the empty cavity is set by the experimental conditions 
(see Section “Characterization of the empty cavity” of the Methods). 
In Extended Data Fig. 6B we present a plot of the solid density of state and of the cavity density of 
states multiplied by the Boltzmann distribution at the photon bath temperature Tph = 300 K. 
Under stationary conditions, the thermal flow from the cold finger to the sample 𝑄𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 equals the 
cavity-mediated heat transfer between the sample and the photon bath 𝑄𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄), that is 
𝑄𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝑄𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄) = 0. At equilibrium, we can subsequently calculate an effective sample 
temperature 𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄), which takes the form:

𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄) = 𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄)𝑇𝑝ℎ + 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄) + 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡

.
(19)

The temperature ratio between the sample and the cold finger 

𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐,𝑄)

𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡
as a function of the cavity 

fundamental frequency is plotted in Extended Data Fig. 6C for different cold-finger temperatures. 
We stress that the renormalization of the sample effective temperature scales with the cavity-solid 
joint density of states 𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄), and hence with the total spectral weigth within the solid 
absorption band 𝛼(0). A larger renormalization of the sample’s temperature is hence expected for a 
larger oscillator strength of the solid’s modes.
While the density of states of the electromagnetic field can be enhanced inside the optical cavity with 
respect to free space, potentially enhancing radiative transitions in materials in resonance with the 
cavity, shorter cavities move the electromagnetic modes to higher frequencies and could effectively 
decouple the optically active material’s modes from the external field, analogously to the Purcell 
effect.
We note that, upon increasing the cavity frequency, i.e. by reducing the coupling of the EM active 
modes from the cavity fundamental mode, the model predicts a decrease of the temperature ratio 
𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄)/𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡, consistent with a decrease of the effective temperature of the sample (Fig. 4B). This 
trend is qualitatively consistent with what observed experimentally with THz spectroscopy (Fig 4A), 
i.e. an increase of the effective critical temperature (Tc

eff) upon increasing the cavity frequency.

Moreover, upon lowering the cavity frequency, the coupling between the active optical transitions in 
the material and light can be enhanced within a frequency range, and the cavity may effectively 
enhance the absorption of the external blackbody radiation from the sample [51], heating up the 
sample with respect to free space conditions.  Our measurements indicate that the cavity frequency 
range explored in the experiments is at higher frequencies with respect to the relevant absorption 
modes in the solid.
As highlighted in Extended Data Fig. 6C, the cavity-mediated modification of the sample-photon 
bath dissipations is more efficient at lower cold-finger temperatures, i.e. when the difference between 
the temperature of the photon thermal bath (Tph) and Text is larger. Since the phase transition upon 
cooling 1T-TaS2 occurs at a lower temperature with respect to the phase transition upon heating it, 
we expect the Purcell-like effect to be more efficient in shifting the apparent cooling critical 
temperature with respect to the heating one. This prediction could justify the effective shrinking of 
the hysteresis observed by sweeping the cavity mode from lower towards higher frequencies (Fig. 
4C).


In Extended Data Fig. 6D we prove that the trend presented in Extended Data Fig. 6C is qualitatively 
independent on the thermal coupling constant between the sample and the cold finger 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡. A 
change in 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 in the employed cavity frequency range acts only as a scaling factor of the cavity 
frequency trend. The results shown in Extended Data Fig. 6D has been calculated for a representative 
cold-finger temperature Text = 80 K. 
Lastly, we point out that the renormalization of the sample effective temperature induced by the cavity 
is more efficient when the thermal coupling between the sample and the cold finger is smaller. At 
very high thermal couplings 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 we expect indeed the contribution to the sample’s temperature 
of the cavity-dependent interaction with the photon bath, and hence the renormalization of Tint, to be 
negligible.

Extended Data Fig 6: Cavity control of sample dissipations. A. Schematic representation of the thermal loads on the 
sample determined by its coupling with the cold finger through the cavity-independent factor 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 and with the photon 
thermal bath through the cavity-dependent factor 𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄). B. Density of states of the solid (peaked at the mode 
frequency Ω) and of the cavity (peaked at multiples of the fundamental mode 𝜔𝑐). The cavity density of states is multiplied 
by the Boltzmann distribution at the temperature of the photon bath Tph = 300 K. C. Dependence of the temperature ratio 
𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄)/𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡 as a function of the cavity frequency for different temperatures of the cold finger Text. The absolute 
temperature renormalization scales with 𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄). D. Evolution of the temperature ratio 𝑇𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄)/𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡 upon 
tuning the cavity frequency for different values of the cavity-independent coupling constant 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 at a fixed cold-finger 
temperature Text = 80 K. The values of the cavity-independent constant 𝐾𝑒𝑥𝑡−𝑖𝑛𝑡 indicated in the legend have been 
normalized by 𝐾𝑝ℎ−𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝜔𝑐, 𝑄) evaluated at 𝜔𝑐= Ω.


Further studies are needed to provide a quantitative estimate of the cavity dependent total radiative 
heat load experienced by the sample in the optical cavity. An increased sensitivity in this respect 
could be provided by cavity design featuring a better thermal isolation between the sample and the 
cold finger. 

4.
TEMPERATURE 
MEASUREMENTS 
WITHIN 
THE 

CAVITY

We stressed throughout the manuscript that the temperature indicated in all the reported 
measurements is the cold-finger readout. When performing THZ optical measurements, this choice 
is mandatory because any thermosensitive device introduced in the cavity would not only impede the 
THz transmission, but also modify the sample environment. On the other hand, measuring the actual 
temperature of the sample is crucial to discriminate between the two cavity-mediated scenarios that 
we proposed (see Section “Theoretical models” of the Methods). 
To this aim, we directly measured the temperature – both of the membrane and the sample – in the 
cavity by sealing of a home-made 20 μm Cr-Al junction within the membranes. In Extended Data 
Fig. 7 we show a picture of the thermocouple arrangement within the sample mount. Importantly, in 
order to not have offsets in the temperature readout, all the wires connecting the junction to the output 
of the cryostat’s head were made of Cr and Al of ~ 120 μm. The only discontinuity point is represented 
by the gold male-female connectors at the output of the sample holder which, as we verified, give no 
temperature discrepancy.
We highlight that, in this experimental setting, the THz optical measurements cannot be performed; 
it is therefore not possible to monitor the THz response of the sample as function of its actual 
(measured) temperature. All the temperature measurements discussed below must be then considered 
a separate characterization of the temperature of the sample in a cavity geometry which is nevertheless 
identical to the one used in all the THz measurements discussed in the main manuscript.

Extended Data Fig 7: Temperature measurements set-up. Photograph of the micrometric Cr-Al junction sealed within 
the membranes and in thermal contact with the sample.


5.
FINITE-ELEMENTS SIMULATIONS OF INCOHERENT 
HEATING

To estimate the effect of the incoherent thermal radiation within the cavity, we performed finite-
elements simulations exploiting the COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS software. By simulating the 
incoherent thermal load at the membrane position, we gained insight on the membrane’s thermal 
profile for different cavity configurations. 
Let us model the membrane as a grey body having emissivity ε, reflectivity ρ, absorptivity α, and 
temperature T, and let us assume the incoherent radiative properties of the membrane to be fully 
described by these four parameters ε, ρ, α, T. The net inward heat flux 𝑄 at certain point 𝑥 on the 
membrane’s surface will be given by the difference between the total arriving radiative flux 𝐺
(irradiation) and the total outgoing radiative flux 𝐽 (radiosity):

𝑄(𝑥) = 𝐺(𝑥) − 𝐽(𝑥).
(20)

The radiosity 𝐽 is the sum of the reflected and emitted radiation from the membrane and can be 
described through the Stefan-Boltzmann equation as:

𝐽(𝑥) = 𝜌𝐺(𝑥) + 𝜖𝜎𝑇4.
(21)

By imposing now that the membrane is in thermodynamical equilibrium with the surroundings, i.e. 
the emissivity ε is equal to the absorptivity α, we can rewrite the reflectivity ρ as:

𝛼 = 𝜖 = 1 − 𝜌.
(22)

Thus, the net inward radiative flux of the membrane can be expressed only as a function of 𝐺, ε, and 
T as:

𝑄(𝑥) = 𝜖(𝐺(𝑥) − 𝜎𝑇4).
(23)

Equation 23 has been used in COMSOL as radiation boundary condition for the membrane’s surface.
The total surface radiation 𝐺 includes radiation from both the ambient surroundings and from other 
surfaces. A generalized equation for the irradiative flux is:

𝐺(𝑥) = 𝐺𝑚(𝑥) + 𝐹𝑎𝑚𝑏(𝑥) 𝜎 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏

4
,
(24)

where 𝐺𝑚 is the mutual irradiation arriving from other surfaces in the modelled geometry, Tamb = 
300 K is the temperature of the surrounding environment schematized as a radiative black body, and 
𝐹𝑎𝑚𝑏 is the ambient view factor. The latter parameter describes the portion of the view from each 
point that is covered by ambient conditions. Conversely, 𝐺𝑚 is determined by the geometry and the 
local temperatures of the surrounding surface boundaries. Including the expression of the irradiation 
𝐺 inside Eq. 23, the general expression of the net radiative load at the specific point 𝑥 on the 
membrane is:

𝑄(𝑥) = 𝜖(𝐺𝑚(𝑥) + 𝐹𝑎𝑚𝑏(𝑥)𝜎 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏

4
− 𝜎𝑇4).
(25)


This equation has been used by COMSOL to compute the net radiative transfer at each point 𝑥 of the 
membrane’s surface. We stress that Eq. 25 results in a linear equation system in 𝑄(𝑥) that must be 
solved in parallel with the heat transfer equation for the temperature 𝑇:

𝑄(𝑥) = −𝑘𝛻2𝑇(𝑥)
(26)

in order to extract the membrane’s thermal profile 𝑇(𝑥). In the previous expression 𝑘 represents the 
membrane’s thermal conductivity.

Firstly, we discuss here the simulated thermal profile of a single silicon nitride membrane held in free 
space. For simplicity we assumed 2D circular geometry for the membrane. We imposed the boundary 
conditions in order to have the membrane’s edge at the same temperature of the cold finger. The 
thermal profile along the radial coordinate of the free space membrane will be hence controlled by 
the balance between the membrane’s emissivity ε and the thermal load due to ambient black body 
radiation at Tamb = 300 K. For the simulations we set the silicon nitride emissivity at ε = 0.3 [52] 
supposing no wavelength dependence across the mid-infrared, where is located the blackbody 
radiation of the membrane within the employed temperature range (80 - 300 K). Extended Data Fig. 
8 illustrates the simulated thermal profile of the membrane in free space, together with a cut along 
the radial direction. 
We highlight that by setting the cold-finger temperature at the temperature at which the phase 
transition in 1T-TaS2 is observed in free space (Text = 180 K), we can retrieve a temperature in the 
middle of the membrane (and hence at the sample position) corresponding to the literature TC. The 
simulation therefore confirms the assumption that the measured rigid shift of the free space critical 
temperature (Fig. 1B, C) with respect to the literature one has to be attributed to the high thermal 
impedance of the Si3N4 membranes between which the sample is embedded, which does not allow 
them to efficiently re-radiated the ambient blackbody radiation.
Importantly, as shown in Extended Data Fig. 9, the simulations confirm that the incoherent thermal 
load on the membranes is not significantly influenced by the distance between the cryogenic mirror 
mounts. This further excludes a trivial scenario in which is the geometrical variation of the cavity 
mounts which screens the ambient radiation and subsequently changes the membrane’s temperature.

Extended Data Fig 8: Finite-elements simulation of the membrane’s thermal dissipations in free space. A.
Simulated 2D temperature profile of the membrane in free space. B. Radial dependence of the membrane’s temperature 
held in free space. The cold-finger temperature has been set at Text = 180 K.


Extended Data Fig 9: Finite-elements simulation of membrane’s temperature as a function of the mirror mounts 
position. A. 3D thermal profile of the membrane for two representative distances between the mirror mounts (13 mm and 
1.0 mm). B. Cut of membrane’s thermal profile along the radial direction for the two mounts distances presented in A. 
The cold-finger temperature has been set at Text = 180 K, as well as the mounts temperature.


REFERENCES

1.
F. J. Garcia-Vidal, C. Ciuti, and T. W. Ebbesen, “Manipulating matter by strong coupling 
to vacuum fields”, Science 373(6551) (2021).

2.
F. Schlawin, D. M. Kennes, and M. A. Sentef, “Cavity quantum materials”, Applied 
Physics Reviews 9, 011312 (2022).

3.
G. Jarc, S. Y. Mathengattil, F. Giusti, M. Barnaba, A. Singh, A. Montanaro, F. Glerean, E. 
M. Rigoni, S. Dal Zilio, S. Winnerl, and Daniele Fausti, “Tunable cryogenic terahertz 
cavity for strong light-matter coupling in complex materials”, Review of Scientific 
Instruments 93, 033102 (2022).

4.
M. Rini, R.A. Tobey, N. Dean, J. Itatani, Y. Tomioka, Y. Tokura, R.W. Schoenlein, and 
A. Cavalleri, “Control of the electronic phase of a manganite by mode-selective vibrational 
excitation”, Nature 449, 72-74 (2007).

5.
D. Fausti, R.I. Tobey, N. Dean, S. Kaiser, A. Dienst, M.C. Hoffmann, S. Pyon, T. 
Takayama, H. Takagi, and A. Cavalleri. “Light-induced superconductivity in a stripe-
ordered cuprate”, Science 331, 189-191 (2011).

6.
M. Mitrano, A. Cantaluppi, D. Nicoletti, S. Kaiser, A. Perucchi, S. Lupi, P. Di Pietro, D. 
Pontiroli, M. Riccò, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, and A. Cavalleri, “Possible light-induced 
superconductivity in K3C60 at high temperature”, Nature 530, 461-464 (2016).

7.
L. Stojchevska, I. Vaskivskyi, T. Mertelj, P. Kusar, D. Svetin, S. Brazovskii, and D. 
Mihailovic, “Ultrafast switching to a stable hidden quantum state in an electronic crystal”, 
Science 344, 177-180 (2014).

8.
F. Giusti, A. Marciniak, F. Randi, G. Sparapassi, F. Boschini, H. Eisaki, M. Greven, A. 
Damascelli, A. Avella, and D. Fausti, “Signatures of enhanced superconducting phase 
coherence in optimally doped Bi2Sr2Y0.08Ca0.92Cu2O8+δ driven by midinfrared pulse 
excitations”, Physical Review Letters 122, 067002 (2019).

9.
A. Montanaro, F. Giusti, M. Zanfrognini, P. Di Pietro, F. Glerean, G. Jarc, E.M. Rigoni, 
S.Y. Mathengattil, D. Varsano, M. Rontani, A. Perucchi, E. Molinari, and D. Fausti, 
“Anomalous non-equilibrium response in black phosphorus to sub-gap mid-infrared 
excitation”, Nature Communications 13, 2667 (2022).

10.
F. Schlawin, A. Cavalleri, and D. Jaksch, “Cavity-Mediated Electron-Phonon 
Superconductivity”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 133602 (2019).

11.
J. B. Curtis, Z. M. Raines, A. A. Allocca, M. Hafezi, and V. M. Galitski, “Cavity quantum 
Eliasberg enhancement of superconductivity”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 167002 (2019).

12.
A. A. Allocca, Z. M. Raines, J. B. Curtis, and V. M. Galitski, “Cavity superconductor-
polaritos”, Phys. Rev. B 99, 020504(R) (2019).


13.
Y. Laplace, S. Fernandez-Pena, S. Gariglio, J. M. Triscone, and A. Cavalleri, “Proposed 
cavity Josephson plasmonics with complex-oxide heterostructures”, Phys. Rev. B 93, 
075152 (2016).

14.
H. Gao, F. Schlawin, M. Buzzi, A. Cavalleri, and D. Jaksch, “Photoinduced Electron 
Pairing in a Driven Cavity”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 053602 (2020).

15.
M. A. Sentef, M. Ruggenthaler, and A. Rubio, “Cavity quantum-electrodynamical 
polaritonically 
enhanced 
electron-phonon 
coupling 
and 
its 
influence 
on 

superconductivity”, Science Advances 4, 11 (2018).

16.
J. Li, and M. Eckstein, “Manipulating Intertwined Orders in Solids with Quantum Light”, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 217402 (2020).

17.
S. Latini, E. Ronca, U. De Giovannini, H. Hübener, and A. Rubio, “Cavity Control of 
Excitons in Two-Dimensional Materials”, Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 6, 3473-3479 (2019).

18.
Y. Ashida, A. Imamoğlu, J. Faist, D. Jaksch, A. Cavalleri, and E. Demler, “Quantum 
Electrodynamic Control of Matter: Cavity-Enhanced Ferroelectric Phase Transition”, 
Phys. Rev. X 10, 041027 (2020).

19.
S. Latini, D. Shin, S. A. Sato, C. Schäfer, U. De Giovannini, H. Hübener, and A. Rubio, 
“The ferroelectric photo ground state of SrTiO3: Cavity materials engineering”, Proc. Nat. 
Acad. Sci. 118 (31) e2105618118 (2021).

20.
K. Lenk, J. Li, P. Werner, and M. Eckstein, “Dynamical mean-field study of a photon-
mediated ferroelectric phase transition”, Phys. Rev. B 106, 245124 (2022).

21.
Ö.O. Soykal, and E. Flatté., “Strong field interactions between a nanomagnet and a 
photonic cavity”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 077202 (2010).

22.
G. L. Paravicini-Bagliani, F. Appugliese, E. Richter, F. Valmorra, J. Keller, M. Beck,
N. Bartolo, C. Rössler, T. Ihn, K. Ensslin, C. Ciuti, G. Scalari, and J. Faist, “Magneto-
transport controlled by Landau polariton states”, Nature Physics 15, 186-190 (2019).

23.
F. Appugliese, J. Enkner, G. L. Paravicini-Bagliani, M. Beck, C. Reichl, W. Wegscheider, 
G. Scalari, C. Ciuti, and J. Faist, “Breakdown of topological protection by cav-
ity vacuum fields in the integer quantum Hall effect”, Science 375(6584), 1030 (2022).

24.
A. Thomas, E. Devaux, K. Nagarajan, G. Rogez, M. Seidel, F. Richard, C. Genet, M. 
Drillon, and T. W. Ebbesen, “Large enhancement of ferromagnetism under a collective 
strong coupling of YBCO nanoparticles”, Nano Lett. 2021, 21, 10, 4365-4370 (2021).

25.
A.G. Vaidyanathan, W.P. Spencer, and D. Kleppner, “Inhibited absorption of blackbody 
radiation”, Physical Review Letters, 47(22), 1592 (1981).

26.
A.C. Jones, B. T. O’Callahan, H. U. Yang, and M. B. Raschke, “The thermal near-field: 
coherence, spectroscopy, heat transfer, and optical forces”, Progress in Surface Science 88, 
349-392 (2013).


27.
A.S. Roberts, M. Chirumamilla, K. Thilsing-Hansen, K. Pedersen,and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, 
“Near-infrared tailored thermal emission from wafer-scale continuous-film resonators”, 
Opt. Express 23, A1111 (2015).

28.
I. Celanovic, D. Perreault, and J. Kassakian, “Resonant-cavity enhanced thermal 
emission”, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 72, 075127 (2005).

29.
R-J Shiue, Y. Gao, C. Tan, C. Peng, J. Zheng, D. K. Efetov, Y. D. Kim, J. Hone, and D. 
Englund, “Thermal radiation control from hot graphene electrons coupled to a photonic 
crystal nanocavity”, Nature Communications 10, 109 (2019).

30.
I. Vaskivskyi, J. Gospodaric, S. Brazovski, D. Svetin, P. Sutar, E. Goreshnik, I. A. 
Mihailovic, T. Mertelj, and D. Mihahilovic, “Controlling the metal-to-insulator relaxation 
of the metastable hidden quantum state in 1T-TaS2”, Sci. Adv. 2015; 1:e1500168 (2015).

31.
Y. D. Wang, W. L. Yao, Z. M. Xin, T. T. Han, Z. G. Wang, L. Chen, C. Cai, Y. Li, and Y. 
Zhang, “Band insulator to Mott insulator transition in 1T-TaS2”, Nat. Commun. 11, 4215 
(2020).

32.
B. Sipos, A. Kusmartseva, A. Akrap, H. Berger, L. Forró, and E. Tutiš, “From Mott state 
to superconductivity in 1T-TaS2”, Nature Mater 7, 960–965 (2008). 

33.
K. Nakanishi, and H. Shiba, “Domain-like incommensurate charge-density-wave states 
and the first-order incommensurate-commensurate transitions in layered tantalum 
dichalcogenides. I. 1-T-polytype”, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 43, 1839-1847 (1977).

34.
K. Nakanishi, and H. Shiba, “Domain-Like Incommensurate Charge-Density-Wave States 
and Collective Modes”, J. Phys. Soc. Japn. 45, 1147-1156 (1978).

35.
J. A. Wilson, F. J. Di Salvo, and S. Mahajan, “Charge-density waves and superlattices in 
the metallic layered transition metal dichalcogenides”, Adv. Phys. 24, 117-201 (1975).

36.
B. Burk, R. E. Thomson, J. Clarke, and A. Zettl, “Surface and bulk charge density wave 
structure in 1T-TaS2”, Science 257, 5068, 362-364 (1992).

37.
R. E. Thomson, B. Burk, A. Zettl, and J. Clarke, “Scanning tunneling microscopy of the 
charge-density-wave structure in 1T-TaS2”, Phys. Rev. B 49, 16899 (1994).

38.
A. W. Tsen, R. Hovden, D. Wang, Y. D. Kim, J. Okamoto, K. A. Spoth, Y. Liu, W. Lu, Y. 
Sun, J. C. Hone, L. F. Kourkoutis, P. Kim, and A. N. Pasupathy, “Structure and control of 
charge density waves in two-dimensional 1T-TaS2”, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 112 (49) 15054-
15059 (2015).

39.
W. Wang, D. Dietzel, and A. Schirmeisen, “Lattice discontinuities of 1T-TaS2 across first-
order charge density wave phase transitions”, Scientific reports, 9(1), 7066 (2019).

40.
L. V. Gasparov, G. Brown, A. C. Wint, D. B. Tanner, H. Berger, G. Margaritondo, R. Gaál, 
and L. Forró, “Phonon anomaly at the charge ordering transition in 1T-TaS2”, Phys. Rev. 
B 66, 094301 (2002).


41.
N. Dean, J. C. Petersen, D. Fausti, R. I. Tobey, S. Kaiser, L. V. Gasparov, and A. Cavalleri, 
“Polaronic Conductivity in the Photoinduced Phase of 1T-TaS2”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 
016401 (2011).

42.
W. L. McMillan, “Landau theory of charge-density waves in transition-metal 
dichalcogenides”, Phys. Rev. B 12, 1187 (1975).

43.
S. Baek, Y. Sur, K. H. Kim, M. Vojta, and B. Büchner, “Interplay of charge density waves, 
disorder, and superconductivity in 2H-TaSe2 elucidated by NMR”, New J. Phys. 24 043008 
(2022).

44.
D. Svetin, I. Vaskivskyi, P. Sutar, E. Goreshnik, J. Gospodaric, T. Mertelj, and D. 
Mihailovic, “Transitions between photoinduced macroscopic quantum states in 1T-TaS2
controlled by substrate strain”, Appl. Phys. Express 7 103201 (2014).

45.
Y. Ma, Y. Hou, C. Lu, L. Li, and C. Petrovic, “Possible origin of nonlinear conductivity 
and large dielectric constant in the commensurate charge-density-wave phase of 1T-TaS2” 
Phys. Rev. B 97, 195117 (2018).

46.
Y. Ma, D. Wu, and Z. Wang, “The evidence of stacking disorder from dielectric response 
along the c-axis in the commensurate CDW phase in bulk 1T-TaS2” Solid State 
Communications, 316–317, 113946 (2020).

47.
P. Pilar, D. De Bernardis, and P. Rabl, “Thermodynamics of ultrastrongly coupled light-
matter systems”, Quantum. 4, 335 (2020).

48.
M. F. Picardi, K. N. Nimje, and G. T. Papadakis, “Dynamic modulation of thermal 
emission: A Tutorial”, Journal of Applied Physics 133, 11101 (2023).

49.
E.M. Purcell, R. V. Pound, and N. Bloembergen, “Nuclear magnetic absorption in 
hydrogen gas”, Phys. Rev. 70, 986 (1946).

50.
D.R.P. Guy, A. M. Ghorayeb, S. C. Bayliss, and R. H. Friend, “High pressure investigation 
of the CDW phase diagram of 1T-TaS2”, In: Hutiray, G., Sólyom, J. (eds) Charge Density 
Waves in Solids. Lecture Notes in Physics, vol 217. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1985).

51.
P. Goy, J. M. Raimond, M. Gross, and S. Haroche, “Observation of cavity-enhanced single-
atom spontaneous emission”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1903-1906 (1983).

52.
R.W. Russell, M. A. Chatelain, J. H. Hecht, and J. R. Stephens “Si3N4 emissivity and the 
unidentified infrared bands”, In: NASA proceedings, 1989, N-91-14897 (1989).


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are indebted to Cesare Tozzo, Paul van Loosdrecht, Hamoon Hedayat, and Omar Abdul-
Aziz for insightful discussion. The authors acknowledge Petra Sutar (Jožef Stefan Institute, 
Ljubljana) for the growth of 1T-TaS2 crystals. The authors acknowledge insightful discussions with 
Jerome Faist. This work was supported by the European Research Council through the project 
INCEPT (ERC-2015-STG, Grant No. 677488). F.F. acknowledges financial support from the 
European Union’s H2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie actions (Grant Agreement No. 799408). D.M. 
and Petra Sutar acknowledge funding from ARRS grant number P-0040. M.E. acknowledges funding 
by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation), Project ID 
429529648 – TRR 306 QuCoLiMa (“Quantum Cooperativity of Light and Matter”).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

G.J, S.Y.M., and A.M. performed the experiments with support from F.G. and E.M.R.. G.J. analyzed 
the data with support from S.Y.M.. M.E., D.F., and F.F. conceived and developed the theoretical
models with support of D.M. and P.P.. G.J. performed the finite-element simulations of incoherent 
thermal heating.. R.S. developed the micrometric thermocouple junction for the temperature 
measurements within the cavity.. S.D.Z. fabricated the silicon nitride membranes and the semi-
reflecting cavity mirrors.. D.M. provided the 1T-TaS2 samples.. S.W. provided the THz emitters and 
guided the THz set-up.. G.J., D.F., A.M., M.E., and F.F. wrote the manuscript with contributions from 
all the other authors.. D.F. conceived and managed the project.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Raw hysteretic curves as a function of the cavity frequency (Figure 4A), as well the raw single THz 
scans of Figs. 4C and 3B are provided in the Supplementary Material. Further datasets collected for 
this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

COMPETING INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare no competing interests.


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

1. Addressing specific questions arising

“Is the observed effect related to incoherent radiation heating or can be 
associated to the cavity electrodynamics?”

a. Does the presence of the sample affect the difference between the 

temperature of the cold finger and the temperature in the middle of the 
cavity?

b. Does the temperature of the cavity mirrors affect the sample temperature?
c. Does the alignment of the cavity modify the sample temperature?
d. Does the external radiation influence the sample temperature? 
e. Does the thermal load of the THz radiation affect the observed transition 

temperature?

2. Additional datasets


1. ADDRESSING SPECIFIC QUESTIONS ARISING

The main experimental evidence reported in the manuscript is that the effective critical temperature 
of the metal-to-insulator transition in 1T-TaS2 can be modified by tens of kelvin by placing the sample 
within a THz cavity. This is linked to a cavity control of the sample temperature, as demonstrated in 
the main manuscript. We have proved that the observed temperature renormalization depends both 
on the cavity length and the cavity alignment. 
The novelty of the experiment, which represents one of the few attempts in the literature to study how 
the properties of solid-state complex systems can be modified through the cavity confinement, calls 
for a thorough characterization of the effect with the aim of ruling out possible experimental artifacts 
and trivial scenarios. In particular, the most straightforward explanation could be that the huge shift 
of the effective critical temperature is due to an incoherent radiation heating of the sample, placed 
within the cavity and therefore in scarce thermal contact with the cold finger.
In the following, we will detail that this is not the case. By jointly discussing results of the finite 
elements simulations and the temperature measurements, we will give proves pointing towards cavity 
electrodynamics as the dominant effect explain our experimental observations.
To facilitate the discussion, we will address specific questions that may arise and argue how the 
complementary tests that we carried out hint towards a cavity-mediated scenario.

a. Does the presence of the sample affect the difference between the temperature 

of the cold finger and the temperature in the middle of the cavity?

In a trivial scenario in which the sample experiences an incoherent radiation heating, also the 
membranes are expected to behave similarly in response to the modification of the cavity geometry. 
In order to rule out this possibility, we measured the temperature of the sample and the temperature 
of just the membranes (i.e., without placing the sample between them) by means of the micrometric 
thermocouple for different cavity fundamental modes.
Fig. S1 presents the results of the temperature measurements performed within the cavity when the 
thermocouple is sealed on the sample (Fig. S1(A)) and when it is held just between the two 
membranes (Fig. S1(B)). The temperature measurements, for each cavity setting, are plotted as the 
difference between the temperature measured on the sample/membrane (Tint/Tmembrane) and the one 
recorded on the cold finger (Text) as function of Tint or Tmembrane. 

We highlight two distinctive trends, characteristic of the presence of the sample:

-
The absolute temperature renormalization passing from the lower to higher cavity frequency 
is significantly higher on the sample with respect to the membrane. For the lowest cold-finger 
temperature (Text = 80 K) we indeed measured a renormalization of the sample’s temperature 
of ~ 27 K moving the cavity fundamental mode from 11.5 GHz to 42.8 GHz. Conversely, 
between the two cavity configurations we measured only a ~ 9 K renormalization of the 
membrane’s temperature.

-
The temperature renormalization induced by the cavity in the sample is non-monotonic with 
respect to the free-space case. Indeed, for high frequency cavities the sample’s temperature 
within the cavity is lower with respect to the sample’s temperature measured in free space. 
This is qualitatively consistent with the trend of the effective critical temperature as function 
of the cavity fundamental mode revealed by THz spectroscopy (Fig. 4A). Conversely, this 
anomalous non-monotonic behaviour is not observed on the membranes, where the 
membrane’s temperature measured within the cavity is lower than the free space case for all 


the cavity frequencies studies. In particular, we observe that the membrane’s temperature 
measured for the larger cavity length (11.5 GHz) approaches the trend measured in free space.

In Fig. S1(C) we present the differential temperature Tint − Text for a fixed cold-finger temperature 
(𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 150 K) as a function of the cavity fundamental frequency. As expected from full temperature 
scans presented in Fig. S1(A, B) we revealed a renormalization of the sample’s effective temperature 
of ~18 K by sweeping the cavity mode from 11.5 GHz to 42.8 GHz. On the other hand, for the same 
frequency range, we detected a significantly smaller change in the membrane temperature (~ 5 K).

A further confirmation that the reported effect hints towards a cavity-mediated scenario comes from 
the direct measurement of the sample’s temperature both in heating and cooling conditions. Should 
the temperature renormalization depend on an incoherent heating, no differences would be expected 
in the two scanning conditions. This is in fact what we observed on the membranes (Fig. S2(A)), 

Fig S1: Temperature measurements within the cavity. A. Difference between the temperature measured on the sample 
(Tint) and on the cold finger (Text) as a function of the sample temperature. Temperatures have been measured upon 
heating the sample from the C-CDW phase. B. Difference between the membrane’s temperature and the cold-finger 
temperature when the thermocouple is held just between the two membranes. C. Difference between the temperature 
measured on the thermocouple and on the cold finger as a function of the cavity frequency for a fixed cold-finger 
temperature (Text = 150 K). In blue the measurements performed with the thermocouple put on the sample, while in black 
with the thermocouple held between the membranes. 


where the difference between Tmembrane and Text is identical when heating up or cooling down within 
the cavity. However, the sample’s temperature shows a different trend for the heating/cooling 
directions (Fig. S2(B)). In particular, while we do not observe any systematic discontinuity when 
heating up the sample, a kink at the nominal critical temperature ~ 215 K is always present when 
cooling down the sample at different cavity lengths. In the temperature range ~ 160-215 K we also 
observe a constant temperature difference between the sample and the cold finger. The 
thermodynamical meaning of this effect is not clear, but the observation of this hysteretic behaviour, 
which is not present on the bare membranes, proves that all the effects discussed are peculiar of the 
sample.

Fig S2: Temperature measurements upon heating and cooling. A. Difference between the membrane and the cold-
finger temperature within a 11.5 GHz cavity upon heating (red curve) and cooling (blue curve). B. Same as (A) but for 
the sample’s temperature in three different cavity configurations. 


b. Does the temperature of the cavity mirrors affect the sample temperature?

A possible source of incoherent thermal load are the cavity mirrors, whose presence might affect the 
temperature of the sample. In order to exclude this incoherent heating scenario, we carried out a 
characterization of the phase transition shift with cavity frequency as a function of the mirrors 
temperature. We made this test by comparing the cryo-cooled (T = 95 K1) mirrors configuration with 
the 290 K mirrors one. The relation between the mirrors and the sample’s temperature in the two 
cases is presented in Fig. S3.

Fig. S4 shows the temperature dependent THz transmission upon heating 1T-TaS2 embedded in the 
middle of cavities with three different frequencies (𝜔𝑐 = 11.5, 21.2, 48.8 GHz). In Fig. S4(A) the 
temperature scans were performed with the cavity mirrors at 290 K, while in Fig. S4(B) they were 
performed in the configuration with cryo-cooled mirrors. The dependence of the effective critical 
temperature (Tc

eff) on the cavity frequency is presented in Fig S5 for the two configurations.

It is evident that, despite a rigid temperature shift independent on the cavity frequency (~ 35 K), the 
effective critical temperature of the phase transition is pushed up with the 290 K mirrors upon 
increasing the cavity frequency, displaying a trend which is analogous to the one measured with the 
cryo-cooled mirrors. Crucially, this evidence further hints that the observed shift of Tc

eff is an effect 

due to the cavity confinement. In a trivial incoherent heating scenario, in the 290 K mirrors 
configuration we would have expected to increase the incoherent thermal load on the sample upon 
closing the cavity and hence push down the apparent critical temperature of the phase transition.

1 This is the lowest reachable temperature of the mirrors for the present experiment, measured when the cold finger is at 
Text = 80 K.

Fig S3: Relation between the sample temperature and the mirrors temperature in the cryo-cooled mirrors configuration 
and in the 290 K mirrors configuration. The black dashed line marks the diagonal.


In order to clarify this point, we simulated with COMSOL the membrane’s thermal profile embedded 
in three cavities having different lengths. The employed 3D geometry can be found in Fig. S6(A) and 
Fig. S7(A) for cryogenic and ambient temperature mirrors, respectively.
The radial profiles plotted in Fig. S6(C) and Fig. S7(C) show that, upon closing the cavity and thus 
increasing the cavity frequency, the shielding of ambient radiation is efficient only with the cryogenic 
mirrors, whereas in the 300 K mirror case the incoherent radiation from the mirrors surfaces 
dominates the thermal load on the membrane. We stress that this trend is opposite to the one measured 
by THz spectroscopy (Fig. S4, S5). 

Together with THz transmission, we characterized the effect of the mirrors temperature on the phase 
transition by tracking the sample’s temperature as a function of the cavity length and of the cavity 
alignment. Fig. S8 shows a comparison of the differential temperature between the cold finger and 
the sample when the latter is held between the cryogenic cavity (Fig. S8(A)) and between the cavity 
with 290 K mirrors (Fig. S8(B)). The measured trend is qualitatively consistent with the effective 

Fig S4: Dependence of the effective phase transition temperature on the temperature of the cavity mirrors revealed 
by THz spectroscopy. A. Heating temperature scans for three representative cavity frequencies (𝜔𝑐 = 11.5, 21.2, 48.8 
GHz) in the 290 K mirrors configuration. B. Corresponding heating temperature scans for the cryogenic mirrors 
configuration.


critical temperature trend measured by THz spectroscopy (Fig. S5). Indeed, despite a cavity-
independent shift of the sample’s temperature due to the incoherent thermal load, in the 290 K mirrors 
case the sample’s temperature is pushed down with a similar trend of the cryogenic mirrors case upon 
increasing the cavity frequency. 
For the lowest cold-finger temperature (Text = 80 K) and in the 290 K mirrors case we measured a 
renormalization of the sample’s temperature of ~ 31 K by sweeping the cavity mode from 11.5 GHz 
to 42.8 GHz, which is similar to the ~ 27 K measured within the cryogenic cavity. A similar trend 
between the 290 K and cryo-cooled cases is measured by fixing the cold finger at 150 K and tracking 
the differential temperature Tint − Text as a function of the cavity fundamental mode (Fig. S8(C)). As 
highlighted in the comparative plots of Fig. S8(C), the renormalization of the sample’s temperature 
measured either within the cryogenic cavity and with the 290 K mirrors is not consistent with the 
trend measured on the bare membranes, where a ~ 3 times smaller renormalization is observed 
moving the cavity mode at 150 K from 11.5 GHz to 42.8 GHz (black points of Fig. S8(C)).
Crucially, we further proved that the cavity-mediated change of sample’s temperature is independent 
on the mirrors temperature by repeating the misalignment test with the 290 K mirrors. In Fig. S9 we 
present the comparison of the differential temperature Tint − Text as function of the cavity alignment 
in the cryo-cooled and in the 290 K mirrors case. We show that, despite a rigid shift due to the 
incoherent thermal load introduced by the 290 K mirrors, the renormalization of the sample’s 
temperature due to the cavity alignment is ~ 3.5 times larger than the one measured on the bare 
membranes for both the mirrors temperature configurations. This evidence further excludes that the 
observed effect is related to the mirror’s incoherent heating and hints to a selective effect of the cavity 
electrodynamics on the sample’s temperature.

Fig S5: Dependence of the heating critical temperature on the cavity fundamental frequency for the 290 K and 
cryogenic mirrors configurations. In blue (red) the effective critical temperature measured upon heating the sample 
from the dielectric phase for the cryogenic mirrors (290 K mirrors) configuration.


Fig S6: Finite elements simulation of membrane’s temperature as a function of the cavity fundamental frequency 
in the cryogenic mirrors configuration. A. 3D thermal view of the cryogenic cavity employed for the simulations. B.
2D thermal profile of the membrane within the cryogenic cavity for three representative cavity frequencies (11.5, 21.4, 
75.0 GHz) employed in the experiment. C. Radial profile of the membranes held within the cryogenic cavity for different 
values of the cavity fundamental mode (indicated in legend). The cold-finger temperature (Text) and the mirrors 
temperature have been set at 180 K.


Fig S7: Finite elements simulation of membrane’s temperature as a function of the cavity fundamental frequency 
in the 300 K mirrors configuration. A. 3D thermal view of the membrane held between the 300 K mirrors. B. 2D 
thermal profile of the membrane within the 300 K mirrors for three representative cavity frequencies (11.5, 21.4, 75.0 
GHz) employed in the experiment. C. Radial profile of the membranes in the 300 K mirrors configuration for different 
values of the cavity fundamental mode (indicated in legend). The cold-finger temperature (Text) has been set to 180 K.


Fig S8: Temperature measurement within the cavity as a function of the mirrors temperature. A. Evolution of the 
difference between the temperature measured on the sample (Tint) and on the cold finger (Text) as a function of the sample 
temperature in the cryo-cooled mirrors configuration. B. Differential temperature Tint − Text as a function of the sample’s 
temperature measured in the 290 K mirrors configuration. In both cases the temperatures have been measured upon 
heating the sample from the C-CDW phase. C. Differential temperature Tint − Text for a fixed cold-finger temperature
(Text = 150 K) as a function of the cavity fundamental frequency. In blue the measurements performed within the cavity 
with cryogenic mirrors, while in red with 290 K mirrors. In black, for reference, the differential temperature measured 
within the membranes in the cryogenic mirrors configuration.


c.
Does the alignment of the cavity modify the sample temperature?

A further parameter which was shown to affect the effective critical temperature of the metal-to-
insulator transition is the alignment of the cavity, which ultimately sets its quality factor (Fig. 3B of 
the main manuscript). In order to demonstrate that this is not just a pure geometrical effect, we 
characterize in the following the response of the sample to the cavity misalignment.
First of all, we proved that the effective change of the phase transition temperature due to the cavity 
alignment cannot be ascribed to a change of the cavity length. In order to do so, we estimated the 
change of the cavity frequency at the sample position as a function of the misalignment angle of the 
mirrors. Fig. S10(A) illustrates the THz time-domain traces in the C-CDW phase for different 
misalignment angles Θ. In the dashed box we highlight the THz reflection associated to the cavity 
round trip whose temporal distance from the main transmitted peak sets the cavity length. We note 
that upon misalignment the peak associated to the cavity round trip reduces its intensity. This is 
consistent with the decrease of the photon lifetime within the cavity and hence with the reduction of 
the quality factor of the bare cavity, which has been estimated in Fig. S10(B) as a function of the 
misalignment angle by approximating the exponential decay with a linear fit. 
The dependence of the cavity frequency shift on Θ and the corresponding linear fit are shown in Fig. 
S10(C). We estimated the change of the fundamental frequency upon misalignment to be Δ𝜔𝑐 = 0.14
GHz/deg for the 11.5 GHz cavity. This implies that the 11.5 GHz cavity misaligned at the maximum 
angle (Θ = 9.5°) has an equivalent fundamental frequency of 12.8 GHz. We therefore set the cavity 
frequency at 12.8 GHz and compare the effective critical temperature obtained in this configuration 
with the one of the sample embedded within the 11.5 GHz cavity misaligned at Θ = 9.5°. We 
measured the shift of the effective critical temperature between the two cavity configurations to be 
ΔMIS = 21 K. The apparent shift of the phase transition can be hence attributed to the cavity 
misalignment (Fig. S10(D)), as it cannot be justified just in terms of a change in the cavity length.

Fig S9: Temperature measurements within the cavity as a function of the cavity alignment for different mirror 
temperatures. Differential temperature Tint − Text as a function of the alignment measured for the sample held within 
cryogenic mirrors (blue) and 290 K mirrors (red). In black, for comparison, the differential temperature measured on the 
membranes. For the present measurements the cold finger has been set at Text = 80 K.


Furthermore, by means of the finite elements simulations, we proved that the renormalization of the 
effective critical temperature cannot be explained by simply assuming an incoherent thermal heating. 
In fact, as shown in Fig. S11, no temperature shift in the membrane is expected when the cavity 
mirrors are in the maximum misaligned configuration considered in the experiment (θ = 9.5°).
Finally, in order to verify how the sample’s temperature is affected by the cavity environment, we 
measured Tint as a function of the cavity alignment for a cavity fundamental mode of 11.5 GHz (Fig. 
S12). By setting the cold-finger temperature to 80 K, we detected a renormalization of 6.5 K in the 
sample’s temperature by switching from the aligned to the maximum misaligned condition. 
Conversely, we measured only a 1.6 K temperature variation when the thermocouple is held only 
between the two membranes. We note that the measured renormalization of the sample’s temperature 
is much smaller than the shift of the effective transition temperature measured by THz spectroscopy 
(Fig. 3 in the main). 

Fig S10: Variation of the cavity fundamental frequency as a function of the total misalignment angle of the cavity. 
A. THz time domain fields passing through the sample within the cavity for different misalignment angles Θ. In the 
dashed box we highlight the THz reflection associated to the cavity round trip. B. Estimated cavity quality factor as a 
function of the misalignment angle. C. Relative shift of the cavity frequency as a function of the misalignment angle 
obtained from the THz fields shown in A and corresponding linear fit. D. Comparison between the temperature dependent 
low frequency transmission (0.2 THz < ꞷ < 1.5 THz) in the 11.5 GHz misaligned cavity (Θ = 9.5°) and in the 12.8 GHz 
aligned one. The measured temperature shift ΔMIS = 21 K quantifies the shift of the effective critical temperature Tc

eff due 

to cavity misalignment.


Fig S11: Finite elements simulation of the membrane’s temperature as a function of the cavity alignment. A. 2D 
thermal profile of the membrane within the cryogenic cavity in the aligned configuration (θ = 0°) and in the maximum 
misaligned configuration employed in the experiment (θ = 9.5°). B. Membrane’s thermal profile along the radial 
coordinate for the two alignment conditions. The cold-finger temperature (Text) and the mirrors temperature have been 
set to 180 K.


d. Does the external radiation influence the sample temperature? 

In order to prove that the shift of the effective critical temperature upon tuning the cavity resonance 
is not an effect merely due to the geometry of the cavity chamber, we removed the cavity mirrors and 
tracked the phase transition of the sample in free space at two different positions of the mirrors mounts 
(Fig. S13). For this characterization we compared the mirrors mounts distance corresponding to a 9 
mm (16.7 GHz) cavity with the one corresponding to a 1 mm (150 GHz) cavity. No significant shift 
of the effective critical temperature (~ 2.0 K) is measured between the two configurations. This proves 
that the thermal load on the sample is not influenced by the distance from the cryogenic mirrors
mounts, and hence that the effective critical temperature shift upon tuning the cavity mode (Fig. 4A 
of the main manuscript) cannot be trivially ascribed to a geometrical variation of the cavity chamber. 
Therefore, the critical temperatures measured in free space discussed in the main manuscript (Fig. 1) 
effectively set the absolute free space reference for all the cavity-dependent studies.
We also demonstrated that the leading effect is not related to a geometrical screening of the black-
body ambient radiation, whose amount within the cavity can be geometrically modified by tuning the 
mirrors distance. To exclude this scenario, we screened with metallic foils the cavity chamber and, 
by means of the micrometric Cr-Al junction, tracked the differential temperature between the sample 
and the cold finger as a function of the cavity frequency. Importantly, as highlighted in Fig. S14, a 
similar temperature trend is detected in both the shielded and non-shielded configurations. This, 
together with the evidence of Fig. S13, further validates that the reported evidence cannot be simply 
explained in terms of a geometrical screening of the ambient blackbody radiation and more likely 
hints at a scenario mediated by cavity electrodynamics.

Fig S12: Temperature measurements within the cavity (11.5 GHz) as a function of the cavity alignment. In blue the 
dependence of the difference between the temperature measured on the sample (Tint) and on the cold finger (Text) as a 
function of the mirror alignment. In black, for comparison, the same differential temperature Tint − Text measured on the 
membranes. For the presented measurements we set the cold finger at Text = 80 K.


Fig S13: Dependence of the effective phase transition temperature on the cavity geometry (without mirrors). The 
low frequency transmission (0.2 THz < ꞷ < 1.5 THz) in free space is plotted for two representative distances between the 
mirrors mounts and the sample. No significant shift in the effective critical temperature is observed (~ 2 K).

Fig S14: Effect of the shielding of ambient radiation on the sample’s temperature. Differential temperature between 
the sample and the cold finger as a function of the cavity fundamental mode. Red (green) points correspond to sample 
temperatures measured without (with) shielding the cavity environment with alumina foils. The test has been made with 
the mirrors temperature set at 290 K.


e.
Does the thermal load of the THz radiation affect the observed transition 
temperature?

In order to verify that the phase transition within the cavity is not influenced by the thermal load 
introduced by the THz radiation, we repeated the same temperature scan with different intensities of 
the THz pulse. This was achieved by varying the bias voltage of the photoconductive antenna. Fig 
S15 shows the cooling temperature scans for the sample within a cavity of a representative frequency 
of 36.8 GHz for two different peak strengths of the input THz field (0.1 KV/cm, and 0.03 KV/cm). 
A negligible shift of the effective critical temperature (< 1.0 K) is measured, confirming that the 
employed THz pulse only acts as probe and does not introduce a detectable thermal load at the sample 
position. For this reason, in order to maximize the signal to noise ratio of the detected THz field, all 
the measurements presented were performed at a THz input peak strength of 0.1 KV/cm.
A further confirmation of the negligible effect of the THz thermal load on the reported evidence is 
given by directly measuring the temperature of the membrane in the absence and in the presence of 
the THz field. In Fig. S16, we plot the temperature difference between the cold finger and the centre
of the membrane (measured by means of the Cr-Al junction).  We measured that even with the 
maximum THz intensity employed in all the measurements in the manuscript (0.1 kV/cm), the 
temperature difference TMembrane − Text changes by less than 1 K.

Fig S15: Dependence of the metal-to-insulator transition on THz probing intensity. Cooling temperature scans for 
the sample within a cavity of a representative frequency of 36.8 GHz for two different intensities of the THz probing 
field: 0.1 KV/cm (A) and 0.03 KV/cm (B). A negligible shift of the effective critical temperature (< 1.0 K) between the 
two THz intensities is detected.


Fig S16: Dependence of the membrane temperature on the THz intensity. Measured difference between the 
temperature of the membrane and the temperature of the cold finger in the absence (0 kV/cm) and in the presence of THz 
radiation with two different intensities (0.03 kV/cm and 0.1 kV/cm). 


2. ADDITIONAL DATASETS

Fig S17: Raw temperature hysteretic curves as a function of the cavity frequency. A. Low frequency THz 
transmission (0.2 < ω < 1.5 THz) for all the cavity frequencies of Fig. 4A (indicated in legend) measured upon heating 
the sample. B. Corresponding sweep curves for the cooling temperature scans.


Fig S18: Optical conductivity and THz transmission in 1T-TaS2 across the metal-to-insulator phase transition. A. 
Real part of the optical conductivity (𝜎1(𝜔)) measured in free space upon heating (left panel) and cooling (right panel) 
the sample from the insulating and metallic phase, respectively. B. THz transmission (T) measured in free space at 
different cold-finger temperatures Text upon heating (left panel) and cooling (right panel) the sample.

Fig S19: Hysteretic behaviour in THz transmission and optical conductivity. A. Low-frequency transmission (0.2 < 
ω < 1.5 THz) upon heating and cooling the sample. B. Real part of the optical conductivity integrated in the same 
frequency range upon heating and cooling. The hysteretic behaviour is the same for both observables. 


Fig S20: Single scans as function of the cavity length. A. Single THz fields measured upon opening (left) and closing 
(right) the cavity at a fixed temperature (150 K). The 3 consecutive scans employed for the average (insets of Fig. 3B) 
are presented. B. Corresponding low frequency transmission (0.2 < ω < 1.5 THz) as a function of the cavity frequency 
for three consecutive scans. The hysteretic behaviour is reproducible for each single scan. The time from one scan and 
the next is approximately 10 minutes.


Fig S22: Hysteretic behaviour in different samples. Free-space hysteretic curves measured for two different samples 
belonging to the same batch. Sample 1 is the sample on which the measurements in the main manuscript have been 
performed.

Fig S21: Single scans as function of temperature. Low frequency THz transmission as function of temperature (both 
heating and cooling) for two different cavity fundamental modes: 337 GHz (orange curves) and 16.7 GHz (green curves). 
The time from one scan and the next is approximately 10 minutes.


Fig S23: Effective critical temperature as function of the cavity alignment. Top panel: Effective critical temperature 
upon heating (red) and cooling (blue) the sample as function of the misalignment angle of the cavity. The shaded 
horizontal lines indicate the free-space reference. Bottom panel: corresponding effective hysteresis.


