Sub-millimetre wave range-Doppler radar as a diagnostic tool for gas-solids systems - solids

concentration measurements

Marlene Bonmanna, Diana Carolina Guío-Pérezb, Tomas Bryllerta, David Pallarèsb, Martin Seemannb, Filip Johnssonb, Jan 

Stakea

a Department of Microtechnology and Nanoscience, Terahertz and Millimetre Wave Laboratory

Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden

b Department of Space, Earth and Environment, Division of Energy Technology

Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden

Abstract

Current non-intrusive measurement techniques for characterising the solids flow in gas-solids suspensions are 
limited by the low temporal or low spatial resolution of the sample volume, or in the case of optical methods, by 
a short range of sight. In this work, a sub-millimetre wave range-Doppler radar is developed and validated for non-
intrusive sensing of solids concentrations in a gas-solids particle system with known characteristics. The radar system 
combines favourable features, such as the ability to see through at optical frequencies opaque materials, to measure
the local solids velocity and the reflected radar power with a spatial resolution of a few cubic centimetres over 
distances of a few metres. In addition, the radar hardware offers flexibility in terms of installation. After signal 
processing, the output of the radar is range-velocity images of the solids flowing along the radar’s line-of-sight. The 
image frame rate can be close to real-time, allowing the solids flow dynamics to be observed.
While the well-established Doppler principle is used to measure the solids velocity, this paper introduces a method 
to relate the received radar signal power to the solids volumetric concentrations (cv) of different particulate
materials. The experimental set-up provides a steady stream of free-falling solids that consist of glass spheres, bronze 
spheres or natural sand grains with known particle size distributions and with particle diameters in the range of 50–
300 µm. Thus, the values of cv found using the radar measurements are validated using the values of cv retrieved 
from closure of the mass balance derived from the measured mass flow rate of the solids stream and the solids 
velocity. The results show that the radar system provides reliable measurements of cv, with a mean relative error of 
approximately 25% for all the tested materials, particle sizes and mass flow rates, yielding values of cv ranging from 
0.2×10-4 m3/m3 up to 40×10-4 m3/m3 and solids velocities within the range of 0–4.5 m/s. This demonstrates the 
ability of the radar technology to diagnose the solids flow in gas-solids suspensions using a unique combination of 
penetration length, accuracy, and spatial and velocity resolution. In future work, the radar technique will be applied 
to study non-controlled solids flow at a larger scale, and to understand flow conditions relevant to industrial reactor 
applications, e.g., fluidised bed, entrained flow, and cyclone units.

Keywords: sub-millimetre wave, Doppler radar, FMCW-pulse Doppler radar, gas-solids flow, solids concentration
measurement, particle velocity measurement

1. Introduction

In a wide range of industrial processes, the transport and mixing of gas-solids phases play essential roles. These
processes range from the pneumatic transport of particulate materials in, for example, food processing [1] and 
pharmaceutics [2], to the fluidised bed technology used, for example, in combustion plants [3]. Measuring the
velocities and concentrations of solids is essential for understanding the mechanisms that govern the solids flow and
for validation of numerical modelling approaches [4, 5] that attempt to describe the complex gas-solids dynamics.

Ideally, a measurement technique to diagnose the solids flow in a gas-solids suspension should:
(i)
Be non-intrusive, avoiding the insertion of objects that affect the solids flow to be measured.

(ii) Resolve the dynamics of the flow. It should provide sufficiently high resolutions in the time (time-scales longer 

than 10-1 s cover most of the power spectra of fast gas-solids flows (see for example [6]) and space (with particle 
scale length being the ultimate target) dimensions.

(iii) Provide penetration into the gas-solids suspension so that the flow can also be diagnosed in locations that lack

optical access.

(iv) Be sufficiently robust to withstand the harsh erosional (and sometimes corrosive) flow conditions.
(v) Be associated with a low cost of implementation.


Among the non-intrusive techniques currently available, the most commonly used are time-averaged pressure 

measurements, from which the axial profiles of the cross-sectional average concentrations of solids can be obtained 
with a spatial resolution that ranges from decimetres to several metres (e.g., [7]). Specific characteristics, such as 
bubble dynamics and regime changes, can be extracted from time-resolved pressure measurements (e.g., [8], [9],
and [10]). Some non-intrusive tomographic techniques applied in gas-solid systems involve x-rays, γ-rays, electrical 
capacitance, and phase-Doppler anemometers. They can be used for mapping solids flow (velocity, concentration,
or both) in narrow bench-scale units with a spatial resolution in the order of a few centimetres [11, 12, 13 and 
references therein, 14]. Such dynamic tomographic measurements have limited applicability to large-scale units, 
owing to the higher integrated absorption of the signal and the rapidly increasing number of sensor pairs needed to 
retain the same level of spatial resolution. In addition, the intended positioning of the sensor pairs is often restricted 
by geometric constraints, which may reduce the flexibility and accuracy of the technique. Moreover, the 
measurement accuracy largely depends on the reconstruction algorithm. Direct tracking techniques, such as 
electrostatic induction sensors or particle image velocimetry (PIV) [15, 12], offer higher spatial resolution (1 mm). 
However, these techniques are restricted to measurements of flows at moderate temperatures and are limited by
the need for an optically free line-of-sight to the measurement volume. Therefore, solids velocity measurements 
made with electrostatic induction sensors or particle image velocimetry PIV are rarely used for dense flows. 

Radar technology combines several of the desired properties listed above, in that it is non-invasive, has long 

penetration lengths, and excellent velocity and spatial resolutions. Some authors [16, 17] have demonstrated non-
intrusive measurements of multi-disperse solids streams using a multi-static dual-frequency (91.5 GHz, 150.3 GHz) 
radar system. They observed proportionality between the solids mass load and reflected signal power. The radar 
technique has also been used to measure particle size distributions (PSD). Even though the radar mode cannot
measure the velocity of the solids, Baer and co-workers [18] have demonstrated that two 80-GHz frequency-
modulated continuous-wave (FMCW) radars can be used to find the cross-sectional average concentration of the
solids volume fraction and velocity across a 200-mm-wide conveying installation. The cv is derived from the time 
of flight of the radar signal and the velocity from two-point measurements using the correlation between the two 
radar signals along the solids flow. However, the configurations involving two transmitter-receiver sets and several 
radars, respectively, require accurate radar alignment, making them less-suitable for performing measurements in 
industrial units. Furthermore, the spatial resolution is restricted, being defined by the overlap of the two radar beams 
[16, 17] and across the whole 200-mm tube [18]. 

Radar systems that utilise only one antenna for transmitting and receiving the radar signals operating in pulsed-

FMCW mode offer an alternative to overcome the complication of radar antenna alignment and to allow (besides 
local solids concentration measurements) for local solids velocity measurements using the Doppler principle. 
Cooper and Chattopadhyay [19] have described a 680-GHz radar that can simultaneously monitor the distance and 
velocity of small solids particles in a sandstorm. However, the radar was not adapted for industrial applications.

The recently developed radar technology with sub-millimetre wave frequencies (325–350GHz) [20] offers high 

spatial resolution and has a relatively compact footprint (40×30×20 cm3). Thus, it allows the performance of
measurements while pointing the radar beam in any desired direction and simplifies the installation for industrial 
measurements. In addition, it operates at higher frequencies than previous radar systems [16, 17, 18]. In the case of
the 680-GHz radar used previously [19], this increases the measurement sensitivity for smaller solids particles and 
increases the spatial resolution. At the same time, the radar operates below optical frequencies (400–750 THz), 
which means that the radar beam has a greater depth of penetration than optical measurement methods. Therefore, 
this sub-millimetre wave radar technology is highly promising for non-intrusive monitoring of solids concentrations
and velocities, allowing the characterisation of volumes in the order of 10-3 m3 (resulting from a beam cross-section 
in the order of 0.01–0.1 m2 and a spatial resolution along the direction of the beam of 10-2 m), with a velocity 
resolution in the order of 10-2 m/s and a time resolution of 10-2 s (frame rate in the order of 10–100 Hz). The 
abilities of FMCW-pulse Doppler radar systems to measure accurately the velocities of objects are generally accepted 
and, specifically for the radar system used in this work, have been previously reported in the literature [20]. Thus, 
there is a need to verify the ability of such radar systems to measure accurately the solids concentrations, thereby
providing an all-in-one measurement of the solids flux.

The aim of this work was to evaluate the use of radar technology as a diagnostic tool for the characterisation 

of solids flows. Here, the 340–GHz sub-millimetre wave FMCW-pulse Doppler radar system described previously
[20] is used to measure the solids velocity and concentration along a free-falling solids stream with known mass 
flow rate, stream diameter and solids properties. Radar-based measurements of the solids concentration are 
compared to their corresponding reference values calculated from closure of the mass balance using the values of 
the measured mass flow rate and the solids velocity (obtained through the Doppler method and, thus, considered 
to be reliable). The radar measurement is tested with solids of different sizes, shapes, and material/dielectric constants 
and with varying solids concentrations. 


2. Theory 

Figure 1 illustrates the general principle of a radar beam intersecting a gas-solids suspension, where the geometrical 
dimensions of the gas-solids suspension with solids volume concentration 𝑐𝑣 exceeds the radar beam-width 
𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 ≈ 𝑅𝜃, where 𝑅 is the distance (range) to the radar antenna and 𝜃 is the angular beam-width. The radar 
beam-width 𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 defines the cross-range resolution of the radar, whereas the spatial resolution in the propagation 
direction of the radar beam is determined by the range resolution ∆𝑅, thereby yielding the sample volume 𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 =
𝜋∆𝑅(𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟/2)2 for a given range increment. For each 𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟, the solids velocity distribution and 𝑐𝑣 are measured.
The solids velocity is indicated by v, the Doppler velocity, whereas 𝑣𝑑 is measured by the radar and is the projection 
towards the radar (i.e., radial velocity).

Figure 1. Radar beam intersecting a gas-solids suspension.

The radar signal is transmitted and then reflected back to the radar antenna by the solids. The relationship 

between the reflected signal power 𝑃𝑟 and 𝑐𝑣 is derived from the radar equation. The radar equation [21] expresses 
the signal power reflected from an individual scatterer:

𝑃𝑟 =

𝑃𝑡𝐺2λ2𝜎𝑏
(4𝜋)3𝑅4 ,
(1)

where 𝑃𝑡 is the peak transmit power, 𝐺 is the antenna gain, λ is the wavelength of the signal, and 𝜎𝑏 is the back-
scattering cross-section.

The back-scattering cross-section for an individual solids particle with radius 𝑟 is calculated as:

𝜎𝑏(𝑟) = 𝑄𝑏(𝑟)𝜋𝑟2
(2)

where 𝑄𝑏 is the back-scattering efficiency calculated using the Mie theory formalism for an approximately spherical 
particle [22]. However, when the radar beam intersects a solids cloud all the individual solids particles within the 
radar beam contribute to the total back-scattering cross-section, 𝜎𝑏,𝑡𝑜𝑡. Furthermore, multiple scattering effects, 
i.e., the impact of second-order scattering of photons that do not leave the radar’s field-of-view after having 
scattered once with solids in the radar beam, gain relevance as the solids concentration increases, thereby altering 
the back-scattered signal. Multiple scattering effects are negligible for sub-wavelength-sized solids when the mean-
free path (inverse of the extinction coefficient) between scattering events is larger than the radar’s field-of-view 
(radar footprint) [23]. Theoretically, for approximately wavelength-sized solids, Mishchenko et al. [24] have 
estimated a solids volume fraction of 2.4×10-3 as a rough threshold value for validity. The suspensions diagnosed in 
this work fulfil most often this criterion, as discussed in the Results section. Thus, neglecting multiple scattering 
effects, the total back-scattering cross-section can be expressed as:

𝜎𝑏,𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 ∫
𝑓𝑃𝑆𝐷(𝑟) 𝜎𝑏(𝑟)𝑑𝑟

𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑛
,
(3) 


where 𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠 is the solids number concentration (the number of solids particles per unit volume), and 𝑓𝑃𝑆𝐷 is the 
PSD function. 

As the radar beam is travelling through the gas-solids suspension, it is reflected. It travels back to the radar 

antenna, experiencing two-way attenuation due to extinction (scattering and absorption). The intensity of the radar 
beam, 𝐼, is reduced according to [22, 25]:

𝐼(𝑅) = 𝐼0𝑒𝑥𝑝−2 ∫ 𝑘𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝑙)𝑑𝑙
𝑙
0
,
(4)

where 𝑘𝑒𝑥𝑡 is the attenuation coefficient and 𝑑𝑙 is the range interval that the beam has travelled. The attenuation 
coefficient 𝑘𝑒𝑥𝑡 is related to the total extinction cross-section, 𝜎𝑒,𝑡𝑜𝑡, as 𝑘𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 𝜎𝑒,𝑡𝑜𝑡/𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟. The extinction cross-
section for an individual solid particle with radius 𝑟 can be calculated as:

𝜎𝑒(𝑟) = 𝑄𝑒(𝑟)𝜋𝑟2,
(5)

with 𝑄𝑒 being the extension efficiency of an individual solid particle calculated using the Mie formalism, and,
neglecting multiple scattering effects, the 𝜎𝑒,𝑡𝑜𝑡 for the gas-solids suspension is:

𝜎𝑒,𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 ∫
𝑓𝑃𝑆𝐷(𝑟) 𝜎𝑒(𝑟)𝑑𝑟

𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑛
.
(6)

However, when making a compromise between the control of the conducted measurements and the size of 

the measurement set-up, it should be noted that under experimental conditions, as in this work, the radar beam 
with radius 𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 is not always fully immersed in a solids stream with radius 𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚 throughout the whole 
measured distance (i.e., rradar>rstream in some regions, see details in Section 3). This violates the requirement for the 
applicability of Eq. (4). To correct for this, the first right-hand side term of Eq. (1) is introduced. In addition, a
scaling factor 𝑓𝑒𝑥𝑡 is introduced in the attenuation term to scale 𝑘𝑒𝑥𝑡. Furthermore, in a real radar system, several 
additional factors influence the measurement, such as the radar hardware components (the gain in receiver 
amplifiers, loss in wires, filters, and antennas) and signal gain and losses introduced by the digital signal processing 
needed to extract the velocity and range data. As these factors are generally not known with sufficient precision, 
the radar instrument needs to be calibrated to estimate the absolute values of the solids concentration (for details of 
the calibration, see Section 3.2.2). In summary, calibration allows the incorporation of all of the above into a single
factor, 𝐾. 

With all the considerations mentioned above, Eq. (1) is re-written as:

𝑃𝑟 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚

𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟

, 1) 𝐾 𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟

𝑅4
∫
𝑓𝑃𝑆𝐷(𝑟) 𝜎𝑏(𝑟)𝑑𝑟

𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥

𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑛

𝑒𝑥𝑝

−2 ∫ (𝑓𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠 ∫
𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑓𝑃𝑆𝐷(𝑟) 𝜎𝑒(𝑟)𝑑𝑟)
𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑑𝑙
𝑙
0

(7)

As the last step, the measured solids volume fraction can be calculated as:

𝑐𝑣 = 𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠𝑉𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠
(8) 

where the solids mean volume is given by:

𝑉𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠 =

4

3 𝜋 ∫
𝑓𝑃𝑆𝐷(𝑟) 𝑟3𝑑𝑟

𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑟=𝑟𝑚𝑖𝑛
.
(9)

3. Methodology 

The following sub-sections describe the procedure for validating the radar measurements of solids 

concentrations, the experimental set-up for establishing a controlled solids stream, the radar system and its 
calibration. 

3.1 Validation procedure

The radar measures the reflected power along a solids stream with mass flow rate 𝑚̇ . For a stable and steady flow 
of solids, the relationship between 𝑐𝑣 and 𝑚̇ is given by closure of the mass balance:


𝑐𝑣 = 𝑚̇ /(𝜌𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝐴𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚𝑣𝑑),
(10)

where 𝜌𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡 is the particle density of the solids, 𝐴𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚 = 𝜋(𝑑𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚/2)2 is the cross-sectional area of the solids 
stream, and 𝑣𝑑 is the solids mean velocity.

The level of agreement between the experimental values of 𝑐𝑣 derived from radar measurements using Eq. (7) 

and the values derived from mass flow rate measurements using Eq. (10) is analysed to validate the concentration 
measurements effected by the radar. The relative error between these values is defined as:

𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑙 = |1 −

𝑐𝑣 𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟

𝑐𝑣 𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠 𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 |
(11)

To calculate 𝑐𝑣 from the radar signal and from the mass balance closure, the parameters on the right-hand sides

of Eq. (7) and Eq. (10), respectively, must be determined. For the mass balance closure, measurements of the mass 
flow rate, 𝑚̇ , and the solids stream cross-sectional dimension, 𝑑𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚, see Section 3.2.1; and for the radar images 
used to calculate the solids mean velocity 𝑣𝑑, see Section 4. Regarding the radar measurements, determinations of 
𝜎𝑏 and 𝜎𝑒 using Eq. (2) and Eq. (5), respectively, are enabled by the solids specifications presented below (e.g., the 
PSDs of the solid shown in Figure 4), while determinations of the radar set-up parameters 𝐾 and 𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 are
described in Section 3.2.2. 

3.2 Experimental set-up

3.2.1 Gas-solids flow system

The experimental set-up was designed and built to establish a controlled, constant, and homogeneously dispersed 
stream of falling solids, while simultaneously providing the possibility to position the radar beam vertically along 
such a solids stream. Figure 2a depicts the detailed set-up configuration, indicating the use for radar measurements.
The set-up design is inspired by an equivalent set-up reported in the literature [26]. The solids are stored in a first 
container (storage hopper) that has gaps for the solids to flow down into a second container (discharge hopper), 
which has a conical bottom with equally distributed holes of 2.8 mm in diameter. The shape and size of the
discharge hopper make it suitable to reduce the formation of solids bridges over the holes, which would otherwise 
cause blockage. The number of open holes in the discharge hopper is used to control the mass flow rate of the 
solids, while the storage hopper simply guarantees a constant height of the particulate material above the holes of 
the discharge hopper. In this way, solids discharged from the holes are not subjected to any additional pressure 
exerted by the weight of piled-up material. After leaving the discharge hopper, the solids pass a metallic funnel in 
which the solids strings formed through the holes of the discharge hopper are transformed into a single stream of 
homogeneously distributed solids. The lower opening of the metallic funnel defines the solids stream cross-section. 
Since the flow of solids is known to entrain air from the surroundings, small gaps are built between the individual
hoppers and the funnel to allow air intake from the surroundings and to avoid a pulsing flow of solids stream that 
would occur otherwise. The stream of falling solids lands onto a 4-mm-thick, high-density polyethylene (HDPE) 
plate that is tilted at an angle of 45°. The inclination ensures that the solids slide continuously into a solids receiver 
container, to avoid solids accumulating on the HDPE plate. Since the solids do not flow with the same velocity 
into the particle receiver as they fall out of the storage hopper (i.e., there are still some solids piling up in the lower 
part of the HDPE plate), the set-up configuration in Figure 2b was used to measure the solids mass flow rate 𝑚̇ for 
each number of holes in the hopper. The distance between the lower funnel opening and the HDPE plate is about 
80 cm. The radar is placed ca. 40 cm below and 40 cm to the side of the set-up, aligned towards a flat metal 
reflector that re-directs the radar beam upwards towards the funnel opening. This implies that the radar beam 
crosses the HDPE plate and intersects the trajectory of the free-falling stream of solids. Note that the range of the 
radar is opposite to the falling height of the particles. The range presented in the Results section is indicated in 
Figure 2a. The angle of the HDPE plate with respect to the radar beam minimises reflections from the HDPE plate 
surface back into the radar. To align the radar beam, the reflected radar signal was maximised along with the range 
of the solids stream. Measurements were performed for four different particulate materials (as specified below) and 
five different mass flow rates. To measure the cross-sectional size of the solids stream, 𝑑𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚, photographs of the 
solids stream were taken with a 10-cm vertical spacing (to avoid distortions at large angles in the photographs’ field-
of-view). A photograph of a plastic sphere (diameter, 3.2 cm) positioned in the centre of the solids stream was used 
as a reference scale. In the configuration used for solids mass flow measurements (Figure 2b), the stream of falling 
solids lands into a container placed upon a precision weighing scale. The mass of collected solids is acquired over 
time for the different study cases (i.e., different particulate materials and a different number of holes in the discharge 
hopper). The solids mass flow rate, 𝑚̇ , is calculated from the time derivation of the cumulative mass curve obtained 
and is shown to remain constant with time.


Figure 2. Measurement set-up for: (a) the radar measurement; and (b) determination of the mass flow rate. HDPE, 

high-density polyethylene.

Regarding the solids particles, different materials (glass, bronze and sand) are tested to assess the performance

levels of the radar measurement for other physical properties of the solids, such as size, shape, and dielectric constant.
These materials are regularly used in industrial-scale and laboratory-scale units hosting gas-solids flows. The 
properties of these materials are summarised in Table 1. The values of the dielectric constant were taken from the
literature [27, 28], whereby bronze has an effectively infinite dielectric constant but the value of 1,000 is used for 
calculations of 𝑄𝑏 and 𝑄𝑒. The particle density was measured by helium porosimetry, while the PSD was measured 
by light diffraction. Figure 3 shows the cumulative fractions of the PSDs and the corresponding probability density 
functions. The shape of the different solids is seen in the microphotographs presented in Figure 4.

Table 1. Summary of the properties of the materials.

Material
Density 
[kg/m3]

Relative dielectric constant 
at 300 GHz
Shape

Glass (~70%–75% SiO2)
2,486
6 
Spherical

Sand (>98% SiO2)
2,655
6 
Irregular

Bronze (~10%–20% Sn, 80%–90% 
Cu)

8,492
Infinity (set at 1,000 for the
calculation)

Spherical


Figure 3. Particle size distributions of the four different types of solids used in this study. (a) The measured

cumulative volumetric fraction. (b) The corresponding probability density functions.

Figure 4. Micrographs of the different types of solids used in the present work. The shapes of the glass and bronze 

particles are approximately spherical, whereas the sand corns exhibit irregular shapes.

3.2.2 The radar system and its calibration

A detailed description of the 340-GHz FMCW range-Doppler radar utilised in this work can be found elsewhere
[Tomas2021]. This radar transmits sequences of linearly frequency modulated pulses, and the reflected pulses are 
processed to find the range (i.e., position relative to the emitter) and velocity of the target solids. For the radar 
system to become a suitable tool in the characterisation of the dynamics of solids suspensions, the following radar 
settings must be adjusted: 
•
the cross-range resolution, ∆𝑑;

•
the range resolution, ∆𝑅;

•
the range interval, 𝑅𝑚𝑖𝑛 to 𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥;

•
the velocity resolution, ∆𝑣;

•
the velocity interval, -𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥/2 to 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥/2 , where negative and positive velocities mean that targets are moving 
towards and away from the radar, respectively;

•
the frame rate (setting the measurement speed), 𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑠; and

•
the sensitivity towards particle detection (signal-to-noise ratio).

The above-mentioned specifications can be optimised by choosing radar settings and hardware accordingly, 

where the most important parameters are:
•
the centre frequency, 𝑓𝑐;

•
the pulse bandwidth, 𝐵𝑊;

•
the pulse duration, 𝑡𝑝;

•
the pulse repetition interval, 𝑃𝑅𝐼;

•
the number of pulses, 𝑛𝑝; and

•
the receiver bandwidth.

Ultimately, whether or not a particle can be detected by the radar at a certain range depends on the signal-to-

noise ratio. The choice of 𝑓𝑐 influences how strong the radar signal is reflected. For a constant particle size, the 


reflected signal power increases with a larger value of 𝑓𝑐, i.e., the sensitivity with which smaller particle sizes can 
be measured increases if all other parameters are kept constant. Furthermore, the resolution of the monitored sample 
volume is limited by 𝑓𝑐 and 𝐵𝑊, since the cross-range resolution and the range resolution are defined by ∆𝑑 ≈
𝑐0𝑅/𝑓𝑐𝐷 and 𝛥𝑅 ≈ 𝑐0/(2𝐵𝑊), respectively, where 𝑐0 is the speed of light, and 𝐷 is the diameter of the radar 
antenna or lens. 

The maximum unambiguous radar range is set by 𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥 = (𝑐0(𝑃𝑅𝐼 − 𝑡𝑝))/2, with the condition that 𝑡𝑝 must 

be smaller than 𝑃𝑅𝐼. As reflections from targets that are further away than 𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥 arrive after the next pulse has
already been emitted, the radar interprets the target as being closer than it is in actuality. The velocity resolution 
and the maximum unambiguous velocity are limited by ∆𝑣 = 𝑐0/(2𝑓𝑐𝑛𝑝𝑃𝑅𝐼) and 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 𝑐0/(2𝑓𝑐𝑃𝑅𝐼). By 
comparing the expressions for 𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥, ∆𝑣, and 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥, one can see that the choice of PRI implies a trade-off between 
maximising 𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥 or ∆𝑣 and 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥. However, for the rather short ranges of a few metres that are relevant in this 
work, there is no need for such a trade-off. 

Another trade-off that must be considered in this work is between 𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑠 and 𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥, ∆𝑣 and 𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥. The frame 

rate, 𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑠, is theoretically set by the product 𝑃𝑅𝐼 ∙ 𝑛𝑝. However, before the signal processing can take place, 
the pulses need to be converted from an analogue into a digital signal by sampling the signals with sampling rate, 
𝑓𝑠. Larger values of 𝑓𝑠 increase the number of samples (𝑛𝑠) needed per converted radar pulse, thereby producing a 
vast amount of data and, consequently, increasing the signal processing time. However, at the same time, 𝑓𝑠 is 
limiting the maximum range as 𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 𝑓𝑠𝑐0𝑡𝑝/(2𝐵𝑊). Therefore, the chosen value of 𝑓𝑠 should be as low as 
possible, so as to minimise 𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑠 while still resolving the relevant ranges. Furthermore, the receiver bandwidth 
determines which ranges can be observed by the radar, i.e., the distance at which the observation window is located. 

The settings used for the radar system in this work are summarised in Table 2. Note that while the maximum 

possible sampling frequency of the system is 𝑓𝑠 = 250 MHz, to reduce the volume of stored data it is reduced by 
a factor of 4–8 at different stages of the range-Doppler signal processing. Therefore, ∆𝑅 is reduced by a factor of 8 
and 𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥 by a factor of 32. The execution time for the pulse train and consecutive signal processing (𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑠) is 
set at 0.08 s.

Table 2. Summary of radar parameters 

Centre frequency
𝑓𝐶
340 GHz

Bandwidth
𝐵𝑊
19.2 GHz

Range resolution
𝛥𝑅
8 mm

Pulse duration
𝑡𝑝
25 µs

Number of pulses
𝑛𝑝
128

Pulse repetition interval 
𝑃𝑅𝐼
48 µs

Number of samples
𝑛𝑠
974

Sampling rate
𝑓𝑠
250 MHz

The output data from the radar is a frequency power spectrum, where the measured frequency translates to the 

range, as described above. The measured power spectrum shows the relative power of the velocity and range and
can be transformed to absolute power values with the help of the radar calibration described below. To estimate 
the parameters 𝐾 and 𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 in Eq. (7), the radar is calibrated using a target with a known radar cross-section and 
the radar beam pattern is measured at different distances from the radar, respectively. This is achieved by measuring 
the reflected signal of a metal sphere with diameter 𝑑𝑠𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 = 1.27 cm attached to a two-axis stepper stage. The 
reference co-ordinate system for the calibration measurement is indicated in Figure 1, replacing the solids-gas 
suspension with a single metal sphere target. In the first case, the metal sphere is stepped along the propagation 
direction of the radar beam with ~5-cm increment step. The parameter 𝐾 is calculated at each position using the 
equivalence 𝐾 = 𝑃𝑟𝑅4/𝜎𝑠𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒, where 𝜎𝑠𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 = 𝜋 (𝑑𝑠𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒/2)2 is the radar cross-section of the metal sphere 
when 𝑑𝑠𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 ≫ 1/(𝑐0𝑓𝑐) [29]. Figure 5a shows the calibration measurement, where each circle represents the 
reflected radar signal of the metal sphere at that position.


Figure 5. (a) The radar signal reflected by a metal sphere with diameter 𝒅𝒔𝒑𝒉𝒆𝒓𝒆 = 1.27 cm along the direction of 

propagation of the radar beam. Each circle corresponds to one measurement point. (b) Radar beam pattern 

measurement at a distance of 2.3 m from the radar antenna. The scanning area is 41 mm × 41 mm with 1-mm 
increment. The arrow-headed lines indicate the radar beam-widths (𝒅𝒓𝒂𝒅𝒂𝒓) along the x-axis and the y-axis in 

relation to the reference system shown in Figure 1. (c) Radar beam-width versus range. The dashed line represents

𝒅𝒓𝒂𝒅𝒂𝒓 = 𝑹𝜽, with a radar angular beam-width 𝜽 = 0.018 rad.

In the second case, the metal sphere is moved step-wise through the radar beam in the x and y directions, that

is, in a plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the radar beam. The radar beam pattern is measured 
at distances of 1.7 m, 1.8 m, 2.1 m, and 2.3 m from the radar antenna across a scanned area of 64 × 64 mm, with 
increment step of 4 mm. To enhance the accuracy of the beam pattern measurement, an additional measurement 
is conducted at 2.3 m with a scanned area of 41 × 41 mm using a finer increment step of 1 mm. Figure 5b shows 
the radar signal distribution in the x-y plane for the fine scan (1 mm increment step) of the radar beam pattern 
measured 2.3 m from the antenna. The arrow-headed lines connect the half-power points along the x-axis and y-
axis, yielding the radar beam-width, 𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟. Figure 5c shows 𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 versus range. The rough scan (4 mm increment 
step) indicates that 𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 increases with R. The asymmetry between the x and y directions is due to the larger 
increment step, which does not allow to discovery of 𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 with greater accuracy than±8 mm. The fine scan 
shows that there is less asymmetry and allows for the calculation of the radar angular beam-width 𝜃 ≈
𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟/𝑅=0.018 rad, which is used for the calculation of 𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟.

Lastly, using the same set-up as was used for the calibration, the attenuation of the radar signal by the HDPE 

plate (see Figure 2) is found to be1 dB. This value was obtained by measuring the signal reflected from the metal 
sphere, with and without the HDPE plate being placed between the metal sphere and the radar. To take attenuation 
into account, 𝐾 is adjusted by a factor of 10-0.1. Note that the dimension of 𝑃𝑟 in Eq. (2) is [W], which is transformed 
to [dB] according to: Ps [dB] = 10log10(Pr [W]).

4. Results and discussion 

In the first part of this section, the results for the measurements obtained with the lowest mass flow rate of glass 
beads are presented in detail, to exemplify for the reader the intermediate data obtained. The second section focuses 
on illustrating the performance of the radar measurements for various mass flow rates of the same solids. Finally, 
the third section evaluates the radar measurement for the three different tested materials at the lowest values of 𝑚̇ . 
This simplifies Eq. (7) because the attenuation, and thus the last term, is negligible, such that any possible 
contribution of multiple scattering effects is avoided.

4.1. Glass beads at one given mass flow rate 

Figure 6a shows the image (a composite of photographs taken at 10-cm height intervals) of a falling stream of 150–
180-µm-diameter glass beads. The mass flow rate for the case illustrated is chosen as 6.5×10-3 kg/s, to enhance the 
contrast between the solids stream and the background in the image.  The image shows a homogeneously 
distributed and stable stream of falling solids exiting the metallic funnel with increasing stream width downstream,
which turns into a flickering stream when it is approximately 40 cm away from the funnel. In the flickering section,
two parts can be identified: a denser core; and a less-defined dispersed solids cloud in the anulus. These observations 
agree well with observations reported in the literature [30]. The solids stream width 𝑑𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚 determined from such 
photographs is exemplified by the data in Figure 6b, where the uncertainty associated with determining the outer 
edge of the stream by means of digital image analysis is indicated by the gap between the white and blue arrows 
(indicating the limits of the outer and inner stream regions, respectively). Figure 6b shows also the radar beam 
cross-sectional size, 𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟, at different locations. Note that since the radar beam is pointed upwards towards the 
funnel opening, the radar beam-width increases with distance to the radar antenna, whereas the solids stream width 
increases in the opposite direction (with falling height from the funnel). This demonstrates that for a certain section 


(𝑅 > 2 m as seen in Figure 6b) the radar beam-width is larger than the particle stream width, which is considered 
in the analysis through the first right-hand term in Eq. (7). 

Figure 6. Analyses of a stream of glass beads with mass flow rate of 6.5×10-3 kg/s. (a) Photograph of the solids 
stream. The white and blue arrow-headed lines represent the outer and inner widths of the solids stream and are 

positioned at 10-cm height intervals. (b) The outer and inner radii, 𝒓𝒐𝒖𝒕𝒆𝒓 and 𝒓𝒊𝒏𝒏𝒆𝒓, of the solids stream extracted 
from (a), together with the radar beam radius, 𝒓𝒓𝒂𝒅𝒂𝒓 (dashed line), versus range. A radar-measured range-velocity 
image for a single frame (c) and time-averaged over 15 s (d). The images show the measured radar signal relative to 

the radar calibration constant. The line indicates the solids mean velocity.


Figure 6, c and d show the corresponding range-velocity images for a single frame and time-averaged data over 

15 s, respectively. The data displayed are for the relative radar signal, meaning that the measured signal has been 
divided by the calibration constant 𝐾; thus, the relative radar signal strengths can be directly translated to relative 
solid concentration levels when attenuation is negligible. The images demonstrate that the radar can resolve the 
range of the solids stream and the corresponding velocity distributions for the different ranges. The blue line in 
Figure 6d indicates the mean velocity of the solids versus range. Note that for 𝑅>2.45 m, the radar can even see 
through the solids stream into the funnel, visualising the solids velocity inside the funnel. At the funnel opening, a 
distinct local minimum of the mean velocity is observed due to the strong reflection from the opening, which spans
a broader interval of velocities (see a detailed explanation in [20]). 
Figure 7a shows the profile of the relative radar signal integrated across the measured velocities for each vertical 
position shown in Figure 6d. For integration, the velocity interval [-0.14, 0] m/s has been excluded, so as to 
minimise the effect of strong static reflections of the set-up itself, i.e., the funnel opening at R≈2.45 m, and some 
parasitic reflections that can be seen on the zero-velocity line. Since the strong reflections from the set-up itself spill 
over a broader interval of velocities, the reflections of the funnel remain visible as peaks in the graph. Other than 
that, the relative radar signal is not affected by any parasitic reflections. Figure 7b shows the upper and lower limits 
of the solids concentration derived from the mass balance with the profiles derived from the radar measurements,
which were calculated based on the relative radar signal in Figure 7a. 

Figure 7. Analyses of a stream of glass beads with mass flow rate of 6.5×10-3 kg/s. (a) Velocity-integrated relative 

radar signal versus range. (b) Solids volume concentration profiles derived from the radar measurement in (a),

without (solid line) and with (dashed-dotted line) scaled 𝝈𝒆, and from closure of the mass balance (squares-dashed 

lines).

The solids concentration profile obtained from the radar measurements lies between the upper and lower limits 

set by the mass balance closure up to 𝑅 ≈ 2.1 m. For 𝑅 > 2.1 m, the range interval within which 𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟 > 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑟
(see Figure 6b), the radar measurements yield higher values than the values found via mass balance closure, with 
increasing disagreement with range being noted towards the funnel. By scaling the extinction cross-section by the 
factor 𝑓𝑒𝑥𝑡= 0.5 in Eq. (7), the agreement between the radar measurements [dashed-dotted line in Figure 7(b)] and 
the mass flow measurements is enhanced, with the exception of locations very close to the funnel opening, which 
could be explained by the parasitic reflection of the funnel. 

4.2 Glass beads at varying mass flow rates 

Investigation of the photographs (see Figure 6a) for the different mass flow rates indicates that the finding of a first 
homogeneously distributed and stable solids stream that increases in width and thereafter turns into a flickering 
section approximately 40 cm downstream, holds true for all the mass flow rates tested in this work. Thus, the width 
of the solids stream and its variation with height, as shown in Figure 6a, is used for all the mass flow rates. Figure 8 
shows the range-velocity image for three different mass flow rates of the glass beads. It is clear that higher flow rates
result in increased radar signal strengths (which indicate higher solids concentrations). Figure 8 also shows that the 
solids velocities at a given height increase in magnitude and have broader distribution at higher flow rates. This 
demonstrates the ability of the radar technique to capture the changes in solids flow dynamics.


Figure 8. Range-velocity radar images of glass beads with mass flow rates of: (a) 0.24×10-3 kg/s; (b) 1×10-3 kg/s;

(c) 1.6×10-3 kg/s; and (d) 6.5×10-3 kg/s. The images show the measured radar signals relative to the radar 

calibration constant. The solid lines indicate the solids mean velocity.

Figure 9a shows the velocity-integrated relative radar signal for mass flow rates ranging from 0.24×10-3 kg/s 

up to 6.5×10-3 kg/s and Figure 9, b–d show the comparison between the corresponding radar-measured values of 
the solids concentration and those derived via the mass balance. 

The radar-measured solids concentrations lie within the lower and upper limit for the mass flow rates of

0.24×10-3 kg/s and 1×10-3 kg/s. For the mass flow rate of 1.6×10-3 kg/s, scaling of 𝜎𝑒𝑥𝑡 with the factor 𝑓𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 0.5
is required for good agreement with the upper limit. The scaled results (dashed-solid lines in Figure 9, b and c) are 
also shown for the lower mass flow rates. While the scaling influences the obtained solids concentration profiles for 
high flow rates (and especially for locations R >2 m), it does not have a significant impact the lowest flow rates
because attenuation is negligible. The levels of 𝑐𝑣 and the ranges at which the radar system fails to detect solids 
reflect an interplay between back-scattering efficiency and attenuation. The limit was not reached for the levels of 
𝑐𝑣 tested here. Theoretically, using the same radar settings presented in this work, assuming a 1-m-long container 
that is homogeneously filled with glass solids, the reflected radar power should be sufficient to measure at least up 
to 𝑐𝑣 =0.07 m3/m3, noting that the radar settings can be further optimised for the specific application in question.

Figure 9. Tests with the glass beads at various mass flow rates. (a) Velocity-integrated relative radar signal versus 
range. (b–d) Solids concentration profiles defined using the radar measurements in (a), without (solid lines) and with 

(dashed dotted lines) scaled 𝝈𝒆, and from closure of the mass balance (squares-dashed lines). 


4.3 Different particulate materials at low mass flow rates 

Figure 10 shows the range-velocity radar images for the lowest mass flow rates of the glass, sand, and bronze solids. 
Note that the flow rate for the bronze solids is considerably higher due to its much larger particle density and 
flowability (owing to greater sphericity) (see Table 1). The plot data for the glass beads and sand do not show any 
significant differences in terms of signal strength or velocity. Furthermore, the radar signal strength for the bronze 
spheres is not significantly different, although it is clear that the mean velocity of the bronze particles is higher than 
those of the sand and glass beads. These results demonstrate the ability of the radar to measure solids flows for a 
range of materials.

Figure 10.  Range-velocity radar images for (a) glass beads, (b) sand corns, and (c) bronze beads at mass flow rates 

0.24×10-3 kg/s, 0.24×10-3 kg/s, and 1.9×10-3 kg/s, respectively. The images show the measured radar signals

relative to the radar calibration constant. The solid lines indicate the solids mean velocity.

Figure 11, a and b show photographs of the solids streams for the sand and bronze spheres, with the arrow-

headed lines indicating the extracted solids stream widths. The solids stream widths of the glass beads (see also 
Figure 6a) and sand are approximately the same. The bronze sphere solids stream has a distinctively different shape,
exhibiting much faster diverging stream width with falling height.

Figure 12a shows the velocity-integrated relative radar signals for all the materials tested in this work. Even 

though sand has the same dielectric constant as glass, sand has a stronger radar signal than glass, which can be 
explained by its broader PSD with a larger mean particle size. In contrast, the radar signal for bronze is much 
stronger close to the funnel opening, which is attributed to its large dielectric constant, and it falls off rapidly with 
decreasing length, which is explained by the rapid growth of the solids stream width and the higher mean velocity,
which results in a much-sparser solids beam. At the HDPE plate, the radar signal for the bronze spheres shows a 
strong peak due to vigorous bouncing of the particles and the fact that few bronze particles penetrate and stick to 
the plate, thereby adding to the signal. 

Figures 9 and 12 show that the solids concentration profiles obtained from the radar measurements show a 

higher level of agreement with the upper concentration limit derived from the mass balance using 𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑟 as the 
stream width. This is because the power distribution across the radar beam-width shows its peak power in the 
centre region (see Figure 3b) and the solids stream has a slightly denser core under these flow conditions (see Figures 
6 and 11). 


Figure 11. Photographs of the solids stream of: (a) sand; and (b) bronze. Sand is at 𝑚̇ = 6.5×10-3 kg/s, and bronze 

is at 𝑚̇ = 53×10-3 kg/s.

Figure 12. (a) Velocity-integrated relative radar signal versus range for different materials. (b–d) The solids volume 
concentration profiles defined according to the radar measurements in (a) (solid lines), and from closure of the mass 

balance (squares-dashed lines).


Figure 13. Relative error [Eq. (11)] between the solids concentration profiles from the radar measurements and the 

upper concentration limit from closure of the mass balance.

Figure 13 shows the relative error between the solids concentration profiles measured by the radar and the 

upper concentration limit derived via the mass balance for all the mass flow rates and materials. For all the mass 
flow rates, the extent of agreement is satisfactory, except for two cases in which the relative error is exceptionally
large. First, for the highest mass flow rate (6.5×10-3 kg/s) at ranges of 𝑅 > 2.1 m, which correspond to the largest 
solids concentration values tested, the relative error increases dramatically. This is in accordance with the over-
estimation of the solids concentration by radar seen in Figure 7b, which is explained in terms of the possible onset 
of multiple scattering effects and the mismatch of the radar beam-width and the solids stream width (as discussed 
in Section 4.1). Second, for bronze solids in the distance range of 1.9–2.1 metres, Figure 11b shows that for these 
ranges, the photographs for evaluating 𝑑𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠 do not have sufficient contrast. Instead, 𝑑𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠 was derived through 
interpolation, leading to a possible misinterpretation of the bronze stream width. This might be the reason for this 
larger discrepancy in solids concentration values. Excluding these two cases, the overall relative mean error for all 
the considered cases is approximately 25% or better.

5. Conclusion
This work demonstrates the successful measurement of particulate solids concentration using a radar system. 

For the tested glass, sand, and bronze with particle diameters in the range of 50–300 µm, the technique was validated 
with the help of a well-controlled, free-falling solids stream from which the solids concentration was derived 
through closure of the mass balance. For solids volume concentrations in the range of 0.5×10-4 m3/m3 < 𝑐𝑣<
10×10-4 m3/m3, the solids concentrations measured by radar are in good agreement with the values estimated from 
the mass balance closure, showing a mean relative error of approximately 25%. For solids concentrations >5×10-4
m3/m3, the theoretical extinction coefficient of the received power by the radar must be decreased if one is to 
retain a good level of agreement. This can be explained by the onset of multiple scattering effects and a too-small 
overlap between the radar beam and the solids stream as the latter expands with range and becomes broader than 
the solids stream. For those materials for which scattering properties are challenging to assess theoretically and for 
large mass flows, the presented validation method combining mass flow and radar measurements can be used as a 
calibration method prior to measurement campaigns.

Overall, the range-Doppler based on FMCW radar system is a highly suitable tool for the on-line non-intrusive 

resolved measurement of the solids flow (concentration as presented in this work, and velocity using the well-
established Doppler method). The radar system presented here has a high level of technology maturity for first 
applications as a diagnostic tool in industry-relevant applications, such as fluidised bed reactors. 


Acknowledgements
Funding: This work was supported by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (Stiftelsen för Strategisk 
Forskning) [grant number ITM17-0265, 2019] and the Energy Area of Advance at Chalmers University of 
Technology.

Nomenclature
𝐴𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚
m²
Solids stream cross-section

𝐵𝑊
Hz
Radar bandwidth 

𝑐0
m/s
Speed of light

𝑐𝑣
m3/m³
Solids volume concentration 

𝑑𝑙
m
Length increment

𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟
m
Diameter of the radar beam

𝑑𝑠𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒
m
Diameter of the metal sphere used for calibration

𝑑𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚
m
Diameter of the solids stream 

𝐷
m
Diameter of the radar antenna or lens

𝑓𝑐
Hz
Centre frequency 

𝑓𝑒𝑥𝑡
-
Scaling factor of 𝜎𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝑓𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑠
Hz
Frame rate

𝑓𝑃𝑆𝐷
-
Particle size distribution probability function

𝑓𝑠
Hz
Sampling frequency of the analogue-to-digital converter

𝐺
-
Antenna gain

𝐼
Wm-2
Intensity of radar beam

𝐾
Wm2
Radar calibration parameter

𝑘𝑒𝑥𝑡
m-1
Attenuation coefficient

𝑚̇
kg/s
Mass flow rate

𝑛𝑝
-
Number of pulses

𝑛𝑠
-
Number of samples taken per pulse

𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠
part./m³
Solids number concentration

𝑃𝑟
W
Reflected signal power

𝑃𝑡
W
Peak transmit power

𝑄𝑏
-
Mie back-scattering efficiency

𝑄𝑒
-
Mie extinction efficiency

𝑟
m
Radius of a single particle 

𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟
m
Radius of the radar beam

𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑚
m
Radius of the solids stream 

𝑅
m
Radar range 

𝑅𝑚𝑎𝑥
m
Maximum unambiguous radar range

𝑣
m/s
Solids velocity

𝑣𝑑
m/s
Doppler velocity

𝑣𝑚𝑎𝑥
m/s
Maximum unambiguous velocity direction

𝑡𝑝
s
Pulse duration

𝑉𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑟
m³
Radar sample volume

𝑉𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑠
m³
Solids mean volume

Greek letters
∆𝑑
m
Cross-range resolution

𝛥𝑅
m
Range resolution

∆𝑣
m/s
Velocity resolution

𝜃
rad
Radar angular beam-width

λ
m
Signal wavelength

𝜌𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡
kg/m³
Particle density

𝜎𝑏
m²
Single-target back-scattering cross-section

𝜎𝑏,𝑡𝑜𝑡
m²
Total back-scattering cross-section of solids ensemble

𝜎𝑒
m²
Single-target extinction cross-section

𝜎𝑠𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒
m2
Radar cross-section of the metal sphere used for calibration


Abbreviations 
FMCW
Frequency-Modulated Continuous-Wave

PSD
Particle Size Distribution 

HDPE
High-density polyethylene

PRI
Pulse Repetition Interval

References

[1]
G.D. Saravacos, A.E. Kostaropoulos, Handbook of Food Processing Equipment, 2nd Edition. Chapter 3.2.2.
Springer, 2015. doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-0725-3.

[2]
K. Albion, L. Briens, C. Briens, F. Berruti, Detection of the breakage of pharmaceutical tablets in pneumatic 
transport, International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 322 (1-2) (2006) 119-129. 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2006.05.039.

[3]
D. Kunii, O. Levenspiel, Fluidization Engineering, 2nd Edition. Butterworth-Heinemann, 1991. 
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-050664-7.50001-9.

[4]
H.P. Zhu, Z.Y. Zhou, R.Y. Yang, A.B. Yu, Discrete particle simulation of particulate systems: Theoretical 
developments, Chemical Engineering Science, 62 (13) (2007) 3378-3396. 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2006.12.089

[5]
H.P. Zhu, Z.Y. Zhou, R.Y. Yang, A.B. Yu, Discrete particle simulation of particulate systems: A review of 
major applications and findings, Chemical Engineering Science, 63 (23) (2008) 5728-5770. 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2008.08.006.

[6]
S. Benyahia, H. Arastoopour, T.M. Knowlton, H. Massah, Simulation of particles and gas flow behavior in 
the riser section of a circulating fluidized bed using the kinetic theory approach for the particulate phase,
Powder Technology, 112 (1–2) (2000) 24-33. doi.org/10.1016/S0032-5910(99)00302-2.

[7]
D. Pallarès, F. Johnsson, Macroscopic modelling of fluid dynamics in large-scale circulating fluidized beds,
Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 32 (5–6) (2006) 539-569. doi.org/
10.1016/j.pecs.2006.02.002.

[8]
F. Johnsson, R.C Zijerveld, J.C Schouten, C.M van den Bleek, B Leckner, Characterization of fluidization 
regimes by time-series analysis of pressure fluctuations, International Journal of Multiphase Flow 26 (4)
(2000) 663-715. doi.org/10.1016/S0301-9322(99)00028-2.

[9]
J. Yerushami, A. Avidan, High velocity fluidization, Fluidization, J.F. Davidson, R. Clift, D. Harrison Eds., 
Academic Press, New York, 1985. 225-291.

[10] M.J. Rhodes, D, Geldart, Transition to turbulence?, Fluidization V, K. Østergaard, A. Sorensen Eds., 

Engineering Foundation, New York, 1986. 281-288.

[11] V. Wiesendorf, J. Werther, Capacitance probes for solids concentration and velocity measurements in 

industrial fluidized bed reactors, Powder Technology 110 (1–2) (2000) 143–157. doi.org/10.1016/S0032-
5910(99)00276-4.

[12] J. Sun, Y. Yan, Nonintrusive measurement and hydrodynamics characterization of gas solid fluidized beds - a 

review, Measurement Science and Technology 27 (11) (2016). doi.org/10.1088/0957-0233/27/11/112001.

[13] Y. Xu, T. Li, L. Lu, X. Gao, S. Tebianian, J.R. Grace, N. Ellis, Development and confirmation of a simple 

procedure to measure solids distribution in fluidized beds using tracer particles, Chemical Engineering 
Science, 217 (2020) doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2020.115501.

[14] T. Bergenblock, F. Onofri, B. Leckner, L. Tadrist, Experimental estimation of particle flow fluctuations in 

dense unsteady two-phase flow using phase Doppler anemometry, International Journal of Multiphase Flow, 
33 (8) (2007) 849-872. doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2007.02.004.

[15] J. Peltola, L. Karvonen, J. Elfvengren, J. Kolehmainen, S. Kallio, D. Pallarès, F. Johnsson, Measurement of 

solids velocity and concentration in a large cold CFB model, 11th International Conference on Fluidized Bed 
Technology, 2014.

[16] A. Reinhardt, A. Teplyuk, R. Knochel, M. Höft, Remote measurement of particle streams with a multistatic 

dual frequency millimeter wave radar sensor, 2018 IEEE/MTT-S International Microwave Symposium -
IMS, 2018, 127-130. doi: 10.1109/MWSYM.2018.8439501

[17] A. Reinhardt, A. Teplyuk, R. Knöchel, M. Höft, Size determination in particle streams using a multistatic 

dual frequency millimeter wave radar, 15th European Radar Conference (EuRAD), 2018, 413-416, doi: 
10.23919/EuRAD.2018.8546531.

[18] C. Baer, T. Jaeschke, P. Mertmann, N. Pohl, T. Musch, A mm-wave measuring procedure for mass flow 

monitoring of pneumatic conveyed bulk materials, IEEE Sensors Journal, 14 (9) (2014) 3201-3209. doi: 
10.1109/JSEN.2014.2326042.

[19] K. B. Cooper, G. Chattopadhyay, Submillimeter-Wave Radar: Solid-State System Design and Applications, 

IEEE Microwave Magazine, 15 (7) (2014) 51-67. doi: 10.1109/MMM.2014.2356092.


[20] T. Bryllert, M. Bonmann, J. Stake, 340 GHz FMCW pulse-doppler radar, preprint available at

https://research.chalmers.se/publication/530791 (June, 2022).

[21] G.W. Stimson, H.D. Griffiths, C.J. Baker, D. Adamy, Stimson’s Introduction to airborne radar, Chapter 12. 

3rd Edition. Institution of Engineering and Technology. 2014.

[22] C.F. Bohren, D.R. Huffman, Absorption and scattering of light by small particles, Chapter 4, John Wiley, 

New York, 1983.

[23] A. Battaglia, S. Tanelli, S. Kobayashin, D. Zrnic, R. J. Hogan, C. Simmer, Multiple-scattering in radar 

systems: A review, Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy & Radiative Transfer, 111 (2010) 917-947. 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jqsrt.2009.11.024.

[24] M.I. Mishchenko, L. Liu, G. Videen, Conditions of applicability of the single-scattering approximation,

Optics Express, 15 (12) (2007) 7522-7527. doi.org/10.1364/OE.15.007522.

[25] U. Platt, J. Stutz, Differential absorption spectroscopy; In: U. Platt and J. Stutz, Differential optical 

absorption spectroscopy, Physics of Earth and Space Environments, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008, 
Chapter 6, pp. 135–174. doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-75776-4.

[26] Z. Liu, P. Cooper, P.W. Wypych, Experimental Investigation of air entrainment in free-falling particle 

plumes, Particulate Science and Technology, 25 (4) (2007) 357-373. doi.org/10.1080/02726350701484006.

[27] M. Afsar, K. Button, Precise millimeter-wave measurements of complex refractive index, complex dielectric 

permittivity and loss tangent of GaAs, Si, SiO2, A12O3, BeO, macor, and glass, IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, 31 (2) (1983) 217-223. doi.org/10.1109/TMTT.1983.1131460.

[28] C. Mätzler, MATLAB functions for Mie scattering and absorption, Institution of applied physics, University 

of Bern, Res. Rep. 8, 2002.

[29] G.T. Ruck, Radar cross section handbook, Springer Science+Business Media, New York, 1970.
[30] Z. Liu, P. Cooper & P.W. Wypych, Air entrainment by free falling streams of particles, 15th Australasian 

Fluid Mechanics Conference, Sydney, 2004.


