1 

Experimental data management platform for data-driven investigation of 
combinatorial alloy thin films 

Jaeho Song, Haechan Jo, and Dongwoo Lee* 

School of Mechanical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea 

*Corresponding author, E‐ mail address: dongwoolee@skku.edu

ABSTRACT 

Experimental materials data are heterogeneous and include a variety of metadata for processing 
and characterization conditions, making the implementation of data-driven approaches for developing novel 
materials difficult. In this paper, we introduce the Thin-Film Alloy Database (TFADB), a materials data 
management platform, designed for combinatorially investigated thin-film alloys through various 
experimental tools. Using TFADB, researchers can readily upload, edit, and retrieve multidimensional 
experimental alloy data, such as composition, thickness, X-ray Diffraction, electrical resistivity, 
nanoindentation, and image data. Furthermore, composition-dependent properties from the database can 
easily be managed in a format adequate to be preprocessed for machine learning analyses. High flexibility 
of the software allows management of new types of materials data that can be potentially acquired from 
new combinatorial experiments. 

Keywords: research data management, combinatorial materials science, multi-component alloys, thin 
films, machine learning 


2 

1. INTRODUCTION

Search for new alloys with an enhanced set of properties can be benefited from having diverse and 

large property datasets and advanced analysis tools such as machine learning [1-12]. The advent of high-

throughput computation and experimentation has accelerated the exploration of composition spaces, 

especially for multicomponent systems, such as metallic glasses [13-18], High-entropy alloys [19-24], and 

magnetocaloric materials [25-27]. For these alloys, the unexplored composition region is immense, 

necessitating the construction of large materials datasets. Computational materials databases based on 

density function theory (DFT), such as AFLOW [10, 28], Materials Project [29], and OQMD [30] provide 

materials data of millions of different crystals, such as structures, enthalpies, electronic structures, etc. 

These databases have been successfully used for data-driven approaches to predict the material properties 

of crystals [31-33]. When it comes to multi-component alloys, however, limited information can be 

acquired from the simulation-based materials databases. This is mainly because many important properties 

of the alloys, such as strength, and electrical resistivity, are strongly dependent on the structural defects, 

whose features are not readily available in the DFT-based databases.  

Combinatorial experiments [3, 34-40] allow facile acquisition of the property data of multi-

component alloys. Thin-film alloys with composition spreads can readily be fabricated through physical 

vapor deposition (PVD) processes, such as evaporation [41, 42], electrodeposition [43, 44], and magnetron 

sputtering [34, 45-48]. Scanning high-throughput measurements on the combinatorial films can effectively 

produce composition-dependent materials data, such as microstructure, micrographs, as well as mechanical, 

electrical, thermal, and optical properties [34, 39, 48-53]. Materials data from the combinatorial 

experiments can be useful not only for designing advanced small-scale materials (e.g., interconnects and 

metal MEMS materials, etc. [52]) but also for predicting the properties of bulk materials [53]. 

Experimental materials data, however, are rather heterogeneous, multifaceted, and contain a variety 

of processing and characterization parameters (metadata), making the construction of the databases 

challenging.[54] Nevertheless, previous work demonstrated that a wide variety of metadata and data 

generated from combinatorial and high-throughput experiments can be successfully managed [55-59]. 

Soedarmadji et al. [55] demonstrated systematic management of millions of thin-film data, including 

structural, optical, and electrochemical properties as well as metadata from various characterization 

experiments. Banko, L. et al. [58] utilized a commercial document management system to manage the 

metadata from PVD processes and diverse characterization data, such as chemical, optical, structural, and 

magnetic properties.  


3 

The computational and experimental materials databases introduced above have achieved 

important advances in research data management (RDM) to study various classes of materials, although 

implementation of RDM and utilization of data-driven alloy investigation are still challenging for the 

research groups with a lack of related experiences. Here, we introduce the Thin-Film Alloy Database 

(TFADB), a RDM platform that is designed specifically for thin-film alloys investigated by combinatorial 

experiments. The database manages the metadata and the property data obtained from high-throughput 

experiments. TFADB is a ready-to-use platform that is designed to be easily implemented by the research 

groups to construct their own alloy databases, quickly overcoming the obstacles to the employment of 

customized RDMs. The database is also readily managed, edited, and re-configured through the user-

friendly GUI (graphical user interface).  

The open version of TFADB (see data availability) can manage the composition, electrical 

resistance, thickness, X-ray diffraction, nanoindentation, and sample image data (optical microscope, 

scanning electron microscope, and transition electron microscope images) of combinatorially investigated 

thin films. New types of data from other experimental tools can also be uploaded and managed through 

TFADB. Furthermore, TFADB can output the experimental datasets in a machine-readable format, 

facilitating the implementation of data-driven approaches to develop new alloys.   

2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


4 

Figure 1. Alloy development process using TFADB (a) The target composition range for a combinatorial study is determined 

by the domain knowledge or the property prediction model that is based on previously deposited materials data available in TFADB. 

(b) Combinatorial synthesis of the target composition is carried out. Deposition histories available in TFADB can be used to

determine the processing parameters of the new deposition. (c) Scanning property measurements (high-throughput experiments) 

measure position-dependent properties. Since the composition of the combinatorial specimens varies with respect to the position, 

position-dependent properties can be converted to composition-dependent properties. (d) The data are uploaded to TFADB. The 

uploaded data can be managed, displayed, and downloaded by multiple users. (e) Systematic data management of TFADB allows 

implementation of data-driven approaches for new alloy design.  

Fig. 1 schematically illustrates the data-driven novel alloy design procedure that utilizes TFADB. 

The alloy candidates with target compositions and properties for the synthesis are selected based on the 

domain knowledge of the researcher or the property prediction model that was built using previously 

deposited materials data in TFADB (Fig. 1a, e). Combinatorial thin film alloys with the target composition 

range are then synthesized by reviewing the processing parameters (metadata) of similar alloy systems that 

may be available in TFADB (Fig. 1b). Combinatorial magnetron sputtering without a substrate rotation is 

one of the common choices to produce combinatorial thin films: films with different compositions at 

different positions on a substrate [3, 34, 40, 45-48, 52, 60]. Typically, hundreds of alloys with different 

compositions can be synthesized from a single deposition. Processing parameters of the PVD process, such 

as Ar pressure, substrate temperature, sputter gun power, and gun angle affect the composition ranges and 

properties of the combinatorial specimens. Therefore, the metadata, recipe of the synthesis process and the 

information related to the thin film sample such as project name, date, and researcher, are systematically 

managed in TFADB (Fig.1d).  

The combinatorially synthesized films are then subjected to scanning property measurements and 

position-dependent properties are acquired and uploaded to TFADB (Fig. 1c). Different kinds of materials 

data can be acquired from conventional experiments that support the scanning measurement modes, such 

as XRD (X-ray diffraction), SEM (scanning electron microscope), and nanoindentation. Custom-designed 

combinatorial techniques can also be used for thermal [39, 61-64], electrical [3, 34, 40, 52, 60], and 

magnetic [49, 65, 66] properties. Acquisition of the materials data from different sets of experiments and 

tools results in heterogeneity in the data format. Therefore, the establishment of the standard format of the 

characterization data is required as will be discussed later. The users of TFADB are encouraged to upload 

the metadata and property data of combinatorial alloy films from unsuccessful experiments, such as poor 

materials properties (e.g, low hardness) or the processing parameters of a problematic synthesis (e.g, 

peeling-off of thin films). This will not only help future researchers find adequate processing parameters 


5 

for new alloy films but also enriches the diversity of the materials data which are beneficial to build more 

reliable machine learning models [67].  

In the last step of the data-driven procedure for the alloy development using TFADB, the new 

property data can be compared with the result from the prediction model (Fig. 1e). Good agreement between 

the predicted and measured properties indicates new materials with desired property is developed. If the 

model accuracy is found to be low, new machine learning models can be constructed by using the newly 

acquired data. Iterative processes of new combinatorial data acquisition and prediction model improvement 

would be needed to design alloys with better properties.  

Figure 2. Hierarchical structure of TFADB (a) The metadata of combinatorial specimen fabrication constitute the 0th and the 1st 

layers of the MySQL database. (b) The metadata of the characterizations are managed in the 2nd layer of the MySQL. (c) The 

measured properties of the combinatorial specimens are uploaded to the SFTP file server. Each metadata or data is assigned with 

an id key allowing tracking of data lineage. The one-dimensional property data with respect to a position on a wafer are stored in 

a .csv file (e.g. EDS, resistance, thickness data), while the multi-dimensional data (e.g. XRD, nanoindentation, image data) are 

managed by saving them in directories.  

The combinatorial synthesis and high-throughput characterizations mentioned earlier produce the 

metadata of processing conditions and characterization tools as well as the property and image data. The 

hierarchical structure of TFADB illustrated in Fig. 2 make these different types of data linked together and 

traceable. Different sets of property data and metadata in TFADB are managed through two different servers 


6 

of MySQL and SFTP (Fig. 2). The metadata are saved in the MySQL database as hierarchical tables (Fig. 

2a-b). Specifically, the metadata such as researcher and project information are saved on the 0th layer of the 

DB structure as Person and Project tables (Fig. 2a). Sample table collects the processing parameters of the 

combinatorial samples (e.g., target composition, chamber pressure, deposition power, Ar gas pressure, 

deposition temperature, annealing temperature, etc.). Sample table is practically used as the first layer of 

the database hierarchy, and each sample metadata is assigned with the primary key, “id_sample” for 

tracking data lineage. Sample table contains the project and person information by inheriting the “id_project” 

and “id_person” columns. The characterization metadata tables constitute the 2nd layer (Fig. 2b) and collect 

the information of measurement conditions of the characterization process. These tables inherit “id_sample” 

from the sample table.  

The characterization data that are obtained from various experimental tools are saved in the local 

directory of the SFTP server, whether as files or folders, depending on the dimension of the data (see Fig. 

3). The characterization data files in the SFTP server are managed by labeling the name of the file/folder 

identical to the primary key id of the sample and characterization process metadata in a format of 

“id_sample-id_property” (as shown in the red box in Fig.2 c for example). The labeled id makes the data 

findable through the primary keys of the metadata, enabling the association between different 

characterization data for a same specimen. Using the data management strategy illustrated above, addition 

of a new characterization process can be readily done.  


7 

Figure 3. Categorization of materials data in TFADB The position-dependent characterization data from high-throughput 

experiments are categorized into one-dimensional (e.g. composition, resistance, thickness) and multi-dimensional (e.g. XRD, 

nanoindentation, SEM images, etc.) data.  

The high-throughput characterization processes produce position-dependent materials information. 

Since combinatorial alloy films have compositional gradients across the in-plane direction of the wafer, 

composition-dependent properties can be acquired once the position-composition relation is found. 

Different characterization methods, however, have different dimensions in the materials data, requiring 

different strategies for managing the data (Fig. 3). Materials data such as composition, thickness, and 

electrical resistance at a point of the specimen are categorized as one-dimensional data. For each position, 

unique materials information represented by texts and/or numbers are determined. The characterization data 

of the one-dimensional data is stored in tables with the positional information. Materials data acquired from 

XRD, nanoindentation, and SEM at a point have two or higher dimensions. For these types of data, the 

materials information for each position are saved in a file named “(x, y position)filename”. With this method, 

multiple data from the same technique at a point (e.g., in-plane and cross-sectional SEM images acquired 

from the same position or composition) can be saved and managed.  

Figure 4. Graphic user interface of TFADB (a) Logbook tab allows the users to register a new specimen with the information of 

the deposition conditions used (a-i). The history of the logbook information can be accessed in the window a-ii. (b) Upload tab is 

used to upload the thin film property data along with the metadata of measurement conditions (b-i). The uploaded materials data 

can be displayed as shown in the window b-ii. (c) Through Search tab, users can search materials data of interest in TFADB by 

typing the keywords (compositional information, project, person, and sample id, etc.) or selecting the elements in the periodic table 


8 

(c-i). Summary of the retrieved information can be seen in the window c-ii, and all the related information can be downloaded. (d) 

The loaded materials information, such as composition, resistance, and thickness maps as well as XRD results and images can also 

be displayed in the GUI. 

Through the graphic user interface of TFADB, the users can upload, search, and download the 

materials property data and the metadata (Fig. 4). Logbook tab in the GUI is used to register a new 

combinatorial specimen and save the information of the processing parameters, such as the sputter targets 

used, power of each gun, deposition time, base pressure, working gas and pressure, deposition temperature, 

substrate type, researcher name, and deposition date (Fig. 4a-i). The processing information of previously 

deposited films can be retrieved (Fig. 4a-ii). This electronic logbook is helpful when a new researcher 

determines the processing conditions for new target compositions. Upload tab of the GUI allows the users 

to upload the characterization data and the related metadata to TFADB (Fig. 4b). To upload the data, the 

users need to insert the sample id and the metadata of the characterization processes and load the 

characterization data (Fig. 4b-i). The uploaded characterization data can be viewed in the window as 

exemplified in Fig. 4b-ii. Through Search tab of the GUI (Fig. 4c), the users can find, download, update, 

and delete the uploaded characterization data and metadata of the selected samples from the database. 

Combinatorial specimens of interest can be found by inserting the keywords of composition, sample id, 

project name, and researcher name or by selecting the constituent elements of the interested alloy from the 

periodic table (Fig. 4c-i). When the selected information is available in the database, a summary of the list 

can be viewed in the window in Fig. 4c-ii. All the selected data are simultaneously downloadable in CSV 

format using the download manager available in Search window. Various characterization data of selected 

samples can also be displayed through the GUI (Fig. 4d). These features of the GUI minimize the effort of 

the researchers for data processing and feature preparation for the machine learning implementation and 

meet the FAIR (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability) data principles [54, 68]. 


9 

Figure 5. Example of machine learning implementation using TFADB to classify amorphous/crystalline phases of alloys (a) 

Composition, electrical resistance, thickness, and XRD data of 302 thin film alloys were retrieved from TFADB. (b) The retrieved 

data were processed and used as training datasets for the machine learning models to classify amorphous/crystalline phases of the 

alloys; excessive resistivity (∆ρ), atomic mismatch (δ), and the FWHM of the XRD peaks respect to compositions were acquired. 

The prepared features were fed into the machine learning classifiers based on logistic regression, decision tree, ANN, and SVC. (c) 

The prediction accuracies of the models were evaluated with 10-fold cross-validation. The test accuracy of ANN (82.45%) was the 

highest among the models. (d) Combinatorial synthesis of a new thin film alloy system (Cu34.9-66.3Zr23.1-43.1Al8.2-35.7) was carried 

out, followed by property mapping. The new dataset was used to test the ANN model built. (e) High-throughput characterizations 

of Cu-Zr-Al sample were performed, and features of the machine learning model (∆ρ and δ) were prepared to predict the phase 

map of the combinatorial thin film specimen. (f) The probability map of amorphous phase is compared with the measured FWHM 

map for the Cu-Zr-Al specimen. Both results indicate that all the compositions are in the amorphous state. The amorphous phase 

formation of selected compositions was double confirmed by cross-sectional SEM images in (f-i~iii).  

In Fig. 5, we demonstrate how the materials data available in TFADB can be employed and 

processed for machine learning implementation. We built machine learning models to classify amorphous 

or crystalline phases of the alloys by using the excessive resistivity (∆ρ) and determining the atomic 

mismatch (δ) as a function of composition. These models would allow efficient phase identification for 

unknown alloy systems without utilizing slow or expensive experimental tools [3]. To train the classifiers, 

we utilized materials data of 302 different metals and alloys, including pure metals (Zi, Ti, Ni, Al, Cu), as-

deposited, and annealed combinatorial systems (Cu-Zr, Cu-Ti, Ni-Zr, Ni-Ti, Cu-Zr-Ti, Ni-Fe-Cr), and as-


10 

deposited combinatorial systems (Al-Cu-Zr, Al-Cr-Ti) that have been deposited to our own TFADB (Fig. 

5a). The characterization data of EDS, thickness (t), electrical resistance (R) were used to determine 

composition-dependent ∆ρ using ∆𝜌 = 𝜌 − 𝜌𝑟𝑜𝑚, where 𝜌 = 𝐹𝑅𝑡 and 𝜌𝑟𝑜𝑚 = Σ𝑖=1
𝑁 𝑐𝑖𝜌𝑖, 𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘 (Fig. 5b)

[3].  Here, F, 𝑐𝑖, 𝜌𝑖, 𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘, and N respectively are the correction factor [69, 70], composition and bulk

resistivity of the constituent element i, and number of the constituent elements of the alloy. δ for a 

composition can be simply calculated using 𝛿 = √Σ𝑖=1
𝑁 𝑐𝑖 (1 −
𝑟𝑖
𝑟𝑎𝑣𝑔)
2
, where 𝑟𝑎𝑣𝑔 = Σ𝑖=1
𝑁 𝑐𝑖𝑟𝑖. Here, ri is

the atomic radius of the element i. For the output, i.e., amorphous/crystalline phases, an alloy was labeled 

as an amorphous phase if the measured FWHM value from the XRD data is greater than 3.4° [71]. Other 

cases were labeled as crystalline (Fig. 5b).  

The artificial neural network (ANN), logistic regression, decision tree, and support vector classifier 

(SVC) were considered as phase prediction models as detailed in methods. Each model was trained with 

the same set of features and outputs of the 302 alloys with the 10-fold cross-validation and the results 

showed that the ANN model have the highest train (84.2%) and test (82.5%) accuracies (Fig. 5c). A new 

combinatorial specimen with a composition range of Cu34.9-66.3Zr23.1-43.1Al8.2-35.7 was fabricated to test the 

ANN model (Fig. 5d). The deposition parameters of the combinatorial synthesis of the Cu-Zr-Al system 

were determined by retrieving and employing the metadata of the processing conditions of the elemental 

targets of pure Cu, Zr, Al from TFADB. The synthesized combinatorial specimen was then subjected to 

composition, thickness, electrical resistance measurements, allowing determination of the features of ∆ρ 

and δ (Fig. 5e). The ANN model with the two features resulted in the probability map for amorphous phase 

of the Cu-Zr-Al system as shown in Fig. 5f. The model showed that all the compositions have the probability 

greater than 64.7 %, indicating that only the amorphous phase was expected to be formed regardless of the 

composition of the system. This prediction result was compared with the XRD and cross-sectional SEM 

images for selected compositions: all the compositions were indeed in amorphous state.  

This example demonstrates that previously deposited data of thin film alloys can be retrieved and 

processed using TFADB for the data-driven analysis of combinatorial thin film alloys. Fabrication and 

characterizations of new targeted combinatorial alloys were also facilitated by retrieving the saved metadata 

of similar or related samples in TFADB. Continuous depositions of materials data using TFADB will enrich 

the quantity and diversity of the database, allowing effective implementation of data-driven approaches for 

alloy investigations with high reliability. TFADB is a ready-to-use and open-source software with high 

flexibility (see data availability). We believe that TFADB meets the growing need of the research groups 

for the adaptation of data-driven alloy investigations with ease. 


11 

3. CONCLUSIONS

A novel research data management platform, TFADB, to track lineage of the experimental data of 

alloys from combinatorial synthesis and high-throughput experiments has been developed. The hierarchical 

database structure to systematically manage heterogenous experimental data and the GUI to efficiently 

upload, retrieve, edit, and download the materials data and metadata are introduced. Examples of data 

management for the combinatorial sputtering process and the scanning measurements (composition, 

thickness, X-ray Diffraction, electrical resistance, nanoindentation, images) and implementation of data-

driven approaches for alloy investigation have been discussed. The features of TFADB allow users to build 

more reliable prediction models by using previously deposited data and to readily determine synthesis 

parameters of unknown alloy systems. TFADB is a ready to use platform with high flexibility. We believe 

that TFADB can offer the opportunity to the research groups who seek the benefits of ever-growing 

materials data and to implement data-driven discovery of new alloy systems with ideal set of properties. 

4. METHODS

Development of TFADB platform and its servers 

TFADB in this study was constructed with two Linux servers of an SQL and an SFTP file in a 

local NAS (Network Attached Storage) device. The SQL server consists of two data schemes, one having 

metadata of the sample synthesis and characterization processes, and the other with configurative settings 

of the database server. The SFTP file server consists of various characterization data acquired from high-

throughput experiments. The GUI of the TFADB was constructed based on Python, with the PyQT5 library. 

The source code TFADB is open to the community through GitHub (Data availability). 

Combinatorial synthesis and high-throughput characterization of the Zr-Cu-Al thin film sample 

The combinatorial alloy thin film of Zr-Cu-Al was magnetron-sputtered on the 4-inch wafer, under 

the base and Ar pressure of 2.0 × 10-7 Torr and 5 × 10-3 Torr, respectively. The deposition temperature and 

time were set to 293 K and 1,300 seconds, respectively. Elemental sputter targets of Zr, Cu, and Al were 

used for the depositions without substrate rotation to produce an in-plane composition spread over the 

substrate. A combinatorial film with a thickness ranging from 285 to 760 nm was produced, with a 

composition range of Zr43.1-23.1Cu66.3-34.9Al8.2-35.7. The composition was evaluated by EDS (FESEM, JEOL 

JSM-7600F) and the thickness was measured by a profilometer (Bruker DXT-A). The electrical resistance 

map of the thin film was determined by using a custom-built high-throughput 4-point probe x-y-z stage 

system with a digital multimeter (RIGOL 3058e) and with probes aligned in-line, with 1 mm spacing. The 


12 

XRD map of the combinatorial film was measured using a XRD (Bruker D8 advance eco) with the Bragg-

Brentano geometry and using Cu-Kα radiation. 

Machine learning analyses 

The logistic regression, decision tree, and SVC models used in this study were built with the Scikit-

learn library of Python. The hyperparameters of the models were set as default, except for the depth of 3 

for the decision tree model to avoid overfitting. The ANN model built was based on the Keras library of 

Phyton. The hyperparameters were tuned based on the grid-search by varying the number of neurons from 

1 to 100, the number of hidden layers from 1 to 2, and the learning rate from 1e-4 to 1e+0. As a result, the 

ANN model with 1 hidden layer, 50 neurons (ReLU), Sigmoid output, and a running rate of 1e-2 was chosen 

and trained.


13 

Acknowledgment 

This work was supported by Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. (IO201211-08077-01), Samsung Future 
Technology Incubation Program (SRFC-MA1802-06), the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) 
(NRF- 2017R1E1A1A01078324, 2020M3D1A101609221, 2021R1A4A1029780), Fundamental Research 
Program of the Korea Institute of Material Science (PNK8270) 

Data availability 

The source code including the server and GUI, executable program, and manual for TFADB are available 
at https://github.com/jh-song-en/TFDMP.  

Author contributions 

J.S. and D.L. conceived and designed the TFADB RDMs, which was developed by J.S. H.J. carried out the 
combinatorial experiments for the thin film sample. J.S. wrote the paper and D.L. supervised the research 
and revised the manuscript. All authors discussed and commented on the manuscript. 

Competing Interests 

The Authors declare no Competing Financial or Non-Financial Interests 

REFERENCES 

[1] C. Wen, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, D. Xue, Y. Bai, S. Antonov, L. Dai, T. Lookman, Y. Su, Machine

learning assisted design of high entropy alloys with desired property, Acta Materialia, 170 

(2019) 109-117. 

[2] A.O. Oliynyk, E. Antono, T.D. Sparks, L. Ghadbeigi, M.W. Gaultois, B. Meredig, A. Mar,

High-throughput machine-learning-driven synthesis of full-Heusler compounds, Chemistry of 

Materials, 28 (2016) 7324-7331. 

[3] D. You, H. Zhang, S. Ganorkar, T. Kim, J. Schroers, J.J. Vlassak, D. Lee, Electrical Resistivity

as a Descriptor for Classification of Amorphous versus Crystalline Phases of Alloys, Acta 

Materialia, (2022) 117861. 

[4] G.L. Hart, T. Mueller, C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, Machine learning for alloys, Nature Reviews

Materials, 6 (2021) 730-755. 

[5] W. Huang, P. Martin, H.L. Zhuang, Machine-learning phase prediction of high-entropy

alloys, Acta Materialia, 169 (2019) 225-236. 


14 

[6] N. Islam, W. Huang, H.L. Zhuang, Machine learning for phase selection in multi-principal 

element alloys, Computational Materials Science, 150 (2018) 230-235. 

[7] D. You, S. Ganorkar, S. Kim, K. Kang, W.-Y. Shin, D. Lee, Machine learning-based

prediction models for formation energies of interstitial atoms in HCP crystals, Scripta 

Materialia, 183 (2020) 1-5. 

[8] M. Umehara, H.S. Stein, D. Guevarra, P.F. Newhouse, D.A. Boyd, J.M. Gregoire, Analyzing

machine learning models to accelerate generation of fundamental materials insights, npj 

Computational Materials, 5 (2019) 1-9. 

[9] C.-T. Wu, H.-T. Chang, C.-Y. Wu, S.-W. Chen, S.-Y. Huang, M. Huang, Y.-T. Pan, P.

Bradbury, J. Chou, H.-W. Yen, Machine learning recommends affordable new Ti alloy with 

bone-like modulus, Materials Today, 34 (2020) 41-50. 

[10] C. Toher, C. Oses, D. Hicks, E. Gossett, F. Rose, P. Nath, D. Usanmaz, D.C. Ford, E. Perim,

C.E. Calderon, The AFLOW fleet for materials discovery, Handbook of Materials Modeling:

Methods: Theory and Modeling, (2020) 1785-1812. 

[11] C. Oses, E. Gossett, D. Hicks, F. Rose, M.J. Mehl, E. Perim, I. Takeuchi, S. Sanvito, M.

Scheffler, Y. Lederer, AFLOW-CHULL: cloud-oriented platform for autonomous phase stability 

analysis, Journal of chemical information and modeling, 58 (2018) 2477-2490. 

[12] Y. Iwasaki, I. Takeuchi, V. Stanev, A.G. Kusne, M. Ishida, A. Kirihara, K. Ihara, R. Sawada, K.

Terashima, H. Someya, K.-I. Uchida, E. Saitoh, S. Yorozu, Machine-learning guided discovery 

of a new thermoelectric material, Scientific Reports, 9 (2019). 

[13] A.L. Greer, Metallic glasses, Science, 267 (1995) 1947-1953.

[14] A.L. Greer, Metallic glasses… on the threshold, Materials today, 12 (2009) 14-22.

[15] J. Schroers, Processing of bulk metallic glass, Advanced materials, 22 (2010) 1566-1597.

[16] A. Peker, W.L. Johnson, A highly processable metallic glass: Zr41. 2Ti13. 8Cu12. 5Ni10.

0Be22. 5, Applied Physics Letters, 63 (1993) 2342-2344. 

[17] M.M. Khan, A. Nemati, Z.U. Rahman, U.H. Shah, H. Asgar, W. Haider, Recent

advancements in bulk metallic glasses and their applications: a review, Critical Reviews in 

Solid State and Materials Sciences, 43 (2018) 233-268. 

[18] J.J. Kruzic, Bulk Metallic Glasses as Structural Materials: A Review, Advanced Engineering

Materials, 18 (2016) 1308-1331. 

[19] J.W. Yeh, S.K. Chen, S.J. Lin, J.Y. Gan, T.S. Chin, T.T. Shun, C.H. Tsau, S.Y. Chang,

Nanostructured high‐entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy design 

concepts and outcomes, Advanced engineering materials, 6 (2004) 299-303. 


15 

[20] B. Cantor, I. Chang, P. Knight, A. Vincent, Microstructural development in equiatomic 

multicomponent alloys, Materials Science and Engineering: A, 375 (2004) 213-218. 

[21] Y. Zhang, T.T. Zuo, Z. Tang, M.C. Gao, K.A. Dahmen, P.K. Liaw, Z.P. Lu, Microstructures

and properties of high-entropy alloys, Progress in materials science, 61 (2014) 1-93. 

[22] D.B. Miracle, O.N. Senkov, A critical review of high entropy alloys and related concepts,

Acta Materialia, 122 (2017) 448-511. 

[23] S. Praveen, H.S. Kim, High-Entropy Alloys: Potential Candidates for High-Temperature

Applications - An Overview, Advanced Engineering Materials, 20 (2018) 1700645. 

[24] B. Gludovatz, A. Hohenwarter, D. Catoor, E.H. Chang, E.P. George, R.O. Ritchie, A

fracture-resistant high-entropy alloy for cryogenic applications, Science, 345 (2014) 1153-

1158. 

[25] A.M. Tishin, Y.I. Spichkin, The magnetocaloric effect and its applications, CRC Press,

2016. 

[26] A. Kitanovski, Energy Applications of Magnetocaloric Materials, Advanced Energy

Materials, 10 (2020) 1903741. 

[27] K.A. Gschneidner, V. Pecharsky, A. Tsokol, Recent developments in magnetocaloric

materials, Reports on progress in physics, 68 (2005) 1479. 

[28] S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang, R.H. Taylor, L.J. Nelson, G.L. Hart, S.

Sanvito, M. Buongiorno-Nardelli, AFLOWLIB. ORG: A distributed materials properties 

repository from high-throughput ab initio calculations, Computational Materials Science, 58 

(2012) 227-235. 

[29] A. Jain, S.P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W.D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D.

Skinner, G. Ceder, Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to 

accelerating materials innovation, APL materials, 1 (2013) 011002. 

[30] S. Kirklin, J.E. Saal, B. Meredig, A. Thompson, J.W. Doak, M. Aykol, S. Rühl, C. Wolverton,

The Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD): assessing the accuracy of DFT formation 

energies, npj Computational Materials, 1 (2015) 1-15. 

[31] O. Isayev, C. Oses, C. Toher, E. Gossett, S. Curtarolo, A. Tropsha, Universal fragment

descriptors for predicting properties of inorganic crystals, Nature Communications, 8 (2017) 

15679. 

[32] L. Ward, A. Agrawal, A. Choudhary, C. Wolverton, A general-purpose machine learning

framework for predicting properties of inorganic materials, npj Computational Materials, 2 

(2016) 16028. 


16 

[33] T. Xie, J.C. Grossman, Crystal Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for an Accurate and 

Interpretable Prediction of Material Properties, Physical Review Letters, 120 (2018). 

[34] A. Ludwig, Discovery of new materials using combinatorial synthesis and high-

throughput characterization of thin-film materials libraries combined with computational 

methods, npj Computational Materials, 5 (2019). 

[35] F. Ren, L. Ward, T. Williams, K.J. Laws, C. Wolverton, J. Hattrick-Simpers, A. Mehta,

Accelerated discovery of metallic glasses through iteration of machine learning and high-

throughput experiments, Science advances, 4 (2018) eaaq1566. 

[36] R. Potyrailo, K. Rajan, K. Stoewe, I. Takeuchi, B. Chisholm, H. Lam, Combinatorial and

High-Throughput Screening of Materials Libraries: Review of State of the Art, ACS 

Combinatorial Science, 13 (2011) 579-633. 

[37] M. Otani, K. Itaka, W. Wong-Ng, P.K. Schenck, H. Koinuma, Development of a high-

throughput thermoelectric screening tool for combinatorial thin film libraries, Applied 

Surface Science, 254 (2007) 765-767. 

[38] P. Tsai, K.M. Flores, High-throughput discovery and characterization of multicomponent

bulk metallic glass alloys, Acta Materialia, 120 (2016) 426-434. 

[39] E. Perim, D. Lee, Y. Liu, C. Toher, P. Gong, Y. Li, W.N. Simmons, O. Levy, J.J. Vlassak, J.

Schroers, S. Curtarolo, Spectral descriptors for bulk metallic glasses based on the 

thermodynamics of competing crystalline phases, Nature Communications, 7 (2016) 12315. 

[40] H. Jo, S. Park, D. You, S. Kim, D. Lee, Combinatorial Discovery of Irradiation Damage

Tolerant Nano-structured W-based alloys, arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01271, (2022). 

[41] B. Fleutot, J.B. Miller, A.J. Gellman, Apparatus for deposition of composition spread alloy

films: The rotatable shadow mask, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, 

Surfaces, and Films, 30 (2012) 061511. 

[42] R.R. Adharapurapu, J. Zhu, V.S. Dheeradhada, D.M. Lipkin, T.M. Pollock, A combinatorial

investigation of palladium and platinum additions to β-NiAl overlay coatings, Acta 

materialia, 77 (2014) 379-393. 

[43] S. Beattie, J. Dahn, Combinatorial electrodeposition of ternary Cu–Sn–Zn alloys, Journal

of the Electrochemical Society, 152 (2005) C542. 

[44] X. Cao, E. Johnson, M. Nath, Identifying high-efficiency oxygen evolution electrocatalysts

from Co–Ni–Cu based selenides through combinatorial electrodeposition, Journal of 

Materials Chemistry A, 7 (2019) 9877-9889. 


17 

[45] P. Cong, R.D. Doolen, Q. Fan, D.M. Giaquinta, S. Guan, E.W. McFarland, D.M. Poojary, K. 

Self, H.W. Turner, W.H. Weinberg, High‐throughput synthesis and screening of combinatorial 

heterogeneous catalyst libraries, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 38 (1999) 483-

488. 

[46] C. Sun, W. Jiang, M. Li, J. Sha, C. Zhou, High-throughput synthesis of oxidation-resistant

Nb–Si based alloy thin film by magnetron co-sputtering, Progress in Natural Science: 

Materials International, 31 (2021) 454-460. 

[47] D. König, K. Richter, A. Siegel, A.V. Mudring, A. Ludwig, High‐Throughput Fabrication of

Au–Cu Nanoparticle Libraries by Combinatorial Sputtering in Ionic Liquids, Advanced 

Functional Materials, 24 (2014) 2049-2056. 

[48] R. Löbel, S. Thienhaus, A. Savan, A. Ludwig, Combinatorial fabrication and high-

throughput characterization of a Ti–Ni–Cu shape memory thin film composition spread, 

Materials Science and Engineering: A, 481 (2008) 151-155. 

[49] S. Thienhaus, S. Hamann, A. Ludwig, Modular high-throughput test stand for versatile

screening of thin-film materials libraries, Science and technology of advanced materials, 12 

(2011) 054206. 

[50] K. Tsubouchi, I. Ohkubo, H. Kumigashira, M. Oshima, Y. Matsumoto, K. Itaka, T. Ohnishi,

M. Lippmaa, H. Koinuma, High‐Throughput Characterization of Metal Electrode Performance

for Electric‐Field‐Induced Resistance Switching in Metal/Pr0. 7Ca0. 3MnO3/Metal Structures, 

Advanced materials, 19 (2007) 1711-1713. 

[51] M.L. Green, I. Takeuchi, J.R. Hattrick-Simpers, Applications of high throughput

(combinatorial) methodologies to electronic, magnetic, optical, and energy-related materials, 

Journal of Applied Physics, 113 (2013) 9_1. 

[52] K. Kim, S. Park, T. Kim, Y. Park, G.-D. Sim, D. Lee, Mechanical, Electrical Properties and

Microstructures of Combinatorial Ni-Mo-W alloy films, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 

(2022) 165808. 

[53] M.-X. Li, S.-F. Zhao, Z. Lu, A. Hirata, P. Wen, H.-Y. Bai, M. Chen, J. Schroers, Y. Liu, W.-H.

Wang, High-temperature bulk metallic glasses developed by combinatorial methods, Nature, 

569 (2019) 99-103. 

[54] M. Scheffler, M. Aeschlimann, M. Albrecht, T. Bereau, H.-J. Bungartz, C. Felser, M.

Greiner, A. Groß, C.T. Koch, K. Kremer, W.E. Nagel, M. Scheidgen, C. Wöll, C. Draxl, FAIR data 

enabling new horizons for materials research, Nature, 604 (2022) 635-642. 


18 

[55] E. Soedarmadji, H.S. Stein, S.K. Suram, D. Guevarra, J.M. Gregoire, Tracking materials 

science data lineage to manage millions of materials experiments and analyses, npj 

Computational Materials, 5 (2019) 1-9. 

[56] A. Zakutayev, N. Wunder, M. Schwarting, J.D. Perkins, R. White, K. Munch, W. Tumas, C.

Phillips, An open experimental database for exploring inorganic materials, Scientific data, 5 

(2018) 1-12. 

[57] S.A. Kube, S. Sohn, D. Uhl, A. Datye, A. Mehta, J. Schroers, Phase selection motifs in

High Entropy Alloys revealed through combinatorial methods: Large atomic size difference 

favors BCC over FCC, Acta Materialia, 166 (2019) 677-686. 

[58] L. Banko, A. Ludwig, Fast-Track to Research Data Management in Experimental Material

Science–Setting the Ground for Research Group Level Materials Digitalization, ACS 

Combinatorial Science, 22 (2020) 401-409. 

[59] K.R. Talley, S.R. Bauers, C.L. Melamed, M.C. Papac, K.N. Heinselman, I. Khan, D.M.

Roberts, V. Jacobson, A. Mis, G.L. Brennecka, COMBIgor: data-analysis package for 

combinatorial materials science, ACS Combinatorial Science, 21 (2019) 537-547. 

[60] H. Jo, S. Park, D. You, S. Kim, D. Lee, Combinatorial Discovery of Irradiation Damage

Tolerant Nano-structured W-based alloys, To be published 

[61] D. Lee, J.J. Vlassak, Diffusion kinetics in binary CuZr and NiZr alloys in the super-cooled

liquid and glass states studied by nanocalorimetry, Scripta Materialia, 165 (2019) 73-77. 

[62] J. Zheng, Y. Miao, H. Zhang, S. Chen, D. Lee, R. Arróyave, J.J. Vlassak, Phase

transformations in equiatomic CuZr shape memory thin films analyzed by differential 

nanocalorimetry, Acta Materialia, 159 (2018) 320-331. 

[63] D. Lee, B. Zhao, E. Perim, H. Zhang, P. Gong, Y. Gao, Y. Liu, C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, J.

Schroers, Crystallization behavior upon heating and cooling in Cu50Zr50 metallic glass thin 

films, Acta Materialia, 121 (2016) 68-77. 

[64] D. Lee, G.-D. Sim, K. Xiao, J.J. Vlassak, Low-temperature synthesis of ultra-high-

temperature coatings of ZrB2 using reactive multilayers, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 

118 (2014) 21192-21198. 

[65] Y. Hirayama, R. Iguchi, X.-F. Miao, K. Hono, K.-i. Uchida, High-throughput direct

measurement of magnetocaloric effect based on lock-in thermography technique, Applied 

Physics Letters, 111 (2017) 163901. 


19 

[66] K. Wang, Y. Ouyang, Y. Shen, Y. Zhang, M. Zhang, J. Liu, High-throughput

characterization of the adiabatic temperature change for magnetocaloric materials, Journal 

of Materials Science, 56 (2021) 2332-2340. 

[67] P. Raccuglia, K.C. Elbert, P.D. Adler, C. Falk, M.B. Wenny, A. Mollo, M. Zeller, S.A. Friedler,

J. Schrier, A.J. Norquist, Machine-learning-assisted materials discovery using failed

experiments, Nature, 533 (2016) 73-76. 

[68] M.D. Wilkinson, M. Dumontier, I.J. Aalbersberg, G. Appleton, M. Axton, A. Baak, N.

Blomberg, J.-W. Boiten, L.B. Da Silva Santos, P.E. Bourne, J. Bouwman, A.J. Brookes, T. Clark, 

M. Crosas, I. Dillo, O. Dumon, S. Edmunds, C.T. Evelo, R. Finkers, A. Gonzalez-Beltran, A.J.G.

Gray, P. Groth, C. Goble, J.S. Grethe, J. Heringa, P.A.C. ’T Hoen, R. Hooft, T. Kuhn, R. Kok, J. 

Kok, S.J. Lusher, M.E. Martone, A. Mons, A.L. Packer, B. Persson, P. Rocca-Serra, M. Roos, R. 

Van Schaik, S.-A. Sansone, E. Schultes, T. Sengstag, T. Slater, G. Strawn, M.A. Swertz, M. 

Thompson, J. Van Der Lei, E. Van Mulligen, J. Velterop, A. Waagmeester, P. Wittenburg, K. 

Wolstencroft, J. Zhao, B. Mons, The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management 

and stewardship, Scientific Data, 3 (2016) 160018. 

[69] D. Vaughan, Four-probe resistivity measurements on small circular specimens, British

Journal of Applied Physics, 12 (1961) 414. 

[70] I. Miccoli, F. Edler, H. Pfnür, C. Tegenkamp, The 100th anniversary of the four-point

probe technique: the role of probe geometries in isotropic and anisotropic systems, Journal 

of Physics: Condensed Matter, 27 (2015) 223201. 

[71] S.-J. Zhao, K. Albe, H. Hahn, Grain size dependence of the bulk modulus of

nanocrystalline nickel, Scripta Materialia, 55 (2006) 473-476. 


