In situ hydride breathing during the template-assisted 
electrodeposition of Pd nanowires

Giuseppe Abbondanza1,2, Andrea Grespi1,2, Alfred Larsson1,2, Dmitry Dzhigaev1,2, Lorena Glatthaar3, Tim 
Weber3, Malte Blankenburg4, Zoltan Hegedüs4, Ulrich Lienert4, Herbert Over3, Gary S. Harlow5, 
Edvin Lundgren1

1 Division of Synchrotron Radiation Research, Lund University, Professorsgatan 1, Lund, Sweden

2 NanoLund, Lund University, Professorsgatan 1, Lund, Sweden

3 Institute of Physical Chemistry, Justus Liebig University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 17, 35392 Giessen, 
Germany

4 Deutsches Elektronensynchrotron DESY, Notkestr. 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

5 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Oregon Center for Electrochemistry, University of 
Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA

Abstract

We investigated the structural evolution of electrochemically fabricated Pd nanowires in situ by means of 
grazing-incidence transmission small- and wide-angle x-ray scattering (GTSAXS and GTWAXS), x-ray 
fluorescence (XRF) and 2-dimensional surface optical reflectance (2D-SOR). This shows how
electrodeposition and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) compete and interact during Pd 
electrodepositon. During the bottom-up growth of the nanowires, we show that β-phase Pd hydride is
formed. Suspending the electrodeposition then leads to a phase transition from β- to α-phase Pd hydride. 
Additionally, we find that grain coalescence later hinders the incorporation of hydrogen in the Pd unit cell. 
GTSAXS and 2D-SOR provide complementary information on the volume fraction of the pores occupied 
by Pd, while XRF was used to monitor the amount of Pd electrodeposited.

1 Introduction

Hydrogen represents a promising alternative to fossil fuel and a clean energy carrier in stationary and mobile 
applications1–3. The benefits of a successful hydrogen-based economy include the integration of intermittent 
renewable energies, sustainability and energy security. Remarkable effort and progress towards safe storage, 
sensing and production of hydrogen has been made over the last years, with the aim of realizing a hydrogen-
based economy4. Particularly, metal hydrides and combinations of different hydrogenating metals (such as 
Pd and V5, Pd and ZrCo alloys6, Pd and Ag7) have proved to be a promising class of materials for hydrogen 
storage, since storing hydrogen in the solid form addresses the safety concerns linked to liquid or gaseous 
hydrogen8,9. Palladium is especially well-known for its catalytic activity towards hydrogen dissociation and 
for its ability to absorb large quantities of hydrogen, leading to the formation of α- and β-phase hydrides10–

13. Furthermore, the hydrogenation of Pd plays a crucial role in the selectivity response of alkynes into 
alkenes14. During the hydride formation, hydrogen atoms occupy the empty octahedral sites in the face-
centered cubic (fcc) structure of Pd, causing a volume expansion of the unit cell. Linear correlations exist
between the lattice parameter and the amount of absorbed hydrogen10. Under electrochemical conditions, 
Pd electrodes promote the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)15. It has been shown that the hydrogen 
produced during the HER can be absorbed by the electrode itself and lead to formation of Pd hydride16,17.

The application of Pd-based nanomaterials to hydrogen storage and sensing is a promising emerging field 18–

20. Pd nanomaterials show better performances in terms of surface-to-volume ratio and hydride stability21.
For instance, ordered arrays of Pd nanowires, fabricated by the template method in nano-porous anodic 
aluminium oxide (NP-AAO), have been successfully used in hydrogen-sensing devices with high 
sensitivity22. In previous research, we have developed a method for the synthesis of such arrays of Pd 
nanowires and we characterized them by ex situ x-ray diffraction and electron microscopy23. The self-


arranged, highly-packed, honeycomb structure of NP-AAO and the bottom-up electrochemical growth of 
Pd make such material easily scalable for manufacturing purposes24,25.

However, the interplay between structure and properties of such nanomaterials, with an emphasis on
hydride formation, has only recently drawn attention. Findings about hydrogen intercalation at grain 
boundaries of nanocrystalline Pd26,27 and reports of size-dependent solubility and kinetics of hydrogen
absorption and desorption28 (referred to as hydride breathing29) in Pd nanoparticles suggest that the size of 
the crystallites plays an important role in the dynamics of hydride formation and stability.

In this work, we investigated in situ the structural evolution in electrochemically grown Pd nanowires in 
NP-AAO templates, by means of synchrotron high-energy x-ray scattering and fluorescence. Due to their 
low attenuation in matter, high-energy x-rays are a powerful tool for the study of encapsulated 
nanostructures in NP-AAO templates. The superior photon flux of synchrotron radiation was necessary to 
capture real-time information. In addition, the bottom-up growth was simultaneously followed by means 
of 2D-SOR, which has been used in previous research to bridge atomic and macroscopic scale 
observations30–33.

2 Material and methods

2.1 Template preparation

Two top-hat-shaped samples of polished polycrystalline Al (99.999%), purchased from Surface Preparation 
Laboratory (SPL, Netherlands), were used for the fabrication of the NP-AAO templates by means of two-
steps anodization24,34,35. The samples were mounted in an electrochemical holder to expose only their 
surfaces to the anodizing solution. The two-steps method consists of a first long anodization where the 
oxide progressively arranges in ordered pores, followed by selective removal of the oxide which results in 
an Al substrate patterned by hemispherical nano-concaves. A second anodization step is subsequently 
performed, where the order of the pores is guided by the pre-existing nano-concaves.

The glassware used in this work were cleaned with an acid mixture of 96% H2SO4 and 65% HNO3 in
proportion 1:1 and then rinsed extensively with ultra-pure water (18.2 MΩ·cm). All the electrolyte solutions 
were prepared using ultra-pure water.

To obtain samples with different pore diameters, two kinds of anodizing solutions were used: 0.3 M oxalic 
acid and 0.3 M sulphuric acid. For both samples, the electrolyte temperature was lowered to 0 °C using a 
jacketed electrochemical cell (Gamry MultiPort Corrosion Cell) connected to a refrigerated recirculating oil 
bath (Julabo). The anodization in oxalic acid was conducted at 40 V while the anodization in sulphuric acid 
was conducted at 25 V, both using a bi-polar power supply (Kikusui PBZ-20-20). The first anodization 
lasted 10 h and the oxide was selectively removed in an etching bath of 0.185 M H2CrO4 and 0.5 M H3PO4
for 12 h at room temperature for each sample.

The second anodization was conducted in the same conditions of electrolyte, temperature and potential, 
for 30 min. Immediately after the second anodization, a sequence of electrochemical barrier layer thinning 
was initiated. It consisted in ramping down the applied anodizing potential to decrease the thickness of the 
insulating barrier layer of oxide at the pore bottom, in order to enable the electrodeposition of metal in the 
pore. Barrier layer thinning for the sample anodized in oxalic acid consisted of ramping down the potential 
from 40 V to 20 V in a time span of 30 min and again from 20 V to 1 V over 40 min, while for the sample 
anodized in sulphuric acid, the potential was decreased from 25 V to 1 V over 30 min. This procedure 
results in a template thickness of approximately 2 µm and in the formation of Y-shaped branches at the 
pore bottom, which affects the morphology of the deposited metal in the next step of fabrication23,25. The 
resulting pore diameter of the two templates is 40 nm for the sample anodized in oxalic acid and 25 nm for 
the sample anodized in sulphuric acid. The two samples are from here on referred to as template D40 and 
template D25, respectively.


Figure 1. (a) Schematic drawing of the polyether ether ketone (PEEK) electrochemical flow-cell31. The 
optical aperture with the glass window enables 2D-SOR measurements. The high-energy x-rays pass 
through the thin PEEK walls (100 µm) of the cell and illuminate the sample at a grazing-incidence angle 
αi. The Pd electrolyte is flown through the cell with a peristaltic pump. While pulses of potential are 
applied between the working and the counter electrode, the voltage across a shunt resistor of 25 Ω is 
measured, to estimate the current. (b) Current density measured during a typical electrodeposition 
potential square-wave-shaped pulse. (c) Schematic drawing of the setup used for the experiment in the 
P21.2 beamline at Petra III (DESY, Hamburg). GTSAXS, GTWAXS, 2D-SOR and XRF were measured 
simultaneously.

2.2 Electrodeposition

A volume of 1 L of aqueous solution (with ultra-pure water) was prepared mixing 5 mM PdCl2 with 0.74 M 
HCl and, upon full dissolution of PdCl2, 0.81 M NH4OH was slowly added. The pH was then adjusted to 
a value of 7.34 by small additions of NH4OH. Achieving pH neutrality is necessary as alumina is stable only 
in the pH range 4-836.

The PEEK electrochemical flow-cell drawn in Fig. 1 (a), which was designed and previously used for in situ
x-ray measurements31,32,37–39, was employed for the experiment. In this cell, the anodized top-hat aluminium 
acted as the working electrode in a two-electrode setup and a Pt counter-electrode was employed. The Pd-
containing electrolyte was flown into the cell using a recirculating peristaltic pump. A thermocouple in a 


PEEK sleeve, inserted in the flow-cell, was used to monitor the temperature during the electrodeposition.
Before the experiment, the cell and the tubing were cleaned by flowing 20% HNO3 for 2 h. While cleaning, 
the sample and the counter-electrode were replaced by a PEEK top-hat shaped dummy sample and a Teflon 
stopper, respectively. After this cleaning procedure, the cell and tubing were flushed with 2 L of ultra-pure 
water.

The pulse electrodeposition method was employed, which consists in applying single AC square-wave 
pulses of electric potential (2 ms for the cathodic half-wave and 2 ms for the anodic half-wave), followed 
by a period of time (196 ms) where the applied potential is zero. The amplitude of the square-wave was 24 
V (peak-to-peak). The benefits of this method, with regards to electrodeposition in NP-AAO, are well 
described in literature25,40,41. The Kikusui PBZ-20-20 power supply was used to program and perform the 
electrodeposition. A shunt resistor of 25 Ω was added in series with the electrochemical cell and the 
potential across it was measured with a digital oscilloscope (Picoscope PS3203D). This was done in order 
to estimate the current using Ohm’s law. Every 7 s, the oscilloscope measured the voltage across the shunt 
resistor for 200 ms with a time resolution of 144 ns. A representative pulse measured during the 
electrodeposition is plotted in Fig. 1 (b).

Sequences of pulsed electrodeposition with a duration of 2 min, followed by a rest time of 3 min, were 
conducted for 60 min for the template anodized in oxalic acid and 10 min for the sample anodized in 
sulphuric acid. The rest sequences were added to observe the release of hydrogen from the Pd crystal lattice 
and at the same time to reduce the possibility of damage to the NP-AAO template by dielectric breakdown 
events42. For a systematic study, the conditions of electrolyte composition and applied potential were kept 
the same for the two templates investigated.

2.3 2-dimensional surface optical reflectance

A schematic of the 2D-SOR setup, which was mounted on the diffractometer together with the 
electrochemical cell, is shown in Fig. 1 (c). The electrochemical flow-cell has an optical access on the top, 
through a glass window. The light source is a red LED with a power of 700 mW and a wavelength of 650 
nm (Thorlabs M625L3). The LED light is first reflected by the sample and then by a beam splitter to a 2D 
CMOS camera with (Allied Vision). A detailed description of the 2D-SOR setup, used in combination with
electrochemical measurements, was previously published31,32.

2.4 In situ synchrotron measurements

The synchrotron measurements were performed at the Swedish Material Science beamline P21.2 (Petra III, 
DESY, Hamburg). The structural evolution of the electrodeposited Pd was followed by means of small-
and wide-angle x-ray scattering ( GTSAXS and GTWAXS), and x-ray fluorescence (XRF). The grazing-
incidence transmission geometry was employed to study the embedded nanostructures while reducing 
distortion phenomena that usually affect grazing-incidence SAXS. In fact, in the grazing-incidence 
transmission geometry, the contributions to the scattering amplitude that are normally described by the 
distorted-wave Born approximation can be neglected43. A 68.5 keV x-ray beam, focussed to 13 µm × 100 
µm (vertical × horizontal), illuminated the sample at a grazing-incidence angle of 0.15°.

XRF was measured by an Amptek XR-100 CdTe detector, positioned at approximately 90° relative to the 
direct beam. The energy channels of the XRF detector were calibrated using standards of Ag, Cu, Mo and 
Rb. XRF spectra were collected during the electrodeposition and the Pd Kα emission line was subsequently 
integrated. The Pd signal from the electrolyte only, right before the electrodeposition, was used as baseline. 

GTSAXS was measured by a Varex XRD 4343CT flat panel detector (pixel size 150 µm) positioned at a 
distance of 14.35 m from the diffractometer centre, as determined by calibration using a silver behenate 
reference. An evacuated flight tube was positioned in between the diffractometer centre and the GTSAXS
detector. GTWAXSwas measured by two additional Varex XRD 4343CT detectors positioned at a distance 
of 2.55 m. Fig. 1 (c) is a depiction of the experimental setup showing how the detectors were positioned.
Where necessary, the strong Bragg reflections arising from the polycrystalline Al substrate were attenuated 


by some tungsten beam stoppers and lead foils, attached to a plexi-glass panel in front of the detectors. The 
detector distances and their tilts were calibrated using NIST LaB6 as standard reference material (measured 
in transmission geometry) and pyFAI as the calibration software44–46. A description of the calibration 
procedure and the sample alignment, with an emphasis on the prevention of artefacts due to sample 
misplacements, can be found in Appendix A. We followed the first 10 min of deposition, while GTSAXS, 
GTWAXS, XRF and 2D-SOR were collected continuously with an exposure time of 5 s. For sample D40,
the electrodeposition and the measurement continued for 1 h, recording one image every 10 s (with an 
exposure time of 5 s). To rule out any beam-induced effect, we measured the sample at two different 
positions, rotating the sample around its surface normal back and forth by 5° between an image acquisition 
and the following one.

Figure 2. Waterfall plots of the GTWAXS patterns as function of time, for the Pd electrodeposition in 
template D40 [(a) and [b] and in template D25 [(c) and (d)]. The boxed areas in (a) and (c) are reported 
in (b) and (d), respectively. The red lines were acquired while the electrodeposition was enabled and the 
blue lines were acquired when the electrodeposition was interrupted (electrochemical cell left at open 
circuit potential).

3 Results and discussion

Fig. 2 shows an overview of the GTWAXS data collected during the electrodeposition of Pd in template 
D40 [(a) and (b)] and template D25 [(c) and (d)]. Every horizontal line of the waterfall plots in Fig. 2 (a) 
and (c) is a diffraction pattern obtained from the integration of the GTWAXS detectors over the whole 
accessible azimuthal range. The reader is referred to Appendix B for a more detailed description of the data 
processing. Qualitatively, two fcc structures have been found, which were identified as α- and β-phase PdHx. 
However, the lattice constant of these two phases is proportional to the amount of hydrogen absorbed in 
the fcc unit cell. As a reference, we marked the positions of the α- and β-phase PdHx calculated by using a 
lattice parameter of 3.895 Å for the α-phase (corresponding to a molar fraction x=0.02) and 4.025 Å for 
the β-phase (corresponding to a molar fraction x=0.58). The plots in Fig. 2 (b) and (d) were extracted from 
the boxed regions in Fig. 2 (a) and (c), drawn across some phase transitions. Here, the two phases coexist 
for approximately 30 s, before the β-phase almost completely disappears and the α-phase becomes 


dominant. What causes the phase transition is the interruption of the electrodeposition. As described in 
Section 2, we alternated sequences of deposition lasting 2 min with sequences of rest lasting 3 min. The red 
lines in Fig. 2 (b) and (d) were acquired during the electrodeposition, while the blue lines were acquired 
after the electrodeposition was suspended.

Figure 3. X-ray fluorescence and scale factors extracted from the Rietveld refinement of GTWAXS 
patterns collected in situ during the electrodeposition of Pd in template D40 [(a) and (b)] and in template 
D25 (c). (d) Cartoon showing the Pd nanowires at stages I to V: the blue segments correspond to α-
phase hydride and the red segments correspond to β-phase hydride. (e) Slope of the black lines in (a) and 
(c) in order of appearance from left to right.

The one-dimensional GTWAXS patterns were fed into a sequential Rietveld refinement algorithm, to 
obtain quantitative structural information. Appendix B contains more information on the refinement 
procedure, as well as a representative GTWAXS frame and its refinement (see Fig. B.2). In Fig. 3 (a), (b) 
and (c) the scale factors of the two phases, extracted from the Rietveld refinement, are reported. The scale 
factor is a measure of the contribution of a certain phase to the overall intensity of a diffraction pattern. 
The grey areas in Fig. 3 (a), (b) and (c) correspond to periods of time where the electrodeposition was 
interrupted. We identified four stages, namely I to IV, were the two templates show a similar evolution of 
the scale factors. For sample D40, we identified a fifth stage (V). In region I, the scale factor of the β-phase 
increases linearly, while the scale factor of the α-phase is zero. This means that the nanoparticles nucleating 
and growing in the first 120 s of deposition form as Pd hydride rather than pure Pd. This phenomenon can 
be attributed to HER, happening in parallel with the electrodeposition, while the applied potential is 
cathodic. In region II, the scale factor of the β-phase decays (in a time span of 30 s), while the α-phase 
appears. Here, the power supply is suspended and both the electrodeposition and the HER are stopped. 
The hydrogen absorbed in the crystal lattice diffuses out of the nanowires, causing a phase transition. In 
region III, the scale factor of the α-phase decays while the scale factor of the β-phase increases. The increase 
of the β-phase scale factor can be fit by two adjacent lines. In the first one, the increase is rapid and can be 
attributed to the conversion of the pre-existent α-phase hydride into β-phase hydride. The second, slower 


increase can be attributed to an increasing quantity of Pd in the pores due to the electrodeposition. Region 
IV can be described by a phase transition from β- to α-phase hydride, similarly to region II. For template 
D40, where the electrodeposition continued for 3600 s, we identified a fifth stage (V). Here, the formation 
of α-phase hydride becomes dominant and the formation of β-phase decreases over time. We surmise that 
only a fraction of the nanowires at the metal/electrolyte interface becomes β-phase hydride and that part 
of the absorbed hydrogen diffuses either towards the electrolyte and towards the bottom of the nanowire, 
forming the α-phase hydride. The hydride phase observations are supported by findings of cathodic current 
decrease during the deposition sequences, as described in greater detail in Appendix C.

It is possible that the hydrogen diffuses quite rapidly from the metal/electrolyte interface to the bulk of the 
nanowire. The diffusion coefficient is well-described by the Arrhenius equation

𝐷 = 𝐷0exp(−

𝐸𝐷
𝑅𝑇),

where D0 is a pre-exponential factor, ED is the activation energy, R is the gas constant and T is the absolute 
temperature. The reported values found in literature for D0 and ED are 2.4x10-7 m2/s and 21.1 kJ/mol, 
respectively47. At room temperature, the Arrhenius equation yields a diffusion coefficient of hydrogen in 
Pd of 4.804×10-11 m2/s. Using the equation for the root mean square displacement due to Brownian 
motion, x=√2𝐷𝑡, it can be estimated that hydrogen takes approximately 10 ms to diffuse across a 1 μm 
long nanowire.

In parallel with the scale factors, the XRF signal arising from the Pd Kα emission line is reported. The XRF 
is insensitive to hydride formation and is only proportional to the amount of Pd atoms inside the pores. 
The XRF signal only increases in stages I, III and the white areas in stage V, while it is constant in regions 
II, IV and the grey regions of stage V. This is in agreement with the fact that the nanowires only grow while 
an electric potential is supplied and supports the evidence that the phase transition in the grey areas is due 
to material pre-existing as β-phase hydride. A visual description of stages I to V, representing the growth 
and the phase transitions is shown in Fig. 3 (d). 

For comparison, we reported the slopes resulting from the linear fits of the β-phase scale factors in Fig. 3
(e). Initially, the growth is faster in template D25. However, in stage III, the conversion of the α-phase into 
β-phase and the electrodeposition rate are more rapid in template D40. This could be due to the higher 
porosity of template D40 (14%, against 12% porosity of template D25) and therefore to the larger 
availability of surface area that is actively involved in HER.

The lattice parameters extracted from Rietveld refinement, are plotted in Fig. 4. The discontinuities in Fig. 
4 (a) and (c) are due to the fact that the phases are not simultaneously detected in the first 600 s of 
electrodeposition. The lattice parameter is a measure of the amount of hydrogen absorbed in the unit cell48. 
As a reference, the lattice parameters of pure Pd, α-phase PdH0.02 and β-phase PdH0.58 are reported. For 
both phases, the lattice parameter is greater in template D40 than in template D25. At the beginning of 
each deposition sequence (regions I and III), the lattice parameter increases, as the Pd absorbs an increasing 
quantity of hydrogen and the α-phase undergoes a phase transition to β-phase. Similarly, when the 
deposition is interrupted, the lattice parameter decreases, as the lattice releases hydrogen by diffusion. Fig. 
4 (e) schematically represents how the increasing occupancy of the octahedral sites of the Pd fcc structure 
by H atoms leads to the volume expansion of the unit cell and the formation of the β-phase hydride. In 
previous research, we observed an anisotropic strain affecting the lattice constant23,39. However, in this 
experiment we could not determine any deviatoric strain (i.e., that after subtracting hydrostatic strain) within 
the experimental uncertainty.

Fig. 4 (b) shows the lattice constant in template D40, as the growth proceeds up to 1 h. Here we can 
distinguish two subdivisions in stage V. In stage VA, the lattice parameter fluctuates around the predicted
value for the α-phase PdH0.02: it increases during the deposition sequences and it decreases during the rest 
periods. In stage VB, however, the lattice parameter decreases below the value predicted for the molar 
fraction x=0.02 and tends towards the lattice parameter of metallic Pd (x=0). Since in stage VB the variation 


in lattice parameter is subtle and its corresponding molar fraction variation is small (from 0.02 to 0), the 
distinction between α-phase hydride and metallic Pd is no longer measurable. Based on this analysis of the 
lattice parameter, it should be noticed that the scale factor of the α-phase hydride reported in Fig. 3 (b) is 
not entirely representative of a hydride phase but rather of a combination of hydride and pure Pd, especially 
after t=1480 s.

Figure 4. Lattice parameters extracted from Rietveld refinement of GTWAXS patterns of the α- [(a) 
and (b)] and β-phase hydride [(c) and (d)]. The theoretical lattice parameter of PdH0.02 (α-phase) PdH0.58
(β-phase) and pure Pd are marked with blue, red and black lines, respectively. (e) Atomistic model of the 
Pd fcc structure upon hydrogenation.

On the other hand, the lattice parameter of the β-phase in Fig. 4 (d) remains well above the value for 
PdH0.58. The scale factor in Fig. 3 (d), however, showed that the β-phase formation is less prominent 
towards the end of the electrodeposition. This strengthens the argument that there is a small region of the 
nanowires, in proximity of the metal/electrolyte interface, which consists of β-phase hydride, while the rest 
of the nanowire resembles α-phase hydride and, progressively, pure Pd. This model is compatible with the 
fact that after the electrodeposition, and after the sample is removed from the electrochemical environment, 
our ex situ measurements performed in previous research revealed no presence of Pd hydride23.

From the Rietveld refinement, the size of the crystallite was extracted and reported in Fig. 5 (a) and (b) for 
template D40 and (c) for template D25. In Fig. 5 (a), by the end of stage I, the crystallite size decreases. 


This is due to the decrease in scattering domain size of the β-phase hydride as the hydrogen leaves the 
crystal lattice, leading to the transition into α-phase hydride. Conversely, at the beginning of stage III in Fig. 
5 (c), there is a sudden increase in crystallite size, from 8 to 12 nm, although the pre-existing α-phase had a 
crystallite size of 12 nm. This can be explained similarly as an increase of scattering domain size of the β-
phase during the HER-initiated transition.

Overall, in both templates, there is an increase in crystallite size from approximately 9 to 18 nm (and above 
20 nm for template D40). This is attributed to the coalescence of nanocrystals, schematically represented 
in Fig. 5 (d). Coalescence phenomena are not unusual under electrochemical conditions. For instance, the 
electrochemical Ostwald ripening in nanocrystalline metal ensembles has been reported49.

Figure 5. Crystallite size extracted from the Rietveld refinement of GTWAXS patterns measured during 
the electrodeposition of Pd in template D40 [(a) and (b)], and in template D25 (c). Schematic depiction 
of grain growth and aggregation during the electrodeposition (d).

This grain coalescence could be the cause of the reduced absorption of hydrogen after long deposition 
times (stage V). It is known that the intercalation and the absorption of hydrogen is mediated by grain 
boundaries26. In addition, hydrogen absorption proceeds in three stages: H2 molecules are dissociated at 
the Pd surface, subsequently hydrogen penetrates into subsurface sites and then diffuses into the bulk50. 
The lower surface-to-volume ratio of the nanocrystals, caused by grain coalescence, potentially leads to in
a reduced availability of absorption sites and thus to a lower rate of hydride formation.

Simultaneously, GTSAXS and 2D-SOR were measured, which revealed complementary information, 
available in Appendix D, on how the deposition proceeds first in the dendritic branches of the nano-pores 
and later in the body of the pore. 

4 Conclusion

In situ GTWAXS measurements revealed that electrochemically fabricated Pd nanowires in NP-AAO 
templates grow as PdHx in the early stages of the electrodeposition. Alternating sequences of 
electrodeposition with sequences of rest causes transitions between β- and α-phase hydride, respectively. 


We proposed a model where the hydrogen, produced by HER at the working electrode, is absorbed by the 
Pd nanowires, forming a small region of β-phase hydride close to the metal/electrolyte interface. The 
hydrogen rapidly diffuses to the bulk of the nanowires, that are less populated by hydrogen and therefore 
have a lower partial pressure, to form an α-phase hydride, which at later times becomes pure Pd as the 
hydrogen degresses. At later deposition times, the coalescence of Pd nanocrystals in the pores causes lower 
rates of hydrogen absorption, which is mediated by grain boundaries.

The correlation between the hydride formation and the deposition/rest sequences adopted in this work 
might be an interesting tool to control the hydrogen intake in the Pd nanowires. This might be useful in 
applications where the hydrogen content enables the selectivity of Pd towards some specific reactions, e.g.,
the conversion of alkynes into alkenes14. In addition, we demonstrated that hydrogenating metals in nano-
porous alumina are a promising class of composite materials for the simultaneous production and storage 
of hydrogen in the solid form. In the future, a combination of Pd with less expensive hydrogenating metals, 
such as V or Ni can be investigated towards this particular application.

Appendix A

Calibration and sample alignment

For the evaluation of absolute lattice parameters, the experimental setup was calibrated by a reference 
powder sample. It is critical that the effective distances of the reference powder and real sample to the 
detector are identical. This was achieved by aligning both samples to the vertical rotation axis of the 
diffractometer and assuring that the incoming beam hit the sample at its centre under grazing incidence. 
The detailed alignment procedure is described in the following. 

Figure A.1. (a) Top-view of a LaB6 calibrant aligned in the centre of the diffractometer and measured 
in the transmission geometry; (b) top-view and (c) side-view of the top-hat shaped sample, scanned in 
the x-ray beam during the alignment.

First, the incident x-ray beam was aligned to the intersecting rotation axes of the diffractometer around the 
z- and y-axes (the latter was used to set the grazing incidence angle). A disk of LaB6 standard reference 
powder was prepared by pressing the powder in a metal washer between two foils of Kapton tape, mounted 
on a spinner (to improve the homogeneity of the diffraction rings). The WAXS arising from the reference 
sample was measured in the transmission geometry [see Fig. A.1 (a)]. In order to ensure that the reference 


coincided with the z-rotation axis, we rotated it about the z-axis and measured WAXS at two positions: 0° 
and 180°. We then fed the measured WAXS patterns into pyFAI to calculate the sample-to-detector 
distance (SDD) for the two positions. We then translated the sample along the x-axis to compensate for 
the difference in the SDD and measured another WAXS pattern. This last measurement was used to 
calibrate the setup and to obtain the coordinates of the point of normal incidence, to perform the azimuthal 
integration of all the subsequent GTWAXS patterns measured in this work.

The top-hat shaped samples used in this work were aligned against the x-ray beam to be in the same position 
as the reference material, i.e., the z-rotation axis of the diffractometer. The alignment procedure consisted 
in (i) scanning and centring the sample across the beam in the y-direction [see Fig. A.1 (b)] for two rotation 
angles about the z-axis: 0° and 90°; (ii) scanning the sample along the z-axis and centring the sample at the 
beam cut-off height [see Fig. A.1 (c)]; (iii) scanning the tilt angle and rotating the sample to the position 
where the maximum beam transmission is measured. This last step was reiterated for the z-axis rotations 
0° and 90°. Before setting the grazing incidence angle, the sample was translated again along the z-axis to 
the cut-off height. Furthermore, we monitored the sample position with an x-ray eye to ensure that the 
sample height was not subject to variations due to misplacements of the horizontal rotation axis against the 
x-ray beam.

Figure B.1. Representative GTSAXS patterns collected during the electrodeposition of Pd in template 
D40 (a) and D25 (b); 1-dimensional patterns extracted from the boxed regions [(c) and (d)], plotted 
together with their fits.

Appendix B

GTSAXS and GTWAXS data processing

The 2-dimensional GTSAXS patterns were integrated in the boxed area shown in Fig. B.1, to obtain 1-
dimensional patterns. The peaks in the GTSAXS pattern were assigned a set of two (h,k) Miller indices, as 
the NP-AAO can be described by a two-dimensional hexagonal lattice51. The 1-dimensional GTSAXS 
patterns were fitted by a multiple-peak fitting algorithm, based on the Python module lmfit52, where the 
peak positions were given as a starting guess based on the Miller indices (h,k) and the inter-pore distance a
through the following equation:

𝑄ℎ𝑘 = 4𝜋√ℎ2 + ℎ𝑘 + 𝑘2

√3𝑎


which describes the peak positions for a two-dimensional hexagonal lattice. The peaks were fitted with 
Voigt profiles to return the peak widths of the GTSAXS pattern and the background was fitted by 
Chebyshev polynomials with 3 coefficients. The peak widths were used to estimate the porous domain size 
using Scherrer’s formula. Fig. B.1 (c) and (d) are an example of integrated GTSAXS patterns and their fit.

Figure B.2. A representative GTWAXS pattern recorded during the electrodeposition of Pd in the 
template anodized in oxalic acid (a). Azimuthal integral of the GTWAXS images, together with its 
Rietveld refinement (b). The Al reflections and the beam stoppers were masked out from the integration.

The 2-dimensional GTWAXS patterns were integrated using the pyFAI “Multi-geometry” module, which 
can take as an input images collected from different detectors at the same time45. The areas containing the 
beam stoppers and the Al reflections were masked out from the integration. The GTWAXS images 
measured prior to the electrodeposition were used as background. The GTWAXS patterns were integrated 
over the whole accessible azimuthal range, and in a radial range from 2.5 to 6 Å-1, in Q-units, with a total 
number of radial bins of 600.

The GTWAXS 1-dimensional pattern of the LaB6 reference was loaded in GSAS-II53 and the peaks were 
fitted to obtain the instrumental resolution function (a calibration file containing the Caglioti coefficients54–

56, amongst other instrumental parameters). These parameters were loaded in GSAS-II and kept fixed for 
every in situ pattern.

The in situ 1-dimensional GTWAXS patterns were fed to a sequential Rietveld refinement algorithm in 
GSAS-II. The intensity scale factor, the lattice parameter and the crystallite size of each phase were refined. 
The background of the patterns was fitted by a Chebyshev polynomial with 12 coefficients. The sequential 
refinement was performed in the reverse order, starting from the last acquired GTWAXS pattern, and the 


output parameters of every refinement was used as the initial guess of the following refinement. Fig. B.2
shows a typical 2-dimensional GTWAXS pattern, an integrated 1-dimensional pattern and the 
corresponding Rietveld refinement. The intensity along the Pd diffraction rings is homogeneous, which is 
a consequence of the isotropic orientation of the crystallites.

Appendix C

Cathodic current

The mean cathodic current flowing in the electrochemical cell during the electrodeposition is reported in 
Fig. C.1 [(a) and (b)] for template D40 and (c) for template D25. During every deposition sequence, the 
current decreases, regardless of the pore size. Furthermore, the initial current of every deposition stage is 
always higher than the last current value measured at the end of the previous deposition stage. This current 
behaviour can be attributed to the fact that PdHx is a semiconductor and its resistivity is proportional to 
the hydrogen content57. During the potential-limited pulse electrodeposition, Pd incorporates an increasing 
quantity of hydrogen, due to HER, and its resistivity increases, leading to a current decrease. An exception 
to this decreasing current behaviour is in stage I of Fig. C.1(a). Here, the current is subjected to fluctuations 
due to electrostatic instabilities during the initial growth of the nanowires. These instability events are 
known to happen in templates treated by means of barrier layer thinning and they are due to the higher 
conductivity of the metal deposited compared to the one of the electrolyte. In addition, the instability events 
are more frequent in the initial stage of growth, where the electrodeposition proceeds faster in nano-pores 
with a slightly thinner barrier layer than the one of other surrounding nano-pores41.

Figure C.1. Mean cathodic current extracted from the negative half-waves measured during the Pd 
electrodeposition in templates D40 [(a) and (b)] and D25 (c).
Appendix D

2D-SOR and GTSAXS domain size

Some frames extracted from the in situ 2D-SOR measurements are reported in Fig. D.1 (a), (b) and (c) for 
template D40, and (d), (e) and (f) for template D25. Thanks to the spatial resolution of this technique, it 
was possible to visually monitor the uniformity of the reflectance over the whole surface of the template. 


Quantitatively, the mean reflectance over the whole sample surface is shown in Fig. D.2 (a) and (b), where 
the SOR signal decreases during the deposition steps. It has been proven that metal nanoparticles in nano-
porous alumina templates are subjected to plasma absorption of optical light, and that the absorbance is 
proportional to the volume fraction occupied by the metal particles58. Therefore, the reflectance decrease 
can be due to the increasing aspect ratio of the nanowires in the pores during the electrodeposition stages.

Figure D.1. 2D-SOR images collected during the electrodeposition of Pd in template D40 [(a), (b) and 
(c)] and in template D25 [(d), (e), (f)]. The PEEK sleeve containing the thermocouple and the Pt counter-
electrode are also visible. The scale bar corresponds to a length of 3 mm.

It has been shown in previous research focused on the electrodeposition of Sn in NP-AAO templates that 
the porous domain size extracted by GTSAXS patterns decreases as the pores are filled 59. GTSAXS and 
SOR can thus provide complementary information. In Fig. D.2, we reported the GTSAXS domain size 
(extracted from the mean peak widths of the GTSAXS profiles), together with the SOR signal. In the first 
1000 s in Fig. D.2 (a) and in the 600 s of deposition in Fig. D.2 (b), the GTSAXS domain size is quite 
constant, while the SOR decreases more rapidly. Conversely, after approximately 1000 s, the SOR signal 
remains constant, while the GTSAXS domain size decreases more sharply. In research about the template-
assisted growth of Ag nanowires in NP-AAO treated with barrier layer thinning (a similar template to the 
one used in this work)41, two regimes of growth were identified: (i) a heterogeneous nucleation of 
nanocrystals occurs at the dendritic pore bottoms, preferentially in those where the barrier layer is thinner 
and (ii) a more uniform growth of the nanowires occurs when the branches are filled, caused by the decrease 
of electrochemically active surface area. This suggests that SOR is more sensitive to the initial stages of 
nucleation of PdHx nanocrystals in the dendritic pores bottom, while GTSAXS is more sensitive to the 
height increase of nanowires that have nucleated in the first stages of deposition.


Figure D.2. Mean 2D-SOR and GTSAXS porous domain size as a function of time for template D40 
(a) and template D25 (b).

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge DESY (Hamburg, Germany), a member of the Helmholtz Association HGF, for the 
provision of experimental facilities. Parts of this research were carried out at PETRA III at the Swedish 
Materials Science beamline P21.2. Beamtime was allocated for proposal I-20211146 EC. We would like to 
thank Sven Gutschmidt for assistance in setting up the experiment.

This work was financially supported by the Swedish Research Council through the Röntgen-Ångström-
Cluster ‘In-situ High Energy X-ray Diffraction from Electrochemical Interfaces (HEXCHEM)’ (Project 
No. 2015-06092), by the ‘Atomic Resolution Cluster’- a Research Infrastructure Fellow program of the 
Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research, and project grant ‘Understanding and Functionalization of 
Nano Porous Anodic Oxides’ (Project No. 2018-03434) by the Swedish research council. We acknowledge 
financial support by NanoLund.

References

1 J. O. Abe, A. P. I. Popoola, E. Ajenifuja and O. M. Popoola, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2019, 44, 15072–

15086.

2 G. W. Crabtree, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. V. Buchanan, Phys. Today, 2004, 57, 39–44.
3 M. Ball and M. Weeda, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2015, 40, 7903–7919.
4 F. Dawood, M. Anda and G. M. Shafiullah, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2020, 45, 3847–3869.


5 K. Komander, T. Tran, J. Saha, M. V. Moro, G. K. Pálsson, M. Wolff and D. Primetzhofer, Phys. Rev. 

Lett., 2021, 127, 136102.

6 F. Wang, R. Li, C. Ding, W. Tang, Y. Wang, S. Xu, R. Yu and Z. Wang, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2017, 42, 

11510–11522.

7 N. Vicinanza, I.-H. Svenum, L. N. Næss, T. A. Peters, R. Bredesen, A. Borg and H. J. Venvik, J. 

Membr. Sci., 2015, 476, 602–608.

8 B. Sakintuna, F. Lamaridarkrim and M. Hirscher, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2007, 32, 1121–1140.
9 S. Niaz, T. Manzoor and A. H. Pandith, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2015, 50, 457–469.
10 F. D. Manchester, A. San-Martin and J. M. Pitre, J. Phase Equilibria, 1994, 15, 62–83.
11 M. Goltsova, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2006, 31, 223–229.
12 R. Delmelle, G. Bamba and J. Proost, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2010, 35, 9888–9892.
13 B. D. Adams and A. Chen, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 282–289.
14 D. Teschner, J. Borsodi, A. Wootsch, Z. Révay, M. Hävecker, A. Knop-Gericke, S. D. Jackson and R. 

Schlögl, Science, 2008, 320, 86–89.

15 S. Sarkar and S. C. Peter, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2060–2080.
16 B. Wickman, M. Fredriksson, L. Feng, N. Lindahl, J. Hagberg and C. Langhammer, Phys. Chem. Chem. 

Phys., 2015, 17, 18953–18960.

17 M. Grdeń, M. Łukaszewski, G. Jerkiewicz and A. Czerwiński, Electrochimica Acta, 2008, 53, 7583–7598.
18 S. K. Konda and A. Chen, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 100–108.
19 E. Boateng and A. Chen, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 6, 100022.
20 A. Kumar, M. M. Mohammadi and M. T. Swihart, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 19058–19085.
21 Z. Zhao, X. Huang, M. Li, G. Wang, C. Lee, E. Zhu, X. Duan and Y. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 

137, 15672–15675.

22 Kyun Tae Kim, Jun Sim, and Sung Min Cho, IEEE Sens. J., 2006, 6, 509–513.
23 A. Larsson, G. Abbondanza, W. Linpé, F. Carlà, P. Mousley, C. Hetherington, E. Lundgren and G. S. 

Harlow, J. Electrochem. Soc.

24 H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466–1468.
25 K. Nielsch, F. Müller, A.-P. Li and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 582–586.
26 S. Alekseeva, A. B. da S. Fanta, B. Iandolo, T. J. Antosiewicz, F. A. A. Nugroho, J. B. Wagner, A. 

Burrows, V. P. Zhdanov and C. Langhammer, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1084.

27 S. Alekseeva, M. Strach, S. Nilsson, J. Fritzsche, V. P. Zhdanov and C. Langhammer, Nat. Commun., 

2021, 12, 5427.

28 C. Langhammer, V. P. Zhdanov, I. Zorić and B. Kasemo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 135502.
29 O. Gillia, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2021, 46, 35594–35640.
30 S. Albertin, J. Gustafson, J. Zhou, S. Pfaff, M. Shipilin, S. Blomberg, L. R. Merte, O. Gutowski, A.-C. 

Dippel, J. Zetterberg, E. Lundgren and U. Hejral, J. Phys. Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 224001.

31 W. Linpé, G. S. Harlow, A. Larsson, G. Abbondanza, L. Rämisch, S. Pfaff, J. Zetterberg, J. Evertsson 

and E. Lundgren, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2020, 91, 044101.

32 W. Linpé, L. Rämisch, G. Abbondanza, A. Larsson, S. Pfaff, L. Jacobse, J. Zetterberg, L. Merte, A. 

Stierle, Z. Hegedues, U. Lienert, E. Lundgren and G. S. Harlow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 096511.

33 S. Pfaff, A. Larsson, D. Orlov, G. S. Harlow, G. Abbondanza, W. Linpé, L. Rämisch, S. M. Gericke, J. 

Zetterberg and E. Lundgren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 19530–19540.

34 O. Jessensky, F. Müller and U. Gösele, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 1173–1175.
35 H. Masuda, K. Yada and A. Osaka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 37, L1340–L1342.
36 E. Deltombe and M. Pourbaix, CORROSION, 1958, 14, 16–20.
37 W. Linpé, G. S. Harlow, J. Evertsson, U. Hejral, G. Abbondanza, F. Lenrick, S. Seifert, R. Felici, N. A. 

Vinogradov and E. Lundgren, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3031–3038.

38 G. S. Harlow, J. Drnec, T. Wiegmann, W. Lipé, J. Evertsson, A. R. Persson, R. Wallenberg, E. 

Lundgren and N. A. Vinogradov, Nanoscale Adv, 2019, 1, 4764–4771.

39 A. Larsson, A. Giuseppe, R. Lisa, L. Weronica, N. Dmitri V., L. Edvin and H. Gary S., J. Phys. Appl. 

Phys.

40 N. J. Gerein and J. A. Haber, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17372–17385.
41 G. Sauer, G. Brehm, S. Schneider, K. Nielsch, R. B. Wehrspohn, J. Choi, H. Hofmeister and U. 

Gösele, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 3243–3247.

42 A. H. M. Shousha, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1975, 17, 100–108.
43 X. Lu, K. G. Yager, D. Johnston, C. T. Black and B. M. Ocko, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2013, 46, 165–172.


44 J. Kieffer and D. Karkoulis, J. Phys. Conf. Ser., 2013, 425, 202012.
45 G. Ashiotis, A. Deschildre, Z. Nawaz, J. P. Wright, D. Karkoulis, F. E. Picca and J. Kieffer, J. Appl. 

Crystallogr., 2015, 48, 510–519.

46 J. Kieffer, V. Valls, N. Blanc and C. Hennig, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2020, 27, 558–566.
47 S. Hara, A. Caravella, M. Ishitsuka, H. Suda, M. Mukaida, K. Haraya, E. Shimano and T. Tsuji, J. 

Membr. Sci., 2012, 421–422, 355–360.

48 J. E. Schirber and B. Morosin, Phys. Rev. B, 1975, 12, 117–118.
49 A. Schröder, J. Fleig, D. Gryaznov, J. Maier and W. Sitte, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12274–12280.
50 H. Okuyama, W. Siga, N. Takagi, M. Nishijima and T. Aruga, Surf. Sci., 1998, 401, 344–354.
51 N. A. Vinogradov, G. S. Harlow, F. Carlà, J. Evertsson, L. Rullik, W. Linpé, R. Felici and E. Lundgren, 

ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 1265–1271.

52 M. Newville, T. Stensitzki, D. B. Allen, M. Rawlik, A. Ingargiola and A. Nelson, Astrophys. Source Code 

Libr., 2016, ascl:1606.014.

53 B. H. Toby and R. B. Von Dreele, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2013, 46, 544–549.
54 G. Caglioti, A. Paoletti and F. P. Ricci, Nucl. Instrum., 1958, 3, 223–228.
55 G. Caglioti, A. Paoletti and F. P. Ricci, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 1960, 9, 195–198.
56 F. Gozzo, L. De Caro, C. Giannini, A. Guagliardi, B. Schmitt and A. Prodi, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2006, 

39, 347–357.

57 J. Barton, Talanta, 1963, 10, 237–246.
58 C. A. Foss, G. L. Hornyak, J. A. Stockert and C. R. Martin, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 7497–7499.
59 W. Linpé, G. S. Harlow, J. Evertsson, U. Hejral, G. Abbondanza, F. Lenrick, S. Seifert, R. Felici, N. A. 

Vinogradov and E. Lundgren, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3031–3038.


