Microstructure reconstruction using diffusion-based 

generative models

Kang-Hyun. Lee1, and Gun Jin Yun1,2

1Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University, Gwanak-

gu Gwanak-ro 1 Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea

2Institute of Advanced Aerospace Technology, Seoul National University, Gwanak-gu 

Gwanak-ro 1, Seoul 08826, South Korea

Abstract

Microstructure reconstruction has been an essential part of computational material 

engineering to reveal the relationship between microstructures and material properties. 

However, finding a general solution for microstructure characterization and reconstruction 

(MCR) tasks is still challenging, although there have been many attempts such as the 

descriptor-based MCR methods. To address this generality problem, the denoising diffusion 

models are first employed for the microstructure reconstruction task in this study. The 

applicability of the diffusion-based models is validated with several types of microstructures 

(e.g., polycrystalline alloy, carbonate, ceramics, copolymer, fiber composite, etc.) that have

different morphological characteristics. The quality of the generated images is assessed with 

the quantitative evaluation metrics (Fréchet inception distance (FID) score, precision, and 

recall) and the conventional statistical microstructure descriptors. Furthermore, the formulation 

of implicit probabilistic models (which yields non-Markovian diffusion processes) is adopted 

to accelerate the sampling process, thereby controlling the computational cost considering the 

practicability and reliability. The results show that the denoising diffusion models are well 

applicable to the reconstruction of various types of microstructures with different spatial 

distributions and morphological features. The diffusion-based approach provides a stable 

training process with simple implementation for generating visually similar and statistically 


equivalent microstructures. In these regards, the diffusion model has great potential to be used 

as a universal microstructure reconstruction method for handling complex microstructures for 

materials science.

Keywords: microstructure reconstruction, diffusion model, denoising diffusion probabilistic 
model, microstructure reconstruction, neural network

1. Introduction

One of the major goals in material science is to build process-microstructure-property 

linkages of the target material to optimize its property for the given application. Owing to the

development of computational materials science with integrated computational materials 

engineering (ICME), inverse materials design has been aided by numerical simulations and 

data-driven techniques in the last decades [1-6]. A vital issue in the computational material 

design framework is building a reliable large-scale microstructure database. To deal with this 

issue, microstructure characterization and reconstruction (MCR) have been utilized to facilitate 

the materials design by using microstructural descriptors which encapsulate the essential 

morphological information. For instance, if one can find a reasonable descriptor for a given 

microstructure image, it is able to reconstruct equivalent microstructure images (or even three-

dimensional microstructure) as many as desired.

To date, a considerable amount of studies have been conducted to propose some reasonable 

and universal descriptors for microstructure reconstruction such as physical descriptors [3, 7], 

correlation functions [8, 9], random fields [10-12], and spectral density functions [13, 14]. 

Based on the pre-characterized microstructure with certain descriptors, most of the MCR 

methods involve an iterative optimization process for minimizing the difference between the 

target descriptors and the current descriptors [1, 15-18]. After a sufficient number of iterations,


it is able to generate statistically and morphologically equivalent microstructure samples. In 

addition, the differentiable descriptors have been also used to characterize and reconstruct 

microstructure samples with gradient-based optimization [3, 4, 7, 19]. However, it is still 

challenging to find a universal descriptor that works for various types of microstructures. The 

conventional MCR methods based on statistics of morphological features (e.g., two-point 

correlation and lineal path functions) often do not work well as the shape of the target 

microstructure gets complicated. For instance, the typical microstructures of alloy, ceramics,

and carbonate are well reconstructed from n-point correlation [3, 8] whereas only some 

artificial neural network (ANN)-based models [3, 4, 20] have shown noteworthy performance 

on the reconstruction of copolymer microstructure. In other words, the conventional MCR

methodologies require insights into the spatial distribution of the morphological features in the 

material of interest.

Meanwhile, various types of data-based synthesis frameworks have been proposed in recent 

days with the rapid evolution of generative neural network models including variational 

autoencoders (VAEs) [21, 22], flow-based models [23-25], and generative adversarial 

networks (GANs) [5, 26-28]. These generative models learn a latent representation of the 

sample data, which can also be thought of as a compressed form of original data. After training 

the generative models, the models can generate a new sample by simply sampling the latent 

variables. In particular, GAN-based models have shown noteworthy performance on 

microstructure reconstruction tasks [5, 20, 23, 26, 29, 30]. In addition, the StyleGAN [31, 32]

also has the lowest Fréchet inception distance (FID) scores with ImageNet 64 × 64 dataset

as shown in Table 1. Using GAN, it is able to generate high-resolution image samples with 

high precision and recall (i.e., low FID). Furthermore, not only do GANs generate high-quality 

samples, GANs can generate samples very fast since it requires only a single pass through the 

trained network. However, GAN models suffer from critical problems such as mode collapse 


and non-convergence issues [27, 33-35]. Due to the adversarial formulation of the loss function 

to train the discriminator and the generator, training GANs is highly unstable [36, 37]. For 

instance, GAN models often produce samples from a limited set of modes (i.e., degraded

diversity of the model outputs). To secure the diversity of samples as well as the precision, the

hyperparameters and the complex features in GAN models should be carefully addressed. The 

difficulties of training and scaling models are the major drawback of GANs, which hinder their

wide application in different domains.

To overcome these problems with GANs, diffusion-based generative models have been 

drawing significant attention for data synthesis in recent days. Recent works on diffusion

models have demonstrated their noteworthy generative performance with high-quality samples

comparable to those from GANs [38-41]. In 2021, Dhariwal and Nichol [38] also showed that 

their tailored denoising diffusion models outperform GANs on image synthesis tasks in sample 

quality (i.e., FID score). In addition, the performance of the diffusion-based model (i.e., 

cascaded diffusion model (CDM)) presented by Ho et al. [42] is also ranked first with the 

benchmark result using ImageNet 64 × 64 (Table 1). The diffusion models are likelihood-

based models which generate samples by gradually denoising the noised samples [38-41].

According to Yang et al. [43], there are three popular formulations of diffusion models which 

are the denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) [41], the score-based generative 

models (SGM), and the stochastic differential equations (SDE). Although the detailed 

formulation process is different for each case, DDPM and SGM can be generalized with the

solutions of SDE for noise perturbation and sample generation (i.e., denoising). In particular,

the open-source code for the generative model formulated with the DDPM approach is also

released by OpenAI [39, 41]. After the original denoising diffusion model was proposed by 

Sohl-Dickstein [44], the diffusion models have been shown to provide a generative 

performance with a comprehensive distribution coverage in various domains such as computer 


vision, natural language processing, and multimodal modeling [43, 45]. Furthermore, the 

stationary objective of these models without adversarial formulation and relatively simple 

architecture compared to GANs also facilitate their application. The advances in the 

probabilistic parameterization of the diffusion models also provide stable training procedures

for forward (diffusion) and backward (denoising) transformation of the prior data distribution

[39, 46].

This study proposes a diffusion model-based microstructure reconstruction approach using

the DDPM formulation [39, 41]. Compared to the conventional MCR methods, the model does 

not require any physical or spatial approximation. Instead, the model directly learns the sample 

data distribution, enabling the generation of multiple synthetic images of microstructures. To 

the authors’ best knowledge, this is the first study conducted for implementing denoising 

diffusion-based microstructure reconstruction. Furthermore, the implicit formulation of 

probabilistic diffusion models, which is called denoising diffusion implicit models (DDIM)

[40, 47], is adopted to accelerate the sampling process (which is a solution for the slow 

computational speed of the original DDPM). To validate the model’s performance, various 

microstructure images with different morphological characteristics are considered to be 

reconstructed. Then, the performance of the model is evaluated using the evaluation metrics

(FID scores [48], precision, and recall [49]) for assessing the quality of samples in terms of 

data synthesis, as well as the conventional spatial statistics for analyzing the morphological

similarities between the original and generated samples.


Table 1. FID score benchmark for image generation on ImageNet 𝟔𝟒 × 𝟔𝟒
Model
FID
Type
Year
References

CDM
1.48
Diffusion
2021
[42]

StyleGAN-XL
1.51
GAN
2022
[31]

ADM
2.07
Diffusion
2021
[38]

Improved DDPM
2.92
Diffusion
2021
[39]

PGMGAN
21,73
GAN
2021
[50]

GLIDE+CLIP+CLS+CLS+FREE
29.184
Diffusion
2022
[51]

GLIDE+CLS-FREE
29.219
Diffusion
2022
[51]

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of Markovian diffusion process and non-Markovian 

inference models for microstructure synthesis

2. Diffusion probabilistic modeling for microstructure reconstruction

2.1. Fundamentals of diffusion models

There are several different formulations for diffusion models presented in previous literature

[43]. The denoising diffusion probabilistic model proposed by Sohl-Dickstein et al. [44]

consists of a parameterized Markov chain that destroys structure in a data distribution by 

iteratively adding noise and a reverse process that restores the structure in data. Their study

also demonstrated the denoising diffusion-based model’s effectiveness in sampling various 

types of data, including complex natural image datasets. Similarly, Song and Ermon [46]

proposed a diffusion-based generative model using score matching (i.e., noise-conditioned 


score networks) that estimates the gradients of data densities. Their result showed that the

trained model could generate high-quality samples comparable to GANs based on Langevin 

dynamics without additional sampling process. Furthermore, Ho et al. [41] demonstrated

DDPM, which is a certain parameterized version of the diffusion probabilistic model, yielding 

an equivalence with denoising score matching (during training) and annealed Langevin 

dynamics (during sampling). In this study, the DDPM [41] approach (Figure 1) is adopted to

build a generative model, as well as the DDIM [40, 47] approach for accelerating the sampling 

process.

2.1.1
Formulation of DDPM

According to the diffusion models with Gaussian noise formulated by Ho et al. [41], a 

Markovian noising process 𝑞 that progressively adds noise to the sample data at different time 

step 𝑡 can be defined as

𝑞(𝑥𝑡 | 𝑥𝑡−1) ∶= 𝑁(𝑥𝑡; √1 − 𝛽𝑡𝑥𝑡−1, 𝛽𝑡𝐈)
(1)

where 𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝑇 are the noised samples (which also act as the latent variables in DDPM) from

the sample data distribution 𝑥0~𝑞(𝑥0), and 𝛽𝑡 is the parameter for controlling the noising 

schedule. Herein, the noising process 𝑞(𝑥𝑡|𝑥0) can be expressed as a Gaussian distribution 

which eliminates the need for sampling from repeated noising processes as

𝑞(𝑥𝑡|𝑥0) = 𝑁(𝑥𝑡; √𝛼̅𝑥0, (1 − 𝛼̅𝑡)𝐈)
(2)

so 𝑥𝑡 can be written as a linear combination of sample data 𝑥0 and a noise variable

𝜖~𝑁(0, 𝐈) by reparametrizing as follows:

𝑥𝑡 = √𝛼̅𝑡𝑥0 + 𝜖√1 − 𝛼̅𝑡
(3)


𝛼𝑡 ≔ 1 − 𝛽𝑡
(4)

𝛼̅𝑡 ≔ ∏ 𝛼𝑖

𝑡

𝑖=0

(5)

It is worth noting that as 𝛼̅𝑡 get close to 0, 𝑞(𝑥𝑡|𝑥0) approaches to a standard Gaussian

distribution 𝑁(0, 𝐈). Sohl-Dickstein et al. [44] also noted that 𝑞(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡) converges to a 

diagonal Gaussian distribution as 𝑇 → ∞. Since all the conditional distributions can be 

modeled as Gaussians, it is able to train a neural network model 𝑝𝜃 to predict a mean and

covariance matrix for denoising purpose as follows:

𝑝𝜃(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡) ≔ 𝑁(𝑥𝑡−1; 𝜇𝜃(𝑥𝑡, 𝑡), Σ𝜃(𝑥𝑡, 𝑡))
(6)

To learn the actual data distribution using the above model (i.e., 𝑝𝜃(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡) ≈ 𝑞(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡)), 

the variational lower-bound (VLB) can be defined to be optimized as follows [39]:

𝐿vlb ≔ 𝐿0 + 𝐿1 + ⋯ + 𝐿𝑇−1 + 𝐿𝑇
(7)

𝐿0 ≔ − log 𝑝𝜃 (𝑥0|𝑥1)
(8)

𝐿𝑡−1 ≔ 𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑞(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡, 𝑥0)||𝑝𝜃(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡))
(9)

𝐿𝑇 ≔ 𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑞(𝑥𝑇|𝑥0)||𝑝(𝑥𝑇))
(10)

where 𝐷𝐾𝐿 is Kullback-Leibler divergence. On the other hand, DDPM can be trained to learn

the true data distribution with the simplified objective defined by Ho et al. [41] using the 

trainable mean functions and constant variances as 

𝐿simple ≔ 𝔼𝑥0,𝜀 ,𝑡 [‖𝜖 − 𝜖𝜃

(𝑡)(√𝛼̅𝑡𝑥0 + √1 − 𝛼̅𝑡𝜖 )‖

2

2
]
(11)


where 𝜖𝜃

(𝑡) is a set of noise parameters indexed by 𝑡 which are predicted with trainable 

parameters 𝜃(𝑡). In other words, the training objective can be defined as a mean-squared error 

between the predicted noise and the true noise without considering the reverse process variance 

Σ𝜃(𝑥𝑡, 𝑡) into VLB. It is also worth noting that Eq. (11) has no regularization term since the 

fixed noise scheduling can lead to isotropic Gaussians with a sufficient number of diffusion 

time steps [38, 41, 43, 45]. Furthermore, the loss function 𝐿simple is equivalent to the 

variational inference objective in DDIM if a certain weight factor is applied [40]. In other words, 

the objective in DDPM can be employed as a surrogate objective for DDIM.

Meanwhile, it can be seen that Eq. (11) does not incorporate terms related to log-likelihood.

However, Ho et al. [39] showed that the model could be improved by learning Σ𝜃(𝑥𝑡, 𝑡). In 

order to consider the effect of Σ𝜃(𝑥𝑡, 𝑡) in loss function, the following hybrid objective [38, 

39] is adopted

𝐿hybrid = 𝐿simple + 𝜆𝐿vlb
(12)

where 𝜆 is a weight factor that is set to 0.001 to treat 𝐿simple as a main component of loss

function while suppressing the effect of 𝐿vlb.

2.1.2
Sampling with DDIM

Although DDPM had demonstrated as a promising generative model for data synthesis, the 

major drawback of DDPM is the high computational cost due to the many iterations. If a single 

sample needs to be generated with a trained DDPM, the reverse of the forward diffusion process 

(i.e., noising process) needs to proceed with thousands of iterative steps. This is the major 

difference compared to GAN where only a single pass through a trained network is required to

generate a sample.


To accelerate the sampling process with DDPM, a sampling approach based on the implicit 

probabilistic models which is called DDIM [47], was proposed by Song et al. [40]. The basic 

idea of DDIM is to generalize the Markovian (stochastic) forward diffusion process to non-

Markovian (deterministic). Unlike the definition of the process 𝑞 (Eq. (1)-(2)), an inference 

distribution 𝑞𝜎 can be defined as follows:

𝑞𝜎(𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝑇|𝑥0) = 𝑞𝜎(𝑥𝑇|𝑥0) ∏ 𝑞𝜎(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡, 𝑥0)

𝑇

𝑡=2

(13)

𝑞𝜎(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡, 𝑥0) = 𝑁(𝑥𝑡−1; 𝜇̃𝑡−1(𝑥𝑡, 𝑥0), 𝜎𝑡

2𝐈)
(14)

𝜇̃𝑡−1(𝑥𝑡, 𝑥0) = √𝛼̅𝑡−1𝑥0 + √1 − 𝛼̅𝑡−1 − 𝜎𝑡

2 ∙ 𝑥𝑡 − √𝛼̅𝑡𝑥0

√1 − 𝛼̅𝑡

(15)

Then, the conditional forward diffusion process (which is also Gaussian) can be written as 

follows using Bayes’ rule.

𝑞𝜎(𝑥𝑡|𝑥𝑡−1, 𝑥0) ≔ 𝑞𝜎(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥𝑡, 𝑥0)𝑞𝜎(𝑥𝑡|𝑥0)

𝑞𝜎(𝑥𝑡−1|𝑥0)
(16)

As can be seen in Eq. (16), it can be said that the process is not Markovian since it depends on 

𝑥𝑡−1 and 𝑥0. In particular, the parameter 𝜎𝑡 determines the stochasticity of the given forward 

process. For instance, the process becomes deterministic when 𝜎𝑡 = 0 and the corresponding 

inference model is called DDIM. On the other hand, the process becomes the DDPM if 𝜎𝑡 =

√(1 − 𝛼𝑡−1)/(1 − 𝛼𝑇)√1 − 𝛼𝑡/𝛼𝑡−1. A sample 𝑥𝑡−1 from a sample 𝑥𝑡 can be generated

with the following equation [40].

𝑥𝑡−1 = √𝛼𝑡−1 (𝑥𝑡 − √1 − 𝛼𝑡𝜖𝜃

(𝑡)𝑥𝑡

√𝛼𝑡

) + √1 − 𝛼𝑡−1 − 𝜎𝑡

2 ∙ 𝜖𝜃

(𝑡)𝑥𝑡 + 𝜎𝑡𝜖𝑡
(17)


In particular, the major advantage of DDIM is that it is unnecessary to reverse the whole 

diffusion process with the predefined number of diffusion steps (𝑇). For instance, we can define 

an arbitrary sampling trajectory with the subset of latent variables {𝑥𝑠1, … , 𝑥𝑠𝑇} that has a 

length smaller than 𝑇. Controlling the length of the sampling trajectory, it is able to search an 

acceptable number of sampling steps considering both the computational cost and the sample 

quality (which is discussed further in section 3.2 ).

2.2 Datasets and model architecture

2.2.1
Generation of synthetic microstructure

To train the diffusion probabilistic models for generating synthesized microstructures, a

sufficient number of microstructure samples with different spatial variations must to be 

obtained. Furthermore, various types of microstructures should be considered to validate the 

effectiveness of diffusion models as a universal method for microstructure synthesis. Therefore, 

the following seven types of microstructures are considered in this study: 1) alloy, 2) carbonate,

3) ceramics, 4) copolymer, 5) polymethyl methacrylate, and 6) fiber composites. To aid the 

validation of the proposed approach, the microstructure images for training are generated using 

the descriptor-based microstructure reconstruction methods presented in the previous literature

[3, 4, 52]. In addition, the microstructure samples are generated to have certain morphological 

features such as grain size distribution, two-point correlation functions, and volume fraction. 

Then, the models are tested to confirm if these features are well reproduced. For each type of 

microstructure, 1,000 images of size 64 × 64 are created. The detailed explanation for the 

reconstruction methods is provided in Appendix A. The sample images for the different kinds 

of reconstructed microstructures can be seen in Appendix B. In addition, 1,000 microstructure 

images of size 256 × 256 are also created for each of the three types of microstructure (alloy, 

carbonate, and fiber composites) to verify the generation performance on higher resolution.


2.2.2
Model architecture

Following the UNet[53]-based architecture presented by Ho et al. [41], which also resembles 

the unmasked PixelCNN++[54], is employed for microstructure reconstruction. The models

have five feature map resolutions from 64 × 64 to 4 × 4 with the 128 base channels and 

have three convolutional residual blocks per resolution level. A global attention layer is used

at the 16 × 16 level between the convolution blocks with a single head. The ablation study is 

not conducted yet which leaves room for further improvement of the diffusion models for MCR 

applications. It is also worth noting that the performance of the diffusion probabilistic models 

can be improved by increasing the number of attention heads while using multi-resolution 

attention as shown in the recent work proposed by Dhariwal and Nichol [38].

2.3 Evaluation metrics

To evaluate the quality of the generative samples with the diffusion models, the FID score 

is utilized since it has been the most widely used metric for image generation tasks. The FID 

assesses the quality of generated images by calculating the magnitude of difference between 

original and generated distributions using the pre-trained Inception v3 neural network model

(often prepared on ImageNet datasets) [48, 55]. FID score can be computed as follows:

‖𝛍𝑟 − 𝛍𝑔‖2

2 + Tr (𝐂𝑟 + 𝐂𝑔 − 2(𝐂𝑟 ∙ 𝐂𝑔)

1/2)
(18)

where 𝛍 and 𝐂 are the mean vectors and the covariance matrices in the embedding space of 

Inception v3 without the classification layer (subscripts 𝑟 and 𝑔 real and generated data, 

respectively). In addition, FID has been known to be in good agreement with human perceptual 

scores [56, 57]. However, a significant drawback of FID is that it cannot separate the two 


critical components for evaluating the quality of the generative samples: fidelity and diversity.

Thus, the improved precision and recall metric proposed is also employed to assess the

performance of diffusion models. According to Kynkäänniemi [49], the precision and recall 

metric for generative models can be computed as follows:

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝚽𝑟, 𝚽𝑔) =
1

|𝚽𝑔| ∑ 𝑓𝑃𝑅(𝜙𝑔, 𝚽𝑟)

𝜙𝑔∈𝚽𝑔

(19)

𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙(𝚽𝑟, 𝚽𝑔) =
1

|𝚽𝑟| ∑ 𝑓𝑃𝑅(𝜙𝑟, 𝚽𝑔)

𝜙𝑟∈𝚽𝑟

(20)

where 𝜙 denotes the feature vector of the data (real/generated), and 𝚽 is the set of the feature 

vectors (real/generated). 𝑓𝑃𝑅(𝜙, 𝚽) is a binary function to determine whether the data of 

interest 𝜙 is located in the volume created by the feature vectors of the sets 𝚽 [49].

To verify the generated microstructure images in terms of morphological features, the 

conventional two-point correlation function [8] and the lineal path function [58] are also used 

to analyze the morphological differences between the original and the generated microstructure

images. The two-point correlation function can be defined as follows:

S2

(𝑖)(𝐫1, 𝐫2) = 𝑋(𝐫1)𝑋(𝐫2)
(21)

where r1 and r2 are randomly selected location vectors and 𝑋 is a binary function that

returns 1 if there is a phase of interest 𝑖 at a given location and 0 otherwise. It is worth noting 

that S2

(𝑖) only depends on the Euclidean distance between r1 and r2 [59]. Similar to the two-

point correlation function, the lineal path function can be computed to evaluate the connectivity 

between the clusters of phase 𝑖 as follows:


𝐿(𝑖)(𝐫1, 𝐫2) = {1 if a linear line between 𝐫1 and 𝐫2 lands on phase 𝑖

0
otherwise
(22)

Then, the discrepancy between the correlation functions (Table 3 and Table 4) is computed as 

follows to quantify the difference between the original and generated microstructure images

𝜀𝑐 = 𝐴𝑐

𝐴𝑜𝑟𝑖

× 100
(23)

where 𝐴𝑐 is the area between the two correlation functions, and 𝐴𝑜𝑟𝑖 is the area under the 

correlation function of the original microstructure images.

Furthermore, it is essential to check if the models are overfitting the training dataset. The

most common form of overfitting in generative models is that the models output only the 

training samples, also called data-copying [60]. To verify the performance of generative 

models, the models should be tested if the data-copying has occurred (section 3.1.3). Thus, the

𝑛 × 𝑚 size generated microstructure images closest to the training images are assessed in 

terms of the mean squared error of pixel values computed as

𝜀𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑙 = 1

𝑛𝑚 ∑ ∑(𝑌𝑖𝑗 − 𝑌̂𝑖𝑗)

2

𝑚

𝑗=1

𝑛

𝑖=1

(24)

where 𝑌𝑖𝑗 and 𝑌̂𝑖𝑗 are pixel values of training and original images, respectively.

2.4 Training procedure

In this study, the diffusion-based generative models for microstructure reconstruction are 

trained using Adam optimizer [61] with a learning rate of 0.0001, training steps of 100000, and 

a batch size of 32 per GPU. The exponential moving average (EMA) rate of 0.9999 is used 


with a dropout ratio of 0.1 for all experiments. The diffusion models are implemented with 

PyTorch library [62] and trained on Nvidia RTX A6000 GPUs. The diffusion time steps for all 

models are set to be 4000 with the linear noise schedule.

3. Results and discussion

3.1 Model performance for microstructure reconstruction

3.1.1
FID scores

The randomly selected generated microstructure images using the diffusion models with 150 

DDIM sampling steps are shown in Figure 2 (more samples can be seen in Appendix C). As 

shown in the figure, the diffusion models can generate visually similar microstructures 

compared to the original microstructure images. To quantify the performance of the generative 

models, the evaluation metrics (FID, precision, and recall) are computed for each type of 

generated microstructure sample as shown in Table 2. It can be found that the lowest FID score 

is achieved for the polycrystalline alloy microstructure images with the highest precision and 

recall (0.784 and 0.758, respectively). This could be explained by the relatively simple 

geometrical structure of the considered alloy images consisting of only the straight grain 

boundaries (i.e., white pixels). Since Song et al. [40] achieved the FID score of 4 on CelebA 

(64 × 64) datasets with the DDIM approach, the observed FID scores in this study are not 

remote from the state-of-the-art generative models. In addition, Dhariwal et al. [38] also 

achieved the state-of-the-art FID score of 2 on ImageNet (64 × 64) datasets with their 

proposed guided diffusion approach surpassing GANs. However, since the FID score is 

computed with the pre-trained Inception V3 model [48, 55], which means the score is 

calculated within the latent space of the network trained for image recognition, it is not easy to 

say that the proposed models are well-trained for the microstructure reconstruction tasks. In 

other words, the FID scores show that the images are visually alike regarding human perception 


of similarity. Thus, the detailed morphological features of the generated microstructure samples

are also evaluated in terms of the spatial correlation functions [8, 58] in the next section.

3.1.2
Morphological features assessed with correlation functions

The comparison between the two-point correlation and the lineal path functions of the 

original and generated microstructure samples are as depicted in Figure 3. It is worth noting 

that the deviations of the functions, which are depicted with the shaded envelope in the graphs, 

are quite small since the original samples are generated with the descriptor-based MCR 

methods (Appendix A) to have certain morphological features. To verify that the diffusion 

models can reproduce these features, the values of the discrepancy between the original and 

generated samples are computed as shown in Table 3 and Table 4. For all the cases, the 

discrepancy values are lower or about 5%, which shows that the generated samples are in good 

agreement with the original samples. Furthermore, the results show that the volume fractions 

are well preserved in the generated samples since the values of the correlation functions

(original/generated) are almost the same when the distance between the randomly selected 

points (r) is 0. In addition, relatively high discrepancy rate values for the alloy, carbonate, and 

polymethyl methacrylate are observed as shown in Table 3. This can be explained by the

relatively low values of the correlation functions for these materials, as shown in Figure 3

(which also means low volume fractions) where a slight difference leads to a significant 

increase in the discrepancy rate. In other words, the original and generated samples have 

visually similar morphologies (section 3.1.1) and near statistically equivalent microstructures 

in terms of spatial correlations. 


Figure 2. Comparison of the original microstructure images and the synthesized 

microstructure images using the trained diffusion model with DDIM-based sampling

Table 2. FID scores evaluated on different types of microstructures (resolution of 
𝟔𝟒 × 𝟔𝟒) with trained diffusion models
Microstructure
FID Score
Precision
Recall

Alloy
2.08
0.784
0.758

Carbonate
18.12
0.324
0.712

Ceramics
13.87
0.384
0.625

Copolymer
6.74
0.483
0.784

Polymethyl methacrylate
11.29
0.637
0.791

Fiber composites
2.22
0.76
0.782


Figure 3. Comparison of two-point correlation functions between the original 

microstructures and the synthesized microstructures using the diffusion models: a) 

alloy, b) carbonate, c) ceramics, d) copolymer, e) polymethyl methacrylate, and f) fiber 

composites


Table 3. The discrepancy between the two-point correlation functions (𝑺𝟐) for different 
microstructures
Microstructure
The discrepancy between the correlation functions 𝜀𝑇𝑃

𝑐
(%)

Alloy
5.17

Carbonate
2.02

Ceramics
1.05

Copolymer
0.66

Polymethyl methacrylate
3.70

Fiber composites
1.30

Table 4. The discrepancy between the lineal path correlation functions (𝑳) for different 
microstructures
Microstructure
The discrepancy between the correlation functions 𝜀𝐿

𝑐 (%)

Alloy
0.32

Carbonate
5.36

Ceramics
1.82

Copolymer
1.08

Polymethyl methacrylate
4.71

Fiber composites
0.81

Moreover, it is crucial to check whether the generated microstructure samples have similar 

physical characteristics compared to the original ones. In particular, the grain size is directly 

related to the tensile strength of the polycrystalline alloys (i.e., Hall-Petch relationship [63]).

To validate the generated samples of alloy microstructure in terms of the physical properties, 

the grain size distributions are evaluated as shown in Figure 4. As shown in the figure, the 

distributions are very similar as well as the means (𝜇mean) and the standard deviations (𝜎dev). 

Regarding this result, it can be said that the diffusion models are able to reconstruct visually 

similar alloy microstructure from the given datasets while capturing the grain characteristics

which are closely related to the material properties. However, it is still required to validate the 

practical application of the diffusion models with various kinds of alloy features such as high 

grain aspect ratios (i.e., columnar structures) and abnormal grain growth [64]. Furthermore, 

training diffusion models with the inverse pole figure (IPF) maps considering the relationship 

between the adjacent grains (e.g., disorientation angle) could be conducted in the future.


Figure 4. Comparison of the grain size distribution between a) the original alloy 

microstructure samples and b) the generated alloy microstructure samples

In particular, the results also show that the trained diffusion models can generate visually 

similar copolymer microstructures (Figure 2). According to the previous literature [5], the 

Gaussian random field[10, 65], decision tree [12], physical descriptor [7], and two-point 

correlation [18] based reconstruction methods cannot generate visually similar copolymer 

microstructures although they may achieve low discrepancy in terms of n-point correlation 

functions. This is due to the difficulties of characterizing the unique feature of copolymer 

microstructure, the local anisotropy along with global isotropy. On the contrary, the generated 

copolymer microstructure images with the diffusion models have various locally anisotropic 

structures (Figure 5 and Appendix C) while retaining the global isotropy. Furthermore, the 

connectivity of the white phase is reproduced well in all the generated samples. The FID score 

of 6.74 with low discrepancy rates of correlation functions (0.66% and 1.08% for 𝑆2 and 𝐿,

respectively) also show that the generated copolymer samples are visually and statistically 

similar to the original samples. Notably, this highlights the performance of the diffusion models 

as a potential universal microstructure reconstruction tool since the method does not require 

any additional modifications for generating complex microstructure images.


Figure 5. Comparison between a) original copolymer images and b) generated 

copolymer images with the diffusion model

It is also worth noting that the circular structures of the fiber composites are successfully 

reproduced with the diffusion models (Figure 2 and Appendix C). Since fixed morphologies of 

rectangular and circular structures are often distorted in the samples reproduced with generative 

models such as GANs [66-69], additional regularizations are often needed to capture these 

features. However, the results in this study are obtained without any additional regularizations 

for the morphology control. Although more various kinds of fixed morphologies such as 

rectangles, ellipsoids, and lattices, need to be considered in the future, the results imply that 

the diffusion model is a possible solution for the reconstruction of the fixed morphological 

features.

In addition, a relatively high FID score of 18.12 is obtained for the case of generated 

carbonate microstructure samples as shown in Table 2. This is probably due to the samples’ 

complicated structures including some small dispersed materials (i.e., white pixels). The lower

precision value of 0.324 compared to those of the other types of microstructure also means that 

the fraction of the realistic generated images is small. Meanwhile, the discrepancy rates of 2.02 

and 5.36% (Table 3) for the correlation functions show that the generated samples have near 


statistically equivalent microstructures compared to the original samples. According to Li et al.

[5], the discrepancy for the case of carbonate microstructure was found to be about 3~7% using 

the transfer learning method, decision tree, Gaussian random field, two-point correlation, and 

physical descriptor-based method. Regarding this result, it seems that the observed discrepancy 

rates indicate an acceptable performance for reconstructing carbonate microstructure.

3.1.3
Evaluation of pixel error for checking data-copying

To detect data-copying in the generated samples, the generated samples that have minimum 

𝜀pixel are illustrated with the corresponding training images as shown in Figure 6. As 𝜀pixel

gets close to zero, the images are near identical in the pixel space. It can also be seen that the 

minimum 𝜀pixel increases with the fraction of the white pixels as there is more chance of 

discrepancy in pixel values. Since all the generated images that have minimum 𝜀pixel values 

are different from the corresponding training images, it can be said that data-copying has not 

occurred during the generation process.

In particular, the generated alloy image which has the minimum 𝜀pixel shows an interesting 

characteristic of the diffusion models. As shown in Figure 7, the generated sample has two 

distinctive regions. The region enclosed by the blue box has high 𝜀pixel whereas the region 

enclosed by the red box has low 𝜀pixel with respect to the original training sample. In other 

words, the region in the red box can be thought of as a copy of the original sample shown in 

Figure 7a. However, the generated sample is obviously different from the original sample since 

the blue-boxed region has different grain structures (high 𝜀pixel). It is worth noting that the 

regions in the blue and red boxed are well-connected, forming the grain boundaries (i.e., white 

pixels). Although the models are trained without any morphological control or additional 

regularization, the generated image shows that the connection of grain boundaries is preserved.


That is, naively speaking, the diffusion models are seemed to learn the essential features of 

grain structures. It emphasizes the performance of the diffusion models as a potential universal 

MCR method for preserving important microstructural features. However, it is required to 

study the trained models’ semantic latent space in future work to ensure whether the diffusion 

models can fully capture various types of complex microstructural features. Meanwhile, the 

generation results show that the trained diffusion models can reconstruct visually similar and 

statistically equivalent microstructure images that are not present in the training dataset.

Figure 6. The original microstructure images and the corresponding closest synthesized 

microstructure images in terms of the mean squared error of pixel values


Figure 7. Comparison of original and generated samples (alloy) that are closest in terms 
of the mean squared error of pixel values: a) corresponding samples, b) region of high 

pixel error, and c) region of low pixel error

3.2 Effect of sampling steps

It has been known that the quality of the generated samples with DDIM is highly affected 

by the number of sampling steps. For instance, Song et al. [40] showed that DDIM with 20 to 

100 sampling steps could generate samples with quality comparable to DDPM with 1000 

diffusion steps. To analyze the effect of the sampling steps, the evaluation metrics are 

computed with the different number of sampling steps for 64 × 64
size carbonate 

microstructure samples as shown in Figure 8a. The graph shows that the FID score is very high,

above 40 with 10 sampling steps, and significantly decreases as the number of steps increases 

to 150. With 300 sampling steps, the FID score seems to converge to a specific value of about 

17.46. The precision and recall values also reach their maximums with 300 sampling steps.

Meanwhile, the sampling time for the generation of 10,000 images almost linearly increases

with the length of the sampling trajectory (Figure 8b) as explained in section 2.1. Since there 


is a trade-off between sampling time and sample quality, it is essential to determine optimal 

DDIM sampling steps to acquire enough samples considering computational capacity. 

To verify the performance of the diffusion models on the reconstruction of higher resolution 

microstructure images, the diffusion models are trained with the 256 × 256 images of alloy, 

carbonate, and fiber composites (Appendix D). The generated samples with the trained 

diffusion models using the same training procedure (section 2.4) are shown in Figure 9 with 

500 DDIM sampling steps (more samples are provided in Appendix E). As can be seen in the 

generated samples, the microstructural features, such as the connected grain boundaries and 

the circular fibers, are well reproduced. The evaluation metrics are also obtained with the 

different sampling steps, as shown in Figure 10a for the carbonate microstructure (256 × 256). 

Similar to the case with 64 × 64 size images, the FID score increases with the number of 

DDIM sampling steps. In particular, the precision of the generated samples also keeps

increasing with sampling steps up to 500. This implies that more sampling steps might be 

required to generate higher resolution microstructure images with acceptable quality. In 

summary, the number of sampling steps in the diffusion models needs to be determined

considering sample resolution, sample quality (assessed with the evaluation metrics such as 

FID, precision, and recall), and computational capacity. Furthermore, the parameters including 

the number of diffusion steps and the hyperparameters of the network architecture may need 

further modifications to optimize the reconstruction performance for specific sample 

resolutions.


Figure 8. Effect of number of sampling steps for generation of 𝟔𝟒 × 𝟔𝟒 microstructure 

images: a) metrics (FID, precision, and recall) for evaluation of microstructure 

(carbonate) reconstructions, c) computational time to sample 1k images

Figure 9. Comparison of the original microstructure images and the synthesized 

microstructure images using the trained diffusion model with DDIM-based sampling

with 500 sampling steps


Figure 10. Effect of number of sampling steps for generation of 256×256 microstructure 

images: a) metrics (FID, precision, and recall) for evaluation of microstructure 

(carbonate) reconstructions, c) computational time to sample 1k images

4. Conclusion

In this study, the denoising diffusion models are first employed for the microstructure 

reconstruction tasks considering various types of microstructures. To verify the reconstruction 

performance of the models, the synthetic microstructure samples with certain morphological 

features (e.g., grain size, volume fraction, two-point correlation functions, and local anisotropic 

structures) are used as training datasets. The trained denoising diffusion models are then used 

to generate samples for each type of microstructure using DDIM sampling to accelerate the 

sampling process. The results show that the diffusion models can reproduce visually similar 


microstructure images and the quality of the samples is assessed with several metrics (FID 

score, precision, and recall). The generated samples also have similar spatial correlation 

functions with those of the original samples, indicating that the statistical distributions of 

morphological features are well reproduced. We suggest that the diffusion models must be 

further studied to develop a universal microstructure reconstruction tool due to its simple

implementation, stable training, and the small number of parameters that need to be controlled. 

The following potential types of future research for microstructure reconstruction with

denoising diffusion models are recommended. To improve the reconstruction performance of 

the diffusion models, an ablation study can be conducted to find the best model configuration. 

Specifically, the parameters of the diffusion models (e.g., numbers of sampling and diffusion 

steps) and the hyperparameters (e.g., number of feature map resolutions, self-attention, and 

residual blocks) can be tuned for the specific microstructure reconstruction tasks. Furthermore, 

the semantic latent space of the diffusion models, which are the noised samples {𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝑇},

need to be studied with the deterministic formulation of DDPM (i.e., DDIM). In order to control 

the microstructural features of the generated samples, manipulation techniques such as 

guidance and interpolation within the latent space need to be developed, which are getting 

much attention recently [70, 71]. The sampling speed needs to be also improved to aid the data-

driven materials design with a sufficient amount of microstructure dataset.

Acknowledgment

This material is based upon work supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research 

under award number FA2386-22-1-4001. Any options, finding, and conclusions, or 

recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily 

reflect the views of the United States Air Force. The authors are grateful for their support


Appendix

A. Descriptor-based microstructure reconstruction

The considered types of microstructure are alloy, carbonate, ceramics, copolymer, 

polymethyl methacrylate, and fiber composites in this study. Firstly, the synthetic 

microstructure images of alloy are generated using MicroStructPy [52] with the given

descriptors such as grain sizes and volume fractions 𝑉𝑓,𝑖 to determine the population density.

The probability 𝑝𝑖  that a certain grain is belonged to the corresponding phase 𝑖 can be 

calculated as 

𝑛𝑖 = 𝑉𝑓,𝑖

𝔼[𝑉𝑖]
(25)

𝑝𝑖 =
𝑛𝑖

∑ 𝑛𝑗
𝑗
(26)

where 𝑛𝑖 is the number of grains (phase 𝑖) per unit volume. The list of grains is generated 

with the probability distribution weighted by 𝑝𝑖 to determine the phase. Then, the positions of 

seeds are generated while matching the grain volume and checking if there is any overlap 

exceeds given tolerance. According to the assigned radius for each grain, a collection of circles

can be obtained from the seed geometrics. Finally, synthetic grain structures can be obtained

after polygonal meshing using Voronoi tessellation and the collection of circles. In addition, 

three types of grains are considered with the effective size ratio of 1:2:2.5:3:4 with the volume 

fraction ratio of 0.15:0.2:0.3:0.2:0.15 in this study.

The synthetic microstructure samples of fiber composites are generated using the random 

sequential absorption (RSA) algorithm [72, 73]. In RSA algorithm, the circular particles are 

randomly positioned and added to the pre-defined domain sequentially. If the added particle 

intersects with the pre-existing particles, the location of the added particle is sampled again 


until there is no intersection. Then, this process is repeated until the target fiber volume fraction 

(which is set to be 0.35 in this study) is reached. 

To generate synthetic microstructure images for the rest of microstructures, the descriptor-

based microstructure reconstruction software platform of MCRpy [3, 4] is used. MCRpy 

provides features of MCR based on various types of descriptors including the volume fractions, 

the spatial correlations, Gram matrices [74], and normalized total variation. In this study, the 

spatial two-point correlation 𝑆2 is used as a descriptor for generating training samples

carbonate, ceramics, and polymethyl methacrylate. It was shown by Paul et al. [3] that the 

microstructures of these materials can be reconstructed well using only n-point correlation 

functions. Since it is able to formulate the objective function (i.e., root mean square error 

between 𝑆2 s of current and target microstructure images) with the differentiable 𝑆2 , the 

desired microstructure is obtained using truncated Newton (TNC) optimizer [75]. On the other 

hand, the microstructure of copolymer is hard to be reproduced with the spatial descriptor [3, 

4]. Thus, the Gram matrices of the feature maps in the pre-trained VGG-19 convolutional 

neural network [74] is used to reconstruct the microstructure of copolymer in this study. In this 

case, the objective function is the mean square error between the Gram matrices of current and 

target microstructure images which is optimized with L-BFGS-B optimizer [76].


B. Microstructure samples for training (𝟔𝟒 × 𝟔𝟒)

Figure 11. Microstructure samples generated by descriptor-based microstructure 

reconstruction method for training the diffusion models (𝟔𝟒 × 𝟔𝟒)


C. Microstructure samples generated by diffusion model (𝟔𝟒 × 𝟔𝟒)

Figure 12. Microstructure samples generated by the trained diffusion models with 150 

DDIM sampling steps (𝟔𝟒 × 𝟔𝟒)


D. Microstructure samples for training (𝟐𝟓𝟔 × 𝟐𝟓𝟔)

Figure 13. Microstructure samples generated by descriptor-based microstructure 

reconstruction method for training the diffusion models (𝟐𝟓𝟔 × 𝟐𝟓𝟔)


E. Microstructure samples generated by diffusion model (𝟐𝟓𝟔 × 𝟐𝟓𝟔)

Figure 14. Microstructure samples generated by the trained diffusion models with 500 

DDIM sampling steps (𝟐𝟓𝟔 × 𝟐𝟓𝟔)


References

[1] R. Bostanabad, Y. Zhang, X. Li, T. Kearney, L.C. Brinson, D.W. Apley, W.K. Liu, W. Chen, Computational 
microstructure characterization and reconstruction: Review of the state-of-the-art techniques, Progress in 
Materials Science 95 (2018) 1-41.
[2] S. Bargmann, B. Klusemann, J. Markmann, J.E. Schnabel, K. Schneider, C. Soyarslan, J. Wilmers, 
Generation of 3D representative volume elements for heterogeneous materials: A review, Progress in Materials 
Science 96 (2018) 322-384.
[3] P. Seibert, A. Raßloff, K. Kalina, M. Ambati, M. Kästner, Microstructure Characterization and 
Reconstruction in Python: MCRpy, Integrating Materials Manufacturing Innovation 11(3) (2022) 450-466.
[4] P. Seibert, A. Raßloff, M. Ambati, M. Kästner, Descriptor-based reconstruction of three-dimensional 
microstructures through gradient-based optimization, Acta Materialia 227 (2022) 117667.
[5] X. Li, Z. Yang, L.C. Brinson, A. Choudhary, A. Agrawal, W. Chen, A deep adversarial learning 
methodology for designing microstructural material systems, International Design Engineering Technical 
Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, American Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, 2018, p. V02BT03A008.
[6] M. Sahimi, P. Tahmasebi, Reconstruction, optimization, and design of heterogeneous materials and media: 
Basic principles, computational algorithms, and applications, Physics Reports 939 (2021) 1-82.
[7] H. Xu, D.A. Dikin, C. Burkhart, W. Chen, Descriptor-based methodology for statistical characterization and 
3D reconstruction of microstructural materials, Computational Materials Science 85 (2014) 206-216.
[8] Y. Jiao, F. Stillinger, S. Torquato, Modeling heterogeneous materials via two-point correlation functions: 
Basic principles, Physical review E 76(3) (2007) 031110.
[9] H. Kumar, C. Briant, W. Curtin, Using microstructure reconstruction to model mechanical behavior in 
complex microstructures, Mechanics of Materials 38(8-10) (2006) 818-832.
[10] Z. Jiang, W. Chen, C. Burkhart, Efficient 3D porous microstructure reconstruction via Gaussian random 
field and hybrid optimization, Journal of microscopy 252(2) (2013) 135-148.
[11] A. Senthilnathan, P. Acar, M. De Graef, Markov Random Field based microstructure reconstruction using 
the principal image moments, Materials Characterization 178 (2021) 111281.
[12] R. Bostanabad, A.T. Bui, W. Xie, D.W. Apley, W. Chen, Stochastic microstructure characterization and 
reconstruction via supervised learning, Acta Materialia 103 (2016) 89-102.
[13] S. Yu, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, W.-k. Lee, B. Dong, T.W. Odom, C. Sun, W. Chen, Characterization and 
design of functional quasi-random nanostructured materials using spectral density function, Journal of 
Mechanical Design 139(7) (2017) 071401.
[14] A. Iyer, R. Dulal, Y. Zhang, U.F. Ghumman, T. Chien, G. Balasubramanian, W. Chen, Designing 
anisotropic microstructures with spectral density function, Computational Materials Science 179 (2020) 109559.
[15] S. Torquato, Random heterogeneous materials, Springer.2013.
[16] C. Yeong, S. Torquato, Reconstructing random media, Physical review E 57(1) (1998) 495.
[17] S. Torquato, Statistical description of microstructures, Annual review of materials research 32(1) (2002) 
77-111.
[18] Y. Liu, M.S. Greene, W. Chen, D.A. Dikin, W.K. Liu, Computational microstructure characterization and 
reconstruction for stochastic multiscale material design, Computer-Aided Design 45(1) (2013) 65-76.
[19] P. Seibert, M. Ambati, A. Raßloff, M. Kästner, Reconstructing random heterogeneous media through 
differentiable optimization, Computational Materials Science 196 (2021) 110455.
[20] X. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Zhao, C. Burkhart, L.C. Brinson, W. Chen, A transfer learning approach for 
microstructure reconstruction and structure-property predictions, Scientific reports 8(1) (2018) 1-13.
[21] Y. Pu, Z. Gan, R. Henao, X. Yuan, C. Li, A. Stevens, L. Carin, Variational autoencoder for deep learning
of images, labels and captions, Advances in neural information processing systems 29 (2016).
[22] T. Guo, D.J. Lohan, R. Cang, M.Y. Ren, J.T. Allison, An indirect design representation for topology 
optimization using variational autoencoder and style transfer, 2018 AIAA/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, 
Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, 2018, p. 0804.
[23] K.M. Guan, T.I. Anderson, P. Creux, A.R. Kovscek, Reconstructing porous media using generative flow 
networks, Computers Geosciences 156 (2021) 104905.
[24] L. Dinh, D. Krueger, Y. Bengio, Nice: Non-linear independent components estimation, arXiv preprint 
arXiv:.00796  (2014).
[25] D.P. Kingma, P. Dhariwal, Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions, Advances in neural 
information processing systems 31 (2018).
[26] S. Kench, S.J. Cooper, Generating 3D structures from a 2D slice with GAN-based dimensionality 
expansion, arXiv preprint arXiv:.07708  (2021).


[27] A. Creswell, T. White, V. Dumoulin, K. Arulkumaran, B. Sengupta, A.A. Bharath, Generative adversarial 
networks: An overview, IEEE signal processing magazine 35(1) (2018) 53-65.
[28] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, Y. Bengio, 
Generative adversarial networks, Communications of the ACM 63(11) (2020) 139-144.
[29] I. Ferreira, L. Ochoa, A. Koeshidayatullah, On the generation of realistic synthetic petrographic datasets 
using a style-based GAN, Scientific Reports 12(1) (2022) 1-14.
[30] A. Henkes, H. Wessels, Three-dimensional microstructure generation using generative adversarial neural 
networks in the context of continuum micromechanics, arXiv preprint arXiv:.01693  (2022).
[31] A. Sauer, K. Schwarz, A. Geiger, Stylegan-xl: Scaling stylegan to large diverse datasets, ACM SIGGRAPH 
2022 Conference Proceedings, 2022, pp. 1-10.
[32] T. Karras, S. Laine, T. Aila, A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks, 
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 4401-4410.
[33] S. Lala, M. Shady, A. Belyaeva, M. Liu, Evaluation of mode collapse in generative adversarial networks, 
High Performance Extreme Computing  (2018).
[34] A. Brock, J. Donahue, K. Simonyan, Large scale GAN training for high fidelity natural image synthesis, 
arXiv preprint arXiv:.11096  (2018).
[35] T. Miyato, T. Kataoka, M. Koyama, Y. Yoshida, Spectral normalization for generative adversarial 
networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:.05957  (2018).
[36] L. Wang, W. Chen, W. Yang, F. Bi, F.R. Yu, A state-of-the-art review on image synthesis with generative 
adversarial networks, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 63514-63537.
[37] H. Zhang, I. Goodfellow, D. Metaxas, A. Odena, Self-attention generative adversarial networks, 
International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2019, pp. 7354-7363.
[38] P. Dhariwal, A. Nichol, Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis, Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 34 (2021) 8780-8794.
[39] A.Q. Nichol, P. Dhariwal, Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models, International Conference on 
Machine Learning, PMLR, 2021, pp. 8162-8171.
[40] J. Song, C. Meng, S. Ermon, Denoising diffusion implicit models, arXiv preprint arXiv:.02502  (2020).
[41] J. Ho, A. Jain, P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 33 (2020) 6840-6851.
[42] J. Ho, C. Saharia, W. Chan, D.J. Fleet, M. Norouzi, T. Salimans, Cascaded Diffusion Models for High 
Fidelity Image Generation, J. Mach. Learn. Res 23 (2022) 47:1-47:33.
[43] L. Yang, Z. Zhang, Y. Song, S. Hong, R. Xu, Y. Zhao, Y. Shao, W. Zhang, B. Cui, M.-H. Yang, Diffusion 
models: A comprehensive survey of methods and applications, arXiv preprint arXiv:.00796  (2022).
[44] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, S. Ganguli, Deep unsupervised learning using 
nonequilibrium thermodynamics, International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2015, pp. 2256-2265.
[45] H. Cao, C. Tan, Z. Gao, G. Chen, P.-A. Heng, S.Z. Li, A survey on generative diffusion model, arXiv 
preprint arXiv:.02646  (2022).
[46] Y. Song, S. Ermon, Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution, Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019).
[47] S. Mohamed, B. Lakshminarayanan, Learning in implicit generative models, arXiv preprint arXiv:.03483  
(2016).
[48] M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, S. Hochreiter, Gans trained by a two time-scale update 
rule converge to a local nash equilibrium, Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[49] T. Kynkäänniemi, T. Karras, S. Laine, J. Lehtinen, T. Aila, Improved precision and recall metric for 
assessing generative models, 32 (2019).
[50] M. Armandpour, A. Sadeghian, C. Li, M. Zhou, Partition-guided gans, Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 5099-5109.
[51] S. Li, Y. Du, J.B. Tenenbaum, A. Torralba, I. Mordatch, Composing Ensembles of Pre-trained Models via 
Iterative Consensus, arXiv preprint arXiv:.11522  (2022).
[52] K.A. Hart, J.J. Rimoli, MicroStructPy: A statistical microstructure mesh generator in Python, SoftwareX 12 
(2020) 100595.
[53] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation, 
International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention, Springer, 2015, pp. 
234-241.
[54] T. Salimans, A. Karpathy, X. Chen, D.P. Kingma, Pixelcnn++: Improving the pixelcnn with discretized 
logistic mixture likelihood and other modifications, arXiv preprint arXiv:.05517  (2017).
[55] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, Z. Wojna, Rethinking the inception architecture for 
computer vision, Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 
2818-2826.


[56] A. Borji, Pros and cons of GAN evaluation measures: New developments, Computer Vision Image 
Understanding 215 (2022) 103329.
[57] M.F. Naeem, S.J. Oh, Y. Uh, Y. Choi, J. Yoo, Reliable fidelity and diversity metrics for generative models, 
International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2020, pp. 7176-7185.
[58] B. Lu, S. Torquato, Lineal-path function for random heterogeneous materials, Physical Review A 45(2) 
(1992) 922.
[59] R. Bostanabad, W. Chen, D. Apley, Characterization and reconstruction of 3D stochastic microstructures 
via supervised learning, Journal of microscopy 264(3) (2016) 282-297.
[60] C. Meehan, K. Chaudhuri, S. Dasgupta, A non-parametric test to detect data-copying in generative models, 
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2020.
[61] D.P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv preprint arXiv;1412.6980  
(2014).
[62] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. 
Antiga, Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library, Advances in neural information 
processing systems 32 (2019).
[63] N.J.S.m. Hansen, Hall–Petch relation and boundary strengthening, 51(8) (2004) 801-806.
[64] F. Najafkhani, S. Kheiri, B. Pourbahari, H. Mirzadeh, Recent advances in the kinetics of normal/abnormal 
grain growth: a review, Archives of Civil Mechanical Engineering 21(1) (2021) 1-20.
[65] A. Borbély, F. Csikor, S. Zabler, P. Cloetens, H. Biermann, Three-dimensional characterization of the 
microstructure of a metal–matrix composite by holotomography, Materials Science Engineering: A 367(1-2) 
(2004) 40-50.
[66] Y. Feng, F. Thiemann, M. Sester, Learning cartographic building generalization with deep convolutional 
neural networks, ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 8(6) (2019) 258.
[67] H. Emami, M. Dong, S. Nejad-Davarani, C. Glide-Hurst, SA-GAN: Structure-Aware Generative 
Adversarial Network for Shape-Preserving Synthetic CT Generation, arXiv preprint arXiv:.07044  (2021).
[68] Y.-H. Su, W. Jiang, D. Chitrakar, K. Huang, H. Peng, B. Hannaford, Local style preservation in improved 
gan-driven synthetic image generation for endoscopic tool segmentation, Sensors 21(15) (2021) 5163.
[69] A. Gokaslan, V. Ramanujan, D. Ritchie, K.I. Kim, J. Tompkin, Improving shape deformation in 
unsupervised image-to-image translation, Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision 
(ECCV), 2018, pp. 649-665.
[70] M. Kwon, J. Jeong, Y. Uh, Diffusion models already have a semantic latent space, arXiv preprint 
arXiv:.10960  (2022).
[71] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, B. Ommer, High-resolution image synthesis with latent 
diffusion models, Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 
2022, pp. 10684-10695.
[72] M.D. Rintoul, S. Torquato, Reconstruction of the structure of dispersions, Journal of colloid interface 
science 186(2) (1997) 467-476.
[73] M. Tarantino, O. Zerhouni, K. Danas, Random 3D-printed isotropic composites with high volume fraction 
of pore-like polydisperse inclusions and near-optimal elastic stiffness, Acta materialia 175 (2019) 331-340.
[74] N. Lubbers, T. Lookman, K. Barros, Inferring low-dimensional microstructure representations using 
convolutional neural networks, Physical Review E 96(5) (2017) 052111.
[75] S.G. Nash, Newton-type minimization via the Lanczos method, SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 
21(4) (1984) 770-788.
[76] R.H. Byrd, S.L. Hansen, J. Nocedal, Y. Singer, A stochastic quasi-Newton method for large-scale 
optimization, SIAM Journal on Optimization 26(2) (2016) 1008-1031.


