arXiv:2211.08152v1  [cs.ET]  15 Nov 2022

Evidence of In-Memory Computing in a Ferrofluid

Marco Crepaldi1, Charanraj Mohan1, Erik Garofalo2,
Andrew Adamatzky3, Konrad Szaciłowski4, Alessandro Chiolerio2∗

1Electronic Design Laboratory,
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,16163, Genova, Italy

2Bioinspired Soft Robotics,
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,16163, Genova, Italy

3Unconventional Computing Laboratory,
University of West England, BS16 1QY, Bristol, United Kingdom

4Academic Centre for Materials and Nanotechnology,

AGH University of Science and Technology, 30-059, Krak´ow, Poland

∗To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: alessandro.chiolerio@iit.it

Magnetic fluids are excellent candidates for important research fields includ-

ing energy harvesting, biomedical applications, soft robotics and exploration.

However, notwithstanding relevant advancements such as shape reconfigura-

bility, that have been demonstrated, there is no evidence for their computation

capability, including the emulation of synaptic functions. Here, we experi-

mentally demonstrate that a Fe3O4 water-based Ferrofluid (FF) can perform

electrical analog computing and be programmed using quasi DC signals and

read at Radio Frequency (RF) mode. We have observed features in all respects

attributable to a memristive behavior, featuring both short and long-term in-

formation storage capacity and plasticity. The colloid was capable of classify-

ing digits of a 8 × 8 pixel dataset using a custom in-memory signal processing

1


scheme, and through Physical Reservoir Computing (PRC) by training a read-

out layer.

One-Sentence Summary
A Ferrofluid can store analog information and run electrical in-

memory computing using quasi-DC write and RF read modes.

Main Text

As a part of the largest international effort underway to explore alternative computing meth-

ods called unconventional computing (1, 2), there is a consolidated trend in the research on

devices, materials and in natural processes, to find an implicit exhibition of computing features,

even beyond solid aggregation state. The idea of computing with liquids attracted engineers

and mathematicians since the early 1900s (3), but later prototypes of liquid computers were

mostly based on hydraulic, reaction-diffusion, and fluidic principles (4). Only recently, liq-

uid and colloidal systems have been subject to attention for mimicking the ions moving in the

human brain through embedding aqueous solutions in gel or solid-state scaffolds (5). Being

applicable to soft robotics (6), energy harvesting (7), and computation in general (8), magnetic

fluids are always of great research interest (Sec. S1). Particularly, ferrofluids (FFs) are mixtures

in which nanometric-size dispersed insoluble particles are suspended throughout a solvent, the

particles being typically superparamagnetic, giving rise to interesting collective behaviour. A

potential of FF in computing, massive-parallel information processing, sensing, and energy har-

vesting regardless of their shape has not been addressed before, notwithstanding first reports on

their shape reconfiguration are already available (9). Here, we demonstrate that a volume of a

superparamagnetic FF can be interchangeably assigned to memory and computing roles. This

property is consistent with the rising paradigm of in-memory computing, which aims at mitigat-

ing processor-memory data transfer bottleneck by embedding computation in memory (10–13).

2


Furthermore, we demonstrate FF computation using the concept of Reservoir Computing (RC),

a paradigm that takes advantage from system dynamics (spontaneous or excited from external

sources) for advanced information processing. Reversibility, fading memory, nonlinearity of

electrical response and structural stochasticity are usually considered as prerequisites for any

physical implementation of RC concepts (14), and most solid-state memristors fulfil these re-

quirements (15).

Our experimental setup shown in Fig. 1A comprises a FF sample (the reservoir) connected to

a two-port Vector Network Analyzer (VNA), a DC bias generator (where the negative terminal is

internally connected to ground) and two bias tee circuits to decouple RF and DC signals (details

in Materials and Methods). Both the DC bias generator and the VNA are connected to a Personal

Computer to implement measurement scripts (Sec. S2), that is, applying a DC voltage across

the reservoir and reading the impedance through its S-parameters, that can be always converted

to impedances as a function of frequency. As shown in Fig. 1B, the FF is stimulated as follows:

a quasi-DC voltage VP (both positive and negative) is applied to the system to program/write it,

and its internal status (read) is acquired in RF mode using the magnitude impedance parameters.

Since the observed S-parameters and consequently impedance magnitude variations are small

(Sec. S3), the sum of the numerical impedance values over all scanned frequencies ZC
xy can be

used profitably as an indicator (see the formulas in the figure). This way the S-parameters are

collapsed to a single number for each measurement point, reducing data volume. Consequently,

each reading measurement is an ensemble of four real numbers ZC
11, ZC
12, ZC
21 and ZC
22, all a

function of time t, e.g., for port one, ZC
11 ≡ ZC
11(t).

Hysteresis, a fingerprint of memristance (16), is a necessary condition for neuromorphic

computation (17). Fig. 1C shows hysteresis loops obtained with a voltage sweep from -3.8 V

to 3.8 V with steps of 0.1 V each lasting 1 s, repeated for 50 times.
At the beginning of

the test (t = 0 s) we started with VP = -0.85 V and impedance values were ZC
11(0) = 14312 Ω,

3


ZC
12(0) = 2320 Ω, ZC
21(0) = 2060 Ω and ZC
22(0) = 11795 Ω. The pinched hysteresis of ZC
11 shrinks

for positive VP as the number of iterations increases, even with such zero average excitation.

The hysteresis of ZC
22 shrinks throughout the whole VP range while for ZC
12 and ZC
21 we ob-

serve the opposite phenomenon. On the one hand, the results indicate that assuming a given

DC stimulus, its effect on the impedance variation is not constant and varies over time. On the

other hand, this feature indicates a long-term adjustment of the material towards an equilibrium

condition, that can be interpreted as the feature of memorizing the previous DC bias history.

Furthermore, due to fluidity of the material, this memory will be naturally fading, which is

another important prerequisite for an efficient and universal RC system (18).

The liquid can be used to store information in the form of a particular impedance evolution

at a given port. To pose a parallelism with biological neurons we can refer to a long-term

plasticity feature. Fig. 2A shows the stimulus scheme used to demonstrate storage capacity for

N information values – in this specific test N = 16. The test comprises repeated Reset, Write

and Hold phases, where Reset implements a control loop on ZC
11 to reset its value to ZC∗
11 .

The results in Fig. 2B show that ZC∗
11 is correctly reached for each iteration, and notwithstanding

impedance control is implemented at port one, ZC
22 evolves towards well defined impedance

values, that are a function of the applied pulse duration TP(i). Interestingly, the ZC
22 values do

not reset at the beginning of each Write phase. The small variation of the ∆ZC
22 values and the

associated uniform distribution parameters during Hold of Fig. 2C, suggests that the colloid

can be used as a high resolution short-term memory. In general, as TP(i) can be controlled with

the power of continuum, analog information storage can be implemented and information can

be stored even for a longer duration (Sec. S4).

By extending the memory stimulus scheme of Fig. 2A, we could demonstrate in-memory

digit classification. To this end, we prepared a dataset consisting of the ten digits 0–9, in

8 × 8 matrices of pixels (Sec. S5) that we have serialized as shown in the scheme of Fig. 3A.

4


Data serialization has been demonstrated to be an efficient approach towards neuromorphic data

processing with very minimal computational resources [e.g. single artificial neurons (19, 20)].

Each pixel, besides its value 0–1 that can be mapped to a voltage level VP, can be attributed a

weight in terms of pulse duration wi and, in general, an offset (in terms of additive voltage). It

is therefore possible to build up sequences with higher or lower sensitivity to a particular digit

or selectively filter particular pixel values. Here, we do not bias the colloid in the condition of

having a pinched hysteresis, so to obtain a monotonic decrease of impedance during the tests,

and therefore enable a direct comparison of the final value for all digits after the application of

the sequences. By assuming instead that the system is in the conditions of a pinched hysteresis,

the FF can progressively adapt to implement a learning mechanism by providing a particular

non-zero offset weighting (Sec. S6).

Fig. 3B shows the stimulus scheme of the pattern classification test, which exploits in-

memory computing features. Similarly to the memorization experiments here we apply a reset

control on ZC
22, towards the impedance set-point ZC
22 = 14338 Ω, using an initial Charge phase

at 10 V. Each pixel is associated to a -3.3 V or 0 V voltage (black or white) for a given weight

duration, with zero offset. After verifying differentiation (Sec. S5), we provide the weighted

sequences so that the pulse durations of the expected black pixels are longer compared to the

others. We apply sequentially all serialized pixel matrices from 0 to 9, using all the weighted

sequences for each digit. Fig. 3C–E show the measurement results assuming 4.5 and 0.25 s

weights (black and white, respectively), for three sample digits, 1, 4 and 7. Results show that

with this in-memory computing scheme ZC
22 decreases more considerably in case the weighted

sequence matches the digit. The final decision can then be achieved by using a simple threshold

on the ZC
22 value, which depends on the digit to be detected, or alternatively, by indexing the

digit that leads to the lowest impedance after all of them are serialized. This particular scheme

works except for 3 which is a subset of 8 (Fig. 3F), thus leading to 90% accuracy. As an

5


effect of long-term plasticity, we have observed also that if the above test is repeated for days

without interruption, the impedance dynamics shrinks, irrespective of the digit (see Sec. S7).

The behaviour of the liquid, however, is reversible and impedance dynamics can be restored.

Similarly to memristors (differences outlined in Sec. S8), to further demonstrate the com-

putation capability of the FF we have implemented PRC using an ad-hoc readout layer. The

FF exhibits chaotic nature (resulting, inter alia from Brownian motions as well as from the

surfactant molecules featuring electrical polarizability), and within its deterministic features, it

presents a strong sensitivity to initial electrical conditions (Sec. S9), while it can provide both

fading memory and long-term plasticity (for instance see the plots in Fig. S3). RC is typically

implemented taking advantage of a physical reservoir short-term memory (21). However, within

the time frame of a digit classification, our findings show that the dynamics of the FF tend in

the long-term to reduce if a trivial reset condition is used (Sec. S7). Moreover, besides sensi-

tivity to initial conditions, the FF exhibits chaotic non-equilibrium at repeated impedance sets

(Sec. S10). Such features can make PRC unfeasible and it is thus necessary to avoid changes

in dynamical regime during both training and inference. To mitigate these variations, we have

designed a particular ’reset’ sequence that maintains the dynamical features of the material

consistent. It consists of the application of a high voltage towards two impedance points, that

are higher and lower compared to the initial impedance ZC∗
22 used to run active computation,

respectively. Fig. 4A shows the measurement scheme and the reset sequence. In our tests

ZC
22|LOW = 16350 Ω, ZC
22|HIGH = 16450 Ω and ZC∗
22 = 16400 Ω.

We used constant weighting to serialize the 64 pixels of the digit matrices (each pixel lasts

2 s, with -3.3 V for 1 and 0 V for 0) and we have trained a Neural Network (NN) layer to classify

four digits 0–3 (rationale and dataset in Sec. S11). The NN comprises a first block which

normalizes in parallel the 64 impedance values in the range 0–1 to get rid of residual dynamical

variations due to the FF chaotic nature. The input layer is made of a 64 Dense model, followed

6


by a Batch Normalization block (that helps back-propagation convergence), another 14

elements Dense model, and finally a single Dense neuron. Inference is achieved in real-time

using the trained NN on new measurement data from the FF consisting on 64 impedance values

ZC
22. Fig. 4B shows the confusion map, after detecting the four digits with the pre-trained NN,

achieving an accuracy of 90.6%.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the first ever evidence of a FF in-memory computing

device. A FF can implement complex calculations both with custom in-memory computing

schemes, and PRC, thus widening its spectrum of features. Besides extending the possibilities of

already existing applications, these findings make solutions featuring unprecedented plasticity,

fault-tolerance and resilience towards extreme environments a plausible reality, thanks to FFs

amorphous nature.

References

1. A. Adamatzky, Unconventional Computing – A Volume in the Encyclopedia of Complexity

and Systems Science (Springer, New York, 2018).

2. A. Adamatzky, ed., Handbook Of Unconventional Computing (In 2 Volumes) (World Sci-

entific, 2021).

3. A. Emch, The American Mathematical Monthly 8, 10 (1901).

4. A. Adamatzky, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 374, 20180372 (2019).

5. N. R. Kheirabadi, A. Chiolerio, K. Szaciłowski, A. Adamatzky, ChemPhysChem N/A,

e202200390 (2022).

6. A. Chiolerio, M. Quadrelli, Advanced Science 4, 1700036 (2017).

7. A. Chiolerio, M. Quadrelli, Energy Technology 7, 1800580 (2019).

7


8. A. Chiolerio, Advanced Intelligent Systems 2, 2000120 (2020).

9. S. Zhao, et al., Nano Letters 22, 5538 (2022).

10. D. Ielmini, H.-S. P. Wong, Nature Electronics 1, 333 (2018).

11. N. Verma, et al., IEEE Solid-State Circuits Magazine 11, 43 (2019).

12. M. Le Gallo, et al., Nature Electronics 1, 246 (2018).

13. A. Sebastian, M. Le Gallo, R. Khaddam-Aljameh, E. Eleftheriou, Nature Nanotechnology

15, 529 (2020).

14. K. Nakajima, I. Fisher, Reservoir Computing. Theory, Physical Implementations, and Ap-

plications (Springer Nature, Singapore, 2021).

15. E. Wla´zlak, D. Przyczyna, R. Gutierrez, G. Cuniberti, K. Szaciłowski, Japanese Journal of

Applied Physics 59, SI0801 (2020).

16. S. P. Adhikari, M. P. Sah, H. Kim, L. O. Chua, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems

I: Regular Papers 60, 3008 (2013).

17. J. Shank, et al., Scientific Reports 8 (2018).

18. L. Gonon, J.-P. Ortega, Neural networks 138, 10 (2021).

19. D. Przyczyna, M. Lis, K. Pilarczyk, K. Szaciłowski, Molecules 24, 2738 (2019).

20. Y. Zhong, et al., Nature Communications 12, 408 (2021).

21. X. Zhu, Q. Wang, W. D. Lu., Nature Communications 11 (2020).

8


Funding
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research

and innovation programme FET OPEN “Challenging current thinking” under grant agreement

No 964388.

Author Contributions
M.C. devised and prepared the set-up, wrote the software, devised

stimuli and ran measurements, analyzed the results, devised and trained the learning network,

prepared the manuscript. A.C., conceptualized and devised the set-up, analyzed the results, pre-

pared the manuscript and correspondence. C.M., E.G., A.A. and K.S. prepared the manuscript,

analyzed the results and contributed.

Competing Interests
The authors declare they have no conflict of interest or competing in-

terests.

Data and Materials Availability
Data is available upon reasonable request to the correspond-

ing author.

Acknowledgments

We thank Davide Dellepiane, Electronic Design Laboratory, for the assembly of the vial, and

Alessandro Barcellona for the support in the design of the bias tee electronics. We thank Diego

Torazza, Robotics Brain and Cognitive Sciences dept., for the 3D rendering of the vial.

Supplementary Materials

Materials and Methods

Supplementary Text (Sec. S1 to S11)

9


Supplementary Fig. S1 to S8

10


Figure 1: A Experimental set-up. B Measurement concept and relevant parameters. The colloid
is programmed using a quasi-DC voltage and its internal status is read through its distributed
impedance values ZC
11, ZC
12, ZC
21 and ZC
22, that correspond to the sum of the samples obtained
throughout the measurement bandwidth of the VNA (10 MHz–6 GHz). C Hysteresis loops as a
function of experiment elapsed time obtained from an initial impedance multi-point (comprising
Z11, Z12, Z21 and Z22) obtained by applying a -3.8 V–3.8 V voltage sweep.

11


Figure 2: A Long-term memory stimulus scheme and B results obtained by applying a positive
pulse to the material of value 3.3 V with different duration TP(i), and by restoring the initial
impedance value ZC∗
11 = 14338 Ω for each test using a closed control loop. C Variation of ZC
22
and corresponding mean and variance during the Hold phase for all information values.

12


Figure 3: A Weighting used for in-memory digit filtering, based on a simple elongation of the
expected black pixels pulses. Each digit is serialized from bottom-left to top-right, sequentially
line by line. B Stimulus scheme for classification, with reset control on ZC
22 after each serialized
digit (exemplified here for 1 weighting). C, D, E Measured impedance variation for all digits for
three examples weighted sequences, 1, 4 and 7. Weighting a particular digit leads to a lowering
of its impedance ZC
22 compared to the others (orange paths). F Final ZC
22 for all weighting
sequences. Classification for digit 3 fails due to overlapping with 8.

13


Figure 4: A Stimulus scheme used for both training and inference during PRC tests with paral-
lelized outputs for the readout NN layer (each one identifying the effect of a pixel value), detail
on the NN layer and conceptual liquid reservoir. B Confusion map of a real-time classification
test of the digits 0 to 3 using the trained NN.

14


arXiv:2211.08152v1  [cs.ET]  15 Nov 2022

Evidence of In-Memory Computing in a Ferrofluid

Supplementary Materials

This PDF file includes:

Material and Methods

Supplementary Text (Sec. S1 to S11)

Supplementary Figures (Fig. S1 to S8)

Materials and Methods

Conditions
All measurements are performed in an electronic laboratory environment (Elec-

tronic Design Laboratory, Via Enrico Melen 83, Genova, Floor 7), at room temperature that

ranges 22–25 ◦ C, and they are executed at night time to avoid possible vibrations that may

occur in the laboratory during normal working hours.

Ferrofluid
We have used an EMG601P ferrofluid, FerroTec, Lot Number U021920A (1).

The quantity of liquid used is 5 ml, that has been released in the vial using a pipette.

Vial
The vial is made of an inert Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) material while

the electrical contacts, directly in contact with the liquid, are based on feed-lines of gold plated

RF connectors, therefore not contributing to any chemical reaction. The vial (3 cm diameter)

has been prepared to host RF SMA connectors (Wurth Elektronik, 1.6 mm straight PCB, Manu-

facturer number 60314202124525) feed lines. The ground pins of the connectors have been cut

to expose only the feed line of the connector. The vial has been drilled to host symmetrically

the two feed lines. Finally, the connectors have been threaded in the drilled surface of the vial,

1


and fixed in place using a rubber band and hot glue. In order not to let the liquid evaporate, the

vial needs to be closed using the supplied cap.

We have specifically chosen not to implement RF shielding on the vial to avoid undercut

propagation modes, therefore permitting the observation of the phenomena without constraints.

Vector Network Analyzer
A PicoVNA 106 (300 kHz–6 GHz), Pico Technology, UK, has

been used to read out the status of the material, using its built-in Dynamic Link Libraries (DLL)

under Microsoft Windows 7. In our experiments, the RF power used to perform the frequency

sweep by the VNA is 0 dBm, and we have not observed any significant impact of such a signal

on the internal status evolution of the liquid. The number of measurement points was 101.

Bias Tee
The two bias tees used are commercial TCBT-14+, Mini Circuits (10 MHz–

10 GHz), that have been soldered on two custom PCBs designed to be mounted on the RF mini

enclosure RF-ENCL-MINI-NF-01, Gequipment.

DC Generator
We have implemented the DC generator using a Micropython Board V1.1,

connected, through its two available DAC converters to an evaluation board of a Maxim OpAmp

with an internal charge pump (MAX 4426T EVAL KIT) to generate, starting from a single

12 V supply, a ± 10 V DC signal using both INAP and INAM terminals. The DACs of the

Micropython board have been set through the internal firmware to a high current drive. The

Micropython board implements a Virtual COM Port (VCP) interface to the Personal Computer

so that the measurement program can set the output DC voltage on-demand by asynchronously

sending commands to the module. The DC generator accepts an external power supply (GBC

34.0106.10, 18.5 W, 0.8 A at 12 V) that generates the 12 V supply required for the OpAmp to

operate.

2


Measurement Software
The measurement software runs on a Windows 7 Virtual Ma-

chine, installed on a CentOS 7 control domain. Both VNA and DC Generator are connected to

the PC using USB cables.

To reproduce the measurements presented in the manuscript, it is sufficient to write a pro-

gram that coordinates both VNA and DC generator to read out the S-parameters from the liquid

and set the DC bias point. In this work, however, we have designed a specific Python scripting

language that executes and compiles specific experiment files.

Impedance Parameters Calculation
To calculate the impedance parameters starting from

the S-parameters we have used the following equations (1–4),

Z11 = (1 + S11)(1 − S22) + S21S12

∆S
Z0,
(1)

Z12 = 2S12

∆S
Z0,
(2)

Z21 = 2S21

∆S
Z0,
(3)

Z22 = (1 − S11)(1 + S22) + S21S12

∆S
Z0,
(4)

where ∆S = (1 − S11)(1 − S22) − S21S12. The above equations output are the impedance

complex numbers values over frequency, from which magnitude values can be extracted. In our

measurement system, these calculations are computed during the S-parameters measurements,

but they can be calculated offline. We have assumed Z0 = 50 Ω. In our tests, we have not

eliminated the contribution of the vial, and we have considered its full impedance contribution

including the colloid.

PRC Readout Neural Network
The neural network has been implemented in

tensorflow. Training is achieved using 50 sequences of digits 0–3 obtained using the same

measurement conditions of the other tests (see Sec. S11). The optimizer used for training is

3


Adam and all the layers have a sigmoid activation function. The ’reset’ sequence is not con-

sidered in the training, and only the 64 impedance values resulting from serialization are used.

During the real-time inference the measurement system streams the data once all the pixels

are serialized, i.e. when a single digit iteration is finished, though the User Datagram Protocol

(UDP) over an Ethernet physical layer. The inference is run on a PC where the trained model is

loaded and the UDP packets are received from the network.

Measurements Processing and Graphs
All the results of this manuscript (except from

the PicoVNA 106 that comes with its proprietary DLL and the vial that has been rendered

using PTC Creo), have been obtained using open source software, that is Python, Inkscape

(https://inkscape.org),
Xfig
(http://mcj.sourceforge.net),

TexMaker
(https://www.xm1math.net/texmaker/)
and
Gimp

(https://www.gimp.org). The files generated by the measurement system have been pro-

cessed,
collated,
and
organized
for
plotting
and
visualization
using
custom

matplotlib Python utilities.

4


Supplementary Text

S1
Typical Applications of Magnetic Fluids and Ferrofluids

Magnetic fluids in general are of great interest in biomedical applications e.g., cell separation

(2), tumor hyperthermia (3), cancer diagnosis (4), magnetorelaxometry (5), drug delivery (6)

and thermal energy conversion (7).

Some noteworthy applications of ferrofluids are magnetic seals for pumps and mixers (8),

inertial and viscous damping for loudspeakers and stepper motors (9), bearings (10), lubricants

(11), heat transfer media (12), and soft robots (13–16).

5


S2
Measurement Software

We have designed a specific scripting language based on Python to support the experiments

through script files and to interface the low-level drivers of the VNA and the DC generator. It

comprises a specific software interpreter, capable of compiling the scripts and partially execut-

ing them in advance to check their correctness. The possibility of controlling both VNA and

DC generator through a PC opens the way to the implementation of programmable experiments,

automatic result storage, real-time computation of quantities of interest from the S-parameters,

and implementation of control loops to investigate algorithms, for instance, to bring impedance

to known set points.

The experiment files include specific commands to set the DC bias, read the data from the

VNA and give the possibility of declaring variables, calculating quantities on the fly based on

the measurement output, and thus implementing control loops thanks to the possibility of in-

cluding selections. The measurement program also takes care of saving the measurement data

on the PC and permits customization in the writing of Comma-Separated Values (CSV) files by

including not only directly measured S-parameters but also any of the variables used during the

execution of the experiment. This approach has the power of enabling the scheduling of spe-

cific scripts and deep customizations to enable batch measurements and implementing complex

calculations. For instance, the herein referenced impedance values ZC
11–ZC
22 are calculated by

the measurement program immediately after the acquisition of the S-parameters from the VNA.

6


S3
RF Impedance Controllability

Figure S1: Measured S-parameters of the FF with a -3.3 V bias applied to the material, from 0
to 64 s, one measurement per second. This measurement demonstrates the DC controllability of
the internal particle collective status of the FF, and the possibility of reading it out in RF mode.

Fig. S1 demonstrates the controllability of the liquid RF impedance through the application

of a DC bias VP and shows its consequent S-parameters evolution. Here, we have applied

a constant -3.3 V DC bias to the material and we have run measurements using the VNA at

every second, for 60 s overall. The graphs show the evolution of the parameters over time,

while the negative DC bias is maintained. In general, although |S12| and |S21| slightly differ

7


(non-ideal reciprocal behaviour) different trends occur in the curves. For this experiment, |S22|

decreases in the full 10 MHz–6 GHz bandwidth, while |S11| for a particular range (see inset)

has a different trend. Similar results can be obtained by applying a positive DC voltage. The

material behaviour strongly depends on its impedance value at the beginning of the experiment,

and the status of the liquid is inherently encoded in the unbalancing of all the four parameters.

Moreover, the evolution of its internal status is in general reversible by applying a signal with

opposite sign. Higher variations in the S-parameters are achievable by applying a larger voltage

(up to ± 10 V for our set-up), however, we have decided to keep limits at a maximum of ± 3.3 V

during computation (except for hard resets), for compatibility with the standard voltage levels

used in consumer electronic components.

8


S4
Enhanced Information Storage

Figure S2:
A Measured storage capacity obtained by starting from an initial condition
ZC∗
11 = 15300 Ω for the same pulse duration given in Fig. 2A (main manuscript), with a total
test time of 2500 s. B Memorization capability obtained using repeated short duration pulses
and resetting the impedance at every iteration to ZC∗
22 = 14338 Ω.

The plots of Fig. S2A show information storage results for more than 2500 s obtained by

applying the same signals given in Fig. 2A of the main manuscript, starting from an impedance

set point ZC∗
11 = 15300 and by resetting it at every iteration (blue TP = 4 s, towards red TP = 64 s).

Interestingly, while the effect of the pulses is not appreciable at port one, at port two we can

observe that the final impedance values are separated from each other and their separation is

maintained even for such long duration. The graphs of Fig. S2B show the possibility of carefully

mapping pulse duration TP, thus increasing resolution towards a full analog memory. In this

9


test, we have applied the same scheme given in Fig. 2A (main manuscript), but with pulses

instead of fixed 3.3 V signals (Thigh = 0.25 s, Tlow = 0.75 s, for a duty cycle of 25%, see detail in

the plots). The use of these pulses permits the observation of fine variations of storage capacity

as information is encoded in the number of pulses where a higher number indicates a higher

information value. In this case, programming occurs with a lower energy compared to the

previous case. Here, however, the obtained impedance values decrease with time but the curves

are still separated during their evolution.

As reported in Fig. 2 (main manuscript) and Fig. S2, depending on the bias setting of the

colloid different numerical values and trends can be achieved. This implicitly demonstrates

that the system provides a long term memorization feature that stores the previous stimulation

history. Analog memories in general are not a new concept [see (17)], but can open the way,

similarly to memristors, to unexplored computation capabilities if paired with modern neural

networks and machine learning.

10


S5
Dataset and Differentiation

Figure S3: A Dataset of ten different 8 × 8 pixel images (black and white), each one identifying
a digit from 0 to 9. B Measured ZC
22 during serialization of digit 8 using constant weight-
ing, with detail on short and long-term information storage features. C Measured pixel array
differentiation assuming constant time-weighting wi = w = 4 s for the digit dataset (single mea-
surement run). The values obtained at the end of the serialization are all different and depend
on both the input sequence and the previous history. Within all the serialization curves, we can
appreciate local variations attributable to a short-term memory effect, while final values include
both long and short-term memory contributions.

11


We have investigated the possibility of classifying the different digits assuming constant

delay weights w, to verify that the colloid operates similarly to a solid state memristive device

featuring short-term plasticity, and therefore, thanks to its non-linear lossy integration, differen-

tiate spike sequences (18). To verify differentiation, we have applied a constant interval of 4 s

for all pixels (that can be 1, i.e., -3.3 V or 0, i.e., 0 V) of all digits (see dataset in Fig. S3A). We

have run measurements by serializing all digits from 0 to 9 and applying them to the liquid in

sequence.

Fig. S3B shows an example measurement for digit 8 during serialization with detail on the

pixel values. Our measurement script saves VP at the end of each stimulation and thus we

provided both sampled data and its corresponding zero-order hold interpolation, that identifies

the actual voltage across the colloid. From the measurements of ZC
22 we can clearly identify

two memory contributions, one long-term and another short-term. The short-term contribution

fades out rapidly as stimulation is interrupted (for black pixels, -3.3 V).

Fig. S3C shows the measurement results for all the digits. The values obtained at the end of

each sequence are all different, demonstrating a differentiation, similarly to the results obtained

on memristors matrices (19). Observe how the slope of the decreasing curves (that is while

a black pixel is applied to the liquid), varies across the serialized digits, to show, similarly to

Fig. S3B an impact of both short and long-term plasticity.

12


S6
Progressive Adaptation

Figure S4: A Measured progressive adaptation obtained by running across the hysteresis curve
given in Fig. 1C and by repeating the digits 20 times each.
The initial impedance set is
ZC
11 = 15100 Ω. When the correct digit matches weighting (which is constant across all digits,
here for digit 1), impedance decreases significantly. B Applied voltage across the colloid with
progressively increasing bias to run across the hysteresis curve. C Corresponding measurement
scheme for the test.

Among the extensive tests we performed on the colloid, we also investigated the possi-

13


bility of exploiting the pinched hysteresis to demonstrate progressive adaptation to a training

sequence, in a similar way as a ’learning’ mechanism. In our in-memory computing scheme,

weighting can be applied also with a non-zero offset. Assuming a pinched hysteresis, an off-

set stimulation is useful to run across it, and depending on the overall duration of the voltage

applied, we demonstrate that the liquid can dynamically latch towards low or high impedance

values. Fig. S4A shows measurement results in which we have applied repeatedly and sequen-

tially the digits (20 times each) given a weighted sequence for 1. Stimulation runs across the

pinched hysteresis loop deeper when 1 is applied with respect to all the other digits, so to

lead impedance dynamically decrease of a larger magnitude. We have reset the impedance to

ZC∗
11 = 15100 Ω, exploiting the equilibrium conditions of the material immediately before our

hysteresis tests given in Fig. 1C (main manuscript). Compared to the measurements given in

Fig. 3 (main manuscript), the FF is here in the conditions such as the voltage values are ex-

changed, that is obtain a ZC
11 impedance decrease a positive VP is required, and consequently a

negative one is required to reset it. To run across the pinched hysteresis, as shown in Fig. S4B

we have applied a progressive offset to the same weight sequence of the measurements of Fig. 3.

The offset function is all equal for all digits, and progressively increases as the serial pixel is

streamed according to the sequence K
�
1 −
i
32
�
, where K is negative, and i is the pixel number

in the range 0–63. As shown in Fig. S4C, to permit the establishment of an internal equilibrium

and not perturb the colloid status, we have not performed a hard reset with a high 10 V voltage,

rather we have reset it with the same magnitude voltage of 3.3 V used for serialization. As

exemplified qualitatively in the hysteresis diagram details, this measurement comprises mostly

all the effects we have observed during our study. In particular, hysteresis progressively evolves

depending on the previous history to increase the impedance dynamics for digit 1 and terminate

with an almost full zeroing for digit 9, where the pinch disappears. The impedance dynamics of

the colloid then progressively latches towards large variations for 1 and progressively reduces

14


for the remainder digits. These results demonstrate the possibility of a dynamical latching us-

ing a FF in a similar way it can be done using memristors. Moreover, it demonstrates that a

‘learning’ mechanism is possible.

15


S7
Dynamics Reduction

Figure S5: A Measured reduction of the FF dynamics after repeating 100 times the classification
measurement with weighting for digit 4, and initial set point ZC
22 = 14338 Ω. The impedance of
the system evolves to shrink around a non-dynamical fixed point, but with minimal dynamical
features (limit cycle). B Final value of ZC
22 after the application of all pixels versus iteration. C
Detected digits versus number of iterations. D Corresponding threshold for the detection of 4.

16


In the in-memory classification experiments of Fig. 3 (main manuscript) we have correctly

assumed that during the tests the status of the liquid was not significantly changing. This hy-

pothesis was verified because the tests lasted less than one hour each (see the experimental time

in the measurement results), for an overall duration of approximately 5 h. However, in general,

we have observed that after applying the serial sequences for days, the resetting of the material

to the same condition at every test leads to a dynamics reduction towards the impedance set point

itself. This result is consistent with the hysteresis plots of Fig. 1 (main manuscript): assuming a

periodical stimulation, its effect on impedance varies over time, leading, in the ultra-long term,

to a shrinking of the hysteresis curve of ZC
22.

Fig. S5A shows superposed ZC
22 curves for each digit, when the pattern classification test

is repeated in sequence for 100 times with weighting for digit 4 and overall measurement time

of 3 days. The dynamics of the impedance patterns obtained during the measurements tend to

collapse to a straight line superposed to the initial impedance set point, with reduced dynamical

behaviour. Fig. S5B shows the final ZC
22 values after the streaming of all pixels as a function

of iteration. We can define a detection threshold as the average value between the lowest and

the immediately preceding value of ZC
22 across all digits at a given iteration. Due to dynamics

reduction, the in-memory classification scheme fails as the lowest impedance values do not

always correspond to 4, notwithstanding weighting. The detected digits shown in Fig. S5C,

confirm that digit 4 leads to the lowest impedance value 29 times out of 100, for an accuracy

of 29%. The expected detection threshold for 4, as shown in Fig. S5D, follows the general

compression trend of the liquid as the classification is progressively repeated.

Consequently, within the given experiment time, we can conclude that the system evolves

towards a limit cycle, making in-memory computing with the previously defined scheme in-

effective. We observed that this behaviour is induced by the reset phase of the impedance

achieved in the same increasing direction for all interactions, which, inter alia, is performed

17


at higher voltage (i.e., 10 V) compared to those used during the serialization (i.e., -3.3/3.3 V).

The behaviour of the liquid, however, is reversible. After applying a fixed stimulation of -10 V

for a sufficiently long time (on the order of minutes) the dynamical behaviour of the liquid is

increased and restored. Moreover, the liquid dynamics can be also restored by repeatedly ap-

plying fast and zero mean hysteresis sweeps at higher voltage (e.g. a factor two faster compared

to the reported results of Fig. 1C, main manuscript). Another possibility is to pose VP = 0 V

and wait for a sufficiently long time to enforce the system towards an internally defined equilib-

rium, thus leaving the liquid to self-adjust. We have observed that after such restoring, although

the initial impedance values can significantly vary compared to the preceding epoch, the dy-

namical behaviour is still restored. After this restoring process, the impedance values can be

successfully brought back to the original values by applying DC voltage.

Given that such locking phenomenon occurs after many repeated classification cycles and in

general after long time, provided that the computation time is reasonably small, the liquid can

be still effectively used to run computation, even assuming the above dynamics reduction. This

limit cycle (that can be considered as a long-term effect) fades out, but slower than the computa-

tion time of the above experiments thanks to the relatively low voltages used in the serialization

process. We have observed faster dynamics reduction with higher stimulation voltage.

18


S8
Solid-state Memristors vs. Ferrofluids

Two features of FF that can be different compared with typical solid-state memristors are, i) the

application of DC bias multiple times to change the material state and ii) speed of the inference

operation. Most memristor-based neural networks are inferred at biological speed, i.e., in a

millisecond-range time constant. With oscillatory neurons, however, one can vary this time

constant by several orders of magnitude, for instance between 1 µs and 100 s or even 1 ks. On

the other hand, the FF needs to be read at RF-level (using an AC signal), unlike memristors, to

the best of our knowledge. Contrarily to memristors where the impedance observed is mono-

dimensional (applied voltage, read current), here the status of the liquid is observable across

all four impedance parameters, thus potentially allowing for higher dimensional interpretations.

Another interesting point, regards the application of programming biases repeated times. This

feature is valid for both FF and some memristors. HfO2-based memristors, for instance, need

this kind of multiple biasing approach to witness a change of state. This is mainly due to their

conductive filament-based switching mechanism they provide (20).

19


S9
Sensitivity to Initial Conditions

Figure S6: A Computed series ln [d(k)] associated to the ZC
22 time-series of our hysteresis test
in Fig. 1C (ǫ = 0.1). The slope at the beginning of the test is positive and therefore exists a linear
fit with positive slope that is a reasonable estimation of the Lyapunov exponent. B The same
computed series of A, but for a uniform distributed function. The trend is flat, therefore d(k)
does not depend on k, confirming stochasticity.

A defining feature of a chaotic deterministic systems is its high sensitivity to initial con-

ditions. To check whether our system provides this feature we have extracted the ZC
22 time-

series given in Fig. 1C (for the complete experiment) and we have applied the algorithm of (21)

which provides a means to estimate the Lyapunov exponent, based on the quantity d(k) =

|Ti+k − Tj+k|, where T is the time-series. Fig. S6A shows the results of the application of the

algorithm with an initial diameter bound of ǫ = 0.1. The curve exhibits periodicity because the

data comprises all the loops depicted in the hysteresis. In contrast to the uniform distribution

20


case (which provides a flat behavior), the term ln [d(k)], at the beginning of the experiment,

shows an increasing trend with k, suggesting that exists a linear fit with positive slope, which is

a good estimation of the Lyapunov exponent. A positive Lyapunov exponent identifies chaotic

character of the time-series and hence a high sensitivity to initial conditions, as well as a system

where the entropy creation rate is positive (22).

21


S10
Chaotic Non-Equilibrium

Figure S7: A Measured ZC
22 impedance during a repeated test in which the liquid, thanks to
the depicted control algorithm (Tol = 1, Tick ∼ 0.7 s) is brought to two particular impedance
values, ZC
22|LOW = 16250 Ω and ZC
22|HIGH = 16300 Ω. The plot shows chaos in the oscillatory
regimes.
B Applied voltage VP during the experiment.
C Summary of the measurement
scheme depicting where the control algorithm intervenes to bias the material to the two par-
ticular impedance points.

22


In view of the reported properties of the FF, and to confirm the obtained results, we have

run an experiment to further demonstrate that the system is chaotic and features a chaotic non-

equilibrium, which could also explain the evolution over time of the hysteresis curves. Fig. S7

shows the results of this experiment. The test consists of the multiple setting of two impedance

values, with a control algorithm that enforces VP = 3.3 V or -3.3 V across the liquid to set the

impedance state to ZC
22|HIGH and ZC
22|LOW, respectively. In between stimuli, we applied pauses

of 10 s where voltage VP is zero (see the measurement scheme of Fig. S7C). The algorithm ap-

plies a fixed voltage until impedance reaches a predefined set point, but the reached impedance

value is not exactly the same as the previous iteration, because the measurement accuracy of the

set-up is finite. This way, initial conditions of the next iteration are slightly perturbed, and we

can then determine if the response of the liquid varies over time. Results in Fig. S7A depict the

switching between various oscillatory states with different rates across ZC
22. In particular, see

Fig. S7B, when the voltage VP applied across the material is fixed (in this example 3.3 V but

our findings show that it occurs also for -3.3 V biases), the impedance variation that is expected

to be monotonically increasing, instead varies with a more complex trend, to separate the os-

cillatory states in subgroups. The presence of multiple oscillatory regimes can be assumed to

pertain to metastable attractors, while overall the resulting complex oscillation can be assumed

as chaotic.

Being the FF a chaotic dynamical system from a DC/RF viewpoint, it can always be seen

as an Analog Recurrent Neural Network (ARNN) (23), therefore as an ensemble of nodes of

a reservoir. Given such a high degree of complexity the system exhibits, we conclude that the

colloid can be considered not only a liquid synapse but an ensemble of more complex nodes, all

inter-related: a liquid network. Considering the measurements of Fig. S7, a possible explanation

of the phenomena, can be traced back to a network of oscillators. Indeed, each particle of the FF

can be seen as a single superparamagnetic oscillator that is coupled via dipolar magnetic fields

23


to those surrounding it. Considering the size of the particles in the FF (nanometric) and the

material itself, magnetite, the spin resonance frequency is in the order of 1–3 GHz, within the

range of the conducted experiments. Hence, the application of the RF field to readout the status

of the material surely comprises the effects of the ferromagnetic resonance of these oscillators.

The effect of the DC stimulus could be explained by the application of a torque on the oscillators

with respect to their natural position, generated on each local spin by the magnetic field.

24


S11
Physical Reservoir Computing – Readout Neural Net-
work Training and Notes

Figure S8: A Complete ZC
22 values corresponding to 50 serializations of the digits 0–3 (overall
4 × 50), for the training of the readout neural network used in PRC. Notwithstanding the ’reset’
condition maintains dynamical properties of the material alive, outputs have variability. B Su-
perposed ZC
22 values for each digit for all the 50 iterations. C and D Histograms of the values of
ZC
22 for the four digits at the first iteration (left) and at the last iteration (right).

Fig. S8A shows the complete waveform of ZC
22 used to train the neural network depicted

in Fig. 4 (main manuscript), later used to perform real-time detection. As shown in Fig. S8A,

the periodical streaming of the digits (repeated 0–3 sequence) leads to a high variability in

25


the impedance values, even with a ’reset’ sequence that maintains the liquid in a dynamical

condition. This notwithstanding, the detail of each digit given in Fig. S8B shows the successful

set of the initial impedance value thanks to the control loop that here is set to an unilateral

tolerance of 2.5 Ω. A detail in the distribution of impedance values is given in Fig. S8C–D that

show histogram bars of both first and last ZC
22 values for all digits, with normal distribution

fitting (mean and standard deviation, µ and σ).

The ’reset’ sequence, used to counterbalance the chaotic features of the FF, enables the

application of a normalization layer as first element in the neural network. Observe that the

’reset’ sequence can be considered as a means to enforce the Echo State Property (ESP) (24), a

key requirement to achieve training using only the output of the reservoir. The FF provides both

long-term and short-term information storage and a required condition for ESP is that the effect

of initial condition should vanish as time passes. Without a ’reset’ sequence, this property is

definitely not verified for our reservoir assuming the same order of magnitude time required for

digit classification. Waiting for a complete fade out of the effect of the inputs would make RC

unreasonably slow.

In memristors PRCs, depending on the specific computing application, the readout NN can

be for instance a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to account for the time dependency of

subsequent samples in real-time detection of firing patterns, or a fully connected NN for pat-

tern recognition (18). Here, the monothonically decreasing curve of impedance ensured by the

’reset’ sequence, permits a readout network implementation based on fully connected Dense

layers. The readout layer given in Fig. 4 (main manuscript), provides excellent training results,

i.e., 3 ×10−4 loss for normalized outputs (0–3 → 0–1) on 2000 epochs, resulting in a 0.001

Root-Mean-Square Error (RMSE). Hence, this NN permits inference on new real-time data

by enabling an easy counterbalancing of the chaotic variations of our reservoir. However, the

definition of RC typically refers to a single output layer to map the higher dimensional space

26


projected by the reservoir [that internally implements a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)] to

the desired features. This corresponds to a single fully connected neuron in our specific case,

that implements our single dimensional digit mapping 0–3 (normalized between 0 and 1). Al-

though with lower training accuracy compared to the previous case, by using a single Dense

layer (sigmoid activation function), input normalization and the dataset given in Fig. S8, we

obtained a loss of 0.044 on 25000 epochs (0.062 RMSE). By using two Dense layers, the first

with four neurons, and the second with one neuron, with input normalization we obtained 0.015

loss on 25000 epochs for a 0.026 RMSE. These values are still reasonable to implement PRC

with a lower complexity readout NN.

References

1. Ferrotec
–
EMG
600P
Series
Safety
Datasheet,
Available
at

https://ferrofluid.ferrotec.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/emg600psds.pdf.

2. M. Boyer, et al., Journal of Vascular Surgery 31, 181 (2000).

3. P. H. Linh, et al., Journal of Physics: Conference Series 187, 1 (2009).

4. Y. Jun, et al., Journal of American Chemical Society 127, 5732 (2005).

5. W. Weitschies, R. K¨oetitz, T. Bunte, L. Trahms, Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological

Letters 7, 5 (1997).

6. T. Neuberger, B. Sch¨opf, H. Hofmann, M. Hofmann, B. von Rechenberg, Journal of Mag-

netism and Magnetic Materials 293, 483 (2005).

7. E. Garofalo, M. Bevione, L. Cecchini, A. Chiolerio, Advanced Materials Technologies p.

2200127 (2022).

27


8. W. Ocho´nski, Z. Szydlo, B. Zachara, Experimental study of frictional characteristics of

magnetic liquid shaft seals (2000). Paper presented at The Tribology conference, Nagasaki,

Japan, 7–12 June.

9. W. Bottenberg, L. Melillo, K. Raj, Journal of Audio Engineering Society 28, 17 (1980).

10. S. Y. Huang, et al., Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Mathematical Physical

Sciences 404, 69 (1986).

11. A. K. Deysarkar, B. H. Clampitt, Journal of Synthetic Lubrification 5, 105 (1988).

12. H. Zhu, C. Zhang, S. Liu, Y. Tang, Y. Yin, Applied Physics Letters 89 (2006).

13. X. Fan, M. Sun, L. Sun, H. Xie, Advanced Functional Materials 30 (2020).

14. J. V. Timonen, M. Latikka, L. Leibler, R. H. Ras, O. Ikkala, Science 341, 253 (2013).

15. X. Fan, X. Dong, A. C. Karacakol, H. Xie, M. Sitti, Proceedings of the National Acadademy

of Sciences 117, 27916 (2020).

16. X. Fan, et al., Science Advances 8, eabq1677 (2022).

17. G. Nagy, IEEE Transactions on Electronic Computers EC-12, 388 (1963).

18. X. Zhu, Q. Wang, W. D. Lu., Nature Communications 11 (2020).

19. S. O. Park, H. Jeong, J. Park, J. Bae, S. Choi, Nature Communications 13 (2022).

20. Y. Zhang, et al., Nature Communications 12 (2021).

21. B. Biswal, C. Dasgupta, Physical Review E – Statistical Nonlinear Soft Matter Physics 66

(2002).

28


22. J. Vallejo, M. Sanjuan, Predictability of chaotic dynamics. A finite-time Lyapunov exponents

approach (Springer Nature, 2017).

23. H. T. Siegelmann, Science Reports 268 (1995).

24. I. B. Yildiz, H. Jaeger, S. J. Kiebel, Neural Networks 35, 1 (2012).

29


