Broadband field-enhancement in

epsilon-near-zero photonic gap antennas

F´elix Thouin,† David M. Myers∗,† Ashutosh Patri∗,‡ Bill Baloukas,† Ludvik

Martinu,† and St´ephane K´ena-Cohen∗,†

†Department of Engineering Physics, ´Ecole Polytechnique de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, H3T

1J4, QC, Canada

‡Department of Electrical Engineering , ´Ecole Polytechnique de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, H3T

1J4, QC, Canada

E-mail: s.kena-cohen@polymtl.ca

Abstract

In recent years, the large electric field enhancement and tight spatial confinement

supported by the so-called epsilon near-zero (ENZ) mode has attracted significant

attention for the realization of efficient nonlinear optical devices. Here, we experimen-

tally demonstrate a new type of antenna, termed an ENZ photonic gap antenna (PGA),

which consists of a dielectric pillar within which a thin slab of indium tin oxide (ITO)

material is embedded. In ENZ PGAs, hybrid dielectric-ENZ modes emerge from strong

coupling between the dielectric antenna modes and the ENZ bulk plasmon resonance.

These hybrid modes efficiently couple to free space and allow for large enhancements

of the incident electric field over nearly an octave bandwidth, without the stringent

lateral nanofabrication requirements required by conventional plasmonic or dielectric

nanoantennas. The linear response of single ENZ PGAs is probed using dark field scat-

tering and interpreted using a simple coupled oscillator framework. Third harmonic

1

arXiv:2211.05214v1  [physics.optics]  9 Nov 2022


generation is used to probe the field enhancement and large enhancements are observed

in the THG efficiency over a broad spectral range. This proof of concept demonstrates

the potential of ENZ PGAs, which we have previously shown can support electric field

enhancements of up to 100–200X, which is comparable with those of the best plasmonic

antennas.

Keywords

Optical antennas, Epsilon near-zero, Third harmonic generation, Field enhancement, Non-

linear optics, Photonics

Introduction

Advances in optical signal processing, optical neural networks and photonic quantum com-

puting are urgently driving the need for nonlinear optical components with ever smaller

footprints and lower energy consumption. In this context, epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) materials

have attracted significant attention. In an ENZ material, the real part of the permittivity

crosses zero due to the presence of a natural (e.g. plasma, phonon, exciton) or artificial

resonance (e.g. metamaterial). This results in exotic optical phenomena such as infinite

phase velocity1 and vanishing photonic density of states.2 Notably, thin films of epsilon

near-zero (ENZ) materials have been reported to have exceptionally high optical nonlin-

earities.3–5 Doped semiconductors are particularly interesting as a class of ENZ materials,

given that their plasma frequency can be readily controlled via the dopant concentration

and tuned in-situ through electrostatic gating. To a large extent, however, the nonlinearities

reported in ENZ materials are a consequence of the field enhancement intrinsically provided

by ENZ thin films.6,7 Importantly, ENZ films support so-called Berreman modes, which can

be directly excited within the light cone using TM-polarized light. These lead to modest

enhancements of the incident electric field for high angles of incidence that can nevertheless

2


strongly enhance high-order nonlinear processes.8 For a thin indium tin oxide (ITO) layer

serving as the ENZ medium, for example, a typical enhancement is EITO/E0 ∼ 2 − 3 can be

anticipated,8,9 where E0 and EITO are the magnitudes of the electric field in air and ITO,

respectively. In addition, ultrathin ENZ films support a so-called ENZ mode, which is nearly

dispersionless and allows for deep sub-wavelength confinement.7 This mode can show much

larger field enhancements (typ. EITO/E0 ∼ 10 − 20), but it exists beyond the light cone and

can only be excited using e.g. a Kretschmann configuration (ideally at the critical coupling

angle) or some form of mode matching with free space.10 In both cases, enhancements typ-

ically occur over a 100–200 nm bandwidth around the ENZ frequency. Many experiments

have explored such effects by placing either metal8,11–15 or dielectric16 optical antennas on

ENZ thin films to increase coupling with free space, provide further lateral confinement or

engineer the spectral response.

We have previously reported that all-dielectric photonic gap antennas (PGAs) consist-

ing of a thin low-index medium, sandwiched in a high index dielectric pillar, can provide

extremely large Purcell factors, strong directionality and large field enhancements over a

broad spectral range.17 These rely principally on the electric field enhancement ensured by

the continuity of the displacement field across the interface between high (ϵhigh) and low per-

mittivity (ϵlow) media ϵlowElow = ϵhighEhigh, where Elow/high are the longitudinal components

of the electric field near the interface. Photonic gap antennas also have the significant advan-

tage of not requiring any deep sub-wavelength lithography as is typically required for most

optical nanoantennas. They instead simply rely on the fabrication of a very thin low-index

layer. In the extreme case, where the thin layer is an ENZ material ϵlow ∼ 0, we have shown

that the bulk plasmon mode hybridizes with the bare modes of the all-dielectric antenna,

leading to hybrid modes with extremely large field enhancements.18 Full wave electromag-

netic calculations show that such structures can provide field enhancements of ∼ 100 using

2 nm-thick films of ITO and ∼ 150 in the mid-infrared using 20 nm-thick doped GaAs, as

the ENZ media. So far, ENZ PGAs have not been experimentally realized. In this letter,

3


we report on the design, fabrication and characterisation of dielectric PGAs hosting a 10

nm-thick layer of ITO as the ENZ material. Using dark field scattering spectroscopy, we

observe several resonances in the infrared. Using frequency domain finite-element method

simulations of the far-field scattering and field enhancement spectra, these can be assigned

to the different polaritonic modes supported by the PGA. We then probe the electric field

enhancement inside the ENZ layer by measuring third harmonic generation (THG). This

also reveals strong resonances in the third harmonic generation efficiency at the energy of

the hybrid modes, evidence of the strong subwavelength electric field confinement. Peak in-

stantaneous THG efficiencies of about 100 µm4/MW2 are obtained at these resonances, with

a strong response spanning > 500 nm. Despite strong losses in the antenna’s dielectric, these

efficiencies exceed those recently reported of for mutliresonnant Ge nanodisk antennas19 and

could be significantly improved through the use of thinner ITO layers.20

Results and discussion

A schematic of the fabricated PGA is depicted in Figure 1 a). It consists of a high refractive

index pillar of elliptical horizontal cross section in which a thin layer of ENZ material is

embedded.
The design stems from considerations discussed in a previous publication.17

The ENZ layer is placed at three quarters of the pillar’s height to improve the directivity

of the antenna through modal interference. The pillar’s elliptical cross section is chosen to

improve the antenna’s field enhancement by concentrating the light intensity midway through

the pillar’s major radius. For operation in the near infrared, amorphous silicon (a-Si) and

ITO are chosen as the high refractive index and ENZ materials respectively. Indium tin

oxide, which is a conductive oxide commonly used as a transparent conductor, has an ENZ

frequency in the near infrared. The exact crossing point of the real part of the permittivity,

which is a consequence of the plasma frequency, and thus the carrier concentration, can

be strongly tuned through the oxygen vacancy density.21 In our highly conductive samples,

4


the ITO ENZ wavelength was measured to be 1188 nm using variable angle spectroscopic

ellipsometry (see Supplementary Figure S1) performed on a 30 nm-thick film grown under

the same conditions as those used in our PGA.

The fabricated elliptical a-Si/ITO/a-Si PGAs have layer thicknesses of 373 nm, 10 nm

and 128 nm, respectively. While the predicted field enhancement could be further increased

for even thinner ITO films, 10 nm was chosen as it allows for relatively uniform films to

be achieved directly using reactive sputtering under a wide range of conditions (see Supple-

mentary Information Figure S2). Achieving high quality thinner (down to monolayer) films

is possible, but requires substantial optimization of the deposition conditions or specialized

printing techniques.20,22 Antennas were patterned laterally using electron beam lithography

(see Methods). Each fabricated array holds nominally identical pillars spaced 10 µm apart to

avoid coupling between pillars. To investigate the impact of the antenna dimensions on the

response, three arrays (I, II and III) hosting antennas with different cross-sectional dimen-

sions were investigated. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs of one of these

arrays as well as a close up on a single antenna are shown in Figures 1 b) and c) respectively.

The cross-sectional dimensions of the antennas in these arrays are summarized in Table 1.

These were measured using top-down SEM micrographs shown in Figure S3 of supplemen-

tary information. These micrographs confirm that the fabricated structures are faithful to

the design, but with some minor imperfections such as a slightly narrower top and the pres-

ence of micrograss between the antennas. The latter occurs to due to the random formation

of silicon oxyfluoride micromasks during the etching of the bottom a-Si layer.23 However, as

we will demonstrate with further optical characterisation, these have no measurable impact

on the antenna response.

Table 1: Cross-sectional dimensions of the investigated antennas

Array index
Minor diameter (nm)
Major diameter (nm)

I
230 ± 10
290 ± 10
II
265 ± 5
320 ± 7
III
290 ± 10
365 ± 5

5


10 μm

a)
b)
a-Si

ITO

a-Si

Glass

c)

0.2 μm

z
x

y

Figure 1: Design and dimensions of the photonic gap antennas. a) A render of the PGA
design. It consists of amorphous silicon pillars of elliptical cross section in which a thin
ITO layer is embedded. The antennas stand on a thick glass substrate. The thickness of
the glass/a-Si/ITO/a-Si layers are 2 mm, 373 nm, 10 nm and 128 nm respectively. b) SEM
image of an antenna array on the sample. The antennas are encircled. c) A close-up on a
single antenna, highlighted for clarity. The fabricated antennas are faithful to the design
despite thin grass-like structures around them and slightly bent sidewalls.

To probe the linear optical response of the antennas, we first measure the far-field scat-

tering spectrum of individual antennas in arrays I, II and III using single particle dark field

scattering (DFS) spectroscopy. The DFS spectra for an antenna representative of those in

arrays I, II and III are plotted in Figure 2 a), b) and c) respectively. The DFS spectra

from other antennas of the same array are qualitatively similar with slight variations in

peak intensities and position due to structural inhomogeneities between nominally identi-

cal antennas (see additional DFS spectra in Figure S3 of supplementary information). The

micrograss surrounding the antennas do not lead to any observable dark field scattering in

the spectral region probed by our experiment (see Figure S4 of supplementary information).

The broadband DFS response covers nearly an octave and redshifts as the lateral dimensions

of the antennas are increased from array I to III.

In Figure 2, we also compare our experimental data with the simulated scattering cross-

section integrated over the collection objective’s numerical aperture. The dimensions re-

6


0.5

1.0 a)

0.5

1.0

Normalized scattered power

b)

1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6

Wavelength ( m)

0.5

1.0 c)

Exp.
Sim.

Figure 2: Experimental (solid lines) and simulated (dashed lines) dark field scattering spectra
of a single antenna in arrays I, II and III in a), b) and c) respectively.

7


ported in Table 1 were used for these calculations. The result for arrays I, II and III are

plotted as dashed lines alongside the experimental data in Figure 2 a), b) and c) respec-

tively. The resonant structure observed in the DFS spectra is faithfully reproduced for all

dimensions but with narrower, slightly shifted features. These discrepancies are most likely

due to small deviations from the idealized geometry and increased damping for the 10 nm

film as compared to the measured refractive index.

The agreement between the experimental DFS spectra and the simulated ones allows

us to interpret the behavior of the antennas using the quasinormal modes of the simulated

structures. The DFS spectra capture the far-field properties of the antennas. The near-

field properties on the other hand, are better captured by the field enhancement spectra

plotted in Figure 3. We define the field enhancement as the maximal ratio between the

z-component of the electric field in the antenna to the magnitude of the incident electric

field. The figure also shows the case of ungapped antennas to highlight the effect of the

interaction between the ITO slab and the bare dielectric antenna modes.
The antennas

show very distinct resonances within the spectral region covered by the DFS bands. Like the

DFS spectra, when the cross-sectionnal dimensions of the antennas are increased from Figure

3 a) to c), these resonances redshift and spread apart. Compared to the purely dielectric

antennas, the ENZ PGA field enhancement spectra exhibit broader, shifted features, an

additional resonance, and a fourfold increase in field enhancement. This behavior is a sign of

the strong coupling between the dielectric antenna modes and the ITO plasmonic resonance

at the ENZ wavelength.18 While the interpretation is the same for all antenna dimensions,

the modes are labelled and shown for the case of antenna II. Dielectric modes are identified

by resonances in the ungapped antenna’s field enhancement spectra such as those labelled

m0, m1 and m2 in Figure 3 b). A cross-section of the z-component of their internal electric

field reveals horizontally anti-symmetric field distributions for all modes and an increasing

number of vertical nodes with the mode index. The strength of the interaction between

the bulk plasmon resonance and a given dielectric mode is related to the electric field’s z-

8


component. By placing the ENZ layer at a quarter of the antenna’s height from the top,

the ENZ mode couples most strongly to mode m1 then m0 and least to m2. This coupling

creates new modes labelled h0, h1, h2 and h3 in Figure 3 b). These are shifted from the bare

antenna modes by their interaction with the ENZ mode and broadened due to its increased

damping. These hybrid light-matter modes inherit both the bare antenna modes’ coupling

to the far-field and the strongly localized character of the ITO plasmonic resonance. These

characteristics are clearly manifested in the antenna’s electric field profiles plotted in the

mode-labelled panels of Figure 3 for the antennas of array II. All profiles taken within the

field enhancement band show both a strong localization of the electric field within the ITO

layer and a radiative component in and around the antenna. This ultimately manifests in

the broadband field enhancements of 10-20 shown in Figure 3 as well as the efficient coupling

to far-field radiation. The same interpretation holds for antennas I and III. It must be noted

however, that some modes do not couple strongly to the ENZ layer. This is the case for

mode h3 of antenna II, for example. Here, the ITO slab is located close to the node of the

photonic mode m2, leading to a weak coupling with the ENZ mode.

We next probe the field enhancement occurring within the fabricated devices through

THG. As any non-linear optical phenomenon, THG is a highly sensitive probe of the local

field intensity created by a pump beam. As such, it has been widely used to probe field

enhancements in metallic24 and dielectric25 optical nanoantennas, thin films of ENZ mate-

rials10,26 and metasurfaces.27 Our experimental setup allows us to image emission from the

sample at the pump’s third harmonic and resolve the contribution of individual pillars (see

Methods section for more details). The image of pillar array II illuminated by a 1.3 µm

pump, taken at the THG frequency, is shown in Figure 4 a). Intense emission is clearly

visible at the antenna positions. No signal above the background is observed between the

antennas, confirming the large field enhancement and the negligible role played by the grass-

like background. To confirm that this emission stems indeed from THG, we check that it

follows a cubic dependence on pump fluence. We compensate for variation in the pump

9


1.00
1.25
1.50

Wavelength ( m)

0

10

20

Field enhancement

a)

1.00
1.25
1.50

Wavelength ( m)

b)

1.00
1.25
1.50

Wavelength ( m)

c)

ITO gap

m0
m1

m2
h0
h1

h2

h3

λENZ
λENZ
λENZ
No gap (x4)

m0

4
2
0

z

y

4.5
2.5
0

m1

2.5
1
0

m2
h1

18
10
0

h0

10
0
6
20
10
0

h2

10
6
0

h3

Figure 3: Simulations of the field enhancement for the antennas in arrays I, II and III (in a),
b) and c) respectively) with (full lines) or without (dashed lines) an ITO gap. The dotted
line indicates the ENZ wavelength. Cuts in the electric field profile’s z-component under
normal excitation are shown for the labelled modes in their respective panels. These cuts
are taken in the major axis plane of antenna II. The dotted lines outline the boundaries of
the antenna. The color map gives the local field enhancement |Ez|/|E0|

10


profile over an array by acquiring an image of the pump spot at the sample such as the one

shown in Figure 4 b) (see Methods for details). The power emitted from two antennas (A

and B in Figure 4) are plotted against pump fluence in Figure 4 c). Both datasets are well

fitted over three ordes of magnitude by a cubic dependance on pump fluence, confirming that

the observed emission stems from THG inside the antenna. We cannot discard, however, the

contribution of cascaded sum frequency processes to this emission.28 Nevertheless, cascaded

or not, THG remains a sensitive probe of field enhancement inside the antennas.

Despite being nominally identical, pillar B is about twice as brigh as pillar A. This reflects

the presence of important structural differences between the antennas to which neither SEM

nor DFS spectroscopy are sensitive to. This hints at the location of the THG process within

the antennas. Great structural differences between antennas are unlikely to arise from the

bulk of the silicon layers due to their amorphous structure, or from the antennas’ surfaces

given their smooth profiles (see Figure S2b of supplementary information). On the other

hand, the polycrystalline ITO layer is noticeably rough and features clear crystalline domains

of tens of nanometers in size (see Figure S2a of supplementary information). When all but

the antennas’ cross sections are etched away from the a-Si/ITO/a-Si multilayer, each antenna

samples a different region of the inhomogeneous ITO layer. Since the antenna’s radiative

properties depend on the overall mode profile, the DFS spectra are only weakly affected by

variations in the microstructure. However, THG is highly sensitive to the permittivity at

the mode hotspot. Since the hotspot is concentrated in the ITO, as shown in the panels

of Figure 3, the microstructure variations are likely to cause the THG intensity variation

between antennas.

We now check the contributions of the different antenna modes to THG. We can extract

the antenna’s TH power conversion efficiency by dividing the time averaged emitted TH

irradiance ⟨PTHG⟩ by the time-averaged received pump irradiance ⟨Ppump⟩. Given that this

number depends on ⟨Ppump⟩ and the pump pulse duration, a more meaningful result is

obtained by instead defining the THG efficiency as the ratio of the peak TH irradiance to

11


Figure 4: a) Third harmonic image of pillar array II illuminated by a pulsed IR pump at
1.3 µm. Antennas are identified through their bright emission. Two of them are labelled
A and B. b) The IR pump profile at the sample plane used to measure the pump fluence
at the location of each pillar. Circles are positioned at the corresponding pillar locations
extracted from the third harmonic image in a). The location of antennas A and B is labelled
accordingly. c) Third harmonic power emitted from A (triangles) and B (squares) for different
pump fluences and their fits to a cubic dependance on pump fluence (solid lines). Vertical
error bars represent the contribution of shot noise and background noise while horizontal
error bars represent uncertainties on the pump power during the measurement.

the cube of the peak pump irradiance. The observed cubic dependance on pump irradiance

guarantees this metric to be independant of pump irradiance while using peak irradiance

values accounts for the pump pulse duration.
Lastly, the values reported here strongly

underestimate the internal THG efficiency due to strong absorption of the TH within the a-

Si dielectric and the finite numerical aperture of the collection objective. Simulations shown

in Supplementary Information estimate that 98% of the generated TH power is absorbed by

the a-Si and only 23% of the radiated TH is collected by our apparatus due to the highly

anisotropic THG radiation profile.

We measured the instantaneous THG efficiency of antennas within arrays I, II and III

using pump wavelengths spanning 1.21 µm to 1.64 µm and plotted them in Figure 5 a) to c).

The single antennas chosen for this investigation are the same as those whose DFS spectra

are plotted in Figure 2. For all antennas, ∼ 100 nm wide resonances are observed atop

a broad THG response within the measured wavelengths. Just like in the DFS spectra,

these resonances redshift with increasing lateral pillar dimensions. They also consistently

12


0

50

a)

0

50

THG efficiency ( m4/MW2)

b)

1.2
1.4
1.6

Pump wavelength ( m)

0

50

100 c)

Figure 5: Pump wavelength dependence of the measured instantaneous THG efficiency for
an antenna in arrays I (a), II (b) and III (c) (black squares). Error bars represent the effect
of compounded uncertainties in the calculated values. All curves correspond to the same
antennas investigated in Figure 2.

13


match the experimental peaks observed in the DFS spectra of Figure 2. However, despite

showing strong THG over their whole field enhancement band, the shape of the THG ef-

ficiency curves differ from the calculated field enhancement spectra cubed. Notably, the

highest enhancement is observed for the widest antenna, in contrast to the prediction of

Fig. 3. Several mechanisms can contribute to these differences. In particular, the a-Si’s

absorption nearly triples over the probed TH spectral window of 550 nm to 400 nm,29 which

significantly reduces the radiated THG power at shorter wavelengths. In addition, the lon-

gitudinal and transverse components of ITO’s frequency dependent nonlinear susceptibility

have been reported to increase by approximately 60% and 100%, respectively, in the range

between 1020 nm to 1320 nm.30 Finally, nonlocal effects, which have been ignored, and ma-

terial roughness can play an important role in the generation and coupling of localized THG

to far field radiation. While all antennas show strong THG over the spectral region probed,

the amplitude of the resonances vary significantly between pillars within the same array (see

supplementary material). This reflects the important local inhomogeneities between nomi-

nally similar antennas previously highlighted. For comparison’s sake, TH power conversion

efficiencies measured for the antennas studied in Figure 5 are 8.6×10−8 at 3.7 GW/cm2,

4.7×10−8 at 2.6 GW/cm2 and 5.1×10−8 at 3.2 GW/cm2 for arrays I, II and III excited at

1.35, 1.45 and 1.55 µm respectively. These figures include the large absorption losses in the

a-Si and the limited collection efficiency. From simulations of the THG external coupling

efficiency, we expect internal efficiencies to be 200 times larger than the figures reported

here. Given that the dominant loss mechanism is simply re-absorption of the THG radiation

within the a-Si, moving to a longer wavelengths or a transparent dielectric could alleviate

these losses.

14


Conclusion

We have demonstrated photonic gap antennas in which an ultra thin layer of ITO, an ENZ

material, is embedded. By comparing dark field scattering spectroscopy measurements with

simulations of the antennas’ scattering cross-section, we showed the antennas host hybrid po-

laritonic modes in accordance with simulations and previous work. Through third harmonic

generation, we confirm that these modes tightly confine the fields inside the 10 nm thick ITO

layer, leading to high field enhancement over a broad spectral range of 400 nm. This proof

of concept demonstrates the effectiveness of PGAs as vertically stacked optical antennas.

They afford a strong localized field enhancement in an device that can be fabricated us-

ing photolithography or straightforward electron-beam lithography, forgoing the high lateral

resolution requirements of traditional antenna designs. While our demonstration is in the

near-infrared, PGAs are particularly attractive for applications in the mid-infrared where the

ENZ frequency of doped III-V semiconductors is located31 . Using molecular beam epitaxy,

infrared ENZ materials could be grown inside PGAs with deep subwavelength thicknesses

well below those reported here and provide more than an order of magnitude larger field

enhancement.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada Strate-

gic Grant Program, the Canada Research Chairs Program and the Discovery Grants Pro-

gram. We would also like to acknowledge design and fabrication support from CMC Mi-

crosystems and Canada’s National Design Network (CNDN).

Author Contributions

* F.T, D.M.M and A.P have contributed equally to this work.

15


Methods

Sample fabrication

A B270 glass substrate (51 mm x 51 mm and 2 mm thick) was pre-cleaned using an oxygen

and argon plasma. The PGAs were fabricated by sputtering in a CMS-18 deposition system

by Kurt J. Lesker using 3-inch targets of Si and ITO (In2O3/SnO2 90/10 wt %). Each layer

of material was grown on a glass substrate to the desired thicknesses. A 372 nm layer of

amorphous silicon was then sputtered at 200 °C, followed by a 10 nm layer of ITO sputtered

at room temperature. The sample was then removed from the chamber and measured on

a J.A. Woollam RC2-XI ellipsometer. After returning it to the sputtering chamber, it was

annealed under vacuum for an hour at a 400 °C setpoint in order to reduce the epsilon-near-

zero wavelength to 1188 nm. The temperature was then brought down to 200 °C for the

sputtering of the final 128 nm layer of amorphous silicon. The layer thicknesses and bulk

optical properties were measured using the same ellipsometer (see Figure S1 of supplementary

information).

The large sample was cleaved into several smaller samples roughly equal in size, which

were cleaned by sonication in acetone and isopropyl alcohol followed by ten minutes in an

oxygen plasma (200 W, 0.8 mbar). Immediately before spin coating, each sample was vacuum

baked (50 torr, 120 °C, five minutes) and primed with SurPass 3000. They were spin-coated

with MA-N 2403 (4000 rpm) negative electron beam resist, pre-baked on a hotplate (90 °C, 1

minute), and exposed in a Raith 150 electron beam lithography system (20 kV, 80 µC/cm2).

Development was done in MA-D 525 developer (40 seconds) followed by two rinses in deion-

ized water while stirring (10 minutes total) then by a post-bake on a hotplate (90 °C, 2

minutes). The samples were then mounted onto an Al2O3-coated silicon carrier wafer us-

ing Crystalbond and etched in an Oxford Instruments Plasmalab 100 ICP 180 reactive ion

etching tool. The recipe for etching the top amorphous silicon (1200 W ICP power, 60 W

RF, 49 V bias, 20 mtorr, 15 °C, 22 sccm SF6, 38 sccm C4F8, 16 seconds) is a pseudo-Bosch

16


process similar to those used elsewhere for anisotropic etching of silicon.32–36 The sample was

removed from the chamber and wet etched in an acid solution (1:3:4 HNO3/HCl/H2O) for 2

minutes to remove the ITO layer. The sample was reinserted in the chamber and etched a

second time using the same peusdo-Bosch recipe for 35 more seconds, and finally cleaned in

an oxygen plasma (2000 W ICP, 0 W RF, 35 mtorr, 15 °C, 30 seconds).

Optical characterisation

The optical characterisation setup used was designed to investigate both dark field scattering

(DFS) and third harmonic generation (THG) in single antennas. This allows the direct cor-

relation of individual DFS and THG spectra despite possible inhomogeneities between pillar

specimens. A detailed diagram of this setup is presented in the supplementary information.

The sample was held in an inverted microscope customized to allow illumination straight

from the top through a 10x microscope objective for THG or at a grazing angle through a

10 mm biconvex lens for DFS spectroscopy. A stabilized laser lamp provided a broad and

stable infrared illumination for the DFS experiments. The output of an optical parametric

amplifier (200 fs pulse duration, 100 kHz repetition rate, Light Conversion ORPHEUS-N)

was used to pump the THG. For both experiments, light was collected from the bottom of

the microscope through a 40x 0.75 NA objective and sent to an infared spectral imager for

DFS scattering spectroscopy or a visible light imaging system for THG. The collected light

was directed to either systems using an accurate magnetically registered kinematic mount.

The visible imager consists of a single lens, a visible shortpass filter (400 nm to 550 nm

bandpass, Thorlabs FESH550) and a silicon CCD camera (Princeton Instruments Pixis 400)

sensitive from 350 nm to 1000 nm.
The infrared imager is composed of a InGaAs CCD

camera (First Light C-RED2) sensitive from 800 nm to 1650 nm connected at the exit of an

imaging spectrometer.

When performing DFS experiments, only the infrared imager was used with the spec-

trometer’s first diffractive order. The spectrum of the broadband light source was obtained

17


by focusing it at the sample plane from within the collection objective’s numerical aperture

and recording it using the infared imager. The spectrum of the DFS cross-section was ob-

tained by dividing the scattered spectrum by that of the light source after proper background

subtraction.

During THG measurements, the pump profile at the sample was first imaged using the

infrared imager with its spectrometer at the zeroth order and a neutral density filter. The

pump was then turned off with a mechanical shutter and the sample’s region of interest was

moved under the pump’s illumination. The collection path is then reconfigured for the use

of the visible imager and the pump shutter opened to acquire an image of the pump induced

THG. Using a ruled sample, the infrared and visible imagers’ image planes are calibrated so

that a location on one of these planes can be mapped onto the other. This allows for the

measurement of the pump power density responsible for THG in a given pillar.

All pump powers were measured with a high resolution thermal power sensor (Thorlabs

S401C). The third harmonic power was measured by calibrating the number of counts on

the visible imager’s camera to the power emitted at the sample’s plane. This calibration was

performed for every wavelength of interest using the same acquisition parameters as those

used in the THG measurements.

References

(1) Edwards, B.; Al`u, A.; Young, M. E.; Silveirinha, M.; Engheta, N. Experimental Ver-

ification of Epsilon-Near-Zero Metamaterial Coupling and Energy Squeezing Using a

Microwave Waveguide. Physical Review Letters 2008, 100, 033903.

(2) Lobet, M.; Liberal, I.; Knall, E. N.; Alam, M. Z.; Reshef, O.; Boyd, R. W.; Engheta, N.;

Mazur, E. Fundamental Radiative Processes in Near-Zero-Index Media of Various Di-

mensionalities. ACS Photonics 2020, 7, 1965–1970.

(3) Passler, N. C.; Razdolski, I.; Katzer, D. S.; Storm, D. F.; Caldwell, J. D.; Wolf, M.;

18


Paarmann, A. Second Harmonic Generation from Phononic Epsilon-Near-Zero Berre-

man Modes in Ultrathin Polar Crystal Films. ACS Photonics 2019, 6, 1365–1371.

(4) Reshef, O.; De Leon, I.; Alam, M. Z.; Boyd, R. W. Nonlinear optical effects in epsilon-

near-zero media. Nature Reviews Materials 2019, 4, 535–551.

(5) Wen, X.; Li, G.; Gu, C.; Zhao, J.; Wang, S.; Jiang, C.; Palomba, S.; Martijn de

Sterke, C.; Xiong, Q. Doubly Enhanced Second Harmonic Generation through Struc-

tural and Epsilon-near-Zero Resonances in TiN Nanostructures. ACS Photonics 2018,

5, 2087–2093.

(6) Vassant, S.; Hugonin, J.-P.; Marquier, F.; Greffet, J.-J. Berreman mode and epsilon

near zero mode. Optics Express 2012, 20, 23971.

(7) Campione, S.; Brener, I.; Marquier, F. Theory of epsilon-near-zero modes in ultrathin

films. Physical Review B 2015, 91, 121408.

(8) Alam, M. Z.; Schulz, S. A.; Upham, J.; De Leon, I.; Boyd, R. W. Large optical non-

linearity of nanoantennas coupled to an epsilon-near-zero material. Nature Photonics

2018, 12, 79–83.

(9) Campione, S.; Liu, S.; Benz, A.; Klem, J. F.; Sinclair, M. B.; Brener, I. Epsilon-Near-

Zero Modes for Tailored Light-Matter Interaction. Physical Review Applied 2015, 4,

044011.

(10) Luk, T. S.; de Ceglia, D.; Liu, S.; Keeler, G. A.; Prasankumar, R. P.; Vincenti, M. A.;

Scalora, M.; Sinclair, M. B.; Campione, S. Enhanced third harmonic generation from the

epsilon-near-zero modes of ultrathin films. Applied Physics Letters 2015, 106, 151103.

(11) Hendrickson, J. R.; Vangala, S.; Dass, C.; Gibson, R.; Goldsmith, J.; Leedy, K.;

Walker, D. E.; Cleary, J. W.; Kim, W.; Guo, J. Coupling of Epsilon-Near-Zero Mode to

19


Gap Plasmon Mode for Flat-Top Wideband Perfect Light Absorption. ACS Photonics

2018, 5, 776–781.

(12) Kim, J.; Dutta, A.; Naik, G. V.; Giles, A. J.; Bezares, F. J.; Ellis, C. T.; Tischler, J. G.;

Mahmoud, A. M.; Caglayan, H.; Glembocki, O. J.; Kildishev, A. V.; Caldwell, J. D.;

Boltasseva, A.; Engheta, N. Role of epsilon-near-zero substrates in the optical response

of plasmonic antennas. Optica 2016, 3, 339.

(13) Schulz, S. A.; Tahir, A. A.; Alam, M. Z.; Upham, J.; De Leon, I.; Boyd, R. W. Optical

response of dipole antennas on an epsilon-near-zero substrate. Physical Review A 2016,

93, 063846.

(14) Campione, S.; Wendt, J. R.; Keeler, G. A.; Luk, T. S. Near-Infrared Strong Coupling

between Metamaterials and Epsilon-near-Zero Modes in Degenerately Doped Semicon-

ductor Nanolayers. ACS Photonics 2016, 3, 293–297.

(15) Jun, Y. C.; Reno, J.; Ribaudo, T.; Shaner, E.; Greffet, J.-J.; Vassant, S.; Mar-

quier, F.; Sinclair, M.; Brener, I. Epsilon-Near-Zero Strong Coupling in Metamaterial-

Semiconductor Hybrid Structures. Nano Letters 2013, 13, 5391–5396.

(16) Wang, K.; Liu, A.-Y.; Hsiao, H.-H.; Genet, C.; Ebbesen, T. Large Optical Nonlinearity

of Dielectric Nanocavity-Assisted Mie Resonances Strongly Coupled to an Epsilon-near-

Zero Mode. Nano Letters 2022, acs.nanolett.1c03876.

(17) Patri, A.; Cogn´ee, K. G.; Haeberl´e, L.; Menon, V.; Caloz, C.; K´ena-Cohen, S. Photonic

Gap Antennas Based on High-Index-Contrast Slot Waveguides. Physical Review Applied

2021, 16, 044065.

(18) Patri, A.; Cogn´ee, K. G.; Myers, D. M.; Haeberl´e, L.; Menon, V.; K´ena-Cohen, S.

Hybrid epsilon-near-zero modes of photonic gap antennas. Physical Review B 2022,

105, 165126.

20


(19) Grinblat, G.; Li, Y.; Nielsen, M. P.; Oulton, R. F.; Maier, S. A. Degenerate Four-Wave

Mixing in a Multiresonant Germanium Nanodisk. ACS Photonics 2017, 4, 2144–2149.

(20) Datta, R. S. et al. Flexible two-dimensional indium tin oxide fabricated using a liquid

metal printing technique. Nature Electronics 2020, 3, 51–58.

(21) Cleary, J. W.; Smith, E. M.; Leedy, K. D.; Grzybowski, G.; Guo, J. Optical and

electrical properties of ultra-thin indium tin oxide nanofilms on silicon for infrared

photonics. Optical Materials Express 2018, 8, 1231.

(22) Li, S.; Tian, M.; Gao, Q.; Wang, M.; Li, T.; Hu, Q.; Li, X.; Wu, Y. Nanometre-thin

indium tin oxide for advanced high-performance electronics. Nature Materials 2019,

18, 1091–1097.

(23) Jansen, H.; Boer, M. d.; Legtenberg, R.; Elwenspoek, M. The black silicon method: a

universal method for determining the parameter setting of a fluorine-based reactive ion

etcher in deep silicon trench etching with profile control. Journal of Micromechanics

and Microengineering 1995, 5, 115–120.

(24) Hanke, T.; Krauss, G.; Tr¨autlein, D.; Wild, B.; Bratschitsch, R.; Leitenstorfer, A.

Efficient Nonlinear Light Emission of Single Gold Optical Antennas Driven by Few-

Cycle Near-Infrared Pulses. Physical Review Letters 2009, 103, 257404.

(25) Xu, L.; Rahmani, M.; Zangeneh Kamali, K.; Lamprianidis, A.; Ghirardini, L.; Saut-

ter, J.; Camacho-Morales, R.; Chen, H.; Parry, M.; Staude, I.; Zhang, G.; Ne-

shev, D.; Miroshnichenko, A. E. Boosting third-harmonic generation by a mirror-

enhanced anapole resonator. Light: Science & Applications 2018, 7, 44.

(26) Capretti, A.; Wang, Y.; Engheta, N.; Dal Negro, L. Enhanced third-harmonic gen-

eration in Si-compatible epsilon-near-zero indium tin oxide nanolayers. Optics Letters

2015, 40, 1500.

21


(27) Tong, W.; Gong, C.; Liu, X.; Yuan, S.; Huang, Q.; Xia, J.; Wang, Y. Enhanced third

harmonic generation in a silicon metasurface using trapped mode. Optics Express 2016,

24, 19661.

(28) Celebrano, M.; Locatelli, A.; Ghirardini, L.; Pellegrini, G.; Biagioni, P.; Zilli, A.;

Wu, X.; Grossmann, S.; Carletti, L.; De Angelis, C.; Du`o, L.; Hecht, B.; Finazzi, M. Ev-

idence of Cascaded Third-Harmonic Generation in Noncentrosymmetric Gold Nanoan-

tennas. Nano Letters 2019, 19, 7013–7020.

(29) Pierce, D. T.; Spicer, W. E. Electronic Structure of Amorphous Si from Photoemission

and Optical Studies. Physical Review B 1972, 5, 3017–3029.

(30) Rodr´ıguez-Sun´e, L.; Trull, J.; Akozbek, N.; de Ceglia, D.; Vincenti, M. A.; Scalora, M.;

Cojocaru, C. Retrieving Linear and Nonlinear Optical Dispersions of Matter: Combined

Experiment-Numerical Ellipsometry in Silicon, Gold and Indium Tin Oxide. Frontiers

in Photonics 2021, 2, 746341.

(31) Jun, Y. C.; Luk, T. S.; Robert Ellis, A.; Klem, J. F.; Brener, I. Doping-tunable thermal

emission from plasmon polaritons in semiconductor epsilon-near-zero thin films. Applied

Physics Letters 2014, 105, 131109.

(32) Con, C.; Zhang, J.; Cui, B. Nanofabrication of high aspect ratio structures using an

evaporated resist containing metal. Nanotechnology 2014, 25, 175301.

(33) Saffih, F.; Con, C.; Alshammari, A.; Yavuz, M.; Cui, B. Fabrication of silicon nanos-

tructures with large taper angle by reactive ion etching. Journal of Vacuum Science &

Technology B, Nanotechnology and Microelectronics: Materials, Processing, Measure-

ment, and Phenomena 2014, 32, 06FI04.

(34) Khorasaninejad, M.; Walia, J.; Saini, S. S. Enhanced first-order Raman scattering from

arrays of vertical silicon nanowires. Nanotechnology 2012, 23, 275706.

22


(35) Ayari-Kanoun, A.; Aydinoglu, F.; Cui, B.; Saffih, F. Silicon nanostructures with very

large negatively tapered profile by inductively coupled plasma-RIE. Journal of Vacuum

Science & Technology B, Nanotechnology and Microelectronics: Materials, Processing,

Measurement, and Phenomena 2016, 34, 06KD01.

(36) Henry, M. D.; Walavalkar, S.; Homyk, A.; Scherer, A. Alumina etch masks for fabri-

cation of high-aspect-ratio silicon micropillars and nanopillars. Nanotechnology 2009,

20, 255305.

23


Broadband field-enhancement in

epsilon-near-zero photonic gap antennas

F´elix Thouin,† David M. Myers∗,† Ashutosh Patri∗,‡ Bill Baloukas,† Ludvik

Martinu,† and St´ephane K´ena-Cohen∗,†

†Department of Engineering Physics, ´Ecole Polytechnique de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, H3T

1J4, QC, Canada

‡Department of Electrical Engineering , ´Ecole Polytechnique de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, H3T

1J4, QC, Canada

E-mail: s.kena-cohen@polymtl.ca

Characterization of the ITO and silicon layers

Relative permittivity and ENZ wavelength

The relative permittivity of the ITO layer embedded inside the PGAs is plotted in Figure S1.

From this measurement, the ENZ wavelength is determined to be 1.188 µm. As described

in the Methods section of the main text, the relative permittivity of the ITO layer was

measured in situ using a M-2000 ellipsometer from J.A. Woollam. The thickness of the ITO

layer was also extracted from the same measurement.

Film morphologies

SEM micrographs of films grown in similar conditions as those used to fabricate the antennas

are presented in Figures S2 a and b for the ITO and amorphous silicon respectively. The

1

arXiv:2211.05214v1  [physics.optics]  9 Nov 2022


1.12
1.14
1.16
1.18
1.20
1.22
1.24
1.26
1.28
1.30

Wavelength [ m]

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

Relative permittivity

Re
Im

Figure S1: The real (solid) and imaginary (dashed) parts of the relative permittivity of the
ITO layer used in the fabrication of the PGAs. The real part crosses zero at a wavelength
of 1.188 µm. The dotted line denotes zero permittivity.

surface of the 373 nm thick a-Si layer is smooth and uniform while clear crystalline domains

and structure is observed on the 13 nm thick ITO film.

Pillar dimensions

The cross-sectional dimensions of antennas were assessed using top down SEM as shown in

Figure S3. By repeating the same measurement over 4 pillars in each array, statistics on these

dimensions were obtained and are tabulated in Table 1 of the main text. The uncertainties

quoted include both those related to the fitting of the ellipse, inter-specimen variations and

estimating the thickness of conductive material deposited.

The antennas were fabricated on a non-conductive substrate. In order to obtain SEM

micrographs, a thin gold layer was sputtered on the sample to minimize the presence of

artefacts caused by charging effects. The thickness of this gold layer was measured to be

14 ± 5 nm using ultraviolet light absorption.1 The dimensions shown in Table 1 have been

corrected for this additional thickness.

2


a)
b)

Figure S2: SEM micrograph of a) a 13 nm thick ITO film deposited on 373 nm of amorphous
silicon and b) the surface of the amorphous silicon layer on which it was deposited.

Figure S3: Top down SEM micrograph of a single pillar to extract its cross sectionnal
dimensions. The red curves were used for dimensionning. They are fitted by eye on the
micrograph’s scale bar and the on the edges of the pillar.

Supplementary DFS spectra

In the main text, the DFS spectrum of only one pillar per array was reported. In Figure

S4, the DFS spectra of other pillars from the same array are plotted as well. Despite minor

discrepancies in mode energy and scattering cross-section, the scattering spectra are similar.

3


0.0

0.5

1.0 a)

0.5

1.0

Scattering cross-section [normalized]

b)

1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6

Wavelength [ m]

0.0

0.5

1.0 c)

Figure S4: Dark field scattering spectra of pillars in arrays I, II and III (in a), b) and c)
respectively). The black dots correspond to the spectra shown in Figure 2 of the main text.

As can be seen from a typical dark field scattering image presented in Figure S5, the

collected signal is exclusively attributable to scattering of the incident light by the pillars.

During a DFS spectroscopy measurement, the slit is closed around a single column of pillars,

vertically discriminating the spectra of single pillars.

Figure S5: Typical infrared dark field scattering image of a pillar array. Individual pillars
are clearly visible.

4


Supplementary instantaneous THG efficiency curves

The instantaneous THG generation efficiencies measured for other pillars than those studied

in the main text are plotted in Figure S6.

1.2
1.4
1.6
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

THG efficiency ( m4/MW2)

a)

1.2
1.4
1.6

Pump wavelength ( m)

b)

1.2
1.4
1.6

c)

Figure S6: Instanteneous THG efficiency of pillars in arrays I, II and III (in a), b) and c)
respectively). Each color corresponds to a different pillar. The black squares correspond to
the data shown in Figure 5 of the main text.

Setup used for the optical characterisation

A diagram of the experimental apparatus used to measure both dark field scattering spectra

and third harmonic generation is presented in Figure S7. This setup is described in detail in

the Methods section of the main text.

Simulations of the TH emission

We modelled the TH radiation pattern (shown in Figure S8) and outcoupling efficiency by

placing two 10 nm-long out of phase dipoles at the two maxima of field enhancement in the

5


10x, NA 0.2
40x, NA 0.7

Bandpass 
[400,550] nm

Si CCD
[300, 1000] nm

InGaAs CCD
[800, 1700] nm

Imaging
Monochromator

IR Probe
[800 1800] nm

IR Pump
[1200 1600] nm

Figure S7: A diagram of the optical characterisation setup.

ITO thin-film of a photonic gap antenna. This simulations was performed using a finite-

difference time-domain method for a substrate-less model. 98% of the TH is lost to the

strong absorption of a-Si at this frequency. Of the 2% that couples out to the far-field, only

23% are collected by our objective.

References

(1) Kossoy, A.; Merk, V.; Simakov, D.; Leosson, K.; K´ena-Cohen, S.; Maier, S. A. Optical

and Structural Properties of Ultra-thin Gold Films. Advanced Optical Materials 2015,

3, 71–77.

6


Figure S8: Radiation pattern from two out of phase dipoles placed inside the ITO slab of a
pillar antenna.

7


