G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 1 of 10

Three-dimensional imaging of porcine joint tissues down to the 

subcellular level

Georg Schulz*a,b, Andrea Barberoc, Francine Wolfc, Griffin Rodgersa, Christine Tannera, Timm 

Weitkampd, Marcus Mummee, Marta Morawskaf, Daniel Beerf, Bert Müllera

aBiomaterials Science Center, Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Basel, 

Gewerbestrasse 14, 4123 Allschwil, Switzerland;

bCore Facility Micro- and Nanotomography, Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of 

Basel, Gewerbestrasse 14, 4123 Allschwil, Switzerland; 

cDepartment of Biomedicine, Univeristy of Basel, Hebelstrasse 20, 4056 Basel, Switzerland,

dSynchrotron SOLEIL, L’Orme des Merisiers, 91190 Saint-Aubin, France; 

eRegenerative Cartilage Surgery, University Hospital of Basel, Spitalstrasse 21, 4031 Basel,

fAdvanced Osteotomy Tools, Wallstrasse 6, 4051 Basel, Switzerland

ABSTRACT

Joint tissues consist of trabecular and cortical bone as well as calcified and hyaline cartilage, which presents a challenge 
for hard X-ray-based visualization on the sub-cellular level due to the wide range of local X-ray absorption values. The 
density of the calcified tissues requires rather high photon energy, which often leads to insufficient contrast within the 
cartilage and impedes the visualization of individual biological cells. Decalcification of the tissues reduces the total and 
local X-ray absorption values and allows for selecting a lower photon energy. Further contrast enhancement can be 
achieved by ethanol fixation and paraffin tissue embedding. In this study, we (i) searched for an appropriate visualization 
method to investigate lesions generated by a laser osteotome and (ii) visualized a decalcified porcine joint after ethanol 
fixation and subsequent paraffin embedding using laboratory- and synchrotron radiation-based microtomography. The 
experiments at the ANATOMIX beamline of Synchrotron SOLEIL were performed in off-axis scan mode with a pixel size 
of 1.3 µm. Individual cells in all layers of the joint could be made visible and the effect of ethanol fixation and paraffin 
embedding demonstrated.

Keywords: Porcine knee joint, calcified cartilage, chondrocytes, decalcification, ethanol fixation, paraffin embedding, 
synchrotron radiation, microtomography

1. INTRODUCTION

In the past decade, robot-guided lasers have become an established method to cut bones. Compared to conventional saws, 
they provide higher cutting precision and can lead to improved bone healing. It is reasonable to expect that in near future 
robot-guided lasers will be successfully employed to excavate damaged cartilage from joints. The present study aimed at 
the selection of an appropriate imaging method and the examination of a potential sample preparation protocol for 
investigating lesions generated by CARLO® (Cold Ablation Robot-assisted Laser Osteotome, Advanced Osteotomy Tools 
AG, Basel, Switzerland) [1], which is one of the world’s first digital, orthopedic laser surgery platforms. The system is 
equipped with a 2940-nm Er:YAG laser targeting the water content in the tissue. The instantaneous evaporation is causing 
micro fractures and blasting out a certain volume depending on the energy setting. By this principle of focused laser energy 
deposition, the tissue is ablated without detectable subsequent thermal damage. Unlike the mechanical instruments 
currently used to perform osteotomy, laser-induced bone ablation does not create a smear layer on the osteotomy edges, 
resulting in a channeled scaffold that preserves the trabecular ridges, which allows the passage of cells to the site of injury, 
potentially benefiting bone healing [2]. Laser ablation has been also experimentally used on knee cartilage [3], for example 
as an alternative to microfracturing. However, the number of studies is limited and meaningful comparisons with current 
medical standards are largely missing [4]. In the current pilot investigation, a fresh domestic pig knee was selected.

__________________________________________________________________________

*Send correspondence to G.S., e-mail: georg.schulz@unibas.ch; telephone: +41 61 207 54 37, https://www.bmc.unibas.ch


G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 2 of 10

Microtomography was chosen as a method to help quantitatively compare the performance, accuracy, and tissue
preservation of laser ablation versus manual professional curettage. In hospitals, the investigation of joints is daily routine. 
Bony tissues can be visualized with a spatial resolution down to a fraction of a millimeter by clinical computed tomography, 
whereas the soft tissues can be made visible by magnetic resonance imaging with a slightly inferior spatial resolution. 
These ranges of spatial resolution rule out investigations on the cellular level. Several microscopic studies of bone biopsies 
from humans and animals with resolution from the micron range [5-8] to the deep submicron domain [9] are available, but 
they mainly concentrate on the hard tissues. The visualization of knee joint specimens using hard X-ray microtomography 
is challenging, as it contains the rather soft hyaline cartilage and the much harder calcified cartilage and bony tissues. As 
the density of these materials differs by about a factor of two, it is difficult to find the proper X-ray photon energy to 
simultaneously visualize both tissue types. A photon energy suitable for bone will be too high for soft tissue components 
and thus will provide insufficient contrast within the cartilage. Conversely, a photon energy well suited to visualizing soft 
tissues will generate streaks and other artifacts owing to the absorbing bone [10]. One possible workaround is the use of
contrast agents such as osmium tetroxide [11]. An alternative would be phase-contrast-based microtomography, because 
the signal is less dependent on the atomic number of the components than in conventional absorption contrast [12, 13].

The present study concentrates first on the macroscopic three-dimensional visualization of the entire porcine condyle 

including bony tissues and hyaline cartilage, to observe the performance of laser and manual ablation. The second step is 
the visualization of cylindrical biopsies on the cellular level without the use of any contrast agent. For theses tasks an 
advanced conventional microtomography system and a synchrotron-radiation microtomography setup were used.

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS

2.1 Tissue preparation

The cartilage ablation study was carried out on a domestic pig condyle specimen. Two ablations were performed with 
CARLO®: the shallow ablation (L-s) that should remove the hyaline cartilage and stop at the calcified cartilage and the 
deep ablation (L-d) that should also remove the calcified cartilage and stop at the cortical bone, see Fig. 1a. In both cases, 
the focal point of the laser was set above bone surface, to increase the width of the cut segment, resulting in smooth ablation 
surface. For comparison, an experienced orthopedic surgeon with specialization in cartilage repair performed a manual 
ablation of the cartilage (M) using a surgical curette. After the first laboratory microtomography experiments the joint was 
formalin fixated. After the fixation four osteochondral blocks (L-s, L-d, M and Ctrl) were extracted and decalcified for a 
period of 60 days using a 7% EDTA 30% sucrose solution (Sigma-Aldrich). Then two cylinders 6 mm in diameter were 
punched out of each of the four regions, cf. Fig. 1c. These osteochondral cylinders were then processed histologically, i.e. 
ethanol series (50% to 100%), applied to xylene and embedded in paraffin. Tissues were then sectioned (thickness 5 to 
7 µm) and stained with Safranin-O / Fast Green to visualize the sulphated glycosaminoglycans (GAG) positive matrix and 
the collagenous matrix.

2.2 Laboratory-based microtomography

The laboratory-based tomography experiments were performed with a nanotom® m (Waygate Technologies, Wunstorf, 
Germany). With a distance of 60 cm between source and detector and a flat-panel detector with 3,072 × 2,400 pixels, the 
system allows visualizing specimens with diameters of up to 35 cm [13]. For substantially smaller objects, the nanofocus 
X-ray tube also provides a cellular resolution [14]. The scan was acquired with an acceleration voltage of 120 kV and a 
beam current of 100 µA. A 0.25-mm-thick copper filter was used to increase the mean photon energy. The effective pixel 
size was set to 25 µm. A set of 1,500 projections was acquired over 360° with an exposure time of 4 s at each rotation 
angle, resulting in a total scan time of 2 hours and 15 minutes. For the visualization of the decalcified cylinders after 
ethanol fixation and paraffin embedding a lower mean photon energy was used, i.e. an acceleration voltage of 90 kV and 
a beam current of 200 µA. With an effective pixel size of 5 µm, 1,440 projections were acquired along 360° with an 
exposure time of 6 s per projection.

2.3 Synchrotron radiation-based microtomography

The synchrotron radiation-based tomography experiments were performed at the ANATOMIX beamline of Synchrotron 
SOLEIL (Saint-Aubin, France) [15] using a filtered white beam with a mean photon energy of around 17 keV (undulator 
gap of 8.3 mm and a gold filter of 10 µm thickness). The data was detected by a scientific CMOS camera (Hamamatsu 
Orca Flash 4.0 V2, 2048 × 2048 pixels, 6.5 μm physical pixel size) equipped with a 20 µm-thick LuAG scintillator. 
Measurements were made at effective pixel sizes of 0.65 µm and 1.30 µm, obtained using microscope objectives 


G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 3 of 10

(Mitutoyo, Kawasaki, Japan) with respective magnifications of 10× and 5×. A set of 5,900 projections was acquired over 
an angular range of 360° with off-axis rotation, which almost doubled the field of view in the horizontal dimensions. The 
exposure time was set to 50 ms, which filled half of the detector’s dynamic range. The propagation distance was set to 
50 mm for single-distance phase retrieval [16].

Figure 1. Preparation steps of the pig condyle. a: Fresh condyle after manual (M), deep laser (L-d) and shallow laser (L-s) 
ablations. b: Three-dimensional rendering of the porcine condyle on the basis of tomography data. c: Cylindrical osteochondral 
specimens after formalin fixation and decalcification of the three ablated regions plus a control, not ablated region (Ctrl).

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 2 shows renderings and orthogonal virtual cuts through the lesions of the joint before formalin fixation. As intended, 
the shallow laser cut only removed the hyaline cartilage and did not reach the calcified cartilage. The deep laser and the 
manual lesion treatment also removed some of the calcified cartilage and was even partially extended to the subchondral 
bone. The laser cut did not have a uniform depth over the lesion, cf. virtual cut in Fig. 2 bottom left, as the planning did 
not include information of the precise location of the cartilage. This variation can be corrected by incorporating optical 
coherence tomography measurements during the cutting procedure. Apart from this detail, the laser-ablated lesion was 
more precise compared to the manual one, in the sense that all surfaces, i.e. cartilage and bone, were flat and homogeneous.


G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2. Three-dimensional renderings from the conventional microtomography data set of the three ablated regions and 
virtual cuts indicate the depth and the quality of the ablations. The three frames “L-s”, “L-d”, “M” are enlarged details of the 
top-view 3D rendering shown on the upper left. The other images are vertical sections (slices) through the tomographic volume 
taken along the dashed yellow lines.

Figure 3 shows histological slices of the control osteochondral cylinder after Safranin-O / Fast Green staining. This 

staining colors the GAG positive matrix in red and the collagenous matrix in bluish green. The histological slice reveals 
the microanatomy of bone and cartilage and illustrates the morphology of the superficial layer, the deep zone, the calcified 
cartilage and the bone. The images in Fig. 3 also show the challenges of histological sectioning and staining, i.e. partial
tissue folding and formation of gaps.

With hard X-ray microtomography it is possible to correct these deformations and obtain additional information on 

the cellular level. It can be performed at one of the individual preparation steps (formalin fixation, decalcification, ethanol 
fixation, paraffin embedding) [17, 18]. Because of the challenges in simultaneous visualization of cartilage and bone [10], 
the imaging was performed after formalin fixation and decalcification. In order to investigate the differences between 
ethanol fixation and paraffin embedding on the macroscopic level, laboratory-based experiments were performed. Figure 4 
shows virtual cuts through the tissues after ethanol fixation (left) and paraffin embedding (right). While the contrast in the 
tomography data after paraffin embedding is increased, the morphology of the specimen has drastically changed between 
the two preparation steps. The cartilage appears inhomogeneously deformed. Moreover, the tissue after ethanol fixation 
shows sufficient contrast (albeit inferior to imaging after paraffin embedding) to identify bone, cartilage, and even calcified 
cartilage, i.e. the dark layer between bone and cartilage.


G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 5 of 10

Figure 3. Optical micrographs of a histological slice of the decalcified, paraffin-embedded porcine osteochondral cylinders 
after Safranin-O / Fast Green staining. The magnified views show three selected regions of the tissues and illustrate their 
appearance on the microscopic level.

Figure 4. Laboratory-based microtomography slices through the ethanol-fixated (left) and paraffin-embedded (right) porcine 
osteochondral tissues indicating the macroscopic deformations induced by paraffin embedding.


G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 6 of 10

For the comparison on the cellular level, synchrotron radiation-based microtomography was used. Figure 5 shows 

virtual cuts through the decalcified tissue after ethanol fixation (left) and paraffin embedding (right). The quality (contrast-
to-noise, no deformation of the specimen) of the tomography data after ethanol fixation is obviously better. Paraffin 
embedding also induces artifacts in the morphology that are apparent in the images. Within the bony tissue, air inclusions 
are present. These inclusions are especially obstructive in the phase-contrast microtomography data sets, as they produce 
artifacts due to the phase shift difference between paraffin and air. Both data sets illustrate the morphology of the joint on 
the cellular level, including individual, specifically shaped chondrocytes.

Figure 5. Synchrotron-radiation microtomography slices through the ethanol-fixated (left) and paraffin-embedded (right)
porcine osteochondral tissues show the difference in contrast for the two preparation routes and artifacts in the paraffin data 
sets induced by air inclusions. The bright features are chondrocytes in lacunae.

The comparison between a data set acquired with an effective pixel size of 1.30 µm (Fig. 6 left) and one of 0.65 µm 

(Fig. 6 right) showed that the former (i.e., lower spatial resolution) is preferable for the investigated tissues. Similar
anatomical features could be observed in both data. The advantage of using the larger pixels rather than the submicron
pixels is that the volume imaged in a single scan is eight times larger. Figure 7 shows a three-dimensional rendering and 
three orthogonal cuts through the specimen, where the horizontal cut (red) was chosen through the cartilage.


G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 7 of 10

Figure 6. Synchrotron radiation-based microtomography slices through the specimen acquired with effective pixel sizes of 
1.30 µm (left) and 0.65 µm (right) indicate minor differences in contrast and spatial resolution.

Figure 7. Three-dimensional rendering and orthogonal virtual cuts through the synchrotron radiation-based microtomography 
data (1.3 µm-wide voxels) of the ethanol-fixed porcine joint specimen showing the morphology with sub-cellular features.


G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 8 of 10

A more detailed view of the virtual slice in Fig. 7 top right is shown in Fig. 8. All the regions could be identified: the 

superficial zone (blue) with the flat chondrocytes; the intermediate zone (green) with spheroid-shaped chondrocytes; the 
deep zone (yellow) with the chondrocytes aligned in columns; the calcified cartilage (magenta) with the chondrocyte
clusters surrounded by calcified extracellular matrix; and the decalcified bone (white).

Figure 8. Synchrotron radiation-based microtomography slice of the ethanol-fixed porcine joint tissue including magnified 
views into the superficial zone (blue framed), the intermediate zone (green framed), the deep zone (yellow framed), the 
calcified cartilage (magenta framed) and the decalcified bone (white framed) showing sub-cellular anatomical features.


G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 9 of 10

4. CONCLUSIONS

For the simultaneous visualization of cartilage, calcified cartilage and bony tissues of a knee using X-ray microtomography, 
the decalcification of the specimen was required. The contrast could be increased by ethanol fixation. Paraffin embedding 
is hardly beneficial, as it produces strong deformations of the cartilage and because it is very challenging to remove air 
inclusions within the trabeculae of the bone. Macroscopic investigations on the entire joints and parts of it can be performed 
with a laboratory-based tomography system. For cellular resolution single-distance phase-contrast microtomography at 
synchrotron radiation facility can be applied. Looking on the feature sizes within the porcine joint specimen, an effective
pixel size of 1.30 µm is preferable, as it provides an eightfold larger volume compared to 0.65 µm-wide pixels with similar 
visual details. Other advantages of the lower resolved data set are lower dose and shorter scan duration to achieve 
equivalent contrast-to-noise ratio. A mapped ROI with the same volume content, includes an eight times smaller size of 
the data set. The lower resolved data set allowed for the detection of chondrocytes and consequently for the differentiation
between the cartilage types. The described radiological examinations will be used in future studies to investigate the 
performance of emerging technologies in which the laser is combined with a real-time feedback loop to control the ablating 
process, i.e. using optical coherence tomography. Moreover, such radiological assessments could be performed to obtain
a more accurate description — as compared to that provided by histological analyses — of the quality of biopsy samples 
collected from operated joints of patients or of implantable cartilage tissues manufactured for the treatment of patients.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors acknowledge financial support of the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) in the frame of the R'equip 
initiative (133802). ANATOMIX is an Equipment of Excellence (EQUIPEX) funded by the Investments for the Future
program of the French National Research Agency (ANR), project NanoimagesX, grant no. ANR-11-EQPX-0031.

REFERENCES

[1]
M. Ureel, M. Augello, D. Holzinger, T. Wilken, B.-I. Berg, H.-F. Zeilhofer, G. Millesi, P. Juergens, and A. A. 
Mueller, “Cold Ablation Robot-Guided Laser Osteotome (CARLO®): From Bench to Bedside,” Journal of 
Clinical Medicine, 10, (2021).

[2]
K.-W. Baek, M. Dard, H.-F. Zeilhofer, P. C. Cattin, and P. Juergens, “Comparing the Bone Healing After Cold 
Ablation Robot-Guided Er:YAG Laser Osteotomy and Piezoelectric Osteotomy—A Pilot Study in a Minipig 
Mandible,” Lasers in Surgery and Medicine, 53, 291-299 (2020).

[3]
J. Meister, R. Franzen, K. Gavenis, M. Zaum, S. Stanzel, N. Gutknecht, and B. Schmidt-Rohlfing, “Ablation of 
articular cartilage with an erbium:YAG laser: An ex vivo study using porcine models under real conditions—
ablation measurement and histological examination,” Lasers in Surgery and Medicine, 41, 674-685 (2009).

[4]
E. Su, H. Sun, T. Juhasz, and B. J. F. Wong, “Preclinical investigations of articular cartilage ablation with 
femtosecond and pulsed infrared lasers as an alternative to microfracture surgery,” Journal of Biomedical 
Optics, 19, 098001 (2014).

[5]
H. Chen, S. Shoumura, S. Emura, and Y. Bunai, “Regional variations of vertebral trabecular bone 
microstructure with age and gender,” Osteoporosis International, 19, 1473-1483 (2008).

[6]
M. Stauber, L. Rapillard, G. H. van Lenthe, P. Zysset, and R. Müller, “Importance of individual rods and plates 
in the assessment of bone quality and their contribution to bone stiffness,” Journal of Bone and Mineral 
Research, 21, 586-595 (2006).

[7]
C. Delecourt, M. Relier, S. Touraine, H. Bouhadoun, K. Engelke, J. D. Laredo, and C. Chappard, “Cartilage 
morphology assessed by high resolution micro-computed tomography in non OA knees,” Osteoarthritis, 24, 
567-571 (2016).

[8]
Y. H. Kim, and J. S. Kang, “Micro-computed tomography evaluation and pathological analyses of female rats 
with collagen-induced arthritis,” Journal of Veterinary Science, 16, 165-171 (2015).

[9]
F. Peyrin, P. Dong, A. Pacureanu, and M. Langer, “Micro- and nano-CT for the study of bone ultra-structure,” 
Current Osteoporosis Reports, 12, 465-474 (2014).


G. Schulz et al., submitted to Developments in X-Ray Tomography XIV, Proc. SPIE vol. 12242
15 November 2022

Page 10 of 10

[10]
G. Schulz, C. Götz, M. Müller-Gerbl, I. Zanette, M.-C. Zdora, A. Khimchenko, H. Deyhle, Thalmann, P., and 
B. Müller, “Multimodal imaging of the human knee down to the cellular level ” Journal of Physics: Conference 
Series 849, 012030 (2017).

[11]
M. Z. C. Ruan, B. Dawson, M.-M. Jiang, F. Gannon, M. Heggeness, and B. H. L. Lee, “Quantitative imaging of 
murine osteoarthritic cartilage by phase-contrast micro-computed tomography ” Arthritis & Rheumatism, 65, 
388-396 (2013).

[12]
M. N. Holme, G. Schulz, H. Deyhle, T. Weitkamp, F. Beckmann, J. A. Lobrinus, F. Rikhtegar, V. Kurtcuoglu, 
I. Zanette, T. Saxer, and B. Müller, “Complementary X-ray tomography techniques for histology-validated 3D 
imaging of soft and hard human tissues using plaque-containing blood vessels as examples,” Nature Protocols,
9, 1401-1415 (2014).

[13]
G. Schulz, C. Götz, H. Deyhle, M. Müller-Gerbl, I. Zanette, M.-C. Zdora, A. Khimchenko, P. Thalmann, A. 
Rack, and B. Müller, “Hierarchical imaging of the human knee,” Proceedings of SPIE, 9967, 99670R (2016).

[14]
A. Khimchenko, H. Deyhle, G. Schulz, G. Schweighauser, J. Hench, N. Chicherova, C. Bikis, S. E. Hieber, and 
B. Müller, “Extending two-dimensional histology into the third dimension through conventional micro 
computed tomography,” NeuroImage, 139, 26-36 (2016).

[15]
T. Weitkamp, M. Scheel, J. L. Giorgetta, V. Joyet, V. L. Roux, G. Cauchon, T. Moreno, F. Polack, A. 
Thompson, and J. P. Samama, “The tomography beamline ANATOMIX at Synchrotron SOLEIL,” Journal of 
Physics: Conference Series, 849, 012037 (2017).

[16]
T. Weitkamp, D. Haas, D. Wegrzynek, and A. Rack, “ANKAphase: Software for single-distance phase retrieval 
from inline X-ray phase-contrast radiographs,” Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 18, 617-629 (2011).

[17]
G. Rodgers, W. Kuo, G. Schulz, M. Scheel, A. Migga, C. Bikis, C. Tanner, V. Kurtcuoglu, T. Weitkamp, and B. 
Müller, “Virtual histology of an entire mouse brain from formalin fixation to paraffin embedding. Part 1: Data 
acquisition, anatomical feature segmentation, tracking global volume and density changes,” Journal of 
Neuroscience Methods, 364, 109354 (2021).

[18]
G. Rodgers, C. Tanner, G. Schulz, A. Migga, W. Kuo, C. Bikis, M. Scheel, V. Kurtcuoglu, T. Weitkamp, and B. 
Müller, “Virtual histology of an entire mouse brain from formalin fixation to paraffin embedding. Part 2: 
Volumetric strain fields and local contrast changes,” Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 365, 109385 (2022).


