A New High Parallel-Field Spectrometer at TRIUMF’s 𝛽-NMR Facility

Edward Thoeng,1, 2, a) Ryan M. L. McFadden,2, 3, b) Suresh Saminathan,2 Gerald D. Morris,2 Philipp Kolb,2

Ben Matheson,2 Md Asaduzzaman,2, 3 Richard Baartman,2 Sarah R. Dunsiger,2, 4 Derek Fujimoto,1, 5, c)

Tobias Junginger,2, 3 Victoria L. Karner,5, 6, c) Spencer Kiy,2 Ruohong Li,2 Monika Stachura,2, 7 John O. Ticknor,5, 6

Robert F. Kiefl,1, 2, 5 W. Andrew MacFarlane,2, 5, 6 and Robert E. Laxdal2, 3, d)
1)Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of British Columbia, 6224 Agricultural Road, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1,
Canada
2)TRIUMF, 4004 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 2A3, Canada
3)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty Road, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2,
Canada
4)Department of Physics, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6,
Canada
5)Stewart Blusson Quantum Matter Institute, University of British Columbia, 2355 East Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4,
Canada
6)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, 2036 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1,
Canada
7)Department of Chemistry, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6,
Canada

(Dated: 1 December 2022)

A new high field spectrometer has been built to extend the capabilities of the 𝛽-detected nuclear magnetic resonance
(𝛽-NMR) facility at TRIUMF. This new beamline extension allows 𝛽-NMR spectroscopy to be performed with fields
up to 200 mT parallel to a sample’s surface (perpendicular to the ion beam), allowing depth-resolved studies of local
electromagnetic fields with spin polarized probes at a much higher applied magnetic field than previously available in
this configuration. The primary motivation and application is to allow studies of superconducting radio frequency (SRF)
materials, close to the critical fields of Nb metal, which is extensively used to fabricate SRF cavities. The details of the
design considerations and implementation of the ultra-high vacuum (UHV) system, ion optics, beam diagnostics are
presented here. Commissioning of the beamline and spectrometer with radioactive ions are also reported here. Future
capabilities and applications in other areas are also described.

I.
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

Superconducting Nb cavities are the enabling technology
behind modern high-power and high-energy linear accelerators
(LINACs).1,2 Electromagnetic radio frequency (RF) fields are
stored in RF cavities and are used to efficiently accelerate
charged particle bunches (or beams). To reduce LINAC length,
hence cost, the electric accelerating field can be increased,
but with a proportional increase in the surface magnetic field
(𝐵surf) parallel to the RF cavity wall resulting in heat dissipation.
Large oscillating 𝐵-fields can result in vortex generation and
movement of those vortices generates heat as explained below.
SRF LINAC cavities (commonly made out of elemental Nb
metal) need to be operated in the superconducting state below
the superconducting transition temperature 𝑇𝑐 (∼9.2 K for Nb),
requiring extensive cryogenic infrastructure. SRF cavities can
only be operated in the Meissner state when 𝐵surf is lower than
the field of first vortex penetration (𝐵vp), which for Nb is on
the order of 200 mT. In the Meissner state, magnetic fields
are screened from the interior of the superconductor and can
only penetrate on a nm-scale thin layer (∼100 nm in Nb) from

a)E-mail: ethoeng@triumf.ca
b)E-mail: rmlm@triumf.ca
c)Current address: TRIUMF, 4004 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 2A3,
Canada
d)E-mail: lax@triumf.ca

the surface, defined by the London penetration depth (𝜆𝐿).
As magnetic fields are increased further beyond 𝐵vp in Nb (a
type-II superconductor), a transition from the Meissner state
to the vortex state occurs where quantized magnetic fluxes
(circulated by vortices of supercurrents) enter the interior of
the superconductor. The rapid oscillation of these vortices in
the RF fields causes severe heat dissipation resulting in a sharp
increase in the surface resistance.3

RF dissipation is contained within this surface layer and its
response to the applied 𝐵surf has a significant impact on the
overall performance of the LINAC. Intensive research at SRF
facilities worldwide has also demonstrated that the performance
of SRF cavities is very sensitive to (and can be enhanced by)
various surface modifications (e.g., vacuum heat treatment,4–7
dilute impurity diffusion,8,9 and higher 𝐵vp superconductor
thin film coatings10–13). Theoretical studies postulate that a
"dirty" layer on a "clean" substrate (or more complicated layered
structures) can help shield the underlayer from the formation of
dissipative vortices.3,10,14 A deeper understanding of how the
Meissner screening deteriorates at 𝐵surf close to 𝐵vp, as well
as how different surface modifications result in a reduced RF
dissipation and an enhanced 𝐵vp is required to improve cavity
performance.

Direct current (DC) magnetic fields applied both perpen-
dicular and parallel to the sample surface have been used as
analogues of cavity operating conditions to characterize SRF
materials with respect to the field of first flux penetration.15

Perpendicular fields result in highly non-uniform surface fields

arXiv:2211.15619v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  30 Nov 2022


2

when the sample is in the Meissner state, with flux accentuated
at sample edges. Parallel fields on coin shaped or ellipsoid
samples provide near uniform surface fields up to the field
of first flux penetration. Measurements typically record the
maximum local surface field (based on the applied field and the
sample geometry) that can be reached before flux is detected
in the bulk. Such measurements do not provide local details
of the role of the surface layer(s) in the field of first flux entry.
Given the interest in layered structures and their precise role in
enhancing the field of first flux entry, a diagnostic that provides
the depth-resolved information of field attenuation through the
London layer would provide new insight.

Useful tools to study SRF materials are techniques utilizing
spin-polarized radioactive probes such as the positive muon
(𝜇+) or radioactive 8Li ions. In either case, the projectile
is implanted into the bulk or near surface where the probe’s
spin reorients according to the static (i.e., time-average) and
dynamic (i.e., stochastic) components of the local magnetic
field. The 𝛽-decay emmissions of the probe are correlated with
its spin orientation at the time of decay and the time evolution
of the asymmetry of the 𝛽-decay provides information about
the local magnetic field. Early studies of SRF Nb samples
utilized the muon spin rotation (𝜇SR) facility at TRIUMF
where magnetic fields were applied perpendicular to the face
of the coin shaped samples of SRF material to characterize
the field of first flux entry.16 Later, a spectrometer allowing
the application of parallel fields was added17 and a number of
measurements were performed both with ellipsoid and coin
samples to characterize the role of various treatments on the
field of first flux entry.15 The low-energy muon spin rotation
(LE-𝜇SR) facility at Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) has a much
lower energy muon beam that allows depth-resolved studies
in parallel fields.18–20 The low momentum muon projectile,
however, is easily deflected by the applied parallel field on the
sample and is limited to ≤30 mT.

TRIUMF’s implementation of the 𝛽-NMR technique21,22

utilizes low-energy (𝐸 ∼ 20-30 keV) radioactive ions like 8Li+

that can be spin-polarized in-flight before delivery to a dedicated
spectrometer. Like LE-𝜇SR, the 𝛽-NMR technique can be used
to “soft-land” the ion at the near surface using a sample biased
at high voltage (HV). The variable HV bias is used to decelerate
the ion to energies varying from hundreds of eV to the full ion
energy which in turn allows depth-resolved studies of the local
magnetic field. The TRIUMF 𝛽-NMR facility23,24 is capable
of studying samples in high perpendicular field (up to 9 T) or
(prior to this work) in parallel fields up to a maximum ∼24 mT.
Compared to low energy muons, the transverse deflection of the
radioactive ion beam (RIB) can be more easily compensated and
therefore an upgrade of the TRIUMF parallel field capability
was proposed and realized. The new facility provides ion
deceleration (for depth-resolved studies) at high parallel fields
up to 200 mT — a capability unique in the world. This paper
describes the new facility, including the design considerations,
the installed equipment, and the commissioning with both
stable and radioactive beams.

II.
𝛽-NMR TECHNIQUE AND THE EXISTING FACILITY AT
TRIUMF

𝛽-NMR is a type of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
technique which utilizes implanted spin-polarized radioactive
nuclei as probes. The main difference compared with conven-
tional NMR is the method of detection. The local field can
be monitored using the anisotropic emission of the 𝛽-particles
(typically MeV energy), which is highly correlated with the
direction of the nuclear spin at the time of the decay.
High energy 𝛽s are detected in two opposing simple detector
telescopes (with pairs of scintillators in coincidence), oriented
at 0 and 𝜋 radians relative to the direction of the initial spin
polarization. Due to the parity violation of the 𝛽-decay, the 𝛽
counts per unit time 𝐶0 and 𝐶𝜋 differ by a factor proportional
to the angular emission probability 𝑊(𝜃), i.e.,

𝐶𝜃 (𝑡) = 1

2
𝑁(𝑡)

𝜏
𝑊(𝜃) = 1

2
𝑁(𝑡)

𝜏

�
{1 + 𝐴0𝑃(𝑡)}
for 𝜃 = 0,
{1 − 𝐴0𝑃(𝑡)}
for 𝜃 = 𝜋,
(1)

where the total number of nuclei (with mean lifetime 𝜏) present
at time 𝑡 after the beam has turned on and implanted at a
constant rate 𝑅0, is defined as:

𝑁(𝑡) =
∫ 𝑡

0
𝑁(𝑡, 𝑡′)𝑑𝑡′ = 𝑅0

∫ 𝑡

0
exp[−(𝑡 − 𝑡′)/𝜏]𝑑𝑡′.
(2)

For the remaining terms in eq. 1, 𝐴0 is the proportionality
constant which depends on both the properties (solid angle) of
the detectors, (𝛽 energy-dependent) detection efficiency, and
the intrinsic asymmetry 𝐴 (𝐴0 ∼ 0.1 for 8Li).21 𝑃(𝑡) in eq. 1 is
the degree of spin-polarization. The count rates are combined
to generate the experimental asymmetry:

𝐴(𝑡) ≡ 𝐶0(𝑡) − 𝐶𝜋(𝑡)

𝐶0(𝑡) + 𝐶𝜋(𝑡) = 𝐴0𝑃(𝑡),
(3)

which is directly proportional to 𝑃(𝑡). The time evolution of
the (longitudinal) spin-polarization can therefore be measured
as the probe spin interacts with the local magnetic field inside
the sample. This method of detection allows about ten orders
of magnitude higher sensitivity (per nuclear spin) than conven-
tional NMR, allowing for the study of situations that are either
extremely difficult or impossible with conventional approaches
(e.g., thin films, ultra-dilute impurities, etc.).21–23

The implantation energy of 𝛽-NMR probes can be varied
(e.g., from ∼0.5 keV to ∼30 keV) to study the surface of mate-
rials on the nm-scale and in a depth-resolved manner. Similar
to 𝜇SR, the 𝛽-NMR technique does not rely on the presence of
a suitable NMR nucleus in the material and can therefore be
applied to any material at any applied magnetic field (including
zero field). In contrast to LE-𝜇SR, where the radioactive life-
time (𝜏) is 2.2 µs, typical 𝛽-NMR probes have a much longer
𝜏 (e.g., 𝜏 = 1.21 s for 8Li25). It is therefore more sensitive to
dynamics on a much longer timescale, making the two tech-
niques complementary (rather than competitive). Furthermore,
𝛽-NMR ions at TRIUMF need to be spin-polarized in-flight via


3

optical pumping, whereas surface 𝜇+s produced from two-body
pion decay are nearly 100% spin-polarized.

The 𝛽-NMR technique as implemented at TRIUMF requires
a dedicated facility to produce high intensity RIBs with a
high degree of spin polarization. In the case of TRIUMF, the
high intensity RIBs are produced at the Isotope Separator and
Accelerator (ISAC) facility, which uses a 500 MeV cyclotron
as a driver to bombard a solid (radio)isotope production target
with proton beams.26 The resulting short-lived nuclides are
then ionized, extracted, and separated on-line (i.e., using the
so-called ISOL method) to produce isotopically pure RIBs
before being sent downstream for various experiments. 8Li+

beams with an intensity of ∼107 s−1 are routinely available.

Prior to being delivered to the 𝛽-NMR end-station, the RIBs
at ISAC are spin polarized in-flight using dedicated facility
infrastructure (allowing for routine operation) via collinear
optical pumping with a circularly polarized resonant laser.27
This step produces ∼70 % nuclear spin polarization.28 The
TRIUMF 𝛽-NMR facility has two beamlines: the 𝛽-NMR leg,
which allows for measurements at high perpendicular fields
up to 9 T, and the 𝛽-detected nuclear quadrupole resonance
(𝛽-NQR) leg, which allows samples to be studied in parallel
fields up to ∼24 mT (prior to this work). The NQR technique is
a zero field analogue of NMR that depends on the quadrupole
interaction of nuclear spins >1/2 in solids. The spin-polarized
RIB can be sent alternately to either of the two beamlines
thanks to an electrostatic “kicker” that is used to “pulse” the
beam. In this way two experiments can run simultaneously.

At the end of each leg is a spectrometer assembly for sample
measurements, containing the detectors, cold finger cryostat
(for low temperature measurements), magnets, RF coil, HV
deceleration (HV cage and deceleration electrodes), and charge-
coupled device (CCD) imaging system. In addition, in order
to achieve depth-profiling the sample ladder and cryostat are
raised to the bias of the HV platform, which can be varied in
order to decelerate the ion beam as it approaches the sample.
The bias capability spans from 0-35 kV via a high stability
(FuG Elektronik GmbH model HCL) DC power supply. A high
voltage interlocked cage surrounds the biased equipment on a
platform above the beamline (see the inset of fig. 1).

The 𝛽-NMR beamline with high (perpendicular-to-sample-
surface) field spectrometer uses a superconducting solenoid to
generate fields up to 9 T. The detectors are oriented forward
and backward relative to the sample, and the emitted 𝛽-particles
penetrate through the sample to reach the front detector located
downstream of the sample. The back detector, located outside
the HV platform, contains a small aperture to allow passage of
the RIB. On the 𝛽-NQR beamline, the (parallel-field) spectrom-
eter uses a normal conducting Helmholtz coil. The detectors
are oriented to the left and right side of the sample, and up to
four samples can be loaded simultaneously into the ultra-high
vacuum (UHV) chamber via a sample ladder load-lock system.
This paper reports the upgrade of the 𝛽-NQR leg with the
addition of a 1m long extension of the beamline to include a
parallel field spectrometer capable of up to 200 mT for unique
depth-resolved studies of SRF and other materials.

III.
HIGH-PARALLEL-FIELD UPGRADE

The high-parallel-field upgrade on the 𝛽-NQR leg was com-
pleted in two phases. The scope of phase I was to modify and
improve the existing low-parallel-field section. In phase II, an
additional ∼1.02 m of new beamline was installed. Phase I
and phase II were completed in June 2019 and in July 2021,
respectively.

A.
Ion optics

There are three main elements of ion optics used along the 𝛽-
NQR beamline: electrostatic steerers, electrostatic quadrupoles,
as well as a magnetic Helmholtz coil. The steerers compensate
for the vertical deflection of the ions as they pass through the
fringe of the applied magnetic field and deflect the beam onto
the sample; the quadrupoles are used to control the beam shape
during transport and to focus the ions onto the sample; and
the Helmholtz coil provides the magnetic field on the sample
parallel to the surface. An additional four-sector electrode close
to the sample (within ∼50 mm) acts as a deceleration electrode,
and allows independent horizontal and vertical steering which
is used to compensate for the beam deflection and to re-center
the beam on the sample. The layout of the ion optics and
Helmholtz coil in the 𝛽-NQR leg are shown in fig. 2. There
are 3 horizontal steerers (XCB) and 4 vertical steerers (YCB)
and two sets of electrostatic quadrupole triplets.
Fig. 2 also shows a model of the new beam line extension
complete with a model beam trajectory for the case where
the Helmholtz coil is producing 200 mT at the sample. The
magnetic fringe field diverts the beam ∼2.4 cm off-axis through
a set of “skimmers”, a vertical steerer, and a thermal radiation
baffle. The vertical steerers adjust the position of the beam
on the sample, while the radiation shield is used to reduce the
heat load on the cryogenically cooled sample. Even though
the design was focused on an applied field of 200 mT, the two
vertical deflectors can be operated independently to achieve
the desired beam path at lower fields (all the way down to
zero-field).
Beam focusing is achieved using two sets of quadrupole
triplets to obtain an axially symmetric beam on sample. Pre-
viously, an Einzel lens was used to focus the beam on the
low-parallel-field (sample 1) spectrometer. With the phase I
upgrade, the first triplet replaced this Einzel lens and is now
used to either obtain an optimum focus on the low-parallel-field
spectrometer or can be used in tandem with the second triplet
to provide a variable symmetric spot size at the second sample
position (sample 2). The optimal setpoints for both triplets
can be obtained using the TRANSOPTR code30,31 via a web
application called Envelope (see fig. 3), which is hosted on a
local server at TRIUMF.
Several HV power supply modules providing bias to the
electrostatic ion optics are installed in two separate crates.
Both crates and all the plug-in modules were purchased from
WIENER Plein & Baus, Corp., with the first crate (8U or 8
standard rack unit, corresponding to 14" in height) installed in
a 19" rack at the beamline level, and the second smaller crate


4

Electrostatic

Kicker

Low-parallel-field

Spectrometer

High-parallel-field

Spectrometer

Optical pumping

region

β-NQR Leg

β-NMR Leg

(High-perpendicular-field

Spectrometer)

8Li+ beam

8Li+
beam

FIG. 1.
Beamline layout of the upgraded 𝛽-NMR facility. Typical beam energy extracted from the source for 8Li+ is ∼20-30 keV. The RIB is
spin-polarized in-flight (first neutralized with an alkali vapour cell, and later re-ionized by a He vapour cell) using dedicated optical pumping
infrastructure, allowing for routine operation. The fast electrostatic kicker allows for semi-simultaneous operation of two spectrometers (i.e., two
experiments running at the same time off of a single RIB). At the 𝛽-NMR leg, a spectrometer equipped with UHV cold-finger cryostat and
superconducting solenoid allows measurements at high magnetic fields (0.5-9 T) perpendicular to the sample surface. The upgraded 𝛽-NQR leg
provides a new spectrometer for measurements up to 200 mT parallel to the sample surface, just downstream of the existing low-parallel-field
(0-24 mT) one. The 𝛽-NQR spectrometer is also equipped with a UHV cold-finger cryostat. The inset shows the side view of the upgraded
𝛽-NQR beamline and the HV platform above the beamline.

(3U or 5.25" in height) installed in another 19" rack inside the
HV platform. The larger crate on the beamline level houses
five modules for the 𝛽-NQR leg ion optics requiring HV bias
relative to ground, and the smaller crate housing two modules
is used exclusively for the four-sector electrode biased relative
to the HV platform.

For the larger crate, one bipolar module uses 10 HV channels
to provide up to ±500 V for the three horizontal steerers and the
first two vertical steerers. Three additional unipolar modules
provide six positive and six negative channels with biases
up to 6 kV for the two quadrupole triplets. All quadrupole
electrodes with the same polarity are wired in parallel with
UHV compatible stripped, bare Cu wires, as shown in fig. 4.
Not shown are the HV feedthroughs installed in the external
vacuum chamber with center conductors that connect to the
internal HV wires and electrodes (see also details in fig. 2).
One unipolar module (with 8 positive and 8 negative channels)
uses 2 pairs of HV positive and negative channels to provide up
to 3 kV for each electrode of the last two vertical steerers, which
is used to deflect the beam through the thermal radiation baffles.
Polarity reversal of this module is achieved with a switch. All
beamline devices are remotely operated via an Experimental
Physics and Industrial Control System (EPICS)32,33 interface.

B.
Beam Diagnostics and Beam Tuning

Beam diagnostics are available at discrete locations to aid
with the beam tuning via measurements of both the beam current
and the beam profile (see fig. 2). The beam current can be
measured using three Faraday cups (FCs). The FCs are driven
by stepper motor actuators to allow precise positioning with
respect to the beam trajectory. All the FCs are typically biased
between 60-350 V with either negative or positive polarity, to
either trap secondary electrons (i.e., for an absolute current
reading) or to amplify the beam intensity during operation (e.g.,
when using a low-intensity RIB). The driven position of the
first two FCs are aligned with the beamline center while the
third FC is positioned off-axis (from the beamline center) to
allow maximum collection when the beam path follows the
reference trajectory. The reference values for the optimum
motor positions were obtained by measuring the alignment of
the FCs using a theodolite via direct line-of-sight for the case
where the Helmholtz coil is producing 200 mT at the sample.
during beamline installation.

The beam profile at the sample location is obtained using
a CCD camera (Starlight Xpress) mounted on a viewport, by
imaging the light emitted by a scintillator (typically sapphire34)
on the sample ladder. Imaging of the beam at the sample
location is virtually limited to RIB as it is primarily the decay
products and not the kinetic energy of the beam that induces
scintillation (the 𝛽s and 𝛼s produced during radioactive decay


5

Sample-1

Sample-2

XCB0

YCB0

XCB3

YCB3

XCB6
YCB6

YCB6B

FC0
FC3

FC6

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6

LPM0

CCD1

CCD2
Sample-1

Sample-2

XCB0

YCB0

XCB3

YCB3

XCB6
YCB6

YCB6B

FC0
FC3

FC6

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6

LPM0

CCD1

CCD2

FIG. 2.
Details of the upgraded 𝛽-NQR leg (see also fig. 1). Top: The final straight section of the beamline (XCB and YCB refer to horizontal
and vertical steerers, FC to Faraday cups, Q to quadrupoles, LPM to Linear Profile Monitor). Bottom: Enlarged view of the new beam line
extension model, showing the electrostatic quadrupoles, steerers, “skimmer” plates (grounded electrodes with a defined aperture to limit the
effective length of optical element), Faraday cup, thermal radiation baffle and final quadrant decelerating electrode. A representative beam
trajectory (blue envelope), obtained using a particle tracking code (General Particle Tracer29) for a 200 mT applied field is illustrated in the
model.

are in the MeV range, ∼103 times more energetic than the
beam itself). The beam profile (and centroid position) can
also be measured using horizontal and vertical slits driven at
45° in combination with a downstream FC, the so-called linear
position monitor (LPM). The LPM plate includes two slits
(horizontal and vertical with respect to the beam axis) and
three circular collimators of different diameters (8.0 mm, 5.6
mm, and 4.0 mm) on a copper block that allows beam size and
position definition for reproducible tuning. The LPM is driven
by a stepper motor, with the center of each slit or collimator

(and corresponding stepper motor position) determined during
the installation using a theodilite.

The tuning strategy and use of the diagnostics is as follows.
The quadrupole triplets are set to theoretical values (from the
Envelope web application) for a given beam energy and desired
spot size. The vertical steerers are set to the theoretical value
for the chosen Helmholtz coil setting (i.e., applied field). The
beam is first centered on axis and aligned using the LPM0
aperture and downstream FCs. A pilot beam using a stable
isotope (e.g., 7Li+) is often used to establish the trajectory with


6

FIG. 3.
Plot of the beamline envelope (beam going from left to right) obtained from the Envelope calculator based on the TRANSOPTR
code,30,31 used to tune the beam dimensionns under flexible operating conditions via two quadrupole triplets (i.e., for various beamspot sizes,
beam energies, HV platform biases, etc). The high-parallel-field and low-parallel-field spectrometer samples are located at 181.5 cm and 76 cm
away from the LPM0 (at 0 cm), respectively. The amplitude of the shaded areas located around 39 cm, 115 cm, and 180 cm indicate the focal
strength of the first quadrupole triplet, second quadrupole triplet, and HV bias, respectively.

the aid of the 25 mm diameter FCs. Fine tuning of beam spot
size and position, particularly at reduced energies, is achieved
with direct beam spot imaging using a scintillator (sapphire34)
and a CCD camera which views the sample ladder through
a glass viewport from the downstream side. The sapphire
produces a bright image under irradiation by a RIB, even at
the typical low beam intensity for RIBs of 106 ions per second.
Another scintillator material (YAP:Ce, Proteus, Inc.) has also
been used to image stable beam (e.g., during beam development
using a non-radioactive ion source) but with a much duller
image even at 5 µA.

C.
Ultra-high Vacuum System

Ultra-high vacuum (∼ 10−10 Torr) is essential to extend the
lifetime of the clean surface of any sample under investigation,
particularly during measurements at cryogenic temperatures, to
prevent condensation of residual gases. The UHV throughout
the beamline is established by differential pumping using a
single backing-pump and two turbo-pumps, which can provide
pressures down to ∼10−9 Torr. Somewhat lower pressures at
the two sample locations are achieved using two separate cryop-
umps, mounted directly below the sample cryostat, providing
base pressures down to ∼10−11 Torr.
The new high-parallel-field spectrometer is built on a stain-
less steel six-way cross with ConFlat (CF) flanges on each
arm. The diameter of the tube along the beam axis is 6" outer
diameter (OD), which is a compromise between reasonable
pumping speed and a more compact Helmholtz magnet. The
top port consists of an 8" CF flange that provides access for the
cryostat to be lowered into the beamline. The side ports are 10"
CF flanges on 8" OD tube stubs, onto which re-entrant ports
with welded thin (0.05 mm) stainless windows are bolted. This

window allows a large diameter space for mounting scintillation
detectors within 6.35 cm (2.5") of the sample.
The three existing UHV chambers on the low-parallel-field
section have been modified to accommodate the new quadrupole
triplet, the LPM, as well as the new FC and viewport for the CCD
camera. Two additional vacuum chambers are also fabricated
in-house for the beamline extension, which includes one six-
way cross for the spectrometer chamber and one beamtube for
the upstream steerers and quadrupoles. All UHV chambers
are electropolished after tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding and
machining. Subsequently, the chambers are leak-checked, and
measured with a residual gas analyzer (RGA) after beamline
assembly and pump-down.

D.
Sample Environment

Magnet Coils

A copper conductor Helmholtz coil is used to provide a
magnetic field of up to 200 mT at the sample position. A
field uniformity better than 0.01 % is required for 𝛽-NMR
experiment across a typical beamspot size, full width at half
maximum (FWHM) of ∼3-4 mm. The number of turns for
each coil along the width and height is 8 × 12, respectively,
producing 56,080 A-turns at a current of 584 A. The coil
conductor is water-cooled with a 10 mm × 10 mm cross section
from the International Annealed Copper Standard (IACS),
consisting of 100 % Cu. Turn-to-turn insulation is provided by
0.5 mm thickness double Dacron® glass, and 1 mm thickness
of additional fiberglass insulation. Each coil is composed of
stacks of four pancakes encapsulated with vacuum impregnated
clear epoxy resin. The resulting dimensions for a single coil


7

Ground
Anode

YCB3

XCB3

Q3

Q2

Q1

XCB6

YCB6

Q6

Q5

Q4

Bare

Cu-wire

Bare

Cu-wire

”Skimmer”

Plate

”Skimmer”

Plate

”Skimmer”

Plate

”Skimmer”

Plate

Feedthrough

Hole

Feedthrough

Hole

Feedthrough

Hole

Feedthrough

Hole

FIG. 4. Ion optics “boxes” used in the upgraded 𝛽-NQR beamline.
Feedthrough holes allow BeCu extension posts connecting the UHV
feedthroughs to the HV electrodes (see also details in fig. 2). The
“skimmer” plates are grounded electrodes with apertures used to limit
the effective length of the ion optics. Also shown are the stripped bare
Cu wires used to connect electrodes in parallel to the common UHV
feedthroughs. Left: Ion optics box upstream of the low-parallel-field
sample position, containing the first quadrupole triplet and steerer
asssemblies. Right: Ion optics box for the high-parallel-field section,
containing the second quadrupole triplet and steerer assemblies. Note
that the beam enters from the bottom side of the image.

are shown in fig. 5, with a separation distance (between inner
face of each coil) of 154.9 mm. The specified coils are sourced
from Stangenes Industries Inc. (Palo Alto, CA).
The magnetic fields along the coil pair axis (i.e., the parallel
fields on the sample) and along the beamline axis were calcu-
lated using the finite element method (FEM) software OPERA-
3d (TOSCA Solver for Static Current Flow problems).35 The
simulated magnetic field homogeneity parallel to the sample
surface (along the coil pair axis) and fringe fields along the
beam axis are shown in fig. 6. The power supply provides up
to 600 A at 50 V and is specified to have a stability of 0.01%
ripple (60 mA rms) with a digital resolution of 16-bit at 200 mT.
The power supply is sourced from Alpha Scientific Electronic
(Stanton, CA) and installed with a water cooling system. Re-
mote control of the power supply is available through an EPICS
interface.32,33 A photograph of the magnet installed around
the cryostat is shown in fig. 7. The cryostat is biased at the
platform voltage and the copper electrode to the right of center
is the grounded anode defining the deceleration gap.

Cryostat Modification

The existing cold-finger cryostat was modified to allow
application of HV bias for the four-sector electrode which
is mounted on the cryostat radiation shields via SHAPALTM

OR=308 mm

IR=171.4 mm

H=136.6 mm

W=92.1 mm

dsep=92.1 mm

dcoil=154.9 mm

FIG. 5. Dimensions of the 𝛽-NQR modified Helmholtz coils. Left:
Inner radius (IR) and outer radius (OR) of a single coil in the high-
parallel-field magnet installed at the sample 2 position. Also shown
are the cooling channel tails at the top of the model. Right: The
dimensions of the coil pair, modified from a Helmholtz configuration to
fit the UHV spectrometer chamber (with 𝑑coil as the central separation
and 𝑑sep as the inner face separation between the coil pair). The width
(W) and height (H) are the overall dimensions of the cross-section of
the conductor turns.

−10
−5
0
5
10

z (mm)

−0.005

0.000

0.005

0.010

0.015

0.020

0.025

0.030

|Bz−B0|
B0
(%)

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700

x (mm)

0

50

100

150

200

250

Bz (mT)

FIG. 6. Top: Relative field variation along the Helmholtz coil axis (i.e.,
across the sample) obtained by summing the measured field profile of a
single coil. The sample is centered at 𝑧 = 0 mm, where the uniformity
of the applied field (206 mT here) is maximal. The red dashed line
indicates the required field uniformity across the typical FWHM of
the beamspot (grey shaded area). Bottom: Calculated stray fields
(transverse to the beam momentum and parallel to sample surface)
along the beamline axis (i.e., the 𝑥-axis) from FEM simulation. The
sample is located at the 𝑥 = 0 mm.


8

Ground
Anode
Ground
Anode

4-sector
Electrode
4-sector
Electrode

Deceleration

Gap

Deceleration

Gap

FIG. 7. Top: View of the 𝛽-NQR spectrometer through one of the
beamline viewports with the stainless steel detector window removed.
Note that the beam enters from the right side of the image. Shown here
are the cryostat, the four-sector electrode (mounted on the cryostat
heat-shield) and the 200 mT Helmholtz coil. Bottom: Calculated
electric fields (using CST Studio)36 with 10 kV bias applied to the
sample (and the cryostat). The beam is decelerated to the desired
implantation energy within a small (∼21 mm) gap between the ground
anode and the four-sector electrode.
.

Hi-M soft spacers, the latter providing electrical isolation while
maintaining high thermal conductivity. The cryostat and the
HV power supply for the four-sector steerers are housed inside
the existing electrically isolated HV platform (via a ceramic
vacuum break) to allow HV bias for beam deceleration. UHV
compatible wires, such as Kapton insulated coaxial cables and
oxygen-free high thermal conductivity (OFHC) bare copper
wires, and lead-free solder joints are used for the assembly.
Non-magnetic components such as connectors and fasteners
are also used in the vicinity of the sample.
To accommodate for thermal contraction during low temper-
ature measurements, the cryostat is supported on motorized
bellows, which can be used to adjust the vertical alignment of
the sample. In practice, the alignment is done by using the
CCD camera at lower temperature to determine the current
position and compare to a reference image with optimal align-
ment (usually determined at room temperature). The existing
HV platform is also modified to accommodate a new support
structure for the cryostat.
A continuous flow of liquid helium (LHe) can be provided

via a portable LHe dewar, which is installed onto the HV
platform prior to the experiment.
Operating temperatures
between 4.5–300K are routinely achievable. Two temperature
sensors (GaAlAs diodes from Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc.)
are mounted on the side of an Al ring that holds the sample
ladder. An additional platinum sensor (Pt-100 from Lake Shore
Cryotronics, Inc.) is also installed on the heat shield. The
temperature is controlled by adjusting the LHe transfer line
needle valve, the He vapor mass flow to a roughing pump at
the exhaust port of the cryostat, and the heater current for the
cryostat (the latter is shown in fig. 8). Temperature stability
is achieved with a Lake Shore model 336 controller driving a
resistive heater on the cryostat cold block. Operating at colder
sample temperatures (<3 K) is foreseen in the near future with
the addition of a cryo-head to be connected to the radiation
shield. Measurements at even lower temperatures are planned
in the future with the addition of a He-3 cryostat.

Detector System

Two scintillator telescope pairs (two on the left and two
on the right of the cryostat position) are used to “view” the
sample through thin (0.05 mm) stainless steel windows. The
scintillator pairs are spaced sufficiently far apart to define a solid
angle accepting 𝛽s originating at the sample, but rejecting most
cosmic events and any 𝛽s from ions stopped in nearby parts.
For the high-parallel-field spectrometer, Hamamatsu H6153-01
fine mesh dynode type photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) are used,
as they are more resistant to the relatively high magnetic fields
used during the experiments. The detector assembly, consisting
of the scintillator (Saint-Gobain BC412 plastic scintillator with
dimensions of 10 cm × 10 cm × 0.3 cm), Lucite light-guide,
and the PMTs mounted in single steel tubes that provide limited
magnetic shielding, are shown in fig. 9.

IV.
COMMISSIONING AND FIRST RESULTS

As part of the instrument’s commissioning, all devices,
including their control interfaces and interlock logic, are tested
without beam to establish that functional requirements are met.
In operando tests using ion beams are organized into stable
beam tests using light ions (e.g., 7Li+ and 12C+) at 20 keV and
RIB tests using 8Li+ at 20 keV. The stable beam tests are done
to check that the optics (i.e., quadrupoles, steerers, etc.) are
manipulating the beam as expected. The RIB is used to further
check functionality, such as the final beam spot at the sample in
order to confirm the optics and to check the detectors and data
aquisition (DAQ) system. The Helmholtz coil field strength
and direction are checked with a hand held probe (Gauss meter).
A final confirmation is done by using polarized 8Li beam and
using the 𝛽-NQR signal to directly measure the magnetic field
on the sample (as described below).
There are two basic types of 𝛽-NMR measurements: res-
onance and relaxation. The beam commissioning with RIB
employed both methods to check the full functionality of the
equipment. A resonance measurement seeks to find the fre-


9

Radiation

Shield

UHV

Coldfinger
Cryostat

Multi-sample

Ladder

4-sector
Electrode
4-sector
Electrode
4-sector
Electrode
4-sector
Electrode

Resistive
Heater

Coil

RF
Coil
RF
Coil

T-sensor
T-sensor

Scintillator
(Sapphire)

Nb

Samples

Nb

Samples

Nb

Samples

FIG. 8. Left: Radiation shield of the 𝛽-NQR cryostat with the four-sector electrode shown facing towards the incoming beam. Middle: Sample
environment inside of the cryostat (with the radiation shield removed). Right: The sample ladder which is used to mount up to four samples via a
UHV load-lock. The first position of the sample ladder in the photo is reserved for a sapphire scintillator, used for beam imaging using a CCD
camera. The cyan-colored border indicates a 8 mm × 8 mm viewing window of the CCD camera through the back of the sample ladder..

quency (i.e., the resonance condition) that corresponds to an
energy difference between a pair of the probe’s magnetic sub-
levels. At TRIUMF, resonances are performed (predominantly)
using continuous beam delivery and a transverse continuous
wave (CW) RF field 𝐵1 to manipulate the probe spins. In the
CW approach, the RF field is stepped slowly through a range
of frequencies close to the probe’s Larmor frequency:

𝜈0 = 𝜔0

2𝜋 = 𝛾

2𝜋 𝐵0,
(4)

where 𝛾/(2𝜋) = 6.302 21(7) MHz/T37 is the 8Li gyromag-
netic ratio and 𝐵0 is the applied magnetic field. On resonance,
in the limit of sufficiently large 𝐵1, the populations of the sub-
levels involved in the transition(s) become equalized, resulting
in a reduction in spin-polarization (or asymmetry).
In a relaxation measurement, the temporal evolution of the
probe’s spin polarization (which is initially very far from ther-
mal equilibrium) is monitored as it returns to thermal equilib-
rium. The most commonly used type of such measurements is
a so-called spin-lattice relaxation (SLR) measurement, wherein
the applied field is parallel to the initial spin-polarization direc-
tion. Spin-polarization of the probe is lost through an energy
exchange with its surrounding environment (often called the

“lattice” in NMR literature).38 That is, spontaneous, stochastic
fluctuations in the local field that are transverse to the probe
spin direction serve to “reorient” it back to thermal equilibrium.
Real time data for either mode can be conveniently displayed
during the running experiment and analyzed using specialized
𝛽-NMR analysis software such as bfit.39,40

The following calibration measurements were used to check
the functionality of the detector, new Helmholtz coil, and the
DAQ system. The magnetic field of the new coil on the sample
location was precisely measured using the 8Li resonance (see
above description). A 99.99% pure Au foil (Alfa Aesar) was
chosen as the calibration sample due to its relatively narrow
resonance line and slow spin-lattice relaxation rate down to
very low magnetic fields.41,42 The measured magnetic field on
the Au foil can be obtained from the frequency of the resonant
peak, 𝜈0 (eq. 4), as a function of the current in the Helmholtz
coil. The results are shown in fig. 10, demonstrating a linear
relation between the applied current and the measured magnetic
fields, as expected. For this calibration, stray fields originating
from the superconducting solenoid at the 𝛽-NMR leg (operated
at 2.2 T during calibration measurements) contribute to a small
constant background field.
During commissioning with RIB, various tunes (ion optics


10

PMT
PMT

Steel
Tube
Steel
Tube

Light
Guide
Light
Guide

Plastic

Scintillator

FIG. 9.
The detector assembly, consisting of the BC412 plastic
scintillator, Lucite light-guide, and the PMTs (mounted in single steel
tubes) on their mechanical support.

0
50
100
150
200
250
300

Applied Current, i (A)

0

20

40

60

80

100

Field, B0 (mT)

B0 = (0.1577±0.0004) mT +

(0.356108± 0.000001) mT A−1 × i

fit
data

FIG. 10.
Calibration of the high-parallel-field coil via the 8Li NMR
frequency in Au foil at different currents applied to the Helmholtz coils.
The solid red line denotes a linear fit to the data, whose expression
appears in the inset.

values along the beam path) at 20 keV 8Li+ are established and
their record is stored in a local database. These tunes can be
re-scaled for different beam energies, applied magnetic fields,
and RIBs, as well as re-loaded (i.e., as a starting condition)
to speedup future beam delivery. An example of a typical
beamspot image is shown in fig. 11, obtained at 200 mT using
a 12.5 mm × 12.5 mm sapphire plate at one of the sample posi-
tions on the sample ladder. The average transverse beamspot
dimensions (i.e., FWHM) at the sample position for various
applied magnetic fields are determined to be ∼3-4 mm.

Currently, spin-lattice relaxation (SLR) measurements on su-
perconducting Nb samples have been successfully performed at
several magnetic fields up to 200 mT. The SLR rate, commonly
denoted as 1/𝑇1, characterizes the time-constant in depolariza-
tion of the 8Li nuclear spins after they are stopped inside the
sample. The value of 1/𝑇1 is extracted by fitting the measured
time-dependent asymmetry 𝐴(𝑡) with a phenomenological de-
polarization function, e.g., 𝑝(𝑡, 𝑡′; 1/𝑇1) = exp[−(𝑡 − 𝑡′)/𝑇1]
for a single exponential depolarization function, which is con-
volved with the square or rectangular beam pulse:

𝐴(𝑡) = 𝐴0





𝑅0
∫ 𝑡
0 exp[−(𝑡 − 𝑡′)/𝜏]𝑝(𝑡, 𝑡′; 1/𝑇1)𝑑𝑡′

𝑁(𝑡)
for 𝑡 ≤ Δ,

𝑅0
∫ Δ
0 exp[−(𝑡 − 𝑡′)/𝜏]𝑝(𝑡, 𝑡′; 1/𝑇1)𝑑𝑡′

𝑁(Δ)
for 𝑡 > Δ,

(5)

where Δ is the beam pulse length (typically ∼1-4 s), 𝜏 is the
8Li lifetime, and 𝑁(𝑡) is the total count rate as defined earlier
in eq. 2. Fig. 12 shows a typical asymmetry spectrum and its
fit to eq. 5, measured on a residual resistivity ratio (RRR)∼300
Nb sample (cut, etched, and annealed at 1400 °C) at 5 K using
a 4 keV 8Li+ beam. Applications are available to display the
raw counts, the calculated asymmetry, and a fit to various
depolarization functions during the experiment.39,40

At applied magnetic fields below ∼1 T, the dominant relax-
ation mechanism in Nb is due to cross relaxation between the
8Li and the 100% abundant host 93Nb nuclear spins,43 which
gives a Lorentzian dependence of 1/𝑇1 on the local magnetic
field according to:

1
𝑇1
≈
(𝛾𝐵𝑑)2 · (1/𝜏𝑐)

(1/𝜏𝑐)2 + [𝛾𝐵loc]2 ,
(6)


11

8 mm x 8 mm

12.5 mm x 12.5 mm

FIG. 11.
Beamspot obtained at 200 mT on a sapphire scintillator.
The image shown is looking upstream from the back side of the
scintillator, viewed using the downstream CCD camera mounted
on a viewport. The small (cyan) bounding box corresponds to the
dimension of the visible area of the sapphire from the aperture at back
of the sample ladder (see fig. 8), while the larger (red) box indicates
the real size of the scintillator.

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Time (s)

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Normalized Asymmetry

4 keV 8Li in Nb

fit
data

FIG. 12.
8Li SLR normalized asymmetry spectrum, i.e., 𝐴(𝑡 =
0) = 1, measured at 4.3 K and 200 mT applied field on a Nb sample
using 4 s beam pulses of 4 keV 8Li+. The shaded area indicates the
measured asymmetry during beam pulse on. The solid line is the
normalized fit to eq. 5.

where 𝛾 is the aforementioned 8Li gyromagnetic ratio, 𝐵loc is
the measured local magnetic field, 𝐵𝑑 is the magnitude of the
fluctuating dipolar field (due to the host 93Nb nuclear spins),
and 𝜏𝑐 is the correlation time for the fluctuation in 𝐵𝑑. The
variation of magnetic fields in the superconducting Nb due
to Meissner screening can therefore be measured from the
asymmetry spectra at different implantation energies (which
corresponds to different implantation depths). Experimental
results on the same sample shown in fig. 12 for five differ-
ent implantation energies are shown in fig. 13. Here, a Nb
sample is probed by 8Li at five different depth distributions
corresponding to ion energies of 4, 8, 12, 16 and 20 keV and
average depths of 12, 22.5, 33, 44, 55 nm, respectively. The
average depths are computed using the Stopping and Range

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Time (s)

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Normalized Asymmetry

8Li+ Energy

4.0 keV
8.0 keV
12.0 keV
16.0 keV
20.0 keV

FIG. 13.
Normalized fits to the SLR asymmetry spectra, i.e.,
𝐴(𝑡 = 0) = 1, of a Nb sample (RRR∼300) at various implantation
energies measured at 4.5 K and at 98 mT. The higher relaxation rates
deeper below the surface reflects the reduced magnetic field due to
Meissner screening.

of Ions in Matter (SRIM) package.44 The data set shows the
expected signature of Meissner screening in superconducting
Nb45 as the depolarization rate increases as the ion is implanted
deeper into the surface. Obtaining the accurate values of the
local magnetic field requires a detailed analysis, taking into
account the implantation distribution of the 8Li+ ions at various
energies, which averages over fields at different depths. The
details of this analysis will be reported in a separate publication.

V.
SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS & FUTURE CAPABILITIES

Just like conventional NMR using stable nuclei, the breadth
of applications of 𝛽-NMR is enormous.21–24 The ability to
operate at intermediate magnetic fields (10s to 100s of mT)
opens new opportunities for scientific applications. In addition
to the SRF material investigations, some of the experiments
enabled in this field regime are: studies of thermally activated
dynamics (i.e., moving the Bloembergen-Purcell-Pound peak46

via adjusting 𝐵0) ,47–51 and the study in soft condensed matter
applications (see e.g.,52–54) where the previously measured
signal was completely wiped out below ∼24 mT, but access
to fields an order of magnitude higher may ameliorate this
difficulty.
Recent measurements on Nb samples indicate vortex pene-
tration at applied fields of 98 mT when Nb samples are warmed
close to critical temperature (𝑇𝑐). The mixed superconduct-
ing state is therefore also accessible and could be of interest
for fundamental studies related to the superconducting vortex
motion and dissipation.55 𝛽-NMR studies of the vortex lattice
have been carried out in other superconductor materials such
as YBa2Cu3O7–𝛿56,57 and NbSe258 using 𝛽-NMR spectrometer
(with out-of-plane applied fields). Further studies for SRF
applications will benefit from lower sample temperatures in
order to maintain the Meissner state at higher applied magnetic
fields. Installation of a procured cryocooler is ongoing and
measurements of superconducting samples in this regime are


12

expected in the near future.

VI.
SUMMARY

The instrumentation at TRIUMF’s 𝛽-NMR facility allows
for the depth-dependent characterization of the local magnetic
field near the surface of a sample. Both the infrastructure
and instrumentation have been upgraded with a new beamline
extension on the 𝛽-NQR leg, which has expanded previous
capabilities from a maximum parallel magnetic field of 24 mT
to 200 mT. This capability is targeted at testing SRF samples
in a regime analogous to the magnetic field conditions in a Nb
cavity operating at the fundamental limit, but will be widely
useful to other condensed matter research. This capability is
unique in the world and we anticipate additional use for other
material science investigations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank: L. Merminga for involvement in the early stages
of the project; M. H. Dehn for assistance during the beamline
assembly; M. Cervantes for sample preparation; D. Lang,
J. Keir, R. Abasalti, B. Hitti, B. Smith, D. Vyas, T. Au, J. Chow,
T. Hruskovec, N. Muller, and M. Marchetto for providing
excellent technical support. The hardware was funded through
a Research Tools and Infrastructure grant from NSERC.

AUTHOR DECLARATIONS

Conflict of Interest

The authors have no conflicts to disclose.

Author Contributions

Edward Thoeng: Data Curation (equal); Formal Analysis
(equal); Investigation (equal); Validation (equal); Visualiza-
tion (equal); Writing — Original Draft Preparation (lead);
Writing — Review & Editing (equal).
Ryan M. L. Mc-
Fadden: Data Curation (equal); Formal Analysis (equal);
Investigation (supporting); Visualization (equal); Writing —
Review & Editing (equal). Suresh Saminathan: Investiga-
tion (supporting); Methodology (equal); Validation (equal);
Visualization (supporting). Gerald D. Morris: Conceptual-
ization (equal); Investigation (equal); Project Administration
(supporting); Resources (equal); Supervision (supporting); Val-
idation (equal). Philipp Kolb: Investigation (equal); Project
Administration (supporting); Supervision (supporting) Vali-
dation (equal). Ben Matheson: Methodology (equal); Vi-
sualization (supporting). Md Asaduzzaman: Investigation
(supporting). Richard Baartman: Conceptualization (equal);
Supervision (supporting). Sarah R. Dunsiger: Investigation
(supporting). Derek Fujimoto: Formal Analysis (support-
ing); Investigation (supporting). Tobias Junginger: Formal

Analysis (supporting); Investigation (supporting); Project Ad-
ministration (supporting); Supervision (supporting). Victo-
ria L. Karner: Investigation (supporting). Spencer Kiy: Data
Curation (equal); Investigation (supporting). Ruohong Li: Re-
sources (equal). Monika Stachura: Investigation (supporting).
John O. Ticknor: Investigation (supporting). Robert F. Kiefl:
Conceptualization (equal); Funding Acquisition (supporting).
W. Andrew MacFarlane: Investigation (supporting); Super-
vision (supporting). Robert E. Laxdal: Conceptualization
(equal); Formal Analysis (supporting); Funding Acquisition
(lead); Project Administration (lead); Supervision (lead); Writ-
ing — Review & Editing (equal).

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Raw
data of the 𝛽-NMR experiments are available for download
from: https://cmms.triumf.ca/

1H. Padamsee, “Future Prospects of Superconducting RF for Accelerator
Applications,” Rev. Accel Sci. Technol. 10, 125–156 (2019).

2H. Padamsee, “50 years of success for SRF accelerators—a review,” Super-
cond. Sci. Technol. 30, 053003 (2017).

3A. Gurevich, “Theory of RF superconductivity for resonant cavities,” Super-
cond. Sci. Technol. 30, 034004 (2017).

4G. Ciovati, “Effect of low-temperature baking on the radio-frequency proper-
ties of niobium superconducting cavities for particle accelerators,” J. Appl.
Phys. 96, 1591–1600 (2004).

5F. He, W. Pan, P. Sha, J. Zhai, Z. Mi, X. Dai, S. Jin, Z. Zhang, C. Dong,
B. Liu, H. Zhao, R. Ge, J. Zhao, Z. Mu, L. Du, L. Sun, L. Zhang, C. Yang,
and X. Zheng, “Medium-temperature furnace baking of 1.3 GHz 9-cell
superconducting cavities at IHEP,” Supercond. Sci. Technol. 34, 095005
(2021).

6H. Ito, H. Araki, K. Takahashi, and K. Umemori, “Influence of furnace
baking on Q–E behavior of superconducting accelerating cavities,” Prog.
Theor. Exp. Phys. 2021 (2021), 10.1093/ptep/ptab056, 071G01.

7E. M. Lechner, J. W. Angle, F. A. Stevie, M. J. Kelley, C. E. Reece, and A. D.
Palczewski, “Rf surface resistance tuning of superconducting niobium via
thermal diffusion of native oxide,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, 082601 (2021).

8A. Grassellino, A. Romanenko, D. Sergatskov, O. Melnychuk, Y. Trenikhina,
A. Crawford, A. Rowe, M. Wong, T. Khabiboulline, and F. Barkov, “Nitrogen
and argon doping of niobium for superconducting radio frequency cavities: a
pathway to highly efficient accelerating structures,” Supercond. Sci. Technol.
26, 102001 (2013).

9A. Grassellino, A. Romanenko, Y. Trenikhina, M. Checchin, M. Martinello,
O. S. Melnychuk, S. Chandrasekaran, D. A. Sergatskov, S. Posen, A. C.
Crawford, S. Aderhold, and D. Bice, “Unprecedented quality factors at accel-
erating gradients up to 45 MVm−1 in niobium superconducting resonators
via low temperature nitrogen infusion,” Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 094004
(2017).

10T. Kubo, “Multilayer coating for higher accelerating fields in superconducting
radio-frequency cavities: a review of theoretical aspects,” Supercond. Sci.
Technol. 30, 023001 (2016).

11A. Gurevich, “Enhancement of rf breakdown field of superconductors by
multilayer coating,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 012511 (2006).

12A. Gurevich, “Maximum screening fields of superconducting multilayer
structures,” AIP Advances 5, 017112 (2015).

13S. Posen, M. K. Transtrum, G. Catelani, M. U. Liepe, and J. P. Sethna,
“Shielding Superconductors with Thin Films as Applied to rf Cavities for
Particle Accelerators,” Phys. Rev. Applied 4, 044019 (2015).

14M. Checchin, A. Grassellino, M. Martinello, S. Posen, A. Romanenko, and
J. Zasadzinski, “Ultimate Gradient Limitation in Niobium Superconducting
Accelerating Cavities,” in Proc. of International Particle Accelerator Con-
ference (IPAC’16), Busan, Korea, May 8-13, 2016, International Particle


13

Accelerator Conference No. 7 (JACoW, Geneva, Switzerland, 2016) pp.
2254–2257, doi:10.18429/JACoW-IPAC2016-WEPMR002.

15T. Junginger, S. H. Abidi, R. D. Maffett, T. Buck, M. H. Dehn, S. Gheidi,
R. Kiefl, P. Kolb, D. Storey, E. Thoeng, W. Wasserman, and R. E. Laxdal,
“Field of first magnetic flux entry and pinning strength of superconductors for
rf application measured with muon spin rotation,” Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams
21, 032002 (2018).

16A. Grassellino, C. Beard, P. Kolb, R. Laxdal, N. S. Lockyer, D. Longuevergne,
and J. E. Sonier, “Muon spin rotation studies of niobium for superconducting
rf applications,” Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 16, 062002 (2013).

17R. Laxdal, S. Abidi, T. Buck, T. Junginger, R. Kiefl, P. Kolb, Y. Ma, L. Yang,
and Z. Yao, “Characterization of SRF Materials at the TRIUMF muSR
Facility,” in 17th International Conference on RF Superconductivity (2015)
p. MOPB050.

18Z. Salman, T. Prokscha, P. Keller, E. Morenzoni, H. Saadaoui, K. Sedlak,
T. Shiroka, S. Sidorov, A. Suter, V. Vrankovic, and H.-P. Weber, “Design
and simulation of a spin rotator for longitudinal field measurements in the
low energy muons spectrometer,” Physics Procedia 30, 55–60 (2012), 12th
International Conference on Muon Spin Rotation, Relaxation and Resonance
(𝜇SR2011).

19T. Prokscha, E. Morenzoni, K. Deiters, F. Foroughi, D. George, R. Kobler,
A. Suter, and V. Vrankovic, “The new 𝜇E4 beam at PSI: A hybrid-type
large acceptance channel for the generation of a high intensity surface-muon
beam,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A 595, 317–331 (2008).

20E. Morenzoni, H. Glückler, T. Prokscha, H. Weber, E. Forgan, T. Jackson,
H. Luetkens, C. Niedermayer, M. Pleines, M. Birke, A. Hofer, J. Litterst,
T. Riseman, and G. Schatz, “Low-energy 𝜇SR at PSI: present and future,”
Physica B 289-290, 653–657 (2000).

21W. A. MacFarlane, “Status and progress of ion-implanted 𝛽NMR at triumf,”

Z. Phys. Chem. 236, 757–798 (2022).

22W. A. MacFarlane, “Implanted-ion 𝛽NMR: A new probe for nanoscience,”

Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson. 68–69, 1–12 (2015).

23G. D. Morris, “𝛽-NMR,” Hyperfine Interact. 225, 173–182 (2014).
24S. R. Kreitzman and G. D. Morris, “TRIUMF MuSR and 𝛽NMR research
facilities,” JPS Conf. Proc. 21, 011056 (2018).

25X. Fléchard, E. Liénard, O. Naviliat-Cuncic, D. Rodríguez, M. A. G. Alvarez,
G. Ban, B. Carniol, D. Etasse, J. M. Fontbonne, A. M. Lallena, and J. Praena,
“Measurement of the 8Li half-life,” Phys. Rev. C 82, 027309 (2010).

26J. Dilling and R. Krücken, “The experimental facilities at ISAC,” Hyperfine
Interact. 225, 111–114 (2014).

27C. D. P. Levy, M. R. Pearson, R. F. Kiefl, E. Mané, G. D. Morris, and A. Voss,
“Laser polarization facility,” Hyperfine Interact. 225, 165–172 (2014).

28W. A. MacFarlane, C. D. P. Levy, M. R. Pearson, T. Buck, K. H. Chow, A. N.
Hariwal, R. F. Kiefl, F. H. McGee, G. D. Morris, and D. Wang, “The Initial
State of Optically Polarized 8Li+ from the 𝛽-NMR in Bismuth,” J. Phys.
Conf. Ser. 551, 012059 (2014).

29GPT, “General particle tracer,” .
30E. Heighway and R. Hutcheon, “Transoptr — a second order beam transport
design code with optimization and constraints,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res. 187, 89–95 (1981).

31R. Baartman, TRANSOPTR Reference Manual, TRIUMF (2022).
32L. R. Dalesio, J. O. Hill, M. Kraimer, S. Lewis, D. Murray, S. Hunt,
W. Watson, M. Clausen, and J. Dalesio, “The experimental physics and
industrial control system architecture: past, present, and future,” Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A 352, 179–184 (1994).

33EPICS, “Experimental physics and industrial control system,” http://www.
aps.anl.gov/epics/.

34Z. Salman, K. H. Chow, M. D. Hossain, R. F. Kiefl, C. D. P. Levy, T. J.
Parolin, M. R. Pearson, H. Saadaoui, D. Wang, and W. A. MacFarlane,
“𝛽-detected nuclear quadrupole resonance and relaxation of 8Li+ in sapphire,”
J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 551, 012034 (2014).

35OPERA, “Opera-3d,” .
36CST, “CST Studio,” .
37N. J. Stone, “Table of recommended nuclear magnetic dipole moments,”

Tech. Rep. INDC(NDS)–0794 (International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
2019).

38C. P. Slichter, “Spin-lattice relaxation and motional narrowing of resonance
lines,” in Principles of Magnetic Resonance (Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 1990) pp. 145–218.

39D. Fujimoto, “Digging into mud with python: mudpy, bdata, and bfit,”

(2020), arXiv:2004.10395.

40D. Fujimoto, “bfit: A python application for beta-detected nmr,” Journal of
Open Source Software 6, 3598 (2021).

41W. A. MacFarlane, K. H. Chow, M. D. Hossain, V. L. Karner, R. F. Kiefl,
R. M. L. McFadden, G. D. Morris, H. Saadaoui, and Z. Salman, “The spin
relaxation of 8Li+ in gold at low magnetic field,” JPS Conf. Proc. 21, 011020
(2018).

42T. J. Parolin, Z. Salman, K. H. Chow, Q. Song, J. Valiani, H. Saadaoui,
A. O’Halloran, M. D. Hossain, T. A. Keeler, R. F. Kiefl, S. R. Kreitzman,
C. D. P. Levy, R. I. Miller, G. D. Morris, M. R. Pearson, M. Smadella,
D. Wang, M. Xu, and W. A. MacFarlane, “High resolution 𝛽-NMR study of
8Li+ implanted in gold,” Phys. Rev. B 77, 214107 (2008).

43T. J. Parolin, J. Shi, Z. Salman, K. H. Chow, P. Dosanjh, H. Saadaoui,
Q. Song, M. D. Hossain, R. F. Kiefl, C. D. P. Levy, M. R. Pearson, and W. A.
MacFarlane, “Nuclear magnetic resonance study of li implanted in a thin
film of niobium,” Phys. Rev. B 80, 174109 (2009).

44J. F. Ziegler, M. D. Ziegler, and J. P. Biersack, “SRIM - The stopping and
range of ions in matter (2010),” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B
268, 1818–1823 (2010).

45M. D. Hossain, Z. Salman, D. Wang, K. H. Chow, S. Kreitzman, T. A. Keeler,
C. D. P. Levy, W. A. MacFarlane, R. I. Miller, G. D. Morris, T. J. Parolin,
M. Pearson, H. Saadaoui, and R. F. Kiefl, “Low-field cross spin relaxation of
8Li in superconducting NbSe2,” Phys. Rev. B 79, 144518 (2009).

46N. Bloembergen, E. M. Purcell, and R. V. Pound, “Relaxation effects in
nuclear magnetic resonance absorption,” Phys. Rev. 73, 679–712 (1948).

47I. McKenzie, M. Harada, R. F. Kiefl, C. D. P. Levy, W. A. MacFarlane,
G. D. Morris, S.-I. Ogata, M. R. Pearson, and J. Sugiyama, “𝛽-NMR
measurements of lithium ion transport in thin films of pure and lithium-salt-
doped poly(ethylene oxide),” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 7833–7836 (2014).

48I. McKenzie, D. L. Cortie, M. Harada, R. F. Kiefl, C. D. P. Levy, W. A.
MacFarlane, R. M. L. McFadden, G. D. Morris, S.-I. Ogata, M. R. Pearson,
and J. Sugiyama, “𝛽-NMR measurements of molecular-scale lithium-ion
dynamics in poly(ethylene oxide)-lithium-salt thin films,” J. Chem. Phys.
146, 244903 (2017).

49R. M. L. McFadden, T. J. Buck, A. Chatzichristos, C.-C. Chen, K. H. Chow,
D. L. Cortie, M. H. Dehn, V. L. Karner, D. Koumoulis, C. D. P. Levy,
C. Li, I. McKenzie, R. Merkle, G. D. Morris, M. R. Pearson, Z. Salman,
D. Samuelis, M. Stachura, J. Xiao, J. Maier, R. F. Kiefl, and W. A. MacFarlane,
“Microscopic dynamics of Li+ in rutile TiO2 revealed by 8Li 𝛽-detected
nuclear magnetic resonance,” Chem. Mater. 29, 10187–10197 (2017).

50R. M. L. McFadden, A. Chatzichristos, K. H. Chow, D. L. Cortie, M. H.
Dehn, D. Fujimoto, M. D. Hossain, H. Ji, V. L. Karner, R. F. Kiefl, C. D. P.
Levy, R. Li, I. McKenzie, G. D. Morris, O. Ofer, M. R. Pearson, M. Stachura,
R. J. Cava, and W. A. MacFarlane, “Ionic and electronic properties of the
topological insulator Bi2Te2Se investigated via 𝛽-detected nuclear magnetic
relaxation and resonance of 8Li,” Phys. Rev. B 99, 125201 (2019).

51R. M. L. McFadden, A. Chatzichristos, D. L. Cortie, D. Fujimoto, Y. S. Hor,
H. Ji, V. L. Karner, R. F. Kiefl, C. D. P. Levy, R. Li, I. McKenzie, G. D.
Morris, M. R. Pearson, M. Stachura, R. J. Cava, and W. A. MacFarlane,
“Local electronic and magnetic properties of the doped topological insulators
Bi2Se3:Ca and Bi2Te3:Mn investigated using ion-implanted 8Li 𝛽-NMR,”
Phys. Rev. B 102, 235206 (2020).

52F. H. McGee, I. McKenzie, T. Buck, C. R. Daley, J. A. Forrest, M. Harada,
R. F. Kiefl, C. D. P. Levy, G. D. Morris, M. R. Pearson, J. Sugiyama, D. Wang,
and W. A. MacFarlane, “A brief survey of 𝛽-detected NMR of implanted
8Li+ in organic polymers,” J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 551, 012039 (2014).

53I. McKenzie, C. R. Daley, R. F. Kiefl, C. D. P. Levy, W. A. MacFarlane,
G. D. Morris, M. R. Pearson, D. Wang, and J. A. Forrest, “Enhanced high-
frequency molecular dynamics in the near-surface region of polystyrene thin
films observed with 𝛽-NMR,” Soft Matter 11, 1755–1761 (2015).

54I. McKenzie, Y. Chai, D. L. Cortie, J. A. Forrest, D. Fujimoto, V. L. Karner,
R. F. Kiefl, C. D. P. Levy, W. A. MacFarlane, R. M. L. McFadden, G. D.
Morris, M. R. Pearson, and S. Zhu, “Direct measurements of the temperature,
depth and processing dependence of phenyl ring dynamics in polystyrene
thin films by 𝛽-detected NMR,” Soft Matter 14, 7324–7334 (2018).

55S. Eley, A. Glatz, and R. Willa, “Challenges and transformative opportunities
in superconductor vortex physics,” J. Appl. Phys. 130, 050901 (2021).

56H. Saadaoui, W. MacFarlane, G. Morris, Z. Salman, K. Chow, I. Fan,
M. Hossain, R. Liang, A. Mansour, T. Parolin, M. Smadella, Q. Song,


14

D. Wang, and R. Kiefl, “Vortex lattice disorder in YBa2Cu3O7–𝛿 studied
with 𝛽-nmr,” Physica B 404, 730–733 (2009).

57H. Saadaoui, W. A. MacFarlane, Z. Salman, G. D. Morris, Q. Song, K. H.
Chow, M. D. Hossain, C. D. P. Levy, A. I. Mansour, T. J. Parolin, M. R.
Pearson, M. Smadella, D. Wang, and R. F. Kiefl, “Vortex lattice disorder in
YBa2Cu3O7–𝛿 probed using 𝛽-NMR,” Phys. Rev. B 80, 224503 (2009).

58Z. Salman, D. Wang, K. H. Chow, M. D. Hossain, S. R. Kreitzman, T. A.
Keeler, C. D. P. Levy, W. A. MacFarlane, R. I. Miller, G. D. Morris, T. J.
Parolin, H. Saadaoui, M. Smadella, and R. F. Kiefl, “Magnetic-field effects
on the size of vortices below the surface of NbSe2 detected using low energy
𝛽-nmr,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 167001 (2007).


