1 
 

Linear complexions directly modify dislocation motion in face-centered cubic alloys 

 

Divya Singh a, Vladyslav Turlo b,d, Daniel S. Gianola c, Timothy J. Rupert a,d,* 

 

a Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, 
USA 
b Laboratory for Advanced Materials Processing (LAMP), Swiss Federal Laboratories for 
Materials Science and Technology (Empa), Thun, CH-3602, Switzerland 
c Materials Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA 
d Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, Irvine, CA 
92697, USA 
*Email: trupert@uci.edu 

 

Abstract 

 
Linear complexions are defect phases that form in the presence of dislocations and thus are 

promising for the direct control of plasticity.  In this study, atomistic simulations are used to model 

the effect of linear complexions on dislocation-based mechanisms for plasticity, demonstrating 

unique behaviors that differ from classical dislocation glide mechanisms.  Linear complexions 

impart higher resistance to the initiation and continuation of dislocation motion when compared to 

solid solution strengthening in all of the face-centered cubic alloys investigated here, with the exact 

strengthening level determined by the linear complexion type.  Stacking fault linear complexions 

impart the most pronounced strengthening effect, as the dislocation core is delocalized, and 

initiation of plastic flow requires a dislocation nucleation event.  The nanoparticle and platelet 

array linear complexions impart strengthening by acting as pinning sites for the dislocations, where 

the dislocations unpin one at a time through bowing mechanisms.  For the nanoparticle arrays, this 

event occurs even though the obstacles do not cross the slip plane and instead only interact through 

modification of the dislocation’s stress field.  The bowing modes observed in the current work 

appear similar to traditional Orowan bowing around classical precipitates but differ in a number 

of important ways depending on the complexion type.  As a whole, this study demonstrates that 


2 
 

linear complexions are a unique tool for microstructure engineering that can allow for the creation 

of alloys with new plastic deformation mechanisms and extreme strength. 

 

Keywords: complexions, dislocations, segregation, precipitation, strengthening 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


3 
 

1. Introduction 

 
 
Complexions are thermodynamically-stable chemical and/or structural states confined to 

defects such as grain boundaries and dislocations [1-9].  As linear complexions (one-dimensional 

defect phases confined to the dislocation lines) were discovered only recently, most of the existing 

literature is concentrated on grain boundary complexions [3,4, 10-20].  A complexion transition is 

typically limited to localized regions near the defect that provides a template for solute segregation, 

and grain boundaries can go through structural transitions similar to bulk phase transitions due to 

variation in parameters such as temperature or local composition [14, 19, 21-24].  Such abrupt 

changes in the structure, composition, stress, and local properties of the grain boundary can lead 

to either beneficial or detrimental changes in material response including atom transport properties 

[14], mechanical properties [20, 25-28] and thermal stability of polycrystals [20-21, 28-30] .  For 

instance, annealing experiments show that increased high temperature stability of nanocrystalline 

face-centered cubic Ni- and Cu-rich alloys can result from the presence of amorphous intergranular 

complexions [20, 21].  In addition, nanocrystalline Cu-Zr can be strengthened by disordered grain 

boundary complexions [21], which was shown to result from stronger dislocation pinning that 

increased the flow stresses needed for dislocation propagation [25].  There is also evidence that 

combining nanostructuring with complexion engineering can increase ductility without the typical 

reduction in strength [27, 28].  In contrast, polycrystalline Ni samples doped with Si showed brittle 

intergranular fracture due to the formation of bipolar interfacial structures within grain boundary 

complexions [26].  These bipolar structures were shown to make it easier for grain boundary 

fracture/decohesion to occur, explaining the overall embrittlement effect. 

 
 
Strengthening of metal alloys generally comes from the retardation of dislocation glide, 

with traditional precipitates or grain boundary complexions being static features of the 


4 
 

microstructure than can act as obstacles to dislocations.  Their effect is therefore indirect on 

plasticity and strength.  However, dislocations themselves have local variations in structure and 

stress state and thus they can potentially host complexions as well, which would open a new 

pathway for strength modification through the manipulation of the direct carriers of plasticity.  

Kuzmina et al. [1] first reported the existence of linear complexions by carefully investigating the 

local structure near dislocations in an Fe-9 at.% Mn alloy.  These authors showed that face-

centered cubic regions with an austenitic composition could form and be in equilibrium with the 

body-centered cubic matrix, but that these complexions were limited to the areas near the 

dislocations.  Modification of a dislocation’s environment should impact plasticity, and in fact 

static strain aging was reported in a follow-up study by Kwiatowski da Silva et al. [31].  Additional 

evidence of linear complexions in body-centered cubic metals was provided by Odette et al., who 

observed the formation of stable precipitates along dislocation networks in irradiated low alloy 

reactor pressure vessel steels [32].  Turlo and Rupert [8] isolated the atomic-scale mechanisms 

responsible for strengthening due to linear complexions in body-centered cubic alloys by 

performing atomistic modeling of dislocation break-away in an Fe-Ni alloy.  These authors 

reported that the complexion’s pinning effect was related to a reduction of the dislocation’s 

intrinsic stress field and that a diffusion-less, lattice distortive transformation of the complexion 

can occur once the dislocation is able to move away.     

 
 
A number of linear complexions in face-centered cubic alloys were recently predicted by 

Turlo and Rupert [9] using atomistic simulations.  Three types of linear complexions were found 

and classified according to their effect on the original dislocation core: (1) Nanoparticle array 

linear complexions, (2) platelet array linear complexions, and (3) stacking fault linear 

complexions.  Nanoparticle array linear complexions were predicted for Ni-Fe, Ni-Al and Al-Zr 


5 
 

alloys, where arrays of L12 phase intermetallic particles are hosted due to stress-driven segregation, 

with the dislocation cores remaining unaltered.  Platelet array linear complexions were predicted 

for Al-Cu, where Cu segregates and then forms disc-shaped platelets that grow out of the slip plane 

and along the dislocation length.  These complexion platelets have the same structure as Guinier-

Preston (GP) zones observed during the aging of Al-Cu bulk alloys [33-42].  For stacking fault 

linear complexions, Zr segregates to both the partial dislocations and the stacking fault itself, 

forming Cu5Zr intermetallic at elevated concentrations.  This particular linear complexion type 

delocalizes the core of the original dislocation.  With a delocalized core, stacking fault linear 

complexions can have a thickness normal to the original slip plane that is more than one atomic 

spacing.  Zhou et al. [43] recently found experimental evidence of nanoparticle array linear more 

complexed and varied solute segregation in a face-centered cubic Pt-Au alloy, with distinct 

chemical segregation profiles observed across different defects comprised of dislocation networks 

such as bulk glissile dislocations, low-angle grain boundaries, stacking fault tetrahedra, and Frank 

loops.  This segregation was of a greater magnitude than prior observations, such as the well-

known Cottrell atmosphere in body-centered cubic metals, and also occurs by segregation of solute 

atoms, rather than smaller impurity atoms.  Ref. [43] found that the local segregation was closely 

dependent on the defect type as well as the exact topology of the defect, suggesting a connection 

of local composition with the stress fields associated with the defects. This observation is 

indicative of close relation between the stress fields associated with the defect and the level of Au 

segregation facilitated by it. The observation of defect-specific solute concentrations by these 

authors opens the door for a materials design approach to defect engineering, where local structure 

and chemistry can be planned.  Linear complexions, as states that are localized to the dislocation 

region, are promising for the development of novel high strength face-centered cubic alloys.  


6 
 

Intuitively, the dislocation mechanics, strengthening mechanisms, and evolution of linear 

complexion under mechanical stress in face-centered cubic alloys should be intimately related to 

the complexion type and structural descriptors.  However, the impact of linear complexions on the 

yield strength of face-centered cubic metals and the extent of strengthening increments that can be 

achieved have not been investigated to date. 

 
In this work, we provide a comprehensive computational study of dislocation motion in the 

presence of the three types of linear complexions uncovered to date in face-centered cubic metals, 

isolating their effect on mechanical behavior.  All of the samples with linear complexions exhibit 

much higher strengths when compared to random solid solutions of the same composition, with 

the strengthening effect dependent on complexion type.  The stresses required for successive 

depinning of dislocations from nanoscale precipitate arrays is sensitive to the particle size and their 

relative distribution along the dislocation line.  Platelet array linear complexions push the partial 

dislocations out of their slip planes, with these segments acting as pinning points for the 

dislocations and overlapping complexion platelets displaying the highest pinning capacity.  

Stacking fault linear complexions delocalize the dislocation core which necessitates the nucleation 

of a new dislocation, sometimes altering the dislocation’s slip plane, and results in the most 

pronounced strengthening effect.  Overall, this work demonstrates new avenues for the 

manipulation of mechanical behavior through defect engineering. 

 

2. Methods  

All simulations were carried out using the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively 

Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) [44] and many-body interatomic potentials following the 

embedded atom method (EAM) formalism for Cu-Zr [45], Ni-Al [46], Al-Cu and Al-Cu-Zr [47].  


7 
 

The interatomic potentials used in this study were selected to reproduce important features of the 

experimental phase diagrams such as the major stable phases and solubility limits, which is crucial 

to capturing the structure and chemistry of nanoscale linear complexions.  The potentials for Cu-

Zr, Al-Zr and Al-Cu have also been previously employed to study grain boundary complexion 

transitions [23, 25, 48-49].  Atomic scale analysis and visualization was performed with OVITO 

[50] using the Polyhedral Template Matching (PTM) [51] and Dislocation Extraction Algorithm 

(DXA) [52] methods.  PTM was used to analyze the local atomic ordering while DXA was used 

to analyze dislocation structure.  The coloring scheme employed in the work is as follows: Face-

centered cubic atoms are green, body-centered cubic atoms are blue, hexagonal close packed atoms 

are red, icosahedral atoms are yellow, and the L12 intermetallic phase is denoted by magenta color.  

Any atoms that cannot be categorized according to these crystallographic structures (i.e., are 

identified as “other” atoms) are represented by white coloring.   

The initial sample geometry is shown in Figure 1(a), where a pair of edge dislocations have 

been inserted into the middle of the sample.  The initial edge dislocation pair relaxes into two 

Shockley partial dislocations separated by a stacking fault with the application of conjugate 

gradient energy minimization.  Each simulation cell was constructed as 60√2 a in the X-direction, 

48√3 a in the Y-direction and 50√6 a in the Z-direction, where a is the lattice constant of the host 

atom of the alloy system.  Typical sample dimensions are presented in Figure 1(a) along the edges 

of the simulation cell, although the exact sizes of the simulation boxes vary slightly depending on 

the lattice constant of each material at a given temperature and composition. The simulation cells 

contained ~3,500,000 atoms, representing very large atomistic models (see, e.g., [53] for 

comparison).   Periodic boundary conditions were employed in all directions.  Two types of 

samples for each alloy system are considered for a given composition: (1) A random solid solution 


8 
 

and (2) an equilibrated state where dopant atoms have segregated to form linear complexions.  

Three thermodynamically equivalent simulation cells (different atomic vibrations but all other 

thermodynamic parameters held constant) were studied for each sample type to enable improved 

statistics.   

The equilibrium states of linear complexion samples were obtained using the hybrid Monte 

Carlo (MC)/molecular dynamics (MD) method, with MC performed following the variance-

constrained semi-grand canonical ensemble proposed by Sadigh et al. [54].  Hybrid MC/MD 

simulations allow for both chemical segregation and local structure relaxation, which enables local 

transformations such as the formation and growth of linear complexions to occur.  In this study, 

one MC step was performed for every 100 MD time steps.  The system was considered to have 

equilibrated when the energy gradient in last 20 ps of MD simulation was less than 0.1 eV/ps.  

Additional details of the MC/MD of simulation procedure can be found in Ref. [9].  Both the solid 

solution and linear complexion samples were next equilibrated at 300 K and zero pressure under 

an NPT ensemble.  Nanoparticle array linear complexions are shown in Figure 1(b) and outlined 

in red, platelet array linear complexions are shown in Figure 1(c) and outlined in blue, and a 

stacking fault linear complexion is presented in Figure 1(d) and outlined in green.  These colors 

are used in subsequent figures to denote the complexion type.  Platelet array complexion 

restructure the dislocation core by creating facets along the line direction, while stacking fault 

complexions delocalize the dislocation core.  The Al-Cu-Zr system has both platelets and 

nanoparticles in the same locations, and therefore have a coexistence of two complexion types.  

All simulation cells contain multiple linear complexion particles along the dislocation line length, 

ensuring that a population of obstacles is probed during deformation.  Mechanical testing consisted 

of the application of shear strain with a strain rate of 108 s-1 at 300 K.  Shear stress-strain curves 


9 
 

were plotted for each sample and each simulation run. We note that the linear complexions are 

only truly stable in the presence of the dislocations, as their stress-fields drive segregation and any 

associated structural transitions.  This means that a linear complexion may evolve or remain in a 

metastable configuration after the dislocations have moved away, with the exact diffusion 

mechanism and time scales involved likely dependent on the complexion type, alloy choice, and 

testing temperature.  To avoid any such uncertainty, we focus our analysis and discussion on the 

initial yield event, where the dislocations are attempting to move away from the equilibrium 

configuration. 

 

Figure 1. The simulation cell with two dislocations split into two Shockley partials and a stacking fault between 
them, (a) before and (b-d) after equilibration at the listed compositions and temperatures. 
 

 


10 
 

3. Results  

3.1. Breakaway stress and flow stress measurements  

 
The shear stress-strain curves obtained from all five alloys, in both solid solution and linear 

complexion configurations, are presented in Figure 2.  The noticeable variations in the stress-strain 

curves demonstrate that solutes and linear complexions interact with dislocations in different ways.  

In order to compare the two situations in a more quantitative manner, it is useful to define critical 

points on the stress-strain curves.  The first sudden drop in the stress can be termed the breakaway 

stress, as it marks the start of dislocation glide after first depinning from the local solute or 

complexion obstacles.  The breakaway stress is analogous to the yield stress of the chosen 

simulation cell.  Subsequent stress drops that appear on the stress-strain curves after the breakaway 

point are analogous to flow stresses, as these are the values needed to continue plastic deformation 

of the sample.  These events are related to the dislocation leaving and returning through the 

periodic boundaries and are termed peak stresses.  Examples of both critical stress quantities are 

shown in Figure 3(a) for an example curve in Ni-Al.     


11 
 

 

Figure 2. Stress-strain curves for different samples with linear complexion (orange) and for a solid solution 
(blue).  Three thermodynamically equivalent but microscopically different samples are tested for statistical 
purposes and shown in different line styles. 

 

To allow for comparison between different base metals, normalized versions of the two 

critical stresses are obtained by dividing the absolute stress values by the shear modulus, G, of the 

base metal, with these metrics plotted in Figures 3(b) and (c).  The normalized values of peak 

stresses are calculated by averaging over the different peak stresses measured for the entire 

simulation run.  This approach is similar to comparing the Peierls barrier of different metals in 

terms of normalized Peierls stress [55], rather than comparing their absolute values.  For example, 

Figure 3(b) shows that the values of normalized breakaway stresses are of similar magnitude for 

Ni-4 at.% Al, Al-4.5 at.%  Zr, Al-0.3 at.% Cu and Al-0.3 at.% Cu-4.5 at.% Zr samples with linear 

complexions, while the breakaway stress for the Cu-1 at.% Zr sample is much higher.  It is 

noteworthy that even though defects are present, the Cu-1 at.% Zr sample shows a breakaway 


12 
 

stress ~0.04G that is a significant fraction of the theoretical shear strength of Cu, previously 

estimated to be ~0.07G for a defect-free crystal [56].  In the subsequent sections, the unique 

dislocation mechanisms associated with critical points on the stress-strain curves are isolated for 

different types of linear complexions.  We focus our attention primarily on the initial breakaway 

event, as this is the critical first plastic event when the system evolves away from the equilibrated 

initial state. Again, this is to avoid any uncertainty about the structure of the linear complexion 

particles after the host dislocations have moved away 

 

Figure 3. (a) Representative shear stress-strain taken from the Ni-Al sample, to show the definition of 
breakaway and peak stresses.  The quantified metrics for different alloys and sample types are presented for 
(b) breakaway stress and (c) peak stresses, which are analogous to yield strength and flow stress, respectively.  
Error bars are standard deviations obtained from the different runs. 
 
 

 


13 
 

3.2. Dislocation mechanics - Nanoparticle array linear complexion 

 
 
Figure 4(a) isolates the initial dislocation breakaway event from a complexion in Ni-4 at.% 

Al, to serve as a representative example of a nanoparticle array linear complexion.  A zoomed view 

of the stress-strain response is shown near the breakaway event, with critical events A-F marked 

on the curve and also shown in detail on the right side of Figure 4(a).  The evolution of dislocation 

line length and stacking fault size (presented as the total number of atoms in the stacking fault, 

which is proportional to the stacking fault width since the simulation cell has a constant length 

along the direction of the dislocation line direction) are also plotted in this figure.  First, it is notable 

that the particles are not on the glide plane of the dislocations, but on the tension side of the 

dislocation stress field.  This means the particles are located either above or below the glide plane, 

depending on which dislocation pair one looks at (top or bottom, which are originally positive and 

negative edge dislocations, respectively).  The linear complexions interact with the dislocations 

through their stress fields, rather than blocking the glide path directly.  The dislocations remain 

pinned by the complexion up to an applied shear strain of ~1.6%, corresponding to panel B, where 

the maximum stress is reached.  One can also observe an increase in the stacking fault size, as the 

leading partial in the top pair begins to pull away while the trailing partial dislocation remains 

fixed.  This is followed quickly by the first full unpinning event of the top dislocation pair, shown 

in panel C, where a bowing motion is observed as the defect unpins from the complexion 

nanoparticles sequentially.  The regions near the front and back of the simulation cell have not 

broken away yet.  The increase in the curvature of the dislocation due to bowing appears as an 

increase in the dislocation line length.  The second pair of partial dislocations in the bottom of the 

simulation cell also begins to move at this point, unpinning through a similar motion yet moving 

in the opposite direction because it is a dislocation of the opposite sign.  Event D shows that both 


14 
 

dislocation pairs have moved away from the complexion and are traveling through the clean areas 

of the simulation cell.  A corresponding decrease in the stacking fault size (i.e., contraction of the 

stacking fault width) is observed here, as the partial dislocation pairs are outside the influence of 

the complexion particle at this stage.  The dislocations continue to glide until they reach the 

periodic boundaries, which allow the dislocations to re-enter the simulation cell from the other 

side and eventually come back to their original positions above/below the linear complexion 

particles (panels E and F), at which point the dislocation line length and stacking fault size return 

to the initial values.  The dislocations are again pinned due to a reduction of their stress fields in 

the presence of the particles.  During this sequence, the partial dislocation pairs generally move 

together, likely due to the fact that there is only one array of complexion particles for each pair 

and therefore a common pinning obstacle.   

 
 
A similar sequence of bowing and breakaway events is observed for all alloys which 

exhibited the nanoparticle array linear complexion type, although important differences can occur, 

with another example shown for Al-4 at.% Zr in Figure 4(b).  A two-dimensional projection 

viewing the top half of simulation cell along the Y-axis is shown, with only one set of partial 

dislocations and their accompanying complexion particles appearing.  The partial dislocation on 

the left (the trailing partial) experiences bowing and unpinning first, in the top half of the images.  

This trailing partial dislocation crosses the gap between particles and eventually pushes the second, 

leading partial dislocation on the right until it breaks away at ~1.88% shear strain.  The first particle 

then becomes pinned at the second array of complexion nanoparticles.  Interestingly, the segment 

of the partial dislocation pair in the top of Figure 4(b) undergoes this breakaway and re-pinning 

sequence before the bottom half of the same partial pair has moved away from its host particles.  

These observations highlight the fact that the partial dislocations can move independently, with 


15 
 

this effect likely being most pronounced when each partial dislocation has nucleated its own 

nanoparticle array.   

 

Figure 4. (a) The evolution of shear stress, dislocation length, and stacking fault size as a function of shear 
strain for the breakaway stress events in a Ni-4 at.% Al alloy with nanoparticle array linear complexions, with 
corresponding snapshots shown to the right.  (b) Similar unpinning and bowing events for one pair of partial 
dislocations on the same slip plane in Al-4 at.% Zr, with the applied shear strain labeled at the top of the images. 
 

An important common observation for nanoparticle array linear complexions is that one 

dislocation segment (whether an individual partial dislocation for Al-Zr or a pair of partials for Ni-

Al) is mobile, while the other dislocation segments remain static for a time.  This response 

demonstrates a non-identical “pinning power” of similar, but not identical, arrays of complexion 

along the dislocations.  For example, Figure 4(b) shows that two small bowing events are observed 

at gaps in the particles in the panel corresponding to 1.84% shear strain, suggesting that such 

particle-free regions can be weak links.  This behavior can be understood by recalling that the 


16 
 

complexion particles form to reduce the dislocation’s stress field and lower the overall system 

energy, meaning that the region near the dislocation with elevated hydrostatic stress is a roughly 

cylindrical template above or below the defect (depending on whether the original dislocation is 

of positive or negative edge character) that can be occupied by obstacles to motion.  Complexion 

particles pin the dislocation in a configuration where it is energetically preferred while the lack of 

a particle corresponds to a dislocation segment that is not effectively pinned.  To investigate this 

effect more clearly, additional models of nanoparticle array linear complexions were created in the 

Ni-Al system with varying Al concentrations, which allows the density of linear complexion 

particles to be systematically increased (Figure 5(a)).  The particles grow to more fully decorate 

or fill the roughly cylindrical regions below/above the dislocation line as Al concentration is 

increased, leading to fewer and smaller gaps between the particles.  Shear deformation simulations 

in Figure 5(b) show that the breakaway stress increases with Al concentration as well, suggesting 

that the closure of the gaps between particles increases the strength of the pinning effect.  These 

effects will be compared to classical strengthening models later. 

 

Figure 5. (a) Nanoparticle array linear complexions for Ni-Al with increasing Al concentration and therefore 
more complexion particles.  (b) Shear stress-strain curves show that the breakaway stress is significantly 
increased as the complexion particles become more densely populated along the dislocation line. 
 

 


17 
 

3.3. Dislocation mechanics – Platelet array linear complexion 

 
 
The effect of platelet array linear complexions on dislocation mechanics and strengthening 

is next explored in the context of an Al-Cu alloy.  The stress-strain response as well as the evolution 

of dislocation line length and stacking fault size is presented in Figure 6 for the initial breakaway 

event (bottom partial dislocation pair), with important events again called out in panels A-F.  The 

trailing partial dislocation on the left first bows in a region where there are no GP zones (denoted 

by a blue arrow in panel B) and then unpins from the platelets one by one, while the leading partial 

dislocation on the right remains stationary.  This behavior reveals that the strengthening provided 

by the platelet complexion arrays is also dependent on their local arrangement, both in terms of 

platelet size and the gaps between them.  As a result of slip events B-C in Figure 5, a decrease in 

the stacking fault width is measured.  Finally, the gliding trailing partial interacts with the 

stationary leading partial, eventually pushing the leading partial to move and continue plastic flow.  

Panel D shows the glide of the leading partial dislocation across the periodic boundary conditions 

and back into the other side of the simulation cell.  It is interesting to note that the leading partial 

does not interact strongly with the existing GP zones platelets on the left side of the cell and instead 

continues to glide relatively unhindered through the crystal in panels D-E.  Finally, the partials 

return to their original locations along the platelet complexion arrays in panel F.  Both the 

dislocation length and stacking fault size first decrease and then increase during this breakaway 

event sequence, returning to the initial values at the end.  Subsequent plastic flow events have 

identical fluctuations in the dislocation line length and stacking fault size, demonstrating that the 

same mechanism operates again and again during the simulated deformation. 

 


18 
 

 

Figure 6. The evolution of stress, total dislocation length, and stacking fault size are shown for the first 
unpinning and pinning events, with atomic snapshots corresponding to important events, for the platelet array 
linear complexions in the Al-0.3 at.% Cu system. 
 

 
In general terms, the deformation mechanisms for the platelet array linear complexions 

resemble those of the nanoparticle array complexions, as the dislocations begin to bow in regions 

without complexion platelets/particles until the entire line can move away from its pinning points.  

However, critical differences can be observed, particularly with regards to the importance of the 

GP zone orientations.  While the nanoparticle arrays did not alter the dislocation core, the platelet 

arrays cause a faceting of the dislocation lines related to the crystallography of the GP zones.  

Figure 7 shows a detailed view of different pinning events, where a strong pinning event (outlined 

in a dashed blue box) can be seen at 1.55% shear strain.  The zoomed view in Figure 7(b1) shows 

that the trailing partial has formed a segment with edge character along the GP zone, but also that 

this segment has shifted up along the GP zone to be slightly out of the original glide plane.  This 

faceted, out-of-plane feature creates a strong obstacle to motion, with pronounced bowing of the 

red screw segments needed to eventually break free.  Figures 7(b2) and (b3) show that a similar 

faceting occurs for the leading partial and also that small segments of the two partials can 

recombine.  The subsequent flow events are also determined by the local platelet and dislocation 

configurations.  Figures 7(d1) and (d2) show the strongest pinning site for the follow-up flow 


19 
 

event, where again recombination of the partials occurs.  In addition, there are overlapping GP 

zones in this region, which result in a very complicated faceted structure that must be overcome. 

 

Figure 7. (a)-(e) Partial dislocation interactions with the GP zones comprising the platelet array linear 
complexion in the Al-Cu alloy.  (b1) The trailing partial remains pinned due to a segment with edge character 
that has moved slightly out-of-plane along the GP zone.  (b2)-(b3) The trailing and leading partials can 
recombine at some small sites, while edge and screw character segments also form.  (d1)-(d2) A strong pinning 
event occurs at a region with overlapping GP zones, where partial dislocation recombination also occurs. 
 

3.4. Dislocation mechanics - Stacking fault type linear complexion 

Stacking fault type linear complexions delocalize the dislocation core into a broader region.  

The changes in the shear stress, dislocation line length, and stacking fault size are presented for 

the first plastic event in Figure 8 as a function of shear strain.  A high breakaway stress of 1.5 GPa 

is recorded at an applied shear strain of 4.2%, at which point the nucleation of a new partial 

dislocation occurs from the delocalized dislocation core in the top half of the simulation cell (panel 

B).  Once nucleation occurs, the new segment grows and an increase in dislocation line length can 

be seen.  The leading partial dislocation can quickly move through the simulation cell, leaving a 

stacking fault behind it and resulting in a rapid increase in the stacking fault size.  The dislocation 

re-enters the simulation cell due to the periodic boundary conditions and begins to be re-absorbed 


20 
 

into the complexion in panel D1, where the beginning stages of nucleation for the trailing partial 

dislocation are also observed.  Eventually the trailing partial also moves out and then back into the 

simulation cell to be re-absorbed.  The bottom complexion undergoes a similar process, with the 

leading partial being nucleated at a larger applied strain in panel C.  By panel F, the leading partial 

has been re-absorbed while the trailing partial has not been nucleated yet, leaving a stacking fault 

that crosses the entire simulation cell for the time being.  The nucleation of partials at different 

stages of the simulated deformation again emphasizes that local variations in complexion structure 

determine the individual breakaway events and their associated barriers. 

 

Figure 8. The evolution of stress, total dislocation length, and stacking fault size are shown for the first 
unpinning and pinning events, with atomic snapshots corresponding to important events, for the platelet array 
linear complexions in the Cu-1 at.% Zr system.   
 

The nucleation event for stacking fault linear complexions is shown in more detail in Figure 

9.  Figures 9(a) gives a top view, looking down onto the glide plane, of the delocalized dislocation 

core that first nucleated a partial in Figure 8.  The dislocation extraction algorithm (DXA) in 

OVITO no longer identifies a continuous dislocation along the linear complexion, but instead finds 

an array of disconnected full edge and partial mixed character dislocations.  Such dissociated and 

disconnected dislocation structures have also been measured in simulations of grain boundary 

structure [25, 57-70].  At 1% applied shear strain, the early stages of partial dislocation nucleation 


21 
 

can be observed from one of the disconnected regions near the top of the image.  As the strain 

increases and the leading partial moves away from the original location, one can observe that the 

region remaining shifts from being largely blue (full dislocation with edge character) to green 

(partial dislocation with mixed character).  Eventually the entire leading partial has been nucleated 

and travels through the simulation cell, leaving another disconnected collection of defects.  Figures 

9(b) and (c) provide front views, down the original dislocation’s line direction, for the solid 

solution and linear complexion version of the Cu-Zr alloy, respectively, where the original slip 

planes are marked by dashed black lines.  For the solid solution, the dislocations glide easily on 

the original slip planes.  In contrast, Figure 9(c) shows that the delocalization of the dislocation 

core also occurs normal to the slip plane, which can lead to nucleation on a different but parallel 

slip plane as deformation continues.  We note that 4.3% shear strain corresponds to panel C in 

Figure 8. 

 


22 
 

 

Figure 9. (a) Top view of a stacking fault linear complexion in Cu-1 at.% Zr for increasing applied shear strain.  
A disconnected collection of defects is observed, with the nucleation of a leading partial occurring from a 
segment of this structure.  Nucleation of this partial changes the overall dislocation character from full (blue) 
to partial (green).  (b)-(c) A front view of the simulation cell, looking down the dislocation line direction.  (b) 
Dislocation motion in the solid solution remains constrained to the initial slip planes (denoted by two dashed 
black lines), while (c) dislocation nucleation can occur in a different, parallel slip planes due to the delocalization 
of the dislocation core. 
 
 

4. Discussion 

 
 
With an understanding of the fundamental dislocation mechanisms, we now return to the 

measured strength values reported in Figures 3(b) and (c).  For all five alloy systems, the 

breakaway stresses of the linear complexion samples are significantly higher than those of the solid 

solution samples, demonstrating that complexions are much stronger obstacles to initial yield.  

Specifically, the linear complexions samples in the Ni-Al, Al-Zr, Al-Cu, and Al-Cu-Zr alloys have 

comparable normalized breakaway stresses in the range of 0.013-0.016 G, or 4-6 times higher than 


23 
 

the comparable solid solutions.  The comparison with the solid solutions can be understood by the 

fact that solutes are modest obstacles to slip that are distributed randomly in the solvent, while 

linear complexions are localized to the region near the dislocation.  Having a stronger obstacle 

generated right at the defect results in more resistance to the initial dislocation motion.  Although 

Cottrell atmospheres are also an example of localized segregation around the dislocations, local 

chemical ordering exists in the case of linear complexions and can modify the slip environment 

more strongly.  For these four complexions, the original dislocation core eventually moves once it 

overcomes the local obstacles comprised of arrays of nanoparticles or platelets.  While there is a 

similar strengthening effect, we note that the obstacle densities are not identical.  The nanoparticle 

array linear complexions shown in Figure 1(b) for Ni-Al and Al-Zr more fully decorate the 

dislocation line than the platelet array complexions shown in Figure 1(c) for Al-Cu and Al-Cu-Zr.  

With less dense spacing yet a slightly stronger strengthening effect, one can conclude that the 

individual platelets provide stronger obstacles for the initial breakaway event than individual 

nanoparticles.  This observation aligns with the mechanisms explored above, as the faceting of the 

dislocation line and the creation of stable edge character segments along the GP zone platelets 

provides additional well-defined obstacles to resist dislocation motion.  Comparison of the Al-Cu 

complexions (only GP zone platelets) with the Al-Cu-Zr complexions (GP zone platelets plus L12 

nanoparticles) shows that the addition of a secondary complexion type only gives a very minor 

strengthening increment.  By far the highest breakaway stress is observed for the Cu-Zr stacking 

fault linear complexion specimens, which are 2.5-3 times stronger than the other linear complexion 

types.  While the original dislocation can eventually move away from the other complexions, the 

requirement for dislocation nucleation results in a higher strength for this defect configuration.  

The breakaway stress corresponding to the nucleation of this Shockley partial is ~0.04G, or 57% 


24 
 

of the ideal pure shear strength of Cu [56].  Also notable is the very low breakaway stress for the 

solid solution Cu-Zr, which means that the gap between complexion (highest value from entire 

dataset) and solid solution (lowest value from entire dataset) samples is particularly pronounced 

in this case, with a strengthening factor of 70× (Figure 3(b)).   

 
 
The flow stresses can next be discussed for different sample types.  Inspection of the 

atomistic configuration at the measured peak stress values from the solid solution samples shows 

that these points are primarily associated with the two dislocations in the simulation cell mutually 

interacting through their respective stress fields, and are therefore not a true measurement of the 

solid solution itself.  In contrast, the peak stresses from the linear complexion samples correspond 

to atomic configurations where the dislocations re-enter the cell and interact again with the 

complexion structure.  As such, we limit this discussion to the linear complexion samples.  For the 

nanoparticle and platelet array linear complexions, the normalized peak stresses associated with 

plastic flow have similar magnitudes to the initial breakaway stress, due to the fact that the 

dislocation returns to its original location each time it travels through the periodic boundaries.  The 

dislocations move around and away from the obstacles, but do not interact with them directly or 

alter the obstacle structure.  Instead, the longer-range stress fields communicate.  The dislocations 

become locked again upon re-entry and must overcome a similar energetic barrier to move.  The 

normalized peak stresses for the Cu-Zr sample with stacking fault linear complexions are still the 

highest, but a significant decrease is observed from the breakaway stress.  This observation can be 

explained by the fact that the specimen does not return to exactly the same configuration after 

dislocation nucleation.  The complexion structure is altered by nucleation, as shown in Figure 9(a), 

meaning that subsequent nucleation events are easier.  The stress-strain curves in Figure 2 shown 


25 
 

this clearly, with noticeable softening after the initial yield event for the Cu-Zr linear complexion 

samples. 
 
 

 
 
To fully explore the details of the dislocation restrictions associated with linear 

complexions, it is useful to compare against traditional strengthening mechanisms.  Figure 10 

provides schematic views and important details to describe the three main linear complexion types 

(right column), as well as their most comparable traditional strengthening mechanism (left 

column).  Nanoparticle array linear complexions are compared to bulk precipitation strengthening 

(top row), platelet array linear complexions are compared to bulk GP zones (middle row), and 

stacking fault linear complexions are compared to heterogeneous nucleation of dislocations from 

grain boundaries (bottom row).  Second phase precipitates (top left) behave as obstacles when they 

lie in a slip plane, acting to physically block the path of a dislocation.  The most common 

deformation mechanism occurs when the dislocation cannot penetrate the particle and must bow 

around it with through a bowing mechanism, leaving behind a sessile Orowan loop that surrounds 

the precipitate and acts as debris (particle shearing can also occur for small, coherent precipitates).  

While this mechanism is well-known and is taught in textbooks (see, e.g., [71]), research continues 

on the topic to this day (see, e.g., Ref. [72]).  Xu et al. [73] used concurrent atomistic-continuum 

simulations to study dislocation motion past an array of obstacles in Al, finding that cooperative 

dislocation bow-out on different length scales was an important mechanism.  In contrast, the 

obstacles in a nanoparticle array linear complexion (top right) are either above or below the slip 

plane, but do not provide a physical barrier.  Instead, the reduced stress field of the dislocation 

serves as a restraining force.  Because of this altered orientation with respect to the slip plane, there 

is no debris left over after the breakaway event (or sheared particles, in the case of small coherent 

precipitates), leaving pristine collections of nanoparticles.  Other dislocations moving through the 


26 
 

material in later stages of plasticity could interact with these particles in a similar way as long as 

their stress fields overlap the particle location, providing a template of strong obstacles within the 

material.   

 
 
Moving to the bulk platelet strengthening mechanism, GP zones (middle left) are found in 

many underaged precipitation strengthened alloys, being particularly common in Al-rich systems 

(see, e.g., [33-42].  These platelets remain coherent with the matrix and are extremely thin, often 

only a few atomic layers in thickness [42] and are therefore typically traversed directly by 

dislocations.  This process leaves a sheared or “cut” GP zone in the microstructure.  Singh and 

Warner [34] studied dislocation interactions with GP zones in Al-Cu using atomistic simulations, 

demonstrating that bowing can sometimes accompany this shearing mechanism.  For example, for 

a 4.4 nm GP zone with 60° orientation with respect to the incoming dislocation, these authors 

reported that the leading partial dislocation cuts through the precipitate, damage the platelet, while 

the trailing partial bows around the feature, leaving debris.  In all cases, damage or debris was left 

behind by the platelet-dislocation interaction.  In contrast, for platelet array linear complexions, no 

damage occurs because the platelet is above or below the glide plane and is therefore bypassed.  

Turlo and Rupert [9] showed that these GP zones grow along {100} planes and have lower atomic 

volume than the matrix, so it is likely that the edge dislocation facets form to reduce the impact of 

their compressive stress field.  Unpinning from these platelet array complexions is therefore 

associated with overcoming the local stress field interactions, rather than a physical obstacle, and 

no damage is left behind.  The lack of damage and/or debris is common to both the nanoparticle 

and platelet array linear complexions, as is the targeted location of the obstacles.  Both bulk second 

phase precipitates and bulk GP zones nucleate at random locations within the material, meaning 

that dislocations must travel some distance before interacting with the obstacles by chance.  In 


27 
 

contrast, complexion formation is driven by the stress field of the dislocations, meaning that the 

obstacles are born at the best possible location, ready to restrict motion immediately. 

 
 
Heterogeneous dislocation nucleation marks the final traditional plasticity mechanism and 

is primarily active in materials with very few or no glissile dislocations, such as nanocrystalline 

metals [74], nanowires [75, 76], ultra-thin films [77], and well-annealing single crystals [78].  

Using nanocrystalline metals as a well-studied point of comparison, the nanoscale grain interiors 

lack pre-existing dislocation content to sustain plastic flow, leading to the nucleation of 

dislocations from interfacial sites.  Grain boundaries contains a network of dislocations with both 

lattice and non-lattice Burgers vector character, which Kuhr and Farkas [79] showed can either 

directly act as a source of defects to be pushed into the grain interior or serve as a local stress 

concentration for the nucleation of new lattice dislocations.  These emitted dislocations are usually 

absorbed into the opposite grain boundary after traversing the grain [80], leaving no residual 

dislocation debris [81].  Stacking fault linear complexions also contain a disconnected network of 

dislocations as a result of the delocalized core, with these defects similarly acting as a dislocation 

nucleation/emission source at high applied stress.  As dislocations cannot abruptly start or stop 

inside of a crystal, the defect is anchored on both sides of the nucleation site and an unzipping 

motion occurs as the dislocation moves away from the complexion (see Figure 9(a)).  The 

complexion can also act as a dislocation sink or absorption site (see Figure 8), in this case once 

the dislocation has left and returned through the periodic boundary conditions.  While this exact 

sequence is strongly influenced by our simulation geometry and boundary conditions, one can 

imagine a more realistic situation where a dislocation is nucleated from one stacking fault linear 

complexion and then encounters another further along the same slip plane.  The growth of the 


28 
 

stacking fault linear complexion out of the slip plane (Figure 9(c)) even means that a parallel but 

nearby slip plane can also host possible dislocation sinks. 

 

Figure 10. Comparison between dislocations mechanics in presence of traditional obstacles (left column) and 
linear complexions (right column).  The top row shows particle-dislocation interactions, the middle row shows 
platelet-dislocation interactions, and the bottom row shows dislocation nucleation events. 

 


29 
 

While direct comparisons of the strengths measured here with experimental reports are 

difficult, due to the high strain rates used in MD and also due to the isolation of individual defects 

in this work, the relative strengthening effect associated with similar obstacles is worthy of 

discussion.  The most important descriptor in future experiments is expected to be the fraction of 

glissile dislocations within the material that are decorated by linear complexions, as this metric 

will determine how many defects have heavily restricted motion.  Even without a direct 

comparison, previous studies on the strengthening effect of bulk precipitates can provide a 

reference point for appreciating the impact of nanoparticle array and platelet array linear 

complexions.  Many Ni-based alloys and superalloys have demonstrated outstanding mechanical 

properties in the presence of bulk L12 precipitates by classical precipitate strengthening [82-90].   

For example, an improvement in the yield strength of up to 400% was reported in Ni-based 

superalloys owing to the presence of nanoscale, ordered L12-type precipitates, as compared to a 

similar alloy with only solid solution strengthening contributions [85].  A bimodal distribution of 

precipitate particles was observed in this alloy, with 70 nm particles present at a 30% volume 

fraction and 10 nm particles present at a 10% volume fraction.  In another example, a hot-rolled 

and annealed Monel K500 containing γ’ (L12) precipitates exhibited a 200% higher yield strength 

than Monel 400, which is the solid solution strengthened alloy of same composition [86].  In the 

case of Al-Cu alloys, precipitation strengthening was found to increase the yield strength up to a 

maximum of ~64% when compared to a solid solution sample of similar bulk composition [36, 

41].  While the strengthening from bulk precipitates can be appreciable, the magnitude of the effect 

imparted by these features is strongly dependent on precipitate size and distribution and/or volume 

fraction.  For example, Rodriguez et al. [36] performed a detailed study on the strengthening 

contribution of GP zones in naturally aged (293 K) Al-4 wt.% Cu samples.  These materials had 


30 
 

small GP zones of diameter 2.5 ± 0.1 nm and a volume fraction of 1.0 ± 0.3, which gave a CRSS 

of 88.1 MPa (a strength increase of 44%) compared to the solid solution sample.  Overall, the 

examples given above show that bulk precipitates can strengthen to high levels, but only if high 

volume fractions of precipitates are added.  The addition of only a few nanoscale obstacles 

generally results in modest increases in strength.  Bulk precipitates are inefficient strengthening 

features because they rely on accidental dislocation-precipitate interactions as the dislocation 

moves through the lattice.  Alternatively, nanoparticle and platelet arrays which are linear 

complexion counterparts of such bulk precipitates can give dramatic strengthening (400-600% 

higher than solid solutions in Figure 3(b)) by placing the obstacles immediately at the dislocations.  

Since linear complexions develop due to the dislocation’s stress field, the obstacle to flow is at the 

exact right place and thus the probability of interaction is explicitly ensured. 

Stacking fault linear complexions require a different class of materials for comparison, 

specifically those where dislocation nucleation is a key process.  Two example types of materials 

where dislocation nucleation governs are nanocrystalline metals and nanowires, where grain 

boundaries and free surfaces often act as the nucleation sources.  Both experiments and MD 

simulations have shown that dislocation emission becomes the dominant source of plasticity in 

nanocrystalline and nanowire samples, with the spacing of nucleation sites (i.e., grain size or 

nanowire diameter) being critical for determining the strength of these materials [91-97].  Roos et 

al. [94] and Bin Wu and coworkers [93] performed in situ transmission electron microscopy tensile 

tests on Au nanowires with diameters ranging from 30 to 300 nm.  Richter et al. [96] similarly 

studied the strength of single crystal Cu nano whiskers for a diameter range of 75 to 300 nm.  These 

studies revealed that yield strength is controlled by wire diameter.  The Au nanowires show 3.5±1 

GPa yield strength for a 200 nm diameter wire and 5.6±1.4 GPa yield strength for a 40 nm diameter 


31 
 

wire [95].  The Cu whisker strength could approach the theoretical limit as wire diameter was 

reduced to ~100 nm [96].  Atomistic investigations of strengthening in Au nanowires reveal a 

similar inverse correlation between the strength and size of Au nanowires (see, e.g., [97]).  

Nanowires can therefore achieve great strengths by making it difficult to nucleate the first 

dislocation, but very fine wires with nanoscale diameters mean that the overall load bearing 

capacity of the material is small.  In addition, synthesis of fine nanowires typically requires the use 

of novel techniques such as templated deposition (see, e.g., [98]) or vapor-liquid-solid growth 

techniques (see, e.g., [99]) which are extremely slow to produce appreciable material volumes.  

This manifests as limited wire dimensions along the growth axis, with lengths of 50 μm and 75 

μm in the studies by Roos et al. [95] and Richter et al. [97], respectively.  A similar deformation 

mechanism has also been observed in faulted nanowires, providing another comparison point for 

stacking fault linear complexions.  Veerababu et al. [103] simulated the deformation of Cu 

nanowires decorated with stacking faults using MD, finding that plastic deformation was 

associated with the nucleation of stacking faults enclosed by leading partial dislocations from the 

nanowire surface. 

The high strength of the nanocrystalline materials is also attributed to dislocation 

nucleation and emission, with grain boundaries acting as the source.  Hugo et al. [100] and Kumar 

et al. [101] studied the deformation of nanocrystalline Ni films using in situ transmission electron 

microscopy, finding evidence of dislocation nucleation for grain sizes of ~20 nm.  Nanocrystalline 

Pt films with an average grain size of 10 nm were also shown to experience dislocation nucleation 

from the grain boundaries during deformation [102].  The critical shear stresses required to 

nucleate partial dislocations were estimated to be  ~2 GPa and ~12 GPa in grain sizes of 24 nm 

and 2 nm, respectively [102].  In another study, Chen et al. [91] reported the tensile strength of 


32 
 

nanocrystalline Cu can become as high as ~1 GPa for an average grain size of 10 nm [91].  Like 

nanowires, the synthesis of nanocrystalline metals typically requires specialized processing routes, 

such high-energy ball mill, melt spinning, or vapor deposition, which severely limit the specimen 

size that can be fabricated.  For instance, the Pt nanocrystalline thin film studied by Li et al. 

were synthesized by magnetron sputtering onto a (001)-oriented NaCl single crystal substrate, 

resulting in a final film thickness of only ~10 nm [102].  When compared to nanocrystalline metals 

and nanowires, stacking fault linear complexions also require dislocation nucleation yet can 

provide comparable strengthening levels without the above mentioned size limitations or the 

requirement of sophisticated fabrication routes.   

 

5. Conclusions 

In this study, atomistic simulations were used to probe the effect of three different classes 

of linear complexions recently predicted for face-centered cubic alloys on the plasticity, 

dislocation mechanics, and strengthening of these materials.  Important findings from the current 

work include: 

• The breakaway and peak stresses in all of the samples with linear complexions are 

significantly higher than the corresponding solid solution configurations, with the largest 

difference being 70× for Cu-Zr.  By seeding strong obstacles to dislocation motion directly 

near the defects that control plasticity, linear complexions have the potential to enable 

engineering alloys with extreme strength. 

• A comparison of the normalized breakaway stress shows that each type of linear 

complexion has a unique effect on the dislocation core in terms of both the pinning 

phenomenon and also the level of predicted strengthening. 


33 
 

• Nanoparticle array linear complexions pin the dislocations they are born at, but do not alter 

the dislocation core structure or obstruct the original glide plane in any away.  The partials 

unpin from the nanoparticle arrays either as a pair or one-by-one, causing the dislocations 

to bow out.  Detailed study of the dislocation motion and stress-strain trends indicate that 

the pinning power depends on the size and local arrangement of precipitate arrays along 

the dislocation line. 

• Platelet array linear complexions present themselves as out-of-plane GP zones that nucleate 

along the partial dislocation lines.  Again, the pinning power of the obstacles depends on 

the spatial distribution and size of the individual platelets, but appears to be stronger than 

the nanoparticle array configuration for a given complexion density.   

• Stacking fault linear complexions delocalize the original dislocation core into a network of 

disconnected dislocations, reminiscent of grain boundary dislocations.  The nucleation of 

a partial dislocation from the reduced core marks the onset of plasticity in this sample.  As 

the nucleation event requires a much higher stress, approaching the theoretical shear stress 

of pure Cu, compared to the prior unpinning mechanisms observed for other complexion 

types, the stacking fault linear complexions offer the greatest promise for extreme strength. 

Linear complexions are a new category of engineered defect structures, demonstrating the 

potential to directly manipulate dislocations and control plasticity in face-centered cubic alloys.  

These strengthening features are different from traditional strengthening mechanisms in a number 

of important ways, most notable being the lack of obstacle damage and the templating of the 

reinforcing features immediately at the dislocations.  As a whole, the results presented in this work 

suggest that controlled incorporated of collections of nano-sized complexions may allow for new 

strengthening pathways.  Thermomechanical processing routes that target the formation of linear 


34 
 

complexions, and ultimately the development of plasticity models that incorporate complexion 

mechanics, would be fruitful targets for future study. 

 

Declaration of Competing interests  

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 

relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.   

 

Acknowledgments 

Research was sponsored by the Army Research Office under Grant Number W911NF-21-

1-0288.  The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should 

not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army 

Research Office or the U.S.  Government.  The U.S.  Government is authorized to reproduce and 

distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein. 

 

Data Availability 

The data that support the findings of this study are available within the article. 

 

 

 
 


35 
 

References 

1. 
Kuzmina M, Herbig M, Ponge D, Sandlöbes S, Raabe D. Linear complexions: Confined 

chemical and structural states at dislocations. Science. 2015;349(6252):1080-3. 

2. 
Dillon SJ, Tang M, Carter WC, Harmer MP. Complexion: A new concept for kinetic 

engineering in materials science. Acta Materialia. 2007;55(18):6208-18. 

3. 
Cantwell PR, Tang M, Dillon SJ, Luo J, Rohrer GS, Harmer MP. Grain boundary 

complexions. Acta Materialia. 2014;62:1-48. 

4. 
Luo J. Grain boundary complexions: The interplay of premelting, prewetting, and 

multilayer adsorption. Applied Physics Letters. 2009;95(7):071911. 

5. 
Kwiatkowski da Silva A, Ponge D, Peng Z, Inden G, Lu Y, Breen A, et al. Phase nucleation 

through confined spinodal fluctuations at crystal defects evidenced in Fe-Mn alloys. Nature 

Communications. 2018;9(1):1137. 

6. 
Turlo V, Rupert TJ. Dislocation-assisted linear complexion formation driven by 

segregation. Scripta Materialia. 2018;154:25-9. 

7. 
Turlo V, Rupert TJ. Linear Complexions: Metastable Phase Formation and Coexistence at 

Dislocations. Physical Review Letters. 2019;122(12):126102. 

8. 
Turlo V, Rupert TJ. Interdependent Linear Complexion Structure and Dislocation 

Mechanics in Fe-Ni. Crystals. 2020;10(12):1128. 

9. 
Turlo V, Rupert TJ. Prediction of a wide variety of linear complexions in face centered 

cubic alloys. Acta Materialia. 2020;185:129-41. 

10. 
Luo J, Shi X. Grain boundary disordering in binary alloys. Applied Physics Letters. 

2008;92(10):101901. 

11. 
Raabe D, Herbig M, Sandlöbes S, Li Y, Tytko D, Kuzmina M, et al. Grain boundary 

segregation engineering in metallic alloys: A pathway to the design of interfaces. Current 

Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science. 2014;18(4):253-61. 

12. 
Shi X, Luo J. Developing grain boundary diagrams as a materials science tool: A case study 

of nickel-doped molybdenum. Physical Review B. 2011;84(1):014105. 

13. 
Liebscher CH, Stoffers A, Alam M, Lymperakis L, Cojocaru-Mirédin O, Gault B, et al. 

Strain-Induced Asymmetric Line Segregation at Faceted Si Grain Boundaries. Physical 

Review Letters. 2018;121(1):015702. 


36 
 

14. 
Frolov T, Divinski SV, Asta M, Mishin Y. Effect of Interface Phase Transformations on 

Diffusion and Segregation in High-Angle Grain Boundaries. Physical Review Letters. 

2013;110(25):255502. 

15. 
Frolov T, Asta M, Mishin Y. Segregation-induced phase transformations in grain 

boundaries. Physical Review B. 2015;92(2):020103. 

16. 
Zhou N, Luo J. Developing grain boundary diagrams for multicomponent alloys. Acta 

Materialia. 2015;91:202-16. 

17. 
Frolov T, Asta M, Mishin Y. Phase transformations at interfaces: Observations from 

atomistic modeling. Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science. 2016;20(5):308-

15. 

18. 
Frolov T, Setyawan W, Kurtz RJ, Marian J, Oganov AR, Rudd RE, et al. Grain boundary 

phases in bcc metals. Nanoscale. 2018;10(17):8253-68. 

19. 
Zhu Q, Samanta A, Li B, Rudd RE, Frolov T. Predicting phase behavior of grain 

boundaries with evolutionary search and machine learning. Nature Communications. 

2018;9(1):467. 

20. 
Schuler JD, Donaldson OK, Rupert TJ. Amorphous complexions enable a new region of 

high temperature stability in nanocrystalline Ni-W. Scripta Materialia. 2018;154:49-53. 

21. 
Khalajhedayati A, Rupert TJ. High-Temperature Stability and Grain Boundary 

Complexion Formation in a Nanocrystalline Cu-Zr Alloy. JOM. 2015;67(12):2788-801. 

22. 
Pan Z, Rupert TJ. Effect of grain boundary character on segregation-induced structural 

transitions. Physical Review B. 2016;93(13):134113. 

23. 
Yang S, Zhou N, Zheng H, Ong SP, Luo J. First-Order Interfacial Transformations with a 

Critical Point: Breaking the Symmetry at a Symmetric Tilt Grain Boundary. Physical 

Review Letters. 2018;120(8):085702. 

24. 
Frolov T, Olmsted DL, Asta M, Mishin Y. Structural phase transformations in metallic 

grain boundaries. Nature Communications. 2013;4(1):1899. 

25. 
Turlo V, Rupert TJ. Grain boundary complexions and the strength of nanocrystalline 

metals: Dislocation emission and propagation. Acta Materialia. 2018;151:100-11. 

26. 
Hu T, Yang S, Zhou N, Zhang Y, Luo J. Role of disordered bipolar complexions on the 

sulfur embrittlement of nickel general grain boundaries. Nature Communications. 

2018;9(1):2764. 


37 
 

27. 
Khalajhedayati A, Pan Z, Rupert TJ. Manipulating the interfacial structure of 

nanomaterials to achieve a unique combination of strength and ductility. Nature 

Communications. 2016;7(1):10802. 

28. 
Rupert TJ. The role of complexions in metallic nano-grain stability and deformation. 

Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science. 2016;20(5):257-67. 

29. 
Andrievski RA. Review of thermal stability of nanomaterials. Journal of Materials Science. 

2014;49(4):1449-60. 

30. 
Hart EW. Grain Boundary Phase Transformations. In: Hu H, editor. The Nature and 

Behavior of Grain Boundaries: A Symposium held at the TMS-AIME Fall Meeting in 

Detroit, Michigan, October 18–19, 1971. New York, NY: Springer US; 1972:155-70. 

31. 
Kwiatkowski da Silva A, Leyson G, Kuzmina M, Ponge D, Herbig M, Sandlöbes S, et al. 

Confined chemical and structural states at dislocations in Fe-9wt%Mn steels: A correlative 

TEM-atom probe study combined with multiscale modelling. Acta Materialia. 

2017;124:305-15. 

32. 
G.R. Odette, N. Almirall, P.B. Wells, T. Yamamoto. Precipitation in reactor pressure vessel 

steels under ion and neutron irradiation: On the role of segregated network dislocations. 

2021;212;11692. 

33. 
Sehitoglu, H., T. Foglesong, and H.J. Maier, Precipitate effects on the mechanical behavior 

of aluminum copper alloys: Part I. Experiments. Metallurgical and Materials Transactions 

A. 2005;36(13):749-761. 

34. 
Singh, C.V. and D.H. Warner, Mechanisms of Guinier–Preston zone hardening in the 

athermal limit. Acta Materialia. 2010;58(17):5797-5805. 

35. 
Esteban-Manzanares G, Bellón B, Martínez E, Papadimitriou I, Llorca J. Strengthening of 

Al–Cu alloys by Guinier–Preston zones: Predictions from atomistic simulations. Journal 

of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids. 2019;132:103675. 

36. 
Rodríguez-Veiga A, Bellón B, Papadimitriou I, Esteban-Manzanares G, Sabirov I, Llorca 

J. A multidisciplinary approach to study precipitation kinetics and hardening in an Al-4Cu 

(wt. %) alloy. Journal of Alloys and Compounds. 2018;757:504-19. 

37. 
Byrne, J.G., M.E. Fine, and A. Kelly, Precipitate hardening in an aluminium-copper alloy. 

The Philosophical Magazine: A Journal of Theoretical Experimental and Applied 

Physics.1961. 6(69): p. 1119-1145. 


38 
 

38. 
Zhang P, Bian J-J, Yang C, Zhang J-Y, Liu G, Weiss J, et al. Plate-like precipitate effects 

on plasticity of Al-Cu micro-pillar: {100}-interfacial slip. Materialia. 2019;7:100416. 

39. 
Murayama, M., Z. Horita, and K. Hono, Microstructure of two-phase Al–1.7 at% Cu alloy 

deformed by equal-channel angular pressing. Acta Materialia, 2001;49(1):21-29. 

40. 
Price, R.J. and A. Kelly, Deformation of age-hardened aluminium alloy crystals—II. 

Fracture. Acta Metallurgica.1964;12(9):979-992. 

41. 
Bellón, B., S. Haouala, and J. Llorca, An analysis of the influence of the precipitate type 

on the mechanical behavior of Al - Cu alloys by means of micropillar compression tests. 

Acta Materialia. 2020;194:207-223. 

42. 
Zhang P, Bian J-J, Zhang J-Y, Liu G, Weiss J, Sun J. Plate-like precipitate effects on 

plasticity of Al-Cu alloys at micrometer to sub-micrometer scales. Materials & Design. 

2020;188:108444. 

43. 
X. Zhou, J. R. Mianroodi,  A. Kwiatkowski Da Silva, T. Koenig, G. B. Thompson, 

P. Shanthraj , D. Ponge, B. Gault, B. Svendsen,  D. Raabe . The hidden structure 

dependence of the chemical life of dislocations. Science Advances;2021;7;16. 

44. 
Plimpton, S., Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics. Journal of 

Computational Physics. 1995;117:1-19. 

45. 
Mendelev MI, Kramer MJ, Ott RT, Sordelet DJ, Yagodin D, Popel P. Development of 

suitable interatomic potentials for simulation of liquid and amorphous Cu–Zr alloys. 

Philosophical Magazine. 2009;89(11):967-87. 

46. 
Mishin, Y., M.J. Mehl, and D.A. Papaconstantopoulos, Embedded-atom potential 

for B2−NiAl. Physical Review B. 2002;65(22):224114. 

47. 
Cheng, Y.Q., E. Ma, and H.W. Sheng, Atomic Level Structure in Multicomponent Bulk 

Metallic Glass. Physical Review Letters. 2009;102(24):245501. 

48. 
Hu, Y. and T.J. Rupert, Atomistic modeling of interfacial segregation and structural 

transitions in ternary alloys. Journal of Materials Science. 2019;54(5):3975-3993. 

49. 
Hu, Y., J.D. Schuler, and T.J. Rupert, Identifying interatomic potentials for the accurate 

modeling of interfacial segregation and structural transitions. Computational Materials 

Science. 2018;148:10-20. 


39 
 

50. 
Stukowski, A., Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO–the 

Open Visualization Tool. Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering. 

2009;18(1):015012. 

51. 
Stukowski, A., V.V. Bulatov, and A. Arsenlis, Automated identification and indexing of 

dislocations in crystal interfaces. Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and 

Engineering. 2012;20(8):085007. 

52. 
Larsen, P.M., S. Schmidt, and J. Schiøtz, Robust structural identification via polyhedral 

template matching. Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering. 2016; 

24(5):055007. 

53. 
Yin S., Zuo Y., Abu-Odeh A., Hui Zheng, Xiang-Guo Li, Jun Ding, Shyue Ping Ong, Mark 

Asta, Robert O. Ritchie,  Atomistic simulations of dislocation mobility in refractory high-

entropy alloys and the effect of chemical short-range order. Nat Commun. 2021;12;4873.  

54. 
Sadigh B, Erhart P, Stukowski A, Caro A, Martinez E, Zepeda-Ruiz L. Scalable parallel 

Monte Carlo algorithm for atomistic simulations of precipitation in alloys. Physical Review 

B. 2012;85(18):184203. 

55. 
Kamimura, Y., K. Edagawa, and S. Takeuchi, Experimental evaluation of the Peierls 

stresses in a variety of crystals and their relation to the crystal structure. Acta Materialia. 

2013;61(1):294-309. 

56.  
Ogata, Ju Li, Sydney Yip. Ideal Pure Shear Strength of Aluminum and Copper. Science. 

2002;298;807. 

57. 
Li, J.C.M., C.R. Feng, and B.B. Rath, Emission of Dislocations from Grain Boundaries 

and Its Role in Nanomaterials. Crystals. 2021;11(1):41. 

58. 
Borovikov, V., M.I. Mendelev, and A.H. King, Effects of solutes on dislocation nucleation 

from grain boundaries. International Journal of Plasticity. 2017.;90:146-155. 

59. 
Li J, Chen S, Weng GJ, Liu C. Stress-assisted grain-rotation-induced dislocation emission 

from grain boundaries in nanocrystalline face-centered-cubic metals. Philosophical 

Magazine Letters. 2019;99(12):466-78. 

60. 
Van Swygenhoven, H., P.M. Derlet, and A. Hasnaoui, Atomic mechanism for dislocation 

emission from nanosized grain boundaries. Physical Review B, 2002. 66(2): p. 024101. 

61. 
Tschopp, M.A. and D.L. McDowell, Grain boundary dislocation sources in nanocrystalline 

copper. Scripta Materialia. 2008;58(4):299-302. 


40 
 

62. 
Spearot, D.E., K.I. Jacob, and D.L. McDowell, Dislocation nucleation from bicrystal 

interfaces with dissociated structure. International Journal of Plasticity. 2007;23(1):143-

160. 

63. 
Spearot, D.E., K.I. Jacob, and D.L. McDowell, Nucleation of dislocations from [001] 

bicrystal interfaces in aluminum. Acta Materialia. 2005;53(13):3579-3589. 

64. 
Spearot DE, Tschopp MA, Jacob KI, McDowell DL. Tensile strength of 〈100〉 and 〈

110〉 tilt bicrystal copper interfaces. Acta Materialia. 2007;55(2):705-14. 

65. 
Spearot, D.E., Evolution of the E structural unit during uniaxial and constrained tensile 

deformation. Mechanics Research Communications. 2008;35(1):81-88. 

66. 
Tschopp, M.A., D.E. Spearot, and D.L. McDowell, Chapter 82 - Influence of Grain 

Boundary Structure on Dislocation Nucleation in FCC Metals, in Dislocations in Solids, 

J.P. Hirth, Editor. 2008;Elsevier:43-139. 

67. 
Tschopp, M.A., G.J. Tucker, and D.L. McDowell, Atomistic simulations of tension–

compression asymmetry in dislocation nucleation for copper grain boundaries. 

Computational Materials Science. 2008;44(2):351-362. 

68. 
Cao, A., Y. Wei, and E. Ma, Grain boundary effects on plastic deformation and fracture 

mechanisms in Cu nanowires: Molecular dynamics simulations. Physical Review B. 2008; 

77(19):195429. 

69. 
Ovid’ko, I.A. and N.V. Skiba, Enhanced dislocation emission from grain boundaries in 

nanocrystalline materials. Scripta Materialia. 2012;67(1):13-16. 

70. 
Borovikov, V., M.I. Mendelev, and A.H. King, Effects of Ag and Zr solutes on dislocation 

emission from Σ11(332)[110] symmetric tilt grain boundaries in Cu: Bigger is not always 

better. International Journal of Plasticity. 2018;109:79-87. 

71. 
Courtney TH. Mechanical Behavior of Metals: Paperback; 2005. 733 p. 

72. 
Gornostyrev YN, Katsnelson MI. Misfit stabilized embedded nanoparticles in metallic 

alloys. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics. 2015;17(41):27249-57. 

73. 
Xu S, Su Y, Jian W-R, Beyerlein IJ. Local slip resistances in equal-molar MoNbTi multi-

principal element alloy. Acta Materialia. 2021;202:68-79. 

74. 
Van Swygenhoven H, Derlet PM, Frøseth AG. Nucleation and propagation of dislocations 

in nanocrystalline fcc metals. Acta Materialia. 2006;54(7):1975-83. 


41 
 

75. 
Ryu S, Kang K, Cai W. Entropic effect on the rate of dislocation nucleation. Proceedings 

of the National Academy of Sciences. 2011;108(13):5174-8. 

76. 
Jennings AT, Greer JR. Heterogeneous dislocation nucleation from surfaces and interfaces 

as governing plasticity mechanism in nanoscale metals. Journal of Materials Research. 

2011;26(22):2803-14. 

77. 
Oh SH, Legros M, Kiener D, Gruber P, Dehm G. In situ TEM straining of single crystal 

Au films on polyimide: Change of deformation mechanisms at the nanoscale. Acta 

Materialia. 2007;55(16):5558-71. 

78. 
Bei H, Gao YF, Shim S, George EP, Pharr GM. Strength differences arising from 

homogeneous versus heterogeneous dislocation nucleation. Physical Review B. 

2008;77(6):060103. 

79. 
Kuhr B, Farkas D. Dislocation content in random high angle grain boundaries. Modelling 

and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering. 2019;27(4):045005. 

80. 
Bitzek E, Brandl C, Weygand D, Derlet PM, Van Swygenhoven H. Atomistic simulation 

of a dislocation shear loop interacting with grain boundaries in nanocrystalline aluminium. 

Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering. 2009;17(5):055008. 

81. 
Budrovic Z, Van Swygenhoven H, Derlet PM, Van Petegem S, Schmitt B. Plastic 

Deformation with Reversible Peak Broadening in Nanocrystalline Nickel. Science. 

2004;304(5668):273-6. 

82. 
Kondo, H., M. Wakeda, and I. Watanabe, Atomic study on the interaction between 

superlattice screw dislocation and γ-Ni precipitate in γ′-Ni3Al intermetallics. 

Intermetallics. 2018;102:1-5. 

83. 
Kioussis, N.G. and N.M. Ghoniem, Modeling of Dislocation Interaction with Solutes, 

Nano-Precipitates and Interfaces: A Multiscale Challenge. Journal of Computational and 

Theoretical Nanoscience. 2010;7(8):1317-1346. 

84. 
Hocker, S., H. Lipp, and S. Schmauder, Precipitation, planar defects and dislocations in 

alloys: Simulations on Ni3Si and Ni3Al precipitates. The European Physical Journal 

Special Topics. 2019.;227(14):1559-1574. 

85. 
Harte A, Atkinson M, Smith A, Drouven C, Zaefferer S, Quinta da Fonseca J, et al. The 

effect of solid solution and gamma prime on the deformation modes in Ni-based 

superalloys. Acta Materialia. 2020;194:257-75. 


42 
 

86. 
Ducki, K.J., Structure and precipitation strengthening in a high-temperature Fe–Ni alloy. 

Archives of Materials Science and Engineering. 2007;28(4):203-210. 

87. 
Dey GK, Tewari R, Rao P, Wadekar SL, Mukhopadhyay P. Precipitation hardening in 

nickel-copper base alloy monel K 500. Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A. 

1993;24(12):2709-19. 

88. 
Oblak, J.M., D.F. Paulonis, and D.S. Duvall, Coherency strengthening in Ni base alloys 

hardened by by DO22 γ' precipitates. Metallurgical Transactions. 1974;5:143-153. 

89. 
Munjal, V. and A.J. Ardell, Precipitation hardening of Ni-12.19 at.% Al alloy single 

crystals. Acta Metallurgica. 1975;23(4):513-520. 

90. 
Nemoto M, Tian WH, Harada K, Han CS, Sano T. Microstructure of precipitation 

strengthened Ni3Al and TiAl. Materials Science and Engineering: A. 1992;152(1):247-

5295.  

91. 
Chen J, Lu L, Lu K. Hardness and strain rate sensitivity of nanocrystalline Cu. Scripta 

Materialia. 2006;54(11):1913-8. 

92. 
Cheng S, Spencer JA, Milligan WW. Strength and tension/compression asymmetry in 

nanostructured and ultrafine-grain metals. Acta Materialia. 2003;51(15):4505-18. 

93. 
Wu B, Heidelberg A, Boland JJ. Mechanical properties of ultrahigh-strength gold 

nanowires. Nature Materials. 2005;4(7):525-9. 

94. 
Kumar KS, Van Swygenhoven H, Suresh S. Mechanical behavior of nanocrystalline metals 

and alloys11The Golden Jubilee Issue—Selected topics in Materials Science and 

Engineering: Past, Present and Future, edited by S. Suresh. Acta Materialia. 

2003;51(19):5743-74. 

95. 
Roos B, Kapelle B, Richter G, Volkert CA. Surface dislocation nucleation controlled 

deformation of Au nanowires. Applied Physics Letters. 2014;105(20):201908. 

96. 
Richter G, Hillerich K, Gianola DS, Mönig R, Kraft O, Volkert CA. Ultrahigh Strength 

Single Crystalline Nanowhiskers Grown by Physical Vapor Deposition. Nano Letters. 

2009;9(8):3048-52. 

97. 
Gall K, Diao J, Dunn ML. The Strength of Gold Nanowires. Nano Letters. 

2004;4(12):2431-6. 


43 
 

98. 
Cortés A, Lavín R, Denardin JC, Marotti RE, Dalchiele EA, Valdivia P, et al. Template 

assisted electrochemical growth of cobalt nanowires: influence of deposition conditions on 

structural, optical and magnetic properties. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2011;11(5):3899-910. 

99. 
Wu Y, Yang P. Direct Observation of Vapor−Liquid−Solid Nanowire Growth. Journal of 

the American Chemical Society. 2001;123(13):3165-6. 

100. 
Hugo RC, Kung H, Weertman JR, Mitra R, Knapp JA, Follstaedt DM. In-situ TEM tensile 

testing of DC magnetron sputtered and pulsed laser deposited Ni thin films. Acta 

Materialia. 2003;51(7):1937-43. 

101. 
Kumar KS, Suresh S, Chisholm MF, Horton JA, Wang P. Deformation of electrodeposited 

nanocrystalline nickel. Acta Materialia. 2003;51(2):387-405. 

102. 
Li X, Long H, Zhang J, Ma D, Kong D, Lu Y, et al. Direct observation of the grain 

boundaries acting as dislocation sources in nanocrystalline platinum. Materials 

Characterization. 2021;181:111493. 

103. 
J. Veerababu, Ubaid Manzoor, G.Sainath, Sunil Goyal, R. Sandhya. Deformation behavior 

of Cu nanowire with axial stacking fault. Mater. Res. Express. 2019:6:075056. 

 

 

 
 


