1

Perspective on first-principles studies of 2D materials

Asha Yadav1, Carlos Mera Acosta2, Gustavo M. Dalpian2*, Oleksandr I. Malyi1*

1ENSEMBLE3 Centre of Excellence, Wolczynska 133, 01-919 Warsaw, Poland

2Centro de Ciências Naturais e Humanas, Universidade Federal do ABC, 09210-580 Santo André, São 

Paulo, Brazil

Emails: gustavo.dalpian@ufabc.edu.br (G. D), oleksandrmalyi@gmail.com (O.I.M)

Abstract 

The successful exfoliation of graphene from graphite has brought significant attention to predicting 

new two-dimensional (2D) materials that can be realized experimentally. As a consequence, first-

principles studies of novel 2D materials become a routine, with thousands of papers published every 

year. What makes these studies interesting is that they predict new materials which have not been 

realized yet but should be a panacea for topological insulators, next-generation battery materials, 

novel solar cell materials, etc. There is no doubt that some of the proposed materials can provide a 

specific solution and their properties/performance can be confirmed experimentally, at the same time 

there are many false predictions because of the computational errors or the Lego-land approach to 

study 2D materials. To reduce the gap between theoretical and experimental works, we perform a 

systematic review of computational and Lego-land factors that should be minimized in future 

theoretical works.  


2

1. Introduction

With the development of nanotechnology and the reduction of the dimensionality of the compounds, 
two-dimensional (2D) materials – nanosystems having one of the dimensions significantly smaller than 
others have been discovered. This field has become especially prominent with the successful 
exfoliation of single-layer graphene from its bulk counterpart (i.e., graphite) using a scotch-tape 
method.1 Since that time, at least in the theoretical literature, it has been common to refer 2D 
compounds as single-freestanding 2D layers. However, while some compounds can indeed be 
exfoliated as a single freestanding layer (e.g., phosphorene2,3, h-BN4,5, and MoS26) many others can 
only be made 2D when grown on a substrate or having a very large thickness (e.g., silicene can only be 
stabilized on a specific substrate, and all attempts to stabilize it as freestanding materials have been 
unsuccessful7). Such experimental results imply that it is likely that the formation of freestanding vs on 
substrate 2D materials can be understood from the intrinsic properties of 2D materials (like energetics) 
as the formation of a 2D material require breaking weak interlayer van der Waals (vdW) (rarely 
chemical) bonds in the bulk compound to separate a single layer. For 2D materials on a substrate, the 
latter can act as a stabilizing agent, often results in chemical bonding between the substrate and 2D 
material8. Hence, if the isolation energy of 2D material is larger than the threshold value, it is unlikely 
that the compound can be realized in a freestanding form (discussed below). 
What makes 2D materials exciting is that dimension reduction results in intrinsic anisotropy, quantum 
confinement effect, and exotic exciton physics that are not available in their bulk counterparts 
(discussed below). Additionally, owing to the vdW nature of the interaction between the layers, the 
properties of 2D materials can be controlled by tuning interlayer stacking9 or combining different 2D 
materials in the heterostructures.10 Since the experimental synthesis of 2D materials is largely based 
on a trial-and-error approach (i.e., the Edisonian approach), the first-principles studies have entered 
the field with investigations of already synthesized materials and theoretical predictions of hundreds 
of new 2D materials and their properties. Such works already suggested many potential new 2D 
compounds and even led to the development of general-purpose open-access databases such as 
2DMatPedia11,  Computational 2D materials database12,13 (C2DB), Materials Cloud two-dimensional 
crystals database14, and MaterialsWeb15 and also property-specific high throughput collections for 
spin-splittings16
and magnetic properties17. Even with this kind of organization, the 

theoretical/computational literature in the field is somewhat chaotic. For instance, one often can 
question if the studied 2D materials are experimentally realizable or if sufficiently accurate methods 
have been used to predict the compounds. While the above questions can be related not only 
specifically to 2D materials,18,19 the case of 2D materials is somewhat more special. First, for bulk three-
dimensional (3D) materials, there are already well-defined experimental databases with crystal 
structures as verified with different methods for structural analysis, and the stability criteria are 
somewhat known (e.g., see, for instance, OQMD20,21, Materials Project22, and AFLOW23). However, for 
2D materials, despite some ground-breaking work, the majority of current theoretical investigations 
are still focused on "created by hand" 2D compounds, which often do not have bulk analogous and for 
which realizability is never discussed. Moreover, the description of 2D materials often requires proper 
treatment of vdW forces which cannot be done based on the most widely used exchange-correlation
(XC) functionals (e.g., Perdew–Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE)24). Finally, the properties of 2D materials in a 
plane-wave approach are described with periodic boundary conditions - meaning that the 2D materials 
are modeled with the periodic cell having an introduced vacuum in one direction (see calculations of 


3

optical properties described below). All these, thus, results in questioning how the properties of the 
materials should be investigated and if one can simply adapt the methods used for the bulk compounds 
to the 2D materials for the analysis. Motivated by this, herein, we provide a comprehensive overview 
of the recent progress in the first-principles investigation of 2D materials, demonstrating the above 
questions and suggesting best practices for accurate descriptions of the properties of 2D materials. In 
Sec. II, we will describe some key properties of 2D materials and how they should be described. In Sec. 
III., we will overview recent progress on predicting novel 2D materials and their properties. The 
summary and perspective for density functional theory (DFT) studies of 2D materials are given in Sec. 
IV.

2. Exciting materials properties enabled in 2D systems and best first-principles 

practices to describe them

2.1. New features in electronic properties of 2D materials: Formation of 2D materials results in bond 
breaking (usually weak vdW or rarely chemical bonds), which can lead to a totally new electronic 
structure, unlike their bulk counterparts. For instance, bulk MoS2 (space group (SG): P63/mmc) is an 
insulator with indirect band gap energy of 0.91 eV with valence band maximum (VBM) located at Γ
while conduction band minimum (CBM) between Γ and K as shown in Fig. 1a, while its monolayer is a 
direct band gap insulator with the band gap energy of 1.9 eV as calculated by using DFT-D225 (see Fig. 
1b). Such a change of electronic properties is caused by kinetic-energy controlled quantum 
confinement and potential-energy controlled band localization/repulsion26 and is a common feature 
of the 2D materials. For instance, the band gap energy of phosphorene changes from 1.46-1.59  to 
0.33-0.87 eV as the number of layers increases from one to five layers (Fig. 1c), which is consistent 
with experimental trends.27

Common problems in the description of fundamental properties of vdW systems: While the above 

results demonstrate the examples of successful description of experimentally observed electronic 

properties of 2D materials within the first-principles calculations, most widely used XC functionals have 

some fundamental limitations in their description: (i) similar to bulk materials, an accurate description 

of the electronic structure requires use of XC functional which has reduced self-interaction error; 28 (ii) 

modern XC functionals (e.g., PBEsol29 and strongly constrained and appropriately normed (SCAN)30

meta-GGA) and even hybrid functionals (e.g., Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) functional31) are still 

unable to describe the vdW forces accurately; (iii) Recently, developed methods for accounting of vdW 

forces are based on the soft XC functionals (deviating from linear Koopman's condition32), which thus 

suggest that there is no single unified method that is able to describe both structural and electronic 

properties of 2D materials with high accuracy. To better illustrate points (i-iii), let us consider the 

example of bilayer phosphorene, which has weak interlayer bonding. When the PBE XC functional is 

used for both structural relaxation and the band gap calculations, one finds that the band gap energy 

is 0.29 eV with the interlayer distance is 3.50 Å which is significantly different from the HSE band gap 

energy of 1.22 eV calculated for the same structure (i.e., one obtained from PBE relaxation)33. 

Importantly, using PBE functional results in significant overestimation of interlayer distance as 

compared to the methods able to accurately describe vdW forces, which is essential for calculations 

of band gap energy (Fig. 1d). For instance, interlayer distance in bilayer phosphorene is 3.50 and 3.09


4

Å with PBE and optB88-vdW XC functionals, respectively33. One may naively think that the treatment 

problem of vdW systems refers only to multilayer systems. However, the band gap energy of 

monolayer phosphorene is sensitive to the treatment of vdW forces. Thus, the HSE band gap energy 

for the PBE relaxed phosphorene structure is 1.62 eV, while the corresponding value for structure 

relaxed with optB86b-vdW34 functional is 1.46 eV. This is not surprising as the phosphorene has a 

buckled honeycomb lattice structure with coexisting low and high electron density regions for which,

accounting non-local correlation is vital for structural relaxation. 

Figure 1. Atom projected electronic band structure of MoS2 in (a) bulk and (b) monolayer form. The blue and red colored 

bands in the band structure represent S and Mo projections, respectively. Fig. (a) and (b) are adapted with permission from 


5

ref26 Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. HSE electronic band gap calculated as a function of (c) the number of 

layers using different XC functionals for internal relaxation of bilayer phosphorene and (d) as a function of interlayer 

distance. The inset in Fig.(d) represents the interlayer distance in bilayer phosphorene. Fig (c) and (d) are reproduced from 

Ref.33 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.

What is the best practice for first-principles calculation of vdW systems: Taking into account the 
above limitations of the existing DFT methodology, the internal structure of the compound should be 
described with the XC functionals that, in general, are able to capture the vdW forces accurately. While 
the electronic structure should be analyzed for structures relaxed usingvdW corrected functional with 
accurate methods to describe electronic structure (e.g., hybrid functional31 and GW35). However, the 
open question is what is the most accurate way to describe vdW bonded systems as there is a range 
of vdW functionals already developed. For instance, the DFT-D approach25,36,37 has been developed as 

a way to add an empirical correction (i.e., 𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝 = −𝑠6 ∑
∑

𝐶6𝑖𝑗
𝑅𝑖𝑗

6 𝑓𝑑𝑚𝑝(𝑅𝑖𝑗)
𝑁𝑎𝑡
𝑗=𝑖+1

𝑁𝑎𝑡−1
𝑖=1
, where 𝑠6 is the global 

scaling factor and summations indicate the sum over all 𝑁𝑎𝑡 atoms of the unit cell, 𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝 and 𝐶6𝑖𝑗 are 

the vdW-dispersion corrected energy term and dispersion coefficient corresponding to pair of atoms i 
and j, respectively, 𝑓𝑑𝑚𝑝(𝑅𝑖𝑗) is the damping function used to account near-singularity value of 

𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑝 for a small value of 𝑅𝑖𝑗 (interatomic distance between pair of atoms I and j) that scales the 
interaction between atoms i and j) on top of already widely used functional. This method has been 
widely used to model 2D materials and often can predict relatively good interlayer distance. However, 
it has a significant drawback as the 𝐶6𝑖𝑗 coefficient is independent of the nature of chemical bonding 
(at least in the first versions of DFT-D), and consequently, the empirical correction by itself does not 
directly account for the charge density distribution in the compound. This thus suggests that often one 
can get the correct interlayer distance but for the wrong reason. The second type of approach has 
been developed via including non-local correlation term to the XC functional38–44 (i.e., 𝐸𝑐𝑛𝑙 = 
1
2 ∫ 𝑑3𝑟𝑑3𝑟′𝑛(𝑟)𝛷0(𝑟, 𝑟′)𝑛(𝑟′), where 𝐸𝑐𝑛𝑙, 𝑛(𝑟) and 𝛷0(𝑟, 𝑟′) are non-local correlation energy correction,

total electron density and correlation kernel). The main fundamental advantage of this approach over 
DFT-D is that the non-local correlation term is electron density-dependent45 and, in principle, allows 
to account for charge-density rearrangements caused by vdW interaction. So far, a range of vdW-DF 
functionals have been developed including vdW-DF038–41, vdW-DF142,43, vdW-DF244, (opt-PBE-vdW, 
optB88-vdW, optB86b-vdW)34,46 and vdW-DF-cx47. All these functionals have some advantages and 
disadvantages. However, more recent comparison of vdW-DF results with diffusion quantum Monte-
Carlo indicates that there is no single treatment of vdW forces at the first-principles level that allows 
to correctly reproduce charge-density distribution in bilayer phosphorene48. Taking into account these 
results, from our perspective, one should still use vdW-DF functional (unless more advanced methods 
are developed) but make sure that the predicted results are not highly sensitive to the choice of the 
vdW-DF functional. If the results become too sensitive to the different treatments of vdW forces, then 
one should honestly admit that first-principles calculations do not have the prediction power needed 
to describe the corresponding effect.  

2.2. Optical/dielectric properties of 2D materials: Similar to the case of bulk materials, the optical 

properties of 2D materials are one of the most fundamental properties. What makes 2D materials 

unique is the strong excitonic effects-Coulomb interaction between electron excited to the conduction 


6

band and hole present in the valence band (Fig. 2a) modifies the optical properties of 2D systems

drastically. Theoretical studies predict the exciton binding energy of about 0.5-1 eV for 2D transition 

metal dichalcogenides49, which is comparable with recent experimental results.50 In particular, for 

phosphorene and 2D-MoSe2, the exciton binding energies determined as differences of electronic and 

optical band gaps (see Fig. 2b) were reported to be around 0.951 and 0.55 eV52, respectively. This 

energy is big enough for exciton observation even at room temperature, allowing to design 

fundamentally new devices utilizing excitonic effects.50 Taking into account electron-hole interaction 

is highly sensitive to the screening environment, it is possible to control the excitons by using different 

substrates, encapsulation, etc., opening the possibility for their programming.53,54

Figure 2. Schematic representation of (a) exciton in 2D material and (b) exciton binding energy. (c) Convergence of exciton 
binding energy calculated using the Bethe-Salpeter equation in a monolayer of MoS2 with respect to k-point grid. The red 
point in the plot and inset in (c) shows k-point sampling overestimating exciton binding energy from the extrapolated value 
by 0.06 eV. Fig (c) is adapted from ref. 12 and used under the basis of Creative Commons License.


7

Common problems in the description of optoelectronic/dielectric properties of 2D materials: For bulk 

compounds, dielectric properties of a given compound can be described with sufficient accuracy using, 

for 
instance, 
density 
functional 
perturbation 
theory55–58
or/and 
independent 
particle 

approximation.59,60 However, both methods cannot account for the excitonic effect, and hence the 

Bethe-Salpeter equation61–64 should be used. Second, both methods have been developed for bulk 

materials where the materials properties (e.g., volume) are defined by atomic identities, composition, 

and structure (Fig. 3a). However, within periodic boundary conditions, the 2D material is described as 

a slab with a vacuum of large thickness (Fig. 3b) where the amount of vacuum directly affects results. 

An example of imaginary part of dielectric function is shown in Fig. 3c for the case of a single MoS2
layer, where the variation of vacuum thickness results in the vacuum volume-dependent dielectric 

function (and hence absorption spectra, not shown here). Such naive application of the DFT theory 

towards the calculation of optical properties is indeed a common mistake in the field, and rarely optical 

calculations are carried out correctly. 

What is the best practice for first-principles calculations: We strongly believe that one should never 
use/present dielectric function data for 2D materials predicted without the volume correction as such 
data can mislead others and lead to unphysical conclusions (e.g., unphysical device performance) at 
least for the cases when the focus is on optical properties. The question remains however how to 
properly account for such correction. Generally, the macroscopic dielectric function of a material 
generated as a result of external plane-wave 𝑉0𝑒𝑖𝑞.𝑟 potential can be given as65

1

ɛ𝑀(𝑞)

= < 𝑉𝑞̃ >𝛺

𝑉0

= ɛ𝐺𝐺′

−1 (𝑞) = ɛ00

−1(𝑞)

where G, q, ɛ𝑀(𝑞), and ɛ00

−1(𝑞) are reciprocal lattice vector, wave vector in the first Brillouin zone, 

macroscopic, and microscopic dielectric function, respectively. < 𝑉𝑞̃ >𝛺 is the lattice periodic function 
averaged over a unit cell. However, generalization of ɛ𝑀(𝑞) to low dimensional systems like 2D 
materials leads to potential averaging over the whole vacuum plus slab region. Thus, extending bulk 
methods to 2D material will be misleading. A different way of averaging over the slab region is 
proposed in ref 65 as 

1

ɛ𝑀

2𝑑(𝑞||) = 2

𝑑 ∑ 𝑒𝑖𝐺⊥𝑧0 sin(𝐺⊥ 𝑑 2
⁄ )

𝐺⊥
𝐺⊥

ɛ𝐺0

−1(𝑞||)

where 𝑧0 is the centre of the slab with the thickness d of the slab. 𝑞|| corresponds to 𝑞 confined to 
the plane of the slab. The summation is carried over all the 𝐺 components with 𝐺|| = 0. This method 
calculates macroscopic dielectric function by accounting contributions from only slab part excluding 
vacuum. In addition to this, another alternative method to incorporate volume correction is to use the 
volume of the slab excluding the vacuum part (𝛺2𝐷, e.g., average volume per layer in the bulk form of 
the material) instead of the volume of the whole cell containing 2D materials (i.e., 𝛺3𝐷)66 as shown in 
the Fig. 3b,3d. In this way, one first needs to define the thickness of 2D materials and then calculate 
the corresponding imaginary part of the dielectric function. This simple approximation allows to solve 
the problem of dielectric function dependence on vacuum thickness. We note, however, that this 
method should be used with caution especially when different definitions of the thickness of 2D 
materials affect the main conclusions. Another important part of the calculation of the optical 


8

properties involves accounting for the role of excitons, which can be done using the Bethe-Salpeter 
equation.61–64 From a practical point of view, one should remember that exciton binding energy is 
highly sensitive to k-point density (Fig. 2c), hence in principle, improper selection of k-points may have 
a dramatic influence on optical property due to its non-analytic nature at a lower density of k points. 

Figure 3. Side views of (a) bulk MoS2 (b) monolayer MoS2. Here, 𝐸|| and 𝐸⊥ are the parallel and perpendicular components

of electric field. Imaginary part of the dielectric function (ɛ2(𝜔)) of MoS2 calculated using independent particle

approximation for different vacuum thicknesses (c) without including volume correction (d) with including volume 

correction. In the equation of ɛ2(𝜔), 𝛺, 𝜔, h, e, and m are cell volume, angular frequency, Plank's constant, charge and 

mass of the electron, respectively. 𝐸𝑖(𝑘) is the energy level for a given wavevector k. Here, i and f correspond to initial and 

final state, respectively. 𝑀𝛼𝛽 is a square matrix with momentum elements in crystal directions α and β. Volume correction 


9

in Fig (d) is accounted by multiplying ɛ2(𝜔), with 𝛺3𝐷 and then normalized by 𝛺2𝐷(calculated by assuming that each 

monolayer layer in the cell occupies a space equal to the van der Waals distance between layers).

3. Prediction of novel 2D materials and their properties 

3.1. General strategies for the search of novel 2D materials 

Since the discovery of graphene, an enormous number of works have been published on predicting 

novel 2D materials. While the initial works were mainly focused on the investigation of graphene 

analogs (e.g., silicene, phosphorene, and h-BN), more recently, the rise of the area of materials 

discovery and design has opened a broad avenue for the prediction and development of new, 

undiscovered 2D materials. These include the development of dedicated 2D materials databases11–17

where thousands of different compounds can be found, together with many of their calculated 

properties, and the development of theoretical/computational strategies for predicting new, not yet 

synthesized materials. One can classify these strategies into two different fashions, similar to what is 

done in nanostructures: bottom-up or top-down approach. In the bottom-up approach, the idea is to 

substitute the chemical elements of a known compound (e.g., MoS2) by other elements with similar 

electronic structures, creating compounds such as MoTe2 or WS2. In the top-down approach, one starts 

from bulk materials and looks for compounds that could be, in principle, exfoliable. Different 

algorithms used to explore 2D materials from its bulk counter part are discussed below. 

The first-generation algorithms for searching of exfoliable 2D materials involve analysis of the stacking 

of atomic planes in some specific directions in the unit cell of a bulk compound. This can be either the 

c lattice vector, which is usually the longer one or a set of directions in which the algorithm loops. The 

simpler way is to use a linear combination of lattice vectors. These algorithms search for a plane which

can be separated as a monolayer from its bulk counterpart, i.e., exfoliate, accounting for chemical 

bonding among these planes through determined criteria, e.g., the sum of covalent or vdW atomic 

radius plus a tolerance factor. Using this kind of methodology, one can easily find exfoliable materials 

that belong to similar classes as graphene. However, this method can easily miss materials that are 

buckled or with some rough patterns inside their crystal structure. To solve this problem, a second-

generation algorithm was created - Instead of evaluating atomic planes along fixed directions, these 

methods analyze the network of connections that form a bonded cluster in the bulk material. Once 

these clusters are identified by measuring the distance among atoms, the existence of layered patterns 

is determined by one of the two methodologies: topology-scaling algorithms (TSA)15 or rank 

determination algorithms (RDA)14. TSA takes into account the rate of how the bonded cluster grows 

when the cell uniformly increases in size. For instance, an original bonded cluster in a structure 

contains N1 atoms. The same cluster inside a supercell of nnn unit cells will contain N2 atoms. By 

analyzing the ratio of N2/N1, it is possible to determine the dimensionality (d) of such cluster by 

expecting this ratio. The RDA algorithm also analyzes bonded clusters embedded inside supercells, but 

the dimensionality is determined by the rank of the matrix composed by the coordinates of a given 

atom and its periodic images that belong to the same cluster. For instance, if a given cluster of atoms 

is set to form a 2D monolayer, a set of just two linear independent vectors can be chosen to map any 

atom coordinate to its periodic images in the same cluster, disregarding the orientation of such cluster 


10

in Cartesian space. Such methodologies can automatically account for rough patterns inside the 

crystal. However, this kind of methodology still has some drawbacks since it relies on fixed criteria for 

finding atoms that are bonded together, forming the clusters. 

The third generation of algorithms relaxes the constraint of using a fixed parameter to determine the 
dimensionality of a specific compound.67 The concept involves the determination of a scoring 
parameter that will indicate the degree of dimensionality (the degree of "1D-ness," "2D-ness," etc.) of 
the material. These different strategies have been applied to 3D materials databases such as the 
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD)68 and the Crystallography Open Database69 (COD), ranking 
the materials according to their degree of dimensionality. The different algorithms described above 
provide a powerful basis for the discovery and design of new 2D materials, leading to the construction 
of large materials databases as described in the section below.  As these methods only account for the 
crystal structure of materials, straightforward questions can be raised regarding their stability and 
synthesizability. 

3.2. Different 2D materials databases
The advent of computational repositories significantly changed the way the computational materials 
science area advances. The basic properties of all synthesized inorganic materials have already been 
calculated and reported,20,22,23 including in many cases band structures, formation energies, phase 
diagrams, and even some stress tensors. The popularity of these inorganic materials databases has 
opened opportunities for other, smaller, databases focused on materials with specific properties,
including databases on 2D materials such as the  2DMatPedia11, C2DB12,13, Materials Cloud two-
dimensional crystals database14 and MaterialsWeb15 to mention a few. These databases mainly 
followed some type of high-throughput or machine learning (ML) approach (discussed below) that 
reported the properties for thousands of unique 2D entries, some of which have been synthesized and 
the majority of which are new theoretical predictions. For instance, the C2DB reported around 4000 
unique entries, all generated compounds follow the strategy shown in Figure 4a. These hypothetical 
materials then pass through a complex automated workflow (Figure 4b) where ab initio calculations 
are performed, and materials properties are calculated. In this step, the stability of materials is 
evaluated through the formation enthalpies and the simplified convex hull (i.e., using bulk OQMD data 
directly compared to corresponding energies of 2D materials in the C2DB). The development of these 
2D materials databases certainly represents a major advance towards the design and discovery of new 
materials. However, even though the advances have been enormous during the last few years, a few 
challenges still remain. These challenges will be discussed below. 


11

Figure 4: (a) General strategy used to generate entries in the C2DB database. (b) Detailed description of the C2DB workflow. 
Fig (a) and (b) extracted from ref12 and used under the basis of Creative Commons License.

3.3. ML prediction for 2D materials 
ML has been intensively explored in recent years and extended to all possible areas of materials 
sciences and condensed matter, naturally, including study of 2D materials. In this context, the 
development, application, and utility of ML techniques are usually focused on (i) the prediction of 
novel 2D material prototypes (Fig. 5),70 (ii) the design of compounds with target properties such as 


12

ferroelectricity, topology, and magnetic order71–73, and (iii) the regression and classification of 
materials properties such as bandgap, conductivity, topology, and spin-polarization74. The current 
stage of the ML application to 2D materials also includes the study of external perturbations such as 
strain and electric field and patterns of properties under the compositional and structural changes71,75. 
In this section, we cover the recent ML progress in 2D materials, which can be divided into two big 
categories (i) materials prediction and (ii) prediction and optimization of materials properties.

Prediction of novel 2D materials: The early works of ML for the prediction of  2D materials are based 
on the global optimization approach.76 Examples include the genetic algorithm for structure searching 
combined with DFT calculations to identify low-energy 2D structures of group-IV dioxides AO2 (A=Si, 
Ge, Sn, Pb).77 Bahmann and Kortus developed an evolutionary algorithm that can search for 2D 
crystals78, and Zhou et al.79 extended an evolutionary algorithm to search for 2D structures. Both 
algorithms help to search for structures with fixed stoichiometry and the number of atoms per cell. 
Luo et al. extended a particle swarm optimization algorithm to search for fixed stoichiometry 2D 
structures that are both completely planar80 and have finite-layer thicknesses.81 Recently, Song et al.82, 
proposed a deep learning generative model for composition generation combined with random forest-
based 2D materials classifier to discover new hypothetical 2D materials, also using element 
substitution structure to predict newly predicted hypothetical formulas. The authors reported 267,489 
new potential 2D materials compositions and confirmed twelve 2D layered materials by DFT formation 
energy calculation. With the goal of discovering novel 2D materials with unusual compositions and 
structures not limited or based only on pre-existing prototypes. Revard et al. developed a grand-
canonical evolutionary algorithm that searches the structural and compositional space while 
constraining the thickness of the structures.83

Figure 5. Schematic diagram to illustrate machine learning method to generate a number of 2D compounds having fixed 
crystal symmetry and Wyckoff positions using a bottom-up approach. This fig is inspired by ref.73


13

Besides the theoretical prediction of hypothetical 2D compounds based on the genetic algorithm and 
neural networks, another strategy is focused on the direct prediction of the target properties that 
define the potential existence of a 2D materials candidate, e.g., the energy above the convex hull, 
formation energy, decomposition temperature, phonon spectrum, and melting temperature. This 
allows for directly predicting the thermodynamic stability with respect to competitive phases and 
dynamic stability. For instance, Mortazavi et al. proposed a machine-learning model for interatomic 
potentials trained with computationally ab-initio molecular dynamics trajectories that in contrast to 
DFT simulations eliminates the nonphysical imaginary frequencies in the phonon dispersion curves.84

Using this method, the authors calculated the phonon dispersion and dynamical stability of novel 2D 
compounds. To generate a predictive ML model for thermodynamic stability, Schleder et al. classified 
compounds into high, medium and low stabilities based on DFT-calculated formation energy and 
energy above the convex hull.70

Prediction of 2D materials with target properties: As previously described, sometimes one wishes to 
predict compounds with a specific target property aiming for potential applications. The ML then not 
only gives a reasonable fitting for the target functionality but also allows for predicting novel 2D crystal 
symmetries and atomic combinations that optimize the target property. Thus, the ML algorithm aims 
to learn specific functionalities that are not necessarily related to compound stability; however, it is 
naturally desirable to predict compounds with a given functionality that are also thermodynamically 
and dynamically stable. This is not always the case, since the complete verification of the stability in 
2D compounds is a complex (but necessary) task85, as previously discussed. The ML prediction of 
compounds with target functionalities includes the discovery of potential 2D ferroelectric metals71 , 
2D hybrid perovskite materials with large bandgaps86, the topological order in 2D toy models87 as well 
as the prediction of 2D quantum spin Hall insulators88, 2D magnets89,  optoelectronic transitions.90 The 
works that involve the prediction of materials using training data calculated using approximations (e.g., 
DFT, quantum monte Carlo, or molecular dynamics), will always implicitly be the bias product of these 
approximations.This fact must always be considered since the approximations are made to learn 
theoretical relationships and that the exotic effects predicted theoretically within a set of 
approximations need not exist in normal environmental conditions.

3.4. Limitations of the majority of current 2D works
Despite the enormous progress that has been carried out on the first-principles exploration of novel 
2D materials, there is still a question regarding the realization of theoretical predictions. In fact, the 
majority of 2D works still report properties of 2D materials created by hands (Lego-land approach, e.g., 
the substitution of C atoms in graphene by Si91 or using some experimentally reported structures to 
guess other 2D  materials92 ). This eventually leads to the situation when many different groups report 
2D materials having the same composition and totally different electronic properties (e.g., SiP93–96). 
Even the 2D materials databases reviewed above, despite their seminal nature, cannot provide 
sufficient information on materials realization. For 3D materials, we know (or at least assume) that 
prediction of the convex hull (e.g., full exploration of competing phases of compounds) and 
investigation of dynamic stability can provide some information on materials realization. Thus, if the 
compound is located above the convex hull - tends to decompose, it is unlikely to be realized if its 
decomposition energy is lower than some threshold value.97–99 For 2D materials, however, despite 
some works on the realization criteria (including the open-access databases), there are still no 


14

universally accepted guidelines to describe the realizability of predicted 2D materials. So let us discuss 
some of the typical criteria used in the literature. 

Phonon stability: The absence of imaginary (negative) phonons is the most widely used criterion to 
analyze the "stability" of 2D materials in the DFT literature. Here, the presence of imaginary 
frequencies indicates that the energy of the system can be lowered by a set of specific atomic 
displacements, and hence it cannot be realized experimentally. To demonstrate the power of this 
method, we consider the example of 2D-NbS2, which is predicted to be a phonon-unstable system, as 
shown in Fig. 6c,d. For the compounds which are phonon stable, there are no imaginary phonons, as 
shown on the example of 2D-MoSe2 in Fig. 6a,b. Interestingly, that description of phonon spectra can 
be used not only to claim the phonon unstable systems but also to predict potential compounds having 
phonon stable spectra, as for instance has been demonstrated by the method of Stokes and Hatch.100

For 2D materials , the phonon stability filter is the cheapest among the ones discussed in this work and 
the most widely used in the field. For instance, Mounet et al. provided phonon band structures for a 
large set of compounds in their open-access database.14 However, in contrast to many other papers, 
we believe that the phonon filter does not allow us to discuss if the compound is dynamically stable or 
not, as strictly speaking phonon calculations only account for small atomic displacements without large 
structural rearrangements. Hence, while the phonon filter is important for predicting realizable 2D 
materials, it is only one of the criteria.  

Figure 6. Application of phonon stability filter for 2D materials. (a) top and side view of 2D-MoSe2 and (b) phonon band 
structure of stable materials having no imaginary frequencies. (c) top and side view of 2d-NbS2 and (d) phonon band 
structure of unstable material having imaginary phonon (shown as negative phonon frequencies). Reprinted with 
permission from Ref.85. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 


15

Dynamic stability: In nature, the equilibrium state of the system is found by minimizing the Gibbs free 
energy at the corresponding temperature and pressure.101 In computational solid state physics, such 
equilibrium state can be predicted by ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations accounting for 
their specific limitations: 
(i) AIMD is limited in time of simulations: Since the AIMD simulation is limited to a few hundred of 
picoseconds (ps), one cannot expect that the system will reach its equilibrium starting at a specific 
temperature within the typical simulation time. To overcome this problem, AIMD studies should be
performed at a few different temperatures, and one should monitor energy and distribution of 
structural motifs to extract the evolution of the system. If the energy of the system can be reduced 
within a few ps at any temperature, it means that the system is unlikely to be realized experimentally. 
Fig. 7a demonstrates the example of the system where, at a low temperature (Fig. 7b), the system's
energy is not lowered during the simulation time. However, AIMD simulation for the system at higher 
temperatures (Fig. 7c) results in substantial energy lowering suggesting that the compound cannot be 
realized as a 2D material. 

Figure 7. Temperature-dependent dynamical stability of 2D SiS system. (a) 2D SiS structure made from phosphorene 
structure (layer group pm2_1n) obtained by replacing P by Si and S atoms. Potential energy profile for AIMD simulation at 
(b) 300K (c) 600K. The insets of Fig. (b) and (c) provide the temperature protocol throughout the AIMD simulations. (d) 
Formation energy of the structure taken at various time steps of AIMD simulation. Reprinted with permission from Ref.85. 
Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 


16

(ii) Energy profile: The potential energy of a system during an AIMD run with NVT (amount of substance 
(N), volume (V) and temperature (T) conserved) ensemble always fluctuates. This eventually can lead 
to the situation when energy lowering during AIMD runs cannot be visually seen from the potential 
energy profile. Indeed, the majority of modern AIMD simulations are initialized by some kind of 
random velocity distribution corresponding to the specific temperature - AIMD simulation profile for 
2D materials usually includes both equilibration and production run at the same time. This eventually 
can lead to the situation when visually insignificant energy lowering symmetry breaking can be 
mistakenly ignored. Hence, to ensure the dynamic stability of 2D materials, one should explore the 
energetics of AIMD configurations (Fig. 7d). For instance, one can extract several snapshots and 
perform static DFT energy minimization for all of them. The proposed 2D material can be only 
dynamically stable if the energy of the configuration obtained at different time steps are not lower 
than that of the initial configuration.

Energetic stability: If a given compound satisfies the phonon and dynamic stability filters, one may 
wonder how much energy it costs to form the 2D material and if it can be done with the typical 
methods. For instance, Zhu et al.102 stated that the proposed 2D material is stable if it has negative 
cohesive energy. Indeed, negative cohesive energy suggests that a compound does not decompose to 
individual atoms spontaneously, but it has rather limited meaning as most compounds have negative 
cohesive energy. Other works suggest that if the formation heat of a compound is negative, it is 
thermodynamically stable.103 Obviously, if the formation heat of a compound is positive, it is unlikely 
that the compound can be synthesized. However, the negative formation heat is also not the true 
descriptor for the compound to be synthesized (see discussion in ref.85). For bulk systems, the 
realizability of the compounds is usually discussed in the language of the energy convex hull - where 
the compounds on the convex hull or close to the convex hull can potentially be synthesized. Indeed, 
the majority of the experimentally synthesized compounds have the energy above convex hull less 
than 100-150 meV/atom.99

Assuming that some instability (i.e., energy above convex hull) can be realized, one can estimate the 
threshold energy above which potential 2D materials can be considered as unstable by calculation of 
maximum energy above convex hull for already synthesized single layers of freestanding 2D 
compounds (Fig. 8). This threshold energy is expected to be different for different XC functionals (e.g., 
one accounting for vdW and not accounting for vdW correction). However, surprisingly within a small 
dataset of 2D materials, it turns out that the maximum value of energy above the convex hull is about 
0.11-0.12 eV/atom, with a substantial difference only for PBE functional (i.e., 0.04 eV/atom). 
Application for such filter thus allows to disqualify some highly unstable materials (see discussion in 
ref.85). We note however that similar to bulk convex hull calculations, such analysis requires explicit 
accounting for the spin degree of freedom to predict a true convex hull. This is especially critical as 
with discovery of monolayer CrI3 2D magnet there is a growing interest in the 2D magnetic materials73. 
While state-of-the-art experimental measurements can reveal magnetic orders in 2D systems 104 , the 
magnetic configuration in potential 2D material is subject to investigation and not subject to guess or 
wishful choice. This thus requires detailed screening of different spin configurations and identifying 
the lowest energy configuration to predict the corresponding properties. Similar to bulk calculation, 
one should include identifying the lowest energy spin arrangement for different sizes of 2D supercell. 
We note that the lowest energy magnetic order can change from monolayer to multilayer system105. 
Such screening is critical not only to the analysis of materials stability but also to the prediction of basic 


17

materials properties. For instance, let us consider the case of 2D-CrI3: if one studies the system 
properties using a non-magnetic configuration, DFT predicts that this material is metallic. Describing 
the same system for different magnetic configurations such as ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic 
suggest material as a semiconductor with band gap 1.135 and 1.247 eV calculated using LDA XC 
functionals, respectively.105

Figure 8. Sensitivity of convex hull energy of In-Se system towards (a) optB86b-vdW and (b) PBE-D2 XC functionals. The red 
and blue dots in Fig. (a) and (b) indicates the formation energies of 2D systems. (c) Isolation energy of different known 
compounds using various XC functionals. The dashed red line represents the expected threshold energy above the convex 
hull. Reprinted with permission from Ref.85. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.

3.5. Freestanding 2D monolayer vs materials on a substrate
Generally, most synthesized materials can be divided into (i) single exfoliated monolayer or (ii) 2D 
materials synthesized on a substrate. In recent years, there is also a growing class of non-vdW 2D 
materials (i.e., compounds that are usually stabilized in the form of a couple of layers of 2D materials 
due to their ability to reconstruct dangling bonds or strong chemical passivation due to a reactive 
surface). While non-vdW 2D materials are not discussed in detail within this paper, the main 


18

conclusions remain the same. What makes the different types of materials unique is the fact that if the 
2D material is isolated in the freestanding form, its properties can indeed be well analyzed within DFT 
and even potential device performance can be predicted. However, for the class of materials 
synthesized on a substrate (i.e., that cannot be isolated as a freestanding single layer), theoretically 
predicted phenomena in freestanding monolayer systems may not be realized experimentally. For 
instance, let us consider silicene. According to DFT calculations, the freestanding monolayer of silicene 
has a zero band gap with the Dirac cone at the Fermi level.91 However, experimental synthesis of 
silicene on various substrates like Ag(111)106, Ag(110)107 , ZrB2(0001)108 , and Ir(111)109 does not agree 
with the theoretical predictions.110 The substrate/material interface can drastically modify the 
electronic, optical, and magnetic properties of deposited compounds. Importantly, the substrate effect 
does not only depend on the specific properties of the compound such as polarity, thickness, 
stoichiometry, and surface dangling bonds, but also depends on the substrate properties which can be 
inorganic or organic, polar or non-polar, and normal-insulator, metal or topological insulator. In 
general, the substrate effects that modify the theoretically predicted properties in 2D compounds are 
classified as (i) strain111, (ii) charge transfer112, (iii) dielectric screening113,114 , and (iv) optical 
interference.115

(i) Strain: Owing to interface formation, 2D material can exhibit the strain effect, which can be 
sufficiently large to change the original properties of 2D material as shown in Fig. 9. Moreover, not all 
strains are actually allowed in a 2D compound on top of a substrate, and hence, the theoretical 
prediction of exotic properties (e.g., topological symmetry protection and superconductivity) in high 
strained materials is not easily achieved.116

(ii) Charge transfer: When a monolayer 2D semiconductor is located on a substrate, it can exhibit 
direct charge transfer or charge density redistribution117, which is sufficient to affect 2D 
semiconductors. For example, using DFT calculations for monolayer silicene on different Ir, Cu, Mg, Au, 
Pt, Al, and Ag substrates Quhe et. al., showed the charge transferred  between the substrate and the 
2D material which can destroy the exotic properties of silicene.8

(iii) Dielectric screening: The dielectric mismatch between a nanoscale semiconducting material and 
the surrounding environment can result in a number of peculiarities that are not present in bulk.118

For example, the dielectric environment can change the exciton binding energy in semiconducting 
films or nanowires by screening Coulomb interactions and modifying electron-hole interactions119 . 
Thus it has a crucial influence on optical bandgaps of semiconductors and can strongly modulate both 
electrical and optical properties of low dimensional materials, including quantum wells120, carbon 
nanotubes121,  and graphene.122

Optical interference: Optical interference, resulting from reflection and refraction at each interface of 
thin films and substrate, which can enhance or reduce the local electric fields (E-fields) around the 
surface depending on optical constants and film thicknesses. It means that the amplitude of local E-
fields can be modulated by the optical interference effect. This effect must be considered when a 
material is ultrathin as in this case the properties of the material are very sensitive to the local E-fields 
around the surface.123 For example, intensities of Raman signals for silicene strongly depend on both 
incident local E-field and emitted local E-field.124


19

Figure 9. Schematic diagram of (a) vdW and (b) substrate based 2D materials. (c) Brillouin zone corresponding to silicene 
unit cell. Electronic band structure of (d) free standing silicene (e) distorted silicene and (f) 4x4 silicene on Ag(111) 
substrate. In Fig (f), color bar shows the higher (red) to lower (blue) contribution from Si pz orbital. Lower panel of the 
figures (c-f) are reproduced from ref125 Copyright (2013) by The American Physical Society.

4: Future of first-principles studies of 2D materials
With the development of electronic structure theory, it becomes clear that the properties of many 
compounds can be well described within DFT as long as the proper atomic identities, composition, and 
structure are used. What makes the case of theoretical studies of 2D materials special is the fact that 
the field is relatively immature – there are no universal standards for the prediction of the material 
properties and their realizability. This led to the situation when the theoretical works often become 


20

similar to a Lego game where scientists often do not use the important criteria for validation of their 
results or even use methods that should not be used to describe corresponding materials properties. 
While it is only a matter of time until clear guidance is developed for the field, herein, we foresee two 
main research challenges: 

(i)
Development of advanced methods to analyze properties of 2D materials: Description of 
2D materials as periodic solids with a large thickness of the vacuum does not allow to 
directly apply every theory developed for the bulk systems towards the 2D materials. This 
is demonstrated above on the example of optical properties of 2D materials, but the 
problem is not limited to that. For instance, charged defects cannot be described within the 
standard defect corrections developed for bulk systems.126,127 This means that DFT should 
not be used as a black box method for 2D compounds as this can eventually increase the 
gap between theory and experiment, leading to significant contradiction and 
misunderstanding in the field.   

(ii)
Validation of the reliability of the theoretical predictions: The 2D community is largely 
driven by applied science resulting in the prediction of materials properties for specific 
applications or even the expected device performance. The demonstration of the 
fundamental science does not always require using the compounds that can be realized, 
while in the case of applied science, one should have clearly developed criteria to be 
satisfied to propose the specific application. Such experience should, for instance, include 
the criteria for the realization of 2D materials and validation of their performance. This may 
be limited to the realization criteria discussed above or, more generally, by developing a 
theory of stable/metastable materials predicting the conditions under which materials can 
be realized. 

We believe that by keeping in mind the main limitations indicated in the current work, the theoretical 
2D community can substantially reduce the gap between the existing theoretical research and the 
experimental works.  

Acknowledgment:
The authors thank ENSEMBLE3 Project (MAB/2020/14) which is carried out within the International 
Research Agendas Programme (IRAP) of the Foundation for Polish Science co-financed by the European 
Union under the European Regional Development Fund and Teaming Horizon 2020 (GA no. 857543)  
programme of the European Commission. GDM thanks financial support from Brazilian funding 
agencies FAPESP and CNPq. This research was supported in part by PLGrid infrastructure.

REFERENCES
1. 
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V Dubonos, I. V Grigorieva, and 
A. A. Firsov, "Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films," Science 306(5696), 666–669 
(2004).

2. 
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek, and P. D. Ye, "Phosphorene: an unexplored 
2D semiconductor with a high hole mobility," ACS Nano 8(4), 4033–4041 (2014).

3. 
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen, and Y. Zhang, "Black phosphorus 
field-effect transistors," Nat. Nanotechnol. 9(5), 372–377 (2014).

4. 
L. Ci, L. Song, C. Jin, D. Jariwala, D. Wu, Y. Li, A. Srivastava, Z. F. Wang, K. Storr, and L. Balicas, 


21

"Atomic layers of hybridized boron nitride and graphene domains," Nat. Mater. 9(5), 430–435 
(2010).

5. 
A. Nagashima, N. Tejima, Y. Gamou, T. Kawai, and C. Oshima, "Electronic states of monolayer 
hexagonal boron nitride formed on the metal surfaces," Surf. Sci. 357, 307–311 (1996).

6. 
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman, and M. S. Strano, "Electronics and 
optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides," Nat. Nanotechnol. 7(11), 
699–712 (2012).

7. 
M. Houssa, A. Dimoulas, and A. Molle, "Silicene: a review of recent experimental and theoretical 
investigations," J. Phys. Condens. Matter 27(25), 253002 (2015).

8. 
R. Quhe, Y. Yuan, J. Zheng, Y. Wang, Z. Ni, J. Shi, D. Yu, J. Yang, and J. Lu, "Does the Dirac cone 
exist in silicene on metal substrates?," Sci. Rep. 4(1), 1–8 (2014).

9.
M. Yankowitz, S. Chen, H. Polshyn, Y. Zhang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. Graf, A. F. Young, and 
C. R. Dean, "Tuning superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene," Science 363(6431), 1059–
1064 (2019).

10. 
K. S. Novoselov,  A. Mishchenko,  A. Carvalho, and A. H. Castro Neto, "2D materials and van der 
Waals heterostructures," Science 353(6298), aac9439 (2016).

11. 
J. Zhou, L. Shen, M. D. Costa, K. A. Persson, S. P. Ong, P. Huck, Y. Lu, X. Ma, Y. Chen, and H. Tang, 
"2DMatPedia, an open computational database of two-dimensional materials from top-down 
and bottom-up approaches," Sci. data 6(1), 1–10 (2019).

12. 
S. Haastrup, M. Strange, M. Pandey, T. Deilmann, P. S. Schmidt, N. F. Hinsche, M. N. Gjerding, D. 
Torelli, P. M. Larsen, and A. C. Riis-Jensen, "The Computational 2D Materials Database: high-
throughput modeling and discovery of atomically thin crystals," 2D Mater. 5(4), 42002 (2018).

13. 
M. N. Gjerding, A. Taghizadeh, A. Rasmussen, S. Ali, F. Bertoldo, T. Deilmann, N. R. Knøsgaard, 
M. Kruse, A. H. Larsen, and S. Manti, "Recent progress of the computational 2D materials 
database (C2DB)," 2D Mater. 8(4), 44002 (2021).

14. 
N. Mounet, M. Gibertini, P. Schwaller, D. Campi, A. Merkys, A. Marrazzo, T. Sohier, I. E. Castelli, 
A. Cepellotti, and G. Pizzi, "Two-dimensional materials from high-throughput computational 
exfoliation of experimentally known compounds," Nat. Nanotechnol. 13(3), 246–252 (2018).

15. 
M. Ashton, J. Paul, S. B. Sinnott, and R. G. Hennig, "Topology-scaling identification of layered 
solids and stable exfoliated 2D materials," Phys. Rev. Lett. 118(10), 106101 (2017).

16. 
G. M. Nascimento, E. Ogoshi, A. Fazzio, C. M. Acosta, and G. M. Dalpian, "High-throughput 
inverse design and Bayesian optimization of functionalities: spin splitting in two-dimensional 
compounds," Sci. data 9(1), 1–18 (2022).

17. 
A. Kabiraj, M. Kumar, and S. Mahapatra, "High-throughput discovery of high Curie point two-
dimensional ferromagnetic materials," npj Comput. Mater. 6(1), 1–9 (2020).

18. 
A. Zunger, "Beware of plausible predictions of fantasy materials," Nature 566(7745), 447-449 
(2019).

19. 
O. I. Malyi, G. M. Dalpian, X.-G. Zhao, Z. Wang, and A. Zunger, "Realization of predicted exotic 
materials: The burden of proof," Mater. Today 32, 35–45 (2020).

20. 
J. E. Saal, S. Kirklin, M. Aykol, B. Meredig, and C. Wolverton, "Materials design and discovery 
with high-throughput density functional theory: the open quantum materials database 
(OQMD)," Jom 65(11), 1501–1509 (2013).

21. 
S. Kirklin, J. E. Saal, B. Meredig, A. Thompson, J. W. Doak, M. Aykol, S. Rühl, and C. Wolverton, 
"The Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD): assessing the accuracy of DFT formation 
energies," npj Comput. Mater. 1(1), 1–15 (2015).

22. 
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, 
and G. Ceder, "Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to 
accelerating materials innovation," APL Mater. 1(1), 11002 (2013).

23. 
S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, G. L. W. Hart, M. Jahnatek, R. V Chepulskii, R. H. Taylor, S. Wang, J. 
Xue, K. Yang, and O. Levy, "AFLOW: An automatic framework for high-throughput materials 


22

discovery," Comput. Mater. Sci. 58, 218–226 (2012).

24. 
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, "Generalized gradient approximation made simple," 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77(18), 3865 (1996).

25. 
S. Grimme, "Semiempirical GGA‐type density functional constructed with a long‐range 
dispersion correction," J. Comput. Chem. 27(15), 1787–1799 (2006).

26. 
L. Zhang and A. Zunger, "Evolution of electronic structure as a function of layer thickness in 
group-VIB transition metal dichalcogenides: emergence of localization prototypes," Nano Lett. 
15(2), 949–957 (2015).

27. 
L. Li, J. Kim, C. Jin, G. J. Ye, D. Y. Qiu, F. H. Da Jornada, Z. Shi, L. Chen, Z. Zhang, and F. Yang, 
"Direct observation of the layer-dependent electronic structure in phosphorene," Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 12(1), 21–25 (2017).

28. 
J. P. Perdew, "Density functional theory and the band gap problem," Int. J. Quantum Chem. 
28(S19), 497–523 (1985).

29. 
J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou, 
and K. Burke, "Restoring the density-gradient expansion for exchange in solids and surfaces," 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100(13), 136406 (2008).

30. 
J. Sun, A. Ruzsinszky, and J. P. Perdew, "Strongly constrained and appropriately normed 
semilocal density functional," Phys. Rev. Lett. 115(3), 36402 (2015).

31. 
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria, and M. Ernzerhof, "Hybrid functionals based on a screened Coulomb 
potential," J. Chem. Phys. 118(18), 8207–8215 (2003).

32. 
T. Koopmans, "Ordering of wave functions and eigenenergies to the individual electrons of an 
atom," Physica 1, 104–113 (1933).

33. 
O. I. Malyi, K. V Sopiha, I. Radchenko, P. Wu, and C. Persson, "Tailoring electronic properties of 
multilayer phosphorene by siliconization," Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 20(3), 2075–2083 (2018).

34. 
J. Klimeš, D. R. Bowler, and A. Michaelides, "Van der Waals density functionals applied to solids," 
Phys. Rev. B 83(19), 195131 (2011).

35. 
L. Hedin, "New method for calculating the one-particle Green’s function with application to the 
electron-gas problem," Phys. Rev. 139(3A), A796 (1965).

36. 
S. Grimme, "Accurate description of van der Waals complexes by density functional theory 
including empirical corrections," J. Comput. Chem. 25(12), 1463–1473 (2004).

37. 
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich, and H. Krieg, "A consistent and accurate ab initio 
parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 elements H-Pu," 
J. Chem. Phys. 132(15), 154104 (2010).

38. 
H. Rydberg, N. Jacobson, P. Hyldgaard, S. I. Simak, B. I. Lundqvist, and D. C. Langreth, "Hard 
numbers on soft matter," Surf. Sci. 532, 606–610 (2003).

39. 
H. Rydberg, B. I. Lundqvist, D. C. Langreth, and M. Dion, "Tractable nonlocal correlation density 
functionals for flat surfaces and slabs," Phys. Rev. B 62(11), 6997 (2000).

40. 
H. Rydberg, M. Dion, N. Jacobson, E. Schröder, P. Hyldgaard, S. I. Simak, D. C. Langreth, and B. I. 
Lundqvist, "Van der Waals density functional for layered structures," Phys. Rev. Lett. 91(12), 
126402 (2003).

41. 
B. I. Lundqvist, A. Bogicevic, K. Carling, S. V Dudiy, S. Gao, J. Hartford, P. Hyldgaard, N. Jacobson, 
D. C. Langreth, and N. Lorente, "Density-functional bridge between surfaces and interfaces," 
Surf. Sci. 493(1–3), 253–270 (2001).

42. 
M. Dion, H. Rydberg, E. Schröder, D. C. Langreth, and B. I. Lundqvist, "Van der Waals density 
functional for general geometries," Phys. Rev. Lett. 92(24), 246401 (2004).

43. 
T. Thonhauser, V. R. Cooper, S. Li, A. Puzder, P. Hyldgaard, and D. C. Langreth, "Van der Waals 
density functional: Self-consistent potential and the nature of the van der Waals bond," Phys. 
Rev. B 76(12), 125112 (2007).

44. 
K. Lee, É. D. Murray, L. Kong, B. I. Lundqvist, and D. C. Langreth, "Higher-accuracy van der Waals 
density functional," Phys. Rev. B 82(8), 81101 (2010).


23

45. 
K. Berland, V. R. Cooper, K. Lee, E. Schröder, T. Thonhauser, P. Hyldgaard, and B. I. Lundqvist, 
"van der Waals forces in density functional theory: a review of the vdW-DF method," Reports 
Prog. Phys. 78(6), 66501 (2015).

46. 
J. Klimeš, D. R. Bowler, and A. Michaelides, "Chemical accuracy for the van der Waals density 
functional," J. Phys. Condens. Matter 22(2), 22201 (2009).

47. 
K. Berland and P. Hyldgaard, "Exchange functional that tests the robustness of the plasmon 
description of the van der Waals density functional," Phys. Rev. B 89(3), 35412 (2014).

48. 
L. Shulenburger, A. D. Baczewski, Z. Zhu, J. Guan, and D. Tomanek, "The nature of the interlayer 
interaction in bulk and few-layer phosphorus," Nano Lett. 15(12), 8170–8175 (2015).

49. 
K. Wang and B. Paulus, "Tuning the binding energy of excitons in the MoS2 monolayer by 
molecular functionalization and defective engineering," Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 22(21), 
11936–11942 (2020).

50. 
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, "Photonics and optoelectronics of 2D semiconductor transition metal 
dichalcogenides," Nat. Photonics 10(4), 216–226 (2016).

51. 
X. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu, and F. Xia, 
"Highly anisotropic and robust excitons in monolayer black phosphorus," Nat. Nanotechnol. 
10(6), 517–521 (2015).

52. 
M. M. Ugeda, A. J. Bradley, S.-F. Shi, F. H. Da Jornada, Y. Zhang, D. Y. Qiu, W. Ruan, S.-K. Mo, Z. 
Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen, "Giant bandgap renormalization and excitonic effects in a monolayer 
transition metal dichalcogenide semiconductor," Nat. Mater. 13(12), 1091–1095 (2014).

53. 
I. C. Gerber and X. Marie, "Dependence of band structure and exciton properties of 
encapsulated WSe2 monolayers on the hBN-layer thickness," Phys. Rev. B 98(24), 245126 (2018).

54. 
A. Raja, A. Chaves, J. Yu, G. Arefe, H. M. Hill, A. F. Rigosi, T. C. Berkelbach, P. Nagler, C. Schüller, 
and T. Korn, "Coulomb engineering of the bandgap and excitons in two-dimensional materials," 
Nat. Commun. 8(1), 1–7 (2017).

55. 
S. Baroni, P. Giannozzi, and A. Testa, "Green’s-function approach to linear response in solids," 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 58(18), 1861 (1987).

56. 
X. Gonze and J.-P. Vigneron, "Density-functional approach to nonlinear-response coefficients of 
solids," Phys. Rev. B 39(18), 13120 (1989).

57. 
X. Gonze, D. C. Allan, and M. P. Teter, "Dielectric tensor, effective charges, and phonons in α-
quartz by variational density-functional perturbation theory," Phys. Rev. Lett. 68(24), 3603 
(1992).

58. 
M. Gajdoš, K. Hummer, G. Kresse, J. Furthmüller, and F. Bechstedt, "Linear optical properties in 
the projector-augmented wave methodology," Phys. Rev. B 73(4), 45112 (2006).

59. 
S. L. Adler, "Quantum theory of the dielectric constant in real solids," Phys. Rev. 126(2), 413 
(1962).

60. 
N. Wiser, "Dielectric constant with local field effects included," Phys. Rev. 129(1), 62 (1963).

61. 
E. E. Salpeter and H. A. Bethe, "A relativistic equation for bound-state problems," Phys. Rev. 
84(6), 1232 (1951).

62. 
G. Onida, L. Reining, R. W. Godby, R. Del Sole, and W. Andreoni, "Ab initio calculations of the 
quasiparticle and absorption spectra of clusters: the sodium tetramer," Phys. Rev. Lett. 75(5), 
818 (1995).

63. 
S. Albrecht, G. Onida, and L. Reining, "Ab initio calculation of the quasiparticle spectrum and 
excitonic effects in Li2O," Phys. Rev. B 55(16), 10278 (1997).

64. 
S. Albrecht, L. Reining, R. Del Sole, and G. Onida, "Ab initio calculation of excitonic effects in the 
optical spectra of semiconductors," Phys. Rev. Lett. 80(20), 4510 (1998).

65. 
F. Hüser, T. Olsen, and K. S. Thygesen, "How dielectric screening in two-dimensional crystals 
affects the convergence of excited-state calculations: Monolayer MoS2," Phys. Rev. B 88(24), 
245309 (2013).

66. 
L. C. Gomes and A. Carvalho, "Electronic and optical properties of low-dimensional group-IV 


24

monochalcogenides," J. Appl. Phys. 128(12), 121101 (2020).

67. 
P. M. Larsen, M. Pandey, M. Strange, and K. W. Jacobsen, "Definition of a scoring parameter to 
identify low-dimensional materials components," Phys. Rev. Mater. 3(3), 34003 (2019).

68. 
A. Belsky, M. Hellenbrandt, V. L. Karen, and P. Luksch, "New developments in the Inorganic 
Crystal Structure Database (ICSD): accessibility in support of materials research and design," 
Acta Crystallogr. Sect. B Struct. Sci. 58(3), 364–369 (2002).

69. 
S. Gražulis, A. Daškevič, A. Merkys, D. Chateigner, L. Lutterotti, M. Quiros, N. R. Serebryanaya, 
P. Moeck, R. T. Downs, and A. Le Bail, "Crystallography Open Database (COD): an open-access 
collection of crystal structures and platform for world-wide collaboration," Nucleic Acids Res. 
40(D1), D420–D427 (2012).

70. 
G. R. Schleder, C. M. Acosta, and A. Fazzio, "Exploring two-dimensional materials 
thermodynamic stability via machine learning," ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12(18), 20149–
20157 (2019).

71. 
X.-Y. Ma, H.-Y. Lyu, K.-R. Hao, Y.-M. Zhao, X. Qian, Q.-B. Yan, and G. Su, "Large family of two-
dimensional ferroelectric metals discovered via machine learning," Sci. Bull. 66(3), 233–242 
(2021).

72. 
G. R. Schleder, B. Focassio, and A. Fazzio, "Machine learning for materials discovery: Two-
dimensional topological insulators," Appl. Phys. Rev. 8(3), 31409 (2021).

73. 
C. M. Acosta, E. Ogoshi, J. A. Souza, and G. M. Dalpian, "Machine learning study of the magnetic 
ordering in 2d materials," ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14(7), 9418–9432 (2022).

74. 
K. Choudhary, K. F. Garrity, N. J. Ghimire, N. Anand, and F. Tavazza, "High-throughput search for 
magnetic topological materials using spin-orbit spillage, machine learning, and experiments," 
Phys. Rev. B 103(15), 155131 (2021).

75. 
B. Mortazavi, I. S. Novikov, and A. V Shapeev, "A machine-learning-based investigation on the 
mechanical/failure response and thermal conductivity of semiconducting BC2N monolayers," 
Carbon N. Y. 188, 431–441 (2022).

76. 
S. Hu, Z. Xie, J. Qian, S. Blackshaw, and H. Zhu, "Wiley Interdiscip," Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci 2(1), 
167–185 (2012).

77. 
A. K. Singh, B. C. Revard, R. Ramanathan, M. Ashton, F. Tavazza, and R. G. Hennig, "Genetic 
algorithm prediction of two-dimensional group-IV dioxides for dielectrics," Phys. Rev. B 95(15), 
155426 (2017).

78. 
S. Bahmann and J. Kortus, "EVO—Evolutionary algorithm for crystal structure prediction," 
Comput. Phys. Commun. 184(6), 1618–1625 (2013).

79. 
X.-F. Zhou, X. Dong, A. R. Oganov, Q. Zhu, Y. Tian, and H.-T. Wang, "Semimetallic two-
dimensional boron allotrope with massless Dirac fermions," Phys. Rev. Lett. 112(8), 85502 
(2014).

80. 
X. Luo, J. Yang, H. Liu, X. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, S.-H. Wei, X. Gong, and H. Xiang, "Predicting two-
dimensional boron–carbon compounds by the global optimization method," J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
133(40), 16285–16290 (2011).

81. 
W. Luo, Y. Ma, X. Gong, and H. Xiang, "Prediction of silicon-based layered structures for 
optoelectronic applications," J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136(45), 15992–15997 (2014).

82. 
Y. Song, E. M. D. Siriwardane, Y. Zhao, and J. Hu, "Computational discovery of new 2D materials 
using deep learning generative models," ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13(45), 53303–53313 
(2021).

83. 
B. C. Revard, W. W. Tipton, A. Yesypenko, and R. G. Hennig, "Grand-canonical evolutionary 
algorithm for the prediction of two-dimensional materials," Phys. Rev. B 93(5), 54117 (2016).

84. 
B. Mortazavi, I. S. Novikov, E. V Podryabinkin, S. Roche, T. Rabczuk, A. V Shapeev, and X. Zhuang, 
"Exploring phononic properties of two-dimensional materials using machine learning 
interatomic potentials," Appl. Mater. Today 20, 100685 (2020).

85. 
O. I. Malyi, K. V Sopiha, and C. Persson, "Energy, phonon, and dynamic stability criteria of two-


25

dimensional materials," ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11(28), 24876–24884 (2019).

86. 
E. I. Marchenko, S. A. Fateev, A. A. Petrov, V. V Korolev, A. Mitrofanov, A. V Petrov, E. A. Goodilin, 
and A. B. Tarasov, "Database of two-dimensional hybrid perovskite materials: open-access 
collection of crystal structures, band gaps, and atomic partial charges predicted by machine 
learning," Chem. Mater. 32(17), 7383–7388 (2020).

87. 
J. F. Rodriguez-Nieva and M. S. Scheurer, "Identifying topological order through unsupervised 
machine learning," Nat. Phys. 15(8), 790–795 (2019).

88. 
C. M. Acosta, R. Ouyang, A. Fazzio, M. Scheffler, L. M. Ghiringhelli, and C. Carbogno, "Analysis of 
topological transitions in two-dimensional materials by compressed sensing," arXiv Prepr. 
arXiv1805.10950 (2018).

89. 
I. Miyazato, Y. Tanaka, and K. Takahashi, "Accelerating the discovery of hidden two-dimensional 
magnets using machine learning and first principle calculations," J. Phys. Condens. Matter 30(6), 
06LT01 (2018).

90. 
X.-Y. Ma, J. P. Lewis, Q.-B. Yan, and G. Su, "Accelerated discovery of two-dimensional 
optoelectronic octahedral oxyhalides via high-throughput ab initio calculations and machine 
learning," J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 10(21), 6734–6740 (2019).

91. 
S. Cahangirov, M. Topsakal, E. Aktürk, H. Şahin, and S. Ciraci, "Two-and one-dimensional 
honeycomb structures of silicon and germanium," Phys. Rev. Lett. 102(23), 236804 (2009).

92. 
Y.-L. Hong, Z. Liu, L. Wang, T. Zhou, W. Ma, C. Xu, S. Feng, L. Chen, M.-L. Chen, and D.-M. Sun, 
"Chemical vapor deposition of layered two-dimensional MoSi2N4 materials," Science 369(6504), 
670–674 (2020).

93. 
B. Huang, H. L. Zhuang, M. Yoon, B. G. Sumpter, and S.-H. Wei, "Highly stable two-dimensional 
silicon phosphides: Different stoichiometries and exotic electronic properties," Phys. Rev. B 
91(12), 121401 (2015).

94. 
M. Ashton, S. B. Sinnott, and R. G. Hennig, "Computational discovery and characterization of 
polymorphic two-dimensional IV–V materials," Appl. Phys. Lett. 109(19), 192103 (2016).

95. 
Y. Ding and Y. Wang, "Density functional theory study of the silicene-like SiX and XSi3 (X= B, C, 
N, Al, P) honeycomb lattices: the various buckled structures and versatile electronic properties," 
J. Phys. Chem. C 117(35), 18266–18278 (2013).

96. 
T. Morishita, S. P. Russo, I. K. Snook, M. J. S. Spencer, K. Nishio, and M. Mikami, "First-principles 
study of structural and electronic properties of ultrathin silicon nanosheets," Phys. Rev. B 82(4), 
45419 (2010).

97. 
W. Sun, S. T. Dacek, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, A. Jain, W. D. Richards, A. C. Gamst, K. A. Persson, and 
G. Ceder, "The thermodynamic scale of inorganic crystalline metastability," Sci. Adv. 2(11), 
e1600225 (2016).

98. 
F. Therrien, E. B. Jones, and V. Stevanović, "Metastable materials discovery in the age of large-
scale computation," Appl. Phys. Rev. 8(3), 31310 (2021).

99. 
O. I. Malyi, J. Varignon, and A. Zunger, "Bulk NdNiO2 is thermodynamically unstable with respect 
to decomposition while hydrogenation reduces the instability and transforms it from metal to 
insulator," Phys. Rev. B 105(1), 14106 (2022).

100. H. T. Stokes and D. M. Hatch, Isotropy Subgroups of the 230 Crystallographic Space Groups

(World Scientific, 1988).

101. J. L. Du, O. I. Malyi, S.-L. Shang, Y. Wang, X.-G. Zhao, F. Liu, A. Zunger, and Z.-K. Liu, "Density 

functional thermodynamic description of spin, phonon and displacement degrees of freedom in 
antiferromagnetic-to-paramagnetic phase transition in YNiO3," Mater. Today Phys. 27, 100805 
(2022).

102. L. Zhu, S.-S. Wang, S. Guan, Y. Liu, T. Zhang, G. Chen, and S. A. Yang, "Blue phosphorene oxide: 

strain-tunable quantum phase transitions and novel 2D emergent fermions," Nano Lett. 16(10), 
6548–6554 (2016).

103. B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. Gogotsi, and M. W. 


26

Barsoum, "Two-dimensional, ordered, double transition metals carbides (MXenes)," ACS Nano 
9(10), 9507–9516 (2015).

104. B. Huang, G. Clark, E. Navarro-Moratalla, D. R. Klein, R. Cheng, K. L. Seyler, D. Zhong, E. 

Schmidgall, M. A. McGuire, and D. H. Cobden, "Layer-dependent ferromagnetism in a van der 
Waals crystal down to the monolayer limit," Nature 546(7657), 270–273 (2017).

105. L. Webster, L. Liang, and J.-A. Yan, "Distinct spin–lattice and spin–phonon interactions in 

monolayer magnetic CrI3," Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 20(36), 23546–23555 (2018).

106. P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet, 

and G. Le Lay, "Silicene: compelling experimental evidence for graphenelike two-dimensional 
silicon," Phys. Rev. Lett. 108(15), 155501 (2012).

107. P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, C. Ottaviani, P. M. Sheverdyaeva, P. Moras, C. Carbone, D. Topwal, 

B. Olivieri, A. Kara, and H. Oughaddou, "Evidence of graphene-like electronic signature in silicene 
nanoribbons," Appl. Phys. Lett. 96(26), 261905 (2010).

108. A. Fleurence, R. Friedlein, T. Ozaki, H. Kawai, Y. Wang, and Y. Yamada-Takamura, "Experimental 

evidence for epitaxial silicene on diboride thin films," Phys. Rev. Lett. 108(24), 245501 (2012).

109. L. Meng, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Du, R. Wu, L. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Li, H. Zhou, and W. A. Hofer, "Buckled 

silicene formation on Ir (111)," Nano Lett. 13(2), 685–690 (2013).

110. S. Cahangirov, M. Audiffred, P. Tang, A. Iacomino, W. Duan, G. Merino, and A. Rubio, "Electronic 

structure of silicene on Ag (111): Strong hybridization effects," Phys. Rev. B 88(3), 35432 (2013).

111. M. A. Bissett, M. Tsuji, and H. Ago, "Strain engineering the properties of graphene and other 

two-dimensional crystals," Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 16(23), 11124–11138 (2014).

112. R. Stephan, M.-C. Hanf, and P. Sonnet, "Molecular functionalization of silicene/Ag (111) by 

covalent bonds: a DFT study," Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 17(22), 14495–14501 (2015).

113. M. N. Brunetti, O. L. Berman, and R. Y. Kezerashvili, "Can freestanding Xene monolayers behave 

as excitonic insulators?," Phys. Lett. A 383(5), 482–486 (2019).

114. E. Cinquanta, G. Fratesi, S. Dal Conte, C. Grazianetti, F. Scotognella, S. Stagira, C. Vozzi, G. Onida, 

and A. Molle, "Optical response and ultrafast carrier dynamics of the silicene-silver interface," 
Phys. Rev. B 92(16), 165427 (2015).

115. A. Acun, B. Poelsema, H. J. W. Zandvliet, and R. van Gastel, "The instability of silicene on Ag 

(111)," Appl. Phys. Lett. 103(26), 263119 (2013).

116. Z.-Q. Huang, F.-C. Chuang, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-T. Liu, H.-R. Chang, H. Lin, and A. Bansil, "Nontrivial 

topological electronic structures in a single Bi (111) bilayer on different substrates: A first-
principles study," Phys. Rev. B 88(16), 165301 (2013).

117. A. Bhattacharya, S. Bhattacharya, and G. P. Das, "Exploring semiconductor substrates for silicene 

epitaxy," Appl. Phys. Lett. 103(12), 123113 (2013).

118. A. F. Slachmuylders, B. Partoens, W. Magnus, and F. M. Peeters, "Dielectric mismatch effect on 

the exciton states in cylindrical nanowires," Phys. Rev. B 74(23), 235321 (2006).

119. M. N. Brunetti, O. L. Berman, and R. Y. Kezerashvili, "Optical properties of excitons in buckled 

two-dimensional materials in an external electric field," Phys. Rev. B 98(12), 125406 (2018).

120. D. Lee, J. Seo, X. Zhu, J. Lee, H.-J. Shin, J. M. Cole, T. Shin, J. Lee, H. Lee, and H. Su, "Quantum 

confinement-induced tunable exciton states in graphene oxide," Sci. Rep. 3(1), 1–5 (2013).

121. D. Varsano, S. Sorella, D. Sangalli, M. Barborini, S. Corni, E. Molinari, and M. Rontani, "Carbon 

nanotubes as excitonic insulators," Nat. Commun. 8(1), 1–9 (2017).

122. F. Fallah and M. Esmaeilzadeh, "Energy levels of exciton in a gapped graphene sheet," J. Appl. 

Phys. 114(7), 73702 (2013).

123. H. Zhang, Y. Wan, Y. Ma, W. Wang, Y. Wang, and L. Dai, "Interference effect on optical signals 

of monolayer MoS2," Appl. Phys. Lett. 107(10), 101904 (2015).

124. S. Sheng, J. Wu, X. Cong, W. Li, J. Gou, Q. Zhong, P. Cheng, P. Tan, L. Chen, and K. Wu, "Vibrational 

properties of a monolayer silicene sheet studied by tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy," Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 119(19), 196803 (2017).


27

125. C.-L. Lin, R. Arafune, K. Kawahara, M. Kanno, N. Tsukahara, E. Minamitani, Y. Kim, M. Kawai, and 

N. Takagi, "Substrate-induced symmetry breaking in silicene," Phys. Rev. Lett. 110(7), 76801 
(2013).

126. H.-P. Komsa, N. Berseneva, A. V Krasheninnikov, and R. M. Nieminen, "Charged point defects in 

the flatland: Accurate formation energy calculations in two-dimensional materials," Phys. Rev. 
X 4(3), 31044 (2014).

127. J. Xiao, K. Yang, D. Guo, T. Shen, H.-X. Deng, S.-S. Li, J.-W. Luo, and S.-H. Wei, "Realistic 

dimension-independent approach for charged-defect calculations in semiconductors," Phys. 
Rev. B 101(16), 165306 (2020).


