IDENTIFYING DAMAGE-SENSITIVE SPATIAL VIBRATION
CHARACTERISTICS OF BRIDGES FROM WIDESPREAD
SMARTPHONE DATA

Liam Cronin
Lehigh University
lmc219@lehigh.edu

Soheil Sadeghi Eshkevari
MIT Senseable City Lab
ssadeghi@mit.edu

Thomas J. Matarazzo
USMA West Point
thomas.matarazzo@westpoint.edu

Sebastiano Milardo
MIT Senseable City Lab
milardo@mit.edu

Iman Dabbaghchian
Lehigh University
imd220@lehigh.edu

Paolo Santi
MIT Senseable City Lab
psanti@mit.edu

Shamim N. Pakzad
Lehigh University
pakzad@lehigh.edu

Carlo Ratti
MIT Senseable City Lab
ratti@mit.edu

ABSTRACT

The knowledge gap in the expected and actual conditions of bridges has created worldwide deficits
in infrastructure service and funding challenges. Despite rapid advances over the past four decades,
sensing technology is still not a part of bridge inspection protocols. Every time a vehicle with a mobile
device passes over a bridge, there is an opportunity to capture potentially important structural response
information at a very low cost. Prior work has shown how bridge modal frequencies can be accurately
determined with crowdsourced smartphone-vehicle trip (SVT) data in real-world settings. However,
modal frequencies provide very limited insight on the structural health conditions of the bridge.
Here, we present a novel method to extract spatial vibration characteristics of real bridges, namely,
absolute mode shapes, from crowdsourced SVT data. These characteristics have a demonstrable
sensitivity to structural damage and provide superior, yet complementary, indicators of bridge
condition. Furthermore, they are useful in the development of accurate mathematical models of the
structural system and help reconcile the differences between models and real systems. We demonstrate
successful applications on four very different bridges, with span lengths ranging from about 30 to
1300 meters, collectively representing about one quarter of bridges in the US. Supplementary work
applies this computational approach to accurately detect simulated bridge damage entirely from
crowdsourced SVT data in an unprecedentedly timely fashion. The results presented in this article
open the way towards large-scale crowdsourced monitoring of bridge infrastructure.

Keywords Mobile Sensing · Infrastructure · Monitoring · Crowdsensing

Introduction

Ubiquitous smartphone devices have normalized the distributed collection of scientific data in everyday life. Sensor
arrays in the modern smartphones enable unprecedented measurements on an individual’s activities. In contrast to
increasing digital capabilities, modern society faces significant infrastructure deficits. Knowledge gaps regarding the
conditions of infrastructure systems have created vulnerabilities to sudden and unexpected losses in service, and have
ultimately produced an infrastructure-funding gap. For instance, at current investment levels, it would take about 50
years for the U.S. departments of transportation (DOTs) to resolve outstanding repairs1. The total 10-year infrastructure-

1This projection is conservative as it does not include any new bridge maintenance issues that would arise.

arXiv:2211.01363v1  [physics.app-ph]  2 Nov 2022


a. Golden Gate Bridge (GGB)
c. Ciampino Bridge (CMP)

300 m

Cadore

b. Cadore Bridge (CAD)
d.

Type: steel truss
Road Profile: good
# of Sensors: 16
AADT: 59k

100 m

Ciampino

400 m

GHMB

1 km

GGB

Type: steel suspension
Road Profile: poor
# of Sensors:
AADT: 109k
53

Type: steel arch frame
Road Profile: very good
# of Sensors: 21
AADT: 19.5k

Type: reinforced concrete
Road Profile: very good
# of Sensors: 6
AADT: 80k

Gene Hartzell
Memorial Bridge (GHMB)

Figure 1: Aerial views and general information for the four case studies. The monitored sections are highlighted in
the photos. These bridges are monitored with traditional fixed sensor networks, and results are used as a baseline to
compare with the mobile sensing campaign. In summary, these bridges display a wide range of characteristics with
span-lengths varying from 56m to 1,280m and consist of four distinct structural systems.

funding gap for roadways and transit is over one trillion USD [1]. Furthermore, the exposure of infrastructure to natural
disasters amplifies uncertainties in asset management. In regions with high risks of multiple natural hazards, e.g.,
earthquakes, coastal flooding, cyclones, etc., transportation infrastructure are subject to significant losses. For example,
road bridges in China account for about 29% of the expected annual damage caused by natural hazards [2]. Bridges and
other road infrastructure are vulnerable to the rising rates of natural disasters and extreme events in response to climate
change and rapid growth in the global human footprint [3, 4, 5]. In particular, flooding and other hydraulic events are
a leading cause of bridge failures in the U.S. [6], the U.K. [7], India [8], and other countries. This emphasizes the
importance of incorporating accurate models of bridges and their exposure to extreme events in life-cycle analyses [9].

Modern structural health monitoring (SHM) techniques are highly capable of determining important physical charac-
teristics of bridges based on sensor data. SHM encompasses a wide range of services such as modal identification,
damage identification and localization, digital twin modelling, risk quantification, and disaster response [10, 11].
Advances in sensing and actuation have led to applications utilizing computer-vision and robotics, e.g., automatic crack
detection, drone-based inspections, etc., which are designed to improve the retrieval of structural condition information
[12, 13, 14]. However, the costs associated with implementing these techniques (even in their simplest forms) have
proven to be unattainable for the vast majority of bridge owners. Sensing technology is not a part of routine bridge
inspections: U.S. National Bridge Inspection Standards only require that each bridge is inspected visually in 24-month
intervals. A widespread need for monitoring approaches that are accurate, easy-to-implement, and cost-effective has
helped spark interest in low-cost alternatives, such as the use of mobile sensor networks [15] and smartphones [16] in
SHM.

In the last two decades, researchers [17, 15, 18, 19, 20, 16, 21, 22, 23, 24] have established the advantages that mobile
sensor networks have over traditional “stationary” ones in measuring bridge vibrations. Two key findings for mobile
sensor networks are (i) few devices are needed to determine structural dynamical properties, which enables widespread
bridge monitoring at a lower cost; and (ii) mobile sensors efficiently capture dense spatial vibration information, e.g.,
high-resolution structural mode shapes [25, 26, 27, 28]. Recent work presented multiple real-world applications in
which crowdsourced smartphone-vehicle-trip (SVT) data were used to accurately determine modal properties of two
bridges [29]. These results emphasized the unique and significant advantages of crowdsourced data. “Pre-existing”
mobile sensor networks [30] such as ridesharing data, municipal transit data, etc., provide an unprecedented potential
for high velocity and large-scale data streams. Modal frequency identification is an essential first step in monitoring
the dynamics and condition of a bridge. While modal frequencies have been successfully used to identify structural
damage in real-world applications, certain modal frequencies, e.g., lower modes, can be insensitive to damage and
simultaneously sensitive to normal environmental changes [31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38], which can reduce their
effectiveness as a damage-sensitive feature. A robust and accurate monitoring system must incorporate several layers of
information into a condition report such as environmental data, dynamical properties, and damage-sensitive features.

Spatial vibration information, such as mode shapes, are both effective damage-sensitive features and can be captured
efficiently by mobile sensors. Structural mode shapes and their curvatures are sensitive features to local and global
damage while less sensitive to environmental variations [39]. Over time, as structural damage develops, the deviations

2


in mode-shape-based metrics [40, 41, 42] can lead to the identification of both the presence and location of the damage.
Similarly, signal processing techniques, e.g., wavelet transforms, have been used to identify mode shape discontinuities
and attributed them to local damage [43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48]. For these reasons, mode shapes and mode shape curvatures
are widely studied and used for damage detection and localization [49, 50, 51, 52, 53].

This paper proposes a method for identifying absolute value mode shapes (AMS) of bridge structures exclusively from
crowdsourced SVT data. The method is validated throughout five real-world applications on four distinct bridges,
Figure 1: The Golden Gate Bridge (USA), the Cadore Bridge (Italy), the Ciampino Bridge (Italy), and the Gene Hartzell
Memorial Bridge (USA). These bridges have distinctly different locations, designs, and traffic volumes. Notably, the
lengths of the largest span vary from 30 m to 1.3 km; a range that represents 32% of US bridges.

The proposed method has three key benefits: (1) it is entirely based on SVT data which can be sourced from common
smartphones and does not require supplementary sensory or GIS information, (2) with ever-expanding smartphone
penetration rates, it can streamline up-to-date AMS estimations on a regular basis, which is critical for long-term,
reference-based health monitoring, and (3) the spatial resolution of the AMS is high, which enables immediate
applications to broader SHM services such as damage identification and localization. These features can be configured
with a software-as-service (SaS) system for automated data collection, preprocessing, and cloud-based storage, that can
provide tools for near-real-time condition assessments.

SVT Aggregation and AMS Identification Method

Position, m

AMS

Average Magnitude

1

2

Segment Locations
123 ...........................................................................................N

Avg. Mag. 

Δ

ε

s

1

2

Frequency

Position, m

Average

Location N

Trip: 1
Location: N 

s

Mean

Mean

123 ...........................................................................................N

Figure 2: Overview of the methodology: the synchrosqueezed wavelet transform converts each acceleration time series
to the time-frequency domain, and the instantaneous magnitudes are calculated. The bridge is divided into overlapping
segments; the width (∆) and spatial stride (S) are two parameters of the method. Averaging the magnitudes in each
segment for each trip at the modal frequencies yields a distribution of magnitudes at each location, the mean of which is
the AMS estimate. Including a small bandwidth (ϵ) around the modal frequency in the averaging process leads to robust
results on noisy datasets. Detailed information is given in Materials and Methods.

The process for identifying AMS is represented graphically in Figure 2. A detailed explanation of the proposed
methodology for AMS identification is given in Materials and Methods section Table 1. After basic preprocessing
steps, the synchrosqueezed wavelet transform is applied to the SVT acceleration signals and the values are mapped to
frequency-space grids (see top panel in Figure 2), which are defined by the width (∆) and stride (S) parameters (scalar
values).

3


This process is repeated for all signals in a batch of SVT data for which the individual frequency-space grids are
aggregated. Narrow frequency bands, which are defined based on prior knowledge of modal frequencies2, are applied to
the aggregated frequency-space grid to plot the absolute signal power at a central frequency as a function of location
(see middle panel in Figure 2) for every trip. The mean value over all trips in the batch is extracted as the AMS for the
modal frequency (see bottom panel in Figure 2). At this stage, the spatial resolution of the AMS can be adjusted by the
user, but it is generally bounded by the sampling rate and the vehicle speed.

The accuracy of the AMS is evaluated using modal assurance criteria (MAC), which produces a value between 0 and 13
that measures the quality of an estimated mode shape by comparing it with the reference mode shape [54].

Results

28.5 m
28.2 m

1280.2 m

272.0 m

f. GHMB-C-V3 

fn: 1.758 Hz
MAC: 0.94
Δ: 50 m
ε: 0.2000 Hz

ID: GHMB
Dataset: 102 
Avg. Speed: 58.5 km/h 
App: Good Vibrations
Ref. Sensors: 16

b. GGB-UC-V1 

fn: 0.106 Hz
MAC: 0.96
Δ: 104 m 
ε: 0.0200 Hz

ID: GGB
Dataset: 102 trips
Avg. Speed: 45.5 km/h
App: SensorPlay & UBER
Ref. Sensors: 54

a. GGB-C-V1

fn: 0.106 Hz
MAC: 0.97
Δ: 88 m 
ε: 0.0171 Hz

c. GGB-C-V2

fn: 0.132 Hz
MAC: 0.95
Δ: 88 m 
ε: 0.0171 Hz

d. GGB-C-V3

fn: 0.169 Hz
MAC: 0.98
Δ: 88 m 
ε: 0.0171 Hz 

e. GGB-C-H1 

fn: 0.080 Hz
MAC: 0.98
Δ: 71 m
ε: 0.0165 Hz

g. CAD-PC-H2 

fn: 1.122 Hz
MAC: 0.94
Δ: 39 m
ε: 0.0037 Hz

ID: CAD
Dataset: 200 trips
Avg. Speed: 62.7 km/h
App: Good Vibrations
Ref. Sensors: 21

h. CMP-PC-V1 

fn: 4.500 Hz
MAC: 0.97
Δ: 10 m
ε: 0.0432

ID: CMP
Dataset: 200 trips
Avg. Speed: 29.1 km/h
App: Good Vibrations
Ref. Sensors: 6

82.3
181.0
131.7
131.7

Figure 3: AMS estimates for all case studies: (a-e) Golden Gate Bridge, (f) Gene Hartzell Memorial Bridge, (g) Cadore
Bridge, and (h) Ciampino Bridge. Subtitles are arranged as follows: Bridge ID | Natural Frequency | MAC Value. The
bridge ID is composed of three parts. First, the bridge acronym. Then, the data collection method: controlled (C),
uncontrolled (UC) or partially controlled (PC). Lastly, the mode direction (vertical (V) or horizontal (H)). The estimate
from the mobile sensing data is shown with green markers and a solid black line. While, the reference is displayed with
a dotted line and black X markers. Each X also represents the location of the fixed sensor on the bridge during the
original study. Last, black triangles show structural supports in the in the direction of the mode.

This study examines the efficacy of the proposed method on four real-world bridges with distinct locations, designs,
and traffic volumes. The applications considered a broad set of SVT conditions; data were collected using different
vehicles, e.g., sedans, minivans, etc, in three types of environments, controlled, partially-controlled, and uncontrolled,
by a variety of smartphone models, and with sample sizes ranging from 50 to 200. Details of the SVT data in each
application are provided in the sections that follow and are summarized in Supplementary Material.

2It is key to emphasize that this method requires estimates of natural frequencies. An approach for determining modal frequencies
from SVT data is reviewed in the SI along with validations on the presented case studies [29].
3Estimated mode shapes with MAC values above 0.90 indicate a high consistency with the reference shape and are regarded as
accurate

4


Consistent with prior work using mobile sensor networks, the resulting AMS have a very high spatial resolution; the
applications below produce mode shapes with 50 points4. All applications produced highly accurate AMS as measured
by MAC values of 0.94 and above. These results provide strong evidence that support the collection and analyses of
crowdsourced SVT data for determining spatial vibration characteristics of existing bridges.

Golden Gate Bridge

The landmark Golden Gate Bridge (GGB) connects San Francisco to Marin County with an annual average daily
traffic (AADT) of 109,000. The suspension bridge has a main span of 1,280 m over the San Francisco Bay. Due to
its structural flexibility, the modal frequencies are much lower than the other bridges in this study. The first three
vertical modal frequencies are 0.106, 0.132 and 0.169 Hz [55], and the fundamental transverse mode has been estimated
within 0.05 and 0.095 Hz by [56] and [57]. For SVT data, two distinct datasets are evaluated. The first dataset called
GGB-C consists of 102 trips collected in a controlled environment [29], i.e., key variables such as vehicle velocity and
smartphone orientation were controlled. The second SVT dataset GGB-UC was provided by Uber from its ride-hailing
fleet, which consists of 50 trips made by a diverse set of drivers and vehicles (thus, uncontrolled).

The methodology is implemented as described in Table 1. In summary, four modes were identified from the controlled
data (GGB-C): three vertical and one transverse. In addition, the first vertical mode was identified from the uncontrolled
data (GGB-UC). MAC values were calculated with respect to the locations of the fixed sensors from prior work [55]
(42 locations for vertical modes and 19 for the transverse mode). Impressively, the MAC values for all AMS estimates
for both SVT datasets are 0.95 or above as noted in Figure 3a-e. Furthermore the identification of a transverse mode
using SVT data is unprecedented, and the corresponding AMS was found with a MAC value of 0.98. Lastly, it is worth
noting that the AMS of the first vertical mode was identified fairly well from the uncontrolled data as indicated with a
MAC value of 0.96 and shown in Figure 3b.

Gene Hartzell Memorial Bridge

The Gene Hartzell Memorial Bridge (GHMB) spans the Lehigh river along route 33 in Easton, PA, United States with
an AADT of 59,000. The bridge structure is a steel truss with four spans and a total length of 540 m with a longest
span of 180 m. The first three vertical modes are found to be 0.87, 1.34 and 1.78 Hz. The SVT data called GHMB is a
controlled dataset of 332 trips collected by the research team’s vehicles and the Good Vibrations App (more information
in Materials and Methods section). For data collection, the team drove at a set of prescribed speeds detailed in the
Supplementary Material. The mean speed across all trips was 82.25 km/h5.

For analysis, the dataset was subdivided to consider the slowest 102 trips. The idea of dividing large datasets into
potentially “more informative” subsets is considered further in the following section. With this subset, the AMS for
the third vertical was identified (Figure 3f). The corresponding MAC value was 0.94, which was calculated using 14
reference locations. The first two vertical modes were not reliably identified, emphasizing that some vibration modes
may not be observable in certain SVT subsets.

Cadore Bridge

The Cadore Bridge is a 272 m long, steel-rigid-arch structure in northern Italy with an AADT of 20,000. The bridge
was inspected and rehabilitated in 2011 and the fundamental natural frequencies are reported as 0.68, 1.24, and 1.80 Hz
for the first three vertical modes. In addition, the bridge was inspected again with a fixed sensor network in 2021 and
vertical and transverse model properties are extracted (see Supplementary Material).

The SVT data called CAD-PC consists of 884 partially-controlled samples recorded using the Good Vibrations app
by Anas Sp.A operators. The vehicle speeds are in average 62.7 km/h. Of the full dataset, the 200 slowest trips were
selected for further analysis. With this subset of data, Figure 3g displays the second transverse mode is found at a
frequency of 1.122 Hz. The MAC value between the estimated AMS and the reference shape (17 locations) was 0.94 .

Ciampino Bridge

This bridge is one segment of an elevated intersection located in the Ciampino district of Rome, Italy. The AADT for
this bridge is approximately 82,000. The segment consists of two adjacent continuous spans of reinforced concrete
with the total length of 56.7 m. Since September 2020, the bridge has been monitored using a fixed sensor network

4In traditional SHM applications with fixed sensors, the spatial resolution is limited by the number of simultaneous sensors. A
mode shape with 50 points requires a network of 50 synchronized sensors.
5the speed limit on the bridge is 104.6 km/h

5


with the first two natural frequencies identified as 4.5 and 6.8 Hz. The SVT data called CMP-PC consists of 992
partially-controlled datasets collected by Anas Sp.A. using the Good Vibrations App. The results shown in Figure 3h
are from the aggregation of the 200 samples with the lowest speeds. The identified AMS in Ciampino bridge has a
MAC of 0.97 when compared to the reference at six locations.

Study of data quantity and quality

Position, m

Average Magnitude

Percent of Dataset

MAC

a.
b.

c.
d.

0
135
270
405
540

5
10−3
2

5
10−2
2

5

Position, m

Average Magnitude

0
320
640
960
1280
10−6

2

5
10−5

2

5
10−4

Cosine Similarity

0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
0.60

0.70

0.80

0.90

1.00

Uncontrolled
Controlled

Uber
Cadore
Ciampino

GGB

V1 V2 
V3 
H1
Hartzell

V3

18
45
72
97
126
0.4

0.55

0.7

0.85

1

Speed, km/h

GGB-C-V1
GGB-C-V2
GGB-C-V3

GHM-C-V3
GGB-C-H1

Figure 4: Analysis of the dataset size and quality of samples. (a) the estimated AMS from GGB-C-V1 - shown in
black - are compared with spatial patterns from single samples - shown with green markers. Two random trips are
highlighted as blue markers. Marker represents the mean magnitude from a segment of the bridge, which corresponds
to the absolute value of the mean of Bij from Table 1. (b) The GHMB dataset is filtered by speed and the 231 fastest
speeds are shown in blue and the 102 slowest speeds in green. The solid black line is the mean with respect to the full
dataset, while, the dashed black line is the mean of the slowest 102 - Figure 3 GHM-C-V3 result. (c) Analysis of the
effect of speed on the quality of a single trip. The cosine similarity between a mode shape reference and the averaged
magnitudes from a singe trip is used as a proxy metric for quality. The cosine similarity is calculated for all controlled
cases and modes, and a liner trendline is fit for each mode. (d) Analysis of the effect of dataset size on the accuracy of
the estimate. In this analysis, the full dataset was subsampled with replacement to create 100,000 bootstrapped datasets,
and each bootstrapped dataset was processed with the averaging scheme. Each point on (d) represents the mean MAC
from the 100,000 bootstrapped datasets at their respective percent of dataset size.

The AMS results for the variety of bridges studied present an opportunity to broadly assess trends and sensitivities
with respect to individual trips or groups of trips, i.e., subsets. Although many factors affect how the bridge signal is
transmitted from the road surface to the cabin, this section focuses on the influence of an important feature identified in
prior work: vehicle speed.

GGB-C is a controlled dataset containing a lower average vehicle speed compared to other datasets. Prior work
discusses how controlled datasets generally exhibit higher SNR which lead to the identification of a relatively larger
number of modes [29]. This is consistent with our findings; this study extracted the highest number of AMS (four) from
this controlled dataset compared to other datasets. Conversely, datasets with high speeds are attributed to lower SNR as
it reduces the time of data collection and intensifies the vehicle dynamical response to the road irregularities [15, 58].

For the Ciampino Bridge and the Cadore Bridge, the sample sizes of full datasets are significantly larger than sample
sizes used in this study. The subsets used in the analyses are based on the premise that the sensing speed is a strong
predictor for SNR, which is a proxy for signal “quality”. Nonetheless, it is important to test this hypothesis by evaluating

6


the sensitivity of the AMS results to the vehicle speed and the size of dataset. These considerations become especially
important when data volumes become orders of magnitude larger, i.e., tens of thousands of datasets. For instance,
crowdsensing platforms with monthly data streams on the order of millions would greatly benefit from pre-processing
tools that can filter out datasets that may be noisy or less likely to positively impact SHM features of interest. This
process could operate by flagging datasets based on metadata analyses, e.g., speed, smartphone, vehicle type, etc., that
strongly correlated with less accurate AMS.

Figures 4a-c break down results with respect to the vehicle’s speed. Figure 4a is a scatter of the contributions to
the AMS (mode V1 in GGB-C) from each trip across the Golden Gate Bridge, two of which are highlighted in blue
as examples. The average of all samples is depicted as the AMS which is presented by dark continuous line. In a
crowdsourced data collection campaign where results from large number of samples are averaged, it is possible to
achieve accurate results even if a few individual trips are excessively noisy. In other words, while all datasets may
be weighted equally during aggregation, they do not equally contribute to structural dynamics information. Figure
4b highlights the band-passed frequency-space plot (mode V3 in GHM-C) for two speed subsets, where blue points
represent faster trips and green slower trips, respectively. Overall a stark difference is visible in Figure 4b where trips
with higher vehicle speeds generally possess larger magnitudes.

Some data subsets correspond to more accurate AMS estimates than others and may be considered to be of higher
quality. Cosine similarity was used to evaluate the accuracy of an AMS from a single trip in comparison to the reference
AMS. Figure 4c plots cosine similarity versus vehicle speed for five different modes over two bridges (GGB and
GHMB). The GHMB dataset, red scatter in Figure 4c, spans the widest range of speeds and the most samples of the
controlled datasets; the regression line was highly significant (F = 80.15, p < .0001), indicating an inverse dependency
of sample quality on speed. While maintaining an inverse relationship, the fits for the GGB modes are not significant
(p > .05). The fit for the horizontal GGB mode has a positive slope, suggesting that mode shape accuracy improves
with vehicle speed, which is inconsistent with our hypothesis. Overall, these results are preliminary and provide limited
quantification on how vehicle speed can affect quality of some specific mode shapes. Complications arise from large
difference in the range of vehicle speeds considered in the GGB and GHMB applications, 20-70 km/hr vs. 20-120
km/hr, as well as the nonuniform sampling of the speeds. In summary, while we can confirm speed is a quality predictor
in one case, i.e., GHMB, this observation is not statistically significant for GGB modes. The quality of an individual
SVT is affected by a wide range of features including bridge length, traffic speed, length ratio, road profile roughness,
expansion joints, to name a few. In our analysis, we found evidence of speed affecting a metric of mode shape quality,
yet further investigation is needed to establish empirical rules for predicting the quality of individual SVT data based on
trip metadata and features.

In Figure 4d, the relationship between sample size and MAC value is presented for the identified AMSs. The sample
size is presented in terms of percentage of the entire sample set. For each percentage level, 100,000 minibatches were
randomly selected with replacement from the full dataset (i.e., sample bootstrapping) and the average MAC value was
calculated. From Figure 4d, in all cases, without exception, the accuracy of identified AMSs monotonically increased
with sample size. The extent of this improvement varied with each mode and with respect to the controllability of the
SVT data. In one case, increasing sample sizes rose the MAC value of the first mode from Uber data (N = 50) by
31%. There are two further observations: (1) the rate at which accuracy increases decreases with sample size, and
(2) accuracy increases at a slower rate for the uncontrolled data. This suggests that when compared to uncontrolled
trips, fewer controlled trips would be needed to achieve a certain AMS accuracy level for a given mode. For instance,
consider the first vertical mode of the GGB: the MAC value from 50% of the controlled data (50 samples used) is about
0.90, which is considerably higher than 0.75, the value from the Uber data (50 samples used).

Discussion

Four studies in this paper demonstrated a wide range of real-world examples in which important spatial vibration
characteristics of bridges, i.e., absolute value mode shapes (AMSs), can be extracted successfully from crowdsourced
smartphone-vehicle trip (SVT) data. Bridges from three general classes were considered: short-span, medium-to-long-
span, and long-span, and three types of crowdsourced SVT datasets were used: controlled, partially-controlled, and
uncontrolled.

The successful applications on the Golden Gate Bridge (GGB) show capabilities for identifying AMSs of long-span
bridges in both vertical and horizontal directions (see Figure 3a-e). Bridges with long main spans (> 500 m) belong
to a small, yet special category. While there are fewer than 100 such bridges in the world, they have a high structural
flexibility which is tied to low modal frequencies (i.e., several modes below 1 Hz [55, 59]). This is notable for the
case of SVT data as this frequency range is distinctly below the typical frequency range of vehicle suspension systems
(1 − 3 Hz). Thus, negative effects of vehicle-bridge-road interaction are mitigated. Additionally, for a given speed

7


and sampling rate, SVT data sets collected on long-span bridges will possess a larger sample size. Finally, long-span
bridges are among the most travelled, as measured by large AADT values, which facilitates high-rate SVT data streams.
In summary, with the potential for large volumes of high quality datasets, SVT data may present their highest value to
long-span bridges.

The studies on the Cadore Bridge (CAD) and Gene Hartzell Memorial Bridge (GHMB) confirmed applicability of the
method to a larger group of existing bridges with maximum spans between 50 − 500 m, i.e., medium- to long-span
bridges. According to the national bridge inventory (NBI) curated by the federal highways administration (FHWA),
about 12, 000 bridges (2%) in the US belong to this class. Similarly, the successful study on the short-span Ciampino
Bridge (CMP) represents applicability of the method to US bridges having maximum spans between 15 m and 50 m,
which includes nearly 163, 000 bridges (26%).

From a structural dynamics perspective, bridges with shorter spans are stiffer than long-span bridges and are more
likely to possess some modal frequencies between the typical vehicle band 1 − 3 Hz. Note that the modal frequencies
for both the second horizontal mode for CAD (see CAD-PC-H2 in Figure 3g) and the third vertical mode for GHMB
(see GHMB-C-V3 in Figure 3f) fall within this range and are therefore subject to high noise from vehicle-bridge-road
interaction. This methodology does not include modeling of the vehicle system nor any processes for decoupling
vehicle dynamics, e.g., empirical mode decomposition, deconvolution, etc. [60]; nonetheless, accurate AMSs were
extracted, which may suggest that large and diverse SVT data sets, acquired using many different vehicle, help mitigate
negative interaction effects. It is notable that only one AMS was successfully extracted from each of these bridges.
This result is partially dictated by the random nature of the traffic excitation: there is no guarantee that a given mode
is sufficiently active in the measured structural response at the space-time coordinates of the SVT data. Large data
volumes (on the order of thousands or hundreds of thousands) would dramatically improve the odds that individual
structural modes have a strong presence in the aggregate space-frequency maps. Generally, for robust damage detection,
several bridge modes should be consistently tracked over time.

The AMSs are directly linked to reliable indicators of structural damage, such as mode shape curvature, total modal
assurance criteria (TMAC), etc. [61], and thereby establish a fundamental functionality for a damage detection system.
Robust synthetic analyses in Supplementary Note 1 exemplify two crowdsensing scenarios in which these features are
used to detect the presence of bridge damage. A 60-m long bridge was considered with a mobile sensor network that
produced 100 SVT datasets per day over the course of six months. The identified AMSs for three modes were used to
track the TMAC value over time (days) which led to an accurate damage detection within a few days of the damage
event.

The approach proposed in this paper is based on statistical signal processing techniques and does not utilize machine
learning (ML). Over the past decade, applications of data-driven ML methods have initiated enormous advances in the
sciences, broadly shaping fields such as physics, computer vision, robotics, natural language processing, neuroscience,
etc. [62, 63, 64, 65], with growing applications in civil engineering [41, 66, 67, 68]. That is, the results here establish
the initial, known capabilities for extracting spatial vibration characteristics features but may underreport the extent of
dynamic features and accuracies that are possible for the considered data sets. For instance, in the studies presented, the
accuracy of the results from SVT data were evaluated through a direct comparison with results based on traditional fixed
sensor networks, while trained AI models may enable techniques for automated cross-validation of modal properties.

Bridge condition monitoring based on SVT data leverages existing vehicle mobility networks and high smartphone
penetration rates. These approaches offer very low upfront monitoring costs compared to traditional sensing systems
and enable a scalable information retrieval process: all bridges that are covered by the smartphone-vehicle network
can be analyzed using these tools. Urban bridges generally have high AADT levels, such that low participation rates
can still yield ample data streaming volumes, e.g., 1% of the AADT of the Golden Gate Bridge amounts to over 1, 000
daily trips. Conversely, data streaming volumes for bridges in rural areas may be limited by comparatively lower AADT
values; yet, large-scale and long-term data sets combined with advances in transfer learning could help utilize prior
analyses of similar bridges to enable dynamic property estimation using sparse SVT data.

A key ambition for crowdsourcing infrastructure condition information is the creation of an open database of bridge
vibration records, curated with historic dynamic property estimates, bridge model files, design details such as material
or span, etc. The overarching goal is to provide bridge owners and inspectors an opportunity to focus on key, pre-
identified bridge locations or components of interest, to enable more frequent, more quantitative inspections, to support
preventative maintenance protocols. Such a database would complement existing archives, e.g., the National Bridge
Inventory, which is managed by the FHWA, with the addition of maintaining historic data and records. Regular
observations of structural behavior over a long term (over one year) are essential to establishing baselines and
performance benchmarks needed for condition evaluations [69]. Centralization and standardization of archival vibration
data and structural health reports would be critical to the success and impact of this program. First, a widespread
coverage of bridges would promote participation of bridge owners. Second, standardized and curated data sets assist

8


with the rapid development and application of new techniques, such as developing trained AI models for condition
monitoring.

The establishment of a mobile sensing platform of this scale creates new interdisciplinary challenges. The everyday use
and reliability has substantial computing, network, and cloud infrastructure needs for which existing cellular networks
and smartphone ownership levels provide an important foundation. There are a very large number of eligible SVT
datasets that extensively cover US infrastructure and have already been collected by ridesharing companies and apps
such as Uber, Lyft, Waze, etc. Fig. 3b shows a successful implementation based on a small number of uncontrolled
SVT trips collected by Uber. There is high potential value within these enormous, pre-existing datasets, which present
opportunities for ridesharing businesses to collaborate with municipalities and state Departments of Transportation.
Advances in smart vehicle technologies, e.g., vehicle-to-infrastructure communication, could made a large positive
impact by accelerating data transmission, storage, and analysis. Developments in material science can help connect
sparse structural response measurements to local and global behavior [70], e.g., load distributions [71], multi-scale
analysis and design [72]. The concept of an open database of bridge records poses potential legal constraints and
questions which will depend on jurisdiction. Is there a need to restrict database access to a limited number of users,
organizations, or institutions for national security? Would there be a there a legal obligation for a bridge owner to act on
data-driven reports describing significant indicators of severe structural damage?

The findings of this paper could have a substantial impact on the monitoring and management of bridges globally. The
tools developed are broadly applicable to all bridges; yet, there remains a need to continue to study the accuracies and
efficacies of using SVT data in additional scenarios to better identify strengths and potential limitations of the approach
for existing bridges. The results presented in Supplementary Note 1 emphasize the power of regularly collecting and
analyzing SVT data over time for damage detection and support the integration of low-cost, large-scale monitoring into
bridge management practices.

Data Collection and Processing

The Good Vibrations Android application has been developed by the researchers at the MIT Senseable City Lab to record
vibrations, locations, and orientations data generated when a smartphone is moving over a monitored infrastructure.
The main objectives of this application can be summarized as follows:

1. Timely detect when a smartphone is entering or leaving a monitored area.

2. Record and store the data coming from the sensors of the smartphone at the highest available frequency.

3. Minimize the energy consumption of the application.

However, the first and last item of this list are generally in contrast. On one hand, to detect the position of a smartphone
with a good level of accuracy while tracking its movements it is necessary to keep the GPS receiver always ON; on the
other hand an active GPS receiver can consume most of the battery of a smartphone. To solve this issue we decided to
implement a multi-barrier activation approach. The first activation barrier consists of detecting if the user is currently
driving. When the application is active, a service listens for an activity change event generated by the Android OS.
Activity detection is a service provided by the Android OS which allows, thanks to a Machine Learning model, to
detect if the smartphone is standing still or carried by a user who is walking, biking, or driving by just analyzing the
signal generated by the IMU sensors of the smartphones. This approach is more energy conservative compared to other
localization methods at the cost of a small activation delay 6. The second activation barrier can be activated only if
the user is driving close to a monitored infrastructure. In this case the application relies on the GPS receiver of the
smartphone and it implements the following logic to detect if the user is close: If a monitored infrastructure is reachable
in less than 60 seconds the GPS receiver is left ON and the current location of the device is collected every 5 seconds.
Otherwise, the application will turn off the GPS module and will schedule a new activation of the GPS receiver in t
seconds. This t value is computed based on the distance from the closest infrastructure.

The t value is a very conservative estimate, but in our experience it is the best trade-off between accuracy, energy
consumption, and computation capabilities. Finally, if the user is driving, the location and speed reported by the GPS
receiver indicate that a monitored infrastructure is reachable in less than 30 seconds, and the accuracy provided by the
GPS receiver is less than 10 m the recording process can start. The data generated by the GPS receiver, (timestamp,
latitude, longitude, speed, accuracy) the rotation vector (timestamp and rotation quaternion) and the accelerometer
(timestamp and x, y, z components of the acceleration vector) are recorded independently at the maximum sample rate
allowed by the device. Generally, GPS data is recorded every second, while Accelerations and Rotation data rate can
vary depending on the specific device between 50 and 500 Hz.

6https://developers.google.com/location-context/activity-recognition/

9


1. Depending on the axis of interest, corresponding raw acceleration signals ar
i (t) are collected with smart-
phones: i = 1, 2, ..., N.
2. Preprocessing: ar
i (t) is downsampled to a desired frequency range, yielding ai(t). The downsampled signals
are checked for stationarity using augmented Dickey-Fuller test [73] to filter out corrupted signals with
baseline shifts or unreasonable variations.
3. (Optional) Depending on the direction of the vehicle motion (right-left or left-right) and in case that the
inspected span is surrounded by expansion joints, a fractual value α ∈ [0, 0.2] is selected and the initial
portions of the signals are trimmed: ai(t) := ai(tn) : n > α × |ai(t)|.
4. Synchrosqueezed wavelet transform is calculated using ai(t), resulting Tai(f, t), in which 0 ≤ f ≤ fNyq
and fNyq is the Nyquist frequency defined by the sampling rate.
5. Tai(f, t) is mapped into spatial coordinates using available time-stamped GPS coordinates (provided by the
app), resulting Tai(f, x) in which x ∈ [0, Lbr] is the longitudinal position on the bridge with total length of
Lbr.
6. Select values for bandwidth ϵ, spatial segment width ∆, and a spatial stride S.
7. Given a desired natural frequency fk, a series of frequency-space grids are defined as follows:

Bij = Tai([fk − ϵ/2, fk + ϵ/2], [j × S, max{Lbr, ∆ + j × S}]) for j = 1, ..., ⌊(Lbr − ∆)/S⌋ + 1.

Bij contains wavelet amplitudes for signal ai(t) in a jth frequency-space grid. If |Bij| = 0, it is skipped.

8. The mean of amplitudes over all signals for each frequency-space grid is calculated: µj = 1

N
�N
1 p : p ∈
Bij.
9. Finally, an ordered set of µj for j = 1, ..., ⌊(Lbr − ∆)/S⌋ + 1 presents the aggregated absolute spatial
pattern of the bridge on frequency fk. For a fair choice of fk, this spatial signature should converge to the
absolute natural mode shape.

Table 1: Summary of the core methodology used for identifying absolute natural mode shapes.

To allow for the fastest possible recording, these data are initially stored in memory and then moved to the storage of the
device when the data collection is over (or periodically to avoid filling up the memory). To avoid losing measurements
during the memory off load, the entire collection process is multithreaded and based on synchronization queues in a
producer-consumer fashion. The new data is inserted into dedicated queues (one for each sensor) and a writer thread is
responsible for moving the data from the queues to the physical storage of the device when required. This minimizes the
amount of code executed as a response to a new data sample, while leaving the data in terms of timestamps and values
exactly as provided by the OS. Once the user leaves the monitored area, a first check on the GPS trace is performed.
However, a driver could get really close to an infrastructure without crossing it. To filter out these cases the application
checks that the recorded GPS trajectory intersects a set of checkpoints located on the bridge. If this happens, the scan is
ready for uploading, otherwise the scan is discarded. Before uploading the collected scans to the Cloud, the data is
compressed and divided into smaller chunks to ease the upload process. Finally, when the smartphone is connected to
the Internet the scans are uploaded to the Cloud and if the process is successful the uploaded data is removed from the
smartphone.

Absolute Modeshape Identification Methodology

The algorithm detects the change in magnitude of known modal frequencies with the position on the bridge, which
is proportional to the AMS. For data collection, vehicles carry smartphones that take acceleration and location
measurements. Since the signals are collected within moving vehicles, the bridge vibrations are highly contaminated by
the road profile and vehicle dynamics. Furthermore, the low quality smartphone sensors introduce additional sampling
errors and measurement noise. For these reasons, the bridge vibrations are imperceptible in a single signal, however, by
averaging many trips the spatial characteristics of the vibrations appear.

Due to the noisy nature of the data collection process, the datasets are filtered proior to aggregation. Under visual
inspection of the collected signals in the uncontrolled datasets, noticeable trends are apparent, and as shown in the
analysis in Figure 4, the speed of the vehicle has a detrimental effect on accuracy. For these reasons, the datasets are
filtered first based on speed, and second, with the augmented dickey fuller (ADF) test for signal stationarity.

10


The aggregation process spatially averages frequency contents to determine the relative magnitude differences at each
location on the bridge. To achieve this, the bridge is divided into overlapping segments; the width, ∆, and stride,
S, (distance segment centers) are two parameters of the method. The synchrosqueezed wavelet transform converts
each acceleration time series to the time-frequency domain, and the instantaneous magnitudes are calculated. Lastly,
averaging the magnitudes in each segment, Bij, at the modal frequencies of the bridge for all trips yields the AMS.
Including a small bandwidth, ϵ, around the modal frequency in the averaging process leads to robust results on noisy
datasets.

The method relies on the prior knowledge of the modal frequencies, and for this study, the natural frequencies are
determined in two different ways. First, the frequencies are found using a traditional fixed sensor network, the state
of practice in SHM, which were used as a reference for analysis. Second, the natural frequencies are found with the
recently proposed algorithm Most Probable Modal Frequencies (MPMF) [29]. The goal of determining the frequencies
in such a way is to demonstrates that all of the results in the work can be found only using measurements obtained from
passing vehicles. The results from this analysis are found in the Supplementary Material.

References

[1] American Society of Civil Engineers. Failure to act: Closing the infrastructure investment gap for america’s
economic future. American Society of Civil Engineers, 2016.
[2] Elco E Koks, Julie Rozenberg, Conrad Zorn, Mersedeh Tariverdi, Michalis Vousdoukas, SA Fraser, JW Hall,
and Stephane Hallegatte. A global multi-hazard risk analysis of road and railway infrastructure assets. Nature
communications, 10(1):1–11, 2019.
[3] Maarten K Van Aalst. The impacts of climate change on the risk of natural disasters. Disasters, 30(1):5–18, 2006.
[4] John FB Mitchell, Jason Lowe, Richard A Wood, and Michael Vellinga. Extreme events due to human-induced
climate change. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 364(1845):2117–2133, 2006.
[5] Sandra Banholzer, James Kossin, and Simon Donner. The impact of climate change on natural disasters. In
Reducing disaster: Early warning systems for climate change, pages 21–49. Springer, 2014.
[6] Wesley Cook, Paul J Barr, and Marvin W Halling. Bridge failure rate. Journal of Performance of Constructed
Facilities, 29(3):04014080, 2015.
[7] Z Van Leeuwen and R Lamb. Flood and scour related failure incidents at railway assets between 1846 and 2013.
Railway Safety & Standards Board, 2014.
[8] Rajeev Kumar Garg, Satish Chandra, and Aman Kumar. Analysis of bridge failures in india from 1977 to 2017.
Structure and Infrastructure Engineering, 18(3):295–312, 2022.
[9] Yoseok Jeong, WooSeok Kim, Ilkeun Lee, and Jaeha Lee. Bridge inspection practices and bridge management
programs in china, japan, korea, and us. Journal of Structural Integrity and Maintenance, 3(2):126–135, 2018.
[10] Jerome Peter Lynch. An overview of wireless structural health monitoring for civil structures. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 365(1851):345–372,
2007.
[11] Charles R Farrar and Keith Worden. Structural health monitoring: a machine learning perspective. John Wiley &
Sons, 2012.
[12] Masoud Sanayei, Ali Khaloo, Mustafa Gul, and F Necati Catbas. Automated finite element model updating of a
scale bridge model using measured static and modal test data. Engineering Structures, 102:66–79, 2015.
[13] Ali Khaloo, David Lattanzi, Keith Cunningham, Rodney Dell’Andrea, and Mark Riley. Unmanned aerial vehicle
inspection of the placer river trail bridge through image-based 3d modelling. Structure and Infrastructure
Engineering, 14(1):124–136, 2018.
[14] Mozhgan Momtaz Dargahi, Ali Khaloo, and David Lattanzi. Color-space analytics for damage detection in 3d
point clouds. Structure and Infrastructure Engineering, 18(6):775–788, 2022.
[15] CW Lin and YB Yang. Use of a passing vehicle to scan the fundamental bridge frequencies: An experimental
verification. Engineering Structures, 27(13):1865–1878, 2005.
[16] Maria Feng, Yoshio Fukuda, Masato Mizuta, and Ekin Ozer. Citizen sensors for shm: Use of accelerometer data
from smartphones. Sensors, 15(2):2980–2998, 2015.
[17] Y-B Yang, CW Lin, and JD Yau. Extracting bridge frequencies from the dynamic response of a passing vehicle.
Journal of Sound and Vibration, 272(3-5):471–493, 2004.

11


[18] YB Yang and KC Chang. Extracting the bridge frequencies indirectly from a passing vehicle: Parametric study.
Engineering Structures, 31(10):2448–2459, 2009.

[19] Dionysius M Siringoringo and Yozo Fujino. Estimating bridge fundamental frequency from vibration response of
instrumented passing vehicle: analytical and experimental study. Advances in Structural Engineering, 15(3):417–
433, 2012.

[20] Yao Zhang, Longqi Wang, and Zhihai Xiang. Damage detection by mode shape squares extracted from a passing
vehicle. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 331(2):291–307, 2012.

[21] PJ McGetrick, D Hester, and SE Taylor. Implementation of a drive-by monitoring system for transport infrastructure
utilising smartphone technology and gnss. Journal of Civil Structural Health Monitoring, 7(2):175–189, 2017.

[22] Yeong-Bin Yang, Judy P Yang, Bin Zhang, and Yuntian Wu. Vehicle Scanning Method for Bridges. Wiley Online
Library, 2020.

[23] Jase D Sitton, Dinesh Rajan, and Brett A Story. Bridge frequency estimation strategies using smartphones. Journal
of Civil Structural Health Monitoring, 10(3):513–526, 2020.

[24] Jase D Sitton, Yasha Zeinali, Dinesh Rajan, and Brett A Story. Frequency estimation on two-span continuous
bridges using dynamic responses of passing vehicles. Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 146(1):04019115, 2020.

[25] Johannio Marulanda, Juan M Caicedo, and Peter Thomson. Modal identification using mobile sensors under
ambient excitation. Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 31(2):04016051, 2016.

[26] Thomas J Matarazzo and Shamim N Pakzad. Structural identification for mobile sensing with missing observations.
Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 142(5):04016021, 2016.

[27] Thomas J Matarazzo and Shamim N Pakzad. Truncated physical model for dynamic sensor networks with
applications in high-resolution mobile sensing and bigdata. Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 142(5):04016019,
2016.

[28] Thomas J Matarazzo and Shamim N Pakzad. Scalable structural modal identification using dynamic sensor
network data with stridex. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, 33(1):4–20, 2018.

[29] Thomas J Matarazzo, Dániel Kondor, Paolo Santi, Sebastiano Milardo, Soheil S Eshkevari, Shamim N Pakzad, and
Carlo Ratti. Crowdsourcing bridge vital signs with smartphone vehicle trips. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07026,
2020.

[30] Kevin P. OKeeffe, Amin Anjomshoaa, Steven H. Strogatz, Paolo Santi, and Carlo Ratti. Quantifying the sensing
power of vehicle fleets. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(26):12752–12757, 2019.

[31] V Askegaard and P Mossing. Long term observation of rc-bridge using changes in natural frequency. nordic
concrete research. publication no 7. Publication of: NORDIC CONCRETE FEDERATION, 1988.

[32] Bart Peeters and Guido De Roeck. One-year monitoring of the z24-bridge: environmental effects versus damage
events. Earthquake engineering & structural dynamics, 30(2):149–171, 2001.

[33] Bart Peeters, Johan Maeck, and Guido De Roeck. Vibration-based damage detection in civil engineering: excitation
sources and temperature effects. Smart materials and Structures, 10(3):518, 2001.

[34] Yabin Liang, Dongsheng Li, Gangbing Song, and Qian Feng. Frequency co-integration-based damage detection
for bridges under the influence of environmental temperature variation. Measurement, 125:163–175, 2018.

[35] Marian Ralbovsky, Stefan Deix, and Rainer Flesch. Frequency changes in frequency-based damage identification.
Structure and Infrastructure Engineering, 6(5):611–619, 2010.

[36] Jeong-Tae Kim, Jae-Hyung Park, and Byung-Jun Lee. Vibration-based damage monitoring in model plate-girder
bridges under uncertain temperature conditions. Engineering Structures, 29(7):1354–1365, 2007.

[37] Chenhao Jin, Shinae Jang, Xiaorong Sun, Jingcheng Li, and Richard Christenson. Damage detection of a highway
bridge under severe temperature changes using extended kalman filter trained neural network. Journal of Civil
Structural Health Monitoring, 6(3):545–560, 2016.

[38] Wei Fan and Pizhong Qiao. Vibration-based damage identification methods: a review and comparative study.
Structural health monitoring, 10(1):83–111, 2011.

[39] CR Farrar and GH James Iii. System identification from ambient vibration measurements on a bridge. Journal of
sound and vibration, 205(1):1–18, 1997.

[40] ZY Shi, SS Law, and LM Zhang. Damage localization by directly using incomplete mode shapes. Journal of
engineering mechanics, 126(6):656–660, 2000.

12


[41] Jong Jae Lee, Jong Won Lee, Jin Hak Yi, Chung Bang Yun, and Hie Young Jung. Neural networks-based damage
detection for bridges considering errors in baseline finite element models. Journal of Sound and Vibration,
280(3-5):555–578, 2005.
[42] Chuanshuang Hu and Muhammad T Afzal. A statistical algorithm for comparing mode shapes of vibration testing
before and after damage in timbers. Journal of Wood Science, 52(4):348–352, 2006.
[43] Kim M Liew and Quan Wang. Application of wavelet theory for crack identification in structures. Journal of
engineering mechanics, 124(2):152–157, 1998.
[44] J-C Hong, YY Kim, HC Lee, and YW Lee. Damage detection using the lipschitz exponent estimated by the
wavelet transform: applications to vibration modes of a beam. International journal of solids and structures,
39(7):1803–1816, 2002.
[45] E Douka, S Loutridis, and A Trochidis. Crack identification in plates using wavelet analysis. Journal of sound
and vibration, 270(1-2):279–295, 2004.
[46] Chih-Chieh Chang and Lien-Wen Chen. Detection of the location and size of cracks in the multiple cracked beam
by spatial wavelet based approach. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 19(1):139–155, 2005.
[47] Upendra P Poudel, Gongkang Fu, and Jian Ye. Wavelet transformation of mode shape difference function for
structural damage location identification. Earthquake Engineering & Structural Dynamics, 36(8):1089–1107,
2007.
[48] Chengjun Tan, Ahmed Elhattab, and Nasim Uddin. Wavelet based damage assessment and localization for bridge
structures. In 26th ASNT Research Symposium, pages 228–240, 2017.
[49] AK Pandey, M Biswas, and MM Samman. Damage detection from changes in curvature mode shapes. Journal of
sound and vibration, 145(2):321–332, 1991.
[50] MM Abdel Wahab and Guido De Roeck. Damage detection in bridges using modal curvatures: application to a
real damage scenario. Journal of Sound and vibration, 226(2):217–235, 1999.
[51] Byeong Hwa Kim, Taehyo Park, and George Z Voyiadjis. Damage estimation on beam-like structures using the
multi-resolution analysis. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 43(14-15):4238–4257, 2006.
[52] Dongming Feng and Maria Q Feng. Output-only damage detection using vehicle-induced displacement response
and mode shape curvature index. Structural Control and Health Monitoring, 23(8):1088–1107, 2016.
[53] Yaser Shokrani, Vasilis K Dertimanis, Eleni N Chatzi, and Marco N. Savoia. On the use of mode shape curvatures
for damage localization under varying environmental conditions. Structural Control and Health Monitoring,
25(4):e2132, 2018.
[54] Randall J Allemang. A correlation coefficient for modal vector analysis. In Proc. 1st Int. Modal Analysis
Conference, pages 110–116, 1982.
[55] Shamim N Pakzad and Gregory L Fenves. Statistical analysis of vibration modes of a suspension bridge using
spatially dense wireless sensor network. Journal of structural engineering, 135(7):863–872, 2009.
[56] Ahmed M Abdel-Ghaffar and Robert H Scanlan. Ambient vibration studies of golden gate bridge: I. suspended
structure. Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 111(4):463–482, 1985.
[57] Mehmet Çelebi. Golden gate bridge response: A study with low-amplitude data from three earthquakes. Earth-
quake spectra, 28(2):487–510, 2012.
[58] Abdollah Malekjafarian and Eugene J OBrien. On the use of a passing vehicle for the estimation of bridge mode
shapes. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 397:77–91, 2017.
[59] Wai-Fah Chen and Lian Duan. Handbook of international bridge engineering. CRC Press, 2013.
[60] Soheil Sadeghi Eshkevari, Thomas J Matarazzo, and Shamim N Pakzad. Bridge modal identification using
acceleration measurements within moving vehicles. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 141:106733,
2020.
[61] Yong Gao and BF Spencer. Damage localization under ambient vibration using changes in flexibility. Earthquake
Engineering and Engineering Vibration, 1(1):136–144, 2002.
[62] Michael I Jordan and Tom M Mitchell. Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects. Science,
349(6245):255–260, 2015.
[63] Vivien Marx. The big challenges of big data. Nature, 498(7453):255–260, 2013.
[64] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.

13


[65] Steven L Brunton, Joshua L Proctor, and J Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations from data by sparse
identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 113(15):3932–
3937, 2016.
[66] Billie F Spencer Jr, Vedhus Hoskere, and Yasutaka Narazaki. Advances in computer vision-based civil infrastruc-
ture inspection and monitoring. Engineering, 5(2):199–222, 2019.
[67] Ali Khaloo, David Lattanzi, Adam Jachimowicz, and Charles Devaney. Utilizing uav and 3d computer vision for
visual inspection of a large gravity dam. Frontiers in Built Environment, 4:31, 2018.
[68] Mohammad Hossein Rafiei and Hojjat Adeli. A novel unsupervised deep learning model for global and local
health condition assessment of structures. Engineering Structures, 156:598–607, 2018.
[69] Ian FC Smith. Studies of sensor data interpretation for asset management of the built environment. Frontiers in
Built Environment, 2:8, 2016.
[70] Berthy T Feng, Alexander C Ogren, Chiara Daraio, and Katherine L Bouman. Visual vibration tomography:
Estimating interior material properties from monocular video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 16231–16240, 2022.
[71] Kai Guo and Markus J Buehler. A semi-supervised approach to architected materials design using graph neural
networks. Extreme Mechanics Letters, 41:101029, 2020.
[72] Neel Nadkarni, Chiara Daraio, and Dennis M Kochmann. Dynamics of periodic mechanical structures containing
bistable elastic elements: From elastic to solitary wave propagation. Physical Review E, 90(2):023204, 2014.
[73] David A Dickey and Wayne A Fuller. Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series with a unit root.
Journal of the American statistical association, 74(366a):427–431, 1979.

14


