1 
 

Partial crystallization in a Zr-based bulk metallic glass in selective laser melting 

 

R.S. Khmyrov,a P.A. Podrabinnik,a T.V. Tarasova,a M.A. Gridnev,a A.D. Korotkov,a  

S.N. Grigoriev,b A.Yu. Kurmysheva,b O.B. Kovalev,c A.V. Gusarova*  

 
 

a Laboratory of Innovative Additive Technologies, Moscow State University of Technology 

STANKIN, Vadkovsky Per. 3a, 127055 Moscow, Russia 

b Laboratory of Electric Current Assisted Sintering Technologies, Moscow State University of 

Technology STANKIN, Vadkovsky Per. 3a, 127055 Moscow, Russia 

c Khristianovich Institute of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics SB RAS, 630090 Novosibirsk, 

Russia 

 

 

* Corresponding author e-mail: av.goussarov@gmail.com 

 

 

Keywords: Bulk metallic glass; Crystal growth rate; Crystallization time; Cooling rate; Heat 

transfer; Homogeneous nucleation; Laser powder bed fusion; Selective laser melting; Thermal 

cycle; Vit 106. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


2 

 

Abstract. Metals and alloys in amorphous state are promising for the use as structural and 

functional materials due to their superior properties related to the absence of such defects as grain 

boundaries and dislocations. Obtaining the amorphous state requires quenching from liquid state 

with a high cooling rate. In conventional technologies, this is the reason for a considerable size 

limitation hindering application of amorphous alloys. Additive manufacturing (AM) is free of the 

size limitation. The so-called bulk metallic glass (BMG) alloys have extremely low critical cooling 

rates and can be used in AM. Recent studies on AM from Zr-based BMGs by selective laser 

melting (SLM) has proved the possibility of attaining the amorphous state and revealed partial 

crystallization to be the principal drawback of this process. The present work aims to analyze the 

conditions for partial crystallization and try to control it by optimizing the process parameters. A 

comprehensive parametric analysis is accomplished in single-track SLM experiments with Zr-

based BMG alloy Vit 106. The observed microstructures are related to the temperature fields and 

thermal cycles estimated by an analytic heat-transfer model in the laser-impact zone. In the cross 

section of a laser track, a central bright domain is identified as the remelted zone. An annular 

darker crystallization zone encircles the remelted zone. The model fits the experimentally obtained 

dependencies of the remelted zone size versus laser power and scanning speed and indicates that 

43 ± 2% of the incident laser energy is transferred into the substrate thermal energy. It seems that 

primary crystalline inclusions existing in the substrate before laser processing dissolve at the laser 

melting. The mean cooling rate in the remelted zone is much greater than the critical cooling rate. 

Therefore, homogeneous nucleation is not expected. Nevertheless, the theoretically estimated 

crystallization times are sufficient for a considerable crystal growth in the heat-affected zone where 

primary crystalline inclusions and nuclei are not completely dissolved. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


3 

 

2. Introduction 

 

Metal alloys in amorphous state have potentially higher mechanical properties, corrosion 

resistance, and some other functional properties compared to those alloys in crystalline state. The 

absence of such defects as grain boundaries and dislocations explains the superior properties. 

Obtaining an amorphous state generally requires quenching from liquid state with high cooling 

rates greater than the so-called critical cooling rate. The higher critical cooling rate the lower glass 

forming ability. Conventional structural materials like steels have low glass forming ability. The 

so-called bulk metallic glasses (BMG) are alloys commonly considered for manufacturing 

amorphous-state structures [1]. BMGs are alloys designed for high glass forming ability. 

Normally, BMG amorphous ingots can be obtained with the minimum of the three dimensions 

greater than one millimeter. In the current structural applications, Zr-based BMGs are the most 

promising among the known BMG alloys due to their excellent fracture toughness [2]. The 

examples of commercial application of such alloys are golf heads, guitar pins, and small 

mechanical parts for consumer electronics [2]. 

In conventional forming processes like casting, the cooling rate is controlled by heat transfer 

from the bulk of the part/ingot. Therefore, cooling rate generally decreases with the part size. 

Starting from a certain size, the maximum possible cooling rate attains the critical cooling rate, so 

that the given material cannot be obtained in amorphous state. The size limitation is very serious. 

To overcome it, new BMG alloys with higher glass forming ability are being developed. 

Sometimes, the alloys optimized for the minimum critical cooling rate do not have optimal 

functional properties. Another approach to increase the part size is the use of additive 

manufacturing where material is added to a growing part step-by-step. One can assure a high 

cooling rate of a small portion of the added material while the number of these portions is not 

limited. Thus, there is no size limit in additive manufacturing. Indeed, metal parts with amorphous 

structure have been successfully obtained by such well-known additive processes as selective laser 

melting (SLM), laser directed energy deposition, fused filament fabrication, and powder spraying 

[3].  

It seems that selective laser melting (SLM) also known as laser powder-bed fusion (LPBF) 

has become the most commercialized additive technology applied for manufacturing from metals 

and alloys. The reason is the small spot < 100 m of currently available technological lasers that 


4 

 

assures a satisfactory precision, their high power sufficient to melt even refractory materials, and 

a large market of high-quality powders of metals and alloys [4]. A considerable experience has 

been accumulated on SLM from BMG alloys [5]. For example, such a massive article as a hip 

prosthesis was fabricated from a Zr-based BMG by SLM [6]. The cooling rate in SLM can be 

several orders of magnitude greater than the critical cooling rate of the processed BMG alloy. 

Surprisingly, partial crystallization of such alloys is often observed [7]. The common explanation 

is rather complicated non-monotonous dependence of temperature versus time due to multiple 

laser scans. For example, the first laser scan melts material in the given point and turns it into 

amorphous state while the second laser scan heats this portion of material to a temperature below 

the liquidus point and induces partial crystallization. Generally, the domains near laser-scanning 

lines are in amorphous state while domains covered by heat-affected zones can be in crystalline 

state. Thus, characteristic fish-scale amorphous/crystalline patterns are formed [7].  

Controlling the crystallization in laser processing of BMG alloys can be advantageous for 

formation of a desirable amorphous/crystalline microstructure. However, in Zr-based alloys, 

crystallization is rather an undesirable process since even a small amount of crystals can 

significantly reduce the fracture toughness [8]. Understanding crystallization in such conditions 

requires further experimental [9] and theoretical [10] fundamental researches in thermodynamics 

and kinetics of BMG alloys. The fundamental researches promote development of predictive 

crystallization models [11,12] combining heat transfer and crystallization kinetics in SLM.  

Conventional experimental studies of phase transformations and structural relaxation in 

amorphous materials concern simple conditions of monotonous heating or cooling [9]. The models 

of crystallization kinetics essentially use the categories of homogenous nucleation and crystal 

growth and assume quasi-isothermal conditions like the most known Johnson-Mehl-Avrami-

Kolmogorov model [12]. Such models are often applied in the strongly unsteady conditions of 

laser processing characterized by important temperature gradients. The experimental study of 

BMG crystallization in SLM is often reduced to observation of the microstructure formed [7] while 

systematic experimental studies are limited. The present work aims to fill this gap. 

The present work concerns single-track experiments is SLM. The microstructure is 

characterized for a wide variety of process parameters typical for SLM. Laser processes an 

amorphous substrate without addition of powder to simplify experiments and exclude additional 

parametes related to powder. However, such an approach cannot significantly influence the 


5 

 

thermal cycles of laser processing, which are essential for microstructure formation. The obtained 

microstructures are related to the temperature fields and thermal cycles estimated by an analytic 

model of heat transfer in the laser-impact zone. Original experiments characterize the laser-

processed material and provide the key thermophysical parameters for the model. Section 2 

describes the experimental approaches. Section 3 describes the heat transfer model. Section 4 

presents the experimental results. Section 5 analyses the experimental results with the use of the 

heat transfer model. 

 

 

2. Material and experimental methods 

 

Table 1 shows the reported by manufacturer PrometalTech [13] chemical composition 

tolerance for the studied Zr-based alloy. The composition is close to that of Vit106 alloy with 

nominal atomic composition formula Zr57Cu15.4Ni12.6Al10Nb5 [14]. The atomic mass m of the 

elements is given according to Ref. [15]. Table 2 reports literature data [16-18] on the following 

properties of this alloy: density , glass transition Tg, onset crystallization Tx, solidus Ts, and 

liquidus Tl temperatures. The onset and offset melting temperatures are obtained by differential 

thermal analysis [18]. These values correspond to the solidus and liquidus points [17], respectively. 

The density reasonably decreases with temperature. 

 

Table 1. Chemical composition of the studied alloy, c (at.%) 

Element
Zr
Cu
Ni
Al
Nb
Reference

Atomic mass, m (a.m.u.)
91.224
63.546
58.6934
26.9815
92.9064
[15]

c

Vit106 nominal
57
15.4
12.6
10
5
[14]

Manufacturer’s tolerance
54.15÷59.71
14.63÷16.13
11.97÷13.20
9.5÷10.5
4.75÷5.24
[13]

EDS analysis
59.0 ± 0.3
14.3 ± 0.2
11.9 ± 0.2
9.3 ± 0.1
5.5 ± 0.2
Present work

 

Above the room temperature, the specific heat of a similar Zr alloy approximately follows 

the Dulong-Petit law in both amorphous and crystalline states [19]. This is reasonable because the 

Debye temperature of Zr is lower than the room temperature [20] and means that the specific heat 

per atom is equal to three Boltzmann constants k. It is supposed that the Dulong-Petit law is 

applicable to Vit 106 alloy too. Then, the mass specific heat is   


6 

 

Zr
Zr
Cu
Cu
Ni
Ni
Al
Al
Nb
Nb

3

p

k
C
c m
c m
c m
c m
c m





,
(1)

where c is the atomic fraction and m the atomic mass according to Table 1 and the subscripts 

designate chemical elements. Table 2 shows the value calculated by Eq. (1). 

 

Table 2. Properties of Vit106 alloy 

Property
Value
Reference

Density, 

 (g/cm3)

at the room temperature, amorphous structure
6.81
[2.4]

at the liquidus temperature
6.520
[2.5]

Tempera-

ture (K)

glass transition, Tg

672
[2.6]

690.6
Thermal expansion

onset crystallization, Tx

738
[2.6]

712.4
Thermal expansion

712
Thermal diffusivity

onset melting
1092
[2.6]

solidus, Ts
1092
[2.5]

offset melting
1120
[2.6]

liquidus, Tl
1115
[2.5]

Specific heat, Cp (J/(kg K))
325.961
Calculated

Linear thermal expansion coefficient,  (K-1)
1.1∙10-5
Thermal expansion

 

The raw material is supplied as 135×40 mm2 plates of 2 mm thick with amorphous structure 

and possible crystalline inclusions. The chemical composition is measured by energy dispersion 

analysis of characteristic X-ray spectra (EDS) in scanning electron microscope (SEM) VEGA 3 

LMH. The phase composition is studied by light microscope Olympus BX51M and the 

abovementioned SEM and X-ray diffractometer Panalytical Empyrean. Thermal expansion of the 

raw material is studied by dilatometry with NETZSCH DIL 402 in the thermal cycle including 

heating from the room temperature at the rate of 3 K/min up to 943 K followed by cooling at the 

same rate. Thermal diffusivity is measured by a laser flash method with NETZSCH LFA 467 in 

the thermal cycle consisting of stepwise heating from the room temperature up to 923 K with 

temperature stabilization at the measurement points followed by stepwise cooling. The samples 


7 

 

for dilatometry 2×2×50 mm and laser flash 10×10×1 mm are cut by electrical discharge machining. 

Section 4 reports the results on the chemical and phase composition and the thermal expansion and 

laser-flash tests of the raw material. 

Phase transformations in metallic glass are studied after laser treatement in the conditions of 

selective laser melting (SLM). The so-called single-track experiments are applied where the 

sample is scanned by a laser beam over well-separated lines to avoid overlapping the heat-affected 

zones of the laser-treated bands (tracks). Figure 1 shows the principal scheme of experimental 

SLM setup “ALAM” used for the singe-track experiments. A fiber laser generates near-infrared 

radiation. A galvanometer scanner focuses and moves a laser beam over the sample surface. The 

sample is inside a chamber with argon flow to avoid oxidation at elevated temperatures in the zone 

where the laser beam strikes the sample, the laser-impact zone. Table 3 summarizes laser 

processing parameters. They are typical in SLM. Samples for single-track experiments are 

10×20×2 mm. The top surface is grinded, not polished to increase the contrast of laser-melted 

domains in the top view. In the SLM process, the laser beam scans a solid substrate covered with 

a thin powder layer, typically around 50 m thick. This work does not apply powder because the 

thin layer cannot significantly change heat transfer in the laser-impact zone, and thus influence the 

thermal cycle of metallic glass determining phase transformations therein. 

 

 

 

Fig. 1. Laser processing experiments. 

 


8 

 

Table 3. Parameters of single track experiments 

Parameter
Value

Laser wavelength
1.07 m

Laser spot diameter
100 m

Radiative laser energy
20 ÷ 160 W

Scanning speed
5 ÷ 3000 mm/s

 

We observe the laser-treated samples from the top by light microscopy and in the cross 

sections perpendicular to the scanning direction by light microscopy and SEM. The cross sections 

are grinded and polished. To increase the contrast for light microscopy, some cross sections are 

etched with a mixture of hydrofluoric and nitric acids. 

 

 

3. Model of heat transfer in the laser-impact zone 

 

The structure of bulk metallic glass forms at temperatures below the liquidus temperature 

where the principal mode of heat transfer is conduction. The transient temperature field in the heat-

affected zone around the laser beam can be estimated by the problem of a point source on the 

surface of a conductive half space [21]. If the laser beam scans the surface with a constant speed 

V, a steady-state temperature distribution T(X,Y,Z) is formed [21] in the frame moving with the 

beam as shown in Fig. 2, 

exp
2
2
2

a

AP
VX
VR
T
T
R













,
(2)

where Ta is the ambient temperature, P the laser beam power, A the effective absorptivity,  the 

thermal conductivity,  the thermal diffusivity, and R the distance from the intersection of the 

beam axis with the surface (see Fig. 2), R2 = X2 + Y2 + Z2. Effective absorptivity A is the fraction 

of the laser beam radiative energy transferred into the heat energy of condensed phase and accounts 

for radiation reflection and other possible energy losses from the laser spot region as evaporation 

and thermal radiation [22]. Reference [22] demonstrated the applicability of the temperature field 

given by Eq. (2) in the conditions of selective laser melting by comparison with the observed 

microstructure. 


9 

 

 

 

Fig. 2. Melt pool around the laser beam scanning with speed V in the direction opposite to axis 

(OX). Frame (OXYZ) moves with the beam. Parameters of the melt pool: depth H, width W, and 

distance Rb from the laser spot center to the back side along axis (OX). 

 

Along the scanning axis (OX) (see Fig. 2) behind the laser spot, R = X. Therefore, the 

exponential term vanishes in Eq. (2) and the temperature profile becomes independent of V. This 

is useful to define the characteristic distance 

2
(
)

b

m
a

AP
R
T
T
 

,
(3)

corresponding to a characteristic temperature Tm. This is the maximum distance from the point 

source to isotherm Tm [23]. To simplify further analysis, Eq. (2) is written in the dimensionless 

form 



1 exp
x
r
  r
 
,
(4)

with dimensionless temperature 

a

m
a

T
T

T
T




,
(5)

coordinates 

(
, , , )
( , , , )

b

X Y Z R
x y z r
R

,
(6)

and thermal Peclet number  defined through characteristic velocity V0, 

 


10 

 

0

V
  V
,     
0

2

b

V
R
 
.
(7)

It should be noted that according to Eq. (7), the product of the characteristic distance and 

characteristic velocity RbV0 = 2 is independent of laser processing parameters and is the property 

of the processed material. 

At a constant value of , Eq. (4) defines an isotherm, which is a surface of revolution around 

scanning axis (OX) (see Fig. 2). The generatrix profile (x), where 2 = y2 + z2 is the dimensionless 

distance from axis (OX), is specified as a parametric curve 

ln(
)r
x
r




,     
2
2
r
x
 

,
(8)

with variable parameter r. The maximum distance of the isotherm from axis (OX), m, is found 

from the condition of local extremum, d/dx = 0. The resulting dependence m() in parametric 

form is 

ln(
)

[1 ln(
)]

r

r
r




  


,     
2
1 ln (
)
m
r
r




.
(9)

One can obtain from Eq. (9) that 

1  at 
1
m


,     
2
 at 
1
m
e





,
(10)

where e is Euler’s number. The distance m is the radius of the half-circle in the (XY) plane where 

the dimensionless temperature attains , see the shadowed region in Fig. 2. Such a region with 

width W and height H, 

2
m
b
W
  R
,     
m
b
H
  R
,
(11)

corresponds to a microstructure transformation at temperature , which can be visible in the cross 

sections of laser-treated samples. Figure 3 shows the dimensionless curve m() for  = 1 

estimating the depth and width of the remelted domain if Tm is the liquidus temperature. 

 

 

 

 

 


11 

 

 

Fig. 3. Curve of dimensionless melt radius m versus the thermal Peclet number  (solid red line) 

and its asymptotes (dashed blue lines). The insert shows the longitudinal section (left) and the 

maximum transversal section (right) of the melt pool in dimensionless coordinates (x,y,z). 

 

 

4. Results 

 

4.1. Chemical and phase composition of raw material 

The chemical composition of raw Zr57Cu15.4Ni12.6Al10Nb5 alloy is measured by EDS analysis. 

Three cross sections are cut from different areas of a plate as shown in Fig. 4. In the bottom of Fig. 

4, the insert shows three rectangular sampling domains (blue) where the EDS spectra are collected 

in every cross section. Two domains are near the plate surfaces while the third domain is in the 

middle. Thus, the composition is measured in nine sampling domains from different parts of the 

plate. We do not observe a variation of material composition with the position of the sampling 

domain inside the plate. Therefore, all the nine measurements are averaged. The last row of Table 

1 shows the measured composition in the following format: “mean” ± “mean square deviation”. 

The measured chemical composition essentially corresponds to the nominal Vit 106 composition 

and the manufacturer’s tolerance listed in the same table.  

 


12 

 

 

 

Fig. 4. Samples for EDS measurement of chemical composition. The blue rectangles indicate 

sampling domains in every cross section. 

 

Figure 5 clearly distinguishes a matrix phase with few-micron inclusions in the 

microstructure observed both by light microscopy and SEM. The observed volume fraction of the 

inclusions is roughly 10%. Besides, SEM reveals inclusions of at least two contrast levels that can 

correspond to different phases. Generally, the darker phase contains heavier elements.  

Figure 6 shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum revealing a pronounced amorphous 

halo and a system of peaks from crystalline phases. According to Shadowspeaker et al. [24], there 

are five equilibrium crystalline phases in the considered system: NiZr2, CuZr2, CuZr, Al2Zr3, and 

Al3Zr4. Comparison with the reference spectra of the listed compounds [25] indicates that only 

CuZr2 peaks match our spectrum, see vertical blue bars in Fig. 6, where the bar height is 

proportional to the intensity of the reference spectral line. The reference CuZr2 peaks are slightly 

shifted to greater angles relative to the observed peaks. The reason can be a non-stoichiometry 

composition or admixture of other elements. The other four equilibrium phases are not revealed. 

The raw material is formed by quenching from liquid phase. Probably, there is no time sufficient 

for formation of these four phases. The chemical composition of these phases considerably  


13 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 5. Raw alloy microstructure: (a) light microscopy in dark field and (b) SEM in backscattered 

electrons. 

 

 

 

Fig. 6. Raw alloy Cu K XRD spectrum. The vertical bars point to the peaks of probable crystalline 

phases. 

 

 


14 

 

deviates from the average composition. Thus, diffusion-controlled formation of them is likely 

inhibited. Several compounds with the composition around the average composition are checked 

too. Figure 6 shows that there are traces of AlZr3 crystals while formation of a solid solution based 

on crystalline Zr is hardly possible. In summary, the probable crystalline inclusion phases are 

CuZr2 and AlZr3. The two compounds explain the inclusions of two contrast levels in Fig. 5b. 

 

4.2. Dilatometry of raw material 

Figure 7 shows linear thermal expansion of the raw material. Table 2 lists the glass transition 

and onset crystallization temperatures determined from the heating branch (red line) of the 

dilatometry curve. The glass transition point overestimates the literature data, see Table 2. This 

may reflect difference in chemical composition. On the contrary, the crystallization point 

underestimates the literature data. Crystallization may start earlier because of the crystalline 

inclusions. The inclusions can be nucleation centers, thus accelerating crystallization.  The cooling 

branch (blue line) is approximately linear indicating no significant structure transformations. The 

linear thermal expansion coefficient derived from the cooling branch is approximately  = 1.1∙10-

5 K-1. The slope of the heating branch below crystallization onset is approximately the same as the 

slope of the cooling branch. Thus, the thermal expansion coefficient is approximately the same in 

the amorphous and crystalline states. 

 

 

 

Fig. 7. Raw alloy dilatometry: heating (red line) and cooling (blue line). 


15 

 

4.3. Thermal diffusivity of raw material 

Figure 8 shows the measured thermal diffusivity  of the raw material. The step on the 

heating branch (red) corresponds to the onset crystallization temperature Tx. The value of Tx 

derived from the thermal diffusivity approximately corresponds to this value derived from the 

thermal expansion, see Table 2, but underestimates literature data on Vit 106 alloy listed in Table 

2 too. The reason of the discrepancy with the literature data can be the crystalline inclusions in the 

studied raw material. These inclusions can promote heterogeneous crystallization. The cooling 

branch (blue) is significantly above the heating branch. It is supposed that the material essentially 

crystallizes during heating. Free electrons are principal heat carriers in metals. Metallic crystals 

are known to be more conductive than amorphous metals because free electrons are less scattered 

by regular atomic lattices. The cooling branch is more smooth than the heating one because there 

are no significant structure transformations at cooling.  

 

 

 

Fig. 8. Raw alloy thermal diffusivity: heating (red line) and cooling (blue line). The arrows point 

to onset crystallization Tx and liquidus Tl temperatures. 

 

One can calculate thermal conductivity  from the thermal diffusivity as 

Cp




,
(12)

where the value of Cp is taken from Table 2 and functions (T) for crystalline and amorphous states 

are estimated by extrapolation from the values of  at the room Tr = 298 K and liquidus Tl 


16 

 

temperature, respectively, see Table 2. Table 4 shows the resulting functions. Figure 9 shows 

thermal conductivity  calculated by Eq. (12) and Table 4 from thermal diffusivity . The heating 

branch in Fig. 8 below Tx results in the amorphous-state thermal conductivity in Fig. 9 while the 

cooling branch in Fig. 8 corresponds to the crystalline-state thermal conductivity in Fig 9. Thermal 

conductivity in the crystalline state is considerably greater than that in the amorphous state because 

electrons are less scattered by atoms arranged in a regular crystalline lattice. In Figs. 8 and 9, the 

dotted lines extrapolate the thermal diffusivity and conductivity to the onset crystallization and 

liquidus temperatures. Table 5 summarizes the resulting values at crystallization onset and melting. 

The indicated uncertainty is estimated based on observed measurement repeatability. The elevated 

uncertainty in the values of the last row is due to a considerable extrapolation interval. 

 

Table 4. Estimated density  versus temperature T 

Crystalline state


3
6.81 1 3 (
)
g/cm

r
T
T






Amorphous state


3
6.52 1 3 (
)
g/cm

l
T
T






 

 

 

Fig. 9. Thermal conductivity of Zr57Cu15.4Ni12.6Al10Nb5 alloy: amorphous state (red line) and 

crystalline state (blue line). The arrows point to onset crystallization Tx and liquidus Tl 

temperatures. 


17 

 

Table 5. Thermal diffusivity and conductivity of Zr57Cu15.4Ni12.6Al10Nb5 alloy in amorphous and 

crystalline states at crystallization onset and melting 

Thermal diffusivity,

 (mm2/s)

Thermal conductivity,

 (W/(m K))

Amorphous at crystallization onset 
4.0 ± 0.1
8.7 ± 0.1

Crystalline at crystallization onset
6.2 ± 0.1
13.5 ± 0.1

Crystalline at melting
7 ± 1
16 ± 2

 

4.4. Microstructure after laser processing 

Figure 10 presents examples of microstructure formed by laser processing with the indicated 

parameters, laser beam power P and scanning speed V. The typical feature of the images is a 

brighter zone formed around the scanning axis, an imaginary line drawn by the laser beam axis on 

the sample surface. This zone looks as a band on the top views and a semicircle in the cross 

sections. Thus, this zone is a half cylinder with the axis being the scanning axis. This zone contains 

considerably less inclusions compared with the non-processes material. One can compare with the 

microstructures in Fig. 5 as well as non-processed domains in Fig. 10. Inclusions dissolve at 

melting. Therefore, the bright-contrast central zone can be identified as the remelted domain. This 

corresponds well to the theoretical prediction of the semicircle cross section of the melt pool shown 

in Fig. 2.  

Bands of a darker contrast surround the remelted zone in Fig. 10. At the lower scanning 

speeds of 5 and 10 mm/s, these bands consist of columnar crystals observed on the top views. 

Generally, there are two rows of columnar crystals. In the inner one, the crystals are perpendicular 

to the scanning axis while they are oblique in the outer row. There can be a considerable space 

between the two rows of columnar crystals filled in with approximately equiaxed inclusions. See, 

for example, the top view at V = 10 mm/s in Fig. 10c. The columnar crystals generally grow in the 

direction of temperature gradient. Temperature decreases with the distance from the laser beam. 

Therefore, the temperature gradient vector approximately points to the center of the laser spot, the 

intersection of the laser beam with the surface. Thus, one can say that the columnar crystals roughly 

point to the laser spot center at the instant of their growth. This indicates that the inner columnar 

crystals form at the moment when the laser spot is at the minimum distance to them while the outer 

row of columnar crystals forms in a certain delay when the laser spot has moved forward.  


18 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Fig. 10. Microstructure of laser-processed samples at laser power P (W): 20 (a), 40 (b), 80 (c), and 

160 (d). Scanning speed V is indicated on the top. Visualization methods: top views in light 

microscope (Top) and cross sections perpendicular to the scanning direction obtained by: SEM in 

backscattered electrons (BSE), light microscopy in polarized light (Light polarized), and light 

microscopy after etching (Light etched). The dotted-line rectangles indicate the remelted width W 

on the top views. 


19 

 

 

 

 

 
Fig. 10. (Continued.) 


20 

 

The crystals can precipitate from the overcooled liquid phase in the temperature interval 

between the crystallization onset Tx and liquidus Tl points. The issue is whether the crystals grow 

from the initial amorphous phase in the heat-affected zone of the laser beam where temperature 

does not overcome the liquidus point or the crystals grow at quenching from the liquid phase 

formed in the remelted domain where the maximum temperature is above the liquidus point. The 

former hypothesis seems more likely because the initial amorphous phase contains crystalline 

inclusions facilitating crystallization at the elevated cooling rates attained in the considered laser 

processes. In Fig. 10b, the top view at V = 10 mm/s shows intersection of the laser-processing zone 

with a scratch.  The scratch disappears in the central bright zone but is clearly visible in the 

surrounding precipitation zone. This proves that the precipitation zone has not been in liquid state 

while the bright zone has been completely remelted. Thus, the boundary between the bright and 

precipitation zones is the remelting boundary where the maximum temperature attains the liquidus 

point. 

The inner zone of columnar crystals is not visible in cross sections. See, for example, SEM 

and light-microscopy images at V = 10 mm/s in Fig. 10c. The SEM images in backscattered 

electrons indicate that there is no compositional contrast in the inner zone of columnar crystals. 

This means a diffusionless crystallization mechanism. On the contrary, the outer row of columnar 

crystals in the top views corresponds to contrast zones revealed by both SEM and light microscopy 

in cross sections. The columnar crystals become shorter and completely disappear with increasing 

the scanning speed. See, for examples Fig. 10a at 5 and 10 mm/s and Fig. 10c at 10 and 20 mm/s. 

The abovementioned figures show that the gap between the two rows of columnar crystals 

increases with the scanning speed. Thus, at higher scanning speeds, the darker contrast zones 

around the brighter remelting zone can be due to approximately eqiuaxed precipitates.  

In Fig. 10d at P = 160 W and V = 10 mm/s, multiple concentric vortices are observed in the 

cross sections and on the top view. Similar vortices were reported in the remelted domains of soda-

lime glass after laser processing [26]. They can be traces of convection in the melt pool. At lower 

power P or at greater scanning speed V, the vortices are not revealed. This may indicate that 

convection in the melt pool becomes less important with decreasing P and increasing V. The width 

of the remelted zone W is measured on the top views as indicated by the dotted-line squares in Fig. 

10. Taking into account the observed perfect semicircular shapes in the cross sections, the remelted 

depth is accepted to be half the width, H = W/2. Table 6 summarizes the measurement results. 


21 

 

When the remelted zone is bounded by columnar crystals, the contrast is clear and the uncertainty 

in H is of the order ±2 m. At higher V, when the remelted zone is bounded by equiaxed 

precipitates, the contrast is vague and the uncertainty can increase up to ±5 m. 

 

Table 6. Measured melt pool depth, H (m), versus scanning speed V and laser power P 

V (mm/s)
P = 20 W
P = 40 W
P = 80 W
P = 160 W

5
115
-
-
-

10
108
192
300
500

20
98
178
263
-

50
80
140
210
315

100
74
103
170
236

200
63
82
126
185

300
-
-
110
157

500
-
-
90
125

700
-
-
84
113

1000
-
-
75
105

1500
-
-
-
87

2000
-
-
-
76

3000
-
-
-
63

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


22 

 

5. Discussion 

 

The observed depth H and width W ≈ 2H of the melt pool listed in Table 6 can be compared 

to the heat transfer model described in Section 3. The principal difficulty is that the model assumes 

constant values of material properties while they can substantially vary depending on the 

amorphous/crystalline state and temperature as shown, for example, in Figs. 8 and 9. The melt 

pool boundary corresponds to the melting isotherm Tm where the melting point is set to the liquidus 

temperature Tl. Conductive heat transfer to the surrounding solid phase controls the position of 

this isotherm. Therefore, material properties are taken for the crystalline phase at the melting point. 

Table 7 lists the accepted model parameters to estimate the size of the melt pool.  

 

Table 7. Parameters of the heat transfer model 

Parameter
Value
Source

Ambient temperature, Ta
300 K
Experimental condition

Melting point, Tm
Tl = 1115 K
Table 2

Onset crystallization temperature, Tx
712 K
Table 2, present experiments

Thermal diffusivity, 
7 mm2/s
Table 5

Thermal conductivity, 
16 W/(m K)
Table 5

 

Figure 11 plots the experimental data of Table 6 as functions of melt depth H versus scanning 

speed V at the constant values of laser power P. The heat transfer model predicts such functions 

by the dimensionless curve shown in Fig. 3. The universal dimensionless curve is defined by two 

scaling parameters, Rb and V0. The goal of Fig. 11 is to find the values of these scaling parameters 

assuring the best theoretical fit to the experimental data. The scaling parameters are not 

independent. Relation RbV0 = 2 = 14 mm2/s follows from Eq. (7). Thus, this is essentially a one-

parameter fit. The found values of the scaling parameters are shown on the plots for every value 

of laser power. The corresponding model curves agree with the experimental points in Fig. 11. The 

discrepancy is, generally, low but appears to be systematic at higher V in Fig. 11d. The reason can 

be a systematic error in measuring the melt pool size because of low contrast in the corresponding 

experimental images. 

 


23 

 

 

 

Fig. 11. Experimental data (points) fitted by the heat transfer model (full lines) versus scanning 

speed V at the following values of incident laser power P (W): 20 (a), 40 (b), 80 (c), and 160 (d). 

Dashed lines are asymptotes of the theoretical curves. Fitting parameters V0 and Rb and the 

corresponding estimated absorbed power AP are indicated in the plots. 

 

 


24 

 

Substituting the estimated values of Rb in Eq. (3) results in the absorbed laser power AP. The 

latter value is indicated in Fig. 11 too. Table 8 lists the effective absorptance A estimated as the 

ratio of the absorbed power to the incident laser power P. The effective absorptance defines the 

fraction of the incident laser energy transformed into the thermal energy of material and accounts 

for not only radiation reflection by also evaporation loss. Indeed, the obtained effective 

absorptance of 0.43 is below the optical absorptivity of 0.57 estimated as the absorptivity of Zr at 

the room temperature [27].  

 

Table 8. Effective absorptance estimated from the theoretical fit to the experimental data 

Laser power, P (W)
20
40
80
160
Mean ± MSD*)

Effective absorptance, A
0.47
0.43
0.41
0.41
0.43 ± 0.02

*) Mean square deviation (MSD) 

 

To estimate the contribution of evaporation to the energy balance at laser processing, one 

should know that the vapor velocity is limited by its sound speed c [28]. Suppose that overheating 

at evaporation is not considerable. Then, the vapor pressure is approximately equal to the standard 

atmosphere ps and its temperature approaches the boiling point Tb at the atmospheric pressure. In 

such conditions, the maximum vapor velocity is estimated as the sound speed in the gas of Zr 

atoms, 

5
3

kTb
c
m

,
(12)

where k is the Boltzmann constant, m the atomic mass, and the factor of 5/3 is the adiabatic 

exponent of monatomic gas. The maximum evaporation energy loss per unit surface f becomes 

f
 ncL
, with
s

b

p
n
 kT
,
(13)

where L is the latent heat of evaporation per atom and n the vapor number density estimated by 

the ideal gas law. Table 9 shows the calculation of the evaporation loss with the material properties 

taken from Ref. [29]. The total evaporation loss depends on the evaporation area. If the evaporation 

takes place within the projection of the laser beam on the surface, the evaporation area is the circle 

of 100 m diameter. The total evaporation loss of 10 W is obtained as the product of the area of 

this circle multiplied by the specific loss f listed in Table 9. This is a rough order-of-value estimate 


25 

 

neglecting, for example, the dependence on the laser power. Nevertheless, this value of total 

evaporation loss is reasonable and can explain reducing the effective absorptance relative to the 

optical absorptivity.  

 

Table 9. Estimation of the evaporation loss 

Physical quantity
Value
Source

Boiling point, Tb
4682 K
[29]

Atomic mass, m
91.22 a.m.u.
[29]

Latent heat of evaporation, L
581.6 kJ/mol
[29]

Sound speed, c
843 m/s
Eq. (12)

Number density, n
1.57∙1024 m-3
Eq. (13)

Evaporation loss per unit surface, f
1.28 GW/m2
Eq. (13)

 

The applied experimental methods reveal the width and depth of the melt pool while they 

cannot measure its length. However, the obtained values of scaling parameters Rb and V0 make it 

possible a theoretical restoring of the longitudinal melt pool profile. Equation (8) gives a 

dimensional generatrix profile depending on the Peclet number . Figure 12 shows the examples 

of the top view on the melt pool. They are theoretically estimated by Eq. (8) using the 

experimentally obtained scaling parameters. In this equation, the dimensionless temperature  is 

set to 1, that corresponds to the melting point.  The melt pool aspect ratio, the ratio of the length 

to the width, is determined by the Peclet number  = V/V0 while the size is proportional to 

parameter Rb.  

Figure 12 indicates that the melt pool shape varies from approximately equiaxed at  of the 

order of 1 and less to well elongated at  of the order of 100 and greater. In the present 

experiments, the former conditions correspond to the scanning speed of the order of centimeters 

per second while the latter conditions are typical at the scanning speed of the order of meters per 

second. The melt pool width considerably reduces with increasing the scanning speed V at a 

constant laser power. The distance from the melt pool forward boundary to the laser spot reduces 

as well while the distance from the backward boundary to the laser spot is equal to the constant 

value of Rb. Thus, the width decreases and the length tends to a constant. The consequence is the 


26 

 

considerable elongation of the melt pool with increasing V. Simultaneously, the melt pool shifts 

backward relative to the laser spot. 

 

 

 

Fig. 12. Theoretically estimated top view on the melt pool at laser power P (W): 160 (right 

column); 80 (middle column); 40 (left column); 20 (row at the bottom left). The solid line is the 

melting isotherm. The green circle is the laser spot. The values of the scanning speed V and the 

corresponding Peclet number  are indicated near every image.  

 

Considerable evolution of microstructure at laser processing is expected in the temperature 

interval from the onset crystallization Tx to melting Tm points. The Tx isotherm is given by the same 

Eq. (8), where the dimensionless temperature is set to 


27 

 

x
a

m
a

T
T

T
T




.
(14)

Figure 13 superposes the theoretically estimated melting and onset crystallization isotherms on the 

experimental top views. The melting isotherm (solid line) generally inscribes into the clear band 

in the middle indicating that this band is a remelted domain. The domain encircled by the melting 

isotherm is slightly narrower than the remelted band in Fig. 13a while it is slightly wider in Fig. 

13c. It seems that such variations are not meaningful because they reflect the difference between 

the experimentally measured and theoretically predicted remelted width. Indeed, Fig. 13a 

corresponds to the left point in Fig. 11a, where the thermal model underestimates the observed 

remelted width. On the contrary, Fig. 13c corresponds to the left point in Fig. 11c, where the 

thermal model overestimates the remelted width. The Tx isotherm (dashed line in Fig. 13) generally 

circumscribes the darker zones of precipitation. The domain encircled by this isotherm is 

systematically wider than the observed precipitation zone. The difference can be explained by the 

non-equilibrium conditions of laser processing where crystallization may start at a temperature 

greater than the onset crystallization temperature Tx determined in quasi-equilibrium conditions. 

Another possible reason is a slow crystal growth rate at temperatures around Tx, where crystals are 

not yet visible on the top-view images. 

Figures 13a-d reveal the bands of columnar crystals. The inner bands a close to the melting 

isotherms while the outer bands are close to the Tx isotherms. Columnar crystals commonly grow 

in the direction of temperature gradient. The gradient direction is perpendicular to the isotherm. 

The growth zone of inner columnar crystals is estimated as zone A in Figs. 13a-d, where the 

crystals are approximately perpendicular to the melting isotherm. The growth zone of outer 

columnar crystals is estimated as zone B, where the crystals are approximately perpendicular to 

the Tx isotherm. Zone B is considerably shifted to the backward side of the melt pool. This indicates 

a delay in crystal grows in the outer bands. One can explain such a delay by a considerable 

overcooling reducing the crystal growth rate. Comparison of Figs. 13c-e shows that the columnar 

crystals become shorter with increasing the scanning speed V and finally disappear. This can be 

due to shortening the thermal cycle of laser processing with increasing V. 

 


28 

 

 
Fig. 13. Theoretically estimated melting (black solid line) and onset crystallization (dashed line) 
isotherms on the experimentally observed top views of the laser-processed surface at the following 
process parameters: P = 20 W and V = 5 mm/s (a); P = 40 W and V = 10 mm/s (b); P = 80 W and 
V = 10 mm/s (c); P = 80 W and V = 20 mm/s (d); P = 160 W and V = 300 mm/s (e). The green 
circle designates the laser spot. Red circles A and B encircle the expected domains of columnar 
crystals formation in the inner and outer rows, respectively. Points 1 – 5 are chosen in the 
characteristic microstructure domains. Laser scans from right to left. 


29 

 

To understand formation of the observed microstructure patterns, thermal cycles are 

theoretically calculated in points 1-3 in Fig. 13b and 4-5 in Fig. 13e. The points on the surface 

have coordinate Z = 0 (see Fig. 2). Table 10 shows the chosen values of coordinate Y. In the moving 

frame shown in Fig. 2, coordinate X varies as 

X
Vt
,
(15)

where t is time. The function of temperature versus time is obtained by substituting the above 

mentioned values of coordinates X, Y, and Z into Eq. (2). Figure 14 shows the resulting thermal 

cycles. Parameters  and  are listed in Table 7. Absorbed laser power AP is shown in Fig. 11. 

Figure 14 shows the resulting thermal cycles. 

 

Table 10. Theoretically estimated parameters of thermal cycles. 

Point
Process 

parameters

Y/m
Microstructure
Crystallization

time (ms)

Mean cooling 

rate (K/s)

1
P = 40 W

V = 10 mm/s

135
Remelted
23.5
1.7∙104

2
200
Inner columnar crystals
55.7
-

3
285
Outer columnar crystals
36.6
-

4
P = 160 W

V = 300 mm/s

130
Remelted
2.7
1.5∙105

5
190
Precipitation
3.2
-

 

Point 1 in Fig. 13b corresponds to curve 1 in Fig. 14. Point 1 is in the mono-phase remelted 

zone. It is  supposed that primary crystalline inclusions completely dissolve when the temperature 

becomes above the liquidus point Tl on the ascending branch of curve 1 while no crystals are 

formed in the interval between the onset cryctallization Tx and liquidus temperatures on the 

descending branch of this curve. The temperature decreases from Tl down to Tx during the time 

interval of approximately 23.5 ms as shown in Fig. 14. The temperature difference Tl – Tx divided 

by the time interval gives the mean cooling rate around 1.7∙104 K/s. This value is much greater 

than the critical cooling rate of 10 K/s reported for alloy Vit 106 [24]. Therefore, a completely 

amorphous structure is expected in the remelted zone. The similar processes should occur in point 

4 where the thermal cycle is considerably shorter because of much greater scanning speed. Table 

10 summarizes the estimated values of crystallization time and mean cooling rate in the 


30 

 

crystallization interval. The mean cooling rate is much greater than the critical cooling rate in all 

the studied regimes. 

 

 

 

Fig. 14. Theoretically estimated thermal cycles in points 1-5: Growth of inner columnar crystals 

(A); Growth of outer columnar crystals (B); Dissolution of primary crystals (C). Liquidus Tl and 

onset crystallization Tx temperatures. 

 

Crystalline structure is observed in points 2 and 3 in Fig. 13b. The corresponding temperature 

curves do not attain the liquidus point. Temperature grows, attains a maximum and decreases. The 

local cooling rate changes from zero at the maximum temperature to the maximum cooling rate 

near temperature Tx. Therefore, it is not useful to talk about cooling rate. The relevant parameter 

is the total time interval in the temperature interval from Tx to Tl, referred to as the crystallization 

time. The crystallization times in points 1 – 3 are comparable (see Table 10) while the 

microstructures are completely different. It is expected that primary crystalline inclusions do not 

dissolve in points 2 and 3 because material does not melt. These inclusions are nuclei for crystalline 

phase growth. Thus, one can conclude that the estimated crystallization times of the order of 

several dozen milliseconds are insufficient for a detectable homogeneous nucleation but sufficient 

for the observed heterogeneous growth of columnar crystals. The total volume of the heat-affected 

zone observed in Fig. 13b is of the order of 1 mm3. Since no signs of homogeneous nucleation are 

found, the mean homogeneous nucleation rate should be of the order or lower than 1/(1 mm3∙10ms) 


31 

 

= 1012 m-3s-1. The length of columnar crystals in Fig. 13b is around 50 m. The crystal length 

divided by the crystallization time is the mean growth rate. Table 11 summarizes the estimated 

mean values obtained with the crystallization time from Table 10. 

 

Table 11. Estimated rates of homogeneous nucleation and crystal growth 

Present work, mean value
Ref. [30],

peak value
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3

Homogeneous nucleation rate (m-3s-1)
≤1012
-
-
1÷5∙1013

Crystal growth rate (mm/s)
-
0.9
1.4
5

 

The rates of homogeneous nucleation and crystal growth considerably vary with temperature. 

They are very low at Tx and lower, increase with temperature, attain their maxima, and, finally, 

decrease down to zero at Tl. Table 11 compares the mean values obtained in the present work with 

the peak values theoretically estimated for a similar Zr-based BMG alloy AMZ4 [30]. It is 

reasonable that the peak value is several times greater than the mean value. Thus, the obtained data 

on crystallization kinetics are compatible with the data of Ref. [29]. Crystallization zones A and B 

in Fig. 13 correspond to the parts A and B of the thermal cycles in Fig. 14. In point 2, the 

temperature maximum approaches the liquidus point (see Fig. 14). It is expected that crystal 

growth rate attains its maximum in this thermal cycle. Therefore, the amorphous phase has been 

consumed when the temperature is near its maximum where crystallization stops. The maximum 

of thermal cycle 2 in Fig. 14 corresponds to crystallization zone A in Fig. 13b. The inner row of 

columnar crystals is formed in this zone. In point 3, the temperature maximum is considerably 

lower (see Fig. 14). It is expected that crystal growth rate does not attain its maximum in this 

thermal cycle. Therefore, crystallization continues when temperature decreases and approaches Tx 

(see part B of thermal cycle 3 in Fig. 14). This corresponds to crystallization zone B in Fig. 13b. 

The outer row of columnar crystals is formed in this zone. 

In Fig. 14, thermal cycles 4 and 5 are considerably shorter. Supposing the same mean crystal 

growth rate of the order of one millimeter per second, one estimates the crystal size in point 5 by 

multiplying the growth rate by the corresponding crystallization time (see Table 10) resulting in a 

value around three microns. This is much smaller than the size of primary crystalline inclusions 

before laser processing visible in cross sections of Fig. 10d. Therefore, crystal growth at V = 300 


32 

 

mm/s is not observed in the cross sections but appears as darker precipitation zones on the top 

views of Figs. 10d and 13e. It is supposed that there are multiple micron-sized or smaller nuclei in 

the primary material, which are not observed before laser processing. These nuclei can 

considerably grow in the precipitation zones corresponding to point 5 in Fig. 13e giving rise to a 

darker contrast on the top view. 

The present work has indicated that the cooling rate attained in typical SLM regimes is much 

greater than the critical cooling rate for the studied Zr-based BMG alloy. It seems that 

homogeneous nucleation in the amorphous phase is suppressed in these conditions.  Nevertheless, 

laser processing can result in considerable microstructure modification related to crystal growth 

even at such high cooling rates. The microstructure formation at the laser processing is sensitive 

to primary crystalline inclusions and nuclei existing in the amorphous phase. The role of these 

inclusions and their formation in multi-layer additive SLM processes requires further 

investigation.  

 

 

6. Conclusion 

 

Microstructure formation in Zr57Cu15.4Ni12.6Al10Nb5 Zr-based BMG alloy (trade mark Vit 

106) at laser processing is studied for a wide variety of processing regimes typical for SLM 

additive manufacturing. Single-track experiments are accomplished concerning laser scanning 

over an amorphous-state substrate at constant laser power P varying from 20 to 160 W and 

scanning speed V varying from 5 to 3000 mm/s. The results are illustrated using a model of heat 

transfer in the laser impact zone. Original laser-flash and dilatometry analysis provides with the 

thermophysical and kinetic parameters necessary for the model. 

An essentially axially-symmetric microstructure of laser tracks is observed where the axis is 

the line drawing by the laser beam axis on the substrate surface. The axial symmetry agrees with 

the heat transfer model. In the cross section perpendicular to the axis, a central half-circular bright 

domain is identified as the remelted zone. An annular darker domain encircles the remelted zone. 

This domain is identified as the crystallization zone.   

The model fits the experimentally obtained dependencies of the remelted zone size versus 

processing parameters P and V. The comparison between the model and the experiments indicates 


33 

 

that 43 ± 2% of the incident laser energy is transferred into the substrate thermal energy in the 

studied conditions. The combined energy losses by radiation reflection and material evaporation 

explain the indicated value of the effective absorption. 

The thermal model reconstructs the three-dimensional shape of the melt pool and heat-

affected zones as the liquidus Tl and onset crystallization Tx isotherms, respectively. The liquidus 

isotherm generally inscribes into the remelted zone while the Tx isotherm circumscribes the 

crystallization zone. The melt pool is approximately equiaxed at the scanning speed of several 

centimeters per second. It elongates considerably when the scanning speed increases up to several 

meters per second. The melt pool aspect ratio is related to the Peclet number. 

One can distinguish the inner and outer rows of columnar crystals separated by a band of 

equiaxed inclusions in the crystallization zone at the scanning speed of a few centimeters per 

second and lower. The inner columnar crystals are perpendicular to the scanning axis while the 

direction of the outer columnar crystals is oblique. At higher scanning speed, the crystallization 

zones look like darker bands without internal structure. 

The observed microstructure is explained by the thermal cycles predicted by the model. It 

seems that primary crystalline inclusions existing in the substrate before laser processing dissolve 

at the laser melting. The mean cooling rate in the remelted zone is much greater than the critical 

cooling rate. Therefore, homogeneous nucleation is not expected. Nevertheless, the theoretically 

estimated crystallization times are sufficient for a considerable crystal growth in the heat-affected 

zone where primary crystalline inclusions and nuclei are not completely dissolved. 

 

 

Authors’ contribution 
Conceptualization AVG, SNG. Investigation ADK, AYuK, PAP, 

RSK, TVT. Supervision AVG. Data curation ADK, AYuK. Funding acquisition AVG. Writing—

original draft AVG, RSK. Writing—review and editing OBK, SNG, TVT. 

 

Funding 
This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (Grant Agreement 

No. 21-19-00295, https://rscf.ru/project/21-19-00295/). The experiments were carried out using 

the equipment of the Centre of collective use of MSUT “STANKIN” supported by the Ministry of 

Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation (Contract No. 075-15-2021-695).  

 


34 

 

Declarations  

 

Ethical approval 
Not applicable. 

 

Consent to participate 
Not applicable.  

 

Consent to publication 
Not applicable.  

 

Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests. 

 

 

References 

 

1. 
Kruzic, J. J. (2016). Bulk metallic glasses as structural materials: A review. Advanced 

Engineering Materials, 18(8), 1308-1331. doi:10.1002/adem.201600066 

2. 
Gao, K., Zhu, X. G., Chen, L., Li, W. H., Xu, X., Pan, B. T., . . . Li, Y. (2022). Recent 

development in the application of bulk metallic glasses. Journal of Materials Science and 

Technology, 131, 115-121. doi:10.1016/j.jmst.2022.05.028 

3. 
Wu, W., Li, X., Liu, Q., Hsi Fuh, J. Y., Zheng, A., Zhou, Y., . . . Li, G. (2022). Additive 

manufacturing of bulk metallic glass: Principles, materials and prospects. Materials Today 

Advances, 16 doi:10.1016/j.mtadv.2022.100319 

4. 
Gusarov, A. V., Grigoriev, S. N., Volosova, M. A., Melnik, Y. A., Laskin, A., Kotoban, D. 

V., & Okunkova, A. A. (2018). On productivity of laser additive manufacturing. Journal of 

Materials Processing Technology, 261, 213-232. doi:10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2018.05.033 

5. 
Zhang, P., Tan, J., Tian, Y., Yan, H., & Yu, Z. (2022). Research progress on selective laser 

melting (SLM) of bulk metallic glasses (BMGs): A review. International Journal of 

Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 118(7-8), 2017-2057. doi:10.1007/s00170-021-

07990-8 

6. 
Zhang, C., Li, X. -., Liu, S. -., Liu, H., Yu, L. -., & Liu, L. (2019). 3D printing of Zr-based 

bulk metallic glasses and components for potential biomedical applications. Journal of 

Alloys and Compounds, 790, 963-973. doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2019.03.275 


35 

 

7. 
Liu, H., Jiang, Q., Huo, J., Zhang, Y., Yang, W., & Li, X. (2020). Crystallization in 

additive manufacturing of metallic glasses: A review. Additive Manufacturing, 36 

doi:10.1016/j.addma.2020.101568 

8. 
Bernard, C., & Keryvin, V. (2020). Crystalline defects in bulk metallic glasses: 

Consequences on fracture toughness determination and ductility. Journal of Physics 

Condensed Matter, 32(48) doi:10.1088/1361-648X/abaa7f 

9. 
Busch, R., & Gallino, I. (2017). Kinetics, thermodynamics, and structure of bulk metallic 

glass forming liquids. JOM, 69(11), 2178-2186. doi:10.1007/s11837-017-2574-5 

10. Khonik, V., & Kobelev, N. (2019). Metallic glasses: A new approach to the understanding 

of the defect structure and physical properties. Metals, 9(5) doi:10.3390/met9050605 

11. Vora, H. D., Mridha, S., Katakam, S., Arora, H. S., Mukherjee, S., & Dahotre, N. B. 

(2016). Thermodynamics and kinetics of laser induced transformation in zirconium based 

bulk metallic glass. Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids, 432, 237-245. 

doi:10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.2015.10.013 

12. Yang, Z., Markl, M., & Körner, C. (2022). Predictive simulation of bulk metallic glass 

crystallization during laser powder bed fusion. Additive Manufacturing, 59 

doi:10.1016/j.addma.2022.103121 

13. PrometalTech, www.prometaltech.com (2022). 

14. Steel Data, https://www.steeldata.info/ (2022).  

15. T. Prohaska, J. Irrgeher, J. Benefield, J.K. Böhlke,L.A.  Chesson, T.B. Coplen, … J. Meija, 

Standard atomic weights of the elements 2021 (IUPAC technical report), Pure Appl. 

Chem. 94 (2022) 573-600, doi:10.1515/pac-2019-0603. 

16. W.H. Wang, R.J. Wang, G.J. Fan, J. Eckert, Formation and properties of Zr-(Ti, Nb)-Cu-Ni-

Al bulk metallic glasses, Mater. Trans. 42 (2001) 587-591, doi:10.2320/matertrans.42.587. 

17. M.E. Blodgett, A.K. Gangopadhyay, K.F. Kelton, Thermal evaporation loss measurements 

on quasicrystal (Ti–Zr–Ni) and glass forming (Vit 106 and Vit 106a) liquids, Int. J. 

Thermophys. 36 (2015) 701-708, doi:10.1007/s10765-014-1663-8. 

18. W. Dong, H. Zhang, W. Sun, B. Ding, Z. Hu, Formation, thermal stability and mechanical 

properties of Zr-Nb-Cu-Ni-Al bulk metallic glasses, Mater. Trans. 47 (2006) 1294-98, 

doi:10.2320/matertrans.47.1294. 


36 

 

19. M. Mohr, R.K. Wunderlich, D.C. Hofmann, H. Fecht, Thermophysical properties of liquid 

Zr52.5Cu17.9Ni14.6Al10Ti5—prospects for bulk metallic glass manufacturing in space, npj 

Microgravity, 5 (2019) 24, doi:10.1038/s41526-019-0084-1. 

20. G.R. Stewart, Measurement of low-temperature specific heat, Rev. Sci. Instr., 54 (1983) 1-

11, doi:10.1063/1.1137207. 

21. A.V. Gusarov, Physics and Modeling, in Fundamentals of Laser Powder Bed Fusion of 

Metals, I. Yadroitsav, I. Yadroitsava, A. du Plessis, and E. MacDonald, Eds., New York: 

Elsevier, pp. 79–117, 2021. 

22. S.N. Grigoriev, M.A. Gridnev, A.D. Korotkov, R.S. Khmyrov, P.A. Podrabinnik, A.V. 

Gusarov, D.E. Andreev, V.I. Yukhvid, Optimization of laser processing for additive 

manufacturing a TiAl-based alloy, High Temp. Mater. Process. 25(3) (2021) 37-58, doi: 

10.1615/HighTempMatProc.202103952. 

23. H.S. Carslaw, J.C. Jaeger, Conduction of Heat in Solids, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1959. 

24. L. Shadowspeaker, M. Shah, R. Busch, On the crystalline equilibrium phases of the Zr57Cu 

15.4Ni12.6Al10Nb5 bulk metallic glass forming alloy, Scripta Materialia, 50 (2004) 1035-

1038, doi:10.1016/j.scriptamat.2003.12.023 

25. National Institute of Standards and Technology Inorganic Crystal Structure Database, 

https://icsd.nist.gov/ (2022). 

26. Grigoriev, S. N., Khmyrov, R. S., Gridnev, M. A., Tarasova, T. V., & Gusarov, A. V. (2022). 

Optimizing the process parameters for additive manufacturing of glass components by 

selective laser melting: Soda-lime glass versus quartz glass. Journal of Manufacturing 

Science and Engineering, Transactions of the ASME, 144(6) doi:10.1115/1.4052840 

27. Refractiveindex.INFO https://refractiveindex.info/ (2022). 

28. Gusarov, A. V., & Smurov, I. (2002). Gas-dynamic boundary conditions of evaporation and 

condensation: Numerical analysis of the knudsen layer. Physics of Fluids, 14(12), 4242-

4255. doi:10.1063/1.1516211 

29. American Institute of Physics Handbook, edited by D. E. Gray (McGraw-Hill, New York, 

1972).  

30. Yang, Z., Al-Mukadam, R., Stolpe, M., Markl, M., Deubener, J., & Körner, C. (2021). 

Isothermal crystallization kinetics of an industrial-grade Zr-based bulk metallic 

glass. Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids, 573 doi:10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.2021.121145 


