Submitted to ArXiv – 17 January 2023 
 

 

1

Time-domain simulator of Josephson junctions based 

on the BCS theory  

 

L. Iwanikow, P. Febvre, Senior Member, IEEE 

 
 
 

Abstract—We realized a time-domain simulator based on the 

electrodynamics of Cooper pairs and quasiparticles in Josephson 
junctions. The tool, based on the charge carriers’ densities of states 
described by the Werthamer and Harris formalisms of Bardeen-
Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, allows to analyze the behavior of 
current- or voltage-controlled Josephson junction-based circuits 
for any signal waveform, at a physical temperature comprised be-
tween the absolute temperature and the critical temperature. The 
simulator can account for I-V curve hysteresis depending on the 
McCumber parameter, or Shapiro and photo-assisted steps in the 
presence of a monochromatic microwave signal.  We used the sim-
ulator to assess the behavior of MgB2-based Josephson junctions 
at THz frequencies by taking into account the presence of the two 
anisotropic gaps of MgB2. 

Index Terms—BCS theory, Josephson junction, time-domain 

simulation, quasiparticle, MgB2 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

imulators are crucial tools for the design of superconducting 
electronic circuits, whether they are analog, digital or quan-
tum. The accuracy, reliability and capabilities of simulation 

tools are increasingly important for the development of more 
complex Single Flux Quantum (SFQ)-based and superconduc-
tor-based RF applications for which higher frequencies imply 
dissipative and dispersive mechanisms near the energy gap of 
superconductors. 

Software like JSIM [1], PSCAN [2], WRSpice [3] or JoSIM 

[4] do not always take into account all electrical phenomena 
caused by the dynamics of Cooper pair and quasiparticles tun-
neling in a Josephson junction. The time-domain simulator pre-
sented here aims at giving a precise description of the physical 
behavior of a Josephson junction based on phase and current 
quantities. The voltage is obtained as the derivative of the 
phase. It is based on the calculation of the tunneling current 
through the Josephson junction barrier, based on the densities 
of states of Cooper pairs and quasiparticles described by the 
BCS theory [5] for both superconducting electrodes. 

Following the prediction that a tunneling supercurrent can 

pass through a thin insulating barrier between two supercon-
ducting electrodes by Josephson [6-7], several models attempt-
ing to explain this phenomenon in accordance with BCS theory 
emerged. Werthamer formalism described the tunneling of 
Cooper pairs and quasiparticles for a voltage-biased junction at 
T = 0 K [8]. Later, Larkin and Ovchinnikov have taken up these 
results, adding the influence of the temperature in the calcula-
tions [9]. This work has been revised under a different 
 

Manuscript receipt and acceptance dates will be inserted here. This work is sup-

ported by the Agence de l'Innovation de Défense (AID), the Direction Générale 
de l’Armement (DGA), the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and the 
Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), the Intelligence Advanced 

formalism by Harris who further detailed the meaning of the 
different parts that make up the tunneling current [10-11]. 

Based on these various models, our simulator is applicable 

for 
weak-linked 
superconductor-insulator-superconductor 

(SIS) Josephson junctions, provided that the superconducting 
materials used in the junction are described by the BCS theory 
and that the junction size is small compared to the Josephson 
length (which is typically 4 µm for a niobium-based junction of 
10 kA/cm2 current density), this in order to keep the current dis-
tribution about constant over the junction area. Under these 
conditions, we can consider that the whole electrodynamics of 
the Josephson junctions is taken into consideration. To prove 
that this is indeed the case, we simulate the effects of an incom-
ing RF radiation on the junction I-V curve and deduce the rela-
tion between the height of photo-assisted steps and the junction 
RF voltage induced by the radiation [12]. 

II. ELECTRODYNAMICS OF A JOSEPHSON JUNCTION 

A. BCS description of the densities of states of charge carri-
ers 

Electrodynamics of a Josephson junction can be obtained 

through the calculation of frequency spectra of the tunneling 
currents, called kernels, for both charge carriers, i.e. Cooper 
pairs and quasiparticles, for superconductors described by the 
BCS theory these spectra are obtained by the calculation of the 
probability of passage of charges by tunneling effect through 
the Josephson junction insulating barrier. Currents are associ-
ated with the densities of energy states of charge carriers in each 
superconducting electrode. Frequency is the natural quantity to 
calculate tunneling currents because they are directly linked to 
the energy states of both superconductors of the junction.  

B. Frequency kernels 

Our work is a direct application of the expression of kernels 

described by Werthamer [8], Larkin & Ovchinnikov [9] and 
Harris [10-11]. The calculation of kernels is done by computing 
the integral over all frequencies of the charge carriers tunneling 
through the barrier. 
 

Calculations rely on physical and electrical quantities such as 

the barrier resistance, the critical current of the junction, the 
critical temperatures of the superconducting materials, and the 

Research Projects Activity (IARPA), via the U.S. Army Research Office Grant 
W911NF-17-1-0120. 

L. Iwanikow and P. Febvre are with IMEP-LAHC, University Savoie Mont 

Blanc, Le Bourget du Lac, France (e-mail: lucas.iwanikow@univ-smb.fr; pas-
cal.febvre@univ-smb.fr). 

S


 

 

2

physical temperature of the device. The frequency kernels are 
complex functions since they take into account the retarded re-
sponse of charge carriers to a given forced solicitation, that be-
comes dominant at the gap frequency which is a characteristic 
frequency of the Josephson junction. 

Fig. 1-a shows the frequency kernels for a niobium-based Jo-

sephson junction. We see that their imaginary part is an odd 
function of voltage due to the junction symmetry, while their 
real part is even since real and imaginary parts are connected 
through Kramers-Kronig relations [11] for causality reasons. 

C. Analytical fits of kernels  

To increase the speed and flexibility of calculations we fit the 

kernels using complex Lorentzian sums based on the OSZ al-
gorithm suggested in [13] and by Jablonski [14], as illustrated 
by Eq. 1-a and Eq. 1-b. Such a choice allows to keep the essen-
tial information on the junction dynamics contained in the ker-
nels, while simplifying the calculation of currents in the time 
domain. 
 

 

 

Fits were made in Python 3 using the LMFIT library [15], 

which gives fitting parameters showing a good agreement with 
the theoretical curves. An illustration of the concordance is 
given in Fig. 1-b. 

III. TIME-DOMAIN SIMULATIONS 

A. Josephson and quasiparticles currents  

The use of the information contained in the frequency kernels 

of the simulated Josephson junction has been highlighted by 
Gayley [16] and Harris [11]. Equations (2.a) and (2.b) exhibit 
the time-domain evolution of the current due to Cooper pairs 
and quasiparticles respectively. 

 

with 𝑊(𝑡) = exp (𝑗𝜑(𝑡)/2). Thus the inverse Fourier trans-
forms of the fits of kernel currents give Eq. 3-a and Eq. 3-b for 
Cooper pairs and quasiparticles respectively. 

 

with 𝜃(𝑡) being the Heaviside function in time-domain. 

 

(a) 

 

(b) 

Fig. 1. (a) Frequency kernels for a niobium-based Josephson junction with 

a critical current IC = 100 µA calculated for T = 4.2 K. The value of the critical 

current of the junction can be interpreted as the real part of the Cooper pairs 

current at zero voltage. (b) Fits of the simulated Josephson junction illustrated 

in Fig. 1-a, showing a good agreement with the theoretical curves. 

B. Phase, voltage, or current control  

The application to the Josephson junction of a user-defined 

voltage or phase waveform is straightforward from equations 
(2.a) and (2.b). On the other hand, if one wishes to simulate a 
current-controlled junction and observe the evolution of the 
voltage across it, it is necessary to use an algorithm such as 
Runge-Kutta or Newton-Raphson. This second algorithm is the 
one that has been deployed for our simulator. 

Time-domain simulations are carried out by initializing all 

our variables at time t = 0 and calculating current increments 
time step by time step.  

C. I-V curves 

Junction I-V curves can be obtained by considering only the 

Josephson current, the quasiparticle current or both. To take 
into account some phenomena described by the standard Resis-
tively and Capacitively Shunted Junction (RCSJ) model [17-
18], the junction capacitance can be added in parallel, as well 
as a shunt resistor, which is of interest in the context of digital 
circuit simulation. 

I-V curves are obtained by sweeping the junction bias current 

Ib. For each bias current a time-domain simulation calculates 


 

 

3

the voltage evolution at the junction terminals over a given time 
until convergence. By averaging the voltage over this time in-
terval, one obtains a point in the I-V curve. 

D. Effect of an RF radiation 

In order to simulate the effect of an RF radiation on the be-

havior of a junction, shown in Fig. 2, calculations are based on 
a 
current 
generator 
waveform 
given 
by 

𝐼(𝑡) =  𝐼!" +  𝐼#$ sin(𝜔𝑡) where 𝜔 corresponds to the angular 
frequency of the RF signal.  

 

 

Fig. 2. Simulated I-V curves for quasiparticles of a niobium-based Josephson 
junction with IC = 100 µA irradiated by a monochromatic microwave signal 
with f = 484 GHz, with (black solid line) and without (red dotted line) the 
Cooper pairs contribution respectively. The blue dashed line is obtained for 
quasiparticles only and without microwave signal. One can see the first four 
Shapiro steps with continuous voltage values, with a voltage spacing of 1 mV 
each. One can also observe the first photo-assisted step, starting from the gap 
at 2.8 mV, with a width of 2 mV. 

 

Fig. 3. Evolution of the normalized amplitude (current discontinuity divided 
by the current I0 = Vg/Rn of the junction) of the discontinuity at the gap voltage 
and the first photo-assisted step as a function of RF voltage, for a niobium-
based Josephson junction with IC = 100 µA irradiated at f = 203 GHz. Lines 
(dashed and solid) represent the theoretical absolute value of Bessel function of 
1st kind of order 0 (blue) and 1 (red). Dots illustrate the simulated evolution of 
the amplitude of the gap (blue) and of the height of the first photo-assisted step 
(red).  
 

Shapiro proved that the presence of a monochromatic micro-

wave signal caused constant voltage steps to appear in the I-V 

curve of a Josephson junction [19]. Two types of steps are to be 
distinguished, the Shapiro steps being the response to the RF 
signal of Cooper pairs, while the photo-assisted steps are the 
response of quasiparticles. The width of these steps is closely 
related to the frequency of the applied radiation. 

Fig. 3 shows the dependence of the height of the first photo-

assisted step on the amplitude of the applied microwave volt-
age. As described in the literature [12], the height of the step 
seems to follow a Bessel function of the first kind of the order 1. 
The same behavior has been observed for the height of the n-th 
photo-assisted step following a Bessel function of the first kind 
of the order n. 

IV. MGB2-BASED JOSEPHSON JUNCTION SIMULATIONS 

A. Frequency kernels 

 Magnesium diboride (MgB2) is a material with a relatively 

high critical temperature (39 K) compared to niobium, that can 
have interesting applications especially at high frequencies, 
such as RSFQ logic. Although it has two anisotropic gaps [20-
21], this material can be described by the BCS theory.  

The description of this double gap is made with the 

approximation that the densities of states can be expressed as a 
weighted sum of two densities of states, one for each half-gap, 
as suggested by Giubileo [22]. 

 

Fig. 4.  Frequency kernels for a MgB2-based Josephson junction with a critical 
current IC = 50 µA calculated for T = 4.2 K. We can observe singularities for 
voltages equal to ± 5 mV, ± 10 mV and ± 15 mV. 
 

Fig. 4 illustrates an example of frequency kernel for a MgB2-

based Josephson junction with a critical current IC = 50 µA cal-
culated for T = 4.2 K. The presence of three peaks is a direct 
consequence of the two gaps for MgB2. The first peak is due to 
the interaction between the narrow half-gaps (ΔS = 2.5 meV), 
while the third peak is the combination of the large half-gaps 
(ΔL = 7.5 meV). The second peak results from the interaction of 
the narrow half-gap from one side of the junction and the large 
half-gap from the other side. 

B. Simulations of SFQ pulses generation 

Magnesium diboride having a large half-gap ΔL, it can be an 

interesting material for high-frequency applications close to the 


 

 

4

gap frequency of 𝑓 = 3.6 THz, like for heterodyne receivers 
(superconducting mixers, or Hot Electron Bolometers (HEBs)) 
for THz astronomy [23-26] or security applications, or Super-
conducting Nanowire Single-Photon Detectors (SNSPDs) [27]. 
Besides, its higher critical temperature allows to work around 
20K which greatly relaxes cryogenic constraints, especially for 
space-based instruments. In an attempt to investigate the simu-
lator for digital applications, we used our model to describe the 
behavior of a current-biased Josephson junction for the genera-
tion of an SFQ signal, by biasing it above its critical current. 

Fig. 5-a shows the simulation of a resistively shunted MgB2-

based Josephson junction biased with a DC current slightly over 
the critical current at a clock rate of 244 GHz, considering the 
Cooper pairs contribution, with or without the contribution of 
quasiparticles. IC  = 100 µA, with a McCumber parameter 
𝛽" =  1 and 𝑅%𝐼" = 5.9 mV. We can see that taking the qua-
siparticles contribution into account induces a delay of 1.1 ps in 
the generation of SFQ pulses. 

 

(a) 

 

(b) 

Fig. 5.  (a) Simulated generation of a SFQ voltage pulse train at 244 GHz for 
a current biased MgB2-based Josephson junction for Cooper pairs alone (dashed 
line) or with quasiparticles contribution (solid line). The junction was current-
biased just over IC = 100 µA, with 𝑗! = 10 𝑘𝐴/𝑐𝑚² , βC = 1 and 
RnIC = 5.9 mV. (b) Simulated evolution of the normalized delay induced by the 
quasiparticles in the SFQ pulses generation as a function of the frequency of 
the generated SFQ pulse train, for 3 critical current densities. Markers are sim-
ulated points while lines are a guide for the eye. The induced delay is normal-
ized to the SFQ signal period. 

Fig. 5-b shows the evolution of this induced delay as a func-

tion of the clock frequency of the generated SFQ pulses, for 
three Josephson junctions with a critical current density of 
5 kA/cm², 10 kA/cm² and 20 kA/cm² and an 𝑅%𝐼" product of 

0.641 mV, 0.907 mV and 1.28 mV respectively, with the same 
𝛽" = 1, specific capacitance of 40 fF/µm² and area of 1 µm². 
One can see that the relative delay becomes higher when the 
SFQ signal frequency reaches the lower than the higher gap fre-
quency due to dispersive effects. We may also see that this ef-
fect is more prominent at lower frequencies for lower critical 
current densities. This is consistent with the fact that pulse 
widths (of the order of 0.10 to 0.15 ps) are wider for lower cur-
rent densities, corresponding to a lower spectral density at 
higher frequencies and hence to a lower ability to break Cooper 
pairs. The dispersion, associated with a higher pulse delay, oc-
curs at about 3 THz for jC = 5 kA/cm2 and at frequencies higher 
than 4 THz for higher current densities. 

V. CONCLUSION 

The simulation tool developed in this work is helpful to pre-

dict the behavior of analog and digital devices and circuits with 
more accuracy, especially for high frequencies applications. It 
also enables simulations of non-conventional material-based 
Josephson junctions in the time-domain like MgB2 junctions. It 
is shown that the behavior from simulations agrees well with 
well-known expectations, such as Shapiro steps and photo-as-
sisted steps when a junction is irradiated by a microwave signal, 
or hysteresis in the I-V curve when the capacitance of the junc-
tion is considered. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 
 E. S. Fang, T. Van Duzer, "A Josephson integrated ciruit simulator 
(JSIM) for superconductive electronic applications," in Ext. Abs. ISEC, 
Tokyo, 1989. 

[2] 
S. V. Polonsky, V. K. Semenov, and P. N. Shevchenko. "PSCAN: 
personal superconductor circuit analyser," Supercond. Sci. Technol., vol. 
4, no. 11, pp. 667, 1991. 

[3] 
Whiteley Research, Inc., [Online]. Available: http://www.wrcad.com. 

[4] 
J. A. Delport et al., "JoSIM—Superconductor SPICE Simulator," IEEE 
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1-5, Aug. 
2019. 

[5] 
J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, J. R. Schrieffer, "Microscopic Theory of 
Superconductivity," Physical Review, vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 162‑164, Apr. 
1957. 

[6] 
B.D. Josephson, "Possible new effects in superconductive tunnelling," 
Physics Letters, vol. 1, no. 7, pp. 251-53, Jul. 1962. 

[7] 
B. D. Josephson, "The discovery of tunnelling supercurrents," Rev. Mod. 
Phys., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 251–254, 1974. 

[8] 
N. R. Werthamer, "Nonlinear Self-Coupling of Josephson Radiation in 
Superconducting Tunnel Junctions," Physical Review, vol. 147, no. 1, pp. 
255‑263, Jul. 1966. 

[9] 
A. I. Larkin, Y. N. Ovchinnikov, "Tunnel effect between superconductors 
in an alternating field," Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 51, Nov. 1966. 

[10] R. E. Harris, "Cosine and Other Terms in the Josephson Tunneling Cur-

rent," Physical Review B, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 84‑94, Jul. 1974. 

[11] R. E. Harris, "Josephson Tunneling Current in the Presence of a Time-

Dependent Voltage," Physical Review B, vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 3329‑33, May 
1975. 

[12] J. R. Tucker and M. J. Feldman, "Quantum Detection at Millimeter Wave-

lengths," Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1055‑1113, Oct. 
1985. 

[13] A. Odintsov, V. Semenov, A. Zorin, "Specific Problems of Numerical 

Analysis of the Josephson Junction Circuits," IEEE Transactions on Mag-
netics, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 763‑66, Mar. 1987. 

[14] D. G. Jablonski, "Electronic Simulation of Josephson Tunneling, Includ-

ing the Effects of Frequency, Temperature, and the Superconducting En-
ergy Gap," J. Appl. Phys., vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 7458‑63, Nov. 1982. 


 

 

5

[15] M. Newville et al. (2021). lmfit/lmfit-py: ver. 1.0.3. 
[16] R. I. Gayley, "Josephson tunnel junction time‐dependence calculations 

based on the Bardeen‐Cooper‐Schrieffer theory," J. Appl. Phys., vol. 52, 
no. 3, pp. 1411‑16, 1981. 

[17] W. C. Stewart, "Current-voltage characteristics of Josephson junctions," 

Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 12, pp. 277- 280, 1968. 

[18] D. E. McCumber, "Effect of ac impedance on dc voltage-current charac-

teristics of superconductor weak-link junctions," J. Appl. Phys., vol. 39, 
pp. 3113-3118, 1968. 

[19] S. Shapiro, "Josephson Currents in Superconducting Tunneling: The Ef-

fect of Microwaves and Other Observations," Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 11, no. 
2, pp. 6, 1963. 

[20] J. Nagamatsu et al., "Superconductivity at 39 K in magnesium diboride," 

Nature, vol. 410, no. 6824, pp. 63-64, Mar. 2001. 

[21] C. Buzea, T. Yamashita, "Review of the Superconducting Properties of 

MgB2," Supercond. Sci. Technol., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. R115‑46, Nov. 
2001. 

[22] F. Giubileo et al., "Strong Coupling and Double-Gap Density of States in 

Superconducting MgB2," Europhysics Letters, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 764‑70, 
Jun. 2002. 

[23] C. A. Curwen et al., "THz Heterodyne System Using Novel Mixer and 

Local Oscillator Devices," 2022 47th International Conference on Infra-
red, Millimeter and Terahertz Waves (IRMMW-THz), Delft, Netherlands, 
pp. 1-2, 2022. 

[24] B. S. Karasik et al., "Far- and Mid-IR Heterodyne Detectors Based on 

MgB2," 2019 44th International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and 
Terahertz Waves (IRMMW-THz), Paris, France, pp. 1-1, 2019. 

[25] J. R. Gao, Y. Gan, B. Mirzaei, J. R.G. Silva, S. Cherednichenko, "5.3 THz 

MgB2 hot electron bolometer mixer operated at 20 K," Proc. SPIE 12190, 
Millimeter, Submillimeter, and Far-Infrared Detectors and Instrumenta-
tion for Astronomy XI, 121900F, 31 August 2022. 

[26] S. Cherednichenko et al., “Low kinetic inductance superconducting 

MgB2 nanowires with a 130 ps relaxation time for single-photon detec-
tion applications”, Supercond. Sci. Technol., vol. 34, no. 4, 044001, Feb. 
2021.  

[27] H. Shibata, “Review of Superconducting Nanostrip Photon Detectors Us-

ing Various Superconductors,” IEICE Transactions on Electronics 
E104.C, no. 9, pp. 429-34, Sept. 2021 

 


