Review
A Review of Applications, Prospects, and Challenges 
of Proton-Conducting Zirconates in Electrochemical 
Hydrogen Devices

M. Khalid Hossain 1,2,*, S. M. Kamrul Hasan 3, M. Imran Hossain 4, Ranjit. C. Das 5, H. Bencherif 6, 
M. H. K. Rubel 7, Md. Ferdous Rahman 8, Tanvir Emrose 9 and Kenichi Hashizume 1,*

1
Department of Advanced Energy Engineering Science, IGSES, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 816-8580, Japan

2
Institute of Electronics, AERE, Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission, Dhaka 1349, Bangladesh

3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA

4
Institute for Micromanufacturing, Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, LA 71270, USA

5
Materials Science and Engineering, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA

6
Higher National School of Renewable Energies, Environment and Sustainable Development, 
Batna 05078, Algeria

7
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi 6205, Bangladesh

8
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Begum Rokeya University, Rangpur 5400, Bangladesh

9
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Louisiana State University, 
Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA

*
Correspondence: khalid.baec@gmail.com and khalid@kyudai.jp (M.K.H.) ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4595-6367

Abstract: In the future, when fossil fuels are exhausted, alternative energy sources will be essential for everyday 
needs. Hydrogen-based energy can play a vital role in this aspect. This energy is green, clean, and renewable.
Electrochemical hydrogen devices have been used extensively in nuclear power plants to manage hydrogen-based 
renewable fuel. Doped zirconate materials are commonly used as an electrolyte in these electrochemical devices. 
These materials have excellent physical stability and high proton transport numbers, which make them suitable 
for multiple applications. Doping enhances the physical and electronic properties of zirconate materials and makes 
them ideal for practical applications. This review highlights the applications of zirconate-based proton-conducting 
materials in electrochemical cells, particularly in tritium monitors, tritium recovery, hydrogen sensors, and hydro-
gen pump systems. The central section of this review summarizes recent investigations and provides a compre-
hensive insight into the various doping schemes, experimental setup, instrumentation, optimum operating condi-
tions, morphology, composition, and performance of zirconate electrolyte materials. In addition, different chal-
lenges that are hindering zirconate materials from achieving their full potential in electrochemical hydrogen de-
vices are discussed. Finally, this paper lays out a few pathways for aspirants who wish to undertake research in 
this field.

Keywords: perovskite oxide; proton-conducting oxide; zirconate; electrochemical device; tritium monitoring; trit-
ium recovery; hydrogen sensors; hydrogen pumps

1. Introduction

As a result of the Industrial Revolution and technological advancements, the globe requires alter-

native energy sources to supply the ever-increasing demand for energy [1–3]. In addition, With the 
rapid depletion of fossil fuel resources and the negative impact of fossil fuel combustion on our envi-
ronments [4–7], scientists have turned their attention to other renewable sources, such as electrochemical 
hydrogen devices based on proton-conducting materials [8–11]. Proton conductors typically have posi-
tively charged protonic species, such as H+, H3O+, and NH4+ [12,13]. Proton-conducting materials provide 
higher conductivity at lower temperatures with longer lifetimes and less expense than traditional oxide 
ionic electrolyte conductors [14,15]. In addition, these conductors lose conductivity at higher temperatures 


2 of 31

due to reversible or irreversible loss of carriers [16]. These characteristics enable these materials to operate 
at narrow ranges of temperature.

Proton conductors can be used in various electrochemical energy devices, such as batteries, fuel-

cell electrolytes, water electrolyzers’ membrane, hydrogen pumps, hydrogen sensors, and hydrogen 
gas separation systems [17–20]. Organic polymer, inorganic oxides, and lattice defect oxides are exam-
ples of the different types of proton conductors. Compared to the other proton conductors, lattice de-
fect-type oxides, i.e., perovskite-type proton-conducting oxides, are the promising proton conductors
due to having the highest proton conductivity and chemical stability within desired temperatures 
[12,21,22]. A typical chemical formula of a perovskite proton conductor is ABO3 (A = Ba, Ca, Sr, etc.; B
= Zr, Ce, Tb, Th, etc.) [23,24]. In addition, perovskite materials have higher conversion efficiency and 
are less expensive than other proton conductors [25,26]. These unique properties of perovskite materials 
have increased their utility in renewable energy applications, especially in solar cells [27]. Among dif-
ferent types of perovskite proton-conducting materials, zirconate materials are the most widely stud-
ied/used due to their high chemical stability and excellent proton conductivity [16,28–30].

Zirconate materials such as BaZrO3-based materials are considered promising proton-conducting 

materials and are widely used in chemical and electrical sectors. However, many studies have shown 
that cerate-based proton conductors such as BaCeO3 have high proton conductivity among perovskite-
based materials [12]. The drawback of BaCeO3-based materials is that they are unstable in CO2 and 
water vapor atmospheres, making them unsuitable for applications [31,32]. In contrast, BaZrO3-based 
proton conductors are stable in CO2 and water vapor environments which are attractive properties for 
electrochemical device application in harsh atmospheres [25]. Moreover, BaZrO3-based materials have 
better physical properties, including chemical stability and higher mechanical hardness than BaCeO3-
based proton-conducting material [33]. Ken Kurosaki et al. reported that BaZrO3 exhibits high thermal 
conductivity due to the high strength between Zr and O [34]. However, the BaZrO3-based proton con-
ductor’s proton conductivity is lower than the BaCeO3-based proton conductor, which can be improved 
by doping with trivalent cations such as Gd3+, Y3+, In3+, Yb3+ [35,36]. Pergolesi et al. have reported that 
Y3+ doped in BaZrO3 enhances chemical stability, but the poor sinterability increases grain-boundary
resistance, which is responsible for reducing proton conductivity [37]. Therefore, the sintering temper-
ature must be increased with decreased grain-boundary resistance to improve electrical properties in 
zirconate-based proton conductors [38]. Recent research has shown that In-doped zirconate-based per-
ovskite proton conductors exhibit better sintering activities with excellent chemical stability [39]. Con-
sequently, experiments with different doping concentrations and synthesis methods are used to de-
velop high-performing doped BaZrO3 material.

Zirconate materials have low thermal conductivity, low dielectric loss, and very low thermal ex-

pansion coefficient [16,40,41], making them more favorable for electrochemical devices than other pro-
ton-conducting oxide materials. Furthermore, compared to other proton-conducting materials in hy-
drogen sensors, zirconate-based hydrogen sensors have been demonstrated to be affordable, portable, 
and temporally correct due to their high chemical stability, smaller dimensions, and cheapness [16,42]. 
Hydrogen can be separated in zirconate-based proton conductors in a controlled way simply by chang-
ing the applied current in the electrochemical cell; thus, they can be utilized as hydrogen pumps [16]. 
Zirconate proton conductors can be used as membrane separators at high temperatures, enabling them 
to act as a sensitive tritium monitor system [43]. Such a device is helpful in removing inference from 
radionucleotides and concentrating tritium, since it can operate like an electrochemical hydrogen iso-
tope pump [43]In addition, tritium release has been reported in zirconate proton-conducting material 
spheres as far back as 30 years ago, and scientists are making more advancements in that technology 
[44–49]. Research has established the reputation of zirconate materials as an efficient tritium recovery 
system. As a result, zirconate materials have garnered significant interest in the scientific community, 
and they have published numerous articles about their work. However, none of the papers go into 
depth about the utility of zirconium proton conductors in electrochemical device applications.

This comprehensive review discusses various aspects and potential of zirconate proton conductors 

in electrochemical device applications. The first section presents a short overview of proton-conducting 
zirconates and electrochemical hydrogen devices, including tritium monitoring systems, tritium recovery 


3 of 31

systems, hydrogen sensors, and hydrogen pumps. In the following section, we broadly discuss recent 
developments and potential of zirconate-based proton conducting materials used as an electrolyte in the 
application of electrochemical devices. The prospects and challenges of zirconate proton conductors in 
electrochemical applications are discussed in the final section of the review (Figure 1) based on the pub-
lished literature and the authors’ experience.

Figure 1. An outline of the main points of this review shown schematically.

2. Proton-Conducting Zirconates

Perovskite proton-conductor oxides, i.e., zirconates and cerate-based materials, are well-known 

proton conductors for electrochemical device applications due to their excellent physical properties
[14,50]. BaZrO3 is a promising zirconate proton conductor widely used in refractory and electrical sec-
tors. This material has excellent stability in a harsh environment, low proton migration, high melting 
temperature, high thermal expansion coefficient, excellent structure, and mechanical properties at high 
temperatures [51,52]. Furthermore, BaZrO3 does not show any phase transition between low and high 
temperatures, making it suitable for electrochemical devices, including tritium monitoring systems, 
tritium recovery systems, hydrogen sensors, and hydrogen pumps [46,53,54].

Although cerate-based proton conductor like BaCeO3, has the highest proton conductivity among

other proton-conductor materials, it is unstable in water vapor and CO2 atmosphere, whereas BaZrO3
materials show stability in harsh weather (water vapor and CO2) [16]. Alkaline earth zirconates, such 
as those found in CaZrO3, BaZrO3, and SrZrO3, are typically more chemically stable and have more 
mechanical strength than alkaline earth cerate ceramics [55,56]. Many studies have shown that doping 
with BaZrO3 can enhance proton conductivity and high chemical stability. The general formula of dop-
ing zirconate is AZr1-xDxO3-δ, where trivalent dopant D is used to replace the tetravalent Zr to create 
oxygen vacancy, which is crucial for proton-conduction perovskite (ABO3) lattice structure [57]. The 
proton conductivity of the BaZrO3 is greatly affected by the type and amount of the dopant used in the 
barium zirconate. With increasing Zr materials, the electrolyte sintering temperature is also increased, 
and as a result, the ionic conductivity is decreased [58]. Moreover, BaZrO3 has high grain-boundary 
resistance which hinders electrochemical applications. Therefore, to improve the proton conductivity, 
it is essential to maintain a minimum grain-boundary resistance and high sintering temperature [59,60].

Studies have shown that Y-doped BaZrO3 (BaZr1-xYxO3-δ) exhibits excellent chemical stability with 

high proton conductivity [61]. For example, Liu et al. investigated BaZr1-xYxO3-δ electrolyte by partially 
replacing Zr4+ with neodymium (Nd3+) to enhance the sinterability and conductivity of the electrolyte 
[62]. The results showed that BaZr0.7 Nd0.1YxO3-δ had higher proton conductivity than BaZr1-xYxO3-δ


4 of 31

electrolyte and that Nd3+ doping increased the chemical stability. However, neodymium (Nb) is a rare-
earth element and expensive, which is not feasible for commercial application. On the other hand, 
mixed BaCeO3-BaZrO3 with dopant shows higher chemical stability but enriched Zr, restricting appli-
cations due to poor sintering and high grain-boundary resistance [63,64]. Therefore, further modifica-
tion is required in zirconate to improve its proton conductivity with suitable stability for electrochem-
ical application.

3. Electrochemical Hydrogen Device

Electrochemical devices are an essential scientific innovation enabling the development of an elec-

tric vehicle for the future. The principles of electrochemistry have materialized in hydrogen storage 
[65], hydrogen sensor [66], and hydrogen compressor [67] applications, as well as different chemical 
sensor applications. The basic electrochemical hydrogen devices have the following components: anode 
(electrode), electrolyte (proton-conducting solid), and cathode (electrode) (Figure 2) [68]. Electrochem-
ical hydrogen devices use two fundamental principles: electromotive force (EMF) and the hydrogen 
transport phenomenon of the electrolyte. Recently, electrochemical devices have extensively used pro-
ton-conducting zirconates [16]. The small radius of protons enables the ions to fit into the interlayer 
structure of the cathode.

Figure 2. The fundamental design and operation of a proton-exchange membrane (PEM)-based electrochemical 
hydrogen device. Reproduced from Ref. [68]. Copyright © 2019 Elsevier.

These electrochemical devices utilize EMF the same as the principle of galvanic cells. The device 

is called a hydrogen sensor when EMF is used to produce signals. On the other hand, if the EMF force 
of the electrochemical cell is used to separate hydrogen, it is called a hydrogen pump. Radioactive iso-
topes like tritium (3H) can be separated using the same principles. An electrochemical reactor is neces-
sary to convert water vapor and methane to tritium. Similarly, tritium can be monitored as a function 
of applied current, thus making this electrochemical device a platform for tritium monitoring. Moreo-
ver, separating radioactive molecules like Rn and enrichment of tritium can be effective for lower levels 
of tritium detection [69].

3.1. Tritium Monitoring Systems

From the public perception and safety-management perspectives of a fusion test facility, tritium 

monitoring faces unique and hazardous challenges. In that sense, detecting low levels of tritium has 
been one of the critical issues for the facilities that handle tritium. Tritium monitoring fulfills the purposes 
of (a) removal of interference of other radioactive materials, (b) discriminating between tritiated water 
vapor (HTO) and tritium molecules (HT), and (c) enrichment of tritium [70]. Usually, tritium monitors 
are constructed by combining an ionization chamber with semipermeable polymer membranes, such as 
silicone, Nafion, perfluorosulfonic acid resin, amide, etc. [71], which is used to selectively remove radio-
active interference like radon and other chemical forms of tritium. The application of an electrochemical 
hydrogen pump using a proton-conducting oxide has also been proposed as a membrane separator [69]. 


5 of 31

Proton-conducting ceramics have unique characteristics that enable them to extract hydrogen from water 
vapor when DC current is passed through them at higher temperatures [71]. Among the proton-conduct-
ing ceramics, zirconates have shown the most promise because of their capability of higher hydrogen 
extraction. However, even within zirconates, CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α and SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α have shown the most 
potential as a tritium monitoring device, and their feasibility has been tested under various atmos-
pheres and temperatures [72].

3.2. Tritium Recovery System

In a nuclear power system, especially in fusion reactors, tritium and its related compounds must 

be recovered for efficient recycling and radiation safety [73–78]. Typically in a fusion reactor, the radi-
oactive isotopes are burned in high-temperature plasma, purged in an inert gas environment, recovered 
in a trap, and stored in a metal particle bed before being injected into the chamber again [79]. However, 
in more recent times, electrochemical cells have revolutionized the tritium fuel cycle and tritium recov-
ery system [79]. The driving force of tritium transportation is enabled by electrochemical hydrogen 
(and related isotopes) transportation, whereby appropriate conductors can create the correct potential 
difference, which in turn can extract tritium selectively from a mixture of radiation gases [80]. Proton-
conducting ceramic cells, mostly zirconates, have great potential to convert tritium (and related mole-
cules) to electricity and vice versa so that they could be used for tritium (and other hydrogen isotopes) 
extraction [79]. Among the zirconate proton conductors, calcium and strontium zirconates are most 
widely used for their high conductivity and superior transfer properties [79,81]. Calcium zirconate with 
indium doping (CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α) is used in electrochemical tritium extraction cells [82], whereas stron-
tium zirconate with ytterbium doping (SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α) is used in porous (Ni/SiO2 and NiO/SiO2) elec-
trochemical cells at 600–700˚C for tritium recovery [79].

3.3. Hydrogen Sensors

Hydrogen is one of the promising alternatives to fossil fuels because of its high efficiency and 

positive environmental impact. The rapid expansion of hydrogen in the energy market is becoming 
critically important for accurately sensing hydrogen in all its forms. Monitoring hydrogen can help 
prevent the formation of explosive/flammable/combustible mixtures. Other hydrogen sensors are used 
in various metallurgical processes and industrial chemical refineries [83]. Standard hydrogen sensors 
can detect the presence of hydrogen gas at the parts per million (ppm) level [84]. Even though electro-
chemical, electrothermal, optical, and even acoustic sensors are available in the market, electrochemical 
sensors are the most affordable, portable, and temporally stable [16].

Interestingly, proton-conductor ceramic materials have been used as electrolyte materials in elec-

trochemical hydrogen sensor cells. Because of the ease of synthesis and flexibility in the temperature 
range, zirconate proton-conducting ceramics have been most widely used [85]. Earlier studies have 
reported that calcium-based zirconates (CaZrO3) doped with indium (In), manganese (Mg), and scan-
dium (Sc) can enhance physical and chemical properties, including proton conductivity and chemical 
stability [85–87]. These electrolytes can be used in conjunction with other sensing electrodes [83] and 
can act as self-reference electrodes [88]. These hydrogen sensors exhibit suitable sensing in various tem-
perature ranges [89] and have superior reproducibility and stability [83].

3.4. Hydrogen Pumps

Hydrogen pumps are an essential tool used exclusively in nuclear reactor facilities, usually in the 

tritium recovery process. Hydrogen pumps provide advantages like minimal toxic emissions, carbon-
free sustainability, and a cheaper renewable energy source. Several methods have been employed to 
materialize a hydrogen pump, for example, cryogenic distillation and pressure swing adsorption [90]. 
However, the most straightforward path for a hydrogen pump is through electrochemical cells [16]. 
When a direct current is delivered to the proton-conducting electrolyte, hydrogen at the anode is ion-
ized to form protons in the electrolyte [16]. The electrolyte layer transforms the proton into hydrogen 
gas as it passes toward the cathode (Figure 2). This approach utilizes separated hydrogen in a regulated 
manner by applying an electrolyte current.


6 of 31

Proton-conducting perovskite oxides such as barium zirconate (BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2O3-δ), calcium zir-

conate (CaZr0.96In0.04O3), and strontium zirconate (SrZr0.9Y0.1O3-α) are used as an electrolyte layer, and 
hydrogen is produced in the cathode [90–92]. Even though cerate-based perovskites can also be used 
as an electrolyte, cerate easily reacts with H2O and CO2 (usually present in the by-product gases) [92]. 
Because of the chemical stability and relative reactivity against carbon dioxide, zirconate-based perov-
skites like doped strontium zirconate with yttrium have been usedan electrolyte with palladium elec-
trodes and utilized as a hydrogen pump [92]. To a similar end, scientists have used ytterbium doping 
for a similar hydrogen pump mechanism with Ni/SiO2 porous electrodes [79]. Zirconate perovskites 
also have higher mechanical strength than their cerate counterparts, which gives durability in harsh 
nuclear fusion environments.

4. Electrochemical Device Applications

The recent progress of zirconate-based materials as an electrolyte in electrochemical device appli-

cations, namely, tritium monitoring, tritium recovery, hydrogen sensor, and hydrogen pump systems, 
their performance and improved properties are discussed and presented in the following section.

4.1. Tritium Monitoring Systems

Due to their potential radioactive properties, low-level tritium detection is an imperative issue in 

tritium handling facilities. Recently, the development and utilization of various types of tritium moni-
tors to control the background count of radiation, detection between HTO and HT, and tritium enrich-
ment have been reported. Tanaka et al. (2004) [70] studied the extraction of hydrogen using argon with 
20.7% oxygen content as fed gas to the anode under a wet air environment. The purpose of using this 
type of gas composition was to reproduce the operating environment of the tritium stack monitor. In 
addition, pasted platinum electrodes have been used, as the hydrogen evolution rate decreased under 
a wet oxygen environment for plated platinum electrodes [81]. The performance of the hydrogen pump 
was evaluated in terms of temperature, water vapor partial pressure, and gas flow rate. First, fed gas 
was supplied to the anode at 600, 700, and 800 °C, 3.5 V, and 91 mL/min. It was observed that the 
hydrogen evolution rate did not start before 700 °C. However, the maximum evolution rate was found 
to be 0.64 mL/min at 800 °C, and the rate of hydrogen recovery was 58%. Another parameter, e.g., 
proton transport number, which refers to the ratio of protonic current to total current, has been reduced 
to 0.52 due to electron-hole migration through an electrolyte with the proton. Under the above condi-
tions, the hydrogen evolution rate was observed as 0.65 mL/min and 0.52 mL/min for a gas flow rate of 
137 mL/min and 47 mL/min, respectively. However, the hydrogen recovery rate was much higher for 
47 mL/min, e.g., 96%, whereas for 137 mL/min, it was only 38%. The dew point of water vapor was 
reduced to around 0.042%. Furthermore, the hydrogen evolution rate depends on water vapor partial 
pressure. It was reported that the hydrogen evolution rate and recovery rate were 0.67 mL/min and 
60%, respectively, for 1.2% water vapor. The evolution rate increased by 1.15 times when water vapor 
partial pressure changed from 0.86 to 1.2% at 91 mL/min. As such, it is imperative to consider the fluc-
tuation of the hydrogen evolution rate during the design of a tritium monitor using proton-conducting 
oxide. Figure 3 shows a typical schematic of a tritium monitor with proton-conducting material [70].


7 of 31

Figure 3. A schematic representation of the tritium monitor in combination with the proton-conducting material. 
Reproduced from Ref. [70]. Copyright © 2004 Taylor & Francis.

In another study, Tanaka et al. (2005) [72] investigated the effect of electrode attachment proce-

dures on hydrogen extraction from exhaust gas mixture (methane, hydrogen, and water vapor) by us-
ing CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α/SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α. The plated platinum electrode (4 µm, 1 µm thickness) and pasted 
platinum electrode were used to evaluate the performance of the hydrogen pump. To simulate the ex-
haust gas composition, argon gas containing 0.1% H2, 0.1% CH4, and 1.2% H2O-vapor was used as fed 
gas at 2 V. It was found that, at 800 °C, the evolution rate of hydrogen was 0.16 mL/min [93] for pasted 
electrodes, whereas for plated electrodes (4 µm), it was 0.46 mL/min, and 0.74 mL/min by CaZr0.9In0.1O3-

α and SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α, respectively. The lower hydrogen evolution rate for pasted electrodes was at-
tributed to methane oxidation, where the water vapor’s electrolysis produced oxygen, but for plated 
electrodes, the decomposition of methane and water vapor enhanced the hydrogen concentration (to 
0.5%) on the anode side, leading to a higher evolution rate of hydrogen. On the other hand, in water 
vapor electrolysis with SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α electrolytes under a wet argon environment, the total current 
increased, but the hydrogen evolution rate was not increased for plated platinum electrodes (4 µm). 
The flow of electron holes through the electrolyte along with proton was the reason for this phenome-
non. Porous pasted electrode and plated electrode (1 µm) may reduce electron-hole flow and increase 
proton flow by providing a better diffusion path for oxygen from the electrode–electrolyte interface to 
the outside of electrodes. Therefore, the pasted platinum electrode is useful for H2O-vapor, whereas the 
plated platinum electrode is useful for H2 and CH4.

Later, Tanaka et al. (2006) [71] studied the effect of a combination of a pasted platinum electrode 

as an anode and a plated platinum electrode wrapped with gold mesh as a cathode with CaZr0.9In0.1O3-

α electrolyte in a hydrogen pump. During performance testing, wet argon gas (1.2% water vapor) with 
20% oxygen was supplied to the anode, and dry argon gas to the cathode at 100 mL/min, 923 K, and 2
V. In these conditions, the maximum evolution rate of hydrogen was observed due to the flow of cur-
rent through the whole surface of the cathode (Figure 4a) [71]. Afterward, hydrogen enrichment in a 
closed-loop system was executed using this setup. Different percentages of water vapor concentra-
tion—0.7%, 0.86%, 1.2%, and 1.7%—were tested (Figure 4b) [71]. With the increase in water vapor con-
centration, the current decreased slightly, enriched hydrogen concentration increased, and the hydro-
gen evolution rate decreased with time. The enhancement in hydrogen concentration can be depicted 
by the increase in proton conductivity, which eventually decreases total conductivity. The reduction in 
the H2-evolution rate was demonstrated by the enhancement of electrochemical hydrogen potential on 
the cathode side, so the performance of the hydrogen pump was not improved by hydrogen concen-
tration enrichment below 1.7% in the closed-loop system. It was also reported that for extracting full 
water vapor under the described experimental conditions, the required electrode is 75 cm2.


8 of 31

Figure 4. (a) Change in hydrogen evolution rate with time for different electrode combinations, (b)Time series 
response of current (top panel), water vapor concentration at the anode outlet (middle panel), and hydrogen con-
centration (bottom panel) against enrichment characteristics. Reproduced from Ref. [71]. Copyright © 2006 Else-
vier.

Tanaka et al. (2008) [94] also designed a tritium monitor prototype with a closed-loop system con-

sisting of CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α as an electrochemical hydrogen pump. The performance of the hydrogen 
pump was assessed at a temperature range of 873 to 1073 K by water vapor electrolysis. It was found 
that the proton transport number decreased at high temperatures, so for extracting hydrogen, a high 
temperature was not required. In addition, to extract a large amount of hydrogen, a large current was 
required to pass with a thin specimen consisting of a large surface area while lower voltage and tem-
perature can be maintained to protect the cell from being damaged. By satisfying these conditions, at 
973 K, 0.5 A, and 0.5 mm thickness, the rate of hydrogen extraction was reported as 1.8 cm3/min. Further 
increase in current caused a reduction in proton transport numbers, which can be attributed to the 
reduction in H2O-vapor partial pressure, rise in oxygen partial pressure in the anode, and an electron
hole in a defect equilibrium reaction. Voltage decreased with increasing current. Furthermore, in the 
closed-loop system, the concentration of hydrogen was reported as 6% after 50 min at 0.625 A, 973 K.

To improve the performance of the hydrogen pump, Tanaka et al. (2008) [69] introduced a propor-

tional countertype tritium monitor consisting of CaZr0.9In0.1O3−α using HTO vapor to extract HT. After 
the extraction, HT was carried out by a metal bellow pump, followed by mixing with air and p10 gas. 
Then, the pulse count of the tritium monitor was recorded and converted to the tritium concentration. 
Experimental conditions were 973 K, electrode area 62 cm2, feed gas flow rate 300 cm3/min, and 10 
cm3/min for anode and cathode, respectively. The extraction was performed and controlled by an elec-
tric current, and the evolution was reported in terms of current density. It was reported that tritium 
concentration increased with current density. Nevertheless, at a constant current density, tritium con-
centration increased, whereas the hydrogen recovery rate decreased with increasing water vapor par-
tial pressure on the anode side (Figure 5a) [69]. This phenomenon can be demonstrated by the inverse 
relationship of the hydrogen recovery rate with water vapor partial pressure [95] In addition, the meas-
ured concentration of the tritium using the proposed tritium monitor was 15% higher than the intro-
duced concentration. Figure 5b shows the relationship between the tritium concentration in the com-
partmented anode and the estimated tritium concentration [69].


9 of 31

Figure 5. (a) Change in tritium concentration and hydrogen recovery rate with water vapor partial pressure, (b) 
relationship between the tritium concentration in anode compartmented the estimated tritium concentration. Re-
produced from Ref. [69]. Copyright © 2015 Taylor & Francis.

Tanaka et al. (2011) [43] designed a tritium monitor to extract the hydrogen and tritium over 873 

K to 1073 K. In this process, the electrolysis of HTO was achieved by a hydrogen isotope pump that 
used CaZr0.91In0.1O3-α as a membrane separator. It was observed that the maximum evolution rate of 
both hydrogen and tritium was at 973 K. The decreasing solubility of proton and electrode reaction’s 
kinetic demonstrated a lower evolution rate at a higher temperature (>973 K). In the hydrogen isotope 
pump, the effect of isotope was found, which was attributed to the lower T/H ratio on the cathode side 
than the anode side, while on the anode side the T/H ratio was extremely low. This low T/H ratio also 
confirmed the possibility of extracting the tritium gas with hydrogen. In order to reduce the isotope 
effect, it was suggested by the research group to use a large electrode area so that the applied current 
can be increased, which eventually leads the hydrogen recovery rate to unity. Table 1 shows zirconate-
based tritium monitors along with their relevant parameters.

Table 1. Zirconate-based tritium monitoring systems.

Electrolyte 
Materials

Proportional 
Counter Vol-

ume (m3)

Mixing 
Ratio

Flow Rate 

(L/min)

Sensitive 
Volume 

(L)

Tritium 
Counting 
Efficiency 

(%)

Calibration 

Factor 

(kBq/m3 per 

cps)

Background 

Rate in Tritium 
Channel (cps)

Minimum 
Detectable 
Activities 
(Bq/m3)

Ref

CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α
0.0013
1:04
0.2 air/0.8 P10
0.26
55
7
0.4–3
100–5400
[69]

CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α
0.0013
N/A
0.091
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1300
[70]

4.2. Tritium Recovery Systems

Tritium recovery from exhaust gas is an important issue for nuclear fusion reactors. For this pur-

pose, the palladium membrane is commercially used as a diffuser, but researchers are looking forward 
to an alternative due to its high cost and maintenance. Proton-conducting oxides showed promising 
characteristics in this regard. Tanaka et al. (2004) [93] demonstrated hydrogen extraction using a hy-
drogen pump consisting of a tube closed at one end made of a proton-conducting oxide as CaZr0.9In0.1O3-

α due to its superior stability in the chemical environment and mechanical reliability. It was found that 
for a gas flow rate of 91 mL/min and fed gas (to anode) with 0.1% hydrogen at dry or wet conditions, 
experimental results of hydrogen evolution rate showed good agreement with theoretical results for 
applied voltage 0–3.5 V, except 2.5 V. The evolution rate of hydrogen exceeded the maximum value 
below 2 V in wet conditions. This phenomenon was demonstrated by the complete extraction of sup-
plied hydrogen followed by the electrolysis of water vapor on the anode side.


10 of 31

On the other hand, for fed gas with 1% H2, the extraction of supplied hydrogen to the cathode side 

was 17% and 50% for the dry and wet conditions at 3.5 V, respectively. In addition, to investigate the 
water vapor electrolysis, 1.2% H2O-vapor-carrying argon gas was supplied at different flow rates (47, 
91, 137 mL/min) to the anode at 3.5 V. In these conditions, the maximum evolution rate of hydrogen 
was reported as 0.67 mL/min at 137 mL/min. However, the “current efficiency” decreased up to 80% 
with current due to the increase in the partial pressure of oxygen and a decrease in the partial pressure 
of water vapor on the anode side. The contribution of methane decomposition in the evolution of hy-
drogen in the dry condition with 0.1% CH4 in argon gas was not even observed, whereas in the wet 
condition, the maximum rate of evolution was recorded as 0.37 mL/min while 3.5 V was applied. It was 
only 10% of evolved hydrogen on the cathode side. However, the maximum hydrogen evolution rate 
by CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α from the gas mixture (0.1% H2, 0.1% CH4, 1.2% H2O) was found at 0.34 mL/min under 
the wet condition and flow rate 91 mL/min. The decomposition of methane under wet conditions was 
initiated by the produced oxygen from the electrolysis of water vapor after the complete extraction of 
hydrogen in the anode for the pasted platinum electrode. Figure 6 shows the schematic of a typical 
tritium extraction system and the response of hydrogen evolution rate against various gases [93].

Figure 6. (a) A schematic representation of hydrogen extraction system with proton-conducting ceramic on one 
end, (b) response of hydrogen evolution rate (top panel) and hydrogen, methane, and water vapor concentration 
(bottom panel) as a function of current. Reproduced from Ref. [93]. Copyright © 2004 Taylor & Francis.

Later, to enhance the hydrogen extraction rate and electrode reactions for real-time application, 

Tanaka et al. (2004) adopted a new technique of preparing electrodes that includes electroless platinum 
plating on yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) instead of using platinum paste [81]. For hydrogen pump 
and water vapor electrolysis experiments, wet argon gas with and without 1% hydrogen was used as 
fed gas into the anode. The applied voltage was between 2 and 0 V. SEM showed that the plated elec-
trode surface consisted of small particles and pores of about 10 nm in size, while the pasted surface 
consisted of 1 µm pores (Figure 7) [80]. It was reported that the hydrogen evolution rate in the hydrogen 
pump increased by 3.2 times and the current increased by 3.5 times for plated electrodes compared to 
the pasted one. This phenomenon was attributed to the presence of a highly dense three-phase bound-
ary due to the small particles. On the other hand, in the experiment of water vapor electrolysis, the 


11 of 31

current increased 1.5 times, but the hydrogen evolution rate decreased by 10%. With the presence of 
small pores on the plated surface, oxygen cannot diffuse easily into the electrode–electrolyte interface, 
which eventually increases the partial pressure of oxygen in the anode. As a result, electron-hole cur-
rent increased, and “current efficiency” became less than unity, so the hydrogen evolution rate de-
creased.

In another study, Tanaka et al. (2012) [82] investigated the recovery of hydrogen isotope under 

vacuum on the cathode side using CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α electrolyte with pasted and plated electrode. In addi-
tion, the mass transfer process was also evaluated. Experimental results showed that the performance 
of the hydrogen pumps improved under vacuum. It was demonstrated by reducing voltage between 
electrodes under vacuum conditions after applying direct current compared to the atmospheric pres-
sure, irrespective of the electrode attachment procedures. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy 
(EIS) was used to observe the mass transfer process. Two important impedance parameters, Wsr and 
Wsc, confirmed that gas diffusivity increases relatively using pasted electrodes under vacuum condi-
tions. Later, the microstructure study found that the larger pore size of pasted electrodes led to better 
gas diffusivity.

Figure 7. SEM of electrode surface; (a) pasted electrode (a magnification of ×10,000), (b) plated electrode (a magni-
fication of ×10,000) and (c) plated electrode (a magnification of ×50,000). Reproduced from Ref. [81]. Copyright © 
2004 Taylor & Francis.

Tirui et al. (2014) [80] also used tube-type CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α to extract hydrogen efficiently and eco-

nomically by an electrochemical hydrogen pump. According to Faraday’s law, hydrogen extraction 
was performed from the mixture of He and H2 at a voltage of less than 3.5 V DC. Various parameters,
such as hydrogen concentration, temperature, current density, and voltage control hydrogen extrac-
tion, were used. It was found that higher hydrogen concentration enhanced the performance of the 
hydrogen pump. For example, at 2.35 V, 973 K, and 664 ppm, the hydrogen evolution rate was found 
as 0.0672 mL/min whereas for 2.61 V, 973 K, and 1128 ppm, it was 0.1046 mL/min, which indicates a 
55% increase in hydrogen evolution rate. The performance of the hydrogen pump was characterized 
by the temperature range 873 K–1073 K, but the maximum hydrogen evolution rate was 0.12 mL/min 
at 1023 K, while the H2 and current density were 0.12% and 0.113 mA/cm2. Although the maximum H2
evolution occurred at 1.34 V, it coincided with the theoretical value at 1.15 V (Figure 8a). Figure 8b 
shows the hydrogen evolution rate against the applied current [80]. In addition, under these conditions 
with the feed gas flow rate of 100 mL/min, the efficiency of hydrogen evolution of the hydrogen pump 
was recorded as higher than 99%, and the transportation number was around 1.0. Furthermore, the 
estimated electrolytic current and number of ceramic tubes were reported as 9.46 × 10−3 A and 25, re-
spectively, for the CIPITISE-TSE application at CIAE.

The effect of another proton-conducting oxide, SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α, on the performance of hydrogen 

pumps under various environments and temperatures (673–873 K) was investigated by Tanaka et al. 


12 of 31

(2008) [96]. Wet argon was passed to the anode while pressure and current were 1.22 kPa and 75 mA, 
respectively. Results showed that with the increase in temperature, voltage and proton transport num-
ber (PTN) decreased under water vapor electrolysis. Maximum PTN was observed at 823 K and started 
to decrease with temperature. Similar results were found under these conditions when helium-carrying 
water vapor and hydrogen were passed to the anode at a pressure of 1.22 kPa and 1 kPa, respectively, 
but the transport number of oxygen ions increased with temperature. In both cases, mixed conduction 
occurred, which is responsible for the lower PTN. It was concluded that a higher temperature was not 
necessary to enhance hydrogen pump performance and a low temperature is practically favorable to 
reduce the migration of oxygen ions, leading to lower oxide degradation. The authors also studied the 
impact of oxygen partial pressure on the cathode side on hydrogen pump performance. The pressure 
was maintained over the range of 0.02 Pa to 1 kPa. It was found that the performance of the hydrogen 
pumps enhanced with increasing oxygen partial pressure, which can be attributed to the enhancement 
of proton transport numbers (above 102 Pa) and reduction of voltage. Furthermore, the comparison of 
the performance of the hydrogen pump based on SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α and CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α was studied during 
underwater vapor electrolysis at 873 K. Even though both showed mixed conduction at elevated tem-
peratures, proton conductivity and electrical resistance were lower for SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α- than
CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α-based hydrogen pumps. These results indicate that proton conductivity is the major pa-
rameter to enhance the performance of the hydrogen pump.

Figure 8. (a) Hydrogen evolution rate versus current under various temperatures, (b) The hydrogen evolution rate, 
and efficiency as a function of current (gas mass flow rates). Reproduced from Ref. [80]. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier.

Tanaka et al. (2010) [97] also used SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3−α to extract hydrogen from a gas mixture. To sim-

ulate the gas mixture present in a hydrogen processing unit, argon gas carrying hydrogen and methane 
at 0.1 kPa and water vapor at 1.2 kPa were passed into the system at 973 K, 85 cm3/min. The hydrogen 
and water vapor concentration at the anode outlet was observed as 0.5% and 1%, respectively, while 
methane was not detected. This phenomenon was successfully demonstrated by the decomposition of 
methane and part of the water vapor into hydrogen gas. Considering the hydrogen pump composed 
of 0.5 kPa H2 and 1 kPa water vapor, it was found that with the increasing current density (up to 1.1 
mA/cm2) hydrogen evolution rate increased linearly along with the theoretical value. After 1.1 mA/cm2, 
it increased nonlinearly, but became much smaller than the theoretical values, which depicted the mi-
gration of other charge carriers to the proton conductor. However, until 0.4 V, 1.1 mA/cm2, hydrogen 
extraction to the cathode was executed by hydrogen pumping, while PTN was unity. Then, hydrogen 
extraction was executed by water vapor electrolysis, and the presence of oxygen was observed at 0.95 
V. Later, oxygen supplied electron holes and oxide ions. These carriers are responsible for the reduced 
efficiency of the hydrogen pump and the reduction of electrolytes. This issue could be solved by reduc-
ing the operating temperature to less than 773 K.

Fukada et al. (2007) [79] conducted a study that proposed a ceramic cell with one end closed tube 

consisting of SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α to recover tritium from the exhaust gas. The porous electrodes of this cell 


13 of 31

were composed of Ni/SiO2 and NiO/SiO2. The fed gas supplied to the anode was wet methane or hy-
drogen, whereas for the cathode, it was wet oxygen. Results showed that regardless of the supplied 
conditions (CH4 +H2O, H2 +H2O), all the j-V curves can be correlated by the linear equation V = E0 − jd/σ
under direct-current (DC) method or a temperature range 600–700 °C. In addition, EMF (E0) and overall 
conductivity (σ) were determined in terms of the partial pressure of H2O on the anode side and the tem-
perature. It was observed that the mass transfer process of CH4 + H2O’s products CO and H2 took place 
by counter diffusion and normal diffusion method, respectively, through the porous anode, which even-
tually affected E0. Conversely, overall proton conductivity was affected by the reduction reaction rate of 
oxygen between the interface of ceramic and the cathode NiO/SiO2. This phenomenon was similar for 
both supplied conditions. Additional tests were conducted by feeding CH4 without H2O into the fuel-cell 
system. From SEM-EDX, it was found that carbon deposition occurred at the cathode interface, which 
was not observed with H2O until six months. All these findings depicted the stable operation of 
SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α ceramic cell to extract Q2 (Q = H, D, T) successfully. Table 2 shows different zirconate-based 
tritium recovery systems and their related parameters.

Table 2. Zirconate-based tritium recovery systems.

Electrolyte Materi-

als

Sintering Con-

dition

Sample Gas 

Mixture Used at 

Anode

Sample Gas Mix-
ture Used at Cath-

ode

Electrode Type Operating Tem-

perature (°C)
Ref.

CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α
800 °C for 1 h
He + H2
He
Pt
650–800
[80]

SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α
N/A
CH4 + H2
O2 + H2O
Ni/SiO2 and 

NiO/SiO2
600–700
[79]

CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α
N/A
N/A
N/A
Pt
800
[93]

CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α
N/A
N/A
N/A
Pt
800
[81]

CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α
N/A
N/A
N/A
Pt
700
[82]

4.3. Sensor Devices

Perovskite materials such as ACeO3 (where A is either Ba or Sr) can act as a high proton-conducting 

electrolyte in hydrogen sensor devices, but their poor chemical stability limits their application [98,99]. 
However, indium-doped CaZrO3 shows better chemical stability than ACeO3 at higher operating tem-
peratures, but has relatively lower proton conductivity [100]. Moreover, the sensing properties of the 
sensor devices mainly depend on the proton conductivity, and conductivity depends on the doping 
effect and phase composition. Therefore, the solid-state reaction method produces the In-doped CaZrO3 
to improve the sensitivity. Chen et al. (2016) [89] investigated the connection between the calcination 
temperature and the fabrication of CaZr0.9In0.1O3-δ electrolyte during the solid-state reaction procedure. 
Figure 9 shows the schematic of the hydrogen sensor and the experiment setup [89]. It was found that 
CaZrO3 can be produced from ZrO2 and CaO directly at 1000 °C or at two stages creating an interme-
diate product (CaZr4O9) at a higher temperature of 1000 °C to 1200 °C. The indium-doping process 
mainly occurs in CaZrO3 between 1200 °C and 1400 °C. From the Emf response of the sensor, the authors
found out that the Emf value of the sensor based on CaZr0.9In0.1O3-δ electrolyte is close to the theoretical 
value and has a proton transport number close to unity (0.95). This proves the excellent sensing capa-
bility of the indium-doped electrolyte. On the other hand, due to the lower proton transport number 
(0.85) and Emf, undoped CaZrO3 does not show good sensing properties.

Matsumoto and Iwahara (2000) [101] developed an electrochemical device that can be used to de-

tect hydrogen and deuterium by using EMFs of cells with the proton-conducting electrolyte 
CaZr0.90In0.10O3-α. The authors proposed that the EMF of the cell had two components: (1) voltage differ-
ence due to the difference in mobility of deuterium and proton, and (2) different reaction rates of D2 
and H2 at the platinum electrodes. The EMF measured at 700 °C of the H2 || D2 cell was found to be 16.9 
mV which was constant in all atmospheres and similar to a previous study by the same authors [102]. 
The cell’s EMFs linearly increased with deuterium molar concentration in the H2 and D2 gas mixture. 
The fabricated hydrogen isotope sensor was very stable and responsive.


14 of 31

Figure 9. (a) Schematic of H2 sensor with a sintered CaZr0.9In0.1O3-δ (b) Experimental setup for hydrogen sensor in 
various partial pressure gases. Reproduced from Ref. [89]. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier.

Kalyakin et al. (2019) [103] studied amperometric-type hydrogen sensors with CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3–δ

electrolyte in the application of humidity analysis. The sensor consists of two electrodes: YSZ having 
oxygen-ionic conductivity and CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3–δ having protonic and oxygen-ionic conductivity, pro-
duced by glycine glycerin nitrate combustion synthesis. The sensor was tested in wet air, with a partial 
pressure of vapor ranging from 0.025 atm to 0.11 atm. From the voltage-current analysis, it was seen 
that with the increase of voltage across the electrode of the sensor, the current rises to a limiting value, 
and the higher the partial pressure is, the higher the limiting current. XRD pattern and SEM showed
that CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3–δ crystal has an orthorhombic perovskite structure, and when sintered at 1550 °C, it 
has well-formed and dense grains with a relative density of 99%, which contributes to its good sensing 
properties. From the conductivity analysis, the authors noticed that CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3–δ electrolyte shows 
electronic and ionic conductivity at high temperatures (800 °C), but only ionic conductivity at a lower 
temperature (600 °C and 700 °C) due to the constant conductivity value over the range of different 
partial pressure of oxidation atmosphere [103]. It can be concluded from their study that CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3–


15 of 31

δ can be used as a mix-ionic conductive electrolyte at relatively high temperatures and in dry oxidation 
atmospheres.

The performance of amperometric hydrogen sensors primarily depends on the electrolytes and 

sensing electrodes. Among the proton-conducting electrolytes, In3+-doped calcium zirconate is chemi-
cally stable and has been used in hydrogen sensors [104,105]. On the other hand, the performance of 
nanostructured ZnO as sensing electrodes has been studied recently [106–109]. Dai et al. (2012) [83] 
have proposed an amperometric hydrogen sensor with a bilayer proton conducting electrolyte, 
CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α, and ZnO electrode as sensing materials. Figure 10 shows the fabrication process of the 
proposed hydrogen sensor [83]. The principle of the sensors is based on current measurement in the 
case of applied voltage on the nanostructured ZnO anode. From the XRD pattern, it can be concluded 
that CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α is stable under pure CO2, H2, and wet Ar atmospheres. Arrhenius’s plot of the pro-
ton conductivities of the electrolyte shows that it has a good proton conductivity, making it an excellent 
choice for hydrogen sensors. After using ZnO as a sintering aid in the electrolyte, it is noticed from SEM 
images that ZnO effectively densifies the electrolyte. ZnO also helps to improve the sensor response by 
increasing the reaction sites due to its porous nature. I–V characteristics of the sensor exhibit the revers-
ibility property, and the current response increase when the hydrogen concentration changes from 0 
ppm to 500 ppm. The amperometric transient graphs show that the response time and recovery time 
increase with the increase in temperature because of the higher electrochemical kinetics at increased 
operating temperature. The response/recovery times are inversely proportional to the gas flow rate. 
Loading of the sensor materials also has an impact on the sensitivity of the sensor. ZnO 5 mg exhibits 
a higher current response compared to the 2 mg of ZnO loading. The hydrogen sensor is also stable 
under extended exposure to hydrogen gas at 700 °C. Further research is needed to improve this sensor’s 
sensitivity and long-term stability.

Figure 10. Chemical composition of materials and the schematic of the fabrication process of the hydrogen sensor. 
Reproduced from Ref. [83]. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier.

Ohshima et al. (2010) [110] investigated the transportation of hydrogen through molten salt LiF-

NaF-KF (Flinak) by a hydrogen sensor consisting of proton-conducting oxide as a solid electrolyte. At 
first, the hydrogen sensor was validated by exposing it to an environment of Ar-H2.In this environment, 
the partial pressure of hydrogen was known. During this test, it was observed that the hydrogen sensor 
showed stability in Flinak while the temperature was not changing. In addition, the EMF of the sensor 
showed agreement with the theoretical EMF at this condition. Nevertheless, with the temperature 


16 of 31

change, the EMF value varied significantly from the theoretical EMF. The temperature change was 
measured between the free surface and the position where the sensor was immersed. Hydrogen 
transport through Flinak was controlled by the temperature dependence of Henry’s law. Its value was 
calculated by using the measured EMF. It was found that Henry’s constant has negative temperature 
dependence for the transportation of hydrogen through Flinak.

Okuyama et al. (2016) [88] investigated the proton dissolution mechanism and electrochemical 

properties of a hydrogen sensor with proton-conducting Mn-doped calcium zirconate (CaZr1-xMnxO3-d, 
x = 0.05, 0.005) electrolyte. The conduction and protonation of the electrolyte were primarily analyzed 
when the electrolyte was exposed to a hydrogen atmosphere. According to the study of Kurita et al.
(2019) [111], when the reference electrode has a low proton transport number, the EMF of the proton 
conductor mainly depends on the hydrogen activity of the working electrode. Therefore, developing a 
hydrogen sensor using CaZr1-xMnxO3-d does not require knowing the hydrogen concentration of the 
reference gas. This allows the electrolyte to serve as a self-standard electrode. Experimental conditions 
include flowing wet air to the reference electrode and flowing different ratios of hydrogen and argon 
gas to the working electrode. Electron spin resonance (ESR) analysis suggests that hydrogen flow 
causes a reduction in manganese ions from Mn3+ to Mn2+. IR diffusion–reaction analysis, which is ob-
served at 3300 cm−1 and caused by O−H vibration, also shows similar spectra, suggesting that from the 
reduction of Mn ion, CaZr1-xMnxO3-d acquires protons. Hence, conductivity increases with the increased
hydrogen flow since the reduction of manganese ions increases proton conduction. The activation en-
ergies of conductivity for CaZr0.995Mn0.005O3-d and CaZr0.95Mn0.05O3-d in reducing atmosphere (H2/H2O) 
are 0.63 eV and 0.66 eV, respectively, whereas in an oxidizing atmosphere (O2/H2O), they are 1.23 eV 
and 1.10 eV, respectively. This result suggests that the predominant charge carrier differs in these two 
atmospheres. Moreover, from the EMFs of hydrogen concentration cells, it is concluded that CaZr1-

xMnxO3-d exhibits hole conduction in the oxidizing environment during proton conduction in a reducing 
environment. Table 3 shows the zirconate-based hydrogen sensors and the related parameters.

4.4. Hydrogen Pumps

Hydrogen energy is very environmentally friendly, as opposed to carbon-based fuel (oil, natural 

gas), which leads to global warming. An efficient method of hydrogen production is an important topic 
that was investigated by Sakai et al. 2008 [112]. Figure 11 shows the operating principle of the electrol-
ysis mechanism, the SEM characterization of zirconate, and the hydrogen evolution rate for different 
electrodes [112]. For electrolysis, different kinds of electrode materials were used, e.g., platinum as both 
cathode and anode, Sr0.5Sm0.5CoO3 (SSC-55) as an anode, Ni with an interlayer of SrCe0.95Yb0.05O3-α
(SCYb) as cathode, and SrZr0.9Y0.1O3-α (SZY-91) with partial doping of cerium, i.e., SrZr0.5Ce0.4Y0.1O3-α
(SZCY-541) as electrolyte. This type of electrochemical device is known as a hydrogen pump. The pro-
ton-conducting electrolyte used in their study was prepared by the solid-state reaction method. To 
overcome one of the limiting factors of the performance, i.e., overpotentials, the authors used SZY-91 
electrolytes with different types of electrodes instead of platinum. When platinum electrodes with SZY-
91electrolyte were used for electrolysis, overpotentials were found to be very high, indicating electrol-
ysis’s poor efficiency. This is due to the electric current conduction and ionic currents during the elec-
trolysis process. The authors were not sure whether this electric current is caused by holes or electrons, 
which makes room for further investigation in the future. When the SSC-55 anode and Ni cathode were 
used in place of platinum electrodes, the overpotential was significantly lower. SSC-55|SZY-91|Ni cell 
showed improved efficiency of current. As SCYb was inserted between the electrolyte and Ni cathode, 
the overpotential of the cathode was significantly reduced, but the hydrogen evolution rate signifi-
cantly differed from the theoretical value in the high current density region. As such, SZCY-541 was 
used instead of the SZY-91 electrolyte to improve the current efficiency. In this case, overpotential was 
slightly smaller than using SZY-91, yet the current efficiency, as well as hydrogen evolution rate, was 
significantly improved. Therefore, the authors concluded that partial doping of Ce improved the cell’s 
performance by reducing electric current and enhancing ionic transport.


17 of 31

Figure 11. (a) Operating principle of steam electrolysis cells based on proton-conducting electrolytes (b) SEM im-
ages of the cross section of SCYb interlayer SZCY-541 electrolyte (top), SCYb interlayer (middle) and nickel elec-
trode (bottom) (c,d) hydrogen evolution rate of the steam electrolysis cell with SZCY-541 electrolyte, SSC-55 anode, 
nickel cathode and SCYb interlayer at 800 °C (c) and 600 °C (d). Reproduced from Ref. [112]. Copyright © 2009 
Elsevier.

The performance of a hydrogen pump consisting of proton-conducting oxide SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α under 

various environments and temperature were investigated by Tanaka et al. (2008) [96]. Performance 
evaluation of the hydrogen pump was done by passing direct current within the temperature range 673–
873 K. Wet argon and hydrogen gas were used as a fed gas at a pressure 1 kPa to the anode side. Results 
showed that mixed conduction (electron-hole, protonic, oxygen ion) occurred through SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α elec-
trolyte at a higher temperature, but with the increase in temperature, voltage and proton transport num-
bers decreased under water vapor electrolysis. The maximum proton transport number was observed 
at 823 K and started to decrease with temperature. Conversely, with the presence of hydrogen on the 
anode side, the proton transport number of oxygen ions increased with increasing temperature. It was 
concluded that a higher temperature was not necessary to enhance hydrogen pump performance, and 
a low temperature is practically favorable to reduce the migration of oxygen ions, leading to lower 
oxide degradation. The authors also studied the impact of oxygen partial pressure on the cathode side 
on hydrogen pump performance. The pressure was maintained over the range of 0.02 Pa to 1 kPa. It 
was found that the performance of the hydrogen pumps was enhanced with increasing oxygen partial 
pressure, which can be attributed to the enhancement of proton transport numbers (above 102 Pa) and 
reduction in voltage. Furthermore, the comparison of the performance of hydrogen pumps based on 
SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α and CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α was studied under water vapor electrolysis at 873 K. Even though both 
showed mixed conduction at elevated temperatures, proton transport numbers and electrical resistance 
were lower for the SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α- than the CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α-based hydrogen pump. In addition, Figure 1 
clearly shows that for 1.5 V, the protonic current of SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α was 37 mA, whereas for CaZr0.9In0.1O3-

α, it was 0.41 mA. In addition, the hydrogen evolution rate was higher for CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α. These results 
indicate that proton conductivity is the major parameter to enhance the performance of the hydrogen 
pump.

Sakai et al. (2009) [92] used palladium as an electrode to enhance the performance of the hydrogen 

pump. Since proton-conducting electrolyte SZY-91 was used, hydrogen was directly produced in the 


18 of 31

cathode without any separation process. The electrolyte was prepared by solid-state reaction, and pal-
ladium electrodes were prepared by a sputtering method to measure the hydrogen evolution rate and 
screen-printing method to measure the morphological effect of the electrode. In this paper, the elec-
trodes were designed without a three-phase boundary (TPB) to improve the performance, which is a 
different technique compared to the authors’ previous study [113]. This was possible due to the palla-
dium’s special property, i.e., hydrogen permeability. Since hydrogen ions can easily penetrate the po-
rous palladium electrodes, the authors were able to design the electrodes without TPB, which improved 
the pump’s performance. The experiment showed that overpotentials at cathode and anode using sput-
tered palladium electrodes were significantly reduced compared to platinum electrodes. However, the 
overpotential of the cathode did not reduce as much as that of the anode, so future research is needed 
to improve the performance of the palladium cathode. When pasted palladium was used as an elec-
trode, cathode overpotential showed a constant nature upon the sintering temperature change. On the 
contrary, the overpotential of anode sintered at 900 °C showed a higher value while anode sintered at 
1400 °C showed almost zero overpotential. From the electrode morphology, the authors explained that 
in the case of 1400 °C sintering temperature, the electrode was dense and uniformly covered with the 
electrolyte, which increased the contact area. This indicates that the rate-determining step (RDS) of the 
anode reaction takes place at the interface of the electrolyte/electrode. Partial pressure of hydrogen did 
not affect the anode performance. On the other hand, anode sintered at 900 °C was porous, so overpo-
tential was high.

Fukada et al. (2009) [114] studied fuel cells with proton-conducting SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α electrolyte to 

produce hydrogen directly from methane reliably and effectively. They investigated the RDS of mass 
hydrogen transfer from the anode through the electrolyte to the cathode for the proper design of the 
hydrogen pump. The experiment was tested with a ceramic tube made of SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α and porous 
Ni/SiO2 electrodes because they are not prone to react with CO2 or CO, and tubes with Ni electrodes are 
more cost-effective than the platinum electrode. As the moist methane (CH4 + H2O) is supplied to the 
porous Ni/SiO2 anode, the CH4 dissociation reaction (CH4 + H2O = CO + 2H2) occurs with the steam 
and produced H2 gathers on the Ni/SiO2 electrode surface. From the Arrhenius plot of electrolyte and 
electrode resistance, it was noticed that polarization resistance was larger than the ohmic resistance, 
and the resistance related to the CH4 dissociation reaction was the RDS of the hydrogen transfer process 
from anode to cathode. Besides, reaction resistance at the cathode compartment was found to be negli-
gible in the transfer process, which led the author to conclude that the rate-determining step was in the 
anode compartment. On the contrary, at the temperature range over 700 °C, the rate-determining step 
was found to be the proton transfer through the SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α electrolyte, and the activation energy 
for proton transfer was 31.5 kJ/mol. It was also found that when the temperature was below 700 °C, the 
resistance related to the reaction at the cathode regulated the transfer rate of hydrogen.

Chen et al. (2012) [115] investigated the mechanism of proton conduction across the grain bound-

ary of 5 mol% yttrium-doped polycrystalline strontium zirconate (p-SZY5), used as a hydrogen pump. 
This electrolyte is chemically stable compared to barium zirconate [116] and showed the highest proton 
conductivity at ~5 mol% concentration [117–120]. Before the experiment, the authors assumed a potential 
barrier at the grain boundary, which restricts proton transport, and the grain boundary acts as a Schottky 
junction. From the Arrhenius plot of average grain boundary and bulk conductivities, it can be noted that 
the activation energy for average grain boundary conductivity (1.22 eV) was almost twice compared to 
the activation energy for bulk conductivity (0.59 eV). Besides, average grain boundary conductivity was 
significantly lower than the bulk conductivity (almost 4–5 orders of magnitude) over the temperature 
range. Therefore, it verifies the authors’ assumption of limiting the protonic current across the grain 
boundary in p-SZY5. Furthermore, from the I-V characteristics of the grain boundary, the authors noticed 
that grain-boundary current increases nonlinearly with the increase of grain boundary voltage, which is 
almost similar to the properties of back-to-back Schottky junction. This proves that due to the presence of 
the Schottky barrier, the internal proton transport in p-SZY5 is reduced. Table 4 summarizes the zirconate-
based hydrogen pumps and their relevant parameters.

Tanaka et al. (2010) [97] proposed a hydrogen pump consisting of SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3−α to extract hydro-

gen from a gas mixture. To simulate the gas mixture present in a hydrogen processing unit, argon gas 


19 of 31

carrying hydrogen and methane at 0.1 kPa and water vapor at 1.2 kPa was passed into the system at 
973 K, 85 cm3/min. The measurements of gases (H2, CH4) at the inlet and outlet of the anode were made 
by a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and hydrogen flame ionization detector (FID), respectively. 
The hydrogen and water vapor concentration at the anode outlet was observed as 0.5% and 1%, respec-
tively, while methane was not detected. This phenomenon was successfully demonstrated by the de-
composition of methane and part of water vapor into hydrogen gas. Considering the hydrogen pump 
composed of 0.5 kPa H2 and 1 kPa water vapor, it was found that with the increasing current density 
(up to 1.1 mA/cm2) hydrogen evolution rate increased linearly along with the theoretical value. After 
1.1 mA/cm2, it increased nonlinearly but became much smaller than the theoretical values, which de-
picted the migration of other charge carriers to the proton conductor. However, until 0.4 V, 1.1 mA/cm2, 
hydrogen extraction to the cathode was executed by hydrogen pumping while the proton number (PN) 
was unity. Then, hydrogen extraction was executed by water vapor electrolysis, and the presence of 
oxygen was observed at 0.95 V (Figure 12a)In addition, Figure 12b shows gas concentration change at 
the outlet as a function of temperature [97]. Later, oxygen supplied electron-hole and oxide ions. These 
carriers are responsible for the reduced efficiency of the hydrogen pump and the reduction of electro-
lytes. This issue could be solved by reducing the operating temperature to less than 773 K. But proton 
conduction was also getting reduced at a low operating temperature which is a big challenge in using 
SrZrO3-based proton conductors. Furthermore, during the investigation of the methane decomposition 
mechanism, it was observed that carbon did not deposit into the substrate. In addition, the following 
catalytic reaction (Equations (1) and (2)) [97] was postulated based on the experimental results (only 
for plated electrode), which shifted to the right side during hydrogen extraction and confirmed the 
usefulness of a hydrogen pump consisting of proton conductor in hydrogen recovery.

CH4 +H2O = CO +3H2
(1)

CO + H2O = CO2 + H2
(2)


20 of 31

Table 3. Zirconate based hydrogen sensors.

Electrolyte Mate-

rials

Synthesis 
Method
Density
Electrode
Proton Conductivity 

(mS·cm−1)/Temperature (°C)

Atmos-
pheres

Hydrogen Concentration 

(unit)/TEMPERATURE (°C)

Working Tem-
perature (°C)
Ref.

CaZr0.9In0.1O3− δ
Solid state reac-

tion
N/A
ZnO/Pt

2.01 ×1 0−4/700
Wet Ar
50–500
500–700

[83]
2.23 × 10−4/700
Air
50–500
500–700

2.41 × 10−4/700
4000 ppm 

H2/Ar
50–500
500–700

CaZr0.95Mn0.05O3-α
N/A
Relative den-

sity 98%
Pt/Pt
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
[88]

CaZr0.9In0.1O3-δ
Solid state reac-

tion
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
[89]

CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3-α
Glycine-nitrate 

combustion

Relative den-

sity 99%

Yttria stabilized 

zirconia/Pt
N/A
N/A
N/A
675–750
[103]

CaZr0.9In0.1O3-δ
Glycine-nitrate 

combustion
N/A
Pt
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
[121]

CaZr0.9In0.1O3-δ
N/A
N/A
Pd
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
[110]

Table 4. Zirconate-based hydrogen pump devices.

Electrolyte Materials Fabrication Method
Thickness 

(µm)
Electrode Type
Feed Gas at Anode Feed Gas at Cath-

ode
Sample Gas
Flow Rate 

(L/min)
Temperature (°C)
Ref.

SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α
Solid state reaction
500
Pt
1% O2+ 99% Ar
1% H2+ 99% Ar
N/A
N/A
600–800
[112]

SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α
Solid state reaction
500
Pd
N/A
N/A
1% H2+ 99% Ar
N/A
800
[92]

SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α
N/A
N/A
Ni/SiO2
CH4-Ar or H2-Ar
N/A
CH4+ H2O
N/A
600–800
[114]

SrZr0.95Yb0.05O3-α
Pecchini method
200–300
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
[115]

SrZr0.8Yb0.2O3-α
N/A
720
Pt
Wet H2 gas or wet Ar
Wet Ar
N/A
0.1
N/A
[96]

SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α
N/A
1500
Pt
CH4 + H2
N/A
N/A
0.1
N/A
[97]


21 of 31

Figure 12. (a) Variation of current density and gas concentrations at the outlet of the anode and cathode as a func-
tion of applied voltage, (b) gas concentration change at the outlet as a function of temperature; here hydrogen, 
methane, carbon monoxide, carbon-di oxide, and water vapor are shown. Reproduced from Ref. [97]. Copyright © 
2010 Elsevier.

5. Challenges and Prospects

Zirconated-based proton-conducting materials used as electrolytes in electrochemical devices face 

significant challenges. These challenges primarily involve performance, material selection, doping con-
centration, temperature, proton conductivity, cost, and water vapor concentration. In the following sec-
tion, this paper presents the challenges and prospects of using zirconated materials in electrochemical 
devices.

5.1. Tritium Monitoring Systems

The common issue in CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α-based hydrogen pump performance is the fluctuation of hy-

drogen evolution rate at a high temperature, which eventually causes the use of multiple tubes to meet 
the commercial grade proportional counter [70]. However, several other factors that lower the hydro-
gen pump performance are the fluctuation in the concentration of H2O-vapor in the anode compart-
ment, an increase in the conductivity of electron-hole and oxide-ion, electrode conductivity, etc. In ad-
dition, high water vapor concentration in fed gas negatively affects the hydrogen pump performance, 
such as hydrogen recovery rate decreases with increasing H2O-vapor concentration which was an issue 
[71]. Although the H2-evolution rate using proton-conducting oxides increases with high temperature 
and voltage, low-temperature proton-conducting oxides are more desirable. In this regard, 
SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α was found most suitable to extract maximum hydrogen at low temperatures, which is 
advantageous. Nevertheless, many ceramic tubes were required to obtain desired hydrogen evolution 
rate in the tritium monitoring system. Another issue in the application of proton-conducting ceramics 
with a pasted platinum electrode was the instantaneous evolution of water vapor on the cathode side 
after applying voltage (Figure 13) [97].

In water vapor electrolysis with a closed-loop system, hydrogen concentration was five times the 

water vapor concentration at the anode side after 50 min. It should be 10 times after 10 min in an actual 
application, which is a big challenge for a tritium monitoring system [122]. The introduction of a pro-
portional type tritium monitor can solve this issue by detecting low-concentration tritium. Moreover, 
the concentration of tritium is increased with the increasing current density while the concentration is 
in the range of two orders in magnitude [69]. The use of wet argon gas as fed gas was proved as a useful 
method to decontaminate the tritium from the membrane separator [43].


22 of 31

Figure 13. Time evolution of hydrogen and water vapor at the cathode outlet under the wet atmosphere containing 
oxygen; (a) applied voltage and current, (b) concentration of water vapor and hydrogen. Reproduced from Ref. 
[97]. Copyright © 2005 Taylor & Francis.

5.2. Tritium Recovery System

The current density is a factor that represents the performance of a tube-type proton conducting 

oxide. Enhancement of current density depends on a better preparation procedure for the electrode. In 
addition, the hydrogen evolution rate increases with current density under vacuum on the cathode side 
at a high temperature (973 K) after applying direct current. It was found that using an electroless plat-
inum electrode instead of pasted electrode provides enhanced hydrogen evolution rate and current in 
the hydrogen pump. However, only the current increased in water vapor electrolysis, but the hydrogen 
evolution rate does not change, so to improve the hydrogen evolution rate, an electrode of better oxy-
gen diffusivity is required. Posted electrode plays a vital role in this case due to its large pore size, but 
the vacuum condition on the cathode side must be confirmed [82]. High vacuum conditions may fur-
ther enhance the hydrogen recovery rate, which needs to be investigated. A large electrode surface area 
is also required to increase the current density in applying tube-type proton conducting oxide. Other-
wise, the requirement for the number of tubes would increase, which may increase the overall cost. 
Another parameter that should be considered to enhance the performance of proton-conducting oxide 
is proton conductivity instead of total conductivity. Increasing the oxygen partial pressure on the cath-
ode side increases the proton conductivity and electrical resistance by preventing the reduction of pro-
ton-conducting oxide. It is also reported that the reduction of proton conducting oxide, e.g., 
SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3−α, can be prevented by reducing the operating temperature, but proton conduction is also 
reduced at a low operating temperature, which is a big challenge of using SrZrO3-based proton con-
ductors. Hence, BaZrO3-based proton-conducting oxide can be a future candidate for operating at in-
termediate temperatures with higher proton conductivity [97].


23 of 31

5.3. Sensor Devices

Although using a zirconate-based proton conductor for hydrogen sensors has significant ad-

vantages, some challenges remain. The sensing properties depend mainly on the proton conductivity, 
which depends on the doping effects. However, when the calcination temperature is higher than 1400 
°C, there is no improvement in doping found in the electrolyte. Even at 1550 °C, the doping effect de-
grades significantly [89]. Limiting current hydrogen sensors are the current-type hydrogen sensor that 
consists of a proton conductor with high chemical stability and proton conductivity [123,124]. Recent 
studies have reported that the limiting current is increased with increasing voltages across the electrode 
in the hydrogen sensor, and also partial pressure is proportional to the limiting current [123–125].

Zirconate electrochemical hydrogen sensor systems often use potentiometric, amperometric, and 

impedimetric mechanisms for sensing. Amperometric methods are the most widely available in hydro-
gen sensors. However, amperometric sensors, for example, CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3–δ electrolyte-based hydrogen 
sensors, are limited by electrotype–electrode interfaces [83]. This is because the sensor’s performance 
depends not only on the zirconate electrolyte but also on the electrode used in the system. Therefore, 
further research needs to be done on the electrode material and its compatibility with the zirconate 
electrolytes. Even though ZnO [83], Pt [89], etc., have been used as electrode materials, their character-
ization remains a mystery, and therefore the maximum sensing performance remains unrealized in the 
scientific community. Moreover, the effects of these microstructures on the triple-phase boundary (gas–
electrode–electrolyte) are not fully known [83]. One more limitation of amperometric sensors is that 
this sensor needs to be a reference electrode that acts as the control electrode. This is required because 
the hydrogen signal needs to be subtracted from this reference to get the actual signal (noise reduction).

However, finding a suitable zirconate material and concentration for the electrolyte is still chal-

lenging, and prospective researchers have a lot of potential to work in that area. Doping is one more 
critical area where scientists still need to optimize the doping concentration to get maximum hydrogen 
sensor performance. Indium, ytterbium, manganese, and scandium have been used as doping materials 
[83,88,103]; however, the field remains open for prospective new doping materials (and concentration) 
that can improve the sensor performance beyond the current level. Finally, our current hydrogen sen-
sors’ operating temperature range is unknown. The temperature likely affects the performance, and the 
performance at high temperatures has not been evaluated. Since doping the zirconates remains chal-
lenging at a higher temperature, so does hydrogen sensor performance [89]. The study of sensing char-
acteristics at high temperatures remains open for prospective researchers.

5.4. Hydrogen Pumps

Hydrogen pumping technologies are essential in a nuclear fusion plant. These hydrogen pumps uti-

lize the methods of electrochemical cell technologies where some researchers used zirconate ceramic ma-
terials as electrolytes [97] and platinum/palladium/nickel materials as electrodes [79,92,112]. The main 
drawback of these methods still lies with material selection. The electrolyte surface becomes narrow be-
cause of the three-phase boundary, resulting in low electrode (electrochemical cell) performance [92]. A 
study has reported that palladium is used as an electrode (instead of platinum) with strontium zirconate 
materials to minimize the effect of three-phase boundaries [92]. Still, finding the right electrode–electro-
lyte combination for maximum performance of hydrogen pumps is a crucial challenge for prospective 
researchers in this field. Some studies reported a few models to explain the boundary conditions. One 
model assumes that a potential barrier is present at the three-phase boundaries, which limits the protonic 
conductivity. Another model assumes that the grain boundary is like a Schottky junction and that the 
protonic current follows thermionic emissions [115]. More innovative models are required from prospec-
tive scientists to explain this characteristic so we can finally overcome this barrier.

Another critical challenge is the high overpotential of platinum-based electrodes when used with 

zirconate conductors [92]. High electrode overpotentials led to the poor efficiency of the electrolytes in 
the pump. The method of doping with electrolytes proved to be a feasible solution to resolve this prob-
lem. Sakai et al. reported that palladium instead of platinum can be used as electrodes in SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3−α
electrolytes to improve the performance of the hydrogen pump [92,126]. However, this cannot signifi-
cantly reduce the problem of overpotential at the cathode.


24 of 31

The hydrogen pumps consisting of SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3−α faced significant challenges in maintaining the 

theoretical hydrogen evolution rate at higher current flow due to the migration of other charge carriers 
to the proton conductor [97]. Furthermore, zirconate-based ceramics also lead to high electrolyte anal-
ysis and low hydrogen pumping characteristics. To overcome this challenge, prospective researchers 
should collectively focus on developing methods to innovate novel materials for electrode/electrolyte 
for electrochemical hydrogen pumps. Finally, more research is required to precisely pinpoint the rate-
limiting step of the hydrogen pump.

6. Conclusions

The slow depletion of fuel sources and awareness of green alternatives drives the scientific com-

munity to focus their efforts on cleaner sources of energy and fuel alternatives. Electrochemical method-
based energy sources have garnered considerable attention among researchers for their potential in 
clean and renewable energy sources. Compared to the other proton-conducting materials used in elec-
trochemical methods as an electrolyte, zirconate-based perovskite proton-conducting materials are the 
most promising materials due to their excellent proton conductivity and chemical stability in a wide 
temperature range. In this paper, we have reviewed the existing literature on the potential of zirconate 
materials as an electrolyte in tritium sensors, tritium recovery systems, hydrogen sensor devices, and 
hydrogen pump devices. We have drawn the following conclusions based on the existing literature.

I.
CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α and SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α proton conductors are extensively used for tritium monitoring. 
These materials have minimal interference with other radioactive molecules and perform well in 
higher temperature ranges.

II.
CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α, SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α, andSrZr0.9Yb0.1O3−α can be utilized in a tritium recovery system. Fur-
thermore, since they have proton conductivity more than cerates, their performance as a tritium 
recovery system is superior.

III.
Using different concentrations of calcium zirconates and materials (CaZr0.9In0.1O3–δ, CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3–

δ, CaZr1-xMnxO3-d), researchers were able to successfully implement an effective hydrogen sensor 
device that is capable of operating in an extensive temperature range and without the need for a 
reference electrode.

IV.
CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α, SrZr0.9Y0.1O3−α, and SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3- α electrolyte zirconate materials have been used 
as electrochemical hydrogen pumps. These materials have excellent hydrogen extraction proper-
ties and can minimize the rate-limiting step.

Using zirconate materials in electrochemical cells presents unique challenges to prospective re-

searchers. Researchers over the years have come up with innovative computational and laboratory ap-
proaches to address these challenges. The challenges in the fields mentioned above are described as 
follows:

I.
Zirconate-based tritium monitoring system faces the challenge of hydrogen rate fluctuation. In 
addition, the real-time concentration is sometimes unreliable because of low temporal resolution. 
Decontamination of the membrane separator is an additional challenge for the zirconate electro-
lyte tritium sensor.

II.
In a tritium recovery system, the main challenge is the operating temperature of the zirconate ma-
terials. Although alternate materials are adequate to address the issue, finding the perfect materi-
als remains challenging.

III.
Challenges in hydrogen sensor devices include electrode/electrolyte material selection, doping 
concentration, and temperature dependence in performance.

IV.
In electrochemical hydrogen pumps, material selection still poses a considerable challenge. Problems 
associated with overpotentials are a massive problem in anodic electrode materials. Moreover, there 
is a requirement for an innovative model with three-phase boundary conditions that will explain the 
correct emission and conductivity.

In this paper, we have laid out the utility of zirconate-based proton conductors in terms of tritium 

monitor, tritium recovery, a hydrogen sensor device, and hydrogen pumps. We have also pointed out the 


25 of 31

challenges and prospects of zirconate materials, which give a path to perspective researchers to make a 
meaningful contribution in this field.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.K.H. and K.H.; methodology, M.K.H.; software, M.K.H.; validation, 
M.K.H., R.C.D. and K.H.; formal analysis, M.K.H., H.B., M.F.R., M.H.K.R., and R.C.D.; investigation, M.K.H.; re-
sources, M.K.H. and K.H.; data curation, M.K.H., S.M.K.H. and T.E.; writing—original draft preparation, M.K.H., 
S.M.K.H., M.I.H. and T.E.; writing—review and editing, M.K.H., M.I.H., R.C.D., and K.H.; visualization, M.K.H., 
H.B., M.F.R., M.H.K.R., and K.H.; supervision, M.K.H. and K.H.; project administration, M.K.H. and K.H.; All au-
thors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-
for-profit sectors.

Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.

Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the MS and PhD students who initially supported us to organize the content 
of the manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References

1.
Sharma, P.; Said, Z.; Kumar, A.; Nižetić, S.; Pandey, A.; Hoang, A.T.; Huang, Z.; Afzal, A.; Li, C.; Le, A.T.; et 
al. Recent Advances in Machine Learning Research for Nanofluid-Based Heat Transfer in Renewable Energy 
System. Energy Fuels 2022, 36, 6626–6658. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.2c01006.

2.
Siram, O.; Sahoo, N.; Saha, U.K. Changing Landscape of India’s Renewable Energy and the Contribution of 
Wind Energy. Clean. Eng. Technol. 2022, 8, 100506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clet.2022.100506.

3.
Sircar, A.; Tripathi, G.; Bist, N.; Shakil, K.A.; Sathiyanarayanan, M. Emerging Technologies for Sustainable and 
Smart Energy; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2022; ISBN 9781003307402.

4.
Chia, S.R.; Nomanbhay, S.; Ong, M.Y.; Shamsuddin, A.H.B.; Chew, K.W.; Show, P.L. Renewable Diesel as 
Fossil 
Fuel 
Substitution 
in 
Malaysia: 
A 
Review. 
Fuel
2022, 
314, 
123137. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2022.123137.

5.
Karakoc, T.H.; Colpan, C.O.; Ekici, S.; Yetik, O. Promising Fuels and Green Energy Technologies for Aviation. 
Int. J. Green Energy 2022. https://doi.org/10.1080/15435075.2022.2082253.

6.
Gogoi, P.; Tudu, B.; Saikia, P. Hydrogen Fuel: Clean Energy Production Technologies. In Status and Future 
Challenges for Non-conventional Energy Sources Volume 1; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2022; pp. 133–
154.

7.
Khan, M.; Das, R.C.; Casey, J.; Reese, B.L.; Akintunde, B.; Pathak, A.K. Near Room Temperature 
Magnetocaloric Properties in Ni Deficient (Mn0.525Fe0.5)Ni0.975Si0.95Al0.05. AIP Adv. 2022, 12, 035227. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/9.0000294.

8.
Hossain, M.K.; Raihan, G.A.; Akbar, M.A.; Kabir Rubel, M.H.; Ahmed, M.H.; Khan, M.I.; Hossain, S.; Sen, 
S.K.; Jalal, M.I.E.; El-Denglawey, A. Current Applications and Future Potential of Rare Earth Oxides in 
Sustainable Nuclear, Radiation, and Energy Devices: A Review. ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 2022, 4, 3327–3353. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaelm.2c00069.

9.
Andrews, J.; Rezaei Niya, S.M.; Ojha, R. Electrochemical Hydrogen Storage in Porous Carbons with Acidic 
Electrolytes: 
Uncovering 
the 
Potential. 
Curr. 
Opin. 
Electrochem.
2022, 
31, 
100850. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coelec.2021.100850.

10.
Sedighi, F.; Ghiyasiyan-Arani, M.; Behpour, M. Ternary Nanocomposites of Ce2W2O9/CoWO4/Porous Carbon; 
Design, Structural Study and Electrochemical Hydrogen Storage Application. Fuel 2022, 310, 122218. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2021.122218.

11.
Hossain, M.K.; Rubel, M.H.K.; Akbar, M.A.; Ahmed, M.H.; Haque, N.; Rahman, M.F.; Hossain, J.; Hossain, 
K.M. A Review on Recent Applications and Future Prospects of Rare Earth Oxides in Corrosion and Thermal 
Barrier Coatings, Catalysts, Tribological, and Environmental Sectors. Ceram. Int. 2022, 48, 32588-32612. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2022.07.220.

12.
Kreuer, 
K.D. 
Proton-Conducting 
Oxides. 
Annu. 
Rev. 
Mater. 
Res.
2003, 
33, 
333–359. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.matsci.33.022802.091825.

13.
Colomban, P. Proton Conductors and Their Applications: A Tentative Historical Overview of the Early 
Researches. Solid State Ionics 2019, 334, 125–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2019.01.032.

14.
Duan, C.; Huang, J.; Sullivan, N.; O’Hayre, R. Proton-Conducting Oxides for Energy Conversion and Storage. 
Appl. Phys. Rev. 2020, 7, 011314. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5135319.


26 of 31

15.
Leonard, K.; Druce, J.; Thoreton, V.; Kilner, J.A.; Matsumoto, H. Exploring Mixed Proton/Electron Conducting 
Air 
Electrode 
Materials 
in 
Protonic 
Electrolysis 
Cell. 
Solid 
State 
Ion. 
2018, 
319, 
218–222. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2018.02.016.

16.
Hossain, M.K.; Chanda, R.; El-Denglawey, A.; Emrose, T.; Rahman, M.T.; Biswas, M.C.; Hashizume, K. Recent 
Progress in Barium Zirconate Proton Conductors for Electrochemical Hydrogen Device Applications: A 
Review. Ceram. Int. 2021, 47, 23725–23748. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2021.05.167.

17.
Hussain, S.; Li, Y. Review of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Materials: Cathode, Anode, and Electrolyte. Energy Transit. 
2020, 4, 113–126. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41825-020-00029-8.

18.
Harada, K.; Tanii, R.; Matsushima, H.; Ueda, M.; Sato, K.; Haneda, T. Effects of Water Transport on Deuterium 
Isotope Separation during Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Water Electrolysis. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2020, 45, 
31389–31395. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.08.256.

19.
Adhikari, S.; Fernando, S. Hydrogen Membrane Separation Techniques. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2006, 45, 875–
881. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie050644l.

20.
Li, Y.; Kappis, K.; Papavasiliou, J.; Fu, Z.; Chen, L.; Li, H.; Vlachos, D.E.; Avgouropoulos, G. Insights on the 
Electrochemical Performance of a Molten Proton Conductor Fuel Cell with Internal Methanol Reformer. J. 
Power Sources 2022, 542, 231813. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2022.231813.

21.
Bonanos, N. Perovskite Proton Conductor. In Encyclopedia of Applied Electrochemistry; Springer: New York, NY, 
USA, 2014; pp. 1514–1520.

22.
Pei, K.; Zhou, Y.; Xu, K.; Zhang, H.; Ding, Y.; Zhao, B.; Yuan, W.; Sasaki, K.; Choi, Y.; Chen, Y.; et al. Surface 
Restructuring of a Perovskite-Type Air Electrode for Reversible Protonic Ceramic Electrochemical Cells. Nat. 
Commun. 2022, 13, 2207. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-29866-5.

23.
Rubel, M.H.K.; Mitro, S.K.; Hossain, M.K.; Hossain, K.M.; Rahaman, M.M.; Hossain, J.; Mondal, B.K.; Akter, 
A.; Rahman, M.F.; Ahmed, I.; et al. First-Principles Calculations to Investigate Physical Properties of Single-
Cubic (Ba0.82K0.18)(Bi0.53Pb0.47)O3 Novel Perovskite Superconductor. Mater. Today Commun. 2022, 33, 104302. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtcomm.2022.104302.

24.
Rubel, M.H.K.; Hossain, M.A.; Hossain, M.K.; Hossain, K.M.; Khatun, A.A.; Rahaman, M.M.; Ferdous 
Rahman, M.; Hossain, M.M.; Hossain, J. First-Principles Calculations to Investigate Structural, Elastic, 
Electronic, Thermodynamic, and Thermoelectric Properties of CaPd3B4O12 (B = Ti, V) Perovskites. Results Phys.
2022, 42, 105977. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rinp.2022.105977.

25.
de Souza, E.C.C.; Muccillo, R. Properties and Applications of Perovskite Proton Conductors. Mater. Res. 2010, 
13, 385–394. https://doi.org/10.1590/S1516-14392010000300018.

26.
Zhou, M.; Liu, Z.; Chen, M.; Zhu, Z.; Cao, D.; Liu, J. Electrochemical Performance and Chemical Stability of 
Proton-conducting 
BaZr0.8−xCexY0.2O3−δ
Electrolytes. 
J. 
Am. 
Ceram. 
Soc.
2022, 
105, 
5711–5724. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/jace.18500.

27.
Zhou, D.; Zhou, T.; Tian, Y.; Zhu, X.; Tu, Y. Perovskite-Based Solar Cells: Materials, Methods, and Future 
Perspectives. J. Nanomater. 2018, 2018, 8148072. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/8148072.

28.
Yang, Y.; Ling, X.; Qiu, W.; Bian, J.; Zhang, X.; Chen, Q. Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Spectroscopy 
Reveals the Phonon Softening of Yttrium-Doped Barium Zirconate Thin Films. J. Phys. Chem. C 2022, 126, 
10722–10728. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.2c01906.

29.
Nur Syafkeena, M.A.; Zainor, M.L.; Hassan, O.H.; Baharuddin, N.A.; Othman, M.H.D.; Tseng, C.-J.; Osman, 
N. Review on the Preparation of Electrolyte Thin Films Based on Cerate-Zirconate Oxides for Electrochemical 
Analysis of Anode-Supported Proton Ceramic Fuel Cells. J. Alloys Compd.
2022, 918, 165434. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2022.165434.

30.
Peltzer, D.; Múnera, J.; Cornaglia, L. Study of the Sorption Properties of Alkali Zirconate-Based Sorbents at 
High Temperature in the Presence of Water and Low CO2 Concentration. J. Alloys Compd. 2022, 895, 162419. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2021.162419.

31.
Rashid, N.L.R.M.; Samat, A.A.; Jais, A.A.; Somalu, M.R.; Muchtar, A.; Baharuddin, N.A.; Wan Isahak, W.N.R. 
Review on Zirconate-Cerate-Based Electrolytes for Proton-Conducting Solid Oxide Fuel Cell. Ceram. Int. 2019, 
45, 6605–6615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.01.045.

32.
Chen, M.; Zhou, M.; Liu, Z.; Liu, J. A Comparative Investigation on Protonic Ceramic Fuel Cell Electrolytes 
BaZr0.8Y0.2O3-δ and BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2O3-δ with NiO as Sintering Aid. Ceram. Int. 2022, 48, 17208–17216. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2022.02.278.

33.
Yamanaka, S.; Fujikane, M.; Hamaguchi, T.; Muta, H.; Oyama, T.; Matsuda, T.; Kobayashi, S.; Kurosaki, K. 
Thermophysical 
Properties 
of 
BaZrO3
and 
BaCeO3. 
J. 
Alloys 
Compd.
2003, 
359, 
109–113. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0925-8388(03)00214-7.

34.
Kurosaki, K.; Adachi, J.; Maekawa, T.; Yamanaka, S. Thermal Conductivity Analysis of BaUO3 and BaZrO3
by 
Semiempirical 
Molecular 
Dynamics 
Simulation. 
J. 
Alloys 
Compd.
2006, 
407, 
49–52. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2005.06.045.


27 of 31

35.
Borland, H.; Llivina, L.; Colominas, S.; Abellà, J. Proton Conducting Ceramics for Potentiometric Hydrogen 
Sensors 
for 
Molten 
Metals. 
Fusion 
Eng. 
Des.
2013, 
88, 
2431–2435. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2013.05.055.

36.
Tanaka, M.; Ohshima, T. Recovery of Hydrogen from Gas Mixture by an Intermediate-Temperature Type 
Proton Conductor. Fusion Eng. Des. 2010, 85, 1038–1043. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2010.01.007.

37.
Pergolesi, D.; Fabbri, E.; D’Epifanio, A.; Di Bartolomeo, E.; Tebano, A.; Sanna, S.; Licoccia, S.; Balestrino, G.; 
Traversa, E. High Proton Conduction in Grain-Boundary-Free Yttrium-Doped Barium Zirconate Films 
Grown by Pulsed Laser Deposition. Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 846–852. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2837.

38.
Assabumrungrat, S.; Sangtongkitcharoen, W.; Laosiripojana, N.; Arpornwichanop, A.; Charojrochkul, S.; 
Praserthdam, P. Effects of Electrolyte Type and Flow Pattern on Performance of Methanol-Fuelled Solid
Oxide Fuel Cells. J. Power Sources 2005, 148, 18–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2005.01.034.

39.
Sun, W.; Liu, M.; Liu, W. Chemically Stable Yttrium and Tin Co-Doped Barium Zirconate Electrolyte for Next 
Generation High Performance Proton-Conducting Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. Adv. Energy Mater. 2013, 3, 1041–
1050. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201201062.

40.
Hossain, M.K.; Biswas, M.C.; Chanda, R.K.; Rubel, M.H.K.; Khan, M.I.; Hashizume, K. A Review on 
Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Perovskite Barium Zirconate Proton Conductors. Emergent Mater.
2021, 4, 999–1027. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42247-021-00230-5.

41.
Zhang, W.; Hu, Y.H. Progress in Proton-conducting Oxides as Electrolytes for Low-temperature Solid Oxide 
Fuel Cells: From Materials to Devices. Energy Sci. Eng. 2021, 9, 984–1011. https://doi.org/10.1002/ese3.886.

42.
Schwandt, C.; Fray, D.J. The Titanium/Hydrogen System as the Solid-State Reference in High-Temperature 
Proton 
Conductor-Based 
Hydrogen 
Sensors. 
J. 
Appl. 
Electrochem.
2006, 
36, 
557–565. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10800-005-9108-5.

43.
Tanaka, M.; Sugiyama, T.; Ohshima, T.; Yamamoto, I. Extraction of Hydrogen and Tritium Using High-
Temperature Proton Conductor for Tritium Monitoring. Fusion Sci. Technol. 2011, 60, 1391–1394. 
https://doi.org/10.13182/FST11-A12690.

44.
Miller, J.M.; Bokwa, S.R.; Macdonald, D.S.; Verrall, R.A. Tritium Recovery from Lithium Zirconate Spheres. 
Fusion Technol. 1991, 19, 996–999. https://doi.org/10.13182/FST91-A29472.

45.
Hossain, M.K.; Tamura, H.; Hashizume, K. Visualization of Hydrogen Isotope Distribution in Yttrium and 
Cobalt 
Doped 
Barium 
Zirconates. 
J. 
Nucl. 
Mater.
2020, 
538, 
152207. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnucmat.2020.152207.

46.
Hossain, M.K.; Hashizume, K.; Hatano, Y. Evaluation of the Hydrogen Solubility and Diffusivity in Proton-
Conducting Oxides by Converting the PSL Values of a Tritium Imaging Plate. Nucl. Mater. Energy 2020, 25, 
100875. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nme.2020.100875.

47.
Hossain, M.K.; Iwasa, T.; Hashizume, K. Hydrogen Isotope Dissolution and Release Behavior in Y-doped 
BaCeO3. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 2021, 104, 6508–6520. https://doi.org/10.1111/jace.18035.

48.
Hossain, M.K.; Yamamoto, T.; Hashizume, K. Effect of Sintering Conditions on Structural and Morphological 
Properties of Y-
and Co-Doped BaZrO3
Proton Conductors. Ceram. Int.
2021, 47, 27177–27187. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2021.06.138.

49.
Hossain, M.K.; Yamamoto, T.; Hashizume, K. Isotopic Effect of Proton Conductivity in Barium Zirconates for 
Various 
Hydrogen-Containing 
Atmospheres. 
J. 
Alloys 
Compd.
2022, 
903, 
163957. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2022.163957.

50.
Han, D.; Liu, X.; Bjørheim, T.S.; Uda, T. Yttrium-Doped Barium Zirconate-Cerate Solid Solution as Proton 
Conducting Electrolyte: Why Higher Cerium Concentration Leads to Better Performance for Fuel Cells and 
Electrolysis Cells. Adv. Energy Mater. 2021, 11, 2003149. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.202003149.

51.
Liu, Y.; Zhang, W.; Wang, B.; Sun, L.; Li, F.; Xue, Z.; Zhou, G.; Liu, B.; Nian, H. Theoretical and Experimental 
Investigations on High Temperature Mechanical and Thermal Properties of BaZrO3. Ceram. Int. 2018, 44, 
16475–16482. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2018.06.064.

52.
Draber, F.M.; Ader, C.; Arnold, J.P.; Eisele, S.; Grieshammer, S.; Yamaguchi, S.; Martin, M. Publisher 
Correction: Nanoscale Percolation in Doped BaZrO3 for High Proton Mobility. Nat. Mater. 2020, 19, 577–577. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-020-0654-3.

53.
Hossain, M.K.; Hashizume, K. Dissolution and Release Behavior of Hydrogen Isotopes from Barium-
Zirconates. Proc. Int. Exch. Innov. Conf. Eng. Sci. 2020, 6, 34–39. https://doi.org/10.5109/4102460.

54.
Perrichon, A.; Jedvik Granhed, E.; Romanelli, G.; Piovano, A.; Lindman, A.; Hyldgaard, P.; Wahnström, G.; 
Karlsson, M. Unraveling the Ground-State Structure of BaZrO3 by Neutron Scattering Experiments and First-
Principles Calculations. Chem. Mater. 2020, 32, 2824–2835. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b04437.

55.
Abdalla, A.M.; Hossain, S.; Radenahmad, N.; Petra, P.M.I.; Somalu, M.R.; Rahman, S.M.H.; Eriksson, S.G.; 
Azad, A.K. Synthesis and Characterization of Sm1-xZrxFe1-yMgyO3 (x, y = 0.5, 0.7, 0.9) as Possible Electrolytes for 
SOFCs. Key Eng. Mater. 2018, 765, 49–53. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/KEM.765.49.


28 of 31

56.
Dai, H.; Kou, H.; Wang, H.; Bi, L. Electrochemical Performance of Protonic Ceramic Fuel Cells with Stable 
BaZrO3-Based 
Electrolyte: 
A 
Mini-Review. 
Electrochem. 
Commun.
2018, 
96, 
11–15. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2018.09.001.

57.
Park, K.-Y.; Seo, Y.; Kim, K.B.; Song, S.-J.; Park, B.; Park, J.-Y. Enhanced Proton Conductivity of Yttrium-
Doped Barium Zirconate with Sinterability in Protonic Ceramic Fuel Cells. J. Alloys Compd. 2015, 639, 435–
444. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2015.03.168.

58.
Yoo, Y.; Lim, N. Performance and Stability of Proton Conducting Solid Oxide Fuel Cells Based on Yttrium-
Doped 
Barium 
Cerate-Zirconate 
Thin-Film 
Electrolyte. 
J. 
Power 
Sources
2013, 
229, 
48–57. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.11.094.

59.
Shafi, S.P.; Bi, L.; Boulfrad, S.; Traversa, E. Yttrium and Nickel Co-Doped BaZrO3 as a Proton-Conducting 
Electrolyte for Intermediate Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. ECS Trans. 2015, 68, 503–508. 
https://doi.org/10.1149/06801.0503ecst.

60.
Bi, L.; Traversa, E. Synthesis Strategies for Improving the Performance of Doped-BaZrO3 Materials in Solid 
Oxide Fuel Cell Applications. J. Mater. Res. 2014, 29, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1557/jmr.2013.205.

61.
Dai, H. Proton Conducting Solid Oxide Fuel Cells with Chemically Stable BaZr0.75Y0.2Pr0.05O3-δ Electrolyte. 
Ceram. Int. 2017, 43, 7362–7365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2017.02.090.

62.
Liu, Y.; Ran, R.; Tade, M.O.; Shao, Z. Structure, Sinterability, Chemical Stability and Conductivity of Proton-
Conducting BaZr0.6M0.2Y0.2O3−δ Electrolyte Membranes: The Effect of the M Dopant. J. Memb. Sci. 2014, 467, 
100–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2014.05.020.

63.
Loureiro, F.J.A.; Nasani, N.; Reddy, G.S.; Munirathnam, N.R.; Fagg, D.P. A Review on Sintering Technology 
of Proton Conducting BaCeO3-BaZrO3 Perovskite Oxide Materials for Protonic Ceramic Fuel Cells. J. Power 
Sources 2019, 438, 226991. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.226991.

64.
Rajendran, S.; Thangavel, N.K.; Ding, H.; Ding, Y.; Ding, D.; Reddy Arava, L.M. Tri-Doped BaCeO3–BaZrO3 
as a Chemically Stable Electrolyte with High Proton-Conductivity for Intermediate Temperature Solid Oxide 
Electrolysis 
Cells 
(SOECs). 
ACS 
Appl. 
Mater. 
Interfaces
2020, 
12, 
38275–38284. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c12532.

65.
Jurewicz, K.; Frackowiak, E.; Béguin, F. Towards the Mechanism of Electrochemical Hydrogen Storage in 
Nanostructured Carbon Materials. Appl. Phys. A 2004, 78, 981–987. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339-003-2418-8.

66.
Korotcenkov, G.; Han, S.D.; Stetter, J.R. Review of Electrochemical Hydrogen Sensors. Chem. Rev. 2009, 109, 
1402–1433. https://doi.org/10.1021/CR800339K/ASSET/IMAGES/MEDIUM/CR-2008-00339K_0039.GIF.

67.
Bouwman, P. Electrochemical Hydrogen Compression (EHC) Solutions for Hydrogen Infrastructure. Fuel 
Cells Bull. 2014, 2014, 12–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1464-2859(14)70149-X.

68.
Keçebaş, A.; Kayfeci, M.; Bayat, M. Electrochemical Hydrogen Generation. In Solar Hydrogen Production; 
Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2019; pp. 299–317.

69.
Tanaka, M.; Sugiyama, T. Development of a Tritium Monitor Combined with an Electrochemical Tritium 
Pump 
Using 
a 
Proton 
Conducting 
Oxide. 
Fusion 
Sci. 
Technol.
2015, 
67, 
600–603. 

https://doi.org/10.13182/FST14-T89.

70.
Tanaka, M.; Katahira, K.; Asakura, Y.; Uda, T.; Iwahara, H.; Yamamoto, I. Hydrogen Extraction 
Characteristics of Proton-Conducting Ceramics under a Wet Air Atmosphere for a Tritium Stack Monitor. J. 
Nucl. Sci. Technol. 2004, 41, 1013–1017. https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2004.9726325.

71.
Tanaka, M.; Asakura, Y.; Uda, T.; Katahira, K.; Tsuji, N.; Iwahara, H. Hydrogen Enrichment by Means of 
Electrochemical Hydrogen Pump Using Proton-Conducting Ceramics for a Tritium Stack Monitor. Fusion Eng. 
Des. 2006, 81, 1371–1377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2005.08.075.

72.
Tanaka, M.; Asakura, Y.; Uda, T.; Katahira, K.; Iwahara, H.; Tsuji, N.; Yamamoto, I. Studies on Hydrogen 
Extraction Characteristics of Proton-Conducting Ceramics and Their Applications to a Tritium Recovery 
System and a Tritium Monitor. Fusion Sci. Technol. 2005, 48, 51–54. https://doi.org/10.13182/FST05-A878.

73.
Hossain, M.K. Study on Hydrogen Isotopes Behavior in Proton Conducting Zirconates and Rare Earth Oxides. 
Ph.D.Thesis, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 2021.

74.
Hossain, M.K.; Ahmed, M.H.; Khan, M.I.; Miah, M.S.; Hossain, S. Recent Progress of Rare Earth Oxides for 
Sensor, Detector, and Electronic Device Applications: A Review. ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 2021, 3, 4255–4283. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaelm.1c00703.

75.
Hossain, M.K.; Hashizume, K.; Jo, S.; Kawaguchi, K.; Hatano, Y. Hydrogen Isotope Dissolution and Release 
Behavior 
of 
Rare 
Earth 
Oxides. 
Fusion 
Sci. 
Technol.
2020, 
76, 
553–566. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2020.1728173.

76.
Hossain, M.K.; Kawaguchi, K.; Hashizume, K. Isotopic Effect of Proton Conductivity in Gadolinium 
Sesquioxide. Fusion Eng. Des. 2021, 171, 112555. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2021.112555.


29 of 31

77.
Khalid Hossain, M.; Kawaguchi, K.; Hashizume, K. Conductivity of Gadolinium (III) Oxide (Gd2O3) in 
Hydrogen-Containing 
Atmospheres. 
Proc. 
Int. 
Exch. 
Innov. 
Conf. 
Eng. 
Sci.
2020, 
6, 
1–6. 

https://doi.org/10.5109/4102455.

78.
Hossain, M.K.; Kawaguchi, K.; Hashizume, K. Protonic Conductivity and Isotope Dependency in Rare-Earth 
Gadolinium Oxide. In Proceedings of the 22nd Cross Straits Symposium on Energy and Environmental 
Science and Technology (CSS-EEST22), Fukuoka, Japan, 2-3 December 2020; Kyushu University: Fukuoka, 
Japan, 2020; pp. 15–16.

79.
Fukada, S.; Suemori, S.; Onoda, K. Overall Conductivity and Electromotive Force of SrZr0:9Yb0:1O3–a Cell 
System 
Supplied 
with 
Moist 
CH 
4. 
J. 
Nucl. 
Sci. 
Technol.
2007, 
44, 
1324–1329. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2007.9711378.

80.
Xia, T.; He, C.; Yang, H.; Zhao, W.; Yang, L. Hydrogen Extraction Characteristics of High-Temperature Proton 
Conductor Ceramics for Hydrogen Isotopes Purification and Recovery. Fusion Eng. Des. 2014, 89, 1500–1504. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2014.04.078.

81.
Tanaka, M.; Katahira, K.; Asakura, Y.; Uda, T.; Iwahara, H.; Yamamoto, I. Effect of Plated Platinum Electrode 
on Hydrogen Extraction Performance Using CaZrO3-Based Proton-Conducting Ceramic for Tritium Recovery 
System. J. Nucl. Sci. Technol. 2004, 41, 95–97. https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2004.9715464.

82.
Tanaka, M. Extraction of Hydrogen into Vacuum by Electrochemical Hydrogen Pump for Hydrogen Isotope 
Recovery. Fusion Eng. Des. 2012, 87, 1065–1069. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2012.02.082.

83.
Dai, L.; Wang, L.; Shao, G.; Li, Y. A Novel Amperometric Hydrogen Sensor Based on Nano-Structured ZnO 
Sensing Electrode and CaZr0.9In0.1O3-δ
Electrolyte. Sens. Actuators B Chem.
2012, 173, 85–92. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2012.06.012.

84.
Ma, J.; Zhou, Y.; Bai, X.; Chen, K.; Guan, B.-O. High-Sensitivity and Fast-Response Fiber-Tip Fabry–Pérot 
Hydrogen Sensor with Suspended Palladium-Decorated Graphene. Nanoscale 2019, 11, 15821–15827. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C9NR04274A.

85.
Ding, Y.; Li, Y.; Huang, W. Influence of Grain Interior and Grain Boundaries on Transport Properties of 
Scandium-doped 
Calcium 
Zirconate. 
J. 
Am. 
Ceram. 
Soc.
2020, 
103, 
2653–2662. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/jace.16968.

86.
Zeba, I.; Ramzan, M.; Ahmad, R.; Shakil, M.; Rizwan, M.; Rafique, M.; Sarfraz, M.; Ajmal, M.; Gillani, S.S.A. 
First-Principles Computation of Magnesium Doped CaZrO3 Perovskite: A Study of Phase Transformation, 
Bandgap Engineering and Optical Response for Optoelectronic Applications. Solid State Commun. 2020, 313, 
113907. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssc.2020.113907.

87.
Dunyushkina, L.A.; Khaliullina, A.S.; Meshcherskikh, A.N.; Pankratov, A.A. Sintering and Conductivity of 
Sc-Doped 
CaZrO3
with 
Fe2O3
as 
a 
Sintering 
Aid. 
Ceram. 
Int.
2021, 
47, 
10565–10573. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2020.12.168.

88.
Okuyama, Y.; Nagamine, S.; Nakajima, A.; Sakai, G.; Matsunaga, N.; Takahashi, F.; Kimata, K.; Oshima, T.; 
Tsuneyoshi, K. Proton-Conducting Oxide with Redox Protonation and Its Application to a Hydrogen Sensor 
with a Self-Standard Electrode. RSC Adv. 2016, 6, 34019–34026. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5RA23560J.

89.
Chen, J.; Wu, S.; Zhang, F.; Lü, S.; Mao, Y. Calcination Temperature Dependence of Synthesis Process and 
Hydrogen 
Sensing 
Properties 
of 
In-Doped 
CaZrO3. 
Mater. 
Chem. 
Phys.
2016, 
172, 
87–97. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2015.12.064.

90.
Tong, Y.; Wang, Y.; Cui, C.; Wang, S.; Xie, B.; Peng, R.; Chen, C.; Zhan, Z. Preparation and Characterization 
of Symmetrical Protonic Ceramic Fuel Cells as Electrochemical Hydrogen Pumps. J. Power Sources 2020, 457, 
228036. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.228036.

91.
Matsumoto, H. Extraction and Production of Hydrogen Using High-Temperature Proton Conductor. Solid 
State Ionics 2002, 152–153, 715–720. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2738(02)00414-9.

92.
Sakai, T.; Matsumoto, H.; Yamamoto, R.; Kudo, T.; Okada, S.; Watanabe, M.; Hashimoto, S.; Takamura, H.; 
Ishihara, T. Performance of Palladium Electrode for Electrochemical Hydrogen Pump Using Strontium-
Zirconate-Based Proton Conductors. Ionics 2009, 15, 665–670. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11581-009-0365-x.

93.
Tanaka, M.; Katahira, K.; Asakura, Y.; Uda, T.; Iwahara, H.; Yamamoto, I. Hydrogen Extraction Using One-
End Closed Tube Made of CaZrO3-Based Proton-Conducting Ceramic for Tritium Recovery System. J. Nucl. 
Sci. Technol. 2004, 41, 61–67. https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2004.9715458.

94.
Tanaka, M.; Asakura, Y.; Uda, T. Performance of the Electrochemical Hydrogen Pump of a Proton-
Conducting 
Oxide 
for 
the 
Tritium 
Monitor. 
Fusion 
Eng. 
Des.
2008, 
83, 
1414–1418. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2008.06.038.

95.
Uchida, H. Relation between Proton and Hole Conduction in SrCeO3-Based Solid Electrolytes under Water-
Containing 
Atmospheres 
at 
High 
Temperatures. 
Solid 
State 
Ion. 
1983, 
11, 
117–124. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2738(83)90048-6.


30 of 31

96.
Tanaka, M.; Asakura, Y.; Uda, T. Experimental Study on Electrochemical Hydrogen Pump of SrZrO3-Based 
Oxide. Fusion Sci. Technol. 2008, 54, 479–482. https://doi.org/10.13182/FST08-A1858.

97.
Tanaka, M.; Katahira, K.; Asakura, Y.; Ohshima, T. Hydrogen Pump Using a High-Temperature Proton 
Conductor for Nuclear Fusion Engineering Applications. Solid State Ion. 2010, 181, 215–218. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2009.01.020.

98.
Han, J.; Wen, Z.; Zhang, J.; Wu, X.; Lin, B. Electrical Conductivity of Fully Densified Nano CaZr0.90In0.10O3−δ
Ceramics Prepared by a Water-Based Gel Precipitation Method. Solid State Ion. 2009, 180, 154–159. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2008.12.016.

99.
Li, Y.; Ding, Y.; Cui, S.; Wang, C. Preparation and Electrical Properties of Sc-Doped CaZrO3. Acta Metall. Sin.
2013, 48, 575–578. https://doi.org/10.3724/SP.J.1037.2011.00776.

100. Yang, W.; Li, G.; Sui, Z. Coprecipitating Synthesis and Impedance Study of CaZr1−xInxO3−σ. J. Mater. Sci. Lett.

1998, 17, 241–243. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1006548731332.

101. Matsumoto, H. Hydrogen Isotope Cell and Its Application to Hydrogen Isotope Sensing. Solid State Ion. 2000, 

136–137, 173–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2738(00)00308-8.

102. Matsumoto, H.; Takeuchi, K.; Iwahara, H. Electromotive Force of Hydrogen Isotope Cell with a High 

Temperature Proton-conducting Solid Electrolyte CaZr0.90In0.10O3−α. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2019, 146, 1486–1491. 
https://doi.org/10.1149/1.1391791.

103. Kalyakin, A.S.; Lyagaeva, J.G.; Chuikin, A.Y.; Volkov, A.N.; Medvedev, D.A. A High-Temperature 

Electrochemical Sensor Based on CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3–δ for Humidity Analysis in Oxidation Atmospheres. J. Solid 
State Electrochem. 2019, 23, 73–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10008-018-4108-7.

104. Zhou, M.; Ahmad, A. Sol–Gel Processing of In-Doped CaZrO3 Solid Electrolyte and the Impedimetric Sensing 

Characteristics 
of 
Humidity 
and 
Hydrogen. 
Sens. 
Actuators 
B 
Chem.
2008, 
129, 
285–291. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2007.08.022.

105. Iwahara, H.; Asakura, Y.; Katahira, K.; Tanaka, M. Prospect of Hydrogen Technology Using Proton-

Conducting Ceramics. Solid State Ion. 2004, 168, 299–310. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2003.03.001.

106. Kang, B.S.; Heo, Y.W.; Tien, L.C.; Norton, D.P.; Ren, F.; Gila, B.P.; Pearton, S.J. Hydrogen and Ozone Gas 

Sensing Using Multiple ZnO Nanorods. Appl. Phys. A 2005, 80, 1029–1032. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339-004-
3098-8.

107. Wang, J.X.; Sun, X.W.; Yang, Y.; Huang, H.; Lee, Y.C.; Tan, O.K.; Vayssieres, L. Hydrothermally Grown 

Oriented ZnO Nanorod Arrays for Gas Sensing Applications. Nanotechnology 2006, 17, 4995–4998. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-4484/17/19/037.

108. Liao, L.; Lu, H.B.; Li, J.C.; He, H.; Wang, D.F.; Fu, D.J.; Liu, C.; Zhang, W.F. Size Dependence of Gas Sensitivity 

of ZnO Nanorods. J. Phys. Chem. C 2007, 111, 1900–1903. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp065963k.

109.
Shao, C.; Chang, Y.; Long, Y. High Performance of Nanostructured ZnO Film Gas Sensor at Room 

Temperature. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 2014, 204, 666–672, doi:10.1016/j.snb.2014.08.003.

110. Ohshima, T.; Kondo, M.; Tanaka, M.; Muroga, T.; Sagara, A. Hydrogen Transport in Molten Salt Flinak 

Measured by Solid Electrolyte Sensors with Pd Electrode. Fusion Eng. Des. 2010, 85, 1841–1846. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2010.06.008.

111. Kurita, N.; Fukatsu, N.; Ito, K.; Ohashi, T. Protonic Conduction Domain of Indium-doped Calcium Zirconate. 

J. Electrochem. Soc. 2019, 142, 1552–1559. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2048611.

112. Sakai, T.; Matsushita, S.; Matsumoto, H.; Okada, S.; Hashimoto, S.; Ishihara, T. Intermediate Temperature 

Steam Electrolysis Using Strontium Zirconate-Based Protonic Conductors. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2009, 34, 
56–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2008.10.011.

113. Sakai, T.; Matsumoto, H.; Kudo, T.; Yamamoto, R.; Niwa, E.; Okada, S.; Hashimoto, S.; Sasaki, K.; Ishihara, T. 

High Performance of Electroless-Plated Platinum Electrode for Electrochemical Hydrogen Pumps Using 
Strontium-Zirconate-Based 
Proton 
Conductors. 
Electrochim. 
Acta
2008, 
53, 
8172–8177. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2008.06.013.

114. Fukada, S.; Suemori, S.; Onoda, K. Rate Determining Step of Direct Hydrogen and Electricity Production in 

SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3−a
Fuel Cell Supplied with CH4+H2O. Energy Convers. Manag.
2009, 50, 1249–1255. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2009.01.023.

115. Chen, C.-T.; Kim, S.K.; Ibbotson, M.; Yeung, A.; Kim, S. Thermionic Emission of Protons across a Grain 

Boundary in 5 Mol% Y-Doped SrZrO3, a Hydrogen Pump. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2012, 37, 12432–12437. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.05.102.

116. Oyama, Y.; Kojima, A.; Li, X.; Cervera, R.B.; Tanaka, K.; Yamaguchi, S. Phase Relation in the BaO–ZrO2–YO1.5

System: Presence of Separate BaZrO3 Phases and Complexity in Phase Formation. Solid State Ion. 2011, 197, 1–
12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2011.06.006.


31 of 31

117. Müller, J.; Kreuer, K..; Maier, J.; Matsuo, S.; Ishigame, M. A Conductivity and Thermal Gravimetric Analysis 

of a Y-Doped SrZrO3 Single Crystal. Solid State Ion. 1997, 97, 421–427. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-
2738(97)00087-8.

118. Yajima, T.; Suzuki, H.; Yogo, T.; Iwahara, H. Protonic Conduction in SrZrO3-Based Oxides. Solid State Ion. 

1992, 51, 101–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2738(92)90351-O.

119. Huang, H.; Ishigame, M.; Shin, S. Protonic Conduction in the Single Crystals of Y-Doped SrZrO3. Solid State 

Ion. 1991, 47, 251–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2738(91)90246-8.

120. Higuchi, T.; Tsukamoto, T.; Sata, N.; Hiramoto, K.; Ishigame, M.; Shin, S. Protonic Conduction in the Single 

Crystals 
of 
SrZr0.95M0.05O3
(M=Y, 
Sc, 
Yb, 
Er). 
Jpn. 
J. 
Appl. 
Phys.
2001, 
40, 
4162–4163. 

https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.40.4162.

121. Kalyakin, A.S.; Lyagaeva, J.Y.; Volkov, A.N.; Medvedev, D.A. Unusual Oxygen Detection by Means of a Solid 

State Sensor Based on a CaZr0.9In0.1O3–δ Proton-Conducting Electrolyte. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2019, 844, 23–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelechem.2019.05.003.

122. Asakura, Y.; Sugiyama, T.; Kawano, T.; Uda, T.; Tanaka, M.; Tsuji, N.; Katahira, K.; Iwahara, H. Application 

of Proton-Conducting Ceramics and Polymer Permeable Membranes for Gaseous Tritium Recovery. J. Nucl. 
Sci. Technol. 2004, 41, 863–870. https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2004.9715558.

123. Taniguchi, N.; Kuroha, T.; Nishimura, C.; Iijima, K. Characteristics of Novel BaZr0.4Ce0.4In0.2O3 Proton 

Conducting Ceramics and Their Application to Hydrogen Sensors. Solid State Ion. 2005, 176, 2979–2983. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2005.09.035.

124. Yang, W.; Wang, L.; Li, Y.; Zhou, H.; He, Z.; Liu, H.; Dai, L. A Limiting Current Hydrogen Sensor Based on 

BaHf0.8Fe0.2O3-δ Dense Diffusion Barrier and BaHf0.7Sn0.1In0.2O3-δ Protonic Conductor. Ceram. Int. 2022, 48, 
22113–22123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2022.04.199.

125. Wang, X.; Liu, T.; Yu, J.; Li, L.; Zhang, X. A New Application of CeZr1-O2 as Dense Diffusion Barrier in 

Limiting 
Current 
Oxygen 
Sensor. 
Sens. 
Actuators 
B 
Chem.
2019, 
285, 
391–397. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2019.01.086.

126. Utilization of Hydrogen for Sustainable Energy and Fuels; Van de Voorde, M., Ed.; De Gruyter: Berlin, Germany, 

2021; ISBN 9783110596274.


