Pump–probe x-ray microscopy of photo-induced magnetization dynamics
at MHz repetition rates
Kathinka Gerlinger,1 Bastian Pfau,1, a) Martin Hennecke,1 Lisa-Marie Kern,1 Ingo Will,1 Tino Noll,1 Markus
Weigand,2 Joachim Gräfe,3 Nick Träger,3 Michael Schneider,1 Christian M. Günther,4 Dieter Engel,1 Gisela
Schütz,3 and Stefan Eisebitt1, 5

1)Max Born Institute for Nonlinear Optics and Short Pulse Spectroscopy, 12489 Berlin,
Germany
2)Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, 12489 Berlin, Germany
3)Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
4)Technische Universität Berlin, Zentraleinrichtung Elektronenmikroskopie (ZELMI), 10623 Berlin,
Germany
5)Technische Universität Berlin, Institut für Optik und Atomare Physik, 10623 Berlin,
Germany

(Dated: 1 March 2023)

We present time-resolved scanning x-ray microscopy measurements with picosecond photo-excitation via a tailored
infrared pump laser at a scanning transmission x-ray microscope. Specifically, we image the laser-induced demagneti-
zation and remagnetization of thin ferrimagnetic GdFe films proceeding on a few nanoseconds time scale. Controlling
the heat load on the sample via additional reflector and heatsink layers allows us to conduct destruction-free measure-
ments at a repetition rate of 50 MHz. Near-field enhancement of the photo-excitation and controlled annealing effects
lead to laterally heterogeneous magnetization dynamics which we trace with 30 nm spatial resolution. Our work opens
new opportunities to study photo-induced dynamics on the nanometer scale, with access to picosecond to nanosecond
time scales, which is of technological relevance, especially in the field of magnetism.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Studying magnetization dynamics on the nanometer scale
is important for our fundamental understanding of magnetic
materials and their use in technological applications.1,2 Soft-
x-ray microscopes using synchrotron radiation (SR) can re-
solve these dynamics down to a few nanometers with element
specificity employing the x-ray magnetic circular dichro-
ism (XMCD) as magnetic contrast mechanism.3,4 The time-
resolution of these microscopes is limited, on the one hand,
by the duration of the SR bunches to typically 30 ps to 100 ps,
depending on the storage ring and the mode of operation. On
the other hand, additional restrictions arise from the pulse du-
ration of the excitation, which, today, is almost exclusively re-
alized electrically, typically on a time scale longer than 100 ps.
Ultrashort laser pulses are able to trigger magnetization dy-
namics down to the pico- or even femtosecond regime and
provide access to photo-induced magnetization phenomena,
such as, e.g., ultrafast demagnetization and all-optical magne-
tization switching,5,6 topological phase transitions,7,8 optical
spin wave excitation9,10 or the control of spin torques.11,12 In
addition, laser pulses can also be used to generate significantly
shorter electrical excitation pulses than typically feasible with
purely electronic signal generators.13,14 Therefore, the inte-
gration of short-pulsed lasers into x-ray microscopes at SR
sources pushes these nanometer-scale imaging instruments to
better time-resolution and extends their scope towards sub-
nanosecond magnetization dynamics that are only accessible
via ultrashort photo-excitation.

a)Electronic mail: bastian.pfau@mbi-berlin.de

While lasers with high repetition rates have already been
employed for studying magnetization dynamics with photo-
emission electron microscopy (PEEM),15,16 they have not yet
been implemented in a scanning transmission x-ray micro-
scope (STXM). One reason is the typically extremely limited
space between the x-ray lenses and the sample, which makes
the integration of a pump laser beam into a STXM very chal-
lenging. Furthermore, the laser must be synchronized to the
bunch clock of the storage ring, which is particularly demand-
ing when, in addition, gapless tunability of the pump repeti-
tion rate is needed for the highly efficient asynchronous exci-
tation schemes used for time-resolved measurements in mod-
ern STXMs.17,18

Complying with the orbital frequency of the storage ring
and ensuring reasonable data collection times, time-resolved
imaging at SR sources is best performed at MHz repetition
rates. However, at such high repetition rates, the extreme ther-
mal load on solid-state samples poses an additional dilemma
to laser-based pump–probe experiments as it can change the
sample’s magnetic properties and, ultimately, lead to perma-
nent degradation or even destruction. In general, the heat load
on the sample can be reduced by shrinking the spot size of
the pump beam, maintaining an identical excitation fluence
with lower average power incident on the sample. However,
in order to probe an almost homogeneously pumped area,
the probe beam size has to be reduced accordingly. In this
work, we use a STXM to probe our samples, which is based
on an x-ray beam ultimately focused down to a few nanome-
ters. This technique, therefore, allows reducing the effectively
pumped area to micrometer size and, in this way, minimiz-
ing the heat load. As a result, we demonstrate destruction-
free time-resolved imaging at pump–probe repetition rates of
up to 50 MHz at fluences exceeding 3 mJcm−2. The photo-

arXiv:2211.01230v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  28 Feb 2023


2

excitation is realized using a custom-developed infrared (IR)
pump laser newly installed at the MAXYMUS microscope—a
STXM at the SR facility BESSY II (Berlin, Germany).
We apply this pump–probe imaging method to detect ul-
trafast photo-induced demagnetization and magnetization re-
covery in GdFe alloys with 30 nm spatial and down to 50 ps
temporal resolution in standard multi-bunch operation mode
at BESSY II. Rare-earth transition metal alloys such as
GdFe are known for their intriguing all-optical magnetization
switching phenomena,19,20 making these materials attractive
for potential data storage applications, as well as a model
system for distinct multisublattice spin and orbital moment
dynamics.21–23 As detailed below, time-resolved imaging with
high spatial resolution allows us to reveal nanometer-sized ar-
eas created by the pump laser that show very different magne-
tization dynamics compared to the rest of the film. Our results
demonstrate that STXM is a highly valuable tool to image
photo-induced pico- to nanosecond magnetization dynamics
on the nanometer scale, which is of high relevance in view
of future spintronics applications, e.g., to study the dynamics
of photo-induced magnetic texture formation7,24 or collective
excitations.10

II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

The
experiments
were
conducted
using
Ta(3)/Gd29Fe71(20)/Pt(3)
(thicknesses
in
nm)
and
Ta(3)/Gd27Fe73(20)/Pt(3)
films,
deposited
on
150 nm
thin silicon-nitride membranes via magnetron sputtering.
The films exhibit a perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and
a typical square-shaped out-of-plane magnetic hysteresis
with a coercive field of 30 mT and 45 mT, respectively.
Magnetic-contrast images of the samples were acquired
with circularly polarized soft x-rays tuned to the Gd M5
edge (1190 eV), providing sensitivity to the out-of-plane
magnetization component of the Gd sublattice. We record
a complete XMCD data set (I+(x,y), I−(x,y)) by switching
either the helicity of the x-ray probe or the polarity of the
applied out-of-plane field of 200 mT, provided by four
rotatable permanent magnets.25 The normalized out-of-plane
magnetization mz(x,y) is retrieved from the XMCD contrast
D(x,y) which in turn is calculated from the two images
(I+, I−) by D(x,y) = log(I+(x,y)/I−(x,y)).
Each XMCD
image is then normalized to a pixel row at the edge of the
scanning area, which is unaffected by the laser excitation.
This procedure also corrects small intensity line artifacts from
the scanning mode of operation. The scanning field of view
is 2.4×2.4 µm2 with a resolution of 30 nm.
The ultrafast demagnetization process was induced via
photo-excitation using a 1039-nm IR pump laser. The laser os-
cillator is passively mode-locked with a laser-diode-pumped
Yb:KGW crystal as active lasing element, operating at a tun-
able repetition rate of 48.5 MHz to 50.5 MHz. After ampli-
fication in a Yb-doped fiber amplifier to a maximum pulse
energy of 50 nJ the repetition rate can be flexibly reduced
down to single pulses via fast acousto-optic pulse selectors.
The laser is synchronized to the BESSY II bunch clock with

GdFe(20)

Al(500)

SiN(150)

Si

IR
x-ray
θ
(a)

(b)

(c)

[Cr(3)/Al(50)]10

z

y
x

FIG. 1.
(a) Sample layout (vertical cross-section) for the time-
resolved measurements (not to scale, layer thicknesses in nm). (b)
Simulated vertical IR absorption profile within the GdxFe100−x film
after IR propagation through the aperture, incident under 26° with
respect to the sample normal. The absorption was normalized to
the absorption in the film without the Cr/Al mask. (c) Non-dichroic
STXM image, (I+(x,y)I−(x,y))1/2, of the Cr/Al mask with aperture.
Scalebar, 500 nm.

an accuracy of 0.3 ps for time-resolved pump–probe experi-
ments, which are carried out in standard multi-bunch opera-
tion of the storage ring. The time resolution of these experi-
ments is limited by the x-ray pulse duration of 50 ps (fwhm)
which is not variable in the normal user operation mode of
BESSY II. Different pump–probe delays can be retrieved via
an asynchronous excitation scheme,17,18 which allows record-
ing all time delays without the need for an optical delay stage.
However, as the initial phase between pump and probe is un-
known, time-zero has to be determined from the dynamic
effect observed, leading to a systematic error of ±0.5 time
steps. A 8 m long fiber delivers the laser pulses from the opti-
cal laser table to the vacuum chamber of the STXM micro-
scope. At the microscope, the pulses are temporally com-
pressed to any chosen duration between 2 ps and 30 ps, with
the minimum duration also depending on the pulse energy.
The pulses are then fed into a 0.5 m long in-vacuum fiber that
transports the pulses inside the STXM instrument. All optical
fibers preserve the polarization of the laser pulses. A custom-
developped micro-optics system focuses the pulses onto the
sample with a spot size of 6.5 µm (fwhm) via a micro-mirror
attached to the mechanics of the order-sorting aperture. The
pulses thereby impinge under a nominal inclination angle of
(20±8)° in the vertical direction, depending on the beam po-
sition on the micro-mirror.
The high pump–probe repetition rate of up to ≈50 MHz
poses particular challenges to the heat management in the


3

sample.
For example, a laser peak fluence already on the
order of 1 mJcm−2—as commonly used to excite magne-
tization dynamics—results in an average power density of
50 kWcm−2, corresponding to an average power of 24 mW in-
cident on the sample within the micrometer-sized focal spot.
We took several measures to reduce the thermal load on the
actual thin magnetic film and improve heat dissipation as
sketched in Fig. 1(a):

• The
whole
sample
is
masked
with
a
reflective
[Cr(3)/Al(50)]10 film (thicknesses in nm) including an
aperture with 1.4 µm diameter, fabricated via focused-
ion beam (FIB) milling. We geometrically estimate that
the aperture selects only 3.2 % of the IR beam. Other-
wise, the Cr/Al mask reflects 95 % of the incident IR
radiation while maintaining a high transparency for the
soft x-rays (see Fig. 1(c)). The remaining absorbed heat
is dissipated within the mask layer itself due to thermal
isolation by the silicon-nitride membrane. This isola-
tion prevents heat and hot-electron transport into the
GdFe layer which otherwise would lead to an additional
indirect excitation of demagnetization effects.26

• The IR pulse first traverses the IR-transparent silicon-
nitride substrate before hitting the magnetic layer, re-
sulting in a refractive-index matching reducing the re-
flectivity of the layer structure.
The magnetic film
absorbs 26 % of the incoming laser power compared
to only 10 % if the film was exposed to the IR di-
rectly, which helps reducing the overall pulse energy
for photo-excitation.27

• We use a 500 nm thick Al heatsink layer directly de-
posited on the GdFe layer to effectively conduct the heat
away from the magnetic film.

• The STXM vacuum chamber is filled with He gas under
a pressure of approximately 10 mbar to promote sample
cooling.

The near-field diffraction at the edges of the circular aper-
ture leads to an inhomogeneous excitation of the magnetic
layer.28 Finite-element simulations (COMSOL multiphysics)
of the wave propagation predict two distinct maxima of the
energy absorbed within the GdFe layer inside the aperture as
shown in Fig. 1(b). In this panel, the absorption is normalized
to the absorption simulated without mask, showing an actual
enhancement of a factor of up to almost 3 at the main peak and
a pronounced quenching in between. In the following, how-
ever, we refer to the laser fluence via the incident peak fluence
of the Gaussian laser focus.
We have performed heat-flow simulations to estimate the
effectiveness of our measures to mitigate the heat load. As
explained in detail in Appendix A, we found that, in particu-
lar, the combination of confining the excited area to microm-
eter size and applying a heatsink layer conducting the heat
away from this area is highly suitable to ensure a moderate
constant heating of the magnetic layer by the laser excitation
during a time-resolved measurement. Using typical laser flu-
ences to excite magnetization dynamics, the temperature rise

5
0
5
10
15
20
25

time delay (ns)

1.00

0.95

0.90

mz

(a)

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0

time delay (ns)

0.8

0.9

1.0

mz

(b)

region 1
region 2

0.65

0.70

0.75

0.80

0.85

0.90

0.95

1.00

mz

-1.00 ns

y

(c)

1

2

x
0.15 ns

(d)

0.40 ns

(e)

0.70 ns

(f)

2.00 ns

(g)

7.00 ns

(h)

FIG. 2. (a) Transient magnetization of Gd integrated over the size of
the aperture in the Cr/Al mask in Gd29Fe71 after optical excitation at
t = 0, measured with time steps of 50 ps. The optical excitation has a
repetition rate of 50 MHz, the gray curve is a repetition of the black
curve indicating the repetitive pump–probe cycle. (b) Transient mag-
netization of Gd integrated over two separate regions as indicated in
(c), coinciding with the field enhancement from the Cr/Al mask. (c)–
(h) Magnetization of the sample at particular delay times as indicated
in (a) by the colored dots. The dashed circle in (c) shows the aperture
in the Cr/Al mask. Scalebar, 500 nm.

of the layer during the measurement will stay below 10 K even
at 50 MHz repetition rate. At the same time, the simulations
show that the picosecond photo-excitation still allows tran-
siently reaching high-temperature, out-of-equilibrium states
in the sample which are inaccessible with slower means of
excitation.

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We imaged the laser-induced de- and remagnetization of
a Gd29Fe71 sample using a pump laser repetition rate of
50 MHz, a pump pulse duration of 4.4 ps and an energy per
pulse on the sample of 1.5 nJ corresponding to 3.1 mJcm−2

laser fluence.
Exemplary XMCD images are shown in


4

Fig. 2(c)–(h) for different delays.
The transient evolution of the magnetization integrated over
the whole aperture (indicated by the dashed circle in Fig. 2(c))
is shown in Fig. 2(a).
On average, the sample demagne-
tizes by ≈10 %, rapidly reaching the magnetization minimum
0.15 ns after the photo-excitation. However, limited by the x-
ray bunch duration of ≈50 ps (fwhm), we are certainly unable
to resolve the dynamics of the Gd sublattice during the GdFe
demagnetization, which is known from XMCD and TMOKE
measurements with femtosecond temporal resolution to pro-
ceed on a sub-ps up to a few ps time scale.22,29 After demag-
netization, the magnetization recovers within 2 ns by 90 %.
We also observe that the magnetization level before time-zero
is already slightly decreased by 1.4 % with respect to the non-
excited sample areas, which we attribute to a small static heat-
ing induced by the absorption of the pump pulses. However,
we do not observe any further indication of magnetic alter-
ation or sample damage, which means that the sample with-
stood the photo-excitation at 50 MHz repetition rate for sev-
eral hours.
In addition to the well-known temporal evolution of the
photo-excited demagnetization of GdFe, the STXM images
provide nanometer-scale spatial information. We indeed ob-
serve laterally very inhomogeneous demagnetization ampli-
tudes (Fig. 2(b)), which is particularly prominent at 0.15 ns
after photo-excitation, where the sample demagnetizes locally
by up to ≈40 % (Fig. 2(d)).
This corresponds to the area
where the intensity of the incoming laser pulse is amplified by
the near-field diffraction induced by the aperture in the Cr/Al
mask.28 The two prominent areas with increased demagneti-
zation observed in the STXM images fit well to the double
peak in the simulated near-field diffraction (Fig. 1(b)) when
assuming an incident angle of 26°. Furthermore we observe a
tilt of the maxima with respect to the vertical direction which
we attribute to an additional azimuthal tilt of the IR beam axis.
In order to investigate samples at even higher pump pulse
energy, we lowered the repetition rate to 5 MHz (18 ps pulse
duration) and performed measurements on the complementary
Gd27Fe73 sample. For a pump-pulse fluence of 5.2 mJcm−2 or
below, we again do not observe any sample damage, resulting
in magnetization dynamics very similar to Fig. 2 (not shown).
However, further measurements at 8.8 mJcm−2 permanently
altered the region of the sample exposed to the hotspot formed
by the field enhancement inside the aperture. Here we show
images of the sample from a time-resolved measurement (at
9.8 mJcm−2 IR fluence) recorded after this modification was
created (Fig. 3(b)–(g)).
The magnetically altered region is marked with a dotted
line in Fig. 3(b) (denoted as “2”) and its magnetization tran-
sient is plotted in Fig. 3(a). Compared to a magnetically in-
tact region (dotted region “1” in Fig. 3(b) and corresponding
curve in Fig. 3(a)), the response to the photo-excitation is re-
markably different. Already the static magnetization (prior to
photo-excitation) in the altered area is reduced by ≈20 % in
the out-of-plane direction with respect to the magnetization of
the sample in regions which are still intact. Static XMCD data
(not shown) taken after the time-resolved measurements con-
firm that this reduction is persistent and not induced by static

2
1
0
1
2
3
4

time delay (ns)

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

mz

(a)

intact region (1)
altered region (2)

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

mz

-0.5 ns

y

(b)

1

2

x
0.2 ns

(c)

0.3 ns

(d)

0.5 ns

(e)

0.7 ns

(f)

1.5 ns

(g)

FIG. 3. (a) Transient magnetization of Gd in Gd27Fe73 after optical
excitation at t = 0, measured with time steps of 100 ps, and integrated
over the magnetically intact and the magnetically altered regions as
indicated in (b). (b)–(g) Magnetization of the sample at particular
delay times as indicated in (a) by the colored dots. The dashed circle
in (b) shows the aperture in the Cr/Al mask. Scalebar, 500 nm.

heating during the pump–probe measurements.
After excitation, both the intact and the altered region de-
magnetize, while a larger demagnetization amplitude is ob-
served in the altered region, which we mainly attribute to the
higher laser intensity incident on this area. Interestingly, the
magnetization in the altered region then recovers faster com-
pared to the unaltered region and even transiently increases
above the initial level. We observe this distinct dynamics in a
confined region with a size of roughly 600×240 nm2.
In addition to its confined size, the average power used to
create the modification (21 mW) is significantly smaller than
the average power used to record the data in Fig. 2 (75 mW),
where such a local material modification was not observed.
From these findings, we infer that the creation of the modi-
fication is induced by the energy of a single laser pulse and
the corresponding highest temperature locally reached in the
magnetic film rather than by static laser heating. It seems that
the higher transient temperature reached in the second mea-
surement leads to an annealing of the region in the magnetic
alloy where most of the IR is absorbed.
To explain the untypical magnetization dynamics, we spec-
ulate that the magnetization in the altered region is canted
towards the in-plane direction due to a canted effective
anisotropy.30 This magnetization canting would explain the


5

lower out-of-plane magnetization before the pump pulse ar-
rives. It is known, that rapid thermal annealing of GdFe alloys
reduces the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and for high
temperatures even completely switches the magnetic easy axis
from out-of-plane to in-plane.31,32 When compared with un-
altered regions, the remagnetization dynamics in the altered
region provides some interesting insights on how the excited
spin system is driven back to its initial state. Apparently, the
spins first follow the applied field while the anisotropy seems
to be suppressed during this early, hot phase of the magne-
tization recovery up to ≈0.5 ns. The strong temperature de-
pendence of the anisotropy is already known from static char-
acterizations of GdFe alloys.33 Only at later times, when the
film has further cooled down, the spins again align along
the reestablished anisotropy axis. The ability to detect such
distinct dynamics with a spatial resolution of 30 nm show-
cases the potential of SR-based x-ray microscopy to study
photo-induced magnetization phenomena. Laser-based time-
resolved x-ray microscopy provides access to the picosec-
ond to nanosecond time scale where magnetic order typically
reestablishes after photo-excitation.7,21 This regime is of high
relevance for technological applications as the speed of photo-
induced magnetization switching is typically limited by the
recovery process and nanometer-scale heat dissipation rather
than the initial ultrafast transition to the excited state.24

Our approach to manage the heat load on the sample largely
builds on the reflection mask to confine the excitation to a
micrometer-sized area and reduce the absorbed power in the
actual sample. While we investigate a metallic thin-film sam-
ple, we consider this concept to be compatible with a vari-
ety of samples from materials science, chemistry and poten-
tially biology which have been prepared for x-ray microscopy.
The mask is highly transparent for soft x-rays (Fig. 1(c)) leav-
ing the area behind the mask observable with x-rays while
being almost unaffected by the photo-excitation (Appendix
A, Fig. 4(b)). However, the masking of the sample also re-
sults in an inhomogeneous excitation of the sample due to
near-field diffraction, which requires customization and mod-
eling of the mask layout. On the other hand, tailored near-
field intensity distributions or plasmonic field enhancements
may be integrated to provide a structured and localized opti-
cal excitation.15,27,28,34,35

IV.
CONCLUSIONS

In summary, we demonstrated laser-pump–STXM-probe
measurements with picosecond photo-excitation, using a new
and now permanently installed fiber laser at the MAXYMUS
instrument. At incident IR laser fluences up to 3 mJcm−2,
we performed a destruction-free experiment on a magnetic
thin-film sample with a repetition rate of 50 MHz, studying
laser-induced demagnetization and recovery in GdFe alloys.
The repetition rate used here is orders of magnitude higher
compared to what is typically used in experiments on photo-
induced magnetization dynamics.29,36,37 With our approach, it
is now possible to discern light-triggered picosecond dynam-
ics with 30 nm spatial resolution. As many classes of materi-

als are heterogeneous on a sub-micrometer length scale—be
it intentionally or inadvertently, we expect this to be a very
valuable capability to map out structural origins of a mate-
rial’s functionality coupled to its dynamic behavior. With a
potential upgrade of the BESSY-II storage ring to the BESSY
VSR concept (Variable pulse length Storage Ring)38 com-
bined with an upgrade of the laser at the MAXYMUS endsta-
tion, the time-resolution of the microscope could be improved
to 1 ps in the future. We also note that similar sample designs
to mitigate heat load and sample damage as demonstrated in
this work may also become important for experiments at x-ray
free-electron lasers operating at MHz repetition rates,39 allow-
ing the combination of highest spatial and temporal resolution
in the study of dynamic phenomena.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Measurements were carried out at the MAXYMUS instru-
ment at the BESSY II electron storage ring operated by the
Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie. Fi-
nancial support from the Leibniz Association via Grant No.
K162/2018 (OptiSPIN) is acknowledged.

APPENDIX A: SIMULATION OF THE HEAT
MANAGEMENT IN THE SAMPLE

The heat management during the time-resolved high-repe-
tition-rate measurements is the most critical aspect of our ex-
periments. We have performed a number of different simu-
lations to assess the effectiveness of the measures applied in
our experiments to mitigate the heat load on the sample from
the excitation laser. In particular, the simulations shed light
on the maximum temperature reached shortly after the laser
pulse, and the time scale of the heat diffusion into the depth
of the sample. Furthermore, we also simulate the lateral heat
transport and the static heating resulting from the continuous
high-repetition-rate excitation.
In the simulations, the magnetic sample is simplified
to a stack of [Al(530 nm)]/ Si3N4(150 nm)/ GdFe(26 nm)/
Al(530 nm), where the first Al layer is only present outside
of the aperture. Material parameters used in the simulation for
Al and Si3N4 can be found in Refs. 27,35. For the GdFe layer,
material parameters of the alloy were used if available40; oth-
erwise they were substituted by values of Fe.41,42 We used the
experimental parameters for the layout of the mask and the
laser excitation at 50 MHz repetition rate.
The response of the GdFe film to a single laser pulse at very
early times (≤1 ns) can be simulated in a one-dimensional
model neglecting the lateral heat transport, which drasti-
cally reduces the numerical effort. We have employed the
udkm1Dsim package43 based on a two-temperature model
(2TM) separating the response of electrons and phonons. The
results are presented in Fig. 4(a) for the GdFe electron and
phonon temperature. During the photo-excitation (centered
at 10 ps in time), the temperatures increase almost instanta-
neously by about 300 K and 200 K, respectively. Soon after


6

FIG. 4. (a) Evolution of the electron temperature Tel and the phonon
temperature Tph in the GdFe layer after a laser excitation centered
at 10 ps (gray dashed line). The simulation includes heat transport
along the depth of the sample. For comparison, the duration of the
x-ray pulse is indicated as a Gaussian with a FWHM of 50 ps (dot-
ted gray line). (b), (c) Evolution of increase of the phonon temper-
ature (logarithmic pseudocolor scale) in the lateral direction within
the GdFe layer and along the sample depth, respectively. The laser
excitation is centered at 10 ps as indicated by the dashed white line.
The solid white lines mark the position of the aperture (b) and the
interfaces of the layers (c) as indicated.

the maximum temperatures are reached, the temperatures of
both systems equalize and the common temperature rapidly
drops due to heat diffusion into the depth of the sample on a
sub-100-ps time scale. As indicated by the (schematic) pulse
shape of the x-ray detection, this very fast component of the

dynamics can hardly be captured in our measurements in de-
tail. However, we again note that the out-of-equilibrium high-
temperature state after excitation may cause magnetization
dynamics (also on longer time scales) that remains inacces-
sible with slower excitation.
In addition, we have performed two-dimensional simula-
tions to also include the influence of the lateral heat transport
and assess the impact of the Al heatsink layer. The simulations
are carried out with the COMSOL multiphysics package again
using a 2TM.27,35 The geometry now includes the aperture in
the top Al mask and has a total lateral width of 10 µm. At the
left and right borders, the system is coupled to a heat bath at
room temperature. We show the results for the evolution and
spatial dependence of the phonon temperature in the lateral
dimension and the depth direction in Fig. 4(b) and (c), respec-
tively. We again observe a picosecond high-temperature state
during the photo-excitation and a very fast heat diffusion into
the depth of the sample. This diffusion leads to an almost uni-
form temperature in the entire sample volume below the aper-
ture after approximately 1 ns. Due to the larger dimensions
the lateral diffusion is much slower. Nevertheless, within one
pump–probe cycle of 20 ns, the heat has almost completely
diffused from the excited volume into the whole sample. This
finding underlines the effectiveness of the heatsink layer for
our experiments.
In a last step, we further simplify the COMSOL model
to simulate the long-term heat diffusion and temperature in-
crease of the sample. The excitation is now simulated as con-
tinuous laser radiation with a power corresponding to the av-
erage absorbed power from our pulsed laser source inside the
aperture. The simulation reveals that, on longer time scales
(including many laser pulses), the temperature increases with
a time constant of ∼100 ns and saturates at an increase of 6 K
above room temperature inside the primarily excited area of
the GdFe film (not shown).
We compare this result with a simple analytical approx-
imation that is particularly suitable for practical purposes.
The heat-flow geometry in our sample can be perceived as
heat conduction through a cylindrical wall. The inner part of
the cylinder corresponds to the excited volume (ri = 0.7µm),
the outer part corresponds to the macroscopic size of the en-
tire sample which stays at constant temperature, e.g., the lat-
eral size of the silicon-nitride membrane (ra ≈ 100µm). The
height of the cylindrical wall is given by the Al film (heatsink)
thickness of d = 0.53µm. The resulting heat flow through the
wall is:

P = 2πdλc
∆T

ln(ra/ri).
(1)

In equilibrium, this heat flow is balanced by the continu-
ous heating from the laser excitation, which we (geometri-
cally) estimate to an average absorbed power of P = 0.62mW
(see main text). Using the heat conductivity of Al of λc =
239WK−1 m−1 (Ref. 44), we obtain a temperature increase
inside the cylinder of ∆T ≈ 4K. Strictly speaking, this value
corresponds to the temperature increase in the Al heatsink vol-
ume below the excited film area. However, as the GdFe layer
is in direct contact to the heatsink, we expect only a slightly


7

higher temperature in the GdFe which is in agreement with the
result from the COMSOL simulation. We also note that ∆T
only weakly depends on the precise choice of ra and ri, mak-
ing this estimate very robust. In conclusion, the very moderate
temperature increase in the sample from the constant heating
by the laser pulses as derived from numerical simulation and
analytical approximation proves the performance of our con-
cept of confining the excited film area to micrometer size in
combination with using a heatsink layer to transport the heat
away from this area.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The
data
that
support
the
findings
of
this
study
are
openly
available
in
Zenodo
at
http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7647267,
reference
num-
ber 45.

1E. Y. Vedmedenko, R. K. Kawakami, D. D. Sheka, P. Gambardella, A. Kiri-
lyuk, A. Hirohata, C. Binek, O. Chubykalo-Fesenko, S. Sanvito, B. J. Kirby,
J. Grollier, K. Everschor-Sitte, T. Kampfrath, C.-Y. You, and A. Berger,
“The 2020 magnetism roadmap,” Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics
53, 453001 (2020).
2A. D. Kent, H. Ohldag, H. A. Dürr, and J. Z. Sun, “Magnetization Dy-
namics,” in Handbook of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, edited by
M. Coey and S. Parkin (Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2020) pp.
1–33.
3H. Stoll, M. Noske, M. Weigand, K. Richter, B. Krüger, R. M. Reeve,
M. Hänze, C. F. Adolff, F.-U. Stein, G. Meier, M. Kläui, and G. Schütz,
“Imaging spin dynamics on the nanoscale using X-Ray microscopy,” Fron-
tiers in Physics 3 (2015).
4P. Fischer, “Magnetic imaging with polarized soft x-rays,” Journal of
Physics D: Applied Physics 50, 313002 (2017).
5A. Kirilyuk, A. V. Kimel, and T. Rasing, “Ultrafast optical manipulation of
magnetic order,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 2731–2784 (2010).
6K. Carva, P. Baláž, and I. Radu, Chapter 2 - Laser-Induced Ultrafast Mag-
netic Phenomena, edited by E. Brück, Handbook of Magnetic Materials,
Vol. 26 (Elsevier, 2017) pp. 291–463.
7F. Büttner, B. Pfau, M. Böttcher, M. Schneider, G. Mercurio, C. M. Günther,
P. Hessing, C. Klose, A. Wittmann, K. Gerlinger, L.-M. Kern, C. Strüber,
C. von Korff Schmising, J. Fuchs, D. Engel, A. Churikova, S. Huang,
D. Suzuki, I. Lemesh, M. Huang, L. Caretta, D. Weder, J. H. Gaida,
M. Möller, T. R. Harvey, S. Zayko, K. Bagschik, R. Carley, L. Mercadier,
J. Schlappa, A. Yaroslavtsev, L. Le Guyarder, N. Gerasimova, A. Scherz,
C. Deiter, R. Gort, D. Hickin, J. Zhu, M. Turcato, D. Lomidze, F. Erdinger,
A. Castoldi, S. Maffessanti, M. Porro, A. Samartsev, J. Sinova, C. Ropers,
J. H. Mentink, B. Dupé, G. S. D. Beach, and S. Eisebitt, “Observation of
fluctuation-mediated picosecond nucleation of a topological phase,” Nature
Materials 20, 30–37 (2021).
8K. Gerlinger, B. Pfau, F. Büttner, M. Schneider, L.-M. Kern, J. Fuchs,
D. Engel, C. M. Günther, M. Huang, I. Lemesh, L. Caretta, A. Churikova,
P. Hessing, C. Klose, C. Strüber, K. Litzius, D. Metternich, R. Battistelli,
K. Bagschik, A. Sadovnikov, and S. Eisebitt, “Application concepts for ul-
trafast laser-induced skyrmion creation and annihilation,” Applied Physics
Letters 118, 7 (2021).
9R. R. Subkhangulov, A. B. Henriques, P. H. O. Rappl, E. Abramof, T. Ras-
ing, and A. V. Kimel, “All-optical manipulation and probing of the d–f ex-
change interaction in EuTe,” Scientific Reports 4, 4368 (2015).
10T. Satoh, Y. Terui, R. Moriya, B. A. Ivanov, K. Ando, E. Saitoh, T. Shimura,
and K. Kuroda, “Directional control of spin-wave emission by spatially
shaped light,” Nature Photonics 6, 662–666 (2012).
11A. J. Schellekens, K. C. Kuiper, R. R. J. C. de Wit, and B. Koopmans, “Ul-
trafast spin-transfer torque driven by femtosecond pulsed-laser excitation,”
Nature Communications 5, 4333 (2014).

12J.-W. Kim, M. Vomir, and J.-Y. Bigot, “Controlling the Spins Angular Mo-
mentum in Ferromagnets with Sequences of Picosecond Acoustic Pulses,”
Scientific Reports 5, 8511 (2015).
13S.-B. Choe, Y. Acremann, A. Scholl, A. Bauer, A. Doran, J. Stöhr, and
H. A. Padmore, “Vortex Core-Driven Magnetization Dynamics,” Science
304, 420–422 (2004).
14L. Heyne, M. Kläui, J. Rhensius, L. Le Guyader, and F. Nolting, “In situ
contacting and current-injection into samples in photoemission electron mi-
croscopes,” Review of Scientific Instruments 81, 113707 (2010).
15L. Le Guyader, M. Savoini, S. El Moussaoui, M. Buzzi, A. Tsukamoto,
A. Itoh, A. Kirilyuk, T. Rasing, A. V. Kimel, and F. Nolting, “Nanoscale
sub-100 picosecond all-optical magnetization switching in GdFeCo mi-
crostructures,” Nature Communications 6, 5839 (2015).
16L. Gierster, A. A. Ünal, L. Pape, F. Radu, and F. Kronast, “Laser induced
magnetization switching in a TbFeCo ferrimagnetic thin film: discerning
the impact of dipolar fields, laser heating and laser helicity by XPEEM,”
Ultramicroscopy Special Issue: LEEM-PEEM 9, 159, 508–512 (2015).
17S. Bonetti, R. Kukreja, Z. Chen, D. Spoddig, K. Ollefs, C. Schöppner,
R. Meckenstock, A. Ney, J. Pinto, R. Houanche, J. Frisch, J. Stöhr, H. A.
Dürr, and H. Ohldag, “Microwave soft x-ray microscopy for nanoscale
magnetization dynamics in the 5–10 GHz frequency range,” Review of Sci-
entific Instruments 86, 093703 (2015).
18M. Weigand, S. Wintz, J. Gräfe, M. Noske, H. Stoll, B. Van Waeyenberge,
and G. Schütz, “TimeMaxyne: A Shot-Noise Limited, Time-Resolved
Pump-and-Probe Acquisition System Capable of 50 GHz Frequencies for
Synchrotron-Based X-ray Microscopy,” Crystals 12, 1029 (2022).
19C. D. Stanciu, F. Hansteen, A. V. Kimel, A. Kirilyuk, A. Tsukamoto,
A. Itoh, and T. Rasing, “All-Optical Magnetic Recording with Circularly
Polarized Light,” Physical Review Letters 99, 047601 (2007).
20I. Radu, K. Vahaplar, C. Stamm, T. Kachel, N. Pontius, H. A. Dürr, T. A.
Ostler, J. Barker, R. F. L. Evans, R. W. Chantrell, A. Tsukamoto, A. Itoh,
A. Kirilyuk, T. Rasing, and A. V. Kimel, “Transient ferromagnetic-like state
mediating ultrafast reversal of antiferromagnetically coupled spins,” Nature
472, 205–208 (2011).
21N. Bergeard, V. López-Flores, V. Halté, M. Hehn, C. Stamm, N. Pontius,
E. Beaurepaire, and C. Boeglin, “Ultrafast angular momentum transfer in
multisublattice ferrimagnets,” Nature Communications 5, 3466 (2014).
22I. Radu, C. Stamm, A. Eschenlohr, F. Radu, R. Abrudan, K. Vahaplar,
T. Kachel, N. Pontius, R. Mitzner, K. Holldack, A. Föhlisch, T. A. Ostler,
J. H. Mentink, R. F. L. Evans, R. W. Chantrell, A. Tsukamoto, A. Itoh,
A. Kirilyuk, A. V. Kimel, and T. Rasing, “Ultrafast and distinct spin dy-
namics in magnetic alloys,” SPIN 05, 1550004 (2015).
23M. Hennecke, I. Radu, R. Abrudan, T. Kachel, K. Holldack, R. Mitzner,
A. Tsukamoto, and S. Eisebitt, “Angular Momentum Flow During Ultrafast
Demagnetization of a Ferrimagnet,” Physical Review Letters 122, 157202
(2019).
24F. Steinbach, N. Stetzuhn, D. Engel, U. Atxitia, C. von Korff Schmis-
ing, and S. Eisebitt, “Accelerating double pulse all-optical write/erase cy-
cles in metallic ferrimagnets,” Applied Physics Letters 120, 112406 (2022),
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0080351.
25D. Nolle, M. Weigand, P. Audehm, E. Goering, U. Wiesemann, C. Wolter,
E. Nolle, and G. Schütz, “Unique characterization possibilities in the ul-
tra high vacuum scanning transmission x-ray microscope (UHV-STXM)
“MAXYMUS” using a rotatable permanent magnetic field up to 0.22 T,”
Review of Scientific Instruments 83, 046112 (2012).
26B. Vodungbo, B. Tudu, J. Perron, R. Delaunay, L. Müller, M. H. Berntsen,
G. Grübel, G. Malinowski, C. Weier, J. Gautier, G. Lambert, P. Zeitoun,
C. Gutt, E. Jal, A. H. Reid, P. W. Granitzka, N. Jaouen, G. L. Dakovski,
S. Moeller, M. P. Minitti, A. Mitra, S. Carron, B. Pfau, C. von Korff Schmis-
ing, M. Schneider, S. Eisebitt, and J. Lüning, “Indirect excitation of ultrafast
demagnetization,” Scientific Reports 6, 18970 (2016).
27L.-M. Kern, B. Pfau, M. Schneider, K. Gerlinger, V. Deinhart, S. Wittrock,
T. Sidiropoulos, D. Engel, I. Will, C. M. Günther, K. Litzius, S. Wintz,
M. Weigand, F. Büttner, and S. Eisebitt, “Tailoring optical excitation to
control magnetic skyrmion nucleation,” Physical Review B 106, 054435
(2022).
28C. von Korff Schmising, B. Pfau, M. Schneider, C. Günther, M. Gio-
vannella, J. Perron, B. Vodungbo, L. Müller, F. Capotondi, E. Pedersoli,
N. Mahne, J. Lüning, and S. Eisebitt, “Imaging Ultrafast Demagnetization
Dynamics after a Spatially Localized Optical Excitation,” Physical Review


8

Letters 112, 217203 (2014).
29M. Hennecke, D. Schick, T. Sidiropoulos, F. Willems, A. Heilmann,
M. Bock, L. Ehrentraut, D. Engel, P. Hessing, B. Pfau, M. Schmidbauer,
A. Furchner, M. Schnuerer, C. von Korff Schmising, and S. Eisebitt, “Ultra-
fast element- and depth-resolved magnetization dynamics probed by trans-
verse magneto-optical kerr effect spectroscopy in the soft x-ray range,”
Phys. Rev. Research 4, L022062 (2022).
30A. Chanda, J. E. Shoup, N. Schulz, D. A. Arena, and H. Srikanth, “Tunable
competing magnetic anisotropies and spin reconfigurations in ferrimagnetic
Fe 100 - x Gd x alloy films,” Physical Review B 104, 094404 (2021).
31A. Talapatra, J. A. Chelvane, and J. Mohanty, “Tailoring magnetic domains
in Gd-Fe thin films,” AIP Advances 8, 056327 (2018).
32A. Talapatra, J. Arout Chelvane, B. Satpati, S. Kumar, and J. Mohanty,
“Tunable magnetic domains and depth resolved microstructure in Gd-Fe
thin films,” Journal of Alloys and Compounds 774, 1059–1068 (2019).
33P. Hansen, C. Clausen, G. Much, M. Rosenkranz, and K. Witter, “Magnetic
and magneto-optical properties of rare-earth transition-metal alloys con-
taining Gd, Tb, Fe, Co,” Journal of Applied Physics 66, 756–767 (1989).
34K. Yao, F. Steinbach, M. Borchert, D. Schick, D. Engel, F. Bencivenga,
R. Mincigrucci, L. Foglia, E. Pedersoli, D. De Angelis, M. Pancaldi,
B. Wehinger, F. Capotondi, C. Masciovecchio, S. Eisebitt, and C. von
Korff Schmising, “All-optical switching on the nanometer scale excited
and probed with femtosecond extreme ultraviolet pulses,” Nano Letters 22,
4452–4458 (2022).
35D. Weder, C. von Korff Schmising, C. M. Günther, M. Schneider, D. Engel,
P. Hessing, C. Strüber, M. Weigand, B. Vodungbo, E. Jal, X. Liu, A. Merhe,
E. Pedersoli, F. Capotondi, J. Lüning, B. Pfau, and S. Eisebitt, “Transient
magnetic gratings on the nanometer scale,” Structural Dynamics 7, 054501
(2020).
36A. Hassdenteufel, C. Schubert, B. Hebler, H. Schultheiss, J. Fassbender,
M. Albrecht, and R. Bratschitsch, “All-optical helicity dependent magnetic
switching in Tb-Fe thin films with a MHz laser oscillator,” Optics Express
22, 10017 (2014).
37C. Möller, H. Probst, J. Otto, K. Stroh, C. Mahn, S. Steil, V. Moshnyaga,
G. S. M. Jansen, D. Steil, and S. Mathias, “Ultrafast element-resolved
magneto-optics using a fiber-laser-driven extreme ultraviolet light source,”
Review of Scientific Instruments 92, 065107 (2021).
38A. Jankowiak, J. Knobloch, P. Goslawski, and N. Neumann, “Technical
Design Study BESSSY VSR,” Tech. Rep. (Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für
Materialien und Energie, 2015).

39N. Zhou Hagström, M. Schneider, N. Kerber, A. Yaroslavtsev, E. Bur-
gos Parra, M. Beg, M. Lang, C. M. Günther, B. Seng, F. Kammerbauer,
H. Popescu, M. Pancaldi, K. Neeraj, D. Polley, R. Jangid, S. B. Hrkac,
S. K. K. Patel, S. Ovcharenko, D. Turenne, D. Ksenzov, C. Boeglin,
M. Baidakova, C. von Korff Schmising, M. Borchert, B. Vodungbo,
K. Chen, C. Luo, F. Radu, L. Müller, M. Martínez Flórez, A. Philippi-
Kobs, M. Riepp, W. Roseker, G. Grübel, R. Carley, J. Schlappa, B. E.
Van Kuiken, R. Gort, L. Mercadier, N. Agarwal, L. Le Guyader, G. Mercu-
rio, M. Teichmann, J. T. Delitz, A. Reich, C. Broers, D. Hickin, C. Deiter,
J. Moore, D. Rompotis, J. Wang, D. Kane, S. Venkatesan, J. Meier, F. Pal-
las, T. Jezynski, M. Lederer, D. Boukhelef, J. Szuba, K. Wrona, S. Hauf,
J. Zhu, M. Bergemann, E. Kamil, T. Kluyver, R. Rosca, M. Spirzewski,
M. Kuster, M. Turcato, D. Lomidze, A. Samartsev, J. Engelke, M. Porro,
S. Maffessanti, K. Hansen, F. Erdinger, P. Fischer, C. Fiorini, A. Castoldi,
M. Manghisoni, C. B. Wunderer, E. E. Fullerton, O. G. Shpyrko, C. Gutt,
C. Sanchez-Hanke, H. A. Dürr, E. Iacocca, H. T. Nembach, M. W. Keller,
J. M. Shaw, T. J. Silva, R. Kukreja, H. Fangohr, S. Eisebitt, M. Kläui,
N. Jaouen, A. Scherz, S. Bonetti, and E. Jal, “Megahertz-rate ultrafast X-
ray scattering and holographic imaging at the European XFEL,” Journal of
Synchrotron Radiation 29, 1454–1464 (2022).
40J. Barker, U. Atxitia, T. A. Ostler, O. Hovorka, O. Chubykalo-Fesenko,
and R. W. Chantrell, “Two-magnon bound state causes ultrafast thermally
induced magnetisation switching,” Scientific Reports 3, 3262 (2013).
41P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, “Optical constants of transition metals: Ti,
v, cr, mn, fe, co, ni, and pd,” Phys. Rev. B 9, 5056–5070 (1974).
42D. E. Gray, American Institute of Physics (AIP). Handbook (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1972).
43D. Schick, “udkm1Dsim – a Python toolbox for simulating 1D ultrafast
dynamics in condensed matter,” Computer Physics Communications 266,
108031 (2021).
44W. Küster, K. H. Bode, and W. Fritz, “Beitrag zur Messung der Wärmeleit-
fähigkeit von Metallen im Bereich von 0 bis 500°C,” Wärme - und Stof-
fübertragung 1, 129–139 (1968).
45K. Gerlinger, B. Pfau, M. Hennecke, L.-M. Kern, I. Will, T. Noll,
M. Weigand, J. Gräfe, N. Träger, M. Schneider, C. M. Günther, D. En-
gel, G. Schütz, and S. Eisebitt, “Data for Pump–probe x-ray microscopy of
photo-induced magnetization dynamics at MHz repetition rates,” (2023),
Zenodo, Dataset, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7647267.


