1

Ethyl cellulose-based thermoreversible organogel photoresist for sedimentation-free 
volumetric additive manufacturing

Joseph T. Toombs, Ingrid K. Shan, Hayden K. Taylor*

J.T.T, I.K.S, H.K.T.
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, 
United States of America.
E-mail: hkt@berkeley.edu

Keywords: gel photoresist, oleogel, organogel, direct laser writing, volumetric additive 
manufacturing

Liquid photoresists are abundant in the field of light-based additive manufacturing (AM). 

However, printing unsupported directly into a vat of material in emerging volumetric AM 

technologies―typically a benefit due to fewer geometric constraints and less material 

waste―can be a limitation when printing low-viscosity liquid monomers and multimaterial 

constructs due to part drift or sedimentation. With ethyl cellulose (EC), a thermoplastic soluble 

in organic liquids, we formulate a simple three-component transparent thermoreversible gel 

photoresist with melting temperature of ~64 °C. The physically crosslinked network of the gel 

leads to storage moduli in the range of 0.1−10 kPa and maximum yield stress of 2.7 kPa for a 

10 wt% EC gel photoresist. Non-zero yield stress enables sedimentation-free tomographic 

volumetric patterning in low-viscosity monomer without additional hardware or modification 

of apparatus. Additionally, objects inserted into the print container can be suspended in the gel 

material which enables overprinting of multimaterial devices without anchors connecting the 

object to the printing container. Flexural strength is also improved by 100% compared to the 

neat monomer for a formulation with 7 wt% EC.


2

1. Introduction

Photoresists for light-based additive manufacturing (AM) have traditionally had liquid 

state of matter. For stereolithography, a layer-by-layer light-based AM process,[1,2] the liquid 

state is advantageous because it allows fresh material to flow into the space between the base 

of the tray containing it and the emerging partially fabricated part. Only after this replenishment 

or reflow can printing of the next layer commence. 

Volumetric additive manufacturing (VAM) techniques like direct laser writing (DLW) 

by two photon polymerization[3] (2PP), light-sheet-based printing,[4,5] and computed axial 

lithography, also known as tomographic VAM[6–9], have made it possible to print directly within 

a volume of precursor material.[10] Volumetric patterning avoids layer replenishment; however, 

liquid photoresists are still commonly used for VAM techniques because they are abundant in 

the light-based AM field. In low-viscosity photoresists, the topology of structures written by 

DLW can be restricted because noncontiguous features may drift in the liquid during stage 

scanning or stitching moves and unsupported features may sag.[11,12] In tomographic VAM, the 

crosslinked network densifies upon gelation and sedimentation may therefore occur before 

exposure is complete since structures are often printed without anchors to a substrate. 

Dry-film photoresists (solid-state photoresists) have a long history in the field of 

semiconductor lithography due to the decreased diffusion of reactive species which increases 

material contrast and improves minimum feature size.[13] Typical photoresists consist of high-

concentration solid polymer and solvent (to dissolve the polymer and produce a liquid that may 

be casted onto the substrate). The solvent is evaporated out of the liquid after deposition, 

resulting in a solid layer into which 3D features can be written with a standard photolithography 

aligner, holographically, or with DLW.[14,15] Sol-gel composites which gel after thermal 


3

treatment and evaporation of solvents used in synthesis have also been developed for DLW.[16]

These approaches are not readily applicable to centimeter-scale AM because solvent 

evaporation quickly becomes impractical for large film thicknesses and bulk volumes.[13]

An alternative approach is to employ a reversibly crosslinking polymer. The Diels-Alder 

reaction between furan and maleimide moieties forms a thermally reversible covalent crosslink. 

When combined with a thiol-ene or acrylate crosslinking system, the Diels-Alder dual-cure 

material enables printing of challenging unsupported microscale features with DLW.[17,18]

However, the temperature-dependent Diels-Alder equilibrium requires elevated temperatures 

to maintain conversion above the gelation point (to remain in gel state) and thus also special 

modifications to the light exposure apparatus.

Whereas the Diels-Alder reaction is a reversible chemical crosslink, reversible physical 

crosslinks, i.e., noncovalent interactions, offer an alternative mechanism to attain a gel-state 

photoresist. Thermally reversible gelatin-based hydrogels have been utilized in VAM, 

including for production of biological constructs and shape-memory materials.[7,19–22]

Particularly for bioprinting, light delivery occurs while the precursor material is in gel state 

which prevents sedimentation of embedded cells and after printing supports the polymerized

structure. However, by design, these aqueous materials are soft after polymerization and do not 

possess the mechanical properties required by many engineering applications. On the other 

hand, thermoplastic binders added to monomer mixtures have been utilized to record volume 

holograms as the spatial variation in density of sensitizers or in refractive index of the affected 

material for data storage applications, albeit, typically in thin films.[23]

In each case, whether chemically or physically crosslinked, photopolymerization of the 

primary photoactive network “fixes” reversible crosslinks of the secondary matrix. Post-


4

exposure, the material is heated (or cooled depending on the thermal dependence of the solid-

to-liquid phase transition[22]) to destroy the secondary network in the unfixed, or uncured, 

regions and the printed structure is extracted.

In this work, we introduce a thermally reversible gel-state organic photoresist based on 

cellulose-derived ethyl cellulose. The simple formulation that we propose enables fast 

solventless preparation of a transparent, room-temperature, nonaqueous gel photoresist which 

makes VAM of challenging geometries and multi-material constructs possible with low-

viscosity organic monomers. 

2. Results/Discussion

Ethyl cellulose (EC) is a polymer derived by etherification of cellulose in which some 

or all of the hydroxyl groups of cellulose are substituted with ethyl groups.[24] EC may be 

produced with variable degree of substitution (DS) of the hydroxl groups on the anhydroglucose 

unit (maximum of 3) which affects the solubility in oils and aqueous solutions. At low DS 

(<2.0) it is soluble in water while at high DS (2.6–2.8) it is soluble in organic solvents.[25] The 

ability to dissolve in oils has utility in food and nutrition research to produce structured oils, 

oleogels, which mimic the texture of natural fats and could be a substitute for saturated fats in 

food products.[26,27] In the pharmaceutical industry, EC has been used extensively as an 

excipient for oral and transdermal drug delivery.[28]

EC forms a physical gel when it is dissolved in certain organic liquids, e.g., aromatic 

hydrocarbons, esters, and acetates,[29] and unsubstituted hydroxyl groups interact through 

dipole-dipole interactions with polar sites on organic solvents[30,31] (see supplementary 

materials table S1 which gives solubility ≤10 wt% in several common monomers). In this work, 

we used trimethylolpropane triacrylate (TMPTA) as a homopolymerizing “solvent” in which 


5

EC was dissolved. The viscosity of TMPTA is ~0.1 Pa s. Preparation of the photoresist gel 

consisted of three steps (Figure 1): 1) EC was mixed with the TMPTA monomer at an elevated 

temperature of 125 °C, near the glass transition temperature of EC,[32] until complete dissolution. 

2) The temperature of the solution was reduced to 80 °C and photoinitiator (PI) was added (see 

Experimental Section). 3) The solution was dispensed at 80 °C into containers for tomographic 

VAM and allowed to cool to room temperature forming a gel which was stable for ≥3 weeks 

and free-standing in films ≥5 mm in thickness and bulk bodies ≥40 mm in height. In the 

experiments that follow, four formulations with varying EC concentration (in wt%) were 

typically investigated: 0 (TMPTA only), 4, 7, and 10. 4 wt % EC was selected as the minimum 

non-zero concentration because it was the minimum required to create a gel which passed the 

tube inversion test.

Figure 1. Preparation of the ethyl cellulose-based organogel photoresist.

Unlike vat polymerization or stereolithography, which absorbs light in a thin layer at an 

interface, VAM requires that light can penetrate the volume of photoresist without significant 

absorption. Therefore, the gel-state photoresist must have sufficient transmission at the writing 

wavelength to support selective polymerization within the volume. We evaluated transmission 

of the gel with UV-vis spectroscopy at wavelengths of 300–750 nm (Figure 2). Transmission 

was greater than 50% for a 1 cm pathlength of 10 wt% EC photoresist for wavelengths greater 

than 405 nm. In printing experiments shown later, 442 nm and 455 nm light sources were used 


6

to maximize transmission while still overlapping the photoinitiator absorption peak. Acceptable 

transmission ≥405 nm suggests that the gel photoresist can be used for techniques utilizing 

either single photon polymerization in the near ultraviolet range e.g., macro and micro-VAM

and light-sheet printing, or 2PP in the near infrared range e.g., DLW.  

Figure 2. EC gel photoresist UV-vis spectroscopy. Transmission % as a function of EC 
concentration in wt%. The inset shows a 1 cm cuvette filled with 10 wt% EC in TMPTA over 
text.

The melt characteristics of the gel photoresist are important for identification of liquid 

processing temperatures needed during gel preparation and post-polymerization development. 

The melt characteristics were investigated with thermorheology studies. In Figure 3a, the 

storage (G′) and loss modulus (G′′) are plotted as a function of temperature. Moduli were 

measured during application of increasing temperature at a constant rate of 0.17 °C s-1. At 

ambient temperature, the elastic properties of the gel are correlated with the concentration of 

EC with 10 wt% having the largest storage modulus and smallest loss tangent (tan δ = G′′/G′ )

and 4 wt% the smallest storage modulus and largest loss tangent. The melting temperature was 

estimated as the temperature at which the loss tangent becomes greater than 1 or the crossover 


7

point of G′ and G′′ . The melting temperature ~64 °C does not change substantially with 

variation in EC concentration. This agrees with previous studies of EC gels, which concluded 

that the melting or softening point is more strongly dependent on the molecular weight and not 

significantly dependent on the concentration of EC.[33,34]

The monotonically decreasing modulus with increasing temperature (along with 

variable concentration) allows for careful tuning of the viscoelastic properties for extrusion and 

deposition applications. This property―which is likely due to intermolecular hydrogen bonding 

between EC chains without secondary conformations (for DS ~2.5)―is uncommon among 

thermoreversible gels.[33,35]

Others such as gellan gum, agarose, and kappa carrageenan hydrogels exhibit step-like 

melting behavior originating from helical aggregation of polymer chains.[33] Although the 

primary function of the photoresist gel explored in this work is to support sedimentation-free 

VAM, the thermo-rheological properties of the gel suggest utility in extrusion-based or direct 

ink writing AM techniques.

At room temperature the material has gel state, but the liquid state of entrapped 

monomer permits photopolymerization. We investigated the effects EC had on kinetics of 

photopolymerization in terms of shear modulus with photorheology (Figure 3b). The onset of 

polymerization was not affected substantially comparing between 0 wt% and non-zero 

concentrations as well as between different EC concentrations. The rate of polymerization was 

reduced with increased EC concentration which could be due to relatively slower propagation 

rates in more dilute monomer concentrations (a result of EC present in the mixture). However, 

the ultimate shear modulus was not affected substantially. 


8

Figure 3.
Gel photoresist rheology: Storage and loss modulus for four formulations of 0 

(TMPTA only), 4, 7, and 10 wt% EC, (a) as a function of temperature and (b) as a function of 
time under illumination (light is activated after the dashed vertical line in the shaded region).
(c) Shear stress vs shear strain for 4, 7, and 10 wt% EC. The peak stress of each curve represents 
the yield stress of the gel.


9

The yield stress of the gel was measured with a shear stress ramp and identification of 

the peak stress (Figure 3c). The shear rate was set to 0.01 s-1 to simulate near static loading 

conditions which are most similar to sedimentation of a printed object. Increase in yield stress 

was correlated with EC concentration and the 10 wt% EC gel exhibited the largest yield stress 

of 2.7 kPa. We expect this trend to continue as EC concentration is increased, however, >10 

wt% was difficult to dissolve in the monomer used here and the yield stress ≤10 wt% was 

sufficient to prevent sedimentation of printed objects at cm scale or smaller.

The utility of non-zero yield stress is in preservation of print fidelity with low viscosity 

precursors. In general, patterned light exposure must continue for a short period after the 

polymer gelation point to reach a green state which is structurally stable to resist deformation 

and avoid collapse during development. However, in a low-viscosity monomer, the partially 

formed object begins to sink due to densification after gelation and the latent image of the 3D 

light dose is distorted as the object (and a boundary layer of preexposed monomer) moves

relative to the spatially static digital light projections (Figure 4 a–c). Latent image VAM, in 

which the object is instead flood-exposed during the phase of photopolymerization between 

gelation and sufficient polymerization has been proposed as a solution to this sedimentation

problem.[36] However, this technique requires: 1) a strongly nonlinear relationship―which is 

sometimes unattainable―between the dose and the polymer degree of conversion to prevent 

unwanted polymerization in the background; 2) a high-power diffuse light source to illuminate 

uniformly the entire print container. Because the photoresist gel in this work had non-zero yield 

stress, it supported the partially polymerized object during the post-gelation illumination phase. 

The patterned exposure phase could be completed without relative motion between the light 

patterns and the printed object, and sufficient polymer conversion was reached without the 


10

distortion that was observed in the 0 wt% EC experiment (Figure 4 d–f) and without an 

additional light source.

Figure 4. In-situ imagery showing sedimentation prevention with gel photoresist. An 
axisymmetric structure with isosceles triangular features (design cross section pictured in inset 
of a) was printed with tomographic VAM in (a, b) TMPTA (0 wt% EC) and (d, e) 7 wt% EC
gel. 𝑔⃗ indicates the direction of the gravitational vector. Scale bars: 1 mm. (c, f) Insets show 
magnified surface structure. Without EC, as the object sinks, the voids between protrusions are 
overexposed and the protrusions become sawtooth shaped. With EC, the object does not sink, 
and isosceles triangular features are preserved. Scale bars: 0.25 mm.

Overprinting is a fabrication method enabled by tomographic VAM in which an object 

is 3D printed onto a preexisting object or insert in the print volume. Not only can the gel state 

of the EC photoresist prevent printed objects from sinking but it also allows objects to be 

suspended in the volume without support or anchors to the print container or external apparatus. 

We fabricated a mock auditory device to demonstrate how this feature of the gel is advantageous 

for overprinting. The overprinted geometry which encapsulated an induction LED and “circuit 

board” was designed to custom-fit a model of a human ear (Figure 5a). 


11

Figure 5. Overprinting with tomographic VAM and EC gel photoresist. (a) CAD model of 
overprinted auditory device. (b) Projected light is occluded by the insert which is accounted for 
in forward and backprojection computations. (c) Insert suspended in gel photoresist prior to 
printing. (d) Overprinted model. Scale bar: 10 mm. (e) Auditory device fitted into ear canal and 
outer ear of 3D printed model.

Digital light projections were computed and optimized with the object-space model 

optimization algorithm[37] using forward and inverse models which account for light occlusion 

by the insert[38] (Figure 5b). The insert was suspended in the gel (Figure 5c) in a two-step 

process: first, a small amount of liquified 7 wt% gel was dispensed into the container and 

allowed to cool; second, the insert was embedded in the gel and more liquified gel was 

dispensed to cover the insert completely. After printing, the gel was heated past its melting 

point, excess liquid was poured off, and followed by solvent development in isopropyl alcohol. 

After completion, the auditory device (Figure 5d) was fitted into the ear model with good shape 

conformation (Figure 5e). 

Finally, we investigated the effect EC has on the mechanical strength of casted flexural 

specimen following the ASTM D790 specifications (Figure 6). Without EC additive, the 

polymerized material had ultimate flexural strength of 12.8 MPa. Increased EC content 


12

increased ultimate flexural strength up to a maximum of 25.6 MPa with 7 wt%, an increase of 

100 % over 0 wt%. Above 7 wt%, the mean flexural strength decreased, which suggests there 

may be an optimal EC concentration (to improve flexural strength) in the range of 4−10 wt%. 

However, the observed decrease in flexural strength from 7 to 10 wt% was not statistically 

significant at the 5% level; therefore, further testing is required to confirm this hypothesis.

Overall, the increased strength could be attributed to residual EC in the crosslinked polymer 

network acting as a reinforcing filler in the TMPTA-EC composite. Indeed, cellulosic materials

have been widely used as biobased fillers in thermoset composites to modify mechanical 

properties.[39] For instance, the increase in strength we observed is consistent with literature 

where EC was used as a filler in crystalline polymers.[40] Without chemical modification of the 

monomer or filler, the effect of filler average molecular weight on the strength of the composite 

could be studied. On the other hand, grafting photocrosslinkable moieties (e.g., acrylics and

alkenes/ynes (with thiol crosslinker)) onto the cellulose polymer chain to produce a

thermoreversible gelling agent which is active in the photopolymerization reaction may further 

improve mechanical strength.[41]


13

Figure 6. Mean flexural strength of polymerized gel. n = 8 samples were tested for each 
concentration of EC. Error bars represent mean ± one standard deviation. p-values were 
calculated with Welch’s t-test. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

3. Conclusion

Ethyl cellulose can be used to create a gel-state photoresist without chemical 

modification of the primary monomer(s), which results in simple formulations and preparation. 

Thermoreversibility at low temperatures provides an accessible mechanism to process a gel-

state material after VAM patterning. This approach is not limited to homopolymerizing material 

systems as used in this work. It could be used with heteropolymer and hybrid material systems 

such as epoxy–vinyl systems[42], which may otherwise be unprintable with VAM due to 

insufficient viscosity, as long as EC is soluble in the constituents. Investigation of how 

solubility in monomers is affected by varying ethyl DS or grafting of photocrosslinkable 

functionalities on cellulose or perhaps alternative thermoreversible gelators (e.g., cellulose 

acetate, or non-cellulose-based polymers) will be important to expand the list of compatible 

monomer–gelator systems. In the work presented here, the mechanical properties improved as 

higher flexural strength was achieved with an EC–thermoset composite compared to only 

thermoset; however, this may not always be the case, especially if higher EC concentration is


14

required to create a gel in very low-viscosity monomers. In future research, it will be important 

to investigate methods to achieve gel characteristics with lower gelator concentration (e.g., 

tuning the molecular weight of EC) to minimize influence on optical and mechanical properties 

and photopolymerization kinetics of the neat material system. Overall, we demonstrated the 

utility of a gel-state organic photoresist for tomographic VAM printing of low-viscosity 

monomer without sedimentation and for overprinting on freely suspended objects for 

individualized and functionally integrated devices. We expect this methodology will enable 

new applications for light-sheet based printing and tomographic VAM such as single-step 

fabrication of soft robotics with embedded pneumatics and electronics.

4. Experimental Section/Methods

Materials: Trimethylolpropane triacrylate was purchased from TCI America. Ethyl cellulose 

(48–49% ethoxy basis, 30–70 mPa·s 5% in toulene), camphorquinone (CQ) photoinitiator,

ethyl 4-(dimethylamino)benzoate
(EDAB),
and 2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine 1-oxyl 

(TEMPO) radical scavenger was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. All other monomers besides 

TMPTA used to evaluate solubility were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. CQ was added at 5 

mM concentration for all photopolymerization experiments. CQ and co-initiator EDAB were 

used together in 1:1 wt CQ/wt EDAB combination for all photopolymerization experiments. 

UV-VIS analysis: Heated liquid samples of photoresist with varying concentrations of EC were 

dispensed into 1 cm path-length quartz cuvettes. The cuvette and EC photoresist was allowed 

to cool to room temperature by natural (unforced) cooling over a 24-hour period. Samples were 

measured with reference to air in an empty quartz cuvette on a Shimadzu UV-2600 Plus 

spectrophotometer. The recorded transmission was corrected by accounting for Fresnel 


15

reflection at the air–quartz interface in the reference arm of the measurement. A dispersion 

relation[43] was used for the refractive index of the cuvette.

Thermorheology analysis: All rheological studies were performed on an Anton Paar Physica 

MCR301 rheometer with 8 mm diameter upper parallel plate and heated lower plate. Oscillatory 

shear loading was performed on each gel and the neat monomer. Gel samples had 8 mm 

diameter and 1.8 mm thickness. The parallel plate gap was set to 0.3 mm when testing the neat 

monomer. For all thermorheology experiments, the shear strain oscillation was constant with 

an amplitude 1% strain and frequency of 5 Hz. Temperature was increased from 25 °C to 100 °C 

at a constant rate of 0.17 °C s-1.

Photorheology analysis: Oscillatory shear loading was performed on each gel formulation and 

the neat monomer. Gel samples had 8 mm diameter and 1 mm thickness. The parallel plate gap 

was set to 0.3 mm when testing the neat monomer. Oscillation amplitude and frequency settings 

used in thermorheology experiments were also used here. A custom LED attachment (center 

wavelength of 443 nm) was affixed to the lower plate of the rheometer. An LED was located 

underneath a microscope slide on top of which the gel or liquid to be analyzed was dispensed. 

Each measurement was performed on a fresh microscope slide. The custom attachment allowed 

light to pass through the glass slide and polymerize the material while preventing motion of the 

slide and allowing oscillatory measurement of the storage and loss moduli over time. Before 

switching on the LED, moduli were measured for a 50 s period under no illumination.

Yield stress rheological analysis: Shear stress ramps were performed on each gel formulation 

with samples of 0.7 mm thickness and 8 mm diameter. The constant shear strain rate was set to 

0.01 s-1. The upper and lower plates were covered with a large grit sandpaper to prevent wall 

slippage at high shear strain. 


16

Mechanical 
strength 
analysis: 
Testing 
coupons 
were 
created 
using 
a 
custom 

polydimethylsiloxane mold following the ASTM D790 specifications. The EC gel photoresist

was heated to a liquid state then cast in the mold and left in a dark area for 24 hours to allow it 

to cool to room temperature and return to gel state. Then, the photoresist was cured in a 

FormLabs Form Cure for 40 mins to ensure complete polymerization.

Three-point flexural tests were performed on a MARK-10 ESM1500 with a Model 5i 

force gauge and MR01-200 force sensor (maximum load 1 kN). Coupons were strained at 0.1 

mm mm-1 min-1 per Procedure B of ASTM D790 Section 4. 

Tomographic VAM printing: For tomographic VAM printing, 1.5 mM TEMPO was added to 

the formulation to improve printing contrast. Heated liquid EC photoresist was dispensed into 

40 mL vials and 1 mL vials for cm-scale (Figure 5) and μm-scale tomographic VAM (Figure 

4), respectively. For overprinted parts, the insert on which the part was printed was placed into 

the vial in this stage. The vials were then set in a dark area for 24 hours to cool to room 

temperature prior to printing. The desired geometry was then printed with the gel-state EC 

photoresist with no modifications to the printing procedure. 

After the desired geometry was printed, vials were heated in a water bath to liquefy the 

surrounding unpolymerized gel. Excess liquid was then poured out and the printed part was 

rinsed in isopropyl alcohol for three minutes. The part was then post-cured for five minutes in 

a FormLabs Form Cure chamber.

Computed axial lithography apparatuses described in previous works were used for cm-

scale[44] and μm-scale[9] printing. In the apparatus for cm-scale printing, the light source was 

changed to a 455 nm LED. 


17

Statistical analysis: In rheology analyses, n = 1 samples were tested for each condition. Data 

presented is actual recorded data.

In mechanical strength analysis, for each sample type, n = 8 samples were tested. 

Outliers were removed with the interquartile range method on the peak flexural stress at failure.

Data in Figure 6 is presented as mean ± one standard deviation. A two-sided Welch’s t-test was 

used to assess significance of differences in the mean ultimate flexural stress between sample 

types. Alpha significance levels of 0.05 and 0.01 were used to classify statistical significance 

and strong statistical significance, respectively. Microsoft Excel was used for this statistical 

analysis.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the lab of Professor Sanjay Kumar lab in the Department of 
Bioengineering at UC Berkeley for use of the rheometer. This work was funded by the National 
Science Foundation under cooperative agreement no. EEC-1160494. 


18

References

[1]
J. R. Tumbleston, D. Shirvanyants, N. Ermoshkin, R. Janusziewicz, A. R. Johnson, D. 
Kelly, K. Chen, R. Pinschmidt, J. P. Rolland, A. Ermoshkin, E. T. Samulski, J. M. 
DeSimone, Science 2015, 347, 1349.

[2]
D. A. Walker, J. L. Hedrick, C. A. Mirkin, Science 2019, 366, 360.

[3]
T. Baldacchini, Three-Dimensional Microfabrication Using Two-Photon 
Polymerization: Fundamentals, Technology, and Applications, Elsevier Inc., 2016.

[4]
M. Regehly, Y. Garmshausen, M. Reuter, N. F. König, E. Israel, D. P. Kelly, C.-Y. 
Chou, K. Koch, B. Asfari, S. Hecht, Nature 2020, 588, 620.

[5]
V. Hahn, P. Rietz, F. Hermann, P. Müller, C. Barner-Kowollik, T. Schlöder, W. Wenzel, 
E. Blasco, M. Wegener, Nat. Photon. 2022, DOI 10.1038/s41566-022-01081-0.

[6]
M. Shusteff, A. E. M. Browar, B. E. Kelly, J. Henriksson, T. H. Weisgraber, R. M. 
Panas, N. X. Fang, C. M. Spadaccini, Science Advances 2017, 3, DOI 
10.1126/sciadv.aao5496.

[7]
B. E. Kelly, I. Bhattacharya, H. Heidari, M. Shusteff, C. M. Spadaccini, H. K. Taylor, 
Science 2019, 363, 1075.

[8]
D. Loterie, P. Delrot, C. Moser, Nature Communications 2020, 11, 852.

[9]
J. T. Toombs, M. Luitz, C. C. Cook, S. Jenne, C. C. Li, B. E. Rapp, F. Kotz-Helmer, H. 
K. Taylor, Science 2022, 376, 308.

[10] Volumetric AM can sometimes refer to process dimensionality, meaning an object is 

printed simultaneously or volume-at-once. In the context of this work, we refer to the 
alternate meaning in which selective photopolymerization occurs within a volume of 
material (not at an interface) regardless of dimensionality., n.d.

[11] T. Zandrini, N. Liaros, L. J. Jiang, Y. F. Lu, J. T. Fourkas, R. Osellame, T. Baldacchini, 

Optical Materials Express 2019, 9, 2601.

[12] H.-B. Sun, S. Kawata, in Advances in Polymer Science, 2006, pp. 169–273.
[13] W. M. Moreau, in Semiconductor Lithography: Principles, Practices, and Materials, 

1988.

[14] K. Ohlinger, Y. Lin, Z. Poole, K. P. Chen, AIP Advances 2011, 1, 032163.
[15] Y. Liu, D. D. Nolte, L. J. Pyrak-Nolte, Applied Physics A: Materials Science and 

Processing 2010, 100, 181.

[16] A. Ovsianikov, A. Gaidukeviciute, B. N. Chichkov, M. Oubaha, B. D. MacCraith, I. 

Sakellari, A. Giakoumaki, D. Gray, M. Vamvakaki, M. Farsari, C. Fotakis, Laser 
Chemistry 2008, 2008, 1.

[17] B. J. Adzima, C. J. Kloxin, C. A. DeForest, K. S. Anseth, C. N. Bowman, 

Macromolecular Rapid Communications 2012, 33, 2092.

[18] G. J. Berg, T. Gong, C. R. Fenoli, C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules 2014, 47, 3473.
[19] P. N. Bernal, P. Delrot, D. Loterie, Y. Li, J. Malda, C. Moser, R. Levato, Advanced 

Materials 2019, 31, DOI 10.1002/adma.201904209.

[20] S. Hasselmann, L. Hahn, T. Lorson, E. Schätzlein, I. Sébastien, M. Beudert, T. 

Lühmann, J. C. Neubauer, G. Sextl, R. Luxenhofer, D. Heinrich, Materials Horizons
2021, DOI 10.1039/D1MH00925G.

[21] R. Rizzo, D. Ruetsche, H. Liu, M. Zenobi‐Wong, Advanced Materials 2021, 33, 

2102900.


19

[22] A. V. Salvekar, F. H. B. A. Nasir, Y. H. Chen, S. Maiti, V. D. Ranjan, H. M. Chen, H. 

Wang, W. M. Huang, 3D Printing and Additive Manufacturing 2022, DOI 
10.1089/3dp.2021.0279.

[23] B. A. Kowalski, R. R. McLeod, J. Polym. Sci. Part B: Polym. Phys. 2016, 54, 1021.
[24] W. Koch, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry 1937, 29, 687.
[25] V. K. Varshney, S. Naithani, in Cellulose Fibers: Bio- and Nano-Polymer Composites

(Eds.: S. Kalia, B. S. Kaith, I. Kaur), Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2011, pp. 43–62.

[26] A. K. Zetzl, A. G. Marangoni, S. Barbut, Food & Function 2012, 3, 327.
[27] A. J. Martins, A. A. Vicente, R. L. Cunha, M. A. Cerqueira, Food & Function 2018, 9, 

758.

[28] O. A. Adeleke, International Journal of Pharmaceutics: X 2019, 1, 100023.
[29] DuPont, ETHOCELTM Ethyl Cellulose Polymers for Industrial Applications, DuPont, 

2019.

[30] E. Lizaso, M. E. Muñoz, A. Santamaría, Macromolecules 1999, 32, 1883.
[31] P. W. S. Heng, L. W. Chan, K. T. Chow, Pharmaceutical Research 2005, 22, 676.
[32] P. Sakellariou, R. C. Rowe, E. F. T. White, International Journal of Pharmaceutics

1985, 27, 267.

[33] M. Davidovich-Pinhas, S. Barbut, A. G. Marangoni, Carbohydrate Polymers 2015, 117, 

869.

[34] M. Davidovich-Pinhas, S. Barbut, A. G. Marangoni, Cellulose 2014, 21, 3243.
[35] T. Laredo, S. Barbut, A. G. Marangoni, Soft Matter 2011, 7, 2734.
[36] C. M. Rackson, J. T. Toombs, M. P. De Beer, C. C. Cook, M. Shusteff, H. K. Taylor, R. 

R. McLeod, Optics Letters 2022, 47, 1279.

[37] C. M. Rackson, K. M. Champley, J. T. Toombs, E. J. Fong, V. Bansal, H. K. Taylor, M. 

Shusteff, R. R. McLeod, Additive Manufacturing 2021, 48, 102367.

[38] J. Toombs, 2022, DOI 10.5281/ZENODO.6640374.
[39] L. Yu, K. Dean, L. Li, Progress in Polymer Science 2006, 31, 576.
[40] J. Chen, D. Wu, K. Pan, International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 2016, 88, 

10.

[41] Z. Qu, G. T. Schueneman, M. L. Shofner, J. C. Meredith, ACS Omega 2020, 5, 31092.
[42] J. J. Schwartz, A. J. Boydston, Nature Communications 2019, 10, 791.
[43] I. H. Malitson, Journal of the Optical Society of America 1965, 55, 1205.
[44] C. C. Li, J. Toombs, H. Taylor, Proceedings - SCF 2020: ACM Symposium on 

Computational Fabrication 2020, DOI 10.1145/3424630.3425421.


20

Supporting Information 

Ethyl cellulose-based thermoreversible organogel photoresist for sedimentation-free 
volumetric additive manufacturing

Joseph T. Toombs, Ingrid K. Shan, Hayden K. Taylor*

Table S1. Solubility of EC in various monomers

Monomer
Abbreviation
Solubility in wt %
Chemical structure of monomer

Neopentyl glycol 
dimethacrylate
NGDMA
≥ 10

Trimethylolpropane 

triacrylate
TMPTA
≥ 10

Trimethylolpropane 

tris(3-

mercaptopropionate)

TMPTP
insoluble

Pentaerythritol 
tetraacrylate
PETTA
insoluble

Hydroxyethyl 
methacrylate
HEMA
≥ 10

Triethylene glycol 

dimethacrylate
TEGDMA   n = 3
≥ 10

Polyethylene glycol 

diacrylate
PEGDA250 n ~ 4
≥ 10

Polyethylene glycol 

diacrylate
PEGDA700 n ~ 14 
insoluble


