Bead-Droplet Reactor for High-Fidelity Solid-Phase Enzymatic 

DNA Synthesis

Punnag Padhy1*, Mohammad Asif Zaman1, Michael Anthony Jensen2,3*, Yao-Te Cheng1, Yogi 

Huang4, Ludwig Galambos1, Ronald Wayne Davis2,3,5, Lambertus Hesselink1*

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A

2Stanford Genome Technology Center, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, 94304, U.S.A

3Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A

4Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A

5Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A

*Corresponding author. Email: punnag@stanford.edu, m.a.jensen@stanford.edu, 

hesselink@ee.stanford.edu

Solid-phase synthesis techniques underpin the synthesis of DNA, oligopeptides, 
oligosaccharides, and combinatorial libraries for drug discovery. State-of-the-art solid-phase 
synthesizers can produce oligonucleotides up to 200-300 nucleotides while using excess 
reagents. Accumulated errors over multiple reaction cycles prevent the synthesis of longer 
oligonucleotides for the genome scale engineering of synthetic biological systems. The sources 
of these errors in synthesis columns are poorly understood. Here we show that bead-bead 
stacking significantly contributes to reaction errors in columns by analyzing enzymatic 
coupling of fluorescently labelled nucleotides onto the initiated beads along with porosity, 
particle tracking and diffusion calculations. To circumvent stacking, we introduce 
dielectrophoretic bead-droplet reactor (DBDR); a novel approach to synthesize on individual 
microbeads within microdroplets. Dielectrophoretic force overcomes the droplet-medium 
interfacial tension to encapsulate and eject individual beads from microdroplets in a droplet 
microfluidic device. Faster reagent diffusion in droplets, and non-uniform electric field 
induced enhancement in reagent concentration at its surface can improve reaction fidelities 
in DBDR. Fluorescence comparisons suggest around 3-fold enhancement of reaction fidelity 
compared to columns. DBDR can potentially enable the high-purity synthesis of arbitrarily 
long strands of DNA to meet the emerging demands in healthcare, environment, agriculture, 
materials, and computing.


1. Introduction

Solid-phase synthesis techniques [1] revolutionized de novo synthesis of DNA [2-4], oligopeptides
[1], oligosaccharides [5], and combinatorial libraries for drug discovery [6]. Insoluble solid support 
bound molecules can be sequentially exposed to a large excess of reagents to synthesize the desired 
long-chain molecule step-by-step [1]. Current state-of-the-art platforms
can
synthesize

oligonucleotides (single-stranded DNA) that are 200-300 nucleotides long in practice [2-4, 7-9], 
irrespective of the synthesis chemistry. Accumulated errors over multiple reaction cycles limit the 
synthesis of longer oligonucleotide strands in the existing solid-phase synthesis platforms [2-4, 7-
9]. For example, in enzymatic synthesis [7, 10-12], these errors lead to a large polydispersity in 
the synthesized oligonucleotides and reduce the yield of the desired product with increase in 
intended strand length [12]. However, as synthetic biology seeks to engineer increasingly complex 
biological systems, there is a surge in demand for the synthesis of arbitrarily long strands of 
oligonucleotides [8, 9]. This requires the minimization of errors over individual synthesis reaction
steps. Therefore, development of fundamentally novel physical sample handling techniques for
solid-phase synthesis that can facilitate more efficient interfacing of solid supports and reagents to
enable high-purity synthesis reactions is essential. Faster reaction rates, reduced reagent 
consumption and wastage as well as a cleaner synthesis process are additionally desirable [8].

Development of high-purity synthesis techniques necessitates an understanding of the 

physical basis of inadequate reagent exposure in existing platforms. In microarrays, misalignment 
of optical beams and inkjet print heads leads to substitution and deletion errors [2-4]. In columns, 
which tend to be more efficient and amenable for subsequent gene assembly [2-4], deletion strands 
are the major byproduct. However, the actual reason for the errors is poorly understood and
generally attributed to the reaction chemistries that are less than 100% efficient [8]. As a result, 
significant research is directed towards optimization and improvement of the chemistries [2, 9-
11]. Research on physical sample handling is primarily geared towards enhancing parallelization, 
throughput, and miniaturization [7, 8].

We establish that the stacking of beads in synthesis columns (Figure 1a) curtails adequate 

exposure of the growing oligonucleotide strands on the bead surfaces to the reagents and limits the 
reaction fidelity. To address this problem, we postulate that synthesis on individual beads can 
maximize reagent access to the bead surfaces. To ensure adequate reagent usage and minimum 
wastage per bead we choose to synthesize within microdroplets. Furthermore, as an added benefit,
the small size of the microdroplet can facilitate faster reagent diffusion [13-15] to the reaction site 
to drive faster reactions. The above objectives can be achieved by encapsulating and ejecting 
individual beads (of radius Rb) from microdroplets (of radius Rd). However, capillary forces due 
to interfacial tension [13, 16] (𝛾𝑜𝑤) are significant at this length scale and must be overcome to
manipulate the bead across the droplet-medium interface. In state-of-the-art bead encapsulation
techniques, beads pre-suspended in the dispersed (droplet forming) phase are flowed towards the 
droplet generator site [17, 18]. After the droplet breakup, the bead is held inside it by the droplet-
medium interfacial tension. It is not amenable to implement multistep solid-phase synthesis 
reactions on individual beads using separate reagent microdroplets for each step. Hence, there is a 


need for new approaches to encapsulate the bead from the surrounding immiscible medium into 
the droplet and eject it back out into the medium.

Herein, we introduce DBDR (Dielectrophoretic Bead-Droplet Reactor), a technique to 

implement solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis on individual beads by using dielectrophoretic 
force [19-23] to encapsulate and eject them from picoliter scale reagent microdroplets (Figure 1b). 
When sufficiently large voltage (𝑉𝑠) is applied across the electrodes, the dielectrophoretic force (∝
𝑅𝑑

3|𝑉𝑠|2) overcomes the capillary forces (∝ 𝑅𝑏𝛾𝑜𝑤) to move the hydrophobic bead, across the 

aqueous reagent-oil medium interface, into the droplet. At low voltages (𝑉𝑠), the dominant capillary 
force ejects the hydrophobic bead out of the droplet. As a proof-of-concept, we demonstrated the 
enzymatic coupling of fluorescently labelled nucleotides to the 3’ end of the initiator strands on 
the bead using DBDR (Figure 1b). Furthermore, fluorescence measurements show that DBDR 
achieves higher fidelity of reactions than columns with stacked beads.

2. Device And Reaction Design

The silicon-on-glass microfluidic device developed for demonstration of DBDR consists 

of Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) electrodes (≈ 15 μ𝑚 wide, Figure 1c and d) in the reaction chamber 
that are suitably aligned with the on-demand droplet generator microchannel [16, 24] (≈ 25 𝜇𝑚
wide, Figure 1c and d) to ensure that the dispensed droplet (𝑅𝑑 ≈ 25 µ𝑚) lies within its trapping 
range. The electrodes are made smaller than the channel (Figure 1d) to ensure that the trapped 
droplet encapsulates the trapped bead as it covers the electrode (Figure 1b). ITO and glass ensure 
optical transparency for imaging the trapping and manipulation process as well as fluorescence 
detection of the coupling reaction. (Supplementary Material and Supplementary Figure 1).

Streptavidin-coated fluorescent green polystyrene beads (𝑅𝑏 = 3 𝜇𝑚, Figure 1e) are used 

as solid supports. 5’ biotinylated oligonucleotide with 25 nucleotides bound to the microbead using 
streptavidin-biotin linkages (Figure 1e(i)) are used as initiators. The enzyme terminal 
deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) couples the fluorescently labelled nucleotides (dCTP-AF647) 
to the 3’ end of the initiators (Figure 1e(ii)) when the bead is encapsulated within the reagent 
droplet (Figure 1b). A red LED excites AF647 to detect the coupling of dCTP-AF647 to the
initiated bead (Figure 1b and 1e(ii), Supplementary Material and Supplementary Figure 2-4).

3. Bead-Droplet Encapsulation and Ejection

The device, filled with ≈ 2.5% w/w solution of Span 80 in silicone oil (kinematic 

viscosity= 1 𝑐𝑆𝑡), is mounted on the sample holder with relevant electrical and fluidic connections
(Supplementary Figure 3a & b). Initiated beads suspended in the oil solution are introduced into 
the device through the bottom fluidic port (Figure 1d). When a single bead enters the vicinity of 
the electrodes it is dielectrophoretically trapped (Supplementary Figure 3c) by applying a voltage 
(𝑉𝑠) across the electrodes (E1 and GND in Figure 1d). Subsequently, a reagent droplet is dispensed 
into the reaction chamber (Supplementary Figure 3d) and trapped adjacent to the bead
(Supplementary Figure 3e).


When 𝑉𝑠 is increased to ≈ 120 𝑉 (amplitude), the bead is fully encapsulated by the reagent 

droplet (Figure 2a, Movie 1). Reducing 𝑉𝑠 to ≈ 0.1 𝑉 ejects the bead from the droplet (Figure 2a,
Movie S1). Electrohydrodynamic simulations (Figure 2b, Supplementary Material) support these 
observations. It can be understood in terms of the change in the system’s electrocapillary potential 
energy (∆𝑈) [25, 26] due to a change in the Gibbs free energy (Δ𝑈𝐼𝑇 ≈ −γ𝑜𝑤cos(θ)∆𝐴𝑤𝑠) of the 
interfaces between the bead, droplet and the medium as well as the change in the electrical energy 
(Δ 𝑈𝐸 = −Δ(𝑄𝑉𝑠)/2) stored in the system (Figure 2c&d). Here, γ𝑜𝑤 = 5.5𝑚𝑁/𝑚, 𝐴𝑤𝑠 is the area 
of the bead covered by the reagent droplet, θ = 145∘ is the contact angle that the reagent droplet 
forms on the surface of the bead (Figure 3) and 𝑄 is the charge stored on the electrode E1
(Supplementary Material). The large θ means the bead has a propensity towards the oil 
(hydrophobic). When 𝑉𝑠 is high, |Δ𝑈𝐸| ≫ |Δ𝑈𝐼𝑇|. To attain the minimum energy configuration, 
the droplet moves towards the electrode (Δ𝑈 ≈ Δ𝑈𝐸 < 0)  and engulfs the bead in the process 
(Figure 2c). When 𝑉𝑠 is low, |Δ𝑈𝐸| ≪ |Δ𝑈𝐼𝑇|. To attain the minimum energy configuration, the 
droplet ejects the hydrophobic bead, which is touching the droplet-medium interface from the 
inside, as it moves away from the electrode (Δ𝑈 ≈ Δ𝑈𝐼𝑇 < 0, Figure 2d). Once the bead 
completely separates from the droplet, Δ𝑈𝐼𝑇 is negligible (Figure 2d). Design tradeoffs indicate 
that while a larger droplet would mean more reagent usage per reaction, a smaller droplet would 
require a larger voltage to exert significant dielectrophoretic force (∝ 𝑅𝑑

3|𝑉𝑠|2) to move the bead 

across the interface (Figure 3a). Our choice of droplet size (𝑅𝑑 = 25𝜇𝑚) is a good compromise. 
Silicone oil 1cSt acts as a chemically inert suspension medium with low viscosity (Figure 3b) and
high dielectric breakdown strength that prevents the rapid evaporation of the tiny reagent 
microdroplets due to their high surface-to-volume ratio [27]. Addition of the surfactant (Span80)
to silicone oil 1cSt further reduces 𝛾𝑜𝑤 to 5.5 𝑚𝑁/𝑚 and increases 𝜃 to 145°. This makes the 
otherwise hydrophilic streptavidin surface of the bead (water droplet forms a contact angle of 50°
on a streptavidin surface in air) hydrophobic (Figure 3c). Therefore, the choice of silicone oil and 
surfactant is critical for the spontaneous ejection of the bead from the droplet on touching its 
interior surface in the absence of an applied voltage. Hence, we establish a robust approach to 
encapsulate and eject individual beads from droplets (detailed experimental process in
Supplementary Material).

4. Enzymatic Coupling of Nucleotide In DBDR

After establishing the physical working principle of DBDR, it was used for a proof-of-

concept demonstration of enzymatic coupling of single nucleotides onto the initiator strands bound 
to a microbead. The above process was duplicated along with fluorescent imaging of the bead with 
a red LED before encapsulating after ejecting it (Figure 4a, Supplementary Material and 
Supplementary Figure 4a-f). The clear red emission at the position of the bead after ejection 
confirmed the binding of the fluorescently tagged bases (dCTP-AF647) to the bead. Three repeats 
of this experiment (Supplementary Figure 4g) were performed with encapsulation time of 300s to 
ensure reproducibility. To eliminate any false positives due to unincorporated bases non-
specifically bound to the surface of the bead, we reiterated the above process using beads devoid 
of initiator strands and reagent solution without TdT (control experiment in Figure 4b). Lack of 
red fluorescence at the site of the bead after ejection confirmed the absence of non-specific binding 


(Figure 4b, Supplementary Materials and Supplementary Figure 4h-m). This establishes DBDR as 
a robust approach for enzymatic DNA synthesis on individual beads in droplet reactors. While 
prior reports of chemical synthesis in microdroplets involved all the reagents in fluidic form
[28,29], there was no droplet microfluidic analogue to solid-phase synthesis [8, 30]. DBDR brings 
together the disparate fields of droplet microfluidics and solid-phase synthesis. While droplet 
microfluidic implementation of gene assembly, gene expression and other steps of the design-
build-test cycle of synthetic biology exist, a droplet microfluidic implementation of solid-phase 
synthesis remained elusive due to the inability to handle solid supports in such systems [30]. By 
addressing this problem, DBDR opens a route for a completely droplet microfluidic process 
pipeline for synthetic biology that could minimize reagent consumption during testing and 
verification.

5. Coupling Fidelity Enhancement in DBDR

After having demonstrated enzymatic coupling of nucleotides to initiated beads using 

DBDR, we compared its coupling fidelity with reactions implemented in synthesis columns. Large 
variations in fluorescence intensity across beads in the column (Figure 5) indicate nonuniform 
reagent environment in the vicinity of each bead which results in corresponding variations in the 
reaction fidelities. Only a small fraction of the beads has extremely bright fluorescence which 
closely represent the maximum attainable enzymatic coupling fidelities. The reduced fidelity on
an overwhelming majority of the beads leads to an overall decrease in the average coupling 
efficiency (average of the histogram in Figure 5) and suggest significant missed couplings. Beads 
reacted using DBDR consistently exhibit higher fluorescence intensities which is quantified using 
the average fluorescence intensity ratio (𝐹𝐼𝑅𝑎𝑣𝑔 = 3.2, Figure 5). This indicates enhanced access 
of individual bead surfaces to reagents within the microdroplets which then translates to improved 
reaction fidelities. A 3.2 times higher reaction fidelity implies that reactions implemented using 
DBDR can achieve near-perfect fidelity even when the same reactions implemented in synthesis 
column attain a fidelity of mere 32%. While excess concentration of reagents is generally used to 
drive up reaction fidelities in synthesis columns [1, 31], it is accompanied by excess reagent 
wastage as well. If the synthesis processes are repeated to generate 𝑁 nucleotides long oligomer 
the ratio of error free products (𝐸𝐹𝑃𝑅) synthesized using DBDR and synthesis columns will be
given by 𝐸𝐹𝑃𝑅 =

1

106 × 3.2𝑁(around a million beads are used in the synthesis column). Therefore,

for merely 𝑁 = 12 >

6

log10 3.2, 𝐸𝐹𝑃𝑅 > 1 can be achieved. So, higher quantity of error free 

synthesis product can be achieved on 1 bead using DBDR than on a million beads using synthesis 
columns for oligomers that are longer than merely 12 nucleotides (𝑁 = 12). Furthermore, the ratio 

of reagents usage (𝑅𝑈𝑅) between DBDR and synthesis columns would be 𝑅𝑈𝑅 =

60𝑝𝑙

50𝜇𝑙 ≈ 10−6.

Hence, DBDR has the potential to synthesize significantly higher quantity of error free strands 
while consuming much less reagents. The performance improvements would be more pronounced 
with increase in 𝑁. This observed superior performance of DBDR compared to synthesis columns
(statistical significance established using Welch’s t test, Supplementary Material) can be attributed 
to 1) bead-bead stacking, 2) faster reagent diffusion time in droplets compared to columns and 3) 
non-uniform electric field acting on droplet reactor.


Firstly, the stacking of beads in synthesis columns restricts reagent access to the bead 

surfaces. Ideally, beads can be stacked in a definite number of regularly packed lattice 
arrangements [32]. The rhombohedral [33, 34] is one of the most tightly packed arrangements with 

a packing fraction of 0.74. It has a fluid filled inter-particle void volume of 4 (√2 −

𝜋

3) 𝑅𝑏

3 ≈ 40𝑓𝑙

[33, 34] in a single unit cell encompassing a bead (of radius 𝑅𝑏) with ≈ 140 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠 of 
initiators on the surface. On the other extreme, the simple cubic (SC) arrangement has a packing 

fraction of 0.52 and a void volume of 4 (2 −

𝜋

3) 𝑅𝑏

3 ≈ 103𝑓𝑙 [32, 33] in a single unit cell. The 

5𝜇𝑀
concentration of fluorescently labelled nucleotides implies
≈ 0.2 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠
(≈

140 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠/700) and ≈ 0.52𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠 (≈ 140 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠/280) of nucleotides per void in 
a unit cell in rhombohedral and SC stacking respectively. On the other hand, in DBDR, the bead 
has access to the entire reagent volume within the droplet (forms a contact angle 𝜑 = 140° with 

the device surface, Supplementary Figure 7) which is

(2−3cos 𝜑+cos3 𝜑)

3
𝜋𝑅𝑑

3 = 65𝑝𝑙 [25] and ≈

325 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠 (≈ 140 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠/0.43) of nucleotides. As we can see, while the droplet has 
ample nucleotides to completely couple with the initiators on the bead surface, the voids in the 
stack don’t. Therefore, ideally the fluorescence intensity ratio (𝐹𝐼𝑅𝑎𝑣𝑔) between beads reacted 
using DBDR and in perfectly stacked synthesis column is expected to be between 280-700.
However, in practice perfect stacking is a rarity. On introduction of reagents into the synthesis 
column (say at 𝑡 = 0, Figure 6a), the particles are displaced from the perfect stack due to the drag 
force [13] exerted by the turbulent flow [35] (𝑡 = 0.05, Figure 6a). The increased interparticle 
spacing facilitates better reagent access to the bead surfaces. This explains the much lower 𝐹𝐼𝑅𝑎𝑣𝑔.
Once the reagent influx stops, the particles settle down under gravity into imperfect stacks (𝑡 =
70𝑠 and 𝑡 = 300𝑠, Figure 6a).

Different particles have different settling times. This explains the varying exposure (spread 

of the grey band and histogram in Figure 5) to reagents during the experimental time (300𝑠). Even 
when the beads are floating up, there are many beads in proximity (≈ 10 beads in a region of size 
equivalent to a droplet in frame 𝑡 = 0.05 in Figure 6a) competing for the reagent molecules.
Therefore, we see that the tight stacking of beads in synthesis columns which is known to provide
the large surface area of solid support for the synthesis of large quantity of oligonucleotides [2, 3]
also contributes significantly to reaction errors (reduced reaction fidelity). These errors accumulate 
over multiple synthesis cycles to ultimately negate the advantage of large synthesis quantity
achieved in the columns. On the other hand, by ensuring one bead per droplet, DBDR is uniquely 
placed to ensure maximum attainable reagent access (resulting in higher observed fluorescence)
to the bead surface during the experimental duration. As a result, beads reacted using DBDR 
exhibit higher than maximum attainable fluorescence in synthesis columns. As stated earlier, to 
compensate for this reduced reagent access in synthesis columns, higher reagent concentrations 
are used [31]. However, this increases reagent wastage per reaction which can accumulate over 
multiple synthesis cycles to make the synthesis of longer strands inviable.

Secondly, in synthesis columns beads not only access reagents from the voids in their 

immediate vicinity but also molecules that diffuse to the stack from further reaches of the column
to replenish the reacted molecules. The shorter dimensions of the droplet facilitate much faster 


diffusion (𝑇𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 ∝ 𝑙2) of reagent species than columns [13-15]. For example, it would take a single 
nucleotides (with diffusion coefficient 𝐷 ≈ 10−6 − 10−5𝑐𝑚2/𝑠 [36, 37]) approximately

𝑇𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓,𝑐𝑜𝑙 =

ℎ2

2𝐷 ≈ 25000𝑠 (ℎ = 2.28𝑚𝑚) to diffuse from the top of the column to the stack of 

beads at the bottom (Figure 6b) which is much longer than the experimentally employed reaction 
times (≈ 300s). On the other hand, diffusion time across the droplet (𝑅𝐷 = 25𝜇𝑚) is a mere 

𝑇𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓,𝐷𝐵𝐷𝑅 =

2𝑅𝐷

2

𝐷 ≈ 12.5𝑠. Therefore, within an experimental time of 300𝑠 the coupling reaction 

in DBDR is less likely to have unreacted strands than in synthesis columns. This can enable the 
faster synthesis of longer strands. Hence, by using parallel manipulation techniques [38] DBDR 
synthesis can be extended to multiple beads undergoing reactions in separate droplets to achieve 
desired synthesis throughput along with high-fidelity and faster reactions. Again, although excess 
reagent concentration can compensate for the longer diffusion times in synthesis columns, it will 
also increase the reagent wastage. It is worth mentioning that in an ideal synthesis column scenario, 
beads would be tightly packed between the filters. In such a case, only the reagents within the 
voids will be accessible for coupling. This would further reduce reaction fidelity and the average 
fluorescence intensities of the beads reacted in columns (𝐹𝐼𝑅𝑎𝑣𝑔 will increase).

Thirdly, the applied electric field can affect rates of catalysis by lowering the activation 

energy required to perform a chemical reaction [39, 40]. Furthermore, the confinement provided 
by the droplet surface along with the non-uniform AC electric field driven drift of the charged 
species such as e.g. 𝑁𝑎+, 𝐶𝑜2+, 𝑀𝑛2+, 𝑍𝑛2+, and 𝑀𝑔2+ (represented generally as 𝑀𝑒+) and the 
negatively charged dCTP-AF647 in the reagent can lead to their significantly enhanced 
concentrations at the droplet-medium interfaces at opposite ends of the droplet (Figure 6c). With 
electric drift coefficients (𝜇𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑓𝑡) ≈ 3 × 10−4𝑐𝑚2/𝑉. 𝑠 − 6 × 10−4𝑐𝑚2/𝑉. 𝑠 [13, 36], these 
charged reacting species can migrate a distance of 75𝜇𝑚 (> 2𝑅𝑑) under the influence of an 
average electric field of 10𝑘𝑉/𝑐𝑚 withing a half period (2.5𝑚𝑠) of a 200 𝐻𝑧 AC supply. The 
increased concentration of 𝑀𝑒+over the negative half cycle will enhance their acceptance into 
terminal transferase (TdT). Its rate of polymerization is dependent on which ion is bound to the 
active site (𝑀𝑔2+ incorporates 𝑑𝐺𝑇𝑃 and 𝑑𝐴𝑇𝑃; 𝐶𝑜2+ incorporates 𝑑𝐶𝑇𝑃 and 𝑑𝑇𝑇𝑃) [41].
Furthermore, the electric field may also help stabilize the metal ion-triphosphate interaction, thus 
enabling a more efficient nucleophilic attack by the 3’-OH group of the primer on the α-phosphate 
of the dCTP-AF647 [42]. Their improved incorporation into the enzyme and the enhanced 
concentration of dCTP-AF647 in the positive half of the AC cycle can lead to improved coupling 
fidelities. It is noteworthy that additional reagents need not be introduced into the droplet to 
achieve these concentration enhancements. Therefore, this does not entail any additional reagent 
consumption or wastage. Our predictions are in line with observations of reaction rate 
accelerations in microdroplet reactors [43, 44].

6. Conclusion

In summary, we introduce a novel technique (DBDR) to implement enzymatic 

oligonucleotide synthesis on individual beads by combining dielectrophoresis and droplet 
microfluidics. Fluorescence measurements and modelling suggest that by avoiding bead-bead 


stacking reaction fidelities using DBDR can exceed synthesis columns. The stacking of beads in 
synthesis columns provides a large surface area for the synthesis of large quantities of 
oligonucleotides [2, 3]. However, it also enhances the accumulation of reaction errors which 
ultimately negates the product quantity advantage over multiple reaction cycles to limit the 
synthesized strand length. On the other hand, the superior reaction fidelity of DBDR, achieved due 
to improved interfacing of solid supports with reagents, when replicated over multiple reaction 
cycles using scalable device architectures can potentially enable the synthesis of ultra-long strands 
of oligonucleotides (≫ 300 bases) with unprecedent yields of the intended FLP while minimizing 
reagent consumption and wastage. It will mitigate the need for subsequent purification and error 
correction and reduce the cost of synthesis per base [8]. The lower reagent diffusion times across 
the droplet may lead to faster reactions which can be advantageous in the synthesis of long strands.
The electrodes exerting the non-uniform electric field can be seen as on-site alignment features
integrated onto the synthesis platform that maximize interaction between individual beads (solid 
supports) and reagent droplets. The electrode identifies the difference in the electrical properties 
of the droplet, bead, and the suspension to exert a dielectrophoretic force to enforce their 
alignment. This is in sharp contrast to microarrays where the reagent alignment apparatus is
external to the synthesis surface [2-4, 9] (mechanical alignment of micromirrors in DMDs and
nozzles in inkjet printheads). Reagents are dispensed or synthesis spots are activated based on 
preprogramed sequence of coordinates. No feedback from the synthesis surface is followed to 
ensure alignment accuracy. Furthermore, our research expanded the functionality of droplet
microfluidics based chemical synthesis systems by incorporating solid-phase synthesis. 

7. Outlook and Scope for Future Work

In addition to being a potential platform for high-fidelity solid-phase enzymatic DNA 

synthesis, DBDR can have many other applications. Water-in-oil droplets are excellent model 
systems to study enzymatic reactions within volume-confined environments [45, 46]. Typically, 
droplets are merged to deliver the reaction substrate to the enzyme. However, this process is 
accompanied by an increase in the overall volume. Instead, if the substrate is bound to a solid 
support, as in DBDR, the volume of the aqueous compartment and the reagent concentrations 
remains the same. Droplet microfluidics has enabled the processing of chemical information using 
Boolean logic, paving the way for chemical computation as well as logic-driven manipulation of 
chemical payloads for combinatorial screening applications [47]. DBDR can extend this concept 
a step further by writing chemical information onto solid supports; thus, creating solid-state drives 
for chemical information, which can facilitate one-bead-one-compound combinatorial synthesis
[6, 48] using Boolean logic as well as DNA data storage on a droplet microfluidic processor. 
DBDR can be extended to implement other forms of solid-phase synthetic chemistries such as 
oligopeptide, and oligosaccharide. Finally, the diminishing costs of performing solid-phase 
combinatorial chemistry using the one-bead-one-compound [6, 48] approach on DBDR may make 
it economically feasible for a larger body of scientists to pursue research into traditionally 
expensive areas of chemistry such as drug discovery and vaccine development; this may expedite 
scientific discoveries to cure potentially life-threatening diseases and ailments.


References 

1. Merrifield, R. B., Solid Phase Synthesis. Science 232, 341-357 (1986).
2. Kosuri, S., & Church, G. M., Large-scale de novo DNA synthesis: technologies and 

applications. Nat. Methods 11, 499-507 (2014).

3. Hughes, R. A., & Ellington, A. D., Synthetic DNA synthesis and assembly: putting the 

synthetic in synthetic biology. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 9, a023812 (2017).

4. Ma, S., Tang, N., & Tian, J., DNA synthesis, assembly and applications in synthetic 

biology. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 16, 260-267 (2012).

5. Plante, O. J., Palmacci, M. R., & Seeberger, P. H., Automated solid-phase synthesis of 

oligosaccharides. Science 291, 1523-1527 (2001).

6. Lam, K. S., Lebl, M., & Krchňák, V., The “one-bead-one-compound” combinatorial library 

method. Chem. Rev. 97, 411-447 (1997). 

7. Eisenstein, M., Enzymatic DNA synthesis enters new phase. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 1113-

1115 (2020).

8. Ostrov, N., Beal, J., Ellis, T., Gordon, D. B., Karas, B. J., Lee, H. H., Lenaghan, S. C.,

Schloss, J. A., Stracquadanio, G., Trefzer, A., Bader, J. S., Church, G. M., Coelho, C. M.,
Efcavitch, J. W., Güell, M., Mitchell, L. A., Nielsen, A. A. K., Peck, B., Smith, A. C.,
Stewart Jr., C. N., & Tekotte, H., Technological challenges and milestones for writing
genomes, Science 366, 310-312 (2019).

9. Ma, S., Saaem, I., & Tian, J., Error correction in gene synthesis technology, Trends 

Biotechnol. 30, 147-154 (2012).

10. Palluk, S., Arlow, D. H., Rond, T., Barthel, S., Kang, J. S., Rathin, B., Bagdassarian, H. 

M., Truong, A. M., Kim, P. W., Singh, A. K., Hilson, N. J., & Keasling, J. D., De novo 
DNA synthesis using polymerase-nucleotide complex. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 645-650 
(2018).

11. Lee, H. H., Kalhor, R., Goela, N., Bolot J., & Church, G. M., Terminator-free template-

independent enzymatic DNA synthesis for digital information storage. Nat. Comm. 10, 
2383 (2019).

12. Jensen, M. A., & Davis, R. W., Template independent enzymatic oligonucleotide synthesis 

(TiEOS): Its history, prospects and challenges. Biochemistry 57, 1821-1832 (2018).

13. Bruus, H., Theoretical Microfluidics. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2008).
14. Chiu, D. T., Lorenz, R. M., & Jeffries, G. D. M., Droplets for ultrasmall-volume analysis, 

Anal. Chem. 81, 5111-5118 (2009).

15. The, S., Lin, R., Hung, L., & Lee, A. P., Droplet Microfluidics, Lab Chip 8, 198-220 

(2008).

16. Zhu, P., & Wang, L., Passive and active droplet generation with microfluidics: a review.

Lab Chip 17, 34-75 (2017).

17. Clark, I. C., & Abate, A. R., Microfluidic bead encapsulation above 20 kHz with triggered 

drop formation. Lab Chip 18, 3598-3605 (2018).

18. Abate, A. R., Chen, C., Agresti, J. J., & Weitz, D. A., Beating Poisson encapsulation 

statistics using close-packed ordering. Lab Chip 9, 2628-2631 (2009).

19. Pethig, R., Dielectrophoresis: status of the theory, technology and applications. 

Biomicrofluidics 4, 022811 (2010).


20. Becker, F. F., Wang, X. B., Huang, Y., Pethig, R., Vykoukal, J., & Gascoyne, P. R.,

Separation of human breast cancer cells from blood by differential dielectric affinity. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 92, 860-864 (1995).

21. Velev, O. D., Prevo, B. G., & Bhatt, K. H., On-chip manipulation of free droplets, Nat.

426, 515-516 (2003).

22. Millman, J. R., Bhatt, K. H., Prevo, B. G., & Velev, O. D., Anisotropic particle synthesis 

in dielectrophoretically controlled microdroplet reactors. Nat. Mater. 4, 98-102 (2005).

23. Hermanson, K. D., Lumsdon, S. O., Williams, J. P., Kaler, E. W., & Velev, O. D.,

Dielectrophoreic assembly of electrically functional microwires from nanoparticle 
suspensions. Science 294, 1082-1086 (2001).

24. Park, S., Wu, T., Chen, Y., Teitell, M. A., & Chiou, P., High-speed droplet generation on 

demand driven by pulse laser-induced cavitation. Lab Chip 11, 1010-1012 (2011).

25. Mugele, F., & Baret, J. C., Electrowetting: from basics to applications. J. Phys. Condens. 

Matter. 17, R705-R774 (2005).

26. Berthier, J., Micro-drops and digital microfluidics. Elsevier, Oxford (2013).
27. Chiu, D. T., Lorenz, R. M., & Jeffries, G. D. M., Droplets for ultrasmall-volume analysis, 

Anal. Chem. 81, 5111-5118 (2009).

28. Nightingale, A. M., Phillips, T. W., Banock, J. H., & DeMello, J. C., Controlled multistep 

synthesis in a three-phase droplet reactor. Nat. Comm. 5, 3777 (2014).

29. Banock, J. H., Krishnadasan, S. H., Nightingale, A. M., Yau, C. P., Khaw, K., Burkitt, D.,

Halls, J. J. M., Heeney, M., & DeMello, J. C., Continuous synthesis of device-grade
semiconducting polymers in droplet based microreactors. Adv. Func. Mater. 23, 2123-2129
(2013).

30. Gach, P. C., Iwai, K., Kim, P. W., Hillson, N. J., & Singh, A. K., Droplet microfluidics for

synthetic biology. Lab Chip 17, 3388-3400 (2017).

31. Ellington, A., & Pollard Jr, J. D., Introduction to the synthesis and purification of 

oligonucleotides. Curr. Protoc. Nucleic Acid Chem. 1, A.3C.1-A.3C.22 (2001).

32. Conway, J. H., & Sloane, N. J. H., Sphere Packings, Lattices and Groups. Springer, New

York (1999).

33. Gvirtzman, H., & Roberts, P. V., Pore scale spatial analysis of two immiscible fluids in 

porous media. Water Resour. Res. 27, 1165-1176 (1991).

34. Graton, L. C., & Fraser, H. J., Systematic packing of spheres-with particular relation to 

porosity and permeability. J. Geol. 43, 785-909 (1935).

35. Garde, R. J., Turbulent flow, New Age Science Limited, Kent (2010).
36. Nkodo, A. E., Garnier, J. M., Tinland, B., Ren, H., Desruisseaux, C., McCormick, L. C., 

Drouin, G., & Slater, G. W., Diffusion coefficient of DNA molecules during free solution 
electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 22, 2424-2432 (2001).

37. Lukacs, G. L., Haggie, P., Seksek, O., Leechardeur, D., Freedman, N., & Verkman, A. S., 

Size dependent DNA mobility in cytoplasm and nucleus. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 1625-1629 
(2000).

38. Chiou, P. Y., Ohta, A. T., & Wu, M. C., Massively parallel manipulation of single cells 

and microparticles using optical images. Nat. 436, 370-372 (2005).

39. Fried, S. D., & Boxer, S. G., Electric fields and enzyme catalysis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 86, 

387-415 (2017).


40. Fried, S. D., Bagchi, S., & Boxer, S. G., Extreme electric fields power catalysis in the active 

site of ketosteroid isomerase. Science 346, 1510-1514 (2014).

41. Deibel Jr, M. R., & Coleman. M. S., Biochemical properties of purified human terminal 

deoxynucleotidyl transferase. J. Biol. Chem. 255, 4206-4212 (1980).

42. Kuznetsova, A. A., Fedorova, O. S., & Kuznetsov, N. A., Structural and molecular kinetic 

features of activities of DNA polymerases. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 6373 (2022).

43. Zhong, X., Chen, H., & Zare, R. N., Ultrafast enzymatic digestion of proteins by 

microdroplet mass spectrometry. Nat. Commun. 11, 1049 (2020).

44. Wei, Z., Li, Y., Cooks, R. G., & Yan, X., Accelerated reaction kinetics in microdroplets: 

overview and recent developments. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 71, 31-51 (2020). 

45. Kuchler, A., Yoshimoto, M., Luginbuhl, S., Mavelli, F., & Walde, P., Enzymatic reactions 

in confined environments. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 409-420 (2016).

46. Grommet, A. B., Feller, M., & Klajn, R., Chemical reactivity under nanoconfinement. Nat. 

Nanotech. 15, 256-271 (2020). 

47. Prakash, M., & Gershenfeld, N., Microfluidic Bubble Logic. Science 315, 832-835 (2007).
48. Takada, Y., Itoh, H., Paudel, A., Panthee, S., Hamamoto, H., Sekimizu, K., & Inoue, M., 

Discovery of gramicidin A analogues with altered activities by multidimensional screening 
of a one-bead-one-compound library. Nat. Comm. 11, 4935 (2020).

Acknowledgments: We thank Paul Christopher Hansen for helpful discussions on the numerical
simulations.

Funding: This project was funded by National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) and 
National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) of the National Institute of Health (NIH) 
under grant numbers 5R21HG009758 and R01GM138716 respectively and by the Stanford 
SystemX Alliance Seed Funding. Part of this work was performed at the Stanford Nano Shared 
Facilities (SNSF)/Stanford Nanofabrication Facility (SNF), supported by the National Science 
Foundation under award ECCS-2026822.

Author contributions: L.H., R.W.D., P.P., M.A.Z. and M.A.J. conceived the project. L.H. 
supervised the project. P.P. designed and fabricated the device with process inputs from M.A.Z., 
Y.C. and L.G. P.P and M.A.Z designed and built the fluidic, electrical, and optical setups. P.P 
designed and conducted the on-chip experiments and data analysis. M.A.J performed chemical 
sample preparation and column synthesis experiments. P.P. performed the numerical simulations.
M.A.Z wrote the image processing codes to analyze bead fluorescence. Y.H. performed the contact 
angle and interfacial tension measurements. P.P. wrote the manuscript with significant inputs from 
M.A.Z, M.A.J and L.H.

Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.


Materials and Correspondence: Correspondence and material requests should be addressed to 
Punnag Padhy or Michael Anthony Jensen.


                      

                

            
      
                
             

                  

                     

              

                      

                   

                  

              

                 

                    
                  

                        

       

   

    

e

a
c
d

b

Figure 1. Representation of synthesis columns and proposed 
Dielectrophoretic Bead-Droplet Reactor (DBDR). (a) Stacking of beads 
in synthesis columns inhibits uniform reagent access across reaction 
sites. (b) DBDR encapsulates and ejects individual beads from reagent 
droplets dielectrophoretically. Inside the droplet, the fluorescently labelled 
nucleotides (dCTP-AF647) couple onto the initiator strands on the bead. 
Complete encapsulation of the solid support enhances reagent access to 
the bead surface. (c) The device footprint depicts the alignment of the 
droplet generator and the electrodes in the reaction chamber and the 
spatial location of the bead and the droplet. The dashed box shows the 
section of the device in (b). (d) Fabricated silicon-on-glass microfluidic 
device with ITO electrodes. Purple color is overlayed on the transparent 
ITO electrodes to distinguish them from the device background. The 
strong electric field gradient of the electrodes enables dielectrophoretic 
trapping. (e) Representation of chemical reactions on the solid support: (i) 
Binding the initiator strand on the bead through streptavidin-biotin 
hydrogen bonds, (ii) Enzymatic coupling of fluorescently labelled 
nucleotides (dCTP-                 ’                                     
bead inside the reagent droplet. 


a

b

c
d

Figure 2. Experimental demonstration and numerical simulation of the encapsulation and ejection of a 
microbead from a picoliter droplet. (a) Experimental implementation and (b) numerical phase field simulation 
depicts the encapsulation of the bead by the droplet under high supply voltage (𝑉𝑠 = 120 𝑉) and its ejection from 
the droplet under low supply voltage (𝑉𝑠 = 0.1 𝑉). The phase field variable (ϕ) has a value of −1 in the silicone oil 
suspension medium (phase 1) and a value of 1 in the reagent droplet (phase 2). ϕ transitions from −1 to 1 at the 
droplet medium interface. The bead is represented in white. 𝑇𝑠𝑤𝑖𝑡𝑐ℎ is the time transition time from high voltage to 
low. (c) Electrocapillary potential energy representation of the engulfing and (d) ejection process. The droplet moves 
to minimize the total potential energy (𝑈 = 𝑈𝐸 + 𝑈𝐼𝑇) of the system. At high 𝑉𝑠, the change in electric energy stored 
between the electrodes is much larger than the change in Gibbs free energy due to the interfacial tension between 
the bead, droplet, and the suspension medium (|Δ𝑈𝐸| ≫ |Δ𝑈𝐼𝑇|). Therefore, Δ𝑈 ≈ Δ𝑈𝐸 decreases as the droplet 
approaches the electrode and encapsulates the bead. On the other hand, at low 𝑉𝑠, change in electric energy is 
much less than the change in Gibbs free energy (|Δ𝑈𝐸| ≪ |Δ𝑈𝐼𝑇|). Therefore, Δ𝑈 ≈ Δ𝑈𝐼𝑇 decreases as the droplet 
moves away from the electrode and ejects the bead.


a

c

b

Figure 3. System design. (a) Smaller droplet ( 𝑅𝑑 = 16 𝜇𝑚) requires a larger supply voltage (𝑉𝑠 = 187 𝑉) to 
overcome the capillary force and encapsulate the bead. At the lower voltage (𝑉𝑠 = 120 𝑉) the dielectrophoretic force 
cannot overcome the capillary force to encapsulate the bead into the smaller droplet (It was enough to encapsulate 
the bead in the larger droplet of 𝑅𝑑 = 25 𝜇𝑚, Figure 2). (b) The low viscosity of silicone oil 1cSt enables the ejection 
of the bead from the droplet at 𝑉𝑠 = 0.1 V. With increase in oil viscosity the increased dissipation of the kinetic 
energy of the droplet prevents complete separation from the bead. (c) Silicone oil 1cSt (dashed line) renders the 
hydrophilic (in air, dotted line) streptavidin surface slightly hydrophobic. The surfactant Span80 further reduces the 
interfacial tension between the silicone oil and the reagent and increases the contact angle (solid line) that the 
reagent droplet forms on a streptavidin surface making it extremely hydrophobic It is critical for the ejection of the 
bead from the droplet. Interfacial tension and contact angle measurements are recorded with time variations to 
account for the surface adsorption. (Refer to Supplementary Material for details.) The streptavidin and glass 
thicknesses are not drawn to scale.


a

b

Figure 4. Demonstration of enzymatic coupling of single nucleotides onto initiator strands on the bead. (a) 
Enzymatic coupling of fluorescently labelled nucleotides (dCTP-AF647) onto the initiator strands on the streptavidin 
coated fluorescent green microbead. The nucleotides and the enzyme (TdT) are present in the reagent droplet. The 
bead has no red fluorescence prior to encapsulation within the droplet. However, after encapsulation and ejection 
from the droplet it fluoresces red indicating binding of the nucleotides to its surface. (b) Control experiment
performed without initiator strands on the bead surface and enzymes in the droplet to establish the absence of any 
non-specific binding of the fluorescently labelled nucleotide onto the bead surface in (a). This is verified by the 
absence of red fluorescence from the bead after its ejection from the droplet. This confirms that the observed red 
fluorescence from the bead in (a) can be attributed to the chemical coupling of the nucleotide to the initiator strands 
on the bead.


Figure 5. Experimental Demonstration of Enhanced Enzymatic Coupling Fidelity of Nucleotide Using 
DBDR. The lower grey band with brightness gradient in the left pane represents the fluorescence intensity 
distribution of beads reacted in the column. A few sample beads are shown in the inset on the right. The 
fluorescence intensities are taken along the yellow lines drawn across the beads. The brightness of the bands 
corresponds to the brightness of the beads in each row as well as to the quartiles of the histogram in the right pane 
which represents the distribution of the average fluorescence of all the beads reacted in the columns (a few sample 
frames of the fluorescence images of the beads reacted in columns are shown in Supplementary Figure 6a). The 
dashed curve in the left pane represents the fluorescence intensity distribution of the bead with average 
fluorescence intensity equal to the mean of the histogram. The mean (𝜇𝑐𝑜𝑙) and the standard deviation (𝜎𝑐𝑜𝑙) of the 
average fluorescence intensities of beads reacted in the synthesis column are 629.27 and 373 respectively. These 
are evaluated over all the 282 beads. The three beads which represent the three experimental trials of DBDR are 
shown as insets in the right pane. Their mean (𝜇𝐷𝐵𝐷𝑅)  and standard deviation (𝜎𝐷𝐵𝐷𝑅) are 2057.5 and 209.05 
respectively. Their fluorescence intensity distributions along the yellow lines are plotted as scatter plots on the left 
pane. The mean of the three distributions is represented by the solid black curve. The top grey band represents 
the standard deviation around the mean DBDR distribution.


a

c

b

Figure 6. Explaining enhanced fidelity of reactions in DBDR compared to columns. (a) Stacking of beads 
prevents reagent access to reaction sites on the bead surface. Particle tracking simulations show that when the 
reagent is introduced into the column the beads are displaced from the stack due to turbulent fluid flow and then 
resettle over the experimental time once the reagent flow stops. This allows enhanced and varying reagent access 


to many beads transiently as they settle down which explains the spread of fluorescence intensities of beads 
reacted in columns in Figure 5. The larger size of the column requires longer time (𝑇𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓,𝑐𝑜𝑙 ≈ 25000𝑠) for the 
nucleotides (diffusion coefficient 𝐷𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑑𝑒 ≈ 10−6 𝑐𝑚2/𝑠) on the top to diffuse to the beads in the stack at the 
bottom. On the other hand, it takes much less time (𝑇𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓,𝑐𝑜𝑙 ≈ 12.5𝑠)  for the nucleotides to diffuse across the 
droplet. This can facilitate much faster reactions. (c) The applied AC electric field can also affect the migration of 
charge species involved in the reaction in the aqueous droplet and impact the reaction fidelity. (i) The applied non-
uniform electric field due to the electrode leads to high density of induced surface charges on the droplet surface 
near the electrode (where the bead is trapped, Figure 1b & c and Figure 2a & b). (ii) In the absence of the field the 
charged reacting species are uniformly distributed within the droplet. 𝑀𝑒+ is a general representation of all positively 
charged metal cations which can be 𝑁𝑎+, 𝑀𝑔2+, 𝐶𝑜2+and 𝑍𝑛2+. The fluorescent base is negatively charged due to 
its phosphate group. (iii) During the negative half of the AC supply cycle, the 𝑀𝑒+ions accumulate on the droplet 
surface closer to the electrode (where the bead is trapped) while the negatively charges nucleotides accumulate 
on the opposite side. (iv) The larger concentration of the ions facilitates their incorporation into the enzyme (TdT) 
and the subsequent binding to the initiator strand. (v) When the AC supply cycle switches, the negatively charged 
nucleotides drift towards the electrode while the unincorporated 𝑀𝑒+ and 𝑀𝑒+ − 𝑇𝑑𝑇 complexes that did not bind 
to the opposite end. (vi) The increased concentration of nucleotides in the vicinity of the beads facilitates faster 
reactions. (vii) As the AC supply switches again, the cycle continues.


Supplementary Material for Bead-Droplet Reactor for High-

Fidelity Solid-Phase Enzymatic DNA Synthesis

Punnag Padhy1*, Mohammad Asif Zaman1, Michael Anthony Jensen2,3*, Yao-Te Cheng1, Yogi 

Huang4, Ludwig Galambos1, Ronald Wayne Davis2,3,5, Lambertus Hesselink1*

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A

2Stanford Genome Technology Center, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, 94304, U.S.A

3Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A

4Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A

5Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A

*Corresponding author. Email: punnag@stanford.edu, m.a.jensen@stanford.edu, 

hesselink@ee.stanford.edu

This supplementary material document provides details of the device fabrication, 
experimental setup, sample preparation, experimental procedure, image and data analysis, 
and numerical and analytical calculations that complement the results discussed in the main 
manuscript.

1. Device Fabrication

Fabrication started with ⁓ 500 μm thick silicon wafers (p-type, 10-20 Ω cm, <100>) and borofloat 
glass wafers ⁓550 μm thick that are 100 mm in diameter. 

1.1.
Silicon Component

The silicon wafer was etched in 5 layers to define the 1) alignment marks, 2) droplet generation
microchannel, 3) reaction chamber 4) and 5) ports for external fluidic and electrical connections
(Supplementary Figure 1a). The first four layers were defined by reactive ion etching using SF6
gas. In the 4th layer the ports were etched almost through the wafer from the backside. In the 5th

layer, the ports were completed by laser drilling through the ports from the front side. The 
photoresist for each layer was patterned using a standard photolithographic approach with a 
maskless exposure system (Heidelberg MLA 150).


1.2.
Glass Component

800 nm of ITO (Indium Tin Oxide) was sputter deposited on piranha cleaned borofloat glass wafers 
at LGA Thin Films. This was followed by 2 layers of photlithoraphic processing: 1) the electrodes 
and alignment marks were defined by RIE of ITO from the entire wafer (barring the electrodes) 
using CH4 and H2 gases and 2) the contact pads were defined by evaporative deposition of 10 nm 
Cr and 200 nm Gold followed by metal liftoff. After each layer, the wafer was wet cleaned using
5:1:1::H2O:H2O2:NH4OH at 70°C for 1 hour (Supplementary Figure 1b).

1.3.
Bonded Chip

The glass and silicon wafers were then aligned (Supplementary Figure 1c) and bonded anodically 
at 350°C by applying a voltage of 350V for 6 mins. The wafers are then diced into 25 mm x 30
mm chips using a laser cutter (Supplementary Figure 1d and e, and Figure 1b). The chips were 
silanized using vapor phase deposition of Dimethyldichlorosilane (DDMS) at Integrated Surface 
Technologies to make the device interior surface hydrophobic for the formation of water droplets.
The silane on the exterior surface of the chip was stripped using UV ozone treatment to stick fluidic 
connectors using Loctite 401 adhesives (Supplementary Figure 1f). Electrical leads are soldered 
onto the gold contact pads through the electrical ports in the silicon wafer (Supplementary Figure
1f). 

2. Experimental Setup

The experimental setup consists of the device holder interfaced with the fluidic, electrical, and 
optical subsystems.

2.1.
Device Sample Holder

A 3D printed plastic sample holder was used to mount the device on the experimental setup. 
Copper pins hold the device in place with a 0.17 mm glass coverslip (24mm x 40 mm) from SPI 
below it. The sample holder was screwed onto a X-Y stage from Newport (Model#-406) mounted 
on a modified Nikon TE2000U inverted microscope (Supplementary Figure 2a and b).

2.2.
Fluidic Subsystem

A piezo driven pressure controller (OB1 MK3+ from Elveflow) with a 30-psi input from the house 
nitrogen supply and a maximum output of 2000 mbar was connected to the input of a fluidic tank 
(15 ml plastic tube) using a 10 mm OD tubing (Supplementary Figure 2c and d). The output of the 
tank flows into the device via a 1/16-inch OD and 1/32-inch ID polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 
tubing from Masterflex (item#-EW06407-41) which was plugged into the fluidic port of the device 
using the Nanoport Assemby from IDEX Health & Science (part# - N-333). 

2.3.
Electrical Subsystem

An A.C. high voltage amplifier (A. A. Lab Systems Ltd. Model#-A-303) amplifies the signal from 
a function generator (Hewlett Packard Model#-8116A) to generate a maximum output amplitude 


of 200 V (Supplementary Figure 2e and f). The amplified output was connected to the electrical 
leads of the device through a single pole double throw (SPDT) switch which connects the supply 
across either of the electrodes (E1 or E2) and the ground pad. 

2.4.
Optical Subsystem

The optical subsystem (Supplementary Figure 2g and h) was built around a modified Nikon
inverted TE2000U microscope. A blue LED (SOLIS-445C from Thorlabs, 445 nm and 5.4 W min) 
with a band pass excitation filter (D480/30x from Chroma) images the bead (6μm diameter 
fluorescent green streptavidin coated polystyrene beads with excitation maxima at 441nm and 
emission maxima at 486nm, Catalog#-24157) and the fluid flow in the device onto a sCMOS 
camera from Thorlabs (Part#-CS2100M-USB). The experiments were recorded at 33 frames per 
second. A red LED (M625L4 from Thorlabs, 625 nm and 700 mW) excites the Alexa-647 to detect
nucleotides labelled with the fluorophore (dCTP-AF647) in the reagent droplet. A sCMOS camera 
from PCO (PCO edge 5.5) was used to capture the low light intensity levels emanating from the 
nucleotides coupled to the initiator strands on the beads at 2s integration time. Appropriate 
bandpass excitation (Item#-86-988 from Edmund Optics, 640 nm center wavelength, 14 nm 
bandwidth, OD - 6) and emission (Item#-86-987 from Edmund Optics, 676 nm center wavelength, 
29 nm bandwidth, optical density - 6) filters were used to ensure non-overlap of the excitation and
emission spectrum. A Nikon objective (ELWD-20, 20x mag, 0.45 NA) with a correction collar for 
spherical aberration correction (set at 0.7mm which is 0.17mm thick glass coverslip + 0.53mm 
thick borofloat glass of the device) was used for imaging.

3. Sample Preparation

3.1.
Preparing the oil solution by adding surfactant

4 ml of Span 80 (S6760 from Sigma Aldrich) was added to 200ml of 1 cSt silicone oil (PSF – 1cSt 
from Clearco Products) to make a 2.5% w/w solution. It was sonicated for 30 minutes to ensure 
complete dissolution of the surfactant.

3.2.
Attaching initiator strand to beads

The initiator strand, which was a biotinylated oligomer with 25 bases (T25mer, 5’ biotin, IDT) 
was attached to the 6 μm diameter (𝑅𝑏 = 3𝜇𝑚) streptavidin coated green-fluorescent polystyrene 
beads using the strong biotin-streptavidin hydrogen bond. The reaction was carried out for 60 min 
at 23°C, 14 RPM. The approximate starting yield (140 attomoles per bead (T25mer bound)) was 
determined by measuring the optical density at 260nm (Nanodrop) before and after initial binding, 
then subtracting the supernatant and wash OD values from the starting yield. Binding/ wash buffer: 
20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.0005% Triton-X 100 (45 μl (plus 5 μl 100 μM 
T25) for binding reaction, and 500 μl for wash steps). Based on a particle concentration of 1.4%,
the number of beads was approximately 867,000 per 25 μl reaction (accounting for a 20% loss due 
to mixing and wash steps). Beads with initiator strands were then spun down using an Eppendorf 
Minispin (Catalog#-022620100) to remove the supernatant and were segregated into two parts (i) 


for Dielectrophoretic Bead-Droplet Reaction in the fabricated chip, and (ii) for benchtop synthesis 
in columns. 

3.3.
Suspending initiated beads in oil solution

The spun down initiated beads are suspended in the oil solution by sonication. The concentration 
of the beads in the silicone oil solution were tuned to ensure mostly a single bead floats in the 
vicinity of the electrodes within the field of view of the objective.

3.4.
Preparing Reagent Solution

The reagent solution was prepared by mixing 25 μl of reagents consisting of the fluorescently 
labelled base (dCTP-AF647) in a buffer solution of 50mM Potassium Acetate, 20mM Tris-acetate, 
10mM Magnesium Acetate, and 0.25mM Cobalt Chloride with the enzyme (TdT) solution 
consisting of 3 µl of 50mM KPO4, 100mM Sodium Chloride, 1.43 mM β-ME, 50% glycerol, and 
0.1% Triton X-100 solution in an Eppendorf tube. This reagent solution was formulated by initial 
benchtop experiments as described in the subsequent experimental procedure section. A trace 
amount of sodium salt of fluorescein (F6377 from Sigma Aldrich) was added to the reagent using 
a toothpick to discriminate it from the continuous phase inside the microfluidic device.

3.5.
Filling device with oil solution as continuous phase

The device was completely immersed in 50 ml of the 2.5% w/w solution of Span80 in 1cSt silicone 
oil contained in a glass jar inside a vacuum desiccator. As the desiccator was evacuated the air 
inside the device was drawn out. When the desiccator is refilled with air, the silicone oil solution 
gushes into the device to fill it completely without any trapped air bubbles.

3.6.
Mounting device on sample stage

The device was then removed from the glass jar, its outer surface was cleaned by thoroughly 
wiping with isopropanol and then mounted on the sample holder (Supplementary Figure 3a). The 
objective was focused on the output of the droplet generation channel and the ITO electrodes.  

3.7.
Making electrical and fluidic connections to device ports

Electrical connections are made from the output of the amplifier to the ground pad and to the trap 
electrodes through the SPDT switch (Supplementary Figure 3a). The fluidic tank was filled with 
15 ml of the above oil solution. A pressure was applied using the pressure controller to fill the 
output PTFE tubing from the tanker with oil solution which is dipped at the other end inside the 
1.5 ml tube containing the reagent. Just before oil starts dripping from the tubing into the reagent 
tube, the height of the PTFE tubing and reagent tube were raised to suck the reagent into the tubing. 
Then the tubing was lowered again into another Eppendorf tube containing the oil solution. As the 
reagent solution started dripping, the height was raised again to fill the PTFE tubing with the oil 
solution while ensuring there are no trapped air bubbles. The tubing was then connected to the 
device inlet while pushing out the oil solution at the bottom to ensure no air gaps and fluidic 
continuity (the oil solution inside the device and at the bottom of the tubing are the same). This 
approach prevented immediate flow of the reagent solution through the droplet generation channel 


as soon as the PTFE tubing was connected thus allowing time for experimental setup and control 
(Supplementary Figure 3b).

4. Experimental Procedure

4.1.
Encapsulation and ejection of bead from droplet

Beads suspended in the oil solution were introduced into the device through the oil inlet (Extended 
Data Fig. 1a). The voltage supply was switched on and set to around 15V amplitude at 25kHz to 
dielectrophoretically trap a bead floating near the top electrode (Supplementary Figure 3c). Then 
the voltage supply was switched off. Following this a pressure of 60 mbar was applied on the 
pressure controller to drive reagent flow in the device. As the reagent approached the entrance of 
the microfluidic channel, a sudden pressure pulse of 10 mbar was exerted to dispense a single 
droplet into the reaction chamber (Supplementary Figure 3d). Then the voltage supply was 
switched on again at15V amplitude and 200 Hz to trap the droplet adjacent to the bead on the top 
electrode (Supplementary Figure 3e).

At this point the supply voltage was gradually increased to ⁓ 120V amplitude. The droplet 

moves toward the electrode to encapsulate the bead. Subsequently the voltage was reduced to 0.1V 
amplitude and the bead was ejected out of the droplet. Supplementary Movie 1 depicts the 
encapsulation and ejection process (Figure 2).  

4.2.
Chemical coupling of base and control on the device

The above physical process was used (with a 300s encapsulation time) for the enzymatic coupling 
of fluorescently tagged nucleotides onto the initiator strand on the bead with a few additional 
intermediate images of the area around the reaction zone captured as enlisted below.

•
Before loading the beads into the device an image to estimate the background noise under 
red illumination (Supplementary Figure 4a and b).

•
After the bead was dielectrophoretically trapped on the top electrode an image each with 
the blue and red excitation are captured to measure the level of the red fluorescence signal 
from the site of the bead just prior to the reaction (Supplementary Figure 4c and d).

•
Finally, after the encapsulation and ejection process another set of images under blue and 
red excitation were captured (Supplementary Figure 4e and f).

These images were captured as 16-bit Tiff files. Supplementary Figure 4c-f are used in Figure 4a
of the main text. These steps were repeated to see the repeatability of the chemical coupling 
reaction on our platform. The three different reacted beads under red excitation are depicted 
separately in Figure 4g and are also used in Figure 5 of the main text. 

The control experiment was repeated using the above process but with beads without 

initiator strands and reagent droplets without the enzymes (Figure 4h-m). Supplementary Figure
4j-m are used in Figure 4b of the main text.


4.3.
Column Synthesis

Firstly, free solution reactions are implemented to develop optimal room temperature protocol 
(Figure 5a) for translation into DBDR. Results were analyzed using reverse-phase high 
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Figure 5b).

To simulate an enzymatic synthesis reaction using a column, an open-top nylon syringe 

filter (Omicron SFNY04XB, 4 mm, 0.45 µm) was used. To the bottom filter (0.45 µm pore size) 
which was held in place by a plastic ring, 15ul of beads (1.2 M) were added. A top filter was then 
positioned above the reagent bed. Between the filters the reaction volume was about 15 µL. A 1ml 
syringe was used to push the bead medium (10mM HCL, 2M NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.0005% Triton-
X 100, pH 7.3) passed the bottom filter until it completely exited the drip director. Fifty µL reagent 
(6 µL TdT (20U/ul), 5 µL 10x TdT buffer (50 mM potassium acetate, 20 mM Tris-acetate, 10 mM 
magnesium acetate, pH 7.9 @ 25°C), 5 µL 10X (2.5 mM) solution of CoCl2, 0.25 µL 1 mM Alexa 
Fluor™ 647-aha-dCTP, 33.75 µL water) were added to the top filter, and an empty 1ml syringe 
was used to push the reagent passed the top filter (flow rate at 50 µL per second), into the reaction 
area until the reagent could be seen inside the drip director. The column was kept upright for 5 
minutes. Once the reaction was completed, the empty 1ml syringe was used to push the spent 
reagents through the column until the drip director was clear. Afterwards, 1 ml of bead suspension 
medium (described above) was used to wash the beads. These beads were than taken in a 1.5 ml 
Eppendorf tube for analysis using fluoroscopy.

As a control, synthesis was performed on beads without initiators and reagents without 

TdT and the reaction was analyzed through fluorescence measurements.

4.4.
Measuring fluorescence from beads reacted in columns

About 3µl of the reacted bead suspension in the buffer was taken in an Eppendorf tube and was 
diluted to ensure the bead concentration was small enough to prevent signal interference from 
beads in different planes while being large enough to have ample beads within the field of view to 
get a statistically significant inference about fluorescence intensity distribution. The beads were 
introduced into the device filled with MilliQ water. The same chips were used for the fluorescence 
measurements to ensure identical optical environment for comparison between on-chip 
experiments with their column counterparts. Once the beads settled down (imaged using blue 
excitation) the excitation was switched to red to image the fluorescence intensity of the beads. 
Many such frames of red fluorescent beads were collected with a large number of beads (≈ 300). 
A select few frames are shown in Supplementary Figure 6a. A few representative beads spanning
the entire range of fluorescence intensities are used in Figure 5 of the main text.

The control experiments implemented using DBDR (Figure 4b of main text) were 

reiterated on the columns. The fluorescence of these beads was measured following the same 
procedure as discussed in the previous paragraph (Supplementary Figure 6b).


4.5.
Estimating interfacial tension and contact angle

The interfacial tension between the reagent droplet and the silicone oil solution (with 2.5% w/w 
Span80) reported in Figure 3 of the main text were measured using the standard Wilhelmy plate 
method. The contact angle that the reagent droplet forms on a streptavidin coated surface (the 
polystyrene bead used in the experiments is coated with streptavidin) in the above silicone oil 
suspension medium was measured by capturing the droplet shape on a streptavidin coated glass 
slide (GS-SV-5 from Nanocs) and estimating the angle it forms on the surface of the slide through 
shape fitting.

The contact angle that the reagent droplet forms on the inner walls of the silanized device 

is estimated using optical microscopy. After generating the reagent droplet, the objective is focused 
on the electrode and the radius of the droplet at the glass surface is measured. After that the focus 
is shifted up till the sharpest image of the droplet boundary is formed. The radius of the greater 
circle of the droplet is measured. Using these two measurements and simple trigonometry the 
contact angle is estimated to be 137.9° (Supplementary Figure 7). As a confirmation of this again 
using elementary trigonometry the height of the greater circle from the glass surface is estimated 
to be 18.3𝜇𝑚 and closely matches the shift in the focus of the objective.

4.6.
Estimating electrical conductivity of reagent 

The conductivity of the reagent droplet was measured using an Orion 3 Star Conductivity Portable.

5. Image Processing and Data Analysis

5.1.
Encapsulation and ejection of bead from droplet

The recorded video (Movie 1) of the encapsulation and ejection process was analyzed frame by 
frame using ImageJ and snapshots that best represent the processes were selected and labelled for 
Figure 2 of the main text.

5.2.
Establishing enzymatic coupling of base to the initiator strands on 

the bead in DBDR

Maintaining the same scale of 250-3300 across the red fluorescence images, the difference in 
brightness of the bead with enzymatic coupling (Figure 4a main text and Supplementary Figure
4f) and the control bead (Figure 4b main text and Supplementary Figure 4m) was obvious.

5.3.
Analyzing fluorescence intensity distribution 

Each frame in Supplementary Figure 6a (one such frame shown in Supplementary Figure 8a) was 
analyzed using predefined image processing functions in Matlab to detect the beads, binarize them
(one such frame shown in Supplementary Figure 8b), evaluate their mean fluorescence intensity, 
and evaluate fluorescence intensity distribution across a horizontal line passing through the bead 
center (one such frame shown in Supplementary Figure 8c). Average fluorescence values across 
frames were collected to plot a histogram of the fluorescence intensity distribution of all beads 
reacted using synthesis columns (Supplementary Figure 8d).


5.4.
Analyzing statistical distribution of data

The average fluorescence intensity of the three beads reacted using DBDR were found to 

be 2184.5, 2171.7, 1816.2 (same unit as was used for column fluorescence data). To validate the 
statistical significance of our results, we performed the Welch’s t-test on both the data sets using 
the inbuilt ttest2 function in Matlab under the null hypothesis that the distributions have identical 
means. The null hypothesis was rejected at 0.05 significance level (𝑃 = 1.99 × 10−10). Therefore, 
the means of the distributions are non-identical. Furthermore, the statistical power of the test was 
0.9997 (evaluated using inbuilt Matlab functions sampsizepwr) for confidence interval of 98%. 
So, the sample size is enough to reject the null hypothesis at 0.02 significance level with almost 
certainty.

6. Numerical and Analytical Modelling

6.1.
Electrohydrodynamic Simulation of the Encapsulation and 

Ejection of the Bead by the Droplet

We modeled the electric field-driven engulfing of the bead by the droplet and its subsequent 
ejection by coupling the Navier Stokes equation for incompressible fluids [13] (eq. S1) with 
the charge continuity equation of electrodynamics [13] (eq. S2). The spatially varying electric 
field due to suitably defined electrodes exerts non-uniform pressure on the fluidic interface 
resulting in a net force on the aqueous reagent droplet suspended in a medium of silicone oil
[13,19] with a kinematic viscosity of 1cSt. The electric force exerted on the fluidic interface is 
given by the Maxwell Stress Tensor [19] (eq. S3). This electric force drives fluid flow as per 
the Navier Stokes equation [13] (eq. S1). As a result, the fluidic interface shifts with time. The 
shift in fluidic interface with time is tracked by the phase-field method [S1] (eq. S4). This 
shifting fluidic interface is fed back into the electrical charge continuity equation (eq. S2) as a 
change in the material boundary and hence a change in the electric boundary condition. 
Mimicking experimental observations (Figure 2(a) in the main text) the bead was kept 
stationary in the simulations. This also reduces the number of moving components and greatly 
simplifies the simulation while keeping the essential physics underlying the process intact. 
Furthermore, we employ an axis-symmetric model for our simulation to reduce computational 
resource requirements (Supplementary Figure 9a) while focusing on the essential physical 
principles underlying the process.

ρ

∂𝑢⃗⃗ 

∂t + ρ(𝑢⃗ ∙ ∇⃗⃗ )𝑢⃗ = ∇⃗⃗ ∙ [−𝑝𝐼⃡+ 𝐾⃡] + 𝐹 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐
(eq. S1a)

𝜌∇⃗⃗ ∙ 𝑢⃗ = 0
(eq. S1b)

𝐾⃡ = 𝜇 {(∇⃗⃗ 𝑢⃗ ) + (∇⃗⃗ 𝑢⃗ )

𝑇}
(eq. S1c)

𝐹 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 = ∇⃗⃗ ∙ 𝑇⃡𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐
(eq. S1d)


Here ρ is density of the fluid, 𝑢⃗ is velocity of fluid flow, p is pressure, 𝐼⃡is the identity tensor, 𝐾⃡ is 
the viscous stress tensor, μ is the dynamic viscosity of fluid and 𝑇⃡𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 is the electric component 
of Maxwell Stress Tensor. 

∇⃗⃗ ∙ 𝐽 = −

∂ρ𝑞
∂𝑡
(eq. S2a)

𝐽⃡= 𝜎𝐸⃗ 
(eq. S2b)

𝐸⃗ = −∇⃗⃗ 𝑉
(eq. S2c)

𝜎 = 𝑉𝑓𝑟𝜎𝑟 + 𝑉𝑓𝑜𝜎𝑜 and   ε = 𝑉𝑓𝑟ε𝑟 + 𝑉𝑓𝑜ε𝑜
(eq. S2d)

Here 𝐽 is the current density, ρq is the charge density, σ is the electrical conductivity, 𝐸⃗ is the 
electric field, 𝐷⃗⃗ is the electric displacement, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, ε is the relative 
permittivity, 𝑉 is the electric potential, 𝑉𝑓𝑟/0 represents the volume fraction of the reagent 
droplet/oil medium, σ𝑟/𝑜 and ε𝑟/𝑜 represent the electrical conductivity and the electrical 
permittivity of the reagent droplet/oil medium respectively. 

𝑇⃡ = 𝐸⃗ ⊗ 𝐷⃗⃗ −

1

2 (𝐸⃗ ⋅ 𝐷⃗⃗ )
(eq. S3)

Here ⊗ represents outer product of two vectors.

∂ϕ

∂t + 𝑢⃗ ⋅ ∇⃗⃗ ϕ = ∇⃗⃗ ⋅

3χϵ𝑝𝑓
2√2 ∇⃗⃗ ψ
(eq. S4a)

ψ = −∇⃗⃗ ⋅ ϵ𝑝𝑓

2 ∇⃗⃗ ϕ + (ϕ2 − 1)
(eq. S4b)                         

𝐹 𝑠𝑡 =

3γ

2√2ϵ𝑝𝑓 ψ∇⃗⃗ ϕ
(eq. S4c)

𝑉𝑓𝑜 =

1−ϕ

2 and  𝑉𝑓𝑟 =

1+ϕ

2
(eq. S4d)

Here ϕ represents the phase field variable which is -1 in the suspension medium and 1 in the 
reagent droplet and transitions from -1 to 1 at the droplet-medium interface. The phase field 
method models the interface as a transition region of non-zero thickness over which the two fluids 
mix with varying volume fractions 𝑉𝑓𝑟 and 𝑉𝑓𝑜.  ϵ𝑝𝑓 is the interfacial thickness parameter which 
determines the stiffness of the transition from the reagent phase (ϕ = 1) to the oil phase (ϕ = −1). 
It should be small enough to maintain the sharpness of the interface and capture the physics 
accurately but large enough to prevent the finite mesh size from causing numerical instabilities.  χ 
is called the mobility tuning parameter. It should be large enough to accurately track the shift in 


the interface position with fluid flow while still being small enough to give a sharp enough of an 
interface. γ is the surface tension coefficient. 

As the droplet moves under the influence of the applied electric stress (eq. S1d and eq. S3) 

as per the Navier Stokes equation (eq. S1a-c) the spatial position of the droplet-medium interface 
evolves. The resultant evolution of the fluidic interface was tracked using the phase field method 
(eq. S4). The changing boundary was reflected as a change in the spatial profile of the electrical 
conductivity and relative permittivity (eq. S2d) which in turn modified the solution of the charge 
continuity equation (eq. S2a). This again results in a change in the force acting on the droplet (eq. 
S1d and eq. S3). This system of coupled equations was solved using COMSOL Multiphysics 
which is a commercially available finite element method-based simulation package. The user 
defined material properties used in the simulation are summarized in Supplementary Table 1.

6.2.
Potential energy-based evaluation of the engulfing and ejection 

process

The Gibbs free energy of the fluidic interfaces is given by [13, 25, 26]:

𝑈𝐼𝑇 = γ𝑜𝑤𝐴𝑜𝑤 + γ𝑜𝑠𝐴𝑜𝑠 + γ𝑤𝑠𝐴𝑤𝑠
(eq. S5)

The total surface area of the bead is a constant (𝐴𝑠) (Supplementary Figure 9b). So,

𝐴𝑠 = 𝐴𝑜𝑠 + 𝐴𝑤𝑠
(eq. S6)

The contact angle that a reagent droplet forms on the surface of the streptavidin coated bead in a 
medium of silicone oil is given by [13, 25, 26]:

cos 𝜃 =

𝛾𝑜𝑠−𝛾𝑤𝑠

𝛾𝑜𝑤
(eq. S7)

Using eq. S6 and eq. S7 in eq. S5 we obtain:

𝑈𝐼𝑇 = 𝛾𝑜𝑠𝐴𝑠 + 𝛾𝑜𝑤(𝐴𝑜𝑤 − cos 𝜃 𝐴𝑤𝑠)
(eq. S8)

The first part of the right side of eq. S8 is a constant. Therefore, 

∆𝑈𝐼𝑇 = 𝛾𝑜𝑤(∆𝐴𝑜𝑤 − cos 𝜃 ∆𝐴𝑤𝑠)
(eq. S9)

Specifically for the system under consideration with 𝑟𝑏 = 3𝜇𝑚 (radius of bead) and 𝑟𝑑 = 25𝜇𝑚
(radius of droplet), as the droplet completely engulfs the bead starting from separate bead and 
droplet we have:

∆𝐴𝑤𝑠 = 4𝜋 × 32𝜇𝑚2
(eq. S10)


As the droplet engulfs the bead its volume remains constant and therefore its surface area with the 
surrounding medium increases. This can be expressed as follows:

4

3 𝜋(𝑅𝑑 + ∆𝑅𝑑)3 =

4

3 𝜋𝑅𝑑

3 +

4

3 𝜋𝑟𝑏

3
(eq. S11a)

∆𝐴𝑜𝑤 = 4𝜋(𝑅𝑑 + ∆𝑅𝑑)2 − 4𝜋𝑅𝑑

2
(eq. S11b)

From eq. S11A ∆𝑅𝑑 = 0.01𝜇𝑚.  Therefore, ∆𝐴𝑜𝑤 = 4𝜋 × 50.0144 × 0.0144𝜇𝑚2. Comparing 
the terms on the right side of eq. S9 we see:

−cos 𝜃∆𝐴𝑤𝑠

∆𝐴𝑜𝑤
= 10.82
(eq. S12)

Therefore, we neglect ∆𝐴𝑜𝑤 in our calculations. So, we assume:

∆𝑈𝐼𝑇 ≈ −𝛾𝑜𝑤 cos 𝜃 ∆𝐴𝑤𝑠
(eq. S13)

As the droplet moves the electrical energy of the system changes. That means the electrical energy 
stored in the circuit changesS2. 

∆𝑈𝐸 = −

∆(𝑄𝑉𝑠)

2
(eq. S14)

Here 𝑄 is the charge on the electrode and 𝑉𝑠 is the supply voltage on it. The total change in the 
energy of the system as the droplet encapsulates and ejects the bead is given by:

∆𝑈 = ∆𝑈𝐼𝑇 + ∆𝑈𝐸
(eq. S15)

As the droplet moves its center of mass shifts which was evaluated using the following equation 
for all 𝑧 such that ϕ > 0 in the simulation.

𝑧𝑑 =

∑ 𝜌𝑧∆𝑉
∑ 𝜌∆𝑉
(eq. S16)

The center of mass of the bead is fixed (𝑧𝑏) in our simulations. The distance between the center of 
masses is then evaluated as:

∆𝑧𝐶𝑀 = 𝑧𝑑 − 𝑧𝑏
(eq. S17)

The change in energies is plotted against ∆𝑧𝐶𝑀 in Figure 2c and d of the main text.

6.3.
Particle tracking simulations

These simulations were carried out to explain that the ideal case of perfect bead-bead stacking 
(which represents the case of minimum exposure of solid support bound growing strands of 


oligonucleotides to the influx of synthesis reagents) is seldom achieved in synthesis columns. To 
this end, we implement particle tracking simulations to show the displacement of beads from 
perfectly stacked initial positions due to turbulent motion of the reagent fluid as they are injected 
into the synthesis columns. As the beads move away from a perfectly stacked configuration, they 
have a higher access to reagents which decreases again as the beads eventually settle down after 
the reagent injection stops into a stacked configuration. So, overall, the reaction fidelity and the 
fluorescence intensity on the beads lies between the lower limit of a perfectly stacked configuration 
and the upper limit of maximum exposure as in the case of DBDR.

For simplicity of setup and reduced memory and simulation time requirements 2D mirror 

symmetric simulations were setup in COMSOL Multiphysics (Supplementary Figure 10). As a 
further simplification, instead of a completely coupled turbulent flow-particle tracking 
simulations, the steady state solution of the turbulent flow equations was obtained using the 
Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) model for turbulence [S3]. This steady state solution 
of the turbulent flow equations was used to exert drag force [13] on the particles (eq. S18) in the 
time dependent particle tracking simulations. The particles also experienced the force of gravity 
(eq. S19). The fluctuating components of the turbulence velocities are represented using a 
continuous random walk model. Assuming that the solutions in the cylindrical columns would be 
azimuthally symmetric, the solutions of the particle tracking simulations were revolved around the 
symmetry axis (Supplementary Figure 10) to generate the plots in Figure 6a of main text.

Once the fluid flow subsides, the particles settle down under the force of gravity into a 

stack.

𝐹 𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑔 =

𝑚𝑝
𝜏𝑝 (𝑢⃗ ′ − 𝑣 𝑝)
(eq. S18)

𝐹 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦 =

𝜌𝑝−𝜌𝑓

𝜌𝑝
𝑚𝑝𝑔 
(eq. S19)

Here 𝑚𝑝 is the mass of a particle, 𝜌𝑝 = 1050 𝑘𝑔/𝑚3 is its density, 𝜌𝑓 = 1000 𝑘𝑔/𝑚3 is the 
density of the fluidic suspension medium, 𝑔 = 9.8 𝑘𝑔/𝑚2 is the acceleration due to gravity, 𝜏𝑝 =

𝜌𝑝𝑑𝑝2

18𝜇 , 𝑣 𝑝 is the velocity of a particle and 𝑢⃗ ′ = 𝑢⃗ + 𝑢⃗ 𝑓 is the velocity of the fluid flow which is the 

sum of the mean flow velocity (𝑢⃗ ) and the fluctuation term (𝑢⃗ 𝑓). 

Supplementary References

S1. Jacqmin, D., Calculation of two-phase Navier-Stokes flows using phase-field modelling, J. Comput. 

Phys. 155, 96-127 (1999).

S2. Padhy, P., Zaman, M. A., Jensen, M. A., & Hesselink, L., Dynamically controlled dielectrophoresis 

using resonant tuning. Electrophoresis 42, 1079-1092 (2021).

S3. Alfonsi, G., Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations for turbulence modelling, Appl. Mech. 

Rev. 62, 040802 (2009).

S4. Michal, S., Hana, N., & Jan, K., The determination of viscosity at liquid mixtures-comparison of 

approaches, AIP Conf. Proc. 1889, 020035 (2017).


S5. Cui, L., Holmes, D., & Morgan, H., The dielectrophoretic levitation and separation of latex beads 

in microchips. Electrophoresis 22, 3893-3901 (2001).

S6. Torza, S., Cox, R. G., & Mason, S. G., Electrohydrodynamic deformation and bursts of liquid drops. 

Philos. Trans. Royal Soc. A 269, 295-319 (1971).

S7. Mikkelsen, A., Kertmen, A., Khobaib, K., Rajnak, M., Kurimsky, J., & Rozynek, Z., Assembly of 

1D granular structures from sulfonated polystyrene particles, Materials 10, 1212 (2017).


        
     

           
    

         

            
           
           

          
         
       

        
           
       

              
                

                   
       

       
       

   

    
    

a
b

c

d
e

                 
        
           
           

f

Supplementary Figure 1. Device Fabrication. a, Fabricated silicon and b, glass part. c, The silicon and the glass 
part of the device are aligned using the alignment markers in an EV Aligner system. They are then bonded and 
diced into chips. d, The top (port) view and the e, bottom (device) view of the fabricated silicon-on-glass microfluidic 
device. f, External electrical and fluidic connectors attached to the device ports. 


a
b

c

d

e
f

g
h

Supplementary Figure 2. Experimental Setup a, The 3-D printed sample holder is screwed onto the x-y stage 
which sits on an inverted microscope setup. b, The device is mounted on the sample holder on top of a glass 
coverslip to prevent any fluid flow onto the objective. c, The piezo-driven pressure controller (OB1 MK3+) from Elv-


Eflow drives fluid flow through the microfluidic device. The output of the pressure controller is connected to the oil 
tank. d, The pressurized air from the pressure controller drives fluid flow from the oil tank into the device. The 
device connector connects the output from the oil tank to the device. e, The electrical signal (upto 15V amplitude) 
from the function generator is fed to the amplifier which amplifies the signal by 20x. f, The amplified output of the 
signal generator is supplied to either of the electrodes (E1 or E2) using a single pole double throw switch. g, The 
red light source is used for the fluorescent detection of the labelled nucleotide. h, The blue light source is used for 
imaging fluid flow, the fluorescent green beads, and the encapsulation and ejection of the bead by the droplet.


 eagent oil 
interface

a
b

c

d

e

Supplementary Figure 3. Sample Mounting, connecting external supplies, bead trapping, droplet 
generation and droplet trapping. a, Electrical connections made to the three device terminals as shown within 
the three green circles. b, Fluidic connection made to the device using the N-333 connectors. The bottom of the 
tubing is filled with oil to ensure the reagent does not flow into the device as soon as the connection is established 
for better experimental control. The reagent flows in after the oil. The reagent-oil interface in the input tubing is 
shown. c, The bead is trapped dielectrophoretically by applying a voltage of 15 𝑉 (amplitude) on the trap electrodes 
at a supply frequency of 25 𝑘𝐻𝑧. The transparent ITO electrodes appear the same color as the background making 
it difficult to segregate in the image. Hence, false color has been overlayed (purple) to distinguish the electrode 
from the rest of the device background. d, Droplet generation in the presence of Span80 in the silicone oil 
suspension medium. Reduced interfacial tension between the reagent and the silicone oil suspension medium as 
well as the increased contact angle that the reagent forms with the device walls aids in the droplet breakup from 
the reagent fluid in the microchannel. e, The droplet is trapped dielectrophoretically by applying a voltage of 15 𝑉
(amplitude) on the trap electrodes at a supply frequency of 200 𝐻𝑧.


   

   

   

   

   

   

   

    

    

    

    

    

   

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

c
d

e
f
a
b

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

    

    

    

    

    

   

    

    

    

    

    

   

    

    

    

    

    

j
k

l
m
h
i

g

Supplementary Figure 4. Fluorescence images and intensity data for enzymatic coupling and control 
experiment. a-f, Coupling reaction. g, Red fluorescence images of beads from three consecutive reactions. h-m,
Control reaction. a and h, Device filled with oil and with relevant electrical and fluidic connectors before start of 
experiment with color scale adjusted to lower thresholds and b and i, higher thresholds. a and b (h and i), are the 
same image with different color scales. The lower color scale in a and h is used to highlight the device structure 
under red illumination while the higher color scale in b and i is used to depict the absence of any source of noise at 
the level of the fluorescence signal from the reacted beads due to AF-647 used to label dCTP. c and j, Bead before 
encapsulation and ejection from droplet under blue and d and k, red illumination. e and l, Bead after encapsulation 
and ejection from droplet under blue and f and m, red illumination. The color of the boxes denotes the illumination 
source (blue 𝜆𝑒𝑥 − 455𝑛𝑚, red 𝜆𝑒𝑥 − 637nm).


Reagent
Μl

T T (20 U/ μ )
3.0

Buffer (10 x)
2.5

CoCl2 (2.5 mM 10 x)
2.5

B     (7 μ ) o     t  to  (50 μM*)
0 (or 1)

Dye  (1 mM)
0.1

Water*
16.9 (or 15.9)

Total
25

a

b

Supplementary Figure 5. Benchtop synthesis reaction. a, Either the reaction was prepared 1) for synthesis free
in-solution (no beads) for parameter optimization using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) where 1
μ (50 μM strand (T25) was added to the reaction mix or 2) for synthesis directly onto the beads (in this case 7 μ 
beads with the initiator already attached were used); for experiments performed in a column (Fig. 5 and 6 of main
text), reaction volumes were doubled to 50 μ . In both cases (1 and 2), 10 M EDTA was used to stop the synthesis
reaction after 5 min. Buffer contents: 50 mM potassium acetate, 20 mM Tris-acetate and 10 mM magnesium
acetate; b, HPLC chromatogram showing general results for post-synthesis on the benchtop (5 min, 23°C) free in-
solution (T25mer coupled to dCTP-AF647); HPLC analysis was only performed to optimize synthesis conditions
before translating to the device. Parameters for sample processing include, Hitachi WAV system, DNA-Sep column
(C-18, Cat. DNA-99-3510); method conditions: Buffer A (0.1 M TEAA (triethylammonium acetate) in water), Buffer
B (0.1 M TEAA (ADS Biotech), 25% acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich)), 80°C, 1.2 ml/ min, gradient: 82% to 12% A for
10min; absorbance and fluorescence were measured at 260 nm and 648 nm (excitation)/ 688 nm (emission),
respectfully. Five μ directly aspirated from the reaction were added to the HPLC column.


   

    

    

    

    

    

a

b

Supplementary Figure 6. Fluorescence data for coupling and control reactions implemented in synthesis 
columns (benchtop reactions). a, Beads with enzymatic coupling of fluorescently labelled (AF647) bases show a 
large variation in fluorescent intensity which indicates a large variation in the degree of coupling. Images were 
captured as 16-bit Tiff files using PCO.EDGE 5.5 camera with an integration time of 2s under red excitation (λ𝑒𝑥 =
637𝑛𝑚). A few representative snapshots are shown here. b, Control experiment implemented on beads without 
initiator strands exposed to coupling reagents without initiator strands shows no red fluorescence under red 
excitation (λ𝑒𝑥 = 637𝑛𝑚). The beads fluoresce green under blue excitation. This is used to detect the physical 
presence of the beads within the field of view of the microscope. The outline color of the images indicates the 
excitation source (blue 𝜆𝑒𝑥 − 455𝑛𝑚, red 𝜆𝑒𝑥 − 637nm).


-

 

 

 

 

      

     

     

     
  .    

Supplementary Figure 7. Optical microscopy-based estimation of the contact angle of the droplet on the 
inner walls of the device. The contact angle is calculated using elementary trigonometric relationships from the 
estimates of the droplet diameter at the interface with the glass bottom of the device and at the greater circle of the 
droplet.


d

a
b
c

Supplementary Figure 8. Image processing of benchtop reaction snapshots to extract fluorescence data 
from beads a, A 16-bit snapshot of fluorescent beads post enzymatic coupling of fluorescently labelled 
nucleotides in benchtop setups under red excitation (λ𝑒𝑥 = 637𝑛𝑚). It is the same as the first snapshot in Fig. 6a. 
b, A binary transformation of the image in a. c. Edge and center line detection of the binarized images in b. The 
extracted fluorescence intensity patterns across the center lines are plotted in Fig. 5 of the main text. The 
transformations are applied to all the collected bead snapshots. d. Average fluorescence intensity distribution of 
all the beads across all the frames. 


   

   

   

    

     
  .       

    

a

b

Supplementary Figure 9. Electrohydrodynamic simulation setup and geometrical and experimental 
estimation of simulation parameters a, Axis-symmetric simulation structure used for electrohydrodynamic 
simulations in COMSOL Multiphysics ®. b, Change in the dimension of the droplet with the encapsulation and 
ejection of the bead from the droplet. As can be seen the radius of the droplet and therefore Aow changes negligibly.


Variable
Value
Description
Reference

Rb
  μ 
Radius of bead
6μ  
     t   

streptavidin coated green, 
fluorescent 
polystyrene 

beads 
purchased 
from 

polysciences 
(Catalog 

No.#-24157).

Rd
25 μ 
Radius of drop
Estimated 
from 

measurements 
in 

Supplementary 
Information Fig. S1c

Rgrad
15 μ 
Radius of gradient field 
electrode 

From designed dimension 
of the electrode Fig. 1(b)

Rground
80 μ 
Radius 
of 
ground 

electrode

Chosen 
to 
make 
the 

simulation 
space 

sufficiently larger than the 
dimensions of the bead 
and 
droplet 
under 

consideration.

Rmedium
80 um (=Rground)
Radius 
of 
suspension 

medium

Same as Rground due to the 
system geometry

hgrad
1 μ 
Thickness of gradient field 
electrode 

Approximate thickness of 
evaporatively 
deposited 

Indium 
Tin 
Oxide 

   ct o   wh ch    0.8μ .

hground
5 μ 
Thickness 
of 
ground 

electrode

This choice does not affect 
the simulation in any way.

hmedium
115 μ 
Thickness of medium
Spacing 
between 
the 

electrode and ground in 
Fig. 1(b)

ρdrop
1025 kg/m3
Density of reagent phase
Evaluated by considering 
the density of all the 
ingredients of the reaction 
buffer.

ρSO
818 kg/m3
Density of oil
Density of silicone oil 
(CAS#-105-51-7)

ρSpan80
986 kg/m3
Density of Span80
Density of Span80 (CAS#-
1338-43-8)

Voil
200 ml
Volume of silicone oil

VSpan80
4 ml
Volume of Span80

Vmed
Voil + VSpan80
Volume of medium
Approximate volume of oil 
+ Span80

Vof
200/204
Volume fraction of oil
Voil/Vmed

VSpan80f
4/204
Volume 
fraction 
of 

Span80

VSpan80f/Vmed

ρmedium
821 kg/m3
Density of medium
ρSO Vof+ ρSpan80 VSpan80f

ηdrop
8.9e-4 Pa.s
Dynamic 
viscosity 
of 

reagent drop

Assumed to be dynamic 
viscosity of water

ηSO
8.18e-4 Pa.s
Dynamic viscosity of 1cSt 
silicone oil

= 𝜅𝑆𝑂 × 𝜌𝑆𝑂 (𝜅𝑆𝑂 is the 
kinematic viscosity which 
is 1 cSt)


ηSpan80
1 Pa.s
Dynamic 
Viscosity 
of 

Span80

Viscosity of Span80 (CAS#-
1338-43-8)

ηmedium
1.5e-3 Pa.s
Dynamic 
viscosity 
of 

suspension medium

𝜂𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚

1/3
= 𝑥𝑆𝑂𝜂𝑆𝑂

1/3 +

𝑥𝑆𝑝𝑎𝑛80𝜂𝑆𝑝𝑎𝑛80

1/3
[S4]

εdrop
80
Relative permittivity of 
drop

Relative permittivity of 
water

εmedium
2.30
Relative permittivity of 
medium

Relative permittivity of 
silicone oil (CAS#-105-51-
7).

εbead
2.55
Relative permittivity of 
bead

[S5]

σdrop
6e-1 S/m
Electrical conductivity of 
reagent drops

Measured 

σmedium
1e-14 S/m
Electrical conductivity of 
suspension medium

[S6]

σbead
1e-9 S/m
Electrical conductivity of 
bead

Conductivity 
of 

polystyrene 
bead 

suspended in silicone oil 
[S7].

γ
5.5 mN/m
Interfacial 
tension 

between 
the 
reagent 

droplet 
and 
the 

suspension medium

Measured. Fig. 3 main text

θbead
145°
Contact 
angle 
of 
the 

reagent 
drop 
on 
the 

surface of the streptavidin 
coated bead surrounded 
by the oil medium.

Estimated Fig. 3 main text

θwall
140°
Contact 
angle 
of 
the 

reagent 
drop 
on 
the 

device walls.

Estimated Supplementary 
Information Fig. S1d

Supplementary Table 1. Table of all the geometric and material parameters used in electrohydrodynamic 
simulations and energy calculations.


Supplementary Figure 10. Turbulent flow driven particle tracking simulation setup. Two-dimensional 
turbulent flow driven particle tracking simulation implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics® to study displacement 
patterns of particles from stacked configuration in synthesis columns as the reagent fluid is injected into the reaction 
space. 3-5 are walls for the fluid flow. 1-5 are walls for the particles as they are held in the space by filters. Reagent 
fluid enters from the top and tends to leak from the sides when the reaction space gets filled up. The filter at the 
bottom creates a resistive path for fluid flow vertically down, thus leading to its leakage from the sides.


