arXiv:2211.10208v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  19 Dec 2022

1
INTRODUCTION
1

Acidity of graphene oxide aqueous solutions:
the role of hydroxyls unveiled

Yulia V. Novakovskaya
Lomonosov Moscow State University, 1/3, Leninskie Gory, Moscow, 119234 Russia
E-mail: jvn@phys.chem.msu.ru

Abstract
Nonempirical modeling of hydrated single-layer graphene oxide (GO) fragments re-
vealed that at least one, but substantial origin of the acidity of aqueous GO solutions
is the dissociation in closely grouped and favorably H-bonded hydroxyls. The process
can further be promoted by the adjacent π-conjugated carbon segments at the edges of
GO flakes or their inner defects. The apparent pKa values of the groups fall in a range
of ca. 2.0 to 5.3. Under certain conditions the ionization may become spontaneous.

1
Introduction

Nowadays, graphene oxide (GO) may seem too old to be of a valuable theoretical in-
terest, the more so as the characteristics of the material vary depending on the method
of synthesis [1], which makes a task of elaborating a reasonable universal model of
its structure practically unsolvable. Hence, any question related to the structure pe-
culiarities seems ill defined.
At the same time, there is a unique property of any
GO specimen unclarified up to the present moment, namely, the high acidity of its
aqueous solutions [6,7]. According to the titration data for different GO specimens,
there should be about 1 acidic site per each 17 carbon atoms [2]. This means that
each tetrad of carbon hexagons should contain an acidic site with a roughly estimated
pKa value of 3.93–3.96 [2], which is too high for typical carboxylic groups that are
not as numerous in non-degraded GO specimens, and the more so for the prevailing
individual hydroxyl groups [1]. As a kind of a compromise, vinylogous acids were sug-
gested [2] to be key groups in this respect, but to our mind the corresponding elegant
dynamic model, which quite reasonably acquires for the disintegration of GO speci-
mens in water, cannot account for the existence of numerous quite closely arranged
acidic sites on non-degraded GO flakes almost immediately upon their formation,
though the higher acidity of vinylogous acidic structural groups compared to usual
carboxylic ones seems doubtless.
To solve the problem one needs detailed information about the correlation be-
tween variations in the contents and local arrangements of oxygen-containing func-
tional groups and the observed acidity of GO specimens. This by no means can be
done in terms of purely experimental approach for nobody can state that not only the
arrangements of functional groups but even the relative amounts of diverse groups
are known. The qualitative and partly quantitative information of the latter kind can


2
SIMULATION METHODOLOGY
2

be retrieved from NMR, FTIR, or XP spectra, but even these data are far from un-
ambiguity due to the variations in the peak positions of particular functional groups
depending on their neighborhoods, including adjacent segments of carbon layer and
water molecules [3–5]. Therefore, simulations of model systems, which involve diverse
combinations of functional groups bound to the surface and edges of a carbon frag-
ment, seem to be the only way that may help in clarifying the origins of the acidity
of aqueous GO solutions. Constructing and analyzing diverse models enabled us to
distinguish those where the acidity can be determined by closely arranged hydroxyl
groups solely. And the result, though unexpected at first glance, but quite reason-
able upon a closer view, is very interesting for the chemistry and chemical physics in
general.
To construct models, we took into account both the experimental data and theo-
retical concepts of GO structure that were in an excellent way summed up by Lerf,
Dimiev, and Eigler [1]. In GO specimens prepared according to the most widely used
original or modified Hummers techniques, the oxidized-to-graphitic carbon ratio varies
from 61:39 [8] to 69:31 [9]. Areal estimates of the highly disordered oxidized regions,
non-oxidized graphitic domains (up to 8 nm2 in area), and defects, or holes (less than
5 nm2) provided reasonably close values of 82, 16, and 2%, respectively [10]. The
surfaces of GO flakes are negatively charged as follows from the high absolute values
of the negative ζ-potential, which is nearly by half larger for the most deeply oxidized
specimens [10], and the progressively decreasing peak values in the cyclic voltam-
metry curves of the deeper oxidized specimens [10]. These observations additionally
substantiate the relatively high dissociation constant of some functional groups in GO
and prompts one to combine the basic ideas of Lerf and Klinowski [11], Scholtz and
Boehm [12], Szabo and Dekany [13], and Dimiev, Alemany, and Tour [2].

2
Simulation Methodology

To minimize the systems, basal carbon plane fragments were decorated chiefly with
the groups that can act as proton donors or assist the process, which are carboxyls
and carbonyls along edges and hydroxyls anywhere. Sin location of hydroxyls was not
considered because the high inner strains that accompany their apperarance should
inevitably lead to either rearrangement or bond-breakage reactions; and only anti
hydroxyl pairs can be thought of as relatively long-lived. The C/O ratio was varied
approximately from 3:1 to 3:2, the latter one corresponding to a slightly larger oxy-
gen content compared to the aforementioned averaged figures, but taking into account
that we do not treat the graphitic and defect domains, and model strictly one layer
(whereas experimental estimates reflect some averaged data for one and several-layer
flakes), such variations in the integral composition are quite founded. Nonempirical
simulations were carried out in the cluster approach because in real specimens there
is no regularity and periodicity in the spatial arrangment of both oxidized and unoxi-
dized carbon domains, as well as the decorating functional groups within the oxidized
domains; and the effects related to the proton-donating ability seem to be of a rela-


3
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3

tively short-range nature. For solving the electronic problem, the density functional
method with the B3LYP hydbrid functional was selected along with the double-ζ
Gaussian basis set of 6-31G quality for basal plane carbon atoms and 6-31G(d,p) for
all the residual atoms involved in functional groups and water molecules. Such com-
bined basis set complies with the requirements to the sets used for simulating 2D or
3D objects (particularly, it is sufficiently compact to avoid linear dependence of basis
functions when describing systems that involve up to two hundreds closely arranged
atoms) and provides a balanced description of the grafted groups (it is sufficiently
flexible due to the same large number of atoms, the tails of the atomic functions of
which contribute to the description of the electron density distribution in their both
more and less distant neighborhoods). The basal plane fragment involved 30 to 54
carbon atoms; the numbers of hydroxyl, carbonyl, and carboxyl groups were varied
in ranges of 5–20, 1–3, and 1–5 respectively, and the number of water molecules was
varied from 5 to 35. The correspondence of the structures to local minima of the
adiabatic potential was confirmed by the normal-coordinate analysis; and thermal ef-
fects were tentatively taken into account by estimating the Gibbs energy increments
(at 298K) determined solely by the vibrational degrees of freedom (Gvib), which is
possible because differences between the Grel = Ee + Gvib relative values counted
from the selected potential energy minimum (which are of primary importance to
us) reflect only the changes related to some local internal structure transformations,
when contributions of most of the degrees of freedom are nearly canceled out. Formal
logarithmic equilibrium constants of the possible dissociation reactions (pKa) were
estimated based on −∆Grel/RT values. Simulations were carried out with the use of
Firefly 8.2 package [14] and visualized with Chemcraft software [15].

3
Results and Discussion

Based on the results obtained, almost all the combinations of groups either arranged
sequentially along an edge of a carbon fragment or over its plane either at a sufficient
distance from or as close as possible to each other can be comparatively analyzed based
on a C30 carbon fragment. Furthermore, such a compact system can be supplemented
with a sufficient number of water molecules to provide the formation of hydration
spheres around the key structure segments. The spectacular compositions considered
below can be represented by the following general formula: C27H6(O)(COOH)3(OH)15
· (H2O)n with a varying number of water molecules, n=5–35.
In the model GO
fragment (which is sufficiently deeply oxidized to acquire a typical folded profile),
the most of hydroxyls arranged over the basal plane and along its edges are grouped
in diads, triads, and pentads. At the largest considered number of water molecules,
n=35, there are a complete hydration monolayer over the functional groups at one side
of the carbon plane and an extended hydration shell around one edge OH triad (Fig.1).
Hydroxyls, which reside in the central part of the carbon fragment, can form hydrogen
bonds with each other so that water molecules are not included in the corresponding
H-bond sequence but rather attached to it from above. This H-bond subnetwork can


3
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4

Figure 1: Hydrated graphene oxide model C27H6(O)(COOH)3(OH)15 · (H2O)35: (a1,
a2, b1, b2) central and (a3, b3) edge segments of the model system (a1, a2, a3) before
and (b1, b2, b3) after the dissociation of hydroxyls. Encircled are hydroxyl groups
that can undergo dissociation and the resulting Oδ− and H3Oδ+ fragments.

either be continuous (a1 in Fig.1) or broken (a2 in Fig.1) depending on the preset
orientation of the groups with respect to each other. According to the number of
hydroxyls involved in a continuous H-bond subnetwork, their corresponding groups
are referred to as either pentad or triad respectively. In both variants, there is one
hydroxyl (encircled) that acts as an acceptor of two H-bond protons of the neighboring
hydroxyls and a donor of its own proton in an H-bond to a water molecule. In the case
of the edge hydroxyls (a3 in Fig.1), their larger freedom in the relative orientation
results in the formation of an H-bond network, in which they are interspersed with
water molecules though a certain orientation again toward one OH group (encircled)
can be noticed. It is these encircled hydroxyls that are primary candidates for the
dissociation; and the simulations proved this idea.
In the case of the hydroxyl in the central part of the carbon fragment, a stable
configuration that involves a water separated (C)O−. . . (H2O). . . H3O+ ion pair was
found (b1 in Fig.1); and its adiabatic potential energy is only 2.5 kcal/mol higher than
that of the original neutral structure. When thermal energy increments are taken into
account, the resulting difference between the Gibbs energies becomes only slightly
larger, 2.7 kcal/mol, which formally corresponds to the pKa value of the hydroxyl
dissociation of 2.0. This value is very high due to the stabilization of the (C)O− group
provided by the ordered H-bond sequences of hydroxyls that converge to this very


3
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5

oxygen in a nearly coplanar ring-like structure, which is stable due to the coordinating
carbon footing. It is worth noting that the above pKa value corresponds to the initial
stage of the dissociation. At a larger amount of water molecules, the energy of the
system can become even lower due to the additional stabilization predetermined by
the larger spatial separation of charges.
When the close neighborhood of the same hydroxyl is seemingly only slightly
changed, namely, the spatial orientation of two hydroxyls separated from this one
by at least one additional group is changed so that they are no longer involved in
the H-bond sequences that end up at the key hydroxyl group, and the immediate
neighborhood of the latter comprises only two rather than four hydroxyls oriented
toward it, the situation changes drastically.
This central hydroxyl of the triad is
not inclined to lose a proton to form a water separated (C)O−. . . (H2O). . . H3O+ ion
pair with the involvement of two neighboring molecules. Stabilization of the charge-
separated configuration was found to be provided only when the (C)O− and H3O+

fragments were separated with a hydroxyl group, which prevented the formation of a
direct short path for the sequential proton shifts that would internally neutralize the
configuration (b2 in Fig.1). And such a structure has an energy higher by 9.2 kcal/mol
than the corresponding all neutral one. It should be noted that the reorientation itself
of two hydroxyls, which made the H-bonded segments within the discussed part of the
system shorter at the same total number of H-bonds, resulted in an increase in the
total energy of the system by 2.8 kcal/mol. As to the formation of the zwitterionic
configuration, the thermal increments lowered its apparent relative free energy to
6.8 kcal/mol, which corresponds to the formal equilibrium constant of the ionization
reaction pKa = 3.5.
In the case of the edge hydroxyl, the situation is visually similar but quanti-
tatively different.
The group can also lose a proton to produce a more distant
hydronium ion, the shortest separations of which involve three water molecules:
(C)O−. . . (H2O)3. . . H3O+ (b3 in Fig.1).
Again, the (C)O− group acts as a tri-
coordinate knot in the H-bond network, but here the stabilization of O− is provided by
its involvement in the 10-atomic π-conjugated carbon segment, which should produce
a stronger effect compared to the above H-bond network solely. And the strength is
unexpectedly high: the adiabatic potential energy of the dissociation is negative! It
equals ∼-4.9 kcal/mol, and ∆Grel, though smaller in absolute value, is also negative
(-2.5 kcal/mol), which means that the dissociation of such edge hydroxyl groups is
thermodynamically favorable, and the corresponding formal equilibrium constant is
of an order of 102.
Furthermore, the complementary stabilization of the two dissociated hydroxyl
groups, one at the edge and another, over the basal carbon plane, makes their co-
existence energetically possible. Even within the small model fragment we consider, a
configuration where both groups lost their protons to form water separated ion pairs
was found (Fig.2a), which complies with the aforementioned estimate of one acidic
site per each tetrad of carbon rings. Remarkably, the adiabatic potential energy of
this double zwitterionic configuration is only 4.5 kcal/mol higher than that of the


4
CONCLUSIONS
6

Figure 2: Hydrated graphene oxide model C27H6(O)(COOH)3(OH)15 · (H2O)n at (a)
n = 35, side view and (b) n = 25, top view. Encircled are the existing Oδ− and H3Oδ+

fragments.

all-neutral structure, and ∆Grel=4.8 kcal/mol.
The a priori unexpected thermodynamic favorableness of the dissociation of an
edge hydroxyl has brought us to an idea of analyzing the process in more detail.
When the number of water molecules in the model system was n=25, a spontaneous
dissociation of the group was found to take place, and a (C)O−. . . H3O+ contact ion
pair appeared (Fig. 2b). A reason for that may be the following. At this number of
water molecules, the edge hydroxyl triad is yet similar to the one over the carbon plane
in that these hydroxyls form a directional H-bonded sequence, but it is not parallel to
the carbon footing, rather coplanar to the aforementioned conjugated 10-atomic seg-
ment. As a result, here the H-bond correlation is supplemented with a π-conjugation
within the subsystem of second-row elements (basal carbons and an oxygen anion),
which stabilizes the (C)O− group, and, hence, assists in the dissociation.

4
Conclusions

Thus, within at least triads of hydroxyls, where two groups as proton donors assist the
third one, this latter can dissociate irrespectively of whether it is located at the edge
or over the basal carbon plane of a GO flake. The process may become spontaneous
at a moderate hydration when the hydroxyls are bound to an incompletely oxidized
edge of a carbon sheet. The dissociation of a hydroxyl located on a basal carbon
plane can be characterized by apparent pKa values in a range of 2.0 to 3.5 in the
absence of the neighboring dissociated groups and up to 5.3 when there is already a
(C)O−. . . (H2O)k. . . H3O+ ion pair in its relatively close proximity. Seemingly minor
changes in the mutual orientation of hydroxyls formed over the carbon sheet as a
result of oxidation can substantially change the apparent dissociation constant. Re-
markably, when the amount of water is moderate, and either two H-bonded sequences


REFERENCES
7

of hydroxyls end up at the same hydroxyl group, which, hence, acts as a double
proton acceptor in its H-bonds with the neighboring hydroxyls and a proton donor
in an H-bond to a water molecule, or one similar H-bonded sequence of hydroxyls
is formed nearby a π-conjugated carbon segment, the hydroxyl can dissociate. The
longer the H-bonded sequences, the higher the dissociation constant. Furthermore,
judging from the simulation results obtained, the stronger the correlation between the
functional groups and the carbon footing, the more probable the dissociation process,
which means that it should proceed more easily already at the stage of separation of
GO flakes. Thus, by contrast to usual trends in dissociation, which is facilitated by
the increasing amount of water, here the ordering and correlation of OH groups in
H-bond network and the existence of adjacent π-conjugated carbon segments play the
more substantial role. Note that the two hydration spheres around the edge hydroxyl
and the average distance between the mean carbon and water planes of ca. 5.1 ˚A
in our simulations correspond to the GO layer separation of no smaller than 9 ˚A. A
subsequent increase in the amount of water seems to provide only a larger separation
of charges due to the migration of hydronium ions.
We would like to stress that the goal of the study was not to consider all the
possible groups that can be ionized during the formation and operation of graphene
oxide species in aqueous solutions but rather to clarify whether hydroxyls that are
most abundant modifying groups of GO flakes can substantially contribute to the
observed acidity of the material. And the positive answer to this question seems to be
of a principal importance to the chemical physics of not only GO, but any extended
carbon-based highly hydroxylated systems.

References

1.
Graphene Oxide (Fundamentals and Applications), A.M. Dimiev, S. Ei-
gler, Eds., Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, 2017, 3–120.

2.
A.M. Dimiev, L.B. Alemany, J.M. Tour Graphene oxide. Origin of acidity,
its instability in water, and a new dynamic structural model ACS Nano,
7(2012), pp. 576–588.

3.
E. Fuente, J.A.Men´endez, M.A. D´ıez, D. Su´arez, M.A. Montes-Mor´an Infrared
Spectroscopy of Carbon Materials:
A Quantum Chemical Study of
Model Compounds J. Phys. Chem. B, 107 (2003), pp. 6350–6359.

4.
C. Zhang, D.M. Dabbs, L.-M. Liu, I.A. Aksay, R. Car, A. Selloni Combined
Effects of Functional Groups, Lattice Defects, and Edges in the Infrared
Spectra of Graphene Oxide J. Phys. Chem. C, 119 (2015), pp. 18167–18176.

5.
E.A. Gushchina, Y.V. Novakovskaya IR spectral fingerprints of carbonyl
groups in graphite oxide:
a theoretical study Mendeleev Commun., 31
(2021), pp. 84–87.


REFERENCES
8

6.
U. Hofmann, R. Holst ¨Uber die S¨aurenatur und die Methylierung von
Graphitoxyd Ber. Deutsch. Chem. Gesellschaft (A and B Series), 72 (1939), pp.
754–771.

7.
A. Clauss, R. Plass, H.-P. Boehm, U. Hofmann Untersuchungen zur Structure
des Graphitoxyds Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 291 (1957), pp. 205–220.

8.
W.S. Hummers, Jr,. R.E. Offeman Preparation of graphite oxide J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 80 (1958), p. 1339.

9.
D.C. Marcano, D.V. Kosynkin, J.M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev,
J.M. Tour Improved synthesis of graphene oxide ACS Nano, 4 (2010), pp.
4806–4814.

10. K. Krishnamoorthy, M. Veerapandian, K. Yun, S.-J. Kim The chemical and
structural analysis of graphene oxide with different degrees of oxidation
Carbon, 53 (2013), pp. 38–49.

11. H. He, J. Klinowski, M. Forster, A. Lerf A new structural model for graphite
oxide Chem. Phys. Lett., 287 (1998), pp. 53–56.

12. W. Scholz, H.-P. Boehm Betrachtungen zur Structur des Graphitoxids Z.
Anorg. Allg. Chem., 369 (1969), pp. 327–340.

13. T. Szabo, Ot. Berkesi, P. Forgo, K. Josepovits, Y. Sanakis, D. Petridis, I. Dekany
Evolution of surface functional groups in a series of progressively oxi-
dized graphite oxide Chem. Mater., 18 (2006), pp. 2740–2749.

14. A.A. Granovsky, Firefly version 8.2.0, http://classic.chem.msu.su/gran/firefly/index.html.

15. Chemcraft - graphical software for visualization of quantum chemistry computa-
tions. http://www.chemcraftprog.com.


