JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
1

Abstract—The field of microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) 
for photonic integrated circuits (PICs) is reviewed. This field
leverages mechanics at the nanometer to micrometer scale to 
improve existing components and introduce novel functionalities 
in PICs. This review covers the MEMS actuation principles and 
the mechanical tuning mechanisms for integrated photonics. The 
state of the art of MEMS tunable components in PICs is 
quantitatively reviewed and critically assessed with respect to 
suitability for large-scale integration in existing PIC technology 
platforms. MEMS provide a powerful approach to overcome 
current limitations in PIC technologies and to enable a new design 
dimension with a wide range of applications.

Index Terms—Microelectromechanical Systems, Photonic 

Integrated Circuits, Silicon Photonics, Photonics, Nanophotonics, 
Integrated Optics, Nanoelectromechanical Systems.

I. INTRODUCTION

Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs) bring the benefits of 

miniaturization to optics, promising leaps in performance and
scalability, as well as a dramatic reduction in cost and power 
consumption for a wide range of optical systems. The numerous
applications 
of 
PICs,
including 
high-speed 

telecommunications [1], 
high-performance 
computing [2], 

label-free biosensing [3], and quantum technologies [4], have 
resulted in a rapidly increasing market size and research 
interest. 

Common PIC technology platforms use silicon, III-V 

semiconductors, or silicon nitride as waveguiding material. 
Silicon is one of the most promising PIC material platforms for 
large-scale integration, due to its high-quality fabrication 
processes, heritage from the microelectronics industry, and its
high refractive index. Consequently, silicon PIC foundry 
processes have been introduced in the past decade [5]–[7], 
providing standard photonic library components [8] and easy 
access [9] including prototyping runs using multi-project 
wafers (MPW) [10], [11]. This approach drastically reduced the 
cost of PIC development, making state-of-the-art technology

accessible to industry and academia alike, which has resulted in 
several large-scale PIC demonstrations in recent years [12]–
[18].

While these breakthroughs have already accelerated the 

development and market introduction of PIC-based products, 
technology is constantly pushed forward to improve 
performance and add value. In order to bring PICs to an even
larger scale, efficient tuning mechanisms are required, to 
compensate for manufacturing variations and environmental
perturbations, or to enable reconfiguration. In this quest for 
enhancing current PIC technologies, the standard platforms are 
constantly augmented, e.g. by introducing new materials or 
process modules, while typically ensuring full compatibility 
with the existing platform.

A promising route for enhancing current PICs is the

exploitation of mechanics at the nano- and microscale. MEMS 
in PICs provide: (1) an efficient tuning mechanism to adjust the 
operation point of photonic components for large-scale PICs, 
(2) enhancement of current capabilities (e.g. by introducing 
bistability and making zero-power consumption states 
possible), and (3) entirely new capabilities, such as mechanical 
motion for dynamic coupling optimization to fiber interface.
MEMS is a mature technology based on semiconductor 
manufacturing techniques and has been successfully integrated 
in numerous high-volume products such as accelerometers,
gyroscopes, and micromirror arrays. The integration of MEMS 
in PICs is thus a natural extension, and several implementations 
of MEMS in photonics have successfully been demonstrated.

Previous reviews on photonic MEMS have focused on non-

integrated, free-space optical MEMS
[19], [20], or on 

individual devices [21]–[23], MEMS based optical cross 
connects [24], and optomechanics [25].

Here, we review the field of MEMS for PICs with a focus on 

scalable PIC platforms. We introduce the fundamental MEMS 
actuation principles for PICs, review the state of the art 
quantitatively by comparing reported devices, and provide 
guidelines for future development. 

In Chapter I, we introduce and compare the available tuning 

mechanisms for PICs (Chapter I.A.), with a focus on MEMS 
tuning methods (Chapter I.B.). Then, we review the optical 
functions enabled by MEMS (Chapter I.C.) and compare
MEMS actuation mechanisms in terms of their compatibility 
with PICs (Chapter I.D.). Chapter II presents the current state 
of the art in MEMS tunable PIC components, with a focus on 
phase shifters (Chapter II.A), variable couplers (Chapter II.B), 
switches (Chapter II.C), and beam steering and others (Chapter 
II.D). Chapter III provides a performance comparison of the 

MEMS for Photonic Integrated Circuits

Carlos Errando-Herranz, Alain Yuji Takabayashi, Pierre Edinger, Hamed Sattari, 

Kristinn B. Gylfason, Member, IEEE and Niels Quack, Senior Member, IEEE

Manuscript received June 15, 2019. This project has received funding from 

the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under 
grant agreement No. 780283 (MORPHIC - www.h2020morphic.eu). N. Quack 
acknowledges funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) 
under grant No. 157566, and H. Sattari from the Hasler Foundation under grant 
No. 17008.

C. Errando-Herranz (carloseh@kth.se), P. Edinger (edinger@kth.se), and K. 

B. Gylfason (gylfason@kth.se) are with KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden. 

A. 
Y. 
Takabayashi 
(alain.takabayashi@epfl.ch), 
H. 
Sattari

(hamed.sattari@epfl.ch) and N. Quack (niels.quack@epfl.ch) are with École 
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
2

state of the art of MEMS tunable components, with a focus on
large-scale integration in PIC platforms, and outlines the 
integration prospects for MEMS in PICs. While a special focus 
is laid on Silicon Photonics, the MEMS concepts apply to the 
various PIC platforms.

A.Tuning Mechanisms in PICs

PIC tuning methods modify waveguide properties by 

leveraging physical effects such as temperature dependence of 
refractive index, plasma dispersion in semiconductors, Pockels 
or Kerr effects for materials with a certain crystal symmetry,
and displacement generated by optical gradient forces 
(optomechanics) or MEMS. Figure
1
shows a
visual 

comparison between available tuning methods in terms of their 
suitability for application in large-scale PICs.

The choice of tuning method depends on the material 

platform and the targeted application. For example, for very 
large-scale PICs working at telecommunication wavelengths, 
the high refractive index contrast of the silicon-on-insulator 
(SOI) platform provides a clear advantage in terms of footprint, 
and offers a wide range of tuning methods, including thermo-
optic (due to the large thermo-optic coefficient of silicon [26]), 
plasma dispersion (silicon is a semiconductor), optomechanics, 
and MEMS. The other mentioned tuning mechanisms are either 
not available or negligible, such as the Pockels effect (centro-
symmetry of the lattice), and the Kerr effect (very low 
efficiency) [27]. Silicon nitride waveguides feature less 
efficient thermo-optic tuning (10 times weaker than in silicon
[28]), and lack plasma dispersion mechanisms (SiN is an 
insulator) and Pockels effect (amorphous structure). III-V 
compound semiconductors feature plasma dispersion and 
Pockels tuning but show limited scalability due to their low 
refractive index contrast and limitations on wafer size [29]. 
Other than the material platform, key parameters for choosing 
PIC tuning methods are optical loss, footprint, power 
consumption, and tuning speed; and each tuning method 
features inherent trade-offs between these parameters, which 
are summarized in TABLE I.

Thermo-optic tuning uses the temperature dependence of the 

refractive index of most materials to tune waveguide properties. 
It is the most common tuning method for Si and SiN photonics, 
and features low optical loss and generally small footprint, at 
the expense of large power consumption, limited speed, and a 

footprint efficiency limited by the thermo-optic coefficient of 
the waveguide materials and the thermal cross-talk between 
adjacent devices. Plasma dispersion tuning relies on the change 
in refractive index caused by carrier injection or depletion in a 
material with mobile charge carriers (i.e. semiconductors) [27]
and provides small footprint and high speed refractive index 
tuning, but typically also introduces significant optical loss. The 
Pockels effect in non-centrosymmetric crystals provides a low-
power, low-loss, and high-speed path to refractive index tuning, 
but requires long propagation lengths (large footprint) due to 
the low electro-optic coefficients of known waveguide 
materials. Similarly, the Kerr effect requires prohibitively long 
devices or exotic materials. Optomechanical tuning relies on 
optical pumping to generate on-chip optical forces that change 
the waveguiding properties [25], [30]. This tuning mechanism 
provides medium/low optical loss and relatively small 
footprints, with actuation speed limited by inertia of the moving 
device to the mechanical resonance frequency. A limitation of 
this method is that, using optical power as the tuning 
mechanism limits its applications in general-purpose PICs, 
since, in most cases, they are required to maintain their function 
independent of the optical power.

In contrast, MEMS photonics rely on a change in optical 

properties of a waveguide by electromechanical actuation. The 
low-power and low optical loss of MEMS actuators makes them 
excellent for large-scale PIC tuning. Although their speed is 
limited by mechanical resonance frequencies, their working 
principle is not limited by waveguide material platform, making 
them widely applicable. Moreover, the design freedom arising 
from electrically driven mechanical movement, significantly 
different from the change in refractive index caused by other 
tuning methods, enables new applications.

B.Fundamentals of mechanical tuning of PICs

To understand how light in PICs can be mechanically tuned, 

it is instructive to look at a generic mathematical expression for 
a guided electromagnetic mode. In PICs, the waveguide
geometries vary considerably less along the direction of 
propagation than they do in the perpendicular cross-section, and 
thus we can approach the analysis by breaking the circuits up in 
segments with fixed cross-sections. Assuming a harmonic time 
dependence at an angular frequency  given by the application, 
and in the absence of material absorption, we can describe the 
electric (or magnetic) vector field of an electromagnetic wave 

TABLE I

COMPARISON OF TUNING MECHANISMS FOR PICS

Power 
cons.

Optical 

loss

Foot-
print
Speed
Limitations

Thermo-optic
--
++
+
+
Thermo-optic 

coefficient

Plasma 

dispersion
+
--
++
++
Semiconductors

Electro-optic 
(Pockels/Kerr)
++
+
--
++
Crystal symmetry

Opto-

mechanic
--
+
+
+

Suspended and 
optical power 

dependent

MEMS
++
+
+
+
Suspended

++ EXCELLENT
+ MEDIUM 
-- LIMITED 
Figure 1. Semi-quantitative comparison between available methods for tuning 
PICs from a scalability perspective.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
3

travelling in the positive 𝑧 direction along such a waveguide 
segment as

𝐸⃗ (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) = 𝐸⃗ 0(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑒−𝑖(𝑘𝑧−𝜔𝑡)
(1)

where 𝑘 = 2𝜋𝑛e/λ is the wave number, 𝑛e is the effective 
index of the mode, 𝜆 is the free space wavelength, and t the 
time. This expression indicates that the mode can be described 
by a product of a cross-sectional field profile factor 𝐸⃗ 0(𝑥, 𝑦)
that is maintained during propagation, and a phase factor
𝑒−𝑖(𝑘𝑧−𝜔𝑡). It is possible to mechanically influence both factors:

1) By applying compressive or tensile stress to the waveguide 

layers, the materials can be strained, which can modify both the 
material absorption and refraction [31].

a) The introduction of material absorption would cause an 

exponential decay of the mode amplitude with z.

b) A change in waveguide material refractive index would 

change 𝑛e of the mode, yielding a change in phase shift per 
step along z. The field distribution in the xy plane is also 
affected.
2) A physical lengthening or shortening of the guide segment

along z would modify the phase factor. If this change is 
achieved by stressing the guide, it would also result in material 
strain (see 1 above).

3) A displacement of a slab of material within the field of the 

mode in the waveguide cross-section can yield two effects:

a) If the moving material slab supports a guided mode of 

its own that is well phase matched (i.e. has similar 𝑛e), light 
couples between the two, causing a change in field profile
and phase of both modes.

b) If the moving material slab does not support a well-

matched mode of its own, the motion only changes the field 
profile and phase of the waveguide mode. This could be
introduction of loss, e.g. by material absorption, radiation or 
scattering by sidewall roughness, or of a phase shift by 
adding or removing refractive material.

In practice, all applications require a certain bandwidth, i.e. the 
waveguides need to operate over a span of angular frequencies, 
and thus we need to consider that both 𝐸⃗ 0 and 𝑛e exhibit
frequency dependence (i.e. dispersion). Dispersion can be tuned 

by effects 1 and 3 above, but 3 is by far the most potent. The 
strong tuning of mode dispersion by effect 3 is specific to 
mechanical tuning and differentiates it from most other forms 
of PIC tuning [32].

By application of the waveguide manipulations described

above, several optical functions can be achieved.

C.Optical functions enabled by MEMS tuning

Fundamental components of a PIC include linear and 

nonlinear optical devices, optical sources, and photodetectors, 
and MEMS can contribute to the function of many of these.

Linear optical devices greatly outnumber other components 

in PICs, and thus their performance is of central importance.
Linear devices include power splitters, filters, delay lines, 
lenses, mirrors, phase shifters, modulators, and coupling 
structures for off-chip interfacing. An arbitrary linear optical
system can be built using a large enough array of fundamental 
building blocks. Each building block features two inputs and 
two outputs and two degrees of freedom to tune the relative
power and the phase shift between the two outputs. As phase 
shifters can be used to build tunable power splitters [33], only 
phase shifters and passive 2×2 power splitters are strictly 
necessary. However, specific higher function blocks, such as
switching, power splitting, or filtering are often used to reduce 
footprint and increase optical performance.

As a central component of linear PICs, the main requirement 

of a phase shifter is that it covers the complete 2π phase space
with minimal optical loss. In general, the phase ϕ gained by an 
electromagnetic wave at a wavelength λ, travelling in a
waveguide mode with effective refractive index ne, over a 
length L, is 

ϕ = 𝑛e𝐿

𝜆
(2)

A phase shift can then be achieved by varying 𝑛e or 𝐿. Fig. 2a

shows a schematic of MEMS actuation approaches to tune 𝑛e
and 𝐿 using displacement or strain.

Most PIC tunable power splitters, based on directional 

couplers, work by changing the mode interference between two 

Figure 2. Schematics of MEMS tuning concepts. a) Methods for phase shifting include effective mode index change using waveguide loading with a1) in-plane, 
a2) single-layer out-of-plane, and a3) double-layer out-of-plane slabs, a4) double-layer in-plane; a5) strain tuning in a piezoelectric material; and a6) effective 
waveguide lengthening using a movable directional coupler. b) Tunable coupling approaches include b1) in-plane, b2) single-layer out-of-plane, b3) dual-layer 
out-of-plane and b4) in-plane, and b5) longitudinal tuning. c) Switching methods include c1) displacement of an absorbing material; breaking the waveguide 
continuity using b2) displacement of a waveguide section, or b3) introduction of a photonic crystal, and b4) bending. d) Tunable grating coupler methods include 
d1) bending of a grating, and d2) changing its period using in-plane actuation. Unless explicitly mentioned, all figures represent waveguide cross-sections.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
4

adjacent mode-matched waveguides, with the power ratio 
between the two outputs 𝑃1and 𝑃2 defined by

𝑃2
𝑃1

= sin (π𝐿𝛥𝑛e

λ
)

2

(3)

with 𝐿 the coupling length, and 𝛥𝑛e = 𝑛e,1 − 𝑛e,2 the difference 
between the effective mode indexes of the two interfering 
supermodes. Mechanical tuning can thus be achieved by 
varying the coupling length 𝐿 or 𝛥𝑛e by displacement (see Fig. 
2b).

Switching a transmitted signal on and off is central to many 

PIC applications. In conventional PICs, this is achieved by 
either introducing absorption (using for example plasma 
dispersion) or using a phase shifter in an interferometric or 
cavity configuration. However, the displacement enabled by 
MEMS naturally enables efficient switching. Since there are 
many approaches to switching, we will only conceptually 
describe them in this section. MEMS switching can be achieved 
1) by using a MEMS tunable directional coupler or a phase 
shifter in an interferometric/cavity
configuration, 2) by 

changing the waveguide absorption by introducing a lossy 
medium, 3) by breaking a waveguide continuity by displacing 
a part of it or 4) by exchanging it for a photonic crystal reflector,
and 5) by changing the wave vector direction using bending.
Schematics can be found in Fig. 2c.

Tuning of coupling structures to interface PICs with off-chip 

devices has so far focused on grating couplers. The basic 
function of a grating coupler can be defined by wave 
interference, and assuming an in-plane waveguide mode with 
index 𝑛e, leads to

𝛬𝑛e − 𝛬𝑛clad sin 𝜃 = 𝑚𝜆
(4)

with 𝑚 = 0, ±1, ±2 … the diffraction order, 𝛬 the grating 
period, 𝑛clad the mode index in the cladding, 𝜃 the outcoupling 
angle with respect to the normal, and 𝜆 the wavelength. Fig. 2d 
shows methods for MEMS tuning of grating couplers by using 
displacement to change 𝜃 and 𝛬.

Other important functions in PICs are sources, memories, 

photodetectors, and nonlinear optics. Although these are not the 
focus of this review, it is worth mentioning that MEMS has 
been used to control some of these functions, and a brief review 
can be found in section II.E. 

D. MEMS Actuation Principles for PICs

The displacements required for MEMS tuning of PIC 

components lie in the range of tens of nanometers to tens of 

micrometers, and several types of MEMS actuators, based on 
different physical principles, fulfill this requirement. The most 
common
MEMS actuation principles are electrostatic, 

electrothermal, piezoelectric, and magnetic actuation. Here, we
provide an overview of the main operating principles suitable 
for PICs, summarized in Table II. Other known MEMS 
actuation principles such as pneumatic, shape-memory alloys, 
electro-active 
polymers, 
scratch-drive, 
phase-change, 

pyrotechnical, chemical, and biological, are not considered 
here, due to their lack of integration compatibility with PICs.
For a more comprehensive and design-oriented perspective on 
MEMS actuation, we refer to the review by Bell et al. [34].

Electrostatic actuators are the most common MEMS 

actuators. For displacement, they leverage the attractive force 
between charged plates in a capacitor featuring at least one 
movable plate. A mechanical spring force counterbalances this 
attractive force, and results in a stable plate displacement which 
depends on the potential difference. However, beyond the
equilibrium point, the system becomes unstable and the 
movable plate collapses in a phenomenon known as pull-in. The 
two most common capacitor geometries used are parallel plate 
and comb drive arrangements. A similar actuation mechanism, 
recently explored for PICs, is based on the movement generated 
by the polarization of a dielectric under an external gradient 
electrical field. This enables actuation of non-conductive 
waveguides, which can be significant for material platforms 
such as SiN.

A schematic visualization of the two, and an illustration of 

their operation, is given in Fig. 3.

In terms of compatibility with PICs, electrostatic actuation is 

attractive due to its simplicity. It only requires electrical 
conductivity in the structural layer and a suitable mechanical 
suspension. This is particularly true for semiconducting 
materials such as silicon, in which the actuation mechanism can 
be integrated within the waveguide layer itself. A limitation 

TABLE II

QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF THE MAIN MEMS ACTUATION PRINCIPLES FOR PHOTONIC INTEGRATED CIRCUITS

Actuation 
Principle

Photonics 

Compatibility
Footprint
Response

Time
Stroke
Power 

Consumption

Complexity / 

Cost

Maximum 

Displacement

Displacement

Resolution

Electrostatic
++
+
++
+
++
++
+ / ++ 1
++

Thermal
++
++
+
++
--
++
++
--

Piezoelectric
+
+
++
--
++
+
+
++

Magnetic
--
--
++
++
--
+
++
++

++ EXCELLENT
+ MEDIUM 
-- LIMITED 

1 Parallel Plate / Comb Drive 

Figure 3. A schematic illustration of a) top/side view of parallel plate and b) 
top view of comb-drive electrostatic MEMS actuators.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
5

arising from the use of the waveguide layer as an electrode, 
particularly in the case of comb drives, is the limited thickness 
of single mode guides that precludes the use of high-aspect ratio 
structures that would be advantageous for large force 
generation. In order to increase the force and stroke, multiple 
comb-drive sub-units can be connected in parallel to a single 
device, which, on the other hand, also increases footprint. 
Response times lie in the microsecond regime and power 
consumption is minimal due to the absence of current flow 
under static conditions.

Electrothermal actuators are used for their variety of simple

and compact designs and for their large displacements and force 
output, which allows them to achieve larger stroke than 
electrostatic actuators. These devices rely on joule heating 
generated by current flowing through part of the structure, 
which results in displacement via thermal expansion. There 
exist two prevalent groups of electrothermal actuators, those 
based on materials with different coefficients of thermal 
expansion (CTE) and those using differences in electrical 
resistance achieved by geometric design. In the first case, the 
materials form a thermal bimorph, so that when the temperature 
increases, the difference in expansion between the materials
results in displacement. The second type includes the hot-
arm/cold-arm and chevron/V-type actuators, which employ
geometry to locally modify resistance and, consequently, the 
amount of thermal expansion. The hot-arm is kept long and 
narrow (increased resistivity), while the cold-arm is made short 
and wide (reduced resistivity), so that, under actuation, the 
structure rotates in the direction of the cold-arm. For the 
chevron or V-type actuator, linear displacement is achieved by 
using a V-shape geometry where symmetric thermal expansion 
causes the structure to move in the direction of the vertex. 
Visual depictions of these electrothermal actuators are provided 
in Fig. 4.

Heat exchange becomes very efficient in small structures

(due to 1/d dependence, where d is the device dimension), 
which allows for faster cooling and, consequently, faster 
switching. However, high-density integration of such actuators 
is limited by thermal interaction with the PIC and loss of 
efficiency due to higher chip temperatures. Additionally, 
because of constant current flow through the device, there is
significant power consumption during static operation, making 

this type of actuation less ideal for low-power applications. 

Piezoelectric actuators make use of the piezoelectric effect, 

in which an applied potential across the piezoelectric material 
generates strain. These actuators can be made small like 
electrothermal actuators and responsive like electrostatic 
actuators but lack the ability to generate large strokes. The need 
for special piezoelectric materials (crystalline materials without 
inversion symmetry) and complex fabrication also makes their 
integration with silicon photonics challenging. Additionally,
the generated strain is typically small and must be combined 
with an elaborate geometry to achieve strokes comparable to 
the other classes of actuators. Larger strains can be achieved 
with high strain piezoelectrics and polymers but usually at the 
cost of reduced output force [34]. Typical geometries consist of 
a slab of piezoelectric material sandwiched between two 
electrodes or interdigitated electrodes on top of the 
piezoelectric. In the first case, an electric field applied between 
the top and bottom electrodes, generates a negative or positive 
strain in the horizontal direction of the piezoelectric material, 
causing it to contract or expand. In the case where the electrodes 
are interdigitated on top of the piezoelectric, the structure also 
experiences strain in the horizontal direction. However, because 
the fixed boundary condition is parallel to the structure, it bends 
downwards or upwards. In both cases, if the magnitude of the 
electric field becomes too large (i.e., for large applied voltages 
and thin piezoelectric layers), the strength of the piezoelectric 
effect 
deteriorates.
Two 
common 
configurations 
for 

piezoelectric actuators are shown in Fig. 5.

As is the case with electrostatic actuators, the electric field, 

not
the 
current flow,
drives
piezoelectric 
actuation. 

Consequently, the power consumption of such devices is small,
and the actuation speed can be fast. Additionally, because the 
functional geometry scales in the out-of-plane direction (i.e., 
thicker piezoelectric layers generate larger displacements), 
piezoelectric devices can be made quite compact, in principle. 
Bulk materials, however, are difficult to integrate with standard 
MEMS processes and the more compatible thin films do not 
provide the desired displacement; moreover, piezoelectric 
actuators typically present a strong hysteresis in the actuation 
curve, presenting challenges for precision position control. 
Therefore, additional process development is required before 
piezoelectric actuators find widespread integration in PICs.
Magnetic actuation is not commonly applied in PICs, but like 
piezoelectric actuation, offers some distinct advantages at the 
cost of increased integration complexity. The most common 
magnetic actuator uses an externally applied magnetic field to 

Figure 4. A schematic illustration of typical electrothermal actuators: a) side 
view of a thermal bimorph actuator, b) top view of a V-shape (or chevron) 
actuator, and c) a hot-arm/cold-arm actuator.

Figure 5. Applied electric field generates strain in the piezoelectric material, 
which modulates its length, so the overall structure expands/contracts or bends 
upwards/downwards: a) side view of a sandwiched electrode configuration, b)
and coplanar electrodes.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
6

attract a patterned permalloy structure or an embedded 
permanent magnet attached to the movable section [35], [36]. 
This geometry enables bidirectional motion from the 
attractive/repulsive electromagnetic force when current is 
applied (see Fig. 6). 

Magnetic actuators can generate forces up to hundreds

micro-Newtons and achieve displacements in the millimeter 
range with high resolution [34]. In addition, magnetic actuation 
provides excellent linearity, which is an advantage for precise 
feedback control. However, the main disadvantages limiting 
their use in MEMS is the difficulty of integrating high 
performance magnetic materials and the large currents required 
to generate electromagnetic forces.

We note that, in recent years, integration of magnetic 

materials with photonic waveguides has attracted significant 
attention due to their applications in Faraday rotation and 
optical non-reciprocity [37]. These platforms may lead to future 
demonstrations of magnetic MEMS actuators for photonics. 

E.Latching for MEMS in PICs

The reduction in PIC power consumption enabled by MEMS 

can be pushed further by using latching mechanisms. Latching
enables non-volatile configuration states where power is only 
consumed during state transitions. Here, we differentiate 
between two types of latching mechanisms: 1) latches using
additional actuators and 2) latches based on geometrical 
bistability.

The first type makes use of an additional actuator moving 

perpendicularly to the primary displacement axis [38]. Both 
actuators include complementary hooks, such that in the latched 
state, they come in contact with one another. With such a 
geometry, the latching actuator can move to “unlatch” the 
primary actuator, and return after the primary actuator has been
displaced, preventing it from following suit and effectively 
latching it in place (see Fig. 7a). By including multiple hooks, 
several discrete positions can be addressed, including latching 
resolution below fabrication resolution by exploiting the 
Vernier effect [39].

The second type is the bistable latching approach, which 

employs a beam, or network of beams whose geometry has been 
selected based on the two stable states existing in a 
precompressed spring [40]. The structure is fabricated and 
released in one of the two stable states, but if the applied force 
by the actuation mechanism exceeds the critical bending force 
of the beam, the entire device “snaps” to the second stable state
(Fig. 7b). The pre-compression can be achieved in-plane by 
suitable design of the geometry or out-of-plane using 
compressive stress [41]. In principle, stiction forces can also be 
used for nonvolatile latching, even though stiction is more 

difficult to control and thus usually avoided. Push-pull actuators
are often used to transition between states in bistable latches 
and to release structures held in place by stiction [42]. 

II. REVIEW OF MEMS IN PICS

A.Phase shifters 
Here we review the MEMS phase shifters described in the 
literature, including those reported as part of a larger device, 
e.g. tunable filters or interferometers. Fig. 8 highlights 
examples from the literature.

A phase shifter on a gold-coated SiN platform using in-plane 

displacement and parallel-plate actuation, following the 
concept in Fig. 2a1 was reported in [43]. A similar platform was 
adapted for out-of-plane displacement of a slab above the 
waveguide, as in Fig. 2a3, and used both parallel plate and
gradient electrical field force actuation [44], including an in-
depth analysis of optical loss [45]. In silicon, the concept in 
Fig. 2a1 was adapted to achieve very efficient in-plane parallel 
plate actuation by means of a slot waveguide (Fig. 8b) [46], 
[47]. Comb-drive actuators, providing increased displacement 
ranges, were used in [48] to increase the magnitude of the phase 
shift.
Being a fundamental building block, phase shifters, although 
central to many devices, are often not explicitly reported. A 
common use of phase shifters is in tunable ring resonators. 
Kauppinen et al. used out-of-plane displacement of a SiN 
cantilever on top of SOI waveguides (see schematic in Fig. 2a3)
to tune their effective index [49], [50]. Errando-Herranz et al.
also used out-of-plane displacement on SOI, but released the 
ring itself, achieving large phase shifts with a simple fabrication
(schematic in Fig. 2a2, SEM in Fig. 8c) [51]–[53]. In-plane 
tunable ring resonators have also been reported on the SOI 
platform, relying on suspended directional couplers and comb-
drive actuators using the concept in Fig. 2a6, to increase 
actuation range (Fig. 8d) [54]–[56]. Piezoelectric actuation was 
utilized to tune the optical path length in SiN resonators [57], 
[58]. Additionally, strain has been used to tune the effective 
index of waveguides (Fig. 2a5), and was extensively studied in 
[59]. This effect was used to phase shift ring resonator 
waveguides in [60] using a thin film piezoelectric, and in [61]
using a bulk piezoelectric substrate. Several phase shifter 

Figure 7. Latching mechanisms for photonic MEMS devices. Top views of a) 
orthogonal latching dents b) and bistable beams.

Figure 6. A schematic illustration of a magnetic actuator where the permanent 
magnets are embedded in the device layer.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
7

approaches have been reported as switches. For example, an 
out-of-plane absorbing membrane was used to tune both real 
and imaginary parts of the effective index in SiN waveguides, 
in a combination of the concepts in Figs. 2a3 and 2c1 [62]. 
Efficient tuning was achieved by plasmonic field enhancement 
in a compact ring resonator in [63]. In [64], two InP phase 
shifters using the working principle in Fig. 2a3 were used in an 
interferometer. MEMS phase shifting in photonic crystal
cavities using in-plane actuation has also been reported [42].

B.Couplers

Here we review devices that achieve analog control of power 

coupling. Figure 9 shows examples of these devices using 
different electrostatic configurations.

Tunable power coupling is key for efficient PICs, and 

multiple papers have reported full transduction ranges with 
directional couplers. A few devices based on III-V platforms 
have been reported, such as combining InP with the in-plane 
MEMS tuning concept in Fig. 2b1 [65], or GaAs with out-of-
plane (Fig. 2b3) [66], and in-plane [67] parallel-plate actuation. 
With a similar approach in silicon, tunable coupling was 
reported using two compact comb drive actuators [68], [69], a 
simpler single-actuator device [70], and a more stable three 
actuator system [71]. Tunable couplers using suspended out-of-
plane actuation and a single device layer (Fig. 2b3) were also 
demonstrated [72], [73].

Tunable couplers are widely used to compensate fabrication 

variations in ring resonators. The tunable ring resonator from 
Ikeda et al. includes a comb-drive to control the coupling 
between bus waveguide and ring [55]. Lee et al. used in-plane 
parallel plate actuation of waveguides to tune light coupling 
into a disk resonator [74], and out-of-plane displacement for a 
disk [75] and for a microtoroidal resonator [76]. In a more 
complex system, Li et al. reported tunable coupling between 
two resonators [77]. This concept was extended to photonic 
crystal cavities using in-plane comb-drive actuators [42], [78].

Tunable couplers have also been used to distribute the optical 

signal from a given input to a set of several outputs at the same 
time with a well defined distribution ratio of the optical power, 
commonly referred to as multicast operation [79].

Variable optical attenuators are a special case of couplers that 

find many uses in PICs, but they have not yet been 
demonstrated outside of proposals [80].

C. Switches

Here we review the various techniques used to implement 

volatile and non-volatile switching for scalable PICs. A 
selection of switching mechanisms is shown in Fig. 10.

Bakke et al. provided an early implementation of 1×2 MEMS 

PIC switch in which an input waveguide was laterally deflected 
by a pair of comb drives towards one of two output waveguides, 
such as in Fig. 2c4 [81]. Another type of switch relies on a 
segmented geometry with a movable waveguide section 
(schematic in Fig. 2c2, SEM in Fig. 10b) [82]. In-plane 
movable waveguides have recently been implemented in VTT’s 
micron-scale silicon photonics platform [83], and switching 
based on frustrated total internal reflection has been 
demonstrated [84].

Tunable couplers have been commonly used as switches, and 

for this purpose, Chatterjee et al. demonstrated in-plane 
perturbation of a static directional coupler using comb-drive 
actuation [85]. Out-of-plane variants using absorbing metals are 
also possible, and have been demonstrated using aluminum 
[62], and gold [86]. Takahashi et al. reported a comb-drive 
actuated in-plane ring resonator acting as a switch between two 
bus waveguides [69]. By using the tunable coupler concept in 
Fig. 2b1, an 8×8 switch matrix was demonstrated [71]. The 
same concept has been applied to switching using tuning of ring 
resonators [38], [55].

Out-of-plane switches based on directional couplers (concept 

in Fig. 2b2) have been scaled up to 50×50 [87], and 240×240 
matrices [13], 
[88]–[93]. 
Furthermore, 
polarization 

independence was demonstrated using two waveguide device 
layers (Fig. 2b3, SEM in Fig. 10a) [94].

Non-volatile switches in PICs are rare, but a few promising 

devices have been reported. Abe et al. used comb-drive 
actuators to displace a latching hook and release it once the 

Figure 9. SEM examples of tunable coupling with MEMS. a) Tunable coupling 
to ring resonator with comb-drive actuation [55]. b) Out-of-plane variable 
coupler with high- Q microtoroidal resonator [76]. c) In-plane tuning of a dual 
PhC cavity [78]. d) Single-photon routing with in-plane tunable directional 
coupler [67]. a), c), d) reprinted with permission from [55], [78], [67] © The 
Optical Society.

Figure 8. SEM captures of photonic MEMS phase shifters. a) In-plane parallel 
plate actuation for slot mode tuning [47]. b) Out-of-plane phase shifting with 
InP [64]. c) Ring resonator filter with out-of-plane SOI actuator [53], and d) In-
plane comb-drive actuator for tunable ring resonator length, reproduced from
[56] with the permission of AIP Publishing.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
8

main actuator was set [38], [95]. Stiction-based latching has not 
yet been reported as a non-volatile mechanism, but different 
reports make use of stiction in other ways. The tunable photonic 
crystal cavity reported by Chew et al. relies on a push-pull 
comb-drive to unstick devices [42]. A similar setup could be 
used for intentional stiction-based nonvolatile latching. The Wu 
group’s results on large-scale switch matrixes utilize stiction 
and parallel-plate pull-in for reliable bistable operation, even 
though the switch is volatile [89].

Switching has also been demonstrated by using an in-plane 

actuated switch based on displacing a waveguide/photonic 
crystal reflector (Fig. 2c3, Fig. 10d) [96]. Switching a photonic 
crystal on and off was also achieved by using a bimorph 
cantilever to insert a series of tips aligned into the holes in a 
photonic crystal waveguide [97].

D.Grating couplers 

MEMS tuning of grating couplers has only recently been

explored, with focus on optical beam steering for optical fiber 
alignment or sensing, or on tuning of transmission spectra.

By changing the grating angle using out-of-plane 

electrostatic MEMS tuning of a suspended grating coupler 
(schematic in Fig. 2d1, SEM in Fig. 11b), Errando-Herranz et 
al. [98] demonstrated a spatial shift in the coupling to an optical 
fiber. This approach was adapted by Yu et al. (Fig. 11a) [99] to 
tune the grating transmission spectra. A second approach to 
MEMS tuning of grating couplers relies on in-plane actuation 
using a comb drive to deform a grating coupler shaped like a 
suspended mechanical spring (Figs. 2d2 and 11c). With such a 
structure, the period of the grating 𝛬 is accessible, potentially 
resulting the large steering angles, as shown in Fig. 11d) [100].

E.Integrated sources and nonlinear PICs 

MEMS have been recently leveraged to tune the properties 

of integrated light sources and nonlinear optic properties of 
waveguides. 

For example, aligning the emission spectra of distinct single-

photon sources is central for optical quantum technologies. 
MEMS-induced strain has been used for this purpose, and 
groups have reported spectral tuning of quantum dots in a III-V 
material platform using electrostatic MEMS [101], [102], and 

in a piezoelectrically-actuated platform combining III-V 
quantum dots and SiN waveguides [61]. Moreover, electrostatic 
MEMS in III-V materials have been used to tune the mode 
volume in a photonic crystal cavity, which in turn tunes the 
Purcell enhancement, and, in the case of an embedded optical 
source, its emission rate [103].

For nonlinear PIC applications, MEMS actuation is still 

relatively unexplored, with proof of concepts using 
piezoelectric [104] and electrostatic actuation [32] to improve 
nonlinear optic efficiencies via fine tuning of waveguide 
birefringence or dispersion.

III. DISCUSSION

A.Phase Shifters 

The large number of phase shifters required for large-scale 

PICs, already reaching the hundreds [105], requires exceptional 
device performance in terms of optical loss (insertion loss, IL), 
power consumption, and footprint. In addition, application-
dependent figures such as tuning curve linearity, IL variation 
with actuation, bandwidth, maximum actuation voltage, and 
induced noise may also be significant.

Since power consumption is minimal for most MEMS 

actuators, it can be argued that IL is the most relevant figure 
when discussing the scalability of photonic MEMS circuits. 
While MEMS phase shifters usually report IL of the same order
of magnitude as their thermo-optic counterparts, there are
significant differences between designs. In general, the main 
contributor to losses are transitions (e.g. anchors for waveguide 
suspension) and waveguide scattering losses due to sidewall 
roughness.
For devices requiring completely suspended 

waveguides (e.g. single-etch electrostatic actuators), transitions 
cannot be avoided, and account for IL between 0.1 dB to 1 dB
in most devices. Although lower transition losses may be 
engineered, the large refractive index contrast between silicon 
and air hinders dramatic improvements, and results in higher 
waveguide scattering losses compared to oxide-clad devices. 
Even with state-of-the art silicon PIC foundry platforms, 
sidewalls typically show rms roughness values of a few nm. 

Figure 10. a) Vertical adiabatic coupler switch, reprinted with permission from 
[89] © The Optical Society. b) Segmented waveguide switch, reproduced from 
[82] with the permission of AIP Publishing. c) Tunable directional coupler 
switch with latching [95], d) Photonic crystal switch [96].

Figure 11. a), b), and c) SEM pictures of reported MEMS tunable grating 
devices. a) Out-of-plane electrostatically actuated device for spectral tuning  
[99], and b) chip-to-fiber alignment [98]. c) In-plane comb-drive actuation for 
beam steering [100] , with d) potentially large beam steering, reprinted with 
permission from [100] © The Optical Society.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
9

That roughness is the main contributor to standard propagation 
losses of 1-2 dB/cm in single-mode silicon strip waveguides.
Devices that report large phase shifts rely on deconfined 
waveguides and large evanescent-field interaction, which leads 
to higher loss due to high power on the sidewalls. This loss 
dominates when the gap is reduced significantly (i.e. below 
fabrication resolution). Devices that rely on out-of-plane 
displacement of a slab on top of a waveguide, on the other hand, 
benefit from the near-atomically-flat top and bottom surfaces, 
and usually feature lower roughness-induced losses. However, 
reported devices using such an architecture have so far relied 
on beams that are not entirely phase mismatched to the guided 
mode, effectively becoming a lossy asymmetric directional 
coupler [44], [45], [64].

Regarding variable loss with actuation, phase shifters that use 

displacement of beams near waveguides fall into
two 

categories. Devices that rely on reducing a gap below 
fabrication resolution can see their IL increase with actuation,
while devices that increase the original gap can see a decrease 
of roughness-induced loss. On the other hand, the insertion loss 
of phase shifters that use in-plane displacement of a stable 
directional coupler [48]
scales with the usually lower 

waveguide loss, although they may suffer from additional 
variable IL due to coupling instability. Piezoelectric-based 
phase shifting, in contrast, does not require deconfined 
waveguides nor transitions, and as a result, insertion loss can be 
much lower.
The dominant contribution becomes the 

propagation losses, and even with the largest reported 
structures, the associated IL remains low [57], [58], [60], [61].

To be able to access all the phase space, a phase shifter must

be able to address any shift within 2π. Figure 12 summarizes 
the maximum phase shift and actuation voltages reported in the 
literature, and shows that only a few demonstrate a significant 
maximum phase shift, although, in principle, any of the 
underperforming devices could be cascaded up to 2π.

From Fig. 12, we can conclude that usual MEMS actuation 

in PICs requires voltage levels below 100 V. We should note 
that, in MEMS, the actuation voltage is usually a design choice, 
which trades off with actuation speed through the designed 

spring constant. A significant technology-dependent feature is 
the shape of the actuation curve. Evanescent phase shifting is 
associated to highly nonlinear actuation curves due to the 
exponential distribution of the evanescent field [46]. The effect 
can be compensated for by using gap-increasing actuation and 
leveraging the quadratic response of electrostatic actuators, 
yielding a quasi-linear actuation range [53]. Another option for 
better linearity is to change the propagation length instead, 
removing the exponential dependence of a gap change. Linear 
phase shifts can also be achieved using piezoelectrics [58], [60], 
[61], and quadratic with comb-drive actuators [54], [55].

Device footprint is not specific to phase shifters, but we will 

highlight a few points here. Shorter interaction lengths are 
typically required to achieve full power exchange in a coupler, 
than required for a 2π shift in a phase shifter. The largest phase
shifts with silicon waveguides are achieved with in-plane 
increase of the propagation length by using suspended 
directional couplers, which comes at the cost of higher IL due 
to the couplers loss and sidewall scattering [48]. The InP phase 
shifters reported in [64] also stand out in Fig. 12, although their
IL, which is expected to be significant due to waveguide 
anchors and coupler asymmetry, was not reported.

Phase shifters can be cascaded and still seen as a single 

component, while couplers and switches would require more 
intricate circuit design to be cascaded. As a result, IL and
length/footprint values don’t have much significance unless 
scaled by the phase shift. In Fig. 13 we use such scaled figures 
to compare the different actuation principles in terms of static 
losses and interaction length. Since measured IL values are 
missing in many reports, some points were estimated using 
other reported measurements (see Appendix B). Although 
instructive, care should be taken when analyzing technological 
trends from this plot, since not all devices scale in the same way. 
As an example, the IL of the phase shifter in [48] will have a 
similar value whether designed for very low phase shifts or 
large ones, due to the need for the two directional couplers with 
IL of 0.2 dB each. Even with the conservative analysis required,
due to estimates and scaling, some trends clearly stand out. 
First, most electrostatic devices seem to follow a general rule: 

Figure 12. Maximum phase shift versus corresponding voltage for photonic 
MEMS phase shifters in the literature. 

Figure 13. Phase shifter length against IL, both scaled to a π-phase shift. 
References in parenthesis correspond to estimated values, see Appendix B.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
10

tuning efficiency (associated to Lπ) scales with IL. Such a result 
suggests that the optical losses are defined mostly by length,
probably dominated by waveguide and anchor loss. Only the 
slot waveguides stand out among electrostatic phase shifters, 
due to the higher IL associated to slot modes and mode 
converters [46], [47]. Finally, when comparing the different 
electrostatic actuators, it appears that in-plane phase shifters 
attain better performance. However, both the reported in-plane 
and out-of-plane actuators actually comprise various tuning 
mechanisms, and we do not believe the differences to be set in 
stone. Piezoelectric phase shifters are a promising alternative 
due to the very low IL attained, although they require about an 
order of magnitude longer devices. Actuators based on a 
gradient electric field (dielectrophoresis, DEP) are rare, but 
show great promise as an alternative to parallel-plate actuation,
in terms of ILπ (even though it may be due to the lower index 
contrast of SiN/air and to the flat bottom/top surfaces), and due 
to the absence of pull-in, effectively increasing possible tuning 
range and stability.

With the development of large-scale reconfigurable circuits, 

we expect a significant increase of research on MEMS phase 
shifters. For proper comparison and valid scalability claims, we 
suggest that future reports include measurements of IL, variable 
IL, reflections, and actuation linearity. Additionally, a 
definition of bandwidth should be introduced, that can then be 
used for the design of spectral functions in large-scale circuits.

B.Couplers and Switches 

As is the case for phase-shifters, the number of couplers and 

switches employed in large-scale PICs is steadily increasing,
with the performance of individual devices determining the 
overall performance of the system. Certain key parameters can 
be used to assess this performance, which include IL, extinction 
ratio, bandwidth, switching speed or response time, device 
footprint, actuation voltage, and power consumption. 

Figure 14 provides a graphic comparison of published 

couplers and switches with regard to extinction ratio and IL. We 
do not observe a clear trend between in-plane and out-of-plane 
devices in terms of ER and IL, although out-of-plane devices 
seem to achieve slightly higher ER in general. Similarly, no 

clear trend can be observed in terms of IL, and the differences 
between devices can be ascribed to optical design and 
fabrication. However, we should note that the couplers based 
on two waveguide levels exhibit slightly lower IL, most 
probably due to the smaller top and bottom surface roughness, 
as compared to the sidewall roughness in single-layer devices.
A clear outlier is [69], with a high IL due to lossy anchors. 

Figure 15 compares reported IL and 3-dB bandwidth for 

various couplers and switches. Here, devices that feature 
adiabatic couplers [72], [88], [92], [94], yield significantly 
wider bandwidth than directional couplers. This is due to the 
absence of periodic exchange of power associated with mode 
interference. In addition, the devices with the lowest reported 
bandwidth are switches based on cavities.

The actuation voltage for couplers and switches ranges 

between 5 V for cavity-based devices to the more common 30 
to 50 V range for large waveguide structures [77]. Indeed, 
switches relying on cavities are more sensitive to actuation, and 
do not require as much displacement as their non-resonant
counterparts and can therefore operate at lower voltages, at the 
cost of a resonance-limited bandwidth.

As next-generation devices move towards the upper left-

hand corner of the two plots in Figs. 14 and 15 and become 
faster and more compact, it is important that all discussed 
parameters continue to be reported
for benchmarking 

performance. Furthermore, large-scale PICs particularly suffer
from back reflection, which can distort the quality of the signal, 
especially in bidirectional meshes [106]. In order to evaluate
couplers and switches according to this metric, reflection 
should be measured and reported. Currently in-plane and out-
of-plane electrostatic devices monopolize the coupler/switch 
field, but the problem space remains open for new combinations 
of actuators and optical designs.

C. Grating couplers

Quantitative assessment of the performance of tunable 

grating couplers is highly dependent on the targeted application.
Here, we focus on three application areas identified in 
literature: mode matching, spectral tuning, and free space beam 
steering.

Figure 15. 3 dB bandwidth versus insertion loss for couplers and switches.
Figure 14. Extinction ratio versus insertion loss for couplers and switches.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
11

Mode matching is highly dependent on the devices to be 

interfaced. So far, the only investigated application has been in
fiber-to-chip alignment, with demonstrated 6 µm maximum 
tuning with 6 V along one direction [98], at the expense of 
varying transmission efficiency. Future work in this direction
can benefit from additional tuning in the perpendicular 
direction, by e.g. tilting the device sideways in a similar way to 
MEMS micromirrors [19].

Tuning the transmission spectra of grating couplers allows 

for compensation of fabrication variation by shifting the
optimum wavelength ∆𝜆𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 to cover the expected fabrication 
variation, while minimizing variation in optical bandwidth 𝛿𝜆
and in coupling efficiency. The only presented MEMS tunable 
grating coupler targeting this application achieves a ∆𝜆𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 of 
22.8 nm with 12 V actuation [99]. This performance is 
comparable to power-hungry thermo-optic tuning of grating 
couplers [107], [108], including MEMS-mediated thermo-optic
designs [109], which in general feature 𝛿𝜆 and efficiency 
variations well below the 6 nm and 0.5 dB reported by the 
MEMS device.

Free space beam steering features a different set of

requirements, such as 2-dimensional steering, large angular 
tuning ∆𝜃, and low angular lobe width 𝛿𝜃, with minimum 
variation with actuation. A sensible figure of merit is their ratio 
∆𝜃/𝛿𝜃. Most applications also require a high tuning speed, a 
stable coupling efficiency, and a minimum optical spectral 
bandwidth if the device relies on wavelength scanning for 
steering along one dimension. The device presented in [100]
can potentially achieve large ∆𝜃 up to 90°. However, 
experimentally, the device achieved up to 5.6° for 20 V 
actuation, with angular full-width half-maximum of 9° and 14°
along the tuning direction and the perpendicular, i.e. a ∆𝜃/𝛿𝜃
of 0.62. Simulations yielded a variable coupling efficiency from 
30 to 40% and a tuning speed up to 200 kHz. As a comparison, 
last-generation optical phased arrays (OPAs) based on plasma 
dispersion phase shifters feature ∆𝜃/𝛿𝜃 of 500, with tuning 
speeds in the order of 30 kHz, at the expense power 
consumption and footprint that were orders of magnitude larger
[105]. Improved performance can potentially be achieved by 
MEMS actuator design
focused on stability and long 

displacements, and higher speeds through larger spring 
constants. 2D steering can be achieved by nesting MEMS
actuators, or by integrating the devices into a linear OPA. An 
alternative approach would be to use MEMS phase shifters in 
an OPA to potentially combine the low-power consumption of 
MEMS with the optical performance of OPAs.

We can now identify a few general guidelines for reporting 

and designing MEMS tunable grating couplers. Future
reporting of results should preferably include a full set of 
measurements including wavelength dependence, angular 
emission using Fourier imaging, coupling efficiency, and
reflection. With these measurements, design may focus on 
improving the previously introduced figures of merit, while 
minimizing drifts in efficiency or optical bandwidth. This goal
can be achieved by careful design of MEMS devices, or by 
combining MEMS tuning with other tuning methods. This field 
is still in its infancy, and a wide range of novel ideas that further 

exploit the large geometrical variations enabled by MEMS has 
yet to be explored.

D. Perspectives on Large-Scale Integration of MEMS in PICs
Large-scale photonic circuits would benefit from MEMS 
actuation due to its low power consumption. PIC platforms 
(silicon photonics in particular), and MEMS have grown 
rapidly thanks to the development of processes for the
microelectronics industry. As a result, dedicated photonics and 
MEMS platform have a lot in common, and a photonic MEMS 
platform is only a step away [110], [111]. The key components 
for reprogrammable photonic MEMS circuits have already been 
reported, and large scale switch networks have been achieved 
with wafer-scale processes [71], [89]. Further improvements on 
the analog building blocks can be expected in the coming years, 
with demonstrators of reprogrammable PICs beyond switch 
networks. Here we discuss the photonic MEMS trade-offs 
common to all building blocks, and how those trade-offs impact 
scalability.

Minimizing IL is key for PIC scalability and has been 

extensively discussed in sections III.A. and III.B. As fabrication
processes improve, and foundries become accessible, we can 
expect standardized MEMS phase shifters and couplers with IL 
below 0.1 dB. As with microelectronics, footprint is one of the 
main drivers for chip cost and the footprint of a single chip 
depends on the aggregate size of individual components. While 
devices should be kept as small as possible, the number of 
driving contacts required also contribute to the footprint. 
Furthermore, a
complex interposer and the associated 

packaging may dominate the cost [112]. The type of interposer 
depends not only on the number of contacts, but also on their
voltage levels, since higher voltages require larger interconnect 
spacing to minimize crosstalk. This property is a problem in 
particular for piezoelectric and DEP MEMS actuators, with 
actuation voltages above 50 V. In contrast, the driving voltage 
for electrostatic MEMS actuators can be much lower, but sub –
10 V devices are usually associated with low spring stiffness 
(below 0.1 N/m) making them susceptible to noise. 

The success of the reported phase shifters, couplers or 

Figure 16. Device footprint versus PIC technology compatibility score. Devices 
include phase shifters, couplers and switches. More information on the 
derivation of the compatibility score in Appendix C.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
12

switches as building blocks for scalable circuit depends heavily 
on materials and processing technology. The integration of non-
standard materials, such as thin film piezoelectrics, into 
standard platforms will require additional process development. 
Reported devices show different levels of compatibility with 
open-access foundries and was assessed on a compatibility 
scale (more information in Appendix C). Complexity and 
footprint are the main drivers for cost, and Fig. 16 shows a 
visualization of how devices with a similar complexity are 
distributed with regard to footprint. On such a scale, the slot 
waveguides from Acoleyen et al. clearly stand-out [46], [47], 
and an improvement on the IL, caused by the lossy slot modes
and mode converters, would make them excellent phase 
shifters. The tunable PhC cavity published by Chew et al. 
demonstrates that even simple comb-drive actuators can be very 
competitive in terms of footprint [78]. Although reported
piezoelectric actuators do not appear advantageous according to 
this metric, as discussed in III.A., phase shifters using 
piezoelectric materials report the lowest IL thanks to their high 
waveguide confinement, and the absence of scattering 
transitions. Consequently, special applications where footprint 
is not a limitation could benefit from the integration of 
piezoelectric materials in PIC foundries.

Photonic MEMS devices typically have resonant frequencies 

of 100 kHz to 10 MHz, which limits actuation speed. Out-of-
plane electrostatic actuators achieve switching speeds above 2 
MHz, while in-plane actuators report speeds in the order of 
100 kHz. The switching speed of MEMS is in general linked to 
their spring constant and mass, which are design parameters, 
suggesting that tens of MHz speeds are within reach. Moreover, 
the electric time constant might pose an additional limitation 
[71]. Therefore, we do not expect MEMS to substitute current 
high-speed 
opto-electronics 
modulation. 
However, 
a 

combination of low-power MEMS reconfiguration with the 
existing high-speed modulation in photonics foundries is well 
within reach. 

The resolution of photonic MEMS is defined by 1) the 

precision in the analog driving voltage, or, for photonic ICs, by 
the number of bits of the Digital to Analog Converter (DAC), 
and 2) the actuation curve (e.g. phase shift or coupling ratio 
versus voltage. This discussion is strictly linked to the effect of 
electrical noise. For example, nonlinear response curves will 
therefore have actuation-dependent fluctuation that can be 
detected in outputs like phase shifts [113], and can be very 
detrimental for certain PIC architectures [106]. Possible 
solutions are to increase actuation linearity [113] or to use 
custom, more costly DACs. Another source of noise, which is 
common in MEMS, is environmental variation in suspended 
geometries, usually caused by humidity or particles. Such 
disturbances are typically minimized by hermetic packaging 
[114], [115], which will likely be used for MEMS-based PICs 
as well. Thermomechanical noise may also cause fluctuations 
in small gap spacing; however, at room temperature operation, 
even with low mechanical quality factor, these perturbations are 
on the picometer-scale and do not present an issue.

Photonic MEMS devices will be subject to reliability of their

actuation mechanism. The reliability of MEMS actuators has 
been studied extensively in previous reports [116], and 

adequate strategies to overcome reliability-related limitations in 
MEMS have been developed [117]. For silicon photonic 
MEMS, a number of effects might lead to reliability limitations. 
Any variation in geometric definition of the actuator will lead 
to a variation in actuation voltage [92]. Such variations can be 
kept within acceptable levels with modern lithography 
capabilities. Electrostatic MEMS actuators can further present 
hysteresis caused by charge trapping in a dielectric located 
between the plates. Hysteresis can be reduced by avoiding high-
k dielectrics between the parallel plates (i.e. by complete 
removal of the buried oxide in SOI), and by actuation 
approaches such as polarity reversal. While fatigue failure is not 
observed in silicon due to the crystalline nature of the material, 
extreme environments and high levels of mechanical stress
exceeding the yield strength will lead to fracture, which can be 
prevented by adequate design and operating conditions. For 
MEMS requiring contact, such as latching systems, wear is a 
significant failure mechanism, and can set strict limits on 
repeatability and device lifetime. 

While low power consumption is the most prominent benefit 

of MEMS actuation, the minimum power consumption is
limited by nonzero leakage currents, thereby requiring a 
constant voltage supply. Non-volatility using latching enables
zero-power photonics and novel functionalities such as one-
time reconfiguration to compensate for fabrication variation. 

The introduction of on-chip suspended waveguides and 

MEMS provides new ground for innovation
and new 

applications for PICs. A few early examples are tunable grating 
couplers [100], dispersion tuning
[32], optomechanical

components for nonlinear and nonreciprocal optics [25], and 
Brillouin lasers and amplifiers [118].

A recent application is quantum photonics, with MEMS 

providing a clear advantage over other tuning methods due to 
the strict requirements for low operating temperatures and low 
optical loss, and the possibility of strain tuning of quantum 
sources [61], [66], [67], which additionally improves qubit 
stability and coherence in certain systems [119]–[121]. These 
properties, combined with the need for large number of phase 
shifters for applications in quantum simulation and computing
[15], makes MEMS an excellent tuning  method for quantum 
photonics, and we can expect breakthroughs in quantum PICs 
enabled by MEMS in the near future. 

IV. CONCLUSION 

In summary, we have described the field of MEMS for 

photonic integrated circuits. A review of experimentally 
demonstrated devices is provided, with a special focus on the 
basic building blocks for large-scale PICs, including phase 
shifters 
and 
couplers/switches. 
Specifically, 
device

performance and prospects for integration into large-scale PICs 
are discussed and quantitatively assessed. The insights obtained 
provide relevant guidelines to design MEMS for advanced 
PICs, which is of particular value given current efforts aimed at 
adopting MEMS technology as a standard process module in 
photonics foundries [122]. The widespread integration of 
MEMS in PICs will provide new functionality and can be 
combined with existing advanced photonics modules, such as 
high-speed photodetectors and modulators. As such, designers 


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
13

will have access to a powerful toolbox of advanced photonics 
capabilities for low-loss, low-power and high-performance
PICs for applications in information and communication 
technologies, sensors for consumer electronics, LIDAR 3D 
imaging, biosensing, quantum sensing or quantum information 
processing. 

APPENDIX

A.Extraction of phase shift 

Tunable ring resonators relying on phase shifting often do

not report the maximum phase shift required for their reported 
resonant wavelength shift Δ𝜆. When the free spectral range 
(FSR) was stated, we include the paper in the FoM plots in 
III.A. by extracting the phase shift as Δϕ = Δλ FSR
⁄
.

B.Extraction of insertion loss 

Many reports do not include a measurement of IL. IL is a key 

figure and, when possible, we estimated it based on the 
actuation principle and platform used as follows. We did not 
include propagation loss in the calculation, except for
particularly long devices, lossy propagation modes, and devices 
with only propagation losses as a source of loss. When not 
discussed, we included the following tapering losses for SOI 
devices: 0.05 dB/transition for in-plane tapered anchors, when 
key to the device functionality; and 0.1 dB/transition for 
changes in the cladding (e.g. transition from suspended to strip 
waveguide). For tunable ring resonators relying on phase shifts, 
we calculated the IL as  IL[dB] = α[dB/cm] × C = 2πλ0 𝑄int.FSR
⁄

, with C the round-trip length, and 𝑄int the intrinsic quality 
factor, approximated as the loaded quality factor when not 
available. If only a small portion of the round-trip is used for 
phase shifting, we subtract a propagation loss corresponding to 
the larger passive portion of the resonator.

C.Photonics compatibility assessment

In order to compare the performance and cost of components 

for large scale circuits, we assessed them on a "photonics 
compatibility" scale, indicating devices requiring only 1-2 steps 
of post-fabrication processing (High); more than 3 simple post-
processing steps but still compatible with current open 
foundries (Medium); complex post-processing with standard 
materials (Low); and non-standard materials and processes that 
are not foundry-compatible (Very low). When plotted, we added 
a random spread to devices with the same grade to improve 
readability.

D.Data availability

The data behind the discussion in Section III, comprising the 

extracted and calculated key figures from the literature, can be 
found in the linked dataset [123].

REFERENCES

[1]
C. R. Doerr, “Silicon photonic integration in telecommunications,” 
Front. Phys., vol. 3, Aug. 2015.

[2]
S. Rumley, D. Nikolova, R. Hendry, Q. Li, D. Calhoun, and K. 
Bergman, “Silicon Photonics for Exascale Systems,” J. Light. 
Technol., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 547–562, Feb. 2015.

[3]
K. De Vos, I. Bartolozzi, E. Schacht, P. Bienstman, and R. Baets, 
“Silicon-on-Insulator microring resonator for sensitive and label-free 
biosensing,” Opt. Express, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 7610–7615, 2007.

[4]
J. W. Silverstone, D. Bonneau, J. L. O’Brien, and M. G. Thompson, 
“Silicon Quantum Photonics,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 
vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 390–402, Nov. 2016.

[5]
M. Pantouvaki et al., “50Gb/s silicon photonics platform for short-
reach optical interconnects,” in Optical Fiber Communication 
Conference, 2016, pp. Th4H–4.

[6]
E. Timurdogan et al., “AIM Process Design Kit (AIMPDKv2.0): 
Silicon Photonics Passive and Active Component Libraries on a 
300mm Wafer,” in 2018 Optical Fiber Communications Conference 
and Exposition (OFC), 2018, pp. 1–3.

[7]
K. Giewont et al., “300-mm Monolithic Silicon Photonics Foundry 
Technology,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 
1–11, Sep. 2019.

[8]
P. Muñoz et al., “Silicon Nitride Photonic Integration Platforms for 
Visible, Near-Infrared and Mid-Infrared Applications,” Sensors, vol. 
17, no. 9, p. 2088, Sep. 2017.

[9]
A. E.-J. Lim et al., “Review of Silicon Photonics Foundry Efforts,” 
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 405–416, Jul. 
2014.

[10]
“Europractice 
Homepage.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 

http://www.europractice-ic.com/. [Accessed: 12-Jun-2019].

[11]
“MOSIS Integrated Circuit Fabrication Service.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.mosis.com/. [Accessed: 12-Jun-2019].

[12]
J. Sun, E. Timurdogan, A. Yaacobi, E. S. Hosseini, and M. R. Watts, 
“Large-scale nanophotonic phased array,” Nature, vol. 493, no. 7431, 
pp. 195–199, Jan. 2013.

[13]
T. J. Seok, N. Quack, S. Han, R. S. Muller, and M. C. Wu, “Highly 
Scalable Digital Silicon Photonic MEMS Switches,” J. Light. 
Technol., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 365–371, Jan. 2016.

[14]
A. Ribeiro, A. Ruocco, L. Vanacker, and W. Bogaerts, 
“Demonstration of a 4x4-port universal linear circuit,” Optica, vol. 3, 
no. 12, pp. 1348–1357, Dec. 2016.

[15]
J. Wang et al., “Multidimensional quantum entanglement with large-
scale integrated optics,” Science, vol. 360, no. 6386, pp. 285–291, 
Apr. 2018.

[16]
N. C. Harris et al., “Quantum transport simulations in a 
programmable nanophotonic processor,” Nat. Photonics, vol. 11, no. 
7, pp. 447–452, Jul. 2017.

[17]
Y. Shen et al., “Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits,” 
Nat. Photonics, vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 441–446, Jul. 2017.

[18]
D. Pérez et al., “Multipurpose silicon photonics signal processor 
core,” Nat. Commun., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 636, Sep. 2017.

[19]
M. C. Wu, O. Solgaard, and J. E. Ford, “Optical MEMS for 
Lightwave Communication,” J. Light. Technol., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 
4433–4454, Dec. 2006.

[20]
A.-Q. Liu, Photonic MEMS Devices: Design, Fabrication and 
Control. CRC Press, 2018.

[21]
F. Chollet, “Devices Based on Co-Integrated MEMS Actuators and 
Optical Waveguide: A Review,” Micromachines, vol. 7, no. 2, p. 18, 
Jan. 2016.

[22]
H. Du, F. Chau, and G. Zhou, “Mechanically-Tunable Photonic 
Devices with On-Chip Integrated MEMS/NEMS Actuators,” 
Micromachines, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 69, Apr. 2016.

[23]
L. Midolo, A. Schliesser, and A. Fiore, “Nano-opto-electro-
mechanical systems,” Nat. Nanotechnol., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 11, Jan. 
2018.

[24]
M. Stepanovsky, “A Comparative Review of MEMS-Based Optical 
Cross-Connects for All-Optical Networks From the Past to the 
Present Day,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2928–
2946, thirdquarter 2019.

[25]
M. Aspelmeyer, T. J. Kippenberg, and F. Marquardt, “Cavity 
optomechanics,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 1391–1452, Dec. 
2014.

[26]
H. H. Li, “Refractive index of silicon and germanium and its 
wavelength and temperature derivatives,” J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 561–658, 1980.

[27]
R. Soref and B. Bennett, “Electrooptical effects in silicon,” IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 123–129, Jan. 1987.

[28]
R. Amatya, C. W. Holzwarth, H. I. Smith, and R. J. Ram, “Efficient 
Thermal Tuning for Second-order Silicon Nitride Microring 
Resonators,” in Photonics in Switching, 2007, 2007, pp. 149–150.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
14

[29]
D. Liang and J. E. Bowers, “Photonic integration: Si or InP 
substrates?,” Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 578–581, Jun. 2009.

[30]
T. J. Kippenberg and K. J. Vahala, “Cavity Opto-Mechanics,” Opt. 
Express, vol. 15, no. 25, pp. 17172–17205, Dec. 2007.

[31]
Y. Kim, M. Takenaka, T. Osada, M. Hata, and S. Takagi, “Strain-
induced enhancement of plasma dispersion effect and free-carrier 
absorption in SiGe optical modulators,” Sci. Rep., vol. 4, p. 4683, Apr. 
2014.

[32]
C. Errando-Herranz, P. Edinger, and K. B. Gylfason, “Dynamic 
dispersion 
tuning 
of 
silicon 
photonic 
waveguides 
by 

microelectromechanical actuation,” in Lasers and Electro-Optics 
(CLEO), 2017 Conference on, 2017, pp. 1–2.

[33]
D. A. B. Miller, “Perfect optics with imperfect components,” Optica, 
vol. 2, no. 8, pp. 747–750, Aug. 2015.

[34]
D. J. Bell, T. J. Lu, N. A. Fleck, and S. M. Spearing, “MEMS 
actuators and sensors: observations on their performance and 
selection for purpose,” J. Micromechanics Microengineering, vol. 15, 
no. 7, pp. S153–S164, Jul. 2005.

[35]
H. J. Cho and C. H. Ahn, “A bidirectional magnetic microactuator 
using 
electroplated 
permanent 
magnet 
arrays,” 
J. 

Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 78–84, Feb. 2002.

[36]
M. Khoo and C. Liu, “Micro magnetic silicone elastomer membrane 
actuator,” Sens. Actuators Phys., vol. 89, no. 3, pp. 259–266, Apr. 
2001.

[37]
B. J. H. Stadler and T. Mizumoto, “Integrated Magneto-Optical 
Materials and Isolators: A Review,” IEEE Photonics J., vol. 6, no. 1, 
pp. 1–15, Feb. 2014.

[38]
S. Abe and K. Hane, “A silicon microring resonator with a nanolatch 
mechanism,” Microsyst. Technol., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 2019–2024, Sep. 
2015.

[39]
A. Unamuno and D. Uttamchandani, “MEMS variable optical 
attenuator with vernier latching mechanism,” IEEE Photonics 
Technol. Lett., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 88–90, Jan. 2006.

[40]
H. Liu and F. Chollet, “Moving Polymer Waveguides and Latching 
Actuator for 2 $ \times$ 2 MEMS Optical Switch,” J. 
Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 715–724, Jun. 2009.

[41]
H. Sattari, A. Toros, T. Graziosi, and N. Quack, “Bistable silicon 
photonic MEMS switches,” in MOEMS and Miniaturized Systems 
XVIII, San Francisco, United States, 2019, p. 13.

[42]
X. Chew et al., “An in-plane nano-mechanics approach to achieve 
reversible resonance control of photonic crystal nanocavities,” Opt. 
Express, vol. 18, no. 21, pp. 22232–22244, Oct. 2010.

[43]
M. Poot and H. X. Tang, “Broadband nanoelectromechanical phase 
shifting of light on a chip,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 104, no. 6, p. 
061101, Feb. 2014.

[44]
M. W. Pruessner, D. Park, T. H. Stievater, D. A. Kozak, and W. S. 
Rabinovich, “Broadband opto-electro-mechanical effective refractive 
index tuning on a chip,” Opt. Express, vol. 24, no. 13, pp. 13917–
13930, Jun. 2016.

[45]
M. W. Pruessner, D. Park, B. J. Roxworthy, T. H. Stievater, N. F. 
Tyndall, and W. S. Rabinovich, “Loss reduction in electro-
mechanically-tunable microring cavities,” Opt. Lett., p. 6, 2019.

[46]
K. Van Acoleyen, J. Roels, T. Claes, D. Van Thourhout, and R. Baets, 
“NEMS-based optical phase modulator fabricated on Silicon-On-
Insulator,” in Group IV Photonics (GFP), 2011 8th IEEE 
International Conference on, 2011, pp. 371–373.

[47]
K. V. Acoleyen, J. Roels, P. Mechet, T. Claes, D. V. Thourhout, and 
R. Baets, “Ultracompact Phase Modulator Based on a Cascade of 
NEMS-Operated Slot Waveguides Fabricated in Silicon-on-
Insulator,” IEEE Photonics J., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 779–788, Jun. 2012.

[48]
T. Ikeda, K. Takahashi, Y. Kanamori, and K. Hane, “Phase-shifter 
using submicron silicon waveguide couplers with ultra-small electro-
mechanical actuator,” Opt. Express, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 7031–7037, 
Mar. 2010.

[49]
S. M. C. Abdulla et al., “Tuning a racetrack ring resonator by an 
integrated dielectric MEMS cantilever,” Opt Express, vol. 19, no. 17, 
pp. 15864–15878, 2011.

[50]
L. J. Kauppinen et al., “Micromechanically tuned ring resonator in 
silicon on insulator,” Opt. Lett., vol. 36, no. 7, p. 1047, Apr. 2011.

[51]
C. Errando-Herranz, F. Niklaus, G. Stemme, and K. B. Gylfason, “A 
Low-power MEMS Tunable Photonic Ring Resonator for 
Reconfigurable Optical Networks,” in The 28th IEEE International 
Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS). Jan 
2015, 2015.

[52]
C. Errando-Herranz, F. Niklaus, G. Stemme, and K. B. Gylfason, “A 
MEMS tunable photonic ring resonator with small footprint and large 
free spectral range,” in Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and 
Microsystems (TRANSDUCERS), 2015 Transducers-2015 18th 
International Conference on, 2015, pp. 1001–1004.

[53]
C. Errando-Herranz, F. Niklaus, G. Stemme, and K. B. Gylfason, 
“Low-power microelectromechanically tunable silicon photonic ring 
resonator add–drop filter,” Opt. Lett., vol. 40, no. 15, pp. 3556–3559, 
2015.

[54]
T. Ikeda and K. Hane, “A microelectromechanically tunable 
microring resonator composed of freestanding silicon photonic 
waveguide couplers,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 102, no. 22, p. 221113+, 
Jun. 2013.

[55]
T. Ikeda and K. Hane, “A tunable notch filter using 
microelectromechanical 
microring 
with 
gap-variable 
busline 

coupler,” Opt Express, vol. 21, no. 19, pp. 22034–22042, 2013.

[56]
H. M. Chu and K. Hane, “A Wide-Tuning Silicon Ring-Resonator 
Composed of Coupled Freestanding Waveguides,”
Photonics 

Technol. Lett. IEEE, vol. 26, no. 14, pp. 1411–1413, Jul. 2014.

[57]
W. Jin, R. G. Polcawich, P. A. Morton, and J. E. Bowers, 
“Piezoelectrically tuned silicon nitride ring resonator,” Opt. Express, 
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 3174–3187, Feb. 2018.

[58]
B. Dong, H. Tian, M. Zervas, T. J. Kippenberg, and S. A. Bhave, 
“PORT: A piezoelectric optical resonance tuner,” in 2018 IEEE 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), 2018, pp. 739–742.

[59]
C. Castellan et al., “Tuning the strain-induced resonance shift in 
silicon racetrack resonators by their orientation,” Opt. Express, vol. 
26, no. 4, pp. 4204–4218, Feb. 2018.

[60]
H. Tian, B. Dong, M. Zervas, T. J. Kippenberg, and S. A. Bhave, “An 
unreleased MEMS actuated silicon nitride resonator with 
bidirectional tuning,” in 2018 Conference on Lasers and Electro-
Optics (CLEO), 2018, pp. 1–2.

[61]
A. W. Elshaari et al., “Strain-Tunable Quantum Integrated 
Photonics,” Nano Lett., vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 7969–7976, Dec. 2018.

[62]
G. N. Nielson et al., “Integrated wavelength-selective optical MEMS 
switching using ring resonator filters,” Photonics Technol. Lett. 
IEEE, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1190–1192, Jun. 2005.

[63]
C. Haffner et al., “Sub-V Opto-Electro-Mechanical Switch,” in 
Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (2019), paper STh3H.4, 
2019, p. STh3H.4.

[64]
Tianran Liu, Francesco Pagliano, René van Veldhoven, Vadim 
Pogoretskii, Yuqing Jiao, and Andrea Fiore, “Low-Voltage InP 
MEMS Optical Switch on Silicon,” presented at the ECIO 2019, 
Gent, Belgium, 2019.

[65]
M. W. Pruessner et al., “InP-based optical waveguide MEMS 
switches 
with 
evanescent 
coupling 
mechanism,” 
J. 

Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1070–1081, Oct. 
2005.

[66]
Z. K. Bishop et al., “Electro-mechanical control of an on-chip optical 
beam splitter containing an embedded quantum emitter,” Opt. Lett., 
vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 2142–2145, May 2018.

[67]
C. Papon et al., “Nanomechanical single-photon routing,” Optica, 
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 524–530, Apr. 2019.

[68]
Y. Akihama, Y. Kanamori, and K. Hane, “Ultra-small silicon 
waveguide coupler switch using gap-variable mechanism,” Opt. 
Express, vol. 19, no. 24, pp. 23658–23663, Nov. 2011.

[69]
K. Takahashi, Y. Kanamori, Y. Kokubun, and K. Hane, “A 
wavelength-selective add-drop switch using silicon microring 
resonator with a submicron-comb electrostatic actuator,” Opt 
Express, vol. 16, no. 19, pp. 14421–14428, Sep. 2008.

[70]
Y. Akihama and K. Hane, “Single and multiple optical switches that 
use freestanding silicon nanowire waveguide couplers,” Light Sci. 
Appl., vol. 1, no. 6, p. e16, Jun. 2012.

[71]
T. Nagai and K. Hane, “Silicon photonic microelectromechanical 
switch using lateral adiabatic waveguide couplers,” Opt. Express, vol. 
26, no. 26, pp. 33906–33917, Dec. 2018.

[72]
T. J. Seok, N. Quack, S. Han, and M. C. Wu, “50×50 Digital Silicon 
Photonic Switches with MEMS-Actuated Adiabatic Couplers,” in 
Optical Fiber Communication Conference (2015), paper M2B.4, 
2015, p. M2B.4.

[73]
S. Han, T. J. Seok, N. Quack, B.-W. Yoo, and M. C. Wu, “Large-
scale silicon photonic switches with movable directional couplers,” 
Optica, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 370–375, Apr. 2015.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
15

[74]
M. C. M. Lee and M. C. Wu, “MEMS-actuated microdisk resonators 
with variable power coupling ratios,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1034–1036, May 2005.

[75]
M.-C. M. Lee and M. C. Wu, “Tunable coupling regimes of silicon 
microdisk resonators using MEMS actuators,” Opt. Express, vol. 14, 
no. 11, p. 4703, 2006.

[76]
J. Yao, D. Leuenberger, M.-C. M. Lee, and M. C. Wu, “Silicon 
Microtoroidal Resonators With Integrated MEMS Tunable Coupler,” 
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 202–208, 
2007.

[77]
Z. Y. Li et al., “A reconfigurable coupled optical resonators in 
photonic circuits for photon shutting,” in 2017 19th International 
Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems 
(TRANSDUCERS), 2017, pp. 619–620.

[78]
X. Chew, G. Zhou, F. S. Chau, J. Deng, X. Tang, and Y. C. Loke, 
“Dynamic tuning of an optical resonator through MEMS-driven 
coupled photonic crystal nanocavities,” Opt. Lett., vol. 35, no. 15, pp. 
2517–2519, Aug. 2010.

[79]
S. Han, T. J. Seok, C.-K. Kim, R. S. Muller, and M. C. Wu, “Multicast 
silicon photonic MEMS switches with gap-adjustable directional 
couplers,” Opt. Express, vol. 27, no. 13, p. 17561, Jun. 2019.

[80]
T. Graziosi, H. Sattari, T. J. Seok, S. Han, M. C. Wu, and N. Quack, 
“Silicon photonic MEMS variable optical attenuator,” in MOEMS 
and Miniaturized Systems XVII, 2018, vol. 10545, p. 105450H.

[81]
T. Bakke, C. P. Tigges, and C. T. Sullivan, “1 /spl times/ 2 MOEMS 
switch based on silicon-on-insulator and polymeric waveguides,” 
Electron. Lett., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 177–178, Feb. 2002.

[82]
E. Bulgan, Y. Kanamori, and K. Hane, “Submicron silicon waveguide 
optical switch driven by microelectromechanical actuator,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., vol. 92, no. 10, p. 101110, Mar. 2008.

[83]
Timo Aalto, Mikko Harjanne, and Matteo Cherchi, “VTT’s micron-
scale silicon rib+strip waveguide platform,” presented at the 
Proc.SPIE, 2016, vol. 9891.

[84]
E. Aharon and D. Marom, “Fast switching via frustrated total internal 
reflection in silicon photonics MEMS-actuated waveguides,” in 2019 
International Conference on Optical MEMS and Nanophotonics, 
Daejeon, Korea, 2019.

[85]
R. Chatterjee and C. W. Wong, “Nanomechanical Proximity 
Perturbation for Switching in Silicon-Based Directional Couplers for 
High-Density 
Photonic 
Integrated 
Circuits,” 
J. 

Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 657–662, Jun. 2010.

[86]
X. Sun et al., “MEMS Tunable Hybrid Plasmonic-Si Waveguide,” in 
Optical Fiber Communication Conference (2017), paper Th2A.6, 
2017, p. Th2A.6.

[87]
S. Han, T. J. Seok, N. Quack, B. Yoo, and M. C. Wu, “Monolithic 
50×50 MEMS Silicon Photonic
Switches with Microsecond 

Response Time,” in Optical Fiber Communication Conference, San 
Francisco, California, 2014, p. M2K.2.

[88]
T. J. Seok, N. Quack, S. Han, R. S. Muller, and M. C. Wu, “Large-
scale broadband digital silicon photonic switches with vertical 
adiabatic couplers,” Optica, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 64–70, Jan. 2016.

[89]
T. J. Seok, K. Kwon, J. Henriksson, J. Luo, and M. C. Wu, “Wafer-
scale silicon photonic switches beyond die size limit,” Optica, vol. 6, 
no. 4, p. 490, Apr. 2019.

[90]
T. J. Seok, N. Quack, S. Han, W. Zhang, R. S. Muller, and M. C. Wu, 
“64×64 Low-loss and broadband digital silicon photonic MEMS 
switches,” in 2015 European Conference on Optical Communication 
(ECOC), 2015, pp. 1–3.

[91]
K. Kwon et al., “128×128 Silicon Photonic MEMS Switch with 
Scalable Row/Column Addressing,” in Conference on Lasers and 
Electro-Optics, San Jose, California, 2018, p. SF1A.4.

[92]
N. Quack, T. J. Seok, S. Han, R. S. Muller, and M. C. Wu, “Scalable 
Row/Column Addressing of Silicon Photonic MEMS Switches,” 
IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 561–564, Mar. 
2016.

[93]
T. J. Seok et al., “MEMS-Actuated 8×8 Silicon Photonic 
Wavelength-Selective Switches with 8 Wavelength Channels,” in 
Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (2018), paper STu4B.1, 
2018, p. STu4B.1.

[94]
S. Han, T. J. Seok, K. Yu, N. Quack, R. S. Muller, and M. C. Wu, 
“Large-Scale Polarization-Insensitive Silicon Photonic MEMS 
Switches,” J. Light. Technol., vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 1824–1830, May 
2018.

[95]
S. Abe and K. Hane, “Variable-Gap Silicon Photonic Waveguide 
Coupler Switch With a Nanolatch Mechanism,” IEEE Photonics 
Technol. Lett., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 675–677, Apr. 2013.

[96]
M.-M. Lee, D. Hah, E. K. Lau, H. Toshiyoshi, and Ming Wu, 
“MEMS-actuated photonic crystal switches,” IEEE Photonics 
Technol. Lett., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 358–360, Jan. 2006.

[97]
S. M. C. Abdulla et al., “Mechano-optical switching in a MEMS 
integrated photonic crystal slab waveguide,” 2011 IEEE 24th Int. 
Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst., pp. 9–12, 2011.

[98]
C. Errando-Herranz, M. Colangelo, S. Ahmed, J. Björk, and K. B. 
Gylfason, “MEMS tunable silicon photonic grating coupler for post-
assembly optimization of fiber-to-chip coupling,” in 2017 IEEE 30th 
International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 
(MEMS), 2017, pp. 293–296.

[99]
W. Yu et al., “MEMS-Based Tunable Grating Coupler,” IEEE 
Photonics Technol. Lett., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 161–164, Jan. 2019.

[100]
C. Errando-Herranz, N. L. Thomas, and K. B. Gylfason, “Low-power 
optical beam steering by microelectromechanical waveguide 
gratings,” Opt. Lett., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 855–858, Feb. 2019.

[101]
M. Petruzzella et al., “Electrically driven quantum light emission in 
electromechanically tuneable photonic crystal cavities,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett., vol. 111, no. 25, p. 251101, Dec. 2017.

[102]
M. Petruzzella et al., “Quantum photonic integrated circuits based on 
tunable dots and tunable cavities,” APL Photonics, vol. 3, no. 10, p. 
106103, Aug. 2018.

[103]
M. Cotrufo, L. Midolo, Ž. Zobenica, M. Petruzzella, F. W. M. van 
Otten, and A. Fiore, “Nanomechanical control of optical field and 
quality factor in photonic crystal structures,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 97, 
no. 11, p. 115304, Mar. 2018.

[104]
K. K. Tsia, S. Fathpour, and B. Jalali, “Electrical control of parametric 
processes in silicon waveguides,” Opt. Express, vol. 16, no. 13, pp. 
9838–9843, Jun. 2008.

[105]
C. V. Poulton et al., “Long-Range LiDAR and Free-Space Data 
Communication With High-Performance Optical Phased Arrays,” 
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1–8, Sep. 
2019.

[106]
I. Zand, B. Abasahl, U. Khan, and W. Bogaerts, “Controlling 
parasitics in linear optical processors,” in IEEE Photonics Benelux 
Chapter/ Annual Symposium 2018, Brussels, Belgium, 2018, pp. 1–4.

[107]
J. Kim et al., “Tunable Grating Couplers for Broadband Operation 
Using Thermo-Optic Effect in Silicon,” IEEE Photonics Technol. 
Lett., vol. 27, no. 21, pp. 2304–2307, Nov. 2015.

[108]
S. Gao et al., “Power-Efficient Thermal Optical Tunable Grating 
Coupler Based on Silicon Photonic Platform,” IEEE Photonics 
Technol. Lett., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 537–540, Apr. 2019.

[109]
C. P. Ho, Z. Zhao, Q. Li, S. Takagi, and M. Takenaka, “Tunable 
Grating Coupler by Thermal Actuation and Thermo-Optic Effect,” 
IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., vol. 30, no. 17, pp. 1503–1506, Sep. 
2018.

[110]
N. Quack et al., “Silicon Photonic MEMS: Exploiting Mechanics at 
the Nanoscale to Enhance Photonic Integrated Circuits,” in Optical 
Fiber Communication Conference (OFC) 2019, San Diego, 
California, 2019, p. M2D.3.

[111]
J. Jacobs et al., “Die level release of silicon photonic MEMS,” in 
Optical MEMS and Nanophotonics (OMN), 2016 International 
Conference on, 2016, pp. 1–2.

[112]
L. Carroll et al., “Photonic Packaging: Transforming Silicon Photonic 
Integrated Circuits into Photonic Devices,” Appl. Sci., vol. 6, no. 12, 
p. 426, Dec. 2016.

[113]
P. Edinger, C. Errando-Herranz, and K. B. Gylfason, “Reducing 
Actuation Nonlinearity of MEMS Phase Shifters for Reconfigurable 
Photonic Circuits,” in Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics 
(2019), paper SF2H.3, 2019, p. SF2H.3.

[114]
F. Niklaus, G. Stemme, J.-Q. Lu, and R. J. Gutmann, “Adhesive wafer 
bonding,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 99, no. 3, p. 031101, Feb. 2006.

[115]
X. Wang et al., “Wafer-Level Vacuum Sealing by Transfer Bonding 
of Silicon Caps for Small Footprint and Ultra-Thin MEMS 
Packages,” J. Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 460–
471, Jun. 2019.

[116]
W. Spengen, R. Modlinski, R. Puers, and A. Jourdain, “Failure 
Mechanisms in MEMS/NEMS Devices,” in Springer Handbook of 
Nanotechnology, B. Bhushan, Ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 1663–1684.

[117]
A. L. Hartzell, M. G. Da Silva, and H. R. Shea, MEMs reliability. 
New York: Springer, 2011.


JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019
16

[118]
N. T. Otterstrom, R. O. Behunin, E. A. Kittlaus, Z. Wang, and P. T. 
Rakich, “A silicon Brillouin laser,” Science, vol. 360, no. 6393, pp. 
1113–1116, Jun. 2018.

[119]
S. Maity et al., “Spectral Alignment of Single-Photon Emitters in 
Diamond using Strain Gradient,” Phys. Rev. Appl., vol. 10, no. 2, p. 
024050, Aug. 2018.

[120]
S. Meesala et al., “Strain engineering of the silicon-vacancy center in 
diamond,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 97, no. 20, p. 205444, May 2018.

[121]
Y.-I. Sohn et al., “Controlling the coherence of a diamond spin qubit 
through its strain environment,” Nat. Commun., vol. 9, no. 1, p. 2012, 
May 2018.

[122]
h2020morphic, 
“Home,” 
MORPHIC. 
[Online]. 
Available: 

https://h2020morphic.eu/. [Accessed: 14-Jun-2019].

[123]
C. Errando-Herranz et al., "Dataset for "Review of MEMS for 
photonic integrated circuits": table for reported key figures ", IEEE 
Dataport, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.21227/fp2b-
8b33. [Accessed: 16-Sep.-2019].

Carlos Errando-Herranz received the M.Sc. degree 
in automatic and electronic engineering from the 
Universitat Politècnica de València (UPV), Spain, in 
2013, and the Ph.D. degree in Micro-
and 

Nanosystems from the KTH Royal Institute of 
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 2018. He is 
currently a postdoctoral researcher at the Quantum 
Nanophotonics group at KTH. His current research 
interests include integrated photonics, quantum 
photonics, and MEMS.

Alain Yuji Takabayashi received the M.Sc. degree 
in electrical engineering and information technology
from the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule 
Zürich (ETHZ), in 2017. He is currently pursuing the 
Ph.D. degree with the Institute of Microengineering at
the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 
(EPFL), Switzerland. His current research is focused 
on the design, fabrication, and characterization of 
silicon photonic MEMS.

Pierre Edinger received the joint M.Sc. degree in 
micro- and nanotechnologies for integrated systems 
from INPG Phelma, France, the Politecnico di Torino, 
Italy, and EPFL, Switzerland, in 2017. He is currently 
pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of 
Micro and Nanosystems, KTH Royal Institute of 
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. His current 
research is focused on silicon photonics and MEMS.

Hamed Sattari received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees 
in Photonics-Telecommunication from University of 
Tabriz, Iran, in 2010 and 2014, respectively. After his 
PhD, he joined R&D unit of Nanotechnology 
Research 
Center 
(NANOTAM) 
at 
Bilkent 

University, Turkey, wherein he was designing 
plasmonic nano-antennas. In September 2016 he was 
awarded as a Swiss Government Excellence 
Scholarship holder for a Postdoctoral position at Q-
Lab, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 
(EPFL). Since September 2017 he is involved in 

silicon photonics projects with goal of realizing MEMS-based reconfigurable 
components including switches, phase shifters, and variable optical attenuators.

Kristinn B. Gylfason (M’99) received the B.Sc. and 
M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the 
University of Iceland in 2001 and 2003, respectively, 
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from 
KTH in 2010. He also received the title of Docent in 
micro- and nanosystems from KTH in 2015. From 
2003 to 2005, he was a Research Engineer with 
Lyfjathroun Biopharmaceuticals, Iceland. He
is 

currently an Associate Professor, leading the team 
with a focus on photonic nanodevices for biomedical 
and communications applications. In 2005, he 

received the Steinmaur Foundation Nanotechnology Graduate Study 
Scholarship.

Niels Quack (S’05–M’11–SM’15) received the M. 
Sc. degree from Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland, in 2005, and the Dr. 
Sc. 
degree 
from 
Eidgenössische
Technische 

Hochschule Zürich (ETH), Switzerland, in 2010.  
From 2011 to 2015 he was Postdoctoral Researcher 
and Visiting Scholar at University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA, within the Integrated Photonics 
Laboratory at the Berkeley Sensor and Actuator 
Center. From 2014 to 2015 he was Senior MEMS 
Engineer with sercalo Microtechnology, Neuchâtel, 

Switzerland. He is currently SNSF Assistant Professor at Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. Research interests 
include Photonic Micro- and Nanosystems, with an emphasis on Diamond 
Photonics and Silicon Photonic MEMS. He is Senior Member of IEEE, Steering 
Committee Member of the IEEE International Conference on Optical MEMS 
and Nanophotonics (OMN), General Chair of the IEEE OMN 2018, Member 
of OSA and SPIE, and he has authored and co-authored more than 50 papers in 
leading technical journals and conferences.


