arXiv:2212.06407v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  13 Dec 2022

Indian J. Phys. 96, 2385-2392 (2022)
[DOI: 10.1007/s12648-021-02190-2]

Logarithmic wave-mechanical effects in polycrystalline metals: Theory and experiment

Maksym Kraiev
Yuzhnoye State Design Office, Dnipro 49008, Ukraine

Kateryna Domina
Z. I. Nekrasov Iron and Steel Institute of NAS of Ukraine, Dnipro 49107, Ukraine

Violeta Kraieva
Department of Physics, Dnipro National University of Railway Transport, Dnipro 49010, Ukraine

Konstantin G. ZloshchastievŌłŚ

Institute of Systems Science, Durban University of Technology, Durban 4000, South Africa
(Dated: received: 9 November 2020 [Springer])

Schr┬©odinger-type wave equations with logarithmic nonlinearity occur in hydrodynamic models
of Korteweg-type materials with capillarity and surface tension, which can undergo liquid-solid or
liquid-gas phase transitions. One of the predictions of the theory is a periodic pattern of density
inhomogeneities occurring in the form of either bubbles (topological phase), or cells (non-topological
phase). Such inhomogeneities are described by solitonic solutions of a logarithmic wave equation,
gaussons and kinks, in the vicinity of the liquid-solid phase transition. During the solidification pro-
cess, these inhomogeneities become centers of nucleation, thus shaping the polycrystalline structure
of the metal grains. The theory predicts a Gaussian profile of material density inside such a cell,
which should manifest in a Gaussian-like profile of microhardness inside a grain. We report exper-
imental evidence of large-scale periodicity in the structure of grains in the ferrite steel S235/A570,
copper C-Cu/C14200, austenite in steel X10CrNiTi18-10/AISI 321, and aluminium-magnesium al-
loy 5083/5056; and also Gaussian-like profiles of microhardness inside an averaged grain in these
materials.

PACS numbers: 61.72.-y, 47.55.nb, 47.35.Fg
Keywords:
wave mechanics; polycrystalline metals; logarithmic Korteweg material; solidification; mi-
crostructure

1.
INTRODUCTION

Various crystalline structures occur in metals during
the process of solidification.
In pure metals, this is a
simple crystal lattice, which can be of a cubic, body-
centered cubic or face-centered cubic type. In real metals,
a more complicated picture occurs, due to the presence
of impurities, defects and other factors. Throughout the
meltŌĆÖs bulk, multiple centers of nucleation occur, so that
crystals begin to grow from those centers outwards, until
their boundaries reach each other. This is where inter-
faces develop between the borders of single-crystal do-
main grains. Finally, a polycrystalline structure occurs
as a large-scale pattern of adjacent grains [1ŌĆō3].
This leads to our first questions: how orderly is this
pattern, and, is the size and mass of each grain a com-
pletely random value? Aside from purely theoretical in-
terest, such questions have immediate practical impor-
tance. The microhardness of grains, their size and den-
sity distributions, are very important properties of poly-
crystalline metals and alloys, because they strongly affect
the macroscopic properties thereof, such as average hard-
ness, plasticity, viscosity and mass [4].

ŌłŚElectronic address: https://bit.do/kgz

These properties are formed when a grain nucleates
from the molt during the solidification process. Using
conventional statistical mechanics for such systems would
result in a very cumbersome description, due to the com-
plexity of its physical and chemical components.
One
could try to apply a ŌĆ£common wisdomŌĆØ reasoning: be-
cause numerous impurities are randomly distributed in
the molten bulk, and so are the associated nucleation
centers, distances between those centers are expected to
be random too. Consequently, one might anticipate that
the distribution of grainsŌĆÖ sizes would be uniform; or at
least, would have some wide plateau-like distribution, so
that no periodic large-scale pattern can form in the poly-
crystalline metals. But is this what actually happens?
It turns out that it is not. Numerous experimental data
and metallographic analysis reveal that the distribution
of grain sizes in cast metals is predominantly Gaussian;
although it also depends on how the material is treated.
Thus, during the collective recrystallization process, the
distribution usually has a Gaussian form, with a shift
towards larger sizes as temperature and soaking time on
heating increase [5ŌĆō7]. However, this distribution and rel-
evant formulae have been established in those materials
phenomenologically, while a proper theoretical explana-
tion of the Gaussian behaviour of grain size distributions
is still pending.
This raises a further question: is there an analytical


way of explaining the matters raised above? For example,
is it possible to find a set of effective collective degrees
of freedom, in which the description of the materials in
question can be substantially simplified, other than by
using ab initio many-body statistical mechanics? Is it
possible to find any universal laws and relations pertinent
to the systems in question, or, at least, to a wide range
thereof?
In this paper, we attempt to answer these questions,
both on theoretical grounds, and by doing experimental
studies of non-alloy structural steel S235/A570, copper
C-Cu/C14200, stainless steel X10CrNiTi18-10/AISI 321,
and aluminium-magnesium alloy 5083/5056. The paper
is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we give an overview of
the logarithmic Korteweg-type model, both in its wave-
mechanical and hydrodynamic representations, we also
describe its phase structure. The predictions of the model
pertinent to polycrystalline metallic materials are dis-
cussed in Sec. 3. The experimental setup and data are
described in Sec. 4, where we used the Vickers hardness
method for microhardness measurements of microstruc-
ture components. Discussion of results and conclusions
are presented in Sec. 5.

2.
THE MODEL

To address the problems mentioned in the Introduc-
tion, we use the wave-mechanical approach based on wave
equations with logarithmic nonlinearity. This approach
finds fruitful applications in the physics of condensed
matter, to mention just a few of the literature land-
marks [8ŌĆō15].
The wide applicability and universality
of logarithmic models can be explained by the fact that
logarithmic nonlinearity appears in a leading-order ap-
proximation in the effective description of those strongly-
interacting many-body systems in which interaction en-
ergies predominate kinetic ones, and which allow a fluid-
mechanical description, see Ref. [13] for details. Exam-
ples of such systems include not only low-temperature
quantum Bose liquids, such as dense Bose-Einstein con-
densates [10, 12] or superfluid helium-4 [11, 14, 15]; but
also Korteweg-type materials which can undergo liquid-
solid or liquid-gas phase transitions [8, 16]. In these ma-
terials, capillarity and surface tension play a substantial
role, which makes them useful for modeling various flows
with non-negligible surface and interface effects [17, 18].
One of the theoryŌĆÖs predictions is inhomogeneities of
density, caused by the existence of multiple soliton and
Gaussian-shaped solitary wave solutions for an underly-
ing logarithmic wave equation in the vicinity of a liquid-
solid phase transition. Each of these inhomogeneities can
manifest themselves in the form of ŌĆ£bubblesŌĆØ (density is
smaller at the center of a domain than at its bound-
aries) or ŌĆ£cellsŌĆØ (density is larger at the center than at
the boundaries). Recent studies of these phenomena were
done for natural silicate materials in geophysics [16], such
as magmas in volcanic conduits, where it is well-known

that (approximately) periodical flows and structures oc-
cur [8].

2.1.
Wave-mechanical representation

When molten metals cool to temperatures near their
solidification point, the characteristic kinetic energies of
their atoms become smaller than the interaction poten-
tials between them. This can happen, not only at low
temperatures, but also in high-density or effectively low-
dimensional systems. Moreover, such materials behave
more like fluids than solids or gases.
Therefore, following the line of reasoning of works
[13, 16], we assume that, in a leading-order approxima-
tion: (i) one can apply a hydrodynamical description to
such materials, by introducing a fluid function, which en-
codes the main properties of a flow, such as density and
velocity, (ii) the fluid functionŌĆÖs dynamics is governed by
a wave-mechanical equation, which somewhat resembles
the Schr┬©odinger equation, but with a nonlinear term, and
(iii) logarithmic nonlinearity occurs in this equation.
This equation can thus be written in the form

iŌłét╬© =
’┐Į
ŌłÆD

2 Ōłć2 ŌłÆ b ln
’┐Į
|╬©|2/Žü0
’┐Į’┐Į
╬©,
(1)

where b, Žü0 and D are real-valued parameters. Here, the
fluid wave-function ╬©(x, t) contains information about
the fluidŌĆÖs macroscopic parameters, such as density and
flow velocity; general discussion of such functions can be
found in Ref. [19], for example. One can show that the
nonlinear coupling b is a linear function of temperature,
b Ōł╝ T , therefore, by setting b = const from now on we
assume that our fluid is in an isothermal state [13].
Equation (1) must be supplemented with the normal-
ization condition
’┐Į

V
|╬©|2dV =
’┐Į

V
Žü dV = M,
(2)

where Žü = Žü(x, t) is fluid density, M and V are the total
mass and volume of the fluid. This condition leads to an-
alytical restrictions upon fluid functions: for the same set
of boundary conditions, Eq. (1) allows multiple normal-
izable (eigen)solutions which correspond to excited states
in the associated Hilbert space of the problem, for exam-
ple L2. In other words, a set of all fluid wavefunctions
must form a Hilbert space, which can be interpreted as
this fluid spontaneously ŌĆ£choosingŌĆØ to be in one of these
states (the ground state is still preferred, because it cor-
responds to the minimum of wave-mechanical energy).
Thus, the fluid function description is somewhat simi-
lar to the formalism of quantum mechanics, except that
the fluid function is essentially macroscopic. It does not
describe particles, but fluid parcels which are collective
degrees of freedom, while their microscopic (molecular
or atomic) structure is neglected. Nevertheless, one can
still use the formal similarities between fluid functions
and wavefunctions, as will be shown below.

2


2.2.
Hydrodynamic representation

Let us write the fluid wavefunction in the Madelung
form

╬© = ŌłÜŽü exp (iS),
(3)

where S = S(x, t) is a phase, which is related to fluid
velocity

u = DŌłćS,
(4)

under the simplifying assumption of irrotational flow.
Substituting Eq. (3) into Eq. (1), one obtains

ŌłétŽü + Ōłć ┬Ę (Žüu) = 0,
(5)

Ōłétu + u ┬Ę Ōłću ŌłÆ 1

ŽüŌłć ┬Ę T = 0,
(6)

with stress tensor T of the form

T = ŌłÆ D

4ŽüŌłćŽü ŌŖŚ ŌłćŽü ŌłÆ ╦£p I,
(7)

where I is the identity matrix,

╦£p = p(Žü) ŌłÆ 1

4DŌłć2Žü = ŌłÆbŽü ŌłÆ 1

4DŌłć2Žü
(8)

is capillary pressure, and

p(Žü) = ŌłÆbŽü
(9)

is a barotropic equation of state for the fluid pressure p.
Tensor (7) belongs to the Korteweg class, which is used
to model fluid mixtures with phase changes, capillarity
effects and diffuse interfaces [17, 18].
Thus, Eq. (1) is a concise way of writing two hydrody-
namic laws for mass and momentum conservation for a
two-phase compressible inviscid fluid with internal cap-
illarity whose flow is irrotational and isothermal. This
makes it useful for studies, especially considering the
large amount of analytical information about logarith-
mic wave equations which is already known.

2.3.
Phase structure and solutions

It is known that Korteweg-type material can be in dif-
ferent phases, depending on the sign of nonlinear cou-
pling [16]. On the other hand, this coupling is also related
to temperature. Therefore, the sign of b corresponds to
phases occurring at the materialŌĆÖs temperature being ei-
ther above or below a certain critical value.
Cellular phase.
For a positive coupling, the field-
theoretical potential density is given by

V(|╬©|2) = ŌłÆb|╬©|2 ’┐Į
ln (|╬©|2/Žü0) ŌłÆ 1
’┐Į
+ V0,
(10)

where V0 = 0. This potential has an upside-down Mex-
ican hat shape.
The local degenerate maxima of this
potential are located at |╬©| = |╬©e| ŌēĪ ŌłÜŽü0.

In this case, a solitary-wave solution of Eq. (1) has the
form of a Gaussian parcel

╬©(+)
g
(x, t) = ┬▒
’┐Į

Žü(+)
g
(x) exp
’┐Į
ŌłÆiŽē(+)
g
t
’┐Į
,
(11)

Žü(+)
g
(x) = ╦£Žü exp
’┐Į
ŌłÆ(x ŌłÆ x0)2

Ōäō2

’┐Į
,
(12)

Žē(+)
g
= b
’┐Į
┬»d ŌłÆ ln
’┐Į ╦£Žü

Žü0

’┐Į’┐Į
,
(13)

where ┬»d is the number of spatial dimensions, and

╦£Žü = M/ ╦£V , ╦£V = ŽĆ
┬»d/2Ōäō
┬»d, Ōäō =
’┐Į

|D/(2b)|
(14)

are the density peak value, effective volume and Gaussian
width, respectively.
The solution ╬©(+)
g
corresponds to the state with the
lowest frequency eigenvalue, Žē(+), which makes it analo-
gous to the ground state in wave mechanics. It has been
extensively studied since RosenŌĆÖs work [20].
Thus, if nonlinear coupling is positive, then our ma-
terial tends to fragment into clusters of density inhomo-
geneities with a Gaussian profile each, referred to here
as cells. In the multi-solution picture, this results in a
phase which is a composition of Gaussian-like cells. If
this phase occurs in the melt of a metal, then during the
solidification process the central regions of these cells are
likely to become nucleation centers; resulting in a poly-
crystalline structure.
Foam phase. If the nonlinear coupling is negative, then
the potential (10) has a habitual Mexican-hat shape, as-
suming V0 = ŌłÆbŽü0 = |b|Žü0. Its local maximum is located
at |╬©| = 0 and local degenerate minima are located at
|╬©| = |╬©e|. These minima correspond to the state with
the lowest eigenvalue of frequency Žē(ŌłÆ)
g
= 0. This indi-
cates the presence of multiple topological sectors in the
model, as well as topologically nontrivial solitons which
interpolate between these minima.
To the best of our knowledge, no topological solutions
have been found in an analytical form, but their existence
can be revealed by numerical studies. In ┬»d-dimensional
space, in Cartesian coordinates, this solution is searched
in the form of a product of ┬»d 1D kink solitons

╬©(ŌłÆ)
s
(x, t) =

┬»d
’┐Į

j=1
Žłj(xj, t),
(15)

and
each
of
these
1D
solitons
saturates
the
Bogomolny-Prasad-Sommerfield
(BPS)
bound
and
has
a
nonzero
topological
charge,
Q
=
╠║ŌłÆ1/2
0
[Žłj(xj ŌåÆ +Ōł×) ŌłÆ Žł(xj ŌåÆ ŌłÆŌł×)] ,
j
=
1, .., ┬»d,
where ╠║0 = Žü1/ ┬»d
0
. The plots of numerical solutions and
corresponding densities can be found in Fig. 2 of Ref.
[16].
Depending on the value of Q, all non-singular finite-
energy solutions can be cast into four topological sectors
[9]. For two of these sectors, the topological charge is not

3


(a) steel S235
(b) copper alloy C-Cu

(c) stainless steel X10CrNiTi18-10
(d) aluminium alloy 5083

FIG. 1: Microstructure of the studied materials.

zero, ensuring the stability of the corresponding solitons.
Thus, despite the kink solution being not the lowest fre-
quency one, its stability against decay into a ground state
╬©e is enhanced by a nonzero topological charge.
One can check that the mass density of the soliton,
given by
’┐Į’┐Į╬©(ŌłÆ)
s
’┐Į’┐Į2, grows from its center of mass outwards,
cf. Fig. 2 of Ref. [16]. Therefore, in three dimensions
the solution ╬©(ŌłÆ)
s
can be viewed as describing a bubble
with a characteristic size Ōäō. In a single-solution setup, it
would fill the entire space, but in a multi-soliton picture
of real material, kinks and antikinks would alternate and
match at distances of an order Ōäō.
In other words, in this phase our material forms foam-
like structures, which facilitates the release of previously
dissolved gas. Such a process can result either in boiling
during the liquid-gas transition (if the temperature of the
foam phase is larger than the temperature of the cellular
phase), or in the formation of cavities in the bulk of the
material, such as the pores and blowholes caused by de-
creased solubility and production of pertinent gases dur-
ing solidification (if the temperature of the foam phase is
smaller than the temperature of the cellular phase).
To summarize, depending on whether the temperature
of the foam phase is larger or smaller than that of the
cellular phase, the two-phase structure of our model can
be used for describing both liquid-gas and liquid-solid
transitions with formation of bubbles or cavities.

3.
THEORETICAL PREDICTIONS

When applied to liquid-solid phase transitions in
polycrystalline metals, the logarithmic wave-mechanical
model answers a number of the questions raised in the

Introduction, such as: is there any large-scale pattern in
those metalsŌĆÖ structure, and how one can derive or esti-
mate hardness and density distributions. We shall deal
with the application of our model to these problems, to
more closely examine how it resolves them in Sections 3.1
and 3.2, respectively.

3.1.
Large-scale structure of metals

Let us assume that the melt can be described as a log-
arithmic Korteweg-type material, at least in a leading-
order approximation. Then according to our model, its
large-scale density profile has a pattern consisting of re-
peating solitary-wave (gaussons) or alternating (kinks-
antikinks) solitonic solutions, depending on the phase our
material is in. In other words, density inhomogeneities,
which are not directly related to molecular bonding but
are a collective nonlinear wave-mechanical phenomenon,
emerge in a melt at a larger length scale.
In the case of metals undergoing a solidification pro-
cess, those points where the density profile reaches its
extrema, are more likely to become the centers of grainsŌĆÖ
nucleation. Therefore, an average grain size is not ran-
dom, instead its value must be close to the width Ōäō given
by equation (14).

3.2.
Microhardness

Apart from the non-random distribution of grains at
a large scale (about ten times the size of a grain, and
above), our model predicts a Gaussian-like distribution
of matter density inside a grain, i.e., from its center to
the boundary. This has implications for the distribution
of microhardness inside a grain, for the following reasons.
The non-uniform distribution of mechanical properties
and density inside a grain is known to occur as a result
of the following effects: segregation of chemical elements
and repulsion of impurities from the center of a grain
to its boundary during the crystallization process, the
formation of stresses, as well as defect clusters of the
crystal structure (dislocations), at the grainŌĆÖs boundary
[1, 2, 21, 22]. These processes start to occur in the melt,
alongside the formation of crystalsŌĆÖ seeds. Strength dis-
tribution depends on the stage the crystallization process
is in, as well as on the quantity and size of seeds and liquid
metal zones between them [3]. The crystals thus become
spatial regions with larger hardness.
A qualitative correspondence exists between non-
uniform distributions of strength and local density in-
side a grain. Variations of local density across a grain,
and the formation of regions of higher and lower density
are caused by the accumulation of crystal grate defects,
such as dislocations and vacancies. The higher probabil-
ity of defects being located towards the grainŌĆÖs bound-
aries leads, on average, to lower values of density at the
boundaries [23, 24].

4


TABLE I: Microhardness distribution inside a grain.

Microhardness (HV)

Alloy
at the
halfway to
near the
at the

center
boundary
boundary
boundary

Ferrite S235
77 ┬▒ 3
87 ┬▒ 3
94 ┬▒ 3
98 ┬▒ 4

Copper C-Cu
74 ┬▒ 3
78 ┬▒ 3
81 ┬▒ 3
96 ┬▒ 4

Austenite X10CrNiTi18-10
205 ┬▒ 5
224 ┬▒ 5
244 ┬▒ 6
269 ┬▒ 9

Aluminium 5083
79 ┬▒ 3
87 ┬▒ 2
92 ┬▒ 2
98 ┬▒ 3

The redistribution of density inside the melt region of
a size comparable to the size of the future grain occurs
during the meltŌĆÖs cooling and crystallization. Metals have
a lower density in a liquid state than in a solid one, cf.
steel: 6500-6800 versus 7700-8000 kg/m3, copper: 8217
versus 8930 kg/m3, and aluminium: 2382 versus 2700
kg/m3.
As the melt cools, the growth of crystals from crys-
tallization centers increases the volume of denser matter,
until the boundaries of different grains touch each other.
In the crystal which is thus forming, the redistribution
of density occurs from its center to its boundary (with a
minimum at the boundary), due to the above-mentioned
effects as a result of defects. This is a continuous process
until the temperature reaches about half of the alloyŌĆÖs
melting temperature.
In a completely solidified grain,
hardness and density both follow a normal distribution,
but in an anti-correlated way: hardness has a maximum
value at the grainŌĆÖs boundary, whereas density achieves
its maximum in the center. The plastic deformation of a
grain might increase the amplitude of this distribution,
but it does not qualitatively change its main feature.
Therefore, our model predicts the periodic distribution
of hardness across the specimen, with the average period
being equal to the average size of a grain; and both of
these values being equal to the characteristic length scale
Ōäō.
In the next section, we compare these predictions with
experimental data.

4.
MODEL-EXPERIMENT COMPARISON

To confront our model predictions with experiment,
we study a number of the most common polycrystalline
metallic materials: structural steel S235/A570, copper
C-Cu/C14200, stainless steel X10CrNiTi18-10/AISI 321,
and aluminium-magnesium alloy 5083/5056.
The microstructure of steel S235/A570 consists of the
ferrite (light regions in Fig. 1a) and pearlite (dark re-
gions in Fig. 1a) phases; their ratio is about 75/25, re-
spectively. Ferrite grains mainly have an equiaxial struc-

ture, with the exception of a few stringer grains of an
elongated shape. They have no particular spatial orien-
tation, and their size is about 20 ┬Ąm. Sizes of pearlitic
microconstituent grains for this steel vary between 5 and
45 ┬Ąm.
The microstructure of the copper alloy specimen con-
sists of approximately equiaxed grains of a size about 100
┬Ąm, see Fig. 1b. Similarly to the previous material, a few
stringer grains of an elongated shape are present. Also,
deformation twins can be found inside the grains.
The microstructure of the stainless steel specimen is
austenitic, and consists of polyhedral grains of a size of
about 100 ┬Ąm on average, Fig.
1c.
As in the copper
specimen, one can also encounter deformation twins in
this steel.
Finally, the microstructure of the aluminium alloy
specimen consists of approximately equiaxed grains of
a size about 30 ┬Ąm, see Fig. 1d. A small quantity of sec-
ondary ferric and silicon phases can be found both inside
the grains and on their boundaries.
Based on this data and using Eq. (14), one can deduce
a bound for the parameters of the models for each of the
specimens. We obtain that |D/b| Ōēł 0.8 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ9 m2 for
ferrite steel, |D/b| Ōēł 2 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ8 m2 for copper alloy and
stainless steel, and |D/b| Ōēł 1.8 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ9 m2 for aluminium
alloy.
Furthermore, microhardness measurements were per-
formed for the above-mentioned materials, using the
Vickers hardness method. The load during the measure-
ments was chosen according to the size of an indentation
in a specimen. The test force was chosen to be either
0.025 or 0.05 N, depending on the grainŌĆÖs size, accord-
ing to ISO 6507-1:2005(E) specifications. The points of
the loadŌĆÖs application were in the following areas of the
grain: the grainŌĆÖs center, half-way to the grainŌĆÖs bound-
ary, near the boundary, and on the boundary. Measure-
ments were performed with a statistical dataset of 40-90
points per sample. The subsequent statistical analysis
was performed at a confidence level of 95 %, see Table
I. The profiles of microhardness measured across each
specimen for the chosen materials are presented in Fig.
2.

5


FIG. 2: Hardness profiles (left column) and grain size distributions (right column) in, from top to bottom: ferrite S235, copper
alloy C-Cu, austenite X10CrNiTi18-10, and aluminium alloy 5083.

Let us compare the experimental results with our the-
oretical predictions. Because hardness is related to the
density of a material, theory predicts the occurrence of
a periodic structure at length scales which are larger, by
an order of magnitude, than the size of an average grain.
The experimental data confirms this conjecture, see the
left-hand side plots in Fig. 2. Statistical analysis con-

firms that the average size of the grains is not random:
its distribution is far from being uniform, but always has
a clear global maximum, regardless of the material, cf.
the right-hand side plots in Fig. 2.
Furthermore, if the distribution of hardness inside each
grain is anti-correlated with the distribution of density,
the data confirms that the latter must have a Gaussian-

6


like form, as predicted by the model. The measured av-
erage sizes of the grains thus provide an experimental
bound for the Gaussian widths of the soliton-type solu-
tions Ōäō for each material studied.

5.
CONCLUSION

In this paper, we considered the so-called logarithmic
Korteweg-type materials, which are hydrodynamic mod-
els using wave equations with logarithmic nonlinearity.
Their corresponding solutions have either trivial and non-
trivial topology - when coupling is, respectively, positive
or negative.
These models were applied to various materials, such
as polycrystalline alloys, which undergo liquid-solid or
liquid-gas phase transitions. Such materials have a two-
phase structure, where each phase is labeled by a sign
of the coupling of logarithmic nonlinearity and described
by above-mentioned solutions.
From a physical point of view, such solutions describe
the density inhomogeneities, which can manifest them-
selves in the form of either bubbles (cavities) or cells in
the vicinity of the liquid-gas (liquid-solid) phase transi-
tion.
In materials undergoing a solidification process,
these inhomogeneities become centers of nucleation of
grains occurring in the liquid phase in the vicinity of a
melting point. One of the theoryŌĆÖs predictions is a large-
scale periodical Gaussian-like pattern, which occurs in-
stead of expected randomness, if based on conventional
statistical arguments. Due to additional processes and ef-
fects occurring during solidification, this periodicity can
distorted, but not entirely destroyed.
The
single-peaked
(predominantly
Gaussian)
be-
haviour of the distribution of grain sizes was estab-
lished phenomenologically a long time ago [5, 6], but its
statistical-mechanical theoretical explanation was hith-
erto unknown, to the best of our knowledge. In this pa-
per, the occurrence of Gaussian-like repeating patterns
is not only explained on hydrodynamic and statistical-
mechanical grounds, but also used for describing den-
sity and hardness of polycrystalline metals. This illus-
trates the importance of taking into account properties
of non-solid (liquid and gas) phases of a solidifying ma-
terial when trying to model its solid phaseŌĆÖs mechanical

properties.
In previous works, natural silicate materials, such as
magmas in volcanic conduits, were considered [8, 16],
and the (approximately) periodical flows and structures
were established.
In this paper, we reported experi-
mental studies of the structural (quasi)periodicity, mi-
crohardness, density and size of grains in structural
steel S235/A570, copper C-Cu/C14200, stainless steel
X10CrNiTi18-10/AISI 321, and aluminium-magnesium
alloy 5083/5056.
To conclude, the wave-mechanical logarithmic model
explains spatial variations in density and hardness of
polycrystalline metals originating from their liquid phase
during the solidification process. At a microstructural
level, domains of spatial density variations form, which
have Gaussian profiles of values, and the peaks of their
distribution functions strongly affect the polycrystalline
structure of the metal grains. The obtained results, along
with their comparison with experiment, indicate an ap-
plicability of the model of a Korteweg type to a wide
range of polycrystalline alloys. This allows us to provide
analytical estimates for some of their mechanical charac-
teristics, which are most important for applications.

Acknowledgments

K.G.Z. is grateful to participants of the XXVI Interna-
tional Conference on Integrable Systems and Quantum
Symmetries (ISQS-26) for stimulating discussions and
remarks [25]. This research is supported by the Depart-
ment of Higher Education and Training of South Africa
and in part by the National Research Foundation of
South Africa (Grants Nos. 95965, 132202 and 131604).
Proofreading of the manuscript by P. Stannard is greatly
appreciated.

Compliance with Ethical Standards

Availability
of
data
and
materials
The data may
be available from the first author upon request.
Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflict of
interest.

References

[1] I V Salli Structure Formation in Alloys (USA: Springer)
114 (1964)
[2] I I Novikov and V S Zolotorevskiy Dendritnaya Likvat-
siya v Splavakh (Dendritic Segregation in Alloys) (USSR:
Nauka) 156 (1966) [in Russian]
[3] M C Flemings Solidification Processing (USA: McGraw-
Hill) 364 (1974)
[4] S P A Gill and C J Campbell J. Mater. Res. 34 1645

(2019)
[5] S A Saltykov Stereometricheskaya metallografiya (Stere-
ometric
metallography)
(USSR:
Metallurgizdat)
446
(1958) [in Russian]
[6] S S Gorelik Rekristallizatsiya metallov i splavov (Recrys-
tallization of metals and alloys) (USSR: Metallurgy) 568
(1978) [in Russian]
[7] E J Lezinskaya and T N Buriak Probl. At. Sci. Technol.
- Phys. Radiat. Eff. Radiat. Mater. Sci. 3 66 (2004)
[8] S De Martino, M Falanga, C Godano and G Lauro Eu-

7


rophys. Lett. 63 472 (2003)
[9] K G Zloshchastiev Acta Phys. Polon. 42 261 (2011)
[10] A V Avdeenkov and K G Zloshchastiev J. Phys. B: At.
Mol. Opt. Phys. 44 195303 (2011)
[11] K G Zloshchastiev Eur. Phys. J. B 85 273 (2012)
[12] K G Zloshchastiev Z. Naturforsch. A 72 677 (2017)
[13] K G Zloshchastiev Z. Naturforsch. A 73 619 (2018)
[14] T C Scott and K G Zloshchastiev Low Temp. Phys. 45
1231 (2019)
[15] K G Zloshchastiev Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 33 1950184
(2019)
[16] K G Zloshchastiev Europhys. Lett. (EPL) 122 39001
(2018)
[17] J E Dunn and J B Serrin Arch. Rat. Mech. Anal. 88 95
(1985)
[18] D M Anderson, G B Mc Fadden and A A Wheeler Annu.
Rev. Fluid Mech. 30 139 (1998)

[19] Yu A Rylov J. Math. Phys. 40 256 (1999)
[20] G Rosen J. Math. Phys. 9 996 (1968)
[21] S F Kiseleva, N A Popova, N A Koneva and E V Kozlov
Lett. Mater. 2 84 (2012)
[22] N A Koneva, L I Trishkina, A N Zhdanov, O B Pereval-
ova, N A Popova and E V Kozlov Phys. Mesomech. 9 87
(2006)
[23] V N Gridnev, V G Gavrilyuk and Yu N Meshkov
Prochnost i Plastichnost Holodnodeformirovannoj Stali
(Strength and Ductility of Cold-Deformed Steel) (USSR:
Naukova dumka) 231 (1974) [in Russian]
[24] O A Kaybyshev and R Z Valiyev Granitsy Zeren i
Svoystva Metallov (Grain Boundaries and Metal Prop-
erties) (USSR: Metallurgiya) 216 (1987) [in Russian]
[25] M Kraiev, K Domina, V Kraieva and K G Zloshchastiev
J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 1416 012020 (2019)

8


