Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi
Single crystal

Anil Kumar1, Rajendra Loke1, Arindam Pramanik2, Rajdeep
Sensarma2, Sitaram Ramakrishnan3, Om Prakash4*, Biplab
Bag5, Arumugam Thamizhavel1 and Srinivasan
Ramakrishnan6*

1Department of Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science,
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, 400005, India.
2Department of Theoretical Physics, Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research, Mumbai, 400005, India.
3Department of Quantum Matter, AdSE, Hiroshima University,
Higashi-Hiroshima, 739-8530, Japan.
4Quantum Computing Hardware, VTT Technical Research
Centre of Finland, Espoo, 02150, Finland.
5Amity Institute of Applied Sciences, Amity University
Jharkhand, Ranchi, 834002, India.
6Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Pune, 411008, India.

*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s):

om.prakash.shukla@icloud.com; ramky07@gmail.com;

Abstract

It was presumed that semimetal Bismuth (Bi) would not show super-
conductivity (SC) even at ultra-low temperatures (<10 mK) due to
its very low carrier density (≈ 3 × 1017cm−3). Recently, we have
established bulk superconductivity in ultra-pure (99.9999%) Bi single
crystal at TC = 0.53 mK with an extrapolated upper critical field
HC(0) = 5.2µT measured along the [0001] (trigonal) -crystallographic
direction [1]. At very low concentrations of the charge carriers, we
are dealing with fragile Cooper pairs with an estimated large coher-
ence length ξGL(0) ≈ 96µm. We also stated that one needs to go

1

arXiv:2212.03543v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  7 Dec 2022


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

2
Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal

beyond the conventional electron-phonon coupling (BCS-like) mecha-
nism to understand the SC state in Bi. Bi is a compensated semi-
metal with electrons and holes as charge carriers. In order to find
the charge carriers responsible for the SC, we report the temper-
ature dependence of the anisotropic critical field along the [01¯10]
(bisectrix)-crystallographic direction and compared it with the earlier
data from measurements along the trigonal. Our theoretical analysis
of the anisotropy of critical fields suggests that the light electrons in
the three pockets of Bi bands are responsible for the SC and indicates
that Bi is an extremely weak type-II (close to type-I) superconductor.
Finally, we review the current theories proposed to explain the SC in Bi.

Keywords: Superconductivity, Low carrier density, ultra-low temperature

Although semimetal Bi has been studied for more than a century, it still
draws attention from both theorists and experimentalists who work in the
frontier areas of condensed matter research [2]. Bismuth with the electronic
configuration ([Xe]- 4f15 5d10 6s2 6p3) crystallizes into a distorted rhombo-
hedral structure described by the space group R¯3m (166) with a = 4.538
˚A and c = 11.823 ˚A. The unit cell consists of two pentavalent Bi atoms, giv-
ing rise to a Fermi surface (FS) comprising of four ellipsoidal-shaped pockets:
three electron and one hole pocket; making Bi nearly charge compensated
semimetal. These pockets account for a very small (≈ 10−5) area of the FS
resulting in a carrier density of n ≈ p ≈ 3 × 1017/cm3, small density of states
at FS g(EF) ≈ 4.2 × 10–6/(eV − atom) (see figures 1-3 in SM). The low car-
rier density translates to a single charge carrier shared by nearly 100,000 Bi
atoms. This led to a presumption that, if at all, superconductivity in bulk Bi
would occur only at ultra-low temperatures. Indeed in 2016 [1] studying a high
purity (6N) single crystal of Bi, some of us established superconductivity below
TC = 0.53mK with an estimated upper critical field of HC(0) ≈ 5.16 ± 0.06µT
along the [0001] (trigonal)-crystallographic direction.
Extensive studies on the charge carriers have established that the elec-
trons in Bi have small effective masses (meff ≈ 0.001me) with significant
anisotropy (meff(B ∥ binary)/meff(B ∥ bisectix) ≥ 200), while the holes are
heavier (meff ≈ 0.07me) and have relatively isotropic effective mass (anisotropy
≈ 10)[3]. To better understand the nature and possible mechanism of supercon-
ductivity in Bi, we have studied the critical field anisotropy in superconducting
Bi using dc magnetization measurements. Here, we report measurement of the
temperature dependence of the upper critical field in a 6N highly pure single
crystal of Bi along the [01¯10] (bisectrix)-crystallographic direction and present
a comparison with the critical field measured along the trigonal [1]. Our the-
oretical analysis of the electronic g-factor, together with the observed critical
field anisotropy suggest that the light electrons are primarily responsible for
the superconductivity in Bi.


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal
3

To study the upper critical field along bisectrix, a Bi crystal sized 2.1 ×
0.3×0.2 cm3 (from the same batch used in [1], RRR ≥ 500) was cut along the
[01¯10] crystallographic direction (see figure 1 in SM). The crystal was push-
fitted to an annealed high-purity (5N) silver (Ag) rod with fine Ag powder
at the interface to enhance effective surface contact area (see fig. [1]). The
Ag rod was further pressed onto the crystal to provide better thermal contact
and threaded to the Cu nuclear stage (NS), enabling cooling of the sample
down to T ≈ 100µK. The dc-magnetization measurement assembly consists of
a magnetometer pick-up coil (4 turns) and an excitation coil, both made up
of superconducting niobium (Nb). The pickup coil as well the excitation coil
outgoing leads are twisted in pairs and enclosed in Pb foil to minimise cou-
pling to the external magnetic fields and reduce noise in the measurements.
The measurement assembly was enclosed in a magnetic shielding consisting of
high permeability material Cryoperm-10 (µr ≥ 104 at 4.2K, SEKELS GmbH,
Germany) and superconducting lead (Pb) shields and attached to the mix-
ing chamber (MC, T= 7mK) plate of the dilution fridge (DRS 1000, Leiden
Cryogenics, Netherlands). This magnetic shielding setup is tested to shield the
sample from the external magnetic fields of the order of Bext ≈ 10mT down to
Bshielded ≲ 10nT, when there is no current in the primary coil. The magnetome-
ter coil is wound directly onto the single crystal to maximize the filling fraction
and connected to the input coil of the dc-SQUID (Tristan Technologies, USA).
Figure [1] shows the schematic drawing of the measurement setup.

Fig. 1 The schematic drawing of the measurement setup with magnetic shielding assem-
bly: (Right) The overview of the measurement setup consisting of an excitation coil
(B/I ≈ 0.04µT/µA) enclosed in magnetic shields attached to the MC, Pt-NMR thermome-
ter and samples mounted on the NS plate (100 µK). (Middle) Actual measurement setup
in the dilution insert. The arrows mark different components shown in the drawing. (Left)
Bi single crystal oriented along the [01¯10] (bisectrix)-crystallographic direction is attached
to the silver rod. The measurement setup used here is similar to the thermalization and
measurement arrangements reported earlier [1].


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

4
Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal

Apart from shielding external magnetic fields, the magnetic shields also
decrease the field produced by the enclosed primary coil. The excitation coil
was calibrated while enclosed in the magnetic shielding assembly at 4.2 K
using a single-axis magnetometer with the low field probe (Bartington Instru-
ments Ltd, England, ±1nT resolution) to accurately determine the excitation
magnetic fields used in the measurements. The pick-up coil is connected to the
dc-SQUID (Fig [1]), which in turn are connected to the RF-amplifier fixed at
the head of the cryostat at room temperature. The RF-head is connected to
the squid control unit which directly reads output in volts. The dc−SQUID
output has been calibrated at 4.2 K by measuring the diamagnetic signal from
classical superconductors, Nb and Pb. To calibrate the SQUID output voltage
with the diamagnetic susceptibility, we used a Rh metal of the same dimension
as Bi crystal and measured the jump in the SQUID output voltage at the tran-
sition temperature with different excitation fields. We used similar excitation
and pick-up coil setups consisting of the magnetic shields mentioned above for
calibration (see [1]).
The experiment was carried out in a dilution refrigerator equipped with
a single Cu-adiabatic nuclear demagnetization stage. The Cu-nuclear stage
was first cooled by the dilution refrigerator down to 7 mK followed by
magnetization of the Cu-nuclear spins by applying a magnetic field of 9 T
using a superconducting magnet (Cryogenics, UK). The Cu-nuclear stage
was thermally connected to the mixing chamber using an Aluminium (Al)
superconducting thermal switch to facilitate isothermal magnetization. The
application of the 9 T magnetic field heats up the Cu-stage to nearly 40 mK
due to the heat of magnetization and we have to wait for nearly 36 hours
to cool down the magnetized Cu-stage to 10 mK. Subsequently, the Al ther-
mal switch is turned off to thermally disconnect the Cu-NS from the MC by
removing the current in the solenoid enclosing Al switch. A slow adiabatic
demagnetization of Cu nuclear spins over a period of 48 hours cools down the
NS to a base temperature of 100 µK. Slow demagnetization helps in maintain-
ing thermal equilibrium between the samples and NS as well as with the NMR
thermometer. We used 195Pt-NMR thermometer for the temperature measure-
ments below 10 mK during adiabatic demagnetization. The NMR thermometer
is calibrated against a Cerium Magnesium Nitrate (paramagnetic thermome-
ter) and a SQUID based noise thermometer (MAGNICON GmbH, Germany)
at 10 mK. The SQUID based noise thermometer can also measure tempera-
tures down to 1mK and is used along with the NMR thermometer below 10
mK. The details of the adiabatic TIFR nuclear refrigerator with temperature
measurement and calibration are given in an earlier report [4].
The superconducting transition of the Bi in a excitation field of 0.2 µT
along the bisectrix is observed (see figure 6 in SM) below 0.53 mK in the form
of a sharp jump in the dc-susceptibility (χ). The TC = 0.53 mK is in agree-
ment with the TC observed for field along the trigonal [1]. The SC transition
is suppressed to lower temperatures with increasing excitation field. All mea-
surements were performed on the free end of the sample, away from the Ag


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal
5

rod joint, avoiding any artefact due to the interface effects. The temperature
dependence of the critical fields along the trigonal and bisectrix is shown in
fig.[2]. The data fitted to HC(T) = HC(0)[1 − (T/TC)2], to estimate the value
of the critical field at T= 0 K. The critical field value along the bisectrix esti-
mated from the fit is 1.58 ± 0.07µT. The resulting critical field anisotropy is:
Htri
C (0)/Hbis
C (0) = 3.26 ± 0.18.

Fig. 2 The temperature dependence of the critical fields HC for field along the trigonal and
bisectrix-crystallographic directions.

This critical field anisotropy presents both a challenge and possible window
into understanding the mechanism behind the suppression of superconductiv-
ity due to the magnetic field in Bi. If Bi was a strong type II-SC, the anisotropy
can be explained in terms of the anisotropic superfluid stiffness of the material
(inherited from the anisotropic band dispersion of Bi). However, the presence
of a sharp jump in the magnetization, and nearly identical diamagnetic suscep-
tibility in the field cooled (FC) and zero field cooled (ZFC) [1] precludes the
possibility that Bi is a strong type II-SC. This is not strange given that major-
ity of elemental superconductors are type-I superconductors. If we consider Bi
as a type-I superconductor, the critical field HC, is determined by equating
the free energy of the superconductor at zero magnetic field (field does not
penetrate below HC) with the free energy of the normal state at HC(0). The
anisotropy can then only arise from the dependence of the free energy of the


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

6
Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal

normal state on the direction of the applied field. This free energy is given by
the equation H2
C/2µ0(1 + χv), where χv is the volume magnetic susceptibil-
ity of the material. For a strongly diamagnetic material like Bi, χv ≈ 10−4 [5]
the anisotropic effects from χv can be neglected. Thus, it is hard to explain
an anisotropic factor of 3.26 in terms of HC. Additionally, a simple estimate
of HC, assuming an energy gap ∆(0) = 1.764kBTC [1] with TC = 0.53 mK
and pairing of electrons with the density of states (per pocket per spin) at the
Fermi level N e
0 = 9.2×1018 eV−1 cm−3 [6] leads to an isotropic HC(0) = 0.2µT
which is much lower than the values observed experimentally. A similarly low
value of HC(0) is obtained if one assumes hole pairing instead of electron pair-
ing. If both electrons and holes are paired, the estimated HC(0) = 0.3µT is
still lower than the experimentally measured values.
The anisotropy of the critical field can be understood if one assumes that
Bi is a weakly type II superconductor and the transition is given by the Pauli
paramagnetic limit. In this case, one needs to compare the pairing energy gain
to the Zeeman energy cost paid by the electrons/holes to maintain similar
Fermi surfaces for the two spin components: gµBHC = ∆(0)
√

2 [7]. To further test
this, we use the following model hamiltonian for each of the three electron
pockets to extract the anisotropic g factor.

He(⃗k) = [ℏvzkzσz + ℏv⊥(kxσx + kyσy)]sx + ∆bgsz
(1)

where σis and sis are the Pauli matrices in the spin and orbital space,
respectively. We use vz = 6.6 × 104 m/s, v⊥ = 8.1 × 105 m/s, and ∆bg =
7.5 meV [6]. Here z denotes the direction along the Γ − L line in the BZ, which
is also the long-axis of the electron pockets. Figure [3] shows the BZ and the
electron & holes pockets contributing to the FS of Bi. The electron pockets
have a tilt angle of 7◦ with respect to the binary-bisectrix plane.


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal
7

Fig. 3 (a) The first Brillouin zone and the Fermi surface of bismuth. (b) Enlarged electron
(blue) and hole (red) pockets. The electron pockets make α ≈ 7◦ tilt angle with respect to
binary-bisectrix plane. The pocket e2 lies along the bisectrix direction.

To find the spin-splitting in the presence of an external magnetic field, we
block diagonalize [8? ] the hamiltonian in the orbital space to get the effective
spin hamiltonian:

Hspin = ℏe

∆bg
vzv⊥Hxσx + ℏe

∆bg
vzv⊥Hyσy + ℏe

∆bg
v2
⊥Hzσz
(2)

where H is the external magnetic field. This allows us to extract the effective
g factors for different electron pockets for H in three different directions; trig-
onal, binary, and bisectrix (see fig.[3](b)), which are listed in table [1]. These
estimates (see SM for more details) are roughly consistent with estimates from
cyclotron resonances [3].

Table 1 Calculated g factor anisotropy of the three electron pockets in Bi

pocket
trigonal
binary
bisectrix

e1
293
1716
1000
e2
293
162
1979
e3
293
1716
1000

We note that a larger value of g in a particular direction implies a smaller
critical field HC(0) in that direction. From the table [1], we see that the g fac-
tor along the bisectrix direction is larger than the g factor along the trigonal


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

8
Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal

direction, and hence one would expect the critical field along trigonal to be
larger than the in-plane critical field along the bisectrix, as seen in our experi-
ments. Further, the ratio of HC(0) along trigonal to that along the bisectrix is
Htri
C (0)/Hbis
C (0) = gbis/gtri ≈ 3.41 (see table [1]). This matches quantitatively
with the anisotropy ratio of ≈ 3.26 measured experimentally. Our individual
estimates for Htri
C (0) ≈ 3.4µT and Hbis
C (0) ≈ 1µT are also close to the experi-
mentally observed values. We also note that the g factor for the hole pocket
is ≈ 63 in the trigonal direction and ≈ 0.8 in the plane [3]. Thus a Pauli limit
calculation with the hole pocket would yield a larger in-plane upper critical
field compared to the critical field along the trigonal, contrary to the experi-
mental findings. Thus the anisotropy seen in the experiments strongly points
to the pairing of electrons driving superconductivity in Bi.
We now consider the models put forth to explain the observation of SC
in Bi. Earlier, Srinivasan, et al. [9] used a simplified two-band model for
describing the longitudinal dielectric function and found that the attractive
interaction responsible for the instability of the normal ground state comes
not only from the exchange of lattice phonons, but also from the electron-hole
sound mode, provided the ratio of the averaged hole to the electron mass,
mh/me ̸= 1. This condition is easily satisfied in the case of Bi and they esti-
mated the TC to be around 1 mK. However, so far there is no experimental
evidence for existence of the electron-hole sound (EHS) mode (a sound-like
longitudinal collective mode) in Bi. Another model proposed by Zaahel Mata-
Pinz´on et al [10] numerically calculated electronic and vibrational densities of
states (eDOS and vDOS, respectively) of crystalline and amorphous forms of
Bi. The calculations showed that the eDOS of amorphous Bi (a-Bi) is about
4× larger than that of crystalline Bi (c-Bi) at the Fermi energy, whereas,
for the vDOS, the energy range of the amorphous is roughly the same as
the crystalline even though the actual shapes are quite different. Using the
experimental parameters obtained for a-Bi and employing a simple weak cou-
pling BCS mode, they gave an upper limit of 1.3 mK as the superconducting
transition for a pure Bi crystal. Furthermore, they suggested that the electron-
phonon coupling (λ) is larger in a-Bi as compared to c-Bi as indicated by the λ
obtained via McMillan’s formula, λc = 0.24 for c-Bi and while experiment and
theory suggest λa = 2.46 for a-Bi. Therefore, with respect to the c-Bi, super-
conductivity in a-Bi is enhanced by the higher values of λ and eDOS at the
Fermi energy. Though this model is simple and predicts TC of the Bi crystal
near to its actual value, use of the electron-phonon mechanism in the forma-
tion of Cooper pairs is not justified due to the failure of the Migdal’s adiabatic
approximation [11] which is central to any electron-phonon coupling scheme
including the BCS-theory. This is due to the fact that the Fermi energy (25
meV) and lattice energy (15 meV) of crystalline Bi are comparable. We believe
that the underlying mechanism for superconductivity in c-Bi is entirely differ-
ent from that of a-Bi. The mechanism for superconductivity in the latter is
due to electron-phonon interaction which is firmly established.


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal
9

Let us now look at the other models which suggest unconventional mecha-
nisms [6, 12–15] for the observation of superconductivity in Bi. S. Koley et.al.
[12] suggested that fluctuating excitons could be the glue for superconductiv-
ity in Bi. They showed that a two-fluid model composed of preformed and
dynamically fluctuating excitons coupled to a tiny number of carriers can pro-
vide a unified understanding of the anomalous temperature dependence of the
resistivity below 1 K as well as superconductivity in Bi below 1 mK. Our
unpublished resistivity data (see fig.5 in the SM) clearly show deviation from
T2 dependence of the resistivity below 800 mK and ultimately shows a T5

behaviour down to 15 mK (in agreement with an earlier study [16]). Koley’s
model has proposed that resonant scattering involving a very low density
of renormalized carriers and the excitonic liquid drives logarithmic enhance-
ment of vertex corrections, boosting superconductivity in Bi. The model also
explains the temperature dependence of the normal state resistivity down to
15 mK. However, at present it is not clear whether such a model can explain
the anisotropy observed in the critical fields. Bhaskaran [13] suggested that a
potential high TC SC from the RVB mechanism is lost in Bi. However, some
superconducting fluctuations survive and the tiny Fermi pockets are viewed
as remnant evanescent Bogoliubov quasiparticles that are responsible for the
anomalous normal state. Multi-band character admits possibility of PT vio-
lating chiral singlet superconductivity Bi. It remains to be seen whether such
a chiral superconductor exists and can explain the observed anisotropy. More-
over, Bhaskaran’s model also suggests elements Sb and As should also exhibit
SC at low temperatures. We did not observe SC in single crystals of both of
Sb and As (unpublished) down to 0.1 mK in a field of 0.4µT. Ruhman and Lee
[6] have argued that conventional electron-phonon coupling is too weak to be
responsible for the binding of electrons into Cooper pairs. They showed that
Bi is the first material to exhibit superconductivity driven by the retardation
effects of Coulomb repulsion alone. They claimed that SC of Bi at low carrier
concentration arises only due to the long-ranged interactions that are capable
of causing such an instability. In the absence of any experimental evidence of a
critical point, they investigated the more likely scenario in which the dynami-
cally screened Coulomb repulsion gives rise to an effective retarded attraction
on the energy scale of the longitudinal plasma oscillations. Further, they used
an approximate isotropic band structure and the random phase approxima-
tion for the screened Coulomb interaction. Within these approximations, they
found the above-mentioned weak coupling instability. The transition tempera-
ture is greatly enhanced by the existence of a heavy hole band which has a large
mass that allows for an enhancement of the static screening (Thomas-Fermi)
without enhancing the plasma frequency. They also showed that TC is not
dramatically decreased when the acoustic plasma mode is absent. Therefore it
was concluded that acoustic plasmon does not contribute to attractive interac-
tions in Bi. They emphasized that the model works only in the s-wave coupling
and the scenario might change with higher angular momentum coupling that


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

10
Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal

might result in the SC of Bismuth. Our analysis suggests that electrons (not
holes) are responsible for SC in Bi and that needs to be reconciled with [6].
Tewari and Kapoor [14] have suggested that superconductivity of Bi arises
due to the electrons belonging to the three pockets. They claimed that the
electrons in Bi behave like a rare gas with inter-particle separation of nearly
185˚A. In such a dilute system, the peculiar oscillatory behavior of the gen-
eralized electronic dielectric function at large distances can give rise to an
attractive interaction between two electrons. This model is valid at extremely
low temperatures for a very low density electron gas, so that there is no elec-
tron–phonon interaction and the interaction amongst the electrons can be
expressed in terms of weak two-body potential characterized by negative scat-
tering length. The dilute nature of the electron gas is crucial and necessary
requirement (i.e. kF × a ≪ 1, where a is the distance between atoms) to observe
SC in Bi. We have calculated the Sommerfeld coefficient(γ) using the formula
γ = π2

3 k2
Bg(EF), where g(EF) is the density of carriers at the Fermi level. Here
the carrier comprises both electrons and holes. A simple estimate of γ, assum-
ing the density of states (per pocket per spin) of electrons at the Fermi level,
Ne
0 = 9.2 × 1018eV−1cm−3 [6], and the density of states (per spin) of holes at
the Fermi level, Nh
0 = 3.5 × 1019eV−1cm−3 [6], gives γ ≈ 4 µJ K−2 mol−1. This
estimated value is quite close to the experimentally obtained γ ≈ 5 µJ K−2

mol−1 [1]. Therefore, a refinement of the model proposed by [14] is required
to understand the temperature dependence of the critical field. Finally, the
model proposed by Ekkehard Kr¨uger [15] relies on the hypothesis that the
non-adiabatic Heisenberg model presents a mechanism of Cooper pair forma-
tion generated by the strongly correlated atomic-like motion of the electrons
in narrow, roughly half-filled “superconducting bands” of special symmetry.
In this case, the formation of Cooper pairs is not only the result of an attrac-
tive electron–electron interaction but is additionally the outcome of quantum
mechanical constraining forces. According to his assertion only these con-
straining forces operating in superconducting bands may produce eigenstates
in which the electrons form Cooper pairs. He argued that both Bi at atmo-
spheric pressure and Bi at 122 Gpa have nearly half-filled narrow electronic
bands which may be responsible for superconductivity in both these phases of
Bi. However, this model does not provide any information on superconducting
properties of Bi apart from the estimation of TC. It is clear that more theo-
retical work is required to understand the superconducting properties of this
fragile electronic SC of Bi.

Acknowledgment

R.S. and A.P. acknowledge use of computational facilities at Dept. of The-
oretical Physics. R.S. acknowledges support from the Department of Atomic
Energy, Government of India, under Project Identification No. RTI 4002. R.S.
thanks Pratap Raychaudhuri, Unmesh Ghorai and Mursalin Islam for useful
discussions.


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal
11

References

[1] O. Prakash, A. Kumar, A. Thamizhavel, S. Ramakrishnan, Evidence
for bulk superconductivity in pure bismuth single crystals at ambient
pressure. Science 355(6320), 52–55 (2017)

[2] V. ´Edel’man, Electrons in bismuth. Advances in Physics 25(6), 555–613
(1976)

[3] Z. Zhu, B. Fauqu´e, Y. Fuseya, K. Behnia, Angle-resolved landau spectrum
of electrons and holes in bismuth. Phys. Rev. B 84, 115,137 (2011)

[4] H.R. Naren, R.S. Sannabhadti, A. Kumar, V. Arolkar, S. Ramakrishnan,
Setting up of a microkelvin refrigerator facility at tifr, journal = AIP
Conference Proceedings, volume = 1447, number = 1, pages = 503-504,
year = 2012

[5] H. Fukuyama, R. Kubo, Interband effects on magnetic susceptibility. ii.
diamagnetism of bismuth. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 28(3),
570–581 (1970). https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.28.570

[6] J. Ruhman, P.A. Lee, Pairing from dynamically screened coulomb repul-
sion in bismuth. Phys. Rev. B 96(235107) (2017)

[7] M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity (Dover Publications,
Mineola, New York, 1996)

[8] P. Wolff, Matrix elements and selection rules for the two-band model of
bismuth. Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 25(10), 1057–1068
(1964)

[9] S. Srinivasan, P. Bhattacharyya, S.S. Jha, Superconducting transition
temperature for semimetals like bismuth. Pramana 13(2), 131–143 (1979)

[10] Z. Mata-Pinz´on, A.A. Valladares, R.M. Valladares, A. Valladares, Super-
conductivity in bismuth. a new look at an old problem. PLOS ONE 11,
1–20 (2016)

[11] A.B. Migdal, Zh. eksp. teor. fiz.
Soviet Physics JETP 34, 1438–1446
(1958)

[12] S. Koley, M.S. Laad, A. Taraphder, Dramatically enhanced superconduc-
tivity in elemental bismuth from excitonic fluctuation exchange. Scientific
Reports 7(10993) (2017)

[13] G. Baskaran, Theory of ultra low tc superconductivity in bismuth: Tip of
an iceberg? arXiv:1705.01506v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] (2017)


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

12
Fragile electronic superconductivity in Bi Single crystal

[14] S. Tewari, C. Kapoor, Non-phononic mechanism of superconductivity in
pure semi-metallic bismuth single crystal at sub-milli kelvin.
Physics
Letters A 382(42), 3131–3134 (2018)

[15] E. Kr¨uger, Constraining forces stabilizing superconductivity in bismuth.
Symmetry 10(2) (2018)

[16] C. Uher, W.P. Pratt, High-precision, ultra low temperature resistivity
measurements on bismuth. Physical Review Letters 39(491) (1977)


