Quasiperiodic circuit quantum electrodynamics

T. Herrig,1 J. H. Pixley,2, 3 E. J. KГ¶nig,4, вҲ— and R.-P. Riwar1

1Peter GrГјnberg Institute, Theoretical Nanoelectronics,
Forschungszentrum JГјlich, D-52425 JГјlich, Germany
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Center for Materials Theory,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA
3Center for Computational Quantum Physics, Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010
4Max-Planck Institute for Solid State Research, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany

Superconducting circuits are an extremely versatile platform to realize quantum information hard-
ware and to emulate topological materials. We here show how a simple arrangement of capacitors
and conventional superconductor-insulator-superconductor junctions can realize an even broader
class of systems, in the form of a nonlinear capacitive element which is quasiperiodic with respect to
the quantized Cooper-pair charge. Our setup allows to create protected Dirac points defined in the
transport degrees of freedom, whose presence leads to a suppression of the classical finite-frequency
current noise. Furthermore, the quasiperiodicity can emulate Anderson localization in charge space,
measurable via vanishing charge quantum fluctuations. The realization by means of the macroscopic
transport degrees of freedom allows for a straightforward generalization to arbitrary dimensions and
implements truly non-interacting versions of the considered models. As an outlook, we discuss po-
tential ideas to simulate a transport version of the magic-angle effect known from twisted bilayer
graphene.

INTRODUCTION

Superconducting circuits are a prime candidate for
the realization of large scale quantum computers [1, 2].
Within this thrust, it has been noticed in the last years
that these circuits harbor an enormous potential for the
realization of topological phases of matter, surprisingly
without need for topological or strongly correlated ma-
terials [3вҖ“23]. In a nutshell, the idea is that instead of
considering the regular band structure of a material (ob-
tained from position and momentum degrees of freedom
of the electron), the transport degrees of freedom of the
circuit (charge and phase across a given circuit branch)
may encode a given topological invariant.
However, when it comes to the emulation of con-
densed matter systems by means of superconducting
circuits there remains until now a huge patch of un-
charted territory: quasiperiodicity.
In solid state sys-
tems, quasiperiodicity may appear on the mean field
level in systems with incommensurate charge density or
spin density waves. Moreover, and possibly more impor-
tantly for applications, incommensurate lattices ubiqui-
tously appear in heterostructures of van-der-Waals ma-
terials [24].
Within this context, twisted heterostruc-
tures [25] at incommensurate twist-angles [26вҖ“32] play
a particularly interesting role. Finally, electrons moving
in a quasicrystalline environment are subject to incom-
mensuration effects, which can lead to emergent criti-
cal behavior [33]. Motivated by these examples, we here
intend to show how quasiperiodicity can be engineered
in the transport degrees of freedom of a circuit by very
straightforward means, and how it can be exploited to

вҲ— e.koenig@fkf.mpg.de

unlock previously inaccessible circuit behavior. The key
to this endeavor turns out to be a peculiar form of a
nonlinear capacitor.
By far the most common capacitor is the regular, lin-
ear capacitor, whose energy depends quadratically on the
charge N

E = 2e2

C N 2 ,
(1)

where C is the capacitance, and the charge number N is
counted in units of Cooper-pairs. The quadratic form is
simply a consequence of standard electrodynamics, where
the energy stored in a capacitor is computed by means
of the square of the electric field.
Now, it is interest-
ing to think about alternative capacitances that are, in
one way or another, nonlinear.
Ferro-electric materi-
als [34вҖ“39], for instance, provide a mechanism leading
to a highly nonlinear capacitive behavior, with an en-
ergy which can locally (close to zero charge on the ca-
pacitor) indeed be approximated yet again as quadratic,
but suprisingly, with an effectively negative capacitance,
C < 0. While the total capacitance of any charged island
must of course be positive to guarantee a lower bound of
the Hamiltonian eigenenergies, partial negative capaci-
tances are a real phenomenon, and have, e.g., been pro-
posed as a lever arm to amplify the voltage sensitivity
of field effect transistors [40]. Another way to engineer
the electrostatic properties of an island is a capacitive
coupling to a nearby electronic quantum system, a so-
called polarizer, whose eigenenergy depends yet again on
the island charge in a nontrivial way. This idea was pi-
oneered by Little [41] to induce superconducting pair-
ing in the absence of electron-phonon interactions.
It
has recently been studied both experimentally and the-
oretically in quantum dot systems to realize attractive
interactions [42, 43]вҖ”yet again a form of negative ca-

arXiv:2212.12382v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  31 Dec 2023


pacitance. Finally, effective negative capacitances have
recently been shown to occur also as a dynamic effect in
the course of a time-dependent flux-drive, due to surface
charges induced by the electro-motive force [44].
Here, we propose a circuit which realizes a quasiperi-
odic nonlinear capacitor (QPNC) by coupling to a nearby
transmon. The resulting energy term is of the form

E = вҲ’ES cos (2ПҖО»N) ,
(2)

with the real parameter О» determining the periodicity of
the capacitance. At the surface, this seems to generalize
the nonlinear capacitance of phase slip junctions [45вҖ“48]
to a term whose periodicity we can choose by design.
Note however, that contrary to conventional phase slip
junctions where charge quantization enters in a different
form [49], in our case, the QPNC is compatible with N вҲҲ
Z.
Interestingly, О» can assume any real value since it
is determined by a ratio of capacities; therefore it will
naturally assume an irrational value. In conjunction with
N вҲҲ Z, this leads to the capacitance being in general
quasiperiodic in charge space.
To illustrate the versatility of this circuit element, we
explore various consequent effects in different combina-
tions with other elements. In fact, the possibility to real-
ize a nonlinear capacitance greatly expands the toolbox
of building blocks to simulate condensed matter systems.
To start, we propose a setup which emulates a Dirac
material.
The topology is defined in a mixed circuit-
parameter space of a superconducting phase and an off-
set charge, which was already studied earlier to provide a
highly stable circuit realization of a Chern insulator [22].
The presence of the Dirac points has a measurable in-
fluence on the current noise spectrum. In particular, we
show that the topology-induced vanishing of the Berry
curvature will suppress the influence of classical finite-
frequency charge noise.
In a different setup, we fully utilize the quasiperiodic-
ity of the nonlinear capacitive energy term by realizing
a simulation of the Aubry-AndrГ© (AA) model [50, 51], a
paradigmatic lattice model for Anderson localization of
quantum particles moving in a quasiperiodic background
potential. Our truly non-interacting setup yields a plat-
form which allows to directly probe Anderson localization
in charge space. The AA model is known to display a
quantum phase transition from extended to Anderson-
localized states and has attracted enormous attention
over the years and in various fields of research. It repre-
sents a fruit fly model of localization which is solvable us-
ing rigorous mathematical [52] and mathematical physics
methods [53] and has been implemented in a variety of ex-
perimental setups, including polaritonic waveguides [54]
as well as cold atomic gases [55]. It is moreover related to
the Hofstadter-butterfly problem of 2D Bloch electrons
in a magnetic field [56]. Clearly, different experimental
emulators of the AA model suffer distinctly from a vari-
ety of imperfections (e.g. particle loss, finite size effects,
residual interactions, and associated reduced quantum
coherence at finite temperature). The proposed super-

conducting circuit offers a platform which in particular
mitigates the problem of residual interactions: It is based
on the coherent macroscopic quantum mechanics of su-
perconducting circuits in which microscopic interactions
are already fully incorporated.
A major advantage of the proposed set up is its versa-
tility. First, we show how this system can emulate the low
energy excitations of a two-dimensional Dirac semimetal.
We then demonstrate how this setup can also be used
to realize the AA model as well as its generalization to
higher dimensions [57вҖ“59]. The nature of quasiperiodic
localization in higher dimensions and whether or not it
is distinct from its random counterpart in any way re-
mains a timely question and our proposed set up repre-
sents an experimental test of this. Last, we discuss how to
combine these perspectives to realize an emulator of the
magic-angle phenomena in twisted bilayer graphene [26вҖ“
28, 32].

RESULTS

Quasiperiodic capacitance

Consider an island with Cooper-pair number opera-
tor пҝҪ
N and superconducting phase ПҶ. Let us add a ca-
pacitively coupled auxiliary transmon, with Cooper-pair
number operator пҝҪ
NT and a Josephson junction of energy
EJT coupling to the ground; see left circuit of Fig. 1(a).
The offset charge NgT = CgTVgT/2e is controlled via
a gate voltage VgT.
We remind the reader that this
is not the complete circuit but just a subsystem of a
larger circuit, such that eventually, more elements will
be connected to the contacts (giving rise to a dynam-
ics of the island degrees of freedom). This subsystem,
however, effectively realizes a quasiperiodic nonlinear ca-
pacitor (QPNC), as we will see below.
The Hamiltonian of the subsystem reads

пҝҪH = 2ECT
пҝҪ
пҝҪ
NT + NgT + О» пҝҪ
N
пҝҪ2

+ 2EC пҝҪ
N 2 вҲ’ EJT cos(пҝҪПҶT) ,
(3)

where the superconducting phase operator пҝҪПҶT is canon-
ically conjugate to the number operator пҝҪ
NT, such that
пҝҪ
пҝҪПҶT, пҝҪ
NT
пҝҪ
= i. Find a detailed derivation of this Hamil-
tonian in the Supplementary Note 1.
The first two
terms of the Hamiltonian are the charging energies of
the island and the transmon, EC = e2/Ctot and ECT =
e2Ctot/(CtotCT,tot вҲ’ C2), with the total capacities of
the island and transmon, here, Ctot = C and CT,tot =
C + CgT + CJT. The parameter

О» = C/Ctot
(4)

will
play
the
crucial
role
of
determining
the
(quasi)periodicity of the nonlinear capacitance.
Note
importantly that as of now, О» = 1, since the only capac-
itance the island has is the one which is coupling to the

2


(d)
(c)

=

C

ES

О»

b', b
N

VgT

C

CgT

CJT

EJT
b', b
N
b'T , b
NT

(a)

Vg

Cg

E2J

Оҙ

EJ

О»

0
О»

P

CP < 0

(b)

Vg

О»

(b)

(a)

Пү/

1
T

(b)

-100
-50
0
50
100

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

SJ(Пү)

SB(Пү)

S(Пү)/

4e2

T

Пү/

1
T

(a)

-100
-50
0
50
100

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

S(Пү)

Figure 1.
Circuit realizing a quasiperiodic nonlinear capacitor (QPNC) and applications.
(a) The element is
implemented by a fast transmon capacitively coupled (with capacity C) to a superconducting island (with phase пҝҪПҶ and charge
пҝҪ
N) at the right contact.
That is, we have an auxiliary island for the transmon (with phase пҝҪПҶT and charge пҝҪ
NT) which is
connected to ground via a Josephson junction (of energy EJT and associated with a capacity CJT). For completeness, we also
include a gate voltage VgT (via a capacitance CgT). The right island is assumed to be connected to further elements as part
of a larger circuit, like in (c, d). The QPNC is associated with an energy scale ES and the quasiperiodicity parameter О», and
it always comes with a parasitic linear capacitance with the same capacity C as the coupling. (b) One way to counteract
the parasitic linear capacitance is by making use of a partial negative capacitance, here realized by a polarizer (P) giving an
energy contribution effectively described by a negative capacity CP < 0. (c) The Dirac circuit realizes topologically protected
degeneracies in 2D. The QPNC is placed in parallel with a Josephson junction (of energy EJ) and in series with a cotunneling
junction (of energy E2J) connecting to ground with a phase shift of Оҙ. A cotunneling junction only allows for pairs of Cooper-
pairs to tunnel. A gate voltage Vg (via a capacitance Cg) is also added to the island. (d) The Aubry-AndrГ© circuit is the same
as the Dirac circuit but without the cotunneling junction. It simulates a trapped version of the Aubry-AndrГ© model on a charge
lattice.

transmon. In a complete model, О» will not be trivially
one, as Eq. (4) implies here, but instead, the total
capacitance of the island Ctot will differ from C due to
additional capacitive elements; see Supplementary Note
1. That is, in general, О» expresses the partition of the
island charge that couples to the transmon. This is the
reason why we deliberately chose to write the parameters
(EC, ECT, and О») in the above non-simplified form, that
is, to generalize them to arbitrary applications in larger
circuits with Ctot Мё= C.
Note that we could also invert the QPNC, that is,
starting from Fig. 1(a), we switch the island at the right
contact with the ground at the left contact, and thus
the charges пҝҪ
N and пҝҪ
NT are inductively connected while
only capacitively coupled to ground. While this changes
a few details in the treatment, the actual effects stay the
same when the auxiliary transmon island only couples
to a single other island (and to ground). However, one
additional effect is that О» is mapped to negative values,
which becomes relevant when extending the model by ca-
pacitively coupling additional islands to the same QPNC
as we show below.
In the following we assume that the dynamics of the
auxiliary transmon are much faster than any dynamics of
пҝҪ
N. Thus we first solve the transmon Hamiltonian while

leaving N constant. This allows us to simplify the Hamil-
tonian given in Eq. (3) to the low-energy Hamiltonian,
where we only take into account the lowest energy level
of the transmon [60]

пҝҪH вүҲ вҲ’ES cos
пҝҪ
2ПҖО» пҝҪ
N + 2ПҖNgT
пҝҪ
+ 2EC пҝҪ
N 2 .
(5)

We identify a nonlinear capacitance in addition to an
unavoidable linear capacitance, such that we can express
the circuit as two parallel capacitive elements, as shown
in Fig. 1(a).
Strictly speaking, the above low-energy
approximation is well-justified in the transmon regime
ECT < EJT, where the amplitude

ES = 16
пҝҪECTE3
JT

4ПҖ2

пҝҪ 1

4
eвҲ’4
пҝҪ EJT

ECT ,
(6)

is small and the energy gap to the first excited state of
the transmon вҲј 2вҲҡECTEJT is large. However, for our
purposes it is advantageous to have a sufficiently large ES
such that its effect is not merely perturbative. We there-
fore note that we do not necessarily need to go very deep
into the transmon regime, where ECT вүӘ EJT: the cosine
expression is still a good approximation when we con-
sider the intermediate regime of ECT вҲј EJT, where ES
is not exponentially suppressed; see Supplementary Note

3


2. Instead we find ES and ECT to have a similar order
of magnitude. To be precise, the value of ES maxes out
at вҲј ECT/4, which can be easily seen by looking at the
Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) in the limit EJT вҶ’ 0. A very mi-
nor drawback of ECT вҲј EJT is that the energy gap to the
first excited level of the transmon is no longer large, such
that it can be occupied. Since the energy dependence of
the excited level resembles a cosine with an amplitude of
reversed sign, these excitations effectively reduce again
ES, such that there is an optimal trade-off for moderate
parameter regimes; for more details see Supplementary
Note 3. At any rate, we identify the regime in which our
low-energy description is valid as the one where EC does
not exceed the gap. For ECT вҲј EJT that provides the
bound EC вүІ ECT.
A remaining obstacle that we have to discuss is the
possible parameter range for the ratio between ES and
EC. For the nonlinear capacitor effect to become dom-
inant, we would ideally need ES вү« EC.
Importantly
however, these two energies are not independent, as both
depend rather non-trivially on the capacitances of the cir-
cuit. As a matter of fact, if all capacitances involved are
regular, positive capacitances, our analysis shows that
ES вү« EC can only be realized for О» close to one or close
to zero, which might seem to severely limit the applica-
bility of our proposal. But there are several successful
work-arounds. One possibility we explore in this work is
to selectively suppress EC (but not ES) by adding non-
trivial Josephson junction elements. Another strategy is
to allow for partial negative capacitances. Let us first
demonstrate that negative capacitances actually lift any
remaining restrictions, such that we can tune ES/EC and
О» at will. Then we briefly sketch some feasible ideas for
implementing negative capacitances based on the polar-
izer principle [41вҖ“43].
In Fig. 2 we choose to depict the ratio EC/ECT as
well as О» as a function of вҲҶC вүЎ Ctot вҲ’ C and вҲҶCT вүЎ
CT,tot вҲ’ C relative to C.
The ratio EC/ECT is read-
ily translated to вҲј EC/4ES, see the discussion above on
the maximal value for ES and, for more details, Supple-
mentary Note 2. Note that we allow for partial negative
capacitances (i.e., вҲҶC and вҲҶCT may be negative), but
only insofar as EC, ECT > 0 (that is, Ctot, CT,tot > 0), as
otherwise there is no lower bound in the Hamiltonian (as
stated already in the introduction). Illegal values for the
capacitances, which break the positivity of the charging
energies, are greyed out. Note that we can also consider
C to be negative (with the same restrictions on positiv-
ity of course), which yields a mirror image of Fig. 2 but
with negative values for О», without the need for invert-
ing the QPNC. However, the below presented polarizer
concept for negative capacitances cannot realize negative
cross-couplings between two islands, which would require
methods like using ferro-electric materials. The values of
вҲҶC and О» are directly related [see Fig. 2(b)], which is
obvious, given the relationship in Eq. (4). The impact
of вҲҶCT on the other hand requires a more detailed dis-
cussion. As a general rule, we find that вҲҶCT should be

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. Evaluation of allowed parameter regimes to
achieve a dominant quasiperiodic capacitance.
De-
picted are the achievable parameter values for (a) the ratio
EC/ECT and (b) О» as a function of the capacitances of the
superconducting islands. The grey areas are illegal instability-
regions marked by a negative charging energy. Note that we
could also achieve negative values for О» when choosing C to
be negative. (a) The values below EC < 0.1ECT are cut off
and depicted in the same shade of green. The solid black line
marks the border for which EC = ECT, thus, where the low-
energy approximation breaks down. The dashed line is at a
value of EC/ECT = 1/4 under which ES can exceed EC.

as small as possible; see Fig. 2(a). The solid line marks
EC = ECT that is the border above which the low-energy
approximation breaks down. More importantly, EC can
drop below ES вҲј ECT/4 only for values underneath the
dashed line. When using strictly positive capacitances,
EC/ECT has a minimal reachable value depending on О»
which is the highest for О» = 1/2 at EC/ECT = 1/4. This
restriction is only lifted close to the trivial value О» = 1,
or for general О» when allowing for partial negative capac-
itances.
As already stated in the introduction, ferro-electric
materials [34вҖ“39] can be used to create partial negative
capacitances. However, as of today, we are unaware of
attempts to include ferro-electric materials into super-
conducting devices at low temperatures. We believe how-
ever, that there is a much more feasible approach, readily
integrable into superconducting device architecture, rely-
ing on a capacitive coupling to a polarizer. Ultimately,
the effect of the polarizer is included in exactly the same
way as for the auxiliary transmon [for a schematic, see
Fig. 1(b)]. We again fix the island charge N, and com-

4


pute the ground state energy of the polarizer as a function
of N (assuming again the existence of an energy gap, see
below). This energy is added as a contribution to the to-
tal charging energy of the resulting circuit. To illustrate
the basic principle studied by Ref. [43], consider a capac-
itive coupling between the island and a generic two-level
system, with a Hamiltonian of the form

пҝҪHP = uNпҝҪПғz + pпҝҪПғx .
(7)

The resulting eigenvalues are Вұ
пҝҪ

u2N 2 + p2.
As indi-
cated above, assuming a large gap (here given by p), we
again reduce the interaction to a simple energy term due
to the ground state Пө0(N) = вҲ’
пҝҪ

u2N 2 + p2. The effec-
tive polarizer capacitance is given by the curvature of
the energy profile, CP вҲј вҲӮ2
NПө0, which is here obviously
negative. Again, if the gap is not sufficient to eliminate
the excited state, there will be an effective reduction of
the negative capacitance, due to the positive curvature of
the excited state. For a more concrete example, imagine
a discrete chain of charge islands (e.g. quantum dots),
which are linearly arranged away from the superconduct-
ing island. Then, the electrostatic interaction due to the
charge N will decay as the inverse of the distance. Sup-
pose in addition that the onsite energy on the chain is
tunable with additional gates, giving rise to a polarizer
potential. Let us for simplicity take for the latter a linear
dependence on the distance, вҲј j. The resulting polarizer
Hamiltonian is of the form

пҝҪHP = вҲ’t

J
пҝҪ

j=2
(|jвҹ©вҹЁj вҲ’ 1| + |j вҲ’ 1вҹ©вҹЁj|)

+

J
пҝҪ

j=1

пҝҪ
uN вҲ’ N0

j
+ pj
пҝҪ
|jвҹ©вҹЁj| ,
(8)

where t accounts for inter-dot hopping, and the shift N0
accounts for an offset charge which is not necessarily the
same as Ng. We can estimate the energy dependence of
the ground state by finding the minimum of the potential
energy of the above Hamiltonian, Пөmin(N) (i.e., neglect-
ing for simplicity the kinetic term вҲј t). For N > N0, this
amounts to an energy profile Пөmin вҲј вҲҡN вҲ’ N0, which yet
again has the sought-after negative curvature. The ad-
vantage with respect to the two-level model is that here,
the energies of the lowest few excited states also exhibit
a negative curvature, such that the system is less suscep-
tible to occupations of excited states.
Finally, another potentially successful strategy to im-
prove the ratio between ES and EC is to replace the
Josephson junction of the auxiliary transmon with a
Cooper-pair cotunneling junction (CCJ, see below for
details), realizing a вҲј cos(2пҝҪПҶT) term.
This decouples
the even and odd Cooper-pair parity states, effectively
increasing both ECT and ES by a factor of 4 while de-
creasing О» by 2. This lifts the above mentioned minimum
restriction on EC/ECT for the Dirac circuit we discuss in
a moment, where we need О» = 1/2. The drawback here is

however that we would need a near perfect decoupling of
the even and odd Cooper pair number states to avoid sig-
nificant disturbance of the cosine behavior. This would
require the manufacturing of CCJs without residual reg-
ular Josephson effect, which may still be challenging.

Dirac material

In the previous section, we have already pointed out
a variety of ways to render the quasiperiodic nonlinear
capacitor (QPNC) dominant. Here we want to provide an
additional strategy, which, surprisingly, turns out to give
rise to an interesting side effect. Namely, this will allow
us to emulate a protected 2D Dirac material, importantly,
by using only topologically trivial materials and circuit
elements.
Consider that in the space of the superconducting
phase пҝҪПҶ, the QPNC term can be written in terms of phase
translation operators shifting the phase by Вұ2ПҖО», while
the linear capacitance corresponds to infinitesimal phase
shifts analogously to an ordinary kinetic energy term but
in phase space instead of position space. Due to this dif-
ference in their behavior (one acting non-locally and the
other locally in phase space) we can attempt to suppress
the linear capacitance without deprecating the effects of
the QPNC.
This feat can be achieved as follows. To suppress the
local kinetic term of the linear capacitor we may include
an additional potential energy term with minima that are
well separated in phase space. If the potential barrier is
high, the tunneling between the minima due to ordinary
quantum phase slips by means of the EC-term are then
suppressed. The simplest nontrivial circuit element that
fits this bill would be a Cooper-pair cotunneling junction
(CCJ) [see Fig. 1(c)], described by a вҲј cos(2пҝҪПҶ) energy
term.
Note that the cos(пҝҪПҶ)-term of a regular Joseph-
son junction does not work here since charge quantiza-
tion renders the phase space 2ПҖ-periodic and, hence, the
single energetic minimum would also suppress any non-
local phase slips. A CCJ can be realized by means of
a symmetric superconducting quantum interference de-
vice (SQUID) while applying a magnetic flux of half a
flux quantum ОҰ0/2 through the loop of the SQUID. This
will cause the regular tunneling events to interfere de-
structively such that the next-higher-order terms become
dominant involving the tunneling of pairs of Cooper-
pairs [61, 62].
A separate recent realization of a CCJ
is in Josephson junctions formed by twisting stacks of
the optimally doped high-temperature copper oxide su-
perconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+y at an angle of 45в—Ұ [63вҖ“
68]. Here, the residual single Cooper-pair tunneling term
precisely vanishes due to the symmetry of the d-wave
superconductors, and the observation of the second har-
monic of the Josephson relation was observed in both
the Fraunhoffer pattern and fractional Shapiro steps in
twist junctions near 45в—Ұ [69]. Beyond these realizations,
the CCJ recently enjoyed a lot of interest: on the experi-

5


mental side it was used to build a modified transmon [62],
giving rise to two ground states with the same fermion
parity.
On the theory side, it was proposed as a key
ingredient to engineer flat-band materials [21].
While ordinary quantum tunneling between the min-
ima of the additional cos(2пҝҪПҶ)-potential will be sup-
pressed, the nonlinear capacitor may still provide non-
local tunneling processes. Here, this tunneling is most
prominent if we set the parameters such that О» = 1/2.
We also add a regular Josephson junction of energy EJ
in parallel, creating an asymmetry between the minima
of the potential. Thus, we arrive at the Hamiltonian

пҝҪHD = 2EC
пҝҪ
пҝҪ
N + Ng
пҝҪ2
вҲ’ ES cos
пҝҪ
ПҖ
пҝҪ
пҝҪ
N + Ng
пҝҪ
+ 2ПҖNgT
пҝҪ

вҲ’ EJ cos
пҝҪ
пҝҪПҶ
пҝҪ
вҲ’ E2J cos
пҝҪ
2
пҝҪ
пҝҪПҶ вҲ’ Оҙ
пҝҪпҝҪ
,
(9)

where the offset charge Ng is induced by the gate voltage
Vg connected to the island, Оҙ is the phase difference across
the circuit, and E2J is the cotunneling energy of the CCJ.
In order to create a strong confinement of the phase,
we consider the cotunneling E2J to be the dominant en-
ergy scale, whichвҖ”considering the aforementioned re-
cent experimental advances [62]вҖ”seems within reach.
Hence, the lowest two energy eigenstates are localized
in the minima of the cotunneling term at ПҶj = Оҙ + jПҖ
with j вҲҲ {0, 1} and their energetic difference is much
smaller than the gap to the next excited state, which, for
E2J вү« EC, is achieved by assuming EJ, ES вүӘ 4вҲҡECE2J.
In the following we make use of this energy separa-
tion of the eigenstates to reduce the size of the Hilbert
space.
Namely, we are splitting the Hamiltonian into
two terms пҝҪHD = пҝҪH0 + пҝҪVD where пҝҪVD = вҲ’ES cos
пҝҪ
ПҖ
пҝҪ пҝҪ
N +
Ng
пҝҪ
+ 2ПҖNgT
пҝҪ
вҲ’ EJ cos(пҝҪПҶ) is a small perturbation to
пҝҪH0 = 2EC
пҝҪ пҝҪ
N +Ng
пҝҪ2вҲ’E2J cos[2(пҝҪПҶвҲ’Оҙ)]. We can thus first
diagonalize пҝҪH0 (in principle exactly), and then take into
account the effect of пҝҪVD perturbatively, in the low-energy
basis of пҝҪH0.
Since charge and phase have the same duality as posi-
tion and momentum we can use BlochвҖҷs theorem to solve
пҝҪH0. However, as is well-established by now [60], the im-
portant difference to a regular particle in a 1D poten-
tial is the 2ПҖ-periodicity constraint on the wave function
ПҲ(ПҶ), in addition to the periodicity of the Hamiltonian.
Since this aspect is of importance below, let us reiterate
it for completenessвҖ”first, with the example of a regular
transmon Hamiltonian, which is 2ПҖ-periodic in ПҶ. Any
attempt to try and gauge away the offset charge Ng by
a unitary transformation пҝҪПҲ(ПҶ) = eiNgПҶПҲ(ПҶ) is bound to
fail, as Ng now simply reenters in the boundary condi-
tion of пҝҪПҲ(ПҶ), ensuring the periodicity of the original wave
function ПҲ. In this analogy пҝҪПҲ is a Bloch function and the
offset charge Ng takes the role of the quasimomentum k
in the solid stateвҖ”except that instead of being a con-
tinuous quantum number, Ng is an external parameter,
selecting a particular Bloch wave function пҝҪПҲn from each
Bloch band n. This gives us a discrete spectrum depend-

ing on Ng instead of continuous bands.
Note that in
contrast to usual applications of BlochвҖҷs theorem, where
the non-periodic Bloch function takes the role of the wave
function, here the wave function ПҲn is the periodic func-
tion that modulates the plane wave eiNgПҶ of the Bloch
function пҝҪПҲn.
With the CCJ, the Hamiltonian is now ПҖ-periodic, but
we still have the same 2ПҖ-periodicity constraint on the
wave function ПҲ. That is why Ng now selects two states
per Bloch band, ПҲ+
n and ПҲвҲ’
n with k = Ng and Ng +
1, which are related via ПҲвҲ’
n (ПҶ) = eiПҶПҲ+
n (ПҶ) and with
ПҲ+
n being ПҖ-periodic. Thus ПҲ+
n (ПҲвҲ’
n ) is (anti-)symmetric
under ПҖ-translation. As argued above, we now focus on
the two states of the lowest band, ПҲВұ
0 .
Due to large
E2J, we can approximate them as superpositions of two
Gaussian-like wave packets each localized at a minimum
ПҶj.
Moreover, the two states form a quasi-degenerate
ground state for all values of Ng, up to exponentially
suppressed phase slip terms, such that, when eliminating
all but these two low energy states, пҝҪH0 вүҲ const., which
can thus be set to zero (deviations from this assumption
cannot destroy the effect, as we explain in a moment).
The remaining low-energy Hamiltonian is entirely due
to пҝҪVD, and can be computed by projecting it onto the
eigenbasis of H0,

пҝҪHD,eff = вҲ’ES cos (ПҖNg) пҝҪПғz вҲ’ EJ cos (Оҙ) пҝҪПғx .
(10)

The offset charge NgT leads only to a shift in Ng. Apart
from that, it does not affect the eigenspectrum and is
therefore being omitted. Here, пҝҪПғx and пҝҪПғz are the Pauli
matrices with пҝҪПғz = |ПҲ+
0 вҹ©вҹЁПҲ+
0 | вҲ’ |ПҲвҲ’
0 вҹ©вҹЁПҲвҲ’
0 |.
This Hamiltonian shows four Dirac points in the pa-
rameter space of (Оҙ, Ng) located at Оҙ вҲҲ {ПҖ/2, 3ПҖ/2},
Ng вҲҲ {1/2, 3/2}.
Thus the Dirac physics is here de-
fined in a mixed parameter space of phase and charge.
This is reminiscent of an earlier work by some of the au-
thors, simulating a Chern insulator [22] in charge and
phase space. Surprisingly, we find that, here, the inter-
play between the QPNC and the CCJ allows for a mech-
anism to protect degeneracies in a 2D parameter space,
which could not have been anticipated in Ref. [22]. To
demonstrate this remarkable protection let us discuss the
stability of the effect when tuning away from the ideal
parameter setting.
First of all, the Dirac nature of the system is com-
pletely insensitive to any small detuning ОҙО» from the ex-
act О» = 1/2. The only effect of such a deviation is a small
reduction of the amplitude in front of the cos(ПҖNg)-term
in Eq. (10) (to a value slightly below ES) because it re-
duces the overlap of the matrix elements вҹЁПҲВұ
0 |пҝҪVD|ПҲВұ
0 вҹ©.
Actually, when considering the full model, it turns out
that a small detuning can even have a positive effect on
the spectrum by counteracting other imperfections; see
Supplementary Note 4.
Another important perturbation might come from the
fact that the realization of the CCJ might not be ideal
and create a residual ОҙE2J cos(пҝҪПҶ вҲ’ Оҙ) term. In Ref. [62],

6


this term is important, as it could lift the degeneracy of
the two same-parity ground states of H0. In our system
however, yet again, small perturbations of this kind only
shift the Dirac points but cannot gap the spectrum. The
perturbed Hamiltonian is of the form

пҝҪHD,eff = вҲ’ES cos (ПҖNg) пҝҪПғz вҲ’ [EJ cos (Оҙ) + ОҙE2J] пҝҪПғx ,
(11)
where the Dirac points are shifted to Оҙc and 2ПҖ вҲ’Оҙc, with
Оҙc = arccos(вҲ’ОҙE2J/EJ). As long as the residual term is
smaller than the CCJ term, ОҙE2J < EJ, the spectrum
is not gapped, and for a small ОҙE2J вүӘ EJ we find a
linear shift Оҙc = ПҖ/2 + ОҙE2J/EJ. Finally, we note that
the position of the Dirac points can also minimally shift
when deviating from the ideal regime E2J вү« EC, which
slightly lift the degeneracy of the two low-energy basis
states of H0 (thus adding a small contribution in пҝҪПғz).
Now we want to study how one can probe the presence
of the Dirac points in a straightforward fashion. We show
that in this particular case, the Dirac physics is respon-
sible for a change in the asymptotic behavior of the clas-
sical current-noise signal. We consider a time-dependent
driving of the offset charge Ng. Consequently, there will
be a geometric component of the current response which
can be cast into the form of a Berry curvature [6, 22]
in the (Оҙ, Ng) parameter space. Importantly, the Dirac
material has the special property that the Berry curva-
ture vanishes exactly for each point (Оҙ, Ng), except for
the Dirac points. Away from these points the Berry cur-
vature is nonzero only when the Dirac cones are gapped.
We therefore need to find a quantity capable of measur-
ing the presence or absence of the Berry curvature in
a local fashion. As we show in the following, this can
be accomplished by measuring the classical current noise
spectrum S (Пү) =
пҝҪ вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ dП„ exp (iПүП„) I(t)I(t + П„) as a re-
sponse to fluctuations in Ng.
We describe the offset charge noise, Ng = N (0)
g
+ Оҫ(t),
by white noise such that вҲӮtОҫ(t) = 0 and вҲӮtОҫ(t)вҲӮtОҫ(tвҖІ) =
2Оҙ(tвҲ’tвҖІ)/T. Here, вҖў denotes the ensemble average and T
characterizes the magnitude of the noise correlations and
has to be determined experimentally [70вҖ“72]. Assuming
slow noise (that is, вҲӮtОҫ(t) being always smaller than the
local gap size) and starting in the ground state |0вҹ©, we use
an adiabatic approximation of the wave function [73] to
calculate the expectation value of the current пҝҪI = 2e вҲӮОҙ пҝҪH
up to first order in ЛҷNg

I (t) = I0 (t) + I1 (t) ,
(12)

with the Josephson current I0(t) = вҹЁ0|пҝҪI|0вҹ© = 2e вҲӮОҙПөn
and the linear correction term I1(t) = вҲ’2e ЛҷNgB0[Оҙ, Ng(t)].
Here, Пөn are the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian with cor-
responding eigenstates |nвҹ© and the Berry curvature is
given by Bn(Оҙ, Ng) = вҲ’2 Im
пҝҪ
вҲӮОҙn
пҝҪпҝҪвҲӮNgn
пҝҪ
. The periodic-
ity of the current in Ng can be exploited by casting the
contributions into a discrete Fourier series; for details
see Supplementary Note 5. Ultimately, we find two con-
tributions to the current noise spectrum, one from the

Оҙ

(b)

(a)

Пү/

1
T

(b)

-100
-50
0
50
100

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

SJ(Пү)

SB(Пү)

S(Пү)/

4e2

T

Пү/

1
T

(a)

-100
-50
0
50
100

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

S(Пү)

Figure 3. Classical current noise spectrum. (a) The full
noise spectrum S(Пү) can be split into (b) two contributions,
SJ(Пү) from the Josephson current and SB(Пү) from the Berry
curvature, corresponding to the adiabatic approximation up
to the first correction. Depicted are two scenariosвҖ”the solid
lines show what we expect in our system while for the dashed
lines, we introduced a small artificial gap вҲҶ of the Dirac points
in form of an пҝҪПғy-term. As clearly shown here, in contrast to
the former, the latter system produces a finite Berry curvature
leading to a finite asymptotic value of high frequencies Пү. We
chose a gap of вҲҶ = 1.06T вҲ’1 with ES = EJ = 10T вҲ’1 and
Оҙ = ПҖ/4 such that ОІ = S(вҲһ)/S(0) вүҲ 1; see Supplementary
Note 5.

Josephson current (with subscript J) and a Berry curva-
ture contribution (with subscript B)

S (Пү) = SJ (Пү) + SB (Пү) .
(13)

The respective asymptotic behavior (the power law)
can be computed by means of the respective dominant
Fourier component. For the Josephson current contribu-
tion, we get

SJ вҲј ПүвҲ’2 ,
(14)

whereas the Berry curvature contribution yields

SB вҲј const. ,
(15)

where the respective constants of proportionality are
quadratic in the respective dominant Fourier coefficient.
Note that we exclude from these considerations the
zeroth Fourier coefficients corresponding to the time-
averaged current contributionsвҖ”they naturally do not
contribute to the noise spectrum. Moreover, in the prox-
imity of the degeneracies one might has to consider mul-
tiple Fourier coefficients for a quantitative analysis; see
Supplementary Note 5.
Now, depending on whether

7


0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

Ng

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

Оҙ/ПҖ

Figure 4. Noisy semicircle path around a Dirac cone.
Depicted in colors are five exemplary paths with possible re-
alizations of the offset-charge noise. The ideal path (see black
line) halfway encircles exactly one Dirac point. However, as
long as the actual path starts and ends at the value of Оҙ where
the degeneracy is located (here Оҙ = 1/2), while passing exactly
one degeneracy, the Berry phase picked up by the two states
differs by ПҖ, independent of the exact shape of the parameter
curve. Hence, as long as the driving occurs sufficiently faster
than the offset charge fluctuations, or the offset charge itself
can be sufficiently controlled to avoid the Dirac points, the
measurement of the Berry phase can be achieved.

the Berry curvature is zero or nonzero, this changes the
asymptotic behavior of the classical noise for large Пү. The
total spectrum S and its two contributions SJ and SB are
shown for the Dirac system and a more general gapped
system in Fig. 3. If the Berry curvature is zero, the noise
decays as ПүвҲ’2. If it is nonzero, it goes to a constant value.
One way to realize the latter case in an experiment is to
consider a decreased E2J which introduces a gap into the
spectrum. To conclude, we can probe whether or not the
system is gapped by measuring the asymptotic value of
the classical current noise spectrum.
For the sake of completeness, let us briefly sketch a
different approach to measure the presence of the Dirac
points, via measuring the Berry phase. Namely, while
the Berry curvature B away from the degeneracies is ex-
actly zero, taking an adiabatic path around a Dirac point,
where B is singular, allows us nonetheless to pick up a
Berry phase. However, since a full circle will give us a
phase of ПҖ for both states, we cannot measure any phase
difference. Therefore, one would have to perform a semi-
circle around the degeneracy in (Оҙ, Ng)-space, where the
two states gather a phase of ВұПҖ/2 giving a difference of
ПҖ. We do not discuss this possibility in more detail due
to experimental challenges, in particular the large ampli-
tude off-set charge noise which impede a precise control
of Ng [70вҖ“72]. As a matter of fact, the very same offset-
charge noise was a necessary ingredient for the previ-
ously described current noise probe. Nonetheless, via ac-
tive measurement of background charges and backaction
control, it is perceivable that a sufficient time-dependent
control of Ng could potentially be achieved.
Then, to
realistically perform this measurement, one should start
and end the evolution at a value of Оҙ at a degeneracy.
Thus, we do not care about the exact value of Ng as long

as the aforementioned feedback control allows to suffi-
ciently fix the value of Ng to stay away from the degen-
eracies. One could then tune Оҙ and Ng around a single
cone; see Fig. 4.
Since the Berry phase depends only
on the angle around the cone and not the exact shape
of the parameter curve, the topological feature could be
observed.

Charge localization in the Aubry-AndrГ© model

Previously, we interpreted the Josephson terms as po-
tentials, identifying the phase as position space (with
torus topology), while capacitive terms were taking the
role of kinetic energies. In this section we invert this iden-
tification, interpreting the capacitive terms as potentials
on an infinite charge lattice while the Josephson terms
introduce a hopping on this lattice.
Due to the charge operator being quantized, the non-
linear capacitor is only truly periodic if О» is a rational
number. For irrational values, the associated energy term
becomes quasiperiodic and by that realizes a quasiperi-
odic lattice in charge space. This opens the possibility
to study the interplay of this lattice with kinetic energy
implemented by a Josephson junction with energy EJ in
parallel to the capacitor [see Fig. 1(d)], giving us the
Hamiltonian
пҝҪHAA = пҝҪT + пҝҪV ,
(16)

with the on-site energy of the quasiperiodic lattice

пҝҪV = вҲ’ES cos
пҝҪ
2ПҖ
пҝҪ
О»
пҝҪ
пҝҪ
N + Ng
пҝҪ
+ NgT
пҝҪпҝҪ

+ 2EC
пҝҪ
пҝҪ
N + Ng
пҝҪ2
,
(17)

and the Josephson energy пҝҪT = вҲ’EJ cos(пҝҪПҶ).
We can
rewrite the latter in the charge eigenbasis |Nвҹ© as a hop-
ping term on the lattice

пҝҪT = вҲ’EJ

2

пҝҪ

N
|Nвҹ© вҹЁN вҲ’ 1| + h.c. ,
(18)

due to the quantization condition between charge and
phase,
пҝҪ
пҝҪПҶ, пҝҪ
N
пҝҪ
= i.
The model, Eq. (16), at EC = 0 corresponds to the
Aubry-AndrГ© (AA) model and EC > 0 adds a quadratic
trapping potential, which is qualitatively similar to an
ultra-cold atom realization of the AA model [55, 74, 75].
In the absence of the potential (EC = 0) the AA model is
exactly solvable with a delocalized phase for ES < EJ, an
Anderson localized phase for ES > EJ, and all the eigen-
states are critical at the (self dual) critical point ES = EJ.
It is has been shown that for EC вүӘ ES, this trapping po-
tential induces finite size effects, in particular a rounding
out of the transition, but the wave functions for EJ вү« ES
(EJ вүӘ ES) qualitatively retain their delocalized (Ander-
son localized) characteristics [76]. It is worthwhile em-
phasizing that Anderson localization only occurs for ir-
rational О»: Otherwise, the ES-term merely introduces a

8


Ng

0.0

1.0

2.0

0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0

0.5

1.5

О»

0.0

1.0

0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0

0.5

О»

Ng

0.0

1.0

0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0

0.5

О»

Ng

(d)

Ng

0.0

1.0

0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0

0.5

О»

(c)

(a)

(b)

Figure 5. Charge fluctuation anomalies related to charge localization in the Aubry-AndrГ© model. For all white
areas, the charge is localized with negligible charge fluctuations. The black lines represent the values for the parameter pair
(О», Ng) for which the ground state is degenerate and, thus, the quantum fluctuations of the charge are finite, ultimately leading
to delocalized states. This breaking of the charge localization is shown for NgT = 0 and the energy ratios (a) ES = EC, (b)
ES = 5EC, and (c) ES = 25EC, as well as for (d) NgT = 1/4 and ES = 25EC. We see that the complexity of the pattern
increases for increasing ES/EC. Moreover, NgT Мё= 0 breaks the mirror symmetry along Ng but not the periodicity.

9


вҖҳsuperlattice widthвҖҷ, a rescaled (larger) lattice spacing,
which in turn implies delocalized Bloch waves living in
an appropriately rescaled (smaller) Brillouin zone. On
the other hand, of course, once EC вү« ES the AA physics
is lost.
However, as illustrated in Fig. 2 above, with
the help of negative capacitances (e.g. realized with the
polarizer concept outlined above), we can also tune the
relative energy scales to minimize the impact of the trap.
In this system, Anderson localization will manifest it-
self in the form of charge localization. This effect could
be probed in a number of ways, e.g. by initializing the
circuit in a given charge state, and subsequently measur-
ing the dispersion (or lack thereof) in charge space as a
function of time. We here choose to compute a related,
but even simpler quantity. Namely, we assume that the
system is prepared in the ground state, and compute the
quantum charge fluctuations associated with it.
Here,
charge localization manifests very simply as

вҲҶN вүЎ вҹЁ пҝҪ
N 2вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁ пҝҪ
Nвҹ©2 = 0 .
(19)

This effect is only broken if пҝҪV becomes degenerate in its
ground state, which happens for specific parameter values
of О», Ng, and NgT. Here, the charge fluctuations of the
ground state immediately spike to a finite value. This
gives rise to an interesting pattern of suppressed charge
fluctuations, which are lifted along characteristic, rather
complex contours, which we refer to as charge fluctuation
anomalies. As an illustration of the regimes of avoided
groundstate degeneracies, and hence strong localization
physics, see Fig. 5.
As mentioned in the introduction, higher dimensional
analogs of the AA model are much less understood.
In particular, the nature of quasiperiodic localization
in higher dimensions and its relation to the more con-
ventional, disorder driven localization is an interesting,
timely and largely open question. Therefore, it is quite
important to have experimental settings where these
ideas can be tested and explored. A crucial advantage
of the platform offered by superconducting circuits is the
possibility to realize a model of in principle arbitrary di-
mension [58]; the 3D version of the circuit is depicted in
Fig. 6 but it can be generalized to dimension d by continu-
ation indicated with the dots. In particular, we show that
one can generalize the quasiperiodic nonlinear capacitor
to a multidimensional version, coupling several islands in
a single cosine term. Each of the d auxiliary transmons
is connected to d islands, whose charge and phase opera-
tors are condensed in a charge vector пҝҪN вүЎ
пҝҪ пҝҪ
Nx, пҝҪ
Ny, . . .
пҝҪвҠә

and a phase vector пҝҪПҶ вүЎ
пҝҪ
пҝҪПҶx, пҝҪПҶy, . . .
пҝҪвҠә, as well as corre-
sponding offset charges Ng and Josephson energies EJ
connected to these islands.
This realizes the effective
Hamiltonian

пҝҪHd
AA = вҲ’EJ В· cos ( пҝҪПҶ) +

d
пҝҪ

j=1
пҝҪV d
j + пҝҪV d
C ,
(20)

where we define the cosine of a vector component-wise
пҝҪ
cos
пҝҪ
пҝҪПҶ
пҝҪпҝҪ

Вө := cos
пҝҪ
пҝҪПҶВө
пҝҪ
. The on-site energy contribution

EJT3

C3y

C3x

C3z

VgT3

EJT2

VgT2

C2z

C2x

C2y

Vgx

Vgy

Vgz

EJT1

C1x

C1y

C1z

EJx

EJy

EJz

Cgx

Cgy

Cgz

VgT1

МӮNy, МӮПҶy

МӮNx, МӮПҶx

МӮNz, МӮПҶz

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

Figure 6.
Circuit implementing the Aubry-AndrГ©
model in multiple dimensions.
Shown is the 3D ver-
sion but the circuit can be generalized to arbitrary higher
dimensions by continuing the structure. In d dimensions we
need d auxiliary transmons (with a Josephson junction of en-
ergy EJT,j) each capacitively connected (via capacitance CjВө,
Вө вҲҲ {x, y, . . .}) to d islands (marked blue) with the corre-
sponding charges ( пҝҪ
Nx, пҝҪ
Ny, ...) and the phases (пҝҪПҶx, пҝҪПҶy, ...)
forming a d-dimensional charge and phase vector, пҝҪN and
пҝҪПҶ, respectively.
Each island is subject to an offset charge
Ng,Вө = Cg,ВөVg,Вө/2e and connected to ground via a Josephson
junction of energy EJ,Вө, both of which also form a vector Ng
and EJ.

due to the j-th transmon is given by

пҝҪV d
j = вҲ’ES,j cos
пҝҪ
2ПҖО»j В·
пҝҪ
пҝҪN + Ng
пҝҪ
+ 2ПҖNgT,j
пҝҪ
,
(21)

and the linear-capacitive contribution

пҝҪV d
C = 2
пҝҪ
пҝҪN + Ng
пҝҪвҠә
EC
пҝҪ
пҝҪN + Ng
пҝҪ
,
(22)

where EC is a matrix representing the entire capacitive
network of the circuit (also containing capacitive cross-
couplings between the islands). We expect the circuit to
include also cross-coupling between the transmons which,
according to a first analysis, appear to be suppressed in
the transmon regime of dominant EJT,j.
The param-
eters О»j, EC, and ES,j can all be calculated with the
capacities of the circuit, analogously to above; see Sup-
plementary Note 1 for a derivation.
By tuning those
capacities (shown in Fig. 6) we can tune the components
of all quasiperiodicity parameters

О»j,Вө =
CjВө
пҝҪ

jвҖІ (CjвҖІВө + CjвҖІ,tot) ,
Вө вҲҲ {x, y, . . .}
(23)

10


independent of each other, and thus, by choosing linearly
independent vectors О»j with only irrational and nonzero
elements, we realize a non-separable quasiperiodic model.
Moreover, by switching a transmon Josephson junction
EJT,j with one of the capacities coupling this transmon
to the islands, we can tune each О»j to have a single neg-
ative component, as already mentioned in the discussion
following Eq. (4). This allows for orthogonal vectors real-
izing a self-dual model according to [58]. As above we can
use partial negative capacitances to improve the ratio of
the parameters, rendering EC negligible. Negative cross
capacitances are a further interesting concept to explore
in future works, as they would allow for the mitigation of
unwanted cross talk, or (as already mentioned) present
an alternative strategy to flip the sign of a specific com-
ponent in the О»j vector.

Discussion

In summary, we have introduced a circuit element, the
quasiperiodic non-linear capacitor, which can be realized
with an appropriately designed combination of capaci-
tors and superconductor-insulator-superconductor junc-
tions. We have discussed potential practical obstructions
and mitigations thereof and outlined two applications: A
Dirac material emulator in combined charge-flux space as
well as an emulator of Anderson localization within the
1D and higher dimensional Aubry-AndrГ© paradigm.
We conclude with a perspective on the quantum em-
ulation of twisttronics and the possibilities to explore
and exploit synergies between the quasiperiodic cir-
cuit element and circuit emulation of topological band
structures [6].
Specifically, it has been demonstrated
[26, 27, 29, 32] that the magic-angle effect in twisted bi-
layer graphene (i.e. the massive flattening of Dirac bands
to virtually vanishing kinetic energy) can be emulated in
a variety of systems even without the need of physically
twisted atomic lattices. Moreover, near the magic angle,
quasiperiodicity was theoretically found to be relevant
and to lead to an eigenstate quantum phase transition
analogous to Anderson localization-delocalization tran-
sitions, but in momentum rather than coordinate space.
While the small absolute value of the magic twist-angle in
graphene leads to an extremely narrow parameter regime
governed by quasiperiodic effects, this restriction is gen-
erally absent in quantum emulators. It will thus be an
interesting topic for the future to study experimental sig-
natures of the interplay of quasiperiodicity and Dirac
physics in quantum circuit analogs of magic angle twisted
bilayer and multilayer graphene.
On a final note, as pointed out in the main text al-
ready, we currently consider the transport degrees of free-
dom to simulate the position of a single particle moving
in a quasiperiodic potential.
Given the importance of
the interplay between quasiperiodicity and strong cor-
relations, it is therefore a further important question,

whether many-body interaction effects can be taken into
account in a meaningful way in the here proposed plat-
form. We expect that such an endeavor would in princi-
ple work similar in spirit to the generalization to higher
dimensions, see Fig. 6. For instance, instead of interpret-
ing the wave function of the circuit to simulate a particle
in an n-dimensional space, it could represent n particles
in a 1-dimensional space (or any other commensurable
combination of spatial dimensions and particle numbers).
The crucial challenge that needs to be overcome for this
idea to work, is that the circuit wave function (if inter-
preted as representing multiple particles) needs to satisfy
fermionic, bosonic, or potentially even anyonic commu-
tation relations, which is not naturally guaranteed (the
circuit wave function generically is not required to satisfy
such symmetry constraints). It will have to be investi-
gated in future works if and how such constraints can be
included in the simulation. Such an approach will in all
likelyhood not be able to feasibly mimic a system in the
thermodynamic limit [77, 78], but we expect that dilute
systems [79, 80] could be tackled.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge fruitful discussions with P. Bushev.
This work has been funded by the German Federal Min-
istry of Education and Research within the funding pro-
gram Photonic Research Germany under the contract
number 13N14891.
J.H.P. is partially supported by
the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Grant
No. FA9550-20-1-0136 and the Alfred P. Sloan Founda-
tion through a Sloan Research Fellowship. The Flatiron
Institute is a division of the Simons Foundation.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing financial or non-
financial interests.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

EJK and RPR conceived of and lead the research
project. TH performed all calculations under the guid-
ance of JHP, EJK and RPR. All authors contributed to
the writing of the text and reviewed the final manuscript.

11


[1] Arute, F. et al.
Quantum supremacy using a pro-
grammable superconducting processor. Nature 574, 505вҖ“
510 (2019).

[2] Gambetta, J. IBMвҖҷs roadmap for scaling quantum tech-
nology.
https://www.ibm.com/blogs/research/2020/
09/ibm-quantum-roadmap/ (2020).

[3] Leone, R., LГ©vy, L. P. & Lafarge, P. Cooper-pair pump as
a quantized current source. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 117001вҖ“
(2008).

[4] Leone & Monjou. Merging diabolical points of a super-
conducting circuit.
Condens. Matter Phys. 16, 33801
(2013).

[5] Yokoyama, T. & Nazarov, Y. V. Singularities in the An-
dreev spectrum of a multiterminal Josephson junction.
Phys. Rev. B 92, 155437вҖ“ (2015).

[6] Riwar, R.-P., Houzet, M., Meyer, J. S. & Nazarov, Y. V.
Multi-terminal Josephson junctions as topological mat-
ter. Nat. Commun. 7, 11167 (2016).

[7] Strambini, E. et al.
The Пү-squipt as a tool to phase-
engineer Josephson topological materials. Nat. Nanotech-
nol. 11, 1055вҖ“1059 (2016).

[8] Eriksson, E., Riwar, R.-P., Houzet, M., Meyer, J. S. &
Nazarov, Y. V. Topological transconductance quantiza-
tion in a four-terminal Josephson junction. Phys. Rev. B
95, 075417вҖ“ (2017).

[9] Meyer, J. S. & Houzet, M. Nontrivial Chern numbers
in three-terminal Josephson junctions. Phys. Rev. Lett.
119, 136807вҖ“ (2017).

[10] Xie, H.-Y., Vavilov, M. G. & Levchenko, A. Topologi-
cal Andreev bands in three-terminal Josephson junctions.
Phys. Rev. B 96, 161406вҖ“ (2017).

[11] Xie, H.-Y., Vavilov, M. G. & Levchenko, A. Weyl nodes
in Andreev spectra of multiterminal Josephson junctions:
Chern numbers, conductances, and supercurrents. Phys.
Rev. B 97, 035443вҖ“ (2018).

[12] Deb, O., Sengupta, K. & Sen, D. Josephson junctions
of multiple superconducting wires.
Phys. Rev. B 97,
174518вҖ“ (2018).

[13] Repin, E. V., Chen, Y. & Nazarov, Y. V. Topological
properties of multiterminal superconducting nanostruc-
tures: Effect of a continuous spectrum. Phys. Rev. B 99,
165414вҖ“ (2019).

[14] Repin, E. V. & Nazarov, Y. V. Weyl points in multi-
terminal hybrid superconductor-semiconductor nanowire
devices. Phys. Rev. B 105, L041405 (2022).

[15] Fatemi, V., Akhmerov, A. R. & Bretheau, L.
Weyl
Josephson circuits.
Phys. Rev. Research 3, 013288
(2021).

[16] Peyruchat, L., Griesmar, J., Pillet, J. D. & ГҮ. Г–. Girit.
Transconductance quantization in a topological Joseph-
son tunnel junction circuit.
Phys. Rev. Research 3,
013289 (2021).

[17] Klees, R. L., Rastelli, G., Cuevas, J. C. & Belzig, W.
Microwave spectroscopy reveals the quantum geometric
tensor of topological Josephson matter. Phys. Rev. Lett.
124, 197002вҖ“ (2020).

[18] Klees, R. L., Cuevas, J. C., Belzig, W. & Rastelli,
G. Ground-state quantum geometry in superconductorвҖ“
quantum dot chains. Phys. Rev. B 103, 014516 (2021).

[19] Weisbrich, H., Klees, R. L., Rastelli, G. & Belzig, W.
Second Chern number and non-abelian Berry phase in

topological superconducting systems. PRX Quantum 2,
010310 (2021).

[20] Weisbrich,
H.,
Bestler,
M. & Belzig,
W.
Tensor
monopoles in superconducting systems. Quantum 5, 601
(2021).

[21] Chirolli, L. & Moore, J. E. Enhanced coherence in su-
perconducting circuits via band engineering. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 126, 187701 (2021).

[22] Herrig, T. & Riwar, R.-P. Cooper-pair transistor as a
minimal topological quantum circuit. Phys. Rev. Res. 4,
013038вҖ“ (2022).

[23] Melo, A., Fatemi, V. & Akhmerov, A. R. Multiplet su-
percurrent in Josephson tunneling circuits. SciPost Phys.
12, 017 (2022).

[24] Geim, A. K. & Grigorieva, I. V.
Van der Waals het-
erostructures. Nature 499, 419вҖ“425 (2013).

[25] Cao, Y. et al.
Unconventional superconductivity in
magic-angle graphene superlattices. Nature 556, 43вҖ“50
(2018).

[26] Fu, Y., KГ¶nig, E. J., Wilson, J. H., Chou, Y.-Z. & Pixley,
J. H. Magic-angle semimetals. npj Quantum Mater. 5,
71 (2020).

[27] GonzГЎlez-Tudela, A. & Cirac, J. I. Cold atoms in twisted-
bilayer optical potentials.
Phys. Rev. A 100, 053604
(2019).

[28] Salamon, T. et al. Simulating twistronics without a twist.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 030504 (2020).

[29] Chou, Y.-Z., Fu, Y., Wilson, J. H., KГ¶nig, E. J. & Pix-
ley, J. H. Magic-angle semimetals with chiral symmetry.
Phys. Rev. B 101, 235121 (2020).

[30] Mao, D. & Senthil, T. Quasiperiodicity, band topology,
and moirГ© graphene. Phys. Rev. B 103, 115110 (2021).

[31] Meng, Z. et al.
Atomic BoseвҖ“Einstein condensate in
twisted-bilayer optical lattices.
Nature 615, 231вҖ“236
(2023).

[32] Lee, J. & Pixley, J. H.
Emulating twisted double bi-
layer graphene with a multiorbital optical lattice. SciPost
Phys. 13, 033 (2022).

[33] Deguchi, K. et al. Quantum critical state in a magnetic
quasicrystal. Nat. Mater. 11, 1013вҖ“1016 (2012).

[34] Landauer, R.
Can capacitance be negative?
Collect.
Phenom. 2, 167вҖ“170 (1976).

[35] Catalan, G., JimГ©nez, D. & Gruverman, A.
Negative
capacitance detected. Nat. Mater. 14, 137вҖ“139 (2015).

[36] Ng, K., Hillenius, S. J. & Gruverman, A. Transient na-
ture of negative capacitance in ferroelectric field-effect
transistors.
Solid State Communications 265, 12 вҖ“ 14
(2017).

[37] Hoffmann, M. et al. Ferroelectric negative capacitance
domain dynamics. J. Appl. Phys. 123, 184101 (2018).

[38] LukвҖҷyanchuk, I., Tikhonov, Y., SenГ©, A., Razumnaya, A.
& Vinokur, V. M. Harnessing ferroelectric domains for
negative capacitance. Commun. Phys. 2, 22 (2019).

[39] Hoffmann, M., Slesazeck, S., Schroeder, U. & Mikola-
jick, T. WhatвҖҷs next for negative capacitance electronics?
Nat. Electron. 3, 504вҖ“506 (2020).

[40] Salahuddin, S. & Datta, S. Use of negative capacitance
to provide voltage amplification for low power nanoscale
devices. Nano Lett. 8, 405вҖ“410 (2008).

[41] Little, W. A. Possibility of synthesizing an organic su-
perconductor. Phys. Rev. 134, A1416вҖ“A1424 (1964).

12


[42] Hamo, A. et al. Electron attraction mediated by coulomb
repulsion. Nature 535, 395вҖ“400 (2016).

[43] Placke,
B.
A.,
Pluecker,
T.,
Splettstoesser,
J.
&
Wegewijs, M. R.
Attractive and driven interactions
in quantum dots: Mechanisms for geometric pumping.
Phys. Rev. B 98, 085307 (2018).

[44] Riwar, R. P. & DiVincenzo, D. P. Circuit quantization
with time-dependent magnetic fields for realistic geome-
tries. npj Quantum Inf. 8, 36 (2022).

[45] BГјchler, H. P., Geshkenbein, V. B. & Blatter, G. Quan-
tum fluctuations in thin superconducting wires of finite
length. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 067007 (2004).

[46] Mooij,
J. E. & Nazarov,
Y. V.
Superconducting
nanowires as quantum phase-slip junctions. Nat. Phys.
2, 169вҖ“172 (2006).

[47] Astafiev, O. V. et al. Coherent quantum phase slip. Na-
ture 484, 355вҖ“358 (2012).

[48] de Graaf, S. E. et al. Charge quantum interference device.
Nat. Phys. 14, 590вҖ“594 (2018).

[49] Koliofoti, C. & Riwar, R.-P.
Compact description of
quantum phase slip junctions.
Preprint at https://
arxiv.org/abs/2204.13633 (2022).

[50] Aubry, S. & Andre, G. Analyticity breaking and Ander-
son localization in incommensurate lattices. Ann. Israel
Phys. Soc. 3, 18 (1980).

[51] Harper, P. G. Single band motion of conduction electrons
in a uniform magnetic field. Proc. Phys. Soc. A 68, 874
(1955).

[52] Avila, A. & Jitomirskaya, S. The ten martini problem.
Ann. Math. 170, 303вҖ“342 (2009).

[53] Wiegmann, P. B. & Zabrodin, A. V. Bethe-ansatz for
the Bloch electron in magnetic field. Phys. Rev. Lett. 72,
1890вҖ“1893 (1994).

[54] Goblot, V. et al. Emergence of criticality through a cas-
cade of delocalization transitions in quasiperiodic chains.
Nat. Phys. 16, 832вҖ“836 (2020).

[55] Roati, G. et al. Anderson localization of a non-interacting
BoseвҖ“Einstein condensate. Nature 453, 895вҖ“898 (2008).

[56] Hofstadter, D. R. Energy levels and wave functions of
Bloch electrons in rational and irrational magnetic fields.
Phys. Rev. B 14, 2239вҖ“2249 (1976).

[57] Sokoloff, J. B.
Electron localization in crystals with
quasiperiodic lattice potentials. Phys. Rev. B 22, 5823вҖ“
5828 (1980).

[58] Devakul, T. & Huse, D. A. Anderson localization transi-
tions with and without random potentials. Phys. Rev. B
96, 214201 (2017).

[59] Luo, X. & Ohtsuki, T. Universality classes of the An-
derson transitions driven by quasiperiodic potential in
the three-dimensional Wigner-Dyson symmetry classes.
Phys. Rev. B 106, 104205 (2022).

[60] Cottet, A.
Implementation of a quantum bit in a su-
perconducting circuit. Ph.D. thesis, UniversitГ© Paris VI
(2002).

[61] DouГ§ot, B. & Vidal, J. Pairing of Cooper pairs in a fully
frustrated Josephson-junction chain. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88,
227005 (2002).

[62] Smith, W. C., Kou, A., Xiao, X., Vool, U. & Devoret,
M. H. Superconducting circuit protected by two-Cooper-
pair tunneling. npj Quantum Inf. 6, 8 (2020).

[63] Sigrist, M. Time-Reversal Symmetry Breaking States in
High-Temperature Superconductors. Progress of Theo-
retical Physics 99, 899вҖ“929 (1998).

[64] Yip, S. Josephson current-phase relationships with un-
conventional superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 52, 3087вҖ“
3090 (1995).

[65] Kuboki, K. & Sigrist, M.
Proximity-Induced Time-
Reversal Symmetry Breaking at Josephson Junctions be-
tween Unconventional Superconductors.
J. Phys. Soc.
Japan 65, 361вҖ“364 (1996).

[66] Can, O. et al. High-temperature topological supercon-
ductivity in twisted double-layer copper oxides.
Nat.
Phys. 17, 519вҖ“524 (2021).

[67] Volkov, P. A. et al. Josephson effects in twisted nodal
superconductors. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2108.13456 (2021).

[68] Tummuru, T., Plugge, S. & Franz, M. Josephson effects
in twisted cuprate bilayers. Phys. Rev. B 105, 064501
(2022).

[69] Zhao, S. Y. F. et al. Emergent interfacial superconduc-
tivity between twisted cuprate superconductors. Preprint
at https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.13455 (2021).

[70] Serniak, K. et al. Hot nonequilibrium quasiparticles in
transmon qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 157701вҖ“ (2018).

[71] Serniak, K. et al. Direct dispersive monitoring of charge
parity in offset-charge-sensitive transmons.
Phys. Rev.
Appl. 12, 014052вҖ“ (2019).

[72] Christensen, B. G. et al. Anomalous charge noise in su-
perconducting qubits. Phys. Rev. B 100, 140503вҖ“ (2019).

[73] Thouless, D. J. Quantization of particle transport. Phys.
Rev. B 27, 6083вҖ“6087 (1983).

[74] LГјschen, H. P. et al. Single-particle mobility edge in a
one-dimensional quasiperiodic optical lattice. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 120, 160404вҖ“ (2018).

[75] Wang, Y. et al. Observation of interaction-induced mo-
bility edge in an atomic Aubry-AndrГ© wire. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 129, 103401вҖ“ (2022).

[76] Modugno,
M.
Exponential
localization
in
one-
dimensional quasi-periodic optical lattices. New J. Phys.
11, 033023 (2009).

[77] Lee, P. A. & Ramakrishnan, T. V. Disordered electronic
systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 287вҖ“337 (1985).

[78] Belitz, D. & Kirkpatrick, T. R. The Anderson-Mott tran-
sition. Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 261вҖ“380 (1994).

[79] Dietmar Weinmann, Jean-Louis Pichard & Yoseph Imry.
Thouless numbers for few-particle systems with disorder
and interactions. J. Phys. I France 7, 1559вҖ“1581 (1997).

[80] Bourgain, J. & Kachkovskiy, I. Anderson localization for
two interacting quasiperiodic particles. GAFA 29, 3вҖ“43
(2019).

13


Supplementary Information on вҖңQuasiperiodic circuit quantum electrodynamicsвҖқ

T. Herrig, J. H. Pixley, E. J. KГ¶nig, and R.-P. Riwar

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 1

Derivation of the Hamiltonians via the Lagrangian
approach

Quasiperiodic nonlinear capacitor

The Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) of the main text charac-
terizes the circuit in Fig. 1(a) of the main text displaying
the quasiperiodic nonlinear capacitor (QPNC). To find
this Hamiltonian, we first use the standard rules to write
down the Lagrangian

L = 1

2
C ( ЛҷПҶT вҲ’ ЛҷПҶ)2

(2e)2
+ 1

2
CgT ( ЛҷПҶT вҲ’ 2eVgT)2

(2e)2
+ 1

2
CJT ЛҷПҶ2
T

(2e)2

+ EJT cos (ПҶT) + 1

2

пҝҪ

Оұ

CОұ ( ЛҷПҶ вҲ’ ЛҷПҶОұ)2

(2e)2
вҲ’ V (ПҶ),
(S1)

where the last two terms correspond to additional ele-
ments connected to the right island (with phase ПҶ) not
explicitly shown in the figure.
We include these here
since the circuit is meant to be a part of a larger circuit
and to generalize the derivation and demonstrate what
influence such elements have on the parameters of the
final Hamiltonian. Here, V (ПҶ) encapsulates any induc-
tive contributions while the CОұ denote the capacities of
any linear capacitance to an island or contact with su-
perconducting phase ПҶОұ.
We neglect any dynamics of
these phases вҖ“ that is, beyond external control like an
applied voltage to ground вҖ“ which also allows us to trun-
cate any energy terms that do not depend on ПҶ or ПҶT.
Treating the phases ПҶОұ as degrees of freedom within the
Lagrange formalism would result in a much more com-
plex calculation shifting the focus away from the QPNC.
Part of this complexity is the appearance of capacitive
cross-couplings between the auxiliary transmon island
(with phase ПҶT) and the other islands whose strengths
would have to be considered depending on the parameter
regime. Here, we want to concentrate on the core behav-
ior of the QPNC in circuits with few degrees of freedom.
As an example of a more complex circuit we consider the
multidimensional Aubry-AndrГ© circuit (see Fig. 6 of the
main text); a derivation of the Hamiltonian for d = 2 can
be found below.

Now we continue with the Euler-Lagrange equations
N = вҲӮL/вҲӮ ЛҷПҶ and NT = вҲӮL/вҲӮ ЛҷПҶT to define the canonically

conjugate charges,

N =C ( ЛҷПҶ вҲ’ ЛҷПҶT)

(2e)2
+
пҝҪ

Оұ

CОұ ( ЛҷПҶ вҲ’ ЛҷПҶОұ)

(2e)2
,
(S2)

NT =C ( ЛҷПҶT вҲ’ ЛҷПҶ)

(2e)2
+ CgT ( ЛҷПҶT вҲ’ 2eVgT)

(2e)2
+ CJT ЛҷПҶT

(2e)2 , (S3)

and define the offset charges Ng вүЎ пҝҪ

Оұ CОұ ЛҷПҶОұ/ (2e)2 and
NgT вүЎ CgTVgT/2e.
Therewith the Hamiltonian can
be derived with a Legendre transformation H = N ЛҷПҶ +
NT ЛҷПҶTвҲ’L. The kinetic part (i.e. the capacitive terms) of
the Hamiltonian can also be written as T = QT CвҲ’1Q/2
with the charge vector Q = 2e (N + Ng, NT + NgT)вҠә and
the capacitance matrix C. The latter can be constructed
from the Euler-Lagrange equations such that Q = CV
with the voltage vector V = ( ЛҷПҶ, ЛҷПҶT)вҠә /2e. With Supple-
mentary Equations (S2) and (S3) we identify

C =
пҝҪ
Ctot
вҲ’C
вҲ’C CT,tot

пҝҪ
,
(S4)

introducing the total capacities of the islands Ctot вүЎ C +
пҝҪ

Оұ CОұ and CT,tot вүЎ C + CgT + CJT, and the inverse

CвҲ’1 =
1

CtotCT,tot вҲ’ C2

пҝҪ
CT,tot
C
C
Ctot

пҝҪ
.
(S5)

This results in the Hamiltonian

H = 2ECT [NT + NgT + О» (N + Ng)]2

+ 2EC (N + Ng)2 вҲ’ EJT cos (ПҶT) + V (ПҶ),
(S6)

with
the
parameter
definitions
ECT
=
e2Ctot/(CtotCT,tot вҲ’ C2), EC = e2/Ctot and О» = C/Ctot,
analogously to the main text. Comparing this Hamilto-
nian (after quantizing) with Eq. (3) of the main text we
find full agreement when removing the additional terms
by setting V (ПҶ) = 0 and пҝҪ

Оұ CОұ = 0, resulting in Ng = 0
and Ctot = C.
However, by including these terms we
find out how every capacitive element connected to the
right island contributes via Ctot to the value of О» and
tunes it away from the trivial value 1.
Now the two circuits in Figs. 1(c, d) of the main text
are examples for complete circuits involving the QPNC
that can be described by the general Hamiltonian in Sup-
plementary Equation (S6). For the Aubry-AndrГ© circuit
(Fig. 1(d) of the main text) we include a Josephson junc-
tion to ground (giving us the inductive term V (ПҶ) =
вҲ’EJ cos (ПҶ)) and a capacitor connected to a gate voltage
to ground (setting the total capacity Ctot = C + Cg and
the offset charge Ng = CgVg/2e). The same elements are
included in the Dirac circuit (Fig. 1(c) of the main text),

S1


however, an additional cotunneling junction connects to
ground with a phase of П•Оұ = Оҙ. Here the full inductive
potential reads V (ПҶ) = вҲ’EJ cos (ПҶ) вҲ’ E2J cos [2 (ПҶ вҲ’ Оҙ)].
Note that the Josephson junctions and the cotunneling
junction are also associated with capacities which are
added to Ctot, too, but for simplicity we do not include
them explicitly. After quantizing the Hamiltonians we
just replace the terms containing пҝҪ
NT and пҝҪПҶT by the
low-energy effective treatment вҲј ES introduced and dis-
cussed in and around Eq. (5) of the main text to find
the Hamiltonians shown in Eqs. (9) and (16) of the main
text.

2D Aubry-AndrГ© circuit

Here we derive the Hamiltonian given in Eq. (20) of the
main text for the d = 2 dimensional Aubry-AndrГ© circuit;
see Fig. 6 of the main text. The Lagrangian reads

L(2)
AA = 1

2

пҝҪ

ВөвҲҲ{x,y}

Cg,Вө ( ЛҷПҶВө вҲ’ 2eVg,Вө)2

(2e)2

+ 1

2

пҝҪ

j,Вө

CjВө ( ЛҷПҶT,j вҲ’ ЛҷПҶВө)2

(2e)2
+ 1

2

пҝҪ

j

CgT,j ( ЛҷПҶT,j вҲ’ 2eVgT,j)2

(2e)2

+
пҝҪ

j
EJT,j cos (ПҶT,j) +
пҝҪ

Вө
EJ,Вө cos (ПҶВө) ,
(S7)

where each index takes two values j вҲҲ {1, 2} and Вө вҲҲ
{x, y}.
Thus we can derive the following four Euler-
Lagrange equations

NВө =
пҝҪ

j

CiОұ ( ЛҷПҶВө вҲ’ ЛҷПҶT,j)

(2e)2
+ Cg,Вө ( ЛҷПҶВө вҲ’ 2eVg,Вө)

(2e)2
,

(S8)

NT,j =
пҝҪ

Вө

CjВө ( ЛҷПҶT,j вҲ’ ЛҷПҶВө)

(2e)2
+ CgT,j ( ЛҷПҶT,j вҲ’ 2eVgT,j)

(2e)2
,

(S9)

and define the offset charges Ng,Вө вүЎ Cg,ВөVg,Вө/2e and
NgT,j вүЎ CgT,jVgT,j/2e and the shifted charges пҝҪ
NВө вүЎ
NВө + Ng,Вө and
пҝҪ
NT,j вүЎ NT,j + NgT,j.
Analogously
to above, we construct a capacitance matrix C satis-
fying the equation Q = CV with the charge vector

Q = 2e
пҝҪ
пҝҪ
Nx, пҝҪ
Ny, пҝҪ
NT,1, пҝҪ
NT,2
пҝҪвҠә
and the voltage vector

V = ( ЛҷПҶx, ЛҷПҶy, ЛҷПҶT,1, ЛҷПҶT,2)вҠә /2e. Then we invert the matrix
to find the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian via Legendre
transformation T = QT CвҲ’1Q/2. With Supplementary
Equations (S8) and (S9) we thus find the capacitance
matrix

C =
пҝҪ
A B
B D

пҝҪ
,
(S10)

with

A =
пҝҪ
Cx,tot
0
0
Cy,tot

пҝҪ
,
(S11)

B =
пҝҪ
вҲ’C1x вҲ’C2x
вҲ’C1y вҲ’C2y

пҝҪ
,
(S12)

and

D =
пҝҪ
CT1,tot
0
0
CT2,tot

пҝҪ
,
(S13)

where we defined the total capacities CВө,tot вүЎ пҝҪ

j CjВө +
Cg,Вө and CT,j,tot вүЎ CgT,j + пҝҪ

Вө CjВө.
We denote the
inverse of this matrix as

CвҲ’1 =
пҝҪ
U
V

VвҠә W

пҝҪ
,
(S14)

which can be derived to be

U =
1

A вҲ’ B 1

DBT ,
(S15)

V = вҲ’
1

A вҲ’ B 1

DBT B 1

D ,
(S16)

and

W =
1

D вҲ’ BT 1

AB .
(S17)

Defining the vectors EJ вүЎ (EJ,x, EJ,y)вҠә, ПҶ вүЎ (ПҶx, ПҶy)вҠә,

and пҝҪN вүЎ
пҝҪ
пҝҪ
Nx, пҝҪ
Ny
пҝҪвҠә
, we find for the full Hamiltonian

H(2)
AA = вҲ’

2
пҝҪ

j=1
EJT,j cos (ПҶT,j) + V (2)
CT

вҲ’ EJ В· cos (ПҶ) + V (2)
C
,
(S18)

where we define the cosine of a vector component-wise
пҝҪ
cos
пҝҪ
ПҶ
пҝҪпҝҪ

Вө := cos
пҝҪ
ПҶВө
пҝҪ
. The islands forming the charge

lattice contribute capacitively as

V (2)
C
= 2 пҝҪN
вҠәEC пҝҪN,
(S19)

with the charging energy matrix EC. Furthermore, the
capacitive energy contribution of the transmons is given
by

V (2)
CT =

2
пҝҪ

j=1
ECT,j
пҝҪ
пҝҪ
NT,j + Оӣj В· пҝҪN
пҝҪ2

+ ECT,cross
пҝҪ
пҝҪ
NT,1 + Оӣ1 В· пҝҪN
пҝҪ пҝҪ
пҝҪ
NT,2 + Оӣ2 В· пҝҪN
пҝҪ
,
(S20)

with the transmon charging energies

ECT,j = 2e2 Cx,totCy,totCTj,tot вҲ’ C2

jxCy,tot вҲ’ C2

jyCx,tot

det [C]
,

(S21)

S2


(j Мё= j), the cross coupling energy

ECT,cross = 4e2 Cx,totC1yC2y + Cy,totC1xC2x

det [C]
,
(S22)

and the quasiperiodicity parameters

О»jВө =
CjВө
CВө,tot
,
(S23)

forming the vectors Оӣj вүЎ (О»jx, О»jy)вҠә. After quantizing
the Hamiltonian, we assume tuning into an appropriate
parameter regime where the transmon charges пҝҪ
NT,j have
much faster dynamics than the island charges пҝҪ
NВө (the
extensive discussion on this regime for the 1D case of the
quasiperiodic capacitor in the main text can easily be
extended to this multidimensional case). Consequently,
we can derive an effective version of this Hamiltonian
given by Eq. (20) of the main text, characterized by
a quasiperiodic capacitive behavior. The cross-coupling
between the transmons вҲј ECT,cross is suppressed in the
transmon limit, that is ECT,j/EJT,j вүӘ 1.

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 2

Numerical evaluation of ES

The essence of the quasiperiodic nonlinear capacitor is
to make use of the offset-charge dependence of the trans-
mon ground state while requantizing this offset-charge
living on a finite superconducting island. In this process
we used the cosine approximation вҲ’ES cos(2ПҖNg) which
is perfectly valid in the transmon regime (EJT вү« ECT)
where the amplitude ES is exponentially suppressed; see
Eq. (6) of the main text. However, since we are inter-
ested in a measurable effect of this term, we suggest to
go beyond the transmon regime, where EJT вҲј ECT or
even EJT < ECT. This is outside of the regime where
the above approximation is justified. This motivates us
to do a numerical evaluation of the exact amplitude ES as
well as the harmonicity of the term; see Supplementary
Figure S1. To test the latter, we compute the Fourier
coefficient of the numeric eigenvalue with the same fre-
quency as the analytic term and compare it to the full
numeric amplitude. We find that, while we overestimate
ES a bit outside the transmon regime, the analytic result
still captures roughly the correct magnitude.
Further-
more, the anharmonicity stays rather small, which yields
only a small contribution of phase cotunneling events.

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 3

Numerical evaluation of the Dirac spectrum

To derive the Dirac Hamiltonian (see Eq. (10) of the
main text) the Hilbert space was reduced to only a

10
1
100
101

EJT/ECT

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

ES/ECT

analytic approximation
numeric amplitude
numeric cosine approximation

Figure S1. Numeric evaluation of ES. We compare the
analytic approximation from Eq. (6) of the main text (blue
line) with a numerically calculated amplitude (orange line)
and the cosine component of the numerical result (green line).
This is done as a function of EJT/ECT in the transmon regime
(EJT вү« ECT) and beyond.

single pseudo-spin degree of freedom and two externally
controlled parameters. First we got rid of the degrees
of freedom of the auxiliary transmon of the QPNC
and afterwards we used BlochвҖҷs theorem to find the
final 2D low-energy basis with Dirac-like dynamics.
To affirm the validity of this process and the resulting
energy profile, we numerically evaluate the Hamiltonian
before and after analytically solving the dynamics of
the auxiliary transmon (see Supplementary Figure S2)
and compare it to the expected Dirac spectrum.
We
perform this comparison for two sets of parameters.
First, we choose a parameter regime where our approx-
imations in the main text are expected to hold; see
Supplementary Figures S2(a, b). Here we see indeed a
very good qualitative and quantitative agreement with
the expected Dirac cone spectrum, i.e., the eigenvalues
of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (10) of the main text. Then,
in Supplementary Figures S2(c, d), we plug in values
for which the approximations cannot be expected to
hold.
Surprisingly, we see that nonetheless, the Dirac
point feature is still preserved in this regime.
But
the agreement is now only qualitative, and no longer
quantitative between Supplementary Figures S2(c) and
(d). In particular, the amplitude of the energy spectrum
with respect to Ng is reduced in the full calculation of
Supplementary Figure S2(c).
This is due to the fact
that here, the energy of the Cooper-pair cotunneling
junction, E2J = 20EC, is chosen very large compared to
the excitation gap of the auxiliary transmon, which, for
the chosen parameters, scales as вҲј 2вҲҡECTEJT = 8EC.
As pointed out in the main text, this leads to excitations
in the auxiliary transmon state, effectively reducing ES.
This fully explains the difference between the two figures.

S3


(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

Figure S2. Tests of the approximation procedure ar-
riving at the Dirac cones. We compare the eigenspectrum
Пөn of the Dirac circuit (see Fig. 1(c) of the main text) in-
cluding explicitly the auxiliary transmon dynamics [shown in
panels (a, c)] and with the effective treatment of the quasiperi-
odic nonlinear capacitor, i.e., where we assume that the aux-
iliary transmon remains in the ground state (b, d).
In (a,
b) we used the parameters EJ = 0.01EC, E2J = 20EC,
and in (a) EJT = 4ECT = 16EC, and in (b) the equiva-
lent ES вүҲ 0.024EC. We find a very good agreement of the
spectra of the two Hamiltonians. In (c) we choose a lower
EJT = ECT, and respectively ES вүҲ 0.47EC in (d), while tun-
ing up EJ = 0.2EC accordingly in both (c, d). Here, neglect-
ing the auxiliary transmon dynamics was not justified (since
(c) and (d) give quantitatively different spectra). However,
the discrepancy can be easily understood by means of excita-
tions in the auxiliary transmon, see also main text.

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 4

Effect of a ОҙО»-detuning on the Dirac spectrum

In the Dirac circuit, the large E2J element stabilizes
phase slips of exactly ПҖ, which enter in the effective Dirac
Hamiltonian via the вҲ’ES cos(ПҖ пҝҪ
N) term. This allows us
to suppress the linear capacitance with a cos(2пҝҪПҶ)-term
without suppressing the nonlinear capacitance. As we al-
ready discussed in the main text, a detuning ОҙО» from the
theoretically optimal value, О» = 1/2 + ОҙО», does not influ-
ence the spectrum within the 2D low-energy basis. In ad-
dition, a numerical analysis of the full Hamiltonian shows
that, to the contrary, a small detuning from О» = 1/2 can
surprisingly be beneficial. Namely, a specific finite de-
tuning ОҙО» will actually exactly close the gap and thus
counteract the perturbing effects of other imperfections
like the influence of higher-energy states.

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 5

Classical current-noise spectrum in more details

We consider an adiabatic current response (see Eq. (12)
of the main text) due to classical offset charge noise,
as described in the main text.
As the two contri-
butions to the response we find the Josephson cur-
rent I0(t)
=
2e вҲӮОҙПөn and a linear correction term
I1(t) = вҲ’2e ЛҷNgB0[Оҙ, Ng(t)] proportional to the Berry
curvature B0.
Exploiting the periodicity of the cur-
rent in Ng, we now cast the different contributions
into a discrete Fourier series, I0 = пҝҪ

nвҲҲZ in exp(iПҖnNg)
and 2eB0
=
пҝҪ

nвҲҲZ bn exp(iПҖnNg) such that I1
=
вҲӮt
пҝҪ

nвҲҲZ ibn exp(iПҖnNg)/(ПҖn). Thus we can straightfor-
wardly calculate the noise spectrum and find two contri-
butions, one from the Josephson current (with subscript
J) and a Berry curvature contribution (with subscript B)

S (Пү) = SJ (Пү) + SB (Пү) ,
(S24)

with

SJ (Пү) = 4T
пҝҪ

n>0

(ПҖn)2 |in|2

(ПҖn)4 + T 2Пү2 ,
(S25)

and

SB (Пү) = 4T
пҝҪ

n>0

Пү2 |bn|2

(ПҖn)4 + T 2Пү2 .
(S26)

The total current noise S and its two contributions SJ
and SB are shown for the Dirac system and its gapped
version in Fig. 3 of the main text.
When considering the phase Оҙ at a value away from the
degeneracies at ПҖ/2 and 3ПҖ/2, we can identify the domi-
nant Fourier coefficients imi and bmb. We thus find an ap-
proximate Lorenz curve of height S0 = 4T|imi|2/(ПҖmi)2

for SJ, and with an asymptotic behavior of SJ(Пү) вҶ’
ПүвҲ’2 (2ПҖmi)2 |imi|2 /T. For SB we find an inverted Lorenz
curve, that is, a constant SвҲһ minus a Lorenz curve of the
same height SвҲһ = 4|bmb|2/T, which gives us the asymp-
totic value of the spectrum for high frequencies |Пү| вҶ’ вҲһ.
Importantly, the asymptotic value vanishes SвҲһ = 0 in
the Dirac system since the Berry curvature (and thus ev-
ery bn) is zero, in contrast to a gapped system; see Fig. 3
of the main text. Therefore, we can probe whether or
not the system is gapped by measuring this offset value
SвҲһ. With this in mind let us briefly discuss the behav-
ior of the current noise contributions for a system that is
possibly gapped.
To compare the two contributions, SJ and SB, it
is useful to consider the parameter ОІ вүЎ SвҲһ/S0 =
(miПҖ)2|b1|2/|i2|2T 2. However, note that the two Lorenz
curves in general have different widths due to different
dominant Fourier coefficients of the current contributions
contributing at different frequency values mi and mb, as
discussed above. Hence we find a non-monotonous noise

S4


spectrum S(Пү) for values of ОІ close to 1; see Fig. 3(a)
of the main text.
Considering the symmetric case of
ES = EJ вүЎ E and a small gap вҲҶ2 вүӘ E2, we can es-
timate the scaling of the noise spectrum contributions as
S0 вҲј TE2 and SвҲһ вҲј вҲҶ2/TE2 such that ОІ вҲј вҲҶ2/T 2E4.

S5


