*E-mail: mm9bq@virginia.edu

Ablation threshold and temperature dependent thermal conductivity of high entropy 

carbide thin films

Milena Milich,1* Kathleen Quiambao-Tomko,2 John Tomko,1 Jon-Paul Maria4, Patrick Hopkins1,2,3

1Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA

2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA

3Department of Physics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA

4 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA

ABSTRACT

High entropy carbides (HECs) are a promising new class of ultra-high temperature ceramics that 

could provide novel material solutions for leading edges of hypersonic vehicles, which can reach 

temperatures > 3,500 C and experience extreme thermal gradients. Although the mechanical 

and thermal properties of HECs have been studied extensively at room temperature, few works 

have examined HEC properties at high temperatures or considered these materials’ responses 

to thermal shock. In this work, we measure the thermal conductivity of a five-cation HEC up to 

1200 C. We find that thermal conductivity increases with temperature, consistent with trends 

demonstrated in single-metal carbides. We also measure thermal conductivity of an HEC 

deposited with varying CH4 flow rate, and find that although thermal conductivity is reduced when 

carbon content surpasses stoichiometric concentrations, the films all exhibited the same 

temperature dependent trends regardless of carbon content. To compare the thermal shock 

resistance of HECs with a refractory carbide, we conduct pulsed laser ablation measurements to 

determine the fluence threshold the HECs can withstand before damaging. We find that this metric 

for the average bond strength trends with the theoretical hardness of the HECs as expected.

KEYWORDS: thermal conductivity, laser ablation, high entropy ceramics, metal carbides, time-

domain thermoreflectance, hypersonics, thermal barrier coating

1 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND


The thermodynamic response of materials when subjected to immense thermal loads and shocks 

typical during hypersonic flight dictates the reliability and performance of hypersonic vehicles [1].   

The leading edge of hypersonic vehicles is a region of intense thermal fluxes, the power densities 

of which can initiate failure of the leading edge. During hypersonic flight, the intense, localized 

and rapid heating of leading edges can routinely lead to several failure mechanisms of ultrahigh 

temperature materials.  Thus, candidate materials for use in these extreme environments are 

usually carbon-based composites [2-10] and ultrahigh temperature ceramics (UHTCs) such as 

refractory borides and carbides due to their high melting points and high thermal conductivities

[11, 12].

New classes of UHTCs have recently emerged based on the concept of entropy stabilization [13-

23], where configurational entropy based on multiple refractory metal cations is used to stabilize 

the lattice. This has resulted in remarkable properties of UHTCs ranging, including ultralow 

thermal conductivities [14].  These reduced thermal conductivities of UHTCs as compared to their 

single-metal cation cousins are driven by the increased chemical disorder from the multiple 

different metal species that result in electron or phonon scattering events.  However, unique to 

these multi-principal element solutions, local lattice distortions or chemical off-stoichiometries can 

additionally influence the thermal conduction processes [14, 24].  

To exemplify the role that these defects specific to entropic stabilization in crystals can have on 

phonon conduction, consider that the thermal conductivity in non-metallic crystals is reduced as 

lattice “imperfections” reduce the phonon mean free path [25-28]. From the phonon’s perspective, 

these imperfections can be in the form of difference in masses in a multi-element chemically 

disordered solid solution [29], such as in the entropy stabilized oxides.  Figure 1a exemplifies this 

concept, which shows the thermal conductivity of various entropy stabilized oxides (ESOs) as a 

function of 6th component mass from the ESOs studied by Braun et al [14] compared to the thermal 


conductivity of the base 5-cation oxide system with an average cation mass of ~54 amu. These 

ESOs are single-phase thin films, with rocksalt structures having a fixed oxygen anion sublattice; 

between each oxygen atom pair sits a cation randomly selected among the equiprobable 

distribution of five or six unique elements. These films included J14 (MgxNixCuxCoxZnxO, x = 0.2), 

and five 6-cation oxides made up of the J14 composition plus an additional cation to include Sc 

(J30), Sb (J31), Sn (J34), Cr (J35), and Ge (J36).  As shown in the experimental data in Figure

1a, the thermal conductivity of these ESO samples can exhibit values similar to an amorphous 

ESO, a-J14 (also shown in Fig. 1a, as reported by Braun et al. [14]), representing that these single 

crystalline ESO films possess “ultra-low” thermal conductivities (similar to amorphous phase).  In 

particular, in the 6-cation oxides (J30 series), the thermal conductivity is reduced by nearly a 

factor of two relative to the J14 5-cation oxide. This reduction and ultra-low thermal conductivities 

of the J30 series is enabled by a local lattice distortion in the J30 relative to the J14 that occurs 

with the addition of the sixth cation. 

The reduction in the phonon contribution to thermal conductivity in high entropy materials 

demonstrates immense promise to create materials with phonon thermal conductivities that can 

achieve “ultralow” values, even below those of the so-called “minimum limit” to thermal 

conductivity [30-33]. While this would be beneficial to heat shielding and insulations, this is 

detrimental to alleviate high heat fluxes and dissipation of localized hot spots that what would 

occur on a leading edge during hypersonic flight.  For this, new classes of high entropy ceramics, 

such as high entropy carbides [23, 34, 35], can offer novel solutions.

Typical carbide structures can be viewed as an arrangement of interstitial carbon in a simple 

metallic lattice. In many cases, carbides take on the cubic rocksalt or hexagonal structures. 

Deviations from ideal stoichiometry are quite common, and specific structural phases exist within 

a broad range of carbon content. As such, point defects, particularly carbon vacancies and 


interstitials can have a dramatic effect on material properties [36-40]. An important question to 

consider is how thermal properties of high entropy carbide systems respond to deviations in 

carbon content. While the thermal properties of refractory ceramics are generally well-studied, 

explorations of high entropy carbide systems remain few and far between, especially with regard 

to carbon stoichiometry and defects. 

In a prior work, we measured the thermal conductivity of novel high entropy carbide (HEC) thin 

films with nominal compositions (HfZrTaMoW)0.2C1−x
and (HfNbTaTiZr)0.2C1−x, and their 

dependence on carbon stoichiometry, x [23]. These HECs transition from electrically-conducting, 

with electrons dominating the thermal transport in a material with primarily metallic bonding, to 

ceramic-like systems with primarily covalent bonding, where thermal conductivities are largely 

dominated by the phononic subsystem, as shown in Figure 1b. While the electronic contribution 

to thermal conductivity remains at a constant when the crystal is primarily covalently bonded, a 

combination of changes in film morphology, point defect scattering, and phase precipitation 

systematically lower the phononic contribution to thermal conductivity with further increased 

carbon content in the films. 

These prior results were reported at room temperature, and thus to further understand and 

evaluate the utility of HEC materials, in this work we study the temperature dependent thermal 

conductivity of a series of HEC films from room temperature to 1,200 C to assess the role that 

carbon stoichiometry has on the thermal conduction processes at elevated temperatures.  

Refractory carbides are well known to have an increasing thermal conductivity with increasing 

temperature due to carbon vacancies causing a high residual electrical resistivity.  We find a 

similar trend in the HEC films studied in this work.


To additionally evaluate the performance of these HEC films under the extreme heat fluxes typical 

of hypersonic vehicle leading edges, we study the damage induced in HEC films by an ultra-fast

laser pulse of varying power. By measuring the ablated area and corresponding laser fluence, we 

can calculate the damage fluence threshold of the material - the minimum power density at which 

damage will occur. This value is effectively a measure of the average bond strength in the 

material, as the time scale of ablation (and the laser pulse) is significantly faster than that of 

conduction, and so little of the pulse energy is dissipated as heat via conduction. We find that the 

damage threshold varies only slightly between HECs of different metal compositions with equal 

carbon content. Furthermore, we observe that the HECs’ damage thresholds trend linearly with 

theoretical hardness, consistent with the fact that both are measures of bond strength.

2 EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

2.1 Film growth – High Power Impulse Magnetron Sputtering (HiPIMS)

In this work we consider three HEC compositions: HEC-3 (HfNbTiTaZrC), HEC-4 (HfNbTiTaVC),

and HEC-9 (HfNbTiTaWC). The films studied in this work are similar to those reported in our prior 

work, deposited with reactive bipolar high power impulse magnetron sputtering (HiPIMS) on c-

plane sapphire [35]. This technique allows greater control over both stoichiometry and 

microstructure, and ensures a more uniform thin film composition. With conventional direct current 

and radio frequency magnetron sputtering techniques, it has been shown that carbon will 

precipitate to enclose the metal carbide grains before stoichiometric ratio has been reached, 

leaving carbon deficient grains surrounded by graphitic carbon. HiPIMS allows for the deposition 

of stoichiometric metal carbides by controlling the deposition parameters, leading to improved 

mechanical, thermal, and chemical properties. The deposition technique and film characterization

of two HEC thin films are further described in our prior works [23, 35].

2.2 Thermal conductivity measurements – Time domain thermoreflectance


The thermal conductivity of the HEC films was measured using time-domain thermoreflectance 

(TDTR) [41-43].  Briefly, the output from a pulsed, 800 nm wavelength Ti:Sapphire laser system 

(Spectra Physics Tsunami) at a frequency of 80 MHz and bandwidth of 10.5 nm, is split into the 

pump and probe paths. The pump path passes through an electro-optical modulator (EOM). 

These pump pulses are then focused on the sample surface using a 10X infinity corrected 

microscope objective creating a modulated heating event on the sample surface. The probe path 

is passed through a mechanical delay stage, incrementally varying the arrival time between the 

pump and probe, and then focused into the middle of the pump spot on the sample surface. The 

back reflection of the probe is directed to a Si photodiode where the in-phase and out-of-phase 

voltages are recorded through a lock-in amplifier, monitoring changes with respect to the 

modulated heating event from the pump. We monitor the ratio of the in-phase to out-of-phase 

lock-in response and relate this ratio to the complex temperature change on the surface of a 

multilayer solid subjected to a frequency modulated train of delta functions as a thermal source 

to the heat equation in cylindrical coordinates, as described previously.  We measure the thermal 

conductivity of the HEC thin films from room temperature to 1,200 C.  We control the temperature 

of our sample via resistively heated Linkam TS1500 under vacuum conditions.  

In our previous work, we only studied the thermal conductivity at room temperature, and thus we 

used an 80 nm Al film as an opto-thermal transducer, as necessitated by TDTR.  However, due 

to the high temperatures studied in this work, we use a thin W film instead of the Al film, enabling 

higher temperature measurements. The room temperature thermal conductivity of a series of 

these W coated HEC films is measured and compared to the thermal conductivity of a series of 

TiC films grown under similar conditions to those of the HEC films, shown in Figure 2. We show 

similar trends to the thermal conductivities reported in our prior work for the HEC films we study 

in this work.  The TiC, however, is observed to have a very consistent thermal conductivity for 

CH4 flow rates beyond 0.5 sccm. We approximate the CH4flow rate at which stoichiometric carbon 


content is reached to be where this leveling occurs, and electronic transport no longer dominates 

the total thermal conductivity. The wide ceramic transition zone observed for TiC, or range of CH4

flow rates in which stoichiometric TiC is achieved, is attributed to its low valence electron 

concentration (VEC) of 8, and thus its high carbon affinity compared to the higher VEC HEC films.

It is important to note that the reduction in thermal conductivity vs. CH4 flow rate that we observe 

in the HiPIMS-deposited HEC films is this work occurs at lower CH4 flow rate than in our prior 

work.  This is due to the fact that in our prior work, the HEC films were deposited via conventional 

magnetron sputtering, where in this work, HiPIMS deposition was used.

2.3 Ablation threshold measurements

We conducted ablation-based measurements on three HEC thin films to determine the threshold 

fluence at which damage occurs. A pulsed 1040 nm laser (Spectra Physics Spirit) is frequency 

doubled to 520 nm by a  Hiro Light Conversion second harmonic generator. The 520 nm beam is 

then directed through a half-wave plate and beam splitter for power control, and is focused by a 

10X infinity-corrected microscope objective to a 17 μm 1/e2 diameter spot size. A camera is used 

to view the damage of the sample surface. Each measurement location on the sample was

damaged by a single ~200 fs pulse with instantaneous incident laser fluences ranging from 3.3 –

9.1 TW/cm2. The average power of the pulsed laser at the sample surface was recorded for each 

fluence level. The resulting damage areas were imaged with SEM, and imageJ was used to 

measure the diameter of damage from the micrographs. The damage area follows a logarithmic 

trend, with a sharp increase in area between the lower fluences, as can be seen in Figure 3. The 

damage area then approaches a saturation point at higher fluences, where the damaged region 

no longer increases in area as the laser fluence is increased, matching the expected logarithmic 

trend. We calculate the damage fluence threshold by fitting the damage area vs fluence data to 


the following equation: 𝐷2 = 2𝜔0

2 ln (

𝐹
𝐹𝑡ℎ), where D is the diameter of the ablation area, ω0 is the 

beam waist, F is the incident laser fluence, and Fth is the fluence threshold [44]. 

3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Temperature dependence of thermal conductivity for thin films with varying carbon content is 

shown in Figure 4. For these measurements, we took TDTR data while the films were heated by 

a temperature stage under vacuum conditions. We observed a lower thermal conductivity in films 

with higher carbon content at all temperatures. This trend is due to the lowered electron 

contribution to thermal conductivity when more of the bonds are covalent. The more carbon that 

is present in the film, the more bonds are covalent, and phonon contribution to thermal 

conductivity increases relative to that of the electronic contribution [23]. Additionally, phonon 

scattering due to interstitial carbon atoms and graphitic carbon precipitates may play a role in 

reducing thermal conductivity when carbon content surpasses stoichiometric concentrations.

Similarly, the observed increase in thermal conductivity with temperature consistent across all 

methane flow rates, is due to the presence of the metallic bonding and carbon defects. At higher 

temperatures, there is a greater concentration of free electrons, and thus an increased electron 

contribution to the total thermal conductivity.  However, increased temperatures also result in 

higher phonon-defect scattering rates. The observed increase in thermal conductivity with 

temperature is thus the superposition of these two effects, with the increase in carrier 

concentration being the dominating factor. This trend is in agreement with trends previously 

shown in metal carbides [36, 39].

We also measure the temperature dependent thermal conductivity of a similarly deposited TiC 

thin film from room temperature to 1200 ̊C and compare it to a stoichiometric HEC-3 thin film, 

shown in Figure 5. The room temperature conductivities of both films are significantly lower than 


previously reported for bulk TiC [36], due to the additional scattering caused by the smaller grain 

sizes and higher defect concentrations driven by carbon off stoichiometry [23, 45]. Additionally, 

as previously observed, the HEC thin film has a lower thermal conductivity than the TiC film due 

to scattering caused by the additional masses present. With regards to the temperature 

dependence of thermal conductivity in the sputtered thin films, the TiC follows the same nonlinear 

increasing trend as the HEC, and again consistent with the observed temperature dependence in 

thermal conductivity of metal carbides [36].

To study the resistance of the HECs to thermal shock, we measure the fluence threshold of three 

five-cation HEC thin films deposited under the same CH4 flow rate and again compare the results 

to that of a similarly-deposited TiC film. At each damage location, the sample is subjected to a 

~200 fs, 520 nm laser pulse with a fluence ranging from 3.3 – 9.1 TW/cm2, as previously 

mentioned. The samples are imaged at 250X magnification with SEM to obtain precise 

measurements of damage diameter, which are then fitted to the logarithmic model presented 

earlier in the paper to determine the fluence threshold. The time scale of the laser pulses is 

sufficiently short such that negligible energy is dissipated via thermal conduction, and the area of 

damage is considered a direct indicator of the amount of energy it takes to break bonds and eject 

material from the sample surface. To ensure that the HEC and TiC films have similar absorptions 

at the wavelength used for ablation, we measure the reflectivity of each sample and find that the

samples all fall in the range of 30-43% power reflected.

We observe slight differences between the fluence threshold of the samples, that appear to trend 

with theoretical hardness, as calculated in Hossain et al. [46], shown in Figure 6. This is expected, 

as both bond stiffness and fluence threshold are indicators of bond energy, and thus can also be 

predicted by the VEC. The VEC determines the average carbon affinity of the transition metals

and therefore the bond strength between each metal and carbon in the lattice. We see that HEC-


3, which has a VEC of 8.4, has a higher fluence threshold and thus higher bond energy than HEC-

4, which has a VEC of 8.6, or HEC-9 with a VEC of 8.8, because it takes a greater amount of 

energy to break ZrC bonds than VC or WC. Additionally, we notice that although the fluence 

thresholds are comparable between the different HECs, we observe significant differences in the 

magnitude of damage between the samples. This appears to trend roughly with the lattice 

parameter of the 5th cation added to the HEC. The HEC-3 sample, which has Zr as its 5th cation, 

experienced less damage than the other HECs at the same laser fluence. ZrC also has a larger 

lattice parameter than VC or WC, and this appears to yield a greater tolerance to 

thermomechanical shock.

4 SUMMARY

In this work we measure the temperature dependent thermal conductivity of (HfNbTaTiZr)C1-x

deposited by HiPIMS under three different CH4 flow rates up to 1200 C. We find that at all 

temperatures, HECs with higher carbon content have a lower thermal conductivity due to the shift 

towards majority covalent bonding from metallic, and an increase in phonon scattering caused by 

interstitial carbon. Although HECs with greater than stoichiometric carbon content nominally 

exhibit lowered thermal conductivities, all of the HEC films studied exhibited the same increase in 

thermal conductivity with temperature. We also compare a stoichiometric HEC film with a similarly 

deposited thin film refractory carbide, TiC, and find that the HEC again demonstrates the same

increase in thermal conductivity with temperature as the single-metal carbide, but with a nominally 

lower thermal conductivity due to additional scattering from the 5 metal cations. 

In studying the thermal shock resistance of three HEC films, we find that the fluence threshold at 

which damage occurs is comparable, and somewhat higher, than that of TiC. Amongst the HECs, 

the damage threshold appears to trend with the theoretical hardness of the material, with harder 

materials demonstrating greater resistance to damage from ablation. This is as expected because 


both fluence threshold and hardness are indicators of average bond strength. Additionally, we 

observe that although the calculated fluence thresholds are largely comparable between the 

HECs, the extent of damage at each fluence level varies significantly, and the damage area 

measured at the highest fluence tested appears to trend with average lattice parameter. The least 

damaged sample was that with the largest average distance between atoms.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We appreciate support from the Office of Naval Research, Grant Number N00014-22-1-2139.

REFERENCES

1.
Kasen, S.D., Thermal management at hypersonic leading edges. 2013.

2.
Glass, D.E., Ceramic matrix composite (CMC) thermal protection systems (TPS) 

and hot structures for hypersonic vehicles. 15th AIAA International Space Planes 

and Hypersonic Systems and Technologies Conference, 2008. 2008: p. 2682.

3.
Curry, D.M., J.A. Cunningham, and J.R. Frahm, Space Shuttle Orbiter Leading 

Edge Thermal Performance, in Entry Vehicle Heating and Thermal Protection 

Systems: Space Shuttle, Solar Starprobe, Jupiter Galileo Probe. 1983, American 

Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. p. 206-233.

4.
Habermehl, S. and J.R. Serrano, Thermal conductivity in nanocrystalline-SiC/C 

superlattices. Applied Physics Letters, 2015. 107(20): p. 201904.

5.
Jacobson, N.S., et al., Oxidation through coating cracks of SiC-protected 

carbon/carbon. Surface and Coatings Technology, 2008. 203(3): p. 372-383.

6.
Jacobson, N.S. and D.M. Curry, Oxidation microstructure studies of reinforced 

carbon/carbon. Carbon, 2006. 44(7): p. 1142-1150.


7.
Ragan, S. and G.T. Emmerson, The effect of heat-treatment temperature upon the 

properties of matrix-inhibited carbon-carbon composites. Carbon, 1992. 30(3): p. 

339-344.

8.
McKee, D.W., Oxidation behavior and protection of carbon/carbon composites.

Carbon, 1987. 25(4): p. 551-557.

9.
Kowbel, W., Y. Huang, and H. Tsou, Effect of boron ion implantation on the 

oxidation behavior of three-dimensional carbon-carbon composite. Carbon, 1993. 

31(2): p. 355-363.

10.
Savage, G., Carbon-carbon composites. 1993: Springer-Science and Business 

Media.

11.
Ushakov, S.V., et al., Carbides and Nitrides of Zirconium and Hafnium. Materials, 

2019. 12(17).

12.
Cedillos-Barraza, O., et al., Investigating the highest melting temperature 

materials: A laser melting study of the TaC-HfC system. Scientific Reports, 2016. 

6: p. 37962 EP.

13.
Rost, C.M., et al., Entropy-stabilized oxides. Nature Communications, 2015. 6.

14.
Braun, J.L., et al., Charge-Induced Disorder Controls the Thermal Conductivity of 

Entropy-Stabilized Oxides. Advanced Materials, 2018. 30(51): p. 1805004.

15.
Gild, J., et al., High-entropy fluorite oxides. Journal of the European Ceramic 

Society, 2018. 38(10): p. 3578-3584.

16.
Sarker, P., et al., High-entropy high-hardness metal carbides discovered by 

entropy descriptors. Nature Communications, 2018. 9(1): p. 4980.


17.
Sharma, Y., et al., Single-crystal high entropy perovskite oxide epitaxial films.

Physical Review Materials, 2018. 2: p. 060404.

18.
Gild, J., et al., A high-entropy silicide: (Mo0.2Nb0.2Ta0.2Ti0.2W0.2)Si2. Journal of 

Materiomics, 2019. 5(3): p. 337-343.

19.
Backman, L., et al., Part II: Experimental verification of computationally predicted 

preferential oxidation of refractory high entropy ultra-high temperature ceramics.

Acta Materialia, 2020. 197: p. 81-90.

20.
Backman, L., et al., Part I: Theoretical predictions of preferential oxidation in 

refractory high entropy materials. Acta Materialia, 2020. 197: p. 20-27.

21.
Gild, J., et al., Thermal conductivity and hardness of three single-phase high-

entropy metal diborides fabricated by borocarbothermal reduction and spark 

plasma sintering. Ceramics International, 2020. 46(5): p. 6906--6913.

22.
Qin, M., et al., Dual-phase high-entropy ultra-high temperature ceramics. Journal 

of the European Ceramic Society, 2020. 40(15): p. 5037--5050.

23.
Rost, C.M., et al., Electron and phonon thermal conductivity in high entropy 

carbides with variable carbon content. Acta Materialia, 2020. 196: p. 231--239.

24.
Giri, A., et al., On the minimum limit to thermal conductivity of multi-atom 

component crystalline solid solutions based on impurity mass scattering. Scripta 

Materialia, 2017. 138: p. 134-138.

25.
Klemens, P.G., The scattering of low-frequency lattice waves by static 

imperfections. Proceedings of the Physical Society of London. Section A, 1955. 

68: p. 1113-1128.


26.
Srivastava, G.P., Phonon conductivity of insulators and semiconductors. Journal 

of Physics and Chemistry of Solids, 1980. 41: p. 357-368.

27.
Srivastava, G.P., The Physics of Phonons. 1990, New York: Taylor and Francis.

28.
Chen, G., Nanoscale Energy Transport and Conversion: A Parallel Treatment of 

Electrons, Molecules, Phonons, and Photons. 2005, New York: Oxford University 

Press.

29.
Abeles, B., Lattice thermal conductivity of disordered semiconductor alloys at high 

temperatures. Physical Review, 1963. 131: p. 1906-1911.

30.
Cahill, D.G. and R.O. Pohl, Lattice vibrations and heat transport in crystals and 

glasses. Annual Review of Physical Chemistry, 1988. 39: p. 93-121.

31.
Cahill, D.G., S.K. Watson, and R.O. Pohl, Lower limit to the thermal conductivity 

of disordered crystals. Physical Review B, 1992. 46: p. 6131-6140.

32.
Winter, M.R. and D.R. Clarke, Oxide Materials with Low Thermal Conductivity.

Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 2007. 90(2): p. 533-540.

33.
Turcer, L.R. and N.P. Padture, Towards multifunctional thermal environmental 

barrier coatings (TEBCs) based on rare-earth pyrosilicate solid-solution ceramics.

Scripta Materialia, 2018. 154: p. 111-117.

34.
Harrington, T.J., et al., Phase stability and mechanical properties of novel high 

entropy transition metal carbides. Acta Materialia, 2019. 166: p. 271--280.

35.
Hossain, M.D., et al., Bipolar high-power impulse magnetron sputtering synthesis 

of high-entropy carbides. Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 2022. 105(6): 

p. 3862-3873.


36.
Williams, W.S., High-Temperature Thermal Conductivity of Transition Metal 

Carbides and Nitrides. Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 1966. 49(3): p. 

156-159.

37.
Radosevich, L.G. and W.S. Williams, Thermal Conductivity of Transition Metal 

Carbides. Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 1970. 53(1): p. 30-33.

38.
Klemens, P.G. and R.K. Williams, Thermal conductivity of metals and alloys.

International Metals Reviews, 1986. 31: p. 197-215.

39.
Williams, W.S., The thermal conductivity of metallic ceramics. JOM Journal of 

Minerals, Metals and Materials Society, 1998. 50: p. 62-66.

40.
Williams, W.S., Electrical properties of hard materials. International Journal of 

Refractory Metals and Hard Materials, 1999. 17(1): p. 21--26.

41.
Cahill, D.G., Analysis of heat flow in layered structures for time-domain 

thermoreflectance. Review of Scientific Instruments, 2004. 75(12): p. 5119-5122.

42.
Hopkins, P.E., Thermal transport across solid interfaces with nanoscale 

imperfections: Effects of roughness, disorder, dislocations, and bonding on 

thermal boundary conductance. ISRN Mechanical Engineering, 2013. 2013: p. 

682586.

43.
Schmidt, A.J., Pump-probe thermoreflectance. Annual Review of Heat Transfer, 

2013. 16: p. 159-181.

44.
Tomko, J.A., et al., Energy confinement and thermal boundary conductance effects 

on short-pulsed thermal ablation thresholds in thin films. Physical Review B, 2017. 

96: p. 014108.


45.
Crocombette, J.P., Origins of the high temperature increase of the thermal 

conductivity of transition metal carbides from atomistic simulations. Journal of 

Physics: Condensed Matter, 2013. 25: p. 505501.

46.
Hossain, M.D., et al., Fermi Level Engineering and Mechanical Properties of High 

Entropy Carbides. arXiv e-prints, 2021.

47.
Mao, H., et al., Microstructure and mechanical properties of carbide reinforced tic-

based ultra-high temperature ceramics: a review. Coatings, 2021.


Figure 1. (a) Thermal conductivity of entropy stabilized oxide (ESO) thin films as a function of 6th

component mass.  The reduction in thermal conductivity from the 5 cation ESO (J14) to the 
various 6 cation ESOs (J30-series) is due to the additional lattice distortion that the 6th cation 
introduces to the lattice, thus offering additional phonon scattering mechanisms, and resulting in 
thermal conductivity near that of the amorphous 5-cation oxide (a-J14).  These results are detailed 
in Bruan et al [14]. Sample key: J14 = (MgNiCuCoZn)0.2O; J30 = J14+Sc; J31 = J14+Sb; J34 = 
J14+Sn; J35 = J14+Cr; J36 = J14+Ge.  (b) Thermal conductivity of (HfZrTaMoW)0.2C1-x high 
entropy carbide (HEC) thin films as a function of methane flow rate (% CH4) in the plasma.  A high 
CH4 content results in a change in bond type from metallic to covalent, along with an increased 
precipitation of excess carbon. This inversely impacts the electronic contribution to thermal 
conductivity, with a continued decrease in electron thermal conductivity as a function of increase 
% CH4.  These results are detailed in Rost et al [23].


Figure 2. Room temperature thermal conductivity of HEC thin films as a function of CH4 flow rate. 
At low CH4 flow rate, the films are electronically conductive, while at high CH4 content, there are 
more covalent bonds and thermal conductivity is phonon-driven, leading to a lowered total thermal 
conductivity. Furthermore, interstitial carbon and carbon precipitates create additional phonon 
scattering events as carbon content exceeds stoichiometric concentration. 

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.0
2.5

5

10

0

15

Thermal conductivity (W m-1K-1)

CH4 Flow rate (sccm)

HEC-3
HfNbTiTaZrC

HEC-9
HfNbTiTaWC

TiC


Figure 3. SEM micrographs of ablation damage for varying fluences on (a) HEC-3 (HfNbTiTaZrC), 
(b) HEC-4 (HfNbTiTaVC), and (c) HEC-9 (HfNbTiTaWC). The damage diameter used to calculate 
fluence threshold is the outer diameter of the hole, the innermost white ring observed in the SEM 
micrographs. The experimental setup is shown in (d).


Figure 4. Temperature dependence of thermal conductivity of HEC-3 thin film with varying CH4
flow rates.  At higher temperatures, there is a greater concentration of free electrons, and thus an 
increased electron contribution to the total thermal conductivity.  This increase in carrier 
concentration with increased temperature tempered by increased phonon-defect scattering rates 
leads to the observed increase in thermal conductivity with temperature, in agreement with trends 
observed in metal carbides [36, 39].

0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200

0

4

8

12

16

20

Thermal Conductivity (W m-1 K-1)

Temperature (C)

1.0 sccm CH4

1.8 sccm CH4
(stoichiometric)

2.3 sccm CH4


Figure 5. Temperature dependence of HEC-3 thermal conductivity in comparison to TiC thin film. 

0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200

0

4

8

12

16

20

24

Thermal Conductivity (W m-1 K-1)

Temperature (C)

TiC

HEC-3


Figure 6. (a) Damage area as a function of laser fluence for three HEC thin films. Dashed lines 
represent the fitted logarithmic model used to calculate fluence threshold. (b) Fluence 
thresholds vs. theoretical hardness. Both fluence threshold and hardness are indicators of bond 
strength, and we observe a near linear agreement between the two. (c) Lattice parameter of the 
single-component carbide corresponding to the 5th cation added, and the area damaged at 9 
TW/cm2.


