Symmetry-based computational search for novel binary and ternary 2D materials

Hai-Chen Wang
,1 Jonathan Schmidt
,1 Miguel A. L. Marques
,1, ∗ Ludger Wirtz
,2 and Aldo H. Romero
3, 2, †

1Institut f¨ur Physik, Martin-Luther-Universit¨at Halle-Wittenberg, D-06099 Halle, Germany
2Department of Physics and Materials Science, University of Luxembourg, 162a avenue de la Fa¨ıencerie, L-1511 Luxembourg, Luxembourg
3Department of Physics, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA

We present a symmetry-based systematic approach to explore the structural and compositional richness of
two-dimensional materials. We use a “combinatorial engine” that constructs candidate compounds by occupy-
ing all possible Wyckoff positions for a certain space group with combinations of chemical elements. These
combinations are restricted by imposing charge neutrality and the Pauling test for electronegativities. The struc-
tures are then pre-optimized with a specially crafted universal neural-network force-field, before a final step of
geometry optimization using density-functional theory is performed. In this way we unveil an unprecedented va-
riety of two-dimensional materials, covering the whole periodic table in more than 30 different stoichiometries
of form AnBm or AnBmCk. Among the discovered structures, we find examples that can be built by decorating
nearly all Platonic and Archimedean tesselations as well as their dual Laves or Catalan tilings. We also obtain
a rich, and unexpected, polymorphism for some specific compounds. We further accelerate the exploration of
the chemical space of two-dimensional materials by employing machine-learning-accelerated prototype search,
based on the structural types discovered in the systematic search. In total, we obtain around 6500 compounds,
not present in previous available databases of 2D materials, with a distance to the convex hull of thermodynamic
stability smaller than 250 meV/atom.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Since the synthesis of single graphene layers,1 two-
dimensional (2D) materials have attracted a significant inter-
est from the community. Their relevance extends to different
research fields, such as catalysis, electronic transport, optical
properties, and topological properties. However, the chemi-
cal space for 2D materials is still relatively unexplored, even
though great effort has been spent on investigating the vast
chemical space for bulk, three-dimensional (3D) compounds.
In fact, experimental synthesis efforts have focused on a few
structures, mostly obtained by exfoliation of known 3D lay-
ered materials.2

On the computational side, we can find a few online
databases of 2D materials, such as Materials Cloud (MC2D),3

V2DB,4 2DMatpedia,5 and the Computational 2D Materials
Database (C2DB).6–8 These databases were built starting from
3D databases, by exfoliating single-layers from layered, van
der Waals compounds. At the moment the vast majority of
known 2D materials correspond to binaries.4,9 An exception
is the very recent addition of materials discovered via a crys-
tal diffusion variational autoencoder in Ref. 8.
These 2D databases are newer, and considerably smaller,
than their three-dimensional counterparts, e.g.
Materials
Project,10 the crystallographic open database (COD),11 the
Cambridge structural database,12 the NIST crystallographic
database,13 OQMD,14 AFLOW,15 materials cloud,16 and
many others. All these initiatives were seeded by experimen-
tal crystal structures stored in the Inorganic Crystal Structure
Database (ICSD) and other experimental databases. In fact,
the creation of the ICSD in 191217–19 paved the way to the
systematic study of the relationship between crystal structure
and materials properties. To complement experimental data,
many databases (both 2D and 3D) also contain results from
high-throughput studies (often accelerated by machine learn-
ing).
High-throughput searches are responsible for a major-

ity of the calculations in the large theoretical databases
like AFLOW,15 OQMD14 and DCGAT.20 Traditional high-
throughput searches rely on simple empirical rules to select
candidate materials for evaluation with density functional the-
ory (DFT). Consequently, they contain a large number of
highly unstable systems. A particularly popular approach is
prototype search, where new materials are hypothesized by
changing the chemical elements in a known crystal structure
(often stemming from ICSD). In some cases, all combinations
of chemical elements are taken into account, while in other
cases arguments based on charge neutrality, atomic or ionic
radii, etc. are used to circumvent the combinatorial nature of
the problem.
In comparison to these rule-based selections, machine
learning algorithms generally allow us to consider all com-
binations of the chemical elements due to their computa-
tional efficiency.21–24 In fact, recent progress has enabled us to
speed up the scanning of crystal prototypes by a factor of up
to ∼200022 with respect to traditional DFT high-throughput
studies.
A second research direction are generative mod-
els that do not rely on existing prototypes. Here, generative
adversarial networks,25,26 variational auto encoders27,28 and,
more recently, diffusion models8,29 are the most successful
approaches. While these generative models have made great
progress over the last year and improved with respect to their
bias towards stable structures, the stability of the structure still
has to be evaluated with a secondary machine learning model.
No matter the generation or selection algorithm, the next step
consists in a local structural optimization of each compound,
invariantly using DFT as the workhorse method.30,31 Analysis
of thermodynamic stability can then be achieved by comput-
ing the formation energy or the distance to the convex hull.
In this way, databases have grown considerably and can now
sometimes reach millions of crystal structures.
While the success of using chemical combinatorics is rec-
ognized for 3D materials, it has been a substantial handicap
for predicting new 2D materials. The number of known 2D

arXiv:2212.03975v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  22 Apr 2023


2

Figure 1. Summarized flowchart for choosing potential materials us-
ing group symmetries and their Wyckoff positions.

materials prototypes is unfortunately very small. Various re-
search groups have considered different strategies to address
this issue, often resorting to machine learning methods. This
paper presents an entirely different approach which is not
based on motifs or chemical substitutions. Instead, we cre-
ate all possible combinations of chemical elements for bi-
nary (and ternary) systems for specific two-dimensional space
groups. Therefore, based on symmetries and chemical crite-
ria, we can arrive at a sizeable two-dimensional crystal struc-
ture database and a diverse set of structural prototypes. The
crystal shapes show a variety of bondings and forms absent in
existing databases. As our search is systematic, crystal struc-
tures contain a large number of different chemical formulae
as well as almost all possible Wyckoff positions allowed by
the space groups. Here we focus on two-dimensional materi-
als but our approach is general, and it can also be applied to
three-, one- or even zero-dimensional structures.
This article is structured as follows. We start by discussing
in detail the systematic approach to discover 2D crystal struc-
tures and our strategies to accelerate the search.
We then
present an overview of the materials we discover, giving a
few examples of structural diversity and polymorphism. In
the following, we discuss machine-learning accelerated pro-
totype search based on the wealth of prototypes obtained. In
the Appendix following the conclusions, we give details on
our methodology.

II.
STRATEGY

Figure 1 and Fig. 2 summarize our approach for the genera-
tion of materials. The first step corresponds to a combinatorial
workflow that creates hypothetical compounds. The initial in-
put parameter is the number of desired chemical species in
the particular material. We consider most elements of the pe-
riodic table, from Li to Bi, including first-row rare earth el-
ements. We exclude, however, radioactive elements and rare
gases, namely At, Tc, Pr, Pm, He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, Rn. We
then generate all possible combinations of the different ele-
ments selected from the periodic table. For example, a total
of 2701 combinations are obtained with no repeated elements
for a binary compound.

The second parameter is the two-dimensional space group.
We use the table of layer group symmetries, created by con-
sidering the wallpaper group and adding reflections in the per-
pendicular direction. A full description of the possible groups
is given in Refs. 32–34. To generate the atomic positions pro-
vided by the layer space group for all possible Wyckoff posi-
tions (WPs), we used the package PyxTal.35 A list of the pos-
sible WPs can be found in the Bilbao Crystallographic Server.
From the 80 layered groups, we studied the 18 that have the
smallest number of different Wyckoff positions and therefore
the smallest number of combinations.
The next step is the creation of all possible combinations
of the WPs for each chemical element in the combined list.
For example, if the number of WPs is four, we get 4! posibil-
ities. This strategy allows different WPs for the same species
and therefore broadens the number of possible stoichiometries
(i.e., a chemical species can occupy more than one WP). We
then create a product of this list associated with the number
of selected species. This selection leads to the definition of a
chemical composition based on the occupation of the different
WPs for each species in the compound. As certain Wyckoff
positions have free parameters, our approach is not exhaus-
tive. For example, for the p1 space group we only occupy the
(single) position 1a once for each atomic species. This leads
to a single possibility for both the binary compound AB, and
the ternary compound ABC. The number of possibilities in-
creases, however, very rapidly with the number of different
Wyckoff positions available within the space group.
In parallel, we create a list of possible oxidation states of
the considered species. We make all possible combinations
without replacement for each element from this list, and we
create a product of the different list elements. We used the
experimentally most common oxidation states, as they will
have considerably larger potential to be synthesized (the se-
lected oxidation states are included in the Supplementary In-
formation). Finally, a compound is created from the provided
number of species, the combination of WPs, and the oxidation
state.
We have not imposed any explicit limit on the number of
atoms in the unit cell.
However, the procedure we use to
generate the compounds does lead to an implicit constraint
which, however, depends on the number and multiplicity of
the Wyckoff positions for each space group. For the space
groups studied here, the maximum number of atoms in the
unit cell was 32, although the majority of the compounds has
less than 16 atoms in the unit cell.
After the material is obtained from the previous step, and
before we perform a complete electronic structure calcula-
tion, we conduct a materials screening, which allows us to
reduce the number of compounds to be fully considered. For
the screening, we used rules implemented in the open-source
material-screening Python package SMACT.36 In this pack-
age, decisions are made based on stoichiometry. The first rule
is to have only neutral compounds, which can be easily com-
puted from the stoichiometry and the oxidation states. The
second rule is the so-called Pauling test for neutral materials
which requires that positive ions have lower electronegativity
than negative ions.


3

Table I. Crystallographic summary of the layer groups considered
in this work: the space group symbol (and number in parenthesis),
the Wyckoff positions (and site symmetries in parenthesis). We also
show the number of binary (N (2)
tot ) and ternary systems (N (3)
tot ) gen-
erated by our combinatorial engine and the number of entries that
were found below 250 meV/atom from the convex hull of stability
(N (2)
<0.25 and N (3)
<0.25).

Space Group
Wyckoff Positions
N (2)
tot
N (2)
<0.25 N (3)
tot
N (3)
<0.25

p1 (01)
1a (1)
225
5
p11m (04)
2b (1), 1a (..m)
1321
339
p11a (05)
2a (1)
225
47
1944
307
p211 (08)
2c(1), 1b(2..), 1a(2..)
6645
623
p2111 (09)
2a (1)
225
40
1944
273
c211 (10)
4b (1), 2a (2..)
1321
153
pb11 (12)
2a (1)
225
15
1944
448
cm11 (13)
4b (1), 2a (m..)
1321
268
p21/b11 (17) 4c (1), 2b (-1), 2a (-1)
3129
220
p21212 (21)
4c(1), 2b(..2),2a(..2)
6645
398
pb21m (29)
4b (1), 2a (..m)
1321
140
pb2b (30) 4c (1), 2b (.2.), 2a (.2.)
6645
228
pm2a (31) 4c (1), 2b (m..), 2a (.2.) 6645
478
pm21n (32)
4b (1), 2a (m..)
1321
148
pb21a (33)
4a (1)
225
19
1944
139
pb2n (34)
4b (1), 2a (.2.)
1321
74
cm2e (36) 8c (1), 4b (m..), 4a (.2.) 6645
383

p31m (70)
6d (1), 3c (..m),
15728
783
2b (3..) 1a (3.m)

After screening, we use the main properties of a given ma-
terial, such as oxidation states, stoichiometry, and Wyckoff
positions to generate the potential compounds. In this step,
we use the PyxTal utility35 to create a 2D unit cell with the
given number of species. When WPs have internal degrees of
freedom, PyxTal tries to create a unit cell with the provided
symmetry constraints. First, the cell directions are selected
according to the space group. Then, the WPs are generated
from the symmetry operations, and, if there are internal de-
grees of freedom, they are set randomly. Next, the cell pa-
rameters and the volume are determined, assuming that each
atom has a radius equal to the covalent bond radius. Finally,
a density is obtained with the cell volume and atomic masses,
which is compared with a minimum density. If the cell den-
sity is smaller than a minimum density (set to 0.75 in scaled
units), the package attempts first to define the atomic posi-
tions randomly (setting the number of attempts to 40), and, in
case this fails, it tries to change the cell parameters (up to 10
times) and repeat the generation of the atomic position. If a
cell cannot be defined, the structure generation is considered
unsuccessful, and a new material is considered. A summary
of the pipeline is represented in figure 2. We generate sys-
tematically two dimensional structures for the space groups
shown in Table I. In this table we also include the correspond-
ing Wyckoff positions, the site symmetry and the number of
different compounds generated for each space group.
The next step is the geometry optimization. Unfortunately,
the initial structures are usually very far away from equi-
librium, making structural optimization with DFT cumber-
some. To increase the efficiency of our workflow we perform

Potential material to be considered

Confirm charge neutrality

Pauling test for electronegativity

Generate cell from WP

Check interatomic distance

Optimize with universal potential

DFT optimization

Convex hull stability

Figure 2. Pipeline for the materials screening, from materials chosen
following flowchart 1.

an intermediate geometry optimization step using a univer-
sal neural-network force-field.23 In contrast to standard force
fields that are usually trained to reproduce the potential en-
ergy surface of a specific system, universal neural network
force fields describe all possible compounds. Of course, the
objective of the latter is not to replace the former, that will be
more precise but with a more limited applicability. Instead,
they provide a reasonable description for all geometrical ar-
rangements and chemical elements. Our model, trained using
a transfer learning approach, has a median absolute error of
96 meV/atom for geometry optimizations. This is already a
competitive value, suitable for describing 2D materials in this
intermediate screening step.
At this point we remove from our dataset materials that are
too thick (using a threshold of 7.5 ˚A) or that are predicted
to be too unstable by the machine learning model (more than
600 meV/atom from the hull, corresponding approximately
to twice the MAE of the original model). We also remove
structures that were already included in C2DB7 (excluding the
very recent structures of Ref. 8).
The use of machine learning force fields resolves several
technical problems: The pre-converged geometries are, in
most cases, already quite good, only requiring a few steps
of geometry optimization using DFT. They also allow us to
discard many repeated and very high-energy structures. After
the DFT geometry optimization we evaluate the distance to
the convex hull of stability. We use the convex hull of Ref. 20
and 22 that is considerably larger than the one of the Materi-
als Project,10 in particular in what concerns the ternary (and
quaternary) sector. Consequently, our distances to the hull are
sometimes larger than in other 2D databases.
Note that besides thermodynamic stability, the issue of dy-
namical stability is a crucial factor for 2D materials, and
should always be verified before a specific material is pro-
posed for synthesis. A material is dynamically stable when it
exhibits no imaginary phonon frequencies across the Brillouin
zone. Unfortunately, the calculation of the phonon dispersion
is extremely time-consuming, and even more so for 2D sys-
tems due to issues related to the vacuum required to treat the
long-range part of the Coulomb interaction.37 We also note
that imaginary phonon frequencies could be an indication of
a charge-density wave phase (at even lower formation energy)


4

which we might be overlooking due to the use of unit cells
with a limited number of atoms.

III.
2D MATERIALS

(a)

(b)

Figure 3. Periodic tables showing the frequency of the chemical el-
ements in binary compounds below 250 meV/atom in (a) our work
and (b) C2DB. We emphasize that our entries do not include, by con-
struction, any of the compounds of C2DB.

Figure 4. Pie chart of the frequency of different general chemical for-
mula for compounds with distances to the convex hull smaller than
250 meV/atom in our database. The category other includes 29 gen-
eral formulas.

It turns out that our workflow was able to arrive at the large
majority of systems already present in C2DB. This is particu-

larly true for binary systems, as these were more extensively
investigated than ternaries (see Table I). This, in our opinion,
fully validates our workflow.
Figure 3 presents a comparison of the binary materials
present in our database (excluding the ones found in C2DB)
compared to C2DB. For the discussion, we only took into ac-
count the materials that are within a distance of 250 meV/atom
from the convex hull of stability, that corresponds loosely to
the definition of “high-stability” in C2DB.7 Note that for con-
sistency we have reoptimized the C2DB structures using our
convergence criteria and our selected set of pseudopotentials.
We find 2D compounds across the whole periodic table, in-
cluding some with lanthanides that have been up to now ex-
cluded from previous works. Not surprisingly, the majority of
compounds includes a non-metal element (due to the require-
ment of charge neutrality), leading to the pronounced peaks
for O, S, Se, Te, F, Cl, Br, I, etc. The figure also reveals some
differences in the prevalence of certain elements between our
dataset and C2DB. For example, we find considerably more
compounds with F than with O, while in C2DB we observe
the opposite behavior. As our approach is to a large extent
systematic in what concerns chemical compositions and ge-
ometries, we believe that the differences are explained by a
bias already present in ICSD and other databases that were
used to seed the 2D databases. For example, it is well known
that oxides are over-represented in experimental works as they
can be more easily synthesized and are often stable in air.
Other conclusions can be drawn from Fig. 3. For example,
it can be seen clearly that the non-metals in the second row
have more difficulty in forming low-energy compounds than
other non-metals in the same group. This is a consequence
of the Singularity Principle,38 i.e., that the chemistry of the
these elements is often different to the later members of their
respective groups. Furthermore, elements like N, O, C, and
F form very strong directional covalent bonds that leave com-
paratively little room for distortions that would be required
to form different structures. As for metallic elements, it is in
particular the transition elements in the fourth row from Ti to
Cu (and in particularly this last one), together with late group
III-A (In and Tl) seem to form easily 2D compounds.
The diversity of stoichiometries is illustrated in Fig. 4. As
our emphasis has been on binary compounds, it is not surpris-
ing that most represented stoichiometries are binary. Among
these, the simple AB2, AB3, A2B3, etc. dominate the low-
energy structures. This fact can be easily understood by the
requirement of charge neutrality and the fact that most non-
metals have oxidation states of -I, -II, or -III. As such, the
same situation can be found for bulk, 3D semiconductors and
insulators.
However, we do find a long list of other stoi-
chiometries (more than 30), and these often reveal very in-
teresting and unexpected structures.
In Fig. 5 we give a glimpse of the diversity of structural mo-
tifs found by our method. Note that this is far from a complete
list of all 2D structures found. We concentrate on unusual
arrangements that go beyond the most common square and
hexagonal lattices. We emphasize that these motifs appeared
naturally in our workflow and were not constructed by hand.
Interestingly, we easily found examples that can be derived


5

Truncated square
Rhombic
Pythagorean

CsBr (217)
SnO (144)
AsO3 (27)

Cairo pentagonal
Trihexagonal
Triakis triangular

AgS2 (42)
Cu3S2 (173)
CeSe2 (63)

Snub-square

CoTe (135)
Cu2Se (29)
InTl3 (237)

Rhombitrihexagonal

InN (155)
Cs7F2 (197)
Rb5H2 (210)

Rb5Ag2 (228)
Tl2O (141)
FeSe (151)

Figure 5. Diversity of structures obtained by our procedure. We la-
bel in bold the convex tiling from which the structure can be derived.
Next to the chemical formula, in parenthesis, is the distance to the
convex hull (in meV/atom) of the specific compound. Note that the
structure depicted is not necessarily the lowest 2D phase for the com-
position we found in our search.

from the majority of the different Euclidean uniform tilings,
both Platonic and Archimedean as well as their dual Laves or
Catalan tilings. Moreover, many of these tilings seem to be
unique to the two-dimensional world, as no layered 3D mate-
rial is known to possess them.
The first two structures can be derived from a truncated

square and a rhombic tiling. In the first case, Cs2Br2 squares
are connected, forming regular empty octahedra, leading to
a rather open lattice. In the second, Se3O3 rectangular units
form bonds along the corners, leading to flattened octahedra.
We then present an example of a Pythagorean tiling, a mo-
tif that is composed of two different squares that share one
side, and can be found all over the world in kitchen or garage
floors. Interestingly, it was proposed recently that elementary,
two-dimensional Cl, Br, and I might be able to adopt this ar-
rangement.39 We also find a series of Cairo pentagonal tilings.
In this example, AgS2 forms two overlaying tessellations of
the plane by irregular hexagons, where each of the hexagons
is formed by four identical pentagons. At the center of the
hexagons we find a Se–Se bond. Note that this is the same
Cairo pentagonal tiling that was found for PdSe2.40–42 One
of the possible structures of Cu3S2 consists on a trihexagonal
tiling (that is often called the Kagome lattice due to its use
in traditional Japanese basketry) of the plane by Cu atoms,
decorated by a S atom in the middle of the triangles. Triakis
triangular lattices appear quite commonly in our data. The
example in Fig. 5 can be seen as composed of Ce equilateral
triangles decorated with a Se atom at its center.
The following three examples are derived from snub-square
lattices.
In the first two, the metal forms this interest-
ing square-triangle lattice and the non-metal decorates the
squares. In the case of CoTe, Te-atoms can be found above
and below the plane of the Co atoms, while in Cu2Se, Se-
atoms alternate above and below the plane of the Cu-atoms.
We note that this specific lattice was recently proposed for
some noble metal chalcogenide monolayers43 and for certain
Ba and Ti oxides.44 The third example is more complex, as
both In and Tl form a distorted version of the snub-square lat-
tice, with further Tl-atoms alternating above and below the
plane. Note, however, that this curious structure is almost at
the limit of our energy threshold. Finally, we present six ex-
amples of rhombitrihexagonal lattices, where the metal atoms
form the triangle-square-hexagon lattice that is then decorated
(mostly) by the non-metals. We found a very diverse num-
ber of different decorations, allowing for many different stoi-
chiometries, ranging from the simple AB and AB2 to the more
unconventional A2B5 and A2B7. A very interesting possibility
raised by the finding of all these snub-square and rhombitri-
hexagonal structures is that these can be easily inflated by a
recursive approach to generate quasi-crystalline systems.45,46

This is, however, only possible for structures not including
out-of-plane alternating atoms, as this induces frustration in
the system reducing its stability.44

We have given several examples of the different stoi-
chiometries in our dataset and of the structural variety stem-
ming from them. Now, we look at the issue of polymorphism,
i.e., the different phases possible for a specific chemical com-
position. Not surprisingly, polymorphism depends strongly on
the chemical elements present in the compound. For example,
for BN we found a single structure below 250 meV/atom, the
well-known honeycomb lattice, while for other compounds
we have an extraordinary variety in the same energy range.
As an example, we show in Fig. 6 a selection of the crystal
structures that we found for CuI. We recall that zincblende


6

Figure 6. Polymorphism in CuI. The vertical axis denotes increasing
energy distance to the convex hull of stability in meV/atom. Cop-
per atoms are depicted in gold, while iodine is in violet. For each
structure we show a top and a side view.

CuI is at the moment the most promising p-type transparent
conducting semiconductor.47 However, CuI has a number of
polymorphs, including a a couple of trigonal phases48–51 that
are layered, with a bonding pattern rather different from the
γ-phase. Fig. 6 shows that also in the 2D case, we find a large
variety of structures and of bonding patterns.
As the lowest-energy 2D layer we find a covalently bound
hexagonal double-layer (i) that is essentially on the convex
hull of thermodynamic stability. The (buckled) single layer
(x) and the van-der-Waals bound double flat-layer also appear
in the energy spectrum but considerably higher, at more than
70 meV/atom. The second most stable structure is, surpris-
ingly, a rectangular lattice of Cu–I (ii), with the I-atoms alter-
nating above and below the plane of the Cu-atoms. A related
lattice (iv) appears just a few meV/atom above. Structure (iii),
which is only 6 meV/atom above the hull, and structure (ix)
are arrangements of one-dimensional objects. The first ex-
hibits nanowires with a triangular section arranged in an al-
ternating fashion as depicted in Fig. 6. The latter (ix) is a
periodic arrangements of nanostripes. (Incidentally, higher in
energy, at 161 meV/atom, we even find a molecular crystal
of Cu4I4 pyramidal clusters). All these systems turn out to
be semiconducting, with calculated (PBE) band gaps ranging
from around 0.5 eV to more than 2.1 eV.

IV.
PROTOTYPE SEARCH

The biggest advantage of the workflow presented above is
that it is (i) systematic and (ii) unbiased in what concerns the
structural variety. Unfortunately, the price to pay for these ad-
vantages is efficiency, in the sense that it is computationally
expensive to go through all possible compositions and space
groups and that many of the possibilities turn out to be highly
unstable or lead to thick slabs. It is, however, possible to ac-
celerate considerably the exploration of the 2D material space
by using the structural prototypes discovered by our approach,
and combining them with a machine-learning model appropri-
ate for prototype search.52,53 Of course, in this way we will not
discover new structural motifs, but we can explore the whole
compositional space very efficiently.

Our approach follows the same basic principles as V2DB,4

but goes beyond it in a number of different directions. First,
we perform transfer learning from a 3D machine, which al-
lows to transfer many of the chemical principles that gov-
ern atomic bonding. Second, we use a much larger training
set, increasing the accuracy of the machine. Third, we lift
several constrains (like charge neutrality or electronegativity
rules) used in V2DB and in our systematic search, and we
expand the possible chemical elements to the whole periodic
table. This allows us to discover a variety of intermetallics
and compounds combining elements with unusual oxidation
states. We furthermore perform machine-learning predictions
for all two-dimensional prototypes, either already present in
C2DB or stemming from our systematic search. Finally, we
perform validation DFT calculations for some of the predic-
tions, specifically for the binary stoichiometries A2B5, A2B7,
and the ternary ABC2, ABC3, AB2C2, A2B2C3.

Note that, in contrast to the systematic generation of struc-
tures based on the space groups, in the machine-learning as-
sisted prototype search, we do not impose any constraint on
the possible oxidation states. As such, the machine can, and
does, propose 2D systems including chemical elements in
other, less common oxidation states.

To keep the number of structures manageable, we asked
the machine to output all structures that it found below
200 meV/atom for the binaries and 50 meV/atom for the
ternaries. In total, we obtained 1023 candidates that were pre-
optimized with our neural-network force-field and then op-
timized with DFT. From these 638 were found to be below
250 meV/atom from the hull, yielding an exceptional success
rate of around 62%. The lowest success rate, of only 9%,
was found for the A2B7 stoichiometry: as these compounds
were sparsely present in the training set, the machine could
not learn the specificity of those structures. The problem can,
of course, be solved by adding further samples to the dataset,
in order to remove the structural (and compositional) bias, as
previously shown for bulk systems in Ref. 22. We are cur-
rently performing DFT calculations for ∼ 40000 more materi-
als, resulting from 238 million machine-learning predictions,
that will be available in the next release of our dataset.


7

V.
CONCLUSIONS

We have presented a systematic approach to explore the
structural and compositional diversity that is possible in the
chemical space of 2D materials. The main advantage of this
approach is that it is not based on a specific number of struc-
tural prototypes. This is particularly important for 2D materi-
als, as the space of possible structures is still rather unexplored
and only few prototype structures, mainly from exfoliation of
layered 3D materials, are known so far. In this way, we have
discovered thousands of unexpected phases that have no coun-
terpart in the world of layered three-dimensional materials.
We expect that such unusual bonding patterns and geometri-
cal patterns will also lead to unique mechanical, electronic,
optical, and magnetic properties.
Our method relies heavily on the use of machine learning.
The extensive use of neural networks in several parts of our
workflow is self-accelerating. In fact, the faster we generate
more data for two-dimensional systems, the larger will be our
training sets, resulting in even more accurate machine learning
models. This leads to a virtuous cycle that, in our opinion, will
pave the way for a rather complete exploration of the binary,
ternary, and eventually also the quaternary two-dimensional
phases in the near future.
Finally, an important question is how many of the phases
in our dataset can be synthesized.
We chose to filter
our results to include only compounds with an energy less
than 250 meV/atom above the convex hull, as these have
higher stability and therefore higher probability to be synthe-
sized. (For comparison, silicene, that has been experimentally
synthesized,54 is more than 600 meV/atom above the hull in
its free-standing form.) However, besides these thermody-
namic arguments, a key factor will be the choice of suitable
substrates that stabilize the two-dimensional layers, and, of
course, the ingenuity of experimental physicists and chemists
to design targeted synthesis strategies.

VI.
APPENDIX: METHODS

A.
DFT calculations

We performed all geometry optimizations and total energy
calculations with the code VASP.55,56 The 2D Brillouin zones
were sampled by uniform Γ-centered k-point grids with a den-
sity of 6 k-points/ ˚A−2. We performed spin-polarized calcula-
tions starting from a ferromagnetic state, and used the pro-
jector augmented wave setups57,58 of VASP version 5.2 with
a cutoff of 520 eV. We converged the calculations to forces
smaller than 0.005 eV/ ˚A. As exchange-correlation functional
we used the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof59 functional with on-
site corrections for oxides and fluorides containing Co, Cr, Fe,
Mn, Mo, Ni, V, or W. The repulsive on-site corrections to the
d-states were 3.32, 3.7, 5.3, 3.9, 4.38, 6.2, 3.25, and 6.2 eV,
respectively. These parameters were chosen to be compatible
with the Materials Project database.10 We imposed a vacuum
region of 15 ˚A, and systems that resulted in structures with a
thickness greater than 7.5 ˚A were automatically discarded. Fi-

nally, as it is common in this kind of approaches, some of the
calculations did not converge due to a multitude of reasons.
The corresponding phases were then simply eliminated from
the dataset.
Distances to the convex hull were evaluated using PYMAT-
GEN60 using the large complex hull of Ref. 22 corresponding
to the dataset available in the Materials Cloud repository.20

B.
M3GNET

We employed the universal neural-network force-field
M3GNET23 that was developed to reproduce the energies and
the forces of bulk structures with remarkable results. As a
starting point we used the pretrained network distributed with
M3GNET. We tested this model on 1300 of our systems by
measuring the difference between the energy calculated with
M3GNET (at the M3GNET relaxed structure) and the energy
calculated with DFT (at the DFT relaxed structure).
We
arrived at a mean absolute error (MAE) of 320 meV/atom
and a median absolute error of 223 meV/atom. These num-
bers are already rather small, especially when we consider
that the training set of M3GNET did not include 2D systems
that can exhibit very different bonding patterns compared to
bulk structures. As soon as enough data was available from
our own simulations, we used transfer learning techniques to
retrain M3GNET for 2D materials (see Section VI). Specif-
ically, we build a dataset comprising energies, forces, and
stresses from structures calculated during the geometry op-
timization steps. Structures with extremely high forces above
50 eV/ ˚A were removed from the data as were structures with
no neighboring atoms inside the cutoff radius to avoid er-
rors during training. To balance the training set, for systems
with more than 4 recorded geometry optimization steps only
the first, last and Nsteps/3 step were used. The final training
set for M3GNET contained 11612 geometry relaxations cor-
responding to 34944 energies and structures. The resulting
network had a validation MAE of 61 meV/atom for direct
energy predictions after training. The test errors for geome-
try optimizations on the same dataset as the pretrained model
were 198 meV/atom for the MAE and 96 meV/atom for the
median absolute error proving the efficiency of our transfer
learning strategy. Of course, we expect these errors to de-
crease further simply by adding more data to the training set.
The models were trained with the base hyperparameters from
M3GNET and by setting the loss function of the stress in the
non-periodic direction to zero.

C.
Crystal-graph attention networks

We used the crystal-graph attention neural networks devel-
oped in Ref. 61 as they were specifically crafted for prototype
searches. In particular, they require as input only the (unre-
laxed) structural prototype and not accurate relaxed structures.
Of course, this model was trained on bulk 3D structures, so
we do not expect it to perform accurately in our case. How-
ever, many of the bonding patterns present in our 2D materials


8

can already be found in the 3D world. To take advantage of
this, we performed transfer learning of the 3D model, using
the 2D structures in our dataset as training data. We used a
dataset of DFT calculations with 22007 entries, 80% of which
were used for training 10% for validation and 10% for testing.
Evaluating both models on the test set, we arrive at an MAE
of 222 meV/atom for the original model and 86 meV/atom for
the model transferred to the 2D data.

0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50

EHull (eV/atom)

0

100

200

300

400

number of systems per bin

Systematic
C2DB
CGAT binaries
CGAT ternaries

Figure 7. Distribution of the distances to the convex hull (calculated
with DFT) for the compounds obtained through our systematic ap-
proach and stemming from the machine-learning assisted prototype
search compared to the entries of C2DB.

In Fig. 7 we present a histogram with the distances to
the convex hull of stability calculated with DFT. The C2DB
data is in light green, and is highly peaked at zero, decay-
ing slowly for larger energies. This is expected, as C2DB
was seeded with stable 3D, van der Waals bonded structures
from ICSD. In blue we depict the structures obtained through
our systematic approach.
These form a continuous distri-
bution with a peak at around 300 meV/atom, and extend-
ing beyond 1.5 eV. Knowing that such distribution for ran-
dom compounds can extend beyond 4 eV, we see how the
charge and electronegativity constraints lead to relatively sta-
ble compounds (at the price of overlooking intermetallics or
compounds with unusual oxidation states. In light blue we
show the machine-learning binaries predicted to be within
200 meV/atom from the hull. This shows a peak at around
that value, as expected form the cutoff, then decaying sim-
ilarly to the C2DB data. The ternary entries, displayed in
green, are shifted to much lower energy, as expected by the
smaller cutoff of 50 meV/atom. This results are absolutely
consistent with the MAE of 86 meV/atom for the 2D model.
The CGAT-hyperparameters are listed in the supplementary
material and the code can be found at https://github.
com/hyllios/CGAT.git.

VII.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

All relevant data used in or resulting from this work
is available at Materials Cloud (https://doi.org/10.
24435/materialscloud:sb-cy).
The database, in-
cluding structures, distances to the hull, and other basic prop-
erties, can be accessed at https://tddft.org/bmg/
physics/2D/ through a simple web-based interface.

VIII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge the computational resources awarded by
XSEDE, a project supported by National Science Founda-
tion grant number ACI-1053575. The authors also acknowl-
edge the support from the Texas Advances Computer Cen-
ter (with the Stampede2 and Bridges supercomputers). We
also acknowledge the Super Computing System (Thorny Flat)
at WVU, which is funded in part by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) Major Research Instrumentation Program
(MRI) Award #1726534, and West Virginia University. AHR
and LW were funded in part, by the Luxembourg National
Research Fund (FNR), Inter Mobility 2DOPMA, Grant Ref-
erence 15627293.
For the purpose of open access, and in
fulfillment of the obligations arising from the grant agree-
ment, the authors have applied a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license to any Au-
thor Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submis-
sion.
AHR also recognizes the support of West Virginia
Research under the call research challenge grand program.
JS and MALM gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Centre for
Supercomputing e.V. (www.gauss-centre.eu) for funding this
project by providing computing time on the GCS Supercom-
puter SUPERMUC-NG at Leibniz Supercomputing Centre
(https://www.lrz.de) under the project pn25co. JS and
MALM gratefully acknowledge the computing time provided
to them on the high-performance computers Noctua 2 at the
NHR Center PC2. These are funded by the Federal Ministry
of Education and Research and the state governments partici-
pating on the basis of the resolutions of the GWK for the na-
tional highperformance computing at universities (www.nhr-
verein.de/unsere-partner).
We also thank Kristian Thygesen for kindly providing us
with full access to the C2DB database.

IX.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

AHR performed the systematic structure generation;
MALM and HCW performed the DFT high-throughput cal-
culations; JS performed the training of the machines and
the machine learning predictions of the distance to the hull;
AHR, LW, and MALM directed the research; all authors con-
tributed to the analysis of the results and to the writing of the
manuscript.


9

X.
COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

∗ miguel.marques@physik.uni-halle.de
† Aldo.Romero@mail.wvu.edu
1 K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D.-e. Jiang,
Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, and A. A. Firsov, Sci-
ence 306, 666 (2004).

2 K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotke-
vich, S. V. Morozov,
and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 102, 10451 (2005).

3 N. Mounet, M. Gibertini, P. Schwaller, D. Campi, A. Merkys,
A. Marrazzo, T. Sohier, I. E. Castelli, A. Cepellotti, G. Pizzi, and
N. Marzari, Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 246 (2018).

4 M. C. Sorkun, S. Astruc, J. Koelman, and S. Er, Npj Comput.
Mater. 6, 1 (2020).

5 J. Zhou, L. Shen, M. D. Costa, K. A. Persson, S. P. Ong, P. Huck,
Y. Lu, X. Ma, Y. Chen, H. Tang, and Y. P. Feng, Sci. Data 6, 1
(2019).

6 S. Haastrup, M. Strange, M. Pandey, T. Deilmann, P. S. Schmidt,
N. F. Hinsche, M. N. Gjerding, D. Torelli, P. M. Larsen, A. C.
Riis-Jensen, J. Gath, K. W. Jacobsen, J. J. Mortensen, T. Olsen,
and K. S. Thygesen, 2D Mater. 5, 042002 (2018).

7 M. N. Gjerding,
A. Taghizadeh,
A. Rasmussen,
S. Ali,
F. Bertoldo, T. Deilmann, N. R. Knøsgaard, M. Kruse, A. H.
Larsen, S. Manti, T. G. Pedersen, U. Petralanda, T. Skovhus,
M. K. Svendsen, J. J. Mortensen, T. Olsen, and K. S. Thygesen,
2D Mater. 8, 044002 (2021).

8 P. Lyngby and K. S. Thygesen, Npj Comput. Mater. 8 (2022).
9 Y. Song, E. M. D. Siriwardane, Y. Zhao, and J. Hu, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 13, 53303 (2021).

10 A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek,
S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, and K. A. Persson,
APL Mater. 1, 011002 (2013).

11 S. Graˇzulis, D. Chateigner, R. T. Downs, A. Yokochi, M. Quir´os,
L. Lutterotti, E. Manakova, J. Butkus, P. Moeck, and A. Le Bail,
J. Appl. Crystallogr. 42, 726 (2009).

12 F. H. Allen, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 58, 380 (2002).
13 M. A. Van Hove, K. Hermann, and P. Watson, Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 58, 338 (2002).

14 J. E. Saal, S. Kirklin, M. Aykol, B. Meredig, and C. Wolverton,

Jom 65, 1501 (2013).

15 S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, G. L. Hart, M. Jahnatek, R. V. Chepul-
skii, R. H. Taylor, S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang, O. Levy, M. J. Mehl,
H. T. Stokes, D. O. Demchenko, and D. Morgan, Comput. Mater.
Sci. 58, 218 (2012).

16 L. Talirz, S. Kumbhar, E. Passaro, A. V. Yakutovich, V. Granata,
F. Gargiulo, M. Borelli, M. Uhrin, S. P. Huber, S. Zoupanos, C. S.
Adorf, C. W. Andersen, O. Sch¨utt, C. A. Pignedoli, D. Passerone,
J. VandeVondele, T. C. Schulthess, B. Smit, G. Pizzi,
and
N. Marzari, Sci. Data 7, 1 (2020).

17 G. Bergerhoff and I. Brown, Crystallographic Databases, edited
by F. Allen, G. Bergerhoff, and R. Sievers, Vol. 360 (International
Union of Crystallography, Chester, 1987) pp. 77–95.

18 D. Zagorac, H. M¨uller, S. Ruehl, J. Zagorac, and S. Rehme, J.
Appl. Crystallogr. 52, 918 (2019).

19 A. Belsky, M. Hellenbrandt, V. L. Karen, and P. Luksch, Acta
Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 58, 364 (2002).

20 J. Schmidt, N. Hoffmann, H.-C. Wang, P. Borlido, P. J. M. A.
Carric¸o, T. F. T. Cerqueira, S. Botti,
and M. A. L. Marques,

“Large-scale machine-learning-assisted exploration of the whole
materials space,” (2022).

21 C. W. Park and C. Wolverton, Phys. Rev. Mater. 4, 063801 (2020).
22 J. Schmidt, N. Hoffmann, H.-C. Wang, P. Borlido, P. J. M. A.
Carric¸o, T. F. T. Cerqueira, S. Botti,
and M. A. L. Marques,
“Large-scale machine-learning-assisted exploration of the whole
materials space,” (2022), arXiv:2210.00579.

23 C. Chen and S. P. Ong, Nature Computational Science 2, 718
(2022).

24 R. E. Goodall, A. S. Parackal, F. A. Faber, R. Armiento,
and
A. A. Lee, “Rapid discovery of novel materials by coordinate-
free coarse graining,” Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11132
(2021).

25 Y. Zhao, M. Al-Fahdi, M. Hu, E. M. Siriwardane, Y. Song,
A. Nasiri, and J. Hu, Adv. Sci. 8, 2100566 (2021).

26 T. Long, N. M. Fortunato, I. Opahle, Y. Zhang, I. Samathrakis,
C. Shen, O. Gutfleisch, and H. Zhang, Npj Comput. Mater. 7, 66
(2021).

27 J. Noh, J. Kim, H. S. Stein, B. Sanchez-Lengeling, J. M. Gregoire,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, and Y. Jung, Matter 1, 1370 (2019).

28 Z. Ren, S. I. P. Tian, J. Noh, F. Oviedo, G. Xing, J. Li, Q. Liang,
R. Zhu, A. G. Aberle, S. Sun, et al., Matter 5, 314 (2022).

29 T. Xie, X. Fu, O.-E. Ganea, R. Barzilay, and T. Jaakkola, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2110.06197 (2021).

30 P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).
31 W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
32 D. Litvin and V. Kopsky, “International tables for crystallography.
volume d: Subperiodic groups,” (2002).

33 M. I. Aroyo, J. M. Perez-Mato, D. Orobengoa, E. Tasci, G. de la
Flor, and A. Kirov, Bulg. Chem. Commun 43, 183 (2011).

34 M. I. Aroyo, A. Kirov, C. Capillas, J. Perez-Mato, and H. Won-
dratschek, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Found. Crystallogr. 62, 115
(2006).

35 S. Fredericks, K. Parrish, D. Sayre, and Q. Zhu, Comput. Phys.
Commun. 261, 107810 (2021).

36 D. W. Davies, K. T. Butler, A. J. Jackson, A. Morris, J. M. Frost,
J. M. Skelton, and A. Walsh, Chem 1, 617 (2016).

37 T. Sohier, M. Calandra, and F. Mauri, Phys. Rev. B 96, 075448
(2017).

38 G. Restrepo, H. Mesa, E. J. Llanos, and J. L. Villaveces, J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 44, 68 (2004).

39 A. W. Huran, H.-C. Wang, A. San-Miguel, and M. A. L. Marques,

J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 12, 4972 (2021).

40 P. Lv, G. Tang, Y. Liu, Y. Lun, X. Wang, and J. Hong, Extreme
Mech. Lett. 44, 101231 (2021).

41 A. D. Oyedele, S. Yang, L. Liang, A. A. Puretzky, K. Wang,
J. Zhang, P. Yu, P. R. Pudasaini, A. W. Ghosh, Z. Liu, C. M.
Rouleau, B. G. Sumpter, M. F. Chisholm, W. Zhou, P. D. Rack,
D. B. Geohegan, and K. Xiao, Journal of the American Chemical
Society 139, 14090 (2017).

42 W. Lei, S. Zhang, G. Heymann, X. Tang, J. Wen, X. Zheng, G. Hu,
and X. Ming, J. Mater. Chem. C 7, 2096 (2019).

43 L. Gao, Y.-F. Zhang, and S. Du, Nano Res. 14, 2826 (2021).


10

44 A. W. Huran, H.-C. Wang, and M. A. L. Marques, 2D Mater. 8,
045002 (2021).

45 S. F¨orster, K. Meinel, R. Hammer, M. Trautmann, and W. Widdra,

Nature 502, 215 (2013).

46 S. F¨orster, S. Schenk, E. M. Zollner, O. Krahn, C.-T. Chiang, F. O.
Schumann, A. Bayat, K.-M. Schindler, M. Trautmann, R. Ham-
mer, K. Meinel, W. A. Adeagbo, W. Hergert, J. I. Flege, J. Falta,
M. Ellguth, C. Tusche, M. DeBoissieu, M. Muntwiler, T. Greber,
and W. Widdra, Phys. Status Solidi B 257, 1900624 (2020).

47 M. Grundmann, F.-L. Schein, M. Lorenz, T. B¨ontgen, J. Lenzner,
and H. von Wenckstern, Phys. Status Solidi A 210, 1671 (2013).

48 R. Kurdyumova and R. Baranova, Kristallografiya 6, 402 (1961).
49 T. Sakuma, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 57, 565 (1988).
50 P. Villars and K. Cenzual, eds., Landolt-B¨ornstein - Group III
Condensed Matter: Crystal Structures of Inorganic Compounds
(Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 2009).

51 I. K. Akopyan, V. V. Golubkov, O. A. Dyatlova, A. N. Mamaev,
B. V. Novikov, and A. N. Tsagan-Mandzhiev, Phys. Solid State
52, 805 (2010).

52 J. Schmidt, M. R. G. Marques, S. Botti, and M. A. L. Marques,

Npj Comput. Mater. 5, (2019).

53 H. J. Kulik, T. Hammerschmidt, J. Schmidt, S. Botti, M. A. L.
Marques, M. Boley, M. Scheffler, M. Todorovi´c, P. Rinke,

C. Oses, A. Smolyanyuk, S. Curtarolo, A. Tkatchenko, A. P.
Bart´ok, S. Manzhos, M. Ihara, T. Carrington, J. Behler, O. Isayev,
M. Veit, A. Grisafi, J. Nigam, M. Ceriotti, K. T. Sch¨utt, J. Wester-
mayr, M. Gastegger, R. J. Maurer, B. Kalita, K. Burke, R. Na-
gai, R. Akashi, O. Sugino, J. Hermann, F. No´e, S. Pilati,
C. Draxl, M. Kuban, S. Rigamonti, M. Scheidgen, M. Esters,
D. Hicks, C. Toher, P. V. Balachandran, I. Tamblyn, S. Whitelam,
C. Bellinger, and L. M. Ghiringhelli, Electron. Struct. 4, 023004
(2022).

54 P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis,
M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet, and G. Le Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett.
108, 155501 (2012).

55 G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, Comput. Mater. Sci. 6, 15 (1996).
56 G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).
57 P. E. Bl¨ochl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994).
58 G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 (1999).
59 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77,
3865 (1996).

60 S. P. Ong, W. D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier, M. Kocher, S. Cho-
lia, D. Gunter, V. L. Chevrier, K. A. Persson, and G. Ceder, Com-
put. Mater. Sci. 68, 314 (2013).

61 J. Schmidt, L. Pettersson, C. Verdozzi, S. Botti, and M. A. L.
Marques, Sci. Adv. 7, (2021).


