Pixel super-resolution interference pattern 
sensing via the aliasing effect for laser frequency 
metrology 

 

Lipeng Wan1,2,3, Tianbao Yu3, Daomu Zhao2 and Wolfgang Löffler1,*  
 
1. Leiden Institute of Physics, Leiden University, 2333 CA Leiden, The Netherlands 
2. Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Quantum Technology and Devices, School of Physics, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou 310027, China 
3. School of Physics and Material Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China 
 
*Corresponding author:  loeffler@physics.leidenuniv.nl 
 
The superposition of several optical beams with large mutual angles results in sub-
micrometer periodic patterns with a complex intensity, phase and polarization structure. 
For high-resolution imaging thereof, one often employs optical super-resolution 
methods such as scanning nano-particle imaging. Here, we report that by using a 
conventional arrayed image sensor in combination with 2D Fourier analysis, the 
periodicities of light fields much smaller than the pixel size can be resolved in a simple 
and compact setup, with a resolution far beyond the Nyquist limit set by the pixel size. 
We demonstrate the ability to resolve periodicities with spatial frequencies of ~3 µm-1, 
15 times higher than the pixel sampling frequency of 0.188 μm-1. This is possible by 
analyzing high-quality Fourier aliases in the first Brillouin zone. In order to obtain the 
absolute spatial frequencies of the interference patterns, we show that simple rotation of 
the image sensor is sufficient, which modulates the effective pixel size and allows 
determination of the original Brillouin zone. Based on this method, we demonstrate 
wavelength sensing with a resolving power beyond 100,000 without any special 
equipment. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

The precise measurement of periodicities of light fields is 
essential for various metrology tasks such as high precision 
laser frequency metrology, angular and position sensing, 
which is for instance crucial in nanolithography.[1] For 
investigation of complex field configurations, periodic 
patterns need to be analyzed, such as for the recently 
discovered bright superchiral fields that can be synthesized 
by interference of several optical beams,[2] and for 
exploration of more general interference phenomena.[3] 
Direct imaging of these fields (lens-free) is, however, 

considered to be impossible because of the large pixel size 
compared to the interference pattern periodicities, see 
Figure 1. The pixel size δ of modern CCD or CMOS image 
sensors is usually at least several micrometers due to 
limitations of the silicon base material and achievable signal 
to noise ratio,[4] resulting in a sampling frequency of fs=
1/𝛿. The Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem [5,6] tells us 
that only structures with spatial frequencies smaller than 
fs/2 can be resolved in all detail, leading to the condition 
𝑓!/2 > 𝑓", where fL is the spatial frequency of the 
interference pattern.  


 

Figure 1.  Illustration of mapping light fields (a) using standard image 
sensor whose pixel size (b) is much larger than the periodicities of the 
interference patterns (a). In the Fourier transform (c) of images captured by 
sensor, the aliases of high-spatial frequency components are clearly visible 
in the first Brillouin zone in the center as indicated by the yellow box 
spanned by the half-length reciprocal vectors. 

Known methods for probing optical fields on scales 

much smaller than usual pixel sizes include nanoparticle 
scanning methods [7] near-field scanning optical microscopy 
(NSOM)[8,9] and vectorial field reconstruction [10]. The spatial 
resolution of these methods is ultimately limited by the size 
of probe to around 80 nm, and complex scanning 
equipment with nanometer precision is needed, and 
consequently these scanning-based methods are very slow.  

Here we report that periodic light structures can 

reliably be detected with a simple arrayed image sensor 
such as CCD or CMOS by exploiting the aliasing effect 
happening for sampling well below the Nyquist limit, 
sketched in Figure 1. We found that 2D fast Fourier 
transforms are sufficient to determine the spatial 
frequencies of the aliases with high precision and that the 
relative 
phase 
of 
the 
beams 
can 
be 
retrieved 

unambiguously with high accuracy. The ambiguity of the 
measured spatial frequency of the aliases is resolved by 
changing the effective image sensor pixel size by rotating 
the image sensor. This method is very fast and the setup 
extremely simple since it only employs an image sensor 
mounted on a rotation stage and no imaging optics. We 
demonstrate measurement of interference periodicities 15 
times smaller than the pixel size, beating the resolution of 
conventional 
pixel-based 
imaging. 
Using 
such 
a 

configuration, our resolution can, in principle, thousands of 
times higher than the image sensor resolution. A potential 
issue is the reduction of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) by 
undersampling,[11] but we find that this is not an issue here; 
another notable exception has been observed in 
experiments focusing light through opaque scattering 
media, where the SNR can be enhanced by 3–5 times with 
sub-Nyquist sampling. [12]  Undersampling is often used in 
the temporal domain including in white-light interference 
microscopy as a function of path delay,[13] but no study has 
directly been explored in the spatial domain with a arrayed 
image sensor, to our best knowledge. 

Exploiting this superresolution technique in the field of 

lensfree optical metrology, we demonstrate the prototype 
of a high precision wavemeter with a resolution of 5 pm 
using a 5.3 μm pixel-size image sensor. Reversely, if the 
laser wavelength is known, the same technique can be used 
to measure the angle between superposed dual laser beams 
with an accuracy of 8 μrad..  

2. THEORY and ARRANGEMENT 

Let us consider a superposition of N plane electromagnetic 
waves with the same angular frequency ω=ck and fixed 
phase relation. The resulting electric field reads 

𝐄 = Re𝐄% = Re&∑
𝐄%!𝑒"#𝐤!∙𝐫'()*
+
!,-
).                   (2) 

The mean square of the electric fields is 

𝑆 =

-

. 𝐄% ⋅ 𝐄%∗

=

-

. &∑+

0,- 𝐄%𝒍 ⋅ 𝐄%𝒍

∗ + ∑+

!,- ∑02! 𝐄%𝒋 ⋅ 𝐄%𝒍

∗𝑒"#𝐤𝒋'𝐤𝒍*⋅𝐫).

      (3)  

We obtain the corresponding field in the spatial-frequency 
domain by performing a 2D Fourier transform of the mean 
square of the electric field 

𝑆/(𝒇) = 𝛼𝛿(𝒇) + ∑+

!,- ∑02! 𝛾!0𝛿&𝐤! − 𝐤0 + 2𝜋𝒇),      (4) 

where 𝛿 denotes the Dirac delta function, α is the zero-
frequency component, and the complex weight function γ#$ 
denotes the magnitude and phase of the spatial frequency 
component. We now discuss the superposition of two 
waves with wavevectors k[sinψ, 0, cosψ] and k[-sinψ, 0, 
cosψ]; from which we obtain an interference pattern with 
spatial frequency ksinψ/π.  We consider an arrayed image 
sensor with a pixel pitch of δx and δy, which in our case for 
square pixels are equal, δx = δy = δ. and the discrete Fourier 
transform of the light pattern sampled by the sensor array 
becomes (for the detailed derivation, see Supporting 
Information S1) 

𝑆/5&𝑓6, 𝑓7) = ∑8,: 𝑆/; <𝑓6 −

8

<$ , 𝑓7 −

:

<%=,                      (5) 

where the complex function 𝑆*% gives the discrete response 
function 

𝑆/;&𝑓6, 𝑓7) = 𝑆/&𝑓6, 𝑓7) · 𝑃%&𝑓6, 𝑓7).                         (6) 

Here 𝑃,  is the Fourier transform of the two-
dimensional pixel responsivity distribution, and the 
real integers u and v characterize the order of spatial 
aliasing. Equations (5) and (6) suggest that the 
recorded image on the image sensor can be 
represented as a set of reciprocal points in the spatial 
frequency domain (reciprocal space), each of which is 
described by the pixilated response 𝑆*%. The analysis in 
the spatial frequency domain is performed within the 
first Brillouin zone or Wigner-Seitz cell spanned by the 


half-length reciprocal unit vectors. Physical insight 
into this process is gained by studying some cases. In 
the case that the spatial frequency of the light field is 
less than half the reciprocal vectors fL < (2 ⋅ 𝛿)&', there 
will be no overlap between different Fourier orders 
and thus, one can directly obtain the interference 
fringe periods of the superimposed light field. If this 
criterion, however, is not met, the high spatial 
frequencies will “fold back” into the first Brilliouin 
zone leading to a frequency ambiguity, a phenomenon 
analogous to the “Umklapp process” in solid-state 
physics. In order to determine the original spatial 
frequency, we need to determine the original Brioullin 
zone number, for which we use rotation of the image 
sensor which can be modelled by a standard rotation 
matrix in Fourier space, say Rz(θ). The spatial 
frequencies  𝐟#$ of the light field, generated by waves j 
and l, are transformed into 𝐟#$

((θ) = 𝐑)(𝜃) ∙ 𝐟#$, which 

means a change in the detected spatial frequencies 
because the effective image sensor pixel dimensions 
change, even for square pixels. We use continuous 
rotation 
and 
show 
that 
the 
absolute 
spatial 

frequencies can be retrieved in this way. 

 

Figure 2.  Experimental setup for pixel super-resolution interference 
pattern sensing: HN, He-Ne laser; TL, tunable laser diode NewFocus 6224; 
WM, wavemeter, HighFinesse WS6-200; RSC, rotating camera platform; M, 
mirror; BS, beam splitter; WP, half waveplate; P, polarizer. 

Our experimental setup is shown in Figure 2. 

Although it is clear from Equation (6) that the pixel 
responsivity distribution of a specific image sensor is 
important, our method works for all types. Here we 
use a CMOS image sensor (Cinogy CMOS 1201-nano, 
i.e., a 5.3 μm pixel size image sensor without 
protective glass) mounted in the center of a precision 
rotation stage Newport M-URM80APP controlled by a 
Newport ESP300 controller, with angular resolution of 
0.001 degree, allowing for continuous rotation of the 
sensor around its centered surface normal. In the 
process of retrieving the periodicities of the 
interference fringes of the superimposed light beams, 
all the necessary steps including rotation of the image 
sensor chip, recording of images and performing fast 

2D Fourier transforms (FFTs) are automated by a 
computer. 

3. MEASUREMENTS RESULTS 

A. One-dimensional interference patterns 

We consider first two-beam superpositions. For this 
configuration, the electric field vectors are chosen to 
be s-polarized, 𝐄,',+ = [0, 1, 0] with respect to the 
image sensor plane, 𝒌' = k[sinψ, 0, cosψ] and 𝒌+ = k[-
sinψ, 0, cosψ] with ψ = π/4. From Equation (4) we 
determine 
that 
the 
spatial 
frequency 
of 
the 

interference pattern is 2234.85 mm-1. The Nyquist 
frequency of our image sensor is 94.34 mm-1, 23.7 
times smaller. We record images while rotating the 
image sensor around its surface normal in steps of 0.1 
degree. Interestingly, simply by observing the real-
space image sensor images, we observed strong visual 
changes even for small rotation angles. We now 
perform real-time Fourier transforms and plot the 
result on a logarithmic color scale, as seen in Figure 
3(a), where we observe next to the strong zero-
frequency peak side-peaks that are aliases of the high-
spatial frequency interference patterns as we show 
now. 

We follow the Fourier peaks fm while rotating the 

image sensor, the result is shown in Figure 3(b). As 
expected for square image sensor pixels, the pattern 
shows a periodicity of 90 degrees, and mirror-
symmetry 
with 
symmetry 
axes 
at 45 + 𝑛 ∙

90 degrees, 𝑛 ∈ ℤ), and the good agreement between 
numerical 
calculation 
and 
experiment 
data 
is 

observed (For further information about numerical 
calculations 
and 
experiments, 
see 
Supporting 

Information S2). The modulation originates from the 
square shape of pixel, whose group of symmetries 
belong to D4. However, it is still not straightforward to 
unravel the physical light field. To gain further insight 
into it, we perform the analysis over one cycle denoted 
by the orange box, followed by a decomposition into 
its Cartesian components, shown in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d). 
We observe an oscillation of the spatial frequency 
components upon rotation; a cycle is completed after 
rotation over 90 degrees. From the perspective of 
geometry, the projection of spatial frequencies of light 
fields on the x-axis should theoretically obey the 
relation f·𝒙G = |f sin(πθ/180)| where 𝒙G is the 𝑥 unit 
vector. The observed oscillation pattern is in effect a 
manifestation of folding, where the high spatial 
frequencies beyond the first Brilliouin zone oscillate 
back and forth across the positive half of the first 
Brillouin zone upon rotation. From this physical 


picture, the x-component of true spatial frequencies 𝑓,

( 

upon rotation can be deduced to be 

𝑓6

=(𝜃, 𝑓>?, 𝑓𝒙

A) = A𝑚 +

-

. −

-

. cos 𝑚𝜋F 𝑓>? + 𝑓6

A(𝜃) cos 𝑚𝜋,  (7) 

where m denotes the m-th harmonics, 𝑓-) = 𝑓./2 is the 
half-length of first Brillouin zone, and 𝒇𝒙

𝒎  is the 

measured x-component of the spatial frequency upon 

rotation. The y-frequency component 𝒇𝒚

𝒓 exhibits a 

reverse trajectory compared to the x-frequency 
component, due to the symmetry, and is 

𝑓7

=&𝜃′, 𝑓>?, 𝑓7

A) = A𝑚 +

-

. −

-

. cos 𝑚𝜋F 𝑓>? + 𝑓7

A(𝜃′) cos 𝑚𝜋             

(8)  

where 𝜃B = 90° − 𝜃.  

Figure 3.  Probing superposed light fields using a CMOS image sensor with a 5.3 μm pixel pitch, where the structure of the interference pattern is much smaller 
than the pixel size. The image sensor is mounted on Newport M-URM80APP to form a custom-made rotating image sensor platform. For a continuous 
rotation (a) shows examples of captured intensity images in the space domain and the corresponding Fourier transform. Tracing the frequencies of Fourier 
peak gives (b) the measured trajectories of spatial frequencies; we compare numerical simulations (blue lines) to the experimental data (red dots). The orange 
box denotes one cycle. Within one cycle, we disentangle and extract the individual components of trajectories of spatial frequencies for the X-component (c) 
and Y-component (d). From this, we calculate the real spatial frequencies of the interference patterns for the X-component (e) and Y-component (f). The inset 
in (e) and (f) are magnifications of the spatial frequencies near the flat regions of the trajectories. The numerical and experimental data show good agreement. 

Figures 3(e) and 3(f) present the genuine 

frequency trajectories of the physical light field 
retrieved using Equations (7) and (8), together with 
the 
corresponding 
theoretical 
prediction 
from 

projection. The image sensor rotation induces a 
change of the true spatial frequency projected along 
the axis, where the other frequency component 
disappears at the end of the rotation trajectory and 
thus, the true spatial frequency of the light field is 
retrieved. For the measurements of the X component, 
we retrieve the spatial frequency of physical light 
fields to be 2222.3759 mm-1, in excellent agreement 
with the simulation and theory. The slight deviation in 
the true spatial frequency is attributed to the 
imperfect alignment of the light beams. This shows 
that we can simply measure the beam half angles with 
very high precision using our rotation technique, 
which is, in our case, 44.6811 degrees (the precision 
will be discussed later). Further, we observe that the 
retrieved spatial frequencies retrieved through the X- 
and Y-frequency components are in practice not equal, 
with the latter being 2222.7448 mm-1. We argue that a 
residual tilt of the image sensor, or a small (75 pm) 

asymmetry of the image sensor pixels, is responsible 
for this.  

B. Probing superposition of multiple coherent 

beams of light 

To further demonstrate the power of our technique, we 
highlight that the proposed scheme can be applied to the 
general two-dimensional (2D) landscape as well. Light 
fields contain rich periodic features can be generated, for 
instance, by interfering multiple beams.[3,14]  It is clear from 
Equation (3) that every beam-pair superposition 𝑬K𝒋 ⋅ 𝑬K𝒍

∗ 

produces a pattern with high spatial frequency that 
contributes to the overall superposed light field 
distribution, we now explore the three waves configuration 
shown in Figure 2 and the specific parameters of this 
superposition are listed in Table 1, where ψ = π/4, φ = π/4, 
α and γ are the relative phase of the waves. When rotating 
the image sensor, we observe three distinct Fourier peak 
trajectories, as expected. All these Fourier peaks are traced 
simultaneously during image sensor rotation, the frequency 
trajectories measured along the Y-direction are shown in 


Figure 4(a), where the zone denoted by the orange box 
reveal a repeating pattern which are shifted for different 
beam combinations, containing information about their 
relative angles between the beams. By using Equation (8) 
one can retrieve the true spatial frequencies, whose 
retrieved trajectories are shown in Figs. 4(b). The true 
spatial frequencies can then be extracted from the end of 
the trajectories, where interference of the PR, PQ and QR 

beam combinations are, respectively, 1573, 2227 and 1577 
mm-1. The theoretical predictions for perfect alignment are 
1580, 2235 and 1580 mm-1, the errors are thus 0.45%, 
0.36% and 0.19% which we attribute to a slightly 
misalignment of the wavevector. This indicates the high 
precision of our method, and that it is also applicable to 
multiple-beam superpositions. 

Figure 4.  Resolving 3-beam light field superpositions. (a) Rotation measurements in the under-sampled case showing numerical simulations 
(blue) and experimental measurements (red). The orange box shows the repeating pattern that is angle-shifted for different beam 
combinations. (b) Retrieved spatial frequency trajectories for the 2D interference patterns. The spatial frequencies are shown in units of 
1/mm. 

Table 1. 3-beam interference configuration 

j 
kj 
𝑬"𝒋

P 
[sinψ, 0, cosψ] 
[-cosψ cosφ, -sinφ, sinψ cosφ] 

Q 
[-sinψ, 0, cosψ] 
 [cosψcosφ, sinφ, sinψ cosφ]eiα 

R 
[0, sinψ, cosψ] 
 [sinφ, -cosψcosφ, sinψcosφ]eiγ 

 

4. PHASE RETRIEVAL 

Having measured the spatial frequencies, we show that it is 
also possible to retrieve the relative phases of the beams in 
superposition using our method. From Equations (4)-(6) 
we see that the phase spectrum of Fourier transform is 
independent of the pixel pitch as well as two-dimensional 
pixel responsivity distribution, i.e., the precise properties of 
sensor therefore play no role for the phase spectrum of the 
Fourier 
transform. 
Therefore, 
the 
relative-phase 

information of the superposed light beams can be obtained, 
even in the undersampled case. 

To prove this point, we attach a piezo chip (Thorlabs 

PA4HEW) to one of the mirrors in one of the arms, this 
allows for finely tuning the path difference with nanoscale 

precision, inducing a shift of the fringes of the interference 
pattern. We apply to the piezo a sawtooth signal with a 
frequency of 100 mHz, Figure 5(a) shows the measured 
phase of the Fourier peak. We see that the Fourier phase 
changes mostly linearly with the applied voltage. 
Synchronously, we measure the relative phase change of 
this Fourier peak compared to another Fourier peak 
originating from two beams without a piezo element, 
shown in Figure 5(b).  We observe the same pattern except 
for a constant phase offset. This proves our theoretical 
predication, opening a new avenue to perform phase 
locking. 

 

Figure 5. Demonstration of phase sensing. A sawtooth signal with a 
frequency of 100 mHz is imposed to the piezoelectric-actuated mirror. We 
measure the absolute Fourier peak phase (left) and the relative phase 
compared to another non-shifted beam combination (right). 


5. SENSITIVITY AND WAVELENGTH SENSING 

We now demonstrate application of our method to 
wavelength sensing.  

Theory.⸻The maximum-magnitude FFT-pixel is 

taken for our spatial frequency reconstruction. The main 
inaccuracies of the setup are the precision of the rotation 
angle ∆θ, the precise image sensor dimensions, and a 
residual tilt of the image sensor. Based on the projected 
spatial frequency relation, we obtain for the wavelength 
resolution ∆𝜆 

 |∆𝜆| =

C&∆E'

. 5FG H J C∆E' ,                                       (9) 

where ∆fc is the spatial frequency resolution and is 
determined by the image size L via 1/L. This, in our case, 
yields an expected error of ~0.1 pm (~0.1 fm) for an 
angular rotation accuracy of ∆θ = 0.1 deg (0.0001 deg). The 
finite size of the image sensor yields an error of 60 pm. The 
latter clearly appears to be the more important limit on 
resolution for our demonstration experiment. We can 
improve this by spatial interpolation via zero-padding, 
which enables a significant increase of the resolution of 
spatial frequency of the light. In our scheme, a zero-padding 
up to 218⨯210 pixels is performed for all results. To ensure a 
good SNR, the interference size is relevant since it 
straightforwardly influences the width of the Fourier spots 
and thus, the accuracy of the measured spatial frequencies. 

Measurements.⸻Experimentally, an external-cavity 

semiconductor laser at ~776.3 nm (New Focus model 
6224) with a linewidth of less than 300 kHz is coupled into 
our setup via a single-mode fiber. We scan the wavelength 
and measure it using a Fizeau-interfero based wavemeter 
(HighFinesse WS6-200). 

 

Figure 6. Demonstration of the high precision of wavelength sensing using 
our technique. The measured wavelength shift is indicated by red spheres 
for the numerical simulation (left) and experimental data (right). The blue 
line is theoretical prediction results. The error bars represent the standard 
deviations corresponding to 15 independent measurements.  

Figure 
6 
shows 
our 
experimental 
results 

demonstrating ultra-high wavelength resolution. Due to the 
stability of the tunable laser source and the absolute 
accuracy of the wavemeter (200 MHz) the wavelength was 
scanned in steps of 5 pm. The observed linear relation is in 
good agreement with theoretical analysis and numerical 

calculation, thereby confirming the wavelength shifts down 
to at least 5 pm or 2.5 GHz in frequency are readily 
discernable by our method. This accuracy can easily be 
improved by enlarging the interference pattern region, 
increasing 
intensity, 
and 
using 
peak 
fitting 
for 

determination of the spatial frequencies of the Fourier 
aliases. 

Spectral performance. We can derive the spectral 

resolving power R that is equal to the ratio between the size 
of zero-padded image and the interference period (See 
Supporting Information S3). The simplicity of the inverse 
relation between the pixel size and the half length of the 
first Brillouin zone δ = 1/fs means that once the aliasing 
order is established, a unique mapping of spatial 
frequencies to wavelength is possible, without the need of 
post-processing. For δ = 5.3 μm pixel size, this is equivalent 
to a free spectral range (FSR) of Δυ = 20 THz, much larger 
than the FSR of our Fizeau interferometers (WS6-200, 100 
GHz) and standard Fabry-Perot cavities (several GHz). Our 
calculations in Equation (9) already resulted in a predicted 
wavelength accuracy below a femtometer, thus a spectral 
resolving power beyond 108, bringing it to the required 
sensitivity for probing the Doppler wobbles induced by 
exoplanets [15] or the Zeeman-splitting of spectral lines of 
hydrogen and antihydrogen. [16] However, a direct proof of 
this theoretically achievable accuracy would require an 
ultrastable, high-SNR system.  
From our simple setup it is evident that our technique could 
have several major advantages over the existing 
wavelength sensing techniques: higher resolution and 
experimental simplicity. Perhaps more importantly, 
systems containing optical elements such as lenses, gratings 
or glass blocks (Fizeau interferometers) cannot be used for 
high-energy photons where media are strongly absorbing. 
Our technique is therefore suited for the extreme-
ultraviolet (EUV) and x-ray regime where recently 
ptychographic methods have been explored [17,18]– with the 
added benefit of experimental simplicity. 

6. DISSCUSSION AND OUTLOOK 

We have shown that a simple arrayed image sensor in 

combination with Fourier analysis allows for deep-subpixel 
sensing of periodic interference patterns. This is possible by 
exploiting aliasing, and the absolute spatial frequencies as 
well as phase spectrum can be obtained by rotation of the 
sensor, even if it is square.  

In 
a 
proof-of-principle 
experiment 
we 
have 

demonstrated 
wavelength 
sensing 
with 
picometer 

resolution, potentially much simpler than Fizeau- or Fabry-
Perot based interferometers. Our method can also quite 
easily be applied to all wavelength ranges where arrayed 
image detectors are available, for instance, to metrology 
challenges in EUV lithography.   


Our approach is quite general, it can be applied to other 

wave systems in nature, ranging from electromagnetic and 
acoustic waves to matter waves.  We emphasize that the 
remarkable accuracy can be further improved by enlarging 
the interference region, improvements on rotational 
accuracy. 

A promising extension and initial motivation of the study 

is applying our methods to the observation and 
characterization of bright superchiral fields [2]. Additionally, 
combining our technique with concepts from quantum 
metrology could be interesting: For instance, in the case 
that interfering light fields are not coherent states of light 
but N00N states, an N-fold-enhanced resolution as 
compared with a classical interference lithography is 
possible, [19–21] using an image sensor sensitive to multi-
photon absorption or with single photon resolution. This is 
reminiscent of recent schemes with pixel super-resolution 
quantum imaging, which have been achieved by measuring 
the joint probability distribution of the spatial resolution of 
spatially entangled photons.[22] Light fields with high-spatial 
frequency features appear also in other fields, such as by 
surface plasmon interference for nanolithography, at the 
interface between metals and dielectrics the wavelength of 
surface plasma waves can be down to the nanometer scale, 
while their frequencies remain in the optical range, going 
beyond the free-space diffraction limit of the light. [23–25] 
 
 
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank 
Xinrui Wei, Jörg Götte, Koen van Kruining, and Robert 
Cameron for fruitful discussions, and Michel Orrit for 
providing the wavemeter. This research was supported by 
EU H2020 (QLUSTER, 862035) from NWO (QUAKE, 
680.92.18.04), from NWO/OCW (Quantum Software 
Consortium), from the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (NSFC) (11874321 and 12174338), and from the 
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities 
(2018FZA3005). 
 
Conflict of Interest. LW and WL filed a USPTO patent 
application “Image sensor-based interference fringe 
metrology with superresolution for laser beam angle and 
absolute 
frequency 
measurement” 
(number 
US 

63/411252), which covers the concept and implementation 
described here. 

 
Data Availability Statement. Data can be obtained from 
the authors upon reasonable request. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 
N. Gisbert Quilis, M. Lequeux, P. Venugopalan, I. Khan, W. Knoll, 
S. Boujday, M. Lamy De La Chapelle, J. Dostalek, Nanoscale 2018, 
10, 10268. 

[2] 
K. C. van Kruining, R. P. Cameron, J. B. Götte, Optica 2018, 5, 
1091. 

[3] 
D. Kouznetsov, Q. Deng, P. Van Dorpe, N. Verellen, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 2020, 125, 184101. 

[4] 
T. Chen, P. B. Catrysse, A. El Gamal, B. A. Wandell, in Sensors 
Camera Syst. Sci. Ind. Digit. Photogr. Appl., SPIE, 2000, p. 451. 

[5] 
S. H. N. Alan Oppenheim, Alan Willsky, SIGNALS and SYSTEMS, 
New York: Prentice Hall, 1996. 

[6] 
D. G. Voelz., Computational Fourier Optics : A MATLAB Tutorial, 
2010. 

[7] 
T. Bauer, S. Orlov, U. Peschel, P. Banzer, G. Leuchs, Nat. 
Photonics 2014, 8, 23. 

[8] 
D. Denkova, N. Verellen, A. V. Silhanek, V. K. Valev, P. Van Dorpe, 
V. V. Moshchalkov, in ACS Nano, 2013, pp. 3168–3176. 

[9] 
N. Caselli, F. La China, W. Bao, F. Riboli, A. Gerardino, L. Li, E. H. 
Linfield, F. Pagliano, A. Fiore, P. J. Schuck, S. Cabrini, A. Weber-
Bargioni, M. Gurioli, F. Intonti, Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 1. 

[10] 
T. Grosjean, I. A. Ibrahim, M. A. Suarez, G. W. Burr, M. Mivelle, D. 
Charraut, Opt. Express 2010, 18, 5809. 

[11] 
E. Schwartz, E. N. Ribak, Appl. Opt. 2017, 56, 1977. 

[12] 
Y. Shen, Y. Liu, C. Ma, L. V. Wang, Optica 2017, 4, 97. 

[13] 
P. de Groot, L. Deck, Opt. Lett. 1993, 18, 1462. 

[14] 
U. Sinha, C. Couteau, T. Jennewein, R. Laflamme, G. Weihs, 
Science (80-. ). 2010, 329, 418. 

[15] 
A. D. Sappey, P. Masterson, B. A. Sappey, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2020, 
37, 3829. 

[16] 
A. Collaboration, Nature 2020, 578, 375. 

[17] 
M. Holler, M. Guizar-Sicairos, E. H. R. Tsai, R. Dinapoli, E. Müller, 
O. Bunk, J. Raabe, G. Aeppli, Nature 2017, 543, 402. 

[18] 
B. Zhang, D. F. Gardner, M. D. Seaberg, E. R. Shanblatt, H. C. 
Kapteyn, M. M. Murnane, D. E. Adams, Ultramicroscopy 2015, 
158, 98. 

[19] 
H. Shin, K. W. C. Chan, H. J. Chang, R. W. Boyd, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2011, 107, 1. 

[20] 
E. Toninelli, P.-A. Moreau, T. Gregory, A. Mihalyi, M. Edgar, N. 
Radwell, M. Padgett, Optica 2019, 6, 347. 

[21] 
Y. Kawabe, H. Fujiwara, R. Okamoto, K. Sasaki, S. Takeuchi, Opt. 
Express 2007, 15, 14244. 

[22] 
H. Defienne, P. Cameron, B. Ndagano, A. Lyons, M. Reichert, J. 
Zhao, A. R. Harvey, E. Charbon, J. W. Fleischer, D. Faccio, Nat. 
Commun. 2022, 13, DOI 10.1038/s41467-022-31052-6. 

[23] 
P. Dvořák, T. Neuman, L. Břínek, T. Šamořil, R. Kalousek, P. Dub, 
P. Varga, T. Šikola, Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 2558. 

[24] 
Z. W. Liu, Q. H. Wei, X. Zhang, Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 957. 

[25] 
W. Srituravanich, N. Fang, C. Sun, Q. Luo, X. Zhang, Nano Lett. 
2004, 4, 1085. 

 


1 

 

Supporting Information 

 

Pixel super-resolution interference pattern sensing via the aliasing 

effect for laser frequency metrology 

 

Lipeng Wan1,2,3, Tianbao Yu3, Daomu Zhao2 and Wolfgang Löffler1,*  

 

1. Leiden Institute of Physics, Leiden University, 2333 CA Leiden, The Netherlands 

2. Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Quantum Technology and Device, School of 

Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China 

3. School of Physics and Material Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, 

China 

 

*Corresponding author: loeffler@physics.leidenuniv.nl 

 

Supplementary Information S1: Derivation of Eqs. (4)-(6) 

The Fourier transform of Eq. (3) is given by  

𝑆"(𝒇) = ∫
𝑆(𝒓)𝑒!"#$𝒇∙𝒓
()
!)
𝑑𝒓.                    (S1) 

On substituting Eq. (3) into Eq. (S1), one obtains the superposition of light fields in the 

spatial frequency domain, as described by Eq. (4) in the main text.  The observation 

of light fields with the sensor 𝑆*(𝒓) can be written as  [1] 

𝑆+(𝒓) = ,𝑆(𝒓) ⊛ 𝑆,(𝒓). ∙ Γ(𝒓, Δ𝐫).                (S2) 

Here the circled asterisk symbol is a 2D convolution of the superposed light fields with 

the pixel responsivity distribution [2], which is then filtered by a comb function Γ  

consisting of an array of Dirac delta functions characterized by the pixel spacing Δ𝒓 =

5𝛿-, 𝛿.7. Note that for CMOS sensor, the pixel spacing is, in general, not equal to the 

pixel size due to the imperfect fill factor. 


2 

 

We now consider the field in the spatial frequency domain  𝑆"+(𝒓). From the sifting 

property, the convolution with a Dirac delta function simply shifts its origin. By 

substituting Eq. (S2) into Eq. (S1) and further taken the convolution theorem into 

account (the Fourier transform of a convolution of two functions is equal to the product 

of the Fourier transforms of each function) we obtain 

𝑆"+5𝑓-, 𝑓.7 = ∑/,1 𝑆" ;𝑓- −

/

2! , 𝑓. −

1

2"= 𝑃? ;𝑓- −

/

2! , 𝑓. −

1

2"=.        (S3) 

Supplementary Information S2: Calculation of the undersampled light 

fields in the rotated frame and experimental data acquisition 

For the numerical calculation, we assume that the pixels are square. The sensor has 

1280⨯1024 pixels with a pixel pitch of 5.3 μm. The calculation of intensity of 

superposed light fields is performed in subpixel units, which are incoherently added to 

yield the average light intensity on a sensor pixel. The sampling pitch of the light fields 

should be much smaller than the pixel pitch for an appropriate mapping the 

superimposed light field on the sensor, and is set to 0.081 μm in our calculations. The 

sensor noise, which is modeled by a white stochastic process (white Gaussian noise), is 

added to the intensity pattern. Note that the fill factor strongly affects the visibility V, 

but has no influence on the spatial frequencies of light fields (see Supplementary 

Information S4), thus unity fill factor is used in our model.  

Experimentally, the light patterns were recorded by our CMOS image sensor. To ensure 

a good signal to noise ratio, our image sensor is set to automatically adjust to the optimal 

exposure time until the signal level is greater than 50% and stays in the range between 

50% - 90% of full saturation level. Additional attenuation is used to avoid saturation. A 

single rotating scan with steps of 0.1 deg takes ~30 minutes for 1D configuration (over 

90 degrees), in the 2D configuration requires a larger angle to be scanned and therefore 

takes longer, about 1 hour.  

 

Supplementary Information S3:  Derivation of the spectral resolving 

power of our configuration 

The spectral resolving power is the capability to resolve two close-by wavelengths and 


3 

 

is given by R = |λ/∆λ| with ∆λ being the spectral resolution. Substituting the wavelength 

resolution given by Eq. (9) into R, one obtains the theoretical spectral resolving power 

of our setup 

𝑅 =

" +34 5

6∆8# + 1 =

9

: + 1 ≈ 𝑟                     (S4) 

where L is the image size with zero padding, D represents the spatial periodicity of the 

light fields and r denotes their ratio r = L/D. Since we are interested in the case L >> D, 

or say, r >> 1, which implies that Nyquist–Shannon condition cannot be fulfilled and 

aliasing occurs. In this sense, the aliasing effect can be used to greatly improve the 

spectral resolving power.  

 

Supplementary Information S4: Influence of the camera fill factor 

 

Fig. S1. Numerical experiments on the measurement for different fill factors. The measured 

spatial frequency (red markers, right axis) is uncorrelated to the pixel fill factor as expected, in 

contrast to the visibility of interference pattern (blue markers, left axis) which correlates closely 

with the pixel fill factor.  

 

The influence of the fill factor of the pixel was investigated in a numerical experiment. 

Simulations were performed for square pixels with 10 nm subpixel units. The spacing 

between the pixels is varied from 0 to 1.5 μm in steps of 30 nm, corresponding a fill 

factor ranging from 71.7% to 100%. The other parameters are the same as for the other 

calculations. Note that CCDs often have a 100% fill factor but CMOS image sensors 


4 

 

can have much less. The visibility and measured spatial frequencies are shown in Fig. 

S1. We observe that the interference visibility strongly depends on the fill factor, which 

can be seen as a manifestation of the fact that pixels do not sample point-like positions 

but sampling points are integrate over a larger area. 

 

References 

 1.  
S. H. N. Alan Oppenheim, Alan Willsky, SIGNALS and SYSTEMS, Second Edi (New York: Prentice Hall, 

1996). 

2.  
W. Luo, Y. Zhang, A. Feizi, Z. Göröcs, and A. Ozcan, "Pixel super-resolution using wavelength 

scanning," Light Sci. Appl. 5, (2016). 

 


