1

Snapshot Multispectral Imaging Using a Diffractive Optical 
Network

Deniz Mengu1,2,3, Anika Tabassum1,2,3, Mona Jarrahi1,2,3, Aydogan Ozcan1,2,3,*

1 Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, 
CA, 90095, USA 

2 Bioengineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA 

3 California NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA 

§ Equal contribution

* Corresponding author: ozcan@ucla.edu

Abstract

Multispectral imaging has been used for numerous applications in e.g., environmental 
monitoring, aerospace, defense, and biomedicine. Here, we present a diffractive optical 
network-based multispectral imaging system trained using deep learning to create a virtual 
spectral filter array at the output image field-of-view. This diffractive multispectral imager 
performs spatially-coherent imaging over a large spectrum, and at the same time, routes a pre-
determined set of spectral channels onto an array of pixels at the output plane, converting a 
monochrome focal plane array or image sensor into a multispectral imaging device without any 
spectral filters or image recovery algorithms. Furthermore, the spectral responsivity of this 
diffractive multispectral imager is not sensitive to input polarization states. Through numerical 
simulations, we present different diffractive network designs that achieve snapshot 
multispectral imaging with 4, 9 and 16 unique spectral bands within the visible spectrum, based 
on passive spatially-structured diffractive surfaces, with a compact design that axially spans
~72𝑚, where 𝑚 is the mean wavelength of the spectral band of interest. Moreover, we 
experimentally demonstrate a diffractive multispectral imager based on a 3D-printed diffractive 
network that creates at its output image plane a spatially-repeating virtual spectral filter array 
with 2x2=4 unique bands at terahertz spectrum. Due to their compact form factor and 
computation-free, power-efficient and polarization-insensitive forward operation, diffractive 
multispectral imagers can be transformative for various imaging and sensing applications and 
be used at different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum where high-density and wide-area
multispectral pixel arrays are not widely available. 


2

1. Introduction

Multispectral imaging has been an instrumental tool for major advances in various fields,

including environmental monitoring1, astronomy2–4, agricultural sciences5,6, biological 
imaging7–9, medical diagnostics10,11, and food quality control12,13 among many others14–20. One 
of the simplest ways to achieve multispectral imaging is to sacrifice the image acquisition time 
in favor of the spectral information by capturing multiple shots of a scene while changing the 
spectral filter in front of a monochrome camera21. Another traditional form of multispectral 
imaging relies on push-broom scanning of a one-dimensional detector array across the field-of-
view (FOV)22. While these multispectral imaging techniques provide sufficient spectral and 
spatial resolution, they suffer from relatively long data acquisition times, hindering their use in 
real-time imaging applications23. An alternative solution that allows simultaneous collection of 
the spatial and spectral information is to split the optical waves emanating from the input FOV 
onto different optical paths each containing a different spectral filter, followed by a 2D 
monochrome image sensor array24,25. However, this approach often leads to more complex and 
bulky optical systems since it requires the use of multiple focal-plane arrays, one for each band,
along with other optical components. 

Modern-day snapshot spectral imaging systems often use coded apertures in conjunction 

with computational image recovery algorithms to digitally mitigate these shortcomings of 
traditional multispectral imaging systems. One of the earliest forms of coded aperture snapshot 
spectral imaging used a binary spatial aperture function imaged onto a dispersive optical 
element through relay optics, encoding both the spatial and spectral features contained within 
the input FOV into an intensity pattern collected by a monochrome focal-plane array26. Since 
this initial proof-of-concept demonstration, various improvements have been reported on coded 
aperture-based snapshot spectral imaging systems based on, e.g., the use of color-coded 
apertures27, compressive sensing techniques28–31 and others32. On the other hand, these systems 
still require the use of optical relay systems and dispersive optical elements such as prisms, and 
diffractive elements, resulting in relatively bulky form factors; furthermore, their frame rate is 
often limited by the computationally intense iterative recovery algorithms that are used to
digitally retrieve the multispectral image cube from the raw data. Recent studies have also 
reported using diffractive lens designs, addressing the form factor limitations of multispectral
imaging systems33–35. These approaches provide restricted spatial and spectral encoding 
capabilities due to their limited degrees of freedom without coded apertures, causing relatively 
poor spectral resolution. Recent work also demonstrated the use of feedforward deep neural 
networks to achieve better image reconstruction quality, addressing some of the limitations 
imposed by the iterative reconstruction algorithms typically employed in multispectral imaging 
and sensing36–38. On the other hand, deep learning-enabled computational multispectral imagers 
require access to powerful graphics processing units (GPUs)39 for rapid inference of each
spectral image cube and rely on training data acquisition or a calibration process to characterize 
their point spread functions33.

With the development of high-resolution image sensor-arrays, it has become more practical 

to compromise spatial resolution to collect richer spectral information. The most ubiquitous
form of a relatively primitive spectral imaging device designed around this trade-off is a color 
camera based on the Bayer filters (R, G, B channels, representing the red, green and blue 
spectral bands, respectively). The traditional RGB color image sensor is based on a periodically 
repeating array of 2×2 pixels, with each subpixel containing an absorptive spectral filter (also 
known as the Bayer filters) that transmits the red, green, or blue wavelengths while partially 
blocking the others. Despite its frequent use in various imaging applications, there has been a 
tremendous effort to develop better alternatives to these absorptive filters that suffer from a 
relatively high-cross talk, low power efficiency, and poor color representation40. Towards this 
end, numerous engineered optical material structures have been explored, including plasmonic 
antennas41, dielectric metasurfaces42–46 and 3D porous materials47–49. While the intrinsic losses
associated with metallic nanostructures limit their optical efficiency, multispectral imager 
designs based on dielectric metasurfaces and 3D porous compound optical elements have been 


3

reported to achieve higher power efficiencies with lower color crosstalk40. However, these 
structured material-based approaches, including various metamaterial designs, were all limited 
to 4 or fewer spectral channels, and did not demonstrate a large array of spectral filters for 
multispectral imaging. Independent from these spectral filtering techniques based on optimized 
meta-designs, increasing the number of unique spectral channels in conventional multispectral 
filters was also demonstrated, which, in general, poses various design and implementation 
challenges for scale-up23,50.  

Here, we introduce the design of a snapshot multispectral imager that is based on a 

diffractive optical network (also known as D2NN, diffractive deep neural network51–60) and 
demonstrate its performance with 4 (2×2), 9 (3×3) and 16 (4×4) unique spectral bands that are 
periodically repeating at the output image FOV to form a virtual multispectral filter array. This 
diffractive network-based multispectral imager (Fig. 1) is trained to project the spatial 
information of an object onto a grid of virtual pixels, with each one carrying the information of 
a pre-determined spectral band, performing snapshot multispectral imaging via engineered 
diffraction of light through passive transmissive layers that axially span ~72𝑚, where 𝑚 is 
the mean wavelength of the entire spectral band of interest. This unique multispectral imager 
design based on diffractive optical networks achieves two tasks simultaneously: (1) its acts as 
a broadband spatially-coherent relay optics achieving the optical imaging task between the input 
and the output FOVs over a wide spectral range; and (2) it spatially separates the input spectral 
channels into distinct pixels at the same output image plane, serving as a virtual spectral filter 
array that preserves the spatial information of the scene/object, instantaneously yielding an 
image cube without image reconstruction algorithms, except the standard demosaicing of the 
virtual filter array pixels. Stated differently, we demonstrate diffractive optical networks that 
virtually convert a monochrome focal plane array or an image sensor into a snapshot
multispectral imaging device without the need for conventional spectral filters.

We present different numerical diffractive network designs that achieve multispectral

coherent imaging with 4, 9 and 16 unique spectral bands within the visible spectrum based on 
passive diffractive layers that are laterally engineered at a feature size of ~225 nm, spanning 
~43 µm in the axial direction from the first layer to the last, forming a compact and scalable
design. Our numerical analyses on the spectral signal contrast provided by these diffractive 
multispectral imagers reveal that for a given array of virtual filter pixels (covering, e.g., 4, 9 
and 16 spectral bands), the mean optical power of each one of the targeted spectral bands is 
approximately an order of magnitude larger compared to the average optical power of the other 
wavelengths.

Furthermore, we experimentally demonstrate the success of our diffractive multispectral 

imaging framework using a 3D-printed diffractive network operating at terahertz wavelengths. 
Targeting peak frequencies at 0.375, 0.400, 0.425 and 0.450 THz, the fabricated diffractive 
network with 3 structured transmissive layers can successfully route each spectral component 
onto a corresponding array of virtual pixels at the output image plane, forming a multispectral 
coherent imager with 4 spectral channels. Although we focused on spatially-coherent 
multispectral imaging in this work, phase-only diffractive layers can also be optimized using 
deep learning to create spatially incoherent snapshot multispectral imagers, following the same 
design principles outlined here. With its compact form factor and snapshot operation without 
any image cube reconstruction algorithms, we believe the presented diffractive multispectral 
imaging framework can be transformative in various imaging and sensing applications. Since 
the presented diffractive multispectral imagers utilize isotropic dielectric materials, their virtual 
spectral filter arrays are not sensitive to the input polarization state of the illumination light, 
which provides an additional advantage. Finally, due to its scalability, it can drive the 
development of multispectral imagers at any part of the electromagnetic spectrum, which would 
be especially important for bands where high-density and large-format spectral filter arrays are 
not widely available or too costly.


4

2. Results and Discussion

Figure 1 depicts the optical layout and the forward model of a 5-layer diffractive

multispectral imager that can spatially separate 𝑁𝐵 distinct spectral bands into a virtual spectral 
filter array on a monochrome image sensor located at the output image plane; in this illustration 
of Fig. 1, 𝑁𝐵 = 9 is shown as an example, although it can be further increased, as will be 
reported below. The input FOV in Fig. 1 exemplifies a hypothetical object where the amplitude 
channel of the object’s light transmission is composed of intersecting lines, and each line strictly 
transmits only one wavelength. Such a forward optical transformation can be defined using a 
linear spatial transformation (y = x) between the input and output intensities for each targeted 
spectral band since image sensors are only sensitive to the incident optical intensity. This 
indicates that for a diffractive network-based spatially-coherent multispectral imager, there is a 
phase degree of freedom at the output image plane, making it easier to learn the desired 
multispectral imaging task through, e.g., deep learning. For a diffractive multispectral imager,
as shown in Fig. 1, 𝑁𝑖 and 𝑁𝑜 indicate the number of effective pixels at the input and output 
FOVs, respectively, which are dictated by the extent of the input and output FOVs along with 
the desired spatial resolution (within the diffraction limit)55,56. The number of spectral channels
(𝑁𝐵) as part of the targeted multispectral imaging design depends on the cross-talk among 
different spectral bands of the virtual filter array created at the diffractive network output, which 
will be quantified in our analysis reported below. Although not demonstrated here, in alternative 
implementations, the diffractive multispectral network can also be placed right behind the 
image plane of a camera, transferring the multispectral image of an object onto the plane of the
monochrome focal plane array, converting an existing monochrome imaging system into a 
multispectral imager. 

To train (and design) our diffractive multispectral imager, we created input objects, where

the transmission field amplitude of a given object at each spectral band was represented by an 
image randomly selected from the 101.6K training images of the EMNIST dataset (see the 
Methods section). The phase profiles of the five diffractive layers (containing ~0.76 million 
trainable diffractive features in total) were optimized through the error-backpropagation and 
stochastic gradient descent using a loss function based on the spatial mean-squared error (MSE)
that includes all the desired spectral channels; see the Supplementary Methods section. This 
deep learning-based optimization used 100 epochs, where the ground truth multispectral output
images were generated using the EMNIST dataset randomly assigned to different spectral bands 
of interest. Figure 2a illustrates the resulting material thickness profiles of a 𝐾 = 5 layer 
diffractive multispectral imager trained to operate within the visible spectrum, evenly covering 
the wavelength range from 𝜆9 = 450 nm to 𝜆1 = 700 nm based on the optical layout shown in 
Fig. 1, i.e., 𝜆9 < 𝜆8 < ⋯ < 𝜆1. For simplicity and without loss of generality, we assume the 
input light spectrum to lie between 450 nm and 700 nm; modern CMOS image sensors cover a 
slightly wider bandwidth than considered here. The forward optical training model of this 
diffractive network assumes a monochrome image sensor at the output plane with a pixel size 
of 0.9𝜇𝑚 × 0.9𝜇𝑚 (~1.28𝜆1 × 1.28𝜆1), which is typical for today’s CMOS image sensor 
technology widely deployed in, e.g., smartphone cameras61. This diffractive design spatially
extends ~43 µm in the axial direction (from the first diffractive layer to the last layer), and is 
optimized to route 𝑁𝐵 = 9 distinct spectral lines (i.e., 700 nm, 668.75 nm, 637.5 nm, 606.25
nm, 575 nm, 543.75 nm, 512.5 nm, 481.25 nm, and 450 nm) onto a 3×3 monochrome sensor 
pixel-array, that is repeating in space for snapshot multispectral imaging without any digital 
image reconstruction algorithm. Without loss of generality, we assumed unit magnification 
between the object/input FOV and the monochrome image sensor plane (output FOV); hence, 
the size of the smallest feature size of the input images was set to be 3 × 0.9𝜇𝑚, i.e., equal to
the width of a virtual spectral filter array (3x3).

Following the deep learning-based training and design phase (see the Supplementary 

Methods section for further details), a multicolor image test set with a total of 2080 distinct 
objects (never seen during the training) was used to quantify the multispectral imaging 
performance of the trained diffractive network design. For each object in our blind test set, the 


5

field amplitude of the object transmission function at each spectral band was modeled based on 
an image randomly selected from the test dataset. An example of the imaging results 
corresponding to a multispectral test object never used during the training is shown in Fig. 2b. 
Based on the checkerboard-like output intensity patterns synthesized by the diffractive 
multispectral imager in response to the 2080 different test objects, the spectral image contrast 
of the diffractive network output can be quantified as shown in Fig. 2c; each row of the matrix
in Fig. 2c corresponds to a different illumination wavelength and all the rows sum up to 100%
(optical power). Hence, the rows of this matrix represent the percentage of the output optical 
power that resides within the designated group of virtual pixels for a given wavelength channel, 
calculated as an average of all the 2080 blind test objects. The columns of the matrix in Fig. 2c, 
on the other hand, illustrate the signal contrast and the spectral leakage over a given array of 
virtual spectral filters assigned to a spectral band. Our analyses show that for a given set of 
virtual spectral pixels assigned to a particular spectral band (a column of the matrix in Fig. 2c), 
the power of the desired signal band is on average (8.57±1.59)-fold larger compared to the mean 
power of the other spectral bands (leakage) collected by the same array of virtual spectral filter 
pixels.

Based on the data shown in Fig. 2c, we see that the performance of the diffractive 

multispectral imager is inversely proportional to the wavelength. In other words, the diffractive 
optical network designed using deep learning can route smaller wavelengths onto their
corresponding virtual spectral filter locations better than larger wavelengths. A similar 
conclusion can also be observed in the spectral responsibility curves of the 3x3 virtual filter
array, periodically assigned to 𝑁𝐵 = 9 (see Fig. 3); the responsivity curves of these virtual filter 
arrays get narrower as the wavelength gets smaller, with the narrowest filter response achieved
for 𝜆9 = 450 nm. These observations can be explained based on the degrees of freedom 
available at each wavelength: due to the diffraction limit of light, the effective number of 
trainable diffractive features seen/controlled by larger wavelengths is smaller than the total 
number of trainable features within the entire diffractive network, 𝑁 = 5 × 392 × 392. For 
example, a given diffractive layer depicted in Fig. 2a contains 𝑁𝐿 = 392 × 392 diffractive 
features, each with a size 225𝑛𝑚 × 225𝑛𝑚, i.e., 𝜆9/2 × 𝜆9/2, which also corresponds to
𝜆1/3.11 × 𝜆1/3.11.
Considering that our diffractive network operates based on 

traveling/propagating waves, the longer wavelengths experience reduced degrees of freedom
due to the diffraction limit of light, which restricts the independent (useful) feature size on a 
diffractive layer to half of the wavelength in each spectral band.

Next, we further quantified the multispectral imaging quality provided by the diffractive 

network design shown in Fig. 2a using two additional performance metrics: Structural 
Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) and Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR); see the Methods 
section. Figure 2d illustrates the average SSIM and PSNR values achieved by the diffractive 
network as a function of the desired spectral bands. These image quality metrics were calculated 
between the diagonal images shown in Fig. 2b (the ground truth images on the left diagonal vs. 
the diffractive network output images on the right diagonal). Although there are some variations
in the multispectral imaging quality of the diffractive network depending on the spectral band
of the input light, the SSIM (PSNR) values have a very high lower bound (worst case 
performance) of 0.88 (19.8 dB). In addition, the mean SSIM and PSNR values are found as 
0.93 and 22.06 dB, respectively. By summing up all the images in each column of Fig. 2b, we 
can create an image that visualizes the impact of the spectral cross-talk from the other 𝑁𝐵 −
1 = 8 spectral channels on each target wavelength, which is shown at the bottom of the image 
matrix in Fig. 2b, as a separate row.  Due to this spectral power cross-talk among channels 
(quantified in Fig. 2c), the average values of the SSIM and PSNR of the output multispectral 
image cube (computed across all the bands) drop to 0.65 and 16.24 dB, respectively. Also see 
Supplementary Fig. 1 for the cross-talk matrix and multispectral imaging performance of a 
diffractive multispectral imager designed for 𝑁𝐵 = 4 spectral bands in the visible spectrum.
Due to the reduced number of target spectral bands compared to the 𝑁𝐵 = 9 case, the spectral
power cross-talk is reduced for the 𝑁𝐵 = 4 diffractive imager as quantified in Supplementary 
Fig. S1b; as a result, the diffractive network can synthesize multispectral image cubes with


6

improved mean SSIM (0.82) and mean PSNR (19.29 dB) calculated across all the 𝑁𝐵 = 4
bands. 

To demonstrate diffractive multispectral imaging with an increased number of spectral 

channels, Figure 4a demonstrates the material thickness profiles of the diffractive layers 
constituting a new multispectral imager that was trained for 𝑁𝐵 = 16, evenly distributed 
between 𝜆16 = 450 nm to 𝜆1 = 700 nm, mapped onto a 4×4 monochrome pixel array repeating 
in space for snapshot multispectral imaging. Compared to the diffractive multispectral imager
depicted in Fig. 2, this new diffractive design targets a lower spatial resolution due to the trade-
off between 𝑁𝐵 and the spatial resolution of the snapshot multispectral imager. Similar to Fig. 
2b, the output images on the diagonals of the multispectral image cube shown in Fig. 4b closely 
match the ground truth multispectral images at the input, highlighting the success of the 
diffractive imaging design. The off-diagonal images that are dark (see Fig. 4b) further illustrate
the success of the spectral routing performed by the diffractive multispectral imager, 
minimizing the cross-talk among channels. Figure 4c also illustrates the average spectral signal 
contrast synthesized by the diffractive network at its output for 𝑁𝐵 = 16 spectral bands. 
Compared to the signal contrast map of the previous diffractive network design (𝑁𝐵 = 9 shown 
in Fig. 2c), the values in Fig. 4c point to a slight decrease in the average spectral contrast at the 
output of this new diffractive multispectral imager with 𝑁𝐵 = 16. However, the output image 
quality of the diffractive multispectral imager with 𝑁𝐵 = 16 is still outstanding: the output 
SSIM (PSNR) values have a very good lower bound of 0.88 (19.62 dB), and the mean SSIM 
and PSNR values are 0.92 and 22.0 dB, respectively (see Fig. 4d). Same as in Fig. 2, these 
image quality metrics were calculated between the diagonal images shown in Fig. 4b (left vs. 
right). By summing up all the images in each column of Fig. 4b, we can create an image that 
visualizes the impact of the power cross-talk from the other 𝑁𝐵 − 1 = 15 spectral bands on 
each target wavelength, which is shown at the bottom of the image matrix in Fig. 4b, as a 
separate row. As a manifestation of the spectral power cross-talk quantified in Fig. 4c, the 
average values of SSIM and PSNR of the output multispectral image cube drop to 0.60 and 
15.33 dB, respectively, calculated across all the 𝑁𝐵 = 16 target spectral channels. Furthermore, 
this diffractive multispectral imager with 𝑁𝐵 = 16 can route the input spectral bands onto 
designated output pixels with an average power contrast that is 11.06× larger with respect to 
the mean power carried by the remaining 𝑁𝐵 − 1 = 15 spectral channels. Figure 5b also reports 
the spectral responsivity curves of the 4x4 virtual filter array at the output image FOV of the 
diffractive network.

Next, to experimentally demonstrate the presented diffractive multispectral imaging 

framework, we designed a diffractive network that can process terahertz wavelengths. This 
terahertz-based diffractive multispectral imager uses 𝐾 = 3 layers (see Fig. 6) to form a virtual 
filter array at its output plane with periodically repeating 2×2 spectral pixels targeting 0.375 
THz, 0.4 THz, 0.425 THz and 0.45 THz (𝑖. 𝑒. , 𝑁𝐵 = 4). For the input object ‘U’ shown in Fig. 
6b, the demosaiced output images predicted by the numerical forward model of our diffractive 
terahertz multispectral imager are depicted in Fig. 7a. In the 4-by-4 image matrix shown in Fig. 
7a, the diagonal images represent the correct match between the spectral content of the 
illumination and the corresponding demosaiced pixels within each 2×2 cell of the virtual filter 
array; in other words, they represent the channels of the multispectral image cube, while the 
off-diagonal images show the cross-talk between different spectral bands. To quantify the 
performance of our diffractive multispectral imager, we compared each spectral channel of the
multispectral image cube predicted by the numerical forward model of our diffractive terahertz 
multispectral imager with respect to the ground-truth image of the input object ‘U’, which 
achieved PSNR values of 15.12 dB, 14.93 dB, 15.03 dB and 13.30 dB for the spectral bands at
0.375 THz, 0.4 THz, 0.425 THz and 0.45 THz, respectively. To compare our numerical results 
with their experimental counterparts, Figure 7b illustrates the experimentally measured
multispectral imaging results obtained through the 3D-printed multispectral diffractive imager 
shown in Fig. 6c, which provided a decent agreement between our numerical and experimental 
multispectral images. Quantitative evaluation of the experimental multispectral imaging results
reveals PSNR values of 13.02 dB, 13.71 dB, 13.02 dB and 12.64 dB PSNR at 0.375 THz, 0.4 


7

THz, 0.425 THz and 0.45 THz, respectively. Compared to our numerical results, these PSNR 
values point to ~12 dB loss of image quality which can be largely attributed to the limited 
lateral resolution and potential misalignments of the 3D printed diffractive multispectral imager
shown in Fig. 6c. 

Beyond the multispectral image quality, we also quantified the spectral cross-talk 

performance of the experimentally tested diffractive multispectral imager. Figures 7c and 7d
illustrate the spectral cross-talk matrices generated by the numerical forward model of the 
diffractive multispectral imager shown in Fig. 6b and its experimentally measured counterpart 
using the 3D-printed diffractive design shown in Fig. 6c, respectively. For a given virtual filter 
array designated to a particular spectral band, the ratio between the mean power of the target
spectral band and the mean power of all the other 3 undesired spectral bands was found to be
2.42 (numerical) and 2.21 (experimental) based on the matrices shown in Fig. 7c and 7d, 
respectively, providing a decent agreement between the numerical and experimental (3D-
fabricated) models of our diffractive multispectral imager.

In general, a key design parameter in diffractive optical networks is the number of 

diffractive features, 𝑁, that are engineered using deep learning since it directly determines the 
number of independent degrees of freedom in the system55,56,62. Figures 8a-c compare the 
multispectral imaging quality achieved by four different diffractive network architectures as a 
function of 𝑁 for 𝑁𝐵 = 4, 9 and 16, respectively. For example, the diffractive multispectral 
imager designs for 𝑁𝐵 = 9 and 𝑁𝐵 = 16 shown in Figs. 2 and 4, respectively, contain in total 
𝑁 = 392 × 392 × 5 trainable diffractive features equally distributed over 𝐾 = 5 diffractive 
layers, i.e., the number of diffractive features per layer is, 𝑁𝐿 = 392 × 392. While these two 
diffractive multispectral imagers can achieve average SSIM (PSNR) values of 0.93 (22.06 dB) 
and 0.92 (22.00 dB) at their output images, respectively, the diffractive multispectral imager 
architectures with fewer N cannot match their performance. For instance, in the case of a 
diffractive multispectral imager design based on 𝑁𝐵 = 9, 𝑁𝐿 = 196 × 196 and 𝐾 = 3 (see 
Fig. 8b), the average output SSIM and PSNR values drop to 0.7 and 15.38 dB, respectively.
Figure 8d further illustrates the impact of 𝑁𝐵 on the multispectral imaging performance of 
diffractive networks for four different combinations of 𝑁𝐿 and 𝐾. One can observe in Fig. 8d
that for a fixed 𝑁𝐿 and 𝐾 combination, the multispectral imaging performance is inversely 
proportional to 𝑁𝐵, which is expected due to the increased level of spectral multiplexing. As a 
comparison, the average SSIM (PSNR) values attained by the diffractive multispectral imager
with the smallest 𝑁 = 196 × 196 × 3 increase from 0.7 (15.38 dB) to 0.78 (16.44 dB) when 
𝑁𝐵 = 9 is reduced to 𝑁𝐵 = 4 spectral bands; this once again points to the relationship between 
𝑁 and 𝑁𝐵, indicating that a larger 𝑁𝐵 would require additional diffractive degrees of freedom 
(a larger 𝑁) in order to perform the desired multispectral imaging task over a larger set of 
spectral bands.

Another critical figure of merit regarding the design of diffractive multispectral imagers is 

the power transmission efficiency of the optically synthesized virtual filter array. Figures 3c
and 5C illustrate the power transmission efficiencies of the virtual filter arrays generated by the 
diffractive multispectral imager networks with 𝑁𝐵 = 9 and 𝑁𝐵 = 16 distinct bands within the 
visible spectrum. For example, based on the data depicted in Fig. 3c, the highest and lowest 
transmission efficiencies for 𝑁𝐵 = 9, are found as 21.56% and 20.70% at 450 nm and 700 nm, 
respectively. On average, this diffractive multispectral imager can provide 20.96% virtual filter 
transmission efficiency for 𝑁𝐵 = 9 spectral bands targeted by the 3×3 repeating cell of the 
virtual filter array. However, the deep learning-based training of this diffractive multispectral
imager shown in Fig. 2 focused solely on the quality of the multispectral optical imaging, i.e., 
the output diffraction efficiency related training loss term (ℒ𝑒) was dropped (see the
Supplementary Methods). While this training strategy drives the evolution of the diffractive 
surfaces to maximize the multispectral imaging performance, the associated virtual filter array 
transmission efficiency reflects only a lower performance bound that can be achieved by a 
diffractive multispectral imager with the same optical architecture. To find a better balance 
between the multispectral imaging quality and the power efficiency of the virtual filter array, 
the loss function that guides the diffractive multispectral imager design during its deep learning-


8

based training can include an additional term, ℒ𝑒, penalizing poor diffraction efficiencies (see 
the Supplementary Methods section). The multiplicative constant, 𝛾, determines the weight of 
the diffraction efficiency penalty, ℒ𝑒, controlling the trade-off between the multispectral 
imaging quality and the power efficiency of the associated virtual spectral filter array. To 
quantify the impact of ℒ𝑒 and 𝛾 on the performance of diffractive multispectral imagers, we 
trained new diffractive models that share an identical optical architecture with the diffractive 
multispectral imager shown in Fig. 2 (𝑁𝐵 = 9 within the visible spectrum), where each design 
used a different value of 𝛾. The results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 9, which indicate that 
it is possible to create a 5-layer diffractive multispectral imager with 𝑁𝐵 = 9, achieving an 
average virtual filter transmission efficiency as high as 79.32%. Furthermore, the compromise 
in multispectral image quality in favor of this significantly increased power transmission
efficiency turned out to be only minimal: while the average SSIM (PSNR) values achieved by 
the lower efficiency diffractive networks shown in Fig. 2 were 0.93 (22.06 dB), the more
efficient diffractive multispectral imager design with 79.32% average virtual filter array 
transmission efficiency achieves an SSIM of ~0.91 and a PSNR of 21.42 dB (see Fig. 9).

Finally, we should emphasize that the presented diffractive multispectral imager design 

framework using deep learning-based optimization of phase-only diffractive layers can also be 
extended to spatially incoherent illumination. In the forward model of such a design to be 
trained using deep learning, each spatially incoherent wavefront at a given band can be 
decomposed into field amplitudes with random 2D input phase patterns, and the output image 
can be synthesized by averaging the intensities resulting from various independent random 
phase patterns for the same input field amplitude. The downside of such an incoherent 
multispectral imager design is that it would take much longer to converge using deep learning
since each forward operation during the training phase would need many independent runs with 
random input phase patterns for each batch of the multispectral training input images.
Therefore, at the cost of a longer one-time training effort, phase-only diffractive layers can also 
be optimized using deep learning to create a spatially incoherent snapshot multispectral imager, 
following the same design principles outlined in this work. 

In summary, we demonstrated snapshot diffractive multispectral imagers that can create a 

virtual spectral filter array over the pixels of a monochrome focal-plane-array or image sensor
without the need for a conventional filter array, while simultaneously establishing an imaging 
condition between the input and output fields-of-view. Owing to their extremely compact form 
factor, power-efficient optical forward operation (reaching >79% filter transmission efficiency)
and high-quality spectral filtering capabilities, the presented diffractive multispectral imagers 
can be useful for numerous imaging and sensing applications, covering different parts of the 
spectrum where high-density and wide-area multispectral filter arrays are not readily available.
Finally, since our diffractive designs are based on isotropic materials, their multispectral 
imaging capability and virtual spectral filter responses are independent of the input polarization 
state of the illumination light, which provides an additional, important advantage.

3. Methods

3.1 Training forward model of diffractive multispectral imagers

3.1.1 Optical forward model

D2NN framework uses deep learning to devise the transmission/reflection coefficients of 

diffractive features located over a series of optical modulation surfaces. The modulation 
coefficient over each diffractive feature/neuron is controlled through one or more physical 
design variables. The presented diffractive multispectral imagers in this work were designed to 
be fabricated based on a single dielectric material and the material thickness, ℎ, was selected as 
the physical parameter for controlling the complex-valued modulation coefficient associated 


9

with each diffractive feature. For a given diffractive layer, the transmittance coefficient of a 
diffractive feature located on the 𝑙𝑡ℎ layer at a coordinate of (𝑥𝑞, 𝑦𝑞, 𝑧𝑙) is defined as, 

where 𝑛 and 𝜅 denote the real and imaginary parts of the refractive index of the fabrication 
dielectric material, respectively, and 𝑛𝑚 = 1 corresponds to the refractive index of the 
propagation medium (air) between the layers. In the case of the diffractive multispectral imagers 
designed to operate at the visible wavelengths, the material of the diffractive layers was selected 
as Schott glass of type ‘BK7’ due to its wide availability and low absorption63. Since its 
absorption coefficient for the visible spectrum is on the order of 10−3 cm-1, the imaginary part 
of the refractive index was ignored, i.e., it was assumed to be absorption-free; considering the
fact that our diffractive designs extend <45 µm in the axial direction, this is a valid assumption. 
For the experimentally tested diffractive multispectral imaging network shown in Figs. 6-7, on 
the other hand, the real and imaginary parts of the diffractive materials were measured 
experimentally using a THz spectroscopy system, i.e., 𝑛 = 1.6524, 1.6518, 1.6512, 1.6502, 
and 𝜅 = 0.05, 0.06, 0.06, 0.06,  at 0.375, 0.400, 0.425 and 0.450 THz, respectively.   

Each diffractive layer was modeled as a multiplicative thin modulation surface in the optical 

forward model. The light propagation between successive diffractive layers was implemented 
based on the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld scalar diffraction theory; since the smallest diffractive 
features considered here have a size of ~/2 this is a valid assumption for all-optical processing 
of diffraction-limited traveling/propagating fields, without any evanescent waves. According 
to this diffraction formulation, the free-space diffraction is interpreted as a linear, shift-invariant 
operator with an impulse response of,

where 𝑟 = √𝑥2 + 𝑦2 + 𝑧2. Based on Eq. 2, 𝑞𝑡ℎ diffractive feature on the 𝑙𝑡ℎ layer, at 
(𝑥𝑞, 𝑦𝑞, 𝑧𝑙), can be described as the source of a secondary wave, generating the field in the form 
of,

where 𝑟𝑞

𝑙 = √(𝑥 − 𝑥𝑞)

2 + (𝑦 − 𝑦𝑞)

2 + (𝑧 − 𝑧𝑙)2. These secondary waves created by the 

diffractive features on the diffractive layer 𝑙 propagate to the next layer, i.e., the (𝑙 + 1)𝑡ℎ layer 
and are spatially superimposed. Accordingly, the light field incident on the 𝑝𝑡ℎ diffractive 
feature at (𝑥𝑝, 𝑦𝑝, 𝑧𝑙+1) can be written as  ∑ 𝐴𝑞

𝑙 𝑤𝑞

𝑙(𝑥𝑝, 𝑦𝑝, 𝑧𝑙+1)
𝑞
, where 𝐴𝑞

𝑙 is the complex 

amplitude of the wave field right after the 𝑞𝑡ℎ diffractive feature of the 𝑙𝑡ℎ layer. This field is 
modulated through the field transmittance of the diffractive unit at (𝑥𝑝, 𝑦𝑝, 𝑧𝑙+1), i.e.,
𝑡(𝑥𝑝, 𝑦𝑝, 𝑧𝑙+1), where a new secondary wave is generated, described by:

The outlined successive modulation and the secondary wave generation processes continue
until the waves propagating through the diffractive network reach the output image plane. 
Although the forward optical model described by Eqs. 1-4 is given over a continuous 3D 
coordinate system, during our deep learning-based training of the presented diffractive optical 
networks, all the wave fields and the modulation surfaces were represented based on their 

𝑡(𝑥𝑞, 𝑦𝑞, 𝑧𝑙) = exp (−2𝜋𝜅ℎ(𝑥𝑞, 𝑦𝑞, 𝑧𝑙)

𝜆
) exp (−𝑗2𝜋(𝑛 − 𝑛𝑚)ℎ(𝑥𝑞, 𝑦𝑞, 𝑧𝑙)

𝜆
)
(1)

𝑤(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝑧

𝑟2 ( 1

2𝜋𝑟 + 𝑛

𝑗𝜆) exp(𝑗2𝜋𝑛𝑟

𝜆
)
(2)

𝑤𝑞

𝑙(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝑧 − 𝑧𝑙

(𝑟𝑞

𝑙)

2 ( 1

2𝜋𝑟𝑞

𝑙 + 𝑛

𝑗𝜆) exp ( 𝑗2𝜋𝑛𝑟𝑞

𝑙

𝜆
)
(3)

𝑢𝑝

𝑙+1(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝑤𝑝

𝑙+1(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧)𝑡(𝑥𝑝, 𝑦𝑝, 𝑧𝑙+1) ∑ 𝐴𝑞

𝑙 𝑤𝑞

𝑙(𝑥𝑝, 𝑦𝑝, 𝑧𝑙+1)

𝑞

.
(4)


10

discrete counterparts. For the diffractive multispectral imager designs operating at the visible 
bands, the spatial sampling rate was set to be 0.5𝜆𝑁𝐵 = 225 𝑛𝑚 for both 𝑁𝐵 = 4 𝑎𝑛𝑑 9, which 
was also equal to the size of a diffractive feature. For the experimentally tested diffractive 
multispectral imaging system, on the other hand, the sampling rate was selected as 0.375𝜆𝑁𝐵
and the size of each diffractive feature was taken as 0.75𝜆𝑁𝐵 with 𝑁𝐵 = 4.

3.1.2 Design of the experimentally tested diffractive multispectral imager operating at 

terahertz bands

As shown in Fig. 6, the size of the input and output FOVs of the experimentally tested 

diffractive multispectral imager with 𝑁𝐵 = 4 were set to be 37.5𝜆1 × 37.5𝜆1, where 
𝜆1~0.8 mm is the wavelength at 0.375 THz. It was assumed that the THz output image plane 
has 100 (10 × 10) pixels of size 3.75𝜆1 × 3.75𝜆1. Since 𝑁𝐵 = 4, these 10 × 10 pixels were 
divided into groups of 2 × 2 virtual spectral filters repeating in space. The fabricated 
diffractive multispectral imager was trained using randomly generated intensity patterns, 
representing the amplitude transmission of the input objects. The 3D-printed blind test object 
is the letter ‘U’ designed based on a 5 × 5 binary image with each pixel corresponding to an 
area of 7.5𝜆1 × 7.5𝜆1. 

The size of each diffractive feature on the 3D-printed diffractive layers shown in Fig. 6 

equals ~0.5mm×0.5mm. Each of the 3 fabricated diffractive surfaces processes the incoming
waves based on 100 × 100 optimized diffractive features, extending over 62.5𝜆1 × 62.5𝜆1. 
In the optical forward model of this diffractive network, all the axial distances between (1) the 
input FOV and the first diffractive surface, (2) two successive diffractive surfaces and (3) the 
last diffractive layer and the output FOV were set to be 40 mm, i.e., ~50𝜆1. The variables ℎ𝑚
and ℎ𝑏 were taken to be 1.56𝜆1 and 0.625𝜆1, respectively (see the Supplementary Methods 
section).

The fabricated diffractive multispectral imager shown in Fig. 6 was trained based on ℒ′ with 

𝛾 = 0.15 (see the Supplementary Methods). Based on this 𝛾 value, the 𝐾 = 3 layer diffractive 
optical network shown in Fig. 6 provides 5.68%, 5.32%, 5.2% and 5.01% virtual filter array 
transmission efficiency (T) for the spectral components at 0.375 THz, 0.4 THz, 0.425 THz and 
0.45 THz, respectively. 

The forward model of a 3D-printed diffractive network is prone to physical errors, e.g., 

layer-to-layer misalignments. To mitigate the impact of these experimental error sources, such 
misalignments were modeled as random variables and incorporated into the forward training 
model so that the deep learning-based evolution of the diffractive surfaces is enforced to 
converge to solutions that show resilience against implementation errors53. Accordingly, the 
diffractive network design shown in Fig. 6 was vaccinated against random 3D layer-to-layer 
misalignments in the form of lateral and axial translations as well as in-plane rotations. For this,
we introduced 4 uniformly distributed random variables, 𝐷𝑥

𝑙, 𝐷𝑦

𝑙, 𝐷𝑧

𝑙 and 𝐷𝜃

𝑙, representing 

the random errors in the 3D location and orientation of a diffractive layer, 𝑙, i.e.,

where ∆𝑥, ∆𝑦, ∆𝑧 and ∆𝜃 denote the error range anticipated based on the fabrication margins of 
our experimental system. For the 3D-printed diffractive optical network shown in Fig. 6, the 
range of the random errors for the lateral misplacement of the diffractive surfaces was taken as 
∆𝑥= ∆𝑦= 0.625𝜆1. The variable, ∆𝑧, which controls the maximum axial displacement of each 
layer, was set to be 2.5𝜆1. The range of errors in the orientation of each layer around the optical 
axis was assumed to be within (−2°, 2°), i.e., ∆𝜃= 2°. During the training stage, 𝐷𝑥

𝑙, 𝐷𝑦

𝑙, 𝐷𝑧

𝑙

𝐷𝑥

𝑙~𝑈(−∆𝑥, ∆𝑥)

𝐷𝑦

𝑙~𝑈(−∆𝑦, ∆𝑦)

𝐷𝑧

𝑙~𝑈(−∆𝑧, ∆𝑧)

𝐷𝜃

𝑙~𝑈(−∆𝜃, ∆𝜃)


11

and 𝐷𝜃

𝑙 were updated for each layer, 𝑙, independently for every batch of input objects,

introducing a new set of random misalignment errors into the forward optical model at each
error backpropagation step.

The numerically computed and experimentally measured power cross-talk matrices 

shown in Figs. 7c-d, were computed based on the images of the letter ‘U’ at 4 different
illumination wavelengths: ~0.8 mm, ~0.75 mm, ~0.7 mm and ~0.66 mm.

3.1.3 Details of the experimental setup

The schematic diagram of the experimental setup is given in Fig. 6. In this system, the THz 

wave incident on the object was generated through a horn antenna compatible with the source 
WR2.2 modular amplifier/multiplier chain (AMC) from Virginia Diode Inc. (VDI). Electrically 
modulated with a 1 kHz square wave, the AMC received an RF input signal that is a 16 dBm 
sinusoidal waveform at 11.111 GHz (fRF1). This RF signal is multiplied 34, 36, 38 and 40 times 
to generate a continuous-wave (CW) radiation at ~0.375 THz, ~0.4 THz, ~0.425 THz and ~0.45 
THz, corresponding to ~0.8 mm, ~0.75 mm, ~0.7 mm and ~0.66 mm in wavelength, 
respectively. The exit aperture of the horn antenna was placed ~60 cm away from the object 
plane of the 3D-printed diffractive optical network so that the beam profile of the THz 
illumination closely approximates a uniform plane wave. The diffracted THz light at the output 
plane was collected using a single-pixel Mixer/AMC from Virginia Diode Inc. (VDI). A 10 
dBm sinusoidal signal at 11.083 GHz was sent to the detector as a local oscillator for mixing 
so that the down-converted signal is at 1GHz. The 37.5𝜆1 × 37.5𝜆1 output FOV was scanned 
by placing the single-pixel detector on an XY stage that was built by combining two linear 
motorized stages (Thorlabs NRT100). The scanning step size was set to be 1 mm~1.25𝜆1. The 
down-converted signal of a single-pixel detector at each scan location was sent to low-noise 
amplifiers (Mini-Circuits ZRL-1150-LN+) to amplify the signal by 80 dBm and a 1 GHz (+/-
10 MHz) bandpass filter (KL Electronics 3C40-1000/T10-O/O) to clean the noise coming from 
unwanted frequency bands. Following the amplification, the signal was passed through a 
tunable attenuator (HP 8495B) and a low-noise power detector (Mini-Circuits ZX47-60), and 
then the output voltage was read by a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research SR830). The 
modulation signal was used as the reference signal for the lock-in amplifier and accordingly, 
we conducted a calibration by tuning the attenuation and recording the lock-in amplifier 
readings. The lock-in amplifier readings at each scan location were converted to a linear scale 
according to the calibration. 

The diffractive multispectral imager was fabricated using a 3D printer (Objet30 Pro, 

Stratasys Ltd.). The optical architecture of the 3D-printed diffractive optical network consisted 
of an input object and 3 diffractive layers (see Fig. 6). While the active modulation area of our 
3D-printed diffractive layers was 5 cm × 5 cm (62.5𝜆1 × 62.5𝜆1), they were printed as light-
modulating insets surrounded by a uniform slab of the printing material with a thickness of 2.5
mm.

3.1.4 Training details and image quality metrics

The image quality metrics SSIM and PSNR were computed based on the comparison 

between the low-resolution ground-truth image cube, 𝐼𝐺𝑇,𝐿𝑅[𝑘, 𝑟, 𝑤], and the output image cube 
formed through the demosaicing of the optical intensity patterns collected by the image sensor, 
𝐼𝑆,𝐿𝑅[𝑘, 𝑟, 𝑤]. Both PSNR and SSIM metrics were computed separately for each spectral 
channel. The PSNR achieved by a diffractive multispectral imager for the spatial information 
in a spectral band, 𝑤′, was computed based on,


12

To compute the SSIM metric, we used the built-in tf.image.ssim() function in TensorFlow based 
on its default parameters. Each data point in SSIM and PSNR values shown in Figs. 2 and 4 
represents the average value calculated using 2080 blind test objects created in a way that the 
amplitude channel of the spatial transmission function at each spectral band was modeled based 
on an image randomly selected from the 18.8K test images of the EMNIST dataset.

The deep learning-based training of the diffractive networks was implemented using 

Python (v3.6.5) and TensorFlow (v1.15.0, Google Inc.). The backpropagation updates were 
calculated using the Adam optimizer64, and its parameters were taken as the default values in 
TensorFlow and kept identical in each model. The learning rates of the diffractive optical 
networks were set to be 0.001. The training batch size was taken as 8 during the deep learning-
based training of all the presented diffractive multispectral imagers. The training of a 5-layer 
diffractive multispectral imager network with 392 × 392 diffractive features per layer (for 100 
epochs) takes approximately 2 weeks using a computer with a GeForce GTX 1080 Ti Graphical 
Processing Unit (GPU, Nvidia Inc.) and Intel® Core ™ i7-8700 Central Processing Unit (CPU, 
Intel Inc.) with 64 GB of RAM, running Windows 10 operating system (Microsoft). Although 
the training time for the deep learning-based design of a diffractive multispectral imager is 
relatively long, it should be noted that this is a one-time effort. Once the diffractive 
multispectral imager is fabricated following the training stage, its physical forward optical 
operation consumes no power except the illumination beam.

Supplementary Materials
This file contains:
- Supplementary Figure S1.
- Design of diffractive multispectral imagers

References
1 
Kargel JS, Abrams MJ, Bishop MP, Bush A, Hamilton G, Jiskoot H et al. Multispectral imaging 
contributions to global land ice measurements from space. Remote Sensing of Environment 2005; 
99: 187–219.

2 
Bell JF, Squyres SW, Arvidson RE, Arneson HM, Bass D, Calvin W et al. Pancam Multispectral 
Imaging Results from the Opportunity Rover at Meridiani Planum. Science 2004; 306: 1703–
1709.

3 
Dinguirard M, Slater PN. Calibration of Space-Multispectral Imaging Sensors: A Review. ; : 12.

4 
Berry S, Giraldo NA, Green BF, Cottrell TR, Stein JE, Engle EL et al. Analysis of multispectral 
imaging with the AstroPath platform informs efficacy of PD-1 blockade. Science 2021; 372: 
eaba2609.

5 
Boelt B, Shrestha S, Salimi Z, Jørgensen JR, Nicolaisen M, Carstensen JM. Multispectral imaging 
– a new tool in seed quality assessment? Seed Sci Res 2018; 28: 222–228.

6 
de Oca AM, Arreola L, Flores A, Sanchez J, Flores G. Low-cost multispectral imaging system for 
crop monitoring. In: 2018 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS). 
2018, pp 443–451.

7 
Rouse AR, Gmitro AF. Multispectral imaging with a confocal microendoscope. Opt Lett 2000; 
25: 1708.

𝑃𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑤′ = 20𝑙𝑜𝑔10

(

 
1

√∑ ∑ |𝐼𝐺𝑇,𝐿𝑅[𝑘, 𝑟, 𝑤′] − 𝐼𝑆,𝐿𝑅[𝑘, 𝑟, 𝑤′]|

2

𝑟
𝑘
)

 ,


13

8 
Levenson RM, Mansfield JR. Multispectral imaging in biology and medicine: Slices of life. 
Cytometry 2006; 69A: 748–758.

9 
McGrath KE, Bushnell TP, Palis J. Multispectral imaging of hematopoietic cells: Where flow 
meets morphology. Journal of Immunological Methods 2008; 336: 91–97.

10 Halicek M, Fabelo H, Ortega S, Callico GM, Fei B. In-Vivo and Ex-Vivo Tissue Analysis through 

Hyperspectral Imaging Techniques: Revealing the Invisible Features of Cancer. Cancers 2019; 
11: 756.

11 Levenson RM, Fornari A, Loda M. Multispectral imaging and pathology: seeing and doing more. 

Expert Opinion on Medical Diagnostics 2008; 2: 1067–1081.

12 Feng C-H, Makino Y, Oshita S, García Martín JF. Hyperspectral imaging and multispectral 

imaging as the novel techniques for detecting defects in raw and processed meat products: Current 
state-of-the-art research advances. Food Control 2018; 84: 165–176.

13 Qin J, Chao K, Kim MS, Lu R, Burks TF. Hyperspectral and multispectral imaging for evaluating 

food safety and quality. Journal of Food Engineering 2013; 118: 157–171.

14 Elias M, Cotte P. Multispectral camera and radiative transfer equation used to depict Leonardo’s 

sfumato in Mona Lisa. Appl Opt 2008; 47: 2146.

15 Pelagotti A, Mastio AD, Rosa AD, Piva A. Multispectral imaging of paintings. IEEE Signal 

Processing Magazine 2008; 25: 27–36.

16 Cosentino A. Identification of pigments by multispectral imaging; a flowchart method. Herit Sci

2014; 2: 8.

17 Easton RL, Knox KT, Christens-Barry WA. Multispectral imaging of the Archimedes palimpsest. 

In: 32nd Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition Workshop, 2003. Proceedings. 2003, pp 111–116.

18 Ortega S, Fabelo H, Iakovidis D, Koulaouzidis A, Callico G. Use of Hyperspectral/Multispectral 

Imaging in Gastroenterology. Shedding Some–Different–Light into the Dark. JCM 2019; 8: 36.

19 Eisenbeiû W. Re¯ ection-optical multispectral imaging method for objective determination of burn 

depth. 1999; : 8.

20 Shimoni M, Haelterman R, Perneel C. Hypersectral Imaging for Military and Security 

Applications: Combining Myriad Processing and Sensing Techniques. IEEE Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing Magazine 2019; 7: 101–117.

21 Zhang C, Rosenberger M, Breitbarth A, Notni G. A novel 3D multispectral vision system based 

on filter wheel cameras. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Imaging Systems and 
Techniques (IST). 2016, pp 267–272.

22 Thompson LL. Remote Sensing Using Solid-State Array Technology. PHOTOGRAMMETRIC 

ENGINEERING 1979; : 9.

23 Chen Z, Wang X, Liang R. RGB-NIR multispectral camera. Opt Express 2014; 22: 4985.

24 Fletcher-Holmes DW, Harvey AR. Real-time imaging with a hyperspectral fovea. J Opt A: Pure 

Appl Opt 2005; 7: S298–S302.

25 Weitzel L, Krabbe A, Kroker H, Thatte N, Tacconi-Garman LE, Cameron M et al. 3D: The next 

generation near-infrared imaging spectrometer. Astron Astrophys Suppl Ser 1996; 119: 531–546.

26 Wagadarikar A, John R, Willett R, Brady D. Single disperser design for coded aperture snapshot 

spectral imaging. Appl Opt 2008; 47: B44.


14

27 Arguello H, Arce GR. Colored Coded Aperture Design by Concentration of Measure in 

Compressive Spectral Imaging. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 2014; 23: 1896–1908.

28 Correa CV, Arguello H, Arce GR. Snapshot colored compressive spectral imager. J Opt Soc Am A

2015; 32: 1754.

29 Lin X, Wetzstein G, Liu Y, Dai Q. Dual-coded compressive hyperspectral imaging. Opt Lett

2014; 39: 2044.

30 Lin X, Liu Y, Wu J, Dai Q. Spatial-spectral encoded compressive hyperspectral imaging. ACM 

Trans Graph 2014; 33: 1–11.

31 August Y, Vachman C, Rivenson Y, Stern A. Compressive hyperspectral imaging by random 

separable projections in both the spatial and the spectral domains. Appl Opt 2013; 52: D46.

32 Wu Y, Mirza IO, Arce GR, Prather DW. Development of a digital-micromirror-device-based 

multishot snapshot spectral imaging system. Opt Lett 2011; 36: 2692.

33 Wang P, Menon R. Ultra-high-sensitivity color imaging via a transparent diffractive-filter array 

and computational optics. Optica 2015; 2: 933.

34 Heide F, Fu Q, Peng Y, Heidrich W. Encoded diffractive optics for full-spectrum computational 

imaging. Sci Rep 2016; 6: 33543.

35 Jeon DS, Baek S-H, Yi S, Fu Q, Dun X, Heidrich W et al. Compact snapshot hyperspectral 

imaging with diffracted rotation. ACM Trans Graph 2019; 38: 1–13.

36 Arguello H, Pinilla S, Peng Y, Ikoma H, Bacca J, Wetzstein G. Shift-variant color-coded 

diffractive spectral imaging system. Optica 2021; 8: 1424.

37 Dun X, Ikoma H, Wetzstein G, Wang Z, Cheng X, Peng Y. Learned rotationally symmetric 

diffractive achromat for full-spectrum computational imaging. Optica 2020; 7: 913.

38 Ballard Z, Brown C, Madni AM, Ozcan A. Machine learning and computation-enabled intelligent 

sensor design. Nat Mach Intell 2021; 3: 556–565.

39 Wetzstein G, Ozcan A, Gigan S, Fan S, Englund D, Soljačić M et al. Inference in artificial 

intelligence with deep optics and photonics. Nature 2020; 588: 39–47.

40 Chen M, Wen L, Pan D, Cumming DRS, Yang X, Chen Q. Full-color nanorouter for high-

resolution imaging. Nanoscale 2021; 13: 13024–13029.

41 Shegai T, Chen S, Miljković VD, Zengin G, Johansson P, Käll M. A bimetallic nanoantenna for 

directional colour routing. Nat Commun 2011; 2: 481.

42 Chen BH, Wu PC, Su V-C, Lai Y-C, Chu CH, Lee IC et al. GaN Metalens for Pixel-Level Full-

Color Routing at Visible Light. Nano Lett 2017; 17: 6345–6352.

43 Zou X, Zhang Y, Lin R, Gong G, Wang S, Zhu S et al. Pixel-level Bayer-type colour router based 

on metasurfaces. Nat Commun 2022; 13: 3288.

44 Li J, Zhang Q, Yang H, Lei T, Du L, Wang X et al. Single-Layer Bayer Metasurface via Inverse 

Design. ACS Photonics 2022; 9: 2607–2613.

45 Miyata M, Nakajima M, Hashimoto T. High-Sensitivity Color Imaging Using Pixel-Scale Color 

Splitters Based on Dielectric Metasurfaces. ACS Photonics 2019; 6: 1442–1450.

46 Nishiwaki S, Nakamura T, Hiramoto M, Fujii T, Suzuki M. Efficient colour splitters for high-

pixel-density image sensors. Nature Photon 2013; 7: 240–246.


15

47 Sell D, Yang J, Doshay S, Fan JA. Periodic Dielectric Metasurfaces with High-Efficiency, 

Multiwavelength Functionalities. Advanced Optical Materials 2017; 5: 1700645.

48 Camayd-Muñoz P, Ballew C, Roberts G, Faraon A. Multifunctional volumetric meta-optics for 

color and polarization image sensors. Optica 2020; 7: 280.

49 Zhao N, Catrysse PB, Fan S. Perfect RGB-IR Color Routers for Sub-Wavelength Size CMOS 

Image Sensor Pixels. Advanced Photonics Research 2021; 2: 2000048.

50 Brauers J, Aach T. A Color Filter Array Based Multispectral Camera. ; : 11.

51 Lin X, Rivenson Y, Yardimci NT, Veli M, Luo Y, Jarrahi M et al. All-optical machine learning 

using diffractive deep neural networks. Science 2018; 361: 1004–1008.

52 Mengu D, Luo Y, Rivenson Y, Ozcan A. Analysis of Diffractive Optical Neural Networks and 

Their Integration With Electronic Neural Networks. IEEE J Select Topics Quantum Electron
2020; 26: 1–14.

53 Mengu D, Zhao Y, Yardimci NT, Rivenson Y, Jarrahi M, Ozcan A. Misalignment resilient 

diffractive optical networks. Nanophotonics 2020; 9: 4207–4219.

54 Bai B, Luo Y, Gan T, Hu J, Li Y, Zhao Y et al. To image, or not to image: class-specific 

diffractive cameras with all-optical erasure of undesired objects. eLight 2022; 2: 14.

55 Kulce O, Mengu D, Rivenson Y, Ozcan A. All-optical information-processing capacity of 

diffractive surfaces. Light: Science & Applications 2021; 10: 25.

56 Kulce O, Mengu D, Rivenson Y, Ozcan A. All-optical synthesis of an arbitrary linear 

transformation using diffractive surfaces. Light Sci Appl 2021; 10: 196.

57 Luo Y, Zhao Y, Li J, Çetintaş E, Rivenson Y, Jarrahi M et al. Computational imaging without a 

computer: seeing through random diffusers at the speed of light. eLight 2022; 2: 4.

58 Mengu D, Ozcan A. All-Optical Phase Recovery: Diffractive Computing for Quantitative Phase 

Imaging. Advanced Optical Materials 2022; 10: 2200281.

59 Goi E, Chen X, Zhang Q, Cumming BP, Schoenhardt S, Luan H et al. Nanoprinted high-neuron-

density optical linear perceptrons performing near-infrared inference on a CMOS chip. Light Sci 
Appl 2021; 10: 40.

60 Li J, Bai B, Luo Y, Ozcan A. Massively Parallel Universal Linear Transformations using a 

Wavelength- Multiplexed Diffractive Optical Network. arXiv:220810362v1 [csNE]; : 30.

61 Hasegawa T, Watanabe K, Jung YJ, Tanaka N, Nakashikiryo T, Yang W-Z et al. A new 0.8µm 

CMOS image sensor with low RTS noise and high full well capacity. ; : 4.

62 Li J, Hung Y-C, Kulce O, Mengu D, Ozcan A. Polarization multiplexed diffractive computing: 

all-optical implementation of a group of linear transformations through a polarization-encoded 
diffractive network. Light Sci Appl 2022; 11: 153.

63 N-BK7 | SCHOTT Advanced Optics. http://www.schott.com/shop/advanced-optics/en/Optical-

Glass/N-BK7/c/glass-N-BK7 (accessed 22 Nov2022).

64 Kingma DP, Ba J. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In: Bengio Y, LeCun Y (eds). 

3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, 
May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings. 2015http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.


16

Figures

Fig. 1: The schematic of a diffractive multispectral imager. The depicted diffractive optical network simultaneously 
performs coherent optical imaging and spectral routing/filtering to achieve multispectral imaging by creating a periodic 
virtual filter array at the output. In this example, 3x3=9 spectral bands per virtual filter array are illustrated; Figures 4-5 
report 4x4=16 spectral bands per virtual filter array. In alternative implementations, the diffractive multispectral network 
can also be placed behind the image plane of a camera (before the image sensor), transferring the multispectral image of 
an object onto the plane of a monochrome image sensor.


17

Fig. 2. Performance of a diffractive multispectral imager with 𝑵𝑩 = 𝟗 spectral bands. a The material thickness 
distribution of the diffractive layers trained using deep learning to spatially separate 9 distinct spectral bands, creating a 
periodic virtual filter array. b Cross-talk image matrix showing the output images at different illumination wavelengths. 
Off-diagonal images indicate that the level of spectral cross-talk is minimal. By summing up all the images in each 


18

column, the impact of the spectral cross-talk from the other 8 spectral channels on each target wavelength is visualized
at the bottom of the image matrix, as a separate row. c Output optical power distribution as a function of the illumination 
wavelength. Each row in this matrix adds up to 100%, and the off-diagonal optical power percentages indicate the level 
of spectral cross-talk between different bands. d SSIM and PSNR values of the resulting images at the output of the 
diffractive network; these image quality metrics were calculated between the diagonal images shown in Fig. 2b (the 
ground truth images on the left diagonal vs. the diffractive network output images on the right diagonal).

Fig. 3. Spectral responsivity and power efficiency achieved by the diffractive multispectral imager shown in Fig. 
2 (𝑵𝑩 = 𝟗). a The virtual spectral filter array periodically repeats at the output field of view of the diffractive network. 
The colored labels, 𝑆𝑖, 𝑖 = 1,2,3, … ,9, denote the virtual pixels assigned to the wavelength 𝜆𝑖.  b Average normalized 
spectral response of the virtual filter array. c The wavelength-dependent transmission power efficiency of the virtual 
filter array created by the diffractive optical network. 


19

Fig. 4. Performance of a diffractive multispectral imager with 𝑵𝑩 = 𝟏𝟔 spectral bands.  a The material thickness 
distribution of the diffractive layers trained using deep learning to spatially separate 16 distinct spectral bands, creating
a periodic virtual filter array. b Cross-talk image matrix showing the output images at different illumination wavelengths. 
Off-diagonal images indicate that the level of spectral cross-talk is minimal. By summing up all the images in each 


20

column, the impact of the spectral cross-talk from the other 15 spectral channels on each target wavelength is visualized
at the bottom of the image matrix, as a separate row. c Output optical power distribution as a function of the illumination 
wavelength. Each row in this matrix adds up to 100%, and the off-diagonal optical power percentages indicate the level 
of spectral cross-talk between different bands. d SSIM and PSNR values of the resulting images at the output of the 
diffractive network; these image quality metrics were calculated between the diagonal images shown in Fig. 4b (the 
ground truth images on the left diagonal vs. the diffractive network output images on the right diagonal).

Fig. 5. Spectral responsivity and power efficiency achieved by the diffractive multispectral imager shown in Fig. 
4 (𝑵𝑩 = 𝟏𝟔). a The virtual spectral filter array periodically repeats at the output field of view of the diffractive network. 
The colored labels, 𝑆𝑖, 𝑖 = 1,2,3, … ,16, denote the virtual pixels assigned to the wavelength 𝜆𝑖.  b Average normalized 
spectral response of the virtual filter array. c The wavelength-dependent transmission power efficiency of the virtual 
filter array created by the diffractive optical network.


21

Fig. 6. Experimental setup of the multispectral terahertz imager (𝑵𝑩 = 𝟒). a Schematic of the experimental setup 
using terahertz illumination and signal detection. b Optical design layout of the fabricated diffractive multispectral 
imager and the material thickness profiles of the 3 diffractive surfaces. c Fabricated diffractive network and the input 
object, the letter ‘U’. 


22

Fig. 7. Experimental results for the diffractive multispectral imager shown in Fig. 6. Multispectral imaging of letter 
‘U’ at 4 distinct wavelengths in terahertz part of the spectrum based on the 3-layer diffractive optical network shown in 
Fig. 6. a Multispectral image cube synthesized by the numerical forward model of the diffractive optical network, after 
the demosaicing step. b Same as (a), except that the images are extracted from the experimentally measured output 
optical intensity profiles. c Cross-talk matrix predicted by the numerical forward model of the diffractive multispectral 
imager in response to the input object ‘U’. d Same as (c), except that the entries in the cross-talk matrix represent the 
experimentally measured percentages of the optical power for each spectral band.


23

Fig. 8. The impact of the number of diffractive features (N) and the targeted spectral bands (𝑵𝑩) on the quality 
of the multispectral imaging using a diffractive optical network. Mean SSIM and PNSR values as a function of N
are reported for a 𝑁𝐵 = 4, b 𝑁𝐵 = 9, c 𝑁𝐵 = 16 spectral channels, forming a spatially repeating virtual spectral filter 
array. d The impact of 𝑁𝐵 on the SSIM of the output multispectral images for different diffractive network architectures.
K refers to the number of successive diffractive layers jointly trained for multispectral imaging, and NL refers to the 
number of trainable diffractive features per diffractive layer.


24

Fig. 9. The trade-off between the multispectral imaging quality and the virtual filter array power transmission 
efficiency. The impact of the additional power efficiency-related penalty term, ℒ𝑒 and its weight 𝛾, on the multispectral 
image cube synthesized by the diffractive multispectral imagers that were trained to form 3×3 virtual spectral filter arrays 
assigned to 𝑁𝐵 = 9 unique spectral bands within the visible spectrum. The optical architectures of these diffractive 
multispectral imagers are identical to the layout depicted in Fig. 1. We report an average virtual filter transmission 
efficiency of >79% across 𝑁𝐵 = 9 spectral bands with a minimal penalty on the output image quality.


