3DSC - A New Dataset of Superconductors Including
Crystal Structures

Timo Sommer1,2,5, Roland Willa2, J¨org Schmalian2,3, and Pascal Friederich1,4,*

1Institute of Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Am Fasanengarten 5, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
2Institute for Theory of Condensed Matter, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Wolfgang-Gaede-Str. 1, 76131 Karlsruhe,
Germany
3Institute for Quantum Materials and Technologies, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
4Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
5School of Chemistry, Trinity College Dublin, College Green, Dublin 2, Ireland
*corresponding author(s): Pascal Friederich (pascal.friederich@kit.edu)

ABSTRACT

Data-driven methods, in particular machine learning, can help to speed up the discovery of new materials by finding hidden patterns in
existing data and using them to identify promising candidate materials. In the case of superconductors, which are a highly interesting
but also a complex class of materials with many relevant applications, the use of data science tools is to date slowed down by a lack of
accessible data. In this work, we present a new and publicly available superconductivity dataset (’3DSC’), featuring the critical temperature
Tc of superconducting materials additionally to tested non-superconductors. In contrast to existing databases such as the SuperCon database
which contains information on the chemical composition, the 3DSC is augmented by the approximate three-dimensional crystal structure
of each material. We perform a statistical analysis and machine learning experiments to show that access to this structural information
improves the prediction of the critical temperature Tc of materials. Furthermore, we see the 3DSC not as a finished dataset, but we provide
ideas and directions for further research to improve the 3DSC in multiple ways. We are confident that this database will be useful in
applying state-of-the-art machine learning methods to eventually find new superconductors.

1 Introduction

Superconductors are materials in which the electrical resistance is zero when the temperature drops below a critical temperature
Tc. Furthermore, superconductors are perfect diamagnets that expel magnetic fields via the Meissner effect. These properties
make superconductors very useful for many high-power applications such as efficient electric power conversion, lossless power
transmission, and ultra-strong magnets, as well as high-sensitivity sensor materials e.g. superconducting quantum interference
devices and photon detectors1,2. The discovery of new superconducting materials with optimized properties will enable e.g. the
use of cheaper coolants due to increased critical temperatures, stronger magnets due to improved magnetic properties, and
simpler production of superconducting wires due to improved mechanical properties.
The critical temperature Tc can be very sensitive to small changes in the crystal structure, for example to changes in the
interatomic distances via mechanical pressure or chemical pressure3, i.e. the deformation of the lattice by replacing one
atom with another element with same valency but different size. Despite the success of understanding the mechanism behind
superconductivity within a microscopic theory, such as the theory by Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer4 and strong-coupling
generalizations thereof, we are to date unable to faithfully predict the critical temperature Tc of new materials. This is largely
caused by the dependence of Tc on subtle details of atomic arrangements in the crystal structure. Input parameters of the
microscopic, low-energy theories, such as the electronic density of states at the Fermi level, the phonon spectrum, and the
electron-lattice coupling, are not easily related to the chemical formula. Thus, when predicting the critical temperature Tc with
machine learning, a first step to narrow this gap is to have access not only to the chemical composition of the material, but also
to the exact 3D structure of the crystal.
Machine learning has been widely used for the prediction of materials properties. Saal et al.5 collected and reviewed a big
number of machine learning generated predictions which have been confirmed experimentally afterwards in applications ranging
from organic LEDs over new binary and ternary crystal structures, perovskites, metallic glasses and metal-organic-frameworks
to superhard materials. Furthermore, machine learning was used to predict the critical temperature Tc of superconductors
using the SuperCon database6 as training data, which is the largest and most commonly used dataset of superconductors.
Unfortunately, the SuperCon database is unavailable as of December 2021. However, previous papers have made parts of the

arXiv:2212.06071v2  [cond-mat.supr-con]  14 Dec 2022


preprocessed data available for further research7,8.
There have been many attempts to predict the critical temperature Tc of a material using the SuperCon database. Hamidieh8

used a gradient boosting model (XGB9) trained on MAGPIE features10 to predict Tc. Aketi et al.11 used gradient boosted
decision trees, Matsumoto et al.12 used random forests and Le et al.13 used Bayesian neural networks on very similar features,
while Gaikwad et al.14 compare multiple machine learning models. Konno et al.15 and Zeng et al.16 used a convolutional neural
network (CNN) and represented the chemical formula as elements on a grid. Li et al.17 used a hybrid neural network consisting
of a CNN and a recurrent neural network (RNN) which is trained on Atom2Vec features18. Dan et al.19 use a convolutional
gradient boosting decision tree (ConvGBDT). Sizochenko et al.20 found that an often used subset of the SuperCon contained
a lot of duplicate entries and repeated their analysis with the cleaned dataset. Meredig et al.21 showed that random splits
for the cross validation give overly confident model evaluations. Roter et al.22 trained a bagged tree model on the chemical
composition and argued that physical features such as the Fermi energy would be helpful for increasing the performance of
their model if they were available for more materials.
Data availability is the most important prerequisite for the development of (supervised) machine learning models for
materials property prediction. In particular, informative and complete information on the materials is essential for the training
of accurate machine learning models. All of the studies discussed above were based on representing materials only by their
chemical composition, which is not a unique and complete representation of materials. Yet, most SuperCon entries contain only
the chemical formula and critical temperature Tc of each material. Structural data such as space group and crystal system are
only sparsely recorded and the full three-dimensional crystal structure is never given. Therefore, all of the aforementioned
predictions of the critical temperature using the SuperCon database were limited to representations of the chemical composition
of each material.
One notable exception of using only chemical formulas to predict critical temperatures is the work of Stanev et al.23. They
developed a superconductivity classifier based on matching the chemical compositions of materials in the SuperCon with the
chemical compositions of materials in the AFLOW database and used tabular structural and electronic features such as the
space group and the energy per atom as additional features. In this pioneering work 1500 materials could be matched, half of
them being superconductors. Stanev et al. argued that structural information is helpful in predicting superconductivity, yet
realized the issue of severely reducing the size of the dataset when doing this matching. As of today, the matched crystal
structures were not published.
Recently, two more databases dealing with superconductors were presented in the literature. The SuperMat24 database and
the SC-CoMIcs25 database are corpora of manually annotated texts from papers about superconductors. The annotations consist
of different entities such as chemical formula and critical temperature with which certain phrases in the texts have been labeled.
These corpora can be used for tasks such as training a named entity recognition model such as SciBERT26 on automatically
labeling new papers, which was demonstrated by Yamaguchi et al.25. Foppiano et al.24 also publicly provide their annotation
procedure to encourage others to continue this work. So far, these annotated corpora are not publicly available. In the future,
they might be useful to automatically extract information about superconductivity from literature.
Court et al.27 used the already trained ChemDataExtractor28 to extract information of superconductors and magnetic
materials from literature. They found approximately 20,400 superconductors and magnetic materials together with their
chemical compositions and respective phase transition temperatures. The focus of the study was the prediction of the phase
diagram of magnetic and superconducting materials. Furthermore, some of the entries were paired with crystal structures from
the Crystallographic Open Database (COD). The authors provide a link to an interactive web app and the data, yet, the provided
link is currently inactive. Another recently initiated superconductor database is the Superconducting Research Database6.
In this online database, superconductors can be submitted with their exact three-dimensional crystal structure and critical
temperature Tc. This database currently contains 14 superconductors which limits its usefulness for machine learning processes.
In this work, we extended the structure matching approach by Stanev et al.23 to build a new database (called 3DSC) of
experimentally tested superconducting and non-superconducting materials. This database is made publicly available. The 3DSC
database features the critical temperature of superconductors as well as the approximated 3D crystal structure of each material.
The core idea is to match materials in the SuperCon database with (modified) crystal structures of the Materials Project29,30 and
the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database31,32 (ICSD). In addition to matching only exact chemical compositions (as in Stanev
et al.23), we employ a systematic adaptation algorithm that approximates the three-dimensional crystal structures of materials
without perfect match by artificial doping of similar crystal structures. For example, the crystal structure of the SuperCon entry
CuLa1.95Nd0.05O4 (which has no perfect match in the Materials Project database) is approximated by taking the 3D crystal
structure of CuLa2O4 and partially replacing La with Nd at the respective crystal positions. This step is important to maximize
the number of matched materials, since the SuperCon contains many entries with doped materials, which otherwise would
mostly be discarded.
In this paper, we introduce and analyze two different 3DSC databases. Both are based on the SuperCon database, but
one uses structures from the Materials Project (3DSCMP) and one uses structures from the ICSD (3DSCICSD). Using our

2


Figure 1. A schematic view of the matching and adaptation algorithm.

matching and adaptation algorithm, we are able to match 5,759 (3DSCMP) and 9,150 (3DSCICSD) superconducting and non-
superconducting materials from the SuperCon. We publicly provide the full 3DSCMP dataset on https://github.com/
aimat-lab/3DSC, including the critical temperature Tc and approximate three-dimensional crystal structures. However,
structures from the ICSD must not be (re-)published. Therefore, we refrain from publishing the 3DSCICSD. The subset of the
3DSCICSD that we provide under this link only contains the ICSD IDs necessary for reproducing the full dataset. The necessary
structures can be downloaded with an ICSD license and artificially doped using our code in the aforementioned repository.
However, despite not being able to publish this database, we have decided to present the 3DSCICSD in this paper along with the
3DSCMP, since it contains more structures and slightly different information than the 3DSCMP.

2 Methods

2.1 Overview of 3DSC data generation
In this section we describe our algorithm to match entries of the SuperCon database based on their chemical formula with
3D structures from crystal structure databases (see Figure 1). We use and compare two different crystal structure databases,
the Materials Project and the ICSD. We furthermore use the copy of the SuperCon database published by Stanev et al.23. All
databases are cleaned as described in section 2.2.
In the first step of the matching algorithm to build our 3DSC database, each SuperCon entry is paired with each crystal
structure. If the chemical formula matches perfectly (after normalization as elaborated in S1), the SuperCon entry is paired to
the crystal structure and added to our database. If the chemical formula is close but not equal, we performed an artificial doping
process to modify the crystal structure and to aim for a perfect match with the chemical formula of the SuperCon entry. This
process is described in more detail in section 2.3 below.
Because this matching and adaptation algorithm generally matches multiple crystal structures to each SuperCon entry, we
conclude the process by filtering the matches according to specific criteria and keeping only the most optimal matches. After
applying this filter, we are left with the final 3DSC database which contains chemical formula, critical temperature Tc, and the
(in many cases approximate) crystal structure. In the case of the Materials Project database, the final 3DSCMP dataset contains
5,759 SuperCon entries matched with 5,773 crystal structures. In the case of the ICSD, the final 3DSCICSD dataset contains
9,150 SuperCon entries matched with 86,490 crystal structures. One reason for this high number of matched crystal structures
is that the ICSD has a large number of entries with the same crystal structure at different crystal temperatures.

2.2 Data and dataset cleaning
SuperCon:
The SuperCon database is the largest database of superconductors and has been used multiple times in the
literature to predict the critical temperature of superconductors with machine learning methods. It contains approximately
33,000 materials that have been tested for superconductivity. Approximately 10,000 of the entries are duplicates of the same
material with the same chemical formula. However, the SuperCon database features only the chemical formula of each material,
whereas structural data such as space group and lattice-type is only sparsely recorded and the full crystal structure is never
given. In this study, we use the already cleaned and published version of the SuperCon dataset published by Stanev et al.23

3


which contains 16,400 different materials with approximately 4,000 non-superconductors. The dataset can be found on GitHub7

and includes the chemical formula and the critical temperature Tc of each material.
We found that this dataset was not fully cleaned yet. We assume that in the original study chemical formulas were compared
as strings, but sometimes the order of elements in the string was different even though it was the same material. For these
21 materials, we averaged the critical temperatures according to the same algorithm as used in Stanev et al., i.e. taking the
mean and excluding the material if the standard deviation was greater than 5K. Because we are averaging over data points
some of which are already averaged, the resulting average might not be the same as in the original dataset. Additionally, we
found that some chemical formulas were invalid, e.g. in the formula Bi4.4Sr3.6Ca2Cu4OY the Y was considered to represent
yttrium, but it actually represented an unknown quantity of oxygen (the SuperCon database strictly follows a nomenclature,
where each element has a count, even if the count is 1). Excluding these entries reduced the dataset by 128 entries. We also
excluded 4 entries that had chemical formulas with more than 150 atoms because these are likely mistakes in the database.
Finally we decided to exclude the few entries with the heavy elements americium (Am), curium (Cm) and polonium (Po) to
reduce the number of entries with rarely occurring elements. After all cleaning steps, we are left with 15,758 SuperCon entries
of which 3,854 are non-superconductors. The maximum critical temperature is 143K for Ba2Ca1.98Cu2.9Hg0.66Pb0.34O8.4.
Non-superconductors are encoded as having a critical temperature of 0K.

Crystal structure datasets:
As sources for the crystal structures we used the Materials Project and the ICSD. The Materials
Project contains approximately 139,000 DFT calculated structures and electronic features and is openly accessible. The ICSD
contains approximately 243,000 mostly experimental structures and is accessible only with a license. The ICSD database was
cleaned before further processing: 19,077 DFT calculated (rather than experimentally measured) entries were excluded to
make the dataset more consistent. 18,147 entries were excluded because the chemical composition given by the ICSD and
extracted from the crystal structure using the python package pymatgen33 were inconsistent. Similarly, 3,195 entries were
excluded because the space group given by the ICSD and the one recognized with pymatgen were inconsistent (likely due to
numerical errors and thresholds). Finally, 3,132 more entries were excluded because of an invalid chemical formula. Even
though not technically invalid, we decided to also exclude materials including deuterium and tritium. Because the ICSD also
has the crystal temperature Tcry recorded for most materials, entries without crystal temperature were assumed to be recorded at
room temperature (293K).
The Materials Project was checked as well but no entries had to be excluded due to the aforementioned reasons. However,
materials without recorded Ehull were excluded since this feature was needed for the matching and adaptation algorithm (see
section 2.3). Because the Materials Project structures had no crystal temperature given, the crystal temperature Tcry was set to
0K in order to have a consistent set of features for the machine learning models.

2.3 Matching algorithm of SuperCon entries and 3D crystal structures
The following section describes the algorithm used for matching and adaptation (from now on referred to as artificial doping)
of SuperCon entries and crystal structures in more detail. The aim is to find one or multiple crystal structures for as many
SuperCon entries as possible. Therefore, each SuperCon entry is paired with each crystal structure and the similarities between
the chemical compositions are compared. In order to increase the number of matched entries, we normalize the chemical
formulas before matching (see S1) and perform artificial doping to approximate crystal structures of materials where the crystal
structure of a very similar material is known.

Artificial doping:
If the chemical formulas of SuperCon entry and crystal structure do not match perfectly but are still similar,
we perform artificial doping. Artificial doping means that we use the crystal structure with a similar chemical formula as a
proxy crystal structure for the real crystal structure of the SuperCon entry. We then partially replace the atoms at given crystal
positions with other chemical elements, imitating real physical doping. After the replacement, the chemical formula of the new
crystal structure matches perfectly the required chemical formula of the SuperCon entry. Note that this algorithm only changes
the occupancies of the crystal sites. It does not change coordinates or interatomic distances. Besides, this algorithm can only be
applied if the original chemical formulas are close enough, so that the real crystal structure of the SuperCon entry is likely to
have similar crystal parameters (such as space group and lattice parameters) as the proxy crystal structure. Therefore, in order
to keep the introduced bias small, we perform artificial doping only if the following requirements are met:

(a) The chemical formulas are similar: We define three similarity metrics of chemical formulas, which are checked after
normalizing the chemical formula of the crystal structure as explained above. These metrics are the absolute difference
of atom numbers

∆abs,i = |xsc,i −xcry,i|,
(1)

4


the relative difference of atom numbers

∆rel,i = 2|xsc,i −xcry,i|

xsc,i +xcry,i
,
(2)

and the total weighted relative difference

∆totrel = 2Σi|xsc,i −xcry,i|

Σixsc,i +xcry,i
.
(3)

xsc,i and xcry,i are the quantities of element i of the chemical formulas of SuperCon entry and crystal structure, respectively.
A pair of SuperCon entry and crystal structure is considered similar if ∆abs,i ≤ 0.30
OR
∆rel,i ≤ 0.20
∀i and
∆totrel ≤ 0.15, and the SuperCon entry has the same elements or up to one additional element as the crystal structure.
One exception is that pure elements only match the same pure element. The thresholds were chosen to yield sensible
results for a number of randomly selected examples. The exact threshold values only partially influence the final result,
as only the most optimal matches according to additional criteria (see later) will be added to the final datasets. Table 1
illustrates the procedure by showing examples of chemical formulas and whether they are considered similar, based on
the definitions above.

The upper bound on ∆rel,i ensures that for each element, the relative difference of the chemical formulas is at most 20 %.
However, this requirement does not work well for doped materials such as CuLa1.95Nd0.05O4. This chemical formula is
close to one with a higher Nd doping concentration (e.g. CuLa1.90Nd0.10O4), even though ∆rel is 67 % for Nd. Therefore,
the metric ∆abs,i allows for absolute differences of 0.3 or less for an element even though the requirement on ∆rel would
be violated. The metric ∆totrel ensures that the 20 % boundary is maxed out preferably for elements with a low number of
atoms (and therefore low weight) in the chemical formula.

(b) The necessary replacement of elements for artificial doping is unambiguous: In a real crystal structure, not all crystal sites
occupied by the same chemical element are equivalent. The dopant might prefer specific crystal sites due to differences
in the local environment and thus free energy. Without further analysis, our artificial doping algorithm cannot determine
which of the possible crystal sites becomes doped. Therefore, artificial doping is performed only if there is not more than
one set of equivalent crystal sites for the dopants. In this case, the dopants are distributed equally over all equivalent
crystal sites (see Figure 2). In Figure 2a, there is only one set of equivalent Rh sites. Therefore Rh can be unambiguously
replaced with Ir. In Figure 2b there are two sets of equivalent Bi sites. It is not obvious which of these sites would be
doped with Sb, therefore no artificial doping is performed.

We define equivalent crystal sites as all crystal sites which would have the same probability of being doped with a
certain element, i.e. the sites are symmetrically equivalent or the sites are already doped or partially occupied by the
same elements in the same quantities and therefore empirically behave identically under doping. The latter condition is
important since a large number of cuprates in the ICSD would otherwise be excluded.

(c) The replacement does not lead to crystal sites with more than two elements: Figure 2c shows an example of this
requirement. Even though the necessary replacement of elements would be unambiguous, we decided to discard such
cases, so that each crystal site is doped with at most two different elements.

(d) Artificial doping does not add or remove a crystal site: Artificial doping is supposed to introduce only a minor bias. As
such, it is acceptable to slightly modify the occupation numbers quantitatively, but fully removing a crystal site would
constitute a severe change in the crystal structure. Furthermore, adding a crystal site is not possible since its position
cannot be determined without further analysis. This is illustrated in Figure 2d.

If requirements (a)-(d) are met, the appropriate quantity of the host element is replaced with the guest element at all
equivalent crystal sites. In the ICSD, each element has its oxidation state given. When doping in a completely new element, its
oxidation state is not known. In this case, we simply use the oxidation state of the host element for the new element. Even with
artificial doping not all SuperCon entries can be matched with a crystal structure. These entries are discarded.

Keep only best matches:
The algorithm described above will generally match multiple crystal structures to each SuperCon
entry. Therefore we identify the best matches by applying specific criteria: In the case of the Materials Project dataset, we
first rank by the energy above hull Ehull (which is calculated in the Materials Project dataset for each crystal structure) and
then by ∆totrel. In both cases, lower values are preferred. If more than one crystal structure have the same optimal Ehull and
∆totrel, both are kept in the database. In the case of the ICSD dataset, the ranking criteria is whether the crystal temperature is
reported (preferred structures are the ones where the crystal temperature was given). If multiple crystal structures fulfill this

5


Table 1. Examples of pairs of chemical formulas of SuperCon entries and crystal structures. For each pair, the columns show
the three similarity metrics (Equations 1 - 3).

SuperCon
Crystal structure
max(((∆∆∆abs)))
max(((∆∆∆rel)))
∆∆∆totrel
Comment

CuLa1.95Nd0.05O4
CuLa1.90Nd0.10O4
0.05
0.67
0.01
Matches after modification of the stoichiometry of La and Nd.

CuLa1.95Nd0.05O4
CuLa2O4
0.05
2.0
0.01
Matching with modification. One site (La) of the unit cell is
partially replaced by another element (Nd).

CuLa2O4
Cu2La4O8
0
0
0
Matches perfectly (normalized chemical formulas are
identical).

NbGeC1.5N0.5
NbGeC1.0N1.0
0.5
0.67
0.25
Does not match because each metric is above its threshold
(severe stoichiometry change would be required).

W5Tc7
W6Tc6
1
0.18
0.17
Does not match because ∆totrel is above the threshold of 0.15.

criterion, all of them are added to our database. The ranking criteria were determined using hyperparameter optimization (see
S4.4). The final 3DSC databases contain multiple crystal structures matched with the same SuperCon entry. This one-to-many
mapping arises because multiple crystal structures might have the exact same rank after sorting. In the case of the 3DSCMP, out
of 5,759 SuperCon entries, only 14 are matched with each 2 crystal structures, so this is not a dominating issue. However in the
case of the 3DSCICSD, the in total 9,150 SuperCon entries are matched with 86,490 crystal structures (see statistical analysis in
section 4.1).

Figure 2. Examples of SuperCon entries and respective candidate crystal structures before artificial doping. The checkmark
shows if it is possible to use artificial doping to modify the chemical formula of the crystal structure (top) to fit the chemical
formula of the SuperCon entry (bottom). The numbers on the atoms denote each set of symmetrically equivalent crystal sites.
(a) shows a crystal with only one set of symmetrically equivalent Rh sites, (b) shows a crystal with two sets of symmetrically
not equivalent Bi sites, (c) would generate a crystal structure with three elements on one site and (d) would require an
additional crystal site.

3 Data Records

The 3DSCMP dataset can be found under https://github.com/aimat-lab/3DSC/tree/main/superconductors_
3D/data/final/MP/. The directory ’cifs/’ contains the cif files of all structures in the 3DSCMP. The file ’3DSC_MP.csv’
contains a table with all 5,759 entries in the 3DSCMP.
The 3DSCICSD can be found under https://github.com/aimat-lab/3DSC/tree/main/superconductors_
3D/data/final/ICSD/. Note that for the 3DSCICSD, only the chemical formula and Tc of each material as well as the
ICSD ID of the original ICSD structure are given in the file ’3DSC_ICSD_only_IDs.csv’ due to the restrictive ICSD license
permissions. In order to generate the full 3DSCICSD database, an ICSD license is required. Once the structures are downloaded,
the matching and adaptation algorithm as described in our GitHub repository can be performed34.
The most important entries of the 3DSCMP and the 3DSCICSD are the chemical formula, the critical temperature in
Kelvin and the path to the cif file which contains the corresponding three-dimensional crystal structure of each material.
Non-superconductors are encoded as having a critical temperature of Tc = 0K. Additionally, the 3DSCMP contains additional
information from the original Materials Project dataset, e.g. electronic features derived from the original structures (before
artificial doping) such as the band gap, the Fermi energy, the energy above hull or the total magnetization. The electronic and
phonon density of states and band structures (if available in the Materials Project) are retrievable using task-IDs.

6


Figure 3. Statistics of the matching algorithm. Panels a) and b) show the number of SuperCon entries that are lost in each step
of the algorithm for the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP dataset, respectively. Panels c) and d) show how many SuperCon entries in
the final dataset were perfectly matched with crystal structures based on the absolute chemical formula, the normalized
chemical formula, and how many were generated using the artificial doping algorithm.

The 3DSCICSD in its full form (after re-running the matching and adaptation algorithm with structures from the ICSD) has
similar entries as the 3DSCMP. One difference is that structures from the ICSD do not contain any electronic features such as
the band gap or the Fermi energy of the original structures. However, the 3DSCICSD contains the crystal temperature Tcry at
which the structures were measured, which is missing in the 3DSCMP. Since Tcry was not reported for all of the structures and in
doubt assumed to be room temperature (see section 2.2), an additional binary entry indicates whether Tcry was given explicitly
in the ICSD or not. Both datasets also contain entries which were important for the matching and adaptation algorithm and the
analysis in this paper. These entries are important to simplify the reproduction and further work on improving the 3DSC. A
more in-depth description of the entries and their exact names in the 3DSCMP and the 3DSCICSD can be found in the the 3DSC
repository34.

4 Results and discussion

4.1 Statistical data analysis
Figure 3a and b show the cleaning and matching statistics for the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP, respectively. ‘No similar
chemical formulas’ means that no crystal structure is close enough to be matched based on the metrics presented in section 2.3.
‘No artificial doping possible’ means that artificial doping can not be performed for one of the other reasons explained in
section 2.3. As a result of the matching algorithm, approximately 57 % of SuperCon entries can be matched with crystal
structures from the ICSD and approximately 36 % of SuperCon entries can be matched with structures from the Materials
Project. Approximately 93 % (5337) of the materials in the 3DSCMP are also in the 3DSCICSD.
The bar plots in Figure 3c and d show how many material-crystal structure matches are obtained by performing the proposed
matching algorithm in contrast to previously reported matching methods which only compare the absolute chemical formulas23.
Matching normalized chemical formulas as well as performing artificial doping significantly increases the number of matched
materials. While normalizing chemical formulas before matching is simple, it doubles the amount of SuperCon entries that can
be matched for the 3DSCICSD and even triples it for the 3DSCMP. In addition, artificial doping roughly triples the matched

7


Figure 4. The distribution of SuperCon entries per critical temperature Tc for the 3DSCICSD (a) and the 3DSCMP (b).

materials for each dataset again. In contrast to standard matching, our proposed matching algorithm leads to a gain of 773 %
and 660 % of matched SuperCon entries for the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP respectively.
When training machine learning models on datasets, an unbalanced distribution of labels can introduce bias, leading to
systematic over- or underestimation of the critical temperatures in certain ranges. Figure 4a and b shows the distribution of Tc in
the datasets for the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP database, respectively. On a logarithmic scale, the number of superconductors
per Tc is relatively constant. One exception is the relatively high number of superconductors with a critical temperature of
approximately Tc = 90K, which can be attributed to a widely studied class of superconductors based on YBa2Cu3O7 which has
a critical temperature of Tc = 92K. Elemental prevalence plots and further statistics of the distribution of Tc, broken down into
different groups of superconductors, can be found in S2.
Finally, it is important to evaluate the statistical influence of having multiple crystal structures per chemical formula in
the 3DSCICSD database. This is an issue mostly for the 3DSCICSD since the 3DSCMP dataset rarely has multiple structures per
SuperCon entry. However, with a different choice of the sorting criteria, this issue would also exist for the 3DSCMP since it is
an inbuilt consequence of the matching approach.

Figure 5a shows Tc dependent crystal structure counts in the dataset. For comparison, Figure 4a shows the distribution
of different superconductors instead of crystal structures. We find that the ratio of high-Tc data points to low-Tc data points
has increased (ignoring the very last bin in the histogram). This shows that high-Tc superconductors such as cuprates have
matched with more crystal structures per material than low-Tc superconductors. This might pose a potential issue because the
effective weight of high-Tc superconductors to low-Tc superconductors has shifted from what it was before. To mitigate this
issue, we have used a sample weight equal to the inverse of the number of crystal structures per material in all machine learning
experiments.
Some materials have matched a lot of crystal structures as shown in Figure 5b. Note that there is an exponential decrease
until approximately 20 crystal structures per SuperCon entry. Most data points beyond this number are artifacts due to series
measurements of the same crystal with varying temperature. Furthermore, some materials have matched crystal structures with
a large number of different space groups as shown in Figure 5c. The color coding shows that many of these different space
groups are data points that are measured at room temperature. This potentially poses an issue, because a machine learning
model trained on the data will “see” many different crystal structures with different space groups and the same chemical
formula, which all have the same critical temperature Tc. This problem is partially mitigated by having many crystal structures
measured at low temperatures as shown in Figure 5d. Note that for a better overview, all of the data points with Tc > 300K
are collected in the last bar. We assume that the low-temperature crystal structures are helpful in predicting Tc, because they
are more likely to be the superconducting structures. However, the issue of having multiple very different crystal structures
mapping to the same critical temperature in the 3DSCICSD has to be kept in mind and will be discussed in section 5.

4.2 Machine learning results
For all experiments in this section we have used a gradient boosting (XGB) model with standard hyperparameters of the xgboost
scikit-learn API35. We used XGB because it turned out to be both more accurate and faster than (hyper-parameter optimized)
densely connected neural network and random forest models. For the cross-validation we have used n randomly repeated 80:20
splits (n = 25 for 3DSCICSD, n = 100 for 3DSCMP). In all our machine learning experiments, following Meredig et al.21, we
accounted for some extrapolation between train and test set to make the task more realistic: We grouped the materials in the
train and test set by their chemical system, so that materials with the same chemical system are either all in the train set or all in
the test set. The chemical system of a material is defined as the set of all chemical elements which make up the material (incl.
dopants), e.g. Ba-Cu-O-Y for YBa2Cu3O7.
We computed the MSLE for each repetition and report the mean as well as the standard error of the mean of the MSLE

8


Figure 5. Statistics regarding the mapping of one SuperCon entry to multiple crystal structures in the 3DSCICSD. (a) shows a
histogram of the number of crystal structures per Tc. (b) shows the number of candidate crystal structures generated by the
artificial doping algorithm per SuperCon entry. c) shows a histogram of the number of different space groups for each
SuperCon entry, both for all crystal temperatures and only for structures at room temperature. (d) shows the number of crystal
structures at a given crystal temperature Tcry. For a better overview, all structures with a crystal temperature Tc > 300K are
collected in the last bar. 50 % of the crystal structures have a crystal temperature Tcry < 273K.

values.The MSLE metric was also used as the loss function of each single model, due to the distribution of Tc values in our
dataset. Whenever possible, the same train-test splits were used in different experiments. Additionally, each crystal structure
was given a sample weight of the inverse of the number of crystal structures for this SuperCon entry, so that the total weight for
every SuperCon entry was the same.
Before being fed into the XGB model, the critical temperature Tc was approximately logarithmically scaled using T ′
c =
arcsinh(Tc/T 0
c ) with T 0
c = 1K. To represent the chemical formula as a numerical vector we used MAGPIE features10. To
represent the crystal structures we developed disordered SOAP (DSOAP) features, an extension of SOAP features36 for
disordered crystal structures, and some symmetry information, as explained in the supporting information S3. Additionally we
concatenated the MAGPIE features of the chemical formula when representing the crystal structure.

4.2.1 Importance of structural information
The performance of the XGB models trained with structural information on the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP dataset is shown in
Table 2. Additionally, the performances on both datasets when trained only on the chemical formula is shown as reference.
Figure 6 shows learning curves in which the performance of the XGB model with and without structural information is plotted
for different train set sizes.
For both the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP, training on the structural information improves the prediction of the critical
temperature Tc, despite the noise introduced by probably not always matching the correct structure. This is true even in the
low-data regime as shown in Figure 6. As an example, to convey a sense for the MSLE, a MSLE of 0.748 for a superconductor
with a true Tc of 1K, 10K and 100K corresponds to an absolute error of 0.84K, 4.36K and 56.36K. In general the MSLE is
lower for the 3DSCMP than for the 3DSCICSD. We assume that this is due to the fact that the 3DSCICSD contains more doped
materials. In such materials, slight changes in the feature space can correspond to large changes in Tc. Therefore, the 3DSCICSD
might be harder to predict than the 3DSCMP.
Furthermore, while the test error of the models with structural information is smaller, the train error is actually larger than
when training on the chemical formula. This is a sign that including the structural information leads to less overfitting of the
models. These results show that information about the 3D structure of the crystal structure is crucial for the prediction of the

9


Table 2. The final results of the XGB models trained on the MAGPIE (“chem. formula”) and the MAGPIE+DSOAP features
(“structure”) for the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP. We report mean and standard error of the MSLEs of 25 and 100 randomly
repeated 80:20 splits of the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP respectively.

Dataset
Features
MSLE (test)
MSLE (train)

3DSCICSD

Chem. formula
1.176±0.095
0.155±0.005

Structure
1.085±0.073
0.275±0.008

3DSCMP

Chem. formula
0.776±0.010
0.078±0.001

Structure
0.748±0.010
0.135±0.001

critical temperature, particularly for a better generalization.
A consequence of the matching algorithm is that the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP contain less materials than the original
SuperCon database from Stanev et al.23. As a reference we compare our new XGB model trained on the 3DSC database with
DSOAP features (see Table 2) to XGB models trained on the full SuperCon data with MAGPIE features. To make the results
comparable, we used exactly the same test sets as before. Additionally, to stay within the extrapolation setting, we removed
materials with chemical systems which already occur in these test sets. The resulting MSLE on the test set is 1.092±0.028 for
the 3DSCICSD and 0.704±0.006 for the 3DSCMP. It is not a surprise that for the 3DSCMP, these results are slightly better than
when training on the 3DSCMP (MSLE = 0.748), which contains only 36 % of the materials in the full SuperCon. In contrast, the
fact that models trained with structural information on the 3DSCICSD perform better (MSLE = 1.085) than when trained on the
full SuperCon with twice as much data shows how useful the structural information is. This shows the potential of data-driven
approaches, given that enough data is published according to FAIR and AI-ready standards37,38.

Figure 6. A log-log plot of the learning curve of the 3DSCICSD (a) and the 3DSCMP (b) with and without access to
structure-aware MAGPIE+DSOAP features. Note the different scales of the MSLE axes in (a) and (b).

4.2.2 Importance of structural information for different groups of superconductors
The SuperCon dataset is very clustered, with many data points coming from narrow groups of materials. Having access to
the 3D crystal structure information might influence different superconductor groups in different ways. In order to test the
performance within different groups of superconductors with and without structural information, we have partitioned the
3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP dataset into seven different datasets containing only one class of superconductors each, namely
cuprates, ferrites, heavy fermion materials, Chevrel phases, oxides and carbon-based materials. All following models are
trained and tested on only one group of superconductors each. This grouping is based on the chemical formula and is done
automatically when cleaning the SuperCon dataset in the matching and adaptation algorithm. If a data point was attributed to
no group, it was added to a group “others”, and if it was attributed to multiple groups, it was excluded in this analysis. The
number of materials in each group and for each dataset is shown in Table 3.

10


Table 3. The number of different materials in the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP for each group of superconductors.

Group
3DSCICSD
3DSCMP

Others
4068
3525

Cuprates
3189
874

Ferrites
936
517

Heavy fermions
402
418

Oxides
384
310

Chevrel phases
103
74

Carbon-based
46
30

To compare the influence of the structural features for each group independently, we trained XGB models with 5-fold cross
validation grouped by chemical system (see section 4.2) on each group, once only with MAGPIE features, encoding only the
chemical formula, and once with MAGPIE+DSOAP features, encoding the crystal structure. The results on the test and train
set are shown in Figure 7. For the test error, the influence of the structurally aware MAGPIE+DSOAP features is not the same
across all groups. Overall, the difference in performance between MAGPIE and MAGPIE+DSOAP features is always smaller
than the standard error, which makes the difference not statistically significant. However, one can still analyze some trends:
The cuprates are the group where the experiments with structural information have the most advantage compared to the runs
without structural information. For ferrites, the runs with structural information are a bit better as well. Furthermore, the train
error with structural features is higher than the train error without structural features for all groups of the 3DSCICSD and for the
bigger groups in the 3DSCMP. This indicates that the structurally aware features are better for generalizing to unseen materials.
What is more interesting is the fact that some of the experiments with structural information have a worse test error than the
runs without structural information, in particular for the carbon based materials and the oxides. We suspect that one reason
for this behavior is the way the 3DSC is created, i.e. by matching chemical formulas of materials with the corresponding
chemical formulas of crystal structures. One can imagine that such an approach fails for groups such as carbon-based materials,
where the normalized chemical formula can look quite similar for very different 3D structures. Technically, it would be most
useful for exactly these groups to have the correct structural information. Yet, the way the matching algorithm works, it is also
likely to simply match very wrong structures. Another reason might be that at a given dataset size, adding additional features
(8000 DSOAP features compared to 145 MAGPIE features) might actually increase overfitting and potentially decrease test set
performance. The benefits of additional features will only become statistically significant once a certain training set size is
reached (due to steeper learning curves)39. Such an overfitting effect can be observed for the smaller groups of the 3DSCMP
(carbon-based materials, Chevrel phases and oxides) where the train error decreases when adding structurally aware features
while the test error is increases.
For the cuprates, the situation is different: The chemical formula of the structure determines the structure quite well, so the
matched structures are likely to be close to the real structures. This might be the reason why the prediction of the Tc of cuprates
works out better with MAGPIE+DSOAP features than only with MAGPIE features.
Overall different groups of superconductors are influenced differently by adding the structural features, even though no
clear conclusions can be drawn due to the small dataset sizes. One potential limitation that one should keep in mind is the
fact that the matching algorithm might fail just for the groups which would most strongly benefit from structural information,
emphasizing again the importance of reporting crystal structures and additional data in a machine readable and FAIR way.

4.3 Sensitivity analysis
We have performed experiments to investigate the influence of two important parameters in the matching algorithm, the ∆max
totrel
and the normalization of the chemical formulas before matching. The plots and a more detailed discussion of these experiments
can be found in the supporting information in S4 for the ∆max
totrel and in S4.2 for the normalization of the chemical formulas. The
final ∆max
totrel used above was chosen to maximize the number of matched materials while minimizing the bias introduced by
artificial doping. Our results furthermore show that normalizing the chemical formula before matching and artificial doping is
beneficial, indicating that many entries in the SuperCon database do not reflect the exact unit cell. Additionally, we implemented
a stricter version of the artificial doping algorithm, where only one single 3DSCICSD crystal structure is selected for each
superconductor, rather than all matching structures. We found that the mean performance becomes slightly worse, but the shift
was not statistically significant.

11


Figure 7. The results of training and testing separately for each superconductor group. For comparison we show the results
with XGB models trained only on MAGPIE features and trained on MAGPIE+DSOAP features. Shown are mean and standard
error of the MSLEs obtained in a 5-fold cross validation grouped by chemical system. The first row shows the performance on
the test set for the 3DSCICSD (a) and the 3DSCMP (b). The second row shows the performance on the train set for the
3DSCICSD (c) and the 3DSCMP (d).

5 Limitations and perspective

The main limitation of the matching algorithm and the 3DSC is that there is no guarantee that a matched crystal structure
is the correct superconducting structure for this material. This is particularly obvious for the 3DSCICSD where there can
be up to 9 different space groups for the same SuperCon entry. The 3DSCICSD tries to mitigate this problem by ‘diluting’
uninteresting structures with more interesting structures. The 3DSCMP tries to counter this problem by using the more stable
structures identified by the energy above hull. Ultimately, this problem can only be solved by manually choosing the correct
superconducting structure based on expert knowledge or measuring the crystal structure at temperatures close to Tc in order to
find the correct crystal phase.
Until the ranking procedure, the matching and adaptation algorithm is very general and tries to keep as much information
as possible. Only the step of selecting which structures are most likely to be the superconducting ones is based on empirical
assumptions and thus introduces bias and potentially noise. We therefore expect further improvements by adjusting the sorting
criteria for ranking crystal structures. Two possible additional sorting criteria are the crystal temperature reported in the ICSD
database, and space groups reported for some of the SuperCon entries. The idea behind sorting according to crystal temperature
is that structures measured at lower temperatures are more likely to be the superconducting structure. However, this approach
might lead to an artificially introduced correlation between Tc and Tcry. Therefore we decided to not include this criteria in our
work. The most likely space group for each material can be identified either by checking the sparse structural information in the
original SuperCon database or by checking ICSD structures for keywords regarding superconductivity in the paper titles or
abstracts. However, this approach only covers a small fraction of materials.
So far, the 3DSC focuses on adding structural information. A promising addition would be to add electronic information,
e.g. from the Materials Project into the 3DSCMP. Examples include the electronic structure, the band gap, the total energy, the

12


formation energy and the Fermi energy, which are given for more than 90 % of the materials in the Materials Project. However,
the equivalent of artificial doping for these electronic features would at least require additional quantum chemical calculations,
if possible at all (e.g. for materials with small doping concentrations).
In this work, we have refrained from merging the 3DSCMP and the 3DSCICSD, since already 93 % of the materials in the
3DSCMP are in the 3DSCICSD and the resulting database could have not been published freely. For future work, it might be
interesting to expand the 3DSCMP using other publicly available datasets such as the Crystallography Open Database40 (COD)
or the Automatic FLOW for Materials Discovery41 (AFLOW) database to maximize the number of materials in the 3DSC.

6 Summary and conclusion

We have created two datasets, which contain the critical temperature Tc and approximated 3D crystal structures of 9,150
(3DSCICSD) and 5,759 (3DSCMP) superconducting and non-superconducting materials. The datasets are built on a public
version of the SuperCon database, enriched with crystal structures which were generated from the Materials Project and the
ICSD database, using an artificial doping algorithm presented in this paper. We publicly provide the full 3DSCMP dataset, as
well as the ICSD IDs of each material in the 3DSCICSD. Additionally we provide the code we developed to create the databases,
to enable recreation and extension of the datasets. We demonstrated that the additional information provided by the crystal
structures leads to a performance gain of machine learning models trained on our datasets. We furthermore discussed the
limitations of the current 3DSC and how they could be approached in future work.
Overall, our work demonstrates the added value of having access to FAIR and machine readable data on superconducting
materials in publicly available databases. We hope that this motivates the scientific community working on superconductivity to
publish their research data in public databases, including structural information as well as additional meta-data.

Usage Notes

We provide the full code used for the dataset generation and the analysis in this paper. In order to simplify reproduction and
further work on the 3DSCMP, we provide a single python script to generate the 3DSCMP, plot most of the statistical plots and
generate the learning curves. Note that due to memory constraints, the raw 3DSCMP file on GitHub is missing the DSOAP and
MAGPIE features which we used for the machine learning experiments in this paper (see section 4.2). Re-running the matching
and adaptation algorithm will also include these feature vectors. Future efforts in training machine learning models on the
3DSCMP can be based on the provided datasets, in particular the readily-available 3DSCMP. Future efforts on improving the
3DSC can be based on the provided code.

Code availability

Code and data are available free of charge on https://github.com/aimat-lab/3DSC.

Acknowledgements

This work was performed on the computational resource bwUniCluster funded by the Ministry of Science, Research and the
Arts Baden-Württemberg and the Universities of the State of Baden-Württemberg, Germany, within the framework program
bwHPC.

References

1. Yao, C. & Ma, Y. Superconducting materials: Challenges and opportunities for large-scale applications. iScience 24,
102541, 10.1016/j.isci.2021.102541 (2021).

2. Eley, S., Glatz, A. & Willa, R. Challenges and transformative opportunities in superconductor vortex physics. J. Appl.
Phys. 130, 050901, 10.1063/5.0055611 (2021). Publisher: American Institute of Physics.

3. Hor, P. H. et al. High-pressure study of the new Y-Ba-Cu-O superconducting compound system. Phys. Rev. Lett. 58,
911–912, 10.1103/PhysRevLett.58.911 (1987).

4. Bardeen, J., Cooper, L. N. & Schrieffer, J. R. Microscopic Theory of Superconductivity. Phys. Rev. 106, 162–164,

10.1103/PhysRev.106.162 (1957).

5. Saal, J. E., Oliynyk, A. O. & Meredig, B. Machine Learning in Materials Discovery: Confirmed Predictions and Their
Underlying Approaches. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 50, 49–69, 10.1146/annurev-matsci-090319-010954 (2020).

6. SuperCon, http://supercon.nims.go.jp/indexen.html (2020).

13


7. vstanev1. Supercon, https://github.com/vstanev1/Supercon (2021).

8. Hamidieh, K.
A Data-Driven Statistical Model for Predicting the Critical Temperature of a Superconductor.
arXiv:1803.10260 [stat] (2018).

9. Chen, T. & Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’16, 785–794, 10.1145/2939672.2939785
(Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2016).

10. Ward, L., Agrawal, A., Choudhary, A. & Wolverton, C. A general-purpose machine learning framework for predicting
properties of inorganic materials. npj Comput. Mater. 2, 1–7, 10.1038/npjcompumats.2016.28 (2016).

11. Aketi, N., Parachuri, S., Dussa, H. P. & Uppara, H. REGRESSION OF SUPERCONDUCTING CRITICAL TEMPER-
ATURE: USING A PCA-GRID SEARCH-ADA BOOST REGRESSION MODEL. Int. J. Innov. Res. Adv. Eng. 6, 6
(2019).

12. Matsumoto, K. & Horide, T. An acceleration search method of higher T c superconductors by a machine learning algorithm.
Appl. Phys. Express 12, 073003, 10.7567/1882-0786/ab2922 (2019).

13. Le, T. D. et al. Critical Temperature Prediction for a Superconductor: A Variational Bayesian Neural Network Approach.
IEEE Transactions on Appl. Supercond. 30, 1–5, 10.1109/TASC.2020.2971456 (2020).

14. Gaikwad, M. & Doke, A. R. Featureless approach for predicting Critical Temperature of Superconductors. In 2020
11th International Conference on Computing, Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), 1–5, 10.1109/
ICCCNT49239.2020.9225447 (2020).

15. Konno, T. et al. Deep learning model for finding new superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 103, 014509, 10.1103/PhysRevB.103.
014509 (2021).

16. Zeng, S. et al. Atom table convolutional neural networks for an accurate prediction of compounds properties. npj Comput.
Mater. 5, 84, 10.1038/s41524-019-0223-y (2019).

17. Li, S. et al. Critical Temperature Prediction of Superconductors Based on Atomic Vectors and Deep Learning. Symmetry
12, 262, 10.3390/sym12020262 (2020).

18. Zhou, Q. et al. Atom2Vec: learning atoms for materials discovery. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, E6411–E6417, 10.1073/
pnas.1801181115 (2018). ArXiv: 1807.05617.

19. Dan, Y. et al. Computational Prediction of Critical Temperatures of Superconductors Based on Convolutional Gradient
Boosting Decision Trees. IEEE Access 8, 57868–57878, 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2981874 (2020).

20. Sizochenko, N. & Hofmann, M. Predictive Modeling of Critical Temperatures in Superconducting Materials. Molecules
26, 8, 10.3390/molecules26010008 (2021).

21. Meredig, B. et al. Can machine learning identify the next high-temperature superconductor? Examining extrapolation
performance for materials discovery. Mol. Syst. Des. & Eng. 3, 819–825, 10.1039/C8ME00012C (2018).

22. Roter, B. & Dordevic, S. V. Predicting new superconductors and their critical temperatures using unsupervised machine
learning. Phys. C: Supercond. its Appl. 575, 1353689, 10.1016/j.physc.2020.1353689 (2020). ArXiv: 2002.07266.

23. Stanev, V. et al.
Machine learning modeling of superconducting critical temperature.
npj Comput. Mater. 4, 29,

10.1038/s41524-018-0085-8 (2018). ArXiv: 1709.02727.

24. Foppiano, L. et al. SuperMat: construction of a linked annotated dataset from superconductors-related publications. Sci.
Technol. Adv. Materials: Methods 1, 34–44, 10.1080/27660400.2021.1918396 (2021).

25. Yamaguchi, K., Asahi, R. & Sasaki, Y. SC-CoMIcs: A Superconductivity Corpus for Materials Informatics. In Proceedings
of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, 6753–6760 (European Language Resources Association,
Marseille, France, 2020).

26. Beltagy, I., Lo, K. & Cohan, A. SciBERT: A Pretrained Language Model for Scientific Text, 10.48550/arXiv.1903.10676

(2019). Number: arXiv:1903.10676 arXiv:1903.10676 [cs].

27. Court, C. J. & Cole, J. M. Magnetic and superconducting phase diagrams and transition temperatures predicted using text
mining and machine learning. npj Comput. Mater. 6, 1–9, 10.1038/s41524-020-0287-8 (2020).

28. Swain, M. C. & Cole, J. M. ChemDataExtractor: A Toolkit for Automated Extraction of Chemical Information from the
Scientific Literature. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 56, 1894–1904, 10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00207 (2016).

29. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation.
APL Mater. 1, 011002, 10.1063/1.4812323 (2013).

14


30. Materials Project, https://materialsproject.org/.

31. Bergerhoff, G., Hundt, R., Sievers, R. & Brown, I. D. The inorganic crystal structure data base. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci.
23, 66–69, 10.1021/ci00038a003 (1983).

32. ICSD, https://icsd.products.fiz-karlsruhe.de/.

33. Ong, S. P. et al. Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source python library for materials analysis.
Comput. Mater. Sci. 68, 314–319, 10.1016/j.commatsci.2012.10.028 (2013).

34. aimat-lab/superconductors_3d: Repository for the 3DSC paper., https://github.com/aimat-lab/superconductors_3D.

35. XGBoost 1.5.2 documentation, https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/python/python_api.html#module-xgboost.sklearn.

36. Bartók, A. P., Kondor, R. & Csányi, G. On representing chemical environments. Phys. Rev. B 87, 184115, 10.1103/
PhysRevB.87.184115 (2013).

37. Wilkinson, M. D. et al. The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. Sci. Data 3, 160018,

10.1038/sdata.2016.18 (2016). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.

38. Scheffler, M. et al.
FAIR data enabling new horizons for materials research.
Nature 604, 635–642, 10.1038/
s41586-022-04501-x (2022).

39. von Lilienfeld, O. A. & Burke, K. Retrospective on a decade of machine learning for chemical discovery. Nat. Commun.
11, 4895, 10.1038/s41467-020-18556-9 (2020).

40. Gražulis, S. et al. Crystallography Open Database – an open-access collection of crystal structures. J. Appl. Crystallogr.
42, 726–729, 10.1107/S0021889809016690 (2009).

41. Curtarolo, S. et al. AFLOWLIB.ORG: A distributed materials properties repository from high-throughput ab initio
calculations. Comput. Mater. Sci. 58, 227–235, 10.1016/j.commatsci.2012.02.002 (2012).

42. Himanen, L. et al. DScribe: Library of descriptors for machine learning in materials science. Comput. Phys. Commun.
247, 106949, 10.1016/j.cpc.2019.106949 (2020).

Author contributions statement

T.S. conceived the database, wrote the code and conducted the experiments, T.S. and P.F. conceived and analyzed the experiments,
R.W. and J.S. contributed expert knowledge regarding superconductors and contributed to the planning and analysis of the
experiments, P.F. supervised the project. All authors contributed to the manuscript.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interest.

15


S1 Normalization of chemical formulas

Instead of matching chemical formulas only when they match exactly, we also match chemical formulas if they differ only by
a constant factor. I.e. the SuperCon entry CuLa2O4 would also be matched by a crystal structure with the chemical formula
Cu2La4O8 with a relative factor of 1/2. This increased the matched entries by a large factor, which is why we assume that
sometimes the experimental authors of the SuperCon data did not know the exact composition of the unit cell and just wrote
down the smallest ratio of integers. We implemented this by multiplying the chemical formula of the crystal structure with the
ratio of the sum of the atom numbers of the two chemical formulas.

S2 Additional dataset statistics

Figure S1. These elemental prevalence plots show how often each chemical element occurs in the 3DSCICSD (a) and the
3DSCMP (b).

16


Figure S2. The number of SuperCon entries with given critical temperature Tc for the full 3DSCICSD (a) and for each
superconductor group ((b) to (h)): cuprates (b), ferrites (c), other (d), oxide (e), heavy fermion materials (f), Chevrel phases (g),
carbon based materials (h). The non-superconductors are shown in orange. The left-most blue bar includes only
superconductors with Tc > 0K.

17


Figure S3. The number of SuperCon entries with given critical temperature Tc for the full 3DSCMP (a) and for each
superconductor group ((b) to (h)): cuprates (b), ferrites (c), other (d), oxide (e), heavy fermion materials (f), Chevrel phases (g),
carbon based materials (h). The non-superconductors are shown in orange. The left-most blue bar includes only
superconductors with Tc > 0K.

18


Figure S4. This structure has 20 doped crystal sites in its primitive unit cell, but they all belong to only 2 different sets of
symmetrically equivalent crystal sites.

S3 Disordered SOAP (DSOAP) features

To represent the 3D crystal structures for machine learning algorithms, we chose SOAP features36 which are calculated using
the python package Dscribe42. Yet, these features only support ordered crystal structures, but not disordered structures with
fractional occupancies such as vacancies and doping. Still, such structures frequently appear in the 3DSC. To address this issue
we have generalized the SOAP features to ‘Disordered SOAP’ (DSOAP) features. These DSOAP features are based on the
original SOAP features of ordered structures, but they also incorporate information such as doping and vacancies.
We will now explain the implementation of the DSOAP features and give an example. The idea behind DSOAP features
is simple: Each disordered structure is understood as consisting of a superposition of ordered structures. The weights in this
superposition are given by the occupancies. The SOAP features of the ordered structures can be calculated with the Dscribe
library. The DSOAP vector of the disordered structure is then given as a weighted average of the SOAP vectors of the ordered
structures, with weights given by the occupancies.
As an example we will discuss the DSOAP features for an (exemplary) crystal with chemical formula
Fe0.35Zn0.35Te1.6Se0.4O0.5. Assume this crystal structure has four atom sites in its primitive unit cell:

1. O0.5
(vacancy)
2. Te
(ordered)
3. Te0.6Se0.4
(doped)
4. Zn0.35Fe0.35
(doped vacancy)
In the following we will explain each step to calculate the DSOAP features of this crystal structure:

1. Vacancies: For vacancies, the total occupancy of each atom site is recorded to use it as weight for this atom site. In
this example, the recorded vacancy weights for the four sites are (0.5, 1, 1, 0.7). After recording these weights the
occupancies of the vacancies are scaled so that afterwards each crystal site has a total occupancy of 1.0. The four atom
sites now have the following occupancies:
1. O
(scaled by a factor of 1/0.5)
2. Te
(unchanged)
3. Te0.6Se0.4
(unchanged)
4. Zn0.5Fe0.5
(scaled by a factor of 1/0.7)

2. Doping: For doped crystal structures, we generate all possible combinations of ordered structures that can arise from
the doped elements. These ordered structures serve as proxy structures. Since there are two doped crystal sites, namely
Te0.6Se0.4 and Zn0.5Fe0.5, with two elements each, there are four proxy structures: FeTe2O, FeTeSeO, ZnTe2O, ZnTeSeO.

Additionally the doping occupancies are recorded as weights for each proxy structure. The weights for all crystal sites of
a structure are multiplied to simulate the probabilities. The doping weights for each of the four proxy structures are:
FeTe2O:
0.5·1·0.6·1 = 0.3
FeTeSeO:
0.5·1·0.4·1 = 0.2
ZnTe2O:
0.5·1·0.6·1 = 0.3
ZnTeSeO:
0.5·1·0.4·1 = 0.2

Note that they add up to 1, because we calculated the doping weights for the manipulated structure without vacancies.
Remark: Because of the combinatorial nature of this algorithm, it can happen that the number of proxy structures becomes
extremely high and computationally not tractable when doing this for each crystal site. To alleviate this problem, we

19


calculate the combinations of proxy structures not per crystal site but per symmetrically equivalent set of crystal sites. An
example for this issue (taken from the ICSD) is shown in Figure S4: The crystal structure of Ag0.75Al0.25 has 20 doped
crystal sites, but they all belong to only two different sets of symmetrically equivalent crystal sites. Therefore, instead of
having to compute 220 different ordered proxy structures we only need to compute 22.

3. SOAP features: We calculate the SOAP vectors of each crystal site of all proxy structures with the Dscribe library. This
is no issue anymore since these structures are completely ordered. Since in our example there are 4 proxy structures with
4 crystal sites each, there are 16 SOAP vectors in total.

4. Weighted average of crystal sites: We compute the full SOAP vector of one proxy structure by doing a weighted
average over all of its crystal sites. The weights are the recorded vacancy weights, i.e. the original total occupancy of
each crystal site. In this example these weights are (0.5, 1, 1, 0.7). The weighted average vvv of some vectors vvvi with
weights wi is defined as

vvv(wi,vvvi) = ∑i wivvvi

∑i wi
(4)

5. Weighted averages of ordered structures: We compute the DSOAP vector of the original disordered structure by
doing a weighted average over all of the ordered proxy structures. The weights are the recorded doping weights. In this
example these weights are (0.3, 0.2, 0.3, 0.2).

Note that the order of the weighted averages doesn’t matter since it is just two times a linear combination of vectors after each
other:

ccc = vvvdop(vvvvac(sssproxy
i j
)) = ∑
i, j

wdop
i
wvac
j

(∑k wdop
k
)·(∑l wvac
l
)
sssproxy
ij
(5)

where ccc is the DSOAP vector for the final crystal, wdop
i
and wvac
j
are the weights for the doping and the vacancies and sssproxy
ij
is
the SOAP vector of the jth crystal site of the ith proxy structure.
Note also that if one inputs an ordered crystal structure, the output is reduced to the original SOAP features.
Additionally to the DSOAP features we used symmetry features Fsym. This was done simply because we have this symmetry
given automatically and we assumed it to be helpful for predicting Tc if the symmetries would be encoded explicitly. These
symmetry features had 11 entries: The first 7 entries encoded the 7 crystal systems (cubic, hexagonal, monoclinic, orthorhombic,
tetragonal, triclinic, trigonal) with the corresponding point group encoded as an integer in these 7 feature vectors. Additionally
the bravais-centring (primitive, base-centered, body-centered, face-centered) is one-hot encoded as 4 additional binary features.
In all experiments these Fsym features are always implicitly appended when using DSOAP features. However, our analysis of
the results showed that the symmetry features made our results slightly better in the case of the 3DSCICSD and slightly worse in
the case of the 3DSCMP, suggesting that the information added by Fsym features is limited (see S4.3).

S4 Additional machine learning experiments

S4.1 The difference of chemical formulas ∆totrel
Each entry in the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP has the parameter ∆totrel which is a measure for how different the chemical
formula of the SuperCon entry and the chemical formula of the original crystal structure before artificial doping were. The
maximum allowed ∆max
totrel is an important cutoff parameter in the matching algorithm as explained in section 2.3. Choosing
an appropriate value of ∆max
totrel is important because if it is chosen too small, not many SuperCon entries can be matched with
crystal structures. In contrast, if it is chosen too big, the introduced bias due to artificial doping will be big because chemical
formulas will be matched with crystal structures with which they are actually not related.

Figure S5a and b show a histogram of how many crystal structures in each dataset have a given ∆totrel. In Figure S5a one
can see that for the 3DSCICSD the matched crystal structures decrease sharply with increasing ∆totrel. Extrapolating this curve
to higher ∆totrel one can conclude that increasing the value of ∆max
totrel would not have increased the number of matched crystal
structures by much. This is less obvious in Figure S5b for 3DSCMP but there is a decreasing trend as well, and the number of
data points with ∆totrel ̸= 0 is smaller anyway.
To study the influence of ∆totrel on the prediction accuracy we trained an XGB model on MAGPIE and MAGPIE+DSOAP
features to compare the error of the test set dependent on the ∆totrel of each structure. Figure S5c shows the distribution of the
Symmetrical Mean Absolute Percentage Error (SMAPE) over the ∆totrel for a model trained on MAGPIE+DSOAP features. For
comparison, the same plot is shown in Figure S5d for a model trained only on MAGPIE features.

20


Figure S5. Plots regarding the role of the parameter ∆totrel. The first row shows the number of crystal structures with a given
∆totrel between the chemical formula of the SuperCon entry and the original crystal structure for the 3DSCICSD (a) and the
3DSCMP (b). The second row shows the Symmetric Mean Absolute Percentage Error (SMAPE) and the standard error of the
mean (SEM) of the critical temperature Tc when using MAGPIE+DSOAP features (c) and when using only MAGPIE features
(d).

21


To analyze the influence of ∆totrel on the prediction accuracy one can look at Figure S5c where the distribution of the
Symmetrical Mean Absolute Percentage Error (SMAPE) was plotted over ∆totrel for each data point. We used the SMAPE
here because it is a relative error which does not depend on the magnitude of Tc. Thus the plotted distribution is free from
the correlation of ∆totrel and Tc. This is important because most cuprates have a ∆totrel between 0 and 0.04, therefore the MAE
would have been very high around this ∆totrel without that the model would have actually been worse there, simply because
cuprates tend to have a high Tc. Intuitively one would expect that entries with a higher ∆totrel would have a higher error at
the prediction, because these structures are only approximated with artificial doping. Such a correlation can not be seen in
Figure S5; the SMAPE seems to be independent of the ∆totrel. This shows that we chose ∆max
totrel small enough so that artificial
doping is a good approximation of the real crystal structures. Additionally Figure S5d shows the same plot, but with an XGB
model trained only on MAGPIE features instead of on MAGPIE+DSOAP features. This plot should definitely be independent
of ∆totrel because the model was only trained on the chemical formula, which is not influenced by ∆totrel. The distribution looks
very similar to the distribution of the model trained on MAGPIE+DSOAP features, which shows again that ∆totrel does not have
a big influence on the dataset with structural features. We can also see this from the sorting criteria optimization (see S4.4)
because the ∆totrel did not seem to be an important sorting criteria there.
In conclusion, the choice of ∆max
totrel was sensible to get a lot of data points, while at the same time not decreasing the
prediction accuracy. One could try to increase ∆max
totrel until one notices a decrease in the performance, but probably this would
not yield many more data points.

S4.2 Normalized chemical formulas
Normalizing the chemical formulas before matching is an important part of the matching algorithm by which a lot of SuperCon
entries are matched which otherwise would not be matched. We will now analyze the influence of this normalization step.

Figure S6a and b show the number of crystal structures with a given normalization factor between the chemical formula
of the SuperCon entry and the chemical formula of the crystal structure for the 3DSCICSD and the 3DSCMP respectively as
explained in S1. These histograms show some more insight into matching normalized chemical formulas. One can see that in
the histogram there are peaks with particularly many chemical formulas having a certain relative normalization factor. Besides
the trivial peak at 1, there is a large peak at 2 and also at 4, 6 and 8. The peak at the 6 is a bit less pronounced. This behavior
is consistent both for the ICSD and the Materials Project. These peaks are not symmetrical. That means there are a lot of
cases where the chemical formula of the crystal structure is a multiple of 2n, but not the other way round. This is an indication
that authors of SuperCon entries often did not know the exact primitive unit cell and simply wrote down the smallest integer
chemical formula.
We also trained an XGB model on the 3DSCMP once with all data points and once only with data points where the chemical
formula did not have to be normalized. This subset of data points decreases the number of matched SuperCon entries to 58 %
(3358 SuperCon entries). The MSLE of this run is shown in Figure S6c. The results show that training on the additional data
points with normalized chemical formulas helps significantly in predicting Tc. This shows that doing this normalization is
overall beneficial, the additional data that is gained is worth the introduced bias.
We conclude that normalizing the chemical formulas seems to be overall beneficial. However, it is not a surprise that by
having more data we get better results. For future studies it would be more interesting to also look at how the extrapolation
performance changes for more difficult extrapolation settings, which is the actual benefit of training on crystal structures instead
of only chemical formulas.

S4.3 Random dropping of crystal structures and importance of symmetry features
In this section we address two independent, little questions. First, we analyze the consequence of randomly dropping all but
one crystal structure per SuperCon entry. This would be the simplest version of reducing the number of crystal structures per
SuperCon entry to 1. Second, we analyze whether the symmetry features Fsym are informative.
We ran experiments with the XGB model as described above. The results in terms of the MSLE are shown in Figure S7a
and b. Each plot shows the reference run, the run with randomly dropped crystal structures and the run without symmetry
features Fsym.
Randomly dropping all but one crystal structure makes the MSLE in case of the 3DSCICSD slightly worse, but not
significantly. For the 3DSCMP this has nearly no effect since there are only very few SuperCon entries with duplicate crystal
structures. The fact that randomly dropping crystal structures does not significantly decrease performance is a good sign:
On the one hand it allows for faster training without significantly losing performance. It also shows that most of the gain of
information that one gets by including the crystal structure is already included if one has just one crystal structure per SuperCon
entry. Also, randomly taking just one structure will probably on average be equal to diluting the few non-superconducting
structures with superconducting ones, because the dataset is very clustered with many close data points. On the other hand,
it is likely that by randomly taking structures there will still be multiple cases where the non-superconducting structure is

22


Figure S6. Analysis of the importance of normalizing chemical formulas in the matching algorithm. The first row shows the
normalization factor of chemical formulas of the SuperCon entry and the crystal structure for the 3DSCICSD (a) and the
3DSCMP (b). For the sake of clarity, the x axis is shown only up to a factor of 10 in both directions. (c) A comparison of
training and testing a model on all crystal structures vs only on crystal structures with absolute matches of the chemical formula
for the 3DSCMP. Shown are the mean and the standard error of the mean of 25 repetitions.

Figure S7. Two independent ablation studies. a and b show a comparison of what happens if one either randomly drops all but
one crystal structure for each SuperCon entry or leaves away the symmetry features Fsym for the 3DSCICSD (a) and the
3DSCMP (b). For comparison a reference run with all crystal structures and including symmetry features Fsym is shown.

23


chosen. Yet that means that there is still room for improvement if one would better choose the crystal structures, which should
be studied in more detail in the future.
Training without symmetry features Fsym seems to make the training for the 3DSCICSD slightly better and for the 3DSCMP
slightly worse, but in both cases the changes are not statistically significant.
In conclusion, randomly dropping duplicate crystal structures does not significantly change the performance. The symmetry
features on the other hand are not useful for the models with DSOAP features.

S4.4 Sorting criteria optimization
In this section we will present how we developed the filtering criteria that were used to reduce the number of crystal structures
per SuperCon entry as explained in section 2.3. First, we chose 4 different criteria which might have an influence:

1. ∆totrel: Entries with a lower ∆totrel are potentially less biased by the artificial doping. This sorting criteria is semi-
continuous: Technically it is a continuous number, but due to the integer number of atoms in most chemical formulas,
there will still often be multiple crystal structures of one SuperCon entry with the same ∆totrel.

2. Whether or not the chemical formula had to be normalized in order to match: Crystal structures and SuperCon entries
potentially match better if their chemical formulas do not have to be normalized to match. This is a binary sorting criteria
which means that after sorting by this criteria there will usually still be many crystal structures with the same ranking.

3. Energy above the hull Ehull (Materials Project): This criteria applies only to the 3DSCMP because only the Materials
Project has Ehull given. Ehull is a property that can be used to predict the stability of the phase of a crystal structure. It is a
continuous number and it happens only very rarely that two crystal structures of the same SuperCon entry have the same
Ehull. Therefore, after sorting and filtering by Ehull, there will nearly never be some duplicate crystal structures left.

4. Texplicit
cry
(ICSD): This criterion only applies to the 3DSCICSD. As explained in section 2.2 not all of the ICSD crystal
structures had Tcry explicitly given. We assumed that crystal structures which did have Tcry explicitly given are more
trustworthy. This sorting criteria is categorical.

5. One additional option was to use all data points without any filtering.

The results of the sorting criteria hyperparameter optimization are shown in Figure S8a to d. Figures a and b show for each
run the mean of all 100 and 25 cross validation repetitions for the 3DSCICSD and 3DSCMP respectively. We plotted all runs of
the grid search so that one can be certain that a particularly good result is not only due to overfitting to the test set.
From the plots in Figure S8a and b one can see that the MAGPIE+DSOAP features are consistently better than only
MAGPIE or only DSOAP features, for both datasets. This shows that including structural information indeed helps the model
in predicting the critical temperature Tc. Interestingly, using only DSOAP features often leads to worse results than using only
MAGPIE features. One possible reason is that MAGPIE features include information about chemical closeness of elements,
which helps predicting rare elements. As shown in Figure S1 (e) and (f) there are a lot of these rare elements in the dataset
which do not appear very often.
We also tried out to incorporate the electronic features of the 3DSCMP, but this did not significantly improve the results so
we did not include them in the analysis in the main part. The electronic features that we tried were the band gap, energy, energy
per atom, formation energy per atom, total magnetization, number of unique magnetic sites and the true total magnetization as
recorded in the Materials Project. Note that we did not try to use the Fermi energy EF because it was not given for all crystal
structures in the 3DSCMP.
It is noticeable that for the 3DSCICSD in Figure S8a the variance of the runs with MAGPIE features is greater than for the
3DSCMP in Figure S8b. In theory, each run which uses only MAGPIE features should have exactly the same performance
because we controlled that every split has exactly the same SuperCon entries and only the used crystal structures are different
between the runs. However, because each SuperCon entry can have a different number of crystal structures, it also appeared a
different number of times for the model. In theory this should not matter because we were passing a sample weight with each
crystal structure to weigh each SuperCon entry the same. However, we suspect that this randomness is due to the data bagging
in the XGB algorithm. Due to the data bagging, different partitions of the data will be used for each decision tree if the dataset
is not exactly the same. This effect is much stronger for the 3DSCICSD than for the 3DSCMP because the 3DSCICSD has much
more crystal structures per SuperCon entry than the 3DSCMP. One could probably mitigate this issue by fixing that all crystal
structures of one SuperCon entry will all be given to the same decision tree.

Figure S8c and d show the top five sorting criteria ordered by their MSLE with mean and error of the mean for the 3DSCICSD
and 3DSCMP respectively. In the 3DSCICSD (c) simply using all data points indeed is the best option. The second best option
with no significant difference in performance is sorting by Texplicit
cry
. Because the performance of the two runs has no significant

24


Figure S8. Results of the sorting criteria optimization. (a) and (b) show the MSLE of all runs of the sorting criteria
optimization with different sorting criteria for the 3DSCICSD (a) and the 3DSCMP (b). Each data point is the mean of 25
repetitions for the 3DSCICSD and 100 repetitions for the 3DSCMP. (c) and (d) show mean and error of the mean of the top 5
sorting criteria for the 3DSCICSD (c) and the 3DSCMP (d) for the run with MAGPIE+DSOAP features sorted by their MSLE.

difference we decided to use the latter, because this reduced the number of crystal structures in the 3DSCICSD database from
approximately 140,000 to approximately 80,000 and makes consecutive training faster and less memory intensive.
For the 3DSCMP (d) it seems that sorting by the energy above the hull Ehull is the by far most important criteria. Even
though the following option also have other criteria after Ehull, these criteria effectively do not matter because Ehull is a
continuous float value. It is interesting that the algorithm clearly chooses structures with low Ehull to be more informative in
this dataset. The Materials Project contains a large number of theoretical structures and the Materials Project website marks
experimentally confirmed structures, but this parameter is not accessible in the API. The structure with the minimum Ehull is
usually experimentally confirmed and the most usual structure for this material, so it might be that the algorithm just focused on
excluding overly theoretical structures. Finding out the exact role of Ehull in this optimization would be an interesting aspect of
further research.
In conclusion, we chose the criteria Texplicit
cry
as the sorting criteria to use for the 3DSCICSD. This matches the 9,150 SuperCon
entries in this dataset with 86,490 crystal structures. For the 3DSCMP we chose the criteria of sorting first by Ehull and then
by ∆totrel as the sorting criteria for this dataset. This matches the 5,759 SuperCon entries in this dataset with 5,773 crystal
structures.

25


