Spatial and polarization division multiplexing harnessing

on-chip optical beam forming

David González-Andrade,1,* Xavier Le Roux,1 Guy Aubin,1 Farah Amar,1 Thi Hao Nhi Nguyen,1 Paula Nuño 
Ruano,1 Thi Thuy Duong Dinh,1 Dorian Oser,1,2 Diego Pérez-Galacho,3 Eric Cassan,1 Delphine Marris-Morini,1

Laurent Vivien,1 and Carlos Alonso-Ramos1

1Centre de Nanosciences et de Nanotechnologies, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Palaiseau 91120, France
2QuTech and Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft University of Technology, Delft 2600 GA, The Netherland

3Telecommunication Research Institute (TELMA), Universidad de Málaga, CEI Andalucía TECH, Málaga 29010, Spain

*Corresponding author: david.gonzalez-andrade@c2n.upsaclay.fr

On-chip spatial and polarization multiplexing have emerged as a powerful strategy to boost the bandwidth of integrated 
optical transceivers. State-of-the-art multiplexers require accurate control of the relative phase or the spatial distribution 
among different guided optical modes, seriously compromising the bandwidth and performance of the devices. To 
overcome this limitation, we propose a new approach based on the coupling between guided modes in integrated 
waveguides and optical beams free-propagating on the chip plane. The engineering of the evanescent coupling between the 
guided modes and free-propagating beams allows spatial and polarization multiplexing with state-of-the-art performance. 
To demonstrate the potential and versatility of this approach, we have developed a two-polarization multiplexed link and a
three-mode multiplexed link using standard 220-nm-thick silicon-on-insulator technology. The two-polarization link shows 
a measured -35 dB crosstalk bandwidth of 180 nm, while the three-mode link exhibits a -20 dB crosstalk bandwidth of 195 
nm. These bandwidths cover the S, C, L, and U communication bands. We used these links to demonstrate error-free 
transmission (bit-error-rate < 10-9) of two and three non-return-to-zero signals at 40 Gbps each, with power penalties 
below 0.08 dB and 1.5 dB for the two-polarization and three-mode links respectively. The approach demonstrated here for 
two polarizations and three modes is also applicable to future implementation of more complex multiplexing schemes.

1. INTRODUCTION
Silicon photonics has been identified as a promising technology to 
address the communication bottleneck in data centers and long-
haul networks [1]. On-chip optical transceivers fabricated at large 
volume using microelectronics facilities could become instrumental 
in exploiting optical carriers to boost the data bandwidth while 
reducing the power consumption of communication systems [2,3].
Current silicon photonics optical transceivers carry different data 
channels at distinct wavelengths using wavelength-division 
multiplexing (WDM) [4]. However, as the industry moves forward 
with the development of next-generation optical networks, other 
multiplexing schemes will be required to support a higher data 
capacity per wavelength channel. One promising approach is the 
use of orthogonal polarizations and spatially-distributed modes to 
encode more data channels at a specific wavelength [5]. The
manipulation of higher-order modes and polarization state of light 
on chip has thus attracted a significant research interest in the past 
years for the realization of performant mode and polarization 
(de)multiplexers.

A myriad of architectures has been proposed to realize mode-

division and polarization-division multiplexing. Mode-division 
multiplexing (MDM) has been demonstrated based on multimode 
interference (MMI) couplers, asymmetric Y-junctions
and 

directional couplers (ADC), adiabatic tapers, pixelated-meta 
structures, and subwavelength metamaterials [6-13]. Similarly, 

multiple devices have been reported for polarization-division 
multiplexing 
(PDM),
including
MMIs, 
Mach-Zehnder 

interferometers, diverse
types of directional couplers (i.e., 

symmetric, asymmetric, tapered and bent), photonic crystals, slot 
waveguides, and subwavelength and tilted nano-gratings [14-24].
Despite the great diversity of proposed solutions, crosstalk still 
remains as one of the main impairments in high-speed optical 
communications, especially in systems with a high-channel count.
An increased crosstalk has a negative impact on the link 
performance in terms of bit-error-rate (BER) and ultimately results 
in a power penalty that jeopardizes low power consumption [25]. 
Silicon multiplexers handling more than two modes (e.g., 3 spatial 
modes with the same polarization) yield poor crosstalk values 
ranging from -19 dB [11] to -9.7 dB [7].

Here, we propose a simple yet effective strategy to realize highly 

efficient mode and polarization (de)multiplexing based on 
engineered on-chip beam forming. Instead of controlling the phase 
or field distribution matching between two guided modes, we 
engineer the evanescent coupling between the modes of a photonic
waveguide and free-propagating beams on the chip plane. 
Coupling between guided modes and on-chip free-propagating 
beams has been achieved using distributed Bragg deflectors [26-
30]. However, the wavelength-dependent nature of the diffractive 
coupling seriously limits their use for wideband mode or 
polarization multiplexers. Conversely, evanescent coupling does 
not present a strong wavelength dependence, which allowed the 


demonstration of on-chip beam expanders with a wide bandwidth 
[31-33]. In our proposed scheme we engineer the evanescent 
coupling to make each waveguide mode (or polarization) couple to 
a different in-plane beam, propagating with a specific angle. As 
schematically shown in Fig. 1(a), this strategy spatially separates
the different waveguide modes, allowing (de)multiplexing. Based 
on this approach, we experimentally demonstrate a two-
polarization link and a three-mode link that allow error-free
transmission of multiplexed high-speed data streams. We show 
transmission of two and three 40 Gbps non-return-to-zero (NRZ) 
signals, with negligible power penalties at a BER of 10-9. To the 
best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of mode and 
polarization handling enabled by beamforming in an integrated 
circuit. These devices could be a promising alternative to fixed 
layout-guided architectures, with excellent potential for the next 
generation of high-speed and large-capacity on-chip optical 
interconnects.

2. MODE DIVISION MULTIPLEXING
A. Operation principle
Figure 1(a) shows the top view of a waveguide evanescently 
coupled to an adjacent slab. The input waveguide has a width of 𝑊
and is placed at a distance 𝐺 from the slab. The waveguide supports 
a discrete set of guided modes with effective indices of 𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝑚 , with 

𝑚 being a natural number indicating the mode order. The slab 
supports a continuum of vertically-confined (𝑧-axis) modes that 
propagate freely in the 𝑥𝑦-plane with a wavenumber given by:

𝒌𝒔
⃗⃗⃗⃗ = 𝒌𝟎𝒏𝒔[𝐬𝐢𝐧(𝜽)𝒙̂ + 𝐜𝐨𝐬(𝜽)𝒚̂],
(1)

where 𝑛𝑠 is the effective index of the slab, 𝜃 is the propagation 
direction angle of the slab mode with respect to the 𝑦-axis, 𝑘0 =
2𝜋 𝜆0
⁄
is the vacuum wavenumber, and 𝑥̂ and 𝑦̂ are the 

unitary vectors in the 𝑥- and 𝑦-directions, respectively. Phase-
matching between the guided waveguide modes and the slab 
modes occurs for

𝐬𝐢𝐧(𝜽𝒎) =

𝒏𝒆𝒇𝒇

𝒎

𝒏𝒔 .
(2)

Note that Eq. (2) is analogous to the grating equation when the 
zero-order harmonic is considered [34,35]. This zero-order 
operation obviates the strong wavelength dependence of the 
propagation angle in distributed Bragg deflectors [26-30]. The 
effective indices of the waveguide (𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝑚 ) and slab (𝑛𝑠 ) are 

wavelength dependent. However, both values are inversely 
proportional to the wavelength, reducing the wavelength
dependence of the ratio 𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝑚 /𝑛𝑠. If the separation distance 𝐺 is 

sufficiently small, the waveguide mode with effective index 𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝑚

will evanescently couple to the slab mode propagating with an 
angle 𝜃𝑚, satisfying Eq. (2). After a given propagation distance, the 
different 
slab 
modes 
are 
spatially 
separated 
allowing 

demultiplexing. Due to reciprocity, the same device can be used to 
multiplex different slab beams into different waveguide modes.

For the implementation of the proposed architecture, we consider

silicon-on-insulator (SOI) with a thickness of the silicon guiding
layer of 220 nm. Figure 1(b) shows the effective indices of the TE0, 
TE1, and TE2 modes calculated as a function of the waveguide 
width 𝑊. Effective indices are calculated using a commercial finite 

.

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic top view of a waveguide evanescently coupled to an 
adjacent slab. A silicon strip waveguide of width 𝑊 is placed at a distance 
𝐺 from a silicon slab. Fundamental (red), first-order (orange), and second-
order (green) TE modes are injected from the left side of the waveguide and 
propagate along the 𝑥-axis. Each mode is coupled to a vertically-confined 
(𝑧-axis) beam within the slab with a different propagation angle 𝜃𝑚. (b) 
Effective index and (c) propagation angle within the slab of TE0, TE1 and 
TE2 modes as a function of the waveguide width, calculated for a Si 
thickness of 220 nm at a wavelength of 1550 nm.

difference eigenmode (FDE) solver. Figure 1(c) shows the
propagation angle of the slab modes satisfying Eq. (2), considering 
a slab index 𝑛𝑠 = 2.85 . Differences in propagation angle 
exceeding 15° can easily be achieved by properly choosing the 
waveguide width.

B. Design of the three-mode demultiplexer
The proposed three-mode demultiplexer is presented in Fig. 2(a). 
The device comprises an input waveguide of width 𝑊𝐼, a coupling 
region with linearly varying waveguide width and slab separation, 
and a final section with fixed waveguide width and slab separation 
of 𝑊𝐸 and 𝐺𝐸, respectively. Changing the waveguide width in the 
coupling region results in a gradual variation of the propagation 
angle of the slab-propagating beam [see Fig. 1(c)], while the 
change in the slab gap modifies the coupling strength. These two 
effects are engineered to focus the slab-propagating beams into a 
near-Gaussian-shaped profile that is coupled to the fundamental 
mode of a strip waveguide placed at the focal point. This approach 
allows coupling each mode of the input waveguide to the 
fundamental mode of a different output waveguide, thereby 
performing mode demultiplexing and conversion simultaneously. 
Note that the approach proposed here can be seamlessly extended 
to handle a larger number of modes.

The device is designed to maximize the coupling efficiency 

between each mode of the input waveguide and the corresponding 
output waveguide while maintaining a low crosstalk. Device 
dimensions are optimized using three-dimensional finite-difference 


time-domain (3D FDTD) simulations. The input waveguide has a 
width of 𝑊𝐼 = 1 µm to support the fundamental, first-order, and 
second-order modes with transverse-electric (TE) polarization in 
the wavelength range between 1450 nm and 1650 nm. The 
dimensions of the coupling region are 𝐺𝐼 = 400 nm , 𝐺𝐸 =
100 nm, 𝑊𝐸 = 200 nm and 𝐿𝑇 = 35 µm. These dimensions 
ensure that all the power in the three input waveguide modes is 
coupled to slab-propagating beams, simultaneously achieving a 
near-Gaussian profile for the three slab beams. Further details on 
the design are provided in Supplement 1, Section 1.

As shown in Fig. 2(a), higher-order modes begin to couple to slab 

beams at early taper positions owing to their weaker modal 
confinement. The TE2 (green), TE1 (orange) and TE0 (red) modes 

are completely radiated along the taper as Gaussian-like beams 
focused on different output points, namely O3, O2 and O1 with 
respective angles 𝜃2 = 34°, 𝜃1 = 37° and 𝜃0 = 44° . Figures 
2(b), 2(c) and 2(d) show the normalized electric field profile at 
these focusing points (fixed 𝑦-position) and along the 𝑥-direction. 
The radiated fields are fitted to Gaussians with distinct mode field 
diameters (MFDs), yielding a high overlap integral of 97% for TE0
input, 88% for TE1 input, and 92% for TE2 input. MFDs used for 
the Gaussians represented by solid blue curves are 2.4 µm, 3.2 µm 
and 5.4 µm. The calculated transmittance to each output is shown 
in Figs. 2(e), 2(f) and 2(g) when TE0, TE1, and TE2 modes are 
injected into the strip waveguide, respectively. Simulations show 
insertion losses as low as 0.14 dB at the central wavelength for TE0, 

Fig. 2. (a) Three-dimensional schematic of the proposed three-mode demultiplexer comprising a tapered waveguide and an adjacent slab. The PMMA 
cladding is not shown for clarity. The simulated electric field distribution in the 𝑥𝑦-plane at mid-height of the Si layer is superimposed on the structure when 
TE0 (red), TE1 (orange) and TE2 (green) are injected at𝜆0 = 1550 nm. Output waveguide apertures are located at the focal points Om+1 to collect the free-
propagating beams. Normalized electric field magnitude |𝐸𝑦| for (b) TE0, (c) TE1 and (d) TE2 input. Simulated results are obtained from the leaked-field 
distribution within the slab at the optimum position in the 𝑦-direction for each focal point and along the 𝑥-axis. The simulated transmittance to each of the 
output as a function of the wavelength when (e) TE0, (f) TE1 and (g) TE2 are launched into the strip nanowire.


with a slight increase to 0.65 dB and 0.69 dB for TE1 and TE2
modes, respectively.
The
degradation of efficiency with 

wavelength detuning has its origin in chromatic dispersion, which 
causes a shift of the focal point. Nevertheless, the demultiplexer 
exhibits a remarkable low crosstalk within a broad bandwidth of 
200 nm. Specifically, the attained crosstalk values are better than -
41 dB for TE0, -40 dB for TE1 and -28 dB for TE2 demultiplexing 
over the entire simulated bandwidth. The effect of potential 
fabrication imperfections on device performance is discussed in 
Supplement 1, Section 2.

C. Fabrication and experimental characterization of the
MDM link
We implemented an MDM link by connecting two mode 
(de)multiplexers in a back-to-back configuration. The link 
comprises three input and three output single-mode waveguides 
and a central multimode waveguide. The input multiplexer couples 
the fundamental mode of each input waveguide to a different mode 
of the multimode section. The output demultiplexer couples each 
mode of the multimode waveguide to the fundamental mode of one 
output waveguide. Focusing grating couplers optimized for TE 
polarization are used to inject and extract the light from the chip 
with a fiber array. We included a reference waveguide on the 
outermost part of the test structure. The device was fabricated using 
a 220-nm-thick single crystal Si layer of an SOI wafer, with a 3-
µm-thick buried oxide (BOX) layer. The patterns were defined by 
electron-beam lithography (RAITH EBPG 5000 Plus) and 

transferred via reactive ion etching (ICP-DRIE SPTS). Optical and 
scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were taken prior the 
deposition of the upper cladding. The sample was then spin coated 
with a 1.5-µm-thick PMMA. Figure 3(a) shows optical images of 
the MDM link, with zoomed-in SEM images of the taper-slab 
coupling region and the collecting output waveguides.

Experimental characterization of the link transmittance is shown 

in Figs. 3(b), 3(c) and 3(d), when the light is injected through inputs 
I2, I3, and I4, respectively. The transmittance of each output is 
obtained by normalizing the measured power at the output ports to 
the measured power at the reference waveguide output in order to 
calibrate out the fiber-chip coupling loss. The measured insertion 
losses are as low as 0.3 dB, 0.9 dB and 1.7 dB at the transmission 
peak wavelengths with 1-dB bandwidths of 143 nm, 96 nm, and 84 
nm for the TE0, TE1, and TE2 mode channels, respectively. Losses 
of higher-order modes are larger than fundamental mode losses due 
to slightly lower overlap with the Gaussian-like profile of the 
collecting output waveguide modes. On the other hand, measured 
inter-modal crosstalk is below -31.4 dB, -28.3 dB and -25.4 dB at 
the transmission peak wavelengths for TE0, TE1, and TE2 mode 
channels, respectively. Additionally, unprecedented crosstalk 
values reaching -40 dB over a broad bandwidth is observed for TE0
and TE2 channels. Considering 1443 – 1638 nm wavelength range 
(195 nm bandwidth), the crosstalk is better than -20 dB for all the 
channels. Transmission peaks of the three channels are slightly
shifted towards shorter wavelengths. We attribute this small
discrepancy with simulations to intrinsic fabrication variability.

Fig. 3. (a) Optical and scanning electron microscope images of the fabricated MDM link. Input and outputs have been numbered from right to left. The top-
right inset shows details of collecting output waveguides, whereas the bottom-right inset shows the taper-slab coupling region. Measured transmission spectra 
of the complete multiplexer-demultiplexer link for light input at (b) I2, (c) I3, and (d) I4, which correspond to TE0, TE1, and TE2 channels, respectively.


4. POLARIZATION DIVISION MULTIPLEXING
A. Design of the two-polarization demultiplexer
We exploit the proposed approach to demultiplex the two 
orthogonal TE and transverse-magnetic (TM) polarizations in the 
waveguide. The proposed two-polarization demultiplexer is 
schematically shown in Fig. 4(a). In this case, we choose a slot 
waveguide to achieve sufficient angular separation for the slab 
beams excited by the fundamental TE0 and TM0 waveguide 
modes, respectively. The propagation angles for the beams phase-
matched to the TE0 and TM0 modes of a strip waveguide, 
calculated as a function of the waveguide width (𝑊), are 
shown in Fig. 4(b). The angle difference is lower than 10°, 
hampering the spatial separation of the two beams. The 
propagation angle of the slab-propagating beam is governed by the 
ratio between the effective indices of the waveguide and the slab, as 
dictated by Eq. (2). The effective indices of the TE0 and TM0 
modes of a strip waveguide are quite different (e.g., 0.66 for 
𝑊 = 500 nm and 1550 nm wavelength). However, the ratio 
with the slab indices is very similar (e.g., 0.86 for 𝑊 = 500
nm and 1550 nm wavelength), resulting in a comparable 
propagation angle for the slab-propagating beams. This 
limitation is overcome using a slot waveguide. We fix a slot 
width of 𝐺𝑆 = 100 nm and calculate the propagation angles for 
the TE0 (𝜃𝑇𝐸) and TM0 (𝜃𝑇𝑀) modes of the slot waveguide as 
a function of the rail width, 𝑊𝑅 [see Fig. 4(c)]. For the input 
waveguide, we choose a rail width of 𝑊𝑅 = 350 nm, yielding 
initial propagation angles of 𝜃𝑇𝐸 = 47° and 𝜃𝑇𝑀 = 60°.

The rail width and the separation between the slab and the slot 

waveguide are linearly reduced along the coupling region to 
achieve a near-Gaussian profile at the focal points for the two slab
beams. The optimized geometrical parameters are 𝐺𝐼 = 400 nm
to 𝐺𝐸 = 100 nm, 𝑊𝐸 = 100 nm and 𝐿𝑇 = 20 µm. 3D FDTD 
simulations are carried out to assess the performance of the 
polarization beam splitter (PBS). The fields radiated into the slab 
have an MFD of 4 µm for TE0 input and 6.8 µm for TM0 input. 
The simulated transfer function for each polarization is shown in 
Figs. 4(d) and 4(e). Insertion losses are as low as 0.26 dB for the 
TE0 mode and 0.15 dB for the TM0 mode at the central 
wavelength. Crosstalk is -61.9 dB and -47.9 dB at the same 
wavelength when TE0 and TM0 modes are injected, respectively. 
Notably, the crosstalk is below -37.4 dB for both modes within the 
simulated bandwidth.

B. Fabrication and experimental characterization of the 
PDM link
We fabricated complete PDM links comprising two polarization 
beam splitters connected in a back-to-back configuration, using the 
same SOI wafers and fabrication methods described in Section 3.C. 
Optical and SEM images of the fabricated devices are shown in 
Fig. 5(a). Two PDM links with nominally identical dimensions for 
the multiplexers and different grating couplers were fabricated to
characterize losses and crosstalk, respectively. The PDM link used
for loss characterization has grating couplers optimized for TE
polarization for input 4 and output 5 and grating couplers optimized 

Fig. 4. (a) Schematic top view of the proposed two-polarization 
demultiplexer comprising a tapered slot waveguide and an adjacent slab. 
The PMMA cladding is not shown for clarity. The inset shows the 
geometry of the slot waveguide. Propagation angle within the slab of TE0
and TM0 modes as a function of the waveguide width for (b) a strip 
waveguide and (c) a slot waveguide, calculated for a Si thickness of 220 nm 
at 𝜆0 = 1550 nm. The simulated transmittance to each of the output as a 
function of the wavelength when (d) TE0 and (f) TM0 are launched into the 
slot nanowire.

for TM polarization for input 3 and output 6. The PDM link used 
for crosstalk characterization has TE grating couplers for input 4
and output 6 and TM grating couplers for input 3 and output 5. TE 
and TM grating couplers have similar radiation angles. Each link 
includes two reference waveguides on the outermost part to 
perform the alignment and transmittance normalization for both TE 
and TM polarizations.

The transmittance of the link is characterized using the 

experimental setup described in Supplement 1, Section 3. 
Measured peak insertion losses are as low as 0.5 dB with a 1-dB 
bandwidth exceeding 100 nm and crosstalk of -40.1 dB for TE0, 
and as low as 0.7 dB with a 1-dB bandwidth exceeding 108 nm and 
a crosstalk of -46.7 dB for TM0. Ultra-low inter-modal crosstalk of 
<-35 dB is attained for both polarizations within the measured 180-
nm bandwidth. Crosstalk reaching values below -40dB could be 
observed in the 1542 – 1680 nm wavelength range for the TM0
channel.


Fig. 5. (a) Optical and scanning electron microscope images of one of the fabricated PDM links. Input and outputs have been numbered from right to left. The 
top-right inset shows details of collecting output waveguides, whereas the bottom-right inset shows the slot-slab coupling region. Measured transmission 
spectra of the complete multiplexer-demultiplexer link for light input at (b) I4 and (c) I3, which correspond to TE0 and TM0 channels, respectively.

Fig. 6. Crosstalk penalty assessment of MDM and PDM links for a transmission bit rate of 40 Gbps at 1549 nm. Bit-error-rate measurements as a function of 
the received power for (a) TE0 channel, (b) TE1 channel and (c) TE2 channel of the MDM link, and for (f) TE0 channel and (e) TM0 channel of the PDM link. 
The insets show the corresponding eye diagrams of the demultiplexed signals (𝑥-axis: 5ps/div and 𝑦-axis: 0.5 mV/div). Ref, Reference; XT, Crosstalk; CH, 
Channel.


5. HIGH-SPEED DATA TRANSMISSION
We have characterized the data transmission performance of the 
three-mode and two-polarization multiplexed links in terms of bit-
error-rate. The experimental setup employed is described in 
Supplement 1, Section 3. The figure of merit used to quantify the 
dynamic performance is the power penalty, defined as the 
difference in optical power measured in the receiver with and 
without signal impairment (i.e., crosstalk), for error-free 
transmission (BER<10-9) without using any correction technique. 
Figure 6 shows the evolution of the BER as a function of the 
received power for the reference, single-port transmission, and 
MDM and PDM operation. For the MDM link, the worst case is 
when all three signals are introduced simultaneously due to the 
crosstalk of the aggressor channels. Still, the power penalties are as 
low as 0.5 dB, 1.5 dB and 0.6 dB for TE0, TE1 and TE2 mode 
channels, respectively. As expected from static measurements, the 
highest power penalty is obtained for TE1 mode channel since the 
crosstalk of the aggressor channels towards this other channel is 
higher [see Fig. 3(b) and 3(d), orange curves]. The PDM link, on 
the other hand exhibits negligible power penalties for both TE0
(0.08 dB) and TM0 (0.03 dB) channels. Power difference between 
reference (Ref) and single-port (w/o XT) measurements are 0 dB 
(TE0 channel), 0.04 dB (TE1 channel) and 0.06 dB (TE2 channel) 
for the MDM link, and 0.25 dB (TE0 channel) and 0.19 dB (TM0
channel) for the PDM link. In all cases, the demultiplexed signals 
exhibit clear and open eye diagrams indicating a low effective 
crosstalk, as shown in the insets of Fig. 6. These results indicate that 
the proposed devices have an excellent potential for error-free data 
transmission, paving the way for next-generation MDM and PDM 
communication applications.

6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we have shown a new approach for spatial and 
polarization multiplexing, exploiting the excitation of optical beams 

free-propagating in the chip plane to achieve state-of-the-art 
performance. To demonstrate the concept, we have developed a 
three-mode and a two-polarization links allowing error-free 
propagation of 40 Gbps signals with negligible power penalties. 
The three-mode link takes advantage of the strong modal
dispersion in strip waveguides to realize mode multiplexing and 
conversion based on free-space-like optical beam forming on chip. 
The proposed three-mode link comprising a multiplexer and a 
demultiplexer shows a measured crosstalk lower than -20 dB over a 
195 nm bandwidth (1443 – 1638 nm) that fully covers the S, C and 
L telecommunication bands, and partially covers the E and U 
bands. Furthermore, insertion losses lower than 1.7 dB with a 1-dB 
bandwidth of 84 nm are attained for all three modes. The two-
polarization link harnesses birefringence engineering in slot 
waveguides to yield an ultra-low crosstalk below -35 dB within the 
1500 – 1680 nm wavelength range for both polarizations (covering 
the entire C, L, and U bands, and part of the S band). 
Measurements also showed low insertion losses (<0.7 dB) for TE0
and TM0, with a 1-dB bandwidth exceeding 100 nm, limited at the 
upper bound by the wavelength range of the laser available in our 
setup.

The low crosstalk values (<-40 dB) observed in the MDM link 

for TE0 and TE2 modes suggest that increasing the separation of the 
focal points within the slab is a simple but effective way to reduce 
crosstalk. This could be achieved by increasing the taper length to 
increase the focal length or by bending the coupling region. On the 
other hand, insertion losses of higher-order modes could be further 
reduced by improving the overlap between the modes coupled to 
the slab free-propagation region and the Gaussian-like profile of the 
collecting output waveguide modes, for example by implementing 
a nonlinear taper in the coupling region. Nevertheless, the proposed 
devices are, to the best of our knowledge, among the mode 
multiplexers and polarization beam splitters with lowest measured 
crosstalk within an ultra-broad bandwidth. For the sake of 

.

Table 1. Comparison of Demonstrated State-of-the-art Three-channel MDM Links and PBSa

MDM/PBS
Ref.
Architecture
IL [dB]
BWCT<-20 dB [nm]
BWCT<-30 dB [nm]
L [µm]

MDM

[7]
Asymmetric Y-junction
3.3 ~ 5.7
-
-
320

[9]
Counter-tapered coupler
~10*
-
-
200

[10]
Adiabatic coupler
~0.2
65
-
310

[11]
Subwavelength asymmetric Y-junction
<2.5
~50*
-
4.8

[12]
Subwavelength DC
<3.8
-
-
>100*

This work
In-slab beamforming
0.3 ~ 1.7
195
-
35

PBS

[14]
MMI
1.2 ~ 2.2-
-
-
132.64

[15]
MZI
~15
~20*
-
340

[16]
DC
<0.5 
125
-
97.4

[17]
ADC
-
-
-
25.5

[18]
Counter-tapered coupler
<0.5
15*
-
5

[19]
Bent DC
<0.35
135
70
20

[20]
Cascaded triple bent DC
<0.8
90
~50
~26

[21]
MMI with photonic crystal
<0.81
77
-
71.5

[22]
Slot ADC 
-
-
-
>13.6

[23]
Subwavelength MMI
<2.5
-
-
92.7

[24]
Tilted-nanograting
<1.5*
-
-
>6.8

This work
In-slab beamforming
0.3 ~ 0.4
>180
>180
20

aValues marked with an asterisk correspond to values estimated from figures. IL, Insertion Loss; CT, Crosstalk; BW, Bandwidth; L, Length.


comparison, Table 1 shows the performance of demonstrated state-
of-the-art three-channel MDM links and polarization beam 
splitters. Note that state-of-the-art polarization beam splitters have 
been usually measured in standalone configuration, therefore, we 
have halved the insertion losses measured by our PDM link to 
ensure a fair comparison.

A high-speed optical communications demonstration was also 

performed to illustrate the applicability of the proposed devices. 
System-level experiments at 40 Gbps without forward error 
correction were conducted for both MDM and PDM links, 
showing clear and open eye diagrams during the joint transmission 
of data channels. BER measurements further validated the good 
transmission capabilities with less than a 1.5 dB power penalty for 
the MDM link and below 0.08 dB for the PDM link. The ease of 
scalability of the proposed architecture along with such low 
penalties can be exploited to implement hybrid WDM-PDM-
MDM optical links to significantly enhance the transmission 
capacity.

The strategy demonstrated here could seamlessly be extended for 

a larger number of modes and simultaneous modal and polarization 
multiplexing. The low crosstalk, wide bandwidth and versatility of 
the proposed multiplexing approach presented in this work will 
open up unique possibilities in quantum information sciences, 
optical sensing, on-chip wireless communications and nonlinear 
photonics.

Funding. French Industry Ministry (Nano2022 project under IPCEI 
program); Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-MIRSPEC-17-
CE09-0041);
European 
Union’s 
Horizon 
Europe 
(Marie 

Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement Nº 101062518) The fabrication 
of the device was performed at the Plateforme de Micro-Nano-
Technologie/C2N, which is partially funded by the Conseil General 
de l’Essonne. This work was partly supported by the French 
RENATECH network.

Disclosures. The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Data availability. Data underlaying the results presented in this 
paper are not publicly available at this time but may be obtained 
from the authors upon reasonable request.

Supplemental document. See Supplement 1
for supporting 

content.

References
1. S. Bernabé, Q. Wilmart, K. Hasharoni, K. Hassan, Y Thonnart, P. 

Tissier, Y. Désières, S. Olivier, T. Tekin, and B. Szelag, “Silicon 
photonics for terabit/s communication in data centers and exascale 
computers,” Solid State Electron. 179, 107928 (2021).

2. S. Rumley, M. Bahadori, R. Polster, S. D. Hammond, D. M. Calhoun, 

K. Wen, A. Rodrigues, and K. Bergman, “Optical interconnects for 
extreme scale computing systems,” Parallel Comput. 64, 65-80 
(2017).

3. P. J. Winzer, D. T. Neilson, and A. R. Chraplyvy, “Fiber-optic 

transmission and networking: the previous 20 and the next 20 years,” 
Opt. Express 26, 24190-24239 (2018).

4. H. Yu, D. Patel, W. Liu, Y. Malinge, P. Doussiere, W. Lin, S. Gupta, 

K. Narayanan, I. Hoshino, M. Bresnehan, S. Sunkoju, D. Mategazza, 
R. Herrick, R. Venables, H. Mahalingam, P. Seddighian, A. Fuerst, J. 
Davis, D. Gold, X. Pan, K. Al-hemyary, A. Agrawal, Y. Li, X. 
Zheng, M. Geethachar, M. Favaro, D. Zhu, A. Liu, and Y. Akulova, 
“800 Gbps fully integrated silico photonics transmitter for data center 

applications,” in 2022 Optical Fiber Communication Conference 
(OFC) (Optical Publishing Group, 2022), p. M2D.7.

5. D. Dai and J.E. Bowers, “Silicon-based on-chip multiplexing 

technologies and devices for Peta-bit optical interconnects;” 
Nanophotonics 3, 283-311 (2014).

6. D. González-Andrade, A. Dias, J. Gonzalo Wangüemert-Pérez, A. 

Ortega-Moñux, Í. Molina-Fernández, R. Halir, P. Cheben, and A. V. 
Velasco, “Experimental demonstration of a broadband mode 
converter and multiplexer based on subwavelength grating 
waveguides,” Opt. Laser Technol. 129, 106297 (2020).

7. W. Chen, P. Wang, T. Yang, G. Wang, T. Dai, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, X. 

Jiang, and J. Yang, “Silicon three-mode (de)multiplexer based on 
cascaded asymmetric Y-junctions,” Opt. Lett. 41, 2851-2854 (2016).

8. D. Dai, J. Wang, and Y. Shi, “Silicon mode (de)multiplexer enabling 

high capacity photonic networks-on-chip with a single-wavelength-
carrier light,” Opt. Lett. 38, 1422-1424 (2013).

9. J. Wang, Y. Xuan, M. Qi, H. Huang, Y. Li, M. Li, X. Chen, Z. Sheng, 

A. Wu, W. Li, X. Wang, S. Zou, an F. Gan, “Broadband and 
fabrication-tolerant on-chip scalable mode-division multiplexing 
based on mode-evolution counter-tapered couplers,” Opt. Lett. 40,
1956-1959 (2015).

10. C. Li and D. Dai, “Low-loss and low-crosstalk multi-channel mode 

(de)multiplexer with ultrathin silicon waveguides,” Opt. Lett. 42,
2370-2373 (2017).

11. W. Chang, L. Lu, X. Ren, D. Li, Z. Pan, M. Cheng, D. Liu, and M. 

Zhang, 
“Ultra-compact 
mode 
(de) 
multiplexer 
based 
on 

subwavelength asymmetric Y-junction,” Opt. Express 26, 8162-8170 
(2018).

12. Y. He, Y. Zhang, X. Jiang, C. Qiu, and Y. Su, “On-chip silicon three-

mode (de) multiplexer employing subwavelength grating structure,” 
in 2017 European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC)
(IEEE, 2017), pp. 1-3.

13. D. González-Andrade, R. Fernández de Cabo, J. Vilas, I. Olivares, A. 

Dias, J. M. Luque-González, J. G. Wangüemert-Pérez, A. Ortega-
Moñux, Í. Molina-Fernández, R. Halir, P. Cheben, and A. V. Velasco, 
“Mode converter and multiplexer with a subwavelength phase shifter 
for extended broadband operation,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 
33, 1262-1265 (2021).

14. M. Yin, W. Yang, Y. Li, X. Wang, and H. Li, “CMOS-compatible 

and fabrication-tolerant MMI-based polarization beam splitter,” Opt. 
Commun. 335, 48-52 (2015).

15. K. Morita and H. Uenohara, “Analytical and experimental 

investigation of a silicon photonic two-stage Mach-Zehnder delay 
interferometer-type polarization beam splitter,” IEEE Photonics J. 10,
6600908 (2018).

16. Z. Lu, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, N. A. F. Jaeger, and L. Chrostowski, 

“Wideband silicon photonic polarization beam spitter based on point-
symmetric cascaded broadband couplers,” Opt. Lett. 23, 29413-
29422 (2015).

17. J. Wang and D. Dai, “Ultra-small silicon polarization beam splitter 

based on cascaded asymmetry directional couplers,” in 2013 Optical 
Fiber Communication Conference (OFC) (Optica Publishing Group,
2013), p. OTh4I.1.

18. W. Chen, B. Zhang, P. Wang, S. Dai, W. Liang, H. Li, Q. Fu, J. Li, Y. 

Li, T. Dai, H. Yu, and J. Yang, “Ultra-compact and low-loss silicon 
polarization beam splitter using a particle-swarm-optimized counter-
tapered coupler,” Opt. Express 28, 30701-30709 (2020).

19. H. Wu, Y. Tan, and D. Dai, “Ultra-broadband high-performance 

polarizing beam splitter on silicon,” Opt. Express 25, 6069-6075 
(2017).

20. J. R. Ong, T. Y. L. Ang, E. Sahin, B. Pawlina, G. F. R. Chen, D. T. H. 

Tan, S. T. Lim, and C. E. Png, “Broadband silicon polarization beam 
splitter with a high extinction ratio using a triple-bent-waveguide 
directional coupler,” Opt. Lett. 4450-4453 (2017).


21. L. Xu, Y. Wang, E. El-Fiky, D. Mao, A. Kumar, Z. Xing, M. G. 

Saber, M. Jacques, and D. V. Plant, “Compact broadband polarization 
beam splitter based on multimode interference coupler with internal 
photonic crystal for the SOI platform,” J. Lightwave Technol. 37,
1231-1240 (2019).

22. S. Lin, J. Hu, and K. B. Crozier, “Ultracompact, broadband slot 

waveguide polarization splitter,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 151101 (2011).

23. L. Xu, Y. Wang, A. Kumar, D. Patel, E. El-Fiky, Z. Xing, R. Li, and 

D. V. Plant, “Polarization beam splitter based on MMI coupler with 
SWG birefringence engineering on SOI,” IEEE Photonics Technol. 
Lett. 30, 403-406 (2018).

24. H. Liu, J. Feng, J. Ge, S. Zhuang, S. Yuan, Y. Chen, X. Li, Q. Tan, Q. 

Yu, and H. Zeng, “Tilted nano-grating based ultra-compact 
broadband polarizing beam splitter for silicon photonics,” 
Nanomaterials 11, 2645 (2021).

25. C. Williams, G. Zhang, R. Priti, G. Cowan, and O. Liboiron-

Ladouceur,
“Modal crosstalk in Silicon photonic multimode 

interconnects,” Opt. Express 27, 27712-27725 (2019).

26. H. M. Stoll, “Distributed Bragg deflector: a multifunctional integrated 

optical device,” Appl. Opt. 17, 2562-2569 (1978).

27. P. J. Bock, P. Cheben, A. Delâge, J. H. Schmid, D.-X. Xu, S. Janz, 

and T. J. Hall, “Demultiplexer with blazed waveguide sidewall 
grating and sub-wavelength grating structure,” Opt. Express 16,
17616-17625 (2008).

28. P. Cheben, P. J. Bock, J. H. Schmid, J. Lapoint, S. Janz, D.-X. Xu, A. 

Densmore, A. Delâge, B. Lamontagne, and T. J. Hall, “Refractive 
index engineering with subwavelength gratings for efficient 

microphotonic couplers and planar waveguide multiplexers,” Opt. 
Lett. 35, 2526-2528 (2010).

29. P. J. Bock, P. Cheben, J. H. Schmid, A. V. Velasco, A. Delâge, S. 

Janz, D.-X. Xu, J. Lapointe, T. J. Hall, and M. L. Calvo, 
“Demonstration of a curved sidewall grating demultiplexer on 
silicon,” Opt. Express 20, 19882-19892 (2012).

30. A. Hadij-ElHouati, A. Ortega-Moñux, J. G. Wangüemert-Pérez, R. 

Halir, S. Wang, J. H. Schmid, P. Cheben, and I. Molina-Fernández, 
“Low-loss off-axis curved waveguide grating demultiplexer,” Opt. 
Lett. 46, 4821-4824 (2021).

31. S. Kim, D. A. Westly, B. J. Roxworthy, Q. Li, A. Yulaev, K. 

Srinivasan, and V. A. Aksyuk, “Photonic waveguide to free-space 
Gaussian Beam extreme mode converter,” Light Sci. Appl. 7, 72 
(2018).

32. C. Ropp, A. Yulaev, D. Westly, G. Simelgor, and V. Aksyuk, “Meta-

grating outcouplers for optimized beam shaping in the visible,” Opt. 
Express 29, 14789-14798 (2021).

33. D. Headlad, W. Withayachumnankul, M. Fujita, and T. Nagatsuma, 

“Gratingless integrated tunneling multiplexer for terahertz waves,” 
Optica 8, 621-629 (2021).

34. T. Tamir and S. T. Peng, “Analysis and design of grating couplers,” 

Appl. Phys. 14, 235-254 (1977).

35. A. Sánchez-Postigo, J. G. Wangüemert-Pérez, J. M. Luque-González, 

Í. Molina-Fernández, P. Cheben, C. Alonso-Ramos, R. Halir, J. H. 
Schmid, A. Ortega-Moñux, “Broadband fiber-chip zero-order surface 
grating coupler with 0.4 dB efficiency,” Opt. Lett. 41, 3013-3016 
(2016).


Spatial and polarization division multiplexing 

harnessing on-chip optical beam forming: supplemental 

document

1.
Design of the coupling region for the mode and polarization demultiplexers

The coupling region is designed using two-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (2D FDTD) simulations combined with 
the effective index method. Initial strip and slot waveguide dimensions are chosen to support three transverse-electric (TE) 
modes and one TE and one transverse-magnetic (TM) modes, respectively. The initial gap (𝐺𝐼) is chosen to minimize back-
reflections at the boundary between the isolated waveguide and the waveguide coupled to the adjacent slab, resulting in 𝐺𝐼 =
400 nm for the three-mode demultiplexer and 𝐺𝐼 = 400 nm for the two-polarization demultiplexer. Final widths and 
separations are chosen to keep a minimum feature size of 100 nm. We sweep the taper length to ensure high transmission for 
demultiplexing of each mode, and more importantly, to verify the distance between the focal points of beams in the slab (also 
referred to as focal separation). The latter is crucial to place the collecting output waveguides on the slab without overlapping 
structures, power coupling or high crosstalk.

Figure S1(a) shows the transmittance as a function of the taper length for the design of the three-mode demultiplexer. 

Insertion losses of less than 1 dB can be achieved for all three modes with a taper length of 16.4 µm. However, the separation at 
adjacent focal points (i.e., between TE0 and TE1, and between TE1 and TE2) is only 5.3 µm. To ensure that there will be no 
overlap between the collecting waveguides, and to decrease crosstalk and insertion losses, we choose a taper length of 30 µm.
For this value, the insertion losses are 0.06 dB for TE0, 0.2 dB for TE1, and 0.64 dB for TE2, while the focal spacing is 
increased by 5 µm (to 10.3 µm).

A similar strategy is followed for the design of the polarization demultiplexer. In this case, maximum transmission is 

achieved for a taper length of 15 µm. However, due to the larger mode field diameter of the radiated fields (e.g., 3.4 µm for TE0
input and 6.4 µm for TM0) and the small variation of transmission with taper length, a tapered slot length of 20 µm is chosen 
increasing the focal separation from 10.6 µm to 13.2 µm. For the selected value, the TE0 and TM0 mode insertion losses drop 
slightly to 0.07 dB and 0.21 dB, respectively.

Fig. S1. Simulated (a) transmittance and (b) focal separation as a function of the taper length 𝐿𝑇 for the three-mode 
demultiplexer. Simulated (c) transmittance and (d) focal separation as a function of the taper length 𝐿𝑇 for the 
polarization beam splitter. Calculations are performed at the wavelength of 𝜆0 = 1550 nm.


2.
Study of fabrication tolerances

Tolerances to fabrication deviations are calculated using three-dimensional FDTD method for both the three-mode 
demultiplexer (see Fig. S2) and the polarization beam splitter (see Fig. S3). To mimic typical fabrication imperfections 
produced during the etching process, we modify the width of the waveguide and slab by also affecting the separation between 
the tapered waveguide and the slab (i.e., the central position of the waveguide and slab are maintained, and their width are 
widened or narrowed by ∆𝑊). The thickness of the silicon layer can also vary across the wafer, so we also study how a 
modified silicon height (by ∆𝐻) affects device performance.

From the simulated spectra for the three-mode demultiplexer shown in Fig. S2, a crosstalk lower than -25.7 dB can still be 

obtained over the simulated 200 nm bandwidth, which corresponds to the case of ∆𝑊 = +10 nm for TE2 input [see Fig. S2(c)]. 
The main effect of positive deviations in silicon width and height is a slight shift of the transmission peak towards longer 
wavelengths, while negative deviations produce the opposite effect. The largest shift of the transmission peak occurs for the 
TE0 mode with 40 nm and 55 nm for width errors of ∆𝑊 = +10 nm and ∆𝑊 = −10 nm, respectively. Nevertheless, the 
insertion losses at these peak wavelengths hardly suffer any degradation, reaching values of 0.2 dB for TE0 (∆𝑊 = −10 nm), 
0.71 dB for TE1 (∆𝑊 = −10 nm), and 0.81 dB for TE2 (∆𝐻 = −10 nm) considering for each mode the worst case among the 
deviations analyzed.

Fig. S2. Simulated transmittance spectra for the three-mode demultiplexer with deviated parameters. (a)-(c) Waveguide 
width variation (ΔW) of +10nm. (d)-(f) Waveguide width variation (ΔW) of -10 nm. (g)-(i) Silicon thickness variation 
(ΔH) of +10nm. (j)-(l) Silicon thickness variation (ΔH) of -10 nm.


The study of the polarization beam splitter fabrication tolerances shows that the crosstalk between TE0 and TM0 modes is 

lower than -35.2 dB in all cases over the entire simulated bandwidth [see Fig. S3(f), corresponding to ∆𝐻 = +10 nm for TM0
input]. Similar to the mode demultiplexer, the different deviations in the transverse dimensions of the waveguide and slab result 
in a transmission peak shift at which maximum insertion losses are 0.71 dB for TE0 input (∆𝑊 = −10 nm) and 0.9 for TM0
input (∆𝐻 = −10 nm) mode. The largest transmission peak shift occurs for TE0 mode (100 nm) for width errors of ∆𝑊 =
±10 nm.

Results shown in Figs. S2 and S3 show that low crosstalk can still be achieved for the proposed devices even with width and 

thickness variations as large as ±10 nm.

Fig. S3. Simulated transmittance spectra for the polarization beam splitter with deviated parameters. (a)-(c) Waveguide 
width variation (ΔW) of +10nm. (d)-(f) Waveguide width variation (ΔW) of -10 nm. (g)-(i) Silicon thickness variation 
(ΔH) of +10nm. (j)-(l) Silicon thickness variation (ΔH) of -10 nm.


3.
Characterization setups

Figure S4(a) shows the schematic of the setup used for the static characterization of the mode-division multiplexing and 
polarization-division multiplexing links.

For the mode-division multiplexing (MDM) link, we use two continuous-wave tunable external-cavity lasers (Yenista Tunics) 

connected to a data acquisition system (Yenista CT400) to sweep the 1440 – 1640 nm wavelength range. A three-paddle 
polarization controller is employed to inject TE-polarized light into the chip and the tilt angle of the fiber array is adjusted 
sequentially to perform the measurements in different spectral regions.

In order to characterize the transmission response for the polarization-division multiplexing (PDM) link, we employed the 

same experimental setup as for the MDM link but replaced the Yenista Tunics tunable laser by a high-power laser (Yenista 
T100S-HP) covering the 1500 – 1680 nm wavelength range to increase dynamic range and to ensure that the measurements are
not limited by the noise floor.

On the other hand, the evaluation of bit-error-rates (BER) and eye diagrams is performed using the setup illustrated in Fig. 

S4(b). Light from a distributed feedback laser emitting at a wavelength of 1549 nm is modulated with pseudo-random binary-
sequence (PRBS) pattern on-off keyed data in a non-return-to-zero (NRZ) format by an external modulator. The length of the 
PRBS patterns is 27-1 and the data rate of the pattern generator is set to 40 Gbps, which corresponds to its upper limit. Then, 
light is amplified using an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) and band-pass filtered to reduce the spontaneous emission 
noise. Two 50:50 coupler stages are cascaded (C1, C2 and C3) to generate four identical signals of approximately equal power. 
In this way, three signals could be connected to the device under test (DUT) and the fourth is used as reference to display the 
modulated input signal on one channel of a high-speed sampling oscilloscope (CSA spectrum analyzer, 60 GHz photodiode). 
To ensure the correct characterization of the DUT, the decorrelation of the data channels coupled to the device is performed by 
including a 1-km and 2-km-long optical fibers. A 1 m jumper is used on the remaining input to compensate for the connector 
losses. The polarization of each data channel is controlled with a polarization controller (PC) to inject TE or TM polarized light 
into the chip. The signal at the chip output is recovered one at a time and passes through a first 90:10 coupler (C4), where 10% 
of the power is directed to an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) for verification purposes. The remaining 90% is amplified and 
filtered again, and split by a second 90:10 coupler (C5). In this case, 10% of the power distributed by the coupler C5 is 
amplified and sent to the other channel of the sampling oscilloscope (CSA spectrum analyzer, 40 GHz photodiode) that gives 
the reconstructed eye diagram. The 90% power after C5 passes through a variable optical attenuator (VOA) and another 90:10 
coupler (C6), whose 90% output is routed to the receiver (RX) for BER evaluation and the 10% output is used to control the 
received power level with a power meter. Detection at the receiver is performed without the use of a limiting amplifier, optical 
preamplifier, or automatic gain control so that the assessment of transmission penalty is not minimized. To perform the 
measurements under the same conditions, the main signal always comes from the input connected to the 1 km optical fiber. 
This means that for the MDM link, the signal from the 1-km-long fiber is connected to input I2 for the characterization of the 
TE0 channel, to input I3 for the TE1 channel and to input I4 for the TE2 channel. The same procedure is used for the 
characterization of the PDM link.

Fig. S4. Schematics of the setups used to perform (a) static and (b) dynamic characterization of MDM and PDM links. 
TX, transmitter; EDFA, erbium-doped fiber amplifier; CX, coupler X, SSMF, standard single-mode fiber; PC, 
polarization controller; DUT, device under test; CSA, communications signal analyzer; OSA, optical spectrum analyzer; 
VOA, variable optical attenuator; PM, power meter; RX, receiver.


