Search for large topological gaps in atomic spin chains
on proximitized superconducting heavy metal layers

Philip Beck1,†, Bendeg´uz Ny´ari2,†, Lucas Schneider1, Levente R´ozsa3, Andr´as L´aszl´offy4, Kriszti´an
Palot´as2,4,5, L´aszl´o Szunyogh2,6, Bal´azs Ujfalussy4, Jens Wiebe1 and Roland Wiesendanger1

1Department of Physics, University of Hamburg, Jungiusstrasse 9A, 20355 Hamburg, Germany.
2Department of Theoretical Physics, Institute of Physics, Budapest University of Technology and
Economics, M˝uegyetem rkp. 3., H-1111 Budapest, Hungary.
3Department of Physics, University of Konstanz, D-78457 Konstanz, Germany.
4Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Institute for Solid State Physics and Optics, H-1525 Bu-
dapest, Hungary.
5ELKH-SZTE Reaction Kinetics and Surface Chemistry Research Group, University of Szeged,
H-6720 Szeged, Hungary.
6ELKH-BME Condensed Matter Research Group, Budapest University of Technology and Eco-
nomics, M˝uegyetem rkp. 3., H-1111 Budapest, Hungary.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract

One-dimensional systems comprising s-wave superconductivity with meticulously tuned mag-
netism and spin-orbit coupling can realize topologically gapped superconductors hosting Ma-
jorana edge modes whose stability is determined by the gap’s size. The ongoing quest for
larger topological gaps evolved into a material science issue. However, for atomic spin chains
on superconductor surfaces, the effect of the substrate’s spin-orbit coupling on the system’s
topological gap size is largely unexplored. Here, we introduce an atomic layer of the heavy
metal Au on Nb(110) which combines strong spin-orbit coupling and a large superconducting
gap with a high crystallographic quality enabling the assembly of defect-free Fe chains using
a scanning tunneling microscope tip. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy experiments and den-
sity functional theory calculations reveal ferromagnetic coupling and ungapped YSR bands
in the chain despite of the heavy substrate. By artificially imposing a spin spiral state our cal-
culations indicate a minigap opening and zero-energy edge state formation. The presented
methodology paves the way towards a material screening of heavy metal layers on elemental
superconductors for ideal systems hosting Majorana edge modes protected by large topolog-
ical gaps.

1

arXiv:2301.05622v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  13 Jan 2023


Main

Inducing spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in nanostructures has recently been of great interest in a
variety of disciplines related to surface science1 due to its close ties with the existence of non-
collinear magnetic states2–4, spin-split surface states5,6, topological surface states7,8 and topologi-
cal superconductivity9–11 which can be accompanied by Majorana bound states (MBS)12–18. Since
the latter is a promising candidate as a building block of topological quantum computation19, sys-
tems which may potentially host MBS have attracted a lot of interest. MBS may be realized in
chains of magnetic atoms, also called atomic spin chains, on s-wave superconductors14,18,20,21, ar-
tificially fabricated by atom manipulation with the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM)22.
Although first experimental realizations, e.g. Fe chains on Re(0001), show signatures of MBS in
scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS)18, the system suffers from the small energy gap ∆s of the
superconducting rhenium substrate, making a clear allocation of in-gap features difficult20. More
recent results of such atomic spin chains on Nb(110)23–25 circumvent this, but presumably at the
price of lower SOC, which manifests itself in the dominance of collinear magnetic ground states
due to weak Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction (DMI) terms26, and the hybridization of the spa-
tially extended precursors of MBS in experimentally accessible chain lengths24.
Aiming at maintaining the largest ∆s = 1.50 meV of all elemental superconductors combined
with the possibility of atom manipulation which the Nb substrate offer, there are two apparent ap-
proaches to induce a higher SOC in the system. On the one hand, one may think of using atoms
with larger atomic SOC, e.g. rare earth metals, for the formation of the atomic spin chain. On
the other hand, one can try to couple the chain to a heavy metal substrate with potentially larger
SOC, which is grown on Nb(110) and therefore becomes superconducting by proximity. First at-
tempts combining both approaches using Gd atoms on bismuth thin films grown on Nb(110) show
hybridization of the Yu–Shiba–Rusinov (YSR) states of small ensembles of 3-4 Gd atoms27. How-
ever, the assembly of longer chains and a formation of bands from the hybridizing YSR states,
which are both prerequisites for the emergence of topological superconductivity and MBSs, were
not possible for that system. Moreover, it is even unclear, whether a larger SOC in the constituents,
i.e. chain, substrate, or both of them, will lead to a larger SOC in the YSR bands of the hybrid
chain system which is finally relevant for the emergence of topological superconductivity with a
large topological gap and well-defined MBSs isolated at the ends of the chain.
Here, we investigate these questions pursuing the second approach by constructing Fe chains
on ultrathin Au films grown on Nb(110) used as a substrate. Au is well known to exhibit large
SOC5,28 and the proximity to Au has been demonstrated to enhance SOC-induced effects in light
elements, including the scattering rate29, the Rashba spin-splitting30,31, and also the magnetocrys-
talline anisotropy energy32. Moreover, twisted spin textures were predicted to occur around single
Fe atoms33 and in Mn chains34 on Au(111). Since previous LEED studies hint at the possibility
to grow pseudomorphic thin films of Au on Nb(110)35, it is a natural candidate to be used as a
proximitized superconducting heavy metal layer on Nb(110). Combining experimental STS and
density functional theory (DFT) calculations by solving the fully relativistic Dirac–Bogoliubov–de
Gennes (DBdG) equations of the single Fe adatom, dimers and chains, we study (i) whether there

2


is indeed a topological gap opening in the YSR bands due to the large SOC in the Au substrate,
and (ii) the effect of a different spin structure in the chain on the topological gap width and the
localization of MBSs.

Monolayer Au on Nb(110)

We first describe the growth and the superconducting properties of the heavy metal layer. We
aimed at the preparation of ultrathin Au films, maintaining the surface structure of Nb(110) as it
offers multiple distinct building directions for artificial chains, which enables some tuning of the
hybridization of YSR states26,36 and, therefore, of the in-gap band structure of such chains23,24. An
overview STM image of the Au/Nb(110) sample after the low-temperature deposition of Fe atoms
is shown in Figure 1a (preparation details in the Methods section). The Nb(110) surface is almost
completely covered by one monolayer (ML) of Au (see sketch in bottom panel of Figure 1a), with
only a few remaining holes. Pseudomorphic growth, as predicted by LEED studies35, is confirmed
by manipulated atom STM images37 (Supplementary Note 1 and Supplementary Figure 1) of the
first ML. Partially, the second ML Au has started to grow at step edges and in the form of a few
free-standing islands. In this ultrathin limit, we find that the energy gap of the superconducting Nb
is fully preserved in the ML Au due to the proximity effect, as demonstrated by the deconvoluted
dI/dV spectrum (see Methods and Supplementary Note 2 for the deconvolution procedure) taken
on the bare ML Au on Nb(110) far from any Fe atom in Figure 1c (gray curve). The energy gap on
the ML Au is of equal size as that of bare Nb(110) at our measurement temperature and the in-gap
dI/dV signal is zero (see Supplementary Figure 2). This behavior is crucial for our experiments,
but might be altered for thicker films as indicated by recent theoretical38,39 and experimental40,41

studies.

YSR states of single Fe atoms

We continue with the investigation of the YSR states induced by single Fe atoms, i.e. the building
blocks of chains. According to our DFT calculations the Fe adatom has a magnetic moment of
3.57µB with a preferred orientation perpendicular to the Au surface (Supplementary Note 5). A
close-up STM image of the statistically distributed single Fe adatoms is shown in Figure 1b, where
they appear as shallower protrusions on the first ML and as brighter spheres on the second ML.
We restrict ourselves to the first ML since only this layer has large enough terraces to construct
artificial chains. The Fe adatoms are adsorbed on the fourfold coordinated hollow sites on this ML
Au (Supplementary Note 1 and Supplementary Figure 1). Fe adatoms which are adsorbed far from
other adatoms or defects show similar dI/dV spectra as shown in the top panel of Figure 1c (red
curve). This reproducibility is required for a well-defined band formation in bottom-up fabricated
nanostructures made from such individual adatoms. On the adatoms we find two pairs of YSR

3


states induced in the gap of the Au ML which are marked by black arrows and greek letters42–44.
One of them is energetically located close to the Au ML gap edge (±α, ±1.23 meV) while the
other one is located close to the Fermi energy EF (±β, ±0.27 meV). We use constant-contour
maps (see Methods) to resolve the spatial distribution of both YSR states43,44, as shown in Fig-
ure 1d. The ±α state has a spatial distribution resembling that of a dyz orbital with two lobes
pointing along the [110] direction. On the other hand, a spatial distribution resembling that of a
dxz orbital extended along the [001] direction is observed for the ±β state. Note that the shapes of
the +β and the −β state are somewhat different since the former has additional faint lobes along
the [110] direction probably indicating contributions from a dx2−y2-like YSR state. The spatial
distributions are explainable by the orbital origin of YSR states26,43,44 and the point group C2v for
the system. However, note that the energetic order of the states is interchanged with respect to the
case of bare Nb(110)26, and that there are no obvious indications for the other two possible, dxy-
and dz2-like, YSR states, which might indicate an overlap of these peaks in energy with the dxz-,
dyz-, or dx2−y2-like YSR states, or that they are hidden in the coherence peaks of the substrate.
In order to further clarify these experimental results we calculated the local density of states
(LDOS) for a single Fe atom on the Au/Nb(110) film as shown in the top panel of Figure 2a
and Figure 2b (see Methods for the calculation details). There are three very close-by, almost
overlapping YSR states in the vicinity of the substrate’s coherence peaks (see also Supplementary
Figure 5a). They correspond to the dz2, dxy and dyz orbitals (see the +1.32 meV map in Figure 2b)
and the spatial distributions of the LDOS around these peaks are very sensitive to the exact en-
ergy (Supplementary Figure 5b). Due to their energetic location and orbital symmetries, we assign
them to the experimental ±α YSR state (c.f. Figure 1c and d) which appear as a single peak in the
dI/dV spectrum due to the finite-temperature smearing. Additionally, there are two most intense
peaks in the calculations which stem from two energetically close-by YSR states near EF where
the one closest to EF corresponds to the dx2−y2 orbital (see the +0.38 meV map in Figure 2b), and
the less intense one further apart from EF to the dxz orbital (see the −0.58 meV map in Figure 2b).
While the latter resembles the experimentally observed −β state, the former has more similarities
to the +β state (c.f. Figure 1d). These theoretical results indicate that the different spatial experi-
mental distributions of the +β and −β states in Figure 1d can be explained by supposing that they
correspond to two different YSR states of dx2−y2 and dxz orbital character which overlap within the
experimental energy resolution, rather than to a single YSR state. The two YSR peaks also overlap
in the theoretical calculations if a larger imaginary part is chosen for the energy, corresponding to
a higher effective temperature. Finally, note that the electron-hole asymmetries in the intensities of
the calculated peaks appear to be inverted compared to the experiment. With the exception of the
dxz-like YSR state, each pair of peaks has a larger electron contribution above EF (Supplementary
Figure 5a). The dxz-like YSR state has a higher electron contribution below EF which implies that
this state has the strongest coupling to the substrate.

4


YSR states of Fe dimers

Before we continue with the investigation of Fe dimers, we consider some intuitive ideas about the
most promising orientations of chains built from individual Fe atoms towards the goal of topologi-
cally gapped YSR bands. As found in previous works23–25,45, enabling a sufficient hybridization of
a YSR state which is already close to EF, while, at the same time, minimizing the hybridizations of
all the other YSR states far from EF may lead to a single YSR band overlapping with EF. Together
with SOC, this can be a sufficient condition for the opening of a topologically non-trivial gap in the
lowest-energy band. Starting from the experimentally detected shapes and energies of the α and β
YSR states (Figure 1d) we thus regard chains along the [001] direction as most promising. For this
orientation, we expect weak and strong hybridizations, respectively, for the α and β YSR states
which are far and close to EF. While a manipulation of close-packed dimers along [001] turned out
to be impossible, we were able to tune the system into the above conditions using dimers with a
distance of 2a along [001] (see STM image in Figure 1e). A dI/dV spectrum measured above the
center of the dimer as well as constant-contour maps of the spatial distributions of the three evident
states are displayed in the bottom panel (orange curve) of Figure 1c and Figure 1e, respectively. In
this configuration, the ±α YSR states of the two atoms do not overlap significantly such that they
do not split into hybridized states, but only slightly shift in energy. In contrast, the ±β YSR states
of the two atoms strongly overlap, and split into an energetically higher one with a clear nodal line
in the center between both impurities (±βa) and another energetically lower one with an increased
intensity in the center (±βs).
These experimental conclusions are corroborated by our calculations (bottom panel of Figure 2a
and Figure 2c). Apparently, all five pairs of single-atom YSR states are split, as expected from
previous experimental and theoretical studies26,46. Although based on the orbital decomposition it
is possible to separate all of the ten pairs (Supplementary Figure 6), the splitting of the three YSR
states contributing to the α YSR state is particularly small, in accordance with the experiment,
which makes it hard to resolve them in the total LDOS. In Figure 2c we plot the LDOS maps of
the six most relevant peaks in Figure 2a. We find that the very weakly splitted dyz YSR states at
+1.32 meV and +1.30 meV which are assigned to the experimental α YSR state appear with an
almost identical shape as the single atom dyz YSR state (c.f. Figure 2b). In contrast, the dx2−y2 and
dxz YSR states strongly split into states with larger (at +0.79 meV and −0.53 meV) and smaller
(at +0.04 meV and −0.66 meV) intensities in the center between both impurities and are thus
associated with the experimental ±βs and ±βa YSR states, respectively. We thus conclude, that
while the α YSR states hybridize only very weakly, the β YSR states hybridize strongly and split
into states which resemble anti-symmetric and symmetric linear combinations of the single atom
YSR states47–49, which can be seen as a prerequisite for band formation from the hybridizing β
YSR states.

5


Gapless YSR band in ferromagnetic Fe chains on Au monolayer

Having identified a promising orientation and interatomic spacing from the investigation of the
single atom and the dimer above, we move on to study artificial chains with the same interatomic
separation, called 2a − [001] chains in the following. A sketch illustrating this geometry and an
STM image of a nine Fe atoms long Fe9 2a − [001] chain are shown in the top panels of Figure 3a
and b. Spin-polarized measurements of a Fe19 2a−[001] chain indicate that the atoms in this chain
configuration prefer ferromagnetic alignment (Supplementary Note 3). This is also supported by
our DFT calculations (Supplementary Note 5). We found that the DMI is around 10% of the
Heisenberg exchange interaction in the dimer. Although this is not particularly weak, the SOC in
the Au layer additionally induces a very strong out-of-plane on-site anisotropy, which prevents the
formation of spin-spirals and stabilizes a normal-to-plane ferromagnetic spin structure.
A dI/dV line profile (see Methods) was measured in the center of such a chain along its main
axis and is plotted in Figure 3a (bottom panel) alongside the acquired stabilization height profile
(middle panel). The first apparent characteristic of this measurement is the modulation of every
feature with the interatomic spacing of 2a in these chains, which is also visible in the height pro-
file. It should be emphasized that this is not a feature of the chains’ in-gap band structure but is
just due to the lattice-periodic part of the wave function. However, we find additional states with
different well-defined numbers of maxima at increasing energy and also very close to EF as indi-
cated by the labels nβ (nβ − 1) for the numbers of maxima (nodes). Note that all these states have
particle-hole partners occurring on the other side of EF with the same energetic distance to EF and
equal numbers of maxima and nodes. However, they mostly have much smaller intensities such
that they are barely visible. These pairs of states can thus be assigned to confined Bogoliubov-
de-Gennes (BdG) quasiparticles residing in a YSR band induced by the finite magnetic chain in
the superconductor23. To determine the orbital origin of these states, we show dI/dV maps (see
Methods) of the Fe9 2a − [001] chain in Figure 3b. We find that the confined BdG states identified
before in Figure 3a are localized inside the spatial extent of the chain deduced from the STM im-
age (dashed red elliptical circumference). We assign those states to a band formed by the strong
hybridization of the ±β YSR states of the single adatoms as they are expected to be largely local-
ized along the longitudinal axis of the chain. Additionally, there is a state at a similar energy as
the single adatom and dimer ±α YSR states around ±1.09 meV. This state has exactly as many
maxima as there are atoms in the chain, namely 9, which are spatially localized along both sides of
the chain with a similar distance to the chain axis as the lobes of the single adatom and dimer’s ±α
YSR states (c.f. Figure 1d and e). Therefore, we assign this state to the very weakly hybridizing
±α YSR states of the single atom. The state is not observed in the dI/dV line profile of Figure 3a
due to its nodal line along the longitudinal chain axis.
In order to measure the dispersion of the confined BdG states from the β YSR band, we collect
similar dI/dV line profiles as the one in Figure 3a of defect-free chains for lengths ranging from
N = 7 to N = 14 atoms (Fe7 − Fe14, see Supplementary Note 4 and Supplementary Figure 4).
It can be observed that the confined BdG quasiparticle states shift in energy as a function of the
length L = N · d = N · 2a of the chain, as expected from the length-dependent interference

6


condition
q = |q| = ±2πn

L
(1)

where n is an integer and |q| is the length of the BdG quasiparticle scattering vector23. For par-
ticular chain lengths, the confined BdG quasiparticle states can be located very close to EF (c.f.
Fe8 and Fe10 in Supplementary Figure 4). We perform one-dimensional fast Fourier transforms
(1D-FFT) of the columns of the dI/dV line profiles at fixed energy E averaging all data sets taken
for chains of multiple lengths, and thereby obtain the dispersion of the scattering vectors E(q)
(Figure 3c). This dispersion is closely linked to the β YSR band structure. We find that this band
has an approximately parabolic dispersion ranging from −0.9 meV at q/2 = 0 to +0.5 meV at
q/2 = π/d. Note that, as already discussed for the dI/dV line profiles above, the particle-hole
partner of this band has a much lower intensity. It is only visible around the Brillouin zone center
(q/2 = 0) in our measurements. Most importantly, the β YSR band smoothly crosses EF without
any indications of a minigap opening.
An overall similar behaviour is found using our ab-initio framework. We performed calculations
for 2a − [001] chains of lengths ranging from 9 to 19 Fe atoms with ferromagnetic spin alignment
(Supplementary Note 7 and Supplementary Figure 7). Exemplarily, the calculated LDOS along
a Fe9 chain is shown in Figure 4a and can be directly compared to the measured line profile in
Figure 3a. The band formation of the YSR states can clearly be observed in a wide range of the
substrate gap in the form of LDOS lines with a well-defined number of maxima along the chain
as indicated in the figure. In Figure 4b we present the corresponding spatial distributions of the
LDOS of the Fe9 chain in the form of two-dimensional maps for a selection of confined BdG states
with the indicated dominant orbital characters and numbers of maxima (see the Methods section
for calculation details). The states closest to the substrate’s coherence peaks with nyz = 2 (and
admixed nyz = 4) and nz2 = 3 maxima have dyz and dz2 orbital characters, respectively. They
reside in a very narrow band formed by the weakly interacting α YSR states of the Fe atoms (Fig-
ure 2), which explains the low dispersion of this band. On the contrary, wide bands are formed by
the strong hybridization of the β YSR states, i.e. a dx2−y2 YSR band (between -0.2 meV and +1.1
meV) having high intensities on both sides along the longitudinal axis of the chain and a dxz YSR
band (between -0.8 meV and 0 meV) characterized by high intensities between the atoms of the
chain (Figure 4a,b). In order to deduce the dispersions of these YSR bands from the theoretical
calculations we applied the same 1D-FFT method as in the experiment (see also Ref. 23), and
averaged over chains containing 9, 11, 13, 14, 17 and 19 Fe atoms (Supplementary Figure 7). The
result is plotted in Figure 4c and can be compared to the experimental dispersion in Figure 3c.
The most characteristic, broad bands are the dx2−y2 and dxz YSR bands between -0.2 meV and
1.1 meV and between -0.8 and 0 meV, respectively. While the energy range of the dxz YSR band
agrees reasonably well with that of the experimental β band, the dx2−y2 YSR band is probably not
detected significantly in the experimental data (Figure 3c). The latter might be explained by the
small intensity of the experimental +β state (Figure 1d) which is not reproduced by the calcula-
tions (Figure 2a). Most importantly, the theoretical study confirms the lack of a detectable minigap
at EF in the YSR bands.

7


Minigap and end states in spin spiral Fe chains on Au monolayer

At first sight, the missing minigap seems surprising. For similar ferromagnetic chains on the lighter
substrates Nb(110) and Ta(110) there are already clear indications for the openings of topological
minigaps 23,50. It is widely accepted that topological minigaps hosting MBSs can open in the
quasiparticle spectrum of one-dimensional helical spin systems being proximity-coupled to a con-
ventional s-wave superconductor 14,15,18,51. For ferromagnetic chains, this phenomenon has been
attributed to a Rashba-type SOC induced by the substrate52, which is equivalent to a spin spiral
structure without SOC in a single-band tight-binding model53. As outlined in the introduction
above, the heavier material Au is well known to exhibit large SOC5,28. However, as our experi-
ments and calculations show, it obviously does not induce a spin-spiral state in the Fe chain, and
likewise does not induce a SOC of sufficient strength in the YSR bands of the ferromagnetic chain
to open a detectable minigap. In order to trace whether we can still force the system into a state with
a large topological gap ∆ind just by artificially imposing a suitable non-collinear spin state onto the
chain, we performed calculations for the same chains as before, but now imposing a helical spin
spiral state (Figure 5, Supplementary Note 8, and Supplementary Figure 8). The configuration of
the spin spiral was such that the first Fe site had its spin pointing along the positive z direction and
then each spin is rotated by 90◦ around the chain axis when moving along the chain (Figure 5a).
Indeed, there are two significant features which emerge in the LDOS of the spin-spiral chain with
19 iron atoms (Figure 5b), which were absent in the LDOS of the ferromagnetic chain (Figure 4a).
First, a minigap at EF opens up between −0.22 meV and +0.22 meV. Second, inside this minigap
a single state can be observed at EF with a pronounced intensity localized at the ends of the chain.
This state has an electron-hole ratio of 1 and is robust against the variation of the chain length from
9 to 19 atoms as illustrated in Figure 5b and Supplementary Figure 8. The strongly different spa-
tial LDOS distribution of the zero-energy state compared to that of some exemplary higher-energy
states is further illustrated in Figure 5c. The former is localized over a few atoms at the two ends
of the chain, while the latter states outside the minigap are extended along the whole chain. It
should be mentioned that all these states, both the zero-energy one as well as those outside of the
minigap show the same orbital character, indicating that the minigap emerges from the dx2−y2 YSR
states of the ferromagnetic chain. The induced minigap of 2∆ind = 0.44 meV width and the narrow
spectral weight around EF stemming from the zero-energy end states are also clearly visible in the
dispersion of the scattering wave vectors deduced from the averaged 1D-FFTs of the LDOSs of
chains of different lengths (Figure 5d). Thus, the calculations show evidence for the formation of a
topological, most probably p-wave-like, minigap which hosts a MBS, if the Fe chain on Au(111) is
forced into a helical spin spiral state, indicating that the absence of the non-collinear ground state
is the limiting factor of this experimental system.

8


Conclusions and outlook

In summary, our combined experimental and theoretical investigation shows that in contrast to
what might be suggested by simplified tight-binding models52,53, a strong substrate SOC alone
generally is not a sufficient condition for the opening of a topological minigap in a ferromagnetic
chain in contact to an s-wave superconductor, since the SOC has to exist in the lowest-energy YSR
band. In fact, first-principles calculations of the magnetic interaction parameters in ultrathin film
systems have demonstrated that also the connection between the formation of a spin-spiral state
and SOC is considerably more complicated. In particular, the DMI preferring a non-collinear spin
alignment is typically weak when a 3d transition metal is deposited on a Au surface compared
to other 5d substrates54–56, which may be tentatively attributed to the fully occupied 5d band of
Au having a reduced effect on the DMI. Proximity to a Au layer is known to give rise to strong
Heisenberg exchange interactions and anisotropy32 in the magnetic layer instead, both of which
prefer a collinear spin alignment and the latter being induced by the SOC. Our results indicate that,
similarly to the competition between DMI and anisotropy terms in the formation of non-collinear
spin structures, the role of SOC may be more complex for inducing topological superconductivity
in the YSR bands of ferromagnetic spin chains.
Our study proves that it is experimentally possible to grow proximitized ultrathin heavy metal lay-
ers on a superconductor with a large Tc that can be used as a substrate for the deposition of transi-
tion metal atoms and to construct defect-free one-dimensional structures with an excellent quality,
enabling the tailoring of YSR bands. Further, we presented an ab-initio method that accurately
reproduces the main LDOS features observed in the experiments. Our work thus demonstrates the
theoretical feasibility of an ab-initio screening of other combinations of transition metal chains
on heavy metal thin films on bulk superconductors in order to find the optimal conditions for the
opening of a large topological minigap.

Methods

STM and STS measurements

The experiments were performed in a custom home-built ultra-high vacuum system, equipped with
an STM setup, which was operated at a temperature of 320 mK57. STM images were obtained by
applying a bias voltage Vbias to the sample upon which the tip-sample distance is controlled by a
feedback loop such that a constant current I is achieved. dI/dV spectra were obtained in open
feedback mode after stabilizing the tip at Vstab = 6 mV and Istab = 1 nA using a standard lock-in
technique with an AC voltage Vmod = 20 µV (rms value) of frequency fmod = 4142 Hz added
to the ramped Vbias. If other stabilization parameters were used for a particular measurement, it is
indicated in the respective figure caption. dI/dV maps were obtained by measuring dI/dV spectra

9


on a predefined spatial grid, which was positioned over the structure of interest, and selecting a slice
at a given voltage. Typical measurement parameters are the same as for individual dI/dV spectra.
dI/dV line profiles are measured similarly to dI/dV maps, with the exception that the spatial
grid is one-dimensional. Constant-contour maps were obtained by repeated scanning of individual
lines of STM images. First, each line is measured as it would be the case in a regular STM image.
The z-signal of this sweep is saved. Then, the feedback is turned off, the bias voltage Vbias is set
to a predefined value of interest, and for the next sweep on the same scan line the dI/dV signal is
measured while restoring the previously recorded z-signal.
A mechanically sharpened and in-situ flashed (50 W) bulk Nb tip was used for all measurements.
While the usage of a superconducting tip is a crucial factor for obtaining a very good energy
resolution, it has the downside that the dI/dV spectra are convolutions of the tip and sample DOSs.
However, we can determine the superconducting gaps of the tip and the sample, and deconvolute
the dI/dV spectra. This process is described in Supplementary Note 2 and is performed for every
spectrum in the main manuscript.

Sample preparation

A Nb(110) single crystal with a purity of 99.99 % was transferred into the ultra-high vacuum
chamber. The sample was cleaned by cycles of Ar ion sputtering and flashes up to 2400 °C, which
results in a clean surface with only few oxygen impurities remaining58. We established flashing
parameters which clean the surface of oxygen, and checked the results by STM. Once this cleaning
procedure was reproducible with the given parameters, we evaporated Au from an e-beam evapora-
tor (EFM3 by FOCUS GmbH) equipped with a Au rod (99.99 % purity). Following this procedure,
we achieved flat and spatially extended films (Figure 1a).
Fe was evaporated onto the surface from a carefully outgassed Fe rod using a second e-beam evap-
orator while keeping the sample temperature below T = 10 K to avoid clustering and diffusion and
thus achieve a random distribution of single Fe adatoms (Figure 1b). From Supplementary Note 1,
we conclude that the Au film grows pseudomorphically and that the Fe atoms are adsorbed in the
fourfold coordinated hollow sites in the center of four Au atoms. This is further supported by the
similarity of the spatial distributions of the YSR states of the Fe/Au/Nb(110) system compared to
the Mn/Nb(110) system26.
STM tip-induced atom manipulation22,37 is used to position individual Fe atoms and construct
artificial structures, such as dimers and chains. The structures built in this study have sufficient
interatomic spacing to unambiguously identify the positions of the individual atoms forming the
structure using STM images. We restrict the investigations here to Fe atoms positioned on the first
ML of Au. Fe atoms on the first and second ML can easily be distinguished by their apparent
height. In the top part of Figure 1b one can see that an Fe atom on the second ML appears as a
bright spherical protrusion, while an Fe atom on the first ML is more shallow and has a relatively
irregular shape. Thus, we can be sure that all of the experiments were carried out on the first ML.

10


First-principles calculations

The calculations were performed in terms of the Screened Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker method (SKKR),
based on a fully relativistic Green’s function formalism by solving the Dirac equation for the nor-
mal state32 and the Dirac-Bogoliubov-de Gennes (DBdG) equation for the superconducting state
within multiple scattering theory (MST)46,59. The impurities are included within an embedding
scheme60, being an efficient method to address the electronic and magnetic properties or the in-gap
spectra of real-space atomic structures without introducing a supercell. The system consists of
seven atomic layers of Nb, a single atomic layer of Au and four atomic layers of vacuum between
semi-infinite bulk Nb and semi-infinite vacuum. The Fe adatoms are placed in the hollow position
in the vacuum above the Au layer and relaxed towards the surface by 21%, while the top Au layer
is also relaxed inwards by 2%. The relaxations are obtained from total-energy minimization in a
VASP61–63 calculation for a single Fe adatom and are used for the dimer and all the chains. For
the potentials we employ the atomic sphere approximation (ASA), the normal state is calculated
self-consistently in the local density approximation (LDA) as parametrized by Vosko et al.64 The
partial waves within MST are treated with an angular momentum cutoff of ℓmax = 2. In the self-
consistent normal state calculations we used a Brillouin zone (BZ) integration with 253 k points in
the irreducible wedge of the BZ and a semicircular energy contour on the upper complex half plane
with 16 points for energy integration. In order to take into account charge relaxation around the
magnetic sites, the single impurity and the 2a − [001] dimer are calculated by including a neigh-
borhood containing 48 and 84 atomic sites, respectively, corresponding to a spherical radius of
r = 1.66 a. The atomic chains are calculated with a somewhat smaller neighborhood correspond-
ing to 2 atomic shells or a spherical radius of r = 1.01 a around the Fe atoms. This way our largest
atomic cluster in the calculation with 19 Fe chain atoms contained 339 atomic sites. After having
obtained the self-consistent potentials in the normal state, the superconducting state is simulated
within single-shot calculations by solving the DBdG equation with the experimental band gap used
as the pairing potential in the Nb layers46. In the case of the single impurity and the dimer, the BZ
integration for the host Green’s function is performed by using the same k mesh as for the normal
state, but in order to achieve convergence for the chains we had to increase the number of k points
up to 1891 in the irreducible wedge of the BZ. A sufficient energy resolution of the LDOS in the
superconducting gap is acquired by considering 301 energy points between ±1.95 meV with an
imaginary part of 13.6 µeV related to the smearing of the resulting LDOS. Both the electron and
the hole components of the LDOS are calculated, but in this paper we present only the electron part
leading to the asymmetry of the spectrum as also seen in the experiments. Due to the ASA used
in our method we obtain the LDOS for each atomic site of the cluster averaged inside the atomic
spheres. The orbital resolution of the YSR states can be determined based on the orbital-resolved
LDOS of the Fe atoms. Since the canonical d orbitals hybridize due to the symmetry of the clus-
ter and due to SOC, we assign the labels based on the orbital which has the largest contribution
to the given peak in the LDOS. In addition, in order to mimic the constant-contour maps in the
experiments, we evaluate the spatial distribution of the LDOS. These LDOS maps are taken from
the first vacuum layer above the surface in which the magnetic atoms are embedded, reflecting the
orbital characteristics obtained from the resolution of the LDOS of the Fe atoms. In order to better

11


reproduce the experimental constant-contour maps taken from the vacuum region, the LDOS of
the magnetic sites are replaced by the average LDOS over the two vacuum sites (empty spheres)
closest to them in the layer above. To get a continuous picture for the LDOS maps we applied an
interpolation65 scheme on the data calculated as described above.

Data availability

The authors declare that all relevant data are included in the paper and its Supplementary Informa-
tion files.

1. Soumyanarayanan, A., Reyren, N., Fert, A. & Panagopoulos, C. Emergent phenomena in-
duced by spin–orbit coupling at surfaces and interfaces. Nature 539, 509–517 (2016).

2. Dzyaloshinsky, I. A thermodynamic theory of “weak” ferromagnetism of antiferromagnetics.
Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 4, 241–255 (1958).

3. Moriya, T.
New Mechanism of Anisotropic Superexchange Interaction.
Physical Review
Letters 4, 228–230 (1960).

4. Bode, M. et al. Chiral magnetic order at surfaces driven by inversion asymmetry. Nature 447,
190–193 (2007).

5. LaShell, S., McDougall, B. A. & Jensen, E.
Spin Splitting of an Au(111) Surface State
Band Observed with Angle Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Physical Review Letters
77, 3419–3422 (1996).

6. Ast, C. R. et al. Giant Spin Splitting through Surface Alloying. Physical Review Letters 98,
186807 (2007).

7. Fu, L. & Kane, C. L. Topological insulators with inversion symmetry. Physical Review B 76,
045302 (2007).

8. Hasan, M. Z. & Kane, C. L. Colloquium: Topological insulators. Reviews of Modern Physics
82, 3045–3067 (2010).

9. Fu, L. & Kane, C. L. Superconducting Proximity Effect and Majorana Fermions at the Surface
of a Topological Insulator. Physical Review Letters 100, 096407 (2008).

10. Lutchyn, R. M., Sau, J. D. & Sarma, S. D. Majorana Fermions and a Topological Phase
Transition in Semiconductor-Superconductor Heterostructures. Physical Review Letters 105,
077001 (2010).

11. Potter, A. C. & Lee, P. A. Topological superconductivity and Majorana fermions in metallic
surface states. Physical Review B 85, 094516 (2012).

12


12. Mourik, V. et al. Signatures of Majorana Fermions in Hybrid Superconductor-Semiconductor
Nanowire Devices. Science 336, 1003–1007 (2012).

13. Kjaergaard, M., W¨olms, K. & Flensberg, K. Majorana fermions in superconducting nanowires
without spin-orbit coupling. Physical Review B 85, 020503 (2012).

14. Pientka, F., Glazman, L. I. & von Oppen, F. Topological superconducting phase in helical
Shiba chains. Physical Review B 88, 155420 (2013).

15. Nadj-Perge, S., Drozdov, I. K., Bernevig, B. A. & Yazdani, A. Proposal for realizing Majorana
fermions in chains of magnetic atoms on a superconductor. Physical Review B 88, 020407
(2013).

16. Nadj-Perge, S. et al. Observation of Majorana fermions in ferromagnetic atomic chains on a
superconductor. Science 346, 602–607 (2014).

17. Ruby, M. et al. End States and Subgap Structure in Proximity-Coupled Chains of Magnetic
Adatoms. Physical Review Letters 115, 197204 (2015).

18. Kim, H. et al. Toward tailoring Majorana bound states in artificially constructed magnetic
atom chains on elemental superconductors. Science Advances 4, eaar5251 (2018).

19. Freedman, M., Kitaev, A., Larsen, M. & Wang, Z. Topological quantum computation. Bulletin
of the American Mathematical Society 40, 31–38 (2002).

20. Schneider, L. et al.
Controlling in-gap end states by linking nonmagnetic atoms and
artificially-constructed spin chains on superconductors.
Nature Communications 11, 4707
(2020).

21. Pientka, F., Peng, Y., Glazman, L. & von Oppen, F. Topological superconducting phase and
Majorana bound states in Shiba chains. Physica Scripta T164, 014008 (2015).

22. Eigler, D. M. & Schweizer, E. K. Positioning single atoms with a scanning tunnelling micro-
scope. Nature 344, 524–526 (1990).

23. Schneider, L. et al. Topological Shiba bands in artificial spin chains on superconductors.
Nature Physics 17, 943–948 (2021).

24. Schneider, L. et al. Precursors of Majorana modes and their length-dependent energy os-
cillations probed at both ends of atomic Shiba chains. Nature Nanotechnology 17, 384–389
(2022).

25. K¨uster, F. et al. Non-Majorana modes in diluted spin chains proximitized to a superconductor.
PNAS 119, e210589119 (2022).

26. Beck, P. et al. Spin-orbit coupling induced splitting of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states in antiferro-
magnetic dimers. Nature Communications 12, 2040 (2021).

13


27. Ding, H. et al. Tuning interactions between spins in a superconductor. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 118, e2024837118 (2021).

28. Henk, J., Hoesch, M., Osterwalder, J., Ernst, A. & Bruno, P. Spin–orbit coupling in the L-
gap surface states of Au(111): spin-resolved photoemission experiments and first-principles
calculations. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 16, 7581–7597 (2004).

29. Bergman, G. Influence of Spin-Orbit Coupling on Weak Localization. Physical Review Letters
48, 1046–1049 (1982).

30. Bihlmayer, G., Koroteev, Y., Echenique, P., Chulkov, E. & Bl¨ugel, S. The Rashba-effect at
metallic surfaces. Surface Science 600, 3888–3891 (2006).

31. Marchenko, D. et al. Giant Rashba splitting in graphene due to hybridization with gold. Nature
Communications 3, 1232 (2012).

32. Szunyogh, L., ´Ujfalussy, B. & Weinberger, P. Magnetic anisotropy of iron multilayers on
Au(001): First-principles calculations in terms of the fully relativistic spin-polarized screened
KKR method. Physical Review B 51, 9552–9559 (1995).

33. Lounis, S., Bringer, A. & Bl¨ugel, S. Magnetic adatom induced skyrmion-like spin texture in
surface electron waves. Physical Review Letter 108, 207202 (2012).

34. Cardias, R. et al. Magnetic and electronic structure of Mn nanostructures on Ag(111) and
Au(111). Physical Review B 93, 014438 (2016).

35. Ruckman, M. W. & Jiang, L.-Q. Growth and thermal stability of Ag or Au films on Nb(110).
Physical Review B 38, 2959–2966 (1988).

36. K¨uster, F., Brinker, S., Lounis, S., Parkin, S. S. P. & Sessi, P. Long range and highly tunable
interaction between local spins coupled to a superconducting condensate. Nature Communi-
cations 12, 6722 (2021).

37. Stroscio, J. A. & Celotta, R. J. Controlling the Dynamics of a Single Atom in Lateral Atom
Manipulation. Science 306, 242–247 (2004).

38. Csire, G., Cserti, J. & ´Ujfalussy, B. First principles based proximity effect of superconduc-
tor–normal metal heterostructures. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 28, 495701 (2016).

39. Csire, G., Cserti, J., T¨utt˝o, I. & ´Ujfalussy, B. Prediction of superconducting transition temper-
atures of heterostructures based on the quasiparticle spectrum. Physical Review B 94, 104511
(2016).

40. Gupta, A. K., Cr´etinon, L., Moussy, N., Pannetier, B. & Courtois, H. Anomalous density of
states in a metallic film in proximity with a superconductor. Physical Review B 69, 104514
(2004).

14


41. Tomanic, T., Schackert, M., Wulfhekel, W., S¨urgers, C. & v. L¨ohneysen, H. Two-band super-
conductivity of bulk and surface states in Ag thin films on Nb. Physical Review B 94, 220503
(2016).

42. Yazdani, A., Jones, B. A., Lutz, C. P., Crommie, M. F. & Eigler, D. M. Probing the local
effects of magnetic impurities on superconductivity. Science 275, 1767–1770 (1997).

43. Ruby, M., Peng, Y., von Oppen, F., Heinrich, B. W. & Franke, K. J. Orbital Picture of Yu-
Shiba-Rusinov Multiplets. Physical Review Letters 117, 186801 (2016).

44. Choi, D.-J. et al. Mapping the orbital structure of impurity bound states in a superconductor.
Nature Communications 8, 15175 (2017).

45. Liebhaber, E. et al.
Quantum spins and hybridization in artificially-constructed chains of
magnetic adatoms on a superconductor. Nature Communications 13, 2160 (2022).

46. Ny´ari, B. et al. Relativistic first-principles theory of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states applied to Mn
adatoms and Mn dimers on Nb(110). Physical Review B 104, 235426 (2021).

47. Ruby, M., Heinrich, B. W., Peng, Y., von Oppen, F. & Franke, K. J. Wave-Function Hybridiza-
tion in Yu-Shiba-Rusinov Dimers. Physical Review Letters 120, 156803 (2018).

48. Flatt´e, M. E. & Reynolds, D. E. Local spectrum of a superconductor as a probe of interactions
between magnetic impurities. Physical Review B 61, 14810–14814 (2000).

49. Morr, D. K. & Stavropoulos, N. A.
Quantum interference between impurities:
Creating
novel many-body states in s-wave superconductors. Physical Review B 67, 020502 (2003).

50. Beck, P., Schneider, L., Wiesendanger, R. & Wiebe, J. Effect of substrate spin-orbit coupling
on the topological gap size of Shiba chains. arXiv:2205.10062 [cond–mat.supr–con] (2022).

51. Klinovaja, J. & Loss, D. Giant Spin-Orbit Interaction Due to Rotating Magnetic Fields in
Graphene Nanoribbons. Physical Review X 3, 011008 (2013).

52. Li, J. et al. Topological superconductivity induced by ferromagnetic metal chains. Physical
Review B 90, 235433 (2014).

53. Braunecker, B., Japaridze, G. I., Klinovaja, J. & Loss, D. Spin-selective Peierls transition
in interacting one-dimensional conductors with spin-orbit interaction. Physical Review B 82,
045127 (2010).

54. Simon, E. et al. Spin-correlations and magnetic structure in an Fe monolayer on 5d transition
metal surfaces. Journal of Physics Condensed Matter 26, 186001 (2014).

55. Belabbes, A., Bihlmayer, G., Bechstedt, F., Bl¨ugel, S. & Manchon, A. Hund’s Rule-Driven
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction at 3d−5d Interfaces. Physical Review Letters 117, 247202
(2016).

15


56. Simon, E., R´ozsa, L., Palot´as, K. & Szunyogh, L. Magnetism of a Co monolayer on Pt(111)
capped by overlayers of 5d elements: A spin-model study. Physical Review B 97, 134405
(2018).

57. Wiebe, J. et al.
A 300 mK ultra-high vacuum scanning tunneling microscope for spin-
resolved spectroscopy at high energy resolution. Review of Scientific Instruments 75, 4871–
4879 (2004).

58. Odobesko, A. B. et al. Preparation and electronic properties of clean superconducting Nb(110)
surfaces. Physical Review B 99, 115437 (2019).

59. Csire, G. et al. Relativistic spin-polarized KKR theory for superconducting heterostructures:
Oscillating order parameter in the Au layer of Nb/Au/Fe trilayers. Physical Review B 97,
024514 (2018).

60. Lazarovits, B., Szunyogh, L. & Weinberger, P. Fully relativistic calculation of magnetic prop-
erties of Fe, Co, and Ni adclusters on Ag(100). Physical Review B 65, 104441 (2002).

61. Kresse, G. & Furthm¨uller, J. Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and
semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set.
Computational Materials Science 6, 15–50
(1996).

62. Kresse, G. & Furthm¨uller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations
using a plane-wave basis set. Physical Review B 54, 11169–11186 (1996).

63. Hafner, J. Ab-initio simulations of materials using VASP: Density-functional theory and be-
yond 29, 2044–2078 (2008).

64. Vosko, S. H., Wilk, L. & Nusair, M. Accurate spin-dependent electron liquid correlation
energies for local spin density calculations: a critical analysis. Canadian Journal of Physics
58, 1200–1211 (1980).

65. Gouraud, H. Continuous shading of curved surfaces. IEEE Transactions on Computers 100,
623–629 (1971).

Acknowledgements
P.B., R.W., and J.W. gratefully acknowledge funding by the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – SFB-925 – project 170620586. L.S., R.W., and J.W.
gratefully acknowledge funding by the Cluster of Excellence ’Advanced Imaging of Matter’ (EXC 2056 -
project ID 390715994) of the DFG. R.W. gratefully acknowledges funding of the European Union via the
ERC Advanced Grant ADMIRE (project no. 786020). B.Ny., L.R., A.L., K.P., L.Sz. and B.U. acknowledge
financial support by the National Research, Development, and Innovation Office (NRDI) of Hungary under
Project Nos. FK124100 and K131938. B.Ny. and L.Sz. acknowledge support by the Ministry for Innova-
tion and Technology and the NRDI Office within the Quantum Information National Laboratory of Hungary.
B.Ny. and K.P. acknowledge the support by the ´UNKP-21-3 and the ´UNKP-21-5 New National Excellence

16


Program of the Ministry for Innovation and Technology from the source of the National Research, Devel-
opment and Innovation Fund. K.P. acknowledges the J´anos Bolyai Research Scholarship of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences.

Author contributions
P.B., L.S. and J.W. conceived the experiments. P.B. and L.S. performed the mea-
surements and P.B. analyzed the experimental data together with J.W.. L.R. performed the VASP calcu-
lations. B.N. performed the SKKR calculations and discussed the data with L.R., A.L., K.P., L.Sz. and
B.U., and A.L. also contributed to the spin model calculations. P.B. and B.N. prepared the figures and wrote
the first version of the manuscript. L.S., L.R., A.L., K.P., L.Sz., B.U., J.W. and R.W. contributed to the
discussions and the finalization of the manuscript.

Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Correspondence
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J. Wiebe (email:
jwiebe@physnet.uni-hamburg.de).

17


Figure 1 | Measured YSR states of Fe atoms and dimers on monolayer Au on Nb(110).
a, STM image of an ultrathin film of Au on Nb(110) with an approximate coverage of 1 ML Au
and additionally deposited Fe atoms. An extracted line profile along the red line is displayed in
the bottom panel (red curve). Rectangles show the surface composition underneath the line profile.
The white scale bar has a length of 20 nm (Vbias = 50 mV and I = 100 pA). b, STM image of
randomly distributed Fe atoms on 1 ML Au (bottom) and 2 ML Au (top). The white scale bar
has a length of 4 nm (Vbias = 6 mV and I = 3 nA). c, Deconvoluted dI/dV spectra measured on
the Au/Nb(110) substrate (gray), a single Fe atom (red, top panel), and the center of a dimer of
Fe atoms spaced by 2a along the [001] direction (orange, bottom panel). Black arrows and Greek
letters label YSR states. Gray ticks mark the position of the superconducting energy gap of the
sample ∆s = 1.50 meV as determined in Supplementary Note 2 (Vstab = 6 mV, Istab = 1 nA and
Vmod = 20 µV). d and e, STM images and constant-contour maps of a single Fe atom (d) and
a Fe dimer (e) spaced by 2a along the [001] direction. Constant-contour maps were obtained for
every energy for which we identified a peak in the corresponding spectrum of c as indicated by the
corresponding Greek letters. White arrows indicate crystallographic directions, red dashed circles
depict the positions of the Fe atoms as determined from the topographies, and white scale bars
represent a length of 1 nm (Vbias = 6 mV and I = 1 nA).

18


Figure 2 | Calculated YSR states of Fe atoms and dimers on monolayer Au on Nb(110).
a, Electron component of the LDOS of the single Fe atom (top panel) and the ferromagnetic 2a −
[001] dimer (bottom panel). Gray dashed vertical lines indicate the superconducting gap of the
substrate ∆s. b, Spatial distributions of the three YSR peaks of the Fe atom with the highest
intensities visible in the top panel of a. c, Spatial distributions of the six YSR peaks of the FM
2a − [001] dimer with the highest intensities visible in the bottom panel of a. The energies are
indicated in the bottom of the panels of b and c. Red circles indicate the positions of Fe atoms and
the white scale bars correspond to a distance of a.

19


Figure 3 | Measured dispersion of BdG quasiparticles in Fe chains on Au monolayer.
a, Deconvoluted dI/dV line profile (bottom panel) and corresponding topographic line profile
(middle panel) measured along the longitudinal axis of a Fe9 2a − [001] chain, as illustrated in the
top panel. Black arrows mark the energies in the bottom panel at which nβ maxima as indicated
are observed along the chain. The subscript of this label refers to the orbital origin of this state
(Vstab = 6 mV, Istab = 1 nA, Vmod = 20 µV). b, The top panel shows an STM image of a Fe9
2a−[001] chain and the lower panels are dI/dV maps of this chain, obtained at energies indicated
in the top right corner of each panel. The maps are labeled by nβ in a similar fashion as the states
in a. The red lines mark the spatial extent of the chain in the STM image. The white scale bar
represents a length of 1 nm (Vstab = −6 mV, Istab = 1 nA, Vmod = 20 µV). c, Averaged energy-
wise 1D-FFT obtained from dI/dV line profiles of FeN 2a − [001] chains with lengths N ranging
from seven to fourteen atoms. Prior to the 1D-FFT, the spectra were deconvoluted. All dI/dV line
profiles were obtained with the following parameters: Vstab = 6 mV, Istab = 1 nA, Vmod = 20 µV.

20


Figure 4 | Calculated dispersion of BdG quasiparticles in ferromagnetic Fe chains on Au
monolayer.
a, Electron component of the LDOS extracted along the longitudinal axis of a ferromagnetic Fe9
2a − [001] chain, calculated on the Fe and the vacuum sites in between. b, Spatial distributions of
the LDOS evaluated in the first vacuum layer above the chain. Energies are indicated in the top
right corners of each panel, while the numbers of maxima and the orbital origins of the states are
indicated in the top left corners. They correspond to the states marked by the same arrows and
numbers in a. The nyz state has two dominant Fourier components nyz = 2 and nyz = 4, where
the former is dominating. The white scale bar has a length of 2a. c, Dispersion of scattering wave
vectors extracted from the calculated LDOSs of ferromagnetically coupled FeN 2a − [001] chains
and averaged for lengths N of 9, 11, 13, 14, 17 and 19 atoms (Supplementary Figure 7). The green
dashed lines in panels a and c indicate the energy gap of the superconducting substrate.

21


Figure 5 | Minigap and MBS enforced by helical spin spirals in Fe chains on Au monolayer.
a, Illustration of the helical spin spiral state with a rotation angle of 90◦ of a chain containing 19
Fe atoms. b, Electron component of the LDOS extracted along the longitudinal axis of a Fe19
2a − [001] chain in the helical spin spiral state shown in panel a. c, The spatial distributions of the
LDOS evaluated in the first vacuum layer above the Fe19 2a − [001] chain at the energies indicated
in the top right corner of each panel. d, Dispersion of scattering wave vectors averaged from the
calculated LDOSs of the FeN 2a − [001] chains including N = 9, 11, 13, 14, 17 and 19 Fe atoms
(Supplementary Figure 8). The green and red dashed lines in b and d indicate the substrate gap
and the minigap, respectively.

22


