Positional and Rotational Molecular Degrees

of Freedom in a Metal-Organic Surface Alloy:

the Copper-Fullerene System and its Multiple

Structural Phases

María Alfonso Moro,∗,† Yannick Dappe,‡ Sylvie Godey,¶ Thierry Mélin,¶ César

González,§ Valérie Guisset,† Philippe David,† Benjamin Canals,† Nicolas

Rougemaille,† and Johann Coraux∗,†

†Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut NEEL, 38000 Grenoble, France

‡SPEC, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, CEA Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, Cedex,

France

¶Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Junia, Univ. Polytechnique Hauts-de-France, UMR

8520-IEMN, Institut d’Electronique de Microélectronique et de Nanotechnologie, F-59000

Lille, France

§Instituto de Magnetismo Aplicado (IMA-UCM-ADIF), 28230 Madrid, Spain and

Departamento de Física de Materiales, Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM), 28040

Madrid, Spain

E-mail: maria.alfonso-moro@neel.cnrs.fr; johann.coraux@neel.cnrs.fr

Abstract

Mixing two chemical elements at the surface of a substrate is known to produce rich

phase diagrams of surface alloys. Here, we extend the concept of surface alloying to

1

arXiv:2301.07348v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  18 Jan 2023


the case where the two constituent elements are not both atoms, but rather one atom

(copper) and one molecule (fullerene).
When deposited at room temperature on a

Cu(111) surface, fullerenes intermix with the metal substrate. Surprisingly, 10 distinct

copper-fullerene surface alloys are found to coexist. The structure of these alloys, i.e.

their composition and commensurability relationship with the substrate, is resolved

using scanning tunneling microscopy and density functional theory calculations. This

diversity in the alloying process is associated to the multiple possibilities a fullerene can

bind to the Cu surface. The molecules are indeed found to have in-plane and out-of-

plane positional degree of freedom: the molecular alloys have elastic in-plane properties

and can buckle. In addition, the molecules can rotate on their binding sites, conferring

extra degrees of freedom to the system. We introduce a competing-interaction energy

model, parametrized against the results of the ab initio calculations, that describes well

all the phases we observe experimentally.

Keywords

fullerene, STM, epitaxy, DFT, energy landscape, surface alloy

Introduction

Surface binary alloys often form at the surface of a metal when it is exposed to a different

chemical element, such as another metal, a group IV atom (C, Si, Ge) or a chalcogen.1–3

Two-dimensional (2D) alloys are involved in countless situations, either as the targeted ac-

tive materials or as intermediates, sometimes parasitic phases. Relevant applications in-

clude catalysis,4,5 growth of 2D materials,6–9 and nano-magnetism.10–12 The physico-chemical

properties of these compounds usually depend on their composition and structure, which can

be ordered12,13 or disordered in the manner of a frustrated magnet.14,15

Molecules can also intermix with a metal substrate. Fullerenes (C60) are molecules known

2


to sink into various metal surfaces, via the formation of one-atom-deep vacancies in the

substrate.16–19 Interestingly, close packing of the (spherical) C60 molecules on a flat substrate

leaves an empty volume of typically 0.5 nm3 (per unit cell) between the two materials.

On a Cu(111) surface, this volume is readily filled by nine metal atoms (Figure 1a), in a

configuration where the full Cu layer onto which the molecules sit is not the topmost one,

but rather the one underneath.19 Considered this way, metal-fullerene systems are analogs

of 2D alloys in biatomic systems, in what we coin metal organic surface alloys. The two

constituting elements being starkly different in size and nature, strain effects and various

types of interactions (inter-molecular or with the substrate) may play a key role in the alloy

stabilization at the surface while preventing bulk alloying (a common issue with biatomic

alloys). Besides, the molecules may possess multiple positional and rotational degrees of

freedom when lying on the metal surface (Figure 1b-d), rendering the interaction energy

landcape complex.

In this work, we revisit the properties of the fullerene-Cu(111) binary system – one of

the most finely analyzed19–23 hybrid metal/organic interfaces of potential relevance for future

molecular electronics, and a reference system for advanced investigations of, e.g., the mechan-

ics of single molecules,24 the nature of individual chemical bonds25 or molecular switching

effects.26,27 Specifically, we address the striking coexistence of numerous Cu-fullerene sur-

face alloys, whose structure is atomically resolved combining scanning tunneling microscopy

(STM) measurements and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Using DFT esti-

mates of the different energy contributions involved in the system, and exploring the impact

of the aforementioned molecular degrees of freedom, we derive an energetic classification of

about 20 surface alloy candidates. Representing the surface alloy energies versus the average

inter-molecular distance and alloy composition, our model predicts that the lowest-energy

phases are those observed experimentally.

3


Figure 1:
(a) Copper-fullerene surface alloying as a ball-packing problem:
atoms and
molecules are represented with disks on side and top views. A free space (pink region on
the side view) exists beyond the van der Waals radius of the molecules where nine Cu atoms
can fit in (see top view), in the case of the commensurate supercell considered here. (b-d)
Structural details of a surface alloy with a high-order commensurability on perpective (a),
top (b) and cross-section (c) views. The bulk Cu atoms are represented with light orange
balls, while (sub)surface Cu atoms are represented with grey balls. Green balls highlight
(around two specific molecules) the Cu atoms forming stronger bonds with C atoms from
the fullerenes; more bonds form in presence of Cu vacancies. The red arrows indicate the
different degrees of freedom in the system.

Results

Coexistence of surface alloys

Thermal evaporation of fullerenes under ultra-high vacuum, onto a Cu(111) surface held at

room temperature (see Methods section), produces 2D islands of densely-packed molecules.

The first molecular layer grows fully before the second layer appears, presumably because sev-

eral C atoms form bonds with metal atoms (Figure 1b), at the bottom pole of the molecular

4


Figure 2: Coexistence of 2D phases of fullerenes on Cu(111), observed with STM at room
temperature in the sub-monolayer regime, (a) three phases on a single image and (b-f) zoom
on five of the 10 observed phases, each framed with a specific colour. The small balls are
individual molecules, the Cu(111) surface appears dark (lowest apparent height).

globe (which is not accessible to the STM tip), while fullerene diffusion onto fullerene-covered

Cu(111) is a low energy-barrier-process.28,29 STM imaging reveals that 10 distinct 2D phases

coexist on the surface (Figure 2a and additional data in Supporting Information Figure S1),

some of which were already observed.23 Figure 2b-f shows the five most frequent phases in

our experiments, the one highlighted by a red frame (Figure 2b) being the most prominent

one. Varying the fullerene flux by a factor four has no appreciable effect on the nucleation

density and the relative proportion of each phase. Deposition temperature is, however, a

more sensitive parameter: increasing it from ∼ 230 K to 300 K and 370 K (STM observations

made at room temperature), we found that the phases’ nucleation densities decrease, and

that only the phase highlighted by a red frame in Figure 2 grows at the highest temperature.

In the following, we focus on the rich energy landscape the system is able to explore

at room temperature, and on the energy hierarchy between the different possible phases.

To determine the energy of each phase, the precise binding configuration of each fullerene

must be deciphered. This implies first to analyze the structural degrees of freedom of each

5


molecule (see an example in Figure 1c,d), which is the purpose of the next sections. Although

the positional degrees of freedom can be deduced experimentally, at least to some extent,

the rotational degrees of freedom not directly accessible, since molecular orbitals, and not

the carbon backbones, are imaged with STM. Finally, although geometrical considerations

are used to determine the molecules’ binding sites (in the presence/absence of Cu vacancies),

correlation with the molecular orbitals imaged with STM (down to 4 K, see Methods section)

is required. We emphasize that the resolution of the molecular structure, which eventually

relies on DFT calculations (see Methods section), has only been done so far for the Cu-

fullerene phase imaged in Figure 2b.

Commensurability and xy positional degree of freedom

As mentioned above, 10 molecular phases are observed experimentally, five of which being

already reported in previous works.23 Close inspection of the STM images reveals that they

have distinct crystallographic orientations, i.e., each phase can be characterized by an angle

θ between the dense rows of fullerenes and the dense Cu rows (see statistics over 90 fullerene-

based domains, Supporting Information Section S2, Table S1). The different θ values are

revealed by Fourier filtering our STM images, whereby we construct a colour-coded dark-field

overlay of the phases (see an example in Figure 3a). Importantly, the first spatial harmonics

do not appear at the same distance from the center of reciprocal space (compare, e.g., the

dark green and red profiles reported in Figure 3b and derived from the Fourier transform

shown in the inset of Figure 3a), i.e.
the first nearest neighbour (NN) inter-molecular

distances dNN are different. Note that the differences are small (a few percents at most),

close to the resolution limit, and are better identified when comparing Fourier harmonics of

phases that coexist on single STM images (corrected from imaging artefacts, see Section S3

in Supporting Information).

From the θ and dNN values of each molecular phase, a commensurate structure with the

substrate can be inferred. The corresponding matrix transformation, between the unit cells

6


Figure 3: Surface crystallography of the 2D phases. (a) Dark-field STM image overlay of
Figure 2a. Inset: corresponding Fourier transform. Circles highlight one of the six (first
order) harmonics used for each phase to build the dark-field image. The vector shown with
a red arrow corresponds to a quarter of a substrate’s reciprocal unit vector. (b) Radial
profiles in reciprocal space, extracted from the inset of a for each phase. (c) Phases’ dense
fullerene row orientation θ versus lattice constant a (< 3.5 nm), predicted for inter-molecular
strains < 4%.
Some commensurate structures (disks symbols) match experiments (disk
colour related to strain level); others (square symbols) are not observed in experiments.
The continuous arcs are calculated for incommensurate superstructures. (d) Relationship
between the unit vectors of the substrate (⃗aCu,⃗bCu) and those of a commensurate phase
( ⃗A = 6⃗aCu+9⃗bCu, ⃗B = −9⃗aCu−3⃗bCu). The green vectors connect the centers of NN fullerenes
(⃗a1st,⃗b1st).

7


of the substrate and of the phase,30,31 is illustrated graphically in Figure 3d, and Supporting

Information Table S2 gives the commensurability of the other observed phases. The simplest

commensurate phase comprises one fullerene per unit cell, has a θ = 0◦ orientation and a

lattice constant a = 10.2 Å equal to dNN. The latter equality does not hold for the other

phases, which are so-called high-order commensurate phases.32 A real-space representation

of the five phases imaged in Figure 2b-f is given in Figure 4a.

The number of conceivable commensurate structures is not limited to those observed

experimentally, though, and is actually infinite in two dimensions. Limiting the remaining

of the discussion to structures whose dNN value remains within ±4% of the equilibrium

distance (strains beyond these values would be energetically prohibitive), and leaving aside

structures with unit cells beyond 30 Å, we are still left with about 20 possible structures.

Besides, not only commensurate phases, but also a multitude of incommensurate ones

may exist. Such phases would correspond to molecular lattices assuming a priori any θ

orientation (possibly stabilized by so-called static distortion waves33,34). The characteristic

variation expected for their lattice constant a versus θ 31 is shown in Figure 3c. The fact

that the {a, θ} values of the phases we observe do not fall or distribute evenly on the in-

commensurate a(θ) arcs is a signature that the fullerene layer is not free-standing on its

substrate. Translated in the language commonly used to describe binary compounds, the

fullerene layer is not in a segregated phase onto the substrate, but rather involved in a surface

alloy characterized by strong C-Cu bonds.

We now analyze the in-plane (xy) position degree of freedom of the molecules, i.e. the

relative position of the molecules’ center and substrate atoms in the commensurate phases.

For that purpose, the so-called geometrical phase, a two-component variable assuming 0-2π

variations, is employed to locate the molecules with respect to a specific crystallographic site.

The geometrical phase is represented on a 2D map using a two colour channels (red and blue,

see Figure 4b). If one assumes that the dNN distances are all the same for a given phase, one

realizes that except for the {10.2 Å, 0.0◦} commensurate phase, only part of the molecules can

8


Figure 4: Atomic coincidences in 2D phases and in-plane order parameter. (a) Top-view
cartoons of the phases observed in Figure 2b-f, described by their lattice constant and the
orientation of their dense fullerene rows. The boxes’ colours match those in Figure 2b-f.
There are no local variations of the NN fullerene distance within each phase. The gray disks
mark the positions of Cu atoms; the larger circles are centered on the center of mass of each
molecule. The circles’ colour represents the molecules’ geometrical phase (as defined in b).
(b) 2D map, within a Cu(111) unit cell (Cu atoms shown as gray disks), of the distance to
the hcp and fcc crystallographic sites (i.e. geometrical phase, coded with red and blue hues).
(c) Local variations of the fullerene NN distance in the high-order commensurate (26.7 Å,
16.4◦) phase, as seen with STM.

occupy the most favourable binding sites (whatever they are: their nature will be discussed

later). This raises the question whether the molecules may move in-plane to reach more

favourable sites, as proposed earlier.23,35 To answer this question, we inspect STM images

9


of the high-order {26.7 Å, 16.4◦} commensurate phase shown in Figure 2d. Converting the

observed molecular positions (center of circles in Figure 4c) into a colour-coded geometrical

phase, we find clear differences with the undistorted case considered in Figure 4a. This means

that experimentally, the molecule position locally changes, demonstrating elastic properties32

(also found in other high-order commensurate phases).

Alloying and z positional degree of freedom (buckling)

We next consider the out-of-plane (z) positional degree of freedom the molecules can have

on the Cu(111) surface. This degree of freedom is directly apparent on the STM images as

a yellow/blue contrast (see Figure 2), which demonstrates that the molecular layer buckles.

Our measurements reveal that buckling can be ordered, as evidenced by the (1 × 1), (2 × 2)

and (
√

7 ×
√

7)R19.1 patterns visible in Figure 2b-d, or disordered (Figure 2e,f).
Close

inspection of the STM images suggests the presence of multiple contrasts associated to

different apparent heights. We emphasize that the heights assessed with STM are not true

heights, since topography and local electronic density of states are entangled. To determine

the height values, we thus have performed a statistical analysis on STM images measured

with different tunnel bias. This parameter was, however, found to have only marginal effect

on the height values. A statistical analysis of the molecules’ height is summarized in Figure 5

for the different phases (see also Section S5 in Supporting Information, Table S3).

Assigning the origin of the heights to the lower molecular level, all phases are found to

exhibit three characteristic apparent height levels, of z4 ≃ 0 pm, z3 ≃ 80 pm, and z2 ≃

155 pm – except for the {10.2 Å, 0◦} commensurate phase, which does not exhibit the z3

level but rather a higher level at z1 ≃ 220 pm. Interestingly, this phase also tends to form

extended patches with uniform height pattern (Figure 2a), whereas all other phases are

truly mixtures of different heights. Around all the phases, the Cu(111) surface is found at

zCu − z4 ≃ 425 pm (a large dispersion is associated to this value, due to the known unstable

imaging of the Cu(111) surface at room temperature).

10


Figure 5: Average apparent heights (z1−4) of fullerene molecules in the observed phases, and
of the bare Cu(111) surface (zCu) around them. The bars visualize the statistical dispersion
of the data.

Overall, the z position of a molecule is found to have four well-defined values z1−4.

To interpret this out-of-plane degree of freedom, two geometrical arguments can be invoked.

First, the molecule’s geometrical diameter is 710 pm, and the height of a Cu(111) step height

is 210 pm. From these numbers, the zCu − z4 ≃ 425 pm value corresponds to a fullerene

molecule sunk into the substrate, sitting on the second Cu layer. In other words, the Cu(111)

surface is embossed with one-atom-deep vacancies (each vacancy being made of seven atoms,

see below) at the bottom of which the molecule sit. Second, the height difference in the simple

commensurate phase (10.2 Å, 0◦), between the low-laying molecules (z4) and those found

z4 − z1 ≃ 220 pm above, suggests that the latter sit on the top Cu layer and the former

sit on the second Cu layer. Consistent with previous works,19,23 our conclusion is that the

out-of-plane degree of freedom is intimately related to the formation of Cu vacancies. To go

beyond these geometrical considerations and to complete the description of the Cu-fullerene

surface alloy phases, we now need to determine the origin of the z2−4 values.

11


Disentangling rotational and z degrees of freedom with DFT

Unambiguously determining the origin of the z2−4 values comes down to resolve the xy,

z, and rotational degrees of freedom of each molecule in the different phases. This means

solving the atomic-scale structure of the system, which is not directly apparent in STM

imaging. The set of possible high-symmetry configurations is unfortunately very large (64),

considering

• the xy position of the center of the molecule with respect to different possible crystal-

lographic sites on the Cu surface, i.e. onto a Cu atom (top), at a hollow site between

three Cu atoms (two possibilities), and halfway between two Cu atoms (bridge site);

• the presence or absence of Cu vacancies of different kind (four, see below) underneath

the fullerene, hence the z position;

• the orientation of the fullerene molecule, i.e. facing a pentagonal / hexagonal facet,

an apical C atom (apex), or a C-C bond between hexagonal facets (6-6).

To tell which of these configurations may correspond to the STM observations, knowledge

on their relative energy is desirable. This information has been sought for previously with

DFT calculations, performed for selected configurations (see Supporting Information, Sec-

tion S6.5), considering the {10.2 Å, 0◦} commensurate phase27,36,37 or small Cu clusters with

individual fullerenes.38 Although these earlier works highlight energy differences in terms of

xy and rotational degrees of freedom, and a global stabilization associated with the presence

of Cu vacancies, they did not aim at a comprehensive classification of all the configurations

that are relevant. We opted for a more systematic (and computationally time-consuming)

approach: for reasons that will become clearer later, we selected 17 of the 64 possible configu-

rations and calculated the binding energies with DFT calculations (Supporting Information,

Section 6.1, Figure S3, Tables S4,S5).

In the absence of Cu vacancies, the molecule with the hexagon, pentagon, apex and 6-6

orientations have lowest calculated binding energies when attached to top, top, hollow (so-

called fcc), and bridge Cu sites respectively. Of all these configurations, the apex/fcc is the

12


lowest-energy one (on this matter, see Supporting Information, Section 6.4).

Seven-atom vacancies have mostly been discussed19 in the context of the {10.2 Å, 0◦}

commensurate phase prepared by mild annealing, where all molecules sit in a vacancy. Re-

cently however, a scenario with one-atom vacancies was also considered.39 In our calculations,

we considered these two kinds of vacancies, and two additional ones, where three atoms are

missing (Supporting Information, Figure S3). We considered only hexagon and pentagon

molecular orientations, which are the experimentally relevant ones (see below). Except for

one of the three-atom vacancies, we find substantially increased binding energy. The config-

uration with a pentagon on a top Cu site at the bottom of the seven-atom vacancies is about

5 eV lower in energy than the most stable site in the absence of a vacancy. The configuration

with a hexagon on a top site is also very stable, slightly less though (1.5 eV). Note that

creating a vacancy has a cost, related to the lower coordination of the Cu atoms expelled

from the vacancy, that must be taken into account to understand the overall energy gain

(Supporting Information, Section 6.2). This cost is actually only affordable, compared to

other configurations without vacancies, for the seven-atom vacancies.

Another important information we derive from the DFT calculations are the true height

differences between the different configurations. Without vacancies, they are of the order of

tens of picometers. The molecules sink by 100 to 200 pm in the presence of the seven-atom

vacancy.

From the above discussion we predict that the z2, z3, z4 heights can be assigned to

hexagon/tip (no vacancy), apex/fcc (no vacancy), and pentagon/top (within a seven-atom

vacancy) configurations, respectively. We simulated the STM images taking into account

the effect of the tip and of the substrate (see Methods section) for these configurations

(Figure 6a-c). Distinct contrasts are clearly expected for each configuration, accounting for

different spatial distributions of the electronic density of states. Calculating the conduc-

tance of the molecule-Cu tunnel junction as a function of the STM tip height for the three

configurations (Figure 6d), we additionally find that beyond the regime of molecule-tip con-

13


Figure 6: Orientational degree of freedom of the fullerene molecules, and relation with
observed apparent heights. (a-c) Atomic structure, and corresponding simulated STM images
(1.5 V, 5 Å tip height), for fullerene molecules in the absence of a vacancy sitting on a hexagon
facet on a top site (a) and on an apex on a fcc site (b), and for a fullerene molecule sitting
on a pentagon within a seven-atom Cu vacancy (c). (d) Simulated STM tip height versus
zero-bias conductance for the (a-c) configurations. (e-i) STM images measured at 4 K [1.5 V,
0.03 nA (e-g); 1.4 V, 0.01 nA (h); -1.5 V, 0.01 nA (i)], revealing the molecular orbitals of the
fullerenes in four of the 2D surface alloys shown in Figure 2 (coloured frames match those
in Figure 2b,c,e,f).

tact, at fixed conductance value the apparent height is slightly larger for the hexagon/top

than for the apex/fcc configuration – themselves substantially larger than for the in-vacancy

configuration. The ∼130-200 pm topographic height difference in presence of the vacancy

(compare Supporting Information, Tables S4,S5) is the strongest contribution to the STM

height contrast. On the contrary, the hexagon/top and apex/fcc configurations (without

vacancy) differ by ∼70 pm in height, but not so much in apparent height, pointing to a

strong contribution of electronic effects.

Experimental confirmation of the DFT predictions were obtained by high resolution low-

temperature STM imaging (see Methods section) of the different phases (Figure 6e-i), which

reveals intra-molecular contrasts of different kinds (some already observed and related to the

molecular orientation in specific Cu-fullerene and metal-fullerene phases24,40–42). We find a

14


very good match between the predictions (Figure 6a-d) and the experimental data (Figure 5,

Figure 6e-i). Noteworthy we also observe that while the majority of in-vacancy molecules

seem to exhibit a pentagon facet (z4), a minority of them exhibits a hexagon facet (see dotted

circle in Figure 6e), consistent with the lower predicted energy of the latter configuration.

We conclude, from our DFT+STM analysis, that the molecules essentially adopt two spe-

cific heights (z3,4), occasionally a third one (z2), anyhow in a one-to-one relationship with the

presence (z4) and absence (z2,3) of a seven-atom, one-atom deep Cu vacancy. The molecules

bind on specific crystallographic sites of the substrate with a well-defined orientation, es-

sentially apex/fcc (z3) and a pentagon/vacancy (z4) configurations.
In other words, the

local tendency to alloying associated with the vacancy formation, i.e. the maximization of

the number of C-Cu bonds, authorizes essentially two {binding site (xy) + orientational + z}

molecular states – these degrees of freedom being fully coupled.

Competing interaction model of surface alloying

As we have seen, fullerene molecules on Cu(111) are characterized by several degrees of

freedom: they can rotate and move in the three space directions to reach favourable binding

sites.
In addition, the Cu surface is ‘reactive’ and has a tendency to form seven-atom

vacancies that increase the number of Cu-fullerene bonds. As a consequence, a variety of

structural phases (surface alloys) is expected, i.e., there is fairly large number of ways to

establish the crystallographic orientation of the fullerene rows with respect to the Cu(111)

lattice and the layer/substrate commensurability. Whether they all form or whether some

are preferred is discussed below based on energy considerations.

From now on, the surface alloys will be named according to their Cu/fullerene compo-

sition. Both Cu atoms from the topmost Cu layer and Cu atoms belonging to the second

(sub-surface) layer form strong bonds with fullerenes (see green-coloured Cu atoms in Fig-

ure 1b-d). The Cu content in the alloy compositions is then determined from the surface and

subsurface Cu layers. Deeper Cu layers are considered to belong to the substrate (Figure 1b-

15


d). The commensurability relationship sets the number of Cu atoms per full molecular layer,

nfull
Cu; knowing the number of vacancies nvac and the number of fullerenes nC60 within the

unit cell, the alloy composition is nCu:nC60 with nCu = 2nfull
Cu − 7nvac (the factor 7 relates

to the number of atoms per vacancy). The composition of the surface alloys observed ex-

perimentally are given in Figure 7a and in the Supporting Information, Tables S1,S2 and

Figure S2.

To estimate the energy of each alloy phase, we now introduce a model that takes into

account three, possibly antagonist, contributions: the inter-molecular pairwise interaction

(Ef−f), the dipole-dipole interaction due to an interfacial charge transfer (Ed), and the

substrate-molecule interaction (Es). The total energy can then be written as:

Et(nCu, nC60, ¯dNN, θ, {⃗πi}i, {⃗ri}i) =
1

nC60

�

i∈[1,nC60]
Ef−f( ¯dNN,⃗ri)

+Ed( ¯dNN,⃗ri) + Es(nCu, nC60, θ,⃗πi,⃗ri)

where the dependence on the composition, on the average NN fullerene distance ¯dNN, on

the crystallographic orientation θ, and on the sets of molecular orientations {⃗πi}i∈[1,nC60]

(⃗πi along, e.g., the center-to-apex axis) and 3D displacements, {⃗ri}i∈[1,nC60], has been made

explicit. We note that the two limit cases, in which eiher fullerene-fullerene interactions or

Cu-fullerene interactions dominate, have been qualitatively addressed in a previous work.23

Here we consider all possible intermediate cases in a quantitative way, using the input of

DFT calculations, and include the effect of dipole-dipole interactions.

The form of Ef−f is shown in the Supporting Information, Figure S4c.
It faithfully

describes, with a simple analytical (hence easily parametrized) function, the result of time-

dependent DFT calculations43 performed in the absence of a substrate, carefully treating

the van der Waals forces dominating at large distances. Ef−f exhibits a marked minimum at

an inter-molecular distance of 10.05 Å, and sensitively depends, especially in the repulsive

16


(short distance) regime, on {⃗ri}i and ¯dNN that vary by typically 1% from phase to phase.

The fullerene-Cu system exhibits significant interfacial charge transfers, 1 to 3 electrons

per molecule in the absence and presence of Cu vacancies respectively, according to indirect

experimental estimates.19 Our DFT calculations predict a transfer of 1.2 and 1.9 electrons.

The charged molecules have an image charge within the metallic substrate, implying that

each molecule should be associated with an electrostatic dipole perpendicular to the surface.

The distinct charge distributions, with and without vacancies, result in similar magnitude for

these dipoles, 0.44 e×nm and 0.48 e×nm, i.e. 0.46 e×nm in average. The interaction between

these dipoles (Ed) is taken in the form of the standard electrodynamics solution assuming a

one-over-cubic-inter-molecular-distance dependency. It is repulsive and its strength compares

to that of Ef−f (Supporting Information, Figure S4c).

The main originality of our approach, and the difficulty in the calculation of Et, is the

evaluation of Es.
Unlike in the common modeling of molecule-on-substrate systems, Es

cannot here be associated to a single form. It adopts two forms, in the presence/absence

of a vacancy under the considered molecule.
For that reason, we call Es an adaptative

interaction energy.
To parametrize it, we translate the 2D map of Figure 4b into a 2D

energy landscape, by associating each high-symmetry crystallographic site to the Cu-fullerene

interaction energy calculated with DFT in the presence/absence of a vacancy (Supporting

Information, Figure S4a,b).

Knowing ⃗πi,⃗ri for each molecule, evaluating �

i Es is in principle straightforward. A

challenging task however is in the determination of nvac, on which �

i Es depends via nCu

(see above formulation of Et). The value of nvac changes from phase to phase, not only due

to different nC60 numbers, but also due to the sometimes destabilizing interaction between

neighbouring vacancies (Section S8 in Supporting Information, Figure S5).37 For phases with

orientation θ < 19.1◦, two neighbour vacancies cannot destabilize each other, because they

are sufficiently far appart.
However, the decrease of the inter-molecular distances when

molecules reach their binding site within a vacancy can come with an energy penalty (see

17


next paragraph). This penalty may be moderate, with the total energy differing by only few

10 meV for configurations with 100% and <100% vacancies, explaining the observation of

both configurations in experiments (see Supporting Information, Section S9). The energy

penalty may be stronger though, preventing the formation of 100% of vacancies for some of

phases, even when θ < 19.1◦. For the (experimentally observed) phase θ = 19.1◦ orientation,

we find that vacancies can only form under 75% of the molecules without being mutually

destabilized, and for the same reason, the fraction decreases to 50% for phases with θ > 19.1◦

orientation.

To compute Et, we first consider all possible in-plane displacements liable to position

each molecule on the nearest lowest-Es configuration.
This is actually what appears to

happen experimentally, with molecules most often found in well-defined configurations. If

the binding configuration is compatible with the formation of a vacancy, then the vacancy

is formed (adaptative potential), provided that the orientation criterion introduced above

is satisfied, also consistent with the STM observations.
There is an important subtlety

in the process of finding the proper {⃗ri}i displacements: some of the supercells have odd

multiplicity (odd nC60), which is incompatible with half the molecules sitting at the bottom of

Cu vacancies (which is the experimental observation). For such supercells we hence compute

the average energies, for configurations with different numbers of vacancies per unit cell (see

Supporting Information, Section S8), and nCu is then an half-integer number.

Discussion: energy hierarchy between phases and coexistence

We now compare the energies of all considered surface alloys, including those observed ex-

perimentally, when the molecular displacements and rotations are allowed and when they

are not (filled/empty symbols in Figure 7b,c). Representing Et versus the composition and

dNN, these alloys fall on parallel lines, each having a given density of Cu vacancies. In the

absence of vacancies, the lower-energy phases are those with smaller unit cells. This result

is actually expected from seminal epitaxial models predicting that the degree of positional

18


Figure 7: Energetics of the 2D surface alloys. (a) Cartoons of the lowest energy configura-
tions, obtained starting from the phases shown in Figure 4a (same colour code; red, blue,
black and light pink correspond to the same crystallographic sites) and allowing 3D molec-
ular displacements and alloying. For better clarity, only the bottom part of the molecules
is shown. (b,c) Total energy (Et) diagram versus composition nCu/nC60 and average NN
fullerene distance ¯dNN, with (filled symbols) and without (open symbols) vacancies, for the
observed phases (b) and those which are not observed experimentally (c). The disk size rep-
resents the surface alloys’ lattice constant a. The colour and disk symbols are represented in
the same convention/scale for b and c. The surface alloys have different density of vacancies,
being present under 50% to 100% of the fullerenes.

coincidence with the substrate, hence the stability, should be maximized for smaller unit

cells.44,45 However, this result does not hold anymore in the presence of vacancies as the

energy strongly decreases. The reason is a strengthened binding (Es gain) associated to the

vacancies, causing changes in the inter-molecular distances, thus of Ef−f + Ed. The energy

span between the different phases is substantially extended in presence of the vacancies,

reaching almost 2 eV. Strikingly, for each experimentally relevant vacancy density, according

to our model the observed alloys have lower energies than other possible alloys (compare Fig-

ure 7b and Figure 7c for vacancy densities of 100%, 75% and 50%; the only exception being

19


the not-observed Cu199.5(C60)7 phase). In that sense the agreement with the experiments is

good.

Interesting, the 169:7 and 217:9 alloy compositions both correspond to two possible phases

(5.4◦ / 16.4◦ and 4.3◦ / 17.5◦ orientations respectively) with different predicted Et (-5.76 eV

/ -5.14 eV and -4.97 eV / -4.93 eV; values expressed per molecule). This shows that, unlike

in biatomic surface alloys, the composition alone is not sufficient to understand the alloy

energetics. However, the crystallographic orientation of the alloy seems a relevant parameter

as Et increases with it for the same composition.

The phases that are not observed experimentally have vacancy densities lower than 100%

and are usually not, given the fraction of molecules within a vacancy, the lowest-energy con-

figurations. Besides, three of the non-observed phases (Cu217(C60)9, ×2, and Cu222.5(C60)9)

have higher-order commensurability supercells, with large lattice constant (symbol size codes

the lattice constants in Figure 7b,c) close to 30 Å. Forming such phases would imply a con-

certed assembling of a large number of fullerenes and vacancies, which is statistically un-

likely, explaining the absence of the Cu217(C60)9 surface alloys in the measurements despite

their relatively low energy. The same argument can explain why the Cu199.5(C60)7 phase,

whose energy is smaller by ∼0.3 eV/molecule than that of the Cu75.5(C60)3, Cu108(C60)4 and

Cu87.5(C60)3 phases having the same vacancy density, is absent in experiments. We note that

the Cu84(C60)3 alloy could not be found in our STM images, although it has a relatively low

energy and a rather small unit cell. It has a vacancy density of 2/3, and for similar orienta-

tions, lower energy phases are predicted by our model (and in fact observed experimentally,

e.g. Cu157(C60)7). Whether accumulating yet more microscopy data would be necessary to

observe this phase remains open questions.

We now address the question of phase coexistence. We first discuss the model’s approx-

imations made to treat the problem with a reasonably small set of parameters (evaluated

with DFT rather than freely adjusted). One important effect of the model is the formation of

Cu vacancies. As explained in the previous section, we relate nvac to the orientation θ of the

20


dense fullerene rows. We came up with a criterion on θ, but did not consider the energy cost

or gain. Intuitively, this cost/gain should depend on the relative position of the vacancies,

since, for instance, Cu atoms can belong to the edges of two vacancies (see Section S7 in

Supporting Information, Figure S4).37 Disentangling the corresponding energy contribution

from others is challenging in DFT calculations. In addition, such a DFT analysis would

require to compare calculations made with large supercells (e.g., for the Cu169(C60)7 phase

with θ = 16.4◦ and a = 26.7 Å), and all having different nCu and nvac numbers, overall

making the comparison almost unfeasible. This is why in our periodic boundary conditions

DFT calculations, individual vacancies (together with one fullerene) were considered within

a relatively large supercell, limiting the interactions between neighbouring supercells. In the

actual phases, the vacancies+fullerenes may cross-talk through the substrate (and no only

by van der Waals or dipole-dipole interactions), which we do not take into account. The

energy of a C-Cu bonds formed within vacancies could then differ from our estimate, and so

could the energy span between the different phases.

Yet, the energies of some of the phases will still be different, by few to several 100 meV.

Such large differences prompt why a phase coexistence is observed experimentally. As dis-

cussed in the Supporting Information, Section S10, the Gibbs energy of the system comprise

an entropy term, which represents here a small contribution that can only marginally modify

the relative energies of the different phases. With this in mind, we can propose a growth-

by-phase-coexistence scenario. We remind that the phase coexistence is observed at room

temperature and slightly above it. A growth temperature increase of about 10% leads to

the exclusive formation of the Cu25(C60)1 phase. The entropy term −TS in the Gibbs free

energy increases by 10% accordingly, hence a limited increase of the entropy stabilisation is

expected. In contrast, temperature can influence the dynamics of domain boundaries (i.e.,

defects) between phases and/or the kinetics of the interconversion of the different phases

into the most stable Cu25(C60)1 phase. The probability to cross the corresponding energy

barrier, according to an Arrhenius law, may increase by much more than 10%, depending on

21


the value of the energy barrier, which would explain both the full conversion of the different

phases, whose total energies span over about 2 eV, into the Cu25(C60)1 phase at 370 K, and

the coexistence at 300 K.

Summary and prospects

We showed that the fullerene-copper system forms what we coined metal-organic surface

alloys, reminiscent of more commonly known biatomic surface alloys. The variety of alloys

observed experimentally was found to be associated with the multiple degrees of freedom

each fullerene molecule can have on the metal surface: in-plane and out-of-plane positional

displacements, as well as internal rotation.
We then resolved the binding configurations

of the molecules based on high-resolution scanning probe microscopy and extensive first

principles calculations.
The alloying mechanism is systematically accompanied with the

formation of one-atom-deep vacancies in the copper surface. To interpret the coexistence

of metal-organic surface alloys, we developed a model that accounts for the inter-molecular

interactions and the binding to the substrate in the presence or absence of Cu vacancies.

Having considered (marginal) entropy contributions to the Gibbs free energy of the system,

we finally rationalized the observed coexistence of phases.

The methodology we developed is relevant to explore various metal-organic systems,

including other metal-fullerene systems.16,21,46–62 Our approach sheds light on the heteroepi-

taxy process involving a hybrid molecular/inorganic system on either sides of the interface.

Beyond the vacancy-induced alloying mechanism, which may be seen as the premises of in-

termixing, the nature of heteroepitaxy could be further explored by considering the elastic

properties of the fullerene lattice, for instance seeking for possible static distorsion waves33

that were observed in non-alloyed metal-organic interfaces.34 Finally, some of the phases

with non-trivial disorder show striking similarities with frustrated 2D spin systems. In this

sense the Cu-fullerene system is also a rich playground to investigate the many-body physics

22


often associated with frustrated magnetism, and more specifically the so-called triangular

Ising antiferromagnet.63

Methods

Sample preparation

Experiments were performed under ultra-high vacuum, inside two chambers (one in Greno-

ble, the other in Lille), each with base pressures in the low 10−10 mbar range.
Copper

single-crystals, cut and polished along a (111) surface, bought from Surface Preparation Lab-

oratory, were prepared by repeated cycles of Ar+ ion sputtering (0.8-1.0 keV) and moderate

temperature annealing (620-700 K). The surface quality was checked with electron diffrac-

tion and STM. Fullerene molecules (99.9% purity) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. They

were thoroughly out-gassed under ultra-high vacuum, within a Kentax evaporator. Evap-

oration was performed on clean Cu(111) at room temperature and 173-223 K, at rates of

0.5-2.0 Å/min using the water-cooled evaporator held at a temperature of around 620-640 K.

Scanning tunneling microscopy

Scanning tunneling microscopy was performed with two different instruments, (one in Greno-

ble, the other in Lille), both connected under ultra-high vacuum to the growth cham-

bers. For room temperature measurements a STM-1 Omicron microscope was used, with

electrochemically-etched W metal probes. For low temperature (4 K) measurements, exper-

iments were carried out with a Joule-Thomson microscope (SPECS, Berlin) using a com-

mercial length-extensional resonator (Kolibri, SPECS Berlin) with W tip prepared by Ar+

sputtering and substrate conditioning.

Correction of drift and hysteresis imaging artefacts are discussed in Section S3 of the

Supporting Information.

23


Density functional theory calculations

The structures and binding energies of the fullerene molecules on their Cu(111) substrate

were optimized using the localized-orbital density functional theory Fireball code,64–66 within

the local density approximation. In our periodic boundary conditions simulations, the sub-

strate was modeled with a five-layer stack of Cu atoms, imposing a fixed position for atoms

in the bottom two layers to simulate bulk layers. Optimized minimal basis sets of localized

orbitals, sp3 for carbon atoms and sp3d5 for copper atoms, were used for structure optimiza-

tion, with respective cutoff radii (in atomic units) 4.5 (s), 5.7 (p), 3.7 (d), for Cu, and 4.5

(s), 4.5 (p), for C, following a previous work on fullerene/Cu(111).67 Also, an sp3d5 basis set

of carbon orbitals has been used for a better description of charge transfer and electronic

dipoles. Different sizes of supercells have been considered in this work to simulate different

inter-molecular distances. All the structures have been fully optimized, using a set of 8×8×1

k-points in the Brillouin zone until forces remained below 0.1 eV/Å.

The tunneling current in the STM simulations was calculated using the non-equilibrium

Green function formalism developed by Keldysh.68,69 First, we optimized the structure

and determined the electronic properties of a Cu-tip formed by a pyramid of four atoms

joined to four layers of Cu(111) using the same DFT calculation scheme as for the different

C60/Cu(111) configurations. In a second step, the tip was placed above the upmost C atom

of the fullerenes, at a distance of 5 Å from it, for different fullerene/Cu(111) configurations

optimized with the DFT simulations and avoiding multiple scattering effects. The images

presented in Figure 6f-h were calculated with a voltage or +1.5 V, corresponding to the

empty states of the molecule. A complete description of the methodology can be found

elsewhere.70

Supporting Information Available

The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org.doi/XXXXX.

24


• Supplementary figure (Supplementary Figure 1) on additional STM data of the different

phases

• Supplementary table (Supplementary Table 1) on the statistical analysis of the orien-

tation of the phases

• Supplementary table (Supplementary Table 2) on the nomenclatures that can be used

to describe the different phases

• Supplementary figure (Supplementary Figure 2) showing cartoon views of the 10 ob-

served phases

• Supplementary table (Supplementary Table 3) on the statistical analysis of the molecules’

height as measured with STM

• Supplementary figure (Supplementary Figure 3) on DFT calculations of the energy

versus Cu-molecule distance for various binding configurations

• Supplementary tables (Supplementary Tables 4-6) summarizing the binding energies,

molecular heights for various molecule-Cu binding configurations

• Supplementary figure (Supplementary Figure 4) showing the 2D molecule-Cu interac-

tion potential with and without vacancies and the inter-molecular interaction potential

together with the dipole-dipole interaction versus inter-molecular distance

• Supplementary figure (Supplementary Figure 5) showing cartoons of the possible ar-

rangement of Cu vacancies in different phases observed experimentally

• Supplementary figure (Supplementary Figure 6) giving a histogram of the density of

vacancies per unit cell in the Cu75.5(C60)3 surface alloy

• Supplementary figure (Supplementary Figure 7) representing two possible configura-

tions for a given phase

25


• Discussions about each of the Supplementary Figures and Tables, and about the cor-

rection of STM imaging artefacts, on different possible kinds of Cu vacancies, on the

effect of the supercell size in the DFT calculations, on the evaluation of the energy cost

for vacancy formation, on previous DFT work on Cu-fullerenes, on the possible inter-

actions between neighbour vacancies, on the way disorder can be taken into account in

our competing interaction model, and on the coexistence of two structures for spectific

phases

Author Information

Corresponding Authors

María Alfonso Moro – Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut NEEL,

38000 Grenoble, France,

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3906-4899;

Email: maria.alfonso-moro@neel.cnrs.fr

Johann Coraux – Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut NEEL, 38000

Grenoble, France,

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2373-3453;

Email: johann.coraux@neel.cnrs.fr

Authors

Yannick Dappe – SPEC, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, CEA Saclay, 91191 Gif-

sur-Yvette, Cedex, France

Sylvie Godey – Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Junia, Univ. Polytechnique Hauts-de-

France, UMR 8520-IEMN, Institut d’Electronique de Microélectronique et de Nanotechnolo-

gie, F-59000 Lille, France

26


Thierry Mélin – Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Junia, Univ. Polytechnique Hauts-de-

France, UMR 8520-IEMN, Institut d’Electronique de Microélectronique et de Nanotechnolo-

gie, F-59000 Lille, France

César González – Instituto de Magnetismo Aplicado (IMA-UCM-ADIF), 28230 Madrid,

Spain and Departamento de Física de Materiales, Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM),

28040 Madrid, Spain

Valérie Guisset – Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut NEEL, 38000

Grenoble, France

Philippe David – Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut NEEL, 38000

Grenoble, France

Benjamin Canals – Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut NEEL,

38000 Grenoble, France

Nicolas Rougemaille – Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut NEEL,

38000 Grenoble, France

Author contributions

J.C. and N.R. conceived the projet.
M.A.M and S.G. performed the experiments with

support from V.G., P.D., T.M. and J.C. Y.D. performed the DFT calculations and C.G.

performed the STM image simulations. M.A.M and J.C analyzed the results. All authors

wrote and revised the paper.

Note

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

27


Acknowledgement

M.A.M. thanks the Nanosciences Foundation, hosted by the Université Grenoble Alpes Foun-

dation, for a Ph.D. grant, and Groupement de Recherche NS-CPU (Nanosciences en champ

proche sous ultravide) for funding of accommodation fees during measurement campaigns

in Lille. This work was carried out in part using the SPM facilities of the Multi-Physics

Characterisation Platform (PCMP) of the IEMN and the RENATECH network. We thank

Dr. Alexandre Artaud for assistance in the correction of imaging artefacts in STM images.

CG acknowledges the computer resources at Lusitania II and the technical support provided

by the Centro Extremeño de iNvestigación, Innovación Tecnológica y Supercomputación

(CENITS), project FI-2022-1-0020 and funding by Comunidad de Madrid (Spain), project

S2018/NMT-4321 NANOMAGCOST.

28


References

1. Christensen, A.; Ruban, A.; Stoltze, P.; Jacobsen, K. W.; Skriver, H. L.; Nørskov, J. K.;

Besenbacher, F. Phase Diagrams for Surface Alloys. Phys. Rev. B 1997, 56, 5822.

2. Bardi, U. The Atomic Structure of Alloy Surfaces and Surface Alloys. Rep. Progr. Phys.

1994, 57, 939.

3. Woodruff, D. Surface Alloys and Alloy Surfaces; Elsevier: Amsterdam, 2002.

4. Besenbacher, F.;
Chorkendorff, I.;
Clausen, B.;
Hammer, B.;
Molenbroek, A.;

Nørskov, J. K.; Stensgaard, I. Design of a Surface Alloy Catalyst for Steam Reform-

ing. Science 1998, 279, 1913–1915.

5. Kuld, S.; Conradsen, C.; Moses, P. G.; Chorkendorff, I.; Sehested, J. Quantification of

Zinc Atoms in a Surface Alloy on Copper in an Industrial-Type Methanol Synthesis

Catalyst. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 126, 6051–6055.

6. Lahiri, J.; Miller, T.; Adamska, L.; Oleynik, I. I.; Batzill, M. Graphene Growth on

Ni(111) by Transformation of a Surface Carbide. Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 518–522.

7. Qi, Y.; Meng, C.; Xu, X.; Deng, B.; Han, N.; Liu, M.; Hong, M.; Ning, Y.; Liu, K.;

Zhao, J.; Fu, Q.; Li, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, Z. Unique Transformation from Graphene to

Carbide on Re(0001) Induced by Strong Carbon–Metal Interaction. J. Am. Chem. Soc.

2017, 139, 17574–17581.

8. Švec, M.; Hapala, P.; Ondráček, M.; Merino, P.; Blanco-Rey, M.; Mutombo, P.;

Vondráček, M.; Polyak, Y.; Cháb, V.; Martín Gago, J.; Jelínek, P. Silicene Ver-

sus Two-Dimensional Ordered Silicide:
Atomic and Electronic Structure of Si-

(19×19)R23.4◦/Pt(111). Phys. Rev. B 2014, 89, 201412.

9. Wang, Y.; Li, L.; Yao, W.; Song, S.; Sun, J.; Pan, J.; Ren, X.; Li, C.; Okunishi, E.;

Wang, Y.-Q.; Wang, E.; Shao, Y.; Zhang, Y. Y.; Yang, H.-T.; Schwier, E. F.; Iwa-

29


sawa, H.; Shimada, K.; Taniguchi, M.; Cheng, Z.; Zhou, S. et al. Monolayer PtSe2,

a New Semiconducting Transition-Metal-Dichalcogenide, Epitaxially Grown by Direct

Selenization of Pt. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 4013–4018.

10. O’Brien, W.; Zhang, J.; Tonner, B. Local Magnetic Properties and Magnetic Ordering

of the Two-Dimensional Surface Alloy c(2×2) Mn/Cu(001). J. Phys.: Condens. Matter

1993, 5, L515.

11. Honolka, J.;
Lee, T.;
Kuhnke, K.;
Enders, A.;
Skomski, R.;
Bornemann, S.;

Mankovsky, S.; Minár, J.; Staunton, J.; Ebert, H.; Hessler, M.; Fauth, K.; Schütz, G.;

Buchsbaum, A.; Schmid, M.; Varga, P.; Kern, K. Magnetism of FePt Surface Alloys.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 067207.

12. Mehendale, S.;
Girard, Y.;
Repain, V.;
Chacon, C.;
Lagoute, J.;
Rousset, S.;

Marathe, M.; Narasimhan, S. Ordered Surface Alloy of Bulk-Immiscible Components

Stabilized by Magnetism. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105, 056101.

13. Sprunger, P.; Lægsgaard, E.; Besenbacher, F. Growth of Ag on Cu(100) Studied by

STM: From Surface Alloying to Ag Superstructures. Phys. Rev. B 1996, 54, 8163.

14. Azizi, A.; Dogan, M.; Cain, J. D.; Eskandari, R.; Yu, X.; Glazer, E. C.; Cohen, M. L.;

Zettl, A. Frustration and Atomic Ordering in a Monolayer Semiconductor Alloy. Phys.

Rev. Lett. 2020, 124, 096101.

15. Ottaviano, L.; Ressel, B.; Di Teodoro, C.; Profeta, G.; Santucci, S.; Cháb, V.; Prince, K.

Short-Range Order in Two-Dimensional Binary Alloys. Phys. Rev. B 2003, 67, 045401.

16. Stengel, M.;
De Vita, A.;
Baldereschi, A. Adatom-Vacancy Mechanisms for the

C60/Al(111)-(6×6) Reconstruction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 91, 166101.

17. Pai, W. W.; Hsu, C.-L. Ordering of an Incommensurate Molecular Layer with Adsorbate-

Induced Reconstruction: C60/Ag(100). Phys. Rev. B 2003, 68, 121403.

30


18. Felici, R.; Pedio, M.; Borgatti, F.; Iannotta, S.; Capozi, M.; Ciullo, G.; Stierle, A.

X-Ray-Diffraction Characterization of Pt(111) Surface Nanopatterning Induced by C60

Adsorption. Nat. Mater. 2005, 4, 688–692.

19. Pai, W. W.; Jeng, H.; Cheng, C.-M.; Lin, C.-H.; Xiao, X.; Zhao, A.; Zhang, X.; Xu, G.;

Shi, X.; Van Hove, M.; Hsue, C.; Tsuei, K. Optimal Electron Doping of a C60 Monolayer

on Cu(111) via Interface Reconstruction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 104, 036103.

20. Rowe, J.; Rudolf, P.; Tjeng, L.; Malic, R.; Meigs, G.; Chen, C.; Chen, J.; Plummer, E.

Synchrotron Radiation and Low Energy Electron Diffraction Studies of Ultrathin C60

Films Deposited on Cu(100), Cu(111) and Cu(110). Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 1992, 6,

3909–3913.

21. Motai, K.; Hashizume, T.; Shinohara, H.; Saito, Y.; Pickering, H. W.; Nishina, Y. N. Y.;

Sakurai, T. S. T. C60 Grown on the Cu(111) 1×1 Surface. J. J. Appl. Phys. 1993, 32,

L450.

22. Tsuei, K.-D.; Yuh, J.-Y.; Tzeng, C.-T.; Chu, R.-Y.; Chung, S.-C.; Tsang, K.-L. Photoe-

mission and Photoabsorption Study of C60 Adsorption on Cu(111) Surfaces. Phys. Rev.

B 1997, 56, 15412.

23. Pai, W. W.; Hsu, C.-L.; Lin, M.-C.; Lin, K.; Tang, T. Structural Relaxation of Adlayers

in the Presence of Adsorbate-Induced Reconstruction: C60/Cu(111). Phys. Rev. B 2004,

69, 125405.

24. Pawlak, R.; Kawai, S.; Fremy, S.; Glatzel, T.; Meyer, E. Atomic-Scale Mechanical Prop-

erties of Orientated C60 Molecules Revealed by Noncontact Atomic Force Microscopy.

ACS Nano 2011, 5, 6349–6354.

25. Gross, L.; Mohn, F.; Moll, N.; Schuler, B.; Criado, A.; Guitián, E.; Peña, D.; Gour-

don, A.; Meyer, G. Bond-Order Discrimination by Atomic Force Microscopy. Science

2012, 337, 1326–1329.

31


26. Chandler, H. J.; Stefanou, M.; Campbell, E. E.; Schaub, R. Li@C60 as a Multi-State

Molecular Switch. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1–8.

27. Xu, H.; Wang, Z.; Lu, Y.; Wei, S.; Liu, X.; Wang, L. Construction of a Molecular Switch

Based on Two Metastable States of Fullerene on Cu(111). J. Phys. Chem. C 2020, 124,

11158–11164.

28. Cuberes, M.; Schlittler, R.; Gimzewski, J. Manipulation of C60 Molecules on Cu(111)

Surfaces Using a Scanning Tunneling Microscope. Appl. Phys. A 1998, 66, S669–S673.

29. Tang, H.; Cuberes, M.; Joachim, C.; Gimzewski, J. Fundamental Considerations in the

Manipulation of a Single C60 Molecule on a Surface with an STM. Surf. Sci. 1997, 386,

115–123.

30. Hooks, D. E.; Fritz, T.; Ward, M. D. Epitaxy and Molecular Organization on Solid

Substrates. Adv. Mater. 2001, 13, 227–241.

31. Artaud, A.; Magaud, L.; Le Quang, T.; Guisset, V.; David, P.; Chapelier, C.; Coraux, J.

Universal Classification of Twisted, Strained and Sheared Graphene Moiré Superlattices.

Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 1–12.

32. Forker, R.; Meissner, M.; Fritz, T. Classification of Epitaxy in Reciprocal and Real

Space: Rigid Versus Flexible Lattices. Soft Matter 2017, 13, 1748–1758.

33. Novaco, A. D.; McTague, J. P. Orientational Epitaxy – The Orientational Ordering of

Incommensurate Structures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1977, 38, 1286.

34. Meissner, M.; Sojka, F.; Matthes, L.; Bechstedt, F.; Feng, X.; Müllen, K.; Manns-

feld, S. C.; Forker, R.; Fritz, T. Flexible 2D Crystals of Polycyclic Aromatics Stabilized

by Static Distortion Waves. ACS Nano 2016, 10, 6474–6483.

35. Hsu, C.-L.; Pai, W. W. Aperiodic Incommensurate Phase of a C60 Monolayer on Ag(100).

Phys. Rev. B 2003, 68, 245414.

32


36. Wang, L.-L.; Cheng, H.-P. Rotation, Translation, Charge Transfer, and Electronic Struc-

ture of C60 on Cu(111) Surface. Phys. Rev. B 2004, 69, 045404.

37. Shi, X.-Q.; Van Hove, M. A.; Zhang, R.-Q. Adsorbate-Induced Reconstruction by C60 on

Close-Packed Metal Surfaces: Mechanism for Different Types of Reconstruction. Phys.

Rev. B 2012, 85, 075421.

38. Larsson, J. A.; Elliott, S. D.; Greer, J. C.; Repp, J.; Meyer, G.; Allenspach, R. Orien-

tation of Individual C60 Molecules Adsorbed on Cu(111): Low-Temperature Scanning

Tunneling Microscopy and Density Functional Calculations. Phys. Rev. B 2008, 77,

115434.

39. Forcieri, L.; Taylor, S.; Moriarty, P.; Jarvis, S. P. Origin of C60 Surface Reconstruction

Resolved by Atomic Force Microscopy. Phys. Rev. B 2021, 104, 205428.

40. Hashizume, T.; Motai, K.; Wang, X.; Shinohara, H.; Saito, Y.; Maruyama, Y.; Ohno, K.;

Kawazoe, Y.; Nishina, Y.; Pickering, H.; Kuk, Y.; Sakurai, T. Intramolecular Structures

of C60 Molecules Adsorbed on the Cu(111)-(1×1) Surface. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 71,

2959.

41. Lu, X.; Grobis, M.; Khoo, K.; Louie, S. G.; Crommie, M. Charge Transfer and Screening

in Individual C60 Molecules on Metal Substrates: A Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy

and Theoretical Study. Phys. Rev. B 2004, 70, 115418.

42. De Menech, M.; Saalmann, U.; Garcia, M. E. Energy-Resolved STM Mapping of C60 on

Metal Surfaces: A Theoretical Study. Phys. Rev. B 2006, 73, 155407.

43. Pacheco, J.; Prates Ramalho, J. First-Principles Determination of the Dispersion Inter-

action Between Fullerenes and their Intermolecular Potential. Phys. Rev Lett. 1997, 79,

3873.

33


44. Grimmer, H.; Bollmann, W.; Warrington, D. Coincidence-Site Lattices and Complete

Pattern-Shift in Cubic Crystals. Acta Cryst. A 1974, 30, 197–207.

45. Smith, D.; Pond, R. Bollmann’s 0-Lattice Theory; a Geometrical Approach to Interface

Structure. Int. Met. Rev. 1976, 21, 61–74.

46. Altman, E. I.; Colton, R. J. Nucleation, Growth, and Structure of Fullerene Films onAu

(111). Surf. Sci. 1992, 279, 49–67.

47. Altman, E. I.; Colton, R. J. Determination of the Orientation of C60 adsorbed on Au(111)

and Ag(111). Phys. Rev. B 1993, 48, 18244.

48. Wang, X.-D.; Yamazaki, S.; Li, J.-L.; Hashizume, T.; Shinohara, H.; Sakurai, T. Recon-

structions of C60 on the Ag(111) 1×1 Surface. Scanning Microscopy 1994, 8, 25.

49. Sakurai, T.; Wang, X.; Hashizume, T.; Yurov, V.; Shinohara, H.; Pickering, H. Adsorp-

tion of Fullerenes on Cu(111) and Ag(111) Surfaces. Appl. Surf. Sci. 1995, 87, 405–413.

50. Sakurai, T.; Wang, X.-D.; Xue, Q.; Hasegawa, Y.; Hashizume, T.; Shinohara, H. Scan-

ning Tunneling Microscopy Study of Fullerenes. Progr. Surf. Sci. 1996, 51, 263–408.

51. Johansson, M.-J.; Maxwell, A.; Gray, S.; Brühwiler, P.; Mancini, D.; Johansson, L.;

Mårtensson, N. Scanning Tunneling Microscopy of C60/Al(111)-6×6:
Inequivalent

Molecular Sites and Electronic Structures. Phys. Rev. B 1996, 54, 13472.

52. Maxwell, A.; Brühwiler, P.; Andersson, S.; Arvanitis, D.; Hernnäs, B.; Karis, O.;

Mancini, D.; Mårtensson, N.; Gray, S.; Johansson, M.-J.; Johansson, L. C60 on Al(111):

Covalent Bonding and Surface Reconstruction. Phys. Rev. B 1995, 52, R5546.

53. Maxwell, A.; Brühwiler, P.; Arvanitis, D.; Hasselström, J.; Johansson, M.-J.; Mårtens-

son, N. Electronic and Geometric Structure of C60 on Al(111) and Al(110). Phys. Rev.

B 1998, 57, 7312.

34


54. Rogero, C.; Pascual, J. I.; Gomez-Herrero, J.; Baro, A. Resolution of Site-Specific Bond-

ing Properties of C60 Adsorbed on Au(111). J. Chem. Phys. 2002, 116, 832–836.

55. Guo, S.; Fogarty, D. P.; Nagel, P. M.; Kandel, S. A. Thermal Diffusion of C60 Molecules

and Clusters on Au(111). J. Phys. Chem. B 2004, 108, 14074–14081.

56. Zhang, X.; Yin, F.; Palmer, R. E.; Guo, Q. The C60/Au(111) Interface at Room Tem-

perature: A Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy Study. Surf. Sci. 2008, 602, 885–892.

57. Schull, G.; Berndt, R. Orientationally Ordered (7×7) Superstructure of C60 on Au(111).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 99, 226105.

58. Li, H.-I.; Pussi, K.; Hanna, K.; Wang, L.-L.; Johnson, D.; Cheng, H.-P.; Shin, H.;

Curtarolo, S.; Moritz, W.; Smerdon, J.; McGrath, R.; Diehl, R. Surface Geometry of

C60 on Ag(111). Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103, 056101.

59. Tang, L.; Xie, Y.; Guo, Q. Complex Orientational Ordering of C60 Molecules on Au(111).

J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 135, 114702.

60. Gardener, J. A.; Briggs, G. A. D.; Castell, M. R. Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Studies

of C60 Monolayers on Au(111). Phys. Rev. B 2009, 80, 235434.

61. Pussi, K.; Li, H.; Shin, H.; Loli, L. S.; Shukla, A.; Ledieu, J.; Fournée, V.; Wang, L.;

Su, S.; Marino, K.; Snyder, M.; Diehl, R. Elucidating the Dynamical Equilibrium of C60

Molecules on Ag(111). Phys. Rev. B 2012, 86, 205406.

62. Paßens, M.; Waser, R.; Karthäuser, S. Enhanced Fullerene–Au(111) coupling in (2
√

3 ×

2
√

3)R30 Superstructures with Intermolecular Interactions. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol.

2015, 6, 1421–1431.

63. Wannier, G. Antiferromagnetism. The Triangular Ising Net. Phys. Rev. 1950, 79, 357.

35


64. Sankey, O. F.; Niklewski, D. J. Ab Initio Multicenter Tight-Binding Model for Molecular-

Dynamics Simulations and Other Applications in Covalent Systems. Phys. Rev. B 1989,

40, 3979.

65. Lewis, J. P.; Jelinek, P.; Ortega, J.; Demkov, A. A.; Trabada, D. G.; Haycock, B.;

Wang, H.; Adams, G.; Tomfohr, J. K.; Abad, E.; Wang, H.; Drabold, D. A. Advances

and Applications in the FIREBALL Ab Initio Tight-Binding Molecular-Dynamics For-

malism. Phys. Status Solidi B 2011, 248, 1989–2007.

66. Jelínek, P.; Wang, H.; Lewis, J. P.; Sankey, O. F.; Ortega, J. Multicenter Approach to

the Exchange-Correlation Interactions in Ab Initio Tight-Binding Methods. Phys. Rev.

B 2005, 71, 235101.

67. Schull, G.; Dappe, Y. J.; González, C.; Bulou, H.; Berndt, R. Charge Injection Through

Single and Double Carbon Bonds. Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 3142–3146.

68. Keldysh, L. V. Diagram Technique for Nonequilibrium Processes. Sov. Phys. JETP

1965, 20, 1018–1026.

69. Mingo, N.; Jurczyszyn, L.; Garcia-Vidal, F.; Saiz-Pardo, R.; De Andres, P.; Flores, F.;

Wu, S.; More, W. Theory of the Scanning Tunneling Microscope: Xe on Ni and Al. Phys.

Rev. B 1996, 54, 2225.

70. González, C.; Abad, E.; Dappe, Y.; Cuevas, J. Theoretical Study of Carbon-Based Tips

For Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy. Nanotechnology 2016, 27, 105201.

36


