Fibrous thermoresponsive Janus membranes for directional 
vapor transport 

Anupama Sargur Ranganatha, Avinash Bajia,b, Giuseppino 
Fortunatoc, René M. Rossic 

aPillar of Engineering Product Development, Singapore University of Technology and 
Design, Singapore 487372 

bManufacturing Engineering, LA TROBE University, Melbourne Victoria 3086, Australia 

c Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Laboratory for 
Biomimetic Membranes and Textiles, CH-9014 St. Gallen, Switzerland 

Abstract  
Wearing comfort of apparel is highly dependent on moisture management and the 
respective transport properties of the textiles. In today’s used textiles, water vapor 
transmission (WVT) depends primarily on the porosity and the wettability of the clothing 
layer next to the skin and is not adapting or responsive to environmental conditions. The 
WVT is inevitably the same from both sides of the membrane. We propose a novel 
approach in this study by developing a thermoresponsive Janus membrane using 
electrospinning procedures. We targeted a membrane as a bilayer composite structure using 
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) as one layer and a blend of PVDF and thermoresponsive 
poly-n-isopropyl acrylamide (PNIPAM) as the second layer changing wettability 
properties in the range of physiological temperatures. Tailored electrospinning conditions 
led to a self-standing membrane incorporating fiber diameters of 400nm and porosities of 
50% for both layers within the Janus membrane. The WVT studies revealed that the 
combined effects of the Janus membrane’s directional wettability and the temperature-
responsive property results in temperature-dependent vapor transport. The results show 
that the membrane offers minimum resistance to WVT when the PVDF side faces the skin, 
which depicts the side with high humidity over a range of temperatures. However, the same 
membrane shows a temperature-dependent WVT behavior when the blend side faces the 
skin. From a room temperature of 25 °C to an elevated temperature of 35 °C, there is a 
significant increase in the membrane’s resistance to WVT. This behavior is attributed to 
the combined effect of the Janus construct and the thermoresponsive property.  
This temperature-controlled differential vapor transport offers ways to adapt vapor 
transport independence of environmental conditions leading to enhanced wearing comfort 
and performance to be applied in fields such as apparel or the packaging industry.  

Introduction 

Tailored protective clothing is one of the oldest but actively researched fields for improving 
textiles' performance and comfort of textiles.1, 2 The practical end-use include firefighter 
protection clothing, diver’s, and space suit as well as raincoats, etc., drive the research in 
protective clothing. Typically, a wearer expects the garment to be functional and 
comfortable for the required end-use. 


Sweat and heat transport of apparel describe the thermal comfort aspect,3 which is a 
tradeoff between the performance and comfort properties of the clothing4. For example, 
rain ponchos have one of the best waterproof abilities as they are impermeable to water but 
uncomfortable to wear as the sweat cannot diffuse. Modern apparels employ a combination 
of novel chemistry and material structure to attain performance and comfort.5-9 Even 
though the performance levels have improved from what it was decades ago, the comfort 
aspect still depends on the surrounding environment. Other than the touch, which is a 
qualitative factor, sweat transport, measured by water vapor transmission (WVT) across 
the fabric, is considered a quantitative measure of comfort in apparel. In a practical 
scenario, sweat transmission combines water and vapor transport, depending on the 
person’s activity level. Liquid sweat transmission is required during a person’s high 
activity level. In contrast, vapor transmission is needed during all activity levels of a person 
and is considered a measure of the fabric’s comfort. It is often reported as a measure of 
comfort for the new material systems.10-12  

WVT is primarily driven by the partial vapor pressure difference across the membrane and 
usually follows Fick’s law of diffusion when a system is in a steady state. The temperature 
and humidity of the local environment govern the partial vapor pressure as expressed in 
Eq. 1. Therefore, WVT is achieved much better in arid 13 compared to humid regions. 

𝑝𝑝𝑤𝑤 =
𝐻𝐻∗6.11∗ 𝑒𝑒(17.67∗
𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇+243.6)

100
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 

Free water vapor diffusion is often insufficient to increase comfort in humid regions, and 
forced ventilation is required to pump out the sweat. Attaching devices to circulate the air 
to remove sweat is cumbersome and practically inconvenient. Therefore, research on a 
material that can steer, adapt, and respond to environmental changes and pump out liquid 
sweat without external support is essential. 

Electrospun fibrous membranes exhibit good water vapor permeability and wind 
resistance. Gibson et al. reported that the water vapor quickly diffuses out through the 
electrospun membrane due to the large porosity of the electrospun membrane. On the other 
side, the large surface area of the nanofibrous layer resists convective wind flow.14 
Furthermore, to improve the performance, electrospun membranes from selected polymers 
such as polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and polyurethane (PU) were modified to enhance their 
tensile stress and breaking elongation %, waterproof ability with tailored vapor 
permeability.15-17 Selected studies evaluated the vapor permeability of multilayered 
membranes18, a combination of electrospun and woven textiles19, and electrospinning of 
hydrophilic/hydrophobic layers.20 Multilayered membrane samples investigated by 
Mukhopadhyay et al.18 showed that the water vapor transmittance is dependent on the 
porosity and pore size of the middle layer of polyester fleece/polyester spacer, even when 
the porosity of the innermost and outermost layers is constant in all the tested samples. 
Therefore, the multilayer system, which had a highly porous middle layer, exhibited larger 
WVT due to increased overall porosity. Investigation of the woven fabric coated with an 
electrospun fibrous mat by Bagherzadeh et al. 19 showed that the electrospun layer did not 
impede the water vapor permeability of the woven fabric. In another investigation of the 
multilayer electrospun membrane by Gorji et al.20 they revealed the effect of incorporating 
graphene oxide in the hydrophilic matrix, which is layered adjacent to a polyurethane 


fibrous membrane. The water vapor permeability reduced with higher hydrophilic layer’s 
weight. Increasing graphene oxide content from 0.1 to 0.4% in the acrylamide-based 
hydrophilic polymer, reduced the water solubility of the polymer and consequently 
increasing the water vapor permeability. However, studies on multi-layer systems did not 
investigate the direction of the vapor transmission across the thickness of the membranes. 
As previous studies revealed that the vapor diffusion through the microporous membrane 
is porosity dependent, the vapor transmission from either side of the membrane along its 
thickness is assumed to be constant.  

Introducing heterogeneity in the membrane chemistry across the thickness, without altering 
the porosity, exhibits directionality in the membrane’s properties. E.g., combining 
hydrophobic and hydrophilic material in layers within a single membrane exhibits 
directional water flow. Such membranes, with faces of different chemistry, are termed 
Janus membranes21, 22. These membranes have attracted high attention from researchers. In 
one such system, the water drops flow from the hydrophobic side to the hydrophilic side 
but not from the hydrophilic to the hydrophobic side. The flow from the hydrophobic side 
is due to the hydrophilic layer underneath the hydrophobic, which pulls the droplet across 
the membrane. The Laplace pressure difference, along with the thickness of the membrane, 
explains this  mechanism.23 

Another class of materials, i.e., environmentally responsive polymers, such as poly N-
(isopropylacrylamide), are termed ‘smart’ due to their switchable properties in response to 
environmental cues.24 Figure 1 shows the change in molecular conformation of PNIPAM 
concerning the environmental temperature. At room temperature, the carbonyl and amide 
groups of PNIPAM are exposed to form a hydrogen bond with the surrounding water vapor. 
However, at elevated temperatures, the hydrogen bonds break and cause intramolecular 
bonding between carbonyl and amide groups from adjacent monomer units. This coil 
conformation is relatively hydrophobic compared to the extended conformation at room 
temperature, being hydrophilic.25-27  

The PNIPAM-based hydrogel can be coated on textiles like cotton or nylon 6 fabrics and 
exhibit thermoresponsive behavior. The WVT studies by Stular et al., and Verbič et al. 
show less vapor transmission at ambient temperature in comparison with WVT at an 
elevated temperature of 40 °C. The swelling of PNIPAM reduces the porosity and, in turn, 
reduces the vapor transmission at ambient temperature  

Independent research on responsive materials,24, 28, 29 and Janus constructs30-32 shows high 
potential for smart and self-sustaining systems with directional liquid transport. Our current 
study shows the result of combining responsive material such as PNIPAM in a Janus 
construct. PNIPAM is blended with PVDF in a 25:75 wt% ratio to minimize the effect of 
swelling and retain the thermoresponsive behavior. The blend and pristine PVDF are 
electrospun in layers to obtain a Janus construct. Consequently, the electrospun Janus 
membrane has PVDF on one face and a blend on the other. We use two independent 
experimental approaches to assess and confirm the WVT performance of the membrane. 
For the first time in literature, we show that WVT is preferentially more in one direction 
within a given membrane. The directionality is plausibly due to the ‘passive pumping’ 
action of the Janus membrane, combined with the thermoresponsive property of the 
hydrophilic layer. 


 

 

Figure 1: Shows the change in the molecular conformation of poly N-(isopropyl acrylamide)
in response to the change in the environmental temperature. 

Materials and methods 
Materials 
PVDF pellets with a molecular weight of 180000 g/mol and 530000 g/mol powder were 
procured from Sigma-Aldrich, Switzerland. PNIPAM powder with a molecular weight of 
300000 g/mol was purchased from Scientific Polymer Products Inc. N, N-
dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.5 %) from Sigma-Aldrich Switzerland. 
 
Methods 
Membrane fabrication  
The PVDF solutions were prepared by dissolving 33 wt% of PVDF (180000 g/mol) pellets 
in DMF at 60 ºC overnight. The blend solutions were prepared by dissolving 18 wt% of 
the polymer mixture, i.e., PVDF (530000 g/mol) and PNIPAM (300000 g/mol) in 75/25 
w/w ratio in DMF, and magnetically stirred at 60 ºC on a hot plate overnight and 
subsequently cooled to room temperature before electrospinning.  
 
Needle-based electrospinning  

PVDF solution or the blend solution was loaded in a plastic syringe with a 21G blunt needle 
(0.8 mm inner diameter). The flow rate of the polymer solution was set to 0.5ml*h-1 using 
a flow pump. The needle tip was connected to a voltage of 10kV and the collector plate to 
a voltage of -5kV. The working distance between the needle and the flat plate aluminum 
collector was 12 cm. The aluminum collector was covered with silicone paper for easy 
peeling off the electrospun membranes. 


Needle-less electrospinning (NanospiderTM) 

NanospiderTM (Elmarco, Czech Republic) is a needle-less electrospinning technology with 
upscaling capability. Figure 1 shows a schematic of the procedure. The following spinning 
parameters were used for homogenous spinning: The vertical gap between the two wires 
was 25 cm, wherein the top wire was applied with a voltage of +60 kV and the bottom wire 
with -10 kV. The traversing carriage, with a speed of 270 mm/s on the bottom wire, housed 
a pinhole of 0.5 mm, which controls the volume of polymer solution trailed on the bottom 
wire. The collector paper moving at a speed of 18 mm/min, is placed right below the top 
wire 

After 20 minutes of electrospinning, the paper position is unrolled to the starting point to 
electrospin in the same area. Five such repetitions build a thick and wide membrane with 
a surface area of 500 mm2. The fabrication of the blend and PVDF layer followed the same 
procedure. Four Janus membranes were prepared and tested for water-vapor resistances 
using the sweating guarded hotplate, elaborated in the following sections. 

Figure 2: Needle-less electrospinning setup used to develop sub-micron-sized fibers at 
the pilot-scale level.  
A carriage with polymer solution traverses the bottom metallic wire (+60 kV) and leaves 
a trail of the solution droplets on this wire. The potential difference between the wires 
draws the fibers from these droplets. The silicone paper collects the fibers placed right 
below the top metallic wire (-10 kV).

 

 Material characterization 
 
The viscosity of the polymer solutions was evaluated using a Physica MCR301 Rheometer 
(Anton P, Graz, Austria) with a plate-cone geometry. The shear viscosity of the polymer 
solutions was assessed as a function of the shear rate. The spinning solution's electrical 


conductivity was measured using Metrohm 660, Switzerland. The electrospun membranes 
were visually examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) by a Hitachi S-4800, 
Hitachi High-Technologies, USA & Canada) using 2 kV accelerating voltage and 10 mA 
current flow. Before the SEM measurements, the samples were sputtered with 8nm of Au-
Pd to increase the conductivity using a sputter coater, Leica EM ACE600, Leica 
Microsystems, Germany. 
 
Sweating guarded hotplate 
 
The sweating guarded-hotplate to determine the resistance of the membrane to WVT 
follows ISO 1109233. It is often referred to as the “skin model” as it simulates the heat and 
vapor transfer processes next to the skin. Primarily, it consists of an electrically heated 
porous plate to simulate the thermoregulation model of the skin (Figure 2). Heat loss is 
avoided by using the guard underneath and on both sides of the hot plate. At the same time, 
the guards are heated to the same temperature as the porous plate. The water-circulating 
system feeds the heated plate to produce the vapor by evaporation. The system underneath 
the plate measures the heating power required to maintain the temperature of the plate. The 
measurement is carried out in a controlled environment as it involves temperature, relative 
humidity, and wind speed combinations. 

Figure 3: Schematic of the sweating hot plate instrument. a) is the photographic image 
of the device. b) shows the airflow tangential to the mounted test sample. c) shows the 
parts in layers. The circulation pump supplies the water to the electrically heated and 
porous plate for evaporation. Cellophane is a waterproof but vapor permeable layer to 
transmit the evaporating vapor from the plate. The test membrane lays flat on the 
cellophane covered heated plate and is held in place by a frame on all sides. 

The membrane is placed on an electrically heated plate, covered with a saturated 
cellophane sheet permeable to vapor but impermeable to water. Air is tangentially blown 
across the membrane surface to maintain a constant vapor pressure gradient. This setup 
permits only the vapor from the plate to pass through the fibrous membrane and prevents 
the water from wetting the fibrous membrane. The heat flux required to maintain the 
saturated vapor pressure is a measure of the membrane’s resistance to vapor permeability. 
The expression for the resistance to vapor permeability is as follows: 

𝑅𝑅𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 =
[𝜌𝜌𝑚𝑚−𝜌𝜌𝑎𝑎]

𝐻𝐻−∆𝐻𝐻𝑒𝑒    
(2) 

𝑅𝑅𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒: Water-vapor resistance in 𝑚𝑚2𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 𝑊𝑊
⁄
 


𝜌𝜌𝑚𝑚: The saturation water-vapor partial pressure in Pascal (Pa), at the surface of the heated 
plate at a temperature in ºC 
𝜌𝜌𝑎𝑎: The water-vapor partial pressure in Pa of the air in the test enclosure with air 
temperature in ºC 
𝐻𝐻: Heating power supplied to the measuring unit in W 
∆𝐻𝐻𝑒𝑒: Baseline error correction term for heating power for the measurement of water-vapor 
resistance 𝑅𝑅𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒, used as a reference value for ambient conditions.  

The boundary layer resistance of the cellophane layers is the baseline measurement of the 
system. The software deducts the resistance of the boundary layer from the experiment 
results for subsequent measurements. Thus, the instrument directly calculates the resistance 
offered by the fibrous membranes. 

OptiCal double-chamber method 

OptiCal from Michell Instruments is a relative humidity (RH) and temperature calibrator 
that uses an optical sensor for high-precision measurements. It is used to design a setup 
that determines the WVT of the membrane. Figure 4 shows the setup schematic, which 
consists of a temperature-controlled chamber with a sealed container for the test membrane. 
A reservoir draws water from a tube placed on the weighing scale to maintain its level to 
ensure a controlled RH. A climatic chamber with controlled temperature and RH houses 
the entire setup. A computer-connected software controls the environmental conditions. In 
parallel, another software records the weighing scale measurements, i.e., the weight 
reduction due to water flow into the OptiCal chamber is directly associated with vapor 
diffusion through the membrane 

Figure 4: Schematic of the double chamber setup.

Measurement of water vapor permeability started after the stabilization of the 
environmental conditions. The water vapor passes through the membrane (∅ = 0.06 m) 


from the OptiCal chamber. As the RH in the OptiCal chamber drops, water from the 
reservoir is evaporated to maintain the desired RH. The water from the tube on the scale 
flows to the reservoir to maintain the water level in the reservoir. The reduced amount of 
water from the tube is weighed by scale, and the weight loss is recorded in real-time. Water 
vapor permeance is the weight loss over a defined period for a unit partial vapor pressure 
difference across the membrane. The environmental conditions between the inside and 
outside instruments govern this partial vapor pressure difference. An external RH and 
temperature sensor from MSR® with a built-in data logger measured the test conditions 
outside the membrane surface. 0.05” thermocouple wires were embedded into the fibrous 
membranes to record the actual temperature at the surface and the interface of two layers 
of the Janus membrane. The expression for the partial vapor pressure as a function of 
temperature and humidity is given by following equations34, 35. 

𝑝𝑝𝑤𝑤 =
𝐻𝐻∗6.11∗ 𝑒𝑒(17.67∗
𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇+243.6)

100
  

(3) 

𝑝𝑝𝑤𝑤 is the partial pressure, H is the humidity in %, and T is the temperature in °C. 

𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑃𝑃 =

𝑊𝑊

𝑒𝑒 ∗ (𝜌𝜌𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖− 𝜌𝜌𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜)∗𝐴𝐴 
(4) 

WVP is the water vapor permeability in g/(ℎ ∗ 𝑚𝑚2*mbar), W is the water loss in grams, t 
is the time in hours, 𝑝𝑝𝑤𝑤𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 − 𝑝𝑝𝑤𝑤𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑒𝑒 is the water vapor partial pressure difference in mbar 
between inside and outside conditions, A is the membrane area in 𝑚𝑚2. 

Figure 4 lists the testing condition of the experiments. It was possible to maintain 
isothermal conditions in the system below the lower critical solution temperature (LCST). 
As the recommended operating temperature of the OptiCal was less than 30 °C, it was 
not possible to maintain isothermal conditions above LCST. However, to ensure that the 
membrane is above LCST and to minimize the thermal gradients, the constant 
temperature condition of 30 °C and 40 °C are maintained outside and inside the chamber, 
respectively. 

 

Results and discussion 

The electrospun membrane with Janus construct was fabricated using a needle-less and 

needle-based electrospinning setup (see Table 1). The needle-based electrospinning setup 
allowed us to incorporate the thermocouples between the layers and just below the surface. 
Therefore, the precise measurement of surface temperature and that between the layers was 
precisely measured for the double-chamber method. These measured temperatures were 
used to calculate the vapor pressure gradient across the membrane.  

The PVDF solution was electrospun on top of the electrospun blend membrane to produce 
a two-layered Janus construct. The blend solution with a concentration of 16 wt% had a 
shear viscosity of 2.38 Pa.s under a shear of 1/10 s and a conductivity of 5.16 μs/cm. 
Similarly, the shear viscosity of the PVDF solution is 1.2 Pa.s and a conductivity of 32 
μs/cm. The SEM examination shows a smooth fiber morphology with a diameter of 0.2-


0.4 μm for needle-less electrospun fibers and 0.2-0.6 μm for needle based electrospun 
fibers. These values indicate no dimensional difference between the fibrous web produced 
by needle based or needle-less electrospinning methods. The specific weight of the Janus 
membranes is 30-40 GSM, a lightweight fabric category. However, in electrospun or thin-
film membranes, this weight range indicates a heavyweight membrane suitable for 
practical applications36. 

  Table 1: Polymeric solution parameters and their corresponding electrospun membrane 
properties. 

 

Polymer (MW, Da) 
Wt% (w/w) 

Shear 
viscosity 
Pa.s, (at 
1/10 s) 

Conductivity, 
μs/cm 

Duration, 
no of cycles 
of 20min 
each 

Fiber 
diameter, 
nm 

Thickness, 
μm 

Porosity, % 

PVDF(530K)/PNIPAM 
(330K)(75/25) 
18 
2.4 
5.16 
5 
502 ± 193.8 
103.3 ± 5.4 
49.7 ± 1.8 

PVDF (180K) 
30 
1.2 
32 
3 
139.2 ± 76.2 
67.7 ± 4.7 
49.6 ± 3.3 

 

 


Figure 5: SEM micrographs of the four Janus membranes prepared using needle-less 
electrospinning. Blend fibers are relatively more uniform in comparison to PVDF fibers, which 
have a bimodal distribution of fiber diameter. GSM refers to the membrane weight in grams 
per square meter. I to IV are the Janus samples electrospun for measuring WVT 

Figure 6 shows the surface elemental composition by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
(XPS) for PNIPAM, PVDF, and their blend. Comparing the blend with respective pristine 
counterparts reveals that the blend surface is enriched with Nitrogen and Oxygen, which is 
like PNIPAM fibers. The XPS results confirm the observations from our previous study on 
the thermoresponsive wettability of PNIPAM/PVDF blends fabricated using needle-based 
electrospinning29. The Thermal characterization using DSC and TGA suggested the phase 
separation of PNIPAM and PVDF during electrospinning. At the same time, the wettability 
switch observed by contact angle measurement at room temperature and elevated 
temperature suggested PNIPAM enriching the fiber surface29. 

A comparison of density and solubility parameters in Table 2 favors the dissolution of 
PNIPAM in DMF over PVDF. Therefore, the evaporation of DMF during the 
electrospinning process supports the migration of PNIPAM to the fiber surface, lasting 
longer in solution. Our previous study on this blend suggests miscibility when the PNIPAM 
content is 50 wt% or above29. However, when the PNIPAM content is 25 wt% or below, 
PVDF and PNIPAM phases separate, enhancing the migration of PNIPAM to the fiber 
surface during the electrospinning process.  

 


 

Elements/transitio
ns 

XPS surface composition, at.% 

PVDF 
PNIPAM 
BLEND 

BLEND after 
three months 
in water

Carbon C1s
51.1 
75.9 
71.8 
71.8 

Nitrogen N1s
- 
10.9 
8.7 
9.4 

Oxygen O1s
3.0 
13.2 
11.8 
9.6 

Fluorine F1s
45.9 
- 
7.8 
9.3 

Figure 6: XPS graphs of PNIPAM, PVDF, and the blend of PVDF/PNIPAM (75/25, w/w) 

 

 

Table 2: Polymer properties

Polymer 
Density 

Solubility 
parameter 
δ2 

Solubility 
parameter 
DMF δ1 

Δδ (1-2) 


PNIPAM 
1.05 
23.5 
24.9 
1.4 

PVDF 
1.68 
17.5 
24.9 
7.4 

 

Before water-vapor transmission experiments were performed, the fabricated membranes 
were conditioned for a day in an environment-controlled chamber (at test conditions). 

The skin model (mimicked by the porous hot plate) measures the membrane’s resistance 
to vapor permeability as a function of temperature, as shown in Figure 7. When the 
membrane is placed on the hot plate, the water vapor diffuses from the bottom to the top 
side of the Janus membrane (see Figure 7). The membrane’s resistance to vapor diffusion 
is measured from both sides of the Janus membrane in a separate set of experiments to 
assess the influence of the wettability gradient within the membrane. This set of 
measurements is performed at five different temperatures to plot the membrane’s resistance 
as a function of temperature. The water vapor resistance measurement removes the 
temperature bias on the WVT and is expected to be constant for the same fabric at different 
isothermal conditions. 

When the membrane is placed on the hot plate with the blend side facing down, i.e., when 
vapor transmits from the blend to the PVDF side of the Janus membrane, there is an 
increased water vapor resistance at higher temperatures (see Figure 7). As the blend is 
thermoresponsive, it is hydrophilic (CA=10⁰) at a lower temperature range (<32 ⁰C) and 
hydrophobic (CA=120⁰) at a temperature higher than 32 ⁰C. As a result, the lower resistance 
is attributed to the blend’s affinity to water vapor at a lower temperature. Similarly, the 
reduced affinity at elevated temperatures causes more significant resistance to vapor 
transmission. As the vapor transmits from the blend to the PVDF side, the hydrophobicity 
increases the membrane’s thickness and consequently increases the membrane’s resistance 
to vapor transmission. 

The hydrophilic layer next to the PVDF layer supports the vapor transmission when the 
PVDF side faces the hot plate. At elevated temperatures, the resistance increases but is 
significantly lower than the resistance the membrane offers, with the blend facing the hot 
plate (Figure 7). Even though the blend is hydrophobic at elevated temperatures, it is less 
hydrophobic than PVDF. Therefore, when the vapor transmits from the PVDF to the blend 
side, the hydrophobicity reduces along with the thickness of the membrane, which favors 
the vapor transmission. 

Based on the examination of the results, the Janus construct with PVDF facing the hot plate 
favors the vapor transmission at all investigated temperatures. This behavior is due to 
unchanging hygroscopic properties of the PVDF with temperature. Therefore, the 
thermoresponsive Janus membrane makes it possible to maintain active vapor transport 
irrespective of the outside temperature. 


 

Figure 7: Effect of Janus directionality on the resistance to water-vapor permeability 
through the membranes. The thermoresponsive property of the blend combined with 
the Janus structure offers higher resistance to WVT. The behavior is attributed to the 
moisture released by the blend layer at a higher temperature. As a result, when the 
blend faces the hot plate, it increases the boundary layer gap and consequently 
increases the resistance to water-vapor permeability.

 

We measured the water vapor permeability using a double chamber method to verify the 
observed behavior. Needle-based electrospinning was used to fabricate the Janus 
membrane to incorporate the thermocouples between the layers and almost at the surface 
of the Blend layer (approximately 5sec of electrospinning). Figure 8 shows the Janus 
membrane with thermocouples on the sample holder to fit the mouth of the OptiCal 
chamber. The figure also shows the SEM micrographs of the blend and PVDF side of the 
Janus membrane incorporating a fiber diameter of 0.2-0.6 μm.  

The sample holder plugs the mouth of the chamber such that one of the sides of the 
membrane faces outside the chamber and the other faces the inside chamber of the OptiCal 
chamber. The entire system and the membranes were conditioned at 20°C and 40% RH 
before carrying out below LCST. Before measurements above LCST, membranes were 
conditioned at 30°C and 40% RH, as mentioned in Figure 4.  


 

Figure 8: The top part shows the membrane with the thermocouples mounted (red arrow) 
on the sample holder that fits the mouth of the OptiCal instrument. The bottom section 
shows the SEM micrographs of the fibers from the PVDF and the blend side, respectively 

 

 

Figure 9 shows the membranes' water vapor permeability as a temperature function. At a 
lower temperature of 20 °C, the permeabilities are comparable for both samples. However, 
the increasing vapor permeability with increasing temperature is predominantly due to 
increasing partial vapor pressure difference across the membrane37. Figure 10 plots the 
vapor permeability as a function of partial vapor pressure across the membrane.  

PVDF being hydrophobic is expected to adsorb less moisture and transmit less than the 
unswelling hydrophilic membrane (Blend). However, interestingly, the vapor permeability 
from the PVDF to the blend side is significantly higher than from the blend to the PVDF 
side. Further, to isolate the membrane effects from the vapor pressure, Figure 10B shows 
the water vapor permeability per unit of partial pressure across the membrane. When the 
vapor transmits from the blend side, the permeability is constant, suggesting the vapor 
pressure difference is the primary driving force. However, vapor permeates significantly 
more (P-value =0.003, n=4) from the PVDF side, suggesting that the membrane’s influence 
on vapor transmission increases with temperature. Therefore, the combined effect of the 
Janus constructs and the temperature-responsive property drives more vapor through the 
membrane from one direction over the other. 

 


 

Figure 9: a) shows the Janus membrane's water vapor permeability as a temperature 
function and compares the effect of the membrane’s directionality. b) shows the partial 
vapor pressure difference across the membrane as a function of temperature. The water 
vapor permeability for PVDF to blend direction is significantly higher due to the 
additional partial pressure drop caused by the wettability gradient in the membrane.

 

 
 


 

a)
b)

Figure 10: a) Water vapor permeability as a function of the partial vapor pressure 
difference across the Janus membrane. Vapor permeability from the PVDF side is 
significantly higher than from the blend side due to the Janus structure favoring the 
vapor transmission from the PVDF to the blend side.  
b) Water vapor permeability per unit of the partial vapor pressure difference across the 
Janus membrane as a function of temperature. The differences in the vapor permeability 
from the blend side to PVDF are statistically insignificant at all tested temperatures. The 
partial vapor pressure difference across the membrane is the primary driving force for 
transmitting the water vapor from the blend side. However, this permeability per unit of 
the pressure from the PVDF side increases significantly with temperature due to the 
Janus construct's combined effect and the blend's thermoresponsive property.

 

Figure 10 shows the possible mechanism based on the obtained experimental results. Based 
on the prior hygroscopic measurements, pristine PNIPAM adsorbs 19 wt% of vapor at a 
temperature of 40 °C38. As the blend contains 25 wt% of PNIPAM and adsorbs water vapor 
in proportion to the PNIPAM content29, which is at least 4 wt% of vapor at 40 °C. However, 
PVDF being hydrophobic, adsorbs less than 1% of vapor via Van der Waal’s forces29. 
Therefore, at any given time during the experiment, the blend surface layer will hold more 
moisture (vapor molecules) (C𝐵𝐵), when compared with the PVDF surface layer (C𝑃𝑃).  

When the PVDF side faces outside, the vapor transmits from the blend to the PVDF side 
of the membrane. The amount of vapor molecules available for evaporation is C𝑃𝑃 on the 
PVDF surface. Therefore, the vapor pressure gradient drives C𝑃𝑃 molecules through the 
membrane. As this concentration of vapor C𝑃𝑃 does not change with temperature, we have 
almost the same vapor permeability when transmitting from the blend to the PVDF side. 

In the other scenario, with the blend side facing outside, the vapor transmits from the PVDF 
side to the blend side of the membrane. At equilibrium, the blend surface holds more vapor 


than the PVDF side. However, at 20 °C, most vapor molecules form hydrogen bonds with 
the amide (-N-H) and carbonyl (-C=O-) groups from PNIPAM. As a result, the 
concentration of vapor molecules (C𝐵𝐵) is a combination of bound vapor (T) and free vapor 
molecules (F). The vapor pressure gradient drives the free vapor molecules (F) through the 
membrane, which is comparable with C𝑃𝑃. Therefore, vapor permeability at temperatures 
below LCST is similar irrespective of the transmission direction.  

Above LCST, due to the coil conformation of PNIPAM, all the bound vapor molecules are 
released and become free vapor molecules. When the vapor molecule C𝐵𝐵 evaporates, the 
vapor pressure gradient drives C𝐵𝐵 through the membrane. As C𝐵𝐵≫C𝑃𝑃, the vapor 
permeability from PVDF to the blend side is higher than that from the flipped direction. 

 

 

Figure 11: Illustrates the mechanism of water vapor permeability from the blend side to 
the PVDF side and vice-versa when driven by the partial vapor pressure difference. 

Conclusion 
Electrospun thermoresponsive Janus membranes exhibit directional WVT. Herein, the 
vapor transmitted from the hydrophobic (PVDF) side to the hydrophilic (blend) is faster 
than in the opposite direction (hydrophilic to hydrophobic). The results from the indirect 
approach, i.e., via the sweating hot plate method, and from the direct approach, i.e., via a 
double-chamber method, complement each other. Based on the physical reasoning, we 
postulate that this mechanism is due to the combined effect of the temperature-responsive 
behavior of the Janus construct on vapor transmission. By complementing the experiment, 
numerical modeling can shed further insight into the physical processes, which results in 
directional vapor permeability. 


These new results open pathways in membrane research and development, which is unique 
for liquid and gas transmission. The novelty not only contributes to the field of textiles, 
packaging, or filter systems. 
 

References 
1. 
Gugliuzza A and Drioli E. A review on membrane engineering for innovation in 
wearable fabrics and protective textiles. Journal of Membrane Science 2013; 446: 350-
375. 
2. 
Waterproof Breathable Textiles (WBT) Market Analysis By Textile (Densely 
Woven, Membrane, Coated), By Product (Garments, Footwear, Gloves), By Application 
(Active Sportswear) And Segment Forecasts To 2020, 
http://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/waterproof-breathable-textiles-
industry (2015). 
3. 
Tanner JC. Breathability, comfort and Gore-Tex laminates. Journal of Industrial 
Textiles 1979; 8: 312-322. 
4. 
Rossi R. Interaction between protection and thermal comfort. Cambridge, UK, 
Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2005, p. 233-253. 
5. 
Mukhopadhyay A and Midha VK. A review on designing the waterproof 
breathable fabrics part I: fundamental principles and designing aspects of breathable 
fabrics. Journal of industrial textiles 2008; 37: 225-262. 
6. 
Gun AD and Bodur A. Thermo-physiological comfort properties of double-face 
knitted fabrics made from different types of polyester yarns and cotton yarn. J Text Inst 
2017; 108: 1518-1527. Article. DOI: 10.1080/00405000.2016.1259953. 
7. 
Rouhani ST and Fashandi H. Breathable dual-layer textile composed of cellulose 
dense membrane and plasma-treated fabric with enhanced comfort. Cellulose 2018; 25: 
5427-5442. Article. DOI: 10.1007/s10570-018-1950-9. 
8. 
Suganthi T and Senthilkumar P. Development of tri-layer knitted fabrics for 
shuttle badminton players. Journal of Industrial Textiles 2018; 48: 738-760. Article. DOI: 
10.1177/1528083717740766. 
9. 
Zhou L, Wang HB, Du JM, et al. Eco-friendly and Durable Antibacterial Cotton 
Fabrics Prepared with Polysulfopropylbetaine. Fibers and Polymers 2018; 19: 1228-
1236. Article. DOI: 10.1007/s12221-018-8053-y. 
10. 
Gu XY, Li N, Cao J, et al. Preparation of electrospun polyurethane/hydrophobic 
silica gel nanofibrous membranes for waterproof and breathable application. Polym Eng 
Sci 2018; 58: 1381-1390. Article. DOI: 10.1002/pen.24726. 
11. 
Gu XY, Li N, Gu HH, et al. Polydimethylsiloxane-modified polyurethane-poly(-
caprolactone) nanofibrous membranes for waterproof, breathable applications. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science 2018; 135: 10. Article. DOI: 10.1002/app.46360. 
12. 
Gu XY, Li N, Luo JJ, et al. Electrospun polyurethane microporous membranes for 
waterproof and breathable application: the effects of solvent properties on membrane 
performance. Polym Bull 2018; 75: 3539-3553. Article. DOI: 10.1007/s00289-017-2223-
8. 


13. 
Gretton J, Brook D, Dyson H, et al. Moisture vapor transport through waterproof 
breathable fabrics and clothing systems under a temperature gradient. Textile Research 
Journal 1998; 68: 936-941. 
14. 
Gibson P, Schreuder-Gibson H and Rivin D. Transport properties of porous 
membranes based on electrospun nanofibers. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical 
and Engineering Aspects 2001; 187: 469-481. 
15. 
Sheng J, Li Y, Wang X, et al. Thermal inter-fiber adhesion of the 
polyacrylonitrile/fluorinated polyurethane nanofibrous membranes with enhanced 
waterproof-breathable performance. Separation and Purification Technology 2016; 158: 
53-61. 
16. 
Sheng J, Zhang M, Luo W, et al. Thermally induced chemical cross-linking 
reinforced fluorinated polyurethane/polyacrylonitrile/polyvinyl butyral nanofibers for 
waterproof-breathable application. RSC Advances 2016; 6: 29629-29637. 
17. 
Sheng J, Zhang M, Xu Y, et al. Tailoring Water-Resistant and Breathable 
Performance of Polyacrylonitrile Nanofibrous Membranes Modified by 
Polydimethylsiloxane. ACS applied materials & interfaces 2016; 8: 27218-27226. 
18. 
Mukhopadhyay A, Preet A and Midha V. Moisture transmission behaviour of 
individual component and multilayered fabric with sweat and pure water. J Text Inst 
2018; 109: 383-392. Article. DOI: 10.1080/00405000.2017.1348435. 
19. 
Bagherzadeh R, Latifi M, Najar SS, et al. Transport properties of multi-layer 
fabric based on electrospun nanofiber mats as a breathable barrier textile material. Textile 
research journal 2012; 82: 70-76. 
20. 
Gorji M, Karimi M and Nasheroahkam S. Electrospun PU/P (AMPS-GO) 
nanofibrous membrane with dual-mode hydrophobic–hydrophilic properties for 
protective clothing applications. Journal of Industrial Textiles 2018; 47: 1166-1184. 
21. 
Wu J, Wang N, Wang L, et al. Unidirectional water-penetration composite fibrous 
film via electrospinning. Soft Matter 2012; 8: 5996-5999. 
22. 
Wang H, Wang X and Lin T. Unidirectional water transfer effect from fabrics 
having a superhydrophobic-to-hydrophilic gradient. Journal of nanoscience and 
nanotechnology 2013; 13: 839-842. 
23. 
Tian X, Li J and Wang X. Anisotropic liquid penetration arising from a cross-
sectional wettability gradient. Soft Matter 2012; 8: 2633-2637. 
24. 
Guo F and Guo Z. Inspired smart materials with external stimuli responsive 
wettability: a review. RSC Advances 2016; 6: 36623-36641. 10.1039/C6RA04079A. 
DOI: 10.1039/C6RA04079A. 
25. 
Tanaka T. Collapse of gels and the critical endpoint. Physical Review Letters 
1978; 40: 820. 
26. 
Tanaka T and Fillmore DJ. Kinetics of swelling of gels. The Journal of Chemical 
Physics 1979; 70: 1214-1218. 
27. 
Schild HG. Poly (N-isopropylacrylamide): experiment, theory and application. 
Progress in polymer science 1992; 17: 163-249. 
28. 
Liu X, Li Y, Hu J, et al. Smart moisture management and thermoregulation 
properties of stimuli-responsive cotton modified with polymer brushes. RSC Advances 
2014; 4: 63691-63695. 10.1039/C4RA11080C. DOI: 10.1039/C4RA11080C. 
29. 
Ranganath AS, Ganesh VA, Sopiha K, et al. Thermoresponsive electrospun 
membrane with enhanced wettability. RSC Advances 2017; 7: 19982-19989. 


30. 
Airoudj A, Bally-Le Gall F and Roucoules V. Textile with Durable Janus Wetting 
Properties Produced by Plasma Polymerization. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 
2016; 120: 29162-29172. 
31. 
Li H, Cao M, Ma X, et al. “Plug‐and‐Go”‐Type Liquid Diode: Integrated Mesh 
with Janus Superwetting Properties. Advanced Materials Interfaces 2016; 3. 
32. 
Ranganath AS and Baji A. Electrospun Janus Membrane for Efficient and 
Switchable Oil–Water Separation. Macromolecular Materials and Engineering 2018; 
303: 1800272. 
33. 
11092 I. Textiles‐Determination of physiological properties–measurement of 
thermal and water‐vapor resistance under steady‐state conditions (sweating guarded‐
hotplate test). 1993. 
34. 
Wagnera W and Prußb A. The IAPWS formulation 1995 for the thermodynamic 
properties of ordinary water substance for general and scientific use. J Phys Chem Ref 
Data 2002; 31: 387. 
35. 
Oyj V. Humidity Conversion Formulas. 2013: 3-16. 

36. 
Brown P and Cox CL. Fibrous filter media. Woodhead Publishing, 2017. 

37. 
Gibson P. Effect of temperature on water vapor transport through polymer 
membrane laminates.  1999. ARMY SOLDIER AND BIOLOGICAL CHEMICAL 
COMMAND NATICK MA. 
38. 
Thakur N, Sargur Ranganath A, Sopiha K, et al. Thermoresponsive Cellulose 
Acetate–Poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) Core–Shell Fibers for Controlled Capture and 
Release of Moisture. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2017; 9: 29224-29233. 
  


