Benchmarking Gaussian Basis Sets in

Quantum-Chemical Calculations of

Photoabsorption Spectra of Light Atomic

Clusters

Vikram Mahamiya,∗,† Pritam Bhattacharyya,∗,†,‡ and Alok Shukla∗,†

†Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai 400076,

India

‡Present Address: Institute for Theoretical Solid State Physics, Leibniz IFW Dresden,

Helmholtzstr. 20, 01069 Dresden, Germany

E-mail: mahamiyavikram@gmail.com; pritambhattacharyya01@gmail.com; shukla@iitb.ac.in

Abstract

The choice of Gaussian basis functions for computing the ground-state properties of

molecules, and clusters, employing wave-function-based electron-correlated approaches,

is a well-studied subject.
However, the same cannot be said when it comes to the

excited-state properties of such systems, in general, and optical properties, in particular.

The aim of the present study is to understand how the choice of basis functions affects

the calculations of linear optical absorption in clusters, qualitatively, and quantitatively.

For this purpose, we have calculated linear optical absorption spectra of several small

charged and neutral clusters, namely, Li2, Li3, Li4, B+
2 , B+
3 , Be+
2 , and Be+
3 , using a

variety of Gaussian basis sets. The calculations were performed within the frozen-core

approximation, and a rigorous account of electron correlation effects in the valence

1

arXiv:2301.02413v1  [physics.chem-ph]  6 Jan 2023


sector was taken by employing various levels of configuration interaction (CI) approach

both for the ground and excited states.
Our results on the peak locations in the

absorption spectra of Li3 and Li4 are in very good agreement with the experiments.

Our general recommendation is that for excited-state calculations, it is very important

to utilize those basis sets which contain augmented functions. Relatively smaller aug-

cc-pVDZ basis sets also yield high-quality results for photoabsorption spectra, and are

recommended for such calculations if the computational resources are limited.

Introduction

Gaussian basis functions (GBFs) were initially proposed by Boys for use in computational

atomic and molecular quantum mechanics,1 and over the years have become the preferred

basis functions in quantum chemistry.1 The reason behind the popularity of GBFs is the

so-called Gaussian product theorem1,2 which allows for analytical results for the expressions

of multi-center integrals involving various physical quantities. Nevertheless, one has to be

always careful about various convergence related issues when using GBFs, because, unlike

Slater basis functions, they do not exhibit correct asymptotic behavior far away from the

nuclei.
This generally leads to the requirement that a large number of GBFs should be

used to achieve convergence, leading to huge memory and CPU-time requirements because

the required number of integrals scale as ≈ N 4, where N is the total number of basis

functions. Keeping this in mind, several groups have studied the convergence properties

of GBFs over the years, and have come up with schemes to balance accuracy with the

computational effort (see, e.g., Refs.3,4 for comprehensive reviews). Huzinaga was one of

the earliest researchers to optimize GBFs for Hartree-Fock (HF) calculations on atoms.5

Ruedenberg and coworkers devised the so-called even-tempered basis set,6,7 while Huzinaga

and coworkers developed well-tempered basis functions.8 Huzinaga and coworkers further

developed several contracted basis sets,9,10 discussed in detail in Ref.4 Pople and coworkers

developed a large number of basis sets3,4 which enjoy continued popularity even in present

2


times. One of the most popular minimal basis sets introduced by Pople and coworkers is STO-

3G contracted basis set,11 whose purpose was to emulate Slater-type orbitals, using GTFs.

Split-valence basis sets are among the most popular extended basis sets introduced by Pople

et al.,12–15 in which for inner shells contracted minimal basis functions are used, but for the

valence shells a split set of basis functions is employed, which consist of both contracted and

primitive GTFs. Depending upon the contraction schemes, these basis sets were given names

such as 3-21G,13 4-31G,12 6-21G,14 and 6-311G15, etc. Pople and coworkers also proposed

further enlarged basis sets containing polarization and diffuse functions of higher angular

momenta, which have since become popular choices in quantum chemistry.15–20 Dunning

and coworkers introduced a series of extended basis sets, called “correlation-consistent” (CC)

basis sets, which are of varying sizes, containing both polarization and diffuse functions.21–23

The basic idea behind these CC basis sets is that they recover a significant amount of electron

correlation energy in post-Hartree-Fock treatments of corresponding atoms. In addition to

the basis sets mentioned here, numerous other sets of basis functions have been developed

over the years, for which we refer the reader to review articles by Davidson and Feller,3 and

Huzinaga.4

Even though so many basis sets have been developed by numerous groups, in most of the

reports the criteria for their selection appears to be driven by a good description of the ground

state energies of the atoms involved either at the Hartree-Fock level, or in electron-correlated

calculations.3,4 Previously, Balakina et al.24 have explored the basis set dependence of the

linear and non-linear optical properties of conjugated organic molecule p-nitroaniline. They

reported that the [4s3p2d/3s] basis set also provides similar results as aug-cc-pVDZ basis

set for the calculations of (hyper)polarizability. Parsons et al.25 have explored the basis

set dependence of optical rotation calculations of various types of gauges. They found that

the origin-invariant length gauge (LG-OI) gauge with aug-cc-pVTZ basis set provides a

balance of cost and accuracy for DFT method.
Reis and Papadopoulos26 reported that

the inclusion of f-functions in the Dunning’s basis sets does not have a large effect on the

3


electric properties of B4 cluster. Lauderdale and Coolidge27 have explored the effect of basis

sets on the non-linear optical properties (hyperpolarizabilities) of linear diacetylenes using

time-dependent Hartree-Fock theory. They found that the inclusion of a diffuse ‘d’ function

to a standard double-zeta plus polarization basis can significantly improve the frequency-

dependent hyperpolarizability. Jabłonski and Palusiak28 have explored the influence of basis

sets in Hartree-Fock (HF) and DFT/B3LYP calculations for the values atoms in molecules

(AIM) parameters. They found that smaller Dunning’s basis sets, including cc-pVDZ and

aug-cc-pVDZ provide poor results as compared to medium-sized Pople-type basis sets. We

are not aware of a systematic study in which the basis sets have been examined from the

perspective of their performance in excited state calculations. Furthermore, we have also

not come across a study which examines the basis sets from the point of view their ability to

compute optical properties of atoms and molecules, which involves calculations of transition

dipole moments, in addition to excited state energies, and wave functions.
In order to

fill this void, we decided to undertake a systematic investigation of the influence of basis

sets on the qualitative and quantitative description of optical absorption spectra of atomic

clusters. In this paper, we have performed calculations of linear optical absorption spectra

of several small neutral and cationic clusters, e.g., Li2, Li3, Li4, B+
2 , B+
3 , Be+
2 , and Be+
3 ,

using the configuration-interaction (CI) approach. For this purpose, a number of basis sets,

namely, 6-311++G(2d,2p), 6-311++G(3df,3pd), cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ, aug-cc-pVDZ, and aug-

cc-pVTZ, were employed, and their influence on the convergence of excited state energies,

wave functions, and transition dipole moments has been systematically examined. In this

study, the reason behind our choice of smaller sized atomic clusters and their ions, as against

larger ones, is that it is possible to perform highly accurate CI calculations on smaller systems

so that the difference between results obtained with different basis sets will be due the nature

of basis sets, and not due to the CI approach employed. Based upon our calculations, the

main conclusion is that it is very important to include diffuse basis functions in the basis set

in order to obtain a good description of the photoabsorption spectra.

4


Theoretical Approach and Computational Details

General Methodology

All the calculations were performed using the first-principles wave-function-based electron-

correlated approaches, using the standard Hamiltonian within the Born-Oppenheimer ap-

proximation. The molecular orbitals are expressed in terms of the linear combination of

Cartesian-Gaussian type basis functions, also called atomic orbitals (AOs). Although, for

such calculations, a number of program packages are available, we employed GAUSSIAN1629

and MELD30 for our calculations. The geometries of all the clusters considered in this work

were optimized using GAUSSIAN16 package29 at the coupled-clusters singles-double (CCSD)

level of theory, employing a large augmented correlation-consistent polarized valence triple-

zeta (aug-cc-pVTZ) basis set.

We perform excited-states calculations for various clusters employing their ground-state

optimized geometries, using the configuration-interaction (CI) methodology at various levels

of approximation, as implemented in the program package MELD30. The CI calculations

yield the vertical excitation energies, the ground and excited state wave functions, and the

transition dipole matrix elements connecting the ground and the excited states, which, in

turn, are used to compute the optical absorption spectra of various clusters.
The level

of CI employed in the calculations depends on the size of cluster, the number of valence

electrons in cluster, and the number of active orbitals. The linear optical absorption spectra

of Li2, Li3, Li4, Be+
2 , B+
2 clusters were computed at the full CI (FCI) level, while for Be+
3

and B+
3 calculations were performed at the quadruple CI (QCI), and the multi-reference

singles-doubles CI (MRSDCI) levels, respectively.

We start the calculations on a given cluster by first performing restricted Hartree-Fock

(RHF) calculations on it, and obtain the molecular orbitals (MOs), expressed as linear com-

binations of the chosen AOs. In order to perform CI calculations, the one- and two-electron

Hamiltonian matrix elements are transformed from the AO representation to the MO rep-

5


resentation. For the FCI calculations, all possible configurations obtained by placing all the

valence electrons of the cluster in the given set of MOs, in all possible ways, consistent with

the Pauli exclusion principle. In the QCI approach, we first choose a reference configuration,

and then generate configurations which are singly-, doubly-, triply-, and quadruply-excited

with respect to it. For the ground-state calculations, the reference configuration is normally

taken to be the RHF configuration, while for the excited-state calculations one chooses an ex-

cited configuration which is closest to the excited state one is trying to calculate. However,

both the FCI and the QCI approaches can lead to a very large number of configurations

if the number of electrons and the MO basis is large, thus, making the calculations in-

tractable. Therefore, for the larger clusters, we employed the multi-reference singles-doubles

configuration-interaction (MRSDCI) approach, as implemented in the MELD package. In

this approach, the singly- and doubly-excited configurations are generated from a list of

configurations called the reference configurations, chosen by the user. We performed the

MRSDCI calculations in an incremental manner, by starting out with a small set of refer-

ence configurations that are close to the states (ground or excited) we are targeting. Then

we analyze the optical absorption spectra of the cluster calculated from that MRSDCI cal-

culation, and identify a new set of configurations which need to be included in the list of

reference configurations based upon their contributions in the wave functions of the targeted

states. The procedure is iterated until the calculated optical absorption spectrum converges

to within a user-defined threshold. In all the CI calculations, the configurations are actu-

ally configuration-state functions (CSFs) which are eigenstates of the point-group symmetry

operators, and the total spin operators S2 and Sz.31–42

The linear optical absorption spectrum of a given cluster is calculated under the electric-

dipole approximation, using the formula

σ(ω) = 4πα
�

i

ωio|⟨i|ˆe.r|0⟩|2γ2

(ωi0 − ω)2 + γ2
(1)

6


Above: (i) σ(ω) represents the optical absorption cross section, (ii) ω is the frequency of

incident light, (iii)ˆe denotes the polarization direction of the incident light, (iv) r is the posi-

tion operator, (v) α is the fine structure constant, (vi) ℏωi0 is the energy difference between

ground state (0) and the ith excited state (i), and (vii) γ is the uniform line width associated

with each excited state. The line width γ is taken to be 0.1 eV in all our calculations. The

sum over index i denotes the sum over all possible excited states. We have restricted this

sum in our calculations up to the states corresponding to excitation energies of 10 eV, or

less. Additionally, the oscillator strength fn corresponding to an optical transition from the

ground state to the n-th excited state is computed using the standard formula

fn = 2me

3ℏ2 ∆En
�

j=x,y,z

�

α
|⟨nα|Oj|0⟩|2
(2)

above me is the electron mass, |0⟩ and |nα⟩ are, respectively the CI wave functions of the

ground state and the excited state in question, with α being a degeneracy label, Oj denotes

j-th Cartesian component of the electric-dipole operator, while ∆En = En − E0 is the

excitation energy of the excited state.

Computational Parameters

In this section, we will discuss the convergence of the results with respect two parameters,

related to the basis-set-size: (a) number of active orbitals in the CI calculations, and (b)

number of CSFs included in the calculations.

Active molecular orbitals

It is well-known that the computational cost at configuration interaction (CI) level of theory

increases as N 6
act, where Nact is the total number of active molecular orbitals used in the

CI calculations.
Therefore, the time needed to perform a CI calculation will proliferate

rapidly with the increasing values of Nact. We have adopted two approaches to reduce the

7


size of the active MO set: (a) we adopt the frozen-core approximation to eliminate the core

orbitals of each atom of the cluster, and (b) for certain cases involving large CI matrices,

we delete all those virtual (unoccupied) orbitals from our calculations whose single-particle

energies are larger than 1 Hartree. The frozen-core approximation is a standard approach

which also has the added advantage of considerably reducing the number of active electrons

(nelec) in the calculation. The “1 Hartree cutoff” also doesn’t reduce the accuracy of the

calculations because we are interested in low-lying optical excitations below 10 eV, while

our cutoff eliminates only those orbitals from the calculations whose energy is larger than

27.21 eV. Both these approximations have been investigated rigorously in our group in earlier

calculations.36,41–43.

To be specific, in the present set of calculations, we have considered all the virtual orbitals

for Li2 and Be+
2 clusters, while for Li3, Li4, Be+
3 , B+
2 and B+
3 clusters we have imposed the 1

Hartree cutoff.

Size of CI expansion

Another important parameter that controls the quality of calculations is the total number

of CSFs, Ntotal, included in the CI expansion of the many-particle wave functions of the

clusters concerned, both for their ground and the excited states. As mentioned earlier, for

a given set of active electrons and MOs, the best possible CI expansion corresponds to the

FCI expansion, which becomes intractable for systems with large values of nelec and Nact.

However, whenever FCI is not possible, we employ one of the restricted CI approaches such

as the QCI or the MRSDCI methods. Of the two, it is crucial to examine the convergence of

the MRSDCI approach which is based upon singles and doubles excitations from a number

of reference configurations (Nref) leading to the final CI expansion with Ntotal CSFs. We

examined the convergence of the optical absorption spectrum for the B+
3 cluster calculated

using the MRSDCI method, with respect to Nref, and Ntotal, as presented in Fig. 1.

8


Figure 1: Convergence of the optical absorption spectrum of the B+
3 computed using the
MRSDCI method, with the increasing numbers of reference configurations (Nref). For cal-
culations labeled MRSDCI1, MRSDCI2, and MRSDCI3, values of Nref were 58, 101, and
144, respectively.

In the figure, we plot the absorption spectra of B+
3 obtained from three MRSDCI calcula-

tions of increasing sizes labeled as MRSDCI1, MRSDCI2, and MRSDCI3. In these calcula-

tions, the values of parameters Nref and Ntotal were Nref= 58, Ntotal= 4007873, Nref= 101,

Ntotal= 5781436, and Nref= 144, Ntotal= 8422193, respectively. From Fig. 1., it is obvious

that the spectra obtained using MRSDCI2 and MRSDCI3 calculations are very close to each

other, signaling convergence with respect to the size of the MRSDCI expansion.

Results and Discussion

Before discussing the results of our calculations of the optical absorption spectra of various

clusters, we first summarize their ground state geometries in Table 1, optimized at the CCSD

9


level of theory, employing GAUSSIAN16 suite of programs29, and large aug-cc-pVTZ basis

sets.

Table 1: The nature of the structure, along with the point group symmetry utilized, during
the coupled-cluster singles-doubles (CCSD) geometry optimization calculations are presented
below. Additionally, for each cluster, the symmetry of the ground-state wave function, total
Hartree-Fock (HF) energy in Hartree (Ha), total CCSD energy (Ha), and the correlation
energy (eV) are also presented. During the calculations, aug-cc-pVTZ basis set was employed
for each cluster.

Cluster
Structure
Point group
Symmetry of the
HF energy
CCSD energy
Correlation energy

GS wave function
(Ha)
(Ha)
(eV)

Li2
Linear
D2h
1Ag
-14.8715509
-14.9033549
0.87

Li3
Linear
D2h
2Ag
-22.3088776
-22.3454346
0.99

Li3
Isosceles triangle
C2v
2A1
-22.3170594
-22.3557287
1.05

Li4
Rhombus
D2h
1Ag
-29.7619144
-29.8354840
2.00

Be+
2
Linear
D2h
2Ag
-28.9205835
-28.9672583
1.27

Be+
3
Linear
D2h
2Ag
-43.5410215
-43.6332325
2.51

B+
2
Linear
D2h
2Ag
-48.8344277
-48.9626672
3.49

B+
3
Equilateral triangle
D3h
1A
′
1
-73.4445744
-73.7127527
7.27

For each cluster, the table lists the nature of its ground-state structure, point group

employed in the calculations, symmetry of the ground state wave function, total energy of the

ground state, and the correlation energy. In Table 2, the details related to our CI calculations

performed for computing the optical absorption spectra of various clusters are provided. For

various clusters, the table lists: (a) the type of CI calculation, (b) the point-group symmetry

employed in the calculations, (c) irreducible representations considered for each point group,

and (d) for each irreducible representation, the size of the CI expansion (Ntotal) for each

cluster are depicted. From Table 2 it is obvious that most of the CI calculations were of the

FCI type, which are exact for the chosen set of active MOs. Furthermore, in the calculations

in which approaches such as QCI or MRSDCI were used, the size of the CI expansion is

quite large. This means that the CI calculations performed in this work are fairly large

scale, indicating that the computed optical absorption spectra are numerically accurate.

Next, for these clusters, we discuss in detail the calculated ground state geometries, followed

by their optical absorption spectra.

10


Table 2: For each cluster, the type of CI approach used for the calculations of the optical
properties, point group symmetry employed during the CI calculations, and the total number
of configurations (Ntotal) in the calculation are listed below. The value of Ntotal corresponds
to aug-cc-pVTZ basis set based CI calculations.

Cluster
Structure
Method
Point group
Symmetry
Ntotal

used

Li2
Linear
FCI
C1
1A
5886

Li3
Linear
FCI
C1
2A
575960

Li3
Isosceles triangle
FCI
C2v
2A1
137956

2B1
129520

2B2
137396

Li4
Rhombus
FCI
D2h
1Ag
1853578

1B1u
1846246

1B2u
1844485

1B3u
1802190

Be+
2
Linear
FCI
C1
2A
419868

Be+
3
Linear
QCI
D2h
2Ag
7393226

2B1u
7393210

2B2u
7286869

2B3u
7286869

B+
2
Linear
FCI
D2h
2Ag
6365216

2B1u
6365216

2B2u
6323328

2B3u
6323328

B+
3
Equilateral triangle
MRSDCI
C1
1A
8422193

11


Geometry

The simplest cluster of lithium is lithium dimer with the D∞h point group symmetry. We

obtained the optimized bond length of Li2 cluster to be 2.70 Å, as shown in Fig. 2(a). This

result is in excellent agreement with the bond length 2.68 Å reported by Wheeler et al.44,

who performed the calculations at the CCSD/CCSD(T) level of theory using the Dunning

correlation-consistent polarized core-valence triple/quadruple-zeta cc-pwCVXZ basis sets.

Florez et al.45 performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the B3LYP

and BLYP functionals, and reported the bond lengths to be 2.70 Å, and 2.71 Å, respectively,

again in excellent agreement with our result. Furthermore, our calculated bond length is

also in a very good agreement with the experimentally measured value 2.67 Å, reported by

Huber46.

As far as Li3 cluster is concerned, two isomers namely linear and isosceles triangle were

found to be stable. The equilateral triangular structure of Li3 cluster is not stable, and

undergoes Jahn-Teller distortion to acquire the isosceles triangular structure. The linear

structure has the D∞h point-group symmetry, with the optimized equal bond lengths of 2.90

Å (see Fig. 2(b)), in excellent agreement with the value 2.89 Å, reported by Jones et al.47.

The lowest-energy geometry of the Li3 cluster is an isosceles triangle with the C2v point-

group symmetry. The CCSD-level optimized bond lengths for this structure are found to be

2.68 and 3.07 Å, with the bond angles 51.73◦ and 64.13◦(see Fig. 2(c)). We note that by

performing DFT calculations, Jones et al.47 obtained the bond lengths of 2.82 and 3.37 Å,

that are significantly different as compared to our results.

12


Figure 2: Optimized geometry of (a) Li2, (b) Li3 linear, (c) Li3 isosceles triangular, (d) Li4,
(e) Be+
2 , (f) Be+
3 linear, (g) B+
2 , and (h) B+
3 equilateral triangular clusters considered in
this work. The geometry optimization has been performed using the CCSD method, and
aug-cc-pVTZ basis sets. All the listed bond lengths are in Å units.

The lowest-energy structure for the Li4 cluster has a rhombus shape, with D2h point

group44,47, as shown in Fig.
2(d).
Our optimized bond lengths of the side and minor

diagonal of the rhombus structure are 3.02 and 2.65 Å, respectively, which are in excellent

agreement with the values 3.04 and 2.62 Å reported by Jones et al.47.

The optimized bond length of the Be+
2 cluster with the D∞h point group is found to be

2.25 Å (see Fig. 2(e)), in good agreement with the reported bond length 2.21 Å, obtained

from DFT calculations by Srinivas et al.48. Our lowest-energy optimized structure of Be+
3

cluster also has a linear geometry, with two equal bond lengths 2.22 Å, as shown in Fig. 2(f).

This value of the bond length is in very good agreement with the value 2.19 Å, computed

by Srinivas et al.48 using DFT.

As far as B+
2 cluster is concerned, we computed its minimum-energy bond length to be

2.18 Å (see Fig. 2(g)), which is 0.18 Å larger than the value 2 Å reported by Hanley et al.49.

13


We attribute this difference to two factors, namely, smaller basis set (6-31G∗), coupled with a

lower-level CI methodology used by the authors.49. Our optimized structure of B+
3 cluster is

an equilateral triangle of sides 1.58 Å, with the D3h point-group symmetry, as shown in Fig.

2(h). Hanley et al.49 using a CI approach, along with the 6-31G∗ basis set, also obtained the

optimized structure to be an equilateral triangle for the B+
3 , but with a bond length of 1.53

Å, which is 0.05 Å smaller than our result. We again attribute the differences to the choice

of a smaller basis set, coupled with a lower-level correlation methodology as compared to

the CCSD approach used by us.

Peak locations

Li2 dimer, with just two active electrons within the frozen-core approximation, is the small-

est many-electron cluster considered in this work. Therefore, very high-quality correlated-

electron calculations using large basis sets are possible for this system, not just for its ground

states, but also for the excited states. As a result, this case can provide us deep insights into

the influence of the choice of basis functions on the calculated excited state properties and the

photoabsorption spectra. For the calculations, we employed the frozen-core FCI method us-

ing six basis sets of varying sizes, namely, 6-311++G(2d,2p), 6-311++G(3df,3pd), cc-pVDZ,

cc-pVTZ, aug-cc-pVDZ and aug-cc-pVTZ, and the computed spectra are presented in Fig.

3(a). All the virtual molecular orbitals generated during the RHF calculations were used in

the CI calculations, i.e., no unoccupied orbitals were discarded. As a result, the frozen-core

FCI results presented here are the best ones possible for the chosen basis sets.

For the Li2 dimer, the peak locations in the computed spectra are presented in Table S1

of the Supporting information (SI), from which it is obvious that for the first two peaks the

excitation energies calculated using different basis sets are in very good agreement with each

other. This is encouraging because from Fig. 3(a) it is obvious that most of the oscillator

strength of the absorption spectrum is confined to these two peaks. However, starting from

the third peak onward, we start seeing differences in the excitation energies predicted by

14


different basis sets. For the third peak, the predicted peak locations can be classified in two

groups: (a) those predicted by correlation-consistent basis sets cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ, and

(b) the ones predicted by 6-311G++ and augmented correlation consistent (aug-cc-) class of

basis sets. We note that the peak locations predicted by the former class of basis functions

have values significantly larger than those predicted by the latter class. Another noteworthy

point is that there is very good agreement among the peak locations predicted by the second

class of basis sets. As far as the location of the fourth peak is concerned, there is good

agreement among the predictions by 6-311++G(3df,3pd) and aug-cc class of basis functions,

while the remaining three basis functions predict very different values. The case of the fifth

peak is somewhat anomalous in that the agreement among the predictions by any of the

basis sets is not good. However, for higher peaks we note that the results from the aug-cc

class of basis functions are in good agreement with each other, while other basis functions

predict widely differing results. Hong et al.50 also performed first-principles calculations of

the photoabsorption spectra of several Lin clusters employing the time-dependent density-

functional theory (TDDFT) methodology, and for Li2 their predicted locations of the first

two peaks are 1.92 eV and 2.53 eV50. On comparing these with our best values of 1.83 eV

and 2.57 eV, respectively, we note: (a) our excitation energy for peak I is about 0.09 eV

smaller than theirs, while (b) our location for peak II is about 0.04 eV larger than theirs.

We attribute these differences to different computational methodologies adopted in the two

sets of calculations, and it will be interesting to compare the computational results with the

experimental ones, whenever they are available.

The peak locations of the photoabsorption spectra of Li3 chain are presented in Table S2

of SI, from which it is clear that the locations of the first two peaks converge completely for

all the basis sets, similar to the case of dimer. The third peak is the most intense peak of

the computed spectra as shown in Fig. 3(b), whose location is in good agreement for all the

basis sets except for cc-pVDZ, which predicts higher excitation energy as compared to the

rest. From the fourth peak onward, the peak locations can be classified in two similar group

15


as discussed previously for the case of dimer: the peak locations predicted from correlation-

consistent basis sets cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ are towards the higher energy side as compared

to all other basis sets. It can also be seen that the peak positions corresponding to the two

classes of basis sets are in good agreement within the class.

Next, we examine the peak locations in the photoabsorption spectra of Li3 triangular

cluster computed using various basis sets. We note that the peak locations corresponding

to the first five peaks are in very good agreement with each other for different basis sets

as is obvious from Table S3 of SI. This result is very encouraging because peak IV is the

most intense (MI) peak of the computed spectra as presented in Fig. 3(c), and it is crucial

for a basis set to be able to accurately describe the MI peaks. The location of this peak is

2.43 eV computed using the aug-cc-pVTZ basis set, which is in a decent agreement with the

experimentally detected peak at 2.58 eV by Blanc et al.51. From the sixth peak onward it

was observed that the peak locations calculated using correlation consistent basis sets (cc-

pVDZ and cc-pVTZ) do not match with the other classes of basis sets. However, the peak

locations computed using the 6-31G class and the aug-cc-pVTZ continue to be in very good

agreement with each other till peak VIII, located near 3.8 eV. The locations of higher-energy

peaks beyond peak VIII computed using these basis sets are presented in Table S4 for the

SI.

16


Figure 3: Optical absorption spectra of (a) Li2, (b) Li3 linear, (c) Li3 triangular, and (d) Li4
clusters computed using various basis sets and the frozen core FCI method. The uniform
line-width 0.1 eV is used to plot the spectrum.

The peak positions of the photoabsorption spectra of Li4 cluster computed using various

basis sets are presented in Table S5 of SI, while the spectra are plotted in Fig. 3(d). We note

that for this cluster, the excitation energies of the first five peaks computed using different

basis sets are in very good agreement with each other. The first three peaks are much more

intense as compared to the higher energy peaks, and in peak III there are slight differences

(≈0.1 eV) in the peak locations predicted by different basis sets. The two largest basis sets

(6-311++G(3df,3pd), and aug-cc-pVTZ) predict the location of peak III at 2.93 eV, while

the predictions by the rest of the basis sets are in the range 3.03–3.08 eV. From peak VI

17


onward we begin to observe differences among the locations predicted by different basis sets,

with a tendency towards clustering into different classes. However, the noteworthy point

is that the intensity corresponding to these higher energy peaks is very low. As far as the

comparison with the experiments is concerned, the first three photoabsorption peaks of the

Li4 cluster located at 1.87 eV, 2.65 eV, and 2.93 eV for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set are in excellent

agreement with the experimental measurements of Blanc et al.51 who detected these peaks

at 1.83 eV, 2.65 eV, and 2.93 eV, respectively.

For Be+
2 cluster, we present the spectra computed by different basis sets in Fig. 4(a),

while the corresponding peak locations are presented in Table S6 of SI. We note excellent

convergence of the excitation energies up to the sixth peak, beyond which results obtained

by different basis sets do not agree much with each other. We further note that Peak V

located near 6.30 eV is the most intense peak, and, for that, the predictions of the different

basis sets are in a fairly narrow energy range 6.30-6.37 eV.

Figure 4: Optical absorption spectra of (a) Be+
2 and (b) Be+
3 clusters computed using various
basis sets and frozen core FCI and QCI methods, respectively. The uniform line-width of
0.1 eV is used to plot the spectrum.

The excited-states peak locations of Be+
3 cluster for different basis sets are presented in

Table S7 of SI. We notice excellent agreement of the excited-states peak locations up to the

18


seventh peak which is also the most intense peak of the spectra located near 6.5 eV, as shown

in Fig. 4(b). Although the peak location of the sixth peak computed using cc-pVDZ basis

set is slightly towards the higher energy region as compared to all other basis sets, but the

difference is small. Noteworthy point is that these basis sets are able to achieve convergence

in the peak positions in Be+
2 and Be+
3 photoabsorption spectra up to much higher excitation

energies, as compared to the Li clusters.

The excited-states peak positions corresponding to the photoabsorption spectra of B+
2

cluster are presented in Table S8 of SI. We notice excellent agreement of the peak energies

corresponding to first three peaks for all the basis sets. The fourth peak is the most intense

peak of the spectra, as shown in Fig.
5(a) for whose location excellent agreement has

been achieved for 6-311++G (2d, 2p), cc-pVTZ, aug-cc-pVDZ, and aug-cc-pVTZ basis sets,

indicating complete convergence. However, the excitation energies for peak IV computed

using the 6-311++G (3df, 3pd) and cc-pVDZ basis sets are about 0.1 eV higher, as compared

to other basis sets. As far as peak V is concerned, which is a very weak shoulder of peak IV,

we again observe excellent convergence for all the basis sets, except cc-pVDZ which fails to

predict the peak. From the sixth peak onward, as discussed previously, the predicted peak

locations can be classified into two groups: (a) larger basis sets of 6-311++G and aug-cc-

type, and (b) smaller basis sets cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ, with the peak locations predicted

by individual classes being in very good agreement with each other.

19


Figure 5: Optical absorption spectra of (a) B+
2 and (b) B+
3 cluster computed using various
basis sets and frozen core FCI and MRSDCI methods, respectively. The uniform line-width
0.1 eV is used to plot the spectrum.

The peak locations corresponding to the excited-states of the photoabsorption spectra

of B+
3 cluster are presented in Table S9 of SI, while the calculated spectra are plotted in

Fig. 5(b) . For this cluster, we get eight well-separated peaks in the explored energy range,

with peak VIII located near 8.9 eV being the most intense. We note that the peak energies

corresponding to all the basis sets converge excellently up to the peak VIII, except those

predicted by the cc-pVDZ basis set, which are consistently higher.
We have noticed in

Fig.4 and Fig.5, only the deep valence excitation energies are dependent on the choice of

basis sets. This behavior can be a consequence of the frozen-core approximation, which we

have employed in the calculations. To verify this, we have computed the optical absorption

spectra of Li2 and Be+
2 clusters by also including the core excitations within the large-scale

QCI method. We found that the optical spectra of these clusters computed by including core

excitations agrees completely with the absorption spectra computed after employing frozen-

core approximation, as shown in Fig.S1 and Fig.S2 of the SI. Therefore, the frozen-core

approximation does not alter the absorption spectra of small clusters.

Based on the peak positions of the individual clusters discussed above, we observe the

20


following general trends: (a) peak locations for all the clusters used in this study are in very

good agreement for all the basis sets up to the most intense peak of the spectra, except

for cc-pVDZ basis set. (b) the excited-states peak locations beyond the most intense peak

can be classified in two groups, in which the peak locations calculated using correlation-

consistent basis sets do not match with the peak locations computed using all other basis

sets, and (c) for the cc-pVDZ basis sets peaks are located at higher energies as compared

to the rest of the basis functions. As the basis-set dependence of the optical properties is

different for the density functional theory compared to the wave function-based large-scale

configuration-interaction method, it will be interesting to explore the optical properties of

clusters using time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) and compare it with our

results. We found that the first peak of the optical absorption spectra of B+
3 cluster is located

at 0.84 eV when computed using large-scale MRSDCI calculations along with a large aug-

cc-pVTZ basis set. However, when the calculations are performed using TD-DFT method

with B3LYP functional and the same basis set, it is obtained at 0.95 eV. The most intense

peak of the optical absorption spectra is located at 8.85 eV using the MRSDCI approach,

which is found to be at 9.35 eV by employing the TD-DFT method. The calulated optical

absorption spectra and excited-states peak locations of B+
3 cluster corresponding to TD-

DFT calculations are provided in the Fig.S3 and Table S10 of the SI. We also report that

the variations in the peak locations of the photoabsorption spectra of B+
3 computed using

various basis sets and TD-DFT method are lesser than the wave function-based CI method.

Oscillator strength

In addition to the excitation energy, the next important quantity determining the profile of

the absorption spectrum is the oscillator strength (f) corresponding to various optical tran-

sitions, connecting the ground state to the excited state in question. The oscillator strength

calculated using Eq. 2 is determined by the excitation energy of the state involved, and the

corresponding transition dipole moment (TDM). The TDM being a matrix element, is, in

21


turn, determined by the many-particle wave functions of the ground and the excited state

that it connects. Another important quantity is the polarization of the photon involved in a

given optical transition (peak), which can be measured in oriented samples. The polarization

is a consequence of the point-group symmetry of the concerned molecule, and hence should

be independent of the basis set employed. In this section, we discuss the convergence of the

oscillator strengths and photon polarizations associated with various peaks of the calculated

spectra. In Table 3, we present the oscillator strengths corresponding to the first peak, and

the most intense peak (peak II) of the spectra of Li2 computed using different basis func-

tions. Additionally, the table also contains the dominant configurations contributing to the

many-particle wave functions of the excited states involved.

Table 3: Comparison of oscillator strengths and the dominant configurations contributing to
the many-particle wave functions for peaks I and II of Li2 cluster calculated using different
basis sets. In the “Polarization” column, ∥ indicates photon polarization along the direction
of the molecule (longitudinal polarization), while ⊥ indicates polarization perpendicular to
the molecular axis (transverse polarization). Note that the transversely polarized states are
doubly degenerate, therefore, the oscillator strength corresponding to those is the sum of
both the contributions. ’H’ and ’L’ stand for HOMO and LUMO orbitals.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak II

Polarization
f
Configurations
Polarization
f
Configurations

6-311++G(2d,2p)
∥
0.460
|H → L⟩
⊥
0.971
|H → L + 2⟩

|H → L + 3⟩
|H → L + 7⟩

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
∥
0.456
|H → L⟩
⊥
0.966
|H → L + 2⟩

|H → L + 3⟩
|H → L + 7⟩

cc-PVDZ
∥
0.463
|H → L⟩
⊥
0.970
|H → L + 1⟩

|H → L; H → L + 2⟩
|H → L + 1; H → L + 5⟩

cc-pVTZ
∥
0.455
|H → L⟩
⊥
0.969
|H → L + 1⟩

|H → L + 4⟩
|H → L + 6⟩

aug-cc-pVDZ
∥
0.462
|H → L⟩
⊥
0.972
|H → L + 1⟩

|H → L + 3⟩
|H → L + 6⟩

aug-cc-pVTZ
∥
0.454
|H → L⟩
⊥
0.966
|H → L + 2⟩

|H → L + 3⟩
|H → L + 7⟩

From Table 3 it is obvious that the oscillator strengths computed using various basis

functions for both the peaks are in very good agreement with each other. We also note that

the direction of the polarization of the photons involved in a given optical transitions are of

22


the excited-states corresponding to the first and second peak of the spectra of Li2 cluster are

parallel and perpendicular to molecular axis, respectively, irrespective of the basis set.

The oscillator strengths corresponding to the first and most intense peaks of the spectra

of Li3 chain and triangular clusters are presented in Table S11 and Table S12, respectively.

We note that the oscillator strengths of the first peaks both of Li3 chain, and the triangular

cluster, computed using the different basis sets are in excellent agreement with each other.

The oscillator strengths corresponding to the most intense peaks of Li3, i.e. peak III of

the chain and peak IV for the triangular cluster, calculated using various basis sets can

be classified into two groups: (a) those calculated using correlation-consistent (cc-pVTZ

and cc-pVDZ) class of basis sets, and (b) those computed using 6-33++G- and augmented

correlation-consistent (aug-cc-) class of basis sets. The oscillator strength calculated by the

first class of basis sets is comparatively higher than the second class of basis sets. But, the

relative maximum difference between oscillator strengths of different classes is close to 6%,

which is fairly acceptable.

The oscillator strengths corresponding to the first and the most intense peak (peak II)

in the photoabsorption spectra of Li4 cluster are presented in Table S13.
We note that

the oscillator strengths of peak I are in good agreement with each other for all the basis

sets except for cc-pVDZ and aug-cc-pVTZ. For these basis sets the oscillator strength is

comparatively larger.
For peak II, we note that the difference in the oscillator strength

computed by cc-pVDZ and 6-311++G (3df, 3pd) basis sets is about 5%, which is again

quite small.

We present the oscillator strengths corresponding to the first and the most intense peaks

of the cationic beryllium clusters Be+
2 and Be+
3 in tables S14, and S15, respectively. We

note very good agreement on the oscillator strengths of both the peaks of the Be+
2 and

Be+
3 clusters for all the basis sets. The maximum relative disagreement we find among the

oscillator strengths for a given peak is around 6%.

Finally, we discuss the oscillator strengths of the first and the most intense peaks of the

23


B+
2 and B+
3 clusters presented in tables S16, and S17, respectively. We note that both for

B+
2 and B+
3 clusters, the oscillator strengths of the first peaks are two orders of magnitude

smaller than those of their most intense peaks, indicating that the first peaks for both the

clusters are relatively feeble. Nevertheless, the oscillator strengths of the first peaks of the

photoabsorption spectra of the two clusters calculated using various basis sets are in very

good agreement with each other. As far as the most intense peaks are concerned, both for B+
2

and B+
3 we see the following pattern: oscillator strengths computed using 6-311++G- and

aug-cc-pVTZ basis sets are in very good agreement with each other, while those computed

using other basis sets differ from them somewhat.

Wave function analysis

Next, we examine the dominant configurations contributing to the CI wave functions of the

excited states contributing to various peaks. The dominant configurations corresponding

to the excited-states CI wave functions of peak I and peak II of Li2 are presented in Table

3. We note that for peak I, the main contribution to the corresponding excited state wave

function is from the singly excited configuration |H → L⟩ for all the basis sets. However,

the next important configuration to the same wave function depends on the class of basis set

employed: (a) it is |H → L+3⟩ single excitation when calculations are performed using larger

basis sets of the type 6-311++ and aug-cc, but (b) for smaller basis sets, this configuration is

found to be |H → L + 4⟩ for cc-PVTZ basis, and |H → L; H → L + 2⟩ for the cc-PVDZ set.

Peak II is due to two degenerate excited states to which the dominant contributions are from

configurations |H → L+2⟩ and |H → L+7⟩, for the calculations performed using 6-31G++

and aug-cc-PVTZ type basis sets. But, for the calculations performed with smaller basis

sets, the dominant configurations is |H → L + 1⟩, while the next important configuration

can be |H → L + 6⟩ or |H → L + 1; H → L + 5⟩, depending on the basis set. Thus, we

can draw the following general conclusion regarding this: (a) for large basis set calculations,

for a given peak, the configurations are in perfect agreement with each other, and (b) the

24


configurations predicted by calculations performed using smaller basis sets such as cc-PVDZ

are found to be different as compared to those obtained in larger basis set calculations.

The dominant configurations for the wave functions corresponding to peak I and the

most intense peak (peak III) of Li3 chain, computed using various basis sets are presented

in Table S11. We find that for the first peak the dominant configuration is |H − 1 → H⟩ for

all the basis sets except for aug-cc-pVTZ. For the aug-cc-pVTZ the dominant configurations

contributing to the excited state wave function are different compared to other basis sets,

because of the reversal of ground and excited states. However, because the peak energies and

oscillator strength for the state are in excellent agreement with all other basis sets implies

that we have obtained correct quantitative description of the excited states even with this

basis set. For peak III the main contribution to the excited state wave function is from

|H − 1 → L + 2⟩ for the larger 6-311++ and aug-cc class of basis sets, while it is from

|H − 1 → L + 1⟩ for the smaller cc-pVTZ and cc-pVDZ basis sets.

The main configurations contributing to the excited states wave functions of peak I and

the most intense peak (peak IV) of Li3 triangular cluster, computed using various basis sets

are presented in Table S12. We note that for the first peak, the main contribution to the

wave function is from configurations |H → L+14⟩ or |H → L+13⟩ for the larger 6-311++G

and aug-cc class of basis sets. For the correlation-consistent basis sets (cc-pVDZ and cc-

pVTZ) the main contribution is due to the configuration |H → L + 2⟩. For the fourth peak,

the dominant configuration is |H − 1 → L⟩, irrespective of the type of basis set used for the

calculation.

The dominant configurations corresponding to the excited states wave functions of peak

I and the most intense peak of the spectra (peak II) of the Li4 cluster are presented in Table

S13. For the first peak, the main contribution is from the configuration |H → L + 1⟩ for all

the basis sets, while for peak II it is |H−1 → L⟩ for all the basis sets. Thus, we have excellent

agreement among all the basis sets when it comes to the most important configuration for

both the peaks of the Li4 cluster.

25


The important configurations corresponding to the excited states wave function of peak

I and the most intense peak (peak V) of the photoabsorption spectra of Be+
2 cluster are

presented in Table S14. The dominant configuration contributing to peak I is |H → L⟩ for

the 6-311++G class of basis sets, and |H → L + 2⟩ for the rest. For peak V, the main

configuration contributing to the CI wave function is |H − 1 → L + 1⟩ for 6-311++G class

of basis sets, and |H − 1 → L⟩ for the rest of the sets.

The configurations dominating the excited state CI wave functions of peak I and the

most intense peak (peak VII) of Be+
3 cluster are listed in Table S15.
We note that the

most important configurations contributing to peak I can be classified in two groups: (a)

for larger 6-311++G(3df,3pd) and aug-cc class of basis sets the dominant configuration is

|H → L + 1⟩, (b) while for smaller basis sets dominant configuration is highly basis set

dependent.
For peak VII, the doubly-excited configurations |H − 2 → L; H → L + 2⟩

and |H − 1 → L; H → L + 4⟩ dominate the excited-state wave functions for the larger

6-311++G(3df,3pd) and aug-cc class of basis sets, but vary significantly for the rest.

Most important configurations contributing to the wave functions for peak I and the

most intense peak (peak IV) of B+
2 cluster are presented in Table S16. It is obvious that the

double-excitation |H − 1 → L; H → L⟩ contributes the most to peak I for all the basis sets.

The dominant configurations contributing to the wave functions of peak IV are |H → L+5⟩

and |H → L + 11⟩ for all the basis sets except the cc-pVDZ/cc-pVTZ, for which instead of

|H → L + 11⟩, the double excitation |H − 1 → L; H → L⟩ contributes.

Finally, we present the dominant configurations in the CI wave functions corresponding

to peak I, and the most intense peak (peak VIII), of B+
3 cluster in Table S17. The configura-

tion with maximum contribution to the excited state wave functions for peak I is |H → L⟩,

irrespective of the basis set. The next dominant configuration is basis-set dependent, how-

ever, it is a double excitation in all the cases. The dominant configuration corresponding to

the CI wave function of peak VIII is the double excitation |H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩ for all

the basis sets.

26


The detailed wave function analysis for all the peaks of the optical absorption spectra of

clusters considered in this work using the largest aug-cc-pVTZ basis set is provided in Table

S18-S25 of the SI.

Conclusion

In this work, we presented electron-correlated calculations of the optical absorption spectra

of small neutral and ionic clusters using various basis sets. First, the stable geometries of

various clusters were determined at the CCSD level of theory, using the aug-cc-PVTZ basis

set. For the ground and the excited state wave functions calculations needed to compute

the absorption spectra, we used the FCI, QCI, and MRSDCI approaches depending upon

the size of the clusters. The CI calculations were performed using six different basis sets,

namely, 6-311++G(2d,2p), 6-311++G(3df,3pd), cc-pVDZ , cc-pVTZ, aug-cc-pVDZ, and

aug-cc-pVTZ.

We observed that the optical absorption spectra of all these clusters exhibit excellent

convergence for all the basis sets in the lower energy range. However, usually after the first

two peaks, the shift in peak locations for cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ basis set are noted in all

likelihood because of the lack of diffuse basis functions in these sets. If we use augmented

basis sets, the absorption spectra show good agreement with the results computed using

other similar basis sets. Although aug-cc-pVDZ basis set has a relatively smaller number of

basis functions as compared to aug-cc-pVTZ basis set, the agreement between the spectra

computed using the two basis sets is very good. Because the number of two-electron integrals

increases as N 4 where N is the number of basis functions in basis set, we can reduce the

computational cost significantly by using aug-cc-pVDZ basis set instead of larger Pople’s

basis sets, and aug-cc-pVTZ basis set. Thus, our general recommendation is that for optical

absorption calculations one should use a basis set containing diffuse functions, i.e., of the

aug-cc- type. However, whether one should use aug-cc-pVDZ, or a larger set, should be

27


decided by the available computational resources.

We believe that the CI calculations presented in this work are quite accurate, as is obvious

from the fact that our obtained results are in very good agreement with the experiments for

Li3 and Li4 clusters. Therefore, it will be of interest to compare our results on other clusters

also with the experiments, as and when they are performed.

Associated Content

Supporting Information

In the supporting information file, we have provided the peak locations, oscillator strengths,

and dominant excited state configurations corresponding to the optical absorption spectra

of all the clusters for all the basis sets considered in this work. The SI file also contains the

details of the many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in the

optical absorption spectrum of clusters for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set.

Author Information

Corresponding Author

Alok Shukla: Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mum-

bai 400076, India; *E-mail: shukla@phy.iitb.ac.in

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by senior research fellowship (DST-Inspire) provided by department

of science and technology, India.

28


Authors

Vikram Mahamiya: Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai,

Mumbai 400076, India; E-mail: mahamiyavikram@gmail.com

Pritam Bhattacharyya: Institute for Theoretical Solid State Physics, Leibniz IFW Dres-

den, Helmholtzstr. 20, 01069 Dresden, Germany; E-mail: pritambhattacharyya01@gmail.com

Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

29


References

(1) Boys, S. F. Electronic Wave Functions. I. A General Method of Calculation for the

Stationary States of Any Molecular System. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London

Series A 1950, 200, 542–554.

(2) McMurchie, L. E.; Davidson, E. R. One- and two-electron integrals over cartesian gaus-

sian functions. Journal of Computational Physics 1978, 26, 218 – 231.

(3) Davidson, E. R.; Feller, D. Basis set selection for molecular calculations. Chemical

Reviews 1986, 86, 681–696.

(4) Huzinaga, S. Basis sets for molecular calculations. Computer Physics Reports 1985, 2,

281 – 339.

(5) Huzinaga, S. Gaussian-Type Functions for Polyatomic Systems. I. The Journal of

Chemical Physics 1965, 42, 1293–1302.

(6) Ruedenberg, K.; Raffenetti, R. C.; Bardo, R. D. Structure and Reactivity, Proceedings

of the 1972 Boulder Conference; Wiley: New York, 1973.

(7) Bardo, R. D.; Ruedenberg, K. Even-tempered atomic orbitals. VI. Optimal orbital

exponents and optimal contractions of Gaussian primitives for hydrogen, carbon, and

oxygen in molecules. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1974, 60, 918–931.

(8) Huzinaga, S.; Klobukowski, M.; Tatewaki, H. The well-tempered GTF basis sets and

their applications in the SCF calculations on N2, CO, Na2, and P2. Canadian Journal

of Chemistry 1985, 63, 1812–1828.

(9) Tatewaki, H.; Huzinaga, S. A systematic preparation of new contracted Gaussian type

orbital set. I. Transition metal atoms from Sc to Zn. The Journal of Chemical Physics

1979, 71, 4339–4348.

30


(10) Tatewaki, H.; Huzinaga, S. A systematic preparation of new contracted Gaussian-type

orbital sets. III. Second-row atoms from Li through ne. Journal of Computational Chem-

istry 1980, 1, 205–228.

(11) Hehre, W. J.; Stewart, R. F.; Pople, J. A. Self-Consistent Molecular-Orbital Methods. I.

Use of Gaussian Expansions of Slater-Type Atomic Orbitals. The Journal of Chemical

Physics 1969, 51, 2657–2664.

(12) Ditchfield, R.; Hehre, W. J.; Pople, J. A. Self-Consistent Molecular-Orbital Meth-

ods. IX. An Extended Gaussian-Type Basis for Molecular-Orbital Studies of Organic

Molecules. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1971, 54, 724–728.

(13) Binkley, J. S.; Pople, J. A.; Hehre, W. J. Self-consistent molecular orbital methods. 21.

Small split-valence basis sets for first-row elements. Journal of the American Chemical

Society 1980, 102, 939–947.

(14) Binkley, J. S.; Pople, J. A. Self-consistent molecular orbital methods. XIX. Split-valence

Gaussian-type basis sets for beryllium. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1977, 66, 879–

880.

(15) Krishnan, R.; Binkley, J. S.; Seeger, R.; Pople, J. A. Self-consistent molecular or-

bital methods. XX. A basis set for correlated wave functions. The Journal of Chemical

Physics 1980, 72, 650–654.

(16) Hariharan, P. C.; Pople, J. A. The influence of polarization functions on molecular

orbital hydrogenation energies. Theoretica chimica acta 1973, 28, 213–222.

(17) Collins, J. B.; von R. Schleyer, P.; Binkley, J. S.; Pople, J. A. Self-consistent molecular

orbital methods. XVII. Geometries and binding energies of second-row molecules. A

comparison of three basis sets. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1976, 64, 5142–5151.

31


(18) Francl, M. M.; Pietro, W. J.; Hehre, W. J.; Binkley, J. S.; Gordon, M. S.; DeFrees, D. J.;

Pople, J. A. Self-consistent molecular orbital methods. XXIII. A polarization-type basis

set for second-row elements. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1982, 77, 3654–3665.

(19) Pietro, W. J.; Francl, M. M.; Hehre, W. J.; DeFrees, D. J.; Pople, J. A.; Binkley, J. S.

Self-consistent molecular orbital methods. 24. Supplemented small split-valence basis

sets for second-row elements. Journal of the American Chemical Society 1982, 104,

5039–5048.

(20) Frisch, M. J.; Pople, J. A.; Binkley, J. S. Self-consistent molecular orbital methods

25. Supplementary functions for Gaussian basis sets. The Journal of Chemical Physics

1984, 80, 3265–3269.

(21) Dunning, T. H. Gaussian basis sets for use in correlated molecular calculations.I The

atoms boron through neon and hydrogen. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1989, 90,

1007–1023.

(22) Kendall, R. A.; Dunning, T. H.; Harrison, R. J. Electron affinities of the first-row atoms

revisited.Systematic basis sets and wave functions. The Journal of Chemical Physics

1992, 96, 6796–6806.

(23) Woon, D. E.; Dunning, T. H. J. The Pronounced Effect of Microsolvation on Diatomic

Alkali Halides: Ab Initio Modeling of MX(H2O)n (M = Li, Na; X=F, Cl; n = 1-3).

Journal of the American Chemical Society 1995, 117, 1090–1097.

(24) Balakina, M.; Nefediev, S. The choice of basis set for calculations of linear and nonlinear

optical properties of conjugated organic molecules in gas and in dielectric medium by the

example of p-nitroaniline. Computational Materials Science 2007, 38, 467–472, Selected

papers from the International Conference on Computational Methods in Sciences and

Engineering 2004.

32


(25) Parsons, T.; Balduf, T.; Cheeseman, J. R.; Caricato, M. Basis Set Dependence of

Optical Rotation Calculations with Different Choices of Gauge. The Journal of Physical

Chemistry A 2022, 126, 1861–1870, PMID: 35271772.

(26) Reis, H.; Papadopoulos, M. G. Nonlinear optical properties of the rhombic B4-cluster.

Journal of Computational Chemistry 1999, 20, 679–687.

(27) Lauderdale, W. J.; Coolidge, M. B. Basis set effects on the nonlinear optical properties

of selected linear diacetylenes. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1995, 99, 9368–9373.

(28) Jabłoński, M.; Palusiak, M. Basis Set and Method Dependence in Quantum Theory of

Atoms in Molecules Calculations for Covalent Bonds. The Journal of Physical Chem-

istry A 2010, 114, 12498–12505, PMID: 21049895.

(29) Frisch, M. J. et al. Gaussian 16 Revision C.01. 2016.

(30) McMurchie, L. E.; Elbert, S. T.; Langhoff, S. R.; Davidson, E. R. MELD package from

Indiana University. It has been modified by us to handle bigger systems.

(31) Shinde, R.; Shukla, A. Large-scale first principles configuration interaction calculations

of optical absorption in aluminum clusters. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2014, 16, 20714–

20723.

(32) Rai, D. K.; Chakraborty, H.; Shukla, A. Tunable Optoelectronic Properties of Triply

Bonded Carbon Molecules with Linear and Graphyne Substructures. The Journal of

Physical Chemistry C 2018, 122, 1309–1317.

(33) Chakraborty, H.; Shukla, A. Pariser - Parr - Pople Model Based Investigation of Ground

and Low - Lying Excited States of Long Acenes. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A

2013, 117, 14220–14229.

(34) Aryanpour, K.; Shukla, A.; Mazumdar, S. Electron correlations and two-photon states

33


in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon molecules: A peculiar role of geometry. The Journal

of Chemical Physics 2014, 140, 104301.

(35) Chakraborty, H.; Shukla, A. Theory of triplet optical absorption in oligoacenes: From

naphthalene to heptacene. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2014, 141, 164301.

(36) SHINDE, R.; SHUKLA, A. LARGE-SCALE FIRST PRINCIPLES CONFIGURA-

TION INTERACTION CALCULATIONS OF OPTICAL ABSORPTION IN BORON

CLUSTERS. Nano LIFE 2012, 02, 1240004.

(37) Shukla, A. Correlated theory of triplet photoinduced absorption in phenylene-vinylene

chains. Phys. Rev. B 2002, 65, 125204.

(38) Shukla, A. Theory of nonlinear optical properties of phenyl-substituted polyacetylenes.

Phys. Rev. B 2004, 69, 165218.

(39) Sony, P.; Shukla, A. Large-scale correlated calculations of linear optical absorption and

low-lying excited states of polyacenes: Pariser-Parr-Pople Hamiltonian. Phys. Rev. B

2007, 75, 155208.

(40) Basak, T.; Chakraborty, H.; Shukla, A. Theory of linear optical absorption in diamond-

shaped graphene quantum dots. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92, 205404.

(41) Priya, P. K.; Rai, D. K.; Shukla, A. Photoabsorption in sodium clusters: first principles

configuration interaction calculations. The European Physical Journal D 2017, 71, 116.

(42) Shinde, R.; Shukla, A. First principles electron-correlated calculations of optical ab-

sorption in magnesium clusters. The European Physical Journal D 2017, 71, 301.

(43) Bhattacharyya, P.; Rai, D. K.; Shukla, A. Systematic First-Principles Configuration-

Interaction Calculations of Linear Optical Absorption Spectra in Silicon Hydrides:

Si2H2n (n = 1-3). The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2019, 123, 8619–8631.

34


(44) Wheeler, S. E.; Sattelmeyer, K. W.; Schleyer, P. v. R.; Schaefer, H. F. Binding energies

of small lithium clusters (Lin) and hydrogenated lithium clusters (LinH). The Journal

of Chemical Physics 2004, 120, 4683–4689.

(45) Florez, E.; Fuentealba, P. A theoretical study of alkali metal atomic clusters: From Lin

to Csn (n = 2-8). International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 2009, 109, 1080–1093.

(46) HUBER, K. P. Molecular Structure Constants of Diatomic molecules. Molecular Spectra

and molecular Structure Constants of Diatomic molecules 1979,

(47) Jones, R. O.; Lichtenstein, A. I.; Hutter, J. Density functional study of structure and

bonding in lithium clusters Lin and their oxides LinO. The Journal of Chemical Physics

1997, 106, 4566–4574.

(48) Srinivas, S.; Jellinek, J. Structural and electronic properties of small beryllium clusters:

A theoretical study. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2004, 121, 7243–7252.

(49) Hanley, L.; Whitten, J. L.; Anderson, S. L. Collision-induced dissociation and ab initio

studies of boron cluster ions: determination of structures and stabilities. The Journal

of Physical Chemistry 1988, 92, 5803–5812.

(50) Hong, X.; Wang, F. TDDFT calculation for photoabsorption spectra of Lin (n=2-11,20)

clusters. Physics Letters A 2011, 375, 1883 – 1888.

(51) Blanc, J.; Broyer, M.; Chevaleyre, J.; Dugourd, P.; Kühling, H.; Labastie, P.; Ul-

bricht, M.; Wolf, J. P.; Wöste, L. High resolution spectroscopy of small metal clusters.

Zeitschrift für Physik D Atoms, Molecules and Clusters 1991, 19, 7–12.

35


For Table of Contents Only

36


Supporting Information For: Benchmarking

Gaussian Basis Sets in Quantum-Chemical

Calculations of Photoabsorption Spectra of

Light Atomic Clusters

Vikram Mahamiya,∗,† Pritam Bhattacharyya,∗,†,‡ and Alok Shukla∗,†

†Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai 400076,

India

‡Present Address: Institute for Theoretical Solid State Physics, Leibniz IFW Dresden,

Helmholtzstr. 20, 01069 Dresden, Germany

E-mail: mahamiyavikram@gmail.com; pritambhattacharyya01@gmail.com; shukla@phy.iitb.ac.in

Table S1: Comparison of the peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of Li2 cluster
computed using various basis sets.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak II
Peak III
Peak IV
Peak V
Peak VI
Peak VII
Peak VIII
Peak IX

(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
1.82
2.61
3.85
4.87
5.88
6.50
7.06
-
-

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
1.83
2.57
3.85
4.61
4.84
5.64
5.88
6.08
7.00

cc-pVDZ
1.82
2.65
4.43
5.95
7.12
-
-
-
-

cc-pVTZ
1.83
2.58
4.26
5.43
5.98
6.64
7.03
-
-

aug-cc-pVDZ
1.82
2.60
3.84
4.58
5.06
5.94
6.67
6.96
-

aug-cc-pVTZ
1.83
2.57
3.87
4.59
5.43
5.93
6.66
7.03
-

S1

arXiv:2301.02413v1  [physics.chem-ph]  6 Jan 2023


Table S2: Comparison of the peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of Li3 chain
computed using various basis sets.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak II
Peak III
Peak IV
Peak V
Peak VI

(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
0.72
1.27
2.58
3.39
3.91
4.28

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
0.72
1.27
2.54
3.38
3.90
4.14

cc-pVDZ
0.72
1.26
2.65
3.47
4.37
4.92

cc-pVTZ
0.72
1.28
2.57
3.45
4.39
4.58

aug-cc-pVDZ
0.72
1.26
2.56
3.38
3.88
-

aug-cc-pVTZ
0.72
1.27
2.53
3.37
3.89
-

Table S3: The peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of Li3 isosceles triangular
cluster computed using various basis sets are compared.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak II
Peak III
Peak IV
Peak V
Peak VI
Peak VII

(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
1.09
1.41
2.14
2.41
2.66
2.97
3.21

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
1.07
1.42
2.12
2.39
2.65
2.96
3.19

cc-pVDZ
1.11
1.40
2.18
2.43
2.61
2.81
3.13

cc-pVTZ
1.08
1.42
2.15
2.40
2.70
3.02
4.27

aug-cc-pVDZ
1.09
1.41
2.13
2.40
2.65
2.96
3.20

aug-cc-pVTZ
1.07
1.42
2.11
2.43
2.65
2.95
3.20

Table S4: High energy peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of Li3 Isosceles
triangular cluster computed using various basis sets are compared.

Li3 Cluster
Peak VIII
Peak IX
Peak X
Peak XI
Peak XII

Basis Set
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
3.77
4.25
5.29
5.99
-

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
3.75
4.17
4.91
5.25
5.79

cc-pVDZ
3.57
4.24
4.94
5.33
6.05

cc-pVTZ
4.69
5.64
-
-
-

aug-cc-pVDZ
4.16
4.44
5.35
5.59
5.94

aug-cc-pVTZ
3.77
4.11
5.39
5.60
-

S2


Table S5: The peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of Li4 rhombus cluster com-
puted using various basis sets. The higher energy peak locations are presented in the Table
I of the Supporting Information.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak II
Peak III
Peak IV
Peak V
Peak VI
Peak VII

(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
1.84
2.65
3.05
3.64
4.24
4.52
5.15

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
1.83
2.64
2.93
3.63
4.21
4.51
5.11

cc-pVDZ
1.87
2.67
3.08
3.65
4.27
4.86
5.42

cc-pVTZ
1.84
2.65
3.03
3.64
4.22
4.54
5.30

aug-cc-pVDZ
1.85
2.65
3.05
3.61
4.23
4.62
-

aug-cc-pVTZ
1.87
2.65
2.93
3.66
4.22
4.61
5.30

Table S6: The peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of Be+
2 cluster computed
using various basis sets are compared.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak II
Peak III
Peak IV
Peak V
Peak VI
Peak VII
Peak VIII
Peak IX

(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
1.75
3.66
4.18
6.04
6.32
8.32
8.90
9.33
9.65

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
1.74
3.68
4.18
6.04
6.30
8.33
8.84
9.31
9.63

cc-pVDZ
1.76
3.69
4.20
6.12
6.37
8.28
9.61
-
-

cc-pVTZ
1.74
3.68
4.19
6.05
6.31
8.44
9.50
-
-

aug-cc-pVDZ
1.77
3.69
4.18
6.08
6.36
8.38
9.09
9.47
-

aug-cc-pVTZ
1.74
3.68
4.18
6.03
6.30
8.34
8.92
9.38
-

Table S7: The peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of Be+
3 cluster computed
using various basis sets are compared.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak II
Peak III
Peak IV
Peak V
Peak VI
Peak VII

(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
1.05
3.16
3.66
4.90
5.39
5.86
6.53

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
1.02
3.17
3.63
4.84
5.40
5.83
6.47

cc-pVDZ
1.04
3.16
3.67
4.91
5.39
5.89
6.52

cc-pVTZ
1.01
3.14
3.60
4.87
5.37
5.83
6.50

aug-cc-pVDZ
1.02
3.16
3.66
4.87
5.41
5.87
6.51

aug-cc-pVTZ
1.02
3.16
3.66
4.87
5.40
5.85
6.52

S3


Table S8: The peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of B+
2 cluster computed using
various basis sets are compared.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak II
Peak III
Peak IV
Peak V
Peak VI
Peak VII
Peak VIII
Peak IX

(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
3.65
4.86
6.01
7.00
7.63
9.68
10.26
11.42
12.71

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
3.65
4.77
5.98
7.14
7.62
9.65
10.22
11.40
12.61

cc-pVDZ
3.64
4.79
6.03
7.16
-
9.88
11.29
12.74

cc-pVTZ
3.66
4.80
5.99
7.05
7.63
9.87
11.12
12.77
-

aug-cc-pVDZ
3.63
4.78
5.98
7.03
7.60
9.66
10.27
11.31
12.52

aug-cc-pVTZ
3.66
4.80
5.99
7.04
7.65
9.65
10.21
11.41
12.20

Table S9: The peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of B+
3 cluster computed using
various basis sets are compared.

B+
3 Cluster
Peak I
Peak II
Peak III
Peak IV
Peak V
Peak VI
Peak VII
Peak VIII

Basis Set
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
0.82
3.24
5.00
5.38
6.02
7.12
8.09
8.85

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
0.83
3.21
4.99
5.44
6.06
7.17
8.07
8.87

cc-pVDZ
0.96
3.28
5.17
5.59
6.11
7.39
8.21
8.95

cc-pVTZ
0.82
3.23
4.98
5.35
6.03
7.01
8.06
8.79

aug-cc-pVDZ
0.84
3.22
5.00
5.41
6.02
7.10
8.03
8.80

aug-cc-pVTZ
0.84
3.22
5.01
5.45
6.03
7.16
8.08
8.85

Table S10: The peak locations of the optical absorption spectra of B+
3 cluster employing TD-
DFT method with B3LYP functional and computed using various basis sets are compared.

B+
3 Cluster
Peak I
Peak II
Peak III
Peak IV

Basis Set
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)
(eV)

6-311++G(2d,2p)
0.94
2.95
5.70
9.35

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
0.95
2.94
5.70
9.35

cc-pVDZ
0.96
3.00
5.73
9.52

cc-pVTZ
0.96
2.95
5.70
9.40

aug-cc-pVDZ
0.96
2.99
5.73
9.40

aug-cc-pVTZ
0.95
2.94
5.70
9.36

S4


Table S11: Comparison of oscillator strengths and the dominant configurations contributing
to the many-particle wave functions for peaks I and the maximum intensity peak (peak III)
of Li3 chain calculated using different basis sets. In the “Polarization” column, ∥ indicates
photon polarization along the direction of the molecule (longitudinal polarization), while ⊥
indicates polarization perpendicular to the molecular axis (transverse polarization). ’H’ and
’L’ stand for HOMO and LUMO orbitals.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak III

Polarization
f
Wave-function
Polarization
f
Wave-function

6-311++G(2d,2p)
∥
0.106
|H − 1 → H⟩
⊥
0.591
|H − 1 → L + 2⟩

|H → L + 6⟩

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
∥
0.106
|H − 1 → H⟩
⊥
0.595
|H − 1 → L + 2⟩

|H → L + 5⟩
|H → L + 11⟩

cc-PVDZ
∥
0.097
|H − 1 → H⟩
⊥
0.631
|H − 1 → L + 1⟩

|H → L⟩
|H → L + 3⟩

cc-pVTZ
∥
0.105
|H − 1 → H⟩
⊥
0.618
|H − 1 → L + 1⟩

|H → L⟩
|H → L + 3⟩

aug-cc-pVDZ
∥
0.101
|H − 1 → H⟩
⊥
0.603
|H − 1 → L + 2⟩

|H → L + 7⟩
|H → L + 10⟩

aug-cc-pVTZ
∥
0.106
|HF⟩
⊥
0.594
|H − 1 → L + 2⟩

|H − 1 → H;
|H − 1 → H;

H − 1 → L + 5⟩
H − 1 → L + 11⟩

Table S12: Comparison of oscillator strengths and the dominant configurations contributing
to the many-particle wave functions for peaks I and the maximum intensity peak (peak IV)
of Li3 triangular calculated using different basis sets. The rest of the information is same as
in the caption of Table S11.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak IV

Polarization
f
Wave-function
Polarization
f
Wave-function

6-311++G(2d,2p)
∥
0.127
|H → L + 14⟩
∥
0.465
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 1⟩
|H → L + 9⟩

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
∥
0.131
|H → L + 14⟩
∥
0.459
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 1⟩
|H → L + 5⟩

cc-PVDZ
∥
0.121
|H → L + 2⟩
∥
0.488
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H − 1 → L + 2⟩
|H → L + 4⟩

cc-pVTZ
∥
0.129
|H → L + 2⟩
∥
0.478
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H − 1 → L + 2⟩
|H → L + 4⟩

aug-cc-pVDZ
∥
0.126
|H → L + 14⟩
∥
0.469
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 10⟩
|H → L + 16⟩

aug-cc-pVTZ
∥
0.129
|H → L + 13⟩
∥
0.462
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 1⟩
|H → L + 5⟩

S5


Table S13: Comparison of oscillator strengths and the dominant configurations contributing
to the many-particle wave functions for peaks I and the maximum intensity peak (peak II)
of Li4 cluster calculated using different basis sets. The rest of the information is same as in
the caption of Table S11.

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak II

Polarization
f
Wave-function
Polarization
f
Wave-function

6-311++G(2d,2p)
∥
0.628
|H → L + 1⟩
∥
0.648
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 8⟩
|H − 1 → L + 5⟩

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
∥
0.615
|H → L + 1⟩
∥
0.683
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 9⟩
|H − 1 → L + 6⟩

cc-PVDZ
∥
0.659
|H → L + 1⟩
∥
0.649
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 4⟩
|H → L + 3⟩

cc-pVTZ
∥
0.624
|H → L + 1⟩
∥
0.678
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 5⟩
|H → L + 4⟩

aug-cc-pVDZ
∥
0.634
|H → L + 1⟩
∥
0.654
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 9⟩
|H − 1 → L + 5⟩

aug-cc-pVTZ
∥
0.656
|H → L + 1⟩
∥
0.660
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L + 9⟩
|H − 1 → L + 5⟩

Table S14: Comparison of oscillator strengths and the dominant configurations contributing
to the many-particle wave functions for peaks I and the maximum intensity peak (peak V)
of Be+
2 cluster calculated using different basis sets. The rest of the information is same as in
the caption of Table S11

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak V

Polarization
f
Wave-function
Polarization
f
Wave-function

6-311++G(2d,2p)
∥
0.113
|H → L⟩
⊥
0.745
|H − 1 → L + 1⟩

|H − 1 → H⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
∥
0.119
|H → L⟩
⊥
0.749
|H − 1 → L + 1⟩

|H − 1 → H⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩

cc-PVDZ
∥
0.114
|H → L + 2⟩
⊥
0.736
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L; H − 1 → L⟩
|H − 1 → L + 2; H → L + 3⟩

cc-pVTZ
∥
0.120
|H → L + 2⟩
⊥
0.749
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L; H − 1 → L⟩
|H − 1 → L + 2; H → L + 3⟩

aug-cc-pVDZ
∥
0.114
|H → L + 2⟩
⊥
0.768
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L; H − 1 → L⟩
|H − 1 → L + 2; H → L + 3⟩

aug-cc-pVTZ
∥
0.120
|H → L + 2⟩
⊥
0.757
|H − 1 → L⟩

|H → L; H − 1 → L⟩
|H − 1 → L + 2; H → L + 3⟩

S6


Table S15: Comparison of oscillator strengths and the dominant configurations contributing
to the many-particle wave functions for peaks I and the maximum intensity peak (peak VII)
of Be+
3 cluster calculated using different basis sets. The rest of the information is same as in
the caption of Table S11

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak VII

Polarization
f
Wave-function
Polarization
f
Wave-function

6-311++G(2d,2p)
∥
0.172
|HF⟩
⊥
0.655
|H − 2 → L + 1⟩

|H → L⟩
|H − 1 → L + 2⟩

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
∥
0.184
|H → L + 1⟩
⊥
0.647
|H − 2 → L; H → L + 2⟩

|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 4⟩

cc-PVDZ
∥
0.178
|H → L⟩
⊥
0.640
|H − 2 → L + 1⟩

|H − 1 → H⟩
|H − 1 → L + 2⟩

cc-pVTZ
∥
0.169
|HF⟩
⊥
0.635
|H − 2 → L; H → L + 1⟩

|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩

aug-cc-pVDZ
∥
0.180
|H → L + 1⟩
⊥
0.646
|H − 2 → L; H → L + 2⟩

|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 4⟩

aug-cc-pVTZ
∥
0.179
|H → L + 1⟩
⊥
0.657
|H − 2 → L; H → L + 2⟩

|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 4⟩

Table S16: Comparison of oscillator strengths and the dominant configurations contributing
to the many-particle wave functions for peaks I and the maximum intensity peak (peak IV)
of B+
2 cluster calculated using different basis sets. The rest of the information is same as in
the caption of Table S11

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak IV

Polarization
f
Wave-function
Polarization
f
Wave-function

6-311++G(2d,2p)
∥
0.026
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
∥
0.910
|H → L + 5⟩

|H → L + 11⟩
|H → L + 11⟩

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
∥
0.025
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
∥
0.915
|H → L + 5⟩

|H → L + 11⟩
|H → L + 11⟩

cc-PVDZ
∥
0.025
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
∥
0.965
|H → L + 5⟩

|H → L + 5⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩

cc-pVTZ
∥
0.024
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
∥
0.942
|H → L + 5⟩

|H → L + 5⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩

aug-cc-pVDZ
∥
0.028
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
∥
0.895
|H → L + 11⟩

|H → L + 11⟩
|H → L + 5⟩

aug-cc-pVTZ
∥
0.026
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩
∥
0.918
|H → L + 11⟩

|H → L + 11⟩
|H → L + 5⟩

S7


Table S17: Comparison of oscillator strengths and the dominant configurations contributing
to the many-particle wave functions for peaks I and the maximum intensity peak (peak VIII)
of B+
3 cluster calculated using different basis sets. The rest of the information is same as in
the caption of Table S11

Basis Set
Peak I
Peak VIII

Polarization
f
Wave-function
Polarization
f
Wave-function

6-311++G(2d,2p)
⊥
0.005
|H → L⟩
∥
0.508
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩

|H − 2 → L; H → L + 1⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩

6-311++G(3df,3pd)
⊥
0.005
|H → L⟩
∥
0.514
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩

|H − 1 → L; H → L + 1⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩

cc-PVDZ
⊥
0.007
|H → L⟩
∥
0.480
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩

|H − 1 → L; H → L + 1⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩

cc-pVTZ
⊥
0.005
|H → L⟩
∥
0.491
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩

|H − 1 → L; H → L + 1⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩

aug-cc-pVDZ
⊥
0.005
|H → L⟩
∥
0.467
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩

|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩

aug-cc-pVTZ
⊥
0.006
|H → L⟩
∥
0.519
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩

|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 3⟩

S8


Table S18: Many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in
the optical absorption spectrum of Li2 cluster for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set. ’E’ corresponds
to excitation energy (in eV) of an excited state, f denotes the oscillator strength for a
particular electric dipole transition. In the “|TDM|” column,we present the magnitudes of the
transition dipole moments (TDMs) to understand the extent of coupling between the relevant
excited state and the ground state. ∥ indicates photon polarization along the direction of
the molecule (longitudinal polarization), while ⊥ indicates polarization perpendicular to the
molecular axis (transverse polarization). ’H’ and ’L’ stand for HOMO and LUMO orbitals.
In the “Wave function” column, each number inside the parentheses denotes the coefficient
of the corresponding configuration in the CI wave function. GS indicates the ground states
wave function of the cluster.

Peak
E (eV)
f
|TDM|
Polarization
Wave function

GS
|HF⟩(0.9520)

|H → L + 7; H → L + 15⟩(0.0879)

I
1.83
0.454
3.184
∥
|H → L⟩(0.7523)

|H → L + 3⟩(0.3959)

II
2.57
0.966
2.770
⊥
|H → L + 2⟩(0.7046)
|H → L + 7⟩(0.5914)

III
3.87
0.049
0.509
⊥
|H → L + 7⟩(0.6291)
|H → L + 2⟩(0.5439)

V
5.42
0.024
0.303
⊥
|H → L + 16⟩(0.8509)

|H → L + 8; H → L + 16⟩(0.1702)

VI
5.93
0.026
0.421
∥
|H → L + 12⟩(0.2911)

|H → L; H → L + 8⟩(0.2523)

S9


Table S19: Many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in the
optical absorption spectrum of Li3 linear cluster for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set. The rest of the
information is same as in the caption of Table S18

Peak
E (eV)
f
|TDM|
Polarization
Wave function

GS
|H − 1 → H⟩(0.9246)

|H − 1 → L + 13⟩(0.0919)

I
0.72
0.106
2.453
∥
|HF⟩(0.8814)

|H − 1 → H; H − 1 → L + 5⟩(0.1436)

II
1.27
0.503
4.023
∥
|H − 1 → H; H − 1 → L⟩(0.5569)

|H − 1 → H; H − 1 → L + 5⟩(0.5102)

III
2.53
0.594
3.096
⊥
|H − 1 → L + 2⟩(0.6262)

|H − 1 → H; H − 1 → L + 11⟩(0.3628)

IV
3.37
0.215
1.141
⊥
|H − 1 → L + 7⟩(0.4255)
|H − 1 → L + 14⟩(0.4237)

V
3.89
0.011
0.343
∥
|H − 1 → L + 8⟩(0.4214)

|H − 1 → H; H − 1 → L + 13⟩(0.3520)

S10


Table S20: Many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in the
optical absorption spectrum of Li3 isosceles triangular cluster for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set.
The rest of the information is same as in the caption of TableS18

Peak
E (eV)
f
|TDM|
Polarization
Wave function

GS
|HF⟩(0.9102)

|H − 1 → H⟩(0.0933)

I
1.07
0.129
2.222
∥
|H → L + 13⟩(0.4241)
|H → L + 1⟩(0.4114)

II
1.42
0.020
0.767
∥
|H → L + 16⟩(0.5005)
|H − 1 → L⟩(0.4115)

III
2.11
0.352
2.611
∥
|H − 1 → H⟩(0.5806)

|H − 1 → L + 15⟩(0.2483)

IV
2.43
0.462
2.885
∥
|H − 1 → L⟩(0.5537)
|H → L + 5⟩(0.3869)

V
2.65
0.088
1.163
⊥
|H → L + 2⟩(0.5541)
|H → L + 12⟩(0.3375)

VI
2.95
0.267
1.922
⊥
|H − 1 → L + 2⟩(0.4766)
|H − 1 → L + 12⟩(0.4269)

VII
3.20
0.117
1.223
⊥
|H − 1 → L + 2⟩(0.3983)

|H → L + 12⟩(0.3579)

VIII
3.77
0.016
0.417
∥
|H → L + 10⟩(0.3841)
|H → L + 19⟩(0.3349)

IX
4.11
0.029
0.533
∥
|H − 1 → L + 14⟩(0.4375)

|H − 1 → L⟩(0.3910)

X
5.39
0.004
0.171
∥
|H → L + 35⟩(0.2813)
|H → L + 37⟩(0.2744)

S11


Table S21: Many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in
the optical absorption spectrum of Li4 cluster for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set. The rest of the
information is same as in the caption of Table S18

Peak
E (eV)
f
|TDM|
Polarization
Wave function

GS
|HF⟩(0.8913)

|(H − 1) → L; H → L + 18⟩(0.0791)

I
1.87
0.656
3.785
∥
|H → L + 1⟩(0.5922)
|H → L + 9⟩(0.4041)

II
2.65
0.660
3.188
∥
|H − 1 → L⟩(0.6193)

|H − 1 → L + 5⟩(0.2910)

III
2.93
0.316
2.098
⊥
|H → L + 7⟩(0.4577)
|H → L + 20⟩(0.4174)

IV
3.43
0.045
0.736
⊥
|H − 1 → L + 3⟩(0.3080)

|H → L + 7⟩(0.2299)

V
3.66
0.103
1.070
∥
|H → L + 6⟩(0.5653)
|H → L + 18⟩(0.3856)

VI
4.22
0.077
0.862
⊥
|H − 1 → L + 3⟩(0.2380)

|H → L + 20; H → L + 21⟩(0.2227)

VII
4.61
0.063
0.746
⊥
|H − 1 → L + 3⟩(0.4044)
|H − 1 → L + 12⟩(0.4026)

VIII
5.30
0.012
0.300
∥
|H → L + 33⟩(0.3681)

|H → L; H → L + 6⟩(0.2294)

Table S22: Many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in the
optical absorption spectrum of Be+
2 cluster for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set.
The rest of the
information is same as in the caption of Table S18

Peak
E (eV)
f
|TDM|
Polarization
Wave function

GS
|H → L⟩(0.9351)

|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩(0.1684)

I
1.74
0.120
1.680
∥
|H → L + 2⟩(0.8403)

|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩(0.3820)

II
3.67
0.121
0.821
⊥
|H → L + 3⟩(0.6705)
|H → L + 4⟩(0.6375)

III
4.19
0.386
1.940
∥
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩(0.7268)

|H → L + 2⟩(0.3897)

IV
6.01
0.201
0.827
⊥
|H − 1 → L⟩(0.6418)

|H − 1 → L; H → L + 1⟩(0.6116)

V
6.30
0.757
1.566
⊥
|H − 1 → L⟩(0.8762)

|H − 1 → L + 2; H → L + 3⟩(0.8573)

S12


Table S23: Many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in the
optical absorption spectrum of Be+
3 cluster for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set.
The rest of the
information is same as in the caption of Table S18

Peak
E (eV)
f
|TDM|
Polarization
Wave function

GS
|H → L⟩(.8776)

|H − 1 → L + 1; H → L⟩(.1913)

I
1.02
0.179
2.678702
∥
|H → L + 1⟩(0.8200)

|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩(0.3257)

II
3.16
0.433
2.365586
∥
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩(0.6152)

|H − 1 → L + 1; H → L + 1⟩(0.4714)

III
3.66
0.028
0.563211
⊥
|H − 2 → L; H → L + 2⟩(0.5209)

|H → L + 17⟩(0.4125)

IV
4.87
0.020
0.407823
⊥
|H − 1 → L + 1; H → L + 2⟩(0.5211)

|H → L + 17⟩(0.3217)

V
5.40
0.204
1.242734
∥
|H − 2 → L; H → L + 1⟩(0.6337)

|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩(0.3104)

VI
5.85
0.054
0.612656
⊥
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 4⟩(0.4315)

|H − 1 → L; H − 1 → L + 2; H → L⟩(0.2864)

VII
6.52
0.657
2.028291
⊥
|H − 2 → L; H → L + 2⟩(0.4960)
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 4⟩(0.4653)

Table S24: Many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in
the optical absorption spectrum of B+
2 cluster for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set. The rest of the
information is same as in the caption of Table S18

Peak
E (eV)
f
|TDM|
Polarization
Wave function

GS
|H → L⟩(.9033)

|H − 2 → L; H − 1 → L + 2⟩(.1271)

I
3.66
0.026
0.537
∥
|H − 1 → L; H → L⟩(0.7250)

|H → L + 11⟩(0.2622)

II
4.80
0.029
0.496
∥
|H − 1 → L + 1; H → L + 1⟩(0.5092)

|H − 1 → H⟩(0.4944)

III
5.99
0.019
0.364
⊥
|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩(0.6138)

|H − 2 → L⟩(0.4445)

IV
7.04
0.918
2.307
∥
|H → L + 11⟩(0.4808)
|H → L + 5⟩(0.4713)

V
7.65
0.009
0.216
⊥
|H − 2 → L⟩(0.5322)

|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩(0.4844)

S13


Table S25: Many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in
the optical absorption spectrum of B+
3 cluster for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set. The rest of the
information is same as in the caption of Table S18

Peak
E (eV)
f
|TDM|
Polarization
Wave function

GS
|HF⟩(0.8535)

|H − 1 → L + 1⟩(0.1393)

I
0.84
0.006
0.524
⊥
|H → L⟩(0.8572)

|H − 1 → L; H → L + 2⟩(0.1319)

II
3.22
0.083
0.726
∥
|H − 1 → L⟩(0.8246)

|H − 1 → L; H − 1 → L + 1⟩(0.1642)

III
5.01
0.053
0.463
∥
|H − 1 → L; H − 1 → L⟩(0.5482)

|H → L; H → L + 1⟩(0.3184)

IV
5.45
0.013
0.217
∥
|H → L; H → L + 1⟩(0.5721)
|H → L; H → L + 2⟩(0.5675)

V
6.03
0.026
0.295
∥
|H → L + 3⟩(0.3937)

|H − 1 → L + 2⟩(0.3723)

VI
7.16
0.026
0.382
∥
|H → L + 1; H → L + 2⟩(0.5866)

|H → L; H → L + 1⟩(0.4308)

VII
8.08
0.059
0.380
∥
|H − 1 → L; H − 1 → L + 1⟩(0.4529)
|H − 1 → L; H − 1 → L + 2⟩(0.3162)

VIII
8.85
0.519
1.091
∥
|H → L + 3; H − 1 → L⟩(0.3762)
|H → L + 3; H − 1 → L⟩(0.3748)

Figure S1: Validation of frozen core approximation for the optical absorption spectra of Li2
cluster employing QCI method.

S14


Figure S2: Validation of frozen core approximation for the optical absorption spectra of Be+
2
cluster employing QCI method.

Figure S3: Optical absorption spectra of B+
3 cluster computed using various basis sets em-
ploying B3LYP functional and TD-DFT method.

S15


