DISCOVERY OF 2D MATERIALS USING TRANSFORMER
NETWORK BASED GENERATIVE DESIGN ∗

Rongzhi Dong
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC 29201

Yuqi Song
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC 29201

Edirisuriya M. D. Siriwardane
Department of Physics
University of Colombo
Colombo 00300, Sri Lanka

Jianjun Hu *
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC 29201
jianjunh@cse.sc.edu

ABSTRACT

Two-dimensional (2D) materials have wide applications in superconductors, quantum, and topologi-
cal materials. However, their rational design is not well established, and currently less than 6,000
experimentally synthesized 2D materials have been reported. Recently, deep learning, data-mining,
and density functional theory (DFT)-based high-throughput calculations are widely performed to
discover potential new materials for diverse applications. Here we propose a generative material
design pipeline, namely material transformer generator(MTG), for large-scale discovery of hypo-
thetical 2D materials. We train two 2D materials composition generators using self-learning neural
language models based on Transformers with and without transfer learning. The models are then
used to generate a large number of candidate 2D compositions, which are fed to known 2D materials
templates for crystal structure prediction. Next, we performed DFT computations to study their
thermodynamic stability based on energy-above-hull and formation energy. We report four new
DFT-verified stable 2D materials with zero e-above-hull energies, including NiCl4, IrSBr, CuBr3, and
CoBrCl. Our work thus demonstrates the potential of our MTG generative materials design pipeline
in the discovery of novel 2D materials and other functional materials.

Keywords deep learning · transformer network · materials discovery · 2D materials · crystal structure prediction

1
Introduction

Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been emerging as a promsing functional materials with wide applications due to
the novel fundamental physics with the reduced dimension[1] The systematic discovery and synthesis of functional
2D materials has been the focus of many studies[2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Having exceptional and tunable properties,
2D materials hold strong promise in semiconductor, energy, and health applications[9, 10]. Since the 2010 Nobel
prize-winning discovery of graphenes[11] with a simple 2D structure of carbon atoms but with attractive and complex
physics, only a few thousands of distinct 2D materials have been successfully synthesized[5]. The isolation of single
graphene sheets, which proves that 2D systems can exist, gives rise to the discovery of many 2D materials with unique
superconducting[12], electronic[13], magnetic[14], and topological properties[15]. In addition to being test beds for
studying the behavior of systems in reduced dimensions, 2D materials hold great promise for various applications in
optoelectronics[16], catalysis[17], and the energy sector[18]. The research effort has been mainly concentrated on the
systems which have bulk counterparts representing anisotropic crystals with layers held together by van der Waals
(vdW) forces, with the most prominent example being the graphene and graphite. The weak interlayer interaction leads

∗Citation: Authors. Title. Pages.... DOI:000000/11111.

arXiv:2301.05824v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  14 Jan 2023


2D materials discovery

to a natural structural separation of the 2D subunits in the crystals, therefore making the mechanical or liquid-phase
exfoliation possible.

Currently, there are three approaches for generating 2D materials: the top-down exfoliation method starts with a bulk
material and exfoliates to make it thinner and peel the layers to obtain 2D materials; the bottom-up approach instead
starts with existing 2D materials and uses element substitution to generate new materials. The third one is the de
novo structure generation approach[3] based on deep learning generative models such as CDVAE[19]. To get new 2D
materials through the exfoliation method, we need to judge whether the 3D bulk material is layered so that it can be
exfoliated. The layer screening process first checks the distance between atoms to identify whether these atom pairs are
bonded. It then calculates the bonded atom clusters both in a 3x3x3 supercell and the unit cell. If the number of clusters
in the supercell is three times that in the unit cell, the structure is tagged as layered[20]. 2D materials are theoretically
exfoliated by extracting one cluster in the standard conventional unit cell of the screened layered bulk structures. In the
element substitution method, all the elements of the periodic table are categorized into different groups according to
their column number. Elements with the same column (group) number share the same number of electrons in their
outermost orbit, and elements with the same row (period) number share the same number of electronic layers, which
means that elements in the same group or neighbor share some similar chemical properties. The substitution method
starts with the structure of a known 2D material and replaces one or more element in this material with other elements
either in the same group or its neighbor elements.

Both the element substitution method and the de novo generation method start with known 2D crystal structures.
Currently, there are several open-source 2D material databases generated through exfoliation, substitution, or de novo
generation methods. The Computational 2D Materials Database (C2DB)[21, 5] uses both exfoliation and substitution
methods to organize a wealth of computed properties for 4038 (checked in October 2022) atomically thin 2D materials.
The materials in the C2DB comprise both experimentally known and not previously synthesized structures. They have
been generated in a systematic fashion by the combinatorial decoration of different 2D crystal lattices. Starting from
108,423 unique, experimentally known 3D compounds, MC2D[6] uses only the exfoliation method to identify a subset
of 5,619 compounds that appear layered according to robust geometric and bonding criteria (checked in October 2022).
High-throughput calculations using van der Waals density functional theory (DFT) validated against experimental
structural data and calculating random phase approximation binding energies further allowed the identification of
1,825 compounds that can be either easily or potentially be exfoliated. 2D Materials Encyclopedia (2DMatPedia)
database[22, 2] screened all bulk materials in the database of Materials Project for layered structures by a topology-
based detection algorithm and theoretically exfoliated them into monolayers. Then, new 2D materials are generated
by applying chemical substitution of elements in known 2D materials by other elements from the same group in the
periodic table. There are a total of 6351 materials in the current 2DMatPedia database (checked in December 2022),
whereas 2940 were obtained by exfoliating existing layered materials (top-down approach), 3409 were obtained by
the chemical substitution of 2D materials (bottom-up approach), and 2 were obtained from the literature via neither a
top-down or bottom-up approach. The bottom-up approach starts from the 35 unary and 755 binary compounds obtained
from the top-down approach. Only the same-column elements are used for substitution. By employing 22 different 2D
crystal prototypes and 52 different chemical elements from the periodic table, Virtual 2D Materials Database (V2DB)[4]
applied a brute-force substitution method to generate a systematic library of more than 72 million 2D compounds. Next,
symmetry, neutrality, and stability sequential filtering layers are applied to identify 316,505 likely stable 2D materials.

Materials Cloud[23] provides a practical yet straightforward approach to assessing whether any 3D compound can be
exfoliated into 2D layers. The multistep procedure starts by pre-screening layered structures based on geometrical
criteria requiring only the atomic positions of the atoms in the structure. The resulting filtered structures are featurized,
and finally, an ML model based on a random forest classifier is applied to assess whether the material can be exfoliated
or, instead, has high binding energy (HBE). Friedrich et al.[24] outlined a new set of non-vdW 2D materials by
employing data-driven concepts and extensive calculations. By filtering the AFLOW-ICSD database according to the
structural prototype of the two experimentally realized systems Fe2O3 and FeTiO3, they have obtained 8 binary and 20
ternary 2D material candidates. The most recent approach for 2D material generation is based on the deep learning
generative model. Lyngby et al.[3] use a crystal diffusion variational autoencoder (CDVAE)[19] to generate new 2D
structures of high chemical and structural diversity and with formation energies mirroring the training structures. They
also use the element substitution method to generate new possible 2D materials based on the newly generated 2D
structures. In total, they find 11630 predicted new 2D materials, where 3073 are generated by CDVAE and 8,599 come
from element substitution of these 3073 structures. They find that 2,004 of their generated 2D candidates are within 50
meV of the convex hull and could potentially be synthesised. In order to capture all these structural features of 2D and
quasi-2D materials, Wang et al.[25] developed a new 2D structure search module in CALYPSO code that is based on
2D PSO algorithm but allows the relaxation of atomic coordinates in the perpendicular direction. They predicted a new
family BxNy with different chemical compositions that have layered structures.

2


2D materials discovery

Here we propose a computational pipeline, material transformer generator(MTG), for generative discovery of new 2D
materials (and other crystal materials). Our method is based on combining a 2D composition generator trained with
known 2D material compositions, two template based crystal structure predictors, two machine learning potential-based
structure relaxers, and DFT relaxation. Extensive experiments show that our MTG pipeline can be used discover a large
number of hypothetical 2D materials.

2
Method

Figure 1: Architecture of our material transformer generator(MTG) pipeline. BLMM is a tranformer neural network
based composition generator. TCSP and CSPML are template based crystal structure prediction algorithms; and
BOWSR and M3GNET are machine learning potential based structure relaxing algorithms. DFT relaxation is a
first-principles calculation method.

Figure1 (a) shows how the framework of our MTG pipeline for 2D material generation. We collected known 2D
formulas and their structures from open datasets C2DB, MC2D, 2DMatPedia, and V2DB. We then train a set of BLMM
(blank language models for materials) composition generators with known 2d formulas to generate new 2D formulas.
Next, we use known 2D structures as templates for structure prediction of these candidate 2D formulas using two crystal
structure prediction algorithms TCSP and CSPML. TCSP is a template-based crystal structure prediction algorithm
based on oxidation state patterns. CSPML is a machine learning-based crystal structure prediction method using a
machine learning model to select templates. For a given new 2D formula such as SrTiO3, both models will first select all
template structures with prototype ABC3, but they are very different when sorting all these templates. TCSP calculates
the element mover distance score and elements oxidation states, which focus on element distance. However, CSPML
selects candidates using structural similarity. This structure similarity measure uses only the topological features of the
atomic coordinates and does not use any information about the elemental composition. After choosing the appropriate
templates and generating new 2D structures, we use two machine learning potential-based relaxation algorithms to
optimize the structures. The first one is BOWSR which is a Bayesian optimization with symmetry relaxation. The
second one is M3GNET, which uses materials graph neural networks with 3-body interactions as energy estimation
model for structure relaxation. The BOWSR algorithm relaxes each structure by changing the independent lattice
parameters and atomic coordinates to obtain lower potential energy. During relaxation, the M3GNET algorithm takes
all atom coordinates and the 3X3 lattice matrix into consideration. The attributes of the bond, atom, and state are
updated in order. For each attribute update, all previous attributes of these three parameters are considered. After all
these operations, for all generated 2D formulas, we obtain near-equilibrium relaxed structures. After the fast machine
learning potential-based relaxation, we further apply the DFT-based relaxation procedure to optimize the structures.
Finally, we calculate the formation energy and e-above-hull energy of top structures to evaluate the final performance.

2.1
BLMM: Transformer based 2D material composition generation

The material composition can be mapped into a sequence generation problem as a composition such as SiTiO3 can be
conveniently expanded into a specific sequence (e.g. Si Ti O O O) sorted by the electronegativities of the elements.
The BLMM model is a composition generator built on the latest transformer deep neural network models, shown to be
excellent on sequence learning and sequence generation. By adopting the self-attention mechanism to weighting the
significance of all tokens in the input sequence, the transformer model[26] has been proved as the state-of-the-art in

3


2D materials discovery

the fields of natural language processing and computer vision. Based on the traditional transformer, Shen et.al.[27]
proposed a blank language model (BLM) which could generate sequences by dynamically creating and filling in blanks.
Our BLMM composition generator[28] is developed based on the BLM blank-filling model. All material formulas can
be rewritten as sequences (e.g., SiTiO3 to Si Ti O O O) composed of a vocabulary with 118 or fewer elements. We
then train a BLMM based 2D composition generator using our 2D materials dataset. The architecture of the BLMM
algorithm is shown in Figure2. Generation starts with a single blank and ends when there is no blank. In each step, the
model selects a blank, predicts a word w, and replaces the blank with the word w and possibly adjoining blanks. By
repeating this blank selecting and filling process, a blank can be expanded to any number of words. Then we use this
well-trained BLMM model to generate new 2D compositions. After getting the generated compositions, we first remove
duplicate compositions that are already included in known 2D datasets and then take the nonredundant formulas as our
new 2D material candidates to be fed to the step of template-based 2D material structure prediction.

Figure 2: BLMM architecture [28].

2.2
Template based 2D material structure prediction

Currently, generic crystal structure prediction is still an unsolved problem despite that global optimization-based
algorithms such as USPEX and CALYPSO can be applied to solve structures for small systems. On the other hand,
we find that, similar to bulk materials[29, 30, 31], most existing 2D material structures can be categorized into a
very limited number of structure prototypes, which implies that their structures can be obtained using template-based
elemental substitution.

After composition generation and duplicate checking, we obtain a 2D material composition candidates dataset. To gain
the probable structures of all candidates, we use two different template-based element substitution methods to select the
most similar structure template and then use element substitution to generate target structures. The crystal structure
generated by these two methods has the same lattice parameters and atomic coordinates as the template structure and
needs to be further relaxed.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Template-based CSP algorithms. (a) TCSP architecture.[32]. (b) CSPML architecture[33]

4


2D materials discovery

TCSP: is a template-based crystal structure prediction algorithm.
The architecture of the TCSP algorithm is
shown in Figure3 (a). For a given candidate 2D material formula, the TCSP algorithm first searches all known 2D
material structure templates that share the same composition prototype as this formula (e.g., SiTiO3 has prototype
ABC3). The Element’s mover distance(ElMD)[34] is used to measure the compositional similarity between the query
formula and compositions of all possible template structures. It then picks the top 5 structures with the smallest
compositional distances as the candidate templates . For each of these candidate templates, we use the Pymatgen[35]
package to check whether it has the same oxidation states as the query formula. Templates with identical oxidation
states are then added to the final template list. If no such templates are found, all five of the top structures are taken as
the final templates. Pymatgen’s StructureMatcher module is then used to reduce the redundant template structures. For
each structure cluster, only one of these structures can be kept, which can significantly reduce the number of similar
structure templates. After the templates of the query formula are designated, the algorithm then enumerates all of the
possible element substitution pairs between the query and template formulas as Algorithm A2 in Ref[32]. It is possible
that there are several element pair substitutions in one template to get the target formula. A replacement quality score
is then calculated by summing the ElMD of all element pairs’ substitution arrangements. This score represents how
similar the substitution element pairs are. A lower score means higher similarity and thus higher quality.

CSPML is a machine learning-based crystal structure prediction algorithm.
CSPML relies on metric
learning[36] for crystal structure prediction, which can select template structures from known structure databases
with high similarity to the given composition. Metric learning uses a binary classifier to distinguish whether two
given compositions have similar structures as defined by a similarity threshold of local structure order parameters
(LoStOPs)[37]. The architecture of the CSPML algorithm is shown in Figure3 (b). For a given 2D formula, CSPML
first restricts the candidates to structures with the same compositional ratio (e.g., SiTiO3 has a composition ratio of
1:1:3). The compositional descriptor of query formula and templates is then calculated by XenonPy[38]. XenonPy
provides 58 physicochemical features for each element. For a given composition, by calculating the weighted mean,
weighted sum, weighted variance, min-pooling, and max-pooling of all elements, XenonPy generates a 290-dimensional
(58x5) descriptor vector. A traditional multi-layer perceptron (MLP) is used to figure out how similar the template
structure and the query formula are. The absolute difference between two compositional descriptors is used as the
input. We pick the top five template structures with the biggest similarity scores with the query formula as the template
candidates. The structure of the query formula is then generated by replacing the atoms in the templates with atoms in
the query composition. When two or more elements have the same composition ratio, the substitution element pairs
are not uniquely determined. In such cases, we substitute a pair of elements with the most similar physicochemical
properties, as described in Ref[33].

2.3
Structure relaxation

Accurately predicting novel stable crystal structures and their properties is a fundamental goal in computation-guided
materials discovery. While ab initio approaches such as density functional theory (DFT) have been phenomenally
successful in this regard, their high computational cost and poor scalability have limited their broad application across
the vast chemical and structural spaces. To circumvent this limitation, machine learning has emerged as a new paradigm
for developing efficient surrogate models for predicting material properties at scale. In this paper, after gaining basic
structures from template-based element substitution methods, we apply and compare two different machine-learning
potential-based structure relaxation methods.

BOWSR: Bayesian optimization with symmetry relaxation algorithm
BOWSR is a graph-based neural network-
based structure relaxation algorithm that uses Bayesian optimization as an optimizer. Bayesian optimization is an
adaptive strategy for the global optimization of functions. In the crystal structure relaxation problem, the target function
that needs to be optimized is the potential energy surface, which describes the energy of the crystal structure. During
the relaxation process of the BOWSR algorithm, the symmetry of the lattice and the Wyckoff positions of the atoms are
limited. Only the independent lattice parameters and atomic coordinates are allowed to change. The BOWSR algorithm
sets parameters for each structure based on these changeable, independent lattice parameters and atomic coordinates.
The potential energy surface of each training observation is calculated by a graph neural network (MEGNet) energy
model, which is trained with 12,277 stable structures with DFT-calculated formation energies. Bayesian optimization is
then used to relax structures iteratively towards states with lower energies.

The geometry relaxation of a structure of N atoms requires optimizing 3N + 6 variables, 3 fractional coordinates for
each atom, and 6 lattice parameters in total. By keeping the symmetry the same during the relaxation process, it can
reduce the number of independent variables. New structures are generated by Bayesian optimization, which minimizes
the formation energy, and the changed variables are then used as inputs to predict new energy. The previous step is

5


2D materials discovery

then repeated multiple times until the formation energy reaches the lowest point or reaches the maximum number of
iterations. The final structure is the BOWSR relaxation results.

M3GNET: materials graph neural networks with 3-body interactions
M3GNet (M3GNET) is a new materials
graph neural network architecture that incorporates 3-body interactions for formation energy prediction. It combines
graph-based deep learning interatomic potential (IAP) and many-body features of traditional IAPs with those of
flexible graph material representations. The inputs of the M3GNet model are position-included graphs. The atomic
numbers of elements and the pair bond distance in the input graph are embedded as graph features. The three-body and
many-body interaction atom indices and angles are calculated by the many-body computation module. The bond and
atom information is then updated through a graph convolution module.

A key difference with prior materials graph implementations such as MEGNet is the addition of the coordinates for
atoms and the 3x3 lattice matrix in crystals, which are necessary for obtaining tensorial quantities such as forces and
stresses via auto-differentiation. The difference of M3GNet with BOWSR’s GNN potential is that it is trained with both
stable structures and unstable structures. The M3GNet-based relaxation algorithm [39] is also different from BOWSR’s
Bayesian optimization. It uses an algorithm named FIRE, which is derived from molecular dynamics with additional
velocity modifications and adaptive time steps and inertia to achieve fast inertial relaxation engine. The ability of a
M3GNet-based relaxing algorithm to accurately and rapidly relax arbitrary crystal structures and predict their energies
makes it ideal for large-scale materials discovery.

2.4
DFT calculations

We carried out the first-principles calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT) using the Vienna ab initio
simulation package (VASP)[40, 41, 42, 43] to optimize the candidate structures suggested by the machine learning
models. The projected augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials were used to treat the electron-ion interactions[44, 45]
with 520 eV plane-wave cutoff energy. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) based Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof
(PBE) method was considered for the exchange-correlation functions [46, 47]. The energy convergence criterion was
10−5 eV and the force convergence criterion was 10−2 eV/Å for all the DFT calculations. The Brillouin zone integration
for the unit cells was performed employing the Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack k-meshes. The formation energies (in
eV/atom) of the materials were determined employing the formula in Eq. 1, where E[Material] is the total energy per
unit formula of the target structure, E[Ai] is the energy of ith element of the material, xi indicates the number of Ai
atoms in a unit formula, and n is the total number of atoms in a unit formula(n = �

i xi). The Pymatgen code[35] was
used to compute the energy above hull values of the materials with negative formation energies.

Eform = 1

n(E[Material] −
�

i
xiE[Ai])
(1)

2.5
Evaluation criteria

We use a series of performance metrics to evaluate our 2D material generation pipeline. To evaluate the BLMM 2D
material composition generator, we calculate the validity, uniqueness, recovery rate, and novelty. Formation energy is
used as an indicator to evaluate the template-based 2D structure generator and relaxer. To further verify the structures,
we use VASP to calculate the energy-above-the-hull.

Validity. For all formulas generated by the BLMM algorithm, we use Semiconducting Materials by Analogy and
Chemical Theory(SMACT)[48] to check whether they obey the charge neutrality and electronegativity (CNEN) rules.

Uniqueness. Uniqueness percentage is calculated by using the number of unique samples divided by the total generated
samples. The uniqueness indicator shows the BLMM model’s ability to generate diverse samples.

Recovery Rate and Novelty. To check the BLMM model’s capability to generate novel materials, we calculate the
recovery rate and novelty of generated formulas. The recovery rate shows the percentage of training samples that have
been rediscovered. Novelty shows how many new samples have been generated.

Formation energy. The way to evaluate the structure generation models is to check the stability of generated structures.
For structures generated and relaxed through our pipeline, we calculate their formation energy using M3GNET.

Energy above convex hull. The energy convex hull [49] is generated based on existing stable structures. Structures
with energy lying on the convex hull are thermodynamically stable, and the ones above it are either metastable or
unstable. For all structures with negative formation energy, we use the energy above convex hull as a further filter to
select more stable structures.

6


2D materials discovery

2.6
Hyperparameters and training

For 2D formula generation, each BLMM model trained on 2D datasets generates 100,000 samples. After generation,
we use the TCSP and CSPML methods separately to generate structure candidates for these samples. BOWSR and
M3GNET are then used to relax generated structures. Table1 shows the hyperparameters used in the BLMM, TCSP,
CSPML, BOWSR, and M3GNET models. In the BLMM model, we use an element vocabulary with size 130, and
the generated formula sequence length is limited to 205. The maximum number of tokens per batch is set to 40,000,
and the number of training steps is set to 200,000. The candidate template structure number of both the TCSP and
CSPML models is set to 10. And only the top 5 candidates, sorted by ElMD and XenenPy, respectively, can be used as
real templates. Relax method BOWSR uses a Bayesian optimizer with initial points 1000, iteration steps 1000, and
seed number 42. The M3GNET relax method uses FIRE[50] optimizer with a 0.1 total force tolerance for relaxation
convergence and 500 relax steps.

Table 1: Hyperparameters used in models.

TCSP
CSPML
BLMM

candidate
10
candidate
10
data workers
32

top
5
top
5
max steps
200000

sort
ElMD
sort
XenonPy
max token
40000

filter
ratio
filter
ratio
vocab size
130

filter
oxidation
max len
205

BOWSR
M3GNET

optimizer
Bayesian Optimizer
optimizer
FIRE

initial points
100
force tolerance
0.1

iteration steps
100
relax steps
500

seed
42

3
Results

3.1
Datasets

As shown in Table2, our template-based 2D materials generation models are trained using the materials downloaded
from the C2DB[21, 5], MC2D[6], 2DMatPedia[22, 2], and V2DB[4] databases with a total of 328,719 formula samples
and 12,214 structures. The C2DB dataset was initially generated by decorating an experimentally known crystal
structure prototype with atoms chosen from a (chemically reasonable) subset of the periodic table. The MC2D dataset
starts from experimentally known 3D compounds and finds 1,825 compounds that are either easily or potentially
exfoliate. The 2DMatPedia dataset is searched from the Materials Project database[51] and uses exfoliate first to find
possible 2D structures, and new structures generated by exfoliation are then used as templates of element substitution.
The generation of the V2DB dataset employs the brute-force element substitution method. This method generated
72,522,240 possible combinations of 2D materials and only 0.4% of these passed the symmetry, neutrality, and stability
validation.

In this work, we separated these 2D samples into two datasets. The first one is an experimental dataset (exp2d for short)
with 4,023 formulas and corresponding structures from the C2DB and MC2D datasets. The second dataset (all2d for
short) contains the all the samples in the above-mentioned our known 2D databases with a total of 302,174 unique
formulas and 8,019 structures.

Table 2: Open source datasets used in 2D material discovery.

Dataset
Formula
Structure
Type
From
Exfoliation
Substitution

C2DB
4038
4038
experimental
known 2D crystal structure prototype
N/A
all

MC2D
1825
1825
experimental
known 3D compounds
all
N/A

2DMatPedia
6351
6351
calculate
Material Project
2940
3409

V2DB
316505
N/A
calculate
22 known 2D crystal prototypes
N/A
all

7


2D materials discovery

3.2
Composition generation performance

We use the BLMM algorithm to generate new 2D material compositions based on two different datasets, the experimental
2D dataset, exp2d, and an all 2D dataset, all2d. For each dataset, we train a generation model using these formulas and
then use these well-trained models to generate new formulas. We also use transfer learning to train BLMM models on
the materials project database and then fine-tune these pre-trained models using our two datasets, which are named
all2d-transfer and exp2d-transfer, respectively. Four composition generation models are trained to generate 100,000
formulas separately. The generated results are shown in Table3. Furthermore, to check whether generated formulas
are chemically valid, we employ two filters to check their charge neutrality (CN) and electronegativity (EN), this
checking step is called CNEN for short. The results are shown in Table3, 93.3%, 67.1%, 93.2%, and 67.0% generated
compositions passed the CNEN check. Besides, we remove duplicate composition in each model, and they achieve
65.8%, 26.5%, 69.4%, and 21.0% uniqueness respectively. We also calculate the recovery rate and novelty of these
generational models. As we can see in the Table 3, their recovery rates are 0.6%, 9.2%, 0.6%, and 11.2% while the
novelties are 63.7%, 24.6%, 67.5%, and 18.8%. This evaluation demonstrates that our methods have the ability to
generate stable and innovative compositions that form stable 2D structures. Since the exp2d dataset is smaller than
the all2d dataset, the BLMM model trained with the exp2d dataset has much fewer samples to learn from and use
for interpolation. Thus, the BLMM model trained with the exp2d dataset has lower validity, uniqueness, and novelty
percentages than the BLMM model trained with the all2d dataset. However, the recovery rate of the BLMM model
trained with fewer samples is higher because the interpolation space is smaller and the interpolated results generated by
the BLMM model are more likely to be the same as the training samples. The composition generator pre-trained with
the materials project database and fine-tuned with the all2d dataset achieves higher uniqueness and novelty compared
with the generator only trained with the all2d dataset. However, due to the lack of sufficient transfer learning samples,
the BLMM model fine-tuned with the exp2d dataset has lower uniqueness and novelty compared with the BLMM
model trained with the exp2d dataset.

Table 3: Composition generation results.

all2d
exp2d
all2d-transfer
exp2d-transfer

Generated results
100000
100000
100000
100000

Validity
93.3%
67.1%
93.2%
67.0%

Uniqueness
65.8%
26.5%
69.4%
21.0%

Recover rate
0.6%
9.2%
0.6%
11.2%

Novelty
63.7%
24.6%
67.5%
18.8%

3.3
Distribution of generated candidate 2D compositions

To check the composition generation performance of BLMM, we plot the element distribution of compositions in
the 2DMatPedia dataset and our generated samples in Figure4, where (a) and (b) show the element frequency in
compositions in the 2DMatPedia dataset and the BLMM model generated dataset, respectively. Here we take the
BLMM model trained with the exp2d dataset as an example. The top 5 most frequent elements in the 2DMatpedia
dataset are O, S, F, Te, and Cl. Out of the total 6,351 formulas, element O has appeared 1,642 times, or about 26% of
the 2Dmatpedia dataset. The occurrences of the elements S, F, Te, and Cl are 653, 598, 586, and 584, respectively. The
top 5 most frequent elements in our generated dataset are Se, O, S, Te, and Cl. The element Se has shown 13,294 times
out of the whole set of 67,103 formulas, which is about 20% of the whole generated dataset. The elements O, S, Te,
and Cl appear 12,591, 11,440, 9,546, and 8,829 times respectively. Overall, we find that four out of the top five most
common elements in these two datasets are the same, and six in the top ten most common elements are also the same,
indicating that the BLMM generator has learned the key composition preferences of 2D materials.

We also analyze the distribution of element pairs in the known 2D dataset and our generation results. To count the
frequencies of element pairs, we take each of the possible 2-element combinations from the element set and count the
number of compositions that contain this pair (we ignore the order of the two elements in the pair). The distribution of
the top 50 element pairs in the 2DMatPedia and our generation datasets are shown in Figure5 (a) and (b), respectively.
The top 5 most frequent element pairs in the 2DMatpedia dataset are H-O, P-O, Li-O, V-O, and Bi-O. However, only
the H-O element pair is shown in the top 5 of our generation results. The other 4 element pairs in our generation results
are C-O, N-O, Cl-O, and H-C. These two datasets only share 2 common element pairs in the top 10 most frequent ones.

To verify whether our newly generated compositions share a similar distribution with the known 2D compositions, we
use the t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding(t-SNE)[52] technique to map the one-hot matrix of compositions
to their corresponding formation energy. Each point in Figure6 corresponds to one formula and the colors represent the

8


2D materials discovery

(a)
(b)

Figure 4: Elements distribution in training and generating samples. (a)Element distribution in the 2DMatPedia dataset.
(b)Element distribution in BLMM model generated samples.

(a)
(b)

Figure 5: Top 50 element pairs distribution in training and generating samples. (a)Element pairs distribution in
2DMatPedia dataset. (b) Element pairs distribution in generated samples by BLMM model trained with exp2d dataset.

formation energy levels. Figure6 (a) shows the formation energy distribution of the 2DMatPedia samples. It can be
found that most samples have formation energy between 0 and -3 eV/atom. Figure6 (b) displays the formation energy
distribution of our generated compositions by BLMM-exp2d, which are developed through the following pipeline:
firstly, we train the BLMM model using the exp2d dataset and generate compositions; next, we generate candidate
structures using the TCSP method and then relax these structures using the M3GNET model; thirdly, the formation
energies of these structures are predicted by the M3GNET method. As the BLMM model is trained by adding and
filling in blanks in existing materials, it has a strong interpolation capability when generating new samples. Therefore,
the newly generated samples are always located around known samples.

3.4
Stability distribution of generated samples

Another way to check the quality of samples generated by our pipeline is to measure their formation energies and
compare their distribution to that of the training set. We use formation energies predicted by the ML potentials M3GNET
of both training samples and generated results.

We first check the formation energy distribution of a special material family AB2, which is the most frequent prototype
in all existing 2D datasets: C2DB, MC2D, and 2DMatPedia. There are 1,288 AB2 samples in the exp2d dataset,
and 1,928 AB2 samples in our generated structures. The distributions of energies of these two datasets are shown in
Figure7(a).

Next, we check the structure-based formation energy distribution of the whole exp2d dataset samples and compare it
with those of our generated samples. Figure7(b) shows that these two set of structures have similar formation energy,
which means that new structures generated through our MTG pipeline are of high quality.

Figure7(c) compares the energy distribution of samples in the exp2d training set with samples generated through
out MTG pipeline. These compositions are generated by the BLMM model trained with four different datasets, as
introduced in section 3.1. The energy distributions of formulas generated by BLMM trained with the all2d dataset

9


2D materials discovery

(a)
(b)

Figure 6: Formation energy distributions in the training (2DMatPedia) and generated samples(BLMM-exp2d). (a)
Formation energy distribution in the 2DMatPedia dataset. (b) Formation energy distribution in generated samples.

and trained with the MP dataset but finetuned using the all2d dataset are very similar to each other. Same situation in
BLMM models trained and finetuned with the exp2d dataset.

10


2D materials discovery

(a)
(b)

(c)

Figure 7: Formation energy per atom distribution. (a) Formation energy distribution of AB2 type structures in the
exp2d dataset and generated through our MTG pipeline (predicted by M3GNET). (b) Formation energy distribution of
structures in the exp2d dataset and structures generated by our MTG-exp2d pipeline (formation energy predicted by
M3GNET). (c) Formation energy distribution of compositions in the exp2d dataset and structures generated by our
MTG pipelines (BLMM models trained by all four datasets, formation energies predicted by M3GNET).

3.5
Discovery results

Our MTG pipeline generates 148,563 candidate 2D formulas. For each formula, we generate 10 structures using TCSP
and CSPML and then we do M3GNET based structure relaxation and we pick the top 1 structure with the lowest energy.
Then we conduct DFT-based relaxation to generate final structures.

Figure8 shows how we generated new structures based on specific template structures and how to relax newly generated
structures to make them more stable. For formula K4Cr2Ge4Te2 generated by the BLMM algorithm, we first select the
structure templates for predicting its crystal structure. As shown in Figure8 (a), TCSP picked Na4Ti2S4O2, a layered
material, as the template structure. Figure8 (b) is then created through the TCSP algorithm. After relaxing by M3GNET,
we get a more stable structure as shown in Figure8 (c). This relaxed structure is then sent to VASP to do further DFT
relaxation and energy calculations. We can find that Figure8 (a) and (b) are more similar as in (b) only elemental
substitutions are applied in the structure (a) with no atomic coordinate fine-tuning. Figure8 (c) changed the coordinates
based on atom sizes and bond types to make this structure more structurally stable. A similar procedure is applied to
discover the structure of K4Cr2Sn4, via the three steps as shown in Figure 8 (d,e,f).

Figure9 shows four new 2D structures discovered through our MTG pipeline that have 0 e-above-hull energy (See cif
information in Supplementary file). All the structures show a layered structure with each layer forming a compact 2D
structure, demonstrating that they have passed the DFT stability check and the capability of our generative 2D materials
design pipeline to find new 2D materials.

11


2D materials discovery

(a) Template structure Na4Ti2S4O2
(b) Generated structure K4Cr2Ge4Te2
(c) Relaxed structure K4Cr2Ge4Te2

(d) Template structure Na2Cl2O4
(e) Generated structure K4Cr2Sn4
(f) Relaxed structure K4Cr2Sn4

Figure 8: Illustration of the structure generation and relaxation process of our MTG pipeline. (a) to (c) shows the
template structure, structure upon element substitution, and the fine-tuned structure after ML potential based relaxation
for predicting the structure of K4Cr2Ge4Te2. (d) to (f) shows the similar process for K4Cr2Sn4.

(a) NiCl4
(b) IrSBr
(c) CuBr3
(d) CoBrCl

Figure 9: Four new 2D structures discovered by our MTG pipeline with 0 E-above-hull energy.

12


2D materials discovery

4
Conclusion

Two-dimensional materials have wide applications due to their unique properties. Here we propose a generative
design pipeline for 2D materials discovery by integrating a transformer-based 2D material composition generator, two
template-based crystal structure predictors, and a graph neural network potential-based structure relaxation algorithm. It
is found that the transformer composition generator can capture the composition preference which allows it to generate
chemically valid potential 2D materials. We have applied our 2D generator pipeline to discover four hypothetical 2D
materials with e-above-hull energy less than 0. Our pipeline is generic and can be used to train other types of materials’
generative design models.

5
Code Availability

The BLMM material composition generator is accessible at https://github.com/usccolumbia/blmm. The TCSP template-
based structure predictor can be accessed at http://materialsatlas.org/crystalstructure. The CSPML template-based
structure predictor can be found at https://github.com/Minoru938/CSPML. The BOWSR structure relaxation algorithm
can be found at https://github.com/materialsvirtuallab/maml. M3GNet relaxation module can be downloaded from
https://github.com/materialsvirtuallab/m3gnet.

6
Data Availability

The
V2DB
database
is
available
at
Harvard
Dataverse
https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/SNCZF4.
The
C2DB database is available at https://cmrdb.fysik.dtu.dk/c2db/.
The MC2D database is available at
https://www.materialscloud.org/discover/mc2d/dashboard/ptable.
The 2DMatPedia database is available at
http://www.2dmatpedia.org/.

7
Contribution

Conceptualization, J.H.; methodology,R.D., J.H. Y.S.,E.S.; software, R.D., Y.S. ; resources, J.H.; writing–original draft
preparation, R.D., E.S., J.H.; writing–review and editing, J.H; visualization, R.D. and E.S.; supervision, J.H.; funding
acquisition, J.H.

Acknowledgement

The research reported in this work was supported in part by National Science Foundation under the grant and 1940099
and 1905775. The views, perspectives, and content do not necessarily represent the official views of the NSF.

References

[1] Nicholas R Glavin, Rahul Rao, Vikas Varshney, Elisabeth Bianco, Amey Apte, Ajit Roy, Emilie Ringe, and
Pulickel M Ajayan. Emerging applications of elemental 2d materials. Advanced Materials, 32(7):1904302, 2020.

[2] Lei Shen, Jun Zhou, Tong Yang, Ming Yang, and Yuan Ping Feng. High-throughput computational discovery
and intelligent design of two-dimensional functional materials for various applications. Accounts of Materials
Research, 2022.

[3] Peder Lyngby and Kristian Sommer Thygesen. Data-driven discovery of 2d materials by deep generative models.
npj Computational Materials, 8(1):1–8, 2022.

[4] Murat Cihan Sorkun, Séverin Astruc, JM Koelman, and Süleyman Er. An artificial intelligence-aided virtual
screening recipe for two-dimensional materials discovery. npj Computational Materials, 6(1):1–10, 2020.

[5] Morten Niklas Gjerding, Alireza Taghizadeh, Asbjørn Rasmussen, Sajid Ali, Fabian Bertoldo, Thorsten Deilmann,
Nikolaj Rørbæk Knøsgaard, Mads Kruse, Ask Hjorth Larsen, Simone Manti, et al. Recent progress of the
computational 2d materials database (c2db). 2D Materials, 8(4):044002, 2021.

[6] Nicolas Mounet, Marco Gibertini, Philippe Schwaller, Davide Campi, Andrius Merkys, Antimo Marrazzo,
Thibault Sohier, Ivano Eligio Castelli, Andrea Cepellotti, Giovanni Pizzi, et al. Two-dimensional materials
from high-throughput computational exfoliation of experimentally known compounds. Nature nanotechnology,
13(3):246–252, 2018.

13


2D materials discovery

[7] Kevin M Wyss, Duy Xuan Luong, and James M Tour. Large-scale syntheses of 2d materials: Flash joule heating
and other methods. Advanced Materials, 34(8):2106970, 2022.

[8] Pablo Ares and Kostya S Novoselov. Recent advances in graphene and other 2d materials. Nano Materials Science,
4(1):3–9, 2022.

[9] Natalie Briggs, Shruti Subramanian, Zhong Lin, Xufan Li, Xiaotian Zhang, Kehao Zhang, Kai Xiao, David
Geohegan, Robert Wallace, Long-Qing Chen, et al. A roadmap for electronic grade 2d materials. 2D Materials,
6(2):022001, 2019.

[10] Shuang Li, Lang Ma, Mi Zhou, Yuanqi Li, Yi Xia, Xin Fan, Chong Cheng, and Hongrong Luo. New opportunities
for emerging 2d materials in bioelectronics and biosensors. Current Opinion in Biomedical Engineering, 13:32–41,
2020.

[11] Kostya S Novoselov, Andre K Geim, Sergei V Morozov, De-eng Jiang, Yanshui Zhang, Sergey V Dubonos,
Irina V Grigorieva, and Alexandr A Firsov. Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films. science,
306(5696):666–669, 2004.

[12] Yuan Cao, Valla Fatemi, Shiang Fang, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, Efthimios Kaxiras, and Pablo Jarillo-
Herrero. Unconventional superconductivity in magic-angle graphene superlattices. Nature, 556(7699):43–50,
2018.

[13] Sajedeh Manzeli, Dmitry Ovchinnikov, Diego Pasquier, Oleg V Yazyev, and Andras Kis. 2d transition metal
dichalcogenides. Nature Reviews Materials, 2(8):1–15, 2017.

[14] Yu Li Huang, Wei Chen, and Andrew TS Wee. Two-dimensional magnetic transition metal chalcogenides.
SmartMat, 2(2):139–153, 2021.

[15] Liangzhi Kou, Yandong Ma, Ziqi Sun, Thomas Heine, and Changfeng Chen. Two-dimensional topological
insulators: Progress and prospects. The journal of physical chemistry letters, 8(8):1905–1919, 2017.

[16] Qing Hua Wang, Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh, Andras Kis, Jonathan N Coleman, and Michael S Strano. Electronics
and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Nature nanotechnology, 7(11):699–712,
2012.

[17] Dehui Deng, KS Novoselov, Qiang Fu, Nanfeng Zheng, Zhongqun Tian, and Xinhe Bao. Catalysis with two-
dimensional materials and their heterostructures. Nature nanotechnology, 11(3):218–230, 2016.

[18] Babak Anasori, Maria R Lukatskaya, and Yury Gogotsi. 2d metal carbides and nitrides (mxenes) for energy
storage. Nature Reviews Materials, 2(2):1–17, 2017.

[19] Tian Xie, Xiang Fu, Octavian-Eugen Ganea, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Crystal diffusion variational
autoencoder for periodic material generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06197, 2021.

[20] Peter Mahler Larsen, Mohnish Pandey, Mikkel Strange, and Karsten Wedel Jacobsen. Definition of a scoring
parameter to identify low-dimensional materials components. Physical Review Materials, 3(3):034003, 2019.

[21] Sten Haastrup, Mikkel Strange, Mohnish Pandey, Thorsten Deilmann, Per S Schmidt, Nicki F Hinsche, Morten N
Gjerding, Daniele Torelli, Peter M Larsen, Anders C Riis-Jensen, et al. The computational 2d materials database:
high-throughput modeling and discovery of atomically thin crystals. 2D Materials, 5(4):042002, 2018.

[22] Jun Zhou, Lei Shen, Miguel Dias Costa, Kristin A Persson, Shyue Ping Ong, Patrick Huck, Yunhao Lu, Xiaoyang
Ma, Yiming Chen, Hanmei Tang, et al. 2dmatpedia, an open computational database of two-dimensional materials
from top-down and bottom-up approaches. Scientific data, 6(1):1–10, 2019.

[23] Mohammad Tohidi Vahdat, Kumar Agrawal Varoon, and Giovanni Pizzi. Machine-learning accelerated identifica-
tion of exfoliable two-dimensional materials. Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 2022.

[24] Rico Friedrich, Mahdi Ghorbani-Asl, Stefano Curtarolo, and Arkady V Krasheninnikov. Data-driven quest for
two-dimensional non-van der waals materials. Nano Letters, 22(3):989–997, 2022.

[25] Yanchao Wang, Maosheng Miao, Jian Lv, Li Zhu, Ketao Yin, Hanyu Liu, and Yanming Ma. An effective structure
prediction method for layered materials based on 2d particle swarm optimization algorithm. The Journal of
chemical physics, 137(22):224108, 2012.

[26] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and
Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

[27] Tianxiao Shen, Victor Quach, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Blank Language Models. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Online, November 2020. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

14


2D materials discovery

[28] Lai Wei, Qinyang Li, Yuqi Song, Stanislav Stefanov, Edirisuriya Siriwardane, Fanglin Chen, and Jianjun Hu.
Crystal transformer: Self-learning neural language model for generative and tinkering design of materials. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.11953, 2022.

[29] Michael J Mehl, David Hicks, Cormac Toher, Ohad Levy, Robert M Hanson, Gus Hart, and Stefano Curtarolo.
The aflow library of crystallographic prototypes: part 1. Computational Materials Science, 136:S1–S828, 2017.

[30] Chuanxun Su, Jian Lv, Quan Li, Hui Wang, Lijun Zhang, Yanchao Wang, and Yanming Ma. Construction of crystal
structure prototype database: methods and applications. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, 29(16):165901,
2017.

[31] Sean D Griesemer, Logan Ward, and Chris Wolverton. High-throughput crystal structure solution using prototypes.
Physical Review Materials, 5(10):105003, 2021.

[32] Lai Wei, Nihang Fu, Edirisuriya MD Siriwardane, Wenhui Yang, Sadman Sadeed Omee, Rongzhi Dong, Rui Xin,
and Jianjun Hu. Tcsp: a template-based crystal structure prediction algorithm for materials discovery. Inorganic
Chemistry, 2022.

[33] Minoru Kusaba, Chang Liu, and Ryo Yoshida. Crystal structure prediction with machine learning-based element
substitution. Computational Materials Science, 211:111496, 2022.

[34] Cameron J Hargreaves, Matthew S Dyer, Michael W Gaultois, Vitaliy A Kurlin, and Matthew J Rosseinsky. The
earth mover’s distance as a metric for the space of inorganic compositions. Chemistry of Materials, 32(24):10610–
10620, 2020.

[35] Shyue Ping Ong, William Davidson Richards, Anubhav Jain, Geoffroy Hautier, Michael Kocher, Shreyas Cholia,
Dan Gunter, Vincent L. Chevrier, Kristin A. Persson, and Gerbrand Ceder. Python materials genomics (pymatgen):
A robust, open-source python library for materials analysis. Computational Materials Science, 68:314–319, 2013.

[36] Brian Kulis et al. Metric learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 5(4):287–364, 2013.
[37] Nils ER Zimmermann and Anubhav Jain. Local structure order parameters and site fingerprints for quantification
of coordination environment and crystal structure similarity. RSC advances, 10(10):6063–6081, 2020.

[38] Chang Liu, Erina Fujita, Yukari Katsura, Yuki Inada, Asuka Ishikawa, Ryuji Tamura, Kaoru Kimura, and
Ryo Yoshida. Machine learning to predict quasicrystals from chemical compositions. Advanced Materials,
33(36):2102507, 2021.

[39] Chi Chen and Shyue Ping Ong. A universal graph deep learning interatomic potential for the periodic table. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.02450, 2022.

[40] G. Kresse and J. Hafner. ab initio. Phys. Rev. B, 47:558–561, Jan 1993.
[41] G. Kresse and J. Hafner. ab initio. Phys. Rev. B, 49:14251–14269, May 1994.
[42] J. Furthmüller G. Kresse. Efficiency of ab initio total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using a
plane-wave basis set. Comput. Mater. Sci., 6:15–50, jul 1996.

[43] G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave
basis set. Phys. Rev. B, 54:11169–11186, Oct 1996.

[44] P. E. Blöchl. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B, 50:17953–17979, Dec 1994.
[45] G. Kresse and D. Joubert. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B,
59:1758–1775, Jan 1999.

[46] John P. Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzerhof. Generalized gradient approximation made simple. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 77:3865–3868, Oct 1996.

[47] John P. Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzerhof. Generalized gradient approximation made simple [phys.
rev. lett. 77, 3865 (1996)]. Phys. Rev. Lett., 78:1396–1396, Feb 1997.

[48] Daniel W Davies, Keith T Butler, Adam J Jackson, Jonathan M Skelton, Kazuki Morita, and Aron Walsh. Smact:
Semiconducting materials by analogy and chemical theory. Journal of Open Source Software, 4(38):1361, 2019.

[49] Miao Liu, Ziqin Rong, Rahul Malik, Pieremanuele Canepa, Anubhav Jain, Gerbrand Ceder, and Kristin A Persson.
Spinel compounds as multivalent battery cathodes: a systematic evaluation based on ab initio calculations. Energy
& Environmental Science, 8(3):964–974, 2015.

[50] Erik Bitzek, Pekka Koskinen, Franz Gähler, Michael Moseler, and Peter Gumbsch. Structural relaxation made
simple. Physical review letters, 97(17):170201, 2006.

[51] Anubhav Jain, Shyue Ping Ong, Geoffroy Hautier, Wei Chen, William Davidson Richards, Stephen Dacek, Shreyas
Cholia, Dan Gunter, David Skinner, Gerbrand Ceder, and Kristin a. Persson. The Materials Project: A materials
genome approach to accelerating materials innovation. APL Materials, 1(1):011002, 2013.

15


2D materials discovery

[52] Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
9(86):2579–2605, 2008.

16


