1

Multiscale mechanical study of the Turritella terebra and Turritellinella 

tricarinata seashells

Y. Liu1, M. Lott1, S.F. Seyyedizadeh1, I. Corvaglia1, G. Greco2, V. F. Dal Poggetto2, A.S. Gliozzi1, R. Mussat 

Sartor3, N. Nurra3, C. Vitale-Brovarone1, N. M. Pugno2,4, F. Bosia1, M. Tortello1

1Dipartimento di Scienza Applicata e Tecnologia (DISAT), Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Torino, Italy

2Laboratory for BioiBionspired, Bionic, Nano, Meta, Materials & Mechanics, Dipartimento di Ingegneria 

Civile, Ambientale e Meccanica, Università di Trento, 38123 Trento, Italy

3Dipartimento Scienze della Vita e Biologia dei Sistemi (DBIOS), Università degli Studi di Torino, 10123 

Torino, Italy

4School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, London, United 

Kingdom

Abstract

Marine shells are designed by nature to ensure mechanical protection from predators and shelter for 
mollusks living inside them. A large amount of work has been done to study the multiscale mechanical 
properties of their complex microstructure and to draw inspiration for the design of impact-resistant 
biomimetic materials. Less is known regarding the dynamic behavior related to their structure at multiple 
scales. Here, we present a combined experimental and numerical study of the shells of two different 
species of gastropod sea snail belonging to the Turritellidae family, featuring a peculiar helicoconic shape 
with hierarchical spiral elements. The proposed procedure involves the use of micro–Computed
Tomography scans for the accurate determination of geometry, Atomic Force Microscopy and 
Nanoindentation to evaluate local mechanical properties, surface morphology and heterogeneity, as well 
as Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy coupled with Finite Element Analysis simulations to determine 
global modal behavior. Results indicate that the specific features of the considered shells, in particular 
their helicoconic and hierarchical structure, can also be linked to their vibration attenuation behavior.
Moreover, the proposed investigation method can be extended to the study of other natural systems, to 
determine their structure-related dynamic properties, ultimately aiding the design of bioinspired 
metamaterials and of structures with advanced vibration control.

1. Introduction

It is well known that nature, over millions of years of evolution, has optimized the mechanical, optical,
and thermal properties of biological systems. As far as mechanical properties are concerned, a rich 
literature can be found dealing with the optimized quasi-static properties of many natural systems (1–4).
On the other hand, the dynamic mechanical properties of biological systems are, up to now, less explored, 
although a collection of several notable examples can be found in recent review papers (5,6).


2

Marine shells, and in particular their micro- and nano-structure, have long been studied as ideal material 
systems for mechanical protection (7), impact attenuation (8), and have also been a source of 
bioinspiration for impact-resistant materials (9). There are about 60,000/70,000 species of shell mollusks, 
the two largest classes being the Gastropoda and the Bivalvia. The molluscan shell is secreted by the 
mantle, or pallium, that is the epithelial layer covering the mollusks (10). The shell growth starts by the 
gland of a larval shell (the protoconch) and proceeds by the addition of new rings of conchiolin 
impregnated with calcium carbonate to the edge of the shell, and by addition of calcium carbonate over 
the whole of its inner surface  and a small number of organic matrices (11). Calcium carbonate has three 
crystal polymorphs: calcite, aragonite, and vaterite, in addition to an amorphous form (12). Calcite is the 
most stable of the three polymorphs under ambient conditions, whereas aragonite is metastable and 
vaterite is the most unstable. Most mollusk shells consist of aragonite and/or calcite, whereas vaterite is 
rarely found. Usually, the secreted calcareous material is in the crystalline form of prisms of calcite 
arranged normally to the surface of the shell, whereas the inner part is made of layers of crystals of 
aragonite parallel to the shell surface. There are several types of microstructures, like the nacreous, the 
crossed lamellar, the foliated, and the prismatic layer microstructures (13–15). The calcium carbonate 
structural elements form at least 95% of the shell making them stiff and strong, while the remainder 
consists of biopolymeric material that helps to make them tough as well (16). Although the nacreous and 
prismatic layer structures are most extensively studied, the most abundant microstructure in mollusks is 
the cross laminar one. The thin lamellar prisms of about 100 nm thickness, called third-order lamellae, are 
aligned parallel and create the plate (second-order lamellae) that inclines at an angle of about 45° against 
the shell surface. This microstructure has a particularly high ceramic content (up to 99.9% in mass), yet it 
shows unusually good mechanical performance (17–19). Nacre features the highest tensile and 
compressive strength among the various architectures, while the crossed lamellar has the highest fracture 
toughness (7). Its functional features are intimately associated with the microstructure of the shell, that 
is usually formed by three layers: inner (close to the animal), middle, and outer. When the shell undergoes 
a quasi-static load caused, for example, by the bite of a predator, the outer layer experiences multiple 
cracks that are stopped at the interface with the middle layer. With increasing load, damage starts
propagating also inside the middle layer, but bridging forces, created by the particular orientation of the 
internal lamellae, hinder crack propagation (20). Moreover, different microstructural responses have also 
been reported, depending on the velocity of the impacts, generating different mechanisms of attenuation 
and fracture formation showing in some cases a considerable enhancement of the dynamic fracture 
strength with respect to that of quasi-static loading (8).

While the microstructure in shells plays a fundamental role in impact attenuation, their overall shape also 
determines their modal characteristics and vibration damping capabilities. These can, at least partially, be 
related to the main function of the shell.

Numerous examples of efficient vibration damping structures exist in nature (6). Some well-known cases 
are the Mantis shrimp dactyl club (21), the woodpecker skull (22), and the turtle shell (23). A common 
feature of these examples, which is also found in seashells, is the multiscale (hierarchical) organization of 
the structure, from optimized microstructures combining stiff and compliant components, to vibration-
deflecting or attenuating elements at intermediate scales (e.g. oriented fiber bundles, suture joints) (5,24–
26), to tuned resonance properties at full scale, e.g., occurring far from typical working conditions.
Ultrasonic techniques, in particular Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS) (27,28) have successfully 
helped to determine and investigate the macroscopic mechanical properties on several biological samples 


3

including wood (29,30), bones (31,32), or the human skull (33), also in combination with micro-computed 
tomography (μCT) scans and finite element analysis (34), while nano and microscale characterizations are 
also fundamental for addressing the same properties at smaller length scales (35–39).

In this paper, we focus on two shells belonging to the Turritellidae family, namely the Turritella terebra
(Linnaeus, 1758) and the Turritellinella tricarinata (Brocchi, 1814). They are among the most common and 
abundant species on muddy and sandy seafloors, which are typical far from the coasts. Often, they are 
the dominant species, with hundreds of individuals per square meter. Both shells are characterized by a 
long tower-like shape which resembles a drill, as shown in Figure 1, hence the name. This long and narrow 
helicoconic shell shape may facilitate, through the foot, the access of the mollusk under the soft mud and 
anchoring to the marine substrate to prevent deep currents from carrying away the shell. Several 
structural features of Turritella terebra have been investigated in order to learn from nature, e.g., for the 
design of “adaptable structures”, since this shell grows in an adaptive way and is able to change form 
through time to meet performance demands (40–42). Mathematical models of the shell have been 
proposed and finite element analysis has also been performed  (42,43). The shells have three macroscopic 
layers, called the inner, middle, and outer layer, but it is not clear whether the calcium carbonate crystals 
are in the form of calcite or aragonite (42). Each is organized in the crossed lamellar architecture showing, 
from the largest to the smallest scale, the first, second and third order lamellae.

Here, we present a multiscale study of the mechanical properties of these two shells. By applying a 
combined numerical and experimental procedure at the micro and macro scale, we investigate the 
complex architecture of the shells and determine global mechanical properties studying their modal 
response and vibration properties. Their frequency response spectra are compared with simulated ones 
and discussed in terms of possible vibration attenuation capabilities, in the perspective of providing useful 
elements for the design bioinspired metamaterials with engineered wave propagation properties.

2. Materials and Methods

In the following, we will describe the techniques and procedures used for the investigation of the two 
shells. The CT scan and the subsequent use of a specific software for the elaboration of the obtained 
images allowed to characterize the geometry of the shell that could be imported in a finite element 
software. The electron microscope was employed to directly determine the microstructure of the shells 
while the Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) allowed to obtain the spatial distribution of the Young’s 
modulus at the nanoscale along with the topography characterization of the polished surface of the 
samples. The obtained results were supported by further instrumented nanoindentation measurements. 
RUS experiments were performed to characterize the vibrational properties of the overall structure of the 
samples and numerical Finite Element Analysis (FEA) was used to retrieve the mechanical properties of 
the samples from the experimental results and to further investigate their vibration attenuation 
capabilities. 

2.1. CT-Scan and creation of a 3D mesh for FEA

CT scans of the shell were performed by using the three-dimensional (3D) X-ray microscope Skyscan 1272 
by Bruker. The images allowed us to obtain a clear 3D view of the sample geometry. The outcome of this 


4

experiment was a triangulated STereoLithography (STL) file which was generated based on pixel density, 
as shown in Figure 1 b). STL files of the samples were prepared according to the procedure suggested by 
Bruker for the 3D scan. For the FEA, the STL files were then re-meshed to reduce the mesh density and 
imported into Meshmixer V3.5 software, where different operations such as Hole filling, Auto Repair, 
Mesh Smoothing, Mesh Solid and Remesh were used. This process was repeated several times to remove 
intersecting triangles, reduce the number of triangular elements and general errors in the file. The initial 
number of nodes was ranging between about 400 thousand and 1.5 million, depending on the case, and 
the density after re-meshing was 8-10% the initial one. The modified 3D STL file, reported in Figure 1 c), 
was then imported into a FEA software (COMSOL Multiphysics 6.0) for further simulation and analysis. 

Figure 1: a) Turritella terebra sample. b) 3D representation from STL file of Turritella terebra generated 
by micro-CT scan. c) Modified Turritella terebra STL file suitable for FEA. 

2.2. Scanning Electron Microscopy

SEM images of the sections of the two types of shell were acquired after mechanical fracturing of the 
samples. A Merlin field emission scanning electron microscope by Zeiss was used to obtain several images 
of the microstructure. Figure 2 shows some images of the Turritella terebra shell at different magnification 
levels. In panel a) it is possible to observe a layered structure formed by the first order lamellae, each with 
a thickness of a few microns (<10 m). Further magnification, panel b), indicates that each layer is formed 
by lamellar elements with different orientations depending on the layer. Panels c) and d), show a 
magnification of the calcium carbonate lamellae forming the various layers. Each sub-element, 
corresponding to a third-order lamella, is approximately 100-150 nm thick. 


5

Figure 2: SEM images of the Turritella terebra shell. a) first-order lamellae about 10 𝜇𝑚 thick with 
alternating orientations of the second order lamellae. b) second-order lamellae stacked in groups forming 
different angles with respect to each other. c)-d) third-order lamellae with thickness ranging from about 
100 nm to 150 nm.

Similar images were acquired also for the T. tricarinata sample and are reported in the Supplemental 
material. The same cross laminar architecture was observed. Sometimes, as shown in Figure S1 c), some 
elements featuring a rod-like shape were also observed. However, in both cases, a clear, crossed lamellar, 
structured composition of the shell was revealed. 

2.3. AFM

In order to measure the local mechanical properties of the Turritella shells, AFM experiments were 
conducted, allowing to obtain, by analyzing the force curves, the distribution of the elastic modulus on
the sample surface. An Innova atomic force microscope by Bruker was used for the acquisition of the force 
vs distance curves. A hand-crafted ultra-high force probe (Bruker DNISP-HS) fabricated by precision 
grinding of a solid diamond with tip radius of 40 nm and tip half angle 42.3° was used. Sensitivity 
calibration of the AFM probe was done by using a sapphire sample and the reliability of the Young’s 
modulus determination was verified on a fused silica test sample (Figure S2). The probe is specifically 


6

designed for nanoindentation and its stiffness, 𝑘 = 353 N/m, is ideal for the expected range of Young’s 
modulus of this sample (calcium carbonate).

Turritella samples were embedded in epoxy resin and polished with sandpaper up to 4000 grit, and 
subsequently with a 1 μm diamond paste to obtain a flat surface on which to acquire the force curves. 
Even if the roughness of the polished surface is of the order of 4 nm, the effect of the microstructure 
cannot be avoided as the sample itself is not a bulk material, but it is formed by calcium carbonate 
lamellae. 

2.4. Instrumented Nanoindentation

To perform the tests on the shells, we used an established protocol (44). The shells were broken and fixed 
into an epoxy resin, which was left to dry for 24 h. The samples were then polished to achieve a roughness 
of about 40 nm. Three types of samples were produced: Turritella terebra (samples named TT0 and TT)
and Turritellinella tricarinata (sample named TC1). We performed nanoindentation tests with the support 
of an iNano®Nanoindenter (Nanomechanics Inc.). The declared sensitivity of the machine is 3 nN for the 
load and 0.001 nm for the displacement. The shell was analysed by means of mapping method (Nanoblitz 
3d, Nanomechanics Inc.). This gives the distribution of the mechanical properties of the sample on a 
specific squared area of interest (selected with the support of the coupled optical microscope). For each 
map, 40/50 × 40/50 points were investigated. A Berkovich tip, i.e. with a three-sided pyramidal shape,
was mounted in the machine and used to perform the experiments (at controlled temperature and 
humidity, 20 °C  and 30-40 % RH); the method used to compute the mechanical properties is the Oliver 
and Pharr (45), with indentation loads in the range 0.1-0.5 mN.

2.5. Ultrasonic measurements 

RUS experiments were performed by applying chirp signals in the 1 − 45 kHz frequency range to the TT
sample, by using a 500-kHz Olympus piezoelectric transducer, as shown in Figure 3 a). Water gel was used 
as a coupling medium. The out-of-plane output vibration signal was recorded by means of a laser doppler 
vibrometer (Polytec) on 60 points along the longitudinal axis of the shell, previously carefully covered by 
reflective tape. The laser scan of the surface was automated by using a translational motor stage. Panel 
b) reports, as gray lines, the 60 spectra recorded during the measurements along with the average 
spectrum, indicated by the black line. The spectra differ mainly in the attenuation levels, in the level of 
noise, and relative spectral weight of the main peaks, but it is possible to recognize main common features 
that can be traced back to the entire structure. This justifies the study of the average spectrum of the 
sample. The average spectrum clearly shows several resonance modes of the structure that can be 
investigated further and suitably compared with FEA simulations. 


7

Figure 3: a) TT sample mounted on the transducer during ultrasonic excitation experiments. b) Gray lines 
are the frequency spectra recorded along the longitudinal axis of the shell while the black line represents 
their average. Yellow symbols represent the resonance frequencies.

3. Results

3.1. AFM results

Figure 4 a) shows a camera image of the polished Turritella terebra sample, called TT, and the 
microstructure is still visible on the right-hand side of the image, where the first order lamellae, like those 
shown in Figure 2 a), can be seen. A topography image of the polished surface, recorded on a flat area, is 
reported in panel b). The topography image mainly shows the edge between the outer (flat) and middle 
(more irregular) layer of the shell. The right-hand side of the surface shows some holes and voids in the 
microstructure, that were probably caused by the polishing procedure or by an intrinsic defect, but the 
remaining surface appears rather smooth. After recording the topography image, a matrix of 32 × 32
force vs distance curves was acquired in the area located by the blue square. The maximum force was set 
around 30 μN. Since the sample is hard and the adhesion force is very small compared to the maximum 
applied force and thus negligible, we fitted the approach curves by using the elastic Hertz model (46,47),
as also done in (48).


8

Figure 4: a) Camera image of the sample and cantilever before acquisition of topography images and force 
vs distance curves on the TT shell embedded in resin. b) Topography image of TT surface. c) Young’s 
modulus map of the area located by the blue square of panel b). The values were calculated by analyzing 
the force curves obtained by using the AFM in the force-volume mode. d) Distribution of the obtained 
Young’s modulus values reported in the map shown in c).

Each force-displacement curve was analyzed by implementing the Hertz model in MATLAB and using the 
approach curve for the fitting procedure. The corresponding Young’s modulus value was plotted in the 
location where the curve was acquired, as shown by the color map of Figure 4 c). The moduli were 
calculated from the reduced ones by using the properties of the diamond tip (𝐸 = 1140 GPa and 𝜈 = 0.2) 
and by assuming the Poisson’s ratio of the shell approximately equal to 𝜈 = 0.3, obtaining a rather large 
dispersion of the values. This is due to the underlying microstructure of the shell, as clearly highlighted by 
the SEM measurements. Panel d) reports the distribution of the obtained values, whose average is in the 
expected range (49) and equal to 𝐸 = 43 ± 17 GPa. No significant variations, within the error bars, are
observed along the cross section of the shell. The underlying microstructure, and the consequent 
dispersion of the obtained values, hinder the possibility of detecting, on such length scales, local variations 
of the mechanical properties of the shell in the different layers because the AFM is probing the CaCO3
crystals along with the lamellar interfaces. On the other hand,  however, we know that it is the composite 
(9) and multiscale structure (20), according to which the lamellae are placed with different relative 
orientations, the reason of their optimized impact-resistance properties. Therefore, the macroscopic 
mechanical properties of the shell are the results of a complex, multiscale microstructure, that is not just 


9

the sum of the single components and that gives rise here to a wide dispersion of data in the force-
displacement curve results.

Topography scans on smaller areas, reported in the Supplemental material, were able to reveal the 
underlying microstructure. A Young’s modulus map on a 2 × 2 μm2 area of a T. tricarinata sample TC1, 
shows that there is no clear spatial correlation between the topographic features and the Young’s 
modulus values (Figure S3). However, the effect of the microstructure is reflected also in this case in the 
rather large dispersion of data. In this case, the obtained value was 𝐸 = 48 ± 17 GPa. The standard 
deviation of the distribution is the same as that obtained on the 36 × 36 μm2 area shown in Figure 4. 
Since the dispersion of data is considerable, the difference with respect to the previous sample is not 
statistically significant. Therefore, the AFM investigation is not essential to determine the effective 
Young’s modulus of the structure, but rather to highlight its inhomogeneity at this scale due to the 
lamellar structure (revealed by the SEM measurements) and to have a first guess for determining the 
mechanical properties of the overall system.

Topography scans with a probe specifically designed for imaging (Bruker RTESPA-300, nominal curvature 
radius = 8 nm) were also performed to gain a clearer idea of the appearance of the underlying 
microstructure, even in the case of very smooth surfaces. An example is reported in Figure S4 
(Supplemental material). The topography, but especially the phase, show very well that the material is 
formed by many elements that, as seen in the SEM images, have a lamellar form but that here appear as 
sort of “tiles” or grains forming the structure. 

3.2. Nanoindentation results

To compare the previous results with those obtained by a different characterization technique at the 
nanoscale, instrumented nanoindentation experiments were also conducted. Here, the main difference 
is that the force is not applied by means of a cantilever, but vertically, thus providing very accurate 
measurements when probing bulk or porous regions, like the interface between different lamellae. 
Although it is not possible to obtain the topography of the surface with this method, nanoindentation 
allows to obtain an estimation of the mechanical properties of the single elements forming the 
microstructure, while the AFM, as reported above, rather highlights the complex microstructure.

No significant gradients of the mechanical properties were observed in the analyzed cross sections of the 
shells (Figure 5). As shown below, this supports the approximation used in FEA simulations of considering 
constant homogeneous mechanical properties over the whole sample. In the indentation region, empty 
spaces were found that indicate a similar “porous” structure (Figure 5 and Figure S6), due to the 
microstructure of the shell. The analysis was then focused on the edge between the resin and the shell 
cross section. 

As reported in Figure 6, the overall values of the Young’s modulus and hardness were not significatively 
different among TT0, TT, and TC1 samples, which all displayed a rather large scatter in the data due to the 
porosity and roughness of the surface. In this case, it is possible that such dispersion screens small 
differences in the values of the mechanical properties among the different samples, thus requiring a more 
precise technique.


10

Figure 5: a) Representative light microscopy image of the region of interest for which are reported b) 
Young’s modulus and c) Hardness map. The sample depicted here is TT0. For these experiments the 
maximal load of 0.1 mN was used. 

Figure 6: Young’s modulus and Hardness of the tested TT and TC samples. These values were selected 
from the maps reported in Figure S6 considering values with Hardness > 1.5 GPa, and Young’s modulus > 
50 GPa to avoid the empty regions. No significative differences emerge among these values. 

3.3. Ultrasound experiments results

Panels a)-d) of Figure 7: report, for some of the main observed resonance peaks, the normalized 
experimental modal shape along the longitudinal axis of the shell. This was obtained by plotting, at the 
frequency of the selected resonance mode, the imaginary part of the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) as a 
function of the laser spot position, reported in the vertical axis as mm, that spanned over the entire length 
of the shell. This allowed to appreciate the amount of bending of the structure as a function of the 
position. The maximum value was normalized to one. Since out of plane vibrations were probed, the 
reported modes are predominantly bending modes. 


11

Figure 7: a)-d) experimental normalized modal shapes for some of the main resonance frequencies for the 
TT. e)-h) vibration modes obtained by finite element simulations after optimization of the material 
parameters (see main text for details).

Panels e)-h) of Figure 7 show the corresponding eigenmodes obtained by FEA using the material 
parameters that best match the experiments, as explained below in more detail. Considering that, from 
the experimental point of view, only bending modes can be detected, there is a good agreement between 
experiments and simulations both in terms of the modal shapes and corresponding resonant frequencies. 

Similar measurements were also performed on two samples of Turritellinella tricarinata, TC1 and TC2, in 
the 5-100 kHz range. Results are reported in Figures S7 and S8. In these cases, some resonance peaks are 
visible at higher frequencies than observed in the previous sample, given the smaller size of these two 
shells.

4. Discussion

4.1. FEA-based Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy.

Resonance frequencies and mode shapes were calculated by using COMSOL Multiphysics 6.0 after 
importing the processed 3D geometry obtained from the CT scan. The eigenfrequencies were computed 


12

as a function of the Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the material by using the Structural Mechanics 
module and by performing an eigenfrequency study with parametric sweeps. The range of the swept
parameters was initially chosen to include, as first guess, the values obtained from the mechanical 
characterization at the nanoscale. The calculated eigenfrequencies and relevant mode shapes were then
compared with the experimental ones (Figure 8 a. A certain number 𝑛 of eigenmodes was considered and 
the optimized material parameters were determined as those minimizing the function:

𝑍 = log (∑
|
(𝑓𝑖

𝑒𝑥𝑝−𝑓𝑖

𝑠𝑖𝑚)

𝑓𝑖

𝑒𝑥𝑝
|
𝑛
𝑖=1
),
(1)

where 𝑓𝑖

𝑒𝑥𝑝 and 𝑓𝑖

𝑠𝑖𝑚 are the experimental and calculated eigenfrequencies of the i-th mode, respectively. 

The abscissae and ordinates of the color map reported in Figure 8b show, for the TT sample, the 
investigated range of Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio values, respectively, while the colors indicate 
the value of 𝑍, which in this case has been computed by considering the first four resonance modes (𝑛 =
4). The red dot locates the minimum 𝑍 value corresponding to the optimized parameters that, in this case,
turn out to be about 𝐸 = 53 ± 2 GPa and 𝜈 = 0.35 ± 0.06, where the uncertainties are calculated by 
propagating the error of 𝑓𝑖

𝑒𝑥𝑝 and 𝑓𝑖

𝑠𝑖𝑚 to 𝑍, respectively. Figure 8c compares the experimental and 

simulated eigenfrequencies. The broken symbols indicate simulated modes with a dominating 
longitudinal displacement which, therefore, cannot be efficiently experimentally detected by the 
vibrometer, sensitive to the out-of-plane displacements only. Notice that there are two such modes, as 
the second, around 33 kHz, is almost superimposed to another one.

Figure 8: a): Schematic of the comparison between FEA and experiments. b): color map of the difference 
between experiment and simulation for the first four resonance modes as a function of the material 
parameters (Young’s modulus and Poisson ratio) for the TT shell. The red dot represents the point that 


13

matches experiments and simulation for all the resonances considered. c): comparison between 
experimental and simulated eigenfrequencies. 

In the case of the two T. tricarinata samples, three frequencies were considered in the minimization 
process, from which we obtained 𝐸 = 70 ± 2 GPa and 𝜈 = 0.32 ± 0.05 for TC1 and 𝐸 = 61 ± 3 GPa and 
𝜈 = 0.31 ± 0.09 for TC2, respectively. Results are reported in the Figures S9 and S10. By looking at images 
shown in Figure 8 b), S9 a) and S10 a), we can notice that the variation of 𝑍 is greater when driven by the 
Young’s modulus rather than by the Poisson ratio. Thus, the Young’s modulus is a much more relevant 
parameter in the inversion procedure for determining the mechanical properties of the samples,
indicating that only this quantity should be compared at the different investigated length scales. The 
Young’s modulus values obtained in the three cases are all within the range determined by the 
nanoindentation experiments (Figure 6), but we can now appreciate some differences, as dissimilarities
in the mechanical properties, that can be due to individual variability. Indeed, it is known that 
environmental and ecological conditions, like sea temperature and oxygen concentration, may affect the 
elemental composition and isotopic ratio in the mollusk shell (50–53). This could be the rationale for a 
future work, in which a large amount of specimens of the same species but with different ecological 
history could be analyzed. 

4.2. Frequency domain analysis

Finally, to better understand the dynamic behavior of the structure of the Turritella shells, we performed 
a comparative numerical frequency domain analysis using the obtained mechanical data. The actual 
geometry, obtained from the CT scan, was used to compute the frequency response spectrum in a certain 
frequency range. The damping was modelled using an isotropic loss factor 𝜂𝑠 (defined as the ratio of 
energy dissipated in unit volume per radian of oscillation to the maximum strain energy per unit volume). 
This value was estimated by comparing the simulated particle velocity field as a function of frequency 
with the experimentally-derived one in the range (0.5-100) kHz. The computed spectra are reported in
Figure 9 for different loss factor values, along with the experimental data for sample TC1. It is apparent
that the addition of damping considerably improves the agreement with the experimental data, although 
there is some discrepancy between peak amplitudes at some resonance frequencies. For example, the 
experimental peak at 20 kHz is rather damped, but the one at about 65 kHz is still clearly noticeable. This 
can be related to the out of plane nature of the measurements, which can introduce some differences in 
the measured relative peak intensities, as well as in the number of detected peaks. A loss factor of 
𝜂𝑠 ≈ 5 × 10−3 − 1 × 10−2 reproduces the experimental data well, since for larger values (as in the case 
of 𝜂𝑠 = 3 × 10−2, also shown in the figure) some spectral features are lost. 


14

Figure 9: Numerical frequency domain analysis. Black symbols, left axis: Experimental frequency response 
spectrum of the Turritellinella sample TC1. Solid and dashed blue lines, right axis: numerical spectra for 
loss factors equal to 𝜂𝑠 = 5 × 10−3and 𝜂𝑠 = 3 × 10−2, respectively.

To understand the influence of the full Turritella structure on its modal vibration properties, we then 
compared its frequency response with that of a similar, but simpler, ideal structure. The Turritella
structure is helicoconic and the internal hollow spiral structure, in comparison with a basic conical one,
can presumably provide better structural strength and impact damping to protect the living organism 
from predators. Moreover, it also presents a hierarchical organization, since every spiral contains, on its 
surface, several thinner spirals that curl around the larger ones. The main reason for this feature, similar 
to a drill, is most probably to help the organism to burrow under the mud (54). Therefore, it is interesting 
to compare this structure to its simplest analog, where only the conical shape has been retained. This can 
help to better understand the influence on the mechanical behavior of “second order” elements in the 
hierarchical structure. The geometry of the conical structure was designed to have the same mass and 
length as the Turritella shell used for the comparison. The density, Young’s modulus, Poisson ratio, and 
loss factor were the same in both cases. Figure 10 reports the vibration strain energy as a function of the 
frequency for these two systems. Results show that, for the two structures, the modes at frequencies up 
to 80 kHz are essentially the same. This is clearly due to the common basic structural features, i.e., the 
conical shape. Panels b), c) and e), f) report the first two simulated modal shapes for the cone and the 
Turritella, respectively. Arrows indicating the displacement magnitude and direction are also reported to 
help the comparison. One can easily see that these two modes present the same vibration characteristics.


15

On the other hand, at higher frequencies, the greater structural complexity of the Turritella gives rise to 
a richer behavior, with more numerous peaks. These are related to the spiral, hierarchical structure of the 
real shell, with several more modes occurring above 100 kHz. Moreover, by comparing modes that are 
rather close in frequency, we can observe a more complex deformation behavior for the shell. For 
example, panels d) and g) show two high-frequency modes for the cone and the shell at about 162 kHz 
and 166 kHz, respectively. Both modes reported in panel d) and g) feature a mixed behavior but, while 
the former, belonging to the cone, has a dominant bending contribution along with torsional components, 
the mode of the Turritella also displays non-negligible longitudinal components, indicated by the vertical 
arrows, together with more pronounced torsional effects than for the conical structure. 


16

Figure 10: a) Calculated elastic strain energy spectrum for the Turritellinella sample TC1 (red) and for an 
ideal, conical shell (blue) with the same mass and length as the Turritella. The loss factor, in both cases, is 
equal to 5 × 10−3. b)-d) Numerical modal shapes for the conical shell geometry. Arrows represent 
displacement. b) First mode at 25.5 kHz, c) Second mode at 49.5 kHz, d) Higher frequency mode at 166.1 
kHz. e)-g) Numerical modal shapes for the Turritella shell geometry. Arrows represent displacement. e) 
First mode at 20.3 kHz, f) Second mode at 44.3 kHz, g) Higher frequency mode at 161.9 kHz.

In general, we can speculate that this behavior can help to achieve a better performance in terms of 
impact absorption, since a higher modal density i.e., a larger number of modes in the same frequency 
range, featured by the Turritella shell structure, indicates the presence of more equivalent spring/damper 
subsystems in the system and thus a greater efficiency in the capability of storing (and dissipating) strain 
energy, and therefore possibly a more resilient structure to impacts. It is interesting to observe that 
organisms with orthoconical shells belonging to the same phylum existed in the past (for example, the 
extinct nautiloid cephalopod Orthoceras (55)), but these were part of a taxon of nektonic animals, 
occupying a different biotype from that of the Turritella.

5. Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed a procedure that integrates microstructural analysis and FEA-based RUS 
to investigate the mechanical and vibrational properties of biological materials, implementing it on two 
varieties of seashells. The method allows to perform RUS on biological samples with complex shape and 
to obtain information not only regarding the frequency spectrum of the various vibrational modes, but 
also on their specific modal shapes, thus rendering a comparison with numerical data unambiguous. 
Characterization at the nanoscale reveals the extraordinarily complex microstructure of the shells. In 
general, this type of analysis can be useful to check the presence of heterogeneity, grading, anisotropy, 
and other mechanical features that might need to be included in macroscopic simulations, such as 
anisotropic moduli, multi-material components or with spatially graded properties. In this study, it was 
possible to use homogeneous mechanical properties for the entire structure, but in general, to fill the gap 
between the properties at the microscale and those at the macroscale, multiscale structural models 
should be designed and investigated, as has been done for other natural systems (56). Moreover, 
homogenization procedures might also be probably necessary. On the other hand, the results provide a 
starting guess for the macroscopic parameters to be introduced in the simulations. Here, we did not 
observe a significant change of the properties along the cross section of the samples, but the large 
dispersion of data in the AFM results is an intrinsic effect of the shell microstructure which turned out to 
be the dominant effect. From the nanoindentation experiments we could obtain the correct order of 
magnitude of the Young’s modulus to insert as a starting value for the FEA. The FEA simulations were 
performed on the actual shell geometry, as obtained from the CT scan. From the comparison with the 
experimental resonance frequencies and modal shapes, the mechanical properties that describe the 
macroscopic behavior of the structure were determined. The obtained Young’s modulus values are within 
the range obtained by the nanoindentation experiments, but differ slightly from sample to sample. 

Finally, the dynamic response of the complex structure of the Turritella was compared to that of a 
simplified, purely conical, shell. It was shown that, in addition to the same vibration modes as the ideal 
conical one, the real shell features a much richer spectral behavior, deriving from the greater structural 


17

complexity. This could also (but clearly, not exclusively), be related to improved attenuation capabilities 
of the structure under impacts. It is known that many natural systems that are optimized for impact 
attenuation feature hierarchical, interfacial, porous and composite architectures (5). In the dynamical 
analysis reported here, we have shown that the hierarchical and helicoconic characteristics play a 
significant role in the rich frequency response of the shells. To verify this hypothesis, the method 
presented here could be implemented in a systematic manner for the characterization of other biological 
structures of interest for their vibration behavior, focusing on hierarchical features, allowing to gain 
further insight into their evolutionary development, to reveal the effect of environmental conditions, like 
ecological stress, on different samples of shells of the same species and to draw inspiration for efficient 
impact resistant or vibration damping bioinspired designs.

Acknowledgements

YL, ML, FSS, GG, VFDP, ASG, NMP, FB, MT acknowledge the European Commission under the FET Open 
‘‘Boheme’’ Grant No. 863179. We thank the Science Museum of Trento (MUSE) for providing the Turritella 
terebra samples. Special thanks to Salvatore Guastella for the SEM images and to J. Pappas for useful 
discussions.

References

1. 
Wegst UGK, Bai H, Saiz E, Tomsia AP, Ritchie RO. Bioinspired structural materials. Nat Mater. 
2015;14(1). 

2. 
Aizenberg J, Weaver JC, Thanawala MS, Sundar VC, Morse DE, Fratzl P. Skeleton of Euplectella 
sp.: Structural Hierarchy from the Nanoscale to the Macroscale 10.1126/science.1112255. 
Science (80- ). 2005;309(5732). 

3. 
Connors M, Yang T, Hosny A, Deng Z, Yazdandoost F, Massaadi H, et al. Bioinspired design of 
flexible armor based on chiton scales. Nat Commun. 2019;10(1). 

4. 
Mayer G. Rigid biological systems as models for synthetic composites. Vol. 310, Science. 2005. 

5. 
Lazarus BS, Velasco-Hogan A, Gómez-del Río T, Meyers MA, Jasiuk I. A review of impact resistant 
biological and bioinspired materials and structures. J Mater Res Technol. 2020 Nov 1;9(6):15705–
38. 

6. 
Bosia F, Dal Poggetto V, Gliozzi AS, Greco G, Lott M, Miniaci M, et al. Optimized structures for 
vibration attenuation and sound control in nature: A review. Matter. 2022;5:3311–40. 

7. 
Yourdkhani M, Pasini D, Barthelat F. The hierarchical structure of seashells optimized to resist 
mechanical threats. WIT Trans Ecol Environ. 2010;138. 

8. 
Li H, Shen J, Wei Q, Li X. Dynamic self-strengthening of a bio-nanostructured armor — conch 
shell. Mater Sci Eng C. 2019;103. 

9. 
Yin Z, Hannard F, Barthelat F. Impact-resistant nacre-like transparent materials. Science (80- ). 
2019;364(6447). 


18

10. 
Checa AG. Physical and biological determinants of the fabrication of Molluscan shell 
microstructures. Vol. 5, Frontiers in Marine Science. 2018. 

11. 
Lowenstam HA, Weiner S. On Biomineralization. On Biomineralization. 1989. 

12. 
Lippmann F. Sedimentary Carbonate Minerals. Sedimentary Carbonate Minerals. 1973. 

13. 
Suzuki M, Nagasawa H. Mollusk shell structures and their formation mechanism. Vol. 91, 
Canadian Journal of Zoology. 2013. p. 349–66. 

14. 
Levi-Kalisman Y, Falini G, Addadi L, Weiner S. Structure of the nacreous organic matrix of a 
bivalve mollusk shell examined in the hydrated state using Cryo-TEM. J Struct Biol. 2001;135(1). 

15. 
Neves NM, Mano JF. Structure/mechanical behavior relationships in crossed-lamellar sea shells. 
In: Materials Science and Engineering C. 2005. 

16. 
Ritchie RO. The conflicts between strength and toughness. Nat Mater. 2011;10(11). 

17. 
Currey JD, Kohn AJ. Fracture in the crossed-lamellar structure of Conus shells. J Mater Sci. 
1976;11(9). 

18.
Kuhn-Spearing LT, Kessler H, Chateau E, Ballarini R, Heuer AH, Spearing SM. Fracture mechanisms 
of the Strombus gigas conch shell: Implications for the design of brittle laminates. J Mater Sci. 
1996;31(24). 

19. 
Kamat S, Su X, Ballarini R, Heuer AH. Structural basis for the fracture toughness of the shell of the 
conch Strombus gigas. Nature. 2000;405(6790). 

20. 
Barthelat F, Rim JE, Espinosa HD. A Review on the Structure and Mechanical Properties of 
Mollusk Shells – Perspectives on Synthetic Biomimetic Materials. In: Applied Scanning Probe 
Methods XIII. 2008. 

21. 
Weaver JC, Milliron GW, Miserez A, Evans-Lutterodt K, Herrera S, Gallana I, et al. The stomatopod 
dactyl club: A formidable damage-tolerant biological hammer. Science (80- ). 2012;336(6086). 

22. 
Wang L, CheungJason JTM, Pu F, Li D, Zhang M, Fan Y. Why do woodpeckers resist head impact 
injury: A biomechanical investigation. PLoS One. 2011;6(10). 

23. 
Damiens R, Rhee H, Hwang Y, Park SJ, Hammi Y, Lim H, et al. Compressive behavior of a turtle’s 
shell: Experiment, modeling, and simulation. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater. 2012;6. 

24. 
Li Y, Ortiz C, Boyce MC. Bioinspired, mechanical, deterministic fractal model for hierarchical 
suture joints. Phys Rev E - Stat Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 2012;85(3).

25. 
Gao C, Li Y. Mechanical model of bio-inspired composites with sutural tessellation. J Mech Phys 
Solids. 2019;122. 

26. 
PRITCHARD JJ, SCOTT JH, GIRGIS FG. The structure and development of cranial and facial sutures. 
J Anat. 1956;90(1). 

27. 
Migliori A, Sarrao JL, Visscher WM, Bell TM, Lei M, Fisk Z, et al. Resonant ultrasound 
spectroscopic techniques for measurement of the elastic moduli of solids. Phys B Phys Condens 
Matter. 1993;183(1–2). 

28. 
Remillieux MC, Ulrich TJ, Payan C, Rivière J, Lake CR, Le Bas PY. Resonant ultrasound 


19

spectroscopy for materials with high damping and samples of arbitrary geometry. J Geophys Res 
Solid Earth. 2015;120(7). 

29. 
Longo R, Laux D, Pagano S, Delaunay T, Le Clézio E, Arnould O. Elastic characterization of wood by 
Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS): a comprehensive study. Wood Sci Technol. 2018;52(2). 

30. 
Longo R, Delaunay T, Laux D, El Mouridi M, Arnould O, Le Clézio E. Wood elastic characterization 
from a single sample by resonant ultrasound spectroscopy. Ultrasonics. 2012;52(8). 

31. 
Bernard S, Grimal Q, Laugier P. Accurate measurement of cortical bone elasticity tensor with 
resonant ultrasound spectroscopy. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater. 2013;18. 

32. 
Daoui H, Cai X, Boubenider F, Laugier P, Grimal Q. Assessment of trabecular bone tissue elasticity 
with resonant ultrasound spectroscopy. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater. 2017;74. 

33. 
Mazzotti M, Sugino C, Kohtanen E, Erturk A, Ruzzene M. Experimental identification of high order 
Lamb waves and estimation of the mechanical properties of a dry human skull. Ultrasonics. 
2021;113. 

34. 
Wang R, Fan F, Zhang Q, Li X, Niu H, Laugier P. Elastic constants identification of irregular hard 
biological tissue materials using FEM-based resonant ultrasound spectroscopy. J Mech Behav 
Biomed Mater. 2019;96. 

35. 
Nguyen CPT, Schoenherr P, Juli L, Seidel J. In-depth atomic force microscopy investigation of 
nanoscale mechanical properties of Pāua nacre. Nanoscale. 2021;13(40). 

36. 
Jung JY, Naleway SE, Yaraghi NA, Herrera S, Sherman VR, Bushong EA, et al. Structural analysis of 
the tongue and hyoid apparatus in a woodpecker. Acta Biomater. 2016;37. 

37. 
Jung JY, Pissarenko A, Yaraghi NA, Naleway SE, Kisailus D, Meyers MA, et al. A comparative 
analysis of the avian skull: Woodpeckers and chickens. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater. 2018;84. 

38. 
Presser V, Gerlach K, Vohrer A, Nickel KG, Dreher WF. Determination of the elastic modulus of 
highly porous samples by nanoindentation: A case study on sea urchin spines. J Mater Sci. 
2010;45(9). 

39. 
Losic D, Short K, Mitchell JG, Lal R, Voelcker NH. AFM nanoindentations of diatom biosilica 
surfaces. Langmuir. 2007;23(9). 

40. 
Chen DA, Klotz LE, Ross BE. Mathematically Characterizing Natural Systems for Adaptable, 
Biomimetic Design. In: Procedia Engineering. 2016. 

41. 
Chen DA, Ross BE, Klotz LE. Parametric analysis of a spiraled shell: Learning from nature’s 
adaptable structures. Designs. 2018;2(4). 

42. 
Chen DA. The Adaptable Growth of Seashells: Informing the Design of the Built Environment 
through Quantitative Biomimicry [Internet]. Clemson University; 2016. Available from: 
https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/all_dissertations/1740

43. 
Pappas JL, Miller DJ. A Generalized Approach to the Modeling and Analysis of 3D Surface 
Morphology in Organisms. PLoS One. 2013;8(10). 

44. 
Deng X, Hasan A, Elsharkawy S, Tejeda-montes E, Tarakina V, Greco G, et al. Topographically 
guided hierarchical mineralization. Mater Today Bio. 2021;100–19. 


20

45. 
Oliver WC, Pharr GM, Introduction I. An improved technique for determining hardness and elastic 
modulus using load and displacement sensing indentation experiments. J Mater Res. 1992;7(6). 

46. 
Hertz H. Ueber die Berührung fester elastischer Körper. J fur die Reine und Angew Math. 
1882;1882(92):156–71. 

47. 
Butt HJ, Cappella B, Kappl M. Force measurements with the atomic force microscope: Technique, 
interpretation and applications. Vol. 59, Surface Science Reports. 2005. 

48. 
Stassi S, Cooperstein I, Tortello M, Pirri CF, Magdassi S, Ricciardi C. Reaching silicon-based NEMS 
performances with 3D printed nanomechanical resonators. Nat Commun. 2021;12(1). 

49. 
Chen CC, Lin CC, Liu LG, Sinogeikin S V., Bass JD. Elasticity of single-crystal calcite and 
rhodochrosite by Brillouin spectroscopy. Am Mineral. 2001;86(11–12). 

50.
Urey HC, Lowenstam HA, Epstein S, Mckinney CR. Measurement of paleotemperatures and 
temperatures of the upper cretaceous of England, Denmark, and the southeastern United States. 
Bull Geol Soc Am. 1951;62(4). 

51. 
Nielsen C. Trochophora Larvae: Cell-Lineages, Ciliary Bands, and Body Regions. 1. Annelida and 
Mollusca. In: Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution. 
2004. 

52. 
Lorrain A, Gillikin DP, Paulet YM, Chauvaud L, Le Mercier A, Navez J, et al. Strong kinetic effects 
on Sr/Ca ratios in the calcitic bivalve Pecten maximus. Geology. 2005;33(12). 

53. 
Yoshimura T, Nakashima R, Suzuki A, Tomioka N, Kawahata H. Oxygen and carbon isotope 
records of cultured freshwater pearl mussel Hyriopsis sp. shell from Lake Kasumigaura, Japan. J 
Paleolimnol. 2010;43(3). 

54. 
Trueman ER, Brown AC. The Burrowing Habit of Marine Gastropods. Adv Mar Biol. 1992;28(C). 

55. 
Kröger B. Revision of Middle Ordovician orthoceratacean nautiloids from Baltoscandia. Acta 
Palaeontol Pol. 2004;49(1). 

56. 
Bar-On B, Barth FG, Fratzl P, Politi Y. Multiscale structural gradients enhance the biomechanical 
functionality of the spider fang. Nat Commun. 2014;5. 


21

Supplemental material

SEM

Figure S1.SEM images of the Turritellinella tricarinata shell TC1. a)-b): second-order lamellae at different 
magnifications. c)-d): different views of the third-order lamellae.


22

Atomic Force Microscopy

Figure S2 Red symbols: experimental values of the reduced Young’s modulus, 𝐸𝑟 obtained on a test fused 
silica sample by means of AFM force vs distance curves and fit with the Hertz model. The blue dashed line 
is the reference 𝐸𝑟 value for fused silica and diamond. 

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

0

20

40

60

80

100

 Experiment
 Reference value

Reduced Young's modulus (GPa)

Fused silica sample

Er=66 ± 4 GPa

Er=68 GPa


23

Figure S3 Topography, a) and phase, b) images of a 2 × 2 𝜇𝑚2 polished surface of the Turritellinella 
tricarinata sample TC1. c) Young’s modulus map of the area shown in a). d) Distribution of the obtained 
Young’s modulus values reported in the map shown in c).

Figure S4.Topography a) and phase b) image acquired, with an AFM imaging silicon probe on the 
polished surface of the inner layer of the T. tricarinata shell TC1. 


24

Instrumented nanoindentation

Figure S5: Resin shell cross section interface observed with light microscopy. 

Figure S6:Representative maps of the mechanical properties of the 3 different types of samples analyzed. 
Note that the scales are not the same.


25

Ultrasonic measurements

Figure S7 Upper panel: gray lines are the frequency spectra recorded along the longitudinal axis of the 
Turritellinella tricarinata shell TC1 while the black line represents their average and the yellow symbols 
the position of the main peaks. Central panel: the normalized modal shapes for some of the main 
resonance frequencies for the shell. Lower panel, a)-d) shows the vibration modes obtained by finite 
elements simulations after optimization of the material parameters (see main text for details).


26

Figure S8 Upper panel: gray lines are the frequency spectra recorded along the longitudinal axis of the 
Turritellinella tricarinata shell TC2 while the black line represents their average and the yellow dots the 
position of the main peaks. Central panel: the normalized modal shapes for some of the main resonance 
frequencies for the shell. Lower panel, a)-d) shows the vibration modes obtained by finite elements 
simulations after optimization of the material parameters (see main text for details).


27

FEA-based Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy

Figure S9 Upper panel: color map of the difference between experiment and simulation for the first three 
resonance modes as a function of the material parameters (Young’s modulus and Poisson ratio) for the 
Turritellinella tricarinata shell, sample TC1. The red dot represents the point that matches experiments 
and simulation for all the resonances considered. Lower panel: comparison between experimental and 
simulated eigenfrequencies.


28

Figure S10 Upper panel: color map of the difference between experiment and simulation for the first 
three resonance modes as a function of the material parameters (Young’s modulus and Poisson ratio) for 
the Turritellinella tricarinata shell, sample TC2. The red dot represents the point that matches 
experiments and simulation for all the resonances considered. Lower panel: comparison between 
experimental and simulated eigenfrequencies.


