1

Dilemma in All-optical Characterization of Single-layer NiI2

Multiferroics

Yucheng Jiang1,2,3, Yangliu Wu4, Jinlei Zhang2, Jingxuan Wei1, Bo Peng4,* and 

Cheng-Wei Qiu1,*

1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, 4 

Engineering Drive 3, Singapore 117583, Singapore

2Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Micro and Nano Heat Fluid Flow Technology and Energy 

Application, School of Physical Science and Technology, Suzhou University of Science and 

Technology, Suzhou, 215009, China

3Science, Mathematics and Technology (SMT), Singapore University of Technology and 

Design (SUTD), 8 Somapah Road, Singapore 487372, Singapore

4National Engineering Research Center of Electromagnetic Radiation Control Materials, 

School of Electronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology 

of China, Chengdu 611731, China

*e-mail: bo_peng@uestc.edu.cn and chengwei.qiu@nus.edu.sg

The search for two-dimensional multiferroic materials is an exciting yet

challenging endeavor. Recently, Song et al. reported the exciting discovery of type-II 
multiferroic order in an antiferromagnetic (AFM) NiI2 single layer, and concluded the 
ferroelectric (FE) polarization induced by a helical magnetic order1. Their finding was 
presented from all-optical experimental evidence, based on the methods of second 
harmonic generation (SHG) and linear dichroism (LD). However, the all-optical 
characterizations alone cannot serve as unanimous evidence of the “FE” existence, 
particularly in conjunction with magnetic orders in a single-layer multiferroic. A main 
argument is that their observed SHG and LD signals may just be manifested from the 
magnetic-order induced breaking of spatial-inversion or time-reversal symmetry
instead of FE order, and thus cannot endorse the finding of a single-layer multiferroic.

Accurate measurements of magnetic and electric orders are very essential to make 

a reliable judgement of a multiferroic. With the device’s thickness approaching atomic 
scale, its magnetic or electrical signals will become too weak to be collected by 
traditional measurements2. Therefore, advanced all-optical probing methods have been 


2

deployed to characterize the magnetism and ferroelectricity, especially for a single layer,
such as magneto-optical Kerr effect, reflective magnetic circular dichroism (RMCD), 
SHG and LD 2,3. Among them, SHG and LD represent two typical optical approaches 
to investigate the domain structure and phase transition of ferroelectrics4,5. As indirect 
characterizations of ferroelectricity, their signals were thought to reflect the breaking of 
lattice inversion symmetry. To date, for a single ferroic, optical methods have made 
great success in the exploration of ferromagnetism or ferroelectricity in two-
dimensional systems2,4,6. However, all-optical methods are unreliable to make a 
judgement of single-layer multiferroics, especially for the antiferromagnets7-9. In this 
case, the SHG and LD responses are not necessarily associated with FE polarization, 

but reflect the magnetic-order induced breaking of inversion symmetry. Without electric 
and magnetic fields applied, the all-optical methods cannot scrutinize the origin of 
optical signals.

In the original paper,1 the SHG and LD data were interpreted as solid evidence for 

ferroelectricity in the NiI2 single layer, in conjunction with the observation of helical 
magnetic (TN,2) phase transition. It was an important experimental basis to identify the 
single-layer NiI2 as a Type-II multiferroic. However, several previous works have 
revealed the inconvenient truth that the magnetic order can also lead to SHG and LD 
signals directly by breaking an inversion symmetry (see Extended Data Fig. 1)7,8, 
without the need of inducing an FE polarization. For example, an AFM CrI3 bilayer

exhibits a giant electric-dipole SHG, despite its centrosymmetric crystal structure7. The 
observed SHG domains tally with
AFM
domains, both of which
show

synchronous responses to the external magnetic field (see Figs. 1 f-g in Ref.7). That 
means the SHG actually reflects the information of magnetic structure instead of 
electric structure. SHG signals originates from the AFM-order induced breaking of 
spatial-inversion and time-reversal symmetries. Another typical example is shown in 
Ref.8 (see Extended Data Fig. 1c). In the FePS3 crystal, a sharp onset in LD signature 
is observed at 118 K, at which AFM phase transition occurs too. It is justified that the 
SHG and LD data cannot sufficiently prove the existence of ferroelectricity, particularly 
in the presence of antiferromagnetism. For the NiI2 single layer, the authors provided 
the data of polarization domains and phase transition through all-optical methods and 
conventional theoretical analysis1. But, magnetic orders not only break the inversion 
symmetry, but also induce rotation of polarization plane due to Faraday effect. Strictly, 
LD, SHG and polarized microscopy images cannot sufficiently validate FE polarization 
in the presence of magnetic orders. The coexistence of FE and magnetic orders
complicates the situation, causing that it is impossible to distinguish FE polarization 
from magnetic orders through all-optical results.

In Fig. 1a, we analyze the effect of magnetic order on the symmetry of NiI2. After 


3

an operation of spatial-inversion (r → −r) operation or a time-reversal (t → −t), NiI2 is 
converted to a different magnetic state. The helical magnetic structures along the 
propagation vector Qx break both spatial-inversion and time-reversal symmetries. In 
this case, one cannot exclude the possibility that the magnetic order causes SHG and 
LD signals. The resulting optical domains may correspond to the magnetic domains 
instead of FE domains in NiI2. To compare magnetic domains with optical domains, we 
performed the RMCD and LD measurements in few-layer NiI2 with different magnetic 
fields applied as shown in Figs. 1 b and c. It is well known that the RMCD map can 
detect the magnetic domains. Good consistency has been shown between RMCD and 
LD maps. With an external magnetic field applied, the LD domains change 

synchronously with the switching of magnetic domains. Therefore, the observed LD 
signals are more likely to originate from the magnetic structure, similar to the cases of 
CrI3 bilayer and few-layer FePS3.

In general, SHG and LD can be widely captured in a variety of materials with 

drastically different origins (see Table 1)4,10-13. For non-ferroic and FE materials, SHG 
and LD can be attributed to non-centrosymmetric lattice structures. For 
centrosymmetric AFM materials, they result from breaking inversion symmetry
induced by AFM order. Without electric or magnetic fields applied, it is difficult to 
clarify the origin of optical signals only by using all-optical methods.

In our opinion, the NiI2 single layer may be a candidate as a two-dimensional 

multiferroic, but requires more direct evidence apart from those all-optical results. The 
given experimental data are not sufficient to support the authors’ conclusion1. It calls 
for more direct magnetic and electric measurements to confirm the multiferroic 
properties of NiI2 single layer. The original paper lacks the magnetic- and electric-field 
control of SHG or LD domains, making it impossible to determine whether optical 
signals result from FE polarization or magnetic order. Next, the authors should probe 
the FE domains by using a direct electrical method like piezoresponse force microscopy. 
If possible, it would be better if they compare the FE domains with SHG domains 
directly by mapping the experimental data. It is therefore believed that the discovery of 
multiferroic single layer is questionable based on the current evidence. 


4

Fig. 1| Magnetic order and optical domains of NiI2. a, Schematic of the helical 
magnetic structure of NiI2, showing a spatial-inversion (r → −r) or time-reversal (t → 
−t) operation. b, RMCD and LD intensity images of few-layer NiI2 under different 
magnetic fields at 11 K for comparison. The scale bar is 1 μm. c, Schematic of RMCD 

and LD measurements for a NiI2 flake (see Methods).

Table 1| Classification of the materials showing the SHG and LD signals.

Non ferroic
Single ferroic
Multiferroic

Type
Non FE or AFM
FE
AFM
FE+AFM

Breaking 

of 

inversion 

symmetry

or

SHG
α-SiO24
BaTiO310
CrI3 bilayer7
MnWO412

LD
Black phosphorus11
In2Se35
FePS38
Pb(TiO)Cu4(PO4)413


5

Methods
A 532 nm laser was coupled to the Witec Raman system with closed cycle
superconducting magnet and He optical cryostat. The light of ~0.6 μW was modulated 
by photoelastic modulator and focused onto samples by a long working distance 
objective (50×, NA = 0.45). The reflected beams were collected by the same objective, 
passed through a non-polarizing beamsplitter cube into a photodetector (see Fig. 1c).
For RMCD measurements, the retardance is λ/4 and PEM frequency is 50 kHz. For LD 
measurements, the retardance and PEM frequency is doubled. The detailed 
experimental and measurements by magneto-optical-electric joint-measurement 
scanning imaging system (MOEJSI) are shown in the following parts.

Data availability
All data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

References
1
Song, Q. et al. Evidence for a single-layer van der Waals multiferroic. Nature 602, 601-

605 (2022).

2
Huang, B. et al. Layer-dependent ferromagnetism in a van der Waals crystal down to the 

monolayer limit. Nature 546, 270-273 (2017).

3
Neacsu, C. C., van Aken, B. B., Fiebig, M. & Raschke, M. B. Second-harmonic near-field 

imaging of ferroelectric domain structure of YMnO3. Phys. Rev. B 79, 100107 (2009).

4
Ok, K. M., Chi, E. O. & Halasyamani, P. S. Bulk characterization methods for non-

centrosymmetric materials: second-harmonic generation, piezoelectricity, pyroelectricity, 

and ferroelectricity. Chem. Soc. Rev. 35, 710-717 (2006).

5
Zheng, C. et al. Room temperature in-plane ferroelectricity in van der Waals In2Se3. Sci. 

Adv. 4, eaar7720.

6
Abdelwahab, I. et al. Giant second-harmonic generation in ferroelectric NbOI2. Nat. 

Photon. (2022).

7
Sun, Z. et al. Giant nonreciprocal second-harmonic generation from antiferromagnetic 

bilayer CrI3. Nature 572, 497-501 (2019).

8
Zhang, H. et al. Cavity-enhanced linear dichroism in a van der Waals antiferromagnet. 

Nat. Photon. 16, 311-317 (2022).

9
Hwangbo, K. et al. Highly anisotropic excitons and multiple phonon bound states in a van 

der Waals antiferromagnetic insulator. Nat. Nanotechnol. 16, 655-660 (2021).

10
Lu, H. A. et al. Second‐harmonic generation of poled BaTiO3 thin films. Appl. Phys. Lett.

62, 1314-1316 (1993).

11
Qiao, J., Kong, X., Hu, Z. X., Yang, F. & Ji, W. High-mobility transport anisotropy and linear 

dichroism in few-layer black phosphorus. Nat. Commun. 5, 4475 (2014).

12
Meier, D. et al. Observation and coupling of domains in a spin-spiral multiferroic. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 102, 107202 (2009).

13
Kimura, K., Katsuyoshi, T., Sawada, Y., Kimura, S. & Kimura, T. Imaging switchable 

magnetoelectric quadrupole domains via nonreciprocal linear dichroism. Commun. Mater.

1, 39 (2020).


6

Acknowledgements C.W.Q. would like to acknowledge the support from National 
Research Foundation Singapore (CRP26-2021-0004). B.P. thanks the financial support
from National Science Foundation of China (52021001).

Author contributions C.W.Q. conceived this work. Y.C.J. and B.P. wrote the 
manuscript with inputs of C.W.Q. and J.L.Z. Y.L.W. and B.P. performed the RMCD and 
LD experiments. All of authors contributed to the discussion.

Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.


7

Extended data Fig. 1| Reproduced SHG and LD responses of NiI2 (Ref.1), CrI3
(Ref.7) and FePS3 (Ref.8). Temperature dependence of SHG intensity a, for one- to 
four-layer NiI2 and b, for CrI3 bilayer. c, LD intensity as a function of temperature for 
a FePS3 multilayer, showing a phase transition at 118 K. The data are collected from 
Ref.1,7,8.


Magneto-optical-electric joint-measurement 

scanning imaging system for identification of two-dimensional

vdW multiferroic

Yangliu Wu, Bo Peng*

School of Electronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and 

Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China

*e-mail: bo_peng@uestc.edu.cn

Sample fabrication
NiI2 flakes were prepared by a normal and widely-used mechanical exfoliation method. 
The few-layer NiI2 were exfoliated via PDMS films in a glovebox from NiI2 bulk 
crystals, synthesized by chemical vapor transport method from elemental precursors 

with molar ratio Ni:I = 1:2. All exfoliated hBN, NiI2 and graphene flakes were 
transferred onto pre-patterned Au electrodes on SiO2/Si substrates one by one to create 
a heterostructure in glovebox and were further in-situ loaded into a microscopy optical 
cryostat for optical measurements in the glovebox. The whole process of NiI2 sample
fabrication and measurement were kept out of atmosphere1,2.
Optical measurements
by the magneto-optical-electric joint-measurement 

scanning imaging system (MOEJSI)
As an advanced imaging system, the magneto-optical-electric joint-measurement 
scanning imaging system (MOEJSI) brings spectroscopic techniques with unmatched 
spatial resolution to very low temperature, high magnetic field and high electric field 
measurements3. It was developed for investigating the magnetic and ferroelectric 
properties
and their mutual control
through
magneto-optical-electric joint-

measurements, besides Raman and photoluminescence features4-7. In particular, the 
RMCD loops and imaging, linear dichroism (LD) imaging and polarization-electric 
field hysteresis loop can be achieved when simultaneously applied high magnetic field
(7 T) and electric field (100 V) at low temperature of 10 K.

The MOEJSI system is built based on a Witec alpha 300R Plus low-wavenumber 
confocal Raman imaging microscope with a spatial resolution reaching diffraction limit, 
which is integrated with a closed cycle superconducting magnet (7 T) with a room 
temperature bore and a closed cycle cryogen-free microscopy optical cryostat (10 K)
with electronic transport measurement assemblies8-10, as shown in Fig. 1a. This system
achieves multi-field coupling of magnetic fields, electric fields and optical fields and 
realize high speed, sensitivity and resolution. For use in the room temperature bore
superconducting magnet, an extended snout sample mount is specially designed for the
cryogen-free microscopy optical cryostat (Fig. 1b). The microscopy optical cryostat
directly anchored on the XY scanning stage of Witec Raman system for scanning 


imaging. The objective mounted in a lens tube and the extended snout enter into the 
room-temperature bore from top and bottom, respectively (Fig. 1b and 1c).

For RMCD and LD measurements, a free-space 532 nm laser of ~2 μW was linearly
polarized at 45° to the photoelastic modulator (PEM) slow axis and sinusoidally phase-
modulated by PEM (RMCD: 50 KHz; LD: 100 KHz), with a maximum retardance of 
λ/4 for RMCD and λ/2 for LD. The light was further reflected by a non-polarizing 
beamsplitter cube (R/T = 30/70) and then directly focused onto samples by a long 
working distance 50× objective (Zeiss, WD = 9.1 mm, NA = 0.55). The reflected beam
which was collected by the same objective passed through the same non-polarizing 
beamsplitter cube and was detected by a photomultiplier (PMT). The PMT and PEM
coupled with lock-in amplifier and Witec scanning imaging system (Fig. 2 and 3). The 
RMCD and LD maps as a function of magnetic field are shown in Fig. 4. With a
magnetic field, the LD domains change synchronously with the switching of magnetic 
domains. Therefore, the observed LD signals originate from the magnetic structure, 
rather than ferroelectric polarization. Only the LD optical method can not identify the 
existence of ferroelectric polarization and is not reliable. The electric measurements, 
including P-E, C-E and J-E hysteresis loop must be done and mutual control of 
magnetic orders and ferroelectric polarization should be observed.

Data availability
All data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

References
1.
Liu, Z. et al. Observation of nonreciprocal magnetophonon effect in 
nonencapsulated few-layered CrI3. Sci. Adv. 6, eabc7628 (2020).

2.
Guo, K. et al. Layer dependence of stacking order in nonencapsulated few-
layer CrI3. Sci. China. Mater. 63, 413-420 (2020).

3.
Liu, Z., Deng, L. & Peng, B. Ferromagnetic and ferroelectric two-dimensional 
materials for memory application. Nano Res. 14, 1802-1813 (2021).

4.
Peng, B. et al. Multiwavelength magnetic coding of helical luminescence in 
ferromagnetic 2D layered CrI3. iScience 25, 103623 (2022).

5.
Liu, Z. et al. Observation of intrinsic crystal phase in bare few-layer CrI3. 
Nanophotonics 11, 4409-4417 (2022).

6.
Zhao, X. et al. Strong moiré excitons in high-angle twisted transition metal 
dichalcogenide homobilayers with robust commensuration. Nano Lett. 22, 
203-210 (2022).

7.
Peng, B. et al. Pattern-selective molecular epitaxial growth of single-
crystalline perovskite arrays toward ultrasensitive and ultrafast photodetector. 
Nano Lett. 22, 2948-2955 (2022).

8.
Li, Q. et al. Enhanced valley Zeeman splitting in Fe-doped monolayer MoS2. 
ACS Nano 14, 4636-4645 (2020).

9.
Fu, W. et al. An anomalous magneto-optic effect in epitaxial indium selenide 
layers. Nano Lett. 20, 5330–5338 (2020).


10.
Wang, Y. et al. Spin-valley locking effect in defect states of monolayer MoS2. 
Nano Lett. 20, 2129-2136 (2020).

Acknowledgements B.P. thanks the financial support from National Science
Foundation of China (52021001, 62250073).

Author contributions B.P. conceived this work. Y.L.W. and B.P. performed the RMCD 
and LD experiments. All of authors contributed to the discussion.

Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.

Fig. 1 | The photograph of the magneto-optical-electric joint-measurement 
scanning imaging system (MOEJSI). a, Witec 300R Raman imaging microscope, 
closed cycle superconducting magnet (7 T) with room-temperature bore and cryogen-
free microscopy optical cryostat (10 K) with extended snout sample mount are 
integrated together. b, An objective in an extended tube is coupled with the extended 
snout of the microscopy optical cryostat. c, The objective and the extended snout get 
into the room-temperature bore of superconducting magnet from top and bottom, 
respectively.

PMT

PEM

Polarizer

Microscopy Optical Cryostat
on XY Scanning Stage

Witec
300R
Raman 
System

Room Temperature Bore 
Superconducting Magnet

Microscopy Cryostat 

Objective

Room Temperature Bore 

Snout

a
b

c

Lens Tube


Fig. 2 | The photograph of free-space RMCD and LD optical path.

Fig. 3 | Schematic of free-space RMCD and LD optical path.

PMT

PEM Polarizer
Mirror

X stage

Y stage

Z stage

R stage

Hole for free-space optical path

NP BS Cube

PEM

Objective

Polarizer

45o

NiI2

PMT

Lens

Lock-in 
Amplifier

PMT: Photomultiplier 
Tube
PEM: Photo-elastic 
Modulator
NP BS: Non-Polarizing 
Beam-splitter 


Fig. 4 | RMCD and LD maps as a function of magnetic field. The scale bar is 1 m.

R

M

C

D

L

D

0.1

-0.1

0

Intensity

-0.3

0.3

0

Intensity

-1.25 T
-1.0 T
-0.75 T
-0.5 T
-0.25 T
-0 T
+0.25 T
+0.5 T
+0.75 T
+1.0 T
+1.25 T


