Transfer Functions of Proteinoid Microspheres

Panagiotis Mougkogiannis, Neil Phillips, Andrew Adamatzky

Unconventional Computing Laboratory, University of the West of England, Bristol, UK

Abstract

Proteinoids, or thermal proteins, are inorganic entities formed by heating amino acids to their melting point
and commencing polymerisation to form polymeric chains. Typically, their diameters range from 1 µm to
10 µm. Some amino acids incorporated into proteinoid chains are more hydrophobic than others, leading
proteinoids to cluster together when they are present in aqueous solutions at specific concentrations, allowing
them to grow into microspheres.
The peculiar structure of proteinoids composed of linked amino acids
endows them with unique properties, including action-potential like spiking of electrical potential. These
unique properties make ensembles of proteinoid microspheres a promising substrate for designing future
artificial brains and unconventional computing devices. To evaluate a potential of proteinoid microspheres
for unconventional electronic devices we measure and analyse the data-transfer capacities of proteinoid
microspheres. In experimental laboratory conditions we demonstrate that the transfer function of proteinoids
microspheres is a nontrivial phenomenon, which might be due to the wide range of proteinoid shapes, sizes,
and structures.

Keywords:
thermal proteins, proteinoids, microspheres, unconventional computing

1. Introduction

Thermal proteins — proteinoids [1] – are produced by heating amino acids to their melting point and
initiation of polymerisation to produce polymeric chains. The tri-functional amino acids undergo cyclisation
at high temperature and become solvents and initiators of polymerisation for other amino acids [2, 1].
At moderate temperature in aqueous solution proteinoids swell into microspheres [1]. A communication
between microspheres occurs via internal material exchange through the junctions [3]. A unique feature of
proteinoid microspheres is that they maintain a steady state membrane potential 20–70 mV without any
stimulating current and some microspheres in the population display the opposite polarization steadily [4].
Electrical membrane potentials, oscillations, and action potentials are observed in the microspheres impaled
with microelectrodes: the microspheres exhibit action-potential like spikes. The electrical activity of the
microspheres also includes spontaneous bursts of electrical potential (flip-flops), and miniature potential
activities at flopped phases [5]. In [6] we speculated that ensembles of proteinoid microspheres can be used
to implement cascades of logical functions via spiking activity and thus form structures similar to micro-
brains. This could pave the way for the development of programmable “synthetic organisms,” which could be
used in fields as diverse as drug delivery and medical diagnostics. There may be far-reaching consequences
for medicine and computing if synthetic molecular computers are developed and proteinoids are used to
govern the behaviour of cells [7]. While considering proteinoid microspheres as novel organic nano-electronic
circuits [6] a first step would be to investigate electrical characteristics of the substrate.

2. Methods

The following materials were used in the experiments: L-glutamic acid (L-Glu) CAS-No: 56-86-0, L-
aspartic acid (L-Asp) CAS-No: 56-84-8, L-lysine (L-Lys) CAS-No: 57-82-49-2, L-histidine (L-His) CAS-
No: 71-00-1, and L-phenylalanine (L-Phe) CAS-No: 63-91-2 purchased from Sigma Aldrich Ltd, UK, with

∗Corresponding author: Panagiotis.Mougkogiannis@uwe.ac.uk (Panagiotis Mougkogiannis)

Preprint submitted to Journal
February 13, 2023

arXiv:2302.05255v1  [cs.ET]  9 Feb 2023


a reagent grade exceeding 98%. Poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA) with a molecular weight between 80,000 and
100,000 was purchased from Polysciences Ltd, UK. The method developed by Lugasi [8] and Kolitz-Domb [9]
was used as the foundation for the proteinoids’ synthetic procedure.
The electrical properties of proteinoids was measured using an impedance – amplitude – phase frequency
response network analyzer (C60, Cypher Instruments, London, UK [10]). The C60 network analyzer applies
2 Vpp sinusoidal voltage waveform across the protenoids across the frequency range (10 Hz to 4 MHz). The
network analyzer was connected to CypherGrapgh (V1.28.0) software package on a computer to control
functionality and store measurements.
The software evaluates the waveform after it passes through the
sample and displays a Bode plot, the frequency response was analyzed and measurements stored. Using the
C60, it is possible to determine how the proteinoids responds to an applied signal. Using the C60, changes
in the proteinoid’s electrical performance over time can also be recorded.
The electrical impedance of proteinoids was measured using a digital Inductance Capacitance Resistance
(LCR) meter (model 891, BK Precision Ltd, UK [11]). The LCR meter was configured to scan across the
20 Hz to 300 kHz frequency range applying 1 Vrms sinusoidal voltage waveform across the proteinoids. The
phase angle describes the amount of time between the application of a voltage and the production of a
current, whereas the impedance magnitude represents the opposition to current flow at a specific frequency.
The magnitude and phase angle of an impedance can be used to calculate both its real and imaginary
components. Due to its large scan range, the LCR metre model 891 is particularly helpful for measuring the
electrical impedance of proteinoids.
The proteinoids were examined with FEI Quanta 650 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope
(SEM). The FEI Quanta 650 is a highly effective tool for analysing the structure and composition of gold-
coated material samples. This SEM can acquire high-resolution images of the sample’s surface, allowing for a
thorough analysis of its properties. The gold coating functions as both a barrier and a conductor, permitting
the creation of the charged-particle beam crucial to the imaging capabilities of the SEM.
Different proteinoids solutions, including water and NaCl 0.15 M ionic solution, were deposited on a
crystal of Nicolet iS 5 FTIR Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The spectra were collected throughout a
scan range of 400 to 4000 cm−1 with a resolution of 4 cm−1. The Bicolet Omnic programme (OMNIC
Series Software, Thermo Scientific) was used for data collection and spectrum analysis following FT-IR
spectroscopy. Spectrum discrepancies between samples and NaCl 0.15 M ionic solution were identified by
comparing them to a reference spectrum of the proteinoid sample in water.

3. Results

Amide I and II, which are characteristic of the peptide backbone [12], are among the functional groups
whose vibrations and absorptions are shown in the spectrum (Fig.1). These peaks are attributable to the
numerous functional groups found in amino acids, including the C-H stretching modes of methylene groups,
the C-N and C-O stretching of amide bonds, and the C=O stretching of the carboxyl group. Several peaks
become apparent in FT-IR analyses of the proteinoid solutions (Fig. 1). You may find these peaks at 1635,
1943, 2108, 2349, and 3258 cm−1. Amide II band, resulting to vibrations of peptide bond between amino
acid residues in proteinoid, is represented by peak at 1635 cm−1. The stretching of the peptide group bonds
causes the peak at 1943 cm−1, which corresponds to the amide I band. Supplemental FT-IR spectra of
proteinoids provide additional evidence that proteinoids can be formed by heat condensation of amino acids,
confirming the findings in the main article.
The SEM images of proteinoid microspheres, ranging in size from 2.5 nm to 400 nm (Figs. 2b and 2c), and
the histogram (Fig. 2d) provide information about the structure and composition of proteinoids. The SEM
images (Fig. 2b and Fig. 2c) reveal the proteinoid’s intricate structure. Larger aggregates of proteinoids
lie with smaller, more irregularly shaped particles in the image.
The image also shows the proteinoid’s
many grooves and bumps, which might be necessary for its electrical function. To learn more about how
proteinoids are distributed in terms of size, we can look at the histogram of proteinoids whose diameters fall
between 2.5 nm and 400 nm. The histogram displays a broad distribution, with the bulk of the proteinoids
lying between the 5 nm and 400 nm size boundaries. This suggests that the proteinoids consist of a wide
range of constituent building blocks, each of which is of a different size.
Measuring the proteinoid solution NaCl 0.15 M with a C60 impedance-amplitude analyzer over a fre-
quency range of 10 Hz to 4 MHz yields a Bode plot that provides insight into the substrate’s characteristics.

2


Figure 1: FT-IR spectra of proteinoids with codes 12, 11, 6, 8, 12, 12F, 11 F, 10, 13, and 2 are displayed in the graphic, with
the FT-IR vibrations of water shown in red. These spectra show that several chemical groups, such as amide I and II, aliphatic
C-H stretching, and aromatic C-H stretching, are present in proteinoid solutions.

Figure 2:
(a) Proteinoid L-Glu:L-Asp:L-Phe chemical structure.
(b) Examining the nanoscale structure of proteinoids
nanospheres, with a bar representing 400 nm for scale. (c) Proteinoid L-Glu:L-Asp:L-Phe , seen at a microscopic level, develop
intricate structures that resemble the neural networks of a genuine brain. d) With a left-skewed distribution spanning from 2.5
nm to 420 nm, this histogram demonstrates the polydispersity of the L-Glu:L-Asp:L-Phe proteinoid nanospheres.

3


Figure 3: a)The Bode plot of a proteinoid L-Glu:L-Asp solution in 0.15 M NaCl shows the gain response of the proteinoid
to changing frequencies indicating the stability of the system. b) The Bode plot of a proteinoid L-Glu:L-Asp solution in 0.15
M NaCl reveals significant differences in the magnitude and phase of the response, indicating a strong influence of the salt
concentration on the proteinoid’s structure and function. c) Bode plot of proteinoids L-Glu:L-Asp solution (5g /3ml NaCl 0.15
M) for gain (dB) d) Bode plot of proteinoids L-Glu:L-Asp solution (5g /3ml NaCl 0.15 M) for phase angle.

4


Table 1:
Resistance, Impedance, and Capacitance of Proteinoids at 300kHz.

Proteinoid
Resistance (kΩ)
Impedance (kΩ)
Capacitance (nF)
Code of Exp.

L-Glu:L-Asp
0.4839
0.4833
64.82
2

L-Glu:L-Phe:L-His
0.09754
0.09732
434.9
8

L-Lys:L-Phe:L-His
1.679
1.683
3.327
13

L-Glu:L-Phe
0.04378
0.05152
29.85
10

L-Glu:L-Asp:L-Lys
0.4706
0.4805
35.23
11

L-Glu
0.2456
0.2471
400.2
12

L-Glu: L-Phe:PLLA
0.2318
0.2301
170.2
11F

L-Lys:L-Phe-L-His:PLLA
0.04574
0.04755
-656.6
12F

L-Glu:L-Asp:L-Phe
0.3756
0.3736
42.23
6

By depicting the signal’s amplitude and phase as a function of frequency, this graph can be used to verify
the system’s stability.
The signal measured by the C60 impedance-amplitude analyzer in a proteinoid solution of NaCl 0.15 M
is shown in the Bode plot in Fig. 3a. The graph displays the signal strength as a function of frequency. As
can be seen in the plot, the signal strength rapidly improves up to about 100 Hz, after which it flattens out.
From this, we can infer that the signal is robust up to a frequency of 106 Hz, but starts to degrade above
that point.
Phase as a function of frequency is depicted in Fig. 3b. In this diagram, we can see that the phase of the
signal is fairly constant up to about 105 Hz, and then it starts to drop off as the frequency increases. The
signal acts in a predictable way up to 500 Hz, but after that it gets more and more unpredictable. Impedance
measurements could be productive in discovering properties of proteinoids solutions, including resistance,
capacitance, and inductance that they possess. Frequency dependent attenuation describes how a signal
weakens as it passes through a medium based on its frequency. Dissolution of macromolecules in solution
and the formation of hydrogen bonds between amino acids contribute to the breakdown of proteinoids.
Higher attenuation occurs at lower frequencies and vice versa. The results reveal that up to a certain signal
frequency (3088 Hz), attenuation increases and then decreases.
This means that at higher frequencies,
attenuation will be stronger because hydrogen bonds between amino acids will occur more frequently. The
degree of attenuation is dependent not only on frequency, but also on solution NaCl concentration and
proteinoid concentration.Increasing the NaCl concentration results in a greater attenuation, while increasing
the proteinoid concentration has the opposite effect (see Fig. 3).
Figure 3c shows a negative gain from 10 Hz to 107 Hz with a maximum gain of
20 dB at 1000 Hz.
The phase angle is positive and increases with increasing frequency, reaching a maximum 60◦ at 1000 Hz.
Proteinoid transfer function in a 0.15 M NaCl solution is a non-trivial and frequency-dependent phenomenon.
The composition of proteinoid, specifically L-Glu:L-Asp, is crucial to the transfer function and determines
the signal attenuation.
Transfer function of proteinoid in a 0.15 M NaCl solution is determined by the collective properties of
amino acids and their interactions with solution ions. Proteinoids are large molecules composed of subunits
held together by covalent bonds, such as amino acids. Covalent bonds in a solution can provide energy
to the ions through interactions. The composition of the proteinoid, specifically L-Glu:L-Asp, is crucial to
the proteinoid’s transfer function. L-Glu:L-Asp is a dipeptide composed of two amino acids: glutamic acid
and aspartic acid. This dipeptide is important in the transfer function of proteinoid because it can form
hydrogen bonds with the ions in the solution. This causes a greater transfer of energy, which results in a
greater signal attenuation. The transfer function of proteinoids is likewise heavily influenced by the signal’s
frequency. A greater attenuation of the signal occurs at lower frequencies because the proteinoids are more
mobile in the solution and interact more strongly with the ions. Proteinoids are restricted in their mobility
at higher frequencies, resulting in less attenuation of the signal Fig. 3d.
The electrical properties of proteinoids are detailed in Tab. 1. Data analysis reveals the proteinoids’
resistance (in Ohms), impedance (in Ohms), and capacitance (in nF).
In recent years, scientists have explored the intriguing effect of negative capacitance (proteinoid code
12F) in Table 4 [13, 14, 15, 16]. When the voltage across a component is increased, the energy stored in the

5


Figure 4: a) This wide variation in capacitance values between proteinoids is indicative of the structural and electrical complexity
of these molecules. b) The graph shows how the impedance of proteinoids changes at different frequencies, which shows how
these biomolecules behave electrically in a complicated way. c) The figure shows the phase angle of the proteinoids in relation
to their frequency. d) Gain, measured in decibels (dB), of various proteinoids at a range of low to high Hz frequencies. Each
proteinoid clearly exhibits a different response over the frequency range, making them each suitable for their own specific uses.

6


electric field decreases, a phenomenon known as negative capacitance. This only happens very seldom in
some systems, such as carbon nanotubes and graphene in field effect transistors [17, 18]. The efficiency and
effectiveness of electrical components can be enhanced by harnessing this effect. According to Johnscher’s
work [19], a time domain analysis of negative capacitance under a step function bias is the proper way to
investigate this phenomenon.
The quantity of a charge stored in the proteinoids at various frequencies is depicted in the Fig. 4a of ca-
pacitance versus frequency. Impedance versus frequency graph (Fig. 4b) illustrates the frequency-dependent
resistance to current flow. The Figs. 4a and 4b illustrate crucial details of the proteinoids’ electrical proper-
ties. Each parameter, capacitance and impedance, responds differently to changes in oscillation frequency.
Both capacitance and impedance are lowered as frequency rises and raised as frequency falls. This indicates
that at low frequencies the proteinoids have greater charge storage capacity and current resistance.
The phase angle of a Bode plot is a measurement of the phase shift as a function of frequency between
the input and output signals from a system. It demonstrates how the proteinoid signal’s amplitude and
phase fluctuate in relation to the input signal’s frequency. The phase angle of the proteinoids as a function
of frequency is shown in the Fig 4c. The phase angles of proteinoids with codes 6 and 12 differ significantly
from those of other proteinoids. The interaction between the proteinoids and other molecules is impacted
by this variation in phase angle.

4. Discussion

The correlation between the concentration of proteinoids in a solution and its electrical conductivity
has been investigated. In laboratory experiments, we demonstrated that the electrical transfer function of
ensembles of proteinoid microspheres is nontrivial and sensitive to the exact composition of the proteinoids
and the solution in which the microspheres reside.
Is there a correlation between the amount of proteinoids in a solution and how well it conducts electricity?
The correlation between proteinoid concentration and signal attenuation is depicted in Fig. 3. Signal
strength is reduced proportionally to the number of microspheres present. This data demonstrates that the
concentration of proteinoids in an electrolyte solution influences the electrical properties of polypeptides,
such as their ability to transmit electrical signals.
The ability of thermal proteins to both accept and resist electrical signals, as well as the number of
charges carried by amino acids, define their distinctive electrical properties. The electrical properties of
proteinoids are determined by the total number of amino acids in a cell, which in turn affects the number
of charges carried by the molecules. The ability of thermal protein molecules to accept or resist electrical
signals increases as the concentration of proteinoids and number of charges increase. Consequently, more
energy is required to transmit a signal, which increases the attenuation.
Employing proteinoids in biohybrid computing systems requires accurate measurements of proteinoid-
environment interactions. Therefore, signal transfer analysis of proteinoids is a useful technique, as it enables
precise determination of signal strengths and durations between proteinoids and their surroundings. Signal
transfer analysis can be utilised to discover the dynamics of a system, such as the interactions between
proteinoids or between proteinoids and their surroundings. This knowledge may enable complex algorithms
to be programmed into proteinoid, giving them the ability to adapt to new situations. Based on the provided
data, proteinoids might be programmed to respond to molecules as a switches or logic gates. Proteinoids’
electrical spikes (Fig. 5) are a type of protein-based circuitry that might be used to monitor and operate
mining logical circuits, as well as for other computational purposes. Proteinoids’ amino acids and other
building blocks might be connected to form a biological network. Proteinoids produce electrical spikes when
the electrical fields generated by the circuit’s components interact. This interaction produces a voltage spike
that might be used to monitor and control the operation of mining logic circuits.
The frequency-dependent attenuation of proteinoids is thought to be connected to their structure and
composition, despite not being fully understood. Within proteinoids, amino acids of different polarity are
organised in a particular pattern. It is believed that dissimilar polarities dampen and absorb electromag-
netic and acoustic waves of specific frequencies. Due to their effect on the electrostatic properties of the
molecule as a whole, polarizability, hydrophobicity, and ionic charge all contribute to proteinoids’ electri-
cal properties. When proteinoids are in an electric field, polarizable molecules experience a stronger force
than nonpolarizable molecules. This is important for proteinoids because it influences how the molecules

7


Figure 5: Using a PicoLog data logger and a platinum-iridium electrode, we can observe the dynamic nature of the proteinoid
L-Glu by tracking its electrical oscillations.

Figure 6: The figure shows the electrical flow in the Randles cell, with resistance Rs due to the solution, Rct as the charge
transfer resistance, Cdl as the double layer capacitance, and Zw as the impedance. The figure illustrates the current flow at
both high and low frequencies.

interact with one another and, ultimately, how the proteinoid behaves electrically. Polarizable molecules,
for instance, can form hydrogen bonds, which can help stabilise the structure of a proteinoid and improve
its electrical properties. In the case of microspheres, the hydrophobic portions of the molecule interact with
water molecules to generate an electrical charge. This charge will alter the proteinoids’ electrical properties,
making it easier for them to interact with their surroundings. For example, a negatively charged proteinoid
may interact more strongly with a positively charged environment.
Randles cells (Fig. 6), a specific form of electrochemical cell, are utilised extensively in the field of
electrochemistry.
John Edward Brough Randles, a British scientist, conceived of it in 1947 [20]. Two-

8


Figure 7: Proteinoids with the following codes: 2,8,13,10,11,12,11F,12F,6 as plotted on a Nyquist diagram. The water resistance
is 3836 Ohm, and the double layer capacitance, charge transfer resistance, and impedance values are all taken from Table 1.

electrode systems with a working electrode and a counter electrode immersed in a reactant solution constitute
Randles cells. It has many applications in electrochemical research, such as evaluating the current-voltage
(I-V) properties of a material or determining the activity of a substance in a solution.
A Randles cell contains two electrodes and generates electricity by applying a voltage difference between
them. In a chemical reaction, the electrode that contacts the reactant solution is known as the working
electrode, while the electrode that serves as a reference point for the potential difference between the working
electrode and the current electrode is known as the counter electrode. The reactants in the solution undergo
a chemical reaction at the working electrode due to the potential difference. It is possible to use the results
of such a study to evaluate the amplitude of the current.
The electrical properties of proteinoids are essential to the Randles cell because they allow an electric
current to flow through the cell when a voltage is applied across its terminals. Applications of the Randles
cell include research on the effects of electric fields on proteinoids and the effect of pH on the electrical
properties of proteins, as well as the advancement of fuel cell technology [21, 22].
The Nyquist plot is a helpful tool for understanding the electrochemical properties of proteinoids. By
analysing a molecule’s Nyquist plot, which displays the real and imaginary components of a proteinoid’s
electrical properties separately, it is possible to learn more about its response to electrical stimulation. This
can shed light on how a proteinoid might react to various environmental conditions or interact with other
molecules. The electrical properties of proteinoids can be better comprehended with the aid of a Nyquist
plot, which depicts the propagation of electrical signals through a molecule.
The Nyquist plot (Fig. 7) illustrates the complex impedance of a system as a function of frequency.
It is a two-dimensional graph depicting the real and imaginary components of the system’s impedance.
The imaginary portion of the impedance response is plotted vertically, while the real portion is plotted
horizontally. The Nyquist plot demonstrates the connection between frequency and impedance. At low
frequencies, the Nyquist plot reveals the system’s resistance due to diffusion. At higher frequencies, the
Nyquist plot reveals the system’s solution’s resistance. The Nyquist plot is a crucial tool for analysing the
electrical behaviour of systems. It is used to measure the frequency response and impedance of a system, as
well as to determine the stability of a system. It is also used to determine the capacitance and inductance
effects of a system. Additionally, it can be used to determine the effects of parasitic components, such as
inductance and capacitance, on a system.
In a Nyquist plot, the diameter of the semicircle represents the magnitude of the open-loop transfer
function. The magnitude of the transfer function, which is the output-to-input ratio, represents the degree

9


to which an input signal is amplified or dampened.
A larger L-Lys:L-Phe:L-His semicircle, as shown in Fig. 5, is indicative of a stronger proteinoid-proteinoid
interaction. This is because a system with a larger diameter is more sensitive to higher frequencies and
can therefore interact with other proteins and molecules more readily. Consequently, L-Lys:L-Phe:L-His
proteinoids are more likely to form stronger bonds with other proteins. In contrast, the L-Glu proteinoid
is not as effective at binding with other proteinoids due to its smaller semicircle diameter, which indicates
that it is less receptive to higher frequencies.
Understanding the electrical spikes caused by proteinoids will be a significant focus of future research.
How the electrical oscillations of L-Glu (Fig. 5) relate to the proteinoid’s physiological roles requires ad-
ditional examination. Future experiments will examine the effect of varying proteinoid concentrations on
electrical oscillations and their potential relevance to other biological processes. Scientists hope to gain a
greater understanding of how proteinoids function in cellular communication and whether or not they can
be modified to produce specific effects.

5. Funding

The research was supported by EPSRC Grant EP/W010887/1 “Computing with proteinoids”.The funders
played no role in the design of the study and collection, analysis, and interpretation of data.

6. Acknowledgements

Authors are grateful to David Paton for helping with SEM imaging.

References

[1] S. W. Fox, Thermal proteins in the first life and in the “mind-body” problem, in: Evolution of Infor-
mation Processing Systems, Springer, 1992, pp. 203–228.

[2] K. Harada, S. W. Fox, The thermal condensation of glutamic acid and glycine to linear peptides1,
Journal of the American Chemical Society 80 (11) (1958) 2694–2697.

[3] L. L. Hsu, S. Brooke, S. W. Fox, Conjugation of proteinoid microspheres: a model of primordial com-
munication, Biosystems 4 (1) (1971) 12–25.

[4] A. T. Przybylski, Excitable cell made of thermal proteinoids, BioSystems 17 (4) (1985) 281–288.

[5] Y. Ishima, A. T. Przybylski, S. W. Fox, Electrical membrane phenomena in spherules from proteinoid
and lecithin, BioSystems 13 (4) (1981) 243–251.

[6] A. Adamatzky, Towards proteinoid computers. hypothesis paper, Biosystems 208 (2021) 104480.

[7] A. Adamatzky (Ed.), Advances in Unconventional Computing: Volume 1: Theory, Vol. 22, Springer,
2016.

[8] L. Lugasi, I. Grinberg, S. Rudnick-Glick, E. Okun, H. Einat, S. Margel, Designed proteinoid polymers
and nanoparticles encapsulating risperidone for enhanced antipsychotic activity, Journal of Nanobiotech-
nology 18 (2020) 1–16.

[9] M. Kolitz-Domb, S. Margel, Engineered narrow size distribution high molecular weight proteinoids,
proteinoid-poly (l-lactic acid) copolymers and nano/micro-hollow particles for biomedical applications,
J Nanomed Nanotechnol 5 (216) (2014) 2.

[10] Cypher-Instruments, C60 network analyzer, http://www.cypherinstruments.co.uk/, [Online; ac-
cessed 18-Sept-2022] (2022).

[11] B. K. Precision, Model 891, https://www.bkprecision.pl/files/891_datasheet.pdf, [Online; ac-
cessed 18-Sept-2022] (2022).

10


[12] F. Dousseau, M. Pezolet, Determination of the secondary structure content of proteins in aqueous
solutions from their amide i and amide ii infrared bands. comparison between classical and partial
least-squares methods, Biochemistry 29 (37) (1990) 8771–8779.

[13] A. I. Khan, K. Chatterjee, B. Wang, S. Drapcho, L. You, C. Serrao, S. R. Bakaul, R. Ramesh, S. Salahud-
din, Negative capacitance in a ferroelectric capacitor, Nature materials 14 (2) (2015) 182–186.

[14] M. Ershov, H. Liu, L. Li, M. Buchanan, Z. Wasilewski, A. K. Jonscher, Negative capacitance effect in
semiconductor devices, IEEE Transactions on Electron devices 45 (10) (1998) 2196–2206.

[15] V. V. Zhirnov, R. K. Cavin, Negative capacitance to the rescue?, Nature Nanotechnology 3 (2) (2008)
77–78.

[16] J. ´I˜niguez, P. Zubko, I. Luk’yanchuk, A. Cano, Ferroelectric negative capacitance, Nature Reviews
Materials 4 (4) (2019) 243–256.

[17] T. Srimani, G. Hills, M. D. Bishop, U. Radhakrishna, A. Zubair, R. S. Park, Y. Stein, T. Palacios,
D. Antoniadis, M. M. Shulaker, Negative capacitance carbon nanotube fets, IEEE Electron Device
Letters 39 (2) (2017) 304–307.

[18] K. Tamersit, M. H. Moaiyeri, M. K. Q. Jooq, Leveraging negative capacitance ferroelectric materials for
performance boosting of sub-10 nm graphene nanoribbon field-effect transistors: a quantum simulation
study, Nanotechnology 33 (46) (2022) 465204.

[19] A. K. Jonscher, The physical origin of negative capacitance, Journal of the Chemical Society, Faraday
Transactions 2: Molecular and Chemical Physics 82 (1) (1986) 75–81.

[20] J. E. B. Randles, Kinetics of rapid electrode reactions, Discussions of the faraday society 1 (1947) 11–19.

[21] S. Laribi, K. Mammar, M. Hamouda, Y. Sahli, Impedance model for diagnosis of water management
in fuel cells using artificial neural networks methodology, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
41 (38) (2016) 17093–17101.

[22] N. Fouquet, C. Doulet, C. Nouillant, G. Dauphin-Tanguy, B. Ould-Bouamama, Model based pem fuel
cell state-of-health monitoring via ac impedance measurements, Journal of Power Sources 159 (2) (2006)
905–913.

11


