 

 

Impact of Surface Roughness in Measuring Optoelectronic 
Characteristics of Thin-Film Solar Cells 

David Magginetti1, Seokmin Jeon2, Yohan Yoon2,3, Ashif Choudhury1, Ashraful Mamun1, Yang Qian1, 
Jordan Gerton4, and Heayoung Yoon1 

1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, UT 84112, USA 

2 US Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375, USA 

3 Department of Materials Engineering, Korea Aerospace University, Goyang, 10540 South Korea  

4 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Utah, UT 84112, USA 

 

Abstract  —  Microstructural properties of thin-film absorber 
layers play a vital role in developing high-performance solar cells. 
Scanning probe microscopy is frequently used for measuring 
spatially inhomogeneous properties of thin-film solar cells. While 
powerful, the nanoscale probe can be sensitive to the roughness of 
samples, introducing convoluted signals and unintended artifacts 
into the measurement. Here, we apply a glancing-angle focused ion 
beam (FIB) technique to reduce the surface roughness of CdTe 
while preserving the subsurface optoelectronic properties of the 
solar cells. We compare the nanoscale optoelectronic properties 
“before” and “after” the FIB polishing. Simultaneously collected 
Kelvin-probe force microscopy (KPFM) and atomic force 
microscopy (AFM) images show that the contact potential 
difference (CPD) of CdTe pristine (peak-to-valley roughness > 600 
nm) follows the topography. In contrast, the CPD map of polished 
CdTe (< 20 nm) is independent of the surface roughness. We 
demonstrate the smooth CdTe surface also enables high-resolution 
photoluminescence (PL) imaging at a resolution much smaller 
than individual grains (< 1 µm). Our finite-difference time-domain 
(FDTD) simulations illustrate how the local light excitation 
interacts with CdTe surfaces. Our work supports low-angle FIB 
polishing can be beneficial in studying buried sub-microstructural 
properties of thin-film solar cells with care for possible ion-beam 
damage near the surface. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Thin-film CdTe solar cells are a leading photovoltaic (PV) 
technology owing to cost-effective manufacturing and reliable 
power production for 20+ years [1, 2]. Optimized close-space 
sublimation (CSS) and vertical traveling deposition (VTD) 
enable the rapid production of high-quality CdTe thin films. 
Such absorber layers consist of inhomogeneous microstructures 
with a typical grain size of approximately 1 µm after post-
deposition processing. Previous studies suggested that 
electrically-active point defects and structural defects of 
microstructures (i.e., grain bulk, grain boundaries) can 
significantly impact the cell efficiencies and long-term stability 
and reliability of CdTe solar cells  [3, 4].  

Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) has been extensively used 
for characterizing inhomogeneous semiconductor materials and 
devices. Examples include atomic force microscopy, electron-
beam microscopy, and confocal optical microscopy, where a 
local excitation source is raster-scanned on the area of interest 
to image spatially resolved properties of solar cells [5-9]. While 

powerful, the nanoscale probe used in SPM can be sensitive to 
the surface roughness of the sample, introducing convoluted 
signals and unintended artifacts into the measurement. Various 
polishing techniques have been proposed and applied to reduce 
the sample roughness, including focused ion beam (FIB), gas-
assisted etching, wet etching, and low-temperature milling [10-
12]. Among them, previous efforts demonstrated an optimized 
argon ion (Ar+) beam could efficiently produce a smooth 
surface with minimizing possible beam damage [13, 14].  

In this work, we use glancing-angle FIB milling to reduce the 
topographical variation of CdTe while retaining the quality of 
the sample. AFM/KPFM is used to measure the surface 
potential of CdTe “before” and “after” the polishing. Analysis 
of KPFM shows the different CPD profiles of pristine and 
polished devices. We demonstrate PL imaging that resolves the 
luminescence characteristics of individual grains and grain 
boundaries. We perform FDTD simulations to visualize the 
light absorption profile of CdTe microstructures, illustrating the 
non-uniform interactions of the local light source to grains and 
grain boundaries in nanoscale PL imaging.  

II. EXPERIMENTAL 

This study used conventional CdS/CdTe solar cells extracted 
from a solar panel [6]. Figure 1(a) shows a representative 
topographic image of the pristine CdTe obtained by atomic 
force microscopy (AFM). Irregular grain sizes range from < 1 
µm to a few µm with a peak-to-valley variation as high as 0.6 
µm in this sampling area (10 µm × 10 µm). To reduce the 
roughness, we performed Ar+ polishing at an incident beam 

 

Figure 1. (a) Topography of CdTe obtained using atomic 
force microscopy. (b) Schematic of ion beam milling. 


 
 

 

energy of 3 keV for one hour. The ion beam was irradiated at a 
glancing angle of 1°, only removing a thin layer of CdTe while 
preserving the CdTe bulk unchanged (Fischione 1060). A 
schematic in Figure 1(b) illustrates the ion-beam milling 
process. KPFM (CPD) and AFM (topography) images were 
simultaneously collected on the samples of “before (pristine)” 
and “after (polished)” the milling (Bruker AFM probes; 
OSCM-PT-R3). The diameter of a cantilever tip was 20 nm, 
and the resonance frequency of the tip was set to ≈ 71 kHz with 
a spring constant of 2 N/m. PL imaging at 405 nm was 
performed using a customized confocal microscopy system. 
The PL maps were collected via immersion objective lens 
(100x) in an oil media (Cargille type B). Finite-difference time-
domain (FDTD) simulations were conducted to study the 
absorption profiles of the laser beam in CdTe for both smooth 
and rough sample surfaces (Ansys Lumerical). FDTD methods 
are often used to solve electromagnetic interaction in a sample 
of interest. Maxwell equations are solved numerically on a 
discrete grid (mesh) in space and time defined in the model. We 
used a standard material library (J. A. Wollam Ellipsometry 
Solutions) to formulate the refractive index and extinction 
coefficient of CdTe at different wavelengths. The mesh size 
was set to 0.25 nm for the simulations.  

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Nanoscale SPM measurements were performed on two CdTe 
solar cells extracted from the same solar panel. To polish one 
of the samples, we used a 3 kV Ar+ beam that is irradiated at an 
angle of 1° parallel to the CdTe surface (Figure 1b). Our milling 
conditions intend to remove the prominent structures on CdTe 
(≈ 100 nm) rather than to produce an atomically smooth 
surface, maintaining a low-level surface roughness after the 
polishing. Figures 2(a, b) show the topography of the “before 
(pristine)” and the “after (polished)” CdTe surface. The 
maximum peak-to-valley roughness of ≈ 600 nm of pristine 
CdTe was noticeably reduced to ≈ 80 nm after the milling.  

The KPFM maps in Figures 2(c, d) show the potential 
difference of CdTe microstructures. It is apparent that the 
potential distribution (i.e., CPD) of the pristine CdTe closely 
follows the topography. Low CPDs are seen on the hills of 
grains (≈ 1.020 V), while grain boundaries show higher CPDs 
(≈ 1.035 V) compared to their adjacent grain interiors. We 
observe the overall CPDs decreases to approximately 30 mV 
(Figure 2d) after the Ar+ beam milling. This reduction could be 
attributed to the eliminated TeOx-rich CdTe surface, which 
exposes the bare CdTe subsurface. Unlike the pristine, the CPD 
variation of the polished CdTe is independent of the remaining 
surface roughness, marked with the red boxes in the area in 
Figure 2. The CPD difference between grain interior and grain 
boundary of the polished CdTe (≈ 20 mV) is similar to the 
pristine. The CPD distribution near grain boundaries observed 
in our KPFM shows a good agreement with the previous work 

by Jiang et al., where a CdTe sample was polished with a 4 kV 
Ar+ beam followed by 250 °C annealing [5].  

The polished CdTe surface enables high-resolution PL 
imaging with a spatial resolution much smaller than individual 
grains (< 1 µm). In our confocal PL system, a 100x objective 
(numerical aperture [NA] = 1.4) focused the collimated laser 
beam (λ = 405 nm) on CdTe, which was facing down on a cover 
glass. We used an immersion lens oil (n = 1.5) to match the 
refractive indices in the PL setup (immersion objective lens / 
oil / cover glass / CdTe), improving the resolution.  

Figure 3 compares the representative PL images obtained on 
pristine and polished CdTe solar cells. Overall, the PL emission 
near grain boundaries is lower than grain interiors for both 
samples. This observation is consistent with previous studies, 
where the defects near grain boundaries serve as non-radiative 

 

Figure 2. Topography and surface potential map of 
pristine (a, c) and polished (c, d) CdTe solar cells.  

Figure 3. PL maps of (a) pristine and (b) polished CdTe 
solar cells excited with a 405 nm laser beam. Each pixel 
of the image (128 × 128 pixels) represents the integrated 
PL intensities near the band-gap (≈ 820 nm).  


 
 

 

recombination centers reducing the PL emission near the 
bandgap [9, 15]. The brightness contrast of the pristine PL map 
appears to follow the topography of CdTe microstructures, with 
random bright spots on the edge of some grains. In contrast, the 
PL emission of the polished sample shows a relatively uniform 
contrast between the grain bulk and grain boundary of CdTe. 
The bright spots are mainly observed in the center of the grain 
bulk, decaying proportionally to the adjacent grain boundaries. 
The dark areas in the PL map are likely associated with the 
concentrated defects rather than unintended artifacts introduced 
by the topography.  

We developed FDTD models of the smooth and rough 
surface CdTe to understand how the light source (i.e., a laser 
beam) 
interacts 
with 
the 
topography, 
coupled 
with 
inhomogeneous microstructures, affects the high-resolution PL 
imaging. Schematics of the models are shown in Figures 4 (a, 
e). Our model defined a rough surface CdTe based on the AFM 
surface roughness seen in Figure 1(a). In addition to the light 
source of 405 nm used in the PL imaging (Figure 3), we also 
simulated the absorption profile for 520 nm and 632 nm, 
frequently used in PL measurements. The absorption profiles of 
the rough surface are compared to their planar counterparts in 
Figure 4. As expected, the light absorption decreases 
exponentially in the planar structures, where the estimated 
absorption depth of approximately 39 nm, 113 nm, and 215 nm 
at an illumination of 405 nm, 520 nm, and 632 nm, respectively. 
Figure 4 (f ~ h) compares the representative absorption 
landscapes simulated for the rough CdTe surface. It is apparent 
that the extruded structures of the CdTe film could absorb more 
photons from an irradiating laser beam. The light absorption 
near grain boundaries can be influenced by the topography of 
adjacent grains due to light scattering. Our simulations support 
that the random bright spots observed in the PL image of the 

rough CdTe can be attributed to its topography rather than its 
intrinsic properties. 

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

In summary, we have shown the impact of surface roughness 
in measuring nanoscale optoelectronic characteristics of CdTe 
solar cells. By reducing the surface roughness using shallow-
angle ion beams, the KPFM probe can measure the subsurface 
CPD distribution of CdTe solar cells. The polished surface 
enables PL imaging at a spatial resolution much smaller than 
individual grains (< 1 µm). Our FDTD simulations show 
inhomogeneous light absorption on rough CdTe, indicating the 
impact of surface roughness in nanoscale optoelectronic 
characterizations. Our work supports low-angle FIB polishing 
can be beneficial in studying buried sub-microstructural 
properties of thin-film solar cells with care for possible ion-
beam damage near the surface. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

This research was supported by the U.S. Department of 
Energy’s Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
(EERE) under the DE-FOA-0002064 program award number 
DE-EE0008983.We acknowledge support in part by the 
National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award No. 
2048152. This work was support by the USTAR shared 
facilities at the University of Utah, in part, by the MRSEC 
Program of NSF under Award No. DMR-1121252. We thank 
P. Perez, M. Wang, and Z. Liu for valuable inputs and training 
of the measurement systems. 

 

Figure 4. Absorption profiles of planar and rough surface CdTe at 405 nm laser beam illuminations. FDTD simulation regions 
(orange color box in a, e) include the perfect match layer (PMLs) and periodic boundary conditions. 


 
 

 

REFERENCES 

[1] 
G. M. Wilson et al., "The 2020 photovoltaic 
technologies roadmap," (in English), Journal of 
Physics D-Applied Physics, vol. 53, no. 49, Dec 2 
2020. 

[2] 
S. G. Kumar and K. S. R. K. Rao, "Physics and 
chemistry of CdTe/CdS thin film heterojunction 
photovoltaic devices: fundamental and critical 
aspects," (in English), Energy & Environmental 
Science, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 45-102, Jan 2014. 

[3] 
J. D. Major, "Grain boundaries in CdTe thin film 
solar cells: a review," (in English), Semiconductor 
Science and Technology, vol. 31, no. 9, Sep 2016. 

[4] 
I. Visoly-Fisher, S. R. Cohen, K. Gartsman, A. 
Ruzin, and D. Cahen, "Understanding the beneficial 
role of grain boundaries in polycrystalline solar cells 
from single-grain-boundary scanning probe 
microscopy," (in English), Advanced Functional 
Materials, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 649-660, Mar 20 2006. 

[5] 
C. S. Jiang et al., "Imaging hole-density 
inhomogeneity in arsenic-doped CdTe thin films by 
scanning capacitance microscopy," (in English), 
Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 209, 
Jun 1 2020. 

[6] 
H. P. Yoon et al., "Local electrical characterization 
of cadmium telluride solar cells using low-energy 
electron beam," (in English), Solar Energy Materials 
and Solar Cells, vol. 117, pp. 499-504, Oct 2013. 

[7] 
C. X. Xiao et al., "Microscopy Visualization of 
Carrier Transport in CdSeTe/CdTe Solar Cells," (in 
English), Acs Applied Materials & Interfaces, vol. 
14, no. 35, pp. 39976-39984, Sep 7 2022. 

[8] 
Y. Yoon et al., "Nanoscale imaging and spectroscopy 
of band gap and defects in polycrystalline 
photovoltaic devices," (in English), Nanoscale, vol. 
9, no. 23, pp. 7771-7780, Jun 21 2017. 

[9] 
A. Abudulimu et al., "Photophysical Properties of 
CdSe/CdTe Bilayer Solar Cells: A Confocal Raman 
and Photoluminescence Microscopy Study," in 2022 
IEEE 49th Photovoltaics Specialists Conference 
(PVSC), 2022, pp. 1088-1090. 

[10] 
L. A. Giannuzzi and F. A. Stevie, Introduction to 
focused ion beams : instrumentation, theory, 
techniques, and practice. New York: Springer, 2005. 

[11] 
N. I. Kato, "Reducing focused ion beam damage to 
transmission electron microscopy samples," Journal 
of Electron Microscopy, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 451-458, 
2004. 

[12] 
E. M. Turner, K. R. Sapkota, C. Hatem, P. Lu, G. T. 
Wang, and K. S. Jones, "Wet-chemical etching of 
FIB lift-out TEM lamellae for damage-free analysis 
of 3-D nanostructures," Ultramicroscopy, vol. 216, p. 
113049, 2020/09/01/ 2020. 

[13] 
M. J. Campin, C. S. Bonifacio, P. Nowakowski, P. E. 
Fischione, and L. A. Giannuzzi, "Narrow-Beam 
Argon Ion Milling of Ex Situ Lift-Out FIB 
Specimens Mounted on Various Carbon-Supported 
Grids," 2018, pp. 339-344: ASM International. 

[14] 
Y.-L. Hsu et al., "Subsurface Characteristics of 
Metal-Halide Perovskites Polished by Argon Ion 
Beam," p. arXiv:2212.13694Accessed on: December 
01, 2022Available: 
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022arXiv2212136
94H 

[15] 
D. Kuciauskas et al., "Spectrally and time resolved 
photoluminescence analysis of the CdS/CdTe 
interface in thin-film photovoltaic solar cells," (in 
English), Applied Physics Letters, vol. 102, no. 17, 
Apr 29 2013. 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


