 

The 2023 INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ADVANCED ENGINEERING (ISAE2023) 

February 13-15, 2023 

Kimdo Royal Hotel, Ho chi minh City, Vietnam 

 
 

Minh Nhat Huynh1, *, Minh Khoi Nguyen Tien1, Cong Toai Truong1,2,3, Minh Tri Nguyen1, Quoc Minh 

Lam1, Van Tu Duong1,2,3, Huy Hung Nguyen1,4, Tan Tien Nguyen1,2,3, † 

1 National Key Laboratory of Digital Control and System Engineering (DCSELab), Ho Chi Minh City 
University of Technology (HCMUT), 268 Ly Thuong Kiet Street, District 10, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, 
Vietnam 

2 Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology (HCMUT), 268 Ly 
Thuong Kiet, District 10, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam 

3 Vietnam National University Ho Chi Minh City, Linh Trung Ward, Thu Duc District, Ho Chi Minh City 
700000, Vietnam 

4 Faculty of Electronics and Telecommunication, Saigon University, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam 

 

†Leading - Corresponding author: nttien@hcmut.edu.vn 
*Presenting author: nhat.huynh1905758@hcmut.edu.vn 

 

 
Abstract 

 In high–power applications, multiple power MOSFETs are connected in parallel and treated as a single 

switch in order to handle much larger total currents. In this paper, a parallel power MOSFETs model from the 

turn–off state until they reach their steady state is introduced. The model represents the relationship between 

each power MOSFET’s gate voltage and the current distribution among them. The study’s key purpose is to 

use the model for dealing with the asymmetry in sharing current and power loss between these semiconductor 

devices during the steady–state region. 

 
Keywords: current unbalanced, parallel connected MOSFETs, MOS device, silicon carbide (SiC) 

semiconductors 

1 Introduction 

The need for renewable energy sources to replace traditional fossil fuels, as well as the increasing in demand 

for high–power applications such as electric vehicles (EVs), is driving the advancement of battery technology 

and its applications in the present day [1], [2]. The utilization of high–voltage batteries in high–power 

applications has elevated the requirement for protection. As the discharge current increases, the discharge 

process becomes more hazardous. Overcurrent protection is essential in maintaining the safety of the batteries 

during operation. There are various methods for interrupting DC currents such as mechanical breakers or 

semiconductor devices [3]. 

Modeling of parallel power MOSFETs in steady-state


In case there is a malfunction in the system, a circuit for interrupt the power source from the system is 

necessary. The main switch for DC circuit breakers can be either contactors or a SiC MOSFETs. Contactors 

are appropriate for applications with high current loads because they can handle high currents. When they do, 

though, an arc might form inside the contactor. In the worst–case scenario, they may experience welding or 

bouncing which shortens the lifespan of the contactor as a consequence. Besides, for protection purposes, the 

time it takes to restore and eliminate a fault in a security system is one of the most important parameters. They 

must be quick enough to repair any potentially deadly harm done to battery cells and other electrical parts. 

Contactors are unable to quickly convert to their blocking state due to the presence of moving parts during the 

switching state [4]–[6]. 

On the other hand, a solid-state circuit breaker uses semiconductor devices in place of the conventional 

mechanical breaker. They can transition states quickly as a result of the lack of moving elements, making them 

ideal for applications that require quick protection from overcurrents or short circuits [7]. Additionally, the use 

of semiconductor devices eliminates the problem of arcs emitted during switching, making solid-state circuit 

breakers a more reliable solution. 

Nevertheless, power MOSFETs are not typically designed for handling hundreds of amperes on their own. 

As a result, the concept of paralleling multiple MOSFETs is unavoidable to achieve the required current ratings 

without breaking individuals’ operating limits [8]–[10]. This method also reduces the equivalent on–state 

resistance which leads to a reduction in power dissipation. 

This way, the current and power are expected to distribute equally between them, reducing the burden on 

each individual. In reality, because of various reasons, it is a key challenge to ensure the current sharing among 

power MOSFETs, which leads to unevenly distributed power loss and thermal dissymmetry [11]. This paper 

focuses on the studying of uneven sharing current between paralleled SiC power MOSFETs. 

2 Current imbalance 

Paralleled power MOSFETs might experience unbalance in sharing current during two separate phases. 

2.1. Dynamic current imbalance 

One of them is dynamic current imbalance, which occurs during the MOSFETs’ turn–on and turn–off 

process. Unbalanced current sharing throughout the state can cause high current spikes and overloading in 

certain MOSFETs, leading to reduced performance and potential thermal runaway. The imbalances stem from 

variations in switching time among the parallel power MOSFETs, which are affected by mismatches in 

threshold voltage (𝑉𝑇𝐻)  and transconductance (𝑔𝑓𝑠) . In addition to the device parameter mismatch, 

asymmetry in the cable design can also contribute to the uneven distribution of current [12], [13]. Even though 

unequal current sharing during the state can have a significant impact on high–frequency applications, it only 

affects the DC circuit breaker for a brief moment during a fault occurrence. 

2.2. Static current imbalance 


 

The 2023 INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ADVANCED ENGINEERING (ISAE2023) 

February 13-15, 2023 

Kimdo Royal Hotel, Ho chi minh City, Vietnam 

On the other hand, static current imbalance directly affects the protection device’s principle because most 

of the time, the paralleled power MOSFETs act as a conduction device. During on–state, the power MOSFETs 

can be considered as equivalent resistors with the values equal to their on–state resistance (𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛)). For SiC 

power MOSFETs, 𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛) can obtain the value of hundreds or even tens of 𝑚𝛺 with the tolerance of ±20%. 

These parallel MOSFETs all share the same drain–to–source voltage (𝑉𝐷𝑆), therefore the lower on–state 

resistance of a particular MOSFET, the higher the drain current (𝐼𝐷) flowing through it, resulting in increased 

power dissipation. The devices may also experience thermal stress due to uneven heating, which may result in 

permanent damage. Consequently, this might lead to reducing in reliability, device lifetime, and even device 

failure. 

One way to mitigate the current unbalance in paralleled power MOSFETs is by relying on positive 

temperature coefficient (PTC) elements. A PTC element is a material that has a resistance that increases as its 

temperature rises, which can be used to suppress the uneven in sharing current among the parallel devices to 

some extend. During normal operation, the MOSFETs with lower 𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛) will dissipate more power and heat, 

causing their PTC elements to have a higher resistance and reducing the drain current flowing through them 

as a result. This helps equalize the drain current distribution among the paralleled MOSFETs, preventing 

thermal stress, hot spots, and prolonging the device's lifespan, which is called thermal self–stabilization. 

Although SiC MOSFETs' positive temperature coefficient can contribute to current sharing in some 

situations, it might not always be enough to guarantee balanced current distribution in high current 

applications. This is because when a large amount of current passes through the system, even a small imbalance 

in current distribution can result in significant power dissipation and temperature rise in one or more of the 

MOSFETs. Besides, the use of PTC elements to balance current in paralleled SiC MOSFETs may not always 

be effective if the current imbalance is too severe. The sensitivity of 𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛) to temperature varies based on 

the type of MOSFET, as shown in the equation below [14]. Consequently, the higher temperatures can cause 

degradation of the MOSFETs over time, reducing their performance and lifespan. Therefore, relying 

exclusively on PTC for suppressing static current imbalance is inappropriate. 

𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛)−𝑡 = 𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛)−25 (𝑡 + 273.15

298.15
)

𝑛

(1)

Where: 𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛)−𝑡 is MOSFETs on–state resistance at temperature  𝑡 (℃); 𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛)−25 is MOSFETs on-

state resistance at 25℃; and 𝑛 is the fitting parameter. This parameter varies depending on the type of 

MOSFET, which is particularly low in SiC devices compared to SI one [15]. 

2.3. Technique for active load balancing 

In addition to being temperature-dependent, power MOSFETs are also voltage–driven devices, in which 

their conductivity capabilities vary in response to the gate-to-source voltage (𝑉𝐺𝑆) applied to them. Based on 

[16], the model for simulating the drain current 𝐼𝐷 of a SiC power MOSFET can be calculated by equations 

(2) and (3): 

During linear region: 𝑉𝐺𝑆 > 𝑉𝑇𝐻; 𝑉𝐷𝑆 < 𝑉𝐺𝑆 − 𝑉𝑇𝐻 


𝐼𝐷 = 𝜇𝑛𝐶𝑜𝑥

𝑊
𝐿 [(𝑉𝐺𝑆 − 𝑉𝑇𝐻)𝑉𝐷𝑆 − 𝑉𝐷𝑆

2

2 ]
(2)

During saturated region: 𝑉𝐺𝑆 > 𝑉𝑇𝐻;𝑉𝐷𝑆 ≥ 𝑉𝐺𝑆 − 𝑉𝑇𝐻 

𝐼𝐷 = 1

2 𝜇𝑛𝐶𝑜𝑥

𝑊
𝐿 (𝑉𝐺𝑆 − 𝑉𝑇𝐻)2
(3)

Where: 𝜇𝑛 is electron mobility; 𝐶𝑜𝑥 is oxide capacitance; 𝑊 is width of the gate; 𝐿 is length of the gate; 

𝑉𝐷𝑆 is drain–to–source voltage; 𝑉𝐺𝑆 is gate–to–source voltage; and 𝑉𝑇𝐻 is gate threshold voltage. 

As aforementioned, their resistance can obtain very small values of hundreds or even tens 𝑚𝛺, which leads 

to a much smaller 𝑉𝐷𝑆 compare to the difference between gate–to–source voltage and threshold voltage 

(𝑉𝐺𝑆 − 𝑉𝑇𝐻). Therefore, based on [17] and equation (4), the drain current during on–state period can be 

determined as shown: 

𝐼𝐷 = 𝜇𝑛𝐶𝑜𝑥

𝑊
𝐿 (𝑉𝐺𝑆 − 𝑉𝑇𝐻)𝑉𝐷𝑆 for (𝑉𝐷𝑆 ≪ (𝑉𝐺𝑆 − 𝑉𝑇𝐻))
(5)

As a result, the on–state resistance can be expressed as an equation depends on 𝑉𝐺𝑆: 

𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛) =
1

𝜇𝑛𝐶𝑜𝑥 𝑊

𝐿 (𝑉𝐺𝑆 − 𝑉𝑇𝐻)
(6)

Equation (5) demonstrates that the power MOSFET can be considered as a voltage control resistor within 

the steady–state region. In particular, 𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛) can be varied depends on 𝑉𝐺𝑆, which leads to a method for 

actively balance the sharing current. 

3 Investigation of static current unbalance suppression 

3.1. Overall system description 

A system has been constructed to monitor the distribution of current among power MOSFETs when they 

are connected in parallel. Additionally, the system is designed to assess the effect of both temperature and 𝑉𝐺𝑆 

on the current sharing. This is achieved by allowing the system to observe the current flowing through each 

MOSFET as well as their temperature, and by enabling the adjustment of the 𝑉𝐺𝑆 applied to each MOSFET 

separately. The system includes: 

1. Two IRFP4688 MOSFETs. 

2. Two ACS758 hall current sensors. 

3. Two NTC Thermistor Sensors. 

4. Dummy loader. 


 

The 2023 INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ADVANCED ENGINEERING (ISAE2023) 

February 13-15, 2023 

Kimdo Royal Hotel, Ho chi minh City, Vietnam 

𝐴 

𝐼𝐷𝑆 

𝐴 

𝑇 

2
3
4

𝑇 

 

Fig. 1. Principle of steady–state paralleled MOSFETs 

3.2. Experiment model 

(a) Control circuit
(b) Power circuit

Fig. 2. Printed circuit board of steady – state paralleled MOSFETs 

Fig. 2 depicts a printed circuit board (PCB) that is designed to conduct test cases with parallel MOSFETs. 

Fig. 2a is the control board, featuring an AVR chip at its core that guarantees the consistency of pulse width 

modulation and data collection. Fig. 2b displays an integrated circuit of two IRFP4688 MOSFETs connected 

in parallel, similar to the system description outlined earlier. The division of control and dynamic circuits into 

separate entities helps to minimize interference and ensures the accuracy of the experimental results by 

avoiding any potential errors. 

 

Fig. 3. Dummy loader for testing paralleled MOSFETs 

Fig. 3 shows the Dummy loader used in this paper. The dummy load system consists of six connected load 

resistors, with their specific parameters outlined in Table 1. 

 


Table 1. The parameters of the dummy loader 

Parameter
Unit
Value

Overall size
𝑚𝑚
600 × 400 × 150𝑚𝑚

Mass
𝑘𝑔
10

Range
𝛺
[0 − 6]

Resolutions
𝛺
1/3

 

3.3. Experiment and results 

Case 1: Using ARX Method to identification of one MOSFET. 

First, individual experiments were performed on each MOSFET to find an equation representing the 

characteristics of the IRFP4688 MOSFETs. The condition experiment is shown in Table 2. 

Table 2. The parameters of the resistance load 

Parameter
Unit
Value

Power
LiFePO4 24V (20Ah – 5C)

Temperature
℃
25

Number of MOSFETs
pieces
10

Sampling time
𝑠
0.05

 

 

Fig. 4. Average data and ARX model of 10 MOSFETs 

The relationship between 𝑉𝐺𝑆,  and 𝑅𝐷𝑆,  is modeled using the ARX model. Fig. 4 displays the average data 

line of 10 MOSFETs (represented by the black line) and the ARX model (represented by the orange line) of 

the system. The obtained discrete–time ARX model is: 

𝐴(𝑧)𝑦(𝑡) = 𝐵(𝑧)𝑢(𝑡) + 𝑒(𝑡)

With:


 

The 2023 INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ADVANCED ENGINEERING (ISAE2023) 

February 13-15, 2023 

Kimdo Royal Hotel, Ho chi minh City, Vietnam 

𝐴(𝑧) = 1 − 0.955𝑧−1 − 0.336𝑧−2 + 0.218𝑧−3 + 0.056𝑧−4

𝐵(𝑧) = −0.005𝑧−6 + 0.054𝑧−7 − 0.054𝑧−8 + 0.016𝑧−9

Case 2: Test the model was founded with a different MOSFET from the previously obtained data set. 

  With the same experimental conditions as case 1, the data of the 11th MOSFET is collected and shown 

in Fig. 5. The test data line has a degree of compatibility with the model (error of about 3%). 

 

Fig. 5. Evaluate ARX model 

Case 3: The case of parallel MOSFETs connected. 

Experimental conditions of the parallel MOSFET model are shown in Table 3. 

Table 3. The parameters of the resistance load 

Parameter
Unit
Value

Power
LiFePO4 24V (20Ah – 5C)

Temperature
℃
25𝑜

Time of experiment
min
20

Sampling time
𝑚𝑠
50

 

The process of observing the thermal and current balance through pulse width modulation (𝑉𝐺𝑆) is difficult 

to accomplish when working with a single MOSFET. To overcome this challenge, the experiment was 

conducted with two paralleled MOSFETs so that changes in temperature and current per MOSFET could be 

clearly observed. The progress is presented below. 

An experiment is conducted to evaluate the capability of thermal self–regulation by applying a total current 

of 20A to the system. During the experiment, each MOSFET is activated with the maximum 𝑉𝐺𝑆 while 

recording both the temperature and the current flowing through each device. 


(a) Temperature of two MOSFETs
(b) Drain current of 2 MOSFETs

Fig. 6. Sharing drain current and thermal self–regulation of paralleled MOSFETs 

The collected data reveals a constraint in relying solely on their PTC element to balance the discharge 

current, which is especially pronounced for SiC devices. The graph illustrates the temperature discrepancy 

between the two devices. Although the PTC element helps prevent the worst outcome – thermal runaway, it 

still negatively impacts the lifespan and reliability of the system, especially in high–power applications. As a 

result, in order to entirely suppress the uneven in sharing current, it is advisable to implement an active load 

balancing technique. 

As aforementioned, MOSFETs’ on–state resistance can be controled by adjusting 𝑉𝐺𝑆 applied to each 

MOSFETs. By manipulating the gate–source voltage, it becomes feasible to regulate the current that flows 

through each MOSFET and achieve a balanced distribution of current among paralleled MOSFETs. 

An experiment is performed to assess the viability of the method mentioned above. This involves applying 

the maximum gate voltage to one device and altering the gate voltage on the other device, while simultaneously 

monitoring the flow of current between two devices. 

(a) Adjusting 1st MOSFET’s gate voltage
(b) Adjusting 2nd MOSFET’s gate voltage

Fig. 7. Adjust sharing current between two MOSFETs 

The results of the experiment (show in Fig. 7) demonstrate that the division of current among the MOSFETs 

can be significantly altered. The figure highlights the presence of an intersection point where the shared current 


 

The 2023 INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ADVANCED ENGINEERING (ISAE2023) 

February 13-15, 2023 

Kimdo Royal Hotel, Ho chi minh City, Vietnam 

between the two MOSFETs reaches a state of balance. This outcome implies that the active balancing method, 

facilitated by the adjustment of 𝑉𝐺𝑆, can maintain a balanced load current even under varying conditions, 

further enhancing the reliability and efficiency of the system. 

4 Conclusions 

For the purpose of improving safety and reliability in high–power applications, a DC circuit breaker that 

utilizes parallel MOSFETs as the primary switch is an appropriate solution. This research examines the issue 

of unequal current division among these paralleled MOSFETs during steady–state and offers a means to 

resolve it. The results reveal that a balanced state among MOSFETs can be achieved more effectively and 

safely through the adjustment of their 𝑅𝐷𝑆(𝑜𝑛) values by means of active balancing in stead of solely rely on 

PTC element.  

Acknowledgements 

This research is funded by Vietnam National University Ho Chi Minh City (VNU-HCM) under grant 

number TX2023-20b-01. We acknowledge the support of time and facilities from National Key Laboratory of 

Digital Control and System Engineering (DCSELab), Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology (HCMUT), 

VNU-HCM for this study.  

References  

[1] 
X. Pu et al., “Recent Progress in Rechargeable Sodium-Ion Batteries: toward High-Power 

Applications,” 
Small, 
vol. 
15, 
no. 
32. 
Wiley-VCH 
Verlag, 
Aug. 
01, 
2019. 
doi: 

10.1002/smll.201805427. 

[2] 
T. Y. Chian et al., “A Review on Recent Progress of Batteries for Electric Vehicles,” 2019. [Online]. 

Available: http://www.ripublication.com 

[3] 
G. Papadopoulos, “State-of-the-art DC Current Interruption Concept using SiC MOSFETs.” 

[4] 
IEEE, 2012 IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition.  

[5] 
N. Y. A. Shammas, “The Role of Semiconductor Devices in High Power Circuit Breaker Applications.” 

[6] 
B. Pilvelait, P. Calman Gold, and M. Marcel, “A HIGH POWER SOLID STATE CIRCUIT BREAKER 

FOR MILITARY HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE APPLICATIONS.” 

[7] 
R. Rodrigues, Y. Du, A. Antoniazzi, and P. Cairoli, “A Review of Solid-State Circuit Breakers,” IEEE 

Trans Power Electron, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 364–377, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TPEL.2020.3003358. 

[8] 
IEEE Power Electronics Society, Annual IEEE Computer Conference, IEEE Industry Applications 

Conference, Colo. Annual IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition 5 2013.09.15-19 Denver, 

and Colo. ECCE 5 2013.09.15-19 Denver, IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE), 

2013 15-19 Sept. 2013, Colorado Convention Center, Denver, CO.  

[9] 
B. Abdi, A. H. Ranjbar, G. B. Gharehpetian, and J. Milimonfared, “Reliability considerations for 

parallel performance of semiconductor switches in high-power switching power supplies,” IEEE 


Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 2133–2139, 2009, doi: 

10.1109/TIE.2009.2014306. 

[10] 
D.-P. Sadik, J. Colmenares, D. Peftitsis, J.-K. Lim, J. Rabkowski, and H.-P. Nee, “Experimental 

investigations of static and transient current sharing of parallel-connected Silicon Carbide MOSFETs.” 

[11] 
R. Letor, “Static and Dynamic Behavior of Paralleled IGBT’ s,” 1992. 

[12] 
H. Wang and F. Wang, “Power MOSFETs Paralleling Operation for High Power High Density 

Converters,” 2006. 

[13] 
P.-O. Jeannin, J.-L. Schanen, and E. Clavel, “Original Cabling Conditions to Insure Balanced Current 

During Switching Transitions Between Paralleled Semiconductors.” 

[14] 
J. Jose, A. Ravindran, and K. K. Nair, “Study of Temperature Dependency on MOSFET Parameter 

using MATLAB,” International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology, 2016, [Online]. 

Available: www.irjet.net 

[15] 
Z. Zeng, X. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “Imbalance Current Analysis and Its Suppression Methodology for 

Parallel SiC MOSFETs with Aid of a Differential Mode Choke,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial 

Electronics, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 1508–1519, Feb. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TIE.2019.2901655. 

[16] 
T. Sakurai and A. R. Newton, “A Simple MOSFET Model for Circuit Analysis,” 1991. 

[17] 
J. Fu, “Fundamentals of On-Resistance in Load Switches Application Report Fundamentals of On-

Resistance in Load Switches,” 2016. [Online]. Available: www.ti.com 

  


