The influence of adatom diffusion on the formation of skyrmion 

lattice in sub-monolayer Fe on Ir(111)

Mingming Shuai1,2, Yulong Yang1,2, Haiming Huang1,2, Rui Song1,2, Yi Zhu1,2, Yanghui Liao1,2, 

Yinyan Zhu1,2,4, Xiaodong Zhou1,2,4*, Lifeng Yin1,2,3,4,5*, and Jian Shen1,2,3,4,5*

1 State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics, Institute for Nanoelectronic Devices and Quantum 

Computing, and Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.

2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai 200232, China

3 Shanghai Research Center for Quantum Sciences, Shanghai 201315, China.

4 Zhangjiang Fudan International Innovation Center, Fudan University, Shanghai 201210, China.

5 Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 210093, China.

*Emails: zhouxd@fudan.edu.cn, lifengyin@fudan.edu.cn, shenj5494@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

Room temperature grown Fe monolayer (ML) on the Ir(111) single crystal substrate has 

attracted great research interests as nano-skyrmion lattice can form under proper growth 

conditions. The formation of the nanoscale skyrmion, however, appears to be greatly 

affected by the diffusion length of the Fe adatoms on the Ir(111) surface. We made this 

observation by employing spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy to study

skyrmion formation upon systematically changing the impurity density on the substrate 

surface prior to Fe deposition. Since the substrate surface impurities serve as pinning 

centers for Fe adatoms, the eventual size and shape of the Fe islands exhibit a direct 

correlation with the impurity density, which in turn determines whether skyrmion can 

be formed. Our observation indicates that skyrmion only forms when the impurity

density is below 0.006/nm2, i.e., 12 nm averaged spacing between the neighboring 

defects. We verify the significance of Fe diffusion length by growing Fe on clean Ir(111) 

substrate at low temperature of 30 K, where no skyrmion was observed to form. Our 

findings signify the importance of diffusion of Fe atoms on the Ir(111) substrate, which 


affects the size, shape and lattice perfection of the Fe islands and thus the formation of 

skyrmion lattice.

1. Introduction

Magnetic skyrmions are non-collinear spin textures characterized by a topological 

winding number[1]. They are induced by the competition of collinear Heisenberg 

exchange between atomic spins and non-collinear Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya (DM) 

interaction in non-centrosymmetric magnetic compounds[2] or in thin films with 

broken inversion symmetry[3]. Skyrmions behave as particles whose creation, 

movement and annihilation form the basis of their applications in information storage 

and logic devices[4-6]. Fe monolayer (ML) grown on Ir(111) single crystal surface 

attracts particular research interests as it hosts a stable nano-skyrmion lattice at zero

magnetic field, which is ideal for skyrmion’s applications[7-14]. Density functional

theory calculations suggest that the formation of skyrmion lattice in the system results

from the interplay between Heisenberg exchange, DM interaction and a higher order 

four-spin interactions[15]. These magnetic interactions are ultimately related to the Fe 

atomic structure on the Ir(111) surface. For example, while a square skyrmion lattice is 

routinely observed in fcc-stacked Fe ML on Ir(111), a hexagonal skyrmion lattice exists 

in hcp-stacked Fe ML on Ir(111)[11]. The correspondence between the stacking order 

of Fe atom on Ir(111) substrate and the symmetry of the formed skyrmion lattice 

indicates that the existence of skyrmion lattice itself should also be susceptible to the 

perturbations to the spatial arrangement of Fe atoms on Ir(111) surface.

The spatial arrangement of adatoms on a substrate surface often depends 

sensitively on the adatom diffusion, which can be controlled by substrate defects or 

substrate temperature. In this work, we investigate how the Fe adatom diffusion affects 

the skyrmion lattice formation of Fe ML on Ir(111) substrate using spin-polarized 

scanning tunneling microscopy (SP-STM)[16]. The substrate defects are impurity 

atoms segregated from the bulk internal to the surface, whose density can be controlled 

by sputtering and annealing procedures upon substrate cleaning process. We observe 


that high (low) defect density gives rise to fractal (triangular) shaped Fe islands and the 

absence (appearance) of skyrmion lattice, indicating that Fe adatom diffusion plays an 

important role in determining the spatial arrangement of Fe atoms and thus the 

formation of the skyrmion lattice. This is further confirmed by our observation that Fe 

deposition on nearly defect-free Ir(111) at low temperatures also results in fractal 

shaped islands without the presence of skyrmion lattice. The apparent correlation 

between Fe adatom diffusion and the formation of skyrmion lattice underlies the 

interplay between structural, electronic and magnetic degrees of freedom in the 

system[17].

2. Experimental details

A sub-monolayer of Fe was thermally deposited on an Ir(111) single crystal 

surface. Prior to the Fe deposition, the Ir(111) single crystal was treated by cycles of Ar 

ion sputtering and subsequent annealing at 1300 K in an ultrahigh vacuum system with 

a base pressure of 7 × 10−9 mbar. During the annealing, impurity atoms will 

segregate from the bulk internal to the surface forming pinning centers to prevent 

adatom diffusion. These impurities are mostly Rh, C, Pt and W for the Ir single crystal 

used in our experiment. To get rid of the impurity atoms, the Ir(111) substrate was

further annealed in oxygen atmosphere (2 × 10−6 mbar) at a lower temperature (~1200

K) for an extended time. It was found that the impurity density depends on the annealing 

time in oxygen allowing one to have a controllable impurity density on the Ir(111) 

surface. After the substrate treatment, Fe was thermally deposited at a rate ~0.08Å/min

onto the Ir(111) substrate from a rod heated by e-beam bombardment. The substrate 

was at room temperature during the Fe deposition. The deposition rate was monitored 

by a quartz microbalance calibrated by STM morphology. SP-STM measurements were 

carried using a 0.25 mm diameter Fe tip at 5 K under a 2000 Oe magnetic field

perpendicular to the substrate surface, which ensures that the magnetic moment at the 

tip apex points along the field direction and has a sensitivity to the out-of-plane 

component of the sample magnetization.

3. Results and discussion


Fig. 1(a-e) show a large area topography of bare Ir(111) substrate surface with 

varying surface impurity densities from 0.4212/nm2 to 0.0024/nm2 prepared by 

aforementioned procedures. The change of the impurity density has a dramatic effect 

on the Fe growth. Fig. 1(f-j) show the topography of typical Fe islands grown on Ir(111) 

substrate with the corresponding surface impurity density level displayed on its top. 

While Fe islands are generally monolayer high, their shape and size depend strongly on 

the surface impurity density. For surface with the highest impurity level (Fig. 1(a)), Fe 

islands are small with an irregular shape indicating a limited surface diffusion of Fe 

adatoms (Fig. 1(f)). As the impurity level is lowered, the Fe islands become larger 

indicating an improved surface diffusion of Fe adatoms. The shape of the islands is

fractal-like, which is caused by the suppressed diffusion of adatoms at the island edges

(Fig. 1(g-h)). In the clean limit with very few surface impurities, the Fe islands are 

triangular-shaped with large size, indicating that the Fe adatoms have an easy diffusion 

path both on the Ir(111) surface and along the island edges with the absence of the 

pinning centers (Fig. 1(i-j)). To quantify the correlation between the impurity density 

level and the shape of the Fe island, we adopt a geometry complex transform (GCT) 

method to determine the similarity of a specific Fe island shape to a perfect equilateral 

triangle. A quantity termed “similarity factor” is obtained from GCT. The smaller the 

factor is, the closer to an equilateral triangle an Fe island shape is. We calculate an 

averaged similarity factor of Fe monolayer islands seen in each image of Fig. 1(f-j) and 

plot it as a function of the surface impurity density in Fig. 1(k). A monotonic change is 

observed, i.e., the shape of an Fe island gradually deviates from a perfect equilateral 

triangle with an increasing surface impurity density. The sensitive dependence of the 

island size and shape on the impurity density reflects the important role of adatom 

diffusion upon the non-equilibrium growth at room temperature[18,19]. It has been 

known that triangular shaped islands tend to be formed as a result of the three-fold 

rotational symmetry of the underlying Ir(111) substrate[8]. However, a significant 

amount of surface impurities obstructs such kind of Fe island formation by suppressing 

the Fe adatom diffusion on the surface via pinning effect. As a result, Fe adatoms form

islands with either irregular or fractal shapes. Triangular Fe islands are only formed


when enhanced surface diffusion is allowed on nearly clean surface.

The change of Fe island shape has a direct consequence on the formation of 

skyrmion lattice. Fig. 2 shows high resolution STM topography images and its height 

differential of Fe islands formed on Ir(111) surface with highest impurity density in (a-

b) and lowest impurity density in (c-d), which corresponds to the situation in Fig.1(a) 

and (e), respectively. Note that height differential images are presented here for better 

visualization of the height change. Fe islands in Fig. 2(c-d) show a clear square lattice 

signal contrast, whose magnetic origin can be confirmed by performing the STM 

measurement under opposite magnetic fields as shown in Fig. 2(e-h). In the SP-STM 

experiment, the spin-polarized tunneling current depends on the relative orientation 

between the tip and the local sample magnetization, giving rise to a signal contrast with 

a magnetic origin in the constant-current STM topographic image. Fig. 2(e-f) are two 

constant-current STM topographic images of the square lattice (presumably skyrmion) 

collected under the +0.25 T and -0.25 T magnetic field, respectively. The applied 

magnetic field is big enough to flip the magnetic direction of the ferromagnetic Fe tip 

but not enough to change the skyrmion spin structure. As expected, the signal contrast 

of such a square lattice is reversed between Fig. 2(e) and (f), confirming its magnetic 

origin. To highlight this signal reversal, Fig. 2(g-h) show the sum and the difference of 

Fig. 2(e) and (f), respectively. The difference ((e)-(f)) will maximize the magnetic 

contrast, while the sum ((e)+(f)) highlights the features with a non-magnetic origin. 

Apparently, Fig. 2(h) shows a bigger signal contrast than that of Fig. 2(g). Therefore, 

such a square lattice is identified as magnetic nano-skyrmion[7,8,15]. Instead of a 

skyrmion lattice, a maze structure is observed in the Fe islands in Fig. 2(a-b). One also 

sees Fe double-layer regions in Fig. 2(a-b) as inferred from the line-cut height profile

(inset of Fig. 2(a)). This double layer region shows no skyrmion, consistent with 

previous studies[8,13].

It is also interesting to look at the situation on Ir(111) surface with an intermediate 

impurity density level. Fig. 3(a) shows a large area topography of Fe islands grown on 

Ir(111) substrate with an impurity density corresponding to Fig. 1(d). The height 


differential image is presented in Fig. 3(b). There are five Fe islands in the area. 

Interestingly, while two fcc-stacked islands (island 1&2) on the top left show square 

skyrmion lattice with flat surfaces, the other three hcp-stacked islands (island 3, 4&5) 

with an opposite orientation on the right show no skyrmion lattice. Moreover, subtle 

differences exist among the hcp-stacked islands: Island 5 shows a mixture of the “bright” 

and the “dark” regions with a difference in the apparent height, while islands 3 and 4 

display a spatially uniform “bright” state. It is known that the hexagonal skyrmion 

lattice is more difficult to resolve in hcp-stacked Fe islands than the fcc-stacked ones 

which may correspond to the situation of island 3 and 4[11]. The apparent mixed-phase 

state in island 5 indicates that there exist other non-skyrmion spin states competing with 

the skyrmion state in the Fe/Ir(111) system. As mentioned before, the magnetic ground 

state of Fe/Ir(111) will be determined by the delicate balance between different

competing magnetic interactions. The differences of skyrmion formation in these

islands indicate that at intermediate impurity level, the diffusivity of the Fe adatoms is 

at a critical value where statistical fluctuation of impurity distribution may affect the Fe 

atom spatial arrangements and thus the magnetic interactions. As a consequence, 

skyrmion formation varies in different Fe islands.

We also perform a field dependent STM measurement on such a non-skyrmion 

phase to obtain more insights of its signal contrast. Fig. 4(a) shows an example of such 

non-skyrmion phase in an Fe island. Similar to the islands 3 and 4 in Fig. 3, it looks 

very smooth in the STM topographic image. However, no skyrmion lattice is observed 

(Fig. 4(b)). Fig. 4(c) and (d) are two zoomed-in STM images of a square area in the 

monolayer region denoted in Fig. 4(a). They are taken under -0.25 T and +0.25 T 

magnetic field, respectively. One can see fine features in such a zoomed-in image, such 

as the peanut shape protrusion. Moreover, the signal contrast doesn’t change very much 

between Fig. 4(c) and (d). Fig. 4(e) and (f) are the sum and the difference of Fig. 4(c) 

and (d). We choose two characteristic locations to compare its line-cut profile between 

Fig. 4(e) and (f). For the peanut shape protrusion, one gets a larger signal contrast in 

the sum image than that of the difference image (Fig. 4(g)), indicating its structural 


origin. However, it becomes less clear for the flat terrace region as shown in the Fig. 

4(h). Both the sum and the difference images show a small and comparable signal 

contrast, indicating a mixture of the structural and the magnetic origin for this region. 

We must note that, such a comparison between the tip-up and the tip-down 

measurement also suffers from a certain ambiguity. For example, a non-fully spin 

polarized STM tip can reduce the magnetic contrast of a pure magnetic spin state. On 

the other hand, if the magnetization of both the STM tip and the sample’s spin state flip 

with the field, one gets the same signal contrast when reversing the field. Further 

investigations are needed to identify the magnetic state of such a non-skyrmion phase.

The nano-skyrmion lattice is argued to be a magnetic ground state in Fe/Ir(111) 

system in previous work[15]. Our experiment shows that the impurity density of the 

Ir(111) surface plays a crucial role in achieving such a magnetic ground state. Such 

cleanness is directly tied to the Fe adatom diffusion on Ir(111) substrate surface, which 

is the most important kinetic process in thin film growth. A smooth and uniform film 

can only be formed with sufficient adatom mobility. In the extreme case of zero mobility, 

an adatom will stay where it lands, yielding a very rough growth front[20]. For epitaxial 

growth of metal on close-packed surfaces like the Fe/Ir(111) system, previous 

experiments showed both irregular-shaped and triangular-shaped islands depending on 

the detailed film/substrate combination. Kinetic Monte-Carlo simulations are 

performed to rationalize the correlation between these observations and the adatom 

diffusion along the edge and around the corner[21]. Our experimental observation 

further correlates the Fe island morphology with the skyrmion formation. As discussed 

above, the formation of skyrmion depends on the energy competition between different 

magnetic interactions which, in turn, relies on the spatial arrangement of Fe atoms on 

the Ir(111) surface. For example, the Fe-Ir hybridization should be involved to mediate 

the magnetic interaction between Fe atomic spins. Such hybridization sensitively relies 

on the orbital overlap of Fe and Ir atom and their relative spatial position. The irregular 

or fractal shapes of the Fe islands on Ir(111) imply that the diffusion of Fe adatoms is

limited, which likely results in a less perfect lattice structure of the Fe islands. This 


constitutes a big perturbation to the skyrmion magnetic ground state. Therefore, it is 

not surprising to see the absence of skyrmion lattice on irregular-shaped and fractal-

shaped Fe islands.

A controlled experiment was conducted to validate our hypothesis. Fe was grown

on a clean Ir(111) substrate at a low temperature (~30 K) in which the diffusion of the 

Fe adatoms is suppressed as compared to the situation at room temperature. Accordingly, 

the Fe islands exhibit a fractal shape as shown in Fig. 5(a). Although the substrate has 

the same low impurity as that in Fig. 1(e), the suppressed diffusion of Fe adatoms 

prevents the formation of triangular-shaped islands. Consequently, no skyrmion lattice 

is observed in the fractal-shaped Fe islands. This confirms that the diffusivity of the Fe 

adatoms plays the most critical role in skyrmion formation.

4. Conclusions

In summary, we have conducted a systematic study on the influence of diffusivity 

of Fe adatoms on the formation of skyrmion lattice in Fe islands. We demonstrate that 

a high substrate surface impurity or a low growth temperature reduces the diffusivity 

of Fe adatoms yielding islands with either irregular or fractal shapes. The reduced 

diffusivity will likely affect the perfection of the atomic structure of the Fe islands, 

which in turn changes the competing magnetic interactions. As a result, the formation 

condition of the skyrmion lattice is broken and no skyrmion lattice can be observed. In 

contrast, for fully developed triangular-shaped islands, the adequate diffusion of the Fe 

adatoms ensures the perfection of the atomic structure and thus the skyrmion lattice 

formation. These results reveal an intimate interplay between structural and magnetic 

degrees of freedom in the Fe/Ir(111) system.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare no competing interests.

Data availability

All raw and derived data used to support the findings of this work are available from 

the authors on reasonable request.


Acknowledgement

This work was supported by National Key Research Program of China 

(2022YFA1403300), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11427902, 

11991060, 12074075, 12074080 and 12274088), the Shanghai Municipal Science and 

Technology Major Project (2019SHZDZX01), and the Shanghai Municipal Natural 

Science Foundation (20501130600, 22ZR1408100 and 22ZR1407400)

References

[1]
N. Nagaosa and Y. Tokura, Topological properties and dynamics of magnetic skyrmions, Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 8, 899 (2013).

[2]
S. Muhlbauer, B. Binz, F. Jonietz, C. Pfleiderer, A. Rosch, A. Neubauer, R. Georgii, and P. Boni, 

Skyrmion Lattice in a Chiral Magnet, Science 323, 915 (2009).

[3]
J. Rowland, S. Banerjee, and M. Randeria, Skyrmions in chiral magnets with Rashba and 

Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. B 93, 020404 (2016).

[4]
X. C. Zhang, Y. Zhou, K. M. Song, T. E. Park, J. Xia, M. Ezawa, X. X. Liu, W. S. Zhao, G. P. Zhao, 

and S. Woo, Skyrmion-electronics: writing, deleting, reading and processing magnetic skyrmions 

toward spintronic applications, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 32, 143001 (2020).

[5]
A. Fert, N. Reyren, and V. Cros, Magnetic skyrmions: advances in physics and potential 

applications, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2, 17031 (2017).

[6]
N. Romming, C. Hanneken, M. Menzel, J. E. Bickel, B. Wolter, K. von Bergmann, A. Kubetzka, 

and R. Wiesendanger, Writing and Deleting Single Magnetic Skyrmions, Science 341, 636 (2013).

[7]
K. Von Bergmann, S. Heinze, M. Bode, E. Y. Vedmedenko, G. Bihlmayer, S. Blugel, and R. 

Wiesendanger, Observation of a complex nanoscale magnetic structure in a hexagonal Fe 

monolayer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 167203 (2006).

[8]
K. von Bergmann, S. Heinze, M. Bode, G. Bihlmayer, S. Blugel, and R. Wiesendanger, Complex 

magnetism of the Fe monolayer on Ir(111), New J. Phys. 9, 396 (2007).

[9]
A. Sonntag, J. Hermenau, S. Krause, and R. Wiesendanger, Thermal Stability of an Interface-

Stabilized Skyrmion Lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 077202 (2014).

[10] K. v. Bergmann, A. Kubetzka, O. Pietzsch, and R. Wiesendanger, Interface-induced chiral 

domain walls, spin spirals and skyrmions revealed by spin-polarized scanning tunneling 

microscopy, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 26, 394002 (2014).

[11] K. von Bergmann, M. Menzel, A. Kubetzka, and R. Wiesendanger, Influence of the Local Atom 

Configuration on a Hexagonal Skyrmion Lattice, Nano Lett. 15, 3280 (2015).

[12] J. Hagemeister, D. Iaia, E. Y. Vedmedenko, K. von Bergmann, A. Kubetzka, and R. 

Wiesendanger, Skyrmions at the Edge: Confinement Effects in Fe/Ir(111), Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 

207202 (2016).

[13] P. J. Hsu, A. Finco, L. Schmidt, A. Kubetzka, K. von Bergmann, and R. Wiesendanger, Guiding 

Spin Spirals by Local Uniaxial Strain Relief, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 017201 (2016).

[14] J. Grenz, A. Kohler, A. Schwarz, and R. Wiesendanger, Probing the Nano-Skyrmion Lattice on 

Fe/Ir(111) with Magnetic Exchange Force Microscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 047205 (2017).


[15] S. Heinze, K. von Bergmann, M. Menzel, J. Brede, A. Kubetzka, R. Wiesendanger, G. Bihlmayer, 

and S. Blugel, Spontaneous atomic-scale magnetic skyrmion lattice in two dimensions, Nat. Phys. 

7, 713 (2011).

[16] H. Huang, M. Shuai, Y. Yang, R. Song, Y. Liao, L. Yin, and J. Shen, Cryogen free spin polarized 

scanning tunneling microscopy and magnetic exchange force microscopy with extremely low noise, 

Rev. Sci. Instrum. 93, 073703 (2022).

[17] S. Andrieu, M. Piecuch, and J. F. Bobo, Fe growth on (0001) hcp Ru and (111) fcc Ir: 

Consequences for structural and magnetic properties, Phys. Rev. B 46, 4909 (1992).

[18] H. Brune, Microscopic view of epitaxial metal growth: nucleation and aggregation, Surf. Sci. 

Rep. 31, 121 (1998).

[19] Z. Y. Zhang and M. G. Lagally, Atomistic processes in the early stages of thin-film growth, 

Science 276, 377 (1997).

[20] J. Vrijmoeth, H. A. van der Vegt, J. A. Meyer, E. Vlieg, and R. J. Behm, Surfactant-Induced 

Layer-by-Layer Growth of Ag on Ag(111): Origins and Side Effects, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3843 (1994).

[21] S. Ovesson, A. Bogicevic, and B. I. Lundqvist, Origin of Compact Triangular Islands in Metal-

on-Metal Growth, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2608 (1999).


Fig. 1. Large scale topography of Fe/Ir(111) system. (a-e) Topography of bare Ir(111) 

substrate with different surface impurity density. The estimated density level and tunnel 

parameters are (a) 0.4212/nm2, -1 V, 100 pA, (b) 0.0552/nm2, 0.76 V, 100 pA, (c) 

0.0248/nm2, 1 V, 100 pA, (d) 0.006/nm2, 1 V, 100 pA, (e) 0.0024/nm2, 1 V, 100 pA. (f-

j) Topography of monolayer Fe island grown on Ir(111) substrate with the surface 

impurity density displayed on the top. The tunnel parameters are (f) 1V, 100 pA, (g) 1 

V, 100 pA, (h) 1 V, 100 pA, (i) 1 V, 100 pA, (j) 0.1 V, 100 pA. (k) The plot of the 

similarity factor of the Fe monolayer island as a function of the surface impurity density.


Fig. 2. The topography and the corresponding height differential image of Fe monolayer 

islands. (a-b) topography and its differential of Fe monolayer island grown under a high 

surface impurity density. A line-cut height profile is shown in the inset. The tunnel 

parameters are 0.1 V, 100 pA. (c-d) topography and its differential of Fe monolayer 

island grown under a clean limit. The tunnel parameters are 0.1 V, 100 pA. (e-f) STM 

constant-current topographic images of the square lattice under +0.25 T and -0.25 T 

magnetic field, respectively. The tunnel parameters are 0.05 V, 100 pA for these images. 

(g-h) The sum and the difference of (e) and (f), respectively.


Fig. 3. The topography and the corresponding height differential image of Fe monolayer 

islands grown under an intermediated surface impurity density level. The tunnel 

parameters are 0.1 V, 100 pA.


Fig. 4. A magnetic field dependent STM measurement on a non-skyrmion phase. (a-b) 

STM constant-current topographic image and its differential of an Fe island with a non-

skyrmion phase. The tunnel parameters are 0.05 V, 100 pA for these images. (c-d) The 

zoomed-in STM images of the square area denoted in Fig. 4(a). They are taken under -

0.25 T and +0.25 T magnetic field, respectively. The tunnel parameters are 0.05 V, 100 

pA for these images. (e-f) The sum and the difference of (c) and (d), respectively. (g-h) 

The line-cut profiles from (e) and (f).


Fig. 5. The topography of Fe monolayer islands grown at low temperatures with a clean 

substrate surface. (b) is a zoomed-in image of the denoted yellow square in (a). The 

tunnel parameters are 0.05 V, 200 pA for these images.


