arXiv:2302.13135v3  [physics.app-ph]  23 Oct 2023

Experimental Demonstration of A Dual-Input/Dual-Output Reflective
Impedance Metasurface
Jean Louis Keyrouz,1, a) Vasileios G. Ataloglou,1 and George V. Eleftheriades1

The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G4,
Canada

(Dated: 25 October 2023)

This paper presents the experimental demonstration of a dual-input/dual-output reflective impedance metasurface. The
design of the metasurface relies on the Method of Moments and leverages auxiliary surface waves to achieve anomalous
reflection of two impinging plane waves with controlled sidelobe levels. The two beams are chosen independently
compared to those in a conventional phase-gradient metasurface where the design presents a single slope to achieve
a certain reflection and all other incident beams would depend on that slope. A prototype that ensures maximum
directivity at two prescribed reflection angles for the two input waves is then fabricated on a Rogers RO3003 printed-
circuit board using 42 metawires loaded with printed capacitors. The proposed metasurface is capable of reflecting an
incident beam from −20◦ to −55◦ and a second from +10◦ to 50◦ at 9.93 GHz. The metasurface is experimentally
characterized and an illumination efficiency of at least 89% is calculated for each of the reflected waves, indicating a
high multiplexing efficacy.

The advent of new wireless communication systems has
elicited a renewed interest in the development of energy ef-
ficient and compact beamforming antennas using metasur-
faces (MTSs).
In fact, MTSs have been used in a wide
range of applications showcasing their exceptional ability to
mold electromagnetic waves in various ways, such as per-
fect anomalous refraction1,2, perfect anomalous reflection3,4,
beamforming5,6, and polarization control7,8.
Metasurfaces have also facilitated the design of structures
that radiate multiple independent beams, when fed by mul-
tiple spatially-separated feed points.
Each feed point pro-
duces a beam in a different direction, enabling multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) communications with the use of a
single aperture. In the context of holographic antennas, the
design with multiple feeds and multiple output beams is typ-
ically done by averaging the impedance of all the differ-
ent cases9–11.
The same method of multiplexing has also
been proposed in the case that the feeds operate at different
frequencies12,13. While the averaging multiplexing method
provides some enhancement in the aperture efficiency of all
beams compared to partitioning the metasurface into dif-
ferent regions, it still suffers from cross interference-terms,
namely the radiation that is produced when the wave from
each feed interacts with the modulation designed for the other
feeds. Therefore, unless there is orthogonality of the incident
fields/modulations or the positions of the feeds is carefully
optimized, the total performance would be sub-optimal. A so-
lution was proposed in14 by forming an over-defined stacked
system of equations for the unknown impedances based on in-
tegral equations and the desired radiated fields. This is solved
in a quasi-direct approach using the least square method15.
On the other hand, integral equation models solved using
the Method of Moments and using a classic iterative opti-
mization approach for determining the necessary impedances

a)Author
to
whom
correspondence
must
be
addressed:jeanlouis.keyrouz@mail.utoronto.ca

for desired functionalities have been recently proposed16,17.
While these methods directly optimize for the far-field pat-
tern, the underlying mechanism is the excitation of auxiliary
surface waves that redistribute the power passively along the
MTS18–20. In addition to capturing the mutual coupling inter-
actions among the different unit cells comprising the MTS, in-
tegral equation methods enable the realization of MIMO sce-
narios. The iterative optimization approach has certain ben-
efits as the exact solution for all inputs is available at each
iteration during optimization. In the case of multiple inci-
dent fields, this means that the optimization scheme treats
all cases rigorously, and there are not any unpredicted cross-
interference terms. Moreover, constraints can be set on the
range of the impedance values so that the latter are physically
realizable. Lastly, a set of metrics such as the directivity or the
sidelobe level can be introduced in the cost function to balance
the requirements of each application. Using this approach, a
multi-layered structure has been proposed for shaping the re-
flected radiation pattern for two different frequencies21.
In this paper, we discuss the design and measurement of
a MIMO single-layer reflective impedance MTS that anoma-
lously reflects two independent plane waves in an asymmet-
ric manner.
This is in contrast to phase-gradient metasur-
faces that can be designed to anomalously reflect an incident
wave in a desired direction but with no control over the re-
flection of other incident waves22.
Moreover, by breaking
the periodicity, the possible output angles are not constrained
by Floquet-Bloch modes as in coarsely-discretized metasur-
faces (often, referred to metagratings)23. The efficient anoma-
lous reflection of two incident beams effectively doubles the
number of channels that the MTS can handle simultaneously.
Such reflective passive MTSs can be used to redirect mul-
tiple beams independently in an indoor or outdoor wireless
environment24.
The metasurface is designed based on the integral-equation
optimization framework to maximize the directivity of two re-
flected plane waves at predetermined angles, while keeping
the sidelobes at a tolerable level17. While the design is based
on the same optimization method, this paper addresses some


2

x
y
z

...

Metawire 1
Metawire 2
Metawire N

W

Λ

h

Incident:1
Incident:2

Reflected:2
Reflected:1

FIG. 1: Model of the impedance MTS with printed capacitor
unit cells.

practical issues compared to the MIMO example presented
therein. Specifically, the simulation is not based on idealized
impedance sheets, but on realistic strip wires that are loaded
with printed capacitors adhering to all fabrication tolerances.
In turn, this allows the estimation of losses and bandwidth of
the proposed design, which are important for any metasurface
used for communications applications. It is noted that losses
can be significant if high surface waves are excited, as in the
case of the unconstrained solution presented before17. Finally,
the design is fabricated on a Rogers RO3003 printed-circuit-
board with sub-wavelength printed capacitor unit cells etched
on its surface resulting in a compact and lightweight structure.
Compared to the theoretical model, the prototype is finite in
all dimensions, adding to the non-idealities of the experiment.
Nevertheless, the reflections of two impinging planes waves
are measured in a bi-static setup at 9.93 GHz, and they match
satisfactorily with theory, further validating the design. The
MoM framework used to design MIMO MTSs allows the re-
flection of independent angle pairs that we detail in the sup-
plementary material.
The designed structure consists of a set of metawires on
top of a grounded dielectric substrate of thickness h and rel-
ative permittivity εr. The substrate has a width of W along
the y direction while the metawires are assumed to be infinite
along the x direction with periodic capacitive loadings every
Λ. The very sub-wavelength nature of the periodic loadings
allows us to assign a homogenized loading impedance Zi at
every metawire (i). The different impedance loadings Zi are
implemented using printed capacitors of varying lengths, as
shown in Fig. 1. It is noted that although the MTS in Fig.1
is intended for operation in free-space, nearby metallic or di-
electric scatterers could have been included and accounted for
rigorously, as it has been done in the context of reconfigurable
intelligent surfaces25.
The MTS is illuminated with transverse electric (TE) plane
waves (En
inc = En
incˆx) at specific incident angles θin in the yz
plane with positive angles extending in the +y direction and
negative angles extending in the -y direction, with n repre-
senting the different inputs. Each incident field En
inc induces
surface conduction currents Jg and Jw in the ground plane and
the metawires respectively, as well as, volume polarization
currents Jv in the dielectric. The scattered fields generated by
these three induced currents, in addition to the incident field,
form the total field radiated by the MTS. A set of coupled
equations for Jg,Jv and Jw is formed by inspecting the total
electric field at the different regions. The total electric field
must be zero on the ground plane because it is entirely tan-
gential to it. According to Ohm’s law, the total electric field

is proportional to Jw with a proportionality constant of Zi at
every metawire (i) and proportional to Jv in the dielectric sub-
strate. Expanding the unknown conduction and polarization
currents using the MoM into pulse basis functions and using
point matching at the center of each basis function leads to the
following linear system of equations17:







0 0
0
0 P
0
0 0 Zw



−




Ggg Ggv Ggw
Gvg
Gvv
Gvw
Gwg Gwv Gww












¯Jg
¯Jv¯Jw



 =




¯Eg
i¯Ev
i¯Ew
i



,
(1)

where P and Zw are diagonal matrices related to the elec-
tric susceptibility of the substrate and the loading impedances
metawires Zi respectively, the ¯J entries represent the sam-
pled induced currents, the G entries represent the self and
mutual interactions between the various components of the
impedance MTS and the ¯Ei entries represent each incident
field sampled at the ground plane, substrate and metawires.
For a given set of loading impedances Zi (encapsulated in the
matrix Zw), Eq. (1) can be used to solve the forward prob-
lem; namely, to find the induced currents and then calculate
the scattered fields in the far-field region. A more detailed de-
scription of the integral equation framework used in our anal-
ysis can be found in previous publications17.
Having established a way to calculate the scattering for a
given set of impedance loadings Zi, the latter can be opti-
mized to match a desired radiation pattern for any given in-
cident field En
inc, since Eq. (1) is valid for any illumination of
the MTS. Naturally, different incident fields in Eq. (1) would
result in a different set of induced currents and, thus, differ-
ent far-field patterns for each input. In fact, if we consider a
dual-input/dual-output system (n=1,2), the goal is to optimize
for a single set of impedances Zi that will allow both incident
electric fields to achieve the desired far-field radiation patterns
Df f
n . It should be pointed out that all metawires contribute to
both functionalities at a collective manner, and there are not
some wires designated for the one or the other case. This
feature makes possible the effective utilization of the entire
aperture for both cases, simultaneously.
In this work, we primarily aim to achieve maximum direc-
tivity at the desired output angles θon, while maintaining a
satisfactory sidelobe level. The cost function that quantifies
these features for two incident angles (n=1,2) can be defined
as follows:

F = −
2
∑
n=1
Df f
n (θon)+
2
∑
n=1
max{Df f
n (θ SLL
on )− Sn,0},
(2)

where Df f
n (θon) represents the directivity at the desired out-
put angles θon, Df f
n (θ SLL
on ) represents the directivity at a set of
angles θ SLL
on
that excludes the main beam, and Sn represents
the maximum level the sidelobes can reach, all in dB scale.
We note that the cost function is minimized with respect to
the impedance loadings without going through a calculation
of a local reflection coefficient for each wire. Specifically,
the imaginary parts of the impedance loadings of the wires
are the ones being optimized, since they play a crucial role in
the emerging pattern. On the other hand, the real part corre-


3

sponds to the small unavoidable losses of a physical imple-
mentation and it only limits the power efficiency of the meta-
surface. Due to the physical limitations when realizing the
sub-wavelength unit cells, a constraint is placed beforehand
on the range of values for the imaginary part of the impedance
loadings Im{Zi}. The first term in Eq. (2) guarantees maximal
directivity in the chosen directions θon while the second term
prevents any sidelobe defined in the set of angles θ SLL
on
from
rising above a predetermined absolute level Sn. The values Sn
are determined by subtracting the desired sidelobe level from
the expected maximum directivity for each beam. Minimiza-
tion of the cost function is done in MATLAB using the built-in
genetic algorithm followed by gradient descent optimization.
The output of the genetic algorithm is inherently random, so
multiple iterations of the optimization algorithm can be per-
formed before selecting the solution with the optimal pattern.
Finally, it is noted that while the beams and the specifications
are equally weighted in forming the cost function of Eq. (2),
unequal multiplicative factors could have been included if one
specification (directivity or sidelobe level) or one beam was
considered of higher importance.
For the presented example, only capacitive loadings are uti-
lized, since the achievable range is sufficient to realize the de-
sired functionality. The loadings are implemented as printed
capacitors that give a reliable and cost-efficient method to re-
alize the required impedances. A correspondence between
the capacitive loading Zload and a printed capacitor is estab-
lished by characterizing a single capacitive unit cell in Ansys
High Frequency Structure Simulator (HFSS). In fact, an em-
bedded source is placed below the unit cell and a full-wave
simulation is performed to record the electric field emanating
from the structure for different capacitor lengths. A similar
procedure is then performed with a homogenized strip of a
varying impedance Zload using the MoM framework. By com-
paring the scattered near-field from the HFSS simulation (in-
volving the patterned wires) and the MoM model (involving
the impedance sheets), a correspondence between the capac-
itor length and the associated impedance loading can be es-
tablished, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Using the above-described
procedure to characterize a single metawire avoids placing it
in an infinite periodic array, typically found in metasurface or
reflectarray designs. This is aligned with the MoM optimiza-
tion framework which models the homogenized impedance
loading of a single metawire and includes all mutual coupling
interactions between dissimilar neighboring metawires.
The design and measurement of a reflective impedance
MTS that displays the anomalous reflection of two incident
plane waves at desired angles are outlined. The designed MTS
consists of 42 metawires with a loading period of Λ = λ/6 on
top of a grounded substrate of height h = 1.52 mm, permittiv-
ity εr = 3 and loss tangent tan(δ) = 0.001. It has a width of
W = 8λ at 10 GHz. The MTS reflects two incident beams
35◦ and 40◦ off their specular direction. In fact, two uni-
form planes waves impinging on the surface at θi1 = −20◦

and θi2 = +10◦ are anomalously reflected at θo1 = −55◦ and
θo2 = +50◦ respectively. These two pairs of angles can be
chosen independently of each other with the design satisfying
both reflections simultaneously.

Cell No

1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

-10

-20

-30

-50

Im{Z} (
i
Ω)

-40

1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5

Width W (mm)
c

Im{Z
(
load} Ω)

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

1.25

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

0

Re{Z
(
load} Ω)

Wc

0.7

0.25
0.25

λ/6
x

y

5

(a)

(b)

FIG. 2: (a) Impedance loading variation Zload as a function of
the length of a printed capacitor. (b) Optimized set of loading
impedances Im{Zi} for the 42 metawires.

The optimization algorithm previously discussed was run
multiple times to obtain a pattern with a sufficiently low cost
function value. The sidelobe level parameters in Eq.(2) S1
and S2 were set in a way that ensures a sidelobe level at most
equal to −13.3 dB when measured from the peak to maintain
a high efficiency. The optimization is performed on the imag-
inary parts of the loading impedances Im{Zi}, as the effect
of the real parts Re{Zi} on the radiation pattern is minimal.
The range of Im{Zi} was constrained to [−50,−15]Ω and the
optimized loading impedances Zi are shown in Fig. 2(b).
The results from the MoM model and the HFSS simulation
involving the physical structure are shown for each case in
Fig. 3. They both present a high directivity and satisfactory
sidelobe levels of at most -12.8 dB and similar patterns at 10
GHz. We calculate the ideal 2D directivity of an aperture with
uniform-amplitude based on26:

Df f
uni(θon) = 2πW

λ
cos(θon).
(3)

The interpretation of 2D directivity in Eq. (3) is discussed
further in the Supplementary material. The illumination and
power (radiation) efficiencies, which are defined as,

ηil = max(Df f (θ))

Df f
uni(θon)
ηp = Pref

Pinc
(4)

are used to calculate the total efficiency of the HFSS radia-
tion pattern where Df f (θ) represents the directivity pattern,
Pref the reflected power and Pinc the incident power.
It is
highlighted that the illumination efficiency relates to the di-
rectivity while the power efficiency is related to losses. For
the wave incident at θi1 = −20◦ and reflected at θo1 = −55◦,
the simulated efficiencies are ηil = 0.995 and ηp = 0.906;
therefore, the total efficiency is η = ηilηp = 90.1%. Sim-
ilarly, for the wave incident at θi2 = +10◦ and reflected at
θo2 = +50◦, ηil = 0.991, ηp = 0.886 and the total efficiency
is η = ηilηp = 87.8%. The simulated fractional bandwidth
for a 3-dB drop in the gain is 4.16% and 8.95% for the re-
flected beams directed at −55◦ and +50◦, respectively. The


4

Angle (in degrees)

Angle (in degrees)

0

0

-20

-20

-40

-40

-60

-60

-80

-80

20

20

40

40

60

60

80

80

Directivity (dB)
Directivity (dB)

-20

-20

-15

-15

-10

-10

-5

-5

0

0

5

5

10

10

15

15

(a)

(b)

S =1.3 dB
1

S =1.8 dB
2

~13.3 dB

~13.3 dB

MoM
HFSS

MoM
HFSS

FIG. 3: MoM and HFSS directivity plots for (a) −20◦ to
−55◦ and (b) +10◦ to +50◦ at 10 GHz. The green shaded
regions represent the ranges θ SLL
on
that exclude the main
beam, and Sn represent the constraint levels imposed on
Eq.(2) for the optimization.

bandwidth is mostly limited by the frequency dispersion of
the capacitive impedance loadings, as well as by the change
of all the electric distances as the frequency varies.
The length of the MTS in the wire longitudinal direction
(x-axis) was truncated to around 6λ. Using finite-length ho-
mogenized impedance sheets, full-wave simulations in HFSS
showed that such a truncation is sufficient to approximate the
assumed uniformity along the x-axis and maintain the far-field
patterns shown in Fig.3. The design was implemented on a
17.99 cm by 23.98 cm board using a Rogers RO3003 sub-
strate with the metawires etched on one side while the other
side is kept copper laminated to serve as a ground plane.
The antenna is measured in an anechoic chamber with two
identical X-band horn antennas acting as the transmitter and
receiver, as shown in Fig. 4. The apertures of the horn anten-
nas are around 245 cm away from the MTS. The transmitting
horn antenna is fixed to the ground while the MTS is rotated
by 20◦ and 10◦ to emulate an incidence at −20◦ and +10◦,
respectively. Measurements of S21 are performed with a res-
olution of 1◦ near the main beam and up to 5◦ for the rest of
the pattern. The horn antennas occupy a region of around 7.5◦

each, which prohibits measurements of the reflected beam in
a 15◦ region around the incident angle. Both the receiving and
transmitting horn antennas are mounted on tripods connected
by plastic tubes to the platform on which the MTS is placed.
This ensures the receiving antenna is maintaining a constant
distance from the MTS when measurements are taken at the
different angles.
The measurement results are shown in Fig. 5 alongside
the measurements performed at the same incident angles on
a copper plate of similar dimensions, both normalized to the
maximum directivity of the copper plate at 9.93 GHz, that
maximized the MTS gain in the desired angles. The measured
gain pattern is similar to the pattern simulated in HFSS. The

FIG. 4: Bi-static measurement setup. The transmitting
antenna illuminates the MTS while the rotating receiving
antenna records the reflected pattern.

specular direction gain is heavily suppressed demonstrating
the efficacy of the MTS in reflecting the input beams at the
desired directions. Both patterns present sidelobe levels of at
least 12.3 dB below the peak directivity. The maximum gain
of the first measured pattern occurs at θo1 = −53◦ and it is
around 1.19 dB (76% efficiency) lower than the maximum ex-
pected gain if the copper plate redirected the incident power
in the desired direction. This maximum is represented by the
dashed line in Fig. 5. Similarly, the maximum gain of the
second measured pattern occurs at θo2 = 51◦ with a gain 0.96
dB (80% efficiency) lower than the gain of the copper plate.
The directivity of the pattern is calculated using the measure-
ment results. The illumination and subsequently the power
efficiency of the two beams is then calculated. For the first
measured pattern, the illumination efficiency is 89% and us-
ing the measured total efficiency (76%), we calculate a power
efficiency of 85%. Similarly, for the second measured pattern
we calculate an illumination efficiency of 93% and a power
efficiency of 86%. A different way of estimating the total ef-
ficiency and the 3-dB bandwidth for each beam through the
bi-static radar equation is discussed in Sec. III of the Supple-
mentary material.
In conclusion, we presented an experimental demonstration
of a reflective impedance metasurface that handles two inde-
pendent incident beams simultaneously. The uniform plane
waves impinging on the surface at −20◦ and +10◦ are anoma-
lously reflected to −55◦ and +50◦ at 9.93 GHz, respectively,
while keeping the sidelobe level at most -12.3 dB . The meta-
surface was designed using a Method-of-Moments based opti-
mization framework and simulated with printed capacitor unit
cells which make the analysis of losses and bandwidth possi-
ble. The physical design was fabricated and measured for both
input channels reporting highly directive beams in the desired
directions, as evident from the radiation pattern and the high
total efficiencies.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Ad-
ditional information concerning the experiment can be found
in the Supplementary information.


5

Angle (in degrees)

Angle (in degrees)

0

0

-20

-20

-40

-40

-60

-60

-80

-80

20

20

40

40

60

60

80

80

-20

-20

-15

-15

-10

-10

-5

-5

0

0

-25

-25

-30

-30

Normalized Gain (dB)
Normalized Gain (dB)

-35

-35

(a)

Metal Plate
MTS

Metal Plate
MTS

(b)

FIG. 5: Normalized Gain radiation patterns of the
measurements and copper plate at 9.93 GHz. The shaded
areas represent the zones where no measurements are
possible ([−27.5◦,−12.5◦] for (a) the first incident beam and
(b) [2.5◦,17.5◦] for the second incident beam).

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

See the supplementary material for details on directivity,
bandwidth and efficiency calculations, as well as the versa-
tility of the framework compared to phase-gradient metasur-
faces and its ability to support more beams.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Department of National
Defence’s Innovation for Defence Excellence and Security
(IDEaS) Program.

1M. Selvanayagam and G. V. Eleftheriades, ”Discontinuous electromagnetic
fields using orthogonal electric and magnetic currents for wavefront manip-
ulation,” Opt. Exp., vol. 21, issue 12, pp. 14 409, Jun 2013.
2C. Pfeiffer and A. Grbic, ”Metamaterial Huygens’ surfaces: Tailoring wave
fronts with reflectionless sheets,” Phys. Rev. X, vol. 110, no. 19, pp. 197401,
2013.
3A. M. H. Wong and G. V. Eleftheriades, ”Perfect Anomalous Reflection
with a Bipartite Huygens’ Metasurface,” Phys. Rev. X, vol. 8, no. 1, pp.
011036, 2018.
4H. Chalabi, Y. Ra’di, D. L. Sounas, and A. Al`u, ”Efficient anomalous re-
flection through near-field interactions in metasurfaces,” Phys. Rev. B, vol.
96, no. 7, 2017.
5A. H. Dorrah and G. V. Eleftheriades, Bianisotropic Huygens’ metasurface
pairs for non-local power-conserving wave transformations,”IEEE Anten-
nas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 1788, 2018.
6B. O. Raeker and A. Grbic, ”Compound Metaoptics for Amplitude and
Phase Control of Wave Fronts,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 122, no. 11, pp.
113901, 2019.

7M. Selvanayagam and G. V. Eleftheriades, ”Polarization Control Using
Tensor Huygens Surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 62, no. 12,
pp. 6155, Dec. 2014.
8T. Niemi, A. O. Karilainen and S. A. Tretyakov, ”Synthesis of Polarization
Transformers,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3102,
Jun. 2013
9Y. B. Li, B. G. Cai, Q. Cheng, and T. J. Cui, ”Isotropic Holographic Meta-
surfaces for Dual-Functional Radiations without Mutual Interferences,”
Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 29, 2016.
10D. Gonz´alez-Ovejero, G. Minatti, G. Chattopadhyay and S. Maci, ”Multi-
beam by Metasurface Antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 65,
no. 6, pp. 2923, Jun. 2017.
11A. V. Chesnitskiy, A. N. Kosmynin, O. M. Kaigorodov, P. A. Sibirtsev,
K. N. Kosmynina and K. V. Lemberg, ”Multibeam Antenna Implementa-
tion Using Anisotropic Metasurfaces,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Young
Professionals Electron Devices Mater. (EDM), pp. 251–255, Jun. 2022.
12Y. Li, A. Li, T. Cui and D. F. Sievenpiper, ”Multiwavelength Multiplexing
Hologram Designed Using Impedance Metasurfaces,” IEEE Trans. Anten-
nas Propag., vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 6408, Nov. 2018.
13M. Faenzi, D. Gonz´alez-Ovejero, and S. Maci, ”Overlapped and sequential
metasurface modulations for Bi-Chromatic beams generation,” Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 118, no. 18, pp. 181902, 2021.
14M. Bodehou, E. Martini, S. Maci, I. Huynen and C. Craeye, ”Multibeam
and Beam Scanning With Modulated Metasurfaces,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1273, Mar. 2020.
15M. Bodehou, C. Craeye, E. Martini and I. Huynen, ”A Quasi-Direct Method
for the Surface Impedance Design of Modulated Metasurface Antennas,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 24, Jan. 2019.
16J. Budhu and A. Grbic, ”Perfectly Reflecting Metasurface Reflectarrays:
Mutual Coupling Modeling Between Unique Elements Through Homoge-
nization,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 122, Jan. 2021.
17G. Xu, V. G. Ataloglou, S. V. Hum, and G. V. Eleftheriades, ”Ex-
treme Beam-Forming With Impedance Metasurfaces Featuring Embedded
Sources and Auxiliary Surface Wave Optimization”, IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 28670, Mar. 2022.
18A. Epstein and G. V. Eleftheriades, ”Synthesis of Passive Lossless Metasur-
faces Using Auxiliary Fields for Reflectionless Beam Splitting and Perfect
Reflection,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 117, no. 25, pp. 256103, 2016.
19D.-H. Kwon and S. A. Tretyakov, ”Arbitrary beam control using passive
lossless metasurfaces enabled by orthogonally polarized custom surface
waves,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 97, no. 3, 2018.
20V. G. Ataloglou and G. V. Eleftheriades, ”Arbitrary Wave Transformations
With Huygens’ Metasurfaces Through Surface-Wave Optimization,” IEEE
Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1750, Sept. 2021.
21J. Budhu, E. Michielssen and A. Grbic, ”The Design of Dual Band Stacked
Metasurfaces Using Integral Equations,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 4576, Jun. 2022.
22N. Yu, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats et al., “Light propagation with phase discon-
tinuities: Generalized laws of reflection and refraction,” Science, vol. 334,
no. 6054, pp. 333–337, Oct. 2011.
23C. Qi and A. M. H. Wong, ”Discrete Huygens’ Metasurface: Realizing
Anomalous Refraction and Diffraction Mode Circulation With a Robust,
Broadband and Simple Design,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 70,
no. 8, pp. 7300, Aug. 2022
24M. Salucci, A. Benoni, G. Oliveri, P. Rocca, B. Li, and A. Massa, ”A Mul-
tihop Strategy for the Planning of EM Skins in a Smart Electromagnetic
Environment,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 2758,
2023.
25A. Rabault, L. L. Magoarou, J. Sol et al., “On the Tacit Linearity Assump-
tion in Common Cascaded Models of RIS-Parametrized Wireless Chan-
nels,” arXiv, 2023
26G. A. Egorov and G. V. Eleftheriades, ”Theory and Simulation of Meta-
surface Lenses for Extending the Angular Scan Range of Phased Arrays,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 3705, May 2020.


