1

DNA origami assembled nanoantennas for 

manipulating single-molecule spectral emission

María Sanz-Paz1§*, Fangjia Zhu1§, Nicolas Bruder1, Karol Kołątaj1, Antonio Fernández-

Domínguez2*, and Guillermo P. Acuna1* 

1Department of Physics, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musée 3, Fribourg CH-1700, 

Switzerland.

2 Departamento de Física Teórica de la Materia Condensada and Condensed Matter Physics Center 

(IFIMAC), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, E-28049 Madrid, Spain.

§These authors contributed equally.

Keywords: nanophotonics, plasmonics, emission spectra, single-molecule fluorescence, colloidal 

nanoparticles, DNA nanotechnology, DNA origami.


2

Abstract: Optical nanoantennas can affect the decay rates of nearby emitters by modifying the 

local density of photonic states around them. In the weak-coupling limit, and according to the 

Fermi’s Golden Rule, the emission spectrum of a dye is given by the energy of all the possible 

radiative transitions weighted by the probability of each of them to occur. By engineering the 

resonance of a nanoantenna, one can selectively enhance specific vibronic transitions of a dye

molecule, thus shaping its emission spectrum. Since interactions between emitters and 

nanoantennas are known to be position dependent, we make here use of DNA origami to precisely 

place an individual dye at different positions around a gold nanorod. We show how this relative 

position between the nanorod and the emitter affects the emission spectrum of the latter. In 

particular, we observe the appearance of a second fluorescence peak whose wavelength and 

intensity are correlated with the fundamental plasmonic resonance of the nanorod, which we 

extract from its photoluminescence spectrum. This second peak results from the selective 

enhancement of transitions to different vibrational levels of the excitonic ground state, whose 

energies are in resonance with the plasmonic one. Furthermore, we argue that the drastic alteration 

of the fluorescence spectrum in some of our samples cannot be accounted for with Kasha’s rule, 

which indicates that radiative and vibrational relaxation dye lifetimes can become comparable

through the coupling to the gold nanorods.


3

Plasmonic nanostructures can act as optical antennas1 capable of mediating interactions between 

light and fluorescent emitters.2 For example, they can couple free-space propagating light into

highly enhanced and localized near-fields, and therefore increase the excitation rate of adjacent 

emitters.3 In addition, even in the weak-coupling regime, plasmonic nanostructures can also tailor 

the emission process, as they can modulate the local density of states (LDOS)4,5 around them, thus 

affecting the decay rates of nearby emitters according to Fermi’s Golden Rule.6 These changes in 

the radiative and nonradiative decay rates influence in turn the photophysical properties of such

fluorescent emitters,7 that can experience strong fluorescence (FL) enhancement,3,8 lifetime 

shortening,9 enhancement/reduction of their quantum yield,10 increment of their photostability,11,12

changes in their emission pattern,13–15 and a shift of their apparent emission center.16 Furthermore, 

LDOS experienced by single emitters are known to be dependent on their distance and orientation 

to the plasmonic structure17 as well as on their spectral overlap.18,19

In most cases, the phenomena above could be interpreted in terms of the Purcell effect, in which 

dye molecules were modelled as two-level systems. In this way, they are described by a single, 

sharp emission wavelength, which
arises
solely
from the transition between two 

electronic/excitonic levels. Although this model can successfully explain multiple experimental 

observations, the energy states of dye molecules are actually more complex, since both ground and 

excited electronic states have multiple vibrational levels associated.20 As illustrated in Figure 1A, 

the emission spectrum of a dye molecule is given by the energy of the possible vibronic transitions 

to its ground state, weighted by their respective transition probabilities (the so-called Franck-

Condon factors).21 In the presence of an optical nanoantenna, this spectrum can be reshaped via 

selectively enhancing some specific radiative transitions through the plasmon resonance. This is 

due to the wavelength-dependent radiative rate enhancement (given by the LDOS) produced by 


4

the nanoantenna, and can only be explained considering the multilevel nature of the dye 

molecule.22 This plasmon-induced spectral reshaping can be exploited in a variety of applications

including the plasmonic engineering of the emission colors of light-emitting devices,23 or for 

tailoring the spectral overlap in dipole-dipole energy transfer processes.24

To date, a handful of works have investigated this effect, albeit either on experiments at the 

ensemble level22,25,26 or in the presence of diffusing molecules at reduced concentrations.27 These 

pioneering examples constitute the first evidence of the potential of nanoantennas to manipulate 

the emission spectra of nearby dye molecules. In order to acquire a deeper understanding of this 

effect, that will unlock a higher level of emission manipulation, it is necessary to perform 

experiments at the single molecule level with a controlled distance and relative position between 

the emitter and the nanoantenna. Here, using the DNA origami technique,28–31 we investigate

plasmon-assisted emission reshaping with an unprecedented control, in the nm range, of the 

distance between an individual dye and a nanoantenna based on a single colloidal gold nanorod 

(AuNR). We show that the FL spectrum of a single dye molecule coupled to a AuNR can be greatly 

modified, and that the degree of reshaping depends on the strength of both the spectral and spatial 

overlap with the plasmon resonant fields. Since such spectral variation occurs due to the selective 

enhancement of radiative transitions, we also demonstrate that we can experimentally retrieve the 

wavelength-dependent behavior of the radiative decay rate enhancement taking place in our hybrid 

dye-AuNR system. Moreover, we find signatures that indicate that photon emission lifetimes 

approach vibrational relaxation timescales in some of our samples, a regime in which fluorescence

does not obey Kasha’s rule.20

To fabricate the dye-AuNR samples, we used a T-shaped DNA origami structure14 (Figure 1B) as 

a template to “host” previously functionalized colloidal AuNRs through DNA hybridization 


5

(further details are included in Figure S4). The origami design enables the incorporation of a single 

fluorescent molecule (ATTO 594) at the tip of the AuNR, 5 nm away from the gold surface (red 

dot in Figure 1B, placed at Pos1). We used commercial colloidal AuNRs with a nominal diameter

and length of 40 nm and 80 nm, respectively. After assembly, the hybrid dye-AuNR structures 

were dried on a glass substrate and measured with a custom-built confocal scanning fluorescence 

microscope, where light from the center of the objective can be directed to a spectrometer (see 

experimental details in Methods).

Initially, we determined the emission spectrum of the single ATTO 594 dye within the DNA 

origami but in the absence of the AuNR for referencing (Figure 1C shows an average spectrum of

more than 50 dye molecules). It exhibits a main peak at ~615 nm and a “shoulder” from a 

secondary transition at ~655 nm. Then, we proceeded by measuring the spectra of the dye-AuNR 

structures. This was carried out by recording time-dependent spectra, with an integration time of 

1 second. From these measurements, FL intensity transients were generated. Only transients with 

a single bleaching step, a signature of emission arising from a single molecule, were employed for 

further analysis (see exemplary FL transient in Figure 1D).  This approach, besides confirming 

that only one molecule was driving the antenna, enabled the discrimination of the single-molecule 

FL emission from the photoluminescence (PL) of the AuNRs,14 by subtracting the latter to the total

signal measured before bleaching. Furthermore, the PL spectrum is governed, for AuNRs with a 

rather low aspect ratio such as the ones employed in this work, by a single peak close to the 

longitudinal plasmonic resonance32–34 (whose wavelength redshifts with increasing nanorod aspect 

ratio35). Since commercial AuNRs exhibit considerable size inhomogeneity (see Figure S1), the 

PL analysis enables a comprehensive characterization of the plasmonic response directly affecting 

the emission properties of the nearby dye, under the same sample and measurement conditions 


6

(see PL peak histogram plot in Figure 1C). The AuNRs size distribution, with the corresponding 

plasmonic resonance distribution, has therefore been exploited to investigate different spectral 

overlaps between the dye emission and the AuNR plasmonic response (Figure 1C). Finally, this 

analysis was combined with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging to ensure that all 

structures studied contained only single AuNRs.

Figure 1. Fluorescence spectrum of an ATTO 594 dye, DNA origami antenna geometry and 

analysis pipeline. (A) Simplified Jablonski diagram showing some excitation and emission 

transitions defining the absorption (grey) and emission (black) spectra of the ATTO 594 dye (data 

taken from atto-tec.com for a dye in PBS solution). (B) Sketch of the DNA origami structure hosting

a AuNR and a single dye molecule (red ball) placed at Pos1. (C) Measured emission spectra of 

ATTO 594 (black line) in a surface-immobilized DNA origami in air, and histogram plot of the PL 

peak position of the AuNRs for all the structures analyzed. The spectrum is blue-shifted with 

respect to the one in (A) due to a change in the environment (experiments are done in air whereas 

reported spectrum from ATTO-TEC were measured in solution). (D) Exemplary fluorescence 


7

transient employed to isolate the fluorescence (FL) and photoluminescence (PL) spectra by 

subtraction of the latter after bleaching.

Figure 2 depicts both the FL and PL from the DNA origami-based dye-AuNR single structures, 

together with the normalized FL reference (dye in the absence of AuNRs) for comparison. For 

better visualization, spectra are separated in two columns according to the AuNR’s PL. Two 

different scenarios can be clearly identified in terms of FL emission reshaping. In the first one, the 

AuNR PL overlaps with the main vibronic transition or is located between the main and the 

secondary (shoulder) FL peaks (PL peak < 630 nm, Figure 2A). In this case, two main effects are 

observed: the suppression of the shoulder that corresponds to the secondary vibronic transition and 

a displacement of the main FL peak to a position that coincides with the AuNR’s PL. In the second

one, the AuNRs present the PL maximum in the vicinity of the shoulder of the FL emission (PL 

peak > 630 nm, Figure 2B). In this situation, we observe the appearance of a second FL peak in 

the spectral range of the bare shoulder and AuNR peak, whose intensity can be higher or lower 

than the main FL peak. Furthermore, in some cases we even observe the suppression of the main 

FL peak. 


8

Figure 2. Reshaped fluorescence spectra from dye-AuNRs with different PL. (A,B) Fluorescence

emission spectra for the dye without AuNR (reference, black line) and for the hybrid dye-AuNR 

structures (dye at Pos1). The AuNR PL is also included for each case (orange line). Spectra are 

divided into cases, with PL < 630 nm (A) and PL > 630 nm (B), i.e. in resonance with main and 

secondary (shoulder) FL peaks. PL spectra are normalized to the corresponding FL maxima for 

visualization of their intensity difference.


9

In order to quantify the observed spectral reshaping, for each FL spectrum we determined both the 

position and the amplitude of the peaks. To do so, we fit the FL spectra to a sum of two Lorentzian 

functions and extract their peak amplitude and position. For the cases in which either the main or 

the secondary (shoulder) peaks are heavily suppressed, the FL spectra is fitted to a single 

Lorentzian function. For all cases, the PL spectra is also fitted with a single Lorentzian. First, we 

compare the position of the Lorentzian(s) fitted from the reshaped FL spectra versus the PL peak

in Figure 3A. When only one Lorentzian is found (top panels of Figure 2A), we observe a

predominately linear correlation between FL and PL peaks (linear fit with slope ~0.99). For the 

cases where two FL peaks appear (Figure 2B), the one with the shortest wavelength is always at 

the intrinsic position regardless of the PL, whereas the other one follows the spectral position of 

the  AuNR PL peak (linear fit with slope ~1.01), in agreement with previously published results at 

the ensemble level.22,25,26

To compare the relative amplitude of the observed peaks, we defined the transition ratio 𝑅 as:27

𝑅 =

𝐼1
𝐼2

1

𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓
(1)

where 𝐼1 and 𝐼2 are the amplitudes of the two fitted Lorentzian functions, and 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓 is the amplitude 

ratio of the main and “shoulder” peaks in air and in the absence of AuNR, whose spectrum is 

obtained by averaging multiple dyes (Figure 1C). For the cases when the fitting of the reshaped 

FL yields only one Lorentzian, its amplitude defines 𝐼1 (𝐼2) if its position is below (above) ~630

nm, and for 𝐼2 (𝐼1) we use the amplitude at the wavelength where the secondary (main) transition 

in the reference spectrum is. This definition of the transition ratio implies that 𝑅 would be equal 

to 1 if the relative amplitudes remain unchanged with respect to the isolated molecule, while 𝑅 > 


10

1 indicates an enhancement of the main transition over the secondary one, and 𝑅 < 1 an 

enhancement of the secondary transition.27

The transition ratio 𝑅 was calculated for all of the structures measured, and the values obtained

are displayed in Figure 3B. For the AuNRs in resonance with the main FL peak (PL peak <630

nm), most values lie above 1 and reach a maximum of 6.2, meaning that there is an enhancement 

of the main transition over the secondary one compared to the reference, which can also be seen 

by the suppression of the “shoulder” observed in the reference spectrum (Figure 2A). On the 

contrary, for AuNRs with a PL peak > 630 nm, we observe a large amount of structures showing 

𝑅 < 1. This implies an enhancement of secondary vibronic transitions, in agreement with published 

results obtained from diffusing molecules.27 In particular, values as low as 𝑅 = 0.016 were 

obtained, which means that the second peak (transition) overpasses the main one (𝑅 = 0.307 

corresponds to both transitions being of equal strength) in intensity. Overall, this represents a 360-

fold tuning of the relative intensities of the observed vibronic transitions with respect to the 

spectrum of an isolated molecule (6-fold for 𝑅 > 1 times 60-fold for 𝑅 < 1). We observe the 

enhancement of this second peak (𝑅 < 1) in more than 80% of the samples where the PL peak > 

630 nm. Furthermore, the correlation between the PL peak and the 𝑅 values is apparent in Figure 

3B. The more redshifted the PL is with respect to the main FL transition, the stronger the effect on 

the enhancement of the secondary transition (lower 𝑅). Figure 3B also shows a considerable 

dispersion in the correlation. This can be due to multiple factors, including the orientation of the 

dye and AuNR size inhomogeneity (Figure S1).25 Altogether, this means that the resonant

wavelength of the AuNRs defines not only the existence and position of the second FL peak, but 

also its relative intensity. This proves that AuNRs can selectively enhance specific radiative 


11

transitions that are in resonance with the plasmonic peak, thus reshaping the overall emission 

spectra of nearby, single dye molecules.

Figure 3. Degree of fluorescence reshaping as a function of the AuNR PL. (A,C) FL vs PL peak 

positions for two different locations of the dye with respect to the AuNR (Pos1 (A) and Pos2 (B)

as shown in the insets). Data is divided into spectra with mostly one FL peak (black squares) and

mostly two peaks (red dots and blue triangles), whose boundary is indicated by a vertical gray

dashed line. Lines represent linear fits for each case, showing that for PL > 630 nm the position 

of the main peak is not affected by the AuNR (slope ~0), whereas the second peak position follows 

the PL (slope ~1.0). (B,D) Distribution of transition ratios, 𝑅, as a function of the PL position for 

a dye at Pos1 (B) and laterally displaced to its center, Pos2 (D). Blue shaded areas serve as a 

guide to the eye to compare the different cases. The gray dashed horizontal line is a reference 

marking the separation between enhancement (𝑅 < 1) or suppression (𝑅 > 1) of the secondary 

vibronic transitions with respect to the isolated molecule.


12

Our findings reveal that the FL reshaping depends not only on the spectral overlap between 

plasmon resonances and molecular vibronic transitions, but also on the position of the dye, which

sets the strength of their mutual coupling.25 To further demonstrate this, we exploited the unique 

flexibility and nanometer positioning control of the DNA origami technique to place the dye 

laterally shifted ~25 nm from the AuNR tip towards the center (Pos2, see Figure S4). Exemplary 

spectra are shown in Figure S2. A reshaping is still observed, with the FL peak position also 

showing a linear dependence on the PL peak (Figure 3C, linear fit with slope ~1.01), although with 

higher dispersion. More importantly, the relative intensity of the peaks is now slightly different 

and the correlation with the PL peak position is a bit weaker than in the situation with the dye at 

the tip (Figure 3D). This is a sign of a weaker coupling between the AuNR and the dye molecule, 

as also evidenced from the lower total intensity collected compared to the reference (Figure S3).

To better understand the experimental results, we performed numerical simulations following the 

approach by Ringler et al.22 In brief, this framework employs the Fermi Golden Rule to describe 

changes in the FL spectrum through the spectral variation of the radiative decay rate enhancement

(radiative Purcell) 𝑔𝑟(𝜆):

𝐹(𝜆) ∝ 𝑔𝑟(𝜆)𝐹0(𝜆)
(2)

where 𝐹(𝜆) and 𝐹0(𝜆) represent the amplitude normalized FL spectrum of the dye in the presence

and absence of the AuNR, respectively. Note that we have dropped spectrally-integrated quantum 

yield terms in Eq. 2,22 as they are inherently wavelength-independent. Thus, to retrieve the FL 

spectrum, it is sufficient to simulate the radiative Purcell factor at the dye position (which gives 

the radiative decay rate enhancement that it experiences) and multiply it by the measured reference 

spectrum. The results for 𝑔𝑟(𝜆) and 𝑔𝑟(𝜆)𝐹0(𝜆), for a dye at Pos1 (inset of Figure 3A) and 


13

orientation along the longitudinal axis of the AuNR, are included in Figures 4A and 4B,

respectively. In order to account for the size dispersion in our experiments, we employed for these

simulations AuNRs with a diameter of 38 nm and different lengths. As expected, 𝑔𝑟(𝜆) increases 

in intensity and redshifts as the length of the AuNRs is increased (Figure 4A). The product 

𝑔𝑟(𝜆)𝐹0(𝜆) (Figure 4B) also redshifts with the AuNR length, though less than 𝑔𝑟(𝜆). Remarkably, 

the numerical predictions underestimate the FL reshaping induced by the AuNR, despite that the 

geometric and material idealizations inherent to local electrodynamics calculations overestimate 

the light-matter interaction strength in nanophotonic systems.36,37 Note for instance that the 

fingerprint of the main peak of 𝐹0(𝜆) is apparent in all the spectra in Figure 4B. There is a number 

of factors that may be playing a significant role in the experiments, such as the dye-AuNR relative 

orientation and distance, or the size dispersion in the nanorod samples for a determined aspect ratio 

(see simulations in Figure S5). Our results indicate that none of them could induce an enhancement 

in 𝑔𝑟(𝜆) large enough to reproduce the rich FL reshaping phenomenology in Figure 2. It is worth 

considering that Figure 4B corresponds to the dye-AuNR configuration that maximizes the Purcell 

effect in our calculations.  In accordance with the experimental study (see Figure 3), we also 

analyze numerically the influence of the dye position on the FL spectrum next. The evaluation of 

Eq. 2 at Pos2 is included (dashed lines) in Figure 4C for three AuNR lengths. The comparison 

against the results for Pos1 (solid lines) reveals a similar plasmonic effect on the emission 

reshaping. This numerical result we can link to the spatially extended character of the bright,

longitudinal mode behind the 𝑔𝑟 maxima in Figure 4A, which translates into a small variation of 

the radiative LDOS within the 25 nm distance between Pos1 and Pos2. 

Overall, Figures 4B and 4C can rationalize the main features observed in the measurements 

included in Figures 2 and S2 in terms of the displacement of the FL peaks and their relative 


14

intensities, but do not reproduce the order of magnitude difference in the range of 𝑅 values between 

Figure 3B and 3D. The numerical calculations predict a weaker dependence of the FL reshaping 

on the dye position than observed in the experiments.

Figure 4. Simulations of the spectral reshaping for dye-AuNRs of different lengths. (A) 

Radiative Purcell 𝑔𝑟(𝜆) experienced by a dye placed at Pos1 and oriented along the main axis of 

a AuNR of 38 nm in diameter and different lengths. (B) Corresponding spectral reshaping 

generated by the radiative Purcell factors simulated in (A). (C) Comparison between the spectral 

reshaping for dyes at Pos1 and Pos2.

Using Eq. 2, we can experimentally estimate the spectral behavior of 𝑔𝑟(𝜆) by dividing our FL 

data by the reference one. Examples corresponding to the spectra shown in Figure 2 are depicted 

in Figure 5. The comparison between the extracted 𝑔𝑟(𝜆) (green) and the AuNR PL (orange) for 

Pos1 shows a close correspondence, although PL peaks are generally blueshifted from 𝑔𝑟 ones. 

This comparison resembles the observations recently reported for PL and scattering maxima,34

although a closer match between PL and radiative Purcell spectra was expected, given that they 

share the same physical origin.33


15

A plausible explanation for the disagreement between the two sets of data in Figure 5 is the failure 

of Eq. 2 in our experimental samples, neglecting possible changes in dephasing due to the 

proximity of the nanorod. As discussed above, it assumes that the vibrational relaxation is much 

faster than the photon emission rate in the dyes. Note that this is implicit in the sketch of Figure 

1A, where all the radiative transitions take place from the ground vibrational state of the excited 

electronic level, in accordance with Kasha’s rule. This is a valid assumption in free space, where 

the timescale for the former (latter) is in the ps (ns) range,21 three orders of magnitude apart. Our 

numerical simulations yield total Purcell factors (Figure S6) five times larger than 𝑔𝑟(𝜆) in Figure 

4A, thanks to the strong absorption by the AuNRs. This corresponds to a ~700-fold reduction in 

the FL lifetime, making it comparable to vibrational decay. Furthermore, recent experiments using 

pump-probe techniques on single dyes at the hotspot of self-assembled optical antennas revealed 

fluorescence lifetimes smaller than 20 ps.39 In this scenario, vibronic transitions from higher 

vibrational states in the electronic transitions, characterized by different Franck-Condon factors, 

take place. The theoretical description of these would require a theory describing photonic and 

vibrational degrees of freedom on the same footing,20 but it is obvious that they will effectively 

alter 𝐹0(𝜆) in Eq. 2, which would no longer correspond to the free-space FL spectrum. Apart from 

rationalizing the discrepancies between PL and 𝑔𝑟 in Figure 5, this mechanism, strongly mediated 

by the total (instead of radiative) LDOS, would also explain why our numerical simulations 

underestimate the strength of the FL modification induced by the AuNR and its nanometric 

dependence on the emitter position. Figure S2 presents the comparison between experimentally 

extracted 𝑔𝑟 and PL for Pos2, showing even larger discrepancies (note however that we can expect 

plasmonic modes contributing to the former that are absent in the latter in this asymmetric 

configuration).


16

Figure 5. Spectral mapping of radiative rate enhancement. (A,B) 𝑔𝑟(𝜆) retrieved from the 

spectra shown in Figures 2A and 2B, respectively, together with the corresponding AuNR PL 

spectra (both normalized to 1 for better comparison). Spectra are divided into cases with PL < 

630 nm (A) and PL > 630 nm (B), i.e. in resonance with the main and secondary FL peaks of the 

isolated molecule.


17

In summary, we have experimentally demonstrated reshaping of the emission spectrum of a single-

molecule by means of coupling to a nanoantenna. We used bottom-up self-assembly of the dye-

AuNR system by means of a T-shaped DNA origami structure, which allows us to precisely control 

their relative positions and thus their interaction. The main features of our results can be 

rationalized by numerical simulations and show that the decay rates to different vibrational 

sublevels of the electronic ground state can be controlled by matching them to the plasmon 

resonance of nearby optical antennas. Furthermore, laterally displacing the position of the dye with 

respect to the AuNR tip, we observe a lower degree of spectral reshaping, a sign of weaker 

coupling between both. Finally, we show that these changes in the fluorescence emission in 

presence of a nanoantenna can be used to measure the spectral behavior of the radiative decay rate 

enhancement produced by such nanostructure. We observe a discrepancy between the

experimentally extracted radiative Purcell and the measured PL, pointing out to the existence of 

an additional mechanism for the decay. This can be explained by the high total Purcell factor of 

this configuration, yielding a FL lifetime that is comparable to vibrational decay and allowing 

vibronic transitions from higher vibrational states.

Overall, our observations indicate that, by tuning the spectral overlap between the intrinsic 

fluorescence of a dye and the resonance of a nanoparticle, one can basically design the emission 

spectrum of the system. In future works, we expect to obtain a higher degree of emission 

manipulation by controlling the dye’s orientation38 and by employing AuNRs with a reduced size 

dispersion.42


18

Methods

Numerical simulations

A frequency domain solver based on the finite element method in CST Studio Suite was used for 

the 3D full-wave simulations. The boundaries were set to “open added space” in the six faces of 

the simulation box. The single emitter was simulated by a discrete port with 5000 ohms combined 

with a dipole antenna of PEC material placed at 5 nm from the AuNR surface. AuNRs were 

modeled as cylinders (R = 19 nm, unless otherwise specified) with two semi ellipsoidal caps (a = 

b = R, c = 12 nm), and a length of 100nm (unless specified otherwise). For the dielectric function

of gold, we used fitting data from the Lorentz–Drude model as in Elazar et al.43. To account for 

the DNA labelling of the AuNRs, a DNA coating layer of 2 nm was introduced with a refractive 

index of 1.7.44 The radiative decay rate enhancement (𝑔𝑟 = 𝛾𝑟 𝛾𝑟0
⁄
) was calculated from the ratio 

of the radiated power of the dipole antenna in the presence and absence of the functionalized 

AuNR, 𝑃𝑟 and 𝑃𝑟𝑜, respectively.40,41

Experimental setup

Spectral measurements were performed at the exit port of a confocal microscopy body. A flip 

mirror was used to change between confocal imaging and spectral detection. Confocal imaging 

was first employed to identify the location of the structures. Then, the flip mirror was switched to 

direct the light from the single structures positioned at the center of the beam onto the spectrometer 

path. Emitted light was focused at the entrance slit of a spectrometer (Spectra Pro HRS 300, 

Princeton Instruments) coupled to a CCD (PIXIS:100B_eXcelon). For signal collection, a high 

NA objective was used (Olympus, 100× NA=1.4).


19

Excitation was performed with a supercontinuum white light laser (FYLA SCT1000) that was 

spectrally filtered to a wavelength of 594 nm (±5nm) to efficiently excite the dye (ATTO 594). 

Light was circularly polarized at the sample plane to achieve uniform excitation of all the 

structures. A long-pass filter at 610 nm was used on the collection to block laser excitation, causing 

the abrupt decay observed in some of the spectra (Figure 2 and S2). 

DNA origami design and folding

The T-shape DNA origami was designed using CaDNAno45 and visualized for twist correction 

using CanDo.46 Figure S4 shows a cartoon with its dimensions and position of the modified staples. 

In short, the DNA template has Poly-A handles that serve to accommodate single AuNRs 

(Nanopartz INC, average size 40x80 nm), with 18x Poly-A8 (blue) and 2xPoly-A12 (green) 

ssDNA strands (Biomers.net GmbH) on the right side. Single ATTO 594 dye (red, Biomers.net 

GmbH) were positioned at the top of the T-design (at Pos1 or Pos2). The design files were 

uploaded at https://nanobase.org/.47 Unmodified DNA sequences were purchased from Integrated 

DNA Technologies, INC. Folding was performed based on the following protocol: a scaffold 

consisting of a vector derived from the single-stranded M13-bacteriophage genome (M13mp18, 

7249 bases, Bayou Biolabs) and staples (100 nM, ca. 32 nts) were mixed in a 1x TAE buffer (40

mM Tris, 10 mM Acetate, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8, stock purchased from Alfa, CAS#77-86-1, 

J63931.k3) containing 12 mM MgCl2 (stock purchased from Alfa, CAS#7786-30-3, J61014.AK). 

The solution was heated to 75°C and ramped down to 25°C at a rate of 1 degree every 20 mins. 

The folded DNA origami structures were purified from excess staples strands by gel 

electrophoresis using a 0.8 % agarose gel (LE Agarose, Biozym Scientific GmbH) in a 1x TAE 

buffer/12 mM MgCl2 buffer for 2.5 hours at 4 V/cm. The appropriate band containing the targeted 

DNA template was cut out and squeezed using coverslips wrapped in parafilm.


20

Nanorods functionalization and attachment to the DNA template

Thiolated DNA (Thiol-C6-T18, ELLA Biotech GmbH) was mixed with AuNRs at a 

100 nmol:100 uL@100OD ratio and frozen overnight.48 Excess DNA was removed using gel 

electrophoresis. This step also ensures the removal of any self-aggregated dimer formed during 

the AuNR functionalization. The concentration was determined via UV-Vis absorption 

spectroscopy (Nanodrop).

The purified DNA template was mixed with the purified AuNRs using an excess of five NPs per 

binding site. After overnight incubation at room temperature, the excess of AuNRs was removed 

by gel electrophoresis (running for 4.5 hours) and the band containing correctly formed structures 

(single AuNRs) was extracted as described before.

Surface Preparation and Sample Immobilization

For immobilization of the structures, glass cover slips were first sonicated in consecutive baths of 

acetone, propan-1-ol and water for 5 minutes each, and then cleaned in a UV cleaning system (PSD 

Pro System, Novascan Technologies, USA). The surfaces were then passivated with a BSA-

biotin/PBS solution (0.5 mg/mL, Sigma Aldrich, CAS#9048-46-8, A8549-10MG) for 20 mins, 

neutrAvidin/PBS solution (0.5 mg/mL, Thermofischer, 10443985) for 20 min, and 5’ biotin-Poly-

A15-3’ ssDNA (Biomers.net GmbH). In between all the steps, the surfaces were washed with 

1x PBS buffer (Alfa, J75889.K2). The samples were incubated on the surfaces for 2h.


21

References

1.
Novotny, L.; van Hulst, N. Antennas for Light. Nat. Photonics 2011, 5, 83–90.

2.
Giannini, V.; Fern Andez-Domínguez, A. I.; Heck, S. C.; Maier, S. A. Plasmonic 

Nanoantennas: Fundamentals and Their Use in Controlling the Radiative Properties of 

Nanoemitters. Chem. Rev. 2011, 111, 3888–3912.

3.
Kinkhabwala, A.; Yu, Z.; Fan, S.; Avlasevich, Y.; Müllen, K.; Moerner, W. E. Large Single-

Molecule Fluorescence Enhancements Produced by a Bowtie Nanoantenna. Nat. Photonics

2009, 3, 654–657.

4.
Biagioni, P.; Huang, J. S.; Hecht, B. Nanoantennas for Visible and Infrared Radiation. 

Reports Prog. Phys. 2012, 75.

5.
Mühlschlegel, P.; Eisler, H.-J.; Martin, O. J. F.; Hecht, B.; Pohl, D. W. Resonant Optical 

Antennas. Science 2005, 308, 1607–1609.

6.
Bharadwaj, P.; Novotny, L. Spectral Dependence of Single Molecule Fluorescence 

Enhancement. Opt. Express 2007, 15, 14266.

7.
Koenderink, A. F. Single-Photon Nanoantennas. ACS Photonics 2017, 4, 710–722.

8.
Puchkova, A.; Vietz, C.; Pibiri, E.; Wünsch, B.; Sanz Paz, M.; Acuna, G. P.; Tinnefeld, P. 

DNA Origami Nanoantennas with over 5000-Fold Fluorescence Enhancement and Single-

Molecule Detection at 25 Μm. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 8354–8359.

9.
Acuna, G. P.; Moller, F. M.; Holzmeister, P.; Beater, S.; Lalkens, B.; Tinnefeld, P. 

Fluorescence Enhancement at Docking Sites of DNA-Directed Self-Assembled 


22

Nanoantennas. Science 2012, 338, 506–510.

10.
Holzmeister, P.; Pibiri, E.; Schmied, J. J.; Sen, T.; Acuna, G. P.; Tinnefeld, P. Quantum 

Yield and Excitation Rate of Single Molecules Close to Metallic Nanostructures. Nat. 

Commun. 2014, 5.

11.
Pellegrotti, J. V.; Acuna, G. P.; Puchkova, A.; Holzmeister, P.; Gietl, A.; Lalkens, B.; 

Stefani, F. D.; Tinnefeld, P. Controlled Reduction of Photobleaching in DNA Origami-Gold 

Nanoparticle Hybrids. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 2831–2836.

12.
Kaminska, I.; Vietz, C.; Cuartero-González, Á.; Tinnefeld, P.; Fernández-Domínguez, A. 

I.; Acuna, G. P. Strong Plasmonic Enhancement of Single Molecule Photostability in Silver 

Dimer Optical Antennas. Nanophotonics 2018, 7, 643–649.

13.
Quidant, R.; Hulst, N. F. Van; Curto, A. G.; Volpe, G.; Taminiau, T. H.; Kreuzer, M. P. 

Unidirectional Emission of a Quantum Dot Coupled to a Nanoantenna. Science 2010, 329, 

930–933.

14.
Zhu, F.; Sanz-Paz, M.; Fernández-Domínguez, A. I.; Zhuo, X.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Stefani, 

F. D.; Pilo-Pais, M.; Acuna, G. P. DNA-Templated Ultracompact Optical Antennas for 

Unidirectional Single-Molecule Emission. Nano Lett. 2022, 22, 6402–6408.

15.
Hübner, K.; Pilo-Pais, M.; Selbach, F.; Liedl, T.; Tinnefeld, P.; Stefani, F. D.; Acuna, G. P. 

Directing Single-Molecule Emission with DNA Origami-Assembled Optical Antennas. 

Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 6629–6634.

16.
Raab, M.; Vietz, C.; Stefani, F. D.; Acuna, G. P.; Tinnefeld, P. Shifting Molecular 


23

Localization by Plasmonic Coupling in a Single-Molecule Mirage. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8.

17.
Acuna, G. P.; Bucher, M.; Stein, I. H.; Steinhauer, C.; Kuzyk, A.; Holzmeister, P.; 

Schreiber, R.; Moroz, A.; Stefani, F. D.; Liedl, T.; Simmel, F. C.; Tinnefeld, P. Distance 

Dependence of Single-Fluorophore Quenching by Gold Nanoparticles Studied on DNA 

Origami. ACS Nano 2012, 6, 3189–3195.

18.
Chen, Y.; Munechika, K.; Ginger, D. S. Dependence of Fluorescence Intensity on the 

Spectral Overlap between Fluorophores and Plasmon Resonant Single Silver Nanoparticles. 

Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 690–696.

19.
Akselrod, G. M.; Argyropoulos, C.; Hoang, T. B.; Ciracì, C.; Fang, C.; Huang, J.; Smith, 

D. R.; Mikkelsen, M. H. Probing the Mechanisms of Large Purcell Enhancement in 

Plasmonic Nanoantennas. Nat. Photonics 2014, 8, 835–840.

20.
Zhao, D.; Silva, R. E. F.; Climent, C.; Feist, J.; Fernández-Domínguez, A. I.; García-Vidal, 

F. J. Impact of Vibrational Modes in the Plasmonic Purcell Effect of Organic Molecules. 

ACS Photonics 2020, 7, 3369–3375.

21.
Lakowicz, J. R. Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy; Ed. Springer, 2006.

22.
Ringler, M.; Schwemer, A.; Wunderlich, M.; Nichtl, A.; Kürzinger, K.; Klar, T. A.; 

Feldmann, J. Shaping Emission Spectra of Fluorescent Molecules with Single Plasmonic 

Nanoresonators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 1–4.

23.
Yang, X.; Ludwig Hernandez-Martinez, P.; Dang, C.; Mutlugun, E.; Zhang, K.; Volkan 

Demir, H.; Wei Sun, X.; Yang, X.; Hernandez-Martinez, P. L.; Dang, C.; Mutlugun, E.; 


24

Zhang, K.; Demir, H. V; Sun, X. W. Electroluminescence Efficiency Enhancement in 

Quantum Dot Light-Emitting Diodes by Embedding a Silver Nanoisland Layer. Adv. Opt. 

Mater. 2015, 3, 1439–1445.

24.
Zhao, L.; Ming, T.; Shao, L.; Chen, H.; Wang, J. Plasmon-Controlled Förster Resonance 

Energy Transfer. J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116, 8287–8296.

25.
Zhao, L.; Ming, T.; Chen, H.; Liang, Y.; Wang, J. Plasmon-Induced Modulation of the 

Emission Spectra of the Fluorescent Molecules near Gold Nanorods. Nanoscale 2011, 3, 

3849–3859.

26.
Ming, T.; Zhao, L.; Yang, Z.; Chen, H.; Sun, L.; Wang, J.; Yan, C. Strong Polarization 

Dependence of Plasmon-Enhanced Fluorescence on Single Gold Nanorods. Nano Lett.

2009, 9, 3896–3903.

27.
Saemisch, L.; Liebel, M.; Van Hulst, N. F.; Van Hulst, N. F. Control of Vibronic Transition 

Rates by Resonant Single-Molecule-Nanoantenna Coupling. Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 4537–

4542.

28.
Rothemund, P. W. K. Folding DNA to Create Nanoscale Shapes and Patterns. Nature 2006, 

440, 297–302.

29.
Pilo-Pais, M.; Acuna, G. P.; Tinnefeld, P.; Liedl, T. Sculpting Light by Arranging Optical 

Components with DNA Nanostructures. MRS Bull. 2017, 42, 936–942.

30.
Kuzyk, A.; Jungmann, R.; Acuna, G. P.; Liu, N. DNA Origami Route for Nanophotonics. 

ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 1151–1163.


25

31.
Yeşilyurt, A. T. M.; Huang, J.-S. Emission Manipulation by DNA Origami-Assisted 

Plasmonic Nanoantennas. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2021, 9, 2100848.

32.
Cai, Y.-Y.; Tauzin, L. J.; Ostovar, B.; Lee, S.; Link, S. Light Emission from Plasmonic 

Nanostructures. J. Chem. Phys. 2021, 155, 060901.

33.
Cai, Y.-Y.; Liu, J. G.; Tauzin, L. J.; Huang, D.; Sung, E.; Zhang, H.; Joplin, A.; Chang, W.-

S.; Nordlander, P.; Link, S. Photoluminescence of Gold Nanorods: Purcell Effect Enhanced 

Emission from Hot Carriers. ACS Nano 2018, 12, 976–985.

34.
Lin, K.-Q.; Yi, J.; Zhong, J.-H.; Hu, S.; Liu, B.-J.; Liu, J.-Y.; Zong, C.; Lei, Z.-C.; Wang, 

X.; Aizpurua, J.; Esteban, R.; Ren, B. Plasmonic Photoluminescence for Recovering Native 

Chemical Information from Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 

14891.

35.
Wiley, B. J.; Chen, Y.; McLellan, J. M.; Xiong, Y.; Li, Z.-Y.; Ginger, D.; Xia, Y. Synthesis 

and Optical Properties of Silver Nanobars and Nanorice. Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 1032–1036.

36.
Tserkezis, C.; Stefanou, N.; Wubs, M.; Mortensen, N. A. Molecular Fluorescence 

Enhancement in Plasmonic Environments: Exploring the Role of Nonlocal Effects. 

Nanoscale 2016, 8, 17532–17541.

37.
Filter, R.; Bösel, C.; Toscano, G.; Lederer, F.; Rockstuhl, C. Nonlocal Effects: Relevance 

for the Spontaneous Emission Rates of Quantum Emitters Coupled to Plasmonic Structures. 

Opt. Lett. 2014, 39, 6118–6121.

38.
Adamczyk, A. K.; P M Huijben, T. A.; Sison, M.; Di Luca, A.; Chiarelli, G.; Vanni, S.; 


26

Brasselet, S.; Mortensen, K. I.; Stefani, F. D.; Pilo-Pais, M.; Acuna, G. P. DNA Self-

Assembly of Single Molecules with Deterministic Position and Orientation. ACS Nano

2022, 16, 16924–16931.

39.
Schedlbauer, J.; Wilhelm, P.; Grabenhorst, L.; Federl, M. E.; Lalkens, B.; Hinderer, F.; 

Scherf, U.; Höger, S.; Tinnefeld, P.; Bange, S.; Vogelsang, J.; Lupton, J. M. Ultrafast 

Single-Molecule Fluorescence Measured by Femtosecond Double-Pulse Excitation Photon 

Antibunching. Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 1074–1079.

40.
Taminiau, T. H.; Stefani, F. D.; Van Hulst, N. F. Single Emitters Coupled to Plasmonic 

Nano-Antennas: Angular Emission and Collection Efficiency. New J. Phys. New J. Phys. 

New J. Phys. New J. Phys. 2008, 10, 105005–105005.

41.
Novotny, L.; Deutsch, B.; Bharadwaj, P. Optical Antennas. Adv. Opt. Photonics 2009, 1, 

438–483.

42.
González-Rubio, G.; Kumar, V.; Llombart, P.; Díaz-Núñez, P.; Bladt, E.; Altantzis, T.; 

Bals, S.; Peña-Rodríguez, O.; Noya, E. G.; MacDowell, L. G.; Guerrero-Martínez, A.; Liz-

Marzán, L. M. Disconnecting Symmetry Breaking from Seeded Growth for the 

Reproducible Synthesis of High Quality Gold Nanorods. ACS Nano 2019, 13, 4424–4435.

43.
Elazar, J. M.; Djurišić, A. B.; Rakić, A. D.; Majewski, M. L. Optical Properties of Metallic 

Films for Vertical-Cavity Optoelectronic Devices. Appl. Opt. 1998, 37, 5271–5283.

44.
Zhu, F.; Sanz-Paz, M.; Fernández-Domínguez, A. I.; Pilo-Pais, M.; Acuna, G. P. Optical 

Ultracompact Directional Antennas Based on a Dimer Nanorod Structure. Nanomaterials

2022, 12, 2841.


27

45.
Douglas, S. M.; Marblestone, A. H.; Teerapittayanon, S.; Vazquez, A.; Church, G. M.; Shih, 

W. M. Rapid Prototyping of 3D DNA-Origami Shapes with CaDNAno. Nucleic Acids Res.

2009, 37, 5001–5006.

46.
Castro, C. E.; Kilchherr, F.; Kim, D.-N.; Shiao, E. L.; Wauer, T.; Wortmann, P.; Bathe, M.; 

Dietz, H. Quantitative Prediction of 3D Solution Shape and Flexibility of Nucleic Acid 

Nanostructures. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012, 40, 2862–2868.

47.
Poppleton, E.; Mallya, A.; Dey, S.; Joseph, J.; Sulc, P. Nanobase.Org: A Repository for 

DNA and RNA Nanostructures. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022, 50, D246–D252.

48.
Liu, B.; Liu, J. Freezing Directed Construction of Bio/Nano Interfaces: Reagentless 

Conjugation, Denser Spherical Nucleic Acids, and Better Nanoflares. J. Am. Chem. Soc.

2017, 139, 9471–9474.


28

Supplementary figures

Figure S1. Size dispersion of AuNRs. TEM image of the AuNRs used in this work, showing 

the size variability, together with histograms of the diameter and length distribution of the 

AuNRs. Insets display center and width of the Gaussian fits.


29

Figure S2. Reshaped fluorescence spectra from structures with different PL for a dye at 

Pos2. (A,B) Fluorescence emission spectra for the dye without AuNR (reference, black line) and 

for the hybrid dye-AuNR structures (dye at Pos2). The AuNR PL is also included for each case 

(orange line). Spectra are divided into cases, with PL < 630 nm (A) and PL > 630 nm (B), i.e. in 

resonance with main and secondary (shoulder) FL peaks. PL spectra are normalized to the 

corresponding FL maxima for visualization of their intensity difference. (C,D) 𝑔𝑟(𝜆) retrieved 

from the spectra in (A,B), together with the corresponding AuNR PL spectra (both normalized to 

1 for better comparison).


30

Figure S3. Total FL intensity for the different positions of the dye around the AuNR.

Distribution of the integrated FL intensity in the whole spectral range for all the measured spots 

for the origami in absence (reference) and presence (Pos1 and Pos2) of the AuNR. Lines 

represent minimum and maximum values and the box shows the mean with the corresponding 

standard deviation. As expected, differential coupling to the AuNR is observed for the various 

potions of the dye around it.

reference
Pos1
Pos2

0

1×104

2×104

3×104

4×104

0

1

2

3

4

Fluorescence enhancement

Integrated intensity (Hz)


31

Figure S4. T-shape DNA origami design. (A) caDNAno Bundle view of the T-shape DNA 

template. Poly-A handles (A8 in blue and A12 in green) serve to assemble a single 40×80 nm 

AuNR. The DNA-template can accommodate a single ATTO 594 fluorophore either at Pos1 

(red) or at Pos2 (brown) to form the different configurations as explained in the main text. (B) 

3D cartoon of the DNA origami indicating dimensions.


32

Figure S5. Effect of dipole orientation, distance and AuNR dimensions. (A,C,E) Simulated 

𝑔𝑟(𝜆) and (B,D,F) corresponding spectral reshaping for a dye at Pos1 (A,B) at different 

orientations, (C,D) coupled to AuNR of different dimensions having the same resonance 

wavelength, and (E,F) placed at various axial distances from the AuNR tip. At the top of each 

row, a sketch is shown depicting the parameters utilized for each situation.


33

Figure S6. Simulations of total Purcell factor. Total Purcell factor 𝑔𝑡𝑜𝑡(𝜆) experienced by a 

dye positioned at Pos1 and oriented along the main axis of a AuNR of 38 nm in diameter and 

different lengths.


