1

Ph3pyWF: An automated workflow software package 

for ceramic lattice thermal conductivity calculation

Kerui Lai, Yuxuan Wang

McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 0C5, Canada

Abstract

This paper presents a Python software package, Ph3pyWF, providing a more convenient platform 

to realize high-throughput analysis of lattice thermal conductivity for ceramic materials. The 

interface of Ph3pyWF is friendly for users with different needs and from different level. For 

novices of interests, the inputs can be quite simple, just with initial unit cell structure. Other 

parameters would be automatically filled. And for expert-level researchers with varied 

requirements, plenty of procedure parameters can be customized. The core concept of Ph3pyWF 

is to build a data exchange and task management system with high efficiency. The design details 

of the Ph3pyWF will be clarified in this paper and following with a few typical oxide ceramics 

examples to demonstrate the applicability of this software package.

Program summary

Program title: Ph3pyWF

Licensing provisions: MIT

Programming language: Python 3

External routines/libraries: Phonopy, Phono3py, Atomate, FireWorks, pymatgen

Nature of problem:

The calculation of lattice thermal conductivity using single-mode relaxation-time approximation 

and the linearized phonon Boltzmann equation from first-principles method requires a large 

number of inter-dependent subprocesses. Manually executing and managing such collection of 

subprocesses is inefficient and error prone. 

Solution method: 

Employing scientific workflow framework to automate the lattice thermal conductivity calculation 

process. Providing a near-turn-key solution with simpler management interface to users.


2

Introduction

Ceramic with low thermal conductivity can be used in many fields, such as thermal barrier 

coating in aerospace and power plant 1 and field of thermoelectric material (function can be 

clarified, like heat block and increase thermoelectric figure of merit). And with the development 

of computer science, precise computational prediction based on first-principles theory was 

becoming possible. Many researchers started to explore prediction models of ceramic materials 

with low thermal conductivity. Lan etc. 2 studied on the prediction model of dopants effect on 

pyrochlore ceramic materials and gave a possible prediction range. Malakkal 3, Liu 4, and Sajjad 5

also used first-principles computational methods to predict the thermal conductivity of BeO, 

BaZr2O3, and Cs2PTi6 respectively. In order to enhance the computational efficiency, such as 

Atomate 6 and FireWorks 7, have been developed in order to automate the tasks assignment and 

management in computational process. These workflow frameworks effectively realize data 

exchange between high performance computer cluster and cloud storage and can manage

thousands of subtasks. Based on these workflow frameworks, reusable subtask components and

computational workflows have been developed for the computation of many material properties

including but not limited to elasticity 6,8, dielectric constant 6, and ferroelectricity 9. 

Traditional method to calculate lattice thermal conductivities of ceramic materials needs 

us to obtain 2nd and 3rd force constant of a given unit cell firstly. From 2nd force constant, phonon 

dispersion and DOS can be further evaluated. And then from 3rd force constant, thermal 

conductivity can be acquired through solving Boltzmann Transport Equation (BTE). For the 

gaining of 2nd and 3rd force constants, usually, finite displacement method is used through first-

principles calculations (VASP 10). While there are already open-source libraries like ShengBTE 11,

Phonopy 12, and Phono3py 13 assisting forming displacement crystal structure file (POSCAR) and 

solving Boltzmann equation, the whole process is manually onerous and thus error-prone. And 

most importantly, these manually repetitive processes cannot fulfill the requirement of high-

throughput calculation and screening. Therefore, building an automated workflow for lattice

thermal conductivity calculation is quite necessary. Based Debye-Callaway model, a workflow 

toolkit AICON 14 achieved high-degree of automation and efficiency which excludes the need of 

calculating the third-order interatomic force constants (IFCs). Although greatly reducing the 

complexity of workflow components, the accuracy of Debye-Callaway method is not enough to 


3

fulfill the precise high-throughput screening. Therefore, developing a workflow based on more 

accurate model is highly necessary. On top of Atomate and FireWorks, we developed Ph3pyWF, 

trying to realize an automated workflow for lattice thermal conductivity calculation, in which more 

flexible user interface and more efficient task management system come true.

Methodology

Ph3pyWF workflow

Figure 1 illustrates the schematic diagram of workflow design, including subprocesses and 

their dependencies involved in a Ph3pyWF workflow. The Ph3pyWF package is developed based 

on Atomate 6 and FireWorks 7 computational workflow frameworks which allow the defining of 

workflows with highly reusable subprocesses. Currently, Ph3pyWF supports using VASP 10 code 

to perform DFT calculations. 


4

Figure 1: The workflow structure of Ph3pyWF. 

The first step of the workflow is to obtain the optimized unit-cell structure of the material 

system of interest. Preset subprocess for structural optimization available in Atomate library is 

adopted for this task with slight modification to the default parameters. This subprocess prepares


5

input files for DFT calculation according to the user-specified structure and parameters, runs DFT 

calculation, and parses output files to extract useful results. 

Following the optimized unit-cell structure, displaced supercell structures can then be 

generated using the finite displacement method. In this step, the optimized unit-cell structure is 

fetched from the database by querying for the document containing the result of the optimization 

subprocess. Phono3py 13 is used to generate a list of displaced supercell structures. Users can

specify different supercell sizes for the 2nd and 3rd order IFCs calculation. By default, the 2nd order 

IFCs are calculated from a subset of displaced supercell configurations for the 3rd order IFCs. 

During this subprocess, Phono3py writes a file containing the information of displaced supercell 

structures, which is later required by the post-analysis subprocess. This file is parsed as a dictionary 

object to be conveniently stored in the database. Additionally, from a unit-cell with large number 

of atoms and (or) low symmetry, the number of supercell configurations generated can be 

exceedingly large which results in unreasonable computation time. Users can specify a cut-off pair 

distance to exclude some of the supercell configurations. For each displaced supercell structure in 

the list, a corresponding static DFT job is appended to a list of subprocesses. 

Upon the completion of the displaced-supercells-generation subprocess, static DFT 

subprocesses are dynamically inserted into the workflow as the parents of the post-analysis 

subprocess. These subprocesses are based on slightly modified preset static calculation subprocess

in Atomate library. In the case where different supercell sizes for the 2nd and 3rd order IFCs 

calculation are specified, additional subprocesses for the 2nd order IFCs are also inserted into the 

workflow by the aforementioned dynamic insertion. Subprocesses for the 2nd IFCs have names 

formatted differently than those for the 3rd order IFCs to provide not only better readability for 

users, but also more robust data retrieval for post-analysis. 

After all the static calculation subprocesses are completed, thermal conductivity can be 

calculated. The post-analysis subprocess fetches the following data from the database: optimized 

unit-cell structure, list and information of displaced supercells generated, interatomic forces 

evaluated by the static calculations, and other required information depending on the specifications. 

With these sets of data fetched, the subprocess will call the Phono3py to calculate IFCs, and 

ultimately use the IFCs to solve the Boltzmann Transport equation to get the lattice thermal 

conductivity at a given range of temperatures. Phonopy library is also called in this subprocess to 

calculate phonon DOS and dispersion band structure. Post-analysis using Phono3py generates 


6

several large output files. The key results (temperature, lattice thermal conductivities, phonon DOS, 

and dispersion band structure) are stored in the database by default. Optionally, large output files 

which contain information on phonon group velocities, and phonon frequency can be compressed 

and stored in the database in binary format. 

Computational parameters

The modular design of this workflow toolkit allows expert users to customize their input 

parameters at different levels of granularity. Error! Not a valid bookmark self-reference. lists 

the top-most-level parameters used when instantiating a new workflow object. The only required 

input parameter without default value is the input unit-cell structure, which can be obtained from 

online database like Materials Project, or by reading files in multiple formats including but not 

limited to POSCAR and Crystallographic Information File (CIF). If skip_relax is set to True, the 

workflow will skip the structural relaxation and use the input unit cell structure directly to generate 

displaced supercells. The last parameter c is a dictionary object containing more detailed 

calculation settings. By default, c does not contain any data, and any setting specified by the user 

will override the default calculation settings.

Table 1: Input parameters of Ph3pyWF at workflow level

Parameter
Type
Default value

structure
pymatgen.Structure
<N/A>

skip_relax
Boolean
False

name
String
“phono3py wf”

c
Dictionary
None


7

Table 2 lists the supported parameters in the dictionary object c, which would be passed to 

subprocesses. The parameter supercell_size_fc3 is a 3-element tuple that specifies the supercell 

dimension for 3rd order IFCs. Supercell is generated by elongating along lattice axes of unit cell. 

The default value is (2,2,2), in which case a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell is created. The parameter 

supercell_size_fc2 specifies the supercell dimension for 2nd order IFCs and is optional. By 

default, 2nd order IFCs calculation uses the same supercell dimension as the 3rd order IFCs supercell 

dimension. Users may specify larger and different supercell dimensions for 2nd order IFCs since 

two-atom interactions have longer range in real space than three-atom interactions. Once 

supercell_size_fc2 is specified, additional displaced supercell structures are generated, and the 

corresponding static Fireworks will be added to the workflow. It is recommended to set the 

supercell dimension according to the unit cell structure. A rule-of-thumb is to ensure that the 

supercell has lengths more than 9 Angstrom along each lattice orientation. The parameter 

cutoff_pair_distance specifies the cutoff pair distance in Angstrom within supercells to reduce 

the number of static Fireworks. With finite displacement method, two of the three atoms in an 

interaction triplet are displaced. If the distance between the two displaced atoms in a displaced 

supercell is larger than the specified cutoff pair distance, such supercell configuration is excluded 

from the IFCs calculations, and no corresponding static Firework will be added. The parameters 

t_min, t_max, and t_step specify the temperatures in Kelvin at which lattice thermal conductivities 

will be evaluated. The default values of t_min, t_max, and t_step generate list temperature values: 

200K, 250K, …, 1350K, 1400K. Note that t_min is included in the list of temperature values while 

t_max is excluded. The parameter mesh is a 3-element list that specifies the q-point mesh sampling 

grid used for thermal conductivity calculation. The default q-point mesh is 11 points along each 

axis. For supercell with large number of atoms, 11 × 11 × 11 q-point mesh may result in long 

computing time exceeding the allocated wall time of a single job, thus it is recommended to specify 

a less dense q-point mesh initially and run a q-point convergence test.


8

Table 2: Supported parameters in dictionary object c to modify the calculation settings of subprocesses.

Parameter
Type
Default value

tag
String
<Automatically generated>

supercell_size_fc3
Tuple
(2,2,2)

supercell_size_fc2
Tuple
<Same as supercell_size_fc3>

cutoff_pair_distance
Float
None

atom_disp
Float
0.03

vasp_input_set_relax
VaspInputSet
Ph3pyRelaxSet

vasp_input_set_static
VaspInputSet
Ph3pyStaticSet

db_file
String
">>db_file<<"

metadata
Dictionary
{}

USER_*_SETTINGS
Dictionary
{}

t_min
Float
200

t_max
Float
1401

t_step
Float
50

primitive_matrix
ndarray
None

mesh
List
[11,11,11]

is_nac
Boolean
True

is_symmetry
Boolean
True

symprec
Float
1e-5


9

Applicability Analysis

To test the applicability of our workflow, some typical binary and complex oxide ceramic 

structures were tested. Monoclinic ZrO2, cubic MgO, corundum Al2O3, wurtzite ZnO, wurtzite 

BeO, rutile SnO2, and cubic CeO2 are selected as binary samples while La2Zr2O7 and Gd2Zr2O7

are chosen as complex oxides samples. Each system uses a different supercell dimension and a

cutoff pair distance to balance accuracy and computational cost. 

The lattice thermal conductivities of selected binary oxide systems calculated using 

Ph3pyWF and their respective experimental results at selected low (300K) and high temperature 

(900K) are shown in Figure 2. The calculated lattice thermal conductivity values show good 

agreement with the experimental values, which proves the usability of our workflow in common 

binary ceramic systems. 

Figure 2: Experimentally measured thermal conductivities of binary oxide systems (MgO 15, ZrO2 16 , Al2O3

17, ZnO 18, BeO 19, SnO2 20, CeO2 21) compared with calculated values by Ph3pyWF at (a) low temperature 

(300K) and (b) high temperature (900K). 

Once the validity of the workflow toolkit has been proved within the a few binary oxide 

systems, we then need to further test Ph3pyWF on more complicated oxide systems such as 

pyrochlores. Composition of both La2Zr2O7 and Gd2Zr2O7 are regarded as promising candidates

for next generation TBC topcoat materials, which are good as our test samples. The IFCs of 

La2Zr2O7 and Gd2Zr2O7 were both calculated using 2 × 2 × 2 supercells (176 atoms) constructed 

from the primitive cell (22 atoms). A cutoff pair distance of 5 Å was set in both workflows, having 


10

reduced the number of static jobs from more than 3800 to less than 900. Local density 

approximation (LDA) instead of generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used as 

exchange-correlation functional to enhance the calculation accuracy in rare-earth system. The 

lattice thermal conductivities calculated using Ph3pyWF and their experimentally measured results 

are shown in Figure 3. The calculated results verified the characteristic low lattice thermal 

conductivities in both systems. For La2Zr2O7, the calculated values show good agreement with the 

experimental ones at relatively low temperature. Underestimation at elevated temperature is 

observed in both cases, and the flattening pattern at high temperature is not reflected in the 

calculated lattice thermal conductivities. This can be explained by the significant thermal 

conductivity contribution from radiational thermal transportation, which is not involved in the 

calculations of this workflow. 

Figure 3: Lattice thermal conductivity (𝜅) of (a) pyrochlore La2Zr2O7 and (b) pyrochlore Gd2Zr2O7. The solid 

curve represents the calculated values of 𝜅 using Ph3pyWF. The filled symbols represent the experimental 

measured values of 𝜅. 22–25


11

Figure 4: Phonon dispersion band structures for (a) La2Zr2O7 and (b) Gd2Zr2O7 calculated using Ph3pyWF.

Lan et al. 26 suggested that for pyrochlore systems with rare-earth elements occupying A 

sites (16d), the lower the frequency of optical phonon branches the lower the thermal conductivity 

due to the scattering of the transverse acoustic branches caused by the low-lying optical branches.

This theory provides reasonable explanation for the lower calculated lattice thermal conductivity 

of Gd2Zr2O7. The calculated results indicate the presence of low-lying optical phonon branches at 

lower frequency in Gd2Zr2O7 (~1.5 THz) than in La2Zr2O7 (~2 THz), which can be observed in 

the phonon dispersion band structures shown in Figure 4. 

Conclusion

In summary, we have presented an automated workflow software package Ph3pyWF for 

calculating lattice thermal conductivities of TBC materials using the finite displacement method 

and single-mode relaxation-time (SMRT) approximation. This workflow software employs a state-

of-the-art scientific workflow framework to combine multiple computational material science 

software packages and is expected to accelerate the exploration of new TBC topcoat materials. 

Ph3pyWF has shown a high degree of automation and is capable of providing a near-turn-key 

solution for lattice thermal conductivity calculations. Compared with manual procedures, this 

workflow is highly efficient and avoids error-prone process, therefore suitable for high-throughput 


12

screening of materials. The capability of Ph3pyWF has been demonstrated on multiple material 

systems with within varied temperature range. The results validated the capability and accuracy of 

this toolkit in predicting the thermal properties of oxides. 

Acknowledgements

The author acknowledges the usage of the Cedar HPC cluster provided by Compute Canada

for providing computing resources. This work was supported by National Science and Engineering 

Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and McGill Engineering Undergraduate Student Masters 

Award (MEUSMA).


13

References

1.
Padture, N. P., Gell, M. & Jordan, E. H. Thermal barrier coatings for gas-turbine engine 

applications. Science (80-. ). 296, 280–284 (2002).

2.
Lan, G., Ou, P., Chen, C. & Song, J. A complete computational route to predict reduction 

of thermal conductivities of complex oxide ceramics by doping: A case study of La2Zr2O7. 

J. Alloys Compd. 826, 154224 (2020).

3.
Malakkal, L., Szpunar, B., Siripurapu, R. K., Zuniga, J. C. & Szpunar, J. A. Thermal 

conductivity of wurtzite and zinc blende cubic phases of BeO from ab initio calculations. 

Solid State Sci. 65, 79–87 (2017).

4.
Liu, Y. et al. Theoretical and experimental investigations on high temperature mechanical 

and thermal properties of BaZrO3. Ceram. Int. 44, 16475–16482 (2018).

5.
Sajjad, M., Mahmood, Q., Singh, N. & Andreas Larsson, J. Ultralow lattice thermal 

conductivity in double perovskite Cs2PTi6: A promising thermoelectric material. ACS Appl. 

Energy Mater. 3, 11293–11299 (2020).

6.
Mathew, K. et al. Atomate: A high-level interface to generate, execute, and analyze 

computational materials science workflows. Comput. Mater. Sci. 139, 140–152 (2017).

7.
Jain, A. et al. Fireworks: A dynamic workflow system designed for highthroughput 

applications. Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp. 27, 5037–5059 (2015).

8.
Wang, Y. et al. DFTTK: Density Functional Theory ToolKit for high-throughput lattice 

dynamics calculations. Calphad 75, 102355 (2021).

9.
Smidt, T. E., Mack, S. A., Reyes-Lillo, S. E., Jain, A. & Neaton, J. B. An automatically 

curated first-principles database of ferroelectrics. Sci. Data 7, 1–22 (2020).

10.
Hafner, J. Ab-initio simulations of materials using VASP: Density-functional theory and 

beyond. Journal of Computational Chemistry vol. 29 (2008).

11.
Li, W., Carrete, J., Katcho, N. A. & Mingo, N. ShengBTE: A solver of the Boltzmann 

transport equation for phonons. Comput. Phys. Commun. 185, 1747–1758 (2014).

12.
Togo, A. & Tanaka, I. First principles phonon calculations in materials science. Scr. Mater.

108, 1–5 (2015).

13.
Togo, A., Chaput, L. & Tanaka, I. Distributions of phonon lifetimes in Brillouin zones. Phys. 

Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 91, (2015).


14

14.
Fan, T. & Oganov, A. R. AICON: A program for calculating thermal conductivity quickly 

and accurately. Comput. Phys. Commun. 251, (2020).

15.
Harris, D. C. et al. Properties of an infrared-transparent MgO: Y2O3 nanocomposite. J. Am. 

Ceram. Soc. 96, 3828–3835 (2013).

16.
Sun, L., Guo, H., Peng, H., Gong, S. & Xu, H. Phase stability and thermal conductivity of 

ytterbia and yttria co-doped zirconia. Prog. Nat. Sci. Mater. Int. 23, 440–445 (2013).

17.
Parchovianský, M., Galusek, D., Švančárek, P., Sedláček, J. & Šajgalík, P. Thermal 

behavior, electrical conductivity and microstructure of hot pressed Al2O3/SiC 

nanocomposites. Ceram. Int. 40, 14421–14429 (2014).

18.
Olorunyolemi, T. et al. Thermal conductivity of zinc oxide: From green to sintered state. J. 

Am. Ceram. Soc. 85, 1249–1253 (2002).

19.
Takahashi, Y. & Murabayashi, M. Measurement of Thermal Properties of Nuclear Materials 

By Laser Flash Method. J. Nucl. Sci. Technol. 12, 133–144 (1975).

20.
Bueno, P. R., Varela, J. A., Barrado, C. M., Longo, E. & Leite, E. R. A comparative study 

of thermal conductivity in ZnO- And SnO 2-based varistor systems. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 88, 

2629–2631 (2005).

21.
Suzuki, K. et al. Thermal and mechanical properties of CeO2. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 102, 

1994–2008 (2019).

22.
Zhang, Y. et al. Low thermal conductivity in La2Zr2O7 pyrochlore with A-site partially 

substituted with equimolar Yb2O 3 and Er2O3. Ceram. Int. 40, 9151–9157 (2014).

23.
Wang, Y., Yang, F. & Xiao, P. Rattlers or oxygen vacancies: Determinant of high 

temperature plateau thermal conductivity in doped pyrochlores. Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 

(2013).

24.
Jiang, T., Xie, M., Guan, L., Wang, X. & Song, X. Effect of Nb5+ and Cu2+ codoping on 

thermal properties of Gd2Zr2O7 ceramic. J. Rare Earths 39, 180–185 (2021).

25.
Guo, L., Guo, H., Peng, H. & Gong, S. Thermophysical properties of Yb2O3 doped 

Gd2Zr2O7 and thermal cycling durability of (Gd0.9Yb0.1)2Zr2O7/YSZ thermal barrier 

coatings. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 34, 1255–1263 (2014).

26.
Lan, G., Ouyang, B. & Song, J. The role of low-lying optical phonons in lattice thermal 

conductance of rare-earth pyrochlores: A first-principle study. Acta Mater. 91, 304–317 

(2015).


