Trap-Integrated Superconducting Nanowire Single-Photon Detectors with
Improved RF Tolerance for Trapped-Ion Qubit State Readout

Benedikt Hampel,1, 2, a) Daniel H. Slichter,1 Dietrich Leibfried,1 Richard P. Mirin,1 Sae Woo Nam,1 and Varun B.
Verma1

1)National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, Colorado 80305, USA
2)Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA

(Dated: 6 February 2023)

State readout of trapped-ion qubits with trap-integrated detectors can address important challenges for scal-
able quantum computing, but the strong rf electric fields used for trapping can impact detector performance.
Here, we report on NbTiN superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) employing grounded
aluminum mirrors as electrical shielding that are integrated into linear surface-electrode rf ion traps. The
shielded SNSPDs can be successfully operated at applied rf trapping potentials of up to 54 Vpeak at 70 MHz
and temperatures of up to 6 K, with a maximum system detection efficiency of 68 %. This performance should
be sufficient to enable parallel high-fidelity state readout of a wide range of trapped ion species in typical
cryogenic apparatus.

The state readout of trapped-ion qubits is usually
accomplished by driving an optical cycling transition
with one or more laser beams and observing qubit-state-
dependent fluorescence from the ion1. Counting just a
few percent of the total fluorescence photons from the
ion is generally sufficient for state readout with fidelity
>0.9992.
The ion fluorescence is at ultraviolet (UV)
or blue wavelengths for nearly all species used experi-
mentally. Most experimental setups use high-numerical-
aperture fluorescence collection optics combined with
photon detectors such as cameras or photomultiplier
tubes to detect the presence or absence of fluorescence
and thus infer the qubit state.
The simultaneous re-
quirements on field of view, numerical aperture, off-axis
aberration, magnification, and physical dimensions of the
collection optics present challenges when scaling this ar-
chitecture to large numbers of ions. Applications such
as scaled trapped-ion quantum computing3–5 may bene-
fit from the integration of multiple photon detectors for
fluorescence detection into the ion trap itself, without
requiring optical elements for imaging6–9.
Superconducting
nanowire
single-photon
detectors
(SNSPDs) are promising candidates for this application,
as they have very low dark count rates10, high detec-
tion efficiencies11, high maximum count rates over a
wide range of wavelengths, including ultraviolet wave-
lengths6,7,12, and can be fabricated as devices with many
separate pixels13, as desirable for parallel detection of
ions in a large array of traps2.
Many ion trap exper-
iments already operate at cryogenic temperatures be-
tween roughly 4 K and 10 K, such that the cryogenic
temperatures required for SNSPD operation might not
present a major obstacle. However, the strong rf elec-
tric fields used to trap ions can induce undesired rf cur-
rents in trap-integrated SNSPDs and degrade their per-
formance6,7. Other approaches for trap-integrated pho-

a)benedikt.hampel@nist.gov

ton detectors include single-photon avalanche photodi-
odes (SPADs), which can be operated in room tempera-
ture ion traps. Trap-integrated SPADs also suffer from
the same rf pickup effects, however, and have much higher
dark count rates and lower quantum efficiencies than
SNSPDs. SPAD output pulses also cause more heating
of the ion motion than SNSPD pulses due to their larger
amplitude7–9.
In this work, we demonstrate an improved design of a
linear ion trap with an integrated SNSPD, optimized for
detection of fluorescence from Ca+ ions at 397 nm and
shielded from the trapping rf fields by an aluminum mir-
ror under the device that also contributes to improved
detection efficiency. Based on the measured system per-
formance and the results in Ref. 7, these devices should
enable high-fidelity qubit state readout of a trapped Ca+

ion under realistic trap operating conditions (tempera-
ture and trapping rf).
The trap electrode design is identical to that in Ref. 7,
but the SNSPDs differ in two major ways.
First, we
use niobium titanium nitride (NbTiN) instead of molyb-
denum silicide (MoSi) as the superconducting material
for the SNSPDs14–17, thus increasing the SNSPD critical
currents by roughly a factor of 10 and enabling opera-
tion at higher temperatures of up to 7 K18. These fea-
tures reduce the sensitivity of the SNSPD performance
to the applied trap rf potentials. Second, a grounded alu-
minum mirror fabricated below the SNSPD provides elec-
trical shielding and increases the detection efficiency of
the SNSPD. We characterize the performance of SNSPDs
in the presence of realistic rf trapping potentials suitable
for trapping a wide range of ion species and determine
their system detection efficiency and dark count perfor-
mance.
An ion trap with integrated SNSPD is depicted in
the photomicrograph in Fig. 1. We designed the shield-
ing mirror by performing two-dimensional finite-element
electromagnetic simulations of the trap geometry in the
plane normal to the trap surface along the vertical white
dotted line in Fig. 1. All dielectric and metal layers on the

arXiv:2302.01462v1  [quant-ph]  2 Feb 2023


2

FIG. 1: Photomicrograph of the linear ion trap with inte-
grated SNSPD. The rf trapping potentials are applied to the
labeled and false-colored rf electrodes. All other non-SNSPD
electrodes are used for dc trapping potentials. The magnified
inset shows the SNSPD on top of a small aluminum mirror,
while a larger aluminum mirror spanning the region beneath
the leads of the SNSPD can be seen in the larger picture.
Both mirrors appear light blue in the gaps between gold elec-
trodes, while the black gaps show the substrate. The green
dotted line borders the active area of the SNSPD. The white
dashed lines indicate the plane of the 2D simulations in Fig. 2.
The bias current Ib is applied to the leads of the SNSPD.

wafer, including the gold trap electrodes, were included
in the simulation. We analyzed the electric field at the
SNSPD when an rf potential was applied to the rf elec-
trodes of the ion trap (false colored red in Fig. 1). The
simulated rf frequency of 70 MHz is suitable for trapping
a wide range of ions including the target Ca+ species.
The results of the simulations are depicted in Fig. 2.
The plot color represents the rf electric field amplitude
on a logarithmic scale.
Larger rf electric fields at the
position of the individual parts of the nanowire cause
larger induced rf currents and correspondingly larger im-
pact on the SNSPD performance6,7. Fig. 2(a) simulates
an SNSPD without shielding, similar to the device de-
scribed in Ref. 7. The illustrated layer stack from bottom
to top consists of the silicon wafer, a 212 nm-thick SiO2
layer, 10 nm-thick and 100 nm-wide NbTiN nanowire on
a pitch of 160 nm, a 130 nm-thick SiO2 layer, and vac-
uum above. In Fig. 2(b), a grounded aluminum mirror is
added between the silicon wafer and the lower SiO2 layer
to shield the SNSPD. The rf electric field around the
nanowire cross-sections is reduced by roughly an order
of magnitude relative to the unshielded case, suggesting
greater immunity to the trapping rf fields. Additional

grounded conductors on top, either a 50 nm-thick gold
mesh with width and pitch equal to the SNSPD gaps
(Fig. 2(c)) or a 50 nm-thick indium tin oxide (ITO) layer
(Fig. 2(d)), further improve the shielding of the SNSPD
against rf signals, while still transmitting most of the ion
fluorescence photons to the nanowire. The top electrical
shielding layer both protects the SNSPD from trapping
rf as well as shielding the ion from electric fields due to
SNSPD pulses.
The mirror also serves as part of an optical stack in
combination with the dielectric layers.
Based on rig-
orous coupled-wave analysis (RCWA)19, the mirror in-
creases the absorption of normally incident photons in
the nanowire by a factor of two when the SiO2 thick-
nesses are chosen appropriately; aluminum was chosen
for its higher UV/blue reflectivity than gold.
Based on the simulation results, we fabricated traps
with integrated SNSPDs on top of grounded aluminum
mirrors but without top shielding layers for simplicity,
as shown in Fig. 2(b).
The SNSPD geometry and di-
electric stack were optimized for absorption at the Ca+

ion fluorescence wavelength of 397 nm. All devices were
fabricated in the NIST Boulder Microfabrication Facility.
The
devices
were
fabricated
on
high-resistivity
(>20 kΩ cm) silicon wafers on which 150 nm of SiO2 were
deposited in a plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposi-
tion (PECVD) process. A 50 nm electron-beam evapo-
rated aluminium layer to form the mirrors was patterned
in a lift-off process and covered with 212 nm of SiO2. This

FIG. 2: Numerically simulated electric field amplitude from
an rf potential of 100 Vpeak at 70 MHz applied to the rf elec-
trodes of the ion trap, viewed for a small cross-section of the
SNSPD and for different shielding configurations. (a) SNSPD
nanowire embedded in SiO2 without shielding. (b) Grounded
aluminum mirror under the nanowire.
(c) Grounded gold
mesh on top of the stack in addition to the grounded alu-
minum mirror. (d) Grounded ITO layer instead of the gold
mesh.


3

was followed by a 10 nm-thick NbTiN film deposited by
co-sputtering at 500 °C on the lower SiO2 layer. Nanowire
meanders were patterned in the NbTiN by optical and
electron-beam lithography combined with reactive-ion
etching with sulfur hexafluoride (SF6). The SNSPD ac-
tive area measures 20 µm × 30 µm. The nanowire width
was determined with a scanning electron microscope as
90 nm with a pitch of 180 nm.
Vias were then etched
through the SiO2 bottom layer in a reactive-ion etch-
ing process with trifluoromethane (CHF3), followed by
a 20 nm-thick gold layer, to connect to the buried alu-
minum mirror electrically.
The rf (red) and dc (gold) electrodes of the ion trap
in Fig. 1 provide the potentials for trapping ions when
driven appropriately.
They were patterned, together
with the SNSPD leads, in a lift-off process from a 350 nm
evaporated gold layer, making electrical contact with the
aluminum mirror layer in regions where vias were pre-
viously opened.
Finally, a 130 nm-thick SiO2 cap was
deposited on top of the SNSPD to protect the nanowire
during further processing and limit degradation due to
oxidation.
This layer was deposited across the entire
wafer in a PECVD process and was patterned to cover
only the SNSPD using a CHF3 reactive-ion etching pro-
cess.
We fabricated and tested two different mirror sizes
(large and small), with the mirrors either electrically
floating or grounded via the trap electrodes, to compare
shielding performance. The small mirror can be seen in
the magnified inset of Fig. 1 and covers the area under
the SNSPD and a small region around it.
The larger
mirror is depicted in the top photomicrograph of Fig. 1.
It was fabricated to cover a larger area, including under
the electrical leads of the SNSPD for several hundred µm
away from the rf electrode.
The measurements of the performance and the rf toler-
ance of the trap-integrated SNSPDs were performed in a
variable-temperature cryostat with a base temperature of
2.6 K. Cryogenically-operated LEDs with a peak wave-
length of 395 nm provided flood illumination of the sam-
ples. The rf electrodes of the ion traps were connected to
rf resonators with a voltage step-up factor of 20 and res-
onance frequencies between 68 MHz and 72 MHz, which
were driven by an amplified rf generator. The SNSPDs
were current-biased using a low-noise voltage source and
a 10 kΩ series resistor through the low-frequency port of
a bias tee.
Output pulses from the SNSPD, emerging
from the high-frequency port of the bias tee, were am-
plified, lowpass-filtered and notch filtered to remove any
rf pickup before being sent to an oscilloscope or counter.
The measured pulse decay time constant for the SNSPDs
was ∼25 ns, giving a device kinetic inductance of 1.3 µH.
The measured bright count rates (BCR) and dark
count rates (DCR) as a function of dc bias current Ib
are presented in Fig. 3 for different operating tempera-
tures and mirror configurations, each at several values of
applied rf voltage on the trap rf electrodes. Based on sim-
ulations and measurements in Ref. 7, rf at 70 MHz with

40 V amplitude on the trap electrodes should confine a
single 40Ca+ ion with axial (radial) secular frequencies of
2 MHz (∼5 MHz), with somewhat higher confinement di-
rectly over the SNSPD. Lower rf amplitudes should also
be usable, and reducing the rf frequency will reduce the
required rf amplitude proportionally to achieve the same
confinement.
The incident photon flux on the SNSPD is the same
for all traces within a given panel, but not necessarily
the same for different panels. The BCR is proportional
to the system detection efficiency (SDE), the probability
that a photon incident on the detector is registered as
a count by the room-temperature electronics. The data
with no applied rf potential show typical SNSPD behav-
ior for all devices: a sigmoid-shaped SDE curve that rises
and eventually plateaus with increasing bias current. The
maximum dc bias current that can be applied before the
SNSPD latches in the normal state, called the switch-
ing current, is denoted with a colored tick mark on the
horizontal axis. The measured DCR is generally below
1 count per second until the bias current is within a few
µA of the switching current, at which point the DCR
is observed to increase exponentially with bias current.
For ion trapping applications, the dark count rate due
to stray light from the readout laser beam(s) is generally
well above 1 count per second, so we did not attempt to
characterize DCR below 1 count per second. This quali-
tative dark count behavior holds both with and without
applied rf potential.
Fig. 3(a) plots BCR and DCR from an ion trap device
with a large mirror under the SNSPD that is left elec-
trically floating (not grounded). With increasing applied
rf amplitude, the switching current is reduced and the
shape of the BCR vs. Ib curve flattens. These effects have
been observed before in ion-trap-integrated SNSPDs, and
are believed to arise from induced rf currents flowing in
the SNSPD6,7. The switching current in the absence of rf
potential is considerably larger than that of the devices in
Refs. 6 and 7, so the SNSPD continues to operate even at
much higher rf amplitudes than were previously demon-
strated. However, the maximum achievable BCR (and
thus maximum SDE) starts to degrade with increasing
rf amplitude. By contrast, the devices in panels (b), (c),
and (d) of Fig. 3, where the mirror under the SNSPD is
electrically grounded, show qualitatively different behav-
ior. First, the reduction in switching current is generally
smaller for a given rf amplitude than for the device with
the ungrounded mirror in Fig. 3(a). Second, the shape of
the BCR vs. Ib curve does not flatten, but instead shifts
so that the BCR begins to rise at smaller bias currents.
The maximum achievable BCR also remains unaffected
for considerably higher rf amplitudes.
In Fig. 4(a), we fit the data from Fig. 3(a) to a model
for BCR vs.
Ib in the presence of induced rf currents
in the SNSPD. This model accounts for both spatially
uniform and spatially varying induced currents, and was
presented in detail in Ref. 7. We expanded the model
slightly to allow for small lateral shifts of the BCR vs. Ib


4

FIG. 3: Bright count rate (BCR) and dark count rate (DCR) in counts per second (cps) as a function of bias current for
different rf voltage peak amplitudes on the ion trap at a temperature of 4.5 K for devices with a large mirror that is (a) not
connected to ground and (b) connected to ground. Comparison to device with (c) a smaller grounded mirror at 4.5 K and (d) the
same device as in (b) operated at 6 K. The switching currents for each value of applied rf are indicated with correspondingly
colored vertical markers on the horizontal axes. BCR values shown are corrected for DCR. DCR is plotted on logarithmic
vertical axes.

curve of the type seen in the other panels of Fig. 3. We
believe these shifts are due to local heating of the SNSPD
from rf dissipation as described below. The strong agree-
ment between data and fits suggests that induced rf cur-
rents in the SNSPD are present in the device with the
non-grounded mirror. By contrast, this model does not
fit well to any of the data from the devices with grounded
mirrors, as the model indicates that induced rf currents
always flatten the slope of the BCR vs. Ib curve. How-
ever, the response of the SNSPDs to increasing rf is simi-
lar to their response to increasing temperature, shown in
Fig. 4(b) for a representative device. We therefore posit
that on-chip power dissipation from the rf drive causes
local heating of the SNSPD, and that this is the pri-
mary contribution to the observed rf dependence of the
BCR versus bias current.
We used an trap-integrated
SNSPD in a different device to probe for local heating,
using the SNSPD switching current as a proxy for its
temperature. If the applied rf (Vpeak = 45 V) is turned
off and the switching current is measured in the ensu-
ing ∼10 µs, we infer an SNSPD temperature increase of
roughly 0.5 K over the steady-state temperature with no

rf drive. This provides qualitative, but not quantitative,
support for the local heating hypothesis.
The rf elec-
trodes in these devices are 350 nm thick, as opposed to
the ∼6 µm thickness in devices that would be used for
ion trapping7; the corresponding increase in trace resis-
tance and thus power dissipation may mean that local
heating is more pronounced in these devices than in ones
fabricated with thicker Au electrodes for use with ions,
which may therefore exhibit lower sensitivity to applied
rf potential.
To determine a calibrated value of the detector SDE,
we fabricated and tested stand-alone SNSPDs using the
self-aligned design described in Ref. 20, where an optical
fiber is butt-coupled to the SNSPD at cryogenic tem-
perature. The layer stack and nanowire geometry was
the same as for the trap-integrated devices, except the
thickness of the bottom SiO2 layer was optimized to a
thickness of 186 nm for theoretically maximum SDE. We
illuminated the standalone SNSPDs with a fiber-coupled
LED source with a peak wavelength of 395 nm.
The
photon flux at the fiber output was calibrated at room
temperature using a photomultiplier tube (PMT) whose


5

FIG. 4: Bright count rate (BCR) and dark count rate (DCR)
in counts per second (cps) as a function of bias current. (a)
Curve fits for an induced rf current model to the data in
Fig. 3(a). (b) BCR and DCR vs. Ib without rf drive at differ-
ent temperatures for a trap-integrated SNSPD. The switching
currents are indicated with markers on the horizontal axis.

quantum efficiency was reported by the manufacturer.
The SDE of the SNSPDs could then be determined rela-
tive to that of the PMT by measuring the ratios of their
respective count rates at a fixed LED power. The self-
aligned SNSPD stack with an aluminum mirror reached
a maximum SDE of 68 %, while SNSPDs without mirror
achieved an SDE of 40 %, both measured at 2.5 K. The
SDE of SNSPDs well below the superconducting tran-
sition temperature is typically independent of tempera-
ture10.
In summary, we have presented an improved, shielded
NbTiN SNSPD integrated into a linear ion trap. These
devices exhibit an order of magnitude increase in tol-
erance to applied trapping rf potential, along with an
increase of at least 2.5 K in operating temperature, rel-
ative to previous work with an identical trap electrode
geometry7. These trap-integrated SNSPDs should be us-
able to perform fluorescence-based state readout of ion
species with charge-to-mass ratios as low as ∼0.01 ele-
mentary charges per unified atomic mass unit, encom-
passing most of the ion species typically used in quan-
tum information experiments. Future work will target
further improvements in SDE of the SNSPDs and further
increases in trap rf tolerance through additional shielding

and reduced on-chip rf dissipation, with the goal of using
the trap-integrated SNSPDs for high-fidelity readout of
qubits encoded in Ca+ ions.

We thank D. V. Reddy and N. K. Lysne for thoughtful
comments on the manuscript. This research was funded
by NIST (https://ror.org/05xpvk416) and the IARPA
LogiQ Program.
This is a contribution of NIST, an
agency of the U.S. Government, and is not subject to
U.S. copyright.

AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conflicts to disclose.

Author Contributions
B.H. performed the simulations, fabricated the de-
vices, took the data, and analyzed the data with assis-
tance from D.H.S. and V.B.V.; B.H. and D.H.S. wrote
the manuscript with input from all authors; V.B.V. and
D.H.S. supervised the work with assistance from D.L.,
R.P.M., and S.W.N.; V.B.V., D.H.S., D.L., R.P.M., and
S.W.N. secured funding for the work.
Benedikt Hampel: Conceptualization (equal); Data
curation (lead); Formal analysis (lead); Investigation
(lead); Methodology (equal); Software (lead); Valida-
tion (equal); Visualization (lead); Writing - original draft
(equal); Writing - review & editing (equal).
Daniel
H. Slichter: Conceptualization (equal); Formal analysis
(supporting); Funding acquisition (equal); Investigation
(supporting); Methodology (equal); Project administra-
tion (equal); Resources (equal); Software (supporting);
Supervision (lead); Validation (equal); Writing - orig-
inal draft (equal); Writing - review & editing (equal).
Varun B. Verma: Conceptualization (equal); Formal
analysis (supporting); Funding acquisition (equal); In-
vestigation (supporting); Methodology (equal); Project
administration (equal); Resources (equal); Software (sup-
porting); Supervision (lead); Validation (equal); Writing
- review & editing (equal). Dietrich Leibfried: Fund-
ing acquisition (equal); Project administration (equal);
Resources (equal); Supervision (supporting); Writing -
review & editing (equal). Richard P. Mirin: Funding
acquisition (equal); Project administration (equal); Re-
sources (equal); Supervision (supporting); Writing - re-
view & editing (equal). Sae Woo Nam: Funding acqui-
sition (equal); Project administration (equal); Resources
(equal); Supervision (supporting); Writing - review &
editing (equal).

DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the findings of this study are
openly available in the NIST Enterprise Data Inventory
(EDI) at http://doi.org/[doi].


6

REFERENCES

1H. G. Dehmelt, “Monoion oscillator as potential ultimate laser
frequency standard,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
Measurement IM-31, 83–87 (1982).

2D. J. Wineland, C. Monroe, W. M. Itano, D. Leibfried, B. E.
King,
and D. M. Meekhof, “Experimental issues in coherent
quantum-state manipulation of trapped atomic ions,” Journal of
Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology
103, 259–328 (1998).

3D. Kielpinski, C. Monroe, and D. J. Wineland, “Architecture for
a large-scale ion-trap quantum computer.” Nature 417, 709–11
(2002).

4C. Monroe and J. Kim, “Scaling the Ion Trap Quantum Proces-
sor,” Science 339, 1164–1169 (2013).

5C. D. Bruzewicz, J. Chiaverini, R. McConnell, and J. M. Sage,
“Trapped-ion quantum computing:
Progress and challenges,”
Applied Physics Reviews 6, 021314 (2019).

6D. H. Slichter, V. B. Verma, D. Leibfried, R. P. Mirin, S. W. Nam,
and D. J. Wineland, “UV-sensitive superconducting nanowire
single photon detectors for integration in an ion trap,” Optics
Express 25, 8705–8720 (2017).

7S. L. Todaro, V. B. Verma, K. C. McCormick, D. T. C. All-
cock, R. P. Mirin, D. J. Wineland, S. W. Nam, A. C. Wilson,
D. Leibfried, and D. H. Slichter, “State readout of a trapped ion
qubit using a trap-integrated superconducting photon detector,”
Physical Review Letters 126, 010501 (2021).

8W. J. Setzer, M. Ivory, O. Slobodyan, J. W. Van Der Wall,
L. P. Parazzoli, D. Stick, M. Gehl, M. G. Blain, R. R. Kay,
H. J. Mcguinness,
and et al., “Fluorescence detection of a
trapped ion with a monolithically integrated single-photon-
counting avalanche diode,” Applied Physics Letters 119, 154002
(2021).

9D. Reens, M. Collins, J. Ciampi, D. Kharas, B. F. Aull, K. Don-
lon, C. D. Bruzewicz, B. Felton, J. Stuart, R. J. Niffenegger,
P. Rich, D. Braje, K. K. Ryu, J. Chiaverini, and R. McConnell,
“High-fidelity ion state detection using trap-integrated avalanche
photodiodes,” Physical Review Letters 129, 100502 (2022).

10E. E. Wollman, V. B. Verma, A. D. Beyer, R. M. Briggs, B. Ko-
rzh, J. P. Allmaras, F. Marsili, A. E. Lita, R. P. Mirin, S. W.
Nam,
and et al., “UV superconducting nanowire single-photon
detectors with high efficiency, low noise, and 4 k operating tem-
perature,” Optics Express 25, 26792 (2017).

11D. V. Reddy, R. R. Nerem, S. W. Nam, R. P. Mirin, and V. B.
Verma, “Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors with
98% system detection efficiency at 1550 nm,” Optica 7, 1649–
1653 (2020).

12S. Crain, C. Cahall, G. Vrijsen, E. E. Wollman, M. D. Shaw, V. B.
Verma, S. W. Nam, and J. Kim, “High-speed low-crosstalk de-
tection of a 171Yb+ qubit using superconducting nanowire single
photon detectors,” Communications Physics 2, 97 (2019).

13E. E. Wollman, V. B. Verma, A. E. Lita, W. H. Farr, M. D.
Shaw, R. P. Mirin,
and S. W. Nam, “Kilopixel array of super-
conducting nanowire single-photon detectors,” Opt. Express 27,
35279–35289 (2019).

14S. N. Dorenbos, E. M. Reiger, U. Perinetti, V. Zwiller, T. Zijlstra,
and T. M. Klapwijk, “Low noise superconducting single photon
detectors on silicon,” Applied Physics Letters 93, 131101 (2008).

15M. G. Tanner, C. M. Natarajan, V. K. Pottapenjara, J. A.
O’Connor, R. J. Warburton, R. H. Hadfield, B. Baek, S. Nam,
S. N. Dorenbos, E. B. Ure˜na, T. Zijlstra, T. M. Klapwijk,
and
V. Zwiller, “Enhanced telecom wavelength single-photon detec-
tion with NbTiN superconducting nanowires on oxidized silicon,”
Applied Physics Letters 96, 221109 (2010).

16S. Miki, T. Yamashita, H. Terai,
and Z. Wang, “High per-
formance fiber-coupled NbTiN superconducting nanowire single
photon detectors with gifford-mcmahon cryocooler,” Opt. Ex-
press 21, 10208–10214 (2013).

17J. Chang, J. W. N. Los, J. O. Tenorio-Pearl, N. Noordzij,
R. Gourgues, A. Guardiani, J. R. Zichi, S. F. Pereira, H. P.
Urbach, V. Zwiller, S. N. Dorenbos, and I. Esmaeil Zadeh, “De-
tecting telecom single photons with 99.5+0.5
−2.07 % system detection
efficiency and high time resolution,” APL Photonics 6, 036114
(2021).

18R. Gourgues, J. W. N. Los, J. Zichi, J. Chang, N. Kalhor, G. Bul-
garini, S. N. Dorenbos, V. Zwiller, and I. E. Zadeh, “Supercon-
ducting nanowire single photon detectors operating at tempera-
ture from 4 to 7 k,” Optics Express 27, 24601–24609 (2019).

19M. G. Moharam, T. K. Gaylord, E. B. Grann, and D. A. Pom-
met, “Formulation for stable and efficient implementation of the
rigorous coupled-wave analysis of binary gratings,” Journal of the
Optical Society of America A 12, 1068 (1995).

20A. J. Miller, A. E. Lita, B. Calkins, I. Vayshenker, S. M. Gru-
ber, and S. W. Nam, “Compact cryogenic self-aligning fiber-to-
detector coupling with losses below one percent,” Optics Express
19, 9102 (2011).


