This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

Relative estimation of scattering noise and its utility to select 

radiation detector for Gamma CT scanner.

Mayank Goswami# and Kajal Kumari

Divyadrishti Imaging Laboratory, Department of Physics, IIT Roorkee, Roorkee, India

Department of Physics, IIT Roorkee, Roorkee, India

#mayank.goswami@ph.iitr.ac.in, 

Abstract

This study investigates two unavoidable noise factors: electronic noise and radiation scattering,
associated with detectors and their electronics. This study proposes a novel methodology to estimate 
electronic and scattering noise separately. It utilizes mathematical tools, namely, Kanpur theorem-1, 
standard deviation, similarity dice coefficient parameters, and experimental Computerized Tomography
technique. Four types of gamma detectors: CsI (Tl), 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒), NaI (Tl) and HPGe are used with their 
respective electronics. A detector having integrated circuit electronics is shown to impart significantly
less (~ 33% less) electronic noise in data as compared to detectors with distributed electronics. Kanpur 
Theorem-1 signature is proposed as a scattering error estimate. An empirical expression is developed
showing that scattering noise depends strongly on mass attenuation coefficients of detector crystal 
material and weakly on their active area. The difference between predicted and estimated relative 
scattering is 14.6%.

The methodology presented in this study will assist the related industry in selecting the appropriate
detector of optimal diameter, thickness, material composition, and hardware as per requirement. 

Keywords: Gamma radiation, radiation detector, Computerized tomography, electronic noise, 
Radiation scattering.

1. Introduction 

Computed tomography (CT) is an established non-destructive evaluation tool. Artifact-free CT images 
are desirable for obtaining true information about the scanned object. The presence of noise in the 
projection data of CT reduces the accuracy. The selection of the detectors plays an important role. 
Detectors are characterized based on their generated response function. The response function, 
commonly referred to as the energy spectrum, is the distribution of counts corresponding to different 
energies or pulse height amplitude. The response function of the detector depends on the size, shape, 
and composition of the detector’s material[1]. The precise and accurate extraction of the energy 
spectrum can enhance the accuracy[2]. Transmission CT modeling must only include photopeak counts. 
However, the separation of counts due to Compton scattering from photopeak is not possible during the 
CT measurements. 

The detector and its associated electronics add radiation counts to measured data due to two undesirable 
factors: (1) electronic noise and (2) the scattering of radiation with the detector’s crystal material.
Shrewd choice (about crystal material, its size, integrated onboard electronics, etc.) detector may 
minimize their effect.


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

The impact of electronic noise on the reconstructed image (referred to as image noise) is generally
estimated using the standard deviation of CT numbers/pixel values (SDCT)[3]. Standard deviation (SD) 
of pixel values of reconstructed CT image in a uniform region of interest (ROI) is used. Two to three 
ROIs are selected in a single reconstructed CT image. The mean value of SD of ROIs is declared as 
SDCT.

The exact quantification of reconstruction error is only possible if prior information about the scanned 
object is available. If such information is already available would render the non-destructive evaluation 
unnecessary. However, Kanpur theorem-1 (KT-1) estimates the inherent error/noise level in projection 
data without having prior information about the scanned object[4]. The inherent noise involves both 
undesirable factors collectively. The following two subsections discuss the primary sources of the 
above-mentioned undesirable factors in detail:

1.1. Electronic nose

Electronic noise is primarily caused by: (a) noise from the preamplifier and integrating amplifier due to 
higher feedback capacitance: and (b) quantization noise caused by an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) 
over a broad signal range[5]. The electronic noise becomes comparable to the signal if a relatively weak
(low activity) radiation source is used. It corrupts the CT examination's diagnostic value. Weak sources 
are required to reduce the probability of passive cancer and vascular disease development[6–8] due to 
radiation exposure. Noise reduction techniques are employed to minimize further and use low-activity 
sources to prevent electronic noise from distorting the signal. The noise reduction techniques use (a) 
statistically rich data measurement methods, (b) a digital filter-based data post-processing approach, (c) 
modification of underlying models, and (d) advanced hardware.

Measurement data with the best Gaussian fit, least standard deviation (SD), and low value of full-width 
half maxima (FWHM) is preferred and shown to give the best reconstruction quality[9]. Once the CT 
data is taken, post-processing noise filtering approaches may be applied during three stages: (a) before 
reconstruction[5,10], (b) while solving the inverse problem[11], and/or (c) after reconstruction on the 
pre-final image[12,13]. Several modifications are proposed in beer-lambert law for variance-related 
noise reduction to improve the CT Modelling[14].

As far as using advanced hardware is concerned, detectors and associated electronics are major 
components. Several comparison studies recommend detectors equipped with Integrated Circuit (IC) 
electronics over detectors equipped with distributed electronics to reduce electronic noise[3,15,16]. It 
was reported that image noise (arising due to electronic noise) could be reduced by approximately 10% 
(estimated by SDCT) using the IC detector[3]. The CT experiment was performed using a detector 
equipped with distributed electronics. The same CT experiment was performed using an IC detector,
but this time, lowering the radiation dose. It was shown that a dose reduction of 20% could be achieved
by replacing the detector equipped with distributed electronics with the IC detector. In both cases, SDCT
values were matched[3]. This study claimed that the use of IC detectors reduces electronic noise, leading 
to further dose reduction.

1.2. Nonlinear Scattering of Radiation

Gamma radiation emerging from a nucleus may interact with atoms (in their mean free path) present in
the rest of the material of the radioactive source and lose some energy, thus contributing to scattering 
part of the energy spectrum. The scattered and photopeak gamma radiation emitted from the radiation
source further interacts with the object (under CT investigation) via three major phenomena: (1) 
Photoelectric effect, (2) Compton scattering, and (3) Pair-production. As listed above, the radiation 
passing through the object may interact with the detectors’ crystal via three mechanisms. The whole 
phenomenon is illustrated in fig.1 [1]. The detector’s response function thus may contain the scattering 
components due to scattering of radiation: (a) within the radioactive source itself, (b) inside the object 


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

(under CT investigation), and (c) inside the crystal of the detector. These components add a critical 
source of noise in the projection data (w.r.t. transmission CT) due to its inability to estimate and remove
it
in CT modeling. Radiation scattering
affects the measured data quantitatively and 

qualitatively[17,18]. Because of the above-discussed issues, one may consider the scattering counts as
an undesirable factor in transmission CT measurements. Several models and methodologies are 
developed to suppress or estimate and eliminate the scattering of radiation with the object from the 
measured data[19–27]. Scattering correction models aren't commonly employed in gamma transmission 
CT, but they're popular in single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), positron emission 
tomography (PET), and X-ray computed tomography. To the best of our knowledge, phenomena (a) 
and (c) are not investigated.

Fig.1: (a) Emergent of gamma rays from radioactive nuclei. The gamma radiation is scattered with atomic 
electrons and losses some energy, (b) The interaction of incident gamma radiation with matter through three 
major phenomena: (1) photoelectric effect, (2) Compton scattering, (3) pair production.

2. Motivation
Electronic noise is associated with detectors’ electronics, but SDCT is estimated using an object 
(phantom or patient) profile. If an object with high-profile heterogeneity is used, then its SDCT may be 
relatively higher. It may or may not indicate that the detector and its electronics have higher electronic
noise. Additionally, the variation of CT pixel values in uniform ROI may be due to ring artifacts. In this
work, in section 3.1, the standard deviation parameter is used to estimate the electronic noise; however,
an alternate approach is proposed.

To the best of our understanding, a tool to decouple and quantify scattering and electronic noise is 
missing in the literature. This work presents a methodology for the same. KT-1 estimates the relative 
scattering noise in projection data obtained by four gamma detectors. 

Section 3 discusses material and methods; section 4 explains the results and discussion.

3. Materials & Methods

A compact gamma CT system is utilized as a tool to realize and evaluate the above-mentioned 
motivations. Four different types of gamma detectors are used in this work. The following section 
explains the implementation of error estimates.

3.1. Electronics Noise estimation methodology

A gamma radiation detector is placed in front of a Caesium source at 42cm (same as in the case of CT) 
but without having any object in between. Radiation counts are measured multiple times. Details of 


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

electronics settings are the same as set in CT measurement except window setting. The full-spectrum 
energy range is set in this case. It is estimated that the gamma source emission has insignificant energy-
dependent randomness (maximum SD 2) as compared to randomness due to electronic noise. This 
calculation is explained in the supplementary file. Four different detectors having different crystal 
materials, sizes, and thicknesses are used. Scattering inside a given detector’s crystal is dependent on 
its material distribution, sizes, and thicknesses. It is expected that scattering radiation contributes
insignificant randomness in multiple measurement data. Since a single radioactive source is used, it is 
expected that the scattering of photons inside the radioactive source (ScatN𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒) remain same for all 
measurements. The value of standard deviation in total counts is expected to give an estimate of
electronic noise using this procedure.

3.2. Methodology to estimate relative error due to scattering 

We cannot differentiate between photopeak counts and counts due to scattering (inside source, object, 
and detector crystal) in gamma photopeak. Kanpur theorem-I, however, is used to estimate the level of 
inherent error in the projection data sets of CT[28]. The detail of inherent error estimation is given in 
the supplementary file. This inherent error includes unavoidable electronic noise (EN), system noise
due to suboptimal electronic setting (SysN), noise due to statistical inaccuracy (StatsN), reconstruction 
error (ReconN), and scattering noise (ScatN) due to scattering of radiation inside the material of 
radioactive source (ScatN𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒), object (ScatN𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒), detector crystal (ScatN𝑐𝑟𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑙), and adjacent 
detectors and shielding (ScatN𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟). It is assumed that these noise components are independent to each 
other thus are additive in nature as stated in Eq. 1a.

All four detectors are set at their respective optimal electronic settings that are obtained by statistically 
rich data measurement methods[9], except high voltage (HV). The value of HV applied to the PMT of 
each detector is set as received from the manufacturer, assuming these are optimal. Therefore, it is 
assumed that SysN has a negligible contribution to the inherent noise level. Error due to the 
reconstruction method (ReconN) is expected to impart a constant effect throughout the inverse image 
processing as the same reconstruction method is used. It converts the Eq. 1a into its approximate version 
Eq. 1b. Scattering component ScatN𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 can be nullified by not using the shielding and using only a 
single detector. The contribution due to scattering inside the radiation source ScatN𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 and object
(being CT scanned) ScatNobject will remain constant if the same source and object are used in every 
CT measurement with the same geometry. Since the thickness of the radiation source is negligible as 
compared to the object and detector crystal. So ScatN𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 impart negligible role in SysN. It basically 
transforms Eq. 2a into Eq. 2b for our studies.

Inherent Noise = EN + SysN + StatsN + ReconN + ScatN

1a

Relative Inherent Noise = EN + ScatN

1b

ScatN = ScatN𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒+ScatN𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 + ScatNobject +ScatN𝑐𝑟𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑙

2a

ScatN = ScatNobject +ScatN𝑐𝑟𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑙

2b

ScatN 𝑓𝑢𝑙𝑙_𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑚 = ScatN 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑛+ScatN 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘

3

Before utilizing KT-1 as a tool to evaluate the relative scattering noise (relative to the type of the used 
detectors) in this work, the sensitivity of KT-1 to noise due to scattering radiations is investigated. The 
following two strategies are employed to achieve this:

A. The gamma photopeak region contains fewer scattered photons as compared to the Compton 

region, while the full energy spectrum contains maximum scattered photons. In this strategy -


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

A, all factors (EN, SysN, StatsN, ReconN) which contribute to the inherent noise are kept 
constant except the ScatN. The scattering-related component (Eq. 2b) can be further defined 
based on the selection of the range of energy spectrum. It is expected that the maximum effect 
of ScatN 𝑓𝑢𝑙𝑙_𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑚 can be measured by selecting full spectrum (Eq. 3) settings during the 
CT measurement. The minimum effect of ScatN can be measured by selecting only the 
photopeak range. It can be verified using KT-1.

B. Two detectors of the same crystal material but different sizes are studied using KT-1. Secondary 

gamma radiation is produced when incident gamma radiation undergoes the Compton and pair 
production interactions. In small-size detectors, these secondary gamma radiations have more 
probability of escaping as compared to relatively larger or intermediate-sized detectors [1]. The 
increase in crystal size raises the photo fraction, owing to a higher contribution from Compton 
scattering as well[29]. The photo fraction is a direct measure of the probability that gamma 
radiation interacted with the material through any interactions, ultimately depositing all its
energy within the detector. 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) detectors of two different sizes 1′′ × 1′′ and 2′′ × 2′′

are used in strategy-B for CT measurements. KT-1 is applied to estimate ScatN 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘
because only photopeak range is selected. The noise components (referred in Eq. 1a) that 
contribute to the inherent noise are kept constant except the size of the detector’s crystal by 
adopting strategy-B. Now, it is expected that if KT-1 is sensitive to scattering noise, then the 
projection data obtained from larger crystal size will show a relatively higher inherent noise 
level.

The details, specifications, and settings of electronic parameters of gamma detectors used in this study 
are given in the next subsection, 3.2.1. The detail of CT geometry parameters and phantom used in 
gamma CT is given in subsections 3.2.2. CT image reconstruction is provided in the last subsection.

3.2.1. Detectors and electronic settings

Four radiation detectors: a compact CsI (Tl) Multi Pixel Photon Counter scintillation detector with IC 
and three detectors with distributed electronics: (a) a high-resolution HPGe semiconductor detector, (b) 
a NaI (Tl) scintillation detector and (c) a 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) scintillation detectors are used in this study. The 
specifications of these four different types of detectors are mentioned in table 1. Detectors with various 
crystal materials, sizes, and thicknesses are employed to explore the effects of these components. The 
latter set of hardware (make: Saint-Gobain Crystals) is interfaced with Nuclear Instrumentation Module 
(NIM) and multichannel data acquisition system. In NaI (Tl) detector (make: electronics enterprise Ltd. 
India), the scintillator crystal is coupled with its photomultiplier (PM) tube; Its anode output is amplified 
by the separate amplifier circuit. It is finally connected to a PC via a single-channel analyzer (SCA). 
The HPGe detector (make: Canberra and NI-PIXI-1031) is interfaced with NIM and a multichannel 
pixie-4 data acquisition system. IC electronics CT setup (make: Hamamatsu model C12137) contains 
CsI (Tl) scintillation crystal coupled with a photodiode, preamplifiers, and analog-to-digital converters;
all are integrated onto the same silicon chip. Each of these has its own manufacturer-provided data 
acquisition software.

Table 1: Specifications of four gamma detectors

Specifications of detectors
NaI (Tl)
CsI (Tl)
HPGe
𝑳𝒂𝑩𝒓𝟑(𝑪𝒆)

Crystal width (cm)
5.1 
1.3 
5.6
2.54 

Crystal thickness (cm)
5.1 
1.3 
6.0 
2.54 

Hygroscopic
Yes
Slightly
Yes
Yes


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

Power Consumption*
+650V
+5V
-4500V
+643V

Estimated Resolution
8.9%
8.2%
0.23%
4.5%

*Positive and negative sign shows the polarity of the bias voltage applied to detectors. HPGe semiconductor 
detector requires negative bias voltage, while NaI (Tl) and 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) scintillation detectors require positive bias 
voltage. The CsI (Tl) detector requires a USB to get connected to a PC in plug-in-play mode.

The measured energy spectrum (count vs. energy plot) for all four detectors is shown in fig.2. 

Fig.2: Energy spectrum of Cs-137 radioactive source detected 

by CsI (Tl), HPGe, NaI (Tl) and 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) detectors.

3.2.2. CT Geometry and peripherals

The gamma CT experiment comprises an encapsulated radioactive source Cs-137 of activity 1.5μCi, an 
object, and gamma-ray detectors. For scanning purposes, a well-known cylindrical-shaped object/CT 
phantom is used. This object is made up of Perspex material with a diameter of 12 cm. The perspex also 
contains an aluminum cylinder (3.8 cm) in an off-centered location. Inside the aluminum cylinder, an 
iron cylinder (diameter of 0.8 cm) is inserted at the center location. It is shown in the inset location at 
the bottom right of fig. 3(c). The experimental setups are shown in fig. 3(a), 3(b) and 3(c). At a time, 
one type of gamma-ray detector is used to perform gamma CT experiments. The CT geometry is chosen 
such that enough counts are detected after being attenuated via the object. The geometry parameters are 
decided according to object size and source strength. Types of detectors have no role in deciding these 
parameters. Gamma CT experiment uses fan-beam geometry shown in fig. 3(d) with a fan-beam angle 
𝜃𝑓𝑎𝑛of 37.1°. Source-to-detector and object-to-detector distances are kept at 42cm and 21cm, 
respectively. The object is uniformly rotated in 18 steps (each 𝜃𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤of 20°) between 0 to 360 degrees. 
This CT geometry is used for all CT experiments in this work. The full energy spectrum is recorded 
using a multichannel analyzer (MCA) for HPGe and 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) detectors. CsI (Tl) detector has 
onboard/integrated MCA on its electronics chip. The counts for a particular energy range (as desired) 
are extracted from these data sets later. For NaI (Tl), desirable energy ranges are chosen using SCA.

During the experiment, the detector is translated on five locations, virtually building an array of 5 
detectors in the shape of an ‘arc’ as shown in fig. 3d. The projection data matrix saved for each detector 
type is of size 5x18. This measurement scheme is referred to as Scheme 2a.


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

Fig.3: Gamma CT measurement Systems using three detectors: (a) NaI (Tl), (b) HPGe, (c) CsI (Tl), (d) 
Schematic diagram showing CT scanning geometry.

The ‘arc’ is formed in such a way that the first and last detector receives an equal spread of radiation 
passing via the object. It’s not advisable to move the HPGe detector. Scheme 2b is devised to create 
four virtual detectors to complete the ‘arc’ of five and create CT data from 5 detectors for 18 views
when the HPGe detector is used. The primary motive for using a single detector at a time is to avoid the 
ScatN𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟.

We compared the sinogram taken by this innovative scanning method, scheme2b, with the scanning 
scheme2a and conventional scheme1 (when we would have used five detectors at the same time) for 
the other three types of detectors. It is found that all three scanning schemes give the same sinogram.
The description of these three scanning schemes is given in the supplementary file.

3.3. Image reconstruction

KT-1 estimates the inherent noise in projection data if CT images are reconstructed using the 
convolution back-projection algorithm (CBP) for parallel beam geometry[30]. We first transformed the 
fan-beam projection data into a parallel beam equivalent to utilizing the Kanpur Theorem. Apt values 
of input information such as geometry information, number of detectors, number of rotations, and type 
of filter functions are utilized to develop custom reconstruction codes.

In our work, we didn’t use the root mean square error (RMSE) as a reconstruction error (RMSE of 
reconstructed image w.r.t. cyber replica of object pixel to pixel) estimation tool. It is the least sensitive 
performance indices[31]. The Sorensen dice coefficient is employed to compute the similarity index in 
reconstructed images w.r.t. cyber replica[32].

4. Results and Discussion 
The electronic noise estimation methodology (described in section 3.1) is applied, and the SD of four
different detectors and their associated electronics (details mentioned in section 3.2.1) is evaluated, one 
at a time. 

Figure 4 shows the SD of NaI (Tl), CsI (Tl), HPGe and 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) 1′′×1′′ detectors. The lowest SD is 
observed for CsI (Tl) detector and the highest for the 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) detector. However, a comparable SD 
is observed for NaI (Tl), HPGe and 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) detectors. It shows that an IC-based detector, i.e., CsI 
(Tl) detector measurement has the least electronic noise as compared to other detector types equipped 
with distributed electronics. In IC detectors, an analog-to-digital converter is directly attached to the 


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

same board as the crystal material. This detector technology reduces the loss of information during the 
transfer of analog-to-digital signals. Apart from reducing electronic noise, IC reduces power 
consumption and heat dissipation[16]. The empirical rule of statistics is applied to all detectors to test 
the normality of data distributions. Three sigmas (3𝜎) rule is applied and 99.73% confidence interval 
is estimated for all the detectors. The calculation of 3𝜎 limits is shown in supplementary data.

Strategy -A is adopted to perform CT experiments. Three different energy ranges: (a) gamma photopeak 
region, (b) Compton region (Compton edge + Compton valley), and (c) full energy spectrum, are 
selected, one by one. Three projection data: 𝑃𝑃ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜, 𝑃𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝 and 𝑃𝐹𝑢𝑙𝑙 are obtained corresponding to 
these three energy ranges using a NaI (Tl) detector. The same procedure is followed for the CsI (Tl) 
and HPGe detectors. Due to the availability of two different sizes of 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) detectors, we used 
these two for strategy B. However, strategy-A can be applied to these detectors also. This exercise has 
generated nine projection data sets, thus nine reconstructed images, in total. The noise level is estimated 
by applying KT-1 on reconstructed images. Root mean square error of goodness of fit (𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 ) is 
used as a KT-1 signature. It would be zero if noiseless projection data is used. The bar graph of 
𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 is shown in fig. 5. We infer that for NaI (Tl) detector, the 𝑃𝐹𝑢𝑙𝑙 has maximum noise level and 
𝑃𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜 has the least. The same is observed for the CsI (Tl) and HPGe detectors. Relative variation in 
noise, estimated for a single detector in three different energy ranges, would be due to scattering only 
as electronics and its settings (except spectrum range selection) are all same. Please refer to Eqs. 1b and 
2b. Therefore, the inherent noise is basically due to ScatN (ScatN𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡+ScatN𝑐𝑟𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑙). This exercise 
validates the KT-1’s sensitivity to noise due to the scattering of radiation.

We cannot compare the scattering noise sensitivity of KT-1 signature between the type of detectors 
using figure 5 as described in Strategy - A. This can be accomplished by including all noise components
referred to in Eq.1a. The major parameters that contribute to the variation of inherent noise are mainly 
due to electronic noise (EN) and ScatN, as discussed in section 3.2.

ScatN cannot be determined by simply subtracting inherent noise and EN values. It is further assumed
that inherent noise value is made of individual weighted values i.e., 𝑥% and y% of EN and ScatN, 
respectively, are given in Eq. 4. The relative characteristics of EN (observed in fig. 4) are formulated
in Eq. 5.

Inherent noise = x % of EN + y % of ScatN
4

𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑠𝐼 < 𝐸𝑁𝑁𝑎𝐼 < 𝐸𝑁𝐻𝑃𝐺𝑒
5

Three possibilities arise while solving Eq. 4 and 5: (a) EN > ScatN, (b) EN ~= ScatN, and/or (c) EN < 
ScatN. The inherent noise, in all energy ranges, must follow the same pattern of inequalities as the 
dominant noise component follows. Possibilities of the case (a) and (b) cannot exist because, in the 
photopeak region, inherent noise follows the pattern IN𝐻𝑃𝐺𝑒 > IN𝑁𝑎𝐼 > IN𝐶𝑠𝐼, which is not similar to 
EN (referring to fig. 5). The pattern of inherent noise is appropriate when the possibility of case (c) 
exists. It concludes that the scattering noise dominates over electronic noise irrespective of 
measurement range in the energy spectrum. Consequently, shows that the KT-1 signature is sensitive 
enough to estimate the relative scattering noise.


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

Fig. 4: Standard deviation of NaI (Tl), CsI (Tl), 

HPGe and 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) detector.

Fig. 5: 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 as KT-1 signature of three different 
energy ranges obtained using NaI (Tl), CsI (Tl), and 

HPGe detectors.

𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) detectors of two different sizes 1′′ × 1′′ and 2′′ × 2′′ are used individually to perform CT 
experiments using strategy B. The projection data is obtained by contributing the counts in the gamma 
photopeak region. The noise level in projection data is obtained using the KT-1 signature. The bar graph 
of 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 is shown in fig. 6. It is observed that projection data obtained from 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) 1′′×1′′ is 
less noisy as compared to those obtained from 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) 2′′×2′′ . The variation in inherent noise is 
mainly due to scattering noise, as discussed in strategy B. The results obtained by KT-1 are in agreement 
with the theoretical statement mentioned in strategy B (an increase in the detector crystal’s size raises
the number of scattering radiations). This exercise validates KT-1’s sensitivity to noise due to scattering 
radiation.

Fig. 6: 
𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 as KT-1 signature of 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒)

detectors.

The scattering noise in four different gamma detectors is estimated using KT-1 once its sensitivity to 
scattering noise is confirmed. Gamma CT experiments are performed individually using CsI (Tl),
𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒), NaI (Tl), and HPGe detectors. We have selected 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) 1′′×1′′ out of the two 
𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) detectors because of their low scattering noise level. The bar graph of 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 as KT-1 
signature of CsI (Tl), 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒), NaI (Tl) and HPGe detectors are plotted in fig.7, respectively. We 
note that the value of 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 is reflecting the value of scattering noise. It is observed that projection 
data obtained using CsI (Tl) detector has the least scattering noise while 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒) has the highest 
scattering noise.


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

The scattering noise depends on the active area of the detector crystal and the type of crystal material.
The active area is calculated by the thickness of the detector crystal (as slice-wise in transverse plane 
CT modeling is performed) multiplied by its width. The details of the factors that affect the scattering 
are provided in table 2.

Table 2: The details of crystal thickness, diameter, and mass attenuation coefficient of four detectors

Detectors
Crystal width (w) 
and thickness (t) 

The active area of 

detectors

Mass Attenuation 

Coefficient 

Ref.

w (cm)
t (cm)
𝐴𝑑 (𝑐𝑚2)
𝜇𝑚 = 𝜇 𝜌
⁄ (𝑐𝑚2

𝑔
⁄ )

CsI(Tl)
1.3
1.3
1.69
0.0700
[33]

𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒)
2.54
2.54
6.45
0.1028
[34]

NaI(Tl)
5.1
5.1
26.01
0.0758
[35]

HPGe
5.6
6.0
33.60
0.0745
[36]

The relation between scattering noise estimated using KT-1 signature, mass attenuation coefficients
(𝜇𝑚) of detector crystal material and their active area (𝐴𝑑) is fitted in equation 6 with 2% of RMSE in 
fitting. It is shown in fig.8. The data given in Table 2 is also used. It is observed that the noise due to 
scattering (inside the object and detector crystal) will be larger if crystal material with a high mass 
attenuation coefficient with relatively thick crystal is used.

𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 = 863.7(𝐴𝑑

0.3 × 𝜇𝑚
4.3)
6

Fig. 7: 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 as KT-1 signature of CsI (Tl), 
𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒),
NaI 
(Tl) 
and 
HPGe 
detector,

respectively.

Fig. 8: 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 𝑣𝑠. Mass attenuation coefficient and 

active area of the detector.

A fresh NaI (Tl) detector that is not used to develop the empirical relation in Eq. 6 is used to measure 
another CT data using the same object and geometry. The value of 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 obtained is 0.041. Its 

crystal material has an attenuation coefficient 0.0758 𝑐𝑚2

⁄𝑔
and its active area is 26.01 𝑐𝑚2. Predicted 

GOF by Eq. 6 is 0.035. We note that this empirical relation is developed using the data of only four 
detectors having different materials, and sizes. The difference (14.6%) in GOFs by Eq. 6 and measured 
using CT may be reduced by carrying out the same study using many detectors of different types.

The reconstructed CT images obtained by four gamma detectors are shown in fig. 9. The value of dice 
similarity coefficients for reconstructed images w.r.t. cyber replica of the object is calculated and given 
below to the respective images. Figure 9(a) and 9(b) shows the cyber replica of the object (2-D image 
of a scanned object) and its simulated reconstructed CT image. The highest value of the similarity index 
is observed for CT simulated reconstruction of the cyber replica of the object (fig. 9(b)). We note this 


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

reconstruction presents a noiseless data reconstruction case without real measurement and that has zero 
scattering noise. Figure 9(c), 9(d), 9(e), and 9(f) shows CT images reconstructed using projection data 
obtained by CsI (Tl), 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒), NaI (Tl), and HPGe detectors, respectively. Reconstruction from CsI 
(Tl) detector scanner has the highest similarity index, while the HPGe detector scanner resulted lowest. 

The process of CT measurement imbibes information about a pixel in the line integrals crisscrossing it 
according to (a) the intercept of lines inside that pixel and (b) the pixels’ linear attenuation coefficient.
The latter also depends on the energy of radiation crossing that pixel. The process of reconstruction 
redistributes this information back into that pixel using the same factors. The reconstruction algorithm 
will redistribute relatively less amount of this information back to a particular pixel having crossed
vertically or horizontally as compared to the pixel which is crossed diagonally. Similarly, a pixel with 
high attenuating material distribution will be get redistributed more information back to it. Any error in 
redistribution in a particular pixel will reflect the wrong redistribution of the overall information to 
other pixels since the inverse process solves all relations simultaneously. Any dissimilarity between the 
reconstructed image of noiseless data (i.e., fig. 9(b)) with reconstructed images of real data can be 
attributed to noise (particularly error in modeling by not incorporating scattered radiation into line 
integrals) in the data itself. It is assumed that the reconstruction error will remain the same in each 
image.

We have quantified this similarity using the Dice coefficient (exact values are given in figure 9 as well) 
of: (a) the overall image (𝐷1) and (b) region containing perspex only (𝐷2). Figure 9(b), when compared 
with fig. 9(a), the only dissimilarity is visible in the metallic region. The reconstructed region of the 
perspex is approximately the same. The dice similarity coefficient of the overall image is ~0.8, and only 
of the Perspex region is ~0.7. These are the best that can be recovered. The dissimilarities in recovery 
images from the real-world measurement (fig. 9(c-f)) are highlighted. The displacement of wrongly 
distributed information is marked using orange-colored arrows with yellow markers. The excess and 
deficiency but wrongly distributed information is marked using yellow and red color boundaries of 
respective shapes. The qualitative and quantitative analysis coherently shows that the recovered image 
with such bigger regions has low dice coefficients, especially 𝐷2. As these regions are due to scattering 
noise, they must be associated with 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 quantitatively as well. We also note that except for 
reconstruction from the scanner using the HPGe detector Dice coefficient is following the same trend, 
i.e., images recovered from CsI (Tl) have the least 𝐷1, 𝐷2 and 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 and so on. We infer that dice 
coefficients reflect the distribution of noise in the reconstructed image.


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

Fig.9: (a) Cyber replica of the object, CT Image obtained by (b) reconstruction 
from cyber replica data, (c) CsI (Tl), (d) 𝐿𝑎𝐵𝑟3(𝐶𝑒), (e) NaI (Tl), and (f) HPGe 

detector.

The experiments are performed by removing aluminum and iron cylinders as well to study the effect of 
the metal portion on scattering signatures. The results are given in the supplementary file. The scanned 
object is made up of 2 layers of perspex. These layers are combined with the help of glue. Some patches 
are observed in the object profile. It is confirmed through an experiment that the apparent patches of 
efficient and inadequate information in CT images are not the result of the glue layer given in the 
supplementary file. The CT images reflect the combined effect of noise due to scattering with the object 
and detector crystal material; however, the scattering noise depiction is all dumped on the object as CT 
modeling does not include cross-section of the crystal. HPGe crystal size is large enough to cover the 
heterogeneity in every translation. This may be the reason we have no congruence between dice values 
and 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 . 

5. Conclusion

An alternate approach to SDCT is proposed to estimate the electronic noise in detectors equipped with 
different types of electronics. Mainly two types of electronics (IC and distributed) are compared. It is 
observed that the detector equipped with IC has low electronic noise in data as compared to the detector 
equipped with distributed electronics. 

This study presents a methodology utilizing transmission CT to estimate the noise due to the scattering 
of radiation with the detector’s crystal and scanned object. The sensitivity of KT-1 to scattering noise 
is demonstrated for the first time, and it is used to estimate the relative scattering noise in a different 
types of gamma detectors. A relation between noise due to scattering radiation, the detector’s crystal 
material, and the active area of the detectors is demonstrated. One must take into account the tradeoff 
parameters of detectors like material type, active area, noise level (electronic and scattering noise),
power consumption, and heat dissipation to make an advanced CT system. The influence of scattering 
noise on CT images is also illustrated. This study also concludes that the dice similarity coefficient is 
less sensitive for the estimation of scattering noise than 𝐺𝑂𝐹𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 .


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

Acknowledge
K. Kumari is thankful to the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India, for the 
fellowship. M. Goswami would like to acknowledge Prof. Anil K. Gourishetty, Prof. Ajay Y.  Deo, and 
members of the RDS Lab at the Department of Physics, IIT Roorkee, for allowing to use the HPGe and 
LaBr3 detector systems. M. Goswami wishes to thank Dr. Snehlata Shakya for sharing the grid-based 
CBP code.

Credit authorship contribution statement 
K. Kumari: Methodology, Experiments, Data Acquisition, coding, Data Analysis, and writing. M. 
Goswami: Methodology, Data Analysis, Funding, Supervision, and Writing. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
[1]
G.F. Knoll, Radiation detection and measurement, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.

[2]
D.N. Grozdanov, N.A. Fedorov, Y.N. Kopatch, I.N. Ruskov, V.R. Skoy, T.Y. Tretyakova, 
S.B. Dabylova, T. Collaboration, Semi-empirical gamma-ray response function of BGO, NaI 
(Tl) and LaBr3 (Ce) scintillation detectors, Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A 
Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 1014 (2021) 165741.

[3]
Y. Liu, S. Leng, G.J. Michalak, T.J. Vrieze, X. Duan, M. Qu, M.M. Shiung, C.H. McCollough, 
J.G. Fletcher, Reducing image noise in computed tomography (CT) colonography: effect of an 
integrated circuit CT detector, J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr. 38 (2014) 398–403.

[4]
P. Athe, S. Shakya, P. Munshi, A. Luke, D. Mewes, Characterization of multiphase flow in 
bubble columns using KT-1 signature and fractal dimension, Flow Meas. Instrum. 33 (2013) 
122–137.

[5]
P. Wu, J.W. Stayman, A. Sisniega, W. Zbijewski, D. Foos, X. Wang, N. Aygun, R. Stevens, 
J.H. Siewerdsen, Statistical weights for model-based reconstruction in cone-beam CT with 
electronic noise and dual-gain detector readout, Phys. Med. &amp; Biol. 63 (2018) 245018. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6560/aaf0b4.

[6]
R.T. Griffey, A. Sodickson, Cumulative radiation exposure and cancer risk estimates in 
emergency department patients undergoing repeat or multiple CT, Am. J. Roentgenol. 192 
(2009) 887–892.

[7]
R. Guttikonda, B.R. Herts, F. Dong, M.E. Baker, K.B. Fenner, B. Pohlman, Estimated 
radiation exposure and cancer risk from CT and PET/CT scans in patients with lymphoma, 
Eur. J. Radiol. 83 (2014) 1011–1015.

[8]
K.D. Abalo, E. Rage, K. Leuraud, D.B. Richardson, H.D. Le Pointe, D. Laurier, M.-O. 
Bernier, Early life ionizing radiation exposure and cancer risks: systematic review and meta-
analysis, Pediatr. Radiol. 51 (2021) 45–56.

[9]
K. Kumari, M. Goswami, Sensitivity Analysis of calibration methods and factors effecting the 
statistical nature of radiation measurement, J. Signal Process. Syst. (2021) 1–11.

[10]
A.A. Green, M. Berman, P. Switzer, M.D. Craig, A transformation for ordering multispectral 
data in terms of image quality with implications for noise removal, IEEE Trans. Geosci. 
Remote Sens. 26 (1988) 65–74.


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

[11]
M. Lyra, A. Ploussi, Filtering in SPECT image reconstruction, Int. J. Biomed. Imaging. 2011 
(2011).

[12]
P. Patidar, M. Gupta, S. Srivastava, A.K. Nagawat, Image de-noising by various filters for 
different noise, Int. J. Comput. Appl. 9 (2010) 45–50.

[13]
M. Diwakar, M. Kumar, A review on CT image noise and its denoising, Biomed. Signal 
Process. Control. 42 (2018) 73–88.

[14]
J. Ma, Z. Liang, Y. Fan, Y. Liu, J. Huang, W. Chen, H. Lu, Variance analysis of x‐ray CT 
sinograms in the presence of electronic noise background, Med. Phys. 39 (2012) 4051–4065.

[15]
X. Duan, J. Wang, S. Leng, B. Schmidt, T. Allmendinger, K. Grant, T. Flohr, C.H. 
McCollough, Electronic noise in CT detectors: impact on image noise and artifacts, Am. J. 
Roentgenol. 201 (2013) W626–W632.

[16]
F. Morsbach, L. Desbiolles, A. Plass, S. Leschka, B. Schmidt, V. Falk, H. Alkadhi, P. 
Stolzmann, Stenosis quantification in coronary CT angiography: impact of an integrated circuit 
detector with iterative reconstruction, Invest. Radiol. 48 (2013) 32–40.

[17]
A. Bieberle, D. Hoppe, E. Schleicher, U. Hampel, Void measurement using high-resolution 
gamma-ray computed tomography, Nucl. Eng. Des. 241 (2011) 2086–2092.

[18]
J. Wiegert, K.J. Engel, C. Herrmann, Impact of scattered radiation on spectral CT, in: Med. 
Imaging 2009 Phys. Med. Imaging, SPIE, 2009: pp. 1232–1241.

[19]
T. Niu, L. Zhu, Scatter correction for full‐fan volumetric CT using a stationary beam blocker 
in a single full scan, Med. Phys. 38 (2011) 6027–6038.

[20]
L.-E. Adam, J.S. Karp, R. Freifelder, Energy-based scatter correction for 3-D PET scanners 
using NaI (Tl) detectors, IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging. 19 (2000) 513–521.

[21]
I. Castiglioni, O. Cremonesi, M.C. Gilardi, V. Bettinardi, G. Rizzo, A. Savi, E. Bellotti, F. 
Fazio, Scatter correction techniques in 3D PET: a Monte Carlo evaluation, IEEE Trans. Nucl. 
Sci. 46 (1999) 2053–2058.

[22]
R. Maad, B.T. Hjertaker, G.A. Johansen, Semi-empirical scatter correction model for high-
speed gamma-ray tomography, Meas. Sci. Technol. 19 (2008) 94016.

[23]
I. Meric, G.A. Johansen, I.V.M. Moreira, A library least-squares approach for scatter 
correction in gamma-ray tomography, Radiat. Phys. Chem. 108 (2015) 39–47.

[24]
N. Freud, P. Duvauchelle, S.A. Pistrui-Maximean, J.-M. Létang, D. Babot, Deterministic 
simulation of first-order scattering in virtual X-ray imaging, Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. 
Res. Sect. B Beam Interact. with Mater. Atoms. 222 (2004) 285–300.

[25]
M. Wagner, F. Barthel, J. Zalucky, M. Bieberle, U. Hampel, Scatter analysis and correction for 
ultrafast X-ray tomography, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 373 (2015) 
20140396.

[26]
S.M. Golgoun, D. Sardari, M. Sadeghi, F.B. Mofrad, A novel method of combined detector 
model for gamma-ray densitometer: Theoretical calculation and MCNP4C simulation, Appl. 
Radiat. Isot. 118 (2016) 246–250.

[27]
P. Priyada, M. Margret, R. Ramar, Intercomparison of gamma ray scattering and transmission 
techniques for fluid–fluid and fluid–air interface levels detection and density measurements, 
Appl. Radiat. Isot. 70 (2012) 462–469.

[28]
P. Munshi, Picking the right solution from a set of correct solutions, Meas. Sci. Technol. 13 
(2002) 647.


This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023

[29]
O. Sakthong, W. Chewpraditkul, C. Wanarak, K. Kamada, A. Yoshikawa, P. Prusa, M. Nikl, 
Scintillation properties of Gd3Al2Ga3O12: Ce3+ single crystal scintillators, Nucl. Instruments 
Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 751 (2014) 1–5.

[30]
P. Munshi, Error analysis of tomographic filters. I: Theory, NDT E Int. 25 (1992) 191–194.

[31]
M. Goswami, Deep learning models for benign and malign ocular tumor growth estimation, 
Comput. Med. Imaging Graph. 93 (2021) 101986.

[32]
A.R. Groendahl, I.S. Knudtsen, B.N. Huynh, M. Mulstad, Y.M. Moe, F. Knuth, O. Tomic, 
U.G. Indahl, T. Torheim, E. Dale, A comparison of methods for fully automatic segmentation 
of tumors and involved nodes in PET/CT of head and neck cancers, Phys. Med. Biol. 66 
(2021) 65012.

[33]
M.E. Medhat, Y. Wang, Geant4 code for simulation attenuation of gamma rays through 
scintillation detectors, Ann. Nucl. Energy. 62 (2013) 316–320.

[34]
P. Dorenbos, J.T.M. De Haas, C.W.E. Van Eijk, Gamma ray spectroscopy with a O19/spl 
times/19 mm/sup 3/LaBr/sub 3: 0.5% Ce/sup 3+/scintillator, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 51 (2004) 
1289–1296.

[35]
W. Mannhart, H. Vonach, Gamma-ray absorption coefficients for NaI (Tl), Nucl. Instruments 
Methods. 134 (1976) 347–351.

[36]
J.H. Hubbell, S.M. Seltzer, Tables of X-ray mass attenuation coefficients and mass energy-
absorption coefficients 1 keV to 20 MeV for elements Z= 1 to 92 and 48 additional substances 
of dosimetric interest, National Inst. of Standards and Technology-PL, Gaithersburg, MD 
(United …, 1995).


