1

On the equivocal nature of the mass absorption curves

Pawel Rochowski

Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, University 

of Gdańsk, Wita Stwosza 57, 80-308 Gdańsk, Poland

Correspondence: pawel.rochowski@ug.edu.pl

Abstract

The idea behind the research presented is based upon apparently contradictory experimental 

results obtained here by means of photoacoustics modalities for the same drug donor/acceptor 

membrane system, serving as a surrogate for a transdermal delivery system. The first modality 

allowed for the monitoring of the total amount of mass uptake (𝑚(𝑡)-type data), while the 

second technique allowed for the quantification of time-dependent concentration distribution 

within the acceptor membrane (𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)-type data). Despite of a very good agreement between 

the 𝑚(𝑡) data and the 1st-order uptake fitting model (standard Fickian diffusion with constant 

source boundary condition), the standard approach failed during the 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡) data analysis. The 

results led to the analysis of the interfacial transfer contribution to the overall mass transfer 

efficiency, which eventually allowed to question reliability of the 𝑚(𝑡) data analysis for the 

determination and quantification of the mass transport parameters. A more detailed analysis of 

the 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡) by means of the newly introduced transport rate number parameter revealed, that 

the mass uptake by the acceptor is almost equally influenced by interfacial and bulk transport 

processes. The analyses performed were translated into a model-free characteristic times, i.e. 

parameters common for any of the model scheme used. 

Keywords: membrane transport; diffusion; non-Fickian transport; photoacoustics; transdermal 

delivery; mathematical modelling.

1. Introduction

Studying the mechanisms of drug membrane transport provides valuable information on the 

membrane (skin) barrier functions, as well as points at new strategies for efficient drug delivery, 

which is relevant for medical and cosmetic applications. Since the pioneering work on the

membrane transport by Daynes, and followed by studies on the cutaneous membrane delivery

published around 60 years ago, there is a strong agreement that the drug passive skin penetration 

is due to the Fickian diffusion process [1–3]. This fundamental idea of the transdermal transfer 


2

origin was confirmed on many occasions simply by stunning similarities between the 

experimental drug absorption/release curves and the Fickian-type models predictions (or its 

simplifications, like Higuchi or first-order release models), making the diffusion-based release 

models a cornerstone of modern pharmacological analysis. 

The last decades brought progress in the development of new mathematical approaches and 

tools for the transdermal drug delivery quantification and modelling; a simple transport models 

were extended with drug sorption/metabolism/decay kinetic terms, porosity/composition 

effects, various geometrical conditions, transfer through multi-layered systems, temperature 

effects etc., but almost always point at Fickian diffusion as a primary (or rate-limiting) transport 

process [4–9]. It is clear that every mathematical model of a physical phenomenon needs 

justification and experimental validation. In case of transdermal delivery studies, mathematical 

models are usually validated upon, so called, drug absorption curves (profiles), which provide

information on the total amount of mass (drug) absorbed vs time. Appropriate experiments 

involve f.e. studies on the donor-to-acceptor transfer kinetics of tracer molecules (dyes or 

radionuclides, depending on the detection scheme) in the Franz diffusion cell systems [10]. A 

far less popular experimental techniques involve depth profiling modalities, which allow to 

scan the penetrant amount in the subsequent strata of a sample during the penetration process

[11]. The difference between results offered by the methods is crucial; while the depth profiling 

techniques provide information on the time dependent penetrant concentration distribution 

within a system (membrane) - the 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)-type data for 1D system, the diffusion cell-based

methods yield the 𝑚(𝑡)-type data, which, in some cases, can be understood as the penetrant 

concentration integral over a space domain of interest (f.e. 𝑚(𝑡) = ∫ 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)𝑑𝑥). Due to the 

𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)-type data processing, at least some of information on the transport mechanisms

originally encoded in the time-dependent penetrant distributions can be averaged out, and so

may remain undetermined by means of the 𝑚(𝑡)-type data analysis. The issue also includes the

mass release studies (the amount of mass released by an object vs time), as the kinetics constants 

of drug release (from donor) and drug absorption (by acceptor) must be equal. 

The approaches for the absorption/release data analysis usually involve dedicated empirical and 

semi-empirical formulas/mechanistic models for the determination of intrinsic system 

characteristics (like diffusion coefficient) under various conditions (f.e. temperature). The latter 

ones are often given in PDE form, tailored for the sorption data quantification (i.e. PDE to ODE 

conversion) [12–16]. Both the semi-empirical formulas and the tailored mechanistic models 

are based upon certain approximations of underlying physics and chemistry. If the system 


3

characteristics are not properly recognized prior to detailed numerical processing, adoption of 

any model may lead to the data analysis failure [17]. On the other hand, even if some 

presumptions on the system behaviour can be done, a more detailed analysis on the system 

properties may be limited by experimental data character (i.e. the averaging problem present in 

the 𝑚(𝑡)-type data). 

The paper is focused on the mass transfer characterization (in the theoretical and experimental 

sense) of an ordinary drug (donor)/membrane (acceptor) system, serving as a surrogate for 

transdermal delivery system. In specific, the role and impact of bulk and interfacial processes 

on the overall mass absorption kinetics are investigated. Anticipating the results, the theoretical 

approaches for the mass transport modelling presented were based upon bulk diffusion-based 

mass transport models studied (mainly) under two types of boundary conditions (BC), the 

instantaneous source (regarded here as the standard approach, where the overall mass transfer 

is limited by the diffusion process) and the slowly-equilibrating BC, as suggested in [18]. The 

latter one appears to serve as a reasonable approach for the quantification of interfacial 

processes due to the observable timescale of interfacial relaxations between viscous materials

[18–20]. The validation (experimental) data were acquired by means of photoacoustics 

techniques, namely the photoacoustic spectroscopy (PAS) and the photoacoustic depth-

profiling (PADP). Here, for the first time, the drug transfer (from a donor into an acceptor

membrane) process is studied by means of 𝑚(𝑡)-type (characteristic for the Franz diffusion 

cells experiments) and 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)-type data acquired for the same system. The results obtained

question one of the paradigm of dermal delivery, namely purely diffusional nature of the passive

(i.e. in the absence of additional external stimuli) dermal absorption process: it appears that the 

drug transfer may be limited by processes occurring at the donor/acceptor interface. It is also 

demonstrated that the 𝑚(𝑡)-type datasets analysis 1) may lead to incorrect and misleading 

quantification of the transport parameters and 2)  may be insufficient to study the role of the 

interfacial processes (affecting the boundary condition character), as the absorption curves 

exhibit equivocal nature. As such, the need for further depth-profiling studies on viscous 

delivery systems is highlighted. Eventually, an alternative analysis of the collected 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)-type 

data, based under electric circuit analogue (EC) approach, is presented. The approach relies on 

the determination of, so called, characteristic time of a system. As such, the approach can be 

viewed, at least to some extent, as a model free approach. Most of the data analysis presented 

thorough the paper refers to characteristic times of the absorption processes, which provide an 

alternative and consistent way for the description of the mass transfer kinetics.


4

2. Theoretical background

2.1 Basic approaches to the diffusion-guided transport quantification

Since the pioneering works of of Higuchi and Schleuplein there is a strong agreement that the 

passive percutaneous drug absorption is mainly due to the Fickian diffusion process. The Fick’s 

laws of diffusion can be given as:

𝑗⃗ = −𝐷∇⃗⃗⃗𝑐,
(1a)

𝜕𝐶

𝜕𝑡 = −∇⃗⃗⃗ ∙ 𝑗⃗ = 𝐷∇2𝑐,
(1b)

where Eq. 1a provides the mass flux (𝑗⃗) as propotional to the product of the diffusion coefficient 

(𝐷) and the permeant concentration gradient (∇⃗⃗⃗𝑐), while Eq. 1b describes the permeant 

accumulation/depletion rate in a certain volume as proportional to the local curvature of 

concentration gradient. It can be pointed out, that the righ-hand side of Eq. 1b holds for isotropic 

systems of constant diffusivity. 

A mathematical description of the permeant concentration evolution requires characterization 

of the initial and boundary conditions related to the surroundings properties and interfacial 

behaviour. The latter ones are picked to match the experimental conditions, but are often 

simplified in terms of underlying physics which, in many cases, allows to describe permeation 

process by a closed-form and elegant mathematical expressions. These expressions can be 

further abridged if the permeation behavior analysis is limited only to a certain time regime. An 

example can be given by a pharmacologically relevant 1D mass transport problem described in 

Crank’s textbook (Section 4.3.2 in [21]), i.e. diffusion from a time-independent source into a 

plane sheet of thickness 2𝑙. Assuming the sheet (−𝑙 < 𝑥 < 𝑙) is initially free of the permeant, 

solution of Eq. 1b under 𝑐(−𝑙, 𝑡) = 𝑐(𝑙, 𝑡) = 𝑐0 yields expression in the trigonometrical series

form:

𝑐

𝑐0 = 1 −

4

𝜋 ∑

(−1)𝑛

2𝑛+1 exp [

−𝐷(2𝑛+1)2𝜋2𝑡

4𝑙2
]
∞
𝑛=0
cos [

(2𝑛+1)𝜋𝑥

2𝑙
],
(2a)

which for small times can be approximated by:

𝑐

𝑐0 = ∑
(−1)𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑐(

(2𝑛+1)𝑙−𝑥

2√𝐷𝑡
)
∞
𝑛=0
+ ∑
(−1)𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑐(

(2𝑛+1)𝑙+𝑥

2√𝐷𝑡
)
∞
𝑛=0
.
(2b)

Eqs 2 allow for the theoretical predictions on the permeant time-dependent concentration 

distributions, and can be further employed for the qunatification and analysis of experimental 

data obtained by means of profilometric techniques. In many practical cases, however, a vital 


5

information on the drug uptake is related to the total amount of the drug adsorbed by a system 

(skin, membrane etc.) rather than the drug spatiotemporal concentration profiles. As such, by 

assuming the total amount of substance inside a membrane (−𝑙 < 𝑥 < 𝑙) at any time is 𝑚(𝑡) =

∫ 𝑐

𝑙
−𝑙
𝑑𝑥, the evolutions of 𝑚 (with concentrations as in Eqs 2) are given as [21]:

𝑚(𝑡)

𝑚𝑒𝑞 = 1 − ∑
8

(2𝑛+1)2𝜋2 exp [

−𝐷(2𝑛+1)2𝜋2𝑡

4𝑙2
]
∞
𝑛=0
, 
(3a)

𝑚(𝑡)

𝑚𝑒𝑞 = 2 (

𝐷𝑡

𝑙2)

1
2 (𝜋−1

2 + 2 ∑
(−1)𝑛𝑖𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑐[

𝑛𝑙

√𝐷𝑡]
∞
𝑛=1
),
(3b)

where 𝑚𝑒𝑞 denotes the asymptotic value of 𝑚(𝑡) for large times. Eqs 3 provide a basis for two 

well-known mass absorption models; in particular, by limiting the summation over n to the first 

term only (n=0), Eq. 3a yields the first-order absorption model (the mass absorption process is 

expressed by a simple monoexponential growth function):

𝑚(𝑡)

𝑚𝑒𝑞 = 1 −

8

𝜋2 exp [

−𝐷𝜋2𝑡

4𝑙2 ] = 1 − 𝐹 exp[−𝛾𝑡]. 
(4a)

By droping the summation in Eq. 3b one obtains the Higuchi equation:

𝑚(𝑡)

𝑚𝑒𝑞 = 2 (

𝐷𝑡

𝜋𝑙2)

1
2 = 𝑘𝑡

1
2.
(4b)

Eqs 4 provide basic mathematical models for the quantification of drug absorption into a single 

homogeneous system. In many practical cases, however, one deals with multilayer systems (i.e. 

in the Franz diffusion cells systems, where the permeate migrate from donor → membrane → 

acceptor, or dermal patches, where drugs migrate from donor → skin layers → blood vessels), 

or porous/composite systems (i.e. multiphase structure of skin – the brick and mortar model, 

and, similarly, skin-mimicking semipermeable membranes). Lately, a new approach for the

modelling of mass transport through composite systems, based on analogies between the mass 

and charge transfer (Fick’s and Ohm’s laws), has been proposed [22]. In general, subsequent

compartments of the mass transport system are characterized simply by their volumes and 

resistances (inversely proportional to conductivities). Consequently, the mass transport can be

modelled in analogy to electric circuits consisting of capacitors and resistors pairs, i.e. by means 

of Kirchhoff’s voltage (the concentration analogue) or current (related to the mass flux) laws. 

For a system consisting of a time-independent donor and an acceptor, the evolution of the 

penetrant amount in the acceptor phase is given by:


6

𝑚(𝑡)

𝑚eq = 1 − exp[−𝑡/𝑅𝐶] = 1 − exp[−𝑡/𝜏],
(5)

where 𝑅 and 𝐶 stands for the acceptor resistance and capacitance (which is a function of the 

acceptor volume 𝑉; for simplicity we take 𝐶 ≡ 𝑉), respectively, while 𝜏 is the exponential-

process characteristic time (i.e. time required for the system to reach m(τ)/meq ≈ 63% of its 

asymptotic value). It is clear that Eq. 5 has similar mathematical form to Eq. 4a. In practice, 

however, an additional geometrical-correction factor has to be included to meet required 

convergence to the Fick’s model predictions (i.e. Eq. 3a). In case of planar geometry, Eq. 5 can 

be rearranged to:

𝑚(𝑡)

𝑚eq = 1 − 0.86 exp[−𝑡/𝜏𝐸𝐶] = 1 − 0.86 exp[−2.62D𝑡/𝑙2].
(6)

where 𝜏𝐸𝐶 = 𝑙2/2.62𝐷 stands for the electric circuit-based mass transfer model characteristic 

time for plane-sheet geometries. There are, at least, two advantages of the electric-circuit (EC) 

based approach; first, the permeation process is characterized by the characteristic time 𝜏𝐸𝐶 and 

optionally by the diffusion coefficient (for a specific case of purely diffusional transport process 

a direct relation between the parameters is given by 𝜏𝐸𝐶 ∝ 𝑙2/𝐷 = 𝜏𝐷

𝑛; note, that 𝜏𝐷

𝑛 is a more 

natural definition of the characteristic diffusion time, as it is based on the system characteristic 

parameters only). The characteristic time can be understood as a certain measure of the 

hindrance that molecules encounter during the permeation, without referring to any particular 

transport mechanism. As such, the approach can be viewed as a model-free approach, which 

seems to be a reasonable choice when the transport mechanisms cannot be directly identified. 

Second, the quantitative analysis of composite systems (porous, multicompartmental, 

multilayered etc.) is based on the well-known principles (Kirchhoff’s laws), the calculus is 

rather straightforward, and does not require to solve any sophisticated and cumbersome 

mathematical problems or adaptation of any transport model. Another possible advantage 

includes generalization of the simple exponential form (Eq. 5) to the Weibull form, which in 

case of the mass release (note that EC approach predicts a time symmetry between the mass 

absorption and release, or, in other words, the characteristic time for absorption and release is 

the same) is given by [23]: 

𝑚(𝑡)

𝑚eq = exp[−(𝑡/𝜏)𝑏 ].
(7)

The Weibull form allows for the analysis of stretched experimental data (in case of purely 

diffusion models, this would indicate a certain dispersion of the diffusion coefficient, f.e. due 


7

to the diffusion coefficient concentration dependence or variations of the systems characteristic 

lengths). It can be noticed, that the stretched exponential functions are commonly used in the 

of relaxation data analysis [24].

2.2 Photoacoustics

The photoacoustics modalities are based upon the detection of gas pressure variations following 

the absorption of modulated light (or more general, energy flux) by a sample. A standard 

approach for the quantification of the PA signal is based upon the Rosencwaig-Gersho’s 

thermal piston model [25]. In brief, the signal generation consists of subsequent steps: (I) 

perturbation of the temperature field in the sample due to the Lambert-Beer-type incident light 

absorption; (II) evolution of the perturbed temperature field governed by a set of Fourier-

Kirchhoff equations for the sample, surrounding gas and backing material; (III) determination 

of gas pressure variations (due to periodic and adiabatic heat transfer from the sample to the 

surrounding gas) in the vicinity of the sample (δP), recorded by a detector (the PA signal 𝑆 ∝

𝛿𝑃) [11]. 

A photoacoustic response of a sample depends on an interplay between the sample physical 

parameters, i.e. its thickness (l), the thermal diffusion length (𝜇𝛼 = 1/𝛼, where 𝛼 stands for the 

sample thermal diffusion coefficient) and the optical absorption length (𝜇𝛽 = 1/𝛽, where 𝛽

stands for the Lambert-Beer optical absorption coefficient). When measured against constant 

modulation frequency and varying wavelength 𝜆 (the PA spectroscopy mode), in the absence 

of saturation effects (𝜇𝛼 < 𝜇𝛽) the photoacoustic response can be given by:

𝛿𝑃(𝜆) = 𝐴 𝐼(𝜆)𝜂(𝜆)𝛽(𝜆),
(8)

where A is the apparatus constant, 𝐼(𝜆) is the incident light intensity, and 𝜂(𝜆) stands for the 

non-radiative conversion efficiency. Due to the 𝛿𝑃(𝜆) ∝ 𝛽(𝜆) relationship, the PA spectra 

exhibit similarities to the standard absorption spectroscopy data. A great advantage of the PA 

method over the standard absorption spectroscopy routines involves no requirement on the 

sample preparation. As such, the pigment behaviour inside a membrane (permeation, chemical 

reactions etc.) can be monitored in-vivo, without any need for an additional mechanical 

treatment.

The second photoacoustic modality considered involves a situation, where the PA response is 

measured against varying modulation frequency and pseudo-monochromatic wavelength 


8

conditions (the PA depth-profiling mode). Then, the relation between the photoacoustic 

response and the modulation frequency can be given by:

𝛿𝑃(𝜆) ∝ 𝐴 𝜂(𝜆)/𝑓𝑛,
(9)

where 𝑛 ∈< 1,1.5 >, depending on the thermal and optical properties (𝜇𝛼, 𝜇𝛽) of the sample 

[26]. A crucial property of the PA techniques mentioned is a relation between the sampling 

depth L (a specific sample thickness contributing to the PA signal, taken to be equal to the 𝜇𝛼) 

and the incident light modulation frequency:

𝐿 = (𝛼/𝜋𝑓)0.5.
(10)

By benefiting from Eq. 10, it is possible to acquire PA signal corresponding to subsequent 

layers of a material simply by varying the light modulation frequency. Furthermore, considering 

the PA signal magnitude proportional to the pigment concentration via 𝛽(𝜆) = ϵ(λ)c

relationship (ϵ(λ) stands for the molar absorptivity), the PA signal magnitude is also a measure 

of the pigment amount from the surface to the sampling depth [27]:

𝑚(𝑡) = ∫ 𝑐(𝑥)𝑑𝑥

𝐿
0
.
(11)

As such, by performing multiple PA scans at a fixed frequency and over a certain period of time 

it is possible to record the mass absorption/release curves (data in the 𝑚(𝑡) form). If the 

experiments are performed at various frequencies (various sampling depths), it is possible to 

evaluate local pigment concentration (𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)-type data) by subtracting signal from two 

neighboring layers and dividing by the layer thickness [11]. 

3. Materials and methods

The experiments performed involved photoacoustic detection of dithranol (in pharmaceutical 

form) absorption by dodecanol-collodion (DDC) membranes. The system has been previously 

identified as a reliable candidate for the photoacoustic proof-of-concept studies due to dithranol

high thermal deactivation efficiency 𝜂(𝜆) and non-overlapping absorption peaks of the drug (~ 

360nm), its photoproducts (~ 430 nm), and the membrane (< 280nm). 2% dithranol/Vaseline 

suspension was delivered by a local pharmacy. Pure dithranol (PN: D2773) was purchased from 

Sigma-Aldrich. The tissue-mimicking DDC membranes (of thickness of l = 23 ± 2 µm) were 

synthesized from collodion solution mixed with 1-dodecanol (with final dry mass ratios 2:1), 

as described earlier [11]. Photoacoustic characterizations of the model drug suspension (in 

comparison to pure dithranol sample) and the membrane is shown in Fig. 1a. 


9

All the experimental studies were performed using the same apparatus. In particular, the set-up 

consisted of a 900 W xenon light source (Newport 66921), grating monochromator with 

adjacent mechanical chopper (Newport 74125), PAC300 photoacoustic chamber (MTEC 

Photoacoustics) and SR7265 lock-in amplifier. A block diagram of the rig is shown in Fig. 1b. 

The PA spectra were recorded in the range of 250-500 nm in 5 nm steps and at modulation 

frequency of 37 Hz. For the depth-profiling studies, nine frequencies in the frequency range of 

37-170 Hz were selected. Assuming the thermal diffusivity of the membranes synthesized was 

𝛼 = 5.57 ⋅ 10−8 𝑚2 𝑠−1 [11], the limiting sampling depths were ~10 – 22 µm from the surface 

(or ~1 – 13 from the drug/membrane interface). 

Fig. 1. a) photoacoustic spectra of pure dithranol, the model drug donor phase (dithranol/Vaseline 

suspension) and the acceptor - DDC membrane; b) – a block diagram of the PA apparatus along with 

the PA cell loaded with the sample.

The depth-profiling studies for a similar system were performed previously [11], using 1 W 370 

nm LED as an incident light source. It may be noted, that a LED source driven by a function 

generator allows for faster frequency swapping and expands the modulation frequency range. 

Here, however, all the measurements were performed within a single apparatus to avoid any 

experimental inconsistencies (i.e. different bandwidths/powers of the light sources, average 

times for the modulation frequency stabilization).

All the experiments were performed at temperature T=25 oC.  

The numerical analysis were performed using OriginPro 2018 (OriginLab) and Mathematica 

12.2 (Wolfram).


10

4. Results and discussion

4.1 On the transport rate limiting processes

Let us consider a case of drug sorption by a membrane of characteristic length l. The membrane

(𝑥 ∈ (0, 𝑙)), initially free of drug, is assumed to be in a one-side (bottom side as in Fig.1b) full 

contact with the drug reservoir (𝑥 ≤ 0), i.e. the cross sections of the membrane and the reservoir

are equal (1D transport approximation). Also it is assumed, that the average drug concentration 

in the reservoir remains constant over the membrane drug sorption time period, and is equal c0

(this assumption is valid as long as the capacity of the reservoir is much greater than the capacity 

of the membrane; as the cross sections of the both compartments are assumed to be equal, the 

capacities are related directly to the characteristic lengths of the compartments). As such, the 

diffusion-driven transport problem for 𝑥 ∈ (0, 𝑙) (the membrane domain) under the membrane 

constant diffusivity condition takes the form:

𝜕𝑐

𝜕𝑡 = −

𝜕

𝜕𝑥 (−𝐷

𝜕

𝜕𝑥 𝑐) = 𝐷

𝜕2

𝜕𝑥2 𝑐,
(12a)

𝑐(𝑥, 0) = 0 for 𝑥 > 0,
(12b)

𝜕𝑐(𝑙, 𝑡)/𝜕𝑥 = 0,
(12c)

where the last condition implies no mass flux at the upper membrane interface. Solution of the 

transport problem (Eq. 12a) requires defining the lower boundary condition, related to the mass 

transfer from the reservoir (drug donor) to the membrane (acceptor). The solutions to the

problem considered by Crank (Section 2.1) were obtained by setting constant concentration at 

the mass donor/acceptor interface, which physically means instantaneous drug mixing within 

the donor phase and transfer to the membrane outermost layer adjanced to the reservoir (or, in 

other words, the membrane transport as a whole is limited by the slowest process, which in the 

case considered is the membrane diffusion). Similarly, the first type of lower BC for the Eq. 

12a can be given by the Dirichlet-type instantaneous source condition: 𝑐(0+, 𝑡) = 𝑐0 (condition 

I, CI). The condition is valid in case of high interfacial mass transfers with respect to the

membrane bulk diffusion, which leads to instantaneous equilibration at the donor/acceptor 

interface (the concentration at the boundary of the membrane domain resembles drug 

concentration in the reservoir). In case of low interfacial transfers the CI condition must be 

replaced by the Neumann-type condition reflecting the magnitude of interfacial flux, given by: 

𝑗|𝑥=0 = 𝜙(𝑐0 − 𝑐(0+, 𝑡)) (condition CII), where 𝜙 stands for the interfacial mass transfer 

coefficient. To study the impact of the magnitude of interfacial mass transfer on the membrane 


11

sorption kinetics let us introduce a dimensionless transport parameter provided by a ratio of the 

interfacial mass transfer and characteristic length to the bulk diffusion coefficient, and hereafter

referred to as the transport rate number: 𝑁𝑅 = 𝜙𝑙

𝐷
⁄ . The parameter introduced reminds of

other dimensionless mass transfer parameter, i.e. the Peclet number (𝑃𝑒 = 𝑣𝑙 𝐷
⁄ ), which

measures an impact of the bulk diffusion and advection (characterized by advection velocity 𝑣)

processes on the mass transport rate, or the Sherwood number, given by the ratio of advective

to diffusive mass transfers across a boundary [28]. Alternatively, the transport rate number can 

be expressed by means of the interfacial mass transfer and diffusion characteristic times: 𝜏𝜙 =

𝑙 𝜙
⁄
and 𝜏𝐷

𝑛 = 𝑙2

𝐷
⁄ , respectively (the “n” superscript indicates, that the characteristic time is 

defined by the system characteristics only; note, that: 𝜏𝐷

𝑛 = 2.62 𝜏𝐸𝐶). As such, 𝑁𝑅 = 𝜏𝐷

𝑛

⁄𝜏𝜙
. It 

can be noted, that for 𝑁𝑅 ≫ 1 the membrane sorption kinetics is limited by the membrane 

intrinsic property – its diffusivity, while for 𝑁𝑅 ≪ 1 the sorption is limited by the interfacial 

mass transfer. 

It should be emphasized, that even in the presence of high interfacial fluxes the CI condition 

may not be valid for small times. This is due to the presence of interfacial relaxation process 

characteristic for a newly created system (here: by adjoining drug donor and acceptor 

subsystems), which leads to new equilibrium value of the surface excess concentration (the 

surface excess concentration of a component at the equilibrium is related to the observable 

difference between the surface and the bulk concentrations of the component) [18]. As such, 

the 𝑐(0+, 𝑡) = 𝑐0 (CI) condition (valid for high interfacial fluxes, as explained earlier) should 

be replaced with a kinetic condition: 𝑐(0+, 𝑡) = 𝛤(𝑡)𝛿𝑥0, where 𝛤(𝑡) represents the evolution 

of surface excess and 𝛿𝑥0 strands for the thickness of the interface layer, while for the CII one 

obtains: 𝑗|𝑥=0 = 𝜙(𝛤(𝑡)𝛿𝑥0 − 𝑐(0+, 𝑡)) [18]. Recent studies on the dynamic interfacial 

tension behaviour between two liquid phases indicate an quasi-exponential character of 𝛤(𝑡)

[29]. To keep the overall picture of the membrane sorption clear, we define the third boundary 

condition (CIII) in the fast interfacial transfer limit as 𝑐(0+, 𝑡) = 1 − exp [−𝜀𝑡], with ε as the 

interfacial equilibration constant. By definition, 𝜀 = 1/𝜏𝑒𝑞, where 𝜏𝑒𝑞 is the interfacial 

equilibration time constant. Eventually, the transport rate number becomes: 𝑁𝑅 = 𝜏𝐷

𝑛

𝜏𝜙 + 𝜏𝑒𝑞
⁄
, 

and 𝑁𝑅 = 𝜏𝐷

𝑛

⁄𝜏𝑒𝑞
in the fast interfacial transfer limit approximation. 


12

Exemplary sorption curves for the diffusion-driven transport models (Eqs 12) under CII and CIII, 

additionally compared to the classical CI case, are shown in Fig. 2. The simulations were 

performed for: material diffusivity 𝐷 = 1 [a.u.], material thickness 𝑙 = 1 [a.u.], transport rate 

number 𝑁𝑅 in the range of 0.01 – 100. Additionally, the time (x-axis) values for each process

was divided by the characteristic time of the process (understood here as a specific time when 

𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 reaches 63% of its equilibrium value, as in case of an exponential process; for the 

𝑁𝑅’s considered here, the characteristic times were (𝑁𝑅/τ): 0.01/111, 0.1/10.1, 1/1.39, 10/0.43, 

100/0.39), to accent similarities between the profiles. From Fig. 2a (CI vs CII) it can be noticed, 

that regardless of the 𝑁𝑅 magnitude, the absorption curves are almost undistinguishable. In 

other words, for the CI- vs CII-type curves considered it is cumbersome to point at a process 

dominating the mass absorption (bulk absorption vs interfacial transfer) by the curve shape (or 

curvature) analysis only. On the contrary, the evolution of concentration profiles (𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡) data)

of CII for relatively low 𝑁𝑅s (see Fig. S1a in the Supplementary materials section, where 1 

(upper row) is for 𝑁𝑅 = 10, while 2 (middle row) - 𝑁𝑅 = 1, Fig.3c – solution of Eqs 12 under 

CI) exhibit evidently different characteristics than the CI, both close to the interface (quasi-

exponential growth vs constant concentration) and in the bulk (for CII: subtle concentration 

gradients along sample thickness for consecutive times). Fig. 2b demonstrates absorption 

curves for CI vs CIII case (corresponding 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡) for 𝑁𝑅 = 10 and 𝑁𝑅 = 1 are shown in Fig. 

S1b). The curvature differences between the CI and CIII profiles are more noticeable compared 

to the previous case, especially for small and medium 𝑁𝑅’s (in fact, this is expected feature, as 

for large surface equilibration constants the surface concentration seen from the experimental 

time window perspective mimics the constant concentration condition: for 𝑐(0+, 𝑡), 

lim𝜖→∞(1 − exp[−𝜀𝑡]) = 1). It can be noticed, that for decreasing 𝑁𝑅’s the 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 profiles 

tend to exponential character.

It is worth to consider whether CIII-type processes can be distinguished from CI-type by analysis 

of 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 experimental data. To explore the issue 24.000 artificial absorption profiles

following Eqs 12 and CI (for 𝐷 = 1 [a.u.], 𝑙 = 1 [a.u.]) condition were generated. In general, 

the data base consisted of subsets, characterized by distinct number of experimental points (3, 

5, 10 or 20 points) measured with a certain precision upper limit (1%, 3% or 5%), and randomly 

distributed within a certain time interval (short times: 𝑡𝜖(0; 𝜏) with 𝑚(𝜏)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 = 0.63, and 

long times: 𝑡 = 𝑡𝜖(0; 5𝜏) with 𝑚(5𝜏)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 ≈ 0.99). As such, a single set (specific number of 

points, precision, time interval) consisted of 1000 various profiles. Exemplary profile (10, 5%, 

5𝜏) along reference absorption curve (numerical solution for Eqs 12 under CI BC) is shown in 


13

Fig. S2. All the data sets were fitted by means of three models, provided by Eqs 4 (exact 

solution, Higuchi) and 6 (monoexponential EC model), to provide apparent values for the 

diffusion coefficient (results are collected in Tab. S1). The results of the analysis indicate, that 

even for the highest precision (1%) and considerably narrow experimental window - 𝑡𝜖(0; 𝜏), 

it would be hard to differentiate between the CIand CIII conditions, as the exponential and exact 

model based analyses of the data sets yield similar results in terms of the free parameter value

(within the uncertainty range). As exponential functions (f.e. Eqs 4a, 5 and 6) are considered as 

an approximation for the exact solution (i.e. Eq. 3a) valid for long times one can point at very 

narrow experimental window (𝑡 ≪ 𝜏) to discriminate between origins of the interfacial 

processes. This, however, requires rapid experimental methods and protocols. An alternative 

way is provided by methods allowing for the permeant detection in the system bulk. 

Fig. 2 Sorption profiles for a finite membrane of diffusivity 𝐷 = 1 and thickness 𝑙 = 1 in a one-side 

contact with a drug reservoir. a) donor/acceptor boundary condition given by interfacial flux of 

magnitude 𝑁𝑅 (CII condition), b) the boundary condition described by exponential relaxation function 

with the equilibration constant of magnitude 𝑁𝑅 (CIII condition). 

4.2 PAS experiment and the lumped data set

This and the following sections are dedicated to showcase experimental evidences for the 

equivocal nature of the mass absorption curves. 

The first membrane transport experiment performed involved spectroscopic detection of the

pigment (dithranol) content evolution, 𝑚(𝑡), in the DDC membrane. The modulation frequency 

of 37 Hz (L = 22 µm) was chosen to sample the membrane maximal thickness possible without 

overstepping the drug/membrane interface boundary. The whole experiment took around 2 

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0
 c(0+, t) = 1

c(0+, t) = 1 - exp(-et) for:

 NR = 0.1
 NR = 1
 NR = 10

m / meq

t / t

c(0+, t) = 1
NR = 0.01
NR = 100

0
1
2
3
0.0

0.5

1.0

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0
 c(0+, t) = 1

j˝x=0 = f (c0-c(0+, t)) for:

 NR = 0.1
 NR = 1
 NR = 10

m / meq

t / t

c(0+, t) = 1
NR = 0.01
NR = 100

0
1
2
3
0.0

0.5

1.0

a)
b)


14

hours, with a single PA spectra (250-500 nm) recorded during a time span of 14 minutes. The 

results of the experiment are shown in Fig. 3, where (a) presents the normalized PA response 

(with respect to carbon black) as a function of wavelength and time (data as recorded during 

the experiment), and (b) - the same data but in the spectra series representation (to enhance the 

data clarity). Two observations can be immediately made. First, the dithranol-characteristic 360

nm band (see Fig. 1a) increases with time, however, the increment rate slows down for the 

longer times. Second observation refers to the stability of the drug. It is known that dithranol is 

relatively unstable and undergoes autooxidation to quinone derivatives and dimers (and, 

eventually, further polymerization), with danthrone and dithranol dimer as the main oxidation 

products in aprotic and protic solvents, respectively. The dithranol degradation rate is typically 

enhanced in the presence of light, increased temperature and exposure to molecular oxygen 

[30].

During our previous dithranol photostability and transport studies by means of photoacoustics 

techniques (with strong LEDs as light sources) it was shown, that the drug remained photostable 

in dodecanol solution, however, underwent photodegradation to two products during the 

membrane penetration process. The degradation products were characterized by PA bands at 

~400 and ~430 nm (in fact, the 430 nm band is the spectroscopic fingerprint of danthrone 

molecules), which clearly deformed the dithranol PA band [11]. Here, by comparing the final 

spectra in Fig. 3b with the model dithranol spectrum in Fig. 1a it can be concluded, that no 

additional strong bands in the 380 – 500 nm region appeared (in comparison to Fig. 2(d-e) in 

[11]), which suggest significant chemical stability of the drug, at least in the time window 

considered and under relatively weak Xe lamp light source irradiation. Eventually, the 

governing transport equation considered here (Eq. 12a) needs no further extensions for 

depletion terms (reaction terms) and preserves its simplest form.

The PA signal evolution from Fig. 3b at a fixed wavelength of 𝜆 = 360 nm is shown in Fig. 3c

(red points). In the absence of the drug degradation processes the time-dependent PA signal 

behaviour is expected to obey the diffusion-based model. Let us assume the classical approach 

to the problem involving the cI-type BC, with 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 represented by one of the Eqs: 3a, 4a 

or 5-6. By applying the best-fit procedure of the monoexponential model (Eq. 6) to the

experimental data one obtains characteristic time of the penetration process 𝜏𝑃𝐴𝑆

𝐸𝐶 = 0.42 ± 0.02 

h (𝜏𝑃𝐴𝑆

𝑛
= 1.10 ± 0.05 h), which can be further translated into the diffusion coefficient as the 

relation holds: 𝐷 = 𝑙2/2.62𝜏𝑃𝐴𝑆

𝐸𝐶 . As such 𝐷𝑃𝐴𝑆 = (1.45 ± 0.21)·10-9 cm2 s-1. The best-fit curve 


15

is presented in Fig. 3c. A very good convergence of the best-fit to the experimental data can be 

noticed, with the goodness-of-fit parameter 𝑅2 = 0.99.

Fig. 3 a) time-resolved PA spectra of DDC membrane in contact with dithranol suspension; b) a 

simplified data representation for the membrane transport kinetics analysis; c) signal evolution from b) 

at the fixed wavelength of 𝜆 = 360 nm (red points) and the monoexponential (Eq. 6) best fit curve.


16

4.3 PADP experiment and the distributed data set

The second membrane transport experiment involved PADP studies on a very similar system 

(i.e. same chemical composition, geometry, PA apparatus etc.) as during the spectroscopic 

experiment; the only difference involved the character of the incident light – fixed wavelength 

(360 nm) and varying modulation frequencies. The lowest modulation frequency was picked to 

match the modulation frequency of the spectroscopic experiment, while the highest one was the 

maximal obtainable on the apparatus configuration used. Raw data (evolution of the PA signal 

for subsequent modulation frequencies) collected during the experiment are collected in Fig. 

S3a. To convert the 𝑆(𝑓, 𝑡) data into the 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡) data (the raw PA signals into the drug 

concentration evolution picture) the method extensively described in the Section 4.4 of [11] and 

briefly here (last paragraph in the Theoretical background) was used. The drug concentration 

profiles, normalized to unity, are shown in Fig. S3b.

The experimental data set from Fig. S3b was analysed by means of Eqs 12 under CI and CIII

conditions (the best-fits were obtained by the NonlinearModelFit procedure with Levenberg-

Marquardt algorithm). Results of the best-fit procedures applied to the data are shown in Fig. 

4. In the first case (the instantaneous source condition, one fitting parameter, the diffusion 

coefficient, Fig. 4a), the best-fit diffusion coefficient was found to be 𝐷𝐶𝐼 = (1.35 ± 0.03)·10-9

cm2 s-1, which is comparable to the value found during the spectroscopic data analysis (𝐷𝑃𝐴𝑆 = 

(1.45 ± 0.21)·10-9 cm2 s-1). The goodness of fit parameters are: 𝑅2 = 0.98 and the estimated 

variance (residual sum of squares divided by the number of degrees of freedom; in general, the 

lower variance, the better fitting quality) 𝑉𝐶𝐼 = 7.38·10-3. An interesting insights into the fitting 

quality can be obtained by analysing the best-fit residuals (the difference between the acquired 

data and best-fit); the best fit residuals are shown in Fig. 4b. The biggest discrepancies can be 

noticed at the initial stage of the transport process (up to ~30 min, point number < 50), especially 

for the highest scanning depths (close to the drug donor/membrane interface). After the 30 

minutes period the discrepancies magnitudes rarely exceeds 5%. It can be noted, that the 

experimental data close to the donor/acceptor boundary reflects quasi-exponential behaviour, 

characteristic for permeation processes affected by interfacial hindrance effects (see Fig. S1). 

The second scenario considered (Fig. 4c-4d) involved two fitting parameters (the diffusion 

coefficient and the interfacial equilibration constant), which were found to be 𝐷𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼 = (4.84 ±

0.41)·10-9 cm2 s-1 and 𝜀 = (5.88 ± 0.25)·10-4 s-1 (𝜏𝑒𝑞,𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼 = 1692 ± 72 s = 0.47 ± 0.02 h). By 

employing Eq. 6 it is possible to determine characteristic times of bulk diffusion process, which 


17

are 𝜏𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼

𝐸𝐶 = 0.13 ± 0.01 h or 𝜏𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼

𝑛
= 0.33 ± 0.03 h (in comparison to 𝜏𝐶𝐼

𝐸𝐶 = 0.45 ± 0.02 h and 

𝜏𝑃𝐴𝑆

𝐸𝐶 = 0.42 ± 0.02 h). The transport rate number for the system considered 𝑁𝑅 =

𝜏𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼

𝑛

𝜏𝑒𝑞,𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼
⁄
≈ 0.7, which indicates mixed transfer regime, i.e. both interfacial and bulk 

processes significantly influence absorption kinetics. The goodness of fit parameters are 𝑅2 =

0.99 and the estimated variance 𝑉𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼 = 1.64·10-3. As 𝑉𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼 < 𝑉𝐶𝐼 one can expect better

experimental data fitting quality for the CIII approach. Indeed, the best-fit residuals for the 

scenario (Fig. 4d) reflect better fitting quality; the majority of residuals at the initial stage of the 

process are lower than 6%, and drop below 5% for the following stages.

Fig. 4. Results of the best-fit procedure of the diffusion model under CI-type (a-b) and CIII-type BCs

(c-d) applied to the data from Fig. S3b: experimental points vs the best-fitting plane (a and c) and the 

best-fit residuals (b and d).

It can be noticed, that the both experiments, PAS and PADP, provided experimental data on the 

PA signal evolution following the λ = 360 nm beam absorption at f = 37 Hz, which can be 


18

analysed by means of the absorption 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚𝑒𝑞-type model. The experimental data (green full 

circles) from the PADP experiment along with the exponential best-fit (blue line), confronted 

against the data from the PAS experiment (Fig. 3c, red circles), are shown in Fig. 5. It can be 

noticed, that the lumped PADP and PAS experimental data follow very similar trend as 

predicted by the standard approach (i.e. instantaneous source condition). The best-fit 

characteristic time for the lumped PADP data, 𝜏𝑃𝐴𝐷𝑃

𝐸𝐶
= 0.45 ± 0.01 h, matches its PAS 

counterpart (𝜏𝑃𝐴𝑆

𝐸𝐶 = 0.42 ± 0.02 h) within the uncertainty range, and the best-fit result obtained 

during the distributed dataset analysis under CI condition: 𝜏𝐶𝐼

𝐸𝐶 = 0.45 ± 0.02 h.

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

0.0006

0.0008

0.0010

0.0012

0.0014

 depth-profiling data
 monoexponential-type best fit

          (t = 0.45 ± 0.01 h)

PA amplitude ( f = 37 Hz)

time [h]

0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.010

0.012

normalized PA signal (l = 360 nm)

Fig. 5. PADP signal evolution from Fig. S3 at the modulation frequency of 37 Hz (green circles) along 

with the best-fit curve (blue) given by Eq. 6, and PAS data from Fig. 3 (red circles).

Summarizing, the analysis of the lumped data sets (𝑚(𝑡)-type data) from PAS and PADP 

experiments led to comparable findings on the system transport properties (i.e. 𝐷 ≈ 1.4·10-9

cm2 s-1, which can be optionally translated into characteristic time of the permeation process), 

with very reasonable and convincing data fitting quality. The results stand in line with the best-

fit diffusion parameter obtained during the analysis of a distributed data set (𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)-type data) 

by means of the Fickian model with CI-type (instantaneous source) boundary condition. The 

qualitative analysis revealed discrepancies between the experimental data and the model 

predictions especially in the donor/acceptor interface region. The PADP data analysis based 

upon the Fickian model under CIII BC (which refers to the time-dependent interfacial 

equilibration between donor and acceptor phases) led to a better fitting quality (estimated 

variance of the fit was 3-times lower compared to the CI-based approach), but also revealed the 

diffusion coefficient to be ~3.5 times higher compared to the estimate provided by lumped data 


19

set analysis. Eventually it was found, that the mass transport process is significantly affected 

by interfacial and bulk transfer rates (𝑁𝑅 ≈ 0.7). 

4.4 The magnitude of the classical approach failure

In the previous sections it has been demonstrated, that the mass uptake rate can be limited by 

surficial processes, but the interfacial hindrance effects might not be easily quantifiable upon 

the analysis of mass absorption curves only. As such, absorption curves encode information on 

the barrier properties of an absorbing system as a whole, disregarding characteristics of 

particular regions. This loss of region-specific information on the system barrier properties 

distort overall picture of mass transfer scheme, and may lead to inaccurate predictions for more 

complex structures, for example involving mass transfer through multi-layered systems.

To estimate the magnitude of the classical approach failure, understood as the discrepancy 

between an apparent diffusion coefficient of the CI-type process and the actual diffusion 

coefficient in the presence of interfacial hindrance effect modelled by means of the CIII-type 

process (considered as a plausible class of the processes, as shown in the photoacoustic 

experimental data), artificial data sets have been modelled with use of Eqs 12 (𝐷 = 1 [a.u.], 

𝑙 = 1 [a.u.]) and CIII boundary conditions (with 𝑁𝑅 spanning from 0.01 to 100), and integrated 

over the x domain to provide absorption profiles (each data set involved ~30 points in the range 

of 𝑡 ∈ (0; 3𝜏)). The absorption profiles were then fitted by means of a standard exponential 

fitting scheme under CI BC (Eq. 6) with only 𝐷 as a fitting parameter (the apparent diffusion 

coefficient). Results of the best-fit procedure are shown in Fig. 6. The standard errors of the 

estimates (diffusion coefficients) were less than 2%, and were omitted in the figure. The 

goodness of fit 𝑅2 parameters were always greater than 0.98. 

It can be noticed, that, on the one hand, the quantification of the absorption data by means of 

the classical diffusion model yields a very convincing convergence (high 𝑅2). On the other 

hand, the model generally fails for the actual material constants value estimation; a reasonable 

results are obtained only for diffusion-controlled problems (𝑁𝑅>>1). Due to high fitting 

accuracy and the data/model convergence, it appears that it is not possible to differentiate 

between the diffusion-controlled and interface transfer/relaxation-controlled processes by 

referring to the absorption profile curvatures only, at least upon data collected for times 

covering most of the sorption process (here: 𝑡 ∈ (0; 3𝜏) and so 𝑚(3𝜏)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 ≈ 0.95). 


20

10
1
0.1
0.01

0.001

0.01

0.1

1
bulk diffusion-controlled absorption

apparent diffusion coefficient [a.u.]

transport rate number NR

interfacial transfer-controlled absorption

Fig. 6 The apparent (best-fit) diffusion coefficient as a function of the transport rate number (𝑁𝑅 =

𝜏𝐷

𝑛

⁄𝜏𝑒𝑞
) for an absorbing system characterized by 𝐷 = 1 [a.u.] and 𝑙 = 1 [a.u.]. The fitting function is 

given by Eq. 6 under CI BC (instantaneous source).

By referring to Fig. 6 and the transport rate number magnitude obtained during the PADP data 

analysis, 𝑁𝑅 ≈ 0.7, it is possible to approximate the ratio between the apparent and actual 

diffusion coefficient for the problem under consideration, 𝐷𝑎𝑝/𝐷𝑎𝑐 ≈ 0.2. Assuming the 

apparent diffusion coefficient to be equal 𝐷𝑎𝑝 ≡ 𝐷𝐶𝐼 = (1.35 ± 0.03)·10-9 cm2 s-1 (exemplary 

value from the absorption profiles data analysis), and 𝐷𝑎𝑐 ≡ 𝐷𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼= (4.84 ± 0.41)·10-9 cm2 s-1

(from PADP analysis), one obtains ratio 𝐷𝑎𝑝/𝐷𝑎𝑐= 0.29 ± 0.03, which is comparable to the 

value obtained from the simulations.

Summarizing, the mass absorption curves provide information on the overall transport kinetics 

by a certain system consisting of particular pair of donor and acceptor compartments 

(characterized by specific interfacial properties). It appears that the impact of the specific 

regions (bulks/interfaces) on the transport rate cannot be simply specified or quantified by 

means of a single absorption profile analysis. As such, results of the absorption curve analysis, 

yielding system characteristic values like 𝜏 or 𝐷 values for instance, should not be re-used for 

the direct analysis, modelling or accurate prediction of other systems properties. 


21

4.5 EC-based analysis of PADP data

The PADP data analysis can be pursued in another direction, i.e. by adopting variable diffusion 

coefficient (𝐷(𝑥)) in the Fick’s model, instead of the interlayer mass transfer hindrance effects 

analyzed by means of a certain form and behavior of boundary condition. The 𝐷(𝑥) is usually 

justified by a variable properties of an absorber system (i.e. spatial heterogeneity of the system). 

In case of DDC membrane synthesized here, there are, however, no clear premises to consider 

the absorber as heterogeneous. As such, the diffusion equation with 𝐷(𝑥) can be used as a 

parametrization tool allowing for the characterization of mass transfer rate variability across the 

membrane.

For the purpose of the PADP data analysis the EC-based approach is proposed. It is assumed, 

that the membrane is made up of layers, each characterized by resistivity and volume (in fact, 

the cross sections of layers, 𝑎, are equal, thus the volume is directly related to characteristic 

lengths of layers). In other words, a single system is divided into number of compartments. 

Mass transfer between the layers (compartments) can be further characterized by means of the

Kirchhoff’s laws (for more details see [22]). As an example, let us consider an absorber of 

thickness 𝑙 = 1 [a.u.] and diffusivity 𝐷 = 1 [a.u.], divided into two equivalent compartments 

of thickness 0.5𝑙 (i.e. the absorber domain 𝑥 ∈ (0; 1) is split into 𝑥1 ∈ (0; 0.5) and 𝑥2 ∈

(0.5; 1)), in a one side contact with a donor (𝑥 ≤ 0), and the donor is characterized by constant 

permeant concentration. As presented before, the mass absorption characteristics depend on the 

interfacial donor/acceptor behaviour (CI vs CII vs CIII - see Fig. S1) and the transfer rate number 

magnitude (for high 𝑁𝑅, CII and CIII mimics CI behaviour). Fig. 7a presents normalized 

absorption curves for the two acceptor compartments (black: 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 = ∫
𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)𝑑𝑥

0.5
0
, red: 

𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 = ∫
𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)𝑑𝑥

1
0.5
, where 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡) is given by Eqs 12 and CIII-type BC) for 𝑁𝑅=100, 

while inset demonstrates absorption curves for 𝑁𝑅 = 0.2. For the 𝑁𝑅=100 case, the two curves 

follow different patterns and so represent distinct sorption characteristics despite similar 

intrinsic properties 𝑅 and 𝑉. As such, the electric circuit characteristic time, given simply by 

𝜏 = 𝜏𝑛 = 𝑅𝑉 is no longer valid, and no longer fulfils 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚𝑒𝑞 ≈ 0.63. For the 𝑁𝑅 = 0.2

case, due to a slow interfacial equilibration, the 𝑥1 ∈ (0; 0.5) compartment is considered as a 

resistive layer, while the 𝑥2 ∈ (0.5; 1) layer almost instantaneously reaches the 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚𝑒𝑞

magnitudes of the first layer. Eventually, both profiles follow similar patterns, and reveal 

similar characteristic times. By following the EC-based mass transfer analysis presented in [22], 

an approximated value of characteristic time for 2nd layer of a 2-layered system can be given 


22

as: 𝜏 = 𝑉1𝑅1 + 𝑉2(𝑅1 + 𝑅2) =

𝑙12

𝐷1 + 𝑙1(

𝑙1
𝐷1 +

𝑙2
𝐷2) (subscripts denote subsequent layers of a 

system), and the absorption curve follows exponential character. As such, behaviour of systems 

displaying a certain mass hindrance effects of the first layer (or displaying interfacial barrier 

properties) can be easily predicted and modelled if thicknesses and diffusivities of the layers 

are known. 

The PADP experimental data management for the EC-based analysis remain similar to the one 

described earlier; the scanning depth is related to the modulation frequency used (see Eq. 10),

while the amplitude of PA signal (S) is proportional the total amount of pigment within a layer,

𝑆 ∝ 𝑚. The total amount of pigment within a certain (i-th) layer can be evaluated directly from 

the raw PA signals: 𝑚𝑖(𝑡) = 𝑆𝐿𝑖(𝑡) − 𝑆𝐿𝑖−1(𝑡), or from 𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡) data by subtracting signals from 

two neighbouring layers: 𝑚𝑖(𝑡) = ∫
𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡)𝑑𝑥

𝐿𝑖
𝐿𝑖−1
, where 𝐿𝑖 depends on the modulation 

frequency. Clearly, the total number of compartments depends on the number of modulation 

frequencies used, while the characteristic lengths of the compartments depend on the 

modulation frequency values picked for the experiment.

Absorption curves for a layered membrane, obtained from the PADP experimental data, are 

shown in Fig. 7b. The whole membrane was divided into two regions: one directly adjanced to 

the drug donor and of thickness of around 4 µm, and the second one encompassing rest of the 

absorber and of thickness of ~18 µm. It can be noted immediately, that the absorption curves 

follows the same pattern, which implies the first layer acts as the resistive one. Quantitative 

interpretation of the data can be performed in terms of Kirchhoff’s current law-based analysis,

yielding set of two ODE’s:

𝑚̇ 𝐼(𝑡) = 𝑙𝐼𝑐̇𝐼(𝑡) =

𝑐0−𝑐𝐼(𝑡)

𝑅𝐼
−

𝑐𝐼(𝑡)−𝑐𝐼𝐼(𝑡)

𝑅𝐼𝐼
,
(Eq. 13a)

𝑚̇ 𝐼𝐼(𝑡) = 𝑙𝐼𝐼𝑐̇𝐼𝐼(𝑡) =

𝑐𝐼(𝑡)−𝑐𝐼𝐼(𝑡)

𝑅𝐼𝐼
,
(Eq. 13b)

with the initial conditions:

𝑐0 = 1, 𝑐𝐼(0) = 𝑐𝐼𝐼(0) = 0,
(Eq. 13c)

where subscripts indicate specific compartment (“0” – drug donor, “I” – membrane 

compartment (𝑙𝐼 assumed to be equal to 4 µm) adjacent to the donor, “II” – the outer membrane 

compartment of thickness 𝑙𝐼𝐼 = 18 µm). The best-fit curves of the model given by Eqs. 13 to 

experimental data are represented by solid lines in Fig. 7b. The best-fit parameters of the model 


23

were found to be: 𝑅𝐼 = 77.2 ± 1.9 µm-1s and 𝑅𝐼𝐼 = 3.62 ± 2.31 µm-1s. By taking simple 𝜏𝑛 =

𝑅𝑉 = 𝑅𝑙, the layer resistances can be translated to 𝜏𝐼

𝑛 = 308 ± 7.6 s and 𝜏𝐼𝐼

𝑛 = 65.2 ± 41.6 s; 

then, by assuming 𝑁𝑅 stands for a ratio of characteristic times representing bulk and interfacial 

processes, 𝑁𝑅 ≈ 𝜏𝐼𝐼

𝑛/𝜏𝐼

𝑛 ≈ 0.2 (in fact this is a certain simplification of the problem, as the 𝜏𝐼

𝑛

parameter involves contributions from both interfacial and bulk transfers). It can be noted, that 

the value is in the same order of magnitude as the transport rate number obtained during the 

distributed PADP data-set analysis under CIII boundary condition.

As the first membrane layer displays barrier properties, the mass uptake can be modelled by 

means of single exponential model. By taking resistances and characteristic lengths of the layers 

as obtained before, the predicted characteristic time of the system is 𝜏𝑝 = 𝑙𝐼𝑅𝐼 +

𝑙𝐼𝐼(𝑅𝐼 + 𝑅𝐼𝐼) = 0.49 ± 0.02 h, and is comparable to the exponential fitting parameter 𝜏𝑏𝑓 = 0.45 

± 0.02 (simple monoexponential best-fit to data for 𝑥𝐼 ∈ (0 µm; 4 µm) from Fig. 7b, not shown). 

The both EC-based characteristic times remain in a considerable agreement with the values 

obtained earlier from the direct PA data analysis (profilometric data analysis under the constant 

source condition: 𝜏𝐶𝐼

𝐸𝐶= 0.45 ± 0.01 h, spectroscopic data analysis: 𝜏𝑃𝐴𝑆

𝐸𝐶 = 0.42 ± 0.02 h). 

Fig. 7 a) normalized absorption (diffusion model under CIII-type BC) curves for two adjoined acceptor 

compartments (𝐷 = 1, black: 𝑥1 ∈ (0; 0.5), red: 𝑥2 ∈ (0; 1)) in contact with donor compartment (𝑥 <

0) for 𝑁𝑅=100 (main) and 𝑁𝑅 = 0.2 (inset); b) experimental data for a layered membrane (first layer of 

~4 µm, second layer ~18 µm) and the best-fits under the EC-based model given by Eqs 13.


24

5. Conclusions

The research focuses on some issues related to absorption/release data analyses in reference to 

actual processes influencing mass transport dynamics. In particular it is argued whether the 

sorption curves, delivered experimentally and validated theoretically by means of various 

approaches to mass transport phenomena, can reflect physics underlying drug absorption

(release), or allow for a reliable identification and quantification of the transport parameters.

The mass transport models investigated were based on the Fick’s diffusion model under three

types of boundary conditions: CI – the Dirichlet constant source (standard approach), CII – the 

Neumann’s interfacial concentration gradient condition and CIII – the Dirichlet’s interfacial 

equilibration condition. It appeared, that despite noticeable differences in the predicted 

concentration field evolutions (CI vs CII and CIII), all the models provided similar absorption 

curves (the total amount of mass absorbed vs time) in terms of their curvatures. The results 

allow to question the reliability of the absorption curves for the transport parameter 

determination. 

The CI and CIII models were confronted against experimental data acquired for a transdermal 

delivery surrogate system by means of two photoacoustic modalities, spectroscopy (PAS) and 

depth-profiling (PADP). PAS allowed to track the total pigment amount inside the membrane, 

as well as monitor stability of the drug, while PADP provided time-dependent drug distribution 

inside the acceptor system. The PADP profilometric (full) dataset evidenced mass distribution 

behaviour (especially close to the donor/acceptor interface) which cannot be easily interpreted 

by the instantaneous source hypothesis. In fact, the data analysis performed by means of the 

CIII–based approach suggested that the overall mass uptake is almost equally influenced by 

interfacial and bulk transport processes. The analyses were performed by means of newly 

introduced parameter, the transport rate number, given by a ratio of characteristic times of bulk 

diffusion and interfacial equilibration (𝑁𝑅 = 𝜏𝐷

𝑛

⁄𝜏𝑒𝑞
). 

The analysis of the PAS and PADP (reduced dataset) absorption profiles yielded comparable 

results by means of diffusion coefficient and characteristic times. In fact, the curvature of both 

datasets remained very similar. Despite very convincing fitting quality (by means of the 1st

order model), the diffusion coefficients (and so characteristic times) obtained were significantly 

different from the diffusion coefficient obtained during PADP profilometric data analysis under 

CIII BC. It appeared, that various approaches (transport models under certain BCs) may lead to 


25

similar predictions of the 𝑚(𝑡) in terms of the function curvature. This makes the 𝑚(𝑡) data of 

limited reliability for the absorption/release mechanisms identification and quantification. 

The last step of the research was devoted to the data analysis by means of the EC model. The 

EC approach allowed for the determination of characteristic times of transport processes for a 

layered membrane, where the first layer was considered to be directly adjanced to the drug 

donor phase (as such, the characteristic time of the layer was related to the characteristic time 

of the interfacial processes), while the second layer represented the bulk transport. The transport 

rate number obtained was in a considerable agreement with the value obtained during the PADP 

data analysis. The EC-based analysis of absorption curves provided characteristic time of the 

transport process comparable to the values obtained during PAS and PADP analysis by means 

of standard approaches. 

The paper underlines the need for further depth-profiling studies on the mass transfer in viscous 

systems. It is expected, that such studies will allow for a better understanding of the 

foundational underpinnings of the membrane transport, which may trigger further studies on a 

novel delivery systems development strategies.

References

[1]
H.A. Daynes, The Process of Diffusion through a Rubber Membrane, Proc. R. Soc. A 

Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 97 (1920) 286–307. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1920.0034.

[2]
T. Higuchi, Rate of Release of Medicaments from Ointment Bases Containing Drugs in 

Suspension, J. Pharm. Sci. 50 (1961) 874–875. https://doi.org/10.1002/jps.2600501018.

[3]
R.J. Scheuplein, Analysis of Permeability Data for the Case of Parallel Diffusion 

Pathways, Biophys. J. 6 (1966) 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3495(66)86636-5.

[4]
P. Liu, W.I. Higuchi, A.-H. Ghanem, T. Kurihara-Bergstrom, W.R. Good, Quantitation 

of simultaneous diffusion and metabolism of β-estradiol in hairless mouse skin: 

Enzyme distribution and intrinsic diffusion/metabolism parameters, Int. J. Pharm. 64 

(1990) 7–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-5173(90)90174-3.

[5]
D.G. Petlin, M. Rybachuk, Y.G. Anissimov, Pathway Distribution Model for Solute 

Transport in Stratum Corneum, J. Pharm. Sci. 104 (2015). 

https://doi.org/10.1002/jps.24669.


26

[6]
G.B. Kasting, M.A. Miller, T.D. LaCount, J. Jaworska, A Composite Model for the 

Transport of Hydrophilic and Lipophilic Compounds Across the Skin: Steady-State 

Behavior, J. Pharm. Sci. 108 (2019) 337–349. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xphs.2018.09.007.

[7]
M.A. Miller, F. Yu, K. il Kim, G.B. Kasting, Uptake and desorption of hydrophilic 

compounds from human stratum corneum, J. Control. Release. 261 (2017) 307–317. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.06.015.

[8]
G. Pontrelli, F. de Monte, A two-phase two-layer model for transdermal drug delivery 

and percutaneous absorption, Math. Biosci. 257 (2014) 96–103. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mbs.2014.05.001.

[9]
T.D. LaCount, Q. Zhang, J. Hao, P. Ghosh, S.G. Raney, A. Talattof, G.B. Kasting, S.K. 

Li, Modeling Temperature-Dependent Dermal Absorption and Clearance for 

Transdermal and Topical Drug Applications, AAPS J. 22 (2020). 

https://doi.org/10.1208/s12248-020-00451-2.

[10]
J. Kushner, D. Blankschtein, R. Langer, Evaluation of the porosity, the tortuosity, and 

the hindrance factor for the transdermal delivery of hydrophilic permeants in the 

context of the aqueous pore pathway hypothesis using dual‐radiolabeled permeability 

experiments, J. Pharm. Sci. 96 (2007) 3263–3282. https://doi.org/10.1002/jps.20955.

[11]
P. Rochowski, P. Niedziałkowski, S.J. Pogorzelski, The benefits of photoacoustics for 

the monitoring of drug stability and penetration through tissue-mimicking membranes, 

Int. J. Pharm. 580 (2020) 119233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2020.119233.

[12]
M. Ignacio, G.W. Slater, Using fitting functions to estimate the diffusion coefficient of 

drug molecules in diffusion-controlled release systems, Phys. A Stat. Mech. Its Appl. 

567 (2021) 125681. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2020.125681.

[13]
D. Caccavo, An overview on the mathematical modeling of hydrogels’ behavior for 

drug delivery systems, Int. J. Pharm. 560 (2019) 175–190. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2019.01.076.

[14]
B. Kaoui, M. Lauricella, G. Pontrelli, Mechanistic modelling of drug release from 

multi-layer capsules, Comput. Biol. Med. 93 (2018) 149–157. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2017.12.010.


27

[15]
A.A. Amarah, D.G. Petlin, J.E. Grice, J. Hadgraft, M.S. Roberts, Y.G. Anissimov, 

Compartmental modeling of skin transport, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 130 (2018) 336–

344. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2018.07.015.

[16]
S. Mubarak, M.A. Khanday, Mathematical modelling of drug-diffusion from multi-

layered capsules/tablets and other drug delivery devices, Comput. Methods Biomech. 

Biomed. Engin. 25 (2022) 896–907. https://doi.org/10.1080/10255842.2021.1985477.

[17]
J. Siepmann, N.A. Peppas, Higuchi equation: Derivation, applications, use and misuse, 

Int. J. Pharm. 418 (2011) 6–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2011.03.051.

[18]
P. Rochowski, S.J. Pogorzelski, M. Grzegorczyk, S. Kulesza, The strategies for the 

modelling of the passive mass transport through porous membranes: applicability to 

transdermal delivery systems, Int. J. Pharm. 591 (2020) 120017. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2020.120017.

[19]
S.J. Pogorzelski, A.D. Kogut, Static and dynamic properties of surfactant films on 

natural waters, Oceanologia. 43 (2001) 223–246. 

http://agro.icm.edu.pl/agro/element/bwmeta1.element.agro-article-ff62ddda-2eba-

4489-ba45-8bce4251b517 (accessed April 23, 2019).

[20]
P. Joos, G. Bleys, Desorption from slightly soluble monolayer, Colloid Polym. Sci. 261 

(1983) 1038–1042. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01421712.

[21]
J. Crank, The Mathematics of Diffusion, Second Edi, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1975.

[22]
P. Rochowski, G. Pontrelli, Mass diffusion in multi-layer systems: an electrical 

analogue modelling approach, Comput. Biol. Med. 148 (2022) 105774. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105774.

[23]
M.S. Gomes-Filho, M.A.A. Barbosa, F.A. Oliveira, A statistical mechanical model for 

drug release: Relations between release parameters and porosity, Phys. A Stat. Mech. 

Its Appl. 540 (2020) 123165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.123165.

[24]
T.C. Dotson, J. Budzien, J.D. McCoy, D.B. Adolf, Cole–Davidson dynamics of simple 

chain models, J. Chem. Phys. 130 (2009) 024903. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3050105.

[25]
A. Rosencwaig, A. Gersho, Theory of the photoacoustic effect with solids, J. Appl. 

Phys. 47 (1976) 64–69. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.328255.


28

[26]
G. Puccetti, R.M. Leblanc, Titanium Dioxide Particles and Dihydroxyacetone on 

Human Epiderm, Photochem. Photobiol. 71 (2000) 426–430.

[27]
A. Schendzielorz, B.D. Hanh, R.H.H. Neubert, S. Wartewig, Penetration Studies of 

Clotrimazole from Semisolid Formulation Using Step-Scan FT-IR Photoacoustic 

Spectroscopy, Pharm. Res. 16 (1999) 42–45.

[28]
F.A. Coutelieris, M.E. Kainourgiakis, A.K. Stubos, The effect of Peclet on the 

Sherwood number in high porosity granular media, in: 2002: pp. 753–760. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2991(02)80206-3.

[29]
V.B. Fainerman, E. V. Aksenenko, A. V. Makievski, M. V. Nikolenko, A. Javadi, E. 

Schneck, R. Miller, Particular Behavior of Surface Tension at the Interface between 

Aqueous Solution of Surfactant and Alkane, Langmuir. 35 (2019) 15214–15220. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b02579.

[30]
K. Thoma, C. Holzmann, Photostability of dithranol, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 46 

(1998) 201–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0939-6411(98)00024-1.


29

Supplementary materials

Fig. S1 The evolution of the diffusion-controlled (the acceptor is characterized by 𝐷 = 1, 𝑙 = 1)

concentration profiles (𝑐(𝑥, 𝑡) data) under CII (a) and CIII (b) BC for relatively low 𝑁𝑅s (upper row: 𝑁𝑅 =

10, middle row: 𝑁𝑅 = 1). The evolution of the concentration field under CI (constant source) is shown 

in (c).


30

Fig. S2 Exemplary artificial absorption profile (the upper limit of measurement precision of 5%, 10 
experimental points distributed within 𝑡𝜖(0; 5𝜏)) obtained by means of diffusion-driven transport model 
(Eqs 12) for a finite membrane of diffusivity 𝐷 = 1 [a.u.] and thickness 𝑙 = 1 [a.u.], under constant 
concentration at the source boundary condition (CI condition).

Fig. S3 Results of the photoacoustic depth-profiling studies on the membrane transport. Raw data points 

are shown in (a), while the time-dependent drug concentration profiles are shown in (b).


31

Tab.S1 Best-fit diffusion coefficient (mean and standard deviation) of various absorption models to 
artificial 1000 data-sets generated by means of the diffusion driven transport model (Eqs 12 under CI
BC), characterized by distinct number of experimental points (3, 5, 10 or 20 points) measured with a 
certain precision upper limit (1%, 3% or 5%) and randomly distributed within a certain time interval.

Diffusion coefficient, mean (standard deviation), long experimental window 𝑡𝜖(0; 5𝜏)

model
precision [%]

number of points

3
5
10
20

exact

1
1.00 (0.03)
1.00 (0.02)
1.00 (0.03)
1.00 (0.03)

3
1.01 (0.08)
1.00 (0.07)
1.00 (0.08)
1.01 (0.08)

5
1.01 (0.13)
1.01 (0.13)
1.01 (0.13)
1.01 (0.13)

EC mono-

exp

1
0.98 (0.03)
0.99 (0.02)
1.00 (0.03)
1.00 (0.03)

3
0.99 (0.07)
0.99 (0.07)
1.00 (0.07)
1.01 (0.07)

5
0.99 (0.12)
0.99 (0.12)
1.01 (0.13)
1.01 (0.13)

Higuchi

1
0.62 (0.02)
0.65 (0.01)
0.66 (0.01)
0.68 (0.01)

3
0.62 (0.03)
0.65 (0.03)
0.66 (0.03)
0.67 (0.03)

5
0.62 (0.05)
0.65 (0.04)
0.66 (0.04)
0.68 (0.05)

Diffusion coefficient, mean (standard deviation),short experimental window 𝑡𝜖(0; 𝜏)

model
precision [%]

number of points

3
5
10
20

exact

1
1.00 (0.02)
1.00 (0.02)
1.00 (0.03)
1.00 (0.03)

3
1.00 (0.07)
1.00 (0.07)
1.00 (0.07)
1.00 (0.08)

5
1.00 (0.12)
1.00 (0.12)
1.00 (0.13)
1.00 (0.13)

EC mono-

exp

1
1.04 (0.02)
1.05 (0.02)
1.05 (0.02)
1.05 (0.02)

3
1.05 (0.07)
1.05 (0.07)
1.05 (0.07)
1.05 (0.07)

5
1.04 (0.11)
1.05 (0.12)
1.05 (0.12)
1.05 (0.12)

Higuchi

1
0.99 (0.02)
0.99 (0.02)
0.99 (0.02)
0.99 (0.02)

3
0.99 (0.07)
0.99 (0.07)
0.99 (0.07)
0.99 (0.08)

5
0.99 (0.11)
0.99 (0.12)
0.99 (0.12)
0.99 (0.13)


