1

Materials challenges for SrRuO3: from conventional

to quantum electronics

M. Cuoco1*, A. Di Bernardo2†

1CNR-SPIN, c/o University of Salerno, I-84084 Fisciano, Salerno, Italy

2University of Konstanz, Department of Physics, 78457 Konstanz, Germany

Correspondence to: 
Mario Cuoco (mario.cuoco@spin.cnr.it)
Angelo Di Bernardo (angelo.dibernardo@uni-konstanz.de) 

Abstract

The need for faster and more miniaturised electronics is challenging scientists to develop novel 

forms of electronics based on quantum degrees of freedom different from electron charge. In 

this fast-developing field, often referred to as quantum electronics, the metal-oxide perovskite 

SrRuO3 can play an important role thanks to its diverse physical properties, which have been 

intensively investigated, mostly for conventional electronics.

In addition to being chemically stable, easy to fabricate with high quality and to grow 

epitaxially onto many oxides – these are all desirable properties also for conventional 

electronics – SrRuO3 has interesting properties for quantum electronics like itinerant 

ferromagnetism and metallic behaviour, strong correlation between magnetic anisotropy and 

spin-orbit coupling, strain-tuneable magnetization, anomalous Hall and Berry effects.

In this Research Update, after describing the main phenomena emerging from the interplay

between spin, orbital, lattice and topological quantum degrees of freedom in SrRuO3, we 

discuss the challenges still open to achieve control over these phenomena. We then provide our 

perspectives on the most promising applications of SrRuO3 for devices for conventional and 

quantum electronics. We suggest new device configurations and discuss the materials 

challenges for their realization. For conventional electronics, we single out applications where 

SrRuO3 devices can bring competitive advantages over existing ones. For quantum electronics, 

we propose devices that can help gain a deeper understanding of quantum effects in SrRuO3 to 

exploit them for quantum technologies. We finally give an outlook about properties of SrRuO3

still waiting for discovery and applications that may stem from them.


2

1. Introduction

The interest of the research community in SrRuO3 has been kept high for almost 60 years1,2, as 

result of the coexistence of its fascinating physical properties with the easiness of its fabrication 

and integration in oxide heterostructures and devices.

Despite the intense research activity done on SrRuO3 and SrRuO3-based heterostructures, 

new physical properties and applications of SrRuO3 are continuously being discovered. SrRuO3

combines a range of interesting properties including good metallic conductivity at low 

temperatures (Ts), magnetic ordering with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, narrow domain 

walls, strong spin-orbit coupling strength2. In addition to this rich physics, another advantage 

of SrRuO3 for device applications is that most of the SrRuO3 properties can be modulated. The 

possibilities to tune these properties are many and include changes in the SrRuO3 thickness and 

stoichiometry, strain application and interfacing of SrRuO3 to other oxides in heterostructures 

and superlattices2.

Several review articles have been written on SrRuO3 over the years including a very 

comprehensive review2 on SrRuO3 properties and applications. In addition to several papers3 - 6

summarizing the main results reported in the literature on the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) 

and topological Hall effect (THE) in SrRuO3, we are aware of another review article7 recently 

published which describes the main applications of SrRuO3-based heterostructures. 

The aim of this work is to put the results obtained to date on SrRuO3 in perspectives and 

discuss which materials challenges have to be addressed to realise SrRuO3-based devices with 

better performance and novel functionalities compared to existing ones. In addition to 

analysing these challenges, we propose specific examples of electronic devices with 

corresponding geometries that have never been realised to date. The fabrication and testing of 

these devices can serve as a stimulus to the research community not only from an application-

related perspective, but also to gain a better understanding of quantum phenomena recently 

discovered in SrRuO3. We propose, for example, devices that would allow to differentiate 

between real-space or momentum-space contributions to the SrRuO3 Berry curvature. 

Differentiating between these contributions is a key step to engineer future quantum devices 

exploiting AHEs and THEs in SrRuO3 for their functioning.

In section 1 of this review, we describe the main physical properties of SrRuO3, and we 

report the deposition techniques and methodologies that can be used to fabricate SrRuO3

devices for technological applications. We highlight in particular techniques that are not only 

suitable to produce devices with optimal properties but also with high reproducibility and 


3

scalability. After discussing the structural parameters and mechanisms that mostly affect the 

physical properties of SrRuO3, we review progress made on the fabrication of free-standing 

SrRuO3 structures. We also review how SrRuO3 properties change when the SrRuO3

dimensionality is lowered from the three-dimensional (3D) to the zero-dimensional (0D) 

regime and quantum effects become increasingly more relevant.

In section 2, we consider the most promising applications of SrRuO3 for both conventional 

and quantum electronics and propose possible devices that can be made for each type of 

applications. Whilst describing these electronic devices and discussing possible layouts for 

their realization, we also outline the materials challenges that have to be addressed for their 

realization.

For conventional electronics, we focus on applications for which SrRuO3-based devices 

would offer a competitive advantage over existing devices. The first class of applications 

include room-T spintronic devices and cryogenic memories, where two distinct properties of 

SrRuO3 namely its high spin-orbit coupling and narrow domain walls are used, respectively, 

to make devices that can offer better performance than existing ones. For the second class of 

applications, we suggest exploiting the properties of freestanding SrRuO3 membranes under 

strain to realise nanoelectromechanical systems with unprecedentedly high figures of merit.

For quantum electronics, we focus on effects related to the non-trivial Berry curvature of 

SrRuO3 and suggest the realization of novel devices, where real-space and momentum-space 

contributions to Hall signals can be differentiated and separately manipulated. We also propose 

new schemes of superconducting devices, where SrRuO3 is coupled to a superconductor. The 

SrRuO3-based superconducting devices that we suggest can host topological superconductivity

or spin-polarised superconducting currents – which can be reversibly modulated by tuning the 

SrRuO3 Berry curvature.

1.1 Main properties and growth techniques 

In this section, we review the main physical properties of SrRuO3 including its structural, 

electronic transport and magnetic properties. We list some parameters and typical values that 

can be used as benchmark comparison to evaluate the degree of quality of SrRuO3 samples. 

We then discuss which growth techniques appear most promising to date for the reliable 

fabrication of SrRuO3 thin films with optimal parameter values (i.e., close to bulk) and over 

large scale. The growth of SrRuO3 thin films with properties identical to bulk is essential to 

investigate emergent phenomena and discover new quantum effects in SrRuO3. A high 


4

scalability in making optimal SrRuO3 thin films is in turn crucial for the development of device 

applications exploiting such effects and phenomena. 

SrRuO3 is a layered oxide perovskite of the ABO3 type belonging to the Ruddlesden-Popper 

series of ruthanates, Srn+1RunO3n+1, with number of layers n = ∞. As for several other ABO3

perovskites, the unit cell of bulk SrRuO3 has an orthorhombic crystal symmetry at room T

(space group Pbnm). In bulk single-crystal form, SrRuO3 undergoes a structural transition first 

into a tetragonal phase (space group I4 / mcm) as T is increased to 547 °C and then into a cubic 

phase (space group Pm3m) as T is further increased up to 677 °C (ref. 2). 

In the unstrained orthorhombic phase at room T, the Ru-O bond is about 2 times shorter in 

length than the Sr-O bond which introduces a distortion of the RuO6 octahedra. The distortion 

of the RuO6 octahedra, which can be manipulated via strain engineering, is a key structural 

parameter affecting some of the SrRuO3 physical properties, as further discussed below in this 

review. The lattice parameters of the orthorhombic cell (space group Pbnm) are2,8 aor = 5.57 Ȧ , 

bor = 5.53 Ȧ , and cor = 7.85 Ȧ . The orthorhombic unit cell consists of four units of the ideal 

cubic perovskite structure, which results in a pseudocubic lattice constant2 apc = 3.93 Ȧ

(Fig. 1). We note that throughout the review we use the subscripts ‘or’ and ‘pc’ to refer to the 

orthorhombic and pseudocubic unit cell parameters, respectively.

SrRuO3 was reported as the first oxide exhibiting ferromagnetism1 due to itinerant electrons 

below a Curie temperature (TCurie) of ~ 160 K (ref. 2), it has a relatively high saturation moment 

of 1.6 μΒ/Ru atom9,10 at T = 0 (μΒ = 9.27 x 10-24 J ∙ T-1 being the Bohr magneton) and it usually 

exhibits perpendicular magnetic anisotropy when epitaxially grown as thin film under 

compressive strain onto a (001) SrTiO3 substrate2. This magnetic anisotropy, however, can 

change depending on substrate-induced strain and orientation (see also section 1.2). The T-

dependence of the SrRuO3 electronic transport properties also shows that SrRuO3 has very 

good metallicity at low Ts due to its Fermi liquid behavior11 for T < 10 K (metallicity is defined 

from the slope dρ/dT of the resistivity ρ versus T curve). As T is increased and approaches 

room T, metallicity in SrRuO3 progressively gets worse12. 

In addition to being one of the metal oxides with the lowest electrical resistivity at room T

(ρ < 200 μΩ ∙ cm at T = 300 K; ref. 13), SrRuO3 is also thermally stable and chemically 

inert2, 14 - 16 and it exhibits very good lattice matching to other functional oxides2,17 including 

piezoelectrics, e.g., Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 or (Ba,Sr)TiO3 (refs. 18,19). These are some of the reasons why 

SrRuO3 has been widely exploited to date both as metallic substrate for the growth of complex 


5

oxide heterostructures2,18-22 and as ferromagnet in spintronic and superconducting devices 

including magnetic tunnel junctions23-25 and Josephson junctions26-28.

Several growth techniques have been used over the years to grow SrRuO3 with the above-

listed properties. The vast majority of the studies to characterise these properties of SrRuO3

has been carried out on SrRuO3 thin films. Bulk single crystals of SrRuO3 are difficult to grow, 

and this is the main reason why the physical properties of SrRuO3 have been mostly 

investigated in its thin film form2. The growth of bulk single crystals of SrRuO3 by the floating 

zone technique, which is the preferred method to synthesize single crystals with low levels of 

disorder, is made difficult by the large amount of RuO2 that evaporates during the SrRuO3

growth. In general, obtaining good-quality single crystals is challenging for any ruthenates 

because the pseudo-binary diagram (SrO-RuO2) is open. This open phase diagram implies that, 

at a given T and for fixed concentrations of the SrO and RuO2, it is not possible to determine 

the composition of the final compound resulting from growth. The composition in fact changes 

due to the Ru evaporation that constantly occurs during growth.

For a bulk single-crystal of the Ruddlesden-Popper series Srn+1RunO3n+1, the RuO2 mass loss

during the floating-zone growth is proportional to the n value of the compound within the 

series29 (n = ∞ for SrRuO3). The evaporated RuO2 accumulates over the walls of the quartz 

tube of the image furnace during growth. The accumulated RuO2 reduces the intensity of the 

FIG. 1. Crystallographic structure of 
SrRuO3. 
Illustration of the orthorhombic unit 
cell of SrRuO3 characterized by tilt of 
the RuO6 octahedra (in purple). The 
Sr, Ru, apical O and planar O atoms 
are represented with grey, blue, red, 
pink spheres, respectively.
The pseudocubic unit cell is also 
shown (light blue box) together with 
representative crystallographic axes 
of the orthorhombic unit cell which 
are indicated by arrows. [Figure 
drawn based on ref. 8].


6

infrared light in the molten zone, which makes the growth extremely unstable29. This is the 

main reason why, although the floating zone technique has been routinely used to grow high-

quality crystals of other compounds in the Srn+1RunO3n+1 Ruddlesden-Popper series30,31 like the 

unconventional superconductor Sr2RuO4 (n = 1) and the metamagnet Sr3Ru2O7 (n = 2), it has 

not been extensively used for SrRuO3 (n = ∞) single crystals. Other factors are also crucial to 

get good-quality SrRuO3 single crystals, which contribute to make the growth process very 

challenging. These crucial factors include the high quality of the feed rod and the excess RuO2

amount, which has to be added to the rod before growth to compensate for Ru losses.

SrRuO3 single crystals of good quality grown by the floating zone technique have been 

obtained thanks to the installation of a cold trap29. The cold trap allows the evaporated RuO2

to collect onto the trap surface other than on the walls of the quartz tube.

Unlike for single crystals, the growth of epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films onto lattice-matched 

substrates is relatively easy to carry out and SrRuO3 thin films of very high quality have been 

obtained by many groups using a variety of chemical and physical deposition techniques32. 

These deposition techniques include 90° off-axis magnetron sputtering33,34, reactive 

evaporation12,35,36, metalorganic chemical vapor deposition37, chemical solution deposition38, 

pulsed laser deposition (PLD) 14,39-44, and molecular beam epitaxy13,32,45-48 (MBE). A 

comparison of the residual resistivity ratio (RRR), which provides quantitative information on

the number of crystallographic defects and impurities inside a material, for SrRuO3 thin films 

grown with the above techniques has been reported in ref.32 and it is shown in Fig. 2a. The 

highest RRR values obtained to date are above 80 for SrRuO3 thin films (grown by MBE13,48

or reactive evaporation35 on (001) SrTiO3 substrates) and of ~ 192 for bulk SrRuO3 single 

crystals29.

SrRuO3 thin films epitaxially grown with the above techniques usually have different lattice 

parameters compared to bulk because of epitaxial strain induced by the substrate. As recently

observed in ref.49, SrRuO3 thin films with RRR higher than 50 have mostly been obtained on

growth substrates having a small lattice mismatch with SrRuO3 such as (001) SrTiO3

(refs.13,35,48-52) and (110) DySrO3 (refs. 53,54). The lattice mismatch for SrRuO3 is of ~ -0.6% 

with (001) SrTiO3 and of ~ 0.4% with (110) DySrO3. We note here that epitaxial SrRuO3 thin 

films grown onto a (001) SrTiO3 substrate usually have a tetragonal structure (4mmm space 

group) for small thicknesses (up to 4-6 nm), and a monoclinic structure (P21/m space group) 

for larger thicknesses55,56. Following the conventional notation, in the literature this monoclinic 

structure with the angle γ (close to 90°) between the [100]or and [001]or axes is also denoted as 

orthorhombic55.


7

The structural transition from tetragonal to orthorhombic is correlated to a change in the 

RuO6 octahedra tilting (see section 1.2), although the origin of this change with thickness 

remains unclear49. Using low-energy electron diffraction and high-resolution scanning 

transmission electron microscopy, it has been shown57 that, unlike for other oxide perovskites, 

the RuO6 octahedra tilting is already present in one-unit-cell-thick SrRuO3 on (001) SrTiO3.

In addition to a very high RRR51,52,58 (> 50), there are several other physical properties that 

can be regarded as hallmark signatures of high quality for SrRuO3 thin films. Indications of 

high SrRuO3 thin film quality include low residual ρ at liquid helium T (~ 4.2 K), a high TCurie, 

a strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (for thin films grown under compressive strain), 

and a low in-plane mosaic spread. 

Low residual ρ is an indication of low concentration of defects and of a good stoichiometry. 

Ultra-high quality SrRuO3 thin films have residual resistivity lower than 3 μΩ cm at T = 4.2 K, 

which is consistent with their very high RRR values13,48,49,51,52. A high TCurie is also a signature 

of good stoichiometry, since Ru deficiencies are one of the main reasons for a decrease in TCurie

(see section 1.2). The highest TCurie reported for SrRuO3 thin films deposited on (001) SrTiO3

is of ~ 152 K (ref. 53). For tensile-strained SrRuO3 thin films grown on (110) DySrO3 substrates, 

TCurie as high as 169 K have been instead measured35,54. 

Apart from being desirable for spintronics applications, strong perpendicular magnetic 

anisotropy is also a signature of high crystallinity in compressive-strained epitaxial SrRuO3

thin films, since it is normally lowered by grain boundaries and other defects59,60. The SrRuO3

thin film in ref.48 do not only have the highest RRR (~ 86) reported to date, but they are also 

the first to show single-domain perpendicular magnetization. The single-domain perpendicular

magnetization of the thin films in ref.48 is evidenced by the fact that their remanent 

magnetization to saturation magnetization ratio (i.e., squareness) is of ~ 0.97. Single-domain 

perpendicular magnetization in SrRuO3 is a desirable property for spintronics61, and its recent 

realization in ref.48 will certainly contribute to further applications of SrRuO3 in oxide 

spintronics at cryogenic Ts.

Low in-plane mosaic spread is also a good indication of high thin film quality. The in-plane 

mosaic spread can be estimated for SrRuO3 by measuring the full width at half maximum, 

FWHM, for the rocking curves of the (001)pc or (002)pc peaks. In Fig. 2b, we reproduce a figure 

from ref.32, where the authors compare the FWHM of the (001)pc and (002)pc peaks of SrRuO3

thin films grown with different deposition techniques and substrates. The data in Fig. 2b show 


8

that SrRuO3 thin films with very low amount of in-plane mosaic spread (i.e., FWHM ≤ 0.01°) 

have been obtained by several groups using either PLD or MBE growth.

Apart from targeting the above-listed parameter values, which are good indicators of high 

SrRuO3 thin film quality, another main challenge to address for future applications of SrRuO3

in conventional and quantum electronics is to understand how to scale up SrRuO3 thin films 

and in turn devices based on them. The scaling up therefore implies not only growing epitaxial 

SrRuO3 thin films with optimal physical properties, but also doing this over large areas and 

pattern then the films into devices with reliable functioning.

Optimising the growth of high-quality epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films on Si, the material at the 

core of complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology, over areas 

comparable to the size of Si wafers used by the semiconductor industry (> 4’’ in diameter) can 

lead, for example, to the integration of the fabrication of SrRuO3-based devices into the 

industrial processes and fabs of the semiconductor industry32.

FIG. 2. Transport and structural properties of representative SrRuO3 thin films from the 
literature. Residual resistivity ratio (a) and full width at half maximum of the rocking 
curve of the (001)pc or (002)pc peaks (b) for SrRuO3 thin films grown with different 
techniques and on various substrates as a function of the SrRuO3 thin film thickness. The 
growth technique and substrate used for each thin film are reported between brackets 
with the corresponding reference number. [Figure adapted from the Supplementary 
Material of ref. 32]. Additional studies to those in panel (a) and reporting SrRuO3 thin 
films with high RRR (larger than 50) are cited in the main text. 

Until recently, most of the attempts done at growing SrRuO3 thin films on Si have resulted 

in thin films of poor quality both from a structural and an electronic transport point of view. 

The formation of an amorphous SiO2 layer directly onto Si during the growth of SrRuO3


9

usually impedes epitaxial growth32 and results in polycrystalline SrRuO3 thin films with a poor 

RRR of ~ 3 at most62. To achieve epitaxial growth, a multi-step deposition is necessary, where 

a thin epitaxial buffer layer (e.g., SrTiO3 (001)) is first deposited on Si, which is then followed 

by the deposition of an epitaxial SrRuO3 thin film onto the buffer layer. This two-step process, 

however, requires breaking vacuum between the two depositions and hence exposing the 

surface of the buffer layer to air, which eventually also leads to thin films of poor quality.

Recently, a single-step process has been successfully developed by Wang and co-workers32, 

where both the SrTiO3 buffer layer and the SrRuO3 thin films are grown in the same MBE 

chamber on 2’’ commercial Si wafers without breaking vacuum. This approach has resulted in 

epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films on Si with excellent structural, magnetic and transport properties. 

Reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) patterns acquired along the [100]pc and 

[110]pc azimuths of the SrRuO3 thin films and X-ray diffraction ϕ scans demonstrate epitaxial 

growth of the SrRuO3 thin films with the [100]pc direction of SrRuO3 oriented along the [110] 

axis of the (001) Si substrate32. The RRR of the SrRuO3 thin films reported in this study32 is of 

~ 11 – this is comparable to that of other SrRuO3 thin films grown on single-crystal oxide 

substrates by PLD32,40-42 (Fig. 2a). It is worth nothing that MBE is nowadays used also to 

manufacture semiconductor devices63, which makes the process reported in ref. 32 appealing 

for the large-scale production of SrRuO3 devices on Si using the same nanofabrication 

processes of the CMOS industry.

More recently, machine-learning models have been combined with the MBE technique to

quickly determine the growth conditions for high-quality SrRuO3 thin films. Wakabayashi et 

al., for example, have adopted Bayesian optimization during the MBE growth of SrRuO3 thin 

films58. Their approach consists in applying Bayesian optimization to one growth parameter at 

a time, whilst keeping all the other growth parameters fixed58. Following this procedure, all the 

MBE growth parameters (e.g., Ru flux rate, growth T, and O3-noozle-to-substrate distance) 

were optimized after only 24 MBE growth runs, and SrRuO3 thin films with a RRR ~ 50 were 

obtained58. Machine-learning-assisted MBE with Bayesian optimization has been reproduced 

also in other studies48,49,51,58, and it has yielded SrRuO3 thin films with RRR of ~ 80 and 86 

after 35 and 44 MBE optimization runs, respectively51,64.

It is clear to us that growth optimization of SrRuO3 thin films assisted by machine learning 

approaches such as Bayesian optimization will eventually replace the typical growth 

optimization based on a trial-and-error approach. The traditional trial-and-error approach is in 

fact time consuming and costly, and it ultimately depends on the skills of the researcher 

carrying out the process.


10

The ultra-high quality SrRuO3 thin films grown by machine-learning-assisted MBE have 

also led to the discovery of novel quantum phenomena in SrRuO3. Performing transport 

measurements on SrRuO3 thin films grown by machine-learning-assisted MBE, Takiguchi and 

co-workers have shown51 evidence for Weyl nodes in the electronic band structure of SrRuO3

– the existence of Weyl nodes had only been predicted65 theoretically in 2013. Weyl nodes are 

of both fundamental and practical interest because they are tuneable in an applied magnetic 

field and can provide high-mobility two-dimensional carriers. The two-dimensional nature of 

these high-mobility carriers stem from Fermi arcs that connect the surface projection of Weyl 

nodes with opposite chirality. Two recent studies66,67 have shown evidence for high-mobility 

two-dimensional carriers from surface Fermi arcs in untwined ultra-high quality SrRuO3 thin 

films.

Based on the example studies reported above, it is clear that MBE, and in particular 

machine-learning-assisted MBE, is currently the most reliable technique to produce ultrahigh-

quality SrRuO3 thin films. The ultrahigh quality is an essential prerequisite to get access to 

quantum phenomena recently discovered in SrRuO3 and to develop quantum electronic 

applications based on transport of Weyl nodes and high-mobility two-dimensional carriers.

MBE, and in particular machine-leaning-assisted MBE, appears therefore as the most 

promising growth techniques to realize SrRuO3 thin films and devices for quantum electronics.

Recent studies32 have shown that MBE is also suitable for large-scale growth of high-quality 

SrRuO3 thin films on Si – which is an essential requirement for the integration of SrRuO3 

devices with conventional CMOS electronics. In addition to MBE, we believe that other growth

techniques are equally promising and should be tested in the future for high-throughput growth

of high-quality epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films on Si. These techniques are radiofrequency (RF) 

magnetron sputtering in a multi-target sputtering chamber equipped with substrate heater and

continuous compositional-spread PLD43 with synchronised translation of the substrate heater 

with the pulsing of the excimer laser.

1.2 Structural parameters and experimental tools to control physical properties

In the previous section, we have described the main physical properties of SrRuO3, the values 

of the measurable parameters attesting high quality of SrRuO3 thin films, and the growth 

techniques that can be used to produce such high-quality films. Here, we review the main 

structural parameters affecting the physical properties of SrRuO3 thin films and we also discuss 

the experimental tools that can be exploited to control these properties. Achieving fine control 


11

over the physical properties of SrRuO3 is in fact another essential ingredient for the 

development of conventional and quantum electronics applications based on SrRuO3. 

As for other perovskite compounds, the physical properties of SrRuO3 depend on a number 

of structural parameters2 including the degree of off-stoichiometry, substrate-induced strain, 

structural disorder, thickness etc. Some properties like the magnetic properties are more 

sensitive than others in SrRuO3 to any variations in these structural parameters.

Changes in the nominal stoichiometry of SrRuO3 thin films are either due to ruthenium or 

to oxygen vacancies45. The stoichiometry of the SrRuO3 thin films is extremely dependent on 

the oxygen activity during deposition, which is set by the amounts of atomic and molecular 

oxygen present during growth45. In SrRuO3 thin films made by MBE, nominal stoichiometry 

is easier to achieve because the fluxes of molecular and atomic oxygen can be controlled 

independently (also from the Ru and Sr supplied). Atomic oxygen, for example, can be 

generated in an MBE chamber using a microwave plasma source and its pressure can be tuned

by adjusting the oxygen flow supplied to the plasma source and the generator power45. At low 

oxygen activity, in SrRuO3 thin films made by MBE, stoichiometry is mostly set by the 

amounts of Sr and Ru supplied during growth. At oxygen activities much higher than those

suitable for good stoichiometry, Ru vacancies become unavoidable and independent on the 

amount of Sr and Ru supplied. The increase in Ru vacancies is most likely due to the formation 

of the volatile compound RuO4, whose concentration increases at higher oxygen activity45,68.

For SrRuO3 thin films grown by PLD other than MBE, it has been observed that they tend 

to be normally Ru deficient because a (high) atomic oxygen pressure already exists within the 

plume, and very little can be done to avoid this2,45. This is one of the reasons why, although 

PLD allows to grow SrRuO3 thin films of consistently good quality, PLD-grown SrRuO3 thin 

films have normally lower RRR compared to thin films of similar thickness deposited by MBE, 

where the fluxes of molecular and atomic oxygen can be independently controlled during 

growth2,45. A good crystallinity in SrRuO3 thin films grown by PLD, however, can still be 

achieved, even in the presence of Ru vacancies45.

Now we discuss the effect that off-stoichiometry has on the SrRuO3 thin film properties. Ru 

vacancies induce an expansion in the SrRuO3 unit cell and this is mechanism responsible for a 

reduction in the TCurie, which can be of up to several tens of Kelvin degrees from its bulk value 

of ~ 160 K (refs. 45,69). As the amount of Ru vacancies increases, the ratio between the 

pseudocubic apc and cpc-axis lattice parameters (cpc/apc) becomes lower than 1, and the 

saturation magnetisation of SrRuO3 increases up to 2.4 μΒ/Ru atom69. This suggests that the 


12

high spin configuration of half d filled Ru4 ions stabilises69, as the crystal structure is distorted 

from cpc/apc > 1 to cpc/apc < 1 by the increase in Ru vacancies.

Oxygen vacancies on their hand cannot be distinguished by Ru vacancies on the basis of 

lattice parameters2. It has been reported, however, that variation in the oxygen stoichiometry 

of the thin films achieved by varying the oxygen partial pressure, P(O2), during growth, can 

influence the RuO6 octahedra rotation and tilting. Like thin films with Ru vacancies, also 

SrRuO3 thin films with oxygen vacancies exhibit an increase of the cpc-axis lattice constant. 

The increase in the cpc-axis lattice constant leads to a deformation of the unit cell from 

orthorhombic to tetragonal70,71. Missing oxygen ions at the octahedral apexes due to oxygen 

vacancies increase the Ru-Ru repulsion along the cpc-axis, which suppresses the rotation of the 

RuO6 octahedra along the apc- and bpc-axes and stabilizes the tetragonal phase72,73. These 

SrRuO3 thin films with a tetragonal structure usually exhibit different electronic transport 

properties compared to thin films with an orthorhombic unit cell. The different physical 

properties are also related to differences in the RuO6 octahedra tilting and rotation – which are 

known to have significant effect on the SrRuO3 properties (as further discussed below).

For thin films grown by PLD, as P(O2) during growth is reduced, the Sr/Ru ration increases 

and the structure stabilises into the tetragonal phase72. Compared to orthorhombic thin films 

grown in the same conditions but at higher P(O2), tetragonal SrRuO3 thin films show an 

increase in their room-T ρ, most likely due to a reduced hybridization between the Ru 4d and 

O 2p orbitals in the tetragonal phase compared to the orthorhombic one72. In addition to the 

electrical properties, also magnetic properties, and in particular magnetic anisotropy, change 

as result of the structural phase transition into the tetragonal phase introduced by oxygen 

vacancies. In a study carried out by W. Lu et al.70, for example, they show that SrRuO3 thin

films with a thickness larger than 50 nm and tetragonal structure have perpendicular magnetic 

anisotropy, whilst thin films with the same thickness and orthorhombic structure exhibit in-

plane magnetic anisotropy70. These results also suggest that stochiometric control is a possible 

route to stabilize the tetragonal phase and the corresponding magnetic anisotropy in SrRuO3

thin films, in addition to varying epitaxial strain or reducing the film thickness70.

Substrate-induced strain is another parameter that can be tuned to obtain SrRuO3 thin films 

with desired physical properties for conventional and quantum electronics. Epitaxial strain in 

stoichiometric SrRuO3 thin films can have a similar effect on magnetism as Ru vacancies in 

off-stochiometric films, meaning that strain can also induce suppression in TCurie (ref. 34). The 

correlation between the structural and physical properties of SrRuO3 with substrate-induced 

strain has been the subject of several studies2,34,74-78. From a structural point of view, there is 


13

general agreement that SrRuO3 thin films under substrate-induced tensile strain tend to have a 

tetragonal structure41,78, whilst SrRuO3 thin films under substrate-induced compressive strain 

have an orthorhombic structure76. For a fixed growth substrate, strain can also change 

depending on several growth parameters including the SrRuO3 thin film thickness. SrRuO3 thin 

films under tensile strain on (110) GdScO3 substrates, for example, show an orthorhombic 

structure up to a certain thickness (~ 16 nm), beyond which these SrRuO3 thin films assume a 

tetragonal structure41. 

In general, strain imposed by the substrate, changes the Ru-O and Ru-O-Ru bond lengths, 

as result of the different rotation of the RuO6 octahedra. In the orthorhombic phase, the RuO6

octahedra rotate out-of-phase about the [010]pc ([1-10]or), which is the magnetic easy axis, and 

in-phase about the [100]pc ([001]or) direction, which is the magnetic hard axis70. The rotations 

along these two orthogonal in-plane directions, however, is suppressed in the tetragonal 

phase70, meaning that in-plane symmetry breaking is different between the orthorhombic and 

tetragonal phases. This difference in in-plane symmetry breaking is considered to be the reason 

for the different magnetic anisotropies observed in orthorhombic and tetragonal SrRuO3 thin 

films70,78 (see also above).

Twinning can also have a profound effect on the magnetocrystalline properties of SrRuO3

thin films and introduce anisotropy axes that are different from those of thin films of optimal 

quality. In the paramagnetic state above TCurie, epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films on (001) SrTiO3

which are free of twin-plane defects and with ideal stoichiometry exhibit uniaxial

magnetocrystalline anisotropy with an easy axis coinciding with the orthorhombic bor-axis79,80

(i.e., the [010]or axis of the orthorhombic unit cell). We note that epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films 

grown on (001) SrTiO3 substrates are oriented with the pseudocubic [001]pc axis (equivalent to 

the orthorhombic [110]or axis) perpendicular to the substrate surface, so that the bor-axis is at 

45° out of the plane of the film. The uniaxial nature of the magnetocrystalline anisotropy in 

SrRuO3 has been demonstrated using Lorentz force microscopy81 as well as through

measurements of the magnetic susceptibility χ around TCurie. χ shows an increase along the bor-

axis, as T is decreased from room T down to TCurie, by several orders of magnitude compared 

to its value measured along the aor-axis79. Below TCurie, the easy magnetization axis deviates 

from the bor-axis due to an orientational transition82 occurring as 𝑇 is decreased, so that the 

angle that the easy axis forms with the surface normal, meaning the [001]pc- (or [110]or-) axis,

decreases progressively from ~ 45° to ~ 30° (ref. 10). Deviations of the angle formed by the 

magnetic easy axis with the [001]pc ([110]or) axis in this films from these values have also been 

reported, which depend on the presence of intertwined crystal nanodomains83 or on the 


14

crystallographic orientation or on the type of growth mode (e.g., step flow or two dimensional) 

of the SrRuO3 thin film80. In general, changes in the orientation of the magnetic easy axis in 

SrRuO3 thin films are due to structural deformations of the orthorhombic unit cell8 (e.g., due 

to strain). Structural deformations are in turn associated with changes in the rotation and tilt of 

the RuO6 octahedra3,84. As discussed above, when the strain in SrRuO3 thin films changes, the 

magnetic easy axis of the films can switch from having an out-of-plane to an in-plane 

orientation70,84,85.This implies that there exists a strong correlation between spin-orbit 

interactions in SrRuO3 and its magnetocrystalline anisotropy (ref. 2).

Variations in the physical properties of SrRuO3 thin films as a function of film thickness 

have also been intensively investigated. An evolution from a metallic to an insulating behaviour 

in the electronic transport properties has been observed as the thin film thickness is decreased

below a critical value, dc, of a few unit cells (u.c.)86-88. The smallest dc reported to date89

corresponds to 2 u.c. for bare SrRuO3 thin films, although similar low-T conductivity values to 

ref.89 have been obtained for SrRuO3/SrTiO3 superlattices with SrRuO3 thickness of 1 u.c.

(ref. 90). Earlier studies ascribed the thickness dependent of the metal-to-insulator transition 

(MIT)
to several extrinsic mechanisms like
disorder, defects, surface electronic 

reconstruction86,87,91-92 etc. which become more significant as the SrRuO3 film thickness is 

reduced and that can lead to an enhancement in weak localization effects86. Nonetheless, the 

atomic-scale precision currently achieved in the growth of ultrathin SrRuO3 thin films rules 

out extrinsic mechanisms as the origin of the MIT, since a MIT is still observed in ultrathin 

SrRuO3 grown with state-of-the-art deposition techniques for a thickness below 2 u.c. One of 

the intrinsic mechanisms that could be responsible for the MIT is the ratio between the 

Coulomb interaction and the Ru 4d bandwidth resulting from the hybridizations between the 

Ru 4d and O 2p orbitals93. This hybridization is strong and anisotropic in thicker SrRuO3 films

generally due to substrate-induced strain, but it becomes weaker in the ultrathin limit leading

to Ru-O bonds with an ionic nature and localised Ru 4d orbitals.

The MIT in the electronic transport is also accompanied by a suppression in ferromagnetism, 

which disappears at a critical thickness below 3 and 4 u.c. in bare SrRuO3 thin films88,89. 

Exchange bias has also been observed in SrRuO3 thin films of thickness smaller than 3 u.c., 

which points to the possible presence of antiferromagnetic regions in contact with 

ferromagnetic ones88. In a theoretical study91, it was suggested that ferromagnetism should 

even persist in thin films of 2 u.c. and that only SrRuO3 thin films with a thickness of 1 u.c. 

should be non-ferromagnetic due to surface-driven effects. Based on this suggestion, it was 

recently found90 that one-unit-cell-thick SrRuO3 films embedded in a SrTiO3/SrRuO3


15

superlattice, where surface effects are non-existent, are indeed ferromagnetic with a magnetic 

moment of approximately 0.2 μΒ/Ru atom. This magnetic moment in one-unit-cell-thick 

SrRuO3 was measured by scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) 

microscopy90.

Magnetic properties in SrRuO3 and possible approaches to tune them have also been the 

subject of several studies. Despite the numerous studies on ferromagnetism and the recent 

observation of two-dimensional magnetism90 in SrRuO3, the itinerant nature of ferromagnetism 

in SrRuO3 remains not fully understood94. Understanding the origin of this magnetism, also 

studying parent compounds with general structure ARuO3 (A = Sr, Ca, Ba), can prove crucial 

to access those mechanisms that can be exploited to enhance TCurie in SrRuO3. Enhancing TCurie

in SrRuO3 and bringing it closer to room T would significantly extend the number of 

applications of SrRuO3. Recent studies on parent compounds like CaRuO3 and BaRuO3 have 

already contributed over the past years to better understand the ferromagnetism in SrRuO3. 

There exist in fact significant differences between the magnetic properties of all these ARuO3-

type compounds. Studying the physical mechanisms behind these differences can help better 

understand ferromagnetism in SrRuO3 and how to manipulate its TCurie.

Although both SrRuO3 and CaRuO3, for example, have an orthorhombic structure with 

Pbnm space group, evidence for ferromagnetic ordering in CaRuO3 has not been found. Several 

studies95,96, however, suggest that CaRuO3 is on the verge of ferromagnetic ordering. Unlike 

SrRuO3, BaRuO3 has a cubic structure with space group Pm-3m and it shows ferromagnetic 

ordering with TCurie ~ 60 K (ref. 97). The saturation magnetization of BaRuO3 (measured at 

T = 5 K in an applied H of 5 Tesla) is of ~ 0.8 μB/Ru atom97, which is significantly lower than 

the saturation magnetization of ~ 1.6 μB/Ru atom measured in SrRuO3.

Earlier studies on Sr1-xCaxRuO3 suggested that the suppression of magnetism in CaxRuO3 is 

due to a decrease in the Ru-O-Ru bond angle happening for increasing Ca concentration x (the 

bond angle decreases from 163° in SrRuO3 to 148° in CaRuO3). Theoretical calculations of the 

band structure of Sr1-xCaxRuO3 compounds also showed that, as the Ru-O-Ru bond angle 

reduces, the band degeneracy at the Fermi level decreases until the Stoner criterion is no longer 

verified, and magnetism is suppressed98. This explanation, however, cannot account for the 

reduced TCurie of BaRuO3 compared to SrRuO3 (the Ru-O-Ru bond angle is 180° in BaRuO3), 

even if size variance effects (induced by Ca and Ba doping) are considered. It should be finally 

noted that Sr1-yBayRuO3 compounds show typical Curie-Weiss (CW) behavior for T > TCurie

and critical fluctuations99 near TCurie, whereas Sr1- xCaxRuO3 compounds exhibit an unusual 

χ- 1(T) dependence as TCurie is approached97.


16

C. Q. Jin and co-workers97 have recently argued that the reduction in TCurie for Sr1- yBayRuO3

for increasing Ba concentration y is caused by band broadening induced by Ba doping, since 

CW behavior persists for T > TCurie. This is in contrast with Sr1- xCaxRuO3, where Ca doping 

leads to a reduction in the Ru-O-Ru bond angle and to a dilution of the ferromagnetic 

interactions, which results in a χ-1(T) dependence typical of the Griffiths’ phase97. The 

arguments proposed by these researchers97 are also supported by a recent study100 based on 

density functional theory + dynamical mean-field theory (DFT+DMFT). These DFT+DMFT 

calculations suggest that the ferromagnetic transition in ARuO3 ruthenates depends on three 

parameters: the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level EF (in accordance with Stoner’s 

model), the DOS peak position with respect to the ruthenate band edge and its bandwidth. 

Based on these theoretical models, CaRuO3 has no ferromagnetism due to its large lattice 

distortion (octahedra tilt and rotation in CaRuO3 is larger than in SrRuO3), which leads to a 

split of the DOS peak and in turn to a decrease in the DOS at the EF. BaRuO3, which has a 

large DOS peak, it is also characterized by larger bandwidth and by a DOS peak position further 

away from the upper band edge than SrRuO3 – these are all factors that result in a suppression 

of TCurie for BaRuO3 compared to SrRuO3.

In addition to epitaxial strain, which can be used to change the structure and in turn the 

magnetic and electronic transport properties of SrRO3, reversible control over the same 

physical properties has also been achieved using an electric field (E) applied, for example, via 

ionic liquid gating (ILG). The earliest studies on the effect of ILG in SrRuO3 already showed 

that an E applied via ILG can induce large changes in the anomalous Hall component of the 

transverse resistivity ρxy (ref. 101) as well as shifts in the onset T of the MIT and in the TCurie of 

ultrathin SrRuO3 films102.

More recently, magneto-ionic effects have been reported by Li and co-workers103, where an 

E applied via ILG has been used to move ions (e.g., H+ or O2-) in or out of SrRuO3 and induce 

large changes in the SrRuO3 magnetic state and THEs. In this study103, the authors have shown 

that a large H+ gradient induced in SrRuO3 via ILG leads to a protonated compound HxSrRuO3

with a paramagnetic metallic ground state. The reason for the ferromagnetic-to-paramagnetic 

phase transition is a change in the electronic band properties induced by a structural change in 

SrRuO3. As the proton H+ concentration increases under the VG applied via the ionic liquid, the 

cpc-axis constant in SrRuO3 undergoes an expansion. Theoretical calculations103 show that, in 

this distorted structural configuration, the DOS gets strongly modified due to a splitting of the 

Ru t2g bands which leads to a shift in the spectral weight towards lowers energies. As a result, 


17

the DOS changes in such a way that the Stoner criterion for ferromagnetism is not fulfilled,

and the paramagnetic ground state becomes energetically favored over the ferromagnetic state.

Also, in ref.103, at the boundaries of the ferromagnetic-to-paramagnetic phase transition, a 

hump-like feature is observed in the transverse Hall resistivity ρxy, which Li and co-workers 

ascribe to a THE. The emergence of a THE is related to an increase in the Dzyaloshinskii-

Moriya interaction (DMI) due to inversion symmetry breaking at the ionic liquid/SrRuO3

interface. From this point of view, these results suggests that magneto-ionic effects induced by 

ILG can be used as an effective tool to reversibly control THEs and the magnetic ground state 

in SrRuO3 thin films. As for the case of SrRuO3, H+ migration induced by ILG has also been 

successfully used in the parent compound CaRuO3, where it induces a reversible E-driven 

magnetic transition from the paramagnetic ground state into an exotic ferromagnetic ground 

state104.

In addition to reversible E-driven variations in H+ concentration under ILG, reversible E-

driven changes in oxygen vacancies (VO) have also been shown to be an effective tool to vary 

the DMI strength and to reversibly switch on/off THEs in SrRuO3 heterostructures. To achieve 

a E-tunable modulation in VO, in a recent study105 a SrRuO3 thin film was grown onto a SrTiO3

substrate, which had been pre-annealed in vacuum to generate a high VO amount. Since the VO

formation energy in SrRuO3 is lower than in SrTiO3, VO tend to diffuse from SrTiO3 into 

SrRuO3 and to accumulate at the SrRuO3/SrTiO3 interface. Under the application of an E

~ 3 kV/cm, in this study105 J. Lu and co-workers were able to manipulate the VO concentration 

at the SrRuO3/SrTiO3 interface and to reversibly enhance or suppress hump-like and bump-

like features related to the THE in SrRuO3.

To summarize, in Fig. 3 we show the main physical properties of SrRuO3 and list the 

structural parameters and experimental tools which can be used to control such properties, as 

discussed in this section.

FIG. 3. Main physical properties of SrRuO3 along with structural parameters and 
experimental tools that can be used to control them. 


18

1.3 SrRuO3 down to the 0D limit

The physical properties described above together with the mechanisms that can be used to 

control have been deducted based on extensive studies on 3D SrRuO3 thin films and bulk 

SrRuO3 single crystals. There are nonetheless other physical properties and effects that emerge 

in SrRuO3 structures once their dimensionality is reduced. These properties and effects can 

become particularly relevant when making devices for quantum electronics, which are often 

based on SrRuO3 systems with dimensionality lower than 3D. In this section, we review the 

main properties of SrRuO3 that change when reducing its dimensionality from 3D to 0D.

The easiest way to realize two-dimensional (2D) SrRuO3 is by sandwiching a single SrRuO3

layer between two insulating SrTiO3 layers. For this system, it has been theoretically calculated

that SrRuO3 should behave as a minority-spin half-metal ferromagnet, with a magnetic moment 

of μ = 2.0 μB/Ru atom106. In general, and magnetic reconstruction tend to destroy the 

metallicity and an insulating behavior is experimentally observed for such 2D SrRuO3 system, 

albeit with finite low-T conductivity values of ~ 10 μS (ref. 90).

Like for other perovskite thin films with general ABO3 structure, the dimensionality of the 

network formed by the BO6 octahedra (B = Ru for SrRuO3) can also be tuned by growing 

ABO3/A’B’O3 superlattices and properly varying the orientation of the growth substrate and 

the periodicity of the superlattice107. In the superlattice, the BO6 octahedra normally form a 2D 

network on a lattice matched (001)-oriented substrate (Fig. 4a), where each octahedra is 

connected with four others in the ab-plane and it is isolated by a B’O6 octahedron along the c-

axis (i.e., along the growth direction). The 2D network can be reduced to a one-dimensional 

(1D) network when a (110)-oriented substrate is used, since in this case each BO6 octahedron 

is only connected to two octahedra along one of the in-plane axes (Fig. 4a). An additional 

reduction to the 0D regime can be obtained if the superlattice [ABO3]1/[A’B’O3]n is grown on 

a (111)-oriented substrate107 (Fig. 4a). If there are two or more consecutive ABO3 layers with 

one period, meaning a [ABO3]m/[A’B’O3]n superlattice (with m > 1), then the BO6 octahedra 

can even be connected in a zig-zag way forming a zig-zag 0D pattern107 (Fig. 4a).

The reduction in dimensionality of the RuO6 octahedra network leads to a variation in the 

magnetic properties of SrRuO3 which changes from being a ferromagnetic metal in the 2D limit 

to an Ising paramagnet in the 1D regime to a ferromagnetic insulator in the 0D case. In the 0D 

regime, a very significant change in the magnetization has been observed upon strain 

application107, which can be exploited in the future for the realization of strain-actuated 

nanoscale memories108 based on 0D SrRuO3. Ab-initio calculations also show that half-


19

metallicity and orbital selective quantum confinement can be realized when the dimensionality 

of RuO6 octahedra network in SrRuO3 is reduced from the 3D to the 0D107 case.

The 1D growth of SrRuO3 can be also tuned by varying the growth rate and the SrTiO3

(001) substrate miscut angle109, which in turn determines the height of the 1D steps (Fig. 4b). 

By further increasing the substrate miscut angle, a bunching of the 1D steps can be obtained109. 

Step bunching in semiconductors and metals has received great attention because bunched 

surfaces can serve as template for the growth of low-dimensional structures110,111. 1D steps of 

SrRuO3 can therefore be used as template for the epitaxial growth of oxide nanowires including 

nanowires made of oxide superconductors, which can be investigated for the emergence of 

topological superconducting phases (see also section 2.4).

FIG 4. Realization of SrRuO3 structures with reduced dimensionality. (a) Illustration of 
different levels of dimensionality obtainable in a SrRuO3-based superlattice for the RuO6
octahedra network [Figure reproduced from ref. 107]. (b) Atomic force microscopy image 
showing finger-like 1D SrRuO3 units with height profile (c) measured along a line 
perpendicular to the one of the finger structures [Figure reproduced from ref. 109]. 
Scanning electron microscopy images in (d) and (e) of 0D SrRuO3 nanodots made on a 
SrTiO3 substrate with high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy images 
of a single nanodot at lower (f) and higher magnification (g). [Figure reproduced from 
ref. 112].

It has also been shown112 that an array of 0D SrRuO3 nanodots fabricated from a SrRuO3

thin film can exhibit higher TCurie compared to that of the original film (Fig. 4c). The reason for 

the increase in TCurie is a relaxation of the strain occurring as result of the removal of lateral 

material around each nanodot112 compared to the original thin film matrix.

Epitaxial heterostructures of SrRuO3/CoFeO4/BiFeO3 have also been used to fabricate 

nanodots113 by the nanoporous anodic alumina template method. The array of nanodots shows


20

strong magnetoelectric coupling with clear magnetization switching induced by an applied E –

which suggests the possibility of using these 0D SrRuO3 nanodots array for high-density 

memory storage (> 100 Gbit/in2) or logic devices. 

More recently, it has been shown114 that a single SrRuO3 grain boundary (GB) formed in 

SrRuO3 grown onto a SrTiO3 bicrystal has transport properties equivalent to that of a spin 

valve. Apart from highlighting that GBs play a key role towards determining the performance 

of SrRuO3-based devices, this study114 suggests that low-dimensionality GBs in SrRuO3 can 

be used for the realization of novel spintronic devices.

2. SrRuO3 in conventional and quantum electronics 

After reviewing the physical properties of SrRuO3 and the experimental tools that can be used 

to control them in section 1, in this section 2 we discuss how SrRuO3 can be combined with 

other material systems to exploit its physical properties for electronics applications. We do not 

only illustrate relevant devices that have already been realised, but we also propose devices 

that have never been made to date. For these new devices, we provide proof-of-concept layouts

and explain how they can offer competitive advantages over their equivalents and/or how they 

can be used in future studies to better understand effects recently discovered in SrRuO3.

Fabrication of devices based on SrRuO3 is nowadays possible thanks to the variety of 

techniques suitable to make SrRuO3 thin films with excellent properties as well as thanks to 

the extensive number of studies reported on the optimization of these thin film properties. In 

addition, the fabrication of SrRuO3 in ultrathin film form and, even more recently, in the form 

of freestanding oxide nanomembranes have paved the way towards the investigation of 

material systems, where the reduced dimensionality of SrRuO3 and its interfacing to other 

oxides have resulted in the discovery of exciting and novel physical effects. The interplay and 

coexistence within the same material of different types of interactions like spin-orbit 

interaction, electron-electron correlations, and charge-to-lattice coupling makes SrRuO3 a rich 

playground for the investigation of a variety of physical phenomena and quantum effects. This 

wide range of physical phenomena and quantum effects includes orbital magnetic moment and 

polarization, magnetocrystalline anisotropy, ultranarrow magnetic domains, MIT (as thickness

is reduced to the 2D limit), and Berry effects (Fig. 5).

It appears clear to us that achieving control over this rich set of phenomena and effects can 

lead to the development of devices for conventional electronics (e.g., spin-orbit torque and 

domain wall spintronics, straintronics) with better performance than existing ones as well as to 


21

novel devices for the emerging field of quantum electronics (e.g., topological electronics and 

superconducting electronics). 

In addition to proposing new proof-of-concept electronic devices based on SrRuO3 and to 

illustrating their layouts, in the following we also describe the materials challenges that have 

to be addressed to realize such devices. We show that addressing these challenges is crucial to 

achieve control over the quantum effects and physical phenomena underlying the devices’

functioning and ultimately affecting their performance.

FIG. 5. Most promising conventional and quantum electronic applications of SrRuO3
(green boxes) based on its physical properties (yellow boxes). The physical properties are 
determined by the competition of different interaction mechanisms (orange boxes) that 
can be enhanced and manipulated in ultrathin SrRuO3 structures also through coupling 
these SrRuO3 structures to other oxide materials (light blue boxes). 

In section 2.1, we suggest new SrRuO3-based devices that are promising for conventional 

electronic applications, both at room T and cryogenic Ts. In section 2.2, we illustrate the usage 

of freestanding SrRuO3 nanomembranes for novel nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) 

with flexomagnetic and flexoelectric properties. In sections 2.3 and 2.4, we propose innovative 

SrRuO3 devices for quantum electronic applications, which are based on the manipulation of 

Berry effects in SrRuO3 (section 2.3) or on the coupling of SrRuO3 to superconductors for the 

generation of topological superconducting states (section 2.4).

2.1 Memory and spintronic devices

The application of SrRuO3 for the realization of room-T memory devices is prevented by the 

low TCurie ~ 160 K of SrRuO3 compared to other 3d-transition metals and ferromagnetic alloys 


22

– which are currently in use for the same applications firstly because they have TCurie higher 

than room T. As a result of this limitation, SrRuO3 has been used mostly as epitaxial metallic 

electrode for the fabrication of room-T oxide memory devices based on other oxides.

The ever-growing interest in cryogenic electronics, however, is boosting the investigation 

of energy-efficient and high-density memory technologies that can operate efficiently also at 

low Ts. From this point of view and given its high compatibility with other functional oxides 

like piezoelectrics or ferroelectrics, SrRuO3 can play a major role for the future integration of 

oxide memory devices in cryogenic CMOS circuits.

We start this section 2.1 by reviewing two applications, one for room-T electronics (i.e., 

ferroelectric tunnel junctions) and the other for cryogenic electronics (i.e., spin valve devices) 

where SrRuO3 has been used with good results as metallic electrode and ferromagnetic layer, 

respectively. Both cases (illustrated in 2.1.1), however, represent examples of applications, 

where we think that SrRuO3-based devices are unlikely to become de facto technological 

standards, at least until protocols for large-scale production of SrRuO3 devices with optimal 

properties and integrable with CMOS technology are developed (as discussed in section 1). 

At the end of section 2.1, we outline two other technological applications that may stem 

from the exploitation of specific SrRuO3 properties. We suggest that two specific properties of 

SrRuO3, namely its narrow magnetic domains and high spin-orbit coupling, can be used to 

realise electronic devices that would offer a competitive advantage over existing devices used 

for the same technological applications.

2.1.1. SrRuO3-based devices for conventional electronics with good performance

For memory devices operating at room T, one of the applications of SrRuO3 that has already 

showed good results stems from its use as an epitaxial metallic electrode in ferroelectric tunnel 

junctions (FTJs). FTJs exploit the change in resistance observed upon polarization reversal of 

a ferroelectric material to encode digital information. If the ferroelectric is sufficiently thin, by 

flipping its polarization, it is possible to change its transmission probability for electrons which 

gives rise to a tunnelling electroresistance effect115 (Fig. 6a). A variety of FTJs with SrRuO3

used as bottom metallic layer have been already realized, and the list of ferroelectrics used 

include BaTiO3 (refs. 116-120), BaxSr1 - xTiO3 (ref. 19), PbZrxTi1-xO3 (refs. 121-123), and BiFeO3

(ref. 124). The changes in resistance observed in these FTJs upon polarization reversal are 

typically of two orders of magnitude at room T 119, and can increase further at cryogenic Ts due 

to a suppression of phonon-assisted indirect tunnelling as T is decreased120.


23

FIG. 6. Conventional memory and spintronic devices with SrRuO3. (a) Illustration of a 
ferroelectric tunnel junction working at room temperature, where SrRuO3 is used as 
metallic layer for the growth of an oxide ferroelectric. An applied write pulse switches 
the polarization of the ferroelectric and changes the electron tunneling current between 
a low- (Rlow) and high-resistance (Rhigh) state [Experimental data in (a) reproduced from 
ref. 115]. (b) Schematic of a spin valve, where SrRuO3 in its ferromagnetic state is used to 
exchange bias another ferromagnet (F) or antiferromagnet (AF) layer. Depending on its 
sign, the exchange bias leads to different asymmetric magnetization versus field, M(H), 
loops, which in turn define different H ranges for the antiparallel (Rhigh) and parallel 
(Rlow) states of the device.

Although FTJs appear promising for the development of non-volatile resistance-switching 

random-access memories (RRAMs), both at room T and cryogenic Ts, the direct current 

reading of their state is based on the measurement of tunnelling current124. This implies that 

the ferroelectric layer has to be thin to maximise the tunnelling current and facilitate the device 

readout. Nevertheless, ultrathin ferroelectric barriers exhibit other undesirable effect like a high 

leakage current which can degrade the device performance125. As for other oxide FTJs, also in 

SrRuO3-based FTJs, ferroelectricity disappears below a critical thickness of the ferroelectric 

barrier. This critical thickness strongly depends on the uniformity and sharpness of the 


24

terminations of the SrRuO3 interface with the ferroelectric – for which oxygen pressure during 

growth also plays a major role118. Achieving fine control over these parameters will play a 

crucial role towards the development of FTJ RRAMs (at either room T or cryogenic Ts) based 

on SrRuO3.

Similar to the case of FTJs, due to its good lattice matching with other oxides, SrRuO3 has 

also been used below its TCurie to exchange-bias other magnetic oxide thin films (ferromagnets 

and antiferromagnets) grown epitaxially onto SrRuO3. Exchange bias is typically used in 

spintronics devices like spin valves to pin the magnetization of a hard ferromagnetic layer, 

whilst the magnetization of the soft ferromagnetic layer can be switched via an applied 

magnetic field H.

One of the peculiarities of the exchanged-biased heterostructures based on SrRuO3 is that 

both negative and positive exchange bias can be realised at the interface between SrRuO3 and 

another magnetic oxide (Fig. 6b). Negative (positive) exchange bias occurs as result of a 

ferromagnetic (antiferromagnetic) alignment of interfacial spins of the two coupled magnetic 

materials, and it manifests as a shift of the magnetization hysteresis loop along the same 

(opposite) direction of the applied cooling H. Negative exchange bias has been reported for 

SrRuO3 epitaxially grown onto the antiferromagnet Sr2YRuO6 (ref.126), whilst positive 

exchange bias has been reported for SrRuO3 grown onto the half-metal ferromagnetic oxide 

La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 (refs. 127-130) or onto Pr0.7Ca0.3MnO3 (ref. 131).

In general, positive exchange bias is more difficult to realize experimentally compared to 

negative exchange bias, and it has been reported only for a few other materials combinations 

including FeF2/Fe (ref. 132), Cu1-xMnx/Co (ref. 133) and Ni81Fe19/Ir20Mn80 (ref. 134) bilayers. The 

possibility of realising both positive and negative exchange bias when SrRuO3 is coupled to 

another oxide magnetic material can be used for the realization of novel spin valve devices, 

where one could switch between different states by varying the sign of the exchange bias. 

Like for other coupled ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic systems, the sign of the exchange 

bias in SrRuO3-based heterostructures is generally set, once the heterostructure is grown, at 

given T and cooling H (Hcool). Under fixed Hcool and T, the sign of the exchange bias in SrRuO3

heterostructures is set by interfacial mixing and layer thickness which are fixed after growth –

these parameters affecting magnetocrystalline anisotropy and layer magnetization128,129,131.

Within the same heterostructure, however, the sign of the exchange bias can be changed upon 

varying Hcool or T. In general, for a bilayer system consisting of two coupled magnetic 

materials, a large enough Hcool can induce either a negative exchange bias for a ferromagnetic-

like interface coupling, or positive exchange bias for antiferromagnetic-like interface coupling. 


25

In a few systems, a sign change in the exchange bias has been observed upon increasing Hcool

– which is typically due to the formation of domain walls parallel or antiparallel to the bilayer 

interface135. For SrRuO3-based systems, a change in the sign of the exchange bias induced by 

a variation in Hcool has been reported, for example, in SrRuO3/PrMnO3 superlattices136. Here, 

the antiferromagnetic exchange coupling switches from positive to negative upon increasing 

Hcool. Controlling the sign of the exchange bias by varying Hcool, however, is not practical for 

applications. This is because such approach usually involves increasing the operational T of 

the device about TCurie, changing Hcool and cooling down the device again. Reversible control 

of the exchange bias sign (e.g., voltage-driven) at a fixed operational T would be better for 

technological applications. 

A reversible voltage-driven switching in the sign of the exchange bias has been recently 

achieved137 at room T in systems not including SrRuO3 and consisting of the antiferromagnet 

BiFeO3 coupled to ferromagnets like Co0.9Fe0.1 or La2/3Sr1/3MnO3. This type of devices, which 

rely on the strong coupling existing in the multiferroic BiFeO3 between ferroelectric and 

antiferromagnetic order, can be operated at room T and pave the way for a new type of ultralow 

energy non-volatile memory. It seems very unlikely tto us hat similar devices based on SrRuO3

can be developed and gain a competitive advantage over devices like those in ref. 137.

2.1.2. SrRuO3-based devices for conventional electronics with competitive advantage

The two applications discussed in section 2.1.1 and shown in Fig. 6 are less likely to be carried 

out with SrRuO3-based devices other than with already existing devices based on other 

materials. Nonetheless, we identify two other applications for conventional electronics, where 

SrRuO3 devices can offer better performance than existing devices and become the better 

alternative, once high reproducibility and scalability in their fabrication is also achieved. 

The first application which we illustrate stems from a characteristic magnetic property of 

SrRuO3, consisting in its domain walls being much narrower than in other oxide ferromagnets. 

The narrow domain walls of SrRuO3 can be used for low-dissipation racetrack cryogenic 

memories. In racetrack memories based on domain wall motion, data bits are stored in the form 

of magnetic domains that are then moved along a nanowire strip, typically through the 

application of a current138. The main issue of the racetrack memories proposed to date, 

however, is the significant Joule heating induced by the large currents which are typically 

required to move the magnetic domains through small nanowires139. Thanks to its small domain 

wall width (DWW), SrRuO3 can be potentially used to overcome this issue and realise 

racetrack memories with lower energy dissipation than those proposed to date. It has been


26

already reported, for example, that domain wall motion in SrRuO3 can be induced with a 

current density that is at least one order of magnitude lower than that needed for ferromagnetic 

metals with similar depinning fields140,141. Although an exact measurement of the DWW in 

SrRuO3 has still not been done, it has been estimated140 that the DWW in SrRuO3 can be as 

low as 3 nm at T < 100 K. An upper limit of 10 nm has also been estimated for DWW in 

SrRuO3 based on scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) measurements142 at 4.2 K on 

SrRuO3/YBa2Cu3O7 bilayers. The upper limit for DWW in this STS study142 has been 

determined by studying the spatial variation of the superconducting gap induced in SrRuO3 by 

YBa2Cu3O7 (YBCO) via the proximity effect. A more accurate measurement of the DWW in 

SrRuO3 can be carried out nowadays using local magnetometry techniques with very high 

spatial resolution like nitrogen vacancy magnetometry143.

The second use case of SrRuO3 for conventional electronics which we identify is the 

realization of spin-orbit torque (SOT) spintronic devices based on SrRuO3 with electrical 

control of their state. To date, SOT devices have been fabricated mostly with heavy metals 

(e.g., Pt, Ta, W, Bi etc.) or semiconductors, whilst oxides have remained mostly unexplored

for SOT spintronics. Oxide materials like SrRuO3 or SrIrO3, however, also exhibit a large spin 

Hall conductivity, σSH, and can be therefore used as source of SOT. Spin-torque ferromagnetic 

resonance (ST-FMR) experiments144 done on Co/SrRuO3 show that SrRuO3 has a 

σSH > 1.5 × 103 ℏ/e S cm-1 (ℏ = 1.05 x 10-34 J s being the reduced Planck constant) with a spin-

Hall angle θSH > 0.24 at T = 60 K – these are values comparable to those of heavy metals.

In addition to the large σSH, other studies also show there exists a direct correlation in 

SrRuO3 between the spin orbit interaction and the rotation and tilting of the RuO6 octahedra144. 

To achieve precise tunability over the SOT strength, further investigation is required, since it 

is currently difficult to disentangle all the mechanisms affecting the SOT strength (e.g., strain, 

RuO6 octahedra rotations).

Independently on the physical mechanisms (or combinations thereof) affecting SOT, it 

seems that the SOT strength can be tuned electrically. Some mechanisms like the RuO6

octahedra rotation and strain, which seem to affect the SOT strength, can be indeed controlled

electrically. One possible way to achieve the electrical control is by applying a voltage to a 

piezoelectric exerting strain onto SrRuO3, as sketched in Figs. 7d and 7e. We think that 

achieving electrical tunability of the SOT strength in SrRuO3 will pave the way for new SOT 

spintronic devices with electrical control of their state.

By carefully engineering the SrRuO3 strain in Ni81Fe19/SrRuO3 bilayers and using a

combination of ST-FMR and in-plane harmonic Hall voltage measurements146,147, it has 


27

already been shown that the SOT efficiency and σSH can increase by almost two orders of 

magnitudes. The authors of these studies146,147 correlate the increase in SOT strength and σSH

with a change in the crystal structure of SrRuO3 from orthorhombic (under compressive strain)

to tetragonal (under tensile strain). We note that these large σSH (up to ~ 441 × ℏ/e S cm- 1) and 

SOT efficiency (up to ~ 0.89) values 146,147 have been measured for SrRuO3 at room T.

FIG. 7. Application of SrRuO3 for spin-orbit torque memories. Illustration of a typical 
spin-transfer torque magnetoresistive random access memory (STT-MRAM) device in 
(a) and of a spin-orbit torque- (SOT-) MRAM device in (b). [Panels (a) and (b) are 
adapted from ref. 148]. In a STT-MRAM device the switching of the magnetization of the 
free magnetic layer is obtained via a tunnelling current injected through a magnetic 
tunnel junction, whereas in a SOT-MRAM device the current is injected through a layer 
with high spin orbit coupling that exerts SOT on the free layer. (c) Main advantages and 
challenges for the realization of SOT-MRAM devices based on SrRuO3 with the layout 
shown in (d) and (e), where a gate voltage VG applied to the piezoelectric is used to 
reversible switch the RuO6 octahedra and tilt them between two configurations. Each 
configuration leads to a different SOT on the free magnetic layer, allowing to electrically 
switch the device between two states.

Based on the above results and considerations, we envision that the SrRuO3-based devices 

that we propose with high SOT efficiency can be used also at room T. As a result, these devices 


28

can find application in the next generation of SOT- magnetoresistive random-access memories 

(SOT-MRAMs). SOT-MRAM been recently proposed to overcome the major limitations of 

spin-transfer torque memories (STT-MRAMs)148, which represents the current state-of-the-art 

MRAM technology149 (Fig. 7a). STT-MRAM has already entered volume production in all 

major foundries, also thanks to its compatibility with CMOS technology149. 

The main limitations of STT-MRAM are related to large switching currents needed for STT-

MRAM operation. These large switching current prevent the application of STT-MRAM for 

ultra-fast operations at the sub-nanosecond regime, also due to the stochastic nature of STT. In 

addition, large switching currents also generate reliability issues because they have to flow 

through the thin oxide of the magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) as shown in Fig. 7a, which 

reduces the MRAM endurance over time. By contrast, the switching current in SOT-MRAM 

does not flow across the MTJ, but through a heavy metal or another material coupled to the 

magnetic free layer (Fig. 7b).

To make the switching of the free layer magnetization in a SOT-MRAM device more 

deterministic, a small H field is often applied perpendicular to the free layer. Several H-free 

schemes have also been proposed150-153, but these usually result in a more complex memory 

cell fabrication. Recently, a H-free switching of the perpendicular magnetization in SrRuO3

was achieved in WTe2/SrRuO3 bilayers at 40 K, where the WTe2 acts as source of out-of-plane 

spin polarization due to its reduced crystal symmetry154.

We envision new SOT devices where the SOT strength in SrRuO3 can be tuned, also at 

room T, via voltage-driven strain exerted by a piezoelectric coupled to SrRuO3 (Figs. 7d and 

e). The voltage-driven modulation in SOT strength leads to a change of the switching current 

for the magnetization of a free layer grown onto SrRuO3 between two values. The bistability 

in the switching current is used to reversibly switch the SOT device between two states.

2.2 Straintronics

The possibility of modulating the spin-orbit interaction in SrRuO3 by inducing structural 

distortions in the material can also be exploited for the realization of novel transducers, 

actuators, and sensors. Shape memory effect materials like Heusler compounds, which exhibit 

changes in their shape in response to the application of an external stimulus (e.g., temperature, 

magnetic field, strain) are nowadays already studied for these applications.

Although shape memory effects are rare in oxides with the only exception of oxide 

multiferroics, they have recently been observed155 also in SrRuO3. In SrRuO3, shape memory 

effects emerge possibly due to a combination of the strong spin-orbit interaction with a weak 


29

pinning of the magnetic domain walls. It has been shown that, upon field cooling SrRuO3 in a 

H of ~ 1 Tesla applied along the [110]pc axis, a single domain state can be induced in SrRuO3, 

as result of the growth of domains parallel to the applied H155. Unlike for Heusler alloys156,157, 

SrRuO3 remains in this structurally distorted phase, which is stable at low Ts and against 

magnetic field sweeps. Upon warming above TCurie155, SrRuO3 exhibits a shape memory effect

and relaxes back from a single domain into a multidomain state configuration.

It has been recently shown that epitaxial strain can also be used as an effective tool to vary 

the magnitude and sign of the Berry curvature and in turn modulate related effects. Several 

groups had already demonstrated that epitaxial strain affects the magnetic properties of SrRuO3

thin films41,74,78,158-161. The magnetic properties are affected by strain due to the strong coupling 

existing between lattice distortion and electronic band structure in SrRuO3. In their recent 

study, Wakabayashi and co-workers53 have performed a systematic investigation of the effect 

of epitaxial strain on the electrical and magnetic properties of ultrahigh-quality SrRuO3 thin 

films. These thin films were deposited using machine-learning-assisted MBE on various 

perovskite substrates with mismatch ranging from -1.6% to 2.3% (compared to bulk SrRuO3).

Following this approach, the authors could single out all the effects that strain induces on its 

own on magnetic and transport properties in SrRuO3. All the other concurrent factors typically 

affecting magnetic and transport properties (e.g., defects, off-stoichiometry etc.) were in fact 

not present in these thin films due to their ultrahigh quality.

Motivated by these previous results and by the fact that Berry effects are also very sensitive 

to changes in the electronic band structure, Tian and co-workers162 have recently investigated 

the effect of epitaxial strain on the AHE in both tensile- and compressive-strained SrRuO3. In 

their study162, they have found that epitaxial strain can be used as a tool to manipulate the Berry 

curvature, and the corresponding AHE (in amplitude and sign). Consistently with previous 

reports41,78, Tian and co-workers have shown that, as the strain changes from compressive to 

tensile, the magnetic easy axis of the SrRuO3 thin films changes from an out-of-plane to an in-

plane orientation. The change in magnetic anisotropy is accompanied by a variation in the sign 

and amplitude of the anomalous Hall component of the transverse Hall resistivity ρxy. Ab-initio 

calculations suggest that the change in ρxy is due to change in the energies of Ru d-orbitals, 

whose rotation varies under strain. The rotation of the Ru moments in real space in SrRuO3

thin films under tensile strain affects their Berry curvature. For thin films under tensile strain, 

the ρxy versus H, ρxy (H), curves exhibit a non-monotonic trend in the intermediate H region at 

low Ts, in contrast with the typical hysteretic behavior expected for an AHE, which recovers 

in ρxy (H) for SrRuO3 thin films under compressive strain. Also, whilst for compressive-


30

strained SrRuO3 thin films, ρxy changes sign with T and it goes from positive to negative at a T 

typically of ~ 125 K before becoming null at TCurie, for tensile-strained thin films ρxy is negative 

independently on T. These results reported by Tian et al.162 pave the way for the application of

epitaxial strain engineering to reversibly control AHEs in SrRuO3-based devices.

By applying strain to SrRuO3 in the form of freestanding nanomembrane, it should be 

possible to achieve larger variations in the SrRuO3 crystallographic structure, and in turn a 

larger modulation of the SrRuO3 physical properties (transport and magnetic) and of related 

effects (e.g., AHEs and THEs). Free-standing single-crystal oxide membranes of various 

materials including SrRuO3 have already been fabricated either via either chemical or 

mechanical lift-off163-169 from the growth substrate (Fig. 8). Both processes are non-destructive, 

unlike other physical release methods used for silicon-on-insulator technology170 or for light-

emitting diodes based on GaN171. Freestanding oxide nanomembranes can be made without 

any thickness limitations down to the monolayer limit167 and can sustain strain up to 8% 

(ref.169), which is unachievable through conventional strain engineering of thin-film 

heteroepitaxy. In addition to the large strain that can be exerted onto them, SrRuO3 oxide 

nanomembranes can be stacked onto materials that are difficult to grow epitaxially onto 

SrRuO3 either because they have different lattice parameters or because they are stable under

different growth conditions163,164.

The fabrication of freestanding SrRuO3 nanomembranes using the chemical lift-off 

approach has already been reported by several groups168,172-176. In all these cases, the SrRuO3

thin film has been grown onto a lattice-matched sacrificial layer which is grown, without 

breaking vacuum, in between the substrate and SrRuO3. To date, the sacrificial layer that has 

been mostly used is Sr3Al2O6, which can be dissolved in water as illustrated in Fig. 8a. 

Nonetheless, the water solubility of Sr3Al2O6 also represents a limiting factor for practical 

applications due to its instability in air. A more stable sacrificial layer is the brownmillerite 

SrCoO2.5, which has been successfully used by H. Peng and co-workers176 for the fabrication 

of freestanding SrRuO3 nanomembranes with (001)pc, (110)pc and (111)pc orientations. Unlike

Sr3Al2O6, SrCoO2.5 is stable in air176, which is important from an application-related 

perspective. Also, SrCoO2.5 can be dissolved using eco-friendly weak acid solutions such as 

vinegar, carbonated drinks and acetic acid176. 

Compared to the epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films before lift-off, free-standing SrRuO3

nanomembranes may exhibit a lower spin state with a moment of 1.0 μΒ/Ruatom and 1.7 μΒ/Ru

atom for the (011)pc -oriented and (111)pc-oriented nanomembranes, respectively174. (001)pc-

oriented SrRuO3 nanomembranes fabricated by chemical lift off with a SrCoO2.5 sacrificial 


31

layer exhibit remarkable changes in magnetic anisotropy compared to the SrRuO3 thin films 

before lift off176. Changes in magnetic anisotropy, however, are not observed for (110)pc- and 

(111)pc-oriented SrRuO3 nanomembranes made following the same chemical lift-off 

procedure176. 

FIG. 8. Fabrication of free-standing single-crystal SrRuO3 nanomembranes. (a) Steps for 
the fabrication of a SrRuO3 nanomembrane consisting of deposition of a SrRuO3 thin 
film on a water-soluble thin film (e.g., Sr3Al2O6) epitaxially grown on a SrTiO3 substrate, 
dissolution of the sacrificial layer in water, pick up of the nanomembrane with 
polycarbonate and dry transfer of the nanomembrane onto the desired substrate (e.g., 
Si). (b) Illustration of fabrication of SrRuO3 nanomembranes with different orientations, 
optical image of a nanomembrane on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), characterization of 
the structural topography of the nanomembrane via atomic force microscopy, scanning 
electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy. (c) Magnetization versus 
applied field loops for SrRuO3 nanomembranes with different orientations and grown 
onto different sacrificial layers, and comparison of their in-plane and perpendicular 
magnetic anisotropy with those of the original SrRuO3 thin films before dissolution of the 
sacrificial layer in water in (d). [Panels from (b) to (d) adapted from ref. 168].

Probing the T evolution of the mechanical response of resonators fabricated from 

freestanding SrRuO3 nanomembranes through laser interferometry, it has been also shown that 


32

structural phase transitions occurring in SrRuO3 can be identified175. This approach suggests a 

novel method to identify phase transition occurring in complex oxide systems based on 

freestanding nanomembranes.

SrRuO3 nanomembranes and related heterostructures can be applied for high-performance 

NEMS including suspended Bragg reflectors, piezoelectric sensors, and mechanical 

transducers. These NEMS devices can be also integrated with CMOS devices, if the epitaxial 

growth of SrRuO3 at high T is carried out separately from the rest of the CMOS fabrication 

processes. 

Although SrRuO3 nanomembranes have not yet been tested for NEMS applications, it has 

already been shown that nanomembranes of other oxides such as SrTiO3, which like SrRuO3 

is neither piezoelectric nor ferroelectric, have a flexoelectric figure of merit (i.e., the curvature 

of the nanomembrane divided by the E). The figure of merit of these SrTiO3 nanomembranes 

are comparable to those of the best piezoelectric and ferroelectric NEMS reported in the 

literature164. Since the figure of merit of a NEMS scales up with the inverse of the cube of the 

thickness164 and the oxide nanomembranes tested to date for NEMS are of ~ 100 nm in 

thickness177, SrRuO3 nanomembranes of a few tens of nanometres in thickness can provide a 

much higher figure of merit compared to existing state-of-the-art flexoelectric NEMS. 

Freestanding of ultrathin SrRuO3 can also be stacked onto ultrathin nanomembranes of other 

oxide materials, as it is done to make heterostructures of 2D van-der-Waals (vdW) materials. 

Heteroepitaxial oxide nanomembranes with SrRuO3 can be tested, apart from their flexoelectric 

figure of merit, also for their flexomagnetic properties, meaning for an increase in their

magnetization under an applied strain gradient (Fig. 9). Flexomagnetism has not been yet 

estimated nor observed in complex oxides, but SrRuO3 may exhibit large flexomagnetic effects 

due to its strong coupling of lattice and spin degrees of freedom. Flexomagnetic SrRuO3-based 

NEMS devices can be potentially used for the realization of magnetic sensors with extremely 

high sensitivity178 and resonant frequency tuneable over a very wide frequency range179.

2.3 Berrytronics

Engineering non-collinear magnetic textures and achieving control over topological effects 

correlated to them has emerged as a promising route for the development of novel quantum 

electronic devices. Studies triggered by these motivations have also led to the discovery of new 

phases in condensed matter, which is crucial for the development of quantum technologies.

In the ongoing studies on topology associated to non-collinear spin textures, SrRuO3 has 

gained a primary role. SrRuO3-based heterostructures with strong inversion symmetry breaking 


33

and spin-orbit coupling can be engineered180-182. Strong inversion symmetry breaking, and 

spin-orbit coupling are key ingredients to generate spin textures that are non-collinear in real 

space and have a topological character.

FIG. 9. Realization and testing of NEMS devices with SrRuO3 oxide nanomembranes. (a) 
Illustration of a setup to measure the bending of a NEMS device based on a SrRuO3 oxide 
nanomembrane heterostructure: the objective beam is focused onto the sample and the 
light reflected is collected to form an interference pattern with the reference beam. Any 
height difference in the nanomembrane stack induces a phase difference in the light 
reflected. The nanomembrane device is connected to electronics for the measurement of 
charge or magnetic moment variations of the oxide nanomembrane (dielectric or 
ferromagnet) sandwiched between metallic SrRuO3 nanomembranes [Figure adapted 
from ref.177]. The SrRuO3 nanomembrane can also be used on its own (i.e., without stack) 
and tested for its flexoelectric (at room T or below) and flexomagnetic properties (below 
TCurie). (b) Main advantages and challenges of NEMS devices made from SrRuO3-based 
oxide nanomembrane heterostructures.

Most of the topological and spin-transport phenomena studied in SrRuO3 are intimately 

related to the curvature of a band structure property of materials known as Berry phase (ΦB)

and to its curvature ΩB, which in SrRuO3 is non-null. ΦB is a geometric quantum phase183, 

while ΩB (Fig. 10a) acts for electrons as the equivalent of a fictitious magnetic field that 

introduces a transverse velocity component to the electrons’ motion. A non-null curvature of 

ΦB can contribute to electronic quantum effects like the AHE184, the Spin Hall Effect185-187


34

(SHE), the THE188-189, the Quantum Hall Effect190 (QHE) and affect a variety of other 

phenomena183 like orbital magnetism191-192, electrical polarization193-194, quantum charge 

pumping195, and topological superconducting phases196-197.

The ΩB in momentum- (k-) space induces a cyclotron motion of electronic modes around a 

crossing point that gives a nonzero intercept in the Landau level phase diagram. The existence 

of this motion has been verified experimentally in transport experiments through measurements 

of Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations181,198. Sources of either time-reversal or inversion symmetry 

breaking can lead to a non-zero ΩB that is locally distributed in the Brillouin zone and can 

manifest with a strong spin-orbital and band dependence. Regardless of the magnetization of a 

material, a modulation in ΩB can have a dominant effect on quantum transport in topological 

materials. A modulation in ΩB can be achieved by manipulating symmetry and band structure 

properties,

Sources of non-null ΩB can also exist in real space. When an electron crosses a spatially 

inhomogeneous magnetic pattern, it acquires a real-space Berry phase, if the magnetic moment 

of the electron varies constantly along the local magnetization. The gradient of the spin 

orientation converts into a Berry vector potential that allows to define an emergent magnetic 

field. Therefore, any magnetic structure that varies smoothly in real space leads to an emergent 

magnetic field and in turn to a geometrical Hall effect.

Like for the spatial variation, a time variation of a spin pattern results in an emergent E. 

Among all possible magnetic spin textures, skyrmions are ideal textures to investigate these 

emerging electric and magnetic fields. Magnetic skyrmions with their characteristic 3D spin 

hedgehog typical form in materials with spiral ordering due to the Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya 

interaction (DMI), which can occur as result of inversion symmetry breaking, double exchange 

for ferromagnetic correlations or Heisenberg exchange for antiferromagnetic correlations. 

In oxides like SrRuO3, due to a sizable spin-orbit coupling and a non-trivial spin texture, the 

Berry curvature can also be strongly enhanced and modulated in sign and amplitude. This is 

possible due to the coexistence of a magnetic spin texture in real space and a non-trivial Berry 

curvature ΩB in k-space in SrRuO3 (Fig. 10b). Such coexistence is quite unique, but it also 

indicates a high complexity which requires distinct strategies for exploiting and disentangling 

the difference sources of Berry curvature effects. In this context, for the engineering of new 

devices as well as for fundamental reasons, it is challenging to evaluate how modifications of 

the spin texture of SrRuO3 (e.g., via VG-applied strain) can tune physical effects stemming from 

its intrinsic non-null ΩB (see also section 2.4). 


35

One of the current most important challenges related to ΩB effects in SrRuO3 is 

understanding how to differentiate and separately access real-space and k-space contributions 

to ΩB. Disentangling these two types of contributions is crucial to achieve control over their 

magnitudes in the Hall response and other quantum transport effects exploited for SrRuO3-

based quantum electronic devices. The ongoing debate on the actual existence of topological 

spin textures (skyrmions) in SrRuO3 also fits into this wider research objective.

FIG. 10. Berry effects in real and momentum space. (a) Berry curvature representation 
in the 3D momentum space. The vector field in the 2D momentum space shown in (b) 
corresponds to the azimuthal projection of the Berry curvature in (a) and it is normally
correlated to a non-trivial spin texture in real space (c).

The existence of nanometric-sized skyrmions in SrRuO3 was first suggested by Matsuno 

and co-workers after the observation180 of a THE manifesting through hump- and bump-like 

features in the H field dependence of the Anomalous Hall conductance (σAH) of bilayers of 

SrRuO3 thin films on SrIrO3 (Fig. 11). The argument made by the Matsuno et al. to explain 

their observation180 is that heavy transition-metal elements like Ir can induce DMIs in systems 

of reduced dimensionality like ultrathin SrRuO3 films. The magnetic exchange occurring 

through the Ir-O bonds can induce a DMI between Ru spins in the SrRuO3 ferromagnetic state

which, for a suitable amplitude of DMI, would lead to the nucleation of skyrmions. 

We note here that the magnetic ground-state phase diagram of SrRuO3-based systems with 

DMIs is hard to compute theoretically because it is difficult to quantify the DMI amplitude and 

to use models with localized spins and short-ranged interactions in the metallic state of SrRuO3. 

Results like those of Matsuno and co-workers180 on the H-dependence of σAH are therefore 

difficult to model. A similar H-dependence of σAH to that first reported in ref.180 has also been 

shown in other studies181,199. Nevertheless, features resembling a THE have also been measured 


36

for SrRuO3 thin films deposited on SrTiO3 without any SrIrO3 or similar interface layer200-204. 

These results and the subsequent observation of bump- and hump-like features also in the H

variation of σAH of asymmetric SrTiO3/SrRuO3/SrIrO3 and symmetric SrIrO3/SrRuO3/SrIrO3

trilayers205 have led to consider alternative mechanisms to skyrmions to explain the physical 

origin of the hump- and bump-like features in the SrRuO3 σAH.

FIG. 11. Topological and anomalous Hall effect in SrRuO3 systems. (a) Schematic of 
SrIrO3/SrRuO3 bilayer on SrTiO3 substrate with a high-resolution transmission electron 
microscopy image of the SrIrO3/SrRuO3 interface. (b) Magnetic field dependence of the 
Hall resistivity ρH of SrIrO3 (2 u.c.)/SrRuO3 (5 u.c.) at T = 80 K showing the contributions
from the anomalous Hall and topological Hall effects with corresponding temperature 
evolution of ρH for the same device shown in (c). [Figure adapted from ref. 180].

The characteristic T evolution of the σAH at H = 0 also suggests that intrinsic contributions, 

in addition to real-space magnetic spin textures, must play an important role in determining the 

AH response of SrRuO3 thin films. The sign change in σAH occurring at a T approximately 

equal to half TCurie, and the variation in both sign and amplitude of σAH when going from 

SrTiO3/SrRuO3/SrIrO3 to SrIrO3/SrRuO3/SrIrO3 trilayers205, cannot be explained on the basis 

of conventional mechanisms contributing to the AHE in ferromagnetic materials like side-jump 

and screw-scattering contributions (Fig. 12). Also, these variations in σAH cannot be accounted 

for only based on skyrmions, as they occur at the same H values where the SrRuO3

magnetization (M) reverses its direction in the M(H) loops. 


37

The σAH variation in an applied H must be also connected to the intrinsic nature of the 

SrRuO3 electronic bands in the ultrathin limit. The low-energy electronic structure and band 

topology of SrRuO3 is in fact characterized by topologically nontrivial spin-polarized bands at 

the Fermi energy (Fig. 12). These bands act as sources of non-null Berry curvature ΩB and lead 

to competing contributions in the AH response205. It is hence clear that k-space contributions 

to ΩB, in addition to the real-space magnetic textures, are essential to fully understand and 

control the AH response of SrRuO3-based systems.

FIG. 12. Anomalous Hall effect in ultrathin SrRuO3 with symmetric boundary 
conditions. Next-nearest-neighbor interorbital hopping (a) and dispersion of the Ru t2g
bands along kx = ky at a given magnetization (b). Berry curvature (c) and spin-
polarization (d) associated to the topologically nontrivial Ru t2g bands close to the Fermi 
level. Temperature evolution for SrIrO3/SrRuO3/SrIrO3 and for SrTiO3/SrRuO3/SrTiO3
of the transverse Hall resistance Rxy (g) and evolution of the intrinsic contribution to 
anomalous Hall conductivity σAH for Ru/Ti, Ru/Ir and Ru/Ru as a function of the Ru 
magnetization (h) [Figure adapted from ref. 205].

Apart from the above heterostructures based on SrRuO3, a remarkable evolution of ΩB in 

k - space has been recently reported also for a system consisting of ultrathin SrRuO3 combined 

with LaAlO3, which is a polar wide bandgap insulator206. Van Thiel and co-workers have 

shown206 that the synthesis of RuO2-terminated SrRuO3 ultrathin films interfaced with LaAlO3

results in levels of charge doping of SrRuO3 that go well beyond those obtainable with 

electrostatic gating. The high doping results in a pronounced profile with excess electron 

density along the growth axis of the SrRuO3 thin film. In the ultrathin limit of SrRuO3, the 


38

doping-induced electronic charge reconstruction leads in turn to a variation of the ΩB sign in 

k-space, which manifests experimentally as a variation in the σAH sign206. 

The theoretical analysis carried out in ref.206 identifies the charge pinning at the 

SrRuO3/LaAlO3 interface and the resulting inversion symmetry breaking as the dominant 

mechanisms responsible for the reconstruction of ΩB in k-space. This implies that the change 

in ΩB sign is a consequence of a topological-like transition in k-space other than of a change in 

the electronic band occupation. The results of this work206 suggest that electronic charge 

reconstruction can be used in the future as an effective tool to manipulate ΩB and correlated 

topological transitions in SrRuO3, which in turn affect measurable quantities like σAH.

Based on the above consideration, it is evident that SrRuO3 represents a material with 

potential coexistence of k- and real-space Berry effects, whose origins and characteristic scales 

are completely distinct. A remarkable aspect of this coexistence is that topological 

configurations in real and k-space occur only for specific regions of the phase diagram as a 

function of parameters such as T, H and electron filling.

Apart from mapping the parameters’ space to determine the configurations with a dominant 

real- or k-space character of ΩB in SrRuO3, another future challenge is to differentiate 

configurations based on real-space topological spin textures from those with a non-trivial 

topology in k-space. To address all these questions, we suggest two possible experiments. 

Our first proposal is sketched in Fig. 13 and exploits the spin dependence of σAH in SrRuO3

in its ferromagnetic state. The key point here is to evaluate the spin content of the AH voltage 

measured across a SrRuO3 Hall bar. To do this, a spin-polarized current can be injected into 

SrRuO3 (e.g., through a half-metal ferromagnet coupled to SrRuO3) and the resulting AH 

voltage should be detected with ferromagnetic electrodes. This should be done for different 

configurations, where the magnetization is switched from parallel to antiparallel with respect 

to the SrRuO3 magnetization or from oriented along the SrRuO3 easy axis or along the SrRuO3

hard magnetic axis. The as-measured transverse Hall signal would contain information about

transport processes conserving spin and can be compared (in sign and amplitude) to another 

transverse Hall signal measured on the same Hall bar with normal-metal electrodes (Fig. 13).

The comparison would allow to understand whether the transverse voltage is due to a ΩB

dominated by spin-conserving processes (related to k-space topological contributions) or by 

non-conserving spin scattering processes (related to real-space topological contributions). 

Our second proposal to understand the dominant contributions to ΩB in SrRuO3 is based on 

the design of heterostructures where SrRuO3 is interfaced with a superconducting material. As 

discussed in detail in section 2.4, we expect that the interplay of magnetic states having a non-


39

trivial ΩB in real or k-space with a superconductor would allow to distinguish between the two 

types of topological contributions.

FIG. 13. Berrytronic device to determine the nature of Berry effects in SrRuO3. The 
device consists of a SrRuO3 Hall bar, where a fully spin-polarized current, which is 
generated by current injection through a half-metal, induces a transverse voltage 
detected with both spin-sensitive (e.g., ferromagnet) and charge-sensitive (e.g., normal 
metal) contacts. If k-space contributions are dominant, the Berry curvature is expected 
to be mostly spin-conserving and the transverse voltage measured with the spin detectors 
has a sign dependent on the half metal magnetization and that can be opposite to the 
voltage signal measured via charge detectors (a). The scenario in (a) is opposite to that
shown in (b), where dominant real-space contributions make the Berry curvature mostly 
not spin-conserving and the two transverse voltage signals have always the same sign. 

2.4 Topological superconductivity and superconducting berrytronics

Due to its good lattice matching with other oxide perovskites including high-temperature 

superconductors (HTSs) like YBCO, SrRuO3 has been already studied in a variety of 

superconducting devices such as Josephson junctions26-28,207,208 (JJs) and superconducting spin 

valves209. As a result of its good lattice matching with YBCO and thermal stability, it has also

been shown that SrRuO3 can also be used as buffer layer to improve the performance of HTS 

coatings210 and to boost their superconducting critical current (Ic) density. 

Several groups have characterised the superconducting properties of JJs with SrRuO3 as 

weak link including YBCO/SrRuO3/YBCO JJs (refs.26, 28,207) and hybrid metal/metal-oxide JJs 

like Nb/Au/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/SrRuO3/YBCO (ref. 208). Most of these experiments and 

independent low-T STS measurements on SrRuO3/YBCO bilayers142 suggest that the 

superconducting order parameter can penetrate into SrRuO3 over a depth larger than 20 nm at 


40

4.2 K (refs. 26,27,142,207), which is an order of magnitude larger than the typical superconducting 

coherence length ξF in a strong ferromagnetic metals like Ni or Co (~ 1-2 nm; refs. 211,212). This

long-ranged proximity effect has been ascribed to crossed Andreev reflections taking place 

near domain walls at the SrRuO3/YBCO interface142 or to resonant tunnelling of quasiparticles 

through an oxygen-depleted layer forming at the SrRuO3/YBCO interface207. It should be 

noted, however, than in hybrid metal/metal-oxide Nb/Au/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/SrRuO3/YBCO JJs a 

long-ranged proximity effect is only observed when both ferromagnets (La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 and 

SrRuO3) are present208. The authors of ref.208 relate this long-ranged proximity to the formation 

of spin-polarised (spin-triplet) Cooper pairs generated by a non-collinear magnetization213 in 

the LSMO/SRO system.

The generation of spin-triplet pairs in superconductor/ferromagnet (S/F) hybrids has been 

investigated by several groups due to its potential for the realization of spintronic devices 

operating in the superconducting state with very low energy dissipation. Within this research 

field, known as superconducting spintronics214, SrRuO3 has been shown to be promising for

the realization of Sr2RuO4/SrRuO3 (S/F) devices.

Anwar et al. have demonstrated215 that the growth by PLD of SrRuO3 at high T (~ 600 C) 

on single-crystal Sr2RuO4 substrates results in a reorientation of the RuO6 octahedra on the 

Sr2RuO4 surface leading to proximity-induced superconductivity in SrRuO3. This is an 

important result for applications because bare Sr2RuO4 single crystals have an insulating 

surface due to atomic reconstructions216 – which makes it difficult to study the superconducting 

proximity effect between the superconductor Sr2RuO4 and other materials. According to Anwar 

and co-workers, the PLD growth of SrRuO3 on Sr2RuO4, restores metallic behaviour at the 

SrRuO3/Sr2RuO4 interface and it allows to measure proximity-induced superconductivity in 

SrRuO3 over a ξF of ~ 9 nm (ref. 217). In addition to the long ξF, which is comparable to that 

reported in YBCO/SrRuO3 systems26,27,142,207, Anwar et al. also studied the proximity-induced 

superconducting gap in SrRuO3
by fabricating
Au/SrTiO3/SrRuO3/Sr2RuO4
tunnel 

junctions218. The shape and T-evolution of gap features in the differential conductance dI/dV

of these junctions show an unusual behavior which the authors reconcile with an anisotropic

superconducting gap induced in SrRuO3 with p-wave or d-wave symmetry218. It is worth noting 

that the interplay between different mechanisms including orbital loop current magnetism 

recently discovered219 at the Sr2RuO4 surface and inverse proximity220 makes the 

Sr2RuO4/SrRuO3 interface a complex system to study and that can indeed host spin-triplet and 

other unconventional superconducting states.


41

The study of the interplay of Berry effects in SrRuO3 with conventional or unconventional 

superconductors represents an unexplored line of research, which can lead to the discovery of 

topologically protected superconducting states for quantum electronics.

We first discuss here the topological phases that may arise if SrRuO3 is coupled to another 

spin-singlet superconductor. The first case that we consider refers to the superconducting 

proximity between a conventional spin-singlet superconductor and SrRuO3 acting as a 

topological metal with uniform magnetization. This assumption is supported by the fact that 

SrRuO3 has electronic bands with a non-trivial topological character and non-null Chern 

number. The superconducting proximity between a topological metal like SrRuO3, in a state 

with uniform magnetization below TCurie, and a spin-singlet s-wave superconductor can result 

in the emergence of topological superconductivity with topologically protected nodes at the 

Fermi level. This topological superconducting state induced in SrRuO3 by proximity effect is 

analogous to that deriving from the formation of pairing correlations between electronic states 

of bands with nontrivial topological structure and marked by a gauge flux distribution in k-

space221. Unlike for the typical superconducting proximity effect, where the structure of the 

superconducting gap in k-space is related to the attractive potential responsible for the 

formation of pairing correlations, electronic pairing in topological bands is determined by the 

topological character of the normal-state electronic wavefunctions. In proximitized 2D vdW 

heterostructures, for example, the vorticity of the superconducting gap in k-space is set by the 

vorticity associated to the Chern number for each of the spin of the two electrons forming a 

Cooper pair221. This also suggests that a non-trivial monopole density can arise in a topological 

superconducting state.

The topological superconductivity which we envision in these spin-singlet s-wave 

superconductor/SrRuO3 systems should be robust against disorder, and it can lead to anomalies 

in both charge (Josephson effect) and heat transport in superconducting devices. Also, the way 

in which the vorticity of electrons pairing in k-space can affect the formation of Andreev 

bounds states in the proximitized region close to the interface between a spin-singlet s-wave 

superconductor and a ferromagnet like SrRuO3 represents an open question still yet to address. 

We expect that a very good electronic matching is needed at the interface between SrRuO3 and 

a conventional s-wave superconductor to trigger topological superconductivity. For this reason, 

the epitaxial growth of a metal-oxide superconductor (e.g., LiTi2O4) with a spin-singlet s-wave 

order parameter onto SrRuO3 would be ideal to meet this requirement. 

Another interesting system which can be explored in the future for the realization of a 

topological superconducting phase consists of SrRuO3 proximity coupled to a nodal d-wave 


42

superconductor like YBCO, as shown in Figs. 14a and b. In such case, the combination of 

induced spin-triplet pairs at the YBCO/SrRuO3 interface with inversion symmetry breaking 

can gap the otherwise nodal (i.e., gapless) excitations in YBCO and turn YBCO into a 

topological superconductor222. This type of topological phase engineering in the 

superconducting state has been proposed223 for systems consisting of a HTS in the presence of 

an applied magnetic field or of heavy fermion superlattices, where mixed spin-triplet pairing

is generated through inversion symmetry breaking. A challenging aspect to achieve topological 

superconductivity in SrRuO3/YBCO is to control the strength of the inversion symmetry 

breaking, the magnetic anisotropy and the degree of inverse proximity at the SrRuO3/YBCO 

interface. Here, we point out that the lack of observation of the topological phases to date in 

the SrRuO3/YBCO may be due to the absence of a significant contribution of the spin-triplet 

order parameter in a spin-singlet superconductor. To overcome this issue and realize 

topological superconductivity, an important ingredient, which has not been fully exploited to

date, could be given by an increase in the atomic spin-orbit coupling at the SrRuO3/YBCO

interface. Indeed, one can employ an interlayer between YBCO and SrRuO3 that is marked by 

a strong spin-orbit coupling to enhance the spin-triplet pairing component in the d-wave 

superconductor. For instance, an heterostructure of the type SrRuO3/SrIrO3/YBCO with few 

layers of SrIrO3 at the interface of YBCO can be a viable route to increase the density of spin-

triplet pairs and in turn obtain a topological superconductor. Also, since the spin-triplet order 

parameter has a vectorial character described by the so called d-vector, another challenging

aspect is the control of the d-vector orientation due to its coupling with the magnetization224 at 

the interface and in the presence of inversion symmetry breaking. Furthermore, inverse 

proximity effects with the leakage of the spin polarization from SrRuO3 into YBCO can play 

a relevant role in reconstructing the d-vector220 and in turn to achieve a topological 

superconducting state – which can be switched on/off depending on the magnetic anisotropy 

and degree of electronic matching at the interface. In the topological superconducting phase, 

we expect the appearance of chiral currents at the edge of the superconductor, which can be 

visualized by means of magnetic imaging technique like scanning SQUID magnetometry. 

Moreover, the charge and spin conductance will be affected by the presence of topological 

modes in a way that will be different from the case of tunneling into a pure nodal d-wave 

superconductor.

An additional path that we foresee for the realization of topological superconductivity in 

superconducting heterostructures based on SrRuO3 stems from the non-collinear magnetic spin 

textures (e.g., skyrmions) which have been suggested to nucleate in ultrathin SrRuO3 at its 


43

coercive field or in heterostructures180 combining SrRuO3 with a high-spin orbit coupling 

material like SrIrO3 (see also section 2.3). The proximity effect between a conventional spin-

singlet superconductor and a non-collinear magnetic spin texture (Fig. 14c) can be exploited to 

convert spin-singlet pairs into chiral or helical spin-triplet pairs. This physical scenario is 

inspired by the theoretical finding that an s-wave superconductor can be turned into a p-wave 

superconductor, if it is interfaced with a semiconductor with large Rashba spin-orbit 

interaction, under the assumption that a source of time-reversal symmetry breaking (e.g., a

magnetic exchange field) is also present225,226. Fabricating this type of devices sketched in 

Fig. 14b, however, requires achieving a systematic control over the generation of skyrmions in 

SrRuO3-based systems and then performing systematic studies on their coupling to 

superconductors.

FIG. 14. SrRuO3-based system for realization of topological superconductivity. 
Illustration of a superconducting heterostructure consisting of a d-wave superconductor 
(e.g., YBCO) with nodal gapless density of states (a) and realization of a topological 
superconducting state in YBCO with gapped density of states due to a combination of 
inverse proximity with SrRuO3, spin-orbit coupling and inversion symmetry breaking 
(b). Schematic of another system for the realization of topological superconductivity (c) 
consisting of an s-wave superconductor in proximity coupling with a non-collinear 
magnetic spin texture (e.g., a skyrmion) in SrRuO3. The topological states forming at the 
boundary of the non-collinear magnetic region are chiral and give rise to a spontaneous 
current flowing along the edge.

Since a rotating magnetic field is equivalent, from the point of view of conversion of spin-

singlets into spin-triplets, to the combination of Rashba spin-orbit coupling with an applied 

homogenous magnetic field, one can engineer quasi-1D topological superconductors with 

magnetic spin textures, or alternatively with antiferromagnetism or ferromagnetism in the 


44

presence of external currents and Zeeman fields. A magnetic helix crystal hence represents a 

suitable system to realize topological superconductivity when coupled to a conventional 

superconductor, since a magnetic helix can simultaneously generate spin-orbit coupling (due 

to inversion symmetry breaking) and a magnetic exchange field. While a magnetic helix is 

sufficient to induce a topological superconducting state, to achieve a strong topologically 

protected state in a number of dimensions greater than one, however, it is necessary that the 

magnetic spin texture winds in all direction. As a result, whilst a magnetic helix coupled to a 

conventional superconductor can induce spinless p-wave pairing in 1D, a spin skyrmion is 

necessary to get an effective spinless chiral p+ip topological superconductor in 2D. Evidence

for topological superconductivity stabilized by non-trivial magnetic spin textures has been 

recently demonstrated in various materials platforms consisting of magnetic atoms/clusters 

deposited on a superconductor surface or of superlattices hosting chiral magnetic textures227-

230. One of the challenges to address in the future to achieve topological superconductivity from 

the proximity effect between a superconductor and magnetic skyrmions in SrRuO3 is to control 

the mutual competition between the magnetic and superconducting order parameters and to 

determine the best magnetic spin texture for the realization of topological superconductivity231.

A magnetic skyrmion in SrRuO3 can also trigger formation of vortices into a superconductor 

coupled to SrRuO3. The spin polarization of the skyrmion combined with the spin-orbit 

coupling can induce a charge current at the superconductor/SrRuO3 interface. An important 

challenge here is to differentiate between effects genuinely induced by the exchange coupling 

between the skyrmions in SrRuO3 and the superconductor from those instead merely related to 

the magnetic stray fields. It should be noted that exotic spin-polarized quasiparticle states can 

also form in these topological superconducting phases – these quasiparticle states can be 

exploited for low-dissipation spin transport in the superconducting state232.

Although
the complexity of the superconducting topological phases based on 

SrRuO3/superconductor hybrids is very high, there are several degrees of freedom that can be 

exploited to control these phases including the type of magnetic spin texture in SrRuO3

triggering them, their shape, and the strength of their coupling between the spin texture and the 

superconducting condensate. Deviations of the magnetic spin texture from a magnetic helix, 

for example, can induce different types of topological superconductivity due to changes in the 

corresponding spatial distribution of the magnetic moments. For an inhomogeneous magnetic 

helix, for example, topological domains may form inside the magnetic material along with 

topologically protected modes nucleating at the domain walls233. This suggests that control 

over topological superconducting phases can be achieved, for example, by engineering 


45

domains with inequivalent non-collinear magnetic spin texture. Local spectroscopy techniques 

can be used to resolve the spatial profile of the magnetic texture. We expect that variations in 

the magnetic spin textures are likely to occur in SrRuO3 and SrRuO3-based heterostructures 

due to the itinerant ferromagnetism of SrRuO3 and to nonuniform stray fields.

In addition to the generation of topological superconductivity, we foresee another important 

application of SrRuO3, which relies on using its Berry curvature as mechanism for spin-triplet 

generation in superconducting spintronic devices. The possibility that magnetic materials with 

non-null Berry curvature can be used to convert spin-singlet pairs into spin-triplet pairs has 

been proposed in a recent study234, where the authors have reported long-ranged Josephson 

coupling (up to ~ 160 nm) between two Nb electrodes separated by the chiral antiferromagnet 

Mn3Ge. When the antiferromagnet Mn3Ge, which has non-null Berry curvature, is replaced by 

another antiferromagnet (IrMn) with trivial spin texture and null Berry curvature, no long-

ranged currents due to spin-triplet pairs is observed234. 

FIG. 15. Superconducting spintronics with SrRuO3 exploiting Berry effects. Illustration 
of a device for reversible control over spin-triplet generation induced by the non-null 
Berry curvature of a SrRuO3 weak link separating two superconducting (S) electrodes 
(a). The application of a gate voltage VG to a piezoelectric coupled to SrRuO3 induces 
strain-driven modifications in its real-space spin texture, which in turn result in 
variations (in sign and amplitude) of the SrRuO3 Berry curvature (b). The modulation of 
the Berry curvature leads to changes in the amplitude of the spin-triplet critical current 
Ic flowing between the two S electrodes, which switches between null (small) and non-null
(large) values thus realizing the equivalent of a superconducting switch.

Compared to the conventional mechanism used to date in superconducting spintronics for 

spin-triplet generation, which consists in coupling of a spin-singlet superconductor to a 

ferromagnet with an inhomogeneous magnetization235-236 (or a to stack of ferromagnets with 


46

non-collinear magnetizations237), using the Berry curvature as alternative mechanism for spin-

triplet generation offers several advantages for applications. 

In materials like SrRuO3 due to its sizable spin-orbit coupling and a non-trivial spin-texture, 

the Berry curvature can be strongly enhanced and modulated (in sign and amplitude) due to the 

correlation existing between magnetic spin texture in real space and Berry curvature in k-space. 

This also implies that, in Josephson junctions where SrRuO3 is used as weak link between two 

superconducting electrodes, changing the magnetic spin texture of SrRuO3 in real space (e.g., 

via VG-driven strain through a piezoelectric coupled to SrRuO3) can in turn affect its Berry 

curvature in k-space and therefore reversibly enhance or suppress the spin-triplet channel in 

SrRuO3 (Fig. 15). If the two superconducting electrodes are separated by a distance larger than 

the spin-singlet coherence length, switching on/off the long-ranged spin-triplet channel in 

SrRuO3, can turn the SrRuO3 weak link from resistive (triplets off) to superconducting (triplet 

on). This type of superconducting device would act as a switch and represent the first 

superconducting spintronic device with full electrical control of its state. 

Voltage-driven devices would offer many advantages compared to existing superconducting 

spintronic devices, whose state is currently controlled by switching the ferromagnet’s 

magnetization from homogeneous (triplets off) to inhomogeneous (triplets on) via an applied 

magnetic field. Superconducting devices with magnetic control of their logic state are in fact 

more sensitive to environmental noise, less scalable and less energy efficient than equivalent 

devices whose logic states is controlled electrically. 

We also note that the Berry curvature per se acts for electrons as the equivalent of a magnetic 

field. Therefore, in addition to variations in the Berry curvature of SrRuO3 induced by voltage-

driven strain, one may fabricate superconducting spintronic devices where the combination of 

spin-polarization (in SrRuO3 itself or in another oxide ferromagnet coupled to SrRuO3) and 

Berry curvature in SrRuO3 can be used for the generation of spin-triplet pairs for 

superconducting spintronics.

2.5 Summary and outlook

In this Research Update, we have given an overview of some of the most recent work done on 

SrRuO3 which holds promising potential for the development of novel electronic (conventional 

and quantum) applications. We have first discussed the main physical properties of SrRuO3, 

which have kept the interest in material always very high over the past 60 years, and the most 

recent advances in recent techniques for the fabrication of high-quality SrRuO3 with high 

reproducibility and over large scales. We have then explained the structural parameters and 


47

experimental tools which previous studies have demonstrated to be useful to control specific

SrRuO3 properties. To illustrate how properties change with dimensionality and confinement, 

which is relevant for quantum applications based on SrRuO3, we have also reviewed progress 

recently made on SrRuO3 structures with dimensionality lower than 3D.

In the second part of this manuscript, we have discussed how, thanks to its rich physics, 

SrRuO3 represents a material platform with great potential for the realization of electronic 

devices not only useful for conventional electronics, but also for emerging quantum electronics.

In this section of our Research Update, we have not only limited ourselves to review recent 

progress made on SrRuO3 devices, but also taken some personal perspectives on future research 

directions which can bring new insights into effects recently discovered in SrRuO3. We have 

also proposed devices never realized to date both for conventional and quantum electronics 

and sketched possible layouts useful for their realization. From this point of view, we hope that 

this manuscript will inspire the research community to perform new investigations on some of 

the SrRuO3 heterostructures and devices that we propose. 

For the specific application of SrRuO3 for conventional electronics, we have discussed two 

of most promising applications where SrRuO3 devices can offer a competitive advantage over 

existing ones. These two applications concern the realization of racetrack memories based on 

domain wall motion and spin-orbit-torque memories. In addition to large-scale production and 

reproducibility in their properties, which are essential requirements to meet for applications, 

other materials challenges must be faced for the realization of such SrRuO3 devices. These 

challenges include obtaining reversible control over the strength of the spin-orbit coupling in 

SrRuO3 (e.g., via modulation in the tilting of the RuO6 octahedra), quantifying the width of 

SrRuO3 domain walls and achieving their manipulation under current injection.

Within the field of conventional electronics, we have also outlined that the very recent 

realization of ultrathin freestanding SrRuO3 membranes can pave the way for the fabrication 

of NEMS devices and sensors with unprecedently high figures out merit. The fabrication of 

SrRuO3 membranes with optimal properties and the testing of their reliability over several 

operation cycles remain key materials challenges for the future development of these devices.

In the field of the quantum electronics, future applications will certainly stem from the

interplay between different mechanisms and quantum effects in SrRuO3. It is currently well-

established that SrRuO3 becomes a very rich quantum system close to the 2D limit and when 

interfaced to other materials. We have explained that the possibility to couple different 

quantum orderings and phases at SrRuO3 interfaces and to tailor the confinement potential in 


48

the ultrathin limit provides novel paths for the generation, control, and manipulation of 

electronic states with nontrivial Berry curvature and topological properties.

As we have discussed in the manuscript section on quantum applications, the interplay of 

Berry curvature and non-trivial topological states with superconductivity paves the way for the 

testing and fabrication of a new quantum electronic devices. The devices which we propose 

exploit quantum effects provided by the Berry phase of SrRuO3 in both real and momentum 

space. Being able to differentiate between momentum-space (spin-conserving) and real-space 

(non-spin-conserving) contributions to the SrRuO3 Berry curvature remains one of the most 

important challenges to realize berrytronic devices on SrRuO3. Also, the realization of 

superconducting systems where the SrRuO3 Berry curvature acts as a mechanism for spin-

triplet generation and it can be reversibly manipulated (in sign and amplitude), can lead to the 

realization of the first class of superconducting spintronic devices with full electrical control 

of their state. A hallmark feature of the quantum devices that we envision is their tuneability 

achieved through control of magneto-orbital effects, strain, and interfacing of SrRuO3. This 

area is not yet fully explored and calls for significant research efforts, particularly in materials 

science, to master quantum transport properties and coherent effects arising from the SrRuO3

electronic and magnetic states.

In addition to the promising applications described above in the manuscript, there are other 

research directions with great potential for the discovery of novel effects in SrRuO3 and the 

consequent development of devices relying on the same effects.

One of these new research directions concerns the study of quantum effects related to the 

geometric properties of the electronic structure of SrRuO3. We have already outlined that 

SrRuO3 is characterized by a Berry curvature that has sources both in real and momentum 

space and that can be tuned through various parameters including dimensionality, strength of 

the magnetization, inversion symmetry breaking, interfacing with other materials. We expect 

that exciting discoveries can be made in future studies on Berry effects in ultrathin SrRuO3

films. This is because, for ultrathin SrRuO3 films close to the one-unit-cell-thick limit, sources 

of Berry curvature in real space can be nucleated at the SrRuO3 film surface or at the interface 

with another material inducing inversion symmetry breaking. These systems can trigger the 

formation of distinct magnetic patterns, which may act as source of nonvanishing Berry 

curvature whilst retaining a topological character. Also, ultrathin SrRuO3 films can be coupled 

to oxides with properties that can also affect the Berry curvature like strong spin-orbit coupling, 

large structural mismatch, polar interface, and superconductivity. Experimental evidence for 

magnetic patterns at the surface or interface of ultrathin SrRuO3 films is still missing. The 


49

hurdles in the identification of these magnetic patterns also suggest that SrRuO3 is a unique 

platform to develop and test new experimental probes and setups suitable to detect such non-

trivial magnetic patterns. It is worth noting that the connection between magnetic patterns and

Berry curvatures is per se very complex and it will require dedicated studies to gain further 

insights into it. Even a simple uniform magnetic domain has topological electronic bands in 

momentum space, with electronic charges that can be controlled via an applied E or strain and

that depend on the strength of magnetism and Rashba spin-orbit coupling.

SrRuO3 also represents an ideal platform to investigate emergent phenomena in correlated 

topological metals. From this point of view, we believe that future studies on topological 

magnetic effects in high-electron density conditions can be carried out using SrRuO3 other than 

semimetallic materials or materials with low-carrier density. This proposed line of research can 

lead to the discovery of new magnetotransport effects deriving from the combination of the 

high sensitivity of strongly correlated electron systems (as they undergo phase reconstructions) 

with phase transitions induced by small changes in an external perturbation. In addition, the 

interplay between Coulomb interaction, spin-orbit coupling and crystal field potentials in 

SrRuO3 can also trigger magnetotransport effects that are scalable in space and controllable in 

the time domain. This is another exciting research direction that remains to date unexplored.

The orbital quantum degrees of freedom are another important feature of SrRuO3, whose 

potential has not been fully explored to date. It is well-established that SrRuO3 is a multi-orbital 

ferromagnet and that the orbital character of its electronic states at the Fermi level can be 

modified via an applied E, strain, or geometric design. Studies aiming at controlling orbital 

effects in SrRuO3 under external stimuli, however, remain still at their infancy. This suggests 

that SrRuO3 offers an enormous potential for the discovery of orbital effects and the 

development of orbitronic devices. We believe that future studies targeting specifically the 

control over the orbital quantum degree of freedom in SrRuO3 may lead to the detection of 

large orbital Hall effects or orbital selective anomalous Hall effects. The discovery of orbital 

Hall effects can set the basis for low-consumption quantum spin orbitronic238. This perspective 

is particularly relevant in SrRuO3 structures with reduced dimensionality, where confinement 

and inversion symmetry breaking can be used to control the orbital population and the orbital 

angular momentum at the Fermi level.

Another major research route that can lead to important fundamental discoveries is the study 

of SrRuO3-based heterostructures combining the magnetic properties of SrRuO3 with 

superconductivity. In section 2.4 we have proposed several SrRuO3-based superconducting 

devices which can be tested and that can lead to a paradigm shift in the field of superconducting 


50

spintronics. Once again, the realization of topological superconducting phases with Cooper 

pairs having non vanishing spin and orbital angular momenta (i.e., spin- and orbital- triplet 

pairs) may be easier for ultrathin SrRuO3 films with topological electronic bands. As discussed 

in section 2.4, one of the major material challenges to achieve topological superconductivity, 

however, is to obtain a high interface quality between SrRuO3 and another superconductor.

The successful integration of Berry curvature effects with superconducting spintronic 

elements can also facilitate the developments of electronic devices where spin Hall effects or 

anomalous Hall effects can be employed to control the superconducting supercurrent and vice 

versa. If these novel superconducting berrytronic devices were realized, they would represent 

a huge boost for low-consumption quantum electronics.

More research studies should also be carried out to clarify the physical mechanisms behind 

phenomena recently discovered in SrRuO3 like the Hall crystal effect239, phonon-driven 

magnetic exchange240, and magnetic domain manipulation241.

An obvious drawback for device applications of SrRuO3 in the field of conventional 

spintronics is the fact that the TCurie of SrRuO3 is below room T. A critical challenge is therefore 

to find ways to increase the TCurie of SrRuO3. A route that could be tested for this would consist 

in developing a suitable geometric design to modify the bandwidth of the electronic bands and 

in turn enhance the density of states of SrRuO3 at the Fermi level. An alternative to such 

approach would consist in employing substitutional transition metal elements to increase the 

magnetic moment strength in SrRuO3. This could be carried out, for example, using Fe or Mn 

as substitutional dopants for Ru in SrRuO3.

Future work on SrRuO3 heterostructures can also lead to great technological advancements, 

especially after freestanding SrRuO3 nanomembranes are fully integrated into them174. The 

study of the effects of geometric parameters related to the large curvature of nanomembranes 

on SrRuO3 properties is still at its infancy. It is very likely, however, that studies on the topic

may lead to the discovery of magnetic and topological Hall effects that are fully geometrically 

driven and that can have an impact on novel quantum electronic devices.


51

Acknowledgments 
The authors wish to thank Prof. A. Caviglia and Dr. A. Vecchione for scientific discussion and 
comments about the manuscript.
A.D.B. acknowledges funding from the Humboldt Foundation in the framework of a Sofja 
Kovalevskaja grant and funding from the Zukunftskolleg at the University of Konstanz. M. C. 
acknowledges support from the MIUR-PRIN grant 20177SL7HC for the project “Two-
dimensional Oxides Platforms for SPINorbitronics nanotechnology (TOPSPIN).” A. D. B. and 
M.C. also acknowledge support by the EU’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program 
under Grant Agreement No. 964398 (SUPERGATE).

Data availability
Data available on request from the authors.


52

References
1. J. J. Randall and R. Ward, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 81, 2629 (1959). https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01520a007
2. G. Koster, L. Klein, W. Siemons, G. Rijnders, J. S. Dodge, C. B. Eom, D. H. A. Blank, and M. R. 

Beasley, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 253 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.84.253

3. P. X. Qin, H. Yan, X. N. Wang, Z. X. Feng, H. X. Guo, X. R. Zhou, H. J. Wu, X. Zhang, Z. G. G. 

Leng, H. Y. Chen, and Z. Q. Liu, Rare Met. 39, 85 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12598-019-
01352-w

4. S. Chen, S. Yuan, Z. Hou, Y. Tang, J. Zhang, T. Wang, K. Li, W. Zhao, X. Liu, L. Chen, L. W. 

Martin, and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater. 33, 2000857 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202000857

5. Z. S. Lim, and A. Ariando, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 54, 093001 (2020).

https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6463/abc03f

6. G. Kimbell, C. Kim, W. Wu, M. Cuoco, and J. W. A. Robinson, Commun. Mater. 3, 19 (2022).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s43246-022-00238-2

7. Y. Gu, Q. Wang, W. Hu, W. Liu, Z. Zhang, F. Pan, and C. Song, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 55, 233001 

(2022). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6463/ac4fd3

8. Q. Gan, R. A. Rao, C. B. Eom, L. Wu, and F. Tsui, J. Appl. Phys. 86, 5297 (1999).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.369859

9. G. Cao, S. McCall, M. Shepard, J. E. Crow, and R. P. Guertin, Phys. Rev. B 56, 321 (1997). 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.56.321

10.L. Klein, J. S. Dodge, C. H. Ahn, J. W. Reiner, L. Mieville, T. H. Geballe, M. R. Beasley, and A. 

Kapitulnik, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 8, 10111 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/8/48/026

11.A. P. Mackenzie, J. W. Reiner, A. W. Tyler, L. M. Galvin, S. R. Julian, M. R. Beasley, T. H. Geballe, 

and A. Kapitulnik, Phys. Rev. B 58, R13 318 (1998). 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.58.R13318

12.L. Klein, J. S. Dodge, C. H. Ahn, G. J. Snyder, T. H. Geballe, M. R. Beasley, and A. Kapitulnik, 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2774 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.2774

13.H. P. Nair, Y. Liu, J. P. Ruf, N. J. Schreiber, S. Shang, D. J. Baek, B. H. Goodge, L. F. Kourkoutis, 

Z. Liu, K. M. Shen, and D. G. Schlom, APL Mater. 6, 046101 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5023477

14.C. L. Chen, Y. Cao, Z. J. Huang, Q. D. Jiang, Z. Zhang, Y. Y. Sun, W. N. Kang, L. M. Dezaneti, W.

K. Chu, and C. W. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 1047 (1997). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.119723

15.T. Shimizu and A. Kawakubo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 40, L117 (2001).

https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.40.L117

16.D. Halley, C. Rossel, D. Widmer, H. Wolf, and S. Gariglio, Mater. Sci. Eng. B 109, 113 (2004).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mseb.2003.10.060

17.T. Kamo, K. Nishida, K. Akiyama, J. Sakai, T. Katoda, and H. Funakubo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 46 

(10B), 6987 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.46.6987

18.C. M. Foster, G. R. Bai, R. Csencsits, J. Vetrone, R. Jammy, L. A. Wills, E. Carr, and J. Amano, J. 

Appl. Phys. 81, 2349 (1997). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.364239

19.T. Kawakubo, S. Komatsu, K. Abe, K. Sano, N. Yanase, and N. Fukushima, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 37, 

5108 (1998). https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.37.5108

20.C. B. Eom, R. B. Van Dover, J. M. Phillips, D. J. Werder, J. H. Marshall, C. H. Chen, R. J. Cava, R. 

M. Fleming, and D. K. Fork, Appl. Phys. Lett. 63, 2570 (1993). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.110436

21.J. Wang, H. Zheng, Z. Ma, S. Prasertchoung, M. Wuttig, R. Droopad, J. Yu, K. Eisenbeiser, and R. 

Ramesh, Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 2574 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1799234

22.K. Takahashi, M. Suzuki, T. Kojima, T. Watanabe, Y. Sakashita, K. Kato, O. Sakata, K. Sumitani, 

and H. Funakubo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 082901 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2336626

23.D. C. Worledge and T. H. Geballe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5182 (2000). 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.85.5182

24.K. S. Takahashi, A. Sawa, Y. Ishii, H. Akoh, M. Kawasaki, and Y. Tokura, Phys. Rev. B 67, 094413 

(2003). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.67.094413

25.G. Herranz, B. Martinez, J. Fontcuberta, F. Sanchez, M.V. Garcia-Cuenca, C. Ferrater, and M. 

Varela, J. Appl. Phys. 93, 8035 (2003) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1555372

26.L. Antognazza, K. Char, and T. H. Geballe, Appl. Phys. Lett. 63, 1005 (1993). 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.109878


53

27.S. C. Gausepohl, M. Lee, L. Tognazza, and K. Char, Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 1313 (1995).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.114524

28.R. Dömel, C. L. Jia, C. Copetti, G. Ockenfuss, and A. I. Braginski, Superconduct. Sci. Technol. 7, 

277 (1994). https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-2048/7/5/012

29.N. Kikugawa, R. Baumbach, J. S. Brooks, T. Terashima, S. Uji, and Y. Maeno, Cryst. Growth Des. 

15, 5573 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.cgd.5b01248

30.J. S. Bobowski, N. Kikugawa, T. Miyoshi, H. Suwa, H-S. Xu, S. Yonezawa, D. A. Sokolov, A. P. 

Mckenzie, and Y. Maeno, Condens. Matter 4, 6 (2019) 
https://doi.org/10.3390/condmat4010006

31.R. Fittipaldi, A. Vecchione, S. Fusanobori, K. Takizawa, H. Yaguchi, J. Hooper, R. S. Perry, and Y. 

Maeno, J. Cryst. Growth 282, 152 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrysgro.2005.04.104

32.Z. Wang, H. P. Nair, G. C. Correa, J. Jeong, K. Lee, E. S. Kim, A. Seidner H., C. S. Lee, H. J. Lim, 

D. A. Muller, and D. G. Schlom, APL Materials 6, 086101 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5041940

33.C. B. Eom, R. J. Cava, R. M. Fleming, J. M. Philips, R. B. vanDover, J. H. Marshall, J. W. P. Hsu, 

J. J. Krajewski, and W. F. Peck Jr., Science 11 (258), 1766 (1992).
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.258.5089.1766

34.Q. Gan, R. A. Rao, and C. B. Eom, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 978-980 (1998).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.120603

35.M. Izumi, K. Nakazawa, Y. Bando, Y. Yoneda, and H. Terauchi, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 66, 3893-3900 

(1997). https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.66.3893

36.L. Klein, Y. Kats, A. F. Marshall, J. W. Reiner, T. H. Geballe, M. R. Beasley, and A. Kapitulnik,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 6090 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.84.6090

37.N. Okuda, K. Saito, and H. Funakubo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 39, 572 (2000). 

https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.39.572

38.D. Yang, X. Tang, R. Wei, Z. Hui, W. Song, X. Zhu, and Y. Sun, J. Alloys Compd 682, 154 (2016). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.04.290

39.X. D. Wu, S. R. Foltyn, R. C. Dye, Y. Coulter, and R. E. Muenchausen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 2434

(1993). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.109388

40.O. Tsuyoshi and T. Kazunori, Appl. Phys. Express 4, 025501 (2011).

https://doi.org/10.1143/apex.4.025501

41.D. Kan, R. Aso, H. Kurata, and Y. Shimakawa, J. Appl. Phys. 113, 173912 (2013).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4803869

42.J. Thompson, J. Nichols, S. Lee, S. Ryee, J. H. Gruenewald, J. G. Connell, M. Souri, J. M. Johnson, 

J. Hwang, M. J. Han, H. N. Lee, D.-W. Kim, and S. S. A. Seo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 161902 (2016). 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4964882

43.H. M. Christen, C. M. Rouleau, I. Ohkubo, H. Y. Zhai, H. N. Lee, S. Sathyamurthy, and D. H. 

Lowndes, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 74, 4058 (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1602962

44.T. Higuchi, Y. Chen, J. Koike, S. Iwashita, M. Ishida, and T. Shimoda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 

II 41, L481 (2002) https://doi.org/10.1143/jjap.41.l481

45.W. Siemons, G. Koster, A. Vailionis, H. Yamamoto, D. H. A. Blank, and M. R. Beasley, Phys. Rev.

B 76, 975126 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.76.075126

46.D. E. Shai, C. Adamo, D. W. Shen, C. M. Brooks, J. W. Harter, E. J. Monkman, B. Burganov, D. 

G. Schlom, and K. M. Shen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 087004 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.110.087004

47.J. W. S. Park, S. H. Baek, C. W. Bark, M. D. Biegalski, and C. B. Eom, Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 061902 

(2009). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3202398

48.Y. K. Wakabayashi, M. Kobayashi, Y. Takeda, K. Takiguchi, H. Irie, S. I. Fujimori, T. Takeda, R. 

Okano, Y. Krockenberger, Y. Taniyasu, and H. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. Mater. 5, 124403 (2021). 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.5.124403

49.Y. K. Wakabayashi, Y. Krockenberger, T. Otsuka, H. Sawada, Y. Taniyasu, and H. Yamamoto, Jpn 

J. Appl. Phys. (2022) – accepted, online version at https://doi.org/10.35848/1347-4065/ac73d8

50.C. H. Ahn, R. H. Hammond, T. H. Geballe, M. R. Beasley, J. M. Triscone, M. Decroux, O/. Fischer, 

L. Antognazza, and K. Char, Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 206 (1997). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.118203


54

51.K. Takiguchi, Y. K. Wakabayashi, H. Irie, Y. Krockenberger, T. Otsuda, H. Sawada, S. A. Nikolaev, 

H. Das. M. Tanaka, Y. Taniyasu, and H. Yamamoto, Nat. Commun. 11, 4969 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-18646-8

52.U. Kar, A. Kr. Singh, S. Yang, C. Y. Lin, B. Das, C. H. Hsu, and W. L. Lee, Sci. Rep. 11, 16070 

(2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-95554-x

53.Y. K. Wakabayashi, S. Kaneta-Takada, Y. Krockenberger, Y. Taniyasu, and Y. Yamamoto, ACS 

Appl. Electron. Mater. 3, 2712 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaelm.1c00288

54.Y. Wang, G. Bossè, H. P. Nair, N. J. Schreiber, J. P. Ruf, B. Cheng, C. Adamo, D. E. Shai, Y. 

Lubashevsky, D. G. Schlom, K. M. Shen, and N. P. Armitage, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 217401 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.217401

55.S. H. Chang, Y. J. Chang, S. Y. Jang, D. W. Jeong, C. U. Jung, Y. J. Kim, J. S. Chung, and T. W. 

Noh, Phys. Rev. B 84, 104101 (2011). http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.84.104101

56.C. J. Roh, J. R. Kim, S. Park, Y. J. Shin, B. J. Yang, T. W. Noh, and J. S. Lee, Appl. Surf. Sci. 553, 

149574 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2021.149574

57.P. Sikawoti, Z. Wang, M. Saghayezhian, D. Howe, Z. Ali, Y. Zhu, and J. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Mater. 

5, 114409 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.5.114409

58.Y. K. Wakabayashi, T. Otsuda, Y. Krockenberger, H. Sawada, Y. Taniyasu, and H. Yamamoto, 

APL Mater. 7, 101114 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5123019

59.Y. K. Wakabayashi, Y. Nonaka, Y. Takeda, S. Sakamoto, K. Ikeda, Z. Chi, G. Shibata, A. Tanaka, 

Y. Saitoh, H. Yamagami, M. Tanaka, A. Fujimori, and R. Nakane, Phys. Rev. B 96, 104410 (2017). 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.96.104410

60.D. T. Margulies, F. T. Parker, M. L. Rudee, F. E. Spada, J. N. Chapman, P. R. Aitchison, and A. E. 

Berkowitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 5162 (1997). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.79.5162

61.S. Ikeda, K. Miura, H. Yamamoto, K. Mizunuma, H. D. Gan, M. Endo, S. Kanai, J. Hayakawa, F. 

Matsukura, and H. Ohno, Nat. Mater. 9, 721 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2804

62.M. Zheng and W. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8, 14012 (2016).

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b02623

63.W. P. McCray, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2, 259 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2007.121
64.Y. K. Wakabayashi, T. Otsuka, Y. Krockenberger, H. Sawada, Y. Taniyasu, H. Yamamoto, pre-

print available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05452

65.Y. Chen, D. L. Bergman, and A. A. Burkov, Phys. Rev. B 88, 125110 (2013).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.125110

66.S. Kaneta-Takada, Y. K. Wakabayashi, Y. Krockenberg, T. Nomura, Y. Kohama, S. A. Nikolaev,

H. Das, H. Irie, K. Takiguchi, S. Ohya, M. Tanaka, Y. Taniyasu, H. Yamamoto, pre-print available
at https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.03292

67.U. Kar, A. Kr. Singh, Y. T. Hsu, C. Y. Lin, B. Das, C. T. Cheng, M. Berben, S. Yang, C. Y. Lin, C.

H. Hsu, S. Wiedmann, W. C. Lee, and W. L. Lee, pre-print available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.13331

68.M. Nakahara, S. Tsunekawa, K. Watanabe, T. Arai, T. Yunogami, and K. Kuroki, J. Vac. Sci.

Technol. B 19, 2133 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1116/1.1415517

69.M. Bohra, C. P. Wu, H. J. Yeh, Y. H. Cheng, C. C. Peng, and H. Chou, J. Appl. Phys. 109, 07D728

(2011). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3561768

70.W. Lu, W. D. Song, K. He, J. Chai, C. J. Sun, G. M. Chow, and J. S. Chen, J. Appl. Phys. 113,

063901 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4790699

71.W. Lu, K. He, W. Song, C. J. Sun, G. M. Chow, and J. S. Chen, J. Appl. Phys. 113, 17E125 (2013).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4795011

72.S. A. Lee, S. Oh, J. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, J. Kim, S. Park, J. S. Bae, T. E. Hong, S. Lee, S. W. Kim, W.

N. Kang, and W. S. Choi, Sci. Rep. 7, 11583 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-11856-z

73.W. Lu, P. Yang, W. D. Song, G. M. Chow, and J. S. Chen, Phys. Rev. B 88, 214115 (2013).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.214115

74.K. J. Choi, S. H. Baek, H. W. Jang, L. J. Belenky, M. Lyubchenko, and C. B. Eom, Adv. Mater. 22,

759 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200902355

75.D. Kann, and Y. Shimakawa, J. Appl. Phys. 111, 093532 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4716029
76.A. Vailionis, W. Siemons, and G. Koster, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 051909 (2008).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2967878


55

77.A. Grutter, F. Wong, E. Arenholz, M. Liberati, and Y. Suzuki, J. Appl. Phys. 107, 09E138 (2010)

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3360345

78.A. Vailionis, H. Boschker, W. Siemons, E. P. Houwman, D. H. A. Blank, G. Rijnder, and G. Koster,

Phys. Rev. B 83, 064101 (2011) https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.83.064101

79.Y. Kats, I. Genish, L. Klein, J. W. Reiner, and M. R. Beasley, Phys. Rev. B 71, 100403 (2005)

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.71.100403

80.Y. Z. Yoo, O. Chmaissem, S. Kolesnik, A. Ullah, L. B. Lurio, D. E. Brown, J. Brady, B. Dabrowski,

C. W. Kimball, M. Haji-Sheikh, and A. P. Genis, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 124104 (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2356328

81.A. F. Marshall, L. Klein, J. S. Dodge, C. H. Ahn, J. W. Reiner, L. Mieville, L. Antagonazza, A. 

Kapitulnik, T. H. Geballe, and M. R. Beasley, J. Appl. Phys. 85, 4131 (1999).
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.370322

82.L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz, and L. P. Pitaevskii, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media (Oxford: 

Pergamon) p 159 (1984). 

83.S. Kolesnik, Y. Z. Zoo, O. Chmaissem, B. Dabrowski, T. Maxwell, C. W. Kimball, and A. P. Genis, 

J. Appl. Phys. 99, 08F501 (2006) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2165132

84.C. U. Jung, H. Yamada, M. Kawasaki, and Y. Tokura, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 2590 (2004)

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1695195

85.X. W. Wang, Y. Q. Zhang, H. Meng, Z. J. Wang, D. Li, and Z. D. Zhang, 109, J. Appl. Phys. 109, 

07D707 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3540669

86.X. Shen, X. Qiu, D. Su, S. Zhou, A. Li, and D. Wu, J. Appl. Phys. 117, 015307 (2015)

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4905485

87.D. Toyota, I. Ohkubo, H. Kumigashira, and M. Oshima, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 162508 (2005)

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2108123

88.J. Xia, W. Siemons, G. Koster, M. R. Beasley, A. Kapitulnik, Phys. Rev. B 79, 140407 (R) (2009) 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.79.140407

89.Y. J. Chang, C. H. Kim, S. H. Park, Y. S. Kim, J. Yu, T. W. Noh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 057201 

(2009) https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.057201

90.H. Boschker, T. Harada, T. Asaba, R. Ashoori, A. V. Boris, H. Hilgenkamp, C. R. Hughes, M. E. 

Holtz, L. Li, D. A. Muller, H. Nair, P. Reith, X. Renshaw Wang, D. G. Schlom, A. Soukiassian, and 
J. Mannhart, Phys. Rev. X 9, 011027 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.9.011027

91.J. M. Rondinelli, N. M. Caffrey, S. Sanvito, and N. A. Spaldin, Phys. Rev. B 78, 155107 (2008)

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.78.155107

92.K. Gupta, B. Mandal, and P. Mahadevan, Phys. Rev. B 90, 125109 (2014).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.90.125109

93.H. Jeong, S. G. Jeong, A. Y. Mohamed, M. Lee, W. S. Noh, Y. Kim, J. S. Bae, W. S. Choi, and D. 

Y. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett. 115, 092906 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5110644

94.S. Hahn, B. Sohn, M. Kim, J. R. Kim, S. Huh, Y. Kim, W. Kyung, M. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Kim, T. W. 

Noh, J. H. Shim and C. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 256401 (2021). 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.256401

95.L. Klein, J. S. Dodge, C. H. Ahn, G. J. Snyder, T. H. Geballe, M. R. Beasley, and A. Kapitulnik, 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2774 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.2774

96.G. Cao, S. McCall, M. Shepard, J. E. Crow, and R. P. Guertin, Phys. Rev. B 56, 321 (1997).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.56.321

97.C. Q. Jin, J. S. Zhou, J. B. Goodenough, Q. Q. Liu, J. G. Zhao, L. X. Yang, Y. Yu, R. C. Yu, T. 

Katsura, A. Shatskiy, and E. Ito, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 7115 (2008). 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0710928105

98.I. Mazin, and D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. B 56, 2556 (1997). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.56.2556
99.J. S. Zhou, K. Matsubayashi, Y. Uwatoko, C. Q. Jin, J. G. Cheng, J. B. Goodenough, Q. Q. Liu, T. 

Katsura, A. Shatskiy, and E. Ito, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 077206 (2008).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.077206

100.
Q. Han, H. T. Dang, and A. J. Millis, Phys. Rev. B 93, 155103 (2016).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.93.155103

101.
S. Shimizu, J. S. Takahashi, M. Kubota, M. Kawasaki, Y. Tokura, and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 105, 163509 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4899145


56

102. H. T. Yi, B. Gao, W. Xie, S. W. Cheong, and V. Podzorov, Sci. Rep. 4, 6604 (2014). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/srep06604

103. Z. Li, S. Shen, Z. Tian, K. Hwangbo, M. Wang, Y. Wang, F. M. Bartram, L. He, Y. Lyu, Y. Dong, 

G. Wan, H. Li, N. Lu, J. Zang, H. Zhou, E. Arenholz, Q. He, L. Yang, W. Luo, and P. Yu, Nat. 
Commun. 11, 184 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13999-1

104. S. Shen, Z. Li, Z. Tian, W. Luo, S. Okamoto, and P. Yu, Phys. Rev. X 11, 021018 (2021).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.11.021018

105. J. Lu, L. Si, Q. Zhang, C. Tian, X. Liu, C. Song, S. Dong, J. Wang, S. Cheng, L. Qu, K. Zhang, Y. 

Shi, H. Huang, T. Zhu, W. Mi, Z. Zhong, L. Gu, K. Held, L. Wang, and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater. 33, 
2102525 (2021). https://doi.org//10.1002/adma.202102525

106. M. Verissimo-Alves, P. Garcia-Fernandez, D. I. Bilc, P. Ghosez, and J. Junquera, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

108, 107003 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.107003

107. M. Gu, K. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Xie, H. Cai, G. P. Zhang, and X. Wu, npj Quantum Mater. 1, 16011 

(2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/npjquantmats.2016.11

108. P. G. Gowtham, G. E. Rowlands, and R. A. Buhrman, J. Appl. Phys. 118, 183903 (2015). 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4935521

109. F. Sanchez, U. Lüders, G. Herranz, I. C. Infante, J. Fontcuberta, M. V. Garcia-Cuenca, C. Ferrater, 

and M. Varela, Nanotechnology 16, S190-S196 (2005). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0957-4484/16/5/010

110. A. Georgakilas, K. Michelakis, G. Halkias, N. Becourt, F. Peiro, and A. Cornet, Microelectron. 

Eng. 41, 583-586 (1998).
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-9317(98)00137-3

111. S. K. Arora, B. J. O’Dowd, B. Ballesteros, P. Gambardella, and I. V. Shvets, Nanotechnology 23, 

253702 (2012). http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0957-4484/23/23/235702

112. G. Laskin, H. Wang, H. Boschker, W. Braun, V. Srot, P. A. van Aken, and J. Mannhart, Nano Lett.

19, 1131-1135 (2019). http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b04459

113. G. Tian, F. Zhang, J. Yao, H. Fan, P. Li, Z. Li, X. Song, X. Zhang, M. Qin, M. Zeng, Z. Zhang, J. 

Yao, X. Gao, and J. Liu, ACS Nano 10, 1025 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5b06339

114. X. Li, L. Yin, L. Zhengxun, M. Wu, Y. Sheng, L. Zhang, Y. Sun, S. Chen, X. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Li, 

K. Liu, K. Wang, D. Yu, X. Bai, W. Mi, and P. Gao, Natl. Sci. Rev. 7, 755 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1093/nsr/nwaa004

115. A. Chanthbouala, A. Crassous, V. Garcia, K. Bouzehouane, S. Fusil, X. Moya, J. Allibe, B. 

Dlubak, J. Grollier, S. Xavier, C. Deranlot, A. Moshar, R. Proksch, N. D. Mathur, M. Bibes, and A. 
Barthelemy, Nat. Nanotech. 7, 101 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2011.213

116. G. Gerra, A. K. Tagantsev, N. Setter, and K. Parlinski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 107603 (2006). 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.107603

117. J. Junquera, and P. Ghosez, Nature 422, 506 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01501
118. Y. J. Shin, Y. Kim, S. J. Kang, H. H. Nahm, P. Murugavel, J. R. Kim, M. R. Cho, K. Wang, S. M. 

Yang, J. G. Yoon, J. S. Chung, M. Kim, H. Zhou, S. H. Chang, and T. W. Noh, Adv. Mater. 29, 
1602795 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201602795

119. A. Gruverman, D. Wu, H. Lu, Y. Wang, H. W. Jang, C. M. Folkman, M. Ye. Zhuravlev, D. Felker,

M. Rzchowski, C. B. Eom, and E. Y. Tsymbal, Nano Lett. 9, 3539 (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1021/nl901754t

120. Z. Wen, L. You, J. Wang, A. Li, and D. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 132913 (2013).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4823580

121. J. Karthik, A. R. Damodaran, and L. W. Martin, Adv. Mater. 24, 1610 (2012).

https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201104697

122. C. Guerrero, J. Roldan, C. Ferrater, M. V. Garcia-Cuenca, F. Sanchez, and M. Vaerla, Solid State

Electron. 45, 1433 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-1101(00)00275-6

123. T. Morimoto, O. Hidaka, K. Yamakawa, O. Arisumi, H. Kanaya, T. Iwamoto, Y. Kumura, I.

Kunishima, and S. I. Tanaka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 39, 2110 (2000).
https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.39.2110

124. Y. B. Lin, Z. B. Yan, X. B. Lu, Z. X. Lu, M. Zeng, Y. Chen, X. S. Gao, J. G. Wan, J. Y. Dai, and

J. M. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 143503 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4870813


57

125. L. Wang, M. R. Cho, Y. J. Shin, J. R. Kim, S. Das, J. G. Yoon, J. S. Chung, and T. W. Noh, Nano

Lett. 16, 3911 (2016). http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01418

126. R. A. Price, M. K. Lee, C. B. Eom, X. W. Wu, and M. S. Rzchowski, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc.

602, 69 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1557/PROC-602-69

127. X. Ke, M. S. Rzchowski, L. J. Belenky, and C. B. Eom, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 5458 (2004).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1767955

128. P. Padhan, and W. Prellier, App. Phys. Lett. 88, 192509 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2202690
129. M. Ziese, I. Vrejoiu, E. Pippel, P. Esquinazi, D. Hesse, C. Etz, J. Henk, A. Ernst, I. V.

Maznichenko, W. Hergert, and I. Mertig, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 167203 (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.167203

130. M. Ziese, I. Vrejoiu, and D. Hesse, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 052504 (2010).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3470101

131. M. Ziese, I. Vrejoiu, E. Pippel, E. Nikulina, and D. Hesse, Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 132504 (2011).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3572027

132. J. Nogues. D. Lederman, T. J. Moran, and I. K. Schuller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 4624 (1996).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.76.4624

133. M. Ali, P. Adie, C. H. Marrows, D. Greig, B. J. Hickey, and R. L. Stamps, Nat. Mater. 6, 70 (2007).

https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat1809

134. S. K. Mishra, F. Radu, H. A. Dürr, and W. Eberhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 177208 (2009).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.177208

135. S. Mangin, F. Montaigne, and A. Schuhl, Phys. Rev. B 68, 140404 (R) (2003).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.68.140404

136. A. Sahoo, P. Padhan, and W. Prellier, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 36423 (2017).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b11930

137. S. Manipatruni, D. E. Nikonov, C. C. Lin, B. Prasad, Y. L. Huang, A. R. Damodaran, Z. Chen, R.

Ramesh, and I. A. Young, Sci. Adv. 23, eaat4229 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat4229

138. S. Parkin, M. Hayashi, and L. Thomas, Science 320, 190 (2008). 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1145799

139. C. Y. You, I. M. Sung, and B. K. Joe, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 222513 (2006). 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2399441

140. M. Feigenson, J. W. Reiner, and L. Klein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 247204 (2007). 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.247204

141. J. Grollier, P. Boulenc, V. Cros, A. Hamzic, A. Vaures, A. Fert, and G. Fain, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83,

509 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1594841

142. I. Asulin, O. Yuli, G. Koren, and O. Millo, Phys. Rev. B 74, 092501 (2006). 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.74.092501

143. L. Rondin. J. P. Tetienne, T. Hingant, J. F. Roch, P. Maletinsky, V. Jacques, Rep. Prog. Phys. 77, 

0560503 (2014). http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/77/5/056503

144. Y. Ou, Z. Wang, C. S. Chang, H. P. Nair, H. Paik, N. Reynolds, D. C. Ralph, D. A. Muller, D. G. 

Schlom, and R. A. Buhrman, Nano Lett. 19, 3663 (2019).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b00729

145. A. S. Patri, K. Hwang, H. W. Lee, and Y. B. Kim, Sci. Rep. 8, 8052 (2018).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-26355-y

146. J. Zhou, X. Shu, W. Lin, D. F. Shao, S. Chen, L. Liu, P. Yang, E. Y. Tsymbal, and J. Chen, Adv.

Mater. 33, 2007114 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202007114

147. J. Wei, H. Zhong, J. Liu, X. Wang, F. Meng, H. Xu, Y. Liu, X. Luo, Q. Zhang, Y. Guang, J. Feng,

J. Zhang, L. Yang, C. Ge, L. Gu, K. Jin, G. Yu, and X. Han, Adv. Func. Mater. 2100380 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202100380

148. T. Endoh, and H. Honjo, J. Low Power Electron. Appl. 8, 44 (2018).

https://doi.org/10.3390/jlpea8040044

149. R. L. de Orio, J. Ender, S. Fiorentini, W. Goes, S. Selberherr, and V. Sverdlov, Micromachines 12,

443 (2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/mi12040443

150. H. Wu, S. A. Razavi, Q. Shao, X. Li, K. L. Wong, Y. Liu, G. Yin, K. L. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 99, 

184403 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.99.184403


58

151. D. MacNeill, G. M. Stiehl, M. H. D. Guimaraes, R. A. Buhrman, J. Park, D. C. Ralph, Nat. 

Phys. 13, 300 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys3933

152. G. Yu, P. Upadhyaya, Y. Fan, J. G. Alzate, W. Jiang, K. L. Wong, S. Takei, S. A. Bender, L. T: 

Chang, Y. Jiang, M. Lang, J. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Tserkovnyak, P. K. Amiri, K. L. Wang, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 9, 548 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2014.94

153. V. Sverdlov, A. Makarov, S. Selberherr, Solid-State Electron. 155, 49 (2019).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sse.2019.03.010

154. Q. Xe, W. Lin, S. Sarkar, X. Shu, S. Chen, L. Liu, T. Zhao, C. Zhou, H. Wang, J. Zhou, S.

Gradecak, and J. Chen, APL Mater. 9, 051114 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0048926

155. S. Kunkemöller, D. Brüning, A. Stunault, A. A. Nugroho, T. Lorenz, and M. Braden, Phys. Rev.

B 96, 220406 (R) (2017). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.96.220406

156. K. Ullakko, J. K. Huang, C. Kantner, R. C. O’Handley, and V. V. Kokorin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69,

1966 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.117637

157. A. Planes, Physics 3, 36 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1103/Physics.3.36
158. A. T. Zayak, X. Huang, J. B. Neaton, and K. M. Rabe, Phys. Rev. B 77, 214410 (2008).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.77.214410

159. B. W. Lee, and C. U. Jung, Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 102507 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3334727
160. K. Terai, T. Ohnishi, M. Lippmaa, H. Koinuma, and M. Kawasaki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 43, L227

(2004). https://doi.org/10.1143/JJAP.43.L227/pdf

161. W. Lu, W. Song, P. Yang, J. Ding, G. M. Chow, and J. Chen, Sci. Rep. 5, 10245 (2015).

https://doi.org/10.1038/srep10245

162. D. Tian, Z. Liu, S. Shen, and P. Yu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2101946118 (2021).

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2101946118

163. H. S. Kum, H. Lee, S. Kim, S. Lindemann, W. Kong, K. Qiao, P. Chen, J. Irwin, J. H. Lee, S. Xie,

S. Subramanian, J. Shim, S. H. Bae, C. Choi, L. Ranno, S. Seo, S. Lee, J. Bauer, H. Li, K. Lee, J. A.
Robinson, C. A. Ross, D. G. Schlom, M. S. Rzchowski, C. B. Eom, and J. Kim, Nature 578, 75
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-1939-z

164. D. Lee, APL Mater. 8, 090901 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0020212
165. D. Lu, D. J. Baek, S. S. Hong, L. F. Kourkoutis, Y. Hikita, and H. Y. Hwang, Nat. Mater. 15, 1255

(2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat4749

166. S. R. Bakaul, C. R. Serrao, M. Lee, C. W. Yeung, A. Sarker, S. L. Hsu, A. K. Yadav, L. Dedon,

L. You, A. I. Khan, J. D. Clarkson, C. Hu, R. Ramesh, and S. Salahuddin, Nat. Commun. 7, 10447
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10547

167. D. Ji, S. Cai, T. R. Paudel, H. Sun, C. Zhang, L. Han, Y. Wei, Y. Zang, M. Gu, Y. Zhang, W. Gao,

H. Huyan, W. Guo, D. Wu, Z. Gu, E. Y. Tsymbal, P. Wang, Y. Nie, and X. Pan, Nature 570, 87
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1255-7

168. Z. Lu, Y.Yang, L. Wen, J. Feng, B. Lao, X. Zheng, S. Li, K. Zhao, B. Cao, Z. Ren, D. Song, H.

Du, Y. Guo, Z. Zhong, X. Hao, Z. Wang, and R.W. Li, npj Flex. Electron. 6, 9 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41528-022-00141-3

169. S. S. Hong, M. Gu, M. Verma, V. Harbola, B. Y. Wang, D. Lu, A. Vailionis, Y. Hikita, R.

Pentcheva, J. M. Rondinelli, and H. Y. Hwang, Science 368, 71 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aax9753

170. M. Bruel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B 108, 313 (1996).

https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-583X(95)01056-4

171. W. S. Wong, T. Sands, and N. W. Cheung, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 599 (1998).

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.120816

172. D. M. Paskiewicz, R. Sichel-Tissot, E. Karapetrova, L. Stan, and D. D. Fong, Nano Lett. 16, 534

(2016). https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b04176

173. D. Kim, W. K. Jung, and S. Lee, npj Flex. Electron. 6, 24 (2022).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41528-022-00155-x

174. P. T. P. Le, J. E. ten Elshof, and G. Koster, Sci. Rep. 11, 12435 (2021).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-91848-2


59

175. D. Davidovikj, D. J. Groenendijk, A. M. R. V. L. Monteiro, A. Dijkhoff, D. Afanasiev, M. Siskins,

M. Lee, Y. Huang, E. van Heumen, H. S. J. van der Zant, A. D. Caviglia, and P. G. Steeneken,
Commun. Phys. 3, 163 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-020-00433-y

176. H. Peng, N. Lu, S. Yang, Y. Lyu, Z. Liu, Y. Bu, S. Shen, M. Li, Z. Li, L. Gao, S. Lu, M. Wang,

H. Cao, H. Zhou, P. Gao, H. Chen, and P. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater. 32, 2111907 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202111907

177. U. K. Bhaskar, N. Banerjee, A. Abdollahi, Z. Wang, D. G. Schlom, G. Rijnders, and G. Catalan,

Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 263 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2015.260

178. T. Nan, Y. Hui, M. Rinaldi, and N. X. Sun, Sci. Rep. 3, 1985 (2013).

https://doi.org/10.1038/srep01985

179. J. Su, F. Niekiel, S. Fichtner, C. Kirchhof, D. Meyners, E. Quandt, B. Wagner, and F. Lofink, J.

Micromech. Microeng. 30, 075009 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6439/ab8dd0

180. J. Matsuno, N. Ogawa, K. Yasuda, F. Kagawa, W. Koshibae, N. Nagaosa, Y. Tokura, and M. 

Kawasaki, Sci. Adv. 2, e1600304 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1600304

181. K. Y. Meng., A. S. Ahmed, M. Barcani, A. O. Mandru, X. Zhao, N. Bague, B. D. Esser, J. Flores, 

D. W. McComb, H. J. Hug, and F. Yang, Nano Lett. 19, 3169-3175 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b00596

182. Y. Ohuchi, J. Matsuno, N. Ogawa, Y. Kozuka, M. Uchida, Y. Tokura, and M. Kawasaki, Nat. 

Commun. 9, 213 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02629-3

183. D. Xiao, M. C. Chang, and Q. Niu, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1959 (2010).

https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.82.1959

184. N. Nagaosa, J. Sinova, S. Onoda, and A. H. MacDonald, N. P. Ong, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1539 

(2010). https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.82.1539

185. S. Murakami, N. Nagaosa, and S. C. Zhang, Science 301, 1348 (2003).

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1087128

186. J. Sinova, D. Culcer, Q. Niu, N. A. Sinitsyn, T. Jungwirth, and A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

92, 126603 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.126603

187. D. Culcer, J. Sinova, N. A. Sinitsyn, T. Jungwirth, A. H. MacDonald, and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

93, 046602 (2004).https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.046602

188. P. Bruno, V. K. Dugaev, and M. Taillefumier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 096806 (2004).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.096806

189. M. Onoda, G. Tatara, and N. Nagaosa, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 73, 2624 (2004).

https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.73.2624

190. D. J. Thouless, M. Kohmoto, M. P. Nightingale, and M. den Nijs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 405 (1982).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.49.405

191. T. Thonauser, D. Ceresoli, D. Vanderbilt, and R. Resta, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 137205 (2005).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.137205

192. D. Xiao, J. Shi, and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 137204 (2005).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.137204

193. R. D. King-Smith and D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 47, 1651 (1993).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.47.1651

194. R. Resta, Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 899 (1994). https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.66.899
195. D. J. Thouless, Phys. Rev. B 27, 6083 (1983). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.27.6083
196. M. A. Khan, D. E. Graf, I. Vekhter, D. A. Browne, J. F. DiTusa, W. Adam Phelan, and D. P. 

Young, Phys. Rev. B 99, 020507 (R) (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.99.020507

197. H. Weibrich, R. L. Klees, G. Rastelli, and W. Belzig, PRX Quantum 2, 010310 (2021).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.010310

198. H. Murakawa, M. S. Bahramy, M. Tokunaga, Y. Kohama, C. Bell, Y. Kaneko, N. Nagaosa, H. Y. 

Hwang, and Y. Tokura, Science 342, 1490 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1242247

199. B. Pang, L. Zhang, Y. B. Chen, J. Zhou, S. Yao, S. Zhang, and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. 

Interfaces 9, 3201 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b00150

200. Y. Gu, Y. W. Wei, K. Xu, H. Zhang, F. Wang, F. Li, M. S. Saleem, C. Z. Chang, J. Sun, and C. 

Song, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 52, 404001 (2019). https://10.1088/1361-6463/ab2fe8


60

201. Q. Qin, L. Liu, W. Lin, X. Shu, Q. Xie, Z. Lim, C. Li, S. He, G. M. Chow and J. Chen, Adv. Mater. 

31, 1807008 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201807008

202. L. Wang, Q. Feng, H. G. Lee, E. K. Ko, Q. Lu, and T. W. Noh, Nano Lett. 20, 2468 (2020).

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b05206

203. L. Miao, N. J. Schreiber, H. P. Nair, B. H. Goodge, S. Jiang, J. P. Ruf, Y. Lee, M. Fu, B. Tsang, 

Y. Li, C. Zeledon, J. Shan, K. F. Mak, L. F. Kourkoutis, D. G. Schlom, and K. M. Shen. Phys. 
Rev. B 102, 064406 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.102.064406

204. G. Kimbell, P. M. Sass, B. Woltjes, E. K. Ko, T. W. Noh, W. Wu, and J. W. A. Robinson, Phys. 

Rev. Mater. 4, 054414 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.4.054414

205. D. J. Groenendijk, C. Autier, T. C. van Thiel, W. Brzezicki, J. R. Hortensius, D. Afanasiev, N. 

Gauquelin, P. Barone, K. H. W. van den Bos, S. van Aert, J. Verbeeck, A. Filippetti, S. Picozzi, 
M. Cuoco, and A. D. Caviglia. Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 023404 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023404

206. T. C. van Thiel, W. Brzezicki, C. Autieri, J. R. Hortensius, D. Afanasiev, N. Gauquelin, D. Jannis, 

N. Janssen, D. J. Groenendijk, J. Fatermans, S. Van Aert, J. Verbeeck, M. Cuoco, and A. D. 
Caviglia, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 127202 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.127202

207. R. Dömel, C. Horstmann, M. Siegel, A. I. Braginski, and M. Y. Kupriyanov, Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 

1775 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.114379

208. G. A. Ovsyannikov, K. Y. Constantinian, V. V. Demidov, and Y. N. Khaydukov, Low Temp. Phys. 

42, 873 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4966622

209. G. A. Ovsyannikov, V. V. Demidov, Y. N. Khaydukov, L. Mustafa, K. Y. Constantinian, A. V. 

Kalabukhov, and D. Winkler, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 122, 738 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1134/S1063776116040063

210. Q. X. Jia, S. R. Foltyn, P. N. Arendt, J. R. Groves, T. G. Holesinger, and M. E. Hawley, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 81, 4571 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1527699

211. M. Giroud, H. Courtois, K. Hasselbach, D. Mailly, and B. Pannetier, Phys. Rev. B 58, R11872 (R) 

(1998). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.58.R11872

212. V. T. Petrashov, I. A: Sosnin, I. Cox, A. Parsons, and C. Troadee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3281 (1999). 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.83.3281#

213. F. S. Bergeret, A. F. Volkov, and K. B. Efetov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4096 (2011). 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.86.4096

214. J. Linder, and J. W. A. Robinson, Nat. Phys. 11, 307 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys3242
215. M.S. Anwar, Y. J. Shin, S. R. Lee, J. S. Kang, Y. Sugimoto, S. Yonezawa, T. W. Noh, and Y. 

Maeno, Appl. Phys. Exp. 8, 019202 (2015). http://dx.doi.org/10.7567/APEX.8.019202

216. R. Matzdorf, Z. Fang, J. I. Zhang, T. Kimura, Y. Tokura, K. Terakura, and E. W. Plummer, Science

746, 289 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.289.5480.746

217. M. S. Anwar, S. R. Lee, R. Ishiguro, Y. Sugimoto, Y. Tano, S. J. Kang, Y. J. Shin, S. Yonezawa, 

D. Manske, H. Takayanagi, T. W. Noh, and Y. Maeno, Nat. Commun. 7, 13220 (2016). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13220

218. M. S. Anwar, M. Kunieda, R. Ishiguro, S. R. Lee, L. A. B. Olthof, J. W. A. Robinson, S. Yonezawa, 

T.W. Noh, and Y. Maeno, Phys. Rev. B 100, 024516 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.100.024516

219. R. Fittipaldi, R. Hartmann, M. T. Mercaldo, S. Komori, A. Bjorlig, W. Kyung, Y. Yasui, T. 

Miyoshi, L. A. B. Olde Olthof, C. Palomares Garcia, V. Granata, I. Keren, W. Higemoto, A. Suter, 
T. Prokscha, A. Romano, C. Noce, C. Kim, Y. Maeno, E. Scheer, B. Kalisky, J. W. A. Robinson, 
M. Cuoco, Z. Salman, A. Vecchione, and A. Di Bernardo, Nat. Commun. 12, 5792 (2021). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26020-5

220. O. Maistrenko, C. Autieri, G. Livanas, P. Gentile, A. Romano. C. Noce, D. Manske, and M. Cuoco, 

Phys. Rev. Research 3, 033008 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.033008

221. S. Murakami, and N. Nagaosa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 057002 (2003).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.057002

222. A. Daido, and Y. Yanese, Phys. Rev. B 94, 054519 (2016).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.94.054519

223. Y. Yanese, A. Daido, K. Takasan, and T. Yoshida, Phys. E: Low-Dimens. Syst. Nanostructure

140, 115143 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physe.2022.115143


61

224. M. T. Mercaldo, M. Cuoco, and P. Kotetes, Phys. Rev. B 94, 140503 (R) (2016).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.94.140503

225. R. M. Lutchyn, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 077001 (2010).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.077001

226. Y. Oreg, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 177002 (2010).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.177002

227. H. Kim, A. Palacio-Morales, T. Posske, L. Rózsa, K. Palotás, L. Szunyogh, M. Thorwart, and R. 

Wiesendanger, Sci. Adv. 4, eaar5251 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aar5251

228. M. M. Desjardins, L. C. Contamin, M. R. Delbecq, M. C. Dartiailh, L. E. Bruhat, T. Cubaynes, J. 

J. Viennot, F. Mallet, S. Rohart, A. Thiaville, A. Cottet, and T. Kontos, Nat. Mater. 18, 1060 
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-019-0457-6

229. A. Kubetzka, J. M. Bürger, R. Wiesendanger, and K. von Bergmann, Towards skyrmion 

superconductor hybrid systems, Phys. Rev. Mater. 4, 081401(R) (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.4.081401

230. A. P. Petrovic, M. Raju, X. Y. Tee, A. Louat, I. Maggio-Aprile, ´ R. M. Menezes, M. J. Wyszynski, 

N. K. Duong, M. Reznikov, Ch. Renner, M. V. Miloševic, and C. Panagopoulos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
126, 117205 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.013225

231. D. Steffensen, M. H. Christensen, B. M. Andersen, and P. Kotetes, Phys. Rev. Res. 4, 013225 

(2022) https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.013225

232. A. Di Bernardo, S. Komori, G. Livanas, G. Divitini, P. Gentile, M. Cuoco, and J. W. A. Robinson, 

Nat. Mater. 18, 1194 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-019-0476-3

233. P. Marra and M. Cuoco, Phys. Rev. B 95, 140504(R) (2017).

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.95.140504

234. K. R. Jeon, B. K. Hazra, K. Cho, A. Chakraborty, J. C. Jeon, H. Han, H. L. Meyerheim, T. Kontos, 

and S. S. Parkin, Nat. Mater. 20, 1358 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-021-01061-9

235. A. Di Bernardo, S. Diesch, Y. Gu, J. Linder, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, E. Scheer, M. G. Blamire, and 

J. W. A. Robinson, Nat. Commun. 6, 8053 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9053

236. A. Di Bernardo, Z. Salman, X. L. Wang, M. Amado, M. Egilmez, M. G. Flokstra, A. Suter, S. L. 

Lee, J. H. Zhao, T. Prokscha, E. Morenzoni, M. G. Blamire, J. Linder, and J. W. A. Robinson, 
Phys. Rev. X 5, 041021 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.5.041021

237. X. L. Wang, A. Di Bernardo, N. Banerjee, A. Wells, F. S. Bergeret, M. G. Blamire, and J. W. A. 

Robinson, Phys. Rev. B 89, 140508 (R) (2014). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.89.140508

238. F. Trier, P. Nöel, J. V. Kim, J. P. Attanè, L. Vila and M. Bibes, Nat. Rev. Mater. 7, 258 (2022). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41578-021-00395-9

239. K. Samanta, M. Ležaić, M. Merte, F. Freimuth, S. Blügel, and Y. Mokrousov, J. Appl. Phys. 127, 

213904 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0005017

240. S. G. Jeong, S. Y. Lim, J. Kim, S. Park, H. Cheong, and W. S. Choi, Nanoscale 12, 13926 (2020).

https://doi.org/10.1039/D0NR03282D

241. W. Wang, L. Li, J. Liu, B. Chen, Y. Ji, J. Wang, G. Cheng, Y. Lu, G. Rijnders, G. Koster, W. Wu, 

and Z. Liao, npj Quantum Mater. 5, 73 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41535-020-00275-5


