Fundamental laws of chiral band crossings: local constraints,
global constraints, and topological phase diagrams

Kirill Alpin,1, ŌłŚ Moritz M. Hirschmann,1, ŌłŚ Niclas Heinsdorf,1, 2 Andreas
Leonhardt,1 Wan Yee Yau,1, 3 Xianxin Wu,1, 4 and Andreas P. Schnyder1

1Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstrasse 1, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany
2Stewart Blusson Quantum Matter Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
3Institute for Theoretical Physics III, University of Stuttgart, D-70550 Stuttgart, Germany
4Institute for Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
(Dated: March 3, 2023)

We derive two fundamental laws of chiral band crossings: (i) a local constraint relating the Chern
number to phase jumps of rotation eigenvalues; and (ii) a global constraint determining the number
of chiral crossings on rotation axes. Together with the fermion doubling theorem, these laws describe
all conditions that a network of chiral band crossing must satisfy. We apply the fundamental laws to
prove the existence of enforced double Weyl points, nodal planes, and generic Weyl points, among
others. In addition, we show that chiral space-group symmetries cannot stabilize nodal lines with
finite Chern numbers. Combining the local constraint with explicit low-energy models, we determine
the generic topological phase diagrams of all multi-fold crossings. Remarkably, we find a four-fold
crossing with Chern number 5, which exceeds the previously conceived maximum Chern number of 4.
We identify BaAsPt as a suitable material with this four-fold crossing exhibiting Chern number 5
near the Fermi energy.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Recent theoretical and experimental efforts have un-
covered a huge number of materials with chiral band
crossings near the Fermi level [1ŌĆō6]. These include Weyl
semimetals [7ŌĆō10], where two bands cross at isolated
points, nodal plane materials with two-fold degeneracies
on planes [11ŌĆō15], as well as materials with multifold
band crossings [16ŌĆō19], such as threefold, fourfold, or six-
fold Weyl points. Common to these band crossings is that
their little groups are chiral (i.e., do not contain inversion
or mirror symmetries), such that they act as sources or
sinks of Berry flux with quantized Chern numbers. As
a consequence, chiral Weyl materials exhibit a number
of unusual phenomena, e.g., the chiral anomaly [20ŌĆō22],
large negative magnetoresistance [23], or a quantized cir-
cular photogalvanic effect [24ŌĆō26], which might be uti-
lized for the development of new devices and technolo-
gies [27, 28]. In combination with magnetic order, chiral
band crossings are highly tunable via an external mag-
netic field [14, 29, 30], a property that is vital for future
applications.
Importantly, the Chern numbers of chiral band cross-
ings, as well as their multiplicities and arrangements in
the Brillouin zone (BZ) is not only constrained by crystal-
lographic symmetries, but must obey further topological
conditions that originate from the periodicity of the BZ.
For example, screw rotations lead to symmetry-enforced
chiral crossings, due to a nontrivial winding of the sym-
metry eigenvalues along the BZ torus [31]. In addition,
there are in a band structure, in general, also chiral cross-
ings at high-symmetry points, due to higher-dimensional

ŌłŚ These two authors contributed equally.

irreducible representations of the little groups, and more-
over there can exist accidental crossings at generic po-
sitions in the BZ. All of these crossings carry a Chern
number, forming an interrelated network of band topolo-
gies [15].
The Chern numbers of this topological net-
work are restricted by the fermion doubling theorem [32],
which dictates that the sum of the Chern numbers over
the entire BZ must add up to zero. The values of the in-
dividual Chern numbers, in turn, are constrained by the
crystalline symmetries and, moreover, each chiral cross-
ing has symmetry related partners with the same Chern
number. Hence, there is a complicated interplay between
crystallography and topology that determines the possi-
ble network of band crossings that can exist in a given
space group (SG).
These conditions due to symmetry and topology can
be used to systematically classify networks of chiral
band crossings.
For example, Refs. [33ŌĆō42] classified
symmetry-enforced topological features of periodic band
structures, Refs. [16, 19, 43ŌĆō45] studied band topologies
of low-energy models, and Refs. [46ŌĆō48] investigated the
connection between rotation eigenvalues and Chern num-
bers of Weyl points. While these works uncovered a num-
ber of interesting band topologies, a deeper understand-
ing for why these arise is lacking, and a fundamental the-
ory of chiral band crossings still needs to be developed.
In this article, we close this gap by deriving two fun-
damental laws of chiral band crossings (Secs. II and III),
namely, (i) a local constraint, Eq. (1), which relates the
Chern number of a chiral crossing to the phase jumps
of the rotation eigenvalues; and (ii) a global constraint,
Eq. (2), which specifies the number and types of band
crossings existing on a rotation axis. Together with the
famous fermion doubling theorem [32], these two fun-
damental laws describe all the conditions that a chiral
topological network must satisfy.
To demonstrate the

arXiv:2303.01477v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  2 Mar 2023


2

usefulness of these concepts, we present in Sec. IV sev-
eral applications of the local and global constraints. For
example, we use the fundamental theorems to prove the
existence of enforced double Weyl points on a twofold ro-
tation axis away from time-reversal invariant momenta
(TRIMs) (Sec. IV A 1), we derive the existence of topo-
logical nodal planes (Sec. IV B 1), and we deduce the
existence of Weyl points at generic positions in the BZ
(Sec. IV B 2).
In addition, we show that chiral nodal
lines with finite Chern numbers cannot be stabilized by
space-group symmetries, but only by internal (artificial)
symmetries. We present a low-energy model that realizes
such a chiral nodal line (Sec. IV A 3).

We complement these fundamental considerations by
an explicit construction of low-energy models of all multi-
fold crossings (Sec. V). Combining these with the non-
Abelian local constraint, we determine the generic topo-
logical phase diagrams of these multi-fold crossings. Re-
markably, we find that there exist four-fold crossings with
Chern number 5 (Sec. V B 1), which exceeds the previ-
ously conceived maximum Chern number of 4 for multi-
fold crossings [49, 50].
We perform a database search
for materials with multi-fold crossings exhibiting Chern
number 5 and identify BaAsPt in SG 198 as a suitable
compound (Sec. VI A). We also briefly discuss the mate-
rials NbO2 and TaO2 in SG 80, which realize double Weyl
points at TRIMs and away from TRIMs (Sec. VI B). In
Sec. VII we conclude with a discussion and provide di-
rections for future work. Technical details are presented
in several appendices.

II.
TWO SYMMETRY CONSTRAINTS ON
CHIRAL CROSSINGS

A chiral band crossing point, commonly referred to
as a Weyl point, acts as a monopole of Berry curvature
Ōä”(k). Each Weyl point can be characterized by a topo-
logical charge, the chirality, which is given by the Chern
number ╬Į calculated on a closed manifold of gapped
bands surrounding the crossing point. Previously, it has
been found that a crossing at kc is always topologically
charged, if the little group Gkc is chiral, i.e., if there
are neither inversion nor mirror symmetries [11]. With-
out fine-tuning or additional symmetries the charge of a
Weyl point is ╬Į = ┬▒1.

If one considers one or more rotation symmetries, the
Chern numbers ╬Į of all chiral crossing in the BZ as
well as their multiplicity are subject to local and global
constraints, respectively.
In this section we formulate
these two constraints on the existence and the topo-
logical charge of chiral crossings, generalizing previous
works [46ŌĆō48]. The proofs are then given in Sec. III.

A.
The local constraint

We find a simple relation how the charge ╬Įb,cb of a
crossing cb between the bands numbered by b and b + 1
is related to the change of complex phase ŌłåŽĢb,cb of an n-
fold rotation eigenvalue ╬╗b. Here and in what follows, we
sort the bands by their energy, i.e., Eb+1(k) > Eb(k) ŌłĆk.
For a given band b the eigenvalue ╬╗b(k) is generally a
function of the crystal momentum k, which is restricted
to the rotation axis.
The eigenvalue may, but does
not need to jump at each crossing on the axis, yielding
ŌłåŽĢb,cb = arg (╬╗b(kcb + ŽĄ╦åz)/╬╗b(kcb ŌłÆ ŽĄ╦åz)) with the unit
vector along the rotation axis ╦åz and ŽĄ > 0 is sent to 0,
see Fig. 1(a).
With these definitions we will show that

╬Įb,cb = ŌłåŽĢb,cb
n
2ŽĆ
mod n,
(1)

where the complex phase is only determined up to the
order n of the rotation axis. Equation (1) includes pre-
vious results obtained for low-energy models subject to
one rotation symmetry and a time-reversal symmetry
[46, 47], and agrees with the expression derived by clas-
sifying equivariant line bundles [48]. If one recalls that
at generic low-symmetry positions in the vicinity of the
rotation axis the number of singly-charged Weyl points
is also restricted by symmetry to be equal n, one finds
that larger |╬Įb,cb| > n/2 would actually be fine-tuned.
Therefore, although the relation is only valid
mod n, it
is expected that real systems are restricted to crossings
with |╬Įb,cb| < n/2. Equation (1) is valid even with time-
reversal symmetry or other crystalline symmetries as long
as the crossing cb is point-like, e.g., also if time-reversal
enables a gapless crossings between equal rotation eigen-
values. With this insight a recently discovered type of
unusual twofold double Weyl point, which occurs on a
twofold instead of a fourfold or sixfold rotation axis away
from time-reversal invariant momenta (TRIMs), can be
understood, see Sec. IV A 1. But a caveat is in order here:
If time-reversal and screw symmetries appear together
not only can equal eigenvalues be paired but in several
cases this enforces nodal planes, in which case Eq. (1)
does not apply. Nevertheless, we will see that Eq. (1)
is a central tool to identify the topology of nodal planes.
Since our results can be applied to more than one rotation
symmetry at a time, it provides a handle to study higher-
fold crossings, where more than two bands intersect. In
such crossings every band b is subject to Eq. (1) for each
rotation symmetry. We will see in Sec. IV A 2 that this
not only explains the observed topological charges, but
results in more than one possible configuration of topo-
logical charges.

B.
The global constraint

The second implication of rotation (and mirror) sym-
metries that governs the qualitative band topology of


3

topological semimetals, is a global constraint on the num-
ber and type of required crossings cb per band b. Gen-
erally, two types of crystalline symmetries can be distin-
guished, those with symmorphic operations, which leave
at least one point in space invariant, and those with
nonsymmorphic operations that leave no point invariant,
e.g., screw rotations and glide mirror operations. Since
the BZ is periodic, nonsymmorphic symmetries lead to
an exchange of bands, due to the k-dependence of their
eigenvalues ╬╗b(k), which implies the existence of at least
one band crossing on a nonsymmorphic rotation axis [31].
Conversely, for bands along a symmorphic rotation axis
it must be possible to undo all band crossings via pair an-
nihilation, due to the BZ periodicity. These constraints
can be formalized with complex phase differences ŌłåŽĢb,cb.
We consider an n-fold symmetry comprising a transla-
tion (a, b, m

n ), e.g., for a rotation this corresponds to
{Cz
n|a, b, m

n } in Seitz notation. If a band b is not part
of a multifold crossings, one finds for each of the rotation
axes
’┐Į

b,cb
ŌłåŽĢb,cb = ŌłÆb ┬Ę 2ŽĆ m

n
mod 2ŽĆ,
(2)

which only depends on the band index b, the translation
part m

n , and the phase difference ŌłåŽĢb,cb for crossings cb
between the bands b and b + 1. If there is a multifold
crossing for band b, a similar relation has to be consid-
ered, where cb comprises crossing to higher and lower
bands, see Eq. (50). Equation (2) constrains the complex
phase that must be accumulated as one moves through
the BZ, up to multiples of 2ŽĆ. If the right side of Eq. (2)
is non-zero up to 2ŽĆ, it is clear that there must be at
least one crossing, which contributes to the summation
on the left side. We note that a glide mirror symmetry
can be treated analogously, by considering crossings on
any path within the mirror plane that crosses the en-
tire BZ, such that it is closed due the periodicity in k.
The usefulness of this formalization for rotation symmet-
ric systems becomes evident in conjunction with our first
result, Eq. (1), which relates each ŌłåŽĢb,cb ╠Ė= 0 to a topo-
logical charge. Therefore, Eq. (2) states that the total
chirality of all crossings on a rotation axis is given by
the band index and the translation part of the screw, up
to multiples of the order of the rotation axis. This im-
plies that accidental crossings on the rotation axis may
change the total charge only by multiples of the order of
the rotation axis, which is reminiscent of what happens
at generic positions, where a symmetry imposes certain
multiplicities of topological crossings.

III.
DERIVATION OF THE TWO
CONSTRAINTS

In this section we derive the local and global con-
straints, which were discussed in the previous section.
For pedagogical reasons, we first present the proof for
nondegenerate bands in Sec. III A, and then generalize it

to degenerate bands in Sec. III B. In Sec. III C we discuss
properties of the sewing matrix with anti-unitary sym-
metries. The global constraint is derived in Sec. III D.

A.
Abelian Chern numbers and eigenvalue jumps

In the following we derive the constraint, Eq. (1), on
the Chern number ╬Į of a crossing cb in band b, which is
protected by an n-fold rotation symmetry Cn. A related
proof is given in Ref. [48], where the Picard group of
complex line bundles is computed over a sphere subject
to a cyclic group action. To give self-contained proofs, we
calculate the Chern number by generalizing the formal-
ism used in Ref. [51ŌĆō54] to spherical integration surfaces.
The Chern number for a nondegenerate band is defined
using the flux of Berry curvature Ōä”(k) through a surface
S enclosing the crossing as

╬Į = 1

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

S
dn ┬Ę Ōä”(k),
(3)

where the surface S is assumed to be a sphere in recipro-
cal space, without loss of generality, and n is the vector
normal to the sphere, see Fig. 1(a). For ease of presen-
tation we have excluded here the case of bands that are
degenerate also away from the crossing point, for which
a non-Abelian Berry curvature must be considered, see
Sec. III B. To calculate the Chern number, Eq. (3), we
split the sphere S into n spherical wedges SW , which
are related by the Cn rotation symmetry. The Abelian
Berry curvature transforms as a vector under rotations,
i.e., D(Cn)Ōä”(k) = Ōä”(D(Cn)k) [52], where D(Cn) is the
spatial representation of the rotation Cn. Noting that
the scalar product n ┬Ę Ōä”(k) is left invariant under the
introduction of the orthogonal matrix D(Cn)Ōä”, one ob-
tains

╬Į = n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

SW
dn ┬Ę Ōä”(k).
(4)

Further, by using that the curvature, Ōä”(k) = Ōłć ├Ś A,
is the rotation of the Berry connection (A(k))ab =
i Ō¤©ua(k)|Ōłć|ub(k)Ō¤®, where |ub(k)Ō¤® is the orbital part of a
Bloch eigenfunction of the considered Hamiltonian. For
a sufficiently small S the only relevant divergence of the
Berry curvature Ōä”(k) occurs at the crossing cb, i.e., Ōä”(k)
has continuous derivatives on S.
We can thus apply
Stokes theorem and find

╬Į = n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéSW
ds ┬Ę A(k)
mod n.
(5)

We note, that the integration in Eq. (5) corresponds to
the Berry phase.
Hence, Stokes theorem holds up to
multiples of 2ŽĆ, which, when taking the factor
n
2ŽĆ into
account, amounts to an equation valid
mod n. In other
words, the U(1) gauge freedom of eigenstates implies that
the integration of A(k) in Eq. (5) can be changed by any
integer multiple of 2ŽĆ, whereas the Chern number ╬Į is


4

(a)

(b)

dn

ds

ŌłéS1
W
ŌłéS2
W

ds

Žåb(+ŽĄz)
^

Žåb(ŌĆōŽĄz)
^

Cn

SW

ŌłéS2
W
ŌłéS1
W
=
+
ŌłéSW

Žåb

z

Figure 1.
(a) Local constraint: Integration area to deter-
mine the Chern number around a point crossing (red sphere).
In the presence of a Cn rotation the full sphere of radius
ŽĄ (green + red) comprises n symmetry-related copies of the
spherical wedge SW (red).
By Stokes theorem the flux of
Berry curvature Ōä” through SW is equal to the line inte-
gral of the Berry connection A along its boundary ŌłéSW
(dashed lines).
The value of the Berry phase depends on
ŌłåŽĢb,cb = ŽĢ(+ŽĄ╦åz) ŌłÆ ŽĢ(ŌłÆŽĄ╦åz). (b) Global constraint: The phase
ŽĢb of screw rotation symmetry eigenvalues enforces a band
crossing in band b with chirality ╬Įb. The points ╬ō(0, 0, 0) and
╬ō2(0, 0, 2ŽĆ) are related by a reciprocal lattice vector.

gauge-invariant. When we want to determine the value
of the Chern number, the corresponding gauge choice is
not known, and thus Eq. (5) holds modulo n.
The closed path ŌłéSW can be split into two open and
Cn-symmetry related paths ŌłéS1
W and ŌłéS2
W , i.e., ŌłéSW =
ŌłéS1
W + ŌłéS2
W . But since a non-zero Berry flux through
the surface SW implies that no single-valued phase con-
vention can be found on the full edge ŌłéSW , we need to
account for a mismatch in the phase convention.
For
this purpose we consider the sewing matrix B, which is
defined as [52]

[BCn(k)]ab = Ō¤©ua(D(Cn)k)|U(Cn)|ub(k)Ō¤® ,
(6)

where U(Cn) describes the action of the rotation on
the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian |ub(k)Ō¤®. For nonde-
generate bands the sewing matrix is simply a complex
phase factor [BCn(k)]ab = ╬┤abeiŽåb(k). Specifically, at sym-
metry invariant momenta kinv with D(Cn)kinv = kinv
the sewing matrix, Eq. (6), reduces to the symmetry
eigenvalue ╬╗b = eiŽĢb(kinv) of U(Cn) for band b, i.e.,

Žåb(kinv) = ŽĢb(kinv). More generally, at kinv the sewing
matrix becomes a diagonal matrix for an appropriate ba-
sis within a degenerate subspace. The Berry connection
is then given by [52]

A(D(Cn)k) = D(Cn)
’┐Į
BCn(k)A(k)BŌłÆ1
Cn(k)

+ iBCn(k)ŌłćBŌłÆ1
Cn(k)
’┐Į
,
(7)

see appendix A for details.
For nondegenerate bands
iBCn(k)ŌłćBŌłÆ1
Cn(k) = ŌłćŽåb(k) and BCn(k)A(k)BŌłÆ1
Cn(k) =
A(k). Using the fact that the path ŌłéS2
W corresponds to
the rotated path ŌłéS1
W but traversed in the reversed direc-
tion, we perform an integral substitution with k = (Cn)kŌĆ▓

in the line integral over ŌłéS2
W , which turns the integra-
tion path ŌłéS2
W into ŌłÆŌłéS1
W .
The integral substitution
has a unity Jacobian determinant, such that the term
A(k) cancels leaving only the sewing matrix term. Us-
ing Eq. (5) we complete the proof of Eq. (1),

╬Į = n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į’┐Į

ŌłéS1
W
ds ┬Ę A(k) +
’┐Į

ŌłéS2
W
ds ┬Ę A(k)

’┐Į

mod n
(8)

= ŌłÆ n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéS1
W
ds ┬Ę ŌłćŽåb(k)
mod n
(9)

= n

2ŽĆ (ŽĢ(kcb + ŽĄ╦åz) ŌłÆ ŽĢ(kcb ŌłÆ ŽĄ╦åz))
mod n
(10)

= n

2ŽĆ ŌłåŽĢ
mod n,
(11)

where kcb + ŽĄ╦åz and kcb ŌłÆ ŽĄ╦åz are the north and south
pole of the original sphere, respectively, see Fig. 1(a).
The difference in complex phases ŌłåŽĢb,cb of the enclosed
crossing is only meaningful up to multiplies of 2ŽĆ, which
is consistent with the equality up to
mod n. A com-
ment on the used gauge is in order. Here, we have used
the cell-periodic part of the Bloch functions in the cal-
culation of the Chern number and Berry phase [55], the
k-dependence of the phases ŽĢb(k) originates only from
the exchange of symmetry eigenvalues and the wave func-
tions ubk(r) that correspond to |ub(k)Ō¤® are periodic in r in
agreement with the crystal lattice. In the next section,
we will consider Bloch functions Žłbk(r) = eik┬Ęrubk(r),
which capture the periodicity of the Brillouin zone, i.e.,
Žłbk+K(r) = Žłbk(r) for all reciprocal lattice vectors K.
The symmetry action for the periodic gauge Žłbk(r) cap-
tures the global symmetry constraints on the band struc-
ture, because the symmetry eigenvalues of nonsymmor-
phic symmetries gain a phase factor that represents the
translation part of the screw and glide symmetry oper-
ations. Nevertheless, Eq. (1) holds independently of the
gauge choice, because all symmetry eigenvalues on a ro-
tation axis obtain the same additional k-dependence in
ŽĢb(k). In other words, practically we think of ŌłåŽĢb,cb in
the limit of ŽĄ ŌåÆ 0 [see, e.g., Eq. (10)], whereby ŌłåŽĢb,cb
becomes the same for both conventions.

B.
Non-abelian Chern numbers


5

and eigenvalue jumps

For bands with degeneracies on S, for example pairs
of bands forming a nodal plane, Eq. (1) is not applica-
ble, since Chern numbers can either become undefined
or assume non-integer values. But in these cases, a non-
abelian Chern number can still be defined [56]

╬Įb1b2 = 1

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

S
dn ┬Ę tr Ōä”b1b2(k),
(12)

where the trace runs over band indices b with b1 Ōēż b Ōēż b2
and the non-abelian Berry curvature and connection [57]
are

Ōä”b1b2 = Ōłćk ├Ś A ŌłÆ iA ├Ś A,
(13)
An,m = i Ō¤©n|Ōłćk|mŌ¤® ,
(14)

respectively, with b1 Ōēż n, m Ōēż b2. The band index range
b1, ..., b2 must be chosen such that these bands have a
non-zero bandgap to bands b1ŌłÆ1 and b2+1 on the surface
S.
A similar equation as Eq. (1) can be derived for non-
abelian Chern numbers. Using Eq. (12) and (13) we have

╬Įb1b2 = 1

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

S
dn ┬Ę tr(Ōłćk ├Ś A ŌłÆ iA ├Ś A)

= 1

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

S
dn ┬Ę tr(Ōłćk ├Ś A)

= n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéSW
ds ┬Ę trA(k)
mod n,
(15)

where we used the fact that tr(A ├Ś A) = 0 since
tr(AiAj ŌłÆ AjAi) = 0. In going from the second to the
third line we reduced the integration area using symme-
try and applied Stokes theorem just like in the proof for
the abelian case. Splitting ŌłéSW into ŌłéS1
W and ŌłéS2
W and
mapping the latter to the former with Eq. (7) we get

╬Įb1b2 =
’┐Į n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéS1
W
ds ┬Ę trA(k)

ŌłÆ n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéS1
W
ds ┬Ę tr(BCn(k)A(k)BŌłÆ1
Cn(k))

ŌłÆ i n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéS1
W
ds ┬Ę tr(BCn(k)ŌłćBŌłÆ1
Cn(k))
’┐Į
mod n

= ŌłÆi n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéS1
W
ds ┬Ę tr(BCn(k)ŌłćBŌłÆ1
Cn(k))
mod n,

(16)

where we used tr(BCn(k)A(k)BŌłÆ1
Cn(k)) = trA(k). Using
JacobiŌĆÖs formula we have

d
d╬╗ log det BŌłÆ1
Cn(╬╗) =
1

det BŌłÆ1
Cn(╬╗)

d det BŌłÆ1
Cn(╬╗)

d╬╗

= tr

’┐Į

BCn(╬╗)dBŌłÆ1
Cn(╬╗)
d╬╗

’┐Į

.
(17)

Combining this with Eq. (16) we obtain

╬Įb1b2 = ŌłÆi n

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéS1
W
ds ┬Ę Ōłćk log detBŌłÆ1
Cn(k)
mod n

= ŌłÆi n

2ŽĆ [log detBCn(kcb + ŽĄ╦åz)

ŌłÆ log detBCn(kcb ŌłÆ ŽĄ╦åz)]
mod n.
(18)

This is equivalent to

╬Įb1b2 = n

2ŽĆ

b2
’┐Į

b=b1
ŌłåŽĢb,cb
mod n,
(19)

when the bands b1, ..., b2 are nondegenerate, consistent
with the abelian case, although here this is also true if
the bands are degenerate somewhere on the sphere except
at the poles. When they are degenerate at the poles, one
must either resort to using Eq. (18) or choose an eigen-
basis in the degenerate subspace, such that the sewing
matrix BCn is diagonal and use Eq. (19).

C.
Sewing matrices of anti-unitary symmetries

In this section we derive similar expressions for the
anti-unitary symmetries as in section III A. Applying
these to generic crossings, we find that single band Chern
numbers of crossings with time-reversal symmetry have
even (odd) Chern numbers without (with) SOC. In the
following, W is either just the time-reversal symmetry
W = T with R = 1 or W is a combination of time-
reversal and crystalline symmetry.
We start with the
derivation of the sewing matrix ╬▒ for degenerate bands

WH(k)W ŌłÆ1 = H(ŌłÆRk)
(20)
=ŌćÆ WH(k) |u(k)Ō¤® = H(ŌłÆRk)W |u(k)Ō¤®
(21)
=ŌćÆ E(k)W |u(k)Ō¤® = H(ŌłÆRk)W |u(k)Ō¤®
(22)

so W |u(k)Ō¤® must be an eigenstate of H(ŌłÆRk). Therefore

╬▒(k) |u(ŌłÆRk)Ō¤® = W |u(k)Ō¤® ,
(23)

which leads to the sewing matrix for anti-unitary sym-
metries

╬▒(k) = Ō¤©u(ŌłÆRk)| W |u(k)Ō¤® .
(24)

The Berry connection transforms under W like so

A(k) = i Ō¤©u(k)| Ōłék |u(k)Ō¤®

= ŌłÆi Ō¤©u(k)| W ŌĆĀŌłékW |u(k)Ō¤®
= ŌłÆi╬▒ŌłŚ(k) Ō¤©u(ŌłÆRk)| Ōłék╬▒(k) |u(ŌłÆRk)Ō¤®

= iRŌłÆ1 Ō¤©u(ŌłÆRk)| ŌłéŌłÆRk |u(ŌłÆRk)Ō¤® ŌłÆ i╬▒ŌłŚ(k)Ōłék╬▒(k)

= RŌłÆ1A(ŌłÆRk) ŌłÆ i╬▒ŌłŚ(k)Ōłék╬▒(k),
(25)


6

where we used

Ō¤©u(k)| W ŌĆĀŌłékW |u(k)Ō¤®

= lim
ŽĄŌåÆ0
1
ŽĄ (Ō¤©u(k)| W ŌĆĀW |u(k + ŽĄ)Ō¤® ŌłÆ Ō¤©u(k)| W ŌĆĀW |u(k)Ō¤®)

= lim
ŽĄŌåÆ0
1
ŽĄ (Ō¤©u(k + ŽĄ)|u(k)Ō¤® ŌłÆ Ō¤©u(k)|u(k)Ō¤®)

= Ō¤©Ōłéku(k)|u(k)Ō¤® = ŌłÆ Ō¤©u(k)| Ōłék |u(k)Ō¤®
(26)

together with the anti-unitarity of W

Ō¤©╬©| W ŌĆĀW |╬”Ō¤® = Ō¤©W╬©|W╬”Ō¤® = Ō¤©╬”|╬©Ō¤®
(27)

and

Ō¤©u(k)|u(k)Ō¤® = 1
(28)
=ŌćÆ Ōłék Ō¤©u(k)|u(k)Ō¤® = 0
(29)
=ŌćÆ Ō¤©Ōłéku(k)|u(k)Ō¤® = ŌłÆ Ō¤©u(k)|Ōłéku(k)Ō¤® .
(30)

1.
Chern number constraints from CnT symmetries

Using Eq.(25), we can derive expressions similar to
Eq.(1) for C4T

╬Įcb = 2

ŽĆ [Žå(S) ŌłÆ Žå(N)]
mod 4

= ŌłÆ 2

ŽĆ ŌłåŽåb,cb
mod 4,
(31)

and for C6T

╬Įcb = ŌłÆ 3

ŽĆ ŌłåŽåb,cb
mod 3,
(32)

with ╬▒(k) = eŌłÆiŽå(k).
The constraint for C6T is only
defined mod 3 instead of mod 6, since C6T relates the
Berry curvature of wedges spanning 1/3 of a sphere to
each other, instead of 1/6 wedges. The main difference of
Eq. (31) and (32) to Eq. (1) is that ŌłåŽåb,cb is no longer the
change of a symmetry eigenvalue but the phase change
of the anti-unitary symmetry sewing matrix (24).
C2T relates the Berry curvature of the upper to the
lower hemisphere, so to derive a local constraint we need
to consider a path Sequator on the equator

╬Įcb = 1

ŽĆ

’┐Į

Sequator
A(k)dk
mod 2
(33)

= 1

ŽĆ

’┐Į

Sequator
C2A(k)dk

ŌłÆ 1

ŽĆ

’┐Į

Sequator
i╬▒ŌłŚ(k)Ōłék╬▒(k)dk
mod 2
(34)

= ŌłÆ 1

ŽĆ

’┐Į

Sequator
A(k)dk

ŌłÆ 1

ŽĆ

’┐Į

Sequator
i╬▒ŌłŚ(k)Ōłék╬▒(k)dk
mod 2
(35)

=ŌćÆ ╬Įcb = ŌłÆ 1

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

Sequator
ŌłékŽå(k)dk
mod 2
(36)

where
we
used
Eq. (25),
A(ŌłÆC2k)
=
A(k)
and
(C2v)dk = ŌłÆvdk with any vector v on the equator. So
╬Įcb is even (odd) when Žå(k) winds an even (odd) number
of times around the equator.
A C3T constraint is redundant, since C3T implies T =
(C3T)3 and therefore also C3 to exist separately.

2.
Chern number constraint of crossings at TRIMs

Next we would like to evaluate a single band Chern
number of a crossing with time-reversal symmetry, W =
T (R = 1) and T 2 = ╬│, where ╬│ = 1 for spinless and
╬│ = ŌłÆ1 for spinful fermions. We split the integration-
sphere around the crossing into two halves,

╬Į = 1

ŽĆ

’┐Į’┐Į

ŌłéS1
A(k)dk +
’┐Į

ŌłéS2
A(k)dk
’┐Į
mod 2
(37)

= 1

ŽĆ

’┐Į’┐Į

ŌłéS1
A(k)dk +
’┐Į

ŌłéS2
A(ŌłÆk)dk

ŌłÆ
’┐Į

ŌłéS2
i╬▒ŌłŚ(k)Ōłék╬▒(k)dk
’┐Į
mod 2
(38)

= ŌłÆ 1

ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéS2
i╬▒ŌłŚ(k)Ōłék╬▒(k)dk
mod 2,
(39)

where ŌłéS1 and ŌłéS2 are paths at the halves edge running
on opposite sides. Using ╬▒(k) = eŌłÆiŽå(k) we have

╬Į = ŌłÆ 1

ŽĆ

’┐Į

ŌłéS2
ŌłékŽå(k)dk
mod 2
(40)

= 1

ŽĆ (Žå(S) ŌłÆ Žå(N))
mod 2
(41)

with N and S being the north and southpole. To evaluate
this expression, consider Eq. (23). We can reinsert itself
with a replacement k ŌåÆ ŌłÆk to get

╬▒(k) |u(ŌłÆk)Ō¤® = T╬▒ŌłŚ(ŌłÆk)T |u(ŌłÆk)Ō¤®
(42)
= ╬▒(ŌłÆk)╬│ |u(ŌłÆk)Ō¤®
(43)

so

╬│ = ╬▒(k)╬▒ŌłŚ(ŌłÆk)
(44)

= eŌłÆi(Žå(k)ŌłÆŽå(ŌłÆk))
(45)

which can be applied to Eq. (41) to arrive at ╬Į = 0
mod 2 for the spinless case (╬│ = 1) and ╬Į = 1 mod 2
for the spinful one (╬│ = ŌłÆ1). So any crossing at TRIMs,
which include also multifold ones, without further de-
generacies away from the crossing, must have even (odd)
Chern numbers without (with) SOC. We see that this
constraint is explicitly fulfilled in all models found in this
paper, for example in section V B and in all low-energy
Weyl point Hamiltonian at TRIMs in [47].

D.
Global constraint on band topology

For chiral band crossings global constraints on the
band topology arise due to conditions on the sum of the


7

topological charges of nodal points. One such global con-
straint is the fermion doubling theorem by Nielsen and
Ninomiya, which states that for each band the sum of all
chiralities has to vanish [32]. Here, we prove a global con-
straint on the rotation eigenvalues, which ultimately fol-
lows from the periodicity of the BZ, i.e., the compactness
of the BZ. To do so, we employ symmetry representations
along the full rotation axis, which can be obtained by
taking powers of the symmetry [58]. For concreteness we
consider a screw rotation symmetry Cn(x, y, m

n ), which
describes an n-fold rotation around the z axis followed by
a translation with the vector (x, y, m

n ). Taking the n-th
power of the screw rotation we obtain
’┐Į
Cn(x, y, m

n )
’┐Įn = eiŽĆs T(0, 0, m) = eiŽĆs+imkz,
(46)

where m, n Ōłł Z, |m| < |n|, and s = 0 (s = 1) for spinless
(spinful) systems. In the second step the translation by a
full lattice vector T(0, 0, m) is replaced by the usual one-
dimensional representation of the translation group. No-
tably, the above and all following steps apply analogously
to glide mirror operations, which would correspond to
an operation with n = 2 and either m = 0 or m = 1
for mirror and glide mirror symmetry, respectively. The
symmetry eigenvalues of the Cn screw rotation is found
as the complex root of Eq. (46) yielding

╬╗Cn = exp
’┐Į
i2ŽĆp + sŽĆ + mkz

n

’┐Į
,
(47)

where p Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , n ŌłÆ 1} distinguishes the n differ-
ent complex roots. On the rotation axes invariant under
the rotation Cn(x, y, m

n ), we label the bands using ╬╗Cn
or rather, equivalently, we consider the complex phase
ŽĢ(kz) = arg ╬╗Cn. To label a specific band b that is iden-
tified by sorting the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian ac-
cording to their energy, we have to consider that Eq. (47)
does not yet include band crossings. The phase ŽĢb(kz)
for a specific band is given by

ŽĢb(kz) = 2ŽĆp + sŽĆ + mkz

n
+
’┐Į

kcŌēżkz
ŌłåŽĢb,c,
(48)

which must include all phase jumps ŌłåŽĢb,c at kc corre-
sponding to all crossings c up to kz, which may be, for
example, with the bands bŌłÆ1 or b+1. The essential step
to identify the global constraints on ŽĢb(kz), ŌłåŽĢb,c, and in
extension also on all chiral crossings is the periodicity of
the Brillouin zone. Thus, we compare the phase ŽĢb(k0
z)
at some position k0
z with the phase ŽĢb(k0
z + 2ŽĆ) after
traversing the Brillouin and accumulating phase jumps
ŌłåŽĢb,c at kc as well as a contribution from mkz

n ,

ŽĢb(k0
z + 2ŽĆ) ŌłÆ ŽĢb(k0
z) = 0
mod 2ŽĆ
(49)
’┐Į

cb
ŌłåŽĢb,c + 2ŽĆ m

n = 0
mod 2ŽĆ.
(50)

The phase jumps ŌłåŽĢb,c in Eq. (50) are not independent
for different bands b. For every phase jump there should

be the reverse exchange of eigenvalues in a higher or lower
band.
Suppose we consider a system, where all band
crossings are twofold, then one may iteratively substitute
Eq. (50) for band bŌłÆ1 into the equation for band b. The
induction process leads to Eq. (2)

b = 1
’┐Į

c1
ŌłåŽĢ1,c1 = ŌłÆ2ŽĆ m

n
mod 2ŽĆ

b = 2
’┐Į

c2
ŌłåŽĢ2,c2 ŌłÆ
’┐Į

c1
ŌłåŽĢ1,c1 = ŌłÆ2ŽĆ m

n
mod 2ŽĆ

Ōćö
’┐Į

c2
ŌłåŽĢ2,c2 = ŌłÆ2 ┬Ę 2ŽĆ m

n
mod 2ŽĆ

...
...

any b
’┐Į

cb
ŌłåŽĢb,cb = ŌłÆb ┬Ę 2ŽĆ m

n
mod 2ŽĆ.

(51)

This
result
contains
the
notion
of
filling-enforced
semimetals, namely, if b m

n ╠ĖŌłł Z, then there must be at
least one symmetry-enforced band crossing [33].
Once
the filling, i.e., the considered band b, is a multiple of n

m,
band crossings do not need to exist.

IV.
APPLICATIONS AND EXTENSIONS

To demonstrate the power of the local and global con-
straints, we present a number of applications and discuss
some extensions.

A.
Applications and extensions
of the local constraint

In the following we use the local constraint, Eq. (1), to
prove the existence of enforced double Weyl points away
from TRIMs (Sec. IV A 1). We generalize the local con-
straint to multiple rotation symmetries in Sec. IV A 2,
which enables us to infer conditions for the Chern num-
bers for all types of (higher-fold) chiral crossings. Finally,
we use the local constraint to show that nodal lines with
nonzero Chern numbers cannot be stabilized by chiral
space-group symmetries (Sec. IV A 3).

1.
Chiral crossings between identical symmetry eigenvalues

In this section we use the local constraint, Eq. (1), to
explain the existence of unusual enforced double Weyl
points away from TRIMs [46, 47]. First, we clarify why
these Weyl points pose an open question in the under-
standing of chiral crossings. According to conventional
wisdom, a stable band degeneracy can only occur if at
least one of the three following conditions is fulfilled:


8

(i) The two bands forming the crossing belong to dif-
ferent symmetry representations, which prevents the in-
troduction of gap opening terms, (ii) there is a higher-
dimensional representation of the little group, or (iii)
there exists an anti-unitary symmetry that leaves the
degeneracy point invariant, leading to Kramers degen-
eracy. However, in space groups 80, 98, and 210 there
exist band crossings away from TRIMs between bands
with identical representations of dimension one [40]. So
at first glance, all of the above three conditions for a
crossing seem violated.
Yet, the combination of time-
reversal and fourfold rotation symmetry generates, due
to Kramers theorem, point-like degeneracies at high-
symmetry points of certain non-primitive Brillouin zones
that are not TRIMs [40]. Interestingly, with SOC these
crossings are known to be double Weyl points with Chern
number ┬▒2 [41], but could until now not be understood
in terms of symmetry eigenvalues [46, 47].
For concreteness, let us now focus on the body-centered
tetragonal SG 80 (I41), whose P point can host two-
fold degeneracies both with and without SOC [e.g., see
Figs. 2(a) and 12]. As we will see, this band crossing can
be understood by noting that the combined symmetry
TC4z, comprising time-reversal T and fourfold screw ro-
tation C4z, leaves the P point invariant. Other than that,
the only unitary symmetry that leaves P invariant is the
rotation C2z whose symmetry eigenvalues can be used to
label the bands. We now need to distinguish the case
with and without SOC, which differ slightly for SG 80.
Without SOC different eigenvalues are paired by the
anti-unitary operation TC4z. In our notation this cor-
responds to ŌłåŽĢ = ┬▒ŽĆ for the Weyl point at P which im-
plies by Eq. (1) a Chern number of ╬ĮP,SG80 = 1 mod 2.
With SOC the representation is doubled compared to
before and splits into two one-dimensional and one two-
dimensional representation at P, because the Kramers
theorem only applies to the latter representation, see
Ref. [40] for details. Since for the two-dimensional rep-
resentation one eigenvalue of C2z is paired to itself, one
finds ŌłåŽĢ = 0 implying ╬ĮP,SG80,SOC = 0 mod 2. Taking
into account that the crossing at P has been ╬ĮP,SG80 = 1
without spin, it follows from the conservation of topolog-
ical charge that ╬ĮP,SG80,SOC = ┬▒2. We have thus reached
an explanation for the double Weyl point at P in terms
of symmetry eigenvalues.
The discussed double Weyl point at P in SG 80 has
a different origin and symmetry than any other twofold
double Weyl point, which occur either on fourfold or six-
fold rotation axes or at TRIMs in the presence of spinless
time-reversal symmetry [46, 47, 59]. Hence, we expect
that also the spin texture [60ŌĆō67] and Berry curvature
are distinct from the conventional double Weyl points.
To demonstrate this, we compute the Berry curvature
and spin texture of the double Weyl point in SG 80. For
this purpose, we derive in Appendix C a tight-binding
model including SOC for SG 80. Figure 2(a) shows the
band structure of this model defined by Eq. (C5). As
expected we find a double Weyl point of charge ╬ĮP = 2

Figure 2.
Band structure, Berry curvature and spin texture
for SG 80. (a) Tight-binding model with SOC of SG 80 as
defined in Eq. (C5). The body-centered tetragonal Brillouin
zone is shown in the inset of Fig. 11(b). The double Weyl
point at P is characterized by its Berry curvature and spin
textures as shown in (b) and (c), respectively, which are given
for the lower band of the crossing on a sphere enclosing it. For
comparison, (d) and (e) show the Berry curvature and spin
textures of a regular double Weyl point. For all vector plots
the north pole of the sphere is labelled by ŌĆ£NŌĆØ.

at each P point, which is compensated by a pair of dou-
ble Weyl points on the fourfold rotation axis ╬ō-Z-M with
╬Į╬ō-Z-M = ŌłÆ2. Figures 2(b) and 2(c) show the Berry cur-
vature and spin texture around the P point, respectively.
To contrast this with conventional double Weyl points
we plot in Figs. 2(d) and 2(e) the Berry curvature and
spin texture of a conventional double Weyl point defined
by H(k) = kzŽāz + (Žā+(kx ŌłÆ iky)2 + H.C.), where Žā+ =
1/2(Žāx + iŽāy) with the Pauli matrices Žāj [61, 68]. While
the details of these textures are parameter-dependent,
their symmetry properties are generic and dictated by


9

the local little groups. In general the spin texture at P
in SG 80 is anisotropic and symmetric under the anti-
unitary C4T symmetry [see regions of similar color shad-
ing in Fig. 2(c)]. In contrast, the texture of a conventional
double Weyl point is symmetric under an unitary (e.g.,
fourfold) rotaiton symmetry, see Fig. 2(d,e).
Another
difference is that the spin texture around the equator of
Fig. 2(c) has a unit winding, whereas the one of Fig. 2(e)
has a winding of two. These differences in spin texture
could be measured experimentally, using, e.g., spin- and
angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy [60, 65, 67].
Using a database search (see Sec. VI) we have iden-
tified NbO2 and TaO2 as candidate materials in SG 80
realizing the double Weyl points away from TRIMs. The
band structure and surface states of these compounds
are presented in Sec. VI B. Notably, we find that for sur-
face terminations perpendicular to any of the crystal axes
there appear four Fermi arcs. This is because for these
terminations the P point is projected onto a symmetry
related copy of itself with the same Chern number ┬▒2,
such that there emerge four Fermi arcs from the projeted
P point in the surface BZ.
The above arguments for SG 80 apply in a similar
manner also to SG 98 (I4122) and SG 210 (F4132), for
which the double Weyl points appaer at the P and W
points, respectively. In addition, related arguments us-
ing the local constraint can be employed to understand
the charge ╬Į = ┬▒2 of the threefold crossings in SG 199
(I213) and SG 214 (I4132) at the point P, see the dis-
cussion in Sec. V B 2.

2.
Chiral crossings with multiple rotation axes

Band crossing points symmetric under little groups
that contain more than one rotation symmetry often ex-
hibit larger topological charges than in the case of a sin-
gle rotation symmetry [16, 17, 49]. Also in this case the
local constraint, Eq. (1), can be used to understand the
observed topological charges. In the following, we extend
the above arguments to multiple rotation axes and con-
sider, for concreteness, a twofold quadruple Weyl point
at ╬ō in SG 195, for which a Chern number of ╬Į = 4
has been reported [68ŌĆō71]. Other non-trivial examples of
nodal points with multiple rotation symmetries are dis-
cussed in Secs. IV B 2 and V in the context of multifold
band crossings.
For a single rotation axis one usually finds that ╬Įcb =
ŌłåŽĢb,cb
n
2ŽĆ holds without the modulus operation, although
the local constraint, Eq. (1), restricts the possible charges
only up to the order of the rotation n. This is because
higher topological charges would require fine tuning. To
see this, consider a crossing point of charge ╬Į = ╬Įcb +mn,
where m is some non-zero integer.
If this crossing is
perturbed by some symmetry-allowed perturbation, the
crossing may split into one with charge ╬Įcb and m sets
of each n Weyl points.
In fact, generally exactly this
happens, because placing mn Weyl points on the rotation

axis is a fine-tuned situation. In other words, to achieve
higher topological charges ╬Į, more lower orders in the
low-energy expansion need to be set to zero, which would
require fine tuning.
In the presence of multiple rotation symmetries, how-
ever, there are more symmetry constraints that can lead
to higher topological charges, such that the smallest pos-
sible value given by the local constraint (1) is not realized.
To demonstrate this, let us consider SG 195 (P23) with
time-reversal symmetry, where a twofold quadruple Weyl
point is enforced to occur at the TRIM ╬ō (and also at
R), if, for example, the 1E2E representation is placed on
the Wyckoff position 1a [72]. The corresponding little
group at ╬ō consist of the point group 23 together with
time-reversal, which does contain a twofold and a three-
fold rotation, but no fourfold rotation, different from the
conventional twofold quadruple Weyl points of Refs. [68ŌĆō
71]. From the representation of this little group, one finds
that there is no exchange of the twofold rotation eigenval-
ues, while the threefold rotation eigenvalue switch. Thus,
the local constraint (1) on the charge ╬Į╬ō is

╬Į╬ō = 0
mod 2
and
╬Į╬ō = 1
mod 3.
(52)

Thus, both ╬Į╬ō = 4 and ╬Į╬ō = ŌłÆ2 are in agreement with
Eqs. (52). To resolve this ambiguity we construct a low-
energy model HT(k) around ╬ō, which is symmetric under
the point group 32 and time-reversal, see Appendix D.
The energy bands of this model exhibit quadratic and cu-
bic dispersions along different directions away from the
crossing point, see Fig. 3. The topological phase diagram
of this low-energy model contains only one phase with
╬Į╬ō = 4, in agreement with Eq. (52). However, the lowest
possible topological charge of ╬Į╬ō = ŌłÆ2, cf. Eq. (52), is not
realized, in contrast to the conventional twofold quadru-
ple Weyl points with fourfold rotation symmetry [68ŌĆō71].
This raises the question, why can the charge ╬Į╬ō = ŌłÆ2 not
be realized in our low-energy model, even though it would
be consistent with the local constraint?
There are two ways to answer this question.
First,
a closer look at the low-energy model presented in Ap-
pendix D reveals that there is a fourfold quasi-symmetry,
i.e., a symmetry of the low-energy model that is bro-
ken by terms of higher order in k.
Namely, the low-
energy Hamiltonian HT(k), Eq. (D1), is left invariant
by U(Cz
4)ŌĆĀHT(k)U(Cz
4) = HT(RŌłÆ1k), where U(Cz
4) is
the representation of a fourfold rotation symmetry and
R is the corresponding transformation in real space, see
Eq. (D4). U(Cz
4) is a quasi-symmetry, as it is a sym-
metry only of the lowest-order terms, but not of the full
Hamiltonian. Yet, since the Chern number is determined
exclusively by the lowest orders in k, at which the point
crossing is well-defined, this quasi-symmetry forces the
charge to be ╬Į╬ō = +4 for the crossing by adding the
local constraint ╬Į╬ō = 0 mod 4.
Second, the Chern number ╬Į╬ō = 0 mod 4 can be un-
derstood by considering how the symmetries act on the
Berry curvature integration. For this purpose we need to
consider the role of the time-reversal symmetry together


10

Figure 3.
Quasi-symmetry-enforced Chern number in twofold
quadruple Weyl points.
Band structure around a twofold
band crossing symmetric under point group 23 and time re-
versal, as given by Eq. (D1) with d1 = 0. The splitting of the
bands along the threefold (twofold) rotation axes in red (pur-
ple) is cubic (quadratic). A fourfold quasi-symmetry enforces
a charge of ╬Į = 4.

with the twofold rotation, to be specific the combination
C2T.
The Berry curvature flux through the northern
SW (N) and southern SW (S) half of the spherical wedge
SW when considering C2 are identical due to C2T and
thus

╬Į╬ō = 2 2

2ŽĆ

’┐Į

SW (N)
dn ┬Ę Ōä”(k)
(53)

= 2

ŽĆ

’┐Į

SNP1+Sequator+SP2N
A ds
mod 4
(54)

where we split the path SW (N) into SNP1 + Sequator +
SP2N and P1 and P2 being endpoints of Sequator. The
Berry connection integration on paths SNP1 and SP2N
are related by symmetry and can be evaluated in a similar
way as in Eq. 8,

’┐Į

SNP1+SP2N
A ds = Žåb(P1) ŌłÆ Žåb(N).
(55)

Regarding the Sequator integration, consider Eq. (7) ap-

plied on this path
’┐Į

Sequator
A(C2k) ds =
’┐Į

Sequator
C2(A(k) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽåb(k)) ds

=ŌćÆ
’┐Į

Sequator
A(ŌłÆk) ds = ŌłÆ
’┐Į

Sequator
A(k) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽåb(k) ds

=ŌćÆ
’┐Į

Sequator
A(k) ds = ŌłÆ
’┐Į

Sequator
A(k) ŌłÆ ŌłćŽåb(k) ds

=ŌćÆ
’┐Į

Sequator
A(k) ds = 1

2

’┐Į

Sequator
ŌłćŽåb(k) ds
(56)

= 1

2(Žåb(P2) ŌłÆ Žåb(P1))
(57)

where all equations are valid up to mod 2ŽĆ and with
A(C2k) = A(ŌłÆk) and (C2v)ds = ŌłÆvds with any vector
v on the equator. We also used Eq. (25) relating A(k)
and A(ŌłÆk) via time-reversal symmetry
’┐Į

Sequator
A(ŌłÆk) ds
mod 2ŽĆ =

’┐Į

Sequator
A(k) ds ŌłÆ i
’┐Į

Sequator
╬▒ŌłŚ(k)Ōłék╬▒(k) ds
mod 2ŽĆ =

’┐Į

Sequator
A(k) ds + ŽåT (P1) ŌłÆ ŽåT (P2)
mod 2ŽĆ =

’┐Į

Sequator
A(k) ds
mod 2ŽĆ,
(58)

where the time-reversal symmetry sewing matrix has the
form ╬▒(k) = eŌłÆiŽåT (k) and ŽåT (P1) = ŽåT (ŌłÆP1) = ŽåT (P2)
in the spinless case (see Eq. (45)). In total, we get

╬Į╬ō = 2

ŽĆ

’┐Į
ŌłÆŽåb(N) + 1

2(Žåb(P1) + Žåb(P2))
’┐Į
mod 4.

(59)

Explicitly calculating Žåb(P1) + Žåb(P2) in the irrep ╬ō2╬ō3
by plugging in the Bloch wavefunctions of the low-energy
Hamiltonian into Eq.(6) yields 0. So

╬Į╬ō = 2

ŽĆ ŽĢ(N)
mod 4.
(60)

The irrep ╬ō2╬ō3 in 1E2E of C2 is Žā0, so ŽĢ(N) = 0, which
means we get

╬Į╬ō = 0 mod 4.
(61)

A material implementation of this WP with charge 4 was
found in BaIrP, see [68]. There it is shown that, upon
introducing SOC, this crossing evolves into 12 WPs and
a 4-fold crossing at ╬ō with C = ╬Į1,2 = ┬▒4, which is in
section V B 1 revealed to be the ╬Įn = {┬▒3, ┬▒1, Ōłō1, Ōłō3}
phase of the model described there.

3.
Chiral nodal lines

Nodal lines protected by crystalline symmetries are
commonly discussed in the context of mirror symmetries,


11

which leave a plane in the Brillouin zone invariant where
they provide two distinct representations. The presence
of two distinct representations is sufficient to obtain acci-
dental nodal lines. Furthermore, there can be symmetry-
enforced line crossings, for example, if another symmetry
operation anticommutes with the mirror symmetry, one
finds nodal lines pinned to high-symmetry paths.
Al-
ternatively, if the original mirror symmetry is nonsym-
morphic this is already enough to conclude in analogy
to Eq. (2) that there must be an odd number of nodal
lines crossing every other gap, which are movable in the
sense that their position is parameter-dependent [34, 35].
Other cases of nodal lines include higher-fold nodal lines
or almost movable nodal lines, which are only pinned to
a finite number of high-symmetry points [40, 42].
For all of these nodal lines the Chern number vanishes
because of the mirror symmetry, when calculated on a
surface that fully encloses the nodal line. It comes to no
surprise that despite the extensive research on various
types of nodal lines, no example of a stable chiral nodal
line, i.e., a nodal line with Chern number, has been dis-
cussed so far.
Nevertheless, there are some reports of
such nodal lines without mirror symmetry in the litera-
ture, which are either of unclear symmetry protection [73]
or as in the case of the nodal lines in hexagonal AgF3 [74]
have found to be actually weakly gapped [48]. Whether
a chiral nodal line can exist is not only of interest due to
its unique topology, but also important for the study of
enforced topological nodal planes. To rigorously deduce
the existence of the latter, one needs to assume that a
chiral nodal line does not exist. In this case a non-zero
sum of Weyl point chiralities within the Brillouin zone,
implies a charged nodal plane, see Sec. IV B 1.
In this section we aim to answer, whether chiral nodal
lines can be stabilized by crystalline symmetries, and we
will extensively apply the rotation symmetry constraint
of Eq. (1). Doing so we consider points in reciprocal space
lying away from any (glide) mirror planes. To approach
the first goal, let us assume that we have obtained a nodal
line at a generic position in the Brillouin zone with a
chirality ╬Įline < n, where n is the order of the highest
rotation symmetry. Suppose in this gedankenexperiment
that we introduce all symmetry-allowed perturbations to
the system to gap out the chiral nodal line. Since the
nodal line is assumed to be chiral, its topological charge
has to persist in the form of Weyl points. But as long
as the original rotation symmetry is preserved, the condi-
tion ╬Įline < n implies that a nodal line cannot be gapped,
because the number of resulting Weyl points at generic
positions would be equal to ╬Įline and thus incompatible
with the required multiplicity n. Unlike nodal lines pro-
tected by a Z2 invariant, shrinking the nodal line to a
point would not remove it, but leave a Weyl point with
the same topological charge behind.
Yet, despite this argument to stabilize a chiral nodal
line, we will discuss in the following that the relation
between rotation symmetry eigenvalues and the chirality,
see Eq. (1), strongly limit the possibility to find any nodal

band feature fulfilling ╬Įline < n.

First, suppose there is a nodal line encircling an n-
fold rotation axis. Then, we can enclose the whole line
by a sphere analogously to Fig. 1(a), which implies by
the arguments given in Sec. III A that the chirality of all
band crossings enclosed by the sphere is related to the
change of rotation eigenvalues on the north and south
pole of the rotation axis ŌłåŽĢb.
Several cases must be
distinguished. If there is no additional point crossing on
the rotation axes, then ŌłåŽĢb = 0 leading to ╬Įline = 0
mod n, implying that the nodal line is trivial or at least
unstable. If there are indeed additional point crossings on
the rotation axis, then ŌłåŽĢb ╠Ė= 0 and one may choose the
sphere to enclose only the point crossings, which implies
that these crossings by themselves are responsible for the
charge of ŌłåŽĢb n

2ŽĆ
mod n, which would be observed on
the original sphere. In both cases the chiral nodal line is
unstable.

To circumvent the objections, one may consider more
intricate configurations of nodal lines. If one examines a
nodal line that is sufficiently extended such that it can-
not be enclosed by a sphere, it is generally still possible
to find a surface to enclose the line and a section of the
rotation axis. The proof of Eq. (1) can then be repeated
for this new surface, after the subdivision of the integra-
tion surface for the Berry curvature, the edges must be
related by symmetry, see also Ref. [52], where the inte-
gration surface intersects more than one rotation axis.
Ultimately, one finds an expression depending on the
changes of eigenvalues of the different rotation axes, but
the symmetry representation only changes when travers-
ing the integration contour if a crossing on a rotation
axes has been enclosed. Thus, either the nodal line it-
self has crossed a rotation axes and is responsible for the
exchange of symmetry eigenvalues, such that the nodal
line can be gapped out except at a set of corresponding
point crossings on the rotation axes, or there will be no
exchange of symmetry eigenvalues and hence at most a
trivial charge. In Appendix B we discuss the case of an-
tiunitary symmetries of higher multiplicity and show that
they do not circumvent the result obtained above from
Eq. (1). In summary, we find that all configurations of
chiral nodal lines discussed here do not fit to the original
proposal of a topological charge ╬Įline < n, hence we find
that no crystalline symmetry is able to protect a chiral
nodal line. Note, a chiral nodal line may still be found
by considering systems with internal symmetries.

To conclude this section we propose a low-energy
model of a chiral nodal line to illustrate how our above
symmetry argument can be circumvented. In this con-
struction we place two Weyl points, W(k, ŽĄ), of different
energy at the origin and couple them by the matrix A(k)
in a way that preserves an internal symmetry Uline. We


12

define

W(k, ŽĄ) = k ┬Ę Žā + ŽĄŽā0,
(62)
A(k) = kzŽā1,
and
(63)

H(k) =
’┐ĮW(k, ŽĄ)
A(k)
A(k)ŌĆĀ
W(k, ŌłÆŽĄ)

’┐Į
,
(64)

where we set the energy offset to ŽĄ = 1, Žā is the vector
of Pauli matrices, and Žā0 denotes the two-dimensional
unit matrix. The bands of the Weyl points intersect in
a nodal sphere [75] and are gapped by A(k) except at
kz = 0, see Fig. 4 for the resulting band structure. This
model exhibits a chiral nodal line with a Chern number
of ╬Įline = 2, which is inherited from the interplay of two
╬Į = +1 Weyl points. It has to be noted that the charge
of such a nodal line does also dependent on the hybridiza-
tion away from kz = 0, e.g., for A(k) = kzŽā3 the nodal
line is not charged. Interestingly, there is a fourfold rota-
tion symmetry U(C4) = Žā0ŌŖŚŽā3, which is broken by A(k)
for kz ╠Ė= 0. Yet, perturbations that preserve the U(C4)
symmetry gap out the nodal line, because the nodal line
is not pinned to the kz = 0 plane and loses its symmetry
protection once moved away despite ╬Įline < n. Neverthe-
less, there is an orbital symmetry in our model, namely,

Uline =
1
ŌłÜ

5

’Ż½

’Ż¼
’ŻŁ

2 0
1
0
0 2
0
1
1 0 ŌłÆ2
0
0 1
0
ŌłÆ2

’ŻČ

’ŻĘ
’ŻĖ,
(65)

which fulfills [H(k), Uline] = 0. The matrix is a unitary
operation with the eigenvalues {ŌłÆ1, ŌłÆ1, +1, +1} that ex-
change at the chiral nodal line. Thus, any perturbation
that respects the symmetry Uline may deform the nodal
line, but cannot introduce a gap. Such a chiral nodal line
could be realizable for example in optical metamaterials
or other synthetic systems.

B.
Applications and extensions
of the global constraint

The global constraint contains the information on the
possible numbers of crossings on rotation axes or mir-
ror planes.
This is for example a guide to the search
for semimetals with few point or line crossings [40]. In
this section we combine both constraints and the Nielsen-
Ninomiya theorem [32]. First, we will discuss a param-
agnetic space group with an enforced topological nodal
plane duo. Secondly, we illustrate the constraints with
a real band structure including accidental Weyl points,
nodal planes, and multi-fold crossings.

1.
Symmetry-enforced topological nodal planes

In the following section we apply local and global con-
straints to the theory of symmetry-enforced topological

Figure 4.
Chiral nodal line. Band structure for the model
chiral nodal line (red highlighting) described by Eq. (62). The
dispersion of the nodal line is linear (quadratic) in radial (kz)
direction.

nodal planes. After a brief summary of the basic argu-
ments that lead to (topological) nodal planes, we consider
the nontrivial case of SG 94 P42212. This space group is
the only known case with two symmetry-enforced topo-
logical nodal planes in a paramagnetic space group, i.e.,
in a grey group including time reversal as a symmetry
element.
We consider nodal planes as two-fold degeneracies on
the surface of the Brillouin zone. Such degenerate planes
can be symmetry-enforced by the combined symmetry
comprising time-reversal T and a two-fold screw rotation
╦£C2 [11, 12, 14, 76]. In short, the anti-unitary symmetry
T ╦£C2 fulfills Kramers theorem at every point on a plane
in the Brillouin zone.
Regions that host nodal planes
are described by ki = ŽĆ in units of the corresponding
inverse lattice constant and have to be at the surface of
the Brillouin zone. This gives rise to a natural distinction
based on the number nodal planes (one, two, or three) or
equivalently distinct symmetries T ╦£C2 with eligible planes
in the Brillouin zone. We refer two the case of two (three)
nodal planes as nodal plane duo (trio) to highlight that
these nodal planes form a single connected object that
can only be assigned a single Chern number.
The whole gapless structure of nodal planes may ex-
hibit a non-zero Chern number on a surface that encloses
the plane, if mirror and inversion symmetries are absent.
For nodal planes trios, i.e., nodal planes at ki = ŽĆ with
i Ōłł {x, y, z}, a single Kramers Weyl point at the TRIM
╬ō can only be compensated by an opposite charge on the
nodal planes, where one needs to consider the case of
spinful time-reversal symmetry [11, 12]. For nodal plane
duos, a similar argument would result in two Kramers
Weyl points that might cancel, hence it is a priori un-
clear, whether nodal plane duos may be nontrivial.
A topological nodal plane duo can, for example, occur
due to the global constraint in a time-reversal broken


13

state. The simplest case is realized in ferromagnetic MnSi
with the magnetic space group 19.27 P2ŌĆ▓
12ŌĆ▓
121. While the
planes kx = ŽĆ and ky = ŽĆ exhibit a nodal plane duo,
there remains only the two-fold rotation axis through ╬ō
that is not part of nodal planes. On this axes the global
constraint takes the form
’┐Į

cb
ŌłåŽĢb,cb = ŌłÆb ┬Ę ŽĆ
mod 2ŽĆ,
(66)

which results in an odd number of crossings for bands
with odd b. Since each crossing exhibits a charge of ╬Į =
┬▒1, cf. Eq. (1), there is an odd overall charge within the
Brillouin zone that cannot be compensated by generic
crossings of even multiplicity. Thus, the nodal plane duo
is topological with a charge of ╬ĮNP = 1 mod 2, see [14].
Finally, we consider the nodal plane duo enforced by
SG 94 P42212 for a spinful description with time-reversal
symmetry. Again, the global constraint gives a non-zero
sum of phase jumps for odd b along the fourfold rota-
tion axis Z-╬ō-Z. Here, one needs the local constraint, be-
cause it is insufficient to count the number of Weyl points,
which may occur as single and double Weyl points. One
finds

╬ĮZ-╬ō-Z ŌēĪ
’┐Į

cb
╬Įcb =
’┐Į

cb

n
2ŽĆ ŌłåŽĢb,cb = ŌłÆ2b
mod 4,
(67)

where the global and local constraints, Eqs. (1) and (2),
have been substituted into the sum of all crossings on
the fourfold rotation axis, and m = 2, n = 4. Thus, for
odd b the Chern number of the nodal plane duo ╬ĮNP =
ŌłÆ╬ĮZ-╬ō-Z ╠Ė= 0 independently of the details of the system.
To illustrate these results we have devised a Hamil-
tonian of SG 94, see Appendix E. This model has
minimal set of four connected bands with symmetry-
enforced hourglass band structures along ╬ō-Z and ╬ō-X,
see Fig 5(a), and two nodal planes covering the surfaces
defined by kx = ŽĆ or ky = ŽĆ, Fig 5(c). The chiralities
of Weyl pointson the ╬ō-Z-╬ō2 follow our local constraint
Eq. (1), see Fig 5(b).
As predicted the nodal planes
are topologically charged. For example, for the lowest
band the chiralities ╬Į1,1 = ╬Į1,2 = ŌłÆ1 at ╬ō and Z, respec-
tively, add up and are also not compensated by charges
at generic positions. Thus, the lower nodal planes carries
the opposite Chern number ╬Į1,NP = +2. This concludes
our discussion of SG 94, which is the only known space
group that enforces a pair of enforced topological nodal
planes without magnetism.

2.
Global constraints for multi-fold degeneracies

While in the previous example the absence of a multi-
fold crossing simplified the exposition, we are going to
consider in the following the opposite case, where sev-
eral multi-fold crossings occur and local and global con-
straints may not directly substituted into each other.
The salient difference is that at multi-fold crossings the

Figure 5.
Tight-binding model of SG 94. (a) Band structure
of the model defined in Eq. (E1). (b) Symmetry eigenvalues
of the fourfold screw rotation ╦£C4 along the full rotation axis
╬ō ŌłÆ Z ŌłÆ ╬ō2. The chiralities ╬Į are compensated by an opposite
charge contained within the nodal plane shaded in red in (a)
and in the Brillouin zone (c). In (c) the arrows show exem-
plarily the Berry curvature associated to the point crossings
at ╬ō and Z.

exchange of bands described by ŌłåŽĢ may occur with lower
(or higher bands) that are not necessarily adjacent to the
considered band, i.e., not only bands b ŌłÆ 1 (or b + 1).
To illustrate the constraints with multi-fold crossings
in a real band structure we discuss the cubic compound
BaAsPt (SG 198 P213) exhibiting an unusual multi-fold
crossing point including a ╬Į = 5 band. The material will
be closer examined in Sec. VI A.
Here, our goal is to give some intuition on how the
global constraint is fulfilled, while respecting the Nielsen-
Ninomyia theorem. For the latter one may pick in prin-
ciple any subset of bands to determine the relevant chi-
ralities of crossings by the non-Abelian generalization of
the Chern number for this set of bands. Here, we con-
sider for simplicity only the band bŌĆ▓ that bounds the red
shaded area in Fig. 9 from below.
Since we encounter multi-band crossings, e.g., at ╬ō,
M, and R, we have to use the general form of the
global constraint introduced in Eq. (50).
It implies
that each two-fold rotation axis should exhibit a to-
tal phase ’┐Į

cbŌĆ▓ ŌłåŽĢbŌĆ▓,cbŌĆ▓ = ŽĆ mod 2ŽĆ, whereas the sym-
morphic three-fold rotations require a phase change of
’┐Į
cbŌĆ▓ ŌłåŽĢbŌĆ▓,cbŌĆ▓ = 0 mod 2ŽĆ. Note that in Eq. (50) the
summations include crossings to lower and to higher


14

bands on the considered rotation axis.
One half of the threefold rotation axis ╬ō-R, cf.points
Fig. 9, exhibits three Weyl points to higher and three to
lower bands together with multi-fold crossings at ╬ō and
R (one of the latter is in close proximity to ╬ō). Since
between each two crossing on ╬ō-R there is a crossing in
the next lower gap, all crossings to the higher (lower)
band have an identical phase jump ŌłåŽĢ and the numeri-
cal calculation determines ŌłåŽĢ = +2ŽĆ/3 (ŌłÆ2ŽĆ/3). When
taking the position relative to band bŌĆ▓ into account all
five Weyl points thus contribute ╬Į = +1. As a side re-
mark, the lower crossing of charge ╬Į = ŌłÆ1 in the in-
set appears together with three generic Weyl points with
╬Į = +1 in its close proximity. Due to their close prox-
imity, we have labeled the crossing on the ╬ō-R axis with
the total charge of the four crossings on at next to the
rotation axis, i.e., ╬Į = +2 for the band that bounds
the red-shaded region from below. While these generic
crossings are not symmmetry-enforced similar arrange-
ments of crossings around a threefold rotation axis have
been predicted before in an analysis of CoSi, which has
the same SG 198 [15]. For the full threefold axis ╬ō-R
there are 12 phase jumps adding up to a phase shift of
ŌłåŽĢ = +24ŽĆ/3 = 0 mod 2ŽĆ. The multi-fold crossings
at ╬ō and R exhibit ŌłåŽĢ = ┬▒2ŽĆ/3 such that in total the
phase equals 0 mod 2ŽĆ on each threefold rotation axis.
In total the band bŌĆ▓ comprises thus 48 Weyl points of
charge ╬Į = +1 on generic points of its threefold rotation
axes.
On the two-fold rotation axis along ╬ō-X there is one
crossing contributing ŌłåŽĢ = ŽĆ. Since ╬ō and X are time
reversal invariant and the twofold rotation eigenvalues
are complex at ╬ō and real at X, it is clear prior to any
calculation that the phase changes at ╬ō but not at X.
Thus, a full twofold rotation axis X-╬ō-X exhibits an odd
number of phases as expected. Overall there are 6 Weyl
points of ╬Į = +1 on the twofold axes through ╬ō. The
two-fold bands on the nodal planes along the R-M line
exhibit two distinct representations that are character-
ized by two-fold rotation eigenvalues like on ╬ō-X, thus
also here the global constraint applies. On R-M there is
a crossing to a lower band as well as a pinned crossing
at M, both exhibit an exhange of bands, whereas none
occurs at R. Along R-M-R there is an odd number of
crossings fulfilling the global constraint Although we en-
counter chiral crossings on R-M, these do not contribute
an Abelian Chern number to the band bŌĆ▓, because a sur-
face enclosing them is gapless due to the presence of the
nodal planes. But for the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem ap-
plied to band bŌĆ▓, one has to consider the contribution to
the nodal plane of ╬Į = 3.
In summary, the chiral charges on the band that
bounds the red-shaded region from below are 6╬ĮbŌĆ▓,╬ō-X =
6, 8╬ĮbŌĆ▓,╬ō-R = 48, as well as ╬ĮbŌĆ▓,╬ō = ŌłÆ5, ╬ĮbŌĆ▓,R = ŌłÆ4 and
╬ĮbŌĆ▓,NP,bŌĆ▓ = +3, which adds up to 48.
Note, that de-
spite the relevance of the sixfold crossing at R to the
band bŌĆ▓, one needs to use the non-Abelian Chern num-
ber calculation to determine the charge contributed to

the red-shaded gap, see Ref. [15] for the details of such a
calculation. By using the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem for
band bŌĆ▓ we can infer that there are at least two set of Weyl
points at generic positions. Indeed, by a closer inspection
of the band structure we find that there are additional
Weyl points close to the ╬ō-R axis axes. As mentioned
before there are 24 Weyl points of charge ╬Į = ŌłÆ1 in the
vicinity R as well as another set of Weyl points with also
╬Į = ŌłÆ1 close to ╬ō.
While we had to consider the charge of the nodal plane
explicitly, in absence of nodal planes it is possible to in-
fer the existence of Weyl points at generic positions based
on symmetries alone, e.g., in a spinful representation of
SG 19 or the magnetic SG 19.27 for the movable four-
fold double Weyl points as noticed for a tight-binding
model in Ref. [11, 14].
It is thus possible to use the
local and global constraints together with the Nielsen-
Ninomiya theorem to deduce the existence of Weyl points
at generic positions within the Brillouin zone.

V.
GENERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF
LOW-ENERGY HAMILTONIANS FOR THE
MULTIFOLD CROSSING CASE

As we have already seen in a previous section IV A 2,
combinations of different symmetries, including time-
reversal, can lead to surprising results.
Up until now
we considered only Weyl points. So the next question
is how the non-abelian constraints affect multifold cross-
ings in this regard. Here we do not only want to restrict
ourselves on just the evaluation of constraints, but to ex-
plicitly calculate Chern numbers in all topological phases
of all multi-fold crossings, as the solution to constraints
derived for the non-abelian case (see section III B) are
not unique and larger Chern numbers than the minimal
ones fulfilling the given constraints can, due to the higher
symmetry, be no longer excluded. We can see these cases
directly when such a topological classification is carried
out explicitly.
This complete topological classification of all multifold
crossings in all space groups follows a three phase ap-
proach. First all irreducible representations (irreps) with
dimensions higher than 2 were found at all high symme-
try points using the Bilbao Crystallographic Server [77].
Since we included time-reversal symmetry in all of our
analysis, the search can be restricted to double space
groups with broken inversion symmetry, since only there
topological charges are allowed to be nonzero in presence
of time-reversal symmetry. Then, low energy Hamiltoni-
ans were generated for all irreps found in the last step,
such that these Hamiltonians respect all symmetries at
the given high symmetry points. Finally, the whole pa-
rameter space of these Hamiltonian are topologically clas-
sified.
We note that there is an alternative approach for gen-
erating low-energy Hamiltonians than the one shown in
this section based on [78], where all possible Hamiltonian


15

terms are tabulated. We used the method described here,
since we found it more convenient to lookup a small num-
ber of symmetry generators and their representations in-
stead of all possible Hamiltonian terms. See also [79ŌĆō81]
for more alternative algorithms.

A.
Automatic generation of low-energy
Hamiltonians from irreps

A general low energy Hamiltonian up to second order
in wave-vector k has the following form

Hnm(k) =
’┐Į

hp1
╬▒h,1H1
hp1nmkp1

+
’┐Į

hp1p2
╬▒h,2H2
hp1p2nmkp1kp2 + O(k3).
(68)

n and m enumerate the orbital degrees of freedom. ╬▒h,q
are the free parameters of H at order q. Hq
hp1...pqnm are
the linearly independent terms in H.
The goal of the
following algorithm is to compute these terms.
The starting point of the automatic generation are
symmetry generators and the corresponding irrep at a
given high symmetry point. With these generators we
build up the whole little group G at his high symmetry
point and the representation D(g) of those symmetries
g Ōłł G. The only constraint of a low energy Hamiltonian
at this point must be that it is symmetric

ŌłĆg Ōłł G : H(gk) = D(g)H(k)D(gŌłÆ1).
(69)

We can symmetrize the Hamiltonian in Eq. (68) via

╦£H1
hv1ij =
1
|G|

’┐Į

gŌłłG
gŌłÆ1
vp1D(g)inH1
hp1nmD(gŌłÆ1)mj
(70)

╦£H2
hv1v2ij =
1
|G|

’┐Į

gŌłłG
gŌłÆ1
v1p1gŌłÆ1
v2p2D(g)inH2
hp1p2nmD(gŌłÆ1)mj

(71)

...

where gab is the real space representation of g and Ein-
stein notation was used. Then ╦£Hq
hp1...pqnm are the new
terms of a symmetric H. Note that D(g) can be anti-
unitary, which is the case when g is for example the time-
reversal symmetry. In this case, D(g) = UK with U uni-
tary and K being the complex conjugation operator. The
latter one can be eliminated by commuting it through all
term in Eq. 70 and 71 until we can use K2 = 1.
The algorithm starts by generating a set of random
complex Hq
hp1...pqnm terms, with h Ōłł {1, ..., N} and N be-
ing the total amount of randomly generated terms. These
are then symmetrized via 70 to produce N symmetrized
╦£Hq
hp1...pqnm terms. Only the linearly independent terms
are kept, which is done using a Gram-Schmidt orthogo-
nalization, during which the terms are treated as vectors
by flattening them to a single index. This also reduces

the number of terms ╦£N Ōēż N to the maximal set of sym-
metric and linearly independent terms. The number of
free parameters of this Hamiltonian at order q is also ╦£N.
For better handling of these terms, we would like to
normalize the real or imaginary part of as many of their
entries to 1, since they are still filled with random nu-
merical values of arbitrary magnitude. We can not nor-
malize all entries to 1, since not all are linearly indepen-
dent. This normalization is done by first gathering all
nonzero columns in Re( ╦£Hq
hp1...pqnm) and Im( ╦£Hq
hp1...pqnm)

in a new matrix Mhr with size ( ╦£N, P), with P the number
of nonzero columns. Rows that are linearly dependent on
other rows are removed in M, such that M is quadratic
and invertible. The final terms of H are then computed
with

HŌĆ▓q
hŌĆ▓p1...pqnm =
’┐Į

h
M ŌłÆ1
hŌĆ▓h ╦£Hq
hp1...pqnm.
(72)

Due to the inversion of M, the real or imaginary part of
all nonzero entries in ╦£H which are chosen to build up the
M matrix are normalized to 1 in only one of the terms
while they are set to 0 in all other. Entries that are not
part of the final M are either a fraction or a fraction con-
sisting of square roots. The last step of the algorithm is
to convert the numerical values of HŌĆ▓ into analytical ex-
pressions by comparing the entries to the values of those
analytical expressions and also to project HŌĆ▓ to Pauli or
Gellmann matrices.
To test if this conversion worked,
the symmetry of the resulting Hamiltonian is checked.

B.
Classification of all multifold crossings at
high-symmetry points

Using the algorithm described in the previous section,
a Hamiltonian for each entry in the compiled list of all
irreps with dimension > 2 was generated. Since we only
want to study the topological charge of the crossing at
the high symmetry point in question, it is sufficient, with
only one exception as we will see later, to generate only
the terms up to linear order in k, since higher orders
could only produce additional crossings away from the
high symmetry point and do not alter the topological
charge of the multifold crossing. Some of the generated
Hamiltonian are equivalent or equivalent up to a trans-
formation, so these cases can be grouped and classified
together. The transformations either have no effect on
or flip the topological charge.
The determination of every bands topological phase
diagrams of the Hamiltonians all follow the same idea
of first finding all points in parameter space where the
current band in question of the given Hamiltonian be-
comes gapless. These are the only points where topo-
logical phase transitions can happen, i.e. the topological
charge of the multifold crossing can change. These points
make up subspaces in parameter space which separate
different topological phases, which were found by consid-
ering the characteristic polynomial of H and comparing it


16

to a characteristic polynomial describing a Hamiltonian
in a gapless phases.
So after finding these subspaces it is possible to deter-
mine the topological charges of every phase by evaluating
it numerically deep in a given phase. This way one can
color in the whole phase by the determined topological
charge. Since no other topological phases are possible,
we can enumerate all possible topological charges for all
multifold crossings.
During this topological classification, the Chern num-
ber of single bands is sometimes undefined. This hap-
pens due to band degeneracies, for example nodal planes,
which by symmetry persist to all orders in k. In most of
these cases, one can still define a non-abelian Chern num-
ber, see Eq. (12). In the case of 4-fold crossings on nodal
planes, we compute non-abelian Chern numbers ╬Įb,b+1,
where bands b and b + 1 are part of the nodal plane.

1.
4-fold crossings

The main results for all 4-fold crossings are summa-
rized in tables I and II. The topological charge of the
lowest band ╬Į1 is undefined in most irreps, since there
the lowest two bands can be shown to be always twofold
degenerate at some k-points away from 0 at all orders in k
due to symmetry constraints. Where this is not the case,
an unusually high Chern number of ┬▒5 can be observed.
As this result is quite unexpected, we explicitly show
the topological phase diagram and its derivation of one
of the two Hamiltonians, the model for the ┬»╬ō6┬»╬ō7 irrep,
that describe these cases. This irrep can be found in SG
195-199.
The little group contains Cx,y,z
2
, C(┬▒1,┬▒1,┬▒1)
3
and time-reversal symmetry. In the following, all used
representations are equivalent to the ones on the Bilbao
Crystallographic Server [77]. The Hamiltonian generated
by the algorithm described in the previous section is

H =╬▒0

’┐Į
2kxŽāxŽäz + ky
’┐Į
ŌłÆ
ŌłÜ

3ŽāxŽä0 ŌłÆ ŽāyŽä0
’┐Į
+

kz
’┐Į
ŽāxŽäx +
ŌłÜ

3ŽāyŽäx
’┐Į’┐Į
+

╬▒1

’┐Į
ŌłÆ2kxŽāyŽäz + ky
’┐Į
ŌłÆŽāxŽä0 +
ŌłÜ

3ŽāyŽä0
’┐Į
+

kz
’┐ĮŌłÜ

3ŽāxŽäx ŌłÆ ŽāyŽäx
’┐Į’┐Į
+

2╬▒2

’┐Į
kxŽāzŽäx + kyŽā0Žäy + kzŽāzŽäz

’┐Į
(73)

with Žä and Žā being Pauli matrices. It is possible to show
(see Appendix F 1) that the Hamiltonian is only gap-
less for ╬▒2 = ┬▒
’┐Į

╬▒2
0 + ╬▒2
1, ╬▒2 = 0 or
’┐Į

╬▒2
0 + ╬▒2
1 = 0 at
points away from k = (0, 0, 0). We can assign the spaces
in between gapless planes in parameter space ╬▒n with
precomputed Chern numbers to arrive at the topological
phase diagram of the ┬»╬ō6┬»╬ō7 irrep model. See figure 6 for
the phase diagram for band 2. We find that band 1 has

0

2

0

2
0 +
2
1

2 =
5

2 = 1
2 =
1

2 = 5
-5

-1

1

5

2

Figure 6. Topological phase diagram of the 4-fold crossing
described by Hamiltonian 73 with three parameters ╬▒0, ╬▒1
and ╬▒2.
Depicted is the Chern number of band 2 ╬Į2.
An
unusually high absolute Chern number of 5 can be found in
regions where ╬▒2 >
’┐Į

╬▒2
0 + ╬▒2
1 or ╬▒2 < ŌłÆ
’┐Į

╬▒2
0 + ╬▒2
1.

two phases, for ╬▒2 < 0 the Chern number is ╬Į1 = ŌłÆ3, for
╬▒2 > 0 it is ╬Į1 = 3. For bands 3 and 4 use ╬Į3 = ŌłÆ╬Į2 and
╬Į4 = ŌłÆ╬Į1.
In the appendix of [68], a symmetry equivalent Hamil-
tonian to Eq. (73) has been derived, although there the
whole topological phase diagram has not been mapped
out.
Previously [17], this 4-fold crossing has been de-
scribed by a Rarita-Schwinger-Weyl spin-3/2 Hamilto-
nian [82ŌĆō84] H(k) = ╬▒S┬Ęk, which only supports the ╬Įn =
{┬▒3, ┬▒1, Ōłō1, Ōłō3} phase, or a distinction was made [85]
but only this phase was considered.
Here we see that
this description is incomplete.
To our knowledge, the
╬Įn = {┬▒3, Ōłō5, ┬▒5, Ōłō3} topological phase has not been
observed yet.
We find no 3-fold symmetry eigenvalue phase jumps
for the lowest/highest band. A phase jump of 2ŽĆ/3 for
╬▒2 < 0 and of 4ŽĆ/3 for ╬▒2 > 0 was observed for band
2. For all bands, a phase jump of ŽĆ was found for both
2-fold symmetries, which constraints all Chern numbers
to be odd ╬Įn = 1 mod 2. Further, the 3-fold symmetry
constraints the Chern number of the lowest and highest
band to ╬Į1/4 = 0 mod 3, which is consistent with ╬Į1/4 =
┬▒3.
Then, for ╬▒2 < 0 we have the constraint ╬Į2/3 =
1 mod 3 and for ╬▒2 > 0 we have ╬Į2/3 = 2 mod 3, which
are fulfilled in all phases in figure 6.
The transition between ╬Į2 = ┬▒1 and ╬Į2 = Ōłō5 phases
is facilitated (see Appendix F 1) by a gap closing of the
middle two bands. This suggests, that the mechanism be-
hind this Chern number switch is an absorption/emission
of 6 Weyl points on the C2 invariant axes into/out of the
multifold crossing. This implies an exchange of C2 sym-
metry eigenvalues of bands 2 and 3 between these two
phases, which we confirmed by a direct calculation.
The phase transition ╬Įn to ŌłÆ╬Įn at ╬▒2 = 0 takes place
by a simultaneous gap closing on C2 invariant lines of
the outer band pairs (1, 2) and (3, 4) as well as on C3
invariant lines of band pair (2, 3). Since corresponding
symmetry eigenvalues switch on both invariant lines, 6
WPs on the outer band pairs and 8 WPs on the mid-


17

╬Įn = {-3,5,-5,3}
╬Įn = {-3,-1,1,3}
╬Į2/3 = {1,-1}

╬Į1/2 = {-1,1}
╬Į3/4 = {-1,1}
╬Į2/3 = {-1,1}

╬Įn = {3,1,-1,-3}

Figure 7. Starting from a singe 4-fold crossing described by
the ┬»╬ō6┬»╬ō7 irrep model (see Eq. 73) in the ╬Į2 = 5 phase, a phase
transition to ╬Į2 = 1 over ╬Į2 = ŌłÆ1 produces a total of 26 WPs
across the 3 bandpairs. WP and multifold point charges are
color-coded.

dle bandpair fuse with or emerge from the 4-fold cross-
ing. The WPs on C2 invariant lines with total charge
┬▒6 switch the sign of the lowest/highest Chern number
╬Į1/4 = Ōłō3 ŌåÆ ┬▒3. For the middle two bands a combined
total Chern number of Ōłō6 ┬▒ 8 = ┬▒2 switches the sign of
the middle Chern numbers ╬Į2/3 = Ōłō1 ŌåÆ ┬▒1.
This means, consecutive topological phase transitions
over ╬Į2 = 5 ŌåÆ ŌłÆ1 ŌåÆ 1 produce a total of 26 WPs dis-
tributed across the 3 bandpairs, 6 in the lower and upper
bandpair respectively and 6+8 = 14 in the middle band-
pair, provided there are no other crossings at the start in
the ╬Į2 = 5 phase, since these could also be merged into
the multi-fold point to carry out the phase transition.
This process is visualised in figure 7.
In figure 8 the spin texture of this 4-fold crossing in
the ╬Į2 = ŌłÆ1 and ╬Į2 = 5 phase are compared for bands
1 and 2. For this, the spin expectation value Ō¤©ŽāŽä0Ō¤® is
used, since the time-reversal irrep ŌłÆiŽāyŽä0 suggests that
Žā is the spin degree of freedom of this crossing.
The
parameters chosen for the ╬Į2 = ŌłÆ1 are ╬▒0 = 0.1, ╬▒1 = 0
and ╬▒1 = 1, while for the ╬Į2 = 5 phase the parameters
are ╬▒0 = 1, ╬▒1 = 0 and ╬▒1 = 0.1. We note that the spin
texture is not symmetric under the little group at this
crossing, since SOC mixes the spin and orbital degrees of
freedom in the irrep ┬»╬ō6┬»╬ō7. The spin texture differences
especially in the first band might be measurable in a spin-
resolved ARPES experiment [65, 67]. In this way, these
two topological phases can be distinguished.

2.
3 and 6-fold crossings

The Hamiltonians for 3 and 6-fold crossings found by
the procedure described above reproduce the ones listed
in [16]. We also find the Hamiltonians for all 3-fold cross-
ings

H =

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
0
kz(╬▒ ŌłÆ i╬▓) ŌłÆky(╬▒ + i╬▓)
0
kx(╬▒ ŌłÆ i╬▓)
. . .
0

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ
(74)

Band 1
╬Į2 = ŌłÆ1
╬Į2 = 5

Band 2

Figure 8.
Spin texture from the expectation value of ŽāaŽä0
for the 4-fold crossing described by Eq. (73) for bands 1 and
2 in the ╬Į2 = ŌłÆ1 and ╬Į2 = 5 phase. The arrow size and color
depend on the magnitude of the spin, red being maximal.

to be equivalent up to transformations. Since these trans-
formations and the explicit dependence of the topological
charge were left out of [16], we included them here in the
tables III and IV and in the Appendix G.
The 6-fold crossing Hamiltonian of SG 198 ┬»R7 ┬»R7 irrep
is equal to

H =╬▒0

’┐Į
kxŽāz╬╗7 ŌłÆ kyŽāz╬╗6 + kzŽāz╬╗3

’┐Į
+

╬▒1

’┐Į
kxŽā0╬╗5 + kyŽā0╬╗2 + kzŽā0╬╗1

’┐Į
+

╬▒2

’┐Į
kxŽāx╬╗7 ŌłÆ kyŽāx╬╗6 + kzŽāx╬╗3

’┐Į
+

╬▒3

’┐Į
kxŽāy╬╗7 ŌłÆ kyŽāy╬╗6 + kzŽāy╬╗3

’┐Į
(75)

with Žān and ╬╗n being Pauli and Gellmann matrices (see
the Appendix I for a definition).
This Hamiltonian is
equivalent up to a unitary transformation to the one
found in [16], with eiŽå = ╬▒0+i╬▒1 and b = ╬▒2+i╬▒3. There
it was also shown that you can arrive at the Hamiltonian
for the SG 212 and 213 ┬»R7 ┬»R8 irrep by setting Žå =
ŽĆ
2 .
Due to nodal planes crossing these points, Chern num-
bers for odd fillings can not be defined. The non-abelian
Chern number for the middle two bands ╬Į34 = 0 remains
trivial, while the Chern number for the remaining bands
are ╬Į12 = ŌłÆ╬Į56 = ┬▒4. The exact phase diagram and its


18

X|M
R
M
X
R

1.50

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

E
Ef [eV]

{3, -5, 5, -3}
{2, -2}
{1, -1}
{-1, 1}

{-2, 2}
{-3, -1, 1, 3}
{-4, 0, 4}
{15,-15}

{-21,21}
{9,-9}
{21,-21}
{5,-5}

{-3,3}
{3,-3}
{-9,9}
S.DOS energy

Figure 9. Bandstructure of BaAsPt and all band crossings on
high symmetry lines. The bandgap between the bands with a
Chern number of ┬▒5 at the 4-fold ╬ō crossings is indicated by
the pink region. This topological bandgap is responsible for
the Fermi arcs in figure 10. The blue dashed line is the energy
slice taken there. We also observe NPs with Chern numbers
up to 21 at energies below Ef.

derivation can be found in the Appendix H.

VI.
MATERIALS

Here we discuss two material examples. Details on the
calculations can be found in the Appendix K.

A.
BaAsPt and related compounds (SG 198)

A material search for a 4-fold crossing with a Chern
number of 5 sufficiently close to the Fermi energy was
done in space groups 195-199 and 207-214. First mate-
rials from the materials project [86] are screened for 4-
fold crossings near the Fermi energy. The Chern number
of this point was directly computed [15] using density-
functional theory, in particular Quantum Espresso [87].
This search was stopped at the first material found, which
was BaAsPt in SG 198. There a 4-fold point with ╬Į = ┬▒5
was found at ╬ō at ŌłÆ100 meV, see figure 9. We note that
BaAsPt belongs to a whole class of materials in SG 198,
referred to as LaIrSi-type materials in [68], consisting of
three elements with similar bandstructures, as seen on
the materials project [86], and likely similar orbital char-
acteristics, such that ╬Į = ┬▒5 might also be found in
those, though at different distances to EF , due to varia-
tions of the Fermi energy in these compounds.
A full topological classification [15] of the 6 bands
crossing EF has been carried out. We enumerate these
bands from 1 to 6 in descending order in energy. The
charge of the nodal planes, which occur in SG 198

M

M

R

1
-1
2
-2
-4
8

Figure 10.
Surface density of states (DOS) of BaAsPt at
0.1 eV. Also shown are the projected topological charges, re-
sulting from a bandfilling in between the bandpair with charge
╬Į = ┬▒5 at ╬ō from the bulk. This is the bandfilling fulfilled in
the parts of the surface DOS without bulk states and where
the Fermi arcs reside. With this filling, the charge of the ╬ō
point is 3ŌłÆ5 = ŌłÆ2, which is compensated by two WPs on the
╬ōX-line. Further, there are 8 WPs on the ╬ōR-line very close
to the ╬ō point which we included into the total charge of 8 of
the projected ┬»╬ō point. The total charge of bulk states around
┬»╬ō is 4, so there are 4 Fermi arcs connecting these states to
the ┬»R point with topological charge ╬Į = ŌłÆ4. Note that the
╬Į = 2 charges near ┬»R are slightly away from ┬»R, so there are
4 copies at every corner. These charges are connected with 8
Fermi arcs to bulk states with ╬Į = ŌłÆ2 points between ┬»╬ō and
┬»R.

at the BZ boundary, is shown in figure 9 in solid col-
ored lines. The figure also shows all crossings on high
symmetry lines.
WPs at generic positions have been
found for band pair (4, 5) (the band pair with ╬Į =
┬▒5 at ╬ō and whose bandgap is shaded red) at k =
2ŽĆ(ŌłÆ0.0289, ŌłÆ0.2699, ŌłÆ0.2988)T and all symmetry re-
lated points with ╬Į5 = ŌłÆ1.
Another generic WP was
found at k = 2ŽĆ(0, ŌłÆ0.2085, ŌłÆ0.291)T with ╬Į4 = ŌłÆ1
for band pair (3, 4).
The fermion doubling theorem is
fulfilled when counting in the topological charges of the
WPs, multifold crossings and NPs found by the full topo-
logical classification of the 6 bands crossing EF .
Further, a large topological band gap shaded in red
separating the two bands with ╬Į = ┬▒5 can be seen. A
surface DOS calculation at 100 meV shows a large num-
ber of Fermi arcs, see figure 10, despite a screening of the
topological charge from the 4-fold point, which due to
the filling of this topological band gap is ŌłÆ3 + 5 = ŌłÆ2,
by charges on ╬ō ŌłÆ X, which sum up to 2. 4 copies of
these WPs appear on the projection ┬»╬ō ŌłÆ ┬»
M. Very close
to the ╬ō point on the ╬ō ŌłÆ R line there are 8 WPs, which
we included into the charge of ┬»╬ō. The total charge of
the bulk bands surrounding ┬»╬ō of 4 give rise to 4 Fermi
arcs emerging from the bulk states at ┬»╬ō and running to


19

SG
Irrep
╬Į1 ╬Į2 ╬Į12 Model Transformation

19
R1R1
-
-
┬▒2 F 9
-

92
A1A2
-
-
┬▒2 F 7
kx ŌåÆ ky,ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆkx,╬▒2 = 0,╬▒3 = 0

96
A1A2
-
-
┬▒2 F 7
ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆky,╬▒2 = 0,╬▒3 = 0

198
R1R3/R2R2 -
-
┬▒2 F 5
-

212/213 R1R2
-
-
┬▒2 F 5
-

212/213 R3
-
-
┬▒2 F 6
-

Table I. All possible topological charges of all 4-fold crossings in the spinless case (without SOC). Their Hamiltonians are either
listed under the Model column or are obtained after a possible transformation applied on the given Hamiltonian.

SG
Irrep
╬Į1
╬Į2
╬Į12
Model Transformation

18
┬»S5 ┬»S5/ ┬»R5 ┬»R5
-
-
┬▒2
F 3
-

19
┬»S5 ┬»S5
-
-
┬▒2
F 3
-

19
┬»T5 ┬»T5
-
-
┬▒2
F 3
kx ŌåÆ ky, ky ŌåÆ kz, kz ŌåÆ kx

19
┬»U5 ┬»U5
-
-
┬▒2
F 3
ky ŌåÆ kz, kz ŌåÆ ky

90
┬»A6 ┬»A7/ ┬»
M6 ┬»
M7 -
-
┬▒2
F 7
-

92/94/96
┬»
M6 ┬»
M7
-
-
┬▒2
F 7
-

92/96
┬»R5 ┬»R5
-
-
┬▒2
F 3
kx ŌåÆ ky, ky ŌåÆ kz, kz ŌåÆ kx

92/96
┬»A7 ┬»A7
-
-
┬▒4
F 8
-

94
┬»A6 ┬»A7
-
-
┬▒2
F 7
kx Ōåö ky

195/196/197/198/199 ┬»╬ō6┬»╬ō7
┬▒3 ┬▒1,Ōłō5 ┬▒4,┬▒2 V B 1
-

195
┬»R6 ┬»R7
┬▒3 ┬▒1,Ōłō5 ┬▒4,┬▒2 V B 1
-

197
┬»H6 ┬»H7
┬▒3 ┬▒1,Ōłō5 ┬▒4,┬▒2 V B 1
-

198
┬»
M5 ┬»
M5
-
-
┬▒2
F 3
-

199
┬»H6 ┬»H7
┬▒3 ┬▒1,Ōłō5 ┬▒4,┬▒2 V B 1
U = ŽāzŽäx

207/208/209/210
┬»╬ō8
┬▒3 ┬▒1,Ōłō5 ┬▒4,┬▒2 F 2
-

/211/212/213/214
207/208
┬»R8
┬▒3 ┬▒1,Ōłō5 ┬▒4,┬▒2 F 2
-

211
┬»H8
┬▒3 ┬▒1,Ōłō5 ┬▒4,┬▒2 F 2
-

212
┬»
M6 ┬»
M7
-
-
┬▒2
F 4
-

213
┬»
M6 ┬»
M7
-
-
┬▒2
F 4
ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆky

214
┬»H8
┬▒3 ┬▒1,Ōłō5 ┬▒4,┬▒2 F 2
U = Žā0Žäx,╬▒1 ŌåÆ ŌłÆ╬▒1

Table II. All possible topological charges of 4-fold crossings in all spinful SGs and their Hamiltonians.

SG
Irrep
Transformation

195...199
╬ō4
╬▓ ŌåÆ ŌłÆ╬▓,kx ŌåÆ kz,ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆkx,kz ŌåÆ ky

195
R4
╬▓ ŌåÆ ŌłÆ╬▓,kx ŌåÆ kz,ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆkx,kz ŌåÆ ky

197
H4, P4
╬▓ ŌåÆ ŌłÆ╬▓,kx ŌåÆ kz,ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆkx,kz ŌåÆ ky

199
H4
╬▓ ŌåÆ ŌłÆ╬▓,ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆky

207...214 ╬ō4, ╬ō5 ╬▒ = 0,╬▓ ŌåÆ ŌłÆ╬▓,kx ŌåÆ kz,ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆkx,kz ŌåÆ ky
207,208
R4, R5 ╬▒ = 0,╬▓ ŌåÆ ŌłÆ╬▓,kx ŌåÆ kz,ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆkx,kz ŌåÆ ky

211,214 H4, H5 ╬▒ = 0,╬▓ ŌåÆ ŌłÆ╬▓,kx ŌåÆ kz,ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆkx,kz ŌåÆ ky

Table III. All 3-fold crossings without SOC and correspond-
ing transformations, which generate their Hamiltonian from
Eq. (74).

SG
Irrep Transformation

199,214
┬»P7
-

Table IV. All spinful 3-fold crossings.
The Hamiltonian is
described in Eq. (74).

the ┬»R point with charge ŌłÆ4. The remaining Fermi arcs
are entirely explained by projected topological crossings
of the band pair (4, 5), namely a small pocket between ┬»╬ō
and ┬»R with containing a charge of ŌłÆ2 connecting via 2

Fermi arcs to bulk bands with a charge of 2 near ┬»R. In
total, we are counting 12 Fermi arcs.

B.
NbO2 and TaO2 (SG 80)

Niobium dioxide was first synthesized in 1941 and was
shown to crystallize in a rutile structure with tetrago-
nal space group symmetry 136[88]. Further research re-
vealed the existence of a distorted lower-symmetry phase
╬▓-NbO2[89].
During the structural transition, pairs of
niobium atoms dimerize along the c-axis, and although
the nature of the transition is believed to be of Peierls
type, the specifics have been the subject of an extensive
amount of research throughout the years[90ŌĆō94]. Slightly
sub-stochiometric single crystals of ╬▓-NbO2 can be syn-
thesized in oxygen-deficient environments, and its crys-
tal structure has space group symmetry 80[95].
Much
later, ╬▓-NbO2 was proposed as a potential realization of
a topological chiral crystal with Kramers-Weyl fermions
in its bulk and the corresponding boundary modes on its
surface[11].
Since the topological band gap in ╬▓-NbO2 is small


20

Figure 11. a) DFT bulk band structure of the distorted TaO2
compound with the topological band gap colored in red and an
arrow pointing to the Weyl point (WP). The inset is showing
a zoom of the double Weyl point. b) Surface spectral density
at ŌłÆ0.297 eV (blue dashed line in a)) with a termination
projecting M onto ╬ō (┬»╬ō) and P onto N ( ┬»
M) as shown in
the inset. Two Fermi arcs connect the projection of the Weyl
point at P with the bulk bands.

and the crossing of interest is overshadowed by spectral
weight of other bands in its vicinity, we propose two al-
terations to the compound to improve its usefulness as
a topological semimetal. First, to increase the effect of
spin-orbit coupling, we consider the hypothetical com-
pound ╬▓-TaO2, which is expected to have the same crys-
tal structure since tantalum and niobium have very sim-
ilar ionic radii and electron configurations[96]. Second,
we enhance the distortion mode that connects the ru-
tile and the reported lower-symmetry phase of NbO2.
To do this, we compare the crystal structures of the par-
ent and the distorted compound, calculate the irreducible
representations of the distortions and identify the linear
combination of modes that connects the two configura-
tions using the ISODISTORT tool[97]. The computed
distortion is then exaggerated by a factor of 1.5, retain-
ing the space group symmetry of ╬▓-NbO2.
Potential
routes to synthesize the proposed crystal include growing
it at higher temperatures or in a more oxygen-deficient
environment[95].
The band structure and the surface states of ╬▓-TaO2
are shown in Fig. 11. In the vicinity of the Fermi energy
there are two time-reversal-related double Weyl points
protected by fourfold rotation symmetry, one of which
is seen on the line ╬ō-M, as well as two double Weyl
points pinned to the points labeled P. Our calculation
shows that Weyl points on ╬ō-M with charge ╬Į = +2
compensate the ones at P with ╬Į = ŌłÆ2. To our knowl-
edge this is the first example, where double Weyl points
are enforced away from a TRIM but pinned to a lower
symmetry point. These doubly charged degeneracies on
a two-fold rotation axis contradict previous suggestions

that double Weyl points require four- or six-fold rota-
tional symmetry[46], and can only be understood from
our argument relating symmetry eigenvalues.

VII.
CONCLUSION

In this paper we have derived two fundamental laws
of chiral band crossings: A local constraint relating the
Chern number to phase jumps of rotation eigenvalues
(Sec. II A), and a global constraint that restricts the num-
ber of chiral crossings on rotation axes (Sec. II B). To
demonstrate the strength of these laws, we have applied
them to determine the existence of enforce double Weyl
points, nodal planes, and other band topologies (Sec. IV).
Complementing these arguments by an exhaustive clas-
sification of low-energy models, we have determined the
generic topological phase diagrams of all multifold cross-
ings (Sec. V). Our analysis reveals, among others, that
there are fourfold crossing points with Chern number 5
(Sec. V B 1). To illustrate some of the derived topological
band features, we have discussed two material examples
(Sec. VI): BaAsPt in SG 198 with fourfold crossing of
Chern number 5 and NbO2/TaO2 in SG 80 with double
Weyl points.
There are several directions for future work. First, the
local and global constraints can be applied in a straight-
forward manner to magnetic space groups. For example,
the local constraint can be used to infer the existence of
double Weyl points away from TRIMs in magnetic space
groups, similar to Sec. IV A 1. Second, our fundamental
laws can be employed to study (multifold) nodal points
and nodal planes of bosonic band structures, e.g., phonon
or magnon bands. Third, our results have implications
for topological response functions that are influenced by
the Berry curvature, e.g., anomalous Hall currents, pho-
togalvanic effects, and magnetooptic Kerr effects. Work-
ing out signatures of the discussed band topologies (e.g.,
the nodal planes or the fourfold crossings with ╬Į = 5) in
these response functions would be an interesting task for
future study.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are thankful to Douglas Fabini, and Johannes
Mitscherling for enlightening discussions. We acknowl-
edges the support by the Max Planck-UBC-UTokyo Cen-
ter for Quantum Materials.

APPENDIX A: Proof of Eq. (7)

Since we chose a different sign in the definition of the
Berry connection (see Eq. (14)) as compared to [52], we


21

here present the derivation of Eq. (7) (Eq. (83) in [52]).

A(R ┬Ę k) = i Ō¤©n(R ┬Ę k)|R ┬Ę Ōłćk|m(R ┬Ę k)Ō¤®

= iR
’┐Į

c,d
BCn(k)nc

’┐Į
c(k)
’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ╦åRŌłÆ1ŌłćkBŌłŚ
Cn(k)md ╦åR
’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Įd(k)
’┐Į

= iR
’┐Į

c,d
BCn(k)nc

’┐Į
c(k)
’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐ĮŌłćkBŌłŚ
Cn(k)md

’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Įd(k)
’┐Į

= R(BCnA(k)BŌłÆ1
Cn + iBCnŌłćkBŌłÆ1
Cn).
(A1)

APPENDIX B: Chiral nodal lines from magnetic
symmetries

In Sec. IV A 3 we discussed the possibility of a nodal
line characterized by a non-zero Chern number. In the
following we generalize this discussion to symmetries,
which comprise both time reversal T and an n-fold rota-
tion Cn around the z direction. The arguments excluding
the possibility of chiral nodal lines for C4T and C6T fol-
low from the constraints in Eqs. (31) and (32) in the same
way as in the main text.

If there is a nonzero sewing matrix phase difference
ŌłåŽåcb, the relations imply a point-like band crossing on
the axis. Since this implies that the only possible chiral
charges of the line are equal to the multiplicity of Weyl
points, such lines would be unstable. To see this, con-
sider a case where ŌłåŽåcb is nonzero and does not change
when the size of the sphere surrounding the CnT invari-
ant point shrinks to zero. ŌłåŽåcb ╠Ė= 0 implies with the local
constraints ╬Įcb ╠Ė= 0. If ╬Įcb is nonzero, only a point-like
crossing can carry the charge implied by the arbitrary
small integration sphere.

Alternatively, if ŌłåŽåcb changes discontinuously when
the sphere shrinks to zero, the crossings carrying the
charge difference implied by the constraints, Eqs. (31)
or (32), must lie on the rotation axis and can not be at-
tributed to a chiral nodal line. To see this, one must de-
form the integration sphere into an spheroid while keep-
ing the intersection points on the axis constant, such that
ŌłåŽåcb remains unchanged. Thereby, the equatorial radius
of the spheroid can be reduced to zero to exclude any
finite size nodal line from the enclosed region, such that
the topological charges may only lie on the rotation axis
in form of WPs located where ŌłåŽåcb changes.

The case of C2T differs, as the constraint derived from
it does not include a term in the form of ŌłåŽåcb, see
Eq. (36).
Instead it involves the winding of Žå around
the rotation axis on a C2T invariant path. A nonzero
winding, which results in a ╬Įcb = 1 mod 2 constraint,
does not imply a charged nodal line of charge 1, since
this nodal line is able to gap out into just a single WP
on the C2T invariant plane.

APPENDIX C: Tight-binding model for SG 80

To illustrate the band topology induced by SG 80, we
give a minimal tight-binding model for the spinless and
spinful case, as discussed in Sec. IV A 1.
We consider
a generic model for the 2a Wyckoff position and take
all symmetry-allowed terms up to 2nd nearest neighbors
into account. We use the phase convention of Bloch func-
tions for the tight-binding orbitals [55] and the primitive
vectors as basis for k [98]. Our model takes the form

(HSG80,Ōåæ)11 = 2tŌĆ▓
1
’┐Į
cos(k1 + k2 + k3) + cos(k3)
’┐Į

+ 2tŌĆ▓
2
’┐Į
cos(k1) + cos(k2)
’┐Į
,
(C1)

(HSG80,Ōåæ)22 = 2tŌĆ▓
1
’┐Į
cos(k1) + cos(k2)
’┐Į

+ 2tŌĆ▓
2
’┐Į
cos(k1 + k2 + k3) + cos(k3)
’┐Į
,
(C2)

(HSG80,Ōåæ)12 = (HŌåæ)ŌłŚ
21
(C3)

= t1
’┐Į
1 + eik1 + ei(k1+k3) + ei(k1+k2+k3)’┐Į

+ t2
’┐Į
ei(k1+k2) + eŌłÆik2 + ei(2k1+k2+k3) + eik3’┐Į
, (C4)

where the parameters t1, t2, tŌĆ▓
1, tŌĆ▓
2 Ōłł R. With spin-orbit
coupling the full Hamiltonian becomes

HSG80(k) =
’┐Į
HSOC
SG80,Ōåæ
HSOC
SG80,ŌåæŌåō
(HSOC
SG80,ŌåæŌåō)ŌĆĀ
HSOC
SG80,Ōåō

’┐Į
,
(C5)

where HSOC
SG80,Ōåæ and HSOC
SG80,Ōåō is obtained by HSG80,Ōåæ by
adding hopping terms that differ for the two spin direc-
tions. We introduce this by

HSOC
SG80,Ōåæ = HSG80,Ōåæ + ŌłåHSG80,Ōåæ,
(C6)

(ŌłåHSG80,Ōåæ)11 =
’┐Į╦£tŌĆ▓
1(ei(ŌłÆk1ŌłÆk2ŌłÆk3) + eik3)

+ ╦£tŌĆ▓
2(eŌłÆik1 + eŌłÆik2)
’┐Į
+ c.c.,
(C7)

(ŌłåHSG80,Ōåæ)22 =
’┐Į╦£tŌĆ▓
1(eŌłÆik1 + eŌłÆik2)

+ ╦£tŌĆ▓
2(ei(ŌłÆk1ŌłÆk2ŌłÆk3) + eik3)
’┐Į
+ c.c.,
(C8)

(ŌłåHSG80,Ōåæ)12 = (ŌłåHSG80,Ōåæ)ŌłŚ
21
= ╦£t1(eik1 + ei(k1+k2+k3))

+ ╦£t2(eik1+ik2 + ei(2k1+k2+k3))

+ ╦£tŌłŚ
1(1 + ei(k1+k3))

+ ╦£tŌłŚ
2(eŌłÆik2 + eik3),
(C9)

where ╦£tŌĆ▓
1, ╦£tŌĆ▓
2 Ōłł C. The corresponding matrix elements in
HSOC
SG80,Ōåō can be obtained from HSOC
SG80,Ōåæ by replacing in the
diagonal entries k ŌåÆ ŌłÆk and in the off-diagonal entries
╦£t1(╦£t2) ŌåÆ ╦£tŌłŚ
1(╦£tŌłŚ
2) for all occurrences. The coupling between


22

╬ō
Z
M
P
╬ō
M

-4

-2

0

2

4

Energy / t1

Figure 12.
Band structure for the model defined in Eq. (C5)
respecting SG 80 without SOC. The Brillouin zone is shown
in the in-set of Fig. 11(b).

spins takes the form

(HSG80,ŌåæŌåō)11
= 2ilŌĆ▓
1 (sin(k1 + k2 + k3) + sin(k3))
+ 2ilŌĆ▓
2 (sin(k1) ŌłÆ sin(k2)) ,
(C10)

(HSG80,ŌåæŌåō)22
= 2lŌĆ▓
1 (sin(k1) ŌłÆ sin(k2))
+ 2lŌĆ▓
2 (ŌłÆ sin(k1 + k2 + k3) ŌłÆ sin(k3)) ,
(C11)

(HSG80,ŌåæŌåō)12

= l1
’┐Į
1 + ieik1 ŌłÆ ei(k1+k3) ŌłÆ iei(k1+k2+k3)’┐Į

+ l2
’┐Į
ŌłÆiei(k1+k2) + eŌłÆik2 + iei(2k1+k2+k3) ŌłÆ eik3’┐Į
,

(C12)

(HSG80,ŌåæŌåō)21
= ŌłÆ(HSG80,ŌåæŌåō(k ŌåÆ ŌłÆk))12
(C13)

where the parameters l1, l2, lŌĆ▓
1, lŌĆ▓
2 Ōłł C.
For the remaining discussion we use the parameters
defined in units of t1 as t2 = 0.2, tŌĆ▓
1 = 0.3, tŌĆ▓
2 = ŌłÆ0.2
and if spin-orbit coupling is included we add ╦£t1 = ŌłÆ0.1+
0.2i, ╦£t2 = 0.05 ŌłÆ 0.05i, l1 = 0.4i, l2 = 0.05 ŌłÆ 0.15i, ╦£tŌĆ▓
1 =
0.1, ╦£tŌĆ▓
2 = 0.05, lŌĆ▓
1 = lŌĆ▓
2 = 0.1i. A possible minimal set of
parameters that realizes the same band topology is given
by ╦£t1 = 0.2 + 0.4i, l1 = 0.8i, ╦£tŌĆ▓
1 = 0.4, where all other
parameters (except t1 = 1) are set to 0.
In the limit of vanishing spin-orbit coupling our model
exhibits only three Weyl points for each spin sector, one
at each of the two distinct points P with ╬Į = +1 and
a double Weyl point at the TRIM M with ╬Į = ŌłÆ2, see
Fig. 12. Without the spin degeneracy the unity charge
at the point P is different from the possible charges of
twofold crossings at TRIMs, which are always ╬Į = ┬▒2 in
spinless systems [47]. The double Weyl point at M shows
on the ╬ō-M path, i.e., where kz = 0 is constant, the typ-
ical quadratic dispersion expected perpendicular to the
rotation axis ╬ō-Z-M [68]. Note, our model for SG 80 with-
out SOC is a counter example to the commonly conceived

notion that there have to be at least four Weyl points in
the presence of time-reversal symmetry [99, 100]. Here,
the number of Weyl points in our model is lower than
four without additional band crossings [40].
Once spin-orbit coupling is taken into account the
bands at P (M) split into a double Weyl point and two
non-degenerate bands (two double Weyl points on the ╬ō-
Z-M path), a detailed description is given in Sec. IV A 1.
For the numerical determination of Chern numbers we
use the Wilson loop approach on a discretized Brillouin
zone as described in Ref. [101].

APPENDIX D: Local constraints in the presence of
quasi-symmetries

In the following we derive a low-energy model for a
twofold crossing that appears among the spinless repre-
sentations of the point group T 23, describing the rota-
tion symmetries of a tetrahedron. The resulting model
applies to SGs 195-199 at the TRIMs ╬ō and R, L or
H within the primitive, face-centered, or body-centered
cubic unit cells in the nomenclature of the Bilbao crys-
tallographic server [102]. All possible terms up to third
order that are compatible with the twofold and threefold
rotation of the cubic point groups symmetry are given in
the model HT(k) as

HT(k) =
’┐Į
d0 + d1(k2
x + k2
y + k2
z)
’┐Į
Žā0
+ a0kxkykzŽāz

+
’┐Į
0
a1(k2
x + k2
yeŌłÆi2ŽĆ/3 + k2
zeŌłÆi4ŽĆ/3)
H.C.
0

’┐Į
,

(D1)

where the Pauli matrices Žāi have been used and the first
term is diagonal that shifts and bends both bands with
d0, d1 Ōłł R.
The chirality ╬Į of this twofold crossing is
╬Į = 4sgn(a0) and a1 Ōłł C. In the given basis, the twofold
and threefold rotations and time-reversal are represented
by

U(Cx
2 ) = Žā0,
U(C111
3
) =
’┐Į
ei2ŽĆ/3
0
0
eŌłÆi2ŽĆ/3

’┐Į
,
(D2)

and
T = Žā1K,
(D3)

respectively.
As discussed in the main text, ╬Į = ┬▒4 is a peculiar
value.
For example for a0 > 0, the local constraints,
Eq. (1), derived from the twofold and threefold rotations
imply ╬Į = 0 mod 2 = 1 mod 3, which is consistent
with ╬Į = 4 but would imply the simpler possibility of
╬Į = ŌłÆ2. This can not only be understood by a refined
local constraint, Eq. (61), but also by the emergence of
a yet recognized quasi-symmetry that mimics a fourfold
rotation. The existence of a fourfold symmetry, can be
motivated pictorially by noticing that the symmetries Cz
2
and Cz
2T together reduce the integration surface of the


23

Chern number into a quarter of the full sphere, as dis-
cussed in Sec. IV A 2. To gap out the bands away from
k = 0 and to obtain a well-defined chirality, it is suffi-
cient to take all the symmetry-allowed terms up to cubic
order in ki, as we did in HT(k). Interestingly, the four-
fold rotation symmetry of the model is only broken at
the fourth order in ki, which is irrelevant for the value of
the Chern number.
The model, Eq. (D1), exhibits a parameter-dependent
fourfold rotation symmetry U(Cz
4) defined as

U(Cz
4) =
’┐Į
0
ei(arg(a2)+2ŽĆ/3)

eŌłÆi(arg(a2)+2ŽĆ/3)
0

’┐Į
,
(D4)

fulfilling

U(Cz
4)ŌĆĀHT(kx, ky, kz)U(Cz
4) = HT(ky, ŌłÆky, kz).
(D5)

The symmetry eigenvalues of this operation are indepen-
dent of a1 and equal to ╬╗(Cz
4) Ōłł {+1, ŌłÆ1}. We made
a choice choice of complex phase in Eq. (D4) that also
does not affect the eigenvalues, but has been used to en-
sure that U(Cz
4) commutes with time-reversal symmetry
T.
The commuting property together with the reality
of eigenvalues implies that at the twofold degeneracy the
symmetry eigenvalues of U(Cz
4) do not exchange, i.e., the
phase jump is ŌłåŽĢ = 0. And thus we can apply our local
constraint according to Eq. (1) to the fourfold rotation
to obtain ╬Į = 0 mod 4 resulting in ╬Į = +4 for a0 > 0.
Let us compare this result to the low-energy model,
again for a spinless system, described by the octahedral
point group O 432, where the twofold axes of tetrahe-
dral group T are replaced by fourfold rotations. We can
turn HT(k) into a model of point group O by setting
a1 = ŌłÆ2ŽĆ/3 in Eq. (D1). This choice turns the quasi-
symmetry U(Cz
4) into a representation of the actual four-
fold rotation of the octahedral point group. Naturally, for
this real fourfold rotation U(Cz
4) our argument on the lo-
cal constraint it opposes on the chirality is unchanged
and one finds ╬Į = ┬▒4 as well.
In summary, we find that the existence of a fourfold
quasi-symmetry in the low-energy model explains the
charge ╬Į = ┬▒4 of the twofold degeneracies with the tetra-
hedral point group T.

APPENDIX E: Tight-binding model for SG 94

In the following we define the model of SG 94 including
spin and with time-reversal symmetry, which is used to
create Fig. 5. We take the 2a Wyckoff position with the
sites (0, 0, 0), (1/2, 1/2, 1/2) and a spin-1/2 as internal
degree of freedom on each site. To keep the model sim-
ple, we pick three independent terms that are sufficient
to avoid any accidental band degeneracies from the set
of hopping terms between up to next-nearest neighbors.
Our 4├Ś4 Hamiltonian thus takes the form

HSG94,Ōåæ =
’┐Į HSG94,Ōåæ
HSG94,SOC
HŌĆĀ
SG94,SOC
HSG94,Ōåō

’┐Į
,
(E1)

where the matrix blocks are

(HSG94,Ōåæ)11 = (HSG94,Ōåæ)22 = t2eŌłÆikz + tŌłŚ
2eikz,
(E2)

(HSG94,Ōåæ)12 = (1 + eikx)(1 + eiky)(t1 + tŌłŚ
1eikz),
(E3)

HSG94,Ōåō = HSG94,Ōåō(t1 Ōåö tŌłŚ
1, t2 Ōåö tŌłŚ
2)
(E4)

for hopping that preserves spin and

(HSG94,SOC)11 = (HSG94,SOC)22 = 0,
(E5)
(HSG94,SOC)12 =

tŌłŚ
SOC(ŌłÆieikx + ieiky ŌłÆ eikz + ei(kx+ky+kz))

+ tSOC(i ŌłÆ iei(kx+ky) ŌłÆ ei(kx+kz) + ei(ky+kz)),
(E6)

(HSG94,SOC)21 = eŌłÆi(kx+ky+kz)’┐Į

tŌłŚ
SOC(ŌłÆ1 + ei(kx+ky) ŌłÆ iei(kx+kz) + iei(ky+kz))

+ tSOC(ŌłÆeikx + eiky + ieikz ŌłÆ iei(kx+ky+kz))
’┐Į
(E7)

for spin-orbit coupling terms. For Fig. 5 we use the pa-
rameters t1 = 1 + i, t2 = 0.5 + 0.8i, tSOC = ŌłÆ0.2 + 0.5i.

APPENDIX F: 4-fold models

1.
SG 198 ┬»╬ō6┬»╬ō7 model with SOC

In the following we show that the phase transitions
of the low-energy Hamiltonian (Eq. (73)) describing the
┬»╬ō6┬»╬ō7 irrep are the ones shown in figure 6. We first apply a
transformation into a basis diagonal in the 3-fold rotation
’Ż½

’ŻŁ
q+
qŌłÆ
qz

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ =
1

2
ŌłÜ

3

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
2
ŌłÆ1 + i
ŌłÜ

3 ŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ i
ŌłÜ

3
2
ŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ i
ŌłÜ

3 ŌłÆ1 + i
ŌłÜ

3
ŌłÆ2
ŌłÆ2
ŌłÆ2

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ ┬Ę k.
(F1)

Due to scale invariance, we can parameterize the follow-
ing way

╬▒0 = cos(G) cos(Z),
(F2)
╬▒1 = cos(G) sin(Z),
(F3)
╬▒2 = sin(G).
(F4)

with 0 Ōēż Z < 2ŽĆ and ŌłÆ ŽĆ

2 Ōēż G Ōēż ŽĆ

2 . We find all points
in parameter space ╬▒n where the energy levels of H be-
come degenerate away from k = 0 by considering the
characteristic polynomial of H

Žć(E) = E4 + a(q+, qz)E2 + detH.
(F5)

Since there are only even powers of E in Žć, the spectrum
is particle-hole symmetric. It is gapless when detH = 0
or a2 ŌłÆ 4detH = 0. We find that Žć and detH do not
depend on Z, so the topological phase diagram must be
rotationaly invariant. Further we parameterize

q+ = exp(iK) cos(M)
(F6)
qz = sin(M)
(F7)


24

due to scale-invariance without loss of generality.

detH = 0 case: We find

detH = p1(G, M) cos(K)3

+ p2(G, M) cos(K) + p3(G, M).
(F8)

Particle-hole symmetry implies detH Ōēź 0, so detH = 0
must be a minimum. Therefore
d detH

dK
= ŌłÆ sin(K)(3p1 cos(K)2 + p2) = 0
(F9)

=ŌćÆ (sin(K) = 0 =ŌćÆ K Ōłł {0, ŽĆ}
(F10)

Ōł© cos(K) = ┬▒
’┐ĮŌłÆp2

3p1
= ┬▒1

2
(F11)

=ŌćÆ K Ōłł {ŽĆ

3 , 2ŽĆ

3 }).
(F12)

So {0, ŽĆ, ŽĆ

3 , 2ŽĆ

3 } are the only K values where H can get
gapless via detH = 0.
With K = 0, detH has the form

detH = f4(M) sin(G)4 + f2(M) sin(G)2 + f0(M).
(F13)

It is zero when

sin(G)2 = ŌłÆf2 ┬▒
’┐Į

f 2
2 ŌłÆ 4f4f0

2f4
= U┬▒(M).
(F14)

A solution for G is found, when U┬▒ is real and 0 Ōēż U┬▒ Ōēż
1. We find this is the case for M Ōłł {ŌłÆ ŽĆ

2 , arctan
’┐Į 1

2
’┐Į
, ŽĆ

2 },
where U+ = 0 =ŌćÆ G = 0, and M = ŌłÆ ŽĆ

4 with U+ =
1
2
=ŌćÆ
G = ┬▒ ŽĆ

4 . UŌłÆ = sin(G)2 only reproduces the
M = ŌłÆ ŽĆ

4 solution.
The M Ōłł {ŌłÆ ŽĆ

2 , arctan
’┐Į 1

2
’┐Į
, ŽĆ

2 } solutions with K = 0
correspond (under symmetry and scale transformations)
to degeneracies on the k = (t, t, t) line, while M = ŌłÆ ŽĆ

4
corresponds to k = (t, 0, 0).
For the case K = ŽĆ we find after a transformation
with M ŌåÆ ŌłÆM and U┬▒ ŌåÆ UŌłō the same solutions.
All other cases can be found by applying the 3-fold
symmetry found in the little group at this k-point.
Therefore, with detH = 0, degeneracies only happen
on high symmetry lines and there are gapless points at
G Ōłł {0, ┬▒ ŽĆ

4 }. We find for G = 0 a gap closing of the
bandpair (2, 3) on C3 invariant lines and at G = ┬▒ ŽĆ

4
a gap closing on C2 invariant lines for the same bandpair.

a2 ŌłÆ 4detH = 0 case:
We find due to particle-hole
symmetry a = ŌłÆE2
1 ŌłÆ E2
2, so a2 ŌłÆ 4detH Ōēź 0, since

a2 Ōēź 4detH

ŌćÉŌćÆ (E2
1 + E2
2)2 Ōēź 4E2
1E2
2
ŌćÉŌćÆ (E2
1 ŌłÆ E2
2)2 Ōēź 0.
(F15)

So the point where a2 ŌłÆ 4detH = 0 must be a minimum
of a2 ŌłÆ 4detH. We find the following form of a2 ŌłÆ 4detH

a2 ŌłÆ 4detH = s1(G, M) cos(K)3

+ s2(G, M) cos(K) + s3(G, M).
(F16)

An optimum can be found via

d(a2 ŌłÆ 4detH)

dK
= ŌłÆ sin(K)(3s1 cos(K)2 + s2) = 0

(F17)

=ŌćÆ K Ōłł {0, ŽĆ}
(F18)

Ōł© cos(K) = ┬▒
’┐ĮŌłÆs2

3s1
= ┬▒1

2
(F19)

=ŌćÆ K Ōłł {ŽĆ

3 , 2ŽĆ

3 }.
(F20)

So once again {0, ŽĆ, ŽĆ

3 , 2ŽĆ

3 } are the only K values where H
can get gapless, now via a2 ŌłÆ 4detH = 0. With K = nŽĆ

3
and n Ōłł N we find

a2 ŌłÆ 4detH = (r1(n, M) cos(G)2 + r2(n, M)) cos(G)2

(F21)

solutions to cos(G)2 = 0 and cos(G)2 = ŌłÆr2

r1
only exist
for G Ōłł {ŌłÆ ŽĆ

2 , 0, ŽĆ

2 }. For G = 0 we find a gap closing of
the outer bandpairs at C2 invariant lines. For G = ┬▒ ŽĆ

2
the gap closing of the same bandpair occurs for any q, as
we find that a2 ŌłÆ 4detH = 0 for any M, K.
We therefore showed that the Hamiltonian is only
gapless for G Ōłł {ŌłÆ ŽĆ

2 , ŌłÆ ŽĆ

4 , 0, ŽĆ

4 , ŽĆ

2 } at points away from
k = (0, 0, 0), which translates to ╬▒2 = ┬▒
’┐Į

╬▒2
0 + ╬▒2
1,
╬▒2 = 0 or
’┐Į

╬▒2
0 + ╬▒2
1 = 0.

2.
SG 207 ┬»╬ō8 model with SOC

The generator of this irrep contains a time-reversal
symmetry T, three 2-fold symmetries 2001, 2010, 2110 and
a 3-fold symmetry 3111. The first-order Hamiltonian gen-
erated from these symmetries is

H =╬▒0

’┐Įkx

2

’┐ĮŌłÜ

3ŽāxŽä0 + ŽāxŽäz + ŽāyŽä0 ŌłÆ
ŌłÜ

3ŽāyŽäz
’┐Į
+

ky
2

’┐Į
ŌłÆ
ŌłÜ

3ŽāxŽä0 ŌłÆ ŽāxŽäz + ŽāyŽä0 ŌłÆ
ŌłÜ

3ŽāyŽäz
’┐Į
+

kz (ŽāxŽäx ŌłÆ ŽāxŽäy)
’┐Į
+

╬▒1
ŌłÜ

2

’┐Į
kx (Žā0Žäx + Žā0Žäy + ŽāzŽäx ŌłÆ ŽāzŽäy) +

ky (Žā0Žäx + Žā0Žäy ŌłÆ ŽāzŽäx + ŽāzŽäy) + 2kzŽāzŽäz

’┐Į
. (F22)

The characteristic polynomial of this Hamiltonian is
identical to the one of model 73 from the main text when
╬▒1 = 0 and ╬▒2 ŌåÆ ╬▒1. Therefore the topological phase
separating points in parameter space of ╬▒0 and ╬▒1 are re-
produced. Computing the Chern numbers, one finds that
topological phase diagram as a whole stays the same, ex-
cept now, one axis corresponds to only ╬▒0, instead of
’┐Į

╬▒2
0 + ╬▒2
1. The statements about the symmetry eigen-
value phase jumps also stay the same.


25

This model also describes SG 207 ┬»R8, SG 208 ┬»╬ō8, ┬»R8,
SG 209 ┬»╬ō8, SG 210 ┬»╬ō8, SG 211 ┬»╬ō8, ┬»H8, SG 212 ┬»╬ō8, SG
213 ┬»╬ō8, SG 214 ┬»╬ō8 with SOC.
The SG 214 ┬»H8 model with SOC can be found by ap-
plying U = Žā0Žäx and ╬▒1 ŌåÆ ŌłÆ╬▒1 to Hamiltonian F22.

3.
SG 198 ┬»
M5 ┬»
M5 model with SOC

The generator of this irrep contains a time-reversal
symmetry T and two 2-fold symmetries 2001, 2010. The
generated Hamiltonian is

H =╬▒0kzŽā0Žäy + ╬▒1kxŽāzŽäz + ╬▒2kxŽāxŽäz + ╬▒3kxŽāyŽäz+
╬▒4kyŽāzŽäx + ╬▒5kyŽāxŽäx + ╬▒6kyŽāyŽäx
(F23)

Its spectrum is particle-hole symmetric as the character-
istic polynomial is Žć(E) = E4 + aE2 + detH.
We can rewrite H with

╬▒1 = (╬▒1, ╬▒2, ╬▒3)T
(F24)

╬▒2 = (╬▒4, ╬▒5, ╬▒6)T
(F25)

such that

H =╬▒0kzŽäyŽā0 + kxŽäz(╬▒1 ┬Ę Žā) + kyŽäx(╬▒2 ┬Ę Žā).
(F26)

Due to the two nodal planes on the kx = 0 and ky =
0 planes, the Chern number of single bands are always
undefined. The Chern number for a filling of 2 can still
be computed when there are no 4-fold degeneracies away
from k = (0, 0, 0)T . Therefore we only need to find these
4-fold degenerate points in parameter space, that is when
detH = 0.
If ╬▒0 = 0, then H is 4-fold degenerate on the kz line. If
╬▒0 ╠Ė= 0, ╬▒1 ╠Ė= 0 and ╬▒2 ╠Ė= 0, we can normalize |╬▒1/2| = 1
by using scale invariance of H. We rotate Žā with a uni-
tary transformation U ŌĆĀŽāU = RŽā with R being a rotation
matrix, such that

U ŌĆĀ(╬▒1 ┬Ę Žā)U = ╬▒1 ┬Ę (RŽā)

= (RŌłÆ1╬▒1) ┬Ę Žā
= Žāz
(F27)

where we chose R such that RŌłÆ1╬▒1 = (1, 0, 0)T . Then

HŌĆ▓ =U ŌĆĀHU
=╬▒0kzŽäyŽā0 + kxŽäzŽāz + kyŽäx(╦£╬▒2 ┬Ę Žā).
(F28)

with ╦£╬▒2 = RŌłÆ1╬▒2. We parameterize without loss of gen-
erality

╦£╬▒2 = (cos P cos R, cos P sin R, sin P)T
(F29)

k = (cos G cos Z, cos G sin Z, sin G)T
(F30)

We find

|HŌĆ▓| = detH = A(P, R, Z) cos(G)4 + 1
(F31)

and detH Ōēź 0. The point detH = 0 must be a minimum
of detH. We find optima at G Ōłł {ŌłÆ ŽĆ

2 , 0, ŽĆ

2 }. G = ┬▒ ŽĆ

2
can be excluded, since there detH = 1 ╠Ė= 0. This leaves
G = 0. With this, we find the constraint for A such that
detH = 0

A(P, R, Z) = 4(cos4 Z ŌłÆ cos2 Z)(1 ŌłÆ cos2 R cos2 P)
= ŌłÆ1
(F32)

We find optima of detH with ddetH

dZ |G=0 = dA

dZ = 0 at
Z = n ŽĆ

4 with n Ōłł Z8. We can exclude Z = ŽĆ

2 , ŽĆ and 3ŽĆ

2 ,
since there A = 0. Inserting the remaining Z values, we
get

cos2 R cos2 P = 0.
(F33)

Note that

╬▒1 ┬Ę ╬▒2 = (RŌłÆ1╬▒1) ┬Ę (RŌłÆ1╬▒2)

= (1, 0, 0)T ┬Ę ╦£╬▒2
= cos P cos R.
(F34)

Therefore ╬▒1 ┬Ę ╬▒2 = 0 represents a surface in parameter
space separating different topological phases. This is also
true when |╬▒1/2| = 0.
If |╬▒1| = 0 we find the characteristic polynomial of H
with the same parametrization of k as above and |╬▒2| = 1

Žć(E) = (E2 + cos2 G cos2 Z ŌłÆ 1)2.
(F35)

Note that Žć(E) is independent of ╬▒2 since it can always
be rotated by a unitary transformation, such that H is
rotationally invariant in ╬▒2. We find a 4-fold point at
E1,2,3,4 = 0. This is the case, when G = 0 and Z Ōłł {0, ŽĆ},
so H is 4-fold degenerate on the kx line.
If |╬▒2| = 0 we find the characteristic polynomial of H
with |╬▒1| = 1

Žć(E) = (E2 + cos2 G sin2 Z ŌłÆ 1)2.
(F36)

We find a 4-fold point at G = 0 and Z Ōłł { ŽĆ

2 , 3ŽĆ

2 }, so H
is 4-fold degenerate on the ky line.
In conclusion, we found that the topology of this model
is entirely dependent on the sign of ╬▒0 and ╬▒1 ┬Ę ╬▒2. We
find the Chern number of the lowest two bands to be
╬Į = 2(ŌłÆ1)╬Ė(╬▒0)+╬Ė(╬▒1┬Ę╬▒2).
For both 2-fold symmetries, the constraint of Eq. (18)
amounts to ╬Į12 = 0 mod 2 by direct calculation.
This
can be seen directly on the (001) line, where the same
symmetry eigenvalues are paired by 2001. This way, a
symmetry eigenvalue jump can be defined for the two
degenerate bands and is equal to ŽĆ everywhere in the
phase diagram. Using Eq. (19) one arrives once again at
╬Į12 =
2
2ŽĆ(ŽĆ + ŽĆ) mod 2 = 0 mod 2.
This Hamiltonian also describes SG 18 ┬»S5 ┬»S5, ┬»R5 ┬»R5,
SG 19 ┬»S5 ┬»S5 with SOC. By applying a Chern number
preserving kx ŌåÆ ky, ky ŌåÆ kz, kz ŌåÆ kx rotation, one ar-
rives at the SG 19 ┬»T5 ┬»T5, SG 92 ┬»R5 ┬»R5 and SG 96 ┬»R5 ┬»R5
Hamiltonian. By applying a ky ŌåÆ kz, kz ŌåÆ ky reflection,
during which Chern numbers are flipped, one arrives at
the SG 19 ┬»U5 ┬»U5 model.


26

4.
SG 212 ┬»
M6 ┬»
M7 model with SOC

The little groups generator contains a time-reversal
symmetry T and three 2-fold symmetries 2001, 2010, 2110.
The low-energy Hamiltonian generated from these sym-
metries is

H =╬▒0kzŽāzŽäz+

╬▒1

’┐Į
kxŽā0Žäy ŌłÆ kyŽāzŽäx

’┐Į
+

╬▒2

’┐Į
kxŽāxŽäz ŌłÆ kyŽāyŽä0

’┐Į
+

╬▒3

’┐Į
kxŽāyŽäz + kyŽāxŽä0

’┐Į
(F37)

The lower and upper two bands of this Hamiltonian
always have doubly degenerate points, such that the
Chern number of the lower and upper band is undefined.
This means, we only have to look at all points in pa-
rameter space where detH = 0. This is the case when
|(╬▒1, ╬▒2, ╬▒3)| = 0. There, H = 0 on the kz = 0 plane.
We also find H = 0 for ╬▒0 = 0 on the kz line. Due to
these considerations and scaling properties of H, we first
consider the ╬▒0 = 1 case, which corresponds to ╬▒0 > 0.
We also set kz = 1, such that all now reachable k points
correspond under rescaling to the upper half of the unit
sphere in k space. We parameterize

╬▒1 = r1 cos P cos R
╬▒2 = r1 cos P sin R
╬▒3 = r1 sin P
(F38)

with r1 Ōēź 0. detH takes on the following form

detH = r4
1(k4
x + k4
y + (16F(R, P) + 2)k2
xk2
y)

+ 2r2
1(k2
x + k2
y) + 1
(F39)

where we find ŌłÆ 1

4 Ōēż F(R, P) Ōēż 0 with F(R, P) =
cos2 P cos2 R(cos2 P cos2 R ŌłÆ 1) = ╬▒2
1(╬▒2
1 ŌłÆ r2
1)/r4
1. In-
serting the minimal value of F in detH, we get

detH = r4
1(k2
x ŌłÆ k2
y)2 + 2r2
1(k2
x + k2
y) + 1.
(F40)

There detH = 0 has no real solution, as detH > 0.
Therefore, for all F Ōłł [ŌłÆ 1

4, 0], detH > 0. Due to sym-
metry, this means, that also on the kz = ŌłÆ1 plane, no
degeneracies of the middle bandpair can occur.
The only way left, is the kz = 0 with r1 > 0 and
|(kx, ky)| ╠Ė= 0 case. We enforce this, by parameterizing
kx = r2 cos(G), ky = r2 sin(G) with r2 > 0. The deter-
minant with kz = 0 becomes

detH =r4
1r4
2(1 ŌłÆ 4(1 ŌłÆ cos(P)2 cos(R)2)

cos(P)2 cos(R)2 sin(2G)2).
(F41)

At detH = 0, this becomes

| sin(2G)| =
1

2

’┐Į

1 ŌłÆ
’┐Į
╬▒1
r1

’┐Į2
| ╬▒1

r1 |

= K (╬▒1/r1)
(F42)

1
0
1

1

0

1

2
2 +
2
3

-2

2

12

Figure 13. Topological phase diagram of the lower two bands
Chern number ╬Į12 of the SG 212 ┬»
M6 ┬»
M7 Model with ╬▒0 > 0.

The only solutions with 0 Ōēż K Ōēż 1 and K Ōłł R, are ╬▒1 =
┬▒ r1
ŌłÜ

2 with K = 1, such that G Ōłł { ŽĆ

4 , 3ŽĆ

4 , 5ŽĆ

4 , 7ŽĆ

4 }. The
topological phase diagram is therefore rotationally invari-
ant in the (╬▒1, ╬▒2, ╬▒3) parameter space around the ╬▒1
axis. The phase separating lines are ╬▒1 = ┬▒
’┐Į

╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3.
The topological phase diagram can be determined the
same way as in the previous models, see figure 13. For
╬▒0 < 0, the Chern numbers in figure 13 switch signs.
By direct calculation, we find ╬Į12 = 0 mod 2. The sym-
metry eigenvalue phase jump for 2001 is defined, since on
the (001) the same symmetry eigenvalues are paired, and
ŽĆ for all bands. The symmetry eigenvalue jump of 2110
is also defined and ŽĆ. Both lead to the ╬Į12 = 0 mod 2
constraint once again. Symmetry eigenvalue jumps are
undefined for 2010, as there different symmetry eigenval-
ues are paired.
We get the SG 213 ┬»
M6 ┬»
M7 Model with SOC by mapping
ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆky. This flips the sign of the Chern numbers in
the topological phase diagram of this model.

5.
SG 198 R1R3 model without SOC

This model is symmetric under a time-reversal sym-
metry T, two 2-fold symmetries 2001, 2010 and a 3-fold
symmetry 3111.

H =╬▒0 [ŌłÆkxŽāzŽäx + kyŽā0Žäy + kzŽāzŽäz.]
(F43)

Due to the nodal plane, the Chern number of the lower
and upper bands are undefined. The Chern number with
a filling of 2 is ╬Į12 = 2(ŌłÆ1)╬Ė(╬▒0). Evaluating Eq. (18)
yields the constraints ╬Į12 = 0 mod 2, ╬Į12 = 1 mod 3 for
╬▒0 > 0 and ╬Į12 = 2 mod 3 for ╬▒0 < 0, which are all
fulfilled in this model. This model also describes SG 198
R2R2, SG 212 R1R2, SG 213 R1R2 without SOC.

6.
SG 212 R3 model without SOC

This model is symmetric under a time-reversal sym-
metry T, three 2-fold symmetries 2001, 2010,2110 and a


27

3-fold symmetry 3111. The low-energy Hamiltonian is

H =╬▒0

’┐Į
kx (ŌłÆŽā0Žäx + Žā0Žäy ŌłÆ ŽāzŽäx ŌłÆ ŽāzŽäy) +

ky (ŌłÆŽā0Žäx + Žā0Žäy + ŽāzŽäx + ŽāzŽäy) +

2kzŽāzŽäz

’┐Į
(F44)

Due to the nodal plane, the Chern number of the lower
and upper bands are undefined. The Chern number with
a filling of 2 is ╬Į12 = 2(ŌłÆ1)╬Ė(╬▒0). From Eq. (18) we get
the fulfilled constraints ╬Į12 = 0 mod 2, ╬Į12 = 1 mod 3 for
╬▒0 > 0 and ╬Į12 = 2 mod 3 for ╬▒0 < 0. This model also
describes SG 213 R3 without SOC.

7.
SG 90 ┬»A6 ┬»A7 model with SOC

This model is symmetric under a time-reversal sym-
metry T, two 2-fold symmetries 2001, 2010 and a 4-fold
symmetry 4001. The Hamiltonian is

H =╬▒0kzŽāzŽäz+

╬▒1

’┐Į
kx (Žā0Žäy + ŽāzŽäx) + ky (Žā0Žäy ŌłÆ ŽāzŽäx)
’┐Į
+

╬▒2
ŌłÜ

2

’┐Į
kx (ŌłÆŽāxŽä0 ŌłÆ ŽāxŽäz + ŽāyŽä0 ŌłÆ ŽāyŽäz) +

ky (ŌłÆŽāxŽä0 + ŽāxŽäz + ŽāyŽä0 + ŽāyŽäz)
’┐Į
+

╬▒3
ŌłÜ

2

’┐Į
kx (ŽāxŽä0 ŌłÆ ŽāxŽäz + ŽāyŽä0 + ŽāyŽäz) +

ky (ŽāxŽä0 + ŽāxŽäz + ŽāyŽä0 ŌłÆ ŽāyŽäz)
’┐Į
(F45)

We only need to look at the detH = 0 points, due to
the double degeneracy of the first two bands at some k
lines. When ╬▒0 = 0, H = 0 on the kz line, so ╬▒0 = 0
divides the topological phase diagram. Therefore we set
╬▒0 = 1, which corresponds to the ╬▒0 > 0 region. The
Chern numbers we get will either remain unchanged or
flip for ╬▒0 < 0. We also first look at the kz = 1 plane.
Then we get

detH = A(kx, ky, r) sin(P)4 + B(kx, ky, r) sin(P)2

+ C(kx, ky, r)
(F46)

where
we
parameterized
╬▒1
=
r sin(P), ╬▒2
=
r cos(P) cos(R), ╬▒3 = r cos(P) sin(R) and r > 0.
We
find that the determinant fulfills B2 ŌłÆ 4AC Ōēż 0.
So
the only possible real solutions of detH = 0 are when
B2 ŌłÆ 4AC = 0, which is the case when kx = 0 Ōł© ky = 0.
At those points detH = 0 can not be fulfilled, since
A(0, ky, r) = A(kx, 0, r) = B(0, ky, r) = B(kx, 0, r) = 0
and C(0, ky, r) Ōēź 1 and C(kx, 0, r) Ōēź 1.
The only
place left is the kz = 0 plane. We parameterize kx =

cos(G), ky = sin(G), where we used the scaling proper-
ties of H. We get

detH = r4(ŌłÆ64 sin(G)4 sin(P)4 + 64 sin(G)4 sin(P)2

+ 64 sin(G)2 sin(P)4 ŌłÆ 64 sin(G)2 sin(P)2 + 4)
(F47)

The only real solutions are G Ōłł { ŽĆ

4 , 3ŽĆ

4 , 5ŽĆ

4 , 7ŽĆ

4 } with P =
┬▒ ŽĆ

4 . The topological phase diagram is identical to the one
of the SG 212 ┬»
M6 ┬»
M7 model, see figure 13, with ╬▒0 > 0.
The Chern numbers flip when ╬▒0 < 0.
The symmetry eigenvalue jump of 2001 is always ŽĆ.
The one of 4001 and 2010 can not be defined, since differ-
ent eigenvalues are paired. So we need to use Eq. (18)
to derive constraints. We get ╬Į12 = 0 mod 2 and ╬Į12 =
2 mod 4, both fulfilled in all topological phases of this
model.
This model also describes SG 90 ┬»
M6 ┬»
M7, SG 92 ┬»
M6 ┬»
M7,
SG 94
┬»
M6 ┬»
M7, SG 96
┬»
M6 ┬»
M7 with SOC. The reflection
kx Ōåö ky can be applied, during which Chern numbers
are flipped, to get the SG 94 ┬»A6 ┬»A7 model with SOC.
Apply the Chern number preserving rotation kx ŌåÆ ky
and ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆkx and set ╬▒2 = 0 and ╬▒3 = 0 to get the SG
92 A1A2 model without SOC, where the Chern number
with a filling of 2 is just ╬Į = ŌłÆ2(ŌłÆ1)╬Ė(╬▒0). The SG 96
A1A2 model is found by applying a ky ŌåÆ ŌłÆky reflection
and also by setting ╬▒2 = 0 and ╬▒3 = 0. This flips the
sign of the Chern number.

8.
SG 92 ┬»A7 ┬»A7 model with SOC

This model is symmetric under a time-reversal sym-
metry T, two 2-fold symmetries 2001, 2010 and a 4-fold
symmetry 4001. The generated Hamiltonian is

H =╬▒0kzŽāzŽäz + ╬▒1kzŽāxŽä0 + ╬▒2kzŽāyŽä0
(F48)

No Chern numbers can be defined.
This Hamiltonian
also describes SG 96 ┬»A7 ┬»A7 with SOC. This Hamiltonian
must be expanded to k2 to extract Chern numbers. This
was done in [40, 103]. One arrives at ╬Į = ┬▒4 for a filling
of 2. Other Chern numbers can not be defined due to
degeneracies. See [103] for the exact topological phase
diagram.

9.
SG 19 R1R1 model without SOC

This model is symmetric under a time-reversal symme-
try T and two 2-fold symmetries 2001, 2010. The Hamil-
tonian is

H =╬▒kxŽāzŽäz + ╬▓kyŽāzŽäx + ╬│kzŽā0Žäy
(F49)

H is always doubly degenerate due to the nodal planes.
Therefore we only need to look for detH = 0.

detH = (k2
x╬▒2 + k2
y╬▓2 + k2
z╬│2)2
(F50)


28

This leads to the condition

k2
x╬▒2 + k2
y╬▓2 + k2
z╬│2 = 0
(F51)

There exist k points away from k = 0 where this is
the case when ╬▒ = 0 Ōł© ╬▓ = 0 Ōł© ╬│ = 0. We get ╬Į12 =
ŌłÆ2(ŌłÆ1)╬Ė(╬▒)+╬Ė(╬▓)+╬Ė(╬│) for the lower two bands. The sym-
metry eigenvalue phase jump is always ŽĆ for both 2001
and 2010. Therefore we get the condition ╬Į12 = 0 mod 2
from Eq. (19), which is fulfilled.

APPENDIX G: 3-fold models

Introduce ╬║ = ╬▒ + i╬▓. Normalize it without loss of
generality ╬║ = ei╬│. Then

H =

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
0
kzeŌłÆi╬│ ŌłÆkyei╬│

0
kxeŌłÆi╬│

. . .
0

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ
(G1)

The characteristic polynomial is

Žć(╬╗) = ŌłÆ╬╗3 + ╬╗(k2
x + k2
y + k2
z) ŌłÆ 2kxkykz cos(3╬│)

= ŌłÆ╬╗3 + 3╬╗ ŌłÆ 2kxkykz cos(3╬│)
(G2)

where we set normalized k2
x + k2
y + k2
z = 3 using the scale
invariance of H. The characteristic polynomial with two
degenerate energies is

Žć(╬╗) = ŌłÆ(╬╗ ŌłÆ E1)2(╬╗ ŌłÆ E2)

= ŌłÆ╬╗3 + ╬╗2(E2 + 2E1) ŌłÆ ╬╗(E2
1 + 2E1E2) + E2
1E2
(G3)

We see that

E2 = ŌłÆ2E1
(G4)

3 = ŌłÆE2
1 ŌłÆ 2E1E2 = 3E2
1
=ŌćÆ E1 = ┬▒1 Ōł¦ E2 = Ōłō2.
(G5)

The only solutions to

k2
xk2
yk2
z cos(3╬│)2 = 1 Ōł¦ k2
x + k2
y + k2
z = 3
(G6)

are

kx/y/z = ┬▒1 Ōł¦ ╬│ = ŽĆn

3 with n Ōłł Z
(G7)

so all lines in ╬▒╬▓ parameter space going from the origin
and in ŽĆ

3 angle to each other, starting at the ╬▓ = 0 line
are the only lines separating different topological phases.
We get the phase diagram for ╬Į1 shown in figure 14, and
╬Į2 = ŌłÆ╬Į1. The ╬Į1 = ŌłÆ2 phases coincide with a symmetry
eigenvalue phase jump of ŌłåŽĢ1 = 2ŽĆ/3, ŌłåŽĢ2 = 0 and
ŌłåŽĢ3 = 4ŽĆ/3 for the 3-fold rotation.
The first bands
phase jump leads with Eq. (1) to the constraint ╬Į1 =
1 mod 3, consistent with ╬Į1 = ŌłÆ2. We get phase jumps
of ŌłåŽĢ1 = 4ŽĆ/3, ŌłåŽĢ2 = 0 and ŌłåŽĢ3 = 2ŽĆ/3 for the ╬Į1 =
2 phase, which is consistent with the constraint ╬Į1 =
2 mod3 derived from the ŌłåŽĢ1.

0

0

-2

2

1

Figure 14. Topological phase diagram of band 1 of the SG
199 ┬»P7 model.

APPENDIX H: 6-fold models

The topological phase diagram for the 6-fold model 75

of irrep ┬»R7 ┬»R7 is invariant under rescaling ╬▒n ŌåÆ ╬▒n/r
with r > 0. So we can reduce the number of parame-
ters of the 6-fold model to 3 by choosing an r such that
(╬▒0 + i╬▒1)/r = eiŽå.
We rename ╬▒2/3/r as ╬▒2/3.
The
parameters Žå, b = ╬▒2 + i╬▒3 correspond to the ones found
in [16].
The characteristic polynomial is of the form

Žć(E) = E6 + A1E4 + A2E2 ŌłÆ detH.
(H1)

We see that the spectrum must be particle hole symmet-
ric.
Due to the nodal planes, Chern numbers for odd
fillings can not be defined. One way a topological phase
transition can happen is by a 6-fold degeneracy. We first
show that the only places, where this can happen is on
the nodal planes. The determinant of H looks like this

detH = B(╬▒n)k2
xk2
yk2
z.
(H2)

detH = 0 is a necessary condition for a 6-fold degeneracy.
When B ╠Ė= 0, this is only the case on the nodal planes.
A 6-fold degeneracy and particle hole symmetry implies
En = 0. Therefore A1 = 0 Ōł¦ A2 = 0 on the nodal plane.
We parameterize kx = cos(P), ky = sin(P), kz = 0. Then

A1 = ŌłÆ2(╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3 + 1)
(H3)

A2 = (╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3 + 1)2
(H4)

A1 = 0 Ōł¦ A2 = 0 is not possible. This is also the case for
all other nodal planes.
Another way a topological phase transition can happen
is by a two-fold degeneracy. At the energy of a two-fold
degeneracy, Žć must have a maximum or minimum with
Žć = 0. With k2
x + k2
y + k2
z = 1 we find that

A1 = ŌłÆ2(╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3 + 1)
(H5)

A2 = (╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3 + 1)2
(H6)


29

0
1
2

2
2 +
2
3

3

2

1

0

1

2

3

1
2
3

4
5
6

-4

4

12

Figure 15. Analytical topological phase diagram for a filling
of 2 of the ┬»R7 ┬»R7 model. All phases separated by a closing
gap are numerated from 1 to 6.

remains true. This means, Žć has a local maximum at

Emax
┬▒
= ┬▒

’┐Į

╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3 + 1

3
(H7)

independent of a0 and k. detH is tuning the value of
this maximum. Therefore detH can be tuned such that
Žć(Emax
┬▒
) = 0, where Emax
┬▒
are the energies of the double
degeneracies, in this case of band pairs (2, 3) and (4, 5).
We get the condition

detH = 4

27(╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3 + 1)3.
(H8)

We find that detH is

detH =k2
xk2
yk2
z(2 cos(2Žå) ŌłÆ 1 + ╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3)2

(2 cos(2Žå) + 2 + 4╬▒2
2 + 4╬▒2
3)
(H9)

With F = ╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3 + 1 (1 Ōēż F), S = 2 cos(2Žå) ŌłÆ 2
(0 Ōēź S Ōēź ŌłÆ4) and AŌłÆ1 = 27k2
xk2
yk2
z (1 Ōēż A) we have

(S + F)2(S + 4F) = 4AF 3.
(H10)

The only solutions with 1 Ōēż A are A = 1 Ōł¦ S = ŌłÆ3F or
A = 1 Ōł¦ S = 0. A = 1 implies kx = ky = kz = ┬▒ 1
ŌłÜ

3
again. We get cos(2Žå) = ŌłÆ3╬▒2
2ŌłÆ3╬▒2
3ŌłÆ1

2
and Žå Ōłł {0, ŽĆ} as
surfaced in parameter space separating different topolog-
ical phases.
Further, Žć has minima at Emin = 0 and Emin
┬▒
=
┬▒(╬▒2
2 + ╬▒2
3 + 1) with Žć(Emin) = ŌłÆdetH.
So we once
again have the condition detH = 0.
The only unex-
plored way this condition can be fulfilled is by B(╬▒n) =
0. This leads to another phase separating surface with
cos(2Žå) = ŌłÆ╬▒2
2ŌłÆ╬▒2
3+1

2
, which corresponds to degeneracies
of band pairs (1, 2), (3, 4) and (5, 6). Since Žć is indepen-
dent of kn at these parameters, this degeneracy occurs

at all k points. It turns out, that this gap closing does
not lead to a change in Chern number. This can be seen
in figure 15, where the topological phase diagram of this
model is show and every phase is numerated from 1 to
6. Additionally, for small off diagonal terms (╬▒2/3 << 1)
the topological phase diagram is equivalent to a double
3-fold point, as expected, since at b = 0, H is a direct
sum of two 3-fold points. At large off diagonal terms, this
is no longer the case. This is the only topological phase
diagram out of all multifold crossings, where the topolog-
ical phase depends on the parameters relative magnitude,
in this case the ratio |╬▒0+i╬▒1|

|╬▒2+i╬▒3|. The Chern number for the
two middle bands is always zero. Following [16], we can
get the SG 212/213 ┬»R7 ┬»R8 model by setting ╬▒0 = ŽĆ

2 .
The band 1 symmetry eigenvalue jump of the 3-fold
rotation is 0 in phases 3 and 6, 4ŽĆ

3 in phases 1 and 2 and
2ŽĆ
3 in phases 4 and 5. The band 2 symmetry eigenvalue
jump of the 3-fold rotation is 0 in phases 2 and 5,
4ŽĆ
3
in phases 1 and 3 and 2ŽĆ

3 in phases 4 and 6. For band
3, we get symmetry eigenvalue jumps of 0 in phases 1
and 4, 4ŽĆ

3 in phases 2 and 6 and 2ŽĆ

3 in phases 3 and 5.
For the remaining bands, particle hole symmetry inter-
changes 2ŽĆ

3 Ōåö 4ŽĆ

3 . We see that we can still distinguish
between phases 1 and 2 (4 and 5) by symmetry eigenvalue
jumps.
Bandpairs are degenerate on rotation axis of the two-
fold rotation, so Eq. 1 can not be applied here.
Con-
sidering Eq. 18, all jumps of log det BC2 are zero for all
bandpairs.
This puts constraints ╬Į1,2 = 0 mod 2 and
╬Į3,4 = 0 mod 2 on the nonabelian Chern numbers. Fur-
ther, the 3-fold rotation symmetry eigenvalue jumps lead
with Eq. 19 to the following constraints ╬Į1,2 = 1 mod 3
in phases 1, 5 and 6 and ╬Į1,2 = 2 mod 3 in phases 2, 3
and 4. These constraints are consistent with the Chern
numbers found in figure 15. For bands 3 and 4 we get
╬Į1,2 = 0 mod 3, which is also fulfilled.

APPENDIX I: Gellmann matrices

We use the following definition of the Gellmann matri-
ces.

╬╗0 =

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
1
0
0
0 ŌłÆ1 0
0
0
0

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ
(I1)
╬╗1 =

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
0 ŌłÆi 0
i
0
0
0
0
0

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ
(I2)

╬╗2 =

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
0 0 ŌłÆi
0 0
0
i 0
0

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ
(I3)
╬╗3 =

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
0 1 0
1 0 0
0 0 0

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ
(I4)

╬╗4 =

’Ż½

’Ż¼
’ŻŁ

1
ŌłÜ

3
0
0
0
1
ŌłÜ

3
0
0
0
ŌłÆ 2
ŌłÜ

3

’ŻČ

’ŻĘ
’ŻĖ

(I5)

╬╗5 =

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
0 0 ŌłÆi
0 0
0
i 0
0

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ
(I6)


30

╬╗6 =

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
0 0 1
0 0 0
1 0 0

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ
(I7)
╬╗7 =

’Ż½

’ŻŁ
0 0 0
0 0 1
0 1 0

’ŻČ

’ŻĖ
(I8)

╬╗8 = 1
(I9)

APPENDIX J: Details on the calculation
for TaO2 and NbO2

To enlarge the topological band gap, we distort the
reported oxygen-deficient NbO2 structure further, mod-
eling a stronger oxygen-deficiency, as well as substituting
Nb with Ta. We assume that the enhanced deficiency
leads to a distortion that is larger in magnitude but pre-
serves the ratio of the modes it is composed of. In gen-
eral, this is a complicated linear combination of many
distortion modes. First, we identify which linear combi-
nation of modes leads to the above-mentioned structural
phase transition by using the ISODISTORT tool.[97] By

comparing the parent and the reported oxygen-deficient
compound, we can identify and then exaggerate the dis-
tortion by a factor of 1.5. The band structure of that
structure has a much larger topological band gap while
preserving the symmetry of the reported oxygen-deficient
crystal. The crystallographic axes of the distorted cell are
a1 = (ŌłÆ4.847, 4.847, 2.967), a2 = (4.847, ŌłÆ4.847, 2.967)
and a3 = (4.847, 4.847, ŌłÆ2.967) in units of Angstrom.
The positions of the atoms are

APPENDIX K: Details on DFT calculations

The DFT calculations have been performed using the
VASP software[104ŌĆō106] and Quantum Espresso [87, 107]
with optimized norm-conserving Vanderbilt pseudopo-
tentials [108] from PseudoDojo [109] within the PBE
approximation[110] of the exchange-correlation func-
tional. For wannierization Wannier90[111] has been em-
ployment and the surface simulation was carried out us-
ing Wanniertools.[112]

[1] C.-K. Chiu, J. C. Y. Teo, A. P. Schnyder, and S. Ryu,
Classification of topological quantum matter with sym-
metries, Rev. Mod. Phys. 88, 035005 (2016).

[2] N. P. Armitage, E. J. Mele, and A. Vishwanath, Weyl
and dirac semimetals in three-dimensional solids, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 90, 015001 (2018).

[3] A. Bernevig, H. Weng, Z. Fang, and X. Dai, Recent
progress in the study of topological semimetals, Journal
of the Physical Society of Japan 87, 041001 (2018).

[4] B. A. Bernevig, C. Felser, and H. Beidenkopf, Progress
and prospects in magnetic topological materials, Nature
603, 41 (2022).

[5] H. Gao,
J. W. Venderbos,
Y. Kim, and A. M.
Rappe,
Topological
semimetals
from
first
princi-
ples,
Annual
Review
of
Materials
Research
49,
153
(2019),
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-matsci-
070218-010049.

[6] B. Q. Lv, T. Qian, and H. Ding, Experimental perspec-
tive on three-dimensional topological semimetals, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 93, 025002 (2021).

[7] X. Wan, A. M. Turner, A. Vishwanath, and S. Y.
Savrasov, Topological semimetal and fermi-arc surface
states in the electronic structure of pyrochlore iridates,
Phys. Rev. B 83, 205101 (2011).

[8] G. Xu, H. Weng, Z. Wang, X. Dai, and Z. Fang, Chern
semimetal and the quantized anomalous hall effect in
hgcr 2 se 4, Physical review letters 107, 186806 (2011).

[9] A. A. Soluyanov,
D. Gresch,
Z. Wang,
Q. Wu,
M. Troyer, X. Dai, and B. A. Bernevig, Type-ii weyl
semimetals, Nature 527, 495 (2015).

[10] B.
Yan
and
C.
Felser,
Topological
materi-
als:
Weyl
semimetals,
Annual
Review
of
Condensed
Matter
Physics
8,
337
(2017),

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-031016-
025458.

[11] G. Chang, B. J. Wieder, F. Schindler, D. S. Sanchez,
I. Belopolski, S.-M. Huang, B. Singh, D. Wu, T.-R.
Chang, T. Neupert, et al., Topological quantum proper-
ties of chiral crystals, Nature materials 17, 978 (2018).

[12] Z.-M. Yu, W. Wu, Y. Zhao, and S. A. Yang, Circum-
venting the no-go theorem: A single weyl point with-
out surface fermi arcs, Physical Review B 100, 041118
(2019).

[13] M. Xiao, L. Ye, C. Qiu, H. He, Z. Liu, and S. Fan,
Experimental demonstration of acoustic semimetal with
topologically charged nodal surface, Science advances 6,
eaav2360 (2020).

[14] M. A. Wilde, M. Dodenh┬©oft, A. Niedermayr, A. Bauer,
M. M. Hirschmann, K. Alpin, A. P. Schnyder, and
C. Pfleiderer, Symmetry-enforced topological nodal
planes at the fermi surface of a chiral magnet, Nature
594, 374 (2021).

[15] N. Huber, K. Alpin, G. L. Causer, L. Worch, A. Bauer,
G. Benka, M. M. Hirschmann, A. P. Schnyder, C. Pflei-
derer, and M. A. Wilde, Network of topological nodal
planes, multifold degeneracies, and weyl points in cosi,
Physical Review Letters 129, 026401 (2022).

[16] B. Bradlyn, J. Cano, Z. Wang, M. Vergniory, C. Felser,
R. J. Cava, and B. A. Bernevig, Beyond dirac and weyl
fermions: Unconventional quasiparticles in conventional
crystals, Science 353 (2016).

[17] P. Tang, Q. Zhou, and S.-C. Zhang, Multiple types of
topological fermions in transition metal silicides, Phys-
ical review letters 119, 206402 (2017).

[18] N. Schr┬©oter, D. Pei, M. G. Vergniory, Y. Sun, K. Manna,
F. De Juan, J. Krieger, V. S┬©uss, M. Schmidt, P. Dudin,
et al., Chiral topological semimetal with multifold band
crossings and long fermi arcs, Nature Physics 15, 759
(2019).

[19] J. Cano, B. Bradlyn, and M. Vergniory, Multifold nodal
points in magnetic materials, APL Materials 7, 101125


31

G
M
P
G

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Energy (eV)

G
M
P
G
G
M
P
G

a)
c)

b)

d)
e)

Figure 16. a) Crystal structure of the parent compound NbO2 in SG #136 and b) of TaO2 with increased oxygen-deficiency
in SG #80. c) - d) DFT band structures for the reported oxygen-deficient NbO2, the same structure with Nb substituted by
Ta and the structure with enhanced oxygen-deficiency modeled by an increased distortion. The topological gaps are colored in
red. NbO2 has a small topological gap that can be slightly enhanced by substitution. Distorting the material (by a factor of
1.5 w.r.t. the distortion of the parent compound in SG #136 to the reported oxygen-deficient structure in SG #80) leads to a
band inversion and a significant enhancement of the topological band gap.

Atom
x
y
z

Ta
0.276080 0.033580 0.217160
Ta
0.816420 0.058920 0.782840
Ta
0.308920 0.026080 0.742500
Ta
0.283580 0.566420 0.257500
Ta
0.206250 0.448580 0.727330
Ta
0.721250 0.478920 0.272670
Ta
0.728920 0.956250 0.257670
Ta
0.698580 0.471250 0.742330
O
0.097210 0.840550 0.951600
O
0.888950 0.145610 0.048400
O
0.395610 0.847210 0.756660
O
0.090550 0.638950 0.243340
O
0.618220 0.372050 0.977430
O
0.394620 0.640790 0.022570
O
0.890790 0.368220 0.746170
O
0.622050 0.144620 0.253830
O
0.111550 0.357720 0.449770
O
0.907950 0.661780 0.550230
O
0.911780 0.861550 0.253830
O
0.607720 0.657950 0.746170
O
0.595550 0.852220 0.484930
O
0.367290 0.110620 0.515070
O
0.360620 0.345550 0.243330
O
0.102220 0.117290 0.756670

Table V. Atomic positions of the distorted ╬▓-TaO2 com-
pound.
The coordinates are given in lattice vectors a1 =
(ŌłÆ4.847, 4.847, 2.967), a2 = (4.847, ŌłÆ4.847, 2.967) and a3 =
(4.847, 4.847, ŌłÆ2.967) in units of Angstrom.

(2019).

[20] N. P. Ong and S. Liang, Experimental signatures of the
chiral anomaly in diracŌĆōweyl semimetals, Nature Re-
views Physics 3, 394 (2021).

[21] P. Hosur and X. Qi, Recent developments in trans-
port phenomena in weyl semimetals, Comptes Ren-
dus Physique 14, 857 (2013), topological insulators /

Isolants topologiques.

[22] A. A. Burkov, Chiral anomaly and transport in weyl
metals, Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 27,
113201 (2015).

[23] T. Liang, Q. Gibson, M. N. Ali, M. Liu, R. J. Cava, and
N. P. Ong, Ultrahigh mobility and giant magnetoresis-
tance in the dirac semimetal cd3as2, Nature Materials
14, 280 (2015).

[24] F. de Juan, A. G. Grushin, T. Morimoto, and J. E.
Moore, Quantized circular photogalvanic effect in weyl
semimetals, Nature Communications 8, 15995 (2017).

[25] F. Flicker, F. de Juan, B. Bradlyn, T. Morimoto, M. G.
Vergniory, and A. G. Grushin, Chiral optical response
of multifold fermions, Phys. Rev. B 98, 155145 (2018).

[26] Z. Ni, K. Wang, Y. Zhang, O. Pozo, B. Xu, X. Han,
K. Manna, J. Paglione, C. Felser, A. G. Grushin,
F. de Juan, E. J. Mele, and L. Wu, Giant topological
longitudinal circular photo-galvanic effect in the chiral
multifold semimetal cosi, Nature Communications 12,
154 (2021).

[27] P. Liu, J. R. Williams, and J. J. Cha, Topological nano-
materials, Nature Reviews Materials 4, 479 (2019).

[28] A. A. Burkov, Topological semimetals, Nature Materials
15, 1145 (2016).

[29] L.
M.
Schoop,
A.
Topp,
J.
Lippmann,
F.
Or-
landi,
L.
M┬©uchler,
M.
G.
Vergniory,
Y.
Sun,
A. W. Rost,
V. Duppel,
M. Krivenkov,
S. She-
oran,
P. Manuel,
A. Varykhalov,
B. Yan,
R. K.
Kremer,
C.
R.
Ast,
and
B.
V.
Lotsch,
Tunable
weyl and dirac states in the nonsymmorphic com-
pound cesbte, Science Advances 4, eaar2317 (2018),
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.aar2317.

[30] M.
M.
Hirschmann,
A.
S.
Gibbs,
F.
Orlandi,
D. Khalyavin, P. Manuel, V. Abdolazimi, A. Yaresko,
J. Nuss, H. Takagi, A. P. Schnyder, and A. W. Rost,
Creating and controlling dirac fermions, weyl fermions,
and nodal lines in the magnetic antiperovskite eu3PbO,
Phys. Rev. Mater. 6, 114202 (2022).


32

[31] Y.
X.
Zhao
and
A.
P.
Schnyder,
Nonsymmor-
phic symmetry-required band crossings in topological
semimetals, Phys. Rev. B 94, 195109 (2016).

[32] H. Nielsen and M. Ninomiya, The adler-bell-jackiw
anomaly and weyl fermions in a crystal, Physics Let-
ters B 130, 389 (1983).

[33] H. Watanabe, H. C. Po, M. P. Zaletel, and A. Vish-
wanath, Filling-enforced gaplessness in band structures
of the 230 space groups, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 096404
(2016).

[34] S. M. Young and C. L. Kane, Dirac semimetals in two
dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 126803 (2015).

[35] R. Takahashi, M. Hirayama, and S. Murakami, Spin-
less hourglass nodal-line semimetals, Phys. Rev. B 96,
155206 (2017).

[36] S. M. Young and B. J. Wieder, Filling-enforced mag-
netic dirac semimetals in two dimensions, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 118, 186401 (2017).

[37] J. Zhang, Y.-H. Chan, C.-K. Chiu, M. G. Vergniory,
L. M. Schoop, and A. P. Schnyder, Topological band
crossings in hexagonal materials, Phys. Rev. Mater. 2,
074201 (2018).

[38] Y.-H. Chan, B. Kilic, M. M. Hirschmann, C.-K. Chiu,
L. M. Schoop, D. G. Joshi, and A. P. Schnyder,
Symmetry-enforced band crossings in trigonal materi-
als: Accordion states and weyl nodal lines, Phys. Rev.
Mater. 3, 124204 (2019).

[39] A.
Leonhardt,
M.
M.
Hirschmann,
N.
Heinsdorf,
X. Wu, D. H. Fabini, and A. P. Schnyder, Symmetry-
enforced topological band crossings in orthorhombic
crystals: Classification and materials discovery, Phys.
Rev. Mater. 5, 124202 (2021).

[40] M. M. Hirschmann, A. Leonhardt, B. Kilic, D. H.
Fabini, and A. P. Schnyder, Symmetry-enforced band
crossings in tetragonal materials: Dirac and weyl de-
generacies on points, lines, and planes, Phys. Rev. Ma-
terials 5, 054202 (2021).

[41] Z.-M. Yu, Z. Zhang, G.-B. Liu, W. Wu, X.-P. Li, R.-
W. Zhang, S. A. Yang, and Y. Yao, Encyclopedia of
emergent particles in three-dimensional crystals, Science
Bulletin 67, 375 (2022).

[42] Y.-M. Xie, X.-J. Gao, X. Y. Xu, C.-P. Zhang, J.-X. Hu,
J. Z. Gao, and K. T. Law, Kramers nodal line metals,
Nature communications 12, 1 (2021).

[43] F. Tang and X. Wan, Exhaustive construction of effec-
tive models in 1651 magnetic space groups, Phys. Rev.
B 104, 085137 (2021).

[44] F. Tang and X. Wan, Complete classification of band
nodal structures and massless excitations, Phys. Rev. B
105, 155156 (2022).

[45] A. Knoll and C. Timm, Classification of weyl points and
nodal lines based on magnetic point groups for spin- 1

2
quasiparticles, Phys. Rev. B 105, 115109 (2022).

[46] C. Fang, M. J. Gilbert, X. Dai, and B. A. Bernevig,
Multi-weyl topological semimetals stabilized by point
group symmetry, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 266802 (2012).

[47] S. S. Tsirkin, I. Souza, and D. Vanderbilt, Composite
weyl nodes stabilized by screw symmetry with and with-
out time-reversal invariance, Phys. Rev. B 96, 045102
(2017).

[48] R. Gonz┬┤alez-Hern┬┤andez, E. Tuiran, and B. Uribe, Chi-
ralities of nodal points along high-symmetry lines with
screw rotation symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 103, 235143
(2021).

[49] N. B. M. Schr┬©oter, S. Stolz, K. Manna, F. de Juan,
M. G. Vergniory, J. A. Krieger, D. Pei, T. Schmitt,
P.
Dudin,
T.
K.
Kim,
C.
Cacho,
B.
Brad-
lyn,
H.
Borrmann,
M.
Schmidt,
R.
Widmer,
V.
N.
Strocov,
and
C.
Felser,
Observation
and
control
of
maximal
chern
numbers
in
a
chiral
topological
semimetal,
Science
369,
179
(2020),

https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aaz3480.

[50] M. Yao, K. Manna, Q. Yang, A. Fedorov, V. Voroshnin,
B. Valentin Schwarze, J. Hornung, S. Chattopadhyay,
Z. Sun, S. N. Guin, et al., Observation of giant spin-
split fermi-arc with maximal chern number in the chiral
topological semimetal ptga, Nature communications 11,
1 (2020).

[51] T. L. Hughes, E. Prodan, and B. A. Bernevig, Inversion-
symmetric topological insulators, Phys. Rev. B 83,
245132 (2011).

[52] C. Fang, M. J. Gilbert, and B. A. Bernevig, Bulk topo-
logical invariants in noninteracting point group symmet-
ric insulators, Phys. Rev. B 86, 115112 (2012).

[53] A. Alexandradinata,
X. Dai, and B. A. Bernevig,
Wilson-loop
characterization
of
inversion-symmetric
topological insulators, Phys. Rev. B 89, 155114 (2014).

[54] A. Bouhon and A. M. Black-Schaffer, Global band
topology of simple and double dirac-point semimetals,
Phys. Rev. B 95, 241101 (2017).

[55] D. Vanderbilt, Berry phases in electronic structure the-
ory:
electric polarization, orbital magnetization and
topological insulators
(Cambridge
University
Press,
2018).

[56] A. A. Soluyanov and D. Vanderbilt, Smooth gauge for
topological insulators, Physical Review B 85, 115415
(2012).

[57] D. Xiao, M.-C. Chang, and Q. Niu, Berry phase effects
on electronic properties, Reviews of modern physics 82,
1959 (2010).

[58] A. Furusaki, Weyl points and dirac lines protected
by multiple screw rotations, Science Bulletin 62, 788
(2017).

[59] S.-M. Huang,
S.-Y. Xu,
I. Belopolski,
C.-C. Lee,
G. Chang,
T.-R. Chang,
B. Wang,
N. Alidoust,
G.
Bian,
M.
Neupane,
D.
Sanchez,
H.
Zheng,
H.-T. Jeng,
A. Bansil,
T. Neupert,
H. Lin, and
M. Z. Hasan, New type of weyl semimetal with
quadratic
double
weyl
fermions,
Proceedings
of
the National Academy of Sciences 113, 1180 (2016),
https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1514581113.

[60] W. Tan, X. Jiang, Y. Li, X. Wu, J. Wang, and B. Huang,
A unified understanding of diverse spin textures of
kramersŌĆōweyl fermions in nonmagnetic chiral crystals,
Advanced Functional Materials , 2208023 (2022).

[61] Q. Chen, F. Chen, Y. Pan, C. Cui, Q. Yan, L. Zhang,
Z. Gao, S. A. Yang, Z.-M. Yu, H. Chen, et al., Discovery
of a maximally charged weyl point, Nature Communi-
cations 13, 7359 (2022).

[62] B. Feng, Y.-H. Chan, Y. Feng, R.-Y. Liu, M.-Y. Chou,
K. Kuroda, K. Yaji, A. Harasawa, P. Moras, A. Bari-
nov, et al., Spin texture in type-ii weyl semimetal wte
2, Physical Review B 94, 195134 (2016).

[63] I. Markovi┬┤c, C. Hooley, O. J. Clark, F. Mazzola,
M. D. Watson, J. M. Riley, K. Volckaert, K. Under-
wood, M. Dyer, P. Murgatroyd, et al., Weyl-like points
from band inversions of spin-polarised surface states in
nbgesb, Nature Communications 10, 5485 (2019).


33

[64] S.-Y. Xu, I. Belopolski, D. S. Sanchez, M. Neupane,
G. Chang, K. Yaji, Z. Yuan, C. Zhang, K. Kuroda,
G. Bian, et al., Spin polarization and texture of the
fermi arcs in the weyl fermion semimetal taas, Physical
review letters 116, 096801 (2016).

[65] G. Gatti, D. Gos┬┤albez-Mart┬┤─▒nez, S. Tsirkin, M. Fan-
ciulli, M. Puppin, S. Polishchuk, S. Moser, L. Testa,
E. Martino, S. Roth, et al., Radial spin texture of the
weyl fermions in chiral tellurium, Physical review letters
125, 216402 (2020).

[66] W.-Y. He, X. Y. Xu, and K. T. Law, Kramers weyl
semimetals as quantum solenoids and their applications
in spin-orbit torque devices, Communications Physics
4, 66 (2021).

[67] K. Hagiwara, P. R┬©u├¤mann, X. L. Tan, Y.-J. Chen,
K. Ueno, V. Feyer, G. Zamborlini, M. Jugovac, S. Suga,
S. Bl┬©ugel, et al., Link between weyl-fermion chiral-
ity and spin texture, arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15252
(2022).

[68] T. Zhang, R. Takahashi, C. Fang, and S. Murakami,
Twofold quadruple weyl nodes in chiral cubic crystals,
Phys. Rev. B 102, 125148 (2020).

[69] H. Li, T. Zhang, A. Said, Y. Fu, G. Fabbris, D. G. Maz-
zone, J. Zhang, J. Lapano, H. N. Lee, H. C. Lei, M. P. M.
Dean, S. Murakami, and H. Miao, Observation of a chi-
ral wave function in the twofold-degenerate quadruple
weyl system baptge, Phys. Rev. B 103, 184301 (2021).

[70] C. Cui, X.-P. Li, D.-S. Ma, Z.-M. Yu, and Y. Yao,
Charge-four weyl point: Minimum lattice model and
chirality-dependent
properties,
Phys.
Rev.
B
104,
075115 (2021).

[71] L. Luo, W. Deng, Y. Yang, M. Yan, J. Lu, X. Huang,
and Z. Liu, Observation of quadruple weyl point in
hybrid-weyl phononic crystals (2022).

[72] L. Elcoro, B. Bradlyn, Z. Wang, M. G. Vergniory,
J. Cano, C. Felser, B. A. Bernevig, D. Orobengoa,
G. Flor, and M. I. Aroyo, Double crystallographic
groups and their representations on the bilbao crystallo-
graphic server, Journal of Applied Crystallography 50,
1457 (2017).

[73] P.-M. Chiu, C.-Y. Huang, W.-J. Li, and T.-K. Lee,
Emergence of topological phases by stacking of two-
dimensional lattices with nonsymmorphic symmetry,
Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 31, 035501
(2018).

[74] R. Gonz┬┤alez-Hern┬┤andez, E. Tuiran, and B. Uribe, Topo-
logical electronic structure and weyl points in nonsym-
morphic hexagonal materials, Physical Review Materi-
als 4, 124203 (2020).

[75] O. b. u. T┬©urker and S. Moroz, Weyl nodal surfaces,

Phys. Rev. B 97, 075120 (2018).

[76] W. Wu, Y. Liu, S. Li, C. Zhong, Z.-M. Yu, X.-L. Sheng,
Y. Zhao, and S. A. Yang, Nodal surface semimetals:
Theory and material realization, Physical Review B 97,
115125 (2018).

[77] M. I. Aroyo, A. Kirov, C. Capillas, J. Perez-Mato, and
H. Wondratschek, Bilbao crystallographic server. ii. rep-
resentations of crystallographic point groups and space
groups, Acta Crystallographica Section A: Foundations
of Crystallography 62, 115 (2006).

[78] F. Tang and X. Wan, Exhaustive construction of ef-
fective models in 1651 magnetic space groups, Physical
Review B 104, 085137 (2021).

[79] J. M. Luttinger, Quantum theory of cyclotron reso-
nance in semiconductors: General theory, Physical re-
view 102, 1030 (1956).

[80] D. Gresch, Identifying Topological Semimetals, Ph.D.
thesis, ETH Zurich (2018).

[81] Y. Jiang, Z. Fang, and C. Fang, A k┬Ę p effective hamil-
tonian generator, Chinese Physics Letters 38, 077104
(2021).

[82] W. Rarita and J. Schwinger, On a theory of particles
with half-integral spin, Physical Review 60, 61 (1941).

[83] M.
Ezawa,
Pseudospin- 3

2
fermions,
type-ii
weyl
semimetals, and critical weyl semimetals in tricolor cu-
bic lattices, Phys. Rev. B 94, 195205 (2016).

[84] L. Liang and Y. Yu, Semimetal with both rarita-
schwinger-weyl and weyl excitations, Phys. Rev. B 93,
045113 (2016).

[85] G. Chang, S.-Y. Xu, B. J. Wieder, D. S. Sanchez, S.-M.
Huang, I. Belopolski, T.-R. Chang, S. Zhang, A. Bansil,
H. Lin, et al., Unconventional chiral fermions and large
topological fermi arcs in rhsi, Physical review letters
119, 206401 (2017).

[86] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D.
Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner,
G. Ceder, and K. a. Persson, The Materials Project:
A materials genome approach to accelerating materials
innovation, APL Materials 1, 011002 (2013).

[87] P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra,
R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti,
M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, et al., Quantum espresso: a
modular and open-source software project for quantum
simulations of materials, Journal of physics: Condensed
matter 21, 395502 (2009).

[88] G. Brauer, Die oxyde des niobs, Zeitschrift f┬©ur anorgan-
ische und allgemeine Chemie 248, 1 (1941).

[89] A. Magneli, G. Andersson, and G. Sundkvist, Note on
the crystal structure of niobium dioxide, Acta Chem-
ica Scandinavica (Denmark) Divided into Acta Chem.
Scand., Ser. A and Ser. B 9 (1955).

[90] A. OŌĆÖHara, T. N. Nunley, A. B. Posadas, S. Zollner,
and A. A. Demkov, Electronic and optical properties of
nbo2, Journal of Applied Physics 116, 213705 (2014).

[91] K. Seta and K. Naito, Calorimetric study of the phase
transition in nbo2, The Journal of Chemical Thermo-
dynamics 14, 921 (1982).

[92] S. Shapiro, J. Axe, G. Shirane, and P. Raccah, Neutron
scattering study of the structural phase transition in
nbo2, Solid State Communications 15, 377 (1974).

[93] C. Rao, G. R. Rao, and G. S. Rao, Semiconductor-metal
transitions in nbo2 and nb1- xvxo2, Journal of Solid
State Chemistry 6, 340 (1973).

[94] K. Jacob, C. Shekhar, M. Vinay, and Y. Waseda, Ther-
modynamic properties of niobium oxides, Journal of
Chemical & Engineering Data 55, 4854 (2010).

[95] H.-J. Schweizer and R. Gruehn, Zur darstellung und
kristallstruktur von ╬▓-nbo2/synthesis and crystal struc-
ture of ╬▓-nbo2, Zeitschrift f┬©ur Naturforschung B 37,
1361 (1982).

[96] K. J. Schulz, N. M. Piatak, and J. F. Papp, Niobium
and tantalum, Tech. Rep. (US Geological Survey, 2017).

[97] H. T. Stokes, D. M. Hatch, B. J. Campbell, and D. E.
Tanner, Isodisplace:
a web-based tool for exploring
structural distortions, Journal of Applied Crystallogra-
phy 39, 607 (2006).


34

[98] W. Setyawan and S. Curtarolo, High-throughput elec-
tronic band structure calculations:
Challenges and
tools, Computational materials science 49, 299 (2010).

[99] Z. Wang, D. Gresch, A. A. Soluyanov, W. Xie, S. Kush-
waha, X. Dai, M. Troyer, R. J. Cava, and B. A.
Bernevig, mote2:
A type-ii weyl topological metal,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 056805 (2016).

[100] I. Belopolski, P. Yu, D. S. Sanchez, Y. Ishida, T.-R.
Chang, S. S. Zhang, S.-Y. Xu, H. Zheng, G. Chang,
G. Bian, et al., Signatures of a time-reversal symmet-
ric weyl semimetal with only four weyl points, Nature
communications 8, 942 (2017).

[101] T. Fukui, Y. Hatsugai, and H. Suzuki, Chern numbers in
discretized brillouin zone: efficient method of computing
(spin) hall conductances, Journal of the Physical Society
of Japan 74, 1674 (2005).

[102] M. I. Aroyo, D. Orobengoa, G. de la Flor, E. S. Tasci,
J. M. Perez-Mato, and H. Wondratschek, Brillouin-zone
database on the Bilbao Crystallographic Server, Acta
Crystallographica Section A 70, 126 (2014).

[103] W. Wu, Z.-M. Yu, X. Zhou, Y. Zhao, and S. A. Yang,
Higher-order dirac fermions in three dimensions, Phys-
ical Review B 101, 205134 (2020).

[104] G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular dynamics
for liquid metals, Phys. Rev. B 47, 558 (1993).

[105] G. Kresse and J. Furthm┬©uller, Efficiency of ab-initio to-
tal energy calculations for metals and semiconductors
using a plane-wave basis set, Computational materials

science 6, 15 (1996).

[106] G. Kresse and J. Furthm┬©uller, Efficient iterative schemes
for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave
basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).

[107] P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau,
M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni,
D. Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, et al., Advanced capabilities
for materials modelling with quantum espresso, Journal
of physics: Condensed matter 29, 465901 (2017).

[108] D. Hamann, Optimized norm-conserving vanderbilt
pseudopotentials, Physical Review B 88, 085117 (2013).

[109] M. J. van Setten, M. Giantomassi, E. Bousquet, M. J.
Verstraete, D. R. Hamann, X. Gonze, and G.-M. Rig-
nanese, The pseudodojo: Training and grading a 85 ele-
ment optimized norm-conserving pseudopotential table,
Computer Physics Communications 226, 39 (2018).

[110] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized
gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 3865 (1996).

[111] A. A. Mostofi, J. R. Yates, G. Pizzi, Y.-S. Lee, I. Souza,
D. Vanderbilt, and N. Marzari, An updated version of
wannier90:
A tool for obtaining maximally-localised
wannier functions, Computer Physics Communications
185, 2309 (2014).

[112] Q. Wu, S. Zhang, H.-F. Song, M. Troyer, and A. A.
Soluyanov, Wanniertools :
An open-source software
package for novel topological materials, Computer
Physics Communications 224, 405 (2018).


