PLASMONIC PHOTOTHERMAL RESPONSE OF A PHANTOM

EMBEDDED WITH GOLD NANOROD AGGREGATES ON

BROADBAND NEAR-INFRARED IRRADIATION

Dheeraj Pratapa,c∗, Rizul Gautama,b, Amit Kumar Shawa,b, Vikasa,b, Sanjeev Sonia,b

aBiomedical Applications Group, CSIR-Central Scientific Instruments Organization, Sector-30C, Chandigarh-160030, India

bAcademy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad-201002, India

cOptics and Photonics Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi-110016, India

ABSTRACT

Longer near-infrared wavelengths provide better penetration depth in biological tissues, so these

are useful for plasmonic photothermal cancer therapeutics. In the context of nanoparticles for such

applications, the absorption can be tuned for longer NIR wavelengths. However, on increasing the

size of the nanoparticle, the scattering is enhanced and thus is not suitable for plasmonic therapeutics.

Therefore, to overcome this issue, different types of small gold nanorods were synthesized and

converted into stable aggregates to red-shift the plasmonic resonance wavelength to longer near-

infrared wavelengths. The gold nanorod aggregates were embedded into the agarose gel phantoms

mimicking the tumor-tissue-like structure. The photothermal response was measured through the

prepared phantoms using a broadband near-infrared light source. It was shown that even in an

extremely dilute concentration of gold nanorods, the photothermal heat generation could increase

after the aggregation and also give gives deeper penetration of thermal energy. The observed

photothermal response was also verified through numerical simulation. The current study shows

better performance by increasing the plasmonic coupling, reducing the mismatch issue of plasmonic

resonance shift in the second biological therapeutic window for the aggregates without increasing the

size of individual nanoparticles. The aggregates provide better light penetration at deeper tissue by

red-shifting the absorbance resonance wavelength which is useful for plasmonic photothermal cancer

therapy.

∗Corresponding author’s email: dpratap@iitd.ac.in

arXiv:2303.11236v1  [physics.optics]  20 Mar 2023


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

Keywords Nanorods · Photothermal · Broadband near-infrared · Aggregation · Absorption · Cancer therapeutics ·

Phantoms

1
Introduction

One of the deadliest diseases to affect people in the modern era is cancer. Chemotherapy, radiation, immunotherapy,

and surgery are currently the main treatment options but all of these remedies, though, have serious side effects for

a patient Vines et al. [2019]. For instance, chemotherapy, targets rapidly dividing malignant as well as the benign

cells and causes non-specific damage to the normal cells also due to heterogeneity of cancer Cobley et al. [2010].

Additionally, because malignant cells quickly develop a resistance to chemotherapy, many of the chemo agents lose

their effectiveness over time Lovitt et al. [2018]. Contrarily, radiotherapy and immunotherapy can have a detrimental

impact on the immune system Darby et al. [2013], Postow et al. [2018], while surgery, which is frequently used as

the first line of treatment for eliminating primary tumors, is invasive and increases the chance of acquiring secondary

cancers and infections Tohme et al. [2017].

There have been efforts to improve the efficacy and the safety of available therapeutic techniques in order to tackle the

complexity of cancer and the risks connected with present treatment options. One of these initiatives is photothermal

therapy (PTT), which uses a variety of electromagnetic energy sources, including visible light, infrared (IR), near-

infrared (NIR), radio waves, or microwaves, to heat specific regions of tissue in so as to destroy cancer cells through

light-to-heat conversion process Sheng et al. [2017]. PTT has received renewed interest in the recent two decades due to

the development of photothermally active nanoparticles, making it a promising method for the non-invasive eradication

of malignant tumors Abadeer and Murphy [2021]. There have been reports on several different nanoplatforms, including

metal nanoparticles of different compositions, shapes, and architectures, carbon nanoparticles and nanotubes, graphene

oxide, and some other inorganic nanoparticles like copper chalcogenide etc. Yang et al. [2019], Kumar et al. [2021],

Kadkhoda et al. [2022]. In the metal nanoparticles, the gold nanoparticles that absorb NIR light, such as hollow

gold nanospheres, gold nanostars, gold nanoshells, gold nanorods, and gold nanocages, are the most common type of

nanoparticles Dreaden et al. [2012], Yang et al. [2021], Pakravan et al. [2021]. Compared to previously used non-metal

materials, these nanoplatforms have higher photothermal conversion characteristics. For deep tissue penetration, the

NIR light is advantageous. Additionally, the gold particles have demonstrated high biocompatibility and functioning,

offering them a competitive option to other externally delivered medicines that are less effective. As a result, plasmonic

photothermal therapy (PPTT), an improved variant of the PTT, is coined Huang and El-Sayed [2011].

The gold nanorods are among the existing NIR-absorbing nanoplatforms that are particularly attractive for PTT

applications because of their exceptional characteristics Xu et al. [2019], Pratap and Soni [2021], Zong et al. [2021]. A

variety of gold nanoparticles of different shapes and sizes could be synthesized Oldenburg et al. [1998]. For example,

gold nanorods might be tiny, approximately 25 nm long and 5 nm in diameter Pratap et al. [2022a]. On the other

hand, the gold nanoshells could have a diameter greater than 100 nm Oldenburg et al. [1998]. It is simpler to produce

high-quality gold nanorods using the traditional seed-mediated growth method than it is to synthesize gold nanoshells

2


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

and nanocages Nikoobakht and El-Sayed [2003], Murphy et al. [2005]. Gold nanorods display outstanding optical

tunability on altering the aspect ratio (AR) Huang and El-Sayed [2010]. By altering the concentration of silver nitrate

used in the seed-mediated growth process, it is possible to change the AR Granja et al. [2021]. Apart from this, it is

demonstrated that when compared to gold nanoshells, gold nanorods have better photothermal heat generation and blood

circulation half-life Von Maltzahn et al. [2009], Xie et al. [2007]. Additionally, various bioactive and cancer-curing

species can be easily coupled with gold nanorods, paving the way for combinations of therapies like PPTT with

chemotherapy or PPTT with photodynamic therapy (PDT). Therefore, multimodal therapy could be possible with the

PPTT.

It is well known that for larger size nanoparticles or higher AR of the nanorods, the relative scattering increases

. To combat this, numerical results for clusters or aggregates of nanoparticles or nanorods for PPTT applications

have recently been reported Wang et al. [2021], Pratap et al. [2022b]. Experimental evidence was presented for the

photothermally stable aggregation of small sized gold nanorods in dispersion form Pratap et al. [2022a]. However,

the gold nanorod aggregation is rarely investigated for PPTT based studies. In this paper, we report on photothermal

properties through tissue phantoms by employing aggregates of gold nanorods to measure the photothermal response

experimentally. Instead of using a monochromatic laser in the current investigation, we use broadband NIR light.

In this paper, experimentally we report the photothermal response using different types of gold nanorods aggregates

in the agarose gel tissue like phantoms on irradiation with an inhouse developed broadband NIR light source. The

organization of the paper is as follows. First, we introduce the problem in the introduction section. The second section

describes the synthesis, optical and structural characterization of the nanorods and their aggregates. The photothermal

setup and the photothermal response are discussed in the third section. In the fourth section, we show the results and

discussions. The last section concludes the paper.

2
Synthesis and characterization of nanorods and aggregates

To synthesize the gold nanorods we followed the standardized protocols described in the literature with slight modifica-

tions. For the current study, we made two types of gold nanorods with seed-mediated method-1 and method-2. It should

be emphasized that throughout the experiment, the concentration of the gold nanorods synthesized by each method

allowed for an equal number of gold nanorods to exist in monodispersive form and in their respective aggregates. We

received ascorbic acid and Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) from Sisco Research Laboratories, hydrochloric acid (HCl)

from Finar, chloroauric acid (HAuCl4), silver nitrate (AgNO3), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), sodium

borohydride (NaBH4) and Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) from Sigma-Aldrich for the synthesis of gold

nanorods.

2.1
Synthesis of smaller nanorods by method-1

For the first case using method-1, the seed-mediated technique, slightly modified from the process described in

references Jia et al. [2015], Chang and Murphy [2018], was successful in producing the necessary gold nanorods. This

3


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

protocol also demonstrated the reproducibility of synthesized gold nanorods. A 2 mL (0.01 M) solution of NaBH4

was prepared and stored in the freezer for use as ice-cold in the first step. Under vigorous stirring, 0.25 mL (0.01 M)

of HAuCl4 solution was added to 9.75 mL (0.1 M) CTAB solution. After adding 0.6 mL (0.01 M) of freshly made,

ice-cold NaBH4, the combination of HAuCl4 and CTAB was vigorously stirred for two minutes. Before use, the

resulting solution that had turned yellowish-brown was held at room temperature for two hours. This served as the

starting point as a seed solution for the creation of nanorods. The growth solution was made by adding 5 mL (0.01 M)

HAuCl4, 1 mL (0.01 M) AgNO3, 2 mL (1.0 M) HCl sequentially into the 90 mL (0.1 M) CTAB solution, and then

adding 0.8 mL (0.1 M) fresh ascorbic acid solution while rapidly stirring until the solution became transparent. To

grow the nanorods, the entire amount of seed solution was added to the growth solution and vigorously stirred for two

minutes. The finished mixture was then left overnight undisturbed at 35 ◦C. The following day, using a Remi-C24 plus

centrifuge, the entire solution containing the nanorods was centrifuged by separating it into equal portions and placing

them in four 50 mL round-bottom centrifuge tubes. This was done at 15000 rpm at 30 ◦C for 20 minutes. The extra

CTAB was gathered as a supernatant and subsequently thrown away. Following the second wash in DI water under

identical conditions, the synthesized gold nanorods formed in the pellet were disseminated in water. The amount of

pellet and added DI water in each step of the washing process were carefully recorded to calculate the concentration

of CTAB empirical in the final nanorod solution as reported previously Wu and Tracy [2015], Pratap et al. [2022a].

The total volume of the final solution was 24 mL and kept as stock suspension of nanorods for further uses which

had a measured concentration of 15.9 mg/L using the inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). We

abbreviated this stock gold nanorod as sNR1.

2.2
Synthesis of larger nanorods by method-2

In method-2, gold nanorods were synthesized using the seed-mediated method but had a higher localized surface

plasmon resonance (LSPR) wavelength than the above method-1. In this case, also, the seed solution and the growth

solution were prepared. Firstly, seed solution was prepared by stirring 10 mL (0.1 M) CTAB solution with 0.25 mL

(0.01 M) HAuCl4 followed by addition of freshly prepared ice-cold solution of 0.6 mL (0.01 M) NaBH4. The ice-cold

NaBH4 was added quickly to the stirring mixture of CTAB and HAuCl4 which immediately turned the bright yellow

colour of the solution into a yellowish brown. This colour change of the solution confirms the formation of gold seeds.

The obtained gold seeds solution was stirred for another 10 minutes followed by incubating the solution at 27 ◦C for

2.5 hours. After completion of the incubation period, the growth solution was prepared by mixing freshly prepared

80 mL (0.1 M) CTAB with 4 mL (0.01 M) HAuCl4. Further a 0.4 mL (1 N) HCl was added to the above solution.

To this solution, 0.8 mL (0.01 M) AgNO3 was added under stirring conditions followed by drop-wise addition of

0.6 mL (0.1 M) ascorbic acid to the reaction mixture that tuned the coloured solution into colourless. To this colourless

solution, 192 µL of incubated seed solution was introduced and again the solution was incubated at 27 ◦C for the next

20 hours. After completion of the incubation period, the obtained gold nanorods solution was centrifuged at 15000 rpm

(Remi-C24 plus centrifuge) for 15 minutes as the synthesized gold nanorods were equally divided into 2 mL eppendorf

tube (all 18 eppendorfs tubes). The excess amount of CTAB collected in the form of supernatant after centrifugation

4


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

was collected and discarded. The obtained gold nanorods in the form of pellets were again washed in DI water at the

same centrifugation condition. The CTAB concentration in the final gold nanorods suspension solution was calculated

again as discussed in previous reports Wu and Tracy [2015], Pratap et al. [2022a]. The total volume of the final solution

was 5 mL and stored at 4 ◦C for further experimental work. The final concentration of gold nanorods in the suspension

solution was examined/measured using ICP-MS with a concentration of 663 mg/L. The abbreviation of this set of the

stock gold nanorods was sNR2.

2.3
Conversion of nanorods into stable aggregates

For the PPTT study and to further dilute the gold nanorod’s stock suspensions (sNR1 and sNR2) and to ensure that there

was no plasmonic coupling among the nanorods, a 950 µl of DI water and 50 µl of stock suspension were combined to

create a further 1:19 diluted samples in the monodispersive forms NR1 and NR2 as obtained from synthesis method-1

and method-2. The diluted nanorods suspensions had a very subtle pink tint to them. As a reference for the aggregates

to be created, the suspension of diluted gold nanorods was used for comparison. In the next step, we used DMEM

and BSA to convert synthesized gold nanorods into aggregates. By dissolving BSA in DMEM, we created a solution

that was 4 % (w/v). For the aggregation, a 50 µl of stock suspension of the sNR1n was added into a 950 mL (4%)

BSA-DMEM solution and mixture was vortexed at 1900 rpm for five minutes under ambient conditions. Apart from

the reference monodispersive sample, NR1, now we had a sample of aggregates, NR1+4%BSA, corresponding to

4% BSA-DMEM aggregation. The same former aggregation procedure had been repeated for sNR2 to convert into

aggregates and its samples was named as NR2+4%BSA.

3
Structural characterization

Figure 1: Scanning electron microscope (TEM) images of gold nanorods prepared by (a) method-1 and (b) method-2.
The scale bar in (a) is 50 nm and in (b) is 100 nm.

The structural characterization of gold nanorods was carried out with a transmission electron microscope (TEM) of make

JEM-2100CR, JEOL. Figure 1 shows the TEM images of the NR1 and NR2. The average measured size of the NR1 was

24.6 ± 3.3 nm × 5.9 ± 0.1 nm and of the NR2 was 42.4 ± 2.9 nm × 9.4 ± 0.7 nm. We see that the size of later gold

nanorods was roughly two times larger than the former one. Since the stock solutions of the nanorods were extremely

diluted, therefore, the nanorods are sparsely distributed in the images. The absorption spectra of the monodispersive gold

5


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

nanorods and their aggregates were measured using a UV-visible spectrometer (UV 3200, LABINDIA). Figure 2 shows

the absorption spectra of the gold nanorods and their aggregates. The strongest LSPR of the NR1 and NR1+4%BSA

were at 797 nm and 915 nm respectively. While the strongest LSPR for the NR2 and NR2+4%BSA were at 812 nm and

1062 nm respectively. The strongest LSPR wavelengths of the nanorods and aggregates are listed in Table 1. It could be

seen that when BSA was 4% then a significant the LSPR red-shift was observed. The absorption spectra of aggregates

associated with NR2 are much flatter than that of the individual nanorods. However, as reported previously, these were

optically and photothermally stable Pratap et al. [2022a]. It is clear from Fig. 2 that by properly choosing the size of the

nanorods and the concentration of BSA, we can easily tune the LSPR from the first biological therapeutic window to

the second biological therapeutic window. It should be noted that any other nanoparticles of different shapes also could

be employed for the higher red shifting of the LSPR.

(a)
(b)

Figure 2: Absorption spectra of (a) NR1 and aggregates NR1+4%BSA, and (b) NR2 and aggregates NR2+4%BSA.

Table 1: The LSPR wavelength of the gold nanorods and aggregates, and the maximum temperature rise ∆T (◦C) after
15 minutes of irradiation of the agarose gel phantoms that were recorded with the thermocouples 1, 2, 3 and 4 at the
depth of 1 mm, 5 mm, 10 mm and 15 mm respectively.

Sample
LSPR (nm)
∆T1 (◦C)
∆T2 (◦C)
∆T3 (◦C)
∆T4 (◦C)

NR1
797
19.67
17.74
12.18
7.40

NR1+4%BSA
915
23.57
19.66
15.24
8.05

NR2
812
21.67
17.90
13.92
8.46

NR2+4%BSA
1062
20.76
15.68
12.57
8.23

4
Photothermal set-up and agarose gel phantom

The photothermal experiment was carried out using in-house developed NIR broadband light source. . Figure 3(a) shows

the experimental plan of the PPTT measurement. A broadband NIR light source was used to irradiate the phantom.

Since the nanorods and aggregates have different LSPR wavelengths that lie in a wide range of the light spectrum,

therefore, two different optical bandpass filters have been used to cut off the extra wavelength bands of the radiation.

The first filter-1 has a transmission range of 720 nm - 870 nm (∆λ1) and the second filter-2 has a transmission range of

6


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

800 nm - 1000 nm (∆λ2). The temperature for the first and the second phantoms as listed in Table 1 were irradiated

using filter-1, the rest of all four samples (aggregated ones) were irradiated using filter-2. A similar photothermal

measurement with braodband visible light (filter) had been reported by Soni et al. Soni et al. [2015].

The transmitted light after the infrared filter was collected through an optical fiber bundle of diameter 12 mm and

irradiated to tissue gel phantom. The incident intensity of light at the top of the phantom was 1.3 W/cm2. The total

incident optical power after the fiber bundle was 1.8 W. Utilizing "K" type thermocouples, the temperature of the

gel phantom was determined at the depths of 1 mm, 5 mm, 10 mm, and 15 mm from the top surface of the phantom

region and named probes 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively. Using a data acquisition equipment from National Instruments

(NI-myDAQ), the thermocouple’s output was recorded. On irradiation of the phantom for 15 minutes, the temperature

change for heating was recorded during the photothermal study and cooling for the same time duration, i.e., 15 minutes

after turning off the irradiation.

The gel phantom was prepared with agarose powder (1%) by dissolving it into the DI water or nanorods/aggregates

suspension considered for the photothermal experiment. The shape of the agarose gel phantom was cylindrical. Its

diameter was 22 mm and total height was 20 mm as shown in the schematic Fig. 3(a) and the actual photograph in

Fig. 3(b). The upper part of the gel of height of 10 mm was embedded with the gold nanorods or aggregates and

the lower part of the height of 10 mm was plain gel. The top part of the phantom embedded with gold nanorods or

aggregates represents the tumor region and the lower plain part represents the healthy tissue. The irradiation was on the

top surface of the agarose gel phantom and for support, the whole gel phantom was kept on a plain glass plate.

(a)

Optical fiber 

bundle

Gel phantom 

with 

embedded 
AuNRs or 
aggregates

Plain gel 
phantom

Thermocouples

(b)

Glass plate

Optical fiber 

bundle

IR filter

Broadband 
Light source
Halogen lampLens

Thermocouples
Agarose gel phantom 

with embedded 

AuNRs or aggregates

Agarose plain gel phantom

Temperature 
acquisition 

module

10 mm

22 mm

10 mm

12 mm

1: 720 – 870 nm
2: 800 – 1000 nm

Irradiance = 1.3 W/cm2

At 1, 5, 10, 15 mm depth

Figure 3: (a) Photothermal set-up and measurement plan, and (b) prepared agarose gel phantom (1%) embedded with
gold nanorods/aggregates on the top region kept on a glass plate.

5
Results and discussions

The transmission of the glass plate is shown in Fig. 4(a). The average transmission of the plate was more than 90 %.

Prior to irradiation of the phantom embedded with gold nanorods or aggregates, the plain gel of total height 20 mm

7


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

was illuminated for 15 minutes to see the effect of water heating in the gel phantom. The temperature rise (∆T) using

infrared bandpass filter-1 and filter-2 are shown in Fig. 4(b) and Fig. 4(c) respectively. At the end of illumination with

filter-1 and filter-2 after exposure for 15 minutes, the maximum difference in the temperature rise was 0.5 ◦C in the

probe-1 at the depth of 1 mm. So, the two different NIR filters can be used to cut off the undesired light spectrum to

exclusively evaluate the photothermal response of the GNR and its aggregates.

(a)

(b)
(c)

Figure 4: (a) Transmission of the glass plate used in the photothermal experiment. Temperature rise ∆T (◦C) in the
plain agarose gel (1%) irradiated with NIR bandpass (b) filter-1 having the transmission ∆λ1 = 720 − 870 nm and (c)
filter-2 having the transmission ∆λ2 = 800 − 1000 nm.

The temperature rise in the gel phantom embedded with gold NR1 and their aggregates are shown in Fig. 5. The

maximum temperature change for the monodispersive case was 19.67 ◦C for the probe-1 at a depth of 1 mm. There was

temperature change of 23.57 ◦C in the case of aggregates with 4% BSA that showed the strong plasmonic coupling

among the gold nanorods. The difference in temperature rise between samples NR1 and NR1+4%BSA is 3.90 ◦C. We

see that the strongest LSPR wavelength 915 nm of sample NR1+4%BSA lies in the transmission range of infrared

bandpass filter-1. Thus it is better to use an aggregated form of the nanoparticles for the therapeutic application to get

more temperature rise in the same concentration of the original monodispersive nanoparticles. The maximum change in

temperature measured for the NR1 and their aggregates NR1+4%BSA with probes 1 , 2, 3 and 4 at depth 1 mm, 5 mm,

10 mm and 15 mm, respectively, are listed in Table 1.

The temperature rise in the case of the gold NR2 and their aggregates NR2+4%BSA embedded in the gel phantom is

quite similar to the former case of the nanorods. Figure 6 shows the temperature rise of the latter case. The maximum

temperature rise was approximately 21.67 ◦C for the monodispersive case for probe-1 at the depth of 1 mm. For

the aggregates with 4%BSA of the maximum temperature change was 20.76 ◦C respectively. Here we see that the

temperature is decreased. This is due to the reason that the absorbance was significantly less than the constitutive

monodispersive form of the nanorods and its strongest LSPR peak was out of the wavelength range of the bandpass

filter-2. The difference in the temperature rise between NR2 and NR2+4%BSA is 0.91 ◦C. However, due to the flatness

of the absorbance of aggregated nanorods and the use of a broadband light source, there was still a sufficient temperature

rise for thermal ablation purpose. Therefore, it would be better if we use the standardized broadband light source

concerning the nanoparticles for the PPTT applications.

8


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

(a)
(b)

Figure 5: Temperature rise ∆T (◦C) in the agarose gel phantom embedded with (a) gold nanorods prepared by method-1,
and its (b) aggregates with 4% BSA. Sample NR1 in (a) was irradiated with spectral range-1, ∆λ1 = 720 − 870 nm,
and sample NR1+4%BSA in (b) irradiated with spectral range-2, ∆λ2 = 800 − 1000 nm.

(a)
(b)

Figure 6: Temperature rise ∆T (◦C) in the tissue gel phantom embedded with (a) gold nanorods prepared by method-2,
and its (b) aggregates with 4% BSA. Samples were irradiated with spectral range-2, ∆λ2 = 800 − 1000 nm.

Comparing Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, we notice that as the depth increases, the rise in temperature decreases as expected. In

both cases, the temperature rise trends are almost similar. However, there were differences in the temperature rise

due to the different sizes and, shapes of the nanorods synthesized by different methods. Additionally, the amplitudes

of absorbances (a.u.) and the nanorods sharpness (or flatness) were also responsible for further temperature rises in

both cases. A third possible reason for the lower temperature rise in the 4% aggregates of NR2 is the occurrence of

9


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

(a)
(b)

Figure 7: Linear fitting of temperature rises ∆T (◦C) at 15 minutes in the agarose gel phantom embedded with gold
nanorods and their aggregates prepared by (a) method-1, and (b) method-2. The extrapolated temperature rise at depth
of 20 mm is shown in the inset.

absorbance (LSPR = 1062 nm) beyond the spectral range of filter-2, i.e., ∆λ2 = 800 − 1000 nm. If its LSPR had been

in the spectral range of filter-2 then there might be a higher temperature change compared to its monodispersive form,

i.e., NR2, as observed in the case for aggregates of NR1.

As for longer NIR wavelengths, the light has deeper tissue penetration. Higher penetration depth with aggregation was

also confirmed with the experimental data. To do so, we plotted the temperature rise after 15 minutes of irradiation

concerning the depth of the thermal probe for method-1 (blue line) and method-2 (red line) set of samples in Fig. 7(a)

and Fig. 7(b) respectively. The experimental data were linearly fitted and their corresponding equations are shown

inset of the figures. Using the equations of the linear fitting, we calculated the temperature rise at the depth of 20 mm.

For the first set of sample, temperature rise for monodispersive (NR1) is 3.13 ◦C and for aggregate (NR1+4%BSA) is

3.31 ◦C. For the second set of samples, the temperature rise at 20 mm depth for monodispersive (NR2) is 4.11 ◦C and

for aggregate (NR2+4%) is 3.77 ◦C. We can see that for the first set of samples, due to the aggregation there is a higher

temperature rise at the depth of 20 mm while for the second set of samples it is not. This is due to the well-defined

resonance peak that lies within the ∆λ2 spectral range while the resonance peak of the second set of aggregates is

out of the spectral range of incident radiation. Although the temperature difference at the 20 mm depth between the

monodispersive and aggregate cases is small, 0.18 ◦C only, it proves that the higher temperature rise at the deeper

phantom (or tissue) is possible due to the aggregation of the nanoparticles. Therefore, the aggregates compared to

monodispersive could be a better option for PPTT.

6
Computational Modeling

As the nanorods and aggregates are randomly distributed in the gel phantom and it is difficult to homogenize the domain

to get the optical parameters. Therefore, to get the optical parameters of the gel phantoms, we used the spectroscopic

10


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

method. A thin slice of the gel phantom of thickness 3 mm was taken and its reflectance and transmittance spectrum was

recorded with an integrating sphere. Using the standard algorithm of the inverse-adding-doubling method(IADM) Prahl

et al. [1993], the absorption and scattering coefficients were calculated as shown in Fig. 8. The size of the nanorods for

method-2 is roughly two times larger than the nanorods prepared by method-1. Figure 8(a) shows that there is higher

scattering for smaller wavelengths while it becomes equivalent to absorption for larger wavelengths. In Fig. 8(b), the

scattering is always dominating over the whole wavelength range 700nm-1000nm due to the larger size of the nanorods.

The coefficients around 1000nm are quite noisy due to the end of the detectors’ range. The calculated coefficients were

used to simulate the photothermal effect in the agarose gel phantom embedded with gold nanorods (NR1, NR2) and

their aggregates (NR1+4%BSA, NR2+4%BSA).

(a)
(b)

Figure 8: Absorption and scattering coefficients of the agarose gel phantom embedded with (a) NR1 and aggregates and
(b) NR2 and aggregates, as obtained by the inverse-adding-doubling method (IADM).

Figure 9 shows the schematic of the computational modelling domain of the considered gel phantom. We solved

Penne’s Bioheat equation Wissler [1998]. The photothermal transport phenomenon is validated through numerical

simulations. For which the same cylindrical agarose gel phantom size of diameter 22 mm and depth 10 mm located

above healthy tissue of diameter and depth is 22 mm and 10 mm was considered for numerical simulation. Further, to

reduce the computation cost, the three-dimensional cylindrical numerical model was reduced to the two-dimensional

axis-symmetric model having radius and depth are 11 mm and 20 mm as Fig. 9. Computation was carried out of

the two-dimensional axis-symmetric model using the finite difference method (FDM). The tumor-tissue domain was

kept at a constant temperature at the right and bottom boundary to mimic the constant body temperature. The left

boundary was symmetric due to the axial symmetric condition. The top surface was kept as a convective boundary as it

is exposed to the environment. NIR irradiation was on the tumor top surface using 12 mm diameter fiber bundle. The

beam diameter was measured 13 mm at the tumor top surface. Hence, for the two-dimensional domain, only 6.5 mm

radius was exposed to NIR radiation Fig. 9. The other tumor region remains unirradiated.

During plasmonic photothermal therapy, NIR radiation is absorbed by the plasmonic nanoparticles present in the tumor

which gives rise to the temperature of the tumor-tissue domain which eventually results in thermal damage. Here,

11


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

11 mm

6.5 mm

10 mm

20 mm

Constant temperature

Constant temperature

Symmetry axis

Convective

Healthy tissue

NIR irradiation

Gold nanorods/aggregates 

embedded tumor

Figure 9: Schematic of two-dimensional axis-symmetric computational modeling shows the different domains and
boundary conditions.

light-tissue interaction is solved by Beer-Lambert’s equation to get energy absorption and thermal transport is solved by

Pennes’ bioheat equation with blood perfusion term set to zero. Numerical simulation was performed in MATLAB

using the FDM algorithm for which the space was discretized in 34 × 61 nodes. Generally, bare tumor/tissue exposed

to NIR irradiation causes negligible energy absorption due to a low absorption coefficient. However, gold nanorods

or aggregates embedded tumor absorbs NIR irradiation significantly due to a higher absorption coefficient. For such

media, discretized Beer-Lambert’s equation for single wavelength shown in Eq. (1) is solved to obtain the attenuated

intensity when NIR radiation propagates through a tumor layer of thickness ∆z.

I∆z(λ) = I0(λ)e−(µa(λ)+µs(λ))∆z
(1)

where I∆z(λ) is attenuated intensity of NIR radiation travelling through tissue layer ∆z at particular wavelength

λ, I0(λ) is incident radiation at particular wavelength λ, µa(λ) is the spectral absorption coefficient of the gold

nanorods/aggregates and µa(λ) is the spectral scattering coefficient of the gold nanorods/aggregates. Since a broadband

NIR source was used for the photothermal therapy. Hence, Beer-Lambert’s equation is solved for each wavelength. To

make computation simple, it was assumed that the incident NIR irradiation has no spectral variation in intensity i.e.,

each wavelength possesses the same intensity. The total incident intensity and total attenuated intensity by a tumor

layer of ∆z is obtained by summing all intensities within the whole broadband spectral range discretized into 1 nm

wavelength intervals which are mathematically expressed as

I0 =

n2
�

i=n1
I0(λi)

12


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

I∆z =

n2
�

i=n1
I∆z(λi)

Where n1 and n2 are starting and ending wavelengths of broadband NIR irradiation.

Further, total internal heat generation Qgen within gold nanorods/aggregates embedded tumor layer of thick-

ness ∆z is calculated using Equation 2.

Qgen(∆z) = I0 − I∆z

∆z
(2)

To solve the temperature distribution within tumor-tissue domain, Pennes’ bioheat equation is solved using the finite

difference method. Equation 3 shows the discretized form of Pennes’ bioheat equation in two-dimension which is

implemented in MATLAB.

ρC(T p+1
m,n − T p
m,n)

∆t
=κT p
m+1,n + T p
m−1,n − 2T p
m,n

∆x2
+ κT p
m,n+1 + T p
m,n−1 − 2T p
m,n

∆y2

+ ωρbCb(Tb − T p
m,n) + Qmet + Qgen
(3)

where ρ, C, κ, ω, and Qmet are density, specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity, blood perfusion and metabolic

heat generation of tumor/tissue. ρb, Cb, and Tb are the density, specific heat capacity and temperature of the blood.

Qgen is the internal heat generation computed from Beer-Lambert’s equation. The list of parameters and its values used

to solve the Eq. (3) are listed in Table 2. ∆t, ∆x and ∆y are time steps, spatial steps in the x-direction and spatial step

in the y-direction. Superscript p denotes the instantaneous time step and subscripts m and n denote node numbers along

the x and y direction respectively. The numerical domain was divided into 34 × 61 and the time step of 0.1 second was

considered.

Table 2: List of parameters and its values used for solving the Penne’s bioheat equation.

Parameters
Values
Parameters
Values

ρ
1000 kg/m3
ρb
1000 kg/m3

C
4200 J/kg/K
Cb
4200 J/kg/K

κ
0.5 W/m/K
Tb
23 ◦C

ω
0 1/s
Qmet
0 W/m3

The numerically calculated temperature rise for the first set of samples is shown in Fig. 10. The dotted curves are

experimental to compare with simulation results. After the 15 minutes of irradiation time, temperature rise in the

nanorods embedded gel phantom at the depth of 1 mm, 5 mm, 10 mm and 15 mm were 18.33 ◦C, 15.51 ◦C, 8.91 ◦C, and

3.39 ◦C respectively while for the aggregates embedded case were 25.16 ◦C, 21.29 ◦C,12.22 ◦C, 4.64 ◦C respectively.

We can see that due to the aggregation there is more temperature rise as was observed experimentally. There is good

agreement between the experiment and simulation for the samples synthesised by method-1. The calculated temperature

rise for the second set of samples is shown in Fig. 11. To compare, the experimental data are also plotted as dotted

lines. The temperature rise after the 15 minutes irradiation time at depth of 1 mm, 5 mm, 10 mm and 15 mm were

13


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

(a)
(b)

Figure 10: Simulated temperature rise (◦C) after irradiating the tissue gel phantom embedded with gold nanorod and
their aggregates (a) NR1 monodispersive and (b) NR1 aggregates with 4%BSA. The dotted curves are experimental for
comparison.

(a)
(b)

Figure 11: Simulated temperature rise (◦C) after irradiating the tissue gel phantom embedded with gold nanorod and
their aggregates (a) NR2 monodispersive and (b) NR2 aggregates with 4%BSA. The dotted curves are experimental for
comparison.

14.29 ◦C, 11.06 ◦C, 5.78 ◦C, and 2.19 ◦C respectively while for the aggregates case these values were 10.43 ◦C, 7.18 ◦C,

3.40 ◦C and 1.29 ◦C respectively. In the latter case, there is some variation between experimental and simulation results,

however, there is a similarity. The simulated result of the photothermal response of NR2+4%BSA is more deviating

from the experimental than NR2. This might be due to the reason that the LSPR resonance of these aggregates is out of

the spectral range of bandpass filter-2 and scattering is quite large. Therefore, aggregates of smaller nanorods are better

than the larger nanorods for plasmonic photothermal applications.

7
Conclusion

In conclusion, we have synthesized two types of gold nanorods and their aggregates to test the in vitro PPTT measurement

and to show similar trends using a broadband NIR light source. The aggregation also depends on the type of

nanoparticles, protocols, and constitutive chemicals used to synthesize these. The use of the aggregated form of the

nanoparticles is preferable for therapeutic applications to get better performance in photothermal heat generation. By

choosing the appropriate size and shape of the nanoparticles one can also tune the LSPR in the second biological

14


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

therapeutic window easily. We have carried out the PPTT testing embedding the synthesized monodispersive gold

nanorods or their aggregates in the gel phantom prepared using agarose powder. The photothermal measurement showed

that it is better to use aggregates instead of monodispersive nanoparticles for the PPTT. In many situations, it is better to

use of broadband light source instead of single-wavelength laser light. The use of broadband light would address the

slight changes in the plasmonic resonances of the nanoparticles or even their aggregates. The present study is useful for

the better performance of PPTT in tumor treatment, through use of aggregates of small sized nanoparticles for opting to

the second biological window for deeper penetration of light in tissue and enhanced photothermal response.

Acknowledgements

D.P. acknowledges the CSIR-India for the Nehru Science Postdoctoral Research Fellowship number HRDG/CSIR-

Nehru PDF/EN, ES & PS/EMR-I/04/2019. D.P. and S.S. acknowledge the support of the CSIR-CSIO Chandigarh for

hosting the research.

References

Jeremy B Vines, Jee-Hyun Yoon, Na-Eun Ryu, Dong-Jin Lim, and Hansoo Park. Gold nanoparticles for photothermal

cancer therapy. Frontiers in chemistry, 7:167, 2019.

Claire M Cobley, Leslie Au, Jingyi Chen, and Younan Xia. Targeting gold nanocages to cancer cells for photothermal

destruction and drug delivery. Expert opinion on drug delivery, 7(5):577–587, 2010.

Carrie J Lovitt, Todd B Shelper, and Vicky M Avery. Doxorubicin resistance in breast cancer cells is mediated by

extracellular matrix proteins. BMC cancer, 18(1):1–11, 2018.

Sarah C Darby, Marianne Ewertz, Paul McGale, Anna M Bennet, Ulla Blom-Goldman, Dorthe Brønnum, Candace

Correa, David Cutter, Giovanna Gagliardi, Bruna Gigante, et al. Risk of ischemic heart disease in women after

radiotherapy for breast cancer. New England Journal of Medicine, 368(11):987–998, 2013.

Michael A Postow, Robert Sidlow, and Matthew D Hellmann. Immune-related adverse events associated with immune

checkpoint blockade. New England Journal of Medicine, 378(2):158–168, 2018.

Samer Tohme, Richard L Simmons, and Allan Tsung. Surgery for cancer: a trigger for metastases. Cancer research, 77

(7):1548–1552, 2017.

Wangzhong Sheng, Sha He, William J Seare, and Adah Almutairi. Review of the progress toward achieving heat

confinement—the holy grail of photothermal therapy. Journal of biomedical optics, 22(8):080901, 2017.

Nardine S Abadeer and Catherine J Murphy. Recent progress in cancer thermal therapy using gold nanoparticles.

Nanomaterials and Neoplasms, pages 143–217, 2021.

Wenjie Yang, Huazheng Liang, Songhua Ma, Devin Wang, and Jun Huang. Gold nanoparticle based photothermal

therapy: Development and application for effective cancer treatment. Sustainable Materials and Technologies, 22:

e00109, 2019.

15


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

Achalla Vaishnav Pavan Kumar, Sunil K Dubey, Sanjay Tiwari, Anu Puri, Siddhanth Hejmady, Bapi Gorain, and

Prashant Kesharwani. Recent advances in nanoparticles mediated photothermal therapy induced tumor regression.

International journal of pharmaceutics, 606:120848, 2021.

Jamileh Kadkhoda, Ali Tarighatnia, Mohammad Reza Tohidkia, Nader D Nader, and Ayuob Aghanejad. Photothermal

therapy-mediated autophagy in breast cancer treatment: Progress and trends. Life Sciences, page 120499, 2022.

Erik C Dreaden, Alaaldin M Alkilany, Xiaohua Huang, Catherine J Murphy, and Mostafa A El-Sayed. The golden age:

gold nanoparticles for biomedicine. Chemical Society Reviews, 41(7):2740–2779, 2012.

W Yang, B Xia, L Wang, S Ma, H Liang, D Wang, and J Huang. Shape effects of gold nanoparticles in photothermal

cancer therapy. Materials Today Sustainability, 13:100078, 2021.

Asrin Pakravan, Roya Salehi, and Mehrdad Mahkam. Comparison study on the effect of gold nanoparticles shape in the

forms of star, hallow, cage, rods, and si-au and fe-au core-shell on photothermal cancer treatment. Photodiagnosis

and Photodynamic Therapy, 33:102144, 2021.

Xiaohua Huang and Mostafa A El-Sayed. Plasmonic photo-thermal therapy (pptt). Alexandria journal of medicine, 47

(1):1–9, 2011.

Weizhen Xu, Qinlu Lin, Yueqin Yin, Dong Xu, Xiaohui Huang, Bucheng Xu, and Guangwei Wang. A review on cancer

therapy based on the photothermal effect of gold nanorod. Current pharmaceutical design, 25(46):4836–4847, 2019.

Dheeraj Pratap and Sanjeev Soni. Review on the optical properties of nanoparticle aggregates towards the therapeutic

applications. Plasmonics, 16(5):1495–1513, 2021.

Qida Zong, Naijun Dong, Xiaotong Yang, Guixia Ling, and Peng Zhang. Development of gold nanorods for cancer

treatment. Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry, 220:111458, 2021.

SJ Oldenburg, RD Averitt, SL Westcott, and NJ Halas. Nanoengineering of optical resonances. Chemical Physics

Letters, 288(2-4):243–247, 1998.

Dheeraj Pratap, Rizul Gautam, Amit Kumar Shaw, and Sanjeev Soni. Photothermal properties of stable aggregates of

gold nanorods. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 635:128054, 2022a.

Babak Nikoobakht and Mostafa A El-Sayed. Preparation and growth mechanism of gold nanorods (nrs) using

seed-mediated growth method. Chemistry of Materials, 15(10):1957–1962, 2003.

Catherine J Murphy, Tapan K Sau, Anand M Gole, Christopher J Orendorff, Jinxin Gao, Linfeng Gou, Simona E

Hunyadi, and Tan Li. Anisotropic metal nanoparticles: synthesis, assembly, and optical applications. The Journal of

Physical Chemistry B, 109(29):13857–13870, 2005.

Xiaohua Huang and Mostafa A El-Sayed. Gold nanoparticles: Optical properties and implementations in cancer

diagnosis and photothermal therapy. Journal of advanced research, 1(1):13–28, 2010.

Andreia Granja, Marina Pinheiro, Célia T Sousa, and Salette Reis. Gold nanostructures as mediators of hyperthermia

therapies in breast cancer. Biochemical Pharmacology, 190:114639, 2021.

16


Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband
near-infrared irradiation

Geoffrey Von Maltzahn, Ji-Ho Park, Amit Agrawal, Nanda Kishor Bandaru, Sarit K Das, Michael J Sailor, and

Sangeeta N Bhatia. Computationally guided photothermal tumor therapy using long-circulating gold nanorod

antennas. Cancer research, 69(9):3892–3900, 2009.

Huan Xie, Kelly L Gill-Sharp, and D Patrick O’Neal. Quantitative estimation of gold nanoshell concentrations in whole

blood using dynamic light scattering. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine, 3(1):89–94, 2007.

Yiru Wang, Zhe Gao, Zonghu Han, Yilin Liu, Huan Yang, Taner Akkin, Christopher J Hogan, and John C Bischof.

Aggregation affects optical properties and photothermal heating of gold nanospheres. Scientific reports, 11(1):1–12,

2021.

Dheeraj Pratap, Ram Krishna Shah, Sameer Khandekar, and Sanjeev Soni. Photothermal effects in small gold nanorod

aggregates for therapeutic applications. Applied Nanoscience, pages 1–14, 2022b.

Henglei Jia, Caihong Fang, Xiao-Ming Zhu, Qifeng Ruan, Yi-Xiang J Wang, and Jianfang Wang. Synthesis of

absorption-dominant small gold nanorods and their plasmonic properties. Langmuir, 31(26):7418–7426, 2015.

Huei-Huei Chang and Catherine J Murphy. Mini gold nanorods with tunable plasmonic peaks beyond 1000 nm.

Chemistry of Materials, 30(4):1427–1435, 2018.

Wei-Chen Wu and Joseph B Tracy. Large-scale silica overcoating of gold nanorods with tunable shell thicknesses.

Chemistry of Materials, 27(8):2888–2894, 2015.

Sanjeev Soni, Himanshu Tyagi, Robert A Taylor, and Amod Kumar. Experimental and numerical investigation of heat

confinement during nanoparticle-assisted thermal therapy. International Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer,

69:11–17, 2015.

Scott A Prahl, Martin JC van Gemert, and Ashley J Welch. Determining the optical properties of turbid media by using

the adding–doubling method. Applied optics, 32(4):559–568, 1993.

Eugene H Wissler. Pennes’ 1948 paper revisited. Journal of applied physiology, 85(1):35–41, 1998.

17


