Orbital Rashba effect as a platform for robust orbital photocurrents

T. Adamantopoulos,1, 2, ∗ M. Merte,1, 2, 3 D. Go,3, 1 F. Freimuth,3, 1 S. Bl¨ugel,1 and Y. Mokrousov1, 3

1Peter Gr¨unberg Institut and Institute for Advanced Simulation, Forschungszentrum J¨ulich and JARA, 52425 J¨ulich, Germany
2Department of Physics, RWTH Aachen University, 52056 Aachen, Germany
3Institute of Physics, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, 55099 Mainz, Germany
(Dated: March 9, 2023)

Orbital current has emerged over the past years as one of the key novel concepts in magnetotransport. Here,
we demonstrate that laser pulses can be used to generate large and robust non-relativistic orbital currents in
systems where the inversion symmetry is broken by the orbital Rashba effect. By referring to model and first
principles tools, we demonstrate that orbital Rashba effect, accompanied by crystal field splitting, can mediate
robust orbital photocurrents without a need for spin-orbit interaction even in metallic systems. We show that such
non-relativistic orbital photocurrents are translated into derivative photocurrents of spin when relativistic effects
are taken into account. We thus promote orbital photocurrents as a promising platform for optical generation of
currents of angular momentum, and discuss their possible applications.

Introduction. Over the past years, we have been witness-
ing an ever growing interest in the origins, properties and
prospects of currents of orbital angular momentum, which
often appear to accompany the currents of spin [1–5]. Al-
though suppressed in equilibrium, the orbital degree of free-
dom can be exploited through the flow of orbital momentum
in non-equilibrium – a property which paves the way for mov-
ing from conventional spintronics to the upcoming field of or-
bitronics [6]. Some of the prospects of orbital currents are
associated with their often colossal magnitude, and the fact
that they emerge even in light materials – abundant, but ut-
terly useless within the paradigms of spintronics which rely
on strong spin-orbit interaction (SOI). In the field of orbi-
tronics, the orbital Rashba effect (ORE) has recently emerged
as a fruitful playground for understanding and studying or-
bital properties out of equilibrium [7–11]. In particular, it has
been demonstrated that the formation of chiral orbital textures,
arising as a result of broken inversion symmetry at the sur-
faces and interfaces, results in an orbital version of Rashba-
Edelstein effect and generation of colossal orbital currents,
which can be efficiently used to generate orbital torques on
magnetization [12, 13].

On the other hand, we know very little about the proper-
ties of orbital currents in the optical domain. Generally, the
physics of optical generation and properties of laser-induced
currents appearing at surfaces and interfaces is attracting con-
siderable attention these days, owing in part to the phe-
nomenon of THz radiation generation with so-called spintron-
ics THz emitters [14, 15]. In the context of spinorbitronics
inspired optical effects, properties of spin photocurrents start
coming under scrutiny as well [16–24]. However, besides the
studies of inverse Faraday effect in the orbital channel [25–27]
and studies on optically-ignited orbital dynamics [28–30], the
phenomenon of orbital photocurrents is largely unexplored,
both from the side of fundamental properties as well as their
microscopic origins. This is even more surprising given that a
stark redistribution of angular momentum, whose orbital com-
ponent is bound to be significant, is believed to largely medi-
ate for example the process of demagnetization in laser exper-
iments [31, 32]. Given the prominent role that orbital currents

came to occupy in d.c. domain, it is thus pertinent to explore
the prospects of orbital photocurrents driven by laser and op-
tical pulses. Since the concept of the orbital Rashba effect
has been extremely successful in pushing forward the field of
orbitronics, we may ask a question: can the orbital Rashba ef-
fect be taken as a unique starting point for exploring the basic
physics of orbital currents driven by light?

In this work we show that the orbital Rashba effect, which
can be used to describe the effect of crystal symmetry break-
ing in wide classes of noncentrosymmetric materials, captures
the key features of orbital photocurrents. We use tight-binding
and ab-initio methods to demonstrate that the magnitude of the
photocurrents of orbital angular momentum at surfaces can be
colossal, clarifying the role of crystal field splitting and orbital
Rashba strength for their emergence. We uncover the non-
relativistic nature of orbital photocurrents, and highlight their
robust nature which results in stable orbital currents even in
systems with vanishing SOI strength. We argue that remark-
able properties of orbital photocurrents make them an attrac-
tive platform for further advances in the realm of orbital op-
tospintronics – thus laying a unique road to opto-orbitronics.

Method. In this work, to make qualitative and quantita-
tive predictions, we make use of Keldysh formalism [18, 33]
to calculate the second order orbital and spin photocurrents
which emerge as a response to a continuous laser pulse of fre-
quency ω according to: JOs
i
= − a2
0I
̵hc ( EH
̵hω)
2 Im∑jk ϵjϵ∗
kϕs
ijk,
where a0 is the Bohr’s radius, e is the elementary charge, I
is the intensity of the pulse, ̵h is the reduced Planck constant,
c is the light velocity, EH = e2/(4πϵ0a0) is the Hartree en-
ergy, and ϵj is the j’th component of the polarization vector
of the pulse. The tensor ϕs
ijk is expressed in terms of the
Green functions of the system, two velocity operators (vi and
vj) and i’th component of orbital velocity operator, defined as
jLs
i
= 1

2{vi,Ls}, or the i’th component of the spin velocity
operator jSs
i
= 1

2{vi,Ss} =
̵h
4 {vi,σs} where the orbital/spin
polarization is aligned along direction specified by s via the
component of the orbital (spin) angular momentum operator
Ls (Ss). In our formalism, parameter Γ is a constant lifetime
broadening introduced so as to describe the effect of disorder

arXiv:2303.04546v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  8 Mar 2023


2

(e)
(c)
(a)

pt

p+

p-

(d)
(b)

p+1

p0

p-1

(f)

FIG. 1. Orbital photocurrents by orbital Rashba effect. (a) The orbital polarised band-structure of the p-orbitals model. The color of
the states marks the value of orbital polarization Lx (color bar). (b) The laser-induced orbital photocurrents within the p-orbitals model at
̵hω = 3.6 eV, in relation to the band filling, for different values of the Rashba constant αOR. (c) Bandstructure of BiAg2 surface without
SOI, for different values of separation between Ag and Bi layers (equilibrium value at d = 1.61 a.u.). (d) Corresponding dependence of the
non-relativistic orbital photocurrent JLx
y
on band filling for ̵hω = 2.25 eV. (e-f) For the BiAg2 surface with SOI the orbital (e) and spin (f)
photocurrents as shown as a function of band filling, for different frequencies ̵hω (color of the line according to the color scale). In (b), (d)-(f)
the JLx/Sx
y
currents arise for light linearly polarised along x, propagating along y, s with orbital/spin polarisation x.

on the electronic states. In this work, we use the values of Γ
of 25 meV and intensity of light of 10 GW/cm2.
Model arguments. We start by considering a tight-binding
model of p-orbitals on a two-dimensional triangular lattice (in
the xy-plane) exposed to a surface potential gradient which
mimics the effect of broken inversion symmetry. This model
was previously introduced in Ref. [34] in order to explain the
spin Rashba effect at (111)-surfaces of noble metals, and it
was used recently to study orbital magnetism arising from the
orbital Rashba effect [8, 35, 36]. We are interested in the be-
havior near the Γ-point for the case when SOI is absent. In
this case, the effective Hamiltonian contains diagonal terms
which express the energy separation of the px and py bands
from the pz band due to the crystal field splitting (CFS), while
the off-diagonal terms account for the orbital Rashba effect in
the general form (an analytic derivation of the tight-binding
model is presented in the Supplemental Material)

HOR(k) = αOR

̵h L(p) ⋅ (ˆz × k),
(1)

where αOR is the orbital Rashba constant, and L(p) is the vec-
tor of matrices of OAM operator in the p-basis. The basis set is
chosen as ∣φnk⟩ =
1
√

N ∑R eik⋅R∣φnR⟩, with φnR denoting the
n-th atomic orbital (n = px,py,pz), positioned at the Bravais
lattice R, while N numbers the lattice sites. Superpositions

of ∣φpzk⟩ and of a radial state ∣φprk⟩ = kx

∣k∣∣φpxk⟩ + ky

∣k∣∣φpyk⟩
lead to the formation of a chiral OAM texture whereas a tan-
gential state ∣φptk⟩ = ky

∣k∣∣φpxk⟩ − kx

∣k∣∣φpyk⟩ carries no OAM.
The ∣φp±k⟩ states, which arise from the superposition of ∣φpzk⟩
with the radial state, carry chiral OAM which is evaluated an-
alytically by

⟨φp±k∣L(p)∣φp±k⟩ = ±̵h2αOR

∆CF
ˆz × k,
(2)

where ∆CF is the value of CFS. The chiral distribution of
OAM in k-space is the trademark of ORE. A typical band-
structure of the model is shown in Fig. 1(a) in the vicinity
of the Γ-point [Suppl]. The distance between the p± states is
tuned by the values of αOR and ∆CF, whereas αOR also influ-
ences the curvature of the p± bands. As expected from Eq.(2),
the p± states have OAM of opposite sign, while the pt state
carries no OAM.
It is known that the ORE unleashes the linear in the field
current-induced orbital magnetization [11]. In the next step,
we utilize the Keldysh formalism to demonstrate the gener-
ation of laser-induced orbital photocurrents within the ORE.
In Fig. 1(b) we show the only symmetry-allowed component
of the orbital photocurrent JLx
y
as a function of band filling.
The light frequency is set at ̵hω = 3.6 eV and matches exactly


3

the energy difference between the p± states at Γ. The cal-
culated orbital response is remarkably sharp and strong with
the peaks located slightly above and below the energies of the
p± states. Since the ORE drives orbital photocurrents already
without SOI, the effect should strongly depend on the strength
of the orbital Rashba effect. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 1(b), the
orbital photoresponse increases drastically with the value of
αOR. For the value of αOR = 3.0 eV ˚A which corresponds to
the case of BiAg2(111) surface alloy [37], the predicted mag-
nitude of the orbital photocurrent reaches a very large value of
about 1600
̵h
2e
A
m. To check whether such values are achievable
in realistic materials, we next turn to first principles calcula-
tions.
Realistic systems. To explore the possibility of generating
large orbital photocurrents in realistic systems, we choose a
prominent representative of the class of strong Rashba sur-
faces: the BiAg2 alloy [37, 38]. We compute the electronic
structure of the BiAg2 surface from ab-initio by using the
the full-potential linearized augmented plane wave FLEUR
code [39], and employ the Wannier interpolation technique
to assess from first principles the laser-induced orbital and
spin photocurrents by using Keldysh formalism [23, 40, 41].
Further computational details and details of the method are
given in the Supplemental Material. The symmetry behavior
of the calculated orbital photocurrents agrees with the sym-
metry predictions of the effective non-magnetic spin Rashba
model [18]. For simplicity, in the following we restrict our
discussion only to JLx
y
and JSx
y
components of the orbital and
spin photocurrents, respectively, which arise for light linearly
polarised along the x-axis.
We begin our discussion by studying the case without SOI.
For the BiAg2 surface it is known that the sp-orbital hy-
bridization gives rise to the prominent ORE, which is reflected
in its characteristic bandstructure, shown with black lines in
Fig. 1(c) for the equilibrium lattice constant: the main features
are identical to that of the orbital Rashba model, with p+1 and
p0 bands of Bi degenerate at Γ-point and split off from the
p−1 band. Remarkably, we observe that, in accordance to the
predictions of the model analysis from above, the ORE gives
rise to very large non-relativistic orbital currents in response
to laser light, as shown for the case of ̵hω = 2.25 eV as a
function of band filling in Fig. 1(d). Here, for the equilibrium
structural configuration, we not only observe a magnitude of
the order of 1500
̵h
2e
A
m for JLx
y , but also witness a remark-
able robustness of the orbital current to the changes in band
filling, reminiscent of a band insulator, where such behavior
is expected when the Fermi energy is varied within the band
gap [42–45].
Before proceeding with the detailed k-resolved analysis of
the origin of the giant orbital photocurrents and their robust
behavior, we note that the width of the observed plateau in en-
ergy can be roughly associated with the difference in energy
between p−1, p0 and p+1 bands: the plateau starts from the re-
gion of flat p−1 and p0 states around [−1;−0.5] eV and goes up
to the energy region of flat p+1 states around +1.6 eV. Outside
of this region, the orbital response is generally suppressed.

We demonstrate that the p±1 separation is correlated with the
orbital current plateau by changing the distance between the
Ag and Bi layers, which results in modifications in the effec-
tive orbital Rashba strength and crystal field splitting, in turn
having a strong effect on the energy dependence of JLx
y . In-
deed, as we can see in Fig. 1(d), the size of the plateau follows
the effective separation between the orbitally-polarized bands:
as the distance is increased by a factor of two, the p+1-band
goes down in energy with respect to p−1,0 states, but not as
significantly as for the case of decreased inter-layer distance.
In both cases, while the changes in the magnitude of the or-
bital currents are driven by modifications in the orbital Rashba
constant, as predicted by the model, the modifications in the
crystal field splitting together with αOR reduce the effective
size of the plateau.
While it is clear that we can achieve gigantic non-
relativistic orbital currents, it is important to explore the role
that the spin-orbit interaction (SOI), universally present in real
solids, can play. In particular, we want to answer the follow-
ing questions, which are particularly relevant for our heavy
test system: (i) What is the impact of SOI on magnitude and
robustness of the orbital photocurrents? (ii) Would the orbital
currents become irrelevant when SOI-driven spin photocur-
rents come into play? In particular the latter have been re-
cently shown to become very prominent in two-dimensional
materials with broken inversion symmetry [19–23, 41].
To answer the first question, we take into account SOI
and compute the orbital photocurrents for various frequencies,
presenting the results as a function of band filling in Fig. 1(e).
By comparing the JLx
y
curves obtained for ̵hω = 2.25 eV with
and without SOI, we remarkably find little difference. This
signifies that orbital currents are much less sensitive to the
changes in the structure of the bands brought by SOI, than
to much more decisive effect of CFS and ORE, which deter-
mine the main features of the bands on a larger than SOI en-
ergy scale. Upon decreasing the frequency, not all transitions
across differently-polarized p-states can be activated, and thus
the width of the plateau becomes smaller while the finer fea-
tures of the p-states come into play. For example, a larger peak
in JLy
y
just above −1 eV at ̵hω = 0.75 eV can be explained by
transitions among p0 and p−1 states around that energy which
are not active at higher frequencies.
A more drastic effect of SOI lies in promoting the spin
physics within the Rashba realm: if without SOI each state
of the system is spin-degenerate, SOI splits this degeneracy
which makes the overall electronic structure spin-polarized
in k-space − a picture often referred to as the (spin) Rashba
effect [46].
As a result, the combined effect of ORE and
SOI unleashes the photocurrents of spin arising in response
to light [18]. To compare the orbital photocurrents to pho-
tocurrents of spin in BiAg2, we compute the latter, presenting
the results in Fig. 1(f). From comparison of the two types
of currents we conclude that although overall the magnitude
of the spin and orbital photocurrents is nominally similar, in
the robust region of band filling between 0 eV and +2 eV the
orbital currents are dominating by far, except for smaller fre-


4

(d)

(c)

(b)

(a)
(e)

(f)

+ℏ𝜔

-ℏ𝜔

+ℏ𝜔

-ℏ𝜔

+ℏ𝜔

-ℏ𝜔

+ℏ𝜔

-ℏ𝜔

p+1

p0

p-1

p+1

p0

p-1

FIG. 2. Microscopics of orbital photocurrents. (a), (b) Orbital (a) and spin (b) polarised band-structure of the BiAg2 surface with SOI,
with the states of distinct orbital symmetry marked as p±1, p0. (c), (d) Reciprocal space distribution of integrated (c) orbital and (d) spin
photocurrents. (e), (f) Band-resolved two-band contributions of (e) orbital and (f) spin photocurrents. In all cases the responses are calculated
for two different light frequencies of ̵hω = 1.00 eV (left panels in (c)-(f)) and ̵hω = 1.75 eV (right panels in (c)-(f)), over the constant energy
surface of the shifted Fermi level E′
F = EF + 0.9 eV. The presented component arises for light linearly polarised along the x-axis and flows
along the y-axis with orbital/spin polarisation along the x-axis. In (e), (f) the horizontal dotted red lines at ±1.0 eV (left panels) and at ±1.75 eV
(right panels) denote the energy of the laser pulse.

quencies of light. For example, for ̵hω = 2.0 eV the achieved
orbital photoconductivity value of σyLx
xx
≈ 3000 (̵h/2e) µA/V2

can be compared to a corresponding spin photoconductivity
magnitude of σySx
xx
≈ 500 (̵h/2e) µA/V2. One has to remark
here that, upon reducing the SOI strength by hand in the cal-
culations, the magnitude of the spin currents is respectively
reduced (not shown), vanishing in the limit of zero SOI. Given
that among Rashba materials BiAg2 is among the heaviest, at
lighter Rashba surfaces, such as that of oxygenated Cu [11],
the orbital character will dominate the nature of the photoin-
duced currents of angular momentum.

At this point we are ready to get a deeper insight into
the properties of orbital photocurrents by scrutinizing their
anatomy in reciprocal space. We start by looking at the distri-
bution of orbital and spin photocurrents in k-space, assuming
the shifted Fermi energy of 0.9 eV above the true Fermi level
– which falls right into the middle of the plateau region and
roughly corresponds to the position of p+1 band – and vary
the frequency from 1.0 to 1.75 eV, Fig. 2(c,d). In Fig. 2(c) and
Fig. 2(d) we present the reciprocal space distribution of the
orbital and spin photocurrents, JLx
y
and JSx
y , respectively. At
first glance, the distributions look quite similar in structure:
upon increasing the frequency, the regions of strong contribu-
tions move further away from the Γ point, which is a signature
of active electronic transitions moving closer to the Brillouin
zone boundaries and high-symmetry lines. Clearly, here the
distribution of the photocurrents of angular momentum probes
the shape of the valence band which launches the transitions
into the p+1 band. One remarkable feature sticks out, how-
ever: while at larger frequencies the sign of the orbital pho-

tocurrents is predominantly uniform throughout the Brillouin
zone, the photocurrents of spin exhibit a characteristic behav-
ior where the regions of positive and negative contributions
reflect each other in shape. Such an “onion skin” effect ex-
plains why, in contrast to orbital photocurrents, the spin pho-
tocurrents are strongly suppressed when integrated over the
k-space.

The origin of the key difference between two types of cur-
rents becomes clear after analyzing in detail the electronic
structure. In Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(b) we show the bands of
BiAg2 with SOI along MΓM′, colored by the magnitude of
the orbital (a) and spin (b) polarization of the states along
x. In comparison to non-relativistic bandstructure, presented
in Fig. 1(c), we clearly see a very prominent splitting of the
states arising as a result of very large SOI of the system. Re-
markably, we observe that while the SOI splitting keeps the
sign of the orbital polarization of the SOI-split states the same
along a given k-path, on the contrary, the spin-polarization of
the states alternates in sign. This effect, particularly clear for
p+1 and p−1 bands around +0.75 eV and −1 eV respectively,
stems from the fact that basic features of the orbital polariza-
tion are already set by the combined effect of ORE and CFS
onto which SOI is applied as a perturbation. For the case of
spin the situation is drastically different: an alternating spin
polarization is a direct consequence of the k-dependent SOI-
mediated coupling of electron’s spin to the surface gradient,
which is the essence of the spin Rashba effect. As a result,
the origin of the orbital photocurrents in ORE enhances their
magnitude, while photocurrents of spin are suppressed by the
spin Rashba effect – with suppression becoming stronger as


5

the splitting between the alternating-in-sign regions in k-space
becoming smaller with decreasing SOI.
The fingerprints of this behavior can be also clearly seen
in the band-resolved decomposition of the photocurrents. In
Fig. 2(e,f) we plot the contributions of so-called resonant two-
state transitions [47, 48] to orbital (e) and spin (f) photocur-
rents along the high symmetry lines: irrespective of light fre-
quency chosen (1.0 eV or 1.75 eV), an alternating-in-sign be-
havior is much more characteristic of a photocurrent of spin
than of its orbital counterpart, in accord to the qualitative be-
havior of state polarization. The latter plots also provide a
key to understanding the quantization-like features in orbital
photocurrents, discussed above. Important thing to realize is
that the narrow p+1-group of states stands energetically well-
separated from the rest of orbitally-polarized valence and con-
duction bands, which is primarily the consequence of the crys-
tal field splitting at the ORE surface. The role of light with a
given frequency is then to launch electronic transitions among
the p+1 band and occupied states which are lower by about ̵hω
in energy, see Fig. 2(e,f). Respectively, changes in frequency
probe the structure of the valence p0- and p−1-states – an ef-
fect we speculated to take place above. On the other hand,
since the energetics of electronic transitions is already set by
the magnitude of CFS and light frequency, the variation of
band filling within a certain interval plays only a minor role,
which gives rise to a robust plateau in the orbital photocurrent.
Note that quasi-quantization plateaus in orbital photocurrent
have little to do with the presence of a global band gap in the
spectrum apparent in Fig. 2, since the robust behavior emerges
already in non-relativistic limit where the system is manifestly
metallic.
Discussion. Given the observed properties of orbital pho-
tocurrents, it is tempting to imagine what impact they could
have in optical magnetism. First of all, the role of orbital
photocurrents for demagnetization properties has to be ex-
plored. In fact, first experiments seem to suggest that an in-
teraction of magnetization with laser pulses may give rise to
orbital currents [49] which can even exhibit a long-range na-
ture [50]. We thus speculate that orbital photocurrents may in-
teract with magnetic properties in an unexpected way. For ex-
ample, would it be feasible to exploit orbital photocurrents for
exerting sizeable optical torques on the magnetization which
take place on the femtosecond timescale? This may prove
indispensable in e.g. all-optical antiferromagnetic switching
schemes which do not rely on intrinsically slower demagne-
tization processes. The non-relativistic nature of orbital pho-
tocurrents would, on the other hand, open a whole new palette
of opportunities associated with material realization of optical
phenomena, traditionally escaping the search as generators of
sizeable spin-based processes. At the same time, the origin of
orbital photocurrents in the crystal structure and key features
of chemical composition would allow for a reliable and robust
control of opto-orbital properties, promoting new possibilities
in our struggle to master light-matter interaction.
Acknowledgements.
This work was supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research

Foundation) − TRR 173/2 − 268565370 (project A11), TRR
288 – 422213477 (project B06), and the Sino-German re-
search project DISTOMAT (MO 1731/10-1).
This project
has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 861300.
We also
gratefully acknowledge the J¨ulich Supercomputing Centre
and RWTH Aachen University for providing computational
resources under projects jiff40 and jara0062.

∗ t.adamantopoulos@fz-juelich.de

[1] B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, and S.-C. Zhang, Orbitronics:
The Intrinsic Orbital Current in p-Doped Silicon, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 95, 066601 (2005).

[2] T. Tanaka, H. Kontani, M. Naito, T. Naito, D. S. Hirashima,
K. Yamada, and J. Inoue, Intrinsic spin Hall effect and orbital
Hall effect in 4d and 5d transition metals, Phys. Rev. B 77,
165117 (2008).

[3] H. Kontani, T. Tanaka, D. S. Hirashima, K. Yamada, and J. In-
oue, Giant Orbital Hall Effect in Transition Metals: Origin of
Large Spin and Anomalous Hall Effects, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102,
016601 (2009).

[4] D. Go, D. Jo, C. Kim, and H.-W. Lee, Intrinsic Spin and Orbital
Hall Effects from Orbital Texture, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 086602
(2018).

[5] D. Jo, D. Go, and H.-W. Lee, Gigantic intrinsic orbital Hall
effects in weakly spin-orbit coupled metals, Phys. Rev. B 98,
214405 (2018).

[6] D. Go, D. Jo, H.-W. Lee, M. Kl¨aui, and Y. Mokrousov, Or-
bitronics: Orbital currents in solids, Europhysics Letters 135,
37001 (2021).

[7] S. R. Park, C. H. Kim, J. Yu, J. H. Han, and C. Kim, Orbital-
Angular-Momentum Based Origin of Rashba-Type Surface
Band Splitting, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 156803 (2011).

[8] J.-H. Park, C. H. Kim, J.-W. Rhim, and J. H. Han, Orbital
Rashba effect and its detection by circular dichroism angle-
resolved photoemission spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B 85, 195401
(2012).

[9] J.-H. Park, C. H. Kim, H.-W. Lee, and J. H. Han, Orbital chiral-
ity and Rashba interaction in magnetic bands, Phys. Rev. B 87,
041301 (2013).

[10] D. Go, J.-P. Hanke, P. M. Buhl, F. Freimuth, G. Bihlmayer, H.-
W. Lee, Y. Mokrousov, and S. Bl¨ugel, Toward surface orbitron-
ics: giant orbital magnetism from the orbital Rashba effect at
the surface of sp-metals, Scientific Reports 7, 46742 (2017).

[11] D. Go, D. Jo, T. Gao, K. Ando, S. Bl¨ugel, H.-W. Lee, and
Y. Mokrousov, Orbital Rashba effect in a surface-oxidized Cu
film, Phys. Rev. B 103, L121113 (2021).

[12] D. Go, F. Freimuth, J.-P. Hanke, F. Xue, O. Gomonay, K.-J.
Lee, S. Bl¨ugel, P. M. Haney, H.-W. Lee, and Y. Mokrousov,
Theory of current-induced angular momentum transfer dynam-
ics in spin-orbit coupled systems, Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 033401
(2020).

[13] D. Go and H.-W. Lee, Orbital torque: Torque generation by
orbital current injection, Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 013177 (2020).

[14] T. Seifert, S. Jaiswal, U. Martens, J. Hannegan, L. Braun,
P. Maldonado, F. Freimuth, A. Kronenberg, J. Henrizi, I. Radu,
E. Beaurepaire, Y. Mokrousov, P. M. Oppeneer, M. Jour-
dan, G. Jakob, D. Turchinovich, L. M. Hayden, M. Wolf,


6

M. M¨unzenberg, M. Kl¨aui, and T. Kampfrath, Efficient metallic
spintronic emitters of ultrabroadband terahertz radiation, Na-
ture Photonics 10, 483 (2016).

[15] E. T. Papaioannou and R. Beigang, THz spintronic emitters: a
review on achievements and future challenges: , Nanophotonics
10, 1243 (2021).

[16] E. Y. Sherman, A. Najmaie, and J. E. Sipe, Spin cur-
rent
injection
by
intersubband
transitions
in
quantum
wells,
Applied
Physics
Letters
86,
122103
(2005),

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1882747.

[17] J. Yin and H. Peng, Asymmetry allows photocurrent in intrinsic
graphene, Nature Nanotechnology 14, 105 (2019).

[18] F. Freimuth, S. Bl¨ugel, and Y. Mokrousov, Charge and spin
photocurrents in the Rashba model, Phys. Rev. B 103, 075428
(2021);
F. Freimuth, S. Bl¨ugel, and Y. Mokrousov, Laser-
induced currents of charge and spin in the Rashba model
(2017), arXiv:1710.10480 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

[19] H. Xu, H. Wang, J. Zhou, and J. Li, Pure spin photocurrent
in non-centrosymmetric crystals: bulk spin photovoltaic effect,
Nature Communications 12, 4330 (2021).

[20] R.-C. Xiao, D.-F. Shao, Y.-H. Li, and H. Jiang, Spin photogal-
vanic effect in two-dimensional collinear antiferromagnets, npj
Quantum Materials 6, 35 (2021).

[21] R. Fei, W. Song, L. Pusey-Nazzaro, and L. Yang, PT-
Symmetry-Enabled Spin Circular Photogalvanic Effect in Anti-
ferromagnetic Insulators, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 207402 (2021).

[22] X. Mu, Y. Pan, and J. Zhou, Pure bulk orbital and spin pho-
tocurrent in two-dimensional ferroelectric materials, npj Com-
putational Materials 7, 61 (2021).

[23] M. Merte, F. Freimuth, T. Adamantopoulos, D. Go, T. G. Saun-
derson, M. Kl¨aui, L. Plucinski, O. Gomonay, S. Bl¨ugel, and
Y. Mokrousov, Photocurrents of charge and spin in monolayer
Fe3GeTe2, Phys. Rev. B 104, L220405 (2021).

[24] S. Hayami, M. Yatsushiro, and H. Kusunose, Nonlinear spin
Hall effect in PT -symmetric collinear magnets, Phys. Rev. B
106, 024405 (2022).

[25] M. Battiato, G. Barbalinardo, and P. M. Oppeneer, Quantum
theory of the inverse Faraday effect, Phys. Rev. B 89, 014413
(2014).

[26] M. Berritta, R. Mondal, K. Carva, and P. M. Oppeneer, Ab Ini-
tio Theory of Coherent Laser-Induced Magnetization in Metals,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 137203 (2016).

[27] J. Zhou, Photo-magnetization in two-dimensional sliding ferro-
electrics, npj 2D Materials and Applications 6, 15 (2022).

[28] T. Satoh, R. Iida, T. Higuchi, Y. Fujii, A. Koreeda, H. Ueda,
T. Shimura, K. Kuroda, V. I. Butrim, and B. A. Ivanov, Exci-
tation of coupled spin–orbit dynamics in cobalt oxide by fem-
tosecond laser pulses, Nature Communications 8, 638 (2017).

[29] M. Matthiesen, J. R. Hortensius, S. Ma˜nas Valero, I. Kapon,
D. Dumcenco, E. Giannini, M. ˇSiˇskins, B. A. Ivanov, H. S. J.
van der Zant, E. Coronado, A. B. Kuzmenko, D. Afanasiev, and
A. D. Caviglia, Controlling Magnetism with Light in a Zero
Orbital Angular Momentum Antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. Lett.
130, 076702 (2023).

[30] M. J. Grzybowski, C. F. Schippers, O. Gomonay, K. Rubi, M. E.
Bal, U. Zeitler, A. Kozioł-Rachwał, M. Szpytma, W. Janus,
B. Kurowska, S. Kret, M. Gryglas-Borysiewicz, B. Koopmans,
and H. J. M. Swagten, Antiferromagnetic hysteresis above the
spin-flop field, Phys. Rev. B 107, L060403 (2023).

[31] W. T¨ows, G. Stegmann, and G. M. Pastor, Spin and Or-
bital Symmetry Breakings Central to the Laser-Induced Ul-
trafast Demagnetization of Transition Metals, Symmetry 15,
10.3390/sym15020457 (2023).

[32] G. Stegmann, W. T¨ows, and G. M. Pastor, Ultrafast magnetiza-

tion and energy flow in the laser-induced dynamics of transition
metal compounds, Phys. Rev. B 107, 054410 (2023).

[33] F. Freimuth, S. Bl¨ugel, and Y. Mokrousov, Laser-induced
torques in metallic ferromagnets, Phys. Rev. B 94, 144432
(2016).

[34] L. Petersen and P. Hedeg˚ard, A simple tight-binding model of
spin–orbit splitting of sp-derived surface states, Surface Science
459, 49 (2000).

[35] B. Kim, C. H. Kim, P. Kim, W. Jung, Y. Kim, Y. Koh, M. Arita,
K. Shimada, H. Namatame, M. Taniguchi, J. Yu, and C. Kim,
Spin and orbital angular momentum structure of Cu(111) and
Au(111) surface states, Phys. Rev. B 85, 195402 (2012).

[36] J. Hong, J.-W. Rhim, C. Kim, S. Ryong Park, and J. Hoon Shim,
Quantitative analysis on electric dipole energy in Rashba band
splitting, Scientific Reports 5, 13488 (2015).

[37] C. R. Ast, J. Henk, A. Ernst, L. Moreschini, M. C. Falub,
D. Pacil´e, P. Bruno, K. Kern, and M. Grioni, Giant Spin Split-
ting through Surface Alloying, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 186807
(2007).

[38] C. Carbone, P. Moras, P. M. Sheverdyaeva, D. Pacil´e, M. Pa-
pagno, L. Ferrari, D. Topwal, E. Vescovo, G. Bihlmayer,
F. Freimuth, Y. Mokrousov, and S. Bl¨ugel, Asymmetric band
gaps in a Rashba film system, Phys. Rev. B 93, 125409 (2016).

[39] www.flapw.de.
[40] G. Pizzi,
V. Vitale,
R. Arita,
S. Bl¨ugel,
F. Freimuth,
G. G´eranton, M. Gibertini, D. Gresch, C. Johnson, T. Koret-
sune, J. Iba˜nez-Azpiroz, H. Lee, J.-M. Lihm, D. Marchand,
A. Marrazzo, Y. Mokrousov, J. I. Mustafa, Y. Nohara, Y. No-
mura, L. Paulatto, S. Ponc´e, T. Ponweiser, J. Qiao, F. Th¨ole,
S. S. Tsirkin, M. Wierzbowska, N. Marzari, D. Vanderbilt,
I. Souza, A. A. Mostofi, and J. R. Yates, Wannier90 as a com-
munity code: new features and applications, Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 32, 165902 (2020).

[41] T. Adamantopoulos, M. Merte, D. Go, F. Freimuth, S. Bl¨ugel,
and Y. Mokrousov, Laser-induced charge and spin photocur-
rents at the BiAg2 surface: A first-principles benchmark, Phys.
Rev. Res. 4, 043046 (2022).

[42] L. M. Canonico, T. P. Cysne, A. Molina-Sanchez, R. B. Muniz,
and T. G. Rappoport, Orbital Hall insulating phase in transition
metal dichalcogenide monolayers, Phys. Rev. B 101, 161409
(2020).

[43] T. P. Cysne, M. Costa, L. M. Canonico, M. B. Nardelli, R. B.
Muniz, and T. G. Rappoport, Disentangling Orbital and Valley
Hall Effects in Bilayers of Transition Metal Dichalcogenides,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 056601 (2021).

[44] T. P. Cysne, S. Bhowal, G. Vignale, and T. G. Rappoport, Or-
bital Hall effect in bilayer transition metal dichalcogenides:
From the intra-atomic approximation to the Bloch states orbital
magnetic moment approach, Phys. Rev. B 105, 195421 (2022).

[45] M. Zeer, D. Go, J. P. Carbone, T. G. Saunderson, M. Redies,
M. Kl¨aui,
J. Ghabboun,
W. Wulfhekel,
S. Bl¨ugel, and
Y. Mokrousov, Spin and orbital transport in rare-earth dichalco-
genides: The case of EuS2, Phys. Rev. Mater. 6, 074004 (2022).

[46] Y. A. Bychkov and E. I. Rashba, Properties of a 2D electron gas
with lifted spectral degeneracy, JETP Lett. 39, 66 (1984).

[47] Y. Zhang, H. Ishizuka, J. van den Brink, C. Felser, B. Yan, and
N. Nagaosa, Photogalvanic effect in Weyl semimetals from first
principles, Phys. Rev. B 97, 241118 (2018).

[48] Y. Zhang, T. Holder, H. Ishizuka, F. de Juan, N. Nagaosa,
C. Felser, and B. Yan, Switchable magnetic bulk photovoltaic
effect in the two-dimensional magnet CrI3, Nature Communi-
cations 10, 3783 (2019).

[49] Y. Xu, F. Zhang, Y. Liu, R. Xu, Y. Jiang, H. Cheng, A. Fert, and
W. Zhao, Inverse Orbital Hall Effect Discovered from Light-


7

Induced Terahertz Emission (2022).

[50] T. S. Seifert, D. Go, H. Hayashi, R. Rouzegar, F. Freimuth,
K. Ando, Y. Mokrousov, and T. Kampfrath, Time-domain ob-

servation of ballistic orbital-angular-momentum currents with
giant relaxation length in tungsten (2023).


