 

 

1 

 

Free form three dimensional integrated circuits and wearables on a thread 
using organic eutectogel gated electrochemical transistors 

 

Rachel E. Owyeung1,2,3, Wenxin Zeng2,3, Matthew J. Panzer1, Sameer Sonkusale2,3† 

1Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Tufts University, 4 Colby Street, Medford 
massachusetts 02155, United States 

2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tufts University, 161 College Ave, Medford 
massachusetts 02155, United States 

3Nano Lab, Advanced Technology Laboratory, Tufts University, 200 Boston Ave. Suite 2600, Medford 
Massachusetts 02155, United States 

†Corresponding author Email:  sameer@ece.tufts.edu 

Abstract 

Existing flexible electronics are planar, nonbreathable, and easily damaged. In this work, authors 
introduce a new paradigm of free-form three-dimensional integrated circuits assembled on a single textile 
thread for ultimate flexibility.  Transistors are assembled as daisy chain on a thread and utilize deep 
eutectic solvent gels, or eutectogels as nonvolatile, breathable, and repairable dielectric for gating organic 
electrochemical transistor. The eutectogels provide stable transistor performance without the need for 
encapsulation, are air permeable to the skin, and make the Organic Eutectogel Gated Electrochemical 
Transistor (OEGET) a promising candidate for wearable electronics. Complex analog integrated circuits, 
such as single stage and multi-stage amplifiers can be realized on a single thread which can bend out of 
the plane of stretching for true three-dimensional flexibility. An all-thread based wearable that uses a 
thread-based strain sensor and thread-based integrated circuit for eye motion and respiration monitoring 
is also presented. 

 
Teaser 

A complex three-dimensional integrated circuit on single thread achieves ultimate flexibility and utilizes 
non-volatile breathable gels for transistor action. 

 
 
 


 

 

2 

 

INTRODUCTION 
 
The flexibility and performance of current bioelectronic interfaces is limited primarily due to the electronic 
circuits and interconnects used for sensor readout and computing. To increase flexibility, emerging 
wearable devices use thin-film inorganic transistors (e.g. thin silicon) and thin dielectrics with serpentine 
interconnects on ultrathin polymeric substrates.(1, 2) Others utilize transistors made with organic 
semiconductors, which are naturally soft and flexible and closely resemble the mechanical properties of 
the human skin.(3–5) Despite the selection of materials and processing to improve the flexibility of 
transistors and integrated circuits, a mismatch still exists between them and the underlying skin or tissue. 
This is because existing bioelectronics are limited to two-dimensional planar configurations, which 
restricts out-of-plane motion and makes it challenging to adapt to the complex, three-dimensional 
contours of the human body. Additionally, the use of materials that are not air-permeable (e.g., silicon) 
prevents natural skin breathing. Innovations on multiple fronts are needed to implement truly flexible and 
breathable bioelectronics. 

The first innovation addresses the issue of form factor to achieve better interface with any complex 3D 
body shape. Our solution is a one-dimensional thread or fiber to realize an entire integrated bioelectronic 
circuit, giving it arbitrary three-dimensional flexibility and stretchability. Compare this to an existing flexible 
electronics platform that can only flex or stretch in two dimensions as they  are bound to a planar 
substrate. The result is a more resilient and durable interface even under repeated body motion. Figure 1 
(a) compares the proposed thread-based bioelectronics with other possible candidates for wearable 
bioelectronics. There have been promising realizations of transistors on fibers and textiles(6), however 
they are either limited to single transistor demonstrations(6–11), or woven into textiles for planar 
implementations(6, 11–13) that are unable to achieve arbitrary 3D flexibility. Prior thread-based transistor 
realizations utilize photolithography, vapor deposition and/or high temperature cleanroom processes that 
are not compatible with low temperature polymeric or natural materials such as threads. Moreover, none 
of the prior implementations have explored free-form 3D realizations of thread-based integrated circuits. 
The second innovation addresses the issue of scalable manufacturing of transistors, sensors and circuits 
suitable for the curvilinear and/or fibrous nature of  the thread, and doing so without cleanroom 
processing and instead relying on a combination of 3D stencil-based patterning, electroless gold plating 
and drop-casting. The new method also allows for high throughput realization of other circuit components 
such as interconnects and resistors in addition to transistors along a single thread for a truly flexible 3D 
integrated circuit. 

The third innovation pertains to the choice of materials and device configuration to realize transistor on 
thread to achieve both superior electronic performance (e.g., high transconductance), and flexibility, 
breathability, and long-term reliability. This is satisfied by utilizing deep eutectic solvent gels or 
eutectogels as nonvolatile, breathable, and repairable dielectric for the transistor, but also as breathable 
anchors for on-skin attachment. This allows the thread-based integrated circuit to flex and stretch both in 
and out of plane for three-dimensional flexibility as shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c). The eutectogel provides a 
nonvolatile electrolyte that allows for long-term device usage without the need for additional 
encapsulation, while the gel scaffold provides mechanical stability, eliminating the requirement for a 
separate substrate to support electronic devices. Compared to hydrogels, which are prone to dehydration, 
the nonvolatile nature of the eutectogel ensures stability in ambient conditions for several days or weeks. 
Additionally, experiments suggest excellent air and water vapor permeability, allowing the eutectogel to 
remain on the body without hindering underlying skin breathability, which is a crucial metric for any long-
term wearable device. Combining thread-based transistors and the resulting thread-based integrated 
circuit with potential thread-based sensors, can help realize a first of its kind all-thread-based wearable, 
which can conveniently curve and flex around complex body parts such as around the earlobe as shown 
in Figure 1(d) or around a finger as shown in Fig. 1(e) and (j).  The thread-based free-form integrated 
circuit are easily anchored on skin via eutectogels as shown in Fig. 1(k) and (l). Fig. 1(f) and (g) 
demonstrate how the geometrical freedom endowed by the thread could lead to coiled integrated circuits 


 

 

3 

 

that can also stretch or extend over 16-fold. Further, with simple application of heat, the eutectogels can 
be fused back together to repair a catastrophically broken device (Fig. 1(i-k)) vide infra.  

The fourth innovation lies in the nature of the transistor itself. It is based on a reimagined design of the 
popular organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) by employing eutectogels as an electrolyte gel for 
transistor gating.  OECT are a popular choice for bioelectronics due to  their biofriendly composition, ease 
of processing, and high transconductance.(14, 15) It utilizes doped conductive polymer such as poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), where PEDOT+ is volumetrically de-doped 
by the ions in the gate electrolyte, which is typically an aqueous solution of sodium chloride or similarly 
small salt, as a function of gate potential. While aqueous-based OECTs are highly effective for sensing in 
biological environments, their low volatility hinders their use in wearable bioelectronics. Additionally, 
without proper encapsulation, these devices are prone to leakage when subjected to deformation. 
Considering these challenges, researchers are exploring alternative electrolytes to aqueous solutions. 
One option is ionic liquid or ionic gel (ionogel) electrolytes, which exhibit non-volatility due to their high ion 
density. (16–18) However, ionic liquids are often toxic and costly, and require the addition of smaller ionic 
species such as sodium chloride for transistor action. (18) We choose deep eutectic solvents instead, 
which share many similarities with ionic liquids, including low volatility, adequate ionic conductivity, and 
chemical tunability. (19, 20) Unlike ionic liquids, deep eutectic solvents are typically composed of 
biofriendly and cost-effective components, making them a viable option for on-skin wearable 
bioelectronics. (20) The most used deep eutectic solvent consists of a hydrogen bond acceptor (HBA) 
quaternary ammonium salt and a hydrogen bond donor (HBD) such as glycerol, ethylene glycol, or urea. 
(19, 21–23) Interestingly, many of these hydrogen bond donors are also used in PEDOT: PSS 
formulations to enhance the conductivity in OECTs. (24, 25) The result is an Organic Eutectogel Gated 
Electrochemical Transistor or OEGET, as shown in Fig. 1(h) and (i).  OEGETs also show some highly 
unique and desirable properties.  For example, all-around electrostatic gating via gel electrolyte and long-
range polarizability (26) allows for limitless 3D device geometries. Another example is in Supplementary 
Information (SI) in Fig. S1 which shows a transistor as a mobius strip. Furthermore, with simple 
application of heat, the eutectogels can fuse back together if broken with no change in electronic or 
mechanical performance. This makes OEGET repairable at its mechanically weakest section where 
eutectogels touch the skin (as anchors), while also serving as the dielectric for all-around transistor 
gating. 

For the fifth innovation, we utilize OEGETs high transconductance for the realization of analog circuits, 
namely amplifiers. Current demonstrations using organic transistors have so far been limited to small-
scale digital integrated circuits and biosensors.(6, 10, 12, 27–30) There have only been a limited number 
of implementations of amplifiers (31, 32) and complex analog integrated circuits.(33). As a proof of 
concept, we realize multi-stage analog integrated circuits based on OEGETs on a single thread. 
Moreoover, for the first time, we also demonstrate an all-thread-based wearable that combines thread-
based sensors and integrated circuits for eye-motion tracking and respiration monitoring. The resultant 
all-thread-based integrated circuit and wearable meets our high bar for any bioelectronic device – that of 
flexibility, softness, compliance, breathability, and adaptability to complex 3D body geometry. (21) 

RESULTS 
 
Fabrication of Eutectogel and Eutectogel Gated Electrochemical Transistor (OEGET) 
The eutectogel uses a DES/H2O mixture as a nonvolatile electrolyte with a 1:2:1 molar ratio of choline 
chloride, ethylene glycol, and water, supported by 20 weight % gelatin. According to a previous report, 
this eutectogel exhibits superior mechanical and ionic properties compared to similar choline chloride-
based DES gelatin gels.(34) The tensile modulus was measured to be 26 kPa, with toughness of 68 
kJ/m3. The gel is stretchable up to 270%, and has an ionic conductivity of 5.2 mS/cm.(23)  Additionally, 
ethylene glycol is already present in many PEDOT:PSS formulations including ours, to induce 
conformational changes of PEDOT chains, which improves overall conductivity. (25, 35) The gelatin 


 

 

4 

 

scaffold is also essential for facile fabrication. The thermoreversible nature of the physical gelatin 
crosslinks facilitates encapsulation of the active channel following drop-casting of the gel precursor 
solution heated above 50℃ on it. Alternately, simply sewing the active channel thread through a pre-
molded eutectogel can also be performed. Both approaches provide a diversity of methods to realize 
highly unique transistor geometries and endow the bulk of the device with on-demand repairability with 
the application of heat (vide infra). 

The OEGET functions as a p-type depletion mode device, where it remains ON until a positive gate bias 
is applied, driving larger cations (choline+) from the eutectogel into the PEDOT:PSS active channel 
coated on the thread (Fig. 1(i)). The choline+ interacts with PSS-, reducing PEDOT+ to neutral PEDOT. 
This dedoping effectively decreases the conductivity of the channel, ultimately turning the device OFF at 
high enough bias. Unlike previous demonstrations of nonaqueous-gated OECTs (13), no additional ions 
are added, indicating that the bulky cation, choline, is sufficient to provide transistor action. This is the first 
report to demonstrate choline chloride operation of PEDOT:PSS OECTs, suggesting promise for driving 
OECTs with larger ions, such as for sensing larger ions or employing other nonvolatile electrolytes. 

Scalable fabrication of OEGET based integrated circuits on thread 
The active channel is formed on threads via a cleanroom-free, three-dimensional stencil-based 
pattering(36) as illustrated schematically in Fig. 2. First, Ecoflex stencil masks are fabricated via doctor 
blading (Fig. 2(a)). Then, monofilament polycaprolactone (PCL) threads (average diameter = 0.19±0.05 
mm) are sewn through a pre-stretched Ecoflex sheet (Fig. 2(c)), such that upon release of the strain 
applied to the Ecoflex sheet, a tight seal is created around the thread (Fig. 2(d)). The Ecoflex mask 
serves as a 3D shadow mask for deposition of a conductive coating. The threads embedded in the 
Ecoflex 3D shadow mask are first surface treated via air plasma (Fig. 2(e)), then silanized to attach 
amine-rich groups to the surface of the threads (see methods), as shown in Fig. 2(f). After, the 
thread/mask ensemble is immersed in a solution of negatively charged gold nanoparticles to act as a 
seed layer for gold deposition (Fig. 2(g)). The nanoparticles promote gold reduction on the threads, where 
they are seeded.(37) Lastly, the 3D-mask/threads ensemble is immersed in a gold salt solution with a 
reducing agent to electrolessly deposit gold all around the PCL threads (Fig. 2(h)). Following gold 
deposition, the resulting thread is pulled out of the mask. Tens to hundreds of active channel gaps can be 
made in a single batch (SI Fig. S2 (a)-(b)) The thickness of the mask correlates to the length of the 
resulting active channel (SI Fig. S3). Versus previous implementations of active channel gaps fabricated 
on threads that rely on application of conductive inks or sputtering,(36, 38) this approach is cleanroom 
free, high throughput, and produces uniform, conductive films. Thicker films of gold can be achieved by 
replenishing the gold salt and reducing agent. Through experimentation, we found that replacing this gold 
salt solution three times during the deposition process resulted in highly conductive gold PCL threads 
(see SI Fig. S4), 1.9 ± 0.1 Ω/cm. The average gap, L, between S/D is 0.59±.07 mm when an Ecoflex 
mask thickness of 0.5 mm is used. The width, W, is defined as the circumference of the PCL thread (πD), 
where D is the thread diameter, resulting in a W/L ratio of 1.02 ± 0.27 (N=7). The PCL threads can also 
be sewn as a single, continuous segment to create one thread with multiple gaps (SI Fig. S2(c-d)). These 
gaps can be subsequently filled with PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 2(i)) and encapsulated with eutectogel through 
drop casting of gel precursor solution (or sewing through a pre-formed eutectogel). Gating with a thread 
or fabric electrode realizes an OEGET, and without gating it realizes a resistor. 

Performance of fabricated OEGETs  
Fig. 3(a-b) illustrates the transfer and output characteristics, respectively, of a champion OEGET for an 
effective width/length ratio (W/L) of 1.2. A carbon fabric (or another conductive thread) is used to apply a 
gate potential. Some hysteresis, though minor, is observed, likely due to sluggish ion motion, as the 
hysteresis increases proportionally with sweep rate (see SI Fig. S5). The specific capacitance of the 
eutectogel as a function of frequency can be found in SI Fig. S6 along with transient current 
characteristics in SI Fig. S7 and S8. Within a 1V operation window, the ON/OFF ratio is 103 for the 
champion device, and 102 on average (N = 16). The electrical symbol of the OEGET, and its 
corresponding small signal model are shown in Fig. 3(c). Here, r0 is the small signal output impedance of 
OEGET around the biasing point and rL represents any gate leakage. For planar realizations of OECT or 


 

 

5 

 

OEGET, a transistor in saturation mode can be described by a simplified MOSFET equation accounting 
for volumetric capacitance: 

𝐼!" =

#$

%& 𝜇𝐶∗(𝑉( − 𝑉))%  
 
 
 
(1) 

Where µ is the charge carrier mobility, C* is the volumetric capacitance, VT is the threshold voltage, and d 
is the channel thickness. For 3D realizations such as ours, finding the channel thickness can be 
problematic. Instead, the volume of the active channel material, 𝜗, can be used for a more generalized 
representation of this equation (𝜗 = 𝑊𝑑𝐿): 

𝐼!" =

*

%&! 𝜇𝐶∗(𝑉( − 𝑉))%   
 
 
 
(2) 

Equation 2 indicates the transistor action is primarily dependent on the volume of active channel material 
and gap length. The volume of the active channel material when dried was 0.05 mm3, thus our 
geometrical equivalent to Wd/L is 140. The small signal output resistance around the biasing point, ro, is 
111 kΩ. Maximum transconductance, gm= 𝜕𝐼! 𝜕𝑉(
⁄
, for the champion device reached 16 mS and was 9±5 

mS on average (N = 16). A 100 mM sodium chloride-gated PEDOT:PSS showed gm = 2.7 mS for a similar 
W/L ratio and PEDOT:PSS thickness of 400 nm.(39) Since gm can be increased simply by increasing 
PEDOT:PSS thickness, it is common to report gm with respect to the active channel geometry (for planar 
devices = Wd/L). Again, for a geometry immune equation 2, we can report gmL2/ 𝜗, which is 0.11 mS/µm 
for our champion device. A helpful figure of merit when designing organic electrochemical transistors for 
circuits is the transconductance per drain current, or transconductance efficiency, at an intended biasing 
point. Our circuits are biased around VGS = 0 V (vide infra) to reduce voltages needed, and the average 
transconductance efficiency was 4.7±1.2 V-1 (N = 16).  

To showcase the mechanical flexibility of the Organic Electrochemical Transistors (OEGETs), we 
conducted transfer curve measurements on a single OEGET device at various bending radii, as illustrated 
in Fig. 3(d). We observed a minor reduction in the maximum current, indicating a slight change in the 
transistor's performance. Furthermore, the transconductance efficiency at VGS = 0 V was measured as a 
function of the bending radius (Fig. 3(e)), revealing a slight alteration in transistor performance at lower 
bending radii, which persisted even up to a bending radius of 6 mm. 

To realize integrated circuitsm with multiple transistors, it is necessary to fabricate transistors with various 
aspect ratios determined by the transistor's effective width, channel length, and the amount of 
PEDOT:PSS, i.e., ϑ/L2 or Wd/L. For creating a few discrete transistors, we can vary the thickness of the 
Ecoflex stencil to obtain transistors with different channel lengths, or use threads of different widths. 
However, this approach may not be feasible for realizing integrated circuits where transistors of varying 
aspect ratios need to be fabricated on a single thread. In such cases, we can utilize a standard approach 
employed in silicon IC design, using series and parallel connections of unit transistors, which is typically a 
transistor with smallest dimension. For planar devices, when N unit transistors, each with an effective 
width of Wu and length of Lu are connected in series with shared gate dielectric and a single gate input, 
we can approximate his to be an effective transistor of width Wu and length NLu. On the other hand, when 
connected in parallel with all drains shorted together and source connections shorted together, with 
shared dielectric and a single gate input, twe can approximate this to be a transistor with effective width 
NWu and length Lu.  

For a proof-of-concept demonstration, we fabricated two OEGETs named T1 and T2, and their transfer 
curves are shown in Fig. 4(a). When connected in series with shared eutectogel and a single gate input, 
the resulting transfer curve has a reduced current magnitude (Fig. 4(b)). The estimated IDS (series) at VGS 
= -0.5 V differs from the experimental results by 10%. Conversely, when T1 and T2 are connected in 
parallel with shared dielectric and a single gate input, the resulting transfer curve has increased current 
magnitude (Fig. 4(c)). The estimated IDS (parallel) at VGS = -0.5 V differs from the experimental results by 
only 7%. The difference between theoretical and experimental values may be due to a small gate leakage 
current, resulting in a small IR voltage drop across the gate connections. This simple proof-of-concept 


 

 

6 

 

can be extended to any combination of series and parallel realizations for realizing any arbitrary effective 
width-to-length ratios to aid in circuit design. Fig. 4(d) shows an actual device of a 5 series connected 
transistors sharing the same gel dielectric and gate,  for an effective aspect ratio of Wu/5Lu.  

Repairability and Breathability of Eutectogel and OEGETs 
The eutectogels exhibit mechanical flexibility due to the dynamic interactions between gelatin triple 
helices and nonhelical interchain hydrogen bonding.(23) These interactions are thermoreversible, making 
the eutectogels easily repairable by the simple application of heat. The healing feature is particularly 
important for wearable bioelectronic applications, where devices are often subjected to frequent 
mechanical contact, motion, and strain. Even without heat, the capacitive functionality of the gel in 
OEGETs can be restored simply by physically reconnecting the broken pieces of the gel. This concept is 
demonstrated in Fig. 5(a), which shows the capacitance of a eutectogel during a catastrophic breaking 
(i.e., a cut in half) indicated by event “1.” At event “2,” the two ends of the gel are placed in physical 
contact with each other, immediately restoring most of the capacitance. At event “3,” the broken interface 
is gently heated using an external heat gun to initiate the mechanical repair. Photographs of the 
corresponding eutectogels during the three events are shown in Fig. 5(a) insets. The minor difference in 
capacitance after event “3” versus the initial capacitance is due to the heat gun causing a change in the 
cross-sectional area by melting the bulk gel during the experiment. 

To study the mechanical repairability further, we measured the series resistance of the eutectogels while 
stretching the gel until it breaks (Fig. 5(b)). The gel can be stretched to around 240% before breaking. 
The gel is then repaired by external application of heat (either via a heat source directly or by applying a 
small amount of preheated gel solution) to the broken interface, and the two ends of the gel are pressed 
back together, where it is left to cool (for 3 hours). Once fully cooled, we perform the same test to observe 
how the gel behaves mechanically. The repaired gel breaks at 245% strain. The similarity in the strain-to-
break percentage indicates that the gel network has been successfully repaired. Note that the healing 
process was performed at room temperature and can be accelerated by chilling the gel. Furthermore, Fig. 
5(e-g) showcases the catastrophic breaking and successful repairing of a “5-series connected transistor” 
shown initially in Fig. 4(d). 

One also needs to monitor the longitudinal performance of a chronic wearable bioelectronic platform over 
multiple days. One major advantage of our use of eutectogel is its low volatility, due to attractive 
interactions between the HBA and the HBDs. As a result, OEGETs will not evaporate like aqueous 
systems when left exposed to ambient conditions. To further examine the benefits of low volatility 
electrolytes, we created a hydrogel equivalent of our eutectogels for comparison. This hydrogel had the 
same concentration of choline chloride and gelatin scaffold as the eutectogel (4 M and 20 wt.%, 
respectively). The photographs of the two equivalent gels (Fig. 5(h)) show that the hydrogel has a 
significant volume reduction compared to the eutectogels over time. The hydrogel's volume decreased by 
57% after 24 hours and continued to shrink to a volume loss of 75% after 72 hours, whereas there was no 
detectable volume change for the eutectogels.  

We fabricated two separate devices, one with hydrogel gating (Fig. 5(c)) and the other with eutectogel 
gating (Fig. 5(d)), and recorded transfer and output curves for each over the next few days. Between 
measurements, the devices were kept at ambient laboratory conditions (22-23℃ and 21-23% RH). From 
the transfer curves shown in Fig. 5(c-d), it is evident that there is a substantial decline in the device 
performance after 24 hours for the hydrogel gated device (94% change in gm within a single day), 
whereas the eutectogels gated transistor maintains comparable performance over seven days (with the 
maximum gm exhibiting only a 12% change after seven days). After a week, the device performance 
deteriorates; however, the ON current is still higher than the value the hydrogel device achieved after 24 
hours (gm of OEGET after 37 days was 0.28 mS, gm of hydrogel OECT after 1 day was 0.15 mS). 

It is worth noting that the PEDOT:PSS used in all experiments did not have any crosslinker, such as (3-
glycidyloxypropyl) trimethoxysilane (GOPS), to enhance the inherent stability of PEDOT:PSS itself. 
Moreover, the PEDOT:PSS was in contact with the electrolyte continuously for all measurements. Any 


 

 

7 

 

minor decrease in device performance is likely due to the instability of PEDOT:PSS in ambient conditions, 
rather than the eutectogel itself.(25)  

To assess long-term wearable comfort on the skin, another important metric is air/vapor permeability. We 
conducted water vapor permeability studies, and the results are depicted in Fig. 5(i). We placed known 
amounts of DI water in vials without a lid (Open (Control)), with a polyethylene terephthalate (PET 
(Control)) lid, and with a eutectogel lid (~1 mm thick) to assess whether the gel inhibited water vapor from 
escaping the vial. The total mass of each vial was weighed for 7 days, and the mass change from the 
initial water weight is plotted in Fig 5(i). As expected, the open vial continuously lost water over the 7 
days, and the PET sheet sealed the vial, preventing any measurable amount of water from leaving the 
container. The eutectogel lid performed similarly to the open container, indicating that it has excellent 
water vapor permeability. Thus, it will enable the skin to breathe naturally even when covering large 
areas.(40)  Moreover, we conducted cell viability studies with the eutectogel to examine its cytotoxicity. 
We observed a negligible reduction in cell viability for the wells treated with gels up to 10 mg/mL, 
indicating that the gels are biocompatible when used at a concentration below 10 mg/mL. This value is 
five times higher than the final concentrations used for work on capacitive ionic skin gel sensors, which 
only showed concentrations up to 2 mg/mL.(41)  

OEGET Integrated circuits on thread 
The high transconductance of OEGETs and the ability to realize multiple transistors on a single thread 
lends itself to a new paradigm of analog integrated circuits on a single thread. As a first demonstration, an 
OEGET is implemented into a common source amplifier with a load resistor RD all implemented on a 
single thread (Fig. 6(a)). Three active channels are fabricated using the cleanroom free 3D shadow mask 
approach followed by gold deposition and drop-casting with PEDOT:PSS solution as discussed earlier. 
Only one channel is further coated with the eutectogel and a gate fabric is added to apply input, thus 
creating a single OEGET. The gate eutectogel also serves as a breathable anchor for skin attachment. 
The two remaining PEDOT:PSS channels serve as resistors in series for a combined load resistance for 
the amplifier. The gain of a single stage common source amplifier shown in Fig. 6(b) schematic is given 
by -gm (RD || r0), where gm is the small signal transconductance, and r0 is the small signal output 
impedance of the OEGET around the biasing point (see Fig. 3(c)). To maximize gm while keeping ID small, 
the DC bias at gate, Vin (or VGS) is chosen around 0 V. The values of RD and VDD are chosen such that the 
OEGET operates in the saturation region, yet VDS is not large enough to cause the breakdown of the 
OEGET which occurs >1.2 V. The resistance of the two PEDOT:PSS resistors in series was 2.19 kΩ total. 
Here, VDD was kept sufficiently low, at -1.5 V. The theoretical gain for this schematic was calculated to be 
3.28 V/V, which matches well with experimental values for gain, at 3.14 V/V (shown in Fig. 6(d)). To 
increase gain, VDD and RD, or the overall width of the transistor can be increased. This is easily achieved 
by using parallel connection of multiple active transistor channels, as described earlier. This gain is 
dependent on frequency as shown in Fig. 6(e). The dominant contributor to limited frequency bandwidth 
is the large time constant at the gate due to the large electrolytic double layer capacitance and the ionic 
resistance through the eutectogel. To trade off gain against reasonable supply voltage, VDD was set to -
8.8 V, which resulted in a gain of 14 V/V at 500 mHz. Unity gain bandwidth occurs around 15 Hz, with a 
gain of 20 V/V at the lowest frequency teste of , 50 mHz. 
 
To demonstrate a more complex thread-based integrated circuit using OEGETs, we implement a two-
stage cascade amplifier, shown schematically in Fig. 6(c). Note that a single thread can be patterned to 
realize the entire analog integrated circuit by creating 6 gaps using the 3d shadow mask patterning, and 
drop-casting PEDOT:PSS on all of them. Eutectogel encapsulation and voltage gating is performed on 
two of the six channels to realize transistors T1 and T2, while others are not gated to realize resistances 
RD1, R3, R4, RD2 in the following sequence T1 – RD1 – R4 – R3 – T2 – RD2. They are then interconnected for 
ground and power supply connections as shown. Eutectogels used to realize T1 and T2 also provide 
natural breathable anchors on the skin without the need for any substrate support. Note that both stages 
resemble a common source amplifier on their own, and they are capacitively coupled (C1) (externally) to 
only permit the AC signal to pass through to the second stage. In doing so, we can maintain the optimal 
biasing point (VGS = 0 V) for the second stage, which is set by a voltage divider through resistors R3 and 


 

 

8 

 

R4 (R3 = R4 = 110 kΩ). The resulting gain at 500 mHz is 34 V/V, versus 14 V/V from the single stage at 
the same frequency. This is the first multistage analog amplifier realized using organic electrochemical 
transistors for high gain.  
 
Thread-based transistors, render a new class of truly flexible, breathable, three-dimensional all-thread 
based wearable when integrated with a thread-based sensor. Towards an example of an all-thread-based 
wearable, we combine a thread based OEGET amplifier with a thread-based strain sensor. Strain sensors 
are made through conductive carbon ink coating of elastic threads further sealed with a thin layer of 
Ecoflex to protect the carbon coating.(42, 43) For a practical demonstration, we employ a thread-based 
resistive strain sensor (with gauge factor in the range of 1.2~2.1) to monitor body motion. The electrical 
schematic of the circuit is shown in Fig. 7(a). Here, VDD = ± 1.6V to keep voltage reasonably low for on-
body usage, while RD = 3.7 kΩ and R3 = R4 = 110 kΩ. An off-the-shelf potentiometer (not thread-based) is 
connected in series with the sensor, RS, which allows us to adjust sensor sensitivity. This ensures the 
gate of the OEGET is not biased at a point that would exceed the electrochemical stability window of the 
eutectogel. We first placed the sensor across the subject’s temple using eutectogels as on-skin 
breathable anchors to monitor eye motion due to blinking for example, as shown in Fig. 7(b-c). The entire 
platform is free-form (without substrate), and can easily wrap or conform to the 3D contour as shown. The 
muscle movement due to eye blinking is captured by the strain sensor, and amplified by the circuit, as 
plotted in Fig. 7(b).  

An all-thread based wearable combining an OEGET circuit and thread-based strain sensor can also be 
placed on the subject’s diaphragm to monitor breathing, in a manner similar to where eutectogel is the 
only supporting contact on skin, ensuring maximum breathability, as illustrated in Fig. 7(f). From the data 
shown in Fig. 7(d), inhale and exhale patterns can be distinguished, as well as different rates of 
breathing, as shown in Fig. 7(e). These modest demonstrations can easily be extended to monitor 
different body motions such as head motion(44) and biopotential monitoring in future work. 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
This paper presents a thread-based transistor and integrated circuit fabricated using a cleanroom free 
approach to realize an integrated circuits that can flex arbitrarily in three dimensions. Apart from the 
substrate-free thread-like form factor of the circuit platform, there are many other unique contributions. 

First this paper presents a unique organic electrochemical transistor (OECT) gated with a nonvolatile 
deep eutectic solvent gel namely eutectogel as a gate dielectric.  This is the first report to demonstrate 
choline chloride operation of PEDOT:PSS based OECT. This differs from prior work that utilized choline-
based electrolytes, which were predominantly electrostatically driven devices utilizing a counter-ion to 
choline for transistor action(45, 46) or were using choline-based ionic liquid as an additive to PEDOT:PSS 
in a role similar to ethylene glycol(13). Also unique and noteworthy is that gels made from DES also 
endows the resulting transistors with greater long-term stability compared to archetypical aqueous 
electrolytes since the electrolyte does not evaporate at room temperature conditions. Compared to other 
longitudinal studies (see SI Table S1), the device presented here is under constant contact with the 
eutectogel electrolyte and does not have a crosslinker in the PEDOT:PSS solution to improve 
PEDOT:PSS stability against degradation as is often employed in literature. Still, the device can last over 
a month in ambient conditions with minor performance degradation at the end of the month. This late term 
degradation is likely due to PEDOT:PSS exposure to small amounts of water continuously exposed 
throughout  the experiment. For future students where longitudinal device performance is paramount, the 
PEDOT:PSS solution could be crosslinked(47) to impede swelling from ambient moisture, and the PCL 
thread could be replaced with a another nonbiodegradable polymer or natural thread. 

As the eutectogel does not evaporate, there is no need for further encapsulation of the OEGETs, and 
they are even air-permeable. This characteristic allows for long-term on-body usage as the underlying 
skin can still breathe.  Moreover, in the proposed free-form realization, the eutectogels serve the dual 
purpose of providing minimalist on-skin anchors minimizing overall skin contact area compared to any 


 

 

9 

 

other flexible electronics platform. This feature reduces any potential adverse impacts on the skin. 
Additionally, cytotoxicity studies on eutectogels indicate that the resulting OEGET is biocompatible. To 
the best of our knowledge, this is the first organic electrochemical transistor capable of direct on-skin 
placement. While these results are promising, further skin patch tests may be necessary to observe the 
long-term effects (over months) of the eutectogel when worn on-body.  

The eutectogel is held together by noncovalent, thermoreversible gelatin interactions, which allows the 
device to be repaired by simple application of heat. Capacitive performance, paramount to OECT 
operation, can be restored by contact of broken gel pieces, and can further be mechanically restored by 
heating the broken interface and waiting for the gelatin interactions to reform upon cooling. Existing 
examples of self-healing properties (48, 49) have focused only on the active channel material, and are 
thus inadequate in by themselves. These prior approaches could employ the eutectogels’ 
thermoreversible property to realize a fully repairable transistor. 

The gelatin scaffold further provides leak-proof operation of the device, such that these can be molded 
onto the 3D contours of biological surfaces, for free-form transistors and three-dimensional integrated 
circuit geometries. This, combined with the thread-based active channel and resistive circuit elements 
enables realization of transistor shapes not possible (SI Fig. S1). Further, the thread and gel ensemble 
are flexible, and resulting OEGETs can be bent to a radius of 6 mm before losing substantial device 
performance.  

Moreover OEGET demonstrates excellent long term reliable performance. The OEGETs exhibit a 
maximum transconductance of 16 mS for the champion device, which is comparable to high performing 
planar OECTs (see SI Table S1), even with the use of a bulky cation, choline, rather than sodium to de-
dope PEDOT. The resulting OEGET-based single stage and multi-stage amplifiers achieve gains of 14 
V/V and 34 V/V for 500 mHz, respectively, which are among the highest reported gains for PEDOT:PSS-
based amplifiers on flexible, 3D substrates.(32) and greatly exceeds reported values when considering 
amplifier demonstrations on flexible substrates. (49–51) An important point to note is that this is achieved 
without truly optimizing the effective width or length of the transistor. To achieve higher gain, one could 
add multiple transistors in parallel connection for each stage and/or optimize the load resistance and 
power supply.  

Our results show transistors and circuits have a modest bandwidth performance, which is adequate for 
monitoring physical activity such as from respiration or eye movement.  One can reduce gel thickness to 
reduce the ionic resistance through the gel and thus the RC time constant at the gate. Moreover, one can 
utilize parallel connection of transistors to increase the transconductance and thus speed. Utilizing 
smaller channel length transistors by choosing a thin shadow mask during fabrication, is also beneficial 
as it increases the transconductance (inversely proportional to L2 for same volume 𝜗 of of the active 
organic semiconductor) and thus the frequency bandwidth. Also, since only p-type depletion mode 
transistor was demonstrated in this report, it can be extended to high mobility solution processable 
organic and inorganic semiconducting materials. 
 
The scalability afforded by stencil based patterning and dropcasting makes it possible to realize really 
complex analog and digital integrated circuits on threads with tens or hundreds of transistors and 
resistors. Beyond amplifiers, one could implement wireless transceiver circuits or implement advanced 
instrumentation circuitry using these transistors. The presented thread-based platform offers a unique 
combination of essential metrics for flexible bioelectronics – softness, compliance, breathability, 
repairability and adaptability to any 3D geometry.  When integrated with thread-based sensors, one can 
realize an all-thread based wearable that can adapt to any three-dimensional body contour to form 
reliable, breathable interfaces with human body for long term longitudinal monitoring. 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Materials 


 

 

10 

 

All materials were used as received without further purification. Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate (III) trihydrate 
(HAuCl4-3H2O), sodium citrate trihydrate, 3-aminopropyl-triethoxysilane (APTES), hydroxylamine 
hydrochloride, 
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) 
3.0-4.0% 
in 
H2O, 

dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (DBSA), gelatin from porcine skin (Type A, gel strength ~175g Bloom), and 
polycaprolactone (PCL) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without further purification. 
Ethylene glycol (99%, Acros Organics) and Choline chloride (ChCl) (JT Baker) were purchased from 
Fisher Scientific. ChCl was stored in a recirculating nitrogen-filled glovebox (O2, H2O < 0.1 ppm) to control 
water absorption from the ambient environment. Spectracarb 2225-Type 900 carbon fabric was 
purchased from Engineered Fibers Technology LLC. 

High throughput fabrication of active transistor threads 
Please see Fig. 2 for detailed schematics for fabrication of thread-based transistors. A 0.5 mm Ecoflex 
00-30 sheet is cast and doctor bladed to form a uniform film, and cured at 60°C. PCL threads were drawn 
from melt to a diameter of 0.19±0.05 mm.  

Colloidal gold was made by first heating a 2.5 x 10-4 M hydrogen tetrachloroaurate (III) trihydrate solution 
to boil (100 mL of DI). Then, 3 mL of a 1 wt % sodium citrate trihydrate aqueous solution was added, 
upon which the solution changed from pale yellow to dark purple. The solution was heated and stirred 
until the solution changed to a deep red color, and then stirred for an additional 30 min. The solution was 
kept at 4°C until use. The nanoparticles show a strong absorbance peak around 520 nm (surface 
plasmon band), observed by UV/VIS (Evolution 220 Thermo Fisher) (see SI Fig. S9). 

After silanization, the 3D shadow mask/thread ensemble was immersed in the colloidal gold solution and 
gently agitated on a shake plate for 25 minutes. Then the ensemble was gently rinsed with DI water 
before adding the electroless plating solution.  

The plating solution consisted of 1 mL of a 5 mM hydrogen tetrachloroaurate (III) trihydrate solution and 
50 µL of a 40 mM hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution, diluted with DI water to bring the final volume to 
5.5 mL. The 3D shadow mask/thread ensemble was again immersed and gently agitated on a shake 
plate for 20 minutes. The solution was replaced for a total of 3 coatings, each for 20 minutes to increase 
the thickness of gold coating (see SI Fig. S4) 

PEDOT:PSS solution of 6 vol % ethylene glycol and 0.2 vol % DBSA vortexed and 0.5 µL was dropcast 
onto the source/drain channel gap of the PCL thread and left to air dry. This corresponds to a volume of 
approximately 0.05 mm3 when dried. 

Eutectogel synthesis 
Eutectogels were prepared as described in a previous report.(23) Briefly, the DES/H2O mixture was first 
formed by mixing ChCl, EG, and deionized H2O in a 1:2:1 molar ratio and stirred vigorously, covered, at 
90°C for 2 h or until a clear, homogeneous solution was formed. Then to form the gel, gelatin was placed 
in a separate vial with approximately one fifth of the total DES/mixture volume to be added to “bloom” the 
gelatin for facile dissolution. The DES/mixture was heated to 80°C was added to the bloomed gelatin for a 
final 20 wt % gelatin solution. This solution was stirred at 80°C for 1 h or until a transparent solution was 
formed. The solution was then poured into molds and chilled at 4°C in a covered container for at least 24 
h. The solution could be reheated and recast as needed, or directly drop casted onto the active channel 
when heated. 

Electrical Characterization 
All transistor devices were tested using an Agilent 4156A semiconductor analyzer at room temperature 
and atmospheric pressure in ambient conditions. AC impedance spectra were measured using a 
VersaSTAT 3 Potentiostat with a built-in frequency response analyzer (Princeton Applied Research, Oak 
Ridge, TN). Circuit data was captured by an Agilent MSO6104A mixed signal oscilloscope. VDD was 
supplied by a Rigol DP1308A DC Power Supply, and Vin was generated by a Tektronix AFG 3022B 
arbitrary function generator.  To measure transient current characteristics as a function of gate voltage 


 

 

11 

 

pulses at 1Hz and 5Hz, a custom transimpedance amplifier made using an operational amplifier and 
resistor was used (Fig. S8). 

Cell Viability Studies 
Fibroblast 3T3 cells were seeded at 10k at 0.2 mL per well in 96-well plates 24 h before the experiment. 
The next day, cells were washed with a PBS buffer three times and incubated with the gels at a serial 
concentration of 1-20 mg/mL in cell culture media for 24 h. The cells were then completely washed off 
with a PBS buffer three times and 10% alamarBlue in cell culture media was added to each well (220 μL) 
and incubated further at 37°C for 2 h. Cell viability was then determined by measuring the fluorescence 
intensity at excitation wavelength 570 nm and emission wavelength 590 nm using a Biotek Synergy H4 
spectrophotometer. 

 
Acknowledgments 
 
The authors would like to thank Junfei Xia for optimizing the electroless gold plating approach and Riddha 
Das for performing cell viability studies. The authors would also like to thank Hojat Rezaei Nejad for some 
of the conceptual figure illustrations.  
 
Funding 
United States National Science Foundation DGE-1144591: REO,  MJP, SS  
United States National Science Foundation 1931978: REO, WZ, SS 
United States National Science Foundation 1935555: REO, SS,  
United States Department of Defense Congressionally Directed Peer Review Medical Research Program 
PRMRP W81XWH-21-2-0012: REO, SS  
United States Office of Naval Research DURIP N00014-20-1-2188: SS 
 
Author Contributions:  
Conceptualization of Eutectogel gated transistor: REO, MJP, SS 
Conceptualization of thread-based integrated circuits: SS, REO 
Conceptualization of thread-based wearable: SS, REO, WZ 
Design of Experiments: REO, WZ 
Investigation: REO, SS 
Visualization: REO, SS, WZ 
Supervision: SS, MJP 
Writing—original draft: REO, SS 
Writing—review & editing: REO, SS, MJP 
 
Competing Interest Statement: 
REO, MJP and SS have filed a patent application through the Tufts Technology Transfer Office. 
 
Data and Material Availability: 
All data are available in the main text or the supplementary materials. 
 
 
References 
1.  
K. J. Yu, Z. Yan, M. Han, J. A. Rogers, Inorganic semiconducting materials for flexible and 
stretchable electronics. npj Flexible Electronics 2017 1:1. 1, 1–14 (2017). 

2.  
T. R. Ray, J. Choi, A. J. Bandodkar, S. Krishnan, P. Gutruf, L. Tian, R. Ghaffari, J. A. Rogers, Bio-
integrated wearable systems: A comprehensive review. Chem Rev. 119, 5461–5533 (2019). 

3.  
T. Someya, Z. Bao, G. G. Malliaras, The rise of plastic bioelectronics. Nature. 540, 379–385 
(2016). 

4.  
J. Rivnay, R. M. Owens, G. G. Malliaras, The rise of organic bioelectronics. Chemistry of 
Materials. 26 (2014), pp. 679–685. 


 

 

12 

 

5.  
H. Yuk, B. Lu, X. Zhao, Hydrogel bioelectronics. Chem Soc Rev. 48 (2019), pp. 1642–1667. 

6.  
H. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, B. He, M. Chen, M. Qi, Y. Liu, J. Xin, L. Wei, Recent progress of 
fiber-based transistors: materials, structures and applications. Frontiers of Optoelectronics 2022 
15:1. 15, 1–16 (2022). 

7.  
H. M. Kim, H. W. Kang, D. K. Hwang, H. S. Lim, B.-K. Ju, J. A. Lim, Metal–Insulator–
Semiconductor Coaxial Microfibers Based on Self-Organization of Organic 
Semiconductor:Polymer Blend for Weavable, Fibriform Organic Field-Effect Transistors. Adv Funct 
Mater. 26, 2706–2714 (2016). 

8.  
J. W. Park, S. Kwon, J. H. Kwon, C. Y. Kim, K. C. Choi, Low-leakage fiber-based field-effect 
transistors with an Al2O3–MgO nanolaminate as gate insulator. ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 1, 
1400–1407 (2019). 

9.  
J. S. Heo, T. Kim, S. G. Ban, D. Kim, J. H. Lee, J. S. Jur, M. G. Kim, Y. H. Kim, Y. Hong, S. K. 
Park, Thread-like CMOS logic circuits enabled by reel-processed single-walled carbon nanotube 
transistors via selective doping. Adv. Mater. 29, 1701822 (2017). 

10.  
R. E. Owyeung, T. Terse-Thakoor, H. Rezaei Nejad, M. J. Panzer, S. R. Sonkusale, Highly 
Flexible Transistor Threads for All-Thread Based Integrated Circuits and Multiplexed Diagnostics. 
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 11, 31096–31104 (2019). 

11.  
L. Zhang, T. Andrew, L. Zhang, T. Andrew, Vapor-Coated Monofilament Fibers for Embroidered 
Electrochemical Transistor Arrays on Fabrics. Adv Electron Mater. 4, 1800271 (2018). 

12.  
Y. Yang, X. Wei, N. Zhang, J. Zheng, X. Chen, Q. Wen, X. Luo, C.-Y. Lee, X. Liu, X. Zhang, J. 
Chen, C. Tao, W. Zhang, X. Fan, A non-printed integrated-circuit textile for wireless theranostics. 
Nat Commun. 12, 4876 (2021). 

13.  
Y. J. Jo, S. Y. Kim, J. H. Hyun, B. Park, S. Choy, G. R. Koirala, T. il Kim, Fibrillary gelation and 
dedoping of PEDOT:PSS fibers for interdigitated organic electrochemical transistors and circuits. 
npj Flexible Electronics 2022 6:1. 6, 1–11 (2022). 

14.  
F. Torricelli, D. Z. Adrahtas, Z. Bao, M. Berggren, F. Biscarini, A. Bonfiglio, C. A. Bortolotti, C. D. 
Frisbie, E. Macchia, G. G. Malliaras, I. McCulloch, M. Moser, T.-Q. Nguyen, R. M. Owens, A. 
Salleo, A. Spanu, L. Torsi, Electrolyte-gated transistors for enhanced performance bioelectronics. 
Nature Reviews Methods Primers. 1, 1–24 (2021). 

15.  
J. Rivnay, S. Inal, A. Salleo, R. M. Owens, M. Berggren, G. G. Malliaras, Organic electrochemical 
transistors. Nature Reviews Materials 2018 3:2. 3, 1–14 (2018). 

16.  
Z. Yi, G. Natale, P. Kumar, E. Di Mauro, M. C. Heuzey, F. Soavi, I. I. Perepichka, S. K. Varshney, 
C. Santato, F. Cicoira, Ionic liquid-water mixtures and ion gels as electrolytes for organic 
electrochemical transistors. J Mater Chem C Mater. 3, 6549–6553 (2015). 

17.  
L. Mracek, S. Pretl, T. Syrovy, A. Hamacek, Ionic liquid as an electrolyte for organic 
electrochemical transistor. Proceedings of the International Spring Seminar on Electronics 
Technology. 2015-Septe, 11–15 (2015). 

18.  
V. Kaphle, S. Liu, C. M. Keum, B. Lüssem, Organic Electrochemical Transistors Based on Room 
Temperature Ionic Liquids: Performance and Stability. Physica Status Solidi (A) Applications and 
Materials Science. 215, 1–9 (2018). 

19.  
E. L. Smith, A. P. Abbott, K. S. Ryder, Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs) and Their Applications. 
Chem Rev. 114 (2014), pp. 11060–11082. 

20.  
L. C. Tomé, D. Mecerreyes, Emerging Ionic Soft Materials Based on Deep Eutectic Solvents. 
Journal of Physical Chemistry B. 124 (2020), pp. 8465–8478. 

21.  
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, H. L. Munro, R. K. Rasheed, V. Tambyrajah, Preparation of 
novel, moisture-stable, lewis-acidic ionic liquids containing quaternary ammonium salts with 
functional side chains. Chemical Communications. 1, 2010–2011 (2001). 

22.  
B. E. Gurkan, E. J. Maginn, E. B. Pentzer, Deep eutectic solvents: A new class of versatile liquids. 
Journal of Physical Chemistry B. 124 (2020), pp. 11313–11315. 

23.  
R. E. Owyeung, S. R. Sonkusale, M. J. Panzer, Influence of Hydrogen Bond Donor Identity and 
Intentional Water Addition on the Properties of Gelatin-Supported Deep Eutectic Solvent Gels. 
Journal of Physical Chemistry B. 124, 5986–5992 (2020). 

24.  
J. Y. Oh, S. Kim, H.-K. Baik, U. Jeong, J. Y. Oh, -K H Baik, S. Kim, U. Jeong, Conducting Polymer 
Dough for Deformable Electronics. Advanced Materials. 28, 4455–4461 (2016). 


 

 

13 

 

25.  
X. Fan, W. Nie, H. Tsai, N. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Cheng, R. Wen, L. Ma, F. Yan, Y. Xia, 
PEDOT:PSS for Flexible and Stretchable Electronics: Modifications, Strategies, and Applications. 
Advanced Science. 6 (2019), , doi:10.1002/advs.201900813. 

26.  
R. E. Owyeung, S. Sonkusale, M. J. Panzer, Opportunities for ionic liquid/ionogel gating of 
emerging transistor architectures. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B. 39, 011001 
(2021). 

27.  
M. Hamedi, R. Forchheimer, O. Inganäs, Towards woven logic from organic electronic fibres. Nat 
Mater. 6, 357–362 (2007). 

28.  
X. Qing, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Ding, W. Zhong, D. Wang, W. Wang, Q. Liu, K. Liu, M. Li, Z. Lu, 
Wearable fiber-based organic electrochemical transistors as a platform for highly sensitive 
dopamine monitoring. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 11, 13105–13113 (2019). 

29.  
Y. Wang, X. Qing, Q. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Q. Liu, K. Liu, W. Wang, M. Li, Z. Lu, Y. Chen, D. Wang, 
The woven fiber organic electrochemical transistors based on polypyrrole nanowires/reduced 
graphene oxide composites for glucose sensing. Biosens. Bioelectron. 95, 138–145 (2017). 

30.  
A. Yang, Y. Li, C. Yang, Y. Fu, N. Wang, L. Li, F. Yan, Fabric organic electrochemical transistors 
for biosensors. Adv. Mater. 30 (2018), doi:10.1002/adma.201800051. 

31.  
V. Venkatraman, J. T. Friedlein, A. Giovannitti, I. P. Maria, I. McCulloch, R. R. McLeod, J. Rivnay, 
V. Venkatraman, J. Rivnay, J. T. Friedlein, R. R. McLeod, A. Giovannitti, I. P. Maria, I. McCulloch, 
Subthreshold Operation of Organic Electrochemical Transistors for Biosignal Amplification. 
Advanced Science. 5, 1800453 (2018). 

32.  
M. Braendlein, T. Lonjaret, P. Leleux, J. M. Badier, G. G. Malliaras, Voltage Amplifier Based on 
Organic Electrochemical Transistor. Advanced Science. 4 (2017), doi:10.1002/advs.201600247. 

33.  
G. D. Spyropoulos, J. N. Gelinas, D. Khodagholy, Internal ion-gated organic electrochemical 
transistor: A building block for integrated bioelectronics. Sci Adv. 5, eaau7378 (2019). 

34.  
H. Qin, R. E. Owyeung, S. R. Sonkusale, M. J. Panzer, Highly stretchable and nonvolatile gelatin-
supported deep eutectic solvent gel electrolyte-based ionic skins for strain and pressure sensing. J 
Mater Chem C Mater. 7, 601–608 (2019). 

35.  
J. Ouyang, C.-W. Chu, F.-C. Chen, Q. Xu, Y. Yang, High-Conductivity Poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene):Poly(styrene sulfonate) Film and Its Application in Polymer 
Optoelectronic Devices. Adv Funct Mater. 15, 203–208 (2005). 

36.  
T. Kumar, R. E. Owyeung, S. R. Sonkusale, Rapid cleanroom-free fabrication of thread based 
transistors using three-dimensional stencil-based patterning. Flexible and Printed Electronics. 6, 
15007 (2021). 

37.  
K. C. Grabar, M. B. Hommer, M. J. Natan, R. G. Freeman, Preparation and Characterization of Au 
Colloid Monolayers. Anal Chem. 67, 735–743 (1995). 

38.  
R. E. Owyeung, T. Terse-Thakoor, H. Rezaei Nejad, M. J. Panzer, S. R. Sonkusale, Highly 
Flexible Transistor Threads for All-Thread Based Integrated Circuits and Multiplexed Diagnostics. 
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 11, 31096–31104 (2019). 

39.  
D. Khodagholy, J. Rivnay, M. Sessolo, M. Gurfinkel, P. Leleux, L. H. Jimison, E. Stavrinidou, T. 
Herve, S. Sanaur, R. M. Owens, G. G. Malliaras, ARTICLE High transconductance organic 
electrochemical transistors (2013), doi:10.1038/ncomms3133. 

40.  
A. Miyamoto, S. Lee, N. F. Cooray, S. Lee, M. Mori, N. Matsuhisa, H. Jin, L. Yoda, T. Yokota, A. 
Itoh, M. Sekino, H. Kawasaki, T. Ebihara, M. Amagai, T. Someya, Inflammation-free, gas-
permeable, lightweight, stretchable on-skin electronics with nanomeshes. Nature Nanotechnology 
2017 12:9. 12, 907–913 (2017). 

41.  
W. Zhang, B. Wu, S. Sun, P. Wu, Skin-like mechanoresponsive self-healing ionic elastomer from 
supramolecular zwitterionic network. Nat Commun. 12 (2021), doi:10.1038/s41467-021-24382-4. 

42.  
F. Alaimo, H. R. Nejad, A. Sadeqi, D. Demarchi, S. Sonkusale, Wearable Flexible Touch Interface 
Using Smart Threads. Proceedings of IEEE Sensors. 2018-October (2018), 
doi:10.1109/ICSENS.2018.8589590. 

43.  
P. Mostafalu, M. Akbari, K. A. Alberti, Q. Xu, A. Khademhosseini, S. R. Sonkusale, A toolkit of 
thread-based microfluidics, sensors, and electronics for 3D tissue embedding for medical 
diagnostics. Microsyst Nanoeng. 2, 1 (2016). 


 

 

14 

 

44.  
Y. Jiang, A. Sadeqi, E. L. Miller, S. Sonkusale, Head motion classification using thread-based 
sensor and machine learning algorithm. Sci Rep. 11 (2021), doi:10.1038/s41598-021-81284-7. 

45.  
Y. J. Jo, H. Kim, J. Ok, Y. J. Shin, J. H. Shin, T. H. Kim, Y. Jung, T. il Kim, Biocompatible and 
Biodegradable Organic Transistors Using a Solid-State Electrolyte Incorporated with Choline-
Based Ionic Liquid and Polysaccharide. Adv Funct Mater. 30, 1909707 (2020). 

46.  
F. Pettersson, T. Remonen, D. Adekanye, Y. Zhang, C. E. Wilén, R. Österbacka, Environmentally 
Friendly Transistors and Circuits on Paper. ChemPhysChem. 16, 1286–1294 (2015). 

47.  
M. ElMahmoudy, S. Inal, A. Charrier, I. Uguz, G. G. Malliaras, S. Sanaur, Tailoring the 
Electrochemical and Mechanical Properties of PEDOT:PSS Films for Bioelectronics. Macromol 
Mater Eng. 302, 1600497 (2017). 

48.  
X. Su, X. Wu, S. Chen, A. Maashaa Nedumaran, M. Stephen, K. Hou, B. Czarny, W. Lin Leong, X. 
Su, X. Wu, S. Chen, M. Stephen, K. Hou, W. L. Leong, A. Nedumaran, B. Czarny, A Highly 
Conducting Polymer for Self-Healable, Printable and Stretchable Organic Electrochemical 
Transistor Arrays and Near Hysteresis-Free Soft Tactile Sensors. Advanced Materials (2022), 
doi:10.1002/adma.202200682. 

49.  
J. Ko, X. Wu, A. Surendran, B. T. Muhammad, W. L. Leong, Self-Healable Organic 
Electrochemical Transistor with High Transconductance, Fast Response, and Long-Term Stability. 
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 12, 33979–33988 (2020). 

50.  
Y. J. Jo, K. Y. Kwon, Z. U. Khan, X. Crispin, T. il Kim, Gelatin Hydrogel-Based Organic 
Electrochemical Transistors and Their Integrated Logic Circuits. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 10, 
39083–39090 (2018). 

51.  
J. E. Tyrrell, K. Petkos, E. M. Drakakis, M. G. Boutelle, A. J. Campbell, Organic Electrochemical 
Transistor Common-Source Amplifier for Electrophysiological Measurements. Adv Funct Mater. 31 
(2021), doi:10.1002/adfm.202103385. 

  
 

Figures and Tables 

 
 


 

 

15 

 

 

 

Figure 1. Conceptual overview and photographs of OEGETs. a. Comparison of free-form thread-
based integrated circuits platform with existing platforms based on printed circuit board and flexible 
electronics technology. b. Demonstration of a single thread integrated circuit (thread IC) comprised of 
eutectogel gated OECTs (OEGETs) on a skin model. The proposed platform enables the thread IC to be 
folded out of plane of the human body, such that when the underlying skin is c. stretched, the thread IC 
can lengthen to accommodate the excess strain on the electronics. The eutectogels serve not only as a 
gate electrolyte but as minimalist breathable anchors for skin attachment as shown. d. Conceptual use-
case of a free-form thread IC using OEGETs. The single thread OEGET IC is shown to interface with a 
strain sensing thread in the context of monitoring eye motion as an example application. Free-form 
realizations allows thread-based OEGET ICs to adapt to any complex contour, such as an ear lobe. e. 
Example OEGET conforming to human skin. f. Coiled (8 mm across) and g. fully stretched thread (129 
mm across) showing 16-fold elongation (stretchability). h. Zoomed in view of OEGET cartoon schematic. 
The OEGET consists of a single thread with gold coated drain and source electrodes, separate by a 
micro-scale gap where PEDOT:PSS is drop casted. A choline chloride eutectogel provides electrolytic 
gating of the transistor. i. Zoomed in view of PEDOT:PSS active channel and eutectogel interface, 
showing dedoping of PEDOT:PSS by Choline ions from the eutectogel. j. Real life picture of OEGET IC 
coiled around a finger with eutectogels anchored on skin k. Close-up view of eutectogels serving as a 
minimalist breathable anchor l. Simple attachment/detachment of eutectogels anchors All scale bars are 
1 cm. 

 
 


 

 

16 

 

 

Figure 2.  Cleanroom free fabrication of thread-based integrated circuit based on daisy connected 
OEGET. Multiple OEGETs are fabricated using a 3D stencil based patterning of a single thread, namely 
polycaprolactone (PCL) in this case, followed by electroless deposition of source/drain gold electrodes 
and drop casting of PEDOT:PSS in a series of following steps a. Ecoflex stencil masks are fabricated via 
doctor blading to desired transistor gap thickness. b. Resulting Ecoflex mask and PCL fibers as threads. 
c. Threads are sutured into the pre-stretched Ecoflex mask. d. Strain on the Ecoflex mask is released to 
seal the openings created by suturing. e. The thread/mask ensemble is plasma treated, f. silanized, and 
g. placed in a bath of gold nanoparticles (NPs) to functionalize any exposed surface with gold NPs. h. 
The thread/mask ensemble is placed in a gold salt solution for electroless deposition of gold all around 
the exposed surfaces. This forms the drain and source terminals in case of transistors, or contact 
electrodes in case of resistors i. When the thread is pulled out of the mask, the active channel is 
revealed, which is then coated with PEDOT:PSS via drop casting. The resulting thread is then sewn into 
pre-formed eutectogels, or have eutectogel precursor solution drop casted on the channels to make 
OEGETs (not shown). 

 


 

 

17 

 

 

Figure 3. OEGET characteristics. a.  Transfer and b. output characteristic curves of the champion 
OEGET. c. Electrical schematic and corresponding small signal model of the OEGET, where vgs is the 
small signal voltage change. d. Transfer curves of an OEGET at different bending radii. e. 
Transconductance efficiency as a function of bending radius for an OEGET. 

 
 


 

 

18 

 

 

Figure 4. Series and Parallel demonstration. a. Transfer curves of individual transistors, T1 and T2. b. 
Resulting transistor curve from T1 and T2 connected in series, sharing the same gate with corresponding 
electrical schematic (gel overlap shaded in teal). c. Resulting transfer curve from T1 and T2 connected in 
parallel, sharing the same gate with corresponding electrical schematic (gel overlap shaded in teal). d. 
Example realization of a combined 5-unit transistor series-connected OEGET 

 
 


 

 

19 

 

 

Figure 5. Attributes of Eutectogels for wearable applications. a. Restoration of the eutectogel 
capacitance after a catastrophic break in the gel with photograph inset of a eutectogel at corresponding 
steps along the graph. b. Series resistance of the eutectogel during strain until break. c. Transfer curves 
from a choline chloride hydrogel gated OEGET over time with inset to view results after 1-3 days. d. 
Transfer curves from a eutectogel-gated OEGET over time. e. Photograph of a 5-transistor daisy-
connected OEGET, which is f. catastrophically broken, then g. repaired to its initial state via heating of 
the broken interfaces. Functionality is fully recovered h. Photographs of the hydrogel and eutectogel 
initially and after 3 days. Scale bars are all 1 cm. i. Water vapor permeability of a eutectogel. 


 

 

20 

 

 

Figure 6. a. Photograph of single thread OEGET amplifier. It consists of a transistor and two resistors in 
series all on a single thread b. Electrical schematic of a common source OEGET amplifier. c. Electrical 
schematic of a two stage OEGET cascade. d. Amplified signal from the low voltage single thread OEGET 
amplifier. e. Gain versus frequency for a single stage common source OEGET amplifier. f. Amplified 
signal from the two stage OEGET cascade.  

 
 


 

 

21 

 

 

Figure 7. a. Electrical schematic of integrated amplified strain sensing circuit. The strain sensor was 
realized using previously published thread-based strain sensor. This is shown with a resistor Rs in the 
schematic. b. Circuit amplified blinking signal. c. Cartoon illustration of sensor placement for monitoring 
blinking with actual photograph inset. d. Circuit amplified inhale and exhale breathing patterns at 20 bpm 
and e. circuit amplified breathing patterns with varied breathing rates. f. Cartoon illustration of sensor 
placement on the diaphragm for monitoring of breathing using the same thread-based strain sensor 
discussed earlier. 


 

 

1 

 

 
 
Supporting Information for 
Free form three dimensional integrated circuits and wearables on a 
thread using organic eutectogel gated electrochemical transistors 
 
Rachel E. Owyeung1,2,3, Wenxin Zeng2,3, Matthew J. Panzer1, Sameer Sonkusale1,2,3* 
 
1Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Tufts University, 4 Colby Street, Medford 
Massachusetts 02155, United States 
 
2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tufts University, 161 College Ave, Medford 
Massachusetts 02155, United States 
 
3Nano Lab, Advanced Technology Laboratory, Tufts University, 200 Boston Ave. Suite 2600, 
Medford Massachusetts 02155, United States 
 
*Corresponding author: Sameer Sonkusale Email:  sameer@ece.tufts.edu 
 
 
This PDF file includes: 
 

Supporting text 
Figures S1 to S9 
Tables S1 
SI References  

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 


 

 

2 

 

Supporting Information Text 
 
Strain sensor fabrication. The strain sensor was fabricated as reported previously.(1) Briefly, the 
Gütermann elastic threads (64% Polyester, 36%   Polyurethane) were stretched. While under 
strain, the elastic threads are coated with C-200 Carbon Resistive Ink (Applied Ink Solutions) to aid 
in the uniformity of coating. Then, the thread is baked in an atmospheric oven at 80°C for 15 
minutes. The conductive threads are then coated by EcoFlex to protect the carbon coating. 
  
 
 
 
 


 

 

3 

 

 

Figure S1. Alternate realization of OEGET and OEGET IC showing transistor does not have to 
confine to two dimensional pattern a. and b. Example OEGET shaped into a Möbius strip. The 
eutectogel has been dyed for better visualization.  

 
 
 


 

 

4 

 

 

 

 

Figure S2. a. Fiber/mask with each individual transistor fiber  b. Resulting single thread showing 
active channel gap c. Side view of fiber mask with daisy connected transistors. Pulling out of the 
mask results in free form thread with active channel gaps in d.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. S3. Optical Images of gold coated PCL with Ecoflex mask thickness of a. 0.45 mm and b. 
1.25 mm. Scale bar is 1 mm. c. Resulting active channel gap versus the thickness of the Ecoflex 
mask used. 
 


 

 

6 

 

 

Fig. S4. Photographs of gold-coated PCL fibers and UV-Vis absorbance data of the gold 
electroless deposition process on a glass slide. The gold salt solution was replaced at minute 30 
and minute 60, as indicated by the arrows on the graph. 
 


 

 

7 

 

 

Figure S5. Sweep rate dependent hysteresis of eutectogel OECTs in (a) Saturation (VDS = -
0.8V) and (b) Linear (VDS = -0.2V) mode  
 


 

 

8 

 

 

Figure S6. Specific Capacitance of the eutectogel as a function of frequency. The gel was 
sandwiched between two tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) coated glass slides separated by a 
poly(tetrafluoroethylene) spacer. 
 
 


 

 

9 

 

 

Figure S7. Current transient response of an OEGET depending on input voltage frequency 


 

 

10 

 

 

Figure  S8. Transient response measured via Transimpedance amplifier. a. Transimpedance 
amplifier schematic. Vbias = -0.8V applied via Keithley 2400 source meter. Function generator 
applied VG = -0.5 to 0.2V with a square wave. b. Transient response of OEGET with a 1 Hz or 5 
Hz square wave input. 
 
 
 


 

 

11 

 

 

Figure S9. Surface plasmon resonance of gold nanoparticle solution. 
 
 


 

 

12 

 

 

Table S1. Comparison of PEDOT:PSS OECT attributes relevant to wearable electronic circuits. 
“x” indicates either experiments were not performed, or do not meet the criteria. “-“ indicates data 
not explicitly given. 
 

Ref. 
Electrolyte 
Substrate/ 
geometry 

gm 
(mS)

ON/ 
OFF 

Wd/L 
(µm) 
Circuits? 
Flexibility 
Stability 
Healing 

(1) 
NaOH/NaCl/malic 

acid hydrogel 

PET/ 
planar 
0.27
102 
0.04 

Logic gates, 

inverter (gain of 1.5 

at 0.575 V input 

voltage) 

x 
5 days 
x 

(2) 
0.1M NaCl 
solution 

Glass slides/ 

planar 
- 
- 
0.14-
1.0 

Amplifier - Gain of 

>20 V/V for 

champion device 

x 
x 
x 

(3) 
0.1M NaCl 
solution 

Glass slide/ 

planar 
1.5 
105 
0.12 
Amplifier - Gain 12 

V/V 
x 
x 
x 

(4) 
0.1M NaCl 
solution 

Polyimide supported 

by PDMS coated 

PET/planar 

~6 
105 
12.9 
x 
Yes 
x 
x 

(5) 
0.1 M NaClO4 

hydrogel 

Polyamide 

monofilaments/ 

Cross-fiber 

- 
103 
- 
Logic gates 
x 
x 
x 

(6) 
0.1 M NaCl 

solution 

Cotton yarn/  
parallel fibers 
- 
- 
- 
x 
x 
x 
x 

(7) 
0.1M NaCl 
solution 

Si wafer (or SEBS for 
strain test)/planar 
14.2
103 
2 
x 
Yes 

1 mo. active 

channel exposed 
to ambient air, 
GOPs crosslinker 

used 

x 

(8) 
0.1 M NaCl 
hydrogel 

PEDOT:PSS fiber/ 

cross-fiber 
19 
- 
- 
Inverter – Gain ~3 

V/V 
Yes 
x 
x 

(9) 

triisobutyl(methyl

) phosphonium 
tosylate + H2O 

Glass slide/ 

planar 
- 
103 
0.05 
x 
x 
x 
x 

(10) 
[EMI][OTF] PVDF-

co-HFP ionogel 

SEBS/ 
planar 
~13 
103 
0.8 
x 
Yes 
x 
Self-

healing 

(11) 
0.1M NaCl 
solution 

Si wafer or PDMS 
substrate/planar 
54 
103 
10 
x 
x 

Stored at 70% 
RH for 68 days, 
active channel 
exposed to air, 
GOPs crosslinker 

used 

Self-

healing 

PEDOT:PSS 
with triton 

X-100 

This 
work 
ChCl eutectogel 
Free-form geometry 
16 
103 
140 

Single stage - 20 

V/V (50 mHz) 

Two stage -  34 V/V 

(500 mHz) 

Yes 

> 1 mo with 
electrolyte 

present 

continuously, no 

crosslinker  

Repair of 

gel 

electrolyte 

 
 
 


 

 

13 

 

 
 
SI References 
 
1.  
F. Alaimo, H. R. Nejad, A. Sadeqi, D. Demarchi, S. Sonkusale, Wearable Flexible 
Touch Interface Using Smart Threads. Proceedings of IEEE Sensors 2018-
October (2018). 

2.  
Y. J. Jo, K. Y. Kwon, Z. U. Khan, X. Crispin, T. il Kim, Gelatin Hydrogel-Based 
Organic Electrochemical Transistors and Their Integrated Logic Circuits. ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces 10, 39083–39090 (2018). 

3.  
M. Braendlein, T. Lonjaret, P. Leleux, J. M. Badier, G. G. Malliaras, Voltage 
Amplifier Based on Organic Electrochemical Transistor. Advanced Science 4 
(2017). 

4.  
J. Rivnay, et al., Organic electrochemical transistors with maximum 
transconductance at zero gate bias. Advanced Materials 25, 7010–7014 (2013). 

5.  
Y. Liang, et al., High Performance Flexible Organic Electrochemical Transistors 
for Monitoring Cardiac Action Potential. Adv Healthc Mater 7, 1800304 (2018). 

6.  
M. Hamedi, R. Forchheimer, O. Inganäs, Towards woven logic from organic 
electronic fibres. Nat Mater 6, 357–362 (2007). 

7.  
G. Tarabella, et al., A single cotton fiber organic electrochemical transistor for 
liquid electrolyte saline sensing. J Mater Chem 22, 23830–23834 (2012). 

8.  
X. Wu, et al., Ionic-Liquid Doping Enables High Transconductance, Fast 
Response Time, and High Ion Sensitivity in Organic Electrochemical Transistors. 
Advanced Materials 31, 1–9 (2019). 

9.  
Y. J. Jo, et al., Fibrillary gelation and dedoping of PEDOT:PSS fibers for 
interdigitated organic electrochemical transistors and circuits. npj Flexible 
Electronics 6, 31 (2022). 

10.  
Z. Yi, et al., Ionic liquid-water mixtures and ion gels as electrolytes for organic 
electrochemical transistors. J Mater Chem C Mater 3, 6549–6553 (2015). 

11.  
X. Su, et al., A Highly Conducting Polymer for Self-Healable, Printable and 
Stretchable Organic Electrochemical Transistor Arrays and Near Hysteresis-Free 
Soft Tactile Sensors. Advanced Materials (2022) 
https:/doi.org/10.1002/adma.202200682. 

12.  
J. Ko, X. Wu, A. Surendran, B. T. Muhammad, W. L. Leong, Self-Healable 
Organic Electrochemical Transistor with High Transconductance, Fast Response, 
and Long-Term Stability. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 12, 33979–33988 (2020). 
  


