1

Anomalous transport in angstrom-sized membranes with exceptional water 

flow rates and dye/salt rejections

Rathi Aparna 1, Singh Khushwant 1, Saini Lalita 1, Kaushik Suvigya 1, Dhal Biswabhusan 1, Parmar Shivam2, 

& Kalon Gopinadhan 1,2,*

1Discipline of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gujarat 382355, India

2Discipline of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gujarat 382355, India

(*E-mail: gopinadhan.kalon@iitgn.ac.in)

ABSTRACT

Fluidic channels with physical dimensions approaching molecular sizes are crucial for novel 
desalination, chemical separation, and sensing technologies. However, fabrication of precisely 
controlled fluidic channels in the angstrom size is extremely challenging. This, along with our limited 
understanding of nanofluidic transport, hinders practical applications. Here, we fabricated high-quality 
salt-intercalated vermiculite membranes with channel sizes  ̴3-5 Å, highly dependent on intercalant. 
Unlike pristine samples, the salt-intercalated membranes are highly stable in water. We tested several 
such membranes, of which 0.6 µm thick membranes showed dye rejection efficiencies >98% with 
exceptionally high water permeance of 5400 L m-2 h-1 bar-1 at a differential pressure of 0.9 bar. 
Interestingly, the same membrane also rejected NaCl ions, with efficiencies of  ̴95%. Our highly confined 
channels exhibit sub-linear ionic conductance related to hydration sizes, steric exclusion, K+ mobility 
enhancement, and conductance saturation at concentrations ≤ 10 mM. This makes highly confined 
channels interesting for both fundamental science and applications. 

1.
Introduction

Angstrom-scale channels play a vital role in many essential functions of life; for example, Na+ channels of 
3 to 5 Å diameters exhibit a high Na+/K+ selectivity of 10 to 30 [1]. 3 Å diameter Aquaporin protein channels 
transport water molecules selectively while rejecting most of the ions including protons. The high 
selectivity of Aquaporin channels is related to its hydrophobicity and angstrom sizes [2]. Several groups 
attempted to mimic biological channels, and had good success in the fabrication of channels/pores with 
sizes in the nanometer range or smaller. The highly confined channels exhibit fast water flow[3], 
hydration[4] and size-based selectivity[5], anomalous dielectric constant[6], ion mobility enhancement[7], 
giant osmotic energy[8,9], etc. All these observations are just indicative of the rich science that exist at 
the smallest scale. 

On the practical side, angstrom-sized channels with sub-micron membrane thickness promise improved 
filtration performance, low cost and low operating pressures. Current state-of-the-art membranes such 
as Toray TM 610, NF 270, and Desal 5 L, reject dyes with efficiencies of 98 to 99% and transport water 
molecules with a flux of 212 L m-2 h-1 at a pressure of 15 bar [10]. These membranes also reject NaCl with 


2

efficiencies of < 50% at differential pressures > 6 bar. Achieving high water flux along with good ion and 
dye rejection at low operating pressures still remains a challenge. This is partially due to our inability to 
fully resolve the competing transport mechanisms at the angstrom scale. Inspired by the performance of 
biological channels, several materials were investigated. Among these, two-dimensional (2D) materials 
are distinctly different and have atomically small thickness [11]. Notable examples are graphene slits [3,5], 
graphene oxide laminates [12,13], carbon nanotubes [7,14], BN nanotubes [9], nanopores [15], and clay 
membranes [16,17]. Most of these 2D material-based membranes, swell in water, resulting in poor sieving 
characteristics. Several studies tried to address this issue by focusing either on mechanical 
confinement[18] or strengthening the interaction between the nanosheets[12,19,20]. Although, several 
of these membranes showed good dye rejections, the water permeance always remained < 1000 L m-2 h-

1 bar-1 for sub-micron thick membranes.

To overcome this, we chose crystals of vermiculite, the clay material, for several reasons. Vermiculite 
crystals are abundant and layered, therefore highly suitable for making membranes consisting of two-
dimensional (2D) laminates. The interlayer space in bulk vermiculite crystals has unintentionally 
intercalated hydrated cations occupying a space of 3-5 Å. This space is similar to or larger than the size of 
water molecules. Manipulating these spaces with controlled intercalation of salt ions could lead to new 
generation membranes. Structurally, vermiculite has two tetrahedral and one octahedral sheet made up 
of O2-, in which Si4+ ions occupy the tetrahedral sites and Al3+ ions the octahedral sites. However, the 
substitution of Al3+ in place of Si4+ at about one-quarter of the tetrahedral sites and substitution of Mg2+

and Fe2+ in place of Al3+ in aluminium hydroxide octahedral sheets leaves a net negative layer charge. This 
is balanced by the intake of various cations like Ca2+, and Mg2+ in the hydrated form, occupying interlayer 
spaces of vermiculite[21].

In our study, these unintentionally intercalated cations were first replaced with lithium ions, resulting in 
expanded vermiculite crystals because of the free swelling nature of Li+ [22]. The expanded vermiculite 
was exfoliated to construct membranes of 2D laminates. We, however, observed that the Li-vermiculite 
(Li-V) membrane is not stable in water. To make it water-stable, we treated pristine free-standing Li-V
membranes with aqueous solutions containing one of the following ions, Al3+, Ca2+, Na+, or K+. The salt 
intercalation indeed helped the membranes to be stable and also tuned the interlayer spaces of 
vermiculite. These membranes were observed to be highly efficient for salt and dye rejections and also 
exhibit exceptionally high water flux. 

2.
Experimental section

2.1. Membrane fabrication

We fabricated lithium intercalated vermiculite membranes via a two-step ion exchange process. In the 
first step of the exchange process, 100 mg of vermiculite was heated in 200 ml of saturated sodium 
chloride solution at 100oC for 24 hours in a reflux assembly, a procedure very similar to other reports 
[23,24]. The resultant sodium exchanged crystals were repeatedly washed with DI water to remove excess 
NaCl. These crystals were then heated in 200 ml of 2 M LiCl solution for 24 hours and again washed with 
DI water to remove excess LiCl that resides on the surfaces. This product was then dried, weighed, and 
dispersed in DI water with a concentration of 1 mg/ml. The solution containing expanded Li-vermiculite 


3

crystals was subjected to ultra-sonication (power = 24 W) in water for 15 minutes. The suspension was 
then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 minutes to obtain a uniform solution consisting of thinner layers. The 
supernatant gave a light-yellow dispersion of vermiculite layers (Fig. 1a) and the final solution consisted 
of 0.62 mg/ml of vermiculite nanosheets giving a 62% yield. Zeta potential measurements provided a 
value of -35±1 mV, a strong indication of a negative surface charge on the suspended flakes. The successful 
dispersion of vermiculite layers in water is confirmed by observing the Tyndall effect (Fig. 1a). We 
prepared a Li-vermiculite membrane, labeled as Li-V, of diameter 1.6 cm via vacuum filtration on several 
porous supports (pore size = 100-200 nm) such as AAO, and PVDF. The vermiculite naturally peeled off 
from the porous support in the case of thicker membranes (Top inset of Fig. 1a); however thin membranes 
were difficult to handle without the porous support. We prepared several membranes of thickness 
ranging from 0.4 to 5.0 µm. We performed our ion transport measurements with free-standing 
vermiculite membranes, which helped us to understand their intrinsic properties without the influence of 
porous support. In pressure-assisted filtration experiments, we used membranes with PVDF porous 
support as the latter provide mechanical strength and a smooth surface to avoid wear and tear of the 
membrane. 

2.2. Pressure-driven filtration setup

For the salt and dye permeation experiments, we used a pressure-driven filtration setup, where the feed 
side of the membrane was exposed to the atmosphere and the other side to pressures lower than 1 bar. 
We conducted the permeation test under several pressure gradients from 900 mbar to 50 mbar. The 
permeate was collected and analyzed to quantify the water permeance and the concentration of dye or 
ions, if present any. 

2.3. Ion transport setup

The setup used for ion transport studies consists of a tau cell made of polyether ether ketone (PEEK) 
material holding a 5 µm thick vermiculite membrane separating salt solutions on either side of the 
membrane. The membrane was mounted on an acrylic sheet that has a pre-drilled square hole, with the 
help of epoxy glue (Stycast 2625), which ensures that the only path for ion transport is through the 
vermiculite membrane. The actual area of the membrane under study was 4 mm2. Two Ag/AgCl electrodes 
were used to measure the ionic current with the help of a source-meter unit (Keithley-Tektronix 2614B) 
and LabVIEW software.

3.
Results and Discussion

The free-standing Li-V membranes are found to disintegrate within 2 - 5 minutes of exposure to both 
water (Fig. 1b) and aqueous LiCl solutions having a maximum concentration of 0.1 M (Fig. S1). However, 
Li-exchanged vermiculite membranes appear stable in concentrated LiCl solutions, for example, 1 M and 
above. If the stable membrane is transferred from 1 M LiCl solution to water, it quickly disintegrates
making them unsuitable for water-related applications. To make them water-stable, we immersed Li-V 
membranes in one of the salt solutions of KCl, NaCl, CaCl2, or AlCl3 of 1M chloride concentration for 24 
hours. After the ion exchange, the membranes were thoroughly washed with DI water which removed
the residual salt that resides on the sample surface. We performed several measurements to confirm the 


4

successful exchange of K+, Na+, Ca2+, or Al3+ with Li+ in the Li-V membranes. The exchanged membranes 
are labelled as cation-V membranes. The salt-exchanged membranes were found to be water stable for 
at least six months, without any evidence of swelling in aqueous solutions (Fig. 1c). In addition, these 
membranes were also tested under large concentration gradients and maximum applied voltages of ±300 
mV across the membrane and were found to be stable (Fig. S2). We did not observe any voltage-induced 
delamination in any of our salt-stabilized membranes. Though the synthesis of Li-vermiculite membranes
were reported previously[23,24], their stability in water was rarely discussed. In those studies, the 
membrane exposure to water was only for a short duration, and hence the instability might not be very 
obvious. We also checked the water wettability of these membranes with contact angle measurement 
and they are found to be mostly hydrophilic (Fig. S3).

Fig. 1. Stability of free-standing vermiculite membranes in water. (a) The exfoliated vermiculite layers 
are successfully dispersed in water as evident from the characteristic Tyndall effect. The solution has a 
typical concentration of 0.62 mg/ml. Inset: pristine free-standing Li-V membrane. (b) A free-standing Li-V 
membrane disintegrates in water within 2 - 5 minutes of exposure. (c) Camera images of a Li-V membrane 
stabilized in salt solutions of KCl, NaCl, CaCl2, and AlCl3.


5

Having confirmed the water-stability of our membranes, we investigated the microstructure of our 
pristine and intercalated membranes. Using the atomic force microscopy (AFM) technique (Fig. 2a), the 
average flake thickness of exfoliated Li-vermiculite was determined to be  ̴1.5 nm (Fig. 2b), which 
corresponds to 1 layer of vermiculite. The cross-section of the membrane obtained using scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) shows an exquisite laminate structure (Inset of Fig. 2b), and the surface of the 
membrane shows a continuous microstructure without any obvious pinholes (Fig. S2). The X-ray
diffraction (XRD) data recorded for bulk vermiculite crystal shows multiple peaks around 8.65o, indicating 
the presence of numerous unintentional cations in the interlayer space (Fig. S4). The XRD data of the Li-V 
membrane (Fig. 2c-d) shows a sharp, and intense peak at 2θ = 7.05o, corresponding to (001) plane. The 
peak at 7.05o (Full width at half maximum= 0.81o) provides an interlayer separation, d of 12.5 Å, confirming 

Fig. 2. Characterization of vermiculite membranes. (a) AFM image of an isolated vermiculite flake. (b) The 
height profile of the flake estimated a thickness of   ̴1.5 nm. Inset: the cross-sectional SEM image of the 
membrane. (c) X-ray diffraction data of Li-V, K-V, Na-V, Ca-V, and Al-V membranes. Higher-order peaks 
are clearly seen in most of the cation exchanged V-membranes. (d) Comparison of the intense peak (001) 
of Li-V, K-V, Na-V, Ca-V, and Al-V membranes. (001) peak of Li-V shows an appreciable shift upon Na, Ca 
and Al- exchange, however, with K, it is not affected much.


6

that the space between the layers has been successfully exchanged with Li -ions (Fig. S4). We also 
recorded the XRD data of salt-stabilized membranes (Fig. 2c-d). In Na-V, Ca-V, and Al-V, apart from the 
peak (001), we observed higher-order peaks (00l) with l= 2,3,4 and 5, and a smaller full width at half 
maximum when compared to Li-V membranes. This indicates that the salt-stabilized laminates are of the 
highest crystalline quality, homogeneous, and without inter-stratification. The most intense peak (001) is 
left-shifted from 7.05o to 5.95 ± 0.05o for Na+, Ca2+ and Al3+ cations, which is related to the modified layer 
charges arising from the exchange of cations, Na+ is an exception due to its robust hydration shell as 
compared to K+[25]. Moreover, water layer can either be 1 or 2 and not in between, explaining the sudden 
change in the interlayer space from  ̴12 Å to  ̴15 Å. Unlike other salt-stabilized membranes, the XRD of K-
V membranes show only (001) and (004) peaks, which is very similar to the XRD pattern of Li-V 
membranes. When compared with Li-V, the (001) peak of K+ is shifted very little to the right from 7.05o to 
7.25o. The little difference in the structure of Li-V and K-V could be related to the similar layer charges 
arising from the exchange of Li+ with K+.

Given the immense interest in dye removal from industrial wastewater and the high quality of our 
membranes, we investigated the water/dye permeation properties of Na-stabilized membranes. We 
tested our membranes with several dyes such as methyl orange (MO, anionic), crystal violet (CV, cationic), 
rhodamine 6G (R6G, cationic), methyl blue (MB, anionic), and brilliant blue (BB, anionic)[16]. The largest 
dimension of the dye molecule that we tested ranges from 1.19 nm to 2.73 nm. The schematic of the 
filtration setup is shown in Fig. S5a. The dye concentration was approximately 10 mg/L on the feed side. 
We collected the retentate, feed, and permeate solutions and analyzed them with the help of a UV-Visible 
spectrometer (Fig. S5b-f). The UV-Visible spectra of retentate solution show a broad and intense peak in 
the visible region for all the studied dyes. In contrast, the spectral intensity of the permeate solution, was 
extremely weak or within the detection limit of the instrument. Since intensity is a measure of the 
concentration, it is clear that the dye molecules on the permeate side are significantly low. The rejection, 
R was calculated by recording the relative difference in the concentration of permeate (Cp) and feed (Cf) 
compartments as

R (%) = (1-Cp/Cf) x 100%

Our membrane shows rejection of >98 % for MO, >99 % for CV, >99 % for R6G, >99 % for MB and >99 % 
for BB (Fig. S5b-f). The water permeance was estimated from the collected volume, V, the pressure 
difference, ΔP, the duration of water permeation, t, and the membrane area, A. The permeance, J, is given 
by

J = V/(ΔP*A*t)

We recorded the highest permeance of  ̴7183 L m-2 h-1 bar-1 for pure water with a  ̴ 400 nm thick Na-V 
membrane; however, it reduced to 6600 L m-2 h-1 bar-1 for the brilliant blue dye with a rejection of  ̴90%. 
When we increased the membrane thickness to  ̴ 600 nm, the rejection increased to > 99% with a slightly 
reduced water permeance of 5400 L m-2 h-1 bar-1. For thicker membranes beyond 600 nm (Fig. S6), the 
rejection remained >99%; however, the water permeance scaled inversely with the thickness (Fig. 3a). 
Since our measurements were static, the dyes accumulated on membrane surface over time, reducing the 


7

water permeance, as shown in Fig. S7a. The dynamic measurements could help minimizing the dye 
accumulation. We also note that both anionic and cationic dyes did not show any significant difference in 
rejection (Fig. S7b), suggesting the dominance of size-based rejection. We repeated these measurements 
with other salt-stabilized membranes also and observed that with increase in interlayer cation valence, 
the water permeance decreased by a factor of 2.5, with negligible change in the rejection (Fig. S7c). The 
reduced water permeance is inferred to be a result of decreased hydrophilicity and hence a weaker in-
take of water. 

Removal of salt from seawater is extremely important for potable water applications, and we explored 
this possibility with our 1.2 µm thick Na-stabilized membranes. We tested the permeation of NaCl (1 M) 
ions with a pressure-assisted filtration setup at several pressure gradients, up to a maximum of 900 mbar. 
We quantified the permeated concentration using inductively coupled plasma-optical emission 
spectroscopy (ICP-OES). At ΔP of 50 mbar, we observed the highest rejection of
 ̴95% and a water 

permeance of  ̴120 L m-2 h-1 bar-1 (Fig. 3b). When ΔP = 550 mbar, the ion rejection decreased to  ̴8% and 
the water permeance increased to > 2300 L m-2 h-1 bar-1 (Fig. S7d). When we further increased ΔP to 900 
mbar, a rejection of > 7% was recorded. We repeated these measurements with several membrane 
thicknesses at ΔP = 50 mbar. The permeate concentration increased from  ̴50 to 650 mM upon decrease 
in thickness from 1.2 to 0.4 µm (Fig. 3b). 

Fig. 3. Dye and Salt filtration. (a) Water permeance (left Y-axis) and Brilliant blue dye rejection (Right Y-
axis) as a function of membrane thickness at ΔP = 900 mbar. (b) Water permeance (Left Y-axis) and NaCl 
rejection (Right Y-axis) as a function of membrane thickness at ΔP = 50 mbar. The pressure gradient clearly 
changes the membrane permeability, as evident from the lower water flow rates at ΔP = 50 mbar as 
compared to ΔP = 900 mbar. This is inferred to be a result of smaller interlayer distance at lower pressure 
gradients. The error bar is for 3 samples.

We also performed these experiments with a mixture of 25 ml 1 M NaCl and 25 ml BB dye (concentration 
 ̴ 10 mg/L), which resulted in a final 50 ml solution of 0.5 M NaCl and 5 mg/L BB. Using a 1.2 μm thick Na-
V membrane at ΔP = 250 mbar, we were able to get a salt rejection of  ̴ 40% and a dye rejection of  ̴ 99% 
with water permeance of 1290 L m-2 h-1 bar-1comparable to that of permeation experiments with only salt 


8

or dye. But at a higher differential pressure of ΔP = 550 mbar, the salt rejection decreased to  ̴ 10% while 
the dye rejection remained constant with increased water permeance of 2277 L m-2 h-1 bar-1, the flux was 
comparable to only 1 M NaCl as the feed (Fig. S7d). This confirms the ability of our membranes to separate 
salt and dye from a mixed solution (Fig. S8).

In addition, we examined the ion permeation across 5 µm thick free-standing membranes with a forward 
osmosis experiment. For this, we kept 1 M NaCl solution on the feed side and DI water on the permeate 
side (Fig. S9a). During a period of  ̴45 hours, sufficient for establishing equilibrium, a concentration of  ̴10
mM of ions permeated through the membrane. This also agrees with the result of UV-visible spectra (Fig. 
S9b). In this case, the ion rejection was estimated to be 99%. The higher salt rejection is due to the larger 
thickness of 5 µm for the membrane used in this experiment. It is to mention that due to osmosis, there 
is a flow of water from permeate to feed side; hence, our measured ion concentration is in the upper limit. 

We further examined the little permeation of salt ions across 5 µm thick membranes to understand the 
rejection mechanism. The approximate size of the fluidic channel that is responsible for the transport is 
estimated by considering the thickness of silicate layers (  ̴9.6 Å)[26] and the interlayer distance, d, where 
the latter is taken from the XRD data. In the case of K-V membranes, d(001) ≈ 12.2 Å, leaving a fluidic space 
that can accommodate  ̴1 layer of water molecules. However, in the case of Na-V, Ca-V, and Al-V 
membranes, d(001) ≈ 15 Å, suggests an interlayer space that can accommodate
 ̴2-layers of water 

molecules. We performed transport measurements with an equal salt concentration on both sides of the 
membrane. The hydrated diameter of the cations considered here ranges from 6.6 to 9.6 Å [27]. The 
hydrated diameter of Cl- is 6.6 Å [27]. The schematic used for the measurement is shown in Fig. S10a. We 
first measured KCl ionic conductance through the K-V membrane. To transport the ions, a voltage, V, was 
applied across the membrane, and the resulting current, I, was monitored. The measured I-
V characteristics (Fig. 4a) at various KCl concentrations, C, is linear within our maximum applied voltage 
of ± 300 mV. The conductance, G=I/V, is found from the slope of the curves. The measured pH of our 
deionized (DI) water was  ̴5.5; therefore, chloride concentrations of 10-5 M and 10-6 M would roughly 
correspond to that of DI water. The measured water conductance of twelve samples is plotted in Fig. S10b. 
We observed a very different ionic conductance behavior for all the salt-stabilized membranes compared 
to other nanochannel systems. In the concentration range 10-5 M - 10-2 M, the conductance increased sub-
linearly with concentration (Fig. 4b). The measurements with NaCl, CaCl2, and AlCl3 solutions using 
respective salt-stabilized membranes, also showed similar sub-linear G(C); however, the magnitude of the 
conductance varies with salt ion. For all the salts, G∝Cα, with the exponent, α = 0.67 to 0.24, inversely 
related to the hydrated diameter of the cations in the order K+< Ca2+< Al3+. This points to the role of steric 
hindrance and ion-ion interactions in providing a size-based discrimination. A similar variation, G(C), was 
reported in carbon nanotubes[7], and biological channels[28], where the exponent was less than 1. For 
concentrations ≥ 10-2 M, the ionic conductance of all the membranes shows saturation (Fig. 4b). When 
compared to the bulk conductance of similar geometry, the NaCl conductance through Na-V is observed 
to be smaller by at least 300. This yields a salt rejection of > 99%, which agrees with the results of ICP-OES 
and UV-visible spectra (Fig. S9).


9

Fig. 4. Ion transport through salt-stabilized vermiculite membranes. (a) I-V characteristics of K-stabilized 
vermiculite membrane for several concentrations of KCl. Inset: Schematic of our ion transport 
measurement setup. (b) Ionic conductance of salt-stabilized membranes with their corresponding salt 
solutions. For example, K-V membrane is measured with KCl solution. The grey dotted line is the data for
open-hole conductance (membrane dimensions are considered) of NaCl calculated from the bulk 
conductivity reported in literature[29]. Dotted lines are guide for the eye, while the solid lines are fitted 
with G∝Cα, where α lies between 0.67 and 0.24. (c) I-V curves for 1 M KCl on one side of the K-V membrane 
and 1 mM to 1 M on the other side after subtracting the redox potential. (d) The variation of diffusion 
potential and current (Inset) as a function of KCl gradient. The diffusion potential is fitted using the Nernst 
equation, which is shown as a solid red line. The diffusion potential and current are plotted after 
subtracting the contribution of redox potential at the electrodes.

It should be noted that interlayer cations of vermiculite membranes are exchangeable if the membrane is
kept in a solution of higher cation concentration than the one/s already present at the interlayer sites. For 
example, we kept K-V membrane in AlCl3 solution of concentration greater than 0.1 mM and for atleast 


10

24 hours, which converted K-V into Al-V. The ion exchange is further verified using techniques such as 
XRD, contact angle measurements and estimating the ionic conductance of the membrane. We monitored
the ionic conductance of K-V membrane when kept in 1 M AlCl3 solution where the conductance 
decreased continuously until it became stable and close to the ionic conductance of 1 M AlCl3 with Al-V
(Fig. S4b).

Salt-stabilized vermiculite laminates have different layer charges which could influence the ion transport. 
To understand this, we performed electro-diffusion measurements with different concentrations of KCl
on opposite sides of the membrane (Fig. 4c). The schematic of the measurement setup is shown in the 
inset of Fig. 4c. We have varied the concentration gradient (Δ) from 10 to 1000. In the absence of any 
applied voltage, a negative current is measured, and its magnitude increases with increase in Δ up to 100. 
Considering the polarity of the electrodes used in the study (Inset of Fig. 4c), the observed negative 
current (Inset Fig. 4d) suggests that these membranes preferentially transport cations over anions. The 
applied voltage that is required to nullify this current is designated as zero-current potential, Vo. We 
subtracted the redox potential, VR from Vo, to estimate the net diffusion potential, Vdiff, of the membrane 
for a particular concentration gradient. The diffusion potential is observed to follow a logarithmic 
dependence with concentration gradient. This allowed us to estimate the selectivity, S, of the membrane 
using the Nernst equation (1) as, 

𝑉𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 = 𝑆

𝑘𝐵𝑇

𝑒 𝑙𝑛∆…………………. (1)

Where S is the selectivity of the membrane, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (298 K), 
and e is the elementary charge. For an ideal cation-selective membrane, S = 1 and for a non-selective 
membrane, S = 0. We fitted the variation of diffusion potential with KCl concentration gradient (Fig. 4d) 
using Eqn.1, providing a selectivity of  ̴0.67. This suggests that K-stabilized vermiculite membranes are 
cation-selective and the diffusion measurements hint the contribution of surface charge in the ion 
transport. We measured other salt-stabilized membranes also, and most of them are found to be cation-
selective, with almost no selectivity for AlCl3. The selectivity is in the order KCl ≈ NaCl > CaCl2 > AlCl3 (Fig. 
S11a-b). 

We estimated the relative mobility of cations to anions, μ+/μ-,from the measured diffusion potential (Fig. 
5a) with the help of Henderson equation[30] as, 

𝜇+
𝜇− = − 𝑧+

𝑧−

𝑙𝑛 (𝛥) −𝑧−𝐹𝑉𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓/𝑅𝑇

𝑙𝑛 (𝛥) −𝑧+𝐹𝑉𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓/𝑅𝑇 ………………… (2)

Where 𝑧+ and 𝑧− are the cation and anion valances, respectively; F is Faraday’s constant; R is the universal 
gas constant; and T= 298 K. The mobility ratio (cations to anions) is in the order KCl ≈ NaCl > CaCl2 > AlCl3. 
With the assumption of constant mobility for chloride ions, the enhanced mobility of K+ is interpreted to 
be a combined effect of confinement and electrostatic interactions (Fig. 5b). A previous report on 
graphene-based two-dimensional channels[31] indicate that confined channels of height  ̴6.6 Å, slightly
increase the mobility of K+.


11

Fig. 5. Mobility of ions through salt-stabilized membranes. (a) I-V characteristics of various chloride salts 
through respective salt stabilized vermiculite membranes with a concentration gradient of 100 across the 
membrane. (b) Mobility ratio as a function of increasing cation hydration radius through our membranes, 
which is compared with literature values on bulk systems[29]. Error bar is taken from mobility ratio of the 
same sample when concentration gradient is 10 and 100.

In clay minerals, the van der Waals attraction of the layers increases as the layer charge increases; an 
example is the highly compact structure of mica, where the layer charge is 1 with a 2: 1 layered structure. 
In vermiculite, layer charge is smaller than 1 due to the inclusion of Ca2+and Mg2+in place of K+ in mica. In 
the case of Al-V membranes, exchanging Al3+ with Li+ would reduce the layer charge, explaining the lower 
selectivity (Fig. S11b). Exchanging the layer with monovalent ions maximizes the layer charge and hence 
the highest selectivity. In the case of K-V, layer charge is high and hence the van der Waals attraction leads 
to smaller interlayer spaces, whereas in the case of Al-V, the layer charge is less and hence the interlayer 
space is large, which agrees with our XRD results. A recent study discusses the possibility of dynamical 
change in the laminar structure whenever a cation is exchanged. The local delamination removes the 
existing cation, and subsequently, re-stacking happens, which accommodates the new cation [32]. In the 
case of monovalent cations, such as K+ and Na+, the larger interlayer spacing with Na+ could be a result of
the larger and stable hydration shell of Na+ over K+.
Though diffusion measurements shed light on the layer charge, our many other observations suggest that 
the incoming species' molecular/hydrated ionic size controls the transport. The pressure-assisted 
filtration experiments provide insights into the membrane microstructure and its modifications under 
pressure gradients. We fabricated the membrane by assembling flake sizes of  ̴600 nm, where the flake 
thickness is  ̴1.5 nm. Fig. S7d summarizes the water permeance and NaCl rejection efficiencies as a 
function of pressure gradients from 50 to 550 mbar. When the pressure gradient is low, the water 
permeance is low, however, the NaCl rejection is high. When we increased the pressure gradient to 550 
mbar, there is less rejection of NaCl; however, the water permeance increased. In the absence or low 


12

values of pressure gradient, the flake placements are perfect, and there are only entry/exit points for the 
water, not the salt. However, when we gradually increased the pressure across the membrane, the 
interlayer spacing of the laminates increased, allowing the entry/exit of water molecules while rejecting 
most ions/dyes of sizes larger than the interlayer spacing. Since the interlayer space is small at low 
pressure gradients, the water permeance will also be low. However, larger interlayer spacing was induced 
when we increased the pressure gradient to 550 mbar, allowing salt ion permeation and increased water 
permeance (Fig. S12a-b). Here the interlayer spacing is still in sub-nm, much smaller than the sizes of dye 
molecules; hence, they are rejected. With the increase in thickness, the water permeance is found to 
decrease. As thickness increases, due to the corrugated path, the effective travel length of water 
molecules becomes larger, resulting in reduced water permeance. A very recent report on graphene oxide
predict a similar increase in interlayer space under increased differential pressures[33]. 
The measured water permeance of 5400 L m-2 h-1 bar-1  far exceeds previous reports. There were some 
studies on hydrophilic membranes of vermiculite[17], montmorillonite[16], and Ti3C2Tx[19]; however, 
they exhibit moderate water fluxes. We measured the water contact angle of the salt-stabilized 
membranes and found them to increase in the order Na-V < Ca-V < Al-V. The higher water permeance in 
the case of Na-V membranes is related to the strong hydrophilicity of thin membranes and suggests the 
importance of capillary pressure. Further, our salt-stabilized membranes can handle pressures of 1 bar at
least. Our vacuum filtration system uses a pressure gradient of 1 bar to fabricate the membranes, and it 
is observed that any external pressure gradients within this limit does not degrade the membrane 
performance. 

Even at a thickness of 600 nm, our membranes showed better rejection while maintaining a high flux 
compared to other membranes. Brilliant blue, one of the largest dye molecules, showed exceptionally 
high flux at a small pressure gradient of 900 mbar. We expect that slightly larger pressure gradients would 
further enhance the flux. The same membrane can also be utilized for desalination applications at low 
pressures as it exhibits 95% salt rejection and a water flux higher than or comparable to other 
membranes[16,17]. This result can be further improved by using several micrometer thick membranes 
and larger pressure gradients. Overall, our inch-size membranes show great promise and are highly 
suitable for industrial applications. We tested several samples and more than 90% of the membranes 
showed high water flux, and good rejections. 

4.
Conclusion

In conclusion, we addressed the water instability of Li-V membranes by intercalating them with various 
chloride salt solutions. The stabilized membranes have highly confined laminates and tunable interlayer 
spacing and exhibit steric hindrance. These membranes exhibit high salt and dye rejections with water 
flow rates exceeding the current state-of-the-art membranes. This is mainly due to the ability to tune the 
transport parameters, which highly depend on external pressure gradients, layer charge, and hydration 
diameter of transporting molecules/ions. The ability to fabricate water-stable vermiculite membranes will 
initiate decades of further research on clay-based membranes.


13

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was mainly funded by Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Government of India, 
through grant CRG/2019/002702 and partially supported by MHRD STARS with grant no. MoE-
STARS/STARS-1/405. A.R. acknowledges the Sabarmati fellowship from IIT Gandhinagar. A. R also 
acknowledges the PMRF fellowship from Ministry of Education, Government of India. G.K. acknowledges 
the research fellowship from IIT Gandhinagar. We acknowledge the contribution of IITGN central 
instrumentation facility. We thank Kalyan Raidongia and Raj Kumar Gogoi of IIT Guwahati for very useful 
discussions.

DATE AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Data is available from the authors upon reasonable request. 

REFERENCES

[1]
B. Hille, Ion channels of excitable membranes, Sinauer, Sunderland, MA, 2001.

[2]
J.S. Hub, B.L. de Groot, Mechanism of selectivity in aquaporins and aquaglyceroporins, Proc. Natl. 

Acad. Sci. 105 (2008) 1198–1203.

[3]
B. Radha, A. Esfandiar, F.C. Wang, A.P. Rooney, K. Gopinadhan, A. Keerthi, A. Mishchenko, A. 

Janardanan, P. Blake, L. Fumagalli, M. Lozada-Hidalgo, S. Garaj, S.J. Haigh, I.V. Grigorieva, H.A. Wu, 

A.K. Geim, Molecular transport through capillaries made with atomic-scale precision, Nature. 538 

(2016) 222–225.

[4]
C. Cheng, S.A. Iyengar, R. Karnik, Molecular size-dependent subcontinuum solvent permeation and 

ultrafast nanofiltration across nanoporous graphene membranes, Nat. Nanotechnol. 16 (2021) 

989–995.

[5]
K. Gopinadhan et al., Complete steric exclusion of ions and proton transport through confined 

monolayer water, Science. 363 (n.d.).

[6]
L. Fumagalli, A. Esfandiar, R. Fabregas, S. Hu, P. Ares, A. Janardanan, Q. Yang, B. Radha, T. 

Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, G. Gomila, K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, Anomalously low dielectric constant 

of confined water, Science. 360 (2018) 1339–1342.

[7]
R. Tunuguntla, R. Henley, Y.-C. Yao, T. Pham, M. Wanunu, A. Noy, Enhanced water permeability 

and tunable ion selectivity in subnanometer carbon nanotube porins, Science. 357 (2017) 792–

796.

[8]
T. Emmerich, K.S. Vasu, A. Niguès, A. Keerthi, B. Radha, A. Siria, L. Bocquet, Enhanced nanofluidic 

transport in activated carbon nanoconduits, Nat. Mater. 21 (2022) 696–702.


14

[9]
A. Siria, P. Poncharal, A.-L. Biance, R. Fulcrand, X. Blase, S.T. Purcell, L. Bocquet, Giant osmotic 

energy conversion measured in a single transmembrane boron nitride nanotube, Nature. 494 

(2013) 455–458.

[10] M. Ağtaş, T. Ormancı-Acar, B. Keskin, T. Türken, İ. Koyuncu, Nanofiltration membranes for salt and 

dye filtration: effect of membrane properties on performances, Water Sci. Technol. 83 (2021) 

2146–2159.

[11] K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S.V. Dubonos, I.V. Grigorieva, A.A. 

Firsov, Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films, Science. 306 (2004) 666–669.

[12] L. Chen, G. Shi, J. Shen, B. Peng, B. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Bian, J. Wang, D. Li, Z. Qian, G. Xu, G. Liu, J. 

Zeng, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, G. Zhou, M. Wu, W. Jin, J. Li, H. Fang, Ion sieving in graphene oxide 

membranes via cationic control of interlayer spacing, Nature. 550 (2017) 380–383.

[13] R.K. Joshi et al., Precise and Ultrafast Molecular Sieving Through Graphene Oxide Membranes, 

Science. 343 (2014) 752–754.

[14] R.H. Tunuguntla, F.I. Allen, K. Kim, A. Belliveau, A. Noy, Ultrafast proton transport in sub-1-nm 

diameter carbon nanotube porins, Nat. Nanotechnol. 11 (2016) 639–644.

[15] T. Jain, B.C. Rasera, R.J.S. Guerrero, M.S.H. Boutilier, S.C. O’Hern, J.-C. Idrobo, R. Karnik, 

Heterogeneous sub-continuum ionic transport in statistically isolated graphene nanopores, Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 10 (2015) 1053–1057.

[16] M.-Y. Huang, Y. Chen, X. Yan, X.-J. Guo, L. Dong, W.-Z. Lang, Two-dimensional Montmorillonite 

membranes with efficient water filtration, J. Membr. Sci. 614 (2020) 118540.

[17] M. Tian, L. Wang, J. Wang, S. Zheng, F. Wang, N. Shao, L. Wang, A Two-Dimensional Lamellar 

Vermiculite Membrane for Precise Molecular Separation and Ion Sieving, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 

10 (2022) 1137–1148.

[18] J. Abraham, K.S. Vasu, C.D. Williams, K. Gopinadhan, Y. Su, C.T. Cherian, J. Dix, E. Prestat, S.J. Haigh, 

I.V. Grigorieva, P. Carbone, A.K. Geim, R.R. Nair, Tunable sieving of ions using graphene oxide 

membranes, Nat. Nanotechnol. 12 (2017) 546–550.

[19] L. Ding, L. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Wu, Z. Lu, J. Deng, Y. Wei, J. Caro, H. Wang, Effective ion sieving with Ti3C2Tx

MXene membranes for production of drinking water from seawater, Nat. Sustain. 3 (2020) 296–

302.

[20] C. Chu, C.-F. Fu, P. Zhang, T. Pan, X. Ai, Y. Wu, P. Cui, Q. Huang, J. Ran, Precise ångström controlling 

the interlayer channel of MoS2 membranes by cation intercalation, J. Membr. Sci. 615 (2020) 

118520.


15

[21] D.G. Schulze, CLAY MINERALS, in: D. Hillel (Ed.), Encycl. Soils Environ., Elsevier, Oxford, 2005: pp. 

246–254.

[22] K. Norrish, J.A. Rausell-Colom, Low-Angle X-Ray Diffraction Studies of the Swelling of 

Montmorillonite and Vermiculite, Clays Clay Miner. 10 (1961) 123–149.

[23] K. Huang, P. Rowe, C. Chi, V. Sreepal, T. Bohn, K.-G. Zhou, Y. Su, E. Prestat, P.B. Pillai, C.T. Cherian, 

A. Michaelides, R.R. Nair, Cation-controlled wetting properties of vermiculite membranes and its 

promise for fouling resistant oil–water separation, Nat. Commun. 11 (2020) 1097.

[24] J.-J. Shao, K. Raidongia, A.R. Koltonow, J. Huang, Self-assembled two-dimensional nanofluidic 

proton channels with high thermal stability, Nat. Commun. 6 (2015) 7602.

[25] H. Li, J.S. Francisco, X.C. Zeng, Unraveling the mechanism of selective ion transport in hydrophobic 

subnanometer channels, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112 (2015) 10851–10856.

[26] G.F. Walker, Water Layers in Vermiculite, Nature. 163 (1949) 726–727.

[27] B. Tansel, Significance of thermodynamic and physical characteristics on permeation of ions during 

membrane separation: Hydrated radius, hydration free energy and viscous effects, Sep. Purif. 

Technol. 86 (2012) 119–126.

[28] M. Queralt-Martín, M.L. López, M. Aguilella-Arzo, V.M. Aguilella, A. Alcaraz, Scaling Behavior of 

Ionic Transport in Membrane Nanochannels, Nano Lett. 18 (2018) 6604–6610.

[29] W.M. Haynes, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 96th Edition, CRC Press, 2015.

[30] J.W. Perram, P.J. Stiles, On the nature of liquid junction and membrane potentials, Phys. Chem. 

Chem. Phys. 8 (2006) 4200–4213.

[31] A. Esfandiar, B. Radha, F.C. Wang, Q. Yang, S. Hu, S. Garaj, R.R. Nair, A.K. Geim, K. Gopinadhan, Size 

effect in ion transport through angstrom-scale slits, Science. 358 (2017) 511–513.

[32] M.L. Whittaker, L.N. Lammers, S. Carrero, B. Gilbert, J.F. Banfield, Ion exchange selectivity in clay is 

controlled by nanoscale chemical–mechanical coupling, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116 (2019) 22052–

22057.

[33] C. Xing, J. Han, X. Pei, Y. Zhang, J. He, R. Huang, S. Li, C. Liu, C. Lai, L. Shen, A.K. Nanjundan, S. 

Zhang, Tunable Graphene Oxide Nanofiltration Membrane for Effective Dye/Salt Separation and 

Desalination, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 13 (2021) 55339–55348.


16

SUPPLEMENTRY INFORMATION

Figure S1. The stability of Li-V membrane in aqueous LiCl solution.
Li-V membrane in various 

concentrations of LiCl ranging from 1 M to 10-5 M at time (a) t = 0, and (b) t = 2 minutes.

Figure S2. Surface optical microscope images of Na-V membrane. Optical images of a Na-V membrane 
surface (a) before it has been exposed to any voltage and (b) after it has been exposed to a concentration 
gradient of 105 and a voltage of 300 mV. The inset shows a magnified version of the same surface. 


17

Figure S3. The hydrophilicity of membranes. The water contact angle of (a) Li-V membrane, (b) K-V 
membrane, (c) Na-V membrane, (d) Ca-V membrane, (e) Al-V membrane. A contact angle of < 90o suggests 
hydrophilicity of all the membranes. As we go from K+ to Al3+, the net charge on the layers decreases since 
vermiculite would require more Al3+ to neutralize vacancies. If the layers are charge neutral, then they are 
expected to be hydrophobic.


18

Figure S4. Additional XRD data and ion exchange in membrane. (a) XRD peak (001) of raw vermiculite 
and Li-V membrane, where the former clearly shows multiple peaks, indicating the presence of several 
cations. (b) Change in the ionic conductance of K-V membrane when it is kept in 1 M AlCl3 solution, which 
indicates the conversion of K-V to Al-V, and each I-V cycle took almost 2 minutes to complete.

Figure S5. UV-Vis absorption spectra of dyes. (a) Schematic of dye filtration set-up. UV-Vis absorption 
spectra of (b) methyl orange, (c) crystal violet, (d) rhodamine 6G, (e) methyl blue, and (f) brilliant blue. 
Inset: Feed and permeate solutions. The increase in retentate intensity is an indication that the 
concentration of the dye is increasing on the feed side due to the outflow of water from feed to permeate. 


19

Figure S6. SEM images of the vermiculite sample. (a-e) cross-sectional images of Na-V membranes with 
thickness ranging from  ̴0.4 μm to  ̴1.2 μm used for the filtration, and (f) SEM image of Na-V membrane.


20

Figure S7. Rejection and permeance of different salt-stabilized membranes and dyes. (a) Time 
dependent water permeance recorded during the filtration of BB dye without any peristaltic pump. (b)
Rejection (%) of several dyes with their largest diameter varying from 1.19 nm to 2.73 nm with a  ̴700 nm
thick Na-V membrane where the permeance of water for all the dyes remained   ̴3200 ± 350 L m-2 h-1 bar-

1. (c) Initial water permeance (left Y-axis) and rejection of BB dye (right Y-axis) across  ̴700 nm thick salt-
stabilized membranes. The reduced water permeance of Al-V membranes compared to K-V might be due 
to less hydrophilicity of Al-V (Fig. S3). (d) Decrease in NaCl rejection (left Y-axis) and increase in water 
permeance (right Y-axis) with increase in applied pressure gradient through a  ̴1.2 µm Na-V membrane.


21

Figure S8. Dye and salt rejection study from a mixed solution. (a) At a differential pressure of 250 mbar, 
(b) At a differential pressure of 550 mbar. Dye rejection remained > 98%. (c) Salt rejection and water 
permeance at ΔP = 250 mbar and ΔP = 550 mbar through a  ̴ 1.2 µm thick Na-V membrane.

Figure S9. Forward osmosis experiment. (a) Diffusion current as a function of time due to the movement 
of ions from higher to lower concentration. (b) UV-Visible spectra of feed (1 M NaCl), permeate, and the 
spectra for a 10 mM NaCl control solution, which shows that the concentration of NaCl in the permeate 
is   ̴10 mM.


22

Figure S10. Ion transport measurement. (a) Schematic of our ion transport set up. (b) Water conductance 
of twelve salt-stabilized vermiculite membranes that were examined for their transport.

Figure S11. Decreasing selectivity with increasing cation valence. (a) Diffusion potential of KCl, NaCl, 
CaCl2, and AlCl3 through K-V, Na-V, Ca-V, and Al-V respectively at concentration gradients 10, 100, and 
1000, with CH = 1 M and CL = 1 mM to 1 M. The diffusion potential is corrected for the contribution of 
redox and liquid junction potential. The latter arises from the intrinsic difference in the mobility of cations 
versus anions. (b) Selectivity of vermiculite membranes stabilized and studied with the same chloride 
solutions.


23

Figure S12. Water and Ion flow. Schematic of the water flow and NaCl ion rejection at pressure gradients 
of (a) 50 mbar and (b) 550 mbar. Here the red and green balls indicate Na and Cl ions, respectively. The
ions are hydrated with water molecules surrounding the ion. The interlayer separation at 50 mbar is 
denoted as d1 and at 550 mbar as d2. The experimental result indicates that the interlayer separation d2 > 
d1, which leads to higher water flow and less rejection of salt ions at higher pressures.  


