Modernist Materials Synthesis: Finding

Thermodynamic Shortcuts with Hyperdimensional

Chemistry

James R. Neilson,∗,†,‡ Matthew J. McDermott,¶,§ and Kristin A. Persson∗,∥,§

†Department of Chemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO

‡School of Advanced Materials Discovery, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO

¶Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA

§Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA

∥Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA

E-mail: james.neilson@colostate.edu; kapersson@lbl.gov

Abstract

Synthesis remains a challenge for advancing materials science. A key focus of this chal-

lenge is how to enable selective synthesis, particularly as it pertains to metastable materials.

This perspective addresses the question: how can “spectator” elements, such as those found in

double ion exchange (metathesis) reactions, enable selective materials synthesis? By observ-

ing reaction pathways as they happen (in situ) and calculating their energetics using modern

computational thermodynamics, we observe transient, crystalline intermediates that suggest

that many reactions attain a local thermodynamic equilibrium dictated by local chemical po-

tentials far before achieving a global equilibrium set by the average composition. Using this

knowledge, one can thermodynamically “shortcut” unfavorable intermediates by including ad-

ditional elements beyond those of the desired target, providing access to a greater number of

1

arXiv:2303.11915v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  21 Mar 2023


intermediates with advantageous energetics and selective phase nucleation. Ultimately, data-

driven modeling that unites first-principles approaches with experimental insights will refine

the accuracy of emerging predictive retrosynthetic models for complex materials synthesis.

Introduction: Broader Context and Key Scientific Questions

New materials enable new technology. The most significant material in terms of economic impact

and quantity, concrete, is enabled by a phase that is metastable at room temperature: Ca3SiO5.1

This metastability is what allows it to be cured into concrete when mixed with water, CO2, and

aggregate. As such, Ca3SiO5 is synthesized at high temperatures and then quenched rapidly to

room temperature to avoid equilibration. Myriad materials predicted to offer interesting functional

electronic properties are metastable and not synthesizable under ambient or standard laboratory

conditions. Key examples are the successfully predicted high-temperature superconductors, FeB4
2

and LaH10,3 that were subsequently synthesized at extremely high pressures. Meanwhile, many

other functional materials have been predicted to be stable at ambient conditions.4 For example, the

battery electrode Li3FePO4CO3 evaded traditional synthesis and required alternative hydrothermal

and ion exchange chemistry for synthesis,5 thus demanding an improved understanding of synthe-

sis itself.

Accurate prediction of reaction kinetics from first principles requires knowledge of the complex

potential energy landscape defined by all atoms in materials, as well as their defects, surfaces, and

interfaces. Therefore, if we assume that reaction kinetics are too challenging to predict accurately

for an arbitrary reaction, then how do we take advantage of what we can calculate – thermodynam-

ics – to predict useful synthesis reactions? A key enabling hypothesis explored in this perspective

is that reactions between solids often achieve local thermodynamic equilibria at interfaces. Several

approaches can predict phase equilibria under different intensive and experimentally controllable

thermodynamic variables, such as temperature and pressure.6 However, we have a relatively poor

understanding of how intensive chemical variables (e.g., chemical potential, µ) influence the for-

2


mation of solids, especially when we desire materials that are characterized as metastable.7 As a

thought experiment illustrated in Figure 1, consider the stability and synthesis reactions for various

isomers of molecular C3H8O. To make the ground state 2-propanol, one can combine the essential

ingredients for a stoichiometric reaction, CH3CHCH2 +H2O. The preparation of other isomers is

facilitated by the inclusion of additional elements (e.g., Ag and I in the case of 1-propanol; Na and

Br in the case of methoxyethane). We call these additional elements “spectators” because they do

not appear in the final product. In reality, however, they have a profound influence over reaction

selectivity.

In the context of molecular chemistry, we think about those elements as facilitating specific

bond exchanges, since the transformations can occur one bond or one individual molecule at a time.

This contrasts the formation of crystalline solids, during which many bonds exchange in concert.

As such, it is not so straightforward to imagine how selective changes in the chemical formula or

chemical structure can manifest at the atomistic scale. Yet, in some cases, specific elements can be

selectively inserted and extracted in topochemical reactions,8 like those enabling the lithium-ion

battery chemistry of our modern personal electronics era.9 There, the lithium chemical potential

can be changed electrochemically to provide a selective driving force for lithium intercalation.

What about the other elements? How can the presence (or absence) of some elements and different

chemical potentials be used for selective synthesis?

Double ion exchange reactions, also known as “metathesis” reactions,11 provide an avenue to

address these questions, where the addition of non-essential elements influences the local elemen-

tal chemical potentials and the reaction progress. In the generic reaction scheme to make a target

compound AB, the simplest reaction could be written as A+B −−→ AB. In a metathesis reaction,

AC +BD −−→ AB+CD, the addition of C and D in the reaction modify the chemical potentials of

the species A and B. This is because the compounds AC and BD are stable over different ranges

of chemical potentials than A and B. Unfortunately, it has remained challenging to predict which

species C and D are most suitable for synthesizing an arbitrary target AB, as it has historically

required knowledge of the full experimental thermodynamic landscape.12 Today, modern thermo-

3


Figure 1: Standard enthalpies of formation of different isomers of C3H8O: 2-propanol, 1-propanol,
and methoxyethane.10 Also indicated are balanced reactions that include additional species needed
for selective reactions to produce the metastable isomers 1-propanol and methoxyethane.

dynamic databases fueled by accurate calculation of phase energies using density functional theory

(e.g., Materials Project,13 OQMD,14 aflowlib15), have since provided the needed infrastructure for

enabling chemical control of solid synthesis, as elaborated below. Furthermore, modern analytical

methods, such as synchrotron X-ray and time-of-flight neutron scattering methods, now allow us to

interrogate reaction progress as it happens in a so-called “panoramic synthesis.”16 By “cooking and

looking,” we test the thermodynamic hypothesis and can identify the breaking points of the model

to move toward a modernist paradigm of predictive retrosynthesis, a “holy grail” of computational

chemistry.17

Background: Existing approaches for synthesis prediction

Two overarching hypotheses allow us to understand and predict the progress of solid state reac-

tions: (a) reactions tend to be dictated by the interfaces between pairs of reactants18 and (b) the

total composition of the reacting system is locally undefined at the interface (i.e., the interface

does not “see” how far the reactants extend). Several different studies19–21 have incorporated one

or both of these concepts to deliver new insights.

4


Pairwise reactions have been observed directly with in situ electron microscopy during the

formation of YBa2Cu3O6+x, thus enabling understanding of correlated changes in bulk phase frac-

tions determined by in situ X-ray diffraction.18 Simply, the pairwise interaction between reactants

derives from the geometric constraints of a locally planar interface. As illustrated in Figure 2(a),

the interface between three solid components has a very limited probability of occurrence (note

that it is still possible, however, to have a three-component solid state reaction with an “open”

component such as a liquid or gas).22 Controlling the nature of these interfaces can influence the

reaction products. For example, engineered planar interfaces in “modulated elemental reactants”23

and sputtered thin films of reactants24 provide a geometric control over which pairwise reactions

occur first. In bulk powder reactions, providing a higher density of interfaces directly improves the

reaction progress.25 By focusing on pairwise reactions, it is possible to understand why and how

those partners evolve together.

Since the interface cannot “see” how much of each reactant there is, the first phase to form

may not be an equilibrium phase for the composition of the total system. The uncertainty around

first-phase formation has created a long-standing problem brought to technological relevance with

the development of Si-based microelectronics, where the understanding of metal silicide formation

is crucial. Initial hypotheses proposed that the most competitive phase to form at an interface is the

congruently melting phase with the highest melting point next to the lowest-temperature eutectic.27

Nowadays, access to large thermodynamic databases enabled by computational chemistry allows

us to calculate the most negative reaction energy for the compositionally-unconstrained mixture of

the two reactants, considering all available mixtures of products (Figure 2(b)).19 In the context of

synthesis, the first-phase-to-form often establishes the reaction pathway and the subsequent series

of steps, as observed during the formation of MgZrN2 by avoiding unreactive ZrN28 or during the

formation of NaCoO2 in which the most favorable interfacial reaction between CoO and Na2O2

yields O3-NaCoO2, even when the reaction is deficient in Na2O2.20 Relating to classical nucle-

ation theory, the phase with the lowest (most negative) reaction energy should have the smallest

5


Figure 2: Approaches for predicting and understanding materials synthesis using local thermody-
namics. (a) Pairwise reactions at interfaces tend to represent the pathway of complex reactions
involving solids. Reproduced with permission from Ref.18 (b) For a given set of phases, one can
compute the minimum (most negative) possible reaction energy across a series of compositions.19

A central hypothesis is that the reaction with the most negative free energy, unconstrained by the
overall composition, will be the first to occur at the interface (Reaction 1), as the nucleation bar-
rier depends strongly on the reaction energy (Eqn. 1). However, if two phases have a high degree
of structural similarity, one can hypothesize that the surface energy contribution of the nucleating
phase will be low (e.g., topochemistry) and also result in a low nucleation barrier, ∆G† (Reaction
2).21 (c) Schematic reaction coordinate diagram for a simple serial reaction pathway is represented
on the left. Actual solid-state reactions take place by multiple, parallel steps and can be better
modeled with a reaction network, as shown on the right. Reproduced with permission from Ref.26

activation barrier. This activation barrier scales as

∆G† ∝
γ3

∆G2rxn
,
(1)

6


where γ is a term denoting the energy cost of forming a surface of the nucleating phase, ∆Grxn

is the free energy of phase formation per volume, and shape effects are ignored.29 Thus, there is

a fundamental relationship that links thermodynamic quantities (reaction energy, surface energy)

to the relative rates of nucleation for different competing intermediates, with the assumption that

a higher nucleation rate yields a dominant reaction rate. However, it is challenging to assert that

such reactions are truly limited by nucleation when reactions occur in a diffusion-limited regime.

Regardless, if one assumes that diffusion is universally limiting, a minimal nucleation barrier can

provide an advantage. A complementary approach for assessing the relative rates of phase forma-

tion without explicit calculation of surface energies is to estimate relative reaction barriers from

structural self-similarity based on the principle of heterogeneous nucleation. In other words, re-

actants that are more structurally similar to their products ought to have a lower barrier.21 This

is schematically illustrated in Figure 2(b): while Reaction (1) has the most negative reaction en-

ergy, Reaction (2) may have a comparably low activation barrier for formation due to the structural

similarity between precursors and products. Building on the notion of “phase selection through

nucleation,”21 these physical principles allow the data-enabled synthetic scientist to start making

predictions.

In modern materials synthesis planning, we identify connections and correlations within the

large landscape of databases that link together composition, structure, and thermodynamic poten-

tials. When we consider a simplistic notion of a reaction coordinate diagram, we can consider the

energy balance progressing in a serial and linear fashion, as illustrated in Figure 2(c). However,

a more realistic representation is to consider the parallel but pairwise reactions with different re-

actants and intermediates in a graph-based network, in which each node is a phase (or mixture of

phases), and each edge is an individual reaction weighted by its “cost”. In its most simple form,

the cost of a reaction is often a function of its energy, ∆Grxn (Figure 2(d)).26 The modernist era

provides us with access to a very large available landscape in this representation, with numerous

approaches to weight the edge lengths and algorithms to identify the lowest cost pathways through

the network.30 With brute-force enumeration of all possible reactions using these large databases,

7


selective reactants have been identified as those with the fewest competing reaction products that

also have a favorable reaction energy.21 Altogether, there is a powerful quiver at our disposal for

enabling a new paradigm of materials synthesis.

Phase selection from local chemical potentials

With the conceptual stage set – unconstrained reservoirs, large thermodynamic databases, cooking-

and-looking – it is now possible to rationalize unusual observations from synthesis studies, such

as the use of “assisted” metathesis to produce different Y-Mn-O ternary phases. In the assisted

metathesis reaction (cf., Ref. [31]), 3 A2CO3 +2 YCl3 +Mn2O3 +1 atm O2, where A is an alkali,

each alkali yields different products when the reaction temperature is below 850 °C (see Fig 3).

For A = Li, the reaction yields the perovskite YMnO3 polymorph (o-YMnO3), yet when A = Na,

the reaction yields the pyrochlore Y2Mn2O7 polymorph under otherwise identical synthesis con-

ditions. For A = K, the reaction yields a mixture of phases below T < 850°C, and exclusively

the hexagonal YMnO3 polymorph for T ≥ 850°C (h-YMnO3). When the reaction temperature

exceeds 850 °C, all three alkali species yield h-YMnO3. These observations raise the questions:

(1) which of the three ternary Y-Mn-O phases are stable under what conditions, and (2) how/why

does the alkali “spectator” ion produce such distinct changes in product formation?

From the preceding experimental phase diagram and other studies of high-temperature ceramic

reactions,33,34 h-YMnO3 was reported to be the bulk stable phase above T = 850 °C. Synthesis

of o-YMnO3 typically requires quite oxidizing conditions, such as 35 kbar (≈3.5 GPa) of oxy-

gen pressure at Trxn = 1000 °C,35 or curiously, a lower-temperature reaction at 800 °C using an

amorphous precursor formed by the decomposition of citrate salts.36 In the modernist approach,

we illustrated that the incorporation of metal vacancies from oxidation (e.g., Y1−xMn1−yO3, also

referred to as YMnO3+δ) thermodynamically stabilizes the o-YMnO3 polymorph37 in agreement

with T- and pO2-dependent metathesis reactions.38 Y2Mn2O7 typically requires rather extreme

conditions for synthesis, such as 30 kbar O2 reactions with KIO4 at T = 1000 °C,39 or 500 °C

8


Figure 3: Observed reaction products for different A = Li, Na, vs K in the reaction, 3 A2CO3 +
2 YCl3 +Mn2O3 +O2 (1 atm): o-YMnO3+δ, Y2Mn2O7, and h-YMnO3,32 their crystal structures,
and known stability conditions. Adapted with permission from Ref.32 Copyright 2019 American
Chemical Society

hydrothermal reactions with ClO –
3 .40 In the modernist approach, with density functional theory

calculations in conjunction with T-dependent elemental references and a machine-learned expres-

sion for vibrational entropy,41 we find that Y2Mn2O7 is thermodynamically stable below T ≤ 1000

°C and favored over YMnO3 when pO2 ≥ 0.7 atm.42 It follows that Y2Mn2O7 should actually be

formed in all of these assisted metathesis reactions, given that they are performed at pO2 ≈ 0.85

atm. Therefore, the alkali “spectators” must somehow influence the reaction pathway to shift the

local equilibrium. It is sensible that a lower-temperature reaction can yield a more oxidized prod-

uct; however, it is not yet clear why Li2CO3 and Na2CO3 precursors arrive at different reaction

products even when performed at an identical temperature and pO2. The fact that the Na-based

precursor leads to the more oxidized product, Y2Mn2O7, is even more perplexing given that the

Na-based reaction is more exothermic and could yield more reducing conditions than the Li-based

reaction if the local interface experiences quasi-adiabatic self-heating.

To understand the interface between reactants, the intensive variable of chemical potential, µ,

best describes the local equilibrium between effectively unrestricted reservoirs of reacting elemen-

tal species. All interfaces evolve towards a local equilibrium where atomic chemical potentials

9


Figure 4: (a) Generalized chemical potential diagram of the Y-Mn-O system. Reaction of Y2O3 +
2 MnO2 should result in the initial formation of some amount of YMn2O5. (b) Y-Mn-O chemical
potential diagram with a projection of the LiMnO2 domain.42 The illustrated overlap between this
domain and YMnO3 suggests a lower effective activation barrier for LiMnO2 to form YMnO3. (c)
Similarly, the location of the NaMnO2 overlapping region42 allows for a lower effective activation
barrier in forming Y2Mn2O7. Adapted with permission from Ref.42 Copyright 2021 American
Chemical Society

equalize across the interface, as the rate of mass transfer is proportional to the chemical potential

gradient. While a large difference in chemical potential can provide a high rate of diffusion (and

thus reaction), if the difference is too large, it may also necessitate the formation of another phase

that is stable over intermediate ranges of chemical potential. This fact also explains why synthesis

reactions from pure elemental precursors (mixed in the proper ratios) do not always result in the

expected products despite possessing the most significant thermodynamic advantage (i.e., the most

negative reaction energy possible). The difficulty in synthesizing a target product is especially true

when multiple polymorphs may be accessible, such as with the isomers in Figure 1. A thermo-

dynamic explanation is that the elemental precursor and desired target often do not form a stable

interface due to competition from other phases that form over intermediate chemical potentials. By

adding spectator ions to our elemental precursors, we can modify the chemical potentials of the

reacting species such that a stable interface should be formed with our desired target, supporting

10


direct and selective reaction to a product that is stable over a particular range of chemical poten-

tials. The addition of spectator elements also increases the dimensionality of the chemical potential

space, allowing one to bypass undesired intermediates. Finally, if the spectator ions together form

an energetically favorable byproduct (e.g., an alkali halide), then it is possible to “re-claim” some

of the reaction driving force that is lost to using a more stable precursor (i.e., one containing bonds

with the spectator species).

Mapping the Y-Mn-O phase equilibria in terms of the elemental chemical potentials on a gen-

eralized chemical potential diagram (e.g., a 3-dimensional diagram with the axes, µY, µMn, and µO,

Figure 4(a))12 allows us to directly observe which phases exhibit stable interfaces with each other.

This map of stable interfaces rationalizes the observation of specific intermediate compounds. For

example, a reaction of Y2O3 +2MnO2 or Y2O3 +Mn2O3 should necessarily produce YMn2O5 on

route to forming Y2Mn2O7 or YMnO3. Indeed, previous work32,38 has shown that for T ≤ 850 °C,

the reaction halts at YMn2O5 and does not yield stoichiometric completion of the reaction which

would be the global thermodynamic equilibrium.33

However, the assisted metathesis reactions proceed through AxMnO2 and YOCl intermedi-

ates, as learned from in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction experiments. To visualize this high-

dimensional phase equilibria, it is possible to extract lower-dimensional slices of the full N = 6

high-dimensional phase space, as illustrated by the intersection of the different AxMnO2 phases

onto the Y-Mn-O chemical subspace (Figure 4). Focusing on the role of LiMnO2 in Figure 4(b),

it shares a stable interface with YMnO3 but not Y2Mn2O7. Therefore, to maintain a local equi-

librium, the LiMnO2 intermediate would have to subsequently form Li2MnO3, LiMn2O4, and

“Li5Mn7O16” (each with distinct crystal structures) to produce Y2Mn2O7.42 As the chemistry pro-

ceeds at a lower temperature through a defective LixMnO2 intermediate, the higher µO stabilizes

the o-YMnO3 polymorph.37 In other words, we infer that LiMnO2 has a lower effective activation

barrier to form YMnO3 than Y2Mn2O7 because the reaction does not need to proceed through

subsequent intermediates.

In contrast, the assisted metathesis reaction with Na proceeds through NaxMnO2 intermediates.

11


Visualized in Figure 4(c), the projection of NaMnO2 into the Y-Mn-O subspace reveals a stable

interface with Y2Mn2O7. Hence, the Na-containing reaction exhibits a lower effective activation

barrier to nucleate Y2Mn2O7 and does not necessitate the formation of additional intermediates.

In the case of KMnO2, it forms stable interfaces with both YMnO3 and YMn2O5 and indeed, a

mixture of both of these products forms after 24 h reactions at Trxn = 850 °C.32 These in situ

observations, coupled with a map of the high-dimensional chemical space, illustrate that different

“spectator” elements modify the chemical potentials of the precursors differently, thereby changing

which intermediates and/or products are accessible. This understanding enables a chemistry-based

control of phase selection.

More generally, the addition of non-essential elements into the reaction facilitates the reaction

progress with thermodynamics alone. For example, when considering over 3000 different enu-

merated reactions to produce Y2Mn2O7, the average change in local chemical potentials (i.e., the

minimum chemical potential “distance” as measured on a chemical potential diagram) decreases

systematically with the number of elements while not significantly affecting the mean reaction

energy available (Figure 5). This can be intuited: as you add more “spectators,” you increase the

likelihood that there will be an intermediate phase that forms stable interfaces between reactant(s)

and product(s), or between other intermediates. This also matches geometric intuition – by increas-

ing the number of dimensions of our chemical potential space, we increase the available number of

phase boundaries shared with the desired product(s). The spectator approach is a way of replacing

the need to form two or more intermediates with only one, or possibly none at all. This is, in

effect, a shortcut through the now larger accessible thermodynamic phase space and a means to

affect selectivity.

Outlook

When we consider “hyperdimensional” chemical reactions – reactions that include elements be-

yond those contained in the product – the reaction design space increases dramatically. In a pre-

12


Figure 5: As illustrated for the nearly 3000 enumerated reaction pathways to synthesize Y2Mn2O7
in the Na-Cl-Y-Mn-O-C chemical system,42 (a) including additional elements in a reaction tends
not to significantly shift the mean grand potential reaction energy, ∆Φrxn), when examining all
enumerated pathways to form Y2Mn2O7. (b) However, increasing the number of elements in the
system does significantly decrease the total change in chemical potential (e.g., chemical potential
“distance”), thus illustrating the presence of thermodynamic shortcuts. Reprinted with permission
from Ref.42 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society

vious perspective concerning “kinetic control” in materials synthesis,43 we voiced the challenge

of how to selectively control reaction barriers in a general manner. Here, we effect this notion

by using the local chemical potential to minimize the number of phases that need to nucleate.

The chemical control provides thermodynamic shortcuts as a means for “phase selection through

nucleation.”

Looking forward, a significant challenge is finding other non-trivial reactions that test these

13


principles. In the synthesis of YMnO3 phases, it was recognized many years ago that “kinetic

factors” played a role in reaction outcomes.44 Here we argue that these kinetic factors are intuited

by the formation of local chemical equilibrium intermediates that effectively halt the reaction. To

explore to what extent the broader term kinetic factors can be cast into a more quantitative frame-

work of local thermodynamics, we need to test our hypothesis with additional systems. We note

that our hypothesis encompasses the notion of “remnant metastability,”7 such that the phases we

call “metastable” often form under conditions where that phase is indeed, locally or globally, the

most stable phase that can be formed at an interface. Knobs that can be turned to affect the thermo-

dynamic landscape include e.g. strain, dimensionality, external fields, and chemical potential.45

Given the use of databases and natural language processing techniques,46–49 modernist materials

chemists have many tools at their disposal.

If our goal is to arrive at a fully predictive model for synthesis planning, many fundamental

knowledge gaps remain. Examining thermodynamic variables alone (e.g., reaction energies, min-

imum changes in chemical potentials), we do not yet understand how to accurately and efficiently

include the role of atomistic disorder when assessing energy or diffusion. In reactivity models

using graph networks, the “kinetic” barrier imagined to contribute to the distance between nodes

is still unknown30 Furthermore, we acknowledge that in many real-life cases, there is a true time

dependence to the reaction outcome (e.g., the specific 17±0.5 h reaction required to make super-

conducting Bi3O2S3
50). In fact, there is a clear variability in the formation of Y2Mn2O7, such that

some reactions, unexpectedly, produce a mixture of Y2O3 and Mn2O3 binaries.32,51 Given the im-

mense complexity of the true potential energy landscape and the time-dependent kinetic processes

that influence the movement across that landscape, new modernist approaches beyond reaction-

diffusion kinetics52 will enable significant advances. Different communities with different tools

and approaches united by fundamental synthesis questions – be it for a specific application or sci-

entific curiosity – have made significant strides and still have many exciting discoveries to be made

at the next interface.

14


Acknowledgements

This work was supported as part of GENESIS: A Next Generation Synthesis Center, an Energy

Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic En-

ergy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0019212.

Conflict of Interest Statement

On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.

Data Availability

The full set of enumerated chemical reactions, as well as all experimental raw data, processed data,

data processing scripts, and figure plotting scripts, are available at:

https://github.com/GENESISEFRC/y2mn2o7-selectivity, and

https://github.com/GENESIS-EFRC/reaction-network.

References

(1) West, A. R. Solid state chemistry and its applications, second edition, student edition ed.;

Wiley: Chichester, West Sussex, UK, 2014.

(2) Gou, H.; Dubrovinskaia, N.; Bykova, E.; Tsirlin, A. A.; Kasinathan, D.; Schnelle, W.;

Richter, A.; Merlini, M.; Hanfland, M.; Abakumov, A. M.; Batuk, D.; Van Tendeloo, G.;

Nakajima, Y.; Kolmogorov, A. N.; Dubrovinsky, L. Discovery of a Superhard Iron Tetra-

boride Superconductor. Physical Review Letters 2013, 111, 157002.

(3) Drozdov, A. P.; Kong, P. P.; Minkov, V. S.; Besedin, S. P.; Kuzovnikov, M. A.; Mozaffari, S.;

Balicas, L.; Balakirev, F. F.; Graf, D. E.; Prakapenka, V. B.; Greenberg, E.; Knyazev, D. A.;

15


Tkacz, M.; Eremets, M. I. Superconductivity at 250 K in lanthanum hydride under high

pressures. Nature 2019, 569, 528–531.

(4) Jain, A.; Shin, Y.; Persson, K. A. Computational predictions of energy materials using density

functional theory. Nature Reviews Materials 2016, 1, 15004.

(5) Chen, H.; Hautier, G.; Jain, A.; Moore, C.; Kang, B.; Doe, R.; Wu, L.; Zhu, Y.; Tang, Y.;

Ceder, G. Carbonophosphates: A New Family of Cathode Materials for Li-Ion Batteries Iden-

tified Computationally. Chemistry of Materials 2012, 24, 2009–2016.

(6) Bartel, C. J. Review of computational approaches to predict the thermodynamic stability of

inorganic solids. Journal of Materials Science 2022, 57, 10475–10498.

(7) Sun, W.; Dacek, S. T.; Ong, S. P.; Hautier, G.; Jain, A.; Richards, W. D.; Gamst, A. C.;

Persson, K. A.; Ceder, G. The thermodynamic scale of inorganic crystalline metastability.

Science Advances 2016, 2, e1600225.

(8) England, W.; Goodenough, J.; Wiseman, P. Ion-exchange reactions of mixed oxides. Journal

of Solid State Chemistry 1983, 49, 289–299.

(9) Mizushima, K.; Jones, P.; Wiseman, P.; Goodenough, J. LixCoO2 (0<x≤1): A new cathode

material for batteries of high energy density. Solid State Ionics 1981, 3-4, 171–174.

(10) Lide, D. R.; Kehiaian, H. V. CRC HANDBOOK of THERMOPHYSICAL and THERMO-

CHEMICAL DATA, 1st ed.; CRC Press, 2020.

(11) Wustrow, A.; Neilson, J. R. Reference Module in Chemistry, Molecular Sciences and Chemi-

cal Engineering; Elsevier, 2022; p B9780128231449000753.

(12) Yokokawa, H. Generalized chemical potential diagram and its applications to chemical reac-

tions at interfaces between dissimilar materials. Journal of Phase Equilibria 1999, 20, 258–

287.

16


(13) Jain, A.; Ong, S. P.; Hautier, G.; Chen, W.; Richards, W. D.; Dacek, S.; Cholia, S.; Gunter, D.;

Skinner, D.; Ceder, G.; Persson, K. A. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials

genome approach to accelerating materials innovation. APL Materials 2013, 1, 011002.

(14) Saal, J. E.; Kirklin, S.; Aykol, M.; Meredig, B.; Wolverton, C. Materials Design and Dis-

covery with High-Throughput Density Functional Theory: The Open Quantum Materials

Database (OQMD). JOM 2013, 65, 1501–1509.

(15) Curtarolo, S.; Setyawan, W.; Hart, G. L.; Jahnatek, M.; Chepulskii, R. V.; Taylor, R. H.;

Wang, S.; Xue, J.; Yang, K.; Levy, O.; Mehl, M. J.; Stokes, H. T.; Demchenko, D. O.; Mor-

gan, D. AFLOW: An automatic framework for high-throughput materials discovery. Compu-

tational Materials Science 2012, 58, 218–226.

(16) Shoemaker, D. P.; Hu, Y.-J.; Chung, D. Y.; Halder, G. J.; Chupas, P. J.; Soderholm, L.;

Mitchell, J. F.; Kanatzidis, M. G. In situ studies of a platform for metastable inorganic crystal

growth and materials discovery. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2014, 111,

10922–10927.

(17) Kovnir, K. Predictive synthesis. Chemistry of Materials 2021, 33, 4835–4841.

(18) Miura, A.; Bartel, C. J.; Goto, Y.; Mizuguchi, Y.; Moriyoshi, C.; Kuroiwa, Y.; Wang, Y.;

Yaguchi, T.; Shirai, M.; Nagao, M.; Rosero-Navarro, N. C.; Tadanaga, K.; Ceder, G.; Sun, W.

Observing and Modeling the Sequential Pairwise Reactions that Drive Solid-State Ceramic

Synthesis. Advanced Materials 2021, 33, 2100312.

(19) Richards, W. D.; Miara, L. J.; Wang, Y.; Kim, J. C.; Ceder, G. Interface Stability in Solid-

State Batteries. Chemistry of Materials 2016, 28, 266–273.

(20) Bianchini, M.; Wang, J.; Cl´ement, R. J.; Ouyang, B.; Xiao, P.; Kitchaev, D.; Shi, T.;

Zhang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Kim, H.; Zhang, M.; Bai, J.; Wang, F.; Sun, W.; Ceder, G. The in-

terplay between thermodynamics and kinetics in the solid-state synthesis of layered oxides.

Nature Materials 2020, 19, 1088–1095.

17


(21) Aykol, M.; Montoya, J. H.; Hummelshøj, J. Rational Solid-State Synthesis Routes for Inor-

ganic Materials. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2021, 143, 9244–9259.

(22) Schmalzried, H. Chemical Kinetics of Solids, 1st ed.; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, 2008; OCLC:

890041543.

(23) Johnson, D. C. Controlled synthesis of new compounds using modulated elemental reactants.

Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science 1998, 3, 159–167.

(24) McAuliffe, R. D.; Huang, G.; Montiel, D.; Mehta, A.; Davis, R. C.; Petrova, V.; Brown-

ing, K. L.; Neilson, J. R.; Liu, P.; Thornton, K.; Veith, G. M. Thin-Film Paradigm to Probe

Interfacial Diffusion during Solid-State Metathesis Reactions. Chemistry of Materials 2022,

34, 6279–6287.

(25) Kamm, G. E.; Huang, G.; Vornholt, S. M.; McAuliffe, R. D.; Veith, G. M.; Thornton, K. S.;

Chapman, K. W. Relative Kinetics of Solid-State Reactions: The Role of Architecture in

Controlling Reactivity. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2022, 144, 11975–11979.

(26) McDermott, M. J.; Dwaraknath, S. S.; Persson, K. A. A graph-based network for predicting

chemical reaction pathways in solid-state materials synthesis. Nature Communications 2021,

12, 3097.

(27) Walser, R. M.; Ben´e, R. W. First phase nucleation in silicon–transition-metal planar inter-

faces. Applied Physics Letters 1976, 28, 624–625.

(28) Rom, C. L.; Fallon, M. J.; Wustrow, A.; Prieto, A. L.; Neilson, J. R. Bulk Synthesis, Structure,

and Electronic Properties of Magnesium Zirconium Nitride Solid Solutions. Chemistry of

Materials 2021, 33, 5345–5354.

(29) d’Heurle, F. M. Nucleation of a new phase from the interaction of two adjacent phases: Some

silicides. Journal of Materials Research 1988, 3, 167–195.

18


(30) Wen, M.; Spotte-Smith, E. W. C.; Blau, S. M.; McDermott, M. J.; Krishnapriyan, A. S.;

Persson, K. A. Chemical reaction networks and opportunities for machine learning. Nature

Computational Science 2023,

(31) Toberer, E. S.; Weaver, J. C.; Ramesha, K.; Seshadri, R. Macroporous monoliths of functional

perovskite materials through assisted metathesis. Chemistry of Materials 2004, 16, 2194–

2200.

(32) Todd, P. K.; Neilson, J. R. Selective Formation of Yttrium Manganese Oxides through Kinet-

ically Competent Assisted Metathesis Reactions. Journal of the American Chemical Society

2019, 141, 1191–1195.

(33) Fedorova, O. M.; Titova, S. G.; Balakirev, V. F.; Golikov, Y. V. Heterogeneous equilibria in

the Y-Mn-O and Tm-Mn-O systems in air. Russian Journal of Applied Chemistry 2004, 77,

1556–1558.

(34) Smith, A. E.; Mizoguchi, H.; Delaney, K.; Spaldin, N. A.; Sleight, A. W.; Subramanian, M. A.

Mn 3+ in Trigonal Bipyramidal Coordination: A New Blue Chromophore. Journal of the

American Chemical Society 2009, 131, 17084–17086.

(35) Wood, V. E.; Austin, A. E.; Collings, E. W.; Brog, K. C. Magnetic properties of heavy-rare-

earth orthomanganites. Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 1973, 34, 859–868.

(36) Brinks, H.; Fjellv˚ag, H.; Kjekshus, A. Synthesis of Metastable Perovskite-type YMnO3 and

HoMnO3. Journal of Solid State Chemistry 1997, 129, 334–340.

(37) Todd, P. K. et al. Defect-Accommodating Intermediates Yield Selective Low-Temperature

Synthesis of YMnO 3 Polymorphs. Inorganic Chemistry 2020, 59, 13639–13650.

(38) Todd, P. K.; Smith, A. M. M.; Neilson, J. R. Yttrium Manganese Oxide Phase Stability and

Selectivity Using Lithium Carbonate Assisted Metathesis Reactions. Inorganic Chemistry

2019, 58, 15166–15174.

19


(39) Fujinaka, H.; Kinomura, N.; Koizumi, M.; Miyamoto, Y.; Kume, S. Syntheses and physi-

cal properties of pyrochlore-type A2B2O7 (A=Tl,Y; B=Cr,Mn). Materials Research Bulletin

1979, 14, 1133–1137, ISBN: 0911330550.

(40) Subramanian, M. A.; Torardi, C. C.; Johnson, D. C.; Pannetier, J.; Sleight, A. W. Ferromag-

netic R2Mn207 Pyrochlores ( R = Dy-Lu , Y )*. 1988, 30, 24–30.

(41) Bartel, C. J.; Millican, S. L.; Deml, A. M.; Rumptz, J. R.; Tumas, W.; Weimer, A. W.;

Lany, S.; Stevanovi´c, V.; Musgrave, C. B.; Holder, A. M. Physical descriptor for the Gibbs

energy of inorganic crystalline solids and temperature-dependent materials chemistry. Nature

Communications 2018, 9, 4168.

(42) Todd, P. K.; McDermott, M. J.; Rom, C. L.; Corrao, A. A.; Denney, J. J.; Dwaraknath, S. S.;

Khalifah, P. G.; Persson, K. A.; Neilson, J. R. Selectivity in Yttrium Manganese Oxide Syn-

thesis via Local Chemical Potentials in Hyperdimensional Phase Space. Journal of the Amer-

ican Chemical Society 2021, 143, 15185–15194.

(43) Martinolich, A. J.; Neilson, J. R. Toward Reaction-by-Design: Achieving Kinetic Control of

Solid State Chemistry with Metathesis. Chemistry of Materials 2017, 29, 479–489.

(44) Giaquinta, D. M.; zur Loye, H.-C. Structural Predictions in the ABO3 Phase Diagram. Chem-

istry of Materials 1994, 6, 365–372, ISBN: 0897-4756.

(45) Sun, W.; Powell-Palm, M. J. Generalized Gibbs’ Phase Rule. 2021, Publisher: arXiv Version

Number: 1.

(46) Kononova, O.; Huo, H.; He, T.; Rong, Z.; Botari, T.; Sun, W.; Tshitoyan, V.; Ceder, G.

Text-mined dataset of inorganic materials synthesis recipes. Scientific Data 2019, 6, 203.

(47) Kim, E.; Huang, K.; Saunders, A.; McCallum, A.; Ceder, G.; Olivetti, E. Materials Synthesis

Insights from Scientific Literature via Text Extraction and Machine Learning. Chemistry of

Materials 2017, 29, 9436–9444.

20


(48) He, T.; Sun, W.; Huo, H.; Kononova, O.; Rong, Z.; Tshitoyan, V.; Botari, T.; Ceder, G.

Similarity of Precursors in Solid-State Synthesis as Text-Mined from Scientific Literature.

Chemistry of Materials 2020, 32, 7861–7873.

(49) Huo, H.; Bartel, C. J.; He, T.; Trewartha, A.; Dunn, A.; Ouyang, B.; Jain, A.; Ceder, G.

Machine-learning rationalization and prediction of solid-state synthesis conditions. Chem-

istry of Materials 2022, 34, 7323–7336, arXiv:2204.08151 [cond-mat].

(50) Phelan, W. A.; Wallace, D. C.; Arpino, K. E.; Neilson, J. R.; Livi, K. J.; Seabourne, C. R.;

Scott, A. J.; McQueen, T. M. Stacking Variants and Superconductivity in the Bi–O–S System.

Journal of the American Chemical Society 2013, 135, 5372–5374.

(51) Wustrow, A.; McDermott, M. J.; O’Nolan, D.; Liu, C.-H.; Tran, G. T.; McBride, B. C.;

Vornholt, S. M.; Feng, C.; Dwaraknath, S. S.; Chapman, K. W.; Billinge, S. J. L.; Sun, W.;

Persson, K. A.; Neilson, J. R. Reaction Selectivity in Cometathesis: Yttrium Manganese

Oxides. Chemistry of Materials 2022, 34, 4694–4702.

(52) Dybkov, V. I. Reaction diffusion in heterogeneous binary systems: Part 1 Growth of the

chemical compound layers at the interface between two elementary substances: one com-

pound layer. Journal of Materials Science 1986, 21, 3078–3084.

21


