1

Proton-fluence dependent magnetic properties of exfoliable quasi-2D van der Waals 

Cr2Si2Te6 magnet

Hector Iturriaga1#, Ju Chen2#, Jing Yang2, Luis M. Martinez1,3, Martin Kirk2,4,5&, Lin Shao6, Y. 

Liu7,$, C. Petrovic7, Srinivasa R. Singamaneni1*

1Department of Physics, The University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX 79968, USA

2Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, The University of New Mexico, MSC03 2060, 1 

University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131-0001, United States, 

3Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 

87545

4The Center for High Technology Materials, The University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New 

Mexico 87106, United States 

5Center for Quantum Information and Control (CQuIC), The University of New Mexico, 

Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131-0001, United States.

6Department of Nuclear Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77845, USA

7Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, 

Upton, New York 11973, USA

$Present address: Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545, USA

Abstract

The discovery of long-range magnetic ordering in atomically thin materials catapulted the van der 
Waals (vdW) family of compounds into an unprecedented popularity. In particular, with a current 
push in space exploration, it is beneficial to study how the properties of such materials evolve
under proton irradiation. Owing to their robust intra-layer stability and sensitivity to external 
perturbations, these materials provide excellent opportunities for studying proton irradiation as a 
non-destructive tool for controlling their magnetic properties. Specifically, the exfoliable 
Cr2Si2Te6 (CST) is a ferromagnetic semiconductor with the Curie temperature (TC) of ~32 K. Here, 
we have investigated the magnetic properties of CST upon proton irradiation as a function of 
fluence (1 x 1015, 5 x 1015, 1 x 1016, 5 x 1016, and 1 x 1018 H+/cm2) by employing variable-
temperature, variable-field magnetization measurements coupled with electron paramagnetic 
resonance (EPR) spectroscopy and detail how the magnetization, magnetic anisotropy and EPR 
spectral parameters vary as a function of proton fluence across the magnetic phase transition. 
While the TC remains constant as a function of proton fluence, we observed that the saturation 
magnetization and magnetic anisotropy diverge at the proton fluence of 5 x 1016 H+/cm2, which is 


2

prominent in the ferromagnetic phase, in particular. This work demonstrates that proton irradiation 
is a feasible method for modifying the magnetic properties and local magnetic interactions of vdWs 
crystals, which represents a significant step forward in the design of future spintronic and magneto-
electronic applications.

*srao@utep.edu

&mkirk@unm.edu

#equally contributed

Introduction and Motivation

Pioneering transition metal-based vdW magnets such as CrI3 and Cr2Ge2Te6 have been 

successfully studied at the single-layer limit, displaying novel and exciting long-range magnetic 

ordering at the 2-dimensional level. This offers hope for the creation of ultrathin magnetic data 

storage devices, spintronic applications, and other cost-effective magnetic devices. [1–5] Of 

particular importance, with renewed interest in space exploration, it is beneficial to investigate the 

behavior of these materials under the effects of proton irradiation. In space, where proton 

irradiation is abundant, bombardment by such particles can quickly modify their electronic and 

magentic properties. Thus, the robust intralayer properties of these compounds make them 

excellent candidates for studying the limits of proton irradiation on such functional materials. 

Particularly, though not exclusively, in the case of ternary transition metal-based vdW 

chalcogenides such as Fe2.7GeTe2 (FGT) and Mn3Si2Te6 (MST), our group has found that proton 

irradiation serves as a non-destructive tool for controlling the magnetic properties of these 

compounds. [6–11] These compounds owe their enhanced magnetization after irradiation to their 

strong intralayer bonds, robust magnetic character, and sensitivity to external perturbations. 

Here, we explore the effects of non-destructive proton irradiation on the related compound 

Cr2Si2Te6 (CST). Paired with its layer-dependent magnetism, proton-irradiated CST could lead to 

breakthroughs in the creation of functional 2D magnets, novel heterostructures, and new high-

speed magnetic devices. In this ternary chromium chalcogenide, the ferromagnetic ordering 

temperature is only 32 K, making it unsuitable for consumer applications. However, its magnetic 

properties are stable even under extreme conditions; hence, proton irradiation may be a suitable 

approach to enhance the properties of CST without destroying it. For this reason, we have 

investigated the evolution of the Curie temperature (TC), saturation magnetization, and 

magnetocrystalline anisotropy in CST crystals irradiated with proton doses of up 1 x 1018 (H+)/cm2


3

by employing variable-temperature, variable-field magnetization measurements coupled with 

electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy.

Experimental Details

The synthesis of mm-sized CST crystals was conducted as previously reported with the 

self-flux method starting with Cr powder and Si and Te pieces. [12] The crystals were then 

irradiated with a 2 MeV proton beam in 1.7 MV Tandetron Accelerator following closely the 

procedure discussed. [6-9] The energy of the beam is kept low enough to avoid damage to the 

crystal. In addition, the weak beam current of 100 nA, beam spot size of 6mm x 6mm rastered over 

an area of 1.2 cm x 1.2 cm, and magnetic bending filters ensure lateral beam uniformity, minimal 

heating, and eliminate carbon contamination. The projected implantation depth is approximately 

35 microns according to the damage profile, which shows a uniform distribution of H from the 

surface down to approximately 30 microns from the surface, at which point there is a noticeable 

increase. The fluences selected for this study are 0 (referred to as pristine in this work), 1 x 1015, 

5 x 1015, 1 x 1016, 5 x 1016, and 1 x 1018 H+/cm2.

The magnetic properties of the crystals were characterized using a Quantum Design 

Magnetic Property Measurement System 3 (MPMS 3) Superconducting QUantum Interference 

Device/Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (SQUID/VSM) hybrid system. DC magnetic moment 

data were extracted using the VSM option throughout all temperature and field ranges. The 

measurements were conducted in a temperature range of 2 K – 300 K and at magnetic fields up to 

30 kOe in both polarities. Samples were loaded separately into the MPMS by wrapping them in 

Teflon tape to avoid contamination from sample holders or from contact with the instrument 

chamber. In the case of magnetic moment anisotropy measurements, we used both quartz and brass 

sample holders, which allow for in-plane (where the crystallographic ab-plane is parallel to the 

applied field) and out-of-plane (where the c-axis is parallel to the applied field) magnetization 

measurements. Contributions to the magnetic moment from the sample holders was corrected 

using the MPMS 3 MultiVu software.

Temperature-dependent X-band (~9.49 GHz) EPR spectroscopic studies were also 

performed for each sample. Samples were individually wrapped with Teflon tape and mounted 

onto a sample holder assembly such that the c-axis of the crystal was oriented parallel to the applied 

magnetic field. Measurements were performed by first setting the temperature and allowing the 

samples to reach thermal equilibrium, and then the scanning the magnetic field between 0 G to 


4

7000 G. To avoid the effects of remanent magnetization between temperature points, the magnetic 

field was removed, the sample was warmed above its Curie temperature, and finally cooled down 

to the next temperature point. Measurements were performed at select temperatures between 10 K 

and 77 K.

Results and Discussion

Figure 1a shows a plot of magnetization vs. temperature at various proton fluences. The 

data were collected along the out-of-plane (H//c) direction with a cooling field of 1 kOe. These 

field cooled (FC) measurements were conducted by cooling the sample from room temperature 

down to 10 K under an applied magnetic field. The sample was then allowed to reach thermal 

equilibrium before the magnetic field was set to 500 Oe, and then the temperature was increased

incrementally back to 300 K. For a better visualization of the ferromagnetic phase of CST, only 

the range from 10 K – 100 K is shown in Figure 1, since the samples are paramagnetic beyond 50 

K. As reflected in this figure, a sharp ferromagnetic to paramagnetic transition is noticed for all 

the samples regardless of proton fluence. Estimation of the Curie temperature (TC) via the first 

derivative of the magnetization with respect to the temperature (Figure 1b) yields a value of 

approximately 36 K, which agrees well with literature reports. [12–15] In addition, the low 

temperature behavior shows that there is a clear change in magnetization after irradiation. 

Unexpectedly, the magnetization of the 5 x 1015 H+/cm2 fluence (orange, upright triangles) slightly 

exceeds the magnetization of the pristine sample at 10 K, before rapidly dropping below the 

magnetization of the pristine sample at 12 K. For all other proton fluences, we observed a clear 

decrease in the magnetization. We believe that there is a small Curie-Weiss component induced 

by the proton irradiation as all the curves below TC turn upwards at lowest temperatures.

Particularly, at 10 K, the sample irradiated with 5 x 1016 H+/cm2 (Figure1a, green rhombus) 

displays a magnetization of 4.5 emu/g, a remarkable 40% decrease from the pristine magnetization 

of 7.5 emu/g. The sample with 5 x 1016 H+/cm2 fluence shows the most dramatic decrease in 

magnetization, hence the comparison in the magnetization between this compound and the pristine 

compound will be emphasized for the following discussion of anisotropic temperature-dependent 

measurements. These measurements were also performed along the in-plane direction (H//ab) to 

gather information about the magnetocrystalline nature of the samples. Figure 2 details a 

comparison of the H//c (solid symbols) and H//ab (open symbols) magnetization vs. temperature 

curves for both FC (cyan symbols) and ZFC (navy blue symbols) measurements. ZFC 


5

measurements were performed by cooling the sample in the absence of a magnetic field. As 

expected, the magnetization is higher in the H//c direction, as this is the magnetic easy axis of CST 

and provides the evidence for a strong perpendicular magnetocrystalline anisotropy in the 

system. [12–16] This is also observed for the irradiated samples, providing evidence that the easy 

axis remains stable despite a decrease in the magnetization. The H//c measurement for the 

irradiated sample (Figure 2b) shows a large bifurcation between the FC and ZFC curves at low 

temperatures that is not present in the pristine magnetization (Figure 2a), suggesting alterations to 

the magnetic anisotropy of irradiated CST. In contrast, the H//ab magnetization data is similar in 

both samples, indicating that the applied field is too small to accurately detect any anisotropic 

effects in this direction. It may also be due to the spin glass behavior.

Figure 3 shows the isothermal magnetic field-dependent magnetization at all proton

fluences as a function of temperatures both below (Figures 3a-d) and above (figures 3e and f) TC

(~ 36 K). Samples were cooled from room temperature to the target measurement temperature and 

then allowed to reach equilibrium in the absence of a magnetic field. For these measurements, the 

samples were subjected to a 5-quadrant field sweep, where the field is ramped up from 0 Oe, up 

to the maximum field of +30 kOe, and then incremented back through 0 Oe and down to -30 kOe, 

before finally increasing the field back to its maximum value. For isotherms below TC, the system 

is warmed above TC to its paramagnetic state in the absence of a magnetic field upon completing 

the measurement and cooled to the next target temperature to avoid remanence effects. The 

measurements were performed in both the H//c (Figures 3a, c, and d, solid symbols) and H//ab 

(Figures 3b, d, and f, open symbols) directions, which allows us to qualitatively and quantitatively 

analyze the magnetocrystalline anisotropy of irradiated CST. From these data, we also extract 

information regarding the effect proton irradiation on the saturation magnetization and coercivity 

of CST.

The hysteresis curves presented in Figures 3a – d offer clear proof of the ferromagnetic 

phase of CST at temperatures below TC. Even after irradiation, all of the samples exhibit typical 

ferromagnetic behavior. We also observe negligible coercivity at all proton fluences. In 

comparison to the H//ab data (Figure 3b), the H//c saturation field is markedly lower, and this

provided additional evidence in support of CST maintaining its perpendicular magnetic anisotropy 

with an H//c easy axis. Conversely, the H//ab magnetization saturates only at higher fields and 


6

shows a more gradual onset of saturation. The most obvious change that occurs after irradiation is 

a reduction in the saturation magnetization. 

Regarding the 5 x 1016 H+/cm2 fluence data, the magnetization decreases by over 30%, and 

this supports our initial observation in the temperature-dependent magnetization measurements. 

Figure 4 shows the saturation magnetization Msat for all fluences as a function of temperature. The 

values of Msat are taken from the H//c hysteresis curves at the maximum field. This plot reveals 

that the reduction in magnetization is not proportional to the number of protons per unit area. In 

fact, the median fluence of 1 x 1016 H+/cm2 (yellow, down triangle) shows lower values of 

magnetization than the highest fluence of 1 x 1018 H+/cm2 (blue, left triangle). Moreover, at a

fluence of 5 x 1016 H+/cm2, the data shows the lowest magnetization despite the sample not being

subjected to the highest proton fluence. We observe a non-monotonic relationship between the 

proton fluence and the magnetization (Figure 4a). As a result, we cannot simply attribute the 

decrease in magnetization to a destruction of the crystal since the 1 x 1018 H+/cm2 data would 

exhibit the lowest magnetization. [6-9] Furthermore, the observed trend persists through the 

ferromagnetic to paramagnetic transition (Figure 4b).

We will now focus on the uniaxial anisotropy as a function of proton fluence. It is unlikely that 

damage to the CST crystals from increased proton irradiation is responsible for the observed 

reduction in magnetization because the trend between proton fluence and reduced magnetization 

is not proportional. Therefore, we examined the interatomic interaction of CST by investigating 

the changes in the magnetocrystalline anisotropy as a function of temperature and proton 

irradiation fluence. Here, we extracted the effective anisotropy constant, Ku, using the Stoner-

Wohlfarth model shown in equation 1: [12,16-20]

2𝐾𝑢
𝑀𝑠𝑎𝑡 = 𝜇0𝐻𝑠𝑎𝑡
(1)

Here, Msat is the saturation magnetization, Hsat is the anisotropy field (i.e., the saturation field along 

the hard axis), and µ0 is the vacuum permeability. For clarity, the anisotropy field and the saturation 

magnetization are extracted from magnetic field vs. magnetization measurements performed in the 

H//ab direction. This allowed us to capture the magnitude of the magnetic field necessary to 

completely align the moments along an unpreferable direction. To estimate the onset of saturation 

along this direction, the second derivative of the first quadrant magnetization was taken with 

respect to the magnetic field and the field magnitude at the local minimum was taken as the 


7

saturation/anisotropy field. The multiplicative factor µ0 is simply unity in cgs units. The values of 

Hsat (Figure 5a) and Ku (Figure 5b) for pristine CST acquired from this estimation agree well with 

literature values. [16] In Figure 5b, Ku is shown for all fluences as a function of temperature below 

TC. Only temperatures below TC are selected as saturation is not achieved in the paramagnetic 

region. As expected, the overall values decrease with increasing temperature, but the fluence 

dependent behavior at each temperature closely mirrors that of the saturation magnetization with 

no simple linear relation between the two. 

The anisotropy constant for the sample irradiated with 5 x 1016 H+/cm2 is consistently lower 

than that of the other proton fluences across all temperatures. Initially, it appears that this could be 

due to both a reduced Hsat and Msat, but a closer inspection of the former reveals a deeper 

phenomenon related to the temperature dependence of the anisotropy. In fact, a temperature-

dependent Hsat is direct evidence of a temperature-dependent anisotropic behavior in CST. [19,20]

Moreover, the anisotropy field shows a slight proportionality with the proton fluence. As shown 

in Figure 5b, we observe that samples irradiated with more protons per unit area generally require 

a higher H//ab field to achieve saturation. This trend can be more observed more clearly at 20 K 

(Figure 5a, blue circles), with deviations at other temperatures likely resulting from measurement 

error. 

We observe a decrease in Ku for all fluences as the temperature is increased. This 

phenomenon has been documented in other vdW compounds such as CrI3 and Fe3GeTe2 and is 

attributed to fluctuating local spin clusters around a macroscopic magnetization vector. [12,19,20]

Hence, a lower value for Ku in the irradiated samples might indicate an effect on the short-range 

interactions in this material. The CST anisotropy is stabilized by two factors, with the first being

a slight distortion of the Te octahedra along the c-axis. The second factor is the Te p spin-orbit 

coupling through the dominant superexchange pathway in CST. [21-24] This Cr-Te-Cr 

superexchange is ferromagnetic, in agreement with the Goodenough-Kanamori rules, and 

dominates over the weak antiferromagnetic Cr3+ direct exchange, the non-negligible interlayer 

interactions, and the 2nd and 3rd nearest neighbor intralayer interactions. [25] Therefore, changes 

in the anisotropy constant could be indirect evidence of modifications to the superexchange

interactions present in proton irradiated CST, since it has been reported that the anisotropy of CST 

is sensitive to changes in both the superexchange interaction and electron-electron repulsions. [23]


8

In addition, though the 2nd and 3rd nearest neighbor interactions represent a superexchange pathway 

across two Te ligand atoms (Cr-Te-Te-Cr), they present a suitable environment for 

antiferromagnetic exchange couplings to exist in CST. [22, 23] If this is enhanced through proton 

irradiation, the antiferromagnetic exchange could account for the reduction in magnetization 

despite an unchanged TC. The dependence of the magnetic properties on proton fluence remains 

unclear, however, and additional investigations are required to fully understand the nature of the 

exchange couplings present in CST.

We will now discuss the results obtained from EPR spectroscopy on CST as a function of 

proton fluence and temperature. The EPR spectra for all samples were collected at temperatures 

ranging from 13 K to 77 K in order to capture the ferromagnetic to paramagnetic phase transition 

in CST. EPR spectra as a function of proton fluence are shown at 13 K (Figure 6a), 35 K (Figure 

6b), 50 K (Figure 6c), and 77 K (Figure 6d). These temperatures highlight the behavior of CST 

well into the ferromagnetic phase, then above TC, and finally in the paramagnetic phase. We 

observe the expected signal from the Cr3+ ion at all temperatures and all fluences with a g-value 

that ranges from 1.96109 - 1.9950 at 13 K depending on the fluence. [27-31] To extract the 

linewidth and (resonance) center field values, the data were fitted using a Lorentzian line shape

function (dotted black line). In the spectrum of the pristine sample at 13 K, the Cr3+ signal 

dominates, but further inspection shows yet another resonance that contributes to the spectrum, 

which is more readily observed in the spectra of the irradiated samples. This broad signal is 

centered at lower fields, and could not be completely captured by the available magnetic field 

range of our EPR spectrometer. Hence, further experiments at the high frequency EPR (>9 GHz) 

are required to pinpoint its origin.

This secondary signal is featured prominently even at 50 K, which is above the TC. It has 

been previously reported that two-dimensional ferromagnetic correlations can persist in CST even 

up to room temperature. [15, 22, 32] Thus, it is possible that the existence of the secondary signal 

could be related to these correlations. However, at 77 K this secondary signal is still present but is 

greatly suppressed, with the spectra across all fluences being dominated by the Cr3+ signal.

The temperature dependence of the g-value and peak-to-peak linewidth Hpp as a function 

of fluence was also explored (Figure 7) for the Cr3+ signal. The temperatures selected correspond 

to the temperature points from the magnetization vs. magnetic field isotherms. In general, the 

irradiated compounds show a narrowing of the Cr3+ signal below TC, but in the paramagnetic 


9

phase, there is a broadening effect. The g-values for all fluences except 5 x 1015 H+/cm2 behave 

similarly in the selected temperature range. Firstly, deviations in g-value from the expected Cr3+

value are minimal as the temperature is raised from 13 K. However, at 40 K, there is a significant 

increase in the g-value for all fluences, with the g-value for some fluences even exceeding 2. This 

effect is also present in the 5 x 1015 H+/cm2 fluence, which generally displayed lower g-values than 

all other fluences below 40 K. It is likely that the fluence and temperature dependent behavior of 

the EPR spectral parameters is closely related to the behavior of the secondary signal. Moreover, 

due to its dominance of the spectra, it could affect the accuracy of the Lorentzian fits used to extract 

the parameters. Therefore, without further EPR experiments at high frequencies, it is difficult to 

discern the underlying cause behind the observed changes. Regardless, the fluctuations in Hpp and 

g-values and the dominance of the secondary signal in the EPR spectra of the irradiated samples 

at temperatures below TC could be an indication of changes to the paramagnetic centers of CST, 

the local magnetic environments.

Conclusions and outlook

Exfoliable CST crystals show the versatility of the magnetic properties of vdW compounds

upon proton irradiation as a function of proton irradiation. In this study, CST crystals irradiated 

with up to 1 x 1018 H+/cm2 were studied in a variety of temperature and magnetic field ranges. 

Through temperature and magnetic field-dependent magnetization, we observe a ferromagnetic 

phase below TC ~ 36 K for all fluences. Though the TC remains unchanged after proton irradiation, 

the saturation magnetization is decreased. Further analysis on the magnetic anisotropy of CST 

shows a temperature and fluence dependent effect, which could indicate variations in the exchange 

mechanisms of CST. While further investigations are required, we speculate that the reduced 

magnetization and uniaxial anisotropy could be a result of reformed short-range intralayer 

interactions involving the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd nearest neighbor interactions and the interlayer exchange. 

Further evidence of this could be taken from the EPR spectra of the irradiated CST, which 

show a superposition of two signals. While the expected Cr3+ signal is present for all samples, a 

secondary signal dominates the entire spectra of the samples at varying degrees depending on the 

temperature and fluence. Although the secondary signal could not be accurately captured by our 

current experiments, its presence, along with the changes in g-value and linewidth of the Cr3+

signal, point to modifications in the magnetic correlations of proton irradiated CST. Overall, the 

case of proton irradiated CST presents an exciting environment to not only probe the origin of 


10

ferromagnetism in CST and other related compounds, but also to explore with methods of tuning 

their magnetic properties for nanoscale magnetic devices and spintronic applications. In effect, 

proton irradiation could be used in tuning the magnetic properties and magnetic interactions of 

exfoliable vdW materials that may have tremendous implications for information technology and 

space exploration.

Acknowledgements

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate 

Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. 184874.1 Any opinions, findings, and conclusions 

or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily 

reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. S.R.S. and H.I. acknowledge support from 

the NSF-DMR (Award No. 2105109). SRS acknowledges support from NSF-MRI (Award No. 

2018067). M.L.K. acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation (MRI 

Grant CHE-1828744 and Grant CHE-1900237). L.M.M acknowledges the useful discussions with 

H. S. Nair. L.M.M and S.R.S acknowledge support from a UTEP start-up grant. L.M.M 

acknowledges the Wiemer Family for awarding Student Endowment for Excellence, and NSF-

LSAMP Ph.D. Fellowship. This publication was prepared by S. R. Singamaneni and co-authors 

under the award number 31310018M0019 from The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The Statements, findings, conclusions, and recommendations 

are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the (UTEP) or The US Nuclear 

Regulatory Commission. Work at Brookhaven National Laboratory is supported by the U.S. DOE 

under Contract No. DESC0012704 (materials synthesis).

References:

[1]. Q. H. Wang et al., The Magnetic Genome of Two-Dimensional van Der Waals Materials, ACS 
Nano (2022).

[2]
H. Li, S. Ruan, and Y.-J. Zeng, Intrinsic Van Der Waals Magnetic Materials from Bulk to 

the 2D Limit: New Frontiers of Spintronics, Advanced Materials 31, 1900065 (2019).

[3]
X. Jiang, Q. Liu, J. Xing, N. Liu, Y. Guo, Z. Liu, and J. Zhao, Recent Progress on 2D 

Magnets: Fundamental Mechanism, Structural Design and Modification, Applied Physics Reviews 
8, 031305 (2021).

[4]
K. F. Mak, J. Shan, and D. C. Ralph, Probing and Controlling Magnetic States in 2D 

Layered Magnetic Materials, Nat Rev Phys 1, 646 (2019).


11

[5]
J.-F. Dayen, S. J. Ray, O. Karis, I. J. Vera-Marun, and M. V. Kamalakar, Two-Dimensional 

van Der Waals Spinterfaces and Magnetic-Interfaces, Applied Physics Reviews 7, 011303 (2020); 
Shultz, D. A.; Kirk, M. L. Molecular spintronics: a web themed issue. Chem. Commun. 2014, 50 
(56), 7401-7402.

[6]. L. M. Martinez, H. Iturriaga, R. Olmos, L. Shao, Y. Liu, T. T. Mai, C. Petrovic, A. R. Hight 
Walker, and S. R. Singamaneni, Enhanced Magnetization in Proton Irradiated Mn3Si2Te6 van Der 
Waals Crystals, Appl. Phys. Lett. 116, 172404 (2020).

[7]. R. Olmos, J. A. Delgado, H. Iturriaga, L. M. Martinez, C. L. Saiz, L. Shao, Y. Liu, C. Petrovic, 
S. R. Singamaneni, Critical phenomena of the layered ferrimagnet Mn3Si2Te6 following proton 
irradiation, J. Appl. Phys. 130, 013902 (2021); https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0056387

[8]. R. Olmos, A. Cosio, C. L. Saiz, L. M. Martinez, L. Shao, Q. Wang, and S. R. Singamaneni, 
Magnetic Properties of Proton Irradiated Fe2.7GeTe2 Bulk Crystals, MRS Advances 4, 2185 
(2019).

[9]. L. M. Martinez, C. L. Saiz, A. Cosio, R. Olmos, H. Iturriaga, L. Shao, S. R. Singamaneni, 
Magnetic Properties of Proton Irradiated Mn3Si2Te6 van der Waals Single Crystals, MRS 
Advances 4, 2177 (2019). 

[10]
T. Shi, Q. Peng, Z. Bai, F. Gao, and I. Jovanovic, Proton Irradiation of Graphene: Insights 

from Atomistic Modeling, Nanoscale 11, 20754 (2019).

[11]
O. V. Yazyev, Magnetism in Disordered Graphene and Irradiated Graphite, Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 101, 037203 (2008).

[12]. Y. Liu and C. Petrovic, Anisotropic Magnetic Entropy Change in Cr2X2Te6 (X = Si and Ge), 
Phys. Rev. Materials 3, 014001 (2019).

[13]
V. Carteaux, G. Ouvrard, J. C. Grenier, and Y. Laligant, Magnetic Structure of the New 

Layered Ferromagnetic Chromium Hexatellurosilicate Cr2Si2Te6, Journal of Magnetism and 
Magnetic Materials 94, 127 (1991).

[14]
B. Siberchicot, S. Jobic, V. Carteaux, P. Gressier, and G. Ouvrard, Band Structure 

Calculations of Ferromagnetic Chromium Tellurides CrSiTe3 and CrGeTe3, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 
5863 (1996).

[15]
B. Liu, Y. Zou, L. Zhang, S. Zhou, Z. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Qu, and Y. Zhang, Critical 

Behavior of the Quasi-Two-Dimensional Semiconducting Ferromagnet CrSiTe3, Sci Rep 6, 1 
(2016).

[16]
W. Niu, X. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Sun, Y. Xu, L. He, W. Liu, and Y. Pu, Probing the Atomic-

Scale Ferromagnetism in van Der Waals Magnet CrSiTe3, Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, 172402 (2021).

[17]
A 
Mechanism 
of 
Magnetic 
Hysteresis 
in 
Heterogeneous 
Alloys, 

https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.1948.0007.

[18]
C. Zhang et al., Hard Ferromagnetic Behavior in Atomically Thin CrSiTe3 Flakes, 

Nanoscale 14, 5851 (2022).


12

[19]
N. Richter, D. Weber, F. Martin, N. Singh, U. Schwingenschlögl, B. V. Lotsch, and M. 

Kläui, Temperature-Dependent Magnetic Anisotropy in the Layered Magnetic Semiconductors 
CrI3 and CrBr3, Phys. Rev. Materials 2, 024004 (2018).

[20]
Y. Liu, J. Li, J. Tao, Y. Zhu, and C. Petrovic, Anisotropic Magnetocaloric Effect in 

Fe3−xGeTe2, Sci Rep 9, 13233 (2019).

[21]
J. Zhang et al., Unveiling Electronic Correlation and the Ferromagnetic Superexchange 

Mechanism in the van Der Waals Crystal CrSiTe3, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 047203 (2019).

[22]
T. J. Williams, A. A. Aczel, M. D. Lumsden, S. E. Nagler, M. B. Stone, J.-Q. Yan, and D. 

Mandrus, Magnetic Correlations in the Quasi-Two-Dimensional Semiconducting Ferromagnet 
CrSiTe3, Phys. Rev. B 92, 144404 (2015).

[23]
N. Sivadas, M. W. Daniels, R. H. Swendsen, S. Okamoto, and D. Xiao, Magnetic Ground 

State of Semiconducting Transition-Metal Trichalcogenide Monolayers, Phys. Rev. B 91, 235425 
(2015).

[24]
D.-H. Kim, K. Kim, K.-T. Ko, J. Seo, J. S. Kim, T.-H. Jang, Y. Kim, J.-Y. Kim, S.-W. 

Cheong, and J.-H. Park, Giant Magnetic Anisotropy Induced by Ligand L S Coupling in Layered 
Cr Compounds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 207201 (2019).

[25]. Hatfield, W. E. Chapter 7. Properties of Condensed Compounds (Compounds with Spin 
Exchange). In Theory and Applications of Molecular Paramagnetism, Boudreaux, E. A., Mulay, 
L. N. Eds.; Wiley Interscience, 1976; pp 381-385.

[26]. C. L. Saiz, J. A. Delgado, J. van Tol, T. Tartaglia, F. Tafti, S. R. Singamaneni, 2D correlations 
in the van der Waals ferromagnet CrBr3 using high frequency electron spin resonance 
spectroscopy, J. Appl. Phys. 129, 233902 (2021).

[27]. C. L. Saiz, M. A. McGuire, S. R. J. Hennadige, J. van Tol, and S. R. Singamaneni, Electron 
Spin Resonance Properties of CrI3 and CrCl3 Single Crystals, MRS Advances 4, 2169 (2019).

[28]
S. R. Singamaneni, L. M. Martinez, J. Niklas, O. G. Poluektov, R. Yadav, M. Pizzochero, 

O. V. Yazyev, and M. A. McGuire, Light Induced Electron Spin Resonance Properties of van Der 
Waals CrX3 (X = Cl, I) Crystals, Appl. Phys. Lett. 117, 082406 (2020).

[29]. Fabrizio Moro, Shenggang Ke, Andrés Granados del Águila, Aljoscha Söll, Zdenek Sofer,
Qiong Wu, Ming Yue, Liang Li, Xue Liu, and Marco Fanciulli, Revealing 2D Magnetism in a 
Bulk CrSBr Single Crystal by Electron Spin Resonance, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022, 32, 2207044

[30]. S. Chehab, J. Amiell, P. Biensan, S. Flandrois, Physica B 1991, 173, 211.

[31]. T. Sakurai, B. Rubrecht, L. T. Corredor, R. Takehara, M. Yasutani, J. Zeisner, A. Alfonsov, 
S. Selter, S. Aswartham, A. U. B. Wolter, B. Buchner, H. Ohta, V. Kataev, Phys. Rev. B 2021, 
103, 024404;

[32]. L. D. Casto et al., Strong Spin-Lattice Coupling in CrSiTe3, APL Materials 3, 041515 (2015).


13

Figure 1: Magnetization vs. temperature (a) and dM/dT vs. temperature (b) shown as a function 
of fluence showing the ferromagnetic to paramagnetic transition at Tc = 36 K for all samples

Figure 2: Anisotropic magnetization vs. temperature for both pristine (a) and irradiated (b) CST 
as a function of cooling field


14

Figure 3: Magnetization vs. magnetic field as a function of fluence for H//c (a,c,e) and H//ab 
(b,d,f) at T = 10 K (a,b), 35 K (c,d), and 50 K (e,f) 


15

Figure 4: Saturation magnetization Msat vs. temperature as a function of fluence (a) and Msat vs. 
fluence at each temperature (b) showing non-monotonic relation between magnetization and 
proton irradiation

Figure 5: Anisotropy field Hsat (a) and uniaxial anisotropy constant Ku (b) vs. fluence as a function 
of temperature

(a)


16

Figure 6: EPR spectra as a function of fluence at T = 13 K (a), 35 K (b), 50 K (c) and 77 K (d)  


17

Figure 7: Peak-to-peak linewidth Hpp (a) and g-value (b) vs. temperature as a function of proton 
fluence


18

Figure 8: Hpp (a) and g-value (b) vs. fluence as a function of temperature


