Notice: This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under Contract No. DE-
AC0500OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and 
the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States 
Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or 
reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for the United States 
Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of 
federally 
sponsored 
research 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
DOE 
Public 
Access 
Plan 

(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).


Deep Kernel Methods Learn Better: From Cards to Process Optimization

Mani Valleti,1,a Rama K. Vasudevan,2 Maxim A. Ziatdinov,2, 3 and Sergei V. Kalinin4,b

1 Bredesen Center for Interdisciplinary Research, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37916 
USA
2 Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831 
USA

3 Computational Sciences and Engineering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 
TN 37831 USA

4 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 
37916 USA

The ability of deep learning methods to perform classification and regression tasks relies heavily 
on their capacity to uncover manifolds in high-dimensional data spaces and project them into low-
dimensional representation spaces. In this study, we investigate the structure and character of the 
manifolds generated by classical variational autoencoder (VAE) approaches and deep kernel 
learning (DKL). In the former case, the structure of the latent space is determined by the properties 
of the input data alone, while in the latter, the latent manifold forms as a result of an active learning 
process that balances the data distribution and target functionalities. We show that DKL with active 
learning can produce a more compact and smooth latent space which is more conducive to 
optimization compared to previously reported methods, such as the VAE. We demonstrate this 
behavior using a simple cards data set and extend it to the optimization of domain-generated 
trajectories in physical systems. Our findings suggest that latent manifolds constructed through 
active learning have a more beneficial structure for optimization problems, especially in feature-
rich target-poor scenarios that are common in domain sciences, such as materials synthesis, energy 
storage, and molecular discovery. The jupyter notebooks that encapsulate the complete analysis 
accompany the article.

a svalleti@vols.utk.edu
b sergei2@utk.edu


The ability of machine learning to perform tasks such as semantic image segmentation,1-3

regression,4, 5 classification,6, 7 and unsupervised learning8, 9 has made it a powerful tool in a wide 
range of applications. ML offers several advantages, including the ability to automatically learn 
patterns and relationships from data, process large amounts of information quickly and accurately, 
and make predictions or decisions based on the learned information. Additionally, these techniques 
can adapt to changing data and learn from new examples, making them a useful tool for both 
exploratory data analysis and predictive modeling.

Over the last several years, active learning methods have proven to be highly effective in 

domain-specific tasks such as robotics10-13 and autonomous driving.14-18 and extended to areas such 
as materials and molecular discovery,19-24 optimization of processes ranging from material 
synthesis25-27 to battery charging.28-30 For materials synthesis, this can include the variation of the 
processing temperature during annealing or substrate temperature and oxygen pressure during film 
growth. For batteries, this includes optimal voltage- and current charging profiles. For molecular 
systems, the relevant problem is the exploration of high-dimensional chemical or chemical 
fingerprint space towards target functionality. 

The ability of machine learning (ML) algorithms, both supervised and unsupervised, to 

effectively analyze high-dimensional datasets depends on their ability to discover and represent 
low-dimensional manifolds that capture the underlying behavior of the data. One such method for 
discovering these manifolds is the variational autoencoder (VAE), which learns representations of 
the data by encoding it into a lower-dimensional latent space with one neural network and then 
reconstructing it back from the latent space with another neural network. The VAE has pronounced
ability to disentangle these representations, with the latent variables representing the intrinsic 
factors of variation in the dataset. However, the relationship between these latent variables and the 
underlying mechanisms that generate the data is not yet fully understood, despite extensive 
empirical demonstrations. Furthermore, the structure and character of the latent manifolds can be 
expected to have a significant impact on their performance, and there is still much to be explored 
and understood in this area.31

To address this, various modifications of the original VAE framework have been 

introduced. One such approach is conditioning the VAEs on the known factors of variation.32

Alternatively, the VAE network's structure can be modified to separate physical factors of 
variations from the geometric ones such as rotation and shift.33 Similarly, the topology of the latent 
space can be controlled. However, in all these applications, the structure of the latent space and 
the latent space distributions are determined solely by the input data.

Here we investigate the evolution of the latent spaces in deep kernel learning (DKL) in 

both static and active settings and apply this approach to a toy card dataset as well as process 
optimization in high-dimensional trajectory spaces. Unlike VAEs, where the latent space structure 
is determined solely by the data, DKL constructs the latent space while predicting the target 
function in the latent space, allowing for the target function to shape the latent manifold. We 
hypothesize and demonstrate that for the model system, the latent manifold formed during active 
DKL is more conducive to process optimization than that of the VAE case, with regions 


corresponding to the optima of the desired behavior occupying a significant portion of the latent 
space. In contrast, distributions of counterfactual measures are much rougher. These observations 
suggest that active DKL may have significant implications for optimization problems over large-
dimensional non-differentiable spaces, such as molecular property optimization.

1. Latent distributions in VAE and rVAE for model data
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are a class of generative models that learn a low-dimensional 

representation of high-dimensional data, such as images or time series.34-39 The idea behind VAEs 
is to learn a compact and interpretable latent space that captures the essential features of the input 
data, while also being able to generate new samples that are similar to the training data. VAEs are 
based on the idea of autoencoders, which consist of an encoder that maps the input data to a lower-
dimensional latent space, and a decoder that maps the latent space back to the original data space.

In VAEs, the encoder and decoder are trained to minimize a reconstruction loss that measures 

the difference between the input data and the reconstructed output. However, to avoid overfitting 
and encourage a more structured latent space, VAEs also introduce a regularization term that 
encourages the encodings in the latent space to follow a specific prior distribution, such as a 
standard normal distribution. This regularization prevents the latent space from overfitting to the 
training data and helps to produce a smooth and continuous latent space that captures the essential 
variations in the input dataset, which allows the VAE to interpolate between different data points 
and generate novel samples. Specifically, the regularization involves minimizing the Kullback-
Leibler (KL) divergence between the learned latent distribution and the prior distribution. By 
minimizing the KL divergence, the VAEs can learn to encode the essential features of the input 
dataset in the latent space while maintaining the desirable properties of a regularized distribution, 
such as smoothness and continuity. Therefore, the latent space of the VAEs provides a useful and 
interpretable representation of the input data that can be used for various downstream tasks.
Additionally, VAEs have generative capabilities, which means that they can generate new samples 
by sampling from the latent space and decoding the samples into the original data space. This 
makes VAEs a useful tool for various applications in machine learning, such as image 
generation,40, 41 noise cleaning,42, 43 and data compression.44, 45

Rotationally invariant autoencoder (rVAE) is a variant of VAE that introduces additional latent 

dimensions to explicitly capture rotational and/or translational symmetries in the input data.33, 46-

49 By assigning 1-3 latent dimensions to encode the angles or shifts in the input data, rVAE can 
learn a latent space that is invariant to rotations and/or translations, which can be useful for a 
variety of scientific applications. For example, in the field of condensed matter physics, rVAE can 
be used to analyze and compare images of crystal lattices with different orientations, while in 
microscopy, it can help to improve the accuracy of image segmentation and tracking of moving 
objects.46, 48 In materials science, rVAE can aid in the identification and classification of 
microstructures in materials, where the microstructures may be rotated or shifted with respect to 
each other.47, 49 When using rVAE to learn a latent space that is invariant to rotations and/or 
translations, images that differ only by rotations or translations will have different encodings in 


the dimensions that explicitly capture these transformations, while sharing the same or similar 
encodings in the other dimensions. This ensures that the learned model can recognize and 
differentiate between images based on their orientation or position, while also being able to 
generalize to new images that may have different orientations or positions.

To illustrate the evolution and formation of the latent distributions in VAEs and rVAEs and 

the role of prior knowledge in the formation of manifold, we use a toy dataset called the cards
dataset. The chosen toy dataset comprises of monochrome images of playing cards from all four 
suits - clubs, spades, diamonds, and hearts. Despite its apparent simplicity, the playing cards 
dataset presents several challenges for machine learning algorithms due to its complex symmetries. 
For instance, the clubs suit has a three-fold symmetry (without the tail) and a mirror symmetry. 
This means a rotation of 120° each will map a club to itself, while a mirror reflection about any 
axis will also produce the same club. Similarly, the spades suit also has a mirror symmetry and at 
high deformations can be difficult to differentiate from the clubs suit. Moreover, horizontally 
flipped hearts and spades can be nearly identical, with subtle differences that can be challenging 
to distinguish. Additionally, diamonds have a unique shape that is distinct from the other three 
suits and rotating them by 90° can lead to degeneracies in the outcomes of applying affine 
transformations to the dataset. These complexities and symmetries in the playing cards dataset can 
pose challenges for machine learning algorithms. 

In order to analyze the capabilities of VAEs and rVAEs and introduce traceable variability to 

the cards dataset in addition to the class labels, we apply affine transformations to the images. We 
randomly rotate and shear each image independently, with values chosen from ranges of [-120°, 
120°] and [-20°, 20°], respectively. The limits of these transformations are chosen such that the 
images are highly distorted, and the rotations will bring the rotational symmetries of the all the 
four suits into play. The images are sheared equally in x and y directions. We select 2,000 images 
from each suit to ensure an equal representation of all classes in the dataset and apply the affine 
transformations to each image to produce a final dataset of 8,000 images for our analyses. By 
saving the ground truth values separately, we can analyze how VAEs and rVAEs distribute these 
variabilities in the latent space and visualize complex symmetries and deformations of the playing 
cards. The latent dimensions z1, z2 will be referred to as the regular latent dimensions for both VAE 
and the rVAE and the latent dimension that explicitly captures the angle in the case of rVAE will 
be referred to as the angular dimension (). The number of regular latent dimensions (z1, z2) for 
the cards dataset case is set to 2 for both VAE and the rVAE cases. However, it should be noted 
that the rVAE has a third latent angular dimension () to explicitly capture the rotations. 

The construction of VAE's latent space can be visualized using two different methods, and one 

being the decoded latent space, or latent representation. This method discards the input dataset 
after the training and makes use of only the decoder or generator part of the VAE to form the 
representation, which can be visualized and explored to gain insight into the underlying structure 
of the data. This method involves sampling the regular latent space (z1, z2) uniformly and decoding 
the samples back into the image space while holding any additional latent dimensions (such as the 
angular dimension in the case of rVAE) at constant values, usually zero. The prior distribution for 


all the regular latent dimensions is set to a unit normal. Hence, the limits for the regular dimensions 
for sampling in this method are set to [-1.5, 1.5] for each latent dimension. The decoded images 
are then plotted in a grid that corresponds to their positions in the latent space, allowing us to 
observe the continuous transformations of the images that correspond to the changes in the latent 
space. Figure 1a and 1e show the decoded latent spaces for VAE and rVAE, respectively. In the 
decoded latent space of VAE (Figure 1a), images with multiple orientations are observed because 
the VAE treats images with different orientations as separate entities. The angular encoding for all 
the images in the decoded latent space of rVAE (Figure 1e) is set to zero, leading to orientations 
due to the baseline zero of the encodings for each class. In complex datasets, datapoints from a 
single class are seldom identified with multiple baseline zeros, as evident in the case of hearts suit
in Figure 1e, where hearts with multiple orientations are found in the decoded latent space. 
Furthermore, the decoded latent spaces provide insights into how the image from one class 
gradually transforms into the image from a different class in the latent space. This process leads to 
the formation of images in the decoded latent space that are not only part of the input dataset but 
can also be non-physical.

Figure 1. Decoded latent space of (a) VAE, (e) rVAE. Latent distributions of VAE colored using 
(b) class label, (c) ground truth shear value in radians, and (d) ground angle of rotation in radians. 
Latent distributions of rVAE colored using (f) ground truth class labels and (g) ground truth shear 
value in radians. (h) Ground truth angle of rotation vs. the angle encoded by the angular latent 
dimension of rVAE in radians. The color bar for (b) is the same as the one used in (f) and (h).

The second method of visualizing the latent space is through latent distributions. Unlike the 

decoded latent space, which uses the decoder to generate samples from the latent space, latent 
distributions focus on the latent variables of the input dataset embedded by the encoder. By 
examining the distributions of these latent variables, researchers can gain insights into the 
characteristics of the data, the properties of the latent space, and the behavior of the VAE. 


Additionally, by using the latent distributions to model the data, researchers can generate new 
samples that preserve the underlying patterns and structures of the original data. This method 
involves plotting the input dataset's images as scatter points in the latent space, with the option to 
color the points using ground truth class labels or features of variability such as class labels, angles 
of rotation, and shear. By examining the distribution of the scatter points, we can identify the 
regions of the latent space that correspond to each class of the dataset, providing insights into the 
construction of the latent space. This method can also help us visualize the variation of continuous 
ground truth entities in the latent space and identify gaps or inconsistencies that may affect the 
VAEs' performance. Figures 1b-d show the latent distributions of VAE, with the scatter points 
colored using ground truth class labels (Figure 1d), shear (Figure 1c), and rotations (Figure 1d). 
The rVAE counterparts are shown in Figure 1f for class labels and Figure 1g for ground truth shear 
values. The distribution of rotations for rVAE is omitted intentionally as it is explicitly encoded in 
the angular dimension, resulting in a noisy distribution in the latent space of z1-z2. The VAE's latent 
distributions exhibit a higher degree of entanglement than those of the rVAE, likely due to the 
difficulty of representing three factors of variation (ground truth class label, shear, and rotations) 
in a two-dimensional space. This is reflected in the higher mutual information between latent 
dimensions and the less well-defined regions of the latent space associated with each class. As a 
result, complex structures such as overlapping of images from different classes (Figure 1b) and 
nonlinear (albeit smooth) variation of continuous ground truth variabilities (Figures 1c and 1d) 
form in the VAE's latent space. Conversely, the rVAE disentangles the classes and the latent 
distribution has well-defined spaces associated with each class (Figure 1f) and a smooth linear 
variation of ground truth shear values (Figure 1g). Only the hearts suit in the rVAE's case appears 
to be encoded in two disconnected branches and overlaps with the spades suit (Figure 1f). The 
shear distribution in the rVAE's latent space (Figure 1g) shows a linear distribution of ground truth 
values even in the case of disconnected hearts' branches.

Figure 1h displays the relationship between the encoded angles in the angular dimension ()

of the rVAE and the ground truth rotations, with datapoints colored according to their ground truth 
class labels. The presence of multiple branches for the hearts suit indicates the encoding of multiple 
baseline zeros for this class. The standard deviation of the encodings of a given ground truth 
rotation can be attributed to the dataset's complexity. Since the rVAE performs unsupervised 
learning of rotations, the high shear present in the inputs poses a challenge for the rVAE to achieve 
perfect encoding of the ground truth rotations. The complete analysis of the cards dataset using 
multiple variations of VAE is available in our review article on VAEs. [Reference to be added]

Deep learning models such as VAEs have been used in high-dimensional process optimization 

problems which optimize a scalar target function in the low-dimensional latent space.50-53

However, their latent space has limitations when it comes to modeling categorical and continuous 
target functions. The VAEs learn a low-dimensional representation of high-dimensional data by 
minimizing the reconstruction error between the input and the reconstructed input, while 
regularizing the latent space to have a unit normal distribution. However, this regularization only 
ensures that the latent space is smooth along the input dimensions and not necessarily smooth in 


terms of the target function. This can result in a complicated and non-smooth latent space, making 
it difficult to optimize the target function using descent-based methods (Figure 1c). In some cases, 
the target function may have a non-differentiable relationship with the input space. This complex 
relationship between the latent space and the target function can lead to non-differentiable 
distributions of the target function in the latent space, which can further exacerbate this problem. 
This is especially problematic in process optimization problems, as the search algorithms rely 
heavily on the differentiability of the target function for efficient optimization. Even when the 
target function has a differentiable relationship with the input space, oftentimes it results is a 
complex and cluttered latent space that is challenging to navigate for the optimization algorithms. 
Furthermore, descent-based optimization methods such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) tend 
to get stuck in local minima in the latent space, resulting in suboptimal solutions. On the other 
hand, Bayesian optimization (BO) requires an extensive number of points to be sampled to explore 
a sufficient region of the latent space, making it computationally expensive. In the case of the 
rVAE, we found that it works well only when one of the variabilities in the dataset is rotations, 
and the remaining variabilities are not complicated. In other cases where multiple variability 
factors are involved, such as ground truth class labels and shear, the latent space becomes complex 
and challenging to navigate for the optimization algorithms. BO remains an effective search 
method in both cases for differentiable target function distributions, but it requires a considerable 
number of function evaluations to find the optimal solution.

2. Latent distributions for the DKL of model data
Deep Kernel Learning (DKL) poses to be one of the potential solutions to the problems that 

are discussed so far. Deep Kernel Learning (DKL) is a method that combines the power of deep 
neural networks with the flexibility of Gaussian Processes (GPs) to model and make predictions 
on complex target functions in high-dimensional spaces.54-58 DKL is able to efficiently explore the 
high-dimensional input space and learn the relationship between the inputs and target function, 
making it a powerful tool for optimization and prediction tasks. GP provides a way to model 
complex functions that are difficult to express in closed form.59 It works by modeling the target 
function as a distribution over functions in the input space. In GP, each point in the input space
(latent space of DKL) is associated with a random variable that represents the value of the function 
at that point. Given a set of input data X = {x1, x2, …, xN} and their corresponding outputs/targets 
y = {y1, y2, …, y3} the GP models the relationship between the input space and the target space
using equation 1, where K is a covariate function (kernel) with hyperparameters .

𝑦 ~ 𝑀𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙(0, 𝐾(𝑋|))
(1)

For the analyses discussed from here on, we use radial basis function (RBF) kernel with weakly 
informative priors. The RBF kernel is shown in equation 2, where the hyperparameter α is the 
variance/amplitude parameter which determines the overall scaling of the kernel. The 
hyperparameter l is the length scale parameter that controls the smoothness of the function in the 


input space. δ and σnoise correspond to the Dirac-delta function and the noise term in the regression 
setting. We use weakly informative priors for the hyperparameters α and l, which are given by 
equations 3. 

𝐾𝑖𝑗 = 𝛼 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−0.5‖𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑗‖

2

𝑙2
⁄ ) + 𝛿𝑖𝑗𝜎𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒

(2)

𝛼 ~ 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙(0,1)

𝑙 ~ 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙(0,1)
(3)

The GP posterior prediction is computed analytically and can then be directly sampled to give the 
predictions on the unseen inputs. Specifically, given the kernel hyperparameters  = {α, l}, the 
posterior prediction on the new inputs 𝑋̈ is defined by equations 4, 

𝑝(𝑦̈|𝑋̈, 𝑦, 𝑋) = 𝑁(µ̈, 𝛴̈)

µ̈ = 𝐾(𝑋̈, 𝑋|)𝐾(𝑋|)−1𝑦

𝛴̈ = 𝐾(𝑋|̈ ) − 𝐾(𝑋̈, 𝑋|)𝐾(𝑋|)−1𝐾(𝑋, 𝑋̈|)

(4)

where 𝐾(𝑋|) and 𝐾(𝑋̈|) are the matrices obtained by computing kernel function (equation 2) 
between all pairs of input data (X) and all pairs of unseen data (𝑋̈) respectively. 𝐾(𝑋̈, 𝑋|) is 
obtained by evaluating the kernel function between the input data and the unseen data. GP is 
characterized by a prior mean function (in our case assumed to be a constant zero-function) and a 
prior covariance function (Kij), which capture the prior assumptions about the behavior of the 
function. The mean function specifies the average value of the function, while the covariance 
function captures the degree of similarity between two points in the input space. The smoothness 
of the function is controlled by the covariance function, which ensures that nearby points in the 
input space have similar function values. The kernel hyperparameters are usually inferred using 
either a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling or variational inference approaches.60

One of the major limitations of GP is unlike deep learning, the GP does not learn 

representations from the data. On the other hand, DKL combines the deep neural networks that 
learn low-dimensional representations from a high dimensional input data with GP. In DKL, the 
high-dimensional input data is projected into the low-dimensional latent space and the GP models 
the targets as a function of the latent space. This structure of neural network+GP is referred to as 
‘deep-kernel’ and is given by equation 5, 

𝐾𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑋|𝜔, ) = 𝐾𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒(𝑔(𝑋|𝜔)|)
(5)


where 𝑔(𝑋|𝜔) are the latent representations of the input dataset X. The weights of the neural 
network g that projects the high-dimensional inputs into a low-dimensional latent space are 
represented by ω and Kbase is the GP-kernel (an RBF kernel as discussed in equation 2). The 
hyperparameters of the deep-kernel are the weights of the neural network (ω) in conjunction with
the hyperparameters of GP (). These hyperparameters can be deterministic and optimized with 
respect to marginal likelihood of the data using stochastic gradient descent. This method tends to 
overfit the data albeit being computationally cheap. The Bayesian way is to represent the weights 
of the neural network (ω) by probabilistic distributions. The posterior distributions of 
hyperparameters of the deep-kernel ( and ω) are then learned in conjunction using the variational 
inference approximation. However, it should be noted that the posteriors of the hyperparameters 
can be sampled using MCMC but avoided here due to computational inefficiencies. 

In summary, the DKL employs a two-component process to model the target function (y) as a 

function of the input space (X). The first component, which we will refer to as the encoder of the 
DKL, a neural network maps the inputs (X) to a lower-dimensional latent space (D ≡ g(X|ω)). 
Subsequently, the second component, a GP layer then predicts the distributions of the targets in 
the latent space (D). The schematic of the DKL is shown in Figure 2. The latent space acts as the 
input space to the GP, while the values of the target function act as outputs. The latent space of 
DKL stands in quite contrast to VAE where the latent space of former is not regularized. The latent 
space of DKL is not explicitly regularized but is rather structured in a way that the output 
distribution is smooth, which makes it well-suited to be modeled by a Gaussian Process (GP). In 
contrast, the latent space of VAEs is regularized to follow a specific prior distribution such as a 
Gaussian distribution, which encourages the latent space to be smooth and continuous. However, 
the DKL's approach results in a more compact and differentiable distribution of targets in the latent 
space compared to VAEs, making it more suitable for optimization problems over high-
dimensional spaces. Additionally, by optimizing the latent space and the hyperparameters jointly, 
the DKL can learn a more flexible representation of the data that can capture complex patterns in 
the data and generalize well to new data.


Figure 2. Schematic delineating the workflow of Deep Kernel Learning (DKL). Inputs (Red) are 
encoded into a low dimensional latent space (yellow/orange) which is the last layer of a fully-
connected neural network (blue). A non-parametric (infinite parameters) gaussian process 
regression model (green) is then used to predict the targets (purple) in the latent space.

We hypothesize that the combination of neural networks and GPs in DKL results in a model 

that is tailored to the target function considered. By enforcing the target function distribution in 
the latent space to be smooth using GPs, DKL constructs a latent space that may potentially be
better suited for optimization than the latent space of a VAE. The smoothness of the target function 
in the latent space should allow optimization algorithms to move more efficiently towards the 
global minimum of the target function, while the neural network provides a flexible and powerful 
way to map the inputs to the latent space.

To explore these assertions, here we apply DKL to the cards dataset previously discussed to 

investigate its latent space construction and compare it to that of VAE. We note that in this 
particular analysis, we adopt a static setting of the DKL, where both the input dataset and their 
corresponding target function outputs are assumed to be available beforehand. Although this 
setting stands in contrast to the typical process optimization scenario, our goal here is to visualize 
the latent space of DKL on this toy dataset. In addition to predicting/optimizing continuous target 


functions, DKL can also be used to predict/optimize categorical target functions. Although the 
predictions of the GP are continuous, the optimization of categorical target functions can be 
achieved through a clever construction of the target function. For example, in a binary case with 
two classes, the target function can be set to one for the class that we are trying to optimize and 
zero for the other class. This way, the (BO) algorithm, when trying to maximize the target function, 
will select the classes with higher values of the target function. In the case of the cards dataset, the 
categorical target function corresponds to the suit of the card. By encoding the target function in 
this way, the BO algorithm is able to select latent variables that correspond to the desired suit, 
resulting in the generation of cards with the specified suit.


Figure 3. Latent space distributions of the DKL on cards dataset when all the input-output pairs 
are available beforehand. The figure is divided into four parts corresponding to target function 
optimized in the analysis viz., (a) hearts, (b) all suits, (c) shears, and (d) rotations. Each part is 
further divided into four subparts where images are represented as the scatter points in the latent 
space and colored using (p) ground-truth class labels, (q) target function predictions by DKL, (r) 
ground-truth rotations’ distribution, and (s) ground-truth shear distribution. The color bars for the 
ground-truths are shown in (a) for all the variabilities and since the predictions in the data-rich 
regime follow the ground truth results closely, the color bars for predictions are omitted for brevity.

The latent dimensions of the DKL will be referred to as D1-D2 to avoid the confusion with the 

latent dimensions of VAE. The resulting latent distributions of DKL on the cards dataset are shown 


in Figure 3, where the figure is divided into four parts (a-d) corresponding to four different target 
functions predicted by the DKL. Each part is further divided into four subparts, where the latent 
distributions of the DKL are colored with predicted target function (q) and ground truth values of 
class labels (p), rotations (r), and shear (s). Since the latent distributions of the DKL strongly 
depend on the target function, we observed four distinct latent distributions for each target 
function. The first set of results (Figure 3a) corresponds to predicting a categorical target function, 
where the target function is set to be one for the hearts suit and zero for the other suits. Figures 3ap 
and 3aq show that the DKL separated the images corresponding to the hearts suit in the latent 
space. While the rest of the classes are overlapped on top of each other in the latent space, as the 
target function for the rest of the classes is zero. For the second set of the results, the target function 
is set to be 0 for clubs, 1 for spades, 2 for hearts and 3 for diamonds. In this scenario, the DKL is 
forced to separate all the classes. This separation of classes can be observed in Figure 3bp (ground 
truth) and Figure 3bq (predictions). Only a tiny portion of the hearts class appears to be overlapped 
with the spades class. This might be because the hearts class at such high rotations and shear are 
indistinguishable from the spades class. This is the reason why the hearts suit is picked for 
discussion in the article. However, better-looking results of the other suits can be visualized in the 
jupyter notebook that accompanies the article. A deeper encoding network can sometimes alleviate 
this issue. In both cases of the categorical target functions, when the latent distributions are colored 
using the continuous ground truth variabilities shear (Figures 3as and 3bs) and rotations (Figures 
3ar and 3br), they appear non-differentiable in the latent space. This phenomenon of completely 
ignoring the variabilities that are not part of the target function can also be observed for the 
categorical variabilities in Figure 3aq, where the classes whose target function values are zeros
overlap on top of each other.

The results in Figure 3c and 3d correspond to the cases where the target function is based on 

continuous variabilities. As with the categorical case, the DKL produces latent spaces that are 
tailor-made for the target function, with the remaining variabilities in the system ignored. Figures 
3c and 3d show the results for the target functions of shears and rotations, respectively. The 
predictions of the target function in both cases appear to be perfect, as we are operating in a data-
rich regime. However, the suit of the image is completely ignored in these cases, as can be observed 
from Figures 3cp and 3dp. The latent distribution of the rotations while predicting shears (Figure 
3cr) appears to be smooth, but this is a serendipitous result and cannot be expected in general. In 
contrast, for the other case where rotations are part of the target function, the shear distribution 
(Figure 3ds) appears to be non-differentiable.

Figure 3 presents the latent spaces constructed by DKL, highlighting its ability to create smooth 

spaces based on target functions while ignoring other variabilities in the system. This contrasts 
with the latent spaces produced by VAE, which only considers the input dataset and often result 
in complicated target function distribution in the latent space. The target function distribution in 
the latent space of the VAE cannot be controlled by the user. The caveat with the latent spaces of 
DKL arises in the low-data regime, where the target function values are not readily available for 


all the input data points. Since the DKL’s latent space is a function of both input and the value of 
the target function, only the datapoints whose target function values are available, form the training 
dataset for DKL. With every additional point, the DKL’s latent space evolves to generalize it to 
the unseen dataset. In contrast, the latent space of the VAE is trained using just the inputs and 
remains constant throughout the optimization. The capability of the DKL’s latent spaces can only
be leveraged in the high dimensional optimization when the DKL generalizes the latent space to 
the complete input dataset based on the few target function values available beforehand. The next
setting elucidates the active setting with the DKL where the latent space is trained using only a 
tiny portion of the dataset. The BO algorithm then picks the next point to be evaluated based on 
the existing latent space, to optimize the target function.

3. Latent distribution for active learning DKL
In this section, we investigate the performance of DKL with BO in the active learning scenario. 

In this scenario, the DKL has access to the entire input dataset, but the outputs become available 
sequentially. BO enables the DKL to explore the input space and optimize the target function by 
balancing the exploitation and exploration of the input space using the acquisition function. 
Usually, the BO algorithm uses a GP as the surrogate probabilistic model, but in this case, we use 
the DKL. The DKL's latent space is designed to be tailored to the target function, and the 
acquisition function exploits this by exploring the latent space based on mean and uncertainty in 
the prediction. The active learning scenario is useful when evaluating the target function for all 
input points at once is costly. By training the DKL on a few data points and sequentially optimizing 
the target function values, the active learning scenario becomes a data-efficient method for 
optimization of high-dimensional systems. The pseudo-code for BO while using DKL as the 
surrogate probabilistic model is shown below.

Pseudo-code for BO using DKL as the surrogate model
Inputs: Initial training set, T = {xi, yi}i=1,…,N; Array of unmeasured points 𝑋̈, Acquisition 
function acq, Number of BO steps NBO

for j=1, …., N do

Train a DKL model from scratch using T
Compute posterior predictive mean (µ̈) and covariance (𝛴̈) on the unmeasured points (𝑋̈)
Evaluate acquisition function on the unseen data, acqi = µ̈ 𝑖 + 𝛴̈𝑖𝑖
Evaluate the target function (𝑦𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡) at 𝑥𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑎𝑐𝑞)
Update T and 𝑋̈ by concatenating (𝑥𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡, 𝑦𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡) to T and deleting 𝑥𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 from 𝑋̈

After training on a small subset of input-output pairs, the DKL predicts the outputs of the 

unseen dataset and/or the entire input dataset. The DKL's final layer is a Gaussian process (GP) 
that produces predictions with mean (μ) and standard deviation (σ), which quantifies uncertainty 
in the prediction. An acquisition function is constructed using the predicted mean and standard 
deviation, evaluated on the input dataset, and the input with the maximum value of the acquisition 


function in the unseen dataset is chosen for evaluation subsequently. This new evaluated datapoint
by an experiment or a simulation is then added to the training set of the DKL, and the process is 
repeated for a set number of times. The standard deviation enables the DKL to explore unexplored 
areas, while the mean allows it to explore points with high target function values. For the cards 
dataset, the DKL is initially trained with the target function outputs of 100 randomly selected input 
images for each target function, and then sequentially explores 500 datapoints that optimize the 
target function. The acquisition function choses for the cards dataset is µ + 10𝜎 to balance the 
exploitation-exploration criterion of the BO algorithm.

In this section, we present the results of the active exploration of DKL on the cards dataset in 

Figure 4. The figure is divided into two parts: Figure 4a corresponds to optimizing a categorical 
target function for cards suit, and Figure 4b corresponds to optimizing a continuous target function 
rotations involved in the image. Each part is further divided into six subparts (p-u) corresponding 
to latent distributions colored with various properties. The plots in (p-r) are the latent distributions 
colored with predicted target function values, while the plots (s-u) are colored with ground truth 
values of class labels, shear, and rotations respectively. The 600 points explored at the end of this 
analysis including the initial 100 points are plotted in (p), the remaining unexplored points are 
plotted in (q), and all the input points are plotted in (r-u).

The results of the exploration of the input space for the categorical target function (hearts suit) 

are shown in Figure 4a. It should be noted that the BO algorithm tries to find the images that 
maximize the target function while exploring the latent space. The explored points indicate that 
the majority of images belong to hearts, while a few images of other suits are explored to minimize 
uncertainty in the latent space. As noted earlier, at the end of the exploration, the DKL only has 
access to 600 input-output pairs out of 8000 images dataset. The algorithm generalizes the learned 
patterns to the unseen dataset, as observed from the unexplored points and the whole input dataset 
plots in Figures 4aq, 4ar, and 4as. However, the generalization is not perfect which can be observed 
from the thin branch of the hearts suit in Figure 4as that runs through the collection of other suits.
The predicted target function values for this thin branch at the end of the exploration are zeros and 
can be seen in Figure 4ap. More exploration points are necessary to generalize the latent space to 
all input images. The rest of the suits did not have this issue, and 600 explored points were enough 
to generalize the latent space to unseen images. The continuous ground truth values in the active-
DKL setting also form a non-differentiable distribution in the latent space as they are not part of 
the target function.

The results of the exploration of the input space for rotations as the target function are shown 

in Figure 4b. The results here form a similar trend to the categorical target function discussed in 
Figure 4a. The algorithm explores a majority of the points where the target function has high 
values, as seen in Figure 4bp. The points near the global minimum are also explored during the 
process as the uncertainty in predictions near the optima is usually high for GP. The ground truth 
for this target function is shown in Figure 4bu and the latent space is segregated based on the value 
of the target function. The algorithm optimally generalizes the latent space to the unseen 
datapoints, as observed in Figures 4bq and 4br. The other variabilities form a non-differentiable 


distribution in the latent space, as seen in Figure 4bs for class labels and Figure 4bt for shear. 
Overall, the DKL algorithm in the active setting does an optimal job in generalizing the learned 
patterns to the majority of unseen dataset. It should be noted that the active setting of the DKL 
only has the access to a mere 600 datapoints out of the 8,000 datapoints in the input dataset. With 
these explanations on the workings of DKL-BO algorithm (also referred to as active setting), we 
now proceed to deploy it for the application of process optimization in the high-dimensional space.



Figure 4. Latent space visualization of the DKL on cards dataset when 100 input-output pairs are 
provided at the initialization step and the BO is allowed to explore for 500 more datapoints while 
optimizing the target function in the latent space. The target functions considered are (a) 
categorical hearts suit and (b) continuous rotations. Each part is further divided into six subplots 
where the input images are embedded using the encoding layer of DKL after the exploration and 
are colored using (p-r) GP predictions in the latent space, ground-truth (s) class labels, (t) shears’ 
distribution, and (u) rotations’ distribution. The scatter points correspond to (p) 600 explored 
points (q) unexplored points and (r-u) the whole input dataset. The color bars are omitted for 
brevity.

4. Process optimization

The application of methods such as Bayesian Optimization is inherently limited by the high 

dimensionality of the search space.31 For example, applications of BO for battery charging are 
typically based on the representation of current and voltage profiles as a small number of discrete 
segments or parameters of which yield low dimensional optimization space.29, 61

Recently, a number of groups have proposed an approach based on combining the 

variational autoencoders subsequent Bayesian optimization.31, 52, 53 In this approach, the family of 
the domain-specific inputs are encoded to the low-dimensional latent space, and Bayesian 
Optimization is performed over resultant latent space. Once the maximum is discovered, the latent 
vector can be decoded to yield optimal trajectory. However, the structure of the latent space in this 
approach is determined solely by the input data set only. Correspondingly, depending on the 
distribution of close to optimal and very suboptimal trajectory, the part of the data space occupied 
by the trajectories of interest and the topology of the corresponding quality surface can be very 
complex, hindering the BO method.31

For the purpose of our study, we focus on analyzing the domain structure evolution in 

ferroelectric material. To perform the analysis, we use a kinetic lattice model of a ferroelectric 
system called FerroSIM, which represents a discrete lattice of continuous spins. Although our 
specific example is based on FerroSIM, the proposed approach can be applied to other systems. 
FerroSIM is a lattice model that represents a ferroelectric material, first introduced by Ricinschi et
al.62 In this model, the order parameter, which is the polarization in the case of a ferroelectric 
material, is represented as a continuous quantity at each lattice site. The local free energy function 
is assumed to be of the Ginzburg-Landau-Devonshire (GLD) form, and the polarization at each 
time step is updated by calculating the derivatives of the total free energy with respect to the 
polarization field at the previous time step. The aim of this study is to optimize the external electric 
field curve in time to maximize the target function at the end of the simulation. Three different 
target functions are chosen for this study viz., curl, normalized curl, and the total polarization. The 
curl at the end of the simulation is defined as the sum of the absolute value of curls at each lattice 
site, which provides a measure of the domain structure complexity and plays a key role in the 
material properties. This will be referred to as ‘curl’ for brevity. At the end of each simulation, the 
polarization vectors at each site are normalized and the curl is recalculated. This property will be 


referred to as the normalized curl and gives us insights about the rotation of the polarization field 
at each site without the effect of magnitude of polarization vectors. The final property is the total 
polarization and is the magnitude of vector sum of the total polarization in x and y directions. By 
simulating the polarization dynamics under the influence of an external electric field, we can 
explore the input space of electric field curves and search for the one that maximizes the target 
function. The details of the FerroSIM are thoroughly discussed in our previous articles.50, 63

As an initial step of the analysis, a domain expert selects the input set of curves deemed 

relevant. For the FerroSIM case, 7,500 curves of the form Aexp(αt) sin(ωt) + B were chosen by 
varying the parameters [A, α, ω, and B] within specific intervals.50 Along with the high dimensional 
input space which is equal to the sampling frequency of the applied electric field, the challenge of 
optimizing arises from the complexity of the FerroSIM model and the non-linearity of the 
considered target functions. Traditional optimization methods may not be suitable for such high-
dimensional problems, where the input space can be extremely large and relationship between the 
input and the target function is complex. Therefore, we used a VAE-BO architecture to optimize 
the curl in our previous work. The workings of this method and the detailed explanation of the curl 
surface in VAE’s latent space are discussed in ref.50

Briefly, the results of a typical FerroSIM simulation are shown in Figure 5a for a sinusoidal 

applied external electric field. The curl distribution in the latent space of the VAE trained on the 
7,500 curves considered is shown in Figure 5b. The hysteresis curve shown in Figure 5a follows 
the very known trends of the ferroelectric material in the presence of applied external electric field 
like polarization saturation, remnant polarization, and coercive field. Polarization snapshots at 
four-different points along the hysteresis curve are shown around the Figure 5a, while these 
selected points are shown on the hysteresis curve using ‘red stars.’ Specifically, these points 
correspond to saturated polarization in -x and -y directions, remnant polarization along the positive 
polarization-axis, and the coercive field along the positive field-axis. In these snapshots, the 
polarization vector at each lattice site is shown as an arrow relative to the maximum polarization 
at each site. Additionally, each lattice site is colored using the vector magnitude of polarization in 
x-direction, as the external electric field is applied only in x-direction and held at zero in the y-
direction.


Figure 5. (a) Hysteresis loop of a FerroSIM simulation under a sinusoidal external applied field 
in the x direction. Snapshots of the polarization vectors at saturation field in both positive and 
negative x-direction, coercive field, and remnant polarization. The polarization plots are colored 
using the x-component of the polarization vector. (b) Final value of curl as a function of VAE’s 
latent space. Applied electric field, polarization, and curl vs. time of two typical points in the 
surface are shown around the curl surface. Four other circular scatter points are marked in the 
latent space that aid the explanation of the shortcomings of the VAE’s latent space.

Additionally, the ground-truth curl surface in the latent space of the VAE from our previous 

work is shown in Figure 5b. The (curl, field) vs. time and (polarization, field) vs. time plots are 
shown for two points in the latent space marked with green stars in the curl surface. These points 
represent two distinct applied electric fields that result in a high and a low value of the final curl. 
The detailed explanations of the characteristics of the electric fields that result in higher or lower 
values of curl are found in ref.50 The limitations of the VAE-BO approach can be immediately 
understood from the ground truth image. Here, the contrast corresponds to the distribution of the 
curl in the latent space of the system. Note that the trajectories corresponding to the maximum curl 
form a manifold in the latent space. However, this manifold has a very complex structure. For 
example, for point (-0.9, -8) the maxima are aligned on a very narrow ridge separated by the throve 
from the part of the manifold containing point (1.1, -1.5). Correspondingly, gradient descent or 
very greedy BO algorithm will fail to traverse from between these two points. Similarly, maxima 
centered around (3, 2.7) and (-0.9, 1.3) (centers of bright circles) have complex ring-like structures 
and occupy relatively small part of the latent space. The four points discussed here are marked as 
circular scatter points in the VAE latent space in Figure 5b. Correspondingly, any GP with a simple 
kernel will proceed to generate very small kernel length to accommodate the narrow maxima. This 


in turn necessitates the large number of the GP iterations. We note that this problem, i.e., the 
properties of the latent manifold containing the behaviors of interest, is extremely well recognized 
in the ML community.31, 64 Ultimately, the efficiency of the unsupervised and semi-supervised 
learning methods, as well as active learning, hinge on how well the manifold is defined and how 
smooth it is. 

5. Static DKL on FerroSIM

In this section, we explore the latent spaces of the DKL for the FerroSIM target function when all 
the outputs are available beforehand. As discussed earlier three different target functions are used 
to train three DKL networks and the results are shown in Figure 6. Each row in the figure 
corresponds to the DKL network trained using (a) curl, (b) normalized curl, and (c) total 
polarization. Each of the latent distributions are colored using the ground truth values of (p) curl, 
(q) normalized curl, and (r) total polarization. When the data is completely available beforehand, 
the predictions of the DKL closely follow the ground truth of the target function. So, the diagonal 
plots which are also marked with ‘green stars’ in the figure also represent predicted targets of the 
DKL network.


Figure 6. Latent space visualization of the DKL on the FerroSIM simulation when all the input-
output pairs are available beforehand. Each row (a-c) corresponds to a DKL network trained to 
predict the final values of (a) curl, (b) normalized curl, and (c) polarization. Each row is further 
divided into 3 subparts (p-r) where the latent embeddings are colored using the predictions of GP 
(green-starred plots) and the ground-truth values of other properties (non-starred). The property 
used to color the scatter points is shown at the top of the column. The color bars for the three 
properties considered are shown in (a).

For all three properties, the target function in the latent space forms a smooth distribution 

with 2-3 well connected clusters of the maximum target function values. For example, curl and 
normalized curl distribution in Figures 6ap and 6bq has two distinct clusters where the target 
function assumes a high value. For the total polarization case shown in Figure 6cr, the latent 
distribution has three distinct clusters with high values of the target function. A majority of the 
curves in input set correspond to a high value of the total polarization. In such scenarios, the VAE’s 


latent space is hard to navigate with multiple local optima, and the BO needs a large number of 
points before the latent space is fully explored. On the contrary, the DKL does a better job of 
forming clusters of the input points with optimized values of the target function. The DKL achieves 
this by clustering the input curves with similar features as well as similar target function properties. 
This latent space is easier to navigate by the BO algorithm as there are only three different clusters 
to be explored to optimize the target property. The other ground truth properties do not form a 
differentiable distribution in the latent space. For example, the normalized curl latent distribution 
shown in Figure 6aq has points with an overlap between higher and lower values of normalized 
curl. The same argument is true for the curl distribution in Figure 6cp. As discussed in the case of 
cards any property that is not directly involved in the construction of the target function will often
form a non-differentiable distribution in the latent space.

6. Active learning DKL on processes

Finally, we proceed to implement the DKL in the active learning mode for the process 

optimization. Here, the DKL is provided with the outputs of 100 randomly sampled electric fields 
from the input dataset. The acquisition function is set to be µ + 10𝜎, which is the same as the one 
used of the cards dataset and for the exploration of VAE’s latent space in ref.50 The BO then 
sequentially evaluates the output of 500 more electric field curves while optimizing the target 
function. The results of the DKL in the active learning setting for the process optimization problem 
are shown in Figure 7. The figure is divided into 2 parts corresponding to (a) curl and (b) total 
polarization as the target functions. Each part is then divided into 5 subparts (p-t), where the (p), 
(q), (r) correspond to the explored points, unexplored points, and the total dataset in the latent 
space colored with predicted target function values. The latent distributions of the entire dataset 
colored with ground truth values of the properties that are not part of the target function are shown 
in (s) and (t).


Figure 7. Results of the DKL on FerroSIM simulations in the active setting when 100 randomly 
input-output pairs are provided to the network at the initialization step and the BO is allowed to 
explore 500 points subsequently. The results are divided into two parts corresponding to the 


optimized target function (a) curl and (b) total polarization. Each part is further divided into five 
subparts where the points in the latent space are colored using (p-q) GP predictions of the target 
function and (r-t) other ground truth properties. (p) Explored points by the network, (q) unexplored 
points, and (r) all points in the input dataset.

The DKL-BO (active setting) results for the optimization of target function curl are shown 

in Figure 7a. The target function distribution in this case (Figure 7ar) has three clusters 
corresponding to the high value of curl. Figures 7ap and 7aq show the explored and unexplored 
points in the latent space respectively, colored with the predicted value of the curl. These plots 
show that most of the input curves with high values of the target function are explored by the 
algorithm. The distributions of other properties considered viz., normalized curl in Figure 7as and 
total polarization in Figure 7at show that the distributions of these properties are not conducive for 
optimization in the latent spaces. For example, the polarization distribution (Figure 7at) has 
multiple local minima, and the normalized curl (Figure 7ats) distribution is non-differentiable.

The results when the total polarization is set as the target function for the algorithm are 

shown in Figure 7b. Majority of the curves in the input space correspond to a high value of the 
polarization which complicates the latent space of VAE for optimization purposes. The target 
function distribution in Figure 7br shows that the DKL is able to cluster these high values of 
polarization into two clusters. The explored points plot shows that the algorithm completely 
explored one cluster and even recognized the presence of a second cluster with high values of 
polarization. This can be deduced from the fact that a few data points from the second cluster are 
sampled by the BO during the exploration. The cluster that is fully explored by the algorithm
comprises the data points with higher values of the polarization which is the reason why the BO 
has not explored the second cluster within the 600-exploration points limit. The ground truth 
distribution of the other two properties viz., normalized curl in Figure 7bs and curl in Figure 7bt 
show that these distributions are non-differentiable i.e., the data points with both high and low 
values of these properties are overlapped in the latent space.

In Figure 8, we present a comparison of the latent spaces of VAE and DKL for the target 

functions of curl and total polarization. The distribution of the ground truth target functions in the 
VAE's latent space is shown in Figure 8a for curl and Figure 8d for total polarization. The 
smoothness of the VAE's latent spaces for both target functions illustrates the differentiable 
relationship between the inputs and target functions. However, these latent spaces are found to be 
complicated with complex local optima for curl and a large number of local optima for total 
polarization. As a result, any greedy optimization algorithm gets trapped in these local optima, or 
in the case of BO, a large number of exploration points are necessary to model the kernel length 
and explore all the local optima. The results of exploration of curl in the latent space using BO is 
thoroughly discussed in discussed in ref.50 The DKL latent distributions for the static setting of 
both target functions are shown in Figure 8b (curl) and 8e (polarization). These latent spaces in 
the data-rich regime do not provide insights into the optimization process. The latent distributions 
of the ground-truth target functions in the latent space at the end of the exploration (600 data


points) by DKL-BO (active setting) are shown in Figures 8c and 8f for curl and total polarization, 
respectively. These low-dimensional latent spaces are much more conducive to the navigation of
optimization algorithms, with fewer well-connected local optima.

Figure 8. The ground-truth distribution of (a) curl and (d) total polarization in the latent space of 
VAE trained on the entire input dataset. Latent space distribution of the static-setting DKL colored 
with the ground-truth values of the target function (b) curl and (e) total polarization. Latent 
distributions at the end of the exploration (600 datapoints) of the active-setting DKL colored with 
ground truth values of the target function (c) curl and (f) total polarization.

7. Summary 

We have compared the process optimization via BO optimization in the latent space of the 

VAE-encoded process trajectories, deep kernel learning over the static data set (fully known output
data) and active DKL learning with partial data. The structure of the latent data space for VAE is 
determined solely by the properties of the input data set and resulting functionality often has very 
complex structure in the latent space. The latter in turn precludes optimization via., gradient 
descent or greedy Bayesian Optimization and imposes the significant limitations on the upper 
bound of the kernel length in GP. This in turn necessitates a large number of the learning steps in 
the case of BO to explore the latent space well.

The DKL on the full data set (known ground truth) forms much more compact distributions 

of the functionality of interest. In this case, the latent encoding reflects both the properties of the 
data and the properties of the target set. The shape of the latent distribution can be complex, but 


the functionality of interest forms much better formed regions. Correspondingly, the alternative 
functionalities tend to be more abrupt. We note that this case corresponds to the known ground 
truth and shown here for illustration.

Finally, the active learning DKL forms well behaved latent distributions. The functionality 

of interest tends to form smaller number of broad maxima in the latent space. For the scenarios 
analyzed in this article, the distributions look smooth, and we pose that they can be potentially 
differentiable due to the presence of GP in DKL. At the same time, counterfactual parameters show 
much more discontinuous and non-differentiable distributions. 

We pose that this finding can offer major implications for optimization and discovery 

problems over the high-dimensional and potentially nondifferentiable spaces, such as natural 
language processing or molecular and material optimization. In this case, the properties 
(smoothness and localization) of the manifold play the central role in the discovery process, and 
active learning DKL shows clear advantage compared to the embedding formed based on data 
only.

Data availability statement:

•
The complete analysis DKL, VAE, and rVAE on the cards dataset can be visualized and 
reproduced using the jupyter notebook at 
https://github.com/saimani5/Notebooks_for_papers/blob/main/dkl_bo_cards.ipynb

•
The complete analysis of DKL on the FerroSIM can be visualized and reproduced using 
the jupyter notebook at
https://github.com/saimani5/Notebooks_for_papers/blob/main/ferrosim_dkl.ipynb

•
VAE and rVAE use a package ‘atomai’ based on pyTorch: 
https://github.com/pycroscopy/atomai

•
DKL uses a package ‘gpax’ built on top of NumPyro, JAX, and Haiku: 
https://github.com/ziatdinovmax/gpax

•
GitHub repository of FerroSIM: https://github.com/ramav87/FerroSim

Acknowledgements:
This work was supported by the Energy Frontier Research Centers program: CSSAS–The Center 
for the Science of Synthesis Across Scales–under Award Number DE-SC0019288, located at the 
University of Washington, and the modeling and process optimization by the US Department of 
Energy Office of Science under the Materials Sciences and Engineering Division of the Basic 
Energy Sciences program. The Bayesian optimization and Deep Kernel Learning research was 
supported by the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS) which is a US Department of 
Energy, Office of Science User Facility at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.


References

1.
Ghosh, A.;  Sumpter, B. G.;  Dyck, O.;  Kalinin, S. V.; Ziatdinov, M., Ensemble learning-

iterative training machine learning for uncertainty quantification and automated experiment in 
atom-resolved microscopy. npj Computational Materials 2021, 7 (1), 100.
2.
Wang, P.;  Chen, P.;  Yuan, Y.;  Liu, D.;  Huang, Z.;  Hou, X.; Cottrell, G. In 

Understanding Convolution for Semantic Segmentation, 2018 IEEE Winter Conference on 
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 12-15 March 2018; 2018; pp 1451-1460.
3.
Gupta, S.;  Arbeláez, P.;  Girshick, R.; Malik, J., Indoor Scene Understanding with RGB-

D Images: Bottom-up Segmentation, Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation. 
International Journal of Computer Vision 2015, 112 (2), 133-149.
4.
Lewis-Beck, C.; Lewis-Beck, M., Applied Regression: An Introduction. SAGE 

Publications: 2015.
5.
Pinson, P.;  Han, L.; Kazempour, J., Regression markets and application to energy 

forecasting. Top 2022, 30 (3), 533-573.
6.
Chen, W.;  Xiao, D.; Li, X., Classification, application, and creation of landscape indices. 

Ying Yong Sheng tai xue bao= The Journal of Applied Ecology 2002, 13 (1), 121-125.
7.
Singhal, G.;  Bansod, B.; Mathew, L., Unmanned aerial vehicle classification, 

applications and challenges: A review. 2018.
8.
Hilas, C. S.; Mastorocostas, P. A., An application of supervised and unsupervised 

learning approaches to telecommunications fraud detection. Knowledge-Based Systems 2008,
21 (7), 721-726.
9.
Celebi, M. E.; Aydin, K., Unsupervised learning algorithms. Springer: 2016; Vol. 9.

10.
Wei, B.;  Ye, X.;  Long, C.;  Du, Z.;  Li, B.;  Yin, B.; Yang, X., Discriminative Active 

Learning for Robotic Grasping in Cluttered Scene. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 2023.
11.
Moya, B.;  Badías, A.;  González, D.;  Chinesta, F.; Cueto, E., A thermodynamics-

informed active learning approach to perception and reasoning about fluids. Computational 
Mechanics 2023.
12.
Behera, S.;  Samantaray, B. K.;  Nayak, J.; Hota, N., Review of Control Principles for 

Active Learning in Robotics.
13.
Bose, A.;  Bruno, J.;  Dames, P.; Bai, L. In Time Constraint Finite-Horizon Path Planning 

Solution for Micromouse Extreme Problem, 2022 IEEE 19th International Conference on Mobile 
Ad Hoc and Smart Systems (MASS), 19-23 Oct. 2022; 2022; pp 325-331.
14.
Dhananjaya, M. M.;  Kumar, V. R.; Yogamani, S. In Weather and Light Level 

Classification for Autonomous Driving: Dataset, Baseline and Active Learning, 2021 IEEE 
International Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), 19-22 Sept. 2021; 2021; pp 
2816-2821.
15.
Liang, Z.;  Xu, X.;  Deng, S.;  Cai, L.;  Jiang, T.; Jia, K. Exploring Diversity-based Active 

Learning for 3D Object Detection in Autonomous Driving 2022, p. arXiv:2205.07708. 
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022arXiv220507708L (accessed May 01, 2022).
16.
Feng, D.;  Wei, X.;  Rosenbaum, L.;  Maki, A.; Dietmayer, K. In Deep Active Learning for 

Efficient Training of a LiDAR 3D Object Detector, 2019 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium 
(IV), 9-12 June 2019; 2019; pp 667-674.
17.
Denzler, P.;  Ziegler, M.;  Jacobs, A.;  Eiselein, V.;  Neumaier, P.; Köppel, M. In Multi-

Sensor Data Annotation Using Sequence-based Active Learning, 2022 IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 23-27 Oct. 2022; 2022; pp 258-263.
18.
Schneegans, J.;  Bieshaar, M.; Sick, B., A Practical Evaluation of Active Learning 

Approaches for Object Detection. 2022.
19.
Kusne, A. G.; Yu, H.;  Wu, C.;  Zhang, H.;  Hattrick-Simpers, J.;  DeCost, B.;  Sarker, S.;  

Oses, C.;  Toher, C.;  Curtarolo, S.;  Davydov, A. V.;  Agarwal, R.;  Bendersky, L. A.;  Li, M.;  


Mehta, A.; Takeuchi, I., On-the-fly closed-loop materials discovery via Bayesian active learning. 
Nature Communications 2020, 11 (1), 5966.
20.
Lookman, T.;  Balachandran, P. V.;  Xue, D.; Yuan, R., Active learning in materials 

science with emphasis on adaptive sampling using uncertainties for targeted design. npj 
Computational Materials 2019, 5 (1), 21.
21.
Ziatdinov, M. A.;  Liu, Y.;  Morozovska, A. N.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Zhang, X.;  Takeuchi, I.; 

Kalinin, S. V., Hypothesis Learning in Automated Experiment: Application to Combinatorial 
Materials Libraries. Advanced Materials 2022, 34 (20), 2201345.
22.
Borg, C. K. H.;  Muckley, E. S.;  Nyby, C.;  Saal, J. E.;  Ward, L.;  Mehta, A.; Meredig, B., 

Quantifying the performance of machine learning models in materials discovery. Digital 
Discovery 2023.
23.
Yuan, X.;  Zhou, Y.;  Peng, Q.;  Yang, Y.;  Li, Y.; Wen, X., Active learning to overcome 

exponential-wall problem for effective structure prediction of chemical-disordered materials. npj 
Computational Materials 2023, 9 (1), 12.
24.
Ziatdinov, M.;  Liu, Y.; Kalinin, S. V. Active learning in open experimental environments: 

selecting the right information channel(s) based on predictability in deep kernel learning 2022, p. 
arXiv:2203.10181. https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022arXiv220310181Z (accessed March 
01, 2022).
25.
Ghosh, A.;  Kalinin, S.; Ziatdinov, M., Hypothesis-driven active learning over the 

chemical space. Bulletin of the American Physical Society 2023.
26.
AlFaraj, Y.;  Mohapatra, S.;  Shieh, P.;  Husted, K.;  Ivanoff, D.;  Lloyd, E.;  Cooper, J.;  

Dai, Y.;  Singhal, A.; Moore, J., A Model Ensemble Approach Enables Data-Driven Property 
Prediction for Chemically Deconstructable Thermosets in the Low Data Regime. 2023.
27.
Griffiths, R.-R.;  Klarner, L.;  Ravuri, A.;  Truong, S.;  Rankovic, B.;  Du, Y.;  Jamasb, A.;  

Schwartz, J.;  Tripp, A.; Kell, G. In GAUCHE: A library for Gaussian processes and Bayesian 
optimisation in chemistry, presented at the ICML 2022 Workshop on Adaptive Experimental 
Design and Active Learning in the Real World (ReALML 2022), Baltimore: 2022.
28.
Chen, H.; Li, X. R. In Distributed active learning with application to battery health 

management, 14th International Conference on Information Fusion, 5-8 July 2011; 2011; pp 1-7.
29.
Attia, P. M.;  Grover, A.;  Jin, N.;  Severson, K. A.;  Markov, T. M.;  Liao, Y.-H.;  Chen, M. 

H.;  Cheong, B.;  Perkins, N.;  Yang, Z.;  Herring, P. K.;  Aykol, M.;  Harris, S. J.;  Braatz, R. D.;  
Ermon, S.; Chueh, W. C., Closed-loop optimization of fast-charging protocols for batteries with 
machine learning. Nature 2020, 578 (7795), 397-402.
30.
Suthar, B.;  Ramadesigan, V.;  De, S.;  Braatz, R. D.; Subramanian, V. R., Optimal 

charging profiles for mechanically constrained lithium-ion batteries. Physical Chemistry 
Chemical Physics 2014, 16 (1), 277-287.
31.
Siivola, E.;  Paleyes, A.;  González, J.; Vehtari, A., Good practices for Bayesian 

optimization of high dimensional structured spaces. Applied AI Letters 2021, 2 (2), e24.
32.
Sohn, K.;  Lee, H.; Yan, X., Learning structured output representation using deep 

conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems 2015, 28.
33.
Bepler, T.;  Zhong, E.;  Kelley, K.;  Brignole, E.; Berger, B., Explicitly disentangling image 

content from translation and rotation with spatial-VAE. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 2019, 32.
34.
Kingma, D. P.; Welling, M., An introduction to variational autoencoders. Foundations and 

Trends® in Machine Learning 2019, 12 (4), 307-392.
35.
Guo, Y.;  Liao, W.;  Wang, Q.;  Yu, L.;  Ji, T.; Li, P., Multidimensional Time Series 

Anomaly Detection: A GRU-based Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder Approach. In 
Proceedings of The 10th Asian Conference on Machine Learning, Jun, Z.; Ichiro, T., Eds. 
PMLR: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2018; Vol. 95, pp 97--112.


36.
Chen, T.;  Liu, X.;  Xia, B.;  Wang, W.; Lai, Y., Unsupervised anomaly detection of 

industrial robots using sliding-window convolutional variational autoencoder. IEEE Access 2020,
8, 47072-47081.
37.
Suh, S.;  Chae, D. H.;  Kang, H. G.; Choi, S. In Echo-state conditional variational 

autoencoder for anomaly detection, 2016 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks 
(IJCNN), 24-29 July 2016; 2016; pp 1015-1022.
38.
Pu, Y.;  Gan, Z.;  Henao, R.;  Yuan, X.;  Li, C.;  Stevens, A.; Carin, L., Variational 

autoencoder for deep learning of images, labels and captions. Advances in neural information 
processing systems 2016, 29.
39.
Walker, J.;  Doersch, C.;  Gupta, A.; Hebert, M. In An Uncertain Future: Forecasting from 

Static Images Using Variational Autoencoders, Computer Vision – ECCV 2016, Cham, 2016//; 
Leibe, B.;  Matas, J.;  Sebe, N.; Welling, M., Eds. Springer International Publishing: Cham, 
2016; pp 835-851.
40.
Shao, H.;  Yao, S.;  Sun, D.;  Zhang, A.;  Liu, S.;  Liu, D.;  Wang, J.; Abdelzaher, T. In 

Controlvae: Controllable variational autoencoder, International Conference on Machine 
Learning, PMLR: 2020; pp 8655-8664.
41.
Hou, X.;  Shen, L.;  Sun, K.; Qiu, G. In Deep feature consistent variational autoencoder, 

2017 IEEE winter conference on applications of computer vision (WACV), IEEE: 2017; pp 1133-
1141.
42.
Liu, Z.-S.;  Siu, W.-C.;  Wang, L.-W.;  Li, C.-T.; Cani, M.-P. In Unsupervised real image 

super-resolution via generative variational autoencoder, Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, 2020; pp 442-443.
43.
Du, Y.;  Xu, J.;  Qiu, Q.;  Zhen, X.; Zhang, L. In Variational image deraining, Proceedings 

of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2020; pp 2406-2415.
44.
Zhou, L.;  Cai, C.;  Gao, Y.;  Su, S.; Wu, J. In Variational autoencoder for low bit-rate 

image compression, Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition Workshops, 2018; pp 2617-2620.
45.
Alves de Oliveira, V.;  Chabert, M.;  Oberlin, T.;  Poulliat, C.;  Bruno, M.;  Latry, C.;  

Carlavan, M.;  Henrot, S.;  Falzon, F.; Camarero, R., Reduced-complexity end-to-end variational 
autoencoder for on board satellite image compression. Remote Sensing 2021, 13 (3), 447.
46.
Ignatans, R.;  Ziatdinov, M.;  Vasudevan, R.;  Valleti, M.;  Tileli, V.; Kalinin, S. V., Latent 

Mechanisms of Polarization Switching from In Situ Electron Microscopy Observations. 
Advanced Functional Materials 2022, 32 (23), 2100271.
47.
Valleti, S. M. P.;  Kalinin, S. V.;  Nelson, C. T.;  Peters, J. J. P.;  Dong, W.;  Beanland, 

R.;  Zhang, X.;  Takeuchi, I.; Ziatdinov, M., Unsupervised learning of ferroic variants from 
atomically resolved STEM images. AIP Advances 2022, 12 (10), 105122.
48.
Kalinin, S. V.;  Zhang, S.;  Valleti, M.;  Pyles, H.;  Baker, D.;  De Yoreo, J. J.; Ziatdinov, 

M., Disentangling Rotational Dynamics and Ordering Transitions in a System of Self-Organizing 
Protein Nanorods via Rotationally Invariant Latent Representations. ACS Nano 2021, 15 (4), 
6471-6480.
49.
Kalinin, S. V.;  Dyck, O.;  Jesse, S.; Ziatdinov, M., Exploring order parameters and 

dynamic processes in disordered systems via variational autoencoders. Science Advances 
2021, 7 (17), eabd5084.
50.
Valleti, M.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Ziatdinov, M. A.; Kalinin, S. V., Bayesian optimization in 

continuous spaces via virtual process embeddings. Digital Discovery 2022, 1 (6), 910-925.
51.
Huang, W.;  Zhao, D.;  Sun, F.;  Liu, H.; Chang, E., Scalable Gaussian process 

regression using deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, AAAI Press: Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2015; pp 3576–3582.
52.
Griffiths, R.-R.; Hernández-Lobato, J. M., Constrained Bayesian optimization for 

automatic chemical design using variational autoencoders. Chemical Science 2020, 11 (2), 577-
586.


53.
Kusner, M. J.;  Paige, B.; Hernández-Lobato, J. M. In Grammar variational autoencoder, 

International conference on machine learning, PMLR: 2017; pp 1945-1954.
54.
Wilson, A. G.;  Hu, Z.;  Salakhutdinov, R.; Xing, E. P., Deep Kernel Learning. In 

Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, Arthur, 
G.; Christian, C. R., Eds. PMLR: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2016; Vol. 51, pp 
370--378.
55.
Liu, Y.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Kelley, K. P.;  Funakubo, H.;  Ziatdinov, M.; Kalinin, S. V., 

Learning the right channel in multimodal imaging: automated experiment in piezoresponse force 
microscopy. npj Computational Materials 2023, 9 (1), 34.
56.
Ziatdinov, M.;  Liu, Y.;  Kelley, K.;  Vasudevan, R.; Kalinin, S. V., Bayesian Active 

Learning for Scanning Probe Microscopy: From Gaussian Processes to Hypothesis Learning. 
ACS Nano 2022, 16 (9), 13492-13512.
57.
Keith, J. A.;  Vassilev-Galindo, V.;  Cheng, B.;  Chmiela, S.;  Gastegger, M.;  Müller, K.-

R.; Tkatchenko, A., Combining Machine Learning and Computational Chemistry for Predictive 
Insights Into Chemical Systems. Chemical Reviews 2021, 121 (16), 9816-9872.
58.
You, J.;  Li, X.;  Low, M.;  Lobell, D.; Ermon, S., Deep Gaussian Process for Crop Yield 

Prediction Based on Remote Sensing Data. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence 2017, 31 (1).
59.
Garnett, R., Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge University Press: 2023.

60.
Blei, D. M.;  Kucukelbir, A.; McAuliffe, J. D., Variational Inference: A Review for 

Statisticians. Journal of the American Statistical Association 2017, 112 (518), 859-877.
61.
Torchio, M.;  Wolff, N. A.; Raimondo, D. M.;  Magni, L.;  Krewer, U.;  Gopaluni, R. B.;  

Paulson, J. A.; Braatz, R. D. In Real-time model predictive control for the optimal charging of a 
lithium-ion battery, 2015 American Control Conference (ACC), 1-3 July 2015; 2015; pp 4536-
4541.
62.
Dan, R.;  Catalin, H.;  Constantin, P.;  Liliana, M.;  Vasile, T.; Masanori, O., Analysis of 

ferroelectric switching in finite media as a Landau-type phase transition. Journal of Physics: 
Condensed Matter 1998, 10 (2), 477.
63.
Kalinin, S. V.;  Ziatdinov, M.; Vasudevan, R. K., Guided search for desired functional 

responses via Bayesian optimization of generative model: Hysteresis loop shape engineering in 
ferroelectrics. Journal of Applied Physics 2020, 128 (2), 024102.
64.
Eismann, S.;  Levy, D.;  Shu, R.;  Bartzsch, S.; Ermon, S. In Bayesian optimization and 

attribute adjustment, Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2018.


