* Corresponding author: ORCID: 0000-0003-0491-1090, email: nikita.medvedev@fzu.cz

Materials under XUV irradiation: effects of structure, size, and 

temperature

Nikita Medvedev*a,b

a Institute of Physics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Na Slovance 1999/2, 18221 Prague 8, Czechia;

b Institute of Plasma Physics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Za Slovankou 3, 18200 Prague 8, 

Czechia;

ABSTRACT

This proceeding discusses the impact of XUV/X-ray irradiation on materials, and how their response is affected by 
temperature, size, and structure. When materials are exposed to intense XUV/X-ray irradiation, they undergo a series of 
processes ultimately leading to observable structure modification and damage. These effects were studied with a hybrid 
simulation tool XTANT-3. The code combines several methods in one interconnected model: the photon absorption and 
electron cascades are simulated with transport Monte Carlo; nonequilibrium kinetics of slow electrons (in the valence 
and the bottom of the conduction band) is traced with the Boltzmann equation; modeling evolution of the electronic 
structure and interatomic potential is done with the transferable tight binding method; and the response of the atomic 
system is simulated with the molecular dynamics. Combining these methods enabled the tracing of the essential effects 
of irradiation. This brief review summarizes the recent results obtained with this simulation tool.

Keywords: XTANT-3, tight binding molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, Boltzmann equation

1.
INTRODUCTION

Since the development of free-electron lasers, the intense ultrashort femtosecond XUV and X-ray pulses became 
available for studies of materials response to such irradiation in a controlled way 1–3. It opened up possibilities for studies 
of transient nonequilibrium states of matter produced by irradiation at their natural timescales. Irradiation of matter with 
ultrashort laser pulses plays a key role in basic and applied sciences 4–8. Laser irradiation experiments are used for 
material processing, nano-, micro-technology, medical applications such as laser surgery, etc.7–10. Femtosecond X-ray 
irradiation allows for subatomic precision measurements of atomic and electronic dynamics 1–3.

X-ray pulse impinging on a material surface triggers a sequence of processes. It starts with photoabsorption by core 
atomic shells, exciting electrons to high-energy states 11. Such electrons then form an electron cascade, exciting 
secondary electrons via impact ionization of core shells and valence/conduction band of the material, and transferring 
energy to the target atoms via elastic channel (electron-ion or electron-phonon scattering) 12,13. Created core-shell holes 
decay primarily via the Auger channel (for the photon energies relevant for currently existing X-ray free-electron lasers), 
thereby exciting secondary electrons 14.

Electrons, relaxed to the bottom of the conduction and the valence band, influence the interatomic potential. The 
interatomic potential changes its shape due to the excitation of electrons from their ground state, which may destabilize
the atomic lattice and induce a phase transition even without heating the lattice to the melting point. As soon as electrons 
are excited, atoms start to react to the modification of the interatomic potential, which in the case of femtosecond lasers 
may lead to the ultrafast phase transition. The effect is known as the nonthermal melting (or, more generally, nonthermal 
phase transition) 15,16.

At longer times, electron-ion (electron-phonon) coupling heats the atomic system, which may induce thermal phase 
transition – such as melting or solid-solid phase transition. This transition takes place when heated atoms overcome their 
potential energy barrier and end up in a new phase. The barriers, being defined by the interatomic potential energy 


surface, are also affected by electronic excitation. Thus, a nontrivial interplay between thermal and nonthermal effects 
may take place in irradiated matter 17–19.

All the above-mentioned processes are sensitive to some degree to the particular state of the material before irradiation. 
The material structure, the shape of the sample, and the irradiation temperature (in situ temperature before the arrival of 
the laser pulse) – all affect the material response. Here, we summarize our recent theoretical research on the influence of 
these factors on the material response to irradiation.

2.
OUTLINE OF THE MODEL: XTANT-3

To study the material irradiation with ultrashort X-ray pulses, we applied the hybrid code XTANT-3 17,20. The code 
combines on-the-fly the following modules, describing the effects and processes taking place in the irradiated sample, 
see Figure 1.

Figure 1. Schematics of the XTANT-3 algorithms, interconnecting the main modules of the program. The initial conditions 
specify the coordinates of all the atoms in the simulation box Rat(t=0) and electronic distribution function fe. The molecular 
dynamics (MD) module propagates the atomic coordinates, using the forces, F, calculated with the help of the tight binding 
(TB) module. It also uses the electron transfer from the electronic system, calculated in two steps: elastic scattering of a 
high-energy fraction of electrons within the Monte Carlo (MC) step, δEat, and electron-ion (electron-phonon) coupling of 
low-energy electrons calculated with the Boltzmann equation (BE), δEel-phon. TB also provides the BE module with the 
transient electronic energy levels (eigenstates of the Hamiltonian), Ei, and wave functions (eigenfunctions) φ. Ei are also 
used in MC. MC calculates the source terms for BE associated with the photoabsorption, Auger decays, and electronic 
scattering: δfe. MD step supplies the BE with the atomic temperature Ta, and the MC with the transient material density ρ (if 
the supercell size is allowed to change in the simulation).

(i)
The photoabsorption, secondary electronic cascades, and Auger decays are simulated with the event-by-event 

Monte Carlo (MC) scheme 17. Electrons are traced until their energy falls below the threshold of ~10 eV, counted from 
the bottom of the conduction band (or the Fermi level for metals). When an electron loses its energy below the threshold, 
it joins the low-energy fraction of electrons, described below.

(ii)
The kinetics of low-energy electrons, populating the valence and the conduction band, is described with the 

Boltzmann equation (BE)
21. It includes the electron-electron scattering in the framework of the relaxation-time 

approximation 21, the electron-phonon (electron-ion) coupling 22 via so-called dynamical coupling (based on Tully’s 
nonadiabatic coupling matrix elements 23), and the source terms calculated from MC module above.

(iii)
The transient electronic structure is calculated with help of the transferrable tight binding (TB) model. 

Depending on the materials studied, XTANT-3 may apply widely used parameterizations such as NRL 24 or DFTB 25.


The electronic structure, or molecular orbitals, defined as the eigenstates of the transient Hamiltonian, depend on the 
mutual positions of all the atoms in the simulation box and thus evolve in time with the atomic motion. It also allows us 
to calculate the potential energy surface for atoms.

(iv)
Atomic trajectories are traced with help of the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. The interatomic potential 

or forces acting on atoms are calculated with help of the TB method above. Thus, the transient electronic populations, 
defined with BE, directly affect the interatomic potential. Additionally, the energy transfer from electrons (elastic 
scattering of high-energy electrons in the MC module, and electron-ion coupling in BE module) is fed to atoms at each 
timestep via velocity scaling 17.

Combining the nonequilibrium electronic description, nonadiabatic coupling, and nonthermal evolution of the 
interatomic potential, allows us to trace the synergistic response of the irradiated matter.

3.
OVERVIEW OF RESULTS

Most of XTANT-3 simulations to date were performed assuming infinitely fast electron thermalization: τe-e→0, with τe-e
being the electron-electron characteristic scattering time. In this approximation, the electronic distribution function 
adheres to the Fermi-Dirac distribution at all time, under the condition of the conserved energy and number of particles. 
The only exception was the most recent work, Ref. 21, in which effects of the nonequilibrium electronic distribution were 
studied in various classes of materials: metals, semiconductors and dielectrics. The electronic nonequilibrium seems to 
play the strongest role in dielectrics, since in metals and to some extent semiconductors electron-electron thermalization 
is typically very fast, on the timescale of ~10 fs for the excitation levels around the material damage threshold4. All the 
results discussed below assume instantaneous electronic thermalization.

A series of works using XTANT-3 to study various conditions in various materials under irradiation have recently been
published: the dependence of the electron-phonon coupling parameters on the electronic temperature for metals was 
reported in Ref. 22; its dependence on the atomic temperature was discussed in more detail in Ref. 26; the difference 
between bulk and nano-sized metals resulting in the formation of the nonthermal melting in the nano-latter was 
presented in Ref. 27; the effect of the shape and dimensionality of a nano sample on the electron-phonon coupling and 
nonthermal ablation was reported in Ref. 28; the effect of in situ irradiation temperature of material damage threshold 
was shown in Ref. 29. Here, we will briefly summarize the findings of these works, and draw some general conclusions.

Let us start with the discussion on temperature dependence. Material preheating, before irradiation, may influence 
further behavior after the arrival of the laser pulse. For example, the electron-phonon coupling seems to be dependent on 
the atomic temperature nearly linearly 22,26. Thus, irradiation of a hot material will affect the kinetics of the electron-ion 
energy exchange, and the characteristic timescales of the ensuing processes.

Even for the same amount of energy deposited in the sample (by means of preheating and incoming laser pulse), there is 
a difference if the energy was deposited during the pulse, or at the macroscopic timescales before it. In the preheating 
scenario, the material has sufficient time to relax, including macroscopic effects such as hydrodynamic expansion, 
whereas during the ultrafast pulse the energy is deposited in the material that did not have time to relax and adjust to the 
new conditions 29. It results in different behavior of the sample, which may affect the damage threshold. For instance, the 
threshold of nonthermal graphitization of diamond seems to be reduced with an increase in the irradiation temperature, 
whereas the ablation threshold in tungsten increases due to pressure dissipation in the preheated metal 29.

The atomic structure or the phase of the material seems to be influencing the electron-phonon coupling more at the low 
electronic temperatures, but not as strongly at high ones 22,28. The effect is different from the pure effect of the density –
the electron-phonon coupling is inversely proportional to the material density (as long as the lattice structure is 
preserved), but the dependence qualitatively changes once the atomic structure changes (e.g., due to destabilization 
under expansion) 22.

The expansion of nano-sized metals induced by the increase of the electronic pressure due to ultrafast irradiation may by 
itself lead to atomic destabilization 27. In such a process, all the material parameters also change, e.g. phonon spectra and 
thusly electron-phonon coupling 27.

The dimensionality of the sample also changes its response to irradiation. In the simulation comparing a nano-sphere
(effectively 0d-sample), nano-rod (1d), nano-layer (2d), and bulk (3d), the electronic heat capacity and the electron-


phonon coupling parameter were mostly affected at low electronic temperatures but were very close to each other at high
ones (above some 5000-7000 K) 28. However, the difference between the samples was more prominent in nonthermal 
behavior: smaller samples reacted to electronic pressure increase easier, expanding and destabilizing the atomic lattice 28.

The lattice destabilization also depended on the particular shape of the nanoparticle. An octahedral gold nanoparticle is 
damaged faster than a cubic one 28. This effect is expected to play a stronger role for smaller particles – as the ratio of 
surface atoms to the interior ones increases.

There is also an effect of the electronic nonequilibrium: the transient state of the electronic distribution forming during 
and after irradiation may be different from the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution. The nonequilibrium electronic 
ensemble alters all the other characteristics: electron heat conductivity, electron-phonon coupling, and nonthermal 
changes in the interatomic potential 21. The coupling parameter seems to be smaller in the nonequilibrium case in 
comparison to the equilibrium distribution. The nonthermal damage threshold may be altered in either way – an increase 
or decrease – depending on the particular shape of the distribution function 21. This effect may be important for a multi-
pulse irradiation scenario, in which a prior pulse may alter the electronic distribution before the arrival of the next one.

The fact that the kinetic of damage and the threshold are sensitive to particular conditions of the sample and the pulse 
complicate the analysis of experimental data. For example, the measured electron-phonon coupling parameter in a metal
may differ noticeably in different experiments, see discussion and examples in Ref. 22. Thus, when extracting the 
dependence on a particular parameter – such as coupling parameter dependence on the electronic temperature – it is very 
important to control for all other parameters: the atomic lattice temperature, material density, size, and shape, as well as 
the laser pulse parameters (photon energy, pulse duration, shape etc.).

4.
CONCLUSIONS

The material properties affect its response to ultrafast irradiation. The in-situ temperature may change the damage 
threshold in a nontrivial way: the material preheating and the energy deposited by radiation do not always add up to the 
same damage threshold. Heating material up may lower or increase the damage threshold, depending on particular 
mechanisms of damage (thermal, nonthermal, defect formation, ablation). Material size may change its properties and 
the damage mechanisms: e.g., bulk metals exhibit phonon hardening under irradiation whereas nano-sized metallic 
particles show nonthermal expansion and destabilization of the lattice. The particular shape of the nanoparticle also 
affects its stability and timescale of response to irradiation. Thus, for a reliable comparison between a theory and an 
experiment (as well as among different experiments) it is important to ensure that all such parameters are well 
controlled.

5.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The financial support from the Czech Ministry of Education, Youth, and Sports (grants No. LTT17015, LM2018114, 
and No. EF16_013/0001552) is gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

[1] 
Rossbach, J., Schneider, J. R. and Wurth, W., “10 years of pioneering X-ray science at the Free-Electron Laser 
FLASH at DESY,” Phys. Rep. 808, 1 (2019).

[2] 
Bostedt, C., Boutet, S., Fritz, D. M., Huang, Z., Lee, H. J., Lemke, H. T., Robert, A., Schlotter, W. F., Turner, J. 
J. and Williams, G. J., “Linac Coherent Light Source: The first five years,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 88(1), 015007 
(2016).

[3] 
Owada, S., Togawa, K., Inagaki, T., Hara, T., Tanaka, T., Joti, Y., Koyama, T., Nakajima, K., Ohashi, H., Senba, 
Y., Togashi, T., Tono, K., Yamaga, M., Yumoto, H., Yabashi, M., Tanaka, H. and Ishikawa, T., “A soft X-ray 
free-electron laser beamline at SACLA: The light source, photon beamline and experimental station,” J. 
Synchrotron Radiat. 25(1), 282–288 (2018).

[4] 
Rethfeld, B., Ivanov, D. S., Garcia, M. E. and Anisimov, S. I., “Modelling ultrafast laser ablation,” J. Phys. D. 


Appl. Phys. 50(19), 193001 (2017).

[5] 
Shugaev, M. V, Wu, C., Armbruster, O., Naghilou, A., Brouwer, N., Ivanov, D. S., Derrien, T. J. Y., Bulgakova, 
N. M., Kautek, W., Rethfeld, B. and Zhigilei, L. V., “Fundamentals of ultrafast laser-material interaction,” MRS 
Bull. 41(12), 960–968 (2016).

[6] 
Caricato, A. P., Luches, A. and Martino, M., “Laser fabrication of nanoparticles,” [Handbook of Nanoparticles], 
Springer International Publishing, 407–428 (2015).

[7] 
Braun, M., Gilch, P. and Zinth, W., eds., [Ultrashort laser pulses in biology and medicine], Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin Heidelberg (2008).

[8] 
Sugioka, K. and Cheng, Y., “Ultrafast lasers—reliable tools for advanced materials processing,” Light Sci. Appl. 
3(4), e149–e149 (2014).

[9] 
Bonse, J., Baudach, S., Krüger, J., Kautek, W. and Lenzner, M., “Femtosecond laser ablation of silicon-
modification thresholds and morphology,” Appl. Phys. A 74, 19–25 (2002).

[10] 
Jiang, C.-W., Zhou, X., Lin, Z., Xie, R.-H., Li, F.-L. and Allen, R. E., “Electronic and Structural Response of 
Nanomaterials to Ultrafast and Ultraintense Laser Pulses,” J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 14(2), 1549–1562 (2014).

[11] 
Hau-Riege, S. P., [High-intensity X-rays - interaction with matter: processes in plasmas, clusters, molecules and 
solids], Willey-VCH Verlag, Weinheim, Germany (2011).

[12] 
Medvedev, N., “Femtosecond X-ray induced electron kinetics in dielectrics: application for FEL-pulse-duration 
monitor,” Appl. Phys. B 118(3), 417–429 (2015).

[13] 
Medvedev, N., Volkov, A. E. and Ziaja, B., “Electronic and atomic kinetics in solids irradiated with free-
electron lasers or swift-heavy ions,” Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B Beam Interact. with Mater. 
Atoms 365, 437–446 (2015).

[14] 
Keski-Rahkonen, O. and Krause, M. O., “Total and partial atomic-level widths,” At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 
14(2), 139–146 (1974).

[15] 
Siders, C. W., Cavalleri, A., Sokolowski-Tinten, K., Tóth, C., Guo, T., Kammler, M., Hoegen, M. H. von, 
Wilson, K. R., Linde, D. von der and Barty, C. P. J., “Detection of nonthermal melting by ultrafast X-ray 
diffraction,” Science 286(5443), 1340–1342 (1999).

[16] 
Rousse, A., Rischel, C., Fourmaux, S., Uschmann, I., Sebban, S., Grillon, G., Balcou, P., Förster, E., Geindre, J. 
P., Audebert, P., Gauthier, J. C. and Hulin, D., “Non-thermal melting in semiconductors measured at 
femtosecond resolution.,” Nature 410(6824), 65–68 (2001).

[17] 
Medvedev, N., Tkachenko, V., Lipp, V., Li, Z. and Ziaja, B., “Various damage mechanisms in carbon and 
silicon materials under femtosecond x-ray irradiation,” 4open 1, 3 (2018).

[18] 
Medvedev, N., Babaev, P., Chalupský, J., Juha, L. and Volkov, A. E., “An interplay of various damage channels 
in polyethylene exposed to ultra-short XUV/x-ray pulse,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 23(30), 16193–16205 
(2021).

[19] 
Medvedev, N., Voronkov, R. and Volkov, A. E., “Metallic water: Transient state under ultrafast electronic 
excitation,” J. Chem. Phys. 158(7), 074501 (2023).

[20] 
Medvedev, N., “Modeling warm dense matter formation within tight binding approximation,” Proc. SPIE - Int. 
Soc. Opt. Eng. 11035 (2019).

[21] 
Medvedev, N., “Electronic nonequilibrium effect in ultrafast-laser-irradiated solids” (2023).

[22] 
Medvedev, N. and Milov, I., “Electron-phonon coupling in metals at high electronic temperatures,” Phys. Rev. B 
102(6), 064302 (2020).

[23] 
Tully, J. C., “Molecular dynamics with electronic transitions,” J. Chem. Phys. 93(2), 1061 (1990).

[24] 
Mehl, M. J. and Papaconstantopoulos, D. A., “NRL transferable Tight-Binding parameters periodic table: 
http://esd.cos.gmu.edu/tb/tbp.html.”

[25]
Koskinen, P. and Mäkinen, V., “Density-functional tight-binding for beginners,” Comput. Mater. Sci. 47(1), 
237–253 (2009).

[26] 
Akhmetov, F., Medvedev, N., Makhotkin, I., Ackermann, M. and Milov, I., “Effect of Atomic-Temperature 
Dependence of the Electron-Phonon Coupling in Two-Temperature Model,” Materials (Basel). 15(15), 5193 
(2022).

[27] 
Medvedev, N. and Milov, I., “Nonthermal phase transitions in metals,” Sci. Rep. 10, 12775 (2020).

[28] 
Medvedev, N. and Milov, I., “Electron-Phonon Coupling and Nonthermal Effects in Gold Nano-Objects at High 
Electronic Temperatures,” Materials (Basel). 15(14), 4883 (2022).

[29] 
Medvedev, N., Kuglerová, Z., Makita, M., Chalupský, J. and Juha, L., “Damage threshold in pre-heated optical 
materials exposed to intense X-rays,” Opt. Mater. Express 13(3), 808 (2023).


