Ultra-high-speed high-resolution laser lithography for lithium niobate 

integrated photonics

Jinming Chena, Zhaoxiang Liua, Lvbin Songa, Chao Suna, Guanhua Wanga, and Ya Chenga,b,c,*

aThe Extreme Optoelectromechanics Laboratory (XXL), School of Physics and Electronic Science, 

East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China

bState Key Laboratory of High Field Laser Physics and CAS Center for Excellence in Ultra-intense 

Laser Science, Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics (SIOM), Chinese Academy of 

Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 201800, China

cState Key Laboratory of Precision Spectroscopy, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, 

China

ABSTRACT  

Photolithography assisted chemo-mechanical etching (PLACE), a technique specifically developed for fabricating high-
quality large-scale photonic integrated circuits (PICs) on thin-film lithium niobate (TFLN), has enabled fabrication of a 
series of building blocks of PICs ranging from high-quality (high-Q) microresonators and low-loss waveguides to electro-
optically (EO) tunable lasers and waveguide amplifiers. Aiming at high-throughput manufacturing of the PIC devices and 
systems, we have developed an ultra-high-speed high-resolution laser lithography fabrication system employing a high-
repetition-rate femtosecond laser and a high-speed polygon laser scanner, by which a lithography efficiency of 4.8 cm2/h 
has been achieved at a fabrication resolution of 200 nm. We demonstrate wafer-scale fabrication of TFLN-based photonic 
structures, optical phase masks as well as color printing.

Keywords: thin film lithium niobate, photonic integrated circuit, photolithography, femtosecond laser micromachining

1. INTRODUCTION

The combination of advanced materials with high optical performance and continuous improvement of micro/nano 
fabrication technology has opened a new chapter for integrated photonics. Recently, thin-film lithium niobate (TFLN) has 
attracted tremendous attention as the material platform for the next generation photonic integrated circuits (PICs)1-8, mainly 
owing to its wide transparency window from UV to mid-IR, moderately high refractive index that enables dense photonic 
integration while maintaining a suitable mode-size in the single-mode LN ridge waveguide, and large electro-optic (EO)
as well as nonlinear optical coefficients which are critical for high-speed EO tuning and high-efficiency wavelength 
conversion applications9-11. Notably, a broad range of high-performance PIC devices have been demonstrated using the 
photolithography assisted chemo-mechanical etching (PLACE) technique12-20 which is developed specifically for the mass-
production of large-scale PICs. As some examples, we have fabricated ultra-high quality (Q~1.23×108) optical 
microresonators17,18 and optical delay lines of meter-scale lengths16 using the PLACE technique. The PLACE fabrication 
technique employs laser direct writing for mask patterning which breaks through the size-limit of exposure area and chemo-
mechanical polish (CMP) which gives rise to sub-nanometer surface roughness on the sidewall of the fabricated 
waveguides to efficiently suppress the scattering loss of the propagating light. Meanwhile, it is a well-developed 
technology that the LN crystal can be used as a host material for doping rare earth ions. Using the doped TFLN, we have 
demonstrated electro-optically tunable microlaser, single-frequency ultra-narrow linewidth microdisk laser, and 
waveguide amplifier on Er3+ doped TFLN21-24. 

Owing to its direct-writing nature, the fabrication efficiency of PLACE intrinsically depends on the scan speed of the 
tightly focused femtosecond laser. In our previous scheme, the direct writing is realized by keeping the laser focal spot 
stationary while translating the sample in 3D (XYZ) space using a high-precision XYZ motion stage. The highest scan 
speed achieved in our previous experiment is 80 cm/s with the sophisticated XY stage, whilst the stage much be frequently 

*ya.cheng@siom.ac.cn; Tel.: +86-21-6991-8546; Fax: +86-21-6991-8021


accelerated or deaccelerated to enable the writing of complex mask patterns. When the motion stage undergoes the 
acceleration and deacceleration, the laser writing process must slow down for maintaining the high accuracy in positioning 
of the motion stage, which in turn reduce the fabrication efficiency. To solve the problem, we recently develop an ultra-
high-speed high-resolution femtosecond photolithography system which combines a polygon scanner with the high-
precision XYZ motion stage. In this manner, the acceleration and deacceleration of the motion stage are eliminated, and 
the scan speed can reach 2 m/s which is much higher than the maximum speed of the high-precision motion stages, allowing 
for achieving an ultra-high production efficiency of 4.8-cm2/h at 200-nm fabrication resolution. We demonstrate
fabrication of large-scale photonic structures and devices including TFLN-based true optical delay lines, wafer-scale
optical phase plate (OPP) as well as wafer-scale laser color printing.

2. THE PLACE FABRICATION TECHNIQUE

To begin with, we introduce the fabrication procedures of PLACE technique, which are schematically illustrated in Fig. 1.
First, a chromium (Cr) metal film deposited on TFLN is patterned into pre-designed mask shape using femtosecond laser
ablation. Subsequently, the TFLN covered with Cr mask undergoes a CMP process, by which the Cr mask pattern is
transferred to TFLN as the Cr mask can protect the underneath LN from the CMP process for the high hardness of Cr. At
last, the residual Cr mask is removed, followed by an additional CMP process for further smoothing the upper edge of
waveguides. This technique allows for the expansion of the footprint of PICs almost without physical limit as the
fabrication resolution is only determined by the focal spot size which is irrelevant with the field of view of the objective
lens used for focusing the femtosecond laser beam. In addition, the photonic structures fabricated by CMP process can
have a surface roughness well below 1 nm, rendering the propagation loss approaching the absorption limit of LN.

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of (a) PLACE technique processing flows. (b) CMP process. 

To showcase the high-performance of the PLACE technique, we fabricated TFLN microdisk17 and microring18 resonators, 
as presented in Fig. 2(a)-(b), respectively, showing an ultra-smooth surface with an average surface roughness below 0.5 
nm. The measured transmission spectrum of the microdisk is shown in Fig. 2(c), indicating an intrinsic Q factor of 1.2×
108. Fig. 2(d) presents the Q-factor measured with the photon-ring method which was carried out by repeatedly scanning 
the laser wavelength with a high-speed Mach-Zehnder modulator into the targeted resonance. The retrieved photon lifetime 
of 64.3 ns indicates a Q-factor of 1.23×108, which is in good agreement with the Q-factor in Fig. 2(c). Since the CMP 
technique does not involve any ion beam etching (IBE) process, surface smoothness beyond that allowed by IBE can be 


readily achieved. Fig. 2(e) shows a LN waveguide amplifier fabricated on the Er3+ doped TFLN wafer using the PLACE 
technique24. Thanks to the low propagation loss and long waveguide length of 10 cm, a small signal gain of above 20 dB 
is achieved at the signal wavelength around 1532 nm when pumped by a diode laser at ∼980 nm.

Figure 2. (a) SEM of the microdisk resonator. (b) Optical microscope image of the microring. (c) The transmission spectrum. (d) 

Photon lifetime measurement at 1551.52 nm wavelength. (e) Digital camera photograph of the excited Er3+-TFLN waveguide chip.

3. HIGH-SPEED FEMTOSECOND PHOTOLITHOGRAPHY SYSTEM

The PLACE fabrication technique uses the high-speed femtosecond laser direct writing system for the task of mask
patterning on a Cr thin film. The schematic of the newly developed polygon-scanner-based femtosecond lithography
system is illustrated in Fig. 3(a), in which a fast-rotating mirror reflects the laser pulses into an objective lens to form a
tiny focal spot rapidly moving in the horizontal direction on the top surface of substrate. Meanwhile, the scanning along
the vertical direction is realized using an XY motion stage operated at a slower speed to achieve synchronized 2D scan in
the XY plane. To form the pre-designed patterns on the Cr film, a home-built controller is used to switch the laser pulses
on/off very quickly during the beam scanning. Figure 3(b) shows the photograph of the home-built system which is mainly
composed of a high-repetition-rate femtosecond laser system, an XYZ motion stage, and the polygon scanner. In addition,
the polygon scanner can be set at a high scan rate of 3000 line/s. By synchronizing the laser pulses, the rotating scanner
and the motion stage, we have achieved infinite field of vision (IFOV) processing, i.e. the area on the substrate to be
patterned into the mask is no longer limited by the field of view of the objective lens but only limited by the motion range
of the XY stage. In our experiment, the motion range of the XY stage is 200 mm×200 mm. For achieving the high-


resolution fabrication performance, a high numerical aperture (NA) objective lens is used to carry out the lithography
process, resulting in a processing velocity of ~2 m/s and a fabrication efficiency of ~4.8 cm2/h at a fabrication resolution
of ~200 nm. In this study, the fabrication resolution is determined by the width of the laser ablation trench formed on the
200 nm-thick Cr film. Surface flatness error is solved by a home-built real-time focusing module. Using the home-built
ultra-high-speed femtosecond laser lithography fabrication system, an array of 1960 Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI)
structures are fabricated on a 4-inch wafer in a continuous fabrication process, as shown in Fig. 3(c). We chose the MZIs
as an example for testing our system because MZIs are the heart of high-speed EO modulators based on TFLN. It is
confirmed that each MZI of 10 mm total length can be patterned within only 4.3 second, indicating a high manufacturing
efficiency which is highly desirable for industrial-scale mass-production.

Figure 3. (a) Principle of ultra-high-speed polygon laser scanner. (b) Physical drawing of femtosecond laser lithography 

system based on polygon scanner. (c) 1960 MZI structures in 4-inch wafer.

4. APPLICATIONS OF WAFER-SCALE NANOFABRICATION

4.1 Rapid fabrication of large photonic structures on TFLN

Using the high-speed femtosecond laser lithography system, we successfully fabricate photonic structures of large footprint 
and reasonable propagation loss. In particular, the propagation loss of the waveguide, which is of vital importance for PIC 
application, should be characterized of sufficient accuracy. For this purpose, we fabricate an unbalanced MZI on the LNOI 
substrate using the high-speed PLACE fabrication system. The difference in the lengths of the two arms is 10 cm as shown 
in Fig. 4(a). The waveguide propagation loss can be determined by measuring the extinction ratio (ER) of the transmitted 
interference signal as a function of the wavelength recorded by the power meter, because two 1×2 multi-mode 
interferometers (MMI) of 50:50 beam splitting ratio are used near the two ends of MZI. The insets of Fig. 4(a) show the 
zoom-in optical micrographs of 1×2 MMI and the Euler bends of the wrapped waveguide, as indicated by the arrows. We 


used a tunable laser covering the wavelength range of telecom band as the light source for measuring the waveguide loss. 
The tunable laser was coupled into the LN ridge waveguide using a lensed fiber. The output signal from the LN waveguide 
was collected by another lensed fiber and directed into the photodetector. The electric signals converted by the exiting 
light from the MZI were analyzed by an oscilloscope. The transmission spectrum near the 1563.84 nm is plotted by Fig. 
4(b), showing the free spectrum range (FSR) of 0.0116 nm and an (ER of ~-5 dB. The optical path difference can be 

expressed as

𝜆2

𝐹𝑆𝑅 of 21 cm which agrees well with the 10 cm length difference in the two arms of the unbalanced MZI

multiplied by the group refractive index of 2.1 in the LN ridge waveguide. Given that the output powers of the short and
long arms are P1 and P2, respectively, and the length difference between the two arms is L, then the ER can be expressed 

as ER =

𝑃1−𝑃2

𝑃1+𝑃2 , indicating the propagation loss α = −

10 log(𝑃2

𝑃1)

𝐿
= −10log(

[1−𝐸𝑅]

[1+𝐸𝑅])/𝐿 . Based on the experimentally 

measured ER of -5 dB, we derive the propagation loss of 0.3 dB/cm for the fabricated waveguides. The loss is 
approximately one order of magnitude higher than the typical waveguide loss in the LN waveguides fabricated using 
PLACE technique, because previously a different scan scheme of the focused femtosecond laser beam was adopted in 
which the femtosecond laser spot was translated along the contours of the waveguides to ensure generation of smooth 
edges of the Cr hard mask19,20. Alternatively, in the current high-speed femtosecond laser lithography fabrication, a raster 
scan scheme is used which leads to higher fabrication efficiency but slightly higher edge roughness. Nevertheless, the 
propagation loss of 0.3 dB/cm is comparable to the typical loss in the LN ridge waveguides fabricated by electron beam 
lithography (EBL), and is already sufficient low for the LN photonic devices of centi-meter scale footprint. Large-scale 
PICs usually demand lower propagation loss which can be achieved by further shortening the laser switching on-off time 
and improving the synchronization between the polygon scanner and the high-speed shutter, as these are the major factors 
responsible for the edge roughness left behind on the Cr mask. 

Figure 4. (a) Micrograph of unbalanced MZI with 10 cm length difference on LNOI. Inset: zoom-in micrographs of 1×2 

MMI and Euler bend waveguide. (b) The transmission spectra near the 1563.84 nm for indicating the extinction ratio.


4.2 Rapid fabrication of wafer-scale optical phase plate

The high-speed femtosecond laser lithography system is a valuable fabrication tool for applications requiring large 
fabrication areas and sub-micron fabrication resolutions on various kinds of materials, which is not limited for TFLN-
based PIC application. Below, we demonstrate fabrication of wafer-scale OPPs, which are fundamental to light field 
shaping and tailoring. The first wafer-scale OPP with a size of 1 cm  1 cm is composed of a checkerboard grating
consisting of 1-μm units as shown in Fig. 5(a)-(b). The digital camera picture of the OPP presented in Fig. 5(b), we can 
see the structural color due to the optical diffraction. To check its diffraction performance, a continuous wave (CW) laser 
at the wavelength of 632 nm propagates through the OPP, and then recorded by the CCD camera to reveal the diffraction 
pattern. As shown in Fig. 5(c), we can see that the CW beam was split into for diffracted beams at the corner of a square.
In the middle of the image, one can see the un-diffracted zeroth-order beam. The uniformity in the four diffracted beams,
in terms of both the beam intensity and its spatial profile, clearly indicates the uniformity of the fabricated OPP structure.
Similarly, a vortex grating as illustrated in Fig. 5(d)-(e) was fabricated using the same fabrication procedures. The 632-nm
CW laser beam was split into eight beams equally spaced in an annular ring, as shown in Fig. 5(f).

Figure 5. (a) Micrograph of checkerboard grating with 1 μm unit pixel. (b) The digital camera photograph of Fig. 6(a) with 
the size of 10 mm×10 mm. (c) Spot distribution after the checkerboard grating. (d) Micrograph of vortex grating with 1 μm
linewidth. (b) The digital camera photograph of Fig. 6(d) with the size of 6 mm×6 mm. (f) Spot distribution after the vortex 

grating.

4.3 Rapid wafer-scale color printing

The capability of rapidly producing the fine grating structures with micro-scale pixel size and wafer-scale footprint allows
for wafer-scale color printing based on the grating diffraction effect. The structural colors generated this way strongly
depends on the diffraction angle and the grating period, as shown in Fig. 6(a). One can generate the full range of spectrum
in the visible by tuning the grating period for a fixed angle of view (i.e., the fixed diffraction angle). Here, we chose to
produce reflective gratings on the fused silica wafer coated with Cr thin film, which is similar to the grating structures
described in Sect. 4.2. However, in the color printing, the grating in each colorful pixel of a size of 20 μm ×20 μm is
fabricated with its own grating period corresponding to the color borne by the pixel. Here, the angle of view, which is the
same as the diffraction angle of our color printing sample, is designed to be 30 degrees, which is a convenient angle for
the viewer holding the sample in his/her hand. According to such a diffraction angle, we can calculate the grating period
d as a function of the diffraction wavelength λ using the well-known equation dsin𝜃 = mλ. The calculated result is presented 


in Fig. 6(b) by choosing a diffraction order m=4, so as to have a relatively large grating period (i.e., from 3.2-6.2 μm) for 
the visible wavelengths. To confirm the calculation result in Fig. 6(b), we fabricated a group of samples of different colors 
(i.e., the color palettes as being called hereafter) for the characterization of the quality of our color printing. As shown in 
Fig. 6(c), the digital-camera-captured photos of the fabricated color palettes under the illumination of a white light source 
show exactly the same color as presented in Fig. 6(b) for the corresponding grating periods. As demonstrated in Fig. 6(d), 
the reflected beams from the palettes produce a range of colors to form a wide gamut in the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram, 
which means that the proposed grating diffraction effect can be used for wafer-scale color printing application thanks to 
the high fabrication efficiency and high fabrication resolution of our polygon-scanner-based femtosecond laser lithography 
system. Figures 6(e)-(f) provide the comparison between an original hard-copy picture of the campus of East China Normal 
University (Fig. 6(e)) and the white balanced digital photograph of the same image printed on the 4-inch wafer using our 
femtosecond laser lithography system (Fig. 6(f)). It can be seen that the original image is well reproduced in the color 
printing sample despite that some difference does exist in the two images which can be improved by further refining the 
grating design parameters and image conversion algorithm. The total time for printing out the full picture of an area of 
32.7 cm2 as shown in Fig. 6(f) is about ~6.8 hrs, thanks to the ultra-high fabrication efficiency of 4.8 cm2/h.

Figure 6. (a) The principle of structural colors based on grating diffraction effect. (b) Theoretically calculated diffraction 
angle as a function of grating periods in the 4-order diffraction. (c) The digital camera photograph of the color palettes at 

different grating periods. (d) The measured reflection colors (black circles) are mapped in the CIE 1931 chromaticity 

diagram. Campus of East China Normal University of (e) original picture and (f) 4-inch wafer color printing. 


Figure 7 (a) The digital camera photograph of the map of world. (b) Micrographs at the positions of top left, bottom left, top
mid, bottom mid, top right, and bottom right of world map. (c) Micrographs of map in different cities (Beijing, Washington, 

Moskva, London and Paris) and North/South Pole for global view.


4.4 Wafer-scale micro-printing of ultra-high resolution and high uniformity

The biggest advantage of our polygon-scanner based femtosecond laser lithography system is the essential IFOV and
extremely high uniformity across the whole wafer area. The reason is that with such a strategy, the fabrication resolution
is only determined by the size of the focal spot generated by the focal system (i.e., the objective lens). Meanwhile, the
fabrication area is only determined by the range of motion of the high-precision stage, which in principle can be extended
to meter-scale range with today’s commercial product. Thus, the dilemma of creating an optical imaging system which
can ensure a high and uniform spatial resolution in a large field of view can be solved. To showcase such a capability of
mask patterning with high resolution and high uniformity with IFOV, we carry out the continuous printing of a world map
in the 4-inch fused silica wafer coated with Cr thin film. The total area of the world map, as shown in Fig. 7(a), is of a size
of 75.6 mm×50.8 mm. Remarkably, the map consists of 86.4 billion pixels in total. To verify the processing uniformity,
we indivisually examine the printing quality in various areas of the top left, bottom left, top middle, bottom middle, top
right and bottom right of the map, respectively, as presented in Fig. 7(b). The sharp edges of the drawings produced by
femtosecond laser direct writing as well as the straightness of the lines in all the panels of Fig. 7(b) clearly indicate the
high uniformity of our photolithography system. Figure 7(c) shows the micrographs of different cities including Beijing,
Washington, Moskva, London/Paris and South/North Poles featured with intricate traffic networks, again confirming the
capability of generating arbitrary patterns with our polygon-scanner based femtosecond laser lithography system.

5. CONCLUSIONS

Photolithography is an important micro- and nanofabrication technology for producing miniaturized devices and systems
in various applications ranging from electronics and photonics to chemistry, biology and medicine. Photolithography based
on femtosecond laser direct writing shows the advantages of high spatial resolution, high fabrication efficiency as
compared to the EBL and focused ion beam writing, as well as flexibility in terms of the substrate materials that can be
processed with femtosecond laser ablation or femtosecond laser modification. For industrial applications, the high
throughput is of vital importance which requires the realization of high scan speed with the photolithography system. Our
fabrication system based on the polygon scanner provides an example to accomplish this task. Using such a system, we
show that we can fabricate low-loss waveguides on TFLN substrate for large-scale PIC application. We also demonstrate
a range of wafer-scale microfabrication applications such as OPP and laser printing. Currently we have achieved a
fabrication efficiency of 4.8 cm2/hr at the highest fabrication resolution of 200 nm, which allows to generate Tera-pixel
scale patterns within an area of full-sized 4-inch wafer in a few hours. It is expected that with the continuous advances in
high-repetition-rate femtosecond laser and high-speed electronic shutter/controller, the fabrication efficiency can be further
promoted by 1~2 orders of magnitude, eventually allowing for patterning a 4-inch wafer in a few minutes. This will have
profound implication as miniaturization will play the central role in the future society.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The research was supported by Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (NO.21DZ1101500) and
Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (Grant No.2019SHZDZX01).

REFERENCES

[1] Cheng, Y., “Lithium niobate nanophotonics,” Taylor & Francis, New York, ed. 1, (2021).
[2] Zhang, M., Wang, C., Cheng, R., Shams-Ansari, A., and Lončar, M., “Monolithic ultra-high-Q lithium niobate 

microring resonator,” Optica 4(12), 1536-1537 (2017).

[3] Wang C., Zhang, M., Chen, X., Bertrand, M., Shams-Ansari, A., Chandrasekhar, S. Winzer, P. and Lončar, M., "

“Integrated lithium niobate electro-optic modulators operating at CMOS-compatible voltages," Nature, 562, 101-
104 (2018).

[4] Wang, C., Zhang, M., Yu, M., Zhu, R., Hu, H., and Lončar, M., “Monolithic lithium niobite photonic circuits for 

Kerr frequency comb generation and modulation,” Nat. Commun., 10, 978 (2019).


[5] Yu, M., Barton, D., Cheng, R., Reimer, C., Kharel, P., He, L., Shao, L., Zhu, D., Hu, Y., Grant, H., Johansson, L. 

Okawachi, Y., Gaeta, A., Zhang, M., and Lončar, M., " Integrated femtosecond pulse generator on thin-film 
lithium niobate," Nature, 612, 252-258 (2022).

[6] Li, M., Chang, L., Wu, L., Staffa, J., Ling, J., Javid, U., Xue, S., He, Y., Lopez-rios, R., Morin, T., Wang, H., 

Shen, B., Zeng, S., Zhu, L., Vahala, K., Bowers, J., and Lin, Q., "Integrated Pockels laser," Nat. Commun., 13, 
5344 (2022).

[7] Pohl, D., Escale, M., Madi, M., Kaufmann, F., Brotzer, P., Sergeyev, A., Guidimann, B., Giaccari, P., Alberti, E., 

and Meier, U., “An integrated broadband spectrometer on thin-film lithium niobite,” Nat. Photonics, 14, 24-29 
(2020).

[8] Zhang, Y., Shao, L., Yang, J., Chen, Z., Zhang, K., Shum, K., Zhu, D., Chan, C., Lončar, M., and Wang, C., 

“Systematic investigation of millimeter-wave optic modulation performance in thin-film lithium niobite,” Photon. 
Res., 10(10), 2380 (2022).

[9] Boyd, G. D., Miller, R. C., Nassau, K., Bond, W. L., and Savage, A., “LiNbO3: an efficient phase matchable 

nonlinear optical material,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 5(11), 234-236 (1964).

[10]Weis, R. S., and Gaylord, T. K., “Lithium niobate: Summary of physical properties and crystal structure,” Appl. 

Phys. A 37(4), 191-203 (1985).

[11]Jin, H., Liu, F., Xu, P., Xia, J., Zhong, M., Yuan, Y., Zhou, J., Gong, Y., Wang, W., and Zhu. S., “On-chip 

generation and manipulation of entangled photons based on reconfigurable lithium-niobate waveguide circuits,” 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113(10),103601 (2014).

[12]Wu, R., Lin, J., Wang, M., Fang, Z., Chu, W., Zhang, J., Zhou, J., and Cheng, Y., “Fabrication of a multifunctional 

photonic integrated chip on lithium niobate on insulator using femtosecond laser-assisted chemomechanical 
polish,” Opt. Lett. 44(19), 4698-4701 (2019).

[13]Wu, R., Gao, L., Liang, Y., Zheng, Y., Zhou, J., Qi, H., Yin, D., Wang, M., Fang, Z., and Cheng, Y., “High-

Production-Rate Fabrication of Low-Loss Lithium Niobate Electro-Optic Modulators Using Photolithography 
Assisted Chemo-Mechanical Etching (PLACE),” Micromachines, 13 (3), 378 (2022).

[14]Fang, Z., Luo, H., Lin, J., Wang, M., Zhang, J., Wu, R.,Zhou, J.,Chu, W., Lu, T., and Cheng, Y., “Efficient 

electro-optical tuning of an optical frequency microcomb on a monolithically integrated high-Q lithium niobate 
microdisk,” Opt. Lett. 44(24), 5953-5956 (2019).

[15]Fang, Z., Haque, S., Farajollahi, S., Luo, H., Lin, J., Wu, R., Zhang, J., Wang, Z., Wang, M., Cheng, Y., and Lu, 

T., “Polygon Coherent Modes in a Weakly Perturbed Whispering Gallery Microresonator for Efficient Second 
Harmonic, Optomechanical, and Frequency Comb Generations,” Phy. Rev. Lett. 125, 173901 (2020).

[16]Zhou, J., Gao, R., Lin, J., Wang, M., Chu, W., Li, W., Yin, D., Deng, L., Fang, Z., Zhang, J., Wu, R., and Cheng, 

Y., "Electro-Optically Switchable Optical True Delay Lines of Meter-Scale Lengths Fabricated on Lithium 
Niobate on Insulator Using Photolithography Assisted Chemo-Mechanical Etching," Chin. Phys. Lett., 37, 
084201 (2020)

[17]Gao, R., Zhang, H., Bo, F., Fang, W., Hao, Z., Yao, N., Lin, J., Guan, J., Deng, L., Wang, M., Qiao, L., and Cheng, 

Y., "Broadband highly efficient nonlinear optical processes in on-chip integrated lithium niobate microdisk 
resonators of Q-factor above 108," New J. Phys., 23, 123027 (2021).

[18]Gao, R., Yao, N., Guan, J., Deng, L., Lin, J., Wang, M., Qiao, L., Fang, W., and Cheng, Y., " Lithium niobate 

microring with ultra-high Q factor above 108," Chin. Opt. Lett., 20, 011902 (2022).

[19]Wu, R., Zhang, J., Yao, N., Fang, W., Qiao, L., Chai, Z., and Cheng, Y., " Lithium niobate micro-disk resonators 

of quality factors above 107," Opt. Lett., 43(17), 4116-4119 (2018).

[20]Wu, R., Wang, M., Xu, J., Qi, J., Chu, W., Fang Z., Zhang, J., Zhou, J., Qiao, L., Chai, Z. Lin, J., and Cheng, Y., 

“Long Low-Loss-Lithium Niobate on Insulator Waveguides with Sub-Nanometer Surface Roughness,” 
Nanomater., 8(11), 910 (2018).

[21]Yin, D., Zhou, Y., Liu, Z., Wang, Z., Zhang, H., Fang, Z., Chu, W., Wu, R.,Zhang, J., Chen, W., and Cheng, Y., 

“Electro-optically tunable microring laser monolithically integrated on lithium niobate on insulator,” Opt. Lett. 
46(9), 2127-2130 (2021).

[22]Lin, J., Farajollachi, S., Fang, Z., Yao, N., Gao,R., Guan, J., Deng, L., Lu, T., Wang, M. Zhang, H., Fang, W., 

Qiao, L., and Cheng, Y., “Electro-optic tuning of a single-frequency ultranarrow linewidth microdisk laser,” Adv. 
Photonics, 4, 036001 (2022).

[23]Zhou, J., Liang, Y., Liu, Z., Chu, W., Zhang, H., Yin, D., Fang, Z., Wu, R., Zhang, J., Chen, W., Wang, Z., Zhou, 

Y., Wang, M., and Cheng, Y., "On‐Chip Integrated Waveguide Amplifiers on Erbium‐Doped Thin‐Film Lithium 
Niobate on Insulator," Laser & Photon. Rev., 15, 2100030 (2021).


[24]Liang, Y., Zhou, J., Liu, Z., Zhang H., Fang, Z., Zhou, Y., Yin, D., Lin, J., Yu, J., Wu, R., Wang, M., and Cheng, 

Y., " A high-gain cladded waveguide amplifier on erbium doped thin-film lithium niobate fabricated using 
photolithography assisted chemo-mechanical etching," Nanophotonics, 11(5), 1033-1040 (2022).


