1 

 

Surface termination control of charge transfer and band alignment across a 

semiconductor-crystalline oxide heterojunction   

M. Chrysler1, J. Gabel2, T.-L. Lee2, Z. Zhu3, T. C. Kaspar4, P. V. Sushko4, S. A. Chambers4,  

and J. H. Ngai1 

 

1Department of Physics, University of Texas-Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA 

2 Diamond Light Source, Ltd., Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire 

OX11 0DE, England, United Kingdom 

3Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 

Richland, WA 99352, USA 

4Physical Sciences Division, Physical & Computational Sciences Directorate, Pacific Northwest 

National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA 

  

 

Charge redistribution across heterojunctions has long been utilized to induce functional response 

in materials systems. Here we examine how the composition of the terminating surface affects 

charge transfer across a heterojunction consisting of Si and the crystalline complex oxide SrTiO3. 

Itinerant electrons in Si migrate across the interface toward the surface of SrTiO3 due to surface 

depletion. The electron transfer in turn creates an electric field across the interface that modifies 

the interfacial dipole associated with bonding between SrTiO3 and Si, leading to a change in the 

band alignment from type-II to type-III. By capping the SrTiO3 surface with ultra-thin (≤ 1 nm) 

layers of BaO, SrO or TiO2, charge transfer across the interface can be weakened or inhibited. 

Ab initio modeling implicates the adsorption of oxygen as driving surface depletion in SrTiO3. 

The electronic coupling between the surface and buried interface expands the functionality of 

semiconductor-crystalline oxide heterojunctions. 

 

 
 


2 

 

I. 
INTRODUCTION 

 
Semiconducting heterojunctions exhibiting built-in electric fields due to charge transfer underpin 

the functionality of virtually all electronic device technologies. While such heterojunctions have 

traditionally been comprised of covalently bonded semiconductors, recent interest has turned to 

hybrid heterojunctions in which one side of the heterojunction is an ionically bonded crystalline 

oxide [1,2]. Such hybrid heterojunctions potentially enable the ideal characteristics of both 

covalently bonded and ionically bonded semiconductors to be combined. Heterojunctions 

possessing complementary covalent and ionic characteristics are of potential interest for a variety 

of applications, including those in which the surface of the oxide is exposed to reactive terrestrial 

conditions [3,4]. Understanding how the electronic behavior of hybrid heterojunctions evolves 

under such conditions is necessary. However, to date, even an understanding of how the 

electronic properties of hybrid heterojunctions evolve with mere exposure to ambient conditions 

is lacking.  

In this regard, surfaces play a pivotal role in determining the electronic behavior of 

semiconducting thin films and heterojunctions. Surfaces break the translational symmetry of the 

crystal lattice, which leads to the formation of undercoordinated atoms that can attract 

adsorbates, or form states that trap charge, or give rise to structural reconstructions at the surface 

[5]. Itinerant carriers in the bulk, if present, can contribute to this interplay between dangling 

surface bonds, adsorbates, and surface reconstructions. In conventional semiconducting 

materials, the phenomenon of surface depletion arises as itinerant carriers are drawn to the 

surface away from their dopant ions in the bulk, thereby forming space charge and band bending 

near the surface [6].     

 
Here we explore the interplay between surface depletion and charge transfer across the 

archetype semiconductor-crystalline oxide heterojunction comprised of Si and SrTiO3 (STO). 

We find that itinerant electrons in the former migrate across the interface toward the surface of 

the latter due to surface depletion. This surface depletion has a dramatic effect on the electronic 

structure of the interface, as electrons transferred from Si to STO create space charge that 

modifies the interfacial dipole associated with bonding between the two materials, leading to a 

change in the band alignment from type-II, in which the conduction band minimum (CBM) of 

STO is above the valence band maximum (VBM) of Si, to type-III, in which the STO CBM is 

below the Si VBM. We find that surface depletion is dependent on the composition of the 


3 

 

terminating layer at the oxide surface. Ultra-thin capping layers of alkaline earth oxide BaO 

inhibit charge transfer across the interface, as manifested in electrical transport and hard x-ray 

photoelectron spectroscopy (HAXPES) measurements. We find that even a sub-monolayer (ML) 

of additional SrO or TiO2 deposited on the as-grown STO surface can significantly alter 

electrical behavior. Density functional theory (DFT) modeling reveals that dissociated oxygen 

adsorbed on the surface of the STO upon exposure to ambient conditions likely drives surface 

depletion. Coupling of the electronic degrees of freedom of the surface with the electronic 

behavior of the buried interface opens additional pathways to exploit semiconductor-crystalline 

oxide heterojunctions in applications. 

 

II. 
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 

 

The epitaxial thin films of STO were grown through co-deposition of SrO and TiO2 

fluxes on nominally undoped, Czochralski-grown (CZ) Si substrates (Virginia Semiconductor) 

using oxide molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), under conditions that are described in detail 

elsewhere [2,7]. The Si substrates have dimensions of 1.4  1.4” (2” diagonal) and were diced 

from larger 4” diameter wafers. Here we present results from epitaxial STO/Si heterojunctions 

for which the surface of the STO was either left as-grown, or capped in situ immediately after 

film growth with: (i) 1 nm of epitaxial BaO, (ii) 0.7 MLs of epitaxial SrO, and (iii) 0.7 MLs of 

TiO2. The epitaxial BaO, SrO, and TiO2 layers were deposited at a substrate temperature of ~ 

400 C in a chamber background pressure of ~ 2  10-7 Torr O2. We chose these capping layers 

to elucidate the effects of surface composition on the electronic behavior of the buried interface. 

Specifically, the 1 nm thick BaO capping layer is a wide band gap insulator that would screen the 

STO substate from the effects of surface adsorbates while 0.7 ML of SrO and 0.7 ML of TiO2 

change the fractions of the STO surface termination with SrO and TiO2 planes. 

Electrical transport measurements of the heterojunctions were carried out in the Van der 

Pauw geometry in a Quantum Design Dynacool system as a function of temperature and 

magnetic field. Sheet resistance and Hall measurements were performed using a Keithley 2400 

Sourcemeter and Keithley 2700 Multimeter fitted with a Keithley 7709 Matrix Module to enable 

multiplexing between all the Van der Pauw lead configurations. Electrical contacts to the 

samples were made using Al wedge bonding (Westbond) to the corners of diced 55 mm2 


4 

 

samples. Two-point current-voltage measurements confirm Ohmic behavior in the contacts. The 

Hall data were fitted to two- or three-carrier models that account for electron conductivity in the 

STO in conjunction with electron and hole conductivity in the Si. The fits to the Hall data were 

constrained such that the resulting carrier densities and mobilities would yield the corresponding 

zero-field sheet resistance obtained at the same temperature as the Hall resistance. We 

additionally constrain the mobilities to be close to those reported for bulk Si and STO films.  

HAXPES measurements were made at the Diamond Light Source (UK) on Beamline I09. 

An x-ray energy of 5.9 keV was selected using a Si(111) double crystal monochromator 

followed by a Si(004) channel-cut high resolution monochromator. The films were found to be 

highly resistive. To avoid surface charging, we reduced the incident x-ray flux until further 

reduction did not yield a measurable shift over time in the binding energy of the Ti 2p3/2 core 

level. A Scienta Omicron EW4000 high-energy hemispherical analyzer had to be set to a 500 eV 

pass energy to compensate for the low x-ray flux, resulting in an overall experimental resolution 

of ~ 500 meV, as judged by fitting a Fermi function to the Fermi edge of a gold foil. The binding 

energy scale was calibrated using the Au 4f7/2 core-level along with the Fermi edge of a gold foil. 

All spectra were measured with an angle of x-ray incidence of approximately 10° relative to the 

surface plane. The angle between the analyzer lens axis, which lays in a horizontal plane, and the 

incoming x-rays was 93°. Thus, the photoelectron take-off angle was 13° off normal. Soft x-ray 

XPS was also performed at a pass energy of 200 eV using x-ray energies that are ~470 eV 

greater than the core-level binding energies of interest in order to maintain a constant probe 

depth of ~ 2 nm [8]. The total energy resolution in the soft x-ray measurements was ~300 meV. 

In order to extract band-edge profiles, we utilize an algorithm we designed to deconvolve 

heterojunction core-level line shapes into a set of layer-resolved spectra that yields a binding 

energy profile for each component material in the heterostructure [9].  

For the DFT modeling of O bonding to the n-type STO (n-STO) and BaO surfaces, the 

BaO film grown on the n-STO (001) surface was represented using the periodic slab model. The 

STO part of the slab was 7 unit cells thick, while the thickness of the BaO film was varied from 

one to four atomic planes. The lateral supercell of the slab corresponds to the 2×2 

crystallographic perovskite cell; the lateral supercell parameters were fixed at a=b=7.81 Å, 

which corresponds to the bulk STO lattice constant of 3.905 Å. The out-of-plane supercell 

parameter was set to 50 Å, which leaves the vacuum gap of at least 14 Å depending on the BaO 


5 

 

thickness. The binding energy (Eb) of the oxygen atom at the n-STO and BaO/n-STO surfaces 

was calculated with respect to the half of the gas-phase O2 molecule energy as Eb = E(Slab) + 

1/2E(O2) – E(Slab + O); i.e., Eb is positive if O binding to the surface is energetically preferred. 

Atoms in the SrO plane furthest from the BaO/n-STO interface were fixed at the sites 

corresponding to the ideal bulk lattice. The total energy of each system was minimized with 

respect to the internal coordinates of all other atoms. The calculations were performed using the 

VASP package [10,11] and the PBEsol exchange-correlation functional [12]. Projector-

augmented wave potentials were used to approximate the effect of the core electrons [13]. A -

centered 2×2×1 k-mesh was used for Brillouin-zone integration in the structure optimization 

calculations; a 12×12×1 k-mesh was used for calculations of the density of states (DOS). The 

plane-wave basis-set cutoff was set to 500 eV. The total energy convergence criterion was set to 

10–5 eV. The charge population analysis was performed using the method developed by Bader 

[14,15].  

Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) measurements were 

performed with a TOF.SIMS5 instrument (IONTOF GmbH, Münster, Germany) using a dual 

beam depth profiling strategy. A 1.0 keV Cs+ beam (~45 nA) was used for sputtering. The Cs+ 

beam was scanned over a 300 × 300 µm2 area. A 25.0 keV Bi3+ beam (~ 0.57 pA) was used as 

the analysis beam to collect SIMS depth profiling data. The Bi3+ beam was focused to be ~5 

microns in diameter and scanned over a 100 × 100 µm2 area at the center of the Cs+ crater. 

 

III. 
RESULTS & DISCUSSION 

 

The STO/Si heterojunction capped with 1 nm of BaO exhibits strikingly different 

electrical transport behavior and electronic structure than the as-grown heterojunction. The as-

grown STO/Si heterojunction exhibits lower sheet resistance Rs than the BaO-capped 

heterojunction, along with an unusual non-monotonic anomaly (arrow), as shown in Fig. 1(a). 

Hall measurements reveal non-linear behavior and a crossover in sign in Rxy that occurs at a 

temperature near the anomaly in Rs (Fig. 1(c)), indicating the emergence of a high-mobility hole-  


6 

 

 

 
Fig. 1. (a) Rs for the 1 nm BaO capped and the as-grown 12 nm STO/CZ-Si heterojunctions. 
Insets show RHEED of the as-grown and 1 nm BaO capped heterojunctions. (b) and (c) show Rxy 
for the 1 nm BaO capped and as-grown heterojunctions, respectively. Raw data is shown as 
symbols and fits to a 2- or 3-carrier model are shown as lines. Note the crossover in the sign of 
Rxy for the as-grown heterojunction indicating the formation of a hole gas. (d) and (e) show 
carrier densities and mobilities in the STO and Si, respectively, for the 1 nm BaO capped 
heterojunction extracted from fits to Rxy. (f) and (g) show carrier densities and mobilities in the 
STO and Si, respectively, for the as-grown heterojunction extracted from fits to Rxy. Closed 
shapes indicate electron carrier densities and mobilities, while open shapes indicate hole carrier 
densities and mobilities. 
 
 
gas in Si which conducts in parallel with the n-type carriers in the STO. Fits to the Rxy data using 

2- and 3-carrier models yield the sheet densities ne,STO and mobilities µe,STO of the electrons in the 

STO (Fig. 1(f)), as well as the sheet densities ne/h,Si and mobilities µe/h,Si of both holes (hollow) 

and electrons (solid) in the Si (Fig. 1(g)). Indeed, an electron and a hole channel are needed in 

the Si to properly fit the non-linearity in the Rxy data at 400 K. The additional electrons in the Si 

at 400 K are attributed to intrinsic carriers that are thermally excited. In contrast, the STO/Si 

heterojunction capped with 1 nm of epitaxial BaO exhibits a higher Rs and insulating behavior 

(dRs/dT < 0) at all temperatures (Fig. 1(a)). While Rxy (Fig. 1(b)) also exhibits non-linear 

behavior, analysis indicates that in the BaO capped sample only n-type carriers are present,  


7 

 

comprised of electrons in the STO that exhibit low mobilities (< 10 cm2/Vs, Fig. 1(d)), and 

electrons in the Si that exhibit much higher mobilities (> 1000 cm2/Vs, Fig. 1(e)). 

  
HAXPES measurements and related modeling reveal the electronic structures that give 

rise to the electrical transport behavior of the as-grown and BaO capped heterojunctions. The Ti 

2p spectrum of the as-grown heterojunction exhibits prominent lower valence features, e.g., Ti3+, 

(Fig. 2(a)), which corroborates the large ne,STO deduced by transport. Furthermore, the Ti 2p and 

Sr 3d core-level spectra exhibit asymmetries toward higher binding energy, while the Si 2p 

spectrum exhibits asymmetry toward lower binding energy for the as-grown heterojunction 

(arrows, Fig. 2a). Such asymmetries are consistent with the presence of built-in electric fields. As 

described in Section II, these spectra can be fitted (Fig. 2(b) and 2(c)) to extract the valence band 

edge profile across the heterojunction (Fig. 2(d)). Such fitting reveals a type-III band alignment 

in the as-grown heterojunction, in which the valence band of Si is above the conduction band of 

STO, thereby enabling a hole-gas to emerge, as found in Hall measurements. In contrast, the 

lower valence features in the Ti 2p spectrum are much weaker for the BaO capped heterojunction 

(Fig. 2(a)), and all core-level spectra are largely symmetric. Fits to the spectra (Fig. 2(c)) indicate 

that the BaO capped heterojunction exhibits a type-II band alignment, in which the conduction 

band of STO is situated below (above) the conduction (valence) band of Si (Fig. 2(d)) [16]. 

As described in detail elsewhere [2,7], the high ne,STO, hole-gas and the built-in electric 

fields in the as-grown STO/Si heterojunction arise from the transfer of itinerant electrons from Si 

to STO. The itinerant electrons originate from O impurities in the Si that act as n-type donors. 

The O impurities stem from two sources, namely, O that has diffused into Si during the epitaxial 

growth of STO, and O that is intrinsically present in the CZ-grown Si substrate [17]. The transfer 

of itinerant electrons to STO creates space charge and in turn a built-in electric field across the 

interface. In a conventional semiconducting heterojunction, the transfer of itinerant charge and 

the formation of space charge generally leaves the type of band alignment across the interface 

unchanged. However, for our STO/Si heterojunctions, the electric field across the heterojunction 

that arises from the transfer of electrons alters the interfacial dipole associated with epitaxial 

bonding between STO and Si [18]. The change in interface dipole moment in turn causes the 

offset between the Si and STO valence bands to increase, thereby inducing the band alignment to 

change from type-II to type-III [7]. The hole-gas in the Si is a manifestation of inversion, as the 

O impurity donors are depleted under a type-III alignment, and the valence band near the  


8 

 

 

 
Fig. 2. (a) Core-level Si 2p, Ti 2p and Sr 3d spectra for as-grown (blue) and 1 nm BaO capped 
(magenta) 12 nm STO/CZ-Si heterojunctions. Also shown are reference spectra (black) from 
single-crystal Si(001) and SrNb0.01Ti0.99O3(001) substrates. (b) and (c) show fits to the Si 2p and 
Sr 3d spectra for the as-grown and 1 nm BaO capped heterojunctions, respectively. (d) Band 
edge profiles across the heterojunctions extracted from the fits in (b) and (c). Note the type-III 
(type-II) alignment in the as-grown (1 nm BaO capped) heterojunction. 
 

 

interface is pulled upwards towards the Fermi Energy EF. In contrast, the BaO-capped 

heterojunction exhibits much weaker charge transfer and a type-II band alignment. Since both 

capped and as-grown heterojunctions were grown under identical conditions and on identical Si 

substrates and exhibited virtually identical O impurity depth profiles, as determined by ToF-

SIMS (Fig. S1) [19], the difference in their electronic behavior cannot be attributed to a 

difference in density of O donors in the Si substrate [7].  

As the presence of a BaO capping layer is the only principal difference between the two 

heterojunctions, we consider the effects of the surface on the electrical behavior and electronic 

structure of the heterojunctions. We note that the upward band-bending at the surface of the as-

grown STO/Si heterojunction revealed by HAXPES (Fig. 2(d)) is reminiscent of surface 

depletion, which causes carriers in the bulk to be pulled to the surface, thereby creating space  

(a)

12 nm SrTiO3/Si
1 nm BaO/12 nm SrTiO3/Si
SrNb0.01Ti0.99O3(001) or Si(001)

Binding Energy Relative to Fermi Level (eV)

105.0
102.5
100.0
97.5

Si 2p

138
136
134
132

Sr 3d
Ti 2p

466
462
458
454

3+
0

expt
fit

1 nm BaO cap

101
100
99
98
97
138
136
134
132

Binding Energy Relative to Fermi Level (eV)

Si 2p
Sr 3d

no cap

Si 2p
Sr 3d

101
100
99
98
97
138
136
134
132

Binding Energy Relative to Fermi Level (eV)

expt
fit

-10
-5
0
5
10

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Distance from Interface (nm)

Band Edge Relative to Fermi Level (eV)

CZ-Si
STO

CB

VB

VB

CB

BaO capped

-10
-5
0
5
10

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Distance from Interface (nm)

Band Edge Relative to Fermi Level (eV)

CB

VB

VB

CB

CZ-Si
STO

as-grown

(b)

(c)

(d)


9 

 

 

 

 
Fig. 3. Soft x-ray C 1s and O 1s core-level spectra for the 1 nm BaO, 0.7 ML SrO, 0.7 ML TiO2 
and as-grown 12 nm STO/CZ-Si heterojunctions. Contributions from various surface adsorbates 
are indicated with dashed lines. 

 

charge and a built-in electric field. In contrast, the BaO-capped heterojunction does not exhibit 

any measurable band-bending at the surface based on HAXPES. 

The adsorption of various species on an oxide surface upon exposure to ambient 

conditions is a key mechanism that can drive surface depletion [5]. On the premise that the 

difference in behavior between the as-grown and BaO-capped heterojunctions can be attributed 

to a difference in adsorbates, more surface-sensitive soft x-ray XPS measurements were carried 

out. Figure 3 shows the C 1s and O 1s spectra in which contributions from the various adsorbed 

species are indicated. The as-grown and BaO capped heterojunctions do not exhibit any 

significant difference in the kinds of functional groups that are adsorbed on their surfaces, as 

indicated by the similar binding energies and intensities for the various spectral features. 

Furthermore, adsorbed oxygen, which is a key adsorbate that will be discussed below, cannot be 

resolved using XPS as the O 1s spectroscopic signature of dissociated O2- strongly overlaps with 

that of oxygen in the lattice. Thus, XPS alone does not yield clear insight. 

Therefore, we turn to ab initio calculations to gain further insight into the changes in 

electronic structure resulting from surface adsorption. Here we focus on the adsorption of 

oxygen, which is a strong and ubiquitous electron scavenger that has been established to induce 

surface depletion in STO by reacting with itinerant electrons to form O2- [5,20-26]. For our 

292
290
288
286
284

C 1s

536
534
532
530
528

Binding Energy (eV)

O 1s
lattice O

C=O

C-C

OH

C=O

C-O-C

1 nm BaO/STO/Si

0.7 ML SrO/STO/Si

STO/Si as-grown

0.7 ML TiO2/STO/Si


10 

 

heterojunctions, such itinerant electrons stem not only from residual oxygen vacancies VO in the 

STO, but also from oxygen impurities in the Si that act as n-type donors.  

 We first compare O adsorption on the TiO2-terminated STO surface with that on the 

BaO surface in the BaO-capped STO. Figure 4(a) shows a schematic of the slab model used to 

investigate oxygen adsorption. To mimic the effect of itinerant electrons in the n-STO arising 

from electron transfer from Si or residual O vacancies, we introduce a single VO located in an 

SrO plane. Two locations of the VO were considered: the first SrO plane from the BaO/STO 

interface (denoted as VO-S1) and the SrO plane ~2 nm away from the interface (denoted as VO-

S5).  

We consider several sites at which oxygen can potentially bind to the TiO2-terminated 

STO surface or the BaO surface. For the case of the as-grown STO surface that is terminated 

with a TiO2 layer, oxygen can bind directly above a surface Ti4+ ion (this configuration is 

denoted by OT in Fig. 4(b) and 4(c)), or directly above a surface O2- ion to form a peroxy-like 

species O22– (OO-STO in Fig. 4(b) and 4(c)).  For the case of the BaO capped heterojunctions, 

oxygen can similarly bind to a surface O2- ion (denoted by OO-BaO in Fig. 4(b) and 4(c)), or 

occupy a site located between two Ba2+ ions (denoted by OBB in Fig. 4(b) and 4(c)). The 

configuration of the adsorbed oxygen directly above a Ba2+ ion was also examined but found to 

be unstable for all BaO thicknesses; thus, this configuration is not discussed further. 

The calculated oxygen binding energies for these sites are shown in Fig. 4(b). For the as-

grown, TiO2-terminated STO surface (corresponding to N = 0 BaO layers), oxygen binds most 

strongly to Ti (Eb  3 eV for OT) for the scenario in which the oxygen vacancy is located in the 

SrO layer immediately below the terminating TiO2 surface, and directly below the Ti site at 

which oxygen is adsorbed (VO-S1). As the distance between the VO and the terminating TiO2 

surface increases (VO-S5), the oxygen binding energy decreases to < 1 eV. In contrast, oxygen 

situated above a surface O2- (OO-STO) is unstable, as the binding energy is negative. While the 

OO-STO configuration is unfavorable, OO-BaO becomes energetically stable as BaO layers are 

added. The binding energy increases from Eb ~ 0 eV for a single plane of BaO, to 1 eV for two 

BaO planes, and saturates at that energy for thicker BaO films. In contrast, the binding energy 

for oxygen adsorbed at the OBB-BaO site weakens with increasing BaO thickness (e.g., Eb  ~ 0 

eV for the 4-layer thick BaO film).   

 


11 

 

 

Fig. 4. Ab initio modelling of oxygen adsorption. (a) Schematic of the slab used in our 
calculations and the locations of oxygen vacancies used to mimic n-STO. (b) Binding energies 
for oxygen at various sites on the TiO2 and BaO surfaces, as a function of the number of BaO 
layers N, where N = 0 corresponds to the TiO2 surface. (c) Charge transferred from STO to O 
binding site as a measure of electron scavenging, along with schematics of the various adsorption 
sites. Note that O adsorbed at the energetically stable site of OO-BaO does not scavenge charge 
from STO. (d) Binding energies (Eb) and the amount of trapped charged (Q) for a chain of 
oxygen atoms of varying length on the TiO2 surface. (e) Eb and Q of the same chain of oxygen 
atoms in the presence of surface excess SrO modeled here as SrO strips (shaded regions in (e)), 
which introduce steps on the surface that result in the adsorbed oxygen to be coordinated by Sr2+ 
and Ti4+. Black dots in (d,e) indicate the lateral coordinated of VO located immediately below the 
topmost TiO2 plane. 

 
To quantitatively correlate the binding energies with the amount of electron charge 

transferred from n-STO to the adsorbed oxygen, we define the transferred charge as the 


12 

 

difference between the total number of electrons attributed to the BaO film and BaO+O 

system,i.e., before and after O adsorption, respectively. The values of these charges for all 

configurations considered are plotted in Fig. 4(c). We note that the charges calculated for the as-

grown TiO2-terminated n-STO and BaO capped n-STO systems can be compared only 

qualitatively because of the differences in the definition of the atomic volume used by the Bader 

analysis for these two systems. Analysis of these trends suggests that oxygen binding at the 

cation sites (OT and OBB) is accompanied by the transfer of 0.7 – 1 electrons, which is 

consistent with scavenging behavior. The amount of charge transferred to the oxygen adsorbate 

shows little dependence on the location of the VO in STO (Fig. 4(c)). However, only OT is 

energetically stable while OBB becomes less stable with increasing BaO thickness. Examination 

of the projected density-of-states (DOS) provides further insight. Whereas binding at the OT site 

traps itinerant electrons at the surface in a deep gap state (Fig. S2(a)), binding at the OBB site 

instead produces a shallow gap state (Fig. S2(b)). For comparison, oxygen binding at either the 

OO-BaO site or OO-STO site does not induce the transfer of charge from STO (Fig. S2(c) and 

S2(d)), but is instead reminiscent of the formation of peroxy O22– species in the case of 

interstitial oxygen atoms.  

 Thus, our ab initio calculations for the TiO2-terminated and BaO-capped n-STO surfaces 

indicate that capping STO with BaO inhibits surface depletion. The binding of oxygen to the 

energetically stable OO-BaO sites does not draw itinerant electrons from n-STO. We also note 

that electron transport from the n-STO to the surface is kinetically inhibited due to the sizeable 

offset between the conduction bands of STO and BaO, in which the latter is situated above the 

former in energy (Fig. S2(e)). In contrast, for the TiO2 terminated STO surface, the binding of 

oxygen to the energetically stable OT sites draws electrons to the surface. We argue that this 

scavenging of electrons to the STO surface induces a self-reinforcing transfer of electrons across 

the interface. As electrons are pulled from Si to the STO surface, the resulting space charge 

across the interface modifies the interfacial dipole and increases the valence band offset (VBO). 

The increasing VBO in turn promotes the transfer of more electrons from Si to STO.  

Up to this point, we considered idealized TiO2-termination of the as-grown n-STO. 

However, the surface of our as-grown heterojunctions likely exhibits a mixture of SrO and TiO2 

terminations. Mixed termination could arise from drift in the stability of Sr and Ti fluxes over the 

duration of the growth and due to dislocations that thread to the surface. Such dislocations stem 


13 

 

from anti-phase boundaries that emerge at steps on the Si(100) surface and these are 

incommensurate in height with the lattice constant of STO [27]. 

Accordingly, we have also performed ab initio calculations for a SrO-terminated surface 

and a TiO2-terminated surface that is partially covered by quasi-one-dimensional SrO islands, in 

which the island step edge is parallel to the [100] direction of STO. For the SrO-terminated 

surface, we find that the binding energies are comparable to those of having 1 ML coverage of 

BaO on top (Fig. 4(b)): ~0.1 eV for the OSS site, which is structurally equivalent to the OBB site 

on the BaO-capped STO and ~0.2 eV for the OO-STO site. To quantify the effect of the surfaces 

with mixed termination on the Eb, we first isolate the effect of SrO steps. To this end, we 

compare the O binding energies calculated for the same amount and the same locations of the 

adsorbed O (shown with magenta in Fig. 4(d) and 4(e)) with and without SrO steps. Figure 4(d) 

shows a view of the top surface of our slab, in which we have introduced 4 VO’s (amounting to 

0.25 per crystallographic lateral cell) situated in the SrO layer immediately below the surface 

layer of TiO2; lateral positions of the VO’s are shown with black dots in Fig. 4(d) and 4(e). The 

binding energies of each additional O species and corresponding charge that is transferred from 

the n-STO are indicated in Fig. 4(d). Note that the binding energies for the oxygen are smaller 

than for the case of binding at an OT site discussed above (Fig. 4(b)), because the VO’s are 

laterally displaced from the adsorbed oxygen, and not immediately below them. As diagonal 

strips of SrO covering 50% of the surface are added on top (brown trapezoids), the binding 

energies for adsorbed O increases, as indicated in Fig. 4(e). We find that this enhancement in 

binding energy is not unique to the SrO steps but is, in fact, germane to a variety of SrO 

structures, such as single SrO molecules, square Sr2O2 islands, and zig-zag SrO chains (see Fig. 

S3 in the Supplementary Information for more details). This enhancement in binding energy on 

surfaces with SrO structures on top can be generally attributed to an increase in the coordination 

of the adsorbed oxygen, as bonding occurs not just to a Ti4+ ion below but to an adjacent Sr2+ ion 

as well.   

To experimentally explore the effect that mixed termination has on electron transfer 

across the interface, we compare the results of the as-grown STO/Si heterojunction with STO/Si 

heterojunctions that have an additional 0.7 sub-ML of SrO or TiO2 deposited on top. Like the as-

grown and BaO capped heterojunctions, the SrO and TiO2 sub-ML capped heterojunctions 

exhibit virtually identical surface adsorbates (Fig. 3). Figure 5(a) shows Rs for the SrO sub-ML  


14 

 

 

 
Fig. 5. (a) Rs for the 0.7 ML SrO and 0.7 ML TiO2 capped 12 nm STO/CZ-Si heterojunctions. 
Insets show RHEED for both heterojunctions. (b) and (c) show Rxy for the 0.7 ML SrO and 0.7 
ML TiO2 capped 12 nm STO/CZ-Si heterojunctions, respectively. (d) and (e) show band edge 
profiles for the 0.7 ML SrO and 0.7 ML TiO2 capped STO/CZ-Si heterojunctions, respectively. 
 

 

capped heterojunction, showing higher Rs for all temperatures in comparison to the as-grown 

STO/Si heterojunction (Fig. 1(a)), as well as the TiO2 sub-ML capped heterojunction. No 

crossover in sign is observed in Rxy for the SrO sub-ML capped heterojunction, indicating the 

absence of a robust hole-gas. Despite the persistent negative sign of Rxy, a hole-gas does emerge 

albeit at 400 K, as the addition of a hole channel was required to properly fit the Rxy data at that 

temperature (Fig. 5(b) and Fig. S4). Nonetheless it is clear that sub-ML deposition of SrO 

significantly weakens electron transfer from Si to STO, as also evident in comparing ne,STO 

between the sub-ML deposited (Fig. S4(a)) SrO heterojunction, to the as-grown heterojunction 

(Fig. 1(f)). Fits to the Si 2p and Sr 3d HAXPES spectra (Fig. S5) corroborate the transport 

measurements, as a type-II band alignment is revealed (Fig. 5(d)). 

 In contrast, the sub-ML TiO2 capped heterojunction exhibits lower Rs and a crossover in 

sign of Rxy from negative to positive, indicating a higher ne,STO than the sub-ML SrO capped 


15 

 

heterojunction and the presence of a robust hole-gas, respectively. However, we note that the 

sub-ML TiO2 capped heterojunction exhibits a higher Rs as well as lower ne,STO, in comparison to 

the as-grown heterojunction. On the premise that larger O binding energies enhance surface 

depletion by promoting electron localization on the adsorbed oxygens, it follows from our ab 

initio calculations that the as-grown heterojunction likely has the largest areal density of exposed 

step edges. Capping with TiO2 reduces the areal density of these exposed edges and, therefore, 

the amount of excess oxygen bonded through double coordination. While capping with SrO also 

reduces the areal density of step edges, SrO further hinders surface depletion as binding at the 

energetically stable OO site does not draw electrons from the bulk, similar to capping with BaO.   

We remark on the relationship between the electric field at the STO surface due to 

surface depletion and the electric field at the interface, which forms a well that confines the 

electrons transferred from Si to STO. The electric field at the interface does not appear to be a 

continuation of the field due to surface depletion, as our fits to the HAXPES spectra of the 

uncapped heterojunction indicate a region with in which the bands are largely flat between the 

surface and the interface (Fig. 1(d)). The transferred electrons accumulate near the interface due 

to the potential of the ionized donors in the Si, leading to the observed band bending.   

Finally, we remark on the band gap of STO shown in the band-diagrams derived from 

HAXPES. Spectroscopic ellipsometry (Fig. S6) indicates the bulk indirect band gap is 3.35 eV 

for a typical 12 nm thick STO film on grown Si. The enhancement of the band gap of STO 

grown on Si relative to the bulk value (3.25 eV) is likely attributable to strain and residual 

disorder, such as dislocations [28,29].    

   

IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 

 

In summary, we demonstrate that the surface of an oxide can be electrically coupled to the 

electronic structure of the buried interface in semiconductor-crystalline oxide heterojunctions. 

Surface depletion in STO/Si heterojunctions drives not only charge transfer across the interface, 

but also a change in band alignment when coupled with the interfacial dipole. Ab initio 

calculations implicate the adsorption of oxygen as a likely mechanism responsible for the 

electrical behavior observed in our heterojunctions.    

  


16 

 

 

 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) (Awards Nos. DMR-
1508530, CMMI-2132105). HAXPES analysis and ab initio modeling work was supported by 
the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences 
and Engineering Division, Synthesis and Processing Science program, FWP 10122. This 
research used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE 
Office of Science User Facility supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of 
Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231 using NERSC award BES-ERCAP0021800. 
A portion of this research was performed on a project (Award DOI: 
10.46936/cpcy.proj.2021.60271/60008423) from the Environmental Molecular Sciences 
Laboratory, a DOE Office of Science User Facility sponsored by the Biological and 
Environmental Research program under Contract No. DE-AC05-76RL01830.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] 
R. A. McKee, F. J. Walker, and M. F. Chisholm, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3014 (1998). 

[2] 
Z. H. Lim, N. F. Quackenbush, A. Penn, M. Chrysler, M. Bowden, Z. Zhu, J. M. Ablett, 
T. -L. Lee, J. M. LeBeau, J. C. Woicik, P. V. Sushko, S. A. Chambers and J. H. Ngai, 
Physical Review Letters 123, 026805 (2019). 

[3] 
L. Kornblum,  D. P. Fenning,  J. Faucher, J. Hwang,  A. Boni, M. G. Han, M. D. 
Morales-Acosta, Y. Zhu, E. I. Altman, M. L. Lee, C. H. Ahn, F. J. Walker and  Y. Shao-
Horn, Energy & Environmental Science 10, 377 (2016). 

[4] 
L. Ji,  M. D. McDaniel, S. Wang, A. B. Posadas,  X. Li, H. Huang, J. C. Lee, A. A. 
Demkov, A. J. Bard, J. G. Ekerdt and E. T. Yu  Nat. Nanotech. 10, 84 (2015). 

[5] 
V. E. Henrich and P. A. Cox, The Surface Science of Metal Oxides (Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 1994). 

[6] 
A. Ohtomo and H. Y. Hwang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 1716 (2004). 

[7] 
M. Chrysler, J. Gabel, T.-L. Lee, A. N. Penn, B. E. Matthews, D. M. Kepaptsoglou, Q. 
M. Ramasse, J. R. Paudel, R. K. Sah, J. D. Grassi, Z. Zhu, A. X. Gray, J. M. LeBeau, S. 
R. Spurgeon, S. A. Chambers, P. V. Sushko, and J. H. Ngai Physical Review Materials 5, 
104603 (2021). 

[8] 
S. A. Chambers and Y. Du, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 38, 043409 (2020). 

[9] 
P. V. Sushko and S. A. Chambers, Sci. Rep. 10, 13028, 13028 (2020). 


17 

 

[10] 
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996). 

[11] 
G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Physical Review B 59, 1758 (1999). 

[12] 
J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. 
Constantin, X. L. Zhou, and K. Burke, Physical Review Letters 100, 136406 (2008). 

[13] 
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994). 

[14] 
R. F. Bader, Atoms in Molecules: A Quantum Theory (Clarendon Press, 1990). 

[15] 
W. Tang, E. Sanville, and G. Henkelman, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 21, 084204 (2009). 

[16] 
We note that the slight downward band bending on the STO side of the buried interface is 
not physical, but rather an artefact. This artefact arises because of the high sensitivity of 
the fitting algorithm to slight differences between the fitting function and the 
heterojunction spectrum. In this case, the valley between the spin-orbit components in the 
heterojunction Sr 3d spectrum is slightly more filled in than that of the fitting function, 
which in turn comes from fitting a spectrum measured for bulk, flat-band 
SrNb0.01Ti0.99O3(001) with a model spectrum consisting of pairs of Gaussians and 
Lorentzians. The algorithm responds by generating artificial band bending at the interface 
in order to minimize the cost function [see Ref. 9]. 

[17] 
A. Borghesi, B. Pivac, A. Sassella, and A. Stella, J. Appl. Phys. 77, 4169 (1995). 

[18] 
R. A. McKee, F. J. Walker, M. Buongiorno Nardelli, W. A. Shelton, and G. M. Stocks, 
Science 300, 1726 (2003). 

[19] 
See Supplemental Material at {link} for additional material characterization. 

[20] 
V. E. Henrich, G. Dresselhaus, and H. J. Zeiger, Physical Review B 17, 4908 (1978). 

[21] 
V. E. Henrich, G. Dresselhaus, and H. J. Zeiger, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 15, 534 (1978). 

[22] 
V. M. Bermudez and V. H. Ritz, Chem. Phys. Lett. 73, 160 (1980). 

[23] 
W. S. Samarakoon, P. V. Sushko, D. Lee, B. Jalan, H. Zhou, Y. Du, Z. Feng, and S. A. 
Chambers, Phys. Rev. Mater. 6, 103405 (2022). 

[24] 
Y. Aiura, I. Hase, H. Bando, T. Yasue, T. Saitoh, and D. S. Dessau, Surface Science 515, 
61, (2002). 

[25] 
M. Andrä, Filip  Dvořák, Mykhailo  Vorokhta, Slavomír  Nemšák, Vladimír Matolín, 
Claus M. Schneider, Regina Dittmann, and Felix Gunkel APL Materials 5, 056106 
(2017). 

[26] 
J. Gabel, M. Pickem, P. Scheiderer, L. Dudy, B. Leikert, M. Fuchs, M. Stübinger, M. 
Schmitt, J. Küspert, G. Sangiovanni, J. M. Tomczak, K. Held, T.-L. Lee, R. Claessen, M. 
Sing Advanced Electronic Materials 8, 2101006 (2022). 

[27] 
X. Shen, K. Ahmadi-Majlan, J. H. Ngai, D. Wu, and D. Su, Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 
032903 (2015). 

[28] 
R. J. Cottier, N. A. Steinle, D. A. Currie, and N. Theodoropoulou, Applied Physics 
Letters 107, 221601 (2015). 

[29] 
D. Bao, X. Yao, N. Wakiya, K. Shinozaki, and N. Mizutani, Applied Physics Letters 79, 
3767 (2001). 

 

 


