Reliable Micro-Transfer Printing Method for
Heterogeneous Integration of Lithium Niobate and
Semiconductor Thin Films

Tom Vandekerckhove1,2,∗, Tom Vanackere1,2, Jasper De Witte1, Stijn Cuyvers1,
Luis Reis1,2, Maximilien Billet1, G¨unther Roelkens1, St´ephane Clemmen1,2,3,
and Bart Kuyken1

1. Photonics Research Group, INTEC, Ghent University - imec, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
2. OPERA-Photonique CP 194/5, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
3. Laboratoire d’Information Quantique, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, 1050 Brussels, Belgium

∗tom.vandekerckhove@ugent.be

Abstract

High-speed Pockels modulation and second-order nonlinearities are key components in optical sys-
tems, but CMOS-compatible platforms like silicon and silicon nitride lack these capabilities. Micro-
transfer printing of thin-film lithium niobate offers a solution, but suspending large areas of thin films
for long interaction lengths and high-Q resonators is challenging, resulting in a low transfer yield. We
present a new source preparation method that enables reliable transfer printing of thin-film lithium
niobate. We demonstrate its versatility by successfully applying it to gallium phosphide and silicon,
and provide an estimate of the transfer yield by subsequently printing 25 lithium niobate films without
fail.

1. Introduction

Photonic integrated circuits enable the construction of complex optical systems with small footprints in
a scalable and controlled way, with applications ranging from telecommunications [1, 2] to quantum
technologies [3, 4]. Silicon (Si) and silicon nitride (SiN) photonics have established themselves as
mature photonic platforms due to their CMOS compatibility, but lack certain key components such as
optical gain, fast Pockels modulation and χ(2) nonlinearities. A promising approach to circumvent
these shortcomings is to heterogeneously integrate other materials at a back-end level to remain CMOS-
compatible [5]. Integrating direct band gap III-V materials brings gain to the integrated circuits [6],
enabling fabrication of on-chip lasers [7, 8] and detectors [9, 10]. Introducing thin-film lithium niobate
and other ferro-electric materials gives access to high-speed Pockels modulation [11, 12] and second
order optical nonlinearities [13].
A mature heterogeneous integration technique consists of die-to-wafer or wafer-to-wafer bonding
[14, 15]. The wafer containing the device material is bonded on a target wafer, followed by a substrate
removal step and device patterning. While lithographic alignment accuracy is obtained in the fabrication
of optical devices, the large bonding footprint combined with the required back-end processing makes
co-integration of multiple materials challenging. A less mature but promising heterogeneous integration
method for integrated photonics is micro-transfer printing (µTP)[16, 17, 18]. Devices are pre-fabricated
on a source wafer, after which they are picked with a PDMS stamp and printed on the target wafer through
kinetically controlled adhesion. While the alignment is determined through the printing process, with

1

arXiv:2304.13760v1  [physics.optics]  26 Apr 2023


state-of-the-art tools providing ±0.5 µm 3σ alignment accuracy [18], dense co-integration of different
materials is possible with limited processing required after printing. Moreover, arrays of devices can be
transferred in a single step, giving a high throughput.
To obtain a high transfer yield in micro-transfer printing, the pre-fabricated devices are suspended
on the source wafer, only connected at several points to the source substrate. In case of semiconductor
optical amplifiers and diodes, the devices are typically several microns thick, limiting their mechanical
flexibility. In contrast, for thin films like lithium niobate (LN) or gallium phosphide (GaP), the layers are
only several hundreds of nanometers in thickness. At the same time, large areas are desirable to enable
long interaction lengths and the definition of larger structures such as racetrack resonators. However,
the suspension of large areas of thin films is generally challenging. In this paper, we developed a new
source preparation method to reliably micro-transfer print large areas of thin films based on pillar-like
support structures. We discuss the optimization of the method and demonstrate reliable transfer-printing
of thin-film lithium niobate. Once optimized, the thin film areas can easily be enlarged without added
process development. While optimized with pillar-like structures, we show the method works with other
support configurations and give an estimate of the yield by printing 25 lithium niobate thin films without
fail onto silicon nitride waveguides. Lastly, we demonstrate the versatility of the method by successfully
applying it on large area thin film gallium phosphide and silicon.

2. Micro-transfer printing and challenges

Micro-transfer printing is a pick-and-place method that allows for the heterogeneous integration of many
materials, with limited post-processing required. This makes it compatible with CMOS technology as
the integration only happens on a back-end level, keeping the front-end process flow unaffected and
avoiding any contamination. The micro-transfer printing process is schematically illustrated in Fig.1.

Fig. 1: Micro-transfer printing concept: a suspended coupon (red) is picked with a PDMS
stamp from the source wafer, breaking the tethers (green) in a controlled way, after which
it is printed onto the target wafer.

A source wafer is fabricated where the to-be-integrated devices (red in Fig.1), from now on referred
to as coupons, are prepared. These can range from optical amplifiers and detectors, to modulators, but
consist of thin-film lithium niobate in the framework of this paper. The layer stack contains a release
layer underneath the coupon, which can be selectively etched. Connections, referred to as tethers (green
in Fig.1) keep the coupons attached to the wafer. In a last preparation step, the coupons are suspended
by etching away the release layer and are ready to be picked. In parallel, the target wafer containing e.g.
the photonic circuit is fabricated. An elastomeric PMDS stamp is then used to pick the coupon from the
source wafer by breaking the tethers in a controlled manner, and print the device onto the target wafer
through direct or adhesive bonding.
For thin films such as thin-film lithium niobate, the suspension of large areas can be challenging due
to their mechanical flexibility. To demonstrate this, we start from a 300 nm x-cut LN/2 µm SiO2/LN layer
stack (NanoLN) and pattern simple rectangles with hourglass-shaped tethers to the side in the 300 nm

2


Fig. 2: Challenges with micro-transfer printing of thin films. Left: Collapsed coupons on
the source wafer with a corresponding cross section. Right: Resulting printed LN coupon
on a SiN waveguide showing cracks (indicated by arrows) and bad tether-breaking.

LN device layer. The underlying SiO2 layer serves as release layer, which can be selectively etched with
hydrofluoric (HF) acid. The release etch is typically optimized to ease the suspension by avoiding the
liquid-to-vapor transition, where capillary forces cause the coupons to collapse to the substrate. A first
option consists of using a vapor-phase HF tool where the etchant is never in a liquid phase. However,
the non-volatile byproduct lithium fluoride (LiF) is redeposited on the top and bottom of the coupon
[19, 20]. Alternatively, a liquid HF etchant can be used in combination with critical point drying (CPD),
such that any byproducts are rinsed away in the liquid phase. While successful for small area coupons,
from a certain size the coupons will collapse due their flexibility, as shown in Fig.2. While occasionally
the edges remain suspended, the coupons themselves collapse. The strong adhesion with the substrate
impedes the coupons from being picked or creates significant stress in the thin film during pick-up,
leading to crack formation. Fig.2 depicts such printed coupon on a SiN waveguide, showing cracks
through the coupon with non-ideal breaking of the tethers.
To overcome these issues, we developed a method that relies on pillar-like support structures to keep
the LN from collapsing to the substrate, independent of the coupon area. Therefore, the coupons do not
adhere to the substrate, avoiding stresses during pick-up and resulting in an excellent transfer yield.

3. Pillar-based transfer printing method

The process flow is depicted in Fig.3. The fabrication starts from a layer stack containing a thin film
with a release layer underneath (Fig.3.1). For lithium niobate, this consists of 300 nm x-cut LN/2 µm
SiO2/LN layer stack (NanoLN). A coupon is patterned in the device layer through standard optical
lithography and dry etching (Fig.3.2). Tethers are defined connecting the coupon to the sides, with
holes within the coupon providing access to the release layer underneath. Next, the release layer is
partially etched through the holes to create voids that will serve as a mold (Fig.3.3). While HF-based
wet etching is used, dry etching is also a possibility. These molds are then filled with a support material
like photoresist, creating a pillar underneath each patterned hole (Fig.3.4). Additionally, covering the
coupon with support material increases its mechanical strength. From this point, the coupon is ready to
be released from the substrate.
Releasing the coupon is done with an HF-based wet etch, without a CPD step as typical intermediate
fluids would dissolve the photoresist. While previously the LN collapsed to the substrate, the thin film
is now suspended by the pillars (Fig.3.5). Due to the limited contact area between pillars and substrate,
the adhesion of the coupon to the substrate is significantly reduced, enabling an easy pick-up with the
stamp. In parallel to the source preparation, dedicated recesses are patterned in the target wafer next to
the photonic circuit. With both source and target wafer prepared, the coupon is picked and printed with
the pillars placed within the recesses, such that the thin film bonds directly to the target (Fig.3.6 & 3.7).

3


Fig. 3: Process flow of the pillar-based micro-transfer printing method

Lastly, the photoresist is removed with a standard cleaning procedure, leaving the thin film printed on
top of the photonic circuit (Fig.3.8).

4. Optimization of the method

To ensure a high transfer yield, some further optimizations can be done, as summarized in Fig.4. A first
improvement is found in the tether design. A simple hourglass design would be expected to break at
its thinnest point. Unfortunately, lithium niobate does not cleave well and sporadically a crack arises
that can propagate through the coupon. By adding elongated holes as so-called crack barriers [21] to
the design (Fig.4a), the cracks are shielded and remain localized at the tether. Fig.4b and 4c show the
effect without and with crack barrier, respectively. Furthermore, in conventional micro-transfer printing
methods the tethers must be strong enough to suspend the coupon, while weak enough to break during
pick-up. In this method, the tethers should no longer be strong and numerous for suspension, but only
serve to keep the coupons attached to the source wafer during the release step. The tether design therefore
becomes less critical and a small number suffices.
A further optimization is done by choosing the correct pillar configuration. Due to the sparse layout
of typical photonic circuits, pillars and corresponding target recesses can easily be placed around waveg-
uides without putting restrictions on circuit design. Nonetheless, it is important that the pillar spacing is
not too large, to avoid collapse between the pillars due to capillary forces, as shown in Fig.4d and 4e.
Depending on the layer stack and the pillar height, which can be controlled through the partial etch of
the release layer, the maximal spacing varies.

4


Fig. 4: Optimization of the pillar-based method: I Optical microscope images of tether
design: (a) new tether design with crack barrier, (b) Broken tether without barrier, (c)
Broken tether with barrier. II Optical microscope image of pillar spacing effect: (d) Large
pillar spacing, (e) Small pillar spacing. III AFM measurements of a pillar: (f) a single
pillar underneath the coupon, (g) AFM roughness measurement on top of a pillar.

A last optimization is found in the pillar definition itself. Although the lithium niobate is no longer
in contact with the substrate after release, the pillars themselves are. To guarantee a successful pick-up,
the adhesion between pillars and substrate can be minimized by increasing the roughness on top of the
pillars. This in itself is determined by the roughness of the mold, i.e. by the partial etch of the release
layer in Fig.3.3. For the HF wet etch, the roughness can be worsened by increasing the HF concentration
and therefore the etch rate. An atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurement on the bottom side of the
coupons allows us to image a single pillar, shown in Fig.4f. The resulting rms roughness on top of the
pillar is measured to be 24 nm (Fig.4g), which guarantees a bad adhesion with the source substrate.

5. Micro-transfer printing of lithium niobate

Having optimized the method, we now demonstrate the micro-transfer printing of 300 nm LN thin films.
Fig.5a shows a 60 µm x 1 mm suspended LN coupon on the source chip, ready to be picked. The pil-
lars are configured in a triangular lattice with a spacing of 20 µm, where horizontal waveguides can be
hosted in between pillars. The green color originates from thin film interference in the air below the
coupon, confirming that the lithium niobate is in fact suspended. To demonstrate the area scalability of
the method, the same source chip contains 120 µm wide coupons, shown in Fig.5b with the blue color
indicating its suspension. This confirms that by adding pillars while maintaining the same pillar spacing,
larger coupons are readily suspended and no added or thicker support layers are required. While demon-
strated with 120 µm wide coupons, the suspended area can be as large as required for high-Q ring or
racetrack resonators with sufficiently large bending radii. An AFM measurement reveals the triangular
grid of pillars underneath the coupon (Fig.5c). Moreover, the bottom side of the LN coupon is mea-
sured to give an rms roughness of 0.22 nm (Fig.5d), ideal for direct bonding and low propagation losses.
The target chip is prepared by etching pillar recesses deeper than the pillars are high to ensure contact
between the coupon and the chip (Fig.5e). During printing, the pillars are placed within the recesses

5


Fig. 5: Pillar-based µTP of LN: (a) Optical microscope image of suspended 60 µm wide
coupon, (b) Optical microscope image of suspended 120 µm wide coupon, (c) AFM mea-
surement of bottom side of a coupon, (d) AFM roughness measurement on bottom side
of a coupon, (e) Optical microscope image of a prepared target with pillar recesses, (f)
Optical microscope image of a printed LN coupon on the target.

and LN is directly bonded to the target. Fig.5f shows a printed coupon, where the uniform purple color
indicates a good and uniform direct bonding between coupon and substrate. In a last step, the photoresist
is removed, leaving the bonded lithium niobate thin film.

Until now, we relied on a grid of separated pillar-like supports to suspend the coupon. However,
the support configuration is defined through optical lithography, which suggests that any kind of support
layout can be employed, as long as the maximal spacing is maintained to avoid collapse. For instance,
in case the coupon serves to only cover a straight waveguide, long connected pillars along the side of the
coupon instead of a grid of separated pillars can be used. Such a suspended coupon is seen in Fig.6a, with
a sketch of its cross section in Fig.6b. This design freedom allows the pillar configuration to be adapted
to the photonic circuit and can be used for stress engineering within the coupon to avoid possible cracks
originating from capillary forces during the release etch. With the current pillar design, two long recesses
are etched next to a SiN waveguide, as shown in Fig.6c. Again, the coupon is printed while placing these
side-pillars in the corresponding recesses. After removal of the photoresist, the LN coupon is uniformly
bonded to the SiN (Fig.6d), creating a hybrid LN/SiN waveguide. A SEM image of a corresponding
cross section is given in Fig.6e, with platinum deposited on top for FIB milling. These resulting hybrid
waveguides were used to fabricate high-speed modulators with beyond 50 GHz bandwidth [22], and in
combination with periodic poling, achieve high-efficiency second harmonic generation with a normalized
conversion efficiency of 2500 %/Wcm2 [23], attesting to their good optical quality. Lastly, to give an
estimate of the transfer yield, 25 LN coupons were micro-transfer printed subsequently on top of SiN
waveguides without fail, of which four are shown in Fig.6f. Optical microscope images of all 25 coupons
are found in the supplementary material.

6


Fig. 6: µTP of LN with a different pillar design: (a) Optical microscope image of sus-
pended LN coupon with side-pillars, (b) Cross section sketch of the LN coupon with side-
pillars, (c) Optical microscope image of SiN waveguide surrounded by side-pillar recesses,
(d) Optical microscope image of printed LN coupon, (e) False-color SEM cross section of
the hybrid LN/SiN waveguide, (f) Optical microscope image of 4 out of 25 subsequently
printed LN coupons on SiN waveguides.

6. Micro-transfer printing of gallium phosphide and silicon

To demonstrate the versatility of the method, we apply it on other thin-film materials than lithium nio-
bate and fabricate suspended coupons. A first interesting material consists of gallium phosphide, as
it possesses a strong χ(2) and χ(3) response [24]. This makes heterogeneous integration onto CMOS-
compatible platforms interesting for the same reasons as integrating lithium niobate [25, 26]. Starting
from a layer stack of 300 nm GaP/1 µm AlGaP/GaP, the same steps are followed as depicted in Fig.3.
The intermediate AlGaP layer serves as release layer, as the high aluminium content allows for selective
etching compared to the GaP device layer with an HF-based etch. The GaP is patterned into coupons,
after which the pillar molds are etched and filled with photoresist. Next, the release layer is etched,
resulting in suspended GaP thin films. A 60 µm x 1 mm and 120 µm x 1 mm sized coupon are shown
in Fig.7a and Fig.7b, respectively. While the focus of this work is integration onto CMOS-compatible
platforms, integration of single-crystal silicon onto other platforms is also interesting e.g. as intermedi-
ate coupling layer on a silicon nitride [27, 28] or lithium-niobate-on-insulator (LNOI) platform [29, 30].
Starting from a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) chip with a layer stack of 220 nm Si/2 µm SiO2/Si, the same
procedure is followed. The oxide layer serves as release layer, which can again be selectively etched
with an HF-based etch. The resulting suspended coupons are shown in Fig.7c and Fig.7d, with a 60 µm
x 1 mm and 120 µm x 1 mm coupon size, respectively. Thus, the same procedure can be followed to
readily suspend large areas of both GaP and Si thin films, showing the versatility of the method.

7. Conclusion

Micro-transfer printing of thin-film lithium niobate is a promising approach to heterogeneously integrate
functionalities that mature CMOS-compatible platforms lack, such as high-speed Pockels modulation
and χ(2) nonlinearities. However, suspending large areas of thin films is challenging, resulting in a low
transfer yield. We have developed a new source preparation method to reliably micro-transfer print thin
films based on pillar-like support structures. We discussed the optimization of the method by introduc-
ing crack barriers in the tether design, controlling the pillar spacing and engineering the pillar roughness.
This enables the micro-transfer printing of coupons with varying surface areas, without any additional

7


Fig. 7: µTP of gallium phosphide and silicon: optical microscope image of (a) suspended
60 µm wide GaP coupon, (b) suspended 120 µm wide GaP coupon, (c) suspended 60 µm
wide Si coupon, and (d) suspended 120 µm wide Si coupon.

process development. Furthermore, different support configurations are possible, where pillars along the
sides of the coupon were shown for integration onto straight waveguides. An estimate of the transfer
yield was given by subsequently printing 25 LN coupons onto SiN waveguides without fail. Moreover,
the versatility of the method was demonstrated by fabricating suspended coupons for both gallium phos-
phide and silicon thin films. Importantly, this method is complementary to existing LNOI processing.
The suspended coupons can contain etched LN waveguides and electrodes, forming optical components
that as a whole can be integrated onto a CMOS-compatible platform. Accordingly, this enables the
co-integration of LNOI-based high-speed modulators [22, 31] with integrated lasers [32] and ultra-fast
detectors [33] on the same chip. By periodically poling the lithium niobate, also χ(2) processes like
second harmonic generation are introduced [23, 34, 35]. As such, micro-transfer printing of thin films
brings us one step closer to build versatile photonic integrated circuits on CMOS-compatible platforms.

Funding. Research Foundation Flanders (11H6723N, 11F5320N, 11F8122N, 1S69123N), European
Research Council (No.759483), Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (MIS F.4506.20).

Acknowledgments. Tom Vandekerckhove, Tom Vanackere, Stijn Cuyvers and Jasper De Witte are PhD
fellows of the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO). St´ephane Clemmen is a research associate of the
Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS). We also thank the European Research Council (ERC) for
the funding in the context of the ELECTRIC project.

Supplemental document. See Supplement 1 for supporting content.

8


References

[1] H. Wang, H. Chai, Z. Lv, Z. Zhang, L. Meng, X. Yang, and T. Yang, “Silicon photonic transceivers
for application in data centers,” Journal of Semiconductors, vol. 41, no. 10, p. 101301, 2020.

[2] A. Rahim, A. Hermans, B. Wohlfeil, D. Petousi, B. Kuyken, D. Van Thourhout, and R. Baets,
“Taking silicon photonics modulators to a higher performance level: state-of-the-art and a review
of new technologies,” Advanced Photonics, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 024003–024003, 2021.

[3] J. Wang, F. Sciarrino, A. Laing, and M. G. Thompson, “Integrated photonic quantum technologies,”
Nature Photonics, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 273–284, 2020.

[4] G. Moody, V. J. Sorger, D. J. Blumenthal, P. W. Juodawlkis, W. Loh, C. Sorace-Agaskar, A. E.
Jones, K. C. Balram, J. C. Matthews, A. Laing, M. Davanco, L. Chang, J. E. Bowers, N. Quack,
C. Galland, I. Aharonovich, M. A. Wolff, C. Schuck, N. Sinclair, M. Loncar, T. Komljenovic,
D. Weld, S. Mookherjea, S. Buckley, M. Radulaski, S. Reitzenstein, B. Pingault, B. Machielse,
D. Mukhopadhyay, A. Akimov, A. Zheltikov, G. S Agarwal, K. Srinivasan, J. Lu, H. X. Tang,
W. Jiang, T. P. McKenna, A. H. Safavi-Naeini, S. Steinhauer, A. W. Elshaari, V. Zwiller, P. S.
Davids, N. Martinez, M. Gehl, J. Chiaverini, K. K. Mehta, J. Romero, N. B. Lingaraju, A. M.
Weiner, D. Peace, R. Cernansky, M. Lobino, E. Diamanti, L. Trigo Vidarte, and R. M. Camacho,
“2022 roadmap on integrated quantum photonics,” Journal of Physics: Photonics, vol. 4, no. 1,
p. 012501, 2022.

[5] P. Kaur, A. Boes, G. Ren, T. G. Nguyen, G. Roelkens, and A. Mitchell, “Hybrid and heterogeneous
photonic integration,” APL Photonics, vol. 6, no. 6, p. 061102, 2021.

[6] D. Liang and J. E. Bowers, “Recent progress in heterogeneous iii-v-on-silicon photonic integra-
tion,” Light: Advanced Manufacturing, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 59–83, 2021.

[7] C. Xiang, J. Guo, W. Jin, L. Wu, J. Peters, W. Xie, L. Chang, B. Shen, H. Wang, Q.-F. Yang,
D. Kinghorn, M. Paniccia, K. J. Vahala, P. A. Morton, and J. E. Bowers, “High-performance lasers
for fully integrated silicon nitride photonics,” Nature communications, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 6650, 2021.

[8] C. Op de Beeck, B. Haq, L. Elsinger, A. Gocalinska, E. Pelucchi, B. Corbett, G. Roelkens, and
B. Kuyken, “Heterogeneous iii-v on silicon nitride amplifiers and lasers via microtransfer printing,”
Optica, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 386–393, 2020.

[9] M. Piels, J. F. Bauters, M. L. Davenport, M. J. Heck, and J. E. Bowers, “Low-loss silicon nitride
awg demultiplexer heterogeneously integrated with hybrid iii–v/silicon photodetectors,” Journal of
lightwave technology, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 817–823, 2014.

[10] J. Goyvaerts, S. Kumari, S. Uvin, J. Zhang, R. Baets, A. Gocalinska, E. Pelucchi, B. Corbett, and
G. Roelkens, “Transfer-print integration of gaas pin photodiodes onto silicon nitride waveguides
for near-infrared applications,” Optics Express, vol. 28, no. 14, pp. 21275–21285, 2020.

[11] N. Boynton, H. Cai, M. Gehl, S. Arterburn, C. Dallo, A. Pomerene, A. Starbuck, D. Hood,
D. C. Trotter, T. Friedmann, C. T. DeRose, and A. Lentine, “A heterogeneously integrated silicon
photonic/lithium niobate travelling wave electro-optic modulator,” Optics express, vol. 28, no. 2,
pp. 1868–1884, 2020.

[12] K. Alexander, J. P. George, J. Verbist, K. Neyts, B. Kuyken, D. Van Thourhout, and J. Beeckman,
“Nanophotonic pockels modulators on a silicon nitride platform,” Nature communications, vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2018.

9


[13] A. Boes, L. Chang, C. Langrock, M. Yu, M. Zhang, Q. Lin, M. Lonˇcar, M. Fejer, J. Bowers,
and A. Mitchell, “Lithium niobate photonics: Unlocking the electromagnetic spectrum,” Science,
vol. 379, no. 6627, p. eabj4396, 2023.

[14] S. Ghosh, S. Yegnanarayanan, D. Kharas, M. Ricci, J. J. Plant, and P. W. Juodawlkis, “Wafer-scale
heterogeneous integration of thin film lithium niobate on silicon-nitride photonic integrated circuits
with low loss bonding interfaces,” Optics Express, vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 12005–12015, 2023.

[15] V. Snigirev, A. Riedhauser, G. Lihachev, M. Churaev, J. Riemensberger, R. N. Wang, A. Siddharth,
G. Huang, C. M¨ohl, Y. Popoff, U. Drechsler, D. Caimi, S. Honl, J. Liu, P. Seidler, and T. J. Kip-
penberg, “Ultrafast tunable lasers using lithium niobate integrated photonics,” Nature, vol. 615,
no. 7952, pp. 411–417, 2023.

[16] T. Vanackere, M. Billet, C. Op de Beeck, S. Poelman, G. Roelkens, S. Clemmen, and B. Kuyken,
“Micro-transfer printing of lithium niobate on silicon nitride,” in 2020 European Conference on
Optical Communications (ECOC), pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2020.

[17] Z. Li, J. A. Smith, M. Scullion, N. K. Wessling, L. J. McKnight, M. D. Dawson, and M. J. Strain,
“Photonic integration of lithium niobate micro-ring resonators onto silicon nitride waveguide chips
by transfer-printing,” Optical Materials Express, vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 4375–4383, 2022.

[18] G. Roelkens, J. Zhang, L. Bogaert, M. Billet, D. Wang, B. Pan, C. J. Kruckel, E. Soltanian, D. Maes,
T. Vanackere, T. Vandekerckhove, S. Cuyvers, J. De Witte, I. Luntadila Lufungula, X. Guo, H. Li,
S. Qin, G. Muliuk, S. Uvin, B. Haq, C. Op de Beeck, J. Goyvaerts, G. Lepage, P. Verheyen,
J. Van Campenhout, G. Morthier, B. Kuyken, D. Van Thourhout, and R. Baets, “Micro-transfer
printing for heterogeneous si photonic integrated circuits,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Quantum Electronics, vol. 29, no. 3: Photon. Elec. Co-Inte. and Adv. Trans. Print., pp. 1–14, 2022.

[19] F. Kaufmann, G. Finco, A. Maeder, and R. Grange, “Redeposition-free inductively-coupled plasma
etching of lithium niobate for integrated photonics,” Nanophotonics, 2023.

[20] K. Luke, P. Kharel, C. Reimer, L. He, M. Loncar, and M. Zhang, “Wafer-scale low-loss lithium
niobate photonic integrated circuits,” Optics Express, vol. 28, no. 17, pp. 24452–24458, 2020.

[21] S. Cuyvers, T. Vanackere, T. Vandekerckhove, S. Poelman, C. Op de Beeck, J. De Witte, A. Her-
mans, K. Van Gasse, N. Picqu´e, D. Van Thourhout, G. Roelkens, S. Clemmen, and B. Kuyken,
“High-yield heterogeneous integration of silicon and lithium niobate thin films,” in 2022 Confer-
ence on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO), pp. 1–2, IEEE, 2022.

[22] T. Vanackere, T. Vandekerckhove, L. Bogaert, M. Billet, S. Poelman, J. Van Kerrebrouck, A. Mo-
erman, O. Caytan, S. Lemey, G. Torfs, G. Roelkens, S. Clemmen, and B. Kuyken, “High-speed
lithium niobate modulator on silicon nitride using micro-transfer printing,” in 2023 Conference on
Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO), pp. 1–2, IEEE, 2023. (to be published).

[23] T. Vandekerckhove, T. Vanackere, J. De Witte, I. Luntadila Lufungula, E. Vissers, G. Roelkens,
S. Clemmen, and B. Kuyken, “High-efficiency second harmonic generation in heterogeneously-
integrated periodically poled lithium niobate on silicon nitride,” in 2023 Conference on Lasers
and Electro-Optics Europe & European Quantum Electronics Conference (CLEO/Europe-EQEC),
pp. 1–1, IEEE, 2023. (to be published).

[24] D. J. Wilson, K. Schneider, S. H¨onl, M. Anderson, Y. Baumgartner, L. Czornomaz, T. J. Kippen-
berg, and P. Seidler, “Integrated gallium phosphide nonlinear photonics,” Nature Photonics, vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 57–62, 2020.

10


[25] M. Billet, L. Reis, Y. L´eger, C. Cornet, F. Raineri, I. Sagnes, K. Pantzas, G. Beaudoin, G. Roelkens,
F. Leo, and B. Kuyken, “Gallium phosphide-on-insulator integrated photonic structures fabricated
using micro-transfer printing,” Optical Materials Express, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 3731–3737, 2022.

[26] A. P. Anthur, H. Zhang, Y. Akimov, J. R. Ong, D. Kalashnikov, A. I. Kuznetsov, and L. Krivitsky,
“Second harmonic generation in gallium phosphide nano-waveguides,” Optics Express, vol. 29,
no. 7, pp. 10307–10320, 2021.

[27] S. Poelman, S. Cuyvers, J. De Witte, A. Hermans, K. Van Gasse, N. Picqu´e, G. Roelkens,
D. Van Thourhout, and B. Kuyken, “Generic heterogeneous integration process flow for commer-
cial foundry low-index photonic platforms,” in Frontiers in Optics, pp. FM1B–6, Optica Publishing
Group, 2021.

[28] I. L. Lufungula, A. Shams-Ansari, D. Renaud, C. Op de Beeck, S. Cuyvers, S. Poelman,
G. Roelkens, M. Loncar, and B. Kuyken, “Universally printable single-mode laser on low-index
platforms,” in 2022 Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO), pp. 1–2, IEEE, 2022.

[29] C. Op de Beeck, F. M. Mayor, S. Cuyvers, S. Poelman, J. F. Herrmann, O. Atalar, T. P. McKenna,
B. Haq, W. Jiang, J. D. Witmer, G. Roelkens, A. H. Safavi-Naeini, R. Van Laer, and B. Kuyken,
“Iii/v-on-lithium niobate amplifiers and lasers,” Optica, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 1288–1289, 2021.

[30] I. L. Lufungula, A. Shams-Ansari, D. Renaud, C. Op de Beeck, S. Cuyvers, S. Poelman,
G. Roelkens, M. Loncar, and B. Kuyken, “On-chip electro-optic frequency comb generation using
a heterogeneously integrated laser,” in CLEO: QELS Fundamental Science, pp. JTh6B–7, Optica
Publishing Group, 2022.

[31] M. Yu, D. Barton III, R. Cheng, C. Reimer, P. Kharel, L. He, L. Shao, D. Zhu, Y. Hu, H. R. Grant,
L. Johansson, Y. Okawachi, A. L. Gaeta, M. Zhang, and M. Loncar, “Integrated femtosecond pulse
generator on thin-film lithium niobate,” Nature, pp. 1–7, 2022.

[32] S. Cuyvers, B. Haq, C. Op de Beeck, S. Poelman, A. Hermans, Z. Wang, A. Gocalinska, E. Peluc-
chi, B. Corbett, G. Roelkens, K. Van Gasse, and B. Kuyken, “Low noise heterogeneous iii-v-on-
silicon-nitride mode-locked comb laser,” Laser & Photonics Reviews, vol. 15, no. 8, p. 2000485,
2021.

[33] D. Maes, S. Lemey, G. Roelkens, M. Zaknoune, V. Avramovic, E. Okada, P. Szriftgiser, E. Peytavit,
G. Ducournau, and B. Kuyken, “High-speed uni-traveling-carrier photodiodes on silicon nitride,”
APL Photonics, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 016104, 2023.

[34] A. Rao, K. Abdelsalam, T. Sjaardema, A. Honardoost, G. F. Camacho-Gonzalez, and S. Fath-
pour, “Actively-monitored periodic-poling in thin-film lithium niobate photonic waveguides with
ultrahigh nonlinear conversion efficiency of 4600% w- 1 cm- 2,” Optics express, vol. 27, no. 18,
pp. 25920–25930, 2019.

[35] C. Wang, C. Langrock, A. Marandi, M. Jankowski, M. Zhang, B. Desiatov, M. M. Fejer,
and M. Lonˇcar, “Ultrahigh-efficiency wavelength conversion in nanophotonic periodically poled
lithium niobate waveguides,” Optica, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 1438–1441, 2018.

11


Supplement 1: Reliable Micro-Transfer Printing
Method for Heterogeneous Integration of Lithium
Niobate and Semiconductor Thin Films

Abstract

In the main manuscript, the claim is made that 25 lithium niobate coupons are micro-transfer
printed without fail to demonstrate the reliability of the method. This supplementary material serves
to provide evidence for this claim by showing optical microscope images of all 25 printed coupons.

1. Optical microscope images of 25 printed lithium niobate coupons

The 25 lithium niobate coupons on silicon nitride waveguides are shown in Fig.1.

Fig. 1: 25 micro-transfer printed lithium niobate coupons onto silicon nitride waveguides.

1

arXiv:2304.13760v1  [physics.optics]  26 Apr 2023


