Control of 4-magnon-scattering in a magnonic waveguide by pure spin current
T. Hache,1, 2 L. Koerber,1, 3 T. Hula,1, 4 K. Lenz,1 A. Kakay,1 O. Hellwig,1, 4 J. Lindner,1 J. Fassbender,1, 3 and H.
Schultheiss1, 3

1)Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden–Rossendorf, Institute of Ion Beam Physics and Materials Research, 01328 Dresden,
Germany
2)Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
3)Technische Universit¨at Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
4)Institut f¨ur Physik, Technische Universit¨at Chemnitz, 09107 Chemnitz, Germany

(Dated: 7 April 2023)

We use a pure spin current originating from the spin Hall effect to generate a spin-orbit torque (SOT)
strongly reducing the effective damping in an adjacent ferromagnet. Due to additional microwave excitation,
large spin-wave amplitudes are achieved exceeding the threshold for 4-magnon scattering, thus resulting in
additional spin-wave signals at discrete frequencies. Two or more modes are generated below and above the
directly pumped mode with equal frequency spacing. It is shown how this nonlinear process can be controlled
in magnonic waveguides by the applied dc current and the microwave pumping power. The sudden onset of
the nonlinear effect after exceeding the thresholds can be interpreted as spiking phenomenom which makes
the effect potentially interesting for neuromorphic computing applications. Moreover, we investigated this
effect under microwave frequency and external field variation. The appearance of the additional modes was
investigated in the time-domain revealing a time delay between the directly excited and the simultaneously
generated nonlinear modes. Furthermore, spatially resolved measurements show different spatial decay lengths
of the directly pumped mode and nonlinear modes.

Introduction

Spintronic devices make use of the charge and spin of
electrons.
It is believed that the use of both degrees
of freedom has a large potential to built novel com-
munication and computing technologies1,2.
Especially
the development of neuromorphic computing is a cur-
rent focus with the aim to exchange energy-demanding
software with energy-efficient neuromorphic hardware3.
Spin waves (magnons) could be used to transmit informa-
tion by frequency, amplitude, wavelength and phase be-
tween spintronic oscillators acting as neurons4. In micro-
structures and thin films they are excited by microwave
magnetic fields, short laser pulses5 and spin-polarized6 or
pure spin currents7. Highly coherent spin waves can be
generated when microwave currents generate microwave
magnetic fields. Laser pulses and spin currents usually
excite a band of spin waves. Large spin-transfer (STT)
or spin-orbit torques (SOT) can completely compensate
the intrinsic damping torque of a ferromagnet8,9 result-
ing in auto-oscillations of the magnetization which can
show high coherency as well10,11.
Another approach of spin-wave generation is the use of
nonlinear magnon-magnon interactions. Here, nonlinear
magnons are created with different frequencies or wave-
lengths compared to the initially populated magnons.
This is usually achieved in an efficient manner after
exceeding a certain threshold amplitude of the initial
magnons, for example, by large pumping powers via mi-
crowave magnetic fields12.
In contrast, in this study nonlinear magnon genera-
tion is already achieved by pumping with moderate mi-
crowave magnetic fields in an ultra-thin magnonic waveg-
uide due to strong reduction but without complete com-
pensation of the damping by SOT. Therefore, the auto-

oscillation regime is not yet reached, but the spin-wave
amplitudes are increased for a wide band of frequencies.
As demonstrated in previous studies, auto-oscillations
generated above the threshold current show effects like
injection-locking (synchronization) to the external mi-
crowave signal13–16.
Far below the threshold current,
the damping is reduced and can increase the propaga-
tion lengths of spin waves17 significantly. Here, we fo-
cus on the regime slightly below the threshold current
with strongly reduced damping. This regime was not yet
intensively studied under additional microwave excita-
tion. First, the pumping power needed to reach the non-
linear regime can be significantly reduced and, second,
the process can be controlled by an additional SOT and,
therefore, by an applied dc current. Above the thresh-
olds of the nonlinear process, additional spin-wave fre-
quencies are generated. The sudden appearance of these
modes can be interpreted as a spiking process in sepa-
rated frequency channels and, thus, might be interest-
ing for neuromorphic computing. Moreover, it could be
used to generate spin-wave frequency combs18 in ultra-
thin magnetic microstructures, for frequency conversion
in magnonics and has to be considered as an additional
damping channel in magnonic waveguides with low or
SOT-controlled damping. Furthermore, the use of SOT
controlled nonlinear effects might be the key to efficiently
couple spin waves as information carriers to optically
readable spin-qubits19–23 with the requirement of stable
spin and charge properties close to the interface24.
First, an overview of the sample geometry and the cal-
culated spin-wave dispersion is given.
Second, it is
shown how the spin-wave intensity evolves under SOT
excitation (dc current) and microwave excitation, sepa-
rately.
As a next step, dc current and microwave ex-
citations are combined to generate non-linear magnon

arXiv:2304.02708v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  5 Apr 2023


2

modes via 4-magnon-scattering due to reduced damping
conditions.
It is shown that this effect is controllable
by the microwave power or dc current magnitude. Fur-
thermore, spatially-resolved, field-dependent and time-
resolved measurements are conducted which give insight
into the underlying processes of the magnon scattering
process.

Device and Measurement geometry

The
sample
under
investigation
is
shown
in
Fig. 1(a).
A magnonic waveguide consisting of a
Ta(2)/Pt(7)/Co60Fe20B20(5)/Ta(2) stack (numbers in
nm) was fabricated on a high-resistive Si chip by means
of electron beam lithography (EBL) and a subsequent
deposition of the metallic layers via magnetron sputter-
ing. An insulating SiO2 layer was fabricated by exposure
of an HSQ resist in a second EBL step. The coplanar
waveguide antenna (CPW) was patterned in a third
EBL step with subsequent depositon of Cr(5)/Au(50)
(numbers in nm) by thermal evaporation.
An external magnetic field is applied perpendicular to
the magnonic waveguide.
A microwave current can
be applied to the CPW by microwave probes.
The
generated Oersted field around the antenna excites the
magnetization in the Co60Fe20B20 layer.
Therefore,
the excited spin waves propagate in Daemon-Eshbach
geometry
(spin-wave
wave
vector
perpendicular
to
the equilibrium magnetization) along the magnonic
waveguide except for the edges where the magnetization
is tilted due to shape anisotropy. A dc current can be
applied to the magnonic waveguide by additional dc
contact pads (not shown) with a separation of 9.5 µm.
Due to the amorphous structure of sputtered CoFeB
films, the resistance is significantly higher than the one
of the Pt layer. Therefore, most of the applied dc current
flows in the Pt layer and generates a pure spin current in
z-direction via the spin Hall effect25–27 in the Pt layer.
This pure spin current generates a spin-orbit torque28

in the adjacent Co60Fe20B20 layer and can increase or
decrease the damping of the magnetization dynamics in
dependence of the applied dc current polarity29.
Fig. 1(b) shows the wave vector spectrum of the used
CPW which was calculated by a Fourier transform of
the antenna’s Oersted field along the stripe in a distance
of 40 nm (thickness of the SiO2). Here, distinct maxima
and minima are formed which have an impact on the
excitable spin waves as discussed below. The spin-wave
dispersion relation of the spin-wave modes propagating
along the magnonic waveguide were calculated with
a finite-element dynamic-matrix approach30 available
in the TetraX micromagnetic-modeling package31 and
is shown in Fig. 1(c).
The following parameters were
used: external magnetic field strength H ext= 43.6 mT,
saturation magnetization M S = 743 kA/m, exchange
stiffness constant Aex
= 0.87 pJ/m,
Lande factor
g = 2.14.
The material parameters were determined

Idc

(a)

SiO2

Ground

532 nm laser

Hext

CoFeB/

Pt

800 nm

220 nm

Si substrate

1820 nm

x
y
z

k (rad/µm)

f  (GHz)
IBI (arb. u.)

edge mode

(b)

(c)

absorption (arb. u.)

antenna’s k-spectrum

max

min

µBLS cut-off

Ground

Signal

FIG. 1.
(a) Sample and measurement geometry. The dc
current is applied to the Pt/CoFeB stripe via gold contacts
distanced by 9.5 µm. The SiO2 pad (40 nm thick) insulates
the Pt/CoFeB stripe from the CPW antenna patterned on
top. (b) FFT of the field distribution of the antenna along
x-direction. (c) Spin-wave dispersion relation of the CoFeB
stripe and absorption which marks the region of high pumping
efficiency of the antenna field. The grey areas in c) and d)
mark the cut-off k-vector for the µBLS measurements limited
by the numerical aperture of the used microscope lense. The
external magnetic field is applied along the y-axis and fixed
at H ext = 43.6 mT for all measurements.

by vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) and ferro-
magnetic resonance measurements on a reference thin
film.
The exchange stiffness constant was determined
from the perpendicular standing spin-wave mode.
A
Gilbert damping parameter α = 0.016 was measured
without applied spin current on a reference thin film.
The magnetic equilibrium configuration was obtained by
initializing the magnetization parallel to the wavequide
and subsequently minimizing the total magnetic energy
including exchange and dipolar energy, as well as the
Zeeman energy from the static external bias magnetic
field. The various lines in Fig. 1(c) belong to different
transversally-standing modes which exhibit different
numbers of nodal lines along the width direction of the
waveguide.
Additionally, the lowest-frequency curve
describes the dispersion of the modes localized at the
edges of the waveguide (edge modes).
The color code


3

of the graph encodes the absorption efficiency of the
antenna’s microwave field.
The main absorption and,
therefore, the most efficient excitation of spin waves is
localized at wave vectors around 3.5 rad/µm (compare
to Fig. 1(b)) at a frequency of about 6.3 GHz. This is
the branch of the fundamental mode (no nodal lines)
along the stripe width.
However, the confinement in
space results in a broadening of the wave vector of all
modes.
In order to measure the spin waves in the waveguide,
Brillouin light scattering microscopy was used (µBLS)32.
This technique is based on the inelastic scattering of
light with magnons. The largest detectable wavevector
is determined by the numerical aperture of the used
microscope objective lense and reaches a value of about
17 rad/µm. This limit is sufficiently far above the range
of the studied spin waves as shown as grey boxes in
Figures 1(b) and (c).

Separate spin-orbit torque and microwave excitation

As a first step, the spin-wave generation by dc current,
microwave field and thermal excitation was measured
separately to determine their impact on the magnonic
system.
Figure 2(a) shows BLS spectra for various
values of the applied dc current through the magnonic
waveguide without any microwave excitation by the
antenna.
The measured spin-wave intensity increases
only for positive dc current polarity which is expected
by a pure spin current generated by spin Hall effect
and resulting spin-orbit torque in this geometry.
The
excited spin-wave band is located between 4.5 GHz and
8 GHz.
The upper limit is determined by the before
mentioned largest detectable spin-wave wave vector in
µBLS measurements.
The lower limit is given by the
lowest spin-wave mode in the waveguide.
Figure 2(b) shows microwave excitation spectra in a
frequency range from 3 GHz to 9 GHz using the antenna
without any applied dc current through the magnonic
waveguide. As expected, the spin-wave intensity reaches
a maximum within the measured spin-wave band of
the waveguide.
The spin-wave intensity was extracted
and is plotted in Fig. 2(c) together with a spectrum
from Fig. 2(a) at 6 mA and the spectrum of thermal
spin waves (dc current and microwave at the antenna
switched off). Please note that constant signals in the
intensity maps correspond to side bands of the used
laser only visible in the data due to logarithmic scaling.
The largest spin-wave intensity during the microwave
frequency sweep is reached at about 5.8 GHz.
This
is slightly lower in frequency than the point of largest
absorption shown in Fig. 1(c) at 6.3 GHz. This deviation
is in range of the measurement uncertainty (± 5 %) of
the parameters used for the calculation. In addition, the
transmission of microwave power might not be constant
over the entire frequency range which can lead to a

(c)

thermal

6 mA

rf excitation 

spectrum

structure B

0 mA
-5 dBm

BLS f (GHz)

BLS intensity (arb. u.)
BLS intensity (arb. u.)

Idc (mA)

applied f (GHz)
Idc (mA)

(b)

BLS intensity (arb. u.)
BLS f (GHz)

(a)

(d)

FIG. 2.
(a) Spin-wave intensity in the Pt/CoFeB stripe
upon dc current variation. An increase in spin-wave ampli-
tude is achieved for positive dc currents only indicating the
effect of the antidamping spin-orbit-torque. (b) Spin-wave in-
tensity in the Pt/CoFeB stripe upon microwave excitation via
the antenna without dc current. (c) Comparison of the ex-
citation spectra (blue: thermal spin-wave spectrum, orange:
spin-wave spectrum at 6 mA (from (a)), green: spin-wave in-
tensity upon microwave excitation (from (b)) (d) Sweep of
the dc current on an additional structure B which indicates
the onset of auto-oscillations far above 6 mA used for the
experiments of this manuscript.

deviation as well.
The spin-wave spectrum at 6 mA
has a significantly different shape.
Here, the highest
spin-wave intensities are reached at the low frequency
limit of the spin-wave band.
This is in agreement
with other experimental observations of SOT-excited
spin waves and can be explained by the lower effective
damping of the localized low frequency modes of the
stripe8.
However, the SOT at these dc current values
is not yet strong enough to compensate the damping
completely and to achieve an auto-oscillation state with
a large intensity of one spin-wave mode. The thermal
spin-wave band (0 mA) has an about one order (two
orders) of magnitude lower spin-wave intensity compared
to the ones excited by dc current (microwave). In direct
comparison to the spectrum at 6 mA, the spin-wave
intensity at the lower frequency limit is not pronounced
since the SOT is missing.
For all experiments of this work it was important to set
the dc current below the threshold of auto-oscillations.
Figure 2(d) shows the integrated spin-wave intensity
measured on an additional device B. Here, the dc
current was increased until breakdown of the device.


4

It is concluded from this measurement that strong
spin-wave amplitudes are reached at significantly higher
dc currents above 7.4 mA which marks the onset of
auto-oscillations.
In all experiments shown in this
manuscript, the dc current was set clearly below this
limit (see black arrow) where the spin-wave intensity is
significantly increased by SOT but without reaching the
auto-oscillating state yet. In this regime, the damping
is reduced and, therefore, allows to excite spin-wave
modes to high amplitudes by microwave excitation via
the CPW antenna as shown next.

Nonlinear spin wave generation and control

The data shown in Fig. 3 was acquired for a dc
current of 6 mA through the magnonic waveguide and
additional excitation of the spin-wave system via the
CPW antenna. Figure 3(a) shows spin wave spectra in
an excitation-frequency range from 4.5 GHz to 9 GHz
at constant microwave power (-5 dBm) and dc current.
Compared to the measurement without dc current
(Fig. 2(b)), here, additional side modes appear for
microwave frequencies from 5.4 GHz to 5.8 GHz. The
mode RF is the directly excited mode at the applied
microwave frequency. One mode is found below the RF
mode (low frequency split mode: LFSM) and up to three
modes are detected above the direct excitation (higher
frequency split modes:
HFSM1, HFSM2, HFSM3).
To preserve the visual clarity the modes are labeled
in Fig. 3(a) only.
The separation of the peaks ranges
from 400 MHz to 700 MHz as function of the applied
microwave frequency. The range of microwave frequen-
cies showing this nonlinear effect can be controlled by
the microwave power applied to the CPW antenna.
As shown in Fig. 3(b), below -6 dBm the effect is not
observed but manifests clearly at higher powers.
At
-6 dBm the effect is maintained about 100 MHz and
at -4 dBm over a range of about 500 MHz.
At even
higher microwave powers, the CPW antennas broke due
to Joule heating.
Figure 3(c) shows the comparison of the spin-wave
spectrum excited with dc current at 6.5 mA solely
(orange) and the spectrum with additional microwave
excitation of 5.66 GHz and a power of -5 dBm at the
same dc current on an additional structure C. First, it
reveals that the frequency of the LFSM is about the
frequency of the intensity maximum of the spin-wave
spectrum for pure dc current excitation.
Second, the
intensity at this frequency is increased by a factor of 16
due to the nonlinear process. This can be explained by
a transfer of power from the directly pumped mode to
the LFSM. Besides the microwave power this nonlinear
effect can be controlled by the dc current applied to
the magnonic waveguide as shown in Fig. 3(d).
Here,
the microwave power and frequency (-5 dBm, 5.7 GHz)
was kept constant and the dc current was swept from

(a)

(b)

BLS intensity (arb. u.)

BLS f (GHz)
BLS f (GHz)

applied f (GHz)

applied f (GHz)

 6 mA
-5 dBm

 5.7 GHz
-5 dBm

 6 mA

-5 dBm

 6 mA
 6 mA
 6 mA
 6 mA

-4 dBm
-6 dBm
-7 dBm
-8 dBm

(c)
structure C
(d)

DC

MW 

+ 
DC

BLS intensity (arb. u.) Idc (mA)

RF
LFSM

HFSM1
HFSM2
HFSM3

FIG. 3. (a) Sweep of the microwave frequency through the
spin-wave band antidamped by the injected spin current. Ad-
ditional modes appear in a range of pumping frequencies RF
from 5.4 GHz to 5.8 GHz. One of the non-linear modes ap-
pears below (LFSM) and up to three non-linear modes are
found above (HFSM1, HFSM2, HFSM3) the RF mode (To
preserve the visual clarity the modes are labeled in (a) only).
(b) Microwave power dependence. The additional modes ap-
pear only at a threshold microwave power above -7 dBm.
The frequency range in which side modes appear increases
for higher pumping powers. The antennas break at powers
above -4 dBm. (c) Comparison of dc current excited spin-
wave spectrum at 6.5 mA (orange) with the spectrum upon
additional microwave excitation (blue) at 5.66 GHz, -5 dBm
(structure C). The lowest split mode frequency seems to coin-
cide with the intensity maximum of the spin-wave band. (d)
Sweep of the dc current. The additional modes appear above
a dc current threshold of about 5.8 mA (structure C). All
intensity maps are normalized to the same color scale.

5.6 mA to 6.5 mA (measured on structure C). It is
clearly visible that the additional side peaks appear after
a certain threshold current of about 5.8 mA. Therefore,
this nonlinear effect is activated after exceeding a certain
level of antidamping SOT simply controlled by the dc
current.

Spatially-resolved measurements

In order to gain further insight into the mode prop-
erties, spatially resolved µBLS measurements were per-
formed across and along the magnonic waveguide. Here,
the spin-wave intensity distribution was first measured
during pure dc current (6.5 mA) excitation and after-
wards with additional microwave excitation (5.66 GHz,


5

(d)

(e)

(f)

BLS intensity (arb. u.)

BLS f (GHz)

(a)

BLS f (GHz)

(b)

BLS intensity (arb. u.)

(c)
x (µm)
y (µm)

x (µm)
y (µm)

5.66 GHz, -5 dBm

-5 dBm

dc contact
dc contact

HFSM

RF

LFSM

DC1

DC2

HFSM

RF

LFSM

antenna

structure C

5.66 GHz, -5 dBm

MW off
MW off

FIG. 4.
Spatial distribution of the spin-wave intensity in
the CoFeB stripe at 6.5 mA (a) Spin-wave intensity across
the stripe during pure dc current excitation (b) Spin-wave
intensity across the stripe upon dc current and microwave
excitation (c) Comparison of integrated spin-wave intensity
distributions. DC1: intensity above 4.8 GHz, DC2: intensity
below 4.8 GHz in (a). RF: intensity of directly excited mode,
LFSM: intensity of lower frequency split mode, HFSM: inten-
sity of higher frequency split mode in (b). Integration ranges
are given as colored segments in (a) and (b). The dashed lines
indicate the edges of the CoFeB/Pt stripe. (d) Spin-wave in-
tensity along the stripe upon dc current excitation.
Local
intensity (frequency) variations appear due to differences in
local current densities, heat and Oersted fields. (e) Spin-wave
intensity along the stripe upon dc current and microwave ex-
citation. (f) Integrated spin-wave intensities of the modes in
(e). The LFSM appears to stay localized near the antenna.
The directly excited mode (RF) and the HFSM have a further
extent.

-5 dBm) on structure C.
Figure
4(a) shows the spin-wave intensity across the
stripe during pure dc current excitation.
The dashed
lines mark the edges of the stripe.
Clearly, the main
intensity is located above 4.8 GHz (DC1) and is cen-
tered within the stripe. Below, the intensity is weaker
and more localized at the edges (DC2). To clarify the
distribution of the spin-wave intensities the data was

integrated for both frequency ranges and is plotted in
Fig. 4(c). Here, the different extracted intensity distribu-
tions were normalized and shifted vertical equidistantly.
The occurrence of spin-wave modes in the center and
at the edges is in agreement to other investigations of
modes in SHNO nanowire geometries33. Due to fabrica-
tion defects like rough wire edges, the spin-wave intensity
is smeared over a wide frequency range and is asymmet-
ric. The DC1 mode in contrast is more localized in the
wire center. Due to the limitation of spatial resolution
caused by the width of the used laser spot of about 320
nm, the spin-wave mode profile can not be further re-
solved.
Figure 4(b) shows the spin-wave intensity at the same
position during additional microwave excitation to reach
higher spin-wave intensities and to enable the nonlinear
effect. Besides the directly pumped mode RF, the non-
linear low frequency split mode (LFSM) and the non-
linear high frequency split mode (HFSM) are clearly vis-
ible.
The mode profiles were extracted by integration
of the spin-wave intensities and are plotted in Fig. 4(c).
These mode profiles clearly indicate the localization of
the modes in the middle of the magnonic waveguide. This
is a first hint that the modes at the edges of the stripe do
not take part in the non-linear process of magnon gener-
ation.
Figure 4(d) shows the spin-wave intensity along the
magnonic waveguide during pure dc current excitation.
The detected spin-wave band between 4.5 GHz and
8 GHz varies slightly in frequency and intensity along
the stripe. We assume that small variations of the cur-
rent densities and magnetic properties are induced by the
fabrication process. Additionally, it is expected that the
temperature varies slightly along the stripe causing fre-
quency and intensity variations.
Figure 4(e) shows the spin-wave intensity along the
stripe during dc current and microwave excitation. The
largest spin-wave intensity is reached in close vicinity to
the antenna located at about x = 0 µm and reaches sig-
nificantly higher values than for the pure dc current ex-
citation shown before. The spin-wave intensities along
the stripe were integrated and normalized for all three
modes RF, LFSM and HFSM and are compared in Fig-
ure 4(f). The LFSM shows a stronger decay compared
to both other modes. Reasons could be a smaller group
velocity or the localization due to the formation of a lo-
cal spin-wave potential well at the low frequency limit
of the spin-wave band. Interestingly, the HFSM shows
a weaker decay then the directly excited RF mode. A
reason could be a stronger damping of the RF mode due
to the flow of power to both split modes which takes
place not only at the antenna position but over some
distance from it. Please note that the increase of spin-
wave intensity of the LFSM mode at about x = 2.5 µm
is caused by the pure dc excitation which overlaps with
the same frequency channels (compare local spin-wave
intensity maximum in Fig. 4(d) and (e).


6

(a)

BLS f (GHz)

applied f (GHz)

MW

+
DC

DC

k (rad/µm)

absorption (arb. u.)

max

min

(c)

(b)

BLS f (GHz)
f (GHz)
BLS int. (arb. u.)

19 mT
29 mT
41 mT

56 mT
75 mT
91 mT

19 mT
29 mT
41 mT
56 mT
75 mT
91 mT

x 5
x 13
x 20
x 35
x 10
x 4

FIG. 5.
Field-dependent measurements on structure D. (a) Microwave frequency sweeps at given external magnetic fields at
6.6 mA and -5 dBm microwave power. (b) Spin-wave spectra at the microwave frequencies with the highest intensity of the
spin-waves in comparison to the spin-wave spectra without microwave excitation. The spin-wave spectra without microwave
excitation were multiplied by a factor given in the graphs. The directly excited mode RF and the nonlinear modes are distributed
in the same frequency range as the modes excited by the dc current only. The nonlinear modes are spaced equally around
the corresponding directly excited RF mode. (c) Numerically- calculated spin-wave dispersion relations and absorptions of
microwave power for the external field values shown above. The quasi-uniform mode is excited strongest by the microwave
antenna and shows the same frequency dependence as the excited and nonlinear modes in (a). The frequencies of the edge
modes in contrast show a different field dependence.

Magnetic field dependence

In addition to the spatially-resolved measurements the
non-linear generation of magnons was studied at differ-
ent external magnetic fields to get a deeper inside in the
involved magnon modes. The measurements were con-
ducted on a separate structure D. The dc current was
kept constant for all measurements at 6.6 mA. The mi-
crowave power was fixed at -5 dBm. The microwave fre-
quency range had to be adjusted for all field values since
the spin-wave dispersion shifts to higher frequencies for
larger external fields. This shift is clearly visible in of Fig.
5(a). The spin-wave band gap at the lower frequencies
(no spin-wave intensity) increases with external field from
2.6 GHz at 19 mT to 7.5 GHz at 91 mT. Nonlinear split
modes were detected symmetrically separated around the
directly excited mode for almost all fields. Only for the
lowest and the largest external field values the intensity
of the effect is reduced significantly. This can be under-
stood in a qualitative fashion by having a look at the an-

tidamping and damping effects influencing the spin-wave
intensity of the directly pumped mode. Small external
fields might be insufficient to align the magnetization per-
pendicular (parallel) to the applied dc current (injected
spin current polarization) which reduces the antidamping
and, therefore, decreases the spin-wave intensity weaken-
ing the nonlinear effect. At high external fields the mag-
netization is mainly aligned perpendicular to the stripe
and the antidamping SOT is maximized. However, with
increasing field the Gilbert damping torque is enhanced
and lower spin-wave intensities are reached. This is in
agreement with the magnetization’s equilibrium align-
ments determined from the calculations. The width of
the saturated region where the normalized perpendicular
magnetization component is larger than 0.9999 was ex-
tracted for all fields from 19 mT to 91 mT: 352, 468, 544,
600, 664, 788 (in nm). Thereby, this component reaches
the following minimum values at the waveguide edges, re-
spectively: 0.4510, 0.5688, 0.6883, 0.8182, 0.9649, 0.9986.
Only for intermediate external fields the antidamping ef-


7

fect of the SOT is maximized and the Gilbert damping
torque is still in a range which allows for high spin-wave
intensities needed for nonlinear effects.
In Fig.
5(b) the spectra with the highest spin-wave
intensity of the nonlinear modes is compared to the spin-
wave spectra without microwave but dc current excita-
tion. This comparison demonstrates that the nonlinear
modes coincidence mostly with the same frequency range
of spin-waves excited by the dc current solely. Moreover,
the nonlinear modes are separated symmetrically around
the directly excited modes for all field values indicating
underlying 4-magnon-scattering processes.
Furthermore, it can be seen that the LFSM does not
always coincident with the lowest frequency mode of
the spin-wave spectra excited by dc current.
Interest-
ingly, two nonlinear modes below the frequency of the
microwave-pumped mode appear for 75 mT and 91 mT.
Possibly, the first LFSM below the directly pumped mode
reaches spin-wave intensities which result in a second or-
der 4-magnon-scattering process generating a magnon at
a lower frequency and at the frequency of the directly
pumped mode RF. 4-magnon-scattering as possible ex-
planation for the shown effect will be discussed at a later
point in more detail.
Figure 5(c) shows the spin-wave dispersion relations cal-
culated with TetraX for the external fields used in the ex-
periments. For all values the quasi-uniform mode of the
stripe is excited most efficiently. The frequency of the
quasi-uniform modes increases for larger external field
values in a similar way as the frequencies of the directly
excited modes and the nonlinear modes in the experiment
(Fig. 5(a)). The lowest frequency branches in the disper-
sions are excitations at the edges of the stripe where the
magnetization is not aligned with the external magnetic
field as mentioned before. Up to 41 mT the frequency
of the edge modes increases and decreases from 56 mT
to 91 mT. Thus, the edge modes clearly show a differ-
ent frequency behavior than the excited and nonlinear
modes studied in the experiment. This behavior is ex-
pected for magnetic stripes with perpendicular magnetic
field before reaching the saturation field. Due to the fre-
quency reduction of the edge modes, it is concluded that
they don’t take part in the nonlinear magnon scattering
process.
This is a further confirmation in addition to
the spatially-resolved measurements shown before which
showed the localization of the direct excited RF mode
and the non-linear modes LFSM and HFSM in the cen-
ter of the waveguide.

Time-resolved measurements

In order to have a closer look to the process which
generates the nonlinear modes, the microwave excitation
was pulsed and the spin-wave spectra were measured
time-resolved in a stroboscopic fashion on an additional
device E. The microwave was switched on for 1 µs and
off for 1 µs with a repetition rate of 0.5 MHz.
The

spin-wave intensities of the directly excited RF mode
and the nonlinear LFSM and HFSM were normalized to
the steady state intensity and are plotted in Fig. 6(a)
as red, green and violet dots, respectively. The traces
are shifted equally along the y-axis of the plot.
The
gray dashed vertical line marks the onset of the RF
mode which is excited by the microwave voltage pulse
(envelope, rectified, black dots). After a strong intensity
increase of the RF mode and an overshoot the intensity
reaches the steady state after about 13 ns. The shape
of the microwave pulse does not show such an overshoot
and is, therefore, not the reason. In contrast, the LFSM
intensity starts to strongly increase at a later time
when the direct RF mode shows the overshoot at about
100 ns. Therefore, it can be concluded that the direct
excitation RF has to exceed a critical power threshold
in the first place before the nonlinear effect takes place
efficiently.
Due to the flow of power to the secondary
modes (LFSM, HFSM), the intensity of the RF mode
decreases until a steady state is reached. The microwave
pulse, the RF and the LFSM mode were fitted by an
exponential, overshoot and sigmoidal function, respec-
tively, to extract the rise times. The microwave pulse has
the shortest rise time of about 4 ns. The RF and LFSM
mode have both a rise time of about 10 ns. Figure 6(b)
shows that the overshoot of the RF mode disappears
by reducing the dc current causing a lower SOT and,
therefore, larger effective damping which results in lower
spin-wave intensities of the directly pumped RF mode.
As result, no nonlinear modes appear and no overshoot
was measured for smaller dc currents.

(b)
(a)

t (ns)
t (ns)

HFSM

LFSM

RF

6.9 mA

5.9 mA

5.0 mA

0.0 mA

pulse

Norm. BLS intensity

microwave

FIG. 6.
Time-resolved µBLS intensity on structure E. (a)
Time-dependence of the directly excited (RF) and nonlinear
modes (LFSM, HFSM) at 6.9 mA, 5.62 GHz and -4 dBm (ap-
plication of the microwave pulse at about 92 ns). LFSM and
HFSM were fitted by a sigmoidal function, RF was fitted by
an overshoot oscillation equation, the microwave pulse was fit-
ted by an exponential function. Rise times: microwave pulse
about 4 ns, RF mode: 10 ns, LFSM: 10 ns, HFSM: low SNR
(b) Integrated spin-wave intensity of RF mode at different dc
currents.
An overshoot is only detected for high dc values
when the SOT antidamps the system significantly.


8

Discussion

The experimental observations indicate 4-magnon
scattering process generating the nonlinear spin wave
modes. A schematic of this process is shown in Fig. 7.
The spin-wave branch with the fundamental quantiza-
tion over the magnonic waveguide’s width is shown in
black.
As calculated in Fig. 1(c) and Fig. 5(c), this
branch is excited strongest by the CPW antenna at a
wave vector of 3.5 rad/µm. Therefore, it is expected that
only there the spin-wave intensity can be increased to a
level which makes nonlinear processes probable. Two of
the directly excited RF magnons interact and create a
new magnon LFSM with a lower frequency and a new
magnon HFSM with a higher frequency. It is assumed
that both nonlinear modes are also part of the shown
spin wave branch because the spatially-resolved measure-
ments shown in Fig. 4(b) revealed the same symmetry
and a location in the center of the magnonic waveguide.
Due to the conservation of energy, both created magnons
must be separated equidistantly around the RF mode in
frequency space as it was found in the experiments. Ad-
ditionally, the conservation of momentum demands for
an equidistant separation in wave vector space. Based
on this demands, the 4-magnon scattering process can
only appear at a part of the spin-wave branch with lin-
ear slope. Indeed, the dispersion relation shows a quite
linear monotonic increase around the pumped RF mode.
The grey area visualizes qualitatively the broadening due
to confinement and inperfections of the waveguide prop-
erties. As result, this process can happen not only by hit-
ting the perfect conditions but also slightly around them.
This explains qualitatively the findings of the microwave
power dependent measurements shown in Fig. 3(b). At

k (rad/µm)

f  (GHz)

LFSM

RF

HFSM

vg  (km/s)

FIG. 7.
Spin-wave branch (black) with fundamental quan-
tization across the magnonic waveguide which is strongly ex-
cited at 3.5 rad/µm by the CPW antenna. The 4-magnon-
scattering process takes place at a linear part of the dispersion
since energy (f ) and momentum (k) have to be conserved.
The split modes LFSM and HFSM are, therefore, separated
equidistantly around the directly excited mode RF in f and k.
The group velocity (orange) of the spin-waves indicates sig-
nificant lower values for the LFSM which fits to the findings
of the spatially resolved measurements. The RF and HFSM
mode have a larger group velocity.

low power the scattering process appears only by hitting
the perfect conditions (-6 dBm). But at larger powers
a certain mismatch in frequency still allows for the scat-
tering process due to the line width of these modes and
their acceptable overlap. The derivative of the spin-wave
branch results in the group velocity shown in orange.
Due to the flattening of the spin-wave dispersion at low
k-values, the group velocity of these spin waves is reduced
compared to the overs. Therefore, it would be expected
that the LFSM mode shows a reduced propagation in
comparison to the other modes RF and HFSM. Indeed,
this was found by measuring the decay in Fig. 4(f). The
LFSM mode shows a much faster drop of spin-wave in-
tensity than the RF and HFSM mode. Additionally, the
calculation revealed a slightly larger group velocity for
the HFSM compared to the RF mode. This slight differ-
ence was also seen in the experiments.

Conclusion

4-magnon-scattering can be controlled in magnonic
waveguides by a pure spin current generated via spin
Hall effect. On the one hand the strength of the injected
spin current and resulting SOT magnitudes do not en-
able the formation of magnetic auto-oscillations. On the
other hand it decreases the damping of the magnonic
system significantly. This results in increased spin-wave
intensities in a wide frequency range.
The additional
pumping with microwave magnetic fields results in large
spin-wave intensities which makes efficient 4-magnon-
scattering possible at low pumping powers in ultra-thin
waveguides. As a result, two or more modes are gener-
ated below and above the directly pumped mode with
equal frequency spacing in between as demanded by en-
ergy conservation.
It is shown that microwave power
and dc current (SOT) thresholds have to be exceeded
before large spin-wave intensities and, therefore, nonlin-
ear modes can be achieved confirming that the onset can
be controlled. In order to corroborate the presence of a
4-magnon-scattering process, the appearance of the ad-
ditional modes are investigated in the time-domain re-
vealing a time delay between directly excited and nonlin-
ear modes. Another indication for a 4-magnon-scattering
process was extracted from the spatially resolved spin-
wave decay measurements. Due to conservation of mo-
mentum during the inelastic scattering one magnon with
higher and one with lower momentum compared to the
two initial ones has to be generated. At low wave vectors
the dispersion relation is flatter resulting in reduced spin-
wave propagation. This was indeed observed for the low
frequency nonlinear mode. Furthermore, it was shown
that nonlinear generation of magnons can be achieved
over a wide range of external magnetic fields which might
be useful for future applications. The deviation of the
frequency behavior of the edge modes was used to ex-
clude them from the explanation of the seen nonlinear ef-
fects. The application of this effect might be used in the


9

generation of higher spin-wave frequencies and smaller
wave lengths or for the generation of spin-wave frequency
combs controlled by pure spin currents. Additionally, the
strong increase of spin-wave intensities after the onset of
the nonlinear process can be interpreted as a spiking pro-
cess with clear threshold behavior. This might be used
in context of the wide field of neuromorphic computing
in which complex and nonlinear device behavior is the
key element for classification tasks.

Acknowledgments

Financial support by the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft is gratefully acknowledged within program
SCHU2922/1-1. We thank B. Scheumann for deposition
of the Au films. Support by the Nanofabrication Facili-
ties Rossendorf (NanoFaRo) at IBC is gratefully acknowl-
edged.

References

1Giovanni Finocchio, Supriyo Bandyopadhyay, Peng Lin, Gang
Pan, J. Joshua Yang, Riccardo Tomasello, Christos Panagopou-
los, Mario Carpentieri, Vito Puliafito, Johan ˚Akerman, Hiroki
Takesue, Amit Ranjan Trivedi, Saibal Mukhopadhyay, Kaushik
Roy, Vinod K. Sangwan, Mark C. Hersam, Anna Giordano,
Huynsoo Yang, Julie Grollier, Kerem Camsari, Peter Mcma-
hon, Supriyo Datta, Jean Anne Incorvia, Joseph Friedman, Sorin
Cotofana, Florin Ciubotaru, Andrii Chumak, Azad J. Naeemi,
Brajesh Kumar Kaushik, Yao Zhu, Kang Wang, Belita Koiller,
Gabriel Aguilar, Guilherme Tempor˜ao, Kremena Makasheva,
Aida Tordi Sanial, Jennifer Hasler, William Levy, Vwani Roy-
chowdhury, Samiran Ganguly, Avik Ghosh, Davi Rodriquez,
Satoshi Sunada, Karin Evershor-Sitte, Amit Lal, Shubham Jad-
hav, Massimiliano Di Ventra, Yuriy Pershin, Kosuke Tatsumura,
and Hayato Goto. Roadmap for unconventional computing with
nanotechnology, 2023.
2B. Dieny, I. L. Prejbeanu, K. Garello, P. Gambardella, P. Freitas,
R. Lehndorff, W. Raberg, U. Ebels, S. O. Demokritov, J. Aker-
man, A. Deac, P. Pirro, C. Adelmann, A. Anane, A. V. Chu-
mak, A. Hirohata, S. Mangin, Sergio O. Valenzuela, M. Cengiz
Onba¸slı, M. d’Aquino, G. Prenat, G. Finocchio, L. Lopez-Diaz,
R. Chantrell, O. Chubykalo-Fesenko, and P. Bortolotti. Oppor-
tunities and challenges for spintronics in the microelectronics in-
dustry. Nature Electronics, 3(8):446–459, 2020.
3Dennis V Christensen,
Regina Dittmann,
Bernabe Linares-
Barranco, Abu Sebastian, Manuel Le Gallo, Andrea Redaelli,
Stefan Slesazeck, Thomas Mikolajick, Sabina Spiga, Stephan
Menzel, Ilia Valov, Gianluca Milano, Carlo Ricciardi, Shi-Jun
Liang, Feng Miao, Mario Lanza, Tyler J Quill, Scott T Keene,
Alberto Salleo, Julie Grollier, Danijela Markovi´c, Alice Mizrahi,
Peng Yao, J Joshua Yang, Giacomo Indiveri, John Paul Stra-
chan, Suman Datta, Elisa Vianello, Alexandre Valentian, Jo-
hannes Feldmann, Xuan Li, Wolfram H P Pernice, Harish
Bhaskaran, Steve Furber, Emre Neftci, Franz Scherr, Wolfgang
Maass, Srikanth Ramaswamy, Jonathan Tapson, Priyadarshini
Panda, Youngeun Kim, Gouhei Tanaka, Simon Thorpe, Chiara
Bartolozzi, Thomas A Cleland, Christoph Posch, ShihChii Liu,
Gabriella Panuccio, Mufti Mahmud, Arnab Neelim Mazumder,
Morteza Hosseini, Tinoosh Mohsenin, Elisa Donati, Silvia Tolu,
Roberto Galeazzi,
Martin Ejsing Christensen,
Sune Holm,
Daniele Ielmini, and N Pryds. 2022 roadmap on neuromorphic

computing and engineering. Neuromorphic Computing and En-
gineering, 2(2):022501, may 2022.
4J. Grollier, D. Querlioz, K. Y. Camsari, K. Everschor-Sitte,
S. Fukami, and M. D. Stiles. Neuromorphic spintronics. Nature
Electronics, 3(7):360–370, 2020.
5Alexey Kimel, Anatoly Zvezdin, Sangeeta Sharma, Samuel Shall-
cross, Nuno de Sousa, Antonio Garc´ıa-Mart´ın, Georgeta Salvan,
Jaroslav Hamrle, Ondˇrej Stejskal, Jeffrey McCord, Silvia Tac-
chi, Giovanni Carlotti, Pietro Gambardella, Gian Salis, Markus
M¨unzenberg, Martin Schultze, Vasily Temnov, Igor V Bychkov,
Leonid N Kotov, Nicol`o Maccaferri, Daria Ignatyeva, Vladimir
Belotelov, Claire Donnelly, Aurelio Hierro Rodriguez, Iwao Mat-
suda, Thierry Ruchon, Mauro Fanciulli, Maurizio Sacchi, Chun-
hui Rita Du, Hailong Wang, N Peter Armitage, Mathias Schu-
bert, Vanya Darakchieva, Bilu Liu, Ziyang Huang, Baofu Ding,
Andreas Berger, and Paolo Vavassori. The 2022 magneto-optics
roadmap. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 55(46):463003,
sep 2022.
6S. I. Kiselev, J. C. Sankey, I. N. Krivorotov, N. C. Emley, R. J.
Schoelkopf, R. A. Buhrman, and D. C. Ralph. Microwave os-
cillations of a nanomagnet driven by a spin-polarized current.
Nature, 425(6956):380–383, 2003.
7Vladislav E. Demidov, Sergei Urazhdin, Henning Ulrichs, Vasyl
Tiberkevich, Andrei Slavin, Dietmar Baither, Guido Schmitz,
and Sergej O. Demokritov. Magnetic nano-oscillator driven by
pure spin current. Nature Materials, 11(12):1028–1031, 2012.
8Andrei Slavin and Vasil Tiberkevich. Nonlinear Auto-Oscillator
Theory of Microwave Generation by Spin-Polarized Current.
IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 45(4):1875–1918, 2009.
9J.C. Slonczewski. Current-driven excitation of magnetic multi-
layers. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 159(1):L1
– L7, 1996.
10Mohammad Zahedinejad, Ahmad A. Awad, Shreyas Muralidhar,
Roman Khymyn, Himanshu Fulara, Hamid Mazraati, Mykola
Dvornik, and Johan ˚Akerman. Two-dimensional mutually syn-
chronized spin Hall nano-oscillator arrays for neuromorphic com-
puting. Nature Nanotechnology, 15(1):47–52, 2020.
11Akash Kumar, Himanshu Fulara, Roman Khymyn, Mohammad
Zahedinejad, Mona Rajabali, Xiaotian Zhao, Nilamani Behera,
Afshin Houshang, Ahmad A. Awad, and Johan ˚Akerman. Robust
mutual synchronization in long spin hall nano-oscillator chains,
2023.
12K. Schultheiss, R. Verba, F. Wehrmann, K. Wagner, L. K¨orber,
T. Hula, T. Hache, A. K´akay, A. A. Awad, V. Tiberkevich, A. N.
Slavin, J. Fassbender, and H. Schultheiss. Excitation of whis-
pering gallery magnons in a magnetic vortex. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
122:097202, Mar 2019.
13V. E. Demidov, H. Ulrichs, S. V. Gurevich, S. O. Demokritov,
V. S. Tiberkevich, A. N. Slavin, A. Zholud, and S. Urazhdin. Syn-
chronization of spin Hall nano-oscillators to external microwave
signals. Nature Communications, 5:3179, 2014.
14T. Hache, T. Weinhold, K. Schultheiss, J. Stigloher, F. Vilsmeier,
C. Back, S. S. P. K. Arekapudi, O. Hellwig, J. Fassbender, and
H. Schultheiss. Combined frequency and time domain measure-
ments on injection-locked, constriction-based spin Hall nano-
oscillators. Applied Physics Letters, 114(10):102403, 2019.
15T. Hache, M. Vaˇnatka, L. Flajˇsman, T. Weinhold, T. Hula,
O. Ciubotariu, M. Albrecht, B. Arkook, I. Barsukov, L. Fallarino,
O. Hellwig, J. Fassbender, M. Urb´anek, and H. Schultheiss. Free-
standing Positionable Microwave-Antenna Device for Magneto-
Optical
Spectroscopy
Experiments.
Phys.
Rev.
Applied,
13:054009, May 2020.
16Kai Wagner, Andrew Smith, Toni Hache, Jen-Ru Chen, Liu
Yang, Eric Montoya, Katrin Schultheiss, J¨urgen Lindner, J¨urgen
Fassbender, Ilya Krivorotov, and Helmut Schultheiss. Injection
locking of multiple auto-oscillation modes in a tapered nanowire
spin Hall oscillator. Scientific Reports, 8(1):16040, 2018.
17V. E. Demidov, S. Urazhdin, A. B. Rinkevich, G. Reiss, and
S. O. Demokritov. Spin hall controlled magnonic microwaveg-
uides. Applied Physics Letters, 104(15):152402, 2014.


10

18T. Hula,
K. Schultheiss,
F. J. T. Gon¸calves,
L. K¨orber,
M. Bejarano, M. Copus, L. Flacke, L. Liensberger, A. Buz-
dakov, A. K´akay, M. Weiler, R. Camley, J. Fassbender, and
H. Schultheiss.
Spin-wave frequency combs.
Applied Physics
Letters, 121(11):112404, 2022.
19Mauricio Bejarano, Francisco J. T. Goncalves, Toni Hache,
Michael Hollenbach, Christopher Heins, Tobias Hula, Lukas
K¨orber, Jakob Heinze, Yonder Berenc´en, Manfred Helm, J¨urgen
Fassbender, Georgy V. Astakhov, and Helmut Schultheiss. Non-
linear magnon control of atomic spin defects in scalable quantum
devices, 2022.
20Brecht G. Simon, Samer Kurdi, Joris J. Carmiggelt, Michael
Borst, Allard J. Katan, and Toeno van der Sar. Filtering and
imaging of frequency-degenerate spin waves using nanoposition-
ing of a single-spin sensor. Nano Letters, 22(22):9198–9204, 11
2022.
21Bertelli Iacopo, Carmiggelt Joris J., Yu Tao, Simon Brecht G.,
Pothoven Coosje C., Bauer Gerrit E. W., Blanter Yaroslav M.,
Aarts Jan, and van der Sar Toeno. Magnetic resonance imaging
of spin-wave transport and interference in a magnetic insulator.
Science Advances, 6(46):eabd3556, 2021/12/02.
22Eric Lee-Wong, Ruolan Xue, Feiyang Ye, Andreas Kreisel, Toeno
van der Sar, Amir Yacoby, and Chunhui Rita Du. Nanoscale de-
tection of magnon excitations with variable wavevectors through
a quantum spin sensor. Nano Letters, 20(5):3284–3290, 05 2020.
23Xiaoche Wang, Yuxuan Xiao, Chuanpu Liu, Eric Lee-Wong,
Nathan J. McLaughlin, Hanfeng Wang, Mingzhong Wu, Hailong
Wang, Eric E. Fullerton, and Chunhui Rita Du. Electrical con-
trol of coherent spin rotation of a single-spin qubit. npj Quantum
Information, 6(1):78, 2020.
24Jeffrey Neethi Neethirajan, Toni Hache, Domenico Paone, Di-
nesh Pinto, Andrej Denisenko, Rainer St¨ohr, P´eter Udvarhelyi,
Anton Pershin, Adam Gali, Joerg Wrachtrup, Klaus Kern, and
Aparajita Singha. Controlled surface modification to revive shal-

low nv–centers. Nano Letters, 03 2023.
25M.I. Dyakonov and V.I. Perel. Possibility of Orienting Electron
Spins with Current. JETP Letters, 13(11):467, June 1971.
26JE Hirsch. Spin Hall effect. Phys. Rev. Lett., 83(9):1834–1837,
1991.
27Axel Hoffmann. Spin Hall Effects in Metals. IEEE Transactions
on Magnetics, 49(10):5172–5193, 2013.
28Qiming Shao, Peng Li, Luqiao Liu, Hyunsoo Yang, Shunsuke
Fukami, Armin Razavi, Hao Wu, Kang Wang, Frank Freimuth,
Yuriy Mokrousov, Mark D. Stiles, Satoru Emori, Axel Hoffmann,
Johan ˚Akerman, Kaushik Roy, Jian-Ping Wang, See-Hun Yang,
Kevin Garello, and Wei Zhang. Roadmap of spin–orbit torques.
IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 57(7):1–39, 2021.
29T. Hache, Y. Li, T. Weinhold, B. Scheumann, F. J. T. Gon¸calves,
O. Hellwig, J. Fassbender, and H. Schultheiss. Bipolar spin Hall
nano-oscillators. Applied Physics Letters, 116(19):192405, 2020.
30L. K¨orber, G. Quasebarth, A. Otto, and A. K´akay.
Finite-
element dynamic-matrix approach for spin-wave dispersions in
magnonic waveguides with arbitrary cross section.
AIP Ad-
vances, 11(9):095006, 2021.
31Lukas K¨orber,
Gwendolyn Quasebarth,
Alexander Hempel,
Friedrich Zahn, Andreas Otto, Elmar Westphal, Riccardo Her-
tel, and Attila Kakay. TetraX: Finite-Element Micromagnetic-
Modeling Package, January 2022.
32Thomas Sebastian, Katrin Schultheiss, Bj¨orn Obry, Burkard
Hillebrands, and Helmut Schultheiss.
Micro-focused Brillouin
light scattering: imaging spin waves at the nanoscale. Frontiers
in Physics, 3:35, 2015.
33Andrew Smith, Kemal Sobotkiewich, Amanatullah Khan, Eric A.
Montoya, Liu Yang, Zheng Duan, Tobias Schneider, Kilian Lenz,
J¨urgen Lindner, Kyongmo An, Xiaoqin Li, and Ilya N. Krivoro-
tov. Dimensional crossover in spin Hall oscillators. Phys. Rev.
B, 102:054422, Aug 2020.


