Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

1

On the effects of transformation strain induced by hydride precipitation

Masoud Taherijam1, Saiedeh Marashi1, Alireza Tondro1,2, Hamidreza Abdolvand1*

1 Department of Mechanical & Materials Engineering, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada, 
N6A 5B9

2Materials and Fuel Performance Testing, Canadian Nuclear Laboratories, Chalk River, Ontario, 
Canada, K0J 1J0

Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

* Corresponding author: H. Abdolvand (hamid.abdolvand@uwo.ca)


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

2

On the effects of transformation strain induced by hydride precipitation

Masoud Taherijam1, Saiedeh Marashi1, Alireza Tondro1,2, Hamidreza Abdolvand2*

1 Department of Mechanical & Materials Engineering, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada, 
N6A 5B9

2Materials and Fuel Performance Testing, Canadian Nuclear Laboratories, Chalk River, Ontario, 
Canada, K0J 1J0

Abstract
One of the main degradation mechanisms of the zirconium alloys used in nuclear reactors is 
hydrogen embrittlement and hydride formation. The formation of zirconium hydrides is 
accompanied by a transformation strain, the effects of which on the development of localized 
deformation zones are not well-understood. This study uses a crystal plasticity finite element 
model that is coupled with diffusion subroutines to quantify such effects. For this purpose, a 
zirconium specimen was hydrided in the absence of any external mechanical loads. With the 
use of electron backscatter diffraction, the rotation fields around interacting intragranular 
hydrides as well as those located at grain boundaries or triple points were measured at a high 
spatial resolution. The as-measured zirconium and hydride morphologies were mapped to the 
model for numerical simulation. Both numerical and experimental results show that hydride 
precipitation induces large rotation fields within the zirconium matrix, where such rotations are 
at their maximum in the vicinity of hydride tips. While the crystallographic orientations and 
shapes of hydrides affect the magnitude of rotation fields, both experimental and modeling 
results revealed the development of discrete and parallel geometrically necessary dislocation 
fields and a strong interaction among neighboring hydrides. It is shown that the stress field 
resulting from hydride precipitation affects the patterning of hydrogen distribution, which in 
return affects further hydride interlinking. 

Keywords: CPFE, EBSD, high resolution, GND density, stress-assisted diffusion, hydrogen, 
zirconium 

* Corresponding author: H. Abdolvand (hamid.abdolvand@uwo.ca)


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

3

1. Introduction
Hydrogen embrittlement and hydride formation are among the main degradation mechanisms 
of zirconium alloys used in thermal nuclear reactors. These alloys tend to corrode and absorb 
hydrogen when exposed to water, with hydrogen atoms subsequently diffusing into the 
zirconium matrix. During maintenance, the temperature of zirconium-alloy components 
decreases, reducing the hydrogen solubility limit which leads to the precipitation of hydrides. 
This can result in a reduction of fracture toughness, and possible failure of critical components 
[1,2]. One of the key failure modes associated with hydride formation is Delayed Hydride 
Cracking (DHC), which occurs when hydrides become sufficiently large and crack within the 
surrounding zirconium matrix [3,4]. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms behind 
hydrogen embrittlement and hydride formation is crucial for ensuring the safety of nuclear 
reactors.

The formation of hydrides is a complex phenomenon that is affected by several factors, 
including the microstructure, e.g., grain size and texture, the thermal history, the applied and 
state of residual stresses, as well as the hydrogen content of zirconium matrix [5–12]. There 
have been several numerical and experimental studies investigating the precipitation of 
hydrides in zirconium alloys, for which comprehensive reviews are conducted and can be found 
in [13,14]. The process of hydride formation involves a transformation strain that arises due to 
the lattice mismatch between the hydride precipitate and the zirconium matrix. This strain can 
lead to the anisotropic elastic and plastic deformation of the material [15–17]. As a result, 
hydrides can induce large rotations in the surrounding zirconium matrix, leading to the 
development of localized deformation zones. These deformation zones can promote the 
formation of cracks and ultimately lead to material failure. Theoretical stress-free 
transformation strains were calculated by Carpenter [18], while Barrow et al. 
[19]

experimentally measured the interfacial strains of precipitated hydrides using nano-beam 
electron diffraction. Although there is a discrepancy between the experimental and theoretical 
results, the experimental values were obtained from hydrides that had undergone plastic 
relaxation, as suggested by Blackmur et al. [20]. This highlights the significance of considering 
the effect of plastic deformation on the observed transformation strains in hydrides.

Various aspects of hydride formation and growth are studied through the use of electron 
microscopy [21–23]. For example, transmission electron microscopy observations show that 
hydrides can form at the nanoscale, and their morphologies depend on the crystallographic 
orientation of the surrounding zirconium matrix [24,25]. The delta (δ) phase is the most 
frequently observed hydride in zirconium alloys [26], which has a Face-Centered Cubic (FCC) 
crystal structure. δ-hydrides have a well-defined orientation relationship with the Hexagonal 
Close-Packed (HCP) α-zirconium matrix, i.e., {111}𝛿 || {0002}𝛼 and < 110 >𝛿 || <
112̅0 >𝛼 [27]. This alignment between the crystallographic planes and directions of the two 
phases is crucial for the nucleation and growth of δ-hydrides. The hydrides can form either as 
inter-granular or intra-granular precipitates depending on the cooling rate [28]. Electron 
BackScatter Diffraction (EBSD) has also been widely used to investigate microstructural
variations of α-grains [29,30], or microstructural effects during hydride formation. For 
instance, Wang et al. [31] used EBSD to study the orientation dependence of hydride 
precipitates in commercially pure titanium. Long et al. [21] used EBSD to study the growth of 
hydride blisters in a Zircaloy-4 plate. Mani Krishna et al. [32] used EBSD technique to 
characterize the role of α/β interface on hydride formation in Zr-2.5 Nb. Their analysis showed 
that hydrides have higher preference to form along α/β interfaces. Marashi et al. [30] used high 
spatial resolution EBSD and imaging to resolve local microstructure variations in Zr-2.5Nb 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

4

CANDU pressure tubes. Due to the presence of a crystallographic relationship between 
hydrides and parent α-grains, such variations affect the patterning of hydrides. While with the 
developed procedure it was possible to measure the orientations of β-crystals, it was shown 
that microstructure variations in Zr-2.5Nb are non-negligible. Kiran Kumar et al. [33] utilized 
EBSD to investigate the morphology and orientation of hydrides within a cold-worked and 
stress relieved zircaloy-4 specimen. 

While early studies assumed that hydrides are brittle [34,35], further investigations have 
provided some insight into the complex process of slip transmission from the zirconium matrix 
to the hydride phase [36–38]. For example, in a study conducted by Weekes et al. [39] on 
Zircaloy-4 micropillars containing hydrides, it was shown that zirconium hydrides might 
deform plastically under a uniaxial load. It was further shown that shear bands were initiated 
in the zirconium matrix before propagating into the hydride domain. Wang et al. [40] used in-
situ high resolution EBSD to analyze the evolution of stress and Geometrically Necessary 
Dislocations (GND) densities in Zircaloy-4 microcantilevers, both with and without hydrides. 
An increased GND density in hydrided samples was observed. In another study, Wang et al. 
[41] used in situ SEM micropillar compression tests to show that certain orientations favor 
shear at the hydride–matrix boundary, while others require increased shear stress to initiate slip 
in hydrides. Similar to zirconium, hydride formation is also observed in titanium alloys. It has 
been shown that thin titanium hydrides can sustain cyclic plastic strains and accommodate up 
to 70% shear deformation [42–46]. Further, it was shown by Conforto et al. [47] that titanium 
hydrides exhibit ductility when they are thinner than 400 nm. The factors governing the 
transition of hydrides from ductile to brittle, however, are yet to be fully understood. 

In recent years, different numerical techniques have been used to model the behavior of 
zirconium alloys in the presence of hydrogen and hydrides. Several studies investigated the
behavior of hydrogen and the formation of hydrides in zirconium using density functional 
theory [48–50]. Szewc et al. [51] studied the effects of hydride formation on the onset of 
plasticity in zirconium using molecular dynamics simulations. The simulations revealed that 
plasticity is always initiated by the nucleation and propagation of pyramidal partial dislocations 
from surfaces, followed by the formation of basal dislocations. Patel et al. [52] devised a 
multiscale method to model the precipitation and reorientation of hydrides in a state of 
equilibrium. Some researchers employed discrete dislocation dynamics modeling to investigate 
the stress fields around hydrides in zirconium [53–57]. While this approach is capable of 
considering the interactions between individual dislocations, it is computationally expensive 
and does not account for the time scale of the phenomenon being studied. In contrast, Crystal 
Plasticity Finite Element (CPFE) is a mesoscale modeling method that can capture the real-
time deformation of individual grains or clusters of grains by incorporating the effects of plastic 
slip on active slip systems. For example, CPFE modeling has been used to investigate the 
effects of crystallographic texture, grain size, and loading conditions on the plastic deformation 
of zirconium alloys [58–64]. Liu et al. [65] investigated hydride formation in Zircaloy-4 under 
cyclic thermomechanical loading using microstructurally representative CPFE modeling. 
CPFE can also be coupled with diffusion modules to understand the stress-assisted diffusion 
of hydrogen atoms [66]. For example, Ilin [67] used a coupled Diffusion-CPFE (D-CPFE) 
approach to study the diffusion of hydrogen atoms within stainless steels and highlighted the 
crucial effects of hydrostatic stress and strain rate on the redistribution of hydrogen atoms. 
Furthermore, the contributions of texture and grain morphology to hydrogen transport towards 
stress-risers, such as notches, were deconvoluted in the study by Tondro and Abdolvand [68]. 
The effects of GNDs on trapping of hydrogen atoms and their contribution to the total 
concentration of hydrogen atoms were also studied by Tondro et al. [69] using a CPFE 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

5

approach. GNDs are a result of the incompatibility in crystal lattice due to the presence of 
impurities or defects in the material.

While several studies have focused on the effect of hydride precipitation on the local plasticity 
induced in the zirconium matrix, less attention is given to the measuring or modeling the 
corresponding rotation field, particularly within the hydrides. Hence, the focus of this study is 
to characterize the deformation field induced by the precipitation of hydrides in the absence of 
external mechanical loads. Both rotation and GND fields within the zirconium matrix as well 
as hydrides were characterized using high spatial resolution EBSD. The “as measured” grain 
morphologies and orientations were mapped into a CPFE model to simulate the distribution of 
GND densities and misorientation fields and compare them with those from EBSD 
measurements. The combination of experimental measurements and modeling allowed 
conducting a comprehensive analysis of the effects of hydrides transformation strain on the 
patterning of local stress, rotation, and hydrogen concentration fields.

2. Methodology
2.1 Sample preparation and measurement set-up
A pure zirconium bar was used which comprised of 2500 ppm Hf, 1000 ppm O, 250 ppm C, 
200 ppm Cr, 200 ppm Fe, 100 ppm N, and 10 ppm H. This bar was firstly heat-treated at 730 
°C for 48 hours to remove prior residual stresses and recrystallize large grains. The average 
grain size of the heat-treated bar was more than 0.7 mm (see Fig. 1). A thick specimen was cut 
from the heat-treated bar, polished, and then cathodically charged in a 0.2 mol solution of 
H2SO4 at 65 °C for 48 hours. The charged specimen was subsequently homogenized at 450 °C 
for 2 hours in an Argon environment, and slowly cooled using 1K/min to room temperature to 
have δ-hydrides forming both within α-grains and at grain boundaries. The hydrided specimen 
was mechanically polished down to 1200 grit, and then in a dilute solution of 1 µm, 0.5 µm, 
and 0.2 µm of Alumina. To acquire high quality diffraction patterns, the specimen was finally 
electropolished for 60 sec at 20 Vol in a -35 °C solution of 10% perchloric acid and 90% 
methanol. A low-magnification image of the electropolished specimen is shown in Fig. 1. 
Hydrides are observed to precipitate both at grain boundaries and within α-grains. 

EBSD measurements were carried out using an Apreo-2 Field Emission Gun Scanning Electron 
Microscope (FEG-SEM), equipped with a Bruker high-resolution EBSD system. For 
performing EBSD scans, a 20 keV electron beam with a 6.5 nA probe current was used at the 
working distance and sample-to-detector distance of 18 mm. All measurements were done 
using the pattern resolution of 400x300 pixels, and the same step size of 40 nm to ensure 
consistency in the calculation of GNDs. The MTEX software [70] was used for the analysis of 
Euler angles and for the determination of GND densities (see below). The EBSD scans were 
conducted on three different types of hydrides including intragranular, grain boundary, and 
triple point hydrides (see Fig. 1). 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

6

Fig. 1. A low magnification image of the hydrided specimen with large α-grains. 

2.2 CPFE model formulation
The numerical simulations of this study were conducted using a coupled Diffusion-CPFE 
model (D-CPFE). This section outlines the key equations used in the model, but further details 
can be found elsewhere [66]. A User MATerial (UMAT) subroutine is coupled with a 
UMATHT subroutine for simulating the diffusion of hydrogen atoms in an anisotropic 
polycrystal. The UMAT subroutine calculates stress increments and updates the solution 
dependent state variables based on the inputs provided by the FE solver, i.e., strain, rotation, 
time, and temperature increments. The total strain increment (∆𝜺 ) can be written as:

∆𝜺 = ∆𝜺𝒆𝒍 + ∆𝜺𝒑𝒍 + ∆𝜺𝒕𝒓𝑯
(1)

where ∆𝜺𝒆𝒍 and ∆𝜺𝒑𝒍 respectively represent the increments of elastic strain and the plastic strain 
resulting from crystallographic slip. 𝜺𝒕𝒓𝑯 is the transformation strain from the precipitation of 
hydrides, which is incrementally applied to the hydride domain. For calculating the plastic 
strain increment from slip, the plastic part of deformation rate (𝑫𝒑𝒍) tensor is integrated over 
each time increment, i.e.:

𝜺̇ 𝒑𝒍 = 𝑫𝒑𝒍 = ∑ 𝑷𝜶𝛾̇ 𝛼

𝑁𝑠𝑝𝑙

𝛼=1

𝑷𝜶 = 𝑠𝑦𝑚(𝑺𝜶) 𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑺𝜶 = 𝑑⃗𝛼 ⊗ 𝑛⃗⃗𝛼

(2)

where 𝑷𝜶 is the symmetric part of the Schmid tensor (𝑺𝜶),  𝛾̇ 𝛼 is the shear strain rate on the 
slip system 𝛼, and 𝑑⃗𝛼 and 𝑛⃗⃗𝛼 are respectively slip direction and normal to the slip plane for the 
same slip system. The following equation is used to calculate shear strain rates [71]: 

𝛾̇ 𝛼 = 𝛾̇0 |𝜏𝛼

𝑔𝛼|

𝑛

𝑠𝑔𝑛 (𝜏𝛼

𝑔𝛼)
(3)

where 𝛾̇0is a reference shear strain rate and 𝑛 controls the rate dependency. 𝜏𝛼 and 𝑔𝛼 are the 
resolved shear stress and the strength of slip system 𝛼, respectively, and 𝑠𝑔𝑛(. ) denotes the 
sign function. An extended Voce hardening law is used to calculate the strength of slip systems:  


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

7

𝑔𝛼 = 𝑔0

𝛼 + (𝑔1

𝛼 + 𝜃1

𝛼Γ) (1 − 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (− 𝜃0

𝛼Γ
𝑔1

𝛼 ))
(4)

where 𝑔𝛼 is the current Critical Resolved Shear Stress (CRSS), 𝑔0

𝛼 is the initial CRSS, Γ is the 

shear accumulated on all slip systems, 𝜃0

𝛼 is the initial hardening rate, and 𝑔1

𝛼 and 𝜃1

𝛼 determine 

asymptotic characteristics of hardening.

The resolved shear stress used in Eq. 3 is proportional to the Kirchhoff stress (𝚿) through [72]:

𝜏𝛼 = 𝑷𝜶: 𝚿
(5)

The Jaumann rate of Kirchhoff stress (𝚿̆) correlates with the elastic part of deformation rate 
tensor (𝑫𝒆𝒍), and the elastic stiffness tensor (ℂ) through the following equation:

𝚿̆ = ℂ: 𝑫𝒆𝒍 where 𝚿̆ = 𝚿̇ − 𝛀𝐞𝐥𝚿 + 𝚿𝛀𝐞𝐥
(6)

where 𝛀𝐞𝐥 is the elastic part of spin tensor, which can be calculated by subtracting the plastic 
part of spin tensor (𝛀𝐩𝐥) from the total spin tensor. The plastic part of spin tensor can be 
determined using the following equation:

𝛀𝒑𝒍 = ∑ 𝑾𝜶𝛾̇ 𝛼

𝑁𝑠𝑝𝑙

𝛼=1

where 𝑾𝜶 = 𝑎𝑠𝑦𝑚(𝑺𝜶)
(7)

The unconstrained misfit strain associated with the formation of δ-hydrides were calculated to 
be 4.58% and 7.2% along the HCP crystal a-axis and c-axis, respectively [18]:

𝜺𝒕𝒓𝑯 = [

0.0458
0
0

0
0.0458
0

0
0
0.072

]

(8)

This transformation strain was applied incrementally and slowly to mimic the quasi-static 
condition of the domain that undergoes precipitation. 

2.2.1 Stress-assisted hydrogen diffusion 
The flux of hydrogen atoms (𝐽⃗) within zirconium matrix depends on the concentration of 
hydrogen atoms (C), temperature and stress gradients:

𝐽⃗ = −𝑫 . [∇⃗⃗⃗𝐶 + 𝐶. 𝑙𝑛𝐶 ∇⃗⃗⃗𝑇

𝑇 − 𝐶 𝑉̅𝐻

3. 𝑅𝑇 ∇⃗⃗⃗𝜎𝑘𝑘]
(9)

where 𝑫 is the diffusivity of hydrogen atoms in the zirconium matrix, 𝑉̅𝐻 is the partial molar 
volume of hydrogen atoms in the Zr lattice and is 1670 mm3/mol, 𝜎𝑘𝑘 is hydrostatic stress times 
three, and R is the gas constant. The three terms in the right-hand side of equation (9) 
respectively represent hydrogen diffusion due to concentration gradients (∇⃗⃗⃗𝐶), temperature 
gradients (∇⃗⃗⃗𝑇), and stress gradients (∇⃗⃗⃗𝜎𝑘𝑘). Considering the size of the investigated area with 
EBSD and considering that a very slow cooling rate was used, the effects of temperature 
gradients can be disregarded from Eq. 9, i.e., we only focus on the effects of stress on mass 
diffusion and solve for an isothermal case where the gradient of temperature is zero. 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

8

The diffusivity coefficients of hydrogen atoms along the a-axis (Da) and c-axis (Dc) of the HCP 
zirconium crystals for the temperature range of 300K-1100 K are [73]:

𝐷𝑐 = 1.08 exp (−
0.46

8.6 × 10−5𝑇)

𝐷𝑎 = 𝐷𝑐(−3.3 × 10−7𝑇2 + 7 × 10−4𝑇 + 0.8298)−1
(10)

in which diffusivities are in units of mm/s2. The general form of diffusion equation derived 
from a control volume can be written as:

𝜕𝐶
𝜕𝑡 = −∇. 𝑱⃗
(11)

For the steady state condition, the derivative of concentration with respect to time will be zero. 

The format of Eqs. 9-11 is very similar to the conductive heat transfer equations used for 
calculating temperature distribution in the presence of heat sinks and sources. In Abaqus FE 
solver, UMATHT can be used for modeling coupled temperature-displacement problems, but 
with replacing temperature with concentration (C), this subroutine can be used for coupled 
diffusion-displacement problems. Following the method discussed in [66], Eqs. 9-13 are 
implemented in a UMATHT subroutine to solve for hydrogen concentration. 

To summarize, the total strain and time increments provided at the beginning of each time 
increment are used to calculate the stress increment using Eqs. 1-7. If a domain undergoes 
hydride precipitation, the transformation strain provided in Eq. 8 is applied to the pre-defined 
hydride domain, after applying appropriate rotations extracted from EBSD. The updated stress 
matrix at each IP is then used to calculate hydrostatic stress, and with the use of current 
coordinates of the same IP, the gradients of hydrostatic stress are calculated. The calculated 
∇⃗⃗⃗𝜎𝑘𝑘 is subsequently sent to UMATHT to calculate hydrogen concentration using Eqs. 9-11. 

2.2.2 CPFE input models
The as-measured EBSD maps are imported into the CPFE model to simulate the effects of 
transformation strain and confirm the source of observed trends in the experiment. First, the 
measured morphologies of α-zirconium and hydrides were imported into the model and a 
biased mesh was generated to capture the details of hydrides shapes. Due to the 3D nature of 
the problem, the model was then extruded by 10 µm in the thickness direction to simulate a 
quasi-3D microstructure.  Second order quadratic brick elements (C3D20R) were used to mesh 
the model, with a significantly higher mesh density applied in the region surrounding the 
hydrides (see Fig. 2). The measured Euler angles from EBSD were assigned to each mapped 
grain. Since hydrides were formed in the absence of any external mechanical loads, no external 
load was applied to the model, but the left and bottom surfaces were fixed from the movements 
in the 𝑥 and 𝑦 directions (Ux= Uy=0), respectively (see Fig. 2). In our experiment, the specimen 
was polished after hydriding. That is, the analyzed hydrides would have formed under the ~1 
mm surface that was removed during the polishing steps. Hence, it was assumed that hydrides 
were formed under the plane strain condition by restricting any movements on both front and 
back surfaces of the model (Uz=0), yet this boundary condition was removed in the last step of 
the simulation to replicate the release of stresses caused by polishing. It is worth mentioning 
that further analysis using other types of boundary conditions, including the plane stress 
condition, indicated that the trends observed for misorientation fields do not vary when 
switching between the plane strain to the plane stress condition, yet a slightly higher rotations 
were calculated in the absence of the relaxation step for the case of plane strain boundary 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

9

condition. Overall, CPFE simulations consistently demonstrated the same trends, regardless of 
the specific boundary conditions applied. Additional analysis concerning the effects of 
boundary conditions can be found in the supplementary file. Since α-zirconium parents are 
very large grains, buffer layers were added to the model to minimize the effects of boundary 
conditions on the deformation fields that develop due to the hydride transformation strain. In 
all models, the buffer layer is much bigger than hydrides in both 𝑥 and 𝑦 directions, have the 
same material properties as the α parent grain, and the numerical results confirmed the absence 
of interaction between the hydrides and boundaries. 

Following the method proposed by Tondro et al [74], the hydride transformation strain was 
applied to the elements of hydride domains incrementally, over 3600 seconds to replicate a 
quasi-static loading condition. If more than one hydride was modeled within a map, the 
transformation strains for all hydrides were applied simultaneously, in one simulation step. 
Further analysis showed that the trends reported in this paper are not sensitive to the sequence 
of hydriding, but the magnitudes may be slightly affected. The single crystal hardening 
parameters used for α-zirconium were the ones reported by Abdolvand et al [62] and provided 
in Table 1. The single crystal elastic constants that were used for α-zirconium were the ones 
determined by Fisher and Renken [75]: C11=143.5 GPa, C33=164.9 GPa, C12=72.5 GPa, 
C13=65.4 GPa, and C44=32.1 GPa. For hydrides, the elastic constants of FCC δ-hydrides 
reported by Olsson et al. [76] were used: C11=162 GPa, C12=103 GPa, C44=69.3 GPa. While 
determining the plastic properties of hydrides is not in the scope of current study, many 
different combinations of hardening parameters were used starting from relatively soft to a 
fully elastic medium. The results of these studies are presented in discussion section 4.1. For 
the sake of consistency, in all results presented in section 3, plastic deformation on {111}<110> 
slip system was allowed in the hydride domain using the CRSS value of 340 MPa which 
evolves linearly with the total plastic shear accumulated on all slip systems (Γ) with the slope 
of 90 MPa. In addition, although hydride precipitation takes place in a temperature window of 
about 150 ˚C, all results presented in this paper are based on the CRSS values presented in 
Table-1. Further CPFE simulations using temperature-dependent elastic constants and CRSS 
values revealed minor effects of temperature variations on the results presented.

Table 1- The single crystal parameters used for α-Zr

Slip system
n
𝛄̇ 𝟎 (𝐬−𝟏)
𝒈𝟎

𝜶 (MPa)
𝒈𝟏

𝜶 (MPa)
𝜽𝟎

𝜶 (MPa)
𝜽𝟏

𝜶 (MPa)

Prism 
20
3.5 × 10-4
120
330
10
0

Basal 
20
3.5 × 10-4
168
220
50
0

Pyramidal <c+a>
20
1.0 × 10-4
330
270
620
280

For calculating hydrogen concertation, diffusion subroutines were called after applying 
transformation strain. Since the cooling rate was 1K/min and considering the diffusion length 
of hydrogen, all results presented for hydrogen concentrations are for the steady state condition. 
Since it was not feasible to measure local hydrogen concentrations, no comparison is made 
between CPFE and experimental results, yet hydrogen concentrations are solely provided to 
discuss the effects of localized stresses on the concentration of hydrogen atoms. A boundary 
condition of 100 wt.ppm was applied to the side surfaces of the model to study the depletion 
and accumulation of hydrogen atoms around hydrides. This boundary condition was applied 
because the solid solution solubility limit of hydrogen in the zirconium lattice at 300 ˚C, the 
nominal operating temperatures of nuclear reactors, is about 100 wt.ppm [13,15,77]. Although 
some DFT calculations conducted at nanoscales suggest that concentrations below 300 ppm do 
not provide enough driving force for the formation of γ and δ hydrides [78]. In addition, atom 
probe tomography (APT) results of [79] has revealed an unexpectedly higher deuterium atomic 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

10

ratio of approximately 10%, surpassing the maximum solubility limit of about 2%. This 
difference might be attributed to the distinct maximal solubility under specific electrochemical-
charging conditions or to the influence of defects near the polished sample surface [80]. APT 
analysis has also confirmed the presence of a layer of ζ-hydride that encapsulate δ-hydrides. 
This supports the core-shell morphology and points to a lower stoichiometric number for the 
transition from α-zirconium to δ-hydrides [81,82]. It is crucial to note that these effects occur 
at length scales much smaller than the one used in this paper. In addition, our primary goal is 
to understand the redistribution of hydrogen atoms within zirconium lattice and in the vicinity 
of hydride domains. By employing the D-CPFE model, we gain valuable insights into 
patterning of hydrogen atoms in the presence of the stress fields induced by hydride 
precipitation.  

To summarize the following steps were followed during numerical modeling:

•
Step-1: The hydride transformation strain was applied. For this step, displacements 
along the x and y of the left and bottom surfaces were respectively set to zero, so as the 
displacement along the z direction of both front and back surfaces. The diffusion 
subroutines were called at the end of this step.

•
Step-2: The displacement along the z direction of the front surface was removed to 
allow relaxation. 

In both numerical and experimental results, Grain Reference Orientation Deviation (GROD) is 
calculated based on the misorientation between each point with respect to the mean orientation 
calculated for all points within the same grain. To provide a like-to-like comparison and to be 
consistent, all results presented for GRODs and GNDs are for Step-2 of modeling, after 
relaxation. Although, stress components are provided at the end of Step-1 to highlight their 
condition before “polishing” the specimen. In addition, the 𝑥, 𝑦, and 𝑧 of the coordinate system 
used respectively point to the east, south, and perpendicular to the plane, unless otherwise 
stated. In all modeling results, the buffer layer is removed to only focus on the local variations 
around hydrides. 

Fig. 2. An example of CPFE input models for triple point hydrides built based on the measured grain orientations 
and morphologies of Fig. 12.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

11

2.2.3 The determination of geometrically necessary dislocation densities
Several methods can be used for the determination of GND densities within CPFE framework. 
A comprehensive comparison between the results of each method and those from EBSD is 
provided in [83]. These CPFE-based methods benefit from using the gradients of plastic shear 
on each slip system for the determination of GNDs- a parameter that is not available in an 
EBSD measurement. Hence, to provide a like-to-like comparison, the method proposed by 
Pantleon [84] was used for both CPFE and EBSD orientation maps. That is, the calculated 
Euler angles at the end of numerical simulations as well as the position of integration points 
were fed to the same subroutine that the measured EBSD maps were fed to. This subroutine is 
a part of the MTEX [70] toolbox for orientation analysis and uses the following procedure for 
determining GND densities.

The GND density 𝜌𝑡 can be calculated as [85]:

𝛼𝑖𝑗 = ∑ 𝑏𝑖

𝑡𝑙𝑗

𝑡𝜌𝑡

𝑁

𝑡=1

where 𝑖, 𝑗 = 1,2,3
(12)

where 𝑏𝑖

𝑡 and 𝑙𝑗

𝑡 are the components of Burger’s vector and dislocation line vector, respectively, 

N is the total number of possible dislocation types, and 𝛼𝑖𝑗 represents the components of Nye’s 
tensor. The Nye’s tensor can be written as a function of lattice curvature [85]:

𝛼𝑖𝑗 = 𝜅𝑗𝑖 − 𝛿𝑗𝑖𝜅𝑚𝑚
(13)

In the above equation 𝜅𝑗𝑖 represents the components of the curvature tensor, with 𝜅𝑗𝑖 =

𝜕𝜃𝑗
𝜕𝑥𝑖, 

where 𝜃𝑗 is the lattice rotation vector and 𝛿𝑗𝑖 is the Kronecker delta. In this paper, results for 
the total GND density are presented, i.e., 𝜌𝐺𝑁𝐷 = ∑
𝜌𝑡
𝑁
𝑡=1
. Further details of GND calculation 

are available in the work by Pantleon [84]. 

3. Results
In this section, the interactions of intragranular hydrides are studied for two individual hydrides 
and a pack of hydrides. This is followed by an investigation into grain boundary and triple point 
hydrides. 

3.1 Interacting intragranular hydrides
Two intragranular δ-hydrides embedded within an α-grain are shown in Fig. 3. The measured 
orientations of the α-grain and δ-hydrides are shown schematically in Fig. 3a with further 
orientation analysis provided in Fig. 3b. The c-axis of the α parent grain is oriented towards 
the x-axis, while two different orientations are measured for the two hydrides. It is evident from 
the orientation analysis that, the {111} planes and < 110 > directions of both hydrides 
respectively coincide with the basal plane and the < 112̅0 > direction of the α parent grain, 
confirming the orientation relationship reported for δ-hydrides. Fig. 3c shows the band contrast 
map for the as-measured EBSD map.

The EBSD measured and CPFE calculated GRODs are respectively shown in Fig. 3d and 3e. 
A very good agreement between the modeling and experimental results is achieved. It is evident 
that the transformation strain from hydrides induces large lattice rotations, as much as 2°, in 
the area in between the two hydrides. Interestingly, the extent and shape of rotation fields from 
model and experiment are identical, where the rotations are only observed in between the two 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

12

hydrides. The measured and calculated GND maps are respectively shown in Fig. 3f and 3g. 
The results for the hydride domains are excluded from analysis due to being very thin (< 400 
nm) and that more measurements points were required for quantifying variations. The 
variations within thicker hydrides are provided and discussed in section 3.3. It can be seen from 
the maps that GNDs are concentrated in the vicinities of hydride boundaries, both along the 
hydride and at the hydride tips. Interestingly, two highly concentrated parallel GND zones are 
identified in both CPFE and EBSD results which are highlighted with the black ovals of Fig. 
3f. The GNDs are at their maximum, ~1015 m-2, along two parallel lines in between the 
hydrides, further highlighting the degree of interaction. The two parallel lines in the GND maps 
coincide with the prism slip system of the parent grain (see Fig. 3a), and are located at the 
places where slip activity is the highest.    

a.
b.
c.

d.
e.
f.
g.

Fig. 3. The interaction of hydrides: (a) EBSD orientation map, (b) the orientation relationship between 
the α parent grain and the two δ-hydrides. Orientations in (a) are with respect to the inverse pole figure 
Z, with the legends shown in (b). (c) As-measured band contrast map. The misorientation map from (d) 
EBSD and (e) CPFE. Geometrically necessary dislocation densities from (f) EBSD and (g) CPFE.

The results of CPFE modeling for the stress field induced by the formation of hydrides are 
shown in Fig. 4. The highest stress component is 𝜎𝑥𝑥 which varies between ±450 MPa. Similar 
to GROD and GND maps, a polarized stress field is observed in between the hydrides where 
tensile stresses are observed at the hydride tips, and compressive stresses are observed in 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

13

between the two hydrides. These variations are provided in Fig. 4e and along Path #1 shown 
in Fig. 4a, where a clear sign reversal can be seen for all stress components. Further, the total 
accumulated plastic shear on all slip systems is shown in Fig. 4d, which explains the trends 
observed for GROD, GND, and stress maps. The accumulated plastic shear is as high as 5% in 
the vicinity of hydride tips and the boundary of hydrides. This plastic shear immediately 
diminishes with distancing from hydrides boundaries leading to the formation of the polarized 
stress and rotation field in between the hydrides. It is worth mentioning that for calculating the 
accumulated plastic shear strain, the absolute values of slip are used. 

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 

e.
f.
g.

Fig. 4. The distribution of (a) 𝝈𝒙𝒙, (b) 𝝈𝒚𝒚, (c) 𝝈𝒙𝒚, and (d) the total plastic shear accomodated by all active 
slip systems around the intergranular hydrides. (e) The variation of stress components along the path #1 
shown in (a). The distribution of (f) hydrostatic stress (𝝈𝑯) and (g) the corresponding hydrogen mass 
concentration. Results presented are all from CPFE modeling. 

The further progression of hydrides depends on the status of hydrogen field around them. The 
distribution of hydrostatic stress (𝜎𝐻) and the corresponding hydrogen field within the lattice 
(C) are respectively shown in Fig. 4f and 4g. In agreement with other stress components, a 
compressive hydrostatic stress field is observed in between the hydrides causing the depletion 
of hydrogen atoms, hence, the absence of hydride interlinking. This is further reinforced by the 
high tensile hydrostatic stresses that are developed at the hydride tips leading to the 
accumulation of hydrogen atoms and further possible elongation of hydrides in their axial 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

14

direction. The results presented in this section are consistent with those reported by Tondro et 
al [74,86], for the interaction of hydrides. 

3.2 Interacting packs of hydrides
The EBSD and CPFE results for a pack of five intragranular hydrides with three distinct 
orientations and two parent grains are shown in Fig. 5. The large α-grain that has its c-axis 
oriented nearly towards the y-axis is called α1 (see Fig. 5a). The orientation relationship 
analysis shown in Fig. 5b indicates that α1 is the parent grain of two of the hydrides, δ1 and δ2. 
As shown in the magnified region of Fig. 5a, a very thin twin is observed in the parent α1 grain. 
This twin is called α2 and is the parent grain of hydride δ3. The as-measured band contrast map 
is shown in Fig. 5c.

a.
b. 
c.

d.
e.
f.
g.

Fig. 5. The interaction of hydride packs: (a) EBSD orientation map, (b) the orientation relationship 
between the α parent grains and the three δ-hydrides. Orientations in (a) are with respect to the inverse 
pole figure Z, with the legends shown in (b). (c) As-measured band contrast map. The misorientation 
map from (d) EBSD and (e) CPFE. Geometrically necessary dislocation densities from (f) EBSD and (g) 
CPFE.

The measured and calculated GRODs for the hydride pack are respectively shown in Fig. 5d
and 5e. A distinct rotation field is observed in between neighboring hydrides indicating a strong 
interaction. Two very localized rotation fields are observed in between the hydrides. For the 
three smaller δ2 hydrides, these two rotation fields connect one tip of a hydride to the middle 
of another hydride. A white oval is plotted around one of these rotation fields in Fig. 5d. The 
area within the red oval of Fig. 5d shows that the two rotation fields are nearly merged into 
one, when one of the bottom δ2 hydride interacts with the bigger hydride δ1. 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

15

The subsequent effects of rotation fields can be seen in the GND maps of Figs. 5f and 5g. A 
very good agreement is observed between the CPFE and EBSD results. GNDs in both cases 
increase from 1012 m-2 in “far-field” zones to 1015 m-2 in the vicinity of hydrides. The two 
localized rotation fields that are highlighted with the red and white ovals led to the formation 
of two distinct GND fields that are observed in both CPFE and EBSD results. The formation 
of such dislocation fields leads to further trapping of hydrogen atoms, which in combination 
with hydrostatic stresses may help further axial growth of hydrides. In addition, higher GND 
and GRODs are measured and calculated at hydride tips in comparison to hydride sides. 

a.
b.
c. 

d. 
e. 
f.

Fig. 6. The distribution of (a) 𝝈𝒙𝒙, (b) 𝝈𝒚𝒚, (c) 𝝈𝒙𝒚, and (d) the total plastic shear accomodated by all active slip 
systems around the pack of intragranular hydrides. The distribution of (e) hydrostatic stress (𝝈𝑯) and (f) the 
corresponding hydrogen mass concentration. Results presented are all from CPFE modeling. 

The results of CPFE modeling for the stress fields around the pack of interacting hydrides are 
shown in Fig. 6. Both 𝜎𝑥𝑥 and 𝜎𝑦𝑦 are considerably high where a polarized stress field is 
observed for all stress components. This is due to the mechanism by which α1 parent grain 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

16

accommodates the localized strain fields induced by the precipitation of hydrides. It is evident 
from Fig. 6d that plastic strains are localized in between the small areas in between the 
hydrides. Similarly, a polarized hydrostatic stress field is observed in the vicinity of hydrides. 
Although, unlike the intragranular hydrides of the previous section, only tensile hydrostatic 
stresses are observed in between the pack of hydrides. This highlights the significant effects of 
local microstructure as well as the crystallographic orientations of hydrides and the parent 
grains on the development of stress patterns. The corresponding hydrogen field is shown in 
Fig. 6f, and it is observed that hydrogen atoms are concentrated both in between the hydrides 
as well as hydride tips. Due to the size and shape of hydride packs, and due to the strong 
interactions among them, the concentration of hydrogen can be as high as 120 wt.ppm, which 
is much higher than the one calculated for the two intergranular hydrides of previous section.     

3.3 Grain boundary hydrides
The deformation induced by hydrides in two neighboring α-grains is studied in this section. 
For this purpose, a large hydrided grain boundary was selected, but divided into three 
subsections that are called Regions of Interest (ROIs). All three ROIs and the hydrided grain 
boundary are shown in Fig. 7a. Considering the size of hydrides and parent grains, high spatial 
resolution EBSD measurements were conducted in the ROIs which are shown in the right-hand 
column of Fig. 7. The c-axis of α1 parent grain is at ~30° angle from the y-axis while the c-axis 
of α2 parent grain is nearly parallel to the x-axis. The naming of each grain is provided within 
the HCP schematics of Fig. 7. To avoid busy figures, the poles of α1 and α2 as well as their 
corresponding hydrides are shown in two different pole figures of Fig. 7c. Four hydrides are 
observed to form at this grain boundary which are named δ1 to δ4.  The top pole figure shows 
the orientations of δ1 and δ2, while the bottom pole figure shows the orientations of δ3 and δ4. 
The orientation relationship analysis presented in Fig. 7c indicates that α1 is the parent grain of 
δ1 and δ2 hydrides, while α2 is the parent grain of δ3 and δ4 hydrides. The two hydrides δ3 and 
δ4 are visible in the EBSD map of ROI1, whereas δ1 and δ2 hydrides are visible in ROI2. 
Although the hydride map is divided into three ROIs, CPFE modeling was conducted on all 
connected hydrides, but for a like-to-like comparison and to study variations, numerical results 
for GND and rotation maps are also sectioned to three ROIs. The stress maps are provided for 
the entire CPFE model, though.  


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

17

a.
b.

c.

Fig. 7. (a) An SEM image of the investigated hydrides that are located at the grain boundary of two α-
grains. This area is divided into three Regions of Interests (ROIs), which are shown in the second column. 
Four distinct hydrides are observed and their orientation relationship with the neighbouring α-grains 
are shown in (c).  

The measured and calculated GRODs and GNDs for the three ROIs are shown in Fig. 8. The 
results for ROI1, ROI2 and ROI3 are respectively shown in the first, second, and third columns. 
The misorientation maps are shown in the first two rows while GNDs are shown in the last 
two. Both CPFE and EBSD results reveal a high lattice rotation in the vicinity of hydrides, 
particularly at hydride tips. The tips of hydrides are mainly seen in ROI1 and ROI2 (Fig. 8a, 8c, 
8d and 8f) where misorientations exceed 4°, which is twice the magnitude measured for 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

18

intragranular hydrides. The rotation fields are very localized and are highlighted by the ovals 
in Fig. 8b and 8c.  

ROI1
ROI2
ROI3

EBSD

F

a. 
b.
c.

CPFE

d.
e.
f.

EBSD

g. 
h.
i.

CPFE

j. 
k.
l.

Fig. 8. The distribution of misorientations and geometrically necessary dislocation (GND) densities 
within α parent grains from EBSD and CPFE. The first and second rows represent the misorientation 
maps from EBSD and CPFE, respectively. The third and fourth rows respectively represent the GND 
maps from EBSD and CPFE. The results for the Region of Interests (ROI) are respectively shown in 
each column. ROIs are shown in Fig. 7.   

The subsequent effects of misorientation fields can be seen in the GND maps of Fig. 8. An 
outstanding agreement is observed between CPFE and EBSD results, further highlighting the 
significant effects of hydride transformation strain on inducing localized deformation fields. 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

19

While a high GND concentration is observed in the vicinity of hydrides, discrete parallel GND 
densities are observed in all ROIs. For example, the red ovals of Fig. 8i highlight parallel and 
discrete GNDs, both in CPFE and EBSD results. The GNDs are mainly parallel to the c-axis 
of the α-grain, and in some cases are parallel to the basal slip system, indicating the high slip 
activity in the α1 parent grain. Likewise, the white oval of Fig. 8i points to the formation of 
localized GND field that is parallel to c-axis of the α2 parent grain. It is interesting to see the 
formation of discrete GNDs both in CPFE and EBSD results of Figs 8i and 8l. addition, the 
black oval of Fig. 8h highlights a localized GND field induced by the formation of δ1 within 
α1. CPFE simulation shows that mainly basal and to a lesser extent prism slip systems are active 
leading to the formation of such localized GND zones (Fig. 8k and Fig. 11). 

EBSD
CPFE
EBSD
CPFE

ROI1

fff

a.
b.
c.
d.

ROI2

e.
f.
g.
h.

ROI3

i.
j.
k.
l.

Fig. 9. The distribution of misorientations and geometrically necessary dislocation (GND) densities 
within δ hydrides from EBSD and CPFE. The first and third columns represent EBSD results for 
misorientations and GNDs, while the second and fourth columns represent the corresponding CPFE 
results. The results for the Regions of Interest (ROI) are respectively shown in each row. ROIs are shown 
in Fig. 7. The legend for misorientations and GNDs are respectively shown in 9e and 9g. 

So far, variations within the α parent grains are shown, with less attention paid to the thin 
hydrides, however, the hydrides of this section are thick enough that allows studying 
misorientation and GND variations across them. In particular, the hydrides of ROI1 and ROI2, 
as shown in Fig. 9, are thicker than 3 µm, allowing further collections of data points. In Fig. 9a 
and 9b, it is shown that while the tips of hydrides have high GRODs, the middle section of 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

20

hydrides undergo less GRODs suggesting that hydride tips are highly stressed in comparison 
to the middle sections. The high GROD zones are highlighted with the black ovals of Fig. 9. 
Likewise, low GND densities are measured and calculated in the middle section of hydrides 
while higher GND densities are observed at the hydride tips. For example, the red oval of Fig. 
9c points to a hydride tip that has a high GND density both in CPFE and EBSD results. On the 
other hand, a smaller GND density is observed in the middle of hydride next to the same red 
oval. The same trend is observed in Fig. 9g and 9h, where a clear dislocation “free zone” is 
observed in the middle of hydride. Consistent with other measurements, the black and red ovals 
of Fig. 9i to 9l reveal high GROD and GND densities in at the hydride tips, within the hydride 
itself. 

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

f.
g.
h.
i.

Fig. 10. The distribution of (a) and (f) 𝝈𝒙𝒙, (b) and (g)  𝝈𝒚𝒚, (c) and (h) 𝝈𝒙𝒚, (d) and (i) hydrostatic stress 
(𝝈𝑯), and (e) hydorgen mass concentration (wt. ppm). The CPFE results for α parent grains and hydrides 
are respectively shown in the first and second row.

The CPFE results for stress fields around and within the hydrides of all ROIs are shown in Fig. 
10. For the α parent grains, the highest components of stress tensor are 𝜎𝑥𝑥 and  𝜎𝑦𝑦 which are 
very negative along the hydride boundaries but are positive at the hydride tips. Similarly, the 
calculated hydrostatic stress is compressive along the hydride boundaries (Fig. 10d), but it is 
tensile at hydride tips leading to respectively depletion and accumulation of hydrogen atoms at 
the mentioned locations (Fig. 10e). This trend holds for both α parent grains, despite having 
different crystallographic orientation, and that four different δ hydrides were precipitated in 
them. In addition, consistent with the GROD and GND calculations, stress concentrations are 
observed right at the hydride boundary. Hydrides are removed from the first row for better 
visualization and to clearly see the stress variations within the α parent grains. The stress fields 
within hydrides are shown in the second row of Fig. 10. Compressive stresses as high as -1 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

21

GPa are calculated within hydrides, which is in agreement with the dislocation dynamic 
calculations of Tummala et al [56].  

The calculated total accumulated plastic shear on all slip systems of α parent grains are shown 
in Fig. 11. Consistent with the GROD and GND maps, a high plastic shear is observed in the 
vicinity of hydrides, particularly at the hydride tips. The active slip systems within the parent 
grains are shown by the blue arrow and highlighted slip plane. It is evident that the basal slip 
system is very active in both α parent grains.

a.
b.
c.

Fig. 11. The distribution of total plastic shear strain accumulated all active slip systems within α parent 
grains: (a) ROI1, (b) ROI2, (c) ROI3. 

3.4 Triple point hydrides 
In this section, CPFE and EBSD results for the formation of hydrides at a triple point are 
provided. Fig. 12a shows an SEM image of the investigated area, where three α parent grains 
and four distinct hydrides were observed. The measured EBSD map of parent grains and 
hydrides are shown in Fig. 12b. A rather thick hydride was formed at the grain boundary shared 
between α1 and α2, which are located at the bottom of Fig 12b. This hydride is called δ1, and 
the orientation analysis shown in Fig. 12d revealed that α2 is its parent grain. Another hydride 
was observed at the right corner of the triple point, which is called δ2. As shown in the 
orientation analysis, δ2 hydride was formed inside the α2 parent grain. The third hydride was 
observed in the left corner of the triple point, called δ3, and has an orientation relationship with 
α3 parent grain. The last hydride was observed within α3 and is called δ4. This hydride also 
follows the hydride orientation relationship with its parent grain, α3. 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

22

a. 
c.

b.

Fig. 12. (a) An SEM image of the investigated hydrides that are located at a triple point. (b) The 
crystallographic orientation of α parent grains and hydrides. Three α grains and four distinct hydrides 
are indexed. (c) The crystallographic relationship between each indexed hydride and the corresponding 
α parent grain. Hydrides are shown with blue circles.  

The measured and calculated GROD, as well as GND densities for both α parent grains and 
four δ hydrides are shown in Fig. 13a- 13h. A very good agreement is observed between CPFE 
and EBSD results for both GRODs and GND maps. A very high GROD is measured by EBSD 
within α1 which is highlighted by the bigger black oval of Fig. 13a. Although none of the 
hydrides had an orientation relationship with α1, the transformation strain induced a large 
rotation within this grain which can also be seen in the CPFE results of Fig. 13b. This large 
rotation resulted in the formation of discrete GND zones that are observed in both EBSD and 
CPFE results for the same grain (see Fig. 13e and 13f). The total accumulated plastic shears on 
all slip systems of α grains are shown in Fig. 13i. It is evident from CPFE results that the 
observed high GROD and GND fields within α1 is a result of accumulation of plastic shear in 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

23

the same location. Likewise, a high GROD field is observed in α2 parent grain which is 
highlighted with the smaller black oval of Fig. 13a. A high intensity GROD field is also 
observed in the CPFE results at the same location (Fig. 13b). The subsequent of this rotation 
field can be seen in the GND maps of Fig 13e and 13f, where discrete parallel GND fields are 
observed in both experimental and modeling results. The calculated plastic shear presented in 
Fig. 13i shows that basal slip system is very active followed by prism. Similar trends are also 
observed in α3 parent grain, in the areas highlighted by the black circle of Fig. 13a. A high 
GND density is calculated in both CPFE and EBSD result.

a. 
b. 
c.
d.

e. 
f. 
g.
h.

i.

Fig. 13. The distribution of misorientations and geometrically necessary dislocation (GND) densities 
within α parent grains and δ hydrides from EBSD and CPFE. Measured misorientations within (a) α 
parent grains and (c) δ-hydrides with the corresponding calculated values respectively shown in (b) and 
(d). Measured GND densities within (e) α parent grains and (g) δ-hydrides with the corresponding 
calculated values respectively shown in (f) and (h). The total calculated plastic shear on all slip systems 
for (i) α parent grains 

The measured and calculated GRODs for the four δ hydrides are respectively shown in Fig. 
13c and 13d. Similar to the results shown in section 3.3 for grain boundary hydrides, higher 
GRODs are observed in the vicinity of hydride boundaries. An example of such a high GROD 
zone is highlighted with the red oval of Fig. 13c, which is also observed in the CPFE results of 
Fig. 13d. Both experimental and modeling results indicate that the minimum variation of 
GRODs is in the middle of the thicker hydride- which is highlighted with the white oval of Fig. 

α1

α2

α3


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

24

13c. In agreement with the observed trends for GRODs, higher and lower GND zones are 
respectively seen in the red and white ovals of Fig. 13g, which are replicated by the CPFE 
model. 

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

f.
g.
h.
i.

Fig. 14. The distribution of (a) and (f) 𝝈𝒙𝒙, (b) and (g) 𝝈𝒚𝒚, (c) and (h) 𝝈𝒙𝒚, (d) and (i) hydrostatic stress 
(𝝈𝑯), and (e) hydorgen mass concentration (wt. ppm). The CPFE results for α parent grains and hydrides 
are respectively shown in the first and second row.

The calculated stresses for the three α-grains and hydrides are shown in Fig. 14. In α-grains, 
the highest component of stress tensor is 𝜎𝑥𝑥 which is negative in the two bottom grains, α1
and α2, while it is tensile and positive in the top grain α3. The corresponding hydrostatic and 
mass concentration fields are respectively shown in Fig. 14d and 14e, where similar polarized 
fields are observed. The depletion of hydrogen atoms from the sides of δ1 hydride, located in 
the bottom of the figure, and further accumulation of hydrogen atoms at the tips of δ3 hydride 
located in the top α grain, might be reason why the hydride penetrated the top grain and not 
further expanded in the two neighboring α1 and α2 grains. Consistent with the results of the 
previous section, the two normal components of stress tensor within hydrides are very negative, 
leading to a very negative hydrostatic stress.

4. Discussion
In this section, the parameters that contribute to the results of CPFE modeling are discussed 
first. This is followed by a detailed investigation of how surrounding α-grains accommodate 
the plastic deformation induced by hydride formation, and how GNDs vary with distancing 
from hydride-zirconium interfaces. Lastly, the effects of thermal cycling on the evolution of 
GNDs and stress fields are studied. 

4.1 The mechanical properties of hydrides 
The effects of the mechanical response of hydrides are studied by assigning different CRSS to 
the hydride domain so that an upper and lower bound for the calculated misorientation fields 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

25

can be obtained. This is done by using fully elastic properties and lower CRSS values to cover 
a wide spectrum for hydride’s plastic properties. Please note that the determination of bulk 
hydride’s mechanical properties is not in the scope of this section. Indeed, the goal of this 
section is to determine if the conclusions made from CPFE modeling depend on the mechanical 
properties of the hydride domain and whether the observed trends for rotation fields are 
affected.  

The results of CPFE modeling for the intragranular hydrides of section 3.1 are revisited here 
by changing hydride’s CRSS values from 220 MPa, resembling a soft hydride, to infinity that 
resembles a fully elastic hydride. CPFE results are shown in Fig. 15a to 15e, while the EBSD 
results for the same map is shown in Fig. 15f. Misorientations are concentrated in between the 
hydrides when CRSS varies between 220 MPa to 460 MPa, indicating that trends reported are 
not affected. When plastic deformation inside hydride is switched off, a high misorientation 
field is observed in between the hydrides as well as along the hydride boundaries, which are 
significantly stronger than what is observed in the experiment. This indicates that hydrides may 
not be fully elastic. This observation is in agreement with several studies focusing on the 
deformability of hydrides in Zr and Ti alloys [9,36–39,41,42,44–46]. The experimental and 
modeling results of this section also indicate that hydride transformation strain is partially 
accommodated by the plastic deformation inside hydrides. This observation is also in 
agreement with previous studies indicating that the transformation strain can induce plasticity 
both internally and at the surface of hydrides [87,88].

Further, in Fig. 15g, CPFE and EBSD results for misorientations along Path #1, shown in Fig 
15f, are plotted. The modeling results for CRSS of 220 MPa, 340 MPa, and 460 MPa follow 
those from EBSD, while those from 800 MPa, 2000 MPa deviate. The highest deviation from 
experimental results is observed for the elastic hydride further indicating that hydrides may not 
be elastic. In addition, the hydride CRSS used in the result section was taken from recent 
micropillar experiments [24], which shows a good agreement with EBSD results.

CPFE results with different CRSS values for grain boundary hydrides of section 3.3 are 
provided in the supplementary Fig. S2. Similar trends to the ones stated in the previous 
paragraph are observed further reinforcing the conclusions made regarding the misorientation 
fields around the hydrides. 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

26

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

f.
g.

Fig. 15. The effects of hydrides critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) variations on the calculated 
misorientation fields from CPFE: CRSS of (a) 220 MPa, (b) 340 MPa, (c) 460 MPa, (d) 800 MPa, and (e) 
fully elastic. (f) The measured misorientation field from EBSD for two interacting intragranular 
hydrides. (g) A comparison between the results of CPFE modeling with different CRSS values for 
hydrides with those from EBSD, along the Path #1 shown in (f).  

4.2 The sequence of hydride formation
So far, the transformation strain induced by hydride precipitation has been applied to all 
hydride domains simultaneously. Here, the effects of precipitation sequence are studied to 
investigate whether the CPFE results presented are impacted. For this purpose, the pack of 
hydrides presented in section 3.2 was simulated and results are provided in Fig. 16. For this 
model, the hydride transformation strain was first applied to the longer hydrides located at the 
top and bottom of the model while the pack of small hydrides did not undergo any phase 
transformation. The results for the first step are shown in the first row of Fig. 16. In the second 
step, transformation strain was applied to the pack of smaller hydrides and results are presented 
in the second row of Fig. 16. 

The CPFE results for the first step show that 𝜎𝑥𝑥 and  𝜎𝑦𝑦 are the two major components of 
stress tensor with a shape that seems to be reflected in the morphologies of smaller hydrides. 
Interestingly, the pack of smaller hydrides are in the area where higher tensile hydrostatic 
stresses are calculated (Fig. 16d). The shapes of the stress fields are changed significantly when 
smaller hydrides are not precipitated yet are almost identical to the ones presented in Fig. 6 for 
the case where all hydrides precipitated simultaneously. That is, the sequence of hydriding is 
not a major contributor to the trends presented in this paper.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

27

a.
b.
c.
d.

e.
f.
g.
h.

Fig. 16. The effects of hydride precipitation sequence. (a)-(d) The stress induced by the precipitation of 
top and bottom hydrides, and (e)-(h) those when the smaller pack of hydrides are subsequently 
transformed.  CPFE results for (a) and (e) 𝝈𝒙𝒙, (b) and (f) 𝝈𝒚𝒚, (c) and (g) 𝝈𝒙𝒚, (d) and (h) hydrostatic 
stress 𝝈𝑯.

4.3 The distribution of GNDs and shear strains around various hydrides
In this section, the spatial distribution of GND densities, cumulative plastic shear on all slip 
systems, and the activity of various slip systems around hydrides within the neighboring α-
grains for the four different hydride cases are studied in detail. This is to investigate the 
relationship between hydride configurations and the deformation fields induced in the 
surrounding environment. 

Fig. 17 shows the spatial variations of the measured GND densities in the surrounding α-grains
with distancing from hydride-zirconium interfaces. Specifically, Fig. 17a and 17b display GND 
variations for two interacting hydrides and interacting packs of hydrides, respectively, while 
Fig. 17c and 17d display such variations for intergranular and triple point hydrides, 
respectively. A grayscale color is used to show the frequency of measured values at each 
distance while the 10%, 90%, and medians are highlighted with the colored points. For the sake 
of clarity and further analysis, a function of the form 𝜌𝐺𝑁𝐷 = 𝐴𝑒−𝐵𝑥 + 𝐶 is used to fit the green 
lines to the measured medians. The fitted parameters are provided in Table 2. While this 
function is descriptive without explicit physical meaning, it effectively represents the 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

28

patterning of GND densities near hydrides. The average thickness of hydrides for each category 
is also provided in Table-2.

a.
b.

c.
d.

Fig. 17. The spatial variations of GND densities with distancing from hydride-zirconium interfaces: (a) 
Two interacting hydrides, (b) interacting packs of hydrides, (c) grain boundary hydrides, and (d) triple 
point hydrides. GNDs are measured within the neighbouring α-grains. The grayscale color gradient 
indicates the frequency of mreasured GND densities for each distance. Red points represent medians 
while magenta points represent 10% and 90% values at each distance. Green lines are the fitted lines 
with the paramater values provided in Table-2.

There is a clear increase in average GND densities close to hydrides. While there is a reasonable 
consistency from map to map for average GND densities, it is evident that both magnitude and 
the rate of increase in GNDs are more pronounced close to thicker hydrides. In addition, the 
magnitude of GNDs is the highest for triple point as well as intergranular hydrides. While GND
concentration settles in ~1µm from the hydride interfaces in intragranular (or interacting) 
hydrides, this value for grain boundary hydrides is ~2µm. The significance of this number is 
in its role for designing microscale nano-indentation experiments on hydride-zirconium pillars 
or cantilevers [24,39]. This finding suggests that when the micromechanics of hydrides is
studied using microcantilever beams or micropillars, it might be necessary to select cross 
sections or the dimensions of specimens bigger than 2µm to avoid perturbing the distribution 
of dislocation densities. Although, as it is evident from the results of previous section, all stress 
components damp at much higher distances. Hence making such small samples results in the 
release of, at least a portion of, residual stresses induced by hydride transformation strain. 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

29

Table 2- Parameters representing the variations of GND densities as a function of distance 𝒙 from the 
hydride interface with the surrounding α-grains.  The implemented function is 𝝆𝑮𝑵𝑫 = 𝑨𝒆−𝑩𝒙 + 𝑪.
𝝆𝑮𝑵𝑫 = 𝑨𝒆−𝑩𝒙 + 𝑪
A
B
C
Hydride thickness (μm)

Two interacting hydrides
4.1e13
3.7
6.3e13
0.4

Pack of interacting hydrides
6.4e13
2.8
4.1e13
1.9

Intergranular hydrides
1.4e14
2.5
7.7e13
2.9

Triple point hydrides
7.1e13
3.3
7.1e13
2.5

So far, the spatial variations of GND densities within α-grains are discussed, however, both 
modeling and experimental results presented in sections 3.3 and 3.4 appear to show higher 
GND densities within hydrides. To further investigate, the average GND densities measured in 
the three intergranular hydrides of section 3.3 and those of triple point hydride of section 3.4 
are calculated and presented in Table 3. Two approaches are used to compare the average 
GNDs from hydrides to those from surrounding α-grains. In the first approach, for calculating 
the average GNDs in α-grains, all points located in <1µm from the hydride-zirconium interface 
are used, while in the second approach, all point with GNDs>1014 m-2 are considered. This is
done to account for grain size effects and that α-grains are bigger with more areas of low GND 
densities. It is evident from Table 3 that, regardless of the method used for calculating average 
GNDs within α-grains, the measured GND density in hydrides are always higher. This is 
another important evidence that a portion of hydride transformation strain is accommodated by 
the plastic deformation inside hydrides [87,88]. 

Table-3. Average GND densities (m-2) in hydrides and surrounding α-grains.

Map
Intergranular 

ROI1

Intergranular 

ROI2

Intergranular 

ROI3

Tripple point 

hydride

Hydride
4.13e14
3.02e14
4.81e14
2.15e14

α-zirconium 
(GND>1014 m-2)

2.24e14
2.30e14
2.15e14
1.44e14

α-zirconium 
(d<1µm)

2.10e14
2.12e14
1.95e14
1.08e14

Fig. 18 represents the distribution of total plastic shear strain accommodated by all slip systems
of neighboring α-grains as a function of the distance from hydride-zirconium interfaces. These 
values are computed by CPFE. For the sake of clarity, only the regions with a total shear strain 
exceeding 0.001 are shown. Fig. 18a and 18b display the variations for two interacting hydrides 
and interacting packs of hydrides, respectively, while Fig. 18c and 18d display such variations 
for intergranular and triple point hydrides, respectively. Included in the figures are the 10%, 
50%, and 90% of the calculated values, while respecting the size of the contributing element. 
In addition, the calculated relative activity of each slip system is provided in Fig. 18e. Relative 
activities are calculated by dividing the total shear on each slip set to the total cumulative shear 
on all slip systems. In all shear calculations, the absolute values are used to avoid cancellation 
of negative shears by the positive ones.   

Generally, shear strains are notably higher in the vicinity of thicker hydrides. Although shear 
strains typically diminish with distancing from the hydride interfaces, for interacting hydrides 
(Fig. 18a) an increase is observed in the midline, underscoring the pronounced effect of 
hydride-hydride interactions. Further, it is evident from Fig. 18e that the basal slip system is 
the most active system in all cases, even though slip on prism has the lowest CRSS. This is 
consistent with the results of previous studies, conducted by molecular dynamics modeling, 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

30

that show the accumulation of dislocations on the basal slip systems [51]. The second most 
active slip system is prism followed by pyramidal for some cases, yet both activities are a lot 
smaller than that of basal. 

a. 
b. 

c. 
d. 

e.

Fig. 18. The total cumulative plastic shear accommodated on all slip systems within the neighboring α-
grains as a function of distance from hydride-zirconium interfaces: (a) Two interacting hydrides, (b) 
interacting packs of hydrides, (c) grain boundary hydrides, and (d) triple point hydrides. The 
distributions include 10%, 50%, and 90% of the calculated values. (e) The relative activity of each slip 
system.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

31

4.4. The cumulative effects of hydride interactions 
The role of hydride interactions in the development of localized deformation zones is further 
studied in this section. The two interacting hydrides of section 3.1 are analyzed using two CPFE 
simulations. As shown in Fig. 19a, in the first simulation, the left-hand side hydride (hydride 
B) is allowed to precipitate in the absence of the right-hand side hydride (hydride A), i.e., the 
zone representing hydride A is replaced by the parent α-grain. In the second simulation, hydride 
B was allowed to precipitate in the absence of hydride A. The rotations calculated from the 
first and second simulations are respectively shown in Fig. 19a and 19b, while those calculated 
for the simultaneous precipitation of both hydrides are shown in Fig. 19c. It is evident from the 
results that a relatively symmetric rotation field develops around the tip of the hydride B. This 
symmetric rotation field is highlighted by the red and yellow ovals of Fig. 19a. Similarly, the 
results of the second simulation reveal a symmetric rotation field around hydride A. However, 
when the two hydrides are precipitated, the rotation field in between the two hydrides is 
positively resonated, while the one outside of the zone is annihilated. That is, the rotation field 
calculated in the red oval of Fig. 19a is annihilated in Fig. 19c, while the one calculated in the 
yellow oval is significantly increased. In fact, the precipitation of the two parallel hydrides has 
resulted in a polarized rotation field in favor of the area confined in between the two. 

Consistent with the results of the previous sections, the most active slip system is basal in all 
simulations of this section. The schematic of the plane normal and shear direction of this slip 
system is shown in Fig. 19a. The resolved shear stresses (RSS) calculated on the most active 
basal variant are shown in Fig. 19d-19f. The sequence of figures follows the one described for 
the rotation fields. Similar to the calculated rotation fields, it is evident that in the region 
confined in between the hydrides, resolved shear stresses from hydrides are directionally 
aligned, however, moving beyond this zone, RSS form the two hydrides counteract due to 
having opposite signs leading to the annihilation of RSS. These areas are highlighted by the 
two red and yellow ovals of Fig. 19f.

Fig. 19g and 19h further illustrate the distribution of resolved shear stress and calculated
rotations along path #2 shown in Fig. 19d. The rotation field calculated for the region confined 
in between the two hydrides is significantly higher than the summation of the rotation field 
induced by the precipitation of each hydride. In contrast, outside the confined zone, the 
combined rotation field is less than the one induced by each hydride due to the opposing RSS
fields. It is worth mentioning that the precipitation of both hydrides leads to a significantly 
higher localized stresses which subsequently induce higher RSS acting on the basal slip 
systems and higher rotation fields. 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

32

a.
b.
c.

d.
e.
f.

g.
h.

Fig. 19. The cumulative effects of hydride interactions: (a) The rotation field induced by the precipitation 
of hydride B in the absence of hydride A, (b) the one induced by the precipitation of hydride A in the 
absence of hydride B, and (c) the rotation field induced by the precipitation of both hydrides. The 
corresponding resolved shear stresses (RSS) acting on the most active basal slip system are respectively 
shown in (d) to (f). (g) and (h) The variation of RSS and rotation along the path #2 shown in d. Hydride 
A and B are labeled in (f). 

4.5. Memory effects and thermal cycling
Understanding the evolution of stress and dislocation fields during precipitation, dissolution, 
and reprecipitation of hydrides undergoing thermal cycles is very important as such cases 
happen for the zirconium-alloy components used in the core of nuclear reactors. During shut 
down for service or maintenance, the temperature of reactor core components decreases leading 
to the precipitation of hydrides if solid solution solubility limit of hydrogen in zirconium is 
exceeded. Conversely, as the temperature of core components increases while going to full 
power, a fraction, or all, of hydrides may dissolve. Over the lifetime of nuclear reactors, core 
components will undergo several thermal cycles. Hence, in this section, we focus on studying 
this process. So far, we showed that the method implemented in the CPFE code for simulating 
hydride precipitation provides reasonable results for rotation and GND fields when compared 
with the measured ones. Here, attention is given to CPFE predictions for both GND and rotation 
fields as well as hydrostatic stress fields under thermal cycling.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

33

Cycle-1: Precipitation
Cycle-1: Dissolution

a.
b.

c.
d.

e.
f.

Fig. 20. Memory effects during hydride precipitation and dissolution. CPFE results in the left column 
are for precipitation and those presented in the right column are for subsequent dissolution. (a, b) 
Rotation fields, (c, d) GND densities, and (e, f) hydrostatic stresses. All results are from CPFE simulations 
and are for the ROI3 of grain boundary hydrides of section 3.3.

First, precipitation and dissolution in one thermal cycle is studied. Specifically, we focus on 
the case of intergranular hydrides of section 3.3, ROI3. Hydride precipitation was modeled 
using the same methodology described in section 2, while for dissolution, the sign of hydride 
transformation strain was reversed and was subsequently applied to the same hydride domain. 
By doing so, the transformation strain that was applied for precipitation was effectively 
removed during dissolution. Fig. 20a and 20b respectively show the calculated rotation field 
within zirconium α-grains after the precipitation and dissolution of hydrides. The 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

34

corresponding GND and hydrostatic stresses are respectively shown in the second and third 
rows of Fig. 20. 

It is shown in Figs. 20a and 20b that even after full dissolution of hydrides, there exists a 
residual rotation field which necessitates the presence of residual GNDs shown in Fig. 20d. 
While the magnitude of both rotation and GND densities are lower after dissolution, the 
presence of GNDs help with re-nucleation of hydrides from the same location. Generally, 
dislocations trap hydrogen atoms leading to local increase in hydrogen concentration and the 
subsequent hydride nucleation. This phenomenon is known as memory effects [89,90]. Most 
importantly, while the calculated hydrostatic stress within the hydride is compressive (Fig. 20e)
after precipitation, a very tensile hydrostatic stress field is calculated for the same domain after 
dissolution. Tensile hydrostatic stresses lead to further accumulation of hydrogen atoms and 
the re-precipitation of hydrides in the same domain. CPFE results presented here are in very 
good agreement with the ones obtained by in situ TEM experiments recently reported by 
Hanlon et al [90] for precipitation, dissolution and reprecipitation of hydrides in zirconium. In 
addition, with the use of discrete dislocation plasticity, Patel et al. [57] calculated a tensile 
hydrostatic stress field in the dissolved hydride domain. It was suggested that the presence of 
dislocation network near the hydride nucleation site contributes significantly to the generation 
of this tensile stress. While our CPFE method does not directly incorporate the effects of 
individual dislocations on the development of tensile hydrostatic stresses, we show that the 
constraints imposed by the surrounding α-grains on the dissolved hydride domain can also be 
a major contributing factor on the development of such stress field further contributing to the 
memory effects. 

Fig. 21. The effects of thermal cycling on precipitation, dissolution, and re-precipitation of hydrides: The 
evolution of GND densities in zirconium α-grains. Results are from CPFE simulations and are for ROI3
of grain boundary hydrides of section 3.3.

In addition to dissolution, the effects of thermal cycling are also investigated in this section. 
Such effects were replicated by applying positive and negative hydride transformation strain 
to the hydride domain so that precipitation, dissolution, and re-precipitation can be further 
studied. Fig. 21illustrates the evolution of average GND density in the surrounding zirconium 
α-grains. A clear increase in the dislocation density is observed with cycling. Further, while 
after each dissolution GND density in the matrix decreases, the difference between GND 
densities after precipitation from those after dissolution decreases. That is, the effects of 
thermal cycling are noticeable in the first few cycles and diminish with further cycling. In 
addition, as GND density increases, the surroundings α-grains will work harden leading to the 
development of higher localized stresses with further cycling. The observed trends of this 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

35

section are in very good agreement with the ones obtained using a dislocation dynamic model
[53,57], where it was shown that the rate of increase in the dislocation density decreases with 
further thermal cycling.  

5. Conclusions
The rotation and GND fields induced by the precipitation of zirconium hydrides in the absence 
of any external mechanical load were measured by EBSD and simulated by CPFE modeling. 
Attention was given to interacting intragranular hydrides, packs of hydrides, grain boundary 
hydrides and triple point hydrides. All hydrides were shown to be FCC δ-hydride that maintain 
a crystallographic orientation relationship with the surrounding HCP α-grains. It is shown that:

(1) The precipitation of hydrides induces large lattice rotations and highly localized GND 

fields both in the surrounding α grains and the hydride itself. The magnitudes of lattice 
rotations and GNDs can exceed 4° and 1015 m-2, respectively. 

(2) The magnitudes of both rotation and GND fields are much higher in the vicinity of 

hydride tips, both in the surrounding α grains and the hydride itself.

(3) In comparison to the surrounding α-grains and for the hydrides studied here, on average, 

higher GND densities are measured and calculated within hydrides. 

(4) The strength of GND density fields diminishes rapidly by distancing from the hydride-

zirconium interfaces. While GND concentrations settles in ~1µm from the hydride 
interfaces in intragranular (or interacting) hydrides, this value for grain boundary 
hydrides is ~2µm. For the cases analyzed here, it was shown that this settling distance 
depends on the thickness of hydrides. 

(5) The effects of α-grain orientations as well as those of hydrides were shown to be 

significant where polarized rotation, GND, and stress fields were observed to develop 
for interacting hydrides as well as hydride packs. The calculated stress fields are shown 
to explain the configuration of hydrides and why they grow axially.

(6) The polarized rotation field measured and calculated in the confined area in between 

interacting hydrides is higher than the summation of the rotation fields induced by 
individual hydrides if each was precipitated in the absence of the other. Numerical 
results revealed that this is due to the patterning of resolved shear stresses acting on the 
slip systems of surrounding α-grains. 

(7) Both CPFE and EBSD results revealed the development of discrete and parallel GNDs, 

which are at their maximum in the vicinity of hydrides. These fields are shown to form 
due to the slip activity that primarily takes place on basal slip system.

(8) Significant stress and rotation variations are observed within α-grains in between 

hydrides, as well as across hydrides and surrounding α-grains.

(9) CPFE simulations revealed that hydride domains respectively develop compressive and 

tensile hydrostatic stresses during precipitation and the subsequent dissolution cycle.
The magnitude of localized GND densities in the vicinity of hydride-zirconium 
interface increases with thermal cycling, which in combination with the patterning of 
hydrostatic stress, leads to the re-precipitation of hydrides from the same location. 
CPFE results revealed that thermal cycling effects are noticeable in the first few cycles 
and weaken with further cycling. 


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

36

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by an Alliance Grant (ALLRP 560391 - 20) as well as a Discovery 
Grant (RGPIN- 2022-02955) from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 
Canada (NSERC). In addition, this research was undertaken, in part, thanks to funding from 
the Canada Research Chairs Program.

Contributions
Masoud Taherijam : Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, 
Visualization, Writing – original draft. Saiedeh Marashi : Methodology, Formal analysis, 
Investigation. Alireza Tondro : Investigation. Hamidreza Abdolvand : Supervision, 
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Resources, Writing – review & 
editing.

Data availability
All EBSD maps and measured Euler angle files (CTF EBSD files) in support of this paper are 
available at Zenodo.org.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

37

6. References

[1]
C.E. Coleman, D. Hardie, The hydrogen embrittlement of α-zirconium—A review, 
Journal of the Less Common Metals. 11 (1966) 168–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-
5088(66)90003-8.

[2]
A.G. Varias, A.R. Massih, Hydride-induced embrittlement and fracture in metals—
effect of stress and temperature distribution, J Mech Phys Solids. 50 (2002) 1469–1510. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5096(01)00117-X.

[3]
M.P. Puls, The effect of hydrogen and hydrides on the integrity of zirconium alloy 
components: delayed hydride cracking, Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.

[4]
Z. Xia, J. Zhang, Q. Tong, S. Ding, Multi-physics modeling of delayed hydride cracking 
in 
zirconium 
alloys, 
J 
Mech 
Phys 
Solids. 
132 
(2019) 
103677. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JMPS.2019.07.020.

[5]
L. Thuinet, A. Legris, Elastically driven morphology of coherent trigonal precipitates 
inside a close-packed hexagonal matrix, Acta Mater. 58 (2010) 2250–2261. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2009.12.012.

[6]
M.A. Vicente Alvarez, J.R. Santisteban, P. Vizcaino, A. V. Flores, A.D. Banchik, J. 
Almer, Hydride reorientation in Zr2.5Nb studied by synchrotron X-ray diffraction, Acta 
Mater. 60 (2012) 6892–6906. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2012.07.029.

[7]
Z. Zhao, M. Blat-Yrieix, J.P. Morniroli, A. Legris, L. Thuinet, Y. Kihn, A. Ambard, L. 
Legras, M. Limback, B. Kammenzind, others, Characterization of zirconium hydrides 
and phase field approach to a mesoscopic-scale modeling of their precipitation, ASTM 
International, 2008.

[8]
J. Li, M. Li, B. Guan, Y. Xin, Y. Wu, X. Liu, G. Chen, Uncovering the hydride 
orientation-mediated hoop fatigue mechanism in a zirconium alloy cladding tube, Int J 
Plast. 159 (2022) 103440. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPLAS.2022.103440.

[9]
T.W. Heo, K.B. Colas, A.T. Motta, L.Q. Chen, A phase-field model for hydride 
formation in polycrystalline metals: Application to δ-hydride in zirconium alloys, Acta 
Mater. 181 (2019) 262–277. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2019.09.047.

[10]
Y.J. Jia, W.Z. Han, Effect of external stress on hydride reorientation in zirconium, Acta 
Mater. 235 (2022) 118100. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2022.118100.

[11]
J. Bair, M. Asle Zaeem, D. Schwen, Formation path of δ hydrides in zirconium by 
multiphase 
field 
modeling, 
Acta 
Mater. 
123 
(2017) 
235–244. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2016.10.056.

[12]
J.R. Santisteban, M.A. Vicente-Alvarez, P. Vizcaíno, A.D. Banchik, J.D. Almer, 
Hydride precipitation and stresses in zircaloy-4 observed by synchrotron X-ray 
diffraction, 
Acta 
Mater. 
58 
(2010) 
6609–6618. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2010.08.022.

[13]
A.T. Motta, L. Capolungo, L.Q. Chen, M.N. Cinbiz, M.R. Daymond, D.A. Koss, E. 
Lacroix, G. Pastore, P.C.A. Simon, M.R. Tonks, B.D. Wirth, M.A. Zikry, Hydrogen in 
zirconium alloys: A review, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 518 (2019) 440–460. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2019.02.042.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

38

[14]
J. Bair, M. Asle Zaeem, M. Tonks, A review on hydride precipitation in zirconium 
alloys, 
Journal 
of 
Nuclear 
Materials. 
466 
(2015) 
12–20. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2015.07.014.

[15]
A.T. Motta, L.-Q. Chen, Hydride Formation in Zirconium Alloys, JOM. 64 (2012) 
1403–1408. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11837-012-0479-x.

[16]
G.J.C. Carpenter, J.F. Watters, R.W. Gilbert, Dislocations generated by zirconium 
hydride precipitates in zirconium and some of its alloys, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 
48 (1973) 267–276. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3115(73)90023-8.

[17]
B.W. Leitch, M.P. Puls, Finite element calculations of the accommodation energy of a 
misfitting precipitate in an elastic-plastic matrix, Metallurgical Transactions A. 23 
(1992) 797–806.

[18]
G.J.C. Carpenter, The dilatational misfit of zirconium hydrides precipitated in 
zirconium, 
Journal 
of 
Nuclear 
Materials. 
48 
(1973) 
264–266. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3115(73)90022-6.

[19]
A.T.W. Barrow, A. Korinek, M.R. Daymond, Evaluating zirconium–zirconium hydride 
interfacial strains by nano-beam electron diffraction, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 432 
(2013) 366–370. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2012.08.003.

[20]
M.S. Blackmur, M. Preuss, J.D. Robson, O. Zanellato, R.J. Cernik, F. Ribeiro, J. 
Andrieux, Strain evolution during hydride precipitation in Zircaloy-4 observed with 
synchrotron X-ray diffraction, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 474 (2016) 45–61. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2016.01.039.

[21]
F. Long, D. Kerr, G. Domizzi, Q. Wang, M.R. Daymond, Microstructure 
characterization of a hydride blister in Zircaloy-4 by EBSD and TEM, Acta Mater. 129 
(2017) 450–461. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2017.03.016.

[22]
R.N. Singh, R. Kishore, S.S. Singh, T.K. Sinha, B.P. Kashyap, Stress-reorientation of 
hydrides and hydride embrittlement of Zr–2.5 wt% Nb pressure tube alloy, Journal of 
Nuclear 
Materials. 
325 
(2004) 
26–33. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2003.10.009.

[23]
V.S. Arunachalam, B. Lehtinen, G. Östberg, The orientation of zirconium hydride on 
grain boundaries in zircaloy-2, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 21 (1967) 241–248. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3115(67)90174-2.

[24]
I.J.S. Cherubin, M. Topping, F. Long, M.R. Daymond, Plastic deformation of δ-
zirconium hydride during micropillar compression, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 577 
(2023) 154285. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2023.154285.

[25]
P.C.A. Simon, L.K. Aagesen, A.M. Jokisaari, L.Q. Chen, M.R. Daymond, A.T. Motta, 
M.R. Tonks, Investigation of δ zirconium hydride morphology in a single crystal using 
quantitative phase field simulations supported by experiments, Journal of Nuclear 
Materials. 557 (2021) 153303. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2021.153303.

[26]
F. Long, D. Kerr, G. Domizzi, Q. Wang, M.R. Daymond, Microstructure 
characterization of a hydride blister in Zircaloy-4 by EBSD and TEM, Acta Mater. 129 
(2017) 450–461. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2017.03.016.

[27]
W. Qin, N.A.P. Kiran Kumar, J.A. Szpunar, J. Kozinski, Intergranular δ-hydride 
nucleation and orientation in zirconium alloys, Acta Mater. 59 (2011) 7010–7021. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2011.07.054.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

39

[28]
Y.J. Jia, I.J. Beyerlein, W.Z. Han, Precipitation characteristics and distributions of 
subsurface 
hydrides 
in 
zirconium, 
Acta 
Mater. 
216 
(2021) 
117146. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2021.117146.

[29]
K. Louca, H. Abdolvand, Accurate determination of grain properties using three-
dimensional synchrotron X-ray diffraction: A comparison with EBSD, Mater Charact. 
171 (2021) 110753.

[30]
S. Marashi, K. Louca, A. Tondro, E. Tulk, H. Abdolvand, Resolving local 
microstructure variations in Zr-2.5 Nb CANDU pressure tubes using high spatial 
resolution electron backscatter diffraction and imaging, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 
577 (2023) 154321.

[31]
Q. Wang, S. Xu, J.S. Lecomte, C. Schuman, L. Peltier, X. Shen, W. Song, 
Crystallographic orientation dependence of hydride precipitation in commercial pure 
titanium, 
Acta 
Mater. 
183 
(2020) 
329–339. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2019.11.027.

[32]
K. V. Mani Krishna, D. Srivastava, G.K. Dey, V. Hiwarkar, I. Samajdar, S. Banerjee, 
Role of grain/phase boundary nature on the formation of hydrides in Zr–2.5%Nb alloy, 
Journal 
of 
Nuclear 
Materials. 
414 
(2011) 
270–275. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2011.04.003.

[33]
N.A.P. Kiran Kumar, J.A. Szpunar, Z. He, Preferential precipitation of hydrides in 
textured zircaloy-4 sheets, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 403 (2010) 101–107. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2010.06.005.

[34]
R.L. Beck, W.M. Mueller, Mechanical properties of solid zirconium hydride, 1960.

[35]
L.A. Simpson, C.D. Cann, Fracture toughness of zirconium hydride and its influence on 
the crack resistance of zirconium alloys, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 87 (1979) 303–
316.

[36]
M. Grange, J. Besson, E. Andrieu, Anisotropic behavior and rupture of hydrided 
Zircaloy-4 sheets, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A. 31 (2000) 679–690.

[37]
S. Arsene, J.B. Bai, P. Bompard, Hydride embrittlement and irradiation effects on the 
hoop mechanical properties of pressurized water reactor (PWR) and boiling-water 
reactor (BWR) zircaloy cladding tubes: part I. hydride embrittlement in stress-relieved, 
annealed, and recrystallized zircaloys at 20 C and 300 C, Metallurgical and Materials 
Transactions A. 34 (2003) 553–566.

[38]
M. Veleva, S. Arsene, M.-C. Record, J.L. Bechade, J. Bai, Hydride embrittlement and 
irradiation effects on the hoop mechanical properties of pressurized water reactor (PWR) 
and boiling-water reactor (BWR) ZIRCALOY cladding tubes: Part II. Morphology of 
hydrides investigated at different magnifications and their interaction with the processes 
of plastic deformation, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A. 34 (2003) 567–578.

[39]
H.E. Weekes, V.A. Vorontsov, I.P. Dolbnya, J.D. Plummer, F. Giuliani, T.B. Britton, 
D. Dye, In situ micropillar deformation of hydrides in Zircaloy-4, Acta Mater. 92 (2015) 
81–96. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2015.03.037.

[40]
S. Wang, S. Kalácska, X. Maeder, J. Michler, F. Giuliani, T. Ben Britton, The effect of 
δ-hydride on the micromechanical deformation of a Zr alloy studied by in situ high 
angular resolution electron backscatter diffraction, Scr Mater. 173 (2019) 101–105. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scriptamat.2019.08.006.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

40

[41]
S. Wang, F. Giuliani, T. Ben Britton, Slip–hydride interactions in Zircaloy-4: Multiscale 
mechanical testing and characterisation, Acta Mater. 200 (2020) 537–550. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2020.09.038.

[42]
C.Q. Chen, S.X. Li, Tensile and low-cycle fatigue behaviors of commercially pure 
titanium containing γ hydrides, Materials Science and Engineering: A. 387 (2004) 470–
475.

[43]
W. Qin, J.L. Liang, Z.Q. Cheng, M.H. Shi, D. Gu, T.L. Li, W.L. Zhu, J.A. Szpunar, 
Threshold stress of hydride reorientation in zirconium alloy nuclear fuel cladding tubes: 
A theoretical determination, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 563 (2022) 153659. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2022.153659.

[44]
C.Q. Chen, S.X. Li, K. Lu, Dislocation interaction with hydrides in titanium containing 
a low hydrogen concentration, Philosophical Magazine. 84 (2004) 29–43.

[45]
C.Q. Chen, S.X. Li, K. Lu, The deformation behaviors of gamma hydrides in titanium 
under cyclic straining, Acta Mater. 51 (2003) 931–942.

[46]
C.Q. Chen, S.X. Li, H. Zheng, L.B. Wang, K. Lu, An investigation on structure, 
deformation and fracture of hydrides in titanium with a large range of hydrogen contents, 
Acta Mater. 52 (2004) 3697–3706.

[47]
E. Conforto, I. Guillot, X. Feaugas, Solute hydrogen and hydride phase implications on 
the plasticity of zirconium and titanium alloys: a review and some recent advances, 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and 
Engineering Sciences. 375 (2017) 20160417.

[48]
C. Domain, R. Besson, A. Legris, Atomic-scale ab initio study of the Zr–H system: II. 
Interaction of H with plane defects and mechanical properties, Acta Mater. 52 (2004) 
1495–1502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2003.11.031.

[49]
C. Domain, R. Besson, A. Legris, Atomic-scale Ab-initio study of the Zr-H system: I. 
Bulk properties, Acta Mater. 50 (2002) 3513–3526. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-
6454(02)00173-8.

[50]
I.C. Njifon, E. Torres, A first principles investigation of the hydrogen-strain synergy on 
the formation and phase transition of hydrides in zirconium, Acta Mater. 202 (2021) 
222–231. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2020.10.030.

[51]
W. Szewc, L. Pizzagalli, S. Brochard, E. Clouet, Onset of plasticity in zirconium in 
relation 
with 
hydrides 
precipitation, 
Acta 
Mater. 
114 
(2016) 
126–135. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2016.05.025.

[52]
M. Patel, L. Reali, A.P. Sutton, D.S. Balint, M.R. Wenman, A fast efficient multi-scale 
approach to modelling the development of hydride microstructures in zirconium alloys, 
Comput 
Mater 
Sci. 
190 
(2021) 
110279. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMMATSCI.2021.110279.

[53]
L. Reali, D.S. Balint, M.R. Wenman, Dislocation modelling of the plastic relaxation and 
thermal ratchetting induced by zirconium hydride precipitation, J Mech Phys Solids. 167 
(2022) 104988. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JMPS.2022.104988.

[54]
L. Reali, D.S. Balint, M.R. Wenman, Discrete dislocation modelling of δ hydrides in Zr: 
towards an understanding of the importance of interfacial stresses for crack initiation, 
Journal 
of 
Nuclear 
Materials. 
572 
(2022) 
154091. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2022.154091.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

41

[55]
L. Reali, M.R. Wenman, A.P. Sutton, D.S. Balint, Plasticity of zirconium hydrides: a 
coupled edge and screw discrete dislocation model, J Mech Phys Solids. 147 (2021) 
104219. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JMPS.2020.104219.

[56]
H. Tummala, L. Capolungo, C.N. Tomé, Quantifying the stress state in the vicinity of a 
δ-hydride in α-zirconium, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 511 (2018) 406–416. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2018.08.050.

[57]
M. Patel, S. Waheed, M.R. Wenman, A.P. Sutton, D.S. Balint, Discrete dislocation 
plasticity modeling of hydrides in zirconium under thermal cycling, MRS Adv. 2 (2017) 
3353–3358.

[58]
W. Wan, F.P.E. Dunne, Microstructure-interacting short crack growth in blocky alpha 
Zircaloy-4, 
Int 
J 
Plast. 
130 
(2020) 
102711. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPLAS.2020.102711.

[59]
C. Hardie, R. Thomas, Y. Liu, P. Frankel, F. Dunne, Simulation of crystal plasticity in 
irradiated metals: A case study on Zircaloy-4, Acta Mater. 241 (2022) 118361. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2022.118361.

[60]
O. Sedaghat, H. Abdolvand, A non-local crystal plasticity constitutive model for 
hexagonal 
close-packed 
polycrystals, 
Int 
J 
Plast. 
136 
(2021) 
102883. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPLAS.2020.102883.

[61]
A. Alawadi, H. Abdolvand, Measurement and modeling of micro residual stresses in 
zirconium crystals in three dimension, J Mech Phys Solids. 135 (2020) 103799. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JMPS.2019.103799.

[62]
H. Abdolvand, M.R. Daymond, C. Mareau, Incorporation of twinning into a crystal 
plasticity finite element model: Evolution of lattice strains and texture in Zircaloy-2, Int 
J Plast. 27 (2011) 1721–1738. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPLAS.2011.04.005.

[63]
H. Abdolvand, K. Louca, C. Mareau, M. Majkut, J. Wright, On the nucleation of 
deformation twins at the early stages of plasticity, Acta Mater. 196 (2020) 733–746. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2020.07.010.

[64]
H. Abdolvand, Development of microstructure-sensitive damage models for zirconium 
polycrystals, Int J Plast. 149 (2022) 103156.

[65]
Y. Liu, S. El Chamaa, M.R. Wenman, C.M. Davies, F.P.E. Dunne, Hydrogen 
concentration and hydrides in Zircaloy-4 during cyclic thermomechanical loading, Acta 
Mater. 221 (2021) 117368. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2021.117368.

[66]
H. Abdolvand, Progressive modelling and experimentation of hydrogen diffusion and 
precipitation in anisotropic polycrystals, Int J Plast. 116 (2019) 39–61. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPLAS.2018.12.005.

[67]
D. Ilin, Simulation of hydrogen diffusion in fcc polycrystals. Effect of deformation and 
grain boundaries: effect of deformation and grain boundaries, Université de Bordeaux, 
2014.

[68]
A. Tondro, H. Abdolvand, On the effects of texture and microstructure on hydrogen 
transport towards notch tips: A CPFE study, Int J Plast. 152 (2022) 103234. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPLAS.2022.103234.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

42

[69]
A. Tondro, M. Taherijam, H. Abdolvand, Diffusion and redistribution of hydrogen 
atoms in the vicinity of localized deformation zones, Mechanics of Materials. 177 (2023) 
104544. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MECHMAT.2022.104544.

[70]
F. Bachmann, R. Hielscher, H. Schaeben, Texture analysis with MTEX–free and open 
source software toolbox, in: Solid State Phenomena, 2010: pp. 63–68.

[71]
A. Needleman, R.J. Asaro, J. Lemonds, D. Peirce, Finite element analysis of crystalline 
solids, 
Comput 
Methods 
Appl 
Mech 
Eng. 
52 
(1985) 
689–708. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0045-7825(85)90014-3.

[72]
D. Peirce, R.J. Asaro, a. Needleman, Material rate dependence and localized 
deformation in crystalline solids, Acta Metallurgica. 31 (1983) 1951–1976. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6160(83)90014-7.

[73]
Y. Zhang, C. Jiang, X. Bai, Anisotropic hydrogen diffusion in α-Zr and Zircaloy 
predicted by accelerated kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, Sci Rep. 7 (2017) 1–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep41033.

[74]
A. Tondro, B. Bidyk, I. Ho, H. Abdolvand, Modelling the interactions of zirconium 
hydrides, 
Mater 
Today 
Commun. 
32 
(2022) 
103933. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MTCOMM.2022.103933.

[75]
E.S. Fisher, C.J. Renken, Single-crystal elastic moduli and the hcp→ bcc transformation 
in Ti, Zr, and Hf, Physical Review. 135 (1964) A482.

[76]
P.A.T. Olsson, A.R. Massih, J. Blomqvist, A.M. Alvarez Holston, C. Bjerkén, Ab initio 
thermodynamics of zirconium hydrides and deuterides, Comput Mater Sci. 86 (2014) 
211–222. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COMMATSCI.2014.01.043.

[77]
J.J. Kearns, Terminal solubility and partitioning of hydrogen in the alpha phase of 
zirconium, Zircaloy-2 and Zircaloy-4, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 22 (1967) 292–303.

[78]
S.C. Lumley, R.W. Grimes, S.T. Murphy, P.A. Burr, A. Chroneos, P.R. Chard-Tuckey, 
M.R. Wenman, The thermodynamics of hydride precipitation: The importance of 
entropy, enthalpy and disorder, Acta Mater. 79 (2014) 351–362.

[79]
A.J. Breen, I. Mouton, W. Lu, S. Wang, A. Szczepaniak, P. Kontis, L.T. Stephenson, Y. 
Chang, A.K. da Silva, C.H. Liebscher, others, Atomic scale analysis of grain boundary 
deuteride growth front in Zircaloy-4, Scr Mater. 156 (2018) 42–46.

[80]
I. Mouton, A.J. Breen, S. Wang, Y. Chang, A. Szczepaniak, P. Kontis, L.T. Stephenson, 
D. Raabe, M. Herbig, T. Ben Britton, others, Quantification challenges for atom probe 
tomography of hydrogen and deuterium in Zircaloy-4, Microscopy and Microanalysis. 
25 (2019) 481–488.

[81]
G.A. McRae, C.E. Coleman, Precipitates in metals that dissolve on cooling and form on 
heating: An example with hydrogen in alpha-zirconium, Journal of Nuclear Materials. 
499 (2018) 622–640.

[82]
N.N. Badr, F. Long, Y. Luo, M. Topping, L.K. Béland, Z. Yao, L. Balogh, M.R. 
Daymond, On Potential Core-Shell Morphologies of δ-Hydride Precipitates in Zircaloy-
2: A Microstructural Characterization approach by Electron Diffraction and Energy-
Loss Spectroscopy, Acta Mater. (2023) 119184.

[83]
O. Sedaghat, H. Abdolvand, Strain-Gradient Crystal Plasticity Finite Element Modeling 
of Slip Band Formation in α-Zirconium, Crystals (Basel). 11 (2021) 1382.


Please cite this article as Taherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356

43

[84]
W. Pantleon, Resolving the geometrically necessary dislocation content by conventional 
electron 
backscattering 
diffraction, 
Scr 
Mater. 
58 
(2008) 
994–997. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCRIPTAMAT.2008.01.050.

[85]
J.F. Nye, Some geometrical relations in dislocated crystals, Acta Metallurgica. 1 (1953) 
153–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6160(53)90054-6.

[86]
A. Tondro, H. Abdolvand, Quantifying hydrogen concentration in the vicinity of 
zirconium hydrides and deformation twins, J Mech Phys Solids. 148 (2021) 104287. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JMPS.2020.104287.

[87]
J.B. Bai, D. Gilbon, J.L. Lebrun, Microstructural study by XRD profile analysis and 
TEM observations on hydrided recrystallized Zircaloy-4, Scripta Metallurgica;(United 
States). 26 (1992).

[88]
M.A.V. Alvarez, J.R. Santisteban, P. Vizcaino, G. Ribarik, T. Ungar, Quantification of 
dislocations densities in zirconium hydride by X-ray line profile analysis, Acta Mater. 
117 (2016) 1–12.

[89]
S.M. Hanlon, S.Y. Persaud, F. Long, M.R. Daymond, Advanced characterization of 
hydrides in zirconium alloys, in: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on 
Environmental Degradation of Materials in Nuclear Power Systems–Water Reactors, 
2019: pp. 1793–1813.

[90]
F. Long, S. Hanlon, M.R. Daymond, Transformation behavior of hydrides precipitated 
with or without stress in Zr-2.5 Nb investigated by in-situ S/TEM thermal cycling, 
Journal of Nuclear Materials. 559 (2022) 153428.


