1

A hybrid optical-wireless network for decimetre-level terrestrial 

positioning

Jeroen C. J. Koelemeij1, Han Dun2, Cherif E. V. Diouf2, Erik F. Dierikx3, Gerard J. M. Janssen2 & 

Christian C. J. M. Tiberius2,

1Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2Delft University of Technology, Delft, The 

Netherlands. 3VSL, Delft, The Netherlands.

e-mail: C.C.J.M.Tiberius@tudelft.nl

Global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) are widely used for navigation and time 

distribution1,2,3, features indispensable for critical infrastructure such as mobile 

communication networks, as well as emerging technologies like automated driving and 

sustainable energy grids3,4. While GNSS can provide centimetre-level precision, GNSS 

receivers are prone to many-metre errors due to multipath propagation and obstructed 

view of the sky, which occur especially in urban areas where accurate positioning is needed 

most1,5,6. Moreover, the vulnerabilities of GNSS, combined with the lack of a back-up system,

pose a severe risk to GNSS-dependent technologies7. Here, we demonstrate a terrestrial 

positioning system which is independent of GNSS and offers superior performance through a 

constellation of radio transmitters, connected and time-synchronised at the sub-nanosecond 

level through a fibre-optic Ethernet network8. Employing optical and wireless transmission 

schemes similar to those encountered in mobile communication networks, and exploiting 

spectrally efficient virtual wideband signals, the detrimental effects of multipath 

propagation are mitigated9, thus enabling robust decimetre-level positioning and sub-

nanosecond timing in a multipath-prone outdoor environment. This work provides a 

glimpse of a future in which telecommunication networks provide not only connectivity, but 


2

also GNSS-independent timing and positioning services with unprecedented accuracy and 

reliability.

The limitations of GNSS in urban areas are difficult to overcome. The limited radio bandwidth (~20 

MHz) of GNSS systems implies metre level positioning errors due to multipath propagation, i.e. 

signals reflected off buildings and objects that interfere with the direct line-of-sight (LoS) signal10, 

while an obstructed view of the sky will impair even advanced GNSS receivers aided by inertial 

navigation systems5,6. These restrictions not only limit navigation applications: GNSS receivers are 

also widely used as time references3, enabling synchronisation of local clocks to coordinated 

universal time (UTC) with residual time errors of several nanoseconds at best. However, emerging 

technologies, such as quantum communication, require sub-nanosecond time synchronisation of 

(quantum) network nodes11. Moreover, even if GNSS errors could be reduced by the required 1-2 

orders of magnitude, yet another bottleneck exists in the form of the unencrypted and relatively 

weak GNSS radio signals, which may be jammed, spoofed, or even forged to convey false time and 

position information. Amidst mounting concerns about the vulnerability of GNSS-dependent 

systems to (un)intentional disruptions7, network operators3 and governments12,13,14 have begun 

looking into possible back-up systems for GNSS. 

Alternative timing and positioning

Several systems have been developed to cope with the limitations of GNSS. These include low Earth 

orbit satellite constellations14,15 and local terrestrial positioning systems14 based on GNSS-inspired 

signal structures with augmentations [one example being the Locata system, which employs two 

code-division multiple access (CDMA) signals with a 10 MHz chip rate on two frequencies, 51 MHz 

apart, within the 2.4 GHz band16,17] for improved signal power, coverage, and resilience (if 

combined with GNSS). Other systems make use of two-way ranging to Wi-Fi access points for 

positioning at the metre level14, or involve local networks of ultra-wideband radio transceivers to 


3

reduce positioning and timing errors due to multipath to the decimetre level18 and sub-nanosecond 

regime20, respectively. However, these systems rely on two-way communication or radio 

transmissions from the mobile transceiver to a sensor infrastructure. Users thus have to reveal 

their presence and position, which is less privacy-friendly than the use of downlink-only (silent)

GNSS receivers. Downlink-only positioning methods, like GNSS, also scale more favourably than 

two-way methods, for which the network overhead increases with the number of users. While each 

of the abovementioned solutions overcomes some of the GNSS limitations – sometimes leading to 

spectacular improvements – they require their own application-specific infrastructure, which forms 

a major obstacle to large-scale deployment. Established wireless-network-based (and therefore

scalable) positioning methods, on the other hand, are still outperformed by GNSS14,21.

Here, we describe a terrestrial networked positioning system (TNPS) based on a hybrid optical-

wireless telecommunication infrastructure, which provides positioning in urban environments with 

centimetre to decimetre level uncertainty as well as sub-nanosecond time synchronisation. The 

system operates independently of GNSS, and many of the risks associated with GNSS are eliminated

by the use of a fibre-optic infrastructure in combination with a constellation of terrestrial 

transmitters that enable received signal power levels one million times higher than typically

received GNSS-signal powers. The TNPS demonstrated here is depicted schematically in Fig. 1 and 

Extended Data Fig. 1. A TNPS testbed was erected at an urban outdoor test site, The Green Village

(TGV), located at the campus of Delft University of Technology (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 2). Six 

radio transmitters (Tx-1 … Tx-6), dispersed over an area of 660 m2, play the role of anchor stations

similar to the satellites of a GNSS constellation. Like in GNSS, the key concept that underpins the 

TNPS is the accurate measurement (by a mobile receiver) of arrival times of the various radio 

signals transmitted by the constellation. Time-of-arrival measurements are converted to ranges,

and subsequently used to locate the receiver relative to the constellation through multilateration. 

Such measurements necessitate tight synchronisation of the internal clocks of the transmitters: 


4

with radio signals propagating at nearly the speed of light in a vacuum, c=299,792,458 m/s, a time

error of 1 ns translates to a 3-dm range error. We achieve sub-nanosecond synchronisation of the 

transmitters by use of White Rabbit (WR), a timing protocol that is implemented in optical 

1.25 Gb/s Ethernet (8-bit/10-bit encoding) equipment8. Thus, the internal clocks of all WR network 

nodes are synchronised to a common reference clock so that each node replicates the time and 

frequency of the reference clock. Such synchronisation is achieved irrespective of fibre-optic and 

electrical signal propagation delays, which are quasi-continuously estimated by the WR protocol

from measured round-trip delays, and electronically compensated. As shown in Figs. 1b and 2a,

each transmitter in the TNPS network receives timing signals [in the form of 10 MHz and 1 pulse-

per-second (PPS) electrical signals] from its associated WR timing node (TN), so that joint radio 

transmissions can be timed with an uncertainty of about 0.2 ns (see Methods for details). The 

reference clock for the WR network of our testbed is located at the Dutch metrology institute, VSL, 

and is connected to the TNPS testbed through approximately 2.5 km of installed telecommunication 

optical fibre. At VSL, a WR device is configured as WR Grandmaster (GM), taking its reference time 

and frequency directly from the timescale UTC(VSL), the Dutch realisation of Coordinated Universal 

Time. Through the WR network, the clocks of all nodes of the TNPS network are phase-coherently 

linked to UTC(VSL) and traceable to the base unit of time in the International System of Units (SI), 

the second.

Radio signal processing and positioning

The TNPS transmitters and receiver (Rx) are based on programmable universal software radio 

peripherals (USRPs). Tx stations transmit bursts of modulated radio signals for positioning, 

navigation and timing (PNT) at a carrier frequency of 3.96 GHz and an effective radiofrequency 

(RF) bandwidth (BW) of 160 MHz (Methods). The large BW helps resolve LoS signals from signals 

that are reflected by the various nearby buildings and objects at the test site. The signal structure 

and relative timing of the transmissions by Tx-1 … Tx-6 are depicted in Figs. 2a,b. PNT signals are 


5

encoded using orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM); see Fig. 2b. To this end we 

divide the 160 MHz signal BW into M=16 subbands of 10 MHz, each containing N=64 subcarriers, 

thus creating a multiband-OFDM signal. Good positioning performance can also be achieved using 

sparse signal bands (in our case employing only 7 out of 16 subbands), provided that the bands at 

the bandwidth edges are included22. Such sparse bands resemble the non-contiguous bands or 

combinations of separated bands that are frequently encountered in mobile communication 

systems.

The position of the receiver is found from the arrival times of the OFDM signals as follows. The first 

step consists in determining the delay, 𝜏̂𝑟𝑖, between transmission by Tx-i and reception by the 

receiver (Methods). From 𝜏̂𝑟𝑖 the pseudo-range, 𝜌𝑟𝑖, is derived, which (at a given time t) can be 

expressed as 

𝜌𝑟𝑖(𝑡) = 𝑐𝜏̂𝑟𝑖(𝑡) = 𝑑𝑟𝑖 (𝑡) + 𝑐𝜏ℎ + 𝑐𝜏′ℎ

𝑖 + 𝑐𝛿𝑟(𝑡) + 𝜀𝑟𝑖(𝑡).
(1)

In Eq. (1), 𝑑𝑟𝑖 (𝑡)= |xr(t) − xi| stands for the time-dependent geometric propagation distance between 

Tx-i and Rx (with xr(t) and xi the three-dimensional position vectors of the receiver and Tx-i, 

respectively), h denotes the common hardware delay of all Tx-Rx links (which arises because all 

transmitters are based on identical USRPs, antennas, and cables), and 𝜏′ℎ

𝑖 are small residual Tx-i-

specific hardware delays; both h and 𝜏′ℎ

𝑖 were determined separately (Methods). Furthermore, r(t)

represents the unknown time-dependent clock offset of the receiver, and 𝜀𝑟𝑖(𝑡) is a term that lumps 

together all errors due to multipath, unknown residual hardware delays, and timing jitter. From the 

received OFDM signals the receiver determines for each transmitter the delay 𝜏̂𝑟𝑖 and pseudo-range

𝜌𝑟𝑖, from which the receiver position xr(t) and clock offset r(t) are subsequently solved by maximum 

likelihood estimation22,23 (MLE) (Methods). In addition to the OFDM time-delay (TD) positioning 

described above, we performed positioning with enhanced precision based on carrier-phase (CP)

measurements (Methods).


6

Positioning and timing performance

To assess the TNPS performance in an urban environment, static and slow kinematic tests (with the 

receiver unit carried by either a trolley or a car) were conducted at TGV, and seven test runs were 

performed in total (see also Methods and Extended Data Fig. 3). An optical land-surveying ground-

truth (GT) system was deployed which provides position reference measurements with an 

estimated root-mean-square error (RMSE) of about 2.5 cm (Methods). Figure 3a shows OFDM-TD

and GT position solutions during one run where the receiver was moved on a trolley along a 30 m 

long trajectory. Figure 3b displays the position errors for this run (as well as their mean and 

standard deviation), indicating good agreement with the GT results, and an overall empirical RMSE 

of 10.2 cm in the east-west (EW) direction, and 7.4 cm in the north-south (NS) direction (Table 1).

Results from full-band and sparse-band OFDM-TD measurements are compared with CP results in 

Fig. 3c. We find that sparse-band and full-band OFDM-TD positioning have similar decimetre-level 

performance, as expected from the similar values for the theoretical Cramér-Rao lower bound

(CRLB) for both methods9,22. CP positioning, however, delivers centimetre-range positioning: using 

ambiguity-float and ambiguity-fixed solutions (Methods), we achieved RMSEs as low as 4-5 cm and 

2-4 cm (EW-NS directions), respectively (Table 1). 

The spread in the record of position errors is partly due to jitter and wander in the transmission 

times of the PNT signals. We experimentally determined an upper limit of 0.2 ns for these timing

variations, which consequently contribute at most 3-5 cm (EW-NS) to the RMSE. The empirical 

RMSE of the TD positions, however, is appreciably greater, which we attribute to multipath effects. 

Indications of multipath are also found in the measured pseudo-ranges; Fig. 4a displays residual 

range errors (defined as TD range minus GT range) for each Tx-i. Apparently, range errors of 

several decimetres for a single transmitter occur. However, owing to the spatial diversity and 

redundancy of the constellation of transmitters, the weight of such errors in the position solution is 

reduced so that an RMSE below 10 cm is achieved. 


7

Multipath is therefore a limiting factor in our TNPS, albeit at a much lower level – decimetre instead 

of metre – than in GNSS positioning by virtue of the much wider BW employed. This is illustrated in

Fig. 4b, where theoretical multipath error envelopes for TD-ranging using the Global Positioning 

System (GPS) (L5 signal, 20.46 MHz BW) and the TNPS are shown. The maximum multipath error 

visible in Fig. 4b is 4 m for GPS, compared to 0.5 m achieved through the TNPS using full-band

(160 MHz BW) as well as sparse-band OFDM (the latter occupying only 70 MHz of BW). CP ranging 

can be even less sensitive to multipath, because the sum phasor of multipath components with a 

combined amplitude smaller than that of the LoS component will lead to a phase error of at most 

π/2, corresponding to a range error of less than 1.89 cm at 3.96 GHz.

Apart from multipath, radio navigation systems suffer from scenarios where the direct LoS to the 

transmitter is blocked, but where non-LoS (NLoS) multipath signals are still detected by the 

receiver, thus leading to position errors. Various strategies to detect and mitigate NLoS propagation

in (ultra)wideband systems exist24,25. A conservative measure against NLoS is to omit the pseudo-

range of an impaired base station from the positioning algorithm. To illustrate the robustness of our 

TNPS to such NLoS-implied omission of one or two base stations, we have computed position 

solutions for one of the runs at TGV for various reduced constellation sizes; see Extended Data 

Fig. 4 and Extended Data Table 1. Owing to the redundancy of the constellation, decimetre-level 

positioning remains possible in most cases if one or two arbitrary base stations are removed. One 

exception is base station Tx-6, whose exclusion renders a large section of the test run outside the 

remaining constellation’s coverage area, where – due to a mechanism known as geometric dilution 

of precision – positioning errors of several decimetres to up to a few metres may readily occur.

Errors of a few decimetres may also occur for situations in which three base stations – half of the 

constellation – are excluded. For CP positioning, at least five base stations are required22, so that 

only one base station may be lost from our constellation. Our experimental data show that CP 


8

positioning with centimetre-range uncertainty remains possible also if one base station is removed 

(Extended Data Table 2).

The TNPS also enables accurate wireless time distribution, because the Rx clock offset with respect 

to WR network time is determined with sub-nanosecond uncertainty (Table 1 and Methods). The 

uncertainty is limited by errors due to multipath, the limited precision with which hardware delays

were determined, and small residual misalignments of the time bases of the Tx stations. In our 

TNPS, WR network time is traceable to UTC(VSL), and the traceability was independently verified 

using a portable atomic clock with a standard uncertainty of 50 ns, limited by the drift of the 

portable clock (Methods). However, WR supports significantly smaller time uncertainties. This is 

illustrated by the time stability (TDEV26) of the roundtrip comparison between WR-SL and 

UTC(VSL), which was typically below 10 ps for averaging times ranging from 2 minutes to up to 115 

days (Fig. 4c). The TDEV shown in Fig. 4c corresponds to a modified Allan deviation (MDEV26) of 

about 110-18 after 107 s of integration (Extended Data Fig. 5). The roundtrip time offset was 6 ns, 

which we attribute to uncalibrated delay asymmetries in the WR hardware and chromatic 

dispersion of the optical fibre. Well-developed methods27,28,29 exist to calibrate such delay 

asymmetries, making it is possible to synchronise WR devices to within a fraction of a nanosecond 

even over distances in excess of 100 km30 ,32. Therefore, our TNPS might be used to broadcast

national realisations of UTC over the air with sub-nanosecond uncertainty, an improvement over 

common GNSS time distribution techniques by two orders of magnitude33.

Compatibility with existing networks

The TNPS reported here represents a milestone towards robust, network-based decimetre-level 

positioning and wireless sub-nanosecond time distribution in urban environments, based on 

signals that are significantly more difficult to tamper with than GNSS radio signals (because the 

relatively high signal levels and anticipated density of base stations will limit jamming and in 


9

particular spoofing attacks to a small geographic area). However, the potential of any PNT 

technology to serve as a GNSS backup or next-generation positioning system also depends on the 

effort needed for its deployment. We here point out several crucial features of our TNPS which 

enhance its compatibility with existing telecommunication networks, thus reducing the barrier to 

implementation. First, there is the high technological readiness level of WR: the WR protocol has 

been standardised34, WR equipment has been commercially available for over one decade and, 

owing to its relatively modest bitrate, WR can operate (without loss of performance) at 

wavelengths in the fibre-optic spectrum that experience relatively large attenuation. Such 

wavelengths are often available as they are less suitable for high-capacity data transmission 

systems. Employing wavelength division multiplexing (WDM), WR operating in such unused 

wavelength bands has already been successfully integrated into long-distance fibre-optic networks 

that simultaneously carry live high-capacity data traffic, showing no interaction between the WR 

signals and the other data traffic, and achieving sub-nanosecond timing performance30,31,32.

Second, our TNPS system may be implemented in ways that circumvent the scarcity of radio 

bandwidth. Present terrestrial PNT systems primarily make use of unlicensed frequency bands (e.g. 

the Industrial, Scientific and Medical band at 2.4 GHz in which Wi-Fi operates), while some other 

systems operate in proprietary spectrum (such as the NextNav Metropolitian Beacon System, which 

operates in an 8-MHz band around 923.75 MHz14). The sparse-band radio system demonstrated 

here could be designed such that its spectral footprint matches the spectra licensed to mobile 

network operators. These consist typically of several bands of 5-15 MHz BW distributed over the 

frequency range 600-3500 MHz, so that a sparse ultra-wide virtual BW may be achieved22. In 

addition, the OFDM modulation format is similar to that used in 4G and 5G radio access networks as 

well as Wi-Fi networks, suggesting that the OFDM PNT signals may be transmitted by present-day 

mobile base stations (in line with current and evolving standards such as 3GPP 36.305 for 4G and 

38.305 for 5G) and Wi-Fi access points (assuming these are synchronised using WR or similar 


10

protocols through the optical network, or over the air through two-way OFDM signal exchange35

with nearby TNPS reference transmitters). In our prototype TNPS, at a PNT message rate of 1 kHz, 

up to 94% of the telecommunication capacity remains available; however, this figure may improve

to well above 99% by straightforward modifications of the PNT signal structure (such as joint PNT 

transmissions employing CDMA instead of TDM, or a reduced PNT message rate), and without loss 

of positioning performance (Methods). With the continuing densification of cellular networks and 

wireless access points, the density of such integrated telecom/TNPS transmitters may ultimately 

become sufficient to achieve city-wide or even nation-wide coverage, with a high level of 

robustness against MP and NLoS signals. 

References

1.
Enge, P. K. The Global Positioning System: signals, measurements, and performance. Int. J. 

Wirel. Inf. Netw. 1, 83 (1994).

2.
Allan, D. W. & Weiss, M. A. Accurate time and frequency transfer during common-view of a 

GPS satellite. In Proc. 34th Ann. Freq. Control Symposium, USAERADCOM 334-346 (IEEE, 

1980).

3.
GSA GNSS technology report, Issue 3. https://doi.org/10.2878/565013 (2020).

4.
Muljadi, E., Zhang, Y. C., Allen, A., Singh, M., Gevorgian, V., & Wan, Y. H. Synchrophasor

Applications for Wind Power Generation. Technical Report, U.S. National Renewable Energy 

Laboratory. https://doi.org/10.2172/1126317 (2014).

5.
Li, T., Zhang, H., Gao, Z., Chen, Q. & Niu, X. High-accuracy positioning in urban environments 

using single-frequency multi-GNSS RTK/MEMS-IMU integration. Remote Sens. 10, 205

(2018).

6.
Humphreys, T. E., Murrian, M. J., & Narula, L. Deep-urban unaided precise global navigation 

satellite system vehicle positioning. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag. 12, 109-122 (2020).


11

7.
Sadlier, G., Flytkjær, R., Sabri, F. & Herr, D. The economic impact on the UK of a disruption to 

GNSS. London Economic, report commissioned by Innovate UK, the UK Space Agency, and 

the Royal Institute of Navigation (2017).

8.
Serrano, J. et al. The White Rabbit project. In Proc. 12th International Conference on 

Accelerator and Large Experimental Physics Control Systems (ICALEPCS) 93-95 (2009).

9.
Dun, H., Tiberius, C. C. J. M., Janssen, G. J. M. & Diouf, C. E. V. Time delay estimation based on 

multi-band multi-carrier signal in multipath environments. In Proc. 32nd International 

Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS+ 2019)

2299-2313 (ION, 2019).

10. Braasch, M.S. Multipath. In Teunissen P.J., Montenbruck O. (eds) Springer Handbook of 

Global Navigation Satellite Systems 443-468 (Springer, Cham 2017).

11. Buttler, W. T. et al. Practical free-space quantum key distribution over 1 km. Phys. Rev. Lett.

81, 3283 (1998).

12. U. S. National Timing Resilience and Security Act of 2017. 

https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/senate-bill/2220 (2017).

13. Alternative position, navigation and timing (PNT) services. European Commission call for 

tenders DEFIS/2020/OP/0007, tender specifications. 

https://etendering.ted.europa.eu/document/document-file-

download.html?docFileId=90368 (2020).

14. Hansen, A. et al. Complementary PNT and GPS Backup Technologies Demonstration Report: 

Sections 1 through 10. Report number DOT-VNTSC-20-07. 

https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/55765 (2021)

15. Benzerrouk, H. et al. Alternative PNT based on Iridium Next LEO satellites Doppler/INS 

integrated navigation system. 2019 26th Saint Petersburg International Conference on 

Integrated Navigation Systems (ICINS) 1-10 (IEEE, 2019).


12

16. Cheong, J. W., Wei, X., Politi, N., Dempster, A.G. & Rizos, C. Characterising the signal structure 

of Locata’s pseudolite-based positioning system. International Global Navigation Satellite 

Systems Society IGNSS Symposium 2009 1-3 (IGNSS,2009).

17. Rizos, C. & Yang, L. Background and recent advances in the Locata terrestrial positioning 

and timing technology. Sensors 19, 1821 (2019).

18. Yavari, M. & Nickerson, B. G. Ultra-wideband wireless positioning systems. Technical Report 

TR14-230, Faculty of Computer Science, University of New Brunswick, Canada (2014).

19. Abdulrahman, A. et al. Ultra wideband indoor positioning technologies: analysis and recent 

advances. Sensors 16, 707 (2016).

20. Prager, S., Haynes, M. S. & Moghaddam, M. Wireless subnanosecond RF synchronization for 

distributed ultrawideband software-defined radar networks. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory 

Techn. 68, 4787-4804 (2020).

21. Razavi, S. M. et al. Positioning in cellular networks: Past, present, future. 2018 IEEE Wireless 

Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) 1–6 (IEEE, 2018).

22. Dun, H., Tiberius, C. C. J. M., Diouf, C. & Janssen, G. J. M. Design of sparse multiband signal for 

precise positioning with joint low-complexity time delay and carrier phase estimation. IEEE 

Trans. Veh. Technol. 70, 3552-3567(2021).

23. Progri, I. F., Bromberg, M. C. & Michalson, W. R. Maximum-likelihood GPS parameter 

estimation. NAVIGATION 52, 229-238 (2005).

24. Guvenc, I. & Chong, C.-C. A survey on TOA based wireless localization and NLOS mitigation 

techniques. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 11, 107-124 (2009).

25. Yan, J., Tiberius, C. C. J. M., Bellusci, G. & Janssen, G. J. M. Non-line-of-sight identification for 

indoor positioning using ultra-wideband radio signals. NAVIGATION 60, 97-111 (2013).

26. Riley, W. J. Handbook of Frequency Stability Analysis. NIST Special Publication 1065 (NIST, 

Boulder 2008).


13

27. Śliwczyński, Ł., Krehlik, P., Czubla, A., Buczek, Ł. & Lipiński, M. Dissemination of time and RF 

frequency via a stabilized fibre optic link over a distance of 420 km. Metrologia 50, 133 

(2013).

28. Sotiropoulos, N., Okonkwo, C. M., Nuijts, R., De Waardt, H. & Koelemeij, J. C. J. Delivering 10 

Gb/s optical data with picosecond timing uncertainty over 75 km distance. Opt. Express 21, 

32643-32654 (2013).

29. Daniluk, G. White Rabbit calibration procedure, version 1.1. CERN BE-CO-HT.

https://www.ohwr.org/documents/213 (2015).

30. Lipiński, M. et al. White Rabbit applications and enhancements. 2018 IEEE International 

Symposium on Precision Clock Synchronization for Measurement, Control, and Communication 

(ISPCS) 1-7 (IEEE, 2018).

31. Dierikx, E. F. et al. White Rabbit precision time protocol on long distance fiber links. IEEE 

Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 63, 945-952 (2016).

32. Boven, P., van Tour, C. & Smets, R. Demonstration of VLBI synchronization via existing 

SURFnet/LOFAR network. ASTERICS GA Deliverable D5.14.

https://www.asterics2020.eu/sites/default/files/documents/asterics-d5.14.pdf (2019).

33. Lombardi, M. A. Evaluating the frequency and time uncertainty of GPS disciplined oscillators 

and clocks. NCSLI Measure J. Meas. Sci. 11, 30-44 (2016).

34. Girela-López, F. et al. IEEE 1588 High Accuracy default profile: applications and challenges.

IEEE Access 8, 45211-45220 (2020).

35. Yang, M. et al. iLPS: local positioning system with simultaneous localization and wireless 

communication. In IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications 379-

387 (IEEE, 2019).

36. Diouf, C., Dun, H., Kazaz, T., Janssen, G. & Tiberius, C. Demonstration of a decimeter-level 

accurate hybrid optical-wireless terrestrial positioning system. In Proceedings of the 33rd 


14

International Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Navigation (ION 

GNSS+ 2020) 2220-2228 (ION, 2020).

37. Yan, J., Tiberius, C. C. J. M., Teunissen, P. J. G., Bellusci, G. & Janssen, G. J. M. A framework for 

low complexity least-squares localization with high accuracy. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 58,

4836-4847 (2010).

38. White Rabbit ZEN TP-FL – Orolia. https://www.orolia.com/product/white-rabbit-zen-tp-fl/

(2022).

39. USRP X310 high performance software defined radio – Ettus. https://www.ettus.com/all-

products/x310-kit/ (2019).

40. Company photo collection, OPNT (unpublished).

41. OpenStreetMap. https://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright.


15

Acknowledgements This research is funded through the Dutch Research Council (NWO) under 

grants 12346 and 13970, with additional support from KPN, VSL, OPNT, and Fugro. We 

acknowledge support on the optical infrastructure from L. Boonstra, T. Theijn, and R. Smets, from 

L. Colussi and F. van Osselen on obtaining the 3.96 GHz experimental license, and R. Tamboer and 

T. Jonathan on realizing the testbed at TGV. 

Author Contributions Conceptualisation, J.C.J.K., G.J.M.J., C.C.J.M.T.; methodology, J.C.J.K., H.D., 

C.E.V.D., E.F.D., G.J.M.J., C.C.J.MT.; prototype system development, H.D., C.E.V.D.; prototype 

deployment and field trial (experiment), H.D, C.E.V.D., E.F.D., G.J.M.J., C.C.J.M.T.; measurement data 

processing, analysis and validation, H.D., C.E.V.D.; writing–original draft preparation, J.C.J.K.;

writing–review and editing, J.C.J.K., H.D., C.E.V.D., E.F.D., G.J.M.J., C.C.J.M.T.; visualisation, J.C.J.K., H.D., 

C.E.V.D.; project administration and funding acquisition, J.C.J.K., G.J.M.J., C.C.J.M.T. All authors have 

read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Competing interests The authors declare the following competing interests: J.C.J.K. is co-founder 

and shareholder of OPNT bv. The authors declare no further competing interests.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.C.J.M.T. 

Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.


16

Fig. 1| TNPS testbed. a, Aerial view (Google Earth) and heightmap of The Green Village (TGV) test 

site, showing the Tx locations and several buildings and objects. b, Schematic layout of the TNPS

testbed. A WR Grandmaster (GM) is synchronised to UTC(VSL) by electrical signals (black arrows), 

and transfers time-of-day (ToD) and frequency to WR boundary clocks (BCs), located in data 

centres DT010A and DT001B, and WR timing nodes (TNs) at TGV through a local

telecommunication optical fibre network (orange arrows, fibre lengths are indicated). WR 

communication employs downstream/upstream wavelengths as indicated (in nanometres); 

wavelength channels are multiplexed into the optical fibre using WDM filters (not shown). An 

8.2 km round trip, terminating at a WR Slave (SL), enables continuous monitoring of the stability of 

the WR network time using a time-interval counter (TIC). At TGV, each TN synchronises and 

triggers a USRP which transmits PNT radio signals, allowing the stand-alone receiver (Rx) to 

determine its position. During some runs, the Rx was synchronised to TN-6 for verification 

purposes. Copyrighted pictures reproduced from refs.38,39,40 with permission from Orolia (WR-GM, 

WR-SL38), National Instruments (USRPs39), and OPNT (TNs and WR-BCs40).


17

Fig. 2| PNT radio signal structure. a, Each TN synchronises a USRP via 10-MHz and 1-PPS signals 

(Tx-1 shown for example). The USRP transmits PNT signals at a 1-kHz rate; PNT signals from the six 

transmitters are time-division multiplexed (TDM) with 2.5-μs guard intervals. The receiver offloads 

the received data to a PC for offline processing. Copyrighted pictures reproduced from refs.39,40 with 

permission from National Instruments (USRPs39) and OPNT (TN40). b, OFDM symbols transmitted 

during a single burst of PNT data (Methods). c, Multiband-OFDM is used employing either all 16 

channels (160 MHz BW), or a sparse 7-band configuration with a virtual BW of 160 MHz.


18

Fig. 3|Positioning performance. a, Aerial view (Google Earth) and trajectory of a 210-second run 

performed at TGV. Ten positions where the receiver was left stationary for a few seconds are 

indicated in chronological order. Red trace, interpolated GT trajectory; blue trace, solutions of the 

OFDM-TD measurements (full 160-MHz BW). b, Position errors (TD minus GT) for all 210,000 

measurements acquired during the run (blue points). Black ellipses indicate 95% contours for 1-s 

subsets of the data acquired at the ten stationary points; multipath-induced biases relative to GT 

(black cross) are visible. The means (standard deviations) are 3.2(9.7) cm and 1.1(7.3) cm in the 

EW and NS directions, respectively (grey lines and yellow histograms). Red ellipse, 95th percentile 

of all coordinate pairs. c, Comparison of position errors for the various positioning methods tested

here. Inset: comparison of position errors in stationary point number 4 (95% contours are shown).


19

Fig. 4|Multipath and timing performance. a, Residual range errors measured during a test run at 

TGV (OFDM-TD,160-MHz BW). Lighter shades indicate unfiltered data, darker traces are moving 

averages obtained with a 0.3-s window. Time-varying effects of multipath occur after 50 s when the 

receiver is set into motion. b, Multipath error envelopes (MEE) for GPS L5 and various multiband 

OFDM signals, for TD ranging and a relative gain of the second path of 0.6. c, Time deviation 

(TDEV26) between the 1-PPS outputs of TN-2 and TN-1, measured at TGV (yellow). Green curve,


20

TDEV between TN-1 and TN-6, (daisy chain of six TNs). Blue curve, 115-day TDEV between WR-GM 

and WR-SL (Fig. 1b).


21

Table 1|Positioning and timing uncertainty

Positioning method
RMSE (cm)

East
North

Time-delay positioning (full band)
10.2
7.4

Time-delay positioning (sparse band)
9.4
8.4

Carrier-phase positioning (float, full band)
3.7
4.5

Carrier-phase positioning (fixed, full band)
2.2
4.1

Timing method
Standard uncertainty (ns)

WR TN time synchronisation at TGV (fibre-optic)
<0.5

Rx clock relative to WR time base (wireless)
0.6 

Rx clock relative to UTC(VSL) (wireless/fibre-optic)
50

Positioning RMSEs correspond to the data shown in Fig. 3c, and include the 2.5-cm RMSE of the 

ground-truth system. Residual time offsets of the WR TNs were calibrated to within 0.1 ns in the 

laboratory prior to installation, and verified on-site with 0.5 ns uncertainty after installation at TGV.


22

Methods

TNPS testbed

Extended Data Fig. 1. shows a partial map of the city of Delft, The Netherlands, indicating the 

locations of TGV, the various WR nodes and associated network topology, and the reference atomic 

clocks that are used to realize UTC(VSL) and synchronise the WR network. The network consisted 

of a mix of WR equipment obtained from the two WR providers mentioned in Ref. 14. The geometry 

of the Tx stations at TGV (Fig. 1a) was chosen for practical reasons, such as available space and 

suitable antenna mounting locations. This resulted into Tx-to-Tx baselines of up to 37 m, which in 

theory can be expanded by one order of magnitude without loss of ranging accuracy (assuming LoS 

conditions; see ‘USRP configuration and OFDM signals’ below). The setup at TGV is described in 

more detail by Diouf et al., who presented a preliminary analysis of positioning based on pseudo-

random noise sequences instead of OFDM signals, achieving an uncertainty at the several-decimetre

level36. At the TGV site, severe multipath conditions are expected in several locations, with 

reflections caused by (among other objects) a 5-m-tall billboard with a shortest distance of about 3 

meters to the test trajectories, and buildings that are located 2-3 m away from Tx-1 and Tx-6. 

Strong reflections are also expected for the antenna of Tx-3, which is affixed to the corner of an

adjacent building using a 0.2-m spacer.

Five test runs were conducted with the Rx unit carried by a trolley, and two runs were performed 

with the Rx unit carried in a car (with the antenna mounted on top of the roof of the car; see 

Extended Data Fig. 2).

USRP configuration and OFDM signals

PNT burst transmissions are driven at a rate of 1 kHz and a duty cycle of 0.14, with each USRP 

delivering 8.9 dBm to the antenna during a burst. The Rx gain is kept at 20 dB; higher gains are 

possible but these lead (in our setup) to occasional impairment of the received signals36. All USRPs 


23

use omnidirectional, ceiling mountable wideband antennas with a gain of 3 dBi. The Tx and Rx 

antennas are connected to the USRPs through cables of 5 m and 1 m length and cable losses of 

5.6 dB and 0.9 dB, respectively. The noise level within the 160 MHz USRP BW, and referred to the 

input, amounts to –80.5 dBm. For a carrier frequency of 3.96 GHz, the received LoS power during a 

burst, PRx,LoS, at a distance d (in metres) can be written as PRx,LoS= –30.4 dBm – 20 log10 (d) dB. This 

translates to a coverage distance of d = 320 if a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 0 dB is to be achieved, 

which supports the estimation of pseudo-ranges with a precision of about 10 cm (CRLB).

The TDM transmission scheme, shown in Fig. 2a, was chosen for its ease of implementation in the 

testbed and for diagnostic purposes. The two OFDM training symbols in Fig. 2b contain identical 

pseudorandom noise sequences that are binary phase-shift-keyed on all available subcarriers. Both 

symbols are used for channel estimation, whereas only one symbol is used for packet 

synchronisation and ranging. The third symbol contains a Gold sequence, unique to each 

transmitter, for identification by the receiver. In principle, ranging and identification could be 

achieved using only the third symbol. When transmitting over 7 out of 16 bands, the overhead of 

the TDM scheme is 6.3%, and 2.5% if only the third symbol is used. A further reduction of the 

overhead to 0.42% would be enabled by joint transmission and detection of the PNT symbols using 

CDMA (analogous to GNSS signals), without significant loss of positioning performance. 

Alternatively, one could maintain the original PNT signals, but lower the PNT transmission rate by a 

factor of 160 to achieve the same rate as in 4G positioning at an overhead of 0.09%.

The 160 MHz BW of the PNT signals is limited by the maximum effective BW of the USRPs. The 

choice for a 3.96 GHz carrier frequency derives from a radiocommunications license for 

experimental research, obtained from the Dutch Telecom Agency.


24

Ground-truth system and measurements

Two robotic land-surveying total stations were used to determine the receiver’s position during 

test runs. To this end, two 360° prisms were mounted onto the Rx vehicle, which were tracked by 

the total stations (see Extended Data Fig. 2). The total stations measure horizontal and vertical 

angles as well as slant distance, with a resulting position uncertainty of several millimetres; the GT 

system was also used to determine the Tx-antenna locations. Although vertical distances are taken 

into account in all distance measurements, the vertical coordinates of the total stations, 360° prims, 

and Tx and Rx antennas were determined separately and assumed not to vary during the runs on 

the horizontal test road. To compare trajectories obtained with the TNPS (1000 position fixes per 

second) and GT system (1-10 fixes per second), the GT positions were interpolated. Using the 

precisely known (and fixed) distance between the two 360° prisms as a length standard, the

uncertainty (here expressed in terms of the RMSE) of the GT measurement was determined in one 

of the test runs to be about 1.8 cm; additional uncertainties due to the interpolation and small 

deviations of the road from the horizontal plane are estimated to increase the overall RMSE of the 

GT measurements to 2.5 cm (as indicated by the black cross hairs in Figs. 3b and 3c). The measured 

GT trajectories were time-aligned with the TNPS trajectories by offsetting the time coordinate of 

the GT data, such that the GT trajectory coincides in time with the trajectory found from CP 

measurements (note that the CP and TD trajectories are automatically time-aligned since they are 

derived from the same set of raw data acquired by the Rx USRP). The uncertainty introduced by this 

time-alignment procedure affects the obtained RMSEs only at the sub-cm level. 

Ranging and positioning through time-delay measurements

After reception of the OFDM signals, packet synchronisation, Fourier transformation, and channel 

estimation, the receiver determines for each transmitter the sampled channel frequency response, 

H, of all used subcarriers22,42. To reduce computational complexity we employ a simplified time-


25

delay model that considers only the LoS path, of which the delay is estimated by maximizing the 

cost function22,23

𝜏̂ = arg max

𝜏

𝑯∗𝒂(𝜏)𝒂∗(𝜏)𝑯

𝒂∗(𝜏)𝒂(𝜏)
.
(2)

In Eq. (2), asterisks denote the Hermitian adjoint, and a is a complex-valued vector that describes 

the accumulated phase factors exp(−j2fp) for each subcarrier p (p=1… MN). 

After all six pseudo-ranges 𝜌𝑟𝑖(𝑡) have been determined (for a given time t) using Eq. (2), the 

receiver position xr(t) and clock offset r(t) are found by maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)37, 

which effectively constitutes a time difference of arrival method. This can in principle be done for 

the three unknown receiver coordinates. However, similar to many GNSS navigation applications 

we are primarily interested in the horizontal position, because the test track is horizontal and the 

vertical coordinate (height) of the receiver antenna, zr, is a known constant (zr=1.573 m when 

placed on the trolley, and zr=2.006 m when mounted onto the car). In addition, all Tx antennas are 

mounted at approximately the same height and at relatively small elevation angles as seen by the 

receiver, which makes our testbed less suitable for positioning in the vertical direction. We 

therefore solve only for the unknown horizontal coordinates (xr, yr) and clock offset using MLE, 

after linearizing the propagation distance between Tx-i and Rx, 𝑑𝑟𝑖 =(xr − xi)2 + (yr − yi)2+ (zr − zi)21/2, 

at the receiver’s approximate position.

The OFDM signals, transmitted by the six Tx-i following a TDM scheme (Fig. 2a), are acquired 

sequentially by the receiver during a 160-μs interval, allowing sufficient time for all PNT signals to 

arrive. At this time scale, the free-running oscillator of the Rx USRP (a temperature-compensated 

crystal oscillator) is observed to drift at rates of 100-150 ps/ms. Therefore, over the course of the

160-μs acquisition period, the clock offset may drift through an interval [−12 ps, 12 ps] relative to 

the time-averaged clock offset. Because the same (fixed) clock offset is assumed for the 


26

determination of all six pseudo-ranges, this leads to possible errors in the pseudo-ranges in the 

interval [−3.6 mm, 3.6 mm]. However, these errors are negligibly small in view of other sources of 

ranging uncertainty. 

Hardware delays and timing uncertainty of PNT radio signals

The variance of the pseudo-ranges depends inherently on the received SNR level and the spectral 

configuration of the frequency bands used. As can be seen from Eq. (1), other hardware-dependent 

sources of error are the uncertainties of the measured hardware delays and possible residual drifts 

and jitter of the oscillators in the TNs and USRPs. Hardware delays are defined relative to the 1-PPS 

output signal of WR timing node 1 (TN-1). Tx-i-specific delays 𝜏′ℎ

𝑖 were determined in the 

laboratory using the same TN-Tx pairs and the same network configuration as used during the field 

trials at TGV. Delays were measured between the USRP RF output signals of the various Tx-i with 

respect to the 1-PPS output of TN-1, and values between -0.7 and 1.6 ns were found. The 𝜏′ℎ

𝑖 values 

were furthermore found to be static (i.e. surviving tens of power cycling events of the TNs and 

USRPs over the course of days); typical standard deviations of repeated measurements with 

intermediate power cycling were 0.1-0.2 ns, indicating that the uncertainty of the 𝜏′ℎ

𝑖 values is at 

the level of a few tenths of a nanosecond.

Uncertainty of Rx clock offsets and wireless time distribution

From Eq. (1) it can be seen that the common hardware delay τh does not need to be known for 

positioning, since its value can be absorbed in the receiver clock offset. However, if the goal is to 

relate the Rx clock to the reference clock of the TNPS (for example to use the Rx unit as a local time 

reference), it will be necessary to determine the clock offset r(t), and consequently τh needs to be 

known. We performed an ad hoc determination of τh by performing a test run while the Rx USRP 

was synchronised by TN-6 (Fig. 1b), thus enforcing the condition r(t)≡0. After correcting for the 


27

known delays 𝜏′ℎ

𝑖 and inserting the receiver positions known from the GT system [i.e. xr(t)≡ xGT(t)]

in Eq. (1), the MLE procedure produces an apparent clock offset that is equal to 𝛿𝐴 = 𝜏ℎ +

∑
𝑎𝑖(𝐱GT(𝑡))
6
𝑖=1
𝜀𝑟𝑖(𝑡)/𝑐, where the ai are position- and Tx-i-dependent sensitivity coefficients from 

the MLE procedure. We take the time-average of all clock offsets A determined during this run, and 

define τh to be equal to the result (17,156.4 ns with a standard deviation of 0.1 ns). However, this 

assumes that the time-average of the summation ∑
𝑎𝑖(𝐱GT(𝑡))
6
𝑖=1
𝜀𝑟𝑖(𝑡)/𝑐 is zero, which may not 

necessarily be the case. Assuming that the measured 0.2-m-level residual errors of Fig. 4a are 

representative of the error terms 𝜀𝑟𝑖(𝑡), we estimate that the summation adds another 0.2 ns of 

uncertainty to τh, which forms an indication of the accuracy with which clock offsets can 

determined. Alternatively, one might calibrate τh prior to installation to reduce the uncertainty

further. Even under conditions of considerable multipath, with ranging errors of ~0.5 m regularly

occurring (Fig. 4b), we estimate clock-offset determination (and thereby wireless distribution of 

the network reference time) to be possible with 0.6 ns of uncertainty. 

Carrier-phase ranging and positioning

Measurements of the carrier phase (CP) enable positioning with considerably higher precision than 

positioning based on TD measurements. Typically, CP methods measure distances with a precision 

corresponding to a small fraction of the carrier wavelength. Therefore, given the 7.57-cm 

wavelength of the 3.96-GHz carrier used in our TNPS testbed, cm-range and even mm-range 

precision comes within reach. The phase of the central-signal carrier can be obtained from the 

complex gain as determined from the sampled channel frequency response H 22. However, CP 

measurements are inherently ambiguous, as the receiver can determine only the fractional phase in 

the domain −π,π), and the integer number of cycles or wavelengths of the propagation path 

remains unknown. The CP results shown in Fig. 3c are nevertheless obtained through CP-only 

positioning. To solve the integer ambiguity, at least two measurements taken at different epochs, 


28

with uninterrupted CP tracking in between, as well as a change of geometry are needed22. Because 

the transmitter locations in our testbed are fixed, the geometry change is accomplished entirely

through the receiver’s motion. In a CP ambiguity-float solution, the receiver position coordinates 

and clock offset are estimated together with the ambiguity parameters, but treating the latter as 

real-valued quantities (leaving room for nonzero fractional parts due to initial phase offsets of the 

Tx-i and Rx units). In addition, we implemented an alternative procedure that exploits the integer 

nature of the ambiguity43, resulting into what is known as an ambiguity-fixed solution. This 

procedure considerably strengthens the position solution, and effectively turns CP measurements 

into very precise TD measurements.

Runs with Rx in synchronous and asynchronous mode

In some of the test runs conducted with the trolley (including the run shown in Fig. 3), the Rx USRP

was synchronised through TN-6, also carried by the trolley (Fig. 1b). In such cases, the signal 

processing and positioning algorithms nonetheless processed all data as if the USRP was in free-

running, asynchronous mode, where the start of the signal bursts is detected in real-time using the 

Schmidl-Cox algorithm. Operating the Rx unit in synchronous mode therefore offers no advantages 

for the positioning algorithm other than that it eliminates the (negligible) mm-level range errors

associated with USRP clock drift. We also verified empirically that the positioning performance 

does not noticeably depend on the mode of operation (synchronous or asynchronous) of the USRP; 

a comparison between the results of two runs obtained with the Rx USRP in synchronous and 

asynchronous mode, for TD as well as CP positioning, are presented in Extended Data Fig. 3.

WR timing performance measurements

The absolute time offset of WR TN-1 relative to UTC(VSL) was measured using a battery-powered,

portable rubidium-based atomic clock. At VSL, the portable clock was synchronised to UTC(VSL) 

with a delay of 26(1) ns, and then carried to TGV (here, numbers appended within parentheses 


29

represent standard uncertainties). Using a TIC, the 1-PPS output of TN-1 was found to lead the 

portable clock’s 1-PPS output by 2(10) ns. Given the 510-12 Hz/Hz uncertainty of the portable 

clock’s frequency and the three-hour duration of the verification, the total uncertainty is estimated 

to be 50 ns (coverage factor k=1 or 68% confidence level), and consequently TN-1 was found to lag 

UTC(VSL) by 24(50) ns. A TIC was used to validate the synchronicity (with 0.5 ns uncertainty) of 

the 1-PPS output of TN-1 and the 1-PPS outputs of the other TNs in the TNPS testbed. The round-

trip stability (TDEV, MDEV) between WR-GM and WR-SL at VSL (Fig. 1b) was measured using a 

multichannel TIC connected to their respective 1-PPS signal outputs.

Method references

42. Li, Y. G. & Stuber, G. L. Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing for Wireless 

Communications (Springer, New York 2006). 

43. Teunissen, P. J. G. The least-squares ambiguity decorrelation adjustment: a method for fast 

GPS integer ambiguity estimation. J. Geod. 70, 65–82 (1995).

Data availability

The datasets that support this manuscript are available at https://doi.org/10.34894/GFDJI1. 

Code availability

The code to process the datasets that support this manuscript is available under the MIT-0 License 

at https://doi.org/10.34894/GFDJI1.


30

Extended Data Fig. 1|Map of the TNPS testbed. Locations of data centres at Delft University of 

Technology (TU D) and schematic representation of the fibre-optic connections are shown. The 

reference atomic clocks that are used to realise UTC(VSL) and synchronise the WR network are 

located at VSL. Map data copyright OpenStreetMap41, obtained under Open Database License 1.0.


31

Extended Data Fig. 2|Car setup and TGV site. The Rx antenna and two 360° prisms are mounted 

onto the roof of a car. In the background part of the TGV test site is visible (viewing direction is 

south east). The various Tx-i antennas are indicated, as well as the two total stations. Tx-2 is hidden 

from the view by tree branches.


32

Extended Data Fig. 3|Comparison of positioning results in synchronous and asynchronous 

mode. a, Ground-truth trajectories of two different runs, one with the Rx USRP operated in 

synchronous mode (blue), and one with the Rx USRP in asynchronous mode (yellow). b, TD 

position errors and 95% ellipses for the synchronous and asynchronous runs shown in a, following

the same colour coding. The black cross indicates the GT solution and its uncertainty. c, Same as in 

b, but for CP ambiguity-float solutions. Note the different scale of the graph. d, Same as in b, but for 


33

CP ambiguity-fixed solutions. During the early stages of the run in synchronous mode (blue), an 

incorrect integer correction was applied, leading to small islands of biased position errors.


34

Extended Data Fig. 4|Horizontal precision and constellation size. Horizontal positioning 

precision, (σEast2 + σNorth2)1/2, with σEast and σNorth the position standard deviations as determined 

from a nonlinear least-squares optimization that assumes normally distributed ranging errors with 

a standard deviation of σr =6 cm for all transmitters. Values above 50 cm are clipped and replaced 

by white areas. Shown also are OFDM-TD position solutions for the run with the asynchronous 

receiver of Extended Data Fig. 3 (blue curves), and the corresponding ground-truth path (red 

curves). a, Precision and position solutions for the full TNPS constellation. b, Precision and position 

solutions for the TNPS constellation with Tx-1 and Tx-3 removed. c, Precision and position 


35

solutions for the TNPS constellation with Tx-1, Tx-2, and Tx-5 removed. d, Precision and position 

solutions for the TNPS constellation with Tx-6 removed.


36

Extended 

Data Fig. 5|Modified Allan deviation. Modified Allan deviation measured between WR-GM and 

WR-SL at VSL (Fig. 1b) after a round trip through 8.2 km of installed optical fibre.


37

Extended Data Table 1|TD positioning RMSE for various reduced constellations. Values for TD 

positioning. Positioning RMSEs include the 2.5-cm RMSE of the ground-truth system.


38

Extended Data Table 2|CP positioning RMSE for various reduced constellations. RMSEs for CP 

ambiguity-float and CP ambiguity-fixed solutions corresponding to the run shown in Fig. 3. 

Positioning RMSEs include the 2.5-cm RMSE of the ground-truth system.


