1

A Critical Evaluation of a Self-Driving Laboratory for the 

Optimization of Electrodeposited Earth-Abundant Mixed-Metal 

Oxide Catalysts for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction (OER)

Erfan Fatehi1, Manish Thadani1, Gabriel Birsan2, Robert W Black1*

1. National Research Council of Canada, Energy, Mining, and Environment Research Centre, 

2620 Speakman Drive, Mississauga, ON, L5K 1B4, Canada

2. Natural Resources Canada, Canmet MATERIALS, Innovation and Energy Technology Sector,

183 Longwood Road South, Hamilton, Ontario, L8P 0A5, Canada

*Robert.black@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

Keywords: Oxygen Evolution Reaction, Acid-Stable OER, Self-Driving Laboratory, Accelerated 

Materials Discovery, Bayesian Optimization, Laboratory Automation, Machine Learning


2

Abstract

This work highlights the potential of earth-abundant mixed-metal oxide catalysts for the 

acid-based oxygen evolution reaction. These catalysts offer numerous combinations of metal-

centre compositions, which can enhance catalytic activity and stability compared to precious-

metal-based catalysts commonly used today. Despite substantial research in this field, there is a 

need for new methods and approaches to accelerate the exploration of these materials. In this study, 

we present a comprehensive approach to designing, developing, and implementing a self-driving 

laboratory to optimize the electrodeposition synthesis of amorphous mixed-metal oxide catalysts 

for the acidic oxygen evolution reaction. We particularly emphasize the development of 

methodologies to address experimental variability. We investigate crucial parameters and 

considerations when transitioning from manual bench-top synthesis and evaluation to automation 

and machine learning guided optimization. We address both experimental and optimization 

algorithm considerations in the presence of experimental variability. To illustrate our approach, 

we demonstrate the optimization of CoFeMnPbOx electrodeposited catalyst materials through 

multiple campaigns. Our results highlight considerations for optimizing overpotential and stability 

based on the outcomes of our experiments.


3

Introduction

As the world faces the pressing challenge of climate change, the development of clean and 

sustainable energy sources is more important than ever. One promising avenue is the use of 

renewable energy technologies, such as water splitting, to generate hydrogen as a fuel. This process 

requires a highly efficient and stable catalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), which is 

often expensive and relies on precious metals such as platinum or iridium for acceptable 

performance in acidic OER environments in terms of catalytic activity and stability.1,2 Alternatives 

to these catalysts are not yet available that match these catalysts' performance for activity and 

acidic stability.3,4 Research on non-noble metal mixed oxide catalysts, in particular those based on 

earth-abundant 3d transition metals for acidic OER, has gained significant attention as a potential 

solution to this challenge.5,6 However, in acidic media these transition metal oxides are quite 

vulnerable under oxidative conditions, demonstrating poor activity and stability compared to 

catalysts based on precious metals. 

Extensive research has been conducted to assess and discover catalyst materials with 

promising properties. However, there is still a vast array of potential candidates in this field that 

we have only begun to comprehend and exploit. The sheer number of material combinations, 

parameters, and synthesis conditions adds to the extensive data space, necessitating thoughtful 

deliberation to expedite the production and evaluation of these materials. To perform this

optimization, we developed and deployed a self-driving laboratory, in collaboration with North 

Robotics.7 Self-driving laboratories represent a new paradigm in how research is performed, 

combining laboratory automation with machine learning optimization to accelerate the pace at 

which experimentation is performed, often leading to 10-100 times increase in the throughput and 

efficiency towards optimization of a new material or process.8–10 To date, numerous studies have 

explored the concept of high-throughput experimentation to explore the vast and rich space of 

mixed-metal oxide catalysts for OER across all media (acidic, neutral, and alkaline).11–16 High-

throughput experimentation looks to parallelize the synthesis and characterization process to 

produce data that is reliable, accurate, and in abundance to down-select optimal materials based 

on the search spaces. The result of such an exploration is a rich dataset of material activity, which 

can then be used to feed various other sources of information, further driving the material discovery 


4

process. This approach has also been used outside of OER catalysis and is a powerful tool to 

explore a variety of electrocatalysis processes such as ORR17 and CO2R.18,19.

Self-driving laboratories offer an alternative approach to high-throughput experimentation, 

utilizing probabilistic optimization algorithms, such as Bayesian optimization and genetic 

algorithms 20, to efficiently optimize the experimental process in a limited number of experiments

and/or a potentially more efficient exploration of the design space through the use of machine 

learning guided optimization. This becomes critically important when dealing with high 

dimensional and/or large amounts of explorable parameters, as the design space can quickly 

outgrow the feasible exploration space possible using high throughput experimentation alone. The 

first example of a self-driving laboratory for material applications was deployed for the

optimization of carbon nanotube growth.21 Since then, self-driving laboratories have grown in 

popularity to address a plethora of various material domains, including but not limited to organic 

molecule synthesis,22,23
structured materials,24
photovoltaics,25
thin-film materials,26–28

nanomaterials,29,30 and electrolytes.31,32 These works have demonstrated the success of self-driving 

laboratories to optimize a synthesis, characterization, or process, while also demonstrating 

flexibility in the application of this concept towards handling a variety of different scientific 

challenges. 

This study focuses on amorphous transition mixed metal oxides and optimizes a set of 

experimental conditions to identify optimal regions of potential CoFeMnPbOx catalysts as it relates 

to both activity (minimize overpotential) and stability utilizing a self-driving laboratory. This study 

serves as a guide towards developing a self-driving laboratory for electrocatalysis applications and 

presents our critical evaluation, findings, considerations, and suggestions when looking to deploy 

a self-driving laboratory for electrodeposition and electrocatalysis evaluation. In particular, we 

explore various approaches to the design of the self-driving laboratory, the importance of 

reproducibility and validity in the data, proxy experimentation, experimental noise and variance 

on the metric of optimization, and finally culminate this into the optimization of a mixed-metal 

oxide catalyst for the OER reaction. 

We set out to design a self-driving laboratory for the electrochemical synthesis and 

characterization of the mixed-metal oxide catalyst material, with the goal of a) optimizing the 

synthesis conditions of the mixed-metal oxide electrodeposition to achieve a material with the 


5

lowest OER overpotential within the defined experimental space, and b) elucidate stability 

information from these catalysts through the utilization of proxy experimentation. We focus our 

efforts on OER active earth-abundant elements (Co, Fe) coupled with a structural element (Mn, 

Pb) synthesized via electrodeposition. Electrodeposition allows for the fabrication of uniform thin 

films with good adhesion and electrical contact with the substrate (in this case, fluorinated tin 

oxide FTO), along with the ability to directly probe the catalyst activity without influence from 

any geometric and/or size distribution influences that may arise when working with non-thin film 

morphologies (eg. power materials). For this particular challenge, previous research has 

demonstrated the effectiveness of anodic electrodeposition to combine catalytically active 

transition metal species, such as Co, Fe, and Ni, with those of more acidic stable, albeit low-activity 

species such as Pb or Bi.33,34 In previous work, Hyunh et. al. approached templating active 3d 

transition elements such as Co and Fe with the acid-stable oxide PbOx to produce CoFePbOx via 

anodic electrodeposition in near-neutral deposition conditions.35 This work was further extended 

to look at the stability of templated NiPbOx and NiFePbOx, demonstrating success in stabilizing 

the NiOx-based compound for extended periods (>20 h) under acidic OER conditions.36 NiOx

traditionally exhibits extremely poor stability under acidic OER conditions, but the inclusion of Fe 

and Pb into the NiOx network can modulate the local acidity and the role of an acid-stable 

supporting matrix to extend the catalyst centre lifetime (ie. reduce the rate of dissolution). In 

another work, Pb2+ ions were electrodeposited with Co2+ and Fe3+ ions under acidic conditions and 

demonstrated the intrinsically stable mixed-metal oxide through an oxidation–redeposition 

equilibrium formed in-situ during OER.37 Both of these examples demonstrate the concept of ‘self-

healing’ catalysts, a concept introduced by Nocera,38,39 to describe the nature of these catalysts and 

their inherent activity and stability under acidic water splitting conditions based on a dynamic 

reconstruction/redeposition process. In this work, we were heavily influenced by the experimental 

protocol of Chatti et. al. to electrodeposit in acidic media.37 They demonstrated that the mixed-

metal oxide could be formed in acidic conditions through an applied anodic potential, but only in 

the presence of sufficient structural elements or risk the immediate dissolution of the active 

material (eg. CoOx vs. CoPbOx). Their experimental procedure was an inspiration for this work, 

and hence we used a modified procedure as the baseline electrodeposition protocol to develop our 

self-driving laboratory. It is expected that there will be an optimal trade-off between the 

composition of structural elements vs. active elements – as more structural elements are utilized, 


6

the overall catalytic activity (and hence overpotential) will reduce due to the inherent poor OER 

catalytic activity of PbOx or MnOx alone. 

Results & Discussion

Framework for Self-Driving Laboratory

An outline of the workflow for the designed self-driving laboratory is shown in Figure 1. The 

automated platform was designed to i) handle and deposit known concentrations of metal salts 

dissolved in aqueous media, ii) handle conductive glass slides as the substrate, iii) load and unload 

these substrates into 3-electrode electrochemical cells
for the electrodeposition and 

electrochemical performance testing. The platform is comprised of two physical modules –

solution handling automation, and electrochemistry handling automation. The third module is the 

data handling and optimization framework to close the experimental loop. 

Figure 1 – Schematic of the self-driving laboratory for the electrochemical deposition and 

performance characterization of amorphous mixed-metal oxide OER catalysts.

The physical platform is shown in Figure 2a, with critical components labelled. The

substrate handling is performed with a vacuum gripper attached to a SCARA robot, with the 


7

gripper custom designed to not touch the surface of the pre-cleaned substrate materials. The 

substrates are pre-cleaned and loaded onto a 36-port slide hotel. The solution handling is performed 

via integrated Cavro XCalibur syringe pumps, a pipette tip attached to the SCARA robot arm, and 

the SCARA robot arms gripper which can grab, cap, and uncap 4 mL vials. Connected to the 

syringe pumps are stock solutions of 1M metal nitrate salts in 18 MΩ Milli-Q water. To prepare 

the electrodeposition solution, a clean vial is loaded onto a weighing scale. Volumes of between 0 

– 1 mL of the metal-salt stock solutions are dispensed via 1/16th tubing into the vial, totalling a 

volume of 1 mL. We can accurately dispense to a precision of 0.02 mL, determined via repeated 

dispense procedures. Each addition of metal-salt solution is quantified via the change in total 

volume mass, which is used to determine the final salt concentrations in the solution. 

Both the electrodeposition and electrochemical performance evaluation occur in our 

custom-made automated 3-electrode electrochemical cells (Figure 2b). Two separate cells are 

used, one for electrodeposition which contains the robot-prepared diluted salt solution (between 

0-1 M nitrate solutions in 0.1 M HNO3, see Supporting Information for details), and one for 

performance evaluation in 0.01M H2SO4 electrolyte (pH measured 1.7-1.8 between batches). Two 

separate cells were utilized to ensure no cross-contamination between electrodeposition and 

performance characterization protocols. After each deposition or performance evaluation, the cells 

are washed using successive fill-empty cycles of deionized water. To determine the number of 

washing cycles that are required to remove trace impurities down to the single ppm level, the cell 

was filled with 0.01 M H2SO4, and the pH was monitored after each successive wash cycle. As 

shown in Figure S1, the pH of our test solution tests neutral after ~8 successive washing stages, 

and thus 10 steps were determined to be an adequate number of washing steps to bring metal 

contaminants down below the single ppm level to avoid cross-contamination after successive 

experiments.


8

Figure 2 - a) EMAP (Electrocatalysis MAP) comprised of 1) robotic arm with integrated pipette holder, 2) 

weigh scale and gripper, 3) liquid dispensing carousal, 4) slide hotel, 5) syringe pumps for liquid handling, 

6) pipette tip holder, 7) vial rack, 8) slide gripper and 9) automated electrochemical cell. Not shown are 

the stock solution bottles, which are positioned at the back of the platform. b) Automated electrochemical 

cell.

Electrochemical Performance Characterization Protocol Development

Critical to this work is the workflow development to properly evaluate the catalyst 

performance. In particular, our goal is to develop an automated experimental protocol that can be 

used to optimize the catalyst overpotential, while also gathering information on the material 

composition relationship to acid stability during OER. As will be discussed in subsequent sections, 

experimental variability, in particular those related to the desired metric to be optimized, must be 

understood and sources of error and variance in the experimental protocol must be minimized for 

a successful optimization process. Furthermore, it is desirable to minimize the total reaction time 

and increase the throughput of experiments, without losing experimental data fidelity. Typically, 

to evaluate the performance of an electrocatalyst, techniques such as linear sweep voltammetry 

(LSV) are used to obtain a metric of overpotential versus a set current rate. Historically, 10 mA/cm2

has been a benchmark target for OER performance.40,41 These measurements can be performed 

relatively quickly, assuming the catalyst is in an electrochemically steady state with its 

environment. For our particular system and desire to optimize non-noble mixed-metal oxides for 

stability in acidic OER, stability is a great concern. Unfortunately, catalyst stability is typically a 

metric that can take significant time to measure, most times involving the entire lifetime 


9

(dissolution) of the catalyst which can take tens to even hundreds of hours. As such, as part of this 

work, we developed a characterization workflow that can a) capture metrics of stability and 

catalyst overpotential in a meaningful, reproducible manner, and b) can be deployed within the 

confines of our automated platform while also providing rapid measurements. 

To evaluate electrochemical performance, we performed 30-minute chronopotentiometry

with intermittent electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy. Scheme
1
summarizes our 

performance measurement protocol. As part of this development, we relied on the concept of 

‘proxy’ figures of merit. Proxy metrics involve measurements that elucidate specific performance 

metrics of a material that may lack fundamental considerations and/or be influenced by external 

factors limiting the use of these metrics outside of the housed experimental campaign, but is 

acceptable within the confines of an experimental campaign when utilized to compare one sample 

to another for optimization purposes. With this reasoning, we chose to evaluate overpotential via 

constant current hold for 30 minutes. Such a measurement allows for the catalyst to reach a ‘steady

state’ within the electrochemical environment, as would be expected of a mixed-metal oxide in an 

acidic environment undergoing surface reconstruction upon initial electrification.42,43 Automation 

complexities associated with more traditional benchmarking methods that better isolate intrinsic 

catalyst activity, such as RDE with tafel analysis, do prevent such methods from being performed 

and utilise
‘true’ catalyst performance as a benchmark of optimization. However, 

chronopotentiometry is a quantitative metric that can be used to evaluate catalyst performance, 

and within the confines of our optimization, this will allow the optimizer to make informed 

decisions regarding relative catalyst performance, and optimize the synthesis conditions as such.44


10

Scheme 1 - a) Scheme for the electrochemical evaluation of the deposited OER catalysts, b) depiction of 

the resulting electrochemical profile.

To properly evaluate catalyst stability, the most appropriate measurements involve the 

direct measurement of the catalyst material dissolution from the material into the electrolyte, via 

methods such as quartz crystal microbalance or inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry.45–

47 These measurements require either expensive infrastructure and/or precise measurements which 

can be difficult to perform within our self-driving laboratory. A proxy method of catalyst stability 

measurement using EIS coupled with chronopotentiometry was developed to evaluate the validity 

of a proxy predictive model of catalyst lifetime. To test this approach, we generated over 20 

electrodeposited Mn/Co/NiOx-based catalyst materials that were reproduced using similar 

electrodeposition procedures as outlined by Hyun et. al.35 Using a low constant applied current 

(0.1 mA/cm2) coupled with intermittent EIS measurements, we were able to fit Randles circuit and 

extract values for Rct and the constant phase element (CPE) (to which was extracted the effective 

capacitance Ceff) as a function of time, and correlate these changes to the true lifetime of the 

catalyst. A more elaborate discussion of this process is provided in the Supporting Information. 

To summarize, we determined that for our samples of interest, there is a near-linear decay in the 

effective capacitance of the sample versus time under constant current, which can be used to 


11

linearly extrapolate and predict the catalyst end of life after operating for only 20 minutes. We 

understand that a much more comprehensive study is necessary to gather a larger data set to gain 

more accuracy and test the thresholds of our predictive model, which are the focus of future studies. 

Furthermore, it is worth exploring and developing other methods of accelerated stress testing of 

OER catalysts, which can be used as strong predictors of catalyst lifetime when coupled with ML 

to elucidate performance-prediction models. However, for our purposes in determining an 

adequate OER performance characterization protocol within the confines of our system 

(electrodeposited non-noble metal OER thin film catalysts), the presented measurements serve as 

an adequate proxy indicator of catalyst lifetime to compare those catalyst synthesized from the 

self-driving laboratory. 

Electrodeposition Protocol Development

A standard electrodeposition protocol is required to establish an acceptable level of sample-

to-sample reproducibility. We used a modified version of Chatti et. al.37 electrodeposition 

procedure as our baseline synthesis method. Modifications to this procedure include using 1M 

HNO3 as the supporting electrolyte to eliminate any possibility of sulphate-precipitates, in 

particular PbSO4, which were observed to occur when sulphuric acid was used as the supporting 

electrodeposition electrolyte. For this particular study, the electrochemical deposition profile 

remains constant, and the electrodeposition solution environment (precursor cation and 

concentration) are the dependent variables, with voltage and time remaining constant to simplify 

the automation complexity at this stage. In future work, we plan to deploy this SDL to optimize 

the electrodeposition voltage and time as part of the Bayesian optimization protocol. The 

electrodeposition voltage must be selected to ensure that there is enough electrochemical driving 

force to electrodeposit the metals of interest in their oxy/hydroxyl state at sufficient rates, while 

also limiting the oxygen evolution reaction. To determine an adequate electrodeposition voltage, 

multiple repeat CoPbOx electrocatalysts were produced with applied deposition potentials of 1.7

V, 1.9 V, 2.1 V, and 2.3 V vs. NHE for 3 minutes (Figure 3a), followed by OER performance 

evaluation (Figure 3b). The current response during deposition increases with subsequent 

electrodeposition voltage increases, as would be expected. Images of the deposited samples after 

electrodeposition indicates that the degree of bubble templating is greater at more positive 

deposition voltages, which corresponds to OER. (Figure S5). Post-deposition OER performance 


12

evaluation in 0.01 M H2SO4 reveals that a deposition potential of 1.7 V vs. NHE results in poor 

catalyst activity, evident from a greater overpotential as well as poor reaction kinetics (determined 

from Rct) and effective capacitance (from Ceff) as analyzed from the EIS data (Figure 3c and

Figure 3d, respectively). Deposition potentials of 1.9 V vs. NHE or greater result in an appreciable 

OER performance. Directly measuring the catalyst OER performance overpotential remains the 

same at 1.88 V vs. NHE, irrespective of the electrodeposition voltage, and the Rct and Ceff show 

only minor changes. We conclude that for this study, 1.9 V vs. NHE is an acceptable 

electrodeposition voltage, whereas any greater voltage will have a large propensity for sample-to-

sample variability given the increased bubble templating due to the competing OER during 

electrodeposition.  

Figure 3 - a) Current response of repeat Co and Pb-nitrate solution deposited samples at the indicated

potentials, and b) corresponding OER potential measured at 5 mA/cm2 in HsSO4 solution of pH = 2. 

Corresponding c) Rct and d) Ceff values extracted from Randles circuit fit to the EIS spectra obtained at the 

time indicated during the OER.


13

The total electrodeposition time becomes an important control parameter to ensure 

adequate loading of the catalyst material. Of concern during OER performance evaluation is the 

propensity of the mixed metal-oxide catalyst to undergo redeposition, should the metal ion 

concentration within the electrolyte be at a sufficient concentration.39 This in turn interferes with 

the evaluation of the true OER overpotential metric. Ideally, the catalyst loading is large enough

to evaluate proper OER kinetics, but also minimal in loading so that the concentration of metal 

ions in the solution remains low during material dissolution to minimize redeposition during the 

OER process. To decouple these two processes during OER, we utilized EIS with distributed 

relaxation time (DRT) analysis to elucidate the electrochemical processes.48,49
We 

electrodeposited CoPbOx catalysts at 1.9 V vs. NHE for 3 minutes and 10 minutes, and performed 

OER for 30 minutes at 5 mA/cm2 before performing EIS.  The extracted DRT parameters (Figure

4 a,b) reveal that after 3 minutes, a single DRT peak centred at τ = 10-5.3 s dominates the spectrum, 

and a Nyquist model fit of a single Randles circuit (R1-(P1/R2)) indicates the presence of primarily 

a single electrochemical process. This can be attributed to the OER reaction. A second much 

smaller shoulder exists at τ = 10-3 s, which is attributed to the redeposition process. For the 10-

minute electrodeposited catalyst, both the Nyquist plot and the DRT indicate multiple 

electrochemical processes, which are suspected to be electrodeposition processes. The DRT 

displays a strong shoulder centred at τ = 10-1.8 s, indicating a larger contribution to the impedance 

of a second electrochemical process, and suggesting that a more appropriate Randles circuit of (R1 

– (P2/R2) – (P3/R3)) represent the electrochemical system. It is also of note that the primary OER 

peak centre shifts to τ = 10-4.7 s. The reason for this occurrence is not yet concluded but is likely 

related to either a change in the polarization resistance (Rct) or the CPE element. The specific 

nature of this change will be investigated in future work. 

To confirm these conclusions, two control experiments were performed to confirm the 

identity of the observed DRT peaks. The resulting DRT fit-EIS spectra for replicate 3-minute 

electrodeposited catalyst materials were subjected to a) OER in a different supporting electrolyte 

(0.1 M HNO3) (Figure S6a), and b) OER characterization in Co2+ / Pb2+ nitrate spiked (0.1 M total 

metal ions) solution to mimic the scenario of a high dissolution of metal ions during the OER 

process (Figure S6b). OER performed in the 0.1 M HNO3 displayed a single DRT peak at τ = 10-

5.5 s which we attribute to the OER process. A second small peak is observed at τ = 10-1.7 s, which


14

Figure 4 - DRT fit of the OER performance data after 30 minutes for samples prepared at a) 3-minute 

electrodeposition and b) 10-minute electrodeposition. Inset- Corresponding Nyquist plots of 1.9 V vs. NHE 

deposited CoPbOx OER catalysts after 30 min OER.

is at the approximate peak center position of the suspected re-deposition process. This is 

confirmed by the metal ion-spiked solution, where it is clear that the presence of metal ions 

dramatically shifts the DRT peaks to represent a host of new electrochemical processes at the lower 

τ regions. From these control tests, these lower frequency τ regions are determined to be the re-

deposition electrochemical processes. Clear identification of these peaks and their specific 

corresponding electrochemical phenomena are outside the scope of this work. From this analysis, 

it is clear that a 3-minute deposition is ideal to minimize the metal-ion loading in solution and 

minimize re-deposition during electrochemical OER performance evaluation. 

Electrochemical Performance Evaluation Protocol

Of critical importance when attempting to optimize an experimental parameter via an 

active learning algorithm is the need to understand the experimental variability. Electrocatalysis 

OER measurements are prone to variability given the nature of the dynamic environment in which 

the experiment takes place.50 Best practices address reactant transport limitations through the use 

of a rotating disk electrode to ensure controlled delivery of the reactants to the catalyst surface, 

and in turn, minimizes the residence of bubbles on the catalyst surface during the reaction. We do 

not have these capabilities in our self-driving laboratories due to the automation complexity of 

sample preparation. As shown in Figure 2, our electrochemical cell is static with no flowing 


15

electrolyte, which means bubble generation creates perturbations in the measured voltage. This 

can create variability in the current response. To determine the level of expected variability, 

multiple repeat Co2+ / Pb2+ samples were synthesized and evaluated with three different applied 

OER currents (1, 5, and 10 mA/cm2) over 30 minutes of OER. Figure S7 highlights these results. 

The sample-to-sample performance of these repeated experiments is relatively consistent, which 

is to be expected, albeit the measurement of the exact overpotential metric increases in variances 

as the current increases, as there is a more vigorous generation of bubbles. The overpotential mean

and standard deviation of each current is 1 mA/cm2: µ = 1.79 V, σ = 2.9 mV; 5 mA/cm2: µ = 1.87 

V, σ = 4.3 mV; and 10 mA/cm2: µ = 2.09 V, σ = 14.9 mV.

Optimization Algorithm Development – Experimental Variability

Based on the overpotential variability inherent in the OER performance measurements, we 

were determined to quantify how this variability impacts the performance of the machine-learning 

optimizer, in-order to influence our choice of optimizer for deployment in the self-driving 

laboratory. An extensive amount of optimizers have been developed and demonstrated 

successfully within self-driving laboratories.26,27,51–53 Benchmarking studies have also been 

performed on various existing datasets, revealing how a specific optimizer performance is 

dependent on the data to be optimized, and a ‘one size fits all’ approach will not yield the best 

performance.10,54 A majority of these optimizers operate in principle based on Bayesian 

optimization – utilizing experimental data as prior knowledge beliefs, and updating said beliefs 

with each successive experiment towards a specific objective function (maximization of a user-

defined performance metric). However, the optimizer has a plethora of variables and 

hyperparameters that can be tuned and adjusted, each of which will impact how said optimizer 

performs within the experimental parameter landscape. Utilizing an existing electrocatalyst 

literature dataset from Rohr & Stein et. al8, we explored the effectiveness of various optimizer 

models, hyperparameters, and acquisition functions when synthetic experimental variability. We 

chose this dataset based on its similarity to the type of experimental data generated from the 

previously discussed self-driving laboratory as part of this work. Our framework is based on the 

open-source optimization library BoTorch53, a Gaussian Process (GP) probabilistic model 

optimizer built on Pytorch that offers a flexible and modular design, which allows users to easily 


16

customize the Bayesian optimization pipeline by plugging in different components such as 

acquisition functions, surrogate models, and optimizers.

Acquisition functions play a crucial role in optimizing algorithms and data queries in noisy 

observation environments. A detailed explanation of the optimization process and the role of the 

acquisition function has been covered in previous studies.55,56 Acquisition functions determine the 

next query point by balancing exploration and exploitation. In this study, we investigated the 

effects of noisy data using upper-confidence bound (UCB) and expected improvement (EI) as our 

acquisition functions, and a combination of noisy-expected improvement (NEI) with various 

acquisition samplers (Quasi-Monte Carlo, Monte Carlo, and analytical) to enhance our analysis. 

These were implemented utilizing BoTorch model libraries of SingleTaskGP and FixedNoiseGP, 

which are single-output GP models. For hyperparameters of GP models, we choose Matérn52 

kernel covariance function (with a high smoothness value, 2.5) and Automatic Relevance 

Determination (ARD)57,58 to determine the relative importance of the inputs. A brief comparison 

of other Matérn kernels performance is shown in the Supporting Information (Figure S8). EI

balances the exploitation of solutions using the likelihood of improvement compared to the current

best solution observed thus far, with the exploration of others which may be a lower likelihood of 

performance improvement, but provide the most information of the parameter space (ie. points 

with the highest variance). EI quantifies the overall expected improvement compared to the current 

best solution - EI(x) = E[max(f(x) - f*, 0)], where f(x) is the function to be optimized, f* is the 

current best-observed value of the function, and E denotes the expectation with respect to the 

posterior of the function. UCB considers both the mean prediction and the uncertainty in the 

surrogate model. The most promising point (ie. experiment) to perform next is determined via an 

evaluation of the upper performance bound at each point in the parameter space αUCB = µ(x) -

βσ(x). The degree of exploration vs. exploitation can be adjusted via a tradeoff parameter β. We

optimize the β parameter with HyperOpt module (infill BO model) during the optimization

process. The BoTorch model and HyperOpt model are consecutively connected and are capable of 

being tuned based on the input data spaces. Another acquisition function - probability of 

improvement (PI) - was initially explored as part of this study, but a simulated performance 

comparison to UCB and EI, shown in Figure S9, revealed worse performance in comparison and 

hence it was not pursued as part of this benchmarking evaluation in noisy observation 

environments.


17

As mentioned previously, to evaluate the efficacy of these various models towards 

experimental output variability, we performed all optimizer evaluations on an OER catalyst data 

set from Rohr & Stein et. al. that was generated using high-throughput OER screening of mixed 

metal oxide samples produced via inkjet printing of a combination of precursors followed by 

controlled calcination.8 This data set represents urinary to quaternary compositions of six possible 

metal-oxide combinations comprising of the cations [Mn–Fe–Co–Ni–La–Ce] at discrete 

composition abundances of [0:0.1:1] with a single output metric of electrochemical overpotential. 

This totals 2344 composition samples in this data set we chose to benchmark. This dataset provides 

a varied distribution in overpotential from 0.7 V to 0.37 V, and in their study, they have indicated 

that the relative performances of BO algorithms over different datasets were observed to be 

consistent. This same publication also introduces four benchmarking metrics to compare the active 

learning algorithm performance, a subset of which we have utilized as a part of this study. 

To explore the effectiveness of the models in the design spaces with a limited number of 

samples (mimicking an SDL), we initiated the BO algorithms with one randomly selected sample 

and one query sample is picked from the pool in each iteration. The total pool of undiscovered data 

points can be expressed as ( 𝑥⃗ ; 𝑦) ∈ 𝐷, whose input features 𝑥⃗ are all discrete data points and are 

made available for evaluation by the acquisition functions. Discrete material design spaces are 

chosen due to the resolution of the experimental set-up and overpotential measurements. The BO 

algorithms and the acquisition functions to be compared are evaluated in 20 campaigns of cycles 

with 20 independent random seeds. The aggregated performances of the BO algorithms were 

derived from 20 averaged runs with reporting mean and standard deviation of the results. We 

reduced the chances of landing on more informative samples by randomly selecting the first 

sample and running the algorithms in campaigns and comparing the mean and variance of the 

models. The Top% metric is a percentage of the top 30 catalysts that were selected from the entire 

parameter space. 

𝑇𝑜𝑝%(𝑖) =
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑜𝑝 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠 [0,30]

𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑜𝑝 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑒𝑣𝑒 (30)

Enhancement Factor (EF) indicates how well the algorithm performs in finding the top candidates 

compared to the random baseline in each learning cycle (𝑖) and is shown as:

𝐸𝐹(𝑖) =
𝑇𝑜𝑝%𝐵𝑜(𝑖)

𝑇𝑜𝑝%𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚(𝑖)


18

The Acceleration Factor (AF) indicates how fast an algorithm can reach a defined number of top 

candidates. This parameter is an especially important metric for the comparison of expensive 

experiments, where it is ideal to accelerate the pace of exploration in as few experiments as 

possible.

𝐴𝐹(#𝑇𝑜𝑝 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠 = 30) =
𝑖𝐵𝑂

𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚

The challenge associated with working with experimental data is they exhibit either 

homoscedastic or heteroscedastic behaviour. With this dataset, we added homoscedastic (NEI) or

synthetic heteroscedastic experimental noise (SEN) to the overpotential outputs and evaluate the 

previously discussed algorithms, hyperparameters, and acquisition functions to gain an 

understanding of the strengths and limitations of such algorithms as they attempt to accommodate 

noisy observation environments. Homoscedastic noise is when the variance of the noise is constant 

across the entire dataset. The assumption of constant variance may lead to biased parameter 

estimates and emphasize the regions with low variance and underemphasize the regions with high 

variance.60 The impact of heteroscedastic noise, a non-constant variability in the optimization 

metric across the dataset, has been reviewed to understand the challenges caused by experimental 

noise, which we present via SEN treatment of the output data. In this case, different levels of 

variability are present in different regions of the search space, which can lead to difficulties in 

accurately estimating the uncertainty and making informed decisions about the next query sample 

in a Bayesian optimization campaign. This is a better representation of true experimental noise as 

the variance of the noise changes concerning the input training data and real-world data which will 

apply more pressure for the BO models to perform. To evaluate the optimizer performance, we 

added 5, 10, and 15 mV variance to the overpotential, using the original data value for each as a 

mean value (NEI) or a random distribution of mean 0 (SEN), and trained the models based on this 

synthetic experimental variability. 

The summarized results of this benchmarking study are shown in Figure 5. First, we 

performed a direct comparison of optimizer performance with no variability applied to the 

overpotential of the experimental dataset (ie. the measured dataset is treated as non-variable). This 

serves as a baseline comparison to evaluate EI and UCB acquisition functions (and associated β 

values of 0.05, 1.4, and 20). As mentioned previously, we utilized HyperOpt to determine an 


19

optimal value of β. Through HyperOpt, we identified β = 1.4 as the optimal β value in our study, 

on average able to identify the top 30 catalyst candidates with the lowest overpotential in 150

cycles. This is compared to UCB (low β)0.05 (180 cycles), UCB (high β)20 (225 cycles), and EI (220 

cycles). It is important to note that the standard deviation of the aggregated model performance in 

each case is significant (UCB (low β)0.05 = 96 cycles, UCB (optimum β) 1.4 = 83 cycles, UCB (high β)20 =60 

cycles, EI = 100 cycles) and is a strong representation of variability in these stochastic approaches.

From the evaluation of the Top(%) benchmarking metric alone, it is difficult to determine a 

statistically significant superior optimizer. Evaluating the EF (Figure 5b) and AF (Figure 5c) 

provides significant insight into the applicability of these methods for our SDL. While EI performs 

worse compared to the UCB optimizers based on the previous metric, when looking at the 

efficiency of the optimizer it performs on par with that of UCB (low β)0.05, in particular early on in 

the optimization cycle (ie. it initially learns at comparative rates). This is in contrast to UCB (high

β)20, which takes significantly longer to reach comparative learning rates as evident from the 

sluggish EF and AF over the first 100 learning cycles. This is expected behaviour, as UCB with 

higher β values compared to optimum value are expected to exhibit greater exploration behaviour 

and requires a greater number of learning cycles to develop efficient models compared to lower β 

values, which are more exploitative. As the data is more spread around the global minimum, 

exploitation is more important to the performance of the models and as a result lower β values

have better performance at the early stages of learning, which diminishes compared to optimal β 

values as the number of learning cycles increases. As expected, all optimizers outperformed a 

completely random selection which we used as a baseline. 


20

Figure 5 – Benchmark performance comparisons for Top%, AF (acceleration factor), and EF(enhancement 

factor) of EI and UCB (various β) acquisition functions, no experimental noise (a-c), 5, 10, 15 mV 

homoscedastic noise applied to EI (labelled Noisy EI) (d-f), and heteroscedastic noise applied to UCB 

(labelled SEN) (g-l), respectively. This benchmarking study was applied to experimental data from [8], as 

detailed in the body.

Under this same framework, we evaluated the addition of variance to the overpotential, 

with the results shown in Figure 5d-f (NEI) and Figure 5g-i (SEN), plotted alongside UCB (optimum

β) = 1.4 and EI with no noise, for comparison. As expected, as the variability of the measurement 

output increases from 5, 10, to 15 mV, the optimizer performance subsequently decreases by 


21

greater margins. In comparing NEI and Top% (using 100% as the benchmark metric), we see an 

increase in the learning cycles from a mean of 224 learning cycles with no artificial noise to 512,

670, and 734 learning cycles, respectively. This also comes with a greater degree of standard 

deviation, which is summarized in Figure 6. A similar comparison using UCB (optimum β)1.4 with 5, 

10, and 15 mV variability (SEN) applied to the overpotential results in a similarly expected 

decrease in performance compared to the non-experimental noise case. In particular, UCB 

performs the best when no artificial noise is added (mean 152 cycles), but fairs worse compared 

to NEI when artificial noise is added (537, 738, and 1129 learning cycles, respectively). 

Furthermore, the standard deviation of SEN is significantly greater compared to the variability-

added evaluations with NEI, which is expected given the heteroscedastic nature of this simulated 

noisy experimental environment.

Figure 6 – A summary of all benchmarked Top(%) tests, comparing the mean number of learning cycles 

required to identify 100% of the top 30 catalysts out of a possible 2344. Error bars define the standard 

deviation determined from the aggregation of 20 simulated campaigns.

In conclusion, this benchmarking evaluation reveals that to have any confidence in our 

global optimization given the performance variability during our catalyst evaluation, we must limit 

our variability to 5 mV. Based on this, we have chosen to use a performance evaluation current of 

5 mA/cm2, which previously was determined to give σ = 4.3 mV, as an acceptable metric between 


22

experimental variability and relevant catalyst performance evaluation. It is clear, however, the 

great importance to limit sources of experimental variability as they have a drastic impact on the 

overall optimizer efficiency. If the goal is to reduce the number of learning cycles (ie. expensive 

experiments), even small amounts of experimental variability can generate large increases in the 

required learning cycles. While our small study evaluated experimental uncertainty on the output 

variable (the variable attempting to be optimized), other studies have been reported with a robust 

methodology and exploration of input experimental variables51, which was not considered in this 

benchmarking study.  

Optimization – Deployment on self-driving laboratory

We performed two separate optimization campaigns using the self-driving laboratory 

outlined in this work, with the design considerations mentioned in prior sections. For each 

campaign, the electrodeposition target elements were Co, Fe, Mn, and Pb, using discrete 

concentrations of between 0 M and 1 M, with an increment step size of 0.1 M, generating an 

experimental landscape of 256 possible different deposition solution compositions.  The measured 

overpotential after 30 minutes of applied constant current (5 mA/cm2) for each catalyst run is 

shown in Figure 7a, with each run plotted as a function of the electrodeposition composition 

(solution molarity of Co2+, Pb2+, and combined (Mn2+ + Fe3+)) in Figure 7b, and associated images 

of each catalyst in Figure S10. In summary, over both campaigns, our self-driving laboratory can

identify successful regions for catalyst synthesis within 5 experiments, and identification of the 

best-performing region (ie. lowest overpotential) in less than 10 experiments, which corresponds 

to a solution composition range of Co2+: 0.4 – 0.6 M, Pb2+: 0.4 – 0.6 M, Mn2+/Fe3+: 0 – 0.1 M.

From a scientific standpoint, the experimental results obtained with this self-driving laboratory are 

corroborated with those results in scientific literature. In particular, previous studies have 

demonstrated that a 1:1 combination of Co2+:Pb2+ with the addition of a small amount of Mn2+ 35

or trace amounts of Fe3+ 37 in the deposition solution leads to the best-performing catalysts within 

their study. Our study serves to demonstrate that with a self-driving laboratory and AI-guided 

optimization, the same results can be identified on the order of hours.  


23

Figure 7 - a) 3D plot of Co, Pb, and Fe + Mn contents as a function of OER potential for all runs performed 

during the 20-run optimization. The best-performing regions for each optimization are circled in red. b) 

Potential vs. experiment number for the optimization process. The red line represents the current optimum 

catalyst during the campaign, and the shaded region corresponds to the circled region in a).

While not a focus of the optimization, stability was also a critical metric that we measured 

during the OER reactions. Stability optimization coupled with overpotential optimization will be 

the focus of future work. Of the data gathered during these optimization campaigns, the EIS data 

and associated equivalent circuit model component values reveal critical information about the 

relationship between the electrochemical deposition solution composition and the catalyst 

stability. All EIS data was analyzed from both experimental campaigns discussed above, and the 

percentage change of Rct and Ceff as a function of each element concentration was analyzed for 

material-performance correlations. The Nyquist plots obtained at t = 3 min and t = 30 min are 

shown in Figure S11, and show the change in the Nyquist plots throughout a 30-minute OER 

experiment. As a majority of the top-performing catalysts were comprised of Co and Pb, Figure 

8a-d plot the percentage change from t = 3 min and t = 30 min for Rct and Ceff versus overpotential 


24

with a hue representing the concentration of a specific element. Evaluation of Ceff change (Figure 

8a,c) reveals that a heavy Co composition (> 0.6 V vs. NHE) does minimize the change in Ceff, 

and in term is an indicator of greater stability compared to those catalysts with lower Co content. 

Pb concentration, on the other hand, appears to have weak or no correlation given the even 

distribution of the data points. Changes in Rct, however, appear to not correlate with elemental 

composition for both Co and Pb, outside of low concentrations (< 0.3 M) of either element leads 

to drastic changes in Rct, as would be expected given the higher rates of dissolution and/or poor 

intrinsic OER activity when catalysts low in Co or Pb are synthesized and tested. These results and 

correlations are highly promising, albeit more work is necessary to further elucidate the scientific 

understanding behind these results with more targeting experiments to further probe the claims 

made here. Regardless, these early results demonstrate how proxy experimentation can be 

developed and utilized in the place of more exhaustive and expensive characterization techniques 

for purposes of optimization and understanding.

Figure 8 - Percentage change in Ceff and Rct, as determined from the Randles ECM for EIS at t = 3 min 

and t = 30 min, as a function of Co metal content (a, b) and Pb metal content (c, d) in the CoFeMnPbOx

catalyst material. Associated Nyquist plots are shown in Figure S11.


25

Conclusions

In conclusion, this study has demonstrated the effectiveness of a self-driving laboratory in 

optimizing mixed-metal oxide electrocatalysts for acid-stable OER. The incorporation of an 

experimental optimizer enabled us to quickly identify an optimal electrodeposition procedure with 

equimolar Pb to Co ratio, and small dopings of either Fe or Mn for improved overpotential 

performance, with this finding corroborated by the literature. Additionally, we explored the use of 

proxy experimentation as a valuable tool for designing experimental workflows when expensive 

characterization equipment is not available, and have shown an initial view of generated 

correlations between elemental composition and pseudo-acid stability through electrochemical 

measurements alone. While the concepts of proxy experimentation presented in this work by no 

means can replace rigorous material characterization methods, they offer an opportunity to utilize 

versatility and carefully designed experimental protocols in unconventional ways to gather some 

scientific intuition and/or information that would otherwise not be possible. This is a concept we 

plan to further develop and report on in future work. We emphasize the importance of 

reproducibility and validity in measurements and have presented our approach to improving this 

methodology as it relates to this work. Moving forward, we plan to expand our capabilities with 

onboard characterization to incorporate other metrics and improve our scientific understanding of 

property-performance relationships. Furthermore, we aim to explore other electrodeposition 

parameters as they relate to other electrochemical systems. We encourage other researchers to 

critically consider the use of self-driving laboratories and proxy experimentation to optimize their 

experiments and elucidate performance information. 


26

Supporting Information

Experimental

The electrodeposition and electrochemical performance evaluation are discussed within the body 

of this work. Anodic electrodeposition conditions employed previous literature procedures, and 

utilized hydrate forms of nitrate salts in total concentrations between 0 – 1 M in 0.1 M nitric acid 

(HNO3, 70% ACS reagent diluted with 18 MΩ Millipore H2O). Electrodeposited samples were of 

the oxy-hydroxide form (CoFePbMnOx) and were synthesized using cobalt(II) nitrate hexahydrate 

(Co(NO3)2•6H2O, 99.999% trace metals basis, Sigma Aldrich), lead(II) nitrate (Pb(NO3)2, 

99.999% trace metals basis, Sigma Aldrich), manganese(II) chloride tetrahydrate (MnCl2•4H2O, 

99.99% trace metals basis, Sigma Aldrich), and iron(III) nitrate nonahydrate (Fe(NO3)3•9H2O, 

99.999% trace metals basis, Sigma Aldrich) from a 1 M stock solution, added and diluted to 10 

mL of the optimizer-specified concentration. An automated dispensing unit with an accuracy of 

0.05 mL was used to prepare the electrodeposition samples, with a mass balance used to confirm 

the final solution concentration to +/- 1% targetted molarity. All electrodeposition procedures were 

performed in a 3-electrode cell with pre-cleaned fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) glass slide used as the 

working electrode and deposition substrate (MSE supplies, 2.2 mm thick, 7-8 Ohm/Sq TEC 7, 25 

x 25 mm), an Ag/AgCl reference electrode (3M KCl, 6 mm, BaSi), and a cleaned graphite rod as 

the counter electrode. The electrochemical OER performance evaluation utilized a similar 

electrochemical set-up in a duplicate electrochemical cell to avoid cross-contamination, except 

used a Pt coil as the counter electrode as opposed to a graphite rod. The OER performance 

electrolyte was 0.01 M H2SO4 (99.999%, Sigma Aldrich). After each experiment, all cell contents 

were washed with 18 MΩ millipore water 10 times to remove trace metal concentrations (See 

Figure S1). 


27

Figure S1 - pH of deionized water after each successive wash step. At 8 successive wash steps ensure full 

cleaning of the cell and minimize contaminants to less than 1 ppm. 


28

Proxy evaluation of catalyst stability

The true evaluation of catalyst stability requires operating the catalyst in a representative 

environment until the catalyst is either fully deactivated or dissolved. We wanted to investigate if 

we could reduce the time required to obtain a relevant descriptor of catalyst stability and utilize 

this approach to obtain a proxy method for comparing catalysts within the same campaign as a 

means to reduce the experimental time required for the performance evaluation.  

Correlation of potential response as a proxy for catalyst stability

Figure S2a shows the electrochemical voltage responses of the various catalysts tested. 

For each electrochemical curve, the voltage slope was extracted at times of 10, 20, and the full 

lifetime of the catalyst material. The full lifetime of the catalyst was taken at the inflexion point to 

higher voltages, which was visually confirmed as this inflexion point corresponded to when the 

thin catalyst layer was completely removed from the FTO substrate during OER. Figure S2b 

shows the extracted and truncated slopes as a function of time, and Figure S2c shows the 

correlation of the voltage slope vs. true catalyst lifetime, which we concluded to be a weak 

correlation of catalyst lifetime, with both 10-minute and 20-minute predictions having a mean 

average error (MEA) of > 20 minutes, or significantly worse for those catalyst materials exhibiting

lifetime outside the bounds of the experimental data set. 


29

Figure S2 - a) Raw potential profiles of the indicated catalysts as a response to an applied current of 0.5 

mA/cm2, b) corresponding linear fits to the slopes within the as-indicated time range, and c) plot of voltage 

slope vs. the lifetime of the catalyst for each time indicator.


30

Correlation of Ceff as a proxy for catalyst stability

Subsequently, current hold EIS measurements were taken every 3 minutes during the 

entirety of the constant-current OER measurement until catalyst dissolution. A single Randles 

circuit with a constant phase element (CPE) was fit to each EIS spectra to extract circuit element 

values for Rs, Rct, CCPE and α. Given the nature of these experiments (low current and thin-film 

catalyst materials), a single Randle circuit was found adequate to represent the obtained data. The 

interfacial capacitance of mixed-metal oxide surfaces, in particular those under dynamic OER 

conditions is difficult to truly evaluate and equate to the true electrochemical active surface area, 

as the true specific capacitance of our materials is impossible to accurately determine given the 

dynamic nature of the amorphous mixed-metal oxide material during OER. Hence we focus on 

establishing a capacitance term that is dependent on the contributions from the solution and 

polarization resistances.62 The following equation was used to extract an effective capacitance 

value for these relations, which we have termed Ceff (effective capacitance) as a representation of 

the capacitive double-layer. 

𝐶𝑒𝑓𝑓 = (𝐶𝐶𝑃𝐸 ( 1

𝑅𝑠

+
1
𝑅𝑐𝑡

)

𝛼−1

)

1/𝛼

Ceff were plotted versus time, and we observed a near-linear fit to the corresponding data 

(Figure S3a-c). Linear fits were performed for each catalyst after 10 minutes, 20 minutes, and full 

lifetime measurements were performed to extract values of slope (Ceff/time). The slopes were then 

used as the dependent variable to fit a simple linear regression model as a predictor of catalyst 

lifetime, with the results shown in Figure S3d-f. Based on these results, we determine that the 

intermittent EIS during constant current and extraction of Ceff change over time, and determination 

of the Ceff slope throughout a 20-minute constant current OER measurement is an adequate proxy

metric of catalyst stability – in particular a much stronger indicator compared to that of voltage 

change over time.


31

Figure S3 – Effective capacitance values fitted from EIS data vs. time during constant current discharge 

plotted and linearly fitted for a) full lifetime of the electrode, b) 10-minute lifetime and c) 20-minute lifetime. 

The linear fits and MAE correlations of real vs. predicted lifetime based on the linear regression fit are 

shown in d)-f) for the same timeframe.


32

Bubble Templating During Electrodeposition

During anodic electrodeposition, bubbles are generated at the electrode surface which blocks the 

substrate sites from further deposition. These bubbles can occlude the catalyst surface, creating a 

templated, visibly non-uniform coated electrode surface. We standardized the electrodeposition 

procedure to include intermittent pulsing during the electrodeposition step to occur every minute 

to remove the bubbles from the surface. The result of this pulsed templating method is a visually 

smooth catalyst surface that is void of bubble templating, as shown in Figure S4. These 

intermittent pulses can be seen in the current response of the electrodeposition (Figure S4b), to 

which the system quickly reaches back to equilibrium after only a few seconds.  The 

reproducibility of this method to produce similar catalyst thin films was demonstrated over 5 

samples of the same deposition conditions, shown via the current response during deposition 

(Figure S4b) and associated EIS spectra obtained after 5 minutes of OER at 5 mA/cm2 current.

Figure S4 - a) Images of the bubble formation during electrodeposition of the catalyst material, with the 

inset showing the image of bubble templating (top) vs. a clean sample that was pulsed with liquid to remove 

bubbles during deposition to remove the bubbles (bottom). b) corresponding deposition profile and c) EIS 

after 5 minutes of OER, with current held at 5 mA/cm2.


33

Figure S5 - Images of the electrodeposited samples from Figure 3.


34

Figure S6 - a) DRT fits to the data for 3-minute electrodeposition and OER performed in a different 

supporting electrolyte (0.1 M HNO3 as opposed to H2SO4) and b) OER performed in the presence of Co2+ 

and Pb2+ nitrate, 0.1 M total metal ions.


35

Figure S7 – a) CoPbOx catalyst samples deposited under the sample electrodeposition conditions, with 

OER measured at 1 mA/cm2, 5 mA/cm2, and 10 mA/cm2. b) Corresponding overpotential (OP) mean and 

error bars to indicate the variability associated with each determining OER overpotential at each applied 

current. σ = 2.9 mV, 4.3 mV, and 14.9 mV, respectively.


36

Benchmarking Algorithms, Hyperparameters, and Acquisition Functions

Computing and Efficient Hyperparameter Tuning

In this work, we have utilized open-source Bayesian optimization algorithms, BoTorch from 

Pytorch and HyperOpt. The simulated materials optimization was conducted in 20 campaigns on 

CUDA and CPU on a computer with 32 GB RAM and core i7-10850H CPU and 16 GB GPU. 

Running the Pytorch algorithms (BoTorch) on CUDA have the benefit of reducing the computer's

high configuration requirements. In HyperOpt, the inner loop for optimization of hyperparameters, 

the number of optimization attempts is set to 100 and the exploration space is set to be from 0.1 to 

100. This technique has enabled us in finding the best hyperparameters for parameters for the 

Bayesian optimization algorithm. 


37

Figure S8 - Benchmarking Algorithms, Hyperparameters, and Acquisition Functions. Comparing 

Matérn12, Matérn32, and Matérn52 kernels with a base smoothness value of 2.5, there is no statistical 

difference in performance for a) acceleration factor (AF) and b) enhancement factor (EF). A more complex 

pattern in data can be captured by kernel covariance function with higher smoothness values and as it is 

shown in c) lower learning cycles were required in Matern52 to reach and learn the top 30 candidates with 

lowest overpotentials in the whole dataset.


38

Figure S9 – Comparison of Acquisition Functions Without Existence of Noise. Comparison of the 

acquisition functions upper confidence bound (UCB, β = 1.4), expected improvement (EI) and probability 

of improvement (PI), no simulated experimental noise. This comparison is performed within the 2344 

experimental dataset used throughout the text. By all metrics of a) learning cycle vs. top percentage (top 

30 catalysts), b) enhancement factor (EF) and c) acceleration factor (AF), UCB outperforms both EI and 

PI.


39

Figure S10 – Photographs of each catalyst sample after 30-minute OER at 5 mA/cm2, produced from 

Optimization Campaign 1, with the sample (experiment number) on the top right of each sample.


40

Figure S11 - Nyquist plots for t = 3 min and t = 30 min throughout a single optimization campaign.


41

References

1. 
Gu, X., Camayang, J. C. A., Samira, S. & Nikolla, E. Oxygen evolution electrocatalysis 

using mixed metal oxides under acidic conditions : Challenges and opportunities. J. Catal.

388, 130–140 (2020).

2.
Chen, Z., Duan, X., Wei, W., Wang, S. & Ni, B. J. Electrocatalysts for acidic oxygen 

evolution reaction: Achievements and perspectives. Nano Energy 78, 105392 (2020).

3.
Wang, Q. et al. Long-Term Stability Challenges and Opportunities in Acidic Oxygen 

Evolution Electrocatalysis. Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 16645, (2023).

4.
Gunasooriya, G. T. K. K. & Nørskov, J. K. Analysis of Acid-Stable and Active Oxides for 

the Oxygen Evolution Reaction. ACS Energy Lett. 5, 3778–3787 (2020).

5.
Gu, X., Camayang, J. C. A., Samira, S. & Nikolla, E. Oxygen Evolution Electrocatalysis 

using Mixed Metal Oxides Under Acidic Conditions: Challenges and Opportunities. J. 

Catal. (2020).

6.
Chen, F. Y., Wu, Z. Y., Adler, Z. & Wang, H. Stability challenges of electrocatalytic oxygen 

evolution reaction: From mechanistic understanding to reactor design. Joule 5, 1704–1731 

(2021).

7.
NorthRobotics. https://www.northrobotics.com/

8.
Rohr, B. et al. Benchmarking the acceleration of materials discovery by sequential learning. 

Chem. Sci. 11, 2696–2706 (2020).

9.
Stein, H. S. & Gregoire, J. M. Progress and prospects for accelerating materials science with 

automated and autonomous workflows. Chem. Sci. 10, 9640–9649 (2019).

10.
Liang, Q. et al. Benchmarking the Performance of Bayesian Optimization across Multiple 

Experimental Materials Science Domains. npj Comput. Mater. 7, 1–23 (2021).

11.
Yu, C., Xiong, Q., Yang, K., Chen, H. & Pan, F. A Programmable and Automated Platform 

for Integrated Synthesis and Evaluation of Water Electrolysis Catalysts. Adv. Mater. 

Technol. 6, 1–7 (2021).

12.
Zhang, T. et al. High throughput screening driven discovery of Mn5Co10Fe30Ni55Ox as 


42

electrocatalyst for water oxidation and electrospinning synthesis. Appl. Surf. Sci. 588, 

152959 (2022).

13.
Shinde, A. et al. High-Throughput Screening for Acid-Stable Oxygen Evolution 

Electrocatalysts in the (Mn–Co–Ta–Sb)Ox Composition Space. Electrocatalysis 6, 229–

236 (2015).

14.
Gregoire, J. M., Xiang, C., Liu, X., Marcin, M. & Jin, J. Scanning droplet cell for high 

throughput electrochemical and photoelectrochemical measurements. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 84, 

(2013).

15.
Haber, J. A. et al. Discovering Ce-rich oxygen evolution catalysts, from high throughput 

screening to water electrolysis. Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 682–688 (2014).

16.
Stein, H. S. et al. Functional mapping reveals mechanistic clusters for OER catalysis across 

(Cu-Mn-Ta-Co-Sn-Fe)O: X composition and pH space. Mater. Horizons 6, 1251–1258 

(2019).

17.
Park, S. H. et al. Combinatorial High-Throughput Screening for Highly Active Pd − Ir − Ce 

Based Ternary Catalysts in Electrochemical Oxygen Reduction Reaction. ACS Comb. Sci.

15, 572–579 (2013).

18.
Jones, R. J. R., Wang, Y., Lai, Y., Shinde, A. & Gregoire, J. M. Reactor design and 

integration with product detection to accelerate screening of electrocatalysts for carbon 

dioxide reduction. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 89, (2018).

19.
Lai, Y. et al. Breaking Scaling Relationships in CO2 Reduction on Copper Alloys with 

Organic Additives. ACS Cent. Sci. 7, 1756–1762 (2021).

20.
Abolhasani, M. & Kumacheva, E. The Rise of Self-Driving Labs in Chemical and Materials 

Sciences. Nature Synthesis, https://doi.org/10.1038/s44160-022-00231-0 (2023).

21.
Nikolaev, P., Hooper, D., Perea-López, N., Terrones, M. & Maruyama, B. Discovery of 

wall-selective carbon nanotube growth conditions via automated experimentation. ACS 

Nano 8, 10214–10222 (2014).

22.
Steiner, S. et al. Organic synthesis in a modular robotic system driven by a chemical 


43

programming language. Science, 363, (2019).

23.
Burger, B. et al. A mobile robotic chemist. Nature 583, 237–241 (2020).

24.
Gongora, A. E. et al. Bayesian experimental autonomous researcher for mechanical design.

Science Advances, 6, 15 (2020).

25.
Wagner, J. et al. The evolution of Materials Acceleration Platforms: toward the laboratory 

of the future with AMANDA. J. Mater. Sci. doi:10.1007/s10853-021-06281-7 (2021).

26.
MacLeod, B. P. et al. Self-driving laboratory for accelerated discovery of thin-film 

materials. Sci. Adv. 6, 1–8 (2020).

27.
MacLeod, B. P. et al. A self-driving laboratory advances the Pareto front for material 

properties. Nat. Commun. 13, 1–10 (2022).

28.
Joress, H. et al. A High-Throughput Structural and Electrochemical Study of Metallic Glass 

Formation in Ni-Ti-Al. ACS Comb. Sci. 22, 330–338 (2020).

29.
Salley, D. et al. A nanomaterials discovery robot for the Darwinian evolution of shape 

programmable gold nanoparticles. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–7 (2020).

30.
Tao, H. et al. Self-Driving Platform for Metal Nanoparticle Synthesis: Combining 

Microfluidics and Machine Learning. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2106725, 1–9 (2021).

31.
Whitacre, J. F. et al. An Autonomous Electrochemical Test Stand for Machine Learning 

Informed Electrolyte Optimization. J. Electrochem. Soc. 166, A4181–A4187 (2019).

32.
Dave, A. et al. Autonomous discovery of battery electrolytes with robotic experimentation 

and machine learning autonomous discovery of battery electrolytes with robotic 

experimentation and machine learning. Cell Reports Phys. Sci. 2, 100264 (2020).

33.
Morales-Guio, C. G., Liardet, L. & Hu, X. Oxidatively Electrodeposited Thin-Film 

Transition Metal (Oxy)hydroxides as Oxygen Evolution Catalysts. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 

8946–8957 (2016).

34.
Yan, Z. et al. Electrodeposition of (hydro)oxides for an oxygen evolution electrode. Chem. 

Sci. 11, 10614–10625 (2020).


44

35.
Huynh, M., Ozel, T., Liu, C., Lau, E. C. & Nocera, D. G. Design of template-stabilized 

active and earth-abundant oxygen evolution catalysts in acid. Chem. Sci. 8, 4779–4794 

(2017).

36.
Li, N. et al. Template-stabilized oxidic nickel oxygen evolution catalysts. Proc. Natl. Acad. 

Sci. U. S. A. 117, 16187–16192 (2020).

37.
Chatti, M. et al. Intrinsically stable in situ generated electrocatalyst for long-term oxidation 

of acidic water at up to 80 °C. Nat. Catal. 2, 457–465 (2019).

38.
Costentin, C. & Nocera, D. G. Self-healing catalysis in water. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. 

A. 114, 13380–13384 (2017).

39.
Thorarinsdottir, A. E., Veroneau, S. S. & Nocera, D. G. Self-healing oxygen evolution 

catalysts. Nat. Commun. 13, 1–10 (2022).

40.
McCrory, C. C. L. et al. Benchmarking Hydrogen Evolving Reaction and Oxygen Evolving 

Reaction Electrocatalysts for Solar Water Splitting Devices. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 4347–

4357 (2015).

41.
McCrory, C. C. L., Jung, S., Peters, J. C. & Jaramillo, T. F. Benchmarking heterogeneous 

electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 16977–16987 

(2013).

42.
Chen, S., Ma, L., Huang, Z., Liang, G. & Zhi, C. In situ/operando analysis of surface 

reconstruction of transition metal-based oxygen evolution electrocatalysts. Cell Reports 

Phys. Sci. 3, 100729 (2022).

43.
Samira, S. et al. Dynamic Surface Reconstruction Unifies the Electrocatalytic Oxygen 

Evolution Performance of Nonstoichiometric Mixed Metal Oxides. JACS Au 1, 2224–2241 

(2021).

44.
Raveendran, A., Chandran, M. & Dhanusuraman, R. A comprehensive review on the 

electrochemical parameters and recent material development of electrochemical water 

splitting electrocatalysts. RSC Adv. 13, 3843–3876 (2023).

45.
Cherevko, S. et al. Dissolution of noble metals during oxygen evolution in acidic media. 


45

ChemCatChem 6, 2219–2223 (2014).

46.
Geiger, S. et al. Catalyst Stability Benchmarking for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction : The 

Importance of Backing Electrode Material and Dissolution in Accelerated Aging Studies. 

ChemSusChem 10, 4140–4143 (2017).

47.
Frydendal, R. et al. Benchmarking the Stability of Oxygen Evolution Reaction Catalysts: 

The Importance of Monitoring Mass Losses. ChemElectroChem 1, 2075–2081 (2014).

48.
Huang, J., Papac, M. & O’Hayre, R. Towards robust autonomous impedance spectroscopy 

analysis: A calibrated hierarchical Bayesian approach for electrochemical impedance 

spectroscopy (EIS) inversion. Electrochim. Acta 367, 137493 (2020).

49.
Effat, M. B. & Ciucci, F. Bayesian and Hierarchical Bayesian Based Regularization for 

Deconvolving the Distribution of Relaxation Times from Electrochemical Impedance 

Spectroscopy Data. Electrochim. Acta 247, 1117–1129 (2017).

50.
Smith, G. & Dickinson, E. J. F. Error, reproducibility and uncertainty in experiments for 

electrochemical energy technologies. Nat. Commun. 13, 1–6 (2022).

51.
Aldeghi, M., Häse, F., Hickman, R. J., Tamblyn, I. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Golem: an 

algorithm for robust experiment and process optimization. Chem. Sci. 12, 14792–14807 

(2021).

52.
Kandasamy, K. et al. Tuning Hyperparameters without Grad Students: Scalable and Robust 

Bayesian Optimisation with Dragonfly. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 21, 1–27 (2020).

53.
Facebook, M. B. et al. BoTorch: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian 

Optimization. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33, 21524–21538 (2020).

54.
Shields, B. J. et al. Bayesian reaction optimization as a tool for chemical synthesis. Nature

590, 89–96 (2021).

55.
Shahriari, B., Swersky, K., Wang, Z., Adams, R. P. & De Freitas, N. Taking the Human Out 

of the Loop: A Review of Bayesian Optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104, 148-175 

(2015).

56.
De Ath, G., Everson, R. M., Rahat, A. A. M. & Fieldsend, J. E. Greed is Good: Exploration 


46

and Exploitation Trade-offs in Bayesian Optimisation. ACM Trans. Evol. Learn. Optim. 1, 

1–22 (2021).

57.
Snoek, J., Larochelle, H. & Adams, R. P. Practical Bayesian Optimization of Machine 

Learning Algorithms. in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (eds. Pereira, 

F., Burges, C. J., Bottou, L. & Weinberger, K. Q.) vol. 25 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2012).

58.
Lei, B. et al. Bayesian optimization with adaptive surrogate models for automated 

experimental design. npj Comput. Mater. 2021, 7, 1–12 (2021).

59.
Bull, A. D. Convergence rates of efficient global optimization algorithms. J. Mach. Learn. 

Res. 12, (2011).

60.
Ryan-Rhys Griffiths et al. Achieving robustness to aleatoric uncertainty with 

heteroscedastic Bayesian optimisation. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 3, 015004 (2022).

61.
Bergstra, J., Komer, B., Eliasmith, C., Yamins, D. & Cox, D. D. Hyperopt: a Python library 

for model selection and hyperparameter optimization. Comput. Sci. Discov. 8, 014008 

(2015).

62.
Li, G., Anderson, L., Chen, Yanan, Pan, M. & Chuang, P.-Y. A. New Insights into 

Evaluating Catalyst Activity and Stability of Oxygen Evolution Reactions in Alkaline 

Media. Sustain. Energy Fuels, 2, 237–251 (2018).


