This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

1

Ultra-fast Graphene-Plasmonic Hybrid Metasurface Saturable Absorber with 

Low Saturation Fluence

Md Zubair Ebne Rafique1,2, Ali Basiri1,2, Jing Bai1,2, Jiawei Zuo1,2, Yu Yao1,2*

1School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, 

USA, 85281

2Centre for Photonic Innovation, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, 85281

*Corresponding author: yuyao@asu.edu

Abstract

Exploring novel materials with enhanced optical nonlinearities at low power levels with ultrafast 

response and small footprints is of great interests for information processing, communication, 

sensing and quantum systems. Recent progress on nonlinear metamaterials and metasurfaces 

suggests promising solutions to overcome the limitations of nonlinear materials in nature. Here we 

present a design concept for highly enhanced saturable absorption effect based on subwavelength-

thick (<1/5) hybrid graphene-plasmonic metasurface structures in infrared wavelengths. Our 

theoretical and experimental results demonstrated that, by exciting nonequilibrium carriers inside 

nanoscale hotspots, one could not only enhance the saturable absorption in graphene, but also 

reduce the saturation fluence by over 3 orders of magnitude (from ~ 1 mJ/cm2 to ~100 nJ/cm2). 

Our pump-probe measurement results suggested an ultrashort saturable absorption recovery time 

(<60 fs), which is ultimately determined by the relaxation dynamics of photoexcited carriers in 

graphene. We also observed pulse narrowing effects in our devices based on the autocorrelation 

measurement results.  Such design concepts can be tailored via structure engineering to operate in 

broader wavelength ranges up to mid-and far- infrared spectral regions. These ultrafast low-

saturation fluence saturable absorber designs can enable low-threshold, compact, self-starting 

mode-locked lasers, laser pulse shaping, and high-speed optical information processing. 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

2

Introduction

Saturable absorbers (SA) are nonlinear optical components with reduced absorption at high optical 

intensities. They are widely used for mode-locked lasers, Q-switching devices, pulse shaping, 

optical signal processing applications, etc. Low saturation fluence and ultrafast recovery time are 

highly desirable attributes of saturable absorbers as they enable access to the nonlinear behavior 

with lower power consumption and faster speed. Using SA with low saturation fluence and 

ultrafast recovery time, one can achieve low-threshold, compact, stable, self-starting high-power 

mode-locked lasers1, efficient laser pulse shaping for ultrashort pulses2,3, and high-speed optical 

signal processing4–6. 

Various saturable absorbers have been demonstrated in literature utilizing different materials and 

approaches, such as semiconductor saturable absorber mirror (SESAM)7–10 and quantum dot (QD) 

saturable absorbers11–13. Traditional SESAM and QD require complicated and costly fabrication 

techniques for precise bandgap engineering, and they have a narrow working wavelength. Carbon 

nanotube (CNT)14–17, transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC)18–20, topological insulator (TI)21,22, 

perovskites23, black phosphorous24,25, etc. are also demonstrated as saturable absorbers. CNTs 

require chirality control for high yield, and other 2D materials such as TMDC and TI show 

saturation fluence in the range from ~3mJ/cm2 to ~7mJ/cm2 with a few hundred femtoseconds to 

picosecond recovery time. Reports on planar SA devices such as semiconductor metasurface6 and 

plasmonic metasurfaces26 require high saturation fluences (100 μJ/cm2 to 0.6 J/cm2) with 

picosecond response time. Graphene-based saturable absorbers27–35 have attracted much attention 

because of graphene’s broadband optical properties36,37, nonlinear absorption32,38, ultrafast 

recovery time39–41, and easy integration with various substrates as well as fiber facets27,29,31,32. Yet, 

due to the weak absorption of graphene (~2.3%), weak light-matter interaction with free space 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

3

light, and ultrashort carrier lifetime, most of the graphene-based saturable absorbers demonstrated 

so far have high saturation fluence on the order of ~1 mJ/cm2 27,29,33. One common method to 

reduce the saturation fluence is to incorporate a waveguide structure to increase the light-matter 

interaction with graphene4,5,42. Such a method can reduce the saturation fluence to a few mJ/cm2

to μJ/cm2 with a recovery time of 1 ps to 100 fs, yet it usually suffers from high insertion loss (~20 

dB) and require large interaction lengths4,5,42.

In this paper, we demonstrate an ultra-compact graphene-plasmonic hybrid metasurface saturable 

absorber (GPMSA) experimentally with ultralow saturation fluence (~100 nJ/cm2) and ultrafast 

recovery time (<60fs) in the infrared wavelength. The subwavelength-thick GPMSA focuses light 

in the nanogaps between adjacent Au nanobars and significantly enhances the saturable absorption 

effects in graphene. More specifically, the highly enhanced field intensity in the nanoscale hot 

spots strongly boosts photon absorption in the graphene over the nanogap regions, resulting in a 

large photoexcited carrier population. The high density of photocarriers results in a significant 

change in graphene optical conductivity around the incident wavelengths. Meanwhile, the highly 

enhanced light-matter interaction43,44 in these hot spots magnifies the tuning effects of the GPMSA 

reflection spectra as a result of the change in graphene optical conductivity. Such two-folded 

enhancement effects finally result in the decrease of saturation fluence by over three orders of 

magnitude compared to that of free space coupled graphene SA reported in literature27,29,30 (~1 

mJ/cm2). Furthermore, the proposed scheme does not slow down the ultrafast carrier dynamics in 

the graphene layer. The number of photoexcited carriers rapidly rises upon the arrival of short 

pulses and relaxes via intraband carrier-carrier and carrier-optical phonon scattering within a few 

tens of femtoseconds. To the best of our knowledge, the GPMSA devices presented here exhibit 

the shortest recovery time and lowest saturation fluence among all free space SAs reported in the 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

4

literature so far6,8,14–16,18–22,26,27,29,45 (supplementary section S16). The proposed GPMSA holds the 

promise to enable high-speed signal processing, pulse shaping, and compact high-power pulsed 

laser sources in infrared wavelengths.

Results and Discussion

Design Concept 

The proposed GPMSA device consists of a plasmonic metasurface, a dielectric spacer layer 

(Al2O3), a metallic back reflector (Aluminum), and a monolayer graphene over the plasmonic 

metasurface, as shown in Figure 1a. The plasmonic metasurface is composed of gold nanobars 

closely coupled with each other. At the resonance wavelength of the plasmonic metasurface, the 

incident light is mainly focused onto the nanogap regions between the adjacent nanobars and 

results in nanoscale hot spots.  The highly enhanced electric field intensity in these hot spots results 

in strong interaction between the resonance mode of the plasmonic metasurface and the graphene 

layer on top. By adding a metallic back reflector and a dielectric spacer layer with a thickness of a 

few tens of nanometers (~20-30nm), we have achieved close to perfect absorption condition43 at 

the resonance wavelength. In this condition, no light is reflected, and all the incoming light is 

absorbed. This can be explained by the modified Fresnel’s equations considering multiple 

reflections of incident light between the top metasurface and the bottom reflector43,44,46. By 

engineering the metasurface design and spacer layer thickness, one can realize destructive 

interference between the first partially reflected wave and the following higher-order reflected 

partial waves at the metasurface to achieve close to 100% absorption in the metasurface cavity 

(see supplementary information S1). Such a metasurface absorber design configuration can further 

enhance the light graphene interaction and results in up to 3 orders of magnitude enhancement for 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

5

the near field intensity in the nanoscale hotspots, as shown in the inset of Figure 1a. Full-wave 

simulation results showed that the optical absorption in the graphene layer over the nanogap region 

(100 nm ×30 nm) at resonance wavelength (~1.035μm) is close to 40% of all the incident light 

inside the device unit cell (150 nm × 450 nm), as shown in Figure 1b (more simulation details are 

provided in supplementary information S6), in comparison with ~2.3% in a suspended monolayer 

graphene47.

Figure 1. Graphene-plasmonic hybrid metasurface saturable absorber (GPMSA) design concept 

(a) A schematic of the GPMSA device (left), its cross-sectional view (top right), and the near field 

intensity enhancement near the nanogap between adjacent Au-nanobars at resonance wavelength 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

6

(1.035μm) of the GPMSA (bottom right). |E|2 is the electric field intensity induced between the 

adjacent nanobars, and E02 is the intensity of the incident electric field. GPMSA device parameters 

used in all simulations presented in this manuscript: Au nanobar length, L=120nm, width, 

W=100nm, gap, g=30nm, thickness, tAu=40nm, x-period, Px=150nm, y-period, Py=450nm and 

Al2O3 thickness, tAlO=40nm. (b) The simulated overall Absorption, A (%), of the incident laser light 

in graphene inside the nanogap region (100nm x 30nm) of GPMSA compared to that of a 

suspended graphene layer without the metasurface structure. Both simulations were performed 

over the same area as the unit cell of the plasmonic metasurface (Px=150 nm, Py=450 nm) (c) 

Carrier dynamics in graphene under ultrafast laser excitation with photon energy Eph= ℏω. 

Photoexcited electrons and holes generated by the incident photons form a non-equilibrium (NE) 

carrier distribution centered at energy ℏω/2 in the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB). 

Within 10 – 100 fs, the non-equilibrium carriers relax to a hot fermi-Dirac distribution due to 

electron-electron (e-e) and electron-optical phonon (e-ph) scattering. (d) Simulated 2D contour 

plot of the photoexcited non-equilibrium electron distribution, N(m-2), in the graphene over the 

GPMSA nanogaps at energies around 

1

2ℏω, i.e., from 0.585eV to 0.615eV above the conduction 

band edge (EC=0eV). The pump fluence is 112nJ/cm2. For this and the following simulations in the 

manuscript, we use the same laser parameters as our measurement setup: pulse width 110fs; 

repetition rate 100MHz; central wavelength 1.035μm, and spectral broadening ~17nm. The x-axis 

represents the time delay with respect to the peak of the incident light pulse. (e) The instantaneous 

change in the real part Re(σS) and (f) the imaginary part of graphene optical surface conductivity 

Im(σS) of the GPMSA device presented in Figure 1d, at the peak of the incident pulse (delay time=0 

in Figure 1d), in comparison with that of a suspended graphene layer without metasurface 

structures. (g) Simulated reflection modulation ΔR (%) of the same device in Figure 1a at the peak 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

7

intensity of different incident pump fluences for GMPSA, the reference device, and suspended 

graphene.

When an ultrashort laser pulse incident onto the GPMSA device, the plasmonic metasurface 

focuses most of the optical energy into the “hot spots” in the nanogaps. Close to 40% of the 

incident photons are absorbed in the graphene located at the hotspots (as shown in Figure 1b) and 

generate a large population of transient photoexcited non-equilibrium (NE) carriers within a few 

tens of femtoseconds. The process is illustrated in Figure 1c. The electrons in the valence band 

absorb the incident photons, get excited to the conduction band, and form a non-equilibrium carrier 

distribution around the energy band covered by the laser wavelength and its spectral bandwidth. 

These photoexcited non-equilibrium carriers relax into a hot fermi-Dirac distribution within 10 –

100 fs due to electron-electron (e-e) and electron-optical phonon (e-ph) scattering30,41. We adopted 

a model considering this non-equilibrium photocarrier accumulation upon laser excitation and their 

subsequent relaxation due to electron-electron and electron-optical phonon scattering30. The 

dynamic interplay between the occupation probability of electrons in the conduction band (fC (t, 

ω)) and the valence band (fV (t, ω)) upon laser excitation is explained by two semi-empirical 

coupled differential equations relating the density of states of graphene at the excitation photon 

energy (D(E)), incident light intensity (I (t, ω)) and the associated relaxation time, 𝜏1, which are 

provided below30,

𝜕𝑓𝑉(𝑡, 𝜔)

𝜕𝑡
= − 𝑓𝑉(𝑡, 𝜔)
𝜋𝛼𝑓

𝐷(𝐸) ћ𝜔 𝐼0𝑒𝑥𝑝(− 𝑡2

Δ2) + 𝑓𝐶(𝑡, 𝜔)
𝜋𝛼𝑓

𝐷(𝐸) ћ𝜔 𝐼0𝑒𝑥𝑝(− 𝑡2

Δ2)

+ 1 − 𝑓𝑉(𝑡, 𝜔)

𝜏1

(1)

𝜕𝑓𝐶(𝑡, 𝜔)

𝜕𝑡
= 𝑓𝑉(𝑡, 𝜔)
𝜋𝛼𝑓

𝐷(𝐸) ћ𝜔 𝐼0𝑒𝑥𝑝(− 𝑡2

Δ2) − 𝑓𝐶(𝑡, 𝜔)
𝜋𝛼𝑓

𝐷(𝐸) ћ𝜔 𝐼0𝑒𝑥𝑝(− 𝑡2

Δ2)

− 𝑓𝐶(𝑡, 𝜔)

𝜏1

(2)


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

8

Where, I(t) = I0exp(-2.76t2/Δ2) is the incident laser intensity, 𝛼f is the fine structure coefficient of 

graphene, D(E) = D(ћω/2) = ћω/(πћ2vF2) is the density of states of graphene on the CB or VB at 

incident photon energy, and Δ is the incident laser pulse width (Full Width Half Maxima-FWHM). 

These two coupled differential equations explain the absorption, stimulated emission, and the 

subsequent relaxation of the excited non-equilibrium carriers. For saturable absorption, we are 

primarily interested in the ultrafast accumulation of non-equilibrium photoexcited carriers from 

VB to CB and the subsequent relaxation of the carriers from the non-equilibrium states to the 

equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution near the Dirac point. The most contributing relaxation 

channels in this process are the carrier-carrier (e-e) and carrier-optical phonon (e-ph) scattering, 

which happens within 10-100 fs. The scattering contributions from other origins such as carrier-

acoustic phonon and phonon-phonon scattering are not considered here as they have a picosecond 

or larger time constant40. So, the relaxation time, τ1, only consists of the excited carriers’ intraband 

electron-electron and electron-optical phonon scattering rates. The detailed simulation process of 

the model can be found in supplementary information S2. Based on this model, we performed 

time-dependent FDTD simulations of the GPMSA device, in a self-consistent way, upon ultrashort 

laser pulse excitation based on an iterative method, taking into account the dependence of optical 

absorption in the GPMSA device on the incident light intensity (supplementary information S3). 

For each incident pulse fluence, we obtain the time-dependent photocarrier distribution and 

graphene surface conductivity from the model and the corresponding reflection spectra of the 

GPMSA is obtained from FDTD simulations. Figure 1d shows the obtained time-dependent 

photoexcited electron populations, N(m-2), around half of incident photon energy (from 0.585eV 

to 0.615eV) above the conduction band edge (EC=0eV) in the graphene over the nanogap regions 

of the GPMSA device, in Figure 1b, for an incident laser pulse. The peak photocarrier populations 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

9

generated in the nanoscale hot spots are two orders of magnitude larger than that in the suspended 

graphene layer (Figure S11). As a result of the transient photocarriers, the optical surface 

conductivity of graphene is modulated with respect to time and wavelength. Figure 1e and 1f show 

that both the real part and imaginary parts of the optical surface conductivity for the graphene 

located in the nanoscale hotspots are strongly modulated (∆σS = -(42 - 57i) μS/m) at resonance 

wavelength compared to that of a suspended graphene layer under the same pulse fluence (∆σS 

-(0.8 - 1i) μS/m). Besides the significantly increased modulation of graphene optical conductivity, 

the reflection of the GPMSA device is also highly sensitive to the change of graphene optical 

surface conductivity inside the nanoscale hotspots43. We performed full-wave simulations (in a 

self-consistent way) to evaluate its reflection modulation, ΔR, at different pump fluence. Note that 

the reflection modulation ΔR is defined as the difference between the maximum reflection upon 

incident pulse (Rmax) and the reflection with no pump (R0), i.e., ΔR (%) = (Rmax - R0) x100%. 

Figure 1g provided the corresponding reflection modulation of the GPMSA mirror at different 

pump fluence compared to a reference device composed of monolayer graphene on the same 

substrate (Al2O3/Al/Si) as the GPMSA device but without plasmonic metasurfaces and the 

suspended graphene layer. The reference device acts as a saturable mirror with a metallic back 

reflector, similar to the GPMSA devices, and thus is more appropriate for evaluating performance

enhancement by the metasurface design than the suspended graphene layer.  According to the 

simulation results in Figure 1g, the reflection of the GPMSA mirror is increased by  ̴ 15% at the 

peak of the incident pulse (indicated by the dotted line) for the pump fluence of 112nJ/cm2 while 

the reflection spectra of a reference device remain unchanged for the same pump fluence since it 

is much lower than the saturation fluence of the reference device. By fitting the simulated reflection 

modulation with a two-level atom model48, the saturation fluence of the GPMSA mirror is found 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

10

to be ~120nJ/cm2 which is close to three orders of magnitude smaller than that of the reference 

device (~100μJ/cm2) and more than three orders of magnitude smaller than that of the suspended 

graphene layer (~1mJ/cm2), also shown in Figure 1g. Therefore, the GPMSA device acts as a 

saturable mirror at significantly reduced pumping fluence compared to the reference device. 

Furthermore, the maximum reflection modulation of the GPMSA mirror is ~30%, more than one 

order of magnitude higher than that of the reference device. 

Figure 2: Simulation results of GPMSA devices. (a, b) Simulated modulation of optical surface 

conductivity, σS (μS/m), (a-real and b-imaginary part) of graphene inside the nanogap of GPMSA 

(structure parameters for this simulation and all simulations in the manuscript are the same as 

presented in Figure 1a) with respect to time and wavelength after pump excitation with fluence 

112nJ/cm2. The laser parameters used in the simulations presented here are the same as in Figure 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

11

1d. (c) Simulated reflection spectra of GPMSA for different incident pump fluences (at the peak of 

the pulses) at laser wavelength 1.035μm compared to no pump condition. Note that the GPMSA 

device used in all the simulations of this manuscript has a resonant wavelength of 1.035μm. (d) 

Simulated reflection modulation, ΔR (%), of GPMSA with respect to wavelength and time at 

566nJ/cm2 incident pump fluence. ΔR is ~25% at the laser pulse peak intensity around the laser 

center wavelength (1.035μm). (e) The simulated amplitude of the reflected pulse, IR (%), with 

respect to time for increasing incident pump fluences. (f) Simulated pulse width, Δ (fs), of the 

reflected pump pulses at the laser center wavelength for different incident pump fluence. (g) 

Simulated reflection modulation, ΔR (%), for different carrier relaxation times, τ1, in graphene. 

(h) Simulated saturation fluence, Fsat, and peak saturation intensity, Isat (MW/cm2), of GPMSA at 

different graphene carrier-relaxation times, τ1. (i) Saturation fluence of GPMSA device as a 

function of wavelength difference between the incident light and the device resonance, ∆λ.

Figure 2a and b show the simulated change in the real and imaginary part of the graphene’s optical 

surface conductivity (σS), with respect to time and wavelength, inside the nanogaps of GPMSA 

(structure parameters are the same as in Figure 1a, resonant at 1.035μm wavelength) for laser 

excitation with pump fluence 112nJ/cm2 at 1.035μm laser wavelength. As a result of the changes 

in graphene’s optical surface conductivity, the reflection spectra of GPMSA change. Figure 2c 

shows the simulated reflection spectra of the device at the peak of the laser pulses (time = 0fs) for 

different incident pumping fluences. The reflection spectra change of GPMSA is also time-

dependent as graphene’s optical surface conductivity changes with time. This is shown clearly in 

Figure 2d, which illustrates the time and wavelength-dependent reflection modulation, ΔR (%), of 

GPMSA at 566nJ/cm2 pumping fluence (a similar figure for the reference device showing <1% 

reflection modulation for even larger pump fluence around 5.66μJ/cm2 is shown in Figure S12). 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

12

From Figure 2c, we see that the reflection modulation is dependent on the incident pump fluence. 

So, to evaluate the device’s operation as a saturable absorber, the self-modulation of reflection, 

ΔR(%), at the center wavelength of the incident laser and at the peak of the pulse (time = 0fs) for 

different incident pump fluences are plotted in Figure 1g (blue curve), showing the saturation effect 

of the device.

Theoretical analysis of the reflected pulse widths from the GPMSA devices suggested pulse 

narrowing effects. Figure 2e presents the simulated reflected pulse amplitudes at different incident 

pumping fluences. It is obtained considering the device’s self-modulation effect (Figure 2d), and 

a normalized Gaussian incident pulse, 𝐼𝑖𝑛 = 𝐼0 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−

𝑡2

Δ2) with pulse width Δ =110fs and 

amplitude 𝐼0=1. The corresponding pulse widths, Δ(fs), of the reflected pulses at different pump 

fluence are shown in Figure 2f. The reflected pulse width decreases with increasing pump fluences. 

The significant decrease (10%) of reflected pulse width relies on two important features of the 

GPMSA, i.e., saturated absorption at high intensity and ultrafast recovery time (shorter than half 

of the pulse width ~55fs), because both are necessary to ensure the peak of the pulse with highest 

intensity experiences larger reflection than the rising and falling edges of the pulse. If the recovery 

time is longer than the pulse width, the absorption experienced by the falling edge of the pulse 

would be close to that at the peak intensity, thus, the pulse width narrowing effect will be much 

weaker. 

An essential factor for the GPMSA operation is the carrier relaxation time of graphene, i.e., τ1. 

This is defined as the time necessary for the photoexcited non-equilibrium carriers to relax from 

the excited states with the help of e-e and e-ph scattering events (other longer time scale relaxation 

channels are not considered here, as explained in the previous section and in supplementary

information S2 and S3). Reflection modulation, saturation fluence, and recovery time of GPMSA 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

13

are dependent on τ1. Figure 2g shows that for the same incident pump fluence (56.6nJ/cm2), shorter 

or longer τ1 will result in small or large reflection modulation, respectively. This is understandable 

because, for slower τ1, the non-equilibrium carriers take longer to relax, i.e., they stay longer at the 

excited states, and it helps to build up the number of carriers in non-equilibrium states. As the non-

equilibrium carrier concentration increases, graphene optical surface conductivity goes through 

larger changes, resulting in larger modulation of the device response. For faster τ1, carriers are 

relaxed from non-equilibrium states quickly and have less time to build up. So, the change in 

graphene optical surface conductivity and the consequent change in device reflection spectra is 

smaller for faster τ1 compared to slower τ1. As a result, for faster τ1, larger pump fluence is required 

to obtain similar modulation as the slower τ1. Consequently, obtaining large reflection modulation 

with an ultrafast device is very challenging. 

The saturation fluence, Fsat, of GPMSA also varies for different relaxation times, τ1, illustrated in 

Figure 2h. For faster τ1, to saturate the device, we need higher pump fluence, whereas, for slower 

τ1, the required pump fluence is smaller. This observation explains the fundamental reason behind 

the difficulties in reducing saturation fluence in graphene while maintaining ultrafast carrier 

relaxation time (Fsat vs. τ1 for reference device is shown in figure S13).  Furthermore, we also 

studied the case for pump laser wavelengths different from the device’s resonance wavelength 

(1.035μm). The saturation fluence increases quickly as the incident pump laser wavelength shifts 

far away from the device resonance, as shown in Figure 2i. This is due to lower near-field 

enhancement inside the nanogaps of the Au nanobars for off-resonance pumping wavelengths

(Figure S15a). This, in turn, leads to decreased photon absorption in graphene, and thus produces 

smaller modulation in its optical conductivity. Therefore, the saturation fluence of the device 

becomes higher (Figure 2i) and reflection modulation becomes lower (Figure S15b, c) as the 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

14

pumping wavelength is away from the resonance, resulting in a limited operation spectral range of 

the saturable absorber. We will continue exploring designs with a broader operation wavelength 

range.

Fabrication and characterization of GPMSA devices

Figure 3. Fabrication and characterization of GPMSA devices. (a) Device fabrication process 

and a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the device after fabrication (before graphene 

transfer). The scale bar (500nm) is indicated with a solid brown line on the lower right corner. 

The inset shows a close-up view of two nanobar structures. Device Parameters are L=150nm, 

W=100nm, g=46nm, PY=470nm, tAu=40nm, and tAlO=20nm. Here, L is the length of the Au nano 

bar, W is the width of the nano bar, g is the gap between the coupled nano bars in the x-direction, 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

15

and Py is the period of the structure in the Y direction, tAu is Au nano bar thickness and tAlO is Al2O3

thickness. (b) Measured reflection spectra of the device (presented in Figure 3a) before and after 

graphene transfer. The resonance wavelength of the device is at 1.035μm. (c) Measured reflection 

modulation, ∆R (%) at 1.035μm, of the GPMSA device compared to the reference device at 

different pump fluences. Red dash lines are the fitted curves. 

We fabricated the device on a Si substrate. First, 150nm Aluminum was evaporated (using 

electron-beam evaporator) as the back reflector. Then 20nm Al2O3 dielectric spacer layer was 

deposited on top of Al using Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD). The Au plasmonic metasurface on 

the dielectric layer was fabricated using a double layer resist of poly (methyl methacrylate) (495K 

PMMA with 2% Anisole, 100nm) and methyl methacrylate (950K MMA with 2% Anisole, 70nm). 

Electron Beam Lithography (EBL) was used to pattern the double layer resist. After patterning the 

sample, cold development (4⁰C temperature) in a solution with 1-part Methyl Isobutyl Ketone 

(MIBK) and 3-part Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) was done. Then Cr/Au (5nm/35nm) layer was

deposited using a thermal evaporator, and lift-off was done using hot acetone for 12 hours. 

PMMA/MMA bilayer resist was used to form the overhang resist structure after development and 

facilitate the lift-off of the plasmonic metasurface structure. The fabrication flow is shown in 

Figure 3a. An SEM image of the device, taken before graphene transfer, is shown in Figure 3a. 

Monolayer graphene was transferred on the device using a wet transfer method (see the methods 

section). We performed Raman spectroscopy to quantify graphene layer and its quality. The 

measured spectra are shown in Figure S16. Raman spectra reveal that the 2D/G peak is larger than 

two, indicating monolayer graphene, and a very small D peak indicates good quality. We used a 

FTIR spectrometer coupled with a microscope, linear polarizer, and a liquid nitrogen-cooled 

Mercury Cadmium Telluride (MCT) detector (Figure S17a) to measure the reflection spectra of 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

16

the GPMSA devices. Figure 3b shows the reflection spectra before and after the graphene transfer 

for a GPMSA device (SEM image and device structure parameters are presented in Figure 3a). 

After graphene transfer, the resonance wavelength of the device was blue-shifted by ~76nm, the 

reflection dip is decreased by 11%, and the reflection at the working wavelength (~1.035μm) is 

changed by 20%. Furthermore, we can tailor the working wavelengths of the GPMSA design 

(Figure S17b) by changing the geometric of the devices, i.e., length, width, gap, and spacer layer 

thickness.

The optical setup for the saturable absorption measurement (shown in Figure S18a) comprises a 

femtosecond laser (Menlo System GmbH) with 110fs pulse width and 100MHz repetition rate at 

center wavelength 1.035μm and spectral broadening of ~17nm. The laser’s output power can be 

changed from 0 to 1200mW (~65μJ/cm2) by varying pump diode currents. The diameter of the 

focus point on the sample was around 150μm (supplementary information S13). The fabricated 

GPMSA device area was 200μm x 200μm, so the laser beam was focused on the center of the 

device to capture most of the incoming light intensity. After the incident light was reflected off the 

sample, it was captured by a power meter. We recorded the reflected power values from GPMSA 

and from the aluminum reflector without the graphene-plasmonic metasurface. These two values 

were used to calculate the reflection of the samples (GPMSA and reference device) at 1.035μm. 

The measured reflection of GPMSA (same device as in Figure 3b) at 1.035μm increased for 

increasing pump fluence and reaches a saturation level after it goes beyond the saturation fluence 

of the device (Figure S18b). This behavior is a characteristic indicator of saturable absorption 

property. Net reflection modulation, ΔR (%), of this device is more than 5.5%, and the relative 

modulation depth (ΔR/R0) is around 20% at 5μJ/cm2 incident pump-fluence. Consequently, the 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

17

insertion loss of GPMSA is ~4.25dB. Compared to the state-of-the-art of graphene-based SA4, the 

insertion loss is four times smaller.

Figure 3c shows the measured net reflection modulation, ΔR (%), profile (ΔR vs. incident pump 

fluence) for the GPMSA device (same as in Figure 3b) compared to the reference device. The 

GPMSA device exhibits much higher reflection modulation, >5.5%, compared to almost zero (i.e., 

unchanged) reflection modulation of the reference device. The measured reflection modulation 

profiles of similar GPMSA devices (resonance at 1.035μm) show quite consistent saturable 

absorption properties (Figure S19). Almost zero reflection modulation from the reference device 

indicates that there is no nonlinear absorption in the A2O3/Al/Si stack. Note that the femtosecond 

laser’s spectra blue-shift due to output power change (Supplementary section S17 and Figure S22) 

does not affect our measurement results as it introduces negligible reflection modulation (~0.1%) 

unrelated to saturable absorption compared to the large reflection modulation (~5.5%) obtained 

from the saturable absorption measurement of the device.

To extract the device’s saturation fluence, we followed the two-level atom model48 and used the 

following equation to fit the reflection profile (vs. incident pump fluence) of GPMSA.

𝑅 = 1 − (𝐴𝑁𝑆 +
𝐴𝑠

1 + 𝐹

𝐹𝑠

)

(3)

Here, 𝐴𝑁𝑆 describes the non-saturable absorption, 𝐴𝑠 is the saturable absorption. 𝐹𝑠 is the 

saturation fluence within the single photon absorption limit. After fitting the measured data with 

equation (3), we obtained the saturation fluence (𝐹𝑠) of the device. The fitted curve is shown in 

Figure 3c with red dashed lines. The estimated saturation fluence from this fitting is ~100nJ/cm2. 

The saturation fluence is 2-3 orders of magnitude smaller than the graphene SA reported in 

literature27,29.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

18

Ultrafast saturable absorption in GPMSA devices

Figure 4. Degenerate Pump-Probe Measurement of GPMSA (a) Pump-probe measurement setup 

comprising of femtosecond laser working ~1.035μm, beam splitter, optical delay line, focusing 

optics and photodetector. A chopper and lock-in amplifier are used to increase the measurement’s 

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). (b) Measured pump-probe signal (normalized, IPPnomalized) from the 

substrate (Al2O3/Al/Si), reference device, and three GPMSA devices (same devices as presented in 

Figure 3c (Device 1) and Figure S19a) at 566nJ/cm2 pump fluence. (c) Measured pump-probe 

signals at different pump fluences for GPMSA (Device 1). (d) Measured and simulated pump-

probe signal peaks with respect to incident pump fluences (Device 1). (e) Full width half maximum 

(FWHM) of the simulated pump-probe signals (blue circles) at different carrier relaxation times 

τ1 and the measured pump-probe signal (red star) at 56.6nJ/cm2 pump fluence.

To investigate the transient behavior and obtain the recovery time of GPMSA, we have performed 

degenerate pump-probe measurements at 1.035μm wavelength with the femtosecond laser (Menlo 

System GmbH) as mentioned previously. A schematic of the optical setup is shown in Figure 4a 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

19

(details can be found in the methods section). With the optical delay line (ODL), we varied the 

delay between the pump and probe pulses and recorded the change in the device reflection with 

the probe pulse as the device interacted with the pump pulse. Pump-probe measurements show 

that GPMSA devices provide enhanced absorption and large reflection modulation within 

femtosecond time scale compared to the substrate and reference device (Figure 4b). The maximum 

reflection modulation occurred around zero-time delay between the pump and probe pulses. It is 

noticeable that the rising part is longer than the decaying part of the pump-probe signal. We think 

it is likely due to the fact that on the rising edge, two competing processes are happening at the 

same time within the excitation energy band (i.e. around 

1

2ℏω  0.6eV) of graphene conduction 

band: absorption of photons (photocarrier generation) and e-e scattering of the excited 

photocarriers (photocarrier relaxation), while the falling edge is dominated mainly by the 

photocarrier relaxation.  Because of these two competing processes on the rising edge, there is a 

slower increase of nonequilibrium carrier concentration and thus takes longer time to reach the 

maximum reflection modulation. This trend was also observed in the simulation presented in 

Figure 2g and Figure S14. The ultrafast reflection modulation also depends on the incident pump 

fluence, as shown in Figure 4c. The reflection modulation goes up as the pump fluence is increased. 

The maximum values of the measured pump-probe signal at different pump fluences, Figure 4d, 

reveal saturation of the signal at higher pump fluences. The measurement results showed 

reasonably good agreement with simulation results (Figure 4d) obtained based on the model 

presented in the previous section. 

To extract the recovery time of the device, we first fitted the decaying portion of the pump-probe 

signal with an exponential decay function to obtain the recovery time, but the exponential decay 

function does not fit well with the measured pump-probe signal. This happens because the recovery 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

20

time of the device is dominated by the ultrafast carrier relaxation (for the photoexcited non-

equilibrium carriers) of graphene, which happens within 10-100fs (<100fs) due to e-e and e-ph 

scattering events, which is shorter than the pulse widths of the pump and probe lasers. Thus the 

pump-probe signal cannot provide the actual relaxation time of the GPMSA device and produce a 

non-exponential decay of the signal. For this reason, we performed time-dependent FDTD 

simulations of GPMSA, in a self-consistent way, utilizing the time-dependent optical surface 

conductivity of graphene for different carrier relaxation times, τ1, obtained from the model 

described in the previous section (Supplementary Information S3). Figure 4e shows the 

comparison between the FWHM of the measured pump-probe signal (~160fs at 56.6nJ/cm2 pump 

fluence) and that of the simulated pump-probe signal for different carrier relaxation times. The 

results suggest that the carrier relaxation time is less than 60fs. By comparing the simulation results 

with the measured pump-probe signal, we found that the time-dependent simulations with 50fs to 

60fs recovery times show good agreement with the measured pump-probe signal (Figure S20). At 

such an ultrashort time scale, the relaxation time of excited non-equilibrium carriers in graphene 

dominates the recovery time of our device, so we can conclude that our device has a recovery time 

of less than <60fs. Our device shows a faster recovery time than most reported works, including 

all graphene-based saturable absorbers, in the literature (Figure S21). We attribute it to the ultrafast 

nonequilibrium carrier relaxation time in graphene. Moreover, it is likely that the plasmonic 

metasurface provides new relaxation channels around the highly enhanced near-field hot spots in 

the nanogaps between adjacent antennas, which helps the hot carrier population and optical phonon 

population in graphene to relax faster. Further investigations are necessary to gain better insights 

into near-filed assisted carrier relaxation processes. 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

21

Autocorrelation: pulse-width measurement

Pulse narrowing is one of the important functions of saturable absorbers49. According to the 

simulation results, we expect decreased pulse width as incident fluence increases (Figure 2f). In 

experiment, we performed ultrashort pulse autocorrelation measurements to investigate the pulse 

width narrowing effect of the GPMSA devices. The measurement setup is shown in Figure 5a. Fs-

laser pulses were incident on the GPMSA device and the reflected light was coupled into a two-

photon-based interferometric intensity autocorrelator for femtosecond lasers (FSAC) to measure 

the pulse width. A simple illustration of the pulse width narrowing concept is presented in Figure 

5b, where we expect to see a narrowing effect of the reflected pulse width from the GPMSA device 

(incident pulse width, ∆in, and reflected pulse width, ∆Ref). Figure 5c shows the intensity 

correlation as a function of the time delay between the pulses from the delay arm and reference 

arm inside the autocorrelator, obtained for the reflected pulse by the GPMSA, the reference device 

as well as the substrate back reflector (without graphene) at the same pump fluence ~58μJ/cm2. 

The autocorrelation curve for the GPMSA device is narrower compared to those for the reference 

device and the substrate back reflector. This, together with experimental results in Figures 3 and 

4, confirms the ultrafast nonlinear absorption and the resulted pulse narrowing of the GPMSA 

devices, which did not happen in either the reference device or the substrate back reflector. Figure 

5d shows the measured reflected pulse widths from the GPMSA device and the incident pulse 

widths at different pump fluences. Note that the output pulse width from the fiber laser source 

decreases as the laser pulse energy increases. Nonetheless, at all incident fluence levels above the 

saturation fluence, the pulse width becomes narrower after reflection from the GPMSA than the 

input pulse width by about 10%, which agrees with the theoretical analysis presented in Figure 2f. 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

22

The results again confirm that the GPMSA device has strong saturable absorption with an ultrafast 

recovery time.

Figure 5. Reflected pulse width measurement. (a) Pulse width measurement setup comprising of 

the femtosecond laser, focusing optics and autocorrelator. The intensity autocorrelator is used to 

measure the pulse width. (b) Schematic representation of the pulse narrowing effect after the laser 

pulse is reflected from the GPMSA device. (c) The pulse shapes, intensity autocorrelation, of the 

reflected laser light from GPMSA (Device 1 in Figure 4b) compared to the reference device and 

substrate at pump fluence ~58 μJ/cm2. (d) Comparison of the reflected laser pulse width, ∆Ref, 

from GPMSA (Device 1 in Figure 4b) and incident pulse width, ∆in, at different incident laser 

pulse fluence. For input pulse fluence smaller than 20 μJ/cm2, the autocorrelation measurement 

results could not provide sufficient signal-to-noise ratio for pulse width estimation. 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

23

Conclusion

In summary, we have demonstrated ultra-fast saturable absorption in subwavelength-thick (~200 

nm, < /5) GPMSA devices based on graphene-plasmonic hybrid metasurfaces. Both theoretical 

and experimental results demonstrated that the GPMSA devices are featured with ultralow 

saturation fluence (~100 nJ/cm2) and ultrafast recovery time (<60fs) in the infrared wavelengths. 

The GPMSA devices focus light into the nanoscale hot spots inside the nanogap between adjacent 

Au nanoantenna and significantly increase light-matter interaction with graphene. Consequently, 

photon absorption in the graphene is significantly boosted over the nanogap regions and generates 

a large photoexcited carrier population. Furthermore, the strong light-graphene interaction in the 

hot spots of the GPMSA magnifies the tuning effects of the reflection spectra due to the ultrafast 

modulation of graphene optical conductivity. These enhanced effects finally result in the decrease 

of saturation fluence by over three orders of magnitude compared to free space coupled graphene 

SAs reported in the literature. Moreover, the proposed scheme does not slow down the ultrafast 

carrier dynamics in the graphene layer while the saturation fluence of the device is decreased. To 

the best of our knowledge, the GPMSA devices presented here exhibit the shortest recovery time 

and lowest saturation fluence among all free space SAs reported in the literature so far. The design 

concept can be readily applied to longer infrared wavelengths via structure engineering thanks to 

the broadband absorption of graphene and the design flexibility of plasmonic metasurfaces. The 

proposed planer hybrid metasurface-based GPMSA design holds the promise to enable high-speed 

signal processing, pulse shaping, and compact high-power pulsed laser sources in the infrared 

wavelengths with low power consumption. 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

24

Methods

Numerical Simulation

All numerical simulation is done using MATLAB® (MathWorks Inc.) with a phenomenological 

graphene carrier dynamics model30 upon laser excitation, considering the non-equilibrium carrier 

accumulation and subsequent relaxation of the non-equilibrium carriers. The detailed simulation 

process can be found in the supplementary information S2 and S3.

FDTD Simulation

All FDTD simulations are done using commercially available Lumerical Inc. FDTD software. The 

optical surface conductivity of non-pumped graphene is extracted from the numerical model 

included in the software, and the time-dependent optical surface conductivity of pumped graphene 

is calculated using the numerical model described above. All other material parameters (Gold, 

Aluminum, and Aluminum Oxide-Al2O3) are also obtained from the simulation software database. 

Time-dependent FDTD simulation process details can be found in the supplementary information.

Plasmonic metasurface fabrication

On a Silicon substrate, a 150nm Aluminum (Al) layer was deposited using electron beam 

evaporation (PVD 75, Kurt J. Lesker Company®). On top of the Aluminum layer, a 20nm 

Aluminum Oxide (Al2O3) layer is deposited using atomic layer deposition (Cambridge Savannah 

ALD) as a dielectric spacer layer. The dielectric layer was spin-coated with two layers of electron 

beam resists. One layer of poly (methyl methacrylate) (495K PMMA with 2% Anisole, ~100nm) 

and on top, another layer of methyl methacrylate (950K MMA with 2% Anisole, ~70nm). On top 

of the resists, a very thin layer (~5-10nm) of Chromium (Cr) was deposited as a charge dissipation 

layer. Electron Beam Lithography (EBL, JEOL JBX-6000FS) was used to pattern the double layer 

resist. After patterning, the sample was developed at a cold temperature (4⁰C) in a solution with 1-


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

25

part Methyl Isobutyl Ketone (MIBK) and 3-part Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to remove the exposed 

resists. Then a thin layer (~5nm) of Cr and 35nm thick Gold (Au) layer was deposited using 

thermal evaporation (Edwards Auto 306). The lift-off was done by soaking the sample in hot 

acetone for 12 hours, followed by an acetone and IPA rinse.

Graphene Transfer

We used a CVD graphene sample on a Cu foil (covered both sides). We cut a small piece, large 

enough to cover the whole area of the fabricated device and put it on a glass slide. We used one 

drop of water on the glass slide to hold the small piece in its place. Then we spin-coated 950K A4 

PMMA layer (at 2500 RPM for 1 minute) on top of the graphene piece to protect the graphene 

layer on that side from the following processing steps. Then we flip the small piece and expose the 

bare graphene side of the Cu foil. We take another glass slide and use Kapton tape on all four sides 

of the piece to hold it on the glass slide. Then put it inside oxygen (O2) plasma etcher for 15 

minutes to etch the graphene off that side of the Cu foil. After the process is done, we remove the 

graphene-covered Cu foil (on one side now) and cut off the four edges of the foil as they were 

protected by the Kapton tape during the plasma etching and still have graphene on both sides. Then 

we put the graphene-covered Cu foil (Copper, Cu, side down) in a copper etchant (a mixture of 

CuCl2 and HCl). After the etching is completed, we can see a translucent piece of graphene 

(covered with PMMA on top) floating on the etchant. We scooped the floating graphene piece 

from the etchant with a small piece of SiO2/Si wafer and put it inside a Deionized (DI) water bath. 

We provide three separate DI water baths (each for 5 minutes) to the graphene piece to remove all 

the Cu etchants. After the last bath, we move the graphene sample to another DI water bath. Then 

we take our device (where we want to transfer graphene) and scoop the graphene sample out of 

the DI water with it (transferring graphene on our device). Then we gently blow the sample with 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

26

an N2 gun (optional as it may tear graphene) to remove any water puddle underneath the graphene 

and then let it dry on its own for 24 hours. After that, we put the sample in an acetone bath for 5 

minutes and then rinsed it with acetone and IPA to remove all the PMMA from the top. Then blow-

dry with an N2 gun. Raman spectrum of the monolayer graphene is presented in Figure S16.

Device reflection spectra measurement

Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR spectrometer connected to a Hyperion 2000 microscope is used to measure 

the reflection spectra of the fabricated devices. A linear polarizer was used on the optical light path 

to align the light polarization along the long axis of the nanobar. The reflected light from the 

sample was collected with a 15x objective (NA=0.4). A liquid Nitrogen cooled Mercury Cadmium 

Telluride (MCT) photodetector was used to detect the collected reflected light from the sample. A 

background spectrum of the sample substrate (Al2O3/Al/Si) is taken and subtracted from all the 

measurements to remove any effect of the substrate.

Degenerate Pump-Probe Measurement

The ultrafast self-modulation is demonstrated by a degenerate (same color) pump-probe 

measurement. The measurement setup is illustrated in Figure 4a. A femtosecond Ytterbium fiber 

laser (Menlo Systems GmbH) is used to generate the pump and probe pulses at 1.035μm with a 

100MHz repetition rate and ~110fs pulse width. The pump beam is focused on the sample at a 45˚ 

angle with a parabolic mirror, and the probe beam is focused at a normal angle on the sample with 

a ZnSe objective lens (NA=0.13). The reflected probe pulse is shrunk and focused with two plano-

convex lenses on a biased free-space InGaAs photodetector (DET08CL, 5GHz, Thorlabs Inc.) and 

displayed by a mixed domain oscilloscope (DSA-X 91604A, Agilent Technologies) with 16GHz 

bandwidth. As the bandwidth and the response time of the photodetector is not enough to resolve 

the changes in the reflection of the probe pulses, we used a chopper (chopping frequency ~1200Hz) 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

27

on the pump path and used it as a reference (5f option selected in chopper controller) for a phase-

sensitive lock-in-amplifier. The photodetector output is connected to the lock-in-amplifier, and the 

DC output of the lock-in-amplifier is connected with a source meter and ultimately, the source 

meter reading is stored automatically by a computer using the MATLAB instrument control 

toolbox. An optical delay line controls the probe pulse delay (ODL 220, Thorlabs Inc.) with respect 

to the pump pulse. The movement of the ODL and the data recording from the lock-in-amplifier 

is synchronized and automated with the computer so that first the ODL is moved to change the 

delay and then a data is recorded. 

Acknowledgments

The research was supported in part by the AFOSR DURIP under grant FA9550-16-1-0183 and 

NSF 2DCC under grant DMR-1539116. Access to the NanoFab and/or EMC was supported, in 

part, by NSF contract ECCS-1542160. 

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Contributions

Y. Y. conceived the idea and supervised the study. M.Z.R. performed device design and 

characterization. M.Z.R., J.B., and J.J. fabricated the device. M.Z.R. and A.B. built the saturable 

absorption and pump-probe measurement setup. M.Z.R carried out the measurements and data 

analysis. M.Z.R. and Y.Y. wrote the manuscript, and all authors contributed to the manuscript.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

28

Reference 

(1)
Quarterman, A. H.; Wilcox, K. G.; Apostolopoulos, V.; Mihoubi, Z.; Elsmere, S. P.; Farrer, I.; 
Ritchie, D. A.; Tropper, A. A Passively Mode-Locked External-Cavity Semiconductor Laser 
Emitting 60-Fs Pulses. Nat. Photonics 2009, 3 (12), 729–731. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2009.216.

(2)
Kartner, F. X.; Jung, I. D.; Keller, U. Soliton Mode-Locking with Saturable Absorbers. IEEE J. Sel. 
Top. Quantum Electron. 1996, 2 (3), 540–556. https://doi.org/10.1109/2944.571754.

(3)
Wang, J.-C.; Sun, C.-K.; Wang, J.-K. Nonlinear Pulse-Shaping Phenomena of Semiconductor 
Saturable Absorber Mirror. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 89 (23), 231106. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2400396.

(4)
Ono, M.; Hata, M.; Tsunekawa, M.; Nozaki, K.; Sumikura, H.; Chiba, H.; Notomi, M. Ultrafast and 
Energy-Efficient All-Optical Switching with Graphene-Loaded Deep-Subwavelength Plasmonic 
Waveguides. Nat. Photonics 2020, 14 (1), 37–43. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-019-0547-7.

(5)
Wang, H.; Yang, N.; Chang, L.; Zhou, C.; Li, S.; Deng, M.; Li, Z.; Liu, Q.; Zhang, C.; Li, Z.; Wang, 
Y. CMOS-Compatible All-Optical Modulator Based on the Saturable Absorption of Graphene. 
Photonics Res. 2020, 8 (4), 468. https://doi.org/10.1364/PRJ.380170.

(6)
Zubyuk, V. V.; Vabishchevich, P. P.; Shcherbakov, M. R.; Shorokhov, A. S.; Fedotova, A. N.; Liu, 
S.; Keeler, G.; Dolgova, T. V.; Staude, I.; Brener, I.; Fedyanin, A. A. Low-Power Absorption 
Saturation in Semiconductor Metasurfaces. ACS Photonics 2019, 6 (11), 2797–2806. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.9b00842.

(7)
Keller, U.; Weingarten, K. J.; Kartner, F. X.; Kopf, D.; Braun, B.; Jung, I. D.; Fluck, R.; Honninger, 
C.; Matuschek, N.; Aus der Au, J. Semiconductor Saturable Absorber Mirrors (SESAM’s) for 
Femtosecond to Nanosecond Pulse Generation in Solid-State Lasers. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum 
Electron. 1996, 2 (3), 435–453. https://doi.org/10.1109/2944.571743.

(8)
Spühler, G. J.; Weingarten, K. J.; Grange, R.; Krainer, L.; Haiml, M.; Liverini, V.; Golling, M.; 
Schön, S.; Keller, U. Semiconductor Saturable Absorber Mirror Structures with Low Saturation 
Fluence. Appl. Phys. B 2005, 81 (1), 27–32. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00340-005-1879-1.

(9)
Saraceno, C. J.; Heckl, O. H.; Baer, C. R. E.; Schriber, C.; Golling, M.; Beil, K.; Kränkel, C.; 
Südmeyer, T.; Huber, G.; Keller, U. Sub-100 Femtosecond Pulses from a SESAM Modelocked 
Thin Disk Laser. Appl. Phys. B 2012, 106 (3), 559–562. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00340-012-4900-5.

(10) Diebold, A.; Zengerle, T.; Alfieri, C. G. E.; Schriber, C.; Emaury, F.; Mangold, M.; Hoffmann, M.; 

Saraceno, C. J.; Golling, M.; Follman, D.; Cole, G. D.; Aspelmeyer, M.; Südmeyer, T.; Keller, U. 
Optimized SESAMs for Kilowatt-Level Ultrafast Lasers. Opt. Express 2016, 24 (10), 10512–10526. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.24.010512.

(11) Lagatsky, A. A.; Leburn, C. G.; Brown, C. T. A.; Sibbett, W.; Zolotovskaya, S. A.; Rafailov, E. U. 

Ultrashort-Pulse Lasers Passively Mode Locked by Quantum-Dot-Based Saturable Absorbers. Prog. 
Quantum Electron. 2010, 34 (1), 1–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pquantelec.2009.11.001.

(12) Du, J.; Zhang, M.; Guo, Z.; Chen, J.; Zhu, X.; Hu, G.; Peng, P.; Zheng, Z.; Zhang, H. Phosphorene 

Quantum Dot Saturable Absorbers for Ultrafast Fiber Lasers. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7 (1), 42357. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep42357.

(13) Ahmed, S.; Qiao, J.; Cheng, P. K.; Saleque, A. M.; Hossain, M. I.; Zeng, L.-H.; Zhao, J.; Qarony, 

W.; Tsang, Y. H. Tin Telluride Quantum Dots as a Novel Saturable Absorber for Q-Switching and 
Mode Locking in Fiber Lasers. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2021, 9 (6), 2001821. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adom.202001821.

(14) Okazaki, D.; Morichika, I.; Arai, H.; Kauppinen, E.; Zhang, Q.; Anisimov, A.; Varjos, I.; Chiashi, 

S.; Maruyama, S.; Ashihara, S. Ultrafast Saturable Absorption of Large-Diameter Single-Walled 
Carbon Nanotubes for Passive Mode Locking in the Mid-Infrared. Opt. Express 2020, 28 (14), 
19997. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.395962.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

29

(15) Xiao, P.; Wu, K.; Mao, D.; Chen, J. A Pulsewidth Measurement Technology Based on Carbon-

Nanotube Saturable Absorber. Opt. Express 2019, 27 (4), 4188. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.27.004188.

(16) Gladush, Y.; Mkrtchyan, A. A.; Kopylova, D. S.; Ivanenko, A.; Nyushkov, B.; Kobtsev, S.; 

Kokhanovskiy, A.; Khegai, A.; Melkumov, M.; Burdanova, M.; Staniforth, M.; Lloyd-Hughes, J.; 
Nasibulin, A. G. Ionic Liquid Gated Carbon Nanotube Saturable Absorber for Switchable Pulse 
Generation. Nano Lett. 2019, 19 (9), 5836–5843. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b01012.

(17) Martinez, A.; Sun, Z. Nanotube and Graphene Saturable Absorbers for Fibre Lasers. Nat. Photonics

2013, 7 (11), 842–845. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2013.304.

(18) Zhang, H.; Lu, S. B.; Zheng, J.; Du, J.; Wen, S. C.; Tang, D. Y.; Loh, K. P. Molybdenum Disulfide 

(MoS_2) as a Broadband Saturable Absorber for Ultra-Fast Photonics. Opt. Express 2014, 22 (6), 
7249. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.22.007249.

(19) Yuan, J.; Mu, H.; Li, L.; Chen, Y.; Yu, W.; Zhang, K.; Sun, B.; Lin, S.; Li, S.; Bao, Q. Few-Layer 

Platinum Diselenide as a New Saturable Absorber for Ultrafast Fiber Lasers. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2018, 10 (25), 21534–21540.

(20) Yan, P.; Liu, A.; Chen, Y.; Chen, H.; Ruan, S.; Guo, C.; Chen, S.; Li, I. L.; Yang, H.; Hu, J.; Cao, 

G. Microfiber-Based WS_2-Film Saturable Absorber for Ultra-Fast Photonics. Opt. Mater. Express
2015, 5 (3), 479. https://doi.org/10.1364/OME.5.000479.

(21) Mu, H.; Wang, Z.; Yuan, J.; Xiao, S.; Chen, C.; Chen, Y.; Chen, Y.; Song, J.; Wang, Y.; Xue, Y.; 

Zhang, H.; Bao, Q. Graphene–Bi 2 Te 3 Heterostructure as Saturable Absorber for Short Pulse 
Generation. ACS Photonics 2015, 2 (7), 832–841. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.5b00193.

(22) Yan, P.; Lin, R.; Ruan, S.; Liu, A.; Chen, H.; Zheng, Y.; Chen, S.; Guo, C.; Hu, J. A Practical 

Topological Insulator Saturable Absorber for Mode-Locked Fiber Laser. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5 (1), 8690. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep08690.

(23) Li, P.; Chen, Y.; Yang, T.; Wang, Z.; Lin, H.; Xu, Y.; Li, L.; Mu, H.; Shivananju, B. N.; Zhang, Y.; 

Zhang, Q.; Pan, A.; Li, S.; Tang, D.; Jia, B.; Zhang, H.; Bao, Q. Two-Dimensional CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3
Perovskite Nanosheets for Ultrafast Pulsed Fiber Lasers. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9 (14), 
12759–12765. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b01709.

(24) Wang, K.; Szydłowska, B. M.; Wang, G.; Zhang, X.; Wang, J. J.; Magan, J. J.; Zhang, L.; Coleman, 

J. N.; Wang, J.; Blau, W. J. Ultrafast Nonlinear Excitation Dynamics of Black Phosphorus 
Nanosheets from Visible to Mid-Infrared. ACS Nano 2016, 10 (7), 6923–6932. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6b02770.

(25) Sotor, J.; Sobon, G.; Macherzynski, W.; Paletko, P.; Abramski, K. M. Black Phosphorus Saturable 

Absorber for Ultrashort Pulse Generation. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 107 (5), 051108. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4927673.

(26) Wang, J.; Coillet, A.; Demichel, O.; Wang, Z.; Rego, D.; Bouhelier, A.; Grelu, P.; Cluzel, B. 

Saturable Plasmonic Metasurfaces for Laser Mode Locking. Light Sci. Appl. 2020, 9 (1), 50. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41377-020-0291-2.

(27) Bao, Q.; Zhang, H.; Wang, Y.; Ni, Z.; Yan, Y.; Shen, Z. X.; Loh, K. P.; Tang, D. Y. Atomic-Layer 

Graphene as a Saturable Absorber for Ultrafast Pulsed Lasers. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2009, 19 (19), 
3077–3083. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.200901007.

(28) Sun, Z.; Hasan, T.; Torrisi, F.; Popa, D.; Privitera, G.; Wang, F.; Bonaccorso, F.; Basko, D. M.; 

Ferrari, A. C. Graphene Mode-Locked Ultrafast Laser. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (2), 803–810. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn901703e.

(29) Bao, Q.; Zhang, H.; Ni, Z.; Wang, Y.; Polavarapu, L.; Shen, Z.; Xu, Q.-H.; Tang, D.; Loh, K. P. 

Monolayer Graphene as a Saturable Absorber in a Mode-Locked Laser. Nano Res. 2011, 4 (3), 297–
307. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-010-0082-9.

(30) Xing, G.; Guo, H.; Zhang, X.; Sum, T. C.; Huan, C. H. A. The Physics of Ultrafast Saturable 

Absorption in Graphene. Opt. Express 2010, 18 (5), 4564. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.18.004564.

(31) Bonaccorso, F.; Sun, Z.; Hasan, T.; Ferrari, A. C. Graphene Photonics and Optoelectronics. Nat. 

Photonics 2010, 4 (9), 611–622. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2010.186.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

30

(32) Bao, Q.; Loh, K. P. Graphene Photonics, Plasmonics, and Broadband Optoelectronic Devices. ACS 

Nano 2012, 6 (5), 3677–3694. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn300989g.

(33) Winzer, T.; Knorr, A.; Mittendorff, M.; Winnerl, S.; Lien, M.-B.; Sun, D.; Norris, T. B.; Helm, M.; 

Malic, E. Absorption Saturation in Optically Excited Graphene. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 101 (22), 
221115. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4768780.

(34) Baylam, I.; Cizmeciyan, M. N.; Kakenov, N.; Kocabas, C.; Sennaroglu, A. Ultrafast Spectroscopy 

of Voltage Reconfigurable Graphene Saturable Absorbers in the Visible and near Infrared. 2D 
Mater. 2019, 6 (3), 035013. https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1583/ab1532.

(35) Vermeulen, N. Perspectives on Nonlinear Optics of Graphene: Opportunities and Challenges. APL 

Photonics 2022, 7 (2), 020901. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0082728.

(36) Falkovsky, L. A.; Varlamov, A. A. Space-Time Dispersion of Graphene Conductivity. Eur. Phys. J. 

B 2007, 56 (4), 281–284.

(37) Gusynin, V. P.; Sharapov, S. G.; Carbotte, J. P. Magneto-Optical Conductivity in Graphene. J. 

Phys. Condens. Matter 2006, 19 (2), 026222. https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/19/2/026222.

(38) Lim, G.-K.; Chen, Z.-L.; Clark, J.; Goh, R.; Ng, W.-H.; Tan, H.-W.; Friend, R.; Ho, P.; Chua, L. L. 

Giant Broadband Nonlinear Optical Absorption Response in Dispersed Graphene Single Sheets. 
Nat. Photonics 2011, 5, 554–560. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2011.177.

(39) Breusing, M.; Ropers, C.; Elsaesser, T. Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics in Graphite. Phys. Rev. Lett.

2009, 102 (8), 086809. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.086809.

(40) Brida, D. Ultrafast Collinear Scattering and Carrier Multiplication in Graphene. Nat. Commun.

2013, 9.

(41) Mihnev, M. T.; Kadi, F.; Divin, C. J.; Winzer, T.; Lee, S.; Liu, C.-H.; Zhong, Z.; Berger, C.; de 

Heer, W. A.; Malic, E.; Knorr, A.; Norris, T. B. Microscopic Origins of the Terahertz Carrier 
Relaxation and Cooling Dynamics in Graphene. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7 (1), 11617. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11617.

(42) Demongodin, P.; El Dirani, H.; Lhuillier, J.; Crochemore, R.; Kemiche, M.; Wood, T.; Callard, S.; 

Rojo-Romeo, P.; Sciancalepore, C.; Grillet, C.; Monat, C. Ultrafast Saturable Absorption Dynamics 
in Hybrid Graphene/Si 3 N 4 Waveguides. APL Photonics 2019, 4 (7), 076102. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5094523.

(43) Yao, Y.; Shankar, R.; Kats, M. A.; Song, Y.; Kong, J.; Loncar, M.; Capasso, F. Electrically Tunable 

Metasurface Perfect Absorbers for Ultrathin Mid-Infrared Optical Modulators. Nano Lett. 2014, 14
(11), 6526–6532.

(44) Basiri, A.; Rafique, M. Z. E.; Bai, J.; Choi, S.; Yao, Y. Ultrafast Low-Pump Fluence All-Optical 

Modulation Based on Graphene-Metal Hybrid Metasurfaces. Light Sci. Appl. 2022, 11 (1), 102. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41377-022-00787-8.

(45) Shcherbakov, M. R.; Liu, S.; Zubyuk, V. V.; Vaskin, A.; Vabishchevich, P. P.; Keeler, G.; Pertsch, 

T.; Dolgova, T. V.; Staude, I.; Brener, I.; Fedyanin, A. A. Ultrafast All-Optical Tuning of Direct-
Gap Semiconductor Metasurfaces. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 17. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
017-00019-3.

(46) Chen, H.-T. Interference Theory of Metamaterial Perfect Absorbers. Opt. Express 2012, 20 (7), 

7165–7172. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.20.007165.

(47) Nair, R. R.; Blake, P.; Grigorenko, A. N.; Novoselov, K. S.; Booth, T. J.; Stauber, T.; Peres, N. M. 

R.; Geim, A. K. Fine Structure Constant Defines Visual Transparency of Graphene. Science 2008, 
320 (5881), 1308–1308. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1156965.

(48) Garmire, E. Resonant Optical Nonlinearities in Semiconductors. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum 

Electron. 2000, 6 (6), 1094–1110. https://doi.org/10.1109/2944.902158.

(49) Verdeyen, J. T. Laser Electronics, 3rd ed.; 1995.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

31

Supplementary Materials

Table of Contents
S1. Plasmonic Metasurface and GPMSA.................................................................................. 32

S2. Time dependent optical conductivity of Graphene and FDTD simulation of GPMSA . 33

S3. Time dependent Fullwave FDTD Simulation in a Self-Consistent way .......................... 36

S4. Graphene n and k calculation.............................................................................................. 37

S5. Optical conductivity of graphene at different pump fluences .......................................... 39

S6. Calculation of Absorption and Absorption Enhancement in Graphene ......................... 40

S7. Simulation of Reference Device- Graphene on Substrate................................................. 41

S8. Device Simulation with different carrier relaxation times ............................................... 42

S9. GPMSA Reflection modulation at off-resonance laser excitation.................................... 43

S10. Graphene transfer and Raman Spectroscopy.................................................................. 43

S11. FTIR Setup and Reflection spectra................................................................................... 43

S12. Pump fluence dependent Reflection measurement setup................................................ 44

S13. Beam diameter calculations and measurements.............................................................. 45

S14. Reflection spectra of different devices before and after graphene transfer.................. 45

S15. Pump-probe simulation...................................................................................................... 47

S16. Comparison of our work with reported works in literature........................................... 47

S17. Laser spectra measurement............................................................................................... 48


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

32

S1. Plasmonic Metasurface and GPMSA

The multiple reflections in the Fabri-Perot cavity can be modeled with the modified Fresnel 
equations presented below1,

𝑟12 = 𝑛1 − 𝑛2 − 𝜎𝑀𝑍𝑜

𝑛1 + 𝑛2 + 𝜎𝑀𝑍𝑜

(4)

𝑟21 = 𝑛2 − 𝑛1 − 𝜎𝑀𝑍𝑜

𝑛2 + 𝑛1 + 𝜎𝑀𝑍𝑜

(5)

𝑡21 =
2𝑛1

𝑛1 + 𝑛2 + 𝜎𝑀𝑍𝑜

(6)

𝑡21 =
2𝑛2

𝑛1 + 𝑛2 + 𝜎𝑀𝑍𝑜

(7)

𝑟𝐴 = 𝐸𝑅

𝐸𝑖

= 𝑟12 + (𝑟12𝑟21 − 𝑟12𝑟21)𝑟23𝑒𝑖2𝑘𝑑

1 − 𝑟21𝑟23𝑒𝑖2𝑘𝑑
(8)

𝑟12 + (1 + 𝑟12 + 𝑟21)𝑟23𝑒𝑖2𝑘𝑑 = 0
(9)

Equation (4)) - (7)) are the modified Fresnel equations. Furthermore, equation (8) represents the 
overall reflection from the device. If we set equation (8)) to zero, which means no reflection and 
all the light is absorbed, we can obtain equation (9)). This equation is the perfect absorption 
condition.

Figure S6: FDTD simulation to obtain the best graphene-plasmonic hybrid metasurface (GPMSA) design 
(a) Plasmonic metasurface design with Fabry-Perot cavity mode (b) Scanning the Au nanobar length to 
find the length corresponding to the resonance around 1.035μm without graphene (c) Al2O3 thickness 
scan to find which thickness provides the best absorption at 1.035μm. (d) Reflection spectra for different 
gaps between two nanobars.

The perfect absorption condition (eq. 6) depends on the metasurface conductivity (σM), dielectric 
layer thickness (d), complex dispersive refractive index (n2) of dielectric layer, and wavelength of 
operation. We can modify the metasurface conductivity by changing the Au- nanobar length, 
width, thickness, gap between and period in y-axis (PY). Adding graphene on top is also going to 
change the metasurface conductivity depending on the quality of graphene, chemical doping, 
number of layers and so on. Furthermore, we can change the dielectric layer thickness to obtain 
perfect absorption in desired wavelength, which in this case is the wavelength of our laser in the 
lab at 1.035μm.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

33

We performed FDTD simulation to optimize design parameters and achieve large absorption and 
high nearfield enhancement in the gap at resonance wavelengths. In Figure S6(b-d), this 
optimization process is highlighted with some selected plots. In Figure 1a, the near field 
enhancement inside the gap is presented. It shows a large enhancement of over 1000 at the laser 
wavelength. Also, at the laser wavelength, the absorption of the final device is around 99% (shown 
in Figure S6d). For near perfect absorption, the structure parameters range is as follows: length of 
Au nanobar, L = 130nm; width of Au nanobar, w = 75nm to 100nm; gap between nanogap, G=30 
to 70nm; thickness of Au, tAU= 40nm; Al2O3 dielectric layer thickness, tox= 20 to 30nm. 
After the device fabrication, the structural parameters were changed and consequently the spectral 
response of the devices deviated from the ideal condition that we simulated here. For fabricated 
GPMSA devices, the best minimum reflection at the resonance (at around 1.035μm) we could 
achieve is around ~20% (As shown in the main manuscript Figure 3b). To recreate this in 
simulation we also changed the device parameters to achieve ~20% minimum reflection at the 
resonance (as shown in Figure 2c and all other simulations presented in the main manuscript
accordingly).
So, GPMSA device parameters used in all simulations presented in this manuscript are Au nanobar 
length, L=120nm, width, W=100nm, gap, g=30nm, Au nanobar thickness, tAu=40nm, x-period, 
Px=150nm, y-period, Py=450nm and Al2O3 thickness, tAlO=40nm.
S2. Time dependent optical conductivity of Graphene and FDTD simulation of GPMSA

From the coupled differential equations mentioned in the main manuscript, equation (1) and (2), 
we can calculate the time-dependent occupation probability in conduction band (CB), 𝑓𝐶(𝑡, 𝜔), and 
valence band (VB), 𝑓𝑉(𝑡, 𝜔). Then we can calculate the time-dependent non-equilibrium carrier 
concentration, 𝑁(𝑡, 𝜔), in the conduction band, within the energy band covered by the laser 
bandwidth, considering a certain relaxation time (τ1), with the following equation,

𝑁(𝑡, 𝜔) = (𝑓𝑉(𝑡, 𝜔) − 𝑓𝐶(𝑡, 𝜔)) ∗ 𝐷(𝐸)
(S10)

The non-equilibrium photoexcited carrier concentration, 𝑁(𝑡, 𝜔), in the conduction band, at the 
laser wavelength (1.035μm), and subsequent relaxation due to carrier-carrier and carrier-optical 
phonon scattering is presented in Figure S7.

Graphene has a constant absorption of 𝜋𝛼𝑓 or 2.3% at all wavelengths. As the carriers accumulate 
in the conduction band from the valence band, the absorption decreases from 2.3%. We can 
account for the changing absorption, 𝐴(𝑡, 𝜔), by considering the time-dependent occupation 
probability of electrons in CB (fC (t, ω)) and VB (fV (t, ω)),

𝐴(𝑡, 𝜔) = 𝜋𝛼𝑓 (𝑓𝑉(𝑡, 𝜔) − 𝑓𝐶(𝑡, 𝜔))
(S11)

Here, 𝐴(𝑡, 𝜔) is the time-dependent absorption of graphene. We can convert this absorption into 
an absorption coefficient, 𝛼(𝑡, 𝜔), by considering a thickness (d) of 0.3nm for the graphene 
monolayer. Please see discussion in supplementary section S4 for absorption coefficient 
calculation of monolayer graphene. For these simulations, we take graphene absorption coefficient
long before pumping, 𝛼(−∞, 𝜔), as the initial or base value and then we try to calculate the 
changes in the absorption coefficient due to laser pumping, ∆𝛼(𝑡, 𝜔) = 𝛼(𝑡, 𝜔) − 𝛼(−∞, 𝜔). 
From the changes in time-dependent absorption coefficient, ∆𝛼(𝑡, 𝜔), the change in complex 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

34

refractive index, ∆𝑛𝑇(𝑡, 𝜔) = ∆𝑛(𝑡, 𝜔) + i∆𝑘(𝑡, 𝜔), of graphene can be calculated with the help 
of the Kramers-kroning model2, 

∆𝑘(𝑡, 𝜔) = 𝑐 ∆𝛼(𝑡, 𝜔)

2𝜔
(S12)

∆𝑛(𝑡, 𝜔) = 𝑐

𝜋 𝑝. 𝑣 ∫
∆𝛼(𝑡, 𝛺)
𝛺2 − 𝜔2 𝑑𝛺

𝛺𝑚

𝛺𝑙
(S13)

∆𝑛(𝑡, 𝜔) = 𝑐

𝜋 [∫
∆𝛼(𝑡, 𝛺)
𝛺2 − 𝜔2 𝑑𝛺

𝜔−

𝛺𝑙

+ ∫
∆𝛼(𝑡, 𝛺)
𝛺2 − 𝜔2 𝑑𝛺

𝛺𝑙

𝜔+

]

Here, KK model relates the change in imaginary part (∆𝑘(𝑡, 𝜔)) and the real part (∆𝑛(𝑡, 𝜔)) of 
graphene’s complex refractive index with its time dependent change in absorption coefficient, 
∆𝛼(𝑡, 𝜔). To calculate the effective total complex refractive index upon laser excitation, we extract 
the optical surface conductivity, 𝜎𝑆(−∞, 𝜔), of non-pumped graphene from FDTD numerical 
model in Lumerical Inc. FDTD simulation software. From 𝜎𝑆(−∞, 𝜔), we can calculate in plane 
(||) complex permittivity, 𝜀(−∞, 𝜔) = 1 +

𝑖𝜎𝑆(−∞,𝜔)

𝜀0𝜔𝑑
, and then complex refractive index, 

𝑛𝑇(−∞, 𝜔) = √𝜀(−∞, 𝜔), of non-pumped graphene. Then we add the time dependent change in 
complex refractive index, ∆𝑛𝑇(𝑡, 𝜔)= ∆𝑛(𝑡, 𝜔) + 𝑖∆𝑘(𝑡, 𝜔), to obtain the total complex refractive 
index of graphene,

𝑛𝑇(𝑡, 𝜔) = 𝑛𝑇(−∞, 𝜔) + ∆𝑛𝑇(𝑡, 𝜔)
(S14)

𝑛𝑇(𝑡, 𝜔) includes the instantaneous time dependent index change due to laser pumping. The 
complex permittivity, 𝜀(𝑡, 𝜔) , of the graphene is then calculated from the complex index,
𝜀(𝑡, 𝜔) = 𝑛𝑇(𝑡, 𝜔)2 = (𝑛(𝑡, 𝜔) + 𝑖𝑘(𝑡, 𝜔))2 . Time dependent optical surface conductivity, 
𝜎𝑆(𝑡, 𝜔), of the graphene can be calculated from the in plane (||) complex permittivity of graphene 
as follows,

𝜀(𝑡, 𝜔) = 1 + 𝑖𝜎𝑆(𝑡, 𝜔)

𝜀0𝜔𝑑
(S15)

Using this instantaneous change in graphene’s optical surface conductivity, 𝜎𝑆(𝑡, 𝜔), we can 
perform simulation of GPMSA using the 2D surface conductivity model in Lumerical FDTD and 
find the time-dependent reflection spectra, as shown in Figure 2d and Figure S8a, of our device.
We sample optical surface conductivity (𝜎𝑆(𝑡, 𝜔)) of graphene at different points of time in 
accordance with the change of non-equilibrium carrier accumulation, 𝑁(𝑡, 𝜔), in graphene CB
(which is responsible for the instantaneous change in optical conductivity). Then we use these 
𝜎𝑆(𝑡, 𝜔), at different time, as conductivity input for the graphene 2D conductivity model in 
Lumerical FDTD to do the time dependent FDTD simulation of our device. The process of 
selecting optical surface conductivity at different points of time is depicted in Figure S7. Pump 
fluence used in this simulation is 0.0566μJ/cm2.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

35

Figure S7: Process of selecting different point of time on the carrier density plot and finding graphene 
conductivity at each of those times. FDTD simulation is done with corresponding surface conductivity of
graphene for each of the selected points. This way we can perform a time-dependent simulation for our
graphene-plasmonic hybrid metasurface device (GPMSA).

Simulation results depicting the time evolution of reflection spectra, R, and reflection modulation
(ΔR) with changing optical surface conductivity of graphene in GPMSA is presented in Figure 
S8b. This simulation is done considering a plasmonic metasurface with gap size 30nm and incident 
pump fluence of 56.6nJ/cm2.

Figure S8: (a) Change in the hybrid metasurface reflection spectra with time (within 10-20fs) after laser 
excitation. The red arrow indicates the change direction with increasing time. (b) Gradual evolution of 
reflection modulation in GPMSA with time (within 10-20fs) after laser excitation.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

36

S3. Time dependent Fullwave FDTD Simulation in a Self-Consistent way

Figure S9: Flow chart of self-consistent FDTD simulation

The process of time dependent Fullwave FDTD simulation in a self-consistent way is shown in 
Figure S9. The process is carried out at each of the preselected time points of the incident pulse
(Figure S7). Carrier density at the half of the incident photon energy and corresponding graphene 
optical conductivity is calculated based on the process described in section S2 which we feed it 
back to FDTD simulation to obtain the near-field enhancement inside the nanogaps and the 
reflection spectra of GPMSA. This iterative process continues until the simulated nearfield 
enhancement inside the nanogaps match with the previously simulated near-field enhancement. 
Monolayer graphene on the plasmonic metasurface is modelled considering four different regions 
according to the enhanced near field in different regions of the hybrid metasurface. These regions 
are indicated by R1, R2, R3 and R4. The graphene around the nano-gap (R1, R2 and R3) 
experiences much more near-field enhancements compared to the surrounding graphene (R4) on 
the other parts of the metasurface. For a plasmonic nano-bar design with gap 30nm and width of 
100nm; area of R1 is 15nmx 105nm, R2 is 7.5nmx 105nm and R3 is 120nmx 31nm and the rest is 
R4. These are illustrated in Figure S10.

Figure S10: (a) Different regions of graphene experience different near field enhancement. (b) Based on 
(a) graphene is modeled in four different regions. R1- Middle of nano gap, R2- Near the edge of nano-gap, 
R3- On the side of nano-gap and edge of nanobar, R4-rest of the graphene regions covering the GPMSA 
and surroundings.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

37

The average near field enhancement is calculated for the regions discussed in Figure S10. This
near field enhancement is multiplied with the incident pulse intensity to get the new incident peak 
intensity. This new pulse intensity is used to calculate graphene’s new optical conductivity for 
each indicated regions (R1, R2 and R3). Then we use this new optical conductivity to simulate our 
device in FDTD again to obtain the new near field enhancement in those regions. Comparing the 
difference in the near field enhancement, between this step and the previous, we can set a stop to 
this loop. The entire process is illustrated in Figure S11 for incident pump fluence of 
0.0566μJ/cm2.

Figure S11: Step 1: Near field enhancement around the nanogap for the input optical conductivity of 
graphene. The average near field enhancement for different regions are indicated below the near field-
enhancement for each step. New optical conductivity is calculated based on the near-field enhancement
obtained in step 1 . Step 2- the resulted near field enhancement after using the newly calculated optical 
conductivity of graphene is shown here. As the near field enhancement in different regions are quite 
different compared to step 1, we use this new near field enhancement to calculate the new optical 
conductivity of graphene. Step 3- We use the newly calculated optical conductivity to do another 
simulation of our device. It seems the near field enhancement after this simulation is very close to the 
results in step 2.

S4. Graphene n and k calculation

Figure S12: (a) Suspended monolayer graphene surrounded by air. (b) Reflection, transmission, and absorption inside 
monolayer graphene depends on the multiple reflection in the cavity formed inside graphene.

The transmission, reflection and absorption from the monolayer graphene depends on the multiple 
reflections happening inside the cavity formed inside graphene surrounded by air, illustrated in 
Figure S12a and b. 
Total reflection coefficient considering multiple reflection inside the cavity,

𝑟𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝑟12 + 𝑡12𝑟23𝑡21𝑒𝑖(2𝜑ℎ−△𝜑𝑟)
1

1 − 𝑟21𝑟23𝑒𝑖(2𝜑ℎ−△𝜑𝑟)

Total transmission coefficient considering multiple reflection inside the cavity,


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

38

𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝑡12 𝑒𝑖𝜑ℎ 𝑡23

1

1 − 𝑟23𝑟21𝑒𝑖(2𝜑ℎ−△𝜑𝑡)

Here, 
𝑟𝑖𝑗 = reflection coefficient of an interface when light going from i medium to j medium
𝑡𝑖𝑗 = transmission coefficient of an interface when light going from i medium to j medium
Path traversed inside material with index n2 (graphene) is AB and BC. Phase accumulated by AB 
and BC is:

φh= k2 * d/ cos(θt’)

Phase difference introduced due to path difference is provided as follows

Δφr= k1 *2d tan(θt’) sin(θi) = 2k2d  (sin2(θt’)/cos (θt’))
Δφt= k1 *2d tan(θt’) sin(θi) = 2k2d  (sin2(θt’)/cos (θt’))

For vertical incidence, 

φh= k2 * d and Δφr= Δφt = 0

So, total reflection and transmission coefficient becomes

𝑟𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝑟12 + 𝑡12𝑟21𝑡21𝑒𝑖(2𝑘2𝑑)
1

1 − 𝑟21𝑟21𝑒𝑖(2𝑘2𝑑)
(S16)

𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝑡12 𝑒𝑖𝑘2𝑑 𝑡21

1

1 − 𝑟21𝑟21𝑒𝑖(2𝑘2𝑑)
(S17)

Here, medium 3 and 1 are same, air. So, n1 =1 and n2= n+ik.
Reflection and transmission coefficient from ach interface is provided below

𝑟12 =

𝑛1−𝑛2
𝑛1+𝑛2 = 

1−(n + ik)

1+(n + ik)

𝑟21 =

𝑛2−𝑛1
𝑛1+𝑛2 = 

(n + ik)−1

1+(n + ik)

𝑡12 =

2𝑛1

𝑛1+𝑛2 = 

2

1+(n + ik)

𝑡21 =

2𝑛2

𝑛1+𝑛2 = 

2(n + ik)

1+(n+ ik)

And propagation constant or wavenumber inside graphene is

𝑘2 = 𝑛2 ∗ 𝑘0 = (𝑛 + 𝑖𝑘) 2𝜋

𝜆

So, 𝑒𝑖(2𝑘2𝑑) = 𝑒𝑖(2(𝑛+𝑖𝑘)2𝜋

𝜆 𝑑) = 𝑒2(𝑖𝑛−𝑘)2𝜋

𝜆 𝑑 = 𝑒𝑖2𝑛2𝜋

𝜆 𝑑−2𝑘2𝜋

𝜆 𝑑 = 𝑒𝑖2𝑛2𝜋

𝜆 𝑑−𝛼𝑑 = 𝑒𝑖2𝑛2𝜋

𝜆 𝑑𝑒−𝛼𝑑

Absorption coefficient of graphene, 

𝛼 = 2𝑘

2𝜋

𝜆 = 2𝑘

2𝜋𝑓

𝑐 = 2𝑘

𝜔

𝑐

Graphene material properties, under laser excitation, is derived from the coupled differential 
equation in main manuscript. 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

39

S5. Optical conductivity of graphene at different pump fluences

Figure S13: After laser excitation, the graphene experiences changes in its optical properties. The changes 
occur at the energy band corresponding to the laser wavelength bandwidth (1.035μm ± 17nm). (a-c) 
Presents changes in occupation probability of photoexcited carriers in graphene CB (fCB) and non-
equilibrium carrier density (N(m-2)), at different pump fluences, within the energy band in CB 
corresponding to the incident laser’s wavelength bandwidth. (d-f) Presents changes in real and imaginary 
part of graphene’s optical conductivity (σS), at different pump fluences, within the energy band in CB 
corresponding to the incident laser’s wavelength bandwidth.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

40

S6. Calculation of Absorption and Absorption Enhancement in Graphene

Absorption is calculated utilizing FDTD simulation software from Lumerical Inc. We setup an 
FDTD simulation and to calculate the absorption within a certain region of graphene we follow 
the below outlined procedure.

1. Setup FDTD simulation with advanced absorption analysis group.
2. Enclose the region of interest and a small part of surrounding region (at least one cell larger) 

with this advanced absorption analysis group. This analysis group contains an index 
monitor and electric field monitor.

3. Run the simulation. It will provide the |E|2 at different position of the simulation region 

inside the enclosed analysis group.

4. Using the formula below the analysis group calculates the power absorbed per unit volume, 

Pabs, at different position of the enclosed region. Pabs.x, Pabs.y and Pabs.z. It depends on 
the imaginary part of permittivity and the electric-field intensity,

𝑃𝑎𝑏𝑠 = −0.5 𝜀0 𝜔|𝐸|2 𝐼𝑚(𝜀)

5. Create a filter (F) for the specific material we want to calculate the absorption for. We can 

use the material parameter used in the simulation (obtained from the index monitor) to find 
the exact region enclosed by the material. This is in terms of x,y, and z. 

6. Then integrate (Pabs x Pabs x F) over 3D (x,y and z) space with corresponding position 

vector defined in Pabs.x, Pabs.y and Pabs.z to get the absorption,

Absorption =
∭
𝑃𝑎𝑏𝑠𝑃𝑎𝑏𝑠 𝐹

𝑥𝑁1𝑦𝑁2𝑧𝑁3

𝑥𝑖𝑦𝑗𝑧𝑘

𝑑𝑥 𝑑𝑦 𝑑𝑧

Figure S14: (a) Enclosed region inside the analysis box to calculate the absorption in graphene within the 
nano-gap (29.4nm x 107nm). (b) Calculated absorption of light inside graphene within the whole nano-
gap region. (b) Enclosed region covering the middle of the nano-gap (17nm x 107nm) (d) Absorption of 
light in graphene within the region enclosed in (c).

Absorption enhancement is obtained by comparing the absorption of a certain region with the 
absorption of light in a suspended graphene (2.3%) having the same area. So, the absorption 
enhancement is obtained by,

Absorption Enhancement= A (%) / 2.3% / (AC/AT)


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

41

Here, A (%) is the absorption within the covered area (AC), AT is the total simulation area, in our 
case its 160nm x 450nm.
So, maximum absorption enhancement within the middle of the nano-gap region (Region 2: 
17nm/107nm) (Figure S14c) is around 280 times. And the maximum average absorption 
enhancement in the rest of the gap region (Region 1: 13nmx107nm) is around 450 times. Illustrated 
in Figure S15.

Figure S15: (a) Different region inside the nano-gap showing different near-field intensities (b) Absorption 
enhancement inside different region inside the nano-gap.

S7. Simulation of Reference Device- Graphene on Substrate

Figure S16: Simulated 2D contour plot of the number of excited non-equilibrium carriers, N(m-2), within 
the narrow energy band (around 

1
2ℏω) of the conduction band of graphene at 112nJ/cm2 pump fluence 

in suspended graphene. The X-axis represents time, and Y-axis represents the relative energy of the 
graphene conduction band calculated from the edge

Figure S17: Simulated reflection modulation (ΔR(%)) from graphene lying on Al2O3/Al/Si substrate for 
5.66μJ/cm2 pump fluence.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

42

Figure S18: Simulated saturation fluence (Fsat) vs relaxation time constants (τ1) for reference device, 
graphene on substrate (Al2O3/Al/Si).

S8. Device Simulation with different carrier relaxation times

Figure S19: Carrier relaxation time in graphene, τ1, vs. the time it takes for the reflection modulation to 
reach maximum after laser pulse maxima. Here, pulse width of laser is 110fs and pump fluence is 
56.6nJ/cm2.

It is evident, from Figure 2g, that the reflection modulation reaches its maxima at a later time 
compared to the incident pulse maxima at time zero. The time delay between the maximum 
reflection modulation and the peak of incident pulse is because it takes some time for the non-
equilibrium carriers to build up in the excitation energy band (

1

2 of the photon energy, ℏω or 

~0.6eV). The carrier build-up time is required because as the excited carriers occupy the empty 
states close to the excitation energy band, the e-e scattering3 scatter them off from the occupied 
states; however, the scattering rate is slower compared to the carrier excitation rate, so eventually, 
the carriers build up. Consequently, the longer the ultrafast relaxation times of graphene (τ1<50fs 
in Figure 2g), the rising part of the reflection modulation becomes longer than the decaying part.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

43

S9. GPMSA Reflection modulation at off-resonance laser excitation

Figure S20: (a) Simulated Near-field enhancement inside nano gap of GPMSA at 900nm pumping (away 
from the resonance). (b) Reflection spectra modulation and (c) Reflection modulation, ∆R (%), of GPMSA 
device for different incident pumping fluences at 900nm (off-resonance pumping).

S10. Graphene transfer and Raman Spectroscopy

Figure S21: Raman Spectrum of the transferred graphene on the metasurface. The ratio between 2D and 
G peak is more than 2 which indicates monolayer graphene, and a very low D peak indicates high quality
and defect-free graphene.

After graphene transfer, we verified the monolayer graphene by doing Raman spectroscopy, 
illustrated in Figure S21. The 2D peak, around 2700cm-1, is more than two times compared to the 
G peak, around 1580cm-1. Furthermore, the D peak is very small, indicating minimal defect or 
disorder in graphene ensuring high quality.
S11. FTIR Setup and Reflection spectra


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

44

Figure S22: (a) FTIR, microscope and MCT detector setup for reflection spectra measurement. (b) 
Reflection spectra of different GPMSA devices with different resonance (working wavelength) 
wavelength.

S12. Pump fluence dependent Reflection measurement setup

Figure S23: (a) Measurement setup to characterize the saturable absorption property of the device. A flip 
mirror in the incident light path is used to re-direct the beam toward the power meter 1 to monitor the 
intensity fluctuation in the laser. An off-axis parabolic mirror is used to focus the incident pump laser on 
the sample a second power meter is used to capture the reflected laser light. (b) Measured reflection, R 
(%) at 1.035μm, of GPMSA (same device as in Figure 3a) at different incident pump fluence and its fitted 
line.

The optical setup for the saturable absorption measurement is shown in Figure S23a. The setup 
comprises a femtosecond laser (Orang-Menlo System) with 100fs pulse width and 100MHz 
repetition rate at center wavelength 1.035μm and spectral broadening of ~17nm. The laser’s output 
power can be changed from 0 to 1200mW by varying pump diode currents.  The diameter of the 
focus point on the sample is around 150μm (supplementary S12). The fabricated GPMSA device 
area is 200μm x 200μm, so the laser beam is focused on the device’s midpoint to capture almost
all of the incoming light intensity. After the incident light is reflected off the sample, it is captured 
by a power meter (S302C- S302C-Thermal Power Sensor Head, Thorlabs Inc., power meter 2 in 
Figure S23a). First, we record the reflected power from the substrate and then we move to record 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

45

the reflected power from the GPMSA. These recorded powers are used to calculate the reflection 
of the sample (GPMSA and reference device) at 1.035μm.
Figure S23b shows the measured reflection profile of Device 1 with respect to different incident 
pump fluence. This measured data is fitted with equation (3), and the obtained saturation fluence, 
𝐹𝑠, of the device is ~100nJ/cm2. The fitted curve is shown with solid red line. 
S13. Beam diameter calculations and measurements

The pump beam is focused using a 45˚ parabolic mirror with reflected focal length 8”. The beam 
diameter at the focus point is calculated considering gaussian pulse shape. The wavelength of the 
pump light is 1.035μm and incident beam diameter is 2mm. Considering the gaussian laser beam, 
the diameter is calculated to be 135μm. But because the beam is falling on the device at 45˚, the
focus point becomes elliptical and one of the axes become longer and the other axis is around 
135μm. 
We confirmed the beam diameter at the focus point by focusing the beam on reflective Au circles 
(fabricated on glass substrate) of different diameters 50μm, 100μm, 150μm, 200μm and 250μm 
(these circles are used to measure beam diameters of other lasers also). For us, we focused the laser 
beam on the middle of the reflective circle of 200μm and 250μm diameters. Then collected the 
reflected beam in a power meter. Then scanned the beam on x-and y-axis of the circle with 10μm 
steps. We start counting the steps just before we see the decrease in signal in the power meter and 
continue counting the number of steps until we completely lost the signal on the power meter. It 
takes about 14 to 16 steps in this case. So, we approximate the shape of the focus point of beam to 
be circular with diameter around 150μm.
S14. Reflection spectra of different devices before and after graphene transfer

Figure S24: (a-c) FTIR spectra of different devices before and after graphene transfer. The different blue 
shifts of resonance, absorption and reflection modulation before and after graphene transfer is presented 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

46

in Table 1. (d-e) Measured reflection modulation profile of device 1 to 3. Structure parameters for Device 
1: L=150nm, W=100nm, g=46nm, and PY=470nm (same device as in Figure 3c); Device 2: L=155nm, 
W=96nm, g=46nm, and PY=470nm and Device 3: L=150nm, W=95nm, g=46nm, and PY=470nm. For all 
GPMSA devices, tAu=40nm, and tAlO=20nm.

Table 1: Changes of different device response after graphene transfer

Device
∆R1.035μm = R1.035μm (w/o 
Gra.) - R1.035μm (w Gra.)

Absorption at 

resonance
(A=1-R)

∆λ = λResonance (w/o Gra.) 

- λResonance (w Gra.)

Reflection 

Modulation, ∆R(%)

1
20%
73%
76nm
5.5%

2
22%
75%
87nm
6.5%

3
19%
70%
70nm
3.7%

The reflection spectra of all three GPMSA devices are presented in Figure S24(a-c). These three 
devices have slightly different structure parameters, but they all have resonance very close to 
1.035μm, the operation wavelength of the laser (same as in Figure 3b). Furthermore, although 
these devices are all pumped around the resonance, the reflection modulation is different due to 
different blue shift of the device resonance after graphene transfer, different absorption at the 
resonance, and different reflection modulation at the incident laser wavelength before-after 
graphene transfer. 
From Figure S24(a-c) and Table 1, we see that the device resonance blue shifts differently which 
results in different reflection modulation and absorption at pump wavelength (1.035μm). The 
maximum blue shift happens for device 2, then device 1 and then device 3. Consequently, the 
maximum reflection modulation is observed for Device 2, ~6.5% in Figure 3c, for device 1 it is 
around 5.5% and for device 3 its around 3.7%.
Although the net reflection modulation for GPMSA is larger than the reference device, they are 
quite small compared to other SA devices presented in literature. The small net reflection 
modulation, ΔR (%), can be explained with the similar logic presented in the context of Figure 2g, 
which states that the GPMSA device having an ultrafast recovery time will have small reflection 
modulation. The evidence for this ultrafast recovery is presented in the main text, where we discuss 
the transient behavior of GPMSA devices.


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

47

S15. Pump-probe simulation

Figure S25: Measured pump-probe signal, normalized with max value, overlapped with the 
simulated pump-probe signal (Device 1) at 566nJ/cm2 pump fluence.

S16. Comparison of our work with reported works in literature

Here we compare the performance of GPMSA with different reported works in the literature. In 
Table S2, we have listed some of the saturable absorbers in literature and their performance 
parameters such as saturation fluence, recovery time, modulation depth, and insertion loss.

Table S2: Comparison of our work with reported works in literature

Wavelength 

(nm)

Saturation 

fluence

Saturation 
intensity
Recovery time
Modulation Depth
Insertion 

Loss

SESAM4
1314
1.1 μJ/cm2
-
-
4%
-10.2119dB

Monolayer Graphene5
750
5.3 mJ/cm2
5300 MW/m2
100fs
65.9%
4.9592 dB

Multilayer Graphene6
630
7.13 mJ/cm2 (3 

layer)

7100 MW/m2

(3 layers)
0.21ps
~65% (3 layer)
4.34 dB

Graphene-Bi2Te3 
heterostructure7
1550
15-22 μJ/cm2
72.9 to 109.5 

GW/m2
191-296fs

11.5-41.88% 
(depending on 

coverage of Bi2Te3)

2.5 to 5 dB

MoS2 Nanoplatelets8
1064
6.9 mJ/cm2
8.7 MW/m2
-
4.6%
0.34 dB

WS2 film9
1560
17 μJ/cm2
250 GW/m2
-
1.20%
0.18 dB

Few Layer PtSe2 10
1064
-
0.346 GW/cm2
-
26%
-

Bi2Te3 Topological 

Insulator film11
1560
3.74 μJ/cm2
26.7 MW/cm2
-
5.7%
-

Large-Diameter 

SWCNT12
2300
18 μJ/cm2
-
220fs
30%
-

Carbon-nanotubes13
1500-1630
11.6 μJ/cm2
-
~1ps
9.182%
-

Ionic Liquid Gated 

CNT14
1540
-
-

80 to 190fs (At 
different Applied 

voltages)

0.7 to 3.2 %
-

Semiconductor 
Metasurface15
830
96 μJ/cm2
1.6 GW/cm2
~6ps16
25%
1.5dB

Plasmonic-Metasurface17
1555
0.64 J/cm2
-
-
60%
8.42 dB

GPMSA-
Our work
1035
~0.10 μJ/cm2
~1.0 MW/cm2
<60fs
20%
5dB


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

48

Modulation Depth = (ΔR/R) x100% and Insertion loss = 10logRdB. In Figure S26(a, b) we 
illustrate the comparison between different devices and GPMSA. 

Figure S26: Our work in comparison to other reported works in literature. (a) Comparing Saturation 
fluence of different reports (b) Recovery time combined with saturation fluence. The red star represents 
our work. The reference number of the reported work is provided as the label.

S17. Laser spectra measurement

Figure S27: Laser spectra at different pumping fluence on the sample. Laser output power is changed by 
changing the amplifier pump current.

A femtosecond Ytterbium fiber laser (Menlo Systems GmbH) is used in our measurements. 
Around 10nm spectra blue shift is observed in the laser’s spectra when output fluence is regulated 
by changing the laser’s pump current (using internal control).
On-resonance devices (resonant around the laser wavelength) are pumped from ~0.04μJ/cm2 to 
~20μJ/cm2, in this pump range the femtosecond laser spectra will blue shift by ~10nm. This blue 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

49

shift causes ~0.1% reflection modulation (unrelated to saturable absorption) of the device, which 
is negligible considering the 6% reflection modulation obtained from the saturable absorption 
measurement. Furthermore, the saturation absorption for these devices happens ~0.1μJ/cm2. In this 
pump range the femtosecond laser has <3nm blue shift. So, the measurement results obtained from 
the on-resonance devices are not affected by the wavelength shift of the laser.

Reference

(1)
Yao, Y.; Shankar, R.; Kats, M. A.; Song, Y.; Kong, J.; Loncar, M.; Capasso, F. Electrically Tunable 
Metasurface Perfect Absorbers for Ultrathin Mid-Infrared Optical Modulators. Nano Lett. 2014, 14
(11), 6526–6532.

(2)
Kador, L. Kramers–Kronig Relations in Nonlinear Optics. Appl. Phys. Lett. 1995, 66 (22), 2938–2939.

(3)
Xing, G.; Guo, H.; Zhang, X.; Sum, T. C.; Huan, C. H. A. The Physics of Ultrafast Saturable Absorption 
in Graphene. Opt. Express 2010, 18 (5), 4564. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.18.004564.

(4)
Spühler, G. J.; Weingarten, K. J.; Grange, R.; Krainer, L.; Haiml, M.; Liverini, V.; Golling, M.; Schön, 
S.; Keller, U. Semiconductor Saturable Absorber Mirror Structures with Low Saturation Fluence. 
Appl. Phys. B 2005, 81 (1), 27–32. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00340-005-1879-1.

(5)
Bao, Q.; Zhang, H.; Ni, Z.; Wang, Y.; Polavarapu, L.; Shen, Z.; Xu, Q.-H.; Tang, D.; Loh, K. P. 
Monolayer Graphene as a Saturable Absorber in a Mode-Locked Laser. Nano Res. 2011, 4 (3), 297–
307. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-010-0082-9.

(6)
Bao, Q.; Zhang, H.; Wang, Y.; Ni, Z.; Yan, Y.; Shen, Z. X.; Loh, K. P.; Tang, D. Y. Atomic-Layer 
Graphene as a Saturable Absorber for Ultrafast Pulsed Lasers. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2009, 19 (19), 
3077–3083. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.200901007.

(7)
Mu, H.; Wang, Z.; Yuan, J.; Xiao, S.; Chen, C.; Chen, Y.; Chen, Y.; Song, J.; Wang, Y.; Xue, Y.; Zhang, 
H.; Bao, Q. Graphene–Bi 2 Te 3 Heterostructure as Saturable Absorber for Short Pulse Generation. 
ACS Photonics 2015, 2 (7), 832–841. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.5b00193.

(8)
Zhang, H.; Lu, S. B.; Zheng, J.; Du, J.; Wen, S. C.; Tang, D. Y.; Loh, K. P. Molybdenum Disulfide 
(MoS_2) as a Broadband Saturable Absorber for Ultra-Fast Photonics. Opt. Express 2014, 22 (6), 
7249. https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.22.007249.

(9)
Yan, P.; Liu, A.; Chen, Y.; Chen, H.; Ruan, S.; Guo, C.; Chen, S.; Li, I. L.; Yang, H.; Hu, J.; Cao, G. 
Microfiber-Based WS_2-Film Saturable Absorber for Ultra-Fast Photonics. Opt. Mater. Express
2015, 5 (3), 479. https://doi.org/10.1364/OME.5.000479.

(10) Yuan, J.; Mu, H.; Li, L.; Chen, Y.; Yu, W.; Zhang, K.; Sun, B.; Lin, S.; Li, S.; Bao, Q. Few-Layer Platinum 

Diselenide as a New Saturable Absorber for Ultrafast Fiber Lasers. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2018, 10 (25), 21534–21540. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b03045.

(11) Yan, P.; Lin, R.; Ruan, S.; Liu, A.; Chen, H.; Zheng, Y.; Chen, S.; Guo, C.; Hu, J. A Practical Topological 

Insulator Saturable Absorber for Mode-Locked Fiber Laser. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5 (1), 8690. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep08690.

(12) Okazaki, D.; Morichika, I.; Arai, H.; Kauppinen, E.; Zhang, Q.; Anisimov, A.; Varjos, I.; Chiashi, S.; 

Maruyama, S.; Ashihara, S. Ultrafast Saturable Absorption of Large-Diameter Single-Walled Carbon 


This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently 
accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited 
and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122

50

Nanotubes for Passive Mode Locking in the Mid-Infrared. Opt. Express 2020, 28 (14), 19997. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.395962.

(13) Xiao, P.; Wu, K.; Mao, D.; Chen, J. A Pulsewidth Measurement Technology Based on Carbon-

Nanotube Saturable Absorber. Opt. Express 2019, 27 (4), 4188. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.27.004188.

(14) Gladush, Y.; Mkrtchyan, A. A.; Kopylova, D. S.; Ivanenko, A.; Nyushkov, B.; Kobtsev, S.; 

Kokhanovskiy, A.; Khegai, A.; Melkumov, M.; Burdanova, M.; Staniforth, M.; Lloyd-Hughes, J.; 
Nasibulin, A. G. Ionic Liquid Gated Carbon Nanotube Saturable Absorber for Switchable Pulse 
Generation. Nano Lett. 2019, 19 (9), 5836–5843. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b01012.

(15) Zubyuk, V. V.; Vabishchevich, P. P.; Shcherbakov, M. R.; Shorokhov, A. S.; Fedotova, A. N.; Liu, S.; 

Keeler, G.; Dolgova, T. V.; Staude, I.; Brener, I.; Fedyanin, A. A. Low-Power Absorption Saturation in 
Semiconductor Metasurfaces. ACS Photonics 2019, 6 (11), 2797–2806. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.9b00842.

(17) Wang, J.; Coillet, A.; Demichel, O.; Wang, Z.; Rego, D.; Bouhelier, A.; Grelu, P.; Cluzel, B. Saturable 

Plasmonic Metasurfaces for Laser Mode Locking. Light Sci. Appl. 2020, 9 (1), 50. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41377-020-0291-2.


