1 

Active Huygens’ metasurface based on in-situ 

grown conductive polymer 

Wenzheng Lu1,*, Leonardo de S. Menezes1,2,3, Andreas Tittl1, Haoran Ren4 and Stefan A. 

Maier4,5,* 

1Chair in Hybrid Nanosystems, Nano-Institute Munich, Faculty of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 

München, Munich, 80539, Germany. 

2Departamento de Física, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, 50670-901 Recife-PE, Brazil. 

3Center for Nanoscience, Faculty of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, 80539, Germany. 

4School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. 

5Department of Physics, Imperial College London, London SW72AZ, UK. 

*e-mail: Wenzheng.Lu@physik.uni-muenchen.de; Stefan.Maier@monash.edu 

Abstract 

Active metasurfaces provide unique advantages for on-demand light manipulation at a 

subwavelength scale for emerging applications of 3D displays, augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) 

glasses, holographic projectors and light detection and ranging (LiDAR). These applications put 

stringent requirements on switching speed, cycling duration, controllability over intermediate 

states, modulation contrast, optical efficiency and operation voltages. However, previous 

demonstrations focus only on particular subsets of these key performance requirements for device 

implementation, while the other performance metrics have remained too low for any practical use. 

Here, we demonstrate an active Huygens’ metasurface based on in-situ grown conductive polymer 

with holistic switching performance, including switching speed of 60 frames per second (fps), 


2 

switching duration of more than 2000 switching cycles without noticeable degradation, hysteresis-

free controllability over intermediate states, modulation contrast of over 1400%, optical efficiency 

of 28% and operation voltage range within 1 V. Our active metasurface design meets all 

foundational requirements for display applications and can be readily incorporated into other 

metasurface concepts to deliver high-reliability electrical control over its optical response, paving 

the way for compact and robust electro-optic metadevices. 

Introduction 

Active metasurfaces, often alternatively termed as tunable or reconfigurable metasurfaces, are 

rapidly emerging as a major frontier in photonic research and have launched tremendous 

breakthroughs in modern optics1–3. Compared with their passive counterparts, active metasurfaces 

consist of ultrathin planar arrays of subwavelength active nanoantennas, whose optical responses 

can be dynamically modulated on-demand. Over the past decade, active metasurfaces have made 

a significant impact on the new development of beam deflectors4–8, spatial light modulators9–12, 

varifocal metalenses13–15, dynamic holograms16–19 and many others. The active tuning schemes 

mainly rely on varying optical properties of the nanoantennas or their surrounding materials 

through chemical reactions19–21, mechanical displacements22–24, electrical switching16,17,25–27, 

thermal modulation28–31 and all-optical switching32–34. Among these modulation schemes, 

electrical switching is of particular interest because it promises compact integration of meta-optics 

with miniaturized on-chip electro-optic systems, which can be readily incorporated into electronic 


3 

smart devices for practical applications1,2, such as 3D displays, augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) 

glasses, dynamic holograms, beam steering and light detection and ranging (LiDAR). 

To this end, a number of active metasurfaces have been implemented by using different electro-

active materials, such as chalcogenide phase-change materials (PCMs)26–27, III-V semiconducting 

materials5,35,36, ionic conducting materials37–38, metallic polymers6,14. Previous active metasurfaces 

exhibit only distinct subsets of key performance metrics1, including switching speed, cycling 

duration, controllability over intermediate states, modulation contrast, optical efficiency and 

operation voltages, as shown in Figure 1a. However, these performance attributes are hardly met 

simultaneously, making them almost impossible for any practical use. For instance, even though 

PCM metasurfaces can provide a switching speed of up to 2 MHz27, they require high operation 

voltage and large cell manipulation26. III-V semiconductors offer excellent switching duration and 

controllability for intermediate states, but suffer from low modulation contrasts due to the small 

tuning range of the material intrinsic refractive index5. Recently, conductive polymers have shown 

many desired properties for electrically active metasurfaces, such as large variation of refractive 

index, fast switching speed, superior cycling stability and low operation voltages39–42. However, 

previous active metasurfaces purely based on conductive polymers are disadvantaged by low 

diffractive efficiency, due to the geometric phase design and the weak resonant nature of the 

nanostructured polymer6,14. Moreover, the fabrication of the conductive polymer relying on spin-

coating prevents long-term switching durability since the contact issue between the polymer and 

the substrate6,14. 

In this work, we introduce an electrically active Huygens’ metasurface based on the in-situ grown 

conductive polymer, polyaniline (PANI), and experimentally demonstrate its holistic active 

switching performance. We combine the superior electro-optical response of PANI with the 


4 

accurate and continuous phase modulation of the Huygens’ nanoantennas, and achieve an 

unprecedented switching performance covering all key requirements for display applications. Our 

active Huygens’ metasurface exhibits a high modulation contrast of 1400% and a diffraction 

efficiency up to 28%, which is 25 times higher than the previous polymer-based metasurface6,14 

and comparable to liquid crystal-based metadevices9. The manufacture of the active PANI layer is 

realized by in-situ polymer growth on the pre-fabricated metasurface. The solid contact between 

the nanoantennas and the grown PANI facilitates mechanical and electrical durability, enabling a 

superior cycling duration of over 2000 switching cycles without noticeable degradations. The 

intrinsic dynamic properties of PANI endow the active metasurface with fast switching speed of 

60 fps and virtually hysteresis-free controllability over continuous intermediate states within a low 

operation voltage range from -0.2 V to +0.6 V. Unlike previous active metasurfaces performing 

well only in subsets of performance metrics (Fig. 1a), our electrically active metasurface with 

holistic switching performance holds great promise towards practical display applications. 


5 

Fig. 1 | Comparison of active metasurface performance and the concept of electrically active 

Huygens’ metasurface composed of PANI-modulated dielectric nanoantennas. a, Comparison 

of different electrically active metasurfaces in performances. The performance is evaluated 

relatively to the display application requirements defined in the reference1. The evaluation of each 


6 

electro-active materials is based on representative references: chalcogenide PCMs26,27, III-V 

semiconductors5,36, ionic conducting materials37,38, metallic polymers6,14. b, Schematics 

illustrating the electrical switching of an individual active Huygens’ nanoantenna based on 

conductive polymer. The polymer is switched to oxidized state at +0.6 V (left), and to reduced 

state at -0.2 V (right). The switching time between the states is 15 ms, corresponding to a refresh 

rate of over 60 fps. c, Simulated and measured transmission spectra (left panel) of a metasurface 

made of homogeneous nanoantennas (height H = 140 nm, radius R = 110 nm, periodicity Px = Py 

= 450 nm) and the calculated phase retardation (right panel) of the nanoantennas with different 

radii in the oxidized state. d, Simulated and measured transmission spectra (left panel) and the 

calculated phase retardation (right panel) in the reduced state. The inset chemical structures show 

the conversion of the polymer between the oxidized and reduced states. The inset images show the 

simulated field distributions of the electric dipole (ED, red) and the magnetic dipole (MD, blue) in 

the oxidized state, as well as the spectrally overlapping electric and magnetic dipoles (ED + MD, 

yellow) in the reduced state, at their corresponding resonant wavelengths of 694 nm, 765 nm and 

785 nm, respectively. 

Results 

Concept of electrically active Huygens’ nanoantennas 

Our active Huygens’ metasurface is composed of dielectric silicon nanodisks surrounded by a 

layer of PANI, resting on an indium-tin-oxide (ITO) substrate that acts as an electrical contact 

(Fig. 1b). The cylindrical shape of the nanoantenna is chosen to provide polarization independence 

and the period of the nanoantennas is fixed to 450 nm in both x and y direction so that the unit cell 

is subdiffractive. The state of the polymer is collectively controlled by voltage tuning via 


7 

electrochemistry, where an applied voltage range between +0.6 V and -0.2 V (vs. a reference 

electrode) can continuously tune the polymer into states in between the oxidized and reduced 

states. In detail, the redox reaction triggered by the applied voltage induces an alternating 

delocalization of the π-electrons in the polymer chain of PANI, resulting in a large variation of the 

refractive index with a maximum Dn = 0.6 at 780 nm (Supplementary Fig. 1). 

The core concept of our design is the spectral tuning of the electric dipole (ED) and magnetic 

dipole (MD) of the nanoantenna by electrical modulation of the surrounding polymer. Fig. 1c and 

d depict the spectral response of nanoantennas at different applied voltages. In the oxidized state, 

the simulated and measured transmission spectra show that the ED and the MD are spectrally 

separated, resonating at 694 nm and 765 nm, respectively. When switched to the reduced state, the 

two dipole resonances redshift to 785 nm and overlap with each other. As suggested by the 

principle of dielectric Huygens’ metasurfaces43, the spectrally overlapping resonances of ED and 

MD signifies the fulfillment of Huygens’ condition, which produces a full-range phase shift from 

0 to 2π combined with high transmission. Importantly, the phase modulation functionality of the 

nanoantenna is switched on at an applied voltage of -0.2 V, exhibiting strong phase shift (Fig. 1d), 

while at +0.6 V, the nanoantenna exhibits a phase retardation well below 2π-phase coverage and 

can be considered switched off (Fig. 1c). The variation of the phase shift in the nanoantennas is 

determined by the interference of the ED and MD resonances, where the spectral responses of the 

two resonances are determined by the nanoantenna geometrics and the refractive-index contrast 

between the nanoantenna and the surrounding environment43. Therefore, by harnessing the 

environmental tuning scheme and carefully choosing nanoantenna geometries for optimum phase 

engineering, switchable metasurfaces with high efficiency and greatly improved switching 

contrast can be realized. 


8 

Metasurface design for electrical beam steering 

Fig. 2 | Metasurface design for electrical beam steering. a,b, Schematic illustrating the concept 

of electrical beam steering using a polymer-integrated Huygens’ metasurface at the applied voltage 

of +0.6 V and -0.2 V, respectively. c, Tilted SEM image of the bare dielectric metasurface with 

eight-element gradient nanoantennas design (highlighted structures). Scale bar: 1 μm. d, Simulated 

far-field transmitted intensities of +1, 0, -1 diffraction orders for the electrical beam steering 

metasurface. 

As a proof of concept, we implemented an active metasurface for optical beam steering, where the 

incident light can be deflected into a fixed angle on-demand by electrical control (Fig. 2a and b). 

The metasurface design is based on an eight-element gradient phase geometry using the calculated 

nanoantenna phase profiles for an incident wavelength of 785 nm (Supplementary Fig. 2). The 

chosen structures have an average transmittance of 0.6. The metasurfaces were fabricated via 


9 

electron-beam lithography (EBL) patterning and reactive-ion etching (RIE), followed by 

electrochemical polymerization for the growth of the polymer. Figure 2c shows a scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM) image of the fabricated bare dielectric metasurface on a transparent conductive 

ITO/glass substrate. The metasurface is designed such that the steered beam couples to the +1 

diffraction order at the polymer reduced state, and to the 0 order at the polymer oxidized state. The 

design principle is validated by simulated electric field distributions (Supplementary Fig. 3), where 

the transmitted spatial phase profile supports diffraction at +1 order at an operation voltage of -0.2 

V and strongly suppresses the diffraction at +0.6 V. Detailed far-field analysis of the metasurfaces 

reveals the switchable beam steering performance with high switching contrast at a diffraction 

angle of 12.7°, meanwhile the intensity of the 0 order can be readily modulated (Fig. 2d). 

In-situ polymer growth and electrical beam steering performance. 


10 

Fig. 3 | In-situ measurement and optimization of beam steering performance. a, Schematic of 

the in-situ optical measurement setup for the active beam steering metasurface. A high-speed 

monochromatic camera was used to record the diffraction pattern during the polymer growth 

process. b, Normalized intensities of +1, 0 and -1 diffraction orders during the polymer growth. c, 

Figure of merit (FOM) of beam steering between 0 and +1 diffraction orders at different coating 

cycles obtained from the measured intensities in b. d, Measured camera image (top) and diffraction 


11 

intensity profile (bottom) at an applied voltage of +0.6 V. e, Measured camera image (top) and 

diffraction intensity profile (bottom) at an applied voltage of -0.2 V. f, Camera images of the 

diffraction orders at different input voltages. g, Diffraction intensity profiles at different applied 

voltage extracted from f. The data in d-f were measured on the beam steering metasurface at an 

optimized polymer coating cycle number of 56. 

To experimentally validate our electrical beam steering metasurfaces, electrochemical growth of 

PANI was implemented on the fabricated metasurface in-situ in the optical measurement setup, 

where a high-speed monochromatic camera was used to monitor the diffraction pattern during the 

polymer growth (Fig. 3a). A three-electrode system integrated with the optical measurement setup 

was employed for PANI growth and electrical switching in an aqueous electrolyte using a custom-

built electrochemical cell (Supplementary Fig. 4, see also Methods for further information). Since 

PANI is switched between -0.2 V and +0.6 V and can be electrochemically polymerized under an 

applied voltage of +0.8 V on an ITO electrode44–45, a cyclic voltammetry with a voltage range from 

-0.2 V to +0.8 V was chosen to carry out PANI growth and electrical switching simultaneously 

(Supplementary Fig. 5, see also Supplementary Note 1), thus allowing for in-situ optimization of 

the electrical beam steering performance. 

The diffraction images were monitored throughout the entire polymer growth process. Figure 3b 

shows the intensities of +1, 0 and -1 diffraction orders as function of the PANI coating cycle. In 

the first 25 coating cycles, the variation of the diffractive intensities is very small due to the 

insufficient amount of the grown PANI. By increasing the coating cycle number and thus the PANI 

thickness, the effect of the grown PANI layer becomes large enough to enable switching of the 

diffraction intensities. As predicted by the design, the diffraction intensity of the +1 order reaches 


12 

its minima and maxima at the oxidized state and the reduced state, respectively, while the 0 order 

shows an opposite response. The intensity contrasts of the +1 and 0 diffraction orders at the two 

states are dictated by the optical phase variation and the intrinsic optical absorption of PANI. 

Further increasing the PANI thickness allows for the optical absorption of PANI to become more 

influential, as evidenced by the decreased diffractive intensity and switching contrast in the +1 

order. The overcoated PANI also leads to a phase mismatch in the nanoantennas, where the 

switching of the +1 and 0 diffraction orders becomes synchronous and solely dependent on 

variation of optical absorption of PANI. 

Quantitative evaluation of the electrical beam steering performance is accomplished by a figure-

of-merit (FOM) generally used for beam deflectors, which is based on the switching contrasts 

between the +1 and 0 diffraction orders at two states28. The FOM can be represented as: 

𝐹𝑂𝑀 = 1

2 (𝐶!" − 𝐶#$%)

= 1

2 ,𝐼&

!" − 𝐼'

!"

𝐼&

!" + 𝐼'

!" − 𝐼&

#$% − 𝐼'

#$%

𝐼&

#$% + 𝐼'

#$%/

(1) 

where C is the switching contrast between two diffraction orders, I0 and I1 represent the intensities 

of the 0 and +1 diffraction orders, respectively, and the superscripts of ox and red denote the 

oxidized and reduced states, respectively. The value of FOM, which falls between 0 and 1, 

describes the capability of a beam deflector to route energy into certain angles, where FOM = 1 

represents the ideal case. The calculated FOM for different coating cycles indicates that the beam 

steering performance is optimized when the FOM reaches 0.6 with a polymer coating cycle number 

of 56 (Fig. 3c). In comparison, the obtained FOM from a chalcogenide PCM-based beam steering 

metasurface26 is 0.42, and 0.38 from a liquid crystal-based one9. Figure 3d and e present the 

diffraction images at the optimized thickness and the corresponding intensity profiles, at +0.6 V 


13 

and -0.2 V, respectively, and the results are in excellent agreement with the simulation. The 

modulation contrast, defined as the intensity ratio of the +1 order between the two states, is over 

1400% and can be further increased by increasing the PANI thickness. The thickness of the PANI 

layer at the optimized condition is measured to be 200 nm (Supplementary Fig. 6), which is only 

1/7 as thin as the thickness of the embedding active layer in liquid crystal-based active 

metasurfaces9–17. So far, the diffraction efficiency of the +1 order at the reduced state is 28.8%, 

where the efficiency loss induced by the optical loss of the grown PANI is 3.7%. In comparison 

with the beam steering metasurfaces purely based on conductive polymers6,14, the diffraction 

efficiency of our design is 25 times higher, being even comparable to the liquid crystal-based 

metadevices9. However, the optical loss of the oxidized PANI is noticeable and accounts for up to 

70% of the transmitted energy of the reduced state (Supplementary Fig. 7). The diffraction 

efficiency can be further increased by decreasing the polymer thickness together with 

optimizations of the nanoantenna geometry and materials, allowing to compensate the optical loss 

of the polymer. 

In addition, intermediate PANI states, which possess gradually changing refractive indices due to 

the partially delocalized π-electrons, can be accessed via voltage tuning, thus allowing for a 

continuous tuning of the phase of the Huygens’ nanoantennas. By operating the voltage between 

the oxidized and reduced states, we can modify on-demand the diffraction intensity and the 

intensity ratio between the +1 and 0 diffraction orders, as demonstrated in the diffraction images 

(Fig. 3f) and the intensity profiles (Fig. 3g) at different applied voltages. Notably, the electrical 

switching demonstrates high-quality reversibility. With a cycling voltage between -0.2 V and +0.6 

V, the electrical switching is fully reversible with a remarkable stability on our active metasurface, 

as shown in the Supplementary Video 1 which includes the diffraction images, diffraction 


14 

intensities and the cyclic voltammograms for a total of 9 switching cycles in real-time. We further 

analyzed the hysteresis behavior of the electrical switching (Supplementary Fig. 8). Our 

electrically active metasurfaces can be operated in a nearly hysteresis-free manner. This allows to 

switch to the intermediate states without a memory effect that could possibly deteriorate the 

accuracy of optical response by electrical modulation, which is crucial for realizing active 

metasurfaces for precise on-demand control of phase and amplitude. 

Electrical switching speed and durability 


15 

Fig. 4 | Electrical switching speed and durability. a,b, Temporal responses for the switch-on 

and switch-off processes, respectively. The rise time (τrise) of the switch-on process is 14.1 ms and 

the fall time (τfall) of the switch-off process is 11.7 ms. The rise time and the fall time are defined 

as the time required to switch between 10% and 90% of the optical response, depicted as the gray 

area, under an abrupt alternation of the applied voltage (green and red areas). c, Input voltage 

schemes with different voltage duration times (Dt) in a range from 50 ms to 5 ms. d, Temporal 


16 

optical response at different input voltage schemes. Each scheme lasts 10 s. The percentage 

numbers indicate the maximum accessible range of the optical response. The recorded slightly 

inconsistent maxima and minima are due to frame drops of the camera. e, Switching durability of 

the electrically active metasurface under Dt = 3 s. The electrical switching is highly reversible and 

consistent without noticeable degradation over 2000 switching cycles. The optical response in this 

figure corresponds to the +1 order at an optimized coating cycle of PANI. 

To evaluate the switching speed of our active metasurfaces, the temporal optical response is 

measured under an abrupt alternation of the input voltages between the on (-0.2 V) and off (+0.6 

V) states, as presented in Figure 4a and b. The rise time (τrise) of the switch-on process and the fall 

time (τfall) of the switch-off process, defined as the time required for the modulated intensity to rise 

or fall between the 10% and 90% switching window, are 14.1 ms and 11.7 ms, respectively. We 

further demonstrated the switching speed can be utilized for electro-optic metadevices under a 

high-speed switching configuration. The metasurface is operated at alternating input voltages 

between the on and off states with a voltage duration time (Dt) varied from 50 ms to 5 ms (Fig. 

4c). Such intense switching conditions could possibly lead to mechanical or electrical failures due 

to the volume expansion, physical exfoliation or irreversible reactions of polymer films46. 

However, remarkably, when Dt approaches the switching time τrise and τfall, the accessible range of 

the optical response approaches the 10% to 90% switching window at Dt = 15 ms, equivalent to 

66 fps, as shown in Figure 4d. Lowering Dt below 15 ms decreases the accessible optical range, 

but does not significantly influence the reversibility. The key characteristic supporting the superior 

cycling duration is that, when electron injection or extraction takes place by voltage application, 

the highly conductive PANI is able to redistribute delocalized π-electrons along the polymer chain 


17 

without structural degradation47,48. This ensures the stability when deploying intense high-speed 

electrical modulation. Moreover, the solid contact between the nanoantennas and the PANI film, 

which is directly grown on the metasurface, provides additional mechanical and electrical 

stabilities. The switching durability is further experimentally secured by a long-time low-speed 

operation (at Dt = 3 s), where the electrical switching exhibits no substantial degradations over 

2000 switching cycles (Fig. 4e). 

Conclusion 

In this study, we have introduced and experimentally realized an active Huygens’ metasurface 

based on the in-situ grown PANI with holistic switching performance for display applications. We 

have achieved electrical switching on the beam steering metasurface with large modulation 

contrast of over 1400%, hysteresis-free controllability, high diffraction efficiency of 28%, fast 

switching speed of over 60 fps and superior switching duration over 2000 switching cycles, under 

an operation voltage range only from -0.2 V to +0.6 V. We have demonstrated that the active 

Huygens’ nanoantenna design not only greatly boosts the optical efficiency, but also offers the 

possibility to continuously tune the phase of the nanoantenna through intermediate states. In 

addition, we have shown that PANI is an excellent candidate of electro-active materials for active 

metasurfaces, owing to its large tuning range of refractive index, fast switching speed, outstanding 

electro-optical properties and superior physical and chemical stability. The in-situ growth of 

conductive polymer on metasurface is straightforward and more reliable, which can be processed 

in a low-cost, large-area and scalable manner. Overall, the concept of our electrically active 

Huygens’ nanoantenna design can be broadly extended to a variety of active metasurfaces that are 

capable of programmable and dynamic wavefront manipulation. From an industrial standpoint, the 


18 

holistic switching performance, together with the scalable, reliable, cost-effective polymer 

manufacturability, provide promising opportunities to achieve switchable glasses-free 3D 

displays, high-resolution AR/VR glasses, LiDAR, and large field-of-view holographic displays, 

forging the path of active metasurfaces towards commercial success. 

References 

1. Gu, T., Kim, H. J., Rivero-Baleine, C. & Hu, J. Reconfigurable metasurfaces towards 

commercial success. Nat. Photon. 17, 48–58 (2023). 

2. Neshev, D. N. & Miroshnichenko, A. E. Enabling smart vision with metasurfaces. Nat. 

Photon. 17, 26–35 (2023). 

3. Shaltout, A. M., Shalaev, V. M. & Brongersma, M. L. Spatiotemporal light control with 

active metasurfaces. Science 364, eaat3100 (2019). 

4. Yu, J. et al. Electrically tunable nonlinear polaritonic metasurface. Nat. Photon. 16, 72–78 

(2022). 

5. Wu, P. C. et al. Dynamic beam steering with all-dielectric electro-optic III-V multiple-

quantum-well metasurfaces. Nat. Commun. 10, 3654 (2019). 

6. Karst, J. et al. Electrically switchable metallic polymer nanoantennas. Science 374, 612–616 

(2021). 

7. Jong, D. de et al. Electrically switchable metallic polymer metasurface device with gel 

polymer electrolyte. Nanophotonics 12, 1397–1404 (2023). 

8. Abdollahramezani, S. et al. Electrically driven reprogrammable phase-change metasurface 

reaching 80% efficiency. Nat. Commun. 13, 1696 (2022). 


19 

9. Li, S.-Q. et al. Phase-only transmissive spatial light modulator based on tunable dielectric 

metasurface. Science 364, 1087–1090 (2019). 

10. Park, J. et al. All-solid-state spatial light modulator with independent phase and amplitude 

control for three-dimensional LiDAR applications. Nat. Nanotechnol. 16, 69–76 (2021). 

11. Kwon, H., Zheng, T. & Faraon, A. Nano-electromechanical spatial light modulator enabled 

by asymmetric resonant dielectric metasurfaces. Nat. Commun. 13, 5811 (2022). 

12. Shirmanesh, G. K., Sokhoyan, R., Wu, P. C & Atwater, H. A. Electro-optically tunable 

multifunctional metasurfaces. ACS Nano 14, 6912–6920 (2020). 

13. Shalaginov, M. Y. et al. Reconfigurable all-dielectric metalens with diffraction-limited 

performance. Nat. Commun. 12, 1225 (2021). 

14. Karst, J. et al. Electro-active metaobjective from metalenses-on-demand. Nat. Commun. 13, 

7183 (2022). 

15. Afridi, A. et al. Electrically driven varifocal silicon metalens. ACS Photonics 5, 4497–4503 

(2018). 

16. Kaissner, R. et al. Electrochemically controlled metasurfaces with high-contrast switching at 

visible frequencies. Sci. Adv. 7, eabd9450 (2021). 

17. Li, J., Yu, P., Zhang, S. & Liu, N. Electrically-controlled digital metasurface device for light 

projection displays. Nat. Commun. 11, 3574 (2020). 

18. Kim, I. et al. Pixelated bifunctional metasurface-driven dynamic vectorial holographic color 

prints for photonic security platform. Nat. Commun. 12, 3614 (2021). 

19. Li, J. et al. Addressable metasurfaces for dynamic holography and optical information 

encryption. Sci. Adv. 4, eaar6768 (2018). 

20. Duan, X., Kamin, S. & Liu, N. Dynamic plasmonic colour display. Nat. Commun. 8, 14606 

(2017). 


20 

21. Li, J., Chen, Y., Hu, Y., Duan, H. & Liu, N. Magnesium-based metasurfaces for dual-

function switching between dynamic holography and dynamic color display. ACS Nano 14, 

7892–7898 (2020). 

22. Ee, H.-S. & Agarwal, R. Tunable metasurface and flat optical zoom lens on a stretchable 

substrate. Nano Lett. 16, 2818–2823 (2016). 

23. Holsteen, A. L., Cihan, A. F. & Brongersma, M. L. Temporal color mixing and dynamic 

beam shaping with silicon metasurfaces. Science 365, 257–260 (2019). 

24. Li, Q. et al. Metasurface optofluidics for dynamic control of light fields. Nat. Nanotechnol. 

17, 1097–1103 (2022). 

25. Benea-Chelmus, I.-C. et al. Electro-optic spatial light modulator from an engineered organic 

layer. Nat. Commun. 12, 5928 (2021). 

26. Zhang, Y. et al. Electrically reconfigurable non-volatile metasurface using low-loss optical 

phase-change material. Nat. Nanotechnol. 16, 661–666 (2021). 

27. Wang, Y. et al. Electrical tuning of phase-change antennas and metasurfaces. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 16, 667–672 (2021). 

28. Komar, A. et al. Dynamic beam switching by liquid crystal tunable dielectric metasurfaces. 

ACS Photonics 5, 1742–1748 (2018). 

29. Liu, X. et al. Thermally dependent dynamic meta-holography using a vanadium dioxide 

integrated metasurface. Adv. Opt. Mater. 7, 1900175 (2019). 

30. Duan, X. et al. Reconfigurable multistate optical systems enabled by VO2 phase transitions. 

ACS Photonics 7, 2958–2965 (2020). 

31. Kepič, P. et al. Optically tunable Mie resonance VO2 nanoantennas for metasurface in the 

visible. ACS Photonics 8, 1048–1057 (2021). 

32. Shcherbakov, M. R. et al. Ultrafast all-optical tuning of direct-gap semiconductor 

metasurfaces. Nat. Commun. 8, 17 (2017). 


21 

33. Leitis, A. et al. All-dielectric programmable Huygens’ Metasurfaces. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 

1910259 (2020). 

34. Wang, Q. et al. Optically reconfigurable metasurfaces and photonic devices based on phase 

change materials. Nat. Photon. 10, 60–65 (2016). 

35. Iyer, P. P., Pendharkar, M., Palmstrøm, C. J. & Schuller, J. A. III-V heterojunction platform 

for electrically reconfigurable dielectric metasurfaces. ACS Photonics 6, 1345–1350 (2019). 

36. Lee, J. et al. Ultrafast electrically tunable polaritonic metasurfaces. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2, 

1057–1063 (2014). 

37. Eaves-Rathert, J. et al. Dynamic color tuning with electrochemically actuated TiO2 

metasurfaces. Nano Lett. 22, 1626–1632 (2022). 

38. Li, Y. Groep, J. van de, Talin, A. A. & Brongersma, M. L. Dynamic tuning of gap plasmon 

resonances using a solid-state electrochromic device. Nano Lett. 19, 7988–7995 (2019). 

39. Chen, S. & Jonsson, M. P. Dynamic conducting polymer plasmonics and metasurfaces. ACS 

Photonics 10, 571–581 (2023). 

40. Lu, W., Jiang, N. & Wang, J. Active electrochemical plasmonic switching on polyaniline-

coated gold nanocrystals. Adv. Mater. 29, 1604862 (2017). 

41. Lu, W., Chow, T. H., Lai, S. N., Zheng, B. & Wang, J. Electrochemical switching of 

plasmonic colors based on polyaniline-coated plasmonic nanocrystals. ACS Appl. Mater. 

Interfaces 12, 17733–17744 (2020). 

42. Lu, Y. et al. All-state switching of the Mie resonance of conductive polyaniline nanospheres. 

Nano Lett. 22, 1406–1414 (2022). 

43. Decker, M. et al. High-efficiency dielectric Huygens’ surfaces. Adv. Opt. Mater. 3, 813–820 

(2015). 

44. Lu, W. Chow, T. H., Lu, Y. & Wang, J. Electrochemical coating of different conductive 

polymers on diverse plasmonic metal nanocrystals. Nanoscale 12, 21617–21623 (2020). 


22 

45. Pensa, E. et al. Spectral screening of the energy of hot holes over a particle plasmon 

resonance. Nano Lett. 19, 1867–1874 (2019). 

46. Pud, A. A. Stability and degradation of conducting polymers in electrochemical systems. 

Synth. Met. 66, 1–18 (1994). 

47. Lacroix, J. C., Kanazawa, K. K. & Diaz, A. Polyaniline: a very fast electrochromic material. 

J. Electrochem. Soc. 136, 1308–1313 (1989). 

48. Heinze, J., Frontana-Uribe, B. A. & Ludwigs, S. Electrochemistry of conducting polymers–

persistent models and new concepts. Chem. Rev. 110, 4724–4771 (2010). 


23 

Methods 

Numerical simulation 

For the numerical simulation of the active Huygens’ nanoantenna, we employed a finite-difference 

time-domain solver (Ansys Lumerical) using periodic boundary conditions in the x and y 

directions. The silicon material data took from Palik49 and the polymer index took from the 

experimentally measured results obtained through ellipsometry (Supplementary Fig. 1). For the 

geometric parameters, the Si nanodisks have a height of 140 nm and a varying radius from 60 nm 

to 160 nm, and the height of polymer is 200 nm. Transmission spectra, phase and transmittance of 

the nanoantenna were simulated under a plane-wave excitation with a linear polarization and 

wavelength range from 500 nm to 1000 nm. 

Metasurface fabrication 

The dielectric metasurfaces were fabricated by a nanofabrication procedure that comprises EBL 

patterning, mask deposition and RIE. In detail, a 140-nm thick Si film were deposited on a 

transparent conductive 50-nm thick ITO-coated fused silica glass substrate using a plasmon-

enhanced chemical vapor deposition. For the lithography, a double layered poly(methyl-

methacrylate) (PMMA) positive photoresist (495k A4 and 950k A2) was spin-coated onto the Si 

film with a soft-baking for 90 s at 170 °C, followed by spin-coating of a conducting layer (ESpace 

300Z) on the photoresist to avoid electron charge and pattern distortion. The array of Si nanodisks 

was patterned on the photoresist using EBL (Raith eLine Plus), followed by a development process 

by immersing the sample into a 3:1 Isopropanol:Methylisobutylketone solution for 50 s. A 30-nm 

thick chromium layer was deposited using an e-beam evaporation as a hard mask. Lift-off process 

was carried out in a remover solution (Microposit Remover 1165). The designed pattern was 


24 

finally etched into the Si film by a RIE process (Oxford Instrument) for 2 min. As the last step, the 

chromium hard mask was chemically removed by wet etching using a chromium-selective etchant 

solution (Sigma-Aldrich). 

Electrochemical setup 

The electrochemical polymer growth and electrical switching were carried out in a specially 

custom-built electrochemical cell. The electrochemical cell is designed for housing a three-

electrode system into a thin layer of aqueous electrolyte with an optical thickness of 1 mm on the 

top of the sample substrate, where a thin transparent glass was used to seal the electrolyte on the 

top, allowing for an optical transmission measurement through the metasurface. The sample 

substrate (ITO-coated fused silica) was used as the bottom sealing glass of the cell. The cell also 

features on the side the in-let and out-let for electrolyte to enable flow-in and flow-out for 

electrolyte replacement, which is driven by an electrical injector. The sample substrate was 

connected as the working electrode through a striped metal plate as the electrode contact, whereas 

a Pt wire and a Ag/AgCl reference were inserted from the side of the cell and connected as the 

counter electrode and the reference electrode, respectively. A potentiostat (CHI-760e) is used to 

apply voltage over the time to perform electrochemical polymer growth and switching. 

In-situ polymer growth and electrical switching 

In-situ PANI growth was carried out by an electrochemical coating method, as reported 

previously44. The ITO substrate with the metasurface sample was connected as the working 

electrode. A cycling voltage in the range from -0.2 V to +0.8 V at a scanning speed of 25 mV/s 

was applied on the sample in an acidic aqueous electrolyte containing 1 M H2SO4 and 0.2 M 


25 

aniline. The thickness of the grown PANI thickness can be controlled by the number of voltage 

cycle. 

For the electrical switching, the electrolyte in the electrochemical cell was replaced by an aniline-

free aqueous electrolyte containing only 1 M H2SO4. To switch the PANI to the oxidized state and 

reduced state, constant voltages of +0.6 V and -0.2 V, respectively, were applied on the substrate. 

For electrical switching cycling, a cycling voltage in the range between -0.2 V and +0.6 V at a 

scanning speed of 25 mV/s was used. 

Structural characterization 

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the metasurface was performed on the Raith eLine Plus 

system in a SEM mode under a working voltage of 5 kV. The height of the deposited Si film and 

the thickness of the grown PANI layer at the optimized coating cycle were measured with a 

profilometer (Bruker Dektak XT) using a stylus with a radius of 2 μm. 

Optical characterization 

The refractive index of PANI was obtained from an ellipsometry measurement on an ellipsometer 

with dual-rotating compensators and a spectrometer (J.A. Woollam, M2000XI-210). A 100-nm 

thick PANI film electrochemically prepared on an ITO-coated glass substrate was measured with 

angle-variable spectroscopic ellipsometry at incident angles of 65°, 70° and 75°, using a bare ITO-

coated glass as a blank reference. The measured refractive index was extracted from an 

experimentally fitted oscillator model based on a previous study50.  

Transmission spectra were taken using a commercial white light transmission microscopy setup 

(Witec Alpha series 300). The homogeneous metasurface sample was illuminated by a normal 


26 

incident collimated white light with a linear polarization. The transmitted light was collected using 

a 20x objective with NA = 0.4 and direct to a grating-based spectrometer. 

Diffraction patterns of the transmitted light was collected on a home-built optical setup as shown 

in Supplementary Figure 4. A white light source as well as a 785 nm laser were coupled into the 

optical path as light sources. The custom-built electrochemical cell with the metasurface sample 

was placed normally to the incident laser, where a 20x objective with NA = 0.4 was used to collect 

the optical response of the metasurface. A high-speed camera with a monochromatic charge-

coupled device (Basler acA1440-220um) was employed to locate the sample and monitor the 

diffraction patterns. 

References 

49. Palik, E. D. Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids. (Academic Press, 1998). 

50. Al-Attar, H. A., Al-Alawina, Q. H. & Monkman, A. P. Spectroscopic ellipsometry of 

electrochemically prepared thin film polyaniline. Thin Solid Films 429, 286–294 (2003). 

Data Availability 

All the relevant data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding 

author upon reasonable request. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research 

Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy (EXC 2089/1 – 390776260), MA 4699.7-1, 

and the Emmy Noether program (TI 1063/1), the Bavarian program Solar Energies Go Hybrid 


27 

(SolTech), and the Center for NanoScience (CeNS), Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich. 

W.L. acknowledges the funding support of the Humboldt Research Fellowship from the Alexander 

von Humboldt Foundation. H.R. acknowledges the funding support from the Australian Research 

Council (DECRA Project DE220101085). H.R. and S.A.M. acknowledge the funding support 

from the Australian Research Council (Discovery Project DP220102152). S.A.M additionally 

acknowledges the Lee-Luces Chair in Physics. 

Author contributions 

W.L and S.A.M. conceived the project. W.L performed the simulation and designed the 

metasurface and carried out the nanofabrication. L.de.S.M. and W.L. constructed the optical 

measurement setup. W.L. designed the customized electrochemical cell and conducted the 

electrical switching experiments. A.T. and H.R. contributed to the metasurface design and made 

helpful comment on the manuscript. S.A.M. offered ideal facility support for carrying out the 

experiments. All authors discussed the results, analyzed the data and commented on the 

manuscript. 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 


28 

Active Huygens’ metasurface based on in-situ 

grown conductive polymer 

Supplementary Information 

Wenzheng Lu1,*, Leonardo de S. Menezes1,2,3, Andreas Tittl1, Haoran Ren4 and Stefan A. 

Maier4,5,* 

1Chair in Hybrid Nanosystems, Nano-Institute Munich, Faculty of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 

München, Munich, 80539, Germany. 

2Departamento de Física, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, 50670-901 Recife-PE, Brazil. 

3Center for Nanoscience, Faculty of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, 80539, Germany. 

4School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. 

5Department of Physics, Imperial College London, London SW72AZ, UK. 

*e-mail: Wenzheng.Lu@physik.uni-muenchen.de; Stefan.Maier@monash.edu 


29 

Supplementary information for 

Active Huygens’ metasurface based on in-situ grown 

conductive polymer 

Wenzheng Lu1,*, Leonardo de S. Menezes1,2,3, Andreas Tittl1, Haoran Ren4 and Stefan A. 

Maier4,5,* 

Table of contents 

Supplementary Fig. 1 Refractive index of polyaniline 

Supplementary Fig. 2 Simulation of electrically active Huygens’ nanoantennas 

Supplementary Fig. 3 Simulated electric field distribution 

Supplementary Fig. 4 Optical measurement setup 

Supplementary Fig. 5 Cyclic voltammogram for electrochemical polymer growth 

Supplementary Note 1 In-situ polymer electrochemical growth on dielectric metasurfaces 

Supplementary Fig. 6 Thickness measurement of PANI layer 

Supplementary Fig. 7 Transmitted energy contrast 

Supplementary Fig. 8 Hysteresis behavior of electrical switching 

Supplementary Video 1 Real-time electrical switching of the active Huygens’ metasurface 

References 


30 

Supplementary Fig. 1 | Refractive index of polyaniline. Real part (left) and imaginary part (k) 

of refractive index of polyaniline (PANI) in the oxidized state (+0.6 V, green line) and the reduced 

state (-0.2 V, red line), respectively. The refractive index was experimentally measured by an 

ellipsometer on a 100-nm thick electrochemically prepared PANI film on an indium-tin-oxide 

(ITO)-coated fused silica substrate. 

Supplementary Fig. 2 | Simulation of electrically active Huygens’ nanoantennas. a,b, 

Schematics of an individual nanoantenna made of a silicon nanodisk surrounded by a layer of 


31 

PANI at an applied voltage of +0.6 V and -0.2 V, respectively. c,d, Simulated transmission optical 

phase profiles (color-coded) of the nanoantenna at +0.6 V and -0.2 V, respectively. e,f, Simulated 

transmittance (color-coded) of the nanoantenna at +0.6 V and -0.2 V, respectively. 

Supplementary Fig. 3 | Simulated electric field distribution. Simulated electric field 

distribution of the transmitted light for the electrically active metasurface under a normal incident 

at an applied voltage of +0.6 V (left) and -0.2 V (right), respectively. The arrow indicates the k 

vector of the transmitted light propagating wave. 


32 

Supplementary Fig. 4 | Optical measurement setup. Schematic of the optical measurement 

setup integrated with the custom-built electrochemical cell for measuring the transmitted 

intensities of different diffraction orders. The white light source is used for locating the 

metasurface sample, and is turned off when performing optical measurement. During the polymer 

growth and the electrical switching, a 785-nm laser is used to illuminate at the center of the 

metasurface, while a cycling voltage is applied on the metasurface to induce variation of 

transmitted diffraction pattern. The transmitted diffraction pattern is recorded by a high-speed 

monochromatic camera CMOS. OL: objective lens, M: plane mirror. 


33 

Supplementary Fig. 5 | Cyclic voltammogram for electrochemical polymer growth. The 

measured cyclic voltammogram for the electrochemical growth of PANI on the dielectric 

metasurface, including 60 coating cycles. The green area shows the region where the PANI 

oxidation process takes place, whereas the red area shows the reduction process. The blue area 

shows the oxidative polymerization process of aniline, resulting in an increasing PANI thickness 

(see also supplementary note 1). The arrow indicates the increasing current intensity as more PANI 

is grown on the metasurface. 

Supplementary Note 1 | In-situ electrochemical polymer growth on dielectric metasurfaces. 

In the presence of the precursor monomer, in this case, aniline, in the electrolyte, application of a 

high voltage can trigger an oxidative polymerization on the surface of the ITO substrate directly 

from the electrolyte1. The dielectric metasurfaces resting on the top of the ITO substrate exposed 

to the electrolyte can thus be grown with PANI. The voltage for oxidative polymerization of aniline 

in our case is approximately +0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl reference), as depicted by the rising current 

intensity in the blue area of the cyclic voltammogram in Supplementary Figure 5. On the other 

hand, PANI can be switched between the oxidized state and the reduced state by an applied voltage 


34 

in the range from +0.6 V to -0.2 V. Therefore, a cycling voltage in the range between -0.2 V and 

+0.8 V is able to induce polymer growth while switching the PANI after each increment in the 

PANI thickness, thus allowing for an in-situ optimization of PANI thickness on the beam steering 

performance. The oxidation and reduction processes of PANI are recorded by the oxidation peak 

and reduction peak on the cyclic voltammogram. The increasing amount of PANI grown on the 

metasurface results in an increasing oxidization current and reduction current, as displayed on the 

green and red area of cyclic voltammogram in Supplementary Figure 5. 

Supplementary Fig. 6 | Measurement of PANI layer thickness. Thickness profile of the PANI 

layer grown on the metasurface. The PANI layer is optimized at a coating cycle number of 56, 

which has a thickness of approximately 200 nm. The thickness of the PANI layer is measured by 

a profilometer. The appeared spikes in the profile is caused by the polymer surface roughness. 


35 

Supplementary Fig. 7 | Transmitted energy contrast. Transmitted energy ratio between the 

oxidized state and the reduced state (Eox/Ered) at different polymer coating cycles. The transmitted 

energy is calculated from the sum of the transmitted intensities of +1, 0 and -1 diffraction orders. 

Supplementary Fig. 8 | Hysteresis behavior of electrical switching. Diffraction intensity of the 

+1 order at different applied voltage switched from the oxidized state and the reduced state. The 

arrows indicate the electrical switching direction. The narrow gap between the intensity of the two 

switching directions shows that the electrical switching of the PANI-integrated metasurface is 

nearly hysteresis-free, allowing for the accurate electrical controllability over the intermediate 

states. 


36 

Supplementary Video 1 | Real-time electrical switching of the active Huygens’ metasurface. 

Images of the transmitted diffraction pattern during the electrical switching for 9 complete cycles. 

The video including the real-time applied voltage (top left), the cyclic voltammogram (top right), 

the intensity of +1 diffraction order (bottom left) and the intensity of 0 diffraction order (bottom 

right). The slightly spike-like signal of the 0 order diffraction intensity is caused by the dynamic 

variation of absorption coefficient of PANI when the applied voltage reverses at around +0.6 V, 

which is observed in other PANI-based demonstration2. The video runs at 30 fps. 

References 

1. Lu, W., Chow, T. H., Lu, Y. & Wang, J. Electrochemical coating of different conductive 

polymers on diverse plasmonic metal nanocrystals. Nanoscale 12, 21617–21623 (2020). 

2. Kaissner, R. et al. Electrochemically controlled metasurfaces with high-contrast switching at 

visible frequencies. Sci. Adv. 7, eabd9450 (2021). 


