An Asymmetric Spoof-Fluid-Spoof Acoustic Waveguide and its

Application as a CO2 Sensor

Nathan Perchikov1, Đorđe Vujić1, Branimir Bajac1, Andrea Alù2, Vesna Bengin1, and Nikolina

Janković1

1 BioSense Institute, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia

2 Advanced Science Research Center, City University of New York, New York, USA

*To whom correspondence should be addressed: nathan.perchikov@biosense.rs, nikolina@biosense.rs

Abstract

We study pressure acoustic propagation in asymmetric spoof-fluid-spoof acoustic waveguides and its potential 
application in acoustic gas sensors. First, a stable and efficient analytical method is established for fast calculation 
of the dispersion curves based on spectral expansion and enforcement of continuity between segments at suitable 
collocation points. The analysis is validated by a commercial finite element software. The geometric design of the 
waveguide is then optimized for the emergence of a nearly-flat dispersion curve associated with vertical geometric 
asymmetry. The waveguide is fabricated using 3D printing technology and the measurement results corroborate the 
numerical simulations. Based on the nearly-flat dispersion curve supported by this waveguide, a CO2 sensor is 
proposed allowing to relate the phase difference measured between two points in the waveguide to the composition 
of the gas in the waveguide. The proposed sensor is experimentally validated in a controlled environment and the 
measurement results match the computational predictions well. The sensor is robust with respect to noise and 
signal-recording duration due to fast phase measurements and shows high sensitivity to gas concentration due to 
reliance on the second, nearly-flat, dispersion curve. In addition, the sensor is label-free and low-cost, while 
exhibiting rapid response, low-maintenance requirements and potential for measurements in a wide range of CO2
concentrations without saturation issues. 

Keywords

Acoustic waveguide, spoof plasmon polariton, gas sensor, spectral point-collocation analysis

1.
Introduction

Periodic structures have been studied for decades, 
however only with the introduction of the concepts 
of phononic and photonic crystals and later
metamaterials, have these structures unlocked their 
full potential allowing for almost arbitrary wave 
manipulation and the engineering of devices with 
novel functionalities [1-8]. Subwavelength unit cells 
and the presence of local resonances are the key 
features of metamaterials that provide properties
radically different from those of conventional media. 
Owing to these features, spoof surface plasmon 
polaritons (SSPP), which emulate natural surface 

plasmon polaritons albeit
operating
in
other

frequency ranges than the optical one, have been 
successfully developed [9-16]. 

Based on the same idea, acoustic SSPP have been 
realized at the interface of a fluid and a corrugated 
surface, exhibiting similar properties in terms of 
wave localization [17-21]. The phenomenon of 
acoustic SSPP has found a number of applications,
including collimation of sound [22-24], bending of 
sound [25], extraordinary transmission [26], focusing 
[27–29], imaging [29], multiband propagation [30], 
rainbow trapping [31], filtering and sensing [32].


Recently, we studied an aSSPP waveguide that is a 
counterpart of a metal-insulator-metal plasmonic 
waveguide, i.e., a spoof-fluid-spoof (SFS) acoustic 
waveguide [33]. Although the structure has a 
potential for various applications, it should be noted 
that the SFS waveguide represented a symmetric 
case, in which the two surfaces had the same 
geometry. The performed experiments validated the 
dispersion characteristics of the first two modes as 
calculated, albeit without
demonstrating any 

particular applications. 

One of the applications for which acoustic structures 
show a great potential is gas sensing, which is critical 
for monitoring and detecting the concentration of
hazardous 
gases, 
air 
quality, 
environmental 

protection, or general analysis across
various 

industries, including safety, aerospace, life-science, 
and the medical, and agricultural industries [34-39].
The main advantages of acoustic structures when
compared to other types of gas sensors are 
robustness, low maintenance, rapid response, and, 
generally, low cost. 

The first acoustic gas sensors were based on speed-
of-sound measurements and the associated sensing 
platforms were typically bulky, as they included 
acoustic pipes and large actuators and transducers
[40-44]. Significant size reduction was achieved with 
sensors that employed piezoelectric materials and 
propagation of various surface (SAW) and bulk 
acoustic waves (BAW) such as the Rayleigh, Love, 
Lamb, 
bulk-longitudinal, 
thickness-shear, 
and 

thickness-extension modes [45-51]. While being very 
attractive due to their size and performance, such
sensors usually require advanced fabrication 
technologies. 

More recent types of acoustic sensors usually rely on 
periodic structures, the typical examples being
phononic crystals [52-60] and spoof-plasmon-based
sensors [61]. It should be said, however, that the 
majority of the proposed sensors were only studied 
analytically and numerically,
never
providing 

experimental verification, which is crucial for 
practical applications. Moreover, in most of the 

studies the sensor-response is based on damped-
resonance amplitude-change, rather than on phase-
measurement. In addition, only the fundamental 
mode of the structure is utilized, which exhibits 
linear behavior in a significant portion of the 
wavenumber range. Both choices limit the sensitivity
potential. Another issue is that pressure-amplitude 
measurements are more susceptible to noise, when 
compared to phase measurements, and thus the 
latter can provide more robustness and reliability.

An advantageous alternative is the utilization of 
nearly-symmetric structures, in which the symmetry 
is associated with the possibility to excite perfectly-
localized modes. Specifically, the higher-mode
dispersion bands
of
nearly-symmetric
periodic 

structures can be nearly-flat, which can provide 
significantly larger
sensitivity for
a sensor in 

comparison to sensors based on the fundamental 
mode dispersion. In general, higher modes and the 
related flat bands have been widely investigated 
both in purely periodic structures and in periodic 
structures with defects
[62-71], however, the 

utilization 
of 
these 
phenomena 
remained 

unexploited in sensing structures. 

In this paper, we first extend the concept of 
symmetric SFS waveguides to a general asymmetric 
case, in which the two bounding surfaces have 
different geometrical parameters. A thorough
spectral point-collocation-based dispersion analysis 
along with finite-element analysis validation are 
presented.
We show that one of the main 

advantages of such a structure, with the additional 
degrees of freedom, is the possibility to manipulate
higher modes in a more flexible way. More 
concretely, the first higher mode can be tailored to 
have a nearly-flat dispersion diagram, which 
consequently produces a significant phase change 
even for minute changes in the surrounding fluid 
characteristics. Afterwards, using nearly-flat mode 
as the underlying idea, we propose a very sensitive 
acoustic gas sensor for the detection of CO2. After 
the 
numerical 
analysis
and 
the 
parametric 

optimization of the design, the sensor is fabricated 


using low-cost 3D printing technology and then
experimentally tested in a controlled environment. 
Besides being cheap and easily fabricated, the 
proposed sensor has the advantage of rapid 
response without
the
need for recovery
or 

maintenance, higher robustness and sensitivity 
when compared to other acoustic sensors as well as 
successful operation in a large gas-concentrations 
range. 

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first sensor 
based on the concept of relating fluid characteristics 
to acoustic phase-difference measurements using 
for waves excited at frequencies associated with the 
higher, nearly-flat dispersion mode. The proposed 
sensor can be further extended to perform with 
other types of analytes. 

The structure of this paper is as follows: after the 
Introduction, in Section 2 and the associated 
Appendix A, we present the theoretical background 
and the employed computational framework, which 
includes point-collocation-based spectral analysis, as 
well as finite-element simulations. Section 3 exhibits
experimental validation of the numerical results. 
Section 4 details how the proposed structure can be 
utilized for gas-sensing applications. Section 5 gives 
a thorough
overview of the fabrication and 

measurements results for the proposed CO2 sensor. 
Further comparative analysis of the quality and 
novelty of the sensor is given in Section 6. Section 7 
concludes. 

2.
Theoretical Background

The layout of the proposed asymmetric spoof-fluid-
spoof 
(ASFS) 
waveguide,
along
with 
the 

corresponding geometrical parameters, are shown in 
Figure 1. We consider lossless two-dimensional 
geometry with perfect rigid surfaces, the structure 
being invariant in the z direction and bounded in the 
y direction. The ASFS waveguide is vertically 
asymmetrical, consisting of two surfaces with 
corrugations that in a general case have different 
geometrical parameters but the same periodicity d
and are separated by a gap g. The fluid that occupies 

the structure is characterized by its density ρ and 
speed of sound C.

Figure 1: A 2D sketch of the asymmetric spoof-fluid-spoof 

waveguide.

There are two main computational approaches to 
obtain the dispersion diagram of the proposed 
structure. The first approach is finite element 
discretization with iterative solution of the 
associated linear eigenvalue problem combined with 
the mode-matching technique, where continuity 
conditions are enforced between the different 
rectangular segments in the waveguide in the 
integral sense, using projection on the basis-function 
space [72]. Another approach is the point-collocation 
method, following which continuity is enforced on a 
given set of discrete points [73].

The finite-element approach basically approximates
the unknown functions using a basis of piece-wise 
linear functions with so-called local support [74]. The 
advantage of the finite-element approach is that 
increase in resolution does not automatically 
translate to increase in the condition number of the 
representative matrix of the eigenvalue problem 
associated with the dispersion analysis. On the other 
hand, special care has to be taken to avoid spurious
(non-wave) solutions. In contrast, if one expands the 
unknown fields individually in each rectangular 
segment using a basis of wave functions, the 
physicality of the solution is guaranteed. However, 
due to the fact that waves are described by complex 
exponents, the approach suffers from certain 
numerical stiffness, since increase in resolution does
directly translate to increase in the condition 
number of the matrix representing the continuity of 
fields between the different segments. For instance, 


in [75] a mode-matching strategy was employed, 
entailed in projecting every basis function of the 
wave-equation kernel by use of a basis of similar 
wave functions, albeit with a different period, the 
ratio of the periods being dependent on the 
respective sizes of the rectangular segments 
comprising the waveguide periodicity-domain. Such 
an approach leads to very large representative 
continuity-enforcing matrices. Consequently, for 
highly asymmetric structures, the condition number 
of the representative matrix may become so high as 
to make the problem intractable on a regular 
processor. 

In contrast, the present work proposes to employ the 
point-collocation strategy, as an alternative for the 
mode-matching technique, while remaining in the 
framework of the wave basis-functions approach. 
One disadvantage of the point-collocation approach 
is the high sensitivity of the solution to the choice of 
the collocation points. However, if a robust choice of 
points is suggested, the approach becomes 
advantageous. A detailed derivation of the 
dispersion equation using the point-collocation 
approach is given in Appendix A together with a
thorough explanation related to the stability of the 
approach and the choice of the collocation points. 

To validate the spectral analysis, dispersion diagrams 
for the proposed structure have also been obtained 
using
the commercial finite-element program 

COMSOL Multiphysics using the two-dimensional 
pressure-acoustics
frequency-domain

eigenfrequency solver. Figure 2(a)
shows a 

dispersion diagram for the first five modes obtained 
using the spectral-collocation and the finite-element 
methods for the ASFS structure with a1 = 10.3 mm, 
a3 = 10.3 mm, d = 34.3 mm, g = 10.3 mm, h1=18.2 
mm, h3 =20.6 mm, confirming excellent agreement 
between the two methods. Figure 2(b) shows the 
acoustic (Fourier-space) pressure for the second-
mode middle wavenumber in a unit cell, and one can 
note typical even and odd field distributions, 
respectively. Figures 3 and 4 show dispersion 
diagrams for the first two modes for the ASFS 
structure with a1 = 10.3 mm, a3 = 10.3 mm, d = 34.3 

mm, g = 10.3 mm, where the parameters h1 and h3
are varied. The fluid in the structure has the 
following parameters:
ρ = 1.1802kg/m3, C
= 

346.8705m/s.

Excellent agreement between the analytical and 
numerical results can be observed in Figure 2, 
confirming the validity of the chosen analytical 
approach. The fundamental mode exhibits the 
expected behavior, i.e., it is predominantly linear,
where the slope of the flat part can be modulated by 
the change of the geometrical parameters. 

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a) Dispersion diagram of the first five modes 
for a1 = a3 = g = 10.3 mm, d = 34.3 mm, h1=18.2 mm, h3
=20.6 mm, obtained using the spectral-collocation and 
the finite-element methods; (b) acoustic (Fourier-space) 

pressure (in logarithmic color scale) for the first- and 
second-mode middle wavenumbers (left and right, 

respectively) in a unit cell, exhibiting even and odd field 

distributions.

However, of particular interest is the second mode, 
since the asymmetry in the structure enables flexible 
manipulation of its slope. In other words, the 


configuration can be used to tailor the second mode 
to be nearly-flat, i.e., to have slow-wave nature yet 
enabling propagation and such a property can be of 
a great advantage in the design of a sensor because 
it can provide fast sensing and high sensitivity.

In other words, in the scenario of quasi-flatness and 
a sensing principle based on a phase change, a 
minute change of a fluid parameter would not 
change the shape of the dispersion diagram, but it 
would slightly push it towards higher frequencies. 
Measured at a specific frequency, the signals before 
and after the minute change in the fluid would have 
significantly different wavenumbers. This is the basic 
idea of the sensor, which will be elaborated on in the 
following. While the same principle can be applied to 
the fundamental mode, it should be noted that the 
linearity or the high slope of the fundamental mode 
for most wavenumbers prevents it from providing
significantly different wavenumbers for minute 
changes in the fluid at a given excitation frequency, 
as supported by the nearly-flat mode. 

We observe from comparing Figures 3(a) and 4(a) 
that vertical perturbation of the symmetry is a 
higher-order effect than the horizontal perturbation. 
Both effects are small, and small perturbation does 
not affect the first mode much. But a small change in 
h1/h3 gives a large change already in the second
mode dispersion curve, whereas a small change in 
a3/a1 gives a large change only in the third mode of 
the dispersion curve.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Dispersion diagrams of the first three modes (a) 
and a zoom-in on the second mode (b) for a1 = a3 = g = 
10.3 mm, d = 34.3 mm, h3 = 20.6, and various h1/h3 <1 
values.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Dispersion diagrams of the first three modes (a) 
and a zoom-in on the second mode (b) for h1 = h3 = 
20.6mm, g = 10.3 mm, d = 34.3 mm, a3 = 10.3, and various 
a3/a1 <1 values.


This suggests that using a vertical perturbation 
would be technologically easier, since the response 
sensitivity is of higher order. 

3.
Experimental validation of the ASFS 
waveguide

In order to corroborate the analytical and numerical 
results, an ASFS waveguide prototype was fabricated 
using 3D-printing with a poly-lactic acid (PLA) 
filament employing a truss-like substructure for the 
solid parts of the structure of the waveguide. The 
geometrical parameters of the fabricated structure 
are d = 34.3 mm, a1 = a3 = g = 10.3 mm, h1 = 20.6 mm, 
h3 = 18.2 mm, and the width in the z direction is equal 
to 20 mm, while the fluid is air with the parameters 
ρ = 1.1802kg/m3, C = 346.87m/s. Due to the need for 
a sufficient number of unit cells and, at the same 
time, the limitations of the 3D printer, three equal 
segments 
were 
fabricated 
separately, 
each 

comprised of 7 unit cells, as shown in Figure 5.

The three segments were attached to an aluminum 
profile and tightened for straight alignment and
pressed against a commercial speaker attached to a 
sound blaster device connected to a laptop. Two 
small microphones were mounted with a distance d
between them on the central segment, with the 
head of each microphone sunk into a drilled hole in 
the waveguide, allowing the microphone to perform 
as a probe of pressure inside the upper corrugation 
of the waveguide. A slow chirp signal with linear 
time-increase in frequency was created using the 
audio-analysis software Audacity [76] and played 
using the speaker. Consequently, the phase shift 
between the two microphones was measured and 
recorded. 

The relative phase shifts and the corresponding 
applied excitation frequencies were used to obtain 
experimental dispersion diagrams. For the purpose 
of a better comparison of the simulated and 
measured results, a 3D model was created in 
COMSOL, and the corresponding dispersion curves 
were calculated. The comparison in Figure 6 reveals 
an excellent agreement between simulated and 
measured results.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: (a) Fabricated segment of the ASFS waveguide, 

(b) Measurement setup.

Figure 6: Comparison of calculated and measured 

dispersion curves for the ASFS waveguide.


4.
A CO2 sensor based on the ASFS waveguide

As discussed above, acoustic gas sensors typically 
rely on the fundamental modes of the acoustic 
structures, 
while 
the 
sensing 
principle 
is

predominantly based on the amplitude change of a 
signal. 
As 
it 
happens, 
however, 
amplitude 

measurements are typically prone to be corrupted 
by noise, although this can be mitigated to some 
extent [44]. This is one of the consequences of the 
fact that low-amplitude pressure measurement 
devices (microphones) are normally relative rather 
than absolute and can be affected by surrounding 
sounds of different frequencies. The amplitude of 
resonance in a higher mode is usually lower than in 
the fundamental mode, and hence it is rarely used 
for amplitude measurements. While there are
sensors based on the measurement of the speed of 
sound [40-43], which is embedded also in the phase 
measurement principle, those sensors rely on
fundamental modes, which limits their sensitivity. 
Namely, fundamental modes have a linear dispersion 
curve for most wavenumbers, which in principle 
challenges their utilization in sensitive large-range 
sensors. In contrast, due to their slow-wave 
property, nearly-flat-dispersion modes can be an 
excellent choice for high sensitivity sensing that is 
based on measuring phase changes. In this context, 
we demonstrate a novel sensor employing the 
second mode of an ASFS waveguide and a phase-
measurement principle, aimed at the detection of 
the concentration of CO2 in composition of air in the 
vicinity of the sensor.

Figure 7(a)
shows
the numerically obtained 

dispersion curves for an ASFS waveguide for various
CO2 concentrations. The geometric parameters were
optimized such that the second mode appears
around 11 kHz and their values are: d = 11.5 mm, a1
= a3 = g = 3.5 mm, h1 = 6 mm, h3 = 6.9 mm, and the 
width in the z direction is equal to 12.5 mm. The 
geometric-parameters
values 
were
decreased 

compared to the previously shown ASFS waveguide 
to correspond to a more compact structure and to 
match our fabrication and measurement capabilities,
as detailed in the following section. The change in 
the CO2 concentration was modeled in simulations 
through its effect on the values of the density ρ and 

speed of sound C of a mixture of the air and CO2, 
using the following formulas:

𝜌 = 𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟

23 °C [1 + (

𝑀𝐶𝑂2

𝑀𝑎 − 1) 𝑐𝑣], ∁=

√

1+2[(1−𝑐𝑣)𝛼𝑎𝑖𝑟+𝑐𝑣𝛼𝐶𝑂2]−1

1+
2

𝛼𝑎𝑖𝑟

∁𝑎𝑖𝑟

23 °C

√1+(

𝑀𝐶𝑂2

𝑀𝑎 −1)𝑐𝑣

, (1)

𝑀𝐶𝑂2

𝑀𝑎 =

44.01

28.9647 , 𝛼𝐶𝑂2 = 6, 𝛼𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 5.003, 𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟

23 °C =

1.192

𝑘𝑔

𝑚3 , ∁𝑎𝑖𝑟

23 °C = 344.96

𝑚

𝑠 .
(2)

where Mx denotes molecular weight of material x, 
and α is the number of degrees of freedom of a gas 
molecule.

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: Calculated dispersion diagrams of the second 
mode of an ASFS waveguide for various concentrations

of CO2 (a) and validation of 0% CO2 case against 

measurement (b).


We note that CO2 concentration of 0% means that 
the mixture consists of pure air, which includes 
0.04% of CO2. By the same token, CO2 concentration 
of 1% means that there is 1.04% of CO2 in the 
mixture, i.e., 1% of the CO2 has been added.

One observes that the different dispersion curves
have the same shape yet there is a slight red spectral 
shift as the CO2 concentration increases. The grey
vertical line going through different-concentration
dispersion curves for the frequency of 11.158 kHz
shows how different concentrations cause different 
phase accumulations along the waveguide. It should
be noted that the structure has to be cautiously 
optimized so that the second mode becomes only 
nearly flat (and not perfectly flat). Then, the mode 
would not represent a standing-wave excited at an 
isolated frequency value, but rather would enable 
slow wave propagation and allow the measurement 
of the phase-change along the waveguide. 
Moreover, propagation would occur at a specific 
frequency for a whole range of values of a target 
analyte. As a side note, in the case of a perfectly-flat 
band, infinitely many wavenumber values would 
correspond to the excitation frequency and we 
would not be able to measure the wavenumber. 

According to the performed numerical simulations,
the proposed ASFS waveguide has a sensitivity of
0.003 Hz/ppm, which means that a concentration 
change of 300 ppm produces a 1 Hz shift in the 
frequency response. However, one should not be 
misled by sensitivity value since our sensor is based 
on the phase-change response to the concentration 
change, and in such a scenario the full phase range is 
adjusted 
to 
the 
prescribed 
range 
of 
CO2

concentrations, while the frequency range is a 
consequence of the chosen concentrations range. 
Therefore, the overall sensitivity is equal to 𝜋/∆𝑐𝑣, 
so it is smaller for a larger range of concentrations.
Furthermore, the sensor utilizes nonlinear phase 
response, which allows for higher phase response to 
small concentration changes specifically at low 
concentrations. There,
this sensitivity is not 

expressed in a high value of Hz per ppm, since we do 
not suggest measuring the frequency shift itself. 

Instead, we suggest measuring the phase shift, and 
indeed, we have a large value of phase shift per ppm 
of concentration for low concentration values. This 
high sensitivity is not manifested in a high value of a 
slope of a linear curve, but rather in the fact that the 
response is concave, and for low concentrations the 
(variable) slope becomes very high.  This concave 
response is achieved by adjusting the operational 

frequency to have

𝜕𝜔

𝜕𝑘 =

𝜕𝑓

𝜕∆𝑑𝜑 = 0 (similarly to the 

approach of [77-78]) at the zero-phase limit. 

A practical issue related to the resolution of the 
sensor is the following. In COMSOL calculations at 
frequencies around 10 kHz, the accuracy of the 
eigenvalue solver is 10-4, which means 1 Hz 
frequency resolution, or 300 ppm concentration 
resolution. Also, for the actual sensor, in a 
measurement, the absolute sensitivity is lower: the 
maximum sampling frequency of a standard sound 
card is around 34 times the operational frequency
chosen here, which implies 17 sampled points per 
half-period, or 1 sample point for 500 ppm. 
Therefore, it may be stated that the maximum 
possible absolute resolution of the sensor with 
standard electronic equipment would be around 500
ppm. The normal concentration of carbon dioxide in 
air is 400 ppm, which means that the design sensor 
is sufficient for detecting concentrations from the 
perspective of health hazards in inhalation.

Figure 7(b) shows open-air measurements with the 
sensor at various frequencies in the relevant range 
covering all the relevant phase range. One observes 
very 
good 
experimental 
validation 
of 
the 

calculations.

In the following section, the sensing principle is
demonstrated experimentally, and the sensor’s 
properties and performance are discussed in detail.

5.
Experimental testing of the CO2 sensor

To test the proposed sensor experimentally, the 
structure 
was
fabricated 
using 
3D 
printing 

technology, employing a PLA filament, and the 
acoustic response was measured for several relevant


CO2 concentration values in controlled environment. 
Prior to fabrication and measurements, several 
issues had to be resolved. Specifically, the 
dimensions and the quantity of the unit cells in the 
ASFS waveguide sensor were determined by the 3D-
printer resolution (dictating the minimal geometric 
dimension in the waveguide), the size of the
available microphones and size of the gas chamber 
available for the experiment; the necessity to have a 
sufficient number of unit cells to achieve a well-
resolved wave structure and, ultimately, the desire 
to have a more compact structure compared to the 
previously presented ASFS waveguide. 

Several 3D simulations were run to determine the 
final configuration and geometric parameters, where 
the analyzed structures were comprised not only of 
the ASFS waveguide but also of holes for the 
microphones, which were modeled using radiative 
boundary conditions.

(a)

(b)

Figure 8: (a) Cross section view of the numerically 

analyzed sensor, (b) Isometric view of the fabricated 

sensor

Dispersion diagrams for the optimized waveguide 
structure for different CO2 concentrations were 
obtained following the principle explained in the 

previous section and using Eqs. (1) and (2), where the 
temperature was measured and set to 23 °C. Since 
the calculated dispersion diagrams turned out to be 
practically the same as for the initial structure, we 
will omit them here. The operating frequency was 
chosen to be 11.158 kHz. This value produces 
maximum measured-phase sensitivity at small 
concentrations and enables covering the full range of 
relevant CO2 concentrations. 

The number of unit cells sufficient to support a wave 
with a nearly flat dispersion curve was found to be 
26 unit cells, with 15 unit cells between the speaker 
and the first of the two 8
mm-diameter 

microphones, and 11 unit cells between the second 
microphone and the outlet. A larger number of unit-
cells would make the sensor too large for the gas 
chamber, and is essentially not necessary. Isometric 
views of the numerically analyzed and fabricated 
structure are shown in Figure 8. 

The extrusion depth for the 2D design was set to be
12.5 mm and the thickness of the plates representing 
the hypothetically rigid corrugated surface was set to 
3.2
mm. The fabricated upper corrugations

corresponding to the locations of the two 
microphones were covered by 1 mm-thick plates, 
with a 1 mm-diameter central hole for the sound to 
get to the head of the microphone positioned against 
the said 1 mm ceiling. Two microphones constructed 
as cylinders with flat sound-receptive circular heads, 
were positioned perpendicularly to the axis of the 
waveguide, at adjacent unit cells, centered above the 
vertical corrugations. The cylinders were mounted 
using plastic nests printed monolithically with the 
structure.

To 
perform 
acoustic 
measurements, 
two 

microphones on cylindrical sticks were inserted into 
the sockets of the sensor, as depicted in Figure 8, 
having the air pressure wave reaching them through 
the 1 mm-diameter hole. A small speaker of an 
earphone was attached by duct tape to one end of 
the waveguide, 15 unit-cells distant from the 
microphone sockets, with the other waveguide end 
remaining open. The sound was generated using the 
free software
Audacity. Measurements were 

conducted in a laboratory, using a gas chamber, into 
which CO2 was pumped through a 1 mm-diameter 


tube from a CO2 balloon, with 0.1 bar relative 
pressure during the course of approximately 1 
minute, until reaching a concentration higher than 
10000 ppm, according to a reference commercial 
optical IR CO2-concentration sensor (“Qingping Air 
Monitor Lite”). Subsequently, a manual air pump was 
used to pump in air and let the CO2-polluted air flow 
out through another 1 mm-diameter tube until 
desired concentrations were reached, as confirmed 
by the reference sensor. Acoustic measurements 
were then performed at steady-state concentrations 
of 0.7%, 0.5%, 0.3% and 0.1%, in addition to the 0% 
concentration 
measurement 
that 
had 
been 

conducted 
outside
the 
gas 
chamber. 
The 

experimental setup is shown in Figure 9.

Figure 9: Experimental setup: a PMMA box (with an inlet 
for gas and an outlet) containing the fabricated sensor, 

with two microphones inserted in the sockets, an 

earphone speaker attached by duct tape at the longer 

end, a soundblaster device Omni Surround 5.1,

connecting the three audio devices to the computer 
outside the chamber using USB ports installed in the 
chamber, with a piece of polystyrene to support the 
sensor to have a free outflux, and a reference sensor 

Qingping Air Monitor Lite.

The measured phases obtained using a procedure 
discussed in detail in Appendix B, are depicted on top 
of the calculated values in
Figure 10. The 

concentration for each measurement was read from 
the reference Qingping Air Monitor. It should be 
noted that the reference sensor measures total CO2
concentration 
using 
an 
optical 
absorption 

mechanism. Due to this, the monitor of the 
reference sensor shows the sum of CO2 in standard 
air and the additionally pumped CO2. To deduce the 
additionally pumped CO2 concentration, an amount 

of 0.04% had to be subtracted. The reason for this is 
that the computation involved specifying the speed 
of sound of standard air at a certain temperature, 
and standard air already contains 0.04% CO2.

One can observe excellent correspondence between 
the measured and calculated concentrations, i.e., 
between the concentrations measured by the 
reference sensor and those measured by the 
proposed sensor. The sensor shows high accuracy 
already at volume concentrations as small as 0.04% 
CO2, which is a non-hazardous concentration, while 
the steep initial rise guarantees good phase 
resolution even for a small concentration change.

Figure 10: Comparison of the calculated and measured 
relative phase change versus the concentration of CO2.

6.
Discussion

The proposed sensor represents a novel sensing 
platform characterized by high accuracy and 
sensitivity, low-cost, and the possibility for a rapid 
and reliable measurement with low maintenance. 

We first implemented
a design that adds a 

perturbation to an otherwise symmetric waveguide, 
characterized by a perfectly-flat second band. The 
symmetry is broken vertically, in a fashion that 
maintains the uniformity of the waveguide in the 
propagation direction, while achieving a nearly-flat 
mode, similarly to the idea in [62]. This is different 
from some other designs that introduce horizontal 


perturbation to achieve a nearly-flat mode [65]-[66]. 
If the horizontal perturbation is breaking the 
periodicity of the waveguide, then measuring the 
wavenumber 
of 
propagating 
waves 
will 
be 

problematic. If the horizontal  perturbation preserves 
the periodicity, still horizontal symmetry-breaking 
enforces fabrication requirements in the propagation 
direction. When approaching the manufacturing 
limit for a small-enough perturbation (for high-
enough sensitivity still enabling measurement), the 
fabrication inaccuracy may destroy the propagating 
wave, damaging the ability to measure a phase 
difference as an indication for the concentration, 
with its advantages in terms of robustness to noise 
and efficient measurement time. A vertical 
perturbation helps to overcome such difficulties. The 
absolute size of the vertical asymmetry can be 
adjusted to the fabrication capabilities and the 
relative accuracy can be decreased by increasing the 
average height of the vertical perturbation, which 
has the only effect of decreasing the operational 
frequency, which is advantageous anyway, as it 
increases the accuracy of signa processing for 
available equipment.

The most important aspect of the introduced 
asymmetry is that it provides the possibility to 
change the nature of the second mode from 
perfectly-flat to nearly-flat. While the proposed ASFS 
structure and its analysis are presented for the first 
time, the major novelty in this work is the sensor and 
its sensing principle that is based on a nearly-flat 
mode, also tailored to maximum sensitivity, in an 
ASFS waveguide, and its reliance on phase difference 
measurement. 

The significance of the proposed sensing principle is 
twofold. The majority of the proposed sensors are 
based on damped-resonance amplitude-change, 
rather than on phase-measurement, and unlike 
phase measurement, amplitude measurement is 
prone to modulation and attenuation by noise and 
measurement duration. This problem was addressed 
in [44], but only partially. Therefore, the phase 
difference measurements are significantly more 

robust and as such represent a more reliable 
solution. 

While there are in the literature sensors based on the 
measurement of the speed of sound [40-43], which 
is embedded also in the phase-measurement 
principle, those sensors employ the fundamental 
mode, and this is true for most acoustic sensors. The 
major disadvantage of the fundamental mode is their 
linearity in the majority of the wavenumber range, 
which limits the sensitivity, i.e., they cannot provide 
sufficiently different wavenumbers for minute 
changes in the fluid as does the nearly-flat mode.  

Furthermore, when introducing a small vertical 
perturbation to the symmetric design, the second-
mode band ceases to be flat for all wavenumbers but 
remains flat for the zero wavenumber. If the 
operational frequency is chosen in such a way that 
the wavenumber of the second-mode for standard 
air is equal to zero then the measured wavenumber 
increases sharply even for infinitesimally-small 
changes in gas concentration, which provides a 
highly sensitive phase–concentration response, 
allowing very high sensing resolution for small 
concentrations. Therefore, the second advantage of 
our solution is the employment of a nearly-flat 
dispersion band.

As previously discussed, our sensitivity is equal to 
0.003 Hz/ppm, however, this value should be taken 
cautiously and interpreted in the context of the given 
sensing principle. Since the robustly measurable 
value is phase, we design the sensor such that the 
phase difference between adjacent unit-cells spans 
π/2 radians for the relevant CO2 concentrations 
range. Also, the sensor is designed such that the 
phase-concentration response curve is nonlinear, 
resembling a square-root function, for which the 
sensitivity, or the slope, becomes arbitrarily high at 
low concentrations. Therefore, the smaller the 
concentrations range, the higher is the sensitivity 
value, i.e., the sensitivity can be chosen almost 
arbitrarily. High -sensitivity values are limited only by 
practical considerations, such as the accuracy of the 
numerical algorithm of the employed software and 
the sampling rate of the used electronic equipment.


The sensitivity of periodic-structure-based sensors, 
as those in Refs. [53,61], are of the order of 
10mHz/ppm, which might be considered similar to 
that of the proposed one, but one should note that 
these sensors employ almost-linear modes and 
operate at frequencies of around 60 kHz, which is 5.4 
times higher than the proposed operating frequency. 
Quartz-Crystal-Microbalance (QCM), SAW or BAW, 
and Film-Bulk-Acoustic-Resonator (FBAR) sensors 
typically exhibit sensitivity of tens of Hz/ppm, 10-3–
10-2 kHz/ppm, and around 1kHz/ppm, respectively,
while their operating frequencies are in the range of
1–10 kHz, 100 kHz – 100 GHz, and 100 MHz – 20 GHz,
respectively [49]. Therefore, their sensitivity can be 
considered comparable to that of the proposed 
sensor. As for the limit of detection, it is indeed 
smaller in other acoustic sensors; however, those 
sensors are typically aimed at other applications, 
such as routine air-quality monitoring.

Besides novelty, increased sensitivity, and robustness 
to noise, the proposed sensor shows some other 
advantages in comparison to other acoustic sensors.
It was shown that even for small concentrations the 
proposed sensor is very accurate. Although only 
measurements up to 1% concentration have been 
shown, it should be noted that the proposed sensor 
can measure concentrations up to 3% or even up to 
5% with a slight change in the sensor design. In other 
words, the proposed sensor can work in a large range 
of concentrations, without reaching saturation and 
as such be applied in various industrial applications.

In comparison to other acoustic sensors, which 
typically require advanced fabrication processes, the 
proposed sensor can be printed from cheap PLA 
material and requires only an earphone and two 
microphones, the signals from which can be 
coordinated by a simple electronic board and 
analyzed using a standard microprocessor.
In 

addition to these advanced properties, the sensor
has shorter measurement time in comparison to 
others, it is label-free, provides rapid and robust 
response, and does not require relaxation time or air 
flushing. Consequently, it can be used for real-time 
measurements. 

Since the basic detection mechanism is related to 
molecular weight of a gas, the sensor is equivalently 
operative for detection of any heavy gas, such as 
N2O, C3H8, C4H10 or light gas such as CH4 or NH3. At 
the same time, this represents an obstacle for the 
sensor’s selectivity since several gases can have 
(approximately) the same molecular weight. 

The size of the proposed sensor may represent a
challenge. While not all applications require small 
sensors, miniaturization is an important requirement 
in sensor design. We would like to note that a 
significantly smaller version of the sensor can be 
achieved if the lateral dimensions are modulated, 
however, such a configuration requires more 
advanced 3D printing technology with higher
printing resolution. Our future work will include the 
improvement of the structure and its miniaturization 
using more advanced technologies. 

7.
Conclusions

In this work, we have investigated an ASFS 
waveguide and its application in gas sensing. First, a 
numerical method was suggested for robust 
dispersion analysis based on the expansion of the 
acoustic fields in the direction perpendicular to the 
wave propagation direction, using a basis of wave 
functions, but employing a point-collocation rather 
than mode-matching technique. The method 
showed satisfactory results coinciding with finite 
element analysis implemented in the commercial 
software COMSOL-Multiphysics. An ASFS waveguide 
was fabricated using 3D printing technology and its 
responses were measured in a simple measurement 
setup that includes off-the-shelf microphones and a 
speaker. The measurement results showed excellent 
agreement with the calculated ones. 

Furthermore, it was numerically demonstrated how 
the second mode of an ASFS waveguide that has 
nearly-flat nature can be used for gas sensing 
purposes. Consequently, a numerically-optimized 
CO2
sensor was
fabricated using 3D printing 

technology and experimentally tested in a gas 
chamber-controlled
CO2
concentration. 
The 

measured results matched well to the calculated 
ones, demonstrating the potential of the proposed 
sensor. Besides the novelty of the sensing principle, 


the sensor is characterized by high sensitivity, 
accuracy, low costs, robustness to noises, rapid 
response without the need for relaxation time and 
maintenance, and the possibility to operate in a large 
range of concentrations without reaching saturation. 
Consequently, we opt that the proposed work 
represents a valuable contribution not only to the 
theoretical analysis of acoustic periodic structures 
but also to sensor engineering applicable for real-
world problems.

Acknowledgements

The work described in this paper was conducted 
within the project NOCTURNO, which received
funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant 
No. 777714. This work was also supported through 
the ANTARES project that has received funding from 
the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme under grant agreement SGA-
CSA 
No. 
739570 
under 
FPA 
No. 
664387, 

https://doi.org/10.3030/739570.

The work was also supported by the Department of 
Defense, the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, 
and the Simons Foundation.

Appendix A: Derivation of the calculated dispersion 
diagram
for the asymmetric spoof-fluid-spoof 

waveguide

The basic governing equations of a fluid subjected 
to acoustic excitation are as follows:

𝜌𝒗̇ = −𝛻𝑝, 𝜌̇ + 𝜌𝛻 ∙ 𝒗 = 0,

𝜕𝑝

𝜕𝜌 =

𝐶2, 𝛻 × 𝒗 = 0 ⇒ 𝛻2𝑝 =

1

𝐶2

𝜕2𝑝

𝜕𝑡2 , 𝛻2𝒗 =

1

𝐶2

𝜕2𝒗

𝜕𝑡2. 
(A.1)

In frequency space the following relations hold:

𝛻2𝑝̌ + 𝑘2𝑝̌ = 0, 𝛻2𝒒̌ + 𝑘2𝒒̌ =
0, 𝛻𝑝̌ = 𝑘𝒒,̌ 𝛻 ∙ 𝒒̌ = 𝑘𝑝,̌
(A.2)

where

𝑝̂ = 𝑒−𝑖𝜔𝑡𝑝,𝒗̂ = 𝑒−𝑖𝜔𝑡𝒗,𝑘 =

𝜔

𝑐 , 𝜂 =

𝜌𝑐, 𝒒̂ = 𝜂𝒗̂,𝒒̂ = −𝑖𝒒̌, 𝑝̂ = −𝑖𝑝̌,
(A.3)

and where ρ, p, C, 𝒗, ω are the density, pressure, 
speed of sound, material velocity and excitation 
frequency in the fluid, respectively.

It is next assumed that the excitation is uniform in 
the z direction, and consequently, so is the response. 
Therefore, the following equations are assumed to 
hold in the x-y plane:

𝜕2𝑝̌

𝜕2𝑥2 +

𝜕2𝑝̌

𝜕2𝑦2 + 𝑘2𝑝̌ = 0, 𝑞̌𝑥 =

𝑘−1 𝜕𝑝̌

𝜕𝑥 , 𝑞̌𝑦 = 𝑘−1 𝜕𝑝̌

𝜕𝑦.
(A.4)

The general solution of the Eq. (A.4) is

𝑝̌(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝑝̌(𝑥, 𝑦) = ∑
[(𝐴𝑚𝑒−𝑖𝑘𝑥,𝑚𝑥 +
𝑚

𝐵𝑚𝑒𝑖𝑘𝑥,𝑚𝑥)𝑒

−𝑖√𝑘2−𝑘𝑥,𝑚
2
𝑦 + (𝐶𝑚𝑒−𝑖𝑘𝑥,𝑚𝑥 +

𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑖𝑘𝑥,𝑚𝑥)𝑒

𝑖√𝑘2−𝑘𝑥,𝑚
2
𝑦]
(A.5)

A wave solution (with kx,m ∈ ℝ) would be supported 
for waves with small enough wavelength, namely, 
𝑘𝑥,𝑚 ≫ 𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥
−1 . It is further assumed that, for any 

value of z, the fluid occupies in the x-y plane some 
subspace bounded by straight-segment boundaries 
as depicted in Figure 1.

One can then specify the coefficients Am, Bm, Cm, Dm,
kx in each of the three sub-domains in a unit cell of 
horizontal length d. In the domains I and III the 
condition of vanishing normal velocity on each of the 
three rigid boundaries produces the following 
solutions:

𝑝̌ 𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) =

1

𝑎3 ∑
𝐴𝑚
𝐼𝐼𝐼
∞
𝑚=0

𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑚𝜋𝑥/𝑎3) 𝑐𝑜𝑠[√𝑘2−(𝑚𝜋/𝑎3)2(𝑔

2+ℎ3−𝑦)]

√𝑘2−(𝑚𝜋/𝑎3)2 𝑐𝑜𝑠(√𝑘2−(𝑚𝜋/𝑎3)2ℎ3)
,

(A.6)

where the coefficients AIIIm are to be determined by 
requiring that 𝑝̌ 𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑥, 𝑔/2) = 𝑝̌ 𝐼𝐼(𝑥, 𝑔/2).


𝑝̌ 𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) =

1

𝑎1 ∑
𝐴𝑚
𝐼
∞
𝑚=0

𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑚𝜋𝑥/𝑎1) 𝑐𝑜𝑠[√𝑘2−(𝑚𝜋/𝑎1)2(𝑔

2+ℎ1+𝑦)]

√𝑘2−(𝑚𝜋/𝑎1)2 𝑐𝑜𝑠(√𝑘2−(𝑚𝜋/𝑎1)2ℎ1)
,

(A.7)

and the coefficients AIm are to be determined by 
requiring that 𝑝̌ 𝐼(𝑥, −𝑔/2) = 𝑝̌ 𝐼𝐼(𝑥, −𝑔/2).

The horizontal boundary conditions in domain I and 
III impose a1,3-periodicity on the solution, since the 
normal velocities have to be equal and vanishing at 
both x = 0 and x = a1,3. In contrast, in the middle layer 
there are no horizontal boundary conditions, and 
thus for a given wave with its given wavelength, the 
phase difference between x = 0 and x = d would 
generally be non-vanishing. Hence, the solution in 
domain II will not be d-periodic in x, but at best d-
periodic up to a phase shift. 

For every value of y, for x-periodic waveguides, the 
spectral wave-equation is linear second-order in x
with no first derivative and with periodic 
coefficients, which makes it a Hill equation. For the 
Hill equation a Floquet-theory result exists [79] 
according to which the solution is d-periodic up to a 
phase shift, namely, that 𝑑𝑘𝑥,𝑚 = 2𝑚𝜋 + ∆𝑑𝜙, 𝑚 ∈
ℤ. Thus, one has

𝑝̌ 𝐼𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) =

1

𝑑 ∑
𝑒

−𝑖(𝑚+𝛥𝑑𝜙

2𝜋 )2𝜋

𝑑 𝑥

√𝑘2−[(𝑚+

𝛥𝑑𝜙
2𝜋 )2𝜋

𝑑 ]

2 ×
∞
𝑚=−∞

{𝐴𝑚
𝐼𝐼 𝑒−𝑖√𝑘2−[(𝑚+

𝛥𝑑𝜙
2𝜋 )2𝜋

𝑑 ]

2

𝑦 +

𝐵𝑚𝐼𝐼𝑒𝑖√𝑘2−[(𝑚+

𝛥𝑑𝜙
2𝜋 )2𝜋

𝑑 ]

2

𝑦} ,
(A.8)

where Δ𝑑𝜙 ∈ [0,2𝜋) is the phase shift over distance 
d of a wave with a given frequency ω. The 
coefficients 𝐴±|𝑚|

𝐼𝐼
, 𝐵±|𝑚|

𝐼𝐼
would be determined by 

the requirement to comply with the vanishing of 𝑞̌y
at the vertical boundaries at a3 < x < d, y = g/2 and a1
< x < d, y = -g/2, and with continuity of normal 
velocities, namely, 𝜂−1𝑞̌𝑦 at 0 < x < a3, y = g/2 and 0 
< x < a1, y = -g/2.

If the waveguide is comprised of Nd unit cells, then it 
would support wave solutions with wavelength 
satisfying the condition Δ𝑑𝜙 ≫ 𝑁𝑑

−1. For example, 

for Nd = 15, adopting that 10 ≫ 1, one could have 
waves for 

Δ𝑑𝜙

𝜋
> 0.2. Due to the symmetry with 

respect to the sign of x, the relevant range of 
normalized wavenumbers for the said example 
would be 

Δ𝑑𝜙

𝜋
∈ [0.2,1]. The said symmetry would 

also 
render 
the 
frequency 
dependence 
on 

wavenumber very low for

Δ𝑑𝜙

𝜋
> 0.8. Consequently, 

one would be able to observe waves in the 
wavelength range of 

Δ𝑑𝜙

𝜋
∈ [0.2,0.8]. The smallest 

possible wavelength in a d-periodic waveguide is d, 
so shorter waves will not propagate. The largest 
wavelength for propagating waves would be, as 
aforesaid, 
of 
wavelength
around 
0.1Ndd. 

Consequently, a dispersion study is only possible for 
Nd > 10.

For the possibility of a numerical solution of the 
collocation type, the x coordinate in the range (0,d] 
is divided as uniformly as possible into segments, or 
rather a set of discrete points is chosen in the said 
range, with as uniform distances as possible between 
them, to enforce the boundary conditions. More 
specifically, at y = g/2, the segment 0 < x < a3 is 
divided into 𝑛𝑎3uniformly spaced points, and the 
segment a3 < x < d is divided into 𝑛𝑠3 uniformly 
spaced points. Similarly, at y = -g/2, the segment 0 <
x < a1 is divided into 𝑛𝑎1 uniformly spaced points, and 
the segment a1 < x < d is divided into 𝑛𝑠1 uniformly 
spaced points.

The stability of this spectral collocation method is 
guaranteed for the following choice of parameters:

𝑛𝑠1,3 = {

⌈

𝑑−𝑎1,3

𝑎1,3 𝑛𝑎1,3⌉ , 𝑖𝑓 ⌈

𝑑−𝑎1,3

𝑎1,3 𝑛𝑎1,3⌉ 𝑖𝑠 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛

⌈

𝑑−𝑎1,3

𝑎1,3 𝑛𝑎1,3⌉ + 1, 𝑖𝑓 ⌈

𝑑−𝑎1,3

𝑎1,3 𝑛𝑎1,3⌉ 𝑖𝑠 𝑜𝑑𝑑

(A.9)

where ⌈∙⌉ is the ceiling function, or the closest larger 
integer number.

In addition, the infinite series have to be truncated in 
numerical calculations. The upper limit of infinity in 
the given solutions is hence replaced by NI, NII, and 


NIII. In order to extract unambiguously the NIII + 1 
coefficients 𝐴𝑚

𝐼,𝐼𝐼 from equating the pressure in 

domains I and III at the 𝑛𝑎1,3 collocation points to the 
pressure at domain II at the same points, the 
following relations must hold:

𝑛𝑎1,3 = 𝑁𝐼,𝐼𝐼𝐼 + 1. 
(A.10)

Finally, for the number of equations to correspond to 
the number of unknown coefficients, the following 
relation must hold:

𝑁𝐼𝐼 =

1

4 (2𝑛𝑎1 + 2𝑛𝑎3 + 𝑛𝑠1 + 𝑛𝑠3 − 𝑁𝐼 − 𝑁𝐼𝐼𝐼 − 4). 

(A.11)

Furthermore, symmetry between the lower and 
upper boundaries requires that 𝑛𝑎1 + 𝑛𝑠1 = 𝑛𝑎3 +
𝑛𝑠3. Consequently, if this requirement is satisfied, 
the following relation would hold: 2𝑁𝐼𝐼 = 𝑁𝐼 +
𝑛𝑠1 = 𝑁𝐼𝐼𝐼 + 𝑛𝑠3. Since 𝑛𝑠3 is even, a necessary 
condition is that NI be even, and that NIII would 
satisfy the relation

𝑁𝐼𝐼𝐼 + 𝑛𝑠3 = 𝑁𝐼 + 𝑛𝑠1. 
(A.12)

This means that there is only one free parameter in 
this algorithm, namely, NI, which can be an arbitrary 
even integer. The chosen value should be large 
enough with respect to unity to obtain convergence, 
but not too large to avoid resonance with numerical
noise. In the solved examples the choice NI = 10 was 
made.

An important remark should be made here. The 
differential equation (A.4) is smooth in each smooth-
boundary domain, and thus its solution is smooth. 
Therefore, the Fourier coefficients of the solution 
should decay exponentially in domains I and III and 
they are proportional to 𝐴𝑚
𝐼 ,𝐴𝑚
𝐼𝐼𝐼. In domain II, the 

solution is a Fourier series in x, multiplied by a low 
frequency oscillatory function of x. Consequently, 
the solution would not contain highly oscillatory 
large amplitude modes. Thus, enforcing continuity at 
a large number of collocation points will guarantee 
small field discontinuities between the collocation 
points, since the solutions would not be able to 
oscillate with a large amplitude between them. 
Therefore, in this case, the collocation method of 

enforcing continuity at interfaces is expected to be 
reliable and convergent. 

Writing down the continuity equations for pressure 
and vertical velocity at 0 < x < a3, y = g/2 and 0 < x <
a1, y = -g/2 and the condition of vanishing vertical 
velocities at a3 < x < d, y = g/2 and a1 < x < d, y = -g/2 
one obtains a system of 6 sets of equations for 6 sets 

of 
variables 
(𝐰 = {𝐴𝑚
𝐼 ,𝐴±|𝑚|

𝐼𝐼
, 𝐵±|𝑚|

𝐼𝐼
, 𝐴𝑚
𝐼𝐼𝐼}

⊺). 

Obtaining the representative matrix 𝐇 of this system 
of equations, namely, 𝐇𝐰 = 0, requires only the 
substitution of a set of uniformly spaced points in 
each segment x, namely,

𝑥 → {𝑥}𝑗, 𝑥𝑗

(𝑎1,𝑎3) =

𝑎1,3

𝑛𝑎1,3+1 𝑗, 𝑗 =

1,2, … , 𝑛𝑎1,3, 𝑥𝑗

(𝑠1,𝑠3) = 𝑎1,3 +

𝑑−𝑎1,3
𝑛𝑎1,3+1 𝑗, 𝑗 =

1,2, … , 𝑛𝑎1,3.
(A.13)

After the matrix 𝐇 is constructed, with each column 
corresponding to a mode of the solution in the entire 
domain and each row corresponding to an equation 
on a collocation point, numerical eigenvalue analysis 
of 𝐇 is performed and the eigenvalue with the 
minimum absolute value is identified. 

Nonzero-amplitude 
pressure 
waves 
can 
be 

supported by the studied system only for a vanishing 
minimum absolute-value eigenvalue of 𝐇. The 
logarithm of this measure is plotted against the wave 
frequency for Δ𝑑𝜙 = 𝜋/2
for the following 

geometrical parameters d = 34.3 mm, a1 = a3 = g = 
10.3 mm, h1 = 20.6 mm, h3 = 18.2 mm, C = 346.87 
m/s, ρ = 1.1802 kg/m3 in Figure A.1.

For high enough frequency resolution and spatial 
resolution, the narrow dips as shown in Figure A.1
would 
approach 
minus 
infinity 
and 
the 

corresponding frequencies would be the nonzero-
amplitude wave frequencies for the assumed value 
of Δ𝑑𝜙.

In order to obtain the wavenumber for a given 
frequency, one has to measure the phases of the 
propagating pressure waves at two locations in the 
waveguide with a distance d between them.

If one acknowledges a relative error δ in the distance 
between two probes measuring the pressure, 


rendering the actual said distance to be (1+δ)d, then 
modes corresponding to terms with 𝑚 = 𝒪(⌊𝛿−1⌋)
may produce additional parasitic finite phase shift.

However, for such terms the denominator in Eq. 
(A.8) would be of the order of 𝑚 = 𝒪(⌊𝛿−1⌋) ≫ 1,
rendering the contribution of the term insignificant.

The latter would hold due to the fact that the 
coefficients 𝐴𝑚
𝐼𝐼 , 𝐵𝑚𝐼𝐼 decay exponentially for 𝑚 ≫ 1, 

balancing the braced expression to order of unity for 
y = g/2. This analysis shows that the pressure is 
stable with respect to phase-shift measurement at 
the waveguide boundaries. The coefficients may 
decrease even more strongly, but not more weakly, 
as the alternating harmonic series is already 
marginally convergent.

Figure A.1: Plot of log|λ|𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝐇) vs. 𝑓 =

𝜔

2𝜋.

Appendix B: Derivation of the measured dispersion 
diagram

The procedure for the derivation of the measured 
dispersion 
diagram 
goes 
as 
follows: 
two 

microphones are positioned in the middle of the 
structure one unit-cell apart and record a signal 
approaching from the speaker positioned at end of 
the waveguide. The recorded pressure-level signals 
are shown in Fig. B.1, first in the full recording range, 
then in the range of 10 msec from 4.102sec to 4.112 
sec and finally over the range of 0.2msec, from 
4.1104sec to 4.1106sec. 

The phase difference between the signals should be 
checked at the right time, which is when the 

wavefront have reached the open end of the 
waveguide and the rarefaction wave has returned to 
the microphones. 

Δ𝑡𝜙 =

Δ𝐿
𝜔𝑑

2𝜋−Δ𝑑𝜙

=

𝑛(1+2ℎ1+2𝑔+ℎ3
𝑑
)

𝑓

1−Δ𝑑𝜙/(2𝜋)

.  
(B.1)

The formula given above yields the right time for 
such an instance, measuring from the start of rise of 
signal above noise, which occurs at 4.103 sec. The 
time duration from that instance to the proper 
instance of phase-difference check is calculated 
according to the formula, namely, as the acoustic 
distance divided by the acoustic speed. The acoustic 
distance is the travel distance of sound as it goes 
through the length of every currogation (top and 
bottom) on its way (n = 37 being the number of unit-
cells from the speaker to the microphone after 
passing the entire waveguide and returnng from the 
open end back to the microphones – the best 
measurement time is just before the rerafaction 
wave returns to inform the microphone that the 
waveguide is truncated). The instance 4.102 sec is 
when the wave travelling directly through the solid 
body of the waveguide reaches the microphones 
directly and creates the first detectible signal: 

dt=15d/√𝐸/𝜌)~0.16 msec << 7.5 msec, which means 
that this happens at some instance almost 
immedeately, setting the right moment to start 
counting the time till the signal through the acoustic 
distance in air reaches the microphones upon 
returning from the open end of the waveguide.

The time from the moment the signal reaches the
microphone through the solid structure till the 
moment the rarefaction wave in air reaches the 
microphone depends not only on the acoustic 
distance but also on the acoustic speed. The acoustic 
(phase) speed at a given frequency of excitation 
depends on the phase. The pressure in the 
microphone matures for measurement when the 
slower of the two phases {Δ𝑑𝜙, 2𝜋 − Δ𝑑𝜙} reaches 
the microphones. Since the phase difference of 𝜋 is 
never reached for relevant gas concentrations, the 
appropriate phase difference is 2𝜋 − Δ𝑑𝜙. For the 


calculation of Δ𝑡𝜙 the phase difference is still 
unknown. In this sense it is an iterative process. First, 
the wavenumber should be assumed in relative-
phase units. One can either just assume any number 
and repeat the process several times until 
convergence is reached. A shorter path is assuming 
the right wavenumber using the numerical 
dispersion diagram and the operational frequency. 

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure B.1: Pressures histories for excitation frequency of 

11.158kHz for concentration of 0.5% CO2 at different 
magnification resolutions (a), (b), and (c), showing the 

calculated phase Δd𝜙~𝜋/3 as shown in Fig. 10.

Using the theoretical diagram can only shorten the 
iterative process, by producing a better initial guess, 
but even without it the iterative process will 
converge. This is to say that the procedure is by no 
means one of cyclic logic. 

Since the dependence of the phase difference on the 
right time instance for comparison is weak, when 
taking the initial guess for the wavenumber based on 
the computational plot, two iterations are sufficient. 

References

1.
J. W. S. Rayleigh, The Theory of Sound, 
(Dover, New York, 1945).

2.
L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation in Periodic 
Structures (Dover, New York, 1946).

3.
M. M. Sigalas and E. N. Economou, Elastic 
and Acoustic Wave Band Structure, Journal 
of Sound and Vibration 158, 377 (1992).

4.
M. S. Kushwaha, P. Halevi, L. Dobrzynski, and 
B. Djafari-Rouhani, Acoustic Band Structure 
of Periodic Elastic Composites, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 71, 2022 (1993).

5.
M. S. Kushwaha, Classical Band Structure of 
Periodic Elastic Composites, Int. J. Mod. 
Phys. B 10, 977 (1996).

6.
Z. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Mao, Y. Y. Zhu, Z. Yang, C. 
T. Chan, and P. Sheng, Locally Resonant 
Sonic Materials, Science 289, 1734 (2000).

7.
M. I. Hussein, M. J. Leamy, and M. Ruzzene, 
Dynamics of Phononic Materials and 
Structures: 
Historical 
Origins, 
Recent 

Progress, and Future Outlook, Applied 
Mechanics Reviews 66, 040802 (2014).

8.
S. A. Cummer, J. Christensen, and A. Alù, 
Controlling 
Sound 
with 
Acoustic 

Metamaterials, Nat Rev Mater 1, 16001 
(2016).

9.
J. B. Pendry, L. Martín-Moreno, and F. J. 
Garcia-Vidal, Mimicking Surface Plasmons 
with Structured Surfaces, Science 305, 847 
(2004).

10. S. A. Maier, S. R. Andrews, L. Martín-

Moreno, and F. J. García-Vidal, Terahertz 
Surface Plasmon-Polariton Propagation and 


Focusing on Periodically Corrugated Metal 
Wires, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 176805 (2006).

11. K. Song and P. Mazumder, Active Terahertz 

Spoof Surface Plasmon Polariton Switch 
Comprising 
the 
Perfect 
Conductor 

Metamaterial, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 
56, 2792 (2009).

12. M. A. Kats, D. Woolf, R. Blanchard, N. Yu, and 

F. Capasso, Spoof Plasmon Analogue of 
Metal-Insulator-Metal Waveguides, Opt. 
Express 19, 14860 (2011).

13. X. Shen, T. J. Cui, D. Martin-Cano, and F. J. 

Garcia-Vidal, Conformal Surface Plasmons 
Propagating on Ultrathin and Flexible Films, 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 40 (2012).

14. Z. Ma, S. M. Hanham, P. Arroyo Huidobro, Y. 

Gong, M. Hong, N. Klein, and S. A. Maier, 
Terahertz Particle-in-Liquid Sensing with 
Spoof 
Surface 
Plasmon 
Polariton 

Waveguides, APL Photonics 2, 116102 
(2017).

15. L. Ye, H. Feng, G. Cai, Y. Zhang, B. Yan, and Q. 

H. Liu, High-Efficient and Low-Coupling 
Spoof Surface Plasmon Polaritons Enabled 
by V-Shaped Microstrips, Opt. Express 27, 
22088 (2019).

16. C. H. Wu, L. Shen, H. Zhang, J. Yan, D. J. Hou, 

G. Zhou, and Y. L. Wu, Equivalent Circuit 
Parameters of Planar Transmission Lines 
with Spoof Surface Plasmon Polaritons and 
Its Application in High Density Circuits, Sci 
Rep 9, 18853 (2019).

17. J. Christensen, P. A. Huidobro, L. Martín-

Moreno, and F. J. García-Vidal, Confining and 
Slowing Airborne Sound with a Corrugated 
Metawire, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 083502 
(2008).

18. Z. He, H. Jia, C. Qiu, Y. Ye, R. Hao, M. Ke, and 

Z. Liu, Nonleaky Surface Acoustic Waves on a 
Textured Rigid Surface, Phys. Rev. B 83, 
132101 (2011).

19. L. Quan, F. Qian, X. Liu, X. Gong, and P. A. 

Johnson, Mimicking Surface Plasmons in 

Acoustics at Low Frequency, Phys. Rev. B 92, 
104105 (2015).

20. O. Schnitzer, Spoof Surface Plasmons Guided 

by Narrow Grooves, Phys. Rev. B 96, 085424 
(2017).

21. W. K. Cao, L. T. Wu, C. Zhang, G. Y. Song, J. C. 

Ke, Q. Cheng, and T. J. Cui, Acoustic Surface 
Waves 
on 
Three-Dimensional 
Groove 

Gratings with Sub-Wavelength Thickness, 
Appl. Phys. Express 11, 087301 (2018).

22. J. Christensen, A. I. Fernandez-Dominguez, F. 

de Leon-Perez, L. Martin-Moreno, and F. J. 
Garcia-Vidal, Collimation of Sound Assisted 
by Acoustic Surface Waves, Nature Phys 3, 
851 (2007).

23. J. Christensen, L. Martín-Moreno, and F. J. 

García-Vidal, 
Enhanced 
Acoustical 

Transmission and Beaming Effect through a 
Single Aperture, Phys. Rev. B 81, 174104 
(2010).

24. N. Korozlu, O. A. Kaya, A. Cicek, and B. Ulug, 

Self-Collimation and Slow-Sound Effect of 
Spoof Surface Acoustic Waves, Journal of 
Applied Physics 125, 074901 (2019).

25. S. Xie, S. Ouyang, Z. He, X. Wang, K. Deng, 

and H. Zhao, Bending and Splitting of Spoof 
Surface Acoustic Waves through Structured 
Rigid Surface, Results in Physics 8, 52 (2018).

26. Y. Zhou, M.-H. Lu, L. Feng, X. Ni, Y.-F. Chen, 

Y.-Y. Zhu, S.-N. Zhu, and N.-B. Ming, Acoustic 
Surface Evanescent Wave and Its Dominant 
Contribution to Extraordinary Acoustic 
Transmission and Collimation of Sound, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 164301 (2010).

27. A. Climente, D. Torrent, and J. Sánchez-

Dehesa, Sound Focusing by Gradient Index 
Sonic Lenses, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 104103 
(2010).

28. Y. Ye, M. Ke, Y. Li, T. Wang, and Z. Liu, 

Focusing of Spoof Surface-Acoustic-Waves 
by a Gradient-Index Structure, Journal of 
Applied Physics 114, 154504 (2013).

29. T. Liu, F. Chen, S. Liang, H. Gao, and J. Zhu, 

Subwavelength Sound Focusing and Imaging 


Via Gradient Metasurface-Enabled Spoof 
Surface Acoustic Wave Modulation, Phys. 
Rev. Applied 11, 034061 (2019).

30. L. T. Wu, G. Y. Song, W. K. Cao, Q. Cheng, T. 

J. Cui, and Y. Jing, Generation of Multiband 
Spoof Surface Acoustic Waves via High-
Order Modes, Phys. Rev. B 97, 214305 
(2018).

31. J. Zhu, Y. Chen, X. Zhu, F. J. Garcia-Vidal, X. 

Yin, W. Zhang, and X. Zhang, Acoustic 
Rainbow Trapping, Sci Rep 3, 1728 (2013).

32. N. Janković, S. Ilić, V. Bengin, S. Birgermajer, 

V. Radonić, and A. Alù, Acoustic Spoof 
Surface Plasmon Polaritons for Filtering, 
Isolation and Sensing, Results in Physics 28, 
104645 (2021).

33. N. Cselyuszka, A. Alù, and N. Janković, Spoof-

Fluid-Spoof Acoustic Waveguide and Its 
Applications for Sound Manipulation, Phys. 
Rev. Applied 12, 054014 (2019).

34. X. Huang, Z. Gong, and Y. Lv, Advances in 

Metal-Organic 
Frameworks-Based 
Gas 

Sensors for Hazardous Substances, TrAC 
Trends in Analytical Chemistry 153, 116644 
(2022).

35. R. Jana, S. Hajra, P. M. Rajaitha, K. Mistewicz, 

and H. J. Kim, Recent Advances in 
Multifunctional Materials for Gas Sensing 
Applications, Journal of Environmental 
Chemical Engineering 10, 108543 (2022).

36. S. Dhall, B. R. Mehta, A. K. Tyagi, and K. Sood, 

A Review on Environmental Gas Sensors: 
Materials 
and 
Technologies, 
Sensors 

International 2, 100116 (2021).

37. J. Zhu, H. Wen, Y. Fan, X. Yang, H. Zhang, W. 

Wu, Y. Zhou, and H. Hu, Recent Advances in 
Gas and Environmental Sensing: From 
Micro/Nano to the Era of Self-Powered and 
Artificial Intelligent (AI)-Enabled Device, 
Microchemical Journal 181, 107833 (2022).

38. T. Seesaard, N. Goel, M. Kumar, and C. 

Wongchoosuk, Advances in Gas Sensors and 
Electronic 
Nose 
Technologies 
for 

Agricultural Cycle Applications, Computers 

and Electronics in Agriculture 193, 106673 
(2022).

39. N. Nasiri and C. Clarke, Nanostructured Gas 

Sensors for Medical and Health Applications: 
Low 
to 
High 
Dimensional 
Materials, 

Biosensors 9, 43 (2019).

40. L. Zipser and F. Wächter, Acoustic Sensor for 

Ternary Gas Analysis, Sensors and Actuators 
B: Chemical 26, 195 (1995).

41. L. Zipser, F. Wächter, and H. Franke, Acoustic 

Gas 
Sensors 
Using 
Airborne 
Sound 

Properties, Sensors and Actuators B: 
Chemical 68, 162 (2000).

42. K. 
Keeratirawee 
and 
P. 
C. 
Hauser, 

Determination of Binary Gas Mixtures by 
Measuring the Resonance Frequency in a 
Piezoelectric Tube, Sensors 22, 1691 (2022).

43. European Patent 1325319, B. Hök, Int. Class. 

GO1N29/02, Appl. No. 01975104, EP-
09.07.2003, Acoustic CO2-sensor.

44. United States Patent 9869659B2, J.R. 

Bukland and A.R. Campbell, Int. Class. 
GO1N29/02, GO1N29/036, Acoustic Sensor, 
16 Jan. 2018.

45. D. B. Go, M. Z. Atashbar, Z. Ramshani, and H.-

C. Chang, Surface Acoustic Wave Devices for 
Chemical Sensing and Microfluidics: A 
Review and Perspective, Anal. Methods 9, 
4112 (2017).

46. K. Länge, Bulk and Surface Acoustic Wave 

Sensor Arrays for Multi-Analyte Detection: A 
Review, Sensors 19, 5382 (2019).

47. F. Fauzi, A. Rianjanu, I. Santoso, and K. 

Triyana, Gas and Humidity Sensing with 
Quartz Crystal Microbalance (QCM) Coated 
with Graphene-Based Materials – A Mini 
Review, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 
330, 112837 (2021).

48. M. P. Nair, A. J. T. Teo, and K. H. H. Li, 

Acoustic Biosensors and Microfluidic Devices 
in 
the 
Decennium: 
Principles 
and 

Applications, Micromachines 13, 24 (2021).

49. A. Kumar and R. Prajesh, The Potential of 

Acoustic Wave Devices for Gas Sensing 


Applications, Sensors and Actuators A: 
Physical 339, 113498 (2022).

50. Q. Zhou, C. Zheng, L. Zhu, and J. Wang, A 

Review on Rapid Detection of Modified 
Quartz Crystal Microbalance Sensors for 
Food: 
Contamination, 
Flavour 
and 

Adulteration, TrAC Trends in Analytical 
Chemistry 157, 116805 (2022).

51. D. Mandal and S. Banerjee, Surface Acoustic 

Wave (SAW) Sensors: Physics, Materials, and 
Applications, Sensors 22, 820 (2022).

52. O. A. Kaya, N. Korozlu, D. Trak, Y. Arslan, and 

A. Cicek, One-Dimensional Surface Phononic 
Crystal Ring Resonator and Its Application in 
Gas Sensing, Appl. Phys. Lett. 115, 041902 
(2019).

53. A. Cicek, D. Trak, Y. Arslan, N. Korozlu, O. A. 

Kaya, and B. Ulug, Ultrasonic Gas Sensing by 
Two-Dimensional Surface Phononic Crystal 
Ring Resonators, ACS Sens. 4, 1761 (2019).

54. Y. Pennec, Y. Jin, and B. Djafari-Rouhani, 

Phononic and Photonic Crystals for Sensing 
Applications, 
Advances 
in 
Applied 

Mechanics 105 (2019).

55. A. Mehaney and A. M. Ahmed, Theoretical 

Design of Porous Phononic Crystal Sensor for 
Detecting CO2 Pollutions in Air, Physica E: 
Low-Dimensional 
Systems 
and 

Nanostructures 124, 114353 (2020).

56. S. E. Zaki, A. Mehaney, H. M. Hassanein, and 

A. H. Aly, Fano Resonance Based Defected 
1D Phononic Crystal for Highly Sensitive Gas 
Sensing Applications, Sci Rep 10, 17979 
(2020).

57. H. Imanian, M. Noori, and A. Abbasiyan, 

Highly Efficient Gas Sensor Based on Quasi-
Periodic Phononic Crystals, Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical 345, 130418 (2021).

58. S. E. Zaki and M. A. Basyooni, Ultra-Sensitive 

Gas Sensor Based Fano Resonance Modes in 
Periodic 
and 
Fibonacci 
Quasi-Periodic 

Pt/PtS2 Structures, Sci Rep 12, 9759 (2022).

59. H. Imanian, M. Noori, and A. Abbasiyan, A 

Highly Efficient Fabry-Perot Based Phononic 
Gas Sensor, Ultrasonics 124, 106755 (2022).

60. Z. A. Zaky, S. Alamri, E. I. Zohny, and A. H. Aly, 

Simulation Study of Gas Sensor Using 
Periodic Phononic Crystal Tubes to Detect 
Hazardous Greenhouse Gases, Sci Rep 12, 
21553 (2022).

61. A. Cicek, Y. Arslan, D. Trak, F. C. Okay, O. A. 

Kaya, N. Korozlu, and B. Ulug, Gas Sensing 
through Evanescent Coupling of Spoof 
Surface Acoustic Waves, Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical 288, 259 (2019).

62. N. Perchikov, O.V. Gendelman, Nonlinear 

dynamics of hidden modes in a system with 
internal symmetry, Journal of Sound and 
Vibration 377:185-215 (2016)

63. D. Leykam, A. Andreanov, and S. Flach, 

Artificial Flat Band Systems: From Lattice 
Models to Experiments, Advances in Physics: 
X 3, 1473052 (2018).

64. J.G. Beadle T.A. Starkey, J.A. Dockrey, J.R. 

Sambles and A.P. Hibbins, The acoustic 
phase resonances
and surface waves 

supported by a compound rigid grating, 
Nature Scientific Reports 8: 10701 (2018)

65. M. Wang, W. Zhou, L. Bi, C. Qiu, M. Ke and Z. 

Liu, Valley-locked waveguide transport in 
acoustic 
heterostructures, 
Nature 

communications 11: 3000 (2020)

66. D.B. Moore, G.P. Ward, J.D. Smith, A.P. 

Hibbins, J.R. Sambles and T. a. Starkey, 
Confined acoustic line modes within a glide 
symmetric waveguide, Nature Scientific 
Reports 1: 10954 (2022)

67. A. Shakeri, S. Darbari, and M. K. Moravvej-

Farshi, 
Designing 
a 
Tunable Acoustic 

Resonator 
Based 
on 
Defect 
Modes, 

Stimulated by Selectively Biased PZT Rods in 
a 2D Phononic Crystal, Ultrasonics 92, 8 
(2019).

68. T. Liu, L.-L. Xu, H. Liu, Y.-X. Fan, and Z.-Y. Tao, 

Manipulation of Acoustic Localizations 
Based on Defect Mode Coupling in a 


Corrugated Waveguide, AIP Advances 10, 
095109 (2020).

69. A. Biçer, M. Günay, N. Korozlu, and A. Cicek, 

Continuously 
Tunable 
Acoustic 
Fano 

Resonance 
in 
Side-Coupled 
Helmholtz 

Resonator Array Assisted by a Surface 
Phononic Crystal, Appl. Phys. Lett. 120, 
011902 (2022).

70. C. Sun, A. Song, Z. Liu, Y. Xiang, and F.-Z. 

Xuan, Topological Fano Resonance of 
Symmetric 
Lamb 
Wave 
Induced 
by 

Antisymmetric Trapped Mode, AIP Advances 
13, 025008 (2023).

71. D. Reyes D. Martinez, M. Mayorga, H. Heo, E. 

Walker and A. Neogi, Optimization of the 
spatial configuration of local defects in 
phononic crystals for high Q Cavity, Front. 
Mech. Eng. 23(6):592787 (2020)

72. R. J. Astley, FE Mode-Matching Schemes for 

the Exterior Helmholtz Problem and Their 
Relationship to the FE-DtN Approach, 
Commun. Numer. Meth. Engng. 12, 257 
(1996).

73. R. Kirby and J. B. Lawrie, A Point Collocation 

Approach to Modelling Large Dissipative 
Silencers, Journal of Sound and Vibration 
286, 313 (2005).

74. O. C. Zienkiewicz, R. L. Taylor and J.Z. Zhu, 

The Finite Element Method: Its Basis and 
Fundamentals, 
Butterworth-Heinemann

(2013).

75. G. Valerio, F. Ghasemifard, Z. Sipus, and O. 

Quevedo-Teruel, Glide-Symmetric All-Metal 
Holey Metasurfaces for Low-Dispersive 
Artificial 
Materials: 
Modeling 
and 

Properties, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Techn. 66, 3210 (2018).

76. https://www.audacityteam.org
77. Dowling, J. P.; Scalora, M.; Bloemer, M. J.; 

Bowden, C. M. (1994). The photonic band 
edge laser: A new approach to gain 
enhancement. Journal of Applied Physics, 
75(4), 1896–1899

78. Cortes, C.L. and Jacob, Z., 2013. Photonic 

analog of a van Hove singularity in 

metamaterials. Physical Review B, 88(4), 
p.045407.

79. Floquet, G. (1883). Sur les equations 

differentielles lineaires. Ann. ENS [2], 
12(1883):47–88.


