MilliKelvin microwave impedance microscopy in a dry dilution refrigerator

MilliKelvin microwave impedance microscopy in a dry dilution refrigerator
Leonard Weihao Cao,1 Chen Wu,1 Rajarshi Bhattacharyya,1 Ruolun Zhang,1 and Monica T. Allen1

Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA

(*Electronic mail: mtallen@physics.ucsd.edu.)

(Dated: 3 October 2023)

Microwave impedance microscopy (MIM) is a near-field imaging technique that has been used to visualize the lo-
cal conductivity of materials with nanoscale resolution across the GHz regime. In recent years, MIM has shown
great promise for the investigation of topological states of matter, correlated electronic states and emergent phenom-
ena in quantum materials. To explore these low-energy phenomena, many of which are only detectable in the mil-
liKelvin regime, we have developed a novel low-temperature MIM incorporated into a dilution refrigerator. This setup,
which consists of a tuning-fork-based atomic force microscope with microwave reflectometry capabilities, is capable
of reaching temperatures down to 70 mK during imaging and magnetic fields up to 9 T. To test the performance of this
microscope, we demonstrate microwave imaging of the conductivity contrast between graphite and silicon dioxide at
cryogenic temperatures and discuss the resolution and noise observed in these results. We extend this methodology to
visualize edge conduction in Dirac semimetal cadmium arsenide in the quantum Hall regime.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Microwave imaging techniques have been developing
rapidly over the past several decades, which involve trans-
mitting MHz to GHz microwave signals to sample surface
through sharp-ended probes, and collecting the microwave
response. To date there are several implementations of the
scanning microwave microscope, such as sharp tips in coax-
ial resonators, microwave resonators on quartz tuning forks,
and probes with impedance matching networks1–6. In this ar-
ticle we focus on the specific implementation of microwave
impedance microscopy (MIM), which has shown capacities
to probe the local conductivity and permittivity of quan-
tum materials with nanoscale spatial resolution6–17. This en-
ables direct visualization of the microscopic nature of elec-
tronic states, including the real-space disorder landscape,
multi-domain behavior, high-Tc superconductors, or the pres-
ence of topological modes that propagate along the sample
boundaries1,2,4,5,18,19. By coupling microwaves with a wave-
length of 1-100 cm to a sharp metallic probe and collecting
the reflected signal, MIM characterizes the complex admit-
tance between the tip and the sample without the requirement
for the sample to be conductive, which is less restrictive than
other electronic imaging techniques20–24. As demonstrated in
recent experiments, MIM can provide insight into the real-
space nature of correlated states and topological states in two-
dimensional heterostructures16,17,25–29.
However, many of
these states are characterized by low energy scales and are
therefore most robust at millikelvin temperatures, motivating
the development of cryogenic MIM instrumentation. Thus far,
most state-of-the-art near-field microwave imaging has been
performed in 1.5-2K30 or He-3 cryostats, which can reach of
a minimum temperature of 300-450 mK3,29.
Here we report on the construction of a novel milliKelvin
MIM, which will support spatially-resolved detection of quan-
tum electronic states at ultra-low temperatures. This setup
consists of scanning probe microscope with tuning-fork-based
height feedback integrated into a dry dilution refrigerator. A
sharp metallic probe driven by an AC signal at microwave fre-
quency is coupled to the tuning fork and scanned over the sam-

ple. Using reflectometry, MIM detects the sample’s response
to high frequency electromagnetic fields emanating from the
probe.
To demonstrate the measurement capabilities of this setup,
we present MIM images of the conductivity contrast between
graphite and SiO2 down to temperatures of 70 mK. Finally,
we also demonstrate microwave imaging of edge states in
Cd3As2 thin films in the quantum Hall regime at the base tem-
perature.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

This setup consists of an custom-designed tuning fork
based atomic force microscope (AFM) integrated into a Lei-
den Cryogenics CF-CS110 dilution refrigerator.
The mi-
croscope housing is in thermal equilibrium with the mixing
chamber plate on the cold-insertable probe, which is loaded
into a dilution refrigerator, as shown schematically in Figure
1(a). Figure 1(b) shows the design of the microscope head,
which houses an etched tungsten wire mounted onto to the end
of one prong of a tuning fork (TF) mechanical resonator (blue
box)31. The oscillation amplitude of the TF is monitored for
continuous height feedback, which enables tapping-mode to-
pographic imaging32. Below the tip holder, the sample stage is
mounted on a stack of CuBe piezoelectric scanners (Attocube
AN-Sxyz100) and the positioners (ANPx(z)100), which con-
trol fine xyz scanning (up to 40µm × 40µm below 4K) and
coarse positioning (5mm×5mm below 4K), respectively.
On the MIM circuitry side, GHz signals are generated by
an analog signal generator, and one split branch of the sig-
nal is coupled to the tip via an impedance matching net-
work (IMN)33, which is responsible for minimizing the re-
flected signal [inset in Figure 1(c)]34. Unless otherwise men-
tioned, measurements in the article are done with 0 dBm
source power, and the power reaching the tip is −33 dBm.
A plot of the reflected microwave power S11 of an example
IMN is shown in Figure 1(c), showing the first resonance at
1.8 GHz. The reflected signal from the tip passes through two
directional couplers mounted on the probe-still plate (1K) to

arXiv:2305.03757v2  [physics.app-ph]  29 Sep 2023


MilliKelvin microwave impedance microscopy in a dry dilution refrigerator
2

IMN

mK

1K

HEMT
3K

Amplifier

Power 
monitor

Mixer

MIM-Re
MIM-Im

Lock-in
AC MIM-Re
AC MIM-Im

~

Attenuator
Phase 
shifter

Reference 

phase

(d)

(c)
(a)

(b)

20 !m

Modulation from 
tuning fork

FIG. 1.
Scanning probe microscopy system with combined AFM and MIM readout, integrated into a dilution refrigerator. (a)
Schematic of the scanning MIM readout electronics and hardware integrated into a dilution refrigerator. The shaded regions refer to the
different thermal stages inside the fridge. (b) Left panel: Photo of the microscope head, scanners and sample stage (corresponding to the
red box in the schematic). Right panels: Zoomed-in side view of the gold-coated tungsten tip glued onto one prong of the tuning fork, and
soldered to the end of the IMN on the other end. The back of the TF is electrically connected for oscillation readout (blue box); Scanning
electron microscope image of the etched tungsten tip used for combined AFM and MIM imaging. (c) Plot of the reflect microwave power S11
of the impedance matching network (IMN) shows the fundamental resonance at the 1.8 GHz. Inset: Circuit diagram of the IMN with a 0.2 pF
capacitor with 5 cm coax connected in series. (d) Plots of the oscillation amplitude of the tuning fork as a function of frequency, showing
the mechanical resonance used for height feedback. The upper and lower panels show the resonance peak at room temperature and 70 mK,
respectively.

cancel out the residual reflected power.
The signal from the sample is then amplified by a cryo-
genic amplifier (Cosmic Microwave Technology CITCRYO1-
12) mounted on the 3K stage, after which the signal propa-
gates out of the probe and gets further amplified and demodu-
lated at room temperature, as shown in Figure 1(a).
During the tip approach procedure, active height feedback
can be performed by monitoring either the TF oscillation am-
plitude or the MIM signal. Here we use a Nanonis SC5 con-
troller to excite and track the TF oscillation and control the
fine scanners during imaging34.Figure 1(d) displays a mea-
surement of the oscillation amplitude of the tuning fork as a
function of excitation frequency, showing the resonance peak
near 32.768 kHz. The Q-factor of the resonance is around
500 - 2000 at room temperature (upper panel), while at base
temperature it can easily reach 10,000-100,000 (lower panel).
The main technical challenge of microwave imaging in a
dry dilution fridge is the emergence of new noise sources,
which impact both spatial resolution and the signal-to-noise
of the microwave reflectometry measurements. There are two
main sources of increased noise: (1) mechanical pulse tube vi-

brations, which are associated with the cooling mechanism of
the dilution fridge, place limits on the lateral spatial resolution
and add noise to the measured MIM signal, and (2) the high
Q factor of the tuning fork at mK temperatures leads to fluc-
tuations in the tip-sample distance, which also couples with
the pulse tube vibration. Our fridge is equipped with a pulse
tube cryocooler operating at ∼ 1.4Hz35,36 generating vibra-
tions that amplitude modulate the tuning fork oscillation, and
consequently also modulate the GHz MIM signal. To mitigate
these vibrations, we physically decoupled the pulse tube mo-
tion from the microscope by unscrewing the rotary valve from
the fridge and putting isolation foam in between37, while the
high-pressure helium lines connected to the compressor are
wrapped with acoustic pipe lagging. On the other hand, the
high Q factor can be reduced by further breaking the symme-
try of the two prongs, and two methods we have been using
include adding extra glue during the tip-gluing process, and
balancing the strain from the tip to the TF.
We found that performing AC-mode MIM imaging, de-
scribed below, largely eliminates background oscillations in
the images that arise from pulse tube vibrations. In AC height-


MilliKelvin microwave impedance microscopy in a dry dilution refrigerator
3

(a)

2 𝜇m
(b)

(c)

FIG. 2. Topographic imaging of a micropatterned dielectric film
at mK temperatures using tuning-fork-based atomic force mi-
croscopy. (a) Optical image of an etched array of holes SiO2. The
diameter and the spacing of the holes are 1 um. The hole depth is
20 nm. (b) AFM spatial scan at 70mK. The scan covers 4× 4 um and
the scan speed is 400 nm/s. (c) Cross-sectional line cut correspond-
ing to the black line in (b).

modulated imaging mode, a low frequency lock-in amplifier
(SR830) is added to the output of the GHz frequency mixer
to demodulate the reflected MIM signal at the tuning fork res-
onance frequency (32 kHz), after which low-pass filters can
be used to attenuate noise34. We note that because the GHz
MIM signal (from the tip) is amplitude-modulated by both the
tuning fork oscillation at 32 kHz and the pulse tube vibra-
tion, there are multiple side-bands around the measurement
frequency. Therefore, voltage preamplifiers with band-pass
filters between 10-30 kHz (SR560, 6 dB/oct) are added to the
output of the GHz mixer to both filter out the DC-MIM signal
which would overload the lock-in amplifier, amplify the sig-
nal amplitude and reduce the out-of-band noise, after which
the MIM signal is fed into the SR830 lock-in amplifier for de-
modulation. During this step, the lock-in amplifier multiplies
the MIM input signal with a TF reference signal (provided by
the measured piezo current from the tuning fork, after amplifi-
cation by a commercial low-noise charge amplifier) to extract
the in-phase components. Both the filters inside SR830 and
the additional low-pass filters (SR560, 1 Hz low-pass) added
to the output of the lock-in are chosen to eliminate noise at the
pulse tube vibration frequency.

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We characterized the low temperature performance of the
AFM on a sample consisting of an array of etched SiO2 holes
patterned on a Si wafer, as depicted in the optical image in
Figure 2(a). Cryogenic AFM measurements are used to visu-
alize the topographic profile of a 5 µm × 5 µm scan region at
70mK, as depicted in Figure 2(b). Figure 2(c) shows a cross-
sectional cut of this AFM image, whose position is marked
by the black line, revealing a noise level of roughly 3 nm.
To more carefully assess the magnitude of the z-noise dur-
ing AFM scanning, we performed 96 × 96-pixel noise scans
over a 1 nm × 1 nm area, such that the spatial profile is ir-

relevant. Root mean square (RMS) roughness was calculated
using Gwyddion after line fitting, which gives z-noise levels
in the range of 1.8 - 2.2 nm. Furthermore, upon careful in-
spection of Figure 2(b), we noticed that a tilted stripe pattern
appears as a background modulation in the AFM image. By
taking a Fourier transform of this data, we found that the stripe
pattern has a frequency of 1.4 Hz, which coincides with the
frequency of the pulse tube.
Next, to demonstrate our combined AFM and MIM imag-
ing capabilities at low temperatures, we measured the spatial
contrast of the MIM response across the boundary between
graphite and SiO2 at 70 mK. Figure 3(a) shows an optical
image of the graphite sample, which has terraces of varying
thicknesses: the purple region is ∼ 3nm and the bright yellow
region is 15-20 nm.
In Figure 3, panels (c) and (d) display AFM and MIM
images of the graphite/SiO2 interface measured at 4K and
70 mK, respectively.
In both sets of AFM images, the
3/20 nm step height in graphite is clearly visible, while the
graphite/SiO2 boundary only shows a faint contour, as the z-
movement of the scanner to compensate for fluctuations in
the tip-sample distance dominates over the 3 nm boundary.
Meanwhile, we observe a sharp contrast in the MIM signal
across the graphite/SiO2 boundary due to the different con-
ductivities of the two materials, as predicted by the response
curves in Figure 3(b). To explain the experimental observa-
tions, one can model the tip-sample interaction for this sys-
tem using finite element analysis28. In the numerical simula-
tion, the tip is defined to be 1 V and the bottom of the SiO2 is
set at 0 V, the ground. The side of the sample is electrically
floating. For a sample with a scalar conductivity, the simu-
lation can be used to calculate the MIM response curves as
a function of sample resistivity, which should be expected to
have a response curve similar to the lump-circuit model de-
fined for MIM imaging17,38. For a better discussion of lump-
circuit model, readers can refer to the supplementary infor-
mation. At a measurement frequency of 1.8 GHz, the imagi-
nary part of the MIM response should monotonically decrease
with the sample resistivity, saturating when the resistivity is
higher than 10−2 Ω · m (insulating limit) or lower than 10−5

Ω · m (conductive limit), as shown in Figure 3(b). A cross-
sectional profile of the penetration of the tip potential into the
sample is provided in the inset. Based on our observation in
the imaging, we estimate the MIM spatial resolution to be be-
low 200 nm, constrained by the apex geometry of the etched
tungsten tip and mechanical noise from pulse tube vibrations.
We also apply this methodology to visualize edge states
at the boundaries of thin film cadmium arsenide (Cd3As2),
a novel three-dimensional Dirac semi-metal, in the quan-
tum Hall regime39,40.
A cross-sectional schematic of the
epitaxially-grown hetero-structure is shown in Figure4 (a),
where the film thickness is 20 nm41,42. The Cd3As2 device
is lithographically patterned and etched into strips of width
10-15 µm, which are electrically grounded. Transport mea-
surements were performed to characterize the magnetic field
behavior of the sample, which reveal dips in the longitudinal
resistance at around 4.7 T and 6.5 T, as shown in Figure 4(b).
These minima should correspond to the emergence of quan-


MilliKelvin microwave impedance microscopy in a dry dilution refrigerator
4

(c)
(d)

(b)

(a)

Graphite

SiO2

Graphite

SiO2

Graphite

SiO2

Graphite

SiO2

(b)

T = 4 K
T = 70 mK

FIG. 3.
Microwave impedance microscopy of graphite at milliKelvin temperatures. (a) Optical image of a graphite flake exfoliated
onto a SiO2/Si substrate. The dark purple region has a thickness of 3-5 nm, and the light yellow region has a thickness of ∼ 20nm. The blue
box marks the imaging window for (c) and (d). (b) Theoretical MIM response curves simulated at 1.8 GHz, illustrating the evolution of the
MIM contrast with the sample conductivity. Inset: vertical cut of the potential distribution for the tip-sample interaction, calculated using
finite-element analysis. (c) AFM and MIM imaging of the graphite flake at 4K, with the scan window covering the 20 nm region (lower left),
3-5 nm region (middle), and the SiO2 region (upper right). The scan speed is 0.5 µm/s . (d) AFM and MIM images of the same location at
70mK. The scan speed is 0.2 µm/s.

(a)

3nm GaSb

20nm Cd3As2

AlInSb

GaSb

(c)
(e)

(d)
(b)
5.4T

6.5T

(f)

FIG. 4.
Microwave imaging of edge modes in a cadmium arsenide film in the quantum Hall regime. (a) Cross-sectional schematic of
an epitaxially-grown Cd3As2 heterostructure. (b) Transport measurement of the longitudinal resistance Rxx as a function of magnetic field at
90 mK. The minima correspond to the emergence of quantum Hall plateaus. (c) MIM image at 6.5 T, revealing a sharp enhancement of the
reflected signal at the boundaries of a quantum Hall insulator state. (d) MIM image at 5.4 T, showing spatially uniform conductivity at the
transition between quantum Hall plateaus (e-f) Cross-sectional line cuts of the MIM response across the sample extracted from (c) and (d)
respectively.


MilliKelvin microwave impedance microscopy in a dry dilution refrigerator
5

tum Hall plateaus43.
To shed light on the real-space conductivity profile of
Cd3As2 in the quantum Hall regime and monitor its evolu-
tion across the topological phase transition between plateaus,
MIM measurements were performed at a series of magnetic
fields at a base temperature of 90 mK. Microwave imaging re-
veals a sharp enhancement of the reflected MIM signal at the
boundaries of the sample in the quantum Hall insulator state,
which rapidly decays into the bulk of the sample, as shown
in Figure 4(c). Meanwhile, we observed a spatially-uniform
conductivity at the transition between quantum Hall plateaus
when the longitudinal resistance deviates from zero at B = 5.4
T (Figure 4(d)). The variation of the MIM signal between dif-
ferent lines comes both from the noise in the MIM signal and
spatial inhomogeneities in the sample.
To more clearly compare the spatial dependence of the
MIM signal in these two regimes, in Figure 4(e-f) we plot the
cross-sectional profiles of the MIM response across the sam-
ple extracted from panels (c) and (d), respectively. These low
temperature microwave images reveal sharply enhanced edge
conduction that encloses an insulating interior in the quantum
Hall regime, which is consistent with the results of transport
measurements performed on this system in prior experimental
studies.
We note that one way to improve signal quality is to use
“floating” AC-mode MIM, where imaging is performed with
the tip retracted a fixed distance (60-100nm) above the sample
surface. At this distance, the AFM channel will not be mod-
ulated due to the topography feedback, but the MIM tip can
still interact with the sample via the electromagnetic fields in
the vicinity of the tip (when operated in the near-field regime).
Because periodic oscillations in the tip-sample distance at the
tuning fork resonance are decoupled from the surface rough-
ness of the sample, noise in the MIM response can be dra-
matically reduced in floating mode. Figure 5 shows the re-
sults of a floating mode MIM scan performed at 3GHz and
T= 70mK, with the tip lifted 100nm above an hBN-covered
graphite layer. The tip apex is around 0.8um, which is re-
flected in the spatial profile of the MIM signal change across
the boundary between the graphite flake and hBN. In this case,
the signal-to-noise ratio is even better than that observed in
tapping mode MIM images (Figure 3(c-d), which is especially
useful for fixed-location MIM measurements. However, this
advantage comes at the expense of signal size, as the tip is
further away from the sample than for tapping mode. The
varying MIM signal in the graphite region is due to the fact
that during a floating scan the tip is hovering at a fixed ab-
solute z-position, while the sample has a surface tilt, which
means the tip-sample distance is varying in the whole frame.
We estimate the distance to be around 70 nm in the upper-left
corner and 100 nm in the lower-right corner.
The choice of tip-sample distance for floating-mode mea-
surements is a compromise between maximizing signal sen-
sitivity and minimizing the risk of a tip crash due to vertical
fluctuations in the tip-sample distance, which arise from pulse
tube vibrations and are aggravated by the large Q factor of the
tuning fork at mK temperatures. For larger scan windows or
rougher sample surfaces, the tip may need to be retracted fur-

ther. We expect the sensitivity of floating mode to be around
0.01−0.1aF/
√

Hz at 0.1 uW input power, and in our case the
noise is mostly due to vertical modulations of the tip-sample
distance25.

(a)
(b)

SiO2

Top hBN

Graphite

FIG. 5. Demonstration of low-noise height-modulated MIM in a
dry dilution fridge. (a) Optical image of a van der Waals heteros-
tucture with a graphite flake (around 5 nm thick) covered by hBN
(around 50 nm thick). From bottom up the whole stack is graphite
(5 nm, connected from the leftmost gold contact), bottom hBN(30
nm, dark green), graphite contact(5-10 nm, middle) and top hBN (50
nm, bright green). The imaging window has 30 nm hBN, 5-10 nm
graphite and 50 nm hBN from bottom up. (b) A floating mode MIM
image of the region enclosed by the red square in panel (a), acquired
at 70mK. The measurement frequency is 3GHz and the tip is re-
tracted 100nm from the highest feature inside the scan window.

IV.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

In summary, we report on the development of a microwave
impedance microscope that operates at temperatures down to
70 mK. This is achieved by incorporating a TF-based AFM
with near-field GHz imaging capabilities into a dry dilution
refrigerator.
Pushing the limits of MIM into new low temperature
regimes should enable local sensing of quantum phenomena
that only exist at low energy scales, including certain topo-
logical states of matter, domain wall physics at phase transi-
tions, quantum states arising from geometric confinement in
mesoscopic devices, and correlated states in two-dimensional
materials and van der Waals heterostructures. Because this in-
strumentation is equipped with combined transport and imag-
ing capabilities, it can also illuminate the correspondence be-
tween macroscopic transport behavior and the underlying mi-
croscopic nature of electronic states, including the real-space
disorder landscape or presence of edge modes.
During the preparation of this manuscript, we became
aware of an article on a related topic44. We are using the same
tuning-fork based MIM circuitry, and in this manuscript we
focus our efforts on mitigating the relevant AFM and MIM
noise caused by the fluctuation in tip-sample distance. The
z-resolution of AFM in the reference is in the order of 0.1-0.3
nm, while in our case it’s 3-20nm. The MIM sensitivity in the
reference is mainly limited by the MIM setup, while our MIM
sensitivity is constrained by the vertical tip-sample variation.


MilliKelvin microwave impedance microscopy in a dry dilution refrigerator
6

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

The supplementary material includes more information on
the analysis of the pulse tube vibration frequency, a descrip-
tion of the lumped element model of MIM, and the determi-
nation of the MIM spatial resolution.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Alex Lygo and Susanne Stemmer for provid-
ing cadmium arsenide devices for these experiments, Yongtao
Cui for inspiring discussions, and Evan Cobb for helping de-
velop some of the MIM circuitry. We gratefully acknowledge
funding support from the UC Office of the President, specifi-
cally the UC Laboratory Fees Research Program (award LFR-
20-653926), the AFOSR Young Investigator Program (award
FA9550-20-1-0035) and the AFOSR/ARO MURI Program
(award FA9550-22-1-0270).
This work was performed, in
part, at the San Diego Nanotechnology Infrastructure (SDNI)
of UCSD, a member of the National Nanotechnology Coordi-
nated Infrastructure, which is supported by the National Sci-
ence Foundation (Grant ECCS-2025752).

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

1I. Takeuchi, T. Wei, F. Duewer, Y. K. Yoo, X.-D. Xiang, V. Talyansky, S. P.
Pai, G. J. Chen, and T. Venkatesan, “Low temperature scanning-tip mi-
crowave near-field microscopy of YBa2Cu3O7−x films,” Applied Physics
Letters 71, 2026–2028 (1997).

2S.-C. Lee, S.-Y. Lee, and S. M. Anlage, “Microwave nonlinearities of an
isolated long YBa2Cu3O7−δ bicrystal grain boundary,” Physical Review B
72, 024527 (2005).

3S. E. de Graaf, A. V. Danilov, A. Adamyan, and S. E. Kubatkin, “A near-
field scanning microwave microscope based on a superconducting resonator
for low power measurements,” Review of Scientific Instruments 84, 023706
(2013).

4S. De Graaf, A. Danilov, and S. Kubatkin, “Coherent interaction with two-
level fluctuators using near field scanning microwave microscopy,” Scien-
tific reports 5, 17176 (2015).

5S. Geaney, D. Cox, T. Hönigl-Decrinis, R. Shaikhaidarov, S. Kubatkin,
T. Lindström, A. Danilov, and S. de Graaf, “Near-field scanning microwave
microscopy in the single photon regime,” Scientific reports 9, 12539 (2019).

6K. Lai, M. Ji, N. Leindecker, M. Kelly,
and Z. Shen, “Atomic-force-
microscope-compatible near-field scanning microwave microscope with
separated excitation and sensing probes,” Review of scientific instruments
78, 063702 (2007).

7B. T. Rosner and D. W. van der Weide, “High-frequency near-field mi-
croscopy,” Review of Scientific Instruments 73, 2505–2525 (2002).

8H. P. Huber, M. Moertelmaier, T. M. Wallis, C.-J. Chiang, M. Hochleitner,
A. Imtiaz, Y. J. Oh, K. Schilcher, M. Dieudonne, J. Smoliner, P. Hinterdor-
fer, S. J. Rosner, H. Tanbakuchi, P. Kabos, and F. Kienberger, “Calibrated
nanoscale capacitance measurements using a scanning microwave micro-
scope.” The Review of scientific instruments 81 11, 113701 (2010).

9K.
Lai,
W.
Kundhikanjana,
M.
A.
Kelly,
and
Z.
xun
Shen,
“Nanoscale microwave microscopy using shielded cantilever probes,” Ap-
plied Nanoscience 1, 13–18 (2011).

10K. Lai, W. Kundhikanjana, M. A. Kelly, Z.-X. Shen, J. Shabani,
and
M. Shayegan, “Imaging of coulomb-driven quantum hall edge states,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 107, 176809 (2011).

11W. Kundhikanjana, Y. Yang, Q. Tanga, K. Zhang, K. Lai, Y. Ma, M. Kelly,
X. Li, and Z. Shen, “Unexpected surface implanted layer in static random
access memory devices observed by microwave impedance microscope,”
Semiconductor science and technology 28, 025010 (2013).

12E. Y. Ma, M. R. Calvo, J. Wang, B. Lian, M. Mühlbauer, C. Brüne, Y.-T.
Cui, K. Lai, W. Kundhikanjana, Y. Yang, et al., “Unexpected edge conduc-
tion in mercury telluride quantum wells under broken time-reversal sym-
metry,” Nature communications 6, 7252 (2015).

13E. Y. Ma, Y.-T. Cui, K. Ueda, S. Tang, K. Chen, N. Tamura, P. M. Wu,
J. Fujioka, Y. Tokura, and Z.-X. Shen, “Mobile metallic domain walls in
an all-in-all-out magnetic insulator,” Science 350, 538–541 (2015).

14Y. Liu, C. Tan, H. Chou, A. Nayak, D. Wu, R. Ghosh, H.-Y. Chang, Y. Hao,
X. Wang, J.-S. Kim, et al., “Thermal oxidation of WSe2 nanosheets adhered
on SiO2/Si substrates,” Nano letters 15, 4979–4984 (2015).

15E. Seabron, S. MacLaren, X. Xie, S. V. Rotkin, J. A. Rogers, and W. L.
Wilson, “Scanning probe microwave reflectivity of aligned single-walled
carbon nanotubes: Imaging of electronic structure and quantum behavior at
the nanoscale,” ACS nano 10, 360–368 (2016).

16Z. Chu, E. C. Regan, X. Ma, D. Wang, Z. Xu, M. I. B. Utama, K. Yu-
migeta, M. Blei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Tongay, F. Wang,
and
K. Lai, “Nanoscale conductivity imaging of correlated electronic states in
WSe2/WS2 Moir’e superlattices,” Physical Review Letters 125, 186803
(2020).

17M. E. Barber, E. Y. Ma,
and Z.-X. Shen, “Microwave impedance mi-
croscopy and its application to quantum materials,” Nature Reviews Physics
4, 61–74 (2022).

18S.-C. Lee and S. M. Anlage, “Spatially-resolved nonlinearity measurements
of YBa2Cu3O7−δ bicrystal grain boundaries,” Applied Physics Letters 82,
1893–1895 (2003).

19T. Tai, B. G. Ghamsari, T. R. Bieler, T. Tan, X. X. Xi, and S. M. Anlage,
“Near-field microwave magnetic nanoscopy of superconducting radio fre-
quency cavity materials,” Applied Physics Letters 104, 232603 (2014).

20M. Eriksson, R. Beck, M. Topinka, J. Katine, R. Westervelt, K. Campman,
and A. Gossard, “Cryogenic scanning probe characterization of semicon-
ductor nanostructures,” Applied Physics Letters 69, 671–673 (1996).

21J. Döring, L. M. Eng, and S. C. Kehr, “Low-temperature piezoresponse
force microscopy on barium titanate,” Journal of Applied Physics 120,
084103 (2016).

22C.-I. Lu, C. J. Butler, J.-K. Huang, Y.-H. Chu, H.-H. Yang, C.-M. Wei, L.-J.
Li, and M.-T. Lin, “Moiré-related in-gap states in a twisted MoS2/graphite
heterojunction,” npj 2D Materials and Applications 1, 24 (2017).

23L. McGilly, A. Kerelsky, N. Finney, K. Shapovalov, E.-M. Shih, A. Ghiotto,
Y. Zeng, S. Moore, W. Wu, Y. Bai, et al., “Seeing moir’e superlattices,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06629 (2019).

24M. R. Rosenberger, H.-J. Chuang, M. Phillips, V. P. Oleshko, K. M. Mc-
Creary, S. V. Sivaram, C. S. Hellberg,
and B. T. Jonker, “Twist angle-
dependent atomic reconstruction and moiré patterns in transition metal
dichalcogenide heterostructures,” ACS nano 14, 4550–4558 (2020).

25K. Lai, W. Kundhikanjana, M. Kelly,
and Z. X. Shen, “Modeling
and characterization of a cantilever-based near-field scanning microwave
impedance microscope,” Review of Scientific Instruments 79, 063703
(2008), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2949109.

26K. Lai, M. Nakamura, W. Kundhikanjana, M. Kawasaki, Y. Tokura, M. A.
Kelly, and Z.-X. Shen, “Mesoscopic percolating resistance network in a
strained manganite thin film,” Science 329, 190–193 (2010).

27E. Y. Ma, B. Bryant, Y. Tokunaga, G. Aeppli, Y. Tokura, and Z.-X. Shen,
“Charge-order domain walls with enhanced conductivity in a layered man-
ganite,” Nature Communications 6, 7595 (2015).

28X. Wu, Z. Hao, D. Wu, L. Zheng, Z. Jiang, V. Ganesan, Y. Wang, and
K. Lai, “Quantitative measurements of nanoscale permittivity and conduc-
tivity using tuning-fork-based microwave impedance microscopy,” Review
of Scientific Instruments 89, 043704 (2018).

29M. Allen, Y. Cui, E. Yue Ma, M. Mogi, M. Kawamura, I. C. Fulga,
D. Goldhaber-Gordon, Y. Tokura, and Z.-X. Shen, “Visualization of an
axion insulating state at the transition between 2 chiral quantum anoma-
lous hall states,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116,
14511–14515 (2019).

30W. Kundhikanjana, K. Lai, M. A. Kelly, and Z.-X. Shen, “Cryogenic mi-
crowave imaging of metal–insulator transition in doped silicon,” Review of
Scientific Instruments 82, 033705 (2011).


MilliKelvin microwave impedance microscopy in a dry dilution refrigerator
7

31Y. Khan, H. Al-Falih, Y. Zhang, T. K. Ng, and B. S. Ooi, “Two-step con-
trollable electrochemical etching of tungsten scanning probe microscopy
tips,” Review of Scientific Instruments 83, 063708 (2012).

32H. Edwards, L. Taylor, W. Duncan,
and A. J. Melmed, “Fast, high-
resolution atomic force microscopy using a quartz tuning fork as actuator
and sensor,” Journal of Applied Physics 82, 980–984 (1997).

33D. M. Pozar, Microwave engineering (John wiley & sons, 2011).
34Y.-T. Cui, E. Y. Ma,
and Z.-X. Shen, “Quartz tuning fork based mi-
crowave impedance microscopy,” Review of Scientific Instruments 87,
063711 (2016).

35C. Wang and P. Gifford, “Development of 4 k pulse tube cryorefrigerators
at cryomech,” in AIP conference proceedings, Vol. 613 (American Institute
of Physics, 2002) pp. 641–648.

36A. Chijioke and J. Lawall, “Vibration spectrum of a pulse-tube cryostat
from 1hz to 20khz,” Cryogenics 50, 266–270 (2010).

37R. Li, Y. Ikushima, T. Koyama, T. Tomaru, T. Suzuki, T. Haruyama, T. Shin-
tomi, and A. Yamamoto, “Vibration-free pulse tube cryocooler system for
gravitational wave detectors, part ii: cooling performance and vibration,” in
Cryocoolers 13 (Springer, 2005) pp. 703–710.

38T. Wang, C. Wu, M. Mogi, M. Kawamura, Y. Tokura, Z.-X. Shen, Y.-Z.
You, and M. T. Allen, “Theory of the microwave impedance microscopy
of chern insulators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09227 (2023).

39R. Sankar, M. Neupane, S.-Y. Xu, C. Butler, I. Zeljkovic, I. Panneer Muthu-
selvam, F.-T. Huang, S.-T. Guo, S. K. Karna, M.-W. Chu, et al., “Large sin-
gle crystal growth, transport property and spectroscopic characterizations
of three-dimensional dirac semimetal Cd3As2,” Scientific reports 5, 12966
(2015).

40T. Schumann, M. Goyal, H. Kim, and S. Stemmer, “Molecular beam epi-
taxy of Cd3As2 on a III-V substrate,” APL Materials 4, 126110 (2016).

41M. Goyal, L. Galletti, S. Salmani-Rezaie, T. Schumann, D. A. Kealhofer,
and S. Stemmer, “Thickness dependence of the quantum hall effect in
films of the three-dimensional dirac semimetal Cd3As2,” APL Materials
6, 026105 (2018).

42A. C. Lygo, B. Guo, A. Rashidi, V. Huang, P. Cuadros-Romero,
and
S. Stemmer, “Two-dimensional topological insulator state in cadmium ar-
senide thin films,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.02759 (2023).

43B. Guo, A. C. Lygo, X. Dai, and S. Stemmer, “ν= 0 quantum hall state in
a cadmium arsenide thin film,” APL Materials 10, 091116 (2022).

44Z. Jiang, S. K. Chong, P. Zhang, P. Deng, S. Chu, S. Jahanbani, K. L. Wang,
and K. Lai, “Implementing microwave impedance microscopy in a dilution
refrigerator,” Review of Scientific Instruments 94, 053701 (2023).


