 
 

1 
 

Boosting the efficiency of transient photoluminescence microscopy  

using cylindrical lenses 

 

Alvaro J. Magdaleno, Mercy Cutler, Jesse J. Suurmond, Marc Meléndez, Rafael Delgado-

Buscalioni, Michael Seitz, Ferry Prins* 

 

A. Magdaleno, M. Cutler, J. Suurmond, M. Seitz, F. Prins   

Condensed Matter Physics Center (IFIMAC) and Department of Condensed Matter Physics, 

Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.  

E-mail: ferry.prins@uam.es 

 

M. Meléndez, R. Delgado-Buscalioni 

Condensed Matter Physics Center (IFIMAC) and Department of Theoretical Condensed 

Matter Physics, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain. 

 

Keywords: transient microscopy, nanomaterials, energy transport 

 

Abstract 

Transient Photoluminescence Microscopy (TPLM) allows for the direct visualization of carrier 

transport in semiconductor materials with sub nanosecond and few nanometer resolution. The 

technique is based on measuring changes in the spatial distribution of a diffraction limited 

population of carriers using spatiotemporal detection of the radiative decay of the carriers. The 

spatial resolution of TPLM is therefore primarily determined by the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR). 

Here we present a method using cylindrical lenses to boost the signal acquisition in TPLM 

experiments. The resulting asymmetric magnification of the photoluminescence emission of the 

diffraction limited spot can increase the collection efficiency by more than a factor of 10, 

significantly reducing acquisition times and further boosting spatial resolution.  


 
 

2 
 

1. Introduction 

Transient Photoluminescence Microscopy (TPLM) has emerged as a powerful technique to 

directly visualize the displacement of energy carriers in a variety of semiconductor materials, 

including 
organic 
semiconductors,[1] 
nanocrystal 
assemblies,[2,3] 
transition 
metal 

dichalcogenides,[4,5] and perovskite semiconductors.[6–9] Through this direct visualization of the 

carrier motion, detailed information on the spatial dynamics can be obtained.[10] 

 

In its simplest form, TPLM uses a pulsed laser for near-diffraction-limited excitation of an 

initial population of energy carriers. As the population broadens in time, photoluminescence 

(PL) emission that results from carrier recombination is collected and projected with large 

magnification (typically >300´). By raster scanning an avalanche photodiode (APD) through 

the strongly magnified image plane, a map of the spatial and temporal dynamics of the 

population can be recorded with sub-ns and few-nm resolution. Raster scanning of an APD is 

the simplest and most cost-effective implementation of TPLM,[1,2] though alternative detection 

schemes have been reported as well, including the use of streak cameras[5,7] or time-gated 

ICCDs.[8] While there are small differences in the quantum efficiency and temporal resolution 

of these different detectors, the overall performance is comparable.  

 

Using this method, a movie-like representation of the time-dependent broadening of the carrier 

population is obtained. By determining the change in variance (σ2(t) - σ2(t = 0)) of the 

population for each time-slice, the mean-square-displacement (MSD) of the population can be 

extracted (MSD = σ2(t) - σ2(t = 0)). Importantly, the spatial precision with which the expansion 

can be determined is set by the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) and can be on the order of just 10 

nm.[2] Consequently, maximising the SNR is one of the key challenges in TPLM experiments.  

 

Importantly, in many materials, carrier diffusion is isotropic along the different in-plane 

dimensions. In this case, a line-scan through the centre of the carrier population suffices to 

obtain the full carrier transport characteristics. The reduced scan area allows for a higher spatial 

precision within the same acquisition time. At the same time though, a large fraction of the 

signal is projected outside of the collection area of the line scan and is therefore lost. To further 

boost the acquisition efficiency of TPLM measurements in isotropic materials, we propose the 

use of cylindrical lenses to concentrate the majority of the PL signal onto the one-dimensional 

scan area. We show that this method dramatically improves the SNR for a given acquisition 

time. While this improvement is significant to all types of materials, it is largest for materials 


 
 

3 
 

with a large diffusion length where carriers diffuse farther out from the original excitation spot. 

The use of cylindrical lenses provides a straightforward route toward improved spatial 

resolution in TPLM measurements. 

 

2. Results 

Our basic TPLM setup is based on the original reports by Akselrod et al.[1,2] and uses raster 

scanning of an avalanche photodiode (APD, Micro Photon Devices PDM, 20×20 µm detector 

size) through the image plane of the carrier population. In short, a pulsed laser diode (PicoQuant 

LDH-D-C-405, PDL 800-D, λ = 405 nm) is focussed down to a near-diffraction limited 

excitation spot with a full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of a few hundred nm using a 100´ 

oil immersion objective (Nikon CFI Plan Fluor, N.A. = 1.3). Fluorescence from the material is 

then collected using the same objective, filtered using a dichroic filter and projected to an 

intermediate image plane using the standard f = 200 mm tube lens of the microscope to yield a 

100´ magnification. To generate a higher magnification for TPLM measurements, a set of relay 

lenses is used. For conventional TPLM, this set consists of a f = 100 mm collimating and a f = 

400 mm imaging lens to yield a theoretical total magnification of the image plane of 400´ (see 

Figure S1). For example, taking an emission spot of 500 nm, the projected size of the carrier 

population at this magnification would be as large as 200 µm, which is significantly larger than 

the APD detector size of 20 µm. The relatively small size of the APD allows for high resolution 

mapping of the emission profile of the carrier population along the scan direction. Importantly 

though, as mentioned, a trade-off exists between the achievable resolution in the scan direction 

and the loss of signal from carriers moving in the orthogonal direction. 

 

To capture signal from carriers moving orthogonally to the scan direction, we implement a 

detection scheme with cylindrical lenses. In this alternative geometry, we substitute the f = 400 

mm spherical lens with a set of two perpendicularly oriented cylindrical lenses to collapse the 

x-axis of the image plane (see Figure 1 and a more complete set-up description in Figure S2). 

The first cylindrical lens (LJ1363RM Thorlabs) has the identical focal length to the original 

spherical lens (f1 = 400 mm) and generates the high total magnification of 400´ along the 

scanning direction (y-axis in Figure 1). The second cylindrical lens has a short focal length (f2 

= 20 mm, AYL2520-A Thorlabs) and is used to collapse the image along the orthogonal 

direction (x-axis in Figure 1), resulting in a total magnification of 20´. With a magnification 

ratio of 400/20 = 20, the short axis of the asymmetric Image of the carrier population is then 

reduced to around 10 µm, well within the size of the APD detector and significantly reducing 


 
 

4 
 

the signal losses due to carriers moving in the orthogonal direction. It should be emphasized 

that these magnifications are theoretical and can vary in practise due to imperfections in the 

alignment and in the lens quality.  

 

 

Figure 1. Set of cylindrical lenses placed along the light path towards the APD. The lenses 

highly magnify the PL emission spot along the scanning direction (y-axis) while 

simultaneously demagnifying it along the orthogonal direction (x-axis). The APD scan of the 

imaged PL spot is performed along the y-axis (white dashed line).  

 

To test the cylindrical lens setup, we image the PL emission spot of a single crystalline flake of 

2D perovskite ((PEA)2PbI4) onto an EMCCD camera (Princeton Instruments, ProEM HS 

1024BX3). 2D perovskites exhibit isotropic carrier diffusion in the in-plane directions in the 

form of excitons.[6,7,11–13] Figure 2a shows the image of the PL emission using the traditional 

spherical lens setup, showing the projection of the symmetric emission spot at large 

magnification. In comparison, for the image from the cylindrical lens setup shown in Figure 

2b, the large magnification along the y-axis is maintained but the compression of the image 

along the x-axis is clearly visible. To compare the light intensity of the cylindrical (Icyl) and 

spherical lens (Isph) configurations, in Figure 2c we show the intensity profiles along the x-axis 

normalized to the maximum intensity of Isph. For the cylindrical projection the FWHM of the 

large y-axis magnification (blue solid line) measures 312 µm, while for the x-axis this is reduced 

to 26 µm, yielding a magnification ratio of around 12. While this is less than the theoretical 


 
 

5 
 

magnification ratio (400 / 20 = 20), a significant gain in signal collection onto the 20 µm APD 

detector can be achieved, as indicated by the grey dashed lines in Figure 2c. To quantify the 

signal enhancement, we integrate the intensity of the central 20 µm of the line traces shown in 

Figure 2c. While the spherical lens projects only 3 % of the total emission along the x-axis onto 

the detector, the cylindrical lens enhances this to 35 %. This is translated into a total integrated 

intensity enhancement (Icyl/Isph) of 10.8.  

 

To test the benefits of the intensity enhancement achieved with the new configuration, we 

perform TPLM with both set-ups. For this, the image plane is projected onto the APD, which 

is placed on a motorized x-y stage that allows for the spatial scanning. In a first step, the APD 

is raster scanned across the image plane to find the center of the emission spot. Then, for both 

Figure 2. (a-b) Visualization of the projection of the emission intensity of the 2D perovskite 

with the spherical and the cylindrical lenses, respectively. (c) Intensity profiles along the x-axis 

of the center of the population for the cylindrical (red) and the spherical (blue) lenses. Dashed 

grey lines denote the APD size (20 µm). Intensities in c are normalized to the maximum 

intensity detected with the spherical lens. 

 


 
 

6 
 

the spherical and cylindrical lens configuration, the actual measurement is performed by 

scanning along the y-axis while keeping the x-axis fixed. The resulting one-dimensional 

diffusion maps for the 2D perovskite are presented in Figure 3a and b. In these spatiotemporal 

maps, every time slice is normalized to its maximum intensity, highlighting the broadening of 

the population as a function of time. Despite equal integration times (4.5 min), laser repetition 

rate (40 MHz), and excitation fluence (50 nJ/cm2), the SNR of the diffusion map of the 

cylindrical lens configuration is considerably better as compared to the spherical lens 

configuration. 

 

Figure 3. Diffusion maps of a perovskite sample for the spherical (a) and cylindrical (b) lens 

setups.  (c) MSD extracted from (a) and (b) for the cylindrical (red circles) and the spherical 

(blue diamonds) setups.  

 

a

b

c


 
 

7 
 

In a conventional TPLM experiment with spherical lenses, the MSD is extracted by measuring 

along the central cross-section of the exciton population and tracking its change in variance 

σ2(t) - σ2(0) for each time slice by fitting the experimental result with the expected intensity 

profile – normally a Gaussian or a Voigt distribution. Using a Gaussian or a Voigt distribution 

as a fit function for the cross section is possible in a conventional TM experiment with spherical 

lenses because the detector size is much smaller than the magnified image of the carrier 

population (20 vs. 200 µm in the example above) and can therefore be well approximated as a 

point detector.[10] Crucially though, because of the smaller magnification in the orthogonal 

direction in the cylindrical lens setup, the approximation of a point detector no longer holds. In 

fact, due to the small magnification in the orthogonal direction (x-direction in Figure 1 and 

Figure 2b) the detector no longer collects a one-dimensional slice of the distribution, but a larger 

collection area, which can be represented by the integral: ℎ(𝑦) = ∫
𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑑𝑥

!/#
$!/#
, where 

𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦) is the carrier distribution and d is the projected and demagnified detector size in the x 

direction (e.g. for a 20 µm APD and a cylindrical setup with 20´ magnification: d = 20 µm / 20 

= 1 µm). This integral represents the expected intensity distribution to be measured for a 

cylindrical lens setup, and hence ℎ(𝑦)  has to be used to fit the experimental results. 

Interestingly, for a Gaussian exciton population, the integral is again Gaussian just like the 

simple cross section (ℎ(𝑦) ∝ 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦 = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡. )). However, this proportionality is specific to 

the Gaussian fit and does not hold for other types of fit functions to the distribution. A number 

of Transient Microscopy studies have shown that simple Gaussian functions often fail to capture 

the tails of the emission profile in thin films.[2,6,14] For a more accurate determination of the 

MSD(t), the tails of emission profiles are often best described by Voigt functions, which are 

convolutions of a Lorentzian with a Gaussian.[2,6] To accurately determine the change in 

variance σ(t)2 - σ(t)2 of the Voigt function in the case of the definite integration, we introduce a 

numerical integration ℎ(𝑦) of a 2D Voigt along the x-axis in the APD scan area. With the 


 
 

8 
 

resulting integrated function, we fit the experimental TPLM data, allowing us to calculate the 

MSD(t) dependence using MSD(t) = σ(t)2 − σ(0)2.  

 

Figure 3c shows a comparison of the resulting MSD as a function of time for both the spherical 

and cylindrical lens setup. The error bars represent the uncertainty (one standard deviation) in 

the fitting procedure for MSD(t), in both cases increasing significantly at later times when the 

fluorescent signal is diminished due to the exponential decay of the excitons in the system. 

Importantly though, the error bars for the cylindrical lens setup are dramatically reduced as 

compared to the spherical lens, as expected from the improved signal collection (see Figure S3 

and S4). Consequently, for equal acquisition times, more precise information about the MSD 

can be obtained using the cylindrical lens setup, particularly at later times. Late time dynamics 

of the MSD can provide valuable information about anomalous transport regimes and the 

corresponding local energy landscape of the material.[13] 

 

To determine the diffusion length, we use a biexponential fit of the fluorescence lifetime decay 

dynamics (see Figure S5) to determine the fraction of surviving excitons as a function of time 

(see Figure S5). The diffusion length LD is then defined as the net displacement in one 

dimension achieved by 37% (i.e., 1/e) of the exciton population. The improved SNR in both the 

spatial as well as the temporal decay dynamics using the cylindrical lens setup improves the 

precision with which the diffusion length can be determined for equal acquisition times, 

yielding LD = 174 ± 11 nm for the spherical and LD = 184 ± 4 nm for the cylindrical lens setup. 

 

The ability to resolve the displacement of excitons is primarily determined by the SNR in the 

experiment. While excitons in (PEA)2PbI4 diffuse across several hundreds of nm during their 

lifetime, displacements in other systems are often much smaller. An example of such a system 

are colloidal quantum-dot thin films in which transport of excitons relies on Förster-mediated  


 
 

9 
 

 

 
 

Figure 4. Diffusion maps of a QD sample for the spherical (a) and cylindrical (b) lens setups.  

(c) MSD for the cylindrical (red circles) and the spherical (blue diamonds) lenses. Dashed lines 

are fits to a power law.  

 

energy transfer between individual quantum dots in the lattice. Figure 4 shows the comparison 

of the MSD as a function of time between the spherical and cylindrical lens setup. Comparing 

Figure 4a and b, a clear improvement in the SNR is observed when using the cylindrical lens 

setup. Importantly, even though the broadening of the population in both diffusion maps is 

much less pronounced than for the perovskite materials, a clear broadening can be observed in 

the corresponding MSD curves (see Figure 4c). In the case of the QDs, the MSD shows a clear 

sub-linear behaviour, indicative of subdiffusive transport (see Figure 4c). Subdiffusion of 

carriers in QD solids is commonly observed and is caused by polydispersity in the QD ensemble 

a

b

Spherical

Cylindrical

c


 
 

10 
 

leading to a disordered energy landscape.[2] To quantify the subdiffusive behaviour, we use a 

power law (MSD(t) = 2Dta). From the fits we obtain D = 0.003 ± 0.001 cm2/s and D = 0.003 ± 

0.002 cm2/s in the cylindrical and spherical lenses, respectively. Corresponding diffusion 

lengths that are obtained from these measurements are LD = 41 ± 6 nm for the spherical and LD 

= 40 ± 5  nm for the cylindrical lens setup. With the cylindrical lens setup, a single measurement 

provides higher accuracy for both the diffusion length and the diffusivity (see Figure S4 and 

S6).  

 

3. Conclusion 

We have demonstrated a simple method to improve the data acquisition efficiency in Transient 

Microscopy measurements for materials with isotropic diffusion in the x-y plane using 

cylindrical lenses. The intensity enhancement for the specific examples in this work is around 

10-fold, reducing the needed acquisition time for measurements with equal SNR by the same 

amount. Importantly, further improvements in the intensity enhancement can be achieved using 

larger focal length ratios for the two cylindrical lenses, as well as using higher quality lenses. 

In the presented work, the combination of the two cylindrical lenses (f1 = 400 mm, f2 = 20 mm) 

were chosen for practical reasons to fit the existing path-length between microscope and 

detector. Naturally, if chosen freely, larger focal length ratios will yield larger compression 

along the x-axis and further improved intensity enhancement. Crucially though, the current 

setup employs a f2 = 20 mm focal length lens with a diameter of 25 mm as the short focal length 

cylindrical lens, resulting in a small f-number and relatively poor quality of the focus. This 

limitation is clear when comparing the theoretical demagnification (400 / 20 = 20) and the 

experimentally obtained demagnification of around 12. Larger f-numbers on both cylindrical 

lenses would further improve the experimental intensity enhancement and the improvement in 

the signal collection, although at the cost of a longer optical path of the total setup. Importantly, 

the intensity enhancement for the cylindrical lens setup also depends on the diffusion length of 


 
 

11 
 

the carriers in the specific material under study. For materials with long diffusion lengths, larger 

enhancements can be obtained as the carriers diffuse farther away from the axis of measurement 

in the conventional spherical lens setup. To simulate the maximum enhancement for different 

time-integrated population distributions and different magnification ratios for a given detector 

size (here taken as 20 μm) is displayed in Figure 5. Enhancements of up to 25 times are 

achievable for example for a magnification ratio of 30 and a relatively long diffusion length 

with a full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of 1.2 μm. Simulations of the dependence of the 

signal enhancement on more general system parameters are shown in Figure S7. 

Finally, it is worth mentioning that the use of cylindrical lenses can benefit to other 

Transient Microscopy techniques beyond TPLM, including for example Transient Absorption 

Microscopy or Transient Scattering Microscopy (i.e. stroboSCAT).[15] The improved SNR in 

these types of measurements will help to reduce data acquisition times and sample degradation, 

and may help resolve details of the transport dynamics at longer times when the decay of the 

carrier population reduces the signal strength.  

 

 

Figure 5. Simulations of the dependence of the signal enhancement (Icyl/Isph) on the 
magnification ratio and the time integrated FWHM of the energy carrier population for a 
detector size of 20 μm. A signal enhancement up to ∼25 is predicted for magnification ratios 
of 30 and FWHM of 1.2 μm.  


 
 

12 
 

 

Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge the support from the “(MAD2D-CM)-UAM” project funded by Comunidad 

de Madrid, by the Recovery, Transformation and Resilience Plan, and by NextGenerationEU 

from the European Union, as well as from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation under 

grant agreement TED2021-131018B-C21.  

 

References 

[1] G. M. Akselrod, P. B. Deotare, N. J. Thompson, J. Lee, W. A. Tisdale, M. A. Baldo, V. 

M. Menon, V. Bulovic, Nature Communications 2014, 5, 3646. 

[2] G. M. Akselrod, F. Prins, L. V. Poulikakos, E. M. Y. Lee, M. C. Weidman, A. J. Mork, 

A. P. Willard, V. Bulović, W. A. Tisdale, V. Bulovic, W. A. Tisdale, Nano Letters 2014, 
14, 3556. 

[3] E. Penzo, A. Loiudice, E. S. Barnard, N. J. Borys, M. J. Jurow, M. Lorenzon, I. 

Rajzbaum, E. K. Wong, Y. Liu, A. M. Schwartzberg, S. Cabrini, S. Whitelam, R. 
Buonsanti, A. Weber-Bargioni, ACS Nano 2020, 14, 6999. 

[4] A. J. Goodman, D. H. Lien, G. H. Ahn, L. L. Spiegel, M. Amani, A. P. Willard, A. 

Javey, W. A. Tisdale, Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2020, 124, 12175. 

[5] M. Kulig, J. Zipfel, P. Nagler, S. Blanter, C. Schüller, T. Korn, N. Paradiso, M. M. 

Glazov, A. Chernikov, Physical Review Letters 2018, 120, 207401. 

[6] M. Seitz, A. J. Magdaleno, N. Alcázar-Cano, M. Meléndez, T. J. Lubbers, S. W. 

Walraven, S. Pakdel, E. Prada, R. Delgado-Buscalioni, F. Prins, Nature Communications 
2020, 11, 1. 

[7] J. D. Ziegler, J. Zipfel, B. Meisinger, M. Menahem, X. Zhu, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, 

O. Yaffe, D. A. Egger, A. Chernikov, Nano Letters 2020, 20, 6674. 

[8] W. Li, M. Shao Ran Huang, S. K. Yadavalli, J. David Lizarazo Ferro, Y. Zhou, A. 

Zaslavsky, N. P. Padture, R. Zia, ACS Photonics 2019, 6, 2375. 

[9] M. I. Saidaminov, K. Williams, M. Wei, A. Johnston, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Vafaie, 

J. M. Pina, A. H. Proppe, Y. Hou, G. Walters, S. O. Kelley, W. A. Tisdale, E. H. 
Sargent, Nature Materials 2020, 19, 412. 

[10] N. S. Ginsberg, W. A. Tisdale, Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 2020, 71, 1. 
[11] S. Deng, E. Shi, L. Yuan, L. Jin, L. Dou, L. Huang, Nature Communications 2020, 11, 1. 
[12] A. J. Magdaleno, M. Seitz, M. Frising, A. Herranz de la Cruz, A. I. Fernández-

Domínguez, F. Prins, Materials Horizons 2021, 8, 639. 

[13] M. Seitz, M. Meléndez, N. Alcázar‐Cano, D. N. Congreve, R. Delgado‐Buscalioni, F. 

Prins, Advanced Optical Materials 2021, 2021, 2001875. 

[14] C. L. Hickey, E. M. Grumstrup, Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2020, 124, 14016. 
[15] M. Delor, H. L. Weaver, Q. Q. Yu, N. S. Ginsberg, Nature Materials 2020, 19, 56. 
 
 


 
 

13 
 

  

Supporting information 

Experimental methods 

2D perovskite preparation 

Perovskite solutions were made in a N2-filled glovebox following the recipes given in refs.[1–3] 

In short, n = 1 phenethylammonium lead iodine (PEA)2PbI4  solutions were prepared by mixing 

stoichiometric ratios of the precursor salts. Phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) (Sigma 

Aldrich, 805904-25G) and lead(II) iodide (PbI2) (Sigma Aldrich, 211168-50G) were mixed 

with a stoichiometric ratio of 2:1 and dissolved in anhydrous n,n-dimethylformamide (DMF, 

Sigma Aldrich, 227056-1L). The solution was heated to 70°C while stirring until all the 

precursors were completely dissolved. The resulting solution was kept at 70°C and the solvent 

was left to evaporate until reaching saturation of the solution. 

Perovskite crystals (hundreds of micron lateral sizes) were obtained using drop casting of the 

saturated perovskite solution on top of a microscope slide and heating to 50°C for 2-3 hours 

until drying. The perovskite crystals of the thin film were mechanically exfoliated using the 

Scotch tape (Scotch Magic) method. After several exfoliation steps, the crystals were 

transferred on a glass slide and were subsequently studied through the glass slide with a ×100 

oil immersion objective (Nikon CFI Plan Fluor, NA = 1.3). 

CdSe QD samples 

CdSe/ZnS (Sigma Aldrich, 790192) thin films are made to carry out the measurements. The 

surface functionalization of octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS, Sigma Aldrich, 104817-25G) based 

self-assembled monolayers explained by Prins, et al[4] is applied to increase the hydrophobicity 

of the glass substrates (24x24x0.16 mm, Labbox, COVN-024-200). It is needed to get smooth 

and densely packed QD films for the diffusion measurements. For safety reasons, the surface 


 
 

14 
 

functionalization process of Prins, et al[4] is slightly modified, using a plasma treatment instead 

of the piranha cleaning for the generation of the oxygen radicals in the glass surface. The plasma 

cleaning was applied during 1 min, the chosen gas to create the plasma was air. 

CdSe/ZnS solutions of ~40 mg/mL[5] are prepared using a hexane:octane ratio of 9:1. 

Subsequently, the QD solutions are drop casted on the functionalized glass substrates. 

Emission profile measurements 

The materials were excited with a 405 nm laser (PicoQuant LDH-D-C-405, PDL 800-D), which 

was focused down to a near diffraction limited spot. The laser spot images were acquired using 

an EMCCD camera coupled to a spectrograph (Princeton Instruments, SpectraPro HRS-300, 

ProEM HS 1024BX3) with a x430 magnification for the spherical and x430 (y-axis), x32 (x-

axis) for the cylindrical lenses configuration, i.e. 100x oil immersion objective with the 

additional magnification of the respective lenses. Results are shown in Figure 2.  

Exciton propagation length 

Fluorescence lifetime measurements were performed using a laser diode of λ = 405 nm 

(PicoQuant LDH-D-C-405, PDL 800-D, Pico-Harp 300) and an avalanche photodiode (APD, 

Micro Photon Devices PDM). The repetition rate was 40 MHz and the peak fluence per pulse 

was 50 nJ cm-2. Figure S5 shows the photoluminescence lifetime traces of the 2D perovskites 

and CdSe QDs and the fit parameters of a bi-exponential fit to the data. The fit was used together 

with the experimentally obtained time-dependent MSD to extract the total number of surviving 

excitons for a given time t as presented in Figure S6. The exciton propagation length is defined 

as the net distance at which 1/e of the free excitons remain. The total number of surviving 

excitons at time t is given by: 

surviving excitons (t) = 

∫
&!'

" #

$! ) &%'

" #

$%
&
#
!*

∫
&!'

" #

$! ) &%'

" #

$%
&
'
!*

 


 
 

15 
 

 

 

 

Figure S1. Conventional TPLM with spherical lenses. The sample is excited with a laser pulse. The photoluminescence spot is 
visualized with a x100 magnification objective. The PL light is filtered with a dichroic mirror and sent through a lens (with 100 
mm focal length) and a spherical lens with a long focal length (f = 400 nm) to obtain a final magnification of around x400.  

 

 

Figure S2. Optical set-up configuration with cylindrical lenses. The sample is excited with a laser pulse. The photoluminescence 
spot is visualized with a x100 magnification objective. The PL light is filtered with a dichroic mirror and sent through a lens 
(with 100 mm focal length) and a set of two cylindrical lenses. The last two project with high magnification the y-axis of the 
PL spot while keeping a smaller magnification on the x-axis.  


 
 

16 
 

 

Figure S3. TPLM intensities obtained along the raster scan of the APD across the PL spot. The intensities captured with the 
cylindrical lenses are depicted in red and with the spherical lens in blue. For a better comparison the values are normalized 
to the maximum intensity measured with the spherical lens configuration.   

 

Figure S4. Error of the fits to the spatial distribution at each time-slice for both the spherical (blue diamonds) and cylindrical 
(red circles) lens setups associated with the diffusion measurements shown in Figure 3 (2D perovskite) and 4 (CdSe QDs), 
respectively. 

 

2D perovskite

CdSe QDs

CdSe QDs


 
 

17 
 

 

Figure S5. Photoluminescence lifetime decays measured with the cylindrical (red) and the spherical (blue) lenses fitted with 
a biexponential fit for both the CdSe QDs and 2D perovskites. Fitting parameters are given in the figure. 

 

 

Figure S6. Fraction of surviving excitons (extracted from lifetime data in Supplementary Figure S5) as a function of net spatial 
displacement !𝑀𝑆𝐷(𝑡) for the cylindrical (red) spherical (blue) lenses for both the 2D perovskites and CdSe QDs. Reported 
errors represent the uncertainty in the fitting procedure for σ(t)2.  Dashed grey line represents that 1/e of the excitons have 
survived.  

 


 
 

18 
 

 

Figure S7 Simulations of the dependence of the signal enhancement (Icyl/Isph) on more general system parameters: d0 being 
the detector size, fwhm the population size, and My and Mx magnifications in y and x directions, respectively. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

References 

[1] S. T. Ha, C. Shen, J. Zhang and Q. Xiong, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 115–121. 
[2] M. Seitz, P. Gant, A. Castellanos-Gomez and F. Prins, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9(8), 

1120 

[3] M. Seitz, A. J. Magdaleno, N. Alcázar-Cano, M. Meléndez, T. J. Lubbers, S. W. 

Walraven, S. Pakdel, E. Prada, R. Delgado-Buscalioni and F. Prins, Nat. Commun., 
2020, 11, 1–8. 

[4] F. Prins, D. K. Kim, J. Cui, E. De Leo, L. L. Spiegel, K. M. Mcpeak and D. J. Norris, 

Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3, 1319–1325 

[5] G. M. Akselrod, F. Prins, L. V. Poulikakos, E. M. Y. Lee, M. C. Weidman, A. J. 

Mork, A. P. Willard, V. Bulović and W. A. Tisdale, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3556–3562. 

 


