1 

 

Anisotropic Rheology and Friction of Suspended 

Graphene 

Andrea Mescola1, Andrea Silva2,3, Ali Khosravi2,3,4, Andrea Vanossi2,3, Erio Tosatti2,3,4, Sergio 

Valeri1,5 and Guido Paolicelli1* 

 

1 CNR-NANO, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto Nanoscienze, Via Campi 213 41125 

Modena, Italy. 

2 CNR-IOM, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto Officina dei Materiali, c/o SISSA Via 

Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy. 

3 International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy. 

4 The Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Strada Costiera 11, 

34151 Trieste, Italy 

5 Department of Physics, Informatics and Mathematics, University of Modena and Reggio 

Emilia, Via Campi 213 41125 Modena, Italy. 

 

* corresponding author: guido.paolicelli@nano.cnr.it 

 
 


2 

 

ABSTRACT 

Graphene is a powerful membrane prototype for both applications and fundamental research. 

Rheological phenomena including indentation, twisting, and wrinkling in deposited and 

suspended graphene are actively investigated to unravel the mechanical laws at the nanoscale. 

Most studies focused on isotropic set-ups, while realistic graphene membranes are often subject 

to strongly anisotropic constraints, with important consequences for the rheology, strain, 

indentation, and friction in engineering conditions.  

Graphene in particular is recognized as the thinnest solid lubricant material and a large amount 

of work has been dedicated to understanding the fundamentals mechanisms of this effect and to 

unravel parameters relevant to its technological development. Here we experimentally show how 

graphene’s frictional response to an external indenter is severely altered by conditions of 

anisotropic suspension, specifically when graphene is clamped across a long and narrow groove. 

Results show that the friction coefficient is significant when the tip is sliding parallel to the 

groove while becoming ultra-low in the orthogonal direction. While the experimental data 

suggest that – rather unexpectedly – pre-strain of the graphene sheet as a result of clamping is 

negligible, the key to understanding the underlying mechanism is provided by simulations. The 

paramount mechanism is provided by the extra anisotropic strain induced from indentation under 

anisotropic constraints, which in turn produces an anisotropic stiffening of the graphene. While 

the focus of this work is on graphene, we believe our experimental protocol and the physical 

mechanism uncovered by our model can be applicable to other 2D membrane-like materials. 

 


3 

 

KEYWORDS: Suspended Graphene, Anisotropic Friction, Uniaxial Strain, AFM, MD 

Simulations.  

 
 


4 

 

Introduction 

The rheological and frictional behavior of pristine graphene has attracted much fundamental 

and technological interest during the last decade. From the mesoscale down to the atomic level, a 

great research effort is underway to unveil the physical mechanisms underpinning the 

indentation, twisting, wrinkling and crumbling phenomena  [1–8] of this extraordinary 

membrane. The exceptional hardness (Young’s modulus around 1 TPa and intrinsic in-plane 

strength of 130 GPa  [5]), the extreme ability to elastically sustain tensile strain up to at least 

20%  [9], and its large out-of-plane membrane-like flexibility make graphene the forefront 

prototype material for the design of innovative systems and structures with controlled intrinsic 

properties  [10]. Graphene has been integrated into several hi-tech electronic devices such as 

organic light-emitting diodes (OLED)  [11,12], strain sensors  [13–17], wearable devices  [18–

20] and micro- and nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS and NEMS)  [21]. Understanding 

and exploiting strain-induced effects in 2D layered materials in general is nowadays a fast-

growing topic in both fundamental and applied research, given that many of its intrinsic 

properties can be tuned by mechanical deformation. While the tunability of transport and optical 

properties under strain has been extensively addressed  [22–26], the microscopic tribological 

behavior as a function of the applied strain and boundary conditions has received far less 

attention  [27–29]. Graphene tends to conform to the morphology of the supporting surface when 

deposited over a hosting substrate and the tribological response of the layered coating 

significantly depends on the layer-substrate interaction  [30–32]. At the  same time, different 

experimental realizations of supported graphene have highlighted the importance of 2D layer 

strain on the overall tribological and electronic behavior  [33–35]. To disentangle these effects 

and shed light on their origin, suspended graphene represents an ideal system. Recently, free-


5 

 

standing graphene has been investigated by S. Zhang et al.  [27], who found a reduction of 

friction with increasing strain in a suspended and isotropically strained graphene sheet with 

Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) measurements. Complementary atomistic simulations showed 

how this tensile pre-strain reduces the membrane flexibility thus decreasing the impact of the tip, 

hence reducing the friction. 

Here we go beyond the isotropic setup in Ref.  [27] and study the  friction behavior of 

graphene suspended and fixed at the edges of a long narrow groove. We observe with remarkable 

reproducibility that the frictional dissipation of the graphene membrane measured by our sliding 

AFM tip turns anisotropic, with a differential friction coefficient (COF) typically three times 

higher parallel to the groove axis compared to orthogonal axis. This occurs with negligible pre-

strain in our system, as confirmed by Raman measurements. Molecular-dynamics (MD) 

simulations reveal that the sliding friction anisotropy is ruled by the interplay between the tip 

indenting action and the boundary conditions. The strain-free, asymmetric suspension condition 

is responsible for the anisotropic indentation pattern shape and rheology of the membrane, 

quantitatively explaining the observations. Our results rationalize the often-overlooked aspect of  

non-isotropic constraints in nanoscale systems, with important implications for realistic 

engineering setups. 

 

Sample characterization 

The suspended graphene was obtained by depositing a commercial single layer CVD graphene 

on a  standard silicon dioxide-based calibration grating array. 


6 

 

 

Figure 1. AFM imaging and Raman characterization of single layer CVD graphene 
anisotropically suspended. (a) 3D topography image and (b) relative line profiles of CVD 
graphene deposited on a single groove. The white dashed line in panel (a) indicates the line 
profile in panel (b). The equilibrium configuration between graphene and underlying substrate 
indicates a complete conformation and clamping on the flat crests enclosing the groove and a 
total suspension at the center of the groove. (c) Raman spectra comparison of supported  
graphene (black) and suspended graphene (red). Note the typical redshift of G and 2D peak 
positions on suspended graphene. (d) Correlation plot of Pos2D versus PosG peaks showing data 
from supported graphene  (gray) and data within the patterned area which include supported 
graphene on the crest and suspended graphene (green and red, respectively). Lines represent the 
linear fit from supported graphene (gray line, slope 0.94), graphene on crest (green line, slope 
0.94), and from suspended graphene (red line, slope 1.13). The neutrality point  indicated by the 
black dot at position (1581.6 cm-1, 2676.9 cm-1) in the Pos2D versus PosG correlation plot, and 
the additional axes to quantify strain and doping are taken from Ref. [36]. 

 

A schematic representation of the sample construction is shown in Supporting 

Information [37]. Briefly, a commercial single layer CVD graphene was deposited over the 

calibration grating by wet transfer process. The calibration grating comprises a central patterned 


7 

 

area and a surrounding flat region. The pattern consists of long, parallel and equally spaced 

grooves (crest-to-crest distance: 3 µm, valley width 2 µm, step height: 500 nm).  After transfer, 

the external flat region is fully covered by single layer graphene that we refer to as supported 

graphene in the following. On the contrary, the sample surface over patterned area displayed 

regions where the graphene adhered to the substrate and regions where it hung fully suspended 

via clamping on the top of the crests (Fig. 1a). AFM 3D-topography and corresponding line 

profiles in Fig. 1a, b, reveal an excellent conformation of graphene sheet over the crests and the 

complete suspension in the region between them. In particular, the AFM profiles before and after 

deposition (solid and dashed lines Fig. 1b, respectively) indicate that graphene tends to 

mechanically relax to a configuration where a small fraction adheres to the side walls of the 

groove. 

The graphene membrane was then characterized by Raman spectroscopy, a well-established 

method used to quantify the purity, thickness and strain of graphene films  [36,38–40]. Figure 1c 

presents the typical Raman spectra obtained from analyzing both the supported graphene (black 

line) and suspended graphene (red line) of the deposited graphitic film. The shape of the two 

prominent G and 2D peaks (both symmetric Lorentzian line shape, and width WG = 12 cm-1 W2D 

= 33 cm-1 respectively) indicates a high-quality, single-layer suspended graphene film  [38–41]. 

The absence of the disorder-related D peak near 1350 cm-1 on the suspended part and the weak 

intensity on the supported one indicate that CVD graphene film is composed of large, defect-free 

single-crystal domains. The downward shift of both peaks positions in the suspended regions 

with respect to the supported graphene is evident and indicative of the different extent of both 

deformation and doping effects  [38] in the two regions. 


8 

 

To disentangle doping and strain effects, we performed extensive Raman maps on graphene on 

the patterned area and graphene supported on the surrounding flat silicon region. Each map 

comprised about 80 points where we measured and fit Raman spectra to obtain G and 2D peak 

positions (PosG and Pos2D in the following). We computed the Pos2D/PosG correlation shown 

in Fig. 1d following the protocol developed by Lee et al.  [36]. PosG and Pos2D are linearly 

correlated even within an ideal graphene sheet because of the ubiquitous presence of doping and 

strain effects. The slope of the linear distribution is indicative of the relative importance of either 

doping or strain effects. The solid blue lines in Fig. 1d represents the linear pure strain axis with 

slope 2.2 and the pure doping axis with slope 0.7, respectively  [36]. The two axes cross at the 

neutrality point marked by a black dot at position  (1581.6 cm-1, 2676.9 cm-1)  [36]. While on the 

doping line only positive values are physically meaningful, the convention adopted for strain 

evaluation is to indicate as a negative value the compressive strain that moves the peak towards 

higher frequencies and as a positive value the tensile strain inducing shift in the opposite 

direction  [42]. The gray dot and the related gray line represent data from supported graphene 

while green and red data come from graphene over the patterned area. Data from supported 

graphene (gray symbols) indicate only a very slight tensile strain as well as a hole-doping effect, 

consistent with the literature for supported CVD graphene  [39]. Raman spectra acquired from 

graphene within the pattern split into two sets with different slopes (green and red symbols). The 

green dots show a trend compatible with the reference signal (supported graphene) and, hence, 

they are attributed to the crest region, where graphene is supported. Indeed, the fitted slope 

(green and gray lines in Fig. 1d) is 0.94 in both cases, a value consistent with the literature  [39]. 

By contrast, the red data are representative of suspended graphene: they group close to the 

doping axis so that the extrapolation towards strain axis indicates a negligible pre-strain. Indeed 


9 

 

the linear fit yields a slope of 1.13 consistent with the value of 1.09 reported by Gajewski et al. 

 [39] for suspended graphene. Hence, our sample presents no pre-strain, probably because the 

portion of membrane adhering to the side wall of the groove is small and its effect negligible. 

 

Figure 2. Direction dependent friction response of suspended CVD graphene. (a) 3D topography 
reconstruction of freestanding CVD graphene over single groove and 2D zoom of the region 
analyzed by FFM (blue square: 1×1 µm2); the two scan directions are represented with double-
headed arrows (black for the orthogonal and red for the parallel, respectively). Scale bar 
corresponds to 150 nm. (b) Friction force as a function of load applied to freestanding CVD 
graphene with groove axis oriented orthogonal (black) and parallel (red) to the fast scan 
direction; circles represent experimental data with their error bars and continuous lines are the 
respective linear fit. (c) Boxplots of COF for orthogonal (black) and parallel (red) scans; 
counting corresponds to 12 different regions for orthogonal scans and to 19 for parallel scans, 
respectively. 

 

 


10 

 

Results and Discussion 

Following the structural results of the Raman spectroscopy analysis, the membrane rheology 

was proved by Friction Force Microscopy (FFM) (Fig. 2). FFM scans in two opposite directions 

were performed on a one square micron area, corresponding to the central region suspended 

between two crests (blue square in Fig. 2a). By tilting the sample 90 degrees, the same area was 

first scanned in the direction orthogonal to the groove axis and then, in the one parallel to the 

groove axis, as indicated in the right side of Fig. 2a by black and red arrows, respectively. The 

same area was analyzed in both directions with positioning accuracy of the order of 100 nm 

( [43,44] and details in Supporting Information [37]). 

Care has been taken to analyse regions free from pre-existing extended wrinkles, which are 

clearly identifiable due to the strong contrast they produce on the lateral force signal  [45]. On 

the contrary, ripple effects on graphene either of an intrinsic type or induced by tip or point 

defect  [46] cannot be resolved since the induced elastic deformations during FFM measurements 

are larger with respect to ripple corrugation. 

The measured frictional dissipation F was found to depend strongly on the scanning direction: 

the friction force recorded during scans parallel to the groove was typically three times that the 

orthogonal, at the same load P (see Fig. 2b and Fig. S2a). The orthogonal vs parallel friction 

increase was then measured at different loads, from about 25nN down to the negative pull-off 

force. Figure 2b reports the typical friction vs load behavior observed in several different spots 

on the membrane. The differential friction coefficient dF/dP (COF) was evaluated for each 

friction vs load curve and used as a representative parameter of the membrane anisotropic 

response. Fig. 2c summarizes the statistics of our multi-spot analysis, revealing a remarkably 

consistent three-fold increase from orthogonal to parallel scanning direction. 


11 

 

In particular we notice that along the orthogonal direction the extremely low COF values are in 

agreement with those measured by Z. Deng et al. on single, bi and tri layer graphene suspended 

on micrometre size circular hole  [47] and confirmed recently by S. Zhan  [27]. These values 

approach that of thick graphite  [48] suggesting the absence of important elastic deformation 

effects. Comparison with graphene supported systems is non-trivial since the specific tribological 

behaviour depends on the substrate on which the graphene is deposited   [27,49]. In general, the 

higher the adhesion towards the substrate the lower the out of plane deformation effect and the 

lower the friction coefficient   [50,51]. Our results, summarised on fig. 2 panel c, reveal that 

along the orthogonal direction the membrane behaves like a graphene layer with minor load 

induced out of plane deformations while along parallel direction load dependent deformation 

effects seems becoming increasingly important. 

The FFM scans were performed over hundreds of nanometers, providing the mesoscopic 

tribological response arising from a nanoscale contact. Over this length scale the atomistic stick-

slip events cannot be detected by our equipment. Nevertheless, the atomistic nature of the 

dissipation can be indirectly assessed from the velocity dependency of the COF. We found that 

halving and doubling the sliding velocity yielded the same COF (Supporting Information [37]). 

This velocity-independence of friction in both directions is the fingerprint of the stick-slip 

regime, whereas a viscous dissipation would yield a linear dependence [52].  

In order to understand the atomistic mechanism underlying the microscopic experimental 

measures, we consider the minimalistic model sketched in Fig 3a, which retains the experimental 

features assumed to be at the origin of the observed behavior. The stick-slip regime indicated by 

the experiments suggests that the fundamental dissipation mechanism should be captured by the  

Prandtl-Tomlinson (PT) model  [53,54], allowing for the tip to be reduced to a point-like object 


12 

 

(blue dot in Fig. 3a) sliding over a corrugated energy landscape. The cantilever was modeled as a 

mass moving at constant velocity vdrag (red square in Fig 3a), dragging the tip via a spring of 

constant K(see Supporting Information [37] and a benchmark of the model parameters at Refs. 

 [27,55,56]. 

 

Figure 3. (a) Model setup. The free-standing graphene membrane is clamped along the edges in 
the y direction at fixed x coordinate, consistently with experimental orientation in Fig. 1a. The 
clamping is realized by attaching a stiff spring (Q=1602 N/m) to each edge carbon atom in a 0.25 
nm region. As reported in the top left corner, the zig-zag edge is clamped while the armchair one 
is free (see SI for results with the opposite orientation, namely clamped armchair and free zig-
zag). The Prandtl-Tomlinson tip (blue sphere) indents the membrane under a constant vertical 
load (along z). Mimicking a minimal AFM setup, the tip is attached to a moving stage (red cube), 
representing the massive cantilever, translating at constant velocity vdrag. Side (b) and top (c, d, e) 
views of the indentation profile. The purple region in (b) reports the position projected on x and 
the black squares indicate the position of the clamps. Note that the axes in (b) are not in scale, 
i.e. the deformation of the membrane is accentuated for visual aid. (c, d, e) Top-view of the 


13 

 

indentation profile for increasing loads, as reported at the top of each plot: the tip (green cross) 
indents the center of the membrane and the system is relaxed (see SI for the relaxation protocol). 
The color scale in (c-e) reports the vertical deformation of the membrane, as indicated by the 
color bar at the bottom. The black bar at the sides indicates the position of the clamps, as in (a). 
The gray dashed lines in (c-e) mark the reference x=0, y=0, as guide to the eye. The height of 
each C atom of the membrane has been linearly interpolated on a finer grid for clearer 
visualization. 

 

Construction of the substrate in the PT model (i.e. the 2D membrane on which the tip slides) 

was key in this model, as it needed to capture the deformable nature of the suspended graphene 

sheet while at the same time preserving the atomistic nature of the contact – a smooth membrane 

cannot yield a stick-slip dynamics and a discrete graphene membrane without the mesoscopic 

clamping asymmetry cannot deform realistically under the tip. To achieve a reasonable tradeoff 

between these two opposite requirements, we modeled the experimental membrane as a classical 

graphene sheet where the AIREBO [56] potential describes intra-layer interactions and a 

Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential [27] interactions between the tip and graphene. To reproduce the 

asymmetric geometry, the membrane was finite in the x direction (orthogonal), and periodic in 

the y direction (parallel). To mimic the adhesion to the groove’s crests, the membrane edges in 

the x direction were clamped with springs of constant Q=1602 N/m to the equilibrium position, 

marked by black straight line in Fig. 3a. Hence, the simulated membrane was suspended and the 

clamping springs provided the restoring force opposing the one exerted by the tip upon loading 

and sliding. In Fig. 3a the clamped side is the zig-zag edge while the periodic side is the armchair 

edge. Effects of finite size, edge orientation and full open boundary conditions are discussed in 

the SI. The simulations were performed at zero temperature to obtain a clear signal and because 

the stick-slips dynamics is regulated by the energy barrier, while temperature introduces thermo-

lubricity without qualitatively modifying the dynamics  [53,54]. As the tip in experiments moved 


14 

 

orders of magnitude slower than the relaxation time of the atomistic motion, a viscous damping 

was applied to all the atoms. The crucial property we rely upon is the near independence of stick-

slip friction upon velocity [52]. 

An external load P was applied to the model tip (as sketched in Fig. 3b), which indents the 

membrane, as shown in Fig. 3c-e for increasing loads. The indentation shape follows the 

asymmetric geometry. The deformation is radial under the tip (green cross in Fig. 3c-e) but this 

symmetry is lost far away from it, in particular nearing the edges: the membrane forms an 

elongated “valley” in the parallel direction (white regions in Fig. 3c-e) and remains almost flat 

near the clamps (blue regions in Fig. 3c-e). This characteristic indentation shape becomes more 

evident as the load increases, as shown in going from Fig. 3c to Fig. 3e. 

 

 


15 

 

Figure 4. Simulated frictional response of the membrane perpendicular (a) and parallel (b) to the 
clamps. The y axis reports the force on the cantilever while x reports the cantilever position. 
Each colored line corresponds to a load, as reported in the legend in the bottom right. The 
friction traces are normalized by the elastic charging of the membrane as reported in SI. Color-
matching horizontal lines show the average friction force at each load after the initial transient. 
Note that the average excludes the end of the simulation to limit the influence of the clamps in 
(a) and of the free-edge in (b). Panels (c), (d) show the tip sliding direction and the evolution 
from the indentation profile in Fig. 3e toward the end of the trajectory; the color scale is the same 
as Fig. 3. The dashed horizontal and vertical gray lines indicate x=0 and y=0 as a guide to the 
eye. 

 

For each indentation load, the tip can slide in the orthogonal and parallel directions. The 

sliding was performed for a load from 0 to 2.24 nN. Note that the loads applied to a point-like tip 

do not relate directly to the experimental one. One can estimate the relative pressure and 

membrane vs tip size ratio between MD and experiments. Taking the equilibrium tip-membrane 

distance according to the LJ potential R=0.35 nm as tip radius in MD and assuming an Hertzian 

contact area (see Supporting Information [37] and Refs.  [57,58]), at the maximum load P=2.2 

nN the pressure was 12.8 GPa, much higher than experiments where the maximum estimated 

pressure was 28 MPa at load 20 nN. At the same time, in the experiments the load was applied 

on an extended tip of radius R=15 nm, while the real contact area of the single asperity 

undergoing stick-slip is certainly smaller (and thus pressure is higher) but difficult to 

estimate [59]. A more meaningful quantity to compare between simulations and experiments is 

the ratio between the tip radius R and the membrane clamped length L. This ratio is R/L=0.011 in 

simulations and R/L=0.01 in experiments, with a groove distance L=1.5 𝜇𝜇m. The two values are 

comparatively close, suggesting that while the nominal pressure in the MD simulations is higher 

than the experimental one, the dimensional ratio is correctly described by the model. This 

geometrical element is crucial to address the anisotropy observed in experiments because the size 


16 

 

relationship between the indenter and the intended membrane sets the shape of the indentation 

pattern and the strain distribution. 

Force traces along the orthogonal and parallel directions for selected loads are reported in Fig. 

4a, b, respectively. The atomistic stick-slip behavior is evident at all loads, owing to the damped, 

zero-temperature dynamics of the MD simulations. As the cantilever started to translate, the tip 

climbed the corrugation energy barrier, see the initial increase of all lines in Fig. 4a, b. Once the 

cantilever restoring force overpowered the barrier, the system depinned, causing the first drop in 

all lines in Fig. 4a, b. This is the onset of static friction. Afterwards, the tip moved by single-

lattice slips, yielding the characteristic saw-tooth force profile of stick-slip dynamics shown in 

Fig. 4a, b. As shown in details on Supplementary Information [37] , the membrane deformation 

instantaneously follows the tip motion: there is an adiabatic separation between slow motion of 

the AFM tip and the fast relaxation of the membrane, as in experiments. 

After an initial transient, the kinetic friction was calculated as the average sliding force shown 

in Fig. 4a, b as horizontal lines. The protocol to compute kinetic friction in this clamped system 

is described in detail in the Supplementary Information [37]. 

  


17 

 

 

Figure 5. (a) Average friction versus load for the direction perpendicular (blue curve) and 
parallel (orange) to the clamp. The COF perpendicular and parallel to the clamps is defined as 
the slope of the light-blue and red dashed lines, respectively. (b), (c) Overall strain of each 
carbon atom as bond length difference averaged over its nearest neighbors. (b) reports the final 
snapshot of orthogonal dragging, (c) for parallel dragging; both snapshots refer to load P= 2.24 
nN (black curves in Fig. 4a, b and last point in Fig 5a). The green cross marks the tip position. 
Darker regions mark smaller strain, lighter regions higher strain. White lines mark the isoline at 
the values reported on the color bar. 

 

From Fig. 4a, b one can already see that the friction in the orthogonal direction is smaller than 

in the parallel one, as in experimental curves in Fig. 2b. The force-load curves for the two 

directions are obtained by plotting the average friction force, horizontal lines in Fig. 4a, b, 

against the applied load P. Figure 5a reports the average friction vs load for the orthogonal (blue 

line) and parallel (orange line). For small loads (P=0-0.5 nN), where the anisotropic mechanical 

constraint of the clamping is very modestly perceived, the two curves behave similarly; as the 


18 

 

load increased however, the average force in the parallel direction kept rising, while in the 

orthogonal direction the growth slowed down. This follows the experimental behavior in Fig. 2b, 

where parallel force is higher while perpendicular is smaller. Even though the model force-load 

curves in Fig. 5a showed a clear non-linear trend, as reasonable for the system, the concept of 

differential COF helps to establish a systematic comparison with experiment. Considering only 

the large-load limit (dashed lines in Fig. 4a), we obtained 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶⊥ =  0.013 and 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 =  0.023, 

yielding a ratio 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼/𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶⊥ =  1.7. We conclude that this minimal model is able to reproduce 

fairly well the experimental finding 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼 ≫  𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶⊥.    

Note that the COF from MD simulations are higher than in experiments. This discrepancy can 

be linked to the system being an ideal crystal at zero temperature, representing an upper bound 

for the friction force in the real system. At the same, the agreement between trends found in 

experiments and in MD simulations are robust against variations of crystal orientation and 

boundary conditions (see Supplementary Information  [37]and  [60]). Hence, we believe the 

physics underpinning the experimental results are well described by the theoretical model, while 

the assumptions of the model result in a qualitative rather than quantitative agreement. 

These “in-silico frictional experiments” were crucial to understand the origin of this 

asymmetric rheological response of suspended graphene in absence of pre-strain. Figure 5b, c 

reports the model strain distribution in the membrane as the bond length deviation from 

equilibrium, < 𝛿𝛿 >𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛=<
𝑙𝑙−𝑙𝑙0
𝑙𝑙0 >𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 where l0 = 0.139 nm is the equilibrium C-C bond length in 

MD and the <⋅>𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛 indicates the average over the nearest neighbors of each carbon atom. While 

no pre-strain is present in the membrane, the tip indentation stretches the membrane up to 𝛿𝛿~2% 

right below the tip as shown by the large yellow patch in Fig. 5b, c. This tip-induced strain is 

larger in the orthogonal direction, as the graphene needs to comply with both the tip pressure and 


19 

 

the clamps pull (see the brighter horizontal strip highlighted by the white contour lines in Fig. 

5b). Hence, the membrane is stiffer in the transverse direction. On the other hand, in the parallel 

direction the tip-induced strain is lower (see the black regions enclosed by the white contour 

lines in Fig. 5c). When the tip was dragged along the transverse direction, the stiff substrate was 

not deformed significantly by the pushing tip and the force needed to slide was small. 

Conversely, when the tip was driven along the parallel direction the graphene membrane 

deformed easily under the action of the sliding probe, resulting in a higher force opposing sliding 

and, thus, a higher dissipation. As the load increases, the orthogonal direction becomes stiffer, 

enhancing this effect and leading to the smaller coefficient of friction shown in Fig. 5a. 

The computational results indicate that the anisotropic stiffening of the membrane induced by 

the clamping during indentation, and not an anisotropic pre-strain, which is absent in our case, is 

the mechanism underpinning the different frictional response in the orthogonal and parallel 

directions. This argument is further corroborated by the experiments. Analyzing the effective 

piezo elongation as a function of the applied loads during the acquisition of friction vs load 

images (see Supporting Information [37]) we can extract the tip-induced elastic deformations of 

graphene along both the orthogonal and parallel directions of the groove. This analysis provided 

an estimate of the effective elastic constant (Keff) for the coupled graphene-cantilever system. 

The mechanics is that of two springs in series: one is given by the flexural constant KN of the 

AFM cantilever, the other represents the elastic response of the graphene membrane subject to 

normal load, whose constant is termed here KGr. 


20 

 

 

 

Figure 6. Elastic behavior of the graphene membrane along the orthogonal (black) and parallel 
(red) scan directions (light and dark lines correspond to different membranes). The elastic 
constant of the graphene membrane is evaluated as discussed on Text and on Supporting 
Information [37]. Data are normalized to the values evaluated at the membrane center (green 
triangle in the insets) and they are shown as relative percentage variation. In the orthogonal 
direction the relative variation of KGr near the clamping regions achieves 40% while along the 
parallel direction it is almost always contained within 10% . The reference values at the centre 
are :  Membrane 1 (dark line) Kgr = 0.455 ± 0.05 (N/m); Membrane 2 (light line) Kgr = 0.46 
±0.15 (N/m). 

 

Fig. 6 reports the variation of the graphene elasticity KGr as a function of the positions along 

the orthogonal (Fig. 6a) and parallel direction (Fig. 6b) with respect to the value at the center of 

the path. In the orthogonal direction, the relative variation of KGr near the clamping regions 


21 

 

achieves 40%, while along the parallel direction the variation is almost negligible (within 10% of 

the value at the center). 

Hence, the intrinsic membrane elasticity as described by KGr strongly depends on the scan 

direction. In particular, the orthogonal scan reveals a non-uniform response along the profile: the 

center region is softer while the system gradually becomes effectively stiffer approaching the 

clamping constraints. On the contrary, in the parallel scan direction, the response is essentially 

constant, as expected from the model. The behavior described by the intrinsic membrane 

elasticity is consistent with computational results: the induced-strain reported in Fig. 5b, c 

indicates anisotropic membrane stiffness along the two sliding directions. Tip sliding along the 

orthogonal direction (Fig 5b) moved toward higher strain regions near the clamps compared to 

the center: the membrane became stiffer. Conversely, when the tip slides along the parallel 

direction (Fig. 5c) the strain distribution just translated unchanged with the tip, yielding the same 

stiffness along the path. 

 

Conclusions 

The effect of in-plane strain on the frictional mechanics of free-standing 2D membranes has 

been addressed only recently. Within the effort of understanding the nano-rheology of 2D 

materials under strain, graphene has been investigated in different conformations, from freely 

suspended on a circular hole to strained as the hole gets pressurized. We found unexpected 

results on the asymmetric tribological response of a single layer CVD graphene freely suspended 

over a specially designed groove geometry. FFM measurements and friction vs load analysis 

performed at the membrane center reveal a remarkably large anisotropy with respect to the 

groove axis. A very low COF is measured by sliding transverse to the groove while an 


22 

 

unexpected nearly threefold increase is obtained when moving parallel. As the pre-strain 

discussed in the literature is absent in our system, a different mechanism is required to explain 

the observed anisotropy. Our MD model, corroborated by subsequent measurements, suggests 

that deformation induced by indenting and sliding action of the tip is anisotropic due to the 

asymmetric clamping conditions. This also reflects into anisotropic friction response of the 

graphene membrane. Sliding orthogonally to grooves produces a larger strain, whence the 

membrane stiffens and the force needed to drive the tip drops. On the contrary, moving parallel 

to grooves the graphene membrane deforms easily and a larger force is needed to slide. This 

mechanism is amplified with increasing load, which results in an asymmetric dependence of 

friction vs load. 

These experimental results complemented by numerical simulations demonstrate how strong 

adhesion (clamping) and decoupling (suspension) from the substrate can modulate the stiffness 

and the friction on these membrane-like systems. Strongly anisotropic geometries, such as that 

investigated here for the first time to the best of our knowledge, are likely to occur in realistic 

systems. Hence, we believe that our results and analysis will be relevant to design and tune 

future graphene-based systems such as nano-mechanical devices and ultra-low friction coatings. 

 
 


23 

 

Acknowledgment 

A.M., G.P., A.S. and A.V. acknowledge support by the Italian Ministry of University and 

Research through PRIN UTFROM N. 20178PZCB5.  A.V.  and A.S. acknowledge support by 

the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No. 

899285. E.T. acknowledges support by ERC ULTRADISS Contract No. 834402. 

Author Contributions 

GP and AM conceptualized the experimental work and performed the experiments. AS and 

AK performed the simulations. AS, AV and ET conceptualized the simulations. All authors 

analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. 

 
 


24 

 

 

REFERENCES 

[1] R. J. Young, I. A. Kinloch, L. Gong, and K. S. Novoselov, The Mechanics of Graphene 
Nanocomposites: A Review, Composites Science and Technology 72, 1459 (2012). 

[2] Q. Cao, X. Geng, H. Wang, P. Wang, A. Liu, Y. Lan, and Q. Peng, A Review of Current 
Development of Graphene Mechanics, Crystals 8, 357 (2018). 

[3] S. Luo, Y. A. Samad, V. Chan, and K. Liao, Cellular Graphene: Fabrication, Mechanical 
Properties, and Strain-Sensing Applications, Matter 1, 1148 (2019). 

[4] C. Galiotis, O. Frank, E. N. Koukaras, and D. Sfyris, Graphene Mechanics: Current Status 
and Perspectives, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng. 6, 121 (2015). 

[5] C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar, J. Hone, and J. Marrow, Measurement of the  Elastic 
Properties and Intrinsic Strength of Monolayer Graphene, Science 321, 382 (2008). 

[6] Y. Gao, S. Kim, H.-C. C, D. Nélias, C. Berger, W. de Heer, L. Polloni, R. Sordan, A. 
Bongiorno, and E. Riedo, Elastic Coupling between Layers in Two-Dimensional Materials, 
Nature Mater 14, 714 (2015). 

[7] U. Ludacka, M. R. A. Monazam, C. Rentenberger, M. Friedrich, U. Stefanelli, J. C. Meyer, 
and J. Kotakoski, In Situ Control of Graphene Ripples and Strain in the Electron 
Microscope, Npj 2D Mater Appl 2, 25 (2018). 

[8] I. V. Gornyi, V. Y. Kachorovskii, and A. D. Mirlin, Anomalous Hooke’s Law in Disordered 
Graphene, 2D Mater. 4, 011003 (2016). 

[9] K. Cao, S. Feng, Y. Han, L. Gao, T. Hue Ly, Z. Xu, and Y. Lu, Elastic Straining of Free-
Standing Monolayer Graphene, Nat Commun 11, 284 (2020). 

[10] V.-M. Hiltunen, P. Koskinen, K. K. Mentel, J. Manninen, P. Myllyperkiö, M. Pettersson, 
and A. Johansson, Ultrastiff Graphene, Npj 2D Mater Appl 5, 49 (2021). 

[11] K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal′ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab, and K. Kim, A 
Roadmap for Graphene, Nature 490, 192 (2012). 

[12] Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousavi, and R. B. 
Kaner, Graphene-Based Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors, Chem. Soc. Rev. 44, 3639 
(2015). 

[13] A. Mehmood, N. M. Mubarak, M. Khalid, R. Walvekar, E. C. Abdullah, M. T. H. Siddiqui, 
H. A. Baloch, S. Nizamuddin, and S. Mazari, Graphene Based Nanomaterials for Strain 
Sensor Application—a Review, Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering 8, 103743 
(2020). 

[14] R. J. Dolleman, D. Davidovikj, S. J. Cartamil-Bueno, H. S. J. van der Zant, and P. G. 
Steeneken, Graphene Squeeze-Film Pressure Sensors, Nano Lett. 16, 568 (2016). 

[15] Z. Yang, Y. Pang, X. Han, Y. Yang, J. Ling, M. Jian, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, and T.-L. Ren, 
Graphene Textile Strain Sensor with Negative Resistance Variation for Human Motion 
Detection, ACS Nano 12, 9134 (2018). 

[16] M. Liu, Z. Li, X. Zhao, R. J. Young, and I. A. Kinloch, Fundamental Insights into 
Graphene Strain Sensing, Nano Lett. 21, 833 (2021). 

[17] X. Zhao, B. Mao, M. Liu, J. Cao, S. J. Haigh, D. G. Papageorgiou, Z. Li, and R. J. Young, 
Controlling and Monitoring Crack Propagation in Monolayer Graphene Single Crystals, 
Adv Funct Materials 2202373 (2022). 


25 

 

[18] C. Liu, B. Yao, T. Dong, H. Ma, S. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Shi, K. Chen, L. Gao, and L. 
Yu, Highly Stretchable Graphene Nanoribbon Springs by Programmable Nanowire 
Lithography, Npj 2D Mater Appl 3, 23 (2019). 

[19] D. Kireev, S. K. Ameri, A. Nederveld, J. Kampfe, H. Jang, N. Lu, and D. Akinwande, 
Fabrication, Characterization and Applications of Graphene Electronic Tattoos, Nat 
Protoc 16, 2395 (2021). 

[20] D. Kireev, J. Kampfe, A. Hall, and D. Akinwande, Graphene Electronic Tattoos 2.0 with 
Enhanced Performance, Breathability and Robustness, Npj 2D Mater Appl 6, 46 (2022). 

[21] X. Fan, A. D. Smith, F. Forsberg, S. Wagner, S. Schröder, S. S. A. Akbari, A. C. Fisher, L. 
G. Villanueva, M. Östling, M. C. Lemme, and F. Niklaus, Manufacture and 
Characterization of Graphene Membranes with Suspended Silicon Proof Masses for MEMS 
and NEMS Applications, Microsyst Nanoeng 6, 17 (2020). 

[22] F. M. D. Pellegrino, G. G. N. Angilella, and R. Pucci, Strain Effect on the Optical 
Conductivity of Graphene, Phys. Rev. B 81, 035411 (2010). 

[23] X. He, L. Gao, N. Tang, J. Duan, F. Xu, X. Wang, X. Yang, W. Ge, and B. Shen, Shear 
Strain Induced Modulation to the Transport Properties of Graphene, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 
083108 (2014). 

[24] H. Zhang, J-W Huang, J. Velasco Jr., K. Myhro, M. Maldonado, D. Dung Tran, Z. Zhao, F. 
Wang, Y. Lee, G. Liu, W. Bao, and C. Ning Lau, Transport in Suspended Monolayer and 
Bilayer Graphene under Strain: A New Platform for Material Studies, Carbon 69, 336 
(2014). 

[25] R. Schmidt, I. Niehues, R. Schneider, M. Drüppel, T. Deilmann, M. Rohlfing, S. M. de 
Vasconcellos, A. Castellanos-Gomez, and R. Bratschitsch, Reversible Uniaxial Strain 
Tuning in Atomically Thin WSe 2, 2D Mater. 3, 021011 (2016). 

[26] F. Wang, S. Li, M. A. Bissett, I. A. Kinloch, Z. Li, and R. J. Young, Strain Engineering in 
Monolayer WS 2 and WS 2 Nanocomposites, 2D Mater. 7, 045022 (2020). 

[27] S. Zhang, Y. Hou, S. Li, L. Liu, Z. Zhang, X.-Q. Feng, and Q. Li, Tuning Friction to a 
Superlubric State via In-Plane Straining, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 116, 24452 (2019). 

[28] K. Wang, C. Qu, J. Wang, W. Ouyang, M. Ma, and Q. Zheng, Strain Engineering 
Modulates Graphene Interlayer Friction by Moiré Pattern Evolution, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 11, 36169 (2019). 

[29] C. Xu, S. Zhang, H. Du, T. Xue, Y. Kang, Y. Zhang, P. Zhao, and Q. Li, Revisiting 
Frictional Characteristics of Graphene: Effect of In-Plane Straining, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces acsami.2c10449 (2022). 

[30] C. Lee, Q. Li, W. Kalb, X.-Z. Liu, H. Berger, R. W. Carpick, and J. Hone, Frictional 
Characteristics of Atomically Thin Sheets, 328, 6 (2010). 

[31] P. Egberts, G. H. Han, X. Z. Liu, A. T. C. Johnson, and R. W. Carpick, Frictional Behavior 
of Atomically Thin Sheets: Hexagonal-Shaped Graphene Islands Grown on Copper by 
Chemical Vapor Deposition, ACS Nano 8, 5010 (2014). 

[32] G. Paolicelli, M. Tripathi, V. Corradini, A. Candini, and S. Valeri, Nanoscale Frictional 
Behavior of Graphene on SiO 2 and Ni(111) Substrates, Nanotechnology 26, 055703 
(2015). 

[33] X. Wang, K. Tantiwanichapan, J. W. Christopher, R. Paiella, and A. K. Swan, Uniaxial 
Strain Redistribution in Corrugated Graphene: Clamping, Sliding, Friction, and 2D Band 
Splitting, Nano Lett. 15, 5969 (2015). 


26 

 

[34] A. Mescola, G. Paolicelli, S. P. Ogilvie, R. Guarino, J. G. McHugh, A. Rota, E. Iacob, E. 
Gnecco, S. Valeri, N. M. Pugno, V. Gadhamshetty, M. M. Rahman, P. Ajayan, A. B. 
Dalton, and M. Tripathi, Graphene Confers Ultralow Friction on Nanogear Cogs, Small 
17, 2104487 (2021). 

[35] T. Rakib, P. Pochet, E. Ertekin, and H. T. Johnson, Corrugation-Driven Symmetry Breaking 
in Magic-Angle Twisted Bilayer Graphene, Commun Phys 5, 242 (2022). 

[36] J. E. Lee, G. Ahn, J. Shim, Y. S. Lee, and S. Ryu, Optical Separation of Mechanical Strain 
from Charge Doping in Graphene, Nat Commun 3, 1024 (2012). 

[37] See Supporting Information at ...URL. Supporting Information describe in details: Sample 
preparation (Fig. S1) and characterization by Raman Analysis;  AFM and FFM procedure; 
Sliding regime / Friction profiles and COF-velocity independency (Fig.S2);  Elastic 
deformation of the membrane (Fig. S3, S4); MD Simulations, in particular, Method, Finite 
Size Effect (Fig. S5), Force Friction Protocol (Fig. S6), Force Friction Armchair OBC (Fig. 
S7, S8, S9) The Supporting Information also contains Refs. [27, 43, 44, 55-58, 60]. 

[38] A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. 
Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth, and A. K. Geim, Raman Spectrum of Graphene and 
Graphene Layers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 187401 (2006). 

[39] K. Gajewski, S. Goniszewski, A. Szumska, M. Moczaɫa, P. Kunicki, J. Gallop, N. Klein, L. 
Hao, and T. Gotszalk, Raman Spectroscopy and Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy 
Characteristics of the CVD Suspended Graphene, Diamond and Related Materials 64, 27 
(2016). 

[40] J.-B. Wu, M.-L. Lin, X. Cong, H.-N. Liu, and P.-H. Tan, Raman Spectroscopy of 
Graphene-Based Materials and Its Applications in Related Devices, Chem. Soc. Rev. 47, 
1822 (2018). 

[41] S. Berciaud, S. Ryu, L. E. Brus, and T. F. Heinz, Probing the Intrinsic Properties of 
Exfoliated Graphene: Raman Spectroscopy of Free-Standing Monolayers, Nano Lett. 9, 
346 (2009). 

[42] J. Zabel, R. R. Nair, A. Ott, T. Georgiou, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, and C. Casiraghi, 
Raman Spectroscopy of Graphene and Bilayer under Biaxial Strain: Bubbles and Balloons, 
Nano Lett. 12, 617 (2012). 

[43] J. E. Sader, J. W. M. Chon, and P. Mulvaney, Calibration of Rectangular Atomic Force 
Microscope Cantilevers, Review of Scientific Instruments 70, 3967 (1999). 

[44] C. P. Green, H. Lioe, J. P. Cleveland, R. Proksch, P. Mulvaney, and J. E. Sader, Normal 
and Torsional Spring Constants of Atomic Force Microscope Cantilevers, Review of 
Scientific Instruments 75, 1988 (2004). 

[45] M. Tripathi, F. Awaja, R. A. Bizao, S. Signetti, E. Iacob, G. Paolicelli, S. Valeri, A. Dalton, 
and N. M. Pugno, Friction and Adhesion of Different Structural Defects of Graphene, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 44614 (2018). 

[46] A. Zambudio, E. Gnecco, J. Colchero, R. Pérez, J. Gómez-Herrero, and C. Gómez-Navarro, 
Fine Defect Engineering of Graphene Friction, Carbon 182, 735 (2021). 

[47] Z. Deng, N. N. Klimov, S. D. Solares, T. Li, H. Xu, and R. J. Cannara, Nanoscale 
Interfacial Friction and Adhesion on Supported versus Suspended Monolayer and 
Multilayer Graphene, Langmuir 29, 235 (2013). 

[48] U. D. Schwarz, O. Zwörner, P. Köster, and R. Wiesendanger, Quantitative Analysis of the 
Frictional Properties of Solid Materials at Low Loads. I. Carbon Compounds, Phys. Rev. B 
56, 6987 (1997). 


27 

 

[49] N. Manini, G. Mistura, G. Paolicelli, E. Tosatti, and A. Vanossi, Current Trends in the 
Physics of Nanoscale Friction, Advances in Physics: X 2, 569 (2017). 

[50] T. Filleter, J. L. McChesney, A. Bostwick, E. Rotenberg, K. V. Emtsev, Th. Seyller, K. 
Horn, and R. Bennewitz, Friction and Dissipation in Epitaxial Graphene Films, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 102, 086102 (2009). 

[51] C. Xu, Z. Ye, and P. Egberts, Friction Hysteretic Behavior of Supported Atomically Thin 
Nanofilms, Npj 2D Mater Appl 7, 1 (2023). 

[52] A. Vanossi, N. Manini, M. Urbakh, S. Zapperi, and E. Tosatti, Colloquium : Modeling 
Friction: From Nanoscale to Mesoscale, Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 529 (2013). 

[53] M. H. Müser, M. Urbakh, and M. O. Robbins, Statistical Mechanics of Static and Low-
Velocity Kinetic Friction, in Advances in Chemical Physics, edited by I. Prigogine and S. A. 
Rice (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2003), pp. 187–272. 

[54] A. Vanossi and O. M. Braun, Driven Dynamics of Simplified Tribological Models, J. Phys.: 
Condens. Matter 19, 305017 (2007). 

[55] S. Plimpton, Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short- Range Molecular Dynamics, 44 (n.d.). 
[56] D. W. Brenner, O. A. Shenderova, J. A. Harrison, S. J. Stuart, B. Ni, and S. B. Sinnott, A 
Second-Generation Reactive Empirical Bond Order (REBO) Potential Energy Expression 
for Hydrocarbons, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 14, 783 (2002). 

[57] M. de Jong, W. Chen, T. Angsten, A. Jain, R. Notestine, A. Gamst, M. Sluiter, C. K. Ande, 
S. van der Zwaag, J. J. Plata, C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, G. Ceder, K. A. Persson, and M. Asta, 
Charting the Complete Elastic Properties of Inorganic Crystalline Compounds, Sci Data 2, 
150009 (2015). 

[58] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, 
D. Skinner, G. Ceder, and K. A. Persson, Commentary: The Materials Project: A Materials 
Genome Approach to Accelerating Materials Innovation, APL Materials 1, 011002 (2013). 

[59] Y. Mo, K. T. Turner, and I. Szlufarska, Friction Laws at the Nanoscale, Nature 457, 1116 
(2009). 

[60] C. M. Almeida, R. Prioli, B. Fragneaud, L. G. Cançado, R. Paupitz, D. S. Galvão, M. De 
Cicco, M. G. Menezes, C. A. Achete, and R. B. Capaz, Giant and Tunable Anisotropy of 
Nanoscale Friction in Graphene, Sci Rep 6, 31569 (2016). 

 

 


