 
1

Evidence for Near Ambient Superconductivity in the Lu-N-H 

System 

Nilesh P. Salke1, Alexander C. Mark1, Muhtar Ahart1, Russell J. Hemley1, 2, 3 

1Department of Physics, 2Department of Chemistry, 3Department of Earth and Environmental 

Sciences, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607 USA 

 

The possibility of superconductivity at ambient pressure and temperature has been a long-standing 
dream in condensed matter science. The past few years have been witness to significant 
breakthroughs in this area with the discovery of novel hydrogen-rich materials exhibiting 
superconductivity in the vicinity of room temperature under pressure.1-6 In this effort, experiments 
performed by different groups and broad agreement of the reported very high critical temperatures 
(Tc) have been key to advancing the field. For example, the discovery of the superconducting 
superhydride LaH10 with its Tc of 260 K at megabar pressures by Somayazulu et al.1 was 
subsequently confirmed by Drozdov et al.2 Later, several groups reported Tc at comparable 
pressures in related Y-H superhydrides,3-5 and recent work has confirmed the discovery of 
superconductivity in the C-S-H system at similar temperatures but at lower, but still megabar, 
pressures.6  

Recently, Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 reported room-temperature superconductivity of 294 K at 
a remarkably low pressure of 10 kbar in the Lu-N-H system. However, several groups have 
reported they are unable to reproduce these results and have asserted that there is no 
superconductivity in the Lu-N-H system.8-11 In addition, theoretical studies have not been able to 
explain these results (e.g., Ref. 12). Measurements of zero electrical resistance and perfect 
diamagnetism are required to prove superconductivity in a material, and both independently 
confirmed by other groups. To this end, we have carried out a series of studies of phases in the Lu-
N-H system at the conditions of the reported very high Tc superconductivity. As a first step in 
resolving this controversy, here we report electrical transport measurements on Lu-N-H that 
closely match both the previously reported Tc values near room temperature and the pressure 
dependence of the critical temperature.7  

We obtained samples synthesized by the University of Rochester group and prepared for electrical 
resistance measurements in diamond anvil cells (DACs) as described by Dasenbrock-Gammon et 
al.7 We independently characterized the electrical transport and other properties of the samples in 
our laboratory at the University of Illinois Chicago and at facilities at Argonne National Laboratory. 
The four-probe electrical resistance measurements were carried out as a function of temperature at 
four different pressures from 8.5 kbar to 23 kbar (see Fig. 1). Because of the small size of the 
sample (and therefore the signal), the measurements were performed using phase-sensitive 
detection, i.e., with a lock-in amplifier to monitor the magnitude of the voltage across the sample. 
The signal was then converted to a resistance amplitude |R|, which is plotted in Fig. 1. In all runs, 
sharp drops of more than 5 orders of magnitude were observed at critical temperatures, with a 
maximum Tc of 276 K at 15 kbar. Technical details on the experimental setup and resistance 
calculations are provided in the Supplementary Information (SI). 


 
2

 

Figure 1. Temperature dependence of resistance |R| of a Lu-N-H sample at various pressures. Multiple 
drops in resistance at 8.5 kbar can be attributed to initial sample inhomogeneity that was reduced with 

subsequent thermal cycling (see SI). The inset shows an image of the sample in a DAC at 2 kbar. 

Figure 2 compares the pressure dependence of Tc of this sample with the data reported by 
Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 There is good agreement between the two data sets, with small 
differences attributed pressure gradients that were directly measured from different ruby grains in 
the sample chamber. In situ confocal Raman measurements of the sample in the DAC are consistent 
with Compound A identified in Ref. 7 as Fm-3m LuH3-xNy (see SI). In addition, these spatially 
resolved spectra collected after transport measurements at 23 kbar showed little variation across 
the sample, indicating a single dominant phase.  

In contrast to the above results, Ming et al.8 reported measurements on Lu-N-H samples they had 
synthesized and found no evidence of superconductivity over a temperature range of 10-350 K and 
pressures up to ~ 40 GPa. The synthesis method described in Ref. 8 used NH4Cl and CaH2 with a 
2:8 ratio as nitrogen and hydrogen sources to react with lutetium metal at 20 kbar and 573-623 K, 
whereas Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 described using a 1:99 nitrogen/hydrogen gas mixture to 
react with lutetium foil at 20 kbar and 338 K. On the other hand, Zhang et al.10 reported using the 
synthesis method described in Ref. 7, but also found no evidence for superconductivity. 
Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 reported that during the course of their study of the Lu-N-H system, 
the synthesis success rate for producing superconducting samples by the described method was 
35%. Altogether, these results indicate successful synthesis of the superconducting material is 
strongly dependent on details of sample preparation, and that further study and optimization of 
these procedures are needed. 


 
3

Additional transport measurements provide insight on this sample variability. R-T measurements 
on another sample obtained from the University of Rochester group are shown in Fig. 3. Similar 
to the results of Ming et al.8, no abrupt drop in |R| was observed above 80 K. This sample showed 
Tc of 240 K at 8 kbar and was synthesized in 2021 and had apparently degraded over a period of 
time. Interestingly, the non-superconducting samples measured in this work and reported by Ming 
et al.8 exhibit a resistance maximum as a function of temperature. In our sample, the maximum |R| 
is observed at 230 K, below which resistance gradually decreases. A similar trend is observed for 
all measurements in the curves in Ref. 8. This turnover suggests an intriguing interplay of insulator-
metal transitions as a function of temperature in the Lu-N-H system reminiscent of those found in 
early studies of lanthanide hydrides at ambient pressure.13 

Superconductivity in Lu-N-H could be sensitive to the concentration of nitrogen doping. For 
hydrides, nitrogen-doping has been shown to be a promising approach to enhance the 
superconducting properties.  Evidence for variable Tc in LaH10 may be due to different degrees of 
nitrogen doping, which can enhance Tc to room temperature.1, 14 Our recent theoretical study 
indicates that the electronic properties expected to give rise to the high Tc superconductivity are 
strongly dependent on the structure, stoichiometry, and N-H-vacancy ordering of the material, i.e., 
in specific superlattices based on Fm-3m LuH3-xNy.15 This sensitivity of the electronic structure 
with respect to crystal structure and atomic ordering indicates that creating the superconductor 
may be strongly dependent on synthesis conditions, including annealing, consistent with the 
suggestions above. Additional routes for synthesis of this intriguing material are being explored 
along with additional characterization and tests of superconductivity. 

 

Figure 2. Pressure dependence of Tc in the Lu-N-H system from this work (red) and reported by 

Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 


 
4

 

Figure 3. Normalized resistance measurements of Lu-N-H samples in which the resistance was not observed 
to drop to zero.  This work (black) 8 kbar data, Rmax of 414 mΩ at 240 K and Rmin of 373 mΩ at 159 K. The 
gap in the data is due to the presence of a large amount of environmental noise in the laboratory. Ming et 
al. (red) 11 kbar, Rmax of 86.9 mΩ at 306 K and Rmin of 78.3 mΩ at 28.0 K; Ming et al. (blue) 4 kbar data, 
Rmax of 237 mΩ at 274 K and Rmin of 185 mΩ at 24.8 K.8 

 
Acknowledgements 

We are grateful to R. Dias for providing the Lu-N-H samples, Q. Li and H. Wen for sharing their 
data files, D. Kuntzelman and R. Sellers for help with the equipment, and Y. J. Ryu for help with 
the Raman measurements at GSECARS. This research was supported by the NSF (DMR-2104881) 
and DOE-NNSA through the Chicago/DOE Alliance Center (DE-NA0003975). Use of the 
GSECARS Raman Lab System was supported by the NSF (EAR-1531583). 

Data Availability 

Data supporting the findings of this study are available from the public link 
https://zenodo.org/record/8020419. 

References 

1. Somayazulu, M.;  Ahart, M.;  Mishra, A. K.;  Geballe, Z. M.;  Baldini, M.;  Meng, Y.;  Struzhkin, V. V.; 

Hemley, R. J., Evidence for superconductivity above 260 K in lanthanum superhydride at megabar 
pressures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 122, 027001. 

2. Drozdov, A. P.;  Kong, P. P.;  Minkov, V. S.;  Besedin, S. P.;  Kuzovnikov, M. A.;  Mozaffari, S.;  Balicas, 

L.;  Balakirev, F. F.;  Graf, D. E.;  Prakapenka, V. B.;  Greenberg, E.;  Knyazev, D. A.;  Tkacz, M.; 
Eremets, M. I., Superconductivity at 250 K in lanthanum hydride under high pressures. Nature 2019, 
569, 528-531. 


 
5

3. Snider, E.;  Dasenbrock-Gammon, N.;  McBride, R.;  Wang, X.;  Meyers, N.;  Lawler, K. V.;  Zurek, 

E.;  Salamat, A.; Dias, R. P., Synthesis of yttrium superhydride superconductor with a transition 
temperature up to 262 K by catalytic hydrogenation at high pressures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 126, 
117003. 

4. Troyan, I. A.;  Semenok, D. V.;  Kvashnin, A. G.;  Sadakov, A. V.;  Sobolevskiy, O. A.;  Pudalov, V. M.;  

Ivanova, A. G.;  Prakapenka, V. B.;  Greenberg, E.;  Gavriliuk, A. G.;  Lyubutin, I. S.;  Struzhkin, V. V.;  
Bergara, A.;  Errea, I.;  Bianco, R.;  Calandra, M.;  Mauri, F.;  Monacelli, L.;  Akashi, R.; Oganov, A. 
R., Anomalous high-temperature superconductivity in YH6. Adv. Mater. 2021, 2021, 2006832. 

5. Kong, P. P.;  Minkov, V. S.;  Kuzovnikov, M. A.;  Besedin, S. P.;  Drozdov, A. P.;  Mozaffari, S.;  Balicas, 

L.;  Balakirev, F. F.;  Prakapenka, V. B.; Greenberg, E., Superconductivity up to 243 K in yttrium 
hydrides under high pressure. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 1. 

6. Pasan, H.;  Snider, E.;  Munasinghe, S.;  Dissanayake, S. E.;  Salke, N. P.;  Ahart, M.;  Khalvashi-Sutter, 

N.;  Smith, G. A.;  Dasenbrock-Gammon, N.;  McBride, R.;  Mostafaeipour, F.;  Smith, D.;  Cortés, S. 
V.;  Xiao, Y.;  Kenney-Benson, C.;  Park, C.;  Prakapenka, V. B.;  Chariton, S.;  Lawler, K. V.;  
Somayazulu, M.;  Liu, G.;  Hemley, R. J.;  Salamat, A.; Dias, R. P., Observation of conventional near 
room temperature superconductivity in carbonaceous sulfur hydride. arXiv:2302.08622. 

7. Dasenbrock-Gammon, N.;  Snider, E.;  McBride, R.;  Pasan, H.;  Durkee, D.;  Khalvashi-Sutter, N.;  

Munasinghe, S.;  Dissanayake, S. E.;  Lawler, K. V.; Salamat, A., Evidence of near-ambient 
superconductivity in a N-doped lutetium hydride. Nature 2023, 615, 244-250. 

8. Ming, X.;  Zhang, Y.-J.;  Zhu, X.;  Li, Q.;  He, C.;  Liu, Y.;  Huang, T.;  Liu, G.;  Zheng, B.; Yang, H., 

Absence of near-ambient superconductivity in LuH2±xNy. Nature 2023,  

       https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06162-w. 
9. Cai, S.;  Guo, J.;  Shu, H.;  Yang, L.;  Wang, P.;  Zhou, Y.;  Zhao, J.;  Han, J.;  Wu, Q.;  Yang, W.;  Xiang, 

T.;  Mao, H.-K.; Sun, L., No evidence of superconductivity in a compressed sample prepared from 
lutetium foil and H2/N2 gas mixture. Matter Rad. Extremes 2023, 8, 048001. 

10. Zhang, Y.-J.;  Ming, X.;  Li, Q.;  Zhu, X.;  Zheng, B.;  Liu, Y.;  He, C.;  Yang, H.; Wen, H.-H., Pressure 

induced color change and evolution of metallic behavior in nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride. Science 
China Phys. Mech. Astron. 2023, 66, 287411. 

11. Xing, X.;  Wang, C.;  Yu, L.;  Xu, J.;  Zhang, C.;  Zhang, M.;  Huang, S.;  Zhang, X.;  Yang, B.; Chen, 

X., Observation of non-superconducting phase changes in LuH2±xNy. arXiv:2303.17587. 

12. Ferreira, P. P.;  Conway, L. J.;  Cucciari, A.;  Di Cataldo, S.;  Giannessi, F.;  Kogler, E.;  Eleno, L. T.;  

Pickard, C. J.;  Heil, C.; Boeri, L., Search for ambient superconductivity in the Lu-NH system. arXiv: 
2304.04447. 

13. Shinar, J.;  Dehner, B.;  Barnes, R. G.; Beaudry, B. J., Anomalous resistivity peaks, localization 

transitions, and the electronic structure of substoichiometric lanthanum trihydrides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1990, 64, 563-566. 

14. Ge, Y.;  Zhang, F.; Hemley, R. J., Room-temperature superconductivity in boron- and nitrogen-doped 

lanthanum superhydride. Phys. Rev. B 2021, 104, 214505. 

15. Denchfield, A.;  Park, H.; Hemley, R. J., Novel electronic structure of nitrogen-doped lutetium hydrides. 

arXiv:2305.18196. 

 
 


 
6

Supplementary Information 

Experimental Details 

We first discuss the Raman spectra of the Lu-N-H sample, which were recorded with a 660 nm 
excitation laser at GSECARS (Sector 13, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory).  
Figure S1 shows examples of spectra collected from various locations in the Lu-N-H sample as 
indicated in the image. The Raman spectra of the Lu-N-H sample match those identified as 
Compound A shown in the Extended Data Figure 1a in Dasenbrock-Gammon et. al.1 

 

Figure S1. Raman spectra map of superconducting Lu-N-H sample measured in this study. The reflecting 
light image shows the Lu-N-H sample at 23 kbar and the Raman measurement locations. Highly reflecting 

areas correspond to places where the electrodes are in direct contact with the upper diamond anvil. 

In all runs, four electrical contacts were connected to the edges of the sample within the DAC (Fig. 
1, inset), with a fifth probe connected to the gasket to check for possible shorts to the cell. The 
resistance between probes was on the order of 5 W, and the resistance from probes to the gasket 
and to the pressure cell body overloaded the multimeter (R > 1 GW). The cell was held in a custom 
vacuum-insulated cryostat (Cryo-Industries) with a copper ring with liquid nitrogen continuously 
flowing through channels in the sample mount. During cooling the liquid nitrogen flow rate was 
adjusted to maintain a cooling rate of approximately 0.25 K/minute. During measurements on 
warming, the liquid nitrogen flow was shut off and the sample was allowed to warm up naturally 
at approximately 0.3 K/minute. 

Thermal insulation was provided using a molecular drag pump (Adixen Drytel 1025) to reduce the 
pressure inside the cryostat to <0.1 mTorr as measured using a standard gauge (Convectron) and 
vacuum gauge controller (Granville-Phillips 307). Temperature was measured using two diode 
sensors, with one mounted on the cell body and one mounted on the copper cooling ring. During 
cooling, the copper ring cooled much faster than the DAC resulting in a temperature gradient 
between the ring and sample. Differences of up to 20 K were observed. During warming, the 


 
7

temperature difference between the cell and copper ring did not exceed 2 K, indicating that 
temperatures recorded during warming were representative of the actual sample temperature. 
Figure S2 shows the temperature dependence of the resistance during cooling and warming cycles 
at 8.5 kbar with a noticeable thermal lag during cooling. 

The pressure was measured using the standard ruby fluorescence method at ambient temperature 
after the completion of the warming cycle. The R-T relation at 8.5 kbar indicates two large drops 
in resistance which were not present in higher pressure measurements (Fig. S2). We observed 
similar behavior in experiments on LaH10.2 We attribute this effect to initial sample inhomogeneity 
where the local current density in a superconducting region of the sample near the transition 
exceeds the bulk critical current density of the material, destroying superconductivity. Upon 
further cooling, the critical current density is expected to increase,3, 4 thereby further reducing the 
effect.  

 

Figure S2. Comparison between cooling and warming cycles at 8.5 kbar. Only data collected during 

warming were used in the analysis. 

A current-regulated AC signal was injected into two adjacent electrical contacts. The signals were 
generated using a DC and AC current source (Keithley 6221) with a sinusoidal waveform and zero 
DC offset with amplitudes ranging from 7.5 µA to 750 µA and a frequency of 17 Hz. A differential 
voltage signal was measured across the other two adjacent probes. The measured signal was fed 
into a high input-impedance transformer preamplifier (Stanford Research SR554) with the gain set 
to 500X. The preamplifier signal was then sent to a 500 kHz DSP lock-in amplifier (Stanford 
Research SR860). The sample itself was not electrically connected to earth ground, i.e., for the 
superconducting sample all electrical measurements were differential and floating with respect to 


 
8

the building ground. The cryostat body and the measuring equipment were referenced to the 
building ground for shielding. 

For the non-superconducting sample shown in Fig. 3, the current was provided by connecting one 
contact to a voltage-regulated AC output with an amplitude of 500 mV and a frequency ranging 
from 17 Hz – 1 kHz. An adjacent contact was connected to ground through a 1 kW resistor, which 
was several orders of magnitude larger than the sample resistance, ensuring the current was 
essentially constant (±0.5%). The transformer preamplifier was not used, which resulted in more 
environmental noise.   

The SR860 lock-in amplifier was fed a reference modulation frequency from the Keithley 6221 
internal oscillator. The time constant for the integration stage was set to 1 second and the internal 
low-pass filter was set to 24 dB. The lock-in amplifier was set to automatically adjust the range 
and sensitivity of the measurement. For the normal (non-superconducting) state the voltage from 
the pre-amplifier was on the order of 100 mV for measurements using a 750 µA current, and 10 
mV for those using the 75 µA current. The signal in the superconducting state was below the noise 
floor of the instrument with a measured value on the order of 10-6 mV. All data was collected using 
a custom LabVIEW program and no post-processing of the data was performed. 

Comparison with Previous Results 

Figure S3 compares R-T curves in this study with previous results by Dasenbrok-Gammon et al.1  
The sample we measured had significantly higher resistance in the normal state compared to those 
reported in the previous paper.1  Different ambient temperature resistance values are attributed to 
different sample sizes. The noise in the resistance oscillates around some finite positive offset 
arising from the nature of the measurement which utilized a lock-in amplifier setup to record the 
resistivity as opposed to a pure DC (e.g., van der Pauw) measurement. The lock-in amplifier 
reports the amplitude of the measured signal |R|, resulting in measurements clustering around a 
positive offset on the order of the absolute value of the noise floor instead of around zero resistance. 
This is discussed in further detail below. 

Because of the low signal levels associated with the small DAC sample and low current required 
for the measurement, phase-sensitive detection was used to monitor a voltage across the sample 
with a lock-in amplifier. This method was used, for example, in similar to methods employed in 
Ref. 1 and some experiments described in Ref. 2. Though lock-in detection greatly suppresses 
noise, it introduces a phase ambiguity when only the magnitude of the voltage |ΔV| difference is 
recorded. Using |ΔV| to compute the resistance (|R|) results in a positive offset being observed even 
in a zero-resistance material (i.e., superconductor). This offset scales with the noise level. 


 
9

 

Figure S3. Temperature dependence of resistance |R| from this work compared with those reported by 

Dasenbrock-Gammon et. al.1 a) Full scale. b) Magnified scale near zero |R|. 

Phase-sensitive detection devices such as lock-in amplifiers exploit the fact that sinusoidal signals 
are orthogonal up to a phase.5,5 Lock-in amplifiers extract the amplitude (|A|) and phase shift (𝜃) 
of a signal modulated with a known carrier wave, greatly increasing the signal to noise ratio (SNR) 
even in extremely noisy environments. In this study a sinusoidal current, 𝐼(𝑡) = |𝐼!"| sin(𝜔𝑡), was 
injected into the sample. The magnitude of the AC voltage between two edges of the sample that 
were in-phase (𝑉!#), and in quadrature (𝑉$%) where 𝜃 = 90&, were measured. Ohm’s law was used 


 
10

to calculate in-phase and quadrature resistances. A complex resistance can then be defined, 
|𝑅|𝑒!' = 𝑅!# + 𝑖𝑅$,where the magnitude |𝑅| is typically reported as the resistance.  

 

Figure S4. (a) Temperature dependence of the in-phase component of the complex resistance at various 
pressures. Inset: superconducting region over a smaller signal range. (b) Temperature dependance of the 
quadrature component of the complex resistance at various pressures. Inset: superconducting region over 

a smaller signal range. 

 


 
11

Being a vector magnitude, |R| is positive definite. If the SNR >> 1, as is typically the case with 
measurements of ohmic materials, this has no impact on resistance measurements. As the SNR 
approaches 1, that noise can result in random fluctuations causing a negative ∆𝑉. In this situation, 
using |𝑅| as a measure of the physical resistance is inaccurate; instead of fluctuating around the 
actual resistance, the data fluctuates around a positive offset. As the SNR drops below 1 this offset 
increases. In a superconductor the drop in voltage across a sample is 0, which results in a 𝑆𝑁𝑅 =

∆)

)!"#$% ≪ 1 irrespective of how little noise is present in the measurement. Instead of the resistances 

fluctuating around zero, using |∆𝑉| to compute |R| results in values that are always positive and 
clustered around an offset proportional to the noise level of the measurement (Fig. S3b).  

The temperature dependance of the in-phase and quadrature voltages reveal the signals 
approaching and crossing zero at Tc (Fig. S4). The negative offset in 𝑉!# is sensitive to the noise 
level in the setup. Increasing the magnitude of the carrier current is observed to both reduce the 
noise and shift the offset closer to zero. The 8.5 kbar and 15 kbar runs (Fig. S3b) were performed 
using a modulation current amplitude of 750 µA, greatly reducing the noise and causing the in-
phase resistance to center around zero. For the 23 kbar and 14 kbar experiments a current of 75 
µA was used, resulting in more noise that distorted the signal. 

References 

1. Dasenbrock-Gammon, N.;  Snider, E.;  McBride, R.;  Pasan, H.;  Durkee, D.;  Khalvashi-Sutter, N.;  

Munasinghe, S.;  Dissanayake, S. E.;  Lawler, K. V.; Salamat, A., Evidence of near-ambient 
superconductivity in a N-doped lutetium hydride. Nature 2023, 615, 244-250. 

2. Somayazulu, M.;  Ahart, M.;  Mishra, A. K.;  Geballe, Z. M.;  Baldini, M.;  Meng, Y.;  Struzhkin, V. V.; 

Hemley, R. J., Evidence for superconductivity above 260 K in lanthanum superhydride at megabar 
pressures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 122, 027001. 

3. Dew-Hughes, D., The critical current of superconductors: an historical review. Low Temp. Phys. 2001, 

27, 713-722. 

4. Ekin, J., Experimental Techniques for Low-temperature Measurements: Cryostat Design, Material 

Properties and Superconductor Critical-current Testing. (Oxford University Press, 2006). 

5. Michels, W. C.; Curtis, N. L., A pentode lock‐in amplifier of high frequency selectivity. Rev. Sci. 

Instrum. 1941, 12, 444-447. 

 

 

 


