1

Platinum-adsorbed Defective 2D Monolayer 
Boron Nitride: A Promising Electrocatalyst 

for O2 Reduction Reaction 

Lokesh Yadav1 and Srimanta Pakhira1, 2*

1 Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational Materials Science 
Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IIT Indore),

Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore-453552, Madhya Pradesh, India.

2 Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational Materials Science 
Laboratory, Centre for Advanced Electronics (CAE), Indian Institute of Technology Indore

(IIT Indore), Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore-453552, Madhya Pradesh, India.

*Corresponding author: spakhira@iiti.ac.in (or) spakhirafsu@gmail.com

Abstract

The wide bandgap and strong covalent bonds of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) had 

long been thought to be chemically inert. Due to its inertness with saturated robust covalent 

bonds, the pristine 2D monolayer hBN cannot be functionalized for applications of energy 

conversion. Therefore, it is necessary to make the 2D hBN chemically reactive for potential 

applications. Here, we have computationally designed a single nitrogen (N) and boron (B) di-

vacancy of the 2D monolayer hBN, noted by VBN defective-BN (d-BN), to activate the 

chemical reactivity, which is an effective strategy to use the d-BN for potential applications

especially in electrochemistry. Single Pt atom adsorbed on the defective area of the VBN d-BN 

acts as a single-atom catalyst (SAC) which exhibits distinctive performances for O2 reduction 

reaction (ORR). First-principles based dispersion-corrected periodic hybrid Density Functional 

Theory (DFT-D) method has been employed to investigate the equilibrium structure and 

properties of the Pt-adsorbed 2D monolayer defective boron nitride (Pt-d-BN). The present 

study shows the semiconducting character of Pt-d-BN with an electronic bandgap of 1.30 eV, 

which is an essential aspect of the ORR. The ORR mechanism on the surface of 2D monolayer 

Pt-d-BN follows a 4e- reduction route because of the low barriers to OOH formation and 

dissociation, H2O2 instability, and water production on the Pt-d-BN surface. Here, both the 

dissociative and associative ORR mechanisms have been investigated, and it is found that the 

associative mechanism with the ORR pathway is more thermodynamically favorable.  


2

Therefore, it can be mentioned here that the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN exhibits a high selectivity 

for the four-electron reduction pathway. According to the calculations of the relative adsorption 

energy of each step in ORR, the Pt-d-BN is anticipated to exhibit substantial catalytic activity. 

These findings are significant because they provide an additional understanding of the ORR 

process on the metal atom-adsorbed d-BN and a new method for producing inexpensive 

materials with strong electrocatalytic activity for various applications of fuel cells. 

Introduction

Now-a-days, researchers have an emphasis on working for clean and renewable energy 

sources to replace traditional ones, and most of the energy sources in our society are 

conventional energy sources such as coal, petroleum, and compressed natural gas (CNG). One 

of the drawbacks of using these conventional energy sources is the emission of greenhouse 

gases. New methods of producing clean and green energy, high-capacity energy devices, and 

effective manufacturing are needed to address problems like global climate change and energy 

requirements of the future. Fuel cells and metal-air batteries, which are used in solar cells, 

electric vehicles, and other applications, are promising technologies to meet future energy 

requirements.1–4 These new energy sources have a low operating temperature, high power 

density, high energy conversion efficiency, and nearly zero emission of greenhouse gases. An 

electrochemical device (such as a fuel cell) uses two redox processes to transform the chemical 

energy of a fuel into electrical energy. The crucial step in the fuel cells is the oxygen reduction 

reaction (ORR), which dramatically affects how energy is converted from chemical energy to 

electrical energy. Two different mechanisms, a two-electron transfer reaction and a four-

electron transfer reaction mechanism that yields H2O2 and H2O as a product, respectively, can 

be used to perform ORR.5 Because of the higher efficiency of the four-electron (4e-) transfer 

reaction, it is used to promote the pathway of O2 into H2O in fuel cells. The reaction pathway 

of the four-electron transfer mechanism is the dominant phenomenon for catalysts made up of 

Platinum.4,6

The cathodic ORR is one of the crucial energy conversion reactions in proton exchange 

membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) with a significant performance since it has relatively slower 

kinetics than the anodic reaction.7 It should be mentioned here that low price and remarkable 

catalyst performance are very important for the cathode ORR of fuel cells as the ORR process 

is well known to have sluggish reaction kinetics. Therefore, the development of high-


3

performance ORR catalysts is essential and requires a better understanding of the underlying 

ORR mechanism. Pt-based ORR electrocatalysts are widely used to accelerate the ORR 

kinetics as they have a lower overpotential value.6 Although, noble metal-free catalysts have 

been studied recently, especially, Pt-based catalysts are still more efficient in terms of catalytic 

performance and long-term durability.8–11 The widespread commercialization of Pt-based 

catalysts is severely hindered by their high cost. In a recent theoretical study, a new class of 

ORR electrocatalysts was developed consisting of the Pt alloyed with intermediate transition 

metals like Sc or Y, and they could have more significant activity than the pristine Pt 

electrodes.12

New possibilities to improve the efficiencies of catalysts have opened in recent years 

due to the emergence of two-dimensional (2D) materials. These 2D materials have a higher 

value of the specific surface area and surface atomic ratio than traditional materials, which is 

particularly useful in the catalysis industry.13 A large number of research groups have reported 

the production of 2D ultrathin Pt-containing nanosheets and monolayers demonstrating 

outstanding ORR catalytic activity compared to commercial catalysts.14–17 Recent studies have 

shown that metal-free carbon materials, especially N-doped and B-doped carbon materials, are 

efficient catalysts for ORR. Due to the ability of N-species to take electrons, which results in 

an overall positive charge on the nearby C atom on which O2 is adsorbed.18 This N-doped 

carbon has improved ORR catalytic activity.18 On the other hand, because of the B atom 

electron-accepting properties, there is an adsorption of O2 on the B atom in the case of B-doped 

carbon.19 The enhanced ORR catalytic activity was achieved on a carbon electrode which was

doped with B and N atoms.19–21

2D monolayer hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) with a geometrical structure resembling 

graphene can be created by replacing all the carbon atoms in graphene with boron (B) and 

nitrogen (N) atoms. Recently, an N-doped hBN monolayer has been demonstrated theoretically 

to be capable of electrocatalytic ORR.22,23 To use hBN-based materials as an electrocatalyst for 

ORR, there is a requirement for electronic communication to the hBN surface, but the pristine

hBN is an insulator with a broad bandgap that ranges from 3.6 to 7.1 eV (depending on the 

experimental techniques).22–25 Since hBN has a wider energy gap than graphene, it is more 

difficult to make it potentially applicable. Several approaches have also been employed, 

including functional group adsorption, metal doping and hydrogenation.26,27 Due to the sp3

bonding, we can say possibly a size mismatch between the metal atom and the B/N atom, these 

approaches bring the structural deformation of the pristine 2D planar geometry of the hBN. 


4

Additionally, it is demonstrated that the conducting edge states and vacancy defects in the hBN 

give rise to semiconducting characteristics. Hence, the hBN sheet supported by conducting 

materials could function as an ORR-active electrocatalyst.

The hBN nanosheet, a structural counterpart of graphene, has also drawn great interest 

because of its special characteristics and vital applications.28–30 2D monolayer hBN sheet, for 

illustration, demonstrates excellent thermal stability and high electrical resistance. More 

precisely, the hBN sheet still maintains its stability at temperatures up to 1000 K, whereas 

graphene-based materials maintain its stability up to 800 K.31 Further a theoretical research 

revealed that boron monovacancies have more formation energies than nitrogen 

monovacancies.32 Therefore, they are more energetically favorable. The chemical reactivity of 

2D hBN monolayer considerably has increased due to these defect sites and by encasing their 

defect sites with metal atoms.32–34 Due to its chemical inertness behavior, the defect-free hBN 

sheet has minimal interaction with the deposited metal atoms. The defective BN sheet may be 

more helpful for creating new catalysts by metal atom doping or adsorption.32–35

Feng et al. reported that the surface-bound metal nanostructures, especially substrate 

confined single metal atom, exhibit improved H2 evolution catalytic performance.33 Very 

recently, Lei et al. experimentally showed that the formation of different vacancies in the d-

BN could be controllably functionalized with single metal atoms by the spontaneous reduction 

of metal cations which are active for the H2 evolution reaction.36 They synthesized Pt-adsorbed

d-BN material and computationally studied the stability and properties of both the Pt-d-BN and 

d-BN materials. It should be mentioned that the 2D monolayer d-BN material can reduce the 

metal cations.36 Following their work, we have computationally designed a pristine 2D sheet 

(monolayer) of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), a single nitrogen (N) and boron (B) di-vacancy 

of the 2D monolayer hBN (3x3 supercell), noted by VBN defective-BN (d-BN), and Pt-adsorbed

2D monolayer defective boron nitride (Pt-d-BN) material, as shown in Figure 1. It is well 

known that the 2D pristine hBN nanomaterial cannot act as an effective electrocatalyst for the 

ORR in a direct manner, and it has a large electronic band gap (Eg), making it an electrical 

insulator. It has an insufficient number of active catalytic sites, which prevents it from practical 

utilization towards the catalytic reactions. The pristine 2D monolayer h-BN often contains 

various types of defects, such as vacancies, interstitial atoms, dislocations, grain boundaries, 

and edges. A good number of studies have already been published for single-atom doping in 

the pristine 2D hBN, but, unfortunately, d-BN has not been too much explored and still, there 

is an opportunity to investigate the d-BN with its applications in electrochemistry. With the 


5

introduction of VBN di-vacancy, the 2D monolayer d-BN has become chemically active and 

adsorbed a single Pt atom in the defective region of it.  A single Pt atom has been considered 

to be adsorbed around the defective area of the VBN d-BN followed by the experimental work36, 

and we hypothesize that this single Pt atom has become efficient to reduce the O2 during the 

ORR process and it can act as a single atom catalyst (SAC) towards ORR. In continuation of 

the SAC work, we have studied the ORR using Pt-d-BN material in the present manuscript 

which suggests further to the experimentalists to perform the experiment. The equilibrium 

structure of the Pt adsorbed d-BN was obtained by the first-principles based hybrid B3LYP-

D3 (in short DFT-D)36 method, and the electronic properties (i.e., the electronic band structure, 

position of the Fermi energy level (EF), electronic band gap (Eg), and total density of states 

(DOS)) of the Pt-d-BN material were computed by employing the same DFT-D method. It was 

computationally found that the electronic band gap of the pristine hBN, VBN di-vacancy (i.e.,

defective boron nitride (in short d-BN)), and Pt-d-BN are 6.23 eV, 4.89 eV, and 1.30 eV, 

respectively, obtained by the DFT-D method. After the Pt absorption, the system raises the 

carrier concentration and reduces the electronic band gap from 6.23 eV to 1.30 eV, which in 

turn into the electronic semi-conductivity. This suggests a novel strategy to improve the ORR 

performance of the 2D Pt-d-BN sheet. In the present investigation, both the associative and 

dissociative ORR mechanisms have been studied in detail. All the reaction steps with the 

intermediates involved in the subject reaction have been computed along with significant 

changes in adsorption energy (∆E), relative Gibbs free energy (∆G), electronic band structure 

and DOS of each ORR step. The computed results indicate that the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN 

material has an excellent electrocatalytic activity with a high 4e- reduction pathway selectivity 

where Pt acts as a single atom catalyst (SAC). Hence, we can say that the 2D monolayer Pt-d-

BN material is an efficient electrocatalyst for ORR resulting it promising for fuel cells 

applications in energy technology. The purpose of this work is to predict the properties of the 

Pt-d-BN material with the possible application in fuel cells and proper strategies of elucidating 

the mechanisms of the 2D d-BN materials as electrocatalysts towards ORR.

Methodology and Computational Details

A microscopic understanding of the role of a catalyst in the form of 2D monolayer slab 

structure, molecular and atomic regimes is now possible because of the developments in the 

field of computational materials science. Recent developments in Gaussian basis sets,

Gaussian-types of orbitals (GTOs), pseudopotential, and supercomputers have facilitated 

simulations for probing the surface phenomena of diverse catalysts, analyzing various catalytic 


6

activities, and examining the chemical reaction pathways.37 The reaction intermediates with 

the relative energy barriers have an important role in understanding how an atom adheres to a 

catalytic surface and provides information in many electrocatalytic applications of catalysts.38

Based on the first principles methods, we have employed the periodic hybrid dispersion-

corrected hybrid density functional theory (in short DFT-D) approach to investigate the 

chemical reaction pathway along with the mechanism of ORR taken place on the surface of 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN material. The analysis of the different properties, namely thermodynamical 

properties, electronic properties and also reaction mechanisms of the 2D monolayer structure, 

can be accomplished very well by computational techniques based on quantum mechanics.39,40

(a) Theory and Computational Modeling

First principles-based periodic dispersion-corrected hybrid density functional theory (DFT-

D) technique was used to obtain the equilibrium structure of the 2D pristine hBN monolayer, 

d-BN and Pt-d-BN materials.39,40 To create the 2D d-BN sheet, the equilibrium unit cell of the  

pristine 2D monolayer hBN was increased to a 3 × 3 supercell. Following the previous work,36

a single nitrogen (N) and boron (B) di-vacancy of the 2D monolayer hBN (3x3 supercell), 

noted by VBN defective-BN (d-BN), has been computationally designed, and it has found that 

a single Pt atom has been reduced in the defective area. To put it another way, we used a 

hexagonally symmetric 2D hBN material to simulate a 3 × 3 supercell slab structure to build 

the 2D Pt-adsorbed d-BN monolayer material around the VBN defective area of the d-BN. The 

2D monolayer pristine hBN, VBN defective-BN, and Pt-d-BN materials were computationally

studied to determine the electronic properties, equilibrium structure, and band structure along 

with the total density of states (DOS) employing the same level of theory. The equilibrium 

lattice parameters of the pristine 2D monolayer hBN were found to be a = b = 2.499 Å with 

layer group symmetry “P-6m2”. The values of equilibrium lattice constants of the Pt-d-BN 

were calculated to be a = 7.384 Å, b = 7.572 Å, along with layer group symmetry “P1”. The 

equilibrium structures of the 2D monolayer pristine hBN, VBN d-BN and Pt-d-BN are illustrated 

in Figure 1a-c.


7

Figure 1. (a) The top view of the pristine 2D monolayer hBN, (b) the top view of the 2D monolayer 

VBN defective-BN (VBN d-BN), and (c) the top view of the 2D monolayer platinum-adsorbed VBN

defective-BN (Pt-d-BN) materials computed by the DFT-D method are presented here. (The dotted 

lines with a parallelogram represent the boundary of 3 × 3 supercells.)

(b) Periodic DFT-D Calculations

The periodic hybrid dispersion-corrected density functional theory (DFT-D) method 

B3LYP-D3 (based on first principles) implemented in CRYSTAL17 suite code was used to 

determine the equilibrium structures and properties of the 2D monolayer pristine hBN, VBN

defective-BN, and Pt-d-BN materials studied here.41–44 This CRYSTAL17 software uses 

Gaussian types of atomic basis sets, which is more efficient than plane waves based codes for 

the hybrid DFT-D calculations.45–48 In the current calculations, triple-ζ valence with 

polarization quality (TZVP) Gaussian basis sets were used for the O, H, B, and N atoms, and 

for the Pt atom, we used the Pt doll 2004 basis set with the relativistic effective core potentials 

(ECPs). It is important to consider the weak van der Waals (vdW) dispersion effects during the 

calculations because of the presence of vdW interactions between the atoms in the layers of the 

hBN, VBN defective-BN, and Pt-d-BN nanosheets, as well as among all the atoms. The semi-

empirical Grimme's 3rd order (-D3) corrections of dispersion have been used in this study to 

account for all the long-range vdW interactions. In addition to provide the reliable and 

attractive geometry of the monolayer 2D structure of the systems considered here, DFT-D (i.e., 

B3LYP-D3) is an extremely useful method because of the least effect of spin contamination on 

the energy and density in the current calculations.49–52 In each calculation, the electronic self-

consistency scale was set to 10-7 a.u. Two-dimensional (2D) vacuum slabs were created for 

these materials so that the electrostatic potential could be considered in these computations, 

and the energies were reported in reference to the vacuum. The height of the vacuum cell was 

set to 500 Å (the 2D slab model in the CRYSTAL17 algorithm with no periodicity in the z-

direction).41–44 Hence, the present computations took the vacuum region nearly of the order of 

500 Å. Although this strategy is different from plane-wave codes such as VASP and Quantum 

Espresso but both lead to the same conclusions.

Now, equilibrium geometries, structures, and electronic properties (such as the electronic 

band structures, Fermi energy (EF), electronic band gap (Eg), and the total density of states 


8

(DOS)) of the 2D monolayer structure of pristine hBN, VBN defective-BN, and Pt-d-BN were 

calculated at the same level of theory. All integrations of the first Brillouin zone were sampled 

on 4×4×1 Monkhorst-Pack k-mesh grids for all the systems considered here. A threshold of 10-

7 a.u. was selected as the evaluation point for the convergence of energy, forces, and electron 

density. For all the materials (i.e., the pristine hBN, d-BN, and Pt-d-BN), the highly symmetric 

Γ-M-K-Γ route in the first Brillouin zone was selected as the k-vector path for visualizing the 

band structures. A total number of eight electronic energy bands (number of four valence bands 

and conduction bands) has been drawn around the Fermi energy level (EF). The total DOS was 

computed using the atomic orbitals of the elements B, N, O, H, and Pt. The present work used 

electrostatic potential calculations, i.e., the energy of both the band structures and DOS is 

computed with respect to the vacuum. A visualization code (VESTA)53 was used to graphically 

represent and analyze all the optimized 2D layer structures. 

(c) O2 Reduction Reaction Mechanism

Nørskov and coworkers developed a method for the analysis of several elementary stages, 

including various protonation states to characterize the O2 reduction reaction pathway and they 

proposed the possible reaction pathway.54 The present DFT-D study reveals that the reduced 

Pt in the defective area of the VBN defective-BN (VBN d-BN) surface is the chemically and 

energetically favorable site for O2 adsorption, which is the initial step of the ORR. The 

sequences of the O2 reduction reaction have been explained by both the 2e- and 4e- transfer 

mechanisms. The ORR mechanism is completed by obtaining two different reaction steps, 

which may contain associative or dissociative reaction pathways.55 The associative and 

dissociative reaction steps are represented by Eq. (1) and (2), respectively.

O2 → O2* → 2O* → O* + OH* → O* + H2O (or H2O2) → OH* + H2O → 2H2O              (1)

O2 → O2* → OOH* → O* + H2O (or H2O2) → OH* + H2O → 2H2O                                 (2)      

where * represents an active site of the catalysts, and these active sites adsorb the reaction 

intermediate species throughout the reactions. In the above two equations, the adsorption of 

protons (H+) and electrons (e-) has been ignored. During the ORR process, these 4e- and 2e-

transfer pathways result in the formation of H2O and H2O2 as the final product, respectively. 

We have focused here on both the dissociative and associative mechanisms because it has been 

found that both the mechanisms are thermodynamically and energetically favorable for the 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN material.


9

(D) Equations for Energy Calculations and Thermodynamic Analysis

For the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN, we have calculated the catalytic performance by 

evaluating the adsorption energy of the adsorbate at the catalytic surface at each reaction step 

during the ORR process. Also, the binding energy of protons (H+) and electrons (e-) has been

included in this calculation. The following equation has been used to calculate the adsorption 

energy (Eads) of the species that are present during the ORR process on the adsorption system 

(Pt-d-BN).

Eads = Etotal  ̶ (Eadsorbent + Eadsorbate)

Where Etotal, Eadsorbent, and Eadsorbate are the total energies of the adsorbed system, 

adsorbent (isolated Pt-d-BN sheet), and adsorbate species, respectively, in the gas phase. A 

negative value of Eads suggests that the process is exothermic, and it is occurring because the 

adsorbed oxygenated intermediates are attached to the thermodynamically stable surface of the 

2D monolayer Pt-d-BN. This material has been considered in the present study to explore all 

the reaction steps of ORR with respect to computational hydrogen electrode model (CHE) or 

standard hydrogen electrode (SHE).2,4,54,55 It should be noted here that CHE model is a widely-

accepted approach in the realm of electrochemical reactions and it predominantly addresses the 

thermodynamics of the system.2,4,54,55 We have also calculated the changes of free energy (∆G)

of all the ORR steps on the surface of 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN, determined by ∆G = ∆E + ∆ZPE 

- T∆S + ∆GpH. Where ∆E is the total energy change directly obtain from DFT calculations, 

∆ZPE and ∆S are the zero-point energy difference and the entropy difference between the 

adsorbed state and the gas phase respectively and T is the temperature of the system. ∆GpH is 

the free energy contributions due to variations in H+ concentration, and here we have taken its 

value zero for the acidic medium. It should be mentioned here that the thermodynamic analysis

and Gibbs free energy calculations during the ORR have been performed at room temperature

(T = 298.15 K). In this work, the slab structure of 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN is used as the standard 

reference state for all adsorption energy calculations.

Results and Discussions

At first, we studied the equilibrium structure and electronic properties of the pristine 

2D monolayer structure of the hBN sheet or slab. The 2D equilibrium structure of the hBN is 

depicted in Figures 1a and 2a. The unit cell was expanded three times (3x3 supercell) along the 

x and y directions, and the z-direction remained unchanged, i.e., we created a 3x3 supercell 


10

structure of the pristine 2D monolayer hBN. The B3LYP-D3 method was used to obtain the 

equilibrium structure and band structure along with the total DOS of the pristine 2D monolayer 

hBN, as shown in Figures 2a-c. The results of our present DFT-D investigation reveal that the 

pristine 2D hBN sheet exhibits hexagonal P-6m2 symmetry with lattice constants a = b = 2.449 

Å, α = β = 90˚, and γ = 120o. The equilibrium B-N bond length is about 1.442 Å, and the 

interatomic distance between the nearest neighbors, N-N and B-B, is found to be about 2.49 Å. 

The Fermi energy level (EF) of the pristine 2D hBN sheet was calculated to be at -7.20 eV and 

is represented by a dotted blue line in Figure 2b-c. Calculations of the band structure of the 

pristine 2D monolayer hBN consist of four conduction bands and four valence bands, which 

have been computed and plotted around the Fermi energy level depicted in Figure 2b and 2c. 

It has a direct electronic bandgap (Eg) of about 6.23 eV, which demonstrates the insulating 

properties of the pristine hBN sheet. The total electron density of states (DOS) calculations has 

been performed at the same level of theory as depicted in Figure 2c, demonstrating that the 

electronic band gap of pristine 2D hBN sheet is around 6.23 eV which is consistent with 

obtained band from the band structures calculations, and there is almost negligible electron 

density around the Fermi level. Due to this large band gap, the pristine 2D hBN sheet behaves 

as an insulator. Hence, it can conclude that the 2D monolayer hBN cannot be employed as an 

electrocatalyst to improve the kinetics of ORR in fuel cells.

Figure 2. The equilibrium structure and electronic properties of the 2D monolayer pristine hBN sheet: 

(a) top view, (b) electronic band structure, and (c) total density of states (DOS) are displayed. 

It has been found that the pristine 2D monolayer hBN cannot function as effective 

catalyst for the ORR due to its large electronic bandgap and inertness.36 The performance of 

the 2D hBN can be dramatically improved by creating defects, and the defective boron nitride


11

shows a dependence on the location and distribution of defects, which can reduce the metal 

ions or can adsorb the metal atoms and reduce the metal ions. Here, we have introduced a single 

nitrogen (N) and boron (B) di-vacancy of the 2D monolayer hBN (3x3 supercell), noted by 

VBN defective-BN (d-BN), and studied the structural and electronic properties of this material. 

The 2D equilibrium structure and band structures along with the total DOS of the VBN d-BN, 

are obtained by the B3LYP-D3 method and depicted in Figure 3a-c. The results of our present 

DFT-D investigation reveal that after introducing VBN defects into the 2D pristine hBN sheet, 

the lattice constants were increased, and it was found that the new lattice constants are a = b = 

7.401 Å, α = β = 90˚, and γ = 126.87o with the P1 symmetry. The average B-N bond length 

around the defective area is about 1.459 Å, and the equilibrium B-B and N-N bond lengths are 

about 1.730 Å and 1.569 Å, respectively, at the boundaries of the defective area obtained by 

the same level of theory. The electronic band structures of the VBN d-BN have been computed 

along the highly symmetric Γ-M-K-Γ k-direction in the first Brillouin zone following the 

pristine 2D h-BN for comparison. The Fermi energy level (EF) of the 2D monolayer VBN d-BN

is found at -6.10 eV, which is represented by a dotted blue line in Figure 3b-c. It should be 

noted here that the position of the EF has been shifted by an amount of 1.10 eV towards the 

conduction bands, as displayed in the electronic band structures and total DOS calculations 

displayed in Figure 3b-c. 

Figure 3. The equilibrium structure of 2D monolayer VBN d-BN material: (a) top view, (b) electronic 

band structure, and (c) total density of states (DOS) are displayed.

The present study shows that the value of electronic band gap (Eg) of the VBN d-BN 

sheet has been reduced by an amount of 1.34 eV compared to the pristine 2D hBN, and the 


12

electronic band gap of it is about 4.89 eV, as depicted in Figure 3b, obtained by the DFT-D 

method. The DOS shows the same value of band gap energy and a small value of electron 

density just below the Fermi energy level, as depicted in Figure 3c, resulting in a high band 

gap semi-conductor.  Moreover, it was computationally found that the absorption of a Pt atom 

at the BN-divacancy site of d-BN is energetically preferable compared to the monovacancy 

site. Therefore, we first investigated the equilibrium structure, geometry, and stability of this 

Pt-adsorbed BN-divacancy i.e., 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN. The equilibrium structure reveals that 

the platinum atom has slightly shifted toward the center of the defective region (VBN) and 

formed four covalent bonds with its nearby B and N atoms, which is shown in Figure 1c. As 

the size of the Pt atom is large relative to both the B and N atoms, the adsorbed Pt atom shifts

upward from the plane of the 2D d-BN sheet, which is displayed in Figure 4b. The average 

equilibrium Pt-N and Pt-B bond lengths are 2.04 Å and 2.08 Å, respectively, which is less than 

the total atomic radius of the participating atoms.

Figure 4. (a) The electronic spin densities, (b) side view, (c) electronic band structure, and (d) total 

density of states of the equilibrium structure of 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN are displayed. The yellow color 

represents the positive part of the wave function that corresponds to the up-spin (α-spin) of the electrons, 

and the sky-blue color represents the negative part of the wave function that corresponds to the down-

spin (β-spin) of the electrons in the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material.

We have used the DFT-D technique to study the electron spin density along with an 

equilibrium 2D monolayer structure of the 2D Pt-d-BN material (3x3 supercell).  Figure 4a-b 

represents electronic spin density and a side view of the equilibrium structure of the 2D Pt-d-BN 

sheet. Electron spin density calculations help us to locate the possible sites of unpaired 

electrons, i.e., electron cloud around the defective area in the Pt-d-BN material and give us an 

idea about the active site for a reaction to happen. Then, we calculated the electronic properties 


13

of this material, including its band structure and total DOS, at the equilibrium geometry, which 

is shown in Figures 4c-d. After the absorption of Pt into the 2D monolayer VBN d-BN, the 

values of the lattice constants increased. The new calculated lattice constants are found to be a 

= 7.384 Å, b = 7.572 Å, α = β = 90˚, and γ = 117.70˚ with P1 symmetry obtained by the same 

DFT-D method. The Fermi energy level (EF) is at -5.55 eV, which is moved towards the 

conduction bands as depicted in Figure 4c, and it has been represented by the dotted blue line 

in Figure 4c. It should be mentioned here that the electronic band gap (Eg), which was initially 

around 6.23 eV in the case of 2D pristine hBN monolayer sheet, has now been decreased to 1.3 

eV after Pt absorption. As a result, the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN has become a semiconductor 

with a small band gap around 1.30 eV, as displayed in Figures 4c-d. The lower value of the 

electronic bandgap of the 2D Pt-d-BN materials increases the electron concentration, and it 

improves the electronic semi-conductivity in nature, and it may help to facilitate higher electron 

transfer towards the reactants during the ORR process. This provides a novel strategy to make 

the Pt-adsorbed 2D monolayer d-BN, i.e., Pt-d-BN, for the effective performance of ORR. 

Therefore, the single Pt atom adsorbed in the d-BN can act as an efficient single-atom 

electrocatalyst (SAC) for ORR. Thus, an enhanced electrocatalytic ORR activity is anticipated 

from the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material, which may be useful for fuel cells. The equilibrium 

lattice constants (a and b), various average bond lengths, symmetry, and electronic band gap 

of the 2D monolayer hBN, d-BN, and Pt-d-BN materials are summarized in Table 1.

Table 1 Equilibrium structural and lattice parameters (in Å) of the pristine hBN, VBN d-BN and Pt-d-

BN materials obtained by the DFT-D method are summarized here.

System
Lattice 

parameters

(Å)

2D Layer 

group and 

symmetry

Electronic 

band gap 

(Eg)

Fermi 

energy 

(EF)

Average bond 

distance between 

atoms

(Å)

B-N
Pt-B
Pt-N

hBN
a = b = 2.449
78, P-6m2
6.23
-7.20
1.442
-
-

VBN d-BN
a = b = 7.401
1, P1
4.89
-6.10
1.459
-
-

Pt-d-BN
a = 7.384,

b = 7.572

1, P1
1.30
-5.55
1.440
2.089
2.047


14

To evaluate the stability of 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material, the binding energy of Pt 

atom in the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material was calculated as follows: Eb = Etotal(Pt-d-BN) -

Etotal(Pt) - Etotal(VBN_d-BN), where Etotal is the total energy corresponding to the different 

species mentioned in the brackets. The calculated value of binding energy of Pt atom in the 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN material is about 0.10 eV. The large Eb of Pt atoms on this VBN_d-BN also 

makes the diffusion of the adsorbed Pt atom to its neighboring hollow site which is 

considerably difficult in terms of the large endothermicity and high energy barrier, thus 

vigorously excluding the clustering of adsorbed Pt atom on this substrate. These results indicate 

that Pt atom can be stably adsorbed on the defective area of BN sheet both thermodynamically 

and kinetically, thus ensuring the stability of Pt-d-BN sheet. It should be mentioned that the 

2D monolayer d-BN material can reduce the metal cations as Lei et al.36 experimentally showed 

that due to the vacancy induced free radicals and Fermi level shifts, d-BN can be controllably 

functionalized with single metal atoms by the spontaneous reduction of metal cations; mono-

metallic or bi-metallic clusters can also be effectively reduced. In essence, these vacancies are 

the reactive sites to reduce metal cations spontaneously on the d-BN surface, as well as the PL 

emission sites within the visible region. A single Pt atom can also be directly bonded on BN at 

the vacancy site which has been discussed in the present investigation. There might be possible 

to form clusters of Pt atoms in the d-BN, but, followed by previous work, we have performed 

only Pt stably anchored in the 2D monolayer d-BN as the single atom which is our main focus 

of the present investigation. While electrocatalysis is a proof-of-concept application, the 

experimental findings36 insights into the selective reduction of metal ions on activated BN are 

universal to create stabilized single metal atoms (like Pt), that can be used for other emerging 

applications, e.g., other catalysts, such as ORR, HER, etc.36

To study the thermodynamical stability of the materials, we have simulated the Raman 

spectrum, Raman active frequencies and amplitudes of vibrational modes using the B3LYP-

D3 method, which is implemented in the ab initio-based CRYSTAL17 suite code. A set of 

4×4×1 Monkhorst-Pack k-point grids were used in these calculations. The standard approach 

to calculate the vibrational spectra is to calculate harmonic vibrational normal modes. In other 

words, a harmonic vibrational analysis was performed at the equilibrium structure of the 2D

monolayer, pristine h-BN, VBN_d-BN and Pt-d-BN materials to obtain the Raman spectra. This 

static method is built upon the assumption that the potential energy surface at an energy 

minimum can be approximated by a harmonic potential. Figure 5 shows the simulated Raman 


15

spectrum for a) hBN, b) VBN_d-BN and c) Pt-d-BN materials. We have remarked the active 

Raman spectra of hBN, and it shows two peaks at the wavenumber 877.77 cm-1 and 1372.35

cm-1. On the other hand, in the Raman spectrum of VBN_d-BN, the vibration of d-BN with a 

wavenumber 1339.93 cm-1 (υ1) is the most intense peak (taken as 100%). The other vibrations 

are also observed at both left and right side of this intense peak, but these have less intensity as 

compared to υ1 vibrational mode. All other vibrations are nearly (10 - 40%) of this intense 

peak. In the case of 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material, three intense peaks are found in our 

present computational study. One vibrational mode (υ1) is at wavenumber 449.39 cm-1 (taken 

as 100%), the second one (υ2) is at wavenumber 1374.83 cm-1 which is nearly 90% intense as 

compared to the highest Raman active vibrational mode υ1, and third one (υ3) is at wavenumber 

1141.03 cm-1 which is nearly 60% intense as compared to υ1. The Raman active spectrum in 

this case is spread from 400 - 1500 cm-1. All other vibrations are less intense nearly less than 

50% of the intensity of υ1.

Figure 5. Raman spectra of the 2D monolayer a) hBN, b) VBN_d-BN and c) Pt-d-BN materials

are shown here computed by the B3LYP-D3 method.

After obtaining the equilibrium structure with the electronic properties of the 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN, we investigated the electrocatalytic activity of the Pt-d-BN towards the 

ORR. This study aimed to investigate the potential of this 2D Pt-d-BN nanosheet as an efficient 

ORR electrode material for fuel cells. In the present investigation, we have explored all the 

ORR pathways by using the periodic slab structure of the 2D Pt-d-BN material based on the 

computational hydrogen electrode (CHE).   The ORR consists of 4 electrons (e-) and 4 protons 

(H+) transfer during the reaction of each O2 molecule, as well as other reaction intermediates 

such as O* (oxygen), OH* (hydroxyl groups), and OOH* (super hydroxyl groups) that have 

been adsorbed onto the active sites of the 2D Pt-d-BN material during the completion of ORR. 


16

Therefore, it can be mentioned here that this material exhibits a high four-electron reduction 

pathway selectivity for effective ORR. 

Before looking into the possible mechanisms for ORR on the surface of the 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN material, it is essential to note that the reduction of adsorbed O2 involves 

the following two reaction steps: First, by the reaction O2* → 2O*, it can immediately dissociate 

into two active atomic oxygen (O) which is known as dissociative reaction mechanism; second, 

it may be hydrogenated to form the OOH* species by the reaction O2* + H+ + e- → OOH* which 

is known as associative reaction mechanism. In the first reaction, the O-O bond gets broken, 

resulting in the adsorption of two individual atomic oxygens on the surface of the 2D Pt-d-BN 

material. One of the O atoms from the O2 after dissociation, remains at the Pt atom, while 

another O atom creates a bond with the nearest N atom and forms the N-O bond. In contrast to 

the first step, the second one involves the addition of the H+ + e- to the O2*, which was adsorbed

by the Pt-d-BN, resulting in a yield of OOH* on the surface of the Pt-d-BN. Moreover, the 

OOH* species cannot easily dissociate into O* + OH* on the Pt-d-BN surface, unlike the O2*

molecule, which may be the cause of the high activation energy values. We are quite curious 

whether this novel 2D structure of the Pt-d-BN material is a promising candidate for fuel cell 

applications, as other Pt-based nanomaterials have displayed outstanding performance for 

launching the sluggish ORR.

In the present work, we have included both the associative and dissociative 

mechanisms for ORR and describe each possible reaction pathway on the surface of the 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN material. According to the dissociative mechanism, the O2 dissociates on 

the active site of the Pt-d-BN (i.e., Pt area), in which, one O* creates a weak bond with the Pt 

atom while other moves to favorable neighboring N. After the subsequent steps, it makes a 

bond with two pairs of electrons (e-) and protons (H+) during the formation of intermediates 

which results in the formation of H2O molecule. In the associative mechanism, during the 

adsorption of O2 on the active site of the Pt-d-BN surface, the O-O bond does not break in the 

subsequent steps. Instead of that it can attract H (H+ + e-), resulting in the formation of OOH*, 

which is further reduced to form H2O. The entire reaction pathways and all possible reaction 

intermediates are shown in Figures 6a-b, respectively, for both the dissociative and associative 

reaction mechanisms of the ORR process on the surface of the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN. 


17

Figure 6. Schematic representation of the O2 reduction reaction pathways on the surfaces of 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN for (a) dissociative mechanism and (b) associative mechanism.

It is a challenging task to do computational modeling of the O2 reduction reaction 

intermediates because of the need to incorporate the effects of solvent/surface on the adsorbed 

intermediates, the high electric field in the double layer, the free energy of solvated reactants 

and the free energy of electrons in the solid as a function of potential. A simple method to solve 

this issue is to link the general trend to gas phase modeling or solid surface reaction modeling. 

The results of DFT computation are accurate for gas species and solid surface reactions, and it 

is simple to compute the electrolytic processes at the gas-solid interface. Here, we have used a 

small segment of this Pt-d-BN material with one oxygen molecule adsorbed as a model for the 

ORR pathways to explain the reaction mechanism. 

Dissociative ORR mechanism:

After calculating the electronic properties and confirming the electronic semi-

conductivity of the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN, we were interested in learning more about the ORR 

activity of the given material as an electrode, more specifically, a cathode of a fuel cell. This 

may show excellent performance for launching the sluggish ORR in fuel cells. We have studied 

each of the reaction intermediates following the ORR mechanism depicted in Figure 6a, which 

illustrates the proposed four-electron (4e-) transfer reaction pathway or four-electron transfer 

mechanism, and it is represented as O2 + 4H+ + 4e- → 2H2O. It is believed that the adsorption 

character at the active site of the catalyst is the most crucial parameter of an efficient ORR.


18

Figure 7. Top view and side view of various equilibrium reaction intermediates during the ORR process 

followed by dissociative mechanisms on the surface of Pt-d-BN sheet: (a) O2*_Pt-d-BN, (b) 2O*_Pt-d-

BN, (c) OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN, (d) O*_Pt-d-BN, (e) OH*_Pt-d-BN.

We have computationally explored the O2 reduction reaction steps with the 

intermediates and ORR mechanism on the surface of the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material 


19

followed by relative free energy and adsorption energy calculations. The initial step of the ORR 

begins with the adsorption of oxygen molecule (O2*) on the active surface of the 2D monolayer 

structure of the Pt-d-BN at the Pt-site (which was considered the active site of the catalyst) 

shown in Figure 7a by considering the computational model system with computational 

hydrogen electrode (CHE) conditions. When the O2* has reached the surface of 2D monolayer 

Pt-d-BN material, the O−O bond length is significantly stretched from 1.230 Å to 1.311 Å 

computed by the DFT-D method, which indicates that the oxygen molecule has been 

effectively activated towards the subject reaction. Following the adsorption of O2* onto the 

surfaces of the Pt-d-BN, it is found that the equilibrium Pt-O and O-O bond lengths are 1.935 

Å and 1.311 Å, respectively, obtained by the DFT-D method. We have also calculated that the 

change of Gibb’s free energy (ΔG) during this stage is about -0.66 eV and the relative 

adsorption energy (ΔE) is about -0.84 eV, which means that it is energetically favorable, and 

the intermediate formed by the O2* adsorption is noted by O2*_Pt-d-BN as depicted in Figure 

7a. Both side view and top view of the equilibrium structures of the O2*_Pt-d-BN reaction 

intermediate is depicted in Figure 7a. Now, the adsorbed O2* dissociates into 2O* in the 

subsequent stage of the ORR process, with one oxygen atom being adsorbed at the N site 

(which is close to the Pt site) on the surfaces of the 2D Pt-d-BN, as noted by 2O*_Pt-d-BN. 

The top view, along with its side view of the equilibrium structure of this reaction intermediate 

2O*_Pt-d-BN, is illustrated in Figure 7b. The equilibrium Pt-O bond length has been reduced, 

and it is about 1.834 Å, and the newly formed N-O bond length was found to be around 1.509 

Å. This process has a shift in free energy of about +0.66 eV and in adsorption energy it is +0.68 

eV, as represented by step II in the energy diagram of the dissociative ORR pathway (or 

potential energy surface (PES)) displayed in Figure 8a-b. The fact is that the change in free

energy of this step is slightly positive, which means that it is an endothermic process. In the 

next step, out of the two present active sites, the electron (e-) and proton (H+) were 

simultaneously added to one of the activated oxygen atoms at the N-site, and the value of free 

energy change in this reaction step is -0.64 eV and adsorption energy change is -1.47 eV. This 

intermediate reaction step is noted by OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN, and the equilibrium structure is shown 

in Figure 7c. The results of the current investigation show that the equilibrium bond lengths of 

the Pt-O and N-OH are about 1.941 Å and 1.514 Å, respectively, calculated the DFT-D method. 

Additionally, the equilibrium bond length of O-H was calculated to be about 1.01 Å. Again, 

the process of addition of another electron (e-) and proton (H+) was repeated, and the first H2O 

molecule was released from the surface of the 2D Pt-d-BN electrocatalyst and resulted in a 

change in free energy about -2.59 eV and in adsorption energy about -1.21 eV, as shown in 


20

Figure 8 a-b. Now, only one active oxygen atom remains on the catalyst surface as shown in 

the proposed reaction pathway, and intermediate reaction step is noted by O*_Pt-d-BN which 

is illustrated in Figure 7d. Additionally, in this process, the formation of H2O2 is a highly 

endothermic process. Therefore, it is out of scope in our current study of dissociative 

mechanisms. It is also observed that the equilibrium Pt-O bond length gets reduced, and the 

value of the Pt-O bond distance is about 1.834 Å calculated by the DFT-D method. Again, the 

addition of a single proton (H+) and a single electron (e-), which are coming from the anode 

side, resulted in the formation of the OH*_Pt-d-BN intermediate, as both the proton and 

electron are migrated towards the remaining active site O* of the O*_Pt-d-BN.  This results in 

a change in free energy of about -1.55 eV and in adsorption energy change about -1.90 eV

computed by the present DFT-D method as depicted in the energy diagram of the dissociative 

ORR pathway in Figure 8 a-b. Now, the equilibrium Pt-O bond length of this intermediate state 

OH*_Pt-d-BN was slightly increased by an amount of 0.074 Å and found to be about 1.974 Å. 

Both the top and side views of the optimized structure are illustrated in Figure 7e. Furthermore, 

during the final stage of the ORR process, the second H2O molecule was released after the 

addition of proton and electron, resulting in a change of free energy about -0.33 eV and change 

of adsorption energy is -0.45 eV, displayed in Figure 8 a-b. The 4e- transfer mechanism is 

involved in this entire ORR process, and the process of protonation of OH* to H2O is a 

potential-limiting step. The free energy change and adsorption energy change for each reaction 

step (except step 2) is negative, as reported in Table 3. 

The 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN also shows high selectivity for the 4e- reduction pathway. 

By keeping the basal plane active, each of the reaction steps takes place at the Pt-site of the 2D 

monolayer of the Pt-d-BN material which indicates that Pt atom acts as a single-atom catalyst 

in the system. Table 2 provides a comparison of the average bond lengths, space group 

symmetries, and lattice constants for each reaction intermediate of the ORR. The equilibrium 

geometries (top view and side view) of all the reaction intermediate states involved in the ORR 

mechanism are depicted in Figure 7. Relative free energy, relative adsorption energy, change 

in adsorption energy (∆E), and change in free energy (∆G) of all reaction steps are displayed 

in the energy diagram of the dissociative ORR pathway in Figure 8a-b. It should be mentioned 

here that the relative adsorption energy and relative free energy of each ORR step with the 

change of adsorption energy (∆E) and free energy (∆G) of the reaction pathway are presented 

in Table 3.


21

Table 2 Equilibrium structural parameters, lattice constants, and electronic band gap (Eg) 

parameters of various systems of the ORR steps taken place on the surface of the 2D monolayer 

Pt-d-BN material.

Table 3 Change in adsorption energy (ΔE), change in free energy (∆G), relative adsorption energy, and 

relative free energy of all ORR reaction steps during the dissociative mechanism performed on the 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN material.

System

Lattice 

parameters

(Å)

Space 

group & 

symmetry

Electronic 

band gap 

(Eg in eV)

Fermi 

energy 

(EF)

Average bond distance 

(Å)

Pt-B
Pt-N
Pt-O

O2*_Pt-d-BN
a = 7.572, b = 7.384
P1
2.097
-6.08
2.126
2.095
1.935

2O*_Pt-d-BN
a = 7.572, b = 7.384
P1
2.615
-6.36
2.156
2.067
1.834

OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN
a = 7.572, b = 7.384
P1
4.163
-5.67
2.048
2.091
1.941

O*_Pt-d-BN
a = 7.572, b = 7.384
P1
2.398
-5.91
2.156
2.090
1.834

OH*_Pt-d-BN
a = 7.572, b = 7.384
P1
3.488
-5.56
2.112
2.098
1.974

OOH*_Pt-d-BN
a = 7.572, b = 7.384
P1
3.344
-5.40
2.118
2.096
1.974

ORR Steps
∆E (eV)
Relative adsorption 

energy (eV)

∆G (eV)
Relative free 

energy (eV)

Pt-d-BN     →     O2*_Pt-d-BN
-0.84
-0.84
-0.66
-0.66

O2*_Pt-d-BN     →     2O*_Pt-d-BN
0.68
-0.16
0.66
0.00

2O*_Pt-d-BN     →     OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN
-1.47
-1.63
-0.64
-0.64

OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN     →     O*_Pt-d-BN
-1.21
-2.84
-2.59
-3.23

O*_Pt-d-BN     →     OH*_Pt-d-BN
-1.90
-4.74
-1.55
-4.78

OH*_Pt-d-BN     →     Pt-d-BN
-0.45
-5.19
-0.33
-5.10


22

Figure 8(a). Relative adsorption energy diagram for the dissociative ORR pathway (energy diagram 

of the dissociative ORR pathway) on the surface of the Pt-d-BN material with the optimized 

geometries of the reaction intermediates and reaction step.


23

Figure 8(b). Relative free energy diagram for the dissociative ORR pathway (energy diagram of the 

dissociative ORR pathway) on the surface of the Pt-d-BN material with the optimized geometries of the 

reaction intermediates and reaction step.

In the present study, we have investigated the electron spin densities of these various 

intermediate states formed during the ORR process, as shown in Figure 9. The electron spin 

densities were assessed by using the same DFT-D method. The spin density estimates the 

differences between spin up (α) and spin down (β). In other words, this is another way to 

estimate the presence of unpaired electrons. Under the condition when spin up (α) and spin 

down (β) are not equal, there is spin polarization which results in the spin density and an 

unequal distribution of the electron is observed in the intermediate states. The spin density 

functional theory (SDFT) is the required generalization of the DFT in the presence of a 

magnetic field, besides the usual scalar external potential due to the nuclei. The spin density s 

and the electron density ρ are the two space functions acting as basic variables in SDFT. The 

interactions that are taking place among the electron spins within a system are also reflected 

by the spin density. Therefore, it plays a fundamental role for understanding magnetic 

phenomena of the material.56 In the following figures, the highlighted yellow color represents 

the positive component of the wave function, i.e., α−spin electrons, and the sky-blue color 

represents the negative component of the wave function, i.e., β−spin electrons. The detailed 

study of the spin density distribution in a molecule is essential for interpreting spin polarization 

propagation in molecular complexes and crystals. It allows one to highlight and rationalize the 

various magnetic interactions as a function of molecular orientation and packing. The aim of 

the present work is to unveil the information hidden in the spin density distribution of electrons 

in our system. The difference in α and β electron densities results in non-zero spin polarization 

and electron density.


24

Figure 9. Electron spin density of the various equilibrium reaction intermediates during the ORR 

process: (a) O2*_Pt-d-BN, (b) 2O*_Pt-d-BN, (c) OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN, (d) O*_Pt-d-BN, (e) OH*_Pt-d-BN, 

(f) OOH*_Pt-d-BN. The yellow color represents the positive part of the wave function that corresponds 

to the up-spin (noted by α−spin) of the electrons, and the sky-blue color represents the negative part of 

the wave function that corresponds to the down-spin (β−spin) of the electrons.

Discussions of various steps of the ORR mechanism in detail:

Step I: In the present work, the DFT-D method has been employed to determine the 

equilibrium geometry of the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material with the O2 adsorbed Pt-d-BN, 

i.e., O2*_Pt-d-BN shown in Figure 7a. The present computational study reveals that the 

equilibrium Pt-B, Pt-N, and Pt-O bond lengths of the O2*_Pt-d-BN intermediate are 2.126 Å, 


25

2.095 Å, and 1.935 Å, respectively, reported in Table 2. The symmetry of the O2*_Pt-d-BN 

reaction intermediate is P1, and the values of lattice constants and interfacial angles are a 

= 7.572 Å, b = 7.384 Å, α = β = 90˚ and γ = 117.70˚ computed by the DFT-D method. The 

change in free energy (∆G) is found to be about -0.66 eV and the adsorption energy change

(∆E) is -0.84 eV, showing an exothermic behavior, which is thermodynamically favorable. The 

electronic band structure along with the total DOS of the O2*_Pt-d-BN intermediate reaction, 

are depicted in Figure 10a. The Fermi energy level (EF) of the O2*_Pt d-BN is found at -6.08 

eV, which is represented by a dotted blue line in Figure 10a. The value of EF has been increased 

by an amount of +0.5 eV after adsorbing the O2 in the 2D Pt-d-BN, as depicted in Figure 10a.  

The lowest energy level of the conduction band was obtained at -5.12 eV, whereas the highest 

energy level of the valence band was calculated at -7.22 eV, both at the K point, confirming 

that this reaction intermediate O2*_Pt-d-BN has a direct band gap (Eg) and the value of Eg is 

about 2.09 eV, as illustrated in Figure 10a. According to the calculation of the total density of 

states (DOS) of the O2*_Pt-d-BN, it is observed that the electrons occupied energy states both 

above and below the Fermi energy level, but the Fermi level itself is free from electron density, 

which is shown in Figure 10a.  

Step II: The equilibrium structure of 2O*_Pt-d-BN intermediate is displayed in Figure 7b, in 

which a single oxygen atom from the O2 molecule of the Pt site has been moved to the N site, 

then, O2* has been dissociated on the surface of the Pt-d-BN. The values of lattice constants of 

this reaction intermediate 2O*_Pt-d-BN are a = 7.572 Å, b = 7.384 Å, and γ = 117.70˚ with the 

P1 symmetry. This intermediate reaction step 2O*_Pt-d-BN (where a N-O bond has been 

created during this step) is in an unstable state, and the corresponding change in free energy is 

positive (∆G = + 0.66 eV). It indicates that this intermediate reaction step is endothermic in 

nature. The same DFT-D approach has been used to determine the electronic band structures 

and total DOS of this reaction intermediate 2O*_Pt-d-BN. The Fermi energy level (EF) is found 

to be reduced by an amount of 0.28 eV.  The Fermi energy level is at-6.36 eV, shown in the 

electronic energy band structures calculations, and the bands have been drawn along the high 

directional symmetry Γ- M – K – Γ with respect to the vacuum depicted in Figure 10b. The 

Fermi energy level is represented by a dotted blue line in Figure 10b. The lowest energy level 

of the conduction band was calculated about -5.12 eV, whereas the highest energy level of the 

valence band was calculated about -7.73 eV, both at the K point, confirming that the reaction 

intermediate 2O*_Pt-d-BN has a direct band gap about 2.61 eV, which is demonstrated in 

Figure 10b. 


26

Step III: During the ORR mechanism, the equilibrium 2D monolayer structure of the 

intermediate reaction step OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN has been formed. One oxygen atom has a bond 

with the Pt site, while the second oxygen atom has a bond with the N site, as shown in Figure 

7c. The values of lattice constants corresponding to this intermediate state are a = 7.57 Å, b = 

7.38 Å, and α = β = 90.0˚ and γ = 117.70˚, with P1 symmetry calculated by the DFT-D method.  

The change in Gibbs free energy (∆G) is calculated to be about -0.64 eV and the change in

adsorption energy (∆E) is -1.47 eV which is displayed in Figure 8 a-b. After absorbing 

simultaneously, a single proton (H+) and a single electron (e-), the oxygen atom attached to the 

N site forms an O-H bond to get its stable configuration with an equilibrium O-H bond length 

of about 1.010 Å. The electronic energy band gap (Eg) of the intermediate reaction state 

OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN further was increased, and it is about 4.16 eV. The Fermi energy level has 

been shifted to -5.67 eV, which is highlighted by a dotted blue line in both the electronic band 

structure and total DOS calculations as depicted in Figure 10c.  The highest energy level of the 

valence band (VB), in this case, is approximately -7.27 eV, while the lowest energy level of 

the conduction band (CB) is approximately -3.11 eV, suggesting that the intermediate 

OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN has a direct band gap about 4.16 eV and electron densities are not observed 

around the Fermi level. 


27

Figure 10. Electronic band structure and total density of states of each reaction intermediate step during 

ORR on the surface of 2D Pt-d-BN sheet: (a) O2*_Pt-d-BN, (b) 2O*_Pt-d-BN, (c) OH*_O*_Pt-d-BN, 

(d) O*_Pt-d-BN, (e) OH*_Pt-d-BN, and (f) OOH*_Pt-d-BN.

Step IV. An equilibrium structure of the intermediate reaction step O*_Pt-d-BN is illustrated 

in Figure 7d, where the OH* group attached to the N site released one H2O molecule leaving 

one oxygen atom bound to the Pt site. The same DFT-D approach has been used to determine 

the band structures along with the total DOS of the reaction intermediate O*_Pt-d-BN. The 

equilibrium Pt-O bond length in this intermediate state is about 1.83 Å. The values of 

equilibrium lattice constants of the O*_Pt-d-BN intermediate state is found to be a = 7.57 Å, b 


28

= 7.38 Å, α = β = 90˚, and γ = 117.70˚ with a P1 symmetry. The change in free energy is found 

to be about -2.59 eV and the change of adsorption energy is -1.21 eV, which is depicted in 

Figure 8 a-b, and it is again an exothermic process. It is computationally found that the 

electronic energy band gap has been reduced to approximately 2.39 eV, and the same can be 

observed from the band structure and total DOS calculations as depicted in Figure 10d. The 

Fermi energy level (EF) of the reaction intermediate O*_Pt d-BN is observed to be reduced by 

the value of 0.24 eV, and it is calculated to be about -5.91 eV which is represented by a dotted 

blue line in Figure 10d. In this calculation, of the electronic band structures, the lowest peak of 

the conduction band was calculated at about -4.74 eV, and the highest peak of the valence band 

was calculated about -7.13 eV, shown in Figure 10d.

Step V. The equilibrium structure of the last reaction intermediates OH*_Pt-d-BN is formed 

after absorbing simultaneously a single proton (H+) and a single electron (e-), and the 

equilibrium structure is illustrated in Figure 7e. The equilibrium O-H and Pt-O bond lengths of 

the OH*_Pt-d-BN are about 0.974 Å and 1.974 Å, respectively, computed by the DFT-D 

method. The values of equilibrium lattice constants were calculated to be a = 7.57 Å, b = 7.38 

Å, α = β = 90˚, and γ = 117.70˚ having a P1 symmetry. The change in free energy is calculated 

to be about -1.55 eV and the change in adsorption energy is -1.90 eV which is displayed in 

Figure 8 a-b. The Fermi energy level (EF) of the reaction intermediate OH*_Pt-d-BN is 

enhanced by an amount of 0.35 eV and calculated to be about -5.56 eV which is represented 

by a dotted blue line in Figure 10e. The lowest energy level of the conduction band was 

calculated about -3.03 eV, whereas the highest energy level of the valence band was calculated 

about -6.52 eV, confirming that the intermediated OH*_Pt-d-BN has a direct band gap about 

3.48 eV. 

Associative Mechanism of the ORR

We have also studied the associative mechanism of the ORR on the surface of the 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN material. The illustration of the associative mechanism of ORR is 

demonstrated in Figure 6b. In the very first step of the associative mechanism, the adsorption 

of the O2 molecule occurred on the Pt site of the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN which is similar to

the first step of the dissociative ORR mechanism. In other words, the O2 adsorption on the

surfaces of the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material is also the 1st reaction step in the case of 

associative ORR process i.e., the first step of both the associative and dissociative ORR 


29

mechanisms are the same which is nothing but O2 activation by adsorbing it on the active 

surfaces of the electrocatalysts. All the structural parameters and electronic properties of this 

2D equilibrium intermediate state O2*_Pt-d-BN have already been discussed in the dissociative 

part. The equilibrium structure (both the top and side views) with the reaction intermediated 

during the ORR process followed the associative reaction mechanism is illustrated in Figure 

11a-d, and the detailed reaction pathway with the adsorption energy of this initial step of the 

associative mechanism (i.e., energy diagram of the associative ORR pathway) is displayed in 

Figure 12. In the next step, the adsorbed O2* on the Pt site captures one proton (H+) and one 

electron (e-), resulting in the formation of the OOH*_Pt-d-BN intermediate, which differs from 

the dissociative mechanism. The equilibrium Pt-B and Pt-N bond lengths are about 2.118 Å 

and 2.096 Å, respectively, computed by the DFT-D method. The slight increment in Pt-O bond 

length of this intermediate step was observed and it is about 1.974 Å, and the newly formed O-

H bond length is about 0.977 Å. Both the top and side views of the equilibrium structure of the 

OOH*_Pt-d-BN intermediate are illustrated in Figure 11b. The free energy change of this 

intermediate state is about -0.85 eV with the relative adsorption energy (∆E)about -1.16 eV

which is shown in energy diagram of the associative ORR pathway in Figure 12 a-b. The 

negative values of both the change of free energy and change of the adsorption energy during 

the associative mechanism of ORR process taken place on the surfaces of the Pt-d-BN show

that the reaction is exothermic and thermodynamically favorable in nature. In contrast to the 

dissociative mechanism where both the values of free energy change and the adsorption energy 

change of the second step (O2* → 2O*) are positive, which means the reaction is endothermic.

However, the associative mechanism results in a decrease in free energy, which indicates the 

spontaneous formation of OOH*_Pt-d-BN under favorable thermodynamic conditions from 

O2*_Pt-d-BN. The equilibrium structures of the reaction steps corresponding to the associative 

ORR mechanism are illustrated in Figure 11. 

The equilibrium lattice constants of the reaction intermediate OOH*_Pt-d-BN are a = 

7.572 Å, b = 7.384 Å, and γ= 117.70˚ with P1 symmetry. The equilibrium structure, electronic 

band structures and the total DOS of this intermediate reaction step OOH*_Pt-d-BN are 

computed by using the same DFT-D method as shown in Figure 10f. The position of the Fermi 

energy level is at -5.40 eV which is represented by a dotted blue line in Figure 10f. The EF

level has been shifted towards the conduction bands by an amount of 0.68 eV compared to the 

intermediate O2*_Pt-d-BN. It also has a direct band gap of 3.34 eV. 


30

Figure 11. Top view and side view of various equilibrium reaction intermediate during the ORR process 

followed by associative mechanisms on the surface of Pt-d-BN sheet: (a) O2*_Pt-d-BN, (b) OOH*_Pt-

d-BN, (c) O*_Pt-d-BN, and (d) OH*_Pt-d-BN.

After the formation of the reaction intermediate OOH*_Pt-d-BN, again, an electron and 

proton are simultaneously added to this system (OOH*_Pt-d-BN). Now, there are two possible 

pathways in this step. The first possibility is the removal of the H2O molecule followed by the 

4e- pathway, which results in a change in free energy of -1.72 eV and adsorption energy change 

of -0.83 eV. The second possibility is the removal of the H2O2 molecule followed by the 2e-


31

pathway, which results in a change in free energy of -0.02 eV (adsorption energy change is -

0.48 eV). Here, the first possibility is more favorable because of its larger value of negative 

adsorption energy. In short, we can say that the two-electron pathway could be significantly 

suppressed by the four-electron pathway under normal working conditions. As a result of this 

step, O*_Pt-d-BN reaction intermediate is formed, and the equilibrium structure of this system 

is shown in Figure 11c. Additionally, the system O*_Pt-d-BN undergoes the process of 

protonation, which is followed by the addition of a single electron and a single proton, resulting 

in the formation of OH*_Pt-d-BN. The calculated values of change of free energy and 

adsorption energy are about -1.55 eV and -1.90 eV, respectively, and the reaction step is both 

favorable and feasible in the thermodynamic regime. The equilibrium structure of the 

intermediate reaction state OH*_Pt-d-BN is shown in Figure 11d. The detailed discussion of 

all the above intermediate steps is already mentioned in the dissociative mechanism section of 

this manuscript. The band structure and total DOS of this associative mechanism are reported 

in Figure 10f, and optimized equilibrium structures of all intermediate states during the 

associative ORR mechanism, along with their respective reaction pathways, are presented in 

Figure 11. 

Now, again the subsequent step involves the further addition of a single electron and a 

single proton to proceed further ORR. Throughout the entire process, four electrons transfer 

mechanism is prominent, and then the H2O is eliminated from the surface of the 2D monolayer 

Pt-d-BN. During the elimination of H2O from the surface of this 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN

material, the change of free energy in this step is about -0.33 eV and adsorption energy change

is -0.45 eV computed by the DFT-D method. The change in adsorption energies (∆E), change 

in free energy (∆G), relative adsorption energy, and relative free energy of all the reaction steps 

corresponding to the associative reaction mechanism of ORR are listed in Table 4. The values

of ∆E, ΔG, relative adsorption energy, and relative free energy are found to be negative which 

indicate that all the above-mentioned reaction steps, shown in Figure 12 a-b, are 

thermodynamically favorable.

Table 4 Change in adsorption energy (ΔE), change in free energy (ΔG), relative adsorption energy, and 

relative free energy of all reaction steps of ORR during the associative mechanism performed on the 

2D monolayer Pt-d-BN sheet.

ORR Steps
∆E (eV)
Relative adsorption 

energy (eV)

∆G (eV)
Relative free 

energy (eV)


32

Figure 12(a). Relative adsorption energy diagrams for the associative ORR pathway (i.e., energy 

diagram of the associative ORR pathway) on the surface of the Pt-d-BN sheet with optimized 

geometries and reaction step.

Pt-d-BN     →     O2*_Pt-d-BN
-0.84
-0.84
-0.66
-0.66

O2*_Pt-d-BN     →     OOH*_Pt-d-BN
-1.16
-2.00
-0.85
-1.51

OOH*_Pt-d-BN     →     O*_Pt-d-BN
-0.83
-2.83
-1.72
-3.23

O*_Pt-d-BN     →     OH*_Pt-d-BN
-1.90
-4.73
-1.55
-4.78

OH*_Pt-d-BN     →     Pt-d-BN
-0.45
-5.18
-0.33
-5.10


33

Figure 12(b). Relative free energy diagrams for the associative ORR pathway (i.e., energy diagram of 

the associative ORR pathway) on the surface of the Pt-d-BN sheet with optimized geometries and 

reaction step.

Conclusions 

In summary, we have computationally explored both the structural and electronic 

properties of the pristine 2D monolayer hBN, d-BN and Pt-d-BN materials by employing 

hybrid periodic DFT-D method. We have introduced a di-vacancy (VBN) defect in the pristine 

2D monolayer hBN and found that VBN d-BN is chemically active. A single Pt atom has been 

adsorbed around the defective area of the VBN d-BN, and the electronic band gap of the 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN has been reduced to 1.34 eV, which indicates that the 2D monolayer Pt-

adsorbed d-BN is a semiconductor. In our present study, we have adopted the 2D monolayer 

Pt-d-BN to assist computationally in the groundwork of an efficient electrocatalyst containing 

a single Pt atom (which was adsorbed by the d-BN) site for highly effective electrochemical 

O2 reduction. In short, the electrocatalytic properties of the 2D novel Pt-d-BN material have 

been systematically investigated on the basis of extensive DFT-D computations and the present 

study shows that a single Pt atom serves or performances as a SAC towards ORR. Both the 


34

associative and dissociative mechanisms during the ORR process have been explored by using 

the CHE model-based computations. Our present investigation has demonstrated that the 2D 

monolayer Pt-d-BN material is a promising ORR catalyst with excellent electrocatalytic 

activity and a high 4e- reduction pathway selectivity, where Pt acts as a single atom catalyst. It 

has found that the ORR on the surface of 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN favors the associative O2

reduction reaction mechanism over the dissociative mechanism as for all the reaction pathways, 

free energies are negative, and all the steps of potential energy curves are downhill in the 

associative mechanism. Our current research indicates that the ORR might be carried out 

effectively with substantially improved reaction kinetics by using the Pt-d-BN 2D monolayer, 

and it could be a very good candidate to substitute Pt-based electrodes in fuel cells. Although 

it is a challenging electrode material to be used for practical purposes in fuel cells and battery 

technologies, but this study suggests that it could be possible to develop a 2D monolayer Pt-d-

BN material in the laboratory and utilize it as an efficient ORR catalyst in the coming years for 

commercial applications. We also expect that our present studies would motivate 

experimentalists to synthesize the 2D monolayer Pt-d-BN material and other Pt-based single 

atom catalysts in the laboratory for future applications.

Conflicts of Interest:

The authors have no additional conflicts of interest.

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author
Dr. Srimanta Pakhira − Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational 
Materials Science Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore 
(IIT Indore), Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore, Madhya Pradesh 453552, India.

Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational Materials Science 
Laboratory, Centre of Advanced Electronics (CAE), Indian Institute of Technology Indore, 
Indore, MP 453552, India. 
ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2488-300X. 
Email: spakhira@iiti.ac.in or spakhirafsu@gmail.com

Authors


35

Mr. Lokesh Yadav − Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational 
Materials Science Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore 
(IIT Indore), Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore, Madhya Pradesh 453552, India.

Acknowledgement:

This work was financially supported by the Science and Engineering Research Board-

Department of Science and Technology (SERB-DST), Government of India, under Grant No. 

CRG/2021/000572. Dr Srimanta Pakhira acknowledges the SERB-DST, Government of India, 

for
providing his Early Career Research Award (ECRA) under project number 

ECR/2018/000255. Dr Pakhira also thanks the SERB-DST for providing the highly prestigious 

Ramanujan Faculty Fellowship under scheme number SB/S2/RJN-067/2017 and providing the 

highly prestigious Core Research Grant (CRG), SERB-DST, Govt. of India under the scheme 

number CRG/2021/000572. Ms. Lokesh thanks the CSIR, Govt. of India, and Govt. of India 

for providing his doctoral fellowship under scheme no. CSIRAWARD/JRF-NET2022/11898. 

The author would like to acknowledge the SERB-DST for providing computing clusters and 

programs. We thank the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Government of 

India for providing the research grants under the scheme number 22/0883/23/EMR-II.

Author Contributions:

Dr. Pakhira designed the project, and he conceived the complete idea of this current 

research project work, and Mr. Lokesh Yadav computationally studied the electronic structures 

and properties of the 2D monolayer h-BN, d-BN, and Pt-d-BN. Dr. Pakhira and Mr. Lokesh 

Yadav explored the whole reaction pathways, transition states, and reaction barriers.  They 

explained the ORR mechanism by the DFT Quantum Mechanical calculations. Dr. Pakhira and 

Mr. Lokesh wrote the whole manuscript and prepared all the tables and figures in the 

manuscript. Dr. Pakhira and Mr. Lokesh interpreted and analyzed the computed results, and 

Dr. Pakhira supervised the project work.

References:

1
S. Pakhira and S. N. Upadhyay, Sustain. Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 1733–1752.


36

2
S. N. Upadhyay and S. Pakhira, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 22823–22844.

3
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 

11, 19–29.

4
S. N. Upadhyay and S. Pakhira, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 11331–11342.

5
J. Hui, S. Pakhira, R. Bhargava, Z. J. Barton, X. Zhou, A. J. Chinderle, J. L. Mendoza-

Cortes and J. Rodríguez-López, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2980–2990.

6
N. M. Marković, T. J. Schmidt, V. Stamenković and P. N. Ross, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 

105–116.

7
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51.

8
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269.

9
A. Kongkanand, S. Kuwabata, G. Girishkumar and P. Kamat, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 

2392–2396.

10
J. Zhang, Science., 2007, 220, 10–13.

11
M. Jiang, B. Lim, J. Tao, P. H. C. Camargo, C. Ma, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Nanoscale, 2010, 

2, 2406–2411.

12
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. 

Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–

556.

13
M. D. Esrafili and P. Nematollahi, Synth. Met., 2017, 226, 129–138.

14
Y. Wang, Y. Li and T. Heine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12732–12735.

15
K. Sasaki, J. X. Wang, H. Naohara, N. Marinkovic, K. More, H. Inada and R. R. Adzic, 

Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2645–2652.

16
B. Cai, R. Hübner, K. Sasaki, Y. Zhang, D. Su, C. Ziegler, M. B. Vukmirovic, B. 

Rellinghaus, R. R. Adzic and A. Eychmüller, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2963–

2966.

17
X. Tian, J. Luo, H. Nan, H. Zou, R. Chen, T. Shu, X. Li, Y. Li, H. Song, S. Liao and R. 

R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1575–1583.


37

18
L. Bu, N. Zhang, S. Guo, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Yao, T. Wu, G. Lu, J.-Y. Ma, D. Su and 

others, Science., 2016, 354, 1410–1414.

19
X. Li, L. Liu, M. Wang and Z. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 370, 6–10.

20
Y. Zhao, L. Yang, S. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Ma, Q. Wu, Y. Jiang, W. Qian and Z. Hu, J. 

Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1201–1204.

21
D. S. Yang, D. Bhattacharjya, S. Inamdar, J. Park and J. S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 

134, 16127–16130.

22
T. Ikeda, M. Boero, S. F. Huang, K. Terakura, M. Oshima, J. I. Ozaki and S. Miyata, J. 

Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8933–8937.

23
A. Lyalin, A. Nakayama, K. Uosaki and T. Taketsugu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 

15, 2809–2820.

24
A. Lyalin, A. Nakayama, K. Uosaki and T. Taketsugu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 

21359–21370.

25
V. L. Solozhenko, A. G. Lazarenko, J.-P. Petitet and A. V Kanaev, J. Phys. Chem. 

Solids, 2001, 62, 1331–1334.

26
D. Golberg, Y. Bando, Y. Huang, T. Terao, M. Mitome, C. Tang and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 

2010, 4, 2979–2993.

27
J. Zhou, Q. Wang, Q. Sun and P. Jena, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 81, 85442.

28
S. Tang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, J. Zhao, Q. Cai and X. Wang, Diam. Relat. Mater., 2014, 44, 

54–61.

29
E. C. Anota, A. B. Hernández, A. E. Morales and M. Castro, J. Mol. Graph. Model., 

2017, 74, 135–142.

30
E. C. Anota, SN Appl. Sci., 2022, 4, 295.

31
J. E. Marshall, Y. Huang and E. M. Terentjev, Responsive Photonic Nanostructures 

Smart Nanoscale Opt. Mater., 2013, 5, 292.

32
G. B. Grad, P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, W. Auwärter and T. Greber, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 68, 

85404.

33
L. Feng, Y. Liu and J. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 287, 431–438.


38

34
M. Gao, A. Lyalin and T. Taketsugu, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 34701.

35
E. Chigo Anota, A. Escobedo-Morales, M. Salazar Villanueva, O. Vázquez-Cuchillo 

and E. Rubio Rosas, J. Mol. Model., 2013, 19, 839–846.

36
Y. Lei, S. Pakhira, K. Fujisawa, H. Liu, C. Guerrero-Bermea, T. Zhang, A. Dasgupta, 

L. M. Martinez, S. R. Singamaneni, K. Wang and others, Mater. Today, 2021, 51, 108–

116.

37
G.-C. Wang, L. Jiang, X.-Y. Pang and J. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 

17943–17950.

38
L. Liu and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4981–5079.

39
X. Han, H. Zhu, X. Nie, G. Wang and X. Zeng, Materials (Basel)., 2018, 11, 392.

40
K. A. Baseden and J. W. Tye, J. Chem. Educ., 2014, 91, 2116–2123.

41
J. Antony and S. Grimme, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 5287–5293.

42
R. Dovesi, F. Pascale, B. Civalleri, K. Doll, N. M. Harrison, I. Bush, P. D’arco, Y. Noël, 

M. Rérat, P. Carbonnière and others, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 204111.

43
S. Pakhira, C. Sahu, K. Sen and A. K. Das, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 549, 6–11.

44
C. Patel, R. Singh, M. Dubey, S. K. Pandey, S. N. Upadhyay, V. Kumar, S. Sriram, M. 

Than Htay, S. Pakhira, V. V Atuchin and others, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 9415–

9426.

45
K. Liang, S. Pakhira, Z. Yang, A. Nijamudheen, L. Ju, M. Wang, C. I. Aguirre-Velez, 

G. E. Sterbinsky, Y. Du, Z. Feng and others, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 651–659.

46
S. Pakhira and J. L. Mendoza-Cortes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 4768–4782.

47
S. Pakhira and J. L. Mendoza-Cortes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 8785–8796.

48
S. Pakhira, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 38137–38147.

49
S. Pakhira, B. S. Lengeling, O. Olatunji-Ojo, M. Caffarel, M. Frenklach and W. A. 

Lester Jr, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 4214–4223.

50
S. Pakhira, R. I. Singh, O. Olatunji-Ojo, M. Frenklach and W. A. Lester Jr, J. Phys. 

Chem. A, 2016, 120, 3602–3612.


39

51
R. Puttaswamy, R. Nagaraj, P. Kulkarni, H. K. Beere, S. N. Upadhyay, R. G. 

Balakrishna, N. Sanna Kotrappanavar, S. Pakhira and D. Ghosh, ACS Sustain. Chem. & 

Eng., 2021, 9, 3985–3995.

52
S. Pakhira, V. Kumar and S. Ghosh, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2023, 10, 2202075.

53
K. Momma and F. Izumi, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2011, 44, 1272–1276.

54
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and 

H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892.

55
S. N. Upadhyay, V. B. Sardar, A. Singh, V. Kumar and S. Pakhira, Phys. Chem. Chem. 

Phys., 2022, 24, 28283–28294.

56
G. Bruno, G. Macetti, L. Lo Presti and C. Gatti, Molecules, 2020, 25, 3537.

Graphical Abstract (TOC):


