i

Phononic graded meta-MEMS for elastic wave amplification and
filtering

Federico Maspero3, Jacopo Maria De Ponti1, Luca Iorio1, Annachiara Esposito2, Riccardo Bertacco3,
Andrea di Matteo2, Alberto Corigliano1, and Raffaele Ardito1

1 Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133 Milano, Italy
2STMicroelectronics, Viale Remo De Feo, 1, 80022 Arzano, Italy
3Dept. of Physics, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133 Milano, Italy

Inspired by recent graded metamaterials designs, we create phononic arrays of micro-resonators for frequency signal amplification
and wave filtering. Leveraging suspended waveguides on a thick silicon substrate, we hybridize surface Rayleigh and Lamb flexural
waves to effectively achieve phononic signal control along predefined channels. The guided waves are then spatially controlled using
a suitable grading of the micro-resonators, which provide high signal-to-noise ratio and simultaneously create phononic delay-lines.
The proposed device can be used for sensing, wave filtering or energy harvesting.

Index Terms—Elastic filters, delay lines, metamaterials, graded resonators, rainbow effect, energy harvesting

I. INTRODUCTION

Over the past few decades the use of MEMS resonators has
become increasingly important in the creation of new designs
for timing references, RF filters, mass and motion sensors [1].
Their properties ultimately depend on the ability to achieve a
high quality (Q) factor combined with a high electromechani-
cal coupling κ2
t [2]. While previous technologies were mainly
restricted by material limits, recent metamaterial solutions
enable unprecedented high Q factor and wide tuning range
[3], [4]. Elastic and acoustic metamaterials have triggered
intense research activity for their potential in wave control
and manipulation [5], bringing new benefits to the world of
MEMS and Radio Frequency (RF) signal control. This trend
in exporting these concepts to the microscale can be seen from
the recent amount of works in the field of metamaterials and
phononic crystals (PnC) applied to MEMS. Sub-wavelength
control and filtering of propagating surface acoustic waves
has been achieved using annular holes and pillars [6], [7], [8]
fully integrated into SAW devices [9]. Micro-PnC have been
employed to reduce anchor losses and consequently enhance
Q factor in MEMS resonators [10], or to provide isolation
from external vibrations [11]. Defect-based waveguides have
been adopted [12] to efficiently couple distant MEMS res-
onators. Delay-lines programmed to selectively operate with
large bandwidths around different frequencies [13], [14] have
been designed by leveraging the unique dispersion features of
metamaterial structures. While well-developed solutions for
wave filtering or focusing have already been transferred to the
micro scale [11], [15], other phenomena e.g. rainbow reflection
and trapping [16], [17], [18], non-local coupling [19], space-
time-modulated structures [20], mode conversion [21], [22],
and topologically protected states [23], [24], [25], [26], [27],
are still at inception.
In this paper we implement, at the microscale, a graded
metamaterial configuration that is able to control elastic wave

Manuscript received June, 2023
Corresponding author: A. Corigliano (email: alberto.corigliano@polimi.it)

Fig. 1.
Schematic of the device and the used experimental setup. In grey,
the bulk silicon die is reported, where a piezoelectric probe is positioned
at the center for actuation in its d33 mode. This probe generates surface
waves that arrive at the phononic graded meta-MEMS, depicted in green. The
waves, while traversing the suspended arrays, slow down and the wave energy
is confined in the lateral resonators, generating high displacement fields. A
laser doppler vibrometer (LDV) evaluates the displacement field in the graded
meta-MEMS.

propagation via the so-called rainbow effect [28]. The chal-
lenge of this work is to develop, differently with respect to
axial resonator solutions in RF filters [6], [7], [8], an array of
suspended flexural resonators, able to simultaneously provide
wave filtering, amplification and signal delay. The proposed
device then acts as a phononic waveguide, where the rainbow
effect manifests its basic features, namely the confinement of
different frequency components and the amplification along
different spatial position [29]. The interplay between these
effects, namely filtering, amplification and signal delay, could
open promising avenues in MEMS towards the development
of highly efficient energy harvesters, in case the resonators
are equipped with piezoelectric materials that may convert the
elastic energy into electrical energy: the spatial confinement
and amplification of elastic waves can greatly enhance the

arXiv:2306.12076v1  [physics.app-ph]  21 Jun 2023


ii

energy conversion. Moreover, in a long term perspective, the
miniaturization of the device up to the nano-scale (that is
feasible with up-to-date production processes) could increase
the frequency range of the device in order to obtain ultra-
wide band (UWB) filters for sensing and for next-generation
6G solutions.
The paper is organised as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce
the device in terms of geometry and operating frequency range.
In Sec. III, we provide a description of the fabrication methods
and the experimental setup. In Sec. IV we compare numerical
and experimental results, analysing the peculiar features of
the device, i.e. the capability of slowing down waves, wave
filtering and amplification. Finally, in Sec. V, we draw together
some concluding remarks.

II. DESIGN OF THE DEVICE

The phononic graded meta-MEMS consists of an elastic
waveguide having a graded array of resonators of different
lengths (see Figure 1 and Figure 2) attached to it. The
term graded refers to a smooth variation of a particular
parameter of the local resonators along space (conventionally
the resonance frequency), which enables spatially varying
effective properties of the medium. The device is different
with respect to other graded structures, such as GRIN lenses
[15], since it takes advantage of local band gaps to control
wave propagation: guided waves slow down as they traverse
the array with different frequency components localising at
specific spatial positions. This phenomenon, known as the
rainbow effect, has been observed in different realms of
physics, from electromagnetism [29] to acoustics [30] and
elasticity [16], with multiple realizations for trapping [18],
mode conversion [21] or energy harvesting [31], [32].
In this work, we consider low frequency resonators (less
than 100 MHz) - commonly used in low-precision consumer
electronics - given the constraints on the prototype dimensions
dictated by the manufacturing process and the experimental
setup. Due to the intrinsic limitations of the micro-fabrication
and the problem in generating the input elastic waves at high
frequencies, we opt for a device working in the frequency
range between 200 kHz and 1.2 MHz. It is worth noting that
the proof-of-concept, obtained at the scale of the prototype,
can be usefully exploited for the application at smaller scales,
provided that a suitable production process is adopted.
A detailed description of the device size and features is
reported in Tab. I.

TABLE I
GRADED META-MEMS GEOMETRY

Parameter
Value

Number of resonators
12

Resonators width
15 [µm]

Minimum length of resonator
50 [µm]

Maximum length of resonator
110 [µm]

Waveguide length
750 [µm]

Waveguide width
30 [µm]

Thickness of the suspended parts
5 [µm]

Thickness of the central bulk part
730 [µm]

Fig. 2. (a)-(c) Schematic process flow of the fabrication process. (d) Detail
view of the device cross section. (e) Scanning electron microscope image of
the fabricated device.

III. DEVICE FABRICATION AND CHARACTERISATION

A. Device fabrication

The samples are fabricated starting from a Silicon On
Insulator (SOI) wafer having 5 µm of n-doped silicon on top
of 1 µm of silicon oxide (Figure 2a). The substrate size is 2x2
cm (Figure 1), its overall thickness is approximately 730 µm
and it is obtained by dicing an 8 inches wafer.
The litography is performed with a maskless aligner, model
MLA100 from Heidelber instrument. After the litography, the
MEMS structures are defined using a DRIE Bosch-like process
[33] performed with a reactive ion etching, model Oxford
Plasmalab 100 (Figure 2b). Finally, the devices are released by
wet etching of the silicon oxide layer in buffered oxide etch
(Figure 2c). A global cross-section of the device is depicted
in Figure 2b, that shows the difference between the suspended
parts and the bulky central region, and an image of one of
the fabricated device is reported in Figure 2e. This procedure
allows us to obtain several suspended microstructures, all
aligned along a squared perimeter with a side of 1 cm, to
accommodate the probe in the center, able to actuate Rayleigh
surface waves (Figure 1).

B. Measurement setup and procedure

The measurement setup is depicted in Figure 3. The silicon
chip is placed on the chuck of a probe station underneath a
vibrometer system of type Polytec MSA500.
The system can detect the out-of-plane displacements in
the picometer range with an in-plane position accuracy of
the laser beam limited by the beam spot size (≈ 0.9 µm for
the 50X magnification); the frequency range of detection of
the instrument is 20 MHz. The system can acquire a grid of
points defined by the user and reconstruct a vibration map of
the device. The mechanical input is provided by means of a
piezoelectric probe of type Ultran, series KC12-1, which is
kept in direct contact with the device under test by a rigid


iii

arm. The probe size was chosen as small as possible in order
to fit on a relatively small silicon substrate and the frequency
range of excitation delivered by the probe set the frequency
boundaries of our experiment i.e. from 200 kHz to 1.2 MHz.
The probe is driven by a power amplifier in sync to the
MSA500 or to an external arbitrary wave-form generator.
Two types of measurements are performed. First a wide
bandwidth sweep signal with a total amplitude of 3 V is
generated to excite all the frequencies ranging from 300 kHz
to 1300 kHz. The steady-state response of the vibrational
map is acquired, providing the frequency spectrum of the
displacement for each point of the grid. This analysis is
done to obtain the frequency response function (FRF) of the
fabricated device, to verify the agreement between numerical
predictions and experimental results. Numerical calculations
are performed through ABAQUS ® finite element software,
for one suspended graded meta-MEMS on an infinite medium
modeled using Absorbing Boundary Conditions [34]. The
frequency analysis is carried out in order to characterise the
resonance frequency of each cantilever, which is a preliminary
step for the subsequent analyses. The second measurement
procedure consists in driving the piezoelectric probe with a
burst sinusoidal signal generated by an external wave-form
generators; this allows us to investigate the transient behaviour,
detecting wavenumber transformations or mode conversions.
The oscillation induced by the burst is then tracked along the
waveguide in order to characterise the signal in time and space.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The device controls the propagating wave in the following
ways: (i) it slows down the wave, lowering both the phase and
the group velocity, (ii) it filters specific frequency components
of the input and (iii) it amplifies the displacement and velocity
fields of the lateral resonators induced by the incoming wave at
their target resonant frequencies. From an application point of
view, these features translate respectively into: (i) delay-lines,
(ii) frequency filters and (iii) frequency selective amplifiers for
surface waves.

Fig. 3. Experimental setup for the characterization of the microscale structure.
(a) The wavefield in space and time is measured using a Polytec MSA500
laser doppler vibrometer (I), eventually complemented with an oscilloscope
(II), while the input is created using a signal generator (III). The chip is placed
on the thick chuck of the vibrometer and is forced in the center through a
probe.

In order to assure such phenomena, we orient the graded
meta-MEMS so that the incoming wave, generated at the
center, propagates from the shortest (first) to the longest (last)
resonator. In this way, the wave propagation is accompanied
by a slow wavenumber transformation due to a decrease in the
resonant frequencies along space.
The first result of the characterisation is reported in Figure
4.

Fig. 4.
(a) Numerical dispersion relation for elastic waves propagating in
the wave-guide. An infinite repetition of periodic resonators is assumed to
properly detect the local dispersion relation in a given spatial position. The
dashed line represents the theoretical frequency of the target resonator (third
last). (b) Experimental measurement of the resonance peak of the target
resonator.

Provided the grading is gentle enough, the behaviour of the
entire structure can be deduced from the knowledge of the
local dispersion curves [16]. The dispersion relation displays
hybrid modes which are obtained by coupling the dynamic
properties of the plain waveguide and the resonators. Since
we are considering flexural wave propagation in the suspended
part, the reference wave mode A0 couples with the flexural
modes of the resonator, resulting in horizontal bands at their
resonant frequencies; this allows us to detect the resonant
frequencies of a given resonator from the zero group-velocity
dispersion branches. For this reason, we compare in Figure
4 the dispersion curve of a given resonator (the third last
in this case) with the corresponding experimental Frequency
Response Function (FRF) associated to the first flexural mode.
The numerical prediction of the resonance obtained from
the dispersion curve and the experimental data, extracted from
the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) performed by the vibrometer
over the entire structure, are in excellent agreement with a ∼
0.9% relative error in the resonant frequency prediction.
This preliminary analysis shows that the micro-fabrication
process is accurate and the tested structures are comparable
to the initial design. Furthermore, to characterise the dynamic
motion of the resonator and to assess the real damping, the
experimental quality factor of the considered resonator is Q :=


iv

Fig. 5. (a) Experimental results of the input wave generated with a burst at 536 kHz compared to the analytical dispersion relation of a Rayleigh wave (dashed
line). (b) Displacement field of the rainbow array at a specific time interval during the analysis. A wavenumber transformation can be observed inside the
structure.

ωr/∆ωr = 936, being ωr the angular resonant frequency
and ∆ωr the angular half-power bandwidth, both values being
retrieved from the experimental data. After having verified that
the obtained frequencies agree with the design target, further
analyses are performed to characterise the propagating elastic
wave on the chip and to assess the ability of the graded meta-
MEMS to control, filter and confine the elastic signal that
traverses the system.

The first necessary step is to define the input signal gen-
erated by the piezoelectric probe. In general, a source exci-
tation on a thick medium generates propagating surface and
bulk shear/pressure waves [35], [36]. Assuming the medium,
composed of the silicon substrate and the chuck, sufficiently
thick with respect to the wavelength, we can realistically infer
the generation of Rayleigh and bulk waves. This is the type
of wave that is needed for our structures to work properly,
given that a Rayleigh wave is easily converted into an out-
of-plane flexural mode when it encounters the beams that are
the backbone of the graded meta-MEMS. To assess the input
wave, a time burst analysis at 536 kHz is performed on a
line of points on the chip before the waveguide. The signal is
then converted in the frequency-wavenumber domain through
a double FFT transform both in time and space. The goal
is to correctly define the nature of the wave by comparing
the experimental result with the analytical solution of the
Rayleigh’s dispersion curve. The result is reported in Figure
5(a) where the dotted line reports the analytical solution of the
dispersion relation of a Rayleigh wave [35], [36] for an infinite
medium, while the contour plot represents the experimental
solution. Even if the wide experimental wavenumber content
is a hallmark of several types of waves, the maximum of the
spectrum is located at very low wavenumbers: this suggests
long wavelengths (≈ 9 mm), fully compatible with Rayleigh
waves.

A. Micro-mechanical delay line

To observe the rainbow metamaterial capability of slowing
down the traversing wave and to confine it, we perform a
time domain analysis with a relatively narrow-band signal
at 536 kHz. This frequency is slightly below the resonant
frequency of the third last resonator, such that the wave is not
stopped but strongly slowed down. We consider, as a reference,
a resonator located at the end of the waveguide to fully
show the resonators’ ability of shortening the wavelength and
simultaneously slowing down the wave. This effect happens
more efficiently with frequency in the lower range of the array.
Figure 5 (b), shows a time frame from the experiments. We see
how the incoming wave propagates through the waveguide and
it is gradually compressed in space, given that we discern 2
distinct wavelengths λ. This compression is also matched by a
slowing of both phase velocity (which is a result of shortening
the wavelength at a given frequency) and group velocity (given
by a change in shape and curvature of the dispersion curve).
Moreover, the resonators are acting as expected, moving out-
of-plane and confining the propagating wave inside them.

B. Wave filtering and signal amplification

The final characterisation aims to show the effectiveness
of the graded meta-MEMS in acting as frequency filters and
amplifiers. To verify this point, a large bandwidth signal is
generated at the input. Figure 6, shows a space-frequency
analysis of the numerical and experimental data. The different
frequency components of the wave are selectively stopped at
different spatial positions, according to a phenomenon known
in physics as as the rainbow effect [29]. The halt is in
correspondence of the bandgap openings that are generated
progressively in space by the resonance frequency of the
resonators. Moreover, we notice that the displacement field
of each wave component is increased in correspondence of
the position of the resonator that has a resonance frequency
matching the one of the wave. Once the maximum amplitude


v

Fig. 6. Space-frequency results of the numerical (a) and experimental (b) data of the out of plane displacement field. The white line, obtained by interpolating
the local maxima, denotes the space-frequency dependence of the bandgap inside the graded meta-MEMS.

for a given frequency is reached, the bandgap opens and strong
wave attenuation and reflection is observed. It is clearly visible
how the frequency content of the input signal is amplified by
the resonance of each resonator. The amplification at resonance
is increased by the group velocity decrease, which enhances
the interaction time between the wave and the resonators
[17]. In this manner, before being backscattered, the waves
enjoy a longer interaction with the resonators enhancing their
displacement amplitude when compared against the case of
isolated resonators with equal resonance frequency.
These two effects, i.e. filtering and amplification are
strongly related; the wave attenuation along the waveguide
is caused by the transfer of energy to the resonators, thus
experiencing amplification effects.

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have shown the rainbow effect at the
microscale by means of flexural resonators. We have ex-
perimentally demonstrated the potential advantages of using
phononic graded meta-MEMS for frequency signal ampli-
fication and filtering. Leveraging a peculiar control of the
waveguide dispersion properties using graded resonators we
confine and amplify different frequency components along
space. The implementation of locally changing dispersion
curves integrates a slowdown effect both in terms of energy
and information carried by the wave. This effect also allows for
broadband signal attenuation given the generation of multiple
partially overlapping band gaps. The proposed device can be
suitably employed for applications involving sensing, wave
filtering or delay-lines in MEMS. Moreover, it paves the way
to the development of efficient energy harvesters, that may
benefit from the enhanced interaction of the incoming wave
with the target resonator.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the financial support of the
H2020 FET-proactive Metamaterial Enabled Vibration Energy

Harvesting (MetaVEH) project under Grant Agreement No.
952039. The authors acknowledge the availability of experi-
mental facilities at PoliFAB.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Corigliano, R. Ardito, C. Comi, A. Frangi, A. Ghisi, and S. Mariani,
Mechanics of Microsystems.
John Wiley ’&’ Sons Inc, 2017.

[2] J. Segovia-Fernandez, M. Cremonesi, C. Cassella, A. Frangi, and
G. Piazza, “Anchor losses in AlN contour mode resonators,” Journal
of Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 265–275, 2015.

[3] X. Zhao, L. Colombo, and C. Cassella, “Aluminum nitride two-
dimensional-resonant-rods,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 116, no. 143504, pp.
1–6, 2020.

[4] X. Zhao, O. Kaya, M. Pirro, M. Assylbekova, L. Colombo, P. Simeoni,
and C. Cassella, “A 5.3 GHz Al0.76Sc0.24N two-dimensional resonant
rods resonator with a kt2 of 23.9%,” Journal of Microelectromechanical
Systems, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 561–570, 2022.

[5] R. V. Craster and S. Guenneau, Acoustic Metamaterials.
Springer
Dordrecht, 2016.

[6] B. J. Ash, S. R. Worsfold, P. Vukusic, and G. R. Nash, “A highly
attenuating and frequency tailorable annular hole phononic crystal for
surface acoustic waves,” Nature Communications, vol. 8, no. 174,
pp. 1–7, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41467-017-00278-0

[7] C. Pouya and G. R. Nash, “Sub- and supersonic elastic waves in
an annular hole phononic metamaterial,” Communications Materials,
vol. 2, no. 55, pp. 1–8, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.
com/articles/s43246-021-00163-w

[8] B. J. Ash, A. R. Rezk, L. Y. Yeo, and G. R. Nash, “Subwavelength
confinement of propagating surface acoustic waves,” Applied Physics
Letters, vol. 118, no. 013502, pp. 1–7, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/full/10.1063/5.0038381

[9] P. Delsing et al., “The 2019 surface acoustic waves roadmap,” Journal
of Physics D: Applied Physics, vol. 52, no. 35, pp. 1–41, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6463/ab1b04/
meta

[10] R. Ardito, M. Cremonesi, L. D’Alessandro, and A. Frangi, “Application
of optimally-shaped phononic crystals to reduce anchor losses of MEMS
resonators,” in 2016 IEEE International Ultrasonics Symposium (IUS),
2016, pp. 1–3.

[11] Z. Yao, V. Zega, Y. Su, Y. Zhou, J. Ren, J. Zhang, and A. Corigliano,
“Design, fabrication and experimental validation of a metaplate for
vibration isolation in MEMS,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Sys-
tems, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1401–1410, 2020.


vi

[12] V. Zega, C. Gazzola, A. Buffoli, M. Conti, L. G. Falorni, G. Langfelder,
and A. Frangi, “A defect-based mems phononic crystal slab waveguide,”
in 2022 IEEE 35th International Conference on Micro Electro Mechan-
ical Systems Conference (MEMS), 2022, pp. 176–179.

[13] O. Kaya, X. Zhao, and C. Cassella, “Frequency reprogrammable
Al0.7Sc0.3N acoustic delay line with up to 13.5 % bandwidth,” in 2022
Joint Conference of the European Frequency and Time Forum and IEEE
International Frequency Control Symposium (EFTF/IFCS), 2022, pp. 1–
4.

[14] O. Kaya, X. Zhao, and C. Cassella, “An aluminum scandium nitride
(Al0.64Sc0.36N) two-dimensional-resonant-rods delay line with 7.5%
bandwidth and 1.8 dB loss,” in 2022 IEEE 35th International Conference
on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems Conference (MEMS), 2022, pp.
1018–1021.

[15] J. Zhao, B. Bonello, L. Becerra, O. Boyko, and R. Marchal, “Focusing
of rayleigh waves with gradient-index phononic crystals,” Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 108, pp. 1–5, 2016.

[16] A. Colombi, D. Colquitt, P. Roux, S. Guenneau, and R. V. Craster, “A
seismic metamaterial: The resonant metawedge,” Sci. Rep., vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 1–6, 2016.

[17] J. M. De Ponti, A. Colombi, R. Ardito, F. Braghin, A. Corigliano,
and R. V. Craster, “Graded elastic metasurface for enhanced energy
harvesting,” New J. Phys., vol. 22, no. 013013, 2019.

[18] G. Chaplain, D. Pajer, J. M. De Ponti, and R. Craster, “Delineating
rainbow reflection and trapping with applications for energy harvesting,”
New J. Phys., vol. 22, no. 6, p. 063024, 2020.

[19] Y. Chen, M. Kadic, and M. Wegener, “Roton-like acoustical dispersion
relations in 3D metamaterials,” Nature communications, vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 1–8, 2021.

[20] Y. Xia, E. Riva, M. I. N. Rosa, G. Cazzulani, A. Erturk, F. Braghin,
and M. Ruzzene, “Experimental observation of temporal pumping
in electromechanical waveguides,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 126, p.
095501, Mar 2021. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.126.095501

[21] J. M. De Ponti, L. Iorio, E. Riva, R. Ardito, F. Braghin, and
A. Corigliano, “Selective mode conversion and rainbow trapping via
graded elastic waveguides,” Phys. Rev. Appl., vol. 16, no. 3, p. 034028,
2021.

[22] G. J. Chaplain and J. M. De Ponti, “The elastic spiral phase pipe,”
Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 523, pp. 1–15, Apr 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0022460X21007185

[23] A. B. Khanikaev, R. Fleury, S. H. Mousavi, , and A. Alu, “Topologically
robust sound propagation in an angular-momentum-biased graphene-like
resonator lattice,” Nat. Commun., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2015.

[24] S. H. Mousavi, A. B. Khanikaev, and Z. Wang, “Topologically protected
elastic waves in phononic metamaterials,” Nat. Commun., vol. 6, pp. 1–5,
2015.

[25] S. D. Huber, “Topological mechanics,” Nat. Phys., vol. 12, p. 621–623,
2016.

[26] G. Chaplain, J. M. De Ponti, G. Aguzzi, A. Colombi, and R. V. Craster,
“Topological rainbow trapping for elastic energy harvesting in graded
Su-Schrieffer-Heeger systems,” Phys. Rev. Applied, vol. 14, p. 054035,
Nov 2020.

[27] J. M. De Ponti, L. Iorio, G. J. Chaplain, A. Corigliano, R. V. Craster,
and R. Ardito, “Tailored topological edge waves via chiral hierarchical
metamaterials,” Phys. Rev. Appl., vol. 19, p. 034079, Mar 2023. [Online].
Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.19.034079

[28] J. M. De Ponti, L. Iorio, E. Riva, F. Braghin, A. Corigliano, and
R. Ardito, “Enhanced energy harvesting of flexural waves in elastic
beams by bending mode of graded resonators,” Front. Mater., vol. 8,
pp. 1–7, 2021.

[29] K. L. Tsakmakidis, A. D. Boardman, and O. Hess, “‘Trapped rainbow’
storage of light in metamaterials,” Nature, vol. 450, no. 7168, pp. 397–
401, nov 2007.

[30] J. Zhu, Y. Chen, X. Zhu, F. J. Garcia-Vidal, X. Yin, W. Zhang, and
X. Zhang, “Acoustic rainbow trapping,” Scientific Reports, vol. 3, no.
1728, pp. 1–6, 2013.

[31] J. M. De Ponti, Graded Elastic Metamaterials for Energy Harvesting.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021.

[32] B. Zhao, H. R. Thomsen, J. M. De Ponti, E. Riva, B. Van Damme,
A. Bergamini, E. Chatzi, and A. Colombi, “A graded metamaterial
for broadband and high-capability piezoelectric energy harvesting,”
Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 269, p. 116056, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0196890422008445

[33] F. Laermer and A. Schilp, “Method of anisotropically etching silicon,”
patent US 5 501 893A. [Online]. Available: https://patents.google.com/
patent/US5501893A/en

[34] P. Rajagopal, M. Drozdz, E. A. Skelton, M. J. Lowe, and R. V. Craster,
“On the use of absorbing layers to simulate the propagation of elastic
waves in unbounded isotropic media using commercially available finite
element packages,” NDT & E International, vol. 51, pp. 30–40, 2012.

[35] J. D. Achenbach, Wave Propagation in Elastic Solids, 1973. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780720403251/
wave-propagation-in-elastic-solids

[36] K. Graff, Wave Motion in Elastic Solids, ser. Dover Books on
Physics
Series.
Dover
Publications,
1991.
[Online].
Available:
https://books.google.it/books?id=5cZFRwLuhdQC


