1

Operando Photonic Band Gap Probe of Battery Electrode Materials

Alex Lonergan1, Umair Gulzar1, Yan Zhang1 and Colm O’Dwyer1,2,3,4*

1School of Chemistry, University College Cork, Cork, T12 YN60, Ireland

2Micro-Nano Systems Centre, Tyndall National Institute, Lee Maltings, Cork, T12 R5CP, Ireland

3AMBER@CRANN, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland

4Environmental Research Institute, University College Cork, Lee Road, Cork T23 XE10, Ireland

Abstract

Innovative new materials are consistently emerging as electrode candidates from lithium-ion battery 
research, promising high energy densities and high-rate capabilities. Understanding potential 
structural changes, morphology evolution, degradation mechanisms and side reactions during lithiation
is important for designing, optimising and assessing aspiring electrode materials. In-situ and operando 
analysis techniques provide a means to investigate these material properties under realistic operating 
conditions. Here, we demonstrate an operando spectroscopic method using photonic crystal-structured 
electrodes that uses the optical transmission spectrum to monitor changes to the state of charge or 
discharge during lithiation and the change to electrode structure, in real-time. Photonic crystals possess 
a signature optical response, with a photonic bandgap (or stopband) presenting as a structural colour 
reflection from the material. We leverage the presence of this photonic stopband, alongside its intricate 
relationship to the electrode structure and material phase, to correlate electrode lithiation with changes 
to the optical spectrum during operation. In this work, we explore the optical and electrochemical 
behaviour of a TiO2 anode in a lithium-ion battery, structured as an inverse opal photonic crystal. In 
principle, the operando technique demonstrated here is versatile and applicable to a wide range of 
electrochemical electrode material candidates when structured with ordered porosity akin to a photonic 
crystal structure.


2

Introduction

The growing popularity of smartphones, electric vehicles and wearable electronic devices, alongside their 

associated high energy demands, has driven the research for lithium-ion battery (LIB) materials towards 

achieving higher energy densities, higher cycling stability, longer lifespans, safer battery cells, lighter and 

more flexible designs1 2 3. Future energy storage devices require highly energy dense materials which can be 

manufactured into versatile designs to support emerging technological innovation4 5. Research attempts to 

facilitate these requirements commonly explore alternative electrode materials for both the anode6 7 and the 

cathode8 9. Another approach focuses on exploring novel geometries or material dimensions, with particular 

emphasis on nano-sized architectures, for the electrode materials10 11. Incorporating nano-sized features into 

the electrode design has reported advantages of shorter ion diffusion lengths with a larger surface area 

exposed, improved rate capability from the increased electrolyte/electrode interface and better accommodation 

of material volume changes due to inherent porosity or particle spacing12 13. 

Mainstream commercial uptake of these alternative electrode materials or designs requires detailed 

information on side reactions, degradation mechanisms, particle cracking, morphology evolution, material 

phase changes and state of charge heterogeneity in order to assess the health and long term stability of these 

potential electrodes in functioning cells14 15 16. In-situ and operando characterisation techniques offer pathways 

to assess the battery performance and electrode material evolution non-invasively, allowing for this 

information to be obtained under realistic operating conditions by maintaining the sealed battery environment 

during analysis17 18 19 This is contrary to ex-situ or post-mortem analytical techniques which deconstruct the

battery cell for analysis, introducing the possibility of material contamination which may not provide an 

accurate description of performance20. 

Development and progress related to in-situ and operando techniques in the literature has taken many 

forms, cleverly utilising a variety of different analytical techniques to probe aspects of LIB behaviour. In-situ 

x-ray diffraction (XRD) has been used to track structural changes and reversibility in anatase TiO2 electrodes21

and assess the crystallinity and identify metastable phases in silicon nanowires22. In-situ and operando Raman 

spectroscopy can monitor the intensity and position of phonon modes which has been used to identify 


3

structural phase transitions (or lack thereof) in TiO2 nanowire and nanoparticle electrodes23 or pinpoint the 

lithiation potential in doped silicon anodes using the transition from crystalline to amorphous silicon as an 

indicator24. Operando atomic force microscopy (AFM) has been used to study dendrite growth on lithium 

metal electrodes25 or assess the mechanical properties of silicon anodes during lithiation processes26.  A myriad 

of other techniques used in the literature for in-situ and operando studies include nuclear magnetic resonance 

(NMR)27, scanning electron microscopy (SEM)28, transmission electron microscopy (TEM)29, fourier 

transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy30 and acoustic ultrasound transmission31, to name just a few. 

Critically, each of these techniques offers an insight into LIB operation which cannot be obtained through 

conventional ex-situ methods. Recently, operando and in-situ optical characterisation techniques have begun 

to emerge. Optical scattering intensity from electrode materials and particles has been used to track phase 

transitions and state of charge in specific materials32 33. Optical fibre Bragg grating sensors have been 

embedded in coin cells in efforts to provide non-invasive operando assessment of chemo-mechanical stress in 

electrode materials34. Cross-sectional optical microscopy images of lithium-ion full cells have been used to 

provide in-situ insights into lithiation-linked color changes and electrode thickness evolution35. In-situ UV-

Vis spectroscopy has been shown to provide useful supplementary characterisation to electrochemical 

processes by determining charge storage mechanisms and tracking of changes in material oxidation states36.

Adopting optical probes provide many opportunities to evaluate mechanical/volumetric changes, interfacial 

species changes, electrolyte composition and absorption characteristics related to electronic processes with 

materials, to name a few possibilities. While invasive probes prove useful to evaluation cell-level state of 

health in batteries, there are challenges in assessing how active material interconnection and changes can be 

tracked in real-time, a problem that lies between spectroscopic identification of surface species or changes 

and electrode-level response.

Here, we take an approach to develop an operando electrode characterisation technique that exploits 

the unique characteristics of photonic crystals (PhCs), where the periodicity in material refractive index creates 

a pseudo photonic band gap, somewhat analogous to the electronic band gap in semiconducting materials, to 

disallow propagation of certain frequencies of light. More specifically, we leverage the presence of the 

photonic stopband in inverse opal (IO) structured TiO2 anodes to monitor the behaviour of the electrode non-


4

destructively during reversible lithitation-induced changes to the interconnected active material. Electrodes 

incorporating an IO PhC design have been explored to a large degree in the literature, and serve as model 

electrodes for investigating porosity and the influence of interconnection between active materials without 

binders or additives37 38 39. However, these IO PhCs are much more than just a simple structural template and

are renowned for their ability to manipulate specific frequencies of light40 41; the periodic dielectric structure 

establishes a ‘structural colour’ reflection from the PhC surface42 43. The structural colour inherent to these 

materials is a key component to the unique potential of the technique proposed here. Electrodes which adopt 

a periodic PhC can exploit this observable structural colour to provide information on battery material 

behavior, non-destructively and without specialised equipment, provided the battery cell was constructed to 

facilitate observation of the electrode material. Recently, the shrinking and swelling of PhC hydrogels have 

used changes in structural colour to track water content present in solid-state electrolyte in zinc-air batteries44, 

demonstrating the capability of a PhC-based optical monitoring system.

While ordered and interconnected porous materials such as inverse opals have show very good stable 

response in LIBs using a range of cathode and anode materials, there remain some opens questions on how 

such electrodes vary during cycling since it has been assumed that porosity (acknowledging the gravimetric 

and volumetric energy density penalty) is believe to facilitate the typical volumetric change, while the 

interconnected nature maintains electrical conductivity41. But deformation accommodation mechanically, 

must also occur if that is the case, or a change to periodicity must accompany large volume changes. Similar 

queries arise for random porous materials and the nature of material packing, ionic and electronic conductivity 

and the benefits of non-tortuous porosity. The marriage of photonic crystal and electrochemical and physical 

processes is examined here as a operando tracking probe to determine how they behave during cycling. The

idea for this concept has been proposed for some time45, though there has yet to be a practical implementation 

for the technique. In this work, we showcase a new operando characterisation technique for LIBs which 

directly exploits this phenomenon. Our results suggest that for TiO2 IO electrodes, the wavelength position 

and transmission intensity of the photonic stopband is intimately linked to the degree of lithiation of the 

electrode. The degree of light transmission intensity, as evidenced by operando spectra, is found track with

the operating voltage for both charge and discharge processes; a cyclical variation in the optical transmission 


5

emerges during charging and discharging. Operando transmission spectra recorded during cyclic voltammetry 

and galvanostatic charge/discharge cycles of TiO2 IO electrodes exhibit consistent red-shifting of the photonic 

stopband energy during cycling. We discuss the significance of these results, correlating the shifts in the 

photonic stopband to the physical properties of the IO electrode. Most notably, the operando technique 

explored here is not restricted to just TiO2 IO electrodes; the method is versatile and applicable to a wide range 

of electrochemically active electrode materials that can be structured to feature a photonic stopband.

Defining the conditions for operando analysis of TiO2 IO anodes

The optical probe is based on an angle-resolved transmission measurement arrangement (Figure 1(a)) where 

the TiO2 IO electrode is measured while charging and discharging in a three-electrode cell (Figure 1(b)). Here, 

we analyse TiO2 IO anodes coated with a thin layer of Ni metal to provide electrical conductivity of a current 

collector while maintaining optical transparency. More detailed information on the choice of materials and 

electrode design can be found in the Methods section. When dealing with the optical response of PhCs, an 

important consideration for the location of the photonic stopband is the periodicity of the structure. For IOs, 

the centre-to-centre pore distance is often used as an indicator of structural periodicity. For our TiO2 IOs, we 

measured centre-to-centre pore distances (Figure 1(c)) and they vary in the range 320 – 330 nm. These TiO2

IOs were prepared via sol-gel infiltration of PS spheres (see Methods section for further details) with initial 

diameters in the range 370 – 380 nm, exhibiting a well-documented uniform shrinkage upon inversion to the 

IO42 43 46. A typical SEM image of a TiO2 IO following the deposition of a 20 nm Ni metal layer can be seen 

in Figure 1 (e); the deposition of the metal layer through magnetron sputter coating has the effect of thickening 

the top surface of the IO walls. Additional SEM images for the TiO2 IO post-cycling can be found in the 

Supplementary Materials Fig. S2. These TiO2 electrodes are materials we have investigated for many years 

and in binder-free and conductive-additive free formulations, they provide very stable multi-thousand cycle 

life response in standard carbonate electrolytes and offer a reliable and well characterised LIB anode system 

to carefully extract a correlation between spectroscopic and electrochemical response. There are some open 

questions such as how anatase TiO2 responds to lithiation during a cycle and over long cycling lifetimes, how 

interconnected porous materials generally behave during initial and longer term cycling in terms of material 


6

expansion and the supposed intrinsic benefits of porosity and what changes occur in materials that are 

relatively stable of long cycle durations. 

Figure 1 Operando spectroscopy and photonic crystal battery electrodes. (a) The operando technique for
photonic crystal LIB electrodes obtains simultaneous optical spectra and electrochemical charge-discharge 
data from the ordered macroporous TiO2 inverse opal electrode. (b) The battery cell uses a three-electrode 
configuration to allow light transmission through the electrode. Lithium metal is used as the counter electrode 
and reference electrode, with sputtered Ni forming the current collector to an underlying glass substrate to the 
working electrode. (c) Scanning electron microscopy of a typical TiO2 IO used as an electrode prior to any 
modifications shows the highly ordered interconnected nature of the material. (d) The optical transmission 
spectrum of a typical unmodified TiO2 IO prepared using 350 nm polystyrene opal spheres as a sacrificial 
template, showing a photonic stopband centred at approximately 573 nm. (e) SEM image of a typical TiO2 IO 
following magnetron sputter deposition of 20 nm of Ni metal onto the surface to form the current collector. 
(f) A TiO2 IO following deposition of 20 nm of Ni metal and immersion of the IO into ethylene 
carbonate:dimethyl carbonate:LiPF6 battery electrolyte, showing a red-shifted photonic stopband centred at 
~766 nm.

Optical transmission spectra for typical TiO2 IOs used in this study are shown in Figs. 1 (d) and (f) for 

a pristine TiO2 IO in air and a Ni-coated TiO2 IO in LiPF6 electrolyte, respectively. The photonic stopband for 

the IO in air at 572 nm red-shifts to 766 nm upon infiltration with electrolyte. This effect is expected due to 

the increase in the effective refractive index of the IO when the electrolyte replaces the air in the porous 

structure42 46. The Bragg-Snell model is commonly used to estimate and predict the central position of photonic 

200 nm
200 nm

Pristine TiO2 IO
Ni-coated TiO2 IO
Ni-coated TiO2 IO - Electrolyte

Photonic 
Stopband

Pristine TiO2 IO - Air

Photonic 
Stopband

b
a

c
d
e
f

Counter/
Reference

Working
Electrode

Li Metal

Ni Mesh

EC/DMC/LiPF6 Electrolyte

TiO2 IO

Glass

Substrate
(Ni coated)


7

bandgaps and stopbands. At 0° incidence, the minimum transmission wavelength 𝜆111 for light reflected from 

the primary (111) plane is found from the Bragg-Snell relation using the effective refractive index 𝑛eff and 

the interplanar spacing 𝑑111 as:

𝜆min = 2 𝑑111 𝑛eff
(1)     

A common method, of which there are a few, used to calculate the 𝑛eff is based on a volume averaging of the 

IO refractive index 𝑛IO, with volume fraction 𝜑IO (typically, 𝜑IO = 0.26) , and the background filling material 

refractive index 𝑛bg, with volume fraction 𝜑bg (typically, 𝜑bg = 0.74), as:

𝑛eff = 𝑛IO 𝜑IO + 𝑛bg 𝜑bg
(2) 

Our previous work43 46 47 with anatase TiO2 IOs found a good agreement between effective refractive index 

estimates using eqn. (2) and experimentally measured optical transmission spectra for 𝑛IO = 2.488, yielding 

an estimate for the effective refractive index of 𝑛eff = 1.387. For the primary (111) reflection plane, 𝑑111 can 

be calculated for ideal and isotropic PhCs using the centre-to-centre pore distance 𝐷 via the relation:

𝑑111 = √

2

3 𝐷
(3) 

Measurements with TiO2 IOs show that a reduced interplanar spacing is present in TiO2 IOs prepared this 

way43 46, possibly attributed to anisotropic shrinking of the space between layers compared to the pore sizes 

on the horizontal plane. Importantly for this work, any changes to the optical spectra from changes to material 

dielectric constant, electrolyte or thickness/periodicity are comparative to an initial state or position, allowing 

for stopband shifts to be simply related to changes in 𝑛eff or 𝑑111, as in eqn. (1).

Reversible lithiation that causes cyclic fluctuations in optical transmission 

Since the approach is sensitive to changes in both material refractive index and periodicity or dimension, the 

fundamental electrochemical response was defined at the outset. Figures 2 (a) and (b) show the voltammetric 

response observed on a typical cyclic voltammogam (CV) for a TiO2 IO electrode for the first and second 

cycle, respectively. The current peaks at ~ 1.63 V in the cathodic sweep and ~ 2.20 V in the anodic sweep are 

typical of reversible lithiation reactions with anatase phase TiO248, peaks present just below ~ 1.3 V in the 


8

cathodic sweep may suggest the presence of a bronze phase TiO2(B), potentially indicating a mixture of both 

phases49. However, there is a large peak at ~ 2.20 V in the cathodic sweep of the first CV cycle which is not 

present in the second cycle, or any subsequent cycles for that matter. The peak voltage for this reaction 

coincides with the reported reaction potential for the conversion of Ni metal to NiO50; the reverse reaction 

(NiO conversion to Ni metal) is not present in this potential window (1.0 – 3.0 V) as this reaction is reported 

to happen below 1.0 V50 and so the modification of the Ni current collecting deposit remains unique to the 

very first cycle.

The operando monitoring of the TiO2 IO electrode immediately revealed some significant effects on 

the appearance of the transmission spectra, compared to the initial spectra prior to cycling. One such effect is 

visible in Figures 2 (c) and (d), which shows several transmission spectra, recorded at 3.0 V, for two different 

TiO2 IO electrodes undergoing cyclic voltammetry (Figure 2 (c)) and galvanostatic charge/discharge (Figure

2 (e)). For every electrode we cycled, and every electrochemical process we tested, we find a significant

irreversible drop in transmission intensity through the electrode, which occurs after the first cycle and,

critically, remains essentially unchanged for all subsequent cycles. The oxidation of the Ni metal current 

collector layer to NiO is most likely the underlying cause for the significant reduction in transmission intensity 

unique to the first cycle; the conversion process ceases after the first cycle, with no substantial drops in 

transmission intensity observed after this point. The photonic stopband also undergoes a considerable red-

shift (~16 nm) in the first cycle between 3.0 V and 2.0 V, likely linked to the conversion of Ni to NiO and 

subsequent increase in effective refractive index of the PhC47, see Supplementary Materials Fig. S3 for more 

details.

Intercalation-mode Li-ion battery material involve reversible lithium insertion and removal during 

each cycle.
This often results in volumetric swelling, sometimes
causing cracking in cyclic 

swelling/contraction cycles, among other effects. Determining the relative contributions of composition (thus 

refractive index) changes and physical (dimension) changes is difficult and they are often measured separately. 

Our approach couples both parameters and we find that real-time monitoring of these processes exhibits cyclic 

behaviour coincident with the charging and discharging cycles. Figures 2 (e) and (f) show a series of operando


9

transmission spectra recorded at 0.1 V intervals for a typical cathodic sweep (discharge, 3.0 V – 1.0 V) and 

the corresponding anodic sweep (charge, 1.0 V – 3.0 V), respectively. Most notably, we see a cyclic fluctuation 

in the optical transmission intensity that is closely linked to the operating voltage. Lithium insertion into the 

electrode during the discharge acts to decrease the overall transmission intensity. The transmission intensity 

is then recovered to the initial intensity, at the cycle’s beginning, when lithium is removed during the charge 

process.

Figure 2 Cyclic optical opacity and lithiation. Labelled peaks on cyclic voltammetry curves for the (a) 1st

and (b) 2nd cycles of a typical TiO2 IO anode, cycled at 0.2 mV/s, showing the disappearance of a prominent 
peak centred at 2.20 V after the first discharge with a suggested link to an irreversible conversion of Ni to NiO 
in the 3 – 1 V voltage window. Operando optical spectra recorded for TiO2 IO anodes at 3.0 V for electrodes 
undergoing (d) cyclic voltammetry and (e) galvanostatic charge/discharge processes, highlighting an initial 
significant irreversible drop in transmission intensity occurring in the early stages of battery life. Reversible 
and cyclic transmission intensity fluctuations shown via operando optical spectra recorded at 0.1 V intervals 
in a typical (c) discharge (cathodic sweep) and (d) charge (anodic sweep) for a TiO2 IO anode. Certain spectra 
are accentuated in colour to highlight specific voltage intervals with the largest fluctuations in transmission 
intensity.

Nickel Oxide Layer

Irreversible Conversion @2.20 V

Lithium Removal: 

Transmission Recovery

Lithium Insertion: 
Transmission Drop

Cyclic Change to Opacity

After 1 Cycle

3.0 V

3.0 V

1.0 V

1.0 V

2.20 V
2.20 V

2.20 V
1.63 V
1.24 V
1.64 V
1.27 V

Cyclic Voltammetry @ 3.0 V
Galvanostatic Charge/Discharge @ 3.0 V

a
b
c

d
d
e

Nickel Metal Layer


10

Here, this effect is shown for a typical CV cycle (0.2 mV/s) but we observe this cyclic process in every 

cycle during voltammetric measurements and also during galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles. The 

transmission intensity constantly, and reversibly, responds to the operating voltage and thus, the level of 

lithiation of the electrode i.e. the mole fraction of Li in LiχTiO2. This identifies an effective refractive index 

change and not a change to the dimensions of the TiO2 electrode during lithium uptake or removal. Several of 

the operando spectra in Figures 2 (e) and (f) are displayed in colour to draw attention to certain spectra at 

specific voltages, namely, the spectra which coincide with the largest suppression or recovery in transmission 

intensity. In the discharge in Figure 2 (e), the largest drop in transmission intensity is found between 1.7 – 1.5 

V. Likewise, during charging the most pronounced recovery in the transmission intensity is found in the 

operando spectra recorded between 2.1 – 2.3 V. Considering that for TiO2, the lithium insertion reaction in 

the discharge occurs at ~ 1.63 V and the lithium removal reaction occurs at ~ 2.20 V, as per the CV data, there 

appears to be a strong correlation between the expected mole fraction of lithium content in the electrode and 

the transmission intensity. Greater lithium mole fractions in the electrode clearly cause a suppression of total 

optical transmission. The drops in transmission intensity are consistent across multiple cycles. Cyclic opacity 

in the electrode is thus linked to the state of charge or depth of discharge. For example, during the lithiation 

of the electrode in the discharge process, voltages between 1.7 – 1.5 V are the onset of more optically opaque 

electrodes and this voltage window in a typical galvanostatic discharge process coincides with an increase in 

the lithium mole fraction in LiχTiO2 from χ ~0.1 to χ ~0.25.

The photonic band-gap and changes to material dimensions in operando

Beyond the overall optical transmission intensity changes during cycling, which track the reversible lithiated 

state of the electrode, spectral features near the photonic band-gap of the ordered macroporous electrode can 

reveal much finer changes in the optical profile and so the dimensions and changes to the TiO2 IO. As per 

eqns. (1) – (3), the photonic stopband of PhC materials is inherently sensitive to the IO pore spacing and 

refractive indices of the materials comprising the porous structure. Figure 3 (a) shows the calculated specific 

capacity at cycle 7 and cycle 70 for a TiO2 IO undergoing repeated galvanostatic charge/discharge processes 

at a C-rate of 2C, showing a respectable performance with a discharge specific capacity of ~ 160 mA h g-1 at 


11

that fast rate, which comparing favourably with other reports for TiO2 materials38 39 and our previous 

examination of these types of electrodes over 5000 cycles; the volumetric expansion is small in the first several 

hundred cycles. Calculated mole fractions of lithium incorporation into LiχTiO2 based on the theoretical 

specific capacity for TiO2, that is 168 mA h g-1 for Li0.5TiO2 or 335 mA h g-1 for Li1TiO223 39, indicate that 

~0.5 moles (Li0.5TiO2) are incorporated at full discharge, a common occurrence with TiO2 electrodes. Figure 

3 (b) shows the corresponding optical transmission spectra for cycle 7 and cycle 70, both recorded at 3.0 V. 

An enlarged view of the photonic stopband is shown in Figure 3 (c), showing the subtle changes in the 

stopband energies during cycling. Most importantly, the shift in the central wavelength position of the 

photonic stopband is emphasised with ~10 nm red-shift observed between cycle 7 and 70. Additional operando

optical spectra for these measurements, showing the cyclic reversible transmission intensity, can be found in 

the Supplementary Materials Fig. S4.

Figure 3 (d) depicts the measured stopband minimum, recorded from operando spectra at 3.0 V, versus 

the number of completed full (charge an discharge) cycles. Interestingly, there appears to be a linear 

relationship between the stopband position and the number of completed cycles; the cycle life of the electrode 

is indicated by the red-shift in stopband position. Over extended (several hundred to several thousand) cycling 

periods, the structural walls of TiO2 IOs have been observed to thicken39 while retaining the periodicity and 

interconnected order. Quantifying this change in the IO structure as relating to an expansion of the interplanar 

spacing of the PhC or an increase in the effective refractive index of the composite material should allow for 

a correlation to be established between the observed structural colour of the material and the cycle number.

Expansion occurs in all directions and the change to the stopband energy is linked to the (111) planes or the 

ordered crystal, i.e. its thickness. The electrochemical behaviour of the TiO2 IO is stable across a number of 

cycles, as seen in Figure 3 (e) with consistent specific capacity values (~ 150 – 160 mA h g-1). The 

Supplementary Material Fig. S5 provides more detail on the coulombic efficiency for this cell. The red-shift 

of the photonic stopband is a gradual and consistent process that occurs throughout the battery life, as 

illustrated in Figure 3 (f). Changes to the photonic stopband position are minor, often just a few nanometres 

of spectral shift, depending on the number of cycles completed. It is important to remember that the cyclic 

and reversible change in light transmission from reversible lithiation during each cycle in Figure 2 of course 


12

happens here also, while the spectrum red-shifts over extended cycling, and the changes to the dimension of 

the TiO2 become apparent.

Figure 3. Photonic stopband spectral shift during reversible lithiation. (a) Voltage versus specific capacity 
for a typical TiO2 IO anode undergoing galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling at 2C, showing cycle 7 and 
cycle 70. (b) The corresponding operando optical transmission spectra, both recorded at 3.0 V. (c) The same 
optical spectra with a closer focus on the gradual red-shift in stopband position with increased battery cycling, 
in this case highlighting a 10 nm red-shift recorded between cycle 7 and cycle 70. (d) A plot showing the 
recorded stopband position at 3.0 V versus the number of completed cycles for a TiO2 IO anode at a 
charge/discharge rate of 2C. A linear fit is applied to the data, suggesting a predictable red-shift with increasing 
cycle number. (e) Recorded specific capacity values across a number of cycles in the galvanostatic 
charge/discharge process of a TiO2 IO anode. (f) Enlarged view of the photonic stopband of a TiO2 IO anode 
showing the gradual red-shift in the central stopband position at 3.0 V with higher cycle number. (g) A 
schematic diagram showing the proposed effect of battery cycling on the photonic stopband of IO structured 
electrodes, with a red-shift in the optical signature observed for increased cycling.

This gradual red-shift in stopband position is not limited to galvanostatic charge/discharge processes; 

it can also be observed in the repeated voltammetric cycling. Optically, the operando transmission spectra, 

recorded at 3.0 V in each case, for a number of selected cycles are shown in Figures 4 (a) – (c) for scan rates

of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 mV/s, respectively. For each scan rate, the spectra are compared at 3.0 V after a period of 

4 full cycles has passed. Importantly, there is a gradual red-shift in the stopband position with cycle number,

observed in each case. At 0.1 mV/s the stopband shifts ~11 nm from 781 nm to 792 nm between cycle 1 and 

Stopband Red-Shift

Cycling

Δλ ~ 10 nm

a
b
c
d

e
f
g


13

cycle 5. A smaller stopband shift of ~9 nm from 781 nm to 790 nm between cycle 1 and cycle 5 is observed 

for the electrode cycled at 0.2 mV/s. Finally, the smallest stopband shift of ~8 nm from 778.5 nm to 786.5 nm 

is observed for the electrode cycled at 0.3 mV/s between cycle 2 and 6. Figures 4 (d) – (f) show the recorded 

CV curves for the 2nd cycle for the three different TiO2 IO electrodes at scan rates of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 mV/s, 

respectively. In each case, the most prominent reaction peaks are located at ~ 1.6 V in the cathodic sweep and 

~ 2.2 V in the anodic sweep, typical of TiO2 electrodes48 49.

By examining the red-shifts, recorded after 4 completed cycles for each scan rate shown in Figures 4

(a) – (c), a trend in the optical data emerges. The largest red-shift of 11 nm is associated with the slowest scan 

speed (0.1 mV/s) and the smallest red-shift is linked to the quickest scan rate (0.3 mV/s). Extending this 

analysis to include the stopband red-shift data for additional CV cycles, shows the trend is maintained, as 

depicted in Figure 4 (g). The highest rate of change in the stopband position with cycle number is observed 

for the slowest scan speed (0.1 mV/s), featuring the steepest slope of 2.86 nm/cycle, with the converse 

statement being true for the slowest scan speed with a slope of just 1.60 nm/cycle. Since the potentiodynamic 

voltammetry does not force a constant reaction rate from a fixed current of a galvanostatic cycle, the fastest 

scan rate thus corresponds to the shortest lithiation duration. Additionally, the change in scan rate is just 0.1 

mV/s, yet we observe a specific difference in response correlated to the degree of lithiation, showing how 

sensitive the measurement and lithiation processes are to voltage changes. The extended lithiation period of 

the overall cycle associated with slower scan speeds may contribute to this effect, with higher degrees of 

lithiation and repeated cycling causing further red-shifting of the stopband. By comparison to the galvanostatic 

data in Figure 2 (d), we note that the fixed current (reaction rate) under standard charge-discharge conditions 

results in a stopband shift of ~0.134 nm/cycle, slightly over an order of magnitude less that under voltammetric 

polarization in spite of a near identical effect of cyclic optical transmission variation during each cycle. Since 

our method is not susceptible to differences between the cumulative processes that contribute to the total 

integrated time in galvanostatic vs voltammetric cycling, the difference in stopband shift from changes to 

material dimension indicates that the galvanostatic data results in a lesser degree of lithiation-induced swelling 

per cycle than voltammetry under similar conditions.


14

Figure 4. Linking red-shift to electrode cycle life. Gradual red-shifting of the photonic stopband in operando 
optical spectra of TiO2 IOs occurring over the course of battery operation for cyclic voltammetry at rates of 
(a) 0.1 mV/s, (b) 0.2 mV/s and (c) 0.3 mV/s, all spectra shown are recorded at a voltage of 3.0 V. In each case, 
the shift in stopband position is shown with an accompanying plot where the shift in stopband position is 
highlighted. The corresponding cyclic voltammetry curves, with labelled reactions peaks, for the same TiO2
IO anodes in their second cycle recorded at rates of (d) 0.1 mV/s (e) 0.2 mV/s and (f) 0.3 mV/s. (g) A plot of 
the photonic stopband positions, all recorded at 3.0 V, versus the number of completed CV cycles for TiO2 IO 
anodes at three different CV scan rates. The data for the relationship between stopband position and number 
of completed cycles for fixed scan rate follow a linear fit.

An interesting feature of the plots in Figure 4 (g) is that there appears to be a strong linear correlation 

between the shift in stopband position and the number of cycles completed. This effect, for these electrodes 

with different CV scan speeds, is similar to the linear trend in stopband shift observed in galvanostatic 

charge/discharge, data displayed in Figure 3 (d). From the operando optical data, it would appear that every 

electrochemical test acts to alter the TiO2 IO electrode, in a steady and predictable manner, giving rise to the 

observed photonic stopband red-shift effect. Additional tests performed on TiO2 IOs prepared from larger 

polystyrene sphere templates also show the same optical effects; there is a red-shift in the photonic stopband 

(now centred at longer wavelengths from a larger initial pore size) with increased cycling. More details on the 

performance and behavior of the larger pore TiO2 IO electrodes can be found in the Supplementary Materials 

Figs. S6-S8. The fact that the stopband red-shifts, regardless of the initial central wavelength position, suggests 

Δλ ~ 9 nm
Δλ ~ 8 nm

2.12 V

1.58 V

2.20 V

1.54 V
1.27 V

2.29 V

1.60 V

Δλ ~ 11 nm

a
b
c

d
e
f
g


15

that this red-shift is closely linked to the properties of the photonic stopband and of the reversibly lithiated 

electrode as a whole and, critically, not an isolated or abnormal change to the transmission/absorption 

properties of the material in a specific region of the spectrum. Referring back to eqn. (1), there are two possible 

explanations for the red-shift in the photonic stopband: an increase in 𝑑111 (the out-of-plane interplanar 

spacing of the photonic crystal) or an increase in 𝑛eff (the effective refractive index). 

Considering the small magnitude of the red-shift to the photonic stopband, changes to either of these 

parameters would also be minor. In this study, some of the larger shifts in stopband position were on the scale 

of ~10 nm. In galvanostatic charge/discharge tests a 10 nm stopband red-shift was recorded after 70 cycles 

compared to just 7 cycles and in CV tests at 0.1 mV/s a stopband red-shift of 11 nm was recorded between 

cycle 1 and 5. The corresponding changes to the electrode parameters correspond ∆𝑑111 = 3 nm or ∆𝑛eff = 

0.025, assuming the optical shift can be attributed solely to each parameter and not some combination of both, 

overall constituting very small changes to the system properties. These miniscule modifications to the 

electrode system are difficult to detect accurately by experimental means, e.g. in situ or operando microscopy 

measurements require sensitivity to track the slight changes to 𝑑111 which are of the order of ~1% of the 

overall interplanar spacing of the macroporous electrode, and photoelectron or energy loss spectroscopy 

analysis of the surface/interface rely on specific cell designs to confidently probe the region of interest.

Tomographic or CT-methods could visualise structural changes, but the sensitivity of the spectral shifts used 

in this work provide high fidelity tracking of very small, but systematic, changes to the overall electrode during 

each cycle, and over the full cycle life, both together. Consequently, for the TiO2 IO electrode system 

examined here, it is currently difficult to uncouple the minor shift in photonic stopband position and attribute 

its origin to either a change in 𝑑111 or 𝑛eff, or, some combination of both parameters.

The PhC electrodes examined in this work consisted of 8 – 10 layers of IO material (see Supplementary 

Materials Fig. S7, for example). Assuming a change in the structural periodicity of ∆𝑑111 = 3 nm alone is 

responsible for the photonic stopband shift, this would translate to a maximum increase in the overall height 

of the electrode of approximately 24 – 30 nm. Some expansion of the electrode height would indicate a change 

to 𝑑111, otherwise a change to 𝑛eff could be assumed. Overall, the observations show a very sensitive change 


16

to optical transmission that is linked to the star of charge or depth of discharge (and lithium mole fraction) 

within each cycle. In addition, we can also track the small but systematic change to the periodicity and 

thickness of an electrode in real-time from the shift of photonic bandgap. Within each red-shifted cycle, the 

remarkably consistent reversible and cyclic change to transmission intensity during the cycle is always 

maintained and this is found under galvanostatic and voltammetric conditions. The operando optical effects 

observed here during reversible lithiation are fascinating and have the potential to offer an optical real-time 

readout of electrode state based on an observed structural colour. The method allow the reversibility to be 

tracked during each cycle and the state of the electrode over extended cycling non destructively, which may 

prove useful for material sensitive to swelling, changes in electronic conductivity or mechanical integrity with 

lithiation, or for assessing influence of SEI, CEI or other interfacial films or interphases.

Conclusions

Operando optical transmission spectra in conjunction with electrodes adopting an IO design have been shown 

to be capable of providing an optical assessment of the degree of lithiation and electrode cycling behaviour. 

Through close monitoring of the transmission spectra during operation, the operando optical spectra reveal an 

intricate relationship between the magnitude of the transmission intensity and the nominal lithium content in 

the electrode at various operating voltages. Drops in the overall transmission intensity correlate to higher 

uptake of lithium content in the electrode; a remarkable reversibility is seen in the inverse process as the 

intensity recovers at the onset of voltages corresponding to lithium extraction from the electrode. Cyclic 

variability in the optical transmission intensity is shown to relate directly to the state of charge of the electrode, 

linking the electrode optics to the electrochemical performance.

Another optical effect which shows great promise is the structural colour inherent to the IO PhC, 

exhibiting a direct response to repeated cycling. A gradual red-shift of the photonic stopband is incurred over 

the course of multiple cycles, establishing a visual colour indicator of the electrode behaviour and history. 

From the data sets reported here, it would appear that this shift in stopband position is linear with cycle number 

and, more importantly, predictable. An observable structural colour for an electrode linked to the cycle number 


17

has the potential to chronicle the electrochemical performance, provided the optical behaviour of the IO 

material is reasonably well-understood or characterised. Taking the broad applicability of this technique into 

consideration, with it being feasible for a wide range of electrode materials which can adopt an IO structure

or be made to mimic one, the operando optical analysis explored here is versatile enough to inform on 

electrode phase and structural evolution while relating this information back to expected levels of lithiation 

during the cycle. This method shows great promise in assessing and diagnosing material performance, 

furthering our understanding of potential electrode candidates by closely monitoring their fundamental

material properties alongside their electrochemical evolution.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge support from the Irish Research Council Government of Ireland Postgraduate Scholarship 

under award no. GOIPG/2016/946. We also acknowledge funding from the Irish Research Council Advanced 

Laureate Award under grant no. IRCLA/2019/118.

Materials & Correspondence 

Correspondence or request for materials should be address to Colm O’Dwyer, Email: c.odwyer@ucc.ie


18

Methods

Preparation of Polystyrene Artificial Opal Templates

Polystyrene spheres in an aqueous suspension were used to form the sacrificial artificial opal templates for the 

IO structure. Monodisperse sphere suspensions, with a concentration of 2.5 wt% polystyrene, were purchased 

from Polysciences Inc. and used, as received, for forming the opal templates via dip-coating. In this work, 

spheres were purchased with diameters in the ranges of approximately 370 – 380 nm and 490 – 500 nm, 

depending on the application. A sulfate ester used in the preparation process of the polystyrene spheres 

bestowed a slight negative charge to the spheres. Opal templates were prepared on glass substrates which had 

been pre-cut into 2 × 1 cm2 pieces. The glass substrates were first cleaned via successive ultrasonication (at a 

frequency of 40 kHz) in acetone (reagent grade 99.5%; Sigma-Aldrich), isopropyl alcohol (reagent grade 

99.5%; Sigma-Aldrich) and deionised water, for 5 minutes each, in order to remove any dust or dirt particles 

by physical agitation. Following the cleaning process, a 1 × 1 cm2 surface on the glass substrate was exposed 

to UV-Ozone treatment using a Novascan PSD Pro Series cleaner for a period of 1 hour, in order to promote 

surface hydrophilicity, immediately prior to immersion in the aqueous sphere suspension. Treated substrates 

were dip-coated into pre-heated vials of sphere suspension at a rate of 1 mm min-1 which was maintained at a 

temperature of approximately 50 °C. An MTI PTL-MM01 dip-coater was used for all dip-coating processes. 

Glass substrates were immersed at a slight incline angle (~ 10 – 20°) to the vertical in order to improve the 

adhesion of the polystyrene spheres to the surface. Upon immersion into the suspension, the substrate was

held still for 5 minutes to the allow the surface of the suspension to settle and allow a stable meniscus to form 

with the substrate. Finally, the substrate was withdrawn from the suspension at a rate of 1 mm min-1 with the 

polystyrene spheres arranging themselves into an ordered colloidal crystal template during extraction.

Sol-Gel Infiltration and Preparation of TiO2 Inverse Opals

TiO2 inverse opals were prepared using the sol-gel synthesis technique to infiltrate the voids in a prepared 

sacrificial opal template. In this technique, a liquid (sol) precursor is introduced into the air voids of an opal 

template. Ambient moisture or applied heat to the infiltrated template allows the sol to hydrolyse, condense 

or crosslink to form a solid material (gel) which resides in the interstitial voids of the opal template. Annealing 


19

the samples at high temperatures is often performed to create crystalline materials. For the TiO2 IOs prepared 

in this work, a 0.1 M TiCl4 solution in isopropyl alcohol was utilised as the sol-gel precursor. A titanium (IV) 

chloride tetrahydrofuran complex (TiCl4·2THF 97%; Sigma-Aldrich) was used as the source of TiCl4; the 

precursor solution was magnetically stirred for 24 h before use, at which point the solution was clear in colour. 

For the sol-gel infiltration process, the TiCl4 solution was drop-cast using a syringe onto opal templates. One 

or two drops of the precursor was applied, just enough to adequately wet the entire surface of the photonic 

crystal. Special care was taken to not flood the sample with excess precursor, which can create solid layers of 

material which may sit atop any potential IO structure. The sacrificial opal template was subsequently removed 

via calcination in air at 450 °C for 1 hr with a heating ramping rate of 5 °C min-1. The high temperature allowed 

for both the removal of the opal template and for the crystallisation of the TiO2 material to anatase phase TiO2. 

Microscopy and Materials Characterisation

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out using a Zeiss Supra 40 high resolution SEM at typical 

accelerating voltages of 15–20 kV. The instrument was used to analyse the morphology of the opals and IO 

PhCs, and the metal film morphology or thickness. Dimensional analysis for feature size distributions from 

SEM images were measured using IMAGEJ software. Microscopy analysis was performed on selected 

samples before and after electrochemical cycling. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis was 

also performed on the same SEM instrument using an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. EDX line scan 

measurements were obtained in several directions across the surface. EDX analysis was particularly useful for 

detecting the presence of residual electrolyte salt in post-cycling images, often presenting as enlarged IO walls. 

EDX analysis could screen for elements present in the electrolyte salt and ensure that post-cycling images 

were free from any salt contamination, please see Supplementary Materials Figs. S11 and S12 for further 

details.

Raman Scattering Spectroscopy for Identifying Material Phase

Raman scattering analysis was used to characterise the prepared TiO2 IO films. The analysis was useful for 

identifying the material phase of TiO2, with modes corresponding to anatase phase TiO2 detected here (see 


20

Supplementary Materials Fig. S10 for more details). In this work, Raman scattering spectroscopy was carried 

out using a Renishaw InVia Raman Spectrometer with a 30 mW Ar+ laser with an excitation wavelength of

532 nm. The beam was focused using a 40x objective lens and collected using a RenCamCCD camera.

Deposition of Conductive Metal Layers onto TiO2 Inverse Opals

Nickel metal layers were deposited over the surface of TiO2 IOs, formed on glass substrates, in order to provide 

a conductive layer for the electrode. A thickness of 20 nm of Ni was used for the electrodes in this work, 

providing a good balance between the conductivity and the optical transmission of the electrode. The metal 

films were deposited via physical vapour deposition using a Quorum 150 T S magnetron sputtering system. 

The thickness of the film deposited could be measured using a built-in film thickness monitor. The Ni metal 

target was purchased from Ted Pella Inc. featuring a material purity of 99.99%. The magnetron sputtering 

system featured a shutter system which could be used to clean the surface of the Ni target prior to deposition, 

a necessary precaution in the case of Ni metal which is prone to oxidation. All films were sputtered under an 

inert atmosphere of high purity to prevent the any reaction between the metal particles and the gas atmosphere. 

In this case, argon gas (> 99.995%) was used as the inert gas for sputtering. The possibility of using transparent 

conductive oxides, such as fluorine-doped tin oxide, as substrates was explored and found to be incompatible 

with this measurement system due to alloying lithiation-induced opacity, see Supplementary Materials Fig. 

S1 for more details.

Creating the Transparent Battery Cell for Recording Operando Spectra

Conventional coin and pouch cells used in traditional and non-specialised lithium-ion battery research could 

not be used for analysis in this work as they do not possess the capability to record optical spectra, often been 

constructed and encapsulated in stainless steel. In order to record optical spectra consistently and to ensure 

compatibility with our optical system, a custom battery cell was designed to facilitate optical measurements. 

A cylindrical glass vial with a diameter of 2.5 cm and a height of 5 cm was used as the main body of the 

transparent cell, allowing for light to pass through and be collected by a spectrometer. A custom 3D printed 

cap was designed using AutoCAD to tightly to fit over the top of the system, while also gripping the electrode 


21

and ensuring it remained upright during analysis. Two protruding holes from the top of the cap were used to 

allow for electrical wire connections to the electrodes. A stereolithography (SLA) vat polymerisation 3D 

printer was used for constructing 3D models. Here, a Formlabs Form 2 3D printer, featuring a 250 mW laser 

operating at 405 nm, was used. High temperature resistant resin from Formlabs was used, on merit of its strong 

structural composition and high deflection temperature >210C, in order to resist possible degradation from 

electrolyte vapour during operation. A hot glue gun and Kapton tape (Bemis Company, Incorporated) were 

used to seal openings in the cell and keep it hermetically sealed. All cells were assembled in an inert 

atmosphere, in this case inside a glovebox in an argon environment.

Optical Transmission Measurements

Optical transmission spectra were recorded using an Ocean Optics Inc. USB2000 + VIS-NIR-ES UV-visible 

spectrometer which features an operational wavelength range of 350 – 1000 nm. An unpolarised tungsten-

halogen lamp with an operational wavelength range of 400 – 2200 nm purchased from Thorlabs Inc. was used 

as the broadband light source for recording spectra. For spectra recorded in air, 100% transmittance was 

normalised to the transmission spectrum of a clean blank piece of glass, allowing the spectra of TiO2 IOs on 

glass to be recorded relative to the spectrum of glass. Similarly, for the spectra recorded in 0.1 M LiPF6

electrolyte, 100% transmittance was normalised to the transmission spectrum of a clean blank piece of glass 

suspended upright in the electrolyte. For all spectra recorded in this work, the angle of incidence between the 

normal from the photonic crystal surface and the incident light was fixed at 0° incidence. For recording 

measurements over long periods of time (e.g. operando spectra recorded over many different electrochemical 

cycles), transparent battery cells were clamped in place to prevent any movement of the sample. This is an 

important consideration as there is some spectral variance experienced between different sample spots on the 

same IO electrode; clamping the cell in place ensured that the spectra were consistent and, importantly, 

recorded from the exact same sample spot.


22

Electrochemical Analysis

Electrochemical testing was carried out using a Biologic VSP potentiostat/galvanostat instrument. TiO2 IO 

electrodes were tested in a half-cell arrangement, as the working electrode, with lithium metal acting as the 

counter and reference electrode. The mass loadings for the TiO2 IO electrodes were within the range 0.1 – 0.2 

mg. Figure 1 (b) shows the typical half-cell configuration used in this work, with the half-cell setup tailored 

for optical transmission. A flooded-cell design, with an excess of electrolyte of approximately 5 – 6 mL, was 

used for all of the electrochemical tests in this work. The electrolyte was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich as a 

1 M solution of LiPF6 salt dissolved in a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of ethylene carbonate and diethyl carbonate. For 

both galvanostatic and cyclic voltammetry tests, the voltage ranges were set to 1.0 – 3.0 V. CV scan rates were 

varied from 0.1 – 0.3 mV/s, depending on the application. For galvanostatic tests, C-rates were calculated 

based on a specific capacity of 168 mA h g-1 for TiO2, where 1 C corresponds to an applied specific current 

of 168 mA g-1. In this work, galvanostatic tests were either carried out at 1 or 2 C, explicitly stated in each 

case.


23

References

1
Kim, T., Song, W., Son, D.-Y., Ono, L. K. & Qi, Y. Lithium-ion batteries: outlook on present, future, and 
hybridized 
technologies. 
Journal 
of 
Materials 
Chemistry 
A
7, 
2942-2964 
(2019). 

https://doi.org:10.1039/c8ta10513h

2
Wu, F., Maier, J. & Yu, Y. Guidelines and trends for next-generation rechargeable lithium and lithium-ion 
batteries. Chemical Society Reviews 49, 1569-1614 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1039/c7cs00863e

3
Ziegler, M. S. & Trancik, J. E. Re-examining rates of lithium-ion battery technology improvement and cost 
decline. Energy & Environmental Science 14, 1635-1651 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1039/d0ee02681f

4
Chen, D., Lou, Z., Jiang, K. & Shen, G. Device Configurations and Future Prospects of Flexible/Stretchable 
Lithium-Ion 
Batteries. 
Advanced 
Functional 
Materials
28, 
1805596 
(2018). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201805596

5
Kong, L., Tang, C., Peng, H.-J., Huang, J.-Q. & Zhang, Q. Advanced energy materials for flexible batteries in 
energy storage: A review. SmartMat 1 (2020). https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/smm2.1007

6
Kim, H. et al. Exploring Anomalous Charge Storage in Anode Materials for Next-Generation Li Rechargeable 
Batteries. Chemical Reviews 120, 6934-6976 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00618

7
Wang, F. et al. Prelithiation: A Crucial Strategy for Boosting the Practical Application of Next-Generation 
Lithium Ion Battery. ACS Nano 15, 2197-2218 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1021/acsnano.0c10664

8
Shi, J.-L. et al. High-Capacity Cathode Material with High Voltage for Li-Ion Batteries. Advanced Materials
30, 1705575 (2018). https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201705575

9
Manthiram, A. A reflection on lithium-ion battery cathode chemistry. Nature Communications 11, 1550 (2020). 
https://doi.org:10.1038/s41467-020-15355-0

10
Mahmood, N., Tang, T. & Hou, Y. Nanostructured Anode Materials for Lithium Ion Batteries: Progress, 
Challenge 
and 
Perspective. 
Advanced 
Energy 
Materials
6, 
1600374 
(2016). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201600374

11
Zhang, L. et al. Advanced Matrixes for Binder-Free Nanostructured Electrodes in Lithium-Ion Batteries. 
Advanced Materials 32, 1908445 (2020). https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201908445

12
Osiak, M., Geaney, H., Armstrong, E. & O'Dwyer, C. Structuring materials for lithium-ion batteries: 
advancements in nanomaterial structure, composition, and defined assembly on cell performance. Journal of 
Materials Chemistry A 2, 9433-9460 (2014). https://doi.org:10.1039/c4ta00534a

13
Pomerantseva, E., Bonaccorso, F., Feng, X., Cui, Y. & Gogotsi, Y. Energy storage: The future enabled by 
nanomaterials. Science 366, eaan8285 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1126/science.aan8285

14
Xu, J., Deshpande, R. D., Pan, J., Cheng, Y.-T. & Battaglia, V. S. Electrode Side Reactions, Capacity Loss and 
Mechanical Degradation in Lithium-Ion Batteries. Journal of The Electrochemical Society 162, A2026-A2035 
(2015). https://doi.org:10.1149/2.0291510jes

15
Liu, H. et al. Intergranular Cracking as a Major Cause of Long-Term Capacity Fading of Layered Cathodes. 
Nano Letters 17, 3452-3457 (2017). https://doi.org:10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b00379

16
Iqbal, N., Haq, I. U. & Lee, S. Chemo-mechanical model predicted critical SOCs for the mechanical stability 
of electrode materials in lithium-ion batteries. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 216, 107034 
(2022). https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmecsci.2021.107034

17
Liu, D. et al. Review of Recent Development of In Situ/Operando Characterization Techniques for Lithium 
Battery 
Research. 
Advanced 
Materials
31, 
1806620 
(2019). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201806620

18
Li, H., Guo, S. & Zhou, H. In-situ/operando characterization techniques in lithium-ion batteries and beyond. 
Journal of Energy Chemistry 59, 191-211 (2021). https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jechem.2020.11.020

19
Grant, A. & O'Dwyer, C. Real-time nondestructive methods for examining battery electrode materials. Applied 
Physics Reviews 10, 011312 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1063/5.0107386

20
Harks, P. P. R. M. L., Mulder, F. M. & Notten, P. H. L. In situ methods for Li-ion battery research: A review 
of 
recent 
developments. 
Journal 
of 
Power 
Sources
288, 
92-105 
(2015). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.04.084

21
van de Krol, R., Goossens, A. & Meulenkamp, E. A. In Situ X‐Ray Diffraction of Lithium Intercalation in 
Nanostructured and Thin Film Anatase TiO2. Journal of The Electrochemical Society 146, 3150-3154 (1999). 
https://doi.org:10.1149/1.1392447

22
Misra, S. et al. In Situ X-ray Diffraction Studies of (De)lithiation Mechanism in Silicon Nanowire Anodes. ACS 
Nano 6, 5465-5473 (2012). https://doi.org:10.1021/nn301339g


24

23
Li, K. et al. Ultrafast-Charging and Long-Life Li-Ion Battery Anodes of TiO2-B and Anatase Dual-Phase 
Nanowires. 
ACS 
Applied 
Materials 
& 
Interfaces
9, 
35917-35926 
(2017). 

https://doi.org:10.1021/acsami.7b11652

24
Long, B. R., Chan, M. K. Y., Greeley, J. P. & Gewirth, A. A. Dopant Modulated Li Insertion in Si for Battery 
Anodes: Theory and Experiment. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 115, 18916-18921 (2011). 
https://doi.org:10.1021/jp2060602

25
Kitta, M. & Sano, H. Real-Time Observation of Li Deposition on a Li Electrode with Operand Atomic Force 
Microscopy 
and 
Surface 
Mechanical 
Imaging. 
Langmuir
33, 
1861-1866 
(2017). 

https://doi.org:10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b04651

26
McAllister, Q. P., Strawhecker, K. E., Becker, C. R. & Lundgren, C. A. In situ atomic force microscopy 
nanoindentation of lithiated silicon nanopillars for lithium ion batteries. Journal of Power Sources 257, 380-
387 (2014). https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.01.077

27
Trease, N. M., Zhou, L., Chang, H. J., Zhu, B. Y. & Grey, C. P. In situ NMR of lithium ion batteries: Bulk 
susceptibility effects and practical considerations. Solid State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 42, 62-70 (2012). 
https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssnmr.2012.01.004

28
Hovington, P. et al. In situ Scanning electron microscope study and microstructural evolution of nano silicon 
anode for high energy Li-ion batteries. Journal of Power Sources
248, 457-464 (2014). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.09.069

29
Fan, Z. et al. In Situ Transmission Electron Microscopy for Energy Materials and Devices. Advanced Materials
31, 1900608 (2019). https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201900608

30
Shi, F., Ross, P. N., Somorjai, G. A. & Komvopoulos, K. The Chemistry of Electrolyte Reduction on Silicon 
Electrodes Revealed by in Situ ATR-FTIR Spectroscopy. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 121, 14476-
14483 (2017). https://doi.org:10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b04132

31
Hsieh, A. G. et al. Electrochemical-acoustic time of flight: in operando correlation of physical dynamics with 
battery 
charge 
and 
health. 
Energy 
& 
Environmental 
Science
8, 
1569-1577 
(2015). 

https://doi.org:10.1039/c5ee00111k

32
Merryweather, A. J., Schnedermann, C., Jacquet, Q., Grey, C. P. & Rao, A. Operando optical tracking of single-
particle ion dynamics in batteries. Nature 594, 522-528 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41586-021-03584-2

33
Merryweather, A. J. et al. Operando monitoring of single-particle kinetic state-of-charge heterogeneities and 
cracking in high-rate Li-ion anodes. Nature Materials (2022). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41563-022-01324-z

34
Albero Blanquer, L. et al. Optical sensors for operando stress monitoring in lithium-based batteries containing 
solid-state or liquid electrolytes. Nature Communications 13, 1153 (2022). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41467-022-
28792-w

35
Hogrefe, C. et al. Cross-Sectional In Situ Optical Microscopy with Simultaneous Electrochemical 
Measurements for Lithium-Ion Full Cells. Journal of The Electrochemical Society 169, 050519 (2022). 
https://doi.org:10.1149/1945-7111/ac6c57

36
Zhang, D., Wang, R., Wang, X. & Gogotsi, Y. In situ monitoring redox processes in energy storage using UV–
Vis spectroscopy. Nature Energy (2023). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41560-023-01240-9

37
Sakamoto, J. S. & Dunn, B. Hierarchical battery electrodes based on inverted opal structures. Journal of 
Materials Chemistry 12, 2859-2861 (2002). https://doi.org:10.1039/b205634h

38
McNulty, D., Lonergan, A., O'Hanlon, S. & O'Dwyer, C. 3D open-worked inverse opal TiO2 and GeO2 
materials for long life, high capacity Li-ion battery anodes. Solid State Ionics 314, 195-203 (2018). 
https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2017.10.008

39
McNulty, D., Carroll, E. & O'Dwyer, C. Rutile TiO2 Inverse Opal Anodes for Li-Ion Batteries with Long Cycle 
Life, High-Rate Capability, and High Structural Stability. Advanced Energy Materials 7, 1602291 (2017). 
https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201602291

40
Armstrong, E. & O'Dwyer, C. Artificial opal photonic crystals and inverse opal structures – fundamentals and 
applications from optics to energy storage. Journal of Materials Chemistry C 3, 6109-6143 (2015). 
https://doi.org:10.1039/c5tc01083g

41
Lonergan, A. & O'Dwyer, C. Many Facets of Photonic Crystals: From Optics and Sensors to Energy Storage 
and 
Photocatalysis. 
Advanced 
Materials 
Technologies, 
2201410 
(2022). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.202201410

42
Schroden, R. C., Al-Daous, M., Blanford, C. F. & Stein, A. Optical Properties of Inverse Opal Photonic Crystals. 
Chemistry of Materials 14, 3305-3315 (2002). https://doi.org:10.1021/cm020100z

43
Lonergan, A., McNulty, D. & O'Dwyer, C. Tetrahedral framework of inverse opal photonic crystals defines the 
optical response and photonic band gap. Journal of Applied Physics
124, 095106 (2018). 

https://doi.org:10.1063/1.5033367


25

44
Zuo, Y. et al. A photonic hydrogel for health self-monitoring of solid-state electrolytes in zinc-air batteries. 
Energy Storage Materials 53, 136-147 (2022). https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ensm.2022.08.047

45
O'Dwyer, C. Color-Coded Batteries – Electro-Photonic Inverse Opal Materials for Enhanced Electrochemical 
Energy Storage and Optically Encoded Diagnostics. Advanced Materials
28, 5681-5688 (2016). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201503973

46
Lonergan, A., Hu, C. & O’Dwyer, C. Filling in the gaps: The nature of light transmission through solvent-filled 
inverse 
opal 
photonic 
crystals. 
Physical 
Review 
Materials
4, 
065201 
(2020). 

https://doi.org:10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.4.065201

47
Lonergan, A., Murphy, B. & O’Dwyer, C. Photonic Stopband Tuning in Metallo-Dielectric Photonic Crystals. 
ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology 10, 085001 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1149/2162-
8777/ac19c5

48
Gao, X. et al. Preparation and Electrochemical Characterization of Anatase Nanorods for Lithium-Inserting 
Electrode 
Material. 
The 
Journal 
of 
Physical 
Chemistry 
B
108, 
2868-2872 
(2004). 

https://doi.org:10.1021/jp036821i

49
Laskova, B., Zukalova, M., Zukal, A., Bousa, M. & Kavan, L. Capacitive contribution to Li-storage in TiO2 
(B) 
and 
TiO2 
(anatase). 
Journal 
of 
Power 
Sources
246, 
103-109 
(2014). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.07.073

50
Ou, J., Wu, S., Yang, L. & Wang, H. Facile Preparation of NiO@graphene Nanocomposite with Superior 
Performances as Anode for Li-ion Batteries. Acta Metallurgica Sinica (English Letters) 35, 212-222 (2022). 
https://doi.org:10.1007/s40195-021-01283-5


1

Operando Photonic Band Gap Probe of Battery Electrode Materials 

Alex Lonergan1, Umair Gulzar1, Yan Zhang1 and Colm O’Dwyer1,2,3,4*

1School of Chemistry, University College Cork, Cork, T12 YN60, Ireland

2Micro-Nano Systems Centre, Tyndall National Institute, Lee Maltings, Cork, T12 R5CP, Ireland

3AMBER@CRANN, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland

4Environmental Research Institute, University College Cork, Lee Road, Cork T23 XE10, Ireland

Contents

1.
Optical opacity associated with transparent conductive oxide substrates.................................................................1

2.
Additional SEM images of TiO2 IO electrodes.........................................................................................................3

3.
Additional operando optical data and electrochemical characterisation...................................................................4

4.
Larger IO periodicity: Equivalent optical effects and stopband shifting ..................................................................7

5.
Additional Material Characterisation for TiO2 IO Electrodes ................................................................................10

6.
References...............................................................................................................................................................15

1. Optical opacity associated with transparent conductive oxide substrates

In the main text, we described how a custom electrode needed to be designed to circumvent issues with 
substrate transparency for conductive oxide glasses. The final electrode design uses a non-conductive glass 
substrate to support the active material (a TiO2 inverse opal) with 20 nm of Ni metal deposited over the entire 
surface to act as a current collector layer. The thin layer of metal acting as the current collector layer is not 
ideal in terms of conductivity, yet thicker layers could not be used due to the need for optical transparency. 
Ideally, the conductive layer would be highly transparent to optical wavelengths. For this reason, glass 
substrates with fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) layers were first tested as potential conductive substrates for 
TiO2 IOs. Figure S1 (a) depicts a typical TiO2 IO prepared on an FTO substrate indicating the relative 
thickness of the layers comprising the electrode structure. In this instance, a TiO2 IO with a larger periodicity 
to those depicted in the main text was used (see Figs S6 – S8 below for more details on larger IO periodicities), 
hence the red hue in the observed structural colour.

The optical transmission spectra for a TiO2 IO, prepared on an FTO substrate, in an air and electrolyte 

background is shown in Fig. S1 (b). In air, a photonic stopband is observable with a central wavelength 
position of 693 nm. In electrolyte, the photonic stopband is red-shifted to longer wavelengths, with a central 
wavelength position of 892 nm. Figure S1 (c) contains several operando optical transmission spectra recorded 
during the first discharge of a TiO2 IO prepared on an FTO substrate. A very noticeable effect which occurs 
for the FTO substrates is a significant reduction in optical transmittance for the electrode, occurring in the 
early stages of the battery life. The lithium insertion potential for TiO2 occurs at ~ 1.65 V, as per the CV 
depicted in Figs. 2 (a) and (b) of the main text. The onset of the optical opacity for this electrode system occurs 
at higher potentials, suggesting it may be linked to a reaction between the SnO2 in FTO and the lithium. The 
electrode visually darkens and creates an overall reduction in transparency.


2

Fig. S1 (a) A typical TiO2 IO electrode prepared on an FTO substrate with a visible structural colour reflection. 
The relative thicknesses of the layers comprising the electrode are indicated. (b) Optical transmission spectra 
of a TiO2 IO electrode prepared on an FTO substrate in an air and electrolyte background with prominent 
photonic stopbands present. (c) Operando transmission spectra recorded during the first discharge of a TiO2
IO electrode prepared on an FTO substrate, showing a rapid decrease in overall transmittance. (d) 
Galvanostatic charge/discharge showing calculated specific capacities in the 10th cycle recorded at a specific 
current rate of 1C. (e) A comparison of the operando optical transmission spectra recorded before cycling and 
after completing 10 cycles. (f) A zoomed-in look at the operando optical spectrum after 10 cycles with no 
detectable stopband.

Electrochemically, the TiO2 IO electrode on FTO exhibits a reasonably similar performance to the 

TiO2 IO electrodes prepared on glass substrates with a conductive Ni layer which can be seen by comparing 
the calculated specific capacity values in Fig 4 (a) in the main text to Fig. S1 (d). However, while the 
electrochemical performance is similar in both cases, the data which can be extracted from the operando 
optical spectra is markedly different. Figure S1 (e) shows a comparison between the initial optical spectrum 
before any cycling occurs and the optical spectrum of the same IO sample on FTO after 10 cycles. Firstly, the 
overall transmittance of the electrode has significantly reduced, presumably linked to the darkening of the 


3

SnO2 material in the conductive FTO coating, as discussed above. The optical features on the operando 
spectrum after 10 cycles can be more clearly seen in Fig. S1 (f). Unlike the operando spectra shown in the 
main text, there does not appear to be any detectable stopband present in the spectra for the TiO2 IOs prepared 
on FTO. One possible explanation for the lack of a detectable photonic stopband could be that blackened SnO2
layer in FTO, which most likely quickly developed via reaction of SnO2 with lithium, obscured the presence 
of the photonic stopband in this case. Unfortunately, this means that it is not possible to track the evolution of 
the photonic stopband of the active material while use a conductive oxide substrate (like FTO), necessitating 
the need to use an alternative substrate, as outlined in the main text. 

2. Additional SEM images of TiO2 IO electrodes

An important consideration, for tracking the photonic stopband of the TiO2 IO electrodes, is that the structural 
order of the IO is maintained during cycling. The photonic stopband is sensitive to the repeating lattice 
structure and the refractive index of the IO material. Hence, it is important to establish that the long range 
order and periodicity of the IO is retained after electrochemical cycling. Figure S2 (a) displays additional SEM 
images which show the condition of a TiO2 IO which has performed 10 CV cycles at a rate of 0.3 mV/s, 
operando optical spectra and electrochemical for this IO can be found in the main text Figs. 4 (c) and (f), 
respectively. Likewise, Fig. S2 (b) shows additional SEM images for the a TiO2 IO which has been cycled for 
70 galvanostatic cycles at a rate of 2C, the corresponding electrochemical and operando optical spectra for the 
same sample can be found in the main text Fig. 3. The periodicity of the IO structure is still present in the all 
of the SEM images shown after undergoing electrochemical cycling. At higher magnifications, slight 
differences to the appearance of the top layer of IO material might arise from the rinsing of the electrode (to 
remove residual electrolyte salt) and re-coating with metal (to provide conductivity for microscopy imaging), 
see Fig. S9 below for more details on this process.

Fig. S2 (a) SEM images of various magnifications showing the appearance of a TiO2 IO electrode following 
10 completed CV cycles at a rate of 0.3 mV/s. (b) SEM images of various magnifications showing the 
appearance of a TiO2 IO electrode following 75 galvanostatic charge/discharge cycles at specific current rate 
of 2C.


4

3. Additional operando optical data and electrochemical characterisation

In the main text, a large drop in transmission intensity, occurring over the first electrochemical cycle only, 
was attributed to the formation of NiO from the Ni metal deposited over the surface to act as a conductive 
layer. Using a potential window of 3.0 – 1.0 V for testing the TiO2 active material, the reconversion of NiO 
to Ni metal does not occur as this reaction potential is reported as occurring below 1.0 V1. This restricts the 
conversion reaction of Ni to NiO to the first discharge only, linking this reaction to the drop in overall 
transmission intensity after the first cycle. This effect was discussed in some detail in the main text. However, 
an optical effect which was only briefly mentioned was the effect of this supposed conversion of Ni metal to 
NiO on the position of the photonic stopband. Referring to eqns. (1) and (2) in the main text, the wavelength 
position of the photonic stopband is linked to the effective refractive index of the IO. The effective refractive 
index is dependent on the material comprising the IO network, including any material which exist in the 
interstitial voids of the structure. Although only a thin coating of Ni metal is deposited across the surface of 
the IO, constituting only a very small fraction of the overall material of the IO network, the conversion of Ni 
metal to NiO (and the subsequent increase in refractive index) should have an impact on the position of the 
photonic stopband2. 

Fig. S3 (a) Cyclic voltammetry profile with labelled reaction peaks for the first cycle of a TiO2 IO electrode
cycled at a rate of 0.3 mV/s. (b) Operando optical spectra recorded at 3.0 V and 2.0 V in the first cathodic 
sweep in CV testing. An enlarged optical spectrum highlights a large initial red-shift in stopband position of 
16 nm occurring in the discharge from 3.0 – 2.0 V. (c) Cyclic voltammetry profile with labelled reaction peaks 
for the second cycle of the same TiO2 IO electrode cycled at a rate of 0.3 mV/s. (d) Operando optical spectra 
recorded at 3.0 V and 2.0 V in the second cathodic sweep in CV testing. No detectable stopband red-shift 
occurs in the second CV cycle in the discharge from 3.0 V – 2.0 V.


5

Figure S3 (a) shows the first CV cycle for a TiO2 IO electrode cycled at a rate of 0.3 mV/s. The 

prominent reaction at 2.18 V in the first cathodic sweep was linked to the reaction for the conversion of Ni 
metal to NiO in the main text. Figure S3 (b) displays the operando optical spectra recorded during the first 
cathodic sweep at 3.0 V and 2.0 V. At 2.0 V there is a stopband red-shift of approximately 16 nm from the 
initial position prior to cycling, a significant red-shift for this stage in the battery life. Importantly, this red-
shift at 2.0 V is detected before the expected lithium insertion reaction for TiO2 (~ 1.59 V, here), linking it to 
the conversion of Ni metal to NiO. In the second CV cycle for the same TiO2 IO sample, shown in Fig. S3 (c), 
the prominent reaction at 2.18 V present in the first cathodic sweep is not detected. This supports the assertion 
that the for the potential window operated here, that is 3.0 – 1.0 V, the conversion of Ni metal to NiO is an 
irreversible reaction for this system. Figure S3 (d) shows the operando optical spectra recorded in the second 
CV cycle at 3.0 V and 2.0 V. In this case, there is no detectable red-shift in stopband position at 2.0 V. This 
suggests that the large initial red-shift after the first cycle is linked to the conversion of Ni metal to NiO.

Fig. S4 Calculated specific capacities for (a) cycle 7 and (d) cycle 70 for a TiO2 IO electrode cycled at a rate 
of 2C. The accompanying operando optical transmission spectra recorded in 0.5 V intervals for the (b) cycle 
7 discharge, (c) cycle 7 charge, (e) cycle 70 discharge and (f) cycle 70 charge. The trends in the fluctuation of 
optical transmittance with operating voltage during the discharge and charge processes are consistently 
observed in both cycle 7 and cycle 70.

Figure S4 provides additional electrochemical and optical data for a TiO2 IO which performed 

galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling at a rate of 2C to accompany the data shown in Fig. 3 in the main text. 
The calculated specific capacities for the charge and discharge processes for cycle 7 and cycle 70 are displayed 
in Figs. S4 (a) and (d), respectively. More detailed discussion of the electrochemical performance of the TiO2
IO can be found in the main text. Of particular note in Fig. S4 are the operando optical spectra. Figure 3 in the 
main text detailed the photonic stopband red-shifting effect which occurs with increased cycling. Here, the 
operando optical spectra in Fig. S4 illustrate how the cyclic changes in transmission intensity (reported in Fig. 
2 in the main text for more discussion) are always occurring throughout the battery life for each cycle. 


6

Figures S4 (b) an (e) show operando optical spectra in 0.5 V intervals for the discharge processes in

cycle 7 and cycle 70, respectively. As discussed in the main text, increasing lithiation of the TiO2 IO electrode 
acts to the decrease the overall transmission intensity; the largest drops in the intensity are closely linked to 
the voltages associated with lithiation insertion into TiO2. In other words, electrode transmittance decreases 
with the nominal lithium content expected to be incorporated into the electrode material at a particular voltage. 
Likewise, Figs S4 (c) and (f) show the operando optical spectra in 0.5 V intervals for the charge processes in 
cycle 7 and 70, respectively. As lithium is removed from the TiO2 IO electrode during the charge process, the 
overall optical transmittance of the increases. When fully charged (at 3.0 V), the appearance of the 
transmission spectrum has recovered to its initial state prior to the cycle beginning. This cyclic relationship in 
the operando transmission spectra is present for every cycle monitored throughout the battery life. 

Fig. S5 (a) Calculated specific capacities for the galvanostatic charge and discharge processes for a number 
of cycles of a typical TiO2 IO cycled at a rate of 2C. (b) A plot showing the evolution of the specific capacity 
for the discharge and charge processes for the first 70 cycles of the same TiO2 IO cycled at 2C. The calculated 
coulombic efficiency for the first 70 cycles is also shown.

Additional electrochemical data for the same TiO2 IO electrode, cycled at a rate of 2C, is shown in 

Fig. S5. The calculated specific capacities for a number of cycles are shown for the discharge and charge 
processes in Fig. S5 (a). There is a noticeable difference in the discharge and charge specific capacity, with 
the charge process consistently featuring a smaller specific capacity. This effect occurs for every TiO2 IO we 
tested with our custom set-up. In terms of the coulombic efficiency for the battery cell, Fig. S5 (b) shows the 
evolution of the coulombic efficiency for the cell, alongside the discharge and charge capacity, across the first 
70 cycles in the battery life. The coulombic efficiency fluctuates between 60 – 80 %. 

Many works with TiO2 IO electrodes, prepared on stainless steel substrates and using traditional coin-

cell set-ups, feature much higher coulombic efficiencies with values close to 100% 3 4. Here, it is likely that 
the custom electrode design, needed to ensure optical transparency, limits the overall coulombic efficiency. 
For the custom set-up used in this work, a thin layer of Ni (20 nm) is used as the current collector layer. A 
thin layer of metal deposited over the surface of the entire electrode is not an ideal method to provide electrical 
conductivity, yet a thin layer was necessary to ensure optical transparency. Considering the differences 
between our custom electrode set-up and conventional battery testing methods in the literature, it is doubtless 
that the battery tested here features a much higher internal resistance. The coulombic efficiency of a cell is 
linked to number of factors, including: operating current, state of charge, the presence of parasitic reactions, 
temperature, battery age and internal resistance5 6. It is certainly plausible to attribute the likely higher internal 
resistances of the cells tested here as a contributing factor to the consistently observed lower coulombic 
efficiencies.


7

4. Larger IO periodicity: Equivalent optical effects and stopband shifting 

The TiO2 IOs used to investigate the operando optical effects in the main text were prepared using polystyrene 
sphere templates with diameters in the 370 – 380 nm range. In terms of the optical effects observed from the 
operando transmission spectra, a cyclic fluctuation of the electrode transmittance and a gradual red-shift of 
the photonic stopband position with cycling are observed for all TiO2 IO electrodes tested. For the red-shifting 
of the photonic stopband position, it is important to establish that any changes to the appearance of the 
photonic stopband are linked to structural or refractive index changes in the ordered material and not occurring 
as a result of a change in the optics of the background electrolyte over time. Understanding how the structure 
or composition of the electrode evolves over time is the more salient effect which can occur here; monitoring 
changes in the photonic stopband of the electrode has the potential to establish a system which can use the 
optical signature of the electrode to diagnose and assess the performance of and the changes to the electrode, 
non-destructively and in-operando. 

One way in which to determine whether the stopband red-shifting effect is tied to background optical 

effects or changes to the structural/optical properties of the IO, is to move the initial position of the photonic 
stopband and observe if the same optical red-shifting of the stopband occurs in different wavelength ranges. 
It is unlikely that changes to optics of the background electrolyte would homogenously span over large 
wavelength ranges, effectively eliminating this possibility if photonic stopband red-shifting effects were still 
observed. For this reason, larger TiO2 IOs were prepared using polystyrene sphere templates with diameters 
in the 490 – 500 nm range. These larger TiO2 IOs were prepared and used as electrodes in an identical fashion 
to the smaller IOs used throughout the main text. Figures S6 (a) and (b) show SEM images of the unmodified 
TiO2 IO and the Ni-coated TiO2 IO, respectively. 

Figures S6 (c) and (d) show the appearance of the transmission spectra for the larger TiO2 IOs in air 

and in electrolyte (also coated with 20 nm of nickel metal), respectively. In air, the photonic stopband for these 
IOs are centred at approximately 660 nm. After coating with 20 nm of Ni and immersing in electrolyte, the 
photonic stopband red-shifts to approximately 874 nm, as expected due to the increase in effective refractive 
index. These stopband positions constitute a significant shift in wavelength position from the IOs with smaller 
periodicities used in the main text (see Fig. 1) which featured a stopband at 573 nm in air and 766 nm in 
electrolyte. Optically, the effects observed in the operando transmission spectra for the larger TiO2 IOs are 
identical to the effects observed for the IOs with a smaller periodicity in the main text. Figure S6 (e) illustrates 
that an irreversible drop in transmission intensity is observed after the first cycle only, matching the effects 
described by Figs. 3 (a) and (b) in the main text. Figure S6 (f) demonstrates that the stopband red-shifting 
effect is still observed in the case of theses IOs featuring a larger periodicity. Here, there is a red-shift of 11 
nm which occurs between cycle 26 and 55 of a TiO2 IO cycled at a rate of 1C. Observing that the photonic 
stopband red-shift still occurs at these longer wavelengths, lends more credibility to the assertion that the 
changes to the stopband are tied to structural/optical changes of the IO material and not related to background 
optical changes in the electrolyte spectral signature.


8

Fig. S6 SEM images of a TiO2 IO prepared using larger (500 nm) polystyrene opal templates showing the (a) 
pristine condition of the IO and (b) the IO after coating with 20 nm of Ni metal for electrical conductivity.
The transmission spectra of a typical TiO2 IO prepared from larger (500 nm) polystyrene opal templates with 
photonic stopband positions highlighted for IOs immersed (c) in air and (d) in electrolyte. TiO2 IOs with larger 
periodicities show analogous optical effects to those presented in the main text through the operando optical 
spectra, namely the (e) irreversible transmission intensity drop after cycle 1 and (f) photonic stopband red-
shifting with increasing cycle number.


9

Fig. S7 A collection of SEM images for TiO2 IOs with larger periodicities prepared using 500 nm polystyrene 
opal templates. (a) SEM images of a TiO2 IO prepared on an FTO substrate. (b) SEM images of a TiO2 IO 
prepared on non-conductive glass and coated with a layer of 20 nm of Ni to act as a conductive layer. (c) SEM 
images of a TiO2 IO which has been imaged after completing approximately 75 galvanostatic cycles at a rate 
of 1C.

Figure S7 contains a collection of SEM images characterising the TiO2 IOs with larger periodicities 

used in this section. Figure S7 (a) shows the appearance of the TiO2 IOs, prior to any electrochemical cycling, 
prepared on an FTO substrate. The appearance of the TiO2 IOs, with thin IO walls, is easily observed here due 
the conductive layer of the FTO eliminating the need for a Ni metal conductive layer for imaging. Figure S7 
(b) displays SEM images for larger TiO2 IOs prepared on a non-conductive glass substrate with 20 nm on Ni 
deposited to act as a conductive later for imaging. Lastly, Fig. S7 (c) shows that appearance of these larger 
TiO2 IOs, prepared on glass substrates, post-cycling at a rate of 1C. Importantly, the structure of the IO is 
largely retained after cycling. In all cases shown in Fig. S7, there appears to be approximately 8 – 10 layers 
of IO material in the layered structure with large ‘islands’ of IO material present throughout the structure.

One final observation on the optical behaviour of these larger TiO2 IOs is illustrated in Fig. S8. Much 

like in the case of the TiO2 IOs with smaller periodicities explored in the main text, the overall transmittance 


10

of the electrode obeys a cyclic behavioural pattern where transmittance is highest for nominally low lithium 
content incorporated into the electrode and vice-versa. Optical transmission for the electrode reliably 
decreases to a minimum at the end of the discharge and then recovers to a maximum value at the end of the 
charge process. In Fig. S8, operando optical spectra in 0.5 V intervals are shown for the discharge processes 
of (b) cycle 26 and (e) cycle 55 and for the charge processes of (c) cycle 26 and (f) cycle 55. Mirroring the 
results in the main text, the cyclic transmittance is also seen for every cycle monitored here.

Fig. S8 Electrochemical and optical data TiO2 IOs with larger periodicities prepared using 500 nm polystyrene 
opal templates. Galvanostatic charge/discharge data showing calculated specific capacities for (a) cycle 26 
and (d) cycle 55. Operando optical spectra recorded in 0.5 V intervals for TiO2 IOs undergoing discharge from 
3.0 – 1.0 V showing a decrease in overall transmittance with increasing lithiation (matching the effects 
depicted in the main text) for (b) cycle 26 and (e) cycle 55. The accompanying operando optical spectra for 
the charge process of the TiO2 IO from 1.0 – 3.0 V showing a recovery in transmittance as delithiation occurs 
for (c) cycle 26 and (f) cycle 55.

5.
Additional Material Characterisation for TiO2 IO Electrodes

The requirement to use a custom electrode is explained above in the text accompanying Fig. S1. In short, 
conductive oxide substrates blacken, lowering the overall electrode transmittance significantly, with the onset 
of lithiation. For the results presented in this work, a custom electrode was developed as a means of avoiding
this effect. A non-conductive glass substrate was used for IO formation and 20 nm of Ni metal was used to 
provide a conductive layer for the electrode. The poor conductivity of the substrate also affected the ability to 
image the IO material via SEM. Microscopy images were prone to excessive charging effects and poor image 
definition as a direct consequence of the poor conductivity. As a result of this effect, many of the images 
shown of the TiO2 IO electrodes throughout the text already feature the 20 nm of Ni coating used to bestow a 
conductive layer to the electrode. The IOs depicted in these images feature noticeably thicker IO walls when 
compared to the uncoated TiO2 IOs in pristine condition.  


11

Fig. S9 Outline of the procedure used for depositing metal coats and imaging the TiO2 IO electrodes. To 
provide a conductive layer, 20 nm of Ni metal is first deposited onto a pristine TiO2 IO. After electrochemical 
cycling the electrode was cleaned to remove residual electrolyte and re-coated with 20 nm of Ni metal to 
provide a conductive layer for SEM imaging.

Figure S9 illustrates the metal coating procedure used to image samples in this study. First the pristine 

TiO2 IO is coated with 20 nm of Ni to provide conductivity for microscopy imaging, simultaneously fulfilling 
the requirement for a conductive current collector layer for the electrode. The pristine TiO2 IO shown here, is 
a typical TiO2 IO prepared on an FTO substrate using the same method and materials as the glass substrate; 
the conductive layer of the FTO substrate makes SEM imaging possible here. Finally, in order to image the 
electrode post-electrochemical cycling, the electrode needed to be cleaned (to remove residual electrolyte salt, 
see below for more details) and re-coated with 20 nm of Ni metal for imaging. Post-electrochemical cycling, 
the TiO2 IOs retain their structural order yet appear visually different with rougher IOs walls and small flecks 
of material present throughout. It is unclear whether or not this a direct result of electrochemical cycling or as 
a result of the cleaning process and repeated metal layers deposited across the surface. Regardless, the periodic
structure of the IOs is retained which is essential for observing the photonic stopband.


12

There are several different crystal phases of TiO2 which can form when crystallising the material; all 

of these different phases of TiO2 have distinctly different electrochemical and optical properties. 
Consequently, it is important to identify which phase of TiO2 is produced when conducting analysis of the 
material. Voltage plateaus in galvanostatic cycling and reaction peaks in CV cycling are dependent on the type 
of TiO2 being used. The reaction peaks observed in the CV cycles in the main text suggested the presence of 
anatase phase TiO27 (and possibly bronze phase TiO28) when compared to literature sources working with 
these materials. The reported refractive indices of different TiO2 phases are significantly different, thus 
affecting the expected position of the photonic stopband of any potential TiO2 IOs. For instance, rutile phase 
TiO2 IO is reported as having a refractive index of 2.62 at 633 nm9 while anatase phase TiO2 is reported as 
having a refractive index of 2.48 at 633 nm9. Our previous works with TiO2 IOs have suggested the dominant 
presence of anatase phase TiO2 IO using a combination of Raman spectroscopy and the expected position of 
the photonic stopband10 11 2.

Fig. S10 Raman scattering spectra for typical TiO2 IOs prepared in this study. (a) The raw, unprocessed 
spectrum shows evidence of background fluorescence but clear peaks are still observed. (b) Background 
subtraction for the Raman spectra allows clear peaks to be observed with labelled Raman shift positions.

Figure S10 shows the Raman spectra recorded from a typical TiO2 IO electrode used in this study. 

Raman spectra are recorded from uncoated TiO2 IOs prepared on glass substrates, prior to any deposition of 
metal or modification of the structure. The Raman spectrum shown in Fig. S10 (a) features several prominent 
peaks yet is prone to background fluorescence, a common issue with Raman spectra recorded with visible 
laser excitation sources. Figure S10 (b) shows the same spectrum following a background subtraction to show 
the peaks more clearly. The Raman shift peaks for the TiO2 IO material observed in this case are labelled and 
match with literature peaks for anatase phase TiO2 and not rutile phase TiO212 13. 


13

Fig. S11 (a) An SEM image showing a line-scan across a region heavily contaminated with electrolyte salt 
post-electrochemical cycling with an insufficient electrode cleaning procedure. (b) The corresponding EDX 
elemental analysis for the line-scan region showing an abundance of elemental fluorine. Individual line-scan 
data tracking elemental (c) titanium, (d) oxygen and (e) fluorine shows a prominent presence of fluorine across 
the sample surface.

Imaging the TiO2 IO electrode post-electrochemical cycling can be complicated due to the presence of 

residual electrolyte. An example of this effect can be seen in Fig. S11 (a) where an excess of electrolyte salt 
is visible on the IO surface of the SEM image of a TiO2 IO electrode which was only minimally treated post-
cycling. Elemental analysis performed using an EDX line-scan across a region of this electrolyte-contaminated 
surface reveals high levels of fluorine and phosphorous in the elemental composition (from LiPF6), seen in 
Fig. S11 (b). Several line-scans for titanium, oxygen and fluorine are shown in Figs. S11 (c), (d) and (e), 
respectively. For a TiO2 IO electrode, high content of elemental Ti and O should be expected. The line-scan 
counts show a dominant presence of elemental F, suggesting an excess of residual electrolyte.  

To prevent the obscuring of the IO surface with residual electrolyte when imaging the surface, it is 

essential to establish that the cleaning of the electrode removes the majority of material not related to the IO 
material. This is an important consideration to ensure that SEM images captured of the electrode post-cycling 
are not complicated with other material and just show the appearance of the IO material. For the TiO2 IO 
electrodes used in this work, allowing the electrode to sit in a vial of de-ionised water for 3 – 4 hours was 
found to be sufficient to remove the majority of residual electrolyte from the surface of the electrode. 


14

Fig. S12 (a) An SEM image showing a line-scan across a region which has been carefully cleaned to remove 
residual electrolyte post-electrochemical cycling. (b) The accompanying EDX elemental analysis does not 
detect a significant presence of fluorine in this case. Individual line-scan data tracking elemental (c) titanium, 
(d) oxygen and (e) fluorine detects a minimal concentration of fluorine when the sample has undergone 
sufficient post-treatment to remove residual electrolyte.

Figure S12 (a) shows the appearance of a typical TiO2 IO electrode post-cycling which has been 

cleaned using this process. The structure of the IO material is maintained and resembles its initial appearance 
prior to cycling. Importantly, there is no visible presence of residual electrolyte contaminating the surface of 
this SEM image. Elemental analysis of a line-scan region across this SEM images does not appear to detect 
any significant levels of fluorine or phosphorous for this area, suggesting a lack of LiPF6 electrolyte salt, as 
seen in the EDX elemental composition in Fig. S12 (b). EDX line-scans of elemental titanium, oxygen and 
fluorine content are shown for this region in Figs. 12 (c), (d) and (e), respectively. Compared to the electrolyte 
contaminated region in Fig. S11, the region depicted here has minimal presence of fluorine and shows high 
counts of titanium and oxygen, as expected from a TiO2 IO. These results would suggest a very minor presence 
of residual electrolyte remaining on the cleaned electrode sample. Consequently, any SEM images of a TiO2
IO electrode post-cycling is this study adopted this electrode cleaning process to remove residual electrolyte. 


15

6. References

1
Ou, J., Wu, S., Yang, L. & Wang, H. Facile Preparation of NiO@graphene Nanocomposite with Superior 
Performances as Anode for Li-ion Batteries. Acta Metallurgica Sinica (English Letters) 35, 212-222 (2022). 
https://doi.org:10.1007/s40195-021-01283-5

2
Lonergan, A., Murphy, B. & O’Dwyer, C. Photonic Stopband Tuning in Metallo-Dielectric Photonic Crystals. 
ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology 10, 085001 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1149/2162-
8777/ac19c5

3
McNulty, D., Carroll, E. & O'Dwyer, C. Rutile TiO2 Inverse Opal Anodes for Li-Ion Batteries with Long Cycle 
Life, High-Rate Capability, and High Structural Stability. Advanced Energy Materials 7, 1602291 (2017). 
https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201602291

4
Wu, N. et al. Anatase inverse opal TiO2-x@N-doped C induced the dominant pseudocapacitive effect for 
durable 
and 
fast 
lithium/sodium 
storage. 
Electrochimica 
Acta
299, 
540-548 
(2019). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2019.01.040

5
Lu, R., Yang, A., Xue, Y., Xu, L. & Zhu, C. Analysis of the key factors affecting the energy efficiency of 
batteries 
in 
electric 
vehicle. 
World 
Electric 
Vehicle 
Journal
4, 
9-13 
(2010). 

https://doi.org:10.3390/wevj4010009

6
Wang, S. et al. in Battery System Modeling (eds Shunli Wang et al.)  1-46 (Elsevier, 2021).

7
Gao, X. et al. Preparation and Electrochemical Characterization of Anatase Nanorods for Lithium-Inserting 
Electrode 
Material. 
The 
Journal 
of 
Physical 
Chemistry 
B
108, 
2868-2872 
(2004). 

https://doi.org:10.1021/jp036821i

8
Laskova, B., Zukalova, M., Zukal, A., Bousa, M. & Kavan, L. Capacitive contribution to Li-storage in TiO2 
(B) 
and 
TiO2 
(anatase). 
Journal 
of 
Power 
Sources
246, 
103-109 
(2014). 

https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.07.073

9
Möls, K. et al. Influence of phase composition on optical properties of TiO2: Dependence of refractive index 
and band gap on formation of TiO2-II phase in thin films. Optical Materials 96, 109335 (2019). 
https://doi.org:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optmat.2019.109335

10
Lonergan, A., McNulty, D. & O'Dwyer, C. Tetrahedral framework of inverse opal photonic crystals defines the 
optical response and photonic band gap. Journal of Applied Physics
124, 095106 (2018). 

https://doi.org:10.1063/1.5033367

11
Lonergan, A., Hu, C. & O’Dwyer, C. Filling in the gaps: The nature of light transmission through solvent-filled 
inverse 
opal 
photonic 
crystals. 
Physical 
Review 
Materials
4, 
065201 
(2020). 

https://doi.org:10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.4.065201

12
Zhang, W. F., He, Y. L., Zhang, M. S., Yin, Z. & Chen, Q. Raman scattering study on anatase TiO2 nanocrystals. 
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 33, 912 (2000). https://doi.org:10.1088/0022-3727/33/8/305

13
Zhang, J., Li, M., Feng, Z., Chen, J. & Li, C. UV Raman Spectroscopic Study on TiO2. I. Phase Transformation 
at the Surface and in the Bulk. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B
110, 927-935 (2006). 

https://doi.org:10.1021/jp0552473


