1

Hybrid Graphene-Plasmon Gratings

Tianjing Guo1 and Christos Argyropoulos2,*

1Institute of Space Science and Technology, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China
2Department of Electrical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 

PA 16803, USA

*cfa5361@psu.edu

Abstract: Graphene can support surface plasmons with higher confinement, lower
propagation loss, and substantially more tunable response compared to usual metal-based
plasmonic structures. Interestingly, plasmons in graphene can strongly couple with 
nanostructures and gratings placed in its vicinity to form new hybrid systems that can provide 
a platform to investigate more complicated plasmonic phenomena. In this Perspective, an 
analysis on the excitation of highly confined graphene plasmons and their strong coupling 
with metallic or dielectric gratings is performed. We emphasize the flexibility in the efficient 
control of light-matter interaction by these new hybrid systems, benefiting from the interplay 
between graphene plasmons and other external resonant modes. The hybrid graphene-
plasmon grating systems offer unique tunable plasmonic resonances with enhanced field 
distributions. They exhibit a novel route to realize practical emerging applications, including 
nonreciprocal devices, plasmonic switches, perfect absorbers, nonlinear structures,
photodetectors, and optical sensors.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Graphene is the flagship two-dimensional (2D) material made of carbon atoms arranged 

in a hexagonal lattice. It has attracted a surge of research interest for its unique electrical, 
mechanical, optical, and thermal properties.1–4 It exhibits distinct advantages over metals 
leading to the realization of plasmonic effects at infrared (IR) and terahertz (THz) frequencies, 
where it can support surface plasmons (SPs) with high confinement and relatively low loss.5

Graphene plasmons (GPs) can become highly tunable by applying electrostatic gating voltage 
or chemical doping,6,7
89making graphene an important building block of envisioned 

reconfigurable devices. Another important advantage of GPs is their strong light confinement
that becomes even stronger by further increasing the doping concentration in graphene.10,11

Moreover, GPs demonstrate much lower loss compared to noble metal plasmons mainly due 
to graphene’s higher carrier mobility, especially in the case of high doping.10,12 As a result, 
many theoretical and experimental studies have focused on demonstrating GPs due to their
potential applications in various optoelectronic emerging technologies.13–17

Graphene monolayers can be tailored into various geometries, such as ribbons,18–20

disks,21,22 and crosses,23 with the goal to improve the GPs excitation. However, the process of 


2

graphene patterning to various shapes is challenging to be experimentally implemented and
can cause detrimental effects on graphene’s response. Another more practical approach to 
excite GPs is to integrate graphene monolayers with various already resonating structures, 
including plasmonic nanoantennas, gratings, and metamaterials, forming new hybrid 
plasmonic or dielectric systems. These hybrid graphene-based structures have the potential to 
rapidly increase the interaction strength between graphene and incident light radiation, 
leading to a variety of new IR and optical devices with exciting functionalities, such as 
tunable absorbers,24,25 efficient modulators,26,27 and photodetectors.28,29 As an example, 
optical gratings can provide strong localized electric fields and can be used to excite even 
more confined and enhanced GPs due to the formation of hybrid graphene-plasmon gratings 
(HGPGs).12,27,30–33 The hybrid designs consisting of gratings combined with graphene benefit 
from the merits of both systems. More specifically, the excited plasmons in graphene can 
strongly couple with the grating structure due to their proximity and coupling of their near-
fields,34,35 usually causing enhanced resonant absorption that is a desirable outcome for most 
applications. In addition, metallic gratings used in such hybrid structures can work as gate 
electrodes to further tune the resonant frequency of the designed graphene-based device.

The combination of graphene and metallic (plasmonic) nanostructures offers a unique 

way to enhance absorption at their resonance, where sharp peaks of reflectance or 
transmittance, combined with enhanced fields are present. This is the fundamental response 
behind the realization of a wide range of potential applications, including sensing, light 
modulation, and photodetection.36–41 In addition, these hybrid devices can have a tunable 
operation at mid-infrared (IR), far-IR, and THz frequencies just by using different grating 
periods. As a potentially useful application, HGPGs can be used to detect the presence of 
molecules or ions in a solution by measuring changes in the plasmonic properties of the total 
hybrid system.42,43 This approach can be used for the sensitive detection of DNA, proteins, 
and other biomolecules. Interestingly, graphene does not play the leading role in this type of 
sensing response. However, it provides the required tunability and biocompatibility, making it 
an ideal building block for new sensing and photodetecting devices. The superior 
reconfigurability guarantees that HGPGs can work as selective sensors for diverse 
applications, since their sensing frequency can be tuned in a wide range. HGPGs can also be 
used to create tunable optical filters and switches.44–46 The plasmonic properties of HGPG 
devices can be modulated by applying an external voltage, allowing for precise control over 
the transmission and reflection of light. Plasmonic absorption is also beneficial to graphene-
based photodetectors that have been demonstrated to achieve ultrafast photodetection speeds 
combined with broadband operation.47–52 The photodetector responsivity is enhanced by 
utilizing HGPG designs simply because they capture light more efficiently.53,54 With the 
additional advent of various relevant nanofabrication techniques, HGPGs are expected to lead 
to new exciting applications emerging from these novel configurations. In this Perspective, 
we provide a detailed overview of the recent advances of various HGPGs structures and their 
potential applications.  


3

II. STRONG COUPLING OF GRAPHENE-PLASMON GRATINGS

The use of metallic subwavelength gratings is an appealing approach to boost the 

excitation efficiency of GPs along a continuous graphene monolayer. By placing graphene 
below a metallic aperture, a novel class of plasmon resonance was reported, where strong 
coupling occurs between the newly created hybrid plasmon mode and incident THz 
radiation.45 The hybrid graphene plasmonic structure is shown in Fig. 1(a). It is composed of 
a metallic grating patterned on top of a continuous graphene monolayer. Higher order modes 
present at longer frequencies are not considered and only the fundamental plasmon mode is 
investigated in this study. It is found that only when the metal contact is much wider than the 
grating channel w, a strong resonance can occur combined with high absorption with 
spectrum demonstrated in Fig. 1(c). Meanwhile, a maximum absorption value of 50% is 
reached, implying very high field confinement at this resonant plasmon frequency. On the 
contrary, Fig. 1(d) depicts a far lower absorption response for the complementary structure 
shown in Fig. 1(b), i.e., periodic graphene ribbons without metallic grating. To interpret the 
above absorption results, the charge density for the two cases is calculated at the resonant 
frequency and demonstrated by the three-dimensional (3D) distributions in Figs. 1(e) and 1(f), 
respectively. The former case exhibits a resonant circuit behavior that interacts strongly with 
the incident wave leading to high absorption, where the metal contacts act as capacitors and 
the graphene as inductors. While the latter work consists only of inductors (graphene) and 
exhibits much weaker resonant response. Hence, the incorporation of plasmonic gratings into 
graphene can substantially improve the THz absorption performance. 

An alternative relevant design was recently demonstrated, made of a continuous, large-

area graphene sheet grown on silica substrate and coated with a square periodic array of 
metallic nanoparticles.55 Figure 1(g) presents this configuration, where the resulted diffractive 
coupling depends on the grating period  . Hence, the resonant frequency of the induced 
grating-coupled graphene plasmon can be tuned by the grating period  and graphene carrier 
density, as illustrated in Fig. 1(h). The resonant frequencies of graphene plasmons are tuned 
across the entire THz regime by using different micrometer-scale array periods  . The 
measured transmission spectra are demonstrated in Fig. 1(i), when the hybrid device has 

period 
 =1.5um
, where a transmission dip is observed that becomes more pronounced for 

higher applied gate voltage (VGS) values. However, the resonant frequency is always constant
and approximately equal to 7 THz. This work illustrated that the plasmonic transmission and 
absorption behavior is not consistent with the predicted theoretical analysis when large 
variations in carrier density N across the graphene sample are present.55 This useful result 
stressed the importance of uniform carrier distribution along graphene to realize strongly 
tunable plasmonic devices. 

The transformation of electromagnetic waves into propagating plasmons in graphene 

was also realized by the asymmetric dual-grating gate configuration operating in reflection 
mode depicted in Fig. 1(j).56 In this work, the wide-area graphene monolayer is separated 
from the dual-grating gate by a thin dielectric sheet. The interaction of the incident THz wave 


4

with graphene is greatly enhanced by canceling the transmission and weakening the reflection 
due to the metallic substrate and Fabry-Perot resonances, respectively. This structure 
transforms normal incident THz waves into graphene propagating plasmons. The efficiency 
of the transformation is characterized by the so-called transformation coefficient, which can 
have negative or positive values when the graphene plasmon propagates in negative or
positive directions, respectively. The absorbance A and transformation coefficient Tp are 
presented in Figs. 1(k) and 1(l), respectively, by optimizing the grating’s asymmetry and 
fixing the narrower gate width. When the relaxation time of graphene is
 =1ps
, the 

transformation coefficient can reach its maximum value of 51% at 4 THz. Moreover, the 
absorbance shown in Fig. 1(k) is very close to 100% at the maximum transformation 
coefficient point, mainly due to the excited Fabry-Perot resonances. This work demonstrates
the possibility to realize efficient transformers of the incident THz waves into propagating 
plasmons along graphene.

Figure 1. Tunable hybrid metal-graphene plasmons.
(a) Hybrid metal-graphene structure to achieve strong coupling between the plasmon mode and incident 
THz wave. (b) Isolated graphene ribbons leading to the complementary structure of (a). (c)-(d) Absorption 
spectra of the structures presented in (a) and (b), respectively. (e)-(f) Charge density profiles along the 
structures shown in (a) and (b), respectively.45 Reproduced with permission from Jadidi et al., Nano Lett. 
15, 7099 (2015). Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g) Hybrid graphene structure with 
continuous large-area graphene sheet coated by a periodic array of gold nanoparticles. (h) First-order 
resonant frequency as a function of carrier density for different period values  . (i) Measured 
transmission spectra of the structure in (g) for different gate voltage values VGS. The inset is the minimum 
transmission frequency as a function of carrier density N.55 Reproduced with permission from 
Tantiwanichapan et al., ACS Photonics 4, 2011 (2017). Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (j) 
Dual-grating gated graphene configuration to excite propagating GPs. (k) Absorption as a function of 
frequency and width w1 of the wider gate finger. (l) Transformation coefficient as a function of frequency 
and width w1.56 Reproduced with permission from Fateev. et al., Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 064002 (2019). 
Copyright 2019, American Physical Society.

Hence, strong coupling phenomena provide a unique route to efficiently excite

plasmonic resonances in graphene and graphene-based nanostructures that can be used in 


5

various emerging applications. Phonons generated at various materials can also couple to 
graphene plasmons when strong coupling is achieved.57 Multiple plasmonic resonances were
observed experimentally in graphene nanoribbons leading to four absorption peaks arising 
from the strong coupling of GPs and three surface optical phonon modes.58 Additionally, 
direct experimental evidence was provided that the coupling of a graphene/SiC support with
gallium nanoparticles-localized surface plasmon resonances can be controlled over a broad 
frequency range, contributing to the enhancement of Raman modes.59 Plasmonic strong 
coupling effects were also investigated experimentally with graphene nanoribbon structures,60

enabling
field-enhanced optical spectroscopy,61
biological sensing,62
and complete 

absorption.24,35

Interestingly, the efficient coupling of GPs to resonant modes excited by metamaterial 

structures was achieved with hybrid graphene-metamaterial systems.63 More specifically, 
complete modulation in the strength of the metamaterial electromagnetically induced 
transparency was realized because of the near-field coupling between monolayer graphene 
and THz resonant metamaterials.64 Furthermore, the incident photons were efficiently 
coupled to plasmons along the graphene layer by constructing a doubly resonant plasmonic 
configuration, leading to strong optical absorption with a large tuning range.65 Strong 
coupling effects were also reported between GPs and special evanescent wave modes induced 
by near-field perturbations between dielectric and metallic gratings.66 Moreover, tunable large 
THz modulation was demonstrated by coupling a gated continuous graphene layer to a non-
resonant subwavelength scale meta-atom structure.67 Finally, effective directional couplers
were designed by combining multilayer graphene-based cylindrical waveguides and metal-
based waveguides.68

The excitation of magnetic polaritons in metal gratings with deep corrugations and their 

coupling with plasmons in graphene was accomplished based on the hybrid plasmonic system
shown in Fig. 2(a).35 The strong coupling effect demonstrated in this work resulted in 
substantial enhancement to the system’s absorption by boosting the intrinsic plasmonic 
resonance of graphene. The absorption enhancement was utilized indirectly to determine the 
coupling effect strength in this work. The hybrid grating in Fig. 2(a) generates a highly 
localized magnetic field inside its trenches forming magnetic polaritons (MPs), also known in 
the literature as spoof plasmons.69,70 Figure 2(b) shows the absorptance spectrum for bare and 
graphene-covered grating structures. The obtained absorptance is only 0.35 for the bare
grating at the MP resonance frequency of 1041 cm−1. However, the absorptance is
substantially boosted to 0.94 after covering the grating with graphene, while its resonant 
frequency exhibits a blueshift. The absorptance enhancement and accompanied resonance 
shift clearly indicate the strong coupling effect between the metallic grating and graphene.
This work also demonstrated the effect on the coupling strength when graphene is elevated 
above the grating surface. As expected, the coupling effect deteriorates when the graphene 
sheet detaches from the grating and its distance is increased. In addition, the coupling is 
modified by the geometrical parameters and graphene chemical potential values. Figure 2(c) 
depicts the absorptance spectra under different chemical potentials. The coupling strength is 
highest when 
 =0.3 eV
and deteriorates when  slightly changes to 0.28 eV or 0.32 eV.


6

Figure 2. Strong coupling in grating-graphene plasmonic hybrid systems.
(a) Geometry of graphene ribbon-grating hybrid structure. (b) Absorption spectra of grating without 
graphene, hybrid graphene-grating structure, and bare graphene ribbon array. (c) Absorption spectra of the
graphene ribbon-grating hybrid structure under different graphene Fermi levels.35 Reproduced with 
permission from Zhao et al., ACS Photonics 2, 1611 (2015). Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
(d) Schematic of grating-assisted double-layer graphene hybrid system.71 Reproduced with permission 
from Zhao et al., Opt. Lett. 41, 5470 (2016). Copyright 2016, Optica. (e) Geometry of grating-assisted 
double layer graphene hybrid structure consisting of a silver grating placed between two graphene layers. 
(f) Absorption plots of the hybrid system as a function of frequency and graphene chemical potential EF. 
Here, the upper- and lower-layer graphene layers have the same chemical potential. (g) Absorption plots as 
a function of frequency and lower-layer graphene chemical potential EF2 when the upper-layer graphene 
chemical potential is fixed to EF1 = 0.4 eV. (h) Absorption plots as a function of frequency and upper-layer 
graphene chemical potential EF1 when the lower-layer graphene chemical potential is fixed to EF2 = 0.6 
eV.72 Reproduced with permission from Qing et al., ACS Photonics 6, 2884 (2019). Copyright 2019, 
American Chemical Society. (i) Compound silver grating covered by a continuous graphene layer. (j) 
Interaction sketch among graphene plasmon and two different MP modes. (k) Geometry of the resulted 
hybrid system when three different MP modes are excited. (l) Simulated and theoretically calculated
absorption spectra of the structure in (k) for the cases with and without graphene cover. (m) Dispersion 
relation of the resulted four hybrid modes.73 Reproduced with permission from Qing et al., Carbon N. Y. 
145, 596 (2019). Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd.

The dielectric diffractive grating in Fig. 2(d) can also be used to efficiently couple the 

incident field and excite plasmonic resonances along a double graphene layer.71 Strong 
coupling is demonstrated by changing the graphene layer separation distance, substantially 
modifying the transparency window of the entire hybrid system. Similarly, an alternative
hybrid system is demonstrated in Fig. 2(e) that consists of a metallic grating separating two 


7

continuous graphene films.72 Three different modes are excited in this hybrid structure, i.e.,
the upper-layer graphene plasmon (UGP), lower-layer graphene plasmon (LGP), and MP. 
Classic coupled oscillator models are used to analyze the coupling behavior of these modes,
which leads to two anti-crossing responses characterized by different Rabi splitting values 
and three new hybrid-polariton modes. The strong coupling between MP and the two 
graphene plasmon modes is explored by calculating the absorption contour plots of this 
hybrid system. Spectral splitting is observed in the absorption spectra due to the strong 
coupling between the MP and UGP modes. The obtained anti-crossing behavior occurs with a 
moderate splitting energy. The MP mode is coupled to the two graphene plasmon modes 
simultaneously leading to a strong interaction between UGP (or LGP) and MP modes that
gives rise to hybrid dispersion bands. Figure 2(f) illustrates the absorption contour plot as a 
function of frequency and graphene chemical potential EF when upper- and lower-layer 
graphene have the same chemical potential (EF = EF1 = EF2). Strong coupling exists between 
the MP and UGP (or LGP) modes as EF increases, leading to the formation of three distinct 
hybrid dispersion bands. The spacer thickness also plays an important role on the coupling 
between the MP and UGP or LGP modes. More importantly, the coupling phenomena can be 
dynamically tuned by controlling the chemical potential of each graphene layer separately, as 
depicted in Figs. 2(g) and 2(h), where the doping is fixed to one graphene layer and vary in 
the other. This study presented an efficient platform to explore the coupling effect achieved 
by hybrid graphene-based systems. 

The aforementioned multimode coupling provides additional energy exchange channels 

and is expected to attract increased attention compared to the single coupling mode. Towards 
this end, the hybrid coupling among GP and MP modes was theoretically investigated by the
multi-coupled hybrid system shown in Fig. 2(i), consisting of a thin dielectric spacer layer, 
asymmetric silver grating filled with dielectric, and a graphene monolayer placed on top.73

Based on the different trench depths of the compound grating, two distinct MP modes (MP1 
and MP2) are excited by this composite configuration. In addition, the hybrid system is
dynamically tuned by controlling the chemical potential of graphene. Graphene plasmon and 
MP modes are excited simultaneously along a practical design of this hybrid structure. The
multimode interaction characteristics are depicted in Fig. 2(j). Rabi splitting occurs when the 
graphene plasmon is coupled to MP1/MP2 modes, generating two new hybrid plasmonic 
modes characterized by three dispersion bands. Moreover, an additional MP mode is 
introduced in the hybrid system by designing one periodic trench depth to be deeper
compared to other trenches in the silver grating, as shown in Fig. 2(k). Based on the coupled 
oscillator model theoretical calculations and finite element method (FEM) simulations, the 
obtained absorption spectra are presented in Fig. 2(l) for the two cases with and without 
graphene monolayer. Three absorption peaks are observed when graphene is absent, 
corresponding to the MP1, MP2, and MP3 modes, respectively. When graphene is included in 
the system, the third absorption peak splits into two peaks because of the hybridization of the 
MP3 mode with the second order graphene plasmon mode. Figure 2(m) displays the 
dispersion relation of the resulted four hybrid modes. Interestingly, all four dispersion bands
exhibit an anti-crossing strong coupling response. Hence, this type of complicated multimode 


8

hybrid system coupled with graphene will further enhanced light-matter interaction. 

III. HYBRID GRAPHENE-PLASMON GRATINGS APPLICATIONS

A. Absorption enhancement

Graphene monolayers exhibit only 2.3% absorption in optical frequencies mainly due to 

their single-atom ultrathin thickness.6,26 Recently, researchers have made excellent progress 
to boost the light absorption in graphene.74 Towards this goal, microcavities were used to 
enhance absorption by making electromagnetic waves propagate through graphene multiple 
times.75 Alternatively, the overall optical path length was increased along graphene by 
draping it over optical waveguides leading to increased overall absorption.76 Moreover, 
perfect absorption was also obtained with hybrid graphene-metal systems when strong 
coupling and other interference effects exist between the THz graphene plasmons and 
metallic grating resonances.30 Consequently, coherent perfect absorption was reported by 
patterning graphene monolayers into periodic arrays of patch resonators placed on each side 
of an ultrathin dielectric substrate, i.e., constructing an asymmetric bifacial graphene 
metasurface.24 When patterned graphene13,21 was placed on a metallic or dielectric substrate, 
perfect graphene absorbers were realized by satisfying some specific constraints.21,36,77–79

Prominent absorption peaks were achieved by using gated graphene nanoribbons, benefiting 
from localized plasmon excitations excited along their surfaces.13 It was also reported that 
perfect THz absorption can be attained based on patterned graphene, however, with relatively 
low tunability.80 In addition, anisotropic graphene plasmonic structures were explored in the 
mid-IR range, where tunable spectral selectivity was accomplished with localized plasmonic 
resonances.81 Finally, tunable plasmon-induced absorption was realized based on graphene-
assisted metal-dielectric gratings.82,83

As mentioned before, graphene monolayers can be coupled to various nanostructures to 

form new hybrid plasmonic systems. Strong enhancement of optical absorption was reported 
by a graphene-insulator-metal hybrid plasmonic device. This coupling was induced by the 
increased diffraction efficiency of the metallic (gold) grating combined with resonant 
coupling between plasmons generated along the grating and graphene hybrid system.65

Additionally, plasmonic gratings covered by graphene sheets were proposed to enhance 
absorption due to the strong localized electric field from the induced magnetic resonances at 
the grating.35,84 Alternatively, it was experimentally demonstrated that highly confined 
propagating surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) can be excited in monolayer graphene at IR 
frequencies by using a silicon diffractive grating combined with graphene.34

An example of a metal/dielectric/metal grating structure covered by graphene is 

demonstrated in Fig. 3(a).33 The system is modeled by full-wave simulations, as well as 
theoretical analysis based on the equivalent circuit model where the dielectric layer is treated 
as a capacitor while the metal and graphene are considered inductors. The near-IR absorption 
spectrum is calculated for three different systems: hybrid graphene-covered grating, grating
without graphene, and bare graphene monolayer. The absorptivity of the hybrid graphene-


9

covered grating structure is depicted in Fig. 3(b) and can reach up to 0.9 values, much higher 
than the other two configurations. The physical mechanism behind these results is the strong 
coupling between MP modes excited at the metal/dielectric grating structure and graphene. 
The sharp Fano resonance achieved by these hybrid structures can have potential applications 
in improving near-IR light absorption.38

The hybrid structure shown in Fig. 3(c) is composed of a metal grating coupled to a 

graphene/waveguide system. This configuration operates at far-IR where a sharp asymmetric 
resonance line profile is achieved arising from the broad graphene plasmon resonance that 
interferes with the sharp planar waveguide resonance mode. The asymmetric profile of the 
resulted Fano resonance is tuned to symmetric by changing the mobility of graphene from 0.5 
m2/Vs to 2 m2/Vs leading to tunable light absorption. Graphene absorption decreases with the 
increase in graphene’s mobility since lower graphene mobility always leads to higher material 
loss. The absorption efficiency can reach 0.76 when graphene mobility  = 0.5 m2/Vs is used, 
as demonstrated in Fig. 3(d). The almost linear relationship between the resonant wavelength 
and surrounding refractive index of this hybrid system is shown in Fig. 3(e) to demonstrate
the structure’s sensitivity. The ‘‘right’’ resonance refers to longer wavelengths while the ‘‘left’’
refers to shorter ones. The sensitivity can reach 5.21 um/RIU for the ‘‘right’’ resonance, much 
higher than 0.242 um/RIU obtained from the ‘‘left’’ one. Hence, this hybrid structure can 
have potential applications as self-calibrated refractive index sensor.

Composite metallic gratings covered by a graphene layer are demonstrated in Fig. 3(f) 

that can lead to wider absorption bandwidth and increased absorption efficiency.85 The 
composite system (bottom) is based on two regular gratings with optimal dimensions and 
small (top) or large (middle) periods. Not only exhibits high absorption but also achieves 
wide spectral bandwidth. Figure 3(g) displays the absorption spectra for transverse magnetic 
(TM) polarized waves under different scenarios. The absorption efficiency is enhanced in the 
case of compound grating covered by graphene compared to the scenario without graphene. 
Importantly, the compound grating can absorb 90% of incident light at the resonance 
wavelength of 1.67 um with a spectral bandwidth around 0.3 um. However, the absorption is 
increased to 98% after being covered by graphene at the same resonant frequency, while the 
spectral bandwidth is doubled to approximately 0.6 um.85 Furthermore, the absorption is 
computed as a function of operation wavelength and incident angles with results shown in Fig. 
3(h) for the cases of compound grating with and without graphene. The computed absorption 
is found to be insensitive for a broad range of incident angles from 0° to 80°. It also exhibits 
wider bandwidth when graphene is used compared to the no graphene case. The electric field 
and Poynting vector distributions are plotted in Fig. 3(i) at off-resonance (top figure) and on-
resonance (middle figure) to better understand the absorption physical mechanism. The 
electric fields are trapped among the two grating trenches at resonance, as shown in the 
middle caption in Fig. 3(i), leading to higher absorption. However, the electric fields are 
confined just in the middle trenches along their openings at off-resonance, as depicted in the 
top caption in Fig. 3(i). Hence, the absorption is much lower for the off-resonance case 
compared to on-resonance. In addition, the energy flow diagram demonstrated in the bottom
caption in Fig. 3(i) also illustrates this effect, i.e., the incoming energy is concentrated on the


10

Figure 3. Hybrid graphene-grating structures to achieve enhanced absorption (theoretical results). 
(a) Hybrid system with graphene covering a metal/dielectric/metal grating design. The effective circuit 
model is used to verify the simulation results. (b) Absorption for different systems including hybrid 
structure, grating, and bare graphene.33 Reproduced with permission from Pan et al., Opt. Express 25, 
16400 (2017). Copyright 2017, Optica. (c) Hybrid structure composed of metal grating, monolayer 
graphene, and planar waveguide. (d) Simulated and theoretically calculated absorption of the designed 
hybrid structure when graphene mobility is fixed to 0.5 m2/Vs. (e) Relationship between the resonant 
operating wavelength and surrounding refractive index.38 Reproduced with permission from Ruan et al., J. 
Light. Technol. 39, 5657 (2021). Copyright 2021, IEEE Xplore. (f) Construction of compound grating by 
superimposing two short and long period grating designs. (g) Absorption spectra of short period, long 
period, and compound grating with and without graphene layer cover. (h) Absorption of compound 
gratings with (bottom) and without (top) graphene layer cover as a function of operation wavelength and 
incident angles. (i) Electric field and Poynting vector distributions in one period of the compound grating. 
Top and middle figures show the electric fields at off- and on-resonance wavelength, respectively. The 
bottom figures demonstrate the Poynting vector at resonant wavelength.85 Reproduced with permission 
from Nguyen-Huu et al., IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 27, 1 (2021). Copyright 2021, IEEE Xplore. 

interface between graphene and the top edges of the trench opening. This absorber design 
exhibits strong absorptance combined with wide spectral bandwidth and omnidirectional 
response. It can have applications in the design of new photodetector and energy harvesting 
systems.

Besides numerical simulations of HGPGs, experimental realization of broadband THz 

absorbers based on graphene was recently reported,86 where an effective absorption 


11

bandwidth of ≥90% ranging from 1.54 to 2.23 THz was achieved but with a relatively low
electrical tunability. In another related work, the absorption was greatly boosted by placing a 
graphene monolayer into a Salisbury-screen-type absorber configuration.87,88 This type of 
structure can provide enhanced fields in the vicinity of the graphene layer. The hybrid 
graphene Salisbury screen composed of graphene plasmonic resonators placed a quarter 
wavelength away from the back reflector was reported to absorb almost 25% of incident light, 
more than 10 times larger than that of monolayer graphene in the same frequency range.89

Furthermore, electrically tunable perfect absorbers were reported experimentally by 
integrating metallic gratings into similar graphene Salisbury screens.32 The resulted hybrid
structures were composed of a metal reflector, polyimide layer, periodic aluminum grating,
and monolayer graphene covering the entire design, as depicted in Fig. 4(a). The graphene 
Fermi level (EF) was varied by tuning the externally applied gate voltage (Vg) in this 
configuration. The interaction between graphene and incident THz waves was further 
enhanced by a metallic grating embedded into the hybrid absorber design. Figure 4(b) 
illustrates the computed absorbance of two absorber designs with and without the grating. 
Both can achieve perfect absorption but the design without the metallic grating requires very 
high Fermi level values (EF = 1.05 eV), which is hard to experimentally realize. However, the 
absorber design with grating can achieve perfect absorption for low Fermi level values (EF =
0.3 eV) due to the improved enhancement in the interaction between graphene and incident
electric field induced by the metallic grating. The measured reflection is presented in Fig. 4(c) 
under normal incidence for different gating voltage values and frequencies. The reflection can 
reach zero values around 0.72 THz, where perfect absorption is obtained, as presented by the 
green line in Fig. 4(d). The electrical modulation depth is also calculated at the resonance
frequency and the maximum modulation depth approaches 29% that is shown by the blue line 
in Fig. 4(d). Hence, these results reveal potential applications of these hybrid absorber 
designs in THz modulators and switches. 

Furthermore, the experimental demonstration of peak absorption over 99% was reported 

for a hybrid structure composed of a monolayer graphene sandwiched between a 1D 
polymethy1-methacrylate (PMMA) grating and a silica layer,90 as shown in Fig. 4(e). The
optical and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the fabricated structure are 
presented in Figs. 4(f) and 4(g), respectively. It is found that we can distinguish samples with 
graphene from those without graphene by inspecting the obtained optical images. The 
fabricated structure is measured with confocal microscope setup, which is schematically 
illustrated in Fig. 4(h). The measured absorption spectra of the proposed absorber design with 
different grating periods for transverse electronic (TE) polarization are shown in Fig. 4(i), 
where peak absorption of 99.6%, 99.1% and 98.6% are achieved with grating period of 1230,
1254 and 1270 nm, respectively. Importantly, it is observed that the measured results are in
excellent agreement with the simulation results, confirming complete optical absorption of 
graphene-based hybrid structures in the near-IR range. Note that the mid-IR spectral range is 
equally important because of many applications that include IR vibrational spectroscopy, 
sensing, and thermal radiation control. Electronically tunable perfect absorption is 
experimentally demonstrated with the HGPG shown in Fig. 4(j).91 In this type of structure,


12

Figure 4. Hybrid graphene-grating structures to achieve enhanced absorption (experimental results). 
(a) Graphene Salisbury screen hybrid metasurface design. The metallic grating between graphene and 
dielectric layer enhances the interaction between THz waves and graphene. (b) Absorption of the bare 
graphene and hybrid absorber system at their resonances. (c) Measured reflection as a function of external 
gate voltage and frequency with the period and width of the grating being 150 um and 70 um, respectively. 
(d) Absorbance and modulation depth measured at the resonant frequency.32 Reproduced with permission 
from Chen et al., Adv. Opt. Mater. 8, 1900660 (2020). Copyright 2020, Wiley online library. (e) Nearly 
perfect absorber design realized by coupling graphene with 1D PMMA grating. (f) Optical image of the 
fabricated structure. (g) SEM image of the same structure. (h) Schematic of the measurement setup. (i) The 
measured and simulated absorption spectra of the hybrid structure with different grating periods for TE 
polarization.90 Reproduced with permission from Guo et al., Adv. Opt. Mater. 4, 1955 (2016). Copyright 
2016, Wiley online library. (j) Schematic of a perfect absorption structure incorporating graphene ribbons 
and plasmonic metallic gratings. The graphene plasmonic ribbon is not located in the center of the metallic 
slit but slightly off the side. (k) SEM image of the structure in (j). (l) Gate voltage-dependent tunable 
absorption map of the proposed structure in (g).91 Reproduced with permission from Kim et al., Nano Lett. 
18, 971 (2018). Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.

the metallic slit is 100 nm wide while the 50 nm wide graphene ribbon is off to one side. The 
narrower slit in this configuration can more efficiently confine the incident radiation, leading 
to larger field enhancement and much higher light absorption compared to the configuration 
where the graphene ribbon is located in the center of the metallic slit. Figure 4(l) presents the 
tunable absorption map of the proposed HGPG design, as a function of frequency and 
graphene Fermi level. By performing experimental measurements, a peak absorption of 96.9 % 
is obtained in the hybrid structure at 1389 cm-1, revealing the potential of far-reaching 
applications in graphene-based active IR optical components. To assess the absorption level 
of HGPG designs, we compared the peak absorption and the operation range obtained with 
numerical simulations and experimental measurements, as seen in Table 1. It is observed that


13

nearly perfect absorption can be obtained by hybrid graphene-grating structures from IR to 
THz regime. However, most structure designs can achieve only narrowband response or 
single-frequency operation. Future efforts will be dedicated to obtaining broadband 
absorption performance. In addition, it is still challenging to shift the operation wavelength to 
near-IR or even visible frequency bands, mainly due to the fabrication difficulties in addition 
to graphene property limitations.

Table 1. Comparison of representative absorber designs based on hybrid graphene-grating structures.

Design
Wavelength/
Frequency
Absorption
Bandwidth
Method
References

Graphene ribbon/Ag 

grating
9.6 um
94%
Single frequency
Simulation
Zhao et al.35

(2015)

PMMA 

grating/Monolayer 
graphene/SiO2/Au 

substrate

1.5 um
Over 99%
FWHM of 20 nm
Experiment/
Simulation

Guo et al.90

(2016)

Dielectric 

grating/Spacer/Monolayer 

graphene

13.93 THz
41.97%
Single frequency
Simulation
Wei et al.66

(2016)

Monolayer 

Graphene/metal/Dielectric

/Metal grating

1.02 um
90%
Single frequency
Simulation
Pan et al.33

(2017)

Monolayer 

graphene/Au grating/SiNx

waveguide

4.5 um
37%
Single frequency
Simulation
Zhang et al.82

(2017)

Au strips/Graphene 

ribbons/Salisbury screen
7.2 um
96.9%
Single frequency
Experiment/ 
Theory

Kim et al.91

(2018)

Monolayer 

graphene/Metal grating
0.43 THz
100%
Single frequency
Experiment/
Simulation

Chen et al.32

(2020)

Graphene patch 

array/Dielectric/ Graphene 

patch array

2.4 THz
99.6%
1.5 THz
Simulation
Guo et al.24

(2020)

Monolayer 

graphene/Compound 

silver grating

1.67 um
98%
0.6 um
Simulation
Nguyen-Huu et 

al.85 (2021)

Metal 

grating/Graphene/Planar 

waveguide

15.2 um
76%
Single frequency
Simulation
Ruan et al.38

(2021)

B. Boosting optical nonlinear response

Enhancing the interaction between graphene and incident waves is not only important 

for linear optics but also even more significant in the nonlinear optics regime, especially at IR 
and low THz frequencies, where nonlinear effects are usually very weak. Towards this goal, 
many approaches were reported to strengthen the interaction between graphene and light, 
such as graphene patterned structures,13
graphene combined with metal/dielectric 

nanostructures,27,92 graphene-based bound states in the continuum (BICs),93 and the excitation 
of GPs.94–96 In addition, graphene itself was proven to be an excellent nonlinear optical 


14

material with a large third-order nonlinear optical susceptibility that can potentially enhance 
various nonlinear effects,20,97–101 leading to a plethora of new applications in nonlinear optics.
Hence, graphene plasmon excitation is an effective method to enhance the nonlinear response 
of graphene, providing a novel platform to study emerging nonlinear plasmonic effects.

The most attractive advantage of graphene is the gate voltage tunability of its nonlinear 

conductivity, in a similar and even more sensitive way compared to its linear conductivity. 
Gate-controllable enhanced third-harmonic generation in single graphene monolayers was
experimentally reported over an ultrabroad bandwidth by modulating their Fermi level or 
tuning the incident photon energy.102 Significantly increased high harmonic generation 
efficiency was also demonstrated by probing doped graphene nanostructures, mainly induced 
by graphene’s
high intrinsic nonlinearity and the resulted strong plasmonic field 

confinement.94 Alternatively, third harmonic generation (THG) strength improvement was
demonstrated by exploring the electromagnetic field enhancement caused by a graphene 
micro-ribbon array.95 Moreover, the quasi-phase matching technique was investigated to 
enhance the THG efficiency of propagating SPPs excited on graphene.103 Graphene
patterning led to a further increase in its nonlinear response at the resonant frequency due to 
the accompanied stronger absorption.104 Furthermore, the hybridization of graphene with 
asymmetric plasmonic split ring resonators boosted the nonlinear response compared to bare 
graphene by more than an order of magnitude within a broad frequency range.105 In addition, 
the graphene placement on a grating substrate considerably increased its THG efficiency by 
several orders of magnitude because of the induced strong coupling effect (see section II for 
more details). Hence, hybrid graphene-plasmonic grating structures seem to provide an ideal 
novel platform to increase the efficiency of various nonlinear optical effects.

More specifically, noticeable THG efficiency improvement was reported when a

graphene layer was placed on grating substrates.100 The efficient excitation of THG GPs was 
demonstrated in graphene sheets again placed on gratings.12 By attaching two silicon-based 
waveguides to a graphene-covered dielectric grating, GPs are guided over a wide spectral 
band at the fundamental frequency (FF), as well as the THG frequency, as depicted in Fig. 
5(a). Simulations are performed under normal incident light impinging on the grating section
of the dielectric waveguide and Figs. 5(b) and 5(c) present the electric field distributions at 
FF and THG frequencies, respectively. The FF GPs propagate along the waveguide on both 
sides after they are excited on the graphene surface exactly above the grating section. 
Importantly, THG GPs appear on the graphene surface, not only in the grating section, but 
also along the entire dielectric waveguide system. The total THG conversion efficiency (CE)
is calculated for each point along the z-direction and is shown in Fig. 5(d), where its
maximum value can reach 3.68 × 10−7 at the grating boundary. However, the THG CE value 
attenuates exponentially along the waveguide due to graphene’s Ohmic losses. The maximum 
THG CE is computed as a function of incident light intensity and the grating period number 
(Np) with results plotted in Figs. 5(e) and 5(f), respectively. Obviously, the maximum THG 
CE increases with the power intensity. It can reach 3.68 × 10−7 under relatively low input 
intensity of 0.19 MW/cm2, consisting very low value compared to previous works.106,107 The 
simulation results in Fig. 5(f) demonstrate that the maximum THG CE decreases with 


15

increased Np. However, the THG output power density is more important to be considered in 
practical applications, where larger gratings will definitely be required. 

Figure 5. Enhanced nonlinear effects with hybrid graphene-grating designs.
(a) FF and THG GPs based on hybrid dielectric waveguide-gratings covered by graphene. (b)-(c) Electric 
field distribution at (b) FF and (c) THG frequencies. Only the grating section is illuminated at the 
resonance wavelength. (d) Computed THG CE along various points at the z-direction. (e) Maximum THG 
CE as a function of the incident power intensity. (f) Maximum THG CE and power density by varying the
grating period.12 Reproduced with permission from Li et al., Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13, 338 (2018).
Copyright 2018, Springer US. (g) Three different structures consisting of single- and double-layer 
graphene. (h)-(i) The evolution of (h) absorption resonant peak and (i) THG CE of the hybrid structure for
each GA iteration (called generation). The insert in (h) shows the calculated transmission, reflection, and 
absorption spectra of the final GA optimized design. The insert in (i) demonstrates the normalized light 
transmittance of the same design.108 Reproduced with permission from Yu et al., Opt. Express 28, 35561 
(2020). Copyright 2020, Optica.

Three different structures are presented in Fig. 5(g) to further enhance the THG CE 

composed of metallic gratings coupled with patterned graphene metamaterials.108 The first 
structure consists of a dielectric interlayer, gold grating, and dielectric waveguide, as well as 
a graphene nanoribbon grating (GNG) placed on top of the entire hybrid system. In the 
second design, another GNG (GNG2) is embedded between the gold grating and GNG1. 
Finally, a third design is presented in Fig. 5(g) that is slightly different from the second, since 
the upper graphene layer is a monolayer graphene in this case. All these three hybrid 
structures exhibit a considerably high absorption resonant peak, where the light-matter 
interaction in graphene is significantly enhanced. Next, genetic algorithms (GA) are used to 
optimize the designed structures with the goal to further improve the absorption and, 
consequently, THG CE. Figures 5(h) and 5(i) illustrate the evolution of the absorption peak 
and THG CE of the hybrid structure after each GA iteration (called generations in the x-axis 
of these plots), respectively. The maximum absorption of the GA optimized design can reach 
0.9956 after 300 generations. Meanwhile, the highest THG CE becomes 1.406×10−6 under 
low pump intensity of 0.18 MW/cm2 for the same generation number.


16

The inherent nonlinear properties of graphene are particularly strong in the THz 

frequency range.109 Hence, strong THG was demonstrated in THz owing to graphene’s intra-
band electron transitions leading to its strong interaction with THz radiation.110 In particular, 
nonlinear ultrathin metasurface structures were proposed based on periodically patterned 
graphene micro-ribbons to obtain strong THG at THz frequencies.20 Extremely high THG CE 
was achieved with relatively low input intensity values on the order of 0.1 MW/cm2, which 
makes graphene wave generation more appealing at THz due to the lack of high power 
sources at these frequencies.111 As a relevant example, enhanced nonlinear THz effects are
reported based on the hybrid graphene-covered metallic grating depicted in Fig. 6(a).30

Perfect absorption is observed at the resonance of this hybrid grating (Fig. 6(b)) under TM-
polarized incident wave indicating a strong coupling effect between the graphene THz
plasmon and metallic grating resonance. The left inset in Fig. 6(b) illustrates the equivalent 
circuit model used to theoretically analyze this structure, where graphene is assumed to be an 
additional shunt admittance Ys. Note that metallic gratings without graphene can also achieve 
perfect absorption but lack dynamic tunability combined with strong nonlinearity induced by 
graphene. The highly localized magnetic fields inside the grating’s trenches imply the 
existence of a magnetic plasmon mode accompanied by strong electric fields that can directly 
boost the inherent graphene nonlinearity. The right inset in Fig. 6(b) represents the electric 
field enhancement distribution at resonance. Figure 6(c) demonstrates the computed THG CE
by this hybrid grating at its absorption peak as a function of the input intensity. The THG CE 
is dramatically enhanced with the increase of the incident FF wave intensity. Note that the 
relationship between the computed THG CE and the input intensity always has a quadratic 
shape. Importantly, very high THG CE values around 0.16 are achieved under a relatively 
low intensity of 100 kW/cm2, consisting a substantial improvement compared to previously 
reported strong THG effects at THz frequencies obtained by relevant nonlinear graphene 
nanostructures.20 Furthermore, this work explores another interesting third-order nonlinear 
optical process, i.e., four wave mixing (FWM), that is also boosted by the same hybrid 
configuration. The FWM output
power of the proposed graphene-covered hybrid 

metamaterial grating is much higher compared to similar designs but without graphene (only 
grating), as shown in Fig. 6(d). This result proves that graphene is crucial to obtain strong 
nonlinearity. Interestingly, the nonlinear response remains relatively insensitive across a 
broad incident angle range. Thus, the strong enhancement of nonlinear effects achieved 
theoretically by this simple hybrid configuration can have potential applications in nonlinear 
THz spectroscopy, THz frequency generators, and wave mixers. 

It was computed that graphene has an especially high third-harmonic susceptibility value

(3)
9
2
2
|
| 10
m
V

−

at THz frequencies, many orders of magnitude larger compared to near-

IR.112 Based on its strong nonlinearity and easy integration with CMOS-based chips, it is 
predicted that graphene can be used in chip-integrated THz nonlinear conversion 
applications.109 Recently, this concept has been experimentally verified by combining
graphene with a metallic grating to provide electric field enhancement at the system’s 
resonance.109 In this work, the grating-enhanced third-order nonlinearity was explored, where


17

Figure 6. Hybrid grating-graphene metamaterial designs to enhance nonlinear effects. 
(a) Illustration of hybrid graphene-plasmonic grating structure. (b) Absorption spectra computed by
analytical and numerical methods. The inset on the left is the equivalent-circuit model used to analyze the 
proposed structure. The inset on the right is the electric field enhancement distribution at the resonance. 
The Fermi level of graphene is fixed to 0.3 eV. (c) THG CE as a function of the incident intensity for the 
hybrid configuration. (d) FWM output power as a function of the incident angle 
1 for the cases of hybrid 

graphene-grating and grating without graphene presented by black and blue lines, respectively. The inset is 
the computed electric field enhancement distribution at the FWM frequency.30 Reproduced with 
permission from Guo. et al., Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 024050 (2019). Copyright 2019, American Physical 
Society. (e) Measurement configuration of a THz wave illuminating the grating-graphene metamaterial 
(top) and bare graphene monolayer (bottom). (f)-(g) Measured THz fields in (f) time and (g) frequency 
domain for the grating-graphene metamaterial. (h)-(i) Measured THz fields in (h) time and (i) frequency 
domain for the bare graphene layer. (j) Measured harmonic fields for the grating-graphene metamaterial 
and bare graphene layer as a function of incident field strength. (k) Extracted nonlinear susceptibility as a 
function of incident THz fields for these two cases.109 Reproduced with permission from Deinert et al., 
ACS Nano 15, 1145 (2021). Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (l) Side view of the graphene-
plasmonic grating where graphene covers the entire grating area.113 Reproduced with permission from 
Wang et al.,  Phys. Scr. 97, 115501 (2022). Copyright 2022, IOP Publishing Ltd. 

a narrowband THz wave was generated and then focused on the sample. The electric field of 
the transmitted wave is measured as a function of time by using the configuration shown in 
Fig. 6(e), where a THz wave with frequency f = 0.7 THz illuminates the grating-graphene or
bare graphene samples. The signal passes through each sample and is measured in the time 
domain with results demonstrated in Figs. 6(f) and 6(h), respectively. The transmitted signal 


18

has a THG frequency equal to 3f = 2.1 THz, calculated by using the Fourier transform of its 
time domain response and depicted in Figs. 6(g) and 6(i) for each sample. Interestingly, no 
THG signal is observed for the bare graphene case even for higher input field strength of 14
kV/cm, as shown in Figs. 6(h) and 6(i). Hence, the hybrid grating-graphene metamaterial 
shows a distinct and much stronger nonlinearity. Next, the field strength of the transmitted 
THG signal at 3f = 2.1 THz is computed by taking its Fourier transform and extracting the 
power spectrum peak with results plotted in Fig. 6(j). Clearly, the THG signal of the hybrid 
grating sample is more than an order of magnitude higher than that of bare graphene. Figure 

6(k) illustrates the measured third-order effective nonlinear susceptibility values 
(3)
eff
of these 

samples that can reach a maximum value of 3 × 10−8 m2/V2 and has a negative sign. 
Interestingly, the nonlinear susceptibility of the grating-graphene hybrid design is more than 
forty times larger compared to bare graphene. The nonlinear THG CE of the grating-graphene 
sample can be further improved by increasing the duty cycle and decreasing graphene’s
Fermi level. The strong saturation effect, depicted in Fig. 6(k) beyond 10 kV/cm, is attributed 
to the induced high carrier temperatures due to the increased field enhancement. This simple 
configuration is CMOS-compatible and has low power consumption. Hence, it can be used in 
commercially viable, chip-integrated, THz nonlinear conversion applications.

Different, but always enhanced, nonlinear effects with hybrid dielectric grating-graphene 

structures were demonstrated in various previous works, including optical bistability and 
second harmonic generation (SHG).12,100,114 The harmonic generation of graphene over
silicon gratings was also numerically investigated.115 The harmonic generation intensities 
were affected by many factors, such as graphene Fermi level and its carrier mobility, grating 
period, and incident angle. In most previously proposed hybrid graphene-grating systems, a 
small part of the graphene area was attached to the grating and interacted with the enhanced 
fields mainly due to the induced discrete hot spots. To further strengthen the THG CE, a 
unique design of graphene plasmonic grating is shown in Fig. 6(l), where the entire grating 
surface, including the trench dips, is conformally covered by graphene layer.113 The enhanced 
THG response is expected to be more pronounced by this hybrid system, since it will greatly 
boost the interaction between incident electric fields and graphene.

C. Improved modulator and sensor designs

GPs can be flexibly tuned through optical excitation and electrical gating due to

increased chemical doping in graphene.6,116–118 They also provide a platform to achieve 
efficient optical modulation in terms of intensity, phase, and polarization of incident 
electromagnetic waves.119–121 An absolute phase modulation of 130 ° is experimentally 
demonstrated with a graphene-based Salisbury screen perfect absorbing device, under the 
excitation of intense THz pulses.122 More specifically, the dielectric-graphene plasmonic 
structures can exhibit nearly 100% resonant transmission when high-mobility graphene is 
used that can be substantially tuned, a feature that could be very useful to implement THz
transmission modulators. Towards this goal, a hybrid graphene/dielectric metasurface system


19

to achieve stronger light-matter interaction was proposed,27 allowing for improved tunability 
and modulation functionality. The system is demonstrated in Fig. 7(a). It is composed of 
periodic asymmetric silicon (Si) nanorods placed between a graphene monolayer and silica 
substrate. Full-wave simulations are performed by illuminating the structure with a normal 
incident plane wave. The induced electric field is greatly enhanced and confined around and 
inside the silicon gratings, since the grating’s asymmetry causes the formation of a narrow 
BIC resonance that leads to high transmission tunability. The transmission coefficients for 
three different graphene Fermi levels are calculated in Fig. 7(b), where the transmission 
modulation is clearly demonstrated. The transmission resonance is flatter and broader only in 
the case of undoped graphene (EF = 0 eV), mainly due to high interband absorption. The 
graphene’s interband transitions loss mechanism is rapidly decreased as the Fermi level 
increases. As a result, strong transmission modulation is achieved under Fermi levels 0.5 eV 
and 0.75 eV depicted by the red and blue dashed lines, respectively, in Fig. 7(b). The
modulation depth is illustrated more quantitatively as a function of incident wavelength by 
plotting
the 
absolute 
value 
of 
the 
transmission 
difference 

|
(
0.75
)
(
0
) |
F
F
T
T E
eV
T E
eV

=
=
−
=
in Fig. 7(c). Evidently, high transmission modulation, 

as high as 60%, is obtained at the Fano resonance dip due to the BIC phenomenon. This 
result indicates efficient and tunable transmission modulation at near-IR frequencies based on 
BIC metasurfaces loaded with graphene. 

Furthermore, two modulators are designed that achieve high quality-factor (Q-factor) 

resonances
with the goal to further increase the modulation depth of hybrid 

graphene/dielectric metasurface systems.123 The first design is composed of periodic 
germanium (Ge) bars adjacent to Ge ring resonators with modulation depth that can reach 
93%. This composite metasurface is shown in Fig. 7(d) and consists of two sets of Ge disks 
with different radii arranged in a certain formation on the silica substrate. Note that a 
continuous graphene sheet is placed on the Ge disks. Electrons and holes on the top graphene 
layer are photogenerated by illuminating it with an IR pump leading to two non-equilibrium 

quasi-Fermi levels 
fn
f
E
= E
and 
fp
f
E
= E
created due to the increased intensity of the 

optical pump. Figures 7(e) and 7(f) represent the transmission and reflection spectra, 
respectively, for various graphene quasi-Fermi level values. Notable, the transmission dip 
decreases as the quasi-Fermi level increases. At the same time, the resulted Fano resonance 
shows a red shift behavior mainly due to Pauli blocking. Hence, the absorption of THz 
photons is blocked by the optical pumping and carrier photoexcitation. In addition, the 
reflection peak and Q-factor also increase with the rise in graphene’s quasi-Fermi level values.
Importantly, the calculated modulation depth can reach as high as 98% at the operating 
frequency of 5 THz, a much larger value than previously studied graphene-based THz 
structures. The required optical intensity to achieve this modulation depth is as low as 7.35 
W/cm2. This hybrid structure provides a promising potential to design fast and efficient 
spatial THz modulators. 


20

Figure 7. Graphene-plasmon grating applications for transmission or reflection modulation.
(a) Schematic of the hybrid graphene-dielectric grating design to achieve high transmission modulation. (b)
Transmission coefficient of the proposed design as a function of incident wavelength under three different 
graphene Fermi levels. (c) Transmission difference as a function of incident wavelength.27 Reproduced 
with permission from Argyropoulos, Opt. Express 23(18), 23787 (2015). Copyright 2015, Optica. (d) 
Schematic of the proposed all-optical THz modulator. (e)-(f) Calculated (e) transmission and (f) reflection 
spectra of this structure.123 Reproduced with permission from Bahadori-Haghighi et al., J. Appl. Phys. 128, 
044506 (2020). Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing. (g) Schematic and operation principle of a modulator 
consisting of input and output photonic waveguides. The input photonic waveguide contains graphene on a 
grating along its slot regions. (h) Transmission spectra as a function of Fermi level c under three different 
wavelengths.124 Reproduced with permission from Kim et al., Nanoscale 9, 17429 (2017). Copyright 2017, 
The Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) Schematic of the proposed modulator, consisting of graphene-covered 
metal grating on polyimide over gold. (j) Modulation depth versus operating frequency. (k) Modulation 
speed estimated through reflectance variations.125 Reproduced with permission from Gaspare et al., Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 31, 2008039 (2021). Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH.

Subwavelength modulators are reported in Fig. 7(g) working in the mid-IR frequency 

range by embedding a hybrid graphene-grating structure into a waveguide.124 The grating 
utilized here is essential to achieve efficient coupling between the distinct waveguide modes. 
The modulation characteristics of this hybrid device are analyzed by changing the driving 
voltage between the aluminum and graphene layer, leading to different graphene Fermi levels 
c. The transmission spectra blue shift as c increases with results demonstrated in Fig. 7(h). 
The transmission can be tuned by more than 25 dB at wavelength 8 um when c slightly 
changes from 0.6 eV to 0.65 eV. In addition, high modulation depth is achieved in every 
wavelength between 7.25 um and 8.7 um, meaning that the proposed modulator can work in a 
wide wavelength range. This hybrid design substantially improves the modulation efficiency 


21

bandwidth compared to previous related works.

To achieve simultaneously high THz modulation efficiency and speed, graphene-based 

grating-gated devices were presented125 that work in reflection mode. The device was
fabricated by depositing a polyimide layer on a Au/SiO2/Si substrate, creating a metallic
grating. The single layer graphene was grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The 
relevant schematic of this device is shown in Fig. 7(i). Simulations were performed to model 
this design and determine the appropriate structure parameters by calculating its reflectance. 
Then, the modulation performance was measured by a THz time-domain spectroscopy (TDS) 
system. In order to evaluate the modulation performance, the modulation depth was defined 

as 
100 [ (
)
(
))
(
)]
G
CNP
CNP
R V
R V
R V
 =

−
, where 
(
R VG )
is the reflectance extracted by the 

TDS measurements at VG and 
(
R VCNP )
is the maximum reflectance at VG = VCNP. Figure 7(j) 

plots the modulation depth as a function of frequency. It can be seen that  can reach a 
maximum value of ~90% at the resonance frequency of 2.45 THz, while the corresponding 
insertion loss is low (~1.3 dB). In addition, the modulation speed is measured by placing the 
designed modulator at the focal point of a quantum cascade laser (QCL) cavity that has single 
mode emission at 2.68 THz. The modulation speed is estimated through the reflectance 
variations shown in Fig. 7(k). The 3 dB cutoff frequency obtained from this curve fit 

(
. ,
19.5 1.8 kH
fc o fit
z
=

) agrees well with the theoretical electronic cutoff 
. ,
24.5 kH
fc o teo
z
=
. 

This work reported a modulator design with an efficient (90%) amplitude modulation with
high speed (>20 kHz) that can be integrated with a THz QCL, effectively compensating the 
QCL cavity dispersion. 

Graphene also has high surface-to-volume area ratio combined with large carrier 

mobility that makes it an attractive material platform for sensing applications. In particular, 
large sensitivity values and high Q-factors were reported with a graphene-gold grating hybrid 
sensor.126 The induced Fano-type transmission or reflection was very sensitive to changes in 
the surrounding environment of this structure. Small changes in the refractive index caused a 
significant shift in the resonance wavelength, achieving highly sensitive detection. Moreover, 
tunable and ultracompact refractive index sensors were constructed by using the metal-
graphene hybrid nanostructures shown in Fig. 8(a).42 In this case, both graphene surface 
plasmon (GSP) and waveguide resonant modes in the silver grating slits are generated based 
on the alternative deposition of graphene and silver nanoribbons on the metallic substrate. 
This leads to a Fano resonance, originating from the coupling between the GSP and grating 
waveguide mode. Figure 8(b) illustrates the simulated spectra under various ambient 
refractive indices. The sharp Fano transmission dip shows a redshift as the refractive index
values are increased, consisting a crucial property to obtain high sensitivity when refractive 
index variations in the surrounding environment are present. Both Fano transmission dip and 
peak exhibit a blueshift as the Fermi level increases with results depicted in Fig. 8(c). The 
GSP electrical tuning is the signature feature of graphene-based devices, usually leading to a
broadening in the operation bandwidth of the designed structure. Variations of the structures 


22

were also studied to investigate the fabrication tolerance of these hybrid gratings. The 
thickness of the substrate, middle silver film, and grating period had little effect on the 
sensing performance. 

Figure 8. Graphene-plasmon grating applications in sensing. 
(a) Schematic of the proposed silver-graphene hybrid structure to achieve a refractive index sensor. (b)
Transmission versus operating wavelength under different ambient refractive indices. (c) Transmission 
versus wavelength under different graphene Fermi level values.42 Reproduced with permission from Pan et 
al., Sci. Rep. 6, 1 (2016). Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (d) The front view of the proposed 
ultrasensitive THz sensor. (e) Resonant frequency versus refractive indices of the analytes to evaluate the 
sensing performance.39 Reproduced with permission from Yan et al., J. Light. Technol. 37, 1103 (2019). 
Copyright 2019, IEEE. (f) Schematic of the designed sensor based on monolayer graphene-coated THz 
metamaterials. (g) Relative reflectance changes when adding chlorpyrifos methyl molecules on top of the 
graphene-metamaterial heterostructure with different concentrations ranging from 0.02 mg/L to 3.0 
mg/L.127 Reproduced with permission from Xu et al., Carbon N. Y. 141, 247 (2019). Copyright 2019, 
Elsevier Ltd. (h) Schematic of the proposed hyperbolic metamaterial structure with high sensitivity to the 
surrounding medium. (i) Lasing frequency versus dielectric permittivity when the proposed structure is 
embedded in different dielectric materials.62 Reproduced with permission from Guo et al., Opt. Mater. 
Express 8, 3941 (2018). Copyright 2018, Optica. 

Single monolayer graphene gratings were integrated with Fabry-Perot (FP) cavities to 

further improve the sensitivity in the THz frequency regime.39 Figures 8(d) represents the 
front view of the proposed system. The incident field was confined in a microscale cavity
leading to higher sensitivity. The sensing performance was evaluated by performing full-


23

wave simulations with results plotted in Fig. 8(e), where a frequency shift in all resonant 
modes is obtained by changing the analyte refractive index values. The slope of the fitting 
lines is utilized to indicate the frequency sensitivity. Here, peak levels of 4.2, 7.6, and 10 
THz/RIU are achieved at the M2, M4, and M6 modes, respectively. In the same work, the 
tunability and wide-angle sensing operation were illustrated by calculating the absorption for 
various graphene Fermi levels and under oblique incidences, respectively. Based on these 
advantages, the proposed graphene-based scheme is promising for the design of on-chip 
integrated THz biochemical sensors.

The first experimental demonstration of a THz sensor based on hybrid graphene-

metamaterial heterostructure was realized by adding chlorpyrifos methyl molecules on top of 
this structure.127 The schematic of the proposed heterostructure sensor is shown in Fig. 8(f), 
which is composed of monolayer CVD-grown graphene, planar array of square patch gold 
resonators, thin layer of polymide, and aluminum ground plane. The reflection spectra are 

measured by using a THz time-domain spectrometer system, defined as 

2

sample
reference
R
E
E
=

with 
sample
( reference
)
E
E
the THz electric field intensity reflected from the sample (silver mirror 

reference). The relative reflectance change is expressed as 
reference
sample
reference
(
)
R R
R
R
R

=
−
, 

where 
sample
( reference
)
R
R
is the measured reflectance with (without) chlorpyrifos methyl. Figure 

8(g) illustrates the relative reflectance changes with chlorpyrifos methyl solution added on 

top of the heterostructure. It is found that the value 
R R
rapidly increases when the 

concentration is lower than 0.1 mg/L, while it rises slowly with the growth of the 

concentration. It can be detected that a maximum 
R R
of 35% is obtained when the 

concentration is 3.0 mg/L. This high sensitivity originates from the -stacking forming 
between molecules and graphene. If the structure is further optimized, the sensitivity can be 
greatly improved, leading to a plethora of new THz sensing applications.

Likewise, a novel physical mechanism was explored to enhance the sensitivity of 

graphene-based devices by designing hyperbolic metamaterial (HMM) structures made of
photoexcited graphene and dielectric layers that were stacked in an alternative way.62 Figure 
8(h) illustrates the proposed structure, where the active graphene response is achieved due to 
IR/visible light pumping. Graphene can act as a gain medium under sufficiently strong 
photoexcitation levels due to the resulted population inversion.128,129
The light-trapping 

effect was supported by this HMM design at THz frequencies. Hence, the THz gain of the 
photoexcited graphene was boosted leading to lasing effect. Simulations and theoretical 
analysis were performed to investigate the lasing or amplification response. It was found that 
this response is ultrasensitive to the surrounding media when the HMM is embedded in 
different dielectric materials, as demonstrated in the inset of Fig. 8(i). The substantial redshift 
in the THz resonant frequency of the lasing mode is presented in Fig. 8(i) achieved by


24

changing the surrounding dielectric medium. This result indicates strong THz sensing. 

D. Efficient photodetectors

Photodetection consists a very important property for a range of fields, such as optical 

communications, environmental monitoring, and image sensing. The first example of 
photodetectors based on graphene exhibited photo-responsivity of 6.1 mA/W at 1.55 um.41

This work combined graphene with plasmonic nanoparticles to enhance the responsivity of 
hybrid photodetectors. However, its photoactive region was limited to submicron length scale 
because of the metal-graphene junction small area. Hence, recently, SPPs graphene 
photodetectors were proposed to extend the junction region by coupling graphene with metal 
gratings,53 as shown in Fig. 9(a). The photovoltage maps were plotted at different 
wavelengths based on this optimized geometry. Figure 9(b) compares the structured grating 
contact and the flat contact at 785 nm, where a large enhancement of photoresponse (~400%)
is achieved. The grating area determines the photoactive area, since the light energy delivered
to the graphene junction occurs at the contact edges where light is converted to an electrical 
signal. The physical mechanism behind the response in this work was the coupling of the 
incident light into SPPs, which provides an interesting platform to achieve SPP-based
photodetectors by using hybrid metallic gratings. 

Interestingly, a novel mechanism of photoconductive gain induced by plasma waves was

reported in a graphene field-effect transistor (FET) design.54 Grating-gates were utilized to 
excite the plasma waves under THz excitation. The excited plasma waves oscillated in the 
graphene FET channel, serving as a cavity, with schematic shown in Fig. 9(c). The transfer-
characteristic and induced photocurrent of the proposed graphene FET are presented in Figs. 
9(d) and 9(e), respectively. The photoresponse was enhanced by increasing the drain bias 
voltage. The conductance tunability was realized in this work by changing the incident 
frequency, AC voltage-source configuration, or direct-current driven electric fields. Metal 
nanogratings integrated with monolayer graphene were utilized to achieve even higher 
performance graphene-based photodetectors.52 The 3D schematic illustration of this design is 
shown in Fig. 9(f), where SPPs are excited under TM polarization near the metal-graphene 
interface leading to enhanced absorption. With the generation of electron-hole pairs in 
graphene, a built-in electric field separated the photoexcited carriers. As a result, photocurrent 
and electrical signals emerged. The optimal values of the structure’s parameters were
determined by using simulations with the goal to obtain enhanced absorption to generate 
maximum carriers. Maximum photocurrent of 0.81 mA at 3 V bias voltage was obtained by 
computing the I-V curve of this structure response under an incident power P of only 0.5 mW. 
The responsivity is plotted as a function of bias voltage in Fig. 9(g). It can be observed that a 
high responsivity of 1650 mA/W is achieved by just using 3 V bias voltage. In addition, the 
relationship between the responsivity and working wavelength is also investigated under 
different bias voltages and presented in Fig. 9(h). The increase in bias voltage values resulted
in spectral response broadening because of the rise in electric field values. 

Next, structure asymmetry was introduced in hybrid graphene-grating designs to couple 


25

the incoming radiation more efficiently to the FET channel. In the case of THz photodetectors, 
the photovoltaic response was enhanced only when asymmetry was introduced into the FET 
unit cell design.56,130 As an example, asymmetric grating gates were used to improve the 
responsivity of graphene-based FET detectors shown in Fig. 9(i).31 In this work, two flakes of 
h-BN were utilized to completely encapsulate the monolayer graphene ensuring its high 
quality, as depicted in Fig. 9(i). Larger photocurrent existed for 0.3 THz compared to lower 
frequencies, where a higher signal-to-noise ratio was present. This can be explained due to 
the stronger radiation coupling to the FET structure at higher frequencies. Maximum current 
responsivity Ri with values up to 55.6 mA/W is obtained at cryogenic temperatures, as 
demonstrated in Fig. 9(j). Applications in THz sensing and inspection of hidden metallic 
objects are envisioned based on these new graphene-based FET detectors. 

Figure 9. Hybrid graphene-metal gratings to enhance photodetection.
(a) Schematic and SEM image of the proposed metal-graphene-metal photodetector. (b) Scanning 
photovoltage maps under 785 nm excitation.53 Reproduced with permission from Echtermeyer et al., Nano 
Lett. 16, 8 (2016). Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the hybrid graphene-
grating structure to realize photo-conductance. Here, two AC voltage sources are used to excite graphene 
simultaneously. (d) Photocurrent characteristics of the proposed design as a function of bias voltages Vgs. 
(e) Photocurrent corresponding to the fundamental plasma resonance at 3 THz.54 Reproduced with 
permission from Wang et al., Nanotechnology 27, 035205 (2016). Copyright 2016, IOP Publishing Ltd. (f) 
Schematic of an alternative graphene-based photodetector. (g) Responsivity versus bias voltage at 1.55 um 
wavelength. (h) Responsivity versus wavelength under different bias voltage values.52 Reproduced with 
permission from Khosravian et al., J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 38, 1192 (2021). Copyright 2021, Optica. (i) 
Asymmetric grating-graphene design to achieve gate-bias-dependent photocurrent. (j) Effective current 
responsivity versus the bias voltage when the excitation is fixed to 0.3 THz.31 Reproduced with permission 
from Delgado-Notario et al., APL Photonics 5, 066102 (2020). Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing.  

E.
Nonreciprocal structures

The induced electric field distributions can be different for opposite excitation directions

due to the structure’s asymmetry.131–134 When nonlinearities are considered in these 


26

asymmetric structures, nonreciprocal phenomena are realized. These interesting effects can 
also be realized by asymmetric hybrid grating designs combined with graphene. As an 
example, the nonreciprocal transmission in near-IR frequencies of such asymmetric HGPG is 
demonstrated in Fig. 10(a), where designs of nonlinear monolayer graphene integrated with 
low-loss dielectric gratings are theoretically presented.135 In the linear regime, the maximum 
electric field enhancement is found at the resonant wavelength and plotted in Fig. 10(b). Then,
the optical nonlinear Kerr effect is triggered under strong input laser excitation intensities. 
The change in the effective refractive index of the dielectric and graphene, mainly due to 
Kerr effect, shifts the resonance peak and affects the transmission spectrum, as shown in Fig. 
10(c). However, the induced electric field maximum values are different in the case of either 
forward or backward illumination mainly due to the structure’s geometrical asymmetry. As a 
result, the refractive index changes differently for opposite direction illumination, achieving 
nonreciprocal transmission which is demonstrated in Fig. 10(d). This work presents a
relatively simple HGPG design to realize self-induced nonreciprocity due to nonlinearities 
paving the way to achieve other relevant nonlinear phenomena, such as optical bistability.
The nonreciprocal efficiency can be further improved by increasing the HGPG structure’s
asymmetry. Moreover, this type of design can work in a broad frequency range just by 
appropriately tuning the grating parameters.

Figure 10. Hybrid graphene-dielectric gratings to achieve nonreciprocal transmission.
(a) Schematic of the nonlinear metasurface based on monolayer graphene integrated with asymmetric 
dielectric grating. (b) Electric field enhancement at the resonant wavelength in the linear regime. (c) 
Transmission in the nonlinear regime as a function of wavelength under different incident intensity values. 
(d) Nonreciprocal transmission as a function of wavelength in the case of forward or backward laser 
illumination.135 Reproduced with permission from Chen et al., Carbon N. Y. 173, 126 (2021). Copyright 
2021, Elsevier Ltd.

IV.SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

HGPGs are a promising class of emerging structures exhibiting unique properties that 

are not present in either graphene or grating alone. This perspective paper illustrated how the 
HGPG designs enable superior performance compared to other relevant designs based solely 
on graphene or gratings. We emphasize some unique features of GPs, such as high tunability, 
strong light confinement, and low loss compared to conventional metal-based plasmons. 
Optical gratings provide strong localized electric fields and are widely used to excite GPs 


27

more efficiently along a continuous graphene layer. Hybrid designs consisting of grating 
structures combined with graphene benefit from the merits of both systems. More importantly, 
strong coupling between GPs and gratings plays an important role in improving the 
performance of these complex structures. Various applications of HGPG in diverse research 
areas are presented, such as perfect absorbers, nonlinear structures, modulators, sensors, 
photodetectors, and nonreciprocal devices. The physical mechanisms are highlighted for each
application by demonstrating theoretical analysis and experimental implementations. 

Although the recent progress of graphene-based hybrid structures has shown great 

opportunity in various applications, several challenges still exist that prohibit the 
establishment of this new technology. First, the graphene simulation models need to be
further improved to consider more practical parameters. For example, we can introduce 
additional parameters to precisely define graphene material properties, since the surface 
conductivity model used in the majority of current simulations is valid only for single 
graphene layer. Second, large electron momentum relaxation time is extremely challenging to 
be achieved in experiments involving the more practical large-area CVD-grown graphene136. 
It should be noticed that the relaxation time value used in numerical simulations are usually 
taken one or even two orders of magnitude higher than that in practical experiments,137

because ideal conditions are assumed in the fabrication process mainly in terms of 
temperature, doping level, external field, and various substrate materials, to name a few. It 
has been demonstrated that larger relaxation time will introduce stronger absorption. As a 
result, improving the quality of graphene used in experiments will be a significant milestone 
to boost the efficiency of HGPG structures. Furthermore, the shift in the plasmonic resonance 
frequency of HGPGs to near-IR or even visible frequency bands still remains challenging. 
Fortunately, some progress has been recently reported in this field, for example, higher 
doping to increase the carrier density through optical pumping or electron injection.137 By 
combining patterned graphene arrays
with dielectric/metallic layers
or plasmonic 

nanostructures, significant enhanced absorption of graphene can be realized at smaller 
wavelgnths.22

Very recently, the concept of BIC has emerged in photonic systems,138,139 offering 

extremely high Q-factor resonances combined with enhanced electric fields. We envision that 
the utilization of the BICs effect generated by HGPG systems will further boost the efficiency 
of nonlinear optical phenomena and other relevant effects requiring strong light-matter 
interaction. In addition, BIC phenomena are highly sensitive to the surrounding environment, 
which is expected to result in useful hybrid designs for biosensing applications. Moreover, 
the nonequilibrium relaxation dynamics of photoexcited graphene is another interesting
emerging research topic
that can be combined with gratings and lead to novel 

applications.129,140 Negative dynamic conductivity can be realized in photoexcited graphene, 
leading to lasing or amplification effects. Efficient tunable lasers can be realized by 
incorporating photoexcited graphene into grating structures, operating across a broad range of 
wavelengths. Furthermore, the integration of graphene with other novel nanomaterials, such 
as quantum dots or even alternatively 2D materials (or van der Waals heterostructures), can
lead to the discovery of new phenomena and enable us to explore the fundamental limits of 


28

light-matter interaction at the nanoscale. In the future, we expect significant advancements in 
the fabrication techniques and characterization methods of hybrid graphene structures, paving 
the way for the development of high-performance photonic and optoelectronic devices, such 
as biosensors, lasers, solar cells, and ultra-compact photonic circuits.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

T. G. acknowledges support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(NSFC) (Grant No. 12104203). C. A. acknowledges partial support from the National Science 
Foundation under Grant No. 2224456 and 2212050, and the Office of Naval Research Young 
Investigator Program (ONR YIP) (Grant No. N00014-19-1-2384).

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding 

author upon reasonable request.

REFERENCES:

1 K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S. V Morozov, D. Jiang, M.I. Katsnelson, I. V Grigorieva, S. V Dubonos, and 
A.A. Firsov, Nature 438, 197 (2005).
2 T. Low, A. Chaves, J.D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N.X. Fang, P. Avouris, T.F. Heinz, F. Guinea, L. Martin-
Moreno, and F. Koppens, Nat. Mater. 16, 182 (2017).
3 G.X. Ni, A.S. McLeod, Z. Sun, L. Wang, L. Xiong, K.W. Post, S.S. Sunku, B.-Y. Jiang, J. Hone, C.R. Dean, 
M.M. Fogler, and D.N. Basov, Nature 557, 530 (2018).
4 J. Tao, L. Wu, and G. Zheng, Carbon N. Y. 133, 249 (2018).
5 W.B. Lu, W. Zhu, H.J. Xu, Z.H. Ni, Z.G. Dong, and T.J. Cui, Opt. Express 21, 10475 (2013).
6 F. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Tian, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. Crommie, and Y.R. Shen, Science. 320, 206 (2008).
7 H. Lu, C. Zeng, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, M.M. Hossain, P. Reineck, and M. Gu, Sci. Rep. 5, 8443 (2015).
8 Y. V. BLUDOV, A. FERREIRA, N.M.R. PERES, and M.I. VASILEVSKIY, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 27, 1341001 
(2013).
9 T.J. Constant, S.M. Hornett, D.E. Chang, and E. Hendry, Nat. Phys. 12, 124 (2016).
10 X. Luo, T. Qiu, W. Lu, and Z. Ni, Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports 74, 351 (2013).
11 F.H.L. Koppens, D.E. Chang, and F.J. García de Abajo, Nano Lett. 11, 3370 (2011).
12 J. Li, T. Zhang, and L. Chen, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13, 338 (2018).
13 L. Ju, B. Geng, J. Horng, C. Girit, M. Martin, Z. Hao, H. a Bechtel, X. Liang, A. Zettl, Y.R. Shen, and F. 
Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol. 6, 630 (2011).
14 Y. Li, K. Tantiwanichapan, A.K. Swan, and R. Paiella, Nanophotonics 9, 1901 (2020).
15 O. Mitrofanov, W. Yu, R.J. Thompson, Y. Jiang, Z.J. Greenberg, J. Palmer, I. Brener, W. Pan, C. Berger, 
W.A. de Heer, and Z. Jiang, Solid State Commun. 224, 47 (2015).
16 O. Mitrofanov, W. Yu, R.J. Thompson, Y. Jiang, I. Brener, W. Pan, C. Berger, W.A. De Heer, and Z. Jiang, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, (2013).
17 W.Y. Kim, H.-D. Kim, T.-T. Kim, H.-S. Park, K. Lee, H.J. Choi, S.H. Lee, J. Son, N. Park, and B. Min, Nat. 
Commun. 7, 10429 (2016).
18 H. Yan, T. Low, W. Zhu, Y. Wu, M. Freitag, X. Li, F. Guinea, P. Avouris, and F. Xia, Nat. Photonics 7, 394 
(2013).
19 J.H. Strait, P. Nene, W.-M. Chan, C. Manolatou, S. Tiwari, F. Rana, J.W. Kevek, and P.L. McEuen, Phys. 
Rev. B 87, 241410 (2013).
20 B. Jin, T. Guo, and C. Argyropoulos, J. Opt. 19, 094005 (2017).
21 H. Yan, X. Li, B. Chandra, G. Tulevski, Y. Wu, M. Freitag, W. Zhu, P. Avouris, and F. Xia, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 7, 330 (2012).
22 Z. Fang, Y. Wang, A.E. Schlather, Z. Liu, P.M. Ajayan, F.J. García de Abajo, P. Nordlander, X. Zhu, and N.J. 


29

Halas, Nano Lett. 14, 299 (2014).
23 A. Fallahi and J. Perruisseau-Carrier, Phys. Rev. B 86, 195408 (2012).
24 T. Guo and C. Argyropoulos, J. Opt. 22, 084003 (2020).
25 B. Xu, C. Gu, Z. Li, and Z. Niu, Opt. Express 21, 23803 (2013).
26 M. Liu, X. Yin, E. Ulin-Avila, B. Geng, T. Zentgraf, L. Ju, F. Wang, and X. Zhang, Nature 474, 64 (2011).
27 C. Argyropoulos, Opt. Express 23, 23787 (2015).
28 Y. Yao, R. Shankar, P. Rauter, Y. Song, J. Kong, M. Loncar, and F. Capasso, Nano Lett. 14, 3749 (2014).
29 D. Yadav, S.B. Tombet, T. Watanabe, S. Arnold, V. Ryzhii, and T. Otsuji, 2D Mater. 3, 045009 (2016).
30 T. Guo, B. Jin, and C. Argyropoulos, Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 024050 (2019).
31 J.A. Delgado-Notario, V. Clericò, E. Diez, J.E. Velázquez-Pérez, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, T. Otsuji, and 
Y.M. Meziani, APL Photonics 5, 066102 (2020).
32 X. Chen, Z. Tian, Y. Lu, Y. Xu, X. Zhang, C. Ouyang, J. Gu, J. Han, and W. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater. 8, 
1900660 (2020).
33 Q. Pan, J. Hong, G. Zhang, Y. Shuai, and H. Tan, Opt. Express 25, 16400 (2017).
34 W. Gao, G. Shi, Z. Jin, J. Shu, Q. Zhang, R. Vajtai, P.M. Ajayan, J. Kono, and Q. Xu, Nano Lett. 13, 3698 
(2013).
35 B. Zhao and Z.M. Zhang, ACS Photonics 2, 1611 (2015).
36 S. Xiao, X. Zhu, B.H. Li, and N.A. Mortensen, Front. Phys. 11, 1 (2016).
37 L. Cui, J. Wang, and M. Sun, Rev. Phys. 6, 100054 (2021).
38 B. Ruan, C. Liu, C. Xiong, M. Li, B. Zhang, E. Gao, K. Wu, and H. Li, J. Light. Technol. 39, 5657 (2021).
39 F. Yan, L. Li, R. Wang, H. Tian, J. Liu, J. Liu, F. Tian, and J. Zhang, J. Light. Technol. 37, 1103 (2019).
40 D.A. Bandurin, D. Svintsov, I. Gayduchenko, S.G. Xu, A. Principi, M. Moskotin, I. Tretyakov, D. Yagodkin, 
S. Zhukov, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, I. V. Grigorieva, M. Polini, G.N. Goltsman, A.K. Geim, and G. Fedorov, 
Nat. Commun. 9, 5392 (2018).
41 T. Mueller, F. Xia, and P. Avouris, Nat. Photonics 4, 297 (2010).
42 M. Pan, Z. Liang, Y. Wang, and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep. 6, 29984 (2016).
43 M. Farhat, M. Yang, Z. Ye, and P.-Y. Chen, ACS Photonics 7, 2080 (2020).
44 Y. Chen, J. Yao, Z. Song, L. Ye, G. Cai, and Q.H. Liu, Opt. Express 24, 16961 (2016).
45 M.M. Jadidi, A.B. Sushkov, R.L. Myers-Ward, A.K. Boyd, K.M. Daniels, D.K. Gaskill, M.S. Fuhrer, H.D. 
Drew, and T.E. Murphy, Nano Lett. 15, 7099 (2015).
46 M. Janfaza, M.A. Mansouri-Birjandi, and A. Tavousi, Opt. Commun. 440, 75 (2019).
47 R.R. Nair, P. Blake, A.N. Grigorenko, K.S. Novoselov, T.J. Booth, T. Stauber, N.M.R. Peres, and A.K. Geim, 
Science. 320, 1308 (2008).
48 K.F. Mak, M.Y. Sfeir, Y. Wu, C.H. Lui, J.A. Misewich, and T.F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 196405 (2008).
49 Y. Zhao, G. Chen, Z. Tao, C. Zhang, and Y. Zhu, RSC Adv. 4, 26535 (2014).
50 C. Liu, Y. Bai, J. Zhou, Q. Zhao, and L. Qiao, J. Korean Ceram. Soc. 54, 349 (2017).
51 B.Y. Zhang, T. Liu, B. Meng, X. Li, G. Liang, X. Hu, and Q.J. Wang, Nat. Commun. 4, 1811 (2013).
52 E. Khosravian, H.R. Mashayekhi, and A. Farmani, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 38, 1192 (2021).
53 T.J. Echtermeyer, S. Milana, U. Sassi, A. Eiden, M. Wu, E. Lidorikis, and A.C. Ferrari, Nano Lett. 16, 8 
(2016).
54 L. Wang, X. Chen, and W. Lu, Nanotechnology 27, 035205 (2016).
55 K. Tantiwanichapan, X. Wang, H. Durmaz, Y. Li, A.K. Swan, and R. Paiella, ACS Photonics 4, 2011 (2017).
56 D.V. Fateev, K.V. Mashinsky, O.V. Polischuk, and V.V. Popov, Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 064002 (2019).
57 M. Jablan, M. Soljačić, and H. Buljan, Phys. Rev. B 83, 161409 (2011).
58 I.J. Luxmoore, C.H. Gan, P.Q. Liu, F. Valmorra, P. Li, J. Faist, and G.R. Nash, ACS Photonics 1, 1151 (2014).
59 C. Yi, T.-H. Kim, W. Jiao, Y. Yang, A. Lazarides, K. Hingerl, G. Bruno, A. Brown, and M. Losurdo, Small 8, 
2721 (2012).
60 B. Deng, Q. Guo, C. Li, H. Wang, X. Ling, D.B. Farmer, S. Han, J. Kong, and F. Xia, ACS Nano 10, 11172 
(2016).
61 F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia, and P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol. 4, 839 (2009).
62 T. Guo, L. Zhu, P.-Y. Chen, and C. Argyropoulos, Opt. Mater. Express 8, 3941 (2018).
63 W. Gao, J. Shu, C. Qiu, and Q. Xu, ACS Nano 6, 7806 (2012).
64 S. Xiao, T. Wang, T. Liu, X. Yan, Z. Li, and C. Xu, Carbon N. Y. 126, 271 (2018).
65 N. Matthaiakakis, X. Yan, H. Mizuta, and M.D.B. Charlton, Sci. Rep. 7, 7303 (2017).
66 W. Wei, J. Nong, L. Tang, Y. Zhu, and H. Shi, Plasmonics 11, 1109 (2016).
67 S.H. Lee, H.-D. Kim, H.J. Choi, B. Kang, Y.R. Cho, and B. Min, IEEE Trans. Terahertz Sci. Technol. 3, 764 
(2013).
68 J.-P. Liu, W.-L. Wang, F. Xie, X. Luo, X. Zhou, M. Lei, Y.-J. Yuan, M.-Q. Long, and L.-L. Wang, Opt. 


30

Express 26, 29509 (2018).
69 A.B. Khanikaev, S.H. Mousavi, G. Shvets, and Y.S. Kivshar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 126804 (2010).
70 J.B. Pendry, L. Martín-Moreno, and F.J. Garcia-Vidal, Science. 305, 847 (2004).
71 X. Zhao, L. Zhu, C. Yuan, and J. Yao, Opt. Lett. 41, 5470 (2016).
72 Y.M. Qing, H.F. Ma, and T.J. Cui, ACS Photonics 6, 2884 (2019).
73 Y.M. Qing, H.F. Ma, and T.J. Cui, Carbon N. Y. 145, 596 (2019).
74 J. Linder and K. Halterman, Sci. Rep. 6, 31225 (2016).
75 M. Furchi, A. Urich, A. Pospischil, G. Lilley, K. Unterrainer, H. Detz, P. Klang, A.M. Andrews, W. Schrenk, 
G. Strasser, and T. Mueller, Nano Lett. 12, 2773 (2012).
76 A. Pospischil, M. Humer, M.M. Furchi, D. Bachmann, R. Guider, T. Fromherz, and T. Mueller, Nat. 
Photonics 7, 892 (2013).
77 S. Thongrattanasiri, F.H.L. Koppens, and F.J. García de Abajo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 047401 (2012).
78 R. Alaee, M. Farhat, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer, Opt. Express 20, 28017 (2012).
79 J.R. Piper and S. Fan, ACS Photonics 1, 347 (2014).
80 Y. Jiang, H. De Zhang, J. Wang, C.N. Gao, J. Wang, and W.P. Cao, Opt. Lett. 43, 4296 (2018).
81 W. Liu, J. Zhang, Z. Zhu, X. Yuan, and S. Qin, Nanomaterials 6, 155 (2016).
82 T. Zhang, J. Dai, Y. Dai, Y. Fan, X. Han, J. Li, F. Yin, Y. Zhou, and K. Xu, Opt. Express 25, 26221 (2017).
83 S.-X. Xia, X. Zhai, Y. Huang, J.-Q. Liu, L.-L. Wang, and S.-C. Wen, Opt. Lett. 42, 3052 (2017).
84 B. Zhao, J.M. Zhao, and Z.M. Zhang, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 32, 1176 (2015).
85 N. Nguyen-Huu, J. Pistora, M. Cada, T. Nguyen-Thoi, Y. Ma, K. Yasumoto, B.M.A. Rahman, Q. Wu, Y. Ma, 
Q.H. Ngo, L. Jie, and H. Maeda, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 27, 1 (2021).
86 Y. Jiang, H. De Zhang, J. Wang, C.N. Gao, J. Wang, and W.P. Cao, Opt. Lett. 43, 4296 (2018).
87 V. Thareja, J.-H. Kang, H. Yuan, K.M. Milaninia, H.Y. Hwang, Y. Cui, P.G. Kik, and M.L. Brongersma, 
Nano Lett. 15, 1570 (2015).
88 J. Min Woo, M.-S. Kim, H. Woong Kim, and J.-H. Jang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 081106 (2014).
89 M.S. Jang, V.W. Brar, M.C. Sherrott, J.J. Lopez, L. Kim, S. Kim, M. Choi, and H.A. Atwater, Phys. Rev. B 
90, 165409 (2014).
90 C. Guo, Z. Zhu, X. Yuan, W. Ye, K. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Xu, and S. Qin, Adv. Opt. Mater. 4, 1955 (2016).
91 S. Kim, M.S. Jang, V.W. Brar, K.W. Mauser, L. Kim, and H.A. Atwater, Nano Lett. 18, 971 (2018).
92 Y. Liu, R. Cheng, L. Liao, H. Zhou, J. Bai, G. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Huang, and X. Duan, Nat. Commun. 2, 579 
(2011).
93 T. Wang and X. Zhang, Photonics Res. 5, 629 (2017).
94 J.D. Cox, A. Marini, and F.J.G. de Abajo, Nat. Commun. 8, 14380 (2017).
95 H. Nasari and M.S. Abrishamian, Nanotechnology 27, 305202 (2016).
96 T. Guo and C. Argyropoulos, Adv. Photonics Res. 2, 2000168 (2021).
97 T. Gu, N. Petrone, J.F. McMillan, A. van der Zande, M. Yu, G.Q. Lo, D.L. Kwong, J. Hone, and C.W. Wong, 
Nat. Photonics 6, 554 (2012).
98 A.R. Wright, X.G. Xu, J.C. Cao, and C. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 072101 (2009).
99 S.A. Mikhailov and K. Ziegler, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 20, 384204 (2008).
100 H. Nasari and M.S. Abrishamian, RSC Adv. 6, 50190 (2016).
101 K.J. Ahn and F. Rotermund, Opt. Express 25, 8484 (2017).
102 G. Soavi, G. Wang, H. Rostami, D.G. Purdie, D. De Fazio, T. Ma, B. Luo, J. Wang, A.K. Ott, D. Yoon, S.A. 
Bourelle, J.E. Muench, I. Goykhman, S. Dal Conte, M. Celebrano, A. Tomadin, M. Polini, G. Cerullo, and A.C. 
Ferrari, Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 583 (2018).
103 H. Nasari and M.S. Abrishamian, Opt. Lett. 40, 5510 (2015).
104 M.M. Jadidi, J.C. König-Otto, S. Winnerl, A.B. Sushkov, H.D. Drew, T.E. Murphy, and M. Mittendorff, 
Nano Lett. 16, 2734 (2016).
105 A.E. Nikolaenko, N. Papasimakis, E. Atmatzakis, Z. Luo, Z.X. Shen, F. De Angelis, S.A. Boden, E. Di 
Fabrizio, and N.I. Zheludev, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 181109 (2012).
106 A.H. Chin, O.G. Calderón, and J. Kono, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3292 (2001).
107 C. Liu, T. Nakajima, T. Sakka, and H. Ohgaki, Phys. Rev. A 77, 043411 (2008).
108 S. Yu, T. Zhang, X. Han, J. Dai, and K. Xu, Opt. Express 28, 35561 (2020).
109 J.C. Deinert, D. Alcaraz Iranzo, R. Pérez, X. Jia, H.A. Hafez, I. Ilyakov, N. Awari, M. Chen, M. Bawatna, 
A.N. Ponomaryov, S. Germanskiy, M. Bonn, F.H.L. Koppens, D. Turchinovich, M. Gensch, S. Kovalev, and 
K.J. Tielrooij, ACS Nano 15, 1145 (2021).
110 M.M. Glazov and S.D. Ganichev, Phys. Rep. 535, 101 (2014).
111 M. Tonouchi, Nat. Photonics 1, 97 (2007).
112 H.A. Hafez, S. Kovalev, J.-C. Deinert, Z. Mics, B. Green, N. Awari, M. Chen, S. Germanskiy, U. Lehnert, J. 


31

Teichert, Z. Wang, K.-J. Tielrooij, Z. Liu, Z. Chen, A. Narita, K. Müllen, M. Bonn, M. Gensch, and D. 
Turchinovich, Nature 561, 507 (2018).
113 B. Wang, R. Wang, F. Yan, J. Liu, J. Liu, W. Sun, and L. Li, Phys. Scr. 97, 115501 (2022).
114 J. Guo, L. Jiang, Y. Jia, X. Dai, Y. Xiang, and D. Fan, Opt. Express 25, 5972 (2017).
115 Y. Zhao, Y. Huo, B. Man, and T. Ning, Plasmonics 14, 1911 (2019).
116 H.-X. Wang, Q. Wang, K.-G. Zhou, and H.-L. Zhang, Small 9, 1266 (2013).
117 H. Liu, Y. Liu, and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. 21, 3335 (2011).
118 T. Guo and C. Argyropoulos, Opt. Lett. 41, 5592 (2016).
119 G.T. Reed, G. Mashanovich, F.Y. Gardes, and D.J. Thomson, Nat. Photonics 4, 518 (2010).
120 R. Degl’Innocenti, H. Lin, and M. Navarro-Cía, Nanophotonics 11, 1485 (2022).
121 T.-T. Kim, H.-D. Kim, R. Zhao, S.S. Oh, T. Ha, D.S. Chung, Y.H. Lee, B. Min, and S. Zhang, ACS 
Photonics 5, 1800 (2018).
122 A.D. Koulouklidis, A.C. Tasolamprou, S. Doukas, E. Kyriakou, M.S. Ergoktas, C. Daskalaki, E.N. 
Economou, C. Kocabas, E. Lidorikis, M. Kafesaki, and S. Tzortzakis, ACS Photonics 9, 3075 (2022).
123 S. Bahadori-Haghighi, R. Ghayour, and A. Zarifkar, J. Appl. Phys. 128, 044506 (2020).
124 Y. Kim and M.-S. Kwon, Nanoscale 9, 17429 (2017).
125 A. Di Gaspare, E.A.A. Pogna, L. Salemi, O. Balci, A.R. Cadore, S.M. Shinde, L. Li, C. di Franco, A.G. 
Davies, E.H. Linfield, A.C. Ferrari, G. Scamarcio, and M.S. Vitiello, Adv. Funct. Mater. 31, 2008039 (2021).
126 Z. Sadeghi and H. Shirkani, Plasmonics 14, 1179 (2019).
127 W. Xu, L. Xie, J. Zhu, L. Tang, R. Singh, C. Wang, Y. Ma, H.-T. Chen, and Y. Ying, Carbon N. Y. 141, 247 
(2019).
128 I. Gierz, M. Mitrano, J.C. Petersen, C. Cacho, I.C. Edmond Turcu, E. Springate, A. Stöhr, A. Köhler, U. 
Starke, and A. Cavalleri, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 27, 164204 (2015).
129 P.-Y. Chen and J. Jung, Phys. Rev. Appl. 5, 064018 (2016).
130 V. V. Popov, D. V. Fateev, T. Otsuji, Y.M. Meziani, D. Coquillat, and W. Knap, Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 
243504 (2011).
131 T. Guo and C. Argyropoulos, Phys. Rev. B 106, 235418 (2022).
132 B. Jin and C. Argyropoulos, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 054056 (2020).
133 B. Jin and C. Argyropoulos, Adv. Opt. Mater. 7, 1901083 (2019).
134 C. Argyropoulos, Nat. Photonics 16, 556 (2022).
135 X. Chen, J. Zhang, C. Wen, K. Liu, Z. Zhu, S. Qin, and X. Yuan, Carbon N. Y. 173, 126 (2021).
136 S. Arezoomandan, H.O. Condori Quispe, N. Ramey, C.A. Nieves, and B. Sensale-Rodriguez, Carbon N. Y. 
112, 177 (2017).
137 J. Cheng, F. Fan, and S. Chang, Nanomaterials 9, 398 (2019).
138 S.I. Azzam and A. V. Kildishev, Adv. Opt. Mater. 9, 2001469 (2021).
139 S.A. Dyakov, M. V. Stepikhova, A.A. Bogdanov, A. V. Novikov, D. V. Yurasov, M. V. Shaleev, Z.F. 
Krasilnik, S.G. Tikhodeev, and N.A. Gippius, Laser Photon. Rev. 15, 2000242 (2021).
140 J.M. Hamm, A.F. Page, J. Bravo-Abad, F.J. Garcia-Vidal, and O. Hess, Phys. Rev. B 93, 041408 (2016).


