Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via
In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique

Yegor Tamashevich1 , Alena Prudnikava1,*, Aleksandr Matveenko1,
Axel Neumann1, Oliver Kugeler1, Jens Knobloch1,2

1Helmholtz Centre for Materials and Energy, Albert-Einstein-Str. 15, 12489 Berlin, Germany
2Department of Physics, Universität Siegen, Walter-Flex-Str. 3, 57068 Siegen, Germany

Abstract

Vacuum thermal treatments (baking) are known to improve the superconducting properties of
the RF surface layer of niobium cavities, and are employed as a last processing step to increase
their efficiency determined by intrinsic quality factor Q0. A new method to perform the baking has
been demonstrated. It consists in annealing of an evacuated cavity with the local heaters installed
on its outer surface in a cryostat which ensures an exterior vacuum and protects the outer cavity
surface from oxidation. Such a set-up has a number of advantages as it does not require to cool the
cavity flanges during baking, and allows to perform the "cold" RF characterization of the cavity in
situ, immediately after the thermal treatment without disassembly of heating elements. Moreover,
the air exposure that causes partial degradation of Q0 by surface reoxidation is avoided. The heat
treatment of a single-cell 1.3 GHz niobium cavity at 230 °C for 24 h demonstrated the doubling of
Q0 at Eacc=10 MV/m (from 1.20 × 1010 to 2.4 × 1010) and retained the maximal accelerating field of
35 MV/m without quenching. The selection of treatment parameters is based on our previous XPS
studies. This treatment ensures incomplete dissolution of the native oxide by oxygen diffusion,
thereby preventing interaction of niobium surface with external contaminants. We propose to bake
the cavities directly in a cryomodule, which would allow to use the treatment to improve their
performance. The potential impact of material parameters on the components of surface resistance
has been briefly examined.

Introduction

g radiofrequency (SRF) cavities form the core of
modern accelerators and free-electron lasers, various
fields of science, medicine, and industry. The efficacy
of SRF cavities hinges on their intrinsic quality factor,
Q0, and its dependence on the accelerating gradient,
Eacc. A high Q0 signifies minimal heat dissipation
and reduced cryogenic power requirements. Since
the efficiency of 2 K cryogenic plants is in the per mil
range, even small gains in Q0 have a large impact on
the AC power consumption and the complexity of
the plant.
The intrinsic quality factor is inversely related to
the resistance of a thin surface layer that interacts
with the RF field during low-temperature cavity oper-
ation. extensive research has been conducted world-
wide to explore the effects of various thermal treat-
ment methods on the superconducting properties
of this surface layer.
Some methods involve sim-
ple vacuum annealing at different temperatures and
durations (e.g., mild baking, medium-temperature
baking [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]), while others incorporate gas

*Corresponding author: alena.prudnikava@helmholtz-berlin.de

environment with or without subsequent chemical
processing (e.g., nitrogen doping and infusion [7, 8,
9, 10]). Regardless of the method, these treatments
increase Q0 by optimizing the concentration of point
defects in niobium lattice within the RF penetration
depth.

The improvement in Q0 is attributed to several phe-
nomena. Firstly, this involves reducing the mean free
path of electrons in the normal state, which decreases
the temperature-dependent component of niobium
resistance in the superconducting state (the Bardeen-
Cooper-Schrieffer resistance, RBCS) [11]. Addition-
ally, flux pinning is enhanced, which reduces the
residual surface resistance component, Rres [12, 13].
Point defects also act as trapping centers, inhibiting
the formation of lossy niobium hydrides, which tend
to form on the surface of niobium during cooling
to low temperatures Recently, medium-temperature
baking, often referred to as Mid-T baking, has gar-
nered significant attentiomid-Ta simple method to
improve the Q0 of niobium cavities. The standard
mid-T baking process involves heating the cavity
inside a dedicated vacuum furnace. However, this
approach has several drawbacks that limit the cavity
performance. Although protective caps have been

arXiv:2307.09094v2  [physics.acc-ph]  24 Dec 2024


Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique. Y.Tamashevich et al.

used in some experiments to mitigate this risk es-
pecially if the protective Nb2O5 layer is completely
dissolved [14][6], contamination remains a significant
concern. Moreover, post-treatment exposure to ambi-
ent air results in partial reoxidation, diminishing the
benefits of the baking process [5].
To address these challenges, alternative approaches
have been explored, such as sealing the cavity vol-
ume and connecting it to a separate pumping station
during heat treatment [5]. This method requires pro-
tecting vacuum gaskets from thermal degradation
by incorporating additional cooling equipment for
the cavity flanges. Despite these advancements, the
current mid-T baking procedure remains costly and
complex, requiring specialized equipment like clean
vacuum furnaces and flange cooling systems, and
time-consuming procedures.
In this work, we demonstrate a new, simplified
method for vacuum annealing niobium cavities that
improves their RF performance. This method does
not require a traditional vacuum furnace or flange
cooling and avoids air exposure of the cavity prior to
RF operation.

Experimental

Setup

The heat treatment was conducted within the Small
Vertical Test Stand (SVTS) cryostat at HZB. The cryo-
stat testing chamber has a diameter of 600 mm and
a height of 2000 mm. It is equipped with a helium
level probe, multiple PT100 and Cernox temperature
sensors, and a resistive heater for helium evaporation.
Additionally, a magnetic shield is installed inside the
chamber. None of these auxiliary components were
dismounted for the experiment.
The heat-treatment method was applied to a stan-
dard 1.3 GHz single-cell TESLA-shape niobium cav-
ity (1DE13). The cavity (RRR=230) was previously
treated with buffer chemical polishing, annealed at
800 °C, followed by electropolishing, high-pressure
rinsing (HPR) and a 120 °C bake. It was then stored
in air for several years. Prior to the experiment, it
underwent HPR at 100 bar at HZB. The cavity was
equipped with a high-Q input antenna (attached to
the top flange via a 7/16 feedthrough) and a field-
probe antenna (connected to the bottom flange via
an NW16 SMA feedthrough). A vacuum right-angle
valve was also attached to the bottom flange. The cav-
ity was placed on a titanium retaining plate within
a standard SVTS insert, though it was not tightly
connected to the insert. A particle-free pumping line
(CF40 bellow) was attached to the cavity right-angle
valve.

Figure 1: Schematic view of the experimental setup. T1, T4
are E-type termocouples at the cavity flanges; T2, T3 are E-
type termocouples at cavity half-cells. Resistive heaters 1,2 are
wrapped in aluminum foil. Two K-type control thermocouples are
located between the heaters and the cavity surface (not shown).
The cavity cell is wrapped in an aluminum-foil shield.

The same SVTS insert was used for the initial base-
line RF test, subsequent heat treatments, and follow-
up RF tests. Throughout all phases, the cavity vac-
uum remained better than 1 × 10−6 mbar. For the
vertical cold RF test, the cavity was equipped with
two Cernox sensors and two RF cables.

Preparation for the Heat Treatment

efore each heat treatment, following the cold test, the
RF cables and the Cernox sensors were removed from
the cavity and placed at the top part of the insert
(though the cables and feedthroughs remained at-
tached to the insert). Several additional feedthroughs
were installed on the insert, including a 4-pin high-
voltage and high-current CF40-feedthrough, a KF-40
5-channel K-type thermocouple feedthrough, and a
KF-40 5-channel E-type thermocouple feedthrough.
Four E-type thermocouples were installed in the
configuration shown in figure 1. Thermocouples T1
and T4 were attached to the cavity flanges, thermo-
couples T2 and T3 were affixed to the half-cells. All
thermocouples were secured with Kapton tape.
Two resistive heaters (Horst HBS010, 250 W nomi-
nal power each) were connected to the high-voltage
feedthrough allowing independent control.
The
heaters were operated using two Horst HT31N tem-
perature regulators. To avoid potential contamination
of the outer cavity surface, the heaters were wrapped

2
Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024


Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique. Y.Tamashevich et al.

Figure 2: Image of the cavity with heaters wrapped in alu-
minum foil to avoid cavity contamination (a), and with external
aluminum-foil thermal shield (b).

with in aluminum foiler 1 was positioned around the
top half-cell, while Heater 2 was placed around the
bottom half-cell (see figure 1 and figure 2(a)). The
heaters were fixed in place using copper wire. Ad-
ditionally, two K-type control thermocouples were
positioned between the heaters and the cavity sur-
face.
The cavity cell was further wrapped in aluminum
foil, as shown in figure 2(b) although the beam tubes
and flanges were left uncovered.

Procedure

After the preparation, the insert was installed in the
cryostat.
The external particle-free pumping line
connected to the insert was linked to the pumping
station, ensuring the cavity was actively pumped
throughout the baking process. The helium space
within the cryostat was evacuated to a pressure of
1 × 10−5 mbar, while the isolation vacuum space was
vented with nitrogen to help cool the helium vessel.
Hence, both the interior and exterior of the cavity
were maintained under vacuum conditions during
baking.
Prior to heating, the pressure inside the
cavity was 9 × 10−7 mbar.

Choosing the Parameters of Heat
Treatment

The selection of heat treatment parameters was
guided by results from our previous work [14]. By
studying the kinetics of niobium oxide dissolution
in situ at various temperatures using synchrotron
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, it has been deter-
mined that a 1 nm-thick Nb2O5 layer substantially
reduces interaction with surface contaminants, such
as carbon. Additionally, the doping of the niobium

Figure 3: Recipe determined from in-situ baking XPS studies
[14] for the reduction of the Nb2O5 layer. The curves denote the
required baking time as a function of temperature to reduce the
initial Nb2O5 layer to 1 nm thickness. The cavity studied for
this work had an oxide thickness of about 5 nm.

surface layer occurs in a controlled manner, driven
by oxygen originating from the native oxide reduc-
tion process. Figure 3 illustrates the temperatures
and durations required for the heat treatment to sat-
isfy these conditions for different initial Nb2O5-layer
thicknesses, which are typical for chemically treated
niobium cavities.
To select appropriate parameters, the temperature
and duration of baking should fall below the curve in
figure 3 for the corresponding initial oxide thickness.
For the first heat treatment, a low temperature range
was chosen due to uncertainties regarding the heat
load on the flanges and the required heating power.
A lower baking temperature also reduces the oxide
reduction rate, simplifies control of experimental pa-
rameters, and lowers the risk of failure. The goal was
to keep the vacuum gaskets of the cavity ports be-
low 300 °C, with a significant margin (approximately
50 °C). therefore, the temperature range selected for
baking was 230–240 °C.
The heat treatment has been performed in two
steps, with an RF test in between each step. The
objective was to leave about 1 nm of niobium pentox-
ide after the second treatment. Since the cavity had
been stored in an open environment for an extended
period, we assumed that the Nb2O5 layer was at
least 5 nm thick, which is greater than the 2.7–3.5 nm
thickness of freshly prepared niobium used in [14]
for heat treatment studies. The plan was to dissolve
approximately 2.2 nm of Nb2O5 during the first treat-
ment and 1.8 nm during the second. According to
[14] at 230 °C, this would require about 13 h and 11 h,
respectively.
Figure 4 shows the temperature and pressure plots

Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024
3


Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique. Y.Tamashevich et al.

Figure 4: Temperature of flanges and a top and a bottom half-
cells of the cavity, as well as pressure in the cavity during the
first (a) and the second (b) heat treatments. For the second heat
treatment the cryostat pressure is shown.

during the first (a) and the second (b) heat treatments
of the cavity in the cryostat. Several vacuum events
were observed during the heating process, with the
pressure in the evacuated helium space increasing
from approximately 1 × 10−5 mbar to 1 × 10−2 mbar.
At this higher pressure, heat transfer by gas is non-
negligible as evidenced by the thermocouple read-
ings attached to the flanges. These vacuum events
also occurred before and after heating, potentially
caused by virtual leaks from the heaters and cables,
which are likely not compatible with high-vacuum
environment.
During the experiment, the bottom flange temper-
ature remained below 120 °C while the top flange
stayed below 90 °C. As shown in figures 2(a,b), the
top flange rests on the holding plate. The contact be-
tween the flange and the plate is made via bolts that
extend beyond the flange. Due to the relatively small
contact area, we assume that the lower temperature
of the top flange results from radiation shielding by
the holding plate rather than contact cooling.
The total time-averaged heating power during
this experiment ranged between 50–80 W, with both
heaters operating at duty cycles between 10 % and
15 %.

Results

The cavity was tested vertically before and after each
heat treatment. Throughout the experiment, the cav-
ity remained mounted in the insert and under vac-
uum. The plots of the intrinsic quality factor (Q0)
versus the accelerating field (Eacc) were measured at
1.51, 1.64, 1.72, 1.80, 1.86, 1.93, 1.99 and 2.04 K. The
Q0(Eacc) curves measured at T=1.80 K, before and
after heat treatments, are shown in figure 5.
Before the heat treatments, the cavity perfor-
mance was moderate. At T=1.80 K (pHe=16 mbar),
it had a maximum quality factor of 1.2 × 1010 at
Eacc=5 MV/m. The previous cold test in 2018 showed
a higher Q0, but since the cavity had been stored
open to air afterward, it is assumed that this degra-
dation was caused by heavy oxidation.
The onset of field emission occurred at approxi-
mately Eacc=25 MV/m. The field emission was unsta-
ble and could be processed away, allowing the final
point at 31 MV/m to be measured without field emis-
sion (radiation values are not shown in the plots).
However, field emission reappeared during the sub-
sequent measurement at around 25 MV/m. We chose
not to process the field emission at fields above
25 MV/m as this could degrade Q0 or lower the field
emission onset. As a result, an administrative limit
of Eacc=31 MV/m was set for all tests.
After the first heat treatment, the Q0 of the

4
Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024


Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique. Y.Tamashevich et al.

Figure 5: Q0(Eacc) plots before and after the respective heat
treatment (T=1.8 K, pHe=16 mbar). After the second baking, no
points were measured between 20 MV/m and 35 MV/m due to
an administrative limit imposed to ensure no Q0 degradation
takes place in case of a quench. Only at the very end of the test
was the data point at 35 MV/m obtained.

cavity increased from 1.20 × 1010 to 1.75 × 1010 at
Eacc=5 MV/m (figure 5).
Additionally, an anti-Q-
slope effect — i.e., continuous improvement in the
quality factor at moderate field levels — was ob-
served [15]. At 1.80 K, the maximum quality factor of
2.2 × 1010 was achieved at Eacc=17 MV/m. The onset
of field emission remained at about Eacc=25 MV/m,
and, as in the previous test, the field emission could
be processed away before reaching the maximum
field. The tests were again carried out to the admin-
istrative limit of Eacc=31 MV/m.
After the second heat treatment, Q0 increased fur-
ther to 2.20 × 1010 at Eacc=5 MV/m with the maxi-
mum Q0 shifting to lower fields, reaching 2.45 × 1010

at Eacc=13 MV/m. The cold test was routinely per-
formed at fields below 20 MV/m due to administra-
tive limits of SRF facility at that dates. The point at
35 MV/m was measured at 1.8 K only to prove no
cavity degradation.
The surface resistance (Rs) versus temperature
plots, along with the corresponding BCS fits (solid
lines), are presented in figure 6. The following func-
tion was used for the fitting [11]:

Rs = A f 2

T e
−∆
kT + Rres,
(1)

where Rs is the surface resistance, A is a fitting
parameter related to the BCS resistance, T is the
temperature, f is the frequency of the cavity, k is the
Boltzmann constant, ∆ is the superconducting energy
gap, and Rres is the residual resistance.
The best fits were obtained with a supercon-
ducting energy gap, ∆, of 1.50 meV.
The ratio

Figure 6: Temperature dependence of the surface resistance before
and after the respective heat treatment. The red curves are the
BCS fits according to Equation 1 with varied A (see text) and
∆/kBTc = 1.89.

∆/kBTc=1.89 (with Tc=9.208 K) is consistent with the
values reported for nitrogen-doped (N-doped) cav-
ities [16]. The residual resistance (Rres) before bak-
ing was (19.83 ± 0.19) nΩ at Eacc=4 MV/m, and af-
ter the first and second baking steps, it dropped
to (9.11 ± 0.19) nΩ and (7.68 ± 0.05) nΩ (both at
Eacc=12 MV/m), respectively.
The fitting parameter A was:

• (4.70 ± 0.21) × 10−23 Ω K/Hz2 before baking,
• (5.95 ± 0.21) × 10−23 Ω K/Hz2 after the first bak-
ing and

• (5.52 ± 0.05) × 10−23 Ω K/Hz2 after the second
baking.

The BCS surface resistance and residual resistance
as functions of Eacc at T=2 K are shown in figure 7.
Before baking, RBCS increased with increasing field,
which is typical for standard niobium cavities [6].
However, after the heat treatments the RBCS curves
became almost independent of the accelerating field.
As to Rres, it initially increased significantly with
the field starting from 6 MV/m for the unbaked cav-
ity. After the baking, the dependence changed, i.e.
Rres decreased with the field up to Eacc=12 MV/m,
followed by a slow increase at higher fields.

Relation of Surface Defects to
Superconducting Surface Resistance

It is generally accepted that vacuum heat treatment
of niobium leads to the reduction of the native oxide
layer, primarily due to the diffusion of oxygen into
the near-surface region [17, 18, 19, 2, 20, 21]. As
a result, the treated surface consists of a distorted
lattice structure (following oxide dissolution), with

Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024
5


Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique. Y.Tamashevich et al.

Figure 7: BCS resistance, RBCS, (a) and residual resistance, Rres; (b) plots before and after the respective heat treatment (T=2 K,
pHe=30 mbar).

lower-valence oxides, as well as a subsurface layer
doped with oxygen as depicted schematically in fig-
ure 8. To optimize thermal treatment parameters
for cavity performance, it is crucial to analyze how
these surface characteristics are affected by differ-
ent heat treatments, as well as their correlation with
superconducting surface resistance.

BCS resistance and the mean-free path of "normal"
electrons.
The RBCS component of the surface resistance is
known to be related to the mean-free path of "nor-
mal" electrons [11]. The mean free path, in turn,
is inversely proportional to the concentration of de-
fects within the London penetration depth. At low
temperatures, the primary scattering centers in well-
annealed niobium are interstitial atoms, particularly
oxygen. Thus, the oxygen concentration and its distri-
bution play a significant role for cavity performance.
Using the solution of Fick’s second law for a con-
tinuous plane source [22] the oxygen-concentration
depth profiles in niobium were calculated according
to:

C =
1
√

πD

� t

0 e−x2/4Dt · ϕ(t)
√

t
dt,
(2)

where D is the diffusion coefficient, t is the dura-
tion of baking, ϕ(t) is the rate at which the diffus-
ing species are introduced from the surface plane
into the solid, i.e. the rate of oxide reduction, for
the first-order reaction equal to ϕ(t)=kC0exp(−kt).
The rate constant for oxide reduction, obtained from
our previous study was used, k=33.96exp(-63.62/RT)
kJ/mol [14], along with the diffusion coefficient
D0=1.53 × 10−14 cm2/s, from [23]. The experimentally
determined oxygen concentration in niobium oxides

and interstitials from [14], C0=151 (the number of oxy-
gen atoms relative to 100 niobium atoms averaged
across several chemically treated niobium samples),
was also applied.
The calculated concentration profiles of oxygen un-
der the surface oxides for both the first and second
heat treatments are shown in figure 9a. For com-
parison, the oxygen profile from the mid-T baking
conducted at 300 °C for 3 h, an optimal condition
that has led to maximal Q0 values in several stud-
ies, has been included. The results demonstrate that
the average oxygen concentration within within the
RF layer (ca. 100 nm) increases from the first to the
second heat treatment. Furthermore, this value for
both treatments exceeds that of the 300 °C/3 h-baking
process.
The mean free path, le, was calculated using the
known relation of le to resistivity and the contribution
of oxygen interstitials to resistivity [24, 25]. Figure 9b
illustrates how le varies with treatment duration and
temperature, based on surface oxygen concentration
under the oxide layer. The minimal RBCS is predicted
at le=20–25 nm (red dashed area in figure 9b) [16]. Af-
ter the first heat treatment at 230 °C, the near-surface
le was around 37.5 nm (marker (1) in figure 9b). The
second heat treatment shifted le closer to the theoret-
ical optimum (30.5 nm, marker (2)), consistent with
the observed reduction in RBCS. The mean free path
corresponding to the 300 °C/3 h treatment is shown
by marker (3) in figure 9b). One should note that the
current diffusion model does not account for oxide
reduction during the heating stage, which plays a
role in the 300 °C/3 h treatment. Therefore, the ac-
tual oxygen profile and le=70.1 nm for the 300 °C/3 h
may differ slightly from the calculated values. The
XPS experimental data presented in [14] confirm a

6
Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024


Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique. Y.Tamashevich et al.

Figure 8: Schematic of the surface of Nb cavities (a) before and
(b) after in-situ mid-T baking (Note: the axes are not to scale).

higher total oxygen concentration than predicted by
the model.
As le values are lower for the heat treatments at
230 °C for a total time of 13 h and 24 h, it should result
in lower RBCS compared to the 300 °C/3 h treatment.
However, according to the obtained data, neither
treatment achieved optimal le values. Notably, the
oxygen concentration profile at 300 °C is less steep
compared to that at 230 °C (figure 9a). To our best
knowledge, impact of this on RBCS remains unclear
and requires further exploration.
Comparing the RBCS(Eacc) curves (figure 7a) after
the first and second baking and the initial cavity state,
RBCS increases upon baking for fields up to 8 MV/m,
and lower at moderate and high fields, with a mini-
mum at 18–20 MV/m, which would fit well for CW
applications. In other words, RBCS(Eacc) curves are
more linear, i.e. less dependent on accelerating field.
The observed behavior requires further investigation
with more cavities, as well as theoretical validation.
near-surface defects. These defects are formed during
the oxide reduction process when the native oxide
layer is transformed into lower-valence oxides (non-
superconducting at 2 K) and distorted niobium lat-
Such(figure 8). tan-colored region in b Additionally,
under certain baking conditions, niobium carbides
may also form on the surface.It is known that normal
conducting precipitates may act as strong pinning
centers via condensation energy interaction [26, 27].
Along with that, oxygen released into the lattice as
interstitials, may alter the local elastic properties of
the lattice, thereby affecting flux pinning behavior by
elastic interactions. Figure 9c shows the total number
of oxygen atoms released from the oxide layer, which

Figure 9: Theoretical modelling results: (a) the oxygen concen-
tration depth profiles for various thermal treatments obtained
using eq.(2); (b) the calculated mean free path of "normal" elec-
trons, le, at the surface oxide layer/niobium interface. The red
dashed area corresponds to the optimum (in terms of RBCS) with
le=20-30 nm. (c) The number of defects (oxygen vacancies)
created in the top surface layer after the baking. Markers (1)
and (2) refer to the calculated values of the first and second bak-
ing at 230 °C, markers (3) and (4) refer to the calculated and
experimental data for baking at 300 °C/3 h, respectively. Solid
lines represent contours of constant vacancy concentration, cor-
responding to the indicated concentration values.

Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024
7


Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique. Y.Tamashevich et al.

roughly corresponds to the number of oxygen va-
cancies created in the top surface layer (this number
neglects formation of oxides with lower valences).
Owing to the model limitation mentioned above, the
300 °C/3 h treatment shows a noticeable difference
between theoretical (marker (3)) and experimental
(marker (4)), data from [14], with the theoretical data
predicting a lower number of vacancies. The values
for the 230 °C treatments are consistent with the XPS
data obtained in our previous work [14].
Upon baking, the Rres component decreased sig-
nificantly after the first heat treatment and showed
a slight further reduction after the second treatment.
The number of vacancies in the top surface layer cre-
ated by the first treatment was 49 per 100 Nb atoms,
and this increased by 1.6 times after the second treat-
ment. Similarly, the number of oxygen interstitials
within a 100 nm depth was 18.3 per 100 Nb atoms
and increased by a factor of 1.3. Thus, the major-
ity of defects are concentrated within a thin surface
layer where the oxide was initially present. We pro-
pose that, similar to the optimal value of le that cor-
responds to minimal RBCS, there exists an optimal
number of defects within the top surface layer af-
ter oxide reduction, corresponding to the minimum
Rres. This hypothesis (described in [28]) has yet to be
verified by further experiments on cavities.
In the future, the quantity and dimensions of the
lower-valence oxides created will be analyzed, as
they are also considered efficient pinning centers. It
has been previously established that the contribution
of defects of different dimensions varies with the ap-
plied field[29, 30]. Therefore, since Rres is not linearly
related to the accelerating field, one can suggest that
the size of defects affects the pinning behavior.
Estimating Rres after air oxidation, which would
“heal” all oxygen vacancies in the surface layer by
transforming lower oxides into the highest oxidation
state, while keeping the depth profile of interstices
within the RF penetration depth, would provide use-
ful information on the impact of surface defects on
pinning. The relationship between pinning effective-
ness, surface defects (e.g., point defects, oxide layers
or islands) and their properties (electronic, magnetic),
and other surface properties like roughness, requires
further study to improve our understanding of pin-
ning mechanisms and Rres behavior of baked nio-
bium surfaces.

Summary and Conclusion

We have successfully demonstrated the feasibility of
performing mid-T baking in-cryostat on supercon-
ducting cavities without requiring specialized vac-
uum furnaces. Instead, a vertical cryostat was used

as a vacuum chamber, presenting several advantages
for research and development experiments in SRF
science:
1) Preservation of cavity cleanliness: A key advantage
is that the cavity’s inner surface is never exposed
to the vacuum environment of a traditional furnace.
This reduces the risk of contamination from furnace
cleanliness issues and post-treatment reassembling,
improving the likelihood of successful heat treat-
ments when "safe" heat treatment parameters from
[14] are applied to avoid carbide formation on the
cavity surface.
2) Simplified flange cooling: There is no need for sepa-
rate pumping systems or active cooling of the flanges
to protect gaskets, as temperatures at the flanges re-
main below the maximum allowable threshold for
gaskets and feedthroughs, reducing the complexity
of the procedure.
3) Enhanced post-treatment testing: Immediate RF
testing of the cavity following the baking process can
be realized, without exposing the outer surface to
air, hence preventing re-oxidation. This may enhance
the heat transfer from the cavity to the surrounding
liquid helium, in which case it is expected that the
cavity performance is improved. Additionally, using
non-magnetic heaters (e.g., tungsten, molybdenum,
or ceramic) prevents magnetic flux trapping during
cooldown. These heaters can remain on the cavity
during rf testing, streamlining the workflow.
4) Selective heating capability: The ability to selec-
tively heat specific regions of the cavity allows for
greater experimental flexibility and the potential for
optimized heat treatment parameters.
5) Retention of post-baking Q0: Avoiding air expo-
sure between baking and RF operation fully pre-
serves the Q0 values achieved during treatment, pre-
venting degradation due to reoxidation of the inner
cavity surface [31].
6) Application in real accelerators: The same pro-
cedure can potentially be adapted for the so-called
"dressed" cavities installed in cryomodules, with heat
treatment performed after installation in situ using
simple heaters, maximizing the benefits of mid-T
baking.
This could fully harness the benefits of
moderate-temperature baking in operational acceler-
ators. The SRF module with heaters and its manufac-
turing method are patent pending.
7) Optimized heat-treatment parameters:
It was
demonstrated that carefully choosing heat-treatment
parameters (temperature and duration) that allow
partial reduction of the native oxide layer through
diffusion reliably improves the Q0 of the cavity.
8) Surface resistance modulation: The relation of the
change to the state of niobium surface characterized
mainly by defects generation in a thin upper layer

8
Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024


Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique. Y.Tamashevich et al.

and alteration of the mean free path of "normal"
electrons within the RF penetration depth, to the
surface resistance components modulation has been
analyzed. The future perspectives to further improve
Q0 have been briefly discussed.
We consider this innovative approach to mid-T
heat treatment represents a significant advancement
in cavity treatment methodologies. This method of-
fers a practical and versatile solution for accelerating
progress in SRF science while enabling performance
improvements in real-world accelerator systems. A
notable advancement is the successful mid-T baking
of a single-cell niobium cavity without the use of a
conventional furnace and venting the cavity between
heat treatment and testing. This approach not only
streamlines the process by reducing equipment costs
but also simplifies experimental procedures.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge Jan Ullrich, Henry Plötz, Michael
Schuster, and Sascha Klauke for clean-room work and
engineering. We axpress our thanks to our cryogenic
team, especially Axel Hellwig, Karsten Janke, and
Stefan Rotterdam.

References

[1]
F Palmer. “Influence of oxide layers on the
microwave surface resistance of niobium”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 23.2 (1987),
pp. 1617–1619.

[2]
Gianluigi Ciovati. “Improved oxygen diffusion
model to explain the effect of low-temperature
baking on high field losses in niobium super-
conducting cavities”. In: Applied Physics Letters
89.2 (2006).

[3]
Bernard Visentin et al. “Cavity baking: A cure
for the high accelerator field Q0 drop”. In: 9th
Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe-New
Mexico-USA. Vol. 1. 1999, p. 198.

[4]
A Romanenko et al. “Effect of mild baking on
superconducting niobium cavities investigated
by sequential nanoremoval”. In: Physical Review
Special Topics-accelerators and beams 16.1 (2013),
p. 012001.

[5]
S Posen et al. “Ultralow surface resistance via
vacuum heat treatment of superconducting
radio-frequency cavities”. In: Physical Review
Applied 13.1 (2020), p. 014024.

[6]
H Ito et al. “Systematic Investigation of Mid-T
Furnace Baking for High-Q Performance”. In:
(2021).

[7]
Anna Grassellino et al. “Nitrogen and argon
doping of niobium for superconducting radio
frequency cavities: a pathway to highly efficient
accelerating structures”. In: Superconductor Sci-
ence and Technology 26.10 (2013), p. 102001.

[8]
Anna Grassellino et al. “Unprecedented quality
factors at accelerating gradients up to 45 MVm-
1 in niobium superconducting resonators via
low temperature nitrogen infusion”. In: Su-
perconductor Science and Technology 30.9 (2017),
p. 094004.

[9]
Arti Dangwal Pandey et al. “Surface character-
ization of nitrogen-doped Nb (100) large-grain
superconducting RF cavity material”. In: Jour-
nal of materials science 53.14 (2018), pp. 10411–
10422.

[10]
A Prudnikava et al. “Systematic study of nio-
bium thermal treatments for superconducting
radio frequency cavities employing x-ray pho-
toelectron spectroscopy”. In: Superconductor Sci-
ence and Technology 35.6 (2022), p. 065019.

[11]
Hasan Padamsee, Jens Knobloch, and Tomas
Hays. RF superconductivity for accelerators. John
Wiley & Sons, 2008.

[12]
Asavari S Dhavale et al. “Flux pinning charac-
teristics in cylindrical niobium samples used
for superconducting radio frequency cavity fab-
rication”. In: Superconductor Science and Technol-
ogy 25.6 (2012), p. 065014.

[13]
Dan Gonnella, John Kaufman, and Matthias
Liepe. “Impact of nitrogen doping of niobium
superconducting cavities on the sensitivity of
surface resistance to trapped magnetic flux”.
In: Journal of Applied Physics 119.7 (2016).

[14]
Alena Prudnikava et al. “In-situ synchrotron
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy study of
medium-temperature baking of niobium for
SRF application”. In: Superconductor Science and
Technology 37.7 (2024), p. 075007.

[15]
M Martinello et al. “Field-enhanced supercon-
ductivity in high-frequency niobium accelerat-
ing cavities”. In: Physical Review Letters 121.22
(2018), p. 224801.

[16]
JT Maniscalco, D Gonnella, and M Liepe. “The
importance of the electron mean free path for
superconducting radio-frequency cavities”. In:
Journal of Applied Physics 121.4 (2017).

[17]
M Delheusy et al. “X-ray investigation of sub-
surface interstitial oxygen at Nb/oxide inter-
faces”. In: Applied Physics Letters 92.10 (2008).

Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024
9


Improved RF Performance of Niobium Cavities via In-situ Vacuum Heat Treatment Technique. Y.Tamashevich et al.

[18]
BR King et al. “Kinetic measurements of oxy-
gen dissolution into niobium substrates: In situ
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy studies”. In:
Thin Solid Films 192.2 (1990), pp. 351–369.

[19]
Qing Ma and Richard A Rosenberg. “Angle-
resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
study of the oxides on Nb surfaces for super-
conducting rf cavity applications”. In: Applied
Surface Science 206.1-4 (2003), pp. 209–217.

[20]
R Darren Veit et al. “Oxygen dissolution and
surface oxide reconstructions on Nb (100)”. In:
Surface Science 688 (2019), pp. 63–68.

[21]
Eric M Lechner et al. “Oxide dissolution and
oxygen diffusion scenarios in niobium and im-
plications on the Bean–Livingston barrier in
superconducting cavities”. In: Journal of Applied
Physics 135.13 (2024).

[22]
John Conrad Jaeger and Horatio Scott Carslaw.
“Conduction of heat in solids”. In: (No Title)
(1959).

[23]
MA Pick et al. “Depth-concentration profile of
hydrogen in niobium”. In: Physical Review B
26.6 (1982), p. 2900.

[24]
AF Mayadas, RB Laibowitz, and JJ Cuomo.
“Electrical characteristics of rf-sputtered single-
crystal niobium Films”. In: Journal of Applied
Physics 43.3 (1972), pp. 1287–1289.

[25]
Klaus K Schulze. “Preparation and characteri-
zation of ultra-high-purity niobium”. In: JOM
33 (1981), pp. 33–41.

[26]
T Matsushita. “Flux pinning in superconduct-
ing 123 materials”. In: Superconductor Science
and Technology 13.6 (2000), p. 730.

[27]
Teruo Matsushita. “Flux Pinning Mechanisms”.
In: Flux Pinning in Superconductors. Springer,
2022, pp. 227–256.

[28]
Yegor Tamashevich, Alena Prudnikava, and
Jens Knobloch. “A model to explain the
Q-increase by moderate-temperature treat-
ment in Nb SRF cavities”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.05159 (2023).

[29]
Alain Pautrat et al. “Quantitative analysis
of the critical current due to vortex pinning
by surface corrugation”. In: Physical Review
B—Condensed Matter and Materials Physics 69.22
(2004), p. 224504.

[30]
CZ Antoine. “Influence of crystalline structure
on rf dissipation in superconducting niobium”.
In: Physical Review Accelerators and Beams 22.3
(2019), p. 034801.

[31]
EM Lechner et al. “RF surface resistance tun-
ing of superconducting niobium via thermal
diffusion of native oxide”. In: Applied Physics
Letters 119.8 (2021).

10
Preprint ver.6, Dec 2024


