Improved Parameter Targeting in 3D-Integrated Superconducting Circuits
through a Polymer Spacer Process

Graham J. Norris,∗ Laurent Michaud, David Pahl, Michael Kerschbaum,
Christopher Eichler, Jean-Claude Besse, and Andreas Wallraff†

Department of Physics, ETH Z¨urich, CH-8093 Z¨urich, Switzerland
(Dated: July 5, 2023)

Three-dimensional device integration facilitates the construction of superconducting quantum
information processors with more than several tens of qubits by distributing elements such as control
wires, qubits, and resonators between multiple layers. The frequencies of resonators and qubits in
flip-chip-bonded multi-chip modules depend on the details of their electromagnetic environment
defined by the conductors and dielectrics in their vicinity. Accurate frequency targeting therefore
requires precise control of the separation between chips and minimization of their relative tilt. Here,
we describe a method to control the inter-chip separation by using polymer spacers. Compared to
an identical process without spacers, we reduce the measured planarity error by a factor of 3.5, to
a mean tilt of (76 ± 35) µrad, and the deviation from the target inter-chip separation by a factor of
ten, to a mean of (0.4 ± 0.8) µm. We apply this process to coplanar waveguide resonator samples
and observe chip-to-chip resonator frequency variations below 50 MHz (≈ 1 %). We measure internal
quality factors of 5×105 at the single-photon level, suggesting that the added spacers are compatible
with low-loss device fabrication.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Quantum computing shows immense promise for en-
abling simulations of complex many-body quantum sys-
tems for materials science and quantum chemistry [1].
Solving realistic problems will require hundreds or thou-
sands of nearly perfect quantum bits (qubits) [2], ne-
cessitating scalable implementations.
Superconducting
circuits are one leading implementation for qubits that
fulfill this criterion [3].
Due to finite qubit coherence
times and control accuracy, quantum error correction,
based, for example, on the surface code [4, 5], will be
needed, requiring millions of physical qubits (depend-
ing on qubit error rates and noise model assumptions)
[2, 6, 7]. Fabricating this quantity of qubits remains a
formidable engineering challenge and will require innova-
tive techniques such as flip-chip bonding to combine mul-
tiple planar (single-layer) chips [8–10] and superconduct-
ing through-substrate vias to suppress package modes
[11, 12].
While air-bridge [13, 14] crossings can over-
come some routing challenges [15], planar devices will
remain limited to a maximum routing density set by the
acceptable crosstalk between closely spaced signal traces
[16].
Instead, the multi-chip approach will ultimately
prove more fruitful since circuit elements (qubits, cou-
plers, readout resonators, etc.) can be placed on sepa-
rate chips which have optimized fabrication procedures
or even different material platforms [17, 18].
In flip-chip bonding, two patterned devices are joined
face-to-face by bumps of superconducting metal, typi-
cally indium due to its ductility and facile cold-welding
[8–10].
The inter-chip spacing, d, is a key parameter

∗ graham.norris@phys.ethz.ch
† andreas.wallraff@phys.ethz.ch

since it affects the frequencies of resonant features, the
impedance matching between different signal lines, and
the capacitive and inductive coupling rates between el-
ements (such as for qubit–qubit couplers or the qubit–
readout resonator coupling) [19].
Values of d between
5 µm and 10 µm are typical, with smaller separations in-
creasing the inter-chip capacitance (cf. a parallel-plate
capacitor) and hence the coupling rates at the expense of
increased electric field redistributions (compared to pla-
nar designs) that change device parameters like the phase
velocity of transmission lines [20].
Relative chip tilt is problematic for 3D-integrated de-
vices since it leads to local changes in the chip-to-chip
separation, d, and hence to local frequency shifts of de-
vice components. An investigation by Foxen et al. found
500 µrad of tilt for an indium-based flip-chip bonding pro-
cess, which corresponds to 6 µm of separation difference
across a 12 mm chip, a large fraction of the chip separa-
tion [10]. This leads to predicted local frequency shifts of
several hundred MHz (several %) for coplanar-waveguide
(CPW) resonators when using typical dimensions (dis-
cussed in Appendix A). The anticipated errors will be
even larger for resonator coupling rates to qubits [19] or
the feedlines used for readout multiplexing since the rates
depend on higher powers of the coupling capacitance.
To avoid the tilt or deviation of the chip separation
compared to the target value, Niedzielski et al. and Li
et al. have demonstrated hard-stop spacers which me-
chanically support the chip [21, 22]. Silicon spacers [21]
are ideal from a process-compatibility perspective, but
uniformly etching large silicon wafers without increasing
surface roughness or loss rates is a significant fabrication
challenge. Alternatively, large indium pads [22] can act
as spacers by significantly increasing the indium surface
area and diluting the bonding force. Such indium pads
are simple to define during the usual indium bump depo-
sition process but their height can be difficult to control

arXiv:2307.00046v1  [quant-ph]  30 Jun 2023


2

Polymer spacer

Control wiring 

Resonators

Indium bumps

(a)
(d)
(c)

(e)
(b)

2 mm
200 µm

2 mm

FIG. 1.
Overview of the presented 3D-integration scheme. (a) Schematic of our flip-chip bonding architecture including
polymer spacers (not to scale). (b) Photograph of a flip-chip-bonded module wire-bonded to a PCB. (c) Colorized optical
micrograph of the bottom wiring chip and (d) top resonator chip featuring feedlines (blue), resonators (red) and SU-8 spacers
(yellow). (e) Detail of an SU-8 spacer also showing indium bumps (green).

due to the substantial thickness being deposited.
Re-
cently, Somoroff et al. have detailed a hybrid approach,
where, instead of using separate indium bumps and hard
spacers, they have used bumps composed primarily of
aluminum with a thin coating of indium [23]. This pro-
cess saves the space required for dedicated spacers but
still suffers from the difficulty of evaporating thick films
with precise thicknesses. Therefore, we chose to develop
a spacer process based on SU-8, which has previously
been used in situations where galvanic connections are
not required [24, 25]. Favorable properties of SU-8 spac-
ers include: a simple fabrication process, suitability for
wafer-scale processing, compatibility with standard fab-
rication procedures for low-loss devices, excellent height
uniformity, and independent control over the chip sepa-
ration.
Here, we present this SU-8 spacer process for indium
flip-chip bonding. In Section II, we specify our device
architecture and fabrication details. Then, we analyze
the impact of the SU-8 spacers on inter-chip spacing and
tilt in Section III. Next, we discuss the frequency repro-
ducibility of resonators on devices with spacers in Sec-
tion IV, before analyzing the quality factors of the res-
onators as a function of their geometric parameters in
Section V and concluding in Section VI.

II.
DEVICE ARCHITECTURE AND
FABRICATION

Our multi-chip module [Fig. 1(a,b)] comprises a res-
onator chip (top) bonded to a wiring chip (bottom)
with 10 µm of nominal spacing.
Here, the wiring chip
[Fig. 1(c)] includes the multiplexed feedlines and wire-
bond connections to the break-out printed-circuit board
(PCB) while all resonators are on the top resonator chip
[Fig. 1(d)]. Superconducting indium bumps (25 µm di-

ameter, 10 µm thickness) mechanically support the res-
onator chip and galvanically join the ground planes of the
two chips to suppress spurious modes. 600 µm by 600 µm
by 10 µm pads of SU-8 photoresist in the corners of the
overlap area on the bottom wiring chip support the res-
onator chip during bump bonding and act as a mechan-
ical stop to ensure uniform chip separation [Fig. 1(e)].
Larger versions of the optical micrographs are provided
in Appendix B.
We fabricate these devices on 100 mm high-resistivity
(> 20 kΩ cm) silicon wafers onto which we sputter 125 nm
of niobium before patterning the film with SF6-based re-
active ion etching. Afterwards, we pattern 10 µm of SU-8
3010 photoresist on the wiring chips to act as spacers.
Next, we pattern a negative photoresist, thermally evap-
orate 10 µm of indium on both the wiring and resonator
chips, and then remove the unwanted indium by dissolv-
ing the photoresist under it in a solvent bath, lifting it
off. After dicing, we flip the resonator chip, align it with
the wiring chip using a split-prism microscope inserted
between the two chips, and then bond them by com-
pressing the indium bumps against each other at room
temperature. To perform microwave measurements, we
glue the device to a sample package and wire bond it
to a PCB. For additional details about the fabrication
process, see Appendix B.

III.
SU-8 SPACER PERFORMANCE

To comprehensively inspect the inter-chip separation,
we use mechanical profilometry, where, as depicted in
Fig. 2(a), a stylus is drawn linearly across the sample
while recording the deflection, resulting in a height vs.
position line scan [Fig. 2(b)]. We observe a step of just
greater than 500 µm from the upper surface of the bottom
chip to the upper surface of the top chip, corresponding


3

No spacers
SU-8 spacers

Profilometer stylus

(a)

(b)

(f)

(e)

Height Deviations, z−⟨z⟩, (µm)

Single SU-8
spacer
(d)

(c)

y Distance [mm]

z−⟨z⟩ z (µm)
(µm)

FIG. 2.
Mechanical profilometry measurements. (a) Schematic of a flip-chip bonded device without spacers indicating the scan
direction of the mechanical profilometer stylus. (b) Raw profilometer data and (c) data after leveling, cropping to the top-chip
region, and subtracting the mean height of the entire top-chip area. (d) Mechanical profilometer height maps of the modules
bonded without spacers. The purple arrows in the leftmost panel indicate the trace presented in (c). The rightmost panel has
a single spacer in the upper left corner, as indicated. (e) Schematic of a flip-chip bonded device with spacers and corresponding
height maps (f). The height maps are approximately 11 mm by 11 mm in size. The colors represent the deviation from the
mean top-chip height on each module while the number in the center of each sub-panel is the extracted average inter-chip
spacing (measured value minus estimated top-chip substrate thickness).

to the substrate thickness of the top chip plus the chip
separation. We level the data based on the bottom chip
and window out the top chip region, resulting in a trace
[Fig. 2(c)] with a smoothly varying profile, with some tilt
and bow (curvature), and with total deviations from the
mean of around 3 µm.
Performing a series of such line scans, and processing
the data as discussed above, we prepare the height maps
presented in Fig. 2(d,f). Some line scans in the height
maps are offset by several µm from adjacent ones due
to measurement artifacts in the profilometer; we remove
(mask) these traces, resulting in the white vertical lines in
Fig. 2(f). Note that, for plotting, we subtract the mean
height of the entire top-chip region for the data displayed
in Fig. 2(c,d,f). Furthermore, we point out that this tech-
nique cannot distinguish chip separation from thickness
variations of the top chip substrate. Independently, we
measured the standard deviation of our wafer thicknesses
at 1.0 µm or below (discussed further in Appendix C).
In devices without spacers [Fig. 2(d)], we observe large
tilts as evidenced by the color gradient as well as de-
viations relative to the mean of ±4 µm.
Once spacers
are added [Fig. 2(f)], tilts are substantially reduced and
there are no longer large chip-separation gradients from
one side of the sample to the other. Instead, now that
large tilts are avoided, we observe bowing, with the cor-
ners raised by roughly 1 µm and the center depressed by
slightly less than that.
For quantitative analysis (and the text values in

Fig. 2(d,f)), we subtract the estimated top-chip substrate
thickness (from independent measurements;
see Ap-
pendix C). We observe a mean separation of (5.8±1.9) µm
over four devices without spacers and (9.6 ± 0.8) µm for
nine devices with spacers. We compute the tilt for these
chips by fitting a plane to the data using a least-squares
method and find a mean tilt of (269 ± 151) µrad for the
spacerless devices and (76±35) µrad for the devices with
spacers. Thus, based on our analysis, the spacers reduce
the error from the target separation by a factor of 10 and
the tilt by a factor of 3.5.

Furthermore, to enable comparisons to published re-
sults [22, 24, 26], we have also measured the chip-to-chip
separation at the corners of the top chip with scanning
electron microscopy (SEM). While chip separation infor-
mation in the middle of the sample is not available with-
out destructive techniques, we find quantitative agree-
ment with the corners of the profilometer height maps.
More details about the SEM measurements and the re-
sults are presented in Appendix C.

Here we note that SU-8 spacers require some special
care since they absorb common solvents used for resist
stripping and swell up, necessitating special drying pro-
cedures and reducing the height uniformity compared to
the heights immediately after spinning, developing, and
baking (discussed in Appendix B). Comparing our mea-
sured data to literature values, the relative deviations
from the target height are similar to those reported for
silicon [21] and indium [22] spacers, although the silicon


4

spacers reported yet smaller tilts (calculated from spacer
heights prior to bonding rather than measured on bonded
devices). Additionally, while the separation and tilt er-
rors of current spacerless processes [26] have improved
compared to early reports [10], they are still larger than
for processes with spacers.
Thus, despite minor fabri-
cation issues, SU-8 performs comparably in practice to
indium and silicon spacers.
The bowing apparent in Fig. 2(f) is a concern since
it could replace tilt as the dominant source of local fre-
quency errors. The observed bowing could be the result
of the geometry of the flip-chip bonder, elastic compres-
sion of the SU-8 spacers which leads to inelastic com-
pression of the indium [27], and the current layout of
spacers located only at the edges of the resonator chip.
The flip-chip bonder and spacer placement can easily be
adjusted, but compression of the SU-8 requires adapt-
ing to lower-force indium bonding or replacement by a
less-compressible spacer material.

IV.
RESONATOR FREQUENCY TARGETING

Having shown that the SU-8 spacers improve our chip
separation and planarity targeting, we next verify that
this results in reproducible parameters for microwave cir-
cuits. In particular, we investigate resonator frequencies
since they are important for fast, multiplexed readout cir-
cuits [28] in which readout resonators must be matched
to Purcell filters within tens of MHz (≈ 0.5 % relative
accuracy).
While standard planar CPWs have electrical proper-
ties ideally determined entirely [29] by the permittivity of
the substrate and the ratio, w/(w+2s), between the cen-
ter conductor width, w, and the gap width, s, the electri-
cal properties of 3D-integrated CPWs depend addition-
ally on the layout of conducting and dielectric features
on, and the distance, d, to the opposite chip [20]. Typical
planar CPWs have center conductor widths, w ≈ 10 µm
[30], greater than or equal to the attainable chip sep-
arations, d, with evaporated indium bumps. Since the
impedance changes are particularly acute when w ⪆ d,
we utilize a smaller w = 5 µm and adapt the gaps on ei-
ther side, s, to target a 50 Ω impedance. This balances
reduced precision of lithographic processes, increased ki-
netic inductance [31], and increased losses due to the
greater electric field strength [32] against separation-
dependent properties and compactness.
In addition, we can cover the chip opposite the CPW
with varying amounts of metal, which will change the
boundary conditions for the electric field and hence in-
fluence the microwave properties (phase velocity and
losses); see Appendix A for concrete examples and discus-
sion of the limiting cases. To our knowledge, the behavior
as a function of material facing the CPW has not been
investigated to date in this context. Here, we compare
resonators on the top chip facing a solid metal film on
the bottom chip in the region opposite the CPW (metal

165
180
195
210

4

5

6

7

Measured Freq., 
m/2  (GHz)

(a)

Metal-Facing

A-1 metal
A-2 metal
Fit

150
165
180
195

4

5

6

7
(c)

Dielectric-Facing

A-1 dielectric
A-2 dielectric
A-3 dielectric
Fit

165
180
195
210

Inverse length, 1/  (m
1)

50

25

0

25

50

(
m )/2  (MHz)

(b)

150
165
180
195

Inverse length, 1/  (m
1)

50

25

0

25

50
(d)

FIG. 3.
3D-integrated resonator frequency reproducibility.
(a) Measured frequencies of a set of metal-facing resonators
vs. inverse physical length from multiple copies of the same
design (plotted separately as A-n, see legend) with 5 µm wide
center conductors. The lower-right inset is a schematic cross-
section of the layout of the CPW line with silicon in gray and
niobium in black (not to scale). (b) Deviations between the
measured frequencies and the mean measured per-resonator
frequency for the data in (a). (c) Measured frequency and
(d) deviations from mean per-resonator frequency vs. inverse
length from the dielectric-facing resonators. The light gray
lines in (a,c) are best-fit lines to a simple model discussed in
the text.

facing) and resonators where the metal has been etched
away during device fabrication in a 140 µm wide strip
centered across from the CPW to expose the dielectric
beneath (dielectric facing). For dielectric-facing devices,
we leave small strips of metal (≈ 10 µm wide) in this
etched region to connect the ground planes and avoid
spurious modes; see Fig. 1(c) and the device design ren-
ders in Fig. 8 for more information.
We designed samples with two feedlines of eight weakly
coupled quarter-wavelength CPW resonators with fre-
quencies staggered in 200 MHz increments from 4.5 GHz
to 6.5 GHz and coupling quality factors of approximately
2 × 106. One feedline features metal-facing CPWs while
the other has dielectric-facing CPWs, see Fig. 1(c). Since
the feedline is located on the wiring chip while the res-
onators are on the other chip, we couple them with inter-
chip parallel-plate capacitors. Further details about the
sample designs are available in Appendix D.
We cooled the resonators down to approximately
15 mK in a dilution refrigerator and measured the com-
plex scattering parameters of the resonators with a vector
network analyzer (VNA). Additional information about


5

the measurement setup is available in Appendix E. We
extracted the resonator frequency at a drive power which
provides good signal-to-noise ratio and where the res-
onator does not show nonlinear behavior using a fitting
technique which is robust to impedance mismatches [33].
In a first measurement, we verify that the fundamen-
tal resonance frequency scales with the physical length
of the resonator using a sample (design A) with 5 µm-
wide CPW center conductors. For the simplest case (the
metal-facing resonators), we plot the measured resonance
frequencies against the inverse physical length, 1/ℓ, of the
resonator in Fig. 3(a) and observe a linear scaling. This
indicates that these CPWs behave as expected, with a
resonant frequency given by vph/4ℓ where vph is the effec-
tive phase velocity of this particular geometry and dielec-
tric. We fit the mean per-resonator measured frequency
to a simple analytical model that accounts for the addi-
tional frequency shift due to the coupling to the feedline
(presented in Appendix F) by a least-squares method and
extract a phase velocity of vfit
ph,m = 1.182 × 108 m/s for
this geometry. This vph may be process specific, since
the phase velocity of a CPW will depend on details such
as the metal film thickness, the degree of over-etching of
the substrate, or oxide films on the various surfaces.
Furthermore, we analyze the reproducibility of the
measured frequencies by comparing the nominally iden-
tical resonators on two or three copies of this design. We
plot the difference between the measured frequencies and
the mean of all measured frequencies of each resonator
on the sample in Fig. 3(b) and observe small deviations
with a mean absolute value of 3 MHz or ≈ 0.05 % between
the same resonators on different copies of the device (16
resonators on two devices). This indicates excellent re-
producibility for the metal-facing CPW geometry.
Next, we investigate the case of CPWs with a 5 µm-
wide center conductor and dielectric facing the CPW line.
We again find frequencies proportional to 1/ℓ [Fig. 3(c)]
and fit a phase velocity of vfit
ph,d = 1.175 × 108 m/s.
For these resonators, we observe a mean absolute fre-
quency difference between different copies of the same
resonator of 15 MHz [Fig. 3(d); 24 resonators on three
devices]. This deviation is dominated by copy A-3 which
had slightly damaged spacers and a rightward tilt with a
magnitude twice as large as that of the other two copies
(the height maps of samples A-1 to A-3 are plotted in or-
der from left to right in the lower row of Fig. 2(f)). Since
the resonators decrease in length from left to right along
each feedline, the rightward tilt of the top chip on copy
A-3 tends to shift the frequency of the shorter resonators
downward, as in Fig. 3(d).
Excluding this device, we
calculate a mean absolute frequency difference of 3 MHz
across 16 resonators on two devices.
Combining the results of both metal- and dielectric-
facing resonators, we find a mean absolute deviation of
the frequency deviations of 12 MHz and a maximum de-
viation between two nominally identical resonators of
50 MHz (3 MHz mean and 7 MHz maximum difference
when excluding sample A-3). Although these data are

from a single fabrication round, this frequency spread is
at or below the typical wafer-to-wafer frequency varia-
tion we observe for planar devices fabricated using sim-
ilar methods but without spacers or indium bumps [34],
indicating that with intact SU-8 spacers, the flip-chip
bonding process is not expected to limit the frequency
repeatability of weakly coupled CPW resonators. Res-
onators with larger coupling capacitors may show greater
sensitivity to interchip spacing deviations since the spu-
rious capacitances to ground that shift the frequency (see
Appendix F) will depend on d.
Given good frequency reproducibility, it is useful to
model the phase velocity of such resonators to target spe-
cific frequencies in future designs.
Typical approaches
include analytical techniques such as conformal mapping
[20, 35, 36] or finite-element (FEM) simulations [26]. We
find that conformal mapping calculates phase velocities
of vCM
ph,m = 1.215 × 108 m/s (vCM
ph,d = 1.185 × 108 m/s)
for the metal-facing (dielectric-facing) CPWs while 3D
radio-frequency (RF) FEM simulations produce phase
velocities of vFEM
ph,m = 1.233 × 108 m/s (vFEM
ph,d = 1.205 ×
108 m/s). These values are within 5 % of the measured
values in the worst case, and a large portion of the re-
maining error is likely attributable to kinetic inductance
[31, 37].
In general, accurately modeling the absolute
frequencies of CPW resonators is challenging due to: (i)
geometrical effects resulting from fabrication such as the
metal thickness and the over-etch into the substrate; (ii)
kinetic inductance of the Cooper pairs in the supercon-
ductor which depends on the film thickness and pene-
tration depth; and (iii) parasitic effects missing in the
equivalent model. Complicating matters further, (i) and
(ii) may vary spatially across the wafer.

V.
RESONATOR QUALITY FACTORS

Having analyzed the reproducibility of resonator fre-
quencies and modeled them, we next evaluate the im-
pact of the additional process steps introduced for the
3D-integrated samples on the low-photon number inter-
nal quality factors of the CPW resonators. Quality fac-
tors at this power are important since this is the regime in
which qubits are operated [38]. For the w = 5 µm CPWs,
we find a mean internal quality factor at single photon
levels of (0.5±0.1)×106, with no statistically significant
difference between metal-facing and dielectric-facing res-
onators [Fig. 4(a)].
We discuss the calculation of the
resonator internal photon number in Appendix G.
Considering a second sample (design B) where the
CPW center conductor width is set to 2.5 µm, 5 µm,
10 µm and 20 µm for different resonators while adapting
the gap size to approximately maintain a 50 Ω impedance
according to the conformal mapping model (resulting in
proportionally larger gaps at large w), we observe that
the internal quality factors are strongly affected by CPW
size, scaling by a factor of ≈ 5 from w = 2.5 µm to
w = 20 µm [Fig. 4(b)].
We expect larger w and gaps


6

0
1
2
3

Count

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Internal Q-factor, Qint, 1ph

×106

(a)
Metal, 5 µm
Dielectric, 5 µm

2.5
5
10
20

CPW trace width, w (µm)

(b)
Metal
Dielectric
Planar
P-Ratio

FIG. 4.
Analysis of 3D-integrated resonator quality factors.
(a) Distribution of single-photon internal quality factors for
24, w = 5.0 µm, CPW resonators across two devices.
(b)
Internal quality factor vs. CPW center conductor width, w,
for both metal and dielectric-facing resonators. A logarithmic
x-axis scale is used for visual clarity. The pink region indicates
the mean and one standard deviation interval for the planar
CPW resonators with w = 10 µm and aq. HF treatment prior
to cooldown. The dashed lines are the result of participation-
ratio analysis of the different geometries.

to reduce the field strength and thus the participation of
lossy interfaces, resulting in increased quality factors. In-
deed, the observed dependence agrees qualitatively with
numerical participation-ratio analysis of the geometries
(discussed in Appendix H). Importantly, the w = 10 µm
resonators have a single-photon internal quality factor of
≈ 1 × 106, which is comparable to airbridge- and qubit-
free, hydrogen-fluoride (HF) treated planar resonators
with identical w produced in our lab using similar fab-
rication techniques but without SU-8 spacers or indium
bumps. Thus, the 5 × 105 quality factors reached by the
w = 5 µm resonators on both the A and B samples are
likely limited by our decision to use a smaller w compared
to planar designs to reduce the sensitivity of transmission
line properties on chip separation rather than additional
steps in the 3D integration process.

VI.
DISCUSSION

To improve parameter reproducibility of indium flip-
chip bonded superconducting microwave circuits, we have
developed an SU-8 spacer process. We showed that the
spacers reduce the mean chip separation error as well
as tilt by factors of 10 (to a mean of (0.4 ± 0.8) µm)
and 3.5 (to a mean of (76 ± 35) µrad) respectively. Fur-
thermore, we demonstrated the ability of the profilome-
try technique to characterize the entire bonded area by
uncovering bowing which is not visible with SEM mea-
surements of the chip corners or pre-bonding measure-
ments of the spacer heights. Additional investigation of

such bowing is required, particularly the impact of addi-
tional spacers. SU-8 spacers have advantages due to the
simplicity and accessibility of their fabrication process.
Based on our measurements, SU-8 spacers perform com-
parably to silicon and indium spacers. However, further
study will be needed to evaluate their qubit compatibility
and the best approach, particularly given their propen-
sity for absorbing solvents during standard cleaning steps
used in state-of-the-art qubit fabrication.
We also verified that the reproducible chip separa-
tion results in CPW resonator frequencies with statis-
tical device-to-device frequency deviations at the typi-
cal wafer-to-wafer variations, which should enable multi-
plexed readout circuits including Purcell filters in future
work. For 3D-integrated CPWs with a 5 µm-wide cen-
ter conductor, we found that standard techniques do not
model the phase velocities with sufficient precision for ab
initio device design and will need to be refined in future
studies, particularly by investigating kinetic inductance
in these geometries. To directly test the impact of spacer
height variations on resonator frequency shifts, we could
vary the height of the spacers, which would also help to
improve our models.
Measurements of the resonator quality factors show
that the flip-chip bonding process preserves the low-loss
material interfaces of a similar planar fabrication process
at the level of quality factors of 5×105. Resonators with
wider center conductors reached higher internal quality
factors in exchange for potentially increased sensitivity
to chip separation deviations. We did not find signifi-
cant differences between metal- and dielectric-facing res-
onators, indicating that we can use either based on design
convenience. In particular, due to their reduced phase
velocity sensitivity on chip spacing deviations, dielectric-
facing resonators may be preferred at the cost of physi-
cally longer resonators due to their lower phase velocity.
More work is needed to investigate alternative geometries
(microstrip-like) to avoid the quality-factor penalties of
narrow CPW lines and preserve separation-independent
properties.

VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Stephan Paredes for his generous assistance
with the indium evaporations. We also thank the staff
of the ETH Z¨urich FIRST and the Binnig and Rohrer
Nanotechnology Center cleanrooms for their assistance
in maintaining the facilities used to prepare the devices
discussed in this work.
The finite-element simulations
were performed using the ETH Z¨urich Euler cluster.
The
authors
acknowledge
financial
support
by
the
EU
Flagship
on
Quantum
Technology
H2020-
FETFLAG2018-03
project
820363
OpenSuperQ,
by
the Office of the Director of National Intelligence
(ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activ-
ity (IARPA), via the U.S. Army Research Office grant
W911NF-16-1-0071, by the National Center of Com-


7

petence in Research Quantum Science and Technology
(NCCR QSIT), a research instrument of the Swiss Na-
tional Science Foundation (SNSF), by the SNFS R’equip
grant 206021-170731, by the Swiss State Secretariat for
Education, Research and Innovation (SERI) under con-
tract number UeM019-11, and by ETH Z¨urich.
The
views and conclusions contained herein are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily rep-
resenting the official policies or endorsements, either ex-
pressed or implied, of the ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S.
Government.

VIII.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

G.J.N., J.-C.B., and C.E. planned the experiments.
G.J.N. designed and G.J.N. and M.K. fabricated the
devices.
G.J.N. and D.P. performed the mechanical
measurements.
G.J.N. performed the microwave mea-
surements and analyzed all data.
L.M. performed the
participation-ratio analysis. G.J.N. wrote the manuscript
with input from all authors. C.E. and A.W. supervised
the work.

Appendix A: Frequency Dependence on Chip
Separation

Since it is challenging to accurately produce a sequence
of chips over a large range of target separations, we turn
to simulations to numerically explore the influence of chip
separation on the frequency of CPW resonators. We con-
sider a center conductor width, w of 10 µm and gaps of
5.5 µm to ground on either side on top of 525 µm of sil-
icon with a relative permittivity, ϵ = 11.45 [39], and as-
sume that there is either a 525 µm thick piece of silicon
(dielectric-facing) or a sheet of metal (metal-facing) a
distance d away on the opposite chip. We calculate the
phase velocity, vph(d) using 3D RF FEM simulations and
plot the relative frequency shift of a resonator as the ratio
vph(d)/vph(10 µm) in Fig. 5.
The dielectric-facing CPW resonator shifts downwards
in frequency with decreasing chip separation due to the
increasing electric field participation in the dielectric (in-
creasing the effective permittivity ϵeff and lowering vph).
The metal-facing CPW resonator shifts upwards in fre-
quency with decreasing chip separation due to the in-
creasing electric field participation in the vacuum region
between the center trace and the metal film above (in-
creasing vph). Decreased chip separation relative to the
target value results in larger deviations than increased
separation, and metal-facing CPWs experience far larger
frequency shifts with changing d than dielectric-facing
ones due to the different boundary conditions.
In both cases, we see that < 1 µm deviations around
the target distance of 10 µm result in frequency devia-
tions below 1 %, but large negative deviations (≈ 5 µm)

6
8
10
12
14

Chip Separation, d (µm)

0.96

0.98

1.00

1.02

1.04

1.06

1.08

1.10

Relative Frequency, vph(d)/vph(10)

Metal-facing
Dielectric-facing

Metal, w=10 µm
Metal, w=5 µm

Dielectric, w=10 µm
Dielectric, w=5 µm

FIG. 5.
Simulated relative frequency shifts as a function of
inter-chip spacing for dielectric- and metal-facing CPW res-
onators.

result in frequency shifts of at least a few percent or hun-
dreds of MHz for resonant frequencies around 5 GHz.
Furthermore, we have simulated CPWs with w =
5 µm and gaps of 3.24 µm (3.14 µm) for the metal-facing
(dielectric-facing) resonators, which show reduced fre-
quency shifts with changing d compared to the w =
10 µm CPWs, motivating our choice of w = 5 µm for
the devices in this work.
The absolute phase velocities for the w = 5 µm CPWs
at d = 10 µm are presented in the main text. For the
w = 10 µm CPWs at d = 10 µm, we calculate vFEM
ph,m =
1.275 × 108 m/s (vFEM
ph,d = 1.190 × 108 m/s) for the metal-
facing (dielectric-facing) CPWs.

Appendix B: Fabrication Details

1.
Niobium Deposition and Patterning

We fabricate the devices discussed in this work on
100 mm, (100)-orientation, high-resistivity (> 20 kΩ cm)
intrinsic float-zone silicon wafers (Topsil GlobalWafers
A/S). We clean the wafers for 5 min in a 1 : 1 mix-
ture of 25 % ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) and 30 %
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) at 60 ◦C to remove organic
contaminants before stripping the native silicon oxide for
60 s in a 7 % solution of hydrofluoric acid (HF) in water
at room temperature and then rinsing with de-ionized
(DI) water. Within 20 min, we place the cleaned wafers
into the load-lock of an ultra-high-vacuum (base pres-
sure < 1 × 10−7 Pa) magnetron sputtering system (AJA
International Inc.), where we sputter ≈ 125 nm of nio-
bium from a 100 mm niobium target (99.99 %, ACI Al-
loys, Inc.)
in a face-to-face geometry over 300 s with
a 25 sccm flow of Ar resulting in a chamber pressure of
≈ 1 Pa. Before venting to the atmosphere, we expose the


8

fresh niobium film to nitrogen gas for 15 min.

After unloading the wafer, we clean it with sonication
in a 50 ◦C bath of isopropanol to remove particles be-
fore spinning AZ 5214E (EU) photoresist (Microchemi-
cals GmbH ) (45 s of spinning at 4000/min followed by a
60 s bake at 105 ◦C on a hotplate). We expose the wafers
in contact mode with a mask aligner (EV Group, EVG
620NT) at an exposure dose of 60 mJ/cm2 of an even
mix of 365 nm, 405 nm and 420 nm light-emitting-diode
(LED) illumination. After exposure, we develop the re-
sist for 60 s in AZ 726 MIF (Microchemicals GmbH ) fol-
lowed by 60 s of rinsing in DI water and a spin rinse and
dry. We etch the now-exposed niobium film in a reactive-
ion etcher (Oxford Instruments, Plasmalab 80 Plus) us-
ing SF6 chemistry, a chamber pressure of 9 × 102 Pa, a
flow rate of 5 sccm, and an RF power of 100 W for ap-
proximately 240 s using the reflectivity of the surface to
a helium-neon laser to determine the end of the etch. We
strip the resist for at least 120 min in 80 ◦C N -Methyl-
2-pyrrolidone (NMP) followed by 10 min NMP, acetone,
and then isopropanol sonication at 50 ◦C.

After stripping, we measure step heights from the
niobium surface to the silicon below of approximately
155 nm in the center of the wafer increasing to 185 nm
at the edge of the wafer using mechanical profilometry.
Using our measured niobium thickness of approximately
125 nm in the center of the wafer, this indicates over-
etches into the silicon of approximately 30 nm in the cen-
ter and 60 nm at the edge of the wafer.

2.
SU-8 Patterning

Before starting the patterning of the SU-8, we clean
the wafers for 60 s in a 7 % HF solution at room temper-
ature and then rinse with DI water. We spin SU-8 3010
(Kayaku Advanced Materials, Inc.) for 60 s at 3000/min
and then allow the film to rest for 5 min on the spin-
ner before soft baking for 180 s at 95 ◦C. We expose the
SU-8 on a mask aligner (EVG 620NT) in contact mode
at an exposure dose of 200 mJ/cm2 of 365 nm LED illu-
mination and perform post-exposure bakes at 65 ◦C for
60 s and then 300 s at 95 ◦C on a vacuum hotplate. We
develop for 90 s in mr-Dev 600 and then wash several
times in alternating isopropanol and mr-Dev 600 baths
until no residues remain. To improve the mechanical re-
silience of the SU-8 spacers, we next hard bake at 180 ◦C
for 900 s.
Finally, we perform mechanical profilometer
(Bruker Corp., DektakXT) measurements of the niobium
and SU-8 thicknesses.

We note that, since the baking temperature of typical
electron-beam-lithography (EBL) resists used for Joseph-
son junction fabrication are above the melting tempera-
ture of indium (156 ◦C), EBL needs to be performed prior
to indium deposition.

3.
Indium Patterning

Before starting the indium patterning, we clean the
wafers for 60 s in a 7 % HF solution at room temper-
ature (45 s for wafers with SU-8) and then rinse with
DI water. We start by spinning AZ nLOF 2070 (Micro-
chemicals GmbH ) for 1 s at 3000/min with 1 s ramps on
either side before allowing the wafer to rest on the spin-
ner for 300 s with the lid open. Then, we soft bake for
30 s at 100 ◦C before removing the edge bead with a few
mL of propylene glycol methyl ether acetate (PGMEA)
while spinning at 500/min and then 30 s at 1500/min
once the PGMEA has been applied. We bake for 360 s
at 100 ◦C on a vacuum hotplate and then expose on a
mask aligner (EVG 620NT) in contact mode at an ex-
posure dose of 110 mJ/cm2 of an even mix of 365 nm,
405 nm and 420 nm LED illumination. Next, we perform
a post exposure bake at 110 ◦C for 60 s on a vacuum hot-
plate before developing in AZ 826 MIF (Microchemicals
GmbH ) for 90 s and then rinsing in DI water. We then
load the wafer into a thermal evaporator (Plassys Bestek,
MEB550S) and perform an in-situ argon ion mill for 300 s
at a beam voltage of 500 V, a beam current of 35 mA, and
an argon flow of 6 sccm. Without breaking vacuum, we
evaporate ≈ 10 µm of indium at 10 nm/s with the wafer
temperature held at approximately 4 ◦C in a water-cooled
chuck. To complete the indium deposition, we lift-off the
indium on top of the resist film in 50 ◦C acetone over
120 min.

4.
Dicing, Cleaning, and SU-8 Drying

With the indium patterning completed, the individ-
ual dies are finished. To prepare for dicing, we spin AZ
4533 (Microchemicals GmbH ) resist for 60 s at 1000/min
before baking for 90 s at 80 ◦C to protect the front sur-
face of the wafer. After dicing, we clean individual chips
with isopropanol and acetone to remove the resist fol-
lowed by 15 min in 80 ◦C NMP to remove resist residues,
then 60 min in 50 ◦C acetone and bake for at least 12 h
in a vacuum oven at 50 ◦C and 2 × 104 Pa to remove the
solvents from the SU-8 spacers.
Immediately after spinning, exposure, development,
and baking, the mean SU-8 3010 spacer height is (10.00±
0.04) µm.
However, after immersing in warm solvents
(in particular, NMP), the SU-8 spacers increase in thick-
ness up to 25 %, which we counteract with a solvent-
exchange and drying procedure (detailed above).
Im-
mediately prior to bonding, the SU-8 spacer height is
approximately (10.2 ± 0.2) µm.

5.
Flip-chip Bonding and Packaging

Then we flip-chip bond the bottom and top chips to-
gether in a flip-chip bonder (Smart Equipment Technol-
ogy Corp. SA, FC150). The bonder uses an autocolli-


9

mator to ensure that the bottom and top chips are par-
allel prior to bonding and a split-prism microscope in-
serted between the chips to align them laterally.
We
calibrate the parallelism of the arm and chuck, align
the autocollimator, and finally align the microscope so
that it points to the same locations on the chuck and
arm. After inserting the chips, we align the bottom and
top chips in five axes (lateral position and rotation as
well as the two rotation axes for parallelism) and press
them together at room temperature with a force between
10 N/mm2 to 40 N/mm2 of indium (20 N/mm2 typical).
Unlike Ref. [10], we do not use atmospheric plasma clean-
ing to remove the indium oxides prior to bonding.
After flip-chip bonding, we glue (GE 7031 Varnish)
the module onto an oxygen-free high thermal conductiv-
ity (OFHC) copper base with a microwave printed circuit
board (PCB) attached. Next, we connect launchers on
the PCB and bottom chip using a manual wedge-type
wire bonder (West Bond, Inc., 7476E) with 25 µm diam-
eter aluminum wire. Finally, we close the sample package
with a 6082 aluminum alloy lid and vacuum bag the sam-
ple for transport from the cleanroom to the laboratory
where it is installed in a cryostat.

6.
Additional imagery

We present additional composite micrographs of a copy
of the design B with varied CPW center conductor width
in Fig. 6. These composite images have been created by
aligning and merging numerous images taken with a mi-
croscope including corrections for lighting non-uniformity
(Hugin) before performing curve adjustments to increase
contrast (GNU image manipulation program). The mi-
crographs in the main text [Fig. 1(c,d,e)] are desaturated
versions of these micrographs which have been artificially
colored.

Appendix C: Mechanical Measurements

1.
Mechanical Profilometry

We measure each bonded module in the mechanical
profilometer (Bruker Corp., DektakXT) starting from
the lower-right corner of the bottom chip. The dektak
scans first vertically from bottom to top and then repeats
such scans from the right edge of the bonded device un-
til the left edge. We level the data by fitting a plane to
bottom chip region in the complete dataset with a least-
squares method and then subtracting this plane from the
entire dataset. Next, we mask out individual vertical line
scans that are clearly offset from the rest of the measure-
ments to avoid skewing the results.
Finally, we subtract the substrate thickness from the
measured top-chip heights. We first estimate the thick-
ness of the substrates by accurately measuring the thick-
ness of other wafers from the same batches using a preci-

sion micrometer (Mitutoyo Corp., MDH-25MB). We used
two different types of wafers for these devices: double-
side polished for the mechanical test samples, and single-
side polished for the resonator samples.
We find that
our double-side polished wafers have a mean thickness of
(505.9 ± 1.0) µm and that our single-side polished wafers
have a mean thickness of (525.2±0.4) µm. We thus select
the data for the top-chip region and subtract the appro-
priate substrate thickness to arrive at the extracted chip
separations.

2.
Scanning-Electron Microscopy

We image the corners of the top chip of a bonded de-
vice edge-on with two different detectors in the scanning-
electron microscope (SEM) and measure the gaps manu-
ally using changes in contrast to detect the bottom-chip
and top-chip edges (see Fig. 7) Since the bottom-chip
edge is visible only by differences in local contrast due to
depth-of-focus, there is some ambiguity in these measure-
ments which we attempt to reduce by using two different
detectors. Additionally, since we are only with a few de-
grees of perpendicular to the edge, we estimate that these
measurements have an uncertainty of a few hundred nm.
We then average the chip separations from both detectors
into a single value for that corner. The average separation
for the module is the mean of the corner separations. To
compute the tilt, we utilize the methodology of Ref. [26],
i.e. we compute the inverse tangent of the chip separa-
tion difference divided by the lateral distance for all six
corner pairs on the device and quote the largest value. A
tilt extracted from fitting a plane to the measured data
is typically lower than these worst-case local tilts.
Without spacers, we calculate a mean per-module cor-
ner separation of (6.1 ± 0.2) µm and mean per-module
worst-case tilt of (450 ± 200) µrad across four bonded
modules. This calculation is similar to that of Ref. [26]
and we find comparable, although slightly worse, values.
With spacers, we extract a separation of (11.0 ± 0.3) µm
and a tilt of (62± 26) µrad over nine modules, a factor of
4 reduction in chip separation deviations and a factor of
7 reduction of planarity errors. All devices in Fig. 3(f)
excluding the one in the lower right corner are included
in this set of nine devices. We find that the corner sepa-
rations extracted from SEM measurements are consistent
with the mechanical profilometry. The larger inter-chip
separation results from the SEM method are likely caused
by the observed bowing.

Appendix D: Sample Details

All results in this work are based on 14.3 mm by
14.3 mm bottom chips and 12.0 mm by 12.0 mm top chips.
We present renders of the device designs in Fig. 8. De-
vices with SU-8 spacers have four 600 µm by 600 µm rect-
angles of SU-8 placed on the bottom chip just within the


10

1 mm

(a)

(b)

FIG. 6.
High-resolution composite micrographs of a copy of sample design B with varied CPW center conductor width. (a)
Bottom chip. (b) Top chip.

outline of the top chip.
They are sized such that, as-
suming a Young’s modulus of 2 GPa [40], we expect a
compression of only 7 % when using a bonding force of
200 N.
The indium bumps are 10 µm high, 25 µm diameter,
and have a pitch of 100 µm. The samples have a total
number of bumps ranging from 8297 to 11 096, resulting
in a total area of between 4 mm2 and 5.4 mm2 of indium.
The dimensions of the CPW resonators for sample de-
signs A are listed in Table I. The resonators are cou-
pled to the feedline with parallel-plate capacitors made of
overlapping 16 µm by 16 µm square pads with a uniform
22 µm gap to ground on all sides [see Fig. 8(b)]. In elec-
trostatic simulations (Ansys, Inc., Maxwell 2022 R1), we
compute a capacitance of approximately 0.44 fF between
the pads, and surplus capacitances to ground (compared
to a coplanar waveguide of the equivalent length) of ap-

(a)
(b)
In-lens detector
Secondary electron detector

10 µm
10 µm

FIG. 7.
Edge-on SEM micrographs of one corner of a flip-
chip bonded device: (a) In lens detector, backscattered elec-
trons. The cursor height, corresponding to the measured sep-
aration and indicated by the pink bar, is 10.90 µm. (b) Sec-
ondary electron detector. The cursor height is 10.80 µm.

TABLE I. CPW resonator parameters of design A. Resonator
indices increase from left to right along the feedline; 0 to
7 refer to the metal-facing resonators on the upper feedline
while 8 to 15 refer to the dielectric-facing resonators on the
lower feedline. w: center conductor width, s: gap width, ℓ:
physical length, ⟨ωm⟩: mean measured resonance frequency.

Index w [µm] s [µm] ℓ [µm] ⟨ωm⟩/2π [GHz]

0
5.00
3.24 6049.8
4.9729
1
5.00
3.24 5816.1
5.1724
2
5.00
3.24 5599.7
5.3748
3
5.00
3.24 5398.7
5.5797
4
5.00
3.24 5211.6
5.7865
5
5.00
3.24 5037.0
5.9921
6
5.00
3.24 4873.7
6.1990
7
5.00
3.24 4720.5
6.3988

8
5.00
3.14 6749.1
4.3347
9
5.00
3.14 6447.9
4.5386
10
5.00
3.14 6172.4
4.7407
11
5.00
3.14 5919.4
4.9423
12
5.00
3.14 5686.2
5.1448
13
5.00
3.14 5470.6
5.3458
14
5.00
3.14 5270.7
5.5467
15
5.00
3.14 5082.8
5.7475

proximately 0.6 fF on the resonator and feedline side. We
define the physical length of the resonators, ℓ, to start
from the center of the square coupling capacitor pad.


11

(a)

(b)

(c)

1 mm

20 µm

FIG. 8.
Renders of the device designs: (a) Sample A with uniform w and s for each CPW resonator type. (b) Detail of an
inter-chip coupler between a feedline and a resonator. (c) Sample B with swept w and s for each CPW resonator type. In
all images, niobium is shown as light gray on the bottom chip and darker gray on the top chip. Areas of exposed silicon on
the bottom chip are rendered in light blue while equivalent areas on the top chip are rendered in magenta. Indium bumps are
rendered in green and SU-8 spacers are rendered in yellow.

Appendix E: Microwave Measurement Setup

The signal path (see Fig. 9) begins at a vector network
analyzer (Agilent Technologies, N5230C) before passing
through a 40 dB attenuator and then an inner and outer
DC block. The cryostat (Bluefors Oy, LD250) features
further 20 dB attenuators at the 4 K, 100 mK, and 15 mK
stages of the input line before a final custom coaxial
Eccosorb filter (Laird plc., Eccosorb CR-110). The rea-
soning behind this choice of attenuators is presented in
Ref. [41]. The sample is enclosed in a package with a
copper base and aluminum lid and then placed inside a
high-purity aluminum magnetic shield surrounded by two
high permeability nickel-alloy shields (Magnetic Shields
Ltd., Cryophy). The output line features an isolator (Low
Noise Factory, ISIS4 12A), a 20 dB directional coupler, a
traveling wave parametric amplifier (TWPA) (MIT Lin-
coln Labs), another LNF isolator, and then a band-pass
filter on or below the base temperature stage. The out-
put line then has an additional circulator at the 100 mK
stage and a high-electron mobility transistor (HEMT)
amplifier (LNF, LNC4 8A) at the 4 K stage. Outside the
cryostat, the output line has an inner and outer DC block
and the room-temperature amplification chain consisting
of: an ultra-low-noise amplifier (ULNA), a low-pass fil-
ter, a 10 dB attenuator, a low-noise-amplifier (LNA) , a
3 dB attenuator, and another inner and outer DC block.

Our measurements were performed without pumping
the TWPA (i.e. with it off) to avoid saturation effects
at high probe powers and frequency-dependent gain that
might distort the resonator lineshapes.

Appendix F: Analytical Resonator Model

Here, we analyze an electrical model of a CPW res-
onator capacitively coupled to a feedline to determine
the resonant frequency under this additional loading and
to find a model to extract the CPW phase velocity from
resonator frequency measurements as a function of res-
onator length. As shown in Fig. 10, we consider our res-
onator as a λ/4 transmission line of impedance Z0,r and
bare resonance frequency ω0 connected to a two-ended
feedline of impedance Z0,f by a coupling capacitance Cc.
We include a parasitic capacitance to ground Ccgr (Ccgf)
on the resonator (feedline) side and expect that the spu-
rious capacitance to ground on the resonator side will
lower the resonant frequency.
We write out the total impedance of the circuit about
the selected node (the blue dot in Fig. 10) and extract
the loaded resonant frequency from the poles of this
impedance. Setting Ccgf = 0 to simplify notation (it only
contributes at high order) and assuming (CcZ0,fω/2)2 is
small, we find the resonance condition:

tan
�π

2 −
ℓ

vph

ωr
2π

�
− (Cc + Ccgr) Z0,rωr = 0
(F1)

where we have substituted ω0 = vph/4ℓ for a λ/4 res-
onator with phase velocity, vph, and physical length ℓ.
Assuming that the capacitive frequency shift is small, so
ωr ≈ ω0, we can expand the tangent and arrive at a so-
lution for ωr:

ωr = π

2
1

ℓ

vph + (Cc + Ccgr) Z0,r
.
(F2)


12

n dB

Aluminum
Cryoperm

20 dB
20 dB
20 dB

20 dB

15 mK

3 dB

0.1 K

4 K

10 dB

Cryostat

40 dB

Vector
Network
Analyzer

Input
MWG

Legend
Band-pass
filter

Eccosorb
filter

Inner + outer
DC block

Amplifier

Attenuator

Directional
coupler

Circulator

50 Ω 
terminator

TWPA

HEMT

RT

Magnetic
shields

2× 

×8

2× 
2× 

Output

FIG. 9.
Diagram of our measurement setup for the cryogenic
microwave measurements.

We fit this model to our measured resonator frequencies
using the design lengths (Table I) with the phase velocity
and b = (Cc + Ccgr) Z0,r as free parameters.

Appendix G: Resonator Internal Photon Number

We compute the internal photon number of the res-
onator as a function of applied power using the following
formula, which can be easily derived [42]

nint = 2
κPapp

ℏω0(κ + γ)2
(G1)

where κ is the coupling rate to the feedline, Papp is the
power applied at the input port of the sample, ℏ is the

Cc

Z0,f
Z0,f
Ccgr
Ccgf

Z0,r
λ/4

FIG. 10.
Circuit representation of the coupling circuit be-
tween the λ/4 resonators and the feedline.

reduced Planck constant, ω0 is the resonant frequency,
and γ is the internal loss rate. We subtract the input
line attenuation measured at room temperature from the
power supplied by the VNA to arrive at the power applied
to the sample input which results in uncertainty of a few
dB.

Appendix H: Participation-Ratio Analysis

To understand the influence of the CPW geometry on
losses, we numerically analyze the electric-field distribu-
tion, focusing on the fraction of the electric field energy
(the participation ratio) stored in thin layers on the sur-
faces of the CPW and substrate representing amorphous
surface oxides which are believed to host two-level sys-
tems (TLS) that induce loss [38]. This technique is widely
used to correlate device geometry with losses and thus
quality factors [43, 44].
We partition a two-dimensional, side-cut slice of the
chosen CPW geometry into metal, substrate, and vac-
uum bulk regions as well as metal—substrate (MS),
metal—vacuum (MV), and substrate—vacuum (SV) in-
terface regions [43, 45]. We follow standard practice and
treat the interface regions as having a thickness of 10 nm
and a dielectric constant of ϵ = 10 [43, 45, 46]. We cal-
culate the electric field distribution using an electrostatic
solver (Ansys, Inc., Maxwell 2022 R1) configured to per-
form adaptive meshing steps until the change in partic-
ipation ratios of the regions outlined above is below 1 %
from one iteration to the next. We repeat such simula-
tions for all CPW geometries of device B and interpolated
values of w in between the measured geometries.
See
Fig. 11 for a diagram of the different regions considered
as well as the final mesh for a w = 2.5 µm, s = 1.49 µm
CPW line.
Since the participation ratios in the different lossy in-
terfaces are highly correlated (meaning that they scale
together with changes in w or s) [46], we are unable
to use the calculated participation ratios along with the
measured internal quality factors to extract loss tangents
of the interfaces (for this, devices with extreme geome-
tries [e.g. isotropically etched trenches in the CPW gaps]
would be required, as in Ref. [46]). Instead, we follow
a simplified procedure to create the participation-ratio
curves in Fig. 4, described here. For each geometry, we


13

1 µm

200 nm

FIG. 11.
Meshing of the participation-ratio simulations.
Gray is bulk substrate, green is metal—substrate interface,
red is metal—vacuum interface, and yellow is substrate—
vacuum interface region. The mesh triangles are outlined in
blue. The inset presents a detailed view of the 10 nm inter-
face region near the lower corner of the CPW metal where
the electric-field is highest.

compute the total interface participation, pΣ:

pΣ(w, x) =
�

i
pi(w, x)
(H1)

where pi is the participation ratio in one of the three

lossy interfaces (MS, MV, or SV), w is the CPW center
conductor width, and x is either metal- (m) or dielectric-
facing (d). Then, we compute relative Q-factors:

Qpr(w, x) = Qmeas(5 µm, x)pΣ(5 µm, x)

pΣ(w, x)
(H2)

using the mean single-photon internal quality factors for
the w = 5 µm resonators of each type on device B.
Compared to the measured data, this procedure over-
estimates the quality factors at large w, likely since it
does not separate the power-dependent (two-level sys-
tem) and power-independent losses which add in parallel,
e.g. as done in Ref. [45]. Furthermore, the participation-
ratio curves in Fig. 4 overestimate the quality factors at
small w slightly, which could be due to our equal weight-
ing of all interfaces.

Appendix I: Finite-Element Electrostatic
Simulations

We simulate the capacitance matrix of the coupling
capacitors discussed in this work using a finite-element
electrostatic solver (Ansys, Inc., Maxwell 2022 R1). We
model each conductor as 125 nm-thick perfect electrical
conductor. We assign voltage excitations to the ground
planes and capacitor pads and then simulate until the
change in total energy from one iteration to the next is
below 0.1 % for a minimum of two converged passes. The
simulation volume of 1000 µm by 1000 µm by 1060 µm is
significantly larger than the ≈ 60 µm capacitor dimen-
sions (cf. Sec. D).

[1] B. Bauer, S. Bravyi, M. Motta, and G. K.-L. Chan,

Chem. Rev. 120, 12685 (2020).

[2] V. von Burg, G. H. Low, T. H¨aner, D. S. Steiger, M. Rei-
her, M. Roetteler, and M. Troyer, Phys. Rev. Research
3, 033055 (2021).

[3] P. Krantz, M. Kjaergaard, F. Yan, T. Orlando, S. Gus-
tavsson, and W. D. Oliver, Appl. Phys. Rev. 6, 021318
(2019).

[4] A. G. Fowler, M. Mariantoni, J. M. Martinis, and A. N.
Cleland, Phys. Rev. A 86, 032324 (2012).

[5] R. Versluis, S. Poletto, N. Khammassi, B. Tarasinski,
N. Haider, D. J. Michalak, A. Bruno, K. Bertels, and
L. DiCarlo, Phys. Rev. Applied 8, 034021 (2017).

[6] C. Gidney and M. Eker˚a, Quantum 5, 433 (2021).
[7] J. Lee, D. W. Berry, C. Gidney, W. J. Huggins, J. R.
McClean, N. Wiebe, and R. Babbush, PRX Quantum 2,
030305 (2021).

[8] D. Rosenberg, D. Kim, R. Das, D. Yost, S. Gustavsson,
D. Hover, P. Krantz, A. Melville, L. Racz, G. O. Samach,
S. J. Weber, F. Yan, J. Yoder, A. J. Kerman, and W. D.

Oliver, npj Quantum Inf. 3, 42 (2017).

[9] W. O’Brien, M. Vahidpour, J. T. Whyland, J. Ange-
les, J. Marshall, D. Scarabelli, G. Crossman, K. Ya-
dav, Y. Mohan, C. Bui, V. Rawat, R. Renzas, N. Vo-
drahalli, A. Bestwick, and C. Rigetti, arXiv:1708.02219
[physics.app-ph] (2017).

[10] B. Foxen, J. Y. Mutus, E. Lucero, R. Graff, A. Megrant,
Y. Chen, C. Quintana, B. Burkett, J. Kelly, E. Jeffrey,
Y. Yang, A. Yu, K. Arya, R. Barends, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro,
A. Dunsworth, A. Fowler, C. Gidney, M. Giustina,
T. Huang, P. Klimov, M. Neeley, C. Neill, P. Roushan,
D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, T. C. White, and
J. M. Martinis, Quantum Sci. Technol. 3, 014005 (2018).

[11] M. Vahidpour, W. O’Brien, J. T. Whyland, J. Ange-
les, J. Marshall, D. Scarabelli, G. Crossman, K. Ya-
dav, Y. Mohan, C. Bui, V. Rawat, R. Renzas, N. Vo-
drahalli, A. Bestwick, and C. Rigetti, arXiv:1708.02226
[physics.app-ph] (2017).

[12] J. L. Mallek, D.-R. W. Yost, D. Rosenberg, J. L. Yoder,
G. Calusine, M. Cook, R. Das, A. Day, E. Golden, D. K.


14

Kim, J. Knecht, B. M. Niedzielski, M. Schwartz, A. Sevi,
C. Stull, W. Woods, A. J. Kerman, and W. D. Oliver,
arXiv:2103.08536 [quant-ph] (2021).

[13] L. Steffen, Y. Salathe, M. Oppliger, P. Kurpiers, M. Baur,
C. Lang, C. Eichler, G. Puebla-Hellmann, A. Fedorov,
and A. Wallraff, Nature 500, 319 (2013).

[14] Z. Chen, A. Megrant, J. Kelly, R. Barends, J. Bochmann,
Y. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth, E. Jeffrey, J. Y. Mu-
tus, P. J. J. O’Malley, C. Neill, P. Roushan, D. Sank,
A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, T. C. White, A. N. Cleland,
and J. M. Martinis, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 052602 (2014).

[15] H. Mukai, K. Sakata, S. J. Devitt, R. Wang, Y. Zhou,
Y. Nakajima, and J. S. Tsai, New J. Phys. 22, 043013
(2020).

[16] I. Besedin and A. P. Menushenkov, EPJ Quantum Tech-
nol. 5, 2 (2018).

[17] T. Brecht, W. Pfaff, C. Wang, Y. Chu, L. Frunzio, M. H.
Devoret, and R. J. Schoelkopf, NPJ Quantum Inf. 2,
16002 (2016).

[18] D. Rosenberg, S. Weber, D. Conway, D. Yost, J. Mallek,
G. Calusine, R. Das, D. Kim, M. Schwartz, W. Woods,
J. L. Yoder, and W. D. Oliver, IEEE Microw. Mag. 21,
72 (2020).

[19] A. Gold, J. P. Paquette, A. Stockklauser, M. J. Reagor,
M. S. Alam, A. Bestwick, N. Didier, A. Nersisyan,
F. Oruc, A. Razavi, B. Scharmann, E. A. Sete, B. Sur,
D. Venturelli, C. J. Winkleblack, F. Wudarski, M. Har-
burn, and C. Rigetti, npj Quantum Inf. 7, 142 (2021).

[20] R. N. Simons, Coplanar waveguide circuits, components,
and systems (Wiley Interscience, 2001).

[21] B. M. Niedzielski, D. K. Kim, M. E. Schwartz, D. Rosen-
berg, G. Calusine, R. Das, A. J. Melville, J. Plant,
L. Racz, J. L. Yoder, D. Ruth-Yost, and W. D. Oliver,
in 2019 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting
(IEDM) (2019) pp. 31.3.1–31.3.4.

[22] X. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Li, J. Wang, T. Su, M. Chen,
Y. Li, C. Li, Z. Mi, X. Liang, C. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. Feng,
K. Linghu, H. Xu, J. Han, W. Liu, P. Zhao, T. Ma,
R. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, P. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Yang,
G. Xue, Y. Jin, and H. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, 184003
(2021).

[23] A.
Somoroff,
P.
Truitt,
A.
Weis,
J.
Bernhardt,
D. Yohannes, J. Walter, K. Kalashnikov, R. A. Mencia,
I. V. Vernik, O. Mukhanov, M. G. Vavilov, and V. E.
Manucharyan, arXiv:2303.01481 [quant-ph] (2023).

[24] K. J. Satzinger, C. R. Conner, A. Bienfait, H.-S. Chang,
M.-H. Chou, A. Y. Cleland, E. Dumur, J. Grebel, G. A.
Peairs, R. G. Povey, S. J. Whiteley, Y. P. Zhong, D. D.
Awschalom, D. I. Schuster, and A. N. Cleland, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 114, 173501 (2019).

[25] C. R. Conner, A. Bienfait, H.-S. Chang, M.-H. Chou,
E. Dumur, J. Grebel, G. A. Peairs, R. G. Povey, H. Yan,
Y. P. Zhong, and A. N. Cleland, Appl. Phys. Lett. 118,
232602 (2021).

[26] S. Kosen, H.-X. Li, M. Rommel, D. Shiri, C. War-
ren, L. Gr¨oberg, J. Salonen, T. Abad, J. Bizn´arov´a,
M. Caputo, L. Chen, K. Grigoras, G. Johansson, A. F.
Kockum, C. Kriˇzan, D. P. Lozano, G. J. Norris, A. Os-
man, J. Fern´andez-Pend´as, A. Ronzani, A. F. Roudsari,

S. Simbierowicz, G. Tancredi, A. Wallraff, C. Eichler,
J. Govenius, and J. Bylander, Quantum Sci. Technol. 7,
035018 (2022).

[27] The Young’s modulus of SU-8 is nearly two orders of
magnitude smaller than that of silicon.

[28] J. Heinsoo, C. K. Andersen, A. Remm, S. Krinner,
T. Walter, Y. Salath´e, S. Gasparinetti, J.-C. Besse,
A. Potoˇcnik, A. Wallraff, and C. Eichler, Phys. Rev.
Appl. 10, 034040 (2018).

[29] Assuming that the CPW dimensions are significantly
smaller than the substrate thickness and distance to any
metallic enclosure.

[30] M. G¨oppl, A. Fragner, M. Baur, R. Bianchetti, S. Filipp,
P. J. Leek, G. Puebla, L. Steffen, and A. Wallraff, J.
Appl. Phys. 104, 113904 (2008).

[31] K. Watanabe, K. Yoshida, T. Aoki, and S. Kohjiro, Jap.
J. Appl. Phys. 33, 5708 (1994).

[32] J. Gao, M. Daal, A. Vayonakis, S. Kumar, J. Zmuidzinas,
B. Sadoulet, B. A. Mazin, P. K. Day, and H. G. Leduc,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 152505 (2008).

[33] S. Probst, F. B. Song, P. A. Bushev, A. V. Ustinov, and
M. Weides, Rev. Sci. Intsr. 86, 024706 (2015).

[34] For 28 resonators on eight devices, we find a mean stan-
dard deviation of resonator frequencies of 23 MHz.

[35] C. P. Wen, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theor. Tech. 17, 1087
(1969).

[36] S. Gevorgian, L. J. P. Linn´er, and E. L. Kollberg, IEEE
Trans. Microw. Theor. Tech. 43, 772 (1995).

[37] L. Frunzio, A. Wallraff, D. Schuster, J. Majer, and
R. Schoelkopf, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 15, 860
(2005).

[38] C. R. H. McRae, H. Wang, J. Gao, M. R. Vissers,
T. Brecht, A. Dunsworth, D. P. Pappas, and J. Mutus,
Rev. Sci. Intsr. 91, 091101 (2020).

[39] J. Krupka, J. Breeze, A. Centeno, N. Alford, T. Claussen,
and L. Jensen, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn. 54,
3995 (2006).

[40] SU-8 3000 series data sheet (2019), Kayaku Microchem.
[41] S. Krinner, S. Storz, P. Kurpiers, P. Magnard, J. Hein-
soo, R. Keller, J. L¨uolf, C. Eichler, and A. Wallraff, EPJ
Quantum Technol. 6, 2 (2019).

[42] A. Bruno, G. de Lange, S. Asaad, K. L. van der Enden,
N. K. Langford, and L. DiCarlo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 106,
182601 (2015).

[43] J. Wenner, R. Barends, R. C. Bialczak, Y. Chen, J. Kelly,
E. Lucero, M. Mariantoni, A. Megrant, P. J. J. O’Malley,
D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, H. Wang, T. C. White, Y. Yin,
J. Zhao, A. N. Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 99, 113513 (2011).

[44] C. Wang, C. Axline, Y. Y. Gao, T. Brecht, Y. Chu,
L. Frunzio, M. H. Devoret, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 107, 162601 (2015).

[45] G. Calusine, A. Melville, W. Woods, R. Das, C. Stull,
V. Bolkhovsky,
D. Braje,
D. Hover,
D. K. Kim,
X. Miloshi, D. Rosenberg, A. Sevi, J. L. Yoder, E. Dauler,
and W. D. Oliver, Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 062601 (2018).

[46] W. Woods, G. Calusine, A. Melville, A. Sevi, E. Golden,
D. K. Kim, D. Rosenberg, J. L. Yoder, and W. D. Oliver,
Phys. Rev. Applied 12, 014012 (2019).


