1

Synergistic Niobium Doped Two-

Dimensional Zirconium Diselenide: An 

Efficient Electrocatalyst for O2 Reduction

Reaction

Ashok Singh1 and Srimanta Pakhira1,2*

1 Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational Materials Science 

Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IIT Indore), Simrol, 

Khandwa Road, Indore-453552, Madhya Pradesh, India.

2 Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational Materials Science 

Laboratory, Centre for Advanced Electronics (CAE), Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IIT 

Indore), Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore-453552, Madhya Pradesh, India.

*Corresponding author: spakhira@iiti.ac.in (or) spakhirafsu@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

The development of high-activity and low-price cathodic catalysts to facilitate the 

electrochemical sluggish O2 reduction reaction (ORR) is very important to achieve the commercial 

application of fuel cells. Here, we have investigated the electrocatalytic activity of two-

dimensional single-layer Nb-doped zirconium diselenide (2D Nb-ZrSe2) towards ORR by 

employing the dispersion corrected Density Functional Theory (DFT-D) method. Through our 

study, we computed structural properties, electronic properties, and energetics of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2

and ORR intermediates to analyze the electrocatalytic performance of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2. The 

electronic properties calculations depict that the 2D monolayer ZrSe2 has a large band gap of 1.48

eV, which is not favorable for the ORR mechanism. After the doping of Nb, the electronic band

gap vanishes and 2D Nb-ZrSe2 acts as a conductor. We studied both the dissociative and 

associative pathways through which the ORR can proceed to reduce the oxygen molecule (O2).

Our results show that the more favorable path for O2 reduction on the surface of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2


2

is the 4e- associative path. The detailed ORR mechanisms (both associated and dissociative) have

been explored by computing the changes of Gibbs free energy (ΔG). All the ORR reaction 

intermediate’s steps are thermodynamically stable and energetically favorable. The free energy 

profile for the associative path shows the downhill behavior of the free energy vs. the reaction 

steps, suggesting that all ORR intermediate structures are catalytically active for the 4e- associative 

path and a high 4e- reduction pathway selectivity. Therefore, 2D Nb-ZrSe2 is a promising catalyst 

for the ORR which can be used as an alternative ORR catalyst compared with expensive platinum 

(Pt). 

INTRODUCTION

The escalating global population and the ongoing advancements in global industrialization 

and society have led to a significant surge in global energy demand. Nowadays a great part of the 

energy demand over the world is fulfilled by fossil fuels.1 However, the bitter truth is that the 

traditional resources of fossil fuels are in danger of being depleted with indefinite extraction and 

utilization.1 In addition to this, the consumption of fossil fuels results in the emission of pollutants.

So, the concern about the energy crisis, environmental pollution, and climate change have put at 

risk the future of human society.2 The gradual exhaustion of fossil fuels and the detrimental impact 

on the environment caused by pollution have provoked scientists and researchers over the world 

to develop renewable, sustainable, eco-friendly, and highly efficient energy resources.3 Renewable 

energy systems including fuel cells and metal-air batteries are efficient solutions to reduce 

environmental issues and alleviate the energy demand. These technologies are primarily realized

in the water cycle. The fuel cell has gained significant attention among the alternatives to fossil 

fuels due to its impressive conversion efficiency, reliable performance, fast startup, operation at 

low temperatures, and minimal emissions. The fuel cell converts chemical energy directly into 

electricity without the emission of pollutants. In other words, Hydrogen (H2), which is generated 

by harvesting sustainable solar and wind energies, is used as input and results in power generation 

with absolutely zero emission.4 So, fuel cells are the ideal choice for energy conversion and power 

sources for a healthy and sustainable future. The fuel cell relies on some of the electrochemical 

reactions such as hydrogen evolution reaction (HER,) ORR and oxygen evolution reaction (OER)

reactions. However, the practical growth of fuel cells has been extensively hindered by the inherent 


3

thermodynamic limitation of the ORR.5 To utilize the ideal performance of the fuel cell, it is 

necessary to hasten the kinetics of ORR. So, today’s demand is to develop an active material that 

can serve as an efficient catalyst and would assist to accelerate the kinetics of the cathodic reaction. 

To date, Platinum (Pt) and Pt-based materials serve as a suitable catalyst for the reduction of O2 at 

the cathode in the fuel cell.6–8 Moreover, a sizable overpotential higher than 0.20 V is observed, 

even with the state-of-art Pt-based catalyst.9 The utilization of Pt catalysts account for 

approximately 40-50% of the total cost associated with fuel cell stacks.10 So, the cost of the fuel 

cell imposes serious limitations on the commercialization of the fuel cell. Moreover, the shortage 

of noble metals in the earth’s crust and their insufficient stability towards the byproducts hinder 

their widespread applications in modern science and technology. Thus, mass production of such 

types of electrocatalysts is not feasible. Mainly the mass production of the ORR catalysts is 

impeded by the following three limitations: (1) the high cost:10 currently, the Pt has been 

recognized as an effective catalyst in the fuel cells, which has a limited reserve and has resulted

from the high cost of the fuel cells; (2) low performance:11 another factor is the deficiency of the 

active sites on the catalyst. To actively use the efficiency of the fuel cells, it is necessary to fabricate 

a catalyst with a large number of active sites and specific selectivity; (3) poor stability:12 another 

factor, which is the cause of the degradation of fuel cell performance, is the stability of the catalysts 

towards the byproducts formed during the operation of the fuel cell. The quest for enhanced 

catalysts for the ORR has sparked advancements in the identification of non-precious metal-based 

catalysts that exhibit superior catalytic activity compared to Pt. In this pursuit, researchers have 

explored various metals both in their pure state and through the process of alloying with other 

metals. Pt, Pd, Au, Ag, and Ni clusters are to be effective to catalyze oxygen reduction in their 

pure form.13 Wang et al. have extensively documented the efficacy of synergistic Mn-Co catalysts 

in facilitating high-rate ORR.14 Numerous recent studies have provided substantial evidence to

support the exceptional catalytic properties of metal oxides and sulfides in the context of ORR,

which gives efficiency as good as the state of art Pt/C catalyst.15,16 Although metal catalysts have 

demonstrated excellent catalytic activity but considering the low availability of metal in the earth’s 

crust and huge cost, the expansion of a cheap and efficient catalyst is a paramount need for 

realizing the practical applications of fuel cells. 

As a typical earth-abundant material, transition-metal compounds such as transition metal 

oxide, metal chalcogenides, metal phosphides, metal carbides, metal nitrides, etc. have been 


4

widely used as promising catalysts for electrochemical mechanisms in fuel cells and energy 

conversion applications.17 Among all the transition metal compounds, two-dimensional transition 

metal dichalcogenides (2D TMDs) have gained significant interest as a catalyst for electrochemical 

reactions. The unique properties of 2D TMDs which make them suitable for the catalyst are: (1) 

large surface area: the 2D TMDs have a high surface-to-volume ratio which provides a large 

density of active sites; (2) stability and thermal conductivity: as the 2D TMDs have only planar 

covalent bonding, they show excellent mechanical strength and remarkable resilience, and thermal 

conductivity enables efficient dispersion of heat generated during exothermic reactions; (3) tunable 

electronic properties: the electronic properties of the 2D TMDs materials can be tailored by 

creating defects, doping, stress, etc.18 The electronic properties in turn tailor the catalytic 

performance of the materials. Owing to the above properties the 2D TMDs are good candidates 

for the electrocatalyst of electrochemical reactions. In the wide family of 2D TMDs, 2D  MoS2 has 

emerged as a highly investigated material due to its remarkable catalytic capabilities.19 MoS2 has 

been considered a promising non-noble HER catalyst but only the edge site shows high HER 

activity.20,21 In other words, experimental and computational studies confirm that the 

electrocatalyst activity of MX2 (where M is transition metal atoms and X is chalcogens) is closely 

correlated with the edge side while the basal plane with a large area is generally inactive.22,23 To 

the best of our knowledge, the optimization of both active site and electronic properties of 2D MX2

electrocatalysis is highly required. As we know the basal plane of 2D TMDs constitutes a large 

surface area, therefore if the inert basal planes could be activated, high electrocatalytic activity 

would be expected. To activate the inert basal plane and tailor the electronic properties, various 

strategies have been developed such as creating defects,24,25 metal doping,26,27 nonmetal 

substitution, strain engineering,28 phase engineering, etc.29 Among all the strategies, substitutional 

doping is considered a suitable technique as it provides long-term stability without degrading 

performance. The dopant atoms change the spin-density distribution around them, which would 

change the strength of O2 adsorption and other reaction species. So, the ORR process can be 

performed on the surface of 2D TMDs  near the appropriate doping atoms. For instance, Xiao et 

al. theoretically demonstrated the favorable catalytic activity of Co/Ni-doped 2D MoS2 towards

ORR.30 Pumera et al. put forward the idea that introducing Fe and Mn dopants into the 2D MoS2

can promote its catalytic activity in the context ORR.31 Recently, Singh and Pakhira

computationally analyzed that 2D monolayer Pt-doped ZrS2 exhibits a superior catalytic activity 


5

towards ORR.27 Moreover, the doping of MoS2 by heteroatoms such as P and N exhibits moderate 

adsorption strength of oxygen molecules and enhances the ORR.32,33 In a recent study by Tain and 

Tang , it was discovered that the addition of Ni or Co to materials such as 1T-TiS2, 2H-TiS2, 1T-

ZrS2, 1T-NbS2, and 2H-TaS2 results in a promising electrocatalytic activity for the ORR. The 

overpotential required for ORR on these doped materials was found to be within the range of 0.32-

0.55 V, which is comparable to that of the most advanced electrocatalysts currently available (i.e., 

Pt).34 It has been shown that the 2D monolayer ZrSe2 is a new material of TMDs and has been 

successfully prepared experimentally and it has 1T phase as a stable structure.35–37 Moreover,

earlier predictions show that at low vacancy density, the ZrSe2 and ZrTe2 TMDs have a low value 

of hydrogen adsorption energy (ΔEH) and the value of ΔG is very close to that of Pt.38

In a recent theoretical study, Som and Jha showed an important observation regarding the 

catalytic activity of both the 2D single layer ZrS2 and ZrSe2 materials. They found that the edge 

sites of these materials, rather than the basal planes, play a crucial role in accelerating the HER. 

To further enhance the HER kinetics, the researchers decided to introduce the Nb, Pt, and W 

dopants in both the 2D ZrS2 and ZrSe2 materials. Interestingly, they discovered that the 2D Nb-

doped systems, namely Nb-ZrS2 and Nb-ZrSe2, exhibited a robust metallic nature, which 

significantly boosted their catalytic activity towards HER. Furthermore, they observed that, on the 

basis of ΔG calculations, 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 has the best catalytic activity towards HER.39

In addition, 2D ZrS2 possesses important characteristics that make it a favorable choice. It is non-

toxic, affordable, and exhibits strong resistance to corrosion. Furthermore, it has been successfully 

synthesized on a large scale and experimented with in the form of thin atomic layers.40 In the 

context of sulfur/selenium-based ZrS2 or ZrSe2 TMDs, the presence of S or Se with a 2− valence 

(S2− or Se2−) enhances the reduction capacity, thereby promoting the activity of the ORR. 

Motivated by the extensive research attention and extraordinary catalytic activity of the Nb-doped 

ZrSe2 toward HER, it is the fundamental interest to explore the more catalytic applications of 2D 

Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR. In this work, a DFT-D calculation is performed to explore the catalytic 

activity of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR. In principle, we aimed to answer these 

questions: how the doping of Nb alters the structural and electronic properties of the 2D monolayer 

ZrSe2? Do the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 catalyst acts as an efficient ORR catalyst? If yes, which path it will 

follow to reduce the O2? To answer these questions, we have analyzed the structural and electronic 

properties of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 and examined the changes of Gibbs free energy (ΔG) for all ORR 


6

intermediates at their minimum-energy condition. This study addresses some unique properties of

the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 and suggests that it can act as an efficient and useful catalyst for the 

ORR mechanism. Thus, this 2D Nb-ZrSe2 can serve as an efficient cathodic catalyst in fuel cells 

and metal-air batteries. 

THEORY, METHODOLOGY, AND COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS

The ORR has an essential role in the functioning of fuel cells. These electrochemical 

devices are designed to convert the chemical energy of the fuel, typically hydrogen (H2), directly 

into electrical energy. The working principle of the fuel cell can be defined as follows:41,42

hydrogen is produced by the electrocatalytic cell as fuel is brought into the anode side of the fuel 

cell. At the anode side, H2 undergoes a reaction resulting in the generation of electrons and protons:

H2 →      2H+ + 2e−

The protons (H+) pass through the membrane, while the accompanying electrons travel through 

the electric circuit. They combine together at the cathode side of the fuel cell with oxygen. At the 

cathode, oxygen is reduced to water by reacting with H+ and e- through the electrochemical 

reaction:43,44

2H+ +

1

2 O2 + 2e− →     H2O

All these processes rely on some electrochemical reactions. Among them ORR is one of the 

reactions at the cathode which reduces oxygen molecule to water. 

ORR reaction involves oxygen diffusion, i.e., the O2 adsorption on the surface of the 

catalysts followed by the H+ + e- transfer processes to reduce the O2 into water. The oxygen 

reduction in acidic media mainly occurs through two different pathways:-45,46 either a four-electron

reduction pathway from O2 to H2O or two electron pathway from O2 to H2O2.

Direct 4e- reduction:

O2 + 4H+ + 4e− →      2H2O
Eo = 1.23 eV

Indirect reduction: 

O2 + 2H+ + 2e− →      H2O2
Eo = 0.68 eV

H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− →       2H2O
Eo = 1.77 eV

The indirect 2e- pathway produces corrosive peroxide (H2O2) intermediates, which may corrode 

the catalytic surface, hence there would be concern about the stability of the fuel cell. Moreover, 


7

the formation of H2O2 hinders the process and kinetics of ORR reaction but also deteriorates 

polymer membrane by generating reactive radicals. Thus, four electron pathway is preferred and 

considered more efficient than that of the two-electron pathway. Based on how the O=O bond 

breaks, the 4e- pathway can be divided into two different reaction pathways:47 (1) O2

decomposition pathway: in this path the O2 is adsorbed on the surface of catalyst and followed by 

the cleavage of O2 bond. Then, it involves a series of electron-proton transfer reactions to reduce 

O2 into water. The detail reaction steps can be described as follows: 

O2 +∗ →      O2

∗

O2

∗ →      2O∗

(2) OOH dissociation path: the O2* reacts with H+ and e- coming from anode side to form OOH*. 

Then, cleavage of the O=O bond occurs into O* and OH*. After that, the hydrogenation of the O*

occurs to form the next OH*. Finally, the removal of H2O occurs from the surface of the catalyst. 

The details can be described as follows: 

O2

∗ + H+ + e− →      OOH∗

OOH∗ →      O∗ + OH∗

O∗ + H+ + e− →      OH∗

OH∗ + H+ + e− →      H2O

Where the asterisk * denotes the adsorption site. In summary, we can say that the ORR reaction

basically relies on the cleavage of O=O bond and protonation of the ORR intermediates. 

The catalytic potential of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR is measured combinedly by 

computing and analyzing the adsorption energy with the values of ΔG of each intermediate species 

during the subject reaction. We used computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) method to calculate 

the adsorption energy and the values of ΔG of each intermediate. In this method, the energies are 

calculated under the standard conditions (pH=0, p=1 bar, T=298.15 K, and U=0 V). We have 

implemented the approach introduced by Nørskov et al. in our study. Their research showcased a 

significant finding that the chemical potential of H+ + e- can be correlated with 1/2 H2 in the 

gaseous state, which was determined using the standard hydrogen electrode.9 Consequently, under 


8

the standard conditions, we can calculate the energy change of the reaction A + H → A + H+ +

e- by employing the reaction A + H → A + 1/2 H2. The adsorption (or binding) energies (ΔE) 

presented in this study has been calculated as the energy difference between the energy of the 

model with adsorbed species [Eslab+adsorbate] and the energy of the catalytic model [Eslab] and the 

energy of the adsorbate [Eadsorbate] according to the following equation:48

𝛥𝐸 = 𝐸𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑏+𝑎𝑑𝑠𝑜𝑟𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑒 − 𝐸𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑏 − 𝐸𝑎𝑑𝑠𝑜𝑟𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑒

Negative adsorption energy indicates that the adsorbed oxygen intermediates are attached to the 

catalytic surface stably. In other words, a negative adsorption energy signifies that the adsorbate 

is likely to bind energetically to the catalyst's surface, indicating a favorable interaction between 

them. Therefore, negative adsorption energy is favorable for elementary reactions over the 

catalytic surface. The value of ΔG in each reaction step was evaluated as:49,50

𝛥𝐺 = 𝛥𝐸 + 𝛥𝐸𝑍𝑃𝐸 − 𝑇𝛥𝑆

Where ΔE denotes the adsorption energy obtained from the DFT-D calculations of the equilibrium 

structures and ΔEZPE and ΔS represent the change in zero-point energy and entropy correction,

respectively. T denotes the room temperature 298.15 K in this calculation. 

For all the systems studied here (i.e., ZrSe2, Nb-ZrSe2, and ORR intermediates), the 

equilibrium atomic configuration, structures, electronic properties, and energetics were obtained 

by using the spin-unrestricted B3LYP DFT framework implemented in CRYSTAL17 suite code.51

To account the weak non-bonding van der Waals (vdW) interactions between the reactants or 

intermediates and the interface, we incorporated the damped vdW dispersion correction (-D3) 

within the framework of density functional theory (DFT), specifically known as DFT-D3. This 

approach was developed by Grimme and co-workers.52 A 2x2 supercell of the 2D monolayer 

structure of the pristine ZrSe2 was considered and one Zr atom was substituted by one Nb atom to 

form the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 structure, and all the ORR reaction steps on the surface of the 

2D Nb-ZrSe2 were investigated in the present study. We have utilized the Gaussian types of atomic

basis sets to define the atomic orbitals, which have been found to yield more precise outcomes 

compared to plane wave basis sets.53,54 In simpler terms, although the computational procedure 

differs from the plane wave code (i.e., VASP, Quantum Espresso), both approaches are yielding 

identical results. In the realm of hybrid density functionals, localized Gaussian basis set codes are 


9

inherently well-suited for addressing the Hartree-Fock (HF) component of the outcome.51,55 For 

the Zr, Se, O, H, and Nb atoms, triple-zeta valance polarized (TZVP) Gaussian basis set were used

in the present calculations.56,57 We employed full optimization process i.e., all atomic coordinates 

and lattice parameters were allowed to relax during geometry optimization. The convergence 

criterion for the self-consistent field (SCF) was established as a total energy difference of 10-7 a.u. 

between two consecutive iterations. The threshold controlling of the coulomb exchange integral 

calculation were controlled by the five-threshold set 7, 7, 7, 7 (ITOL1 to ITOL4) and 14(ITOL5) 

for both the geometry optimization and electronic property calculations. The CRYSTAL17 code 

utilizes the default threshold for geometry optimization on all atoms, employing specific values 

for maximum and RMS force (0.000450 a.u. and 0.00300 a.u., respectively) and maximum and 

RMS displacement (0.001800 a.u. and 0.001200 a.u., respectively). To ensure accurate 2D 

monolayer i.e., SLAB calculations using the CRYSTAL17 code, we have established a separation 

of 500 Å in the normal surface direction of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 along Z-direction where 

is no symmetry.27,58 This distance effectively prevents any spurious interactions between the 

periodic images of the monolayer slab. Our current calculations indicate that this separation is 

sufficient to mitigate any undesired influences. To perform the integration within the Brillouin 

zone, we have used 16x16x1 k-mesh in the Monkhorst pack scheme59 for the pristine 2D ZrSe2, 

Nb -ZrSe2, and all the reaction intermediates for both the geometry optimization and electronic 

property calculations. The electronic band structure was constructed along high symmetry k-path 

direction Ґ-M-K-Ґ of the corresponding irreducible Brillouin zone. All the equilibrium structures 

with the images were plotted by using VESTA software.60


10

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The equilibrium structure of the 2D monolayer ZrSe2, which is the main object of this 

present work, belongs to 1T phase (i.e., one atom of Zr is octahedrally coordinated by six atoms 

of Se) as shown in Figure 1-2. By using VESTA software, a 2D monolayer ZrSe2 primitive cell 

was computationally designed, and a model system has been developed for further studies, and the

structure was optimized by using the first principle-based periodic dispersion-correction hybrid 

DFT (DFT-D3, noted by B3LYP-D3) method as shown in Figure 1. The structure is a trigonal 2D 

slab system with 𝑃3𝑚1 layer group 

Figure 1. Representation of the 2D monolayer ZrSe2 and 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2.


11

Figure 2. Metal coordination, stacking sequence, unit cell, and structural properties of ZrSe2 and Nb-ZrSe2.


12

symmetry, and the computed unit cell parameters i.e., the lattice constants are about a = b = 3.75

Å of the 2D pristine monolayer ZrSe2 which is well consistent with the previously reported 

values.39,40 Each unit cell consists of one Zr and one Se atom as shown in Figure 1-2. In Figure 2, 

the computed equilibrium average bond length Zr-Se between the Zr and Se atoms is about 2.68 

Å. The corresponding bond angles ∠ZrSeZr and ∠SeZrSe are estimated to be 88.99˚ and 91.00˚, 

respectively. Then, the doped system is constructed by substituting one Zr atom with one transition 

metal Nb per 2x2 supercell of the 2D monolayer pristine ZrSe2 as illustrated in Figure 1. The 

doping was defined by the following equations:

Ɵ =

𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚 𝑝𝑒𝑟 2𝑥2 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙

𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚 𝑖𝑛 2𝑥2 𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙

So, the Nb dopant atom amounts to 25% (only metal atom doping) atomic substitution in per 2x2 

supercell of the 2D ZrSe2. The 2D monolayer structure of Nb-ZrSe2 consists of one Nb, three Zr, 

and eight Se atoms per one unit cell as represented in Figure 2. The 2D Nb-ZrSe2 system is then

fully relaxed with respect to both atomic coordinates and cell parameters by the same level of 

DFT-D method during optimization. The equilibrium structure of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 material

System

Lattice 

parameters

(Å)

Interfacial 

angle in 

degree

Layer group 

and symmetry

Average bond length

References

Zr-Se (Å)
Nb-Ze (Å)

ZrSe2

monolayer

a=b=3.75

a=β=90˚

γ=120˚

𝑝3̅𝑚1
2.68
-
This work

ZrSe2

monolayer 

(previously 

reported)

a=b=3.77

a=β=90˚

γ=120˚

𝑝3̅𝑚1
2.70
-
39,40

Nb-ZrSe2

monolayer

a=b=7.38

a=β=90˚

γ=120˚

P1
2.67
2.60
This work

Table 1. The equilibrium structural properties of 2D monolayer ZrSe2 and 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2.


13

belongs to the P1 (No. 1) layer group symmetry. The equilibrium lattice parameters of the 2D Nb-

ZrSe2 were found to be a = b = 7.38 Å as represented in Figure 2. The equilibrium average Zr-Se

and Nb-Se bond lengths were found to be 2.67 Å and 2.60 Å, respectively. The equilibrium bond 

angles ∠ZrSeZr, ∠NbSeZr, ∠SeNbSe, and ∠SeZrSe were found to be 87.51˚, 88.61˚, 92.86˚, and 

92.86˚, respectively, as represented in Figure 2. All the fully relaxed structural parameters of 2D 

monolayer ZrSe2 and Nb-ZrSe2 material have been reported in Table 1. The ORR mechanism 

Figure 3. (a) Brillouin zone with high symmetry k-points, (b) top and side view of equilibrium structure of  monolayer ZrSe2, (c) 

band structure, and (d) total DOSs of monolayer ZrSe2.


14

involves the movements of the electrons i.e., the transfer or transportation of electrons is a key 

process during the electrochemical ORR mechanism. Previous studies have shown that the 

electronic properties (i.e., electronic band gap, band structure and total density of states) of 

catalysts have a significant impact on their catalytic efficiency. The electronic properties have been 

analyzed by computing and observing the electronic band structure and total density of states 

(DOSs) of both the 2D monolayer ZrSe2 and Nb-ZrSe2 materials. Analysis of the electronic 

properties can be useful to obtain information about electron distribution on the catalytic surface 

which is useful to understand fully the catalytic performance of the catalyst. The electronic 

properties of the 2D monolayer ZrSe2 and Nb-ZrSe2 materials have been obtained by employing 

the same DFT-D theory. The electronic band structure of the pristine ZrSe2 were plotted in the 

highly symmetric k-path direction Ґ-M-K-Ґ with respect to vacuum. The highly symmetric path 

has been shown in Figure 3a, and the equilibrium electronic structure of the 2D monolayer ZrSe2

material is shown in Figure 3b (top and side view). The Fermi energy level (EF) of the pristine 

ZrSe2 was found at the energy value of -5.34 eV as shown by the dotted line in Figure 3c-d. The

2D single layer ZrSe2 material shows semiconducting characteristics with the indirect band gap of

about 1.48 eV as represented in Figure 3c. The DOSs has been computed by the same level of 

DFT-D theory, and the profile of DOSs supports the band gap of the 2D pristine ZrSe2 which was 

obtained by the electronic band structures calculations as shown in Figure 3d. The calculated 

electronic band gap of the pristine 2D ZrSe2 is consistent with the previously reported values.39,40

The electronic property calculation depicts that the 2D pristine monolayer ZrSe2 has a noticeable 

indirect band gap of 1.48 eV, thus the utilization of this substance as a catalyst to improve the rate 

of the ORR is not feasible. Doping Nb in the pristine 2D monolayer ZrSe2 (Nb-ZrSe2) disrupts its 

symmetry and introduces additional unsaturated electrons. The equilibrium structure with the 

electronic properties of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 have been calculated at its equilibrium geometry by using 

the same level of the DFT-D theory as depicted in Figure 4a-d. This alteration leads to an 

augmented charge density in the basal plane of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 resulting in enhanced 

catalytic activity towards ORR. We have drawn the electronic band structure of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2

along the highly symmetric k-path direction Ґ-M-K-Ґ like the pristine 2D monolayer ZrSe2

material with respect to the vacuum for comparison. The EF of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 was found at -4.87

eV as represented by the dotted line in Figure 4b-c. The results from our present DFT-D analysis 

demonstrate that the introduction of Nb doping in the pristine 2D monolayer ZrSe2 causes the 


15

energy gap to disappear, stemming in a zero-band gap where the bands are overlapped around the 

EF making it conductor. In other words, the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 has metallic characteristics as shown in 

Figure 4b. The zero-band gap indicates easier electron transfer from valence band to the 

conduction band. To support this, we computed the DOSs calculation using the same level of 

DFT-D theory. The DOSs profile show that there is sufficient carrier concentration about the EF

as shown in Figure 4c. An increased concentration of electrons near the EF enhances electronic 

conductivity, thereby facilitating faster electron transfer to the reactants during the process of 

ORR. The carrier density around the EF mostly comes from the dopant (Nb) d-subshell electron 

density of states. Based on our analysis of partial density of states (PDOS) calculations, we have 

successfully established the influence of the d-subshell electron density of states of the Nb atom 

on the carrier concentration around the EF, as depicted in Figure 4d. The contributing component 

of the d-subshell electron density of the Nb atom in the total DOSs has been computed to examine 

the conducting properties of the material where the d-subshells electron density of states of the Nb 

atom follow the locus of the total DOSs of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 material. In other words, 

this indicates that the d-subshell electrons of the Nb atom regulates and tunes the electronic

properties of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 material which may enhance the electrocatalytic 

activities of the material.

Figure 4. (a) Top and side view of equilibrium structure of monolayer Nb-ZrSe2, (b) band structure of monolayer Nb-ZrSe2, (c) 

total DOSs of Nb-ZrSe2, and (d) contribution of d subshell of Nb in the total DOSs.


16

The distinctive electronic characteristics of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 can be 

summarized as follows: (1) the rapid transfer of charges is facilitated by the presence of continuous 

band states in close proximity to the EF; (2) enhanced electron mobility can be observed due to the 

significant density of states surrounding the EF; (3) the metallic properties of the 2D monolayer 

Nb-ZrSe2 contribute to accelerate charge transfer leading to improve the ORR activity.

Considering the previous studies of ORR mechanism on TMDs, the surface chalcogen 

atomic layer takes part in the reduction process of the molecular oxygen (O2). Recently Singh and 

Pakhira investigated the ORR mechanism on the surface chalcogen (S) atomic layer of the 2D 

monolayer Pt-ZrS2 using DFT-D methods.27 So, in the case of TMDs, it can be concluded that the 

surface chalcogen atomic layer is the active center of the catalyst during electrochemical ORR 

mechanism. In this work, we have investigated the ORR mechanism in an acidic media, where the 

protons (H+) and electrons (e-) transfer take place simultaneously on the ORR adsorbates to reduce 

the O2. We considered the Se site as an active site (near the Nb-doped region) for the ORR 

adsorbates including O2*, 2O*, OOH*, O*, and OH*. 

Table 2. Adsorption energy (ΔE in eV) of various reaction intermediates involved in both the dissociative and associative pathways

of ORR on the surface of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 material.

Various reaction steps involved in dissociative/associative mechanism
ΔE (eV)

[Nb-ZrSe2+O2 → O2*_Nb-ZrSe2]
0.15

[O2*_Nb-ZrSe2 → 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2]
1.94

[O2*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2]
-0.18

[OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → O*_Nb-ZrSe2+H2O]
-1.47

[2O*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2]
-2.65

[O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → O*_Nb-ZrSe2+H2O]
-0.95

[O*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → OH*_Nb-ZrSe2]
-1.59

[OH*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → Nb-ZrSe2+H2O]
-1.54


17

The ORR mechanism was started by analyzing the interaction of O2 with the active site Se

of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2. The adsorption of O2 with the active site is the crucial step to 

initiate the ORR process and significantly affects the catalytic activity of the material. Here, we 

calculated the adsorption energy of the O2 molecule by taking the difference between the electronic 

energy of the O2 absorbed Nb-ZrSe2 denoted by O2*_Nb-ZrSe2 with electronic energy of isolated 

2D Nb-ZrSe2 and gaseous state of the O2 molecule. The adsorption energy of O2 should not be too 

positive or too negative for a good electrocatalyst.27,58,61,62 The higher positive adsorption energy 

value between O2 and the active site (called O2-active site interaction) depicts that it is not able to 

capture the O2 molecule. In other words, the higher and positive value of O2 adsorption energy 

(around the active center) leads to poor absorption of O2 molecule, so it is very difficult to start 

the ORR process. A very negative adsorption energy value between O2 and catalyst is not ideal for 

ORR mechanism because a very strong O2-active site interaction may lead to occupation of active 

site by O2 molecule and hinders the further reaction steps.27,58,61,62 Thus, a very large positive and 

negative values of the O2 adsorption energy around the active site of the catalyst diminish the 

electrocatalytic activity of the material towards the ORR process. So, the adsorption energy of O2

should be optimum to efficiently start the ORR on the catalytic surface. Based on the above 

discussion, we computed the O2 activation energy, which could be good descriptor of the catalytic 

activity of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR. In other words, the determination of the 

optimal value of O2 adsorption energy on the Nb-ZrSe2 surface plays a crucial role in initiating the 

ORR process. For an ideal condition, the adsorption energy of O2 on the catalytic surface should 

Figure 5. Graphical representation of adsorption energy of various ORR intermediates in (a) dissociative, and (b) associative 

mechanisms.


18

be close to zero, but which is not the case in real life. Noble metals, such as Pt are considered the 

best catalyst till date for electrochemical reactions especially for ORR. So, for practical 

applications the O2-active center interaction energy for a good catalytic candidate should be close 

to or slightly weaker than that of the Pt. Chen et al. reported that the Pt-based catalyst shows good

ORR reactivity, therefore, can be used as a reference to evolute the catalytic activity of other 

materials. The O2 adsorption energies on the Pt(111) and Pt(100) surfaces were found to be -0.69

eV and -1.10 eV, respectively.6,63 It was found in the present calculations that O2adsorption energy 

on the surface of 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 was about -0.15 eV which is smaller than that of the O2-

active site interaction energy of Pt. Thus, this negative and small adsorption energy of O2 suggests 

that the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 can be energetically favorable for electrochemical ORR to 

proceed further, which indicates that the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 material would show an efficient 

catalytic activity towards ORR. 

Now the removal of water (H2O) molecule is the last step of ORR mechanism. After the 

removal of H2O molecule, the new ORR cycle of ORR mechanism starts. So, suitable H2O

adsorption energy is essential during the ORR mechanism. The adsorption energy of H2O on 

catalytic site should be small. The adsorption energy of H2O molecule was found to be -1.54 eV 

on the Se-site as reported in Table 2. The relatively low adsorption energy observed on the Se site 

suggests that it is well-suited for the ORR mechanism. This means that the Se site remains 

accessible for the subsequent cycles of the ORR. Moreover, the favorable adsorption energies of 

O2 and H2O on the Se site of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 indicates that this material has the potential to serve as 

an effective catalyst for converting O2 into H2O during the reduction process.

Now, after the adsorption of O2 molecule, which is the initial step of ORR mechanism, 

ORR can proceed via two ways. The path of the ORR mechanism depends on how the O=O bond 

cleaves. The first way is called associative path, which involves both the proton and electron 

transfer simultaneously to form OOH species, then followed by the successive protonation steps 

to reduce O2. The second path is known as dissociative path, which involves the O=O bond 

breaking after the adsorption of O2 molecule into two O atoms on the active site of the catalytic 

surface. In this work, we have studied both the possible pathways of ORR mechanism on the 

surface of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2. We computed the adsorption energy of the reaction

intermediates with the active site Se of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 for both associative and dissociative 


19

reaction pathways. The adsorption energy for the hydrogenation of O2* into OOH* species during 

associative reaction was found to be -0.18 eV obtained by the DFT-D calculation as represented 

in Figure 5. The adsorption energy of dissociative pathway (i.e., dissociation of the adsorbed O2*

into 2O*) was found to be 1.94 eV, i.e., the dissociation energy of O2*. According to computed

adsorption energy, the associative pathway is more energetically favorable than that of the 

dissociative pathway. The adsorption energy for associative pathway (O2* → OOH*) indicates 

that the OOH* species is stably absorbed on the Se site of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2. As the adsorption 

energy of associative path (-0.18 eV) is close to zero i.e., very small and negative, therefore we 

consider the associative ORR path would be thermodynamically favorable and feasible. Thus, we 

believe that associative reaction path is energetically more favorable and efficient for catalyzing 

O2 molecules. The associative reaction path is represented as: O2* + H+ + e- → OOH*. The large 

positive adsorption energy of dissociation of O2 molecule to the atomic O indicates that this step 

is not stable and would be greatly suppressed by the associative 4e- mechanism. A positive 

adsorption energy implies that the dissociation of O2 is not energetically favorable, which hinders 

the progression of subsequent reaction steps. So, the whole ORR mechanism will proceed as O2*

→ OOH*→ O* + H2O → OH* → H2O. The adsorption energy of all ORR intermediates has been 

calculated by the same level of theory and reported in Table 2. The graphical representation of 

adsorption energy of all intermediate steps has been shown in Figure 5a-b. For all the intermediates 

states involved in the associative path, the adsorption energy is negative and optimum, revealing 

highly exothermic characteristics and thermodynamically favorable. We also computed the 

adsorption energy for all the ORR intermediates which occurs in the dissociative ORR pathway as 

represented in Figure 5a. Adsorption energy of all reaction intermediates involved in dissociative 

path has been reported in Table 2.

From the above discussion, we can conclude that the ORR mechanism on the surface of 

the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 material will follow the 4e-associative mechanism. To further analyze 

the catalytic activity of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR, we have computed the values 

of ΔG for each intermediate reaction steps. In this work, we have calculated the values of ΔG by 

computing the harmonic vibrational frequency of each intermediate step of ORR mechanism using 

the CRYSTAL17 code. We will discuss the ΔG, structural properties, and electronic properties of 

each reaction intermediate step involved in both associative and dissociative mechanism during 

the ORR. 


20

Reaction intermediate steps involved in associative mechanism:

Ist step: The first step of the ORR mechanism, irrespective of the path, is the adsorption of O2 onto 

the reaction site of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 slab. To model this step, we placed an O2 molecule 

on the surface near to the Nb atom in the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 at a distance 1.60 Å which is equal to the 

equilibrium bond length of the Se-O. The same DFT-D method has been employed to perform the 

geometry optimization of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 with an O2 molecule attached to the Se site (represented 

as O2*_Nb-ZrSe2). The equilibrium structure of O2*_Nb-ZrSe2 has been represented in Figure 6a

(top and side view). We analyzed and calculated the intrinsic electronic characteristics of the 

equilibrium structure O2*_Nb-ZrSe2. In order to gain insights into the electronic properties, we 

calculated the electronic band structure and DOSs as depicted in Figure 6b and 6c, respectively.

We plotted a total number of eight bands around the EF, which are sufficient for collecting the 

electronic behavior of the O2*_Nb-ZrSe2. We calculated the band structure of O2*_Nb-ZrSe2 along 

the Ґ-M-K-Ґ high symmetry k-path direction with respect to vacuum, which is consistent to the 2D 

Nb-ZrSe2 band structure with the band pathway along the same k-vector direction for comparison. 

The EF was found at -4.94 eV as represented by the dotted line in Figure 6b-c. From the band 

structure calculations, we observed that some of the electronic

Figure 6. (a) Top and side view of equilibrium structure of O2*_Nb-ZrSe2, (b) band structure, and (c) total DOSs of O2*_Nb-ZrSe2.


21

Table 3. Equilibrium lattice parameters and structural parameters of various ORR intermediates.

bands overlap around the EF. Thus, the band structure of O2*_Nb-ZrSe2 predicts the conducting 

nature of the O2*_Nb-ZrSe2 system. To confirm the conducting nature of O2*_Nb-ZrSe2, we 

computed and analyzed the DOSs of O2*_Nb-ZrSe2. According to the DOSs profile, it appears to 

be an ample amount of electron density surrounding the EF as shown in Figure 6c. Therefore, 

O2*_Nb-ZrSe2 has metallic characteristics. After optimization, the equilibrium Se-O and O-O 

Reaction steps

Lattice 

parameters

(Å)

Interfacial 

angle ( ̊ )

Layer

group and 

symmetry

Electronic 

band gap

(eV)

Average bond length (Å)

Zr-Se
Nb-Se
Se-O
Se-OH

Nb-ZrSe2

a=7.38,

b=7.38

a=β=90˚

γ=120˚

P1
0
2.67
2.60
-
-

O2*_Nb-ZrSe2

a=7.37, 

b=7.38

a=β=90˚

γ=120.01˚

P1
0
2.67
2.58
1.69
-

2O*_Nb-ZrSe2

a=7.39, 

b=7.35

a=β=90˚

γ=120.36˚

P1
0
2.66
2.60
1.67
1.67

OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2

a=7.39, 

b=7.40

a=β=90˚

γ=120.20˚

P1
0.66
2.66
2.66
2.00
-

O*_OH*_Nb-

ZrSe2

a=7.39, 

b=7.43

a=β=90˚

γ=120.32˚

P1
1.39
2.68
2.61
1.72
1.77

O*_Nb-ZrSe2

a=7.37, 

b=7.41

a=β=90˚

γ=120.13˚

P1
0
2.67
2.60
1.67
-

OH*_Nb-ZrSe2

a=7.38, 

b=7.40

a=β=90˚

γ=120.10˚

P1
0.66
2.65
2.61
1.87
-


22

bond lengths were found to be 1.67 Å, and 2.20 Å, respectively. We observed an increased bond 

length of the O-O bond as compared to the free O2 molecule bond length (1.21 Å) by the amount 

of 0.99 Å after the adsorption onto surface of the Nb-ZrSe2 as represented in Figure 12. The 

increment in the bond length indicates that the O2 molecule is activated and would be available for 

the next ORR steps. The optimized equilibrium structure of the 2D monolayer O2*_Nb-ZrSe2

belongs to the layer group symmetry P1 (layer group symmetry number is no.1), with the 

optimized equilibrium lattice constants within computed by the DFT-D method are a = 7.37 Å , b

= 7.38 Å, and angle between a and b i.e., γ = 120.01˚ as reported in Table 3. The value of ΔG 

during the reaction O2 + * → O2* was found to be -0.10 eV. The negative value of ΔG indicates 

that the reaction is exothermic. Thus, negative, and small value of ΔG suggests that the adsorption 

of O2 on active site is thermodynamically stable and kinetically feasible for the ORR mechanism. 

IInd step: The next step (in the 4e- transfer associative reaction mechanism of the subject reaction)

is the hydrogenation of adsorbed activated oxygen molecule around the Se site near the Nb atom. 

To model this ORR intermediate, we have placed one H atom near to the one O atom and the 

present DFT-D study has found that the equilibrium O-H distance is about 0.97 Å from the outer

O atom in the O2*_Nb-ZrSe2. Here, we assumed that a H+ coming from the anode side through 

proton exchange membrane and an e- coming through external circuit reacts with the adsorbed O2

molecule to form OOH (noted by OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2). The full geometry optimization (i.e., atomic 

coordinates and lattice parameters) of the so formed system OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 reaction 

intermediate was performed by employing the same DFT-D method, and the equilibrium structure 

of the OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 intermediate is shown in Figure 7a (top and side view). We computed and 

examined the electronic properties of the OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 by using the same DFT-D method. The 

band structure was plotted along the high symmetric k-path Ґ-M-K-Ґ as shown in Figure 7b. We 

plotted eight bands around the EF, which are sufficient for collecting the electronic behavior of the 

OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 followed by our previous calculation. The EF was found at -5.42 eV shown by 

the dotted line in Figure 7b-c. The band structures of the OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 depicts the 

semiconducting nature of the OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 reaction intermediate with an indirect band gap of 

0.66 eV. The conduction band minima and the valance band maxima of the OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 are 


23

located as Ґ- and M- points, respectively. The DOSs corresponding to the band structures of the 

OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 were also calculated and plotted by using the same DFT-D method as shown in 

Figure 7c. The DOSs plot is well consistent with the band structures and this computation supports 

the band gap of the OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 intermediate. Our DFT-D calculation predicts that the 

equilibrium bond lengths of O-O and Se-O were found to be 1.45 Å and 2.00 Å, respectively as 

represented in Figure 12. The equilibrium structure of the OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2 intermediate belongs 

to the P1 (No.1) symmetry with equilibrium lattice constants a = 7.39 Å, b = 7.40 Å, and γ =

120.20˚ as reported in Table 3. The value of ΔG during the reaction O2* + H+ + e- → OOH* was 

found to be 0.13 eV. This positive value of the ΔG indicates the endothermic nature of the reaction. 

Thus, this step of ORR mechanism is unstable and readily proceed for the further reaction step(s). 

Furthermore, the value of ΔG is very close to zero, hence it can be considered ideal for ORR. 

IIIrd step: The next step of 4e- associative mechanism is the reduction of OOH* into O* through 

the process of hydrogenation of the reaction intermediate OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2. We assume that a 

proton (H+) coming from the anode side through proton exchange membrane and simultaneously, 

electron (e-) flow through an external circuit, reacts with OOH* to form O* intermediate species.

We have modeled this intermediate state by placing an oxygen atom at a distance 1.62 Å from the 

Se site which is close to equilibrium bond length of Se-O. The full optimization (lattice parameters 

and atomic coordinates) of the reaction intermediate O*_Nb-ZrSe2 was 

Figure 7. (a) Top and side view of equilibrium structure of OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2, (b) band structure, and (c) total DOSs of OOH*_Nb-

ZrSe2.


24

performed and the equilibrium 2D layer structure (top and side view) of the O*_Nb-ZrSe2 is 

represented in Figure 8a. Figure 8b-c represent the electronic band structure and DOSs profile of 

the O*_Nb-ZrSe2 computed by DFT-D method. The band structures have been plotted along the 

high symmetry Ґ-M-K-Ґ k-path direction with respect to the vacuum followed by the previous 

computations. The EF of O*_Nb-ZrSe2 system was found at -6.57 eV as shown by the dotted line

in Figure 8b-c. From the band structure calculations of the O*_Nb-ZrSe2 intermediate, it has been 

found that some of the energy bands cross the EF, which indicates the metallic nature of the 

O*_Nb-ZrSe2. The DOSs calculations of O*_Nb-ZrSe2 show that there is electron density around 

the EF as shown in Figure 8c. So, both the band structure and DOSs profile shows the metallic 

nature of the O*_Nb-ZrSe2, which supports the transportation of electrons involved in this reaction

step. The equilibrium structure of the O*_Nb-ZrSe2 intermediate has P1 (layer group symmetry 

no. is 1) layer group symmetry with the optimized lattice parameters a = 7.37 Å, b = 7.41 Å, and 

γ = 120.10˚ as reported in Table 3. The equilibrium bond length of Se-O after the optimization was 

found to be 1.67 Å as represented in Figure 12. The value of ΔG in this reaction step (OOH* →

O* + H2O) was found to be -1.82 eV. The negative value of ΔG reveals a highly exothermic 

character of this reaction. This intermediate reaction step is thermodynamically stable and 

energetically favorable for ORR mechanism.

Figure 8. (a) Top and side view of equilibrium structure of O*_Nb-ZrSe2, (b) band structure, and (c) total DOSs of O*_Nb-ZrSe2.


25

IVth step: The next step of 4e- associative mechanism is the hydrogenation of the O*_Nb-ZrSe2

intermediate by reacting with H+ and e- coming from the anode side of the fuel cell. We assume 

that O* at the Se site capture one H+ and e- to form OH* species. To model this intermediate state, 

we put an H atom at a distance 0.90 Å from the O atom, which is equilibrium bond distance of a 

free O-H molecule. The reaction intermediate OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 was then optimized and the 

equilibrium structure of OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 intermediate is illustrated in Figure 9a.

To examine the electronic behavior, we studied the electronic properties of the OH*_Nb-ZrSe2

intermediate. We have drawn the electronic band structure of the OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 intermediate 

along the high symmetry k-path direction Ґ-M-K-Ґ in the first Brillouin zone with respect to the 

vacuum, which is consistent with all the intermediates with the pristine one. The EF of OH*_Nb-

ZrSe2 was found at -5.30 eV as depicted by the dotted line in Figure 9b-c. From the band structure 

calculations, we can see that the OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 displays semiconducting nature with the indirect 

band gap of 0.66 eV as shown in Figure 9b. The conduction band minima and the valance band 

maxima of the OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 are located at Ґ and M, respectively, like previous intermediate 

step. To confirm this band gap, we drawn the DOSs profile corresponding to the band structures 

calculations, and the DOSs profile well supports the band gap of OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 as shown in 

Figure 9c. The relaxed structure of the OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 has P1 (No.1) layer group symmetry with 

the equilibrium lattice constants a = 7.38 Å, b = 7.40 Å, and γ = 120.10˚ as reported in Table 3. 

Figure 9. (a) Top and side view of equilibrium structure of OH*_Nb-ZrSe2, (b) band structure, and (c) total DOSs of OH*_Nb-

ZrSe2.


26

The equilibrium bond distance of Se-O and O-H were found to be 1.87 Å and 0.97 Å, respectively, 

as displayed in Figure 12. The value of ΔG for this reaction step (O* → OH*) was found to be -

1.23 eV computed by the same DFT-D method. The negative value of ΔG indicates that this step 

is exothermic, and hence this process is thermodynamically and energetically favorable for the 

reduction of O2. The value of ΔG of each reaction intermediates during associative mechanism has 

been reported in Table 4.

Table 4. The change in Gibbs free energy (eV) of the reaction steps during associative mechanism at the surface of the 2D 

monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 material.

Reaction intermediates involved in dissociative mechanism: The dissociative mechanism has

the same initial step to initiate the ORR as associative mechanism i.e., O2 adsorption on the Se-

site of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2. The next two steps will be different than associative 

mechanism, which we will discuss later in this manuscript. After that ORR process follows the 

same ORR steps. The dissociative mechanism involves the following distinct reaction steps:

Dissociation of O2* into 2O*: After the adsorption of O2 on the surface of the 2D monolayer Nb-

ZrSe2, the dissociation of O2 into its constituents i.e., two O atoms at two different sites of the 2D 

Various reaction steps involved in associative mechanism
ΔG (eV)

[Nb-ZrSe2+O2 → O2*_Nb-ZrSe2]
-0.28

[O2*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2]
0.13

[OOH*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → O*_Nb-ZrSe2+H2O]
-1.82

[O*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → OH*_Nb-ZrSe2]
-1.23

[OH*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → Nb-ZrSe2+H2O]
-1.76


27

Nb-ZrSe2 occurs, and an intermediate has been formed during this dissociation reaction which is 

denoted by 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2. To examine this reaction step, we put O atoms at a distance 1.61 Å

from the Se-site of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2. Then, we fully optimized the 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2 structure and

the relaxed equilibrium structure of 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2 (top and side view) obtained by the DFT-D

method is shown in Figure 10a. To examine the electronic behavior, we studied the electronic 

properties of the 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2 system. We plotted the electronic band structure of the 2O*_Nb-

ZrSe2 intermediate along high symmetry k-path direction Ґ-M-K-Ґ in the first Brillouin zone. We 

plotted a total number of eight band with respect to the vacuum. From the band structure plot, we 

can see some of the electronic band crosses the EF indicating the metallic characteristic of the 

2O*_Nb-ZrSe2 as shown in Figure 10b. The EF of 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2 is located at -7.37 eV as shown

by dotted line in Figure 10b-c. To confirm conducting nature, we plotted the DOSs profile 

corresponds to the band structure plot. The DOSs profile shows a sufficient electron density around 

the EF as shown in Figure 10c. Thus, 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2 has metallic nature which supports the 

electron transport during the reaction. The equilibrium structure of 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2 has the P1

(No.1) layer group symmetry with the equilibrium lattice constants a = 7.39 Å, b = 7.35 Å, and γ

= 120.36˚ as reported in Table 3.  After the optimization of this intermediate, the equilibrium bond 

length between Se and O atom was found to be 1.67 Å represented in Figure 12.  

The value of ΔG for this reaction step (O2* → 2O*) was calculated to be 1.90 eV as 

reported in Table 5. According to computed results, O2* dissociation into 2O* is highly 

Figure 10. (a) Top and side view of equilibrium structure of 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2, (b) band structure, and (c) total DOSs of 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2.


28

endothermic. Thus, we concluded that the dissociation of O2* into 2O* is energetically unfavorable 

and thermodynamically unstable. Thus, the dissociative mechanism would be greatly suppressed 

by the associative mechanism. Thus, the ORR on the surface would favor the associative 

mechanism to reduce O2 into H2O. 

Protonation of 2O* to form O*_OH*: Now the O2 dissociation step is followed by the 

hydrogenation of 2O* by reacting with H+ and e- coming from the anode side of the fuel cell. To 

examine this step, we have added a hydrogen atom at a distance 0.90 Å from one of the O* atoms. 

Thus, the intermediate state O*_OH* has been formed and the equilibrium structure was obtained

by using the DFT-D method. The equilibrium structure (top and side view) of the O*_OH*_Nb-

ZrSe2 is depicted in Figure 11a. 

Figure 11. (a) Top and side view of equilibrium structure of O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2, (b) band structure, and (c) total DOSs of 

O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2.


29

The electronic properties calculations have been accomplished by using the same DFT-D method. 

We have calculated the electronic band structure along the high symmetric k-path direction Ґ-M-

K-Ґ in the first Brillouin zone followed by the previous calculation. We can see that the electronic 

band structure of O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 intermediate has a direct band gap of 1.39 eV at the Ґ point

as shown in Figure 11b. Thus, the intermediate O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 shows a semiconducting 

nature. The EF is located at -6.64 eV as shown by the dotted line in Figure 11b-c. To confirm the

electronic band gap of the O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2, we also computed the DOSs profile corresponds 

to this band structures. The DOSs profile well supports the band gap of the O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2

and the 

Figure 12. Structural properties of the various ORR intermediate structures.


30

Table 5. The change in Gibbs free energy of reaction steps in dissociative mechanism at the surface of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2
material.

semiconducting nature of the O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2 as shown in Figure 11c. The optimized structure 

has P1 (No.1) layer group symmetry with equilibrium lattice constants a = 7.39 Å,  b = 7.43 Å, 

and γ = 120.13˚ as reported in Table 3.  The equilibrium  Se-O, O-H, and Se-OH bond lengths 

have been found to be 1.72 Å, 1.06 Å, and 1.77 Å respectively, as represented in Figure 12. The 

value of ΔG for this reaction (2O* → O*_OH*) step was found to be -2.26 eV as reported in Table 

5, which indicates this step of dissociative mechanism is exothermic and thermodynamically 

favorable.

Various reaction steps involved in dissociative mechanism
ΔG (eV)

[Nb-ZrSe2+O2 → O2*_Nb-ZrSe2]
-0.28

[O2*_Nb-ZrSe2 → 2O*_Nb-ZrSe2]
1.99

[2O*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2]
-2.26

[O*_OH*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → O*_Nb-ZrSe2+H2O]
-1.40

[O*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → OH*_Nb-ZrSe2]
-1.23

[OH*_Nb-ZrSe2+H++e- → Nb-ZrSe2+H2O]
-1.76


31

After the protonation of 2O*, the dissociative mechanism follows the same intermediate states as 

the associative mechanism, which has been discussed earlier in this manuscript. The values of ΔG 

during the dissociative path have been reported in Table 5.

To summarize the catalytic activity of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR, we plotted and analyzed 

the ΔG curve (potential energy curve) for both associative and dissociative mechanism based on 

the DFT-D calculations as shown in Figure 13-14. We constructed these diagrams by considering 

the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 as a reference geometry i.e., 2D Nb-ZrSe2 considered corresponding to energy 

of 0 eV for both associative and dissociative mechanism of ORR. At a standard condition (i.e., at 

Figure 13. Free energy diagram of dissociative ORR mechanism at the surface of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 material.


32

a temperature of 298.15 K with pressure 1 atm) the total value of ΔG for full reaction O2 + 2H2 →

2H2O should be -4.92 eV. From our Gibbs energy landscape, the total value of ΔG was found to 

be -4.94 eV and -4.96 eV for dissociative and associative mechanism respectively. So, from our 

DFT-D calculations we can see that total value of ΔG for ORR mechanism are well consistent with 

the experimental value. In dissociative path, the free energy landscape shows that all the reaction 

steps are downhill except O2* → 2O* as shown in Figure 13. For associative path, all the reaction 

steps are also downhill in the free energy landscape except O2* → OOH* as shown in Figure 14. 

But by comparing both the free energy landscape, the O2* → 2O* step of dissociative mechanism 

has higher uphill than that of the associative mechanism. Thus, the 2O* step is not stable and 

Figure 14. Free energy diagram of associative ORR mechanism at the surface of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 material.


33

thermodynamically feasible for ORR mechanism, which makes the further ORR steps through 

dissociative path difficult. Whereas the uphill in associative mechanism is very small which is 

kinetically surmountable. Furthermore, all values of ΔG are negative, indicating that the entire 

ORR process through associative mechanism is exothermic and thermodynamically favorable. 

Therefore, the associative 4e- pathway for the ORR on the surface of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 is the most 

favorable path.

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we theoretically shed light on geometrical structure, electronic properties,

and catalytic activity of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 as well as detailed ORR mechanism on the surface of the 

2D Nb-ZrSe2 by using the DFT-D method. We investigated and examined both the possible path 

i.e., associative, and dissociative path of the ORR mechanism on the surface of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2. 

The analysis of the electronic properties of pure monolayer ZrSe2 demonstrated that a single layer 

of ZrSe2 in a two-dimensional form exhibits semiconductor behavior, characterized by a band gap 

of 1.48 eV. To alter the electronic properties and catalytic activity of ZrSe2, the substitutional 

doping of Nb has been done per 2x2 supercell of the ZrSe2 monolayer. The 2D Nb-ZrSe2 has zero 

band gap, indicating the metallic nature of 2D Nb-ZrSe2. Conductivity of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 plays a 

crucial role in facilitating the movement of electrons in the mechanism of ORR and 2D Nb-ZrSe2

could act as an excellent catalyst towards ORR. To analyze the whole reaction process, ORR 

intermediate structures involved in the associative and dissociative path were constructed and 

optimized by using the same DFT-D method. To examine the catalytic activity, we computed the 

adsorption energy of ORR intermediates involved in both associative and dissociative mechanism. 

The dissociative mechanism involves the following intermediates O2* → 2O* → O*_OH* → O*

+ H2O → OH* and associative mechanism has the following intermediates O2* → OOH* → O*

+ H2O → OH*. For dissociative mechanism the value of ΔE of 2O* intermediate was found to be 

1.99 eV to the catalytic site on the surface of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2, which indicates that poor binding 

of 2O*. For associative mechanism the value of ΔE of OOH* intermediate was found to be -0.18 

eV, which indicates that optimum binding of OOH* to the catalytic site on the surface of the 2D 

Nb-ZrSe2. Thus, dissociative path would be less favorable path to reduce the O2 molecule to water

as compared to that of the associative path. In addition, for associative mechanism the value of ΔE

for all intermediates is negative. The negative value of ΔE indicates that all the intermediates have 


34

good binding with Se site, thus energetically favorable path. The value of ΔG for all the reaction 

intermediates has also been computed. The values of ΔG also suggests that the associative path 

would be preferred over the dissociative mechanism. Thus, 2D Nb-ZrSe2 can be used as an 

excellent catalyst for the ORR mechanism. 

Data and Software Availability. This work was carried out with the following version of the 

programs. All the structures were modeled by using the VESTA software. (https://jp-

minerals.org/vesta/en/) All the calculations were carried out by using the ab-initio based

CRYSTAL17 suite code. (https://www.crystal.unito.it/) GNUPLOT and Inkscape 0.92 were used 

to plot the electronic band structures, total DOS, and PES. (http://www.gnuplot.info/ and 

https://inkscape.org/). Python scripts were used to generate data plots. (https://www.python.org/) 

The relevant data has been reported in Table 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 in the main manuscript. All the 

equilibrium structures with their crystallographic information files (.cif) involved in the subject 

reaction have been provided in the Supporting Information. The data for this study can be obtained

at https://pubs.acs.org/.  

Supporting Information

The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website. All the 

equilibrium structures involved in the subject reaction have been provided in the Supporting 

Information.

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts of interests to declare.

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author: Dr Srimanta Pakhira

Email: spakhira@iiti.ac.in or spakhirafsu@gmail.com

ORCID: 0000-0002-2488-300X


35

Corresponding Author

Dr. Srimanta Pakhira − Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational 

Materials Science Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IIT 

Indore), Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore-453552, Madhya Pradesh, India;  

Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational Materials Science 

Laboratory, Centre for Advanced Electronics (CAE), Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IIT 

Indore), Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore-453552, Madhya Pradesh, India;

ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2488-300X; 

Email: spakhira@iiti.ac.in or spakhirafsu@gmail.com

Authors

Mr. Ashok Singh − Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational 

Materials Science Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IIT 

Indore), Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore-453552, Madhya Pradesh, India.

ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2852-344X

Acknowledgment

We acknowledge the funding and technical support from the Science and Engineering Research 

Board-Department of Science and Technology (SERB-DST), Govt. of India under Grant No. 

CRG/2021/000572 and ECR/2018/000255. This research work is financially supported by the 

SERB-DST, Govt. of India under Grant No. CRG/2021/000572, ECR/2018/000255 and 

SB/S2/RJN-067/2017, SERB-DST, Govt. of India. Dr. Srimanta Pakhira acknowledges the 

Science and Engineering Research Board, Department of Science and Technology (SERB-DST), 

Government of India, for providing his highly prestigious Ramanujan Faculty Fellowship under 

the scheme no. SB/S2/RJN-067/2017, and for his Early Career Research Award (ECRA) under 

the grant No. ECR/2018/000255. Dr. Pakhira thanks to the SERB for providing the Core Research 

Grant (CRG), SERB-DST, Govt. of India under the scheme number CRG/2021/000572. Mr. 


36

Ashok Singh thanks University Grants Commission (UGC), Govt. of India for availing his doctoral 

fellowship under the Ref. No: 1468/(CSIR-UGC NET JUNE 2019). The author would like to 

acknowledge the SERB-DST for providing the computing cluster and programs and IIT Indore for 

providing the basic infrastructure to conduct this research work. We acknowledge the National 

Supercomputing Mission (NSM) for providing computing resources of 'PARAM Brahma' at IISER 

Pune, which is implemented by C-DAC and supported by the Ministry of Electronics and 

Information Technology (MeitY) and Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government 

of India.

Author Contributions:

Dr. Pakhira developed the complete idea of this current research work, and Dr. Pakhira and Mr. 

Ashok Singh computationally studied the electronic structures and properties of the 2D monolayer 

Nb-ZrSe2. Dr. Pakhira and Mr. Ashok Singh explored the whole reaction pathways, intermediates, 

and reaction barriers. Dr. Pakhira and Mr. Ashok Singh explained the ORR mechanism by the 

DFT calculations. Quantum calculations and theoretical models were designed and performed by 

Dr. Pakhira and Mr. Ashok Singh. Dr. Pakhira and Mr. Ashok Singh elucidated and analyzed the 

computed results and ORR mechanism. Dr. Pakhira and Mr. Ashok Singh wrote the whole 

manuscript and prepared all the Tables and Figures in the manuscript.

REFERENCES

(1) 
Chu, S.; Majumdar, A. Opportunities and Challenges for a Sustainable Energy Future. 

Nature 2012, 488, 294–303.

(2) 
Abdelkareem, M. A.; Elsaid, K.; Wilberforce, T.; Kamil, M.; Sayed, E. T.; Olabi, A. 

Environmental Aspects of Fuel Cells: A Review. Sci. Total Environ. 2021, 752, 141803.

(3) 
Chu, S.; Cui, Y.; Liu, N. The Path towards Sustainable Energy. Nat. Mater. 2016, 16, 16–

22.

(4) 
Grimes, P. Fuel Cells: Energy Conversion for the Next Century. Phys. Today 1994, 47, 54–

61.

(5) 
Gewirth, A. A.; Thorum, M. S. Electroreduction of Dioxygen for Fuel-Cell Applications: 


37

Materials and Challenges. Inorg. Chem. 2010, 49, 3557–3566.

(6) 
Duan, Z.; Wang, G. Comparison of Reaction Energetics for Oxygen Reduction Reactions 

on Pt(100), Pt(111), Pt/Ni(100), and Pt/Ni(111) Surfaces: A First-Principles Study. J. Phys. 

Chem. C 2013, 117, 6284–6292.

(7) 
Ying, J. Atomic-Scale Design of High-Performance Pt-Based Electrocatalysts for Oxygen 

Reduction Reaction. Front. Chem. 2021, 9, 753604.

(8) 
Kulkarni, A.; Siahrostami, S.; Patel, A.; Nørskov, J. K. Understanding Catalytic Activity 

Trends in the Oxygen Reduction Reaction. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118, 2302–2312.

(9) 
Nørskov, J. K.; Rossmeisl, J.; Logadottir, A.; Lindqvist, L.; Kitchin, J. R.; Bligaard, T.; 

Jónsson, H. Origin of the Overpotential for Oxygen Reduction at a Fuel-Cell Cathode. J. 

Phys. Chem. B 2004, 108, 17886–17892.

(10) Hung, A. J., Yu, C. C., Chen, Y. H., & Sung, L. Y. Cost Analysis of Proton Exchange 

Membrane Fuel Cell Systems. AIChE Journal 2008, 54, 1798–1810.

(11) Othman, R.; Dicks, A. L.; Zhu, Z. Non Precious Metal Catalysts for the PEM Fuel Cell 

Cathode. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2012, 37, 357–372.

(12) Banham, D.; Ye, S.; Pei, K.; Ozaki, J. I.; Kishimoto, T.; Imashiro, Y. A Review of the 

Stability and Durability of Non-Precious Metal Catalysts for the Oxygen Reduction 

Reaction in Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells. J. Power Sources 2015, 285, 334–348.

(13) Wang, B. Recent Development of Non-Platinum Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction Reaction. 

J. Power Sources 2005, 152, 1–15.

(14) Wang, Y.; Yang, Y.; Jia, S.; Wang, X.; Lyu, K.; Peng, Y.; Zheng, H.; Wei, X.; Ren, H.; 

Xiao, L.; Wang, J.; Muller, D. A.; Abruña, H. D.; Hwang, B. J.; Lu, J.; Zhuang, L. 

Synergistic Mn-Co Catalyst Outperforms Pt on High-Rate Oxygen Reduction for Alkaline 

Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 6–13.

(15) Lu, X. F.; Chen, Y.; Wang, S.; Gao, S.; Lou, X. W. Interfacing Manganese Oxide and Cobalt 


38

in Porous Graphitic Carbon Polyhedrons Boosts Oxygen Electrocatalysis for Zn–Air 

Batteries. Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1902339.

(16) Lu X. F., Zhang S. L., Sim W. L., Lou X. W. Phosphorized CoNi2S4 Yolk‐Shell Spheres for 

Highly Efficient Hydrogen Production via Water. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 22885 

– 22891.

(17) Liu, M.; Xiao, X.; Li, Q.; Luo, L.; Ding, M.; Zhang, B.; Li, Y.; Zou, J.; Jiang, B. Recent 

Progress of Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Reduction in Fuel Cells. J. Colloid Interface Sci.

2022, 607, 791–815.

(18) Li, F.; Xue, M. Two ‐ Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides for Electrocatalytic 

Energy 
Conversion 
Applications. 
In
Two-dimensional 
Materials
-
Synthesis, 

Characterization and Potential Applications, 1st edition; Nayak P. K., Eds.; IntechOpen:

Rijeka, 2016, pp. 64-84.

(19) Huang, H.; Feng, X.; Du, C.; Wu, S.; Song, W. Incorporated Oxygen in MoS2 Ultrathin 

Nanosheets for Efficient ORR Catalysis. J. Mater. Chem. A 2015, 3, 16050–16056.

(20) Jaramillo, T. F.; Jørgensen, K. P.; Bonde, J.; Nielsen, J. H.; Horch, S.; Chorkendorff, I. 

Identification of Active Edge Sites for Electrochemical H2 Evolution from MoS2

Nanocatalysts. Science 2007, 317, 100–102.

(21) Yang, L.; Liu, P.; Li, J.; Xiang, B. Two-Dimensional Material Molybdenum Disulfides as 

Electrocatalysts for Hydrogen Evolution. Catalysts 2017, 7, 285.

(22) Chia, X.; Ambrosi, A.; Lazar, P.; Sofer, Z.; Pumera, M. Electrocatalysis of Layered Group 

5 Metallic Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (MX2, M = V, Nb, and Ta; X = S, Se, and Te). 

J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4, 14241–14253.

(23) Toh, R. J.; Sofer, Z.; Pumera, M. Catalytic Properties of Group 4 Transition Metal 

Dichalcogenides (MX2; M = Ti, Zr, Hf; X = S, Se, Te). J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4, 18322–

18334.

(24) Komsa, H. P.; Kotakoski, J.; Kurasch, S.; Lehtinen, O.; Kaiser, U.; Krasheninnikov, A. V. 


39

Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides under Electron Irradiation: Defect 

Production and Doping. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 035503.

(25) Li, H.; Tsai, C.; Koh, A. L.; Cai, L.; Contryman, A. W.; Fragapane, A. H.; Zhao, J.; Han, 

H. S.; Manoharan, H. C.; Abild-Pedersen, F.; Nørskov, J. K.; Zheng, X. Erratum: Activating 

and Optimizing MoS2 Basal Planes for Hydrogen Evolution through the Formation of 

Strained Sulphur Vacancies. Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 364.

(26) Shi, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Yang, D. R.; Xu, W. X.; Wang, C.; Wang, F. Bin; Xu, J. J.; Xia, X. H.; 

Chen, H. Y. Energy Level Engineering of MoS2 by Transition-Metal Doping for 

Accelerating Hydrogen Evolution Reaction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 15479–15485.

(27) Singh, A.; Pakhira, S. Unraveling the Electrocatalytic Activity of Platinum Doped 

Zirconium Disulfide toward the Oxygen Reduction Reaction. Energy Fuels 2023, 37, 567–

579.

(28) You, B.; Tang, M. T.; Tsai, C.; Abild-Pedersen, F.; Zheng, X.; Li, H. Enhancing 

Electrocatalytic Water Splitting by Strain Engineering. Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1807001.

(29) Jin, H.; Guo, C.; Liu, X.; Liu, J.; Vasileff, A.; Jiao, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Qiao, S. Z. Emerging 

Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials for Electrocatalysis. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118, 6337–6408.

(30) Xiao, B. B.; Zhang, P.; Han, L. P.; Wen, Z. Functional MoS2 by the Co/Ni Doping as the 

Catalyst for Oxygen Reduction Reaction. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2015, 354, 221–228.

(31) Urbanová, V.; Lazar, P.; Antonatos, N.; Sofer, Z.; Otyepka, M.; Pumera, M. Positive and 

Negative Effects of Dopants Toward Electrocatalytic Activity of MoS2 and WS2: 

Experiments and Theory. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 20383–20392.

(32) Huang, H.; Feng, X.; Du, C.; Song, W. High-Quality Phosphorus-Doped MoS2 Ultrathin 

Nanosheets with Amenable ORR Catalytic Activity. Chem. Commun. 2015, 51, 7903–7906.

(33) Singh, Y.; Back, S.; Jung, Y. Activating Transition Metal Dichalcogenides by Substitutional 

Nitrogen-Doping for Potential ORR Electrocatalysts. ChemElectroChem 2018, 5, 4029–

4035.


40

(34) Tian, S.; Tang, Q. Activating Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Monolayers as Efficient 

Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction via Single Atom Doping. J. Mater. 

Chem. C 2021, 9, 6040–6050.

(35) Zhang, M.; Zhu, Y.; Wang, X.; Feng, Q.; Qiao, S.; Wen, W.; Chen, Y.; Cui, M.; Zhang, J.; 

Cai, C.; Xie, L. Controlled Synthesis of ZrS2 Monolayer and Few Layers on Hexagonal 

Boron Nitride. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 7051–7054.

(36) Mahamudujjaman, M.; Afzal, M. A.; Islam, R. S.; Naqib, S. H. First-Principles Insights into 

Mechanical,
Optoelectronic, and
Thermo-Physical Properties of Transition Metal 

Dichalcogenides ZrX2(X = S, Se, and Te). AIP Adv. 2022, 12, 025011.

(37) Gong, C.; Zhang, H.; Wang, W.; Colombo, L.; Wallace, R. M.; Cho, K. Band Alignment of 

Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides: Application in Tunnel Field Effect 

Transistors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 103, 053513.

(38) Lee, J.; Kang, S.; Yim, K.; Kim, K. Y.; Jang, H. W.; Kang, Y.; Han, S. Hydrogen Evolution 

Reaction at Anion Vacancy of Two-Dimensional Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides: Ab 

Initio Computational Screening. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018, 9, 2049–2055.

(39) Som, N. N.; Jha, P. K. Hydrogen Evolution Reaction of Metal Di-Chalcogenides: ZrS2, 

ZrSe2, and Janus ZrSSe. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2020, 45, 23920–23927.

(40) Mañas-Valero, S.; García-López, V.; Cantarero, A.; Galbiati, M. Raman Spectra of ZrS2

and ZrSe2 from Bulk to Atomically Thin Layers. Appl. Sci. 2016, 6, 264.

(41) Felseghi, R. A.; Carcadea, E.; Raboaca, M. S.; Trufin, C. N.; Filote, C. Hydrogen Fuel Cell 

Technology for the Sustainable Future of Stationary Applications. Energies 2019, 12, 4593.

(42) Maheshwari, K.; Sharma, S.; Sharma, A.; Verma, S. Fuel Cell and Its Applications: A 

Review. Int. J. Eng. Res. Technol. 2018, 7, 2278-0181.

(43) Dange, P.; Savla, N.; Pandit, S.; Bobba, R.; Jung, S. P.; Gupta, P. K.; Sahni, M.; Prasad, R. 

A Comprehensive Review on Oxygen Reduction Reaction in Microbial Fuel Cells. J. 

Renew. Mater. 2022, 10, 665–697.


41

(44) Marković, N. M.; Schmidt, T. J.; Stamenković, V.; Ross, P. N. Oxygen Reduction Reaction 

on Pt and Pt Bimetallic Surfaces: A Selective Review. Fuel Cells 2001, 1, 105–116.

(45) Nie, Y.; Li, L.; Wei, Z. Recent Advancements in Pt and Pt-Free Catalysts for Oxygen 

Reduction Reaction. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44, 2168–2201.

(46) Hui, J.; Pakhira, S.; Bhargava, R.; Barton, Z. J.; Zhou, X.; Chinderle, A. J.; Mendoza-Cortes, 

J. L.; Rodríguez-López, J. Modulating Electrocatalysis on Graphene Heterostructures: 

Physically Impermeable Yet Electronically Transparent Electrodes. ACS Nano 2018, 12, 

2980–2990.

(47) Duan, Z.; Wang, G. A First-Principles Study of Oxygen Reduction Reaction on a Pt(111) 

Surface Modified by a Subsurface Transition Metal M (M = Ni, Co, or Fe). Phys. Chem. 

Chem. Phys. 2011, 13, 20178–20187.

(48) Fazio, G.; Ferrighi, L.; Perilli, D.; Di Valentin, C. Computational Electrochemistry of 

Doped Graphene as Electrocatalytic Material in Fuel Cells. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2016, 

116, 1623–1640.

(49) Kan, D.; Wang, D.; Zhang, X.; Lian, R.; Xu, J.; Chen, G.; Wei, Y. Rational Design of 

Bifunctional ORR/OER Catalysts Based on Pt/Pd-Doped Nb2CT2 MXene by First-

Principles Calculations. J. Mater. Chem. A 2020, 8, 3097–3108.

(50) Ji, Y.; Yang, M.; Dong, H.; Wang, L.; Hou, T.; Li, Y. Monolayer Group IVA 

Monochalcogenides as Potential and Efficient Catalysts for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction 

from First-Principles Calculations. J. Mater. Chem. A 2017, 5, 1734–1741.

(51) Dovesi, R.; Erba, A.; Orlando, R.; Zicovich-Wilson, C. M.; Civalleri, B.; Maschio, L.; 

Rérat, M.; Casassa, S.; Baima, J.; Salustro, S.; Kirtman, B., Quantum-Mechanical 

Condensed Matter Simulations with CRYSTAL. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci.,

2018, 8, e1360.

(52) Grimme, S.; Antony, J.; Ehrlich, S.; Krieg, H. A Consistent and Accurate Ab Initio 

Parametrization of Density Functional Dispersion Correction (DFT-D) for the 94 Elements 

H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 154104.


42

(53) Tosoni, S.; Tuma, C.; Sauer, J.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. A Comparison Between Plane 

Wave and Gaussian-Type Orbital Basis Sets for Hydrogen Bonded Systems: Formic Acid 

as a Test Case. J. Chem. Phys. 2007, 127, 154102.

(54) Adhikari, K.; Chakrabarty, A.; Bouhali, O.; Mousseau, N.; Becquart, C. S.; El-Mellouhi, F. 

Benchmarking the Performance of Plane-Wave vs. Localized Orbital Basis Set Methods in 

DFT Modeling of Metal Surface: A Case Study for Fe-(110). J. Comput. Sci. 2018, 29, 163–

167.

(55) Paier, J.; Diaconu, C. V.; Scuseria, G. E.; Guidon, M.; Vandevondele, J.; Hutter, J. Accurate 

Hartree-Fock Energy of Extended Systems Using Large Gaussian Basis Sets. Phys. Rev. B

2009, 80, 174114. 

(56) Vilela Oliveira, D.; Laun, J.; Peintinger, M. F.; Bredow, T. BSSE-Correction Scheme for 

Consistent Gaussian Basis Sets of Double- and Triple-Zeta Valence with Polarization 

Quality for Solid-State Calculations. J. Comput. Chem. 2019, 40, 2364–2376.

(57) Laun, J.; Vilela Oliveira, D.; Bredow, T. Consistent Gaussian Basis Sets of Double- and 

Triple-Zeta Valence with Polarization Quality of the Fifth Period for Solid-State 

Calculations. J. Comput. Chem. 2018, 39, 1285–1290.

(58) Upadhyay, S. N.; Pakhira, S. Mechanism of Electrochemical Oxygen Reduction Recation 

at Two-Dimensional Pt-Doped MoSe2: An Efficient Electrocatalyts. J. Mater. Chem. C

2021, 9, 11331.

(59) Monkhorst, Hendrik J. and Pack, James D. Special Points for Brillouin-Zone Integrations

Phys. Rev. B 1976, 13, 5188-5192.

(60) Momma, K.; Izumi, F. VESTA 3 for Three-Dimensional Visualization of Crystal, 

Volumetric and Morphology Data. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2011, 44, 1272–1276.

(61) Upadhyay, S. N.; Sardar, V. B.; Singh, A.; Kumar, V.; Pakhira, S. Elucidating the Oxygen 

Reduction Reaction Mechanism on the Surfaces of 2D Monolayer CsPbBr3 Perovskite. 

Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2022, 24, 28283–28294.


43

(62) Upadhyay, S. N.; Pakhira, S. Nanostructured Pt-Doped 2D MoSe2: An Efficient 

Bifunctional Electrocatalyst for Both Hydrogen Evolution and Oxygen Reduction 

Reactions. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2022, 24, 22823–22844. 

(63) Sun, H.; Li, J.; Almheiri, S.; Xiao, J. Oxygen Reduction on a Pt(111) Catalyst in HT-PEM 

Fuel Cells by Density Functional Theory. AIP Adv. 2017, 7, 085020.

GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT


