 

 

 

Optimisation and artifacts of photothermal 

excitation of microresonators 

 

Liping Kevin Ge1,2, Alessandro Tuniz2,3, Martijn de Sterke2,3,  James M. Zavislan4,  

Thomas G. Brown4,  Sascha Martin5 and David Martinez-Martin* 1,2 

 

1 School of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Sydney, 

NSW, 2006 Australia 

2 The University of Sydney Nano Institute, University of Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia 

3 Institute of Photonics and Optical Science (IPOS), School of Physics, University of Sydney, 

Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia 

4 The Institute of Optics, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, 14627, USA 

5 Department of Physics, University of Basel, Basel, 4056, Switzerland 

 

*Correspondence: David Martinez-Martin: Email | david.martinezmartin@sydney.edu.au 

 

 

Keywords  

Atomic force microscopy, picobalance, photothermal excitation, microreasonator, laser, 

cantilever, Gaussian beam 

 

ABSTRACT 

The excitation of microresonators using focused intensity modulated light, known as 

photothermal excitation, is gaining significant attention due to its capacity to accurately 

excite microresonators without distortions, even in liquid environments, which is 

driving key advancements in atomic force microscopy and related technologies. 

Despite progress in the development of coatings, the conversion of light into 

mechanical movement remains largely inefficient, limiting resonator movements to 

tens of nanometres even when milliwatts of optical power are used. Moreover, how 

photothermal efficiency depends on the relative position of a microresonator along the 

propagation axis of the photothermal beam remains poorly studied, hampering our 

understanding of the conversion of light into mechanical motion. Here, we perform 


 

 

photothermal measurements in air and water using cantilever microresonators and a 

custom-built picobalance, and determine how photothermal efficiency changes along 

the propagation beam axis. We identify that far out-of-band laser emission can lead to 

visual misidentification of the beam waist, resulting in a drop of photothermal 

efficiency of up to one order of magnitude. Our measurements also unveil that the beam 

waist is not always the position of  highest photothermal efficiency, and can reduce the 

efficiency up to 20% for silicon cantilevers with trapezoidal cross section.  

 

INTRODUCTION  

Recent years have been marked by a renewed interest in microelectromechanical 

systems (MEMS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and picobalance devices, which 

enable nanosensing applications across biomedicine, nanotechnology and materials 

science [1-4]. Such applications typically require the accurate excitation of oscillations 

in microcantilevers and microresonators in vacuum, air, or liquids. Amongst them, 

liquids present the most challenging environment, because their added mass and 

viscosity reduce the quality factor of microcantilevers below 10, thus diminishing the 

overall measurement accuracy. 

Many approaches can be used to excite cantilever oscillations: these include acoustic, 

magnetic, electrostatic, and Lorentz-force-induced excitations. Of these, acoustic 

approaches are the most common, wherein oscillations are driven by a vibrating dither 

piezoelectric within the cantilever holder [5, 6]. However, these methods often produce 

spurious resonance peaks associated with the excitation of other parts of the larger 

instrument, interfering with the cantilever movement. This is particularly detrimental 

in liquids, where the cantilever quality factor is low (<10) [5], thereby demanding high 

driving powers. Magnetic excitation instead require a magnetic bead attached to the 

cantilever or a magnetic functionalisation of the cantilever itself, which can degrade 

over time and can be toxic to biological samples [7, 8]. In addition, the magnetic coil 

near the cantilever precludes the simultaneous use of a transmission optical microscope, 

limiting practicality. Electrostatic excitation requires the application of an alternating 

bias voltage between the cantilever and an electrode, which induces a detrimental 

surface charge diffusion when working in liquids [9]. Finally, Lorentz-force-induced 

excitation requires alternating current through a cantilever under a static magnetic field, 


 

 

but is limited to very specific cantilever geometries that can transport electric currents, 

significantly increasing the cantilever's temperature, thus hindering biological 

applications [10].  

All the above limitations can be overcome by exciting the cantilever with an intensity-

modulated light beam, via the photothermal excitation method [11]. Although this 

method was developed before the invention of AFMs, and was used to excite and detect 

resonator oscillations via a beam deflection scheme [11], it has recently become 

available in commercial AFMs. With this scheme, an intensity-modulated light beam 

is positioned near the fixed end of the cantilever, and induces a localised temperature 

gradient which dilates a portion of the cantilever at the modulation frequency, 

producing a well defined cantilever movement [12, 13]. While the first designs used 

metal-coated cantilevers [14], uncoated cantilevers have recently been developed [4]. 

Most importantly, regardless of whether the cantilever is in vacuum, air or liquid, this 

excitation method is accurately described by a simple damped harmonic oscillator 

response [15], and works over a wide frequency bandwidth of more than 10 MHz [16]. 

However, large cantilever oscillation amplitudes (> 10 nm) with a low average optical 

power (< 100 µW) remain challenging, particularly when the cantilevers are in liquid 

[16-19]. 

Delicate samples such as live mammalian cells or yeast [4, 20] benefit from using low 

optical powers to prevent damage, which leads to small cantilever amplitudes. However, 

large cantilever amplitudes (>10 nm) are known to increase the quality of AFM 

measurements when quantifying mass [4, 20], rheology [21], and force-distance AFM 

based measurements [22]. Larger cantilever amplitudes operating at lower powers can 

be achieved by increasing the photothermal efficiency, which has recently become an 

increasingly active field of research: approaches typically involve either physical or 

chemical modifications of cantilevers (e.g., by partially coating them with light-

absorbing photo-acoustic materials such as gold, carbon or nanoparticle coating layers), 

or the use of different cantilever geometries. For example, coatings can enhance optical 

energy conversion into mechanical motion, increasing a cantilever's oscillation 

amplitude by up to 6 times for a given power [23-25], whereas trapezoidal cantilever 

cross-sections have been reported to perform better than their rectangular counterparts 

[26], noting that the location of the exciting laser spot on the cantilever also plays an 

important role [15]. However, the dependence of the photothermal excitation efficiency 


 

 

relative to the location of the cantilever along the propagation axis of the beam is yet to 

be characterised in detail (Fig. 1a).  

Here we present a detailed characterisation of the changes in cantilever excitation 

efficiency along the propagation axis (here: z-axis) of a photothermal excitation beam 

using a picobalance [4, 20], which is mounted on an inverted optical microscope in 

similar fashion to commercially available bio-AFMs (illustrated in the Fig. 1a 

schematic). Our measurements reveal that, due to a long-wavelength artifact resulting 

from far out-of-band laser emission, the longitudinal position that leads to the highest 

photothermal excitation efficiency can easily be misjudged when using an inverted 

optical microscope, which may reduce the photothermal efficiency by up to 

approximately one order of magnitude, even though the error introduced in the laser 

working distance is approximately 5%. We unambiguously identify that the origin of 

this artifact is due to spurious laser light, and we provide convenient and practical 

measures to address it. Our work also unveils that the longitudinal position that provides 

the highest photothermal excitation efficiency is not always at the beam waist but 

depends on the cantilever properties and can reduce the photothermal efficiency by up 

to 20%. Considering that photothermal excitation is becoming essential in many AFMs 

[22] and the emerging picobalance technology [4], often used in conjunction with an 

inverted optical microscope, we expect this work to inform optimal design procedures 

and operation guidelines for related technologies.  

 

RESULTS and DISCUSSIONS 

Photothermal excitation efficiency along the beam propagation axis 

AFMs typically include a laser (wavelength 852 nm in our setup) to determine the 

cantilever movement. It comes with two lateral degrees of freedom (x- and y) to adjust 

the position of the laser on the cantilever, whereas its longitudinal (z) position is 

generally fixed. Photothermal excitation relies on the introduction of a second, intensity 

modulated laser (wavelength: 405 nm in our setup) [27] whose position is adjusted in a 

similar fashion. Figure 1b shows a zoomed-in schematic of the experimental setup used 

in this work: it consists of a custom-built inertial picobalance, a technology whose 

principal inventor is one of us (DMM) and which is used to characterise the mass of 

living mammalian and yeast cells, as well as mechanical and rheological cell properties 


 

 

[4, 20, 21, 28-30]. The picobalance is mounted on an inverted microscope, which can 

simultaneously provide sample information from both transmitted differential 

interference contrast microscopy and fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 1a-b). Note that 

this setup can also operate as an AFM by adding a piezo scanner [31]. However, unlike 

conventional AFMs, the position of each laser in the picobalance can be adjusted both 

laterally and longitudinally via piezo-motor positioners, enabling us to characterise the 

photothermal efficiency along the propagation axis of the photothermal beam (Fig. 1c). 

As a first experiment, we recorded cantilever resonance curves (amplitude and phase 

versus the excitation frequency) driven with photothermal excitation for different 

relative positions of the cantilever along the longitudinal axis of the photothermal 

excitation beam. Figure 2a shows the amplitude and phase vs frequency of a cantilever 

in water at two different longitudinal positions. The red curve in this figure corresponds 

to the longitudinal position that provides the highest photothermal efficiency (optimal 

position), while the blue curve corresponds to the longitudinal position at which the 

photothermal laser beam waist is located on the cantilever according to the optical 

microscope. Figure 2b shows measurements of the cantilever amplitude at resonance 

(highest amplitude in a resonance curve) for different relative longitudinal positions of 

the cantilever. In all these measurements the excitation beam strikes the cantilever near 

its base at the optimal lateral location [26, 32]. Once this location was found, it was 

kept constant during the experiments, and only the longitudinal position was changed. 

The origin of the z axis was chosen at the optimal position. The longitudinal position 

labelled “apparent beam waist” corresponds to the position at which the beam waist of 

the photothermal beam coincides with the cantilever, according to optical images. The 

measurements were performed with average optical powers of the photothermal beam 

varying from 25.9 µW to 46.3 µW (Fig. 2b). Optical images of the photothermal beam 

at the cantilever plane were recorded for different longitudinal positions. Fig 2c depicts 

an optical image (top image) of the beam at the cantilever plane for the longitudinal 

position that provided the highest cantilever amplitude; the lower image shows the 

optical image of the beam for the longitudinal position at which the beam waist appears 

at the cantilever plane.  

These measurements were performed in both air and liquid environments and for 

cantilevers with standard geometries (rectangular shape with rectangular cross section, 

triangular shape with rectangular cross section, and rectangular shape with trapezoidal 


 

 

cross section cantilevers) and made of common materials, including gold coated silicon 

nitride and silicon cantilevers, and bare silicon cantilevers without coating (Fig. S1). A 

summary of the results is shown in Fig 2d, where the vertical axis represents the 

enhancement in efficiency, which is the ratio between the resonance amplitude at the 

optimal longitudinal position for a given cantilever type and that at the apparent beam 

waist position. One would expect the highest photothermal efficiency occur near the 

beam waist of the photothermal beam; however, our experiments showed that the 

cantilever oscillation amplitude, and therefore the photothermal efficiency, increased 

by 2-8 times at a longitudinal position that was far away from the beam waist as 

identified by using the optical microscope (Fig. 2b, d and Fig. S1). Surprisingly, as 

depicted in Figures 2b and S1, the z position for which the photothermal efficiency was 

the highest depends on the cantilever type and is at least at 2450 µm below the discerned 

beam waist (here termed “apparent beam waist”), therefore well outside the 206 µm 

confocal range of our laser (Fig 1c). Yet, it is important to note that by design, the 

working distance of our laser is 46.2 mm; hence, a change in the working distance of 

2450 µm represents only a 5% change. We now investigate and discuss the origin of 

this discrepancy in detail. 

Identifying the true beam waist position 

The photothermal laser beam in our picobalance is a Gaussian beam with a waist (i.e., 

minimum 1/e intensity radius) of 3.65 µm (Fig 1c). Therefore, if we aim the 

photothermal beam on a cantilever and we move the cantilever in the longitudinal 

direction (we do this by approaching or withdrawing the laser source to or from the 

cantilever), the optical power measured beneath the cantilever should be minimum 

when the cantilever is at the beam waist, as at that point the cantilever would screen 

most of the laser light (Fig 3a-c). Gold-coated cantilevers are very opaque to the 

wavelength of our photothermal laser (405 nm), and in silicon cantilevers the 

penetration depth of this wavelength is only ~100 nm [33]. Thus, the cantilevers are 

generally very opaque at the excitation wavelength. 

Figure 3a shows a schematic of the experimental set-up to perform such optical power 

measurements beneath the cantilever. The photothermal beam is aligned in the lateral 

directions and can move longitudinally. Below the cantilever an optical power sensor 

(Thorlabs S120VC) measures the residual optical power of the photothermal beam that 

is not screened by the cantilever (Fig. 3b). Results are shown in Fig. 3d, where the blue 


 

 

curve corresponds to the cantilever amplitude at resonance for different z positions of 

the beam relative to the cantilever, and the red curve shows simultaneous measurements 

of the residual (unscreened) optical power below the cantilever. As before, the origin 

of the z axis is chosen to be the longitudinal position that provides the highest resonant 

cantilever amplitude for a given photothermal beam power. These data demonstrate that 

the beam waist position identified with the optical microscope (apparent beam waist in 

Fig. 3c) differs from the real position of the beam waist (beam waist in Fig 3c) by 

approximately 2450 µm.  

We note that Gaussian beams exhibit a focal shift, which causes the position of the 

beam waist to differ from that of the nominal focal point of a lens (Fig. 3d) [34]. For 

our Gaussian beam is calculated to be 32 μm, which is consistent with our observations. 

Moreover, the wavelength of 405 nm of our photothermal beam is at the edge of the 

visible part of the spectrum, whereas the objective (CFI Plan Fluor 10X from Nikon) in 

our setup is aberration corrected at 550 nm. Our measurements (Fig. S2) indicate a 

position shift of only 50 μm at the 405 nm wavelength. Therefore neither the focal shift, 

nor chromatic aberration can explain the observed 2450 μm discrepancy between the 

real and the apparent beam waists.  

Origin of the Apparent Beam Waist 

With the focal shift and chromatic aberration ruled out, we considered whether the 

apparent beam waist could be linked to the wavelength distribution of the laser source. 

Although more than 99% of the laser light produced by a laser diode is usually centred 

around the nominal wavelength, there is still some light produced outside that range. In 

order to be able to acquire fluorescent and/or differential interference contrast images, 

optical filters are placed in front of the camera (Fig 1a): a longpass filter (FEL0450, 

Thorlabs, US) with a cut-off wavelength of 450 nm to prevent the photothermal beam 

from saturating the images and a short-pass filter (FES0750, Thorlabs, US) with a cut-

off wavelength of 750 nm to prevent the read-out laser from saturating the images. 

Therefore, the apparent beam waist detected could be the beam waist of unfiltered 

radiation at a wavelength above 450 nm rather than the actual beam waist of the 

attenuated 405 nm radiation. To investigate this, we mounted an additional and identical 

longpass filter to see whether the observed radiation would attenuate further. However, 

we did not observe further attenuation nor further displacement of the apparent beam 


 

 

waist, implying that the observed beam waist with the microscope was that of 

wavelengths higher than 450 nm. To confirm this, we returned to the initial 

configuration of filters (Fig. 1a) and mounted a bandpass filter (15117 Edmund Optics, 

US) at the output of the 405 nm laser and next to the existing neutral density filter. The 

bandpass filter was centred at wavelength of 405 nm and had a bandwidth of 10 nm. 

With this new filter in place, the apparent beam waist was not detectable by the 

microscope in the presence of the longpass filter, confirming that it corresponded to a 

wavelength above 450 nm. 

We then removed the longpass filter whilst keeping the 405 nm bandpass filter and 

repeated the photothermal efficiency measurements simultaneously with optical power 

measurements beneath the cantilever (similar to Fig. 3c). We found that under these 

conditions the apparent beam waist and the real beam waist essentially coincide with 

an error of approximately 300 μm (Fig. S3). This error compares to the 206 μm confocal 

parameter of the laser; the 50 μm chromatic aberration of the objective at 405 nm; and 

the 32 μm Gaussian focal shift. Since without the longpass filter the laser light prevents 

the acquisition of optical information from the sample, it should only be removed for 

the purpose of laser alignment. These experimental results demonstrate that the laser 

diode generates radiation well outside the nominal range. Thus, although generally 

more than 99% of optical power is within a few nanometres of the nominal wavelength, 

there is still a portion of the optical power at wavelengths that are well away from this 

wavelength, which may interfere with measurements of the position of the beam waist 

(Fig. 4a) or impact the sample. 

We then repeated the measurements of Fig. 2 but with the bandpass filter in place 

(Figure S4). The results demonstrate that for silicon nitride cantilevers with rectangular 

cross section, the highest photothermal efficiency takes place near the beam waist and 

within the confocal range of the laser. However, for silicon cantilevers with trapezoidal 

cross section, we identified that the highest photothermal efficiency takes place at a 

longitudinal position outside the confocal range of the laser, increasing the 

photothermal efficiency by up to 20% compare to that at the beam waist (Figure S4). 

Thus more accurate models are required to better understand photothermal excitation 

under different conditions. 


 

 

Finally, we conducted a spectral analysis of our laser source to characterise its power 

distribution within the wavelength range of 350–850 nm. Figure 4b show the results of 

these measurements with the long-pass filter (red curve) and without (blue curve). The 

blue curve confirms that approximately 99.9% of the laser emission is within a window 

of 10 nm centred at 405 nm. However, the red curves shows that the laser still emits 

approximately 0.1% of the power at wavelengths hundreds of nm away from the 

intended 405 nm. Furthermore, the red spectrum also demonstrates that when the 450 

nm long-pass filter is used, the 405 nm is essentially fully attenuated and non-intended 

radiation with wavelengths of 540 nm and 610 nm become dominant, giving rise to the 

artifact of the apparent beam waist found with the optical microscope. 

 

CONCLUSION 

In conclusion, we have characterised the changes in photothermal excitation efficiency 

along the propagation axis of a photothermal beam. We have found that the beam waist 

location can be erroneously identified from visual inspection alone, which reduces the 

photothermal efficiency by nearly an order of magnitude. This surprising result is 

caused by spurious low-power long-wavelength laser radiation that is well above the 

specified (narrow) range. This radiation dominates in the presence of filters commonly 

used in correlative atomic force and optical microscopies to prevent camera saturation 

and which enable the acquisition of fluorescence and DIC from the sample. We have 

provided an effective means to manage this phenomenon in order to optimise the 

photothermal excitation of cantilevers and resonators. Moreover, our results 

demonstrate that the highest photothermal efficiency occurs at different longitudinal 

positions for different cantilever types. In particular we identified that silicon nitride 

cantilevers with rectangular cross section are most efficiently excited near the laser 

beam waist within the confocal range of the laser, whereas silicon cantilevers with 

trapezoidal cross section are best excited outside this confocal range. These results point 

to the need to adjust the relative longitudinal position of a microcantilever or resonator 

to optimise the photothermal efficiency. This is particularly important when very low 

laser powers (≪1 mW) are required, as for instance when working with live cells [4, 

20], but also to optimise photothermal excitation when using different types of 

cantilevers, and cantilever chip thicknesses, as these can vary by hundreds of 


 

 

micrometres, affecting the longitudinal position of the cantilever relative to the 

photothermal beam. Given the increasing use and applications of photothermal 

excitation in multiple systems such as AFMs and picobalances, we expect this work to 

significantly improve the performance of present and future instruments and to inform 

the design of new devices. 

 

METHODS 

Experimental setup  

A custom-built picobalance device is shown in Fig. 1a-b. It includes two lasers, a blue-

violet photothermal excitation laser with wavelength 405 nm (Thorlabs, US), and an 

infrared detection laser with wavelength 852 nm (Schäfter + Kirchhoff GmbH, 

Germany). The 405 nm laser is driven in Current Control Mode by a laser diode 

controller (LDC500, Stanford Research System, US). To improve the stability of this 

laser, its temperature is kept constant with a Peltier element controlled by a 

thermoelectric controller (LDC500). The 852 nm laser, combined with a four-quadrant 

Si PIN photodiode (S5980 Hamamatsu, Japan) was used to measure the deflection of 

the cantilever. A hard-coated bandpass filter (Edmund Optics, US) with a central 

wavelength of 850 nm and 25 nm bandwidth with an optical density of 4 is located in 

front of the photodiode. A Ti2-E inverted optical microscopy (Nikon, Japan) mounted 

with a CFI Plan Fluor 10X (Nikon, Japan) objective can capture real-time differential 

interference contrast (DIC) images during system operation. ECS nano-positioners 

(Attocube, Germany) controlled by AMC100 controllers (Attocube, Germany) can 

accurately adjust both lasers’ lateral position relative to the cantilever as well as its 

longitudinal position.  

Beam waist location and Photothermal efficiency 

To confirm whether the excitation laser’s beam waist observed from the optical 

microscope coincided with the actual position, we laterally adjusted the excitation laser 

spot on the cantilever in air for each measurement until a maximum amplitude was 

obrained. After that, the blue laser was adjusted longitudinally by a ECS nano-

positioner with pre-defined increments of 300 µm. The cantilever’s oscillation 

amplitude was registered using the detection laser followed by a photodiode detector 

and a lock-in amplifier. Two different setups of lock-in amplifiers were used, a CX 


 

 

device from Nanosurf AG (Switzerland) and a BP4.5 control system with an OC5 

oscillation controller from Nanonis (Germany). A laser power meter PM100D 

(Thorlabs, US) was placed underneath the cantilever to measure laser power around the 

cantilever. The infrared detection laser is switched off to avoid the interference of laser 

powers with excitation laser during the measurement of transmitted power (Fig. 1c). 

The excitation laser’s longitudinal ‘position’s origin was set at the position with the 

highest amplitude. The cantilever oscillation amplitude was estimated from thermal 

noise measurements using ‘Sader’s method’ to calibrate the cantilever’s spring constant 

[35-37]. 

Determination of oscillation amplitude along laser propagation axis  

The comprehensive analysis of peak oscillation amplitude for each position along the 

excitation laser propagation axis was measured for the different types of cantilevers in 

both air and water. The cantilever is immersed in the water environment within a 35 

mm Petri dish (Ibidi, Germany). Two silicon nitride cantilevers were used: Nunano 

QUEST R 500 TL (rectangular shape with rectangular cross section) and Bruker NP-

010D (triangular shape with rectangular cross section). Both cantilevers were coated 

with the backside of gold. The silicon cantilever MikroMasch NSC35/CR-AU-C  with 

gold-coated (rectangular shape with trapezoidal cross section) and MikroMasch 

NSC35/NO AL-A without gold coating (rectangular shape with trapezoidal cross 

section) were also tested for photothermal efficiency enhancement. The detailed 

parameters and specs of cantilevers used in the experiments are shown in Table 1. The 

input power of the excitation laser is range from 25.9 𝜇W to 46.3 𝜇W without BP filter 

and 18.5 𝜇W to 33.1 𝜇W with BP filter.   

Determination of chromatic aberration of objective 

To investigate if the differences between apparent focus and the beam waist were 

caused by chromatic aberration from the microscopy objective, we placed a pinhole 

with 2 𝜇𝑚 diameter (Edmund Optics) in the center of the 405 nm laser beam and the 

550 nm of light emitted from microscopy. We first aligned the laser at the middle of 

the field of view shown on the microscopy to align the laser and the pinhole on the same 

axis before placing the pinhole. This avoided the difficulty of alignment without 

viewing the position. The pinhole was placed on a 35 mm Petri dish (Ibidi) followed 

by fine-tuning the pinhole position to control the microscopy stage (Nanosurf), ensuring 

that the laser and the pinhole coincide. The objective height adjusts to find the minimum 


 

 

spot for both 405 nm laser and 550 nm light as the focal position, and the chromatic 

aberration of the objective is given as the different heights of focal positions.  

Laser power spectrum acquisition 

A reflective collimator directs the source beam to an inverted microscope (Nikon 

Instruments Eclipse). The light is focused to a mirror using a microscope objective 

(Olympus 50X), and its reflection is directed to a calibrated imaging spectrometer 

(IsoPlane SCT 320 – Princeton Instruments) with visible camera (PIXIS).  Wavelength 

dependent intensity spectra between 350-850nm are obtained by binning the counts at 

each wavelength. The results are shown in Fig. 4(b). Each spectrum, with- and without- 

the low pass filter, is obtained after maximizing the power density in the central region 

of the camera following a small focal adjustment, as per the photothermal excitation 

measurements shown in the schematic of Fig. 3(d). 

 

Author contributions 

DMM scoped the initial project which was discussed with LKG, MdS and AT who 

provided insightful suggestions. DMM and LKG mounted the picobalance instruments. 

DMM, LKG and SM implemented required modifications in the picobalances. LKG 

performed the photothermal efficiency measurements with different cantilevers in air 

and water. JMZ and TGB provided insightful discussions and suggested the pinhole 

experiments to measure chromatic aberration, which were performed by LKG and 

DMM. AT performed the laser power spectrum experiments with support by LKG and 

DMM. All the authors reviewed and discussed the data. All authors contributed to write 

the manuscript. 

  

Acknowledgement  

This work has benefited from the SOAR award and Engineering Research Scholarship 

(ERS) provided by The University of Sydney. We acknowledged D. Stenger, P. 

McCarthy and the mechanical workshop from The Faculty of Engineering (The 

University of Sydney) for their help of manufacturing the enclosures that host the 

picobalances; A. Tonin and the electronic workshop of the physics department 

(University of Basel) for helping with the beam deflection electronics; the mechanical 


 

 

workshop of the physics department (University of Basel) for their help with the 

development and manufacturing of the devices; P. Buchmann and P. Argast from the 

electronic and mechanical workshop of the department of biosystems science and 

engineering (ETH Zurich) for helping with the temperature controlled system of the 

enclosures; Nanosurf AG for their technical support customising software, mechanical 

and electronic components. 

 

Competing of interests  

DMM is the principal inventor (including granted and/or pending applications) of two 

patent families related to an inertial picobalance to measure the mass and mechanical 

properties of cells and an atomic force microscope, both of them compatible with 

optical microscopies (US20170052211A1 and WO/2015/120, 991). DMM is the 

principal inventor (including granted and/or pending applications) of a patent family 

for a controlled environmental system that provides cell culture conditions and it is 

compatible with probe-based instruments and optical microscopies (US10545169B2). 

DMM is the principal inventor (including granted and/or pending applications) of a 

patent family for microcantilever-based mass sensors, which enable measuring a cell’s 

mass without regard to changes of its position (US20190025257A1). DMM is co-

principal inventor (including granted and/or pending applications) of a patent family 

related to a device to measure rheological properties (LU102351). The remaining 

authors declare no competing interests.  

 

References 

 

[1] 
S. K. Vashist, "A review of microcantilevers for sensing applications," J. of 
Nanotechnology, vol. 3, pp. 1-18, 2007. 

[2] 
U. Maver, T. Velnar, M. Gaberšček, O. Planinšek, and M. Finšgar, "Recent 
progressive use of atomic force microscopy in biomedical applications," TrAC Trends 
in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 80, pp. 96-111, 2016/06/01/ 2016, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2016.03.014. 

[3] 
S. P. Ng et al., "Mechanical Unfolding of TNfn3: The Unfolding Pathway of a fnIII 
Domain Probed by Protein Engineering, AFM and MD Simulation," Journal of 
Molecular Biology, vol. 350, no. 4, pp. 776-789, 2005/07/22/ 2005, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2005.04.070. 


 

 

[4] 
D. Martínez-Martín et al., "Inertial picobalance reveals fast mass fluctuations in 
mammalian cells," Nature, vol. 550, no. 7677, pp. 500-505, 2017/10/01 2017, doi: 
10.1038/nature24288. 

[5] 
T. Schäffer, J. Cleveland, F. Ohnesorge, D. Walters, and P. Hansma, "Studies of 
vibrating atomic force microscope cantilevers in liquid," Journal of Applied Physics, 
vol. 80, pp. 3622-3627, 1996. 

[6] 
I. Revenko and R. Proksch, "Magnetic and acoustic tapping mode microscopy of 
liquid phase phospholipid bilayers and DNA molecules," Journal of Applied Physics, 
vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 526-533, 2000, doi: 10.1063/1.371894. 

[7] 
E. L. Florin, M. Radmacher, B. Fleck, and H. E. Gaub, "Atomic force microscope 
with magnetic force modulation," Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 
639-643, 1994, doi: 10.1063/1.1145130. 

[8] 
W. Han and S. M. Lindsay, "Probing molecular ordering at a liquid-solid interface 
with a magnetically oscillated atomic force microscope," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 
72, no. 13, pp. 1656-1658, 1998, doi: 10.1063/1.121143. 

[9] 
K.-i. Umeda, N. Oyabu, K. Kobayashi, Y. Hirata, K. Matsushige, and H. Yamada, 
"High-Resolution Frequency-Modulation Atomic Force Microscopy in Liquids Using 
Electrostatic Excitation Method," Applied Physics Express, vol. 3, no. 6, p. 065205, 
2010/06/04 2010, doi: 10.1143/apex.3.065205. 

[10] 
O. Enders, F. Korte, and H.-A. Kolb, "Lorentz-force-induced excitation of cantilevers 
for oscillation-mode scanning probe microscopy," Surface and Interface Analysis, 
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 119-123, 2004, doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/sia.1665. 

[11] 
E. Dieulesaint, D. Royer, and C. Bonnefoy, "Mechanical Excitation of a Membrane 
by an Optical Beam," in 1981 Ultrasonics Symposium, 14-16 Oct. 1981 1981, pp. 
802-805, doi: 10.1109/ULTSYM.1981.197733.  

[12] 
D. Erie, G. C. Ratcliff, and R. Superfine, "Photothermal modulation for oscillating 
mode atomic force microscopy in solution," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 72, pp. 
1911-1913, 1998. 

[13] 
A. Labuda, K. Kobayashi, Y. Miyahara, and P. Grütter, "Retrofitting an atomic force 
microscope with photothermal excitation for a clean cantilever response in low Q 
environments," Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 83, no. 5, p. 053703, 2012, doi: 
10.1063/1.4712286. 

[14] 
G. C. Ratcliff, D. A. Erie, and R. Superfine, "Photothermal modulation for oscillating 
mode atomic force microscopy in solution," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 72, no. 15, 
pp. 1911-1913, 1998, doi: 10.1063/1.121224. 

[15] 
B. A. Bircher, L. Duempelmann, H. P. Lang, C. Gerber, and T. Braun, "Photothermal 
excitation of microcantilevers in liquid: effect of the excitation laser position on 
temperature and vibrational amplitude," Micro & Nano Letters, vol. 8, pp. 770-774, 
2013. 

[16] 
T. Fukuma, "Wideband low-noise optical beam deflection sensor with photothermal 
excitation for liquid-environment atomic force microscopy," Review of Scientific 
Instruments, vol. 80, no. 2, p. 023707, 2009, doi: 10.1063/1.3086418. 

[17] 
S. Nishida, D. Kobayashi, T. Sakurada, T. Nakazawa, Y. Hoshi, and H. Kawakatsu, 
"Photothermal excitation and laser Doppler velocimetry of higher cantilever vibration 
modes for dynamic atomic force microscopy in liquid," Review of Scientific 
Instruments, vol. 79, no. 12, p. 123703, 2008, doi: 10.1063/1.3040500. 

[18] 
B. Ilic, S. Krylov, and H. G. Craighead, "Theoretical and experimental investigation 
of optically driven nanoelectromechanical oscillators," Journal of Applied Physics, 
vol. 107, no. 3, p. 034311, 2010, doi: 10.1063/1.3305464. 

[19] 
M. Tabib-Azar, "Optically controlled silicon microactuators," Nanotechnology, vol. 
1, no. 1, pp. 81-92, 1990/07/01 1990, doi: 10.1088/0957-4484/1/1/013. 

[20] 
A. P. Cuny et al., "High-resolution mass measurements of single budding yeast reveal 
linear growth segments," Nature Communications, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 3483, 2022/06/22 
2022, doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30781-y. 


 

 

[21] 
G. Fläschner, C. I. Roman, N. Strohmeyer, D. Martinez-Martin, and D. J. Müller, 
"Rheology of rounded mammalian cells over continuous high-frequencies," Nature 
Communications, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 2922, 2021/05/18 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-
23158-0. 

[22] 
A. P. Nievergelt, N. Banterle, S. H. Andany, P. Gönczy, and G. E. Fantner, "High-
speed photothermal off-resonance atomic force microscopy reveals assembly routes 
of centriolar scaffold protein SAS-6," Nature nanotechnology, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 696-
701, 2018. 

[23] 
N. Gao, D. Zhao, R. Jia, D. Zhang, and D. Liu, "Plasmonic Microcantilever with 
Remarkably Enhanced Photothermal Responses," (in eng), Sci Rep, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 
4796-4796, 2017, doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-05080-y. 

[24] 
M. Penedo, A. Yurtsever, K. Miyazawa, H. Furusho, K.-A. Ishii, and T. Fukuma, 
"Photothermal excitation efficiency enhancement of cantilevers by electron beam 
deposition of amorphous carbon thin films," Sci Rep, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 17436, 
2020/10/15 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-74433-x. 

[25] 
N. Inada, H. Asakawa, T. Kobayashi, and T. Fukuma, "Efficiency improvement in the 
cantilever photothermal excitation method using a photothermal conversion layer," 
Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology, vol. 7, pp. 409-417, 2016, doi: 
10.3762/bjnano.7.36. 

[26] 
D. Kiracofe, K. Kobayashi, A. Labuda, A. Raman, and H. Yamada, "High efficiency 
laser photothermal excitation of microcantilever vibrations in air and liquids," (in 
eng), Rev Sci Instrum, vol. 82, no. 1, p. 013702, Jan 2011, doi: 10.1063/1.3518965. 

[27] 
D. Ramos, J. Tamayo, J. Mertens, and M. Calleja, "Photothermal excitation of 
microcantilevers in liquids," Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 99, no. 12, 2006, doi: 
10.1063/1.2205409. 

[28] 
D. Martinez-martin, D. J. Müller, S. Martin, D. Alsteens, and G. Flaschner, "Top-
cover for a controlled environmental system, top-cover-set and controlled 
environmental system compatible with probe based techniques and procedure to 
control the environment for a sample,"  Patent Appl. WO/2017/01, 2020.  

[29] 
D. Martinez-martin, D. Müller, and G. Fläschner, "Microcantilever,"  Patent Appl. 
US20190025257 2019.  

[30] 
D. Martinez-martin, D. J. Müller, S. Martin, C. Gerber, and B. Bircher, "Measuring 
device and method for determining mass and/or mechanical properties of a biological 
system," Patent US2017005221181, 2017.  

[31] 
D. Martinez-martin, D. J. Müller, S. Martin, and C. Gerber, "Atomic force 
microscope measuring device," Patent EP3108283A1, 2016.  

[32] 
M. Vassalli, V. Pini, and B. Tiribilli, "Role of the driving laser position on atomic 
force microscopy cantilevers excited by photothermal and radiation pressure effects," 
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 97, no. 14, p. 143105, 2010, doi: 10.1063/1.3497074. 

[33] 
A. Ronzhin, "Silicon timing response to different laser light," Fermi National 
Accelerator Lab.(FNAL), Batavia, IL (United States), 2017.  

[34] 
A. E. Siegman, Lasers. University science books, 1986. 

[35] 
A. L. Weisenhorn, P. K. Hansma, T. R. Albrecht, and C. F. Quate, "Forces in atomic 
force microscopy in air and water," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 54, no. 26, pp. 2651-
2653, 1989, doi: 10.1063/1.101024. 

[36] 
J. E. Sader, J. W. M. Chon, and P. Mulvaney, "Calibration of rectangular atomic 
force microscope cantilevers," Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 3967-3969, 
1999, doi: doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1150021. 

[37] 
W. D. Pilkey and W. D. Pilkey, Formulas for stress, strain, and structural matrices. 
John Wiley & Sons New Jersey, 2005. 

 


 

 

Figures 

  

 

Figure 1. Schematic of the picobalance and Gaussian beam. a) The picobalance 
comprises a photothermal excitation laser beam (405 nm laser drawn in blue), which is 
used to excite the cantilever. The position of each laser can be adjusted independently 
in three orthogonal directions using piezo-based positioners. The picobalance is 
mounted on and compatible with an inverted optical microscope. b) Detail from a) 
showing the cantilever and the Gaussian beams reaching the cantilever. The cantilever 
can be in either air or in water. The microscope objective is underneath the cantilever. 
c) Gaussian beam propagating downwards in the z-direction. The main Gaussian beam 
parameters are indicated with their actual values for the photothermal beam. The beam 
waist w! = 3.65 µm, where the beam radius is smallest. The Rayleigh range z! =
103 µm corresponds to the propagation distance where the cross section of the beam is 
twice that at the beam waist. The confocal parameter is twice the Rayleigh range. 

 

 

 
 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

Figure 2. Photothermal efficiency as a function of the relative longitudinal position 
of the cantilever. a) Amplitude and phase response of a cantilever versus frequency 
for two different cantilever positions. The blue lines correspond to resonance curves 
(amplitude and phase) of the cantilever when the cantilever is located at the beam waist 
according to the optical microscope. The red lines show equivalent information as the 
blue lines but for the optimal position along the propagation axis of the photothermal 
beam. The measurements are performed in water with a R500 TL cantilever. b) 
Cantilever amplitude at resonance for different relative longitudinal cantilever positions 
for different optical powers of the photothermal beam. The origin of the axis is chosen 
to be at the position of maximum (optimal) photothermal efficiency, which is indicated 
by the dashed line (shaded in blue). The other dashed line (shaded in orange) indicates 
the longitudinal position at which the cantilever is at the apparent beam waist. The 
measurements are performed in water with a R500 TL cantilever. c) The images show, 
top:  optical image of a cantilever and photothermal beam at the optimal position; 
bottom: optical image of the cantilever at the apparent beam waist. d) Results for similar 
measurements as in b), but for different cantilever types in both air and water 
environments. The enhancement factors of the resonance amplitude at the optimal 
longitudinal position compared to that at the apparent beam waist are shown. All results 
were conducted for at least two independent cantilever probes and measurements for 
each probe were repeated at least twice. For each laser position five consecutive 
resonance curves were acquired.  

 

 

 

 
 


 

 

 

 

Figure 3. Identifying the true position of the photothermal beam waist. a) 
Schematic setup for measuring the residual optical power of the photothermal excitation 
beam beneath the cantilever in which the longitudinal position of the phothermal laser 
with respect to the cantilever is changed. To avoid interference, the infrared laser is 
switched off during these measurements. It is switched back on immidately afterwards 
to read out the cantilever oscillation amplitude. b) Top views schematic of the 
photothermal beam spot size at the cantilever for two different relative longitudinal 
cantilever positions. c) Cantilever (R500 TL) resonant oscillation amplitude and 
residual optical laser power versus longitudinal position measured using the setup in a). 
The apparent beam waist position is marked with a dashed line shaded orange and the 
real beam waist position is shown with a dash line shaded in blue. d) Schematic of the 
photothermal Gaussian beam profile with the Gaussian focal shift, Rayleigh range, 
confocal range and beam waist indicated.  

 

 
 


 

 

 

Figure 4. Beams of different wavelengths generated by a laser diode. a) Schematic 
of two superimposed beams of different wavelengths generated by a laser diode. The 
principal beam comprises the intended 405 nm light, yet the diode also generates light 
above 450 nm (spurious beam). The location of the beam waists of the principal and 
spurious beams differ by 2450 µm in our setup. b) Power spectra in the range 350–
850 nm of the 405 nm laser diode use in the experiments without the 450 nm longpass 
(LP) filter (blue curve) and with the 450 nm LP filter (red curve). All measurements 
are normalised with respect to the peak laser power measured without LP filter. 

 


 

 

Table 1: The detailed parameters of the cantilevers used in the experiment, including manufacturer, model, morphology, nominal dimensions, 

types of materials and coating layers. The oscillation information was obtained from the experiment.  

Manufacturer Model  
Beam 

number  

Shape / 

Cross section 

Dimensions 

(LxWxT) (𝜇𝑚) 

Materials of 

cantilever  

Backside 

coating  

Oscillation in air  
Oscillation in water  

𝑓(kHz) 
𝑄
𝑘(N/m) 
𝑓(kHz) 
𝑄

Nunano 
QUEST R500 

TL 

N/A 
Rectangular / 

Rectangular 

125x30x0.9 
Silicon nitride  
5nm/40 nm  

Ti/Au 

74.5 
100 
0.72 
24.0  
3.1 

Bruker  
NP-010 
D 
V-shaped / 

Rectangular 

200x25x0.55 
Silicon nitride  
5nm/45 nm  

Ti/Au 

19.1 
32 
0.083 
4.11 
1.7 

Bruker  
NP-010 
C 
V-shaped / 

Rectangular 

115x25x0.55 
Silicon nitride  
5nm/45 nm  

Ti/Au 

62.4 
65 
0.43 
16.7 
2.5 

MikroMasch 
NSC35/TIPLES

S/CR-AU 

C 
Rectangular / 

Trapezoidal   

145x35x2.0 

 

Silicon  
20nm/30 nm  

Cr/Au 

158 
230 
4.4 
63.9 
6.1 

MikroMasch 
NSC35/TIPLES

S/CR-AU 

A 
Rectangular / 

Trapezoidal   

126x35x2.0 
Silicon 
20nm/30 nm  

Cr/Au 

214 
280 
6.3 
88.8 
6.9 

MikroMasch 
NSC35/TIPLES

S/NO AL 

A 
Rectangular / 

Trapezoidal   

126x35x2.0 
Silicon 
None  
216 
320 
7.4 
83.9 
6.4 

 


 

 

Supplementary information   

Optimisation and artifacts of photothermal excitation of microresonators 

 

 

Liping Kevin Ge1,2, Alessandro Tuniz2,3, Martijn de Sterke2,3, James M. Zavislan4,  

Thomas G. Brown4,  Sascha Martin5, and David Martinez-Martin* 1,2 

 

 

 

1 School of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Sydney, 

NSW, 2006 Australia 

2 Sydney Nano Institute. University of Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia 

3 Institute of Photonics and Optical Science (IPOS), School of Physics, University of Sydney, 

Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia 

4 The Institute of Optics, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, 14627, USA 

5 Department of Physics, University of Basel, Basel, 4056, Switzerland 

 

 

* Correspondence: David Martinez-Martin: Email | david.martinezmartin@sydney.edu.au 

 
 


 

 

Section 1 
As shown in Figure S1, the optical microscope does not locate properly the position of 

the photothermal beam waist. Locating the cantilever at the photothermal beam waist 

identified with the optical microscope can reduce the photothermal efficiency almost 

up to an order of magnitude. 


 

 

 

Figure S1. Cantilever amplitude at resonance for different positions of cantilevers 
along the propagation axis of the photothermal beam (z axis). The measurements are 
performed with different cantilever types in both air and water environments and for 
different optical powers of the photothermal beam. The origin of the z axis is chosen to 
be at the position of maximum photothermal efficiency, which is indicated by the 
dashed line labelled as “optimal position”. The other dashed line, which is labelled as 
apparent beam waist, indicates the z position at which the cantilever is at the 
photothermal beam waist according to the optical microscope. a) Oscillation amplitudes 
at resonance for a Nunano R500 TL cantilever air (left graph) and water (right graph). 


 

 

This is a gold coated silicon nitride cantilever with rectangular shape and rectangular 
cross section. b) Oscillation amplitudes at resonance for a Bruker NP-010D cantilever 
in air (left grapht) and water (right graph). This is a gold coated silicon nitride cantilever 
with triangular shape and rectangular cross section. c) Oscillation amplitudes at 
resonance for a MikroMasch NSC35/CR-AU-C cantilever in air (left graph) and water 
(right graph). This is a gold coated silicon cantilever with a rectangular shape and 
trapezoidal cross section. d) Oscillation amplitudes at resonance for a MikroMasch 
NSC35/NO AL-A cantilever in air (left graph) and water (right graph). This is an 
uncoated silicon cantilever with a rectangular shape and trapezoidal cross section. The 
initial starting point of the experiment along the z axis is at the apparent beam waist of 
the laser, and from there the cantilever is relatively moved along the z axis in increments 
of 300 µm. All results have been conducted for at least two independent cantilever 
probes and each probe has been repeated at least two times. For each laser position five 
consecutive resonance curves were acquired.  

 
 


 

 

Section 2 
We have characterised the chromatic aberration of the objective by using a pinhole. As 

shown in the figure S2 below we have illuminuated one side of a 2 µm diameter pinhole 

with light with two different wavelengths indenpendently, particularly using green light 

(550 nm wavelength) and our blue laser (405 nm wavelength). Upon illumination we 

observed the other side of the pinhole with the microscope and recorded the postion of 

the objective to get the pinhole in focus. The working distance of the objective varied 

slightly with the wavelength of the light used, with the objective working distance being 

approximately 50 µm larger for 405 nm wavelength light than that for 550 nm 

wavelength light. In this experiment the pinhole acted as light point source.  

 

 

 

Figure S2. Optical images of a 2µm-diameter pinhole illuminated with light of 
different wavelengths. a) Image of the pinhole illuminated with 550 nm light. The 
image is in focus. b) Image of the pinhole illuminated by the 405 nm laser. The 
objective remains at the exact same distance from the pinhole as in a) and the pinhole 
appears now out of focus due to chromatic aberration. c) Image of the pinhole 
illuminated by the 405 nm laser as in b) after correcting the objective working distance, 
which had to be increased by 50 µm to get the pinhole in focus. d) Image of the pinhole 
illuminated by the 550 nm light with the objective at the same working distance used 
in c). The pinhole in these conditions appears out of focus. The scale bar is shown in a)  
applies to all the images. e) Schematic diagram of the experimental set up summarising 
the effect of the chromatic aberration. 

 
 


 

 

Section 3 

The laser diode that generates the 405 nm photothermal beam, generates additional 

beams with other wavelengths and foci than that of the intended 405 nm beam. Due to 

that effect the optical microscope mislocates the position of the photothermal beam. 

Such artifact can be eliminated by filtering the light generated by the diode with an 

appropriate band pass filter as confirmed below in the Figure S3. 

 

Figure S3.  Cantilever oscillation amplitude at resonance along the beam 
propagation axis (z axis) and residual (unscreened by the cantilever) optical laser 
power. In this case the blue laser is filtered by a bandpass (BP) filter with centre 
wavelength of 405 nm and a bandwith of 10 nm. This filter removes the spurius light 
generated by the diode enabling to truly identify photothermal beam waist with the 
microscope. The beam waist identified with the microscope coincide with the real beam 
waist identified by the optical power measurements. The measurements are performed 
with a R500 TL cantilever in air. For this type of cantilever, the optimal excitation z 
position coincides approximately with the beam waist. The origin of the z axis is chosen 
to be at the position of maximum photothermal efficiency, which is indicated by the 
dash line lable as “optimal position”.  

 
 


 

 

Section 4 

As demonstrated in Figure S3, using an appropriate bandpass filter for the photothermal 

beam enables to use the microscope to correctly locate the beam waist of the 

photothermal beam. For silicon nitride cantilevers with a rectangular cross section, the 

optimal position of the cantilever longitudinal position coincides approximately with 

the beam waist within the confocal parameter of the beam. That is indeed the expected 

since the maximum density of optical power is within that region. However, we find 

that for trapezoidal silicon cantilevers the optimal position for photothermal excitation 

is outside the confocal region of the beam. 

 
 


 

 

 

Figure S4. Cantilever amplitude at resonance for different positions of cantilevers 
along the propagation axis of the photothermal beam (z axis). This is a similar 
experiment as the one shown in Figure S2. However, in this case the experiment was 
performed filtering the photothermal laser with the BP filter with center wavelength of 
405 nm and bandwith of 10 nm. As demonstrated in Figures S3, the BP filter removes 
spurious wavelengths generated by the diode that focus at a difference distance than the 
intended 405 nm radiation. The use of the BP filter enables to locate the true 
photothermal beam waist using the optical microscope. The green shadowed dashed 
line, labelled as “beam waist”, indicates the longitudinal position at which the cantilever 
is at the beam waist of the filtered photothermal beam, as identified with the optical 


 

 

microscope. The origin of the longitudinal position is chosen to be at the position of 
maximum photothermal efficiency, which is indicated by the dashed line labelled as 
“optimal position”. a) Oscillation amplitudes at resonance for a Nunano R500 TL 
cantilever air (left graph) and water (right graph). This is a gold coated silicon nitride 
cantilever with rectangular shape and rectangular cross section. b) Oscillation 
amplitudes at resonance for a Bruker NP-010D cantilever in air (left graph) and water 
(right graph). This is a gold coated silicon nitride cantilever with triangular shape and 
rectangular cross section. c) Oscillation amplitudes at resonance for a MikroMasch 
NSC35/CR-AU-C cantilever in air (left graph) and water (right graph). This is a gold 
coated silicon cantilever with a rectangular shape and trapezoidal cross section. d) 
Oscillation amplitudes at resonance for a MikroMasch  NSC35/NO AL-A cantilever in 
air (left graph) and water (right graph). This is a non-coated silicon cantilever with a 
rectangular shape and trapezoidal cross section. The optimal position could be further 
away, however, due to the space taken by the BP filter, there was not enough movement 
range to measure the further points for the uncoated silicon cantilevers. The initial 
starting point of the experiment is with the cantilever located at the beam waist. All 
results have been conducted for at least two independent cantilever probes and each 
probe has been repeated at least two times. For each laser position five consecutive 
resonance curves were acquired. The shape and the cross-section of each cantilever is 
labelled in the figure.  

 

 


