 
1

Solid lubrication by wet-transferred solution-processed graphene 

flakes: dissipation mechanisms and superlubricity in mesoscale 

contacts 

Renato Buzio*1, Andrea Gerbi1, Cristina Bernini1, Luca Repetto2, Andrea Silva3,4 and Andrea Vanossi3,4 
 

1CNR-SPIN, C.so F.M. Perrone 24, 16152 Genova, Italy 
2Dipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Genova, Via Dodecaneso 33, 16146 Genova, Italy 
3CNR-IOM Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto Officina dei Materiali, c/o SISSA, Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy 
4 International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy 
 

ABSTRACT. Solution-processed few-layers graphene flakes, dispensed to rotating and sliding contacts via liquid 

dispersions, are gaining increasing attention as friction modifiers to achieve low friction and wear at technologically-

relevant interfaces. Vanishing friction states, i.e. superlubricity, have been documented for nearly-ideal nanoscale contacts 

lubricated by individual graphene flakes; there is however no clear understanding if superlubricity might persist for larger 

and morphologically-disordered contacts, as those typically obtained by graphene wet transfer from a liquid dispersion. In 

this study we address the friction performance of solution-processed graphene flakes by means of colloidal probe Atomic 

Force Microscopy. We use an additive-free aqueous dispersion to coat micrometric silica beads, which are then sled under 

ambient conditions against prototypical material substrates, namely graphite and the transition metal dichalcogenides 

(TMDs)      and    . High resolution microscopy proves that the random assembly of the wet-transferred flakes over the 

silica probes results into an inhomogeneous coating, formed by graphene patches that control contact mechanics through 

tens-of-nanometers tall protrusions. Atomic-scale friction force spectroscopy reveals that dissipation proceeds via stick-slip 

instabilities. Load-controlled transitions from dissipative stick-slip to superlubric continuous sliding may occur for the 

graphene-graphite homojunctions, whereas single- and multiple-slips dissipative dynamics characterizes the graphene-TMD 

heterojunctions. Systematic numerical simulations demonstrate that the thermally-activated single-asperity Prandtl-

Tomlinson model comprehensively describes friction experiments involving different graphene-coated colloidal probes, 

material substrates and sliding regimes. Our work establishes experimental procedures and key concepts that enable 

mesoscale superlubricity by wet-transferred liquid-processed graphene flakes. The proposed methodology is suitable to 

explore the friction response of other layered nanomaterials prepared by scalable production routes.  

 


 
2

KEYWORDS: Atomic Force Microscopy, superlubricity, atomic-scale friction, graphene, liquid dispersion, transition 

metal dichalcogenides, morphological roughness 


 
3

1. INTRODUCTION  

 

Solution-processed single-layer/few-layers graphene (SLG/FLG) flakes, supplied to macroscale rotating and sliding contacts via 

liquid dispersions, are gaining increasing attention as friction modifiers in practical applications.1–5 Compared to mechanically 

cleaved or grown graphene, liquid dispersions appear more suitable for mass production, they do not require time-consuming 

optimization to coat different material substrates, and they are virtually able to conformally coat interfaces of arbitrary geometry. 

Whereas the flakes quality strictly depends on the production method,6 and detrimental effects on their lubricity may arise from 

unintentional contamination from high-boiling-point solvents and surfactants,7 solution-processed SLG/FLG flakes probed by 

AFM were recently shown to display ultralow friction forces comparable with bulk graphite and mechanically cleaved graphene.7 

This points to the promising opportunity to exploit such nanomaterials to achieve ultralow friction states and possibly 

superlubricity, namely a condition in which the friction force vanishes or very nearly vanishes. It is worth mentioning that the 

occurrence of almost negligible friction coefficients (i.e. ≪0.01), assessing just the friction variation with the imposed normal load, 

does not necessarily imply vanishing values of the measured friction force and the overall absence of dissipative stick-slip 

regimes.8,9 In general, for graphitic nanosystems, superlubricity develops because of the presence of atomically smooth shear 

planes at the contact interface. Specifically, nanosized flakes are thought to adhere at the sliding surfaces and arrange in 

orientationally misaligned configurations, that give almost complete cancellation of the lateral force via interfacial 

incommensurability (structural lubricity).10–12 Dienwiebel et al.13 first demonstrated experimentally that an individual nanoflake 

attached to an Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) tip displays registry-dependent friction when sled against graphite. Later, similar 

phenomena were reported for other carbon-based nanosystems.10 There is no clear understanding, however, if superlubricity might 

persist when nanocontacts are scaled-up in size towards larger but highly disordered contacts,14 as those typically obtained by 

depositing SLG/FLG flakes from the liquid phase. Coating micrometric colloidal AFM probes by solution-processed graphene 

flakes represents an effective strategy to explore this issue. Nowadays, both nanosized (conventional) and colloidal AFM probes 

have been coated by graphene, either using direct graphene growth,15–17  triboinduced graphene transfer,8,9,18–22 all-dry viscoelastic 

graphene transfer,23 or graphene wet-transfer from liquid interfaces24 and from liquid dispersions.25–28 AFM probes coated by 

liquid-processed graphene flakes have overall shown reduced interfacial adhesion and friction together with increased lifetime,28,29 

albeit no detailed investigation of their contact interface and of the elementary dissipation mechanisms was attempted. This is 

likely due to the high degree of uncertainty arising from the broad distribution of thickness and size of the wet-transferred flakes.30 

Such issue contributes to the coating inhomogeneity, together with the variability associated with the random stacking of the 


 
4

transferred flakes over the probes’ surface. The actual coating structure thus remains largely uncontrolled in experiments, with a 

few exceptions.31–33 In particular Daly et al.33 gained insight on the role of the coating heterogeneous layering, by considering 

AFM colloidal probes covered by a nanometer-thick (     ) multilayer graphene oxide (GO) film. They claimed that the 

heterogeneous layering of the transferred flakes can critically affect interfacial sliding, as several topological defects do enter the 

sliding volume and substantially modulate the shear strength. However, as the shear response across GO planes ultimately depends 

on strong hydrogen-bond networks controlled by intercalated species (hydroxyl/epoxy functional groups and water molecules),34 

the GO-coated colloidal AFM probes were practically unable to explore the emergence of ultralow-friction states. Remarkably, the 

impact of the jagged morphology of the coating, with nanometer roughness generated by the flakes deposition, was not addressed 

in conjunction with normal and friction force spectroscopy.  

In this study we explore in detail the friction response of mesoscale sliding junctions formed by contacting atomically-smooth 

model substrates, namely graphite and the TMDs      and    , with graphene-coated colloidal AFM probes. The use of a high-

quality, thermodynamically-stable and surfactant-free aqueous dispersion of SLG/FLG flakes allows us to obtain lubricious wet-

transferred coatings, without the need to implement high-temperature (      ) annealing steps to recover the flakes’ intrinsic 

properties.7 Experiments address how the coating variability impacts contact mechanics and friction. We gain detailed interfacial 

knowledge through a suitable combination of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and AFM. Atomic-scale friction force 

spectroscopy turns out to be excellently described by the single-asperity thermally-activated Prandtl-Tomlinson model, as 

confirmed by ancillary numerical modelling. The ubiquitous graphitic nanoroughness at the contact interface is shown to 

effectively link the friction of mesoscopic junctions to a well-established theoretical paradigm of nanotribology. 

 

 

2. Experimental 

2.1 Characterization of the graphene flakes from a surfactant-free aqueous dispersion 

 

A commercially-available additive-free aqueous dispersion of graphene was used for experiments (named Post-treated ‘Eau de 

Graphène’ EdG from Carbon Waters, France).  This is a homogeneous stable mixture of single-layer and FLG flakes (typical layers 

number     ; broad lateral-size distribution from tens of nanometers up to a few micrometers;           ) with 

concentration           and a shelf life of 3 months at     (graphene precipitation is slowly taking place for longer periods). To 

obtain the dispersion, potassium graphite     is first exfoliated down to SLG and FLG flakes in tetrahydrophuran THF to yield a 

thermodynamically stable graphenide (negatively charged graphene) solution. Graphenide ions are then oxidized back to graphene 


 
5

by air exposure, and immediately transferred to degassed water to achieve a remarkably stable solution.35 In fact, graphene re-

aggregation is drastically slowed down in degassed water, by spontaneous adsorption of negatively charged     ions on the 

hydrophobic graphene surface. To characterize the graphene flakes, we drop-casted        aliquots of pure EdG solution onto 

Si(100) wafers terminated with 300nm-thick SiO2 (Crystec GmbH, Germany), used upon ultrasonic bath in acetone and ethanol. 

After a     sedimentation and drying in ambient conditions, graphene deposits were rinsed with a few drops of DI water (to 

minimize the     residues at the sample surface) and dried with N2 on a      hot plate for a few minutes. Some samples were 

also prepared by drop casting graphene on Si wafers preliminarily treated by oxygen plasma (30W, 30s, working pressure 

                ). Samples were characterized by optical microscopy, AFM and Raman spectroscopy. The morphological 

AFM imaging was accomplished in contact-mode or tapping-mode (AFM Solver P47-PRO by NT-MDT, Russia equipped with 

probes CSC37/Al-BS by MikroMasch or OTESPA-R3 by Bruker respectively). Raman spectra were collected with a commercial 

spectrometer (NRS-4100 by JASCO, Japan), using the 532nm (2.33eV) laser excitation wavelength and     or      objectives. 

The laser power incident on the samples was       . The spectrometer was calibrated with the G band of HOPG at          . 

Raman spectra were collected on several spots of the same sample. All peaks were fitted with Lorentzian functions. 

 

2.2 Graphene-coated AFM probes: fabrication method and characterization 

In order to identify an effective strategy to deposit FLG flakes from the aqueous solution to the AFM probes, we initially 

considered deposition on both commercial nanoprobes (Si probes HQ:CSC38/Al-BS and HQ:CSC37/Al-BS by MikroMasch; 

OTESPA-R3 by Bruker; Pt-coated probes HQ:NSC35/Pt by MikroMasch; custom Au-coated probes OMCL-AC160TS by 

Olympus) and  custom-made colloidal probes (with silica beads of diameter      , prepared as in ref.8) . Contrary to previous 

studies,36,37 we found that the simple immersion of such probes in the graphene solution (from tens of minutes up to several hours) 

provided erratic results in terms of graphene adsorption, and an overall poor graphene coverage. In particular we were not able in 

all the performed trials to have FLG flakes covering the very end of the nanoprobes’ tip, or the contact region of the colloidal 

probes (see Supplementary Information Figure S1). Indeed this was the case also when the probes were pre-treated by oxygen 

plasma.37 This negative results might reflect crucial differences in the concentration, lateral size or residual functionalization of the 

EdG flakes compared to flakes synthesized via redox reactions, and dispersed into highly-concentrated (          ) but 

metastable solutions.36,37  Therefore, to substantially enhance the graphene coverage using the EdG solution, we implemented a 

deposition protocol ‘mixing’ dip-coating and drop-casting techniques. The method is illustrated in Figure 1. 

 


 
6

 

Figure 1. Method used to coat AFM probes with graphene from the EdG aqueous solution. (a) Schematics of the experimental set-up (not in scale). (b) Top-view 

optical micrograph of a commercial nanoprobe, with the cantilever fully dipped into the EdG drop (the dotted line is the position of the drop lateral meniscus driven 

by the micromanipulator). High-resolution optical micrographs of the same cantilever respectively: (c) pristine uncoated; (d) before retraction of the tipped-end 

from the EdG drop; (e) coated by a FLG liquid layer, immediately after retraction from the EdG drop; (f) after several ‘dip-retract’ cycles; (g) coated by a FLG dry 

deposit.  

 

Briefly, an uncoated AFM probe was firmly placed in contact with a piece of SiO2-terminated Si wafer with the aid of a metal leaf 

spring. A      drop of EdG solution was dispensed onto      close to the probe, then a glass plate attached to a XYZ 

micromanipulation stage (Newport  M-460A-XYZ  stage  with SM-13/DM-13  screws) was slowly lowered until it came in contact 

with the drop itself. The drop - sandwiched between the glass plate and the Si wafer - was ‘pull’ by the micromanipulation stage 

towards the AFM probe, in order to bring the tipped end of the cantilever nearby the drop meniscus (Figure 1a).  We note that 

neither the glass, nor the Si wafer and the AFM probe were pre-treated by oxygen plasma, therefore there was no spreading of the 

drop over the wetted surfaces (water contact angle      with     ). Next, the micromanipulation stage was used to systematically 

‘dip and retract’ the tipped end of the cantilever from the EdG drop (Figure 1b-d). The whole procedure was carried out under an 

optical microscope, equipped with a long-working distance objective    . It is crucial to mention that immediately after retracting 

the cantilever from the drop, a thin liquid layer usually wetted the cantilever end (Figure 1e-f), so that a new ‘dip-retract’ cycle was 

not performed until the liquid layer was fully dried (Figure 1g). This makes the method a ‘mixture’ of dip-coating and drop-casting 

techniques. As the whole procedure is prone to exploration and optimization of several parameters, graphene deposition was in 


 
7

practice accomplished as follows. For each probe we carried out one or more ‘deposition runs’, until a grayish coating appeared on 

the cantilever tipped end. We identify a ‘deposition run’ with the total time the      EdG drop remained trapped between the glass 

plate and Si wafer, before its evaporation. Under standard laboratory conditions (relative humidity           and 

temperature         ), the drop evaporated in   90 (   ) minutes. In the course of this time, one could typically perform 

     ‘dip-retract’ cycles (                  ) before drop evaporation.  At the end of the ‘deposition run’, the probe was 

rinsed with DI water, and dried with N2 flow on a      hot plate for a few minutes. A new ‘deposition run’ started by iterating the 

procedure above with a new      EdG drop. The rationale was thus to progressively increase the amount of deposited graphene by 

increasing the total number of ‘dip-retract’ deposition cycles. The effective coverage on each probe was evaluated a posteriori by 

direct inspection via high resolution microscopy. All coated probes were routinely inspected by SEM, completed under a 1kV  

acceleration  voltage  using  a tungsten filament instrument or a field-emission  one (CrossBeam  1540 XB by Zeiss). For colloidal 

AFM probes, Raman spectra of the graphene coating were collected at      magnification. Additionally, the morphology and 

friction response of the deposited flakes were studied by reverse AFM imaging on a spiked  grating  (Tipsnano TGT1), using both 

dynamic (‘tapping’) mode and contact mode (normal load        ). 

 

 

2.3 AFM measurements with the graphene-coated probes 

Normal force and friction force spectroscopies were carried out in contact-mode under ambient conditions. Graphene-coated AFM 

probes were placed in contact with the freshly-cleaved surfaces of HOPG (grade ZYB by MikroMasch),        or         

crystals (from HQ Graphene) respectively. For the calibration of the elastic constant of each probe   , and of the normal force    

and lateral force   , see our previous publication.8 Normal force vs distance curves (      ) were obtained by ramping the probe-

sample distance while recording the cantilever deflection signal. We assigned     to the hard-wall repulsion region.38–40 We 

obtained atomic-scale          characteristics from friction maps (        pixels), in which    was systematically decreased 

every ten lines from a relatively large starting value (i.e. a few hundreds of nanoNewtons depending on the probe) to the pull-off 

point. To this end, we interrogated surface portions that were free from atomic steps (with a typical scan range         ).  

Friction  maps  were  analyzed in LabView  (National  Instruments) and they were displayed using the WSXM software.41  

 

2.4 Atomic-scale friction: modelling and data analysis 

 


 
8

We analyzed atomic friction maps by means of the one-dimensional Prandtl-Tomlinson (PT) model42. In this framework, a point-

like single-asperity – that mimics the AFM tip – is driven over a one-dimensional sinusoidal potential of amplitude    and 

periodicity  , representing the corrugated substrate, by means of a pulling spring of value  . The spring connects the single-

asperity to an external stage moving at speed  .  The spring indeed represents an effective parameter combining the torsional 

properties of the cantilever and the mechanical properties of the contact interface. According to the PT model, the single-asperity 

can move with two distinct regimes that depend on the Tomlinson parameter              , i.e. the ratio between the potential 

amplitude and the effective elastic energy. When    , the total potential energy has a single minimum at any time and the single-

asperity moves smoothly over the potential with vanishing dissipation; for    , two (or more) minima appear in the energy 

landscape so that the single-asperity dynamics becomes intermittent (stick-slip) and dissipation occurs. Experimentally, we 

estimated the contact parameters   ,   and   as a function of the normal load   .8,43 Briefly, for each value of   , we selected only 

those specific portions of the experimental lateral force traces having periodicity                 for HOPG;              

for     and     ). In fact these correspond to individual slip jumps of the AFM probe approximately along the zigzag 

crystallographic direction. Smaller (or longer) slips than a were disregarded. For each selected force profile, the corrugation   , the 

contact stiffness k  and the Tomlinson parameter   were estimated as: 

 

   

       

 
 
 
 
 
 
         (1) 

 

  

        

     
     
 
 
 
         (2) 

 

  

   

      
 
 
 
 
         (3) 

 

where       , a and      are the highest local force maxima, the slip distance, and the lateral force slope respectively. To designate 

the highest force maxima along any selected force trace, we ordered the jumps of slip distance a in terms of decreasing force 

amplitude    and we conventionally assumed        to correspond to the     tail of the highest jumps.  For each normal load 

value   , the mean values of   , k and   were obtained by averaging over an ensemble of several slip jumps (        ). 

Theoretically, we calculated friction force vs displacement profiles by integrating the underdamped Langevin equation:  

 

          

       

  
                                                  (4) 


 
9

 

where the potential energy        reads: 

 

        

  
     

   

   

 

                                      (5) 

 

A 4th-order Runge-Kutta algorithm was used to this end. The instantaneous lateral force trace was evaluated as: 

 

            
 
 
 
         (6) 

 

For the tip mass we used             . The Langevin damping                  was chosen to reproduce 

experimental force traces. The thermal noise term      satisfies the fluctuation-dissipation theorem:                       

   . A sliding velocity          and a temperature        were chosen to mimic experimental conditions. The simulated 

force traces were computed as averages over tens of stick-slip events in the steady state regime. To reproduce the experimental 

variation of the tip and sample, simulated forces were obtained as an average over 16 values of   in the range          and 5 

independent realization of the thermal noise. The standard deviation over this average is used as a confidence level in the 

comparison with experimental data. 

 

3. RESULTS and DISCUSSION 

3.1 Morphology and nanotribology of drop-casted graphene flakes 

 

Drop-casted deposits of FLG flakes on      showed a discontinuous coverage of graphene patches, as readily appears from the 

top-view optical micrograph of Figure 2a. Qualitatively, this was the case also when the aqueous dispersion of graphene was drop-

cast on      treated by oxygen plasma (not shown). The inhomogeneity of the deposited material is indeed common to other 

liquid-phase sources of graphene and it has been reported in previous studies.7,33 It reflects the relatively low interaction of 

graphene with the deposition substrate. Magnification of the graphene patches by AFM revealed a micrometric random network, 

characterized by bare oxide regions alternating with compact agglomerates of flakes. As shown in Figure 2b, the individual flakes 

mostly stack with their basal plane aligned with the      surface and are characterized by a broad lateral-size distribution. Friction 

maps and          characteristics attested the lubricious response of the flakes, with (ultralow) friction forces by factors        

smaller than on the uncovered      and a friction coefficient       . It is certainly remarkable that the drop-casted samples show 


 
10

lubricity comparable with bulk graphite upon a short drying step at      in ambient air. In fact, thanks to the additive-free protocol 

for the preparation of the EdG dispersion, there is no need to implement high thermal annealing to recover the graphene lubricity 

from contamination by high-boiling-point solvents (e.g. see the 90 minutes annealing at 350 °C in vacuum, to restore lubricity of 

graphene inks prepared by liquid-phase exfoliation in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone 7).  

 

 

Figure 2. (a) Optical micrograph of a graphene patches formed on a      substrate by drop-casting the water-based FLG flakes dispersion. (b) 

Topography (top, scale bar 530nm,         ), associated friction map (bottom) and (c)          curves contrasting the response of FLG 


 
11

flakes and uncovered      regions. (d) Representative Raman spectrum acquired on a micrometric region from the FLG patch in (a) (highlighted 

with the red dotted square). 

 

A representative Raman spectrum for the drop-casted sample is shows in Figure1c. Bands positioned around         , 

        ,          and          correspond, respectively, to the characteristic  ,  ,    and    Raman signatures of sub-

micrometric few-layer/multilayer graphene flakes. The   peak originates from in-plane vibrational mode involving the    carbon 

atoms of the graphene sheet (    phonon at the Brillouin zone center).44 Raman bands   and     are defect-induced modes 

observed in disordered graphite and graphene. The   peak is due to the breathing modes of     rings and requires a defect for its 

activation by double resonance.45 Double resonance is also at the origin of    band. The intensity and width of   and     peaks 

depend on the degree and nature of the basal plane disorder.44 The 2D band is the second order of the D band. Unlike the D band, 

however, it does not need to be activated by proximity to a defect, hence it is always a strong band in graphene even when there is 

no D band present. For an ideal single-layer graphene sheet, both   and    bands are absent, whereas the 2D peak is single band 

(            ). Previous Raman spectroscopy studies on graphene flakes dispersions prepared by liquid phase exfoliation in both 

aqueous and non-aqueous environments, have shown that besides the G and 2D bands such samples usually show significant   and 

   intensities.7,46 

For the case of the water dispersion used in the present study, the full-width-at-half-maximum FWHM and the relative intensity of 

the 
main bands (              ,                  ;                ;                      

                          ,                   ) agree well with those reported by Bepete et al.47,48 for graphene thin 

films stamped on glass and        , after membrane filtration of the EdG dispersion itself. Specifically, both relative intensities 

                  and                 can be ascribed to the coexistence of edge defects and basal-plane    point-defects. 

The latter provide the major contribution, being likely related to some functionalization of the flakes with –    and –   groups. 

This is consistent with the evidence that the     and      ratios decrease significantly (             ,             ) when 

   defects are cured by annealing the thin films at 800°C.47 Furthermore, as the D peak is relatively narrow (       ) and the    

peak is not merged with G,  the D band certainly reflects to a minor extent the contribution from the edges of the sub-micrometer 

flakes.49 Finally, the 2D peak - although broader than in pristine graphene - is still well-fitted by a single Lorentzian.46 Due to our 

interest in coating AFM probes by low-temperature processing methods, the     defects were not cured by high-temperature 

annealing. The amount of defects in nonannealed flakes can be estimated to be in the range            , that corresponds to a 

typical distance between point-defects of     .47 

 


 
12

3.2 Graphene-coated AFM probes: characterization of morphology and normal-force-spectroscopy  

 

We fabricated graphene-coated AFM probes as described in Figure 1.  Representative SEM micrographs of such probes are 

displayed in Figure 3. It appears that the graphene patches cover different portions of each cantilever, being however mostly 

concentrated nearby the tipped end due to the controlled micromanipulation of each probe. For sharp probes, evidence of graphene-

wrapped nanotips was occasionally found (Figure 3a,b). In such case, normal-force spectroscopy curves measured on HOPG were 

qualitatively similar to those of the uncoated probes, i.e. they showed sharp snap-in-contact/snap-off-contact and an adhesion force 

in the range              (see Supplementary Information Figure S2). This agrees with previous reports on graphene-coated 

nanotips.16,36 

 

 

 

Figure 3. SEM micrographs of the graphene-coated AFM probes at different magnifications. (a),(b) Commercial rectangular-shaped silicon cantilever 

(HQ:CSC37AlBs by Mikromasch), with evidence of the graphene-wrapped nanotip (inset in (b)). (c),(d) Colloidal AFM probe with a silica bead glued onto a 

rectangular-shaped cantilever, after a total number of 200 ‘dip-retract’ deposition cycles. At higher magnification, the silica surface appears partially covered by 

FLG flakes (inset in (d)). (e),(f) Colloidal AFM probe as in (c), but after 600 ‘dip-retract’ deposition cycles: the silica surface is coated by a thicker, still 

inhomogeneous, deposit of flakes. Crumpled flakes are easily discerned at a higher magnification (e.g. see inset in (f), field of view            ). 

 

A more complex phenomenology characterized the graphene-coated colloidal probes. High-resolution SEM micrographs showed 

that the graphene coating was far from homogeneous at the sub-micrometric length scale, with uncoated silica regions alternating 


 
13

with tens-of-nanometers tall protrusions formed by randomly stacked  and/or highly-crumpled flakes (Figure 3c-f). This 

morphology is corroborated by reverse AFM topographies (see Supplementary Information Figure S3) and agrees with that 

discussed for the drop-casted samples (Figure 2a,b). Likewise, Raman spectra collected on the graphene-coated beads were 

comparable with those of the drop-casted specimens (see Supplementary Information Figure S4). We point out that the observation 

of graphene patches over the beads’ surface does not ensure, by itself, the manifestation of graphene-mediated effects in contact 

mechanics. In fact, for the micrometric beads used in the present study (nominal diameter       , the circular contact spot with 

an ideally-smooth countersurface has a diameter of about           (see Supplementary Figure S1 in9 for an estimate of the 

contact radius     using a sphere-on-flat contact mechanics theory). Hence, graphene-mediated contact phenomena may appear 

provided that the graphene patches either exactly coat such contact spot or – which is more often the case – they prevent the silica-

substrate contact by forming a new, off-centered and topographically highest contact asperity. We exemplify this issue by 

considering the results summarized in Figure 4. 

Here, the surface morphology of an ideally-smooth silica bead was systematically characterized by AFM in the course of four 

successive ‘deposition runs’ (Figure 4a-j), together with the evolution of the adhesive force    against HOPG (Figure 4k). Note 

that each ‘deposition run’ here consists of only 50 ‘dip-retract’ deposition cycles. One can see that upon runs 1 to 3, the deposited 

FLG flakes neither coat the mesoscopic contact spot nor they are thick enough to generate a new contact asperity (Figure 4c-h). 

Thus the adhesion between the colloidal bead and HOPG is controlled by direct           contact and turns out to be 

comparable to the pristine case, i.e.               . However, an adhesion breakdown to        takes place after 

‘deposition run’ 4, as in this case the newly deposited FLG flakes do contribute to form the topographically highest contact asperity 

(Figure 4i,j). The agglomerated flakes have thickness of several tens of nm and maintain a lubricious behavior (Figure 4l). More 

importantly, they have an irregular morphology that reflects their random pile-up and non-conformal adhesion to the silica surface 

(see also Supplementary Information Figure S5). Accordingly, the key role of the deposited FLG flakes is to generate a lubricious 

nanoroughness over the surface of the colloidal beads, that drives both the decrease of the contact area (from meso to nanoscale) 

and of the contact forces. Analysis of representative AFM topographies with threshold criteria gives a rough estimate of    

        for the contact area at the topographically highest contact spot with graphite (Supplementary Information Figure S6). 

This phenomenology is well documented in colloidal probe AFM experiments involving nominally rigid interfaces.50–52 Even more 

remarkable, adhesion breakdown was also shown to occur when the nanoroughness originates from tribo-induced material transfer 

of FLG flakes from a graphitic substrate to the sliding colloidal probe.8  


 
14

 


 
15

 

Figure 4. (a) AFM morphology and (b) cross-section height (along the dash line in (a)) for a pristine silica bead. The white arrow and dotted circle in (a) highlight 

respectively the position and size of the contact spot with HOPG (see text). (c)-(j) Evolution of the surface morphology and of the cross-sectional height for the 

same bead upon four ‘deposition runs’. Only after ‘deposition run’ 4, the topographically highest contact asperity becomes off-centered and located over a graphene 

deposit (see (i),(j)). (k) Adhesion force    measured on HOPG after each ‘deposition run’: adhesion breakdown occurs after the fourth run. (l) Cross-section height 

and friction force along the dotted line in (i): it shows the lubricious behavior of deposited FLG flakes compared to     .  

 

 

Figure 5 further clarifies the impact of the graphene coating on         curves acquired on HOPG.  

 

 

 

Figure 5. (a) Normal force vs distance curve on HOPG for a pristine colloidal probe. (b) Normal force vs distance curve for a graphene-coated colloidal probe 

named ‘coated probe 1’. Besides adhesion reduction, a long-ranged repulsive interaction at       signals the response of the elastically-soft graphene coating. (c) 

As in (b) but for a different probe named ‘coated probe 2’. Adhesion is still reduced compared to the pristine contact in (a), but there is no evidence of the coating 

compliance. 

 

Figure 5a,b contrasts the typical response of a pristine silica bead with that of a graphene-coated bead (named ‘coated probe 1’) 

and corresponding to the probe of Figure 3e,f. As previously mentioned, the most prominent effect of the graphene coating is to 

induce the adhesion breakdown, here from           to      . Besides this, a fully-reversible long-ranged repulsive 

interaction arises at a few tens of nanometers distance from the hard-wall-repulsion contact line    . We ascribe this peculiar 

feature to an elastic contribution, due to some mechanical compliance of the (rough) graphene coating in the low-loads regime. 

Several concurrent factors might contribute to this response. In fact, the flakes do not necessarily stack to form a compact overlayer 

and load-induced deformations of the graphene coating might take place at low loads. A similar effect was previously observed for 


 
16

graphene-coated sharp AFM probes prepared by dip coating,32 this being ascribed to the existence of nanogaps between the flakes 

and the coated surface. Also,         curves similar to ours were reported by Ishikawa et al.25 for individual micrometric flakes 

partially attached the colloidal beads. The long-ranged repulsion was ultimately explained by a progressive flattening  of the 

attached flakes on increasing the normal load. Consistently, such compliant response was not observed in         with graphene 

flakes tightly attached to the probe surface, i.e. directly glued to the colloidal bead.23 As such instabilities in normal force and 

friction force do depend on the random stacking features of the graphene coating, we observed qualitative variations from probe to 

probe. Figure 5c shows the         spectroscopy curve for a different probe (named ‘coated probe 2’),  which in fact reveals 

adhesion reduction compared to the pristine contact, albeit there is no evidence of any elastically-soft response of the coating in 

this case. Consistently with the previous picture, variations in the long-ranged behavior of the spectroscopic curves were 

occasionally observed in the course of experiments conducted with the same probe, this being a behavior consistent with the 

release of loosely attached FLG flakes from the coated probe to the contact substrate  (Supplementary Information Figure S7). We 

show below that despite unavoidable differences among         curves of the coated probes, elementary dissipation mechanisms 

on atomically smooth substrates could be effectively rationalized within the framework of the single-asperity thermally-activated 

PT model. 

 

3.3 Atomic-scale friction and superlubricity of graphene-coated AFM probes  

The elementary dissipation mechanisms were explored through load-dependent atomic-scale friction force spectroscopy. 

Representative lateral force maps acquired respectively on HOPG,      and      by means of the ‘coated probe 1’ (see section 

3.2) are shown in Figure 6a-c. They attest that the sliding motion was typically of stick-slip type. Indeed this occurred over a broad 

range of normal loads (             ; hence dissipation at the         ,         and          interfaces was 

controlled by an atomic-scale interlocking mechanism, taking place between the topographically highest asperity of the graphene 

coating and each atomically-smooth substrate. According to the          characteristics in Figure 6d, the smallest friction occurred 

at the          interface, intermediate friction at the         interface and the highest dissipation at the          one. This 

was the case for normal load values both below or above the jumps signaling the peculiar transition of the ‘coated probe 1’ in 

normal-force spectroscopy (see Figure 5b). The trend                                       qualitatively agrees 

with the outcome of several ambient AFM experiments,19,26,53–55 conducted with nanosized probes on single-layer, few-layer and 

bulk substrates of graphite,     and      respectively. Albeit a comprehensive understanding of such trend is missing, it is likely 

that the different out-of-plane elasticity of the three substrates (                                     54 and the 

extreme friction sensitivity to ambient humidity of TMDs56,57 compared to graphite,58 do dictate the splitting of the friction forces.  


 
17

The weak dependence of    on    results in ultrasmall friction coefficients (                       ) for     and     , 

and a slightly higher value (               ) for HOPG. However, a condition of nearly vanishing friction strictly occurred 

only for the          homojunction under the lowest (tensile) loads, i.e.         . This was in fact clearly signaled by the 

evolution of the lateral force loops, from (dissipative) stick-slip to continuous (superlubric) sliding, on reducing the load    (Figure 

6e). This load-dependent phenomenology is well documented in single-asperity AFM studies on graphite, TMDs,59,60 and other 

atomic and molecular crystals,42,61  and suggests to rationalize the response of the graphene-mediated contact on the three 

substrates within the single-asperity PT model. The load-dependent variation of the interfacial parameters   ,   and    extracted 

from the          curves of Figure 6d, is resumed in Figure 6f-h. Specifically Figure 6f reveals that the potential corrugation    

depends weakly on    and assumes the highest values for the          and          interfaces, being at least a factor    

smaller for the          case. For the latter,    varies from      (        ) to less than      (        ). Figure 6g 

shows that the lateral contact stiffness   varies less from one interface to the other, being in the range          for    

     . As a result, the Tomlinson parameter        acquires different values for the         ,          and          

interfaces, that mostly reflect the splitting of the interfacial potential corrugation     among the three systems (Figure 6h). Through 

renomalization of the friction force by   ,          curves can be mapped into the adimensional   

       curves, with   

        

(Figure 6i). This graph demonstrates that the friction response of the graphene-coated probe follows very well the predictions from 

the thermally-activated PT model at       . Importantly the graph includes atomic-scale friction data acquired with multiple 

graphene-coated probes, which strengthens the generality of our results (see also Supplementary Figures S6, S7).  The friction 

response of the layered contact junctions, embodied by the          characteristics of Figure 6d, is thus reconducted to contact 

pinning effects. In fact, pinning is enhanced when going from FLG/     to         and         . As in the latter two the 

effective corrugation potential    (and thus the Tomlinson parameter     ) is higher, the layered heterojunctions fall into the 

highly-dissipative stick-slip regions of the   

       plot, although characterized by very small values of the coefficient of friction. 

For the          homojunction, however, nearly continuous superlubric sliding is possible since, for such interface,   assumes 

the smaller values (         ) and the contact may transition from stick-slip to continuous superlubric sliding thanks to a load-

controlled reduction of  . Note that the working temperature of the experiments        allows the transition to be observed 

around     (thermolubricity), rather than at     as predicted by the athermal (    ) PT model. On the other hand, at       

the contact heterojunctions enter a multi-slip regime.59 This change is indicated by the clear downward flexion of the theoretical 

curve in Figure 6i, which follows well the experimental data. In this underdamped, multi-slip regime the details of the contact 

become progressively more important as   increases, resulting in a sizable spread of the experimental data and increased 

confidence level of the theoretical curve. Moreover, the origin of the double slips is rooted in the underdamped nature of the 


 
18

contact. In this regime each slip is accompanied by a larger force drop due to the large change in the spring elongation. Thus 

different values of   result in different recorded forces. 

 

 

Figure 6. (a)-(c) Atomic-scale lateral force maps acquired respectively on HOPG (        ),     (        ) and      (        ), 

using the ‘coated probe 1’ of  Figure 5. (d) Set of representative          characteristics measured for the three layered sliding junctions (  

      ). The sharp friction jumps (highlighted by black arrows) reflect the specific normal-force response of the used probe. (e) Load-


 
19

dependent friction loops for the FLG/HOPG interface in (d). (f)-(h) Load-dependent variation of the interfacial parameters   ,   and  , extracted 

from the friction characteristics in (d). (i) Comparison of experimental   

        data with predictions from the PT model, for three different 

graphene-coated colloidal probes (indicated respectively by circles, squares and triangles). The PT confidence level is shown in orange.  

 

 

Hence, despite reasonable differences from probe to probe originated by the variability of the graphene coating morphology and 

compliance, the single-asperity PT model provides a fruitful and comprehensive framework to describe graphene-mediated sliding 

friction. 

The phenomenology depicted above shares several similarities with the case of colloidal AFM probes coated by triboinduced 

graphitic transfer layers.8,9 There, atomic-scale friction between the tribo-induced FLG flakes and graphite is governed by an 

individual nanocontact that corresponds to the highest triboinduced nanoasperity. As a result, (i) atomic friction depends on the 

energy landscape experienced by such nanoasperity and load-controlled transitions from dissipative stick-slip to continuous 

superlubric sliding are possible according to the PT model.8 Additionally, (ii) dissipation systematically increases when the 

graphite substrate is replaced with     or     .9 Furthermore, (iii) as soon as the flakes are tribotransferred to the bead surface, 

one observes a breakdown of interfacial adhesion compared to the smooth-bead case. The present study clearly extends previous 

findings8,9 to the situation in which a state-of-the-art dispersion of graphene flakes is wet-transferred at the contact interface. Quite 

interestingly, the observation of the superlubric transition for the FLG/HOPG homojunction underlines the mandatory use of an 

additive-free dispersion, but it also gives direct proof that the small amount of topological defects of the solution-processed flakes 

(basal-plane     point-defects with –    and –   functionalization and concentration        , see section 3.1) does not 

enhance contact pinning effects compared to the triboinduced-flakes case. This is supported by the evidence that at low loads 

         we estimate an interfacial potential corrugation        for both tribotransferred8,9 and solution-processed flakes. 

The tight correspondence between the two systems thus points to the ubiquitous role of interfacial graphitic nanoasperities as key 

players for solid lubrication in the explored friction regime. The widespread applicability of our results is related to the fact that 

nanoroughness not only characterizes the wet-transferred graphene flakes prepared in this work, but also the morphology of 2D 

flakes transferred on solid supports by means of other protocols. In fact, wet-transferred flakes commonly display heterogeneous 

stacking, as well as folds, cracks and wrinkles.62 Hence, our study elucidates key concepts of relevance for different contact 

junctions - lubricated either by liquid dispersions of graphene or by other wet-transferred 2D flakes63–65 - that are operated under 

nominally wearless sliding conditions or do involve more complex tribochemistry and third-body-effects.5,66   

 


 
20

4. CONCLUSIONS 

In summary, we addressed the nature of the elementary energy dissipation mechanisms, together with the appearance of 

superlubricity, in sliding contacts lubricated by wet-transferred graphene flakes. Our tribological system comprises graphene-

coated colloidal AFM probes sled against graphite,      or     single-crystal substrates under ambient conditions. We show that 

the random stacking of the wet-transferred FLG flakes gives sizeable differences in the load-bearing capacity from probe to probe, 

albeit a prominent reduction of interfacial adhesion is always observed for all the coated probes. This naturally arises from the 

coating nanoroughness, that reduces the effective contact area between the coated probe and the substrates from meso- to nano-

scale. We also demonstrate that energy dissipation occurs via atomic-scale stick-slip instabilities, likely governed by the potential 

energy landscape experienced by one dominant graphitic nanocontact. Nearly continuous superlubric sliding is observed under low 

loads for graphitic homojunctions, indicating that in such case interfacial pinning phenomena may disappear in favor of structural 

lubricity effects.   This description shares relevant similarities with the superlubricity machanism recently elucidated for graphene-

coated probes prepared by triboinduced material transfer, thus contributing to define a general framework for solid lubrication by 

FLG flakes. The thermally-activated single-asperity PT model is shown to provide a comprehensive description of the main 

experimental results. Our work establishes experimental procedures and key concepts that enable superlubricity by wet-transferred 

liquid-processed graphene flakes. The proposed methodology is suitable to address the friction performance of other nanomaterials 

prepared by scalable production routes targeting hi-tech mechanical applications.  

 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 

Supporting Information 

The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/XXXXXXXX 

SEM micrographs of AFM probes prepared by dip coating (Figure S1), normal force spectroscopy of a graphene-wrapped 

AFM nanoprobe (Figure S2), AFM morphologies of graphene-coated colloidal AFM probes (Figure S3), optical 

micrographs and Raman spectra of a graphene-coated colloidal probe (Figure S4), AFM and SEM micrographs of the 

contact region for a graphene-coated colloidal probe (Figure S5), contact area for the topographically highest nanoasperity 

(Figure S6), variation of the normal force spectroscopy upon release of a graphene flake from a colloidal probe (Figure S7), 

atomic-scale friction force spectroscopy for two different graphene-coated colloidal probes (Figures S8 and S9). 


 
21

 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

*Corresponding Author 

Renato Buzio -  Email: renato.buzio@spin.cnr.it 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

 

R.B. acknowledges useful discussions with Thomas Bottein, Charlotte Gallois and Elodie Jobert from Carbon Waters, and with 

Carlos Drummond from CNRS CRPP and Université de Bordeaux. This  work  was  financially  supported  by  the  MIUR  

PRIN2017  project  20178PZCB5  “UTFROM  - Understanding and tuning friction through nanostructure manipulation”. A.V. 

acknowledges also support from ERC Advanced Grant ULTRADISS, contract No. 86344023. 

 

 

REFERENCES  

 

(1) 
Marian, M.; Berman, D.; Rota, A.; Jackson, R. L.; Rosenkranz, A. Layered 2D Nanomaterials to Tailor Friction and Wear in Machine 

Elements—A Review. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2022, 9 (3), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.202101622. 

(2) 
Morstein, C. E.; Dienwiebel, M. Graphite Lubrication Mechanisms Under High Mechanical Load. Wear 2021, 203794. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wear.2021.203794. 

(3) 
Berman, D.; Deshmukh, S. A.; Sankaranarayanan, S. K. R. S.; Erdemir, A.; Sumant, A. V. Macroscale Superlubricity Enabled by 

Graphene Nanoscroll Formation. Science 2015, 348 (6239), 1118–1122. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1262024. 

(4) 
Wu, P.; Li, X.; Zhang, C.; Chen, X.; Lin, S.; Sun, H.; Lin, C. Te; Zhu, H.; Luo, J. Self-Assembled Graphene Film as Low Friction Solid 

Lubricant in Macroscale Contact. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9 (25), 21554–21562. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b04599. 

(5) 
Restuccia, P.; Righi, M. C. Tribochemistry of Graphene on Iron and Its Possible Role in Lubrication of Steel. Carbon 2016, 106, 118–

124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2016.05.025. 

(6) 
Backes, C.; Berger, C.; Beyer, A.; Fasel, R.; Merino, C.; Mendez, J.; Nolan, H. Production and Processing of Graphene and Related 

Materials. 2D Mater. 2020, 7 (2), 22001. 

(7) 
Buzio, R.; Gerbi, A.; Uttiya, S.; Bernini, C.; Del Rio Castillo, A. E.; Palazon, F.; Siri, A. S.; Pellegrini, V.; Pellegrino, L.; Bonaccorso, F. 


 
22

Ultralow Friction of Ink-Jet Printed Graphene Flakes. Nanoscale 2017, 9 (22), 7612–7624. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7NR00625J. 

(8) 
Buzio, R.; Gerbi, A.; Bernini, C.; Repetto, L.; Vanossi, A. Graphite Superlubricity Enabled by Triboinduced Nanocontacts. Carbon 

2021, 184, 875–890. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2021.08.071. 

(9) 
Buzio, R.; Gerbi, A.; Bernini, C.; Repetto, L.; Vanossi, A. Sliding Friction and Superlubricity of Colloidal AFM Probes Coated by 

Tribo-Induced Graphitic Transfer Layers. Langmuir 2022, 38 (41), 12570–12580. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.2c02030. 

(10) 
Vanossi, A.; Bechinger, C.; Urbakh, M. Structural Lubricity in Soft and Hard Matter Systems. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 (1), 1–11. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-18429-1. 

(11) 
Lee, J. H.; Cho, D. H.; Park, B. H.; Choi, J. S. Nanotribology of 2D Materials and Their Macroscopic Applications. J. Phys. D. Appl. 

Phys. 2020, 53 (39). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6463/ab9670. 

(12) 
Hod, O.; Meyer, E.; Zheng, Q.; Urbakh, M. Structural Superlubricity and Ultralow Friction across the Length Scales. Nature 2018, 563 

(7732), 485–492. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0704-z. 

(13) 
Dienwiebel, M.; Pradeep, N.; Verhoeven, G. S.; Zandbergen, H. W.; Frenken, J. W. M. Model Experiments of Superlubricity of 

Graphite. Surf. Sci. 2005, 576 (1–3), 197–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.susc.2004.12.011. 

(14) 
de Wijn, A. S.; Fasolino, A.; Filippov, A. E.; Urbakh, M. Low Friction and Rotational Dynamics of Crystalline Flakes in Solid 

Lubrication. EPL (Europhysics Lett. 2011, 95 (6), 66002. https://doi.org/10.1209/0295-5075/95/66002. 

(15) 
Martin-Olmos, C.; Rasool, H. I.; Weiller, B. H.; Gimzewski, J. K. Graphene MEMS: AFM Probes Performance Improvement. ACS 

Nano 2013, No. 5, 4164–4170. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn400557b. 

(16) 
Pacios, M.; Hosseini, P.; Fan, Y.; He, Z.; Krause, O.; Hutchison, J.; Warner, J. H.; Bhaskaran, H. Direct Manufacturing of Ultrathin 

Graphite on Three-Dimensional Nanoscale Features. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6 (February), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep22700. 

(17) 
Liu, S.; Wang, H.-P.; Xu, Q.; Ma, T.; Yu, G.; Zhang, C.; Geng, D.; Yu, Z.; Zhang, S.; Wang, W.; Hu, Y.; Wang, H.; Luo, J. Robust 

Microscale Superlubricity under High Contact Pressure Enabled by Graphene-Coated Microsphere. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 14029. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14029. 

(18) 
Sha, T. D.; Pang, H.; Fang, L.; Liu, H. X.; Chen, X. C.; Liu, D. M.; Luo, J. Bin. Superlubricity between a Silicon Tip and Graphite 

Enabled by the Nanolithography-Assisted Nanoflakes Tribo-Transfer. Nanotechnology 2020, 31 (20). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-

6528/ab70cd. 

(19) 
Tian, J.; Yin, X.; Li, J.; Qi, W.; Huang, P.; Chen, X.; Luo, J. Tribo-Induced Interfacial Material Transfer of an Atomic Force Microscopy 

Probe Assisting Superlubricity in a WS 2 /Graphene Heterojunction. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12 (3), 4031–4040. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b14378. 

(20) 
Li, J.; Gao, T.; Luo, J. Superlubricity of Graphite Induced by Multiple Transferred Graphene Nanoflakes. Adv. Sci. 2018, 5 (3), 1700616. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.201700616. 

(21) 
Liu, Y.; Song, A.; Xu, Z.; Zong, R.; Zhang, J.; Yang, W.; Wang, R.; Hu, Y.; Luo, J.; Ma, T. Interlayer Friction and Superlubricity in 

Single-Crystalline Contact Enabled by Two-Dimensional Flake-Wrapped Atomic Force Microscope Tips. ACS Nano 2018, 12 (8), 

7638–7646. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.7b09083. 


 
23

(22) 
Liu, Y.; Wang, K.; Xu, Q.; Zhang, J.; Hu, Y.; Ma, T.; Zheng, Q.; Luo, J. Superlubricity between Graphite Layers in Ultrahigh Vacuum. 

ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12 (38), 43167–43172. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c05422. 

(23) 
Li, J.; Li, J.; Jiang, L.; Luo, J. Fabrication of a Graphene Layer Probe to Measure Force Interactions in Layered Heterojunctions. 

Nanoscale 2020, 12 (9), 5435–5443. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9nr09528d. 

(24) 
Zhang, G.; Güell, A. G.; Kirkman, P. M.; Lazenby, R. A.; Miller, T. S.; Unwin, P. R. Versatile Polymer-Free Graphene Transfer Method 

and Applications. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8 (12), 8008–8016. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b00681. 

(25) 
Ishikawa, M.; Ichikawa, M.; Okamoto, H.; Itamura, N.; Sasaki, N.; Miura, K. Atomic-Scale Peeling of Graphene. Appl. Phys. Express 

2012, 5 (6), 3–6. https://doi.org/10.1143/APEX.5.065102. 

(26) 
Liu, Y.; Song, A.; Xu, Z.; Zong, R.; Zhang, J.; Yang, W.; Wang, R.; Hu, Y.; Luo, J.; Ma, T. Interlayer Friction and Superlubricity in 

Single-Crystalline Contact Enabled by Two-Dimensional Flake-Wrapped Atomic Force Microscope Tips. ACS Nano 2018, 12 (8), 

7638–7646. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.7b09083. 

(27) 
Li, B.; Yin, J.; Liu, X.; Wu, H.; Li, J.; Li, X.; Guo, W. Probing van Der Waals Interactions at Two-Dimensional Heterointerfaces. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 2019, 14 (6), 567–572. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-019-0405-2. 

(28) 
Hui, F.; Chen, S.; Liang, X.; Yuan, B.; Jing, X.; Shi, Y.; Lanza, M. Graphene Coated Nanoprobes: A Review. Crystals 2017, 7 (9), 269. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/cryst7090269. 

(29) 
Zhang, X.; Xu, C.; Zou, Z.; Wu, Z.; Yin, S.; Zhang, Z.; Liu, J.; Xia, Y.; Lin, C. Te; Zhao, P.; Wang, H. A Scalable Polymer-Free Method 

for Transferring Graphene onto Arbitrary Surfaces. Carbon 2020, 161, 479–485. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2020.01.111. 

(30) 
Kang, J.; Sangwan, V. K.; Wood, J. D.; Hersam, M. C. Solution-Based Processing of Monodisperse Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials. 

Acc. Chem. Res. 2017, 50 (4), 943–951. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00643. 

(31) 
Hui, F.; Vajha, P.; Ji, Y.; Pan, C.; Grustan-Gutierrez, E.; Duan, H.; He, P.; Ding, G.; Shi, Y.; Lanza, M. Variability of Graphene Devices 

Fabricated 
Using 
Graphene 
Inks: 
Atomic Force 
Microscope 
Tips. 
Surf. 
Coatings 
Technol. 2017, 
320, 
391–395. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2016.12.020. 

(32) 
Lanza, M.; Gao, T.; Yin, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Tong, Y.; Shen, Z.; Duan, H. Nanogap Based Graphene Coated AFM Tips with High 

Spatial Resolution, Conductivity and Durability. Nanoscale 2013, 5 (22), 10816–10823. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3nr03720g. 

(33) 
Daly, M.; Cao, C.; Sun, H.; Sun, Y.; Filleter, T.; Singh, C. V. Interfacial Shear Strength of Multilayer Graphene Oxide Films. ACS Nano 

2016, 10 (2), 1939–1947. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5b05771. 

(34) 
Soler-Crespo, R. A.; Gao, W.; Mao, L.; Nguyen, H. T.; Roenbeck, M. R.; Paci, J. T.; Huang, J.; Nguyen, S. T.; Espinosa, H. D. The Role 

of Water in Mediating Interfacial Adhesion and Shear Strength in Graphene Oxide. ACS Nano 2018, 12 (6), 6089–6099. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.8b02373. 

(35) 
Bepete, G.; Anglaret, E.; Ortolani, L.; Morandi, V.; Huang, K.; Pénicaud, A.; Drummond, C. Surfactant-Free Single-Layer Graphene in 

Water. Nat. Chem. 2017, 9 (4), 347–352. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchem.2669. 

(36) 
Hui, F.; Vajha, P.; Shi, Y.; Ji, Y.; Duan, H.; Padovani, A.; Larcher, L.; Li, X. R.; Xu, J. J.; Lanza, M. Moving Graphene Devices from 

Lab to Market: Advanced Graphene-Coated Nanoprobes. Nanoscale 2016, 8 (16), 8466–8473. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5nr06235g. 


 
24

(37) 
Cao, L.; Liu, R.; Zhang, W.; Wang, Y.; Wang, G.; Song, Z.; Weng, Z.; Wang, Z. High-Reliability Graphene-Wrapped Nanoprobes for 

Scanning Probe Microscopy. Nanotechnology 2022, 33 (5). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6528/ac1630. 

(38) 
Cappella, B.; Dietler, G. Force-Distance Curves by Atomic Force Microscopy. Surf. Sci. Rep. 1999, 34 (1–3), 1–104. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-5729(99)00003-5. 

(39) 
Buzio, R.; Boragno, C.; Valbusa, U. Friction Laws for Lubricated Nanocontacts. J. Chem. Phys. 2006, 125 (9), 1–8. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2345369. 

(40) 
Buzio, R.; Toma, A.; Chincarini, A.; de Mongeot, F. B.; Boragno, C.; Valbusa, U. Atomic Force Microscopy and X-Ray Photoelectron 

Spectroscopy 
Characterization 
of 
Low-Energy 
Ion 
Sputtered 
Mica. 
Surf. 
Sci. 
2007, 
601 
(13), 
2735–2739. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.susc.2006.12.056. 

(41) 
Horcas, I.; Fernández, R.; Gómez-Rodríguez, J. M.; Colchero, J.; Gómez-Herrero, J.; Baro, A. M. WSXM: A Software for Scanning 

Probe Microscopy and a Tool for Nanotechnology. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 2007, 78 (1). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2432410. 

(42) 
Socoliuc, A.; Bennewitz, R.; Gnecco, E.; Meyer, E. Transition from Stick-Slip to Continuous Sliding in Atomic Friction: Entering a New 

Regime of Ultralow Friction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92 (13), 134301–1. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.134301. 

(43) 
Jinesh, K. B.; Krylov, S. Y.; Valk, H.; Dienwiebel, M.; Frenken, J. W. M. Thermolubricity in Atomic-Scale Friction. Phys. Rev. B 2008, 

78 (15), 155440. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.78.155440. 

(44) 
Wu, J. Bin; Lin, M. L.; Cong, X.; Liu, H. N.; Tan, P. H. Raman Spectroscopy of Graphene-Based Materials and Its Applications in 

Related Devices. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2018, 47 (5), 1822–1873. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6cs00915h. 

(45) 
Ferrari, A.; Robertson, J. Interpretation of Raman Spectra of Disordered and Amorphous Carbon. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. 

Phys. 2000. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.61.14095. 

(46) 
Hasan, T.; Torrisi, F.; Sun, Z.; Popa, D.; Nicolosi, V.; Privitera, G.; Bonaccorso, F.; Ferrari, A. C. Solution-Phase Exfoliation of 

Graphite for Ultrafast Photonics. Phys. Status Solidi Basic Res. 2010, 247 (11–12), 2953–2957. https://doi.org/10.1002/pssb.201000339. 

(47) 
Bepete, G.; Pénicaud, A.; Drummond, C.; Anglaret, E. Raman Signatures of Single Layer Graphene Dispersed in Degassed water, “’Eau 

de Graphene’.” J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120 (49), 28204–28214. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b07288. 

(48) 
Bepete, G.; Hof, F.; Huang, K.; Kampioti, K.; Anglaret, E.; Drummond, C.; Pénicaud, A. ”Eau de Graphene” from a KC8 Graphite 

Intercalation Compound Prepared by a Simple Mixing of Graphite and Molten Potassium. Phys. Status Solidi - Rapid Res. Lett. 2016, 10 

(12), 895–899. https://doi.org/10.1002/pssr.201600167. 

(49) 
Casiraghi, C.; Hartschuh, A.; Qian, H.; Piscanec, S.; Georgi, C.; Fasoli, A.; Novoselov, K. S.; Basko, D. M.; Ferrari, A. C. Raman 

Spectroscopy of Graphene Edges. Nano Lett. 2009, 9 (4), 1433–1441. https://doi.org/10.1021/nl8032697. 

(50) 
Monti, J. M.; McGuiggan, P. M.; Robbins, M. O. Effect of Roughness and Elasticity on Interactions between Charged Colloidal Spheres. 

Langmuir 2019, 35 (48), 15948–15959. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.9b02161. 

(51) 
Yang, S.; Zhang, H.; Hsu, S. M. Correction of Random Surface Roughness on Colloidal Probes in Measuring Adhesion. Langmuir 2007, 

23 (3), 1195–1202. https://doi.org/10.1021/la0622828. 

(52) 
Ramakrishna, S. N.; Clasohm, L. Y.; Rao, A.; Spencer, N. D. Controlling Adhesion Force by Means of Nanoscale Surface Roughness. 


 
25

Langmuir 2011, 27 (16), 9972–9978. https://doi.org/10.1021/la201727t. 

(53) 
Zhou, X.; Liu, Y.; Hu, X.; Fang, L.; Song, Y.; Liu, D.; Luo, J. Influence of Elastic Property on the Friction between Atomic Force 

Microscope Tips and 2D Materials. Nanotechnology 2020, 31 (28). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6528/ab7f7d. 

(54) 
Tran-Khac, B. C.; Kim, H. J.; DelRio, F. W.; Chung, K. H. Operational and Environmental Conditions Regulate the Frictional Behavior 

of Two-Dimensional Materials. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2019, 483 (December 2018), 34–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2019.03.249. 

(55) 
Vazirisereshk, M. R.; Ye, H.; Ye, Z.; Otero-de-la-Roza, A.; Zhao, M.-Q.; Gao, Z.; Johnson, A. T. C.; Johnson, E. R.; Carpick, R. W.; 

Martini, A. Origin of Nanoscale Friction Contrast between Supported Graphene, MoS2 , and a Graphene/MoS2 Heterostructure. Nano 

Lett. 2019, 19 (8), 5496–5505. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b02035. 

(56) 
Zhao, X.; Perry, S. S. The Role of Water in Modifying Friction within MoS2 Sliding Interfaces. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2010, 2 (5), 

1444–1448. https://doi.org/10.1021/am100090t. 

(57) 
Vazirisereshk, M. R.; Martini, A.; Strubbe, D. A.; Baykara, M. Z. Solid Lubrication with MoS2: A Review. Lubricants 2019, 7 (7). 

https://doi.org/10.3390/LUBRICANTS7070057. 

(58) 
Egberts, P.; Ye, Z.; Liu, X. Z.; Dong, Y.; Martini, A.; Carpick, R. W. Environmental Dependence of Atomic-Scale Friction at Graphite 

Surface Steps. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2013, 88 (3), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.035409. 

(59) 
Medyanik, S. N.; Liu, W. K.; Sung, I.-H.; Carpick, R. W. Predictions and Observations of Multiple Slip Modes in Atomic-Scale Friction. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97 (13), 136106. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.136106. 

(60) 
Lee, C.; Li, Q.; Kalb, W.; Liu, X. Z.; Berger, H.; Carpick, R. W.; Hone, J. Frictional Characteristics of Atomically Thin Sheets. Science 

2010, 328 (5974), 76–80. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1184167. 

(61) 
Buzio, R.; Gerbi, A.; Barra, M.; Chiarella, F.; Gnecco, E.; Cassinese, A. Subnanometer Resolution and Enhanced Friction Contrast at the 

Surface of Perylene Diimide PDI8-CN 2 Thin Films in Ambient Conditions. Langmuir 2018, 34 (10), 3207–3214. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b04149. 

(62) 
Song, Y.; Zou, W.; Lu, Q.; Lin, L.; Liu, Z. Graphene Transfer: Paving the Road for Applications of Chemical Vapor Deposition 

Graphene. Small 2021, 2007600, 2007600. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202007600. 

(63) 
Zhang, Y.; Zhang, D.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Q.; Li, Q.; Dong, M. Atomic-Scale Friction of Black and Violet Phosphorus Crystals: Implications 

for 
Phosphorus-Based 
Devices 
and 
Lubricants. 
ACS 
Appl. 
Nano 
Mater. 
2021, 
4 
(9), 
9932–9937. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.1c02593. 

(64) 
Feng, D.; Peng, J.; Liu, S.; Zheng, X.; Yan, X.; He, W. Influences of Thickness, Scanning Velocity and Relative Humidity on the 

Frictional Properties of WS2 Nanosheets. Mater. Res. Express 2018, 5 (1). https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1591/aaa150. 

(65) 
Li, Y.; Huang, S.; Wei, C.; Zhou, D.; Li, B.; Wu, C.; Mochalin, V. N. Adhesion between MXenes and Other 2D Materials. ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13 (3), 4682–4691. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c18624. 

(66) 
Wang, P.; Duan, F. Tribochemistry of Graphene Oxide/Graphene Confined between Iron Oxide Substrates: Implications for Graphene-

Based Lubricants. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2022, 5 (9), 12817–12825. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.2c02697. 

 


 
26

 

 

 

 

 

Table of Contents TOC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
27

 

Solid lubrication by wet-transferred solution-processed graphene 
flakes: dissipation mechanisms and superlubricity in mesoscale 
contacts  
  
 
Renato Buzio*1, Andrea Gerbi1, Cristina Bernini1, Luca Repetto2, Andrea Silva3,4 and Andrea Vanossi3,4   
 

1  CNR-SPIN, C.so F.M. Perrone 24, 16152 Genova, Italy 
2  Dipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Genova, Via Dodecaneso 33, 16146 Genova, Italy 
3 CNR-IOM Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto Officina dei Materiali, c/o SISSA, Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy 
4 International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Supplementary Information 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
28

 
 
 
 

 

 
Figure S1. SEM micrographs of commercial AFM probes dipped into Eau de Graphene solution. Despite variations of the 
preparation protocol and probes material there was no evidence for graphene-wrapped tips, albeit FLG flakes were clearly 
discerned over different regions of the probes’ surface. (a),(b) Pt-coated probes (HQ:NSC35/Pt by MikroMasch), treated by oxygen 
plasma (30W, 30s, working pressure                 ) prior to immersion into graphene solution (dipping time 36 minutes). 
(c),(d) Si probe (HQ:CSC38/Al-BS by MikroMasch), treated by oxygen plasma (as in (a)-(b)) and dipped into graphene solution 
(dipping time 100 minutes). (e) Au-coated probe (custom OMCL-AC160TS by Olympus) dipped into graphene solution (dipping 
time 40 minutes). (f) Magnification of the dotted region in (e). 


 
29

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Figure S2. Normal force vs distance           curve acquired on HOPG with the graphene-wrapped AFM probe of Fig. 3(a),(b) 
(see main text). The curve shows sharp snap-in-contact and snap-off-contact, and an adhesion force         .  

 
 
 

 
 
 
 


 
30

 

Figure S3. Reverse AFM morphologies (left column) and cross-section heights (along the dash lines; right column) for three silica 
beads coated by wet-transferred flakes. (a-b) They correspond to the colloidal bead of Figure 3c,d and Figure 4 in the main text. (c-
d) They correspond to the colloidal bead named “Coated Probe 1” (see Figure 3e,f, Figure 5b  and Figure 6 of the main text). (e-f) 
They correspond to the colloidal bead named “Coated Probe 2” (Figure 5c of the main text).  
 
 
 


 
31

 

 
 
 

Figure S4. Optical micrographs of (a) pristine colloidal AFM probe and (b) the same probe after being coated by FLG flakes (scale 
bar in (a) is     )). (c) Comparison of Raman spectra collected respectively on drop-casted FLG flakes (red curve) and at the 
surface of the graphene-coated probe (black curve). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 
32

 

 

Figure S5. (a) AFM morphology acquired by reverse imaging nearby the contact region of the graphene-coated colloidal probe of 
Figure 3c,d and Figure 4i. (b),(c) SEM micrographs of the same region, from different viewpoints. The arrow highlights the 
location of the topographically-highest contact asperity.  


 
33

 
 

 

Figure S6. Estimation of the area of the topographically-highest nanoasperity for three graphene-coated colloidal probes. The area 
of the topographically-highest nanoasperity is roughly estimated by processing the topographies in (a),(c),(e) with the “flooding” 
option of the WSXM software. This method is based on setting all the image values below a given threshold value     (selected by 


 
34

the user) to a constant value. The resulting image resembles a picture of a flooded region of land (Figure S6, right column). Once 
the process is finished WSXM can calculate the area           of the “drought islands”.  The threshold value     was varied for 
each topography in small steps of           below the maximum surface height     , to find out the threshold    

  separating 

the regime of single-asperity contact (         

  , only one island in the “flooded topography”) from a multi-asperity contact 

(       

 , two or more islands in the “flooded” topography). The area of the topographically-highest nanoasperity was estimated 

as              

  . We conventionally assumed that    

  values that are more than 1nm apart from      (i.e.         

     ) 

are unphysical.  In fact the penetration depth of a nanoasperity into graphite is expected to be of only             at the normal 
load          (from Hertzian contact theory      

          with the effective Young modulus         and a tentative 

curvature radius            for the nanoasperity). In such specific situations the area of the topographically-highest 
nanoasperity was assumed to be               .  We obtained that      is            for all the beads. Arrows in the 
original AFM topographies (left column) and “flooded topographies” (right column) highlight the location of the single “drought 
island”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 
35

 

 

Figure S7. Variation of the long-ranged behavior of two spectroscopic curves (top) acquired with the very same graphene-coated 
colloidal probe on HOPG. Variation is triggered by the release of a loosely attached FLG flake from the coated probe to HOPG 
(occurred  while sliding on HOPG in between the two spectroscopic experiments). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
36

  

 
Figure S8. (a) Representative          characteristics measured by means of the colloidal probe shown in Figure S3a and Figure 
S5 (see also main text Figure 3c,d) for the three layered sliding junctions         ,         and           respectively 
(        ). (b)-(c) Load-dependent variation of the interfacial parameters    and k. (d) Comparison of experimental data with 
the PT model. Data are represented by square symbols as in Figure 6i. 


 
37

 

 

 
Figure S9. (a) Representative          characteristics measured for the three layered sliding junctions         ,         and  
         respectively (        ). An AFM micrograph of the colloidal probe used in this case is reported in Figure S3e. (b)-
(c) Load-dependent variation of the interfacial parameters    and k. (d) Comparison of experimental data with the PT model. Data 
are represented by triangles, as in Figure 6i. 
 


