Effective suppression of dark counts in superconducting 
microstructures with grid of pinholes in a magnetic field

(2023-2-18)

Dong Zhu, Ilya Charaev, Andreas Schilling

Department of Physics, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057

Zurich, Switzerland

In a magnetic field, vortices significantly contribute to the dark counts of single-
photon detectors made of superconducting wires, and they are also limiting the 
critical current of such
devices. To address this issue, we prepared 

superconducting microwires with a pinhole grid from WSi thin films and report 
on corresponding critical-current and count-rate measurements in an external 
magnetic field B. When compared to corresponding devices without pinholes, the 
critical current only weakly depends on the magnetic field at B < 16 mT and it is 
even larger already at B > 10 mT. Moreover, dark counts are not only suppressed
in zero field, but particularly in magnetic fields B < 16 mT, while photon counts
are virtually field insensitive in the same range of the magnetic field. 

Keywords: microwire, WSi, single-photon detection, pinholes.

Introduction

After more than two decades of research since the first experimental report in 
2001[1], superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) have
made great progress in many aspects of performance, such as high detection 
efficiency[2-6], low dark counts[3, 7, 8], high temporal resolution[9], kilo-pixel 
array[10] and a wide range of useful wavelengths[5, 11-13]. Recently, research 
in related photon detectors has entered a further phase as several research 
groups have reported the detection of single photons in superconducting wide 
microwire detectors made of various of different materials, such as NbN[14], 
WSi[15] and MoSi[16]. Contrary to the well-known hot spot-based theoretical 
model, which considers the width of superconducting wires only up to a few 
hundred nanometers, these experimental advances suggest completely 
different detection mechanisms, e.g., a vortex-assisted scenario in which vortex 
and anti-vortex pairs are generated whenever a photon is absorbed in the 
microwire, and their motion leads to a switching to the normal state along with


the generation of a measurable voltage pulse [14, 17]. An increase of the wire 
width w to the micron scale offers more freedom to design new detectors based 
on current nano- and even microfabrication techniques.

It is well known that defects, such as artificial holes, can trap vortices and hinder
their motion,
thereby
increasing the
current-carrying
capability
of a 

superconducting film[18-22]. This phenomenon can be used for changing the 
properties of superconducting microwires and detectors[23]. The effect of a
single hole on the critical current of a NbN-based microbridge was recently 
investigated, and corresponding experiments showed that the application of an 
external magnetic field 𝐵 has only a weak effect on the critical current 𝐼𝑐 , 
leading to a plateau in 𝐼𝑐(𝐵). This has been taken as an evidence for vortex and 
anti-vortex nucleation near the hole[24]. 

Such a plateau in 𝐼𝑐(𝐵) modifies the properties of a superconducting microwire 
single-photon detector (SMSPDs) by making it much less sensitive to the 
presence of external magnetic fields in comparison to ordinary SMSPDs, where
𝐼𝑐 decreases rapidly when a magnetic field is applied[25]. As we demonstrate 
below, an SMSPD made of a 2-nm thin WSi film with a pinhole grid not only 
shows a plateau but also an enhanced 𝐼𝑐 in a magnetic field, leading to stable
behaviour with respect to critical current, dark counts and photon counts in a 
certain range of the magnetic field.

Experimental

The fabrication of our devices started with the preparation of a 2-nm thin WSi
film by co-sputtering from W and Si targets in argon atmosphere a 3-inch silicon 
wafer with a 50 nm thermally oxidized SiO2 layer. The stoichiometry of the WSi 
thin film was determined by EDX to W0.59Si0.41 with a sheet resistance of ≈ 1000 
Ω/□. The 1-µm wide meander-shaped wires were patterned by electron-beam 
lithography at 20kV acceleration voltage on 60 nm PMMA A2 resist, followed by 
reactive ion etching in SF6. Figure 1 shows two types of structures, one with and 
one without pinholes. Each of the 90 µm long wires was 1 µm wide, and 61 wires
were arranged into a meander structure with a filling factor of 50% and an active 
area of 90x120 µm2. Figure 1(a) shows the meander structure without pinholes
and Figure 1(b) the corresponding structure with pinholes. In the straight part
we designed a triangular hole arrangement with 200 nm between the center of 


the holes, while we have chosen a hexagonal geometry in the meander turns.
The 

Fig. 1  SEM sample images. (a) 1-µm wide meander with a filling factor of 0.5, 
the scale bar is 2 μm; (b) 1-µm wide meander with hole design, the effective
diameter of the holes varies within up to 30% around the nominal diameter of
100 nm, the scale bar is 2 𝜇𝑚.

nominal hole diameter was 100 nm by design. However, the effective hole 
diameters of the actual device scattered by up to 30% around the nominal value 
due to the structuring process (e.g., dose errors and instability of the electron 
beam lithography technique). As we shall show below, however, the 
“effective“ width of the lines with holes as deduced from the normal-state 
resistance is in agreement with the design value of the width, which is reduced 
from 1 µm by ≈ 3x100nm = 300 nm to ≈ 0.7 µm. The measurements were
performed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of approximately 
200 mK. The bias current and voltage pulses were applied and amplified by a DC 
source and amplifier, respectively. Optical experiments were carried out by 
guiding 850 nm and 1310 nm wavelength light from a laser source through a 
standard SMF 28e optical fiber leading to the cold stage. We attenuated the 
incident light by four orders of magnitude of the total laser power to reach the
single-photon regime.

Results

The temperature dependence of the resistances of both samples are shown in 
Figure 2. The presence of pinholes reduces the meander cross section and 
therefore increases the normal-state resistance, and we obtain a ratio 


𝑅mea 𝑅pin
⁄
~0.7, where 𝑅pin and 𝑅mea denote the normal state resistances at 

room temperature for the pinhole meander and the normal meander, 
respectively. Due to processing-induced degradation[19], the superconducting 
critical temperature shows a slight difference, i.e., a 𝑇𝑐~2.3 K for the pinhole 
meander and a slightly higher 𝑇𝑐~2.4 K for normal meander, as shown in the 
inset of Figure 2.

Fig. 2
The temperature dependence of the resistances of the meanders

with(“pinhole”) or without (“normal”) pinholes. The inset shows the same data
near the superconducting transition.

The difference in the critical-current characteristics between the two detectors 
in magnetic fields between ≈ -40 mT and +40 mT is depicted in Figure 3. The 
black squares, taken from corresponding data of the normal meander,
reproduce the suppression of the critical current in a magnetic field which is 
caused by the Meissner current that lowers the barrier threshold for vortex 
penetration at the meander edges, and is limiting the current-carrying capability
of the device[25]. The normal meander has a maximum of 𝐼𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥~15.2 μA, 
which can be rescaled by the factor 0.7 to 𝐼𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥

∗
~10.6 μA (blue triangles) of a 

device with equal current density but an effective wire width that is comparable 


to that of the pinhole meander. The critical current decreases rapidly with 
increasing magnetic field, with a half width at half maximum value
Δ𝐵HWHM~10 mT. In contrast, the critical current of the pinhole meander has a 
very different magnetic-field dependence (red circles in Fig. 3), with a reduced 
maximum of 𝐼𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥~8 μA on the one hand, but a virtually unchanged value in a 
magnetic 𝐵 ≈ ±19 mT around B = 0 on the other hand. Moreover, 𝐼𝑐(𝐵)
strongly exceeds the corresponding values measured in the normal meander 
structure already at B > 10 mT. 

We have also compared the dark-count rates of the two detectors by varying 
the bias current and the magnetic field. The Figures 4 (a, b) show the dark-count 
rate (DCR) vs. bias current IB for normal and pinhole meanders at different

Fig. 3 Magnetic-field dependence of the critical current 𝐼𝑐. Red, black and blue 
symbols indicate pinhole meander, normal meander and corresponding rescaled 
data, respectively, where the rescaling accounts for the correction due to the 
different effective wire widths (see text).

magnetic fields, respectively. For the normal meander, the bias current was
rescaled according to the resistance ratio in the normal state to have 
comparable effective wire widths and current densities. In the normal meander, 
there is a strong shift in the corresponding DCR data towards low bias currents 
with increasing magnetic field (Fig. 4a). By contrast, the corresponding DCR 


dependences of the pinhole meander show a comparably small shift, 
particularly for B < 16 mT (Fig. 4b) while the shift also increases in larger fields
up to 30 mT, which is the largest magnetic field investigated here. This behaviour 
can also be seen clearly when measuring the DCR vs. magnetic field by fixing the
bias currents and varying the magnetic field around zero (Figs. 4c and 4d).

Fig. 4 Dark-count rates as functions of bias current and magnetic field. (a) DCR 
vs. rescaled bias current for the normal meander for fixed magnetic fields; (b) 
corresponding DCR vs. bias-current data for the pinhole meander; (c) DCR vs. 
magnetic field for the normal meander for fixed rescaled bias currents; (d) DCR 
vs. magnetic field for the pinhole meander for selected constant bias currents.


Fig. 5  Photon count rates (PCR) vs. bias current and magnetic field under light 
illumination with 850 nm wavelength. (a) PCR of the normal meander vs.
rescaled bias current for fixed magnetic field; (b) PCR vs. bias current of the 
pinhole meander; (c) PCR of the normal meander vs. magnetic field for several 
rescaled bias currents; (d) corresponding PCR data of the pinhole meander. 

As expected from the data displayed in Fig. 3, the magnetic-field window where 
the DCR is negligible in the normal meander is narrowing with the bias current 
increasing towards the zero-field critical current (Fig. 4c). The corresponding 
magnetic-field window for the pinhole meander is much wider upon 
approaching the zero-field critical current plateau (Fig. 4d), thereby reflecting 
again the beneficial influence of the pinholes on the dark-count rate.

We have measured the photon count rates (PCR) of both detectors, as shown in 
Figure 5. These data have been corrected by the expected dark counts as derived 
from our current and field dependent DCR measurements. Figure 5(a) shows the 
PCR of the normal meander at an illumination with light of 850 nm wavelength 
and a total laser power of 3 nW, with a tendency to form a clear plateau at bias 


currents near 9 µA in zero magnetic field, indicating that the internal detection
efficiency becomes saturated. The detection performance decreases rapidly
with the application of a magnetic field[26], and full saturation for Ib < Ic could 
not be achieved. Scanning the magnetic field for fixed rescaled bias currents as 
shown in Fig. 5(c) reveals that the PCR at a large bias current close to the zero-
field critical current is only weakly field dependent, although the useful 
magnetic-field window is strongly narrowing as we have shown in Fig. 3. The PCR
of the pinhole meander, by contrast, does not show any plateau with varying 
bias current (see Fig. 5(b)), meaning that the internal efficiency is not saturated 
before the meander wire switches to the normal state. However, it exhibits
virtually no performance degradation in magnetic fields below 16 mT (Fig. 5(b)), 
which also becomes obvious from corresponding measurements at constant 
current and varying magnetic field as shown in Fig. 5(d). We note that the slight 
asymmetry upon changing the direction of the magnetic field in Figs. 4 and 5 
must be caused by a not quite perfectly symmetrical geometry of the meanders.

Finally, we examined the single-photon detection behaviour of the pinhole 
meander at a lower photon energy. In Fig. 6(a) we show the total count rate 
(including dark counts) upon illumination with light of 1310 nm wavelength and 
a total laser power of 1 nW. Dark counts manifest themselves in a sudden upturn 
of the total count rate as a function of bias current, as can be clearly seen in the 
data measured in 20 mT and 24 mT. In agreement with the data shown in 5(b), 
the count rates virtually do not change for bias currents below ≈ 7 µA and 

Fig.6 Single-photon detection behaviour of the pinhole meander detector at 1310 
nm wavelength. (a) Count rate vs. bias currents upon changing the magnetic 
field. (b) Photon count rate vs. total laser power for different magnetic fields
while fixing the bias current at 6.8 µA and (c) at 7.3 µA.

magnetic fields below 16 mT. We have therefore chosen 6.8 µA and 7.3 µA as 
two bias currents to test single photon response (see Figs. 6 (b,c))[15]. The 
linearity of the count-rate as a function of laser power suggests that the pinhole 


meander is working in the single-photon regime, at least for the magnetic fields 
at and below 12 mT.

Conclusions

To summarize, we investigated the properties of a superconducting microwire
pinhole meander, showing single-photon detection and dark-count properties
that are significantly different from those of normal microwire meander 
detectors[14-16, 23]. This pinhole meander exhibits a robust critical current 
against magnetic field within a certain magnetic-field window spanning ≈ +/- 16 
mT [24, 27]. This has been attributed in single superconducting microwires to 
vortex-anti-vortex generation near the pinholes rather than at the wire edges 
for sufficiently small magnetic fields and resulting small Meissner screening 
currents [23]. Remarkably, dark counts are also suppressed, suggesting that the
holes along the wire are limiting vortex motion and are thereby reducing the 
tendency to spontaneously form a normal conducting region. Photon-count 
rates are virtually field independent in this range of magnetic field, and the
detector has been shown to work in the regime of single-photon detection. The 
fact that vortex motion is impaired is supported by the enhancement of the 
critical current for B > 10 mT by the presence of the artificial pinholes in the 
otherwise weakly-pinning WSi material.

Although we did not observe saturated photon counting behaviour, our results 
suggest that geometric modifications of microwire single-photon detectors can
dramatically alter the physical properties and potentially improve photon 
detection performance, particularly in a magnetic environment. We mention
that the chosen pinhole density corresponds to a matching field (i.e., the 
magnetic field where the vortex density matches the hole density) of ≈ 45 mT.
Although this is in the region of the magnetic fields applied in this study, it has 
been suggested that it may be the hole size that determines the width of the 
magnetic field window with a plateau in the critical current of superconducting 
microwires [23]. In this sense, there is still much room for studying the effects 
of size, density, and the arrangement geometry of pinholes to further improve 
the detector performance of such superconducting microwire detectors.

REFERENCES


1.
Gol'tsman, G.N., et al., Picosecond superconducting single-photon optical detector. Applied 
Physics Letters, 2001. 79(6): p. 705-707.

2.
Esmaeil Zadeh, I., et al., Single-photon detectors combining high efficiency, high detection 
rates, and ultra-high timing resolution. APL Photonics, 2017. 2(11).

3.
Salim, A.J., A. Eftekharian, and A.H. Majedi, High quantum efficiency and low dark count rate 
in multi-layer superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors. Journal of Applied Physics, 
2014. 115(5).

4.
Verma, V.B., et al., High-efficiency superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors 
fabricated from MoSi thin-films. Opt Express, 2015. 23(26): p. 33792-801.

5.
Gu, M., et al., A High-Efficiency Broadband Superconducting Nanowire Single-Photon 
Detector with a Composite Optical Structure. Chinese Physics Letters, 2015. 32(3).

6.
Verma, V.B., et al., High-efficiency WSi superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors 
operating at 2.5 K. Applied Physics Letters, 2014. 105(12).

7.
Shibata, H., et al., SNSPD With Ultimate Low System Dark Count Rate Using Various Cold 
Filters. Ieee Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 2017. 27(4).

8.
Zhang, L., et al., Ultra-low dark count rate and high system efficiency single-photon detectors 
with 50 nm-wide superconducting wires. Applied Physics B-Lasers and Optics, 2011. 102(4): 
p. 867-871.

9.
Korzh, B., et al., Demonstration of sub-3 ps temporal resolution with a superconducting 
nanowire single-photon detector. Nature Photonics, 2020. 14(4): p. 250-+.

10.
Wollman, E.E., et al., Kilopixel array of superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors.
Opt Express, 2019. 27(24): p. 35279-35289.

11.
Dauler, E.A., et al., Review of superconducting nanowire single-photon detector system 
design options and demonstrated performance. Optical Engineering, 2014. 53(8).

12.
Wang, Y., et al., Broadband Near-Infrared Superconducting Nanowire Single-Photon Detector 
with Efficiency over 50%. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 2016: p. 1-1.

13.
Zheng, F., et al., Design of a Superconducting Nanowire Single-Photon Detector With Dual-
Broadband and High Detection Efficiency. Ieee Photonics Journal, 2017. 9(5).

14.
Korneeva, Y.P., et al., Optical Single-Photon Detection in Micrometer-Scale NbN Bridges.
Physical Review Applied, 2018. 9(6).

15.
Chiles, J., et al., Superconducting microwire detectors based on WSi with single-photon 
sensitivity in the near-infrared. Applied Physics Letters, 2020. 116(24).

16.
I. Charaev, Y.M., A. Dane, A. Agarwal, M. Colangelo, and K. K. Berggren, Large-area 
microwire MoSi single-photon detectors at 1550 nm wavelength. Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020. 
116(242603).

17.
Vodolazov, D.Y., Single-Photon Detection by a Dirty Current-Carrying Superconducting Strip 
Based on the Kinetic-Equation Approach. Physical Review Applied, 2017. 7(3).

18.
Wang, Y.L., et al., Enhancing the critical current of a superconducting film in a wide range of 
magnetic fields with a conformal array of nanoscale holes. Physical Review B, 2013. 87(22).

19.
Wang, Y.L., et al., Enhancing superconducting critical current by randomness. Physical Review 
B, 2016. 93(4).

20.
Latimer, M.L., et al., Vortex interaction enhanced saturation number and caging effect in a 
superconducting film with a honeycomb array of nanoscale holes. Physical Review B, 2012. 
85(1).

21.
Berdiyorov, G.R., et al., Large magnetoresistance oscillations in mesoscopic superconductors 
due to current-excited moving vortices. Phys Rev Lett, 2012. 109(5): p. 057004.

22.
Latimer, M.L., et al., Realization of artificial ice systems for magnetic vortices in a 
superconducting MoGe thin film with patterned nanostructures. Phys Rev Lett, 2013. 111(6): 
p. 067001.

23.
Li, F.Y., et al., Fast and efficient detection of a single photon with hole-patterned 
superconductor microstrips. Applied Physics Letters, 2022. 121(12).


24.
Vodolazov, D.Y., et al., Defect-controlled vortex generation in current-carrying narrow 
superconducting strips. Superconductor Science & Technology, 2016. 29(2).

25.
Engel, A., et al., Detection mechanism of superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors.
Superconductor Science and Technology, 2015. 28(11).

26.
Vodolazov, D.Y., et al., Vortex-assisted mechanism of photon counting in a superconducting 
nanowire single-photon detector revealed by external magnetic field. Physical Review B, 
2015. 92(10).

27.
Zotova, A.N. and D.Y. Vodolazov, Intrinsic detection efficiency of superconducting nanowire 
single photon detector in the modified hot spot model. Superconductor Science & 
Technology, 2014. 27(12).


