Observation of long-range ferromagnetism via anomalous 

supercurrents in a spin-orbit coupled superconductor 

 

B. K. Xiang1,*, Y. S. Lin1,*, Q. S. He1,*, J. J. Zhu1, B. R. Chen1, Y. F. Wang1, K. Y. 
Liang1, Z. J. Li1, H. X. Yao1, C. X. Wu2, T. Y. Zhou2, M. H. Fang2, Y. Lu3, I. V. 
Tokatly4,5,6, F. S. Bergeret3,4, Y. H. Wang1,7,†  

 
1. State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics and Department of Physics, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200433, China  
2. School of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China 
3. Centro de Fisica de Materiales (CFM-MPC), Centro Mixto CSIC-UPV/EHU, 
Manuel de Lardizabal 4, E-20018 San Sebastian, Spain 
4. Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC), Manuel de Lardizabal 5, E-20018 
San Sebastian, Spain 
5. Nano-Bio Spectroscopy group, Departamento Física de Materiales, Universidad 
del País Vasco, Av. Tolosa 72, E-20018 San Sebastián, Spain 
6. IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, E-48011 Bilbao, Spain  
7. Shanghai Research Center for Quantum Sciences, Shanghai 201315, China  
 

* These authors contributed equally to this work. 

† To whom correspondence should be addressed. wangyhv@fudan.edu.cn  

 
Abstract 
 

Conventional superconductors naturally disfavor ferromagnetism because the 
supercurrent-carrying electrons are paired into anti-parallel spin singlets. In 
superconductors with strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling, impurity magnetic 
moments induce supercurrents through the spin-galvanic effect. As a result, 
long-range ferromagnetic interaction among the impurity moments may be 
mediated through such anomalous supercurrents in a similar fashion as in 
itinerant ferromagnets. Fe(Se,Te) is such a superconductor with topological 
surface bands, previously shown to exhibit quantum anomalous vortices around 
impurity spins. Here, we take advantage of the flux sensitivity of scanning 
superconducting quantum interference devices to investigate superconducting 
Fe(Se,Te) in the regime where supercurrents around impurities overlap. We find 
homogeneous remanent flux patterns after applying a supercurrent through the 
sample. The patterns are consistent with anomalous edge and bulk supercurrents 
generated by in-plane magnetization, which occur above a current threshold and 


follow hysteresis loops reminiscent of those of a ferromagnet. Similar long-range 
magnetic orders can be generated by Meissner current under a small out-of-
plane magnetic field. The magnetization weakens with increasing temperature 
and disappears after thermal cycling to above superconducting critical 
temperature; further suggesting superconductivity is central to establishing and 
maintaining the magnetic order. These observations demonstrate surface 
anomalous supercurrents as a mediator for ferromagnetism in a spin-orbit 
coupled superconductor, which may potentially be utilized for low-power 
cryogenic memory.  
 
 
Introduction 
Charge carriers in a solid material are capable of mediating spin correlation between 
localized magnetic moments. Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) [1–3] 
interaction is an important mechanism to align localized impurity spins into long-
range ferromagnetic order through exchange coupling with conduction electrons in 
normal metals. If a metal also has strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC), RKKY 
interaction may further facilitate ferromagnetism through an applied current [4,5]. In 
an insulator, however, the RKKY mechanism is suppressed due to the lack of low 
energy quasiparticles. A magnetically doped topological insulator is an example of 
such a system, which forms long-range ferromagnetism by the Van Vleck mechanism 
on its way to becoming a quantum anomalous Hall insulator [6,7].  
 
SOC in s-wave superconductors may drive the coupling between the spin of magnetic 
impurities and supercurrent. In the bulk of such a superconductor with SOC, the local 
magnetic moment of the impurity spin 𝑺 is locked with the orbital moment of 
supercurrent around it to generate spontaneous vortices without a magnetic field, the 
so-called quantum anomalous vortices (Fig. 1a) [8,9]. The sparsely populated vortices 
favor anti-parallel out-of-plane alignment to reduce the free energy of the 
supercurrent. Vortex-antivortex pairs form as a result [8]. For superconductors 
without SOC, because of the superconducting gap, the RKKY mechanism between 
the impurity moments through quasiparticle excitations is exponentially 
suppressed [10] just like in an insulator. Interestingly, in superconductors with Rashba 
SOC, non-exponential decaying interaction between magnetic impurities is predicted 
from RKKY-type calculation of the spin-spin correlation function [11]. A complete 
analysis of such magnetic coupling, which includes the London-Pearl screening 
effects, shows that the interaction of the anomalous supercurrents stemming from 
different impurities can mediate a long-range ferromagnetic coupling [12]. (If the 
impurity density is too high, the superconducting gap will be completely suppressed, 


and a ferromagnetic order may appear via the RKKY mechanism at the expense of 
superconductivity [10,13].)  
 
In Rashba superconductors and in superconductors with surfaces supporting a Dirac 
band, the symmetry allows for a term in the Ginzburg-Landau free energy of the form 
of Lifshitz invariant 𝐹! = 𝜅(𝒏 × 𝑩) ∙ ℏ∇𝜑 [14–16], where ∇𝜑 is a phase gradient in 
the order parameter, 𝑩 is the magnetic induction, 𝒏 is the surface normal, and 𝜅 is 
the Edelstein constant, which depends on the Rashba splitting of the Kramer’s pair at 
the Fermi level. For Dirac surface states, it is a limiting case of a large Rashba SOC 
when the physics is dominated by only one helical band. A direct consequence of the 
Lifshitz invariant is that any supercurrent 𝑱𝑺 (being proportional to ∇𝜑) induces 
polarization of surface impurity moments, which has been observed on isolated 
quantum anomalous vortex and antivortex in Fe(Se,Te) [8].  
 
The inverse effect, in analogy with the spin-galvanic effect in SOC metals, is that a 
local magnetic moment polarizes the condensate and generates anomalous 
supercurrents 𝑱𝒂 ∝ 𝒏 × 𝑺 at the center of the impurity [11,17–19]. Surrounding the 
impurity, 𝑱𝒂 follows a dipolar distribution that decays as a power law and extends 
over long distances away from the magnetic impurity (Fig. 1b) [12]. Confined to the 
surface plane, two impurity spins favor an alignment along their center line (Fig. 1c). 
Such a configuration minimizes the total supercurrent on both impurities and thus 
reduces the free energy. For disordered impurity spins on a plane, ferromagnetic 
coupling leads to long-range in-plane magnetization 𝑴𝑱 which generates an edge 𝑱𝒂 

with an opposite flow direction from that in the bulk (Fig. 1d) [15]. With the 
exception of square lattices where anti-ferromagnetism is favored [12], Rashba SOC 
allows the interesting possibility that a ferromagnetic order in a system of magnetic 
impurities can be established via coupling to the superconducting condensate.  
 
Just like in a ferromagnet, where an external magnetic field is necessary to align 
magnetic domains, a long-range ferromagnetic order across the sample needs to be 
facilitated by applying a global supercurrent. In magnetic heterostructures with 
Rashba SOC, the magnetization follows hysteretic switching under external 
current [5,20]. The magnetic effect of an external supercurrent on a Rashba or Dirac 
superconductor with magnetic impurities has yet to be experimentally studied. In 
general, in the absence of a constant bias current or external magnetic field, both 
magnetization and anomalous supercurrents produce magnetic induction, the spatial 
distribution of which depends on sample geometry. Measuring such a magnetic signal 
and its evolution after applying a current may provide key evidence for the 
supercurrent-mediated long-range ferromagnetic coupling of magnetic impurities.  


 
The detection of current-induced magnetization in magnetic heterostructures typically 
relies on Hall resistance, which is regarded as proportional to the magnetization. Such 
a Hall response does not occur in a superconductor due to the vanishing resistance. 
Therefore, a technique directly sensitive to the magnetic induction from the 
magnetization and anomalous supercurrents is essential for detecting long-range 
magnetization in Rashba superconductors. In this work, we use scanning 
superconducting quantum interference device (sSQUID) microscopy [21–30] to 
perform magnetic imaging of a Rashba superconductor Fe(Se,Te) in the high 
interstitial Fe density regime.  
 
Observation of hysteretic magnetization with bias current in Fe(Se,Te) 
Fe-chalcogenide superconductor Fe(Se,Te) has exhibited strong spin-orbit coupling, 
which leads to superconducting topological surface states [31–35]. The excess Fe 
atoms occupy interstitial sites and act as magnetic impurities [36]. Scanning tunneling 
microscopy studies have found zero-energy bound states in vortex cores or interstitial 
Fe sites on its surface [33,37–39]. Signs of time-reversal symmetry breaking have also 
been reported on the surface states from photoemission spectroscopy [40] and 
nitrogen-vacancy center magnetometry [41]. However, these works have been carried 
out on Fe(Se,Te) samples in the low interstitial Fe density regime without applying 
any supercurrent.  
 
A high interstitial Fe concentration will completely suppress superconductivity [42–
44] but the impurity moments are not exchange-coupled if the density is too low. The 
impurity concentration we consider here have an average interstitial Fe distance close 
to the coherence length so that their critical temperatures are lower than the bulk 
superconducting samples [45,46]. For the particular sample shown in Figure 2a, its 
critical temperature is about 6 K (Fig. S1a). The suppression of superconductivity by 
magnetic impurities is more visible from the reduced diamagnetic susceptibility (Fig. 
2b) compared with that of the samples with <1% of interstitial Fe [8]. Flake samples 
with excess interstitial Fe tend to exhibit inhomogeneity in superfluid density [47] and 
this is evident from separated domains with different diamagnetic strength (Fig. 2b, 
dashed regions). The critical current of the lower domain is around 250 µA (Fig. 2c) 
when applying the current through the two top current leads, as indicated in Figure 2a. 
And unlike the quantum anomalous vortices observed in those samples, we do not 
observe any isolated vortices here, regardless of the cooling field.  
 
We image the flux response of Fe(Se,Te) under a bias current (𝐼%) at the base 
temperature of 1.5 K. There is no flux contrast after cooling the sample under zero-


field (Fig. 2d). Under a direct current of 𝐼% = 100 µA flowing from the top-left 
electrode to the one on the top-right, the flux signal is dominated by an out-of-plane 
Oersted field, which has opposite signs on the two sides of the current (Fig. 2e). The 
current distribution extracted from the flux image shows that the top part of the 
sample has a higher current density (Fig. 2f). As a result, the magnetic induction on 
most of the sample is less than 1 mG. Interestingly, the current flux within the sample 
changes sign when 𝐼% = 200 µA (Fig. 2g). The sign change rules out Oersted field-
generated vortices. The current distribution (Fig. 2h) shows a strong current density 
along the lower sample edge, which is consistent with earlier observations [42]. After 
𝐼% = 200 µA is removed (Fig. 2i), there is remanent flux with the same positive sign 
as the flux signal within the sample when the bias is applied (Fig. 2d). Reversing the 
direction of bias current to 𝐼% = −200 µA, we obtain a current flux image that shows 
the opposite sign (Figs. 2j and k). Removing 𝐼% = −200 µA also leaves remanent 
flux (Fig. 2l) but with the opposite sign from those after removing the positive peak 
current 𝐼& = 200 µA (Fig. 2i).  

 
We have observed such remanent flux in all the superconducting Fe(Se,Te) samples 
with a modest amount of Fe impurities (Fig. S7). But this effect is absent both in low 
interstitial Fe density samples in which quantum anomalous vortices are present and 
in highly doped non-superconducting samples. The induced magnetization does not 
affect diamagnetic susceptibility (Fig. S2b). The pattern of the remanent flux at 𝐼% =
0 µA after 𝐼& = 200 µA is applied is similar to the flux image at 𝐼% = 200 µA after 

subtracting the flux contribution from the supercurrent (𝛷(𝐼% = 200 µA) −
2 × 𝛷(𝐼% = 100 µA)) (Fig. S2a). The memory effect suggests a long-range 
magnetization facilitated by the bias supercurrent above a certain threshold.  
 
In order to understand how the remanent flux appears with the bias, we park the nano-
SQUID over the lower-right domain (Fig. 2d, yellow circle) and sweep 𝐼% 
continuously. Any remanent magnetization from previous rounds is erased by raising 
the temperature above 𝑇' and cooling down under zero-field and zero 𝐼% again. The 
thermal cycling results in a virgin state with zero flux (Fig. 3a, empty circle). As 𝐼% is 
increased from zero, the local flux signal Φ( is linearly proportional to 𝐼% with a 
negative slope. At 𝐼% ~ 140 µA, Φ( suddenly turns upwards and quickly crosses 
zero at 𝐼% ~ 160 µA. At 𝐼% = 200 µA, Φ( reaches the level consistent with the 
image (Fig. 2c). Upon reducing 𝐼%, Φ( first reduces slightly and then increases such 
that Φ( is positive when 𝐼% = 0. It keeps increasing when 𝐼% changes sign until 
𝐼% = −120 µA, when Φ( suddenly turns down sharply, crosses zero and then 
reaches negative value at 𝐼% = −200 µA. The upsweep from −200 µA is 
antisymmetric with the down sweep from 200 µA, and it merges with the virgin trace 


at 𝐼% = 140 µA, the current at which Φ( initially turned. Subsequent 𝐼% sweeps 
follow the large hysteretic loop. By subtracting the Oersted field contribution (which 
is linear with 𝐼%) from the current flux, we obtain a hysteresis loop of induced flux 
purely from the polarization of the sample by the supercurrent (Fig. 3b). It is 
reminiscent of a magnetization switched by current-induced spin-orbit torque in heavy 
metal-ferromagnet heterostructures [5].  
 
Anomalous supercurrents and long-range magnetization 
Since we notice an enhanced current density along the sample edge under a high bias 
(Figs. 2h and k), we investigate how it evolves from a low bias regime and its relation 
with the magnetic hysteresis. We take line cuts across the edge (Fig. 2e, blue line) 
from the flux images obtained under increasing 𝐼% after a zero-field cooling (Fig. 
S3). The flux contrast increases very slowly for small 𝐼% but shows a discontinuously 
sharp enhancement above 120 µA (Fig. 3c). The supercurrent density at the edge 
similarly exhibits a jump at this current (Fig. 3d), which is the same as the switching 
current in the ferromagnetic hysteresis loop (Fig. 3b). Both the intensity and the sign 
of the flux from this edge current are consistent with the remanent flux (Figs. 2i and 
l). This provides clear evidence that an anomalous supercurrent on the edge occurs 
after the bias current exceeds a threshold and remains there after the bias is removed.  
 
As discussed in the introduction, there are potentially two main sources that may 
contribute to the remanent flux signal in a Rashba superconductor. Besides the 
anomalous supercurrents 𝑱𝒂, the magnetization 𝑴𝑱 mediated by the supercurrent 

also produces magnetic induction (Figs. 1c and d). Since our sample has a finite 
thickness (about 300 nm), both the top and bottom surfaces have to be taken into 
account (Fig. 3e). Under an in-plane bias current 𝐼%, supercurrent passes through both 
surfaces equally and points in the same direction. But since the surface normals 𝒏 
are reversed on the two surfaces, their 𝑴𝑱, which are in-plane, are opposite from each 

other (Fig. 3e). Given that our scanning height of 1 µm is much larger than the 
separation between two surfaces, their 𝑴𝑱 flux signal basically cancels. On the other 
hand, since 𝑱𝒂’s from the two surfaces generated by 𝑴𝑱 go through another cross 

product with 𝒏, their signs are identical. Therefore, the remanent flux signal is twice 
the flux of 𝑱𝒂 from each surface, whose magnitude is proportional to its 𝑴𝑱.  

 
Using the above vectorial relations between magnetization and supercurrent, we can 
now understand the hysteretic magnetic behavior of Fe(Se,Te) with current bias. 
Under a current bias applied through the sample, a unidirectional supercurrent 𝑱𝑺 is 
established (Fig. 2h, blue lines). Noting that 𝑱𝒂 has opposite directions in the bulk 
and along the edges (Figs. 1d and 3e), we can see 𝑱𝒂 in the bulk (Fig. 2h, dark green 


lines) counters 𝑱𝑺 from the external bias, while the edge 𝑱𝒂 (Fig. 2h, light green 
lines) flows in the same direction as 𝑱𝑺. Although the total anomalous currents carried 
by the bulk and edge are the same, the current density is much higher along the edge 
(Figs. 1c and d). This causes a much-enhanced edge current density (Figs. 2h, k and 
3c) after the onset of 𝑴𝑱 when 𝐼% exceeds the threshold of 120 µA. Once the bias 

is removed, 𝑱𝑺 disappears and there is no net current through the sample (Fig. 2i). 
The edge and bulk 𝑱𝒂 circles around the sample with a distribution determined by the 
pattern of remanent 𝑴𝑱, which depends on how 𝐼% is applied and the geometry of 

the sample (Fig. S4).  
 
The ferromagnetic coupling mediated by the anomalous supercurrents between 
impurity moments is particularly sensitive to the loss of superconducting condensate. 
To show this, we again first generate the remanent flux by applying and then 
removing 𝐼% = −200 µA at the base temperature. We then increase the sample to a 
specific temperature 𝑇) and then cool it back to the base temperature for imaging 
(Fig. S5). The flux contrast reduces with increasing 𝑇) and disappears above 5 K. 
Plotting the flux contrast with resistance as a function of temperature (Fig. 3f), we 
find that 𝑴𝑱 is roughly constant below 𝑇) = 3 K and starts to decrease appreciably 

above that. While the superconductor is still in a zero-resistance state at 4 K, which is 
also evident from a small but finite superfluid density on the right domain of the 
sample (Fig. 3f), 𝑴𝑱 is halved upon reaching this temperature. At 5 K, the resistance 
is still an order of magnitude smaller than the normal state resistance. And yet, 𝑴𝑱 is 

almost completely invisible. This suggests that the long-range ferromagnetic ordering 
between magnetic impurities is disrupted by thermal fluctuations in the underlying 
superconducting condensate.  
 
Magnetization with an external field 
The ferromagnetic coupling between impurity moments can not only be mediated by a 
bias current but also by a circulating supercurrent from the Meissner effect. After 
zero-field cooling (Fig. 4a), we apply an out-of-plane magnetic field 𝐻 at base 
temperature much smaller than the lower critical field of Fe(Se,Te) (~ 500 Oe) [8] to 
induce the Meissner current. We image the flux signal with the field present and 
change the field after each scan. The flux response is diamagnetic at 𝐻 = 0.64 G for 
both the top and bottom domains (Fig. 4a). But at 𝐻 = 1.08 G the bottom part starts 
to turn positive, and the paramagnetic area grows bigger and stronger with increasing 
field (Fig. S6). At 𝐻 = 1.51 G, the lower domain is completely paramagnetic, while 
the top domain is still diamagnetic. Upon reducing 𝐻 = 0.64 G, however, the top 
domain also changes sign so that both domains are paramagnetic. This is in clear 
contrast with the flux signal at the same field from the upsweep. The positive flux 


signal remains after removing the field. The flux pattern after reaching 𝐻 = -1.51 G 
in a down-sweep and then returning to -0.64 G in an up-sweep is anti-symmetric with 
that at 1.51 G and 0.64 G in a reversed field history, respectively. And the remanent 
flux signal is negative upon returning to zero. The whole hysteresis loop with 𝐻 is 
better visualized by sampling one location within each domain (Fig. 4b). The overall 
hysteresis is consistent with the 𝑴𝑱 induced by a bias supercurrent.  

 
The remanent flux contrast induced by the Meissner current appears similar to that 
induced by the bias current. This is the case only because of the specific current leads 
used in the bias experiment. When we use electrodes located on the same side of the 
sample, a large part of the supercurrent circles around the sample (Figs. 2h and Figs. 
S4a-b), which is similar to the current distribution of the Meissner current (Fig. 4a). 
As a result, the magnetization texture is also composed of in-plane moments pointing 
towards or away from the center of the sample. However, when we use electrodes on 
the opposite side of the sample, the supercurrent flows unidirectionally (Fig. 3e and 
Fig. S4c). The remanent flux we obtain in this scenario is consistent with a uniform 
in-plane magnetization. A more thorough analysis of this scenario to examine the 
vectorial product relation between 𝑴𝑱 and 𝑱𝑺 due to the magneto-electric effect on 

the superconducting Dirac surface states is being carried out in a separate work.  
 
Discussion and outlook 
Recent theory [12] predicts ferromagnetic coupling between two impurity moments as 
long as they are in-plane, even if their distance is larger than 𝜆. But the ferromagnetic 
coupling energy decays with the distance, and it has to compete with the out-of-plane 
polarization in the quantum anomalous vortex-antivortex state, which is favored for 
isolated vortices [8,9]. A spontaneously tilted spin orientation [48] with 
antiferromagnetic out-of-plane and ferromagnetic in-plane configuration may occur at 
a distance larger than 𝜆 (Fig. 1b). The ferromagnetic order is also predicted over the 
antiferromagnetic order for magnetic impurities on a 2D oblique lattice in a large 
parameter space [12]. However, a full calculation for a disordered impurity 
distribution such as that in our experimental system is too computationally involved to 
perform at this point. We can only speculate here that the ferromagnetic order may be 
favored since the antiferromagnetic order typically requires a regular lattice without 
frustration, while ferromagnetic order depends less on the lattice [49]. Although a 
disordered state is also possible under three-dimensional random-site dipole 
interactions [50], the extra ferromagnetic term besides the dipole interaction in a two-
dimensional Rashba superconductor [12] may stabilize a ferromagnetic order.  
 
At last, we compare ferromagnetism in Rashba superconductors and conventional 


magnetic heterostructures with Rashba-type SOC with regard to potential 
applications. In both cases, the basic mechanism for switching is current-induced 
spin-orbit-torques [5]. Therefore, the magnetic dynamics similarly follow the Landau-
Lifshitz-Gilbert equation, which determines the fundamental timescale of the 
switching process. In the ferromagnet/heavy metal heterostructures, the switching 
current density is typically on the order of 10* A/cm2. In our Fe(Se,Te) 
superconductor, the switching current of 120 µA over a 50-µm-wide 300-nm-thick 
cross-section corresponds to a current density less than 1 × 10+ A/cm2. Since only 
the surface supercurrent is essential for the switching, it is plausible to further reduce 
the switching current density by fabricating thin film devices in order to reduce the 
current shunted by the bulk. Another significant advantage of being in the 
superconducting state while switching the magnetization is the elimination of power 
dissipation. One disadvantage of using a superconductor is that the magnetic state 
cannot be directly read out through the Hall resistance of the device. Nevertheless, 
electrical detection of the memory status is not difficult. Besides using SQUID as a 
flux-to-voltage converter, as we demonstrate, the anomalous supercurrents may be 
detected by the phase difference across Josephson junctions [51] in contact with the 
surface of Fe(Se,Te). In terms of non-volatility in the event that a low-temperature 
environment is lost, it is conceivable that the superconducting Dirac surface state may 
be proximitized by a conventional ferromagnet with easy-plane anisotropy as an 
interface between cryogenic and room-temperature spintronics [52,53]. 
 
In conclusion, we use sSQUID microscopy to uncover the anomalous supercurrent-
mediated ferromagnetic coupling between magnetic impurity moments in Fe(Se,Te). 
Supercurrent, whether it is applied through external bias or generated through the 
Meissner effect under a small out-of-plane magnetic field, polarizes impurity 
moments to form long-range surface magnetization. An anomalous edge supercurrent 
appears above a bias current threshold and remains after the bias is removed, which 
manifests the interaction mechanism. The temperature dependence of the remanent 
magnetization shows that the superconducting condensate is essential for the 
ferromagnetic interaction. These experimental results support a general mechanism in 
superconductors with Rashba SOC or Dirac surface states to mediate ferromagnetic 
coupling between localized magnetic moments through the condensate. The 
switchable and non-volatile magnetization state may serve as a cryogenic memory 
that can be interfaced with ferromagnets to facilitate the dissipationless conversion 
between spin and charge currents for applications in superconducting spintronics.  
 
 
 


 

Acknowledgement 

We would like to acknowledge support by National Key R&D Program of China 
(Grant No. 2021YFA1400100), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 
No. 11827805 and 12150003) and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology 
Major Project (Grant No. 2019SHZDZX01). Work at Zhejiang University is 
supported by National Key R&D program of China (Grant No. 2022YFA1403202) 
and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12074335). F.S.B 
and Y.L. acknowledge financial support from Spanish MCIN/AEI/ 
10.13039/501100011033 through project PID2020-114252GB-I00 (SPIRIT) and 
TED2021-130292B-C42, and the Basque Government through grant IT-1591-22. 
I.V.T. acknowledges support by Grupos Consolidados UPV/EHU del Gobierno Vasco 
(Grant IT1453-22) and by the grant PID2020-112811GB-I00 funded by 
MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033. All the authors are grateful for the discussion 
with S. Y. Yin, Y. Z. Wu and X. P. Qiu and experimental assistance by Q. He, L. Zhou 
and C. L. Zheng.  
 
 
 
References 

[1] M. A. Ruderman and C. Kittel, Indirect Exchange Coupling of Nuclear Magnetic Moments by 
Conduction Electrons, Phys. Rev. 96, 99 (1954). 
[2] T. Kasuya, A Theory of Metallic Ferro- and Antiferromagnetism on Zener’s Model, Prog. Theor. 
Phys. 16, 45 (1956). 
[3] K. Yosida, Magnetic Properties of Cu-Mn Alloys, Phys. Rev. 106, 893 (1957). 
[4] J. König, H.-H. Lin, and A. H. MacDonald, Theory of Diluted Magnetic Semiconductor 
Ferromagnetism, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5628 (2000). 
[5] A. Manchon, J. Železný, I. M. Miron, T. Jungwirth, J. Sinova, A. Thiaville, K. Garello, and P. 
Gambardella, Current-Induced Spin-Orbit Torques in Ferromagnetic and Antiferromagnetic 
Systems, Rev. Mod. Phys. 91, 035004 (2019). 
[6] R. Yu, W. Zhang, H.-J. Zhang, S.-C. Zhang, X. Dai, and Z. Fang, Quantized Anomalous Hall 
Effect in Magnetic Topological Insulators, Science 329, 61 (2010). 
[7] C. Chang et al., Experimental Observation of the Quantum Anomalous Hall Effect in a 
Magnetic Topological Insulator, Science 340, 167 (2013). 
[8] Y. S. Lin et al., Direct Observation of Quantum Anomalous Vortex in Fe(Se,Te), Phys. Rev. X 
13, 011046 (2023). 
[9] K. Jiang, X. Dai, and Z. Wang, Quantum Anomalous Vortex and Majorana Zero Mode in Iron-
Based Superconductor Fe(Te,Se), Physical Review X 9, 11033 (2019). 
[10] P. W. Anderson and H. Suhl, Spin Alignment in the Superconducting State, Phys. Rev. 116, 898 
(1959). 
[11] A. G. Mal’shukov, Nonexponential Long-Range Interaction of Magnetic Impurities in Spin-


Orbit Coupled Superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 98, 054504 (2018). 
[12] Y. Lu, I. V. Tokatly, and F. S. Bergeret, Superconductivity Induced Ferromagnetism In The 
Presence of Spin-Orbit Coupling, ArXiv:2307.10723 (2023). 
[13] F. S. Bergeret, K. B. Efetov, and A. I. Larkin, Nonhomogeneous Magnetic Order in 
Superconductor-Ferromagnet Multilayers, Phys. Rev. B 62, 11872 (2000). 
[14] V. M. Edelstein, Magnetoelectric Effect in Polar Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2004 
(1995). 
[15] F. S. Bergeret and I. V. Tokatly, Theory of the Magnetic Response in Finite Two-Dimensional 
Superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 102, 060506 (2020). 
[16] S. K. Yip, Two-Dimensional Superconductivity with Strong Spin-Orbit Interaction, Phys. Rev. 
B 65, 144508 (2002). 
[17] S. S. Pershoguba, K. Björnson, A. M. Black-Schaffer, and A. V. Balatsky, Currents Induced by 
Magnetic Impurities in Superconductors with Spin-Orbit Coupling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 116602 
(2015). 
[18] F. S. Bergeret and I. V. Tokatly, Manifestation of Extrinsic Spin Hall Effect in Superconducting 
Structures: Nondissipative Magnetoelectric Effects, Phys. Rev. B 94, 180502 (2016). 
[19] J. J. He, K. Hiroki, K. Hamamoto, and N. Nagaosa, Spin Supercurrent in Two-Dimensional 
Superconductors with Rashba Spin-Orbit Interaction, Commun Phys 2, 128 (2019). 
[20] M. Amundsen, J. Linder, J. W. A. Robinson, I. Žutić, and N. Banerjee, Colloquium: Spin-Orbit 
Effects in Superconducting Hybrid Structures, arXiv:2210.03549. 
[21] H. Hilgenkamp, H.-J. H. Smilde, D. H. A. Blank, G. Rijnders, H. Rogalla, J. R. Kirtley, and C. 
C. Tsuei, Ordering and Manipulation of the Magnetic Moments in Large-Scale Superconducting p-
Loop Arrays, Nature 422, 50 (2003). 
[22] C. Granata, Nano Superconducting Quantum Interference Device: A Powerful Tool for 
Nanoscale Investigations, Physics Reports 614, 1 (2016). 
[23] K. C. Nowack et al., Imaging Currents in HgTe Quantum Wells in the Quantum Spin Hall 
Regime, Nature Mater 12, 787 (2013). 
[24] L. Embon et al., Imaging of Super-Fast Dynamics and Flow Instabilities of Superconducting 
Vortices, Nat Commun 8, 85 (2017). 
[25] E. Persky, A. V. Bjørlig, I. Feldman, A. Almoalem, E. Altman, E. Berg, I. Kimchi, J. Ruhman, 
A. Kanigel, and B. Kalisky, Magnetic Memory and Spontaneous Vortices in a van Der Waals 
Superconductor, Nature 607, 692 (2022). 
[26] D. Jiang et al., Observation of Robust Edge Superconductivity in Fe(Se,Te) under Strong 
Magnetic Perturbation, Science Bulletin 66, 425 (2021). 
[27] Y. P. Pan, S. Y. Wang, X. Y. Liu, Y. S. Lin, L. X. Ma, Y. Feng, Z. Wang, L. Chen, and Y. H. 
Wang, 3D Nano-Bridge-Based SQUID Susceptometers for Scanning Magnetic Imaging of Quantum 
Materials, Nanotechnology 30, 305303 (2019). 
[28] Y. P. Pan, J. J. Zhu, Y. Feng, Y. S. Lin, H. B. Wang, X. Y. Liu, H. Jin, Z. Wang, L. Chen, and Y. 
H. Wang, Improving Spatial Resolution of Scanning SQUID Microscopy with an On-Chip Design, 
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 34, 115011 (2021). 
[29] B. K. Xiang, S. Y. Wang, Y. F. Wang, J. J. Zhu, H. T. Xu, and Y. H. Wang, Flux Focusing with 
a Superconducting Nanoneedle for Scanning SQUID Susceptometry, Microsyst Nanoeng 9, 78 
(2023). 
[30] J. Zhu et al., Direct Observation of Chiral Edge Current at Zero Magnetic Field in Odd-Layer 


MnBi2Te4, ArXiv:2307.10150 (2023). 
[31] P. Zhang et al., Observation of Topological Superconductivity on the Surface of an Iron-Based 
Superconductor, Science 360, 182 (2018). 
[32] P. D. Johnson, H.-B. Yang, J. D. Rameau, G. D. Gu, Z.-H. Pan, T. Valla, M. Weinert, and A. V. 
Fedorov, Spin-Orbit Interactions and the Nematicity Observed in the Fe-Based Superconductors, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 167001 (2015). 
[33] Z. Wang, J. O. Rodriguez, L. Jiao, S. Howard, M. Graham, G. D. Gu, T. L. Hughes, D. K. Morr, 
and V. Madhavan, Evidence for Dispersing 1D Majorana Channels in an Iron-Based 
Superconductor, Science 367, 104 (2020). 
[34] Z. Wang et al., Topological Nature of the FeSe0.5Te0.5 Superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 92, 115119 
(2015). 
[35] G. Xu, B. Lian, P. Tang, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, Topological Superconductivity on the 
Surface of Fe-Based Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 047001 (2016). 
[36] W. Bao et al., Tunable (Δπ,Δπ)-Type Antiferromagnetic Order in  α-Fe(Te,Se) 
Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 247001 (2009). 
[37] T. Machida, Y. Sun, S. Pyon, S. Takeda, Y. Kohsaka, T. Hanaguri, T. Sasagawa, and T. Tamegai, 
Zero-Energy Vortex Bound State in the Superconducting Topological Surface State of Fe(Se,Te), 
Nature Materials 18, 811 (2019). 
[38] M. Chen, X. Chen, H. Yang, Z. Du, X. Zhu, E. Wang, and H.-H. Wen, Discrete Energy Levels 
of Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon States in Quantum Limit in FeTe0.55Se0.45, Nat Commun 9, 970 (2018). 
[39] J. X. Yin et al., Observation of a Robust Zero-Energy Bound State in Iron-Based 
Superconductor Fe(Te,Se), Nature Physics 11, 543 (2015). 
[40] N. Zaki, G. Gu, A. Tsvelik, C. Wu, and P. D. Johnson, Time-Reversal Symmetry Breaking in 
the Fe-Chalcogenide Superconductors, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2007241118 (2021). 
[41] N. J. McLaughlin et al., Strong Correlation Between Superconductivity and Ferromagnetism 
in an Fe-Chalcogenide Superconductor, Nano Lett. 21, 7277 (2021). 
[42] D. Jiang et al., Observation of Robust Edge Superconductivity in Fe(Se,Te) under Strong 
Magnetic Perturbation, Science Bulletin 66, 425 (2021). 
[43] C. Dong, H. Wang, Z. Li, J. Chen, H. Q. Yuan, and M. Fang, Revised Phase Diagram for the 
FeTe1-XSex System with Fewer Excess Fe Atoms, Phys. Rev. B 84, 224506 (2011). 
[44] C. Dong, H. Wang, Q. Mao, R. Khan, X. Zhou, C. Li, J. Yang, B. Chen, and M. Fang, Phase 
Diagram and Annealing Effect for Fe1+δTe1−xSx Single Crystals, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 25, 
385701 (2013). 
[45] Y. Sun, T. Yamada, S. Pyon, and T. Tamegai, Influence of Interstitial Fe to the Phase Diagram 
of Fe1+yTe1−xSex Single Crystals, Sci Rep 6, 32290 (2016). 
[46] H. Zhao et al., Nematic Transition and Nanoscale Suppression of Superconductivity in 
Fe(Te,Se), Nature Physics 17, 903 (2021). 
[47] Y. Li et al., Electronic Properties of the Bulk and Surface States of Fe1+yTe1−xSex, Nat. Mater. 
20, 1221 (2021). 
[48] P. Fan et al., Observation of Magnetic Adatom-Induced Majorana Vortex and Its Hybridization 
with Field-Induced Majorana Vortex in an Iron-Based Superconductor, Nature Communications 12, 
1348 (2021). 
[49] V. M. Rozenbaum, Orientation States of Dipoles on 2D Bravais Lattices, Sov. Phys. JETP 72, 
1028 (1991). 


[50] B. E. Vugmeister and M. D. Glinchuk, Dipole Glass and Ferroelectricity in Random-Site 
Electric Dipole Systems, Rev. Mod. Phys. 62, 993 (1990). 
[51] E. Strambini et al., A Josephson Phase Battery, Nat. Nanotechnol. 15, 656 (2020). 
[52] Y. M. Shukrinov, I. R. Rahmonov, and A. E. Botha, Superconducting Spintronics in the 
Presence of Spin-Orbital Coupling, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 28, 1 (2018). 
[53] C. Guarcello and F. S. Bergeret, Cryogenic Memory Element Based on an Anomalous 
Josephson Junction, Physical Review Applied 13, 034012 (2020). 
 

 

 
 
 


 
Figures 

 

 

Figure 1. Ferromagnetic coupling between impurity moments via anomalous 
supercurrents on a Dirac surface band. a, For bulk states in a spin-orbit coupled 
superconductor, when two impurity distance 𝑎 is large (relative to the London 
penetration depth 𝜆 of the superconductor), the impurity moments 𝑺 (purple 
arrows) point out-of-plane to couple with a circulating supercurrent (green circles) 
and generate quantum anomalous vortices. b, For two impurity moments on the 
surface Dirac band, the in-plane component of 𝑺 generates anomalous supercurrents 
𝑱𝒂 (green lines) due to the surface Rashba field following the cross product: 𝑱𝒂 ∝
𝒏 × 𝑺, where 𝒏 is the surface normal. The distribution of 𝑱𝒂 around each spin has a 
dipole-like pattern. c, Top view of two impurity moments on the surface interacting 
through the anomalous supercurrents. When their distance 𝑎 ≲ 𝜆, the spins align 
along their center line to minimize the free energy. d, Cross-sectional view of 
impurity moments on a finite surface. The ferromagnetic coupling among impurities 
to form an in-plane long-range magnetization 𝑴𝑱 may be favored (with the 
exception of a square lattice). The 𝑱𝒂 in the bulk has a smaller magnitude and flows 
in the opposite direction from the 𝑱𝒂 on the edge.  
 
 


 

Figure 2. Supercurrent-induced magnetization. a, Optical image of the Fe(Se,Te) 
sample. Here, we use the outer two electrodes on the upper edge (blue arrows) for the 
source and drain of a bias current 𝐼%. b, Susceptometry image of right half of the 
sample at 𝑇 = 1.5 K. The lower part shows stronger diamagnetism than the upper 
part. c, Current-voltage characteristics of the lower part with the voltage drop 
measured across the probes shown in a. The critical current of this domain is about 
240 𝜇A at 1.5 K. d, The magnetometry image obtained after cooling under zero field 
and zero current shows no flux contrast. e and f, Magnetometry image and current 
density 𝑱, respectively, under a constant current bias 𝐼% = 100 𝜇A reached from zero 
after the virgin cooling. The current density is obtained from the current flux image by 
a fast Fourier transform. The grayscale is the normalized intensity of 𝑱 and the 
streamlines trace the current flow (same below). g and h, Magnetometry image and 
current density, respectively, under 𝐼% = 200 𝜇A. Note that the flux signal in g 
changes sign from e with the same sample bias direction. i, Remanent flux signal after 
reaching 𝐼& = 200 𝜇A and then returning to 𝐼% = 0 𝜇A. j and k, Magnetometry 
image and current density, respectively, under 𝐼% = −200 𝜇A. l, Remanent flux signal 
after reaching 𝐼& = −200 𝜇A and then returning to 𝐼% = 0 𝜇A. All the scale bars are 
20 𝜇m. The remanent flux corresponds to an anomalous supercurrent distribution 𝑱𝑨 
with a large magnitude on the edge.  
 
 


 

Figure 3. Hysteresis of remanent flux and anomalous edge current. a, Flux 
hysteresis loop as a function of 𝐼% obtained at a fixed location (Fig. 2d, yellow 
mark). The loop starts from a virgin cool (yellow circle at the origin), up sweeps to 
200 𝜇A (black points), down sweeps to −200 𝜇A (magenta points) and then up 
sweeps to 200 𝜇A (green points) to complete the loop. b, Flux hysteresis loop after 
subtracting the direct flux contribution of the bias current from that in a. c, The flux 
line cuts across the edge as labeled in Fig. 2e obtained under increasing 𝐼%’s after a 
zero-field cool (Fig. S3). d, Peak supercurrent density on the same edge and extracted 
from the same flux images as in c. There is a sudden jump in edge current density at 
𝐼% = 120 𝜇A. e, Illustration of the vectorial product relation between supercurrent and 
magnetization of a Dirac system with finite thickness. The bias induces a supercurrent 
distribution 𝑱𝒔 (blue arrows) flowing in the same direction in the top and bottom 
surfaces. The supercurrent leads to a surface magnetization 𝑴𝑱 (Magenta arrows) 
following 𝑴𝑱 ∝ 𝒏 × 𝑱𝑺, where 𝒏 is the surface normal. Magnetization on the bottom 
surface 𝑴𝑱

. is opposite from 𝑴𝑱. Due to the spin-galvanic (or magnetoelectric) 

effect, 𝑴𝑱 induces an anomalous current 𝑱𝒂 ∝ 𝒏 × 𝑴𝑱. 𝑱𝑨 in the bulk (dark green 
arrows) are opposite from 𝑱𝑺 while those on the edge (light green arrows) flow in the 
same direction. 𝑱𝒂 in the top and bottom surfaces are equal and in the same direction. 
After removing the bias, the remanent flux is largely due to the 𝑱𝒂, which is 
proportional to the remanent 𝑴𝑱 in each surface. f, Temperature dependence of 
resistance (magenta line) and the magnetization extracted from the images of Fig. S5.  
 
 


 

Figure 4. Hysteretic switching by Meissner current. a, Representative 
magnetometry images of the sample at different out-of-plane magnetic fields 𝐻 as 
indicated above the panels. The sequence starts with a virgin cool under zero field and 
zero bias current (the middle panel). The maximum 𝐻 = 1.51 G applied during the 
sequence is much smaller than the lower critical field of Fe(Se,Te). As a result, the 
direct effect of 𝐻 is to induce a Meissner current circulating around the sample (blue 
circles). Scale bars are 20 𝜇m. b, Magnetic flux of the lower (red) and upper (blue) 
domains as a function of 𝐻 extracted from magnetometry images (full set shown in 
Fig. S6). The sequence starts at the yellow circle. 
 

 


