Machine Learning Predictions of High-Curie-Temperature Materials
Joshua F. Belot,1 Valentin Taufour,2 Stefano Sanvito,3 and Gus L. W. Hart4

1)Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA, 84602
2)University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA, USA, 95616
3)School of Physics, AMBER and CRANN Institute, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland
4)Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA, 84602

(*Electronic mail: gus.hart@byu.edu)

(Dated: 14 July 2023)

Technologies that function at room temperature often require magnets with a high Curie temperature, TC, and can be
improved with better materials. Discovering magnetic materials with a substantial TC is challenging because of the
large number of candidates and the cost of fabricating and testing them. Using the two largest known data sets of
experimental Curie temperatures, we develop machine-learning models to make rapid TC predictions solely based on
the chemical composition of a material. We train a random forest model and a k-NN one and predict on an initial dataset
of over 2,500 materials and then validate the model on a new dataset containing over 3,000 entries. The accuracy is
compared for multiple compounds’ representations (“descriptors”) and regression approaches. A random forest model
provides the most accurate predictions and is not improved by dimensionality reduction or by using more complex
descriptors based on atomic properties. A random forest model trained on a combination of both datasets shows that
cobalt-rich and iron-rich materials have the highest Curie temperatures for all binary and ternary compounds. An
analysis of the model reveals systematic error that causes the model to over-predict low-TC materials and under-predict
high-TC materials. For exhaustive searches to find new high-TC materials, analysis of the learning rate suggests either
that much more data is needed or that more efficient descriptors are necessary.

Ferromagnetic materials are essential in modern technolo-
gies especially in energy production and data storage. The
threshold temperature where magnetism disappears is called
the Curie temperature, TC.
Searches for high-TC materials
typically look for magnets with a TC of at least 550–600 K,
which is required for reliably running an application at room
temperature.1,2 High-TC magnets are valuable but rare,1,3,4 in
particular when other properties are required on their elec-
tronic structure.5 Although some empirical rules for the de-
sign of new magnets exist6, rapid predictions of Curie temper-
atures could assist in identifying candidate high-TC magnets
in large-scale screening exercises.
Thousands of known fer-
romagnetic materials exist7, and while high-throughput com-
putation can help in identifying hundreds of thousands of po-
tential magnets, experience suggests that only a fraction of
them can actually be realized.3,8–10

Measuring the Curie temperature of a compound is a rel-
atively standard and accurate procedure, but of course needs
the material to be made first. In contrast, in a computational
design process, the TC must be predicted ahead of experi-
ments, only using physical and chemical information. This
is a complex task prone to large errors. In fact, one needs
to compute the elementary magnetic excitations of a com-
pound, most typically from density functional theory (DFT),
map these on a simple model, usually a Heisenberg-type one,
and then perform thermodynamic sampling with Monte Carlo
methods.11–26 Then, the choice of DFT functional, the qual-
ity and appropriateness of the mapping, and subtleties in the
Monte Carlo algorithms, all contribute to a large uncertainty
on the predictions. Often this uncertainty is so severe that
blind predictions of TC for unknown compounds are almost
impossible to make.

Machine-learning algorithms capture complex relation-
ships
in
data
that
may
be
difficult
to
recognize
or

understand.27 Even though machine-learning models often
have low interpretability, they can provide cheap Curie tem-
perature predictions. Rapid predictions can be a first step in
screening computer-suggested materials, so that experimental
efforts can be more selective.

Algorithms such as ridge regression, kernel ridge re-
gression, neural networks, and random forest have been
trained on experimental data and used to predict Curie
temperatures.1,8,28–34. Most of these studies were limited to
specific structural or chemical families, and used a relatively
small dataset (< 1800) for training which limited the ability
to generalize the results to other less known families. In this
work, a random-forest model is trained on an initial dataset of
the chemical compositions of over 2,500 ferromagnetic mate-
rials1. We then used a larger dataset of ∼ 31007 for a “blind
test”, which shows our model to have good generalization.
Then we built a model using the combined dataset. This is, by
far, the largest dataset to be used in this kind of study.

In general, the crystal structure affects the Curie tempera-
ture and there have been attempts to incorporate structural in-
formation into different machine-learning models with vary-
ing degrees of success.
In some cases, Curie temperature
predictions that utilize known structural data are more ac-
curate, in particular when the structural diversity present in
the dataset is limited.7,8,29,31,36–38 However, the use of struc-
tural information in a larger and more diverse set of data, may
have an adverse effect on the TC predictions.1 Furthermore,
the lack of available structural information excludes a large
portion of experimental data which weakens the model’s pre-
dictive power. The use of structural data in training a machine
learning model also limits predictions to materials with known
structure. In this work, we avoid these problems and exploit
our large corpus of magnetic data in DS1 and DS2 by using
models and data that do not include structural information.

arXiv:2307.06879v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  13 Jul 2023


2

FIG. 1. (a) Experimental data (DS1) projected
from the 85-dimensional feature space to two
dimensions in a t-SNE35 plot. Colors were as-
signed based on the majority element in each
compound.
(b) DS1 represented as a two-
dimensional t-SNE plot. Colors were assigned
based on the Curie temperature.
Two com-
pounds, Fe1Ni3 and Cr2Pt3, have anomalously
high Curie temperatures, relative to others in the
same cluster.

In reference [1], a random forest model was used to predict
the Curie temperature based solely on chemical composition.
In this work, we first use the same data (DS1) and attempt to
improve the predictions by trying different machine-learning
models and alternate descriptors. Using the random forest
model trained on DS1 to make predictions on a new set of

experimental data (DS2),7 we find that the model generalizes
quite well but the prediction errors are 90 K (MAE) as com-
pared to 69 K (MAE). Next, we combine DS1 and DS2 to
build a new model and scan over 100s of thousands of po-
tential new magnets. In the process, we find that the errors
between the experimental and predicted Curie temperatures


3

FIG. 2. (a) Experimental data (DS2) projected
from the 85-dimensional feature space to two
dimensions in a t-SNE35 plot. Colors were as-
signed based on the majority element in each
compound.
(b) DS2 represented as a two-
dimensional t-SNE plot. Colors were assigned
based on the Curie temperature.

reveal a previously unnoticed systematic error.
We cleaned both DS1 and DS2 according to the methods
outlined in Ref. [1]. Both datasets had many duplicate com-
pounds often with different reported experimental Curie tem-
peratures. The duplicates were eliminated by selecting only
the median Curie temperature in order to retain an actual mea-

sured value of the TC. In DS1, we also added entries for each
of the non-magnetic elements found in the data and set the
Curie temperature to zero. After cleaning the raw data, DS1
contains the Curie temperatures of 2,557 unique compounds
and DS2 contains 3,194. There is an overlap of 1,189 com-
pounds between DS1 and DS2. Our feature vector has 85 fea-


4

FIG. 3. k-nearest neighbor and random forest predictions. (Left) Prediction with k-NN model with k = 2. 44% of the TC predictions were
within 50 K of the actual values and 64% were within 100 K. The mean absolute error was 109 K (A 2-NN model with randomly shuffled TC
values gives a MAE of 270 K). (Right) Random forest prediction. 62% of the TC predictions were within 50 K of the actual values and 78%
were within 100 K. The mean absolute error was 69 K. (A random forest model with randomly shuffled TC values gives a MAE of 240 K).

FIG. 4. Random forest model trained on DS1 and validated with
DS2. 54% of the TC predictions for DS2 were within 50 K of the
actual values and 70% were within 100 K. The mean absolute error
was 90 K.

tures, each one describing a distinct element found in the data.
Each compound is characterized by placing the percentage
that each element occupies in the compound in the appropri-
ate feature. For each machine-learning prediction, a randomly

selected third of the compounds in DS1 was used as the test
data and the other two thirds were used to train the models.
It is not possible to visualize the data in 85 dimensions.
However, a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding35 (t-
SNE) projection reduces the data to two dimensions and may
reveal data clustering. Figure 1(a) shows the t-SNE plot for
DS1, where each point is colored by the majority element in
the compound. The red circles show areas where compounds
with the same majority element cluster together. Figure 1(b)
shows the same t-SNE plot but with the colors corresponding
to the Curie temperatures of each compound. Each point in
these plots represents a magnetic compound in the dataset. A
comparison of the two plots reveal that most of the high-TC
materials have a majority element of either cobalt or iron. It
also shows that there are occasional high-TC spikes in clusters
where the TC is typically very low (for example, FeNi3 and
Cr2Pt3). Figure 2 shows similar plots for DS2.
In Ref. [1], ridge regression, kernel ridge regression, neural
networks, and random-forest machine-learning methods were
all tested and the random-forest model made the most accurate
predictions. We used DS1 in a k-nearest neighbors model and
compared its performance to the accuracy of the random forest
model. The k-NN algorithm was varied for 1 to 20 neighbors
to determine the optimal k. A k-NN model with 2 neighbors
provided best prediction accuracy but was not as good as the
random forest (see Fig. 3).
To see how well the DS1 random forest model generalizes

on unseen data, we did a “blind” test on all the data in DS2
(see Fig. 4). 54% of the predicted Curie temperatures were
within 50 K and 70% within 100 K. The mean absolute error
was 90 K. This is a larger error than the CV score on DS1 data,
however, the model still makes relatively accurate predictions


5

FIG. 5. Random forest prediction using features based on the com-
position and 20 of the features generated by the MAST-ML39 Python
library. 62% of the TC predictions for DS1 were within 50 K of the
actual values and 78% were within 100 K The mean absolute error
was 69 K. 57% of the TC predictions for the MAST-ML data were
within 50 K of the actual values and 77% were within 100 K The
mean absolute error was 70 K.

on around 2,000 previously unseen magnets. We also used k-
fold cross validation to show how the addition of DS2 data
affects our predictive accuracy. 50 iterations of 3-fold cross
validation shows that DS1 averages an MAE of 73 K and a
standard deviation of 3.2. A combination of DS1 and DS2
averages an MAE of 71 K and a standard deviation of 2.3

While the random-forest results are encouraging, a few dif-
ferent strategies were tried to improve the random-forest pre-
dictions. One of these strategies is to reduce the number of
dimensions in the DS1 design matrix. A random forest was
made for a range (5–85) of features using principal compo-
nent analysis (PCA). PCA is not helpful to our model because,
although noisy, the change in mean absolute error for each
dataset shows that the accuracy improves up to about 60 fea-
tures and stops improving after that as already observed in
Ref. [1].
Another improvement strategy is designing better features.
The MAST-ML39 Python library can generate descriptors
based on about one hundred atomic properties (such as ionic
radius, electronegativity, etc.). Using MAST-ML, we gener-
ated 428 features for the compounds in DS1 and selected the
top 20 most meaningful ones identified through MAST-ML’s
EnsembleModelFeatureSelector method which uses a
random forest model to rank feature importance.
Figure 5

shows these features used in a random forest and the compar-
ison between these predictions and our random forest model
predictions in Fig 3. The MAST-ML features yield practi-
cally the same accuracy as with the original features. This is
somewhat surprising because the MAST-ML descriptors in-
corporate many atomic properties, not merely the composi-

FIG. 6. Random forest prediction with a balanced dataset. The Curie
temperatures of the test data above 600 K were predicted with an
accuracy of 37% of the data within 50 K and 49% within 100 K. The
mean absolute error for those points was 141 K.

FIG. 7. MAE vs the amount of training data in a combined set of DS1
and DS2. For each iteration the test data was a new random sample of
850 compounds while the training data was randomly sampled from
the remaining data.

tion. However, reference [40] shows that the domain knowl-
edge in the generated features is not expected to improve pre-
diction accuracy over simple fractional features when using
large amounts of data. Our results suggest that DS1 is large
enough to make an accurate model using our original frac-
tional features. While the size of ML model using the MAST-
ML descriptors is significantly smaller than the size of the
model using the composition-only descriptors, both models
have the same accuracy and both are efficient enough to be
used in the large searches below. Our final models used the


6

composition-only descriptors.
Getting more balanced training data may be another way to
improve the model. An analysis of DS1 shows a significant
imbalance, 38% of the magnetic materials have a TC 0 − 100
K, while only 15% have a TC 600 − 1400 K. This could lead
the model to reduce the prediction error at low temperatures
at the expense of making larger errors at high temperatures.
This is counter to the purpose of the model, which is that to
discover candidate high-TC magnets. Thus, we downsampled
the low-TC compounds to more evenly distribute DS1. The re-
sulting model is shown in Fig. 6. Even though there is a high
density of low-TC compounds, apparently they are necessary
for accurate predictions of higher-TC compounds. The bal-
anced data predictions for high TC materials are not as good
as with the origin model, with an accuracy of 10% less within
50 K, 14% less within 100 K, and the mean absolute error 14 K
higher.
Let us make one final comment before using the ML model
to search for new high-TC.
With this unprecedented large
database of magnetic compounds, a large range of training
set sizes are possible so that the learning rate of the model can
be estimated. Figure 7 shows the MAE on a test set of 850
compounds (approximately 1/3 the size of DS1, similar to the
predictions in Fig. 3) while the training set is increased, us-
ing the remaining data. The process was repeated 100 times
and averaged. A linear fit reveals a slope of ≈ −0.22. This
learning rate is not particularly fast, but a better learning rate
is probably not possible with composition-only descriptors.
To reduce the MAE to 50 K in the current model class would
require a near tripling of the data.
The purpose of the ML model is to enable identification of
candidate high-TC materials. Our first attempt was to sweep
over compositions of binary materials, but this revealed a sys-
tematic error. The error persists independent of the training
data (DS1 or DS2), the particular ML method (random forest,
k-NN), or the descriptors. Figure 8 compares the predictions
with the experimental TC of eight different sets of binary sys-
tems. The top four red subplots analyze four different high-TC
materials and the four lower blue subplots analyze four differ-
ent low-TC materials. Each subplot shows the actual TC value
(red points) compared to the ML prediction (black line). A
clear pattern emerges: between experimental data points, the
ML model, instead of interpolating smoothly, drifts towards
the average TC of the training data (293 K). In the case of high-
TC materials, deep “valleys” occur in the absence of nearby
experimental data. And for low-TC materials, the model tends
to overestimate between training points. In a pattern reminis-
cent of Gaussian processes, the model tends to “regress toward
the mean”.
This systematic drift toward the mean can be seen across
all the test data in Fig. 9(left), which shows the difference be-
tween the predicted and the experimental TC for the test data
as a function of the experimental TC (the random forest model
using DS1). Intuition suggests that this systematic error could
be mitigated simply by shifting and re-scaling according to
the black line in the figure. However, the Fig. 9(right) demon-
strates that this does not work. The errors and the predicted
TC’s are not correlated. The reader should remember that cor-

relation is not transitive in general. Although the errors are
correlated with the experimental TC’s, and the experimental
and predicted TC’s are correlated, the errors and the predicted
TC’s are not necessarily correlated.
Recognizing the systematic error in predictions and being
more interested in the accuracy of high-TC predictions, we
trained a random forest model on a combined set of DS1 and
DS2 but only included the 967 compounds with TC > 600 K
thus boosting the mean of the training data from 293 K to
825 K and mitigating the regression to the mean. Obviously
this new model cannot be used to predict low-TC materials
but as we are primarily concerned with high-TC materials, this
new model with a higher average protects the predictions from
straying too far in data-deficient areas.
This new high-TC-only model was used to search compo-
sition space for all binary and ternary candidate compounds
with exceptionally high-TC.
The high-TC-only model used
only 71 features, restricted to elements that appear in com-
pounds with TC > 600 K. Figs 1 and 2 show that most of the
highest-TC compounds contain either cobalt, iron, or both. Us-
ing these elements, we generated every possible ternary com-
bination containing iron, cobalt, and one of the other 69 ele-
ments (X1) in 1% increments. The random forest model can
rapidly predict TC for this entire set. Figure 10 displays the
maximum predicted TC of each combination of cobalt, iron,
and X1.
While cobalt clearly dominates the high-TC com-
pounds, materials with a high iron concentration also are pre-
dicted to have a high TC and are worth exploring because iron
is much cheaper than cobalt42. Figure 11 shows similar pre-
dictions but for iron-rich ternary and binary candidates, which
are inexpensive. These predictions suggest that, at least in
general, for maximizing TC, it is difficult to beat cobalt-rich
materials, and that for minimizing materials cost for a rela-
tively high TC, iron-rich materials are difficult to beat. Other
searches excluding cobalt and iron were also performed but
no competitive materials emerged.
Unsuspected high-TC materials sometimes appear. For ex-
ample, see FeNi3 and Cr2Pt3 in Fig. 1—these turn up in clus-
ters with very low Curie temperatures. But atomic structure,
not merely composition, evidently plays an essential role in
such materials. Devoid of explicit structure in the training data
or the model, our predictions cannot be expected to include
such candidates. Our models can learn a major portion of the
relationship between chemical composition and Curie temper-
ature and thus generally predict quite accurately. But it seems
that finding exceptional cases will require data that includes
structural information and a model that incorporates explicit
relationships between magnetism and structure. As discussed
at the beginning, the reliability of such models remains chal-
lenging, and corresponding data is limited, so computational
discovery of new high-TC remains an outstanding challenge.
a.
Supplementary Material
The supplementary material
includes two error plots from the 2-NN predictions shown in
the left plot of Fig. 3. It also includes a plot of the number
of features reduced by PCA vs. the MAE of the predictions
made by a random forest model using that number of features.
b.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Mark
Transtrum for useful discussions about the systematic error


7

FIG. 8.
Eight plots show-
ing the Curie temperatures for
eight
different
binary
com-
pounds. Horizontal rows share
the same scale on the y axis.
The black lines show the ran-
dom forest predicted Curie tem-
peratures across the entire com-
position range (step size: +1 at
- %). The red dots are experi-
mental data.

in Fig. 9. J.F.B. was generously supported by the College
of Physical and Mathematical Sciences at Brigham Young
University. J.F.B also acknowledges the mentorship provided
by Ben Afflerbach and the Informatics Skunkworks Program.
G.L.W.H. was supported by the U.S. National Science Foun-
dation under Award #DMR-1817321.
V.T. acknowledges
funding from the Critical Materials Institute, an Energy In-
novation Hub funded by the U.S. Department of Energy Ad-
vanced Manufacturing Office. S.S. Acknowledges financial
support from the Irish Research Council (IRCLA/2019/127).

c.
Data Availability
The data and code to repro-
duce
the
findings
of
this
study
are
available
here:

https://github.com/msg-byu/ML-for-CurieTemp-Predictions.

1J. Nelson and S. Sanvito, “Predicting the curie temperature of ferromagnets
using machine learning,” Physical Review Materials 3, 104405 (2019).

2J. Coey, “Perspective and prospects for rare earth permanent magnets,” En-
gineering 6, 119–131 (2020).

3S. Curtarolo, G. L. Hart, M. B. Nardelli, N. Mingo, S. Sanvito, and O. Levy,
“The high-throughput highway to computational materials design,” Nature
materials 12, 191–201 (2013).


8

FIG. 9. Prediction error of the random forest model (experimental minus prediction). (Left) Error versus experimental TC values. (Right) Error
versus predicted TC values. The black line is the line of best fit. The errors are correlated with the experimental TC but not with the predicted
TC.

FIG. 10. Heat map showing the maximum predicted TC of each com-
bination of cobalt, iron, and X1 where X1 can be any element in mate-
rials with a TC over 600 K found in DS1 and DS2 (excluding cobalt
and iron). TC is measured in Kelvins. Plot created using Python-
Ternary.41

4H. A. Merker, H. Heiberger, L. Nguyen, T. Liu, Z. Chen, N. Andrejevic,
N. C. Drucker, R. Okabe, S. E. Kim, Y. Wang, et al., “Machine learn-
ing magnetism classifiers from atomic coordinates,” Iscience 25, 105192
(2022).

5E. Y. Vedmedenko, R. K. Kawakami, D. D. Sheka, P. Gambardella, A. Kiri-
lyuk, A. Hirohata, C. Binek, O. Chubykalo-Fesenko, S. Sanvito, B. J. Kirby,
J. Grollier, K. Everschor-Sitte, T. Kampfrath, C.-Y. You, and A. Berger,
“The 2020 magnetism roadmap,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 53, 453001
(2020).

6J. M. Coey, Magnetism and magnetic materials (Cambridge university
press, 2010).

7J. K. Byland, Y. Shi, D. S. Parker, J. Zhao, S. Ding, R. Mata, H. E. Magliari,
A. Palasyuk, S. L. Bud’ko, P. C. Canfield, et al., “Statistics on magnetic
properties of co compounds: A database-driven method for discovering co-
based ferromagnets,” Physical Review Materials 6, 063803 (2022).

8A. Kabiraj, M. Kumar, and S. Mahapatra, “High-throughput discovery of
high curie point two-dimensional ferromagnetic materials,” npj Computa-

FIG. 11. Heat map showing the maximum predicted TC of each com-
bination of iron, X1, and X2 where X1 and X2 can be any element
in materials with a TC over 600 K found in DS1 and DS2 exclud-
ing cobalt and iron. Each compound is composed of a minimum of
80% iron. TC is measured in Kelvins. Plot created using Python-
Ternary.41 (This plot should not be directly compared with Fig. 10
because of the difference in color scales.)

tional Materials 6, 35 (2020).

9T. Graf, C. Felser, and S. S. Parkin, “Simple rules for the understanding of
heusler compounds,” Progress in solid state chemistry 39, 1–50 (2011).

10S. Sanvito, C. Oses, J. Xue, A. Tiwari, M. Zic, T. Archer, P. Tozman,
M. Venkatesan, M. Coey, and S. Curtarolo, “Accelerated discovery of new
magnets in the heusler alloy family,” Science Advances 3, e1602241 (2017),
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.1602241.

11W. Nolting, A. Vega, and T. Fauster, “Electronic quasiparticle structure
of ferromagnetic bcc iron,” Zeitschrift für Physik B Condensed Matter 96,
357–372 (1995).

12J. Kübler, “Ab initio estimates of the curie temperature for magnetic com-
pounds,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 18, 9795 (2006).

13J. Kübler, G. Fecher, and C. Felser, “Understanding the trend in the curie
temperatures of co 2-based heusler compounds: Ab initio calculations,”
Physical Review B 76, 024414 (2007).


9

14S. Halilov, A. Perlov, P. Oppeneer, and H. Eschrig, “Magnon spectrum and
related finite-temperature magnetic properties: A first-principle approach,”
Europhysics Letters 39, 91 (1997).

15F. Körmann, A. Dick, B. Grabowski, B. Hallstedt, T. Hickel, and J. Neuge-
bauer, “Free energy of bcc iron: Integrated ab initio derivation of vi-
brational, electronic, and magnetic contributions,” Physical Review B 78,
033102 (2008).

16N. M. Rosengaard and B. Johansson, “Finite-temperature study of itinerant
ferromagnetism in fe, co, and ni,” Phys. Rev. B 55, 14975–14986 (1997).

17M. Ležai´c, P. Mavropoulos, and S. Blügel, “First-principles prediction of
high curie temperature for ferromagnetic bcc-co and bcc-feco alloys and
its relevance to tunneling magnetoresistance,” Applied physics letters 90,
082504 (2007).

18J. Rusz, L. Bergqvist, J. Kudrnovský, and I. Turek, “Exchange interactions
and curie temperatures in ni2−xMnSb alloys: First-principles study,” Phys.
Rev. B 73, 214412 (2006).

19A. V. Ruban, S. Khmelevskyi, P. Mohn, and B. Johansson, “Temperature-
induced longitudinal spin fluctuations in fe and ni,” Phys. Rev. B 75, 054402
(2007).

20T. Tanaka and Y. Gohda, “Prediction of the curie temperature considering
the dependence of the phonon free energy on magnetic states,” npj Compu-
tational Materials 6, 184 (2020).

21F. Körmann, A. Dick, T. Hickel, and J. Neugebauer, “Pressure dependence
of the curie temperature in bcc iron studied by ab initio simulations,” Phys-
ical Review B 79, 184406 (2009).

22A. I. Liechtenstein, M. Katsnelson, V. Antropov, and V. Gubanov, “Lo-
cal spin density functional approach to the theory of exchange interactions
in ferromagnetic metals and alloys,” Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic
Materials 67, 65–74 (1987).

23M. Pajda, J. Kudrnovsk`y, I. Turek, V. Drchal, and P. Bruno, “Ab initio
calculations of exchange interactions, spin-wave stiffness constants, and
curie temperatures of fe, co, and ni,” Physical Review B 64, 174402 (2001).

24I. Turek, J. Rusz, and M. Diviš, “Electronic structure and volume magne-
tostriction of rare-earth metals and compounds,” Journal of magnetism and
magnetic materials 290, 357–363 (2005).

25Q. Gong, M. Yi, R. F. Evans, B.-X. Xu, and O. Gutfleisch, “Calculating
temperature-dependent properties of nd 2 fe 14 b permanent magnets by
atomistic spin model simulations,” Physical Review B 99, 214409 (2019).

26C. Takahashi, M. Ogura, and H. Akai, “First-principles calculation of the
curie temperature slater–pauling curve,” Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 19, 365233 (2007).

27Z. Song, X. Chen, F. Meng, G. Cheng, C. Wang, Z. Sun, and W.-J. Yin,
“Machine learning in materials design: Algorithm and application,” Chi-
nese Physics B 29, 116103 (2020).

28S.
Sanvito,
C.
Oses,
J.
Xue,
A.
Tiwari,
M.
Zic,
T.
Archer,
P. Tozman,
M. Venkatesan,
M. Coey,
and S. Curtarolo, “Ac-
celerated
discovery
of
new
magnets
in
the
heusler
alloy
fam-
ily,”
Science
Advances
3
(2017),
10.1126/sciadv.1602241,

http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/4/e1602241.full.pdf.

29D.-N. Nguyen, T.-L. Pham, V.-C. Nguyen, A.-T. Nguyen, H. Kino,
T. Miyake, and H.-C. Dam, “A regression-based model evaluation of the
curie temperature of transition-metal rare-earth compounds,” in Journal of
Physics: Conference Series, Vol. 1290 (IOP Publishing, 2019) p. 012009.

30X. Zhai, M. Chen, and W. Lu, “Accelerated search for perovskite materi-
als with higher curie temperature based on the machine learning methods,”
Computational Materials Science 151, 41–48 (2018).

31T. Long, N. M. Fortunato, Y. Zhang, O. Gutfleisch, and H. Zhang, “An
accelerating approach of designing ferromagnetic materials via machine
learning modeling of magnetic ground state and curie temperature,” Ma-
terials Research Letters 9, 169–174 (2021).

32H. C. Dam, V. C. Nguyen, T. L. Pham, A. T. Nguyen, K. Terakura,
T. Miyake, and H. Kino, “Important descriptors and descriptor groups of
curie temperatures of rare-earth transition-metal binary alloys,” Journal of
the Physical Society of Japan 87, 113801 (2018).

33X. Hu, Y. Zhang, S. Fan, X. Li, Z. Zhao, C. He, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, and
W. Xie, “Searching high spin polarization ferromagnet in heusler alloy via
machine learning,” J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 32, 205901 (2020).

34S. Lu, Q. Zhou, Y. Guo, and J. Wang, “On-the-fly interpretable machine
learning for rapid discovery of two-dimensional ferromagnets with high
Curie temperature,” Chem 8, 769–783 (2022).

35F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel,
M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos,
D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn:
Machine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research 12,
2825–2830 (2011).

36P. V. Balachandran, “Machine learning guided design of functional materi-
als with targeted properties,” Computational Materials Science 164, 82–90
(2019).

37P. V. Balachandran, D. Xue, and T. Lookman, “Structure–curie temperature
relationships in batio 3-based ferroelectric perovskites: anomalous behavior
of (ba, cd) tio 3 from dft, statistical inference, and experiments,” Physical
Review B 93, 144111 (2016).

38X. Chen, S. Lu, X. Wan, Q. Chen, Q. Zhou, and J. Wang, “Accurate prop-
erty prediction with interpretable machine learning model for small datasets
via transformed atom vector,” Physical Review Materials 6, 123803 (2022).

39R. Jacobs, T. Mayeshiba, B. Afflerbach, L. Miles, M. Williams, M. Turner,
R. Finkel, and D. Morgan, “The materials simulation toolkit for machine
learning (mast-ml): An automated open source toolkit to accelerate data-
driven materials research,” Computational Materials Science 176, 109544
(2020).

40R. J. Murdock, S. K. Kauwe, A. Y.-T. Wang, and T. D. Sparks, “Is domain
knowledge necessary for machine learning materials properties?” Integrat-
ing Materials and Manufacturing Innovation 9, 221–227 (2020).

41Marc, B. Weinstein, tgwoodcock, C. Simon, chebee7i, W. Morgan,
V. Knight, N. Swanson-Hysell, M. Evans, jl bernal, ZGainsforth, T. G. Bad-
ger, SaxonAnglo, M. Greco, and G. Zuidhof, “marcharper/python-ternary:
Version 1.0.6,” (2019).

42National Minerals Information Center, “U.s. geological survey mineral
commodity summaries 2023 data release,” (2023).


