Comment on “Thermodynamic determination of the equilibrium first-
order phase-transition line hidden by hysteresis” Sci Rep 13, 6876 
(2023); arXiv:2303.00327, by K. Matsuura et al.

P Chaddah*

UGC-DAE Consortium for Scientific Research

Indore 452001 India 

We stress that the lower hysteresis line should not be used to infer any 
thermodynamic quantity below the temperature at which the lower hysteresis 
line shows a maximum.

The following two results of Matsuura et al [1] are being commented on, 

1. The authors stress that for a field-induced FOT exhibiting large hysteresis, 

the line of the mid-points of the lower-field and higher-field boundaries of 
the hysteresis region, is not the equilibrium phase-transition line.

2. If this line of mid-points viz. H0(T) is used as the equilibrium phase-

transition line in their study on Fe(Zn)2Mo3O8 then something peculiar is 
found from the Clausius-Clapeyron equation below 18K. Specifically, the 
entropy difference (and the magnetization difference) between the two 
phases would show complicated behaviour, and would switch its sign
below this temperature. Recognizing that such an unusual behaviour 
requires novel origin like in the melting curve of helium-3, they consider 
this an unphysical artefact arising of an erroneously inferred equilibrium 
phase-transition line. The equilibrium phase transition line determined 
through their studies, that avoid the “two-phase mixture” region of field 
and temperature, flattens below 18K and does not show peculiarities 
below this temperature. The lower-field boundary of hysteresis, they 
conclude, should not be used below 18K.


On the first point we note that the hysteresis in temperature-dependent 
measurements is dictated by the limits of supercooling (T*) and superheating 
(T**). At these thermodynamic stability limits the metastable states become 
unstable [2]. The actual observed hysteresis could be smaller because
fluctuations cause the transition even while a finite barrier of free-energy
separates the metastable state from the stable state.

We take two examples of free-energy functions that are in common use [3,4].
Following sections 2.3  and 2.4 of reference [4], we note that for a form of the 
free energy that is symmetric under inversion of the order parameter, we have 
TC – T* = 3[T**-TC] ; and for a form of the free energy that is not symmetric 
under inversion of the order parameter, we have TC – T* = 8[T**-TC] . In both 
cases we note that TC ≠ [T* + T**]/2 , with TC being closer to T** than to T*.

We thus note that TC will not, except in some fortuitous case, be the mean of T* 
and T**. One therefore cannot assert that TC is the mid-point of the lower-
temperature and higher-temperature boundaries of the hysteresis region. By 
analogy, one also cannot assert that H0 is the mid-point of the lower-field and 
higher-field boundaries of the hysteresis region. The mid-point of hysteresis 
being taken as the equilibrium phase-transition point is an approximation 
frequently used by experimentalists, but is not rigorously valid even in simple 
models for first-order transitions. 

We now come to the second point of peculiar behaviour of the hysteresis mid-
point at low temperature. We wish to assert that the peculiarity is actually in the 
behaviour of the lower-field limit of the hysteresis, which starts reducing with 
lowering temperature below 30K, while the upper-field limit does not show such 
peculiarity and is continuously increasing with reducing temperature. We assert
that the lower-field limit of the hysteresis should not be used below 30K (i.e. 
even above 18K) as it corresponds to the de-arrest of the higher magnetization 
FRI phase that has undergone glass-like kinetic arrest in this material. It is not 
due to the thermodynamic phase transformation from metastable FRI phase to 
stable AFM phase.

Matsuura et al [1] note that the hysteresis mid-point H0 reduces with lowering 
temperature below 18K, and using dH0/dT with Clausius-Clapeyron equation 
implies that the transformation entropy change becomes negative. Matsuura et 


al term this as a complicated behaviour which, they show through their detailed 
analysis for extracting the equilibrium phase transition line, is not correct.

Umetsu et al [5,6] reported similar peculiar behaviour in Ni-Mn-In in the 
hysteresis mid-point in magnetization [5], and in the hysteresis mid-point in 
resistivity [6], at temperatures below about 50K under isothermal variation of 
magnetic field. Umetsu et al [5,6] conclude in both papers that the 
transformation entropy change becomes negative at low temperature. They 
were aware of the phenomenon of kinetic arrest but stressed that they consider 
it to be thermal transformation arrest, and probably did not consider it while 
they were studying magnetic-field-induced transformations. 

Such peculiarity in the lower-field limit of the hysteresis was observed and
highlighted as a consequence of glass-like kinetic arrest of the first-order 
magnetic transition in both the half-doped manganite Nd0.5Sr0.5MnO3 [7] and in 
FeRh(Pd) that also show a magnetic first order transition [8]. As discussed in 
sections 4.3  and 5.3 of ref [4] while discussing manifestations of kinetic arrest 
during isothermal variation of magnetic field, the ‘lower hysteresis line’ is 
observed as the higher field kinetically arrested phase is de-arrested with 
lowering field. The high-field arrested phase transforms to the lower-field de-
arrested equilibrium phase, and magnetization and resistivity show a jump
under isothermal reduction of magnetic field. But this part of the ‘lower 
hysteresis line’ is dictated by kinetics, and does not correspond to 
thermodynamic processes. Figure 5 of reference [7] and figure 6 of reference [8]
show results of isothermal field cycling in these two different magnetic
materials, along with the insets in each figure that explain the lower temperature 
non-monotonicity (similar to reports in ref [1] and ref [5,6]) as due to the lower
hysteresis line being the kinetic arrest line.

Thermodynamics looks at transitions that occur at equilibrium, when the free 
energy of the two phases are equal. As noted in this paper, thermodynamics 
allows transitions to occur away from equilibrium and up to the metastability
limit or the spinodal, from a metastable state to the equilibrium state and in such 
cases hysteresis is observed. Transition between two phases, with sharp change 
in physical properties, can also be observed beyond the metastability limit when 
a glass-like arrested state is de-arrested. Hysteresis in the isothermal scan will 
again be observed. We note that the lower field of the hysteretic scan shifts from
the T* spinodal to the de-arrest line with lowering temperature, and will go from 
increasing with reducing T to decreasing for reducing T. We assert that the data 


of Matsuura et al [1], and also the earlier data of Umetsu et al [5,6], is in
conformity with this explanation.

It follows that the lower hysteresis line, below the temperature Tmax at which its
maximum is observed, is a manifestation of the arrested high magnetization FM
phase being de-arrested and transforming to the equilibrium AFM phase. It has
no relation to the equilibrium phase transition line. The upper hysteresis line 
could be used below Tmax by doing an analytic continuation of its relation to the 
equilibrium phase transition line obtained at higher temperature. The kinetic 
arrest, and de-arrest, lines are dictated by kinetics. These do not correspond to 
thermodynamic processes. 

While Matsuura et al do not use the mid-point [H0] below the temperature (18K)
at which the mid-point shows a maximum, we stress that the lower hysteresis 
line should not be used to infer any thermodynamic quantity below the 
temperature (30K) at which this lower hysteresis line shows a maximum.

References:

1. K. Matsuura et al., Sci Rep 13, 6876 (2023); arXiv:2303.00327.
2. S. Kundu et al., Phys Rev Lett 124, 095703 (2020).
3. P. M. Chaikin and T. C. Lubensky, Principles of Condensed Matter Physics 

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1995).

4. P. Chaddah, First Order Phase Transitions of Magnetic Materials (CRC 

Press, Boca Raton, 2018).

5. R.Y. Umetsu et al, Phys Scr 60, 25 (2009).
6. R.Y. Umetsu et al, Mat Trans 54, 291 (2013).
7. R. Rawat et al, J Phys Cond Mat 19, 256211 (2007).
8. P. Kushwaha et al, Phys Rev B 80, 174413 (2009).

*Since retired


