Dynamic Formation of Preferentially Lattice Oriented, Self Trapped Hydrogen Clusters

M. A. Cusentino,1 E. L. Sikorski,2 M. J. McCarthy,2 A. P. Thompson,2 and M. A. Wood2

1Material, Physical, and Chemical Science Center, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, USA
2Center for Computing Research, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, USA
(Dated: July 20, 2023)

A series of MD and DFT simulations were performed to investigate hydrogen self-clustering and retention
in tungsten. Using a newly develop machine learned interatomic potential, spontaneous formation of hydrogen
platelets was observed after implanting low-energy hydrogen into tungsten at high fluxes and temperatures.
The platelets formed along low miller index orientations and neighboring tetrahedral and octahedral sites and
could grow to over 50 atoms in size. High temperatures above 600 K and high hydrogen concentrations were
needed to observe significant platelet formation. A critical platelet size of six hydrogen atoms was needed for
long term stability. Platelets smaller than this were found to be thermally unstable within a few nanoseconds.
To verify these observations, characteristic platelets from the MD simulations were simulated using large-scale
DFT. DFT corroborated the MD results in that large platelets were also found to be dynamically stable for five or
more hydrogen atoms. The LDOS from the DFT simulated platelets indicated that hydrogen atoms, particularly
at the periphery of the platelet, were found to be at least as stable as hydrogen atoms in bulk tungsten. In
addition, electrons were found to be localized around hydrogen atoms in the platelet itself and that hydrogen
atoms up to 4.2 ˚A away within the platelet were found to be bonded suggesting that the hydrogen atoms are
interacting across longer distances than previously suggested. These results reveal a self-clustering mechanisms
for hydrogen within tungsten in the absence of radiation induced or microstructural defects that could be a
precursor to blistering and potentially explain the experimentally observed high hydrogen retention particularly
in the near surface region.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Future fusion reactors will require materials that can with-
stand the harsh conditions at the plasma-material interface
including heat loads on the order of 10 MW/m3 and parti-
cle fluxes on the order of 1024 m−2s−11. In particular, the
variety of plasma species, including the hydrogen fuel, he-
lium ash, and impurities like beryllium or nitrogen, can dam-
age the plasma-facing components resulting in microstruc-
tural changes and degradation of material properties. The cur-
rent candidate material for the divertor region, which will be
subject to most of the particle exhaust from the core plasma, is
tungsten due to its high melting temperature and thermal con-
ductivity as well as its low sputtering yield2. A majority of
the plasma will be comprised of deuterium and tritium where
accumulation in the divertor can lead to poor material perfor-
mance such as hydrogen induced embrittlement3. Addition-
ally, due to the radiological hazards of tritium, there will also
be limits on the amount of tritium that can be retained in the
plasma-facing components, for example ITER will have a 1
kg inventory limit. Therefore a detailed understanding of how
hydrogen implantation and accumulation at trap sites into the
tungsten divertor will affect material performance is critically
needed.
Hydrogen is known to strongly trap at defects sites, like
grain boundaries4–6, dislocations7,8, and helium bubbles9–11.
Relative trapping affinities at defects or within the bulk is
key to understanding the damage accumulation; the former
trap sites can be modified via manufacturing processes but
the latter is an intrinsic property of the lattice. Trapping at
grain boundaries has been hypothesized as nucleation sites
for bubbles and subsequent blister formation12.
However,
this would only explain blister formation along grains and not
within the grains themselves, where experiments have shown

blister formation in single crystal tungsten13. While hydro-
gen has a low solubility in tungsten, experiments have shown
that tungsten exposed to hydrogen plasmas indeed result in
large, micron sized blisters that form near the surface14–17.
These blisters not only modify the near surface microstruc-
ture, including exfoliation and cracking16,18, but are a source
of larger than expected hydrogen inventories in the diver-
tor material. Some prior work has suggested the formation
of a supersaturated layer of tungsten, where the atomic per-
cent of hydrogen is much higher than expected given the
solubility in tungsten, at higher hydrogen fluences that may
lead to blister formation13,19–21 Similarly, irradiations of both
ions and deuterium have shown higher retention due to trap-
ping at ion-induced point defects like vacancies and voids22

and can remain trapped up to high temperatures. However,
tungsten exposed to pure deuterium plasmas at low energies,
where the implantation energy is below the threshold en-
ergy for Frenkel pair formation, has still resulted in blister
formation14,15. Without a continuous source for H trapping
defects, there must be additional mechanisms at play to re-
sult in these observed high retention rates and super saturated
regions leading to blistering.

Recent density functional theory (DFT) work has suggested
that hydrogen can cluster into 2D platelet geometries in the
absence of defects. Li et al.23 indicated that stable hydro-
gen platelets can form below tungsten surfaces and is partic-
ularly stable under the (111) surface orientation. Similarly,
Hou et al., found hydrogen platelets on the (100) plane to be
stable at high hydrogen concentrations and could be a mech-
anism for accumulation within the divertor24. However, these
prior DFT studies were performed for limited temperatures
and simulation times making it difficult to dynamically as-
sess the stability of these types of platelet structures. Simu-
lations beyond DFT, such as molecular dynamics (MD), are

arXiv:2307.09946v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  19 Jul 2023


2

needed to further determine the dynamics of platelet forma-
tion and growth. Prior MD simulations by Smirnov et al.25

observed platelet formation in tungsten either under external
non-hydrostatic stresses or near dislocations at hydrogen con-
centrations of 0.3-1 atom percent. These studies indicate that
there is a relationship between platelet formation and lattice
strain that warrants further study. These studies indicate a self-
trapping mechanism for hydrogen that could explain the even-
tual formation of blister formation under low-energy, high flux
deuterium exposure.
In this work, we simulate hydrogen implantation in tung-
sten using a newly developed W-H machine learned inter-
atomic potential detailing platelet formation that occurs spon-
taneously at high hydrogen concentrations.
The effects of
surface orientation, temperature, and flux on platelet growth
are quantified. In addition, we report on unprecedented large-
scale DFT simulations to unravel the mechanism for stability
of these platelets at high temperature. The following sections
describe simulation methods, hydrogen implantation MD sim-
ulations, and DFT simulations that validate the MD work for
hydrogen platelet formation.

II.
COMPUTATIONAL METHODS

A combination of simulation methods is required in order to
properly address hydrogen self-trapping within tungsten. To
achieve experimentally comparable particle fluxes, efficient
classical MD simulations that utilize an interatomic potential
are needed. Direct simulation of hydrogen implantation is cru-
cial because it allows for an assessment of the timescale of
self-trapping in relation to particle flux and operational tem-
perature. Confirmation of MD observations are then carried
out with density functional theory, scaling to simulation sizes
only accessible with high-performance computing resources
to ensure clarity in conclusions drawn.

A.
Molecular Dynamics

Molecular dynamics simulations were performed with the
Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator
(LAMMPS)26,27. The Spectral Neighbor Analysis Potential
(SNAP)28 developed for modeling W-H plasma material in-
teractions was used to describe all atomic interactions. The
details of this interatomic potential (IAP) require a lengthy
discussion which will be provided in another publication. In
short, this machine learned IAP was trained against DFT prop-
erties of gaseous, solid-state and interfacial phases of W-H.
Validation of the potential was done by comparing the extent
of interpolation/extrapolation of a set of MD simulations to
training structures. These validation tests include H implanta-
tion and solubility in BCC W, providing confidence in the use
cases herein.
A 6.4 nm x 6.4 nm x 12 nm tungsten slab with periodic
boundary conditions in the lateral (x and y) directions and a
free surface with a variable surface orientation (z) direction
was generated, see Figure 1 for example. The slab was first

equilibrated to 1000 K using an isobaric ensemble where the
pressure components in the lateral (in-plane of free surface)
directions were set to 0 bar for a total of 50 ps. After equili-
bration, hydrogen was implanted by randomly placing a hy-
drogen atom 10 ˚A above the surface and giving the hydro-
gen atom a velocity equivalent to an energy of 75 eV directly
towards the surface. The simulation was evolved for 10 ps
before implanting another hydrogen atoms resulting in a flux
of 2.4 · 1027 m−2s−1. During the implantations, the micro-
canonical ensemble was used with a variable timestep that was
allowed to vary between 10−4 fs and 0.5 fs andwas updated
every 10 timesteps such that no atom moved more than 0.02 ˚A
per timestep in order to preserve stable dynamics. After each
implantation, a Langevin thermostat29 was run at 1000 K for
100 timesteps to remove any excess heat from the system and
maintain the temperature at 1000 K. Opposite the hydrogen
exposed surface the last 1nm of material has a fixed position
in space to ensure there is no net recoil of the sample. The
simulation was evolved for 1500 ion implantations or a total
of 15 ns. Hydrogen retention, diffusion rates, and clustering
metrics were collected where analysis and visualization was
performed with OVITO30. Simulations were performed for
the (100), (110), and (111) surface orientations, temperatures
of 300 K, 600 K, 800 K, and 1000 K, and for fluxes of 2.4 ·
1027 m−2s−1, 1.1 · 1027 m−2s−1, 6.1 · 1026 m−2s−1, and 4.0
· 1026 m−2s−1 by changing the lateral dimensions between
6.4 nm, 9.6 nm, 12.7 nm, and 15.9 nm.

B.
Density Functional Theory

DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna Ab
initio Simulation Package (VASP)31. Spin-polarized gener-
alized gradient (GGA) exchange-correlation functional was
used with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE)32 formulation.
Plane-wave basis sets were implemented utilizing projector-
augmented wave (PAW) pseudo-potentials.
DFT run in
molecular dynamics (DFT-MD) simulations utilized a cutoff
energy of 700 eV and were sampled at the gamma point.
Fermi smearing was utilized with a smearing width of 0.2
eV. The precision was set to normal and the electronic self-
consistent loop exit criterion was set to 10−4 eV. Single
self-consistent framework (SCF) calculations on an DFT-MD
snapshot of a 128 W atom supercell with 6 H atoms after 2
ps at 1000 K demonstrated that non-spin-polarized treatment
was converged with spin-polarized treatment to 0.023 meV.
Non-spin-polarized treatment was then used for the produc-
tion DFT calculations. DFT-MD simulations used an NVT
ensemble and 1 fs timesteps. Temperature was controlled us-
ing the Nos´e-Hoover thermostat and the Nos´e mass was set to
correspond to 40 time steps (SMASS=0). DFT-MD simula-
tions utilized the standard H pseudopotential and the GW W
pseudopotential with 14 valence electrons. For visualization
purposes, the partial charge density and electron localization
function calculations33 used the standard W pseudopotential
with 6 valence electrons. This allowed for visualization of
charge localized to H without core charge localized to all W
atoms.


3

C.
Cluster Characterization

All cluster identification for both MD and DFT was con-
ducted using the Cluster Analysis modifier in the OVITO
software30, using a cluster cutoff value of 4.2 ˚A for MD and
4.2 or 4.5 Angstroms for DFT-MD. Tracking unique H clus-
ters through time is needed to discern mechanisms and kinet-
ics of platelet formation and growth. Once a cluster of at least
two hydrogen atoms is identified by OVITO, the cluster is as-
signed a unique tag which is used to track its center of mass
and hydrogen atom IDs. Thermally stable clusters taken for
subsequent analysis are those that retain > 60% of their H
and collectively diffuse < 2 ˚A. Orientation of a cluster is de-
termined by a least squares fit to a plane containing all con-
stituent H atoms. The plane normal vector is then classified
by comparing to set of low miller indexed planes of the W lat-
tice ({100}, {110}, {111}, {211}). Further comparison of H
clusters based on tetrahedral and octahedral interstitial posi-
tions of the BCC lattice was performed if no low-index plane
could be matched within 5◦ projection difference. Note that
spherical clusters will fail to be classified within these toler-
ances as either crystal plane or interstitial types, an other cat-
egory is reserved for this case. An added benefit of assigning
persistent unique cluster IDs is to quantify the lifetime of any
stable cluster, this includes both the growth and breakup mod-
ifications to a cluster. Generalizable code for this analysis is
available upon request.

III.
DYNAMICS OF HYDROGEN RETENTION

In order to unravel the mechanisms for damage in the near
surface region, detailing the dynamic changes in hydrogen ac-
cumulation is required. Predictions of blister formation due to
mass transport of the plasma-borne species within the matrix
cannot be made from binary collision simulations of single ion
strikes34. Compounding effects of hydrogen accumulation are
hypothesized to be sensitive to surface orientation, diffusion
barriers and flux of particles, necessitating a direct investiga-
tion with MD simulations. Herein we address each of these
contributing factors in turn, ruling out weakly dependent vari-
ables to limit the number of redundant simulations. If hydro-
gen was randomly distributed in the lattice then damage due to
clustering (and thus local expansion of the lattice) will be de-
pend on the energetic favorability, and diffusive processes that
bring hydrogen into close proximity. Key variables for study
are then those that challenge this base assumption of random
spatial distribution, energetic stability, and diffusive versus
ballistic transport of hydrogen. Therefore, we prepare sim-
ulations that contrast i) surface orientation to address chan-
neling along crystallographic directions, ii) diffusion driven
transport at various temperatures, and iii) particle flux values
that control ballistic transport through the lattice.
We ran implantations in a representative selection of low
energy surface orientations to highlight effects of energetic
particle channeling and surface dependencies. However, we
did not observe drastic differences between the (100), (110),
and (111) surface orientations. For 75 eV particles it was ob-

Figure 1.
Atomistic snapshots of 75 eV hydrogen implantation
in tungsten at (a) 5 ns, (b) 10 ns, and (c) 15 ns. The top image
displays the entire simulation cell while the bottom image depicts
a particular platelet growing over time. The grey and green atoms
represent tungsten and hydrogen, respectively.

served that all orientations show significant adsorption at the
surface, a depletion zone up to 1 nm below the surface, and
a monotonically increasing accumulation up to a maximum
depth of 12 nm. Beyond fluences of 1.2 ·1019 m−2 (> 5ns)
these profiles are self-similar for all surface profile, with very
little variation between surface orientations. For the hydro-
gen retention, the (100) and (111) surfaces had similar hydro-
gen retention at 47.1% and 47.9%, respectively. In contrast,
the (110) surface had a significantly lower retention at 28.3%
which was in part due to the higher reflection rate. The per-
centage of hydrogen at the surface ranges from about 5% for
the (111) surface to about 8% for the (110) surface.
Throughout the simulated implantations, prompt formation
of hydrogen clusters was observed for all plasma-material ex-
posure conditions. Direct simulation of the implantation and
time evolution of absorbed plasma species allows for diffu-
sion and self-trapping events to occur naturally, without the
need to bias towards clustering phenomena. Snapshots in Fig-
ure 1 are at 5 ns intervals are shown for the (100) surface at
1000 K and a flux of 2.8 · 1027m−2s−1. Within the first 2 ns
there is little hydrogen clustering, but mobility is observed to
be high throughout the simulation cell. Weak dependence on
the surface orientation for cluster size (data captured at 15ns
elapsed) was observed, with the (110) surface orientation re-
sulting in smaller clusters due to lower overall retention. This
diffusive growth of hydrogen clusters is directly amplified at
elevated temperatures, as exemplified by Figure 2, where all
temperature changes were run with a surface normal of (100)
and 2.8 · 1027 m−2s−1 flux. Interestingly, the cluster size dis-
tribution did not increase further moving from 600 K to 1000


4

Figure 2. Cumulative distribution function of hydrogen cluster sizes
after 15 ns of simulation time for varying (a) temperatures, and (b)
hydrogen fluxes. Inset images in each panel visualize the simulation
cell highlighting cluster morphology.

K. This implies that the increase in diffusivity needed to form
larger clusters is beginning to be offset by the decreasing ther-
mal stability of additional hydrogen.
Due to limitations on length and timescale available to MD,
particle fluxes are higher than what is expected at the ITER di-
verter surface. At the implantation energy studied here a high
concentration of absorbed hydrogen resides close to the sur-
face, promoting clustering via short diffusive distances needed
and ballistic implantation into preexisting clusters. Indeed,
the largest cluster sizes (> 50 atoms) were observed for the
highest fluxes tested, where a flux of six times lower resulted
in mean cluster sizes a factor of four lower. These observa-
tions are captured in Figure 2, where insets demonstrate dif-
ferences in the final state over the range of flux values tested,
but where the total hydrogen content is equivalent. The dras-
tic change in cluster size distribution observed between fluxes
of 2.4 · 1027 and 1.1 · 1027 is evidence of the increase in H
self-trapping events where mobile H in the lattice will attach
and grow larger clusters.
Simulations of hydrogen clustering over material and en-
vironmental conditions reinforces the importance of under-
standing the mechanisms of divertor surface degradation as

Figure 3.
(a) Final sizes for hydrogen clusters for simulations at
T = 1000 K. Inset image captures median lifetime of each integer
cluster sizes, where a clear increase in stability is seen for larger
cluster sizes. (b) Distribution of lifetimes for dissolved clusters (i.e.,
those that disappear before the simulation end time). The colored
sections of each bar indicate the maximum size reached by dissolved
clusters, which only extremely rarely exceeds seven hydrogen atoms.

all conditions predict a rapid change in local chemistry and
lattice strain.
The most surprising observation was the interplay of the
lattice and hydrogen cluster orientations. Classical arguments
for the formation of a secondary phase in a solid would be
that free energy is minimized were the surface area between
phases is reduced, implying spheroidal shapes were to be ex-
pected. However, as shown in Figure 1, larger clusters atoms
tend to form rather flat, distinctly oriented structures. Stabil-
ity of these larger structures hinges upon whether they can trap
enough free hydrogen to reach a critical size at which they be-
come immobile and effective sinks for additional hydrogen.


5

Figure 4.
(a) Stable cluster orientation categorized by habit plane
within the BCC crystal. Low Miller index category (blue) includes
100, 110, 111 and 211 planes. Purely tetrahedral occupation (or-
ange) is isolated from mixed tetrahedral/octahedral (green) clusters.
(b) Schematic of a conventional unit cell detailing the tungsten BCC
lattice (blue atoms), tetrahedral interstitial sites (yellow), and octahe-
dral interstitial sites (red). The grey lines connecting the tetrahedral
and octahedral sites on each face of the cell are added to guide the
eye.

This critical size for stability would constitute an initial pre-
cursor to blister formation. Below that size, hydrogen has the
potential to desorb from the cluster and freely diffuse through
the tungsten matrix.
Analysis of these mechanisms of blister formation was con-
ducted using the cluster tracking techniques outlined in Sec-
tion II C. Figure 3(a) and (b) captures four simulations run at
1000 K, with surfaces of (100) and all fluxes tested (between
0.4 to 2.8 · 1027 m−2s−1, see also Figure 2b). Data is shown
at the end of the simulated implantation, 16 ns, where more
than half of the observed clusters contain five or more hydro-
gen. The inset shows the median lifetime per cluster size for
the same data. Clusters with sizes smaller than approximately
6 hydrogen (dotted grey line) have significantly shorter life-
times than those with more than 6 hydrogen, which all have
lifetimes of at least 11 ns. Notable as well is the steep increase
in median lifetime for clusters from sizes 2 to 6, which demon-
strates the strong contribution of even single hydrogen atoms
to self-trapping effectiveness. Beyond the apparent threshold
of 6 hydrogen atoms, adding hydrogen does not appear to ei-
ther strengthen or weaken the dynamic stability of already-
formed clusters.
Tracking the cluster lifetimes of sub-critical sizes, Figure
3b) highlights the rapid (< 1ns) breakup of small clusters im-
plied by Figure 3b). For comparison, the total number of large

(≥ 6 H) clusters seen to breakup was 5 and is shown in red.
These findings support the existence of a stability threshold
of approximately six hydrogen atoms to maintain and grow
large hydrogen clusters. To ensure this stability threshold is
not an artifact of the interatomic potential, we will turn to first
principles predictions of hydrogen clustering in Section IV.
As alluded to previously, and shown in Figure 1, larger hy-
drogen clusters inside of the tungsten bulk tend to form plate-
like, oriented structures where the thickness is most com-
monly one H layer. The specific orientation and geometry
of these large clusters is important to quantified as the lattice
strain generated by these self-trapping loci will lead to dam-
age accumulation and increased hydrogen inventory. Orien-
tation analysis will be conducted on the same simulations as
those in Figure 3 (namely, those at T = 1000 K). Prior simula-
tion work24 has indicated that clusters of hydrogen can form
stably along the (100) plane, but crucially these predictions
were made at 0 K, neglecting thermal expansion and disso-
ciation. Figure 4c) highlights all of the available tetrahedral
and octahedral sites within a single unit cell of the W-BCC
lattice. Additionally, an example plane that connects the ener-
getically favorable tetrahedral sites is shown in grey. For hy-
drogen clusters that do not exhibit a clear planar orientation,
see superimposed example in Figure 4d), the closest plane in-
dices are determined within a small tolerance. The distribu-
tion of these determined cluster orientations is displayed in
panel b) where low indexed planes and those formed by con-
necting adjacent interstitial sites far out number cluster with
no dominant orientation. Data categorized as ’Tetrahedral’
is exclusively where hydrogen resides in adjacent interstitial
sites of this type, where a cluster of mixed interstitial sites is
given its own category. Of the stable clusters these oriented
platelets form readily, indicating that a maximization of H-H
interaction is not the most energetically favorable configura-
tion. This understanding of preferential sites within the lattice
during platelet formation provides the ability to make minia-
turized versions that can be investigated further with first prin-
ciples methods. Namely, the nature of the bonding between
W-H and H-H is best characterized with these higher fidelity
methods.

IV.
MECHANISM FOR STABLE HYDROGEN SELF
TRAPPING

The primary challenge for DFT calculations is the cubic in-
crease in computational cost associated with respect to num-
ber of electrons. To mitigate this, smaller representative prob-
lems have to be utilized, with the caveat that the predic-
tions be converged with respect to finite size and time effects.
Presently, the main concern is that smaller periodic cells will
artificially increase the hydrogen self interactions. An initial
sweep of supercell sizes ranged from 2 × 2 × 2 to 7 × 7 × 7
containing 4 to 12 H atoms arranged in adjacent tetrahedral
sites. Though the SCF per atom H incorporation energy for
the 5 × 5 × 5 supercell was converged with the 7 × 7 × 7
supercell to 0.04 eV, we wanted to mitigate finite size effects
and enable investigation of higher H atom counts as much as


6

computationally feasible. We selected the 7 × 7 × 7 supercell
for further study. It is important to note that smaller volumes
were observed to suppress the formation of a thermally sta-
ble cluster, rather showing that spatially dispersed hydrogen
is energetically favorable.
To investigate what mechanisms may be bolstering platelet
stability, the 7 × 7 × 7 supercells included a range of H atoms
from 2 to 11 and each was simulated at 1000 K for 1 ps.
We note these large DFT-MD simulations took ≈ 37k node
hours on the GPU machine Summit at Oak Ridge National
Laboratories. The H atom range allowed for investigation of
early stage platelet formation and comparison across concen-
trations. Using the same spatial cutoff as the large scale im-
plantation simulations (4.2 ˚A), the average number of clus-
tered hydrogen was quantified, which is displayed in Figure
5a). As the cluster values can shift somewhat through time,
the average size of the largest detected cluster is recorded from
0.75 - 1.0 ps. Figure 5b) displays the average distance between
the closest two H atoms in the simulation (usually located in
the clusters from Figure 5a). Their average distances are de-
creased as the H concentration increases in the cell, pointing
to an increased stability from H-H interactions. In agreement
with the classical MD predictions, there exists a minimum H
count for stable clusters which occurs around 6-8 atoms based
on these DFT-MD tests at 1000 K. The agreement between
the MD and DFT-MD tests is quite remarkable, as no training
data of this scale was included in the initial MLIAP training
set.
A snapshot from the highest hydrogen concentration after
≈ 0.8 ps was used to investigate the electronic structure lead-
ing to the bonding changes of interest. To better understand
the electronic structure of H during platelet formation, we first
look at the Local Density of States (LDOS). Any overlap be-
tween DOS curves is an indication of hybridization or bond-
ing. The position of H in the W supercell in the DFT-MD
snapshot are shown in Figure 6(a). The H are color coded by
the number of neighbors using a 4.5 ˚A. H bonds are visual-
ized at the same cutoff to better illustrate the distances and
angles between the H atoms, but do not necessarily indicate
real bonds. Examining atomic positions in Figure 6(a), we
can see all H atoms except two may be located in a platelet.
We resolved the LDOS for every H in the supercell, and are
displayed by neighbor count in Figure 6(b). Peaks at lower
energies and thus further away from the Fermi level are inter-
preted as more stable H, while higher energies are interpreted
as less stable. The LDOS peaks for H atoms ranging from 0
neighbors (isolated) to 3 neighbors indicate similar energetic
stability. In contrast, the central H atom in the platelet has
a much higher energy LDOS peak, indicating this H is less
energetically stable. As additional H began to coalesce and
take advantage of favorable platelet edge locations, the central
H atom became trapped in the center of the platelet. Collec-
tively, the LDOS suggests that H can exist favorably both in an
isolated position and at the edges of a platelet. Having four or
more neighbors is less energetically stable and this may indi-
cate why platelets, with increased surface area, preferentially
form over bubbles, with increased volume. As H concentra-
tions increase, isolating may no longer be possible and thus

Figure 5.
Statistics tracking the dynamics of hydrogen atoms in
a series of DFT-MD runs of a 7x7x7 W supercell (686 atoms) with
increasing hydrogen concentration. (a) Average number of H atoms
in the largest-tracked cluster. Each value is averaged over the last
0.25 ps of a 1 ps simulation. (b) Measurement of the fluctuations
between the two closest hydrogen atoms in each simulation. The
minimum (blue) and maximum (red) distances found over time are
plotted. With increasing hydrogen concentration, both the minimum
and maximum distances decrease significantly, corresponding to an
increase in tracked cluster size.

the edge of a platelet becomes the most stable, possible con-
figuration.
While overlap or hybridization in DOS peaks may suggest
bonding, we need to check whether the electrons are also
shared spatially. The partial charge density (PCD) for the su-
percell snapshot resolved from -11 to -6 eV below the Fermi
level is shown in Figure 7. The blue isosurface shows that
each H has localized charge. Visualizing 56% of the PCD
illustrates longer range electron sharing. Both the blue and
grey isosurfaces show the H atoms previously categorized as
isolated do not share electrons with any other H atom. One of
the H atoms categorized as having one neighbor (pink) does
not in fact share charge, as seen on the left side of 7(b). The
remaining 8 H atoms are all contained in the same grey iso-
surface, shown in 7(b) and 7(c).


7

Figure 6. (a) Visualization of H atoms in the 11H DFT-MD simula-
tion after ≈ 0.8 ps. W atoms are only displayed in the inset so as to
better view the position of the H atoms. Grey, pink, blue, purple, and
red represent H with 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 H neighbors, respectively, with
a 4.5 ˚A cutoff radius. Bonds are added to the H solely for visual aid.
(b) Local density of states for each H atom with respect to the Fermi
level.

A spatial cutoff of 4.2 ˚A will identify 7 of the H atoms
contained in the grey isosurface as part of the same cluster.

However, a cutoff value of 4.5 ˚A is needed to classify all 8
H as part of the cluster, but this incorrectly includes one of
the isolated H as well which does not share charge with the
cluster. While using a radial cutoff metric may not precisely
identify all H atoms sharing charge, we can conservatively
use a 4.2 ˚A cutoff distance to identify H platelets that share
electrons. This is in good agreement with the findings from
our MD simulations.
While the PCD reveals an energy resolved charge map, we
can get a complete spatial picture of the electronic structure
by also examining the Electron Localization Function (ELF).
The ELF maps the probability of finding any calculated elec-
tron from 0.0 to 1.0, where 0.0 indicates a low probability
of finding an electron and 1.0 indicates a high probability of
finding an electron. The ELF is scaled such that a value of 0.5
would match the probability of a homogeneous electron gas.
The ELF for the 0.8 ps snapshot is shown in Figure 8. It is vi-
sualized as a slice along (111) that intersects with 3 H atoms
and captures some of the charge localized to a fourth H that
does not precisely intersect the same plane. The ELF reveals
that there is a very high (ELF ≥0.7) probability of finding an
electron localized to each H in the slice. Meanwhile, we can
also observe how the presence of H affects the surrounding W
electron sea. On the upper portion of the ELF slice, we can see
uniform green regions (ELF ≈ 0.3) depicting the electron sea
between W atoms. In contrast, on the lower portion and near
the Hs, the electron sea is discontinuous. Increased regions of
yellow and orange (ELF ≈0.1 - 0.2) are present between W
atoms near the H atoms. This suggests that the H atoms are
stealing charge from the neighboring W atoms and creating
these charge voids.

V.
CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we have performed MD simulations of hy-
drogen implantation in tungsten using a newly developed W-
H machine learned interatomic potential and ran large-scale
DFT simulations of hydrogen clustering in unprecedentedly
large simulation cells. After low-energy, high flux hydrogen
implantation in tungsten, we observe the spontaneous forma-
tion of 2D platelet hydrogen clusters which accumulate along
preferred directions, especially those containing tetrahedral
sites, such as the (111) plane. The platelets require a high
concentration of hydrogen and high temperatures above 600
K to regularly form and tend to become more stable as they
become larger. A critical size of about 6 hydrogen atoms was
needed to form a stable platelet, where clusters smaller than
this tend to annihilate within a few nanoseconds. Characteris-
tic platelets formed during the MD simulations were modeled
using DFT and also found to be energetically stable and re-
mained clustered at high temperatures. Hydrogen atoms, par-
ticularly at the periphery, were found to be at least as stable
as hydrogen atoms in the bulk as indicated by the LDOS. In
addition, ELF analysis showed that electrons had a high prob-
ability of being located near a hydrogen atom in a platelet and
that the local electronic structure near the surrounding tung-
sten atoms was distorted, indicated that the hydrogen were


8

Figure 7. Partial charge density of W supercell with 11 H. Blue and grey isosurfaces correspond to ≈84% and 56%, respectively, of the total
charge density from -11 to -6 eV below the Fermi level. H atoms are colored in agreement with Figure 6. The simulation cell is shifted for
clarity of shared partial charge among hydrogen.

Figure 8. Electron Localization Function for (111) slice intersecting
three of the H atoms. The ELF intersects the charge localized to one
additional H that does not precisely lie on the plane. The ELF color
range is narrowed to 0.0 to 0.7 for visualization. Blue represents
a high probability of finding an electron and red represents a low
probability of finding an electron. Contours are added as a visual
aid.

stealing charge from tungsten to become more stable in the
platelet. The combination of MD and DFT simulations indi-
cate that these platelets can form form under fusion relevant
conditions and are stable at the relevant temperatures.
The results discussed in this work indicate a mechanism for
hydrogen self-clustering at high temperatures and fluences ex-
pected in the divertor region. Tungsten exposed to low-energy
hydrogen has resulted in blistering yet the exact mechanism
for blister formation is still unknown particularly for blisters
that form within the grain. This work suggests that hydro-
gen can cluster into platelets which may be a precursor to the
supersaturated layer and blistering observed in experiments,
which would require large inventories of hydrogen to accu-
mulate in the material. If hydrogen can self-cluster at higher
concentrations and temperatures, retention and blistering will
remain an issue even in the absence of neutron induced radia-

tion damage or other microstructural defects that traditionally
have shown to trap hydrogen. This could potentially result in
higher than expected hydrogen retention in the material just
from the hydrogen implantation itself, which will affect the
overall tritium inventory in the reactor. Additional work is
needed in extending the time and length scales of the observed
platelet growth to mesoscale models, which do not currently
take into account this mechanism, to bridge the gap between
hydrogen platelet formation and blistering.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

All authors gratefully acknowledge funding support from
the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Fusion Energy
Sciences (OFES) under Field Work Proposal Number 20-
023149 and the plasma surface interaction project of the Sci-
entific Discovery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC)
program, which is jointly sponsored by the Fusion Energy
Sciences (FES) and the Advanced Scientific Computing Re-
search (ASCR) programs within the U.S. Department of En-
ergy Office of Science. This research used resources of the
Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE
Office of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-
AC05- 00OR22725.
This article has been authored by an employee of Na-
tional Technology & Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC
under Contract No. DE-NA0003525 with the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy (DOE). The employee owns all right, title
and interest in and to the article and is solely responsible
for its contents. The United States Government retains and
the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, ac-
knowledges that the United States Government retains a non-
exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish
or reproduce the published form of this article or allow oth-
ers to do so, for United States Government purposes. The
DOE will provide public access to these results of feder-
ally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public
Access Plan https://www.energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-
access-plan. This paper describes objective technical results
and analysis. Any subjective views or opinions that might be


9

expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Department of Energy or the United States Gov-
ernment.

REFERENCES

1 G. Federici, C. Skinner, J. Brooks, J. Coad, C. Grisolia, A. Hassz,
A. Hassanein, V. Philipps, C. Pitcher, J. Roth, W. Wampler, and
D. Whyte. Plasma-material interactions in current tokamaks and
their implications for the next step fusion reactors. Nuclear Fu-
sion, 41:1967–2137, 2001.

2 R.A. Pitts, S. Carpenter, F. Escourbiac, T. Hirai, V. Komarov,
S. Lisgo, A.S. Kukushikin, A. Loarte, M. Merola, A.S. Naik,
R. Mitteau, M. Sugihara, P. Bazylev, and P.C. Stangeby. A full
tungsten divertor for iter: Physics issues and design status. Jour-
nal of Nuclear Materials, 438:S48–S56, 2013.

3 M. Wirtz, S. Bardin, A. Huber, A. Kreter, J. Linke, T.W. Morgan,
G. Pintsuk, M. Reinhart, G. Sergienko, I. Steudel, G. De Temmer-
man, and B. Unterberg. Impact of combined hydrogen plasma
and transient heat loads on the performance of tungsten as plasma
facing material. Nuclear Fusion, 55(12):123017, nov 2015.

4 R.A. Causey. Hydrogen isotope retention and recycling in fusion
reactor plasma-facing components. Journal of Nuclear Materials,
2002:91–117, 2002.

5 Hong-Bo Zhou, Yue-Lin Liu, Shuo Jin, Ying Zhang, G.-N. Luo,
and Guang-Hong Lu.
Investigating behaviours of hydrogen in
a tungsten grain boundary by first principles:
from dissolu-
tion and diffusion to a trapping mechanism.
Nuclear Fusion,
50(2):025016, jan 2010.

6 YZ Jia, W Liu, B Xu, G-N Luo, SL Qu, TW Morgan, and
G De Temmerman.
Mechanism for orientation dependence of
blisters on w surface exposed to d plasma at low temperature.
Journal of Nuclear Materials, 477:165–171, 2016.

7 D. Terentyev, V. Dubinko, A. Bakaev, Y. Zayachuk, W. Van
Renterghem, and P. Grigorev. Dislocations mediate hydrogen re-
tention in tungsten. Nuclear Fusion, 54(4):042004, mar 2014.

8 A. Bakaev, P. Grigorev, D. Terentyev, A. Bakaeva, E.E. Zhurkin,
and Yu. A. Mastrikov.
Trapping of hydrogen and helium at
dislocations in tungsten: an ab initio study.
Nuclear Fusion,
57(12):126040, oct 2017.

9 Y. Ueda, M. Fukumoto, J. Yoshida, Y. Ohtsuka, R. Akiyoshi,
H. Iwakiri, and N. Yoshida. Simultaneous irradiation effects of
hydrogen and helium ions on tungsten. Journal of Nuclear Mate-
rials, 386-388:725–728, 2009.

10 N Juslin and BD Wirth. Molecular dynamics simulation of the ef-
fect of sub-surface helium bubbles on hydrogen retention in tung-
sten. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 438:S1221–S1223, 2013.

11 ZJ Bergstrom, MA Cusentino, and BD Wirth. A molecular dy-
namics study of subsurface hydrogen-helium bubbles in tungsten.
Fusion Science and Technology, 71(1):122–135, 2017.

12 Joachim Roth and Klaus Schmid.
Hydrogen in tungsten as
plasma-facing material.
Physica Scripta, 2011(T145):014031,
dec 2011.

13 Naruaki Enomoto, Shunsuke Muto, Tetsuo Tanabe, J.W. Davis,
and A.A. Haasz.
Grazing-incidence electron microscopy of
surface blisters in single- and polycrystalline tungsten formed
by h+, d+ and he+ irradiation.
Journal of Nuclear Materials,
385(3):606–614, 2009.

14 T. Venahus, R. Causey, R.P. Doerner, and T. Abeln. Behavior of
tungsten exposed to high fluences of low energy hydrogen iso-
topes. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 290-293:505–508, 2001.

15 M.Y. Ye, H. Kanehara, S. Fukuta, N. Ohno, and S. Takamura.

Blister formation on tungsten surface udner low energy and high
flux hydrogen plasma irradiation in nagdis-i.
J. Nucl. Mater,
2003:72–76, 2003.

16 W.M. Shu, E. Wakai, and T. Yamanishi. Blister bursting and deu-
terium bursting release from tungsten exposed to high fluences of
high flux and low energy deuterium plasma. Nucl. Fusion, 47:201,
2007.

17 M. Balden, S. Lindig, A. Manhard, and J.-H. You.
D2 gas-
filled blisters on deuterium-bombarded tungsten. J. Nucl. Mater,
414:69–72, 2011.

18 Y Ueda, T Funabiki, T Shimada, K Fukumoto, H Kurishita, and
M Nishikawa. Hydrogen blister formation and cracking behav-
ior for various tungsten materials. Journal of nuclear materials,
337:1010–1014, 2005.

19 V.Kh. Alimov, J. Roth, and M. Mayer. Depth distribution of deu-
terium in single- and polycrystalline tungsten up to depths of sev-
eral micrometers. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 337-339:619–
623, 2005. PSI-16.

20 T. Tanabe. Review of hydrogen retention in tungsten. Phys. Scr.,
2014:014044, 2014.

21 Cong Li, Linping He, Hanjun Tu, Liqun Shi, and Xingzhong
Cao. Deuterium trapping behavior in tungsten surface due to low-
energy ion irradiation. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 577:154336,
2023.

22 Y. Hatano,
M. Shimada,
T. Otsuka,
Y. Oya,
V.Kh. Al-
imov, M. Hara, J. Shi, M. Kobayashi, T. Oda, G. Cao,
K. Okuno, T. Tanaka, K. Sugiyama, J. Roth, B. Tyburska-
P ˜A¼schel, J. Dorner, N. Yoshida, N. Futagami, H. Watanabe,
M. Hatakeyama, H. Kurishita, M. Sokolov, and Y. Katoh. Deu-
terium trapping at defects created with neutron and ion irradia-
tions in tungsten. Nuclear Fusion, 53(7):073006, may 2013.

23 L Yang and BD Wirth. First-principles study of hydrogen diffu-
sion and self-clustering below tungsten surfaces. Journal of Ap-
plied Physics, 125(16), 2019.

24 Jie Hou, Xiang-Shan Kong, Jingjing Sun, Yu-Wei You, Xuebang
Wu, C. S. Liu, and Jun Song. Hydrogen bubble nucleation by self-
clustering: density functional theory and statistical model studies
using tungsten as a model system. Nuclear Fusion, 58(9):096021,
jul 2018.

25 R.D. Smirnov and S.I. Krasheninnikov. Stress-induced hydrogen
self-trapping in tungsten.
Nuclear Fusion, 58(12):126016, oct
2018.

26 S. Plimpton. Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular
algorithms. Journal of Computational Physics, 117:1–19, 1995.

27 A.P. Thompson, H.M. Aktulga, R. Berger, D.S. Bolintineanu,
W.M. Brown, P.S. Crozier, P.J. in ’t Veld, A. Kohlmeyer, S.G.
Moore, T.D. Nguyen, R. Shan, M.J. Stevens, J. Tranchida,
C. Trott, and S.J. Plimpton. Lammps - a flexible simulation tool
for particle-based materials modeling at the atomic, meso, and
continuum scales. Comp. Phys. Comm., 271:10817, 2022.

28 A.P. Thompson, L.P. Swiler, C.R. Trott, S.M. Foiles, and G.J.
Tucker. Spectral neighbor analysis method for automated gen-
eration of quantum-accurate interatomic potentials.
Journal of
Computational Physics, 285:316–330, 2015.

29 T. Schneider and E. Stoll. Molecular-dynamics study of a three-
dimensional one-component model for distortive phase transi-


10

tions. Phys. Rev. B, 17:1302–1322, Feb 1978.

30 A. Stukowski. Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation
data with ovito - the open visualization tool. Modelling and Sim-
ulation in Material Science and Engineering, 18:015012, 2010.

31 G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller. Efficient iterative schemes for ab
initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set. Phys-
ical Review B, 54(16):11169–11186, oct 1996.

32 John P Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzerhof. Gener-
alized Gradient Approximation Made Simple. Physical Review

Letters, 77(18):3865–3868, oct 1996.

33 B. Silvi and A. Savin. Classification of chemical bonds based on
topological analysis of electron localization functions. Letters to
Nature, 371:683–686, 1994.

34 James F Ziegler, Matthias D Ziegler, and Jochen P Biersack.
SRIM: the stopping and range of ions in matter. Cadence Design
Systems, 2008.


