1

Magnetization dynamics due to field interplay in field free spin Hall 

nano-oscillators

Ayush K Gupta1, Sourabh Manna2, Rajdeep Singh Rawat2, Rohit Medwal1*

1Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India

2Natural Sciences and Science Education, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological 

University 637616, Singapore

*Correspondence should be addressed to Rohit Medwal:  rmedwal@iitk.ac.in

Abstract: Spin Hall nano oscillators (SHNOs) have shown applications in unconventional computing 

schemes and broadband frequency generation in the presence of applied external magnetic field. However, 

under field-free conditions, the oscillation characteristics of SHNOs display a significant dependence on 

the effective field, which can be tuned by adjusting the constriction width, thereby presenting an intriguing 

area of study. Here we study the effect of nano constriction width on the magnetization dynamics in 

anisotropy assisted field free SHNOs. In uniaxial anisotropy-based field free SHNOs, either the anisotropy 

field (𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠) or the demagnetization field (𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔) can dominate the magnetization dynamics depending

on the constriction width. Our findings reveal distinct auto-oscillation characteristics in narrower 

constrictions with 20 nm and 30 nm constriction width compared to their wider counterpart with 100 nm 

width. The observed frequency shift variations with input current (𝐼𝐷𝐶) and constriction widths stem from 

the inherent nonlinearity of the system. The interplay between the 𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔 and 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠, coupled with 

changes in constriction width, yields rich dynamics and offers control over frequency tunability, auto 

oscillation amplitude, and threshold current. Notably, the spatial configuration of spin wave wells within 

the constriction undergoes transformations in response to changes in both constriction width and 

anisotropy. The findings highlight the significant influence of competing fields at the constriction on the 

field-free auto oscillations of SHNOs, with this impact intensifying as the constriction width is varied.

Keywords: spintronics, pure spin current, spintronic oscillators, spin Hall nano oscillators


2

I. INTRODUCTION

Our dependence on technological devices has been increasing, and we are striving to find faster and more 

efficient ways to compute and communicate. Current complementary metal-oxide semiconductors 

(CMOS) technology [1] used in a wide range of devices may not be able to keep up with increase in novel 

applications of computing devices [2,3]. Spin-based devices such as Spin torque magnetic random-access 

memory (STMRAM) [4], Spin torque nano oscillator (STNO) [5], Spin Hall nano oscillator (SHNO) can 

be used to enhance our current computing process [6] and data storage capabilities [7]. Spin Hall nano 

oscillators have been of particular interest in recent times due to their easy fabrication process, scalability, 

and CMOS compatibility. In addition, a wide variety of spin-wave modes, such as propagating SW [8–

10], droplet solitons [11,12], localized bullet modes [13,14] etc. can be excited by exploiting the inherent 

non-linear magnetization dynamics in SHNOs. This nonlinearity of the magnetization dynamics can be 

well tuned via input dc current as well as gate voltage [15,16], that enables novel applications of SHNO 

in magnonics [8,17,18]. In summary, SHNOs offer a plethora of applications as broadband frequency 

generation [19,20], high frequency tunability [20,21], mutual synchronization [21–24], and various non-

conventional computing schemes [25–27],. 

SHNO devices utilize the spin Hall effect (SHE) [28] to generate high-frequency oscillations. This 

phenomenon occurs when a charge current flows through a material with significant spin-orbit coupling 

(SOC), such as heavy metals. In such a high SOC material, the charge current segregates based on the 

spin polarization of electrons, leading to the production of a pure spin current transverse to the charge 

current. SHNOs are typically bilayer heterostructures which consist of a ferromagnet layer (FM) attached 

to a heavy metal layer (HM). Passing a charge current through the HM layer results in a pure spin 

current [29] due to SHE and subsequent injection of spin current into the FM layer. The injected spin 

current exerts a damping like spin orbit torque (SOT) [30] on the magnetization that may counter the 

damping torque depending on the orientation of magnetization with respect to the spin polarization vector.


3

Therefore, a sufficiently strong damping like SOT acting opposite to the damping torque can fully 

compensate for the damping and lead to a sustained oscillation of magnetization around the effective field

𝐻𝑒𝑓𝑓. Typically, a biasing magnetic field is used for the operation of SHNO. However, such a biasing 

field is not the indispensable factor for the generation of sustained auto-oscillation in SHNO as 

demonstrated in a few recent studies of field-free SHNO [31–33]. Designing field-free SHNO will provide 

additional benefits of lower energy consumption, higher scalability, better scope for CMOS integration 

etc.

Awad et al [34] has experimentally demonstrated the importance of constriction width in a 

nanoconstriction SHNO to determine the oscillation characteristics in presence of a sufficiently high out-

of-plane biasing field. In this article we present a systematic study on the effect of constriction width on 

the field free magnetization oscillations considering the in plane uniaxial anisotropy in the FM layer.

Therefore, 𝑯𝒆𝒇𝒇 in this case has contribution from the anisotropy field (𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔) in addition to the 

demagnetisation field (𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈) due to dipolar interactions and the current induced Oersted field. The 

demagnetisation field is highly dependent on the constriction width; decreasing the width brings the edges 

of constriction closer which in turn increases the dipolar interaction energy as well as the 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈. On the 

other hand, 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 is invariant of constriction width and instead depends on the magnetocrystalline 

anisotropy in the system. Consequently, wider (𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 > 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈) and narrow constrictions (𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 <

𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈) have different fields as dominating component in total internal field 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 ,at the constriction. In 

the later part of this paper, we show that frequency response for the different constriction widths is also a 

subject of the interplay between the anisotropy field and the demagnetisation field. We further show that 

the nonlinearity coefficient 𝑁, which describes the inherent nonlinearity in frequency of the auto-

oscillating modes, is a function of 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 and changes sign with decrease in constriction width. In the final 


4

part, we discuss about the substantial difference of the spatial profile of auto oscillation modes at varying 

constriction width.

II. METHODOLOGY

The magnetization dynamics of a ferromagnet is governed by two major torques−a precessional 

torque due to the effective magnetic field and a damping torque that tries to damp the precession about 

the effective field (𝑯𝒆𝒇𝒇) due to the electron-phonon, electron-impurities scattering events in the material. 

The magnetization dynamics can be expressed by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation given as.

𝜕𝑴
𝜕𝑡 = (−𝛾𝑴 × 𝐵𝒆𝒇𝒇) + ( 𝛼

𝑀𝑠

𝑴 × 𝜕𝑴

𝜕𝑡 )
(1)

Here the first term on the RHS is the precessional torque 𝝉𝒑 acting on the magnetization, which is 

tangential to the precession trajectory and the second term is the damping torque 𝝉𝑫 pointing towards the

𝑩𝒆𝒇𝒇. The 𝑩𝒆𝒇𝒇 = 𝑩𝒆𝒙𝒕 + 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 + 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔, consists of the external field (𝐵𝑒𝑥𝑡), demagnetization field

(𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔) and anisotropy field (𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠) present in the material.

To obtain sustained precession of magnetization around the 𝑩𝒆𝒇𝒇 , a so-called anti-damping torque 

opposite to the direction of 𝝉𝑫 must be present in the system to counter the damping. This additional anti-

damping torque can be obtained from the injected spin current. The high spin-orbit coupling in the HM 

layer facilitates the conversion of the applied charge current into a transverse spin current denoted by 𝑱𝒔 =

(

𝐼𝐷𝐶
𝐼𝑟𝑒𝑓) 𝜃𝑆𝐻|𝐽𝑐| [11]. Here, 𝜃𝑆𝐻 is the spin Hall angle of HM, |𝐽𝑐| is the current density at 𝐼𝑟𝑒𝑓. The injected 

𝑱𝒔 gives rise to the anti-damping torque 𝝉𝑨𝑫 that acts opposite to the damping torque and tries to orient 


5

the M along the spin polarization direction 𝝈. The 𝝉𝑨𝑫 is typially of Slonczewski form which is given 

by [35].

Figure 1. (a) System schematic shows the SHNO and directions of spin current, charge current and 𝐻𝑘. 

(b) Trajectory traced by head of magnetization for 100 nm constriction for 𝐾𝑢1 = 10

𝑘𝐽

𝑚3 at 𝐼𝑡ℎ along 

with projections. (c) Spatial profile of current density for 100 nm constriction width. (d) Spatial profile of 

y component of Oersted field for 100 nm constriction width.

𝜏𝐴𝐷 =
|𝐽𝑐|ℏ𝜃𝑆𝐻

2𝑒𝑡𝐹𝑀𝜇𝑜𝑀𝑠

(𝑴 × (𝝈 × 𝑴))
(2)

Here 𝑡𝐹𝑀 is the thickness of the FM layer. Field-like torque 𝝉𝑭𝑳 due to the 𝑱𝒔, which is analogous to the 

precessional torque, is not considered due to its low magnitude as compared to the 𝝉𝑨𝑫 [36]. The 


6

magnetization dynamics in this case is governed by the Landau Lifshitz Gilbert Slonczewski (LLGS) 

equation [30,37].

𝜕𝑴
𝜕𝑡 = (−𝛾𝑴 × 𝑯𝒆𝒇𝒇) + ( 𝛼

𝑀𝑠

𝑴 × 𝜕𝑴

𝜕𝑡 ) +

|𝐽𝑐|ℏ𝜃𝑆𝐻

2𝑒𝑡𝐹𝑀𝜇𝑜𝑀𝑠

(𝑴 × (𝝈 × 𝑴))
(3)

The spin polarization efficiency 𝜖 =

𝜃𝑆𝐻Λ2

(Λ2+1 )+(Λ2−1)(𝑀 .𝜎) describes the transparency of the interface for 

spin current [38], where Λ describes the transport properties of the material depending on the angle 

between 𝑴 and 𝝈. For pure spin current based on spin orbit torque Λ = 1, thus 𝜖 =

𝜃𝑆𝐻

2 [39].

To examine the width dependent field free auto-oscillations, we have designed the SHNO as a Py (5 

nm)/Pt (5 nm) bilayer stack with nano constriction geometry and varying constriction widths. The stack, 

measuring 5 µ𝑚 × 5 µ𝑚, incorporates a round nano constriction at the center, characterized by an 

opening angle of 22° and a radius of curvature of 50 nm. Using COMSOL®, this geometry is simulated 

in air, with an electric current applied to the yz face (Fig. 1(a)) along x-direction. The current density 

distribution and the associated Oersted field profile (Fig. 1(b) and (c)) are obtained from COMSOL® 

simulations, at the reference current 𝐼𝑟𝑒𝑓 = 1 𝑚𝐴. Given the relatively lower conductivity of the FM layer 

(3.12 × 106 𝑆/𝑚) compared to the HM layer (8.9 × 106 𝑆/𝑚), the majority (74%) of the current flows 

through the HM layer, rendering the spin filtering effect negligible in the FM layer. The SHE in Pt leads 

to the generation of pure spin current with −𝑦 polarization that diffuses into the Py layer, perpendicular 

to the xy plane. The Py layer is discretized into a grid of 512 × 512 × 1 rectangular cells, with each cell 

measuring 2 × 2 × 5 𝑛𝑚³, which is smaller than the Py's exchange length along the lateral directions. The 

material parameters of Py are defined as follows: gyromagnetic ratio 𝛾 = 29.53 𝐺𝐻𝑧/𝑇, damping 

constant 𝛼 = 0.02 , saturation magnetization 𝑀𝑠 = 8 × 105 𝐴/𝑚 , and exchange constant 𝐴𝑒𝑥 =

12 × 10−12 𝐽/𝑚 [8]. The magnetization dynamics is obtained by numerically integrating the LLG 


7

equation. Initially, the magnetization is relaxed for 5 ns before applying 𝐼𝐷𝐶. The magnetization dynamics 

is simulated for a total of 45 ns for each 𝐼𝐷𝐶 value, excluding the initial 15 ns to account for stable 

precession and eliminate transient effects.

To eliminate the requirement for an external biasing field, we exploit the inherent uniaxial anisotropy of 

the ferromagnetic material. The uniaxial anisotropy generates the anisotropy field, which, combined with 

the demagnetization field and Oersted field, forms the effective field (𝑯𝒆𝒇𝒇 ) responsible for the precession 

of magnetization. In order to investigate the oscillation properties of such a bias-free SHNO under the 

influence of an anisotropic field, we performed the simulation with varying the DC current, uniaxial 

anisotropy constant (𝐾𝑢) and the orientation of easy axis. Easy axis angle is defined such that it maximizes 

the amplitude of auto-oscillations. This angle approaches the y-axis for narrower constrictions, while 

increasing the constriction width causes the angle to shift towards the x-axis (see Appendix C (Fig. 8)). 

This behaviour arises from the dipolar interaction originated from the geometrical confinement at the 

constriction region which is characterized by the constriction width. (See Table 1).

III. RESULTS

The width dependent field free auto oscillations are studied for NC width ranging from 100 nm to 

20 nm at uniaxial anisotropy values varying from 𝐾𝑢 = 5 𝑘𝐽/𝑚 3 to 15 𝑘𝐽/𝑚3. The magnetization

trajectory during auto oscillations for 100 nm at 𝐾𝑢 = 10 𝑘𝐽/𝑚3 is shown in Fig 1(b). It was observed 

that the dynamics for 100 nm show a red shift in frequency with an increase in current, regardless of the 

anisotropy values. Increasing the anisotropy (𝐾𝑢) led to an amplitude increase due to the closer proximity 

of spin wave wells which is caused by an elevated 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕. The red shift in frequency was observed till the 

constriction width of 40 nm (see Appendix E), where all the constriction had a negative 

𝛿𝑓

𝛿𝐼. Conversely, 


8

for 30 nm constriction, initially, a blue shift in frequency is observed with almost no frequency 

tunability at high 𝐼𝐷𝐶 (Fig. 2).

Figure 2. Variation of the frequency of auto oscillations with input current for different constriction sizes 

at different 𝐾𝑢 values.

The spin wave (SW) wells for these narrow widths are mostly restricted to constriction. On the flip side,

the frequency response of the 20 nm constriction exhibited a consistent blue shift with current, 

accompanied by significantly more constrained spin wave wells. These different magnetodynamical 

behaviour originate from the change in the total internal magnetic field 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 at the constriction. In our case 

the 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 also has an additional contribution from 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 along with 𝑩𝑶𝒆, 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 due to the uniaxial 

anisotropy present in the system. The anisotropy field 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 is represented by.

𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 = 2𝐾𝑢

𝑀𝑠

cos 𝜃 𝑢̂
(4)

The 𝜃 is the angle between magnetization M and the easy axis and 𝑢̂ is the direction of the easy axis. The 

𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 decreases as the amplitude of the oscillations is increased. The spin torque 𝝉𝒔 ∝ 𝐽𝑐 [30], as a 

consequence the amplitude scales with an increase in current which in turn reduces the 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔. The 

dependence of 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 on auto oscillation amplitude is attributed to the magnitude of 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 being 


9

proportionate to the component of magnetization along the corresponding direction. Increase in auto 

oscillation amplitude decreases the component of magnetization along the easy axis, leading to a 

diminished contribution from 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈. Now the 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 , taking 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 and 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 into account, can be 

written as

𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 = 2𝐾𝑢

𝑀𝑠

𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝑢𝑖𝑚𝑖 − 𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔

𝑖
(5)

Figure 3. Variation of the y-component of 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠, 𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 at the centre of constriction with input 

current for different constriction width  at 𝐾𝑢 = 10 𝑘𝐽/𝑚3.

Fig. 3 illustrates the current dependence of 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔, 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 and 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 at 𝐾𝑢 = 10 𝑘𝐽/𝑚3 for different 

constriction widths. At all three constrictions, a decrease in 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 and 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 is observed with an 

increase in current. This is due to the increased amplitude of oscillation with the current. It is also 

interesting to see that for the smallest width of 20 nm, 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 is ten times larger than that of the 100 nm, 

which can be explained by the fact that the dipolar interaction energy at the center of the constriction 

varies inversely with the constriction width.

The major contribution to 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 for 20 nm NC comes from the 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 (Fig. 3(c)) while for 100 nm NC 

width the predominant contribution comes from 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 (Fig. 3(a)). Consequently, the 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 for small NC 

width follows 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 instead of 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔, contrary to the behaviour observed in large constriction widths

(see Appendix A Fig. 6).


10

The frequency tunability of the auto oscillations is a crucial aspect of the SHNO. The frequency 

of auto-oscillations 𝑓 is extracted by performing FFT over the stable regime of oscillations. Current 

tunability of 𝑓 with varying constriction width and 𝐾𝑢 is shown in Fig. 2. Notably, the magnetodynamical 

behaviour of field free SHNOs is strikingly different for all three constriction widths. This can be 

described by the magnetodynamic nonlinearity of the system. In the case of a thin film with in-plane fields,

the complex spin wave amplitude is described by [14]

𝛿𝑏
𝛿𝑡 = −𝑖[𝜔𝑜 − 𝐷Δ𝑏 + 𝑁|𝑏|2𝑏] − Γ𝑏 + 𝑓 ( 𝑟

𝑅𝑐

) 𝜎𝐼𝑏 − 𝑓 ( 𝑟

𝑅𝑐

) 𝜎𝐼|𝑏|2𝑏
(6)

Here, 𝜔𝑜 is the FMR frequency, 𝐷 =

2𝐴𝑒𝑥
𝑀𝑠

𝛿𝜔𝑜
𝛿𝐻 is spin wave dispersion coefficient, 𝑅𝑐 is related to the 

effective area of spin current injection, Γ = 𝛼 (𝜔𝐻 +

𝜔𝑀

2 ) is spin wave dissipation rate with

𝜔𝐻 = 𝛾𝐻𝑖𝑛𝑡, 𝜔𝑀 = 4𝜋𝛾𝑀𝑠. 𝑁 is the non-linear frequency shift given by.

𝑁 = −

𝜔𝐻𝜔𝑀(𝜔𝐻+𝜔𝑀

4 )

𝜔𝑜(𝜔𝐻+𝜔𝑀

2 )
(7)

Considering a standing spin wave bullet solution, 𝑏 = 𝐵𝑜𝜓 (

𝑟

𝑙) 𝑒−𝑖𝜔𝑡. Where 𝜓 describes the spatial 

profile of the bullet. The frequency of the oscillations is given as 𝜔 = 𝜔𝑜 + 𝑁𝑃. Where 𝑃 = |𝐵𝑜|2 is the 

power of the oscillations, which directly relates to the amplitude. The value of 𝑁 depends on the 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 and

differs for all three constrictions. For SHNOs with in plane fields the value of N can be approximated with 

equation (7) (see Appendix D). It can be clearly deduced from the expression of 𝑁, that for positive 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕

, the non-linear frequency shift will be negative. This is evident in the case of the 100 nm constriction

(Fig. 3(a)), where 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 is dominated by 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 and stays positive (see Appendix A (Fig. 6)) for all 𝐾𝑢

values throughout the 𝐼𝐷𝐶 sweep. Consequently, the frequency of the oscillations for this constriction

decreases with current, exhibiting a red shift. In contrast, the value of N for 30 nm constriction is positive 


11

but stagnates for high 𝐼𝐷𝐶 because of minuscule change in 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕. The frequency response shows a blue shift 

for low 𝐼𝐷𝐶, for high 𝐼𝐷𝐶 there is little to no frequency tunability with current (Fig. 2(b)). The frequency 

response for 20 nm constriction shows a blue shift for about all current values due to the positive value of 

non-linear frequency shift. (Fig. 2(c)). An increase in frequency with 𝐾𝑢 is also observed which is 

attributed to that the frequency is characterized by the 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 . Increment in 𝐾𝑢 increases the 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠 ’s 

contribution to 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡, which increases the frequency.

Figure 4. Spatial profile of auto oscillations at threshold current density for different constriction widths 

and 𝐾𝑢 values.

The threshold current density for auto oscillations increases with decrease in 𝐾𝑢 and constriction width. 

The 𝐼𝑡ℎ depends on the 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕, from the macrospin model 𝐼𝑡ℎ can be written as [40]

𝐼𝑡ℎ =
𝛾𝛼

2|𝜏𝐷𝐿|(𝑚̂𝑜. 𝜎̂) (𝜇𝑜𝑀𝑠 + 2𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 − 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡

2

2𝑀𝑠

)

(8)


12

Here, |𝜏𝐷𝐿| is the magnitude of damping like SOT, (𝑚̂𝑜. 𝜎̂) is the angle between relaxed magnetization 

and spin polarization. According to the equation above, the threshold current 𝐼𝑡ℎ should decrease with 

increasing 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡. Fig. 2(c) shows a sharp increase in 𝐼𝑡ℎ with decreasing 𝐾𝑢 for 20 nm constriction as the

change in 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 is very steep at low constriction widths. For 20 nm and 30 nm constriction, the auto 

oscillation could not be excited for 𝐾𝑢 = 5 𝑘𝐽/𝑚3 even at current densities of approximately 7 𝑇𝐴/𝑚2 . 

This limitation arises from the substantial 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 at the centre of the constriction, which hinders 

oscillation excitation as the SOT fails to overcome 𝜏𝐷.

A spatial profile of the auto oscillation amplitude is shown in Fig. 4, which is obtained using the FFT of 

spatiotemporal data of the oscillations in each cell. Notably, the localization of amplitude varies across 

different constriction widths.The formation of spin wave (SW) wells at the constrictions follows the 

distribution of 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕. In sufficiently wide constrictions, as the current increases, SW modes emerge at 

opposite edges of the constriction, gradually approaching each other with increase in 𝐾𝑢. Beyond a critical 

current, these modes detach from the edges and begin propagating. These SW wells move closer to each 

other and try to align with the easy axis as the increase in 𝐾𝑢 is results in the enhancement in 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕. The 

alignment of edge modes at the opposite constriction edges in narrow constrictions differs from that of 

100 nm constrictions due to the proximity of the constriction edges. This proximity leads to the dominance 

of the demagnetization field over other fields, resulting in a negative sign for the 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡. The opposite 

direction of the 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 at different constrictions, results in SW wells having positive and negative slope from 

x-axis respectively for wider and narrower constrictions. Additionally, in 20 nm and 30 nm constrictions, 

the spin wave (SW) wells occupy the entire available volume within the constriction.


13

Figure 5. Variation of amplitude of auto oscillations with input current for different constriction sizes at 

different 𝐾𝑢 values. (a) 100 nm (b) 30 nm (c) 20 nm.

An increment in amplitude of the auto oscillations with uniaxial anisotropy and current for all the 

constriction widths is observed (Fig. 5). Higher amplitude at higher current densities is due to the increased 

SOT at the constriction, which pulls the magnetization far out of its equilibrium. To understand the 

variation of amplitude with the 𝐾𝑢 the 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 distribution at the constriction for all three constrictions is 

examined. The change in 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 at a similar current density for different 𝐾𝑢 is due to the change in the 

𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 which competes with the 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈 as both are opposite, thus the high 𝑩𝒂𝒏𝒊𝒔 results in a high 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕.

The SW wells move closer to each other due to the high 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 resulting in a larger auto-oscillation area at 

the constriction, which increases the auto-oscillation amplitude. Additionally, a decrease in auto 

oscillation amplitude with constriction width is observed. This is attributed to very high 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 amplitude 

due to the dominating 𝑩𝒅𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒈. High |𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡| gives rise to strong damping torque which reduces the auto 

oscillation amplitude.


14

The fluctuations in the amplitude are also observed, because at high 𝐾𝑢 values the amplitude of the 

oscillations is shared between multiple harmonics. When the minor harmonics have high amplitude, the 

amplitude of the major harmonic shrinks. This behaviour is also visible in the linewidth spectra of the auto 

oscillations (see Appendix B). The low linewidth corresponds to the high amplitude of the major 

harmonic; on the other hand, high linewidth appears due to the significant amplitude of other minor 

harmonics.

IV. CONCLUSION

In summary, we have demonstrated that the uniaxial anisotropy-based field free SHNOs exhibit significant 

variations in auto oscillation properties with change in constriction width. Wide constrictions are primarily 

influenced by the anisotropy field, resulting in a consistently negative frequency shift with current. In 

contrast, narrow constrictions are predominantly governed by dipolar interactions, leading to a primarily 

positive frequency shift. Decreasing the constriction width results in a lower oscillation frequency due to 

the increased central magnetic field 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 at the centre of the constriction. Additionally, the oscillation of 

SW modes forming at the constriction have different behaviour with changes in constriction width. For 

100 nm constriction the SW wells are aligned at the opposite edges of the constriction with a positive 

slope from x-axis, while for the narrow constrictions where 𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔 dominates the SW wells have a 

negative slope. Furthermore, the SW modes for wide constrictions stick to the edges of the constriction 

whereas for narrower (20 and 30 nm) constrictions these modes are inherently different and predominantly 

occupy the entire constriction region from the start. Our results show that the miniaturization of field-free 

SHNOs essentially leads to lower threshold current of auto oscillation. However, wider constriction 

provides higher oscillation amplitude and better frequency tunability with input current. These findings 


15

illuminate the field-free auto-oscillation dynamics of SHNOs across varying length scales, opening 

avenues for their application in diverse unconventional computing schemes like neuromorphic computing, 

reservoir computing, and probabilistic computing.

Data availability statement

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 

reasonable request.

References

[1] V. A. Bespalov, N. A. Dyuzhev, and V. Yu. Kireev, Possibilities and Limitations of CMOS 

Technology for the Production of Various Microelectronic Systems and Devices, Nanotechnol Russia 
17, 24 (2022).

[2] Andrae, Anders SG, and Tomas Edler. "On global electricity usage of communication technology: 

trends to 2030." Challenges 6.1 (2015): 117-157.

[3] Garimella, Suresh V., et al. "Technological drivers in data centers and telecom systems: Multiscale 

thermal, 
electrical, 
and 
energy 
management." Applied 
energy 107
(2013): 
66-80.

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261913001554?via%3Dihub.

[4] A. V. Khvalkovskiy et al., Basic Principles of STT-MRAM Cell Operation in Memory Arrays, J. Phys. 

D: Appl. Phys. 46, 074001 (2013).

[5] T. Chen, R. K. Dumas, A. Eklund, P. K. Muduli, A. Houshang, A. A. Awad, P. Dürrenfeld, B. G. 

Malm, A. Rusu, and J. Åkerman, Spin-Torque and Spin-Hall Nano-Oscillators, arXiv:1512.03162.

[6] M. Romera et al., Vowel Recognition with Four Coupled Spin-Torque Nano-Oscillators, Nature 563, 

7730 (2018).

[7] J. Puebla, J. Kim, K. Kondou, and Y. Otani, Spintronic Devices for Energy-Efficient Data Storage 

and Energy Harvesting, Commun Mater 1, 1 (2020).

[8] H. Fulara, M. Zahedinejad, R. Khymyn, A. A. Awad, S. Muralidhar, M. Dvornik, and J. Åkerman, 

Spin-Orbit Torque–Driven Propagating Spin Waves, Sci. Adv. 5, eaax8467 (2019).

[9] L. Chen, K. Zhou, Z. Tao, Z. Gao, L. Liang, Z. Li, and R. Liu, Self-Oscillations in a Nanogap Spin 

Hall Nano-Oscillator with a Perpendicularly Magnetized External Film, Phys. Rev. Appl. 19, 054051 
(2023).

[10]
M. Succar and M. Haidar, Spin Wave Excitations in a Nanowire Spin Hall Oscillator with 

Perpendicular Magnetic Anisotropy, Journal of Applied Physics 133, 093901 (2023).

[11]
M. Dvornik, A. A. Awad, and J. Åkerman, Origin of Magnetization Auto-Oscillations in 

Constriction-Based Spin Hall Nano-Oscillators, Phys. Rev. Applied 9, 014017 (2018).


16

[12]
S. M. Mohseni et al., Spin Torque-Generated Magnetic Droplet Solitons, Science 339, 1295 

(2013).

[13]
P. Dürrenfeld, A. A. Awad, A. Houshang, R. K. Dumas, and J. Åkerman, A 20 Nm Spin Hall Nano-

Oscillator, Nanoscale 9, 1285 (2017).

[14]
A. Slavin and V. Tiberkevich, Spin Wave Mode Excited by Spin-Polarized Current in a Magnetic 

Nanocontact Is a Standing Self-Localized Wave Bullet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 237201 (2005).

[15]
H. Fulara, M. Zahedinejad, R. Khymyn, M. Dvornik, S. Fukami, S. Kanai, H. Ohno, and J. 

Åkerman, Giant Voltage-Controlled Modulation of Spin Hall Nano-Oscillator Damping, Nat 
Commun 11, 4006 (2020).

[16]
A. Kumar, M. Rajabali, V. Hugo González, M. Zahedinejad, A. Houshang, and J. Åkerman, 

Fabrication of Voltage-Gated Spin Hall Nano-Oscillators, Nanoscale 14, 1432 (2022).

[17]
V. E. Demidov, S. Urazhdin, A. Anane, V. Cros, and S. O. Demokritov, Spin–Orbit-Torque 

Magnonics, Journal of Applied Physics 127, 170901 (2020).

[18]
Han, J., Zhang, P., Hou, J. T., Siddiqui, S. A., & Liu, L. (2019). Mutual control of coherent spin 

waves and magnetic domain walls in a magnonic device. Science, 366(6469), 1121-1125.

[19]
R. Sharma, R. Mishra, T. Ngo, Y.-X. Guo, S. Fukami, H. Sato, H. Ohno, and H. Yang, Electrically 

Connected Spin-Torque Oscillators Array for 2.4 GHz WiFi Band Transmission and Energy 
Harvesting, Nat Commun 12, 1 (2021).

[20]
B. Jiang et al., Towards Terahertz Spin Hall Nano-Oscillator with Synthesized Anti-Ferromagnets, 

Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 490, 165470 (2019).

[21]
V. E. Demidov, H. Ulrichs, S. V. Gurevich, S. O. Demokritov, V. S. Tiberkevich, A. N. Slavin, A. 

Zholud, and S. Urazhdin, Synchronization of Spin Hall Nano-Oscillators to External Microwave 
Signals, Nat Commun 5, 1 (2014).

[22]
B. Jiang, W.-J. Zhang, M. K. Alam, S.-Y. Yu, G.-B. Han, G.-L. Liu, S.-S. Yan, and S.-S. Kang, 

Synchronization of Nanowire-Based Spin Hall Nano-Oscillators, Chinese Phys. B 31, 077503 (2022).

[23]
M. Zahedinejad, A. A. Awad, S. Muralidhar, R. Khymyn, H. Fulara, H. Mazraati, M. Dvornik, 

and J. Åkerman, Two-Dimensional Mutually Synchronized Spin Hall Nano-Oscillator Arrays for 
Neuromorphic Computing, Nat. Nanotechnol. 15, 1 (2020).

[24]
M. Zahedinejad, H. Fulara, R. Khymyn, A. Houshang, M. Dvornik, S. Fukami, S. Kanai, H. Ohno, 

and J. Åkerman, Memristive Control of Mutual Spin Hall Nano-Oscillator Synchronization for 
Neuromorphic Computing, Nat. Mater. 21, 81 (2022).

[25]
Y. Shim, S. Chen, A. Sengupta, and K. Roy, Stochastic Spin-Orbit Torque Devices as Elements 

for Bayesian Inference, Sci Rep 7, 1 (2017).

[26]
J. R. Mohan, A. J. Mathew, K. Nishimura, R. Feng, R. Medwal, S. Gupta, R. S. Rawat, and Y. 

Fukuma, Classification Tasks Using Input Driven Nonlinear Magnetization Dynamics in Spin Hall 
Oscillator, Sci Rep 13, 1 (2023).

[27]
A. J. Mathew, J. R. Mohan, R. Feng, R. Medwal, S. Gupta, R. S. Rawat, and Y. Fukuma, 

Evaluation of Memory Capacity and Time Series Prediction Using a Spin Hall Oscillator as 
Reservoir, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 59, 1 (2023).

[28]
J. E. Hirsch, Spin Hall Effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1834 (1999).


17

[29]
S. Y. Huang, D. Qu, T. C. Chuang, C. C. Chiang, W. Lin, and C. L. Chien, Pure Spin Current 

Phenomena, Applied Physics Letters 117, 190501 (2020).

[30]
J. C. Slonczewski, Current-Driven Excitation of Magnetic Multilayers, Journal of Magnetism and 

Magnetic Materials 159, L1 (1996).

[31]
S. Manna, R. Medwal, S. Gupta, J. R. Mohan, Y. Fukuma, and R. S. Rawat, Anisotropy-Assisted 

Bias-Free Spin Hall Nano-Oscillator, Applied Physics Letters 122, 072401 (2023).

[32]
K. Yogendra, M. Koo, and K. Roy, Energy Efficient Computation Using Injection Locked Bias-

Field Free Spin-Hall Nano-Oscillator Array with Shared Heavy Metal, in 2017 IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Nanoscale Architectures (NANOARCH) (2017), pp. 89–94.

[33]
T. Shirokura and P. N. Hai, Bias-Field-Free Spin Hall Nano-Oscillators with an out-of-Plane 

Precession Mode, Journal of Applied Physics 127, 103904 (2020).

[34]
A. A. Awad, A. Houshang, M. Zahedinejad, R. Khymyn, and J. Åkerman, Width Dependent Auto-

Oscillating Properties of Constriction Based Spin Hall Nano-Oscillators, Appl. Phys. Lett. 116, 
232401 (2020).

[35]
Phys. Rev. B 87, 174411 (2013) - Current Induced Torques and Interfacial Spin-Orbit Coupling: 

Semiclassical Modeling, https://journals.aps.org/prb/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevB.87.174411.

[36]
T. Nan, S. Emori, C. T. Boone, X. Wang, T. M. Oxholm, J. G. Jones, B. M. Howe, G. J. Brown, 

and N. X. Sun, Comparison of Spin-Orbit Torques and Spin Pumping across NiFe/Pt and NiFe/Cu/Pt 
Interfaces, Phys. Rev. B 91, 214416 (2015).

[37]
D. C. Ralph and M. D. Stiles, Spin Transfer Torques, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic 

Materials 320, 1190 (2008).

[38]
Garello, K., Miron, I., Avci, C. et al. Symmetry and magnitude of spin–orbit torques in 

ferromagnetic heterostructures. Nature Nanotech 8, 587–593 (2013)

[39]
L. Liu, T. Moriyama, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, Spin-Torque Ferromagnetic Resonance 

Induced by the Spin Hall Effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 036601 (2011).

[40]
A. N. Slavini and P. Kabos, Approximate Theory of Microwave Generation in a Current-Driven 

Magnetic Nanocontact Magnetized in an Arbitrary Direction, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 41, 
1264 (2005).


18

Table I. Easy axis angle and maximum value of 𝐽𝑐 at constriction for different constriction widths.

NC width (nm)
𝑱𝒄 (𝑻𝑨

𝒎𝟐)
𝝓 (𝒅𝒆𝒈𝒓𝒆𝒆𝒔)

20
2.727
90

30
1.818
90

40
1.407
80

60
1.006
80

80
0.797
70

100
0.665
70


19

APPENDIX A: 𝑩𝒊𝒏𝒕 FOR DIFFERENT CONSTRICTION WIDTHS AT DIFFERENT 𝑲𝒖

VALUES

Figure 6:
𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 at constriction widths at different 𝐾𝑢 as a function of current have been plotted (a) 100 

nm (b) 30 nm (c) 20 nm.

The plot displays 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 for various constriction widths and 𝐾𝑢 values. In the case of the 100 nm width, 

𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠 dominates, leading to an increase in 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 with higher 𝐾𝑢. Additionally, at larger 𝐾𝑢 values, 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡

steeply decreases due to the increased auto oscillation amplitude. For narrower constrictions, 

𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 becomes negative as a result of the heightened influence of 𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔. At higher 𝐾𝑢 values, 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡

becomes less negative for narrower constrictions and exhibits a higher positive value for wider 

constriction, primarily due to the increasing contribution from 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠.


20

APPENDIX B: LINEWIDTH VARIATION OF AUTO OSCILLATIONS WITH 

CONSTRICTION WIDTH, INPUT CURRENT AND 𝑲𝒖

Figure 7: Linewidth of auto oscillations at different 𝐾𝑢 as a function of current have been plotted (a) 100 

nm (b) 20 nm (c) 30 nm.

For the 100 nm constriction, the fluctuations in Δf increase as 𝐾𝑢 is raised. The oscillation amplitude 

undergoes harmonic splitting due to high 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 at higher 𝐾𝑢 values, resulting in broadened peaks. In 

contrast, for the 20 nm and 30 nm constrictions, Δf fluctuations occur at lower 𝐼𝐷𝐶 values but diminish as 

𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 stabilizes. Lower constrictions exhibit improved linewidth, potentially attributable to the proximity 

of edge modes within the constriction.


21

APPENDIX C: ANGULAR VARIATION OF AUTOSCILLATION AMPLITUDE FOR 

DIFFERENT CONSTRICTION WIDTHS

Figure 8: FFT amplitude of auto oscillations as a function of angle of effective field for different 

constriction widths.

Auto oscillation amplitude for different constriction widths at different in plane angles of the uniaxial 

anisotropy. 100 nm has peak amplitude around 75° and the width of the peak is larger than the other 

constriction widths. Other two narrow constriction have the peak amplitude at 90°. Still due to the 

extremely dominant demagnetizing effects at 20 nm NC width the amplitude at 85° is considerably lower 

than that of the 30 nm.


22

APPENDIX D: COEFFICIENT OF NON-LINEAR FREQUENCY AT 𝑲𝒖 = 𝟏𝟓 𝒌𝑱/𝒎𝟑

Figure 9: Nonlinear frequency shift for different constriction widths at 𝐾𝑢 = 15 𝑘𝐽/𝑚3 as afunction of 

input current

Coefficient of non linear frequency shift (as given in Eq. (6)) is plotted against 𝐼𝐷𝐶 for 100 nm constriction 

width at 𝐾𝑢 = 15 𝑘𝐽/𝑚3. As explained in the main text the shift in frequency from the simulation results 

approximately matches with the theoretical prediction, where N stays negative for 100 nm and positive 

for the narrow constrictions. For 30 nm constriction the change in N with current is minute compared to 

20 nm and 100 nm constriction which is the reason of poor tunability of frequency with current.

In eqn [7] Slavini et al. [14] have assumed an infinite thin film in y-z plane with constant demagnetizing 

effect along its thickness to get equation (6). The applied field is taken to be in-plane along z direction 

with a constant magnitude. Resulting excitation is thought of as a standing self-localized wave bullet 

which is confined in the constriction. Field and in turn the nonlinearity coefficient is assumed to be 

constant as the current is fixed which differs from our results where both of them are a function of 𝐼𝐷𝐶. 

Power of auto oscillations P is also a function of current as amplitude depends on 𝐼𝐷𝐶.

𝜔 = 𝜔𝑜 + 𝑁𝑃


23

𝛿𝜔
𝛿𝐼 = 𝑁 δP

δI + 𝛿𝑁

𝛿𝐼 𝑃

Also the frequency of spin wave bullet is single modal while in our case the field free auto oscillation 

have multiple modes. Thus only a qualitative comparison between the simulation and analytical results is 

made.

Figures S9 and S10 show the total shift in the frequency of the oscillations with the current in the arbitrary 

units. For the 100 nm constriction the shift is negative with decrement in the value with increase in 𝐼𝐷𝐶. 

The 20 nm constriction show a increasingly positive shift with the current while the 30 nm constriction 

has a very slow change in shift with the current.

Figure 10: 𝑁𝑜𝑛𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑓𝑡 × 𝑃𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 for 100 nm constriction width at 𝐾𝑢 = 15 𝑘𝐽/𝑚3 as 

a function of input current.


24

APPENDIX E: AUTO-OSCILLATION SPECTRA FOR DIFFERENT CONSTRICTION 

WIDTHS AS A FUNCTION OF CURRENT

Figure 11: Auto oscillation PSDs at 𝐾𝑢 = 15 𝑘𝐽/𝑚3 from constriction widths from 20 nm to 100 nm as 

a function of current are plotted. Colorbars represent the auto oscillation amplitude in arbitrary units.

Frequency response at 6 different constriction widths (100 nm – 20 nm) is shown. The dynamics till 40 

nm constriction width is similar to that of 100 nm, while at 20 nm and 30 nm constriction width the 

magnetodynamical behaviour is different. Again it is because till 40nm constriction width the 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑠

contribution to the 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 is greater than that of 𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔 which makes the 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 positive. Consequently, the 

nonlinear frequency shift is negative till 40 nm constriction width. Below the 40 nm constriction width 


25

the contribution of 𝐵𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑔 towards 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑡 dominates and the magnetodynamic nonlinearity changes sign. 

The frequency response with current 

𝛿𝑓

𝛿𝐼 is positive for narrower constrictions.


