Mottness and spin liquidity in a doped organic superconductor
κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8

H. Oike,1, 2, ∗ H. Taniguchi,3 K. Miyagawa,2 and K. Kanoda2, 4, 5, 6, †

1PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Kawaguchi 332-0012, Japan
2Department of Applied Physics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan
3Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University, Saitama 338-8570, Japan
4Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstrasse 1, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
5Physics Institute, University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany
6Department of Advanced Materials Science, University of Tokyo,
Kashiwanoha 5-1-5, Kashiwa 277-8561 Chiba, Japan
(Dated: July 20, 2023)

It has been more than 40 years since superconductivity was discovered in organic conductors,
and the way scientists view organic superconductors has changed over time. At first, the fact that
organic conductors exhibit superconductivity was a novelty in itself, and subsequently it was shown
that behind the superconductivity is the physics of electron correlation, which has been a focus in
condensed matter physics at large. Amid the remarkable development of correlation physics, the
unique characteristics of organic conductors, e.g., a variety of lattice geometries and the highly com-
pressible feature, led to the elucidation of fundamental principles and the finding of new phenomena,
such as bandwidth-controlled Mott transitions and possible quantum spin liquids. However, most
organic superconductors have commensurate band fillings, such as a half or a quarter, whereas in-
organic superconductors, such as high-Tc cuprates and iron-based superconductors, have often been
investigated under the variation of their band fillings. Thus, the physical linkage between organic
and inorganic superconductors has remained unresolved. In this review article, we focus on the
layered nonstoichiometric superconductor, κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8, which is exceptional among
organic conductors in that the nonstoichiometry serves as doping to a half-filled band. Moreover,
the strong correlation of electrons and a geometrically frustrated triangular lattice make this system
exhibit the unique phenomena involved in Mottness, spin liquidity, and superconductivity, which are
key concepts of correlated electron physics. This review will summarize what we learned from the
pressure study of κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 and how they relate to the extensively studied issues
in inorganic materials.

PACS numbers: xxxx

Contents

1. Introduction
2

2. Electronic states of κ-type BEDT-TTF
compounds
2
A. Crystal and band structures
3
B. Bandwidth-controlled Mott transition
3
C. Quantum spin liquid
5
D. Superconductivity and energetic hierarchy
6

3. Synthesis and crystal structure of the doped
organic conductor
7
A. Synthesis
7
B. Crystal structure
8

4. Mottness in the doped organic conductor
9
A. Charge transport under pressure
9
B. Hall effect and Mottness
11

∗Electronic address: oike@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
†Electronic address: kanoda@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

C. Bandwidth-controlled Mottness transition at a
finite doping level
12

5. Spin liquidity in the doped organic conductor13
A. Spin-charge separation
13
B. Spin excitations and interlayer charge transport 14
C. Exotic excitations in the doped quantum spin
liquid
16

6. Superconductivity in the doped organic
conductor
17
A. Pressure dependence of the superconducting
transition temperature
17
B. Mottness-Driven BEC-BCS Crossover
18
C. How does the doped quantum spin liquid form
superconductivity?
19

7. Summary
20

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
21

References
21

arXiv:2307.09187v2  [cond-mat.supr-con]  19 Jul 2023


2

1.
INTRODUCTION

The 1980s was a period of discovery of various su-
perconducting organic crystals, such as TMTSF-based
compounds and BEDT-TTF-based compounds, where
TMTSF and BEDT-TTF represent tetramethyltetrase-
lenafulvalence and bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene,
respectively
[1–14].
Among
them
is
the
paper
on superconductivity in κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 (κ-
Hg2.89Br8), published in 1987 [11, 12], a year after
the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in
cuprates [15]. From a modern perspective, both super-
conductors emerge when doping a Mott insulator [16–
18], and thus, it is reasonable that we imagine a com-
mon physics behind them.
However, these discoveries
were probably seen as events in different fields at that
time.
The paper on high-Tc cuprates immediately at-
tracted tremendous attention and sparked the study of
strongly correlated electron systems. On the other hand,
it took some time before the background for studying
κ-Hg2.89Br8 could be formed.
In the 1990s, it began to be recognized that organic
conductors are suitable for studying strongly correlated
electron systems [19–21]. Although the crystal structures
of molecular materials are complex, the conduction bands
have a simple structure that is well reproduced by over-
lapping frontier orbitals of molecules as reproduced with
extended H¨uckel and tight-binding approximations[19].
In addition to the simplicity of the band structure, the
pressure tunability of the lattice constants is favorable
for investigating parameter-dependent physical proper-
ties. Pressure changes the orbital overlap together with
the lattice parameters, and consequently affects the key
parameters of correlated electron physics such as the ki-
netic energy of the conduction electrons and the interac-
tion strength between electrons. Thus, pressure studies
on κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds have revealed a con-
crete picture of a bandwidth-controlled Mott transition
in half-filled systems, namely, non-doped systems.
The development of Mott physics in κ-type BEDT-
TTF compounds has provided the basis for κ-Hg2.89Br8
to be viewed as a doped Mott insulator. However, this
did not immediately lead to the development of the
physics of doped systems in organic conductors because
of the difficulties of experiments. κ-Hg2.89Br8 often ex-
hibits crystalline phases other than the targeted phase
[22], and it has been difficult to find a method to syn-
thesize the targeted crystalline phase with good repro-
ducibility. Indeed, only a few groups, including one of
the authors, were successful in synthesizing κ-Hg2.89Br8
after the discovery by Lyubovskaya et al [11, 17, 22].
Moreover, microcracks often appear in the material upon
cooling, making it difficult to quantify electrical conduc-
tion phenomena at low temperatures.
Perhaps it was
also difficult to find an analytical method to reveal new
physics from the experimental results of κ-Hg2.89Br8.
In the 2000s, experimental indications of a quan-
tum spin liquid (QSL) in κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 led

to further interest in κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds
[23].
The κ-type compounds have isosceles triangu-
lar lattices and exhibit antiferromagnetic (AF) orders
in the Mott insulating states [24]; however, κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu2(CN)3, a Mott insulator with a nearly right
triangular lattice, was found to have no magnetic order
and was suggested to have gapless excitations reminis-
cent of Fermi degeneracy at low temperatures although
its ground state is still under debate [23, 25–27]. Amid
the longstanding quest for QSLs on geometrically frus-
trated lattices, this experimental indication triggered the
discoveries of other QSL candidates [28–30] and conse-
quently made κ-Hg2.89Br8 unique because it also has a
similar triangular lattice and thus may host a doped QSL.
Doped QSL was theoretically proposed as the origin of
high-Tc superconductors [31], but their parent materials
are antiferromagnets. Thus, κ-Hg2.89Br8 should play a
key role in understanding the superconductivity emerg-
ing from a QSL.
In this review, we describe how the study of κ-
Hg2.89Br8 has opened up new aspects of strongly cor-
related electron systems. Analogous to the bandwidth-
controlled Mott transition in a half-filled system, how do
electron correlations give rise to nonperturbative effects
in the doped system? Although charge is not mobile in
QSL states of a half-filled system, how does carrier dop-
ing superimpose charge degrees of freedom over the exotic
spin states? How does superconductivity emerge in these
situations? Although there is still much to be learned
about these diverse phenomena from κ-Hg2.89Br8, this re-
view summarizes what we have found in the doped Mott
insulator.
In Chapter 2, we provide an overview of the Mott tran-
sition, QSL and superconductivity exhibited by κ-type
BEDT-TTF compounds for a clearer understanding of
κ-Hg2.89Br8. Because many review articles are available
on these topics in κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds [20, 32–
37], we provide a brief overview of the fundamentals and
present status relevant to κ-Hg2.89Br8.
Chapter 3 de-
scribes the synthesis and crystal structure of κ-Hg2.89Br8,
emphasizing its uniqueness. Chapters 4-6 describe the
unusual electronic properties of κ-Hg2.89Br8 in detail and
discuss doping effects on the Mott transition, QSL, and
superconductivity, respectively. Chapter 7 summarizes
this review.

2.
ELECTRONIC STATES OF κ-TYPE
BEDT-TTF COMPOUNDS

A characteristic feature of κ-type BEDT-TTF com-
pounds is that materials with similar crystal structures
exhibit a wide variety of electronic states. In all com-
pounds, electrons in the HOMO (highest occupied molec-
ular orbital) of BEDT-TTF molecules are solely responsi-
ble for the electrical conduction and magnetism. There-
fore, although the phenomena are diverse, they can be
attributed to the behavior of electrons in the same type


3

of orbital. This feature has worked effectively in devel-
oping the physics of strongly correlated electron systems.
This chapter describes the basic properties of non-doped
κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds.

A.
Crystal and band structures

Fig.
1 shows the crystal structure of κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 as an example of κ-type BEDT-TTF
compounds, which have a layered structure composed of
anion layers and BEDT-TTF layers (Fig. 1(a)) [38]. The
anion layers pull out one electron from every two BEDT-
TTF molecules to form a closed shell, and consequently,
the HOMOs of BEDT-TTF molecules become an open
shell. Therefore, anion layers are nonmagnetic and insu-
lating, similar to a block layer of high-Tc cuprates, and
BEDT-TTF layers play a main role in correlated electron
physics. Fig. 1(b) shows a κ-type molecular arrangement
in a BEDT-TTF layer.
Because the hybridization be-
tween atomic orbitals in a molecule are much larger than
inter-molecular transfer integrals [39], the molecular or-
bitals can be regarded as minimum units of the electronic
structure. This hierarchical structure gives a rather sim-
ple view of κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds although the
atomic arrangement in real space is complicated.
Based on the extended H¨uckel and tight binding ap-
proximations, the dimer formation of two molecules
makes the HOMOs split into bonding and antibonding
orbitals.
When the intra-dimer transfer integral tb1 is
several times larger than the inter-dimer transfer inte-
grals, the conduction band composed of antibonding HO-
MOs is half-filled (Fig. 1(c)) [19, 40]. Although weak
dimerization results in a quarter-filled conduction band
[41–43], which is composed of both bonding and an-
tibonding HOMOs, this review focuses on compounds
with relatively strong dimerization. Then, antibonding
HOMOs form a triangular lattice characterized by inter-
dimer transfer integrals t and t′ (Fig.1(d)).
Because of the anti-bonding nature of the dimer or-
bital, an inter-dimer bonding is stabilized when their
wave functions have opposite signs (Fig.2(a)).
When
t′ is zero, the lattice is identical to a square lattice,
whose Fermi surface is also square at half-filling with
particle-hole symmetry (Fig.2(c,d)). On a triangular lat-
tice, however, there are no configurations in which all
inter-dimer bonds are stabilized (Fig.2(b)).
The geo-
metrical frustration of the phase factor leads to the de-
generative nature of the bottom half of the conduction
band for finite t′ values and breaks particle-hole symme-
try (Fig.2(c)), resulting in a hole-like Fermi surface at
half-filling (Fig.2(d)). This tight-binding picture can ap-
proximate the first-principal band structure calculation
[44]. The asymmetry may be related to the difference
between hole-doped and electron-doped Mott insulators
[45–48].

FIG. 1:
(a) Crystal structure of κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3.
(b) κ-type molecular arrangement in a BEDT-TTF layer.
According to the extended H¨uckel approximations, the con-
duction and valence bands are mainly represented by four
inter-molecular transfer integrals, tb1, tb2, tp, and tq [19].
(c) Schematic representation of energy splitting of HOMO to
form a conduction band. (d) Isosceles trianglar lattice formed
by BEDT-TTF dimers. Inter-dimer transfer integrals t and
t′ are represented by tb2, tp, and tq.

B.
Bandwidth-controlled Mott transition

In the above tight-binding picture, we regard a dimer
as a site, and thus, the onsite Coulomb repulsion U means
an energy increase due to the occupation of two electrons
(or two holes in the present case) on a dimer. Therefore,
the value of U is different from an on-molecular repulsion
Umol, which is approximately 4 eV without screening [49].
Because Umol is much larger than tb1, U is approximately
given by 2tb1 as follows. Fig. 3 depicts two configura-
tions: one is two “singly occupied” dimers, both of which
have one hole, or equivalently three electrons (Fig.3(a)),
and the other is a pair of an “empty” dimer with no hole
(four electrons) and a “doubly occupied” dimer with two
holes (two electrons) (Fig.3(b)). U is defined as the en-
ergy difference between these two configurations. In the


4

FIG. 2:
(a) Energy levels of four dimers with four bonds
of a transfer integral t. A circle indicates a dimer. Because
of the anti-bonding nature of dimers, the inter-dimer bond is
stabilized when the signs of the phase of dimer orbitals are
opposite to each other, such as sigma bonds formed from p
orbitals. (b) Energy levels of four dimers with an additional
diagonal bond of a transfer integral t′. (c) Density of states of
the isosceles triangular lattice formed by inter-dimer transfer
integrals t and t′. (d) Fermi surfaces of the isosceles trian-
gular lattice at half filling. b (c) and kb (kc) represent the
lattice constant and wavenumber along the b axis (c axis),
respectively. When t′/t = 0, the Fermi level is at a van Hove
singularity. The finite value of t′/t decreases the energy level
of the van Hove singularity, and consequently, the Fermi sur-
face becomes hole-like.

former configuration, the energy equals 6EH – 2tb1 where
EH is the energy level of the HOMO. In the latter con-
figuration, the energy is equal to 6EH when the second
order of tb1/Umol is neglected. Then, the energy differ-
ence between two states nearly equals 2tb1, meaning that
U is approximated to be 2tb1. Since 2tb1 is comparable
to the bandwidth W, κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds can

be viewed as strongly correlated electron systems.
A Mott insulating state emerges because of electron
correlation in a half-filled system, where the number of
electrons in the conduction band equals that of the lattice
sites. When U exceeds the energy gain of forming a con-
duction band, the double occupancy is strongly prohib-
ited, and then every electron becomes localized at each
lattice site, resulting in the insulating state. Such Mott
insulating states appear in a wide variety of materials,
such as oxides, chalcogenides, organic crystals, and more
recently twisted bilayer graphene [20, 34, 52–54]. Because
a large U/W is necessary for Mott insulating states to
emerge, a reduction in U/W results in a phase transition
to a metallic state, which is referred to as a bandwidth-
controlled Mott transition (Fig. 3(c)).
Fig.
3(d) shows the values of U/W and t′/t for
κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds with a half-filled con-
duction band, κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2, κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br,
κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl,
and κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3, together with those for
the doped compound κ-Hg2.89Br8 [39, 50, 51].
The
values of U/W and t′/t are obtained by two meth-
ods:
one is the extended H¨uckel and tight binding
approximation [39, 50], and the other is based on
first-principle band structure calculations [51].
Al-
though the absolute values depend on the methods,
they share the magnitude relation; the t′/t value of κ-
(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 is close to unity and decreases
in the order κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 > κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 > κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl >
κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br.
Thus,
κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 is closest to the right triangular lattice
system among the half-filled compounds.
Because the
critical U/W value of the Mott transition depends on
the t′/t value [55–58], it is difficult to precisely determine
the critical value by comparing compounds with consid-
erably different values of t′/t. As far as the isostructural
compounds with relatively close values of t′/t are con-
cerned, the U/W value is larger for the Mott insulat-
ing compound κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl than for
the metallic compound κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br,
which is consistent with the bandwidth-controlled Mott
transition [20].
Molecules are mainly held together by van der Waals
bonds or weak ionic bonds in organic crystals, whereas
inorganic crystals consist of stronger chemical bonds be-
tween atoms.
The difference in the strength of chem-
ical bonds leads to a compressibility for organic crys-
tals that is higher than that for inorganic crystals.
For example, the compressibility values are 6.8%/GPa
for κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 [59] and 1.5%/GPa for
a high-Tc cuprate HgBa2CuO4+δ [60].
The soft lat-
tice of organic crystals makes bandwidth control by
pressure easier than that of inorganic materials, as
shown in the band structure calculations for the struc-
tural data of κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 under pres-
sure. This bandwidth controllability enables the exam-
inations of correlated electron physics with pressure ex-


5

FIG. 3:
(a) Energy levels of two “singly-occupied” dimers. The arrows and circles represent electrons and holes, respectively.
Because the site occupancy is defined as the number of holes at a dimer in the present case, a singly occupied site has three
electrons in the HOMOs. (b) A pair of an “empty” dimer and a “doubly occupied” dimer. If two electrons occupy a bonding
orbital in a doubly-occupied site, the energy equals 2EH + Umol – 2tb1, which is much larger than 2EH because of the strong
on-molecular repulsion betweem holes Umol. Closed-shell molecules do not normally form hybridized orbitals, but immediately
after changing from a singly-occupied site to an empty site by charge transfer with other sites, the electrons are considered to
occupy the hybridized orbitals. (c) Schematic figure of the bandwidth-controlled Mott transition. Because double occupancy
is strongly prohibited in a Mott insulating state, “empty” and “doubly occupied” sites are created as a bounded pair. In a
Fermi liquid state, “empty” and “doubly occupied” sites can be unbound, resulting in metallic conduction. (d) The values of
U/W and t′/t for κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds obtained by the extended H¨uckel and tight binding approximation [39, 50]
and first-principle calculations [51].

periments [20]. Indeed, the Mott insulators, κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl and κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3,
undergo a bandwidth-controlled Mott transition at mod-
erate pressures of 30 MPa [20, 61] and 150 MPa [38, 62,
63], respectively.
When the band filling deviates from half by carrier
doping, the doped carriers can be conductive even un-
der the prohibition of double occupancy. Although the
doped carriers tend to be trapped by polaron formation,
Anderson localization, or charge ordering, they can be
conductive as in high-Tc cuprates. Then, what will hap-
pen when U/W is varied in such doped systems? The
system will always be conductive, but prohibited double
occupancy is allowed with decreasing U/W. In Chapter
4, an implication of the “bandwidth-controlled Mottness
transition” in such situations is discussed with the exper-
imental studies of κ-Hg2.89Br8.

C.
Quantum spin liquid

In the Mott insulating state of κ-type BEDT-TTF
compounds, an antibonding HOMO is an open shell, and
a localized electron hosts a spin degree of freedom. A

finite probability of inter-dimer electron transfer causes
a magnetic interaction between spins, which is usually
antiferromagnetic. Although classical spins are expected
to form AF order, quantum mechanical spins can form a
spin singlet, and thus the magnetism of Mott insulators
is nontrivial [64]. The relative energy between the AF or-
der and spin singlet depends on the lattice dimension; a
spin-singlet state has lower energy in a one-dimensional
system (Fig. 4(a)). In a square lattice, whose ground
state is an AF order, a singlet state has a closer energy to
it than in a cubic lattice (Fig. 4(b,c)). In addition to di-
mensionality, antiferromagnetically interacting spins on
a triangular lattice are a typical example of geometrical
frustration, as depicted in Fig. 4(d). Thus, a triangular
lattice is of great interest because geometrical frustra-
tion makes the spin states more versatile as discussed in
several review papers [35, 36, 65–67].
A
Mott
insulator
with
a
nearly
right
triangu-
lar lattice κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 is reported to
show a QSL-like properties, whereas a Mott insula-
tor with an anisotropic triangular lattice κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl undergoes AF ordering [24]. The
QSL state was suggested in the nuclear magnetic res-
onance (NMR) experiments as an absence of the spec-


6

FIG. 4:
(a-c) Antiferromagnetic (AF) order and singlet states
in a one-dimensional lattice (a), square lattice (b) and cubic
lattice (c). Their energies per site E are calculated with the
Heisenberg Hamiltonian (E = 1/NΣJs · s) of spin s one half,
where N and J represent the number of sites and antifer-
romagnetic interaction (J > 0), respectively. (d) Schematic
figure of spin frustration on a triangular lattice. (e) A resonat-
ing valence bond state of the benzene ring. (f) A hypothetical
bond alternating state of the benzene ring.

tral splitting or broadening characteristic of AF ordering
down to 50 mK [23]. Then, exotic low-energy excitations
were examined in terms of a variety of physical quantities,
such as the NMR relaxation rate [25], specific heat [26],
thermal conductivity [27], lattice expansion [68], muon
spin resonance [69], and electron spin resonance [70]. We
mention, however, that some results appear not to have
coherent explanations at present and even a qualitative
property, e.g., whether the excitations are gapless or not,
is still under debate partially because of its sensitivity to
lattice defects or impurities [71, 72], which are inevitably
implemented in materials.
From a theoretical point of view, the resonating-
valence-bond (RVB) state was proposed by P. W. An-
derson as an analogy to the benzene ring [73]. It is well
known that the π orbitals of the benzene ring form six
equivalent chemical bonds (Fig.
6(e)), not alternating
single and double bonds (Fig. 6(f)). Because the double
bond corresponds to a spin singlet state of π electrons,
a benzene ring can be viewed as a superposition of spin
singlet states as in the RVB state. Although the RVB
state illustrates a key element of the QSL, recent theo-
retical studies have revealed a possible variation in QSL
states such as gapless spinon Fermi surfaces [74], spinon
pairing [75, 76], Dirac QSL [77] and chiral QSL [78]. Be-

sides this diversity, randomness is suggested to alter the
QSL nature [79], and thus, makes a comparison between
experiments and theory elusive.
While studies on spin excitations are thus under-
way, charge excitations in quantum spin liquids are
also intriguing.
The charge excitations of κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 are gapped at ambient pressure, but the
charge gap becomes vanishingly small under pressure to-
ward the critical pressure of bandwidth-controlled Mott
transition.
Then, charge degrees of freedom would be
mixed with spin degrees of freedom [63], possibly form-
ing an even more exotic spin and charge liquid.
An-
other intriguing issue is what occurs when carriers are
doped into a QSL. The doped RVB state is also proposed
by P. W. Anderson as a metallic state, hosting high-Tc
superconductivity [31].
However, it is not straightfor-
ward to make experimental access to this issue because
the mother materials of doped Mott insulators have the
AF ground state in most cases.
The family of κ-type
BEDT-TTF compounds is unique in that it contains both
non-doped and doped triangular lattice compounds, κ-
(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 and κ-Hg2.89Br8. In Chapter
5, the unconventional excitations of doped spin liquid are
discussed in detail by comparing the experimental data
of these two compounds.

D.
Superconductivity and energetic hierarchy

Quantum-mechanically degenerate degrees of freedom
are often unstable at low temperatures, and can form an
ordered state by lifting the degeneracy. For instance, a
density wave is formed via Fermi surface nesting and a
superconducting state is formed via Cooper pairing. In
correlated electron materials, the lifting of degeneracy
relates to multiple energy scales, and we refer to such
coexistence of energy scales as energetic hierarchy.
What does it look like to trace the energetic hierar-
chy of κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl from high energy
to low energy, or from high temperature to low temper-
ature? Concerning the conduction electrons in the anti-
bonding HOMO band, the largest energy scales are the
onsite Coulomb repulsion U and the bandwidth W, which
are on the order of 103-104 K, as schematically summa-
rized in Fig. 5. According to the scaling analysis of re-
sistivity [80], the electron system is in a quantum critical
regime in the range of a few hundred Kelvin. This im-
plies that the electronic system is neither insulating nor
metallic because of the competing nature of U and W
and that an insulating phase formed by particle-like elec-
trons and a metallic phase formed by wave-like electrons
are quantum-mechanically degenerate. In a temperature
range below 100 K, the pressure dependence of the elec-
tronic state becomes clear, indicating that the degeneracy
of insulating and metallic phases is lifted.
In the low-pressure Mott-insulating regime, further
cooling results in magnetic ordering at a temperature of
a few tens of Kelvin in κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl


7

FIG. 5:
Schematic pressure-temperature phase diagram of
κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl.
Because the energy scales
of electronic correlation U and bandwidth W are one or-
der of magnitude larger than that of thermal fluctuations at
room temperature, electrons in the conduction band are nei-
ther delocalized as waves nor localized as particles. In this
sense, electronic states are quantum mechanically degenerate
as shown in the scaling analysis of resistivity [80]. In the tem-
perature range of a few tens of Kelvin, Mott insulating and
metallic states are separated by a first-order phase transition
represented by the thick black line [61]. The Mott insulat-
ing state undergoes an antiferromagnetic (AF) transition at
TN, and the metallic state undergoes a superconducting (SC)
transition at Tc.

[20, 21], indicating that the degeneracy of spin degrees
of freedom is also lifted. On the other hand, in the high-
pressure metallic regime, the metallic phase undergoes
a superconducting transition by lifting the Fermi degen-
eracy and forming a superconducting gap. It should be
noted that the energy scales of magnetic ordering or the
superconducting gap are lower than the bare interaction
strength U and W by more than two orders of magni-
tude.
Thus, to clarify how superconductivity emerges
from the quantum mechanical degeneracy, it is necessary
to properly trace the energetic hierarchy.

In a doped Mott insulator, the doped carriers can be
conductive, even in the presence of a large U value ex-
ceeding W. Then, what does the energetic hierarchy look
like when a doped Mott insulator exhibits superconduc-
tivity? A good starting point to trace the energetic hi-
erarchy may not be a conventional Fermi liquid in which
electron correlation is regarded as a perturbation. This
review traces the energetic hierarchy of κ-Hg2.89Br8 from
high energy to low energy, namely, the synthesis of the
crystal in Chapter 3, Mott physics in Chapter 4, mag-
netism in Chapter 5, and superconductivity in Chapter
6.

3.
SYNTHESIS AND CRYSTAL STRUCTURE
OF THE DOPED ORGANIC CONDUCTOR

Although
κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8
(κ-Hg2.89Br8)
has an almost identical molecular arrangement to the
half-filled κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds mentioned in
Chapter 2, it hosts two sublattices that are incommensu-
rate with each other [12, 22].
One sublattice is com-
posed of BEDT-TTF molecules and Br ions, and the
other is formed by Hg ions.
Although it is not clari-
fied why the chemistry of BEDT-TTF, Br, and Hg self-
organizes such an incommensurate structure, the band
filling of κ-Hg2.89Br8 deviates from half owing to this
non-stoichiometry. κ-Hg2.89Br8 is a unique material in
that it is superconducting at low temperatures despite
being a doped organic material.
In this chapter, syn-
thetic methods and crystal structures are described to
consider what is currently known about the chemistry
and metallicity of κ-Hg2.89Br8.

A.
Synthesis

Most BEDT-TTF salts are synthesized by electrolytic
oxidation of the solution in which BEDT-TTF molecules
and supporting electrolyte are dissolved.
Oxidized
BEDT-TTF becomes a radical and binds to the cationic
electrolyte.
In the earliest synthesis methods, the
electrolytes were relatively simple tetrabutylammonium
(TBA) salts (e.g., TBAI3, TBAIBr2 in the cases of the
anions of I3 and IBr2, respectively) [4, 6, 81–85].
Later, the development of synthesis methods enabled
to crystalize the compounds whose counter anions are
present only in solution, not in an ingredient salt. For
instance, in κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 [13, 86], the
counter anion [Cu(NCS)2]− is not present as an isolated
ion in its ingredient salts CuSCN and KSCN. Most
κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds are synthesized with this
method, and this is also the case for κ-Hg2.89Br8, where
the divalent anion [Hg3Br8]2− is required for synthesis
[87]. [Hg3Br8]2− exists only as an equilibrium state in a
solution, as shown in the following equation:

2[HgBr3]− + n[HgBr2] ↔ [Hg3Br8]2−.

Therefore, it is necessary to first prepare this diva-
lent anion for the synthesis of κ-Hg2.89Br8 from the
ingredients TBAHgBr3 and HgBr2.
The density of
[Hg3Br8]2− can be adjusted by the amount of HgBr2
added to the solvent. In addition to the preparation of
[Hg3Br8]2−, the subsequent electrochemical synthesis
is complex.
If the amount of HgBr2 is too high, then
nucleation of a crystal frequently occurs during electro-
chemical synthesis, resulating in a large number of small
crystals. To obtain a large single crystal, we followed the
synthesis conditions described in the literature [87] as
much as possible by fully considering the above factors.
In our synthesis, we first placed two kinds of so-


8

lutes, TBANHgBr3 and HgBr2, in a 1,1,2-trichloroethane
solvent with concentrations of 18.7 mmol/L and 0.30
mmol/L, respectively, and stirred for one day. Since pre-
vious studies [87] highlight importance of the purity of
the former solute, it was purified twice by a recrystal-
lization method. After confirming that all solutes had
dissolved, BEDT-TTF molecules were added to the solu-
tion at a concentration of 1.6 mmol/L and stirred again
for another day. The solution was poured into an elec-
trochemical glass cell and left in an incubator at 40 °C
overnight. Then, electrochemical oxidation was started
by applying a current of 0.5 µA. Even if we follow the
above procedure, κ-Hg2.89Br8 often happens not to grow
due to polymorphism. In our experience, an electrochem-
ical synthesis with a relatively long period of time (2
or 3 months) enhances the probability of obtaining κ-
Hg2.89Br8. Therefore, we use large glass cells (e.g., 100
mL or 200 mL) for long-term electrochemical synthesis.
Crystals of κ-Hg2.89Br8 are easily distinguished from
other polymorphs by their shapes; κ-Hg2.89Br8 has a
rhombic shape as shown in Fig. 6(a), whereas other prod-
ucts are needle-shaped or rectangular crystals. However,
we occasionally encountered crystals whose shapes are
indistinguishable.
In such a case, electrical resistivity
measurements at room temperature enable the distinc-
tion because the other products have much higher elec-
trical resistivity than κ-Hg2.89Br8.
Thus, the complex
synthesis method of κ-Hg2.89Br8 has been established.

B.
Crystal structure

κ-Hg2.89Br8 has a unique crystal structure, where
BEDT-TTF molecules are commensurate with Br ions
but incommensurate with Hg ions (Fig.6(b)) [12, 22].
Because the counter anion [Hg3Br8]2− is stoichiomet-
ric, a few percent of the large Hg ions seem to be ex-
pelled from the crystal during the crystallization pro-
cess, possibly due to strain release. Although the mecha-
nism is not fully clarified, the chemistry of BEDT-TTF,
Br, and Hg results in the fixed composition of (BEDT-
TTF)4Hg2.89Br8. When we assume that the valences of
Br and Hg ions are -1 and +2, respectively, the valence
of BEDT-TTF is +0.555, which is 11% larger than that
of the κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds with a half-filled
band.
The inter-Hg distance of κ-Hg2.89Br8, 3.9 ˚A, is
much larger than that in Hg2X2 (X = Cl, Br, I) crys-
tals, 2.4 ˚A[88], which have inter-Hg bonds; this supports
the assumption for the valence of Hg2+ with a closed
shell. Indeed, Raman spectroscopy revealed the valence
of BEDT-TTF by observing valence-sensitive molecular
vibration modes [89]. According to the calculations based
on extended H¨uckel and tight-binding approximations,
the onsite Coulomb repulsion U is larger than the band-
width W (Fig. 3(d)). Thus, κ-Hg2.89Br8 can be viewed
as a doped Mott insulator.
When one tries to control band filling, mixed crystals
are often used in high-Tc cuprates La2−xSr2CuO4 where

FIG. 6:
(a) Picture of a single crystal of κ-(BEDT-
TTF)4Hg2.89Br8.
(b)
Crystal
structure
of
κ-(BEDT-
TTF)4Hg2.89Br8. (c) Calculated electrostatic potential gener-
ated by Hg ions. One hundred Hg ions are one-dimensionally
aligned along the x-axis with an interval of 3.9 ˚A at y = 0,
and the electrostatic potential from each ion is superimposed.
At distances greater than 3 ˚A from the Hg ions, the x depen-
dence of the potential is less pronounced, and the conduction
electrons are less affected by the incommensurability of the
electrostatic potential.

La and Sr ions are trivalent and divalent, respectively
[52].
In molecular crystals, such chemical doping has
also been extensively studied, and has achieved metal-
lic states in λ-(BEDT-TTF)2(GaCl−1
4 )1−x(CoCl−2
4 )x,
α-(BEDT-TTF)3(GaCl−1
4 )1−x(CoCl−2
4 )x(TCE) and β′-
(BEDT-TTF)3(GaCl−1
4 )2−x(CoCl−2
4 )x [90–93].
How-
ever, superconductivity has not been achieved in these
organic mixed crystals as they exhibit an nonmetallic
temperature dependence of resistivity at low tempera-
tures. One possible reason for the nonmetallic behaviors
is the localization of carriers due to an irregular electro-
static potential from randomly distributed multiple kinds
of anions. The disorder effect is pronounced in organic
materials, whose bandwidth is typically several to ten
times smaller than that of inorganic materials such as
high-Tc cuprates.
In κ-Hg2.89Br8, chemical doping is realized due to
the incommensurate crystal structure, which is also


9

the case for κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.78Cl8 [87, 94], (MDT-
TS)(AuI2)0.441 [95] and (MDT-ST)(I3)0.417 [96]. The Hg
lattice is incommensurate with the BEDT-TTF lattice
along the c-axis, which is parallel to a conducting plane,
and commensurate along the a-axis and b-axis, thus pro-
ducing an incommensurate electrostatic potential along
the c-axis. The theoretical study expect the appearance
of an incommensurate Mott insulator when the potential
corrugation is large enough [97].
However, the ampli-
tude of the potential corrugation is vanishingly small in
the area where the distance from the Hg ions is suffi-
ciently longer than spacing between Hg ions, 3.9 ˚A(Fig.
6(c)). Therefore, the incommensurability of the poten-
tial should not significantly affect the conduction elec-
trons because they mainly exist in the TTF structure,
the central part of BEDT-TTF molecules, which is ap-
proximately 6-9 ˚Aaway from Hg ions. In reality, the in-
commensurate Hg ions slightly modulate the positions
of BEDT-TTF molecules [22], which might generate an
irregular potential to conduction electrons as a higher or-
der effect. Thus, the irregular potential, which inevitably
accompanies chemical doping, affects electrical conduc-
tion in a different manner from mixed crystals.
This
may explain why κ-Hg2.89Br8 is metallic at the lowest
temperatures and becomes superconducting.
Another characteristic feature in the structure of κ-
Hg2.89Br8 is a nearly isotropic triangular lattice [18, 22,
98]. According to the band structure calculations [18, 98],
the value of t′/t, which indicates an anisotropy of the
triangular lattice, is close to that of the QSL candidate
material κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3. This feature makes
the electronic states of κ-Hg2.89Br8 even more intriguing
because it enables us to examine the behaviors of corre-
lated electrons in a doped Mott insulator with a triangu-
lar lattice as well as the impact of pressure variation on
them.

4.
MOTTNESS IN THE DOPED ORGANIC
CONDUCTOR

When the on-site Coulomb repulsion U is sufficiently
larger than the bandwidth W, double occupancy of elec-
trons at a lattice site is strongly prohibited. The ten-
dency or degree of prohibited double occupation is often
referred to as Mottness [99]. In a half-filled system, where
the number of electrons is the same as that of lattice sites,
Mottness drives the electronic system into a Mott insu-
lating state [100]. However, off the half filling, electrons
can be conductive even if double occupancy is prohib-
ited, and thus Mottness does not necessarily cause an
insulating state [101–107]. Thus, how Mottness matters
in doped systems is an intriguing issue. This chapter de-
scribes the electrical conduction phenomena exhibited by
the doped system, based on the experimental results of
resistivity and Hall measurements under pressure, which
varies Mottness.

FIG. 7:
(a) Temperature dependence of the in-plane resis-
tivity ρ// of κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 under pressure [17].
Reprinted from Ref.
[17].
©2007 The Physical Society of
Japan. (b) Low temperature expansion of the temperature
dependences of ρ// [17]. Reprinted from Ref. [17]. ©2007
The Physical Society of Japan. (c) Schematic figure of the
contactless conductivity measurement. When an ac field is
applied to a metallic material, diamagnetization appears due
to electromagnetic induction. (d) Pressure dependence of the
exponent α in ρ// = ρo + AT α, which fits the data in a tem-
perature range below 20 K and above the superconducting
transition temperatures. ρo and A are the residual resistivity
and the temperature coefficient, respectively [17, 18].

A.
Charge transport under pressure

Four-probe resistivity measurement is a straightfor-
ward approach to study electrical conduction phenom-
ena. However, the inhomogeneity of local resistivity in a
sample may obscure the interpretation of measurement
results. The current path is determined so that the re-
sistance is minimized and thus may also be inhomoge-
neous.
The measurements under pressure, which may
induce inhomogeneity in the internal pressure, should be
even more cautious about this. In this respect, liquids
are employed as pressure media because the fluidity of
the liquid homogenizes the pressure at the sample sur-
face. This allows isotropic pressure, or hydrostatic pres-
sure, to be applied up to the solidification pressure of the
pressure medium.
The first transport study on κ-Hg2.89Br8 under pres-


10

FIG. 8:
(a) Temperature dependence of the in-plane resistivity ρ of κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 at 0 T and a perpendicular
field of 9 T under pressure. Reprented from Ref. [108] under the creative commons license. (b) Log-log plot of ρ(T)−ρo. α is
determined by α ≡ dlog[ρ(T)−ρo]/dlogT, which corresponds to the slope in the log-log plot. Reprented from Ref. [108] under
the creative commons license. (c) Contour plot of pressure-temperature dependence of the exponent α. The yellow region
(α ≈ 1) corresponds to a non-Fermi liquid phase, and the blue region (α ≈ 2) corresponds to a Fermi liquid phase. Reprented
from Ref. [108] under the creative commons license.

sure was reported by Bud’ko et al. in 1992 [109]. Ac-
cording to the paper, the electrical resistivity along the
conduction plane ρ// is metallic in a low-pressure range,
whereas nonmetallic behaviors appear in a high-pressure
range above 3.0 GPa. It is noted, however, that most
pressure media solidify before reaching 3.0 GPa during
pressure application at room temperature.
More than
a decade later, a pressure medium Daphne 7373, which
does not solidify up to 1.9 GPa [110], was developed and
used for resistivity measurements in the high-pressure
range of κ-Hg2.89Br8. Then, it was found that nonmetal-
lic behaviors do not appear and that a metallic phase
with ρ// obeying the temperature(T)-square law domi-
nates in a pressure range of 1.5-3.4 GPa (Fig. 7 (a,b))
[17, 111].
Thus, the nonmetallic behaviors in the ear-
lier report possibly originate from the anisotropy and/or
inhomogeneity of the pressure.
Indeed, we confirmed
that intentionally introduced uniaxial strain drives κ-
Hg2.89Br8 into a nonmetal [112]. The quality of pressure
occasionally plays a decisive role in the electronic state
as in the present case.
A way to minimize inhomogeneity in current path,
which inevitably depends on the geometry of electrodes
attached to the crystal, is to perform contactless con-

ductivity measurements, which are ac susceptibility mea-
surements in the MHz frequency range.
When an ac
magnetic field is applied to a metallic material, eddy
currents induced by electromagnetic induction cause a
diamagnetic response (Fig. 7(c)). As a result, the mag-
netic flux penetrates the sample from the surface only
by the skin depth, which is analogous to the penetra-
tion depth in a superconducting phase.
This skin ef-
fect enables probing resistivity via an ac susceptibility
measurement with a different geometry of the current
path from the conventional four-probe method because
the skin depth depends on resistivity [18, 113]. The con-
tactless measurements were performed with the pressure
medium Daphne 7474, which does not solidify up to 3.7
GPa [114].
Because Daphne 7474 degrades electrodes
made of carbon paste, which is often used in the trans-
port measurements of organic conductors, the contactless
method is also advantageous in terms of avoiding con-
tact resistance problems. In all four-probe measurements
with Daphne 7373 or a cubic anvil cell and contactless
measurements with Daphne 7474, ρ// at low tempera-
tures follows the T-square law of Fermi liquid in a high-
pressure range, whereas it deviates from the T-square law
in a low-pressure range (Fig. 7(d)) [17, 18]. The consis-


11

tent results obtained by the different methods suggest
that the emergence of the Fermi liquid at high pressures
is due to the bulk nature of κ-Hg2.89Br8.

The temperature-pressure dependence of the exponent
α in ρ// = ρo + AT α is essential for understanding how
electron correlations affect their conduction, where ρo
and A are the residual resistivity and the temperature co-
efficient, respectively. However, the emergence of super-
conductivity in a pressure range below 1.5 GPa hinders
the determination of ρo, which is necessary to obtain an
accurate value of α. Then, the temperature-pressure de-
pendence was investigated by suppressing superconduc-
tivity with a magnetic field to determine the ρo values
[108]. These experiments revealed that the ρ// behaviors
at low temperatures exhibit an abrupt change from T
linear (α = 1) to T square (α = 2) at a critical pressure
of approximatly 0.4 GPa (Fig. 8) [108].

A T-linear behavior of resistivity is also observed in
the doped Mott insulators, high-Tc cuprates [52] but not
in the non-doped κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds [63].
This comparison suggests that doped carriers in a Mott
insulator are likely to be responsible for the anomalous
metallicity in κ-Hg2.89Br8.
Although the mechanism
for T-linear behavior has not been identified, we dis-
cuss how to view anomalous metallicity.
One view is
that some fluctuations relevant to electron transport di-
verge toward lower temperatures, as in the case of the
quantum critical point in heavy fermion systems [116].
When a power-law divergence toward absolute zero is su-
perimposed, the resultant temperature dependence devi-
ates from the T-square behavior of a conventional Fermi
liquid [116].
In this scenario, κ-Hg2.89Br8 is consid-
ered to be in a “quantum critical phase” in a pressure
range below 0.4 GPa. A very recent study of the See-
beck effect in κ-Hg2.89Br8 supports this point of view
(Fig.9) [115]; in the low-pressure range where a non-
Fermi liquid emerges, the Seebeck coefficient divided by
temperature, -S/T exhibits logarithmic temperature de-
pendence, which has been observed in a wide variety of
materials [117–130] and discussed theoretically as an in-
dication of quantum criticality [131–134], while -S/T is
temperature-insensitive at high pressures as expected in
a Fermi liquid. Another view is that charge excitation
or charged particles that follow unusual statistics emerge
due to Mottness [135–137]. Because Mottness imposes
constraints on electrical transport due to the suppres-
sion of double occupancies, low-energy excitations may
appear to be different particles from conventional quasi-
particles, possibly resulting in a deviation of the α value
from 2.
These views are not necessarily incompatible
with each other. Clarifying the mechanism responsible
for anomalous metallicity is a future challenge because
it can correlate the transport phenomena of correlated
electrons in inorganic and organic materials.

FIG.
9:
(a)
Temperature
dependence
of
the
see-
beck coeficient divided by temperature S/T of κ-(BEDT-
TTF)4Hg2.89Br8
under pressure.
(b) Contour plot of
pressure-temperature dependence of S/T.
Reprented from
Ref. [115] under the creative commons license.

B.
Hall effect and Mottness

The Hall coefficient RH is inversely proportional to the
carrier density in the simplest view. From the data at 10
K, one can see a clear pressure dependence of RH in κ-
Hg2.89Br8 (Fig. 10) [18]. Although RH abruptly changes
in a low-pressure range, it exhibits a moderate pressure
dependence similar to half-filled systems in a pressure
range above 0.6 GPa. Given that ρ// obeys the T-square
law, the behavior of RH in a high-pressure range can
be attributed to a Fermi-liquid picture.
On the other
hand, the enhancement of RH occurs in a pressure range
of T-linear behavior beyond the framework of a conven-
tional Fermi liquid. At ambient or low pressures, the elec-


12

FIG. 10:
Pressure dependence of the Hall coefficient
RH for the doped compound κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 at
several temperatures and a half-filled compound κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br at 10 K. The inset shows the pressure
derivative of 1/RH for κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 at 10 K.
Reprinted from Ref. [18]. ©2015 the American Physical So-
ciety.

tronic specific heat coefficient and nuclear magnetic res-
onance (NMR) relaxation rate are significantly enhanced
[138, 139], implying that a strong electronic correlation
is likely responsible for the anomalous metallicity. Such
anomalous metallicity is also observed in doped Mott in-
sulators with electric-double-layer transistor [47].

Pressure does not change the chemical composition
and therefore the band filling of HOMO-based conduc-
tion bands is fixed. Thus, it is not straightforward to
explain the pressure dependence of RH. In general, sev-
eral factors can contribute to the Hall coefficient, includ-
ing the carrier density, anisotropy of the carrier mobility,
and gauge fields [16, 140–143]. When double occupancy
is allowed under pressure, the effective density of mobile
carriers increases with pressure. Simply assuming that
only doped carriers are mobile, the mobile carrier density
n equals 0.11 per site, which corresponds to 5.0 × 10−2

cm3/C in 1/ne, where e is the elementary charge. The
values below 0.4 GPa are in this range. Another factor is
that wavenumber-dependent carrier mobility, which ap-
pears, for example, when electrons and holes coexist or
when anisotropic scattering is pronounced, affects the RH
values as argued in fluctuation-exchange theory and the
t−to−J model [142]. The spin fluctuations are enhanced
due to Mottness, and thus, it is reasonable that applying
pressure suppresses this contribution consistently with
the reduction in the NMR relaxation rate under pressure
[138, 139]. The third factor is gauge field, which emerges
when quantum mechanical particles move under certain

constrains [143]. Recent theoretical studies suggest that
anomalous Hall effects emerge in the κ-type BEDT-TTF
compounds with a half-filled band due to interplay be-
tween spin structure and band structure [144–146]. In
doped Mott insulators, charged carriers are prohibited to
doubly occupy a single site, and consequently their wave
function can gain a phase factor that depends on their
trajectory of constraint motion [16], possibly leading to
a kind of anomalous Hall effect. This mechanism is also
considered to be suppressed under high pressure together
with suppression of Mottness. Although the mechanism
responsible for the increase in RH have not been iden-
tified, but Mottness lies behind all of them. Therefore,
the anomalous metallicity can be seen as a nonpertur-
bative effect of strong electronic correlations on electron
transport.

C.
Bandwidth-controlled Mottness transition at a
finite doping level

A comparison of the pressure dependence of κ-
Hg2.89Br8with that of the non-doped κ-type BEDT-TTF
compounds reveals a generalized picture of the Mott
transition (Fig.
11).
In non-doped systems, a dras-
tic change in double-occupancy probability, or a bound-
unbound transition of doublons and holons, is associated
with the Mott metal-insulator transition, where the dou-
blon and holon stand for doubly occupied and empty
sites, respectively [100] (Fig.
11(b)).
This means a
one-to-one correspondence between Mottness and metal-
insulator transition. However, when a Mott insulator is
doped, the excess electrons and holes can still be conduc-
tive, even if double occupancy is prohibited. Then, this
correspondence does not hold, and instead, we may refer
to the drastic change in double-occupancy probability as
“Mottness transition” (Fig. 11(b)). The T-linear behav-
ior of ρ// and the enhancement of RH indicate the separa-
tion of the Mottness transition and metal-insulator tran-
sition. κ-Hg2.89Br8 is considered to exhibit a bandwidth-
controlled Mottness transition at a pressure of approxi-
mately 0.5 GPa, above which the anomalous metallicity
disappears.
The critical U/W values of the Mottness transition
are estimated to be 1.07 for κ-Hg2.89Br8 and 0.88 for κ-
(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 based on extended H¨uckel and
tight binding approximations [18, 22, 38, 50, 62], im-
plying that carrier doping increases the critical value
of U/W. The itineracy of doped carriers enhances the
screening effect and effectively weakens electron-electron
interactions, possibly leading to an increase in the criti-
cal value of U/W. This picture is in line with the the-
oretical studies based on dynamical mean field theory
(DMFT) [102–104, 106, 147], which considers hybridiza-
tion between an orbital in a lattice site of interest and
an electron bath composed of other lattice sites [100].
An electronic state at the lattice site is the superposi-
tion of empty, single and double occupancy, which self-


13

FIG. 11:
(a) Pressure-temperature phase diagrams of κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 and a quantum spin liquid (QSL) candidate
κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3. The red, green and purple areas indicate the superconducting (SC), non-Fermi liquid (NFL), and
Mott insulating (MI) phases, respectively. Reprented from Ref. [108] under the creative commons license. (b) Schematic figure
of the metal-insulator transition and Mottness transition. We call the phase transition with respect to Mottness as “Mottness
transition”. A Mottness transition accompanies a metal-insulator transition in half-filled compounds, but does not necessarily
accompany it in the doped compound because doped carriers can be mobile even under the prohibition of double occupancy.

consistently determines the density of states. Therefore,
when the prohibition of double occupancy opens an en-
ergy gap in the single-particle excitation at the lattice
site, the density of states of the electron bath has an en-
ergy gap. DMFT reproduce the phase transitions in the
Mottness in both of non-doped and doped systems, and
predicts an increase in the critical U/W value by doping
[102–104, 106]. Recent theoretical studies have revealed
the nature of metallic states that are qualitatively differ-
ent from Fermi liquids [107, 148–152], which should lead
to our understanding of anomalous metallicty in doped
Mott insulators.

Bandwidth-controlled metal-insulator transitions ob-
served in non-doped organic compounds and band-filling-
controlled metal-insulator transitions widely studied in
inorganic materials like cuprates have been discussed in
parallel [153]. Nevertheless, we note that they also have
different features; e. g., the metal-insulator transitions
in the former is of first order [34, 154], whereas in the
latter, the transition appears continuous in many cases
[52]. κ-Hg2.89Br8 offers an unique platform to elucidate
the interplay between Mottness and itineracy behind the
two kinds of metal-insulator transitions.
Furthermore,
the metallic states that are qualitatively different from a
conventional Fermi liquid due to non-perturbative effects
of electronic correlations also appear in heavy Fermion
materials, and how to conprehensively understand such
strange metallicity is an intriguing issue [155–158] as dis-
cussed in Chapter 5.

5.
SPIN LIQUIDITY IN THE DOPED ORGANIC
CONDUCTOR

In a conventional Fermi liquid state, conduction elec-
trons exhibit Pauli-paramagnetism, obeying Fermi statis-
tics whereas electrons in a Mott insulator lose the charge
degrees of freedom and behave like a localized spin sys-
tem.
Thus, Mottness is closely related to magnetism.
Then, what does magnetism of doped Mott insulators
look like? A doped Mott insulator is similar to a Mott
insulator in terms of Mottness, whereas it is similar to a
conventional Fermi liquid in terms of metallicity. A well-
known manifestation possessing contradictory properties
is a spin gap in the metallic state as observed in high-Tc
cuprates. What makes κ-Hg2.89Br8 even more unique is
that the parent Mott insulator can be a QSL instead of
antiferromagnets for the cuprates. This chapter describes
the magnetism of the triangular-lattice doped Mott in-
sulator κ-Hg2.89Br8.

A.
Spin-charge separation

Fig. 12 compares the spin susceptibility χspin of three
κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds, the half-filled metal κ-
(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br, the Mott-insulating QSL
candidate κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3, and the present
system κ-Hg2.89Br8 [23, 33, 98, 159].
Surprisingly,
the χspin
behaviors of κ-Hg2.89Br8
and κ-(BEDT-


14

FIG. 12:
(a) Temperature dependences of the spin susceptibility χspin of the doped compound κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8
and a half-filled compound κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br (denoted as κ-HgBr and κ-Br, respectively). χspin of κ-(BEDT-
TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 under magnetic fields parallel and perpendicular to the conducting layers is indicated by red and green
points, respectively. The broken lines represent the numerical curves obtained by the series expansion of the triangular-lattice
Heisenberg model with a J value of 130–150 K. Reprented from Ref. [98] under the creative commons license. (b) Scaled
χspin of κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 and κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 (denoted as κ-Cu2(CN)3). Jχspin is plotted against T/J,
where χspin is defined per mole of spin and J is in units of kB. The inset shows the in-plane resistivity of the two compounds.
Reprented from Ref. [98] under the creative commons license.

TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 makes no difference when χspin and T
are scaled to an exchange interaction, J (Fig.
12(b))
while they behave contrastingly in conductivity (Inset of
Fig. 12(b)). The χspin of κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 is
well reproduced by a series expansion of the triangular-
lattice Heisenberg model with a J of 250 K [160]. What
is peculiar is that the χspin of κ-Hg2.89Br8 is also well
reproduced by the triangular-lattice Heisenberg model
down to T ∼ 0.2J or lower with a J of 140 K as if
it hosts localized spins in spite of the metallicity. Note
that the isostructural metallic compounds with half-filled
bands, κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br and κ-(BEDT-
TTF)2Cu(NCS)2, exhibit a Pauli paramagnetic spin be-
havior.

We comment on the scaling in terms of J.
In Fig.
12(b), the horizontal axis is the temperature divided by
J, meaning that thermal energy is measured in units of
J, and the vertical axis is the spin susceptibility multi-
plied by J, meaning that the Zeeman energy is measured
in units of J, namely, the magnetic field is measured in
units of µ/J, where µ is the magnetic moment of an elec-
tron spin. In addition, the χspinJ value is displayed in
units of emu K per mole of spin to see how a spin is
polarized under the scaled magnetic field. Because 11%
carrier doping reduces the number of spins from 1 to
0.89 per a BEDT-TTF dimer site, the value per mole of
dimer is multiplied by 0.89 for κ-Hg2.89Br8 and 1 for κ-
(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3. The magnetic similarity and

conductive dissimilarity between two systems are a clear
indication of spin–charge separation in that carrier dop-
ing does not affect the spin sector.
A prominent feature in the scaled susceptibility is a
sharp decrease at low temperatures below ∼ 0.1 J, which
is out of the relevant temperature range of the series ex-
pansion. Although a triangular-lattice Heisenberg model
results in 120-degree long-range order at the lowest tem-
perature, magnetic ordering is absent in these compounds
[161]. Then, the sharp decrease in the susceptibility is
not a simple indication of the growth of the 120-degree
spin correlation, but may signify the growth of quantum
mechamical degeneracy inherent in a QSL.

B.
Spin excitations and interlayer charge transport

In the possible doped QSL state of κ-Hg2.89Br8, the
charge and spin degrees of freedom seem to be separately
excited in a conducting layer as discussed in the preceed-
ing section. In this situation, let’s consider the interlayer
transfer of electrons. It should accompany the simultane-
ous transfer of charge and spin because they are usually
inseparable as the constituent degrees of freedom of an
electron. This means that the interlayer charge transport
requires its recoupling with the separated spin degrees of
freedom. Thus, even in a metallic state within the layers,
it is nontrivial whether the our-of-plane resistivity ρ⊥ is


15

FIG. 13:
(a, b) Temperature dependences of the out-of-
plane resistivity ρ⊥ (a) and in-plane resistivity ρ// (b) at
several pressures. Reprented from Ref. [98] under the cre-
ative commons license. (c) Pressure dependence of the nor-
malized temperature derivative of the out-of-plane resistivity
1/ρ⊥(dρ⊥/dT). Reprented from Ref. [98] under the creative
commons license. (d) Contour plot of 1/ρ⊥(dρ⊥/dT) in the
pressure–temperature plane. Reprented from Ref. [98] under
the creative commons license.

metallic.
Figs. 13(a) and 13(b) compare the ρ⊥ and ρ// of κ-
Hg2.89Br8. Remarkably, ρ⊥ exhibits nonmetallic behav-
ior over a wide temperature range and sharply turns to
metallic below 20 K at 0.1 and 0.15 GPa [98], while ρ// is
metallic in the whole pressure-temperature range inves-
tigated. The nonmetallic behavior of ρ⊥ disappears at

FIG. 14:
(a, b) Schematic figure of in-plane charge transport
(a) and out-of-plane charge transport (b). When spin singlet
states resonate in a plane, in-plane charge transport does not
involve the destruction of a spin singlet, resulting in metallic
conduction. However, out-of-plane charge transport requires
the destruction of a spin singlet, and thus ρ⊥ can exhibit
nonmetallic behavior.

pressures, and above 0.8 GPa, ρ⊥ obeys the temperature-
square law of a Fermi liquid as ρ// does [98]. The con-
tour map of the normalized temperature derivative of
ρ⊥, 1/ρ⊥(dρ⊥/dT), captures the overall behavior of ρ⊥
in the pressure-temperature diagram (Fig. 13(d)), high-
lighting three distinctive pressure regions; that is, P <
0.3 GPa, 0.3 < P < 0.6 GPa and P > 0.6 GPa. The
high-pressure region corresponds to the FL region identi-
fied by the temperature-square dependences of both ρ//
and ρ⊥.
In the low-pressure region, the nonmetal-to-
metal crossover of ρ⊥ sharply occurs at low tempera-
tures with the temperature-linear behavior of ρ//. In the
intermediate-pressure region, the crossover temperature
increases towards the high-pressure region and the non-
metallic behavior is less pronounced.
Of particular interest is the contrasting behavior of
ρ// and ρ⊥ in the low-pressure region. In the non-doped
compound κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl, ρ// and ρ⊥
simultaneously change from a metallic to an insulating
temperature dependence across the critical pressure of
the metal-insulator transitions [162]. Thus, the contrast-
ing behavior is characteristic of κ-Hg2.89Br8. As its possi-
ble origin, in-plane spin correlations can differently affect
ρ// and ρ⊥ as follows. For example, if spin and charge
degrees of freedom are separated, the interlayer electron
transfer necessitates their simultaneous hopping, which
should be a higher-order event. Or if spins form some
entangled states like the RVB state [31, 67, 73], the out-
of-plane charge transport requires the breaking of the res-
onating bonds with an excitation gap while the in-plane
one does not (Fig. 14). It is quite interesting how the
energy distribution of spin excitations in the presumable
QSL relates to that of charge excitations as theoretically
argued as dimensional decoupling at continuous quantum
critical Mott transitions [163].
This argument on the nonmetallic behavior of ρ⊥ pro-
vokes further interest in why it changes to metallic be-


16

havior under pressure or upon cooling. The pressure in-
duces the bandwidth-controlled Mottness transition from
a strange metal to a Fermi liquid as discussed in Chapter
4. In a Fermi liquid, elementary excitations are carried
by quasi-particles with charge and spin combined, whose
transport is essentially the same in the intra and inter-
layer directions. Interestingly, the nonmetallic behavior
crosses over to the metallic one upon cooling in the low-
pressure region. This implies that spin and charge are
coupled in a different manner from a conventional Fermi
liquid state because the temperature-linear behavior of
ρ// persists down to the lowest temperature. Thus, it
would be an intriguing issue to examine how the sepa-
rated spin and charge degrees of freedom recouple to form
unknown elementary excitations at low temperatures.

C.
Exotic excitations in the doped quantum spin
liquid

The specific heat measurements underscore the unique
excitations in κ-Hg2.89Br8 [138, 164, 165]. Although the
one-dimensional phonons due to the incommensurate Hg
sublattice complicate the analysis that separates the elec-
tronic contribution from the phonon contribution and the
Schottky anomaly, the electronic specific heat coefficient
γ is evaluated to be 55 mJ mol−1 K−2 [138]. How to
address this value consistently with the non-Fermi liq-
uid behaviors of κ-Hg2.89Br8 is an open issue of interest.
We note that this value is extraordinarily large among
organic conductors; e.g., γ = 25 and 22 mJ mol−1 K−2

for the half-filled metals, κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu(NCS)2 and
κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br, respectively [138]. This
suggests that an unusually large number of gapless exci-
tations are degenerate in κ-Hg2.89Br8. The Wilson ratio,
(π2/3)(χspin/µ2
B)/(γ/k2
B), gives an additional insight to
the nature of low-temperature thermal excitations.
κ-
Hg2.89Br8 exhibits an anomalous value of 0.6. This value
is extraordinartily smaller than the values for the half-
filled systems, 0.95 and 0.98, respectively, which are typ-
ical values for Fermi liquids [166, 167]. The low Wilson
ratio implies that gapless excitations detected in the spe-
cific heat measurements do not fully contribute to spin
polarization unlike in Fermi liquids.
We compare the
γ value and Wilson ratio of κ-Hg2.89Br8 with those of
its undoped version κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3. The γ
value of 13 mJ mol−1 K−2 for κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3
is discussed as a hallmark of the spinon Fermi sur-
faces in conjunction with the acceptable Wilson ra-
tio, 1.6, which is comparable to another QSL candi-
date, Me3EtSb[Pd(dmit)2] [26, 28, 168]. Assuming the
spin-charge separation, one may independently consider
the spin and charge contributions to the γ value of κ-
Hg2.89Br8. Given that the spin sector has the common
Wilson ratio, 1.6, for these QSL candidates as a spinon
property, the spin contribution to the γ value is estimated
by dividing the χspin value of 5 × 10−2 emu mole−1 by
1.6 and yields 22 mJ mol−1 K−2, which explains only a

part of the observed γ value. Then, the remaining large
value, 33 mJ mol−1 K−2, can be attributed to the charge
sector formed by 11% doped holes although it is question-
able whether the charge sector is fermionic. Anyway, the
spin-charge separation, in which the charge sector does
not contribute to χspin, offers one possible explanation
to the low Wilson ratio in κ-Hg2.89Br8.

To view the present results with a more broad per-
spective, we compare the present single-orbital material
κ-Hg2.89Br8 with multi-orbital metallic QSL candidates
Pr2Ir2O7 and CePdAl, in which localized and itinerant
electrons coexist [169–176]. In these materials, spatially
localized orbitals, e. g., the f orbital of a rare earth ele-
ment, hybridize with spatially extended orbitals. When
the hybridization is strong, a Fermi liquid state with a
heavy electron mass appears.
In a weakly hybridized
regime, however, a band-selective Mott transition called
Kondo breakdown is proposed to result in a certain class
of materials [177, 178], where only the f electrons fall into
the Mott insulating state. Kondo breakdown is similar
to the Mottness transition in κ-Hg2.89Br8 in that two
kinds of metallic states are distinguished by Mottness,
and is also relevant to multi-orbital organic conductors
[179–182].

When the localized f-electron spins are subject to spin
frustration, e. g., in the Shastry–Sutherland lattice and
pyrochlore lattices, a metallic state with a QSL nature
can emerge as theoretically suggested [174, 175, 183, 184].
In these metallic spin liquid states of multiorbital sys-
tems, spin and charge sectors are disentangled at high
temperature and weakly hybridized to form an anoma-
lous metallic state, which is mentioned as a fractional-
ized Fermi liquid, at low temperatures [169]. The similar
temperature dependence of entanglement between spin
and charge sectors may explain the appearance of metal-
lic behavior of ρ⊥ of κ-Hg2.89Br8 in the low-pressure re-
gion as discussed in the previous section. In addition, κ-
Hg2.89Br8 exhibits non-Fermi liquid behavior in a finite
pressure range, which is similar to the metallic QSL can-
didate in the multiorbital system CePdAl [176, 185]. This
similarity implies that, in the presence of QSL, electronic
fluids form non-Fermi liquid phases common to single or-
bital and multiorbital systems. Despite the similarities
with multiorbital systems, however, it should be noted
again that κ-Hg2.89Br8 is a single band system; Only
one of the separated spin and charge degrees of freedom
here can be fermionic while those in the above-mentioned
multi-orbital materials are both fermions. Moreover, the
effect of carrier doping on frustrated spin systems has
recently been investigated in cold-atom systems [186].
Further investigations on similarities and individualities
among those systems are expected to offer an extended
view on the relation between the QSL nature and non-
Fermi liquid nature.


17

6.
SUPERCONDUCTIVITY IN THE DOPED
ORGANIC CONDUCTOR

Superconductivity often appears when doping or pres-
surizing Mott insulators,
as represented by high-Tc
cuprates, iron-based compounds, fullerides and κ-type
BEDT-TTF compounds, implying an intimate relation-
ship between superconductivity and Mottness. However,
because the energy scale of on-site Coulomb repulsion is
much larger than that of cooper pairing, we need concepts
that connect the phenomena of this energetic hierarchy.
Mottness can be varied while metallicity is maintained
in pressure experiments on κ-Hg2.89Br8 as mentioned in
Chapter 4, and thus κ-Hg2.89Br8 is a suitable material
for investigating the role of Mottness in the emergence
of superconductivity. Furthermore, κ-Hg2.89Br8 also en-
ables to clarify the relationship between spin liquidity
and superconductivity, which has been of theoretical in-
terest [31, 187, 188], because the QSL nature is relevant
at low pressures as mentioned in Chapter 5. This chapter
describes the pressure variation in the superconducting
properties of the doped Mott insulator κ-Hg2.89Br8.

A.
Pressure dependence of the superconducting
transition temperature

Superconductivity in κ-Hg2.89Br8 was first reported in
1987 by Lyubovskaya et al., [11] and the nonmonotonous
pressure dependence of the superconducting transition
temperature Tc was reported in 1992 by Bud’ko et al.
[109], who also found a nonmetallic phase emerging at
high pressures; however, it has not been reproduced.
Contrastingly, there was observed a resistivity drop rem-
iniscent of superconductivity at high pressures exceeding
3 GPa [17]; however, this also has not been reproduced.
Presumably, these observations are due to poor hydro-
staticity of pressure or strain in the sample.
The ac
susceptibility measurements made afterward confirmed
superconducting transitions in a pressure range of 0-1.7
GPa with a dome-shaped pressure dependence of Tc (Fig.
15) [18].
The superconducting diamagnetism at ambi-
ent pressure was smaller than those at pressures above
0.3 GPa, indicating that the superconducting volume,
at least, at ambient pressure is fractional; indeed, the
specific heat measurements suggest the superconducting
volume fraction of 30-50 % at ambient pressure [138].
The diamagnetic response at 1.4 K increases with pres-
sure, reaching twice as much at 0.3 GPa, and saturates
in pressure and temperature variations, suggesting that
the entire sample is superconducting above 0.3 GPa con-
sistently with the recent thermodynamic measurements
under pressure [189]. (Very recently, a few crystals with a
full superconducting volume fraction at ambient pressure
were successfully synthesized [190, 191].)
The pressure dependence of Tc shows a peak at a pres-
sure of approximately 0.5 GPa, which corresponds to
the pressure range of the bandwidth-controlled Mottness

FIG. 15:
(a) Temperature dependence of ac susceptibility in
a MHz frequency range χ′
rf of κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 un-
der pressure. The arrows indicate the superconducting (SC)
transition temperature Tc. The finite value of χ′
rf above Tc
is due to the skin effect, which enables contactless conduc-
tivity measurements, as described in Chapter 4. Reprinted
from Ref. [18]. ©2015 the American Physical Society. (b)
Pressure dependence of Tc probed by ac susceptibility mea-
surements. At ambient pressure and 0.2 GPa, the SC dia-
magnetism is not perfect, indicating that a part of the sample
does not exhibit an SC transition consistent with the specific
heat measurement at ambient pressure. Although the origin
of inhomogeneity in a sample is not clarified, the pressure ap-
plication results in a bulk superconductivity above 0.3 GPa.
Reprinted from Ref. [18]. ©2015 the American Physical So-
ciety.

transition, as described in Chapter 4. In non-doped κ-
type BEDT-TTF compounds [20], Tc decreases with in-
creasing pressure in a Fermi liquid phase, commonly to
κ-Hg2.89Br8 above 0.5 GPa.
These behaviors indicate
that the energy scale of Cooper pairing in a Fermi liquid
phase increases toward a Mottness transition. When the
Mottness is further increased and κ-Hg2.89Br8 enters into
the low-pressure non-Fermi liquid regime, Tc turns into a
decrease. Contrastingly, the pairing interaction appears
to increase with decreasing pressures as will be discussed
in the section 6-C. This puzzling behavior is likely re-
lated to the interlayer decoupling, which works against
the three-dimensional ordering, in the non-Fermi liquid
regime as we discussed in the section 5-B.


18

FIG. 16:
(a) Magnetic field H dependence of in-plane resistivity ρ// at a pressure of 0.32 GPa, where the field is applied
perpendicular to the conducting layers. Reprented from Ref. [108] under the creative commons license. (b)–(j) Contour plots of
the normalized in-plane resistivity, ρ//(T, H)/ρn, in the temperature-field (T-H) plane, where ρn is the normal state resistivity
with the form of ρo + AT α. The values of ρo, A and α are obtained by fitting the functional form to the high-field data. The
solid lines indicate the contours of ρ//(T, H)/ρn = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.9. The red and blue areas indicate
the normal and superconducting phases, respectively. Reprented from Ref. [108] under the creative commons license.

B.
Mottness-Driven BEC-BCS Crossover

As seen in the chapter 4, the nature of carriers respon-
sible for electrical conduction on the low-pressure side of
the Tc dome differs from that on the high-pressure side.
Thus, one may expect something different in Cooper par-
ing between the two pressure regimes.
On the high-
pressure side, the quasiparticles of the Fermi liquid form
Cooper pairs; however, in a state where conventional
quasi-particles are not well defined, the formation of
Cooper pairs is difficult to be described. A critical mag-
netic field probes the spatial extent of the Cooper pair
and thus its pressure variation gives insight into this is-
sue.
Fig.
16 shows contour plots of the normalized in-
plane resistivity ρ// under perpendicular magnetic fields
at several pressures [108]. Although superconductivity is
broken at relatively low fields of a few Tesla in a high-
pressure range above 0.5 GPa, superconductivity per-
sists to high magnetic fields in a low-pressure range be-
low 0.5 GPa. The contrasting magnetic field dependen-
cies indicate that the upper critical field Hc2⊥ does not
scale to Tc, consistently with the unusually large crit-
ical fields at ambient pressure [192–194].
Hc2⊥ is ap-
proximately related with the in-plane coherence length
ξ// through Hc2⊥ = ϕo/2πξ2
// [195], where ϕo is the
flux quantum. However, the determination of Hc2⊥ from
magnetoresistance require a particular caution for highly
two-dimensional superconductors. When a magnetic field
is applied perpendicular to layered superconductors, fi-
nite resistivity is often caused by vortex flow in the vor-
tex liquid state even below Hc2⊥ [195], as observed in this

system. In such a case, Hc2⊥ is better characterized by
an initial drop in resistivity, e.g. 80% or 90% transition
points [ρ//(T, H)/ ρn(T) = 0.8 and 0.9], which are indi-
cated by the bold contours in Figs. 16(b)–16(j). Then,
the GL coherence length ξ// is evaluated by extrapolat-
ing the temperature slope of Hc2⊥ near Tc to absolute
zero. The pressure dependence of ξ// is shown in Fig.
17(a). ξ// at 0.4 GPa is as short as 3 nm, which is the
length of a few unit cells, and increases with pressure to
a value of 20 nm at 1 GPa, which is a close value to the
non-doped κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds [108].

Having clarified the pressure variation of ξ//, it is of
interest to know how many Cooper pairs spatially over-
lap with one another. Whereas more than 10,000 pairs
overlap in typical Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) su-
perconductors, such as Sn or Pb, the overlapping of only
a few pairs or less takes on the nature of a Bose-Einstein
Condensation (BEC) [196–199]. In the first approxima-
tion, ξ// is regarded as the size of the Cooper pair. A
carrier density is associated with a length scale 1/kF, the
inverse of the Fermi wavenumber. Thus, kFξ// measures
the degree of the pair overlapping and serves as an indi-
cator of the BEC/BCS feature [200]. The kF values of
κ-Hg2.89Br8 under pressure are estimated from the Hall
coefficient by assuming a cylindrical Fermi surface, and
the kFξ// values are obtained as shown in Fig.
17(b)
[108].
At high pressures, e.g.
1.0 GPa, kFξ// reaches
50, indicating that thousands of pairs overlap, as in the
conventional BCS regime.
On the other hand, at low
pressures, kFξ// is as small as 3. According to a theoret-
ical suggestion [201], the size of the Cooper pair may
become smaller than ξ// when approaching the BEC


19

FIG. 17:
(a) Pressure dependences of dHc2⊥/dTc and ξ//.
(b) Pressure dependences of kFξ// and superconducting (SC)
transition temperature Tc, where kF and ξ// are the Fermi
wavenumber and a SC coherence length, respectively.
The
value of kFξ// monotonically increases from 3 to 50 as a func-
tion of pressure. As schematically depicted, a small value of
kFξ// at low pressures indicates that a few Cooper pairs over-
lap similarly to a Bose-Einstein Condensation (BEC)-like su-
perconductivity, and a large value of kFξ// at high pressures
indicates that many Cooper pairs overlap as in a Bardeen-
Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS)-like superconductivity.
Reprented
from Ref. [108] under the creative commons license.

regime. Therefore, only a few pairs overlap at low pres-
sures below 0.4 GPa, indicating more BEC-like Cooper
pairing than higher pressures. This pressure dependence
is viewed as a Mottness-driven BEC-to-BCS crossover.

C.
How does the doped quantum spin liquid form
superconductivity?

Taken together with the discussions in this review, κ-
Hg2.89Br8 is suggested to host a doped QSL that exhibits
BEC-like superconductivity at low pressures. The charge
transport, which is confined in the layer at high temper-
atures, gets interlayer phase coherence below 20 K and
condensate into a superonducting state below 6 K as dis-
cussed in Chapter 5. Thus, the behavior of the phase
of their wave function is a key to the superconducting
condensate.
In the vicinity of the superconducting transition under
a magnetic field, flowing vortices or preformed Cooper
pairs are accompanied by phase fluctuations of the wave
functions. Such superconducting fluctuations are known
to cause the Nernst signal eN (=Ey/▽xT), which is
an electric field generation Ey perpendicular to a ther-
mal gradient ▽xT and magnetic field Bz, as observed
in cuprates, iron chalcogenides, and organic conductors
[202–205]. A Nernst effect is analogous to a Hall effect
in terms of transverse voltage generation under a certain
flow, and these coefficients are associated with the Mott
relation when quasiparticles mainly contribute to both
entropy flow and charge flow [206, 207]. The magnetic-
flux flow bring about an entropy flow but is not neces-
sarily accompanied by charge flow, and can contribute to
the Nernst effect. Thus, the Nernst effects can possibly
capture superconducting fluctuations in a more sensitive
manner than the Hall effects.
Figs.
18(a)-18(d) display the magnetic-field depen-
dences of eN at several fixed temperatures under pres-
sures of 0.3, 0.5, 0.65, and 0.9 GPa, together with their
contour plots (Figs. 18(e)-18(h)) [108]. The very sensi-
tive pressure dependence of eN profile is evident; at 0.3
GPa, the eN value remains large even at the maximum
field, 9 T, whereas it rapidly drops above 1 T at 0.9
GPa. Accordingly, the contour line of eN is almost ver-
tical above 3 T at 0.3 GPa, and gradually inclined with
increasing pressure. When the eN profiles are compared
with the ρ//profiles in Fig. 16, the location of of large
values of eN in the temperature-pressure plane roughly
coincides with those of Hc2⊥ determined by ρ///ρn =
0.9. It is remarkable that, at low pressures, the Nernst
signals remain large even at magnetic fields much higher
than Hc2⊥. To highlight the persistence of Nernst sig-
nal generations in a nominally normal state, we show,
in Fig. 19, a pressure-temperature dependence of eN at
9 T in a contour plot [108].
The Nernst signals that
emerges from well above Tc in the low-pressure range are
suppressed with increasing pressure, indicating their rel-
evance to Mottness.


20

FIG. 18:
(a)–(d) Magnetic field (H) dependence of the Nernst signal eN at several fixed temperatures under pressure, where
the field is applied perpendicular to the conducting layers. (e)–(h) Contour plots of eN in the temperature–field (T,-H) plane.
The arrows indicate superconducting transition temperatures at H = 0. Reprented from Ref. [108] under the creative commons
license.

FIG. 19:
Temperature-pressure (T-P) profile of the Nernst
signal eN at a magnetic field of 9 T. The white circles in-
dicate superconducting transition temperatures at H = 0.
Reprented from Ref.
[108] under the creative commons li-
cense.

The persistence of Nernst signals at high temperatures
well above Tc is among the properties of BEC-like con-
densates; preformed pairs are expected to generate the
Nernst signal in a more sensitive manner than the re-
sistivity [208]. It has been reported that the 13C NMR
relaxation rate divided by temperature, 1/T1T, takes a

maximum value upon cooling at a temperature of 7–9 K,
which is twice as high as Tc of 4.2 K, at ambient pres-
sure, and this peak formation becomes less prominent
with increasing pressure [139]. The recent torque mea-
surements suggest that the fluctuating superconductivity
sets in at approximately 7 K at ambient pressure [194].
These behaviors are also likely to capture the preformed
pairs in the BEC-like regime at ambient pressure and its
crossover to the BCS regime at high pressures.
Upon
cooling across Tc, the preformed pairs turn to a vortex
liquid state as manifested by a decrease in resistivity and
the large Nernst signals. The field-robust vortex liquid
state at low pressures is also consistent with the small
values of kFξ// inherent in BEC-like pairing, as shown
theoretically [209]. Thus, a doped QSL presumably hosts
preformed pairs in a nominally normal state and becomes
superconducting when their phase coherence grows suffi-
ciently at low temperatures.

7.
SUMMARY

In this review, we describe what the study of κ-
Hg2.89Br8 has opened up in the physics of strongly cor-
related electron systems. The pressure variation in the
resistivity and Hall coefficient suggests that a bandwidth-
controlled Mott-like transition, called Mottness transi-
tion here, occurs even in the condition that the band
filling deviates from a half. Unlike the metal-insulator
transitions in half-filled systems, pressure variation of
Mottness in the doped system brings about two kinds
of metallic states: a non-Fermi liquid and a conventional


21

Fermi liquid, as described in Chapter 4. In the non-Fermi
liquid regime, the spin susceptibility of κ-Hg2.89Br8 be-
have almost identically to the quantum spin liquid (QSL)
in the Mott insulator κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu2(CN)3 when
scaled by the exchange interactions. The invariant QSL-
like behaviors irrespective of whether it is metal or in-
sulator demonstrates a spin-charge separation driven by
Mottness. The charge transport is confined in a layer at
high tempeartures, but gains interlayer coherence at low
temperatures, forming unconventionally degenerative ex-
citations, as described in Chapter 5. Out of the degen-
eracy, preformed pairs gradually appear on cooling as
seeds of superconductivity, as indicated by the enhance-
ment of Nernst effects, and eventually, a superconducting
transition occurs. The upper critical field of supercon-
ductivity strongly depends on pressure, and the deduced
inter-Cooper-pair distance uncovered a drastic pressure
variation in superconducting nature from Bose-Einstein
Condensation-like to Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer-like, as
described in Chapter 6. Thus, we traced the energetic
hierarchy of κ-Hg2.89Br8 in the order of Mottness, spin
liquidity, and superconductivity, which occur in charge,
spin, and charge-spin coupled degrees of freedom, respec-
tively. At each energy scale, correlated electrons exhibit
unconventional behaviors and the pressure control of cor-
relation reveals how the unconventional states transition
into the conventional metal and superconductor.
In this review, we discussed the physics behind the
experimental results particularly focusing on transport,
thermoelectric and magnetic properties. Although exper-
imental methods available under pressure are limited, the

extension of these measurements to much higher mag-
netic fields or spectroscopic studies are expected to af-
ford deeper insight into the interplay between QSL and
charges or unveil novel phenomena yet to be observed in
strongly correlated systems so far. On the other hand,
we anticipate that the development of synthesis methods
that produce pressure-controllable doped Mott insulators
other than κ-Hg2.89Br8 will widen the present discussion
based on a specific material to a broader perspective.
Moreover, a comprehensive understanding of correlated
electrons should require integration of concepts across
multiple research areas, for example, as we compared the
present single-band system with heavy electron systems
with multiband. It may be a promissing way in this line
to attempt to find physical linkage among the diverse
phenomena in various materials.
We hope this review
will help find cross-disciplinary concepts for correlated
electrons.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Yuji Suzuki, Kodai Wakamatsu,
Jun Ibuka and Takenori Fujii for their significant con-
tributions to the studies related to this review, and
Dita Sari Puspita for the picture of a large single crys-
tal. This work was supported by JST PRESTO (Grant
No. JPMJPR21Q2), and JSPS KAKENHI (Grants No.
11J09324, No.
22H01164, No.
21K03438, 18H05225,
21K18144, 20K20894, 20KK0060).

[1] K. Bechgaard, C. Jacobsen, K. Mortensen, H. Pedersen,
and N. Thorup, Solid State Communications 33, 1119
(1980).

[2] D. J´erome, A. Mazaud, M. Ribault, and K. Bechgaard,
Journal de Physique Lettres 41, 95 (1980).

[3] D. J´erome and H.-J. Schulz, Advances in Physics 31,
299 (1982).

[4] S. Parkin, E. Engler, R. Schumaker, R. Lagier, V. Lee,
J. Scott, and R. L. Greene, Physical Review Letters 50,
270 (1983).

[5] E. Yagubskii, I. Shchegolev, V. Topnikov, S. Pesotskii,
V. Laukhin, P. Kononovich, M. Kartsovnik, A. Zvaryk-
ina, S. Dedik, and L. Buravov, Zh. Teor. ´Eksp. Fiz. 88,
244 (1985).

[6] H. Kobayashi,
R. Kato,
A. Kobayashi,
G. Saito,
M. Tokumoto, H. Anzai, and T. Ishiguro, Chemistry
Letters 15, 89 (1986).

[7] H. Kobayashi, R. Kato, A. Kobayashi, Y. Nishio, K. Ka-
jita, and W. Sasaki, Chemistry Letters 15, 789 (1986).

[8] H. Kobayashi, R. Kato, A. Kobayashi, Y. Nishio, K. Ka-
jita, and W. Sasaki, Chemistry Letters 15, 833 (1986).

[9] A. Kobayashi, R. Kato, H. Kobayashi, S. Moriyama,
Y. Nishio, K. Kajita, and W. Sasaki, Chemistry Letters
16, 459 (1987).

[10] K. Kajita, Y. Nishio, S. Moriyama, W. Sasaki, R. Kato,
H. Kobayashi, and A. Kobayashi, Solid state communi-

cations 64, 1279 (1987).

[11] R.
Lyubovskaya,
E.
Zhilyaeva,
A.
Zvarykina,
V. Laukhin, R. Lyubovskii, and S. Pesotskii, JETP
Lett 45, 9 (1987).

[12] R.
Lyubovskaya,
E.
Zhilyaeva,
S.
Pesotskii,
R. Lyubovskii,
L. Atovmyan,
O. D’yachenko,
and
T. Takhirov, JETP Lett 46 (1987).

[13] H. Urayama, H. Yamochi, G. Saito, K. Nozawa, T. Sug-
ano, M. Kinoshita, S. Sato, K. Oshima, A. Kawamoto,
and J. Tanaka, Chemistry Letters 17, 55 (1988).

[14] J. M. Williams, A. J. Schultz, U. Geiser, K. D. Carlson,
A. M. Kini, H. G. Wang, W.-K. Kwok, M.-H. Whangbo,
and J. E. Schirber, Science 252, 1501 (1991).

[15] J. G. Bednorz and K. A. M¨uller, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik
B Condensed Matter 64, 189 (1986).

[16] P. A. Lee, N. Nagaosa, and X.-G. Wen, Reviews of mod-
ern physics 78, 17 (2006).

[17] H. Taniguchi, T. Okuhata, T. Nagai, K. Satoh, N. Mˆori,
Y. Shimizu, M. Hedo, and Y. Uwatoko, Journal of the
Physical Society of Japan 76, 113709 (2007).

[18] H. Oike, K. Miyagawa, H. Taniguchi, and K. Kanoda,
Physical Review Letters 114, 067002 (2015).

[19] H. Kino and H. Fukuyama, Journal of the Physical So-
ciety of Japan 64, 2726 (1995).

[20] K. Kanoda, Physica C: Superconductivity 282, 299
(1997).


22

[21] K. Kanoda, A: 1012696314318 3043843, 15729540
(1997).

[22] R.
Li,
V.
Petricek,
G.
Yang,
P.
Coppens,
and
M. Naughton, Chemistry of materials 10, 1521 (1998).

[23] Y. Shimizu, K. Miyagawa, K. Kanoda, M. Maesato, and
G. Saito, Physical review letters 91, 107001 (2003).

[24] K. Miyagawa, A. Kawamoto, Y. Nakazawa, and K. Kan-
oda, Physical review letters 75, 1174 (1995).

[25] Y. Shimizu, K. Miyagawa, K. Kanoda, M. Maesato, and
G. Saito, Physical Review B 73, 140407 (2006).

[26] S. Yamashita, Y. Nakazawa, M. Oguni, Y. Oshima,
H. Nojiri, Y. Shimizu, K. Miyagawa, and K. Kanoda,
Nature Physics 4, 459 (2008).

[27] M. Yamashita, N. Nakata, Y. Kasahara, T. Sasaki,
N. Yoneyama, N. Kobayashi, S. Fujimoto, T. Shibauchi,
and Y. Matsuda, Nature Physics 5, 44 (2009).

[28] T. Itou, A. Oyamada, S. Maegawa, M. Tamura, and
R. Kato, Physical Review B 77, 104413 (2008).

[29] T. Isono, H. Kamo, A. Ueda, K. Takahashi, M. Ki-
mata, H. Tajima, S. Tsuchiya, T. Terashima, S. Uji, and
H. Mori, Physical review letters 112, 177201 (2014).

[30] Y. Shimizu, T. Hiramatsu, M. Maesato, A. Otsuka,
H. Yamochi, A. Ono, M. Itoh, M. Yoshida, M. Taki-
gawa, Y. Yoshida, et al., Physical Review Letters 117,
107203 (2016).

[31] P. W. Anderson, science 235, 1196 (1987).
[32] K. Miyagawa, K. Kanoda, and A. Kawamoto, Chemical
reviews 104, 5635 (2004).

[33] K. Kanoda, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan
75, 051007 (2006).

[34] K. Kanoda and R. Kato, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter
Phys. 2, 167 (2011).

[35] Y. Zhou, K. Kanoda, and T.-K. Ng, Reviews of Modern
Physics 89, 025003 (2017).

[36] A. Pustogow, Solids 3, 93 (2022).
[37] X. Wang and Q. Zhang, SmartMat p. e1196 (2023).
[38] U. Geiser, H. H. Wang, K. D. Carlson, J. M. Williams,
H. A. Charlier Jr, J. E. Heindl, G. A. Yaconi, B. J.
Love, and M. W. Lathrop, Inorganic chemistry 30, 2586
(1991).

[39] T. Mori, H. Mori, and S. Tanaka, Bulletin of the Chem-
ical Society of Japan 72, 179 (1999).

[40] C. Hotta, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 72,
840 (2003).

[41] N.
Drichko,
R.
Beyer,
E.
Rose,
M.
Dressel,
J. A. Schlueter,
S. Turunova,
E. Zhilyaeva,
and
R. Lyubovskaya, Physical Review B 89, 075133 (2014).

[42] N.
Hassan,
S.
Cunningham,
M.
Mourigal,
E.
I.
Zhilyaeva, S. A. Torunova, R. N. Lyubovskaya, J. A.
Schlueter, and N. Drichko, Science 360, 1101 (2018).

[43] N.
M.
Hassan,
K.
Thirunavukkuarasu,
Z.
Lu,
D. Smirnov,
E. I. Zhilyaeva,
S. Torunova,
R. N.
Lyubovskaya, and N. Drichko, npj Quantum Materials
5, 15 (2020).

[44] W. Ching, Y.-N. Xu, Y. Jean, and Y. Lou, Physical
Review B 55, 2780 (1997).

[45] Y. Kawasugi, K. Seki, Y. Edagawa, Y. Sato, J. Pu,
T. Takenobu, S. Yunoki, H. M. Yamamoto, and R. Kato,
Nature communications 7, 12356 (2016).

[46] H. Watanabe, H. Seo, and S. Yunoki, Nature Commu-
nications 10, 3167 (2019).

[47] Y. Kawasugi, K. Seki, J. Pu, T. Takenobu, S. Yunoki,
H. M. Yamamoto, and R. Kato, Physical Review B 100,
115141 (2019).

[48] Y. Kawasugi and H. M. Yamamoto, Crystals 12, 42
(2021).

[49] L. Ducasse, A. Fritsch, and F. Castet, Synthetic metals
85, 1627 (1997).

[50] T. Mori, A. Kobayashi, Y. Sasaki, H. Kobayashi,
G. Saito, and H. Inokuchi, Bulletin of the Chemical So-
ciety of Japan 57, 627 (1984).

[51] H. C. Kandpal, I. Opahle, Y.-Z. Zhang, H. O. Jeschke,
and R. Valent´ı, Physical review letters 103, 067004
(2009).

[52] M. Imada, A. Fujimori, and Y. Tokura, Reviews of mod-
ern physics 70, 1039 (1998).

[53] S. Y. Kim, M.-C. Lee, G. Han, M. Kratochvilova,
S. Yun, S. J. Moon, C. Sohn, J.-G. Park, C. Kim, and
T. W. Noh, Advanced Materials 30, 1704777 (2018).

[54] E. Y. Andrei and A. H. MacDonald, Nature materials
19, 1265 (2020).

[55] T. Mizusaki and M. Imada, Physical Review B 74,
014421 (2006).

[56] B. Kyung and A.-M. Tremblay, Physical review letters
97, 046402 (2006).

[57] S. Acheche, A. Reymbaut, M. Charlebois, D. S´en´echal,
and A.-M. Tremblay, Physical Review B 94, 245133
(2016).

[58] A. Szasz and J. Motruk, Physical Review B 103, 235132
(2021).

[59] M. Rahal,
D. Chasseau,
J. Gaultier,
L. Ducasse,
M. Kurmoo, and P. Day, Acta Crystallographica Sec-
tion B: Structural Science 53, 159 (1997).

[60] N. C. Hyatt, J. A. Hriljac, Y. Miyazaki, I. Gameson,
P. P. Edwards, and A. P. Jephcoat, Physical Review B
65, 014507 (2001).

[61] F. Kagawa, T. Itou, K. Miyagawa, and K. Kanoda,
Physical Review B 69, 064511 (2004).

[62] Y. Kurosaki, Y. Shimizu, K. Miyagawa, K. Kanoda, and
G. Saito, Physical review letters 95, 177001 (2005).

[63] T. Furukawa, K. Kobashi, Y. Kurosaki, K. Miyagawa,
and K. Kanoda, Nature communications 9, 307 (2018).

[64] P. A. Lee, Science 321, 1306 (2008).
[65] L. Balents, Nature 464, 199 (2010).
[66] B. Powell and R. H. McKenzie, Reports on Progress in
Physics 74, 056501 (2011).

[67] L. Savary and L. Balents, Reports on Progress in
Physics 80, 016502 (2016).

[68] R. Manna, M. De Souza, A. Br¨uhl, J. Schlueter, and
M. Lang, Physical review letters 104, 016403 (2010).

[69] F. Pratt, P. Baker, S. Blundell, T. Lancaster, S. Ohira-
Kawamura,
C.
Baines,
Y.
Shimizu,
K.
Kanoda,
I. Watanabe, and G. Saito, Nature 471, 612 (2011).

[70] B. Miksch, A. Pustogow, M. J. Rahim, A. A. Bardin,
K. Kanoda, J. A. Schlueter, R. H¨ubner, M. Scheffler,
and M. Dressel, Science 372, 276 (2021).

[71] T.
Furukawa,
K.
Miyagawa,
T.
Itou,
M.
Ito,
H. Taniguchi, M. Saito, S. Iguchi, T. Sasaki, and
K. Kanoda, Physical review letters 115, 077001 (2015).

[72] M. Urai, T. Furukawa, Y. Seki, K. Miyagawa, T. Sasaki,
H. Taniguchi, and K. Kanoda, Physical Review B 99,
245139 (2019).

[73] P. W. Anderson, Materials Research Bulletin 8, 153
(1973).

[74] O. I. Motrunich, Physical Review B 72, 045105 (2005).
[75] S.-S. Lee, P. A. Lee, and T. Senthil, Physical review
letters 98, 067006 (2007).

[76] V. Galitski and Y. B. Kim, Physical review letters 99,


23

266403 (2007).

[77] S. Hu, W. Zhu, S. Eggert, and Y.-C. He, Physical review
letters 123, 207203 (2019).

[78] A. Szasz, J. Motruk, M. P. Zaletel, and J. E. Moore,
Physical Review X 10, 021042 (2020).

[79] H. Kawamura and K. Uematsu, Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 31, 504003 (2019).

[80] T. Furukawa, K. Miyagawa, H. Taniguchi, R. Kato, and
K. Kanoda, Nature Physics 11, 221 (2015).

[81] G. Saito, T. Enoki, K. Toriumi, and H. Inokuchi, Solid
State Communications 42, 557 (1982).

[82] H. Kobayashi,
T. Mori,
R. Kato,
A. Kobayashi,
Y. Sasaki, G. Saito, and H. Inokuchi, Chemistry Let-
ters 12, 581 (1983).

[83] E.
Yagubskii,
I.
Shchegolev,
V.
Laukhin,
and
P. Kononovich, Jetp Lett 39 (1984).

[84] I. Hennig, K. Bender, D. Schweitzer, K. Dietz, H. En-
dres, H. J. Keller, A. Gleitz, and H. W. Helberg, Molec-
ular Crystals and Liquid Crystals 119, 337 (1985).

[85] H.
Anzai,
M.
Tokumoto,
T.
Ishiguro,
G.
Saito,
H. Kobayashi, R. Kato, and A. Kobayashi, Synthetic
Metals 19, 611 (1987).

[86] H. Urayama, H. Yamochi, G. Saito, S. Sato, T. Sug-
ano, M. Kinoshita, A. Kawamoto, J. Tanaka, T. Inabe,
T. Mori, et al., Synthetic Metals 27, A393 (1988).

[87] R. Lyubovskaya, M. Aldoshina, L. Goldenberg, and
E. Zhilyaeva, Synthetic metals 42, 2143 (1991).

[88] R. Havighurst, Journal of the American Chemical Soci-
ety 48, 2113 (1926).

[89] T. Yamamoto, M. Uruichi, K. Yamamoto, K. Yakushi,
A. Kawamoto, and H. Taniguchi, The Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry B 109, 15226 (2005).

[90] H. Mori, M. Kamiya, M. Haemori, H. Suzuki, S. Tanaka,
Y. Nishio, K. Kajita, and H. Moriyama, Journal of the
American Chemical Society 124, 1251 (2002).

[91] H. Mori, M. Kamiya, H. Suzuki, M. Suto, S. Tanaka,
Y. Nishio, K. Kajita, and H. Moriyama, Journal of
Physics and Chemistry of Solids 63, 1239 (2002).

[92] M. Katsuhara, S. Kimura, T. Mori, Y. Misaki, and
K. Tanaka, Chemistry of materials 14, 458 (2002).

[93] M. Suto,
K. Yamashita,
H. Suzuki,
K. Yoshimi,
S. Kimura, H. Mori, T. Kawamoto, T. Mori, Y. Nishio,
and K. Kajita, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan
74, 2061 (2005).

[94] R.
Lyubovskaya,
R.
Lyubovskii,
R.
Shibaeva,
M.
Aldoshina,
L.
Gol’Denberg,
L.
Rozenberg,
M. Khidekel, and Y. F. Shul’Pyakov, JETP Lett.(Engl.
Transl.);(United States) 42 (1985).

[95] T. Kawamoto, Y. Bando, T. Mori, K. Takimiya, and
T. Otsubo, Physical Review B 71, 052501 (2005).

[96] T. Kawamoto, T. Mori, K. Enomoto, T. Konoike,
T. Terashima, S. Uji, A. Takamori, K. Takimiya, and
T. Otsubo, Physical Review B 73, 024503 (2006).

[97] H. Seo, H. Yoshioka, and Y. Otsuka, in Journal of
Physics: Conference Series (IOP Publishing, 2008), vol.
132, p. 012018.

[98] H. Oike, Y. Suzuki, H. Taniguchi, Y. Seki, K. Miyagawa,
and K. Kanoda, Nature communications 8, 756 (2017).

[99] P. Phillips, Annals of Physics 321, 1634 (2006).

[100] G. Kotliar and D. Vollhardt, Physics today 57, 53
(2004).

[101] M. Capone, M. Fabrizio, C. Castellani, and E. Tosatti,
Physical review letters 93, 047001 (2004).

[102] G. Sordi, K. Haule, and A.-M. Tremblay, Physical re-

view letters 104, 226402 (2010).

[103] G. Sordi, P. S´emon, K. Haule, and A.-M. Tremblay,
Physical review letters 108, 216401 (2012).

[104] G. Sordi, P. S´emon, K. Haule, and A.-M. Tremblay,
Scientific reports 2, 547 (2012).

[105] H. Yokoyama, M. Ogata, Y. Tanaka, K. Kobayashi, and
H. Tsuchiura, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan
82, 014707 (2012).

[106] E. Gull, O. Parcollet, and A. J. Millis, Physical review
letters 110, 216405 (2013).

[107] F. Simkovic, R. Rossi, A. Georges, and M. Ferrero,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.09237 (2022).

[108] Y. Suzuki, K. Wakamatsu, J. Ibuka, H. Oike, T. Fujii,
K. Miyagawa, H. Taniguchi, and K. Kanoda, Physical
Review X 12, 011016 (2022).

[109] S.
Bud’ko,
A.
Gapotchenko,
A.
Luppov,
R. Lyubovskaya, and R. Lyubovskii, Soviet physics,
JETP 74, 983 (1992).

[110] K. Yokogawa, K. Murata, H. Yoshino, and S. Aoyama,
Japanese journal of applied physics 46, 3636 (2007).

[111] T.
Okuhata,
T.
Nagai,
H.
Taniguchi,
K.
Satoh,
M. Hedo, and Y. Uwatoko, Journal of the Physical So-
ciety of Japan 76, 188 (2007).

[112] H. Oike, K. Miyagawa, H. Taniguchi, H. Okamoto, and
K. Kanoda, arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06032 (2022).

[113] H. Oike, K. Miyagawa, K. Kanoda, H. Taniguchi, and
K. Murata, Physica B: Condensed Matter 404, 376
(2009).

[114] K. Murata, K. Yokogawa, H. Yoshino, S. Klotz, P. Mun-
sch, A. Irizawa, M. Nishiyama, K. Iizuka, T. Nanba,
T. Okada, et al., Review of Scientific Instruments 79,
085101 (2008).

[115] K. Wakamatsu, Y. Suzuki, T. Fujii, K. Miyagawa,
H. Taniguchi, and K. Kanoda, Nature Communications
14, 3679 (2023).

[116] G. Stewart, Reviews of modern Physics 73, 797 (2001).
[117] R. Daou, O. Cyr-Choiniere, F. Lalibert´e, D. LeBoeuf,
N. Doiron-Leyraud, J.-Q. Yan, J.-S. Zhou, J. Goode-
nough, and L. Taillefer, Physical Review B 79, 180505
(2009).

[118] F. Lalibert´e, J. Chang, N. Doiron-Leyraud, E. Has-
singer, R. Daou, M. Rondeau, B. Ramshaw, R. Liang,
D. Bonn, W. Hardy, et al., Nature Communications 2,
432 (2011).

[119] M.-E. Boulanger, G.-Q. Zheng, M. Lizaire, A. Legros,
A. Gourgout, S. Benhabib, S. Badoux, F. Lalibert´e, M.-
E. Boulanger, A. Ataei, et al. (2020).

[120] P. Mandal, T. Sarkar, and R. L. Greene, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 116, 5991 (2019).

[121] M. Gooch, B. Lv, B. Lorenz, A. M. Guloy, and C.-W.
Chu, Physical Review B 79, 104504 (2009).

[122] S. Arsenijevi´c, H. Hodovanets, R. Ga´al, L. Forr´o, . S.
Bud’ko, and P. Canfield, Physical Review B 87, 224508
(2013).

[123] J. Maiwald, H. S. Jeevan, and P. Gegenwart, Physical
Review B 85, 024511 (2012).

[124] S. Hartmann, N. Oeschler, C. Krellner, C. Geibel,
S. Paschen, and F. Steglich, Physical review letters 104,
096401 (2010).

[125] L. Malone, L. Howald, A. Pourret, D. Aoki, V. Tau-
four, G. Knebel, and J. Flouquet, Physical Review B
85, 024526 (2012).

[126] T. Kuwai, T. Iwaki, M. Takeuchi, T. Mizushima,
T. Tayama, Y. Isikawa, and T. Fukuhara, Journal of


24

the Physical Society of Japan 80, SA064 (2011).

[127] E. Mun, S. L. Bud’ko, and P. C. Canfield, Physical Re-
view B 82, 174403 (2010).

[128] E. Mun, S. L. Bud’ko, C. Martin, H. Kim, M. A.
Tanatar, J.-H. Park, T. Murphy, G. Schmiedeshoff,
N. Dilley, R. Prozorov, et al., Physical Review B 87,
075120 (2013).

[129] M. Matusiak, D. Gnida, and D. Kaczorowski, Physical
Review B 84, 115110 (2011).

[130] P. Limelette, W. Saulquin, H. Muguerra, and D. Gre-
bille, Physical Review B 81, 115113 (2010).

[131] I. Paul and G. Kotliar, Physical Review B 64, 184414
(2001).

[132] K.-S. Kim and C. P´epin, Physical Review B 81, 205108
(2010).

[133] J. M. Buhmann, M. Ossadnik, T. Rice, and M. Sigrist,
Physical Review B 87, 035129 (2013).

[134] A. Georges and J. Mravlje, Physical Review Research
3, 043132 (2021).

[135] J. Zaanen and B. Overbosch, Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and En-
gineering Sciences 369, 1599 (2011).

[136] Y. Yamaji and M. Imada, Physical review letters 106,
016404 (2011).

[137] A. A. Patel and S. Sachdev, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 114, 1844 (2017).

[138] A. Naito, Y. Nakazawa, K. Saito, H. Taniguchi, K. Kan-
oda, and M. Sorai, Physical Review B 71, 054514
(2005).

[139] Y. Eto, M. Itaya, and A. Kawamoto, Physical Review
B 81, 212503 (2010).

[140] E. Lange and G. Kotliar, Physical Review B 59, 1800
(1999).

[141] H. Kontani, K. Kanki, and K. Ueda, Physical Review B
59, 14723 (1999).

[142] J. O. Haerter and B. S. Shastry, Physical Review B 77,
045127 (2008).

[143] N. Nagaosa, J. Sinova, S. Onoda, A. H. MacDonald, and
N. P. Ong, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1539 (2010).

[144] M. Naka, S. Hayami, H. Kusunose, Y. Yanagi, Y. Mo-
tome, and H. Seo, Nature communications 10, 4305
(2019).

[145] M. Naka, S. Hayami, H. Kusunose, Y. Yanagi, Y. Mo-
tome, and H. Seo, Physical Review B 102, 075112
(2020).

[146] S. Hayami, Y. Yanagi, M. Naka, H. Seo, Y. Motome,
and H. Kusunose, in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
(SCES2019) (2020), p. 011149.

[147] A. Reymbaut, S. Bergeron, R. Garioud, M. Th´enault,
M. Charlebois, P. S´emon, and A.-M. Tremblay, Physical
Review Research 1, 023015 (2019).

[148] P. W. Phillips, L. Yeo, and E. W. Huang, Nature
Physics 16, 1175 (2020).

[149] T. Sch¨afer, N. Wentzell, F. ˇSimkovic IV, Y.-Y. He,
C. Hille,
M. Klett,
C. J. Eckhardt,
B. Arzhang,
V. Harkov, F.-M. Le R´egent, et al., Physical Review
X 11, 011058 (2021).

[150] E. W. Huang, G. L. Nave, and P. W. Phillips, Nature
Physics 18, 511 (2022).

[151] M. Qin, T. Sch¨afer, S. Andergassen, P. Corboz, and
E. Gull, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics
13, 275 (2022).

[152] F. ˇSimkovic IV, R. Rossi, and M. Ferrero, Physical Re-

view Research 4, 043201 (2022).

[153] R. H. McKenzie, Science 278, 820 (1997).
[154] F. Kagawa, K. Miyagawa, and K. Kanoda, Nature 436,
534 (2005).

[155] A. Cai, Z. Yu, H. Hu, S. Kirchner, and Q. Si, Physical
Review Letters 124, 027205 (2020).

[156] S. Paschen and Q. Si, Nature Reviews Physics 3, 9
(2021).

[157] D. H. Nguyen, A. Sidorenko, M. Taupin, G. Knebel,
G. Lapertot, E. Schuberth, and S. Paschen, Nature
Communications 12, 4341 (2021).

[158] W.-W. Yang, Y.-X. Li, Y. Zhong, and H.-G. Luo, Phys-
ical Review B 104, 165146 (2021).

[159] A.
Skripov,
A.
Stepanov,
V.
Merzhanov,
R. Lyubovskaya,
and R. Lyubovskiˇı,
Soviet Jour-
nal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics Letters
49, 265 (1989).

[160] N. Elstner, R. Singh, and A. Young, Physical review
letters 71, 1629 (1993).

[161] K. Satoh, H. Fujita, K. Katayama, H. Taniguchi, T. U.
Ito, K. Ohishi, and W. Higemoto, Physica B: Condensed
Matter 404, 597 (2009).

[162] H. Ito, T. Ishiguro, M. Kubota, and G. Saito, Journal
of the Physical Society of Japan 65, 2987 (1996).

[163] L. Zou and T. Senthil, Physical Review B 94, 115113
(2016).

[164] A. Naito, Y. Nakazawa, K. Saito, H. Taniguchi, K. Kan-
oda, and M. Sorai, Physica C: Superconductivity 388,
595 (2003).

[165] S. Yamashita,
A. Naito,
Y. Nakazawa,
K. Saito,
H. Taniguchi, K. Kanoda, and M. Oguni, Journal of
thermal analysis and calorimetry 81, 591 (2005).

[166] K. G. Wilson, Reviews of modern physics 47, 773
(1975).

[167] K. Yamada, Progress of Theoretical Physics 53, 970
(1975).

[168] S. Yamashita, T. Yamamoto, Y. Nakazawa, M. Tamura,
and R. Kato, Nature communications 2, 275 (2011).

[169] T. Senthil, S. Sachdev, and M. Vojta, Physical review
letters 90, 216403 (2003).

[170] S. Burdin, D. Grempel, and A. Georges, Physical Re-
view B 66, 045111 (2002).

[171] Q. Si, Physica B: Condensed Matter 378, 23 (2006).
[172] P. Coleman and A. H. Nevidomskyy, Journal of Low
Temperature Physics 161, 182 (2010).

[173] M. Kim and M. Aronson, Physical review letters 110,
017201 (2013).

[174] J. Pixley, R. Yu, and Q. Si, Physical review letters 113,
176402 (2014).

[175] Y. Tokiwa, J. Ishikawa, S. Nakatsuji, and P. Gegenwart,
Nature materials 13, 356 (2014).

[176] H. Zhao, J. Zhang, M. Lyu, S. Bachus, Y. Tokiwa,
P. Gegenwart, S. Zhang, J. Cheng, Y.-f. Yang, G. Chen,
et al., Nature Physics 15, 1261 (2019).

[177] Q. Si and F. Steglich, Science 329, 1161 (2010).
[178] L. Prochaska, X. Li, D. MacFarland, A. M. Andrews,
M. Bonta, E. Bianco, S. Yazdi, W. Schrenk, H. Detz,
A. Limbeck, et al., Science 367, 285 (2020).

[179] R. Takagi, T. Hamai, H. Gangi, K. Miyagawa, B. Zhou,
A. Kobayashi, and K. Kanoda, Physical Review B 95,
094420 (2017).

[180] B. Bri`ere, J. Caillaux, Y. Le Gal, D. Lorcy, S. Lupi,
A. Perucchi, M. Zaghrioui, J.-C. Soret, R. Sopracase,
and V. T. Phuoc, Physical Review B 97, 035101 (2018).


25

[181] R. Takagi, H. Gangi, K. Miyagawa, E. Nishibori, H. Ka-
sai, H. Seo, B. Zhou, A. Kobayashi, and K. Kanoda,
Physical Review Research 2, 033321 (2020).

[182] A. Kobayashi, B. Zhou, R. Takagi, K. Miyagawa,
S. Ishibashi, A. Kobayashi, T. Kawamura, E. Nishi-
bori, and K. Kanoda, Bulletin of the Chemical Society
of Japan 94, 2540 (2021).

[183] M. Vojta, Reports on Progress in Physics 81, 064501
(2018).

[184] J. Wang and Y.-f. Yang, Physical Review B 106, 115135
(2022).

[185] A. Ramires, Nature Physics 15, 1212 (2019).
[186] M. Xu, L. H. Kendrick, A. Kale, Y. Gang, G. Ji, R. T.
Scalettar, M. Lebrat, and M. Greiner, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.13983 (2022).

[187] H.-C. Jiang, npj Quantum Materials 6, 71 (2021).
[188] M. F. L´opez, B. J. Powell, and J. Merino, Physical Re-
view B 106, 235129 (2022).

[189] Y.
Matsumura,
S.
Yamashita,
H.
Akutsu,
and
Y. Nakazawa, Low Temperature Physics 48, 51 (2022).

[190] D.
Sari,
M.
Kaito,
Y.
Someya,
U.
Widyaiswari,
I. Watanabe, H. Taniguchi, and Y. Ishii, in Journal of
Physics: Conference Series (IOP Publishing, 2023), vol.
2462, p. 012061.

[191] K. Wakamatsu, Y. Ueno, K. Miyagawa, H. Taniguchi,
and
K.
Kanoda,
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2205.03682
(2022).

[192] E. Ohmichi, T. Ishiguro, T. Sakon, T. Sasaki, M. Mo-
tokawa, R. Lyubovskii, and R. Lyubovskaya, Journal of
superconductivity 12, 505 (1999).

[193] Y. Shimojo, S. Kamiya, M. Tanatar, E. Ohmichi, A. Ko-
valev, T. Ishiguro, H. Yamochi, G. Saito, J. Yamada,
H. Anzai, et al., Synthetic metals 133, 197 (2003).

[194] S. Imajo, S. Sugiura, H. Akutsu, Y. Kohama, T. Isono,
T. Terashima, K. Kindo, S. Uji, and Y. Nakazawa, Phys-
ical Review Research 3, 033026 (2021).

[195] M. Tinkham, Introduction to superconductivity (Courier
Corporation, 2004).

[196] Y. Uemura, L. Le, G. Luke, B. Sternlieb, W. Wu,
J.
Brewer,
T.
Riseman,
C.
Seaman,
M.
Maple,
M. Ishikawa, et al., Physical Review Letters 66, 2665
(1991).

[197] Y. Uemura, A. Keren, L. Le, G. Luke, B. Sternlieb,
W. Wu, J. Brewer, R. Whetten, S. Huang, S. Lin, et al.,
Nature 352, 605 (1991).

[198] Y. Uemura, Solid state communications 126, 23 (2003).
[199] T. Hartke,
B. Oreg,
C. Turnbaugh,
N. Jia,
and
M. Zwierlein, arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05948 (2022).

[200] F. Pistolesi and G. C. Strinati, Physical Review B 49,
6356 (1994).

[201] J. R. Engelbrecht, M. Randeria, and C. S. Melo, Phys-
ical Review B 55, 15153 (1997).

[202] Y. Wang, L. Li, and N. Ong, Physical Review B 73,
024510 (2006).

[203] B. Kang, M. Shi, S. Li, H. Wang, Q. Zhang, D. Zhao,
J. Li, D. Song, L. Zheng, L. Nie, et al., Physical Review
Letters 125, 097003 (2020).

[204] M.-S. Nam, A. Ardavan, S. J. Blundell, and J. A.
Schlueter, Nature 449, 584 (2007).

[205] M.-S. Nam, C. M´eziere, P. Batail, L. Zorina, S. Si-
monov, and A. Ardavan, Scientific reports 3, 3390
(2013).

[206] K. Behnia and H. Aubin, Reports on Progress in Physics
79, 046502 (2016).

[207] H.
Oike,
T.
Ebino,
T.
Koretsune,
A.
Kikkawa,
M. Hirschberger, Y. Taguchi, Y. Tokura, and F. Ka-
gawa, Physical Review B 106, 214425 (2022).

[208] Q. Chen, J. Stajic, S. Tan, and K. Levin, Physics Re-
ports 412, 1 (2005).

[209] K. Adachi and R. Ikeda, Physical Review B 99, 064508
(2019).


