 
1

 

 

 

Fabrication of nanopatterned metal layers on silicon by nanoindentation / 

nanoscratching and electrodeposition. 

 

R. Cecchinia*, A. Fabrizia, C. Paternostera, W. Zhangb, G. Roventib 

 

a VINF/Marche Polytechnic University, Department of Mechanics - v. Brecce 

Bianche, 60131 Ancona, Italy 

b Marche Polytechnic University, Department of Physics and Material and 

Territory Engineering - v. Brecce Bianche, 60131 Ancona, Italy 

 

Abstract 

The present work illustrates a novel approach for the maskless and resistless 

fabrication of nanopatterned metal layers on Si substrates, based on the 

combination of nanomechanical surface modification techniques (such as 

nanoindentation and nanoscratching) and electrodeposition. Single crystal (100) 

n-doped Si substrates were first cleaned from native oxide. Nanoindentation and 

nanoscratching were then used to locally change the substrate microstructure and 

create regions with reduced electrical conductivity. The substrates were finally 

mounted as cathode electrodes in a three electrode electrochemical cell to 

potentiostatically deposit a Ni layer. Electrodeposition was prevented in regions 

with modified microstructure, enabling the formation of a patterned Ni layer. The 

fabrication of several patterns including continuous Ni lines of 200 nm width and 

several microns length was obtained.  

 

This article appeared in Electrochimica Acta 55 (2010) 3355–3360 and may 
be found at: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S001346861000085X;  
DOI: 10.1016/j.electacta.2010.01.024) 


 
2

Keywords: maskless nanopatterning; nanoindentation; electrodeposition; silicon; 

phase transformation. 

____________ 

* Corresponding author, tel.: +39 071 2204794, fax: +39 071 2204801, E-mail address: 
r.cecchini@univpm.it 
 
 
1. Introduction 

Microelectronic and micro-mechanical devices industry is in constant need of 

high resolution and low cost fabrication processes. One critical aspect is 

represented by the processes involved in the transfer of a given pattern onto a 

substrate. Often the substrate is constituted by a semiconductor material, like Si, 

onto which a patterned metal layer needs to be grown for the fabrication of micro-

electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) and electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic 

devices. Metal nanostructures (e.g. nanometric clusters) on semiconductors can 

also be used as catalysts for chemical reactions and for the fabrication of sensors. 

Moreover, metal/semiconductor Schottky junctions have a huge number of 

applications (e.g. solar cells). Several processes, including electrodeposition, are 

studied for the fabrication of Schottky diodes [1-4]. 

Typically, lithographic processes such as photolithography are used for 

transferring the pattern from a mask to a photoresist material layer, previously 

deposited on the substrate. Subsequently, deposition, etching or other steps are 

performed in order to add and subtract material as required for transferring the 

pattern on the substrate [5].  Among other deposition processes, electrodeposition 

in combination with photolithography represents an effective and cost efficient 

way for fabricating, e.g., patterned magnetic metal layers [6-7]. The use of a resist 

for substrate patterning has the disadvantage of requiring several fabrication steps, 

including resist deposition, curing and removal. Several approaches for maskless 


 
3

and resistless nanopatterning have been attempted, including the use of 

nanomechanical techniques. Nanoindentation and nanoscratching are well known 

tools for changing as well as for measuring the properties of surfaces at 

nanometric scale. The combination of nanoindentation and nanoscratching with 

electrochemical deposition as a way for obtaining metal nanopatterning on 

semiconductor surfaces has been investigated by other authors [8-14]. Selective 

metal electrodeposition and electroless deposition within the scratches produced 

by an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) or a nanoindenter in an oxide or organic 

insulating layer has been demonstrated [8-12]. In other works defects were created 

by nanoindentation on hydrogen terminated Si surface, where metal deposits were 

grown by electroless deposition, as a consequence of modified local surface 

activity [13,14]. In these types of positive lithographic processes deposition 

occurs on nanomechanically modified areas of the substrate. 

On the other hand, nanoindentation and nanoscratching can also be used to 

change the microstructure, e.g. the phase, of the indented or scratched material. It 

is for instance known that nanoindentation and nanoscratching of single crystal Si 

can induce amorphisation in a limited volume of material near the surface [15-18]. 

The use of scratching was for instance considered for the fabrication of 

amorphous patterns on single crystal Si, subsequently used as an etching masking 

[19].  

Aim of this work is to study a novel approach to the maskless and resistless 

fabrication of nanopatterned metal layers on Si, where nanomechanically induced 

local amorphisation of the substrate is used as a mask for electrodeposition. By 

this approach, the combination of nanomechanical surface modification and 

electrodeposition results in a negative type of lithography for metal 

nanopatterning. 


 
4

Patterned Ni layers on n-doped single crystal (100) Si substrates were 

fabricated 
using 
nanoindentation 
and 
nanoscratching 
followed 
by 

electrodeposition and characterized by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM).  

 

2. Experimental 

Commercially available 380 m thick n-type single crystal (100) Si wafers  

(phosphorous doped with resistivity of 1-10 ∙cm) with one mechanically 

polished side were cut into 1 cm x 1 cm samples and immersed in 3.5 % HF 

solution for 10 min to remove native SiO2 layer and leave a hydrogen terminated 

surface. A Hysitron® UBI nanoindenter with a Berkovich diamond tip (curvature 

radius ~1 m) was used to perform nanoindentation and nanoscratching on the Si 

samples top surface. Nanoindentations were performed by applying a force 

perpendicularly to the substrate surface (z direction) with loading and unloading 

sequences of 10 s and peak forces of 1000 to 10000 N. Using its scanning probe 

mode, the nanoindenter was also operated for nanoscratching, by simultaneously 

applying a force along the z direction and scanning the tip in the lateral, x-y, 

directions. Nanoscratching was done at constant forces of 200, 300, 400 and 500 

N and scanning rate of 130 m/s. 

After nanomechanical surface modification step, an ohmic contact was 

fabricated on the Si samples back surface using InGa eutectic (99.99%). The 

samples were then mounted on a copper support. An insulating adhesive tape was 

used to mask off the support and the sample leaving exposed an area of 0.196 cm2 

on the Si top surface.  

Si amorphisation in the scratched regions was investigated by micro-Raman 

spectroscopy, using a Jobin-Yvon® micro-Raman system with 632.8 nm 


 
5

excitation laser, and by conductive Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), using a 

NT-MDT® Solver P47 Pro AFM operated with Pt coated probes. 

A conventional three electrode cell was used to perform Cyclic Voltammetry 

(CV) and electrodeposition; a platinum spiral was the counter-electrode and an 

Ag/AgCl (E = +0.208 vs. SHE) was the reference electrode, to which all 

potentials are referred to. The reference electrode was mounted inside a Luggin 

capillary, whose tip was placed next to the working electrode surface. A Watts 

type bath was used for electrochemical tests: NiSO4·6H2O 1.14 M, NiCl2·6H2O 

0.15 M, H3BO3 0.65 M and saccharine 1 g∙dm-3. All the solutions were prepared 

with double-distilled water and analytical grade reagents. All electrochemical 

experiments were performed at room temperature (T=25 °C). Bath composition 

and deposition temperature were chosen in order to obtain nanocrystalline Ni 

deposits. In fact, preliminary tests indicated that addition of saccharine and 

deposition at room temperature favours the reduction of Ni grain size, as 

measured by Scherrer’s equation, using the full-width at half maximum (FWHM) 

of diffraction peaks recorded from electrodeposited Ni layers with a Philips® PV 

1730 X-Ray Diffractometer (XRD) with λCu Kα=0.154 nm. Before each 

electrochemical experiment, solutions were deaerated by N2 bubbling inside the 

cell. CV was performed to characterize the electrochemical system and establish 

Ni deposition potential on Si. CV tests were carried out using an EG&G Princeton 

Applied Research® potentiostat/galvanostat model 273 controlled by a personal 

computer; the scanning rate was 20 mV/s. Electrodeposition experiments were 

performed potentiostatically with deposition potential in the range of -1.000 to -

3.000 V and carried out by an AMEL® model 549 potentiostat connected to an 

AMEL® model 568 programmable generator function for deposition times in the 

range 0.2 to 2 s. The current density (j) - time (t) curves measured during 


 
6

electrodeposition were recorded by a computer connected to the potentiostat. 

After electrodeposition, samples were investigated by a Philips® XL20 SEM 

equipped with an Edax® Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX) system. 

A schematic description of the present approach for maskless and resistless 

metal nanopatterning on Si is illustrated in Fig. 1. After native oxide layer 

removal by immersion in HF solution, Si surface is modified by nanoindentation 

or nanoscratching, which generates amorphous regions on Si. Finally Ni 

electrodeposition is carried out and a Ni layer is grown on unmodified Si regions. 

 

 

3. Results and Discussion. 

First, force (P) - penetration depth (h) curves were used to characterize Si 

substrates behaviour during nanoindentation. A typical example of recorded P-h 

curves is reported in Fig. 2. These curves are similar to those reported in the 

literature [15-17] and are related to the indentation parameters, to the substrate 

mechanical properties and to mechanically induced phase transformations in the 

substrate. It is known that in nanoindentation atmospheric phase Si-I (diamond 

structure) transforms into a metallic Si-II (b-Sn structure) phase on loading when 

a critical pressure (11-13 GPa) is attained under the indenter tip [20]. Other phase 

transformations are possible on unloading. The metallic phase can transform into 

a-Si or into high pressure polycrystalline phases Si-III (bc8, body-centered cubic 

structure) and Si-XII (r8, rhombohedral structure). These transformations are 

accompanied either by a discontinuity, called “pop-out”, or by a so called “elbow” 

in the unloading part of the P-h curve. Strong correlation has been found between 

the “pop-out” and the appearance of Si-III and Si-XII, while the presence of the 

“elbow” is linked to the appearance of a-Si [15]. It has been also proved that the 


 
7

above mentioned transformations on the Si indented volume can be controlled by 

controlling the indentation parameters: tip geometry, peak load, loading and 

unloading rates [21]. It was argued that Si-II→Si-XII/Si-III transformation can 

only occur when sufficient time for lattice reconstruction is given to the indented 

material. a-Si formation is therefore favoured by fast unloading. a-Si formation is 

also favoured when unloading is performed from low peak loads, as the volume of 

modified material is in such cases too low to allow a sufficient number of 

nucleation sites to be created for the reconstructive Si-II→Si-XII/Si-III transition. 

The recorded curves, such as the one reported in Fig. 2, with the presence of an 

“elbow” on the unloading part of the P-h curve, suggest that under present 

experimental conditions, and in particular the relatively low peak loads used, a-Si 

is formed during nanoindentation. Using the nanoindenter for nanoscratching, a-Si 

lines were also created on the Si surface. Formation of a-Si during lubricated and 

dry scratching has previously been observed [17-19].  

Fig. 3(a) reports the results of micro-Raman investigation on a scratched and 

on an unmodified Si region. Subtraction of the two spectra (scratched Si and 

reference unmodified Si) is reported in Fig. 3(b). The comparison with Raman 

measurements reported in the literature [15-17] confirms the attribution of the 

broad bands at 160, 310, 400 and 470 cm-1 to a-Si phase. 

Electrical characterisation of the a-Si layer formed during scratching was done 

by conductive AFM. Fig. 4 reports the current-voltage curves measured on both 

scratched and unmodified Si areas. The current-voltage curve measured on 

unmodified crystal Si is determined by the properties of the metal/semiconductor 

junction formed between the Pt of the AFM tip and the crystal n-Si: the initial 

exponential increase of the current with forward voltage bias (n-Si substrate 

negative with respect to AFM tip) is compatible with the presence of a Schottky 


 
8

barrier at the junction. On the other hand, no forward current is observed on 

scratched areas up to + 3.0 V forward voltage bias; while only a low value of 

current is present above this value of bias. 

Characteristics of the electrolyte/Si systems were investigated by CV tests, 

performed both for as received native oxide covered and for HF cleaned Si 

samples (Fig. 5). Ni electrodeposition starts at about -0.920 V on HF cleaned Si, 

while it starts at about - 1.300 V on native oxide covered Si. During the reverse 

scan Ni deposition continues also for more positive potential values; this is due to 

the fact that in the reverse scan Ni deposition occurs on the metallic layer 

deposited during the direct scan. An anodization peak, due to Ni dissolution, is 

observed during the reverse scan on HF cleaned Si substrates. No anodization 

peak is observed during the reverse scan on native oxide covered Si substrates, 

and SEM investigations and EDX analysis confirmed that no Ni dissolution 

occurs during the reverse scan on such samples. Hence, the presence of native 

SiO2 layer on the Si substrate surface shifts Ni deposition potential towards more 

negative values compared to oxide free Si surface during the direct scan, as well 

as hindering Ni dissolution during the reverse scan. The absence of anodization 

during the reverse scan of the CV in presence of SiO2 can be in fact explained as a 

result of the electric properties of the Ni/substrate junction formed during the 

forward scan of the CV. Current-voltage measurements on electrodeposited Ni/n-

Si and Ni/SiO2/n-Si samples showed a rectifying behaviour for both types of 

junctions, with an exponential increase of current as a function of voltage for 

forward bias (n-Si negative with respect to Ni layer, as during forward scan of the 

CV) and a constant value of current recorded for reverse bias (n-Si positive with 

respect to Ni layer, as during reverse scan of the CV). For Ni/n-Si samples, the 

value of measured reverse current (~ 1 mA cm-2) is high enough to allow Ni 


 
9

dissolution during the reverse scan of the CV. For Ni/SiO2/n-Si reverse current is 

extremely low (~1∙10-3 mA cm-2) and is not sufficient to allow significant Ni 

dissolution during the reverse scan of the CV. Similar properties of 

electrodeposited metal/semiconductor junctions were reported in other works [1-

4]. The effect of SiO2 interlayer on the reduction of the reverse current of the 

junctions is also expected [5]. 

Ni electrodeposition was then carried out on nanomechanically modified Si 

substrates. Fig. 6(a) shows an SEM image of a Si sample where Ni 

electrodeposition was performed after nanoindentation with peak load of 10000 

N. It is seen that a continuous Ni film is formed on the unmodified Si surface, 

whereas no film growth takes place in the indented region, as a result of 

amorphisation of Si and consequent reduced electrical conductivity, as described 

by Fig. 4. Fig. 6(b) reports an SEM image of a sample where indentation was 

performed with 1000 N. As it can be seen, also for this value of peak load 

amorphisation of Si was obtained. Some Ni deposition defects appear near the 

edges of the imprint, probably as a consequence of not complete amorphisation of 

Si in the indented area.  

This indicates the possible use of nanomechanical modification of Si surface 

and electrodeposition for fabricating patterned metal layers. Incidentally, this 

procedure can also be useful as a complementary technique for studying 

nanomechanically induced phase transformation on Si. This has been the subject 

of several investigations, by Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), Raman 

spectroscopy and electrical conductivity measurements by conductive indentation 

tips and Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) techniques [15, 22-25]. The extension 

and shape near surface of the Si region with significant reduction of electrical 

conductivity, due to microstructural changes, can be quickly evaluated as it 


 
10

corresponds to the region where no electrodeposition takes place. From Fig. 6(a) 

and (b) it can be seen that the amorphised region follows the shape of the indenter 

Berkovich tip. 

A typical j-t curve recorded during Ni electrodeposition is shown in Fig. 7. 

Cathodic current density rises up with t, reaches a maximum value and then starts 

falling. This is consistent with a deposition process that proceeds by nucleation 

followed by nuclei growth. Three dimensional nucleation and growth is often 

observed for metal electrodeposition on semiconductors, as a consequence of 

weak interaction between metal adatoms and substrate [26,27]. Film growth by 

coalescence of Ni nuclei is confirmed by SEM images (Fig. 6).    

Using the nanoindenter for nanoscratching and by controlling the nanoindenter 

tip movement in the x-y directions different a-Si patterns, such as lines, squares 

and arrays were created on Si. Electrodeposition followed, generating a Ni 

patterned layer. 

In Fig. 8 is reported the image of two 15 m x 30 m rectangular patterns 

separated by a 1 m wide line, fabricated by scanning the nanoindenter tip with a 

constant force of 300 N along the x direction followed by electrodeposition of a 

200 nm thick Ni film. The distance between the scanned lines, 100 m in this 

case, was chosen so that the amorphised lines were overlapping. This prevents Ni 

film to grow inside the scanned areas. Absence of Ni in the scanned area was 

verified by EDX measurements.  It is important to notice here that the masking 

properties of the amorphised Si are extremely good. No Ni electrodeposition 

occurred inside the patterns fabricated by scratching at constant force of 300 N 

for deposition potentials as negative as -3.00 V. This is a much more negative 

potential than the value at which electrodeposition starts on Si covered by native 

SiO2 (Fig. 4), increasing the deposition selectivity of the present approach 


 
11

compared to those based on masking by native oxide. Considering that 

electrodeposition starts on hydrogen-terminated samples at -0.920 V, this gives a 

wide range of deposition potentials to be used for Ni electrodeposition. It has also 

to be noticed that, if needed, the amorphous Si layer produced by nanoindentation 

and nanoscratching can be easily removed after electrodeposition by HF solution 

clean [19]. 

The smallest force at which no Ni deposition was observed on scratches was 

200 N. It can be inferred that for such load amorphisation of Si is still obtained. 

In [19] diamond tips with curvature radius of 300 – 1000 nm were used for 

scratching a Si substrate, forming a-Si patterns. It was found that vertical forces as 

low as 180 N are sufficient to create a layer of a-Si of few nanometres of 

thickness.    

Scanning the surface along further apart lines allowed the fabrication of 

parallel Ni lines such as those reported in Fig. 9. Continuous and well separated 

lines with several microns length and submicron width were electrodeposited. The 

quality of the deposits obtained with the present approach seems to be improved 

with respect to other methods based on the scratching through an oxide layer 

when considering the submicrometric range [9,10]. One of the reasons of such 

improvement can be found in the fact that in the present approach the deposition 

occurs on the unmodified, and hence flat, Si surface rather than on scratched, and 

hence rough, regions (e.g. grooves). Moreover, in [9,10] it was reported that 

nucleation starts at the AFM-scratch edges and metal lines result from the 

coalescence of two separate lines into a single one, as a consequence Si 

amorphisation in the centre of the groove. This effect does not represent an issue 

with the present approach, as the formation of a-Si is precisely the principle 


 
12

exploited to obtain nanopatterning. The metal lines formed by our approach do 

not present this double feature characteristic. 

The smallest line width obtained was below 100 nm, although these lines were 

discontinuous (Fig. 10). Finally, by scanning the nanoindenter in two 

perpendicular directions, arrays of Ni islands were electrodeposited. Fig. 11 

reports the SEM image of one of such arrays with nanometric Ni deposits. The 

array was obtained by scanning the nanoindenter tip with a force of 300 μN along 

lines with 250 nm separation first in the x and then in the y direction, followed by 

Ni electrodeposition at -2.300 V for 0.2 s. 

Further improvement on quality and scaling down of the patterning could be 

attained by additional investigation on the effect of scanning rate during 

scratching and by use of tips with different geometry. For what concerns the 

electrodeposition step, the effect of deposition potential and other additives 

besides of saccharine, on the nucleation and growth stage could be investigated in 

order to improve deposit quality. 

 

4. Conclusions.  

A novel maskless and resistless processing method for the fabrication of 

patterned metal films on Si was studied. The method combines nanomechanical 

surface modification techniques, for changing the substrate microstructure, and 

selective film growth by electrodeposition. Nanoindentation and nanoscratching 

were used to induce localized amorphisation on the surface of n-doped single 

crystal (100) Si substrates. The regions with modified microstructure were used to 

mask the substrates during Ni electrodeposition step from a Watts type bath, 

leading to the formation of patterned Ni layers. Several patterns with 

characteristic dimensions both in the micrometric and nanometric range were 


 
13

fabricated. As the size of the amorphous lines created during scratching depends 

on the applied force and on tip size, it is foreseen that by using shaper tips even 

smaller features could be created. Diamond nanoindentation tips with curvature 

radius smaller than 50 nm are already commercially available. In alternative an 

AFM with diamond or diamond coated tips could be used instead of a 

nanoindenter to attain even smaller feature sizes. 

 

 

Acknowledgments 

The authors are thankful to Dr. T. Bellezze, Prof. M. Cabibbo, Prof. R. Fratesi 

and Prof. S. Spigarelli for useful discussion, to Dr. A. Di Cristoforo for XRD 

measurements, to Dr. L. Gobbi and Dr. G. Barucca for their assistance with SEM 

investigations, to the Microwave and Optics Group of Electronic Engineering 

Dep. (Marche Polytechnic University) for conductive AFM measurements and to 

the Physics Dep. and C.I.G.S. Laboratory of the University of Modena and 

Reggio Emilia for Raman and FIB-SEM investigations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
14

 

 

 

 

References 

1. 
J. Carrey, K. Bouzehouane, J.M. George, C. Ceneray, T. Blon, M. Bibes, A. 

Vaurès, S. Fusil, S. Kenane, L. Vila, L. Piraux,  Appl. Phys. Lett. 81 (2002), 

760. 

2. 
P. Allongue and K Souteyrand, J. Electroanal. Chem ., 269 (1989) 361. 

3. 
G. Guler, O.Gullu, O.F. Bakkaloglu, A.Turut, Physica B 403 (2008) 2211. 

4. 
T. Zambelli, M. L. Munford, F. Pillier, M.-C. Bernard, P. Allongue, J. 

Electrochem. Soc., 148 (2001) C614. 

5. 
S.M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons, 

NewYork, 1981. 

6. 
M. Duch, J. Esteve, E. Gómez, R. Pérez-Castillejos, E. Vallés, J. 

Electrochem. Soc. 149 (2002) C201.  

7. 
W. Schwarzacher, O. I. Kasyutich, P. R. Evans, M. G. Darbyshire, Ge Yi, 

V. M. Fedosyuk, F. Rousseaux, E. Cambril, D. Decanini, J. Magn. Magn. 

Mater., 198-199 (1999) 185. 

8. 
L. Santinacci, T. Djenizian, P. Schmuki, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79 (2001) 1882. 

9. 
L. Santinacci, Y. Zhang, P. Schmuki,  Surf. Sci. 597 (2005) 11. 

10. 
L. Santinacci, T. Djenizian, H. Hildebrand, S. Ecoffey, H. Mokadad,  T. 

Campanella, P. Schmuki, Electrochim. Acta 48 (2003) 3123. 

11. 
Y. Zhang, E. Balaur, P. Schmuki, Electrochim. Acta 51 (2006) 3674. 

12. 
Y. Zhang, E. Balaur, S. Maupai, T. Djenizian, R. Boukherroub, P. Schmuki, 

Electrochem. Commun. 5 (2003) 337. 


 
15

13. 
T. Homma, N. Kubo, T. Osaka, Electrochim. Acta 48 (2003) 3115. 

14. 
N. Kubo, T. Homma, Y. Hondo, T. Osaka, T. Osaka, Electrochim. Acta 51 

(2005) 834. 

15. 
V. Domnich, Y. Gogotsi, S. Dub, Appl. Phys. Lett. 76 (2000) 2214. 

16. 
D. Ge, V. Domnich, Y. Gogotsi, J. Appl. Phys. 93 (2003) 2418. 

17. 
X. Li, J. Lu, Z. Wan, J. Meng, S. Yang, Trib. Int. 40 (2007) 360. 

18. 
J.W. Park, N. Kawasegi, N. Morita, D.W. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett. 85 (2004) 

1766. 

19. 
J.W. Park, S.S. Lee, B.S. So, Y. H. Jung, N. Kawasegi, N. Morita, D.W. 

Lee, J. Mater. Process. Technol. 187–188 (2007) 321. 

20. 
J.Z. Hu, L.D. Merkle, C.S. Menoni, I.L. Spain, Phys. Rev. B 34 (1986) 

4679. 

21. 
J. Jang, M.J. Lance, S. Wen, T. Y. Tsui, and G.M. Pharr, Acta Mater. 53 

(2005) 1759. 

22. 
S. Ruffell, J.E. Bradby, N. Fujisawa, J.S. Williams,  J. Appl. Phys. 101 

(2007) 083531. 

23. 
S. Ruffell, J.E. Bradby, J.S. Williams, J. Appl. Phys. 102 (2007) 063521. 

24. 
S. Ruffell, J.E Bradby, J.S.Williams, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89 (2006) 091919. 

25. 
S.T. Ho, Y.H. Chang, H.N. Lin,  J. Appl. Phys. 96 (2004) 3562. 

26. 
G. Oskam, J.G. Long, A. Natarajan and P.C. Searson, J. Phys. D: Appl. 

Phys. 31 (1998) 1927. 

27. 
E. Budevski, G. Staikov, W. J. Lorenz, Electrochim. Acta 45 (2000) 2559. 

 

 

 

 


 
16

 

List of figures captions 

Fig. 1. Schematic description of the process steps for maskless and resistless 

patterning: a) n-doped single crystal (100) Si substrate covered with native oxide 

layer; b) native oxide removal by immersion in HF solution; c) Si surface 

nanoindentation or nanoscratching by diamond tip, which generates amorphous 

regions on Si; c) Ni electrodeposition on unmodified Si regions. 

Fig. 2. Force (P) as function of penetration depth (h) plot for loading and 

unloading during nanoindentation of n-doped single crystal (100) Si substrate with 

a Berkovich diamond tip: peak load= 10000 N; loading-unloading rate= 1000 

N/s. The arrow marks the “elbow” in the unloading part of the curve, indicating 

formation of a-Si. 

Fig. 3. (a) Raman shift obtained from an unmodified crystal Si area (solid line) 

and on an area after nanoscratching with a constant force of 300 N (dotted line); 

(b) Raman shift obtained by subtraction of Raman spectra obtained from 

unmodified crystal Si area to the Raman spectra obtained from the scratched area. 

The arrows mark the bands corresponding to a-Si. 

Fig. 4. Current-voltage measurement by conductive AFM recorded on an 

unmodified crystal Si area (--) and on an area scratched with a constant force of 

300 N (--). Positive voltage bias corresponds to AFM tip at a positive potential 

with respect to Si substrate.   

Fig. 5. Cyclic voltammogram obtained for as received (dashed line) and HF 

cleaned (solid line) n-doped (100) Si samples in the Watts type bath. Scanning 

rate= 20 mVs-1. 

Fig. 6. SEM image of a Si sample after: (a) nanoindentation with peak load= 

10000 N and loading-unloading rate= 1000 N/s followed by Ni 


 
17

electrodeposition at -1.200 V for 4.0 s; (b) nanoindentation with peak load of 

1000 N and loading-unloading rate= 1000 N/s followed by Ni electrodeposition 

at -2.000 V for 0.6 s (b). 

Fig. 7. Current density transient (j-t) recorded during Ni electrodeposition from 

the Watts type bath at deposition potential of -1.600 V. 

Fig. 8. SEM image of two rectangular patterns in a 200 nm thick Ni film 

separated by 1 m wide Ni line, fabricated by scanning the nanoindenter tip with 

a constant force of 300 N along lines separated by 100 nm and Ni 

electrodeposition performed with potential of -1.300 V for 3.0 s. 

Fig. 9. SEM image at low (a) and high (b) magnification of parallel 200 nm wide 

and 100 nm thick Ni lines fabricated by scanning the nanoindenter with a constant 

force of 300 N along lines separated by 250 nm and Ni electrodeposition 

performed with potential of  -2.000 V for 0.6 s. 

Fig. 10. SEM image of parallel Ni lines with width lower than 100 nm. 

Nanoscratching was done by scanning the nanoindenter with constant force of 500 

N along parallel lines separated by 250 nm. Ni electrodeposition was done at a 

potential of -2.300 V for 0.2 s. 

Fig. 11. SEM image of an array of Ni deposits with lattice period of 250 nm, 

obtained by scanning the nanoindenter with a constant force of 300 N along two 

perpendicular directions and Ni electrodeposition performed with a deposition 

potential of -2.300 V for 0.2 s. 


