Inorganic synthesis-structure maps in zeolites

with machine learning and crystallographic

distances

Daniel Schwalbe-Koda,∗,† Daniel E. Widdowson,‡ Tuan Anh Pham,† and Vitaliy

A. Kurlin∗,‡

†Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, United States

‡University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom

E-mail: dskoda@llnl.gov; vitaliy.kurlin@gmail.com

Abstract

Zeolites are inorganic materials known for their diversity of applications, synthesis

conditions, and resulting polymorphs. Although their synthesis is controlled both by

inorganic and organic synthesis conditions, computational studies of zeolite synthesis

have focused mostly on organic template design. In this work, we use a strong distance

metric between crystal structures and machine learning (ML) to create inorganic syn-

thesis maps in zeolites. Starting with 253 known zeolites, we show how the continuous

distances between frameworks reproduce inorganic synthesis conditions from the liter-

ature without using labels such as building units. An unsupervised learning analysis

shows that neighboring zeolites according to our metric often share similar inorganic

synthesis conditions, even in template-based routes. In combination with ML classi-

fiers, we find synthesis-structure relationships for 14 common inorganic conditions in

zeolites, namely Al, B, Be, Ca, Co, F, Ga, Ge, K, Mg, Na, P, Si, and Zn. By explaining

the model predictions, we demonstrate how (dis)similarities towards known structures

1

arXiv:2307.10935v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  20 Jul 2023


can be used as features for the synthesis space. Finally, we show how these meth-

ods can be used to predict inorganic synthesis conditions for unrealized frameworks

in hypothetical databases and interpret the outcomes by extracting local structural

patterns from zeolites. In combination with template design, this work can accelerate

the exploration of the space of synthesis conditions for zeolites.

Introduction

Zeolites are inorganic porous materials widely recognized for their rich polymorphism and

numerous applications.1–3 Their porous structure provides unique opportunities to tailor

materials performance in catalysis, gas adsorption, selective membranes, and more.4–6 In

principle, the performance of zeolites for each application can be controlled by adequate

selection of polymorph and composition. However, this selection is often hindered by the

high-dimensional synthesis routes required to produce the materials.7 Zeolites are often syn-

thesized with hydrothermal treatments, with inorganic and organic precursors cooperating to

crystallize the nanoporous structure.8 Organic templates are known to direct the formation of

certain topologies, thus biasing the phase competition landscape to favor the best-matching

topology instead of another.8,9 Because of this effect, design of organic structure-directing

agents (OSDAs) led to multiple successful examples of phase-selective zeolite synthesis and

control of catalytic properties,10–12 especially when used in combination with computational

methods.13–19

On the other hand, computational design of inorganic synthesis conditions for zeolites has

not yet achieved the same impact as template design. Despite their promise in controlling ac-

tive site distribution,20 phase selectivity,21 Si/Al ratio,22 morphology,23 or lowering the cost

of syntheses,24 selection of inorganic conditions capable of synthesizing existing and novel

zeolites is not easily modeled.25 Recent progress in quantifying the role of inorganic synthe-

sis conditions in zeolites includes: coupling machine learning and literature extraction;26,27

obtaining structure-synthesis correlations from synthesis routes;21,28 predicting effects of in-

2


organic cations in heteroatom distributions;17,20 or using ML to control composition and

particle sizes from template-free syntheses.22 Nevertheless, their reliance on reported data

prevents them to propose inorganic conditions for the synthesis of novel or hypothetical

frameworks. Whereas some inorganic synthesis-structure relationships can be derived from

building units27,29,30 or alternative structural descriptors,28 automatically screening for new

structures in hypothetical zeolite databases requires bypassing human-crafted labels such

as building units. Furthermore, although graph-theoretical methods can detect composite

building units (CBUs) in arbitrary structures, their computational cost may be prohibitive

when exploring large datasets. Data-driven methods based in the topology of the structure

also provide information on key factors that govern kinetics of zeolite crystallization,31,32

but do not immediately inform their synthesis conditions. Finally, aggregate framework in-

formation such as density-energy plots33,34 or local interatomic distances35 provide few cor-

relations between different inorganic synthesis conditions and targeted frameworks, which

motivate new data-driven approaches to synthesizability prediction.36 Thus, advancing to-

wards a priori discovery of novel zeolite frameworks requires developing methods to: (1)

uncover synthesis-structure relationships in zeolites; (2) efficiently explore the inorganic syn-

thesis space of zeolites; and (3) bypass the absence of labeled data in hypothetical zeolite

databases.

In this work, we correlate inorganic synthesis conditions to zeolite structure using a

mathematically strong representation for comparing periodic crystals, the Average Mini-

mum Distance (AMD),37 derived from the Pointwise Distance Distribution (PDD)38 of crys-

tal structures (see Fig. 1). The PDD is independent of a unit cell, continuous under small

perturbations, theoretically complete for generic crystals, and distinguished all periodic crys-

tals in the Cambridge Structural Database. Importantly, it can be computed much more

efficiently than graph-based approaches, only requiring a fast nearest neighbor search.39 We

show that the AMD vectors of zeolites can be used to predict inorganic synthesis conditions

and recall a comprehensive dataset of synthesis conditions from the literature. Then, we

3


demonstrate that unsupervised and supervised machine learning (ML) methods can be used

to create structure-synthesis relationships independently from OSDA design. Finally, we

propose inorganic synthesis conditions to realize hypothetical frameworks based on distances

toward structures whose synthesis is known, thus proposing interpretable synthesis-structure

models to guide the synthesis of new zeolites.

a
b

interatomic distance

interatomic distance

nearest neighbor index
nearest neighbor index

structural 
distance

prob.

Si

Al

F

NaOH

temp

time

1.
BEA

Si

Al

H₂O

NaOH

temp

time

2.
MOR

Si

Al

H₂O

NaOH

temp

time

N.
CHA

...

Si

literature
synthesis matrix

distance matrix

unsupervised 
learning

supervised learning

synthesis prediction

Si
P
F
Na

P
F
Na
Ge

Figure 1: Computational methods used to extract relationships between zeolite
structures and their associated inorganic synthesis conditions. a, Using the concept
of AMD and the distance between these invariants, we compute a distance matrix between
known zeolites. b, This information is combined with literature data and ML methods to
correlate structural patterns with inorganic conditions.

Results and Discussion

Inorganic synthesis maps from unsupervised learning

Designing synthesis-structure relationships in zeolites has long relied on intuitive patterns

emerging from their natural structure. For example, some CBUs are typically known to be

synthesized by different inorganic conditions, such as d6r in the presence of sodium ions or

d4r in the presence of germanium or fluorine. Nevertheless, not all structures produced with

4


certain inorganic agents exhibit the same CBUs, and CBUs are not necessarily realized only

by one element. Data-driven methods showed promise in connecting zeolite synthesizability

to their local structure35 or accelerating their screening,36 but interpreting large databases of

structures can be challenging depending on the selected data representations. For instance,

subgraph isomorphism used to extract building units is an NP-type problem, and requires

creating a predefined set of substructures that are being searched for. On the other hand,

local structural fingerprints such as the Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP)40 may

be unable to distinguish between certain atomic environments.41

To address these problems, we created a procedure to compare zeolites and extract

synthesis-structure relationships without relying on any structural labels except for the

atomic positions (Fig. 1). Using the concept of PDDs and AMDs, we calculated the distance

between two zeolite structures by comparing their AMD (see Methods). This comparison

between average local environments is computationally efficient but descriptive enough to

distinguish all crystals in the CSD.38 Then, we assumed that zeolites sharing similar lo-

cal structures exhibit similar inorganic synthesis conditions. To test this hypothesis, we

computed the distance matrix between 253 known frameworks in the International Zeolite

Association (IZA) database using AMD, and then performed a qualitative analysis of the

results. We found that the AMDs correlated weakly with differences of density and with

the SOAP distance between structures, but showed almost no correlation with graph-based

distances from previous work42 (Fig. S1). Moreover, we noted that zeolites sharing the

lowest distances according to our metric have often been synthesized together (see Table S1

in the Supporting Information). Recovering pairs of structurally similar frameworks such as

ITH-ITR, SBS-SBT, or MWF-PAU at low distance already suggests that the similarity

metric is qualitatively sound. To generalize this observation, we charted a map of zeolite

structures based on their distances. Figure 2 shows the minimum spanning tree created by

converting the AMD distance matrix into a graph with weighted edges. Although the tree

shows discrete connections and may not be accurate in the presence of outliers, it facilitates

5


a qualitative interpretation of the results and may provide insights about synthesis-structure

maps. Even without considering synthesis labels of the data in Fig. 2, known relation-

ships between zeolites emerge naturally from the structural tree map. Zeolites known for

their similar building patterns are clustered together in the minimum spanning tree, demon-

strating that their AMD values capture the space of zeolites without learnable features.

Examples of such clusters include the ABC-6 zeolites, structures containing lov building

units, six-membered rings frameworks (e.g., GIU cluster), Ge- or boron-containing zeolites

(e.g., BEC or IRR and SFN-SSF branch, respectively), to name a few (see also Fig. S3

for a visual guide). Similarly, structural outliers such as the low-density RWY or JSR, or

interrupted frameworks such as -CLO, -SYT, and -ITV tend to cluster together, as their

distances to all other zeolites is high (Fig. S2). At the same time, other interrupted frame-

works produced in different synthesis conditions, such as -IRY, -IFU, or -IFT synthesized

with germanium, appear along with other germanosilicates in the synthesis map, not only

with other interrupted frameworks. This ability to traverse the structural space in a contin-

uous way allows drawing non-obvious connections that may be overlooked by building units

alone. For example, the MEI framework lies within the SBS, SBT, SAO, and SBE cluster

despite not having common CBUs with any of these zeolites. Nevertheless, the MEI struc-

ture also has large pores and building patterns that could help inform the synthesis of other

of these zeolites. In fact, the recent synthesis of PST-32 (SBT) and PST-2 (SBS/SBT)

aluminosilicate zeolites was performed in the presence of sodium,24 similar to the original

inorganic synthesis of MEI, although at lower Si/Al ratios.

Despite the usefulness of the tree map in connecting zeolites with similar synthesis con-

ditions, the visual analysis cannot determine whether the map consistently provides new

insights on the synthesis of zeolites. To improve this qualitative analysis, we performed a

hierarchical clustering of the data to quantify whether the structural distance metric clusters

the data according to the literature synthesis conditions (see Methods). The dendrogram of

the AMD values (Figs. S5 and S6) shows how zeolites are related to each other based on

6


frac. Si-based recipes

0%
100%

Figure 2: Minimum spanning tree of 253 zeolites in the IZA database according
to the L∞ metric on AMD vectors of length k = 100 atomic neighbors. Each
framework is a node, and edges minimize the total length of a tree. Darker (lighter) colors
indicate that silicon is more (less) frequent in the synthesis of each zeolite.

distances, thus providing a more quantitative view to the minimum spanning tree of Fig. 2.

Then, to create labels for synthesis conditions, we started with a dataset of extensive synthe-

sis conditions extracted from the zeolite literature from Jensen et al.43 After augmenting the

data with frameworks not typically reported in publications, such as those found as miner-

als, we analyzed the frequency of occurrence of each synthesis condition for each framework.

Although the initial dataset had information on both organic and inorganic conditions, we

disregarded the organic templates when labeling the data, thus assuming that inorganic and

organic conditions can, to an extent, be predicted independently of each other. Furthermore,

given the scarcity of data for some synthesis conditions, we focused only on the 14 inorganic

conditions that have been used to synthesize at least 10 zeolites, namely Al, B, Be, Ca, Co,

F, Ga, Ge, K, Mg, Na, P, Si, and Zn. Finally, we verify whether flat clusters formed by

7


points with a maximum distance of each other share the same positive labels. This intuition

is quantified by computing the homogeneity between data points given clusters formed by

a given distance threshold44 (see Methods). If all clusters had only positive labels, their

homogeneity would be 1, whereas zero homogeneity indicates perfect mixing of positive and

negative labels. Figure 3a shows that clusters with at least one positive data point become

more homogeneous as the distance threshold decreases. This supports the qualitative view

that structures considered similar according to the AMD values also share similar synthesis

conditions more often than not. On the other hand, as clusters become larger and the in-

creasingly dissimilar structures are grouped together, the homogeneity decreases. Whereas

the distribution of labels for some inorganic agents such as Al, Si, Be, F, or Na exhibit

higher homogeneity at low distances (see Fig. S7), others such as Co, Mg, or Zn show little

predictive power. This suggests that structural distances computed with the AMD have

stronger correlations with certain synthesis conditions than with others. Although the lack

of true negative data points may also influence the computed homogeneity, these results

demonstrate quantitatively that some synthesis-structure relationships can be established in

zeolites using AMDs.

Additional investigations of the data explain the patterns in homogeneity obtained above.

Figure 3b shows how the minimum spanning tree can be visualized according to the frequency

of certain inorganic conditions in zeolite synthesis (see Fig. S4 for complete results). For

example, some frameworks realizable with Ge or Na form their own groups in the tree, as

also illustrated by the subclusters in dendrograms (Fig. 3c). Indeed, zeolites such as BEC,

ISV, ITT or IWR are typical examples of large- and extra-large pore structures synthesized

using germanium. Similarly, denser phases such as GIU, FAR, LOS etc. are often obtained

in sodium-mediated syntheses. For common synthesis conditions such as silicon, trends can

be derived from the visualization of silicon-free routes. The labeled trees from Figs. 2 and

S4 show that non-silica zeolites are often located in similar regions of the structure space.

Groups formed by zeolites such as NAT, EDI, and THO, or AFO, AEL, AHT show that

8


Figure 3: Unsupervised learning for inorganic synthesis of known zeolites. a, Clus-
ter homogeneity of zeolites for selected elements (see also Fig. S7). b, Minimum spanning
tree of zeolites (Fig.
2) labeled according to frequency of Ge or Na in the synthesis of
each zeolite (see also Fig. S4). Darker (lighter) colors indicate that the inorganic synthesis
condition is more (less) frequent in the synthesis of each zeolite. c, Subset of the zeolite
dendrogram for selected regions of the minimum spanning tree.

non-silica zeolites also share structural patterns that may be harder to obtain in silica-based

structures.

This unsupervised analysis demonstrates that our distance metric relates zeolites with

similar inorganic synthesis conditions without any learnable parameters. Although zeolite

structures contain several outliers and lack true negative data, the structural patterns still

provide a strong prior for exploring the synthesis conditions. In particular, as inorganic

synthesis conditions can be inferred by the similarity between crystal structures, they can

also help downselect structures for zeolites yet to be realized.

9


Interpretable classifiers for predicting inorganic synthesis condi-

tions

One disadvantage of the pure unsupervised learning approach is the inefficient utilization of

the available labels. Although similarity between crystal structures is a good indicator of

common synthesis conditions, the dissimilarity between structures can also provide insights

on which structures are less likely to be synthesized with a given composition. To perform

this analysis, we use the labeled data to train supervised learning methods that predict

the synthesis conditions of a zeolite given its distances to known frameworks. Specifically,

we trained logistic regression, random forest, and XGBoost classifiers on literature data to

predict each class label individually. However, training models on the literature labels has

two caveats: (1) the data is often unbalanced, i.e., the number of positive data points is

much smaller than the number of negative data points; and (2) the negative data is not

truly negative, as its lack of literature reporting does not imply that a zeolite cannot be

synthesized under the synthesis conditions in analysis. To account for these problems, we

trained balanced classifiers by subsampling the dataset for each synthesis conditions, thus

ensuring that training sets had the same proportion of positive and negative data points,

but validation/test sets were allowed to have more negative samples than positive ones. In

that case, because models were tested on different negative splits, they were prevented from

memorizing “negative” data points as truly negative, as exemplified by the case of MEI

zeolite above. Finally, for each synthesis condition, we performed an extensive hyperparam-

eter optimization for each of the three classifiers, evaluating the models according to their

accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, and areas under the receiving operating characteristic

(ROC) and precision-recall (PR) curves.

The results of the hyperparameter search are summarized in Fig. S8. Whereas no clas-

sifier outperforms the other in all tasks, XGBoost models often show the best metrics of

ROC and PR areas under the curve (AUC) for a variety of synthesis conditions. When the

results for the XGBoost classifier are visualized according to all metrics at once (Fig. 4a),

10


they demonstrate how the best hyperparameters lead to adequate figures of merit based on

results from the validation set (see also Fig. S9). When evaluated against a held-out test

set, the model with best set of hyperparameters still exhibits high ROC and PR AUCs for

a variety of synthesis conditions (Fig. S10). Nevertheless, this set of hyperparameters is far

from being the only one that performs well in these conditions (Fig. S11). As discussed in

the analysis using unsupervised learning, the ability to correctly label zeolites whose syn-

thesis contains Co or Zn is smaller than other labels, as indicated by the worse performance

of all classifiers in labeling these conditions. However, some synthesis conditions that were

not well-predicted by the unsupervised learning method, such as Mg, can now be predicted

using XGBoost models, despite its low recall (Fig. S10). These results show that ML clas-

sifiers can predict inorganic synthesis conditions using distances towards known zeolites as

features. This has useful implications, as it bypasses the need to create general representa-

tions for zeolites, and instead uses a set of points in the space as references for new synthesis

conditions.

To interpret the outcomes of the classifiers, explainability techniques can be used to probe

what features most affect a positive (or negative) classification of a zeolite within certain

synthesis conditions. Given that the input features are distances towards known frameworks,

a trained classifier decides how to assign a label to an input structure based on its similarity

values. Using the Shapley value method (SHAP), we analyze what distances most affect

the classification of a zeolite into a given class. As each SHAP value indicates how much

each feature affects the probability of classifying a framework into a given class, we compute

the Pearson correlation coefficient between the actual feature value and the SHAP value

for each one of the inorganic synthesis conditions. This quantifies whether being close to

a particular framework (feature) increases or decreases the likelihood of being assigned a

positive label. The results for the interpretability of XGBoost classifiers are shown in Fig.

4b (see also Fig. S12 and S13). As the correlation coefficient between AMD and SHAP

values are computed on a per-feature (thus per-zeolite) basis, the nodes from the tree map

11


Figure 4: Supervised learning of inorganic synthesis in known zeolites. a, Results of
hyperparameter optimization of XGBoost classifiers for selected inorganic conditions. Each
thin gray line is one set of parameters for the XGBoost models. The pink line represents the
best performance according to the ROC and PR AUC. The figures of merit are: accuracy
(Acc), precision (Prec), recall (Rec), F1-score (F1), receiving operating characteristic AUC
(ROC), and precision-recall AUC (PR). The figure of merit has value 0 at the center and
1 at the border of the circle. b, Pearson correlation coefficient between AMD and SHAP
values. A negative correlation (green) indicates that smaller distances lead to higher SHAP
values, and thus contribute to classifying the zeolite with a positive label.

in Fig. 2 are colored according to these coefficients. In this plot, a negative correlation (in

green color) indicates that low distances increase the SHAP value and thus the likelihood of

being classified as a positive label. Conversely, a positive correlation (in pink color) with a

feature indicates that a given zeolite is more likely to be synthesized with a given synthesis

condition if it is distant from the featurizing structure. The results not only support the

observations highlighted by the unsupervised learning methods, but also complement them

with new insights. For instance, zeolites synthesized with Ca and K have a wide overlap of

positive and negative correlations (Fig. S13), possibly due to the clustering of minerals in

12


the tree map. There is also an overlap between boron-containing zeolites and germanium-

containing zeolites, especially in the ISV branch. This result could be interesting if validated

in practice, especially as the use of boron may enable the removal of Ge from the synthesis

of certain zeolites, such as BEC. The central branch characterized by Ge-containing zeolites

(such as BEC, ISV, IRR, ITT, see Fig. 2) also have features that correlate with F or

Mg, but not Al or Ca. On the other hand, Be-containing zeolites are often complementary

to Si-containing zeolites, as the former are found only in specific clusters or outliers in the

tree map. This further supports the fact that the classifiers are able to obtain correlations

beyond existing heuristics, thus providing data-driven ways to guide inorganic synthesis in

zeolites.

Proposing inorganic synthesis conditions for hypothetical zeolites

Given that structural similarity is correlated to inorganic synthesis in zeolites and that

supervised learning methods are able to predict synthesis using only distances as inputs,

we can use the models developed in this work to propose inorganic synthesis conditions for

hypothetical zeolites. This approach complements previous work on the design of OSDAs for

frameworks, thus enabling inorganic synthesis conditions to be predicted in silico whenever

a new framework is proposed.
To do that, we used the dataset of 331,171 hypothetical

zeolites proposed by Pophale et al.,33 known as the “Deem dataset.” As structural features

and densities from the hypothetical zeolites optimized with force fields may deviate from the

experimental ones, we used the IZA and hypothetical zeolites from Erlebach et al.,45 which

employed a neural network force field trained at the SCAN level of density functional theory

calculations to reoptimize the hypothetical zeolites. Then, by comparing the hypothetical

structures against all known zeolites, we created a distance matrix that is used as input

for the unsupervised and supervised learning methods shown in the previous section. As

in the case of known zeolites, AMDs are correlated with differences of density, but are not

solely determined by them (Fig. S14). Using AMDs, a low-dimensional map can be created

13


for all hypothetical structures, thus providing an intuitive way to visualize the space of

structures. Figure S15 shows a 2D projection of the distribution of hypothetical zeolites

based on their distance matrix using UMAP. This plot shows that distance features are able

to sort the space of zeolites according to energy and density despite not using this information

as explicit inputs. The visualization also illustrates that most hypothetical frameworks do

not have neighboring known structures. While 105 of all known zeolites have at least one

other known zeolite up to 0.1 ˚A away (45% of structures, see Fig. S6), only about 36,112

of the 331,171 hypothetical structures have at least one known zeolite as neighbor when the

same distance threshold is used (11% of zeolites in the dataset). This illustrates how the

space of enumerated zeolites is often populated with structures far from known structural

patterns of zeolites, as also demonstrated by previous studies (see also Fig. S16).

As demonstrated in this work, zeolites in the neighborhood of known frameworks are

likely to share similar synthesis conditions as those known structures. Thus, downselecting

frameworks for given synthesis conditions can benefit from the unsupervised and supervised

methods developed here. This approach can be used in combination with previous “syn-

thesizability metrics” of zeolites, such as local interatomic distances35 or other data-driven

predictions.46 However, we chose to evaluate them independently, as these synthesizabil-

ity predictions do not take into account that certain known frameworks may be considered

“unfeasible” depending on the synthesis conditions.34,47 For instance, structures containing

three-connected rings, such as those with building units lov or vsv, could be ranked as “un-

synthesizable,” despite being achieved with beryllium or borogermanate conditions. Thus,

to propose synthesis conditions for zeolites, we evaluated all hypothetical frameworks for

all synthesis conditions using an ensemble of 100 binary classifiers per inorganic condition

(see Methods). As each classifier is trained on different negative data splits, the resulting

classification varies for each model, allowing us to assess the degree of agreement between the

models. By taking the average of the predictions, we obtain the probability of synthesizing

the zeolite with that synthesis condition.

14


Figure 5: Selection of hypothetical zeolites using AMD values and inorganic con-
ditions. a, Selection of LTA-like zeolites according to predicted Si-based recipes. Only
the 1000 closest points to LTA are shown in this graph. b, Unusual cages that distinguish
the two hypothetical structures #308,105 and #313,030 and determine their synthesis to
be more/less likely to be successful under Si conditions, respectively. c, Three examples of
hypothetical zeolites selected based on the predicted synthesis conditions. Only five (Al, Be,
Ge, K, Si) of the 14 synthesis conditions are shown.

Figure 5a depicts the distribution of hypothetical zeolites with Si-based recipes in the

neighborhood of LTA zeolite. As all distances between known and hypothetical zeolites had

been already computed, we can use both the distances and the class probabilities as criteria

for navigating the space of hypothetical structures. This navigation using reference materials

instead of features facilitates the selection process and can also inform their synthesis. For

example, Figs.
5a,b illustrate two different hypothetical zeolites in the neighborhood of

LTA. Although both have low distance towards LTA (compare with dendrogram in Fig.

S6), structure #308,105 is predicted to be more likely to be synthesized as a silicate than

#313,030. Both contain the lta and sod cages characteristic of the LTA zeolite, but differ by

15


the presence of a second cage similar to sod, shown in Fig. 5b. Whereas this new building unit

resembles an expanded sod cage with distorted six-membered rings in #308,105, hypothetical

framework #313,030 shows a new cage, formed by the merging of two sod cages, not seen

in known zeolites. This increased distance towards known structural patterns drives the

prediction of feasible synthesis using Si as unlikely, even when the distance towards the LTA

zeolite is lower. This example shows how the combination of AMD values and classifier

predictions facilitates the exploration of hypothetical zeolites using reference structures.

Beyond exploration of the zeolite space, the models also uncover existing and new

synthesis-structure relationships. Figure 5c shows three examples of hypothetical frame-

works predicted to be synthesized using three different elements: Be, Ge, and K. To obtain

these frameworks, we filtered only frameworks within densities of 14 and 17 T/1000 ˚A3 that

are predicted to have 100% probability of synthesis with the given element. Then, we ranked

the frameworks by their relative energy. Despite not using explicit labels on the CBUs, the

supervised learning models recovered the known heuristics of building units and inorganic

synthesis conditions. For instance, framework #261,338, predicted to be synthesized in pres-

ence of Be, is formed mostly by lov building units, as found in other Be-zeolites such as RSN,

LOV, or NAB. This same framework is predicted to be unlikely as a silicate, possibly fol-

lowing the trends seen in JSR or NPT structures. Hypothetical zeolite #64,550, predicted

to be synthesized with germanium, also shows features similar to known ones. In addition to

its three-dimensional pore structure, with 12×12×10 intersecting pores, the structure shows

the d4r CBU typical of other structurally similar germanosilicates, such as POS or UOV,

but with 7 symmetrically inequivalent T sites. Finally, one unrealized framework predicted

to be synthesized with potassium is structure #303,768. Although this hypothetical struc-

ture does not exhibit typical CBUs, the local structures similar to d8r CBUs are predicted

to be favored by K, in analogy with similar relationships in known zeolites. This demon-

strates how data-driven models can not only recover known relationships between CBUs and

inorganic conditions, but also propose new synthesis-structure relationships in zeolites based

16


on distance patterns towards known structures. When used to analyze the entire space of

hypothetical frameworks, the models show that the distribution of predicted inorganic syn-

thesis conditions is uneven across the space of zeolites (Fig. S19). For instance, whereas

about 27% of all known zeolites can be synthesized with germanium, according to the liter-

ature dataset we used in this work, only 8% of the hypothetical zeolites have probability of

being synthesizable under Ge conditions of at least 80%. Similarly, the space of hypothetical

structures is surprisingly lacking in structures predicted to be synthesizable with sodium.

While about 45% of all known structures have at least one sodium-based synthesis, 17%

of hypothetical structures are predicted to be realizable with Na given the 80% threshold

probability. As most enumerated datasets are often created without considering synthesis

conditions,48 comprehensive enumerations may introduce biases in structures that do not

reflect the space of zeolite synthesis typically considered in practice. Thus, in combination

with template design17 and property screening,49,50 our methods to predict inorganic syn-

thesis conditions in zeolites may help in synthesizing unrealized frameworks with targeted

properties.

Conclusions

Mapping the space of inorganic conditions in materials synthesis is an outstanding challenge

due to the complexity of chemical interactions during synthesis.
In the case of zeolites,

synthesis conditions are known to affect structural patterns in the materials, but finding

correlations between structural patterns and inorganic syntheses often relies on heuristics.

In this work, we used unsupervised and supervised learning methods to propose inorganic

synthesis conditions for zeolite synthesis. In particular, we showed how a mathematically

strong distance metric between crystals can predict inorganic synthesis conditions in zeolites.

This enables structural comparisons beyond human-crafted labels of building units or pore

sizes/topologies. Clustering techniques demonstrate that our metric consistently recalls the

17


inorganic synthesis conditions from literature datasets, thus providing predictive power even

in the absence of labels. Then, we show that ML classifiers can predict synthesis conditions

of a given framework based on its distribution of distances towards known structures. The

classifiers were used to predict 14 different synthesis conditions for known and unrealized

zeolites. When explaining the predictions, we showed how ML classifiers analyze synthesis

conditions also from the dissimilarity between crystals, as well as from the similarity. The

results from the explainability analysis reveals overlaps in inorganic synthesis conditions,

such as boron and germanium, as well as complementary relationships, such as silicon and

beryllium. Finally, we showcased how our methods can be used to predict inorganic synthe-

sis conditions for hypothetical zeolites, facilitating the downselection of new structures for

experimental attempts. This combination of data-driven methods can create a pathway for

full in silico prediction of zeolite synthesis beyond the design of organic templates.

Methods

Pointwise Distance Distributions and Average Minimum Distances

Any periodic crystal structure is modeled as a periodic set S of atomic centers considered as

zero-sized points, with atomic types as optional labels. Any linear basis of vectors v1, v2, v3

in 3-dimensional space generates a lattice Λ = {c1v1 + c2v2 + c3v3 | ci are integers} and unit

cell U = {t1v1 + t2v2 + t3v3 | 0 ≤ ti < 1}. Any finite motif of points M ⊂ U defines the

periodic point set S = {p+v | p ∈ M, v ∈ Λ}. This conventional representation of a periodic

crystal S by a unit cell and a motif is ambiguous because infinitely many different pairs

(cell, motif) generate periodic sets that are equivalent up to rigid motion (a composition of

translations and rotations). Fixing any reduced cells leads to unavoidable discontinuities51

even for 2-dimensional lattices.

The ambiguity of crystal representations was theoretically resolved for all periodic point

sets in any dimension by the complete isoset52 invariant. We define below the computation-

18


ally faster Pointwise Distance Distribution (PDD) invariant, which distinguished all (more

than 670,000) periodic crystals in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) through more

than 200 billion pairwise comparisons within two days on a typical desktop computer.

Fix a number k ≥ 1 of atomic neighbors. Our experiments on zeolites and the CSD used

k = 100. Let S be a periodic set with a motif M of points p1, . . . , pm. For each point pi, write

down the sequence of increasing distances di1 ≤ · · · ≤ dik to its k nearest neighbors in the full

infinite set S without considering any extended cell or cut-off radius. Collect these sequences

of distances into an m × k matrix and lexicographically order the rows. If any l of the rows

coincide (usually due to extra symmetries), collapse them into a single row with the weight

l/m and put these weights into an additional first column (unique rows have weight 1/m).

The resulting m × (k + 1) matrix PDD(S; k) is called the Pointwise Distance Distribution,

a statistical distribution of rows with weights describing each point’s environment. As an

example, Fig. 6 shows the computation for a point in the square lattice S whose first k = 8

neighbours have distances 1, 1, 1, 1 (in green) and
√

2,
√

2,
√

2,
√

2 (in blue).

Figure 6: Computational pipeline of PDD is illustrated for a 2-dimensional square lattice.

The Average Minimum Distance AMD(S; k) is the vector obtained by taking the weighted

average of the last k columns in PDD(S; k), so AMD is a single vector of k average distances.

To compare two AMD vectors of the same length, our experiments used the L∞ metric equal

to the maximum absolute difference of corresponding coordinates. For a metric on PDDs,

we use the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD)53 with the L∞ metric on rows. If any point of

S is perturbed in its ε-neighborhood, then PDD(S; k) changes by at most 2ε in the EMD

19


metric. If a periodic set S is generic, which is achievable by almost any perturbation of

atoms, then S can be reconstructed from the number m of motif points, a (basis of a) lattice

Λ and PDD(S; k) with a known upper bound on k. For the details on these results, see

Definition C5 and proofs of Theorems 4.3 and 4.4 in the extended version of Ref. 54.

Zeolite structures data

The dataset of 253 known zeolite structures used in the unsupervised learning method was

obtained from the International Zeolite Association (IZA) database.55 The dataset of hypo-

thetical frameworks used in this work was developed by Pophale et al.,33 and re-optimized

using a neural network force field trained on DFT-SCAN data by Erlebach et al.45 Because

not all of the 253 known zeolites used previously were optimized by Erlebach et al., we

used their subset of 236 known frameworks when computing distance matrices from the

hypothetical frameworks and the known frameworks.

Following the notation from the IZA, known zeolites are named in this manuscript ac-

cording to their three-letter code in bold typeface. Known CBUs are represented with their

three-letter code in lowercase and italic typeface.

Literature data

Literature data was obtained from public datasets of zeolite synthesis conditions from Jensen

et al.,43 which has been validated by Schwalbe-Koda et al. for the computational design of

OSDAs.17 Whereas in those works only zeolite-OSDA pairs were considered, in this work

only relationships between zeolites and non-organic synthesis conditions are analyzed. As the

dataset was produced by collecting literature data from over 60 years of studies in synthetic

zeolites, several natural frameworks were omitted from the table, as well as newer structures

not captured at the time of this study.
To address this problem, we manually inserted

new rows on the table with the composition of the missing structures. The compositions

were obtained with manual verification of the synthesis conditions in articles describing the

20


mineral/synthetic zeolite, as also shown in the online IZA database. The resulting, cleaned

data used in this study is available for download (see Code and Data Availability).

In the literature analysis, a zeolite is classified as having a certain synthesis condition

when at least 25% of its synthesis recipes exhibit that condition (excluding OSDAs). This

label is used as a categorical variable when performing the classification task.

Unsupervised learning

A minimum spanning tree between zeolites was constructed by first creating a fully

connected, undirected graph with weighted edges, where weights correspond to the distances

between two structures. The tree was then obtained using NetworkX’s (v. 2.5)56 minimum

spanning tree algorithm, which minimizes the total length of the tree.

The dendrogram of known zeolites was produced by creating a linkage matrix from

the distance matrix using the Ward algorithm as implemented in SciPy (v. 1.10.0).57 The

resulting clusters in Fig. S6 were obtained by forming flat clusters with maximum AMD

distance of a given threshold.

The homogeneity of the clustering was computed by calculating the Shannon entropy

of flat clusters created with a given threshold,44 as implemented in scikit-learn (v. 1.2.0).58

As the literature dataset is not balanced and lack true negative points, the homogeneity was

only computed for clusters containing at least one positive data point. This ensures that a

large homogeneity corresponds to recall of positive data points, which prevents biasing this

metric in imbalanced datasets.

Dimensionality reduction was performed using UMAP,59 as implemented in the

umap-learn package in Python (v.
0.5.3).
The 2D UMAP plot was produced by com-

paring hypothetical frameworks using the cosine distance of their normalized distances to

IZA structures, and using 10 neighbors as parameter.

21


Supervised learning

Classification of inorganic synthesis conditions was performed by training separate clas-

sifiers for each synthesis condition. The features used during training were the distances

towards the 253 known frameworks, as computed with the AMD method described above.

To obtain a statistically meaningful result, only elements used to synthesize at least 10 ze-

olites were considered. In particular, 14 inorganic conditions are considered: Al, B, Be, Ca,

Co, F, Ga, Ge, K, Mg, Na, P, Si, and Zn.

Train-validation-test sets were created starting with a 60-20-20 ratio, respectively, then

subsampling the training set to have an equal number of points with positive and negative

labels. Although techniques such as reweighting or resampling could have been employed to

obtained balanced training sets, removing data points is a simple approach that prevents clas-

sifiers from treating negative data as “true negative”, resembling positive-unlabeled learning

strategies.

Hyperparameter optimization of synthesis classifiers was performed using a grid-

search method over relevant spaces of hyperparameters for logistic regression, random forest,

and XGBoost60 methods. The full range of hyperparameters investigated in this hyperpa-

rameter search is shown in Tables S2, S3 and S4, following the notation in the scikit-learn

(v. 1.2.0) and xgboost (v. 1.7.5) Python packages. Model performances were compared

using the same dataset splits, and the best model is selected according to its validation

performance. The results on the paper showcase the performance on held-out test data.

One of the best models to classify synthesis conditions of zeolites was the XGBoost

model with the following hyperparameters: colsample bytree = 0.5, learning rate =

0.1, max depth = 6, min child weight = 1, n estimators = 200, subsample = 0.5.

This model and set of hyperparameters showed good performance across a range of inorganic

synthesis conditions, as evaluated by the accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, area under the

receiving operator characteristic curve (ROC AUC), and area under the precision-recall curve

(PR AUC). In particular, the best model was selected to maximize the ROC AUC and PR

22


AUC for the balanced classifiers. As a comparison, the performance metrics and their base-

lines of unbalanced classifiers — thus trained on dataset splits with an uneven number of

positive/negative labels — are shown in Fig. S10.

Explainability of the classifiers was computed using the Shapley value method (SHAP)61

under the TreeExplainer framework,62 as implemented in the shap Python package (v.

0.41.0).
The interventional feature perturbation method was used without limit for the

tree explainer. Then, correlations between the SHAP values and the distance features were

computed for each synthesis condition. To ensure that the correlations are not artifacts of

particular train splits, we report the average correlation obtained from an ensemble of 100

XGBoost classifiers trained on splits with different negative data points.

Acknowledgement

This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence

Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. D.S.-K. ac-

knowledges funding from the Laboratory Directed Research and Development (LDRD) Pro-

gram at LLNL under project tracking code 22-ERD-055, and under the Postdoctoral Devel-

opment Program. T.A.P. acknowledges funding from the Center for Enhanced Nanofluidic

Transport (CENT), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of

Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award DE-SC0019112. D.E.W. and

V.A.K. acknowledge funding from the EPSRC (EP/R018472/1, EP/X018474/1) and Royal

Academy of Engineering (IF2122/186) in the UK.

Manuscript released as LLNL-JRNL-851183.

Data and Code Availability

The code to compute PDDs and AMDs for arbitrary crystal structures is available on GitHub

at https://github.com/dwiddow/average-minimum-distance.
The code and data re-

23


quired to reproduce all results and figures in this manuscript will be available after peer-

review.

References

(1) Davis, M. E. Ordered porous materials for emerging applications. Nature 2002, 417,

813–821.

(2) ˇCejka, J., van Bekkum, H., Corma, A., Schueth, F., Eds. Introduction to Zeolite Science

and Practice, 3rd ed.; Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis 168; Elsevier: Amster-

dam ; Boston, 2007; OCLC: ocn163318390.

(3) Vermeiren, W.; Gilson, J.-P. Impact of Zeolites on the Petroleum and Petrochemical

Industry. Topics in Catalysis 2009, 52, 1131–1161.

(4) Li, Y.; Li, L.; Yu, J. Applications of Zeolites in Sustainable Chemistry. Chem 2017, 3,

928–949.

(5) Li, Y.;
Yu, J. Emerging Applications of Zeolites in Catalysis, Separation and

Host–Guest Assembly. Nature Reviews Materials 2021,

(6) Dusselier, M.; Davis, M. E. Small-Pore Zeolites: Synthesis and Catalysis. Chemical

Reviews 2018, 118, 5265–5329.

(7) Corma, A. In Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis; van Steen, E., Claeys, I.,

Callanan, L., Eds.; Elsevier B.V., 2004; Vol. 154 A; pp 25–40.

(8) Cundy, C. S.; Cox, P. A. The Hydrothermal Synthesis of Zeolites: History and De-

velopment from the Earliest Days to the Present Time. Chemical Reviews 2003, 103,

663–701.

(9) Lobo, R. F.; Zones, S. I.; Davis, M. E. Structure-Direction in Zeolite Synthesis. Journal

of Inclusion Phenomena and Molecular Recognition in Chemistry 1995, 21, 47–78.

24


(10) Barrer, R. M. Zeolites and Their Synthesis. Zeolites 1981, 1, 130–140.

(11) Brand, S. K.; Schmidt, J. E.; Deem, M. W.; Daeyaert, F.; Ma, Y.; Terasaki, O.;

Orazov, M.; Davis, M. E. Enantiomerically Enriched, Polycrystalline Molecular Sieves.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2017,

114, 5101–5106.

(12) Gallego, E. M.; Portilla, M. T.; Paris, C.; Le´on-Escamilla, A.; Boronat, M.; Moliner, M.;

Corma, A. ”Ab Initio” Synthesis of Zeolites for Preestablished Catalytic Reactions.

Science 2017, 355, 1051–1054.

(13) Lewis, D. W.; Willock, D. J.; Catlow, C. R. A.; Thomas, J. M.; Hutchings, G. J. De

novo design of structure-directing agents for the synthesis of microporous solids. Nature

1996, 382, 604–606.

(14) Sastre, G.; Cantin, A.; Diaz-Caba˜nas, M. J.; Corma, A. Searching Organic Structure

Directing Agents for the Synthesis of Specific Zeolitic Structures: An Experimentally

Tested Computational Study. Chemistry of Materials 2005, 17, 545–552.

(15) Schmidt, J. E.; Deem, M. W.; Lew, C.; Davis, T. M. Computationally-Guided Synthesis

of the 8-Ring Zeolite AEI. Topics in Catalysis 2015, 58, 410–415.

(16) Davis, T. M.; Liu, A. T.; Lew, C. M.; Xie, D.; Benin, A. I.; Elomari, S.; Zones, S. I.;

Deem, M. W. Computationally Guided Synthesis of SSZ-52: A Zeolite for Engine Ex-

haust Clean-Up. Chemistry of Materials 2016, 28, 708–711.

(17) Schwalbe-Koda, D.; Kwon, S.; Paris, C.; Bello-Jurado, E.; Jensen, Z.; Olivetti, E.;

Willhammar, T.; Corma, A.; Rom´an-Leshkov, Y.; Moliner, M.; G´omez-Bombarelli, R.

A Priori Control of Zeolite Phase Competition and Intergrowth with High-Throughput

Simulations. Science 2021, 374, 308–315.

25


(18) Schwalbe-Koda,
D.;
Corma,
A.;
Rom´an-Leshkov,
Y.;
Moliner,
M.;
G´omez-

Bombarelli, R. Data-driven design of biselective templates for intergrowth zeolites. The

Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2021, 12, 10689–10694.

(19) Bello-Jurado, E.; Schwalbe-Koda, D.; Nero, M.; Paris, C.; Uusim¨aki, T.; Rom´an-

Leshkov, Y.; Corma, A.; Willhammar, T.; G´omez-Bombarelli, R.; Moliner, M. Tun-

able CHA/AEI zeolite intergrowths with A priori biselective organic structure-directing

agents: controlling enrichment and implications for selective catalytic reduction of NOx.

Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2022, 61, e202201837.

(20) Di Iorio, J. R.; Li, S.; Jones, C. B.; Nimlos, C. T.; Wang, Y.; Kunkes, E.; Vattipalli, V.;

Prasad, S.; Moini, A.; Schneider, W. F.; Gounder, R. Cooperative and Competitive Oc-

clusion of Organic and Inorganic Structure-Directing Agents within Chabazite Zeolites

Influences Their Aluminum Arrangement. Journal of the American Chemical Society

2020, 142, 4807–4819.

(21) Shin, J.; Jo, D.; Hong, S. B. Rediscovery of the Importance of Inorganic Synthesis

Parameters in the Search for New Zeolites. Acc. Chem. Res. 2019, 52, 1419–1427.

(22) Li, X.; Han, H.; Evangelou, N.; Wichrowski, N. J.; Lu, P.; Xu, W.; Hwang, S.-J.;

Zhao, W.; Song, C.; Guo, X., et al. Machine learning-assisted crystal engineering of a

zeolite. Nature Communications 2023, 14, 3152.

(23) Li, S.; Li, J.; Dong, M.; Fan, S.; Zhao, T.; Wang, J.; Fan, W. Strategies to control

zeolite particle morphology. Chemical Society Reviews 2019, 48, 885–907.

(24) Lee, H.; Shin, J.; Lee, K.; Choi, H. J.; Mayoral, A.; Kang, N. Y.; Hong, S. B. Synthesis

of Thermally Stable SBT and SBS/SBT Intergrowth Zeolites. Science 2021, 373, 104

LP – 107.

(25) Oleksiak, M. D.; Rimer, J. D. Synthesis of Zeolites in the Absence of Organic Structure-

26


Directing Agents: Factors Governing Crystal Selection and Polymorphism. Reviews in

Chemical Engineering 2014, 30, 1–49.

(26) Jensen, Z.; Kim, E.; Kwon, S.; Gani, T. Z. H.; Rom´an-Leshkov, Y.; Moliner, M.;

Corma, A.; Olivetti, E. A Machine Learning Approach to Zeolite Synthesis Enabled by

Automatic Literature Data Extraction. ACS Central Science 2019, 5, 892–899.

(27) Muraoka, K.; Sada, Y.; Miyazaki, D.; Chaikittisilp, W.; Okubo, T. Linking Synthe-

sis and Structure Descriptors from a Large Collection of Synthetic Records of Zeolite

Materials. Nature Communications 2019, 10, 4459.

(28) Asselman, K.; Vandenabeele, D.; Pellens, N.; Doppelhammer, N.; Kirschhock, C. E.;

Breynaert, E. Structural Aspects Affecting Phase Selection in Inorganic Zeolite Syn-

thesis. Chemistry of Materials 2022, 34, 11081–11092.

(29) Itabashi, K.; Kamimura, Y.; Iyoki, K.; Shimojima, A.; Okubo, T. A Working Hypoth-

esis for Broadening Framework Types of Zeolites in Seed-Assisted Synthesis without

Organic Structure-Directing Agent. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2012,

134, 11542–11549.

(30) Li, J.; Corma, A.; Yu, J. Synthesis of New Zeolite Structures. Chemical Society Reviews

2015, 44, 7112–7127.

(31) Blatov, V. A.; Ilyushin, G. D.; Proserpio, D. M. The Zeolite Conundrum: Why Are

There so Many Hypothetical Zeolites and so Few Observed? A Possible Answer from

the Zeolite-Type Frameworks Perceived as Packings of Tiles. Chemistry of Materials

2013, 25, 412–424.

(32) Kuznetsova, E. D.; Blatova, O. A.; Blatov, V. A. Predicting New Zeolites: A Com-

bination of Thermodynamic and Kinetic Factors. Chemistry of Materials 2018, 30,

2829–2837.

27


(33) Pophale, R.; Cheeseman, P. A.; Deem, M. W. A Database of New Zeolite-like Materials.

Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2011, 13, 12407–12412.

(34) Li, L.; Slater, B.; Yan, Y.; Wang, C.; Li, Y.; Yu, J. Necessity of Heteroatoms for Re-

alizing Hypothetical Aluminophosphate Zeolites: A High-Throughput Computational

Approach. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2019, 10, 1411–1415.

(35) Li, Y.; Yu, J.; Xu, R. Criteria for Zeolite Frameworks Realizable for Target Synthesis.

Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2013, 52, 1673–1677.

(36) Helfrecht, B. A.; Semino, R.; Pireddu, G.; Auerbach, S. M.; Ceriotti, M. A New Kind of

Atlas of Zeolite Building Blocks. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2019, 151, 154112.

(37) Widdowson, D.; Mosca, M.; Pulido, A.; Cooper, A.; Kurlin, V. Average Minimum

Distances of periodic point sets - fundamental invariants for mapping all periodic crys-

tals. MATCH Communications in Mathematical and in Computer Chemistry 2022, 87,

529–559.

(38) Widdowson, D.; Kurlin, V. Resolving the data ambiguity for periodic crystals. Advances

in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) 2022, 35, 24625–24638.

(39) Elkin, Y.; Kurlin, V. A new near-linear time algorithm for k-nearest neighbor search

using a compressed cover tree. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).

2023.

(40) Bart´ok, A. P.; Kondor, R.; Cs´anyi, G. On Representing Chemical Environments. Phys-

ical Review B 2013, 87, 184115.

(41) Pozdnyakov, S. N.; Willatt, M. J.; Bart´ok, A. P.; Ortner, C.; Cs´anyi, G.; Ceriotti, M.

Incompleteness of atomic structure representations. Physical Review Letters 2020, 125,

166001.

28


(42) Schwalbe-Koda, D.; Jensen, Z.; Olivetti, E.; G´omez-Bombarelli, R. Graph Similarity

Drives Zeolite Diffusionless Transformations and Intergrowth. Nature Materials 2019,

18, 1177–1181.

(43) Jensen, Z.; Kwon, S.; Schwalbe-Koda, D.; Paris, C.; G´omez-Bombarelli, R.; Rom´an-

Leshkov, Y.; Corma, A.; Moliner, M.; Olivetti, E. A. Discovering Relationships between

OSDAs and Zeolites through Data Mining and Generative Neural Networks. ACS Cen-

tral Science 2021, 7, 858–867.

(44) Rosenberg, A.; Hirschberg, J. V-Measure: A Conditional Entropy-Based External Clus-

ter Evaluation Measure. Proceedings of the 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Meth-

ods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning

(EMNLP-CoNLL). Prague, Czech Republic, 2007; pp 410–420.

(45) Erlebach, A.; Nachtigall, P.; Grajciar, L. Accurate large-scale simulations of siliceous

zeolites by neural network potentials. npj Computational Materials 2022, 8, 174.

(46) Helfrecht, B. A.; Pireddu, G.; Semino, R.; Auerbach, S. M.; Ceriotti, M. Ranking the

Synthesizability of Hypothetical Zeolites with the Sorting Hat. Digital Discovery 2022,

1, 779–789.

(47) Mazur, M.; Wheatley, P. S.; Navarro, M.; Roth, W. J.; Poloˇzij, M.; Mayoral, A.;

Eli´aˇsov´a, P.; Nachtigall, P.; ˇCejka, J.; Morris, R. E. Synthesis of ’unfeasible’ Zeolites.

Nature Chemistry 2016, 8, 58–62.

(48) Argente, E.; Valero, S.; Misturini, A.; Treacy, M. M.; Baumes, L.; Sastre, G. Computer

Generation of Hypothetical Zeolites. AI-Guided Design and Property Prediction for

Zeolites and Nanoporous Materials 2023, 145–172.

(49) Lin, L.-C.; Berger, A. H.; Martin, R. L.; Kim, J.; Swisher, J. A.; Jariwala, K.;

Rycroft, C. H.; Bhown, A. S.; Deem, M. W.; Haranczyk, M.; Smit, B. In Silico Screening

of Carbon-Capture Materials. Nature Materials 2012, 11, 633–641.

29


(50) Hewitt, D.; Pope, T.; Sarwar, M.; Turrina, A.; Slater, B. Machine learning accelerated

high-throughput screening of zeolites for the selective adsorption of xylene isomers.

Chemical Science 2022, 13, 13178–13186.

(51) Kurlin, V. A. Mathematics of 2-dimensional lattices. Foundations of Computational

Mathematics 2022, 1–59.

(52) Anosova, O.; Kurlin, V. An isometry classification of periodic point sets. Lecture Notes

in Computer Science (Proceedings of DGMM). 2021; pp 229–241.

(53) Hargreaves, C. J.; Dyer, M. S.; Gaultois, M. W.; Kurlin, V. A.; Rosseinsky, M. J. The

Earth Mover’s Distance as a Metric for the Space of Inorganic Compositions. Chemistry

of Materials 2020, 32, 10610–10620.

(54) Widdowson, D.;
Kurlin, V. Pointwise Distance Distributions of periodic sets.

arXiv:2108.04798 2021,

(55) Baerlocher,
C.;
McCusker,
Database
of
Zeolite
Structures.
https://www.iza-

structure.org/databases/, 2023.

(56) Hagberg, A. A.; Schult, D. A.; Swart, P. J. Exploring Network Structure, Dynamics,

and Function using NetworkX. Proceedings of the 7th Python in Science Conference.

Pasadena, CA USA, 2008; pp 11 – 15.

(57) Virtanen, P. et al. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in

Python. Nature Methods 2020, 17, 261–272.

(58) Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine

Learning Research 2011, 12, 2825–2830.

(59) McInnes, L.; Healy, J.; Melville, J. UMAP: Uniform manifold approximation and pro-

jection for dimension reduction. arXiv:1802.03426 2018,

30


(60) Chen, T.; Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. Proceedings of

the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data

Mining. New York, NY, USA, 2016; pp 785–794.

(61) Lundberg, S. M.; Lee, S.-I. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30;

Guyon, I., Luxburg, U. V., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S.,

Garnett, R., Eds.; Curran Associates, Inc., 2017; pp 4765–4774.

(62) Lundberg, S. M.; Erion, G.; Chen, H.; DeGrave, A.; Prutkin, J. M.; Nair, B.; Katz, R.;

Himmelfarb, J.; Bansal, N.; Lee, S.-I. From local explanations to global understanding

with explainable AI for trees. Nature Machine Intelligence 2020, 2, 2522–5839.

31


Supporting Information for: Inorganic synthesis-structure

maps in zeolites with machine learning and

crystallographic distances

Daniel Schwalbe-Koda∗,†, Daniel E. Widdowson,‡ Tuan Anh Pham,† and Vitaliy

Kurlin∗,‡

†Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, United States

‡University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom

E-mail: dskoda@llnl.gov; vitaliy.kurlin@gmail.com

Supporting Figures

1


Figure S1: Correlations of AMD values between zeolites with experimental lattice parameters
from the IZA database and a, density differences, b, AMD values for zeolites optimized with
NNPscan, c, SOAP distance, and d, the graph distance D-measure. The values from c, d
were retrieved from Schwalbe-Koda et al. (Ref. 42 from the main text)

2


Figure S2: Distributions of AMD distances for each zeolite against all other known zeolites.
Brighter colors indicate a higher median. All subfigures share the same x axis.

3


Figure S3: Minimum spanning tree of known zeolites with colored labels for a visual guide.
Although several clusters could be highlighted, only some of those discussed in the main text
are shown here.

4


Figure S4: Minimum spanning tree of known zeolites labeled according to the fraction of
recipes per element.

5


Distance (Å)

Figure S5: Complete dendrogram of zeolites created using the AMD values as features.

6


Distance (Å)
Distance (Å)
Distance (Å)
Distance (Å)

Figure S6: Subclusters of the full dendrogram in Fig. S5 with labels.

7


Figure S7: Clustering homogeneity for different synthesis conditions when flat clusters are
created with the given threshold. A homogeneity of zero indicates a perfect mixing between
positive and negative labels in the same clusters.

8


Figure S8: Precision-recall (PR) and Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) areas under
the curve (AUC) for different hyperparameters of three different classifiers: logistic regres-
sion, random forest, and XGBoost. The PR AUC and ROC AUC are adopted as the main
figures of merit for evaluating these classifiers.

9


Figure S9: All figures of merit for different hyperparameters of the XGBoost classifiers.
Each gray line represents the average metric of five runs at each set of hyperparameters.
The figures of merit of interest, along with the values of each line in the circle, are shown in
the lower right of the plot.

10


balanced
a

b

c

d

unbalanced

Figure S10: Precision (PR) and recall (RC) curves for the best a, balanced and b, unbal-
anced XGBoost classifier. The receiver operating characteristic curve, shown with the true
positive (TP) and false positive (FP) ratios, are also depicted for a c, balanced and d, unbal-
anced XGBoost classifier. The best hyperparameters are selected according to the validation
results. The curves in this figure are computed for a held-out test split.

11


0.66
0.68
0.70

Mean ROC AUC

0.70

0.71

0.72

0.73

0.74

Mean PR AUC

Figure S11: Mean area under the ROC and PR curves for the XGBoost classifiers, computed
with respect to all synthesis predictions at once. The best models maximize both the PR
and ROC curves.

12


Figure S12: Visualization of the SHAP values for a single XGBoost classifier predicting
whether Ge should be used in the synthesis of known zeolites. To plot the results in this
graph, each feature (AMD distance to a given zeolite) was normalized in a per-feature basis.
Larger SHAP values indicate higher impact in a positive classification.

13


Figure S13: Zeolite tree map labeled with the Pearson correlation coefficient between AMD
and SHAP values per synthesis conditions. A negative correlation (shown in green) indicates
that smaller AMD distances (i.e., high similarity) lead to higher SHAP values (i.e., higher
likelihood of a positive classification). The correlation coefficient is the average correlation
of AMD and SHAP values for 100 XGBoost models for each synthesis condition.

14


Figure S14: Relationship between AMD distances computed between known and hypothet-
ical frameworks, and their density difference. Both known and hypothetical zeolites were
optimized with the NNPscan method by Erlenbach et al.

Figure S15: Low-dimensional projection of the hypothetical zeolite space using their dis-
tance towards known zeolites as features. The red dots indicate zeolites present in the IZA
database. The low-dimensional plot was obtained using UMAP (see Methods), and recovers
the density and energy of the frameworks simply by comparing them against known struc-
tures.

15


Figure S16: Energy-density plots for zeolites, reproducing the plot from Erlenbach et al.
The analysis of the data using these two variables shows a high concentration of mid-energy,
mid-density zeolites in the hypothetical structures database.

16


Figure S17: Average distance of hypothetical zeolites towards known zeolites, visualized
using the UMAP plot from Fig. S15. Brighter colors indicate lower distances. (continues in
Fig. S18).

17


Figure S18: Average distance of hypothetical zeolites towards known zeolites, visualized
using the UMAP plot from Fig. S15. Brighter colors indicate lower distances. (continued
from Fig. S17).

18


Figure S19: Distributions of synthesis probabilities, as predicted by 100 XGBoost models,
for all hypothetical zeolites in the “Deem dataset”. Brighter colors indicate higher medians
of the distributions.

19


Supporting Tables

Table S1: Closest pairs of IZA zeolites according to AMDs. The pairs shown are sorted
according to distances between their AMDs, and have maximum AMD distance of 0.05 ˚A.

Zeolite 1
Zeolite 2
AMD distance (˚A)

ITH
ITR
0.016
ITG
UOV
0.021
SBS
SBT
0.022
ITG
IWW
0.025
MEL
SFV
0.032
MWF
PAU
0.033
IMF
SFV
0.035
IMF
TUN
0.035
AFG
TOL
0.037
FAR
MAR
0.037
ERI
SWY
0.039
OFF
SWY
0.040
AFT
AFX
0.040
IWW
UOV
0.041
AFS
BPH
0.042
SFH
SFN
0.042
AFX
SFW
0.044
EMT
FAU
0.045
LIO
TOL
0.045
PTY
PWO
0.046
IWS
SOV
0.047
AWO
UEI
0.047
ITG
UWY
0.050

20


Table S2: Hyperparameters explored for the logistic regression models. For the L1 loss, only
the saga solver was used. The l1 ratio parameter is used only in the case of the L1 loss.

Parameter
Choices

penalty
[l2, l1, none]
C
[0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100]
solver
[lbfgs, liblinear, sag, saga]
l1 ratio
[0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0]

Table S3: Hyperparameters explored for the random forest classifiers.

Parameter
Choices

n estimators
[50, 100, 200]
max depth
[None, 10, 20]
min samples split
[2, 5, 10]
min samples leaf
[1, 2, 4]
bootstrap
[True, False]

Table S4: Hyperparameters explored for the XGBoost classifiers.

Parameter
Choices

n estimators
[50, 100, 200]
learning rate
[0.01, 0.1, 0.2]
max depth
[3, 4, 5, 6]
min child weight
[1, 2, 3]
subsample
[0.5, 0.75, 1]
colsample bytree
[0.5, 0.75, 1]

21


