1

All-glass 100 mm Diameter Visible Metalens for Imaging the Cosmos

Authors: Joon-Suh Park1*†, Soon Wei Daniel Lim1†, Arman Amirzhan1, Hyukmo Kang2, 
Karlene Karrfalt2,3, Daewook Kim2, Joel Leger3, Augustine M. Urbas3, Marcus Ossiander1,4, 

Zhaoyi Li1, and Federico Capasso1*

1John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University; 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02138, United States. 

2Wyant College of Optical Sciences, The University of Arizona; Tucson, Arizona, 85721, 
United States.

3Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base; Dayton, Ohio 45433, 
United States.

4Institute of Experimental Physics, Graz University of Technology, 8010 Graz, Austria.

†These authors contributed equally to this work.

*Corresponding author. Email: parkj@g.harvard.edu, capasso@seas.harvard.edu

†: These authors equally contributed to this work. 

Abstract:

Metasurfaces, optics made from subwavelength-scale nanostructures, have been limited to 
millimeter-sizes by the scaling challenge of producing vast numbers of precisely engineered 
elements over a large area. In this study, we demonstrate an all-glass 100 mm diameter 
metasurface lens (metalens) comprising 18.7 billion nanostructures that operates in the visible 
spectrum with a fast f-number (f/1.5, NA=0.32) using deep-ultraviolet (DUV) projection 
lithography. Our work overcomes the exposure area constraints of lithography tools and 
demonstrates that large metasurfaces are commercially feasible. Additionally, we investigate the 
impact of various fabrication errors on the imaging quality of the metalens, several of which are 
unique to such large area metasurfaces. We demonstrate direct astronomical imaging of the Sun, 
the Moon, and emission nebulae at visible wavelengths and validate the robustness of such 
metasurfaces under extreme environmental thermal swings for space applications.


2

Introduction:

Large objective apertures are necessary for optical systems which collect weak or rapidly evolving 
signals, such as in astronomical imaging and remote airborne surveillance, as well as in high-power 
laser applications to decrease the incident power density. Due to the optomechanical mounting 
limitations and the volumetric-and-weight scaling of refractive objective lenses with the diameter, 
large aperture optics must often be reflective instead of transmissive. Dielectric metasurfaces, 
which consist of sub-wavelength-spaced nanostructures with micron-scale thickness, have the 
potential to serve as ultralight and thin transmissive optics if they can be fabricated at scale over 
large areas. Although many early demonstrations of metasurfaces and binary subwavelength 
diffractive optics utilized electron-beam (e-beam) lithography1–4 or other serial point-by-point 
fabrication techniques, such as two-photon optical lithography5–7, which led to skepticism about 
their practical scalability, metasurfaces are now produced at larger scales using modern 
semiconductor foundry photolithography8–10 and nanoimprinting techniques11–13, alleviating such 
scaling concerns. 

Increasing the metasurface diameter to accommodate large-aperture applications, however, does 

have physical and economic manufacturing limitations, as the number of required nanostructures
scales as the square of the radius. E-beam lithography, which involves the serial writing of each 
nanostructure at high spatial resolution, is not a practical method for producing metasurface lenses 
(metalenses) larger than several centimeters in diameter. Even with state-of-the-art tools equipped 
with ultrafast 100 MHz-scale e-beam oscillators and multi-beam settings14, the fabrication process 
takes several hours per sample, rendering it inefficient for large-scale production. Recent 
developments in e-beam writing techniques using variable-shaped beam (VSB) and cell-projection 
(CP) allow repeated metasurface structures to be written over a 280 mm diameter circle in 36 
hours.15 Nanoimprint lithography (NIL) is a viable technique for mass-producing metasurface 
optics or continuous metasurface films using metasurface patterns fabricated using e-beam 
lithography as molds11,12,16 , but the size of the mold itself is still limited by e-beam lithography 
limits, which directly restrict the maximum area of an individual NIL-made metasurface. A list of 
recent notable developments in scaling the diameter of metalenses is provided in Table S1.

The use of modern semiconductor foundry technology, which has supported the exponential 

growth in transistor density in integrated circuits since 196517, has been considered one of the 
most promising approaches for mass-producing metalenses. Previous works have demonstrated
that i-line and deep-ultraviolet (DUV) projection lithography techniques, which enable high 
throughput nanofabrication by optically projecting the desired patterns onto a photoresist film,
can be used to create centimeter-scale metalenses8,9,11,18. However, such lithography tools have 
an exposure size limit of around 20-30 mm, precluding single-shot fabrication of larger area
metasurfaces (Fig. S1(a)). 

Here, we experimentally demonstrate and characterize of a sub-meter scale (i.e., 1/10th of a 

meter) large diameter metalens operating at visible wavelengths, fabricated using fully CMOS 
compatible process and materials. The metalens is manufactured using DUV projection 
lithography and has an area that exceeds the single shot exposure size limit of the lithography tool. 
We do this by stitching multiple exposure fields using different photolithography reticles in an 
exposure cycle. The metalens is polarization-insensitive, has a 100 mm diameter and 150 mm focal 
length for 632.8 nm wavelength light, corresponding to a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.32 or an f-
number of 1.5. We choose fused silica (SiO2) as the sole constituent material for this monolithic 
metalens not only for its low absorption in the visible and CMOS process compatibility but also 
for its high laser-induced damage threshold, which is suitable for high-energy applications. Also, 


3

the thermal robustness enables various coatings (e.g., anti-reflection or anti-fouling coats) to be 
deposited directly onto the metalens or its backside, which is an essential requirement for such 
metalenses to be utilized in
versatile astronomical applications. We show that
this 

photolithography-based manufacturing approach, which was previously limited to the infrared 
spectrum19–21 and to silicon wafers, can be extended to the visible spectrum and to more robust 
materials. The metalens’ imaging quality is evaluated through its point-spread-function (PSF), 
modulation transfer function (MTF), focusing efficiency, and transmitted wavefront error via full-
aperture interferometry. Then, we further simulate various fabrication error scenarios and quantify
their individual impacts on wavefront and imaging quality. These simulations demonstrate that 
large area metasurfaces fabricated with multiple exposures and field stitching face fundamentally 
different aberration and efficiency challenges as compared to single-shot-photolithography
metalenses and other ground refractive elements. We also show the suitability of the meta-optical
device in extreme environments by evaluating its optical performance after thermal shock and 
temperature cycling across a 400C range. Finally, we illustrate the remote and high-throughput
imaging capabilities of the large diameter metalens by photographing celestial objects (the Sun, 
the Moon, and an emission nebula) in the visible22,23, using the 100 mm diameter metalens as the 
only imaging lens. 

Results:

Metalens design

Metasurfaces comprise nanostructures that impart a designed local wavefront or polarization
transformation to incident light and can demonstrate unconventional functionality and 
performance with a very thin form factor that is difficult to achieve with conventional bulk optics.
For instance, full Stokes polarimetry imaging has been realized with a single metasurface coupled 
to a commercial camera sensor24–26, and an ultrathin perforated membrane metalens has been used 
to focus extreme ultraviolet radiation in transmission27. With precision design and manufacturing, 
metalenses have achieved diffraction-limited, high-efficiency performance28,29, and attained 
broadband aberration correction when used in conjunction with existing refractive optics30,31.

To design a 100 mm diameter metalens in a manner compatible with the fabrication workflow 

of existing semiconductor chip manufacturing tools, we first divide the 100 mm diameter region 
into 25 square sections (5×5 square array). Each section occupies a 20 × 20 mm square area (Fig. 
S1(b)), which is smaller than the exposure size limit of the DUV lithography tool used in this study 
(22 × 22 mm). We intentionally choose an odd number of arrays to ensure that the center of the 
metalens coincides with the center of a discretized section. This prevents unwanted scattering of 
light along the optic axis that may occur due to the stitching of the discretized fields near the 
metalens center, which may degrade imaging quality. Since the metalens is rotationally symmetric, 
the full 25 sections can be represented with just seven unique sections, six of which are repeated 
at four rotation angles (0°, 90°, 180°, and 270°) and one which is located at the metalens’ center. 
Therefore, the 100 mm diameter metalens can be fabricated with 7 unique reticles (i.e., DUV 
photomasks). 

The metalens is composed of fused silica nanopillars with diameters ranging from 250 nm to 

600 nm which have a constant edge-to-edge spacing of 250 nm and a height of 1.5 µm. This keeps 
both the pattern and the gap dimensions above the 200 nm single-exposure feature size limit of the 
DUV lithography tool used (ASML PAS 5500/300C DUV Wafer Stepper, λ=248 nm). The
simulated transmitted phases and amplitudes versus the nanopillar diameter are plotted in Fig. 


4

S2(a), which demonstrates phase coverage between π/2 and 3π/2 radians. Although full 0 to 2π
radian phase coverage can be achieved if the nanopillar height is increased to 2.1 μm, it is 
accompanied by a significant decrease in manufacturability and reduced structural integrity due to 
the increased structure width-to-height aspect ratio. We have thus limited the nanopillars to a 
maximum aspect ratio of 1:6. We have designated the empty area (i.e., absence of a nanopillar) as 
a zero-phase element and included such empty areas in the design of the metalens to compensate 
for the limited library phase coverage. This approach maintains focal spot quality but reduces the 
focusing efficiency8. The diameter profile along the metalens radial direction is determined by 
selecting the nanopillar element at each radial position r with a transmitted phase 𝜑(𝑟) that most 
closely matches the desired ideal hyperbolic focusing profile32,33:

𝜑(𝑟) = − 2𝜋

𝜆𝑑

(√𝑟2 + 𝑓2 − 𝑓) + 𝜑(0),
(1)

where 𝜆𝑑 is the design wavelength, f is the focal length of the metalens, and 𝜑(0) is the phase at 
the center of the metalens. When Eq. 1 is satisfied, the transmitted light from each point on the 
metalens interferes constructively at the focal point; this is equivalent to having a spherical 
wavefront that converges at the focal point. We set 𝜑(0) to that of the transmitted phase of the 
nanopillar with the largest diameter in the library (600 nm) so that the phase wrapping zone 
transition between the largest and smallest nanostructures is located the furthest from the optical
axis. The nanopillars at each radial position are placed uniformly across the azimuthal direction
with a constant edge-to-edge spacing of 250 nm. The full metalens design comprises 18.7 billion
nanopillars. The azimuthal spacing between nanopillars is slightly larger than 250 nm close to the 
metalens center due to the larger quantization error associated with the small integer number of 
nanopillars; however, such changes to the edge-to-edge gap have minimal effect on the transmitted 
phase from each nanostructure (see Fig. S2(b)). The maximum phase error resulting from such 
edge-to-edge spacing variation is 0.26 radians or 0.04 λ, which is below the Maréchal criterion of 
0.25 λ for achieving diffraction-limited performance33–35.

The seven individual stitching sections of the metalens are indexed as reticles 1 to 7 (Fig. S1(b)), 

respectively. The center three reticles (reticles 1-3) were made by an industry-grade photomask 
manufacturer. The outer four reticles (reticles 4-7) were made in-house using a laser photomask 
writer with a larger critical feature size compared to that of the photomask manufacturer (Fig. 
S1(c)). Each reticle contains a 4-times magnified image of a 20 × 20 mm square section of the 
metalens, to match the DUV projection lithography tool demagnification ratio (Fig. S1(d)). The 
detailed process of the metalens design file generation, as well as the strategies employed to reduce 
file size and write times, can be found in the Supplementary Information.

As the first fabrication step, we coat a 150 mm (6-inch) fused silica wafer with a 150 nm-thick 

aluminum (Al) film (Fig. 1(a)), anti-reflective coating (ARC), and positive DUV photoresist layers 
(Fig. S3(a)). Then we create global alignment marks for the DUV lithography process. The 
alignment marks (i.e., fiducials) are positioned and oriented such that the four alignment marks
remain at the same location when the wafer is rotated by 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270° (Figs. S3(b), 
S3(c)). The patterned alignment marks in the photoresist layer are transferred into the aluminum 
film using wet etching, then both the ARC and photoresist layers are stripped with a downstream 
oxygen plasma ashing process. 

We then coat the wafer with another ARC layer and a negative DUV photoresist layer, which 

serves as the etch mask for the metalens pattern creation in the Al layer. We opt to use a negative 
photoresist due to its advantageous process window compared to positive photoresist when 


5

creating isolated structures: overexposure of positive resist can cause shrinkage or delamination of 
the resist patterns, while patterns on negative resist simply become enlarged. As shown in Fig. 
1(b), the wafer is first loaded into the DUV lithography tool at 0° orientation, and reticles 1-7 are 
aligned and exposed. The alignment error of the used stepper lithography tool is less than 45 nm, 
which is about 7 % of the target wavelength and thus not expected to significantly distort the 
transmitted wavefront. State-of-the-art photolithography tools can achieve overlay errors down to 
1 nm. The wafer is then rotated to 90°, and reticles 2-7 are exposed. The same process is repeated 
for the 180° and 270° wafer orientations, followed by baking and development (Fig. S4(a)). The 
alignment and exposure of the entire 100 mm metalens is fully automated and takes less than 20 
minutes per wafer.

After the metalens pattern is formed in the negative photoresist, it is first transferred to the ARC 

layer using an Ar/O2 reactive ion etch (RIE) (Fig. S4(b)) and then transferred into the Al layer 
using Ar/Cl2 inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE), as shown in Fig. 1(c).
SiO2 is thermodynamically protected against chemical etching by Cl2 plasma8 and acts as an etch 
stop layer. Both the ARC and resist layers are then stripped using a downstream oxygen plasma 
ashing process (Fig. S4c), which does not significantly affect the patterned Al film. Using the 
patterned Al as a hard etch mask, we then vertically etch into the fused silica substrate with ion-
enhanced inhibitor etching using an optimized octafluoropropane (C3F8) ICP-RIE process (Fig. 
S5(a)) until the etch depth reaches 1.5 μm. The measured uniformity of the etching speed across 
the 100 mm diameter region is provided in Fig. S6, which shows that the maximum resulting etch 
depth difference across the entire 100 mm diameter metalens is approximately 80 nm, 
corresponding to 5 % of the target pillar height. This height deviation is associated with a phase 
error smaller than the quarter-wave deviation acceptable under Maréchal criterion (Fig. S2(d)). 
Once the desired etch depth is reached, the residual Al film on the top of the nanopillars is
selectively etched away using an Ar/Cl2 ICP-RIE process, leaving the fused silica nanopillars. 
More details on the fabrication process can be found in the Materials and methods section. 

Optical performance characterization

A photograph and a tilted scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the 100 mm diameter 
metalens are shown in Fig. 2(a) and 2(b), respectively. The vertical and smooth sidewalls of the 
etched fused silica nanopillars are visible, which is a notable improvement from previous fused 
silica metalens work that resulted in tapered and rough sidewalls8. More detailed SEM images of 
the metalens are provided in Supplementary Fig. S7. Figs. 2(c) and 2(d) present a side-by-side 
comparison between the fabricated metalens and an off-the-shelf plano-convex refractive lens 
made of N-BK7 glass with MgF2 anti-reflection coating (#19-904, Edmund Optics) with a similar 
diameter (D=100 mm) and focal length (f=150 mm at λ=587.6 nm). The metalens including the 
substrate is 42 times thinner (0.5 mm vs. 21 mm) and 16.5 times lighter (14.6 g vs. 242.2 g) than 
the refractive lens counterpart. 

To evaluate the focusing quality of the metalens, we illuminate the pristine backside of the 

metalens with the expanded and collimated beam of a Helium-Neon laser (λ=632.8 nm). We then 
acquire the focal profile along the optical axis separately using a horizontal microscope (Fig. S8) 
and a point-source microscope attached to a coordinate measuring machine (Fig. S9). The 
measured distance to the focal plane from the metalens is 149.970.18 mm, which agrees well 
with the designed focal length of 150 mm (Fig. S9). Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) show a transverse and a 
longitudinal cut of the measured Point-Spread Function (PSF). For comparison, the simulated
transverse and longitudinal focusing profiles for a diffraction-limited metalens with NA=0.32 are 
provided in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d). 


6

The Strehl ratio of the fabricated metalens is 0.6. Furthermore, the diameter of the first ring of

minimum intensity around the focal point of the metalens is 3.4 μm, whereas the ideal Airy disk 
diameter for a diffraction-limited lens with NA=0.32 would be 2.3 μm, indicating the presence of 
aberrations in the metalens. The measured PSF, degraded by the wavefront aberration, resembles 
that of a lens with an effective NA of 0.2, which corresponds to a lens with a diameter of 60 mm 
and a focal length of 150 mm that has an Airy disk diameter of 3.86 μm (Fig. 3(e)). This similarity 
becomes more apparent when the 2D modulation transfer functions (MTFs) are calculated from 
the PSF images and compared with the ideal MTFs for lens NAs of 0.32 and 0.2, as shown in Fig. 
3(f).

The primary cause of the aberration is the reticle quality difference between the industry-grade 

center sections (reticles 1-3) and the lab-made outer sections (reticles 4-7). The SEM images in 
Fig. S7 show a small nanopillar diameter mismatch between the two different reticle sources. This 
indicates that the nanopillar diameters in the outer sections were not correctly fabricated. Such a 
diameter mismatch results in a phase discontinuity between the inner and outer exposure fields. 
The more significant fabrication error, however, is that in the inner region, all nanopillars are 
present as per the design, but in the outer regions, the small diameter pillars are missing due to 
those features not being resolved in the reticles fabricated with the lower resolution in-house laser 
writer. Both errors are avoidable by using reticles from a single manufacturing source. 

The effect of the missing pillars on the PSF becomes more apparent when the transmitted phase 

and the diffracted amplitude information are decoupled using interferometry and diffraction 
intensity imaging.  The deviation of the transmitted wavefront phase of the metalens from the ideal, 
i.e., wavefront aberration function (WAF), is obtained using full-aperture interferometry. For this, 
a commercial Fizeau interferometer (Zygo VeriFireTM ATZ, Zygo Corporation) is used in a
double-pass nulling interferometry configuration, in which the metalens-focused beam is reflected 
back by a return sphere (i.e., high-accuracy spherical ball), and produces an interferogram at the 
interferometer aperture (Fig. S10). Due to the double-pass configuration, the metalens WAF is half 
of the measured WAF. More details of the interferometric procedure are provided in the 
Supplementary Information. The map of the metalens WAF is shown in Fig. 3(g), with the root-
mean-square (RMS) error over the entire 100 mm aperture of 0.08 λ and a peak-to-valley (PV) 
error of 0.64 λ (after removing interferometry alignment terms, i.e., piston, tip/tilt, and power). 
The inner 60 × 60 mm section, fabricated with industry-grade photomasks, displays lower RMS 
and PV values of 0.05 λ and 0.28 λ, respectively. These values indicate that the industry-grade 
fabrication technique can attain phase error values close to the diffraction-limit criterion of an 
RMS below 0.075 λ and a PV below 0.25 λ33,34,36. The fitted Zernike polynomial coefficient values 
to the WAF are provided in Fig. S11 and Table S2, which indicate that the optical aberrations are 
dominated by 2nd- and 4th-degree contributions. The expected tilt dependence of the as-
manufactured metalens’ wavefront (i.e., coma) was also successfully evaluated and confirmed
interferometrically (Fig. S15). The RMS wavefront error rises to 1  for tilts around 10 arcseconds. 

The diffracted intensity after the metalens (Fig. 3(h)), i.e., light contributing to the focus, shows 

a stark difference between the efficiency of the inner (reticles 1-3) and outer (reticles 4-7) lens 
sections. The diffracted image is captured at a plane displaced 11 mm axially away from the focal 
plane, in the direction towards the metalens. We find that 86% of the power that contributes to the 
focus comes from the inner region, which comprises only 46% of the total metalens area, causing 
the focal spot to resemble that of a square 60 × 60 mm lens instead. As discussed earlier, the 
reduced diffraction intensity in the outer region is mainly due to missing small diameter pillars in 
the in-house fabricated photomasks. The measured focusing efficiency of the entire metalens, 


7

relative to that of the equivalent off-the-shelf MgF2-coated plano-convex refractive lens in Fig. 
2(d), is 40.4%. However, when only the inner region is profiled, the focusing efficiency rises to 
63.1%, which agrees with the diffracted intensity profile. Thus, the reticle quality difference across
each exposure field is the primary cause of the aberrated PSF. 

Fabrication error tolerance study

Exposure field-linked fabrication errors are a unique problem for metasurface optical elements
made with CMOS-compatible manufacturing processes, since such rectilinear imperfections do 
not exist for traditional optics manufacturing methods such as diamond turning or other mechanical 
grinding and polishing techniques. To fully characterize such fabrication errors on the imaging 
quality degradation and their corresponding tolerances, we conduct a simulation-based study
quantifying the following effects: (1) unresolved nanopillars below certain diameters, (2) a 
uniform shift in nanopillar diameters, and (3) a uniform shift in nanopillar height. Effects (1) and 
(2) can occur during photomask manufacturing or through shifts in exposure and development
conditions, and (3) can occur if the nanopillars are either under- or over-etched. We consider the 
effects of these errors when they are applied to each reticle-linked section individually and across 
the inner and outer sections (Fig. S12).

Since full-lens simulation of 18.7 billion nanostructures is impractical on full-wave Maxwell 

equation solvers, we employ the locally periodic assumption37 and take the transmitted field to be
equal to the stitched fields from individual nanopillars. We numerically discretize the metalens 
into 100,000 annular rings, each divided into 100 sections evenly in the azimuthal direction, 
resulting in a total of 10 million arc sections. This discretization choice allows for fine resolution 
of the rapidly-varying radial transmission behavior without expending additional elements to 
resolve the slowly-varying azimuthal behavior. We then propagate the transmitted electromagnetic 
field from each arc section toward the focal plane using a vectorial propagator38, weighting each 
arc section with its area. The focal plane complex fields are used to calculate the MTF, Strehl ratio
(volume under the 2D MTF relative to that of the diffraction limit), and focusing efficiency
(fraction of incident power that passes through 3 Airy disk diameters centered on the optic axis). 
Further details of the simulation are provided in the Supplementary Information. 

Fig. 4(a)-(c) present the simulated wavefront of a metalens where nanopillars smaller than a 

given threshold diameter are unresolved for (a) all 7 sections, (b) only the inner sections (reticles 
1-3), and (c) only the outer sections (reticles 4-7), respectively. The simulated Strehl ratios and 
focusing efficiencies of each case with respect to the minimum fabricated pillar diameters are
shown in Fig. 4(d-e), respectively. The Strehl ratio degrades when either the inner or outer sections’
smaller pillars are missing but remains near unity for the case when the pillars below a given 
diameter are equally missing over all sections. This reduction in the Strehl ratio occurs due to 
incomplete constructive interference near the focus due to a mismatch in diffracted intensity 
contributions from different parts of the lens, which broadens the transverse peak. However, when 
all sections have similar amounts of missing pillars, such diffracted intensity variations are 
eliminated, and one obtains diffraction-limited focusing. In comparison, the focusing efficiency in 
all three cases decreases monotonically as the minimum fabricated pillar diameter increases, since 
more light passes straight through the metalens and is not deflected to the focus. This is consistent 
with previous findings, in which metalenses with unfabricated smaller structures were still able to 
produce diffraction-limited focusing albeit at reduced efficiencies8. The MTFs for the three 
scenarios when the minimum fabricated nanopillar diameter is 550 nm are shown in Fig. 4(f). The 
MTF curves are normalized to unity at their zero frequency values, respectively. When all sections 
have missing smaller diameter pillars, the MTF remains diffraction-limited. When the inner 


8

sections have missing pillars, the MTF at lower spatial frequencies is reduced, and vice versa for 
outer sections having unfabricated pillars. More detailed plots of the MTF behavior under other
missing pillar conditions are provided in Fig. S13(a-c). 

For fabrication errors other than section-linked missing nanopillars, the Strehl ratio remains 

diffraction-limited although the focusing efficiency decreases. The calculated Strehl ratios and 
focusing efficiencies resulting from nanopillar diameter shifts are provided in Fig. S13(d-e), 
respectively. The metalens retains diffraction-limited performance for nanopillar diameter shifts 
less than 100 nm. Similarly, an error in nanopillar height, which can occur during the final SiO2
etching process, does not significantly affect the Strehl ratio (Fig. S13(f)) but reduces the focusing 
efficiency. This retention of high Strehl ratio focusing arises because the phase relationship 
between nanopillars of different diameters remains largely unchanged with respect to systematic 
diameter and height variations (Fig. S2(a,d)). However, as the relative phase between the empty 
areas and the nanopillars shifts, the efficiency is reduced due to out-of-phase interference at the 
focal plane.

Beyond fabrication errors, we investigate the role of imperfections in the measurement 

apparatus, which arise easily due to the challenges of aligning and characterizing large aperture 
optical elements. If the illuminating light is non-uniform, for example, with a Gaussian intensity 
profile (Fig. S14(a)), the measured PSF becomes aberrated and the Strehl ratio falls below unity, 
even for a perfectly fabricated metalens (Fig. S14(b)). However, the Gaussian width of the 
illumination must be substantially smaller than the lens diameter (20 mm Gaussian width) to 
reduce the Strehl ratio below the diffraction-limited level of 0.8. Tilts in the illuminating field (i.e., 
off-axis illumination) can also introduce field-dependent aberrations in the PSF. Fig. S16 exhibits 
the simulated reduction in measured Strehl ratio as a function of incident angle tilts. The 
illuminating field must be normally incident to within 10 arc seconds to provide an accurate 
measurement of the metalens focusing quality, which agrees with interferometric measurements 
shown in Fig. S15. Our PSF characterization setup (Fig. S8) has an illumination uniformity and 
tilt tolerance below these thresholds.

Table S3 summarizes the main conclusions of the fabrication and measurement error simulation 

study. Only a mismatch between the unfabricated pillars in the inner and outer sections produces 
the Strehl ratio reduction observed in the experimental focal spot. 

Meta-imaging the cosmos

To illustrate the imaging performance of the fabricated metalens, we build a wide field-of-view
(i.e., ~0.6°) meta-astrophotography apparatus using only the 100 mm diameter metalens (without 
any other optical lenses or mirrors), a narrowband color filter, and a cooled CMOS imaging sensor
placed at the metalens focal plane (Fig. 5(a)). The distance between the metalens and the imaging 
sensor is controlled by a helical focuser and the apparatus is enclosed to eliminate stray light. We 
note that this is not a telescope, as there is no second lens and no magnification involved. The 
meta-astrophotography system is mounted on an equatorial mount with a guide-scope for real-time 
sky tracking, and is used to capture images of sunspots on the Sun (with a 633 nm bandpass filter, 
Fig. 5(b)), the North America Nebula (with a 656.28 nm Hydrogen alpha bandpass filter, Fig. 5(c)), 
and the Moon (with a 633 nm bandpass filter, Fig. 5(d)). All images were captured in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA. Higher resolution images and details of the image acquisition methods are 
provided in Figs. S17, S18, and S19, respectively. More photographs taken with the 100 mm 
diameter metalens are provided in Fig. S26.


9

Such imaging of celestial objects in the visible illustrates that the 100 mm diameter all-glass 
metalens is suitable for remote imaging applications. To deploy meta-optics in remote imaging 
platforms such as high-altitude UAV platforms, low-earth orbit satellites, or off-world exploration
spacecraft and vehicles, the nanostructures must withstand extreme environmental stresses such as 
large temperature swings, cosmic radiation, and vibration39–41. To test whether the all-glass 
metalens can survive harsh environments, we devised a thermal shock and heat stress cycling test 
resembling that of the United States Department of Defense Test Method Standard (MIL-STD-
883F). The subject in testing was cyclically moved between a cold reservoir (liquid nitrogen, -
195.8 ℃) and a hot reservoir (hot plate, 200 ℃). The subject remained in each thermal reservoir 
for 10 minutes to reach thermal equilibrium, while the sample transfer time between the two 
thermal baths was less than 5 seconds to induce thermal shock. More details of the devised test 
method are provided in Fig. S20. After performing the stress test on a 10 mm diameter all-glass 
metalens8 for 10 cycles and returning the sample to room temperature, we do not observe 
significant change in the optical performance (Fig. S21) nor physical damage after 15 cycles (Fig. 
S22). This is due to fused silica having a low-level of impurities and also a near-zero thermal 
expansion coefficient (𝛼 ≈ 0.5 × 10−6/𝐾) 42 which would result in an approximately 0.01 % shift
of the metalens radius over the 400 ℃ temperature range. As the thermo-optic coefficient (𝑑𝑛/𝑑𝑇)
of fused silica is also very low (< 10−6/𝐾)43, we expect that the change in the transmitted 
wavefront with respect to the temperature will be low as well. Therefore, we anticipate the impact 
of thermal variations on the optical performance of all-glass metalens to be insignificant within 
the given test temperature range. The metalens also does not exhibit noticeable physical damage 
under the vibrational stress induced by immersing the sample in an ultrasonication bath for 20 
minutes (Fig. S23). These results suggest that the all-glass metasurfaces can survive extreme 
environment conditions and therefore is well-positioned for space applications requiring launch 
survival. Similar tests conducted on TiO2 metasurfaces comprising 700 nm tall nanopillars44 also 
show promising results as well (Fig. S24, S25). The thermal resilience also allows various optical 
coatings to be applied onto the metalens after fabrication, since such modifications require special 
thermal environments during coating.

Discussion:

In summary, we demonstrate the fabrication of an all-glass 100 mm diameter metalens capable of 
operating in the visible wavelength range using DUV lithography, surpassing the tool's exposure 
size limit. The diameter of the metalens can be further increased to about 290 mm, as 300 mm 
diameter wafers and corresponding CMOS foundry tools become increasingly available in the 
industry. We also show that in addition to PSF measurements, full-aperture interferometry offers 
valuable insights into the optical wavefront-based characterization of metalenses. This technique 
effectively decouples the phase and amplitude error information, which identifies a unique 
challenge for flat optic elements fabricated by stitching multiple exposure fields. Through 
simulation-based study, we also show the effects of various possible exposure field-linked
fabrication errors on the imaging quality of the metalens, which provide tolerance windows for the 
manufacturing processes. Additionally, we demonstrate that the single metalens is capable of 
imaging celestial objects in the visible wavelength range. 

The efficiency of the presented metalens can be improved by using all-industrial grade reticles

and higher resolution manufacturing techniques such as immersion DUV lithography (λ=193 nm), 
so that even smaller diameter nanopillars can be fabricated9,12. Dispersion engineering with 
anisotropic pillar shapes can also be employed to achieve broadband high efficiency 28. As fused 


10

silica has relatively high laser-induced damage threshold (LIDT) compared to most optical 
glasses45, we anticipate that the all-glass metasurface platform will be useful in versatile coating 
options and high-power laser applications not only for focusing but also for polarization 
manipulation26 and pulse compression46,47. Furthermore, their resilience under extreme 
environmental conditions highlights their suitability for remote imaging in harsh environments. 
Additionally, the demonstrated fabrication process holds promise for creating large-diameter 
aberration-correcting meta-optics30,31. These meta-optics may replace or enhance optical
components in existing multi-element optics systems, providing a path towards low-weight, high-
performance, large-aperture imaging devices.

Material and methods:

Fabrication process

150 mm diameter, double side polished, 500 μm thick JGS2 fused silica wafers (WaferPro LLC) 
are used in this study. During the fabrication process, the creation of a photoresist edge-bead, 
either by recoil or surface tension, can introduce unreliable fabrication conditions. This includes 
challenges such as difficulties in wafer height detection or achieving plasma etch uniformity at 
the edge of the wafer. In addition, some plasma etching tools mechanically clamp down on edge 
of the wafer during processing that the edge of the area should be avoided. Therefore, it is 
generally a good rule of thumb to exclude a few millimeters around the rim of a wafer during 
wafer-based manufacturing. As conventional semiconductor foundries typically use 100 mm (4-
in.), 150 mm (6-in.), 200 mm (8-in.), or 300 mm (12-in.) wafers, here we choose 150 mm 
diameter wafer as a substrate for a 100 mm diameter metalens.

The wafers are cleaned using a MOS clean process involving an organic cleaning step by 

immersing the wafers in 1:1:6 volumetric ratio H2O2:NH4OH:H2O solution at 85 ℃ for 10 
minutes, followed by an ionic clean step by immersing in 1:1:6 H2O2:HCl:H2O solution at 85 ℃
for 10 minutes. After each cleaning step, the wafers are thoroughly rinsed in deionized (DI) 
water bath by filling and dumping the rinse bath 3 times. The MOS cleaned wafers are then spin-
rinsed and dried (Superclean 1600 Spin Rinse Dryer, Verteq). The 150 nm thick Al film is 
deposited on the cleaned wafers using an e-beam evaporator with planetary wafer holders (CHA 
MARK 50 E-beam Evaporator, CHA Industries). 

The Al-coated wafers are first spin-coated with 62 nm thick DUV anti-reflection coating 

(ARC) layer (DUV 42P, Brewer Science), followed by spin-coating of 600 nm thick positive 
DUV resist (UV210-0.6, Shipley). The alignment marks are exposed at the designated positions 
as shown in Fig. S3 using a DUV projection lithography tool (PAS 5500/300C DUV Stepper, 
ASML). The photoresist film is then post-exposure baked (PEB) and developed using AZ 726 
MIF developer. We note that all spin-coating, baking, and developing process are performed 
with a SUSS MicroTech Gamma automatic coat-develop tool for consistent fabrication results. 
The developed alignment marks are then transferred to the ARC layer using Ar/O2 reactive ion 
etching (RIE, PlasmaLab80Plus, Oxford Instruments), exposing the underlying Al film. Then, 
the alignment markers are wet-etched into the Al film to a depth of approximately 120 nm to 
meet the requirement for phase-contrast detection system in the DUV stepper system. The resist 
and ARC layer are then stripped using downstream oxygen plasma ashing (YES EcoClean, Yield 
Engineering Systems). 


11

The wafer with alignment marks (i.e., fiducials) etched into Al layer is then coated with 62 nm 

thick DUV ARC layer, followed by 500 nm thick negative DUV resist (UVN2300, Dow 
Electronic Materials). The 100 mm diameter metalens pattern is exposed onto the wafer with the 
DUV stepper system as depicted in Fig. S1, where reticles 1-3 are fabricated by an industry-
grade photomask manufacturer and the reticles 4-7 are prepared on chrome coated reticle plates 
using the DWL2000 Laser Writer (Heidelberg Instruments) followed by developing and chrome 
wet-etching with the HMP900 Mask Processing System (Hamatech). We note that the DUV 
photoresists used in this study are chemically amplified resists, and hence it is important to 
minimize the time between the exposures of the first section and the last to achieve the desired 
pattern sizes throughout the wafer. In detail, the photoresists used in this study consist of 
compounds that generate acid upon photoactivation. The shape and size of the developed 
photoresist profile is determined by the acid-induced reaction that occurs during the post-
exposure bake step. Since the photo-generated acid diffuses into the photoresist film over time, 
any significant delay between exposures of the discretized sections can lead to differences in the 
feature dimensions across those sections. Therefore, reducing the number of sections to be 
aligned and exposed, or the overall time of exposure, can help ensure consistency of the feature 
sizes between the sections. The exposed resist layer then goes though PEB and development 
processes using AZ 726 MIF developer solution and the SUSS MicroTech Gamma automatic 
coat-develop tool. The metalens pattern is then transferred to the ARC layer using Ar/O2 RIE 
(PlasmaLab80Plus, Oxford Instruments). 

Using the patterned resist and ARC layer as an etch mask, the metalens pattern is then 

transferred to Al film using Ar/Cl2 inductively coupled plasma RIE (ICP-RIE, PlasmaPro 100 
Cobra 300, Oxford Instruments). The resist and ARC layer are then stripped using downstream 
plasma ashing (Matrix 105, Matrix Integrated Systems), leaving only the patterned Al on the 
wafer. Then, the 1.5 μm tall, fused silica nanopillars are formed by vertically etching into the 
fused silica substrate using C3F8 ICP-RIE (NLD-570, ULVAC), using the patterned Al as an etch 
mask. In detail, when C3F8 is introduced in the etch chamber and is dissociated into plasma, a 
thin film of fluorocarbon deposits on the exposed area of the substrate, creating an etch inhibitor 
layer that prohibits fluoride ions from chemically etching SiO2 (Fig. S5(a)). The fluoride ions, 
which are accelerated toward the surface of the substrate, physically bombard and break the 
fluorocarbon film, and chemically etch the SiO2 underneath anisotropically. By balancing the 
growth rate of the fluorocarbon film and the etch speed with temperature, one can control the 
sidewall tapering angles during the SiO2 etch (Fig. S5(b-i)). Details of the vertical etch process 
is provided in Fig. S5 and S6. Then, the residual Al on top of each nanopillar is removed using 
selective etch with Ar/Cl2 ICP-RIE (PlasmaPro 100 Cobra 300, Oxford Instruments). 

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Garry Bordonaro, John Treichler, Aaron Windsor, Jeremy Clark, 
and Chris Alpha for their generous help in using CNF facilities. The authors would also like to 
thank Dr. Rohith Chandrasekar and Lidan Zhang for insightful discussions and Dr. Seong Soon Jo 
for help with metalens wafer dicing. This work was supported by the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) Grant No. HR00111810001. This work was performed in part at the 
Cornell NanoScale Science & Technology Facility (CNF), a member of the National 
Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI), which is supported by the National Science 
Foundation (Grant NNCI-1542081), and in part at the Harvard University Center for Nanoscale 


12

Systems (CNS); a member of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure Network 
(NNCI), which is supported by the National Science Foundation under NSF award no. ECCS-
2025158. The computations in this paper were run on the FASRC Cannon cluster supported by the 
FAS Division of Science Research Computing Group at Harvard University. S.W.D.L. is 
supported by A*STAR Singapore through the National Science Scholarship scheme.

Author contributions

J.S.P. and F.C. conceived the study. J.S.P., S.W.D.L., and M.O. developed codes. S.W.D.L. and 
J.S.P. performed simulations and their analysis. J.S.P. fabricated the samples. J.S.P. and S.W.D.L. 
analyzed the fabrication results. J.S.P., S.W.D.L., H.K., K.K., D.K., J.L., A.M.U., and Z.L. 
performed metalens characterization and analyzed the data. J.S.P. and A.A. built the meta-
astrophotography apparatus. A.A. performed the image acquisition of the celestial objects. 
S.W.D.L. and A.A. analyzed the celestial images. All authors contributed to the writing of the 
manuscript, discussed the results, and commented on the manuscript.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare no competing interests.

Data availability

Data of this study is available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

References
1 
Khorasaninejad M, Chen WT, Devlin RC, Oh J, Zhu AY, Capasso F. Metalenses at visible 
wavelengths: Diffraction-limited focusing and subwavelength resolution imaging. Science 2016; 352: 
1190–1194.

2 
Chen MK, Chu CH, Liu X, Zhang J, Sun L, Yao J et al. Meta-Lens in the Sky. IEEE Access 2022; 
10: 46552–46557.

3 
Chen FT, Craighead HG. Diffractive lens fabricated with mostly zeroth-order gratings. Opt Lett
1996; 21: 177–179.

4 
Lalanne P, Astilean S, Chavel P, Cambril E, Launois H. Design and fabrication of blazed binary 
diffractive elements with sampling periods smaller than the structural cutoff. JOSA A 1999; 16: 
1143–1156.

5 
McLamb M, Li Y, Stinson P, Hofmann T. Metasurfaces for the infrared spectral range fabricated 
using two-photon polymerization. Thin Solid Films 2021; 721: 138548.

6 
Roques-Carmes C, Lin Z, Christiansen RE, Salamin Y, Kooi SE, Joannopoulos JD et al. Toward 3D-
Printed Inverse-Designed Metaoptics. ACS Photonics 2022; 9: 43–51.

7 
Roberts G, Ballew C, Zheng T, Garcia JC, Camayd-Muñoz S, Hon PWC et al. 3D-patterned inverse-
designed mid-infrared metaoptics. Nat Commun 2023; 14: 2768.


13

8 
Park J-S, Zhang S, She A, Chen WT, Lin P, Yousef KMA et al. All-Glass, Large Metalens at Visible 
Wavelength Using Deep-Ultraviolet Projection Lithography. Nano Lett 2019; 19: 8673–8682.

9 
Hu T, Zhong Q, Li N, Dong Y, Xu Z, Fu YH et al. CMOS-compatible a-Si metalenses on a 12-inch 
glass wafer for fingerprint imaging. Nanophotonics 2020; 9: 823–830.

10 Zhong Q, Dong Y, Li D, Li N, Hu T, Xu Z et al. Large-Area Metalens Directly Patterned on a 12-

Inch Glass Wafer using Immersion Lithography for Mass Production. In: 2020 Optical Fiber 
Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC). 2020, pp 1–3.

11 Einck VJ, Torfeh M, McClung A, Jung DE, Mansouree M, Arbabi A et al. Scalable Nanoimprint 

Lithography Process for Manufacturing Visible Metasurfaces Composed of High Aspect Ratio TiO2 
Meta-Atoms. ACS Photonics 2021; 8: 2400–2409.

12 Kim J, Seong J, Kim W, Lee G-Y, Kim S, Kim H et al. Scalable manufacturing of high-index atomic 

layer–polymer hybrid metasurfaces for metaphotonics in the visible. Nat Mater 2023; 22: 474–481.

13 Yoon G, Kim K, Huh D, Lee H, Rho J. Single-step manufacturing of hierarchical dielectric metalens 

in the visible. Nat Commun 2020; 11: 2268.

14 Liu ED, Tran C, Prescop T, Lam DK. Multiple columns for high-throughput complementary e-beam 

lithography (CEBL). In: Alternative Lithographic Technologies IV. SPIE, 2012, pp 419–428.

15 Zeitner UD, Banasch M, Trost M. Potential of E-beam lithography for micro- and nano-optics 

fabrication on large areas. J MicroNanopatterning Mater Metrol 2023; 22: 041405.

16 Yin X, Park J-S, Stensvad KK, Brott RL, Rubin N, Wolk MB et al. Roll-to-roll dielectric 

metasurfaces. In: Metamaterials, Metadevices, and Metasystems 2020. SPIE, 2020, p 114600S.

17 Moore GE. Cramming More Components Onto Integrated Circuits. Proc IEEE 1998; 86: 82–85.

18 She A, Zhang S, Shian S, Clarke DR, Capasso F. Large area metalenses: design, characterization, and 

mass manufacturing. Opt Express 2018; 26: 1573–1585.

19 Zhang L, Chang S, Chen X, Ding Y, Rahman MT, Duan Y et al. High-Efficiency, 80 mm Aperture 

Metalens Telescope. Nano Lett 2023; 23: 51–57.

20 Zhang L, Chang S, Chen X, Ding Y, Rahman MT, Yao et al. Wafer-scale single-aperture near-

infrared metalens fabricated by deep UV photolithography. In: Conference on Lasers and Electro-
Optics (2022), paper FF2D.4. Optica Publishing Group, 2022, p FF2D.4.

21 Li J, Wang Y, Liu S, Xu T, Wei K, Zhang Y et al. Largest aperture metalens of high numerical 

aperture and polarization independence for long-wavelength infrared imaging. Opt Express 2022; 30: 
28882–28891.

22 Extreme Optics and Imaging (EXTREME). 2023 https://youtu.be/XOW4gPOdOVI.

23 Park J-S, Lim SWD, Ossiander M, Li Z, Amirzhan A, Capasso F. All-Glass, Mass-Producible, Large-

Diameter Metalens at Visible Wavelength for 100 mm Aperture Optics and Beyond. In: Conference 
on Lasers and Electro-Optics (2022), paper AW4I.1. Optica Publishing Group, 2022, p AW4I.1.

24 Arbabi E, Kamali SM, Arbabi A, Faraon A. Full-Stokes Imaging Polarimetry Using Dielectric 

Metasurfaces. ACS Photonics 2018; 5: 3132–3140.


14

25 Rubin NA, D’Aversa G, Chevalier P, Shi Z, Chen WT, Capasso F. Matrix Fourier optics enables a 

compact full-Stokes polarization camera. Science 2019; 365: eaax1839.

26 Rubin NA, Chevalier P, Juhl M, Tamagnone M, Chipman R, Capasso F. Imaging polarimetry 

through metasurface polarization gratings. Opt Express 2022; 30: 9389–9412.

27 Ossiander M, Meretska ML, Hampel HK, Lim SWD, Knefz N, Jauk T et al. Extreme ultraviolet 

metalens by vacuum guiding. Science 2023; 380: 59–63.

28 Chen WT, Park J-S, Marchioni J, Millay S, Yousef KMA, Capasso F. Dispersion-engineered 

metasurfaces reaching broadband 90% relative diffraction efficiency. Nat Commun 2023; 14: 2544.

29 Zuo H, Choi D-Y, Gai X, Ma P, Xu L, Neshev DN et al. High-Efficiency All-Dielectric Metalenses 

for Mid-Infrared Imaging. Adv Opt Mater 2017; 5: 1700585.

30 Chen WT, Zhu AY, Sisler J, Huang Y-W, Yousef KMA, Lee E et al. Broadband Achromatic 

Metasurface-Refractive Optics. Nano Lett 2018; 18: 7801–7808.

31 Liu G-Y, Hsu W-L, Pan J-W, Wang C-M. Refractive and Meta-Optics Hybrid System. J Light 

Technol 2021; 39: 6880–6885.

32 Aieta F, Genevet P, Kats MA, Yu N, Blanchard R, Gaburro Z et al. Aberration-Free Ultrathin Flat 

Lenses and Axicons at Telecom Wavelengths Based on Plasmonic Metasurfaces. Nano Lett 2012; 12: 
4932–4936.

33 Aieta F, Genevet P, Kats M, Capasso F. Aberrations of flat lenses and aplanatic metasurfaces. Opt 

Express 2013; 21: 31530–31539.

34 Smith W. Modern Lens Design. 2nd edition. McGraw Hill: New York, 2004.

35 Maréchal A. Mechanical Integrator for Studying the Distribution of Light in the Optical Image. JOSA

1947; 37: 403_1-404.

36 Geary JM. Introduction to Lens Design: With Practical Zemax Examples. Willmann-Bell: Richmond, 

Va, 2002.

37 Pestourie R, Pérez-Arancibia C, Lin Z, Shin W, Capasso F, Johnson SG. Inverse design of large-area 

metasurfaces. Opt Express 2018; 26: 33732–33747.

38 Marathay AS, McCalmont JF. Vector diffraction theory for electromagnetic waves. JOSA A 2001; 

18: 2585–2593.

39 Witherspoon B, Huff L, Jacoby M, Mammini P. Results of environmental testing of the focus and 

alignment mechanism of the near-infrared camera on the James Webb Space Telescope. In: 
Astronomical and Space Optical Systems (eds Warren, P. G., Marshall, C. J., Heaney, J. B., 
Kvamme, E. T., Tyson, R. K., Hart, M.). SPIE, 2009, pp 416–428.

40 Tumarina M, Ryazanskiy M, Jeong S, Hong G, Vedenkin N, Park IH et al. Design, fabrication and 

space suitability tests of wide field of view, ultra-compact, and high resolution telescope for space 
application. Opt Express 2018; 26: 2390–2399.

41 McElwain MW, Feinberg LD, Kimble RA, Bowers CW, Knight JS, Niedner MB et al. Status of the 

James Webb Space Telescope mission. In: Lystrup M, Batalha N, Tong EC, Siegler N, Perrin MD 


15

(eds). Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2020: Optical, Infrared, and Millimeter Wave. SPIE: 
Online Only, United States, 2020, p 21.

42 Roy R, Agrawal DK, McKinstry HA. Very Low Thermal Expansion Coefficient Materials. Annu Rev 

Mater Sci 1989; 19: 59–81.

43 Leviton DB, Frey BJ. Temperature-dependent absolute refractive index measurements of synthetic 

fused silica. In: Optomechanical Technologies for Astronomy. SPIE, 2006, pp 800–810.

44 Lim SWD, Park J-S, Kazakov D, Spägele CM, Dorrah AH, Meretska ML et al. Point singularity 

array with metasurfaces. Nat Commun 2023; 14: 3237.

45 Said AA, Xia T, Dogariu A, Hagan DJ, Soileau MJ, Stryland EWV et al. Measurement of the optical 

damage threshold in fused quartz. Appl Opt 1995; 34: 3374–3376.

46 Ossiander M, Huang Y-W, Chen WT, Wang Z, Yin X, Ibrahim YA et al. Slow light nanocoatings for 

ultrashort pulse compression. Nat Commun 2021; 12: 6518.

47 Divitt S, Zhu W, Zhang C, Lezec HJ, Agrawal A. Ultrafast optical pulse shaping using dielectric 

metasurfaces. Science 2019; 364: 890–894.


16

Fig. 1. Fabrication process of the 100 mm diameter, all-glass metalens. (a) Global alignment 
marks are formed by etching the alignment patterns into the deposited aluminum film on a fused 
silica substrate. (b) A 100 mm diameter metalens pattern, segmented into 25 sections, is formed 
on the aluminum film using a negative DUV photoresist with 7 photomasks. After exposing 
sections 1-7 at 0°wafer orientation with global alignment onto the negative DUV photoresist film, 
sections 2-7 are also aligned and exposed on the resist layer at 90°, 180°, and 270°wafer rotation, 
respectively. The exposed DUV photoresist is baked and developed, leaving the metalens pattern 
in the aluminum film. (c) Using the photoresist pattern as an etch mask, the metalens pattern is 
transferred to the aluminum film with an Ar/Cl2 plasma etch. The photoresist layer is stripped 
using downstream oxygen plasma ashing. Using the patterned aluminum as etch mask, we perform 
a vertical SiO2 etch with C3F8 plasma into the fused silica substrate until the desired pillar height 
of 1.5 𝜇𝑚 is reached. The residual Al film is removed using a Cl2 plasma etch, leaving only the 
fused silica nanopillars. 


17

Fig. 2. Photographs and SEM images of the 100 mm diameter, all-glass metalens. (a) 
Photograph of the metalens compared with a table tennis racket. (b) SEM image of the fused silica 
nanopillars comprising the metalens. More SEM images are provided in Supplementary 
Information (Fig. S7). Photographs taken from the side of (c) the metalens (𝑓 = 150 𝑚𝑚 at 𝜆 =
632.8 𝑛𝑚) and (d) a plano-convex lens made of N-BK7 glass with a similar diameter (100 mm) 
and focal length (𝑓 = 150 𝑚𝑚 at 𝜆 = 587.6 𝑛𝑚, Edmund Optics #19-904). The thickness and 
weight of the metalens are 0.5 mm and 14.6 g, and those of the refractive lens are 21 mm and 242.2 
g, respectively.


18

Fig. 3. Optical characterization of the 100 mm diameter, all-glass metalens. (a) Focal spot 
image of the fabricated metalens at the design wavelength (𝜆 = 632.8 nm). Scale bar: 3 𝜇𝑚. (b) 
Point-Spread-Function (PSF) of the metalens along the optic axis. 𝑧 = 0 𝜇𝑚 represents the focal 
plane (f=150 mm). (c) Simulated focal spot image of an ideal lens with NA=0.32 (scale bar: 3 𝜇𝑚), 
and (d) simulated PSF of an ideal lens along the optic axis. (e) Focusing profiles along the sagittal 
(vertical) and the tangential (horizontal) plane of the metalens’ focus shown in (a) and simulated 
focusing profiles of diffraction-limited lenses with NAs of 0.32 (100 mm aperture, 150 mm focal 
length) and 0.20 (60 mm aperture, 150 mm focal length), respectively. (f) Modulation transfer 
function (MTF) of the metalens along the sagittal and the tangential direction, and diffraction-
limited MTFs of lenses with NA of 0.32 and 0.20, respectively. (g) Measured wavefront error map 
of 100 mm diameter metalens, obtained from full-aperture interferometry. The interferometry 
alignment terms (i.e., piston, tip, tilt, and power) are removed. (h) Intensity image of the 1st-order 
diffracted beam from the metalens, which corresponds to the intensity contribution from each point 
of metalens to the focal point. The diffracted intensity is higher in the central 6 × 6 cm region, at 
which industrial-grade photomasks were used (reticles 1-3), compared to the outer region at which
lab-written photomasks were used (reticles 4-7). The mismatch in diffraction efficiency between 
the inner and outer regions causes a broadening of the observed focusing behavior from that of an 
ideal 100 mm diameter lens. 


19

Fig. 4. Simulation-based study on the effects of missing smaller pillars in different regions of 
metalens on its imaging quality and efficiency. Simulated wavefront error of a metalens missing 
small pillars (a) in all sections (reticles 1-7), (b) in the inner sections only (reticles 1-3), and (c) in 
the outer sections only (reticles 4-7), respectively. The surface plots show the resulting wavefront 
error when the smallest fabricated nanopillar diameter is 550 nm. (d) Simulated Strehl ratio versus
the minimum fabricated nanopillar diameter for all sections, inner sections only, and outer sections 
only, respectively. The Strehl ratio remains diffraction-limited when the nanopillars are missing 
uniformly across the entire metalens, while a mismatch in the loss of nanopillars result in poorer 
imaging quality due to the resulting wavefront error. (e) Simulated focusing efficiencies when all 
sections, inner sections only, and outer sections only are missing smaller pillars. All cases exhibit 
degradation of overall focusing efficiencies due missing smaller diffracting elements. (f) 
Normalized modulation transfer function (MTF) for each scenario of missing pillars when the 
smallest fabricated nanopillar diameter is 550 nm. The MTF contrast curves are normalized to 
their respective zero-frequency values.


20

Fig. 5. Imaging the heavens in the visible with 100 mm diameter wide field-of-view (~0.6°)
meta-astrophotography apparatus. (a) Photograph of the astro-imager comprising only a 100 
mm diameter metalens, an exchangeable optical filter, and a cooled CMOS monochromatic sensor, 
mounted on an equatorial mount guided by a guide-scope. (b) Acquired image of the Sun with a 
neutral density filter (OD 3.0) and a 1 nm bandwidth bandpass filter centered at 632.8 nm. Image 
taken on Feb. 01, 2023, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Identified sunspot group numbers are 
labeled. (c) Acquired image of the North America Nebula (NGC 7000, in the constellation Cygnus) 
with a 7 nm bandwidth 𝐻-𝛼 filter (𝜆 = 656.28 nm). Image taken on May 13, 2022, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA. Notable celestial objects are labeled. The imaging system can detect stars 
down to an apparent magnitude of 9.15. (d) Acquired image of the Moon at its last quarter phase,
taken with a 1 nm bandwidth bandpass filter centered at 632.8 nm. Image taken on Aug. 18, 2022, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. High-resolution images are provided in the Supplementary 
Information. 


1

Supplementary Information for

All-glass 100 mm Diameter Visible Metalens for Imaging the Cosmos

Authors: Joon-Suh Park1*†, Soon Wei Daniel Lim1†, Arman Amirzhan1, Hyukmo Kang2, 
Karlene Karrfalt2,3, Daewook Kim2, Joel Leger3, Augustine M. Urbas3, Marcus Ossiander1,4, 

Zhaoyi Li1, and Federico Capasso1*

1John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University; 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02138, United States. 

2Wyant College of Optical Sciences, The University of Arizona; Tucson, Arizona, 85721, 
United States.

3Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base; Dayton, Ohio 45433, 
United States.

4Institute of Experimental Physics, Graz University of Technology, 8010 Graz, Austria.

†These authors contributed equally to this work.

*Corresponding author. Email: parkj@g.harvard.edu, capasso@seas.harvard.edu

This PDF file includes:

Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S26
Tables S1 to S3


2

Supplementary text:

Generation of metalens design file 
In this metalens design file generation, we place the nanopillars in cylindrical coordinates from 
azimuthal symmetry considerations1. The required fused silica nanopillar diameter D(n) at each 
radial position 𝑟𝑛 is chosen to satisfy Eq. (1) as closely as possible. The edge-to-edge distance 
between the nanopillars is fixed at 250 nm. The nth nanopillar having diameter of D(n) at each 
radial position 𝑟𝑛 is then placed evenly along the azimuthal direction so that the angular distance 
between nanopillars (∆𝜃𝑛) satisfies the following equation:

∆𝜃𝑛 =

2𝜋

⌊
2𝜋𝑟𝑛

𝐷(𝑛)+250 𝑛𝑚⌋,
(Eq. S1)

where ⌊𝑥⌋ is the floor function. This places nanopillars so that they have the same edge-to-edge 
distance equal to or slightly larger than 250 nm. This resulted in placement of 18,700,751,972 
nanopillars for the entire 100 mm diameter metalens. 

The created 100 mm diameter metalens design is then discretized into 25 sections, each having 

an area of 20 × 20 mm. Out of the 25 sections, only 7 sections (see Fig. S1) are selected and 
written to individual GDSII format CAD file using the GDSPY module on Python. We use 1 nm 
as the coordinate precision. Several techniques are used to reduce each CAD file size so that it 
can be later loaded to commercial photomask writers: (1) Each nanopillar with a specific 
diameter is only created once as a GDS cell, and other positions reference that first cell. (2) Each 
circle that represents a nanopillar is approximated to be an octagon to reduce the number of 
vertices. Nanopillars that are within 250 nm distance from the reticle boundaries are removed to 
avoid structure overlap between the sections. The total file size for all 7 reticle designs is 115.6 
GB (19 GB, 20 GB, 20.3 GB, 20.1 GB, 16.5 GB, 3.2 GB, and 16.5 GB for reticles #1-#7, 
respectively), and all GDSII files are generated simultaneously using a 20-core workstation (two 
Intel® Xeon® E5-2690 v2 processors, 768 GB RAM) with a peak memory usage of 500 GB, 
taking less than 5 hours. 

Simulation of metalens performance
The 100 mm metalens is numerically simulated by discretizing the 100 mm aperture into 
100,000 annular rings with equal radial thickness of 500 nm, then discretizing each annular ring 
into 100 equal sections in the azimuthal direction, which produces 10 million annular sections. 
The radial discretization is chosen to resolve the highest spatial frequency zone at the edge of the 
metalens using at least four points. Each of the 10 million annular sections is associated with the 
complex scalar electric field that is transmitted through the nanopillar located at the geometric 
center of that annular section. The transmitted electric field through each nanopillar is obtained 
using the locally periodic assumption2. Each glass nanopillar on glass substrate geometry 
combination is individually simulated using the Rigorous Coupled Wave Analysis platform 
RETICOLO3 on a periodic square lattice with a nominal edge-to-edge distance of 250 nm, 200 
staircase discretization per circular arc quadrant, and 2601 Fourier plane waves. Empty regions 
without nanopillars are simulated under the same conditions with the nanopillar being replaced 
with a layer of air that has the same thickness as the nanopillar height. The fused silica refractive 
index as a function of wavelength is obtained from the dispersion equation published by 
Malitson4 The transmitted electric field associated with each nanopillar is the zeroth diffraction 
order electric field for normal incidence illumination from the glass substrate. The area-weighted 


3

electric fields are propagated to the focal plane using a vectorial propagator5. The focal plane is 
sampled on a 201 × 201 square grid up to a maximum transverse diameter of 6 Airy disk 
diameters, where one Airy disk diameter is 1.22λ/NA. The focusing efficiency is defined as the 
power flux through a circular diameter equal to 3 Airy disk diameters at the focal plane, divided 
by the incident power at the metalens. This focusing efficiency does not include the Fresnel 
reflection loss at the first air/glass interface on the back face of the metalens, which is expected 
to be around 4%. The 2D modulation transfer function (MTF) of the focal spot is computed by 
Fourier transformation of the intensity profile within 6 Airy disk diameters on the focal plane 
with no zero padding. The Strehl ratio of the focal spot is calculated by integrating the volume 
under the 2D MTF and dividing it by the volume under the diffraction limited 2D MTF. 


Publish 

Date 

(YYYY.

MM.)

Diameter

(λ)

Diameter 

(mm)

λ

(nm)

Wavelength 

range

Fabrication 

Method
Material

Focal 
length 
(mm)

NA
f/#

Pol.-
dep. 
(Y/N)

Focusing 

Eff.
Ref.

1996. 

02.
1,580
1

(square)
632.8
Visible
EBL
Fused quartz
20
0.025
20
N
53%
6

1999.

05.
233
0.2

(square)
860
NIR
EBL
TiO2
0.4
20° off axis
N
80%
7

2012.

08.
581
0.9
1550
NIR
EBL
Ag
30,
60

0.015, 
0.075

33.3,
66.7
Y
1%
8

2013.

04.

6
10
14

0.004 
0.007 
0.0094

676
Visible
FIB
Au

0.025 
0.005 
0.007

0.62 
0.57 
0.56

0.63 
0.710

.74

Y
10%
9

2014.

12.
10
305

(square)

30⨉106

(10 
GHz)

GHz
Not reported
Metal
300
0.58
0.70
Y
24.7%
10

2016.

06.
451
0.24
532
Visible
EBL
TiO2
0.09
0.80
0.38
Y
73%
11

2017.

10.
75
0.3
4000
MIR
EBL
a-Si:H
on MgF2
0.05
0.95
0.17
N
78%
12

2017.

10.
104
10

96⨉103

(3.11 
THz)

THz
Photolith.
SOI
30
0.16
3.00
N
24%
13

2018.

01.
12,903
20
1550
NIR
i-line stepper
a-Si
50
0.20
2.50
N
91.8%
14

2018.

02.
839
0.6
715
NIR
EBL
a-Si
0.042
0.99
0.07
N
37%
15

2018.

02.
3,871
6
1550
NIR
i-line stepper
a-Si
50
0.06
8.33
N
62.5%
16

2018.

02.

571
-870
0.4
460
-700
Visible
EBL
TiO2

on SiO2/Ag
0.98
0.20
2.45
N
16-

22.6%
17

2018.

04.
192
1
5200
MIR
EBL
PbTe

on CaF2
0.5
0.71
0.50
Y
75%
18

2018.

07.
15,798
10
633
Visible
EBL
SiN
-4
0.78
-0.40
N
Not 

reported
19

2018.

11.

30,303
37,594
42,283

20

660,
532,
473

Visible
EBL
poly-Si

12.9,
16,
18

0.61,
0.53,
0.49

0.65,
0.8,
0.9

Y
79%
20

4


Publish 

Date 

(YYYY.

MM.)

Diameter

(λ)

Diameter 

(mm)

λ

(nm)

Wavelength 

range

Fabrication 

Method
Material

Focal 
length 
(mm)

NA
f/#

Pol.-
dep. 
(Y/N)

Focusing 
Efficienc

y

Ref.

2019.

08.

2,000
1,200
750

6

(square)

3000, 
5000, 
8000

MIR
EBL
Ge
2
0.83
0.33
Y
33%
21

2019.

09.
2,128
10
4700
MIR
EBL
Au
120
0.04
12.00
Y
Not 

reported
22

2019.

11.
15,798
10
633
Visible
KrF DUV
Fused silica
50
0.10
5.00
N
45.6%
1

2019.

11.
5,639
3
532
Visible
EBL
TiO2
14.4
0.10
4.80
N
Not 

reported
23

2020.

01.
2,128
2
940
NIR
ArF immersion 

DUV
a-Si
1.732
0.50
0.87
N
29.2%
24

2020.

03.
18,797
10
532
Visible
EBL
Resist
(ma-N)
4
0.78
0.40
Y
80%
25

2020.

05.

19
-30
6.48

0.2⨉106-
0.3⨉106
(0.9 - 1.4 

THz)

THz
Photolith.
Si
15
0.21
2.31
Y
33.9%
26

2020.

09.
1,000
5.2

(square)
5200
MIR
EBL
PbTe

on CaF2
2.5
0.88
0.27
N
32-45%
27

2021.

01.

4,098
3,759
3,040

2
488, 

532, 658
Visible
EBL
TiO2
3.2,
1

0.3
0.7

0.5 
1.55
Y
Not 

reported
28

2021.

02.
288
1.5

(square)
5200
MIR
EBL
GSST
1.5,
2

0.58, 
0.47

0.71, 
0.94
Y
23.7%,
21.6%
29

2021.

04.
581
0.9
1550
NIR
NIL
Si
10
0.04
11.11
Y
26%
30

2021.

08.
7,273
4
550
Visible
NIL
TiO2
9.8
0.20
2.45
N
43%
31

2021.

10.
1,290
2
1550
NIR
EBL
a-Si
4
0.24
2.00
N
42.7%
32

2022.

01.
3,160
2
633
Visible
EBL
sc-Si
2
0.45
1.00
N
64%
33

2022.

04.
4,887
2.6
532
Visible
EBL
GaN
5.03
0.25
1.93
N
Not 

reported
34

5


Publish 

Date 

(YYYY.

MM.)

Diameter 

(λ)

Diameter 

(mm)

λ

(nm)

Wavelength 

range

Fabrication 

Method
Material

Focal 
length 
(mm)

NA
f/#

Pol.-
dep. 
(Y/N)

Focusing 

Eff.
Ref.

2022.

05.

20,492
18,797
15,198

10
488, 

532, 658
Visible
EBL
TiO2
16
0.30
1.60
N
15%
35

2022.

05.
55,172
80
1450
NIR
KrF DUV
a-Si
260
0.15
3.25
N
71%
36, 37

2022.

05.
4,717
50
10600
LWIR
Stepper 
photolith.
Si
34
0.59
0.68
N
Not 

reported
38

2022.

08
8,000
80
10000
LWIR
Contact 
photolith.
a-Si
80
0.45
1.00
N
Not 

reported
39

2023.

01
4,887
2.6
532
Visible
EBL
GaN
10
0.13
3.85
N
74%
40

2023.

03

22,222
18,797
15,748

10

450,
532,
635

Visible

NIL, ArF 
immersion 

DUV

TiO2 coated 

resin
24.5
0.20
2.45
Y

40.9%,
55.6%,
44.6%

41

This 
work
157,978
100
633
Visible
KrF DUV
Fused silica
150
0.32
1.50
N
40.4%

Table. S1. List of notable metalens’ diameters and their parameters. 
Progression in time of notable metalens diameters with respect to design wavelength (λ and mm), fabrication methods, constituent
materials, polarization dependence (pol.-dep.), and their optical parameters (focal length, numerical aperture (NA), f-number (f/#), and 
focusing efficiency. Acronyms in the fabrication method column are as follows:

⚫
EBL: Electron beam lithography

⚫
NIL: Nano-imprint lithography

⚫
FIB: Focused-ion beam lithography

⚫
DUV: Deep-ultraviolet lithography

6


7

Fig. S1. Fabrication strategy and prepared reticles. 
(a) An abbreviated schematic of a DUV projection lithography system. A DUV beam (λ=248 nm
for KrF excimer laser source) is incident on a reticle (photomask) which has the desired patterns 
written in chrome. The transmitted light is then passed through an array of image reduction lenses 
so that the image on the reticle is demagnified and projected onto the surface of a target wafer. 
Depending on the lithography tool, the demagnification ratio is typically 4:1 or 5:1. This allows
the resolution of features smaller than the source wavelength, while keeping the reticles pristine. 
These image reduction systems, however, limit the maximum exposure area with guaranteed 
image resolution only on the order of 30 mm square area on the wafer. In this article, we use an
ASML PAS 5500/300C DUV stepper having λ=248 nm, demagnification ratio of 4:1, and 
maximum exposure area of 22 × 22 𝑚𝑚 on a wafer. (b) To realize a 100 mm diameter metalens 
using the DUV system, we discretize the lens into 25 different sections, each having a 
20 × 20 𝑚𝑚 area. We intentionally put reticle #1 at the center of the metalens pattern to avoid 
stitching errors on the optic axis. As the metalens is azimuthally symmetric, we identify and use 
only the 7 unique sections from a quadrant to make the whole metalens. As we target a 100 mm
(4-in.) diameter metalens, we choose the wafer to be larger than the metalens diameter (150 mm, 
6-in.) which allows space for alignment markers and easier handling. (c) Fabricated reticles for the 
100 mm metalens. Reticles #1-#3 (inner 60 × 60 mm area) are fabricated by industry-grade 

          
          

          

                
                

                  

          

          

          
          

                  

                  

                 
                  

                    

                           

                           
                               

                  

             
               

       

           

              

                    

     

     

          

           

           

                

                     
                     

                        
                      

   

   
   

   

                        

      

     


8

photomask manufacturer (Photronics Inc.) and reticles #4-#7 are fabricated in-house using a 
Heidelberg DWL2000 laser mask writer. Reticles #4-#7 have poorer quality (unresolved small 
patterns, incorrect feature sizes) compared to reticles #1-#3 due to imperfection in the optimization 
of in-house mask fabrication processes. The prepared CAD file size (GDSII format) is marked on 
each reticle. (d) Image of the reticle patterns on a top left edge of the reticle #1. Filled areas (red)
represent cleared areas on the reticle, while the unfilled (white) area is opaque with chrome mask. 
Empty areas along the azimuth are part of the design that contributes to the wavefront. The circular 
patterns are approximated as octagons to reduce the number of vertices, and therefore reduce the 
overall CAD file size. The patterns are 4X magnified on the reticle. Structures that overlap with
the reticle boundaries are intentionally omitted to avoid multiple exposure between the reticles.


9

Fig. S2. Simulated library of fused silica nanopillars.
(a) Library of nanopillars used in the metalens design. Nanopillar height H=1.5 μm and edge-to-
edge gap g=250 nm is used for while sweeping the diameters from 0 to 800 nm. Only the structures 
with diameters between 250 nm and 600 nm, and 0 nm (empty area) are selected to be included in 
the metalens design. (b) Effect of edge-to-edge gap variance on the nanopillar’s transmitted phase 
and intensity. (c) Effect of diameter shift while maintaining the same center-to-center distance to 
model the size error which could occur during fabrication. (d) Effect of overall nanopillar’s height 
shift on the transmitted phase to model the height error which could occur during fabrication. 

   
   

   
   

                         
                     
 

 


10

Fig. S3. Rotation and alignment strategy.
(a) Optical microscope image of the alignment marks for the ASML PAS5500/300C DUV stepper. 
After coating DUV-42P ARC (Brewer Science, anti-reflection coating) and UV210 resist (Shipley, 
positive DUV resist), the alignment patterns are exposed on the 150 nm thick aluminum film on a 
150 mm diameter fused silica wafer using the DUV stepper system (Fig. 1(a)). After post-exposure 
bake and development of the alignment marks, the patterns are transferred to the Al film using wet 
etching. The alignment marks are etched to 120 nm in depth to satisfy the phase-contrast detection 
system in the DUV stepper. (b) Schematic of alignment mark placements. An arrow indicates a 
mark’s position, and the orientation of the mark at each position is indicated by the direction of 
the arrow. The marks are placed outside the metalens exposure area and are used as global 
alignment keys during the projection lithography processes for each reticle. The marks are placed 
in a way that the DUV tool can search the same location for the four alignment marks at each wafer 
rotation of 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270°, respectively, for the convenience in exposure schedule 
programming. 

                           
                          

  

         

             

                              

    

            

     

           

  
   
    
    

   
   

   

                                   


11

Fig. S4. Photographs of metalens wafer in between fabrication steps.
(a) Photograph of the developed photoresist pattern of the 100 mm metalens. The pattern is formed 
on the aluminum (Al) film on a 150 mm (6-inch) fused silica wafer, coated with DUV antireflective 
film (DUV ARC). (b) Using O2/Ar plasma, the DUV ARC layer is etched so that the metalens 
pattern is transferred to the ARC layer and expose the Al film below. (c) The 100 mm metalens 
pattern is then transferred to the Al film using Cl2 reactive ion etch. The Al on the edge of the 
wafer is not etched due to the wafer clamping mechanism of the plasma etcher. The residual resist 
and ARC materials are stripped using downstream plasma ashing. 

                                   

                        

                  
                  

   
   
   


12

Fig. S5. Optimization of fused silica vertical etching process.
(a) Schematic of ion-enhanced inhibitor etch process. C3F8 gas is introduced into the etch chamber 
and is ionized by RF drive. Light-weight, free electrons are first attracted toward the electrically 
isolated wafer surface and charge the surface to negative polarity as the electron population is built 
up. The ionized gas simultaneously forms fluorocarbon polymer on the exposed surface, creating 
a chemical etch inhibiting film, while the positively charged fluorocarbon ions are accelerated 
toward the negatively charged surface. The accelerated ions directionally bombard the surface, 
breaking and removing the fluorocarbon polymer film that faces the surface normal of the substrate.
The fluoride radicals present in the plasma diffuse onto the surface and chemically etch the 
exposed SiO2, creating volatile SiF3 and CO as etch products. The polymers deposited on the 
sidewalls inhibit the lateral etch of SiO2. The vertical etch of SiO2 is achieved by balancing the 
rate of fluorocarbon deposition and the reactive ion etch. Here, we use substrate temperature as the 
rate control parameter. (b)-(h) Tilted SEM images of the etched SiO2 pillars and trenches at 
different etch temperatures. The fixed process temperature for each sample ranges from 0℃ to 
40℃. As the temperature rises, the polymer deposition speed is slowed and the reactive ion etching 
is accelerated, that near-vertical sidewalls are reached at 40℃. The samples in the SEM images 
still have residual Al etch mask on the top of each structure, which accounts for the rough top 
surface. (i) Tilted SEM image of the vertical-sidewall sidewall etched SiO2 nanopillars with 
different diameters. The height of the nanopillars is 1.5 μm. The smooth area at the bottom of the 
pillars is an etched surface. 

   
   

   
   
   

   
   
   

                 
                 

                 
                 
                 

                 
                 
                 

  

    

                           

             
                

                           

   

           

                        

           
            

           

            

    
       

             

            

             
             


13

Fig. S6. Measured etch rate uniformity across the 100 mm diameter region.
The SiO2 etch rate is measured across 100 mm diameter region with stylus profilometry at 45 
different positions. The positions of the acquired data are marked in small green squares. With the 
measurement data, the etch rate across the region of interest is obtained by fitting to a cubic 
polynomial: 

𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑎0 + 𝑎1𝑥 + 𝑎2𝑦 + 𝑎3𝑥𝑦 + 𝑎4𝑥2 + 𝑎5𝑦2 + 𝑎6𝑥3 + 𝑎7𝑥2𝑦 + 𝑎8𝑥𝑦2 + 𝑎6𝑦3.

The measured average etch rate across the 100 mm diameter region is 606.4 nm/min, with standard 
deviation of 7.41 nm/min. The etch uniformity could be further improved by having better control 
over the temperature distribution and plasma uniformity in the etch chamber. 


14

Fig. S7. SEM images of the fabricated 100 mm diameter all-glass metalens.
(a) Top-view SEM image of the metalens center area, corresponding to Reticle #1. (b) Top-view 
SEM image of the metalens. (c) Top-view SEM image of the metalens where 4 reticles meet; 3 
reticles are oriented north, while reticle #2 (top left) is oriented toward west. The missing pillars 
between the reticles are intentional; they were omitted to avoid possible multiple exposure at the 
boundary of the sections. (d) Tilted SEM image of metalens where 4 industry-grade reticles meet; 
reticle #1 is oriented north, while the top two reticles (#2 and #3) are facing west, and lower left 
corner reticle (#2) is facing south. Note that the vertical sidewalls are consistent for different pillar 
diameters. (e) Top-view SEM image of the metalens at its edge, between the boundaries of home-
made reticles #6 and #5. The missing small pillars are from fabrication error of the reticles, where 
small pillar structures were not resolved. (f) Top-view SEM image of the metalens where home-
made (#4, #7) and industry-grade reticles (#2, #3) meet. Comparing with reticles 2 and 3, reticles
4 and 7 shows slight misalignment, missing small pillars, and incorrect pillar size, originating from 
the lower-resolution mask writing process developed in-house. 

          

          

          
          

          

          

          
          

          

          

          
          

          

          

         

          

      

   
   

   
   

   
   


15

Fig. S8. Schematic of point-spread-function measurement setup.
A fiber-coupled He-Ne laser (𝜆 = 632.8 𝑛𝑚, N-LHR-121, Newport Corporation) is used as an 
illumination source. After passing the laser beam through the fiber collimator (F220APC-633, 
Thorlabs), the collimated beam is then sent through an objective lens (EA achro 20X/0.40, W.D. 
0.8 mm, Motic) from its back side. The focal point of the objective lens is used as the point-source 
image, which is placed at the focus of a 45° off-axis parabolic mirror (#35-629, Edmund Optics). 
The parabolic mirror then creates a collimated beam with diameter of 101 mm, which is incident 
on the 100 mm diameter metalens. The image of the focus is 40X magnified and recorded by the
microscope camera of Optikos MTF measurement tool (LensCheck, Optikos Corp.). The 
microscope camera is stepped along z-axis to acquire the point-spread-function along the optic 
axis. The focal plane of the metalens is determined by the plane of maximum on-axis intensity.

For an accurate PSF measurement, a high-quality collimated light incident on a metalens at a 

normal angle is important. This is relatively easier to achieve for few millimeter aperture optics, 
where quality optomechanical components are readily available, but not for a hundred-millimeter 
or larger scale optics: Not only is the creation of large-diameter collimated beam with near-
planewave phase front difficult and costly, the alignment of large optics with respect to the 
collimated beam also requires extensive trial and error. To ensure the validity of the PSF 
characterization, therefore, a different measurement technique is needed to corroborate the PSF 
analysis for large-diameter optics, in general. A more commonly used and widely accepted 
characterization method for large optics is interferometric analysis.

             
           
          

                

                

              

                  
                           

               

               

        

 

 
 

      

                
                  

               
           

         
           


16

Fig. S9. Focal length measurement using point-source microscope (PSM) and coordinate 
measurement machine (CMM).
(a) A schematic diagram of a point-source microscope (PSM, Optical Perspectives Group LLC). 
A point source image is projected onto the objective lens’ object plane, which is used as a 
reference to ensure the PSM is correctly focused on the surface of interest or at the center of a 
sphere. Detailed descriptions and discussions can be found in Ref. 42. (b) Schematic of the focal 
length measurement apparatus. A PSM is securely mounted on a coordinate measurement 
machine (CMM, Tesa Micro-hite 3D, Tesa Technology), which is first focused on the rear 
surface of the metalens. After acquiring the x,y,z positions of the PSM at various metalens 
surface positions, the PSM is then moved to focus at the center of the return sphere (RS), whose 
center is aligned to the metalens’ focus using a Fizeau interferometer. The known thickness of 
the metalens substrate is subtracted out. (c) Various points of measurements at the surface of the 
metalens. The positional data are taken at 13 different locations and are labeled with numbers: 1-
6 for the inner section of the metalens, and 7-13 for the outer section of the metalens. The 
measured distance from the focal plane (i.e., metalens’ surface to the return sphere’s center of 
curvature) is 149.97 mm with standard deviation of 0.18 mm, which is in good agreement with 
the designed focal length of 150 mm. (d) List of measured axial (i.e., along the metalens’ surface 
normal) distance values from the return sphere’s center of curvature at different positions of the 
metalens.

      

      

             
           
      

          

    

                  

                   
                

          
           

        

                                 

            
               
   

                                      

             

   

            
                 

            
          

    
    

                               

       
     

 

 
 


17

Fig. S10. Schematic of full-aperture interferometry measurement setup.
A laser Fizeau interferometer (Zygo VerifireTM ATZ, Zygo Corporation) was used in nulling 
interferometry double-pass configuration to obtain the full-aperture wavefront measurement. We 
note that the image depicted on the left is not an exact configuration of the used interferometer but
is only a simplified schematic diagram to illustrate the measurement concept. For better 
understanding, please see Ref. 42. The metalens is illuminated by a collimated beam (𝜆 =
632.8 𝑛𝑚) from a Fizeau interferometer, creating the metalens’ focus at its focal plane. A return 
sphere (RS) with a known diameter is placed at the center of the metalens’ focus, having the focal 
plane coincide with the center of the return sphere. The focused beam by the metalens propagates 
toward the return sphere and is retroreflected from the RS surface, which is re-incident on the 
metalens. The doubly transmitted (i.e., double-pass) wavefront creates twice of the wavefront 
aberration function (WAF) deviating from an ideal spherical wavefront; if the wavefront from the 
metalens is perfectly spherical, the reflected wavefront from the return sphere would also be 
perfectly spherical, resulting in a null interferogram. The interfered irradiance image is then 
acquired with a camera. Multiple phase-shifted fringe patterns are used to calculate the phase map. 
The phase map is unwrapped across the full-aperture to provide the wavefront error map. After 
removing artifacts from misalignment (i.e., piston, tip, tilt, and power) of the metrology 
configuration (i.e., interferometer, metalens, and the return sphere) we obtain the metalens’
wavefront error.

             

          

    

        

       
      
    

            

           

    

          
           

                                            

     
          
                                     

             

      
     

      

           
    


18

Fig. S11. Fitted coefficients of Zernike polynomials of the measured WAF up to 66th order 
(10th degree)
The bar plots correspond to the fitted WAF coefficient values in Table S2. The bars are colored 
by the radial degree (n) of Zernike polynomial for visual discrimination. Major contribution to 
aberration comes from the 2nd (colored red, index no. 4-6) and the 4th (colored blue, index no. 11-
15) radial degrees. The large contribution from the horizontal coma (colored green, 3rd degree, 
index no. 8) is likely from the field-dependent aberration due to the misalignment of the metalens 
in the interferometry setup. 


19

Index
Degree 

(n)

Order 
(m)

Coefficient 

(waves)
Common name

1
0
0
0.002
Piston
34

7

-3
-0.002

2
1
1
0.002
Horizontal (x) tilt
35
-5
0.001

3
-1
0.003
Vertical (y) tilt
36
-7
-0.008

4

2

2
-0.405
Vertical 

astigmatism
37

8

8
0.044

5
0
-0.174
Defocus
38
6
-0.013

6
-2
0.130
Oblique 

astigmatism
39
4
0.052

7

3

3
-0.069
Oblique trefoil
40
2
-0.011

8
1
0.149
Horizontal coma
41
0
0.030

9
-1
-0.041
Vertical coma
42
-2
-0.007

10
-3
-0.045
Vertical trefoil
43
-4
-0.005

11

4

4
0.093
Vertical quadrafoil
44
-6
0.004

12
2
-0.113
Vertical secondary 

astigmatism
45
-8
-0.005

13
0
-0.145
Primary spherical
46

9

9
-0.011

14
-2
0.023
Oblique secondary 

astigmatism
47
7
0.000

15
-4
0.006
Oblique quadrafoil
48
5
0.001

16

5

5
-0.003
49
3
-0.004

17
3
-0.010
50
1
0.001

18
1
-0.017
Horizontal 

secondary coma
51
-1
0.012

19
-1
0.007
Vertical secondary 

coma
52
-3
-0.013

20
-3
-0.005
53
-5
0.005

21
-5
0.018
54
-7
0.002

22

6

6
0.009
55
-9
0.008

23
4
-0.035
56

10

10
0.006

24
2
0.002
57
8
-0.005

25
0
-0.006
Secondary 
Spherical
58
6
-0.008

26
-2
0.010
59
4
0.044

27
-4
0.005
60
2
-0.012

28
-6
0.010
61
0
0.022

29

7

7
0.005
62
-2
0.008

30
5
0.004
63
-4
-0.010

31
3
-0.004
64
-6
-0.003

32
1
0.009
65
-8
0.002

33
-1
0.010
66
-10
-0.005

Table. S2. Fitted coefficients of Zernike polynomials of the measured WAF up to 66th order 
(10th degree)
Zernike polynomial basis are expressed as:

{𝑍𝑛

𝑚(𝜌, 𝜑) = 𝑅𝑛

𝑚(𝜌) cos(𝑚𝜑) (for 𝑚 ≥ 0)

𝑍𝑛

𝑚(𝜌, 𝜑) = 𝑅𝑛

𝑚(𝜌) sin(𝑚𝜑) (for 𝑚 < 0)
(Eq. S2)

Where the radial polynomial 𝑅𝑛

𝑚(𝜌) is,

𝑅𝑛

𝑚(𝜌) = ∑
(−1)𝑠
(𝑛−𝑠)!

𝑠!(𝑛+𝑚

2 −𝑠)!(𝑛−𝑚

2 −𝑠)! 𝜌𝑛−2𝑠
(𝑛−𝑚)/2
𝑠=0
.
(Eq. S3)


20

Fig. S12. Schematic of considered fabrication error scenarios.
The considered error scenarios in the simulation-based study are as follows: (1) Small pillars are 
not resolved (not meeting critical dimension criterion), (2) shift in nanopillar diameters and (3) 
error in nanopillar height (due to error during etching). (a) Distribution of reticle patterns of an 
as-designed metalens, having no fabrication error. Reticle (Mask) 1 is placed at the center and 
Mask 2-7 are distributed at each quadrant rotated by 0⸰, 90⸰, 180⸰ and 270⸰, respectively. (b)-(h) 
Distribution of an erroneous mask across the metalens, when Mask 1 to Mask 7, respectively, is 
wrongly fabricated. (i) Distribution of erroneous masks when all 7 are erroneous. Distribution of 
erroneous masks when (j) Masks 1-3 (inner sections) and (k) Masks 4-7 (outer sections) have 
error. The dominating fabrication error of the measured metalens in the manuscript corresponds
to the case of (k) with error scenario (1). 

               
                   
                   
                   

                   
                   
                   
                   

                     

                 

                    

                 

                     

               

                  

                        


21

Non-

ideality

Fields 
affected
Error sources
Focusing 
efficiency
Strehl ratio

Smaller 
pillars 
missing

All
Poor reticle quality

(Low-resolution reticle writer)

> 6%

(Min. pillar
D < 550 nm)

~1

(Min. pillar
D < 550 nm)

Inner 
fields 
only

Inner reticles: Low-resolution
Outer reticles: High-resolution

> 44%

(Min. pillar
D < 550 nm)

> 0.67

(Min. pillar
D < 550 nm)

Outer 
fields 
only

Inner reticles: High-resolution
Outer reticles: Low-resolution

>39%

(Min. pillar
D < 550 nm)

> 0.64

(Min. pillar
D < 550 nm)

Pillar 

diameter 

shift

All
Fabrication error
> 68%

(𝐷 ± 50 nm)

~1

(𝐷 ± 50 nm)

Individual 

fields
Reticle quality control
> 77%

(𝐷 ± 50 nm)

> 0.98

(𝐷 ± 50 nm)

Inner 
fields 
only

Inner reticles: Low-resolution
Outer reticles: High-resolution

> 74%

(𝐷 ± 50 nm)

> 0.96

(𝐷 ± 50 nm)

Outer 
fields 
only

Inner reticles: High-resolution
Outer reticles: Low-resolution

> 73%

(𝐷 ± 50 nm)

> 0.96

(𝐷 ± 50 nm)

Pillar 

height shift
All
Fabrication error 
(error in etch rate)

> 48%

(𝐻 ± 500 nm)

~1

(𝐻 ± 500 nm)

Non-

uniform 

illumination

All
Measurement setup error
N/A

> 0.99

(Gaussian w > 38 

mm)

Table. S3. Summary of simulation results on various fabrication and characterization error 
scenarios.
High-resolution and low-resolution reticles correspond to industry-grade and in-house fabricated 
reticles, respectively. The main contributing factor to the aberrated focal spot obtained in 
experiment is the missing smaller pillars in the outer fields.


22

Fig. S13. Effects of fabrication errors on the metalens imaging quality (simulation results).
MTF contrast curves with respect to minimum resolved nanopillar diameter in (a) all sections, 
(b) only the inner sections (reticles 1-3), and only the outer sections (reticles 4-7). All MTF 
curves are normalized to their zero-frequency values, respectively. The MTF degradation of (c) 
resembles that of the experimental data provided in the main text, which corroborates the SEM 
images and the diffracted intensity data. Effect of uniform offset in nanopillar diameters in all 
sections, individual sections, inner sections, and outer sections, respectively, on (d) Strehl ratio 
and (e) focusing efficiency, are shown, respectively. The metalens behaves diffraction limited 
(Strehl ratio > 0.8) even if the error in diameter is around 100 nm. This is due to nanopillars 
having a near-linear phase change with respect to their diameter (Fig. S2a), that each section 
experiences low phase aberration despite the overall diameter error. However, as the diameter 
offset between sections induce phase offsets between the sections (Fig. S2c), the focusing 
efficiency suffers due to out-of-phase interference at the focal plane between the sections. (f) 
shows effect of having overall error in nanopillar height on the Strehl ratio and focusing 
efficiency of the metalens. As the phase response of nanopillars with respect to height changes 
almost linearly (Fig. S2d), the Strehl ratio remains near unity even at with ±33% error or ±500 
nm. However, when the height of the nanopillars deviates from the designed height of 1500 nm, 
the relative phase between the nanopillars and the empty area no longer meets the design, leading 
to a loss in focusing efficiency due to out-of-phase interference. We expect that if we can fill the 
metalens entirely with nanopillars, such loss of focusing efficiency by height error can be 
minimized.

                  

                        


23

Fig. S14. Effects of non-uniform illumination intensity on the metalens imaging quality 
(simulation results).
We investigate the effect of non-uniform illumination intensity by modelling the incident 
intensity profile using a cylindrically symmetric Gaussian intensity profile with a flat phase 
front. The Gaussian width 𝑤 is defined so that the radial intensity profile has the form 𝐼(𝜌) =

𝐼0 exp(−

𝜌2

𝑤2). The Strehl ratio drops below the diffraction limit (0.8) when the Gaussian width of 

the incident beam is less than 40% of the total aperture size. 

   
   


24

Fig. S15. Measured wavefront error map with respect to various tilted incidence angles. 
Measured wavefront aberration from null interferometry configuration (Fig. S10) when metalens 
is tilted from normal incidence. This data represents and confirms the expected field-dependent 
aberration from a single optical component. Also, this measurement provides alignment 
tolerance in tilt when the metalens is placed in an imaging system. (a)-(f) Wavefront error of the 
metalens at various tilt angles ranging from -20” (arc seconds) to +20” after piston, tip, tilt, and 
power are removed. Due to low diffraction efficiencies at the outer region, interference 
information from certain points is not resolved. (g) Plots of wavefront error along the x-axis of 
the metalens at each measured incidence angles, respectively. (h) RMS of the wavefront error 
with respect to metalens tilt angles. (i) Plots of fitted Zernike polynomial coefficients up to 36th

order with respect to the metalens tilt angles. Due to the lack of information at the edge of the 
metalens, fittings were performed using data from the central 80 mm diameter aperture area. The 
coma aberration is the dominant wavefront error with respect to lens tilt. 


25

Fig. S16. Simulated Strehl ratio of the 100 mm diameter metalens at various incident 
angles. For this tilt study, the metalens focal spot is sampled on a 601 × 601 square grid around 
the tilted focal spot center up to a transverse diameter of 18 Airy disks. This large sampling 
region is required to capture the spatial patterns associated with strongly aberrated focal spots. 
The incident tilt angle is defined as the angle of the incident wavefront in air before it hits the 
first air/glass interface on the back face of the metalens. The Strehl ratio falls below the 
diffraction limit (~0.8) at a 30” tilt. 


26

Fig. S17. Sensor-induced noise removal with FFT for Sunspot imaging. 
(a) Strong intensity incidence from the Sun caused crosstalk between pixels of the camera 
sensors due to the on-sensor microlens array. Image taken on Feb. 1, 2023, 12:37 PM, on the 
rooftop of the Science Center building, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The 
meta-astroimager was mounted on a ZWO AM5 equatorial mount in sun tracking mode. Two 
filters, a 1 nm bandwidth 𝜆 = 632.8 𝑛𝑚 bandpass filter (FL632.8-1, Thorlabs) and a neutral 
density filter of optical density (OD) 3.0, were placed in front of the image sensor. Imaging was 
performed using a ZWO ASI183mm-pro cooled CMOS imaging sensor (monochrome, 13.2 mm 
⨉ 8.8 mm sensor, 2.4μm ⨉ 2.4μm pixel size) cooled to 10.5℃, with 8 ms exposure time per 
frame in RAW16 format and with a gain value of 85. Pixel binning was not used. A total of 1000 
frames were used to process the image, using Astrosurface software (http://astrosurface.com/ U2 
2023-01-25) with following parameters: Algo C quality estimator, 50 pixel tracking shift max, 
Planet/Disk target, 50% (500 frames) stack, stacking method by mean, global alignment mode, 
and sharpening using Wavelet-Deconvolution algorithm built in the Astrosurface software. (b) 
Fast Fourier transform (FFT) image obtained from (a) using ImageJ software (https://imagej.net). 
(c) Filter positions in k-space image to reduce low-order periodic noise. (d) FFT image after the 
noise filtering is applied. (e) Inverse-FFT image of (d), having some of the pixel noise removed. 
The sunspot image taken by public sources on the same date can be found online for comparison
(https://soho.nascom.nasa.gov/data/synoptic/sunspots_earth/sunspots_512_20230201.jpg).


27

Fig. S18. Acquired high-resolution image of the North America Nebula (NGC7000). 
Image of the North America Nebula (NGC7000) acquired from rooftop of the Science Center 
Building, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, on May 13, 2022. The used 
metalens astro-imager comprises a 100 mm diameter metalens, SVBONY 2-inch, 7 nm
bandwidth H-alpha filter, and a ZWO ASI1600mm-pro cooled CMOS mono camera (4656 x 
6520 pixels, 3.8 μm × 3.8 μm pixel size), mounted on a Celestron AVX equatorial mount with 
optical tracking provided from a QHY miniquidescope as a guide-scope mounted to a guide-
camera (ASI178mm, ZWO). The image sensor was cooled to 0.5 ℃, and 11 light frames and 4 
dark frames were acquired with 120 second exposure time per frame in RAW12 format with a 
gain value of 200. Pixel binning was not used. The acquired images are then processed using 
Deep Sky Stacker (http://deepskystacker.free.fr/) software, with standard mode (Light: average, 
Dark: median, Alignment: Automatic). 


28

Fig. S19. Acquired high-resolution image of the moon. 
Image of the Moon acquired from rooftop of the Science Center Building, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, on August 18, 2022. The used metalens astro-imager 
comprises a 100 mm diameter metalens, a 1 nm bandwidth bandpass filter at 𝜆 = 632.8 𝑛𝑚
(FL632.8-1, Thorlabs), and a ZWO ASI183mm-pro cooled CMOS mono camera (monochrome, 
13.2 mm × 8.8 mm sensor, 2.4 μm × 2.4 μm pixel size) with sensor temperature at -0.5℃, 
mounted on an iOptron ZEQ25 equatorial mount controlled by ZWQ AsiAir Plus controller. 
Total of 413 frames were acquired with 442 ms exposure time per frame in RAW8 format and a 
gain value of 111. Pixel binning was not used. The acquired images are processed using 
Autostakkert software (https://www.autostakkert.com/, Image stabilization: Planet (COG), 
Dynamic background, Quality estimator: Local (AP), Frames to stack: 46% (189 frames), 
Drizzle 1.5x) and wavelet deconvolution was performed with Registax 6 software 
(https://www.astronomie.be/registax/).


29

Fig. S20. Extreme environment testing (thermal stress cycles) with 1 cm diameter all-glass 
metalens. 
A 1 cm diameter all-glass metalens (Ref. 1) was used as a proxy to test the glass nanopillar 
metalens’ robustness against extreme temperature shocks that may occur when deployed in an 
extreme environment such as space. The shock test presented here approximates the United 
States military specifications (MIL-STD-883F METHOD 1011.9 and 1010.8), in which the 
sample goes through several cycles of thermal shock between hot and cold thermal reservoirs. (a)
A 1 cm diameter metalens, diced into 1.1 × 1.1 cm square, is mounted on a 0.5 mm thick 1-inch 
diameter fused silica substrate (JGS2) for handling purposes. Copper (Cu) tapes were used to 
hold the metalens in place. (b) Metalens immersed in liquid nitrogen (-195.8℃) which serves as 
a cold reservoir. The sample remained in liquid nitrogen bath for 10 minutes to ensure reaching 
thermal equilibrium. (c) The cooled sample from (b) is then put on a hot plate (200℃) within 5 
seconds after being taken out of the cold reservoir. The sample is kept on the hot plate for 10 
minutes to ensure reaching thermal equilibrium. The sample is then put back in the liquid 
nitrogen bath within 5 seconds after it has been taken off the hot reservoir, where the process is 
repeated for total of 10 cycles, following the MIL-STD-883F METHOD 1011.9. 

        

            

     

                          
                    

                           

                    

                   
                

               

                  
   
   
   

     


30

Fig. S21. Result of extreme environment testing (thermal stress) with 1 cm diameter all-
glass metalens. 
The measured wavefront error of the 1 cm diameter metalens before and after 10 cycles of 
thermal shock test in Fig. S20 are presented. Wavefront error of the metalens (a) before and (b) 
after thermal shock cycles. (c) and (d) show wavefront error of another 1 cm diameter metalens 
(control sample), which did not go through the thermal shock test. (e) Change in measured 
wavefront error’s root-mean-squared (RMS) values before and after thermal shock, compared 
with that of the control sample. The plotted values are the mean and the standard deviation of 5 
independent measurements for each data point, respectively. The RMS value appears to increase 
slightly, but it is within measurement error. (f) Measured peak-to-valley (PV) value of the 
wavefront error before and after thermal shock test compared with that of the control sample. 


31

Fig. S22. SEM images of 1 cm diameter all-glass metalens before and after extreme 
environment testing (thermal stress). 
(a) and (b) show the SEM images of the edge of the 1 cm diameter all-glass metalens, before 
going through the thermal stress cycles. (c) and (d) show the SEM images taken at the same 
region shown in (a) and (b). No apparent physical damage was observed even after 15 cycles of 
the thermal shock cycles. Gaps in the rings are where the nanopillars were not fabricated due to 
photomask resolution limitations. We do not observe evidence of fabricated nanopillars being 
damaged they leave a telltale mark at the base when they are broken off from the substrate. 


32

Fig. S23. Optical microscope images of 1 cm diameter all-glass metalens before and after 
extreme environment testing (vibrational stress). 
A 1 cm diameter metalens was immersed in isopropanol and put in an ultrasonication bath (Ultra 
Clean Equipment, Inc.) for 20 minutes at the highest power setting to see effects of the 
vibrational stress on the nanopillars. From optical microscope images taken (a), (b) before and 
(c), (d) after ultrasonication, the nanopillars seem to remain intact even after prolonged exposure 
to sonic waves. The optical images are taken at a similar location to show that the nanopillars 
remain intact. Gaps in the rings are where the nanopillars were not fabricated due to photomask 
resolution limitations. We do not observe evidence of fabricated nanopillars being damaged they 
leave a telltale mark at the base when they are broken off from the substrate. 


33

Fig. S24. SEM images of 1 mm diameter TiO2 metasurface before and after extreme 
environment testing (thermal stress).
A 1 mm diameter TiO2 metasurface (700 nm tall, Ref. 43) on a 1-in. diameter fused silica wafer 
went through the same thermal shock cycles, illustrated in Fig. S20, showing their robustness 
against rapid temperature fluctuations. The scalebar in the inset of (c) is 3 μm. More in-depth and 
controlled environmental testing will need to be performed to further confirm the robustness. 


34

Fig. S25. Optical microscope images of 1 mm diameter TiO2 metasurface before and after 
extreme environment testing (vibrational stress). 
A 1 mm diameter TiO2 metasurface (700 nm tall, Ref. 43) fabricated with e-beam lithography on 
a 1-in. diameter fused silica wafer went through the same 20 minute ultrasonication as illustrated 
in Fig. S23, which show their robustness against sonic waves. More in-depth and controlled 
environmental testing will need to be performed to further confirm their robustness. 


35

Fig. S26. Other acquired images with the metalens (top row) and the meta-
astrophotography apparatus (bottom row)
(Top row) Images through the 100 mm metalens taken with a smartphone camera (Galaxy Note 
20 Ultra, Samsung) with a 10 nm bandwidth 633 nm bandpass filter. Left two images are
projected from a digital monitor (Galaxy Tab S7 Plus, Samsung). Image on the right shows an 
inverted image of the person (Soon Wei Daniel Lim) sitting on the other side of the lens. 
(Bottom row) Images taken with the meta-astrophotography apparatus, with adjusted focus using 
the helical focuser. Left photo is Federico and Paola Capasso. Middle photo is Arman Amirzhan 
(left) and Vincent Ginis (right), and right photo is Soon Wei Daniel Lim. All images are taken by 
Joon-Suh Park.


36

References
1 
Park J-S, Zhang S, She A, Chen WT, Lin P, Yousef KMA et al. All-Glass, Large Metalens at Visible 
Wavelength Using Deep-Ultraviolet Projection Lithography. Nano Lett 2019; 19: 8673–8682.

2 
Pestourie R, Pérez-Arancibia C, Lin Z, Shin W, Capasso F, Johnson SG. Inverse design of large-area 
metasurfaces. Opt Express 2018; 26: 33732–33747.

3 
Hugonin JP, Lalanne P. RETICOLO software for grating analysis. 2023. 
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2101.00901.

4 
Malitson IH. Interspecimen Comparison of the Refractive Index of Fused Silica. JOSA 1965; 55: 
1205–1209.

5 
Marathay AS, McCalmont JF. Vector diffraction theory for electromagnetic waves. JOSA A 2001; 
18: 2585–2593.

6 
Chen FT, Craighead HG. Diffractive lens fabricated with mostly zeroth-order gratings. Opt Lett
1996; 21: 177–179.

7 
Lalanne P, Astilean S, Chavel P, Cambril E, Launois H. Design and fabrication of blazed binary 
diffractive elements with sampling periods smaller than the structural cutoff. JOSA A 1999; 16: 
1143–1156.

8 
Aieta F, Genevet P, Kats MA, Yu N, Blanchard R, Gaburro Z et al. Aberration-Free Ultrathin Flat 
Lenses and Axicons at Telecom Wavelengths Based on Plasmonic Metasurfaces. Nano Lett 2012; 12: 
4932–4936.

9 
Ni X, Ishii S, Kildishev AV, Shalaev VM. Ultra-thin, planar, Babinet-inverted plasmonic metalenses. 
Light Sci Appl 2013; 2: e72–e72.

10 Ding X, Monticone F, Zhang K, Zhang L, Gao D, Burokur SN et al. Ultrathin Pancharatnam–Berry 

Metasurface with Maximal Cross-Polarization Efficiency. Adv Mater 2015; 27: 1195–1200.

11 Khorasaninejad M, Chen WT, Devlin RC, Oh J, Zhu AY, Capasso F. Metalenses at visible 

wavelengths: Diffraction-limited focusing and subwavelength resolution imaging. Science 2016; 352: 
1190–1194.

12 Zuo H, Choi D-Y, Gai X, Ma P, Xu L, Neshev DN et al. High-Efficiency All-Dielectric Metalenses 

for Mid-Infrared Imaging. Adv Opt Mater 2017; 5: 1700585.

13 Jia D, Tian Y, Ma W, Gong X, Yu J, Zhao G et al. Transmissive terahertz metalens with full phase 

control based on a dielectric metasurface. Opt Lett 2017; 42: 4494–4497.

14 She A, Zhang S, Shian S, Clarke DR, Capasso F. Large area metalenses: design, characterization, and 

mass manufacturing. Opt Express 2018; 26: 1573–1585.

15 Paniagua-Domínguez R, Yu YF, Khaidarov E, Choi S, Leong V, Bakker RM et al. A Metalens with a 

Near-Unity Numerical Aperture. Nano Lett 2018; 18: 2124–2132.

16 She A, Zhang S, Shian S, Clarke DR, Capasso F. Adaptive metalenses with simultaneous electrical 

control of focal length, astigmatism, and shift. Sci Adv 2018; 4: eaap9957.


37

17 Shi Z, Khorasaninejad M, Huang Y-W, Roques-Carmes C, Zhu AY, Chen WT et al. Single-Layer 

Metasurface with Controllable Multiwavelength Functions. Nano Lett 2018; 18: 2420–2427.

18 Zhang L, Ding J, Zheng H, An S, Lin H, Zheng B et al. Ultra-thin high-efficiency mid-infrared 

transmissive Huygens meta-optics. Nat Commun 2018; 9: 1481.

19 Fan Z-B, Shao Z-K, Xie M-Y, Pang X-N, Ruan W-S, Zhao F-L et al. Silicon Nitride Metalenses for 

Close-to-One Numerical Aperture and Wide-Angle Visible Imaging. Phys Rev Appl 2018; 10: 
014005.

20 Lee G-Y, Hong J-Y, Hwang S, Moon S, Kang H, Jeon S et al. Metasurface eyepiece for augmented 

reality. Nat Commun 2018; 9: 4562.

21 Wang A, Chen Z, Dan Y. Planar metalenses in the mid-infrared. AIP Adv 2019; 9: 085327.

22 Miragliotta JA, Shrekenhamer DB, Strikwerda AC, Zgrabik CJ, Currano LJ, Bonnema GT. 

Multifunctional infrared metasurfaces for polarization analysis. In: Metamaterials, Metadevices, and 
Metasystems 2019 (eds Engheta, N., Noginov, M. A., Zheludev, N. I.). SPIE, 2019, pp 35–42.

23 Guo Q, Shi Z, Huang Y-W, Alexander E, Qiu C-W, Capasso F et al. Compact single-shot metalens 

depth sensors inspired by eyes of jumping spiders. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2019; 116: 22959–22965.

24 Hu T, Zhong Q, Li N, Dong Y, Xu Z, Fu YH et al. CMOS-compatible a-Si metalenses on a 12-inch 

glass wafer for fingerprint imaging. Nanophotonics 2020; 9: 823–830.

25 Andrén D, Martínez-Llinàs J, Tassin P, Käll M, Verre R. Large-Scale Metasurfaces Made by an 

Exposed Resist. ACS Photonics 2020; 7: 885–892.

26 Shen Z, Zhou S, Li X, Ge S, Chen P, Hu W et al. Liquid crystal integrated metalens with tunable 

chromatic aberration. Adv Photonics 2020; 2: 036002.

27 Shalaginov MY, An S, Yang F, Su P, Lyzwa D, Agarwal AM et al. Single-Element Diffraction-

Limited Fisheye Metalens. Nano Lett 2020; 20: 7429–7437.

28 Li Z, Lin P, Huang Y-W, Park J-S, Chen WT, Shi Z et al. Meta-optics achieves RGB-achromatic 

focusing for virtual reality. Sci Adv 2021; 7: eabe4458.

29 Shalaginov MY, An S, Zhang Y, Yang F, Su P, Liberman V et al. Reconfigurable all-dielectric 

metalens with diffraction-limited performance. Nat Commun 2021; 12: 1225.

30 Baracu AM, Dirdal CA, Avram AM, Dinescu A, Muller R, Jensen GU et al. Metasurface Fabrication 

by Cryogenic and Bosch Deep Reactive Ion Etching. Micromachines 2021; 12: 501.

31 Einck VJ, Torfeh M, McClung A, Jung DE, Mansouree M, Arbabi A et al. Scalable Nanoimprint 

Lithography Process for Manufacturing Visible Metasurfaces Composed of High Aspect Ratio TiO2 
Meta-Atoms. ACS Photonics 2021; 8: 2400–2409.

32 Lim SWD, Meretska ML, Capasso F. A High Aspect Ratio Inverse-Designed Holey Metalens. Nano 

Lett 2021; 21: 8642–8649.

33 Ogawa C, Nakamura S, Aso T, Ikezawa S, Iwami K. Rotational varifocal moiré metalens made of 

single-crystal silicon meta-atoms for visible wavelengths. Nanophotonics 2022; 11: 1941–1948.


38

34 Chen MK, Chu CH, Liu X, Zhang J, Sun L, Yao J et al. Meta-Lens in the Sky. IEEE Access 2022; 

10: 46552–46557.

35 Li Z, Pestourie R, Park J-S, Huang Y-W, Johnson SG, Capasso F. Inverse design enables large-scale 

high-performance meta-optics reshaping virtual reality. Nat Commun 2022; 13: 2409.

36 Zhang L, Chang S, Chen X, Ding Y, Rahman MT, Yao et al. Wafer-scale single-aperture near-

infrared metalens fabricated by deep UV photolithography. In: Conference on Lasers and Electro-
Optics (2022), paper FF2D.4. Optica Publishing Group, 2022, p FF2D.4.

37 Zhang L, Chang S, Chen X, Ding Y, Rahman MT, Duan Y et al. High-Efficiency, 80 mm Aperture 

Metalens Telescope. Nano Lett 2023; 23: 51–57.

38 Hou M, Chen Y, Yi F. Lightweight Long-Wave Infrared Camera via a Single 5-Centimeter-Aperture 

Metalens. In: Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (2022), paper FM4F.4. Optica Publishing 
Group, 2022, p FM4F.4.

39 Li J, Wang Y, Liu S, Xu T, Wei K, Zhang Y et al. Largest aperture metalens of high numerical 

aperture and polarization independence for long-wavelength infrared imaging. Opt Express 2022; 30: 
28882–28891.

40 Liu X, Chen MK, Chu CH, Zhang J, Leng B, Yamaguchi T et al. Underwater Binocular Meta-lens. 

ACS Photonics 2023. doi:10.1021/acsphotonics.2c01667.

41 Kim J, Seong J, Kim W, Lee G-Y, Kim S, Kim H et al. Scalable manufacturing of high-index atomic 

layer–polymer hybrid metasurfaces for metaphotonics in the visible. Nat Mater 2023; 22: 474–481.

42 Karrfalt K, Parks RE, Kim D. Evaluating SMR positioning with an autostigmatic microscope. In: 

Optical Manufacturing and Testing XIV (eds Kim, D., Choi, H, Ottevaere, H., Rascher, R.). SPIE, 
2022, pp 216–225.

43 Lim SWD, Park J-S, Kazakov D, Spägele CM, Dorrah AH, Meretska ML et al. Point singularity 

array with metasurfaces. Nat Commun 2023; 14: 3237.


