Competing mechanisms govern the thermal rectification behavior in semi-stochastic 

polycrystalline graphene with graded grain-density distribution

Simanta Lahkar*, Raghavan Ranganathan

Department of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gujarat 382355, India

Abstract

Thermal rectifiers are devices that have different thermal conductivities in opposing directions of 

heat flow. The realization of practical thermal rectifiers relies significantly on a sound understanding of the 
underlying mechanisms of asymmetric heat transport, and two-dimensional materials offer a promising 
opportunity in this regard owing to their simplistic structures together with a vast possibility of tunable 
imperfections. However, the in-plane thermal rectification mechanisms in 2D materials like graphene 
having directional gradients of grain sizes have remained elusive. In fact, understanding the heat transport 
mechanisms in polycrystalline graphene, which are more practical to synthesize than large-scale single-
crystal graphene, could potentially allow a unique opportunity, in principle, to combine with other defects 
and designs for effective optimization of thermal rectification. In this work, we investigate the thermal 
rectification behavior in periodic atomistic models of polycrystalline graphene whose grain arrangements 
were generated semi-stochastically to have different gradient grain-density distributions along the in-plane 
heat flow direction. We employ the centroidal Voronoi tessellation technique to generate realistic grain 
boundary structures for graphene, and the non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations method is used 
to calculate the thermal conductivities and rectification values. Additionally, detailed phonon 
characteristics and propagating phonon spatial energy densities are analyzed based on the fluctuation-
dissipation theory to elucidate the competitive interplay between two underlying mechanisms, namely, (i) 
propagating phonon coupling and (ii) temperature-dependence of thermal conductivity that determines the 
degree of asymmetric heat flow in graded polycrystalline graphene.

Introduction

Developing technologies that can improve energy sustainability is a major priority for our 

society in the current times. New and efficient thermal devices can play a central role in this regard 
in a variety of applications. A thermal rectifier is one such thermal nanodevice that preferentially 
conducts heat in one direction, analogous to its electronic counterpart, and can potentially open up 
novel technological frontiers of applications such as continuous thermoelectric renewable-power 
generation, thermal logic circuits, and thermal management systems for atomic clocks if adequate 
efficiencies can be achieved1, 2. Compared to bulk materials, where asymmetric heat flow 
characteristics can be achieved through a limited number of ways, two-dimensional (2D) materials
possess a wide range of tunable structural features that can create a suitable structural asymmetry 
affecting the heat transfer efficiencies in the two opposite directions with respect to the direction 
of asymmetry. Graphene is a particularly promising 2D material for this technology owing to its 
extremely high in-plane thermal conductivity3. Some of these strategies to tune the thermal 
rectification (TR) behavior include features like defects, doping, functionalization, grain density, 
interfacial structures, geometries, and boundary conditions2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. However, their practical 
realization relies on a robust understanding of the underlying heat transport phenomena1, 2.


In our earlier work, we found a cross-plane thermal rectification mechanism in out-of-plane 

gradient hydrogen-functionalized multilayer graphene (G-MLG), which was attributed to the 
phonon density of states (PDOS) mismatch between the heat source and sink 4. In general, the 
mechanisms that are responsible for causing asymmetric heat flow behavior in 2D materials can 
broadly be divided into two kinds: 1) difference between the phonons produced at the hotter end 
of the device for heat flow in forward and reverse directions, respectively, that can propagate
across the length of the device with varying efficiencies affecting the relative ease of heat flow
between the two directions, and 2) disparate temperature-sensitivities of the local thermal 
conductivities in the different sections of the device close to either end that result in different 
average conductivity depending on the location of the heat source and sink3. A common strategy 
of TR of the first kind involves asymmetric interfacial structures between two materials having 
different phonon transport properties. This was the attributed mechanism for the up to 44% thermal 
rectification (% difference in thermal conductivities between the two directions) predicted by Liu 
et al. at the silicene/graphene interface5. In our previous study, we observed tunable cross-plane 
TR in multilayer graphene with gradient hydrogenation in consecutive layers through molecular 
dynamics (MD) simulations attributed to a primary mechanism of the first kind4. Geometrical 
features like triangular holes in a graphene sheet are also expected to cause asymmetric phonon 
scattering for different directions of heat flow8. Another study by Wang et al. used MD simulations 
to show that having a tapered width or a doping of carbon nanoparticle in one end of graphene 
sheets led to a prominent scattering of the propagating phonons when the narrow or doped end of 
the sheet is at the heat source, causing a TR of over ~10% which they had observed experimentally 
in micrometres-sized graphene sheets3. However, the rectification due to such mechanisms should 
reduce with increasing sample length as the heat transport shifts farther from the ballistic to 
diffusive regime due to a reduction in the strength of coupling between the phonons across the 
device length. Wang et al. also observed a 26% TR experimentally in graphene sheets with an 
asymmetric nanopore distribution owing to the second kind of thermal rectification. Here, the 
thermal conductivity in the end without nanopores had a high negative dependence on the local 
temperature, whereas the side with pores had almost temperature-independent thermal 
conductivity, resulting in a difference in the net thermal conductivity of the rectifier upon exchange 
of the hot and cold sides3. This approach of rectification was further studied in detail by Hu et al., 
who illustrated theoretically that introducing regular nanopores pattern in pristine graphene to 
create a graphene phononic crystal (GPnC) resulted in higher phonon localization and, 
consequently, caused a reduction in the temperature (T) dependence of thermal conductivity, k, 
(𝑘 ∝ 𝑇−𝛼 and α ≈ 1 in pristine graphene)9. Interestingly, the degree of reduction in α depends on 
the nanopore and patterned-domain size, which prompted Hu et al. to add more than one GPnCs 
with different pore sizes in a series circuit with pristine graphene on one side leading to an increase 
in the TR10.

While the majority of research focus in this field has so far been on engineering single 

crystalline 2D rectifiers, it is important to elucidate the effects of polycrystalline structures on the 
rectification mechanisms in order to realize practical 2D thermal rectifiers at length scales beyond 


several micrometres, owing to the difficulty associated with producing and processing pristine,
large area, single crystalline 2D materials. Though a recent study using non-equilibrium molecular 
dynamics simulations (NEMD)11 found TR in polycrystalline graphene with a special design of 
grain width gradient across the device12, our ability to properly understand and design such a 
polycrystalline graphene thermal rectifier is still at a very nascent stage, critically due to a lack of 
understanding and evidence of the underlying mechanisms of TR in general grain-size or grain-
density graded polycrystalline graphene, or any other 2D material, in the literature. Here, we report 
a systematic study of TR in stochastically generated atomistic models of polycrystalline graphene 
sheets having a gradient distribution of grain densities across the length of the layers and uncover 
the interplay between two simultaneously acting distinct mechanisms that cause the asymmetric 
heat flow in opposite directions in such graded polycrystalline graphene (GPG) structures.

Simulation and analysis methods

In order to obtain realistic atomistic models of polycrystalline 2D materials, the central 

Voronoi tessellation (CVT) algorithm13 was used to relax the atomistic structure of grain 
boundaries and the lattice around it to be in-line with experimental observations. Classical non-
equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) simulations (using the LAMMPS14 package) were used 
to study the steady-state heat flow behaviour in the different models as it provides the required 
balance between accuracy and scale to study the relevant thermal phenomena effectively11. The 
steady-state local temperature of each atom during the simulation was calculated as:

𝑇𝑖 =

〈𝑚𝑖𝑣𝑖 ∙ 𝑣𝑖〉

3𝑘𝐵

(1)

where 𝑚𝑖 and 𝑣𝑖 are the mass and velocity of the atom i and 𝑘𝐵 is the Boltzmann constant. 

The simulation starts by repeated minimization with in-plane relaxation and MD equilibration runs 
in a canonical ensemble (NVT) until the pressure and potential energy of the system upon 
(Gaussian) randomized velocity initiation fall below a set threshold. This is followed by gradual 
heating and cooling of the respective heat baths for 500 ps, and then maintaining the set bath 
temperatures for the rest of simulation, where the atoms outside the heat baths are in a micro-
canonical (NVE) ensemble. Once steady state has been reached the calculation of the average 
temperature profiles and the heat flow rate is done by averaging over at least 1.3 ns or more, 
depending on the nature of the simulation, which is used to calculate the thermal conductivities 
based on the temperature difference between the heat source and the heat sink in the structure, 
∆𝑇11, using the following relationship: 

𝑘 = 𝑄. 𝐿

𝐴. ∆𝑇
(2)

Where Q/A is the steady state heat flux, and L is the distance between the heat source and 

the heat sink. The value of ∆𝑇 ≈ 1.35 × 𝐿 is used to maintain good signal to noise ratio and the 
linear transport regime, where temperature and length units are K and nm, respectively. The atoms 


in two narrow 0.5 nm edges at the two ends along the direction of heat flow are kept fixed during 
the heat transfer simulation. A timestep of 0.2 fs is used for the simulations to have sufficient 
accuracy. The Langevin thermostat, shown not to cause any unphysical phonon density of states 
characteristics, was used to model the heat source and sink in the simulations11. The width of the 
temperature baths were made sufficiently large in comparison to the damping to ensure proper 
thermalization of the phonons in the simulation11. If the thermal conductivities of a structure in the 
two opposite directions are k1 and k2, respectively, in the order of decreasing magnitude, the TR 
coefficient can be calculated as:

𝑇𝑅 =

(𝑘1 − 𝑘2) × 100

𝑘2

(3)

The optimized Tersoff forcefield developed by Kinaci et al. has been used to describe the 

graphene inter-atomic interactions15 owing to its high accuracy in thermal analysis of graphene 
using MD simulations16. The fluctuation-dissipation theory, which can capture the anharmonic 
effects of temperature on phonons, was used to analyze the phonon localization their spatial energy 
distribution, using the phonon package implemented in LAMMPS that calculates the dynamical 
matrix for a structure from MD simulations17. The participation ratio of different phonon modes3

can be calculated as:

𝑃𝜆 = 1

𝑁 ∑ (∑ 𝜀𝑖𝛼,𝜆

∗
𝜀𝑖𝛼,𝜆
𝛼
)

2

𝑖
⁄
(4)

where 𝜀𝑖𝛼,𝜆 is the 𝛼th eigenvector component of the phonon mode 𝜆 with frequency 𝜔𝜆 for 

the 𝑖th atom and N is the total number of atoms. The 𝜀𝑖𝛼,𝜆 and 𝜔𝜆 can be calculated by diagonalizing 
the dynamical matrix18. These values were used, together with the atomic structure and per atom 
temperature information, to map the the spatial energy distribution of propagating phonons on 
atom i given by:

𝐸𝑖 = ∑ ∑ ∑ (𝑛 +

1

2) ℏ𝜔𝜀𝑖𝛼,𝜆

∗
𝜀𝑖𝛼,𝜆𝛿(𝜔 − 𝜔𝜆)
𝛼
𝜆
𝜔
(5)

where n is the phonon occupation number given by the Bose-Einstein distribution, and 𝜆

spans all the long range phonons with 𝑃𝜆 greater than a set threshold3.

Results and discussion

We first designed a protocol to create the atomistic structures of GPG having realistic and 

randomized distributions of grain shapes and orientations across the devise, while also possessing 
an average arrangement of grain densities across the GPG structure that resembled any arbitrary 
user-defined design, or layout. We started with an arbitrary layout of grain densities at different 
points along the length of the structure, which will guide the creation of grains that follow any 
desired distribution, including a uniform or a monotonically increasing/decreasing grain number 
density, along the length of the structure. This layout is then mirrored to represent a periodic 
distribution in the 2D space. Then a set of regular points is generated based on the layout of number 


densities from the previous step that are distributed in a rectangular region representing the size of
the final periodic atomistic GPG structure. Following this step, random perturbations are 
introduced to the set of regular points in the form of vectorial displacements for each point that 
follow a Gaussian distribution with the mean at 0 the standard deviation being scaled to 1/8th of 
the inter-point distance based on the corresponding number density that was used to create the 
given point. Thus, the degree of perturbations in this step can be changed, which affects the
statistical deviations of the final atomistic polycrystalline graphene structure versus a regular 
arrangement of grains that very closely follows the prescribed grain density distribution layout
without sufficient realistic randomness in grain shapes and orientations. Then the points are used 
as the generators to create a Voronoi tessellation whose edges represent the grain boundary regions 
and each polygon in the tessellation is used to generate a graphene lattice having 0.246 nm lattice 
constant19 and random orientations. Finally, the centroidal Voronoi tessellation algorithm13 is used 
to create a realistic grain boundary structure having only pentagon and heptagon pairs per 
experimental observations of polycrystalline graphene. This scheme of semi-stochastic 
polycrystalline structure creation for graphene is illustrated in Fig. 1. 

FIG. 1. Semi-stochastic atomistic modeling scheme for graded polycrystalline graphene. The initial 

layout is mirrored and added to create a periodic layout which is used to define the regular grain generator 
positions. The dotted line at the middle of the periodic atomistic polycrystalline graphene model shows the 
location at which the model is split to generate two structures each having a monotonic change in average 
grain density along its length.

Subsequently, we define a new parameter to characterize the key aspect of the degree of 

the variation of grain density across the length of the structures, denoted as the grain density 
gradient parameter, which is calculated as the difference between the maximum and minimum 
values of grain densities divided by the distance between the respective regions in the unit GPG 
structure as described above. In this study, all the GPG structure have a linear variation of the 
number of grains per unit width across the length of the structure. Once the periodic GPG models 
are created, it is divided exactly in half and each half, which has the maximum and minimum grain 
densities at its two ends, is used as a separate model for the atomistic conductivity simulations as 
shown in Fig. 2.


FIG. 2. NEMD calculation and thermal rectification in GPG. (a) and (b) are atomic snapshots for the 

conductivity simulations in opposite directions with respect to the grain density gradient, with atoms 
colored based on the per atom temperatures averaged through the interval of the simulation used for 
conductivity calculation (the range of the color bar is from 258 K for blue and 342 K for red). (c) and (d) 
plot the temperature profile for (a) and (b), respectively, averaged over the same duration with the standard 
deviation (SD) as error bars. (e) shows the average percent TR for different GPG structures with the SD as 
error bars calculated from the different values obtained by repeating the conductivity simulations with 
different starting velocities. The first point along x-axis corresponds to single crystal graphene.

We use non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) simulations11 to determine the 

thermal conductivities, k’s, and the corresponding TRs for the different atomistic graphene models.
In this technique, where the temperature difference is first imposed using different thermostats
(heat baths) at the source and sink regions (Fig. 2(a) and (b)) and the resultant heat flux is used to 
calculate the thermal conductivity after a steady state has been reached, which is characterized by 
the development of a steady temperature profile in the structure (Fig. 2(c) and (d)) and the 
convergence between the heat input and output by the source and sink region thermostats 
respectively 11.

Fig. 2(e) plots the TR values obtained for single crystalline graphene and GPG models 

having different grain density gradients the similar simulation box length of about 100 nm along 
the heat transport direction. The TR plot clearly indicates that the k is larger when heat is flowing 
from high grain density to low grain density region in GPG, with practically zero TR for single 
crystalline graphene as expected. The direction of TR observed from NEMD simulations in this 
study agree with the observations in a previous study on the NEMD TR simulations of 
polycrystalline graphene with linear variation of grain width along the length12. Besides the 
direction of the TR observed, the relationship between the grain density gradient and the TR value 
in GPG also indicates that the magnitude of TR gets higher with increasing grain density gradient 
in the structure, i.e., the TR increases with increasing difference between the terminal grain 
densities (in other words, the terminal grain sizes) for the same length of the GPG structure.


Next, we try to understand the underlying mechanism of TR in GPG by focusing on the 

phonon characteristics in polycrystalline graphene at any arbitrary temperature. Fig. 3 compares 
the phonon localization characteristics in single crystalline graphene versus a representative 
uniform grain-size polycrystalline graphene model, calculated using the fluctuation-dissipation 
theory20, which is implemented as the phonon package in LAMMPS and calculates the dynamical 
matrix for a structure from MD simulations17, 21, 22, in order to understand the underlying 
mechanism of asymmetric heat transport property. Since we are interested in analyzing 
polycrystalline samples, we use the full-sized periodic atomistic structure for both single crystal 
and polycrystal graphene as a single unit cell without any replication for our simulations and 
phonon analysis, and then compare the relative differences between the different structures having 
different average grain sizes. In order to obtain reliable phonon properties we equilibrated the 
structure as NVT ensemble, after repeated minimization and relaxation as described above, and
ran the simulation for over 1.3 ns to calculate the dynamical matrix18. This method of calculating 
the phonon properties can also capture the anharmonic effects of temperature on phonons17. 

FIG. 3 Phonon Localization and spatial energy distribution of propagating phonons in single crystalline 

and polycrystalline graphene. (a) shows two box plots illustrating the respective statistical distributions of 
the 𝑃𝜆’s of phonons in a single crystal and a polycrystalline graphene (with average grain size of 13.44 
nm2). The orange and green dotted lines are at the positions of the medians and modes of the respective
distribution. The ends of the box denotes the 25th and 75th percentile points in the distribution, while ends 
of the whiskers are at the last data point within a distance of 1.5*IQR from the respective ends of the box 
(IQR = 75th percentile – 25th percentile values) and the circles denote the position of the outliers. The 
increased number of outliers with low 𝑃𝜆, the higher proximity of the mean to the 25th percentile point, and 
the significant shortening of the upper whisker clearly indicates the increased phonon localization and 
reduction in the range of propagating phonons in polycrystalline graphene as compared to single crystalline 
graphene. (b) shows the map of spatial energy distribution of propagating phonons in 4 different uniform 
grain sized graphene models (the upper red and lower blue ends of the color bar correspond to the energy 
of 0.19 and 0.165 eV/atom respectively), whose average values are plotted in (c) versus corresponding 
average grain size joined by a dotted line along with another dotted line at the value of the average spatial 
energy distribution for single crystal graphene.


The participation ratio, 𝑃𝜆, of a phonon gives the proportion of atoms in the unit sample that 

contribute to the given phonon mode, which is a measure of the range of the phonons. Thus the 
long range phonons will have a value of 𝑃𝜆 much closer to 1 while the short range (localized)
phonons will have a 𝑃𝜆 closer to 0. From Fig. 3 (a), it can be clearly seen that polycrystalline 
graphene has significantly greater localization of phonons, as well as a reduction in the range of 
long range phonons, as compared to the single crystalline graphene. The long range phonons, also 
known as the propagating phonons, are primarily responsible for thermal conduction in graphene23. 
We can map the energy carried by the propagating phonons in a given structure by summing up 
the spatial energy distributions for all the propagating phonons with participation ratio over a 
certain threshold. 

Thus, we created different uniform grain size polycrystalline graphene models with the same 

total unit cell size of 11 nm X 11 nm and calculated the spatial energy distribution of propagating 
phonons (having 𝑃𝜆 > 0.4) for these structures (Fig. 3(b)) equilibrated at the same temperature of 
300 K. The corresponding variation of the mean values of propagating phonon spatial energy 
distributions for different grain sizes of polycrystalline graphene is plotted in Fig. 3(c), along with 
the corresponding values for continuous single crystal graphene sheets. We find that the 
propagating phonons carry much more energy in large grain sizes, i.e., for low grain densities, 
with single crystal graphene having the maximum energy of propagating phonons. Further, an 
increase in temperature also leads to an increase in the average spatial energy distribution values 
for all the grain sizes due to a significant increase in the phonon occupation number, n, in equation 
(5), which we have also verified. This clearly indicates that if the large grain size region is at the 
heat source, then propagating phonons with higher energy will be produced at the heat source, as 
compared to the converse case when the smaller grain size region is at the heat source. This should 
cause the heat transport to be more efficient from the low grain density to high grain density region 
in GPG3. We further verified that for a fully periodic GPG structure (where the two heat baths 
were placed respectively at the start and middle of the structure) with a length of about 20 nm and 
width of about 7 nm (Fig. 4), the average spatial energy distribution of propagating phonons is 
higher for the graded structure when the heat flows from region with low grain density (larger 
grain size) to the region with high grain density (smaller grain size). This could be attributed to the 
higher energy propagating phonons originating from the low grain density region at the heat 
source, which couple across the structure increasing the energy of propagating phonons at the other 
end as well, and consequently increases the heat flow efficiency of the whole structure in that 
direction. This is indeed observed from the increased thermal conductivity measured in this 
particular direction for this size of GPG structure. However, this does not align with the observed 
direction of TR in GPG of larger length, i.e., 100 nm and above (Fig. 2(e)). Hence, the higher 
energy propagating phonon coupling should not be the primary mechanism responsible for the 
observed TR in the larger 100 nm GPG models that we observed. 


FIG. 4 Map of spatial energy distribution, 𝐸𝜆, in a 20 nm long GPG for opposite heat flow directions 

with respect to the grain density gradient is shown in (a) and (b) along with the corresponding per atom 
average temperatures in (c) and (d), respectively (the bounds of the color bars are 0.163 eV/atom at lower 
blue end, and 0.183 eV/atom for upper red end for (a) and (b), and 284 K at lower blue end, and 316 K for 
upper red end for (c) and (d)). The corresponding average 𝐸𝜆 and k values are mentioned below the map of 
the respective structure.

Thus, we investigate the second possible mechanism of TR for GPG, which depends on the 

varying temperature (T) sensitivities of k for different regions in the 2D thermal rectifier3. We 
calculated the k in single crystalline graphene and uniform grain sized polycrystalline graphene 
samples with (a) varying grain sizes and (b) varying temperatures and determined the variation in 
k, verifying that they follow a 𝒌 ∝ 𝑻−𝜶 relationship, where the value of the constant 𝜶 for a given 
uniform graphene structure indicates how strongly its k varies with T (Fig. 5. (a)). Fig. 5(b) shows 
that the T-sensitivity of k is higher for larger grain sizes and reduces with reducing grain sizes, 
with the single crystalline graphene having the highest sensitivity of k to T. Furthermore, the 
relationship between k and T for each uniform grained graphene structure clearly shows that the 
thermal conductivity of graphene decreases with increasing temperature. These observations imply
that for GPG, the thermal conductivity will be higher when the larger grain size region (low T-
sensitivity of k) of the GPG is at the colder end, i.e., the heat sink, and the smaller grain size region
(low T-sensitivity of k) is at the hotter end, i.e., the heat source.

FIG. 5. Varying temperature dependence of thermal conductivities for graphene with different uniform 

grain sizes and for single crystalline graphene. (a) plots the log of k versus log of the average T, which 
varies between 200 K to 600 K with 100 K intervals, for NEMD simulations of single crystal graphene and 
different uniform grain sized polycrystalline structures with the same total size but varying average grain 


size. The linear fit equation for each structure is given close to the corresponding plot. (b) plots the changing 
values of 𝜶 for the 4 different polycrystalline structures obtained from the linear fitting in (a) connected 
with a line for visual clarity, along with a dotted line denoting the value of 𝜶 for single crystal graphene. 
(c) plots the variation of 𝜶 for single crystalline graphene models versus different model lengths connected 
with a line for visual clarity.

It is understood that for pristine graphene, 𝒌 ∝ 𝑻−𝟏 due to the increased Umklapp scattering of 

long-range propagating phonons, which dominate the thermal transport in graphene, at higher 
temperatures9, 23, 24. Therefore, the increased localization of phonons in polycrystalline graphene
with decreasing grain size (Fig. 3(a)) leads to a reduction of its T-sensitivity of k as we observed. 
While the graphene models used for this comparative analysis between different grain sizes were 
of 120 nm in length and 60 nm in width each, we have also verified that the value of 𝜶 for single 
crystalline graphene models of 7 nm unit width further increases with increasing length of the 
sample, converging to 𝜶 = 1 (Fig. 5(c)). Therefore, although the smaller model lengths result in 
smaller calculated values of 𝜶 due to a reduced capacity to sample long range phonons in the 
atomistic simulations, the qualitative nature of variation of 𝜶 for different grain sizes that we 
found should hold true irrespective of the sample size. In fact, the difference between the actual T-
sensitivity of k for different grain sizes in graphene should only become even more prominent in 
absolute terms for larger length samples. Hence, our results indicate that the grain-size dependent 
local k of graphene could be the dominant mechanism which causes the observed direction of TR 
in GPG (Fig. 2(e)), such that the k is higher when the heat flows from high grain density to low 
grain density, while the first mechanism based on the different propagating phonon energies at the 
heat source also acts on the GPG structures simultaneously with an opposite effect. This implies 
that the competitive interplay between the two TR mechanisms limits the TR value in GPG. 

This hypothesis of the two competitive mechanisms of TR involved in GPG leads to some 

interesting conclusions which can be used to test the same. The way the higher energy propagating 
phonons generated at the heat source could increase the k is by coupling across the length of the 
thermal rectifier device, resulting in an increase in the energies of propagating phonons even at the 
heat sink3. However, with increased length of the TR device, the long range phonons undergo more 
scattering while traveling from one end of the device to the other, which reduces the effect of the 
higher energy of those propagating phonons at the heat source3. Hence, the effect on k of the first 
mechanism based on the propagating phonon energy at the heat source should get reduced with 
increasing device length, even when the difference in terminal grain densities remains the same3.


FIG. 6. Variation of average TR in GPG with varying lengths but same terminal grain densities (error 

bars denote the SD from multiple simulations).

To test this, we created four different GPG structures with varying lengths but the same 

terminal grain densities and a linear increase in the number of grains per width across the length.
We calculated the TR for each using the same NEMD method. The results are plotted in Fig. 6 
with the x-axis showing the length of the graded structures having the same width of 40 nm. Since 
the terminal grain densities are the same for all the structures, the gradient reduces with increasing 
length of the structure. It is clearly observed that the TR increases notably for increasing length, 
or decreasing grain density gradient, when the same terminal grain densities are maintained. This 
peculiar result aligns well with the explanation that with increasing length, the effect of the second 
mechanism of TR based on asymmetric T-sensitivity of k remains the same while the effect of the 
competing first mechanism based on propagating phonon energy reduces, resulting in a higher 
dominance of the second mechanisms and consequently a net increase in the TR of the GPG 
models along the same direction of heat flow as the second mechanism.

Conclusion

This study provides the first evidence of the competing dual mechanisms that dictate the 

thermal rectification behavior in polycrystalline graphene, viz., asymmetric (i) propagating 
phonon coupling and (ii) temperature-dependence of thermal conductivity based on large-scale
atomistic simulations and phonon calculations. This understanding can be vital in future efforts to 
manipulate the TR in practical polycrystalline graphene structures for more efficient 2D thermal 
rectifiers. Specifically, we expect engineered graded polycrystalline structures with a combination 
of greater length and larger difference between terminal grain densities to be promising candidates 
for efficient thermal rectifiers. Indeed, further structural modifications such as gradations in 
functionalization and defects can further enhance the rectification observed in similar graphene 
samples synergistically. 

Author information

*Corresponding Author: Simanta Lahkar – simanta.l@iitgn.ac.in


Author Contributions: SL conceptualized the work, executed and analyzed the simulations and 
wrote the manuscript. RR contributed towards conceptualization, analysis and revision of the 
manuscript. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. 

Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing financial or non-financial interests.

Acknowledgement

The authors acknowledge the Param Ananta computing facility at IIT Gandhinagar for all the 
simulations reported in this work. Funding from the Early Career Fellowship program at IIT 
Gandhinagar is also acknowledged. 

Data availability

The typical simulation and analysis scripts, along with sample results and structures are available 
at https://github.com/simantalahkar/poly-tr-mechanism. Any other data related to this study will 
be provided by the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

References

1.
Wong M, Tso C, Ho T, Lee H. A review of state of the art thermal diodes and their potential 
applications. Int J Heat Mass Transfer 164, 120607 (2021).

2.
Zhao S, Zhou Y, Wang H. Review of thermal rectification experiments and theoretical calculations 
in 2D materials. Int J Heat Mass Transfer 195, 123218 (2022).

3.
Wang H, Hu S, Takahashi K, Zhang X, Takamatsu H, Chen J. Experimental study of thermal 
rectification in suspended monolayer graphene. Nat Commun 8, 15843 (2017).

4.
Wei A, Lahkar S, Li X, Li S, Ye H. Multilayer graphene-based thermal rectifier with interlayer 
gradient functionalization. ACS applied materials & interfaces 11, 45180-45188 (2019).

5.
Liu B, et al. Interface thermal conductance and rectification in hybrid graphene/silicene 
monolayer. Carbon 79, 236-244 (2014).

6.
Nobakht AY, et al. Thermal rectification via asymmetric structural defects in graphene. Carbon
132, 565-572 (2018).

7.
Ju S, Liang X. Thermal rectification and phonon scattering in silicon nanofilm with cone cavity. J 
Appl Phys 112,  (2012).


8.
Ju S, Liang X. Thermal rectification and phonon scattering in silicon nanofilm with cone cavity. J 
Appl Phys 112, 054312 (2012).

9.
Hu S, An M, Yang N, Li B. Manipulating the temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity
of graphene phononic crystal. Nanotechnology 27, 265702 (2016).

10.
Hu S, An M, Yang N, Li B. A series circuit of thermal rectifiers: an effective way to enhance 
rectification ratio. Small 13, 1602726 (2017).

11.
Li Z, et al. Influence of thermostatting on nonequilibrium molecular dynamics simulations of heat 
conduction in solids. J Chem Phys 151, 234105 (2019).

12.
Xu K, et al. Gradient nano-grained graphene as 2D thermal rectifier: A molecular dynamics based 
machine learning study. Appl Phys Lett 121, (2022).

13.
Ophus C, Shekhawat A, Rasool H, Zettl A. Large-scale experimental and theoretical study of 
graphene grain boundary structures. Phys Rev B 92, 205402 (2015).

14.
Thompson AP, et al. LAMMPS-a flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials modeling at 
the atomic, meso, and continuum scales. Comput Phys Commun 271, 108171 (2022).

15.
Kınacı A, Haskins JB, Sevik C, Çağın T. Thermal conductivity of BN-C nanostructures. Phys Rev B 86, 
115410 (2012).

16.
Si C, Wang X-D, Fan Z, Feng Z-H, Cao B-Y. Impacts of potential models on calculating the thermal 
conductivity of graphene using non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations. Int J Heat Mass 
Transfer 107, 450-460 (2017).

17.
Kong LT. Phonon dispersion measured directly from molecular dynamics simulations. Comput 
Phys Commun 182, 2201-2207 (2011).

18.
Liang Z, Sasikumar K, Keblinski P. Thermal transport across a substrate–thin-film interface: effects 
of film thickness and surface roughness. Phys Rev Lett 113, 065901 (2014).

19.
Yang G, Li L, Lee WB, Ng MC. Structure of graphene and its disorders: a review. Science and 
technology of advanced materials 19, 613-648 (2018).

20.
Campaná C, Müser MH. Practical Green’s function approach to the simulation of elastic semi-
infinite solids. Phys Rev B 74, 075420 (2006).


21.
Kong LT, Bartels G, Campaná C, Denniston C, Müser MH. Implementation of Green's function 
molecular dynamics: An extension to LAMMPS. Comput Phys Commun 180, 1004-1010 (2009).

22.
Kong LT, Denniston C, Müser MH. An improved version of the Green's function molecular 
dynamics method. Comput Phys Commun 182, 540-541 (2011).

23.
Feng T, Ruan X, Ye Z, Cao B. Spectral phonon mean free path and thermal conductivity 
accumulation in defected graphene: The effects of defect type and concentration. Phys Rev B 91, 
224301 (2015).

24.
Morelli DT, Slack GA. High lattice thermal conductivity solids. In: High thermal conductivity 
materials). Springer (2006).


