1 

 

Synthesis and characterisation of LK-99 

Ivan Timokhin1,2,+, Chuhongxu Chen1,2,+, Ziwei Wang1,2,+, Qian Yang1,2,*, Artem Mishchenko1,2,* 

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. 

2 National Graphene Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. 

+ These authors contributed equally  

*e-mail: qian.yang@manchester.ac.uk, artem.mishchenko@gmail.com  

 

Recently, two arXiv preprints (Refs.1,2) reported signatures of superconductivity above room temperature 
(SART) and at ambient pressure, striking worldwide experimental research efforts in replicating the 
results3-6, as well as theoretical attempts to explain the purported superconductivity7-11. The material of 
interest has chemical formula Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O, where x ≈ 1, and was named by the authors as LK-99. It 
belongs to lead apatite family, and was synthesised from two precursors, lanarkite (PbSO4·PbO) and 
copper phosphide (Cu3P). Here we performed a systematic study on LK-99, starting from solid-state 
synthesis, followed by characterisation and transport measurements. We did not observe any signatures 
of superconductivity in our samples of LK-99.  

Introduction  

In the dynamic field of LK-99, in just three weeks after first preprints, over 3 dozen of follow-up works 
emerge. And this trend seems to continue increasing. Below we briefly review the state of the art of LK-99 
research.  

Series of DFT calculations8-15 found ultra-flat electronic bands across all Brillouin zone (plane-flat16 bands) 
near the Fermi level in LK-99, suggesting strong electronic correlations. The importance of oxygen for flat 
bands, as a result from the hybridisation between Cu d-states and O p-states was highlighted10,17. One of 
preprint even suggested that annealing LK-99 in oxygen atmosphere could improve the band flatness, since 
O deficiency spoils the orbital hybridisation17. Cu-O hybridisation was also discussed in the context of spin-
glass-like behaviour of Cu-O hybrids15. Overall, however, the band flatness of LK-99 seems to stem from 
electronic localisation due to a large separation between copper atoms. 

Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) could play a role in the electronic structure of LK-99, as DFT calculations without 
SOC give flat band at the Fermi level, while DFT with SOC results in band gap opening; the conduction band 
is still very flat (bandwidth 0.025 eV), and could be reached upon electron doping of 0.5 e/unit cell13. 
Besides, SOC could lead to a ferromagnetic ground state13. DFT calculations without explicitly including SOC 
performed in one study revealed antiferromagnetic ground state, their work also shows that LK-99 is a 
semiconductor with 0.9 eV band gap18. Another study, however, amounts SOC to only 3 meV gap in the flat 
band of LK-99, making it less important comparing to other effects such as exchange interactions (e.g., 
antiferromagnetic superexchange)19. 

The importance of copper nanoclusters for SART is emphasized in one study, based on the author’s 
previous development of resonating valence bond (RVB) theory, so-called atom Mott insulator (AMI)7. It 
suggests that plane-flat bands of LK-99 are not that important for SART, and could only result in very low 
transition temperatures7. The low-temperature scale of the corelations in LK-99 is also suggested in local 
density approximation band calculations20.  

Using tight-binding (TB) calculations, analysis of Berry curvature in flat bands of LK-99 revealed no 
signatures of magnetism21. Another TB study of the plane-flat band in LK-99 showed its topological origin, 
however no discussions on possible superconductivity or magnetism were provided22.  

A combination of dynamic mean field theory (DMFT) and four- and two-band TB calculations predicts that 
LK-99 is a Mott insulator with strong interactions at the flat band23. A combination of DFT and DMFT 
calculations also suggested the importance of oxygen for the electronic properties of LK-99, and vast 
complexity of its electronic structure24. The DFT + DMFT approach was further elaborated, together with an 
update on tight-binding description of LK-9925. Meanwhile, the crystal structure of a parent material of LK-


2 

 

99, the undoped lead apatite also known as oxypyromorphite, Pb10(PO4)6O, has also been recently 
revisited26 following the ongoing development of LK-99 research, which should provide better input for 
future ab initio calculations.  

Overall, the importance of band flatness and the contribution of copper or oxygen in the electronic 
structure of LK-99 was highlighted throughout theoretical attempts. Yet more theoretical works to unify the 
currently dispersed findings are needed to provide a general picture to understand experimental 
observations on LK-99.  

In contrast to a flurry of theoretical responses, experimental attempts to reproduce LK-99 synthesis and 
test for superconductivity are more sporadic. One early attempt to reproduce LK-99 claimed successful 
synthesis, supported by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) analysis of samples. However, no signs of 
superconductivity was observed27. They reported weak diamagnetic response of the samples, -0.006 emu/g 
at 10 kOe at room temperature. Another attempt claims observation of strong diamagnetic behaviour of 
synthesised LK-99, however no quantitative data were provided beyond the observation that some LK-99 
flakes deviate to a large angle under magnetic field of a permanent magnet6. Another study reported that 
synthesised LK-99 samples are heterogeneous, with a small fraction of ‘flaky’ fragments exhibiting ‘half-
levitation’ over permanent magnet at room temperature28. Magnetisation measurements of these 
fragments (and even of the samples that did not half-levitate) show magnetic response, e.g., 0.00055 
emu/g at 10 Oe, but -0.01 emu/g at 10 kOe at room temperature. Low magnetic field data show 
ferromagnetic hysteresis. Ferromagnetic signatures were even stronger in half-levitating fragments. 
However, quantitative measurements were not possible due to their small size.  

In one preprint, where the authors claimed the observation of superconducting transition at approximately 
100 K, with resistance drop following decreasing temperature in LK-993. This result, however, could also be 
interpreted as a metallic behaviour of the sample, since the noise level of their measurements precludes 
detecting resistance lower than 10-5 W. Another preprint reported semiconducting behaviour (with 
resistivity of 104 W×cm at room temperature) of LK-99 and no signs of diamagnetic levitation5.  

Further attempts to reproduce LK-99 also show sample inhomogeneity and semiconducting temperature 
dependence29. Curiously, LK-99 shows a small drop in resistance near 387 K (and a small diamagnetic jump 
at temperatures in the 340-350 K range), without any signs of zero resistance at any studied temperatures. 
The authors attributed resistance drop to either LK-99 itself, or impurities like Cu2S or Cu2O. The presence 
of Cu2S, and its crucial role in the behaviour of LK-99 was elaborated in another experimental work30. By 
measuring resistance of pure Cu2S and LK-99 containing Cu2S, the authors reproduced the sudden drop in 
resistance around 385 K, attributing it to a structural phase transition of Cu2S from b to g phase, 
accompanied by 3-4 orders of magnitude decrease in resistivity. The role of Cu2S impurities in explaining LK-
99 physics was also highlighted elsewhere31, signifying the importance of obtaining Cu2S-free LK-99 for 
further investigations. LK-99 is also found to be hygroscopic and could convert from Pb9Cu1(PO4)6O to 
Pb9Cu1(PO4)6(OH)2 upon expose to ambient moisture32. Yet, again, no signs of superconductivity (or 
theoretical hints towards it) were observed.  

So far, none of the experimental efforts has successfully reproduced SART in LK-99 as reported in the 
original preprints. Rather, the reported results show a range of diverse behaviour that likely originated 
from the inhomogeneity of the synthetic LK-99 materials, because of a lack of precise recipe. The ongoing 
enthusiasm in searching for SART calls for collective efforts in open research to establish unified synthesis 
routes and characterization standard, for LK-99, and for future quests towards SART. 

Results and discussion 

In our work, several attempts to synthesize LK-99 were carried out. The main synthesis route, described in 
the arXiv preprints1,2 and in the patent33, rely on the reaction between lanarkite (PbSO4·PbO), and copper 
phosphide (Cu3P) at 925°C in a sealed environment. Our synthesis follows closely the original preprints and 
patent, the details are described below. We have also tried different ratios of precursors, various 
container/crucible materials, and a range of temperature profiles. 


3 

 

Precursors synthesis 

In our experiments, lanarkite was first synthesized following the procedure described elsewhere1,2,33. 
Briefly, 1:1 molar ratio of PbO and PbSO4 (first synthesis was carried out with compounds prepared from 
lead nitrate: PbO - by decomposition at 600°C, PbSO4 – by precipitation with H2SO4; further attempts were 
made from reagents purchased from commercial sources) were ground in agate mortar to form a fine 
mixture. Then the mixture was heated at 750°C in an alumina crucible for 24 hours in air. The mixture was 
left to cool naturally before taking out of the furnace. X-ray diffractometry (XRD, Rigaku Miniflex I) was 
used to confirm the crystalline structure of the as-synthesized material. Its XRD peaks (Fig. 1a) match well 
with the lanarkite reference entry, confirming its purity.  

We then synthesized copper phosphide (Cu3P) according to the procedure described before1,2,33. To this 
end, a stoichiometric ratio of copper powder (10 μm, 99.95%) and red phosphorus (Chempur 99.995%) 
were mixed together in the argon glovebox and sealed in the quartz ampule under 10−3 mbar vacuum. The 
ampule was then heated to 550°C and kept for 15 hours, then at 650°C for another 10 hours. After cooling 
down naturally, we opened the ampoule and took the sample out for XRD measurements. XRD results (Fig. 
1b) confirm the obtained compound as Cu3P and its good crystallinity.  

Fig. 1. XRD patterns of synthesized precursors. a, lanarkite. b, copper phosphide. Insets show 
photographs of the materials. 

With the two precursors ready, we can start the synthesis of LK-99. To make sure a good mixture of the two 
components, we weigh and grind both components into fine powder before initiating the reaction. Cu3P is 
mechanically hard and brittle, it was ground in agate mortar inside glovebox and sieved through a 300-
mesh sieve. Lanarkite was ground at ambient environment. Two precursors were mixed and sealed inside 
quartz ampoule and heated up for certain period of time. Afterwards, samples were taken out of the 
furnace for further characterization and measurements. We found that molten lead compounds severely 
corrode quartz glass, leading to the cracking of the quartz ampoule. The obtained materials were first 
characterized using XRD, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) 
microanalysis (Zeiss Ultra microscope), to confirm the crystallinity and elemental composition of the 
synthesized materials.  

Copper-doped lead apatite (LK-99) synthesis and characterisation 

Lanarkite and Cu3P were mixed with compound molar ratio 1:1, as described previously, and loaded directly 
into quartz ampoules. The ampoules were heated to 925°C in a furnace and kept for 15 hours. After the 


4 

 

ampoules cooled down, we found severe cracking or even the total breakdown of the ampoules. To 
prevent this from happening, we then tried loading the precursor mixture into alumina crucibles, before 
loading into quartz ampoules for high-temperature reaction. This helped to some extent, to contain the 
reaction and to reduce the damage to the ampoules from molten reactants. Figure 2a shows one of the 
quartz ampoules after reaction at high temperature, similar to that reported in Fig. 1f in the original 6-
author preprint2. However, alumina crucible also got heavily corroded by lead-containing melt during 
growth (Fig. 2e,f). EDX of the as-grown sample shows lead-containing matrix with islands of aggregated 
metallic copper (Fig. 2b,c,d). The obtained sample was also checked under XRD, to compare with the 
original LK-99 sample2. The XRD peaks of the synthesized material match only partially with that of 
undoped lead apatite, Fig. 2g. 

Fig. 2. Synthesis and characterisation of LK-99. a, photograph of the ampoule after synthesis showing 
damage due to volatile lead compounds. b, SEM micrograph with overlay of EDX map showing elemental 
composition of the synthesised LK-99. c,d, elemental maps of Cu and Pb of the same specimen as in panel b. 
The EDX mapping reveals segregation of metallic copper islands in the matrix of lead apatite. e,f, photographs 
of alumina crucibles before (e) and after (f) synthesis. Lead-containing melt causes strong corrosion of 
alumina as evidenced by the coloration. g, XRD of the synthesized material and its comparison with the 
reference spectrum of lead apatite. Inset shows photograph of as-grown LK-99 inside alumina crucible. 

We then used copper crucible, in replacement of alumina crucible, to repeat the experiment, in order to 
avoid crucible corrosion and the potential Al contamination in the synthesized products. Similarly, the 
synthesis process follows that described previously. XRD and EDX were used to confirm the composition of 
the final products, Fig. 3. EDX confirms that the final product is made of mainly four elements (Pb, Cu, P and 
O). Among them, copper tends to form aggregates (Fig. 3b) after precipitating at high temperature (see also 
Fig. 2b,c). All other elements show more uniform distribution throughout the measured area (more than 3 
areas are checked using EDX, showing similar overall distribution). XRD confirmed the presence of LK-99 
(Cu-doped Pb10(PO4)6O), Fig. 3f. Our experimental peaks match what is expected for Cu-doped lead apatite, 
with the addition of a peak at around 27 degree, as reported in the 6-author preprint2.  


5 

 

Fig.3. Synthesis of LK-99 in copper crucible. a-e, SEM and EDX analysis of as-grown LK-99. f, XRD of LK-99. Left 
inset shows LK-99 inside copper crucible. Right inset shows zoomed-in region of panel f, highlighting peaks 
that are characteristic of Cu-doped lead apatite, according to Ref. 2.  

During the synthesis in copper crucible, some material evaporated and condensed at the bottom of the 
quartz ampoule. We also characterized this material. It appears to be lead apatite (Pb10(PO4)6O (see XRD in 
Supplementary Fig. 1d). EDX results of the material from the bottom wall of the ampoule show that Cu is 
also present, Supplementary Fig. 1.  

To avoid evaporation of the material from copper crucible, we further modified the synthesis procedure. To 
this end, we covered the copper crucible with copper cap and filled the ampoule with 0.15 bar of argon for 
the reaction to take place. Temperature and duration of the reaction were kept the same as above, 925°C 
for 15 hours. This modification completely prevented evaporation of material outside the crucible and 
helped to contain reaction completely within the crucible. This also prevented side reactions of precursors 
or LK-99 with quartz ampoule. The obtained LK-99 was still rather inhomogeneous, Fig. 4.  

We did not observe either diamagnetic levitation or zero resistance in any of our LK-99 samples. However, 
in some of the synthesized samples, we found few very small pieces of materials, either black or pink 
appearance under optical microscope, with strong para- or ferromagnetic response. That is, these samples 
move, flip, or stand as the magnet moves underneath, similar to those reported in some videos (e.g., as in 
Ref. 6) in an attempt to replicate LK-99 diamagnetic levitation. We carefully separated these particles and 
performed EDX analysis on them. As confirmed by EDX, these magnet-responsive particles have iron 
inclusions (Supplementary Fig. 2). This helps to explain our results with magnetic response. Unfortunately, 
despite all the care has been taken to avoid iron contamination during the process, some remains. 

 


6 

 

Fig.4. Synthesis of LK-99 in copper enclosure under argon. a, SEM image with overlay of EDX map showing 
elemental composition, b-d, EDX analysis for phosphor, copper and lead, respectively. e, XRD spectrum of the 
synthesised LK-99.  

Transport measurements 

We then fabricated several samples for transport measurements, both the as-grown material, and a ground 
and pressed pellet from the synthesized LK-99, details are shown in Fig. 5 and Supplementary Fig. 3. Four-
probe resistance was measured using lock-in amplifier, excitation current was in the mA range, and was 
monitored by a second lock-in. Current-voltage characteristics were recorded using 2614b Keithley 
SourceMeter and 2182A Keithley Nanovoltmeter, using either 4-terminal or van der Pauw geometry. 
Temperature of the sample mounted in the vacuum chamber was controlled using Ricor K535LV 
cryocooler. The temperature was measured by Cryo-Con Model 12 temperature monitor equipped with 
Pt100 RTD thermometer attached to the sample holder. Due to strong inhomogeneity of the samples, their 
voltage-current characteristics show a broad variation of response, with resistance ranging many orders of 
magnitude, and V-I curves showing signatures of switching, hysteresis, nonlinearity, and even negative 
differential resistance. Samples appear to be brittle as well. Often, samples crack and break down during 
measurements, when high current (> 50 mA) was applied, or during mounting due to even slight 
mechanical vibration.  

Figure 5c shows temperature dependence of the resistance of one of our samples. High-temperature data 
show clear drop in resistance, very similar to the one shown in Fig. 5 in the original preprint2. This 
behaviour is very similar to resistance drop in Cu2S due to structural phase transition, see data in 
Supplementary Fig. 4 and similar results in Ref. 30. Resistance peaks at 100-150 K are measurement 
artifacts due to divergence of contact resistance at low temperatures, see the strong increase in out-of-
phase signal of measured voltage in the corresponding low temperature range in the inset of Fig. 5c. 


7 

 

Overall, the device shows a combination of resistance drop at high temperature, most likely due to 
structural phase transition of Cu2S, combined with low-temperature semiconducting behaviour of LK-99.   

Fig. 5. Transport measurements of LK-99. a, van der Pauw voltage-current measurements of as-grown LK-99 
sample at room temperature in air. Top-right inset shows a photograph of the device with four terminals 
marked with numbers. Four numbers in the legend are indications of the measurement configurations: 
terminals corresponding to the first two numbers are connected to a current source, while terminals 
corresponding to the last two numbers are connected to a nanovoltmeter. Insets (i), (ii), and (iii) are zoomed-
in V-I curves for different measurement configurations. b, van der Pauw voltage-current measurement of the 
LK-99 sample shown in a at 62 K in vacuum. The legends and insets (i) and (ii) in b are also zoomed-in curves 
for different measurement configurations. Low-temperature V-I curves show that parts of the device become 
insulating, most likely due to a granular nature of LK-99 sample. c, Temperature dependence of resistance of 
the LK-99 sample shown in a. The heating cycle is first conducted in air and the resistance of the sample is 
recorded through via dc measurements. Following the heating cycle, the cooling cycle is carried out under 
vacuum conditions. The transport properties of the sample in the cooling cycle are assessed utilizing lock-in 
measurements. Inset: the out-of-phase component of the lock-in signal during the cooling cycle. Arrows 
indicate the temperature change directions. 

 

In summary, we can conclude that although the synthesis of LK-99 shows XRD features similar to the 
reported, and EDX data confirm their elemental composition, no signatures of superconductivity are visible. 
We did observe a drop in the resistance of some of our samples at 380-390 K, which is consistent with 
structural phase transition of Cu2S in that temperature range.  


8 

 

 

Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 
2020 research and innovation program (Grant Agreement No. 865590) and the Research Council UK 
(BB/X003736/1). Q.Y. acknowledges the Royal Society University Research Fellowship URF\R1\221096, and 
the Research Council UK (EP/X017575/1).  

Data availability 

Relevant data are available from the corresponding authors on request. 
 


9 

 

Supplementary Information 

Supplementary Fig. 1. Lead apatite condensed outside copper crucible in the quartz ampoule. a-c, SEM and 
EDX analysis of Cu-doped lead apatite. d, XRD of the evaporated material. Left inset shows a photograph of 
the precipitate at the bottom of quartz ampoule that was used for analysis.  

 

Supplementary Fig. 2. SEM and EDX analysis of two samples (a-c and d-f) with magnetic response, showing 
presence of iron.  


10 

 

Supplementary Fig. 3. Transport measurements of LK-99 at room temperature in air. a, 4-terminal 
measurement of as-grown LK-99 sample. V/I curve is highly unstable. Left inset shows photograph of the 
measured sample, right inset is SEM image of the same sample overlayed with EDX map after measurements, 
cracks formed during measurement is visible in the middle of the sample. b, van der Pauw measurements of 
ground LK-99 pressed into a pellet. Four numbers 1234 show measurement configuration, +I-I+V-V. Insets: top 
left and right bottom show zoomed-in curves highlighting huge differences in resistance across the pellet. 
Bottom left inset shows photograph of the pellet with contacts labelled.  

 

Supplementary Fig. 4. Transport measurements of Cu2S pellet. a, four-terminal measurement of a Cu2S pellet 
pressed from grounded Cu2S powder. Inset: photograph of the pellet with four electrical contacts marked with 
numbers. A current source is applied through terminals 1 and 4, and terminals 2 and 3 are connected to the 
high and low of a voltmeter. Two voltage-current curves are measured before and after the heating process 
shown in b, and the corresponding resistances are calculated from the linear fit of the curve. b, resistance of 
the Cu2S pellet and the LK-99 sample (same data as in Fig. 5c in the main text) at high temperature in the air. 
The resistance of the sample is recorded via dc measurements. Arrows indicate directions of temperature 
change. 

 

 
 


11 

 

References 

1 
Lee, S., Kim, J.-H. & Kwon, Y.-W. The First Room-Temperature Ambient-Pressure Superconductor. 
arXiv, 2307.12008 (2023).  

2 
Lee, S. et al. Superconductor Pb(10-x)Cux(PO4)6O showing levitation at room temperature and 
atmospheric pressure and mechanism. arXiv, 2307.12037 (2023).  

3 
Hou, Q., Wei, W., Zhou, X., Sun, Y. & Shi, Z. Observation of zero resistance above 100K in Pb(10-
x)Cux(PO4)6O. arXiv (2023).  

4 
Kumar, K., Karn, N. K. & Awana, V. P. S. Synthesis of possible room temperature superconductor LK-
99:Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. arXiv (2023).  

5 
Li Liu, Z. M., Xiaoning Wang, Hongyu Chen, Zhiyuan Duan, Xiaorong Zhou, Han Yan, Peixin Qin, Zhiqi 
Liu. Semiconducting transport in Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O sintered from Pb2SO5 and Cu3P. arXiv, 
2307.16802 (2023).  

6 
Wu, H., Yang, L., Xiao, B. & Chang, H. Successful growth and room temperature ambient-pressure 
magnetic levitation of LK-99. arXiv (2023).  

7 
Baskaran, G. Broad Band Mott Localization is all you need for Hot Superconductivity: Atom Mott 
Insulator Theory for Cu-Pb Apatite. arXiv (2023).  

8 
Si, L. & Held, K. Electronic structure of the putative room-temperature superconductor 
Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. arXiv, 2308.00676 (2023).  

9 
Griffin, S. M. Origin of correlated isolated flat bands in copper-substituted lead phosphate apatite. 
arXiv (2023).  

10 
Kurleto, R. et al. Pb-apatite framework as a generator of novel flat-band CuO based physics, 
including possible room temperature superconductivity. arXiv (2023).  

11 
Cabezas-Escares, J., Barrera, N. F., Cardenas, C. & Munoz, F. Theoretical insight on the LK-99 
material. arXiv (2023).  

12 
Lai, J., Li, J., Liu, P., Sun, Y. & Chen, X.-Q. First-principles study on the electronic structure of 
Pb10−Cu (PO4)6O (x = 0, 1). Journal of Materials Science & Technology (2023). 
https://doi.org:10.1016/j.jmst.2023.08.001 

13 
Bai, H., Gao, L. & Zeng, C. Ferromagnetic ground state and Spin-orbit coupling induced bandgap 
open in LK99. arXiv (2023).  

14 
Hao, L. & Fu, E. First-principles calculation on the electronic structures, phonon dynamics, and 
electrical conductivities of Pb10(PO4)6O and Pb9Cu(PO4)6O compounds. arXiv (2023).  

15 
Sun, Y., Ho, K.-M. & Antropov, V. Metallization and Spin Fluctuations in Cu-doped Lead Apatite. 
arXiv (2023).  

16 
Bhattacharya, A., Timokhin, I., Chatterjee, R., Yang, Q. & Mishchenko, A. Deep learning approach to 
genome of two-dimensional materials with flat electronic bands. npj Computational Materials 9, 1-
9 (2023). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41524-023-01056-x 

17 
Tao, K. et al. The Cu induced ultraflat band in the room-temperature superconductor Pb10-
xCux(PO4)6O4 (x=0,0.5). arXiv (2023).  

18 
Zhang, J. et al. Structural, electronic, magnetic properties of Cu-doped lead-apatite Pb{10-
x}Cux(PO4)6O. arXiv (2023).  

19 
Mao, N., Peshcherenko, N. & Zhang, Y. Wannier functions, minimal model and charge transfer in 
Pb9CuP6O25. arXiv (2023).  

20 
Lee, P. A. & Dai, Z. Effective model for Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. arXiv (2023).  

21 
Chen, W. Berry curvature and quantum metric in copper-substituted lead phosphate apatite. arXiv 
(2023).  

22 
Hirschmann, M. M. & Mitscherling, J. Tight-binding models for SG 143 (P3) and application to 
recent DFT results on copper-doped lead apatite. arXiv (2023).  

23 
Yue, C., Christiansson, V. & Werner, P. Correlated electronic structure of Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O. arXiv 
(2023).  

24 
Korotin, D. M., Novoselov, D. Y., Shorikov, A. O., Anisimov, V. I. & Oganov, A. R. Electronic 
correlations in promising room-temperature superconductor Pb9Cu(PO4)6O: a DFT+DMFT study. 
arXiv (2023).  


12 

 

25 
Si, L. et al. Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O: a Mott or charge transfer insulator in need of further doping for 
(super)conductivity. arXiv (2023).  

26 
Krivovichev, S. V. The crystal structure of Pb10(PO4)6O revisited: the evidence of superstructure. 
arXiv (2023).  

27 
Kumar, K., Karn, N. K., Kumar, Y. & Awana, V. P. S. Absence of superconductivity in LK-99 at ambient 
conditions. arXiv (2023).  

28 
Guo, K., Li, Y. & Jia, S. Ferromagnetic half levitation of LK-99-like synthetic samples. arXiv (2023).  

29 
Wu, H. et al. Observation of abnormal resistance-temperature behavior along with diamagnetic 
transition in Pb{10-x}Cux(PO4)6O-based composite. arXiv (2023).  

30 
Zhu, S., Wu, W., Li, Z. & Luo, J. First order transition in Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O (0.9<x<1.1) containing 
Cu2S. arXiv (2023).  

31 
Jain, P. K. Phase transition of copper (I) sulfide and its implication for purported superconductivity 
of LK-99. arXiv (2023).  

32 
Jiang, Y. et al. Pb9Cu(PO4)6(OH)2: Phonon bands, Localized Flat Band Magnetism, Models, and 
Chemical Analysis. arXiv (2023).  

33 
이석배, 김지훈, 권영완 & 퀀텀에너지연구소, 주. Room temperature and normal pressure 
superconducting ceramic compound, and method for manufacturing same. WO2023027536A1 
(2023). 

 


