 
1

Salt-assisted vapor-liquid-solid growth of one-dimensional van der Waals materials 
 
Thang Pham1*, Kate Reidy1, Joachim D. Thomsen1, Baoming Wang1, Nishant Deshmukh2, Michael 
A. Filler2* and Frances M. Ross1* 
 
1. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
2. School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 
30332, USA 
 
Corresponding authors. Email: thangpt88@gmail.com (T.P.), michael.filler@chbe.gatech.edu 
(M.A.F.), fmross@mit.edu (F.M.R.) 
 
Abstract 

 We have combined the benefits of two catalytic growth phenomena to form 
nanostructures of transition metal trichalcogenides (TMTs), materials that are challenging to 
grow in a nanostructured form by conventional techniques, as required to exploit their exotic 
physics. Our growth strategy combines the benefits of vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) growth in 
controlling dimension and growth location, and salt-assisted growth for fast growth at moderate 
temperatures. This salt-assisted VLS growth is enabled through use of a catalyst that includes Au 
and an alkali metal halide. We demonstrate high yields of NbS3 1D nanostructures with sub-ten 
nanometer diameter, tens of micrometers length, and distinct 1D morphologies consisting of 
nanowires and nanoribbons with [010] and [100] growth orientations, respectively. We present 
strategies to control the growth location, size, and morphology. We extend the growth method 
to synthesize other TMTs, NbSe3 and TiS3, as nanowires. Finally, we discuss the growth 
mechanism based on the relationships we measure between the materials characteristics 
(growth orientation, morphology and dimensions) and the growth conditions (catalyst volume 
and growth time). Our study introduces opportunities to expand the library of emerging 1D vdW 
materials and their heterostructures with controllable nanoscale dimensions. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The discovery of graphene has stimulated interested in van der Waals (vdW) bonded 
materials that can be mechanically or chemically exfoliated to obtain single layer sheets (1, 2). 
Beyond well-known examples, such as two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides 
(TMDs), are the less-studied vdW materials based on one-dimensional (1D) motifs that show 
exotic properties and promising applications owing to their intrinsic anisotropic character (3–5). 
The prototypical family of these so-called “1D vdW” materials is the transition metal 
trichalcogenides (TMTs) with the formula MX3, such as NbSe3, TiS3 and HfTe3 (4, 6). These 
materials contain covalently bonded triagonal prismatic chains of metal (M) and chalcogens (X) 
further assembled, through weaker inter-chain covalent bonds, into bilayer sheets that are 
stacked to result in a mixture of 2D and 1D characteristics (7). Even in the bulk form, many of 
these crystals exhibit intriguing electronic, optical, and thermal properties uniquely derived from 
their 1D character (3–5). This includes hosting charge and spin density waves(4), 
superconductivity (4) and spatially confined phonon density of states(3), to name just a few. 


 
2

Moreover, nanoscale, exfoliated forms of several TMTs have shown exotic optoelectronic (8, 9) 
and thermal transport characteristics  (10), for instance superdiffusive thermal transport in NbSe3 
nanowires with diameter smaller than 20 nm (11), highlighting the importance of nanoscale 
confinement in these materials (3, 7, 12, 13). 

NbS3 is an interesting TMT due to its extensive library of polymorphs and structure-
dependent properties (14–16). Five distinct phases of NbS3 have been observed experimentally 
and many more stable phases were recently predicted (15). Different polymorphs usually have 
different degrees of metal pairing (Nb-Nb distance) along the chain, or different bilayer stacking 
order. These structural differences result in a wealth of electronic properties, for example three 
distinct charge density wave instabilities in type-II NbS3, a metallic phase with basic structure 
belonging to the space group P21/m (14, 17). Despite these fascinating structures and properties, 
NbS3 is one of the least reported members in the family of TMTs in terms of both fundamental 
studies and potential applications, in part because of the lack of a synthesis method that enables 
precise manufacturing of the material (18). Successful integration of NbS3 into next-generation 
devices that make use of its nanoscale properties would benefit from a deterministic synthesis 
method that allows control over the material’s structural phase, chemistry, size, and placement 

(3). 

Bulk TMTs have mainly been synthesized by chemical vapor transport and flux growth(5, 
6). While these methods produce single crystals of high purity, they face several issues in scalable 
manufacturing of nanostructures (3, 5). Long times of days to weeks are required to grow the 
crystals, and additional steps such as exfoliation (mechanically or chemically) and transfer are 
needed to place nanoscale samples onto target substrates for further characterization and 
applications. The need for post-growth processing often results in a lack of control of the resulting 
nanomaterial in terms of its size and interface quality, hindering integration with other material 
systems (5, 19). 

A successful strategy to create 1D nanostructures of semiconductors with controlled sizes 
and placement on a substrate has been the catalytic process of vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) growth 

(20). The working principle of VLS depends, at its most general, on the formation of a liquid 
eutectic between the growth material and a catalyst patterned onto the substrate at the desired 
location of the nanowire (20). With Au as a common catalyst, growth materials have ranged from 
group IV and III-IV semiconductors (21, 22) such as Si, Ge, and GaAs, usually supplied by chemical 
vapor deposition (CVD) precursors, to binary oxides, e.g., ZnO (23, 24). A versatile feature of VLS 
is the ability to create heterostructures; even chemically dissimilar materials have been 
interfaced (25–27). For layered materials, the VLS mechanism has been demonstrated for 
synthesis of nanowires containing low-melting metals, such as Ga (GaS (28), GaSe (29)), In (In2Se3    

(30)), Bi (Bi2Se3 (31)) and Ge (GeS (32, 33), GeSe (34)). However, for synthesis of TMTs the 
technique is more challenging, since the metals of interest have very high melting points and low 
vapor pressure (e.g., Nb and Ti) and do not form liquid eutectic compositions with a metal such 
as Au in the typical CVD temperature range of 600-900°C. As such, to the best of our knowledge, 
there has been no study of TMT nanostructures synthesized by VLS or any other method that can 
provide a high degree of control over the material’s structure, chemistry, and dimensions. 

Here we report a modification of the VLS mechanism that enables synthesis of transition 
metal trichalcogenides, exemplified by NbS3 1D nanostructures, developed by adapting a strategy 
of salt-assisted growth that has been demonstrated for other materials, specifically TMDs. The 


 
3

technique is based on the use of VLS catalysts with conventional solid sources for Nb and S that 
are combined with an alkali metal halide, NaCl. As discussed below, the salt is known to react 
with transition metal/metal oxides (Nb/NbOx) to form intermediate products that have lower 
melting points (35, 36). This improves the vapor pressure and increases the mass flow of the 
metal (Nb) precursor, resulting in growth over short times (time scales of minutes) at 
temperatures (650-750°C) much lower than would be required in the absence of the salt. Under 
these conditions, the addition of a metallic catalyst enables VLS growth with control of 1D 
nanostructure sizes and growth locations.  

We show that this hybrid growth strategy, which we refer to as salt-assisted VLS growth, 
results in high-density 1D materials with sub-ten nanometer diameter and lengths up to several 
tens of micrometers, the regime in which strongly correlated physics starts to emerge (3). 
Additionally, using electron microscopy techniques (electron diffraction and atomic-resolution 
scanning transmission electron microscopy) we show that the materials exhibit several distinct 
1D morphologies, such as wires and ribbons, and two growth orientations, namely [010] and 
[100] directions. We present strategies to control the growth of 1D NbS3, varying the 
nanostructure size through the growth time, the 1D morphology through the catalyst size, the 
growth location via catalyst patterning, and we discuss the effect on growth of the substrate by 
using both bulk substrate (SiOx/Si, SiN, sapphire) and 2D substrate (few-layer graphene and 
hexagonal boron nitride). We demonstrate the synthesis of other TMT nanowires, namely NbSe3 
and TiS3, using the same approach. Finally, we propose a growth mechanism consistent with 
these findings based on the relationships we measure between the NbS3 growth orientation, 
morphologies, catalyst diameter, growth time, and nanowire dimensions. The dimensions we 
obtain are within the range needed to display the materials’ unusual electron, phonon, and spin 
transport properties (37). Our study introduces an opportunity to expand the library of vdW 
materials towards emerging 1D materials, and we anticipate that the deterministic synthesis will 
enable the integration of 1D quantum materials into next generation quantum electronics. We 
also propose this as a more general approach for exploring nanowire synthesis of group IV and V 
heavy metal compounds (e.g., oxides of Mo, W, Ta, Hf) based on an alloy catalyst containing both 
a metal and an alkali metal halide.  
 
RESULTS 
Structures and growth orientations 

We show in Figure 1 an overview of the types of structures that we have obtained through 
salt-assisted VLS growth of NbS3. Figure 1A illustrates growth over a large area, showing a high 
density of 1D structures with spherical particles at one end, indicative of the VLS mechanism (22). 
In this example, diameters in the range of 10-500 nm and lengths up to tens of micrometers were 
obtained for 30 minutes growth at 725°C using 10-nm Au catalyst film. Figure S1 shows the 
selectivity of this growth, with locations controlled through patterning of Au on a SiOx/Si 
substrate. 

This growth and all others presented below were obtained in the deposition system 
shown in Fig. S1A, with a process that is further described in the Methods. We studied growth on 
both bulk substrates (amorphous SiOx/Si, SiN, sapphire, and mica) and on 2D vdW materials 
(single to few-layer graphene and hexagonal BN) transferred onto SiN TEM grids (Fig. S1B). Au 
with thickness in the range 0-50 nm is evaporated onto these substrates to provide the VLS 


 
4

catalyst metal; on heating, these films agglomerate into droplets from which the nanostructures 
grow. The solid source for Nb is mixed with NaCl to act as a growth promoter. The salt is intended 
to react with the Nb powder precursor to form intermediate products with lower melting point, 
aiming to enhance the vapor pressure and increase the mass flow (38, 39). Typically, 50 mg of Nb 
powder is mixed with 25 mg of NaCl, and the mixture is loaded into an alumina boat. A growth 
substrate is placed upside down directly above the precursor mixture and the Nb/NaCl/substrate 
boat is set to a temperature of 650-800°C. 150-200 mg of S crystals are placed upstream and 
heated to 130-150°C. 100-150 sccm of high purity Ar is used as the carrier gas for growth times 
varying from 5 to 45 minutes. We note that below 650°C, the evaporation rate is very limited and 
the growth results in short and small structures. On the other hand, above 800°C, we observe 
mostly NbS2 phases (Fig. S2), in agreement with a recent report showing the conversion of NbS2 
phase from NbS3 at high temperature (1000°C) (40). We therefore find an optimum temperature 
of 725°C and this was used for all of the growths discussed below, unless indicated otherwise. 

  

 

 
Fig. 1. VLS growth of NbS3 one-dimensional materials. (A) A representative SEM image of 30-
min growth on a SiOx/Si substrate showing high density of 1D nanomaterials. Inset: High 
magnification SEM image displays the presence of nanoparticles residing at one end of the 1D 
materials. (B) High-resolution TEM image with electron diffraction pattern inset. (C-D) Atomic-
resolution EDS chemical composition mapping of a NbS3 nanowire. (E-H) Typical morphologies of 
as-synthesized NbS3 1D nanostructures: (E) nanowires having growth orientation [010], and (F-
H) nano-ribbons having growth orientation [100]. 

 
 


 
5

Atomic structure and chemistry of the as-synthesized materials were measured by electron 
microscopy. Atomic-resolution TEM images and electron diffraction (Fig. 1B) reveal the Nb-Nb 
repeat distance along the chain direction is b= 3.36 ± 0.12 nm, while the other lattice parameters 
are a = 9.63 ± 0.21 nm and c = 19.62 ± 0.29 nm. These parameters indicate that the deposited 
material is monoclinic NbS3 (NbS3-II phase), a stable and metallic phase of NbS3 that has 
previously been synthesized in the bulk (16, 17). Atomic-resolution energy dispersive 
spectroscopy (EDS) shows that the 1D structures are composed of S and Nb with atomic ratio 
S/Nb = 3.23 ± 0.20, matching closely with the stoichiometry expected for NbS3 (Fig. 1C and D). 
We note that there is ~1-5at% of Na and Cl in our samples as impurities. This EDS characterization 
also reveals that, post-growth, the particle contains Au, Nb, S and, notably, Na and Cl (Fig. SI3). 
This observation suggests a second role of NaCl due to its presence in the VLS catalyst, in addition 
to its use as an evaporation promoter as reported in the literature (41, 42). We discuss below the 
role of NaCl in forming an alloyed VLS catalyst that guides the growth of 1D structures. 

Figures 1E and F highlight the two morphologies of 1D materials that we typically see in 
our synthesis: one type is straight with an approximately square cross-section (referred to as 
nanowires (NWs), Fig. 1E) while the other has a ribbon morphology and rectangular cross section 
(referred to as nanoribbons (NRs), Figs. 1F-H). We note that Figs. 1E and F are representative of 
our synthesized materials regardless of the substrate, either SiOx/Si or few-layer graphene 
suspended on a SiN TEM grid (Fig. S1C). The growth is reproducible: in a typical 30 minute-growth 
using 10 nm Au, more than 90% of the Au droplets have nucleated a nanostructure. The cross-
sectional area of NbS3 nanowires does not change greatly along the nanowire. In contrast, NbS3 
nanoribbons are more variable. Their cross section is rectangular (Figs. 1F-H), with non-planar 
sidewalls and growth direction varying along the length. A typical nanoribbon has a uniform width 
throughout its length (Fig. 1F), while we also observe other nanoribbons that show tapering (Figs. 
1G and H) or a non-uniform cross-section (Fig. 1H). Moreover, many nanoribbons are thin and do 
not remain attached to the substrate. Some curl up towards the free-end tip, resembling a spiral 
structure (Fig. 1F). Similar “topological crystals” (43, 44) have been observed in bulk NbSe3 and 
TaSe3 synthesized by chemical vapor transport. Interestingly, such structures are theoretically 
predicted to be energetically stable under certain nonequilibrium conditions, such as in the 
presence of Se droplets during growth (43). Measurements of the cross-section areas, lengths, 
and diameters of different NbS3 morphologies can be found in Fig. S4.  

Atomic-resolution imaging provides more insight into nanowire and nanoribbon 
morphology. In Fig. 2, high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) STEM images show two distinct 
growth orientations, [100] (interchain) in Fig. 2A and [010] (intrachain) in Fig. 2B, in which the 
chain direction is parallel or perpendicular to the material growth direction, respectively (see 
atomic models in Fig. S1B). We will therefore refer to the nanostructures as b-nanowires (b-NW) 
and a-nanoribbons (a-NR) respectively, following the crystallographic convention that b is the 
chain direction in the crystal structure. Viewing the structure along the b direction, as in Fig. 2C, 
visualizes the bonding of neighbor chains into bilayers, a signature of TMT materials (3, 15). 


 
6

 

Fig. 2. Atomic structure of VLS NbS3 1D structures. (A-B) Atomic-resolution HAADF STEM images 
of a typical (A) b-nanowire (b-NW) and (B) a-nanoribbon (a-NR), showing the catalyst (bright 
region). The growth orientations are indicated by the white arrows. (C) Bilayer stacking disorder 
in a-NR. Rotation and rigid body shift between adjacent bilayer domains, indicated by the red 
and blue arrows, respectively, result in boundaries, some of which are displayed as the white 
dashed lines within the structure. (Inset): Higher magnification image of NbS3 chains showing 
ordered regions and stacking disorder. Further examples of stacking disorder are shown in Fig. 
S5. 
 

A prominent feature of both types of nanostructures is the variation in the stacking 
sequence and orientation of the bilayers. The stacking defects are clearly displayed in a-NRs 
oriented so that the prismatic chains point in the beam direction (Figs. 2B and C and Fig. S5). This 
end-on view provides a unique perspective of how the bilayers stack and arrange. In few-nm 
domains the bilayers stack in the same orientation with a rotation and/or rigid body shift 
between neighboring domains. In b-NWs, the disorder is visible in the variable spacing between 
the vertical lines (dark in TEM imaging, bright in STEM) in Figs. 1B and 2A, and the streaking in 
electron diffraction shown in the inset of Fig. 1B. The different crystal phases of NbS3 are known 
to form depending on the growth conditions (16, 18). The structure of the self-assembled NRs 
suggests that this may be in part attributed to the fact that the bilayer arrangement appears 
prone to stacking defects such as rotations and rigid body shifts, especially if new material is 
being added along the side of a series of chains. Changes in stacking order introduced during 
growth may eventually result in the different polymorphs reported in the literature (16, 18).  

The outline for the rest of our report is as follows. We first present strategies to control 
the dimensions (length and diameter) and morphologies of salt-assisted VLS-grown NbS3. We 


 
7

then demonstrate the growth of NbSe3 and TiS3 using a similar approach. Finally, using structural 
correlations, we propose growth mechanisms for the different morphologies observed in the 
TMT nanostructures. 

 

 

 
Fig. 3. Size control of 1D NbS3 materials. (A-C) SEM images of NbS3 growth using 10-nm Au 
catalyst film for growth times of 5, 15 and 30 minutes. (D) a-NR and b-NW length as a function of 
growth time. For each growth, 50-150 nanostructures were measured, exclusive of droplets 
without visible growth. The dash purple line indicates a linear fit to extract the growth rate. (E) 
Diameter of a-NR and b-NW as a function of Au diameter for 10-nm and 15-nm-thick Au (the 
thicknesses that produced the highest nanostructure yield). For a-NRs with a rectangular cross 
section, the longer side is used, as defined in the Fig. S4A schematics of a-NR and b-NW that 
indicate length, diameter and thickness. The purple line represents a 1:1 ratio of 
catalyst/nanowire diameters. 
 
Size control of 1D NbS3 structures 

We find that the nanostructure length can be controlled through the growth time. Figures 
3A-C show growths using 10-nm Au films on SiOx/Si substrates for different periods of time with 
post-growth SEM showing the length of the nanostructures (Fig. 3D). The catalyst sizes for the 
three growth times are comparable (250 ± 120 nm), and are similar to droplet sizes after heating 
in the absence of the growth flux (Fig. S4A). This is consistent with dewetting kinetics of a uniform 
film where rapid initial dewetting is followed by a slower-changing configuration (45). After 5 
minutes we see short nanowires (90 ± 30 nm) emerging from several catalyst particles. At this 


 
8

stage, it is hard to distinguish between a-NRs and b-NWs based on our SEM resolution. After 15 
minutes, almost all catalysts have formed a nanostructure, the average length is 420 ± 140 nm, 
and one can start visually differentiating between a-NRs and b-NWs. For 30-min growth (a typical 
growth time for data presented in this study), a-NRs are longer with an average length of 1300 ± 
480 nm, and b-NW are shorter at 650 ± 360 nm. A linear fit to length data (Fig. 3D) suggests an 
incubation time before growth begins of ~2.5 minutes. After that period, the nanostructures 
elongate linearly with a rate of 29.0 ± 8 nm/min for a-NRs and 25.0 ± 12 nm/min for b-NWs. We 
note that the deviation in the measurement might partially come from the tilt of the structures 
with respect to the imaging direction.  

The diameter of the 1D NbS3 materials can also be controlled with catalyst droplet size. 
Figure 3E shows the diameter of individual a-NRs and b-NWs as a function of their catalyst 
diameter for two growths that used 10-nm and 15-nm Au films. These films dewet to produce 
droplets with different but overlapping size distributions (45). Other growth conditions such as 
precursor mass, growth temperature, and growth time are kept the same. It appears that for 
both growths, the a-NRs have diameters comparable to their droplet diameter. This relationship 
is typical amongst VLS nanowires grown from other materials (25). On the other hand, the 
diameter of b-NWs is smaller than their catalyst diameter; the ratio of catalyst/nanowire 
diameters for b-NW in both cases is ~1.8. It is worth noting that the a-NRs observed here are 
distinctive compared to what has been reported in nano-ribbon structures of oxides (46), such as 
ZnO and SnO2, and layered materials (47), for example Bi2Se3 and GaSe. In these materials, the 
catalyst diameter is often much smaller than the width of the ribbons and the droplets reside at 
one corner of the ribbon’s top surface (somewhat like the structure in Fig. 1H). The growth 
mechanisms of these ribbon structures are therefore often attributed to a mixture of both VLS 
and vapor-solid (VS) mechanisms (46, 47) with VS dominating and creating highly tapered 
structures. We will compare the growth mechanism of our NbS3 a-NRs with these reports in the 
subsequent discussion. 
 
 
 
 
 


 
9

Morphology control of 1D NbS3 structures: nanowires vs. nanoribbons  
 

 

Fig. 4. Relationship between Au thickness and NbS3 morphology. (A-E) SEM images of NbS3 
structures synthesized using Au thin films with different thickness (0, 1, 5, 10 and 15 nm) for the 
same growth time of 30 minutes and growth temperature of 725°C. For 50-nm Au, refer to the 
patterned growth in Fig. S1B. (F) Population percentage of 1D structures without Au catalyst 
particle, a-NR and b-NW observed in the growths using different Au film thicknesses. 

 
We now investigate the role of Au in determining the growth morphology, particularly 
whether VLS growth takes place at all and whether the structure is an a-NR or b-NW. We find 
that the deposited Au thickness, or equivalently, the catalyst size (45), does affect the 
nanostructure type (Fig. 4). Figure 4A shows growth on SiOx/Si substrates without Au catalyst (0 
nm Au film) results in mostly b-NWs. This non-catalyzed growth mode is shown in more detail in 
Fig. S6. 1-nm and 5-nm Au films similarly resulted in no VLS nanowires (Figs. 4B and C). NbS3 
nanostructures are visible but are broad and flat, similar to what we observe in growth without 
Au (Fig. 4A), and are decorated by several small droplets around their edges instead of having a 
single particle at one end as in the typical VLS nanowires in Figs. 1 and 2. This suggests that for 
thin Au (1 and 5 nm), the NbS3 1D structures nucleate spontaneously and Au particles attach to 
them. With thicker Au (10, 15, 50 nm), the grown materials show the telltale signatures of VLS 
growth described above. Furthermore, the nanostructure type is correlated with the Au film 
thickness. The fraction of the population that consists of a-NR, b-NW and uncatalyzed growth in 
experiments using different Au film thicknesses is shown in Fig. 4F. As the film thickness 
increases, a-NRs become dominant. This trend is most striking at 50-nm Au, where a-NRs make 
up 70% of the grown nanowires. In Fig. 4E, we show that on a single substrate a-NRs and b-NWs 
grow from an overlapping distribution of Au droplets, but there is a trend for the larger droplets 


 
10

to produce more a-NRs. The increasing proportion of a-NRs in thicker Au films is consistent with 
this observation, since thicker films dewet into droplets that are larger on average. Overall, we 
suggest that the possibility exists for controlling the 1D morphologies of NbS3 by choice of the Au 
film thickness or by using catalysts of well-defined initial size. 

 

Materials control: Salt-assisted VLS synthesis of other 1D transition metal trichalcogenides 

 

 

Fig. 5. Salt-assisted VLS growth of various TMTs. SEM images showing 1D nanomaterials 
observed in the salt-assisted VLS growth of (A-C) NbSe3 and (D-F) TiS3. 
 
 
We extend our salt-assisted VLS method to synthesize nanostructures in two other vdW 
chain materials, NbSe3 and TiS3, to explore the generality of the approach to a variety of transition 
metals (Nb, Ti) and chalcogens (S, Se). Figure 5 shows representative SEM images of NbSe3 and 
TiS3 1D structures with SEM-EDS elemental mapping shown in Fig. S7. We note that for NbSe3, 
the yield of 1D materials at the optimum NbS3 growth temperature of 700-750°C is lower than in 
the growth of NbS3. To increase the density of NbSe3 nanostructures the substrate temperature 
was raised to the 800-850°C range. The result is NbSe3 with nanowire morphology (Fig. 5b) with 
[010] growth orientations, similar to NbS3 and consistent with the similarity of the NbSe3 and 
NbS3 crystal structures. However, we also observe plate-like half-hexagon structures stemming 
from a single Au catalyst (Fig. 5C). We attribute this 2D-like structure to the presence of the 
layered hexagonal material NbSe2, since at the high growth temperature, NbSe2 is known (48, 
49) to be more stable than NbSe3. This is analogous to the presence of NbS2 at high growth 
temperatures discussed above and in Fig. S2. TiS3 synthesized under the same condition as NbS3 
(Figs. 5D-F) displays a mix of 1D wire and truncated trapezoid morphology. By analogy we suggest 


 
11

that at 700-750°C there exists a mix of 1D TiS3 and 2D TiS2 (8, 50), which result in structures having 
mixed features of wire-like (1D) and plate-like (2D) morphologies. Optimization of the synthesis 
parameters, mostly the interplay between the temperature of the substrate and precursors and 
even the choice of alkaline metal halides (51) should offer prospects for improving the density of 
NbSe3 nanowires and increasing the proportion of the 1D phase of TiS3. 
 
The mechanisms at work during salt-assisted VLS growth  

To understand potential growth mechanisms that could describe the above results, we 
consider the relationships between the source materials, growth parameters and morphologies 
of NbS3 1D nanostructures. We first discuss the possible role of NaCl in VLS growth. We note that 
our growth is the first to use both NaCl and Au, for any metal chalcogenide (including mono-, di- 
and tri-chalcogenide) growth by CVD. NaCl alone has been shown as an effective growth 
promoter in the synthesis of 2D vdW materials such as MoS2, WSe2 and NbSe2 (41, 42). In these 
cases, it was suggested that NaCl reacts with transition metal precursors, for instance the metal 
and its oxide (e.g., MoO3, W, Nb2O5), to create volatile intermediate compounds (metal 
oxychlorides) with much lower melting points, and thus, higher vapor pressures at a given growth 
temperature compared to the metal or metal oxide precursors alone (35, 36). For example, the 
possible reaction route for the case of WSe2 is (42): 

3WO3 (s) + 2NaCl (s)  Na2W2O7 (l) + WO2Cl2(g) 
 
 
(1). 

The nucleation and growth of WSe2 take place by a dissociation/formation reaction to 
replace W-O and W-Cl bonds at the step edges of the material by W-Se bonds, as suggested 
recently in Ref. (51): 

WO2Cl2(g) + 2Se + 3H2  WSe2(s) + 2HCl(g) + 2H2O (g)  
 
(2). 

In our growth of NbS3, we postulate that similar reactions between the NaCl and Nb 
(presumably with an oxide shell, Nb2O5, since the source was prepared and growth carried out at 
ambient pressure (52)) generate metal oxychloride products, such as NbOCl3 which has a 
moderately low melting point of 200°C (53). These volatile species are then transported to the 
growth substrate simultaneously with the S vapor (see the growth setup in Fig. S1) to initiate the 
formation of the final structure. A control experiment using only Nb and S results in little or no 
NbS3 formation, suggesting that virtually no evaporation of the Nb precursor takes place at 600-
850°C. This supports the role of NaCl as an evaporation promoter.  
 
However, our EDS results mentioned earlier and shown in Fig. S3 indicate a second 
potential role of NaCl in our VLS growth of NbS3 nanowires. We find that post-growth the catalyst 
particle contains not only Au, Nb, S, but also Na and Cl. The Na and Cl concentrations are 
comparable to those of the growth species, suggesting that this is not merely a small 
contamination of NaCl arising from its role as a growth precursor. This observation may help 
explain why, to the best of our knowledge, there has not previously been a synthesis of any 
transition metal chalcogenide nanowire (including mono, di and tri-chalcogenides) by VLS. VLS 
growth generally requires the formation of a eutectic between the catalyst and the nanowire 
materials. However, Au does not form eutectic droplets with Nb or S (based on the individual 
binary phase diagrams) below 1064°C, the melting point of Au. The lack of a reactive Au 
compound to act as a VLS catalyst has been demonstrated in the literature for some growths of 
transition metal dichalcogenide materials, for example MoS2 and WS2, where Au only serves as a 
growth substrate (54) or nucleation point (55) rather than directly participating in the growth 


 
12

process. Moreover, Au foil and deposited Au triangles in the presence of transition metals (Mo, 
W) and chalcogen (S) vapors in these studies (at a similar temperature range of 650-750°C to that 
used in our synthesis) do not react, instead remaining in their original morphologies (55) instead 
of transforming into spherical particles, as we observed (post-growth) in our NbS3 experiments. 
In this regard, we hypothesize that the catalyst droplet forms as a eutectic composition of Au and 
Na/Cl-containing intermediates at our growth temperature of ~725°C. We suggest that NaCl 
vapor (abundant at the growth temperature of 725-750°C) is mobile under the growth conditions 
and is able to be incorporated into the Au nanostructures. We note that the post-growth 
spherical shape of the catalyst particles and observations we have made of adjacent particles 
that have merged could imply a liquid eutectic state during the growth.  
 
We therefore propose that NaCl in our growth plays two roles. It serves as an evaporation 
promoter that reacts with Nb precursors to create volatile metal oxychloride intermediates (one 
possibility being NbClO3), which enhances the mass flux of precursors to enable or accelerate 
growth at low temperatures (650-750°C). We also suggest that NaCl vapor may adsorb on Au and 
form a eutectic alloy, creating a reactive liquid surface at which Nb vapor compound(s), such as 
NbClO3, and S are incorporated after arriving from the vapor phase to result in NbS3 nanowires 
via the VLS mechanism.  

We now consider the morphologies produced as growth proceeds. In VLS, the growth 
species have two pathways (56) by which adatoms incorporate into the growth front of a 
nanowire. The first pathway, which is unique to VLS growth, is adatom absorption through the 
catalyst droplet, assumed due to a higher sticking coefficient on the droplet surface compared to 
the substrate; this drives supersaturation of the growth species in the droplet, and therefore 
subsequent nucleation and growth of atomic layers at the catalyst-nanowire interface (22). To 
validate that this VLS pathway is indeed active in the formation of our nanostructures, we 
performed an interrupted growth in which a TEM-compatible substrate (Fig. S8A) was imaged 
directly after growth and then returned to the furnace for a second growth under the same 
conditions (Fig. S8B). Comparison of the images for one NbS3 b-NW (marked by the red rectangle) 
showed that growth took place at the catalyst-nanowire interface (Fig. S8C) as expected for the 
VLS mechanism, rather than, for example, at the non-Au tip of the nanowire.   

The second pathway involves either direct impingement onto the sidewall or adatom 
diffusion from the substrate to some part of the nanowire, followed by diffusion along the 
nanowire sidewalls and incorporation at any part of the nanowire surface, resulting in growth via 
the vapor-solid (VS) mechanism (25). This type of surface diffusion pathway is similar to the 
growth mechanism suggested in salt-assisted synthesis of 2D transition metal dichalcogenide 
materials (38, 51), in which MoS2 grows quickly by reaction and attachment of adatoms 
preferentially at the step edges. Since the overall geometry and nature of the surface are 
important parameters in the VS process, we might expect the VS pathway to have a different 
overall effect on a-NRs and b-NWs. These nanostructures exhibit surfaces with different 
attachment sites and diffusion parameters, due to the relationship between the anisotropic 
crystal structure and the growth direction. For b-NW, with growth orientation [010] or intrachain 
orientation, the available surface for transporting adatoms is along the chains. For a-NRs, with 
growth orientation [100] or interchain orientation, the surfaces present are either parallel to the 
chains or composed of a perpendicular plane that cuts through chains. b-NWs generally show flat 
step-free surfaces, suggesting that diffusion along these planes is fast and attachment is difficult 


 
13

unless steps are present. a-NRs show rougher surfaces implying that attachment is more 
favorable. This may therefore imply that a-NRs could be growing with a proportionally larger 
contribution from VS compared to VLS growth. This is consistent with the greater variety in shape 
and frequent tapering visible in a-NRs, as shown in Figs. 1F-H. Indeed, a general observation, 
when considering the contribution of VS to a VLS process, is that each nanostructure may be 
affected differently, due to the variable geometry of the sidewalls present. Here, some a-NRs 
crawl along the surface while others grow off the surface (Fig. 1). This may account for the scatter 
in data for dimension and growth rates in Figs. 3D and S4, even for similar catalyst diameters and 
hence VLS growth rates. 

We finally discuss the factors that determine whether growth will produce a-NR or b-NW 
morphologies. In VLS growth (in the most general case, say where droplets are present on an 
amorphous substrate), the initial nucleation event is the formation of a small crystallite either at 
the triple phase line or at the droplet surface (57, 58). The shape of this nucleus depends on the 
energies of the interfaces between the growth material and droplet material, growth material 
and substrate, and growth material and vapor phase. These parameters are generally unknown, 
but in growths without Au catalysts (Fig. 4A), we observe structures that appear more like b-NWs 
(Fig. S6). This suggests that in NbS3 the planes that are parallel to the chain directions may have 
lower energies. If the initial nucleus follows these energetic considerations it is likely to be 
elongated in the b direction. Needle-shaped nuclei lying at the droplet surface will create a-NR 
structures as material is added to the planes parallel to the chain directions. However, if the 
nucleus rotates (57) at all, then elongation along the b direction becomes impossible and a b-NW 
is more likely to result. Geometrically we might therefore conclude that a larger droplet with 
lower surface curvature favors the orientation of needle shaped nuclei parallel to the droplet 
surface and hence the growth of a-NRs. This is consistent with our finding that thicker Au films 
produce more a-NRs compared to the number of b-NW. This simple argument neglects the 
complexities of the energetics and kinetics; further experiments with well-defined catalyst 
geometry would help to explore these possibilities. 

Based on these discussions we propose that the salt-assisted VLS synthesis of NbS3 1D 
nanostructures operates simultaneously with a VS mechanism that appears to contribute 
relatively more to the growth of a-NRs. We suggest that the morphology that is produced 
depends on the geometry present at the nucleation event, and this may depend on the 
anisotropy in surface energies and growth rates for the nucleus. Further studies with size-
selected Au nanoparticles, rather than the dewetted films used here, will enable exploration of 
the specifics of how the catalyst-related VLS and attachment/diffusion-related VS pathways favor 
the formation of a-NR versus b-NW morphologies. 
 
Conclusions 

We have presented a growth strategy that uses an alloy from Au and NaCl as a catalyst to 
synthesize a variety of 1D vdW materials, NbS3, NbSe3 and TiS3, on bulk substrates (SiOx/Si, SiN, 
sapphire, mica) as well as on van der Waals surfaces (graphene, hexagonal BN). The method we 
describe, salt-assisted VLS growth, combines key benefits of both vapor-liquid-solid and salt-
assisted growth processes. We show that the thickness of the Au film that dewets to form the 
catalytic droplets and the positions at which it is patterned onto the substrate offer the ability to 
control the size and location of the structures, as is the case in a conventional VLS process. The 


 
14

presence of salt offers advantages of fast growth at moderate temperatures (650-750°C), 
producing a high yield of NbS3 nanostructures with sub-ten nanometer diameter and lengths up 
to several tens of micrometers within a relatively short time (15-45 minutes) compared to growth 
in the absence of salt. For NbS3 we describe two distinct morphologies that result from this 
growth mechanism: b-NWs, straight nanowires in which the growth direction s along the chain 
direction ([010]), and a-NRs, where dimensions are more variable and growth is perpendicular to 
the chain direction ([100]). We outline the key synthesis parameters, particularly the growth time 
and the thickness of the initial Au film, that influence the dimensions and morphologies of these 
different NbS3 1D structures. We show in particular that thicker Au (50 nm) results in more a-
NRs, while thinner initial Au (10 nm) favors the growth of b-NWs. The diameter of b-NWs can be 
constrained within a small range (80-100 nm) by controlling the Au layer thickness and hence the 
droplet size after Au dewetting. We demonstrate the generality of salt-assisted VLS growth by 
creating nanowire morphologies in other 1D transition metal trichalcogenides, NbSe3 and TiS3. 
We explored the details of the salt-assisted growth mechanism through the relationship between 
morphology and growth parameters. We propose the coexistence of two pathways, catalyst 
limited growth and surface diffusion limited growth (VLS and VS), to account for the difference 
in the growth rates, geometry and relative frequency of NbS3 a-NRs and b-NWs.  

We believe that our demonstration of this new growth mechanism for nanowires and 
nanoribbons of transition metal trichalcogenides (NbS3, NbSe3 and TiS3) will expand the ability to 
grow emerging 1D vdW materials, including their heterostructures, and make use of their 
properties. Additionally, we propose that our method will also create opportunities to explore 
nanowire synthesis and nanowire heterostructures in group IV and V heavy-metal compounds 
(e.g., oxides of Mo, W, Ta, Hf). The synthesis of oxide nanowires of Mo, W, Ta, Hf based on vapor-
phase synthesis, including VLS, is challenging, mainly because of the difficulty of creating and 
supplying sufficient vapor pressure of the metal precursors. The results obtained for NbS3 shows 
this challenge can be overcome with the presence of salt under appropriate conditions; in this 
way the reactants can be incorporated into a catalyst particle, as in the case of conventional VLS, 
to direct the growth of nanowires. Further measurements are required to explore the range of 
applicability of the salt-assisted VLS process.  

Going forward, it is important to measure the properties of the grown nanostructures to 
establish any effects of the catalytic elements present. It will then be possible to understand how 
the native anisotropy of these synthesized TMT materials governs properties such as conductivity 
and linear dichroism, and how the defects we see within the self-assembled nanostructures 
affect their electrical and thermal transport properties. The capability we have demonstrated, to 
create TMT nanostructures with some control of diameter and growth location, opens 
opportunities for such studies. We anticipate a greater understanding of the basic science of this 
versatile class of materials and technological advances as components of quantum devices where 
precise placement of individual identical nanowires is required (59), for example in nano-
thermoelectrics or in fault-tolerant quantum circuits. 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Substrate preparation: SiOx/Si, SiN, a-sapphire and mica bulk substrates are cleaned with 
isopropanol and deionized water, followed by oxygen plasma (150 mTorr, 5 minutes). To create 


 
15

2D substrates, few-layer graphene and hexagonal boron nitride were first mechanically 
exfoliated by a Scotch-tape method, then transferred onto holey SiN TEM grids. Au films are then 
e-beam evaporated onto the substrates with different thickness (1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 30, 50 nm). 
CVD growth: 50 mg of Nb powder is mixed with 25 mg of NaCl (Sigma Aldrich), and the mixture 
is loaded into an alumina boat. A growth substrate is placed upside down right on top of the 
precursor mixture and the Nb/NaCl/substrate boat is set to a temperature of 650-800 °C. 150-
200 mg of S (Sigma Aldrich) is put upstream and far away from the hot zone. S boat is kept at 
room temperature in the beginning of each growth and it is only pushed into a hot zone (130-
150 °C) only after the Nb/NaCl/substrate boat reaches the target temperature. 100-150 sccm of 
high purity Ar (Airgas) was used as the carrier gas. The growth time varies from 5 to 45 minutes. 
At the end of the growth, the carrier gas was turned up to 200 sccm and the tube furnace’s cap 
was open to cool down the furnace quickly. For growths on 2D materials on SiN TEM grid, we 
machine a boron nitride holder which allows to load a TEM grid upside down to maintain the 
same growth setup as in the growths using a bulk substrate. For the growths of NbSe3 and TiS3, 
we used the same growth parameters, except Tgrowth = 800°C for NbSe3 and 50 mg of TiO2 for TiS3 
synthesis. 
Material characterization: SEM imaging was carried out at 5-20 kV on FEI Helios Nanolab 600. 
S/TEM characterization was carried out in a Themo Fisher Scientific Themis Z STEM operated at 
200 kV. Typical aberration-corrected STEM imaging conditions are 19 mrad semi-convergent 
angle (estimated sub-angstrom probe size) and 80 pA probe current. EDS was collected at higher 
probe current of 120-200 pA. Elemental mapping and quantification used Thermo Fisher Velox 
software. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge funding from the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, 
Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under Award DE-SC0019336. This work made use 
of the Shared Experimental Facilities supported in part by the MRSEC program of the National 
Science Foundation under award number DMR-1419807. The authors thank Dr. Aubrey Penn at 
MIT.nano for assistance with STEM characterization. 
 
Author contributions: Conceptualization: T.P. and F.M.R. Methodology: T.P and F.M.R. Formal 
analysis: T.P., M.A.F and F.M.R. Investigation, experiments, validation: T.P, K.R, J.D.H, B.W., N.D. 
Data curation: T.P. and F.M.R. Writing-original draft: T.P., M.A.F and F.M.R. Writing-review and 
editing: all authors. Visualization: T.P. Supervision: M.A.F. and F.M.R. Funding acquisition: M.A.F. 
and F.M.R. 
 
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
 
Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are 
present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. 
 
Supplementary Materials 
This PDF file includes: 
Supplementary Text 


 
16

Figs. S1 to S8 
 


 
17

References 
 
1.  
K. S. Novoselov, Two-dimensional atomic crystals. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 102 (2005). 

2.  
A. K. Geim, I. V. Grigorieva, Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature. 499, 419–425 
(2013). 

3.  
A. A. Balandin, F. Kargar, T. T. Salguero, R. K. Lake, One-dimensional van der Waals 
quantum materials. Materials Today. 55, 74–91 (2022). 

4.  
R. V. Coleman, B. Giambattista, P. K. Hansma, A. Johnson, W. W. McNairy, C. G. Slough, 
Scanning tunnelling microscopy of charge-density waves in transition metal 
chalcogenides. Adv Phys. 37, 559–644 (1988). 

5.  
A. Patra, C. S. Rout, Anisotropic quasi-one-dimensional layered transition-metal 
trichalcogenides: synthesis, properties and applications. RSC Adv. 10, 36413–36438 
(2020). 

6.  
J. O. Island, A. J. Molina-Mendoza, M. Barawi, R. Biele, E. Flores, J. M. Clamagirand, J. R. 
Ares, C. Sánchez, H. S. J. Van Der Zant, R. D’Agosta, I. J. Ferrer, A. Castellanos-Gomez, 
Electronics and optoelectronics of quasi-1D layered transition metal trichalcogenides. 2d 
Mater. 4 (2017), p. 000000. 

7.  
T. Pham, S. Oh, P. Stetz, S. Onishi, C. Kisielowski, M. L. Cohen, A. Zettl, Torsional 
instability in the single-chain limit of a transition metal trichalcogenide. Science (1979). 
361, 263–266 (2018). 

8.  
J. O. Island, M. Barawi, R. Biele, A. Almazán, J. M. Clamagirand, J. R. Ares, C. Sánchez, H. 
S. J. van der Zant, J. V. Álvarez, R. D’Agosta, I. J. Ferrer, A. Castellanos-Gomez, TiS3 
Transistors with Tailored Morphology and Electrical Properties. Advanced Materials. 27, 
2595–2601 (2015). 

9.  
V. E. Fedorov, S. B. Artemkina, E. D. Grayfer, N. G. Naumov, Y. V. Mironov, A. I. 
Bulavchenko, V. I. Zaikovskii, I. V. Antonova, A. I. Komonov, M. V. Medvedev, Colloidal 
solutions of niobium trisulfide and niobium triselenide. J Mater Chem C Mater. 2, 5479–
5486 (2014). 

10.  
T. A. Empante, A. Martinez, M. Wurch, Y. Zhu, A. K. Geremew, K. Yamaguchi, M. 
Isarraraz, S. Rumyantsev, E. J. Reed, A. A. Balandin, L. Bartels, Low Resistivity and High 
Breakdown Current Density of 10 nm Diameter van der Waals TaSe3 Nanowires by 
Chemical Vapor Deposition. Nano Lett. 19, 4355–4361 (2019). 

11.  
L. Yang, Y. Tao, Y. Zhu, M. Akter, K. Wang, Z. Pan, Y. Zhao, Q. Zhang, Y.-Q. Xu, R. Chen, T. 
T. Xu, Y. Chen, Z. Mao, D. Li, Observation of superdiffusive phonon transport in aligned 
atomic chains. Nat Nanotechnol, 1–5 (2021). 

12.  
S. Meyer, T. Pham, S. Oh, P. Ercius, C. Kisielowski, M. L. Cohen, A. Zettl, Metal-insulator 
transition in quasi-one-dimensional HfTe3 in the few-chain limit. Phys Rev B. 100, 041403 
(2019). 

13.  
T. Pham, S. Oh, S. Stonemeyer, B. Shevitski, J. D. Cain, C. Song, P. Ercius, M. L. Cohen, A. 
Zettl, Emergence of Topologically Nontrivial Spin-Polarized States in a Segmented Linear 
Chain. Phys Rev Lett. 124, 206403 (2020). 

14.  
S. G. Zybtsev, V. Y. Pokrovskii, V. F. Nasretdinova, S. V. Zaitsev-Zotov, V. V. Pavlovskiy, A. 
B. Odobesco, W. W. Pai, M. W. Chu, Y. G. Lin, E. Zupanič, H. J. P. Van Midden, S. Šturm, E. 
Tchernychova, A. Prodan, J. C. Bennett, I. R. Mukhamedshin, O. V. Chernysheva, A. P. 


 
18

Menushenkov, V. B. Loginov, B. A. Loginov, A. N. Titov, M. Abdel-Hafiez, Nb S3: A unique 
quasi-one-dimensional conductor with three charge density wave transitions. Phys Rev B. 
95, 035110 (2017). 

15.  
S. Conejeros, B. Guster, P. Alemany, J. P. Pouget, E. Canadell, Rich Polymorphism of 
Layered NbS3. Chemistry of Materials. 33, 5449–5463 (2021). 

16.  
M. A. Bloodgood, P. Wei, E. Aytan, K. N. Bozhilov, A. A. Balandin, T. T. Salguero, 
Monoclinic structures of niobium trisulfide. APL Mater. 6, 026602 (2017). 

17.  
E. Zupanič, H. J. P. van Midden, M. A. van Midden, S. Šturm, E. Tchernychova, V. Ya. 
Pokrovskii, S. G. Zybtsev, V. F. Nasretdinova, S. V. Zaitsev-Zotov, W. T. Chen, W. W. Pai, J. 
C. Bennett, A. Prodan, Basic and charge density wave modulated structures of NbS3-II. 
Phys Rev B. 98, 174113 (2018). 

18.  
M. A. Bloodgood, Y. Ghafouri, P. Wei, T. T. Salguero, Impact of the chemical vapor 
transport agent on polymorphism in the quasi-1D NbS3 system. Appl Phys Lett. 120, 
173103 (2022). 

19.  
M. A. Stolyarov, G. Liu, M. A. Bloodgood, E. Aytan, C. Jiang, R. Samnakay, T. T. Salguero, 
D. L. Nika, S. L. Rumyantsev, M. S. Shur, K. N. Bozhilov, A. A. Balandin, Breakdown current 
density in h -BN-capped quasi-1D TaSe 3 metallic nanowires: prospects of interconnect 
applications. Nanoscale. 8, 15774–15782 (2016). 

20.  
R. S. Wagner, W. C. Ellis, Vapor-liquid-solid mechanism of single crystal growth. Appl Phys 
Lett. 4, 89–90 (1964). 

21.  
D. Jacobsson, F. Panciera, J. Tersoff, M. C. Reuter, S. Lehmann, S. Hofmann, K. A. Dick, F. 
M. Ross, Interface dynamics and crystal phase switching in GaAs nanowires. Nature. 531, 
317–322 (2016). 

22.  
F. M. Ross, Controlling nanowire structures through real time growth studies. Reports on 
Progress in Physics. 73, 114501 (2010). 

23.  
Z. L. Wang, Zinc oxide nanostructures: Growth, properties and applications. Journal of 
Physics Condensed Matter. 16, R829 (2004). 

24.  
T. Pham, S. Kommandur, H. Lee, D. Zakharov, M. A. Filler, F. M. Ross, One-dimensional 
twisted and tubular structures of zinc oxide by semiconductor-catalyzed vapor–liquid–
solid synthesis. Nanotechnology. 32, 075603 (2020). 

25.  
M. Ek, M. A. Filler, Atomic-Scale Choreography of Vapor-Liquid-Solid Nanowire Growth. 
Acc Chem Res. 51, 118–126 (2018). 

26.  
E. Barrigón, M. Heurlin, Z. Bi, B. Monemar, L. Samuelson, Synthesis and Applications of 
III-V Nanowires. Chem Rev. 119 (2019), pp. 9170–9220. 

27.  
L. Güniat, P. Caroff, A. Fontcuberta I Morral, Vapor Phase Growth of Semiconductor 
Nanowires: Key Developments and Open Questions. Chem Rev. 119 (2019), pp. 8958–
8971. 

28.  
E. Sutter, J. S. French, S. Sutter, J. C. Idrobo, P. Sutter, Vapor-Liquid-Solid Growth and 
Optoelectronics of Gallium Sulfide van der Waals Nanowires. ACS Nano. 14, 6117–6126 
(2020). 

29.  
P. Sutter, J. S. French, L. Khosravi Khorashad, C. Argyropoulos, E. Sutter, Optoelectronics 
and Nanophotonics of Vapor-Liquid-Solid Grown GaSe van der Waals Nanoribbons. Nano 
Lett. 21, 4335–4342 (2021). 


 
19

30.  
H. Peng, D. T. Schoen, S. Meister, X. F. Zhang, Y. Cui, Synthesis and phase transformation 
of In2Se3 and CuInSe2 nanowires. J Am Chem Soc. 129, 34–35 (2007). 

31.  
J. J. Cha, J. R. Williams, D. Kong, S. Meister, H. Peng, A. J. Bestwick, P. Gallagher, D. 
Goldhaber-Gordon, Y. Cui, Magnetic doping and kondo effect in Bi2Se3 nanoribbons. 
Nano Lett. 10, 1076–1081 (2010). 

32.  
P. Sutter, S. Wimer, E. Sutter, Chiral twisted van der Waals nanowires. Nature. 570 
(2019), pp. 354–357. 

33.  
Y. Liu, J. Wang, S. Kim, H. Sun, F. Yang, Z. Fang, N. Tamura, R. Zhang, X. Song, J. Wen, B. Z. 
Xu, M. Wang, S. Lin, Q. Yu, K. B. Tom, Y. Deng, J. Turner, E. Chan, D. Jin, R. O. Ritchie, A. 
M. Minor, D. C. Chrzan, M. C. Scott, J. Yao, Helical van der Waals crystals with discretized 
Eshelby twist. Nature. 570 (2019), pp. 358–362. 

34.  
Z. Fang, Y. Liu, S. Gee, S. Lin, S. Koyama, C. So, F. Luo, R. Chen, B. Tang, J. Yao, Chemically 
Modulating the Twist Rate of Helical van der Waals Crystals. Chemistry of Materials. 32, 
299–307 (2020). 

35.  
J. Zhou, J. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Xia, H. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Yu, J. Lei, D. Wu, F. 
Liu, Q. Fu, Q. Zeng, C. H. Hsu, C. Yang, L. Lu, T. Yu, Z. Shen, H. Lin, B. I. Yakobson, Q. Liu, K. 
Suenaga, G. Liu, Z. Liu, A library of atomically thin metal chalcogenides. Nature. 556, 355–
359 (2018). 

36.  
S. Li, Y. C. Lin, W. Zhao, J. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. Shen, D. M. Tang, J. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. 
Zhu, L. Chu, W. Zhao, C. Liu, Z. Sun, T. Taniguchi, M. Osada, W. Chen, Q. H. Xu, A. T. S. 
Wee, K. Suenaga, F. Ding, G. Eda, Vapour-liquid-solid growth of monolayer MoS2 
nanoribbons. Nat Mater. 17, 535–542 (2018). 

37.  
M. Chen, L. Li, M. Xu, W. Li, L. Zheng, X. Wang, Quasi-One-Dimensional van der Waals 
Transition Metal Trichalcogenides. Research (2023), doi:10.34133/RESEARCH.0066. 

38.  
J. Zhou, J. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Xia, H. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Yu, J. Lei, D. Wu, F. 
Liu, Q. Fu, Q. Zeng, C. H. Hsu, C. Yang, L. Lu, T. Yu, Z. Shen, H. Lin, B. I. Yakobson, Q. Liu, K. 
Suenaga, G. Liu, Z. Liu, A library of atomically thin metal chalcogenides. Nature. 556, 355–
359 (2018). 

39.  
H. Wang, X. Huang, J. Lin, J. Cui, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, F. Liu, Q. Zeng, J. Zhou, P. Yu, X. Wang, H. 
He, S. H. Tsang, W. Gao, K. Suenaga, F. Ma, C. Yang, L. Lu, T. Yu, E. H. T. Teo, G. Liu, Z. Liu, 
High-quality monolayer superconductor NbSe2 grown by chemical vapour deposition. 
Nature Communications 2017 8:1. 8, 1–8 (2017). 

40.  
E. V. Formo, J. A. Hachtel, Y. Ghafouri, M. A. Bloodgood, T. T. Salguero, Thermal Stability 
of Quasi-1D NbS3Nanoribbons and Their Transformation to 2D NbS2: Insights from in 
Situ Electron Microscopy and Spectroscopy. Chemistry of Materials. 34, 279–287 (2022). 

41.  
C. Xie, P. Yang, Y. Huan, F. Cui, Y. Zhang, Roles of salts in the chemical vapor deposition 
synthesis of two-dimensional transition metal chalcogenides. Dalton Transactions. 49, 
10319–10327 (2020). 

42.  
W. Han, K. Liu, S. Yang, F. Wang, J. Su, B. Jin, H. Li, T. Zhai, Salt-assisted chemical vapor 
deposition of two-dimensional materials. Sci China Chem. 62 (2019), pp. 1300–1311. 

43.  
A. N. Enyashin, A. L. Ivanovskiĭ, Electronic, energy, and thermal properties of the Möbius 
strip and related ring nanostructures of NbS3. Physics of the Solid State 2006 48:4. 48, 
780–785 (2006). 


 
20

44.  
M. Tsubota, K. Inagaki, T. Matsuura, S. Tanda, Polyhedral topological crystals. Cryst 
Growth Des. 11, 4789–4793 (2011). 

45.  
C. V. Thompson, Solid-State Dewetting of Thin Films. Annual Reviews. 42, 399–434 
(2012). 

46.  
Z. L. Wang, Splendid one-dimensional nanostructures of zinc oxide: A new nanomaterial 
family for nanotechnology. ACS Nano. 2, 1987–1992 (2008). 

47.  
D. Kong, J. C. Randel, H. Peng, J. J. Cha, S. Meister, K. Lai, Y. Chen, Z. X. Shen, H. C. 
Manoharan, Y. Cui, Topological insulator nanowires and nanoribbons. Nano Lett. 10, 
329–333 (2010). 

48.  
Y. S. Hor, U. Welp, Y. Ito, Z. L. Xiao, U. Patel, J. F. Mitchell, W. K. Kwok, G. W. Crabtree, 
Superconducting NbSe2 nanowires and nanoribbons converted from NbSe3 
nanostructures. Appl Phys Lett. 87, 142506 (2005). 

49.  
M. Nath, S. Kar, A. K. Raychaudhuri, C. N. R. Rao, Superconducting NbSe2 nanostructures. 
Chem Phys Lett. 368, 690–695 (2003). 

50.  
C. G. Hawkins, L. Whittaker-Brooks, Controlling Sulfur Vacancies in TiS2-x Cathode 
Insertion Hosts via the Conversion of TiS3 Nanobelts for Energy-Storage Applications. ACS 
Appl Nano Mater. 1, 851–859 (2018). 

51.  
Q. Ji, C. Su, N. Mao, X. Tian, J. C. Idrobo, J. Miao, W. A. Tisdale, A. Zettl, J. Li, J. Kong, 
Revealing the Brønsted-Evans-Polanyi relation in halide-activated fast MoS2 growth 
toward millimeter-sized 2D crystals. Sci Adv. 7 (2021). 

52.  
A. A. Murthy, P. Masih Das, S. M. Ribet, C. Kopas, J. Lee, M. J. Reagor, L. Zhou, M. J. 
Kramer, M. C. Hersam, M. Checchin, A. Grassellino, R. Dos Reis, V. P. Dravid, A. 
Romanenko, Developing a Chemical and Structural Understanding of the Surface Oxide in 
a Niobium Superconducting Qubit. ACS Nano. 16, 17257–17262 (2022). 

53.  
Georg. Brauer, Handbook of Preparative Inorganic Chemistry V2. (Elsevier Science, ed. 
2nd, 1965). 

54.  
P. Yang, S. Zhang, S. Pan, B. Tang, Y. Liang, X. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Shi, Y. Huan, Y. Shi, S. J. 
Pennycook, Z. Ren, G. Zhang, Q. Chen, X. Zou, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, Epitaxial Growth of 
Centimeter-Scale Single-Crystal MoS2 Monolayer on Au(111). ACS Nano. 14, 5036–5045 
(2020). 

55.  
C. Li, T. Kameyama, T. Takahashi, T. Kaneko, T. Kato, Nucleation dynamics of single crystal 
WS2 from droplet precursors uncovered by in-situ monitoring. Scientific Reports 2019 
9:1. 9, 1–7 (2019). 

56.  
A. Rothman, V. G. Dubrovskii, E. Joselevich, Kinetics and mechanism of planar nanowire 
growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 117, 152–160 (2020). 

57.  
F. Panciera, Y. C. Chou, M. C. Reuter, D. Zakharov, E. A. Stach, S. Hofmann, F. M. Ross, 
Synthesis of nanostructures in nanowires using sequential catalyst reactions. Nature 
Materials 2014 14:8. 14, 820–825 (2015). 

58.  
B. J. Kim, J. Tersoff, S. Kodambaka, M. C. Reuter, E. A. Stach, F. M. Ross, Kinetics of 
individual nucleation events observed in nanoscale vapor-liquid-solid growth. Science 
(1979). 322, 1070–1073 (2008). 

59.  
E. Bakkers, Bottom-up grown nanowire quantum devices. MRS Bull. 44, 403–410 (2019). 

  
 
 


 
21

Supplemental Information 
 
Salt-assisted vapor-liquid-solid growth of one-dimensional van der Waals materials 
 
Thang Pham1, Kate Reidy1, Joachim D. Thomsen1, Baoming Wang1, Nishant Deshmukh2, Michael 
A. Filler2 and Frances M. Ross1 
 
1. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 
2. School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 
30332, USA 
 
Corresponding authors. Email: thangpt88@gmail.com (T.P.), michael.filler@chbe.gatech.edu 
(M.A.F.), fmross@mit.edu (F.M.R.) 
 


 
22

 

Fig. S1. Overview of VLS growth of NbS3 1D nanostructures. (A) Setup of the growth using a 
horizontal tube furnace, for growths on both bulk substrates (top) and on vdW materials, in this 
case few-layer graphene, suspended on a SiN TEM grid (bottom). (B) Atomic model of NbS3 
viewing along different crystallographic orientation. (C) Low-magnification STEM image of 30-
min growth on suspended graphene. (D) Patterned growth using 50-nm Au patterned 


 
23

lithographically on a SiOx/Si substrate. Note the low density of uncatalyzed NWs growing in 
regions without Au. 
 

 

Fig. S2. NbS2 phase formed during high-temperature growth. NbS2 phase seen in the form of 
nano-flowers (A) and hexagonal plates (B) after growths at temperature above 750°C. The 
amount of precursors and other growth parameters were the same as used elsewhere. (C, D) 
Higher magnification SEM image of a hexagonal-plate multilayer NbS2 and its corresponding SEM-
EDS elemental mapping showing the presence of salt in the grown structure. These morphologies 
are characteristic of NbS2 with its hexagonal crystal structure and are not shown by NbS3. 
 


 
24

 

Fig. S3. Chemical compositions of salt-assisted VLS NbS3 structures. STEM-EDS elemental 
mapping of a (A) b-NW and (B) a-NR. (C) Atomic concentration of different elements, including 
Au, S, Nb, Na and Cl, in the post-growth catalyst particles of a-NR and b-NW. 
 
 


 
25

 

Fig S4. Measured dimensions of Au catalysts, a-NRs and b-NWs. (A) Au catalyst diameters at 
different growth times (5, 15 and 30 mins). The other growth parameters were kept the same. 
(B) Schematics showing the geometries of a-NB and b-NW and our definitions of length (L), width 
or diameter (W or D) and height or thickness (H or T) used in this study. Two growths using 10-
nm and 15-nm Au films were used to obtain good statistics on the measurement of (C) NbS3 
length, (D) Width/Height (W/H) ratio and (E) cross-section area of the 1D materials. For W/H in 
(B), width is defined as the longer side in the cross section and height as the shorter side. The 
cross section area in (E) was measured at the visible end of the 1D materials. 
 


 
26

 

Fig. S5. Stacking disorder in a-NRs. (A) Colored polygons represent domains with different bilayer 
stacking orientation, which is defined and illustrated by the arrows. There is a rotation and rigid 
body shift between adjacent domains, for example a rotation between orange and green 
domains at the bottom left corner, and a shift between two adjacent green domains in the middle 
of the image. In uncolored regions, there is disorder between chain-chain interaction and no clear 
bilayer structure. (B) Another example of a nanoribbon having stacking disorder. 
 


 
27

 

Fig. S6. 1D NbS3 synthesized in the absence of Au catalyst. (A) STEM image of NbS3 1D 
nanomaterials grown directly on a SiN TEM grid. Note that the morphology is similar to the 
materials grown on SiOx/Si substrate (Fig. 4A) using the same growth conditions. (B) High-
resolution STEM image of a representative structure showing its growth orientation of [010] (b-
NW). (Inset) Its corresponding electron diffraction. (C, D) Atomic-resolution STEM images at 
increasing magnification showing the chain structure of the material. 
  
 

 

Fig. S7. Chemical analysis of other TMT 1D nanostructures. SEM-EDS chemical mapping of (A) 
TiS3 and (B) NbSe3 after salt-assisted VLS synthesis. The low signal/noise in SEM-EDS results in 
some of the chemical maps being noisy. For TiS3 growth in (A), the growth temperature is 725°C 
and 50 mg of TiO2 was used the metal precursor. The other synthesis parameters were kept the 
same as in the growth of NbS3. For NbSe3 growth in (B), the growth temperature is 825°C. 


 
28

 

 
Fig S8. Interrupted growth of b-NW NbS3. (A) TEM image of NbS3 nanostructures grown on 
graphene transferred onto a SiN TEM grid at 725°C for 20 mins, using 3-nm Au catalyst film. (B) 
The same area imaged after a second growth for 20 mins using the same synthesis conditions 
(and no additional Au deposited). The b-NW enclosed by the red rectangle grew longer after the 
second growth. Note that its catalyst shape also changes, and other small motions of Au are 
visible elsewhere. (C) The overlapped images show that the b-NW grew from the catalyst-
nanowire interface (the catalyst particle moved closer to the SiN grid’s circular edge), adding 68 
nm in length over the 20 mins of the second growth. 


