1 

 

Crystal-Chemical Origins of the Ultrahigh Conductivity of Metallic Delafossites 

 

Yi Zhang (ејөжҳ“)1, Fred Tutt1, Guy N. Evans2, Prachi Sharma1,3, Greg Haugstad4, Ben Kaiser1, 
Justin Ramberger1, Samuel Bayliff3, Yu Tao1, Mike Manno1, Javier Garcia-Barriocanal4, Vipul 
Chaturvedi1, Rafael M. Fernandes3, Turan Birol1, William E. Seyfried Jr.2, and Chris Leighton1* 

 
1Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA 

2Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Minnesota,             
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA 

3School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA 

4Characterization Facility, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA 

 

Abstract: Despite their highly anisotropic complex-oxidic nature, certain delafossite compounds 

(e.g., PdCoO2, PtCoO2) are the most conductive oxides known, for reasons that remain poorly 

understood. Their room-temperature conductivity can exceed that of Au, while their low-

temperature electronic mean-free-paths reach an astonishing 20 пҒӯm. It is widely accepted that these 

materials must be ultrapure to achieve this, although the methods for their growth (which produce 

only small crystals) are not typically capable of such. Here, we first report a new approach to 

PdCoO2 crystal growth, using chemical vapor transport methods to achieve order-of-magnitude 

gains in size, the highest structural qualities yet reported, and record residual resistivity ratios 

(>440). Nevertheless, the first detailed mass spectrometry measurements on these materials reveal 

that they are not ultrapure, typically harboring 100s-of-parts-per-million impurity levels. Through 

quantitative crystal-chemical analyses, we resolve this apparent dichotomy, showing that the vast 

majority of impurities are forced to reside in the Co-O octahedral layers, leaving the conductive 

Pd sheets highly pure (пҒҫ1 ppm impurity concentrations). These purities are shown to be in 

quantitative agreement with measured residual resistivities. We thus conclude that a previously 


2 

 

unconsidered вҖңsublattice purificationвҖқ mechanism is essential to the ultrahigh low-temperature 

conductivity and mean-free-path of metallic delafossites. 

*Corresponding author: leighton@umn.edu 

 

Introduction 

Complex oxide materials have proven to be fertile ground for the discovery of new physical 

phenomena and the advancement of technologically important device function, the ABO3 

perovskites being a prime example1вҖ“4. Many related classes of complex oxides offer similarly 

substantial potential but remain less extensively studied. ABO2 delafossites are one example, 

where two-dimensional triangular sheets of typically monovalent A ions are separated by layers 

of edge-shared BO6 octahedra5вҖ“10. Most delafossite compounds are insulating or semiconducting, 

such as the CuFeO2 studied for frustrated magnetism11,12 and the CuAlO2 considered for 

transparent conductive oxide applications13. It has been known since 1971, however5вҖ“8, that some 

delafossites exhibit metallic character, exemplified by PdCoO2 and PtCoO2. These metallic 

delafossites received little attention until the relatively recent discovery that, in bulk-single-crystal 

form, they are the most conductive oxides known5,10. While their c-axis resistivities (пҒІc) are more 

than 100 times higher5,8,9,14вҖ“16, the room-temperature a-b-plane resistivities (пҒІab) of PdCoO2 and 

PtCoO2 are only 3.1 and 1.8 пҒӯпҒ—cm, respectively17, comparable to or lower than Au5. Their low-

temperature (T) residual пҒІab values fall as low as 8.1 nпҒ—cm17, implying residual resistivity ratios 

(RRRs) up to 376 17 and low-T mean-free-paths of пҒҫ20 пҒӯm 5,15. These are astonishing values, 

particularly in complex oxides, in such highly anisotropic structures, and given the relatively little 

materials development performed. 


3 

 

The electronic structure of metallic delafossites is similarly noteworthy. Taking PdCoO2 as an 

example, the established R-3m structure of the 3R polymorph5вҖ“7,9,10,18 results in a strikingly simple 

electronic structure where a single Pd d band crosses the Fermi level, with only modest 

contributions from Co, and negligible O character5,9,10,18вҖ“21. The triangular Pd1+ planes thus 

generate a Fermi surface closely approximating a hexagonal-cross-section cylinder filling half the 

hexagonal Brillouin zone in the a*-b* reciprocal-space plane5,15,18вҖ“23. The remarkable simplicity 

of this electronic structure is underscored by electron effective masses of only 1-1.7 me 5,15,18,24. 

The edge-shared CoO6 octahedra also have short Co-O bond lengths and large crystal field 

splitting, stabilizing low-spin (S = 0) Co3+ 18. PdCoO2 is thus a model metallic delafossite, which 

can be thought of as triangular metallic sheets of Pd1+ separated by insulating nonmagnetic layers 

of Co3+O6 edge-shared octahedra. 

The above attributes, particularly the exceptional low-T mean-free-path and simple hexagonal 

Fermi surface, have enabled a remarkable string of recent achievements with bulk crystals of 

PtCoO2 and PdCoO2. These include observations of: various forms of quantum oscillation14,15,25,26, 

very large positive magnetoresistance along the c-axis27, potential phonon-drag effects in 

resistivity15, possible hydrodynamic electron transport25, and itinerant surface ferromagnetism 

23,28,29. Yet more recently, non-local electrodynamics30, directional ballistic transport31, 

supergeometric electron focusing32, and non-local transport33 have been reported in PdCoO2 

crystals and micron-scale structures, exploiting the long mean-free-path and anisotropic Fermi 

surface. The addition of magnetic moments in PdCrO2 adds further richness, encompassing 

magnetic frustration34вҖ“36, a complex antiferromagnetic spin structure34вҖ“37, possible chirality37, an 

anomalous Hall effect38,39, and T-linear resistivity40,41 potentially due to magneto-elastic 

scattering41. Metallic delafossites are thus making their mark in condensed matter and materials 


4 

 

physics, and potential applications are being explored, in nanoelectronic interconnects 42, harsh-

environment electronic devices43вҖ“45, electrocatalysis43,46, ballistic transport devices31вҖ“33,43,44, etc. 

Despite this progress, the origins of the ultrahigh conductivities and mean-free-paths in metallic 

delafossites remain unclear. While progress has been made with understanding thermal properties 

of PdCoO2 18 and related phonon spectra47,48, much remains to be elucidated regarding electron-

phonon scattering and coupling5,14 and thus the low room-T resistivities5. Yet more urgently given 

the above advances14,15,25вҖ“27,29вҖ“33, the origin of the outstanding a-b-plane residual resistivities and 

low-T mean-free-paths remain incompletely understood5,43. It is widely accepted that ultrahigh 

purity and ultralow defect density are necessary for such behavior5,14,15,25,49,50, but, confusingly, 

the crystal growth methods applied to metallic delafossites6,14,16,51вҖ“54 are not typically capable of 

such5,49. The prevailing method for PdCoO2 and PtCoO2 is a metathesis-based flux 

growth6,14,16,52,53, which is not well understood, typically limited to пҒҫ1-mm lateral sizes, and not 

performed under conditions that would be expected to realize ultrahigh purity. Multiple authors 

have in fact commented on the crude synthesis methods for metallic delafossites relative to other 

systems with comparable mean-free-paths5,49. On the other hand, recent electron microscopy on 

single-crystal PdCoO2 supports sufficiently low defect densities that only upper limits could be 

placed49,55. An electronic transport study of metallic delafossites as a function of irradiation-

induced point defect density also evidenced extraordinarily low initial defect densities on the Pd/Pt 

planes, insensitive to the (unknown) disorder level on the B-O layers49. It is thus unclear what the 

impurity and defect densities are in single-crystal metallic delafossites, how they are divided 

between A and B-O planes49, if/how defect densities are minimized by current growth methods49, 

or whether some form of defect mitigation or tolerance occurs49. One proposal for the latter is the 

hidden kagome picture recently advanced to explain reduced electron-impurity scattering56.         


5 

 

The current work seeks to elucidate some of the above through advances that are thus far absent 

from the PdCoO2 literature: improvements in bulk crystal growth in terms of mechanistic 

understanding, crystal size, defect density, and purity; more extensive structural and chemical 

characterization; and comprehensive trace impurity analysis. The latter is particularly conspicuous 

in its absence from the metallic delafossite literature, likely because the premier method вҖ“ 

inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) вҖ“ typically involves acid digestion. 

Metallic delafossites such as PdCoO2 and PtCoO2 are unusually stable in extreme pH, however43вҖ“

45, likely hindering prior attempts at comprehensive trace impurity analysis.  

Here, we first elaborate on a new crystal growth method for PdCoO2 based on chemical vapor 

transport (CVT), for which a simple mechanism is proposed. CVT is then compared to the 

established metathesis/flux method and is shown to enable orders-of-magnitude gains in crystal 

size and mass, the highest structural quality yet reported, and record RRR. Nevertheless, particle-

induced X-ray emission (PIXE) and low-T magnetometry suggest significant impurity 

concentrations. Enabled by microwave digestion methods, the first comprehensive trace impurity 

analyses of metathesis/flux-grown and CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystals were thus performed by ICP-

MS, with remarkable conclusions. Specifically, these metallic delafossite crystals are definitively 

not ultrapure in a general sense. Standard metathesis/flux crystals typically have пҒҫ250 ppm metals-

basis impurities; CVT crystals are purer but still harbor пҒҫ50 ppm impurities. Through a detailed 

crystal-chemistry-based analysis, however, we show that the vast majority of these impurities must 

populate Co-O octahedral layers, while as few as four elements can conceivably substitute for Pd. 

The concentration of these elements is of order 1 ppm, пҒҫ100 times lower than the total impurity 

concentration, which is shown to be in quantitative agreement with the measured residual пҒІab. We 

thus propose that a вҖңsublattice purificationвҖқ mechanism is central to the extraordinary low-T 


6 

 

conductivity of metallic delafossites, enabling ultrahigh purity in the conductive Pd/Pt sheets, 

largely unaffected by substantial impurity concentrations in the CoO6 octahedra.          

 

Results 

Chemical vapor transport crystal growth 

As noted in the Introduction, metathesis-based flux growth has become standard for single-crystal 

PdCoO2 and PtCoO2 6,14,16,52,53. This is based on metathesis reactions such as PdCl2 + Pd + Co3O4 

вҶ’ 2PdCoO2 + CoCl2, i.e., PdCl2, Pd, and Co3O4 reagents (99.995-99.999% purity in our case) 

reacting to form the target PdCoO2 plus a CoCl2 by-product, which is chemically removed (see 

Methods for more details). In the current study, dwell temperatures of 700-750 пӮ°C were employed 

for metathesis growth, followed by cooling to 400 пӮ°C at 40-60 пӮ°C/h. As shown in the scanning 

electron microscopy (SEM) image in Fig. 1b, the resulting product is a mass of PdCoO2 crystals 

and crystallites. The optical microscope image in the inset to Fig. 1b highlights one of the largest 

crystals from a typical growth, measuring 0.8 пӮҙ 0.6 mm2 laterally, and 0.017 mm thick. This 

corresponds to 0.008 mm3 and 0.065 mg, comparable to literature reports16,25,31,49,50. Typical 

powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) data from such crystals are shown in Fig. 1d (green), displaying 

a good match with a PdCoO2 standard (grey), and yielding lattice parameters a = 2.8308 пӮұ 0.0002 

Г… and c = 17.747 пӮұ 0.002 Г…, in agreement with accepted values5,6.  

While such crystals have enabled exciting advances14,15,17,22вҖ“27,29вҖ“33, as discussed in the 

Introduction, it is nevertheless true that little progress in PdCoO2 crystal size or quality has been 

reported since ca. 2007. There is also limited understanding of the growth mechanism. Most 

publications describe the mechanism as вҖңfluxвҖқ or вҖңself-fluxвҖқ and employ specific temperature-


7 

 

time trajectories, but with little explicit justification14,16,51вҖ“53. Seeking improvement over this, we 

explored CVT crystal growth of PdCoO2. CVT is not commonly applied to complex oxides but 

the fact that PdCoO2 decomposes (at пҒҫ800 пӮ°C in air, for example45) hints at CVT as a possibility, 

as does the relatively low decomposition temperature of PdCl2 (пҒҫ600 пӮ°C in low Cl2 partial 

pressure57,58), a potential transport agent. CVT was thus performed in a set-up shown schematically 

in Fig. 1a, and elaborated upon in Methods and Supplementary Information Sections A and B. The 

solid precursors are coarse PdCoO2 powder derived from the above metathesis growth, along with 

99.999%-pure PdCl2. At typical hot and cold zone temperatures of 760 and 710 пӮ°C, we propose 

that PdCl2 decomposition is followed by a reaction such as PdCoO2(s) + 2Cl2(g) вҶ” PdCl2(g) + 

CoCl2(g) + O2(g), i.e., Pd chloride and Co chloride vapor transport across the temperature gradient 

in a Cl2(g) and O2(g) atmosphere. The reaction runs to the left in the growth (cold) zone, resulting 

in PdCoO2 crystals and chloride by-products, which are chemically removed (see Methods).  

As shown in Fig. 1c, after optimization of hot and cold zone temperatures, relatively large PdCoO2 

crystals and multicrystals derive from this process, at high yield (>90%). Specifically, the reaction 

product is a mix of single crystals and larger multicrystals, the latter likely forming due to 

nucleation of Pd or PdO seeds during the initial inverted-temperature-gradient period of the growth 

(see Methods and Supplementary Information Section A). Multicrystals up to 12 пӮҙ 12 mm2 

laterally and 0.3 mm thick are grown (Fig. 1c), corresponding to 43.2 mm3 and 345 mg. Gently 

breaking apart such multicrystals isolates single crystals up to 6.0 пӮҙ 4.0 mm2 laterally and 0.17 

mm thick, corresponding to 4.08 mm3 and 32.6 mg. A representative example is shown in the inset 

to Fig. 1c. These CVT PdCoO2 multicrystals are thus larger than our metathesis/flux crystals by 

factors of пҒҫ15 in maximum lateral dimension, пҒҫ18 in thickness, and пҒҫ5300 in volume and mass. 


8 

 

Correspondingly, the CVT single crystals are larger than metathesis/flux single crystals by factors 

of пҒҫ8 in maximum lateral dimension, пҒҫ10 in thickness, and пҒҫ500 in volume and mass.  

As illustrated in Fig. 1e, PXRD patterns from powdered CVT crystals are also consistent with 

single-phase PdCoO2, with a = 2.8306 пӮұ 0.0002 Г… and c = 17.746 пӮұ 0.002 Г…. Intriguingly, large-

scale comparisons of the lattice parameters for flux/metathesis and CVT crystals suggest subtle 

but significant differences. Averaged over all measured crystal batches, our metathesis flux 

crystals have a = 2.8309 пӮұ 0.0007 Г…, c = 17.749 пӮұ 0.005 Г… (where the uncertainties are now 

standard deviations), while CVT crystals have a = 2.8302 пӮұ 0.0002 Г…, c = 17.745 пӮұ 0.002 Г…. Both 

the lattice parameters and standard deviations are therefore lower in CVT crystals. The smaller 

standard deviation indicates better reproducibility with CVT, while decreased cell volume often 

indicates lower defect density59вҖ“64, including in complex oxides60вҖ“64. Minimization of unit cell 

volume has in fact emerged as a guiding principle for synthesis of highly perfect complex oxides 

with minimized densities of non-stoichiometry-accommodating defects60вҖ“64. These data thus hint 

at lower defect densities in CVT-grown crystals, a conclusion that is reinforced below. As a final 

comment on structure, note that powdered samples of these CVT crystals were recently used in a 

12-1000 K structural study via PXRD and accompanying refinement, confirming their single-

phase nature and the thermal stability of the R-3m structure18.  

 

Structural and chemical characterization 

With CVT growth established to provide substantial improvements in PdCoO2 crystal size and 

mass, and with improved defect density suggested by the lattice parameters, it is important to more 

rigorously assess structural quality and purity. Preliminary prior characterization established single 

crystallinity via two-dimensional single-crystal X-ray diffraction18. In Fig. 2a this is improved on 


9 

 

by presenting Laue diffraction data conclusively confirming single crystallinity. The six-fold-

symmetric pattern of diffraction spots down this [001] zone axis, interspersed with a second six-

fold pattern of weaker spots (seen upon close examination of Fig. 2a), is as expected, as illustrated 

by the simulated pattern in Fig. 2b based on the accepted R-3m structure and lattice parameters6. 

Wide-range specular high-resolution X-ray diffraction (HRXRD) was also performed on 001-

oriented crystals (Fig. 2c), showing only sharp 003 through 0015 reflections, further confirming 

single crystallinity and phase purity. Of particular significance, a HRXRD rocking curve through 

the 006 reflection is shown in the inset to Fig. 2c, revealing a full-width-at-half-maximum of only 

0.0089пӮ°. To the best of our knowledge, this is the lowest rocking curve width reported for a metallic 

delafossite, demonstrating very low mosaic spread, another strong indicator of low defect density.  

Turning to chemical characterization, Fig. 2d shows an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy 

(EDS) scan from a representative PdCoO2 CVT crystal. Only Pd L and Co K peaks are clearly 

visible in this wide-energy-range scan, their relative intensities giving a Pd/Co ratio of 0.98 пӮұ 0.05, 

consistent with the nominal stoichiometry. The inset to Fig. 2d focuses on the low-energy region 

shaded gray in the main panel, revealing, with the exception of a small detector-artifact peak and 

the inevitable C contamination in SEM/EDS, only peaks from Pd, Co, and O. Unsurprisingly, EDS 

is thus not sufficiently sensitive to detect any trace impurities in these PdCoO2 crystals, which was 

the motivation for the PIXE data in Fig. 2e. PIXE is analogous to EDS except that the excitation 

is achieved with MeV-range He ions rather than electrons, vastly decreasing the broad background 

due to bremsstrahlung. As can be seen in Fig. 2e, which shows spectra from two different CVT 

crystals (orange and blue), PIXE thus exposes a plethora of Pd, Co, and sum peaks, at high signal-

to-noise ratio. Aside from some instrumentation artifacts (labeled with asterisks in Fig. 2e), almost 

all aspects of these spectra are reproduced by a GUPIXWIN65 simulation for PdCoO2, shown as 


10 

 

the black line. The inset to Fig. 2e, however, shows a close-up of the 4.5 to 7.3 keV region (shaded 

gray in the main panel), highlighting two peaks that are not accounted for by Pd, Co, or O. These 

peaks also exhibit crystal-to-crystal variations in intensity, strongly suggesting that they derive 

from trace impurities. The пҒҫ5.4 keV peak very likely indicates Cr impurities, while the 6.4 keV 

peak is very likely due to Fe. Full quantification of impurity concentrations at this level is 

challenging for PIXE but our best estimates based on GUPIXWIN fits to Pd L, Co K, and Fe K 

peaks suggest Fe concentrations of вүі 50 ppm. (As for all impurity concentrations in this paper, 

this value is on a weight basis, i.e., it is in пҒӯg/g). While this is only approximate, this is a first 

indication that even CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystals may not actually be ultrapure. As a final 

comment on these PIXE data, we note that Cl was not detected; the estimated limit of detection is 

of order 1000 ppm, however, due to overlap of Cl K and Pd L peaks.      

 

Electronic and magnetic properties 

Electronic transport is an excellent relative probe of total defect and impurity densities, and thus 

T-dependent пҒІab measurements were made on the new CVT-grown crystals. It is essential to 

acknowledge at this point that such measurements are nontrivial for single-crystal PdCoO2 

17,25,49,52, because of the extremely small low-T resistances (due to the very low residual пҒІab), and 

the sizable c-axis/a-b plane resistance anisotropy (пҒҫ350-750, depending on T 8,14вҖ“16). The most 

accurate measurements in the literature in fact use focused ion beam techniques to pattern 

structures with long channel lengths to increase resistance, at the same time fully constraining the 

current path in the a-b plane17,25,49,52. In our case, the availability of larger crystals than in prior 

work enabled cleavage into relatively long and thin bar-shaped samples for simpler, in-line, top-

contact, four-wire measurements. The inset to Fig. 3a shows an example of such an in-line 


11 

 

geometry on a 1.2-mm-long, 23-пҒӯm-thick crystal. Even in this case, residual resistances were 

found to be пҒҫ20 пҒӯпҒ—, necessitating low-noise measurements and careful accounting for 

instrumental offset voltages. Full details are provided in Methods and Supplementary Information 

Section C. Briefly, an AC resistance bridge with a pre-amplifying channel scanner was employed, 

using parallel measurements on superconducting V thin films to determine and account for offsets. 

Top-contact geometries such as those shown in the inset to Fig. 3a are also subject to systematic 

error due to the large пҒІc/пҒІab 8,14вҖ“16. As described in Supplementary Information Section C, finite-

element simulations of current flow and potential drop were thus performed in our specific 

measurement geometry. These confirm overestimation of пҒІab due to the large пҒІc that generates 

potential drop through the crystal thickness. This issue worsens with cooling (as пҒІc/пҒІab increases), 

meaning, importantly, that RRR values in this geometry represent lower bounds on true values 

(see Supplementary Information Section C for details). 

Based on the above procedures, presented in Fig. 3a is пҒІab(T) for the representative CVT-grown 

PdCoO2 crystal shown in the inset; Fig. 3b shows the same data on a log10-log10 scale. The 300 K 

resistivity of this representative crystal is 3.65 пҒӯпҒ—cm, which can be compared to reported values 

of 2.0-6.9 пҒӯпҒ—cm using standard contact methods8,14вҖ“16 and 3.1 пҒӯпҒ—cm using more accurate focused-

ion-beam-patterned geometries17. Our value of 3.65 пҒӯпҒ—cm is thus indeed slightly larger than the 

most accurate determination of 3.1 пҒӯпҒ—cm 17, but within the bounds expected for overestimation of 

пҒІab due to the top-contact geometry (see Supplementary Information Section C). On cooling, the 

пҒІab(T) of this crystal saturates below 10-20 K, reaching a measured value of 8 nпҒ— cm. Taking this 

at face value, and considering the residual resistivity measurement uncertainty (dominated by 

offset subtraction), a RRR of 436 пӮұ 25 is indicated. As noted above and discussed in detail in 


12 

 

Supplementary Information Section C, however, this RRR represents a lower bound due to the 

top-contact geometry. Finite element simulations suggest a true residual пҒІab of пҒҫ4.4 nпҒ— cm, 

yielding an actual RRR up to пҒҫ670 (see Supplementary Information Section C). Even without this 

correction, however, our measured RRR of пҒҫ440 is a record in PdCoO2, which can be compared 

to 376 in prior metathesis/flux-grown crystals measured with focused-ion-beam patterning 

methods17. In addition to realizing order-of-magnitude gains in crystal size and mass, our new 

CVT approach thus also results in measurably lower disorder in electronic transport.    

Magnetometry measurements provide another probe of crystal quality and impurity concentrations 

in PdCoO2 and were thus performed on CVT crystals. A typical result for the T-dependent molar 

susceptibility (пҒЈmol) is shown in Fig. 3c. As illustrated by the black solid line, these data are well 

described by пҒЈmol(T) = пҒЈ0 + C/(T - пҒұ), i.e., a sum of T-independent Pauli-related and T-dependent 

Curie-Weiss contributions, where C is the Curie constant and пҒұ is the Curie-Weiss temperature. 

The Pauli contribution derives from delocalized Pd d electrons, the пҒЈPauli = пҝҪ
пҝҪпҒЈ0 = 1.65 Г— 10-4 emu 

mol-1 Oe-1 (the factor of 3/2 accounts for Landau diamagnetism) in this case being near the middle 

of the distribution of literature values (0.9 Г— 10-4 to 2.9 Г— 10-4 emu mol-1 Oe-1, see Table 1). The 

low-T Curie-Weiss tail, however, which should not ideally occur in PdCoO2 (the Co3+ ions are 

low-spin, S = 0), very likely arises from local moments due to magnetic impurities. As shown in 

Table 1, the пҒұ = -2.6 K extracted from the fit in Fig. 3c is indeed small, indicating weak inter-

moment interactions, as would be expected of dilute impurities. This is reinforced by the inset to 

Fig. 3c, where (пҒЈmol - пҒЈ0)-1 is plotted vs. T, the 5 to 20 K fit yielding пҒұ = -2.0 K.  

Interestingly, the Curie constant extracted from the fit in Fig. 3c yields an effective number of 

Bohr magnetons (пҒӯeff) as high as 0.09 пҒӯB per formula unit (Table 1). Further insight into this is 


13 

 

provided in Fig. 3d, which shows the applied magnetic field (H) dependence of the magnetization 

(M) at 2 K, after correcting for пҒЈ0. The solid black line Brillouin fit captures the data moderately 

well, yielding a reasonable J = 1.2, along with a concentration of local moments corresponding to 

пҒҫ130 ppm. (This is again on a weight basis; the atomic mass of Fe was assumed to convert from a 

number density of impurities (from the fit in Fig. 3d) to a weight-basis concentration). Taking this 

J and combining it with the Curie constants from the fits in Fig. 3c then yields local moment 

concentrations of пҒҫ200 ppm. The low-T paramagnetism in Figs. 3c, d, can thus be consistently 

described by dilute, non-interacting local atomic moments, at concentrations of order 100 ppm. 

While some fraction of this Curie-tail magnetism no doubt arises from surface contamination, this 

is a second indication, along with PIXE data (Fig. 2e), that even CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystals host 

substantial impurity concentrations. Nevertheless, the пҒӯeff values from the Curie-Weiss tails of 

CVT-grown crystals do represent a significant improvement over metathesis/flux crystals. This is 

emphasized in Table 1, which includes data from our metathesis/flux crystals, in addition to prior 

literature14,16,53. The Curie-Weiss пҒӯeff of our CVT crystals is over 4 times lower than our 

metathesis/flux crystals and is the lowest reported for PdCoO2. Literature values on 

metathesis/flux-grown crystals in fact span 0.15 to 0.78 пҒӯB per formula unit (Table 1)14,16,53, 

implying substantial magnetic impurity concentrations, even in crystals with large RRR14. This 

apparent contradiction вҖ“ clear indications of significant densities of magnetic impurities from 

magnetometry, in crystals that exhibit low disorder in transport вҖ“ appears not to have been 

addressed in the literature. While CVT crystals are improved in this regard (they have the lowest 

пҒӯeff), and surface contributions are likely, the implied level of magnetic impurities is concerning. 

For this reason, and to augment the chemical characterization in Figs. 2d, e, we thus undertook 

trace impurity analysis via ICP-MS.      


14 

 

Impurity analysis 

As alluded to in the Introduction, ICP-MS-based trace impurity analysis on PdCoO2 is complicated 

by the extraordinary acid etch resistance of metallic delafossites43вҖ“45, which hinders simple acid 

digestion. We thus employed microwave digestion techniques (see Methods for details), achieving 

complete digestion in пҒҫ15 bar of aqua regia or concentrated nitric acid vapor at 200 пӮ°C. ICP-MS 

was then performed on both metathesis/flux and CVT PdCoO2, quantifying the concentrations of 

54 selected elements in a metals-basis approach (see Methods and Supplementary Information 

Section D). This led to the immediate conclusion, contrary to the naГҜve view, that PdCoO2 crystals 

are not generally ultrapure (Table 2). Averaged over multiple crystals and ICP-MS runs, the total 

metals-basis impurity concentration in our metathesis/flux crystals is in fact 251 пӮұ 3 ppm (Table 

2, top panel). We emphasize that this value derives from the same synthesis method used in many 

prior reports on PdCoO2 5вҖ“8,14вҖ“17,22вҖ“27,29вҖ“33,49,50,53,55 with пҒІab down to 8 nпҒ— cm and RRR up to 376 

17. Our CVT crystals are purer, as might be expected of vapor-based growth, but still retain an 

average metals-basis impurity concentration of 47 пӮұ 8 ppm (Table 2, top panel). 

Such substantial impurity concentrations, which are broadly consistent with PIXE and 

magnetometry (Figs. 2e and 3c, d), frame a central question for the remainder of this work: How 

can the record residual пҒІab of these materials, and their exceptional RRR, be reconciled with such 

impurity concentrations? To underscore the importance of this question, note that the reported 20-

пҒӯm low-T mean-free-path of PdCoO2 would require impurity concentrations several orders-of-

magnitude lower than the above ICP-MS values, a point that we return to quantitatively below. 

Analysis of the distribution of the detected impurity elements casts much light on this issue. To 

this end, we first elaborate a simple classification scheme for the various substitutional elemental 


15 

 

impurities that can be accommodated in PdCoO2. Fig. 4a depicts the crystal structure of PdCoO2, 

along with a classification for potential A- and B-site impurities in the ABO2 delafossite structure. 

The critical point here is that, very unlike ABO3 perovskites for example, there is a massive 

asymmetry in the number of elements that can conceivably populate A vs. B sites. This arises 

because the B-site in metallic ABO2 delafossites involves a common cation valence in oxides (3+) 

and a common coordination with O2- (octahedral); this is as in perovskites, which can 

accommodate much of the periodic table on the B site. The A-site in metallic ABO2 delafossites, 

on the other hand, involves a relatively uncommon valence in oxides (1+) and a far less common 

coordination with O2- ions (linear, see the structure in Fig. 4a). This situation, which contrasts 

starkly with ABO3 perovskites, greatly reduces the possible accommodation of A-site vs. B-site 

substitutional impurities in ABO2 compounds.  

Considering this in more detail, as shown in Fig. 4a, potential A-site-substituting impurities can 

be classified in terms of elements that are known to adopt the A-site in ABO2 compounds, that 

either can (dark yellow) or cannot (light yellow) feasibly substitute for Pd in PdCoO2. We 

determine this feasibility by applying Goldschmidt-type criteria, requiring <30% ionic size 

mismatch, an ability to adopt the required coordination, and valence within пӮұ1 of the host element. 

Fig. 4b then shows a periodic table of select elements most relevant to ABO2 compounds, labeled 

with their valence, coordination number, and ionic radii in the state most closely matching the 

delafossite structure. As shown in the figure, Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, Cu+, Ag+, Pt+, and Hg2+ (shaded 

yellow) are known to adopt the A-site in ABO2 compounds, but in most cases cannot feasibly 

substitute for Pd in PdCoO2. In particular, Li+, Na+, K+, and Rb+ (light yellow) only form ABO2 

compounds with distinctly different structure to delafossite PdCoO2, with large coordination 

number with O2-. In most cases their ionic radii in this coordination are also far beyond the 30% 


16 

 

mismatch for feasible substitution for Pd. In fact, the elements that can feasibly substitute for Pd 

in PdCoO2 (dark yellow) number only four: Cu, Ag, Pt, and Hg, highlighted via the bold border in 

Fig. 4b. Hg substitution would also be a special case, as the 2+ valence (Hg does not typically 

adopt 1+ valence in 2-fold coordination) would require an additional charge-balancing defect. This 

general concept is supported by prior work on deliberately Mg-substituted PdCoO2, where A-site 

substitution with Mg2+ was argued against based on similar reasoning66.  

The situation on the B site is very different. As shown in Fig. 4a, potential B site substituents can 

be classified in terms of those that are known to adopt the B site in delafossites and can feasibly 

substitute for Co (darkest blue), those that are known to adopt the B site in ABO2 compounds but 

cannot feasibly substitute for Co (lightest blue), and those for which it is unknown whether they 

form ABO2 compounds but do fit the Co site in PdCoO2 (intermediate blue). Again, feasibility is 

based on <30% size mismatch, 3пӮұ1 valence, and octahedral coordination. As shown in Fig. 4b, the 

total group of possible B-site substituents is numerous, totaling at least 40 (all blue shades), 

remaining as high as 20 even after applying our fit criteria (darkest blue shades). In contrast to 

ABO3 perovskites, the fundamental crystal chemistry of the ABO2 delafossites thus results in a 

large asymmetry between the number of elements that can exist as substitutional impurities on the 

A and B sites. 

Fig. 4c next maps the measured average concentrations of various ICP-MS-detected elements in 

CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystals on to the classification scheme in Figs. 4a, b. This periodic table 

employs the log10 color scale of average impurity concentrations shown to the right, also labeling 

the concentration and limit of detection beneath each element. The conclusion is simple. 

Substantial concentrations are found of elements that are likely to populate the Co site in PdCoO2 


17 

 

(e.g., Mn, Fe, Ni, Al, Cr, Ir, Sn; the darker blue shades in Fig. 4b), but not of elements that can 

feasibly populate the Pd site. Neither Cu, Ag, Pt, or Hg (in the dark border in Figs. 4b, c) reach 

even 1 ppm in CVT crystals. These findings are further quantified in Table 2, where the top panel 

summarizes the total impurity concentrations of the elements likely to populate the Pd and Co sites 

in PdCoO2. In metathesis/flux crystals, of the total impurity concentration of 251 ppm (far right, 

Table 2), at least 132 ppm are elements that would be expected to populate the Co site (darkest 

blue shades in Fig. 4b), whereas only 4.4 ppm are elements that could feasibly populate the Pd site 

(Cu, Ag, Pt, Hg, dark yellow in Fig. 4b). We thus define a вҖңsublattice purification ratioвҖқ of 4.4/251 

= 1.8% of the total impurity concentration that could feasibly substitute for Pd. As also shown in 

the top panel of Table 2, the equivalent for CVT PdCoO2 is 1.9/47 = 4.0% of the total average 

impurity concentration that could feasibly substitute for Pd, in this case only 1.9 ppm.  

The middle and bottom panels of Table 2 break these concentrations down further, into the only 

four elements that can feasibly populate the Pd site (middle panel) and the most prevalent elements 

likely to populate the Co site (bottom panel). The former group consists of only Ag, Hg, Cu, and 

Pt, while the latter group includes Al, Cr, Mn, Fe, and Ni. Notable here is that one of the largest 

differences between CVT and metathesis/flux crystals is the decrease in Al, possibly due to the 

high thermal stability and low volatility of Al oxides. Another difference is the non-negligible 

concentration of impurities in metathesis/flux crystals that are not obviously capable of populating 

either the A or B sites. Surface contamination, strained B-site accommodation, and uptake in the 

minor impurity phases sometimes detected in metathesis/flux crystals (see Fig. S3a and associated 

discussion) can likely account for this. The concentrations of Cr, Mn, Fe, and Ni are also of 

particular interest, due to their likely magnetic character, no doubt contributing to the Curie-Weiss 

susceptibility in Figs. 3c, d, and Table 1. Quantitatively, the estimated magnetic impurity 


18 

 

concentration from the bottom panel of Table 2 is 31 ppm in CVT crystals, compared to order 100 

ppm from magnetometry. This is reasonable agreement considering the likelihood of additional 

surface contamination in magnetometry. In terms of comparisons to PIXE, ICP-MS on CVT 

crystals indicates 9 пӮұ 2 ppm of Fe, also comparing reasonably to the order-50-ppm approximate 

estimate from PIXE (Fig. 2e). Finally, ICP-MS was also used to determine the Pd/Co ratio of CVT 

crystals, yielding 1.08 пӮұ 0.02. This is inconsistent with the EDS result of 0.98 пӮұ 0.05 at first sight, 

but EDS data were acquired from 25 пӮҙ 25 пҒӯm2 regions free of surface particles. These particles are 

of course not excluded from ICP-MS, and thus remnant surface Pd and PdCl2 likely skews the 

ICP-MS Pd/Co ratio. 

 

Discussion 

The conclusion from the above is that the prototypical metallic delafossite PdCoO2 is by no means 

ultrapure in general. Total metals-basis impurity concentrations decrease from пҒҫ250 ppm in 

metathesis/flux crystals to пҒҫ50 ppm in CVT crystals, but remain substantial. Crystal-chemical 

principles, however, dictate that the great majority of substitutional impurities must reside on the 

Co site, the relatively rare valence and coordination on the Pd site resulting in few elemental 

impurities (particularly Cu, Ag, and Pt) being capable of substitution. Sublattice purification ratios 

of пҒҫ1% thus arise, limiting the substitutional impurities on the Pd site to пҒҫ1 ppm. Our simple 

conclusion from these findings is that the electronic conduction in metallic delafossites such as 

PdCoO2, which is strongly restricted to Pd d states at the Fermi level5,10,18вҖ“21, thus occurs in highly 

pure Pd planes, with minimal substitutional impurities. This sublattice purification naturally 

explains how ultralow residual пҒІab and extraordinary mean-free-paths can arise in metallic 

delafossite single crystals, despite the relatively dirty methods employed in their synthesis5,49. 


19 

 

Directly addressing a question posed in recent work49, the BO6 octahedral planes in metallic 

delafossites thus do host substantial disorder, in contrast to the Pd/Pt sheets, which were deduced 

to be highly perfect49. The apparent contradiction of sizable magnetic impurity concentrations in 

crystals with high RRR is thus naturally resolved, as the majority of substitutional impurities, 

including magnetic ones, populate only the CoO6 octahedra.  

The above picture is predicated, however, on two key assumptions: that the пҒҫ1 ppm deduced 

impurity concentrations in the Pd planes are sufficiently low to facilitate the observed residual пҒІab 

and mean-free-paths, and that the significant impurity concentrations in the BO6 octahedral planes 

have sufficiently little impact on conduction in the Pd sheets. The first assumption can be addressed 

using the 2D unitary scattering approach recently applied by Sunko et al., which was validated in 

irradiated metallic delafossite crystals49. This essentially assumes the strongest possible s-wave 

scattering49 in a Drude model, resulting in рқңҢ пҝҪ 
пҝҪв„Ҹ

пҝҪпҝҪ

пҝҪпҝҪ
пҝҪ , where в„Ҹ and e are the reduced Planck 

constant and electronic charge, nd is the areal defect density, and n is the volume carrier density. 

Based on this, our deduced residual пҒІab of 4 nО©cm would require a 2D defect density of 6 пӮҙ 109 

cm-2 in CVT-grown PdCoO2. Remarkably, this is in striking agreement with our determined Pd-

sheet impurity density, which corresponds to 5 пӮҙ 109 cm-2 based on the 1.9 ppm of A-site impurities 

in Table 2. (This calculation takes into account the exact A-site impurity elements in Table 2, and 

their relative masses). This indicates quantitative agreement between our deduced A-site impurity 

concentration and measured residual resistivity. This extends also to flux/metathesis crystals, 

where the A-site impurity concentration of 4.4 ppm in Table 2 would be expected to generate a 

residual пҒІab of 7 nО©cm, remarkably close to measured values17. (Again, this calculation takes into 

account the exact A-site impurity elements in Table 2, and their relative masses; the distribution 


20 

 

of impurities is different for CVT and metathesis/flux crystals). The second assumption is also 

supported by the recent work of Sunko et al., which explicitly concluded that disorder in the B-O 

layers must be efficiently screened49; the extent of this disorder was not determined in that paper, 

but is now known to be substantial (of order 100вҖҷs of ppm).  

Density functional theory (DFT) calculations provide further support for the above. These were 

performed (see Methods) on PdCoO2 lightly-substituted with Pt, Fe, and Al, i.e., a known impurity 

on the Pd site and two prevalent impurities on the B site. 3 Г— 3 Г— 3 supercells containing a single 

substituent atom were employed, i.e., 3.7% concentrations, as a computationally-tractable 

approximation to the dilute limit. Unfolding of supercell bands was used to determine the effect 

of these impurities on the band structure and density-of-states (DOS) within the PdCoO2 primitive 

cell. Fig. 5 shows the resulting band structures in the left panels (a-c) and the corresponding DOS 

in the right panels (d-f). As might be expected, dilute Pt impurities on the A site (Figs. 5a, d) have 

little effect on the band structure and DOS. The Pd d-band crossing the Fermi energy (EF) has no 

visible distortion at EF in Fig. 5a, and the atom-projected DOS in Fig. 5d is of very similar form 

for Pd and Pt. Note here that the simulated Pd0.963Pt0.037CoO2 has 26-times more Pd than Pt but no 

normalization is applied in Figs. 5d-f, simply to promote visibility of the impurity DOS.  

As might also be anticipated, the situation for Fe impurities on the B site is more complex. A 

narrow impurity band forms below EF (Fig. 5b), generating a clear peak in the Fe-projected DOS 

in Fig. 5e. Nevertheless, this main impurity band peak is centered at пҒҫ0.2 eV below EF (many times 

kBT at the temperatures of interest in this work), and is quite narrow, meaning that the impact at 

EF remains negligible even for Fe impurities. This directly supports the above conclusion that 

typical transition-metal B-site impurities (which are present at much lower concentrations in 


21 

 

experiment) have only weak impact on conduction in the Pd planes of PdCoO2. For Al impurities 

(Figs. 5c, f), the absence of d electrons results in no significant effect on the band structure or DOS 

in the energy range in Figs. 5c, f, the only impact being some smearing of existing bands. This 

smearing is likely related to the larger structural distortions induced by Al impurities relative to Fe 

and Pt. The Pd-Pd length for Pd ions bonded via O in AlO6 octahedra shifts by as much as 0.6%, 

for example, 1.5 times more than the equivalent for Fe impurities, and 5 times more than for Pt. 

Similarly, the average bond length in AlO6 octahedra differ by пҒҫ0.5% from the CoO6 octahedra in 

pristine PdCoO2, much more than for the Fe case (0.02%). Figs. 5b, c, e, f, thus establish that the 

B-site impurities Fe and Al indeed have greater impact on the electronic structure than the A-site 

impurity Pt (Figs. 5a, d), but with even Fe and Al having little meaningful impact in the vicinity 

of EF, supporting our arguments.  

It should be emphasized that the above analysis focuses on substitutional impurities. While 

interstitial impurities should also be considered, the delafossite structure is unlikely to host 

interstitial sites in which the ions in Fig. 4b can realistically be accommodated. The most obvious 

interstitial space involves an extra ion bonded to two O2- ions in the adjacent B-O layer, for which 

DFT calculations suggest a formation energy as high as 6.3 eV in the case of Pd interstitials49, 

consistent with the low interstitial volume. The equilibrium concentrations of such defects would 

thus be negligible, and would decrease for larger Ag, Pt, and Hg interstitials. Beyond impurities, 

other point, line, and areal defects should be considered. As alluded to in the Introduction, 

however, current indications are that the densities of such defects are extraordinarily low in single-

crystal metallic delafossites. This is supported by TEM observations49,55, deductions from 

irradiation-induced defect studies49, the substantial formation energies for most point defects in 

PdCoO2 49, and the various additional observations of structural quality in the current paper, most 


22 

 

notably the X-ray rocking curve widths (Fig. 2c inset). Substitutional impurities thus appear to be 

the key defects in metallic delafossites, which have been comprehensively elucidated here. Future 

work to more completely understand the reasons for the low density of other point, line, and areal 

defects in these compounds is nevertheless clearly important.     

In summary, this work establishes CVT as a highly promising approach to bulk single crystal 

growth of PdCoO2, with potential applicability to other metallic delafossites such as PdCrO2 and 

PdRhO2. Compared to standard metathesis/flux methods, CVT generates orders-of-magnitude 

gains in crystal size and mass, along with the highest structural quality, highest purity, lowest 

magnetic impurity concentration, and highest RRR yet reported. Nevertheless, the first detailed 

trace impurity analysis of PdCoO2 single crystals by ICP-MS reveals that, contrary to the naГҜve 

view, these metallic delafossites are not generally ultrapure; standard metathesis/flux methods 

result in пҒҫ250 ppm impurity concentrations, falling to пҒҫ50 ppm in CVT crystals. Simple crystal-

chemistry-based analyses show that the vast majority of these impurities are forced to reside in the 

Co-O octahedral planes, however, only a small fraction being capable of substituting for Pd 

(typically a total of пҒҫ1 ppm of Cu, Ag, and Pt). The вҖңsublattice purification ratioвҖқ is thus пҒҫ1%, 

resulting in ultrahigh purity in the Pd planes in which electronic conduction takes place, largely 

unaffected by the impurities in the CoO6 octahedra. This sublattice purification mechanism is 

therefore central to the ultrahigh low-T conductivity of metallic delafossites, resolving the apparent 

contradiction that they appear impure from magnetometry yet highly pure in electronic transport. 

These results significantly demystify the outstanding low-T conductivity and mean-free-path in 

metallic delafossites, setting the stage for further advances with this extraordinary materials class. 

As an example, the analyses in Refs.25,30 place PdCoO2 in a situation where the momentum-

conserving scattering rate is larger, but not much larger, than the momentum-relaxing scattering 


23 

 

rate, leaving the system in a crossover regime between ballistic and viscous electronic transport. 

The momentum-conserving scattering is unlikely to be electron-electron scattering at the 

temperatures of interest30 but could be electron-impurity scattering. It would thus be interesting to 

understand whether the Co-O plane impurities elaborated here could be responsible for such. More 

broadly, the concepts developed in this work can also be expanded to other metallic and 

semiconducting delafossites, and potentially to other complex crystal families with very different 

valence/chemical environments for different cations. 

 

Methods 

Crystal growth 

PdCoO2 crystals were grown by two methods: the established metathesis/flux process6 and our 

new CVT process18. The established process utilizes the metathesis reaction PdCl2 + Pd + Co3O4 

вҶ’ 2PdCoO2 + CoCl2 6. Powders of PdCl2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 99.999% purity), Pd (Sigma-

Aldrich, 99.995%), and Co3O4 (Alfa Aesar, 99.9985%) were mixed in a 1.5:1:1 molar ratio, then 

loaded and vacuum sealed (at 10-6 Torr) in quartz ampoules; excess PdCl2 is reported to promote 

crystallization of PdCoO2 14. Ampoules were then heated to 700-750 В°C at a ramp rate of 300 В°C/h 

in a box furnace, dwelled for 40-150 h, cooled to 400 В°C at 40-60 В°C/h, then furnace cooled to 

ambient. These conditions were fine-tuned to optimize yield and phase purity. To remove excess 

PdCl2 and the reaction by-product CoCl2, the crystalline PdCoO2 products (shown in Fig. 1b) were 

soaked in ethanol overnight then repeatedly washed in boiling ethanol until the effluent ran clear. 

Minor unreacted Pd and Co3O4 phases were often detected in these products by PXRD (see 

Supplementary Information Section B). The largest crystals found in the products were 0.8 пӮҙ 0.6 

mm2 laterally and 0.017 mm thick (Fig. 1b, inset).  


24 

 

For CVT, пҒҫ1 g of coarse-grained PdCoO2 product from the above metathesis reaction was mixed 

with ~120 mg of PdCl2 powder, then loaded and vacuum sealed (at 10-6 Torr) in quartz ampoules. 

Ampoules were then placed in a two-zone tube furnace with the reagents at one end of the ampoule 

(Fig. 1a). CVT was performed at a range of temperatures, spanning 740-800 пӮ°C for the hot zone 

and 680-750 пӮ°C for the cold zone. Hot- and cold-zone temperatures of 760 and 710 пӮ°C were found 

optimal in terms of crystal size and complete transport (i.e., yield). For the first 3 days, the empty 

end of the tubes was maintained as the hot end, to clean the growth zone. The temperature gradient 

was then inverted for 13 days to establish the reagent-filled end of the tubes as the hot zone and 

the originally empty end as the cold/growth zone (Fig. 1a). We believe CVT to proceed via 

decomposition of PdCl2 (above пҒҫ600 пӮ°C 57,58), followed by the reaction PdCoO2(s) + 2Cl2(g) вҶ” 

PdCl2(g) + CoCl2(g) + O2(g) (Fig. 1a). Multicrystals up to 12 пӮҙ 12 mm2 laterally and 0.3 mm thick 

result from this process (Fig. 1c). Single crystals were then isolated by gently breaking the 

multicrystals apart, generating up to 6.0 пӮҙ 4.0 mm2 lateral sizes, with thickness up to 0.17 mm (see 

Fig. 1c, inset, for an example crystal). Excess chlorides were then removed by washing PdCoO2 

crystals in boiling ethanol. We are aware of no prior report of such CVT growth of metallic 

delafossites, although one approach to PdRhO2 growth did employ a CVT-like temperature 

gradient51 but with clear qualitative differences with our methods and findings.  

Structural and chemical characterization 

Optical microscope images of crystals were acquired with a Zeiss Axiovert A1 MAT inverted 

microscope, while SEM was performed in a JEOL JSM-6010PLUS/LA. EDS data were taken with 

an EDS detector integrated in the SEM, at 20 kV accelerating voltage. PIXE spectra were acquired 

in a MAS 1700 pelletron tandem ion accelerator (National Electrostatic Corp.) at 50 ОјC dose from 

a 4 MeV He2+ beam; PIXE data were analyzed using GUPIXWIN65. Laue diffraction, PXRD, and 


25 

 

single-crystal HRXRD (including rocking curves) were taken using Photonic Science back-

reflection Laue, Rigaku MiniFlex 600, and Rigaku SmartLab XE diffractometer systems, 

respectively, the latter two with CuKпҒЎ radiation. PXRD analysis employed JADE for whole pattern 

fits, which were used to determine a and c lattice parameters. Laue analysis employed Lauesim67, 

modified for hexagonal symmetry.  

Electronic transport and magnetometry measurements 

Single crystals for electronic transport were first cleaved into bar shapes (Fig. 3a, inset) and affixed 

with GE varnish to Al2O3 wafers. Al contact wires were attached in a four-point in-line geometry 

to the top surface of the PdCoO2 using ultrasonic wire bonding. T-dependent (пҒҫ4-300 K) resistance 

measurements were then performed in a Janis cryostat/superconducting magnet, using a Lakeshore 

370 AC resistance bridge and Lakeshore 3708 preamplifier/channel scanner (at 13.7 Hz and 10 

mA). As alluded to in the main text and described in detail in Supplementary Information Section 

C, great care was taken to accurately determine and account for instrumental voltage offsets, which 

are important due to the very low low-T resistance of PdCoO2. A specialized protocol for this was 

developed and tested on zero-resistance superconducting V films. As also described in 

Supplementary Information Section C, finite element COMSOL simulations were performed to 

support the interpretation of the transport results, particularly with respect to the issue of systematic 

errors associated with the пҒІc/пҒІab anisotropy. To minimize contamination for magnetometry 

measurements, crystals were first ground with thoroughly cleaned nonmagnetic tools then washed 

in ethanol to remove CoCl2. The latter could occur not only at the original crystal surfaces but also 

at internal inclusions/voids16. Magnetometry was then done in a Quantum Design Physical 

Property Measurement System equipped with vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) and high-T 

options, from 2 to 600 K in magnetic fields to 7 T.  


26 

 

Impurity analysis 

For trace impurity analyses, ethanol-washed crystals were microwave digested in aqua regia (a 1:3 

mixture of 70%-concentrated trace-metal-grade nitric acid (Ricca) and 36%-concentrated trace-

metal-grade hydrochloric acid (Fisher Scientific)), or concentrated nitric acid, in sealed teflon 

pressure vessels. A CEM MARS 5 microwave digestion system was employed, reaching 200 В°C 

and пҒҫ15 bar for 2 h. Solutions were allowed to slow cool to room temperature overnight before 

serial dilution and analysis; no visible solid remained. Trace element analysis in a Thermo 

Scientific iCap TQ triple quadrupole ICP-MS system was performed by standard addition methods 

using SPEX CertiPrep and ThermoFisher Scientific multielement standards. Internal standard sets 

included: Sc, Y, Ir for alkali metals, alkaline-earth metals, non-precious transition metals, 

metalloids, and heavy metals; Sc, Y, Bi for precious metals; V, Rb, Cs, Bi for Sc, Y, and rare-earth 

elements. ICP-MS analytical details for each element are listed in Table S6. 

DFT calculations 

First-principles density functional theory calculations were performed with the Quantum 

ESPRESSO package using norm-conserving pseudopotentials, with the exchange-correlation 

energy approximated by the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional68вҖ“70. The energy cutoff for the 

plane waves was set to 100 Ry. Dilute impurities on the Pd- and Co-sites (i.e., Pd1-xZxCoO2 and 

PdCo1-xZxO2) were simulated in a 3 Г— 3 Г— 3 supercell with 108 atoms, with one Pd or Co atom 

replaced, corresponding to x = 0.037. Pt substituted for Pd, and Fe and Al substituted for Co were 

considered. Both the unit cell shape and atomic positions were relaxed for electronic structure 

calculations. The band structure and DOS were calculated on a О“-centered Monkhorst-Pack grid 

of 4 Г— 4 Г— 4 k points in the Brillouin zone of the supercell. The unfolded band structures in Fig. 5 

were obtained using the bandUPpy code71вҖ“73. The unfolding method projects a wave vector бёҙ in 


27 

 

the supercell Brillouin zone onto a corresponding wave vector бёө in the primitive cell Brillouin zone 

via a supercell reciprocal lattice vector. This unfolding evaluates the spectral weight or probability 

of finding a set of primitive-cell Bloch states at wave vector бёө that are contributing to the supercell 

eigenstates at wave vector бёҙ at the same energy. The specific method adopted here72 finds the 

effective band structure for doped PdCoO2 by using the spectral function to calculate the weight, 

which is given by the number of primitive cell bands that are crossing within a small energy 

window around the band center. 

 

Data availability 

All data needed to evaluate the conclusions presented in the paper are included in the paper and/or 

the Supplementary Information. Digital data are available from the corresponding author upon 

reasonable request.  

 

References 

1. 
Imada, M., Fujimori, A. & Tokura, Y. Metal-insulator transitions. Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 
1039вҖ“1263 (1998). 
2. 
Hwang, H. Y. et al. Emergent phenomena at oxide interfaces. Nat. Mater. 11, 103вҖ“113 
(2012). 
3. 
Ramesh, R. & Schlom, D. G. Whither oxide electronics? MRS Bull. 33, 1006вҖ“1014 
(2008). 
4. 
Mannhart, J. & Schlom, D. G. Oxide interfaces - an opportunity for electronics. Science 
327, 1607вҖ“1611 (2010). 
5. 
Mackenzie, A. P. The properties of ultrapure delafossite metals. Reports Prog. Phys. 80, 
032501 (2017). 
6. 
Shannon, R. D., Rogers, D. B. & Prewitt, C. T. Chemistry of noble metal oxides. I. 
Syntheses and properties of ABO2 delafossite compounds. Inorg. Chem. 10, 713вҖ“718 
(1971). 
7. 
Prewitt, C. T., Shannon, R. D. & Rogers, D. B. Chemistry of noble metal oxides. II. 
Crystal structures of platinum cobalt dioxide, palladium cobalt dioxide, copper iron 
dioxide, and silver iron dioxide. Inorg. Chem. 10, 719вҖ“723 (1971). 


28 

 

8. 
Rogers, D. B., Shannon, R. D., Prewitt, C. T. & Gillson, J. L. Chemistry of noble metal 
oxides. III. Electrical transport properties and crystal chemistry of ABO2 compounds with 
the delafossite structure. Inorg. Chem. 10, 723вҖ“727 (1971). 
9. 
Daou, R., FrГ©sard, R., Eyert, V., HГ©bert, S. & Maignan, A. Unconventional aspects of 
electronic transport in delafossite oxides. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 18, 919вҖ“938 (2017). 
10. 
Lechermann, F. From basic properties to the Mott design of correlated delafossites. npj 
Comput. Mater. 7, 120 (2021). 
11. 
Mekata, M., Yaguchi, N., Takagi, T., Mitsuda, S. & Yoshizawa, H. Magnetic ordering in 
delafossite CuFeO2. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 104вҖ“107, 823вҖ“824 (1992). 
12. 
Ye, F. et al. Magnetic interactions in the geometrically frustrated triangular lattice 
antiferromagnet CuFeO2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 157201 (2007). 
13. 
Kawazoe, H. et al. P-type electrical conduction in transparent thin films of CuAlO2. 
Nature 389, 939вҖ“942 (1997). 
14. 
Takatsu, H. et al. Roles of high-frequency optical phonons in the physical properties of 
the conductive delafossite PdCoO2. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 76, 104701 (2007). 
15. 
Hicks, C. W. et al. Quantum oscillations and high carrier mobility in the delafossite 
PdCoO2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 116401 (2012). 
16. 
Tanaka, M., Hasegawa, M. & Takei, H. Growth and anisotropic physical properties of 
PdCoO2 single crystals. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 65, 3973вҖ“3977 (1996). 
17. 
Nandi, N. et al. Unconventional magneto-transport in ultrapure PdCoO2 and PtCoO2. npj 
Quantum Mater. 3, 66 (2018). 
18. 
Zhang, Y. et al. Thermal properties of the metallic delafossite PdCoO2: A combined 
experimental and first-principles study. Phys. Rev. Mater. 6, 115004 (2022). 
19. 
Ong, K. P., Zhang, J., Tse, J. S. & Wu, P. Origin of anisotropy and metallic behavior in 
delafossite PdCoO2. Phys. Rev. B 81, 115120 (2010). 
20. 
Eyert, V., FrГ©sard, R. & Maignan, A. On the metallic conductivity of the delafossites 
PdCoO2 and PtCoO2. Chem. Mater. 20, 2370вҖ“2373 (2008). 
21. 
Kim, K., Choi, H. C. & Min, B. I. Fermi surface and surface electronic structure of 
delafossite PdCoO2. Phys. Rev. B 80, 35116 (2009). 
22. 
Noh, H.-J. et al. Anisotropic electric conductivity of delafossite PdCoO2 studied by angle-
resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 256404 (2009). 
23. 
Mazzola, F. et al. Itinerant ferromagnetism of the Pd-terminated polar surface of PdCoO2. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, 12956вҖ“12960 (2018). 
24. 
Sunko, V. Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy of delafossite metals. (Max Planck 
Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, 2019). 
25. 
Moll, P. J. W., Kushwaha, P., Nandi, N., Schmidt, B. & Mackenzie, A. P. Evidence for 
hydrodynamic electron flow in PdCoO2. Science 351, 1061вҖ“1064 (2016). 
26. 
Putzke, C. et al. h/e oscillations in interlayer transport of delafossites. Science 368, 1234вҖ“
1238 (2020). 
27. 
Takatsu, H. et al. Extremely large magnetoresistance in the nonmagnetic metal PdCoO2. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 56601 (2013). 
28. 
Harada, T. et al. Anomalous Hall effect at the spontaneously electron-doped polar surface 


29 

 

of PdCoO2 ultrathin films. Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 13282 (2020). 
29. 
Mazzola, F. et al. Tuneable electronвҖ“magnon coupling of ferromagnetic surface states in 
PdCoO2. npj Quantum Mater. 7, 20 (2022). 
30. 
Baker, G. et al. Non-local electrodynamics in ultra-pure PdCoO2. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.14239 (2023). 
31. 
Bachmann, M. D. et al. Directional ballistic transport in the two-dimensional metal 
PdCoO2. Nat. Phys. 18, 819вҖ“824 (2022). 
32. 
Bachmann, M. D. et al. Super-geometric electron focusing on the hexagonal Fermi surface 
of PdCoO2. Nat. Commun. 10, 5081 (2019). 
33. 
McGuinness, P. H. et al. Low-symmetry nonlocal transport in microstructured squares of 
delafossite metals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118, e2113185118 (2021). 
34. 
Doumerc, J.-P., Wichainchai, A., Ammar, A., Pouchard, M. & Hagenmuller, P. On 
magnetic properties of some oxides with delafossite-type structure. Mater. Res. Bull. 21, 
745вҖ“752 (1986). 
35. 
Mekata, M., Sugino, T., Oohara, A., Oohara, Y. & Yoshizawa, H. Magnetic structure of 
antiferromagnetic PdCrO2 possible degenerate helices on a rhombohedral lattice. Phys. B 
Condens. Matter 213вҖ“214, 221вҖ“223 (1995). 
36. 
Takatsu, H., Yoshizawa, H., Yonezawa, S. & Maeno, Y. Critical behavior of the metallic 
triangular-lattice Heisenberg antiferromagnet PdCrO2. Phys. Rev. B 79, 104424 (2009). 
37. 
Takatsu, H. et al. Magnetic structure of the conductive triangular-lattice antiferromagnet 
PdCrO2. Phys. Rev. B 89, 104408 (2014). 
38. 
Takatsu, H., Yonezawa, S., Fujimoto, S. & Maeno, Y. Unconventional anomalous hall 
effect in the metallic triangular-lattice magnet PdCrO2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 137201 
(2010). 
39. 
Ok, J. M. et al. Quantum oscillations of the metallic triangular-lattice antiferromagnet 
PdCrO2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 176405 (2013). 
40. 
Zhakina, E. et al. Investigation of planckian behavior in a high-conductivity oxide: 
PdCrO2. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.10631 (2023). 
41. 
Mendez-Valderrama, J. F. et al. T-linear resistivity from magneto-elastic scattering: 
application to PdCrO2. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.10776 (2023). 
42. 
Kumar, S., Multunas, C., Defay, B., Gall, D. & Sundararaman, R. Ultralow electron-
surface scattering in nanoscale metals leveraging Fermi-surface anisotropy. Phys. Rev. 
Mater. 6, 85002 (2022). 
43. 
Harada, T. Thin-film growth and application prospects of metallic delafossites. Mater. 
Today Adv. 11, 100146 (2021). 
44. 
Harada, T. & Okada, Y. Metallic delafossite thin films for unique device applications. 
APL Mater. 10, 70902 (2022). 
45. 
Harada, T., Ito, S. & Tsukazaki, A. Electric dipole effect in PdCoO2/ОІ-Ga2O3 Schottky 
diodes for high-temperature operation. Sci. Adv. 5, eaax5733 (2019). 
46. 
Li, G. et al. In situ modification of a delafossite-type PdCoO2 bulk single crystal for 
reversible hydrogen sorption and fast hydrogen evolution. ACS Energy Lett. 4, 2185вҖ“2191 
(2019). 


30 

 

47. 
Klobes, B. et al. Anisotropic lattice dynamics and intermediate-phase magnetism in 
delafossite CuFeO2. Phys. Rev. B 92, 14304 (2015). 
48. 
Bansal, D. et al. Lattice dynamics and thermal transport in multiferroic CuCrO2. Phys. 
Rev. B 95, 54306 (2017). 
49. 
Sunko, V. et al. Controlled introduction of defects to delafossite metals by electron 
irradiation. Phys. Rev. X 10, 21018 (2020). 
50. 
Daou, R., FrГ©sard, R., HГ©bert, S. & Maignan, A. Large anisotropic thermal conductivity of 
the intrinsically two-dimensional metallic oxide PdCoO2. Phys. Rev. B 91, 41113 (2015). 
51. 
Kushwaha, P. et al. Single crystal growth, structure, and electronic properties of metallic 
delafossite PdRhO2. Cryst. Growth Des. 17, 4144вҖ“4150 (2017). 
52. 
Kushwaha, P. et al. Nearly free electrons in a 5d delafossite oxide metal. Sci. Adv. 1, 
e1500692 (2015). 
53. 
Tanaka, M., Hasegawa, M. & Takei, H. Crystal growth of PdCoO2, PtCoO2 and their 
solid-solution with delafossite structure. J. Cryst. Growth 173, 440вҖ“445 (1997). 
54. 
Takatsu, H. & Maeno, Y. Single crystal growth of the metallic triangular-lattice 
antiferromagnet PdCrO2. J. Cryst. Growth 312, 3461вҖ“3465 (2010). 
55. 
Chang, C. S. et al. Visualization of defects in single-crystal and thin-film PdCoO2 using 
aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy. Phys. Rev. Mater. 6, 
93401 (2022). 
56. 
Usui, H. et al. Hidden kagome-lattice picture and origin of high conductivity in delafossite 
PtCoO2. Phys. Rev. Mater. 3, 45002 (2019). 
57. 
Renner, H. et al. Platinum Group Metals and Compounds. in UllmannвҖҷs Encyclopedia of 
Industrial Chemistry 1вҖ“73 (Wiley, 2018). 
58. 
Oranskaya, M. A. & Mikhailova, N. A. Dissociation pressure and vapour pressure of 
palladium chloride. Russ. J. Inorg. Chem. 5, 5вҖ“7 (1960). 
59. 
Voigt, B. et al. Transport evidence for sulfur vacancies as the origin of unintentional n-
Type doping in pyrite FeS2. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 15552вҖ“15563 (2019). 
60. 
Brooks, C. M. et al. Growth of homoepitaxial SrTiO3 thin films by molecular-beam 
epitaxy. Appl. Phys. Lett. 94, 162905 (2009). 
61. 
Ambwani, P. et al. Defects, stoichiometry, and electronic transport in SrTiO3-Оҙ epilayers: 
A high pressure oxygen sputter deposition study. J. Appl. Phys. 120, 55704 (2016). 
62. 
Breckenfeld, E. et al. Effect of growth induced (non)stoichiometry on the structure, 
dielectric response, and thermal conductivity of SrTiO3 thin films. Chem. Mater. 24, 331вҖ“
337 (2012). 
63. 
Ohnishi, T., Shibuya, K., Yamamoto, T. & Lippmaa, M. Defects and transport in complex 
oxide thin films. J. Appl. Phys. 103, 103703 (2008). 
64. 
Jalan, B., Moetakef, P. & Stemmer, S. Molecular beam epitaxy of SrTiO3 with a growth 
window. Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 32906 (2009). 
65. 
GUPIXWIN 2.1.4. computer program at https://www.physics.uoguelph.ca/about-gupix-
and-gupixwin (2005). 
66. 
Hasegawa, M., Tanaka, M. & Takei, H. Metathetical reaction growth and characterization 
of delafossite-type Pd(Co,Mg)O2 single crystals. J. Cryst. Growth 226, 277вҖ“280 (2001). 


31 

 

67. 
Pang, E. lauesim. computer program at https://github.com/epang22/lauesim (2019). 
68. 
Giannozzi, P. et al. QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source software project 
for quantum simulations of materials. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 21, 395502 (2009). 
69. 
Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient approximation made 
simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865вҖ“3868 (1996). 
70. 
van Setten, M. J. et al. The PseudoDojo: Training and grading a 85 element optimized 
norm-conserving pseudopotential table. Comput. Phys. Commun. 226, 39вҖ“54 (2018). 
71. 
Tsirkin, S., Novianus, A. & Cheng, N. bandUPpy. computer program at 
https://github.com/band-unfolding/banduppy (2023). 
72. 
Medeiros, P. V. C., StafstrГ¶m, S. & BjГ¶rk, J. Effects of extrinsic and intrinsic 
perturbations on the electronic structure of graphene: Retaining an effective primitive cell 
band structure by band unfolding. Phys. Rev. B 89, 41407 (2014). 
73. 
Medeiros, P. V. C., Tsirkin, S. S., StafstrГ¶m, S. & BjГ¶rk, J. Unfolding spinor wave 
functions and expectation values of general operators: Introducing the unfolding-density 
operator. Phys. Rev. B 91, 41116 (2015). 
74. 
Villars, P. & Cenzual, K. PdCoO2 Crystal Structure: sd_1920856 data sets. in PAULING 
FILE in: Inorganic Solid Phases. 
https://materials.springer.com/isp/crystallographic/docs/sd_1920856 (2016). 
75. 
Shannon, R. D. & Prewitt, C. T. Effective ionic radii in oxides and fluorides. Acta 
Crystallogr. B25, 925вҖ“946 (1969). 
76. 
Wagner, F. E. et al. Before striking gold in gold-ruby glass. Nature 407, 691вҖ“692 (2000). 
 

Acknowledgements 

We thank Prof. Xinyuan Zhang for useful advice on ICP-MS analysis. This work was primarily 

supported by the US Department of Energy through the University of Minnesota (UMN) Center 

for Quantum Materials, under Grant No. DE-SC0016371. Parts of this work were carried out in 

the Characterization Facility, UMN, which receives partial support from the National Science 

Foundation through the MRSEC (Award Number DMR-2011401) and NNCI (Award Number 

ECCS-2025124) programs. The Minnesota Supercomputing Institute at UMN provided resources 

that contributed to the research reported within this paper. 

 

 


32 

 

Author contributions 

CL conceived the study and supervised its execution. YZ and FT grew the crystals, which were 

structurally and chemically characterized by YZ, FT, GH, MM, and JG-B. YZ, FT, BK, JR and 

VC performed the transport and magnetometry measurements. YZ, SB, and YT performed Laue 

characterization and analysis. YZ, GE, and WS performed mass spectrometry measurements and 

analysis. PS, TB, and RF performed the theoretical work. CL and YZ wrote the paper, with input 

from all authors.  

 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests.  

 

Additional information 

Supplementary information: The online version contains supplementary information available 

at XXX.  

 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Chris Leighton. 

 
 


33 

 

 

Fig. 1. Crystal growth, microscopy, and powder X-ray diffraction for metathesis/flux and 

chemical vapor transport (CVT) crystals. (a) Schematic of CVT growth of PdCoO2. (b,c) 

Images of the products of the metathesis/flux (b, scanning electron microscopy) and CVT (c, 

optical) methods. Insets: Optical microscopy images of typical single crystals from the 

metathesis/flux (0.8 Г— 0.6 Г— 0.017 mm3) and CVT (3.5 Г— 2.0 Г— 0.17 mm3) methods. (d,e) Powder 

X-ray diffraction patterns (intensity vs. 2пҒұ angle) from representative ground crystals from the 

metathesis/flux ((d), green) and CVT ((e), blue) methods; reference patterns are shown in grey.  

 
 


34 

 

 

Fig. 2. Structural and chemical characterization of CVT-grown single-crystal PdCoO2. (a) 

Back-reflection Laue X-ray diffraction pattern along a [001] zone axis of a representative single 


35 

 

crystal, with reciprocal-space axes labeled. (b) Corresponding simulated Laue pattern where the 

size of the points indicates their relative intensity and the central black circle represents the beam 

aperture. The simulation is based on the accepted PdCoO2 structure and lattice parameters 6,74. (c) 

Specular high-resolution X-ray diffraction (intensity vs. 2пҒұ angle) from a representative 001-

oriented single crystal, showing only 00l reflections. Inset: Rocking curve through the 006 

reflection in (c), with a full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of 0.0089пӮ°. (d) Energy-dispersive 

X-ray spectrum (intensity vs. energy) from a representative region (25 пӮҙ 25 пҒӯm2) of a single crystal. 

The peaks are labeled and the inset is a close-up of the 0 to 3.9 keV region shaded grey. (e) Particle-

induced X-ray emission spectra from two crystals (CVT 1 in blue and CVT 2 in orange), along 

with the GUPIXWIN simulation result discussed in the text (black, vertically offset for clarity). 

The peaks labeled with an вҖң*вҖқ are known instrumental artifacts in our ion beam accelerator/PIXE 

system. The inset is a close-up of the 4.5 to 7.3 keV region shaded grey; note the different 

intensities of the Cr and Fe KпҒЎ peaks in the two crystals. The Cr peak at 5.4 keV has partial overlap 

with an artifact peak but the variation in intensity from crystal-to-crystal strongly suggests a 

contribution from Cr. The Fe peak at 6.4 keV has no such overlap and also varies from crystal-to-

crystal. 

 

  

 

 
 


36 

 

 

Fig. 3. Electronic and magnetic properties of CVT-grown single-crystal PdCoO2. (a) a-b-

plane resistivity (пҒІab) vs. temperature (T) on a representative single crystal. Inset: Image of the 

crystal and four-point in-line contact arrangement. (b) Data from (a) on a log10-log10 scale, 

highlighting the residual resistivity ratio of 436 пӮұ 25. The error bars in (b) represent the uncertainty 

estimated from offset subtraction (dominant at low T) and sample dimension measurements. (c) 

Molar magnetic susceptibility (пҒЈmol) vs. T in a 1 T magnetic field (blue open circles), from a 

representative powdered crystal. The black solid line is a fit to a sum of Pauli and Curie-Weiss 

susceptibilities, as discussed in the text. Inset: T dependence of (пҒЈmol - пҒЈ0)-1, where пҒЈ0 is the T-

independent susceptibility. The solid black line is a 5-20 K Curie-Weiss fit. (d) 2-K magnetization 

(M, corrected for пҒЈ0) vs. magnetic field (пҒӯ0H) for the crystal in (c) (blue open circles). The solid 

black line is a Brillouin fit described in the text.  


37 

 

 

Fig. 4. Impurity analysis of CVT-grown single-crystal PdCoO2. (a) Crystal structure of 

PdCoO2. (b) Partial periodic table highlighting elements relevant to the delafossite structure. As 

defined in (a), light yellow highlights elements that are known to adopt the A site in ABO2 


38 

 

compounds but do not fit the Pd site in PdCoO2. Dark yellow highlights elements that are known 

to adopt the A site in delafossites and do fit the Pd site in PdCoO2; these are further highlighted by 

the bold black border. Analogously, the lightest blue color highlights elements that are known to 

adopt the B site in ABO2 compounds but do not fit the Co site in PdCoO2, and the darkest blue 

highlights elements that are known to adopt the B site in delafossites and do fit the Co site in 

PdCoO2; the intermediate blue shade highlights elements for which it is unknown whether they 

adopt the B site in ABO2 compounds but they do fit the Co site in PdCoO2. In this classification 

scheme, dark yellow highlights the elements likely to substitute for Pd (there are only four), while 

the two darker blue colors highlight the elements likely to substitute for Co (there are at least 20). 

Also shown for each element are the valence, coordination number, and ionic radius 75 in the state 

most closely relevant to the delafossite oxide structure. Where ranges of radii are provided this is 

for low- to high-spin states. Note that Au is not shaded dark yellow in (b); there exists some 

evidence of Au1+ in linear coordination with O2- 76 but it is not common. (c) Partial periodic table 

labeled with the detected concentration and detection limit for each element probed in mass 

spectrometry. All values are in weight-basis ppm and are averaged over multiple runs and CVT 

crystals, as in Table 2. The color scale (right) is a log10-scale of the average impurity concentration 

in CVT crystals. As in (b), the bold black border highlights the elements likely to substitute for 

Pd; the total concentration of these elements is only 1.9 ppm. The entire rare-earth block of 

elements appears as вҖңREвҖқ in panels (b,c); in panel (c), the values are the sum totals for these RE 

elements. Na, B, and Si, which are common glassware impurities, were excluded from all ICP-MS 

analyses.    

 
 


39 

 

 

Fig. 5. DFT-calculated electronic band structure and density-of-states of lightly-substituted 

PdCoO2. (a)-(c) Band structure of Pd1-xPtxCoO2, PdCo1-xFexO2, and PdCo1-xAlxO2, respectively, 

for x = 0.037, i.e., 3.7% substitutional impurity density. Shown is the high-symmetry k-path О“-L-

F-О“-T, in the first Brillouin zone, with energies relative to the Fermi energy, EF. The intensities 

are on a log10 scale depicting the weight of the unfolded primitive cell bands obtained from the 

supercell bands via the unfolding method 72,73. (d)-(f) Corresponding density-of-states (DOS). 

Shown are the total DOS (black), and the atom-projected DOS of Pd (dark yellow), Co (blue), O 

(red), and the respective impurity (cyan). The DOS values are for the primitive cell, calculated by 

dividing by the corresponding number of atoms in the supercell. The atom-projected DOS curves 


40 

 

for the impurity atoms (labeled with an asterisk) should thus be scaled by a factor of 0.037 for 

direct comparison; they are plotted here unscaled for improved visibility.  

 

 
 


41 

 

Table 1. Summary of parameters from analysis of magnetometry data on PdCoO2 crystals in this 

work and in prior literature. Shown are the literature reference, measurement details, temperature-

independent susceptibility (пҒЈ0), Curie-Weiss temperature (пҒұ), and effective number of Bohr 

magnetons from the low-temperature Curie-Weiss contribution (пҒӯeff). Note that the Pauli 

susceptibility can be calculated using пҒЈPauli = пҝҪ
пҝҪпҒЈ0, as discussed in the text. 

Reference 
Measurement 

details 

рққҢрқҹҺ 

(emu mol
-1 Oe
-1) 

рқңҪ 
(K) 

рққҒрқ’Ҷрқ’Үрқ’Ү 

(рққҒрқ‘©/formula unit) 

Tanaka et al. 

(1996) 16 

Ground crystal 
1.9 Г— 10
-4 
-3.50 
0.66 

Tanaka et al. 
(1996) 16 
H вҹӮ c 
1.1 Г— 10
-4 
10.63 
0.69 

Tanaka et al. 

(1996) 16 

H вҲҘ c 
1.6 Г— 10
-4 
0.69 
0.57 

Tanaka et al. 
(1997) 53 
Ground crystal 
0.6 Г— 10
-4 
-12.13 
0.78 

Takatsu et al. 

(2007) 14 

H вҹӮ c 
1.9 Г— 10
-4 
-38.9 
0.20 

Takatsu et al. 
(2007) 14 
H вҲҘ c 
1.7 Г— 10
-4 
-40.8 
0.15 

This work, 

metathesis/flux 

Ground crystal 
2.0 Г— 10
-4 
-8.1 
0.37 

This work, 
CVT 
Ground crystal 
1.1 Г— 10
-4 
-2.6 
0.09 

 

 
 


42 

 

Table 2. Summary of average impurity concentrations (in weight-basis ppm) in metathesis/flux- 

and CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystals, as determined by ICP-MS. The averages are over 2-3 runs on 

1-3 crystals, and the uncertainties listed are standard deviations. Na, B, and Si, which are common 

glassware impurities, were excluded from all analyses. The detection limit (DL) is listed for each 

element; for concentrations below this detection limit, вҖңBDLвҖқ is entered. Top panel. First column: 

total concentrations of elements known to adopt the A-site in ABO2 compounds that also fit the 

Pd site in PdCoO2. Second column: total concentrations of elements known to adopt the A-site in 

ABO2 compounds that do not fit the Pd site in PdCoO2. Third column: total concentrations of 

elements that fit the Co site in PdCoO2. Fourth column: total concentrations of elements known to 

adopt the B-site in ABO2 compounds that do not fit the Co site in PdCoO2. Fifth column: 

concentration of all other elements measured (i.e., those not in columns 1-4). Sixth column: Total 

of all prior columns. Middle panel. Concentrations of the only elements (four) that are known to 

adopt the A-site in ABO2 delafossites and also fit the Pd site in PdCoO2. Bottom panel: 

Concentrations of the seven most prevalent elements that fit the Co site in PdCoO2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


43 

 

Total Impurities in PdCoO2 

 
Known A 
site ABO2, 
fits Pd site 
PdCoO2 
(Ојg/g) 

Known A  
site ABO2, 
does not fit  
Pd site PdCoO2 
(Ојg/g) 

Fits Co site, 
PdCoO2 
(Ојg/g) 

Known B  
site ABO2, 
does not fit  
Co site PdCoO2 
(Ојg/g) 

All other 
(Ојg/g) 
Total 
(Ојg/g) 

Flux 
4.41 Вұ 0.03 
21 Вұ 2 
132 Вұ 2 
67 Вұ 1 
27.3 Вұ 0.5 
251 Вұ 3 

CVT 
1.9 Вұ 0.3 
0.4 Вұ 0.1 
42 Вұ 7 
0.6 Вұ 0.2 
1.9 Вұ 0.6 
47 Вұ 8 

 

A-site Elemental Impurities in PdCoO2 

 
Ag 
(Ојg/g) 
Hg 
(Ојg/g) 
Cu 
(Ојg/g) 
Pt 
(Ојg/g) 

Flux 1.69 Вұ 0.01 
BDL 
0.50 Вұ 0.03 
2.22 Вұ 0.02 

CVT 
0.78 Вұ 0.06 
0.21 Вұ 0.02 
0.4 Вұ 0.2 
0.6 Вұ 0.2 

DL 
0.74 
0.038 
0.080 
0.026 

 

Most Prevalent B-site Elemental Impurities in PdCoO2 

 
Al 
(Ојg/g) 
Cr 
(Ојg/g) 
Mn 
(Ојg/g) 
Fe 
(Ојg/g) 
Ni 
(Ојg/g) 
Sn 
(Ојg/g) 
Ir 
(Ојg/g) 

Flux 
82 Вұ 2 
3.22 Вұ 0.09 
13.3 Вұ 0.2 
9.2 Вұ 0.2 
15.0 Вұ 0.2 
2.49 Вұ 0.04 
1.08 Вұ 0.01 

CVT 
6.3 Вұ 0.8 
3 Вұ 1 
12 Вұ 6 
9 Вұ 2 
7 Вұ 3 
1.61 Вұ 0.03 
2.5 Вұ 1 

DL 
3.0 
0.30 
0.47 
0.29 
0.55 
0.16 
0.06 

 

 

 


1 

 

Supplementary Information for: 
 

Crystal-Chemical Origins of the Ultrahigh Conductivity  

of Metallic Delafossites 
 

Yi Zhang (ејөжҳ“), Fred Tutt, Guy N. Evans, Prachi Sharma, Greg Haugstad, Ben Kaiser, 
Justin Ramberger, Samuel Bayliff, Yu Tao, Mike Manno, Javier Garcia-Barriocanal, Vipul 
Chaturvedi, Rafael M. Fernandes, Turan Birol, William E. Seyfried Jr., and Chris Leighton* 
 
*Corresponding author. Email: leighton@umn.edu 
 
 
 
This PDF file includes: 
 
Section A. Chemical Vapor Transport (CVT) Crystal Growth  
Figs. S1 and S2 
Section B. Specific Growth Parameters of Characterized Crystals 
Figs. S3 
Tables S1 and S2 
Section C. Transport Measurement Details 
Figs. S4 to S6 
Tables S3 to S5 
Section D. ICP-MS Trace Impurity Analysis Details 
Tables S6 and S7 
References  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 


2 

 

Section A. Chemical Vapor Transport (CVT) Crystal Growth 

CVT Setup and Optimization. As noted in the main text, while CVT has not been reported for 

PdCoO2, there are several reasons to consider this growth approach, including the fact that PdCoO2 

decomposes1вҖ“3 and that PdCl2 (which decomposes at пҒҫ600 пӮ°C in low Cl pressure4,5) is a potentially 

convenient transport agent. CVT crystal growth of Co3O46, Pd6, and PdO6 have also been reported. 

A CVT process was thus designed based on the known properties of PdCoO2, PdCl2, and CoCl2.  

CVT growth of Co3O4, Pd, and PdO using PdCl2 as a transport agent have been reported at growth 

temperatures in the 400-1000 В°C range6, based on reactions such as рқҗ¶рқ‘ңпҝҪрқ‘ӮпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘ пҝҪ пҝҪ 3рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ вҮҢ

3рқҗ¶рқ‘ңрқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ пҝҪ 2рқ‘ӮпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ, рқ‘ғрқ‘‘пҝҪрқ‘ пҝҪ пҝҪ рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ вҮҢ рқ‘ғрқ‘‘рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ, and 2рқ‘ғрқ‘‘рқ‘ӮпҝҪрқ‘ пҝҪ пҝҪ 2рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ вҮҢ 2рқ‘ғрқ‘‘рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ пҝҪ

рқ‘ӮпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ. The decomposition of PdCoO2 in air commences at пҒҫ800 В°C3, in the range of established 

CVT temperatures for Co3O4, Pd, and PdO6. We therefore propose the analogous transport 

reaction, рқ‘ғрқ‘‘рқҗ¶рқ‘ңрқ‘ӮпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘ пҝҪ пҝҪ 2рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ вҮҢ рқҗ¶рқ‘ңрқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ пҝҪ рқ‘ғрқ‘‘рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ пҝҪ рқ‘ӮпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ, where, in the forward 

reaction, solid PdCoO2 is volatilized by Cl2 vapor generated from partial thermal decomposition 

of PdCl2, then transformed into a mixture of gaseous CoCl2, PdCl2, and O2 at the hot end of the 

growth ampoule. CoCl2 and PdCl2 vapors then transport across the temperature gradient, forming 

PdCoO2 in the ampouleвҖҷs cold end through the reverse reaction.  

The choice of transport agent was also considered, i.e., whether to use PdCl2, PdBr2, or PdI2, for 

example. For PdCoO2 growth, the co-stability of halides of Co and Pd is essential. PdBr2 and PdI2 

have very low decomposition points (250 and 360 В°C, respectively7), much lower than the CoBr2 

and CoI2 melting points (678 and 520 В°C, respectively)7. The bromides or iodides of Pd and Co 

having comparable vapor pressures at reasonable temperatures is thus unlikely. PdCl2, however, 

decomposes at 600-740 В°C (the range is likely due to variable Cl2 pressures)4,5, with a melting 

point at 680 В°C7, while CoCl2 has a similar melting point of 737 В°C7; this suggests a reasonable 

likelihood of co-stability of their vapors at пҒҫ700 В°C. PdCl2 was therefore chosen as the transport 

agent, taking advantage of its partial thermal decomposition to generate Cl2 at ~600 В°C, without 

the use of hazardous Cl2 gas, and avoiding potential impurities from Cl2-generating transport 

agents such as HgCl26.  

As shown in Fig. S1a, for CVT growth, vacuum-sealed quartz ampoules (see Methods) were held 

horizontally in a multi-zone furnace, with the precursor powders (пҒҫ1 g of metathesis/flux-grown 

PdCoO2 and пҒҫ0.12g of PdCl2) loaded at the right end of the ampoule (in Zone 2), and the empty 


3 

 

end of the ampoule in Zone 1. For the first 3 days, Zone 1 was the hot zone and Zone 2 the cold 

zone, while for the remaining 13 days the temperatures gradient was reversed; the rationale for 

this is provided below. A typical ampoule after the end of a CVT growth is shown in Fig. S1b. At 

the end of a successful growth, essentially all of the PdCoO2 is transported to the growth (cold) 

zone, forming PdCoO2 single crystals, PdCoO2 multicrystals, and excess chlorides. The other 

ampoule end is essentially empty, indicating high yield.  

A 50 В°C temperature difference was chosen for most growths in this work. Smaller differences, 

such as 30 В°C, led to slow crystal growth rates and incomplete transport in 13 days, while larger 

differences, such as 60 В°C, led to smaller crystal sizes, likely indicating too high a transport rate. 

Most growths were done with 710/760 В°C cold/hot zone temperatures (such as the ampoule in Fig. 

S1b), which were found to yield the largest crystals, with reflective surfaces, and near-complete 

transport. Higher temperature conditions were experimented with, using 750/800 В°C and 800/850 

В°C (the ampoules in Figs. S1c, d, respectively), for example. At these higher temperatures, the 

yield of PdCoO2 crystals decreased, with no improvement in crystal size. A magenta coating also 

developed on the inner ampoule walls, as in metathesis/flux growth at пӮі750 В°C, which was found 

by X-ray diffraction to be mainly Co2SiO4. This likely results from high-temperature side reactions 

between cobalt compounds and quartz. Eventually, in the 800/850В°C growth, no PdCoO2 crystals 

were grown, and PdO, along with <10 wt.% untransported PdCoO2 precursor was found to remain 

in the hot zone. At these temperatures, PdCoO2 likely decomposes into binaries at 850 В°C, the 

resulting cobalt compounds reacting with the quartz to form the Co2SiO4 tube coating in Fig. S1d. 

CVT Mechanisms. Based on the above, and on additional observations below, various conclusions 

can be reached regarding the mechanisms of CVT growth. The growth starts with the initial 

conditions in Fig. S2a, with the mix of precursor powders located in Zone 2 and the nominally 

empty ampoule end in Zone 1. Note here that the вҖңemptyвҖқ end of the ampoule is inevitably 

unintentionally dusted with precursor powder particles during loading, as shown in Fig. S2a. As it 

is common for metathesis/flux-grown PdCoO2 (one of the precursors here) to have small amounts 

of impurity phases, including Pd (see Section B below), there are thus microscopic quantities of 

Pd present, as also shown in Fig. S2a. In the first stage of the growth, illustrated in Fig. S2b, the 

ampoule end filled with precursors is the cold zone (Zone 2) and the empty end is the hot zone 

(Zone 1), for an inverted-temperature-gradient period of 3 days. The purpose of this first stage is 


4 

 

to transport any PdCoO2 powder particles in the вҖңemptyвҖқ end of the ampoule to the other end, 

hence вҖңcleaningвҖқ the growth zone, i.e., ridding it of stray nuclei. During this stage however, which 

was found to be essential, Pd (whether from phase impurities in the metathesis/flux-grown PdCoO2 

or partial thermal decomposition of PdCl2) will be transported to the empty ampoule end, as Pd is 

known to transport via Cl2 from cool to hot 6; this is due to the exothermic рқ‘ғрқ‘‘пҝҪрқ‘ пҝҪ пҝҪ рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ вҶ’

рқ‘ғрқ‘‘рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷпҝҪпҝҪрқ‘”пҝҪ reaction6. The significance of this point is returned to below. The initial 3 days of 

inverted temperature gradient are followed by the main (13-day) growth stage shown in Fig. S2c. 

At the start of this period, as explained above, the growth zone (Zone 1) can be expected to contain 

Pd crystallites (whether there originally, or transported from Zone 2). These Pd crystallites may 

then act as nucleation centers for PdCoO2 crystal growth. Notably, the interatomic distance within 

the (111) planes of Pd is 0.275 nm8, similar (within -2.8%) to the PdCoO2 lattice parameter of a = 

0.283 nm1,8,9. Pd particles can thus likely seed the PdCoO2 CVT crystal growth in this process, 

which we propose as an explanation for the multicrystal formation that we found common. In 

essence, we propose that PdCoO2 crystals can grow in multiple directions from different (111)-

family facets of Pd crystallites, generating multicrystals. As noted in the main text, these 

multicrystals can be easily separated into single crystals, and some single crystals also form, 

presumably due to non-Pd-seeded growth. As a final comment on this mechanism, note that PdO 

may also play a similar role in nucleation. 
 


5 

 

 

Fig. S1. CVT growth setup and example ampoules. (a) Two-zone furnace setup prior to CVT 

growth. The ~6-inch-long quartz ampoule is held between two zones labeled Zone 1 and Zone 2, 

with the boundary marked by the black dashed line. The precursor powders are loaded into the 

right side of the ampoule, in Zone 2. (b) Example quartz ampoule after a 710/760 В°C CVT growth. 

вҖңZone 1вҖқ, вҖңZone 2вҖқ, and the dashed line mark the in-furnace position of the ampoule. CVT crystals 

are grown in the left side of the ampoule, in Zone 1, at essentially complete yield. (c) Example 

quartz ampoule after a 750/800 В°C CVT growth. (d) Example quartz ampoule after a 800/850 В°C 

growth. In (c,d), note the magenta coating inside the quartz tubes, identified as Co2SiO4.   

 
 


6 

 

 

Fig. S2. Schematics illustrating various stages of PdCoO2 CVT growth. Growth ampoules after 

(a) initial loading, (b) the first, inverted-temperature-gradient stage (3 days), and (c) the second, 

main growth stage (13 days). The legend at the top identifies PdCl2, PdCoO2, and Pd/PdO. In (a), 

the majority of the precursors (PdCoO2 and PdCl2 powder) are in Zone 2 but stray powder 

inevitably populates Zone 1. Pd is present only as an impurity in the metathesis/flux-grown 

PdCoO2. In (b), during the inverted-temperature-gradient stage, Zone 1 is at 760 В°C and Zone 2 is 

at 710 В°C. The PdCl2 has partially decomposed into Pd and Cl2, and Cl2 in turn reacts with PdCoO2 

to form PdCl2, CoCl2, and O2. PdCoO2 is transported from Zone 1 to 2 (removing stray nuclei) but 

microscopic amounts of Pd (and possibly PdO) are transported from Zone 2 to 1. In (c), during the 

main growth stage, Zone 1 is at 710 В°C and Zone 2 is at 760 В°C. PdCoO2 is transported from Zone 

2 to Zone 1 and Pd is transported from Zone 1 to Zone 2. 

 

 
 


7 

 

Section B. Specific Growth Parameters of Characterized Crystals 

Tables S1 and S2 summarize the metathesis/flux and CVT growth conditions used to grow the 

specific PdCoO2 crystals characterized in this paper. Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) was 

performed on almost all metathesis/flux and CVT crystals, and the other characterization/ 

measurement techniques applied are listed in each case.   

In addition to the characterization in the main text, Fig. S3 shows additional PXRD from four 

further metathesis/flux crystal batches and four further CVT batches. The phase purity is seen to 

significantly improve via CVT. As shown in Fig. S3a, Co3O4 and Pd minor phase impurities were 

commonly found in our metathesis/flux crystals. In CVT crystals (Fig. S3b), only a minor Pd phase 

impurity was ever detected.  

 

 
 


8 

 

Table S1. Growth parameters of metathesis/flux-grown crystals. Crystal growth parameters of 

metathesis/flux growth batches that produced samples characterized in this paper. Each batch 

corresponds to one ampoule. Listed are the batch numbers, growth temperature (Tgrowth), dwell 

time at Tgrowth, cooling rate, and characterization methods. Characterizations that appear in the 

main text are bolded with the corresponding figure/table in parentheses. PXRD is powder X-ray 

diffraction, SEM is scanning electron microscopy, and ICP-MS is inductively coupled plasma 

mass spectrometry.  

Batch 
number 
Tgrowth 
(В°C) 
Dwell time at 
Tgrowth (h) 
Cooling rate 
(В°C/h) 
Characterized by: 

M/F06 
700 
40 
60 
PXRD, SEM (Fig. 1b),  
magnetometry (Table 1) 

M/F62 
750 
150 
40 
PXRD, optical imaging (Fig. 1b, inset) 

M/F29 
750 
60 
40 
PXRD (Fig. 1d) 

M/F30 
750 
60 
40 
PXRD (Fig. 1d) 

M/F55 
750 
100 
40 
PXRD, ICP-MS (Table 2) 

M/F56 
750 
100 
40 
PXRD, ICP-MS (Table 2) 

M/F59 
750 
150 
40 
PXRD, ICP-MS (Table 2) 

 

 
 


9 

 

Table S2. Growth parameters of CVT-grown crystals. Crystal growth parameters of CVT 

batches that produced samples characterized in this paper. Each batch corresponds to one ampoule. 

Listed are the batch numbers, cold and hot zone temperatures (Tcold and Thot), and characterization 

methods. Characterizations that appear in the main text are bolded with the corresponding 

figure/table in parentheses. PXRD is powder X-ray diffraction, ICP-MS is inductively coupled 

plasma mass spectrometry, PIXE is particle-induced X-ray emission, EDS is energy-dispersive X-

ray spectroscopy, HRXRD is high-resolution X-ray diffraction, and RC is X-ray rocking curve 

analysis.  

Batch 
number 
Tcold 
(В°C) 
Thot 
(В°C) 
Characterized by: 

CVT34 
710 
760 
PXRD, optical imaging (Fig. 1c inset), ICP-MS (Fig. 4c, Table 2) 

CVT14 
710 
760 
PXRD, optical imaging (Fig. 1c), PIXE (Fig. 2e) 

CVT12 
710 
760 
PXRD (Fig. 1e), optical imaging, EDS (Fig. 2d), transport 

CVT29 
750 
800 
PXRD, optical imaging, Laue (Fig. 2a), HRXRD (Fig. 2c),  
RC (Fig. 2c inset) 

CVT24 
710 
760 
PXRD, optical imaging, PIXE (Fig. 2e), ICP-MS (Fig. 4c, Table 2), 
magnetometry 

CVT25 
710 
760 
PXRD, optical imaging, PIXE (Fig. 2e), ICP-MS (Fig. 4c, Table 2), 
transport (Figs. 3a,b), VSM 

CVT01 
680 
740 
PXRD, calorimetry, magnetometry (Fig. 3c, d, Table 1), EDS 

CVT33 
710 
760 
PXRD, ICP-MS (Fig. 4c, Table 2), PIXE 

 

 
 


10 

 

 

Fig. S3. Additional PXRD data from metathesis/flux and CVT crystals. PXRD scans (intensity 

I vs. angle 2пҒұ) from (a) four metathesis/flux crystal batches (green) and (b) four CVT crystal 

batches (blue). Peaks due to Co3O4 and Pd phase impurities are marked with diamond and spade 

symbols, respectively. PdCoO2 reference patterns are shown at the bottom in gray1,10.  

 
 


11 

 

Section C. Transport Measurement Details 

Offset Correction and Signal-to-noise Ratio. As noted in the main text, the very low residual 

value of the a-b plane resistivity (пҒІab) in PdCoO2 single crystals renders low-temperature (T) 

transport measurements challenging. Specifically, signal-to-noise ratio becomes an issue, as do 

instrumental offsets. These issues were alleviated in this work through the study of relatively long 

bar-shaped crystals (Fig. 3a, inset), but must still be carefully addressed. The signal-to-noise ratio 

was maximized through the use of an AC resistance bridge (a Lakeshore 370 operating at 13.7 Hz) 

in tandem with a preamplifier/channel scanner (a Lakeshore 3708). Currents of 10 mA were 

employed and self-heating was rigorously ruled out by estimations of the (very low) deposited 

power, and careful low-T checks of resistance vs. current and resistance vs. T at various excitation 

currents. The resulting noise performance is illustrated below and in the data of Figs. 3a, b. 

With respect to offsets, which are critical given the пҒҫ20 пҒӯпҒ— residual resistances, these were first 

carefully characterized via parallel measurements of zero-resistance superconducting V thin films. 

The latter were Si/Si-N/V(100 nm) films deposited in ultrahigh vacuum in a molecular beam 

epitaxy system. As shown in the inset to Fig. S4, the same top-contact, in-line, four-wire geometry 

as was used for PdCoO2 crystals (Fig. 3a, inset) was employed for the V films. The four contacts 

are labeled A, B, C, D, and a standard notation for four-wire resistance (R) measurements is 

followed by using the first two letters to refer to the I+ and I- terminals, respectively, and the last 

two letters to refer to the V+ and V- terminals, respectively, e.g., RADBC. As shown in Fig. S4, the 

nominally zero-magnetic-field RADBC(T) of such films reveals a superconducting transition with an 

onset temperature of пҒҫ5.2 K and an endpoint of пҒҫ5.1 K, in agreement with expectations11. Such 

samples were thus measured at 3.9 K, safely in the zero-resistance regime, to characterize the 

voltage and resistance offsets in our measurement set-up.  

Offset measurements were made both with and without the preamplifying channel scanner. Table 

S3 shows typical results for two separate sets of contacts on V films at 3.9 K. The first three data 

columns are without the preamplifier, and the last three data columns are with the preamplifier. 

Considering the data without the preamplifier first, measurements of RADBC and RDACB were found 

to be near identical, at -0.4 to -0.3 пҒӯпҒ— for Contact Set 1 and 0.3 to 0.7 пҒӯпҒ— for Contact Set 2. Such 

findings are representative. Over many measurements, using different wire and contact sets, 

different bridge ranges and currents (10 mA was used in Table S3), etc., the resistances offsets 


12 

 

from zero were found to be approximately Вұ1 ОјО©, with noise of approximately Вұ0.5 ОјО©. Most 

importantly, the approximately Вұ1 ОјО© offset indicates that measurements of пҒҫ20 ОјО© resistance can 

be made with reasonable accuracy. Adding the preamplifier to the set-up (right side of Table S3) 

was found to result in differences. The noise dropped to approximately Вұ0.1 ОјО© (by roughly a 

factor of 5), but the offsets from zero resistance were found to grow to approximately Вұ5 ОјО© (also 

by roughly a factor of 5). Interestingly, however, it was found empirically that the sign of the offset 

reproducibly inverted on going from RADBC to RDACB, i.e., with a 180пӮ° phase shift of the excitation 

(Table S3). Averaging between RADBC and RDACB thus yielded offsets of only Вұ1-2 ОјО©, over many 

measurements, using different wire and contact sets, different bridge ranges and currents, etc. 

Thus, regardless of whether the preamplifier was included, offsets from zero resistance could be 

kept to a workable Вұ1-2 ОјО©.   

Based on the above characterization of offsets in the measurement setup, PdCoO2 single-crystal 

measurements were made two ways. First, for the residual resistance measurement at пҒҫ4 K on the 

CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystal in the inset to Fig. 3a, the preamplifier was removed, resulting in 

RADBC = 19.4 ОјО© as the average value, with a noise level of approximately Вұ0.5 ОјО©. Accepting the 

Вұ1 ОјО© offset from the above analysis, using the measured sample dimensions (0.0225 Вұ 0.0006 

mm thick, 1.045 Вұ 0.005 mm long, and 0.20 Вұ 0.02 mm wide), and propagating errors then leads 

to a residual пҒІab of 8 Вұ 1 nО© cm. Combining this with the measured 300-K RADBC of 8465 Вұ 5 ОјО© 

(where the offset is negligible) yields the RRR of 436 Вұ 25 quoted in the main text. Second, for 

low-noise пҒІab(T) measurements (see Figs. 3a, b), the preamplifier was inserted and both RADBC(T) 

and RDACB(T) were measured, as shown in Fig. S5. Based on the above analysis, these values were 

then averaged to the solid line in Fig. S5, thereby accounting for the offsets to within Вұ1-2 ОјО©. 

Finite-element Simulations of Current Flow and Voltage Drop. As noted in the main text, the 

large c-axis/a-b-plane resistivity ratio (пҒІc/пҒІab) of PdCoO2 single crystals9,12вҖ“15 provides a second 

measurement challenge. Specifically, the top-contact geometry used here, while convenient, must 

lead to some level of additional systematic error due to some inevitable current flow along c-axis 

directions. Finite element current flow and voltage drop simulations were thus performed using 

COMSOL Multiphysics. For these simulations, samples with dimensions close to the crystal in 

Fig. 3a were set up, as shown in Fig. S6. Two current injection geometries were studied. Fig. S6a 

shows the top-contact geometry employed in our experiments, while Fig. S6b shows a side-contact 


13 

 

geometry for current injection. The former closely replicates the experimental geometry, while the 

latter illustrates the effect of more ideally constraining the current in the a-b-plane, thus 

minimizing the influence of the large пҒІc/пҒІab. The boundary conditions applied in both geometries 

consisted of a 10 mA current flow from contact A, with a grounded contact D; an automatically 

generated mesh was used in the simulations. 

For the purposes of initial illustration, Figs. S6a, b, are simulation results based on the reported 

ПҒab16 and ПҒc13 of metathesis/flux-grown single crystals (with RRR = 376), the ПҒab values being from 

ion-beam-patterned crystals16. Although it impacts the results negligibly, the contacts were 

simulated using typical resistivities for Cu. All of the 300-K and low-T resistivity values are listed 

in Table S4. As shown by Fig. S6b, using 300-K values, the color maps of voltage drop in the side-

current-contact geometry are as expected. No potential differences are apparent between the top 

and bottom of the crystal, and the voltage is dropped gradually from A to D. As shown by Fig. 

S6a, however, this is not so when the all-top-contact geometry is simulated. Due to the large пҒІc/пҒІab, 

distinct (~25%) potential differences arise from the top to the bottom of the crystal near the 

contacts, despite the thickness of only 22 Ојm. For quantification, the simulation results were then 

used to determine the 4-terminal resistance using R = (VC - VB)/I. The results are summarized in 

Table S4 (right columns) for the side-contact and top-contact geometries. The side-contact results 

are as expected, reproducing the input RRR from resistivity to good accuracy. The top-contact 

simulated R values are 50-90% larger than those for side current contacts, however, due to the 

effect of the large пҒІc/пҒІab. This effect worsens with decreasing T as пҒІc/пҒІab grows on cooling (also 

shown in Table S4). The top-contact RRR of 278 is thus пҒҫ20% smaller than the side-contact (true) 

value. As stated in the main text, measured RRR values in this work (пҒҫ440 for CVT crystals) are 

thus lower bounds due to overestimation of the residual пҒІab. 

Further quantification of the extent of underestimation of the RRR was achieved by running 

additional top-contact simulations that reproduce the observed RRR of пҒҫ440. This was done by 

finding the required true value of residual ПҒab to reproduce the experimental results, while keeping 

the 300-K value of ПҒab (which is dominated by phonon, not impurity, scattering) constant. (In the 

absence of additional information, ПҒc was also maintained at the same values as in prior 

simulations). As shown in Table S5, the true residual ПҒab required to reproduce a top-current-

contact RRR of 436 is 4.4 nО©cm, close to half the measured value. The measured RRR of 436, by 


14 

 

our best estimates, thus corresponds to a true value of 670 (Table S5). As noted in the main text, 

these estimates are further supported by unitary scattering limit calculations, which indicate that 

our measured Pd-plane impurity density is consistent with this residual ПҒab to within 15-30%. Note 

that the above simulations assume ПҒc is unchanged from metathesis/flux crystals to CVT crystals. 

If we were to assume some reduction in ПҒc, which is likely based on the higher purity, then the ПҒab 

needed to reproduce the measured top-contact RRR would increase. The RRR estimate of 670 

should thus be viewed as an upper bound for the true value, yielding 440 < RRR < 670. 

 
 


15 

 

 

Fig. S4. Superconducting transition of V thin films used for offset characterization. RADBC(T) 

(see above text for definition) of a Si/Si-N/V(100 nm) film. Note the onset and endpoints of the 

superconducting transition at approximately 5.2 and 5.1 K, respectively. Inset: Optical image of 

the substrate/film mounted on a chip package. The wire-bonded Al contacts are labeled A, B, C, 

D. Current was driven A-D, while the voltage drop was measured B-C. 

 
 


16 

 

Table S3. Offset characterization via 3.9 K measurements of superconducting V thin films. 

Various measured 3.9-K resistances of Si/Si-N/V(100 nm) films. The results shown are averaged 

over 10-60 measurements, on two contact sets; the uncertainties listed are resulting standard 

deviations. The excitation current was 10 mA. Shown are RADBC, RDACB and their average (see text 

above for definitions), both without (left) and with (right) the preamplifying channel scanner. 

 
RADBC, 

w/o preamp 
(ОјО©) 

RDACB, 

w/o preamp 
(ОјО©) 

Raverage, 

w/o preamp 
(ОјО©) 

RADBC, 

w/ preamp 
(ОјО©) 

RDACB, 

w/ preamp 
(ОјО©) 

Raverage, 

w/ preamp 
 (ОјО©) 

Contact 
Set #1 
-0.4 Вұ 0.6 
-0.3 Вұ 0.6 
-0.4 Вұ 0.4 
5.6 Вұ 0.2 
-4.1 Вұ 0.3 
0.8 Вұ 0.2 

Contact 
Set #2 
0.3 Вұ 0.5 
0.7 Вұ 0.6 
0.5 Вұ 0.4 
6.1 Вұ 0.1 
-5.63 Вұ 0.05 
0.24 Вұ 0.06 

 

 
 


17 

 

 

Fig. S5. Offset correction of PdCoO2 пҒІab(T) measurements. RADBC and RDACB vs. T for the CVT-

grown crystal in Figs. 3a, b. The measurements were made with 10 mA excitation with the 

preamplifying channel scanner. After interpolation of RDACB(T) to generate data at identical 

temperatures to RADBC(T), the two data sets were averaged (see the above text for detailed 

justification), resulting in the black data points, upon which Figs. 3a, b, are based. 

 

 
 


18 

 

 

Fig. S6. Finite element simulations of current flow and voltage drop in PdCoO2 crystals. 

Simulations were performed with COMSOL Multiphysics on crystals with dimensions (0.022 Г— 

1.000 Г— 0.200 mm3), designed to closely resemble the crystal in Figs. 3a, b. Panel (a) is for a 

geometry with all top contacts, while (b) is for a geometry with side current contacts. The contacts 

are labeled A, B, C, D, an excitation current of 10 mA was used (injected at A and extracted at D), 

and the relevant resistivity parameters are discussed in the text and shown in Table S4. Contacts 

B and C are the voltage contacts, placed 1 mm apart, edge-to-edge. The resulting simulated 300-

K voltage drops are shown as color maps based on the scale to the right. Note the through-thickness 

color gradient near the contacts in (a).  

 
 


19 

 

Table S4. Input resistivity values and extracted resistances from finite element simulations. 

Shown are 300-K and residual low-T values of the PdCoO2 a-b plane resistivity, c-axis resistivity, 

their ratio, and the Cu contact resistivity13,16,17, which were used as inputs for the simulations. As 

described above, the PdCoO2 values shown are from metathesis/flux-grown crystals13,16, measured 

on focused-ion-beam patterned samples for the a-b-plane case16. The last two columns show the 

output from such simulations, specifically the simulated four-wire resistance (Rsim) in the top-

current-contact and side-current-contact geometries. Corresponding PdCoO2 RRR values are 

shown in the bottom row. 

 
ПҒab 
(О© cm) 
ПҒc 
(О© cm) 
ПҒc/ПҒab 
ПҒCu 
(О© cm) 
Rsim, top contact 
(mО©) 
Rsim, side contact 
(mО©) 

300 K 
3.05Г—10-6 
1.03Г—10-3 
338 
1.67Г—10-6 
10.2 
7.03 

Low-T 
8.1Г—10-9 
6.0Г—10-6 
741 
7Г—10-12 
0.0367 
0.0193 

RRR 
376 
171 
 
 
278 
364 

 

 
 


20 

 

Table S5. Simulation parameters reproducing the observed RRR ratio in top-contact 

measurements. Shown are analogous parameters to Table S4, with the exception that the input 

low-T (residual) value of ПҒab (bolded) has been selected to reproduce the measured top-contact 

RRR of пҒҫ440. The deduced residual ПҒab of 4.44 nпҒ— cm generates a top-contact RRR of 436, which 

the simulations suggest requires a side-current-contact (true) RRR of 670 (rightmost column).     

 
ПҒab  
(О© cm) 
ПҒc  
(О© cm) 
ПҒc/ПҒab 
ПҒCu  
(О© cm) 
Rsim, top contact 
(mО©) 
Rsim, side contact 
(mО©) 

300 K 
3.05 Г— 10-6 
1.03 Г— 10-3 
338 
1.67 Г— 10-6 
10.2 
7.03 

Low-T  
4.44 Г— 10-9 
6.0 Г— 10-6 
1350 
7 Г— 10-12 
0.0234 
0.0105 

RRR 
687 
171 
 
 
436 
670 

 

 
 


21 

 

Section D. ICP-MS Trace Impurity Analysis Details  

As noted in the main text, 54 elements were selected for ICP-MS trace impurity analysis of both 

metathesis/flux- and CVT-grown PdCoO2 crystals. The selection of these 54 elements was based 

on their being either known to form ABO2 compounds, or being known impurities in the growth 

reagents. A full listing of these elements, and their corresponding analyte and analysis mode is 

provided in Table S6. Elements that are known to form at least one ABO2 compound were first 

identified, in part using Ref.18. Purity certifications for the commercial reagents used in the crystal 

growth processes were then examined. Table S7 shows the grades and predominant impurities of 

the reagents used in most crystal growth batches in this work, including the crystals that were used 

for ICP-MS and transport measurements. The least pure reagent, Pd, is >99.995% pure, 

corresponding to <55 ppm impurities. Based on Table S7, the detected presence of Ni, Mn, Fe, Sn, 

Ir, and Ag in the final PdCoO2 crystals (see Table 2) is thus expected at some level. Additionally, 

Pt would not be surprising as an impurity in a Pt-group reagent element such as Pd, and the 

presence of Ni, Mn, Fe, and Zn in the reagents suggests that the first-row transition metals Cu and 

Cr would also not be unexpected. All the elements in the middle and bottom panels of Table 2 can 

thus be reasonably accounted for based on the reagents, with the exception of Al. The latter may 

arise from Al-containing sample handling apparatus, particularly weighing boats. 

 

 
 


22 

 

Table S6. Tested elements and ICP-MS analytical conditions 

Analytical conditions for all the trace elements quantified in this work by ICP-MS. The analyte for 

each element is listed in the second column, with the corresponding analysis mode in the third 

column. Kinetic energy discrimination helium collision cell (KED-He) or triple quadrupole 

oxygen collision cell (TQ-O2) mode were used. 

Element 
Analyte 
Analysis mode 
 
Element 
Analyte 
Analysis mode 

Li 
7Li 
KED-He 
 
Pd 
105Pd 
TQ-O2 

B 
11B 
KED-He 
 
Ag 
107Ag 
TQ-O2 

Na 
23Na 
KED-He 
 
In 
115In 
KED-He 

Mg 
24Mg 
KED-He 
 
Sn 
118Sn 
KED-He 

Al 
27Al 
KED-He 
 
Ba 
138Ba 
KED-He 

Si 
29Si 
KED-He 
 
La 
139La 
TQ-O2 

K 
39K 
KED-He 
 
Ce 
140Ce.16O 
TQ-O2 

Ca 
44Ca 
KED-He 
 
Pr 
141Pr.16O 
TQ-O2 

Sc 
45Sc.16O 
TQ-O2 
 
Nd 
144Nd.16O 
TQ-O2 

Ti 
49Ti 
KED-He 
 
Sm 
149Sm.16O 
TQ-O2 

V 
51V.16O 
TQ-O2 
 
Eu 
153Eu 
TQ-O2 

Cr 
52Cr.16O 
TQ-O2 
 
Gd 
157Gd.16O 
TQ-O2 

Mn 
55Mn 
KED-He 
 
Tb 
159Tb.16O 
TQ-O2 

Fe 
57Fe 
KED-He 
 
Dy 
163Dy.16O 
TQ-O2 

Co 
59Co 
TQ-O2 
 
Ho 
165Ho.16O 
TQ-O2 

Ni 
60Ni 
KED-He 
 
Er 
166Er.16O 
TQ-O2 

Cu 
63Cu 
KED-He 
 
Tm 
169Tm.16O 
TQ-O2 

Zn 
66Zn 
KED-He 
 
Yb 
172Yb 
TQ-O2 

Ga 
71Ga 
KED-He 
 
Lu 
175Lu.16O 
TQ-O2 

As 
75As.16O 
TQ-O2 
 
W 
182W 
KED-He 

Rb 
85Rb 
KED-He 
 
Re 
185Re 
KED-He 

Sr 
88Sr.16O 
TQ-O2 
 
Os 
189Os 
KED-He 

Y 
89Y.16O 
TQ-O2 
 
Ir 
193Ir 
TQ-O2 

Zr 
90Zr.16O 
TQ-O2 
 
Pt 
195Pt 
TQ-O2 

Mo 
98Mo.16O 
TQ-O2 
 
Au 
197Au 
TQ-O2 

Ru 
101Ru 
TQ-O2 
 
Hg 
202Hg 
TQ-O2 

Rh 
103Rh 
TQ-O2 
 
Tl 
205Tl 
KED-He 

 

 

 
 


23 

 

Table S7. Reagent grades and impurities 

Purity grades and predominant impurity elements (> 1 ppm) from the manufacturersвҖҷ certificates 

of analyses for the commercial reagents used to grow the crystals characterized here by ICP-MS. 

 
Manufacturer 
Reagent grade 
Predominant impurity elements found 

Co3O4 
Alfa Aesar 
99.9985% (вүӨ 15 Ојg/g) 
Fe, Mn, Ni, Ca, Zr, Mg, Zn 

PdCl2 
Thermo Fisher Scientific 
99.999% (вүӨ 10 Ојg/g) 
Rh 

Pd 
Sigma-Aldrich 
99.995% (вүӨ 55 Ојg/g) 
Ag, Fe, Ca, Sn, As, Ir, K, Mo 

 

 
 


24 

 

References 
S1. 
Shannon, R. D., Rogers, D. B. & Prewitt, C. T. Chemistry of noble metal oxides. I. 
Syntheses and properties of ABO2 delafossite compounds. Inorg. Chem. 10, 713вҖ“718 
(1971). 
S2. 
Harada, T. Thin-film growth and application prospects of metallic delafossites. Mater. 
Today Adv. 11, 100146 (2021). 
S3. 
Harada, T., Ito, S. & Tsukazaki, A. Electric dipole effect in PdCoO2/ОІ-Ga2O3 Schottky 
diodes for high-temperature operation. Sci. Adv. 5, eaax5733 (2019). 
S4. 
Renner, H. et al. Platinum Group Metals and Compounds. in UllmannвҖҷs Encyclopedia of 
Industrial Chemistry 1вҖ“73 (Wiley, 2018). 
S5. 
Oranskaya, M. A. & Mikhailova, N. A. Dissociation pressure and vapour pressure of 
palladium chloride. Russ. J. Inorg. Chem. 5, 5вҖ“7 (1960). 
S6. 
Binnewies, M., Glaum, R., Schmidt, M. & Schmidt, P. Chemical Vapor Transport 
Reactions. (De Gruyter, 2012). 
S7. 
Chemical Rubber Company. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. (CRC Press, 
2022). 
S8. 
Prewitt, C. T., Shannon, R. D. & Rogers, D. B. Chemistry of noble metal oxides. II. 
Crystal structures of platinum cobalt dioxide, palladium cobalt dioxide, copper iron 
dioxide, and silver iron dioxide. Inorg. Chem. 10, 719вҖ“723 (1971). 
S9. 
Mackenzie, A. P. The properties of ultrapure delafossite metals. Reports Prog. Phys. 80, 
032501 (2017). 
S10. Villars, P. & Cenzual, K. PdCoO2 Crystal Structure: sd_1920856 data sets. in PAULING 
FILE in: Inorganic Solid Phases. 
https://materials.springer.com/isp/crystallographic/docs/sd_1920856 (2016). 
S11. Wexler, A. & Corak, W. S. Superconductivity of vanadium. Phys. Rev. 85, 85вҖ“90 (1952). 
S12. Rogers, D. B., Shannon, R. D., Prewitt, C. T. & Gillson, J. L. Chemistry of noble metal 
oxides. III. Electrical transport properties and crystal chemistry of ABO2 compounds with 
the delafossite structure. Inorg. Chem. 10, 723вҖ“727 (1971). 
S13. Takatsu, H. et al. Roles of high-frequency optical phonons in the physical properties of 
the conductive delafossite PdCoO2. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 76, 104701 (2007). 
S14. Hicks, C. W. et al. Quantum oscillations and high carrier mobility in the delafossite 
PdCoO2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 116401 (2012). 
S15. Tanaka, M., Hasegawa, M. & Takei, H. Growth and anisotropic physical properties of 
PdCoO2 single crystals. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 65, 3973вҖ“3977 (1996). 
S16. Nandi, N. et al. Unconventional magneto-transport in ultrapure PdCoO2 and PtCoO2. npj 
Quantum Mater. 3, 66 (2018). 
S17. Kasap, S. O. Principles of Electronic Materials and Devices. (McGraw-Hill Education, 
2018). 
S18. Sunko, V. Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy of delafossite metals. (Max Planck 
Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, 2019).  


