This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

Review on Infrared Nanospectroscopy of Natural 2D
Phyllosilicates

RAPHAELA DE OLIVEIRA,1,2 ALISSON R. CADORE,3 RAUL O. FREITAS,2INGRID D. BARCELOS2,*

1Brazilian Synchrotron Light Laboratory (LNLS), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), São Paulo, Brazil
2Physics Department, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Minas Gerais, Brazil
3Brazilian Nanotechnology National Laboratory (LNNano), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), São Paulo, Brazil
*Corresponding author: ingrid.barcelos@lnls.br

Phyllosilicates emerge as a promising class of large bandgap lamellar insulators. Their applications have been explored 
from fabrication of graphene-based devices to 2D heterostructures based on transition metal dicalcogenides with 
enhanced optical and polaritonics properties. In this review, we provide an overview on the use of IR s-SNOM for studying 
nano-optics and local chemistry of a variety of 2D natural phyllosilicates. Finally, we bring a brief update on applications 
that combine natural lamellar minerals into multifunctional nanophotonic devices driven by electrical control.

1.
INTRODUCTION

Natural minerals have interesting physicochemical properties 

and great potential for different technological applications. 
Phyllosilicates are a naturally abundant family of sheet silicate 
minerals comprising clays, micas, chlorites, serpentines, and others, 
which are all hydrated minerals [1,2]. They present a lamellar 
structure, intercalating silicon oxide tetrahedral (T) layers that form 
a hexagonal lattice (in ratio of 2:5 of silicon (Si) and oxygen (O) 
atoms) with octahedral (Oc) layers formed by tri and bivalent ions 
as central atoms, such as aluminum (Al) and magnesium (Mg), with 
oxygen and hydroxyl (OH) groups at the vertices (Fig. 1a). The Oc
layers can be of two types: dioctahedral (brucite-like), with a 
bivalent ion as the central atom of the octahedron, or trioctahedral 
(gibbsite-like), with a trivalent central atom and more compact 
arrangement[1,2]. The T-Oc-T stacking (or T-Ocstacking in the case 
of serpentine group) of phyllosilicate minerals is weakly bound by 
van der Waals (vdW) force, enabling easy exfoliation down to 
monolayers with thicknesses ranging from 7 to 15 Å depending on 
the specimen [2]. Structural differences between phyllosilicate 
samples occur due to the different atomic substitutions in both T 
and Oclayers. To maintain the charge balance of the structure, these 
atomic substitutions favor the formation of a cationic layer between 
the T-Oc-T/T-Ocstacking or even the incorporation of substitutional 
impurities in tetrahedral and octahedral sites[1,2].

Within the large family of phyllosilicates, representative 

specimens such as talc, phlogopite, clinochlore, and serpentine 
cover the main aspects of the entire family. Talc (Fig. 1b), with 
chemical formula Mg3Si4O10(OH)2, is formed by the intercalation of 
octahedral layers of bivalent central Mg atoms with O and OH at the 
vertices with tetrahedral layers of silicon oxide in a T-Oc-T stacking. 
With exfoliation down to monolayer (1L) already reported in the 
literature[3,4], talc has a direct bandgap energy of 5.2 eV and higher 
dielectric constant than other insulating two-dimensional (2D) 
materials such as hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)[4–6]. The lamellar 
structure of the trioctahedral mica phlogopite (Fig. 1c) is a direct 
alteration of talc clay. Its chemical formula is given by 
KMg3(AlSi3)O10(OH)2, in which one of the four Si4+ atoms in the 
tetrahedral layer is substituted by one Al3+ atom [7,8]. This 
substitution results in a negatively charged structure. To maintain 
charge neutrality, a cationic layer of K+ atoms is formed between 

the T-Oc-T stacking. The lamellar structure of clinochlore (Fig. 1d) is 
formed by tetrahedral layers with one Al substitution like 
phlogopite.However, an Al3+substitution occurs in one of the three 
Mg2+sites in the Oclayer of the T-Oc-T stacking[2,9].Unlike talc and 
phlogopite, clinochlore presents an extra trioctahedral layer 
(brucite-like) formed purely by Mg as central atoms intercalating 
the T-Oc-T stacking, such that its chemical formula is given by 
Mg5Al(AlSi3)O10(OH)8.
Serpentine 
minerals 
are 
hydrous 

phyllosilicates with a layered crystal structure based on overlapped 
T and Oc layers [1,2] in a T-Oc stacking. The structural form of 
serpentines has a tetrahedral silicate sheet with the apical oxygens 
shared with the corners of an Mg-rich octahedral sheet (Fig. 1e)
[10,11]. Serpentine group includes antigorite and lizardite as 
representative specimens of high and low-temperature formations, 
respectively, with chemical formula Mg3Si2O5(OH)4[2].

Phyllosilicates on its few-layer (FL) form have been used as 

substrates and encapsulating media in the manufacture of 
graphene-based nanodevices [5,12,13], as a capping layer 
protecting sensitive materials from degradation [14,15], and as 
substrates 
for 
transition 
metal 
dichalcogenides 
(TMDs) 

monolayers, improving the TMDs carrier mobility [16] and 
excitonic recombination [8,16–18]. Therefore, accessing the 
nanoscale properties of these materials enables the discrimination 
of different classes of minerals and the identification of their 
chemical compounds. One of the most efficient ways to access a 
material structure and chemistry is to probe its natural vibrational 
activity [10,19–22]. Thus, a systematical way to study the 
vibrational assignments of minerals in their FL form, which have a 
low response to excitation, is to use tip-enhanced techniques [23–
26]. Since the small amount of material results in a low signal 
response in techniques with resolution at the microscale such as 
standard Fourier-transform 
infrared 
(FTIR) 
and Raman 

spectroscopy, 
scattering-type 
scanning 
near-field 
optical 

microscopy (s-SNOM) is a powerful alternative to overcome this 
diffraction limit [26–28] and, therefore, a tool able to characterize
2D materials composition and optical response at the nanometer 
scale [29]. Moreover, broadband IR imaging and spectroscopy 
integrated into s-SNOM setups extend the reach of the technique 
towards the optical characterization of 2D minerals and their vdW 
heterostructures to access their multiple vibrational signatures in a 
single experiment[24,27,29–31].


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

Fig.1. The general structure of phyllosilicate minerals. (a) The panel shows 
a hexagonal lattice (topview) formed by Si tetrahedra where three O at the 
corners are shared between Si atoms and the remaining O atom points 
outwards. This tetrahedral (T)layer is the basis of the phyllosilicate minerals, 
forming an alternating stacking between T and octahedral (Oc) layers, which 
can be dioctahedral or trioctahedral(lateral view). (b) Talc, (c) phlogopite (d) 
clinochlore, and (e) antigorite are examples of each of the four subgroups of 
phyllosilicates: clays, micas, chlorites, and serpentines; respectively. The 
panels show the atomic structure of each mineral (top), followed by a 
photograph of their bulk form (middle) and an optical microscopy image 
(bottom) of several few-layer flakes obtained by mechanical exfoliation onto 
SiO2/Si (300 nm thick SiO2) substrates.

In the presented scope, this Review article displays how 

infrared (IR) nanospectroscopy is helping to unveil fundamental 
optical properties of the 2D natural phyllosilicates and their vdW 
heterostructures. Regarding investigations in the FL form of 
phyllosilicates, we will discuss talc, muscovite, phlogopite, and 
clinochlore as representative specimens of clays, dioctahedral 
micas, 
trioctahedral 
micas 
and 
chlorites, 
respectively, 

complemented by an antigorite-serpentine study case, covering the 
main aspects of the entire phyllosilicate family. Further, we briefly 
introduce the synchrotron s-SNOM experiment, commonly named 
synchrotron infrared nanospectroscopy (SINS), as an ultimate tool 
to study the vibrational signatures of these minerals in their FL form 
at the nanoscale. Hence, this Review brings several examples of the 
use of SINS technique for assigning the vibrational identity of FL-
phyllosilicates. Finally, we revisit advances on applications 
comprising different natural minerals, graphene and phyllosilicate 
layers, for creating ultrathin vdW heterostructures. Further, we 
highlight investigations of graphene polaritonic activity in these 
natural crystals, the electrical modulation of their fundamental 
properties and the appearance of hybrid plasmon-phonon modes.

2.
RAMAN SPECTROSCOPY APPLIED TO NATURALLY 
OCCURING PHYLLOSILICATES

All geological specimens of phyllosilicates shown in Fig.1 were 

obtained from Minas Gerais (Brazil). From bulk to ultrathin flakes, 
the standard scotch tape exfoliation method was carried out to 
release and transfer 1L and FL-phyllosilicates atop two different 
substrates. The produced flakes were pre-characterized by optical 
microscopy as shown in Fig.1, and the different colors of the flakes 

correspond to different thicknesses.

To investigate the vibrational properties of phyllosilicate 

materials, both non-destructive spectroscopy techniques can be 
used: Raman and Infrared [19,32–35]. Fig. 2a-d displays
representative Raman spectra for the selected phyllosilicates: talc, 
phlogopite, clinochlore, and serpentine, respectively. Fig. 2 
compares the Raman features of the bulk crystals with respect to 
exfoliated flakes (thicknesses larger than 200 nm)onto SiO2/Si and 
Au substrates.

In Fig. 2a, Raman spectrum displays several modes located in 

the spectral window from 75 to 1350 cm-1 and from 3550 to 3800 
cm-1, e.g., fundamental modes in silicates. The Raman peaks at about 
194.5, 362.1,676.2 and 1050.5cm-1are ascribed to the fundamental 
vibrations of silicates in talc. The spectrum is dominated by rigid 
translation and rotation of the T-Oc-T modules (80–250cm−1), 
lattice modes involving Mg–O bonds and tetrahedral bending (250–
650 cm-1), strong bending and stretching modes of Si–O–Si bridges, 
around 670 cm-1 and above 1000 cm-1, respectively [19,36].
Moreover, Ref. [24] has used symmetry analysis to identify all 
Raman-active modes of talc and showed thatasymmetry crossover 
occursfrom 1L to 2L thickness, attributed to the stacking of adjacent 
layers, changing from C2h3 to Ci1spacegroup,respectively.

In Fig. 2b, the phlogopite-Raman spectrum displays several 

modes. The spectrum collected is close to the Raman-active 
fundamental modes theoretically predicted [37]. The spectrum 
shows two characteristic peaks at 197 and 683cm-1corresponding 
to the vibration of MgO6 octahedra and TO4 (T = Si, Al) tetrahedra, 
respectively, besides several other modes related to extra common 
modes for silicates (stretching and bending Si–O–Si vibrations, 
besides translational (Mg,Al,Fe)-O vibrations in the Oc layers). 
Moreover, the position and shape of some Raman modes of 
phlogopite are strongly affected by changes in impurity 
concentration. For instance, the presence of Fe ions induces a peak 
splitting of the Si–O–Si (700-800 cm-1) modes and the appearance 
of the strong peak in the 500-550cm-1range[8].

The Raman spectrum of a bulk-clinochlore sample shown in Fig.

2c is in close agreement with the spectrum theoretically calculated
[38].The spectrum features 10 strong and well-defined modes. The 
peaks around 1089 and 1059 cm-1 are attributed to antisymmetric 
Si-O-Si stretching modes, while the symmetric Si-O-Si stretching 
appears as strong bands at 687 and 553 cm-1. The peaks at 459 and 
440 cm-1 are probably assigned to librational OH and bending Si-O-
Si modes. The strong band at 353 cm-1 has been assigned to the 
bending vibration of Si-O and its intensity decreases with the Si 
substitution by Al. The peak at 283 cm-1 is probably related to 
movements of the T sheet, whereas the sharp peak at 203cm-1 was 
ascribed to vibrations of the octahedrons. Finally, the peak at 125
cm-1 is regarded as translational Si-O-Si modes. It is worth 
mentioning that the two other weaker peaks observed at around 
106 and 158 cm-1 are related to bending Si-O and to a combination 
of the out-of-plane vibration of the Mg ions with librations of the OH 
groups in the brucite-type interlayer, respectively[9,19,38].


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

Fig. 2. Raman Spectroscopy. Raman spectrum excited at 638 nm and 473nm
of the bulk-crystal (blue, red, green, and purplecurves) and exfoliated flakes
onto SiO2/Si (black curves) and Au (gray curves) substrates of (a) talc, (b) 
phlogopite, (c) clinochlore, and (d) serpentine, respectively.

Fig. 2d plots the Raman spectrum of a natural serpentine 

sample [11]. In this case, the Raman spectra present bands 
corresponding to the inner vibrational modes of the lattice and to 
SiO4 vibrations [39]. One can observe a band occurring at 1045 cm-

1 that corresponds to the antisymmetric stretching modes of the Si-
O-Si. An intense band at 680 cm-1 due to symmetric stretching 
modes of the Si-O-Si linkages and a band at 630cm-1ascribed to HO-
Mg-OH translation modes. There is a band at 375 cm-1 due to 
bending modes of the SiO4tetrahedra and a band at 226cm-1, where 
vibrations of O-HO groups are expected (O is the non-bridging 
oxygen atom of the tetrahedron and H is the hydrogen atom of the 
OH group tilted toward an octahedral cation vacancy)[39]. 

As presented in Fig. 2, it is extremely challenging to access the 

Raman signatures of isolated FL-phyllosilicate flakes via far-field 
analysis onto SiO2/Si substrates (black curves). Due to the 
diffraction-limited size of the micro-Raman probe, the experiment 
sensitivity or signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is mainly reduced, and the 
vibrational response becomes dominated by the supporting 
substrate. This behavior was also observed for muscovite [40] and 
reported elsewhere [4,41,42]. Nevertheless, for FL-talc flakes onto 
HOPG substrates, Refs. [4,42] demonstrated that only the three 
most intense modes are observedaround 194.8, 676.2, and 3678.8
cm-1. Moreover, by having the phyllosilicate flakes exfoliated onto 
Au substrates (gray curves in Fig. 2), we have observed very few
Raman modes for eachmaterial.Thus, exemplifying the difficulty of 
assessing the vibrational fingerprints of FL-phyllosilicates by 
Raman spectroscopy. In that perspective, sub-diffractional 
analytical modalities such as s-SNOM and SINS are key tools. With a 
tip-driven lateral resolution (~25nm), high spectral irradiance 
throughout mid-IR to THz ranges and penetration depth of a few 
tens of nanometers, SINS is now established as a decisive modality 
to study atomic layered materials and, therefore, a robust 
alternative 
for 
opto-vibrational 
characterization 
of 
FL-

phyllosilicates.

3.
SYNCHROTON INFRARED NANOSPECTROSCOPY 
AND NANOIMAGING

Standard FTIR spectroscopy is a well-established technique in 

the study of natural crystals[43]. This technique enables in-situ and 
non-destructive chemical identification with a micrometric 
resolution of organic matter and mineral phases in geological 
samples[43,44]. The micro-FTIR beam size using a conventional IR 
source can reach a lower limit of tens of micrometers and be further 
reduced to 3–5 µm using a synchrotron radiation source [43]. The 
use of synchrotron IR radiation not only improves the spatial 
resolution of the technique but also allows the investigation of very 
low concentrations of chemical species due to minimal signal loss
[45]. As an example, high-resolution synchrotron micro-FTIR 
imaging of low-concentration fluid inclusions, such as water and 
CO2 gas, were reported in Earth science studies [45].However, the 
spatial resolution of FTIR spectroscopy even using synchrotron 
radiation is optically limited by diffraction, which intrinsically scales 
with the radiation wavelength. 

The SINS development, which combines a broadband 

synchrotron IR source with s-SNOM technique, has overcome the 
diffraction limit of conventional optics to provide spatial resolution 
down to tens of nanometers [27,46]. Comparative studies using 
conventional- and nano-FTIR techniques allow a direct association 
of FTIR absorption bands with the imaginary part (phase) of SINS 
complex signal response [46], and offer an approach to extracting 
dielectric function of nanomaterials[47]. Particularly in the study of 
phyllosilicates, two specificities of this nanoprobe technique to the 
detriment of micro-FTIR were reported for the case of talc crystals
[24,48], wherein the SINS technique not only provides nanometric 
resolution for vibrational analysis of natural crystals but also 
enables the study of confinement effects by varying the number of 
crystal layers. First, the most prominent bulk-talc mode in the SINS 
phase spectrum at 534.1 cm−1 corresponds to essentially out-of-
plane atomic motions, revealing a preferential sensitivity to out-of-
plane vibrations probed by SINS [24]. Second, a SINS scattering 
intensity modulation according to the number of talc layers [24,48]. 
Thus, it acts as a directional probe by preferentially accessing 
vibrational modes oriented parallel to the electromagnetic mode of 
the strongly polarized near-field dipole at the SINS-tip.

s-SNOM is a well-known analytical modality that combines 

atomic force microscopy (AFM) optical microscopy for achieving 
nanoscale spatial resolution for vibrational analysis [49–51].
Among several advantages, s-SNOM allows measuring morphology 
and optical responses of materials surface simultaneously, enabling 
structural and dielectric analysis in a single experiment (Fig.3)[29].
From the optical perspective, s-SNOM is a scattering-based 
modality mediated by a metallic nanoantenna (AFM tip), whose 
free charges are polarized by the incident light enabling strong field 
confinement at the tip apex. In this configuration, the confinement 
volume is no longer dependent on the wavelength but on the 
antenna shape, overcoming the diffraction limit even for extremely 
long wavelengths[52].The AFM operates in semi-contact (tapping) 
mode, whose oscillation is set near the natural cantilever resonance 
frequency Ω. Far-field background suppression is achieved by 
applying higher harmonics (nΩ for n>2) demodulation with a lock-
in amplifier[53].


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

Fig. 1. s-SNOM concept scheme. As a tip-enhanced modality technique, s-
SNOM overcomes the diffraction limit via field confinement at the apex of a 
nanoantenna (metallic AFM tip). By combining IR and AFM microscopies, 
the technique reaches nanometric lateral resolution in an experiment that 
retrieves both morphology and optical responses, simultaneously. By 
applying asymmetric interferometry, s-SNOM allows complex detection of 
the scattering radiation. Therefore, with amplitude and phase of the local 
scattering, s-SNOM can access IR reflectivity and absorption phenomena of 
any vibrational active material. Figure adapted from Ref.[54].

A unique feature of s-SNOM is its ability to measure complex 

scattering properties of the materials, giving the complete nano-
resolved ultra-broadband near-field response, ξn(ω) = Sn(ω)eiφn(ω), 
where Sn(ω) and φn(ω), are the s-SNOM amplitude and phase, 
respectively, demodulated at the nthtip harmonic. All SINS data here 
refers to n=2. In the case of SINS measurements (i.e., broadband s-
SNOM spectroscopy), we record both amplitude and phase spectra 
simultaneously. Note that φn(ω) is acquired owing to the lock-in 
based detection in an asymmetric interferometry scheme [53]. In 
such a configuration, phase delays driven by the sample’s 
permittivity are separated from the interferometer modulation, 
allowing phase contrast imaging [55] and spectroscopy at the 
nanoscale [56,57]. Like classical FTIR spectroscopy, a reference 
spectrum needs to be collected to separate sample’s response from 
the environmental influence, source emission coverage and the 
detector sensitivity. Therefore, it is common practice in SINS to 
measure a flat responsive material (such as Au or Si) to be used a 
reference complex spectrum (ξn,ref(ω) = Sn,ref(ω)eiφn,ref(ω)). Hence, a 
normalized spectrum is achieved from the complex ratio ξn(ω)/ 
ξn,ref(ω) that yields normalized amplitude (Sn(ω)/Sn,ref(ω)) and 
phase(φn(ω) –φn,ref(ω)).

Fig. 2.  Synchrotron Infrared Nanospectroscopytechnique. (a) Based in the s-
SNOM concept, SINS allows expanding the reach of nanoscale IR analysis 
powered by the ultrabroadband and continuous energy coverage of 
synchrotron sources. In SINS, a broadband IR beam (1) produced by an 
electron storage ring illuminates a metallic AFM tip (4) producing a dense 
field confinement at its apex. Field confinement is restricted to the tip size, 

therefore, no longer depends on the wavelength (sub-diffractional 
confinement). For demultiplexing the broadband response, the beam is 
divided by a beamsplitter (2) into two arms: a reference arm for phase 
modulation (3) and the tip-sample stage (5), that is mounted in one of the 
arms of an asymmetric Michelson interferometer. Backscattered, the beam 
is recombined by the beamsplitter and then pointed (7) towards an IR 
detector (8). (b) Example of SINS broadband image of a phyllosilicate crystal 
(left) that access both morphology (center) and IR reflectivity (right), 
simultaneously. (c) Typical SINS spectrum of a talc flake. The extended 
coverage of the synchrotron allows exploring mid- to far-IR vibrational 
responses in a single experiment with excellent SNR. Fig. (a) adapted from
[54].

The s-SNOM data is strongly connected to the complex 

material’s permittivity. Therefore, the amplitude SINS spectra are 
proportional to the real part of the permittivity, a quantity related to 
the reflectivity power of the material. On the other hand, the s-
SNOM phase is proportional to the imaginary part of the 
permittivity and, hence, provides information on the absorption 
power of the material (Fig. 3). For instance, Fig. 4 shows SINS 
amplitude and phase spectra of a talc flake. The lineshape of the 
SINS data qualitatively resembles a driven damped harmonic 
oscillator resonance, a lineshape also expected for the permittivity 
at resonances.Moreover, scientific questions from many fields were 
benefited by the complex optical sensitivity of s-SNOM combined to 
its extreme spatial resolution including 2Ds polaritonics [29,58], 
2Ds twistoptics [59], biological applications [60,61], fundamental 
condensed matter physics and many other fields.

In early 2010’s, F. Huth et al. presented a proof-of-principle of s-

SNOM operating with a broadband IR thermal source [62]. This 
demonstration was seminal for advancing this ultramicroscopy 
modality towards chemical analysis as it could operate as classical 
IR spectrometer, however, with sub-diffraction resolution (nano-
FTIR). Despite the successful demonstration, black body sources 
are far from ideal for s-SNOM as they are not polarized and usually 
offer modest spectral irradiance. Hence, alternative broadband 
sources were adapted to s-SNOM, such as plasma sources
[26,63,64], lasers based on difference frequency generation (DFG)
[56,57] and synchrotron IR radiation [65]. In case of synchrotron 
radiation (SR) sources, these are highly brilliant compared to 
thermal sources (500 to 1000 times more brilliant) and offer 
extreme IR coverage, spanning from THz to near-IR[66].Therefore, 
the enhanced spectral irradiance throughout the entire IR range of 
SR sources enabled ultrabroadband IR nanoscale spectroscopy, 
commonly named synchrotron infrared nanospectroscopy
[27,67,68]. In this modality, a SR IR beam serves an asymmetric 
Michelson interferometer where the tip-sample stage is mounted 
inside one of the interferometric arms, Fig. 4a. The IR beam is 
optically processed by the beamline primary optics to enter the 
interferometer as a collimated or parallel beam (Fig. 4a,1). The 
beam is then divided by a beamsplitter (Fig.4a,2), propagating to a 
reference arm (Fig. 4a,3), whose travel produces the phase 
modulation in the interferogram. The other beam portion is 
propagated to the tip-sample stage (Fig. 4a,4), where the beam is 
focused onto the AFM tip (Fig. 4a,5). The piezoelectric sample 
scanner (Fig. 4a,6) enables localized point spectroscopy or near-
field imaging. Back-reflected from reference and tip-sample arms, 
the beam is recombined (Fig.4a,7) after the beamsplitter and then 
propagated to a single-point IR detector (Fig. 4a,8). This 
configuration produces broadband IR interferograms that are 
demultiplexed by Fourier post-processing. The result is a 


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

broadband spectrum (e.g., top-right inset panel in Fig.4a) collected 
from a sample area comparable to the tip radius (~25x25 nm2).

In the perspective of vibrational identity of FL-phyllosilicates, 

SINS was a decisive tool for a first approach on the IR signatures of 
naturally occurring atomic-thin talc flakes. The wide coverage of the 
synchrotron allowed simultaneous monitoring of in-plane andout-
of-plane stretchingand bending modesin a single SINS experiment
[24,48].As all these bands were measured in a single spectrum and 
the study unveiled a direct connection between the number of talc 
layers and the Si-O stretching modes. Typically, the SINS 
experiment starts with the imaging of the phyllosilicate flake that is 
mounted on a flat substrate (Fig. 4b, left panel). The AFM scan 
reveals the surface morphology of the flake, delimiting the different 
atomic terraces in a range of few microns area (Fig.4b, rightpanel). 
As the tip is Illuminated by the broadband IR from the synchrotron, 
the confined fields at the apex interact with the sample surface 
during the AFM mapping, therefore, the IR scattering is collected 
simultaneously. Fig. 4b right panel also shows a common 
broadband IR amplitude map that highlights the IR reflecting power 
of the flake in the whole IR range covered by the detector. The Au 
substrate has a superior reflectance compared to the talc flake and, 
consequently, the thinner plateaus of the flake have higher 
reflectance than the thicker ones. Once spatially mapped, a point 
spectrum is taken at specific locations of the flake to retrieve the 
spectral response of a certain number of talc layers. For instance, 
Fig.4c shows a representative SINS spectrum of a talc flake acquired 
at the Advanced Light Source that offers a SINS setup operating 
from mid- to far-IR [24,48]. So far, SINS has demonstrated a great 
potential to study phyllosilicates as it has enhanced sensitivity to Si-
O bands a simultaneous coverage of a large portion of the IR 
spectrum.

4.
NANO-FTIR
AND 
s-SNOM 
APPLIED 
TO 

NATURALLY OCCURING PHYLLOSILICATES

A. Muscovite – Dioctahedral Mica

Muscovite is a dioctahedral mica, with chemical formula 

KAl2(Al,Si3)O10(OH)2, and it is among the earliest known vdWs 
materials that can be exfoliated in high quality to large sizes with 
atomic flatness, as well as down to 1L [40,69]. Muscovite mica is 
known to be a large bandgap material (5.1 eV) [1,69] with several 
industrial applications. Since its surface is atomically flat, muscovite 
mica was considered an excellent substrate for materials used in 
flexible devices and optoelectronics applications with other 2D 
materials in vdW heterostructures[13,40,70–73].

Ref. [40] has pointed out the difficulty to probe the vibrational 

modes of ultrathin muscovite flakes. So, Fali and colleagues have 
used a combination of mid-IR s-SNOM and nano-FTIR techniques to 
perform near-field spectroscopy and imaging of 2D crystal 
muscovite mica down to the 1L limit on different substrates [74].
Fig.5a brings a representative AFM topography image, followed by 
narrow-band s-SNOM amplitude and corresponding phase images 
of muscovite mica exfoliated on a Si substrate taken at selected 
excitation laser frequencies (1030, 1075, and 1175 cm–1). The 
authorsclaim that although the excitation frequency of 1075cm–1is 
of particular interest since it is in the hyperbolic polaritonic range 
(1050–1130 cm–1) of mica, the amplitude/phase images did not 
display the characteristic interference fringes (due to large losses) 
that are the hallmark of polaritonic propagating modes. 

Nevertheless, they have also performed nano-FTIR measurements 
to understand the full wavelength and thickness-dependent IR 
optical features.  

Fig. 3.Infrared dielectric properties of muscovite mica. (a) AFM topography 
image, third harmonic near-field amplitude, and phase images at three 
different frequencies of 55 nm mica flake on Si substrate. (b) Near-field 
experimental nano-FTIR amplitude S2and phase φ2spectra at different mica 
thicknesses. (c) Simulated S2 amplitude spectra of 40,7, and 4 nm mica slab 
on Si substrate. (d) Simulated S2 amplitude spectra of 40 nm mica on Si 
substrate considering the full dielectric tensor, only the out-of-plane 
dielectric function, and only the in-plane dielectric function. (e) Similar to (b) 
but for 4 nm mica. Fig. (a-b) adapted from Ref. [74] Copyright 2019: The 
American Chemical Society, whereas Fig.(c-e)adapted from Ref.[75].

Fig.5b then brings the experimental normalized amplitude and 

phase spectra, respectively. Both amplitude and phase spectra 
show similar appearances for different layer thicknesses; however, 
the signal level becomes progressively smaller with decreasing 
thickness due to a smaller probed volume. The broad and strong 
band between 980 and 1200 cm−1centered around 1080 cm−1 was 
assigned to stretching vibrations of Si−O; the shoulder at 831 cm−1
to the stretching Al−O mode, whereas the band near 920 cm−1 was 
assigned as a mixed modes arising from Al−OH stretch, Al−O−Al 
vibration, and Si−O−Si and Si−O−Al stretching vibrational modes. 
Finally, the authors claimed that their measurements enabled the 
extraction of the dielectric function in this spectral range, 
highlighting that the IR dielectric permittivity of mica along the 
ordinary and extraordinary directions have opposite signs in the 
920–1130 cm–1 range, thus, implying regions of both Type I and 
Type II hyperbolic behavior.

After this experimental study, Chen and coworkers attempted 

to obtain the in-plane and out-of-plane dielectric functions of mica 
by COMSOL simulations [75]. Fig. 5c plots the simulated S2
amplitude spectra for 40, 7, and 4 nm mica thick on Si substrate. 
Next, the authors examined the in-plane and out-of-plane responses 
individually. Fig.5d-e shows the calculated spectra of 40 and 4 nm 
mica thick on Si substrate, respectively. The spectra were obtained 
using the full dielectric tensor, only the in-plane dielectric function, 
and only the out-of-plane dielectric function. The authors then 
observed that for thicker samples although only considering the 
out-of-plane component of the dielectric tensor yields a similar 
result compared to considering the full tensor, the effect of the in-
plane response was non-negligible. Whereas, for thinner films, they 
claim that the out-of-plane response is indeed dominant. Finally, we 
must comment that such point-spectra analysis as a function of 
mica thickness could be done by SINS experiments, thus 
corroborating or not the findings claimed in such theoretical work.

B. Phlogopite – Trioctahedral Micas


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

Phlogopite is a common phyllosilicate within the trioctahedral 

mica group with chemical formula KMg3(AlSi3)O10(OH)2 from 
which a solid-solution series can be formed in relation to Fe 
concentration arising as main impurity [1,2,8]. Exfoliated 
phlogopite-series flakes have been shown and investigated by 
scanning microscopy techniques techniques [76–78], as well as 
combined with other 2D materials [8]. The crystals show a 
monoclinic layered structure (with C2/m symmetry) with a T-Oc-T 
stacking. Cadore and co-workers have investigated the influence of 
Fe impurities on the optoelectronic properties of phlogopite and 
revealed that the incorporation of Fe ions in the phlogopite 
structure decreases considerably its bandgap from about 7 to 3.6eV
[8]. However, the authors were uncapable of properlyassigning the 
optical fingerprint of FL-phlogopite by standard Raman and FTIR 
spectroscopy experiments.

We present here SINS measurements on a FL-phlogopite flake 

to properly describe the phlogopite vibrational assignment at 
nanoscale. Fig. 6a shows the topography and IR broadband image 
of a selected staircase-like phlogopite flake exfoliated onto a 100 nm 
Au/Si.Fig. 6b compares the amplitude S2(ω) and phase φ2(ω) of the 
second harmonic point-spectra acquired at different phlogopite 
steps. The spectra revealed well-resolved IR absorption bands for 
FL-phlogopite located approximately at 472, 508, 682, 750, 809, 
851, 960, 1001 and 1062 cm-1. The assessment of these IR 
absorption bands observed through SINS technique can be done by 
comparing with previous micro-FTIR literature for bulk phlogopite
[34,79]. The bands at 472 and 508 cm-1 were assigned as Si-O 
vibrations; the band at 682 cm-1 was assigned as Si-O-Mg vibration; 
the bands at 750, 809, and 851 cm-1 were related to Al-O-Si 
stretching modes; while the bands at 960, 1001 and 1062 cm-1were 
assigned as Si-O-Si in plane stretching modes. We can conclude that 
phlogopite preserves its natural vibrational identity even when the 
material is thinned down to FLs.

Fig. 6. Infrared Nanospectroscopy of phlogopite. (a) AFM topography and IR 
broadband image of staircase-like phlogopite flake exfoliated onto Au/Si 
substrate. (b) SINS point-spectra: amplitude S2(ω) (continuous lines) and 
phase φ2(ω) (dashed lines) of phlogopiteflake with 18 nm (red) and 39 nm 
(black) of thickness acquired at the red and black circle positions in (a), 
respectively.

C. Clinochlore - Chlorite

Clinochlore is a natural layered structured crystal with the 

chemical formula Mg5Al(AlSi3)O10(OH)8 that belongs to the chlorite 
group[1,2].Besides being applied to diverse fields, such as prebiotic 
synthesis and polymerization of biomolecules[80], catalyst in the 
chemical recycling of waste plastics[81], decontamination of water 
resources [82], and hydration/weathering processes at nanoscale
[83], it has recently been shown that clinochlore is an insulator 
(bandgap of ~3.6 eV) and can be mechanically exfoliated down to 
FL (Fig. 7a) [9]. Moreover, in this work de Oliveira and co-workers 
demonstrated that the spectral response and vibration signature 
should remain intact in exfoliated flakes. Fig. 7b brings a high-
resolution AFM topography image (left panel), together with the 

broadband near-field image (right panel) acquired with sharp 
optical reflectivity contrast for different amounts of stacked layers 
(AFM height profile). Fig. 7c plots SINS point spectra of 11 and 20
nm clinochlore thick region (red and black dot position in Fig. 7b, 
respectively). The measured SINS spectra unveil a strong IR activity 
in the frequency range from 400-1150 cm-1 that matches their 
micro-FTIR counterparts. Following the results obtained by micro-
FTIR, the Si–O in-plane stretching vibration bands have been 
observed at 1023 and 987 cm-1, while the Si–O in-plane bending 
vibration has been observed at 445 cm-1. Al–O stretching is 
associated with the weak band at 811 cm−1 and the two bands 
observed at 680 and 470 cm-1 are assigned to the metal-OH bond 
libration and translation, respectively. In the 400–550 cm−1 region, 
the IR spectra displayed three bands near 521, 492, and 420 cm−1. 
These bands are assigned to (Fe,Mg)-O-Si or Al-O-Si bending[9].

Fig. 7. Infrared Nanospectroscopy of Clinochlore. (a) Optical microscopy 
image of staircase-like clinochlore flake exfoliated onto SiO2/Si substrate (left 
panel). AFM topography image (right panel) of the highlighted region as 
inserted in right and the corresponding profile along the green line in the 
AFM image. (b) AFM topography image of a FL-clinochlore flake onto a Au/Si
substrate with respective AFM profile line (left panel) and broadband near 
field image of the same region revealing scattering intensity modulation 
according to the number of layers (right panel). (c) SINS point-spectra: 
amplitude S2(ω) (dashed line) and phase φ2(ω) (continuous line) of 
clinochlore flake with 11 nm (red) and 20nm (black) of thickness acquired 
at the red and black dot position in (b), respectively. Adapted from Ref.[9].

D. Talc – Clay

Talc, or also called soapstone, is an insulator (bandgap of ~5eV)

[3]and 2:1 layered magnesium hydrosilicate mineral with chemical 
formula Mg3Si4O10(OH)2. Talc is known as the softest mineral and 
shows perfect basal cleavage held together by van der Waals force
[3,5,12,24,84]. This vdW crystal forms, by mechanical exfoliation, 
flat crystals with nanometer thicknesses, as observed with AFM 
topography (Fig. 8a). Exfoliated talc flakes have been used so far as 
substrates in ultrathin 2D-based devices [5,12,16], and in TMDs 
exciton physics experiments[16–18].

SINS measurements have been applied to ultrathin talc flakes to 

probe its vibrational fingerprints [24,48].In Fig.8a(bottom panel), 
SINS broadband image unveils sharp contrast among the talc layers 
and the SiO2 substrate. Furthermore, Fig.8bhighlights the changes 
in the SINS spectra as a function of talc thickness. Fig. 8c shows IR 
resonances assigned to Si–O vibrations in the tetrahedral layer 
around ν3~990 cm-1 and ν2~1010 cm−1, as well as OH libration 
modes around ν1~670 cm-1 and νout ~690 cm−1. Considering the 
symmetry of those vibrations checked by first-principle 
calculations, ν1and ν3 are in-plane modes, whilst ν2 and νoutare out-
of-plane vibrations. These results indicate that talc vibrational 
modes and their spectral response can be spectrally tuned upon 
controlling the number of layers and readily defining an IR 
fingerprint for the talc layers.Moreover, Ref. [24]has calculated the 
atomic displacement patterns of allIR active vibration modes of talc 


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

and correlate these motions to the intensity patterns in the SINS 
phase spectrum.

Fig. 8. Vibrational properties of Talc. (a) AFM topography and IR broadband 
nearfield image of a staircase-like talc on a SiO2 substrate. (b) SINS point-
spectra of talc nanocrystals with different layers on the Au/Sisubstrate. (c) 
Position of the maxima of the talc peaks, which are labeled according to the 
theoretical assignment (right panel), as a function of the talc thicknesson the 
Au substrate. Si, Mg, O, and H atoms are represented by yellow, green, red, 
and white spheres, respectively. Figure adapted from Ref. [48]. Copyright 
2018: The American Chemical Society.

E. Antigorite – Serpentine

Natural obtained serpentines have theoretical formula 

Mg3Si2O5(OH)4, but can be arranged in three main structural forms 
of serpentine, classified based on their different T-Oc stacking 
arrangements: lizardite (flat layers), chrysotile (curled layers) and 
antigorite (corrugated layers) [85]. In lizardite, the resulting 
structure is planar, owing to shifts of the Ocand T cations away from 
their ideal positions and to the limited Al-for-Si substitution in the T 
sites. In antigorite, the misfit is compensated by a modulated wave-
like structure, in which the sheet of Oc is continuous and the tilted 
SiO4 tetrahedra periodically switch their orientation, pointing 
alternatively in opposite directions. Chrysotile forms cylindrical or 
spiral tube structures, which are responsible for its properties as 
asbestos in insulating and fire-resistant materials [86]. Recent 
works have also shown by ab initio simulations that the serpentine 
class have a bandgap of about 4-4.2eV,besides, obtain FL-antigorite 
flakes by mechanical exfoliation [11]. Fig, 9a then shows the AFM 
image of a representative staircase-like serpentine flake (in green-
orange shades) deposited atop the SiO2/Si substrate (in blue). The 
dashed black line in Fig.9a indicates the position where a line profile 
of the serpentine flake was acquired and it resolves steps a ~1 nm-
thick layer within the serpentine flake, suggesting that isolated 
serpentine monolayers could, eventually, be produced.

Fig.9.Infrared Nanospectroscopy of Serpentine. (a) AFM topography image 
of an antigorite-serpentine flake (green-orange shades) atop the SiO2/Si 
substrate (blue shades). (b) AFM topography and (c) Broadband IR image of 
serpentine multilayer in the same region, the scale bar represents 500 nm. 
(d) SINS point spectra of serpentine (blue curve) obtained at the location 
marked by a blue circlein (b). Figure adapted from Ref.[11].

Fig.9b-d indicates that their structural signature remains intact, 

or, in other words, their serpentine nature is not modified during 
the exfoliation procedure. Fig. 9b-c presents the AFM topography 
(Fig. 9b) and broadband IR image (Fig. 9c) of a representative 
serpentine flake. The IR response map (Fig. 9c) is generated by the 
direct integration of the tip-scattered signal across the whole 
spectral sensitivity of the detector. Finally, Fig.9d shows a standard 

SINS point spectrum obtained in the mid-IR range (600-1300 cm-1) 
at the location marked in Fig. 9b. All measured spectra in this IR 
range show only Si-O vibrational modes. In this region, the authors 
described the strong vibrational responses at 960, 990 and 1025
cm−1 to Si-O stretching modes, while the band at 666 cm-1 is related 
to Si-O bending mode.

F. 
Electrically 
tunable 
hybrid 
modes 
in 
graphene/talc 

heterostructures

As described in the previous sections, the phonon-polariton of 

talc can be easily probed by SINS. Moreover, graphene, another 
natural material, has shown very interesting optoelectronic 
properties, for instance, controlling light at the nanoscale [87]. 
These experiments were mainly carried out with s-SNOM and 
demonstrated the ability to confine and control light and 
manipulate it through regulation of graphene Fermi level [88–90].
So far, several works presented hybrid modes when graphene was 
deposited over different 2D substrates [91–93]. Thus recently, a 
natural atomically flat vdW heterostructure has been studied in a 
graphene/talc nanophotonic device and a hybrid plasmon phonon-
polaritons were identified using SINS. In this work, Barcelos and 
colleagues demonstrated that the SINS spectra of talc vary as a 
function of its number of layers, but more important the hybrid 
plasmon phonon-polaritons in a graphene/talc heterostructure can 
be finely controlled by an external bias when both materials are 
assembled in a transistor-like architecture [48].

Fig. 10. Hybrid polaritons in Graphene/Talc heterostructure. (a) SINS point-
spectra of the talc/Au (red curve) and G-talc/Au (black curve) were obtained 
at the locations marked by red and black dots in the optical image shown in 
the inset. (b) Resistance vs. back-gate voltage (VG) for the G-talc/Au 
heterostructure. The inset illustrates the configuration for the G-talc/Au 
transistor measured. (c) SINS point-spectra for the G-talc/Au 
heterostructure for selected gate bias. In the inset are presented the maxima 
intensities of the SINS point-spectra for all gating measurements, 
demonstrating the gate tunability of the plasmon-phonon polaritons 
coupling between graphene and talc. (d) Hybridization of graphene 
plasmons and talc phonons: calculated dispersion relations for graphene-
talc systemfor weakly (left panel, n=1×1010cm−2) and moderate (right panel, 
n=6.5×1012 cm−2) doped graphene. The vertical dotted line indicates the 
momentum excited in by the SINS system due to the AFM tip radius. Figure 
adapted from Ref.[48].Copyright 2018: The American Chemical Society.

Fig. 10a plots SINS point-spectra for regions on and off the 

graphene layer and one can note that the ʋ2=1025cm−1out-of-plane 
mode is significantly increased for graphene/talc compared to pure 
talc. Whereas there is a slight modification for the ʋ3=960 cm−1
mode. The transfer curve of the graphene/talc device (Fig. 10b) 
depicts the graphene charge neutrality at a back-gate voltage VG~32
V, corroborating the spontaneous p-type doping of graphene at 
VG=0 V[5]. By performing in situ SINS measurements as a function 


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

of VG, a clear amplitude modulation of the ʋ2=1025 cm−1 mode was 
observed (Fig. 10c). These findings indicated a clear coupling 
between graphene plasmons and the talc phonons leading to the 
formation of hybrid plasmon-phonon polaritons. This hybridization 
is further confirmed by ω−q dispersion calculation (Fig. 10d), 
where a blueshift of the hybrid mode in the ω−q dispersion of the 
graphene-talc system in the high p-doping condition (n≈6.5×1012
cm−2 corresponding to VG=0 V) is shown in the right panel of Fig.
10d, in comparison with pure talc on the left panel. Thus, the 
authors demonstrated the potential use of natural crystals as well 
as their vdW heterostructures to be a key element in low-cost 
ultracompact devices for long-wavelength and polariton-based 
mid-infrared applications.

G. Flexible and electrically tunable plasmons in graphene/mica 
heterostructures

Flexible plasmonic devices with electrical modulation are of 

great interest for diverse applications, such as flexible 
metamaterials and wearable sensors and photonic devices. 
However, the traditional flexible metal–polymer plasmonic 
structures suffer from a lack of electrical tunability. Then, Hu and 
colleagues experimentally demonstrated a flexible, electrically 
tunable, and strain-independent plasmons based on graphene–
mica heterostructures [94]. They have shown a robust study for 
resonance frequency, quality factor, electrical tunability and lifetime 
of graphene plasmons for different bending radius and bending 
cycles. They demonstrated that the plasmons properties did not 
degrade at all even after 1000 bending cycles at a bending radius of 
3mm. Moreover, the authors have used s-SNOM technique for 
assessing the graphene plasmon properties on SiO2 and mica 
substrates. 

Fig. 11. Highly confined and long lifetime of flexible plasmon in a 
Graphene/Mica heterostructure. (a,b) Graphene plasmon confinement 
(λ0/λp) and lifetime (t) as a function of Fermi level, respectively. (c) Near-field 
amplitude s(ω=895 cm−1) images of graphene plasmon on mica and SiO2
substrates (third-order demodulated harmonics of the near-field 
amplitude). (d) Line profiles of plasmon intensity across the graphene edge 
(white dash lines in (c)). Figure adapted from Ref.[94]under the terms of the 
CC BY 4.0 license.

Fig.11a displays the field localization of plasmon in the flexible 

graphene/mica heterostructure device. Whereas Fig.
11b 

comparatively shows the plasmons lifetime of graphene over the 
mica and on SiO2 substrates. The authors observed a strong IR-
active phonon absorption from 950 to 1200cm−1(1168cm−1) in the 
mica (SiO2) substrate, which corroborated the strong plasmon–
phonon coupling in the graphene/mica (graphene/SiO2) devices. 
They then performed the real-space imaging of plasmon fields of 

the flexible graphene/mica devices. Fig. 11c shows representative 
near-field images on mica and SiO2 substrates. The fringes parallel 
to the graphene edge are formed by the interference of tip-launched 
forward propagating plasmons and the partially reflected plasmon 
waves by the edge, and the oscillation period equals to λp/2. Fig.11d 
plots line profiles of the near-field signals across the edge at the 
excitation wavelength of 895cm−1(λ0=11.12µm). The authors have 
found a plasmon wavelength λp=196 nm (220 nm) for the 
graphene/mica heterostructure (graphene/SiO2), corresponding to 
wavelength confinement of ~57 (~51), as well as an inverse 
damping ratio of 12.2 on graphene/mica heterostructures, which 
was approximately two times larger than that on SiO2. Finally, the 
authors claim that their results provide the basis for the design of 
flexible active nanophotonic devices.

Table 1-Summaryof the IR-active vibrational modes of phyllosilicates 
probed by nano-FTIR. The references for all mode assignments can be 
found in Section 4 for each phyllosilicate.

Group
Specimen
Chemical formula
Frequency 
(cm-1)

Assignment

Mica
Muscovite
KAl2(Al,Si3)O10(OH)

2

1080
831
920

Si−O stretching
Al−O stretching
mixed 
Al−OH/Al−O−Al 
stretching and 
Si−O−Si/Si−O−Al 
stretching

Phlogopite
KMg3(AlSi3)O10(OH

)2

472 
508 
682
750 
809 
851 
960
1001
1062

∥ Si-O stretching
∥ Si-O stretching
Si-O-Mg stretching
∥ Si/Al-O-Si 
stretching
∥ Si/Al-O-Si 
stretching
⊥ Si/Al-O stretching
∥ Si-O stretching
∥ Si-O stretching
Si-O stretching

Chlorite
Clinochlore
Mg5Al(AlSi3)O10(O

H)8

420
445
470
492
521
680
811
987
1023

(Fe, Mg)-O-Si or Al-
O-Si bending
∥ Si–O bending
metal-OH translation
(Fe, Mg)-O-Si or Al-
O-Si bending
(Fe, Mg)-O-Si or Al-
O-Si bending
metal-OH libration
Al–O stretching
∥ Si–O stretching
∥ Si–O stretching

Clay
Talc
Mg3Si4O10 (OH)2
670
690
990
1010

∥ OH libration
OH libration
∥ Si–O stretching
⊥ Si–O stretching

Serpentine
Antigorite
Mg3Si2O5(OH)4
666
960
990
1025

Si-O bending
Si-O stretching
Si-O stretching
Si-O stretching

5.
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

This review paper brings an update on how SINS has 

approached the vibrational identity of naturally occurring vdW 
crystals, mainly belonging to the phyllosilicate class (Table 1). We 
have briefly described the structure of such 2D materials, the 
limitations of using Raman spectroscopy to assess their vibrational 
modes in the ultrathin limit, followed by the SINS experimental 
scheme and data collection. Due to its wide IR coverage and high 
sensitivity to Si-O vibrational activity, SINS is a decisive analytical 
tool for phyllosilicates, allowing monitoring their IR signatures from 
mid- to far-IR in a simultaneous experiment that connects 


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

morphology and nano-optics of these minerals in their atomic-thin 
form. The enhanced SNR of SINS enables the access to the chemistry 
of few layers of phyllosilicates in a non-destructive fashion, as it 
operates with an extreme low power IR beam. Our work then 
highlights the SINS contribution to the study of different 
phyllosilicates: micas, clays, chlorites,and serpentines, as well as the 
plasmonic tunability in graphene/talc and graphene/mica 
heterostructures.

Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge financial support from 
the Brazilian Institute of Science and Technology (INCT) in Carbon 
Nanomaterials, and The National Council for Scientific and Technological 
Development (CNPq). The authors like to acknowledge the Brazilian 
Synchrotron Light Laboratory (LNLS), part of the Brazilian Centre for 
Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), a private non-profit 
organization under the supervision of the Brazilian Ministry for Science, 
Technology, and Innovations (MCTI). Also, the Advanced Light Source (ALS) 
for the facilities in experiments involving synchrotron radiation and its 
associated installations, besides Hans A. Bechtel and Stephanie G. Corder for 
the experimental 
assistance. 
The 
authors 
thank the 
Brazilian 

Nanotechnology National Laboratory (LNNano – Proposals No. 20230143, 
20221047, 20221050, and 20221696), the Microscopic Samples Laboratory 
(LAM –Proposals No. 20221265 and 20221266), and the IMUBIA beamline 
(Proposals No. 20220423and20220584) at CNPEM for sample fabrication 
and characterization. R.O. thanks the Coordination for the Improvement of 
Higher Education Personnel (CAPES) and research supporting foundation of 
Minas Gerais state (FAPEMIG). I.D.B., A.R.C. and R.O.F. acknowledge the 
support from CNPq through the Research Grants 311327/2020-6, 
309920/2021-3, and 309946/2021-2. I.D.B acknowledges the prize 
L’ORÉAL-UNESCO-ABC for Women in Science Prize - Brazil/2021. R.O.F 
acknowledges the FAPESP financial support (Young Investigator Grant 
2019/14017-9).

Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Data Availability. Data underlying the results presented in this paper 
arenot publicly available at this time but may be obtained from the authors 
uponreasonable request.

References
1. R. Frisenda, Y. Niu, P. Gant, M. Muñoz, and A. Castellanos-Gomez, 
"Naturally occurring van der Waals materials," NPJ 2D Mater Appl 4(1), 1–
13 (2020).
2. W. A. Deer, R. A. Howie, and J. Zussman, An Introduction to the Rock-
Forming Minerals (Mineralogical Society of Great Britain and Ireland, 2013).
3. A. B. Alencar, A. P. M. Barboza, B. S. Archanjo, H. Chacham, and B. R. A. 
Neves, "Experimental and theoretical investigations of monolayer and 
fewlayer talc," 2d Mater 2(1), 015004 (2015).
4. B. Vasic, C. Czibula, M. Kratzer, B. R. A. Neves, A. Matkovic, and C. Teichert, 
"Two-dimensional talc as a van der Waals material for solid lubrication at 
the nanoscale," Nanotechnology 127(1), 69–73 (2021).
5. E. Mania, A. B. Alencar, A. R. Cadore, B. R. Carvalho, K. Watanabe, T. 
Taniguchi, B. R. A. Neves, H. Chacham, and L. C. Campos, "Spontaneous 
doping on high quality talc-graphene-hBN van der Waals heterostructures," 
2d Mater 4(3), 031008 (2017).
6. D. A. Robinson, "Measurement of the Solid Dielectric Permittivity of Clay 
Minerals and Granular Samples Using a Time Domain Reflectometry 
Immersion Method," Vadose Zone Journal 3(2), 705–713 (2004).
7. R. M. Hazen and C. W. Burnham, "The Crystal Structures of One-Layer 
Phlogopite and Annite," American Mineralogist 58(9–10), 889–900 (1973).
8. A. R. Cadore, R. de Oliveira, R. Longuinhos, V. de C. Teixeira, D. A. Nagaoka, 
V. T. Alvarenga, J. Ribeiro-Soares, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. M. Paniago, 
A. Malachias, K. Krambrock, I. D. Barcelos, and C. J. S. de Matos, "Exploring 
the structural and optoelectronic properties of natural insulating phlogopite 
in van der Waals heterostructures," 2d Mater 9(3), 035007 (2022).
9. R. de Oliveira, L. A. G. Guallichico, E. Policarpo, A. R. Cadore, R. O. Freitas, 
F. M. C. da Silva, V. de C. Teixeira, R. M. Paniago, H. Chacham, M. J. S. Matos, 
A. Malachias, K. Krambrock, and I. D. Barcelos, "High throughput 

investigation of an emergent and naturally abundant 2D material: 
Clinochlore," Appl Surf Sci 599, 153959 (2022).
10. A. Tlili, D. C. Smith, J.-M. Beny, and H. Boyer, "A Raman microprobe study 
of natural micas," Mineral Mag 53(370), 165–179 (1989).
11. J. C. C. Santos, A. P. M. Barboza, M. J. S. Matos, I. D. Barcelos, T. F. D. 
Fernandes, E. A. Soares, R. L. Moreira, and B. R. A. Neves, "Exfoliation and 
characterization of a two-dimensional serpentine-based material," 
Nanotechnology 30(44), 445705 (2019).
12. A. R. Cadore, E. Mania, A. B. Alencar, N. P. Rezende, S. de Oliveira, K. 
Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, H. Chacham, L. C. Campos, and R. G. Lacerda, 
"Enhancing the response of NH3 graphene-sensors by using devices with 
different graphene-substrate distances," Sens Actuators B Chem 266, 438–
446 (2018).
13. J. Mohrmann, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and R. Danneau, "Persistent 
hysteresis
in 
graphene-mica 
van 
der 
Waals 
heterostructures," 

Nanotechnology 26(1), 015202 (2015).
14. A. v. Kretinin, Y. Cao, J. S. Tu, G. L. Yu, R. Jalil, K. S. Novoselov, S. J. Haigh, 
A. Gholinia, A. Mishchenko, M. Lozada, T. Georgiou, C. R. Woods, F. Withers, 
P. Blake, G. Eda, A. Wirsig, C. Hucho, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. K. Geim, 
and R. v. Gorbachev, "Electronic properties of graphene encapsulated with 
different two-dimensional atomic crystals," Nano Lett 14(6), 3270–3276 
(2014).
15. Y. He, H. Dong, Q. Meng, L. Jiang, W. Shao, L. He, and W. Hu, "Mica, a 
potential two-dimensional-crystal gate insulator for organic field-effect 
transistors," Advanced Materials 23(46), 5502–5507 (2011).
16. D. Nutting, G. A. Prando, M. Severijnen, I. D. Barcelos, S. Guo, P. C. M. 
Christianen, U. Zeitler, Y. Galvão Gobato, and F. Withers, "Electrical and 
optical properties of transition metal dichalcogenides on talc dielectrics," 
Nanoscale 13(37), 15853–15858 (2021).
17. G. A. Prando, M. E. Severijnen, I. D. Barcelos, U. Zeitler, P. C. M. 
Christianen, F. Withers, and Y. Galvão Gobato, "Revealing Excitonic 
Complexes in Monolayer WS2 on Talc Dielectric," Phys Rev Appl 16(6), 
64055 (2021).
18. A. C. Gadelha, T. L. Vasconcelos, L. G. Cançado, and A. Jorio, "Nano-
optical Imaging of In-Plane Homojunctions in Graphene and MoS 2 van der 
Waals Heterostructures on Talc and SiO 2," J Phys Chem Lett 12(31), 7625–
7631 (2021).
19. A. Wang, J. J. Freeman, and B. L. Jolliff, "Understanding the Raman 
spectral features of phyllosilicates," Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 46(10), 
829–845 (2015).
20. V. C. Farmer, "The infra-red spectra of talc, saponite, and hectorite," 
Mineralogical Magazine and Journal of the Mineralogical Society 31(241), 
829–845 (1958).
21. V. C. Farmer and J. D. Russell, "The infra-red spectra of layer silicates," 
Spectrochimica Acta 20(7), 1149–1173 (1964).
22. B. Reynard, L. Bezacier, and R. Caracas, "Serpentines, talc, chlorites, and 
their high-pressure phase transitions: a Raman spectroscopic study," Phys 
Chem Miner 42(8), 641–649 (2015).
23. H. Miranda, V. Monken, J. L. E. Campos, T. L. Vasconcelos, C. Rabelo, B. 
S. Archanjo, C. M. Almeida, S. Grieger, C. Backes, A. Jorio, and L. Gustavo 
Cançado, "Establishing the excitation field in tip-enhanced Raman 
spectroscopy to study nanostructures within two-dimensional systems," 2d 
Mater 10(1), 015002 (2023).
24. R. Longuinhos, A. R. Cadore, H. A. Bechtel, C. J S De Matos, R. O. Freitas, 
J. Ribeiro-Soares, and I. D. Barcelos, "Raman and Far-Infrared Synchrotron 
Nanospectroscopy of Layered Crystalline Talc: Vibrational Properties, 
Interlayer Coupling, and Symmetry Crossover," The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry C (2023).
25. R. J. C. Batista, R. F. Dias, A. P. M. Barboza, A. B. de Oliveira, T. M. 
Manhabosco, T. R. Gomes-Silva, M. J. S. Matos, A. C. Gadelha, C. Rabelo, L. 
G. L. Cançado, A. Jorio, H. Chacham, and B. R. A. Neves, "Nanomechanics of 
few-layer materials: do individual layers slide upon folding?," Beilstein 
Journal of Nanotechnology 11, 1801–1808 (2020).
26. F. Huth, A. Chuvilin, M. Schnell, I. Amenabar, R. Krutokhvostov, S. 
Lopatin, and R. Hillenbrand, "Resonant Antenna Probes for Tip-Enhanced 
Infrared Near-Field Microscopy," Nano Lett 13(3), 1065–1072 (2013).
27. R. O. Freitas, C. Deneke, F. C. B. Maia, H. G. Medeiros, T. Moreno, P. 
Dumas, Y. Petroff, and H. Westfahl, "Low-aberration beamline optics for 
synchrotron infrared nanospectroscopy," Opt Express 26(9), 11238 (2018).


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

28. S. So, M. Kim, D. Lee, D. M. Nguyen, and J. Rho, "Overcoming diffraction 
limit: From microscopy to nanoscopy," Appl Spectrosc Rev 53(2–4), 290–312 
(2018).
29. I. D. Barcelos, H. A. Bechtel, C. J. S. de Matos, D. A. Bahamon, B. Kaestner, 
F. C. B. Maia, and R. O. Freitas, "Probing Polaritons in 2D Materials with 
Synchrotron Infrared Nanospectroscopy," Adv Opt Mater 8(5), 1901091 
(2020).
30. O. Khatib, H. A. Bechtel, M. C. Martin, M. B. Raschke, and G. L. Carr, "Far
Infrared Synchrotron Near-Field Nanoimaging and Nanospectroscopy," ACS 
Photonics 5(7), 2773–2779 (2018).
31. H. A. Bechtel, E. A. Muller, R. L. Olmon, M. C. Martin, and M. B. Raschke, 
"Ultrabroadband infrared nanospectroscopic imaging," Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 111(20), 7191–7196 (2014).
32. E. Loh, "Optical vibrations in sheet silicates," Journal of Physics C: Solid 
State Physics 6(6), 1091–1104 (1973).
33. J. D. Clemens, S. Circone, A. Navrotsky, P. F. McMillan, B. K. Smith, and 
V.
J. Wall, "Phlogopite: High temperature solution calorimetry, 

thermodynamic properties, Al-Si and stacking disorder, and phase 
equilibria," Geochim Cosmochim Acta 51(9), 2569–2578 (1987).
34. A. Beran, "7. Infrared Spectroscopy of Micas," in Micas, A. Mottana, F. P. 
Sassi, J. B. Thompson, and S. Guggenheim, eds. (De Gruyter, 2002), pp. 351–
370.
35. A. M. Hofmeister and J. E. Bowey, "Quantitative Infrared Spectra of 
Hydrosilicates and Related Minerals," Mon Not R Astron Soc 367(2), 577–
591 (2006).
36. G. J. Rosasco and J. J. Blaha, "Raman Microprobe Spectra and Vibrational 
Mode Assignments of Talc," Appl Spectrosc 34(2), 140–144 (1980).
37. D. A. McKeown, M. I. Bell, and E. S. Etz, "Raman spectra and vibrational 
analysis of the trioctahedral mica phlogopite," American Mineralogist 84(5–
6), 970–976 (1999).
38. G. Ulian, D. Moro, and G. Valdrè, "Infrared and Raman spectroscopic 
features of clinochlore Mg6Si4O10(OH)8: A density functional theory 
contribution," Appl Clay Sci 197(July), 105779 (2020).
39. J. R. Petriglieri, E. Salvioli-Mariani, L. Mantovani, M. Tribaudino, P. P. 
Lottici, C. Laporte-Magoni, and D. Bersani, "Micro-Raman mapping of the 
polymorphs of serpentine," Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 46(10), 953–958 
(2015).
40. A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Wojtaszek, N. Tombros, N. Agraït, B. J. van 
Wees, and G. Rubio-Bollinger, "Atomically thin mica flakes and their 
application as ultrathin insulating substrates for graphene," Small 7(17), 
2491–2497 (2011).
41. B. Vasić, R. Gajić, I. Milošević, Ž. Medić, M. Blagojev, M. Opačić, A. 
Kremenović, and D. Lazić, "Natural two-dimensional pyrophyllite: Nanoscale 
lubricant, electrical insulator and easily-machinable material," Appl Surf Sci 
155114 (2022).
42. A. Matković, L. Ludescher, O. E. Peil, A. Sharma, K.-P. Gradwohl, M. 
Kratzer, M. Zimmermann, J. Genser, D. Knez, E. Fisslthaler, C. Gammer, A. 
Lugstein, R. J. Bakker, L. Romaner, D. R. T. Zahn, F. Hofer, G. Salvan, J. G. 
Raith, and C. Teichert, "Iron-rich talc as air-stable platform for magnetic two-
dimensional materials," NPJ 2D Mater Appl 5(1), 94 (2021).
43. G. Della Ventura, F. Bellatreccia, A. Marcelli, M. Cestelli Guidi, M. 
Piccinini, A. Cavallo, and M. Piochi, "Application of micro-FTIR imaging in the 
Earth sciences," Anal Bioanal Chem 397(6), 2039–2049 (2010).
44. Y. Chen, C. Zou, M. Mastalerz, S. Hu, C. Gasaway, and X. Tao, 
"Applications of Micro-Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) in the 
Geological Sciences—A Review," Int J Mol Sci 16(12), 30223–30250 (2015).
45. M. K. Nieuwoudt, M. P. Simpson, M. Tobin, and L. Puskar, "Synchrotron 
FTIR microscopy of synthetic and natural CO 2 –H 2 O fluid inclusions," Vib 
Spectrosc 75, 136–148 (2014).
46. Y.-H. Lu, J. M. Larson, A. Baskin, X. Zhao, P. D. Ashby, D. Prendergast, H. 
A. Bechtel, R. Kostecki, and M. Salmeron, "Infrared Nanospectroscopy at the 
Graphene–Electrolyte Interface," Nano Lett 19(8), 5388–5393 (2019).
47. G. Álvarez‐Pérez, T. G. Folland, I. Errea, J. Taboada‐Gutiérrez, J. Duan, J. 
Martín‐Sánchez, A. I. F. Tresguerres‐Mata, J. R. Matson, A. Bylinkin, M. He, 
W. Ma, Q. Bao, J. I. Martín, J. D. Caldwell, A. Y. Nikitin, and P. Alonso‐
González, "Infrared Permittivity of the Biaxial van der Waals Semiconductor 
α‐MoO 3 from Near‐ and Far‐Field Correlative Studies," Advanced Materials 
32(29), 1908176 (2020).

48. I. D. Barcelos, A. R. Cadore, A. B. Alencar, F. C. B. Maia, E. Mania, R. F. 
Oliveira, C. C. B. Bufon, Â. Malachias, R. O. Freitas, R. L. Moreira, and H. 
Chacham, "Infrared Fingerprints of Natural 2D Talc and Plasmon–Phonon 
Coupling in Graphene–Talc Heterostructures," ACS Photonics 5(5), 1912–
1918 (2018).
49. S. Kawata and Y. Inouye, "Scanning probe optical microscopy using a 
metallic probe tip," Ultramicroscopy 57(2–3), 313–317 (1995).
50. F. Zenhausern, Y. Martin, and H. K. Wickramasinghe, "Scanning 
Interferometric Apertureless Microscopy: Optical Imaging at 10 Angstrom 
Resolution," Science (1979) 269(5227), 1083–1085 (1995).
51. B. Knoll and F. Keilmann, "Near-field probing of vibrational absorption 
for chemical microscopy," Nature 399(6732), 134–137 (1999).
52. A. J. Huber, F. Keilmann, J. Wittborn, J. Aizpurua, and R. Hillenbrand, 
"Terahertz Near-Field Nanoscopy of Mobile Carriers in Single Semiconductor 
Nanodevices," Nano Lett 8(11), 3766–3770 (2008).
53. F. Keilmann and R. Hillenbrand, "Near-field microscopy by elastic light 
scattering from a tip," Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 362(1817), 787 (2004).
54. R. A. Mayer, F. H. Feres, and R. O. Freitas, "Synchrotron infrared 
nanospectroscopy as a game changer in nanophotonics," in 2021 SBFoton 
International Optics and Photonics Conference (SBFoton IOPC) (IEEE, 2021), 
pp. 1–6.
55. R. Hillenbrand and F. Keilmann, "Complex Optical Constants on a 
Subwavelength Scale," Phys Rev Lett 85(14), 3029–3032 (2000).
56. F. Huth, A. Govyadinov, S. Amarie, W. Nuansing, F. Keilmann, and R. 
Hillenbrand, "Nano-FTIR Absorption Spectroscopy of Molecular Fingerprints 
at 20 nm Spatial Resolution," Nano Lett 12(8), 3973–3978 (2012).
57. A. A. Govyadinov, I. Amenabar, F. Huth, P. S. Carney, and R. Hillenbrand, 
"Quantitative Measurement of Local Infrared Absorption and Dielectric 
Function with Tip-Enhanced Near-Field Microscopy," J Phys Chem Lett 4(9), 
1526–1531 (2013).
58. T. Low, A. Chaves, J. D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N. X. Fang, P. Avouris, T. F. 
Heinz, F. Guinea, L. Martin-Moreno, and F. Koppens, "Polaritons in layered 
two-dimensional materials," Nat Mater 16(2), 182–194 (2017).
59. M. Chen, X. Lin, T. H. Dinh, Z. Zheng, J. Shen, Q. Ma, H. Chen, P. Jarillo-
Herrero, and S. Dai, "Configurable phonon polaritons in twisted α-MoO3," 
Nat Mater 19(12), 1307–1311 (2020).
60. O. Khatib, J. D. Wood, A. S. McLeod, M. D. Goldflam, M. Wagner, G. L. 
Damhorst, J. C. Koepke, G. P. Doidge, A. Rangarajan, R. Bashir, E. Pop, J. W. 
Lyding, M. H. Thiemens, F. Keilmann, and D. N. Basov, "Graphene-Based 
Platform for Infrared Near-Field Nanospectroscopy of Water and Biological 
Materials in an Aqueous Environment," ACS Nano 9(8), 7968–7975 (2015).
61. L. M. Meireles, I. D. Barcelos, G. A. Ferrari, P. A. A. de A. Neves, R. O. 
Freitas, and R. G. Lacerda, "Synchrotron infrared nanospectroscopy on a 
graphene chip," Lab Chip 19(21), 3678–3684 (2019).
62. F. Huth, M. Schnell, J. Wittborn, N. Ocelic, and R. Hillenbrand, "Infrared-
spectroscopic nanoimaging with a thermal source," Nat Mater 10(5), 352–6 
(2011).
63. D. J. Lahneman, T. J. Huffman, P. Xu, S. L. Wang, T. Grogan, and M. M. 
Qazilbash, "Broadband near-field infrared spectroscopy with a high 
temperature plasma light source," Opt Express 25(17), 20421 (2017).
64. M. Wagner, D. S. Jakob, S. Horne, H. Mittel, S. Osechinskiy, C. Phillips, G. 
C. Walker, C. Su, and X. G. Xu, "Ultrabroadband Nanospectroscopy with a 
Laser-Driven Plasma Source," ACS Photonics 5(4), 1467–1475 (2018).
65. P. Hermann, A. Hoehl, P. Patoka, F. Huth, E. Rühl, and G. Ulm, "Near-field 
imaging 
and 
nano-Fourier-transform 
infrared 
spectroscopy 
using 

broadband synchrotron radiation," Opt Express 21(3), 2913 (2013).
66. W. D. Duncan and G. P. Williams, "Infrared synchrotron radiation from 
electron storage rings," Appl Opt 22(18), 2914 (1983).
67. H. A. Bechtel, S. C. Johnson, O. Khatib, E. A. Muller, and M. B. Raschke, 
"Synchrotron infrared nano-spectroscopy and -imaging," Surf Sci Rep 75(3), 
100493 (2020).
68. P. Hermann, A. Hoehl, G. Ulrich, C. Fleischmann, A. Hermelink, B. 
Kästner, P. Patoka, A. Hornemann, B. Beckhoff, E. Rühl, and G. Ulm, 
"Characterization of semiconductor materials using synchrotron radiation-
based near-field infrared microscopy and nano-FTIR spectroscopy," Opt 
Express 22(15), 17948 (2014).
69. W. de Poel, S. Pintea, J. Drnec, F. Carla, R. Felici, P. Mulder, J. A. A. W. 
Elemans, W. J. P. van Enckevort, A. E. Rowan, and E. Vlieg, "Muscovite mica: 
Flatter than a pancake," Surf Sci 619, 19–24 (2014).


This is the Accepted Manuscript version of the manuscript: R. de Oliveira et. al Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2023.This has been published 
online at https://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAA.482518

70. G. Zhong and J. Li, "Muscovite mica as a universal platform for flexible 
electronics," Journal of Materiomics 6(2), 455–457 (2020).
71. Y. Bitla and Y.-H. Chu, "MICAtronics: A new platform for flexible X-
tronics," FlatChem 3, 26–42 (2017).
72. X. Zou, J. Xu, L. Liu, H. Wang, P. Lai, and W. M. Tang, "Damage-free 
mica/MoS 2 interface for high-performance multilayer MoS 2 field-effect 
transistors," Nanotechnology 30(34), 345204 (2019).
73. C. G. Low and Q. Zhang, "Ultra-thin and flat mica as gate dielectric 
layers," Small 8(14), 2178–2183 (2012).
74. A. Fali, S. Gamage, M. Howard, T. G. Folland, N. A. Mahadik, T. Tiwald, K. 
Bolotin, J. D. Caldwell, and Y. Abate, "Nanoscale Spectroscopy of Dielectric 
Properties of Mica," ACS Photonics 8(1), 175–181 (2021).
75. X. Chen, Z. Yao, Z. Sun, S. G. Stanciu, D. N. Basov, R. Hillenbrand, and M. 
Liu, "Rapid simulations of hyperspectral near-field images of three-
dimensional heterogeneous surfaces – part II," Opt Express 30(7), 11228 
(2022).
76. M. R. Islam and M. Tomitori, "Evaluation of the discrete thickness of 
exfoliated artificially synthesized mica nanosheets on silicon substrates: 
Toward characterization of the tunneling current through the nanosheets," 
Appl Surf Sci 532(March), 147388 (2020).
77. W. Bower, W. Head, G. T. R. Droop, R. Zan, R. A. D. Pattrick, P. Wincott, 
and S. J. Haigh, "High-resolution imaging of biotite using focal series exit 
wavefunction restoration and the graphene mechanical exfoliation 
method," Mineral Mag 79(2), 337–344 (2015).
78. Y.-C. Zou, L. Mogg, N. Clark, C. Bacaksiz, S. Milovanovic, V. Sreepal, G.-P. 
Hao, Y.-C. Wang, D. G. Hopkinson, R. Gorbachev, S. Shaw, K. S. Novoselov, R. 
Raveendran-Nair, F. M. Peeters, M. Lozada-Hidalgo, and S. J. Haigh, "Ion 
exchange in atomically thin clays and micas," Nat Mater 20(12), 1677–1682 
(2021).
79. D. M. Jenkins, "Empirical study of the infrared lattice vibrations (1100-
350 cm-1) of phlogopite," Phys Chem Miner 16(4), 408–414 (1989).
80. L. Shi, G. Song, P. Li, X. Li, D. Pan, Y. Huang, L. Ma, and Z. Guo, "Enhancing 
interfacial performance of epoxy resin composites via in-situ nucleophilic 
addition polymerization modification of carbon fibers with hyperbranched 
polyimidazole," Compos Sci Technol 201, 108522 (2021).
81. E. Quaranta, E. Mesto, M. Lacalamita, C. Malitesta, E. Mazzotta, E. Scelsi, 
and E. Schingaro, "Using a natural chlorite as catalyst in chemical recycling 
of waste plastics: Hydrolytic depolymerization of poly-[bisphenol A 
carbonate] promoted by clinochlore," Waste Management 120, 642–649 
(2021).
82. A. Mehdikhani, M. Gholinejad, A. Zamani, and J. M. Sansano, 
"Application of imidazole modified clinochlore for adsorption of ibuprofen 
residues from polluted water: preparation, characterization, kinetic and 
thermodynamic studies," Journal of the Iranian Chemical Society 19(1), 109–
120 (2022).
83. K. Umeda, L. Zivanovic, K. Kobayashi, J. Ritala, H. Kominami, P. Spijker, A. 
S. Foster, and H. Yamada, "Atomic-resolution three-dimensional hydration 
structures on a heterogeneously charged surface," Nat Commun 8(1), 2111 
(2017).
84. W. Tufar, "Talc," in Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry
(Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2000).
85. M. Mellini, "Chrysotile and polygonal serpentine from the Balangero 
serpentinite," Mineral Mag 50(356), 301–305 (1986).
86. C. Rinaudo, D. Gastaldi, and E. Belluso, "CHARACTERIZATION OF 
CHRYSOTILE, ANTIGORITE AND LIZARDITE BY FT-RAMAN SPECTROSCOPY," 
The Canadian Mineralogist 41(4), 883–890 (2003).
87. S. Xiao, X. Zhu, B.-H. Li, and N. A. Mortensen, "Graphene-plasmon 
polaritons: From fundamental properties to potential applications," Front 
Phys (Beijing) 11(2), 117801 (2016).
88. Z. Fei, A. S. Rodin, G. O. Andreev, W. Bao, A. S. McLeod, M. Wagner, L. 
M. Zhang, Z. Zhao, M. Thiemens, G. Dominguez, M. M. Fogler, A. H. C. Neto, 
C. N. Lau, F. Keilmann, and D. N. Basov, "Gate-tuning of graphene plasmons 
revealed by infrared nano-imaging," Nature 487, 82–85 (2012).
89. F. C. B. Maia, B. T. O’Callahan, A. R. Cadore, I. D. Barcelos, L. C. Campos, 
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. Deneke, A. Belyanin, M. B. Raschke, and R. O. 
Freitas, "Anisotropic Flow Control and Gate Modulation of Hybrid Phonon-
Polaritons," Nano Lett 19(2), 708–715 (2019).

90. G. X. Ni, A. S. McLeod, Z. Sun, L. Wang, L. Xiong, K. W. Post, S. S. Sunku, 
B.-Y. Jiang, J. Hone, C. R. Dean, M. M. Fogler, and D. N. Basov, "Fundamental 
limits to graphene plasmonics," Nature 557(7706), 530–533 (2018).
91. I. D. Barcelos, A. R. Cadore, L. C. Campos, A. Malachias, K. Watanabe, T. 
Taniguchi, F. C. B. Maia, R. Freitas, and C. Deneke, "Graphene/h-BN 
plasmon-phonon coupling and plasmon delocalization observed by infrared 
nano-spectroscopy.," Nanoscale 7(27), 11620–5 (2015).
92. H. Hu, N. Chen, H. Teng, R. Yu, Y. Qu, J. Sun, M. Xue, D. Hu, B. Wu, C. Li, 
J. Chen, M. Liu, Z. Sun, Y. Liu, P. Li, S. Fan, F. J. García de Abajo, and Q. Dai, 
"Doping-driven 
topological 
polaritons 
in 
graphene/α-MoO3 

heterostructures," Nat Nanotechnol 17(9), 940–946 (2022).
93. H. Yan, X. Li, B. Chandra, G. Tulevski, Y. Wu, M. Freitag, W. Zhu, P. 
Avouris, and F. Xia, "Tunable infrared plasmonic devices using 
graphene/insulator stacks," Nat Nanotechnol 7(5), 330–334 (2012).
94. H. Hu, X. Guo, D. Hu, Z. Sun, X. Yang, and Q. Dai, "Flexible and Electrically 
Tunable Plasmons in Graphene-Mica Heterostructures," Advanced Science 
5(8), 1800175 (2018).


