1

Scalable Production and Supply Chain of Diamond using Microwave Plasma: a 

Mini-review

Sergey V. Baryshev1,2 and Matthias Muehle3,1

1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, MI 48824, USA

2Department of Chemical Engineering and Material Science, Michigan State University, MI 48824, USA

3Fraunhofer USA, Inc. Center Midwest, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA

Abstract

Discovered and reported exactly 40 years ago, microwave plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition 
(MPACVD) pointed out an economic technology that could potentially produce lab-grown diamond stones
at scale. After this breakthrough discovery, demonstrating that diamond can be growth at low pressure and 
temperature, the progress quickly curbed and synthetic single crystal diamond (SCD) size and quality could 
not be improved toward attaining requirements critical in solid-state electronics. This led to the early 
promise of MPACVD to not come true and slowed the level of investments, thereby further stalling the 
progress in diamond syntheses. With the invention of a few novel homo- and hetero-epitaxy growth 
techniques, the diamond research and technology has recently reinvigorated. This mini review attempts to 
capture the momentum of recent progress in diamond MPACVD that could finally bring scalable 
manufacturing of high quality large size wafers for future electronics and optics.

Introduction

Like no other gemstone, diamonds have been praised in human history and culture. Diamonds were 

scarce, and thus a symbol of wealth and prestige. Beyond jewelry, it quickly became clear that diamond 
possesses extraordinary mechanical, thermal, and electronic properties and has been deemed the ultimate 
engineering material and frontier material of the 21st century. Indeed, diamond has the potential to reshape 
a wealth of applications ranging from quantum computing to electric grid infrastructure. Radiation hardness 
makes diamond the detector for space and high energy physics [1-3], and for high flux X-ray optics [4] and 
sensing [5, 6]. Diamond’s resilience to high electric fields and superior thermal properties makes it 
attractive for generating electron beams in high pulsed power systems [7, 8]. Optically active vacancy center 
states in diamond make it a viable platform for quantum computing [9, 10]. An exceptionally large 
electrochemical window makes diamond an electrode of choice for photo-electro-chemical treatments of 
strongly bonded chemicals [11]. Diamond is biocompatible, thus enabling infinite opportunities in biology 
and medicine through implantable electronics [12, 13]. Several key figures of merit exist [14-18] showing 
that diamond outnumbers any existing semiconductor when used for power applications. It is illustrated in 
great detail in Fig.1.


2

Fig.1. Key electronics figures of merit compared for major semiconductors. Adapted from Ref.[19].

To realize the promise that diamond holds for future electronics, high quality, large size diamond 

plates must be produced at scale. Developed for plethora of semiconductors [20], the main focus of the 
Czochralski’s method was on the carbon group of the periodical table of elements. Discovered for tin, the 
method was quickly developed and perfected across the globe for Ge, leading to creation of the BJT at Bell 
Labs, and Si, fueling the third industrial revolution. Si wafers of perfect quality are available in up to 300 
mm diameters. Because of the allotropy of carbon, the Czochralski’s method could not be simply adapted 
to synthesize diamond. Historical efforts at General Electric Company [21] made it possible to grow 
diamond under high-pressure, high-temperature (HPHT) conditions similar to those found deep 
underground. Diamond seed would pull a new crystal of a few mm from a molten carbon feedstock kept at 
10-15 GPa (equivalent to the pressure at ~200 km below ground level) and 2,000-3,000 K in a press 
chamber twice an average human height. Such conditions facilitate the reverse graphite-to-diamond 
transition (Fig.2), where the sp2 hybridized graphite is the fundamental ground state of carbon and sp3

hybridized diamond is a metastable state of carbon.

Fig.2. Elementary view of sp3 to sp2 transformation.

Baliga FOM:


3

The material nearest to the seed is usually poor in quality, and the highest quality diamond plates 

are cut from the outer regions of the boule, meaning that the boules must be much larger than the desired 
plates. The growth rates of crystal-clear type IIa HPHT diamond with N-concentration of ~10 ppb must be 
very slow to prevent the uptake of nitrogen and other impurities. In Ref.[22], one large size diamond plate 
75 mm2 was extracted from a 10 carat HPHT boule that took (sic!) 11 days to grow. Producing large size 
diamond plates via HPHT is deemed unpractical, and at this point restricts the supply chain for future 
microelectronics. The long time standard high-quality diamond plate in HPHT technology available on the 
marketplaces has been 3.53.5 mm2 in size.

Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of diamond at subatmospheric pressures then came as a remedy. 

By different accounts, it is claimed that diamond CVD was pioneered in USA [23] or in the Soviet Union 
[24] in the 1960’s. There is a patent by William G. Eversole of Union Carbide Corporation applied in 1958
[25] that precedes the work by Angus and Spitsyn. In this patent, three important discoveries were claimed: 
1) methane was used as a major feedstock for synthesis, 2) hydrogen was successfully used for diamond 
product cleaning from co-deposited black carbon by-product, and 3) all syntheses were successful at 1,000 
C. These three major findings set the stage for what followed as diamond CVD breakthroughs. CVD 
methods differ and named according to a particular way reactive species, methyl and atomic hydrogen, are 
activated: hot filament [26], arc [27], combustion flame [28], glow discharge [29] and, finally, microwave 
plasma assisted CVD (MPACVD) [30] are mainly known due to their efficiency in growing diamond.
MPACVD stood out over the past 40 decades as the only means capable of producing ultrapure single 
crystal diamond (SCD) at relative scale in terms of the lateral size and thickness and quantity. The other 
CVD methods have shortcomings in terms of product chemical impurity cleanliness, crystallinity or 
scalability.

To grow diamond, one needs diamond to initiate the growth. Historically, the choke points for 

MPACVD were always the seed crystals that had to be sourced from HPHT grown substrates, and therefore
historically the SCD production by CVD revolved around crystals of no more than 3-5 mm is linear size.
With no special means, in homoepitaxy, the film being grown is as large and good as the initial 
seed/substrate. The initial substrate must have the lowest possible defect densities, starting with point 
defects in terms of desirable impurity levels and line defects in terms of dislocation densities. As a rule, 
dislocations must be reduced as low as possible to make the best performing devices. Plane and bulk defects 
are just unacceptable. Simultaneously, useful substrate area must be as large as possible for industry to even 
consider diamond as a base material. The initial dislocation densities tend to be the lowest in the HPHT 
technology. Substrates with defect densities as low as 103 cm-2 are readily available (Fig.3). This value is 
at least an order of magnitude lower than any other type of single crystal diamond on the market, and several 
orders of magnitude lower than any natural diamond [31]. Because HPHT crystals are small, maintaining 
or further lowering impurity concentration was usually the main challenge addressed in MPACVD. Even 
so, optically clear, and so-called electronic grade CVD diamond plates appear black when viewed by X-
rays because the number of dislocations is vast with a typical lateral density on the order of 105 1/cm2. Fig.3 
shows that CVD diamond quality is very inconsistent when compared between different groups that 
produce them (5 orders of magnitude spread), where dislocation density below 103 1/cm2 is rarely achieved. 
Such high dislocation densities negate diamond’s supremacy and hinders the ultimate performance of 
diamond electronics and compromise the device yield and hence manufacturing future. The presence and 
evolution of strain in diamond plates during epitaxial growth and device fabrication raise production cost 
and reliability concerns, and ultimately put the feasibility of a high-quality supply chain in question. For 
electronics R&D, substrates of a lateral size of at least 1010 mm2 to a square inch or better two inches are 
desirable to produce a device or an integrated circuit on the inner surface and away from the edges. For a 
long time, MPACVD diamond was a synonym of subpar quality diamond. To revolutionize modern 
electronics, incredible effort is being directed to finding ways to use CVD to economically grow defect-
free, large area diamond thin films. To reach the described wealth of potential applications, we need a 
method to produce diamond as a thin film that is scalable in size and available in plentiful amounts.


4

In 2020, the Department of Energy (DOE) funded programs in the search of growing large 

diffraction-grade diamond crystals for the manufacturing of X-ray optics for next generation brilliance light 
sources (synchrotrons and free electron lasers). The requirements were based on some early feasibility 
demonstrations [32] that diamond crystals could attain sizes 664 mm3 with perfect reflectivity >99% and 
theoretical bandwidth of 200 nrad over an area of 55 mm2. Those essentially meant that dislocation density 
must be as low as <100 cm-2. As Fig.3 highlights, it was only possible in HPHT crystals and DOE pushed 
for finding ways to enable new CVD means for economic production. In 2023, DARPA announced a new 
program to try and find pathways toward top-quality diamond produced economically for future 
radiofrequency (RF) and power electronics. Requirements were to grow diamond substrates greater than 
50 mm with dislocation density below 103 cm-2. In all announcement cases, such diamond would 
automatically guarantee superior electrical, thermal, and mechanical properties. Both DOE and DARPA 
announcements were eyebrow-raising but were informed by and came on the hills of new technological 
discoveries in MPACVD of SCD: mosaic, epitaxial layer outgrowth and flip-seed homoepitaxy and 
heteroepitaxy on iridium.

Fig.3. A comparison chart that maps out the state-of-the art quality of HPHT and homo- and hetero-

epitaxially grown diamond in terms of their dislocation density. Data is taken from Ref.[33].

Diamond CVD background

Si and Ge are in the carbon group of the periodic table. Unlike Si and Ge, carbon can assemble in 

different crystal forms, so-called allotropes, as explained and example in Fig.4. There is abundance of 
carbon allotropes known to date [34, 35], and only one of them assembles in the form that gave the name 
to Si and Ge crystal structures, i.e. diamond cubic structure. Graphite is the most thermodynamically stable 
material (ground state) and diamond is metastable. To reverse graphite into diamond one needs high 
pressure and high temperature. It is impossible from thermodynamic point of view to produce diamond 
under low pressure conditions. The discovery patented by Eversole and all who came later unambiguously 
demonstrated the opposite. The phase diagram of diamond synthesis is summarized in Fig.5. In any CVD 
method, for SCD growth methane feedstock of CH4 (3-5% of the mixture) diluted in hydrogen (95-97% of 
the mixture) is used. Hydrogen is a secret sauce and does all the important jobs in the MPACVD reactor.


5

Fig.4. A conceptual diagram comparing sp, sp2 and sp3 hybridization of carbon and lists corresponding 

allotropes most praised in electronics.

Fig.5. Diamond-graphite phase diagram.

Hydrogen defines the plasma properties, such as electron concentration and energy distribution and 

gas temperature. Graphite is sp2 bonded and diamond is sp3 bonded. The difference is that sp3 bond must 
contain only single bonds, called sigma bonds, between carbon atoms. Graphite, or rather graphene, is a sp2
planar structure giving away 2D materials with conductivity. Diamond sp3 is a 3D structure. It actually 
replicates methane. By adding four methane molecule shaped unit cells, one constructs the diamond cubic 
crystal. This is summarized in Fig.4. In order to maintain single sigma-bonds to build the diamond cubic 
structure methane must be converted into methyl and remain suspended in atomic hydrogen. In early 
1990’s, a critically important body of work emerged that showed extremely efficient dissociation of 


6

hydrogen gas into atomic hydrogen in 1-1,000 Torr if gas temperature is 1,000-3,000 K. Fig.6a shows that 
it is possible to dissociate over 50% percent of molecular hydrogen. It was shown by modelling and 
experiment [36] that hydrogen plasma driven by a microwave source at 1-1,000 Torr can produces that hot 
of a gas. Upon dissociating, atomic hydrogen attacks methane and produces the reactive methyl radical, a 
fundamental building block of diamond growth. It appears that methyl production through a reaction H + 
CH4 = CH3 + H2 is much more energy favorable (activation energy of 38.07 kJ/mol [37]) than through 
direct decomposition reaction CH4 = CH3 + H (activation energy of 438.89 kJ/mol [38].) This is the first 
abstraction reaction. Additional relation between hydrogen atomization ratio and methyl production rate 
was established by Goodwin and Butler [39], see Fig.6b. It is seen that approximately 1-10% of atomized 
hydrogen is enough to produce maximal amount of methyl. This corresponds the standard operational 
regimes of MPACVD reactors of 100-200 Torr. Finally, atomic hydrogen saturates the methyl system and 
locks methyl radicals into single bonded configurations. One could think of diamond synthesis as a series 
of hydrogen abstraction and exchange reactions as summarized in Fig.7. Then methyl radical interacts with 
the substrate or other radicals through a series of follow up hydrogen abstractions and creates the famous 
diamond lattice hex where all carbon atoms are sigma bonded. Lastly, as Eversole showed, hydrogen 
actively and preferentially etches sp2 graphitic content at >1000 K temperatures and hence additionally 
make diamond production net positive [40].

Fig.6. (a) Efficiency of atomic hydrogen generation at different gas temperatures and pressures, adapted 
from Ref.[41]; (b) The atomic hydrogen ratio effect on carbon species at a typical gas temperature 2,500 

K, adapted from Ref.[39].

Little has changed in terms of understanding of basic diamond growth kinetics in 

methane/hydrogen plasmas. Main efforts and successes were achieved in finding innovative ways to 
overcome substrate related choke points and substrate holder re-designs for scalable productions. These 
successes and innovations are reviewed for the remainder of this review.


7

Fig.7. Hydrogen abstraction reactions drive diamond synthesis.

State-of-the-art

CVD SCD lift-off and substrate recycling

It must be noted that in 1-to-2-inch diamond plate production, separating the grown layer from the 

substrate using laser ablation is no longer a viable option due to the kerf loss [42]. Currently, the state-of-
the-art solution is the lift-off via interface ion implantation. Ion implantation is a common technique in 
semiconductor industry used for doping, where dopant ions directly bombard a wafer. Dopant depth and 
distributions within a substrate are controlled by adjusting kinetic energy and charge state of the ions. A 
variation of this technique was first applied to diamond [43, 44] with a goal of generating sub-surface 
damage such that the sub-surface region is graphitized and the top growth diamond surface remained intact.
Graphitized region is then more prone to chemical attack or dry etching, thereby opening up the possibility 
of detaching two sections of the post growth sample separated by the engineered graphitic interface, a 
process coined as lift-off. Fig.8 shows a diagram of the process. Typically, MeV carbon ions are used to 
irradiate diamond to engineer the graphitized interface. Because the very top surface retains its crystallinity 
it can be used as a seed for diamond deposition. The damaged region is further graphitized under elevated 
temperature during CVD growth (~900 C). The separation is extremely robust with minimal kerf losses 
and achieved by different means such as hot chromic acid, thermal oxidation, and others. The lift-off 
technique was proven to be very effective for large plate production with no inherent size limitations and 
hence became a method-of-choice for recycling high quality HPHT seeds, that are very costly, hence for 
overcoming the supply bottleneck for scalable SCD production in MPACVD at lower cost.


8

Fig.8. The concept of ion implantation enabled lift-off. Sub-surface damage distribution within the

diamond seed is shown when irradiated with MeV C ions. A step-wise schematic illustrating the wafer 

replication process by recycling the substrate seed [45] is shown.

Substrate pocket holder design and polycrystalline diamond rim termination

In MPACVD, the parameters for a geometric growth progression are expected to remain the same 

with time once the macroscopic reactor parameters like the gas flow, pressure and microwave power are 
set. It appears to be an incorrect assumption. As the CVD crystal grows thicker on the substrate, gaining 
thickness similar to that of its substrate, additional effects caused by sample-plasma interactions start 
playing role. A practical method allowing for quasi-stable growth conditions was proposed and realized at
AIST in Japan. They introduced a so-called enclosed (or pocket) type molybdenum holder in 2005 [46]. 
The design and the difference against the traditional open type of holder are illustrated in Fig.9. In the 
original paper, it was demonstrated that growth condition stability was achieved. The pocket design resulted 
in a striking improvement of the grown crystal quality as long as the sample remained recessed in the 
pocket.

Fig.9. Schematic illustration of the enclosed/pocket and open type sample holders: the sample is recessed 

in the pocket to distance d [46].

At MSU, Asmussen’s group [47] found that there is an additional benefit of the pocket holder 

design. It helps mitigating the polycrystalline diamond (PCD) rim formation. Until then, PCD rim formation 
was yet another shortcoming in the CVD growth. PCD formation is a net negative effect resulting in reduced 
lateral area of the grown SCD films. Fig.10 illustrates the concept of the discovered mitigation. The general 


9

understanding of this effect is that plasma does not couple to the substrate edges, thereby not causing 
overheating at the edges. As a result, it does not change the growth conditions from being favorable to grow 
SCD into PCD, which contains a large fraction of bulk defects like graphitic grain boundaries. Such a 
simple modification of the holder was proved to be absolutely indispensable in producing higher quality 
crystals of simultaneously larger lateral area.

Fig.10. Open (top row) versus pocket (bottom row) holder comparisons regarding the PCD rim formation: 

Cross-sectional views of SCD synthesis versus time and optical images of as-grown crystals. As SCD 
growth versus time proceeds the new SCD grows without a PCD rim both vertically and horizontally. 
PCD is only deposited on the top of the substrate holder. The yellow color denotes the HPHT SCD seed 

substrate, orange denotes the synthesized CVD SCD and the gray area identifies the deposited PCD 

material.

Mosaic technique

This technique should not come as a surprise if one remembers how thin solid films grow

undergoing through nucleation, isolated crystal/island growth and coalescence, as illustrated in Fig.10. The 
first demonstration of the mosaic technique was experimentally reported in 1994 at MIT Lincoln Laboratory
[48]. Several hundred of cubic micro tiles, defined here as diamond cubes with sides no larger than 300 μm
(Fig.11) were used. The mosaic seeds were [100] HPHT crystals. Crystal tile sizes and shapes were sorted, 
assembled and kept together in a specialty holder on a silicon wafer as illustrated in Fig.11. Approximately 
20 μm of homoepitaxial diamond was grown over this substrate using a plasma CVD process, forming a 
continuous layer over the mosaic substrate as illustrated in Fig.11. The resulting layer was highly defective, 
but it validated the basic concept of mosaic growth in demonstrating that a continuous homoepitaxial layer 
can be achieved even with multiple interfaces and imperfect alignment between tiles. The study also showed 
how quantitative evaluation of relative misalignments is straightforward, regardless of the number of tiles.
After this trailblazing demonstration, the mosaic approach has been accelerating and deepening as a branch 
of diamond technology with a few technological milestones, including a 3D mosaic crystal [49].


10

Fig.10. The principal concept of achieving large area diamond substrate through mosaic technique.

Fig.11. (left). Top view of schematic drawing of assembly of cubic crystals in a square frame. Inset is a 
scanning electron micrograph of a single cubic diamond crystal, where the square faces of the cube are 
{100} planes and the corners are faced with {111} planes. (right) Optical micrograph showing joined 

mosaics.

As Figs.10 and 11 illustrates, conceptually the mosaic approach is straightforward. From practical 

standpoint, isolated tile assembly remained a challenge because the height distribution between individual 
tiles and their relative in-plane (twist) and out-of-plane rotations (tilt and torsion) (see Fig.12 for 
explanation) and interface gaps were later found critical for successful growths. The main requirements 
being creating conditions were stress at the interface is 0.1-0.3 GPa [50, 51] guaranteeing no cracking of 
the wafers upon thermocycling in the reactor and during post-growth device/IC fabrication steps.

Fig.12. Four tiles placed together illustrating the TTT concept of twist (left) and tilt/torsion (right) angle 

misorientations [52].


11

Stringent requirements on tile preparation and assembly in terms of tile height, twist, tilt and torsion 

and limited substrate sourcing slowed down the progress toward attaining high quality SCD plates of 10+ 
mm in linear size. To make the mosaic technology economic, multiple sourced high quality substrate tile 
had to be found, characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), laser cut, polished, remeasured by XRD making 
sure the correct crystallographic qualities. There was slow progress until a cloning technique was invented 
at AIST, Japan [53]. The group realized that if the ion implantation and lift-off process is repeated using 
the same seed, each produced plate would have identical crystal orientations and other geometrical features. 
The group proceeded with developing mosaic technique by defining these produced plates as clones. The 
cloning process starts by ion implanting a high purity HPHT Ib-type seed. Each clone and following mosaic 
plates are all grown by MPACVD and cloned through the lift-off (ion implantation plus etching). 
Conceptually, the full process is illustrated in Fig.13.

Fig.13. The concept of production of cloned tiles by ion implantation, and of the resulting large plate 

production [54].

Each cloned tile is fine-tuned by laser cutting and polishing leading to the resulting angle 

misalignments from the mosaic re-assembling process of about 2° which yielded excellent results and 
effectively showed a path for solving the substrate sourcing bottleneck. As Fig.14 highlights, the process 
was successful at the 1-inch scale when four tiles were joined. Boundaries above the original tile interfaces 
are not visible optically and are labeled with arrows in the figure.

Fig.14. Polished mosaic plate 22 mm wide as produced by the tile cloning mosaic method based on four 

tiles put together as a substrate.

If the cloning process is repeated over and over again, the resulting diamond plate area is amplified 

exponentially. The same group expanded the total area of CVD grown SCD plates first to 20×40 mm2 and 
later attempted a 2 inch wafer, a critical benchmark size for semiconductor industry, and successfully 
produced a 40×60 mm2 diamond substrate by joining together twenty-four 10×10 mm2 cloned SCD plates
[55]. The thickness of the plate was 1.8 mm. These two milestone results, and one other one reported in 


12

Ref.[56] are shown in Fig.15. These 2-inch results hold the record and show the potency of the mosaic 
technique for revolutionizing diamond electronics.

Fig.15. (top) Demonstrated cloning processes resulted in 20×40 mm2 and 40×60 mm2 SCD of mm 

thicknesses; (bottom) Two-inch diameter SCD during growth and as grown. In this case, thickness non-

uniformity, center to edge, was found to be as high as 25%.

Recent work by Diaz at MSU [57] revisited the mosaic growth and created a systematic list of 

critical requirements for successful 1 to 2 inch growths as

First, it was practically found that the gaps between the tiles, to be successfully bridged and overgrown in 
the homoepitaxy, have to be less than 50 μm [53]. Larger gaps do not merge.

Second, as best described by Findeling-Dufour et al. [58, 59] and supported much later by Wang et al. [51], 
the height steps between the tiles (resulting from the tile thickness differences) are favorable for tile joining 
as it facilitates so-called step flow growth and bridging per Fig.16. Without this condition the mosaic growth 
fails. Whether there is a critical height step exists remains unknown.


13

Fig.16. Proposed mechanism of junction interface formation under the surface step flow in CVD mosaic 

growth. Adapted from Ref.[51].

Third, relative in-plane tile orientation (twist angle as in Fig.12) matters. Because in high quality 
homoepitaxy orientation of the substrate tile is conserved, the discrepancy between step flow growth 
direction and actual orientation, as set by the twist angle, obviously must lead to internal stresses [50, 51]
often causing cracking. The larger the twist the larger the stress. The one case where the four tiles held 
together without cracking were assembled with relatively small misorientations [52]. This is why the 
cloning technique was so successful at increasing substrate areas substantially as it virtually eliminated 
misorientations, twist, tilt and torsion.

Fourth, to minimize internal stresses as the mosaic crystal assembles growth conditions must be 
incentivized to allow for the resulting boundary to form hundreds of microns away from the actual touching 
boundaries (see Fig.16). To facilitate this process, lattice off-cuts are introduced, where the cut-off means 
a few degrees difference from the perfect cubic crystallographic angle. The resulting step flow growth leads 
then to a boundary shift thereby improving the boundary crystal quality.

Epitaxial layer outgrowth (ELO) technique

At Michigan State University, there were a series of important findings [60, 61] that resulted from 

the intertwined effects of pocket holder and step flow growth, as pictured in Figs.17. Because the parasitic 
effect of the PCD rim formation is suppressed, single crystalline outflow/outgrowth is allowed. The CVD 
crystal literally gains the lateral dimension as it gets thicker with time. The original papers found that it was 
possible to double the lateral area without any additional efforts! This area increasing effect was dubbed as 
epitaxial layer outgrowth or ELO. Further, it was discovered that there is an asymmetry effect that may be 
induced if the diamond substrate is off set in the pocket holder as highlighted by Fig.17.


14

Fig.17. Schematic and results of symmetric and asymmetric ELO in the pocket during CVD.

Our recent work at MSU [62] extended understanding of the asymmetry effect and overall ELO kinetics by 
analyzing the growth results in the framework of the Avrami model [63] describing the gas-to-solid phase 
transformation through temporal lateral gain function L(t) as

𝐿(𝑡) = 𝐴(1 − 𝑒−𝑡/𝜏),   (1)

when boundary conditions are set for the simple straight box pocket holder design (Fig.18). Here A is the 
max lateral gain (measured in mm) and  is the characteristic time (measured in hours.) Eq.1 is a trivial 
case of the first order exponential decay growth. The lateral gain rate slows down exponentially as the 
distance G between the growing CVD crystal and the pocket side wall reduces. While trivial, Eq.1 perfectly 
describes the resulting growths in both symmetric and asymmetric cases.

Fig.18. (left) A step-like schematic of the ELO process resulting in exponential decay mode; (right) 

Lateral gain experimental data fit by Eq.1.


15

The next question that arises is whether the holder-SCD system can be manipulated such that the 

growth rate dL(t)/dt is a constant. Intuitively, it is clear that the holder needs to be redesigned such that the 
gap G between the growing CVD crystal and the pocket wall is kept constant. This then mitigates the 
exponential decay and allows for the desired constant growth rate. The geometrical means to achieve and 
control the optimal constant gap distance is by making an angled pocket holder. Again, it is intuitively clear 
that the angle has to be between 0 (open holder design causing unwanted PCD rim) and 90 (square box 
design causing exponential decayed ELO) degrees. This concept is illustrated in Fig.19. A series of holders 
were created where the most promising were the ones with an angle close to 45 degrees. Fig.20 compares 
results obtained for the holders that have opening angle varied with respect to 45 degrees; it compares 60-
and 37-degree pocket holders. Because the pockets now are semi-open, some PCD deposition is expected 
to form that would cause the gap to close from 37 degrees toward 45 degrees thereby inducing quasi-linear 
ELO. The inset in Fig.20 shows the cross-section of a sample typically grown in the 37 degree design 
showing the straight line crystal expansion directly confirming that linear ELO mode was achieved.
Through additional optimization steps, it was shown that the linear size of the homoepitaxially grown CVD 
crystals can be doubled and the area can be quadrupled which is a next significant step forward in grown 
truly single crystal diamond without internal interfaces like it is in the mosaic approach.

Fig.19. Linear lateral growth can be achieved by using properly angled pocket holder.

Fig.20. Comparison between 60 and 37 degree pockets leading correspondingly to sublinear (blue 

symbols) and linear (read symbols) ELO profiles during CVD.


16

Heteroepitaxy

Fig.21. Micrographs of top surface view (top) and the cross section (bottom) of a polycrystalline diamond 

film [64].

The growth of single crystalline diamond on non-diamond substrates has long been desired and 

attempted. If achieved, it would give new opportunities where diamond CVD is no longer dependent on 
limited supply HPHT substrates. One prime contender was the use of silicon since it has the diamond cubic 
lattice, albeit a different lattice constant. Additionally, silicon has been the established semiconductor 
material for the last 50 years and practically flawless wafers 300 mm in diameter are easily available. While 
there is a plerophory of data and research growing diamond on silicon, any attempts to grow single 
crystalline diamond were futile. Any growth of diamond directly on silicon, whether it be on unseeded 
wafers [65] or when applying improved seeding conditions (diamond nano particles [66], dip coating [67]
or surface carburization [68]) result in the formation of polycrystalline diamond (PCD) instead. The major 
problem will all of these grown PCD films is that crystal nucleation occurs in random orientation. Fig.21 
shows a cross section of such an exemplarity PCD growth. Thus, even though individual crystals coalesce 
when growing the film thicker, the existence of the random orientation prevents the ultimate coalescence 
into a single crystal, leaving behind grain boundaries. As in mosaic technique (Fig.12), the TTT 
misorientations in between individual crystals limit how much individual crystals can combine. In order to 
successfully grow SCD onto silicon material, it would be necessary to overcome this fundamental 
challenge, as in have all nucleation sides aligned with respect to twist and tilt. The most promising technique 
explored is bias-enhanced nucleation (BEN). BEN has been demonstrated to produce highly oriented 
nucleation sides on silicon. Subsequently, these nucleation sides can be coalesced effectively and grow into 
highly oriented diamond. The effectiveness of BEN in creating highly oriented diamond has been 
demonstrated on silicon [69-71] as well as on silicon carbide [72], another wide bandgap material that is of 
high interest for heterointegration with diamond. Fig.22 shows the top surface of such a highly oriented 
diamond film on silicon. It can be clearly seen, that the orientation of the diamond is almost exclusively 
alongside the (100) orientation. The resulting film appears more platelet like (something one could call 
assembled micro-tiles with minimized twist, tilt and torsion) than what randomly oriented PCD looks like
(Fig.21). Nevertheless, remaining substantial TTT variance is still visible. While BEN offered the most 
promising path in achieving direct heteroepitaxy of SCD on silicon, the process ultimately fell short.


17

Fig.22. Micrograph of a highly oriented heteroepitaxially nucleated diamond film on (001) oriented 

silicon wafer [71]. Scale bar is 10 microns.

Fig.23. Micrograph of a 45 µm thick heteroepitaxial diamond film deposited on Ir/YSZ/Si(001): (a) 

diamond film surface; (b) cross-section [73].

In the end, iridium came as a remedy and proved to be the only suitable material, where 

heteroepitaxy of SCD has been demonstrated. Since its first successful reporting by Schreck et al. [74]
every scientific report on SCD growth heteroepitaxy is done on iridium, albeit at a variance of substrate 
materials. Fig.23 shows the top growth surface achieved in a later publication by Gsell et al. [73]. It can be 
clearly seen that the grown diamond film is completely smooth and one continuous film. There is no 
resemblance of individual grains. The key reason that SCD heteroepitaxy on iridium succeeded, while it 
failed on silicon is that the lattice mismatch between diamond and iridium is only 7.1%, while it is 35% 
between diamond and silicon. More recently, in 2017 Schreck et al. [75] also introduced the ion 
bombardment induced buried lateral growth (IBI-BLG) mechanism, which explains how heteroepitaxial 
growth takes place. There, ion bombardment from the plasma induces the formation and lateral spread of 


18

epitaxial diamond within a narrow (~1 nm) carbon layer. This allows for the spread of buried epitaxial 
islands, created by original nucleation sides, over distances of several microns. During this process, 
secondary nuclei are being created continuously in the vicinity, which in turn cause the continuous lateral 
overgrowth with diamond. So far, this process is unique to growth of diamond on iridium surfaces.

Fig.24. Optical image of a 92 mm diameter SCD grown on Ir via heteroepitaxy. The wafer has a total 

thickness of 1.600.25 mm and its weight is 155 carat [75].

Once SCD heteroepitaxy has been successfully developed on iridium, it allowed to synthesize 

freestanding SCD wafers close to 100 mm. See Fig.24 for such an example of a 92 mm (3+ inches!) SCD 
wafer grown via heteroepitaxy. However, the process faces some unresolved challenges. For one, the 
deposition of iridium onto suitable carrier wafer materials is non-trivial. For example, in order to deposit 
iridium onto silicon, an yttra-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) [73] or strontium titanite [76] interlayer is necessary 
and iridium deposition temperatures need to be above 800 C. YSZ turned out to be the favorable choice 
since it reduces both, the in-plane twist of the nucleation centers and also the out-of-plane tilt, while 
strontium titanite only reduces twist. Other suitable carrier wafer materials are sapphire [77] and magnesium 
oxide [78] but these substrates contain their own individual additional challenges. Another one is as follows. 
Because diamond deposition takes place at substrate temperatures >800 C, any of stack substrates used for 
growth, for example diamond/Ir/YSZ/silicon, have significantly different individual thermal expansion 
coefficients, thereby causing significant thermal stresses into the material stack and, as a result, often 
leading to cracking of the resulting SCD wafer. Process optimizations attempting to minimize the amount 
of stress formation are still ongoing [79, 80]. For example, processes using magnesium oxide now use the 
KENZAN technique, which provides natural delamination of the heteroepitaxially grown SCD wafer. This 
prevents wafer cracking and helps substantially reduce threading dislocations [81].

Flipped seed technique

Fig.25. Schematic illustration of flipped crystal growth on three equivalent <100> orientations [82].


19

The approach of growing on various sides of a crystal in order to expand its lateral dimensions was 

first introduced by Mokuno et al. [83] as “side-surface growth”, but was also known as “flipped side” or 
“flipped crystal growth”. The technique employs the fact that all {100} crystal orientations are equivalent, 
and hence allow for equal growth whether it occurs in <100>, <010> or <001> direction. Early reports on 
the flipped crystal approach altered the growth between the [001] and [010] direction; it is illustrated in
Fig.25, where three subsequent growth iterations were performed altering between [100], [010] and again 
[100] growth. Each respective cube represents one growth step. The small lines indicate the individual 
growth directions of each growth iteration. In between growth steps, the diamond would typically be laser 
trimmed and polished to remove any PCD or otherwise parasitic growth that had occurred and would 
negatively impact future growth iterations. In Fig.25, the original dimensions were doubled and, as result,
the area quadrupled. Fig.26 shows a photograph of a diamond grown by the flipped seed method. Surface 
enlargements up to 1010 mm2 were reported using this technique [84]. A slight variation of the flipped 
crystal approach originating from the same research group was introduced [83]. There, growth iterations 
on three adjacent sides were performed. This variation leveraged the equivalence of the {100} sides. 
Diamond wafers half inch in size have been demonstrated [83].

Fig.26. Example of lateral growth using three iterations of the flipped seed method [84].

The two biggest problems associated with using flipped crystal growth is that defect density and 

the local stress increased significantly at the interfaces, where the actual crystal flipping occurred. This was 
experimentally verified by Mokuno et al. during their half-inch wafer demonstration [83]. Fig.27 shows the 
photograph of  the laser cleaved and polished surface of a diamond that was enlarged to a half-inch. Fig.27a
shows a half-inch SCD wafer that was subsequently grown and separated from the surface of the image 
shown in Fig.27b. Fig.27c shows the birefringence pattern inside the wafer Fig.27b highlighting the regions 
of strain and defect agglomeration, which transferred from the original enlarged crystal (Fig.27a) into the 
newly grown half-inch wafer (Fig.27b).


20

Fig.27. (a) Photograph of a half-inch seed plate obtained by cutting and polishing the diamond that was 
enlarged by flipped crystal growth. (b) Photograph of a half-inch SCD wafer grown from an enlarged 

seed. (c) Polarized light microscope image of the half-inch SCD wafer highlighting the regions of internal 

crystal stress.

Yet another alteration of the flipped seed method is the flipped side approach, which was proposed

by Muehle in his PhD thesis [85]. While the main principle still relies on the growth of various {100} 
directions it also leverages the fact that defects propagate preferentially along the original growth direction
[86, 87]. Friel et al. [87] demonstrated a vast reduction of the defect density when the growth direction of 
SCD is flipped orthogonally across different {100} directions. This was demonstrated by X-Ray 
topography, where defect propagation is visible as dark streaks. Fig.28 illustrates a clear separation between 
the [001] and [100] growth, and that the defect density in the second [100] growth is immensely reduced.

Fig.28. {111} Propagation topograph of a single crystal CVD diamond sample containing two 

consecutive CVD growth runs along the orthogonal [001] and [110] directions.

The goal of the flipped side approach is to solely use single directional growths as starting point 

for the next iteration of flipping. This is achieved by first creating a seed that is grown on its side for initial 
reduction of the defect density. From there, lateral enhancement is achieved by performing growth iterations 
to a desired thickness, then create a new flipped side crystal and repeat the process. The process for even 
larger lateral area expansion, starting at 13 mm node to 50 mm (de facto two inches) node, is shown in 
Fig.29. In the process flow, an optional step was added in the beginning which creates a 13 mm flipped side 
wafer for further defect reduction at the beginning of the process.


21

Fig.29. Schematic of the flipped side approach. Starting from a 13 mm wafer node, SCD enlargement to 

50 mm is achieved via two iterations of side flipping.

While this approach sounds logical and promising, it also has major drawbacks. When doing the 

mosaic approach, the later enlargement of the wafer dimension is simply that of the beginning tiles. A 
simple vertical growth step of as little as 1-2 mm is sufficient to create the enlarged wafer, and relative area 
enlargements can be as much as 8 or 16. Additionally, any further size enlargements can leverage the 
previously enlarged wafers. Contrary, during flipped side growth, the relation between the area to growth 
thickness results for each mm of growth to a similar enhancement of usable area. As a result, to achieve a 
two-inch wafer, a total of 100 mm of growth thickness, executed in separate enlargement steps for each of 
the two lateral dimensions, step is needed. Strikingly, when further size enlargement, e.g. three or four inch 
wafer node, are targeted the process has to start from the beginning and it does not scale from any prior 
progress. Any subsequent wafer enlargement comes with ever increasing requirements on total vertical 
growth. Another major concern for this technique is the well-known occurrence of shrinking SCD surfaces 
throughout the vertical growth process, especially when performing consecutive growth processes that are 
producing the vertical growth needed to enable the area enlargement [46]. Careful design of appropriate 
holders and sample placement (see Fig.20) can likely alleviate that problem, but appropriately designing 
optimized pocket holders that can accommodate crystals with length increasing to 2 inches or even more, 
and controlling the resulting growth process will amplify the complexity of an already complex and 
challenging engineering problem.

Future diamond manufacturing

This section presents the use of artificial intelligence (AI) as an emerging technology that, in the 

authors’ opinion, has so far been underutilized in the realm of materials development. As such it has the 
potential to define how diamond wafers and application devices are being manufactured. Further, these 
techniques have the protentional to disrupt the semiconductor industry, as well as adjacent crystal growth 
applications and additive manufacturing.

The use of AI has pioneered and transformed, even created, many new technologies and application 

fields. In turn, these had an invaluable impact on our economy and society. Only 15 years after the 
introduction of the first iPhone in 2007, people are using a swath of apps that are built into every major 
operating system to instantly translate foreign language text, use biometric facial and fingerprint recognition 
as a safety feature, identify nearly any object in a taken picture, or use external apps for recognition of your 
favorite music, or birdsong. All of these apps, and many more, that greatly improving our quality of life, 
are fueled by clever AI [88]. AI-based content recommendations on social media apps can be seen as a 
blessing or a curse. Either way, its transformative impact on societies across the globe cannot be denied. 
The majority of these AI-fueled disruptions fall under the category associated with “tech companies”. 
FAANG (Facebook [now Meta Platforms], Amazon, Apple, Netflix and Google [now Alphabet]) is another 
synonym. In a way it highlights how these five companies in particular were on the forefront of digital 
innovation, all of which can be tracked down to clever use of deep learning (DL), which is a subset of AI.


22

The takeaway is that while AI has disrupted society and large parts of the economy, similar impacts 

have not been seen in hardware driven technology development. So far, AI has only seen preliminary use 
in these, such as predictive maintenance decision making, creation and analysis of digital twins, and AI-
enabled generative design creations for resource efficiency and waste reduction [89]. However, while these 
adoptions hint at the potential of use of AI in “old tech”, it has not radically shifted the way business and 
R&D is conducted. One obvious holdback is the fact that development and integration of AI into complex, 
and often regulated hardware, is more complicated than to apply AI to digital products. As a result, materials 
development is still largely following a classical paradigm where human operators design new experiments 
based on information from post-process analysis and based on classical feedback of information. Recently, 
first disruptions of this concept were achieved by using AI to predict and control elastic strain in 
semiconductor crystalline materials, and to then experimentally demonstrate the the AI-predicted behavior
[90].

Fig.30. Schematic of a reactive (top) and AI-guide (bottom) material process development cycle.

This glimpse of how AI can transform material science and engineering inspired a reconsideration 

of the classical approach in experimental design. Instead, a data fed-forward guided approach was 
introduced and explored. The goal was to use AI in order to short-circuit the development cycle by 
leveraging the vast amounts of data generated during materials growth (in situ), which are typically 
underutilized in the experimental design process (Fig.30). Such an AI-guided approach inserts AI models 
between the start and end of the process to leverage the large amounts of data generated during synthesis. 
AI models trained on data distributions from in situ, reactor, and ex situ data can achieve accurate 
predictions of future material states, detect the formation of defects in those states, and be used as a closed-
loop control. This generates a new cycle within a single process. This approach is expected to make process 
development more efficient by reducing the number of experiments needed to achieve a result, e.g. fewer 
defects in a material. Properly trained AI pipelines will self-learn over fewer experiments than an exhaustive 
reactive approach and can continually be updated as conditions inevitably drift during the process cycle. 
Such an AI-guided approach is not possible with human operators, as even experienced experts cannot, in
situ, correlate input data with microscopic defect states and predict their formation.

Diamond is a perfect material for adoption of such an approach. For one, diamond as a material is 

still in its infancy when it comes to material maturation. The last 30 years of diamond research have shown 
that development of diamond as material, and its derived applications, follows similar timelines and cost as 
those of other semiconductor materials, such as SiC and GaN. For example, following the traditional 
reactive approach to material manufacturing development, 20 years and $10 billion dollars in R&D 
investment were required to introduce SiC devices to commercial markets in Japan alone (Fig.31). Despite 
this effort costs of SiC devices remained 3 those of Si as of 2017 due to remaining defects in the grown 
material [91, 92]. While SiC has seen a massive rollout in recent years due to increase demand in electric 


23

mobility solutions, that 3 cost premium has not changed [93], and is being attributed to a still overall 
modest market size. It is a reasonable assessment that diamond will fall under similar timelines and cost 
barring disruptive ways of how material maturation is handled. Use of an AI-guide material development 
cycle has the potential to overcome this. When successful, it does not only vastly improve the timeline for 
diamond wafers and applications, but the AI-guided approach can also be applied to other crystalline 
materials as well as for future advances in additive manufacturing.

Fig.31. Timeline for development of SiC wafer node and SiC-based Schottky barrier diodes from R&D to 

commercial deployment [92].

Fig.32. Visual depiction of segmentation model results on unseen test data. Left: Input Image, Middle: 
Actual/Labeled geometric features mask, Right: Predicted geometric features. Data presented in black, 
red, pink, and green represent the different independent features; background, pocket, diamond top and 

side.

Such an AI-guide approach was implemented into a MWCVD growth reactor for SCD wafer 

growth. The ultimate goal of enabling autonomous diamond growth via an AI growth control system. At 
such, in situ images of the diamond growth state and reactor telemetry were recorded. A full-frame 
mirrorless interchangeable lens camera (Sony Alpha 7R IV) was equipped with a macro lens (Sony 
SEL90M28G) for the red-green-blue (RGB) image recording. This configuration achieves pixel resolutions 
of ~1.61.6 µm2. Reactor telemetry was recorded via the in-house developed diamond reactor control 
software. An AI algorithm pipeline was developed to model diamond growth across three interconnected 
thrusts of 1) Feature extraction pipeline, for extraction of geometrical features, 2) Defect detection pipeline, 
to extract macroscopic defect features, and 3) Frame prediction pipeline, to predict future image states 6, 
8,12 and 20 hours into the future. The feature extraction pipeline concerns development of a novel DL-
driven semantic segmentation approach [94]. The objective of this algorithm was to isolate and classify 


24

accurate pixel masks of geometric features like diamond, pocket holder and background, and their 
corresponding derivative features based on the shape and size (Fig.32). The best performing DL-based 
model achieved excellent feature level accuracy metrics surpassing 91.6% for pocket holder, diamond top 
and diamond side features of interest. Similarly, the best performing defect detection pipeline achieved 
accuracy metrics surpassing 92% for detecting defects forming on the growth surface of the diamond (called 
center defects), defects alongside the diamond edges (called edge defects) and the formation of PCD rim, 
whether it is on the diamond or the holder. Lastly, the geometric and defect prediction pipelines were used 
as inputs for the AI to generate output images. Image sequences of 5 images, each taken 10 minutes apart, 
and corresponding reactor telemtetry was sufficient for prediction of the growth state in the diamond 
reactor. Fig.33 shows such an exemplamentory growth state prediction. It can be seen that the AI-predicted 
(right top) image and the actual growth stage recorded by the camera 6 hours later (right bottom) have stark 
overlap. The AI model accurately predicted the diamond shape and size, as well as the formation of defect 
alongside the edge of the pocket in the pocket holder. Pixel-by-pixel prediction accuracies of >99.999% 
were achieved. This constitutes a never-before obtained result of spatiotemporal AI prediction of diamond 
shape from data obtained during a growth run, and demonstrates in situ growth state prediction based on a 
few inputs is a viable path for AI-based growth prediction, and subsequently growth control.

Fig.33. AI prediction of diamond shape and defects six hours ours into the future. The five images on the 
left serve as the input sequence. The images on the right show the comparison between the predicted (top) 

and actual (bottom) growth state.

The next steps will be to expand to the use of multiple reactors as to form a reactor network. Doing 

so will help in eliminating some of the inherent bias the current data inherently has as only a single 
MPACVD growth reactor is utilized. Additionally, the use of extra data will leverage the learning 
capabilities of the AI. Second, the move towards full integration of an automated AI-feedback governed 
intelligence which guides the operation of a diamond reactor will be the keystone towards unleashing the 
power of AI when it comes to hardware based materials development. It will leapfrog further development 
of diamond materials, both on the wafer level and on the application space. Additionally, it also serves as 
a demonstrator that AI technologies, intertwined with complex hardware, can be deployed for enhanced 
material development and also as much more sophisticated growth quality control tool.

Diamond heterointegration

Separately, the authors want to highlight another technology in which diamond has potential 

disruptive use, namely heterointegration of diamond with other semiconducting materials. There, diamond 


25

is co-integrated with other semiconducting materials, such as Si, SiC, GaN, and others, to build devices and 
solutions that leverage beneficial properties for each of the materials. For example, integration of diamond 
with GaN makes a lot of sense, since it benefits from the great n-type conductive properties in GaN, while 
diamond has superb thermal conduction and p-type conductive properties. As such diamond-GaN p-n-
junctions are a very promising solution for heterointegrated devices. One way of achieving such a 
heterointegration is by using a semiconductor grafting technique to transfer an n-type membrane onto a 
prepared diamond wafer. One other specific realization of heterointegration is the creation of 
AlGaAs/GaAs/diamond heterojunctions for diamond-collector heterojunction bipolar transistors [95]. 
Generation of such semiconductor membranes, and handling thereof, are well established techniques [96]. 
Due to their unique properties, they can be simply transfer-printed using a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) 
stamp onto the new foreign substrate [97]. As a result, novel heterointegrated solutions will be achievable
[98]. The use, and combination, of materials via membrane technology, is a potential path forward, that can 
bypass current limitations of heterointegration of diamond with other semiconductor materials.

Outstanding scientific challenges. Plasma and reactor design and engineering

This section reviews some outstanding issues that, in authors’ opinion, are critical for advancing 

economic and scalable mad-made diamond production. Understanding of the interplay between the 
activated plasma and the substrate holder system is a key issue: it takes both the knowledge of the types 
and distributions of reactive species in methane/hydrogen base plasmas and the heating that activates 
chemistry in the gas phase and on the substrate. The interplay in question is affected by macroscopic reactor 
parameters such as forward microwave power, total pressure, precursor gas flow rates, sample stage cooling 
and overall geometry of a MPACVD reactor. Because these macroscopic parameters are simply the means 
to actuate plasma and reactive species and heat flow, plasma modelling becomes critical for rapid growth 
optimization and comparison between various reactors. Currently, state-of-the-art models try to understand 
SCD growth behavior by only utilizing the static reactor discharge region without the presence of the SCD 
sample [99, 100] or without giving details about self-consistently solving for electromagnetic (EM) field or 
heat transport redistributions in the presence of open or pocket holder and/or substrates [101, 102].

It must be stressed that the development of self-consistent reactor models specific to SCD growth 

could further reenergize the diamond supply chain technologies. Through modelling, respective plasma and 
substrate domains need to be optimized for high-quality growth where defect nucleation and propagation, 
and internal stresses due to defects and thermal gradients are inhibited, which is especially become critical 
when growing on the 1- to 2- inch wafer scale and beyond. Another critical aspect is that modelling must 
be carried out hand in hand with in situ reactor spectromicroscopy such that chemical species in the plasma 
center and periphery and thermal gradients across substrates and sample holders can be mapped and 
quantified. One current, basic and yet outstanding issue is benchmarking models and experiments in terms 
of absolute substrate temperature.

Generally, the proposed modeling approach should involve coupled steps 1) electromagnetic design 

of the reactor cavity, 2) plasma-microwave interaction, 3) plasma-substrate-cooling bath heat transfer, 4) 
chemical 
kinetics 
and 
reactivity 
of 
the 
CH4/H2
plasma, 
and 
5) 
additional 
emerging 

perturbations/interactions between CVD crystal (as it grows thicker) and plasma. These effects were not 
fully understood. Exemplary results of such a numerical model executed in COMSOL with boundary 
conditions coupling , thereby completing steps 1-3, are shown in Fig.34. In this model, a pure H2 plasma 
(pressure between 50 and 300 Torr) is ignited in a microwave cavity resonator by an external high power 
(1-3 kW) source operated at 2.45 GHz. H2 molecules dissociate and ionize, producing electrons (at high 
concentrations >1017 m-3) absorbing the microwave power and heating up the gas to over 3,000 K. This 
result is highlighted in Fig.34a. Despite addition of small amounts of hydrocarbons in the feed gas (<=5:95 
ratio) required for diamond growth, the main properties of the plasma discharge like thermal balance in the 
reactor and heat transfer to the substrate and through the sample holder/pocket (Fig.34b) are obtained by 


26

studying pure hydrogen plasma. The benefit of using this simplified situation is two-fold. First – fewer than 
30 reactions need to be considered, thereby enabling a great relief in terms of computational time. Second 
– classical analytical plasma approaches become available, thereby providing a robust sanity-check 
framework to supplement the numerical results. As a final result, Fig.34c contains the calculated steady-
state temperature distribution on the mosaic substrate 15 by 15 mm2 surface. The model predicts correctly 
that the growth temperature in the substrate center is 850 °C, a typical benchmark measured across similar 
reactors under the same growth conditions. A somewhat negligible thermal gradient of less than 10 C from 
the center to the perimeter was found. If one assumes previously considered phenomenological evidence 
[102] of the PCD rim formation caused by the temperature enhancement, our result may explain the PCD 
formation mitigation in the pocket design. In Fig.34c, one can see that at the ±8 mm mark temperature 
increases by a negligible amount (within computational error), while globally temperature on the outer side 
of the substrate is reduced. It can be naturally assumed that the temperature enhancement at the edges could 
be counter-balanced by the smaller heat flux from the plasma edges, thereby leading to the net zero effect 
and yielding uniform temperature distribution and preventing the rim formation only specific to the 
pocketed substrate holders.

Fig.34. Developed and matured MSU high pressure (100 Torr), high power (2 kW) reactor model that 

self-consistently solves for a) EM-plasma power coupling and plasma heating to temperatures over 3,000 

K; b) heat deposition and transfer to the substrate; and c) Resulting temperature distribution on the 

substrate.

Figs.15 and 24 highlighted the record growths of diamond plates of 1 inch or larger by the mosaic 

and heteroepitaxy techniques. On such scales, it is recorded that the growth rate become remarkably non-
uniform across the plates and cracking occurs. Particularly for 2-inch growth in Fig.15, it was concluded
that cracks were caused by immense internal stress as per recorded temperature difference of 100°C 
between the center of the samples and its edges. Since the growth rate is strongly dependent on the 
temperature, it decreased by about 20%. So far, growth results by the mosaic and ELO techniques or 


27

heteroepitaxy demonstrated that there is no fundamental limit on how laterally large the plate can be. The 
limiting factor becomes the standard reactor operating frequency of 2.45 GHz. The corresponding half-
wavelength of 60 mm at this frequency implies that an alternative plasma source must be developed when 
approaching substrate sizes 1 inch and above. There is a great need in developing more into reactor 
modelling with more focus, e.g., on 915 MHz frequency standard where larger plasmas activation becomes
possible. As illustrated in Fig.34, lower frequency reactors could be modelled and optimized along with 
pocketed sample holder configurations to achieve uniform heat flux with no thermal gradient that would 
yield uniform temperature that, in turn, would yield uniform growth rate and minimal internal stress while 
inhibiting PCD rim formation. Such reactor optimization work could therefore facilitate growing ever-
larger diamond plates of the microelectronics golden standard 2 inch and larger.

Scalable production also requires enhanced growth rates without compromising quality. It has been 

long known that addition of only 10’s ppm of nitrogen in to methane/hydrogen plasma can boost SCD 
growth rates ten-fold [103, 104]. Despite ubiquitous application in growing SCD, however, the causes of 
the growth rate enhancement remain fundamentally unclear. Obviously, N2 addition to the process gas 
mixture affects the chemistry and composition of the microwave activated gas interacting with the substrate 
surface. In 2022, Ashfold and Mankelevich published a profound study on two-dimensional self-consistent 
modelling of N/C/H gas mixtures [105]. Using typical CVD reactor parameters, they showed that only 
~0.3% of the input nitrogen molecules remain in the plasma reaction zone mostly contributing to the 
formation of NHx (x=0-3) and HxCN (x=0-2) species. As a result, an abysmal near surface N atom 
concentration was found to exist in the reactor such that the near-surface [N]/[CH3] ratio could be as low 
as ~10-5. They concluded that it remained challenging to explain how such small concentrations of N-
containing precursor can result in ~10-fold increases in growth rate. This calls for continuous efforts to 
understand fundamental plasma kinetics theoretically and through modelling that could have immediate 
practical growth applications.

Lastly, it is proposed that modelling using standards platforms that can be easily accessed, like 

COMSOL and ANSYS assisted with BOLSIG+, and shared open access reaction databases must be 
prioritized. This way modelling can be reproduced and verified in academic research. The importance of 
using codes like BOLSIG+ stems from its ability of giving a more detailed view of the electron energy 
distribution function (EEDF). It is generally known that, while the major fraction of electrons of roughly 
1-2 eV defines properties like gas temperature, EEDF tails can drastically change plasma reactivity and 
reaction selectivity. Fig.35 compares methane ionization rates between Maxwellian and local EEDF 
approaches. More detailed analysis of Boltzmann equation for a standard MSU diamond CVD reactor 
demonstrated that error in ionization rate calculation, caused by the high energy EEDF tail, may be larger 
than a factor of 10. This will lead to errors in plasma parameters prediction in that plasma reactive species 
concentration calculations and hence growth rate may be incorrect. This further calls for advanced in situ
plasma spectromicroscopy and other probe diagnostics to reveal non-Maxwellian conditions and effects.


28

Fig.35. An example of non-Maxwellian EEDF on plasma reactivity: (left) Normalized EEDF in hydrogen 

plasma at two different methane mole fractions, 0.001 and 0.01 hydrogen; (right) Total ionization 

frequency of the CH4/H2 gas mixture at 0.001 and 0.01 mole fraction of methane.

Conclusions

In conclusion, an overview of recent advancements in scalable diamond production was given. In 

2016, Yole Group published a graph that charted history and comparison between wafer development for 
the major wide bandgap semiconductors, as plotted against Si (Fig.36, top). It can be seen that progress in 
diamond development was curbed at no more than 1 inch. Between 2016 and 2023, true breakthroughs took 
place, especially in diamond heteroepitaxy. Fig.36, bottom extends the previous chart overlapping at 2015 
mark. One can see that linear progress gave way to exponential growth in diamond wafer size. Projection 
toward 2030 predicts that this exponential trend will hold allowing for wafers as large as 6-8 inches. While 
this new chart is probably over-optimistic, it does highlight the fact that heteroepitaxy is expected to fuel 
the future progress in diamond R&D. It has to be noted that three homoepitaxy (mosaic, ELO and flipped-
seed) and heteroepitaxy techniques are currently all viable options for scalable and economic production of 
diamond. Hence, we outline some important points when all these methods are compared in terms of 
scalability and economics for creating reliable supply chain for future manufacturing.

In heteroepitaxy, one big concern is the high cost of the iridium itself. Another is the lack of a 

process to reuse prepared wafers for multiple growth runs, like it exists in homoepitaxy, e.g., see cloning 
in mosaic growth. When mosaic homoepitaxy and heteroepitaxy are compared, it is clear that both 
techniques rely on pre-existing tile-like seeds that merge/coalesce into a single crystal under CVD growth: 
in mosaic method tiles are placed by hand and in heteroepitaxy tiles are generated via BEN. Because the 
twist, tilt and torsion set by hand will never be as perfect as can be achieved through BEN, an argument can 
be made that diamond grains in mosaic method will never merge perfectly at the interface but rather stay 
connected. As Fig.29 illustrates, in flipped seed method, the area enchantment is as good as the thickness 
attained in the prior growth (then flipped). As a result, the flipped side technique has not been practically 
implemented beyond academic feasibility studies and is considered to only serve as a fallback solution in 
case other techniques fall short on delivering wafers in the appropriate sizes.

It is fair to state that at this point, no technique can achieve size, quality and quantity at the same 

time. Wafer size in heteroepitaxy is the largest and so is the defect density, 107-109 cm-3 [106], much higher 
compared to those in homoepitaxy. Such high defect densities compromise application of heteroepitaxially 
grown SCD in electronics. While area enlargement in ELO is modest, defect densities in the low 103 cm-3

are routine [107]. When ELO is used together with additional substrate engineering techniques [108, 109], 
it is possible to reduce the defect density down to 102 cm-3 [110], a value otherwise only achieved by the 
highest quality HPHT crystals. In Fig.28, a striking example of dislocation reduction in the flipped seed 

Electron energy (eV)

Normalized count

Ionization Rate (m3/s)

10-19

10-20

10-21

10-22

0.   0.002. 0.0004 0.006. 0.008.   0.01  0.012

Mole fraction


29

method is highlighted. It can be hypothesized that, moving forward, new combinations between the existing 
four methods could be developed to pave ways for new methodologies attaining large size, low defect 
density and low-cost diamond wafers.

From historic perspective, the progress in diamond synthesis consisted from two stages: 1) 

development of physics and chemistry of methane/hydrogen plasma activation and kinetics that led to 
engineering development of the workhorse reactor designs and 2) engineering development of novel 
substrate and substrate holder techniques, like ion-assisted lift-off, BEN, mosaic assembly and pocket 
holder. In this paper, it was argued that in order to enable future progress and diamond manufacturing, self-
consistent synergy should be applied between plasma modelling and theory and in situ diagnostics, and 
substrate/holder optimization. This way best conditions could be found and implemented where chemical 
species and heat flux distributions are of proper magnitude and uniformity to enable 2+ inch wafers growths 
at high rates and minimal thermal stress mitigating cracking and minimizing dislocation densities. When 
models, in situ spectromicroscopy data and other reactor observables are combined with AI and machine 
learning, it is expected to further bolster advancement in diamond manufacturing for future 
microelectronics that includes both all-diamond and heterointegrated devices.

Fig.36. Historic charts showing the progress in diamond substrate size.


30

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by internal funds provided by College of Engineering, Michigan State University 
and Fraunhofer USA, Inc., NSF award 2036737 including a supplemental INTERN award, and DOE Basic 
Energy Science award DE-SC0020671.

Reference

[1]
N. Skukan, V. Grilj, I. Sudić, M. Pomorski, W. Kada, T. Makino, Y. Kambayashi, Y. Andoh, S. 
Onoda, S. Sato, T. Ohshima, T. Kamiya, and M. Jakšić, “Charge multiplication effect in thin 
diamond films,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 109, no. 4, pp. 043502, 2016.

[2]
A. V. Krasilnikov, J. Kaneko, M. Isobe, F. Maekawa, and T. Nishitani, “Fusion Neutronic Source 
deuterium–tritium neutron spectrum measurements using natural diamond detectors,” Review of 
Scientific Instruments, vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 1720-1724, 1997.

[3]
J. F. Hochedez, P. Bergonzo, M. C. Castex, P. Dhez, O. Hainaut, M. Sacchi, J. Alvarez, H. Boyer, 
A. Deneuville, P. Gibart, B. Guizard, J. P. Kleider, P. Lemaire, C. Mer, E. Monroy, E. Muñoz, P. 
Muret, F. Omnes, J. L. Pau, V. Ralchenko, D. Tromson, E. Verwichte, and J. C. Vial, “Diamond 
UV detectors for future solar physics missions,” Diamond and Related Materials, vol. 10, no. 3-7, 
pp. 673-680, 2001.

[4]
S. Stoupin, “Novel diamond X-ray crystal optics for synchrotrons and X-ray free-electron lasers,” 
Diamond and Related Materials, vol. 49, pp. 39-47, 2014.

[5]
S. Stoupin, S. Antipov, and A. M. Zaitsev, “High-dynamic-range transmission-mode detection of 
synchrotron radiation using X-ray excited optical luminescence in diamond,” Journal of 
Synchrotron Radiation, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 708-712, 2020.

[6]
M. Zou, M. Gaowei, T. Zhou, A. V. Sumant, C. Jaye, D. A. Fisher, J. Bohon, J. Smedley, and E. 
M. Muller, “An all-diamond X-ray position and flux monitor using nitrogen-incorporated ultra-
nanocrystalline diamond contacts,” Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1060-
1067, 2018.

[7]
E. Wang, I. Ben-Zvi, T. Rao, D. A. Dimitrov, X. Chang, Q. Wu, and T. Xin, “Secondary-electron 
emission from hydrogen-terminated diamond: Experiments and model,” Physical Review Special 
Topics - Accelerators and Beams, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 111301, 2011.

[8]
J. Shao, M. Schneider, G. Chen, T. Nikhar, K. K. Kovi, L. Spentzouris, E. Wisniewski, J. Power, 
M. Conde, W. Liu, and S. V. Baryshev, “High power conditioning and benchmarking of planar 
nitrogen-incorporated ultrananocrystalline diamond field emission electron source,” Physical 
Review Accelerators and Beams, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 123402, 2019.

[9]
T. Schröder, M. E. Trusheim, M. Walsh, L. Li, J. Zheng, M. Schukraft, A. Sipahigil, R. E. Evans, 
D. D. Sukachev, C. T. Nguyen, J. L. Pacheco, R. M. Camacho, E. S. Bielejec, M. D. Lukin, and D. 
Englund, “Scalable focused ion beam creation of nearly lifetime-limited single quantum emitters 
in diamond nanostructures,” Nature communications, vol. 8, no. 1, 2017.

[10]
L. Childress, and R. Hanson, “Diamond NV centers for quantum computing and quantum 
networks,” MRS Bulletin, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 134-138, 2013.

[11]
N. Yang, S. Yu, J. V. Macpherson, Y. Einaga, H. Zhao, G. Zhao, G. M. Swain, and X. Jiang, 
“Conductive diamond: synthesis, properties, and electrochemical applications,” Chemical Society 
Reviews, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 157-204, 2019.

[12]
N. Nunn, M. Torelli, G. McGuire, and O. Shenderova, “Nanodiamond: A high impact 
nanomaterial,” Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1-9, 2017.

[13]
A. Ahnood, M. C. Escudie, R. Cicione, C. D. Abeyrathne, K. Ganesan, K. E. Fox, D. J. Garrett, A. 
Stacey, N. V. Apollo, S. G. Lichter, C. D. L. Thomas, N. Tran, H. Meffin, and S. Prawer, 
“Ultrananocrystalline diamond-CMOS device integration route for high acuity retinal prostheses,” 
Biomedical Microdevices, vol. 17, no. 3, 2015.


31

[14]
R. C. Burns, A. I. Chumakov, S. H. Connell, D. Dube, H. P. Godfried, J. O. Hansen, J. Härtwig, J. 
Hoszowska, F. Masiello, L. Mkhonza, M. Rebak, A. Rommevaux, R. Setshedi, and P. Van 
Vaerenbergh, “HPHT growth and x-ray characterization of high-quality type IIa diamond,” Journal 
of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 21, no. 36, pp. 364224, 2009.

[15]
B. J. Baliga, “Power semiconductor device figure of merit for high-frequency applications,” IEEE 
Electron Device Letters, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 455-457, 1989.

[16]
B. J. Baliga, “Semiconductors for high‐voltage, vertical channel field‐effect transistors,” Journal 
of Applied Physics, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1759-1764, 1982.

[17]
E. Johnson, “Physical limitations on frequency and power parameters of transistors,” vol. 13, pp. 
27-34, 1965.

[18]
R. W. Keyes, “Figure of merit for semiconductors for high-speed switches,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 225-225, 1972.

[19]
M. W. Geis, T. C. Wade, C. H. Wuorio, T. H. Fedynyshyn, B. Duncan, M. E. Plaut, J. O. Varghese, 
S. M. Warnock, S. A. Vitale, and M. A. Hollis, “Progress Toward Diamond Power Field-Effect 
Transistors,” physica status solidi (a), vol. 215, no. 22, pp. 1800681, 2018.

[20]
R. Uecker, “The historical development of the Czochralski method,” Journal of Crystal Growth,
vol. 401, pp. 7-24, 2014.

[21]
F. Bundy, H. Hall, and H. Strong, “Wentorf jun, rh man-made diamonds,” Nature, vol. 176, no. 
4471, pp. 51-55, 1955.

[22]
H. Sumiya, and K. Tamasaku, “Large Defect-Free Synthetic Type IIa Diamond Crystals 
Synthesized via High Pressure and High Temperature,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 
51, pp. 090102, 2012.

[23]
J. C. Angus, H. A. Will, and W. S. Stanko, “Growth of diamond seed crystals by vapor deposition,” 
Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 2915-2922, 1968.

[24]
B. V. Derjaguin, D. V. Fedoseev, V. M. Lukyanovich, B. V. Spitzin, V. A. Ryabov, and A. V. 
Lavrentyev, “Filamentary diamond crystals,” Journal of Crystal Growth, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 380-384, 
1968.

[25]
W. G. Eversole, Synthesis of diamond, USA,to Union Carbide Corporation, 1961.

[26]
S. Matsumoto, Y. Sato, M. Tsutsumi, and N. Setaka, “Growth of diamond particles from methane-
hydrogen gas,” Journal of materials Science, vol. 17, pp. 3106-3112, 1982.

[27]
F. Akatsuka, Y. Hirose, and K. Komaki, “Rapid Growth of Diamond Films by Arc Discharge 
Plasma CVD,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 27, no. 9A, pp. L1600, 1988/09/01, 1988.

[28]
Y. Hirose, S. Amanuma, and K. Komaki, “The synthesis of high‐quality diamond in combustion 
flames,” Journal of applied physics, vol. 68, no. 12, pp. 6401-6405, 1990.

[29]
D. Satrapa, R. Haubner, and B. Lux, “Aspects of diamond deposition by anomalous pulsed dc glow-
discharge-activated chemical vapor deposition,” Surface and Coatings Technology, vol. 47, no. 1-
3, pp. 59-68, 1991.

[30]
M. Kamo, Y. Sato, S. Matsumoto, and N. Setaka, “Diamond synthesis from gas phase in microwave 
plasma,” Journal of crystal growth, vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 642-644, 1983.

[31]
A. Tallaire, J. Achard, F. Silva, O. Brinza, and A. Gicquel, “Growth of large size diamond single 
crystals by plasma assisted chemical vapour deposition: Recent achievements and remaining 
challenges,” Comptes Rendus Physique, vol. 14, no. 2-3, pp. 169-184, 2013.

[32]
Y. Shvyd'Ko, S. Stoupin, V. Blank, and S. Terentyev, “Near-100% Bragg reflectivity of X-rays,”
Nature Photonics, vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 539-542, 2011.

[33]
K. Ichikawa, K. Kurone, H. Kodama, K. Suzuki, and A. Sawabe, “High crystalline quality 
heteroepitaxial diamond using grid-patterned nucleation and growth on Ir,” Diamond and Related 
Materials, vol. 94, pp. 92-100, 2019.

[34]
H. Andreas, “The era of carbon allotropes,” Nature materials, vol. 9, pp. 868, 2010.

[35]
E. H. Falcao, and F. Wudl, “Carbon allotropes: beyond graphite and diamond,” Journal of 
Chemical Technology & Biotechnology: International Research in Process, Environmental & 
Clean Technology, vol. 82, no. 6, pp. 524-531, 2007.


32

[36]
J. Butler, Y. A. Mankelevich, A. Cheesman, J. Ma, and M. Ashfold, “Understanding the chemical 
vapor deposition of diamond: recent progress,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 21, no. 
36, pp. 364201, 2009.

[37]
Q. Fang, Y. Zhang, J. Xia, and Y. Li, “Theoretical Investigation on H-Abstraction Reactions of 
Silanes with H and CH3 Attacking: A Comparative Study with Alkane Counterparts,” ACS omega,
vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 5558-5569, 2022.

[38]
B. Ruscic, “Active thermochemical tables: sequential bond dissociation enthalpies of methane, 
ethane, and methanol and the related thermochemistry,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, vol. 
119, no. 28, pp. 7810-7837, 2015.

[39]
D. G. Goodwin, and J. E. Butler, "Theory of diamond chemical vapor deposition," Handbook of 
industrial diamonds and diamond films, pp. 527-581: CRC Press, 2018.

[40]
A. R. Badzian, and R. C. DeVries, “Crystallization of diamond from the gas phase; Part 1,” 
Materials Research Bulletin, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 385-400, 1988/03/01/, 1988.

[41]
R. Haubner, “Low-pressure diamond: From the unbelievable to technical products,” Chemtexts,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 10, 2021.

[42]
M. Muehle, M. Becker, T. Schuelke, and J. Asmussen, “Substrate crystal recovery for 
homoepitaxial diamond synthesis,” Diamond and related materials, vol. 42, pp. 8-14, 2014.

[43]
N. Parikh, J. Hunn, E. McGucken, M. Swanson, C. White, R. Rudder, D. Malta, J. Posthill, and R. 
Markunas, “Single‐crystal diamond plate liftoff achieved by ion implantation and subsequent 
annealing,” Applied physics letters, vol. 61, no. 26, pp. 3124-3126, 1992.

[44]
J. Posthill, D. Malta, T. Humphreys, G. Hudson, R. Thomas, R. Rudder, and R. Markunas, “Method 
of fabricating a free‐standing diamond single crystal using growth from the vapor phase,” Journal 
of applied physics, vol. 79, no. 5, pp. 2722-2727, 1996.

[45]
Y. Mokuno, H. Yamada, and A. Chayahara, “1.3 Single crystal diamond wafers,” Power 
Electronics Device Applications of Diamond Semiconductors, pp. 41, 2018.

[46]
Y. Mokuno, A. Chayahara, Y. Soda, Y. Horino, and N. Fujimori, “Synthesizing single-crystal 
diamond by repetition of high rate homoepitaxial growth by microwave plasma CVD,” Diamond 
and Related Materials, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 1743-1746, 2005/11/01/, 2005.

[47]
S. Nad, Y. Gu, and J. Asmussen, “Growth strategies for large and high quality single crystal 
diamond substrates,” Diamond and related materials, vol. 60, pp. 26-34, 2015.

[48]
M. Geis, N. Efremow, R. Susalka, J. Twichell, K. Snail, C. Spiro, B. Sweeting, and S. Holly, 
“Mosaic diamond substrates approaching single-crystal quality using cube-shaped diamond seeds,” 
Diamond and related materials, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 76-82, 1994.

[49]
G. Shu, B. Dai, V. Ralchenko, A. Bolshakov, A. Khomich, E. Ashkinazi, J. Han, and J. Zhu, 
“Growth of three-dimensional diamond mosaics by microwave plasma-assisted chemical vapor 
deposition,” CrystEngComm, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 198-203, 2018.

[50]
A. B. Muchnikov, D. B. Radishev, A. L. Vikharev, A. M. Gorbachev, A. V. Mitenkin, M. N. 
Drozdov, Y. N. Drozdov, and P. A. Yunin, “Characterization of interfaces in mosaic CVD diamond 
crystal,” Journal of Crystal Growth, vol. 442, pp. 62-67, 2016.

[51]
X. Wang, P. Duan, Z. Cao, C. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Peng, X. Xu, and X. Hu, “Surface morphology of 
the interface junction of CVD mosaic single-crystal diamond,” Materials, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 91, 
2019.

[52]
A. Matsushita, N. Fujimori, Y. Tsuchida, N. Ohtani, D. Dojima, K. Koide, T. Kaneko, and S. 
Shikata, “Evaluation of diamond mosaic wafer crystallinity by electron backscatter diffraction,” 
Diamond and Related Materials, vol. 101, pp. 107558, 2020/01/01/, 2020.

[53]
H. Yamada, A. Chayahara, Y. Mokuno, H. Umezawa, S.-i. Shikata, and N. Fujimori, “Fabrication 
of 1 Inch Mosaic Crystal Diamond Wafers,” Applied Physics Express, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 051301, 
2010/04/16, 2010.

[54]
H. Yamada, A. Chayahara, H. Umezawa, N. Tsubouchi, Y. Mokuno, and S. Shikata, “Fabrication 
and fundamental characterizations of tiled clones of single-crystal diamond with 1-inch size,” 
Diamond and Related materials, vol. 24, pp. 29-33, 2012.


33

[55]
H. Yamada, A. Chayahara, Y. Mokuno, Y. Kato, and S. Shikata, “A 2-in. mosaic wafer made of a 
single-crystal diamond,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 104, no. 10, 2014.

[56]
G. Shu, B. Dai, A. Bolshakov, W. Wang, Y. Wang, K. Liu, J. Zhao, J. Han, and J. Zhu, 
“Coessential-connection by microwave plasma chemical vapor deposition: a common process 
towards wafer scale single crystal diamond,” Functional Diamond, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 47-62, 2022.

[57]
R. Diaz, “LARGER AREA SINGLE CRYSTAL DIAMOND SUBSTRATE FORMATION WITH 
A MOSAIC TILING PROCESS,” Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan 
State University, 2021.

[58]
C. Findeling-Dufour, and A. Gicquel, “Study for fabricating large area diamond single-crystal 
layers,” Thin Solid Films, vol. 308, pp. 178-185, 1997.

[59]
C. Findeling-Dufour, A. Gicquel, and R. Chiron, “Growth of large single-crystal diamond layers: 
analysis of the junctions between adjacent diamonds,” Diamond and related materials, vol. 7, no. 
7, pp. 986-998, 1998.

[60]
A. Charris, S. Nad, and J. Asmussen, “Exploring constant substrate temperature and constant high 
pressure SCD growth using variable pocket holder depths,” Diamond and Related Materials, vol. 
76, pp. 58-67, 2017.

[61]
S. Nad, A. Charris, and J. Asmussen, “MPACVD growth of single crystalline diamond substrates 
with PCD rimless and expanding surfaces,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 109, no. 16, 2016.

[62]
S. Bai, “ELO GROWTH LARGE AREA SINGLE CRYSTAL CVD DIAMOND USING 
POCKET HOLDERS,” Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Sciences, Michigan 
State University, 2022.

[63]
M. Avrami, “Kinetics of phase change. II transformation‐time relations for random distribution of 
nuclei,” The Journal of chemical physics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 212-224, 1940.

[64]
"http://www.chm.bris.ac.uk/pt/diamond/semflat.htm."

[65]
R. Polini, and M. Tomellini, “Analysis of size distribution functions of diamond crystallites formed 
in the early stages of chemical vapour deposition,” Diamond and related materials, vol. 4, no. 12, 
pp. 1311-1316, 1995.

[66]
Y. Mitsuda, Y. Kojima, T. Yoshida, and K. Akashi, “The growth of diamond in microwave plasma 
under low pressure,” Journal of materials science, vol. 22, pp. 1557-1562, 1987.

[67]
T. Yara, H. Makita, A. Hatta, T. Ito, and A. H. A. Hiraki, “Low temperature fabrication of diamond 
films with nanocrystal seeding,” Japanese journal of applied physics, vol. 34, no. 3A, pp. L312, 
1995.

[68]
H. Liu, and D. S. Dandy, “Studies on nucleation process in diamond CVD: an overview of recent 
developments,” Diamond and related Materials, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 1173-1188, 1995.

[69]
R. Kohl, C. Wild, N. Herres, P. Koidl, B. Stoner, and J. Glass, “Oriented nucleation and growth of 
diamond films on β‐SiC and Si,” Applied physics letters, vol. 63, no. 13, pp. 1792-1794, 1993.

[70]
J. Robertson, “Mechanism of bias-enhanced nucleation and heteroepitaxy of diamond on Si,” 
Diamond and Related materials, vol. 4, no. 5-6, pp. 549-552, 1995.

[71]
M. Schreck, K.-H. Thürer, and B. Stritzker, “Limitations of the process window for the bias 
enhanced nucleation of heteroepitaxial diamond films on silicon in the time domain,” Journal of 
applied physics, vol. 81, no. 7, pp. 3092-3095, 1997.

[72]
H. Kawarada, T. Suesada, and H. Nagasawa, “Heteroepitaxial growth of smooth and continuous 
diamond thin films on silicon substrates via high quality silicon carbide buffer layers,” Applied 
physics letters, vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 583-585, 1995.

[73]
S. Gsell, T. Bauer, J. Goldfuß, M. Schreck, and B. Stritzker, “A route to diamond wafers by 
epitaxial deposition on silicon via iridium/yttria-stabilized zirconia buffer layers,” Applied Physics 
Letters, vol. 84, no. 22, pp. 4541-4543, 2004.

[74]
M. Schreck, F. Hörmann, H. Roll, J. K. Lindner, and B. Stritzker, “Diamond nucleation on iridium 
buffer layers and subsequent textured growth: A route for the realization of single-crystal diamond 
films,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 78, no. 2, pp. 192-194, 2001.


34

[75]
M. Schreck, S. Gsell, R. Brescia, and M. Fischer, “Ion bombardment induced buried lateral growth: 
the key mechanism for the synthesis of single crystal diamond wafers,” Scientific reports, vol. 7, 
no. 1, pp. 44462, 2017.

[76]
T. Bauer, S. Gsell, M. Schreck, J. Goldfuß, J. Lettieri, D. G. Schlom, and B. Stritzker, “Growth of 
epitaxial diamond on silicon via iridium/SrTiO3 buffer layers,” Diamond and related materials,
vol. 14, no. 3-7, pp. 314-317, 2005.

[77]
Z. Dai, C. Bednarski-Meinke, R. Loloee, and B. Golding, “Epitaxial (100) iridium on A-plane 
sapphire: A system for wafer-scale diamond heteroepitaxy,” Applied physics letters, vol. 82, no.
22, pp. 3847-3849, 2003.

[78]
K. Ohtsuka, K. Suzuki, A. S. A. Sawabe, and T. I. T. Inuzuka, “Epitaxial growth of diamond on 
iridium,” Japanese journal of applied physics, vol. 35, no. 8B, pp. L1072, 1996.

[79]
M. Fischer, S. Gsell, M. Schreck, and A. Bergmaier, “Growth sector dependence and mechanism 
of stress formation in epitaxial diamond growth,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 100, no. 4, 2012.

[80]
Y.-H. Tang, and B. Golding, “Stress engineering of high-quality single crystal diamond by 
heteroepitaxial lateral overgrowth,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 108, no. 5, 2016.

[81]
H. Aida, S.-W. Kim, K. Ikejiri, Y. Kawamata, K. Koyama, H. Kodama, and A. Sawabe, 
“Fabrication of freestanding heteroepitaxial diamond substrate via micropatterns and 
microneedles,” Applied Physics Express, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 035504, 2016.

[82]
H. Yamada, A. Chayahara, Y. Mokuno, N. Tsubouchi, S.-i. Shikata, and N. Fujimori, 
“Developments of elemental technologies to produce inch-size single-crystal diamond wafers,” 
Diamond and Related materials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 616-619, 2011.

[83]
Y. Mokuno, A. Chayahara, H. Yamada, and N. Tsubouchi, “Improving purity and size of single-
crystal diamond plates produced by high-rate CVD growth and lift-off process using ion 
implantation,” Diamond and related materials, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1258-1261, 2009.

[84]
A. Chayahara, Y. Mokuno, N. Tsubouchi, and H. Yamada, “Development of single-crystalline 
diamond wafers-Enlargement of crystal size by microwave plasma CVD and wafer fabrication 
technology,” Synthesiology English edition, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 259-267, 2010.

[85]
M. Muehle, “Process Development to Solve Critical Challenges Moving Towards Two Inch Single 
Crystalline Diamond Wafers,” Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan 
State University, 2017.

[86]
M. Gaukroger, P. Martineau, M. Crowder, I. Friel, S. Williams, and D. Twitchen, “X-ray 
topography studies of dislocations in single crystal CVD diamond,” Diamond and Related 
materials, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 262-269, 2008.

[87]
I. Friel, S. Clewes, H. Dhillon, N. Perkins, D. Twitchen, and G. Scarsbrook, “Control of surface 
and bulk crystalline quality in single crystal diamond grown by chemical vapour deposition,” 
Diamond and Related Materials, vol. 18, no. 5-8, pp. 808-815, 2009.

[88]
S. Makridakis, “The forthcoming Artificial Intelligence (AI) revolution: Its impact on society and 
firms,” Futures, vol. 90, pp. 46-60, 2017.

[89]
F. Callejon, and F. Klebe, “How Artificial Intelligence overcomes major obstacles standing in the 
way of automating complex visual inspection tasks,” Quality, vol. 59, no. 13, pp. 21VS-25VS, 
2020.

[90]
Z. Shi, E. Tsymbalov, M. Dao, S. Suresh, A. Shapeev, and J. Li, “Deep elastic strain engineering 
of bandgap through machine learning,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 116, 
no. 10, pp. 4117-4122, 2019.

[91]
S. Das, L. D. Marlino, and K. O. Armstrong, Wide bandgap semiconductor opportunities in power 
electronics, Oak Ridge National Lab.(ORNL), Oak Ridge, TN (United States), 2018.

[92]
S. Shikata, Diamond Research in Japan, Diamond Electronics Meeting at Army Research 
Laboratory, 2017.

[93]
P. Roveendra, and N. Thomas. "What’s the Difference Between Silicon Carbide and Silicon?," July 
27, 2023.


35

[94]
F. Lateef, and Y. Ruichek, “Survey on semantic segmentation using deep learning techniques,” 
Neurocomputing, vol. 338, pp. 321-348, 2019.

[95]
S. J. Cho, D. Liu, A. Hardy, J. Kim, J. Gong, C. J. Herrera-Rodriguez, E. Swinnich, X. 
Konstantinou, G.-Y. Oh, and D. G. Kim, “Fabrication of AlGaAs/GaAs/diamond heterojunctions 
for diamond-collector HBTs,” AIP Advances, vol. 10, no. 12, 2020.

[96]
J. Rogers, M. Lagally, and R. Nuzzo, “Synthesis, assembly and applications of semiconductor 
nanomembranes,” Nature, vol. 477, no. 7362, pp. 45-53, 2011.

[97]
M. A. Meitl, Z.-T. Zhu, V. Kumar, K. J. Lee, X. Feng, Y. Y. Huang, I. Adesida, R. G. Nuzzo, and 
J. A. Rogers, “Transfer printing by kinetic control of adhesion to an elastomeric stamp,” Nature 
materials, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 33-38, 2006.

[98]
M. Kim, J.-H. Seo, U. Singisetti, and Z. Ma, “Recent advances in free-standing single crystalline 
wide band-gap semiconductors and their applications: GaN, SiC, ZnO, β-Ga 2 O 3, and diamond,” 
Journal of Materials Chemistry C, vol. 5, no. 33, pp. 8338-8354, 2017.

[99]
G. Shivkumar, S. Tholeti, M. Alrefae, T. Fisher, and A. Alexeenko, “Analysis of hydrogen plasma 
in a microwave plasma chemical vapor deposition reactor,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 119, 
no. 11, 2016.

[100]
F. Silva, K. Hassouni, X. Bonnin, and A. Gicquel, “Microwave engineering of plasma-assisted 
CVD reactors for diamond deposition,” Journal of physics: condensed matter, vol. 21, no. 36, pp. 
364202, 2009.

[101]
L. Li, C. Zhao, S. Zhang, Q. Gong, X. Sun, M. Qian, and Y. Hang, “Simulation of diamond 
synthesis by microwave plasma chemical vapor deposition with multiple substrates in a substrate 
holder,” Journal of Crystal Growth, vol. 579, pp. 126457, 2022.

[102]
J. A. Cuenca, S. Mandal, E. L. Thomas, and O. A. Williams, “Microwave plasma modelling in 
clamshell chemical vapour deposition diamond reactors,” Diamond and Related Materials, vol. 
124, pp. 108917, 2022.

[103]
C.-s. Yan, Y. K. Vohra, H.-k. Mao, and R. J. Hemley, “Very high growth rate chemical vapor 
deposition of single-crystal diamond,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 99, 
no. 20, pp. 12523-12525, 2002.

[104]
A. Chayahara, Y. Mokuno, Y. Horino, Y. Takasu, H. Kato, H. Yoshikawa, and N. Fujimori, “The 
effect of nitrogen addition during high-rate homoepitaxial growth of diamond by microwave 
plasma CVD,” Diamond and related materials, vol. 13, no. 11-12, pp. 1954-1958, 2004.

[105]
M. N. Ashfold, and Y. A. Mankelevich, “Self-consistent modeling of microwave activated 
N2/CH4/H2 (and N2/H2) plasmas relevant to diamond chemical vapor deposition,” Plasma 
Sources Science and Technology, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 035005, 2022.

[106]
M. Schreck, M. Mayr, O. Klein, M. Fischer, S. Gsell, A. F. Sartori, and B. C. Gallheber, “Multiple 
role of dislocations in the heteroepitaxial growth of diamond: A brief review,” physica status solidi 
(a), vol. 213, no. 8, pp. 2028-2035, 2016.

[107]
S. Nad, and J. Asmussen, “Analyses of single crystal diamond substrates grown in a pocket 
substrate holder via MPACVD,” Diamond and Related Materials, vol. 66, pp. 36-46, 2016.

[108]
M. Naamoun, A. Tallaire, P. Doppelt, A. Gicquel, M. Legros, J. Barjon, and J. Achard, “Reduction 
of dislocation densities in single crystal CVD diamond by using self-assembled metallic masks,” 
Diamond and Related Materials, vol. 58, pp. 62-68, 2015.

[109]
A. Tallaire, J. Achard, O. Brinza, V. Mille, M. Naamoun, F. Silva, and A. Gicquel, “Growth 
strategy for controlling dislocation densities and crystal morphologies of single crystal diamond by 
using pyramidal-shape substrates,” Diamond and Related Materials, vol. 33, pp. 71-77, 2013.

[110]
A. Tallaire, O. Brinza, V. Mille, L. William, and J. Achard, “Reduction of dislocations in single 
crystal diamond by lateral growth over a macroscopic hole,” Advanced materials, vol. 29, no. 16, 
pp. 1604823, 2017.


