1

A novel method of experimental determination of grain stresses and 

critical resolved shear stresses for slip and twin systems in a

magnesium alloy

P. Kot1, M. Wroński2,*, A. Baczmański2, A. Ludwik2, S. Wroński2, K. Wierzbanowski2, Ch. 

Scheffzük3, J. Pilch4 and G. Farkas4

1NOMATEN Centre of Excellence, National Centre of Nuclear Research, A. Sołtana 7, 05-400 Otwock-

Świerk, Poland

2AGH University of Krakow, Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-

059 Krakow, Poland

3 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Applied Geosciences, Adenauerring 20b, 76131 

Karlsruhe, Germany

4The Czech Academy of Science, Nuclear Physics Institute, Hlavní 130, 250 68 Řež, Czech Republic

(*) Corresponding author

Keywords: Neutron diffraction measurement; Crystallographic slip; Twinning; Critical resolved 

shear stress; Elastoplastic deformation; Magnesium alloy

Abstract

A novel original method of determination of stresses and critical resolved shear stresses 

(CRSSs) using neutron diffraction was proposed. In this method, based on the crystallite group 

method, the lattice strains were measured in different directions and using different reflections hkl 

during uniaxial deformation of magnesium alloy AZ31. The advantage of this method is that the 

stresses for groups of grains having similar orientations can be determined directly from 

measurement without any models used for data interpretation. The obtained results are 

unambiguous and do not depend on the models’ assumptions as in previous works. Moreover, it 


2

was possible for the first time to determine the uncertainty of the measured CRSS values and local 

stresses at groups of grains.

The used methodology allowed for the determination of stress partitioning between grains 

having different orientations and for an explanation of the anisotropic mechanical behaviour of the 

strongly textured alloy. Finally, the CRSS values allowed for the validation of the type of 

intergranular interaction assumed in the elastic-plastic self-consistent model and for a significant 

reduction of the number of unknown parameters when the model is adjusted to the experimental 

data.

1.
Introduction

Magnesium alloys, due to their unique properties such as high specific strength, high thermal 

conductivity and damping capacity, have been used in many industries. However, the limited 

ductility and poor formability of Mg alloys at room temperature restrict their wide range of 

applications [1,2]. The poor formability is a consequence of the strong plastic anisotropy of Mg 

alloys. In the hcp phase of Mg alloys, plastic deformation occurs by means of the following 

crystallographic slips: basal <a> {0001}〈112̅0〉, prismatic <a> {11̅00}〈112̅0〉 and the pyramidal 

slips: <a> {11̅01}〈112̅0〉 , first order <c+a> {11̅01}〈1̅21̅3〉 and second order <c+a> 

{12̅12}〈1̅21̅3〉 which have very different values of critical activation stresses. The listed slip 

modes are generally not sufficient to accommodate an imposed plastic deformation, therefore in 

Mg alloys the activation of twin modes is also observed, realized by the tensile twin 

mode {11̅02} and compression twin mode {11̅01} . Various modifications of the chemical 

composition and microstructure can be used to weaken the strong plastic anisotropy, which in 

consequence improve the formability of Mg alloys, such as:

(i) alloying - the addition of rare-earth elements (e.g. Y, Ce, Nd, La) [3–5] weakens the 

crystallographic texture of Mg alloys and enhances the activation of non-basal slips, 

(ii) texture modification via different processing - e.g. [6] has shown that the asymmetric rolling 

process improves the formability of Mg alloys by suppressing the twinning activity,

(iii) and grain refinement - reducing the grain size suppresses the twinning activity, leads to a 

homogeneous microstructure, and improves formability [7–9].


3

All these modifications can significantly affect the deformation behaviour of the newly obtained 

magnesium alloy. Therefore, it is important to develop test methods to study changes in material 

properties caused by such modifications. It is particularly important to determine the critical 

resolved shear stresses (CRSSs) necessary for activation of slip and twin systems, as well as to 

measure the stresses at polycrystalline grains and to determine the plastic deformation of the 

grains. It is obvious that knowledge of the CRSS and plastic processes occurring at the scale of 

polycrystalline grains is necessary to understand and describe material properties such as hardness, 

hardening and elastic-plastic behaviour at the macroscopic scale.

The macromechanical properties of polycrystalline materials were determined by means of 

mechanical tests and an effort was made to estimate the measurement uncertainty of such values 

as the stiffness modulus [10], compressive [11] or flexure strength [12], as well as residual stresses 

[13–15]. Characterization of properties at the level of polycrystalline grains, however, is usually 

more complex, and the uncertainty of values such as the CRSS is difficult to estimate. The CRSS

values estimated for the AZ31 alloy exhibiting different texture and microstructure are often 

scattered in wide ranges, which, after eliminating extreme values, are as follows: for basal slip 

systems 2-50 MPa, for prismatic systems 55-100 MPa, for pyramidal systems 50-100 MPa, and 

for tensile twins 15-50 MPa (Suppl. Material in [16]). It should be emphasised that the values are 

given without uncertainties. The value of 200 MPa for compression twins can be added to this 

review [17]. Generally, it can be stated that the CRSS of the deformation modes of magnesium 

alloys can be ordered from low to high values as follows: basal slip, tensile twinning, prismatic 

slip, pyramidal slip, and compression twinning.

Accordingly, two easy deformation modes are basal slip and tensile twinning. However, the 

basal slip, having the lowest CRSS, is predominant only in advantageous crystal orientations, when 

loading force is deviated from the crystal <c> axis and from the basal plane. Therefore, other slip 

or twin systems must also be activated to accommodate plastic deformation [18,19]. Moreover, 

twinning can be initiated by the processes occurring in the neighbouring grains (autocatalytic twin 

nucleation [20]) leading to the appearance of shear bands [20]. It was also found that so-called 

slip-induced tensile twinning appears, which is mainly governed by the geometrical relation

between the source slip system and the activated twin system [21]. Another interesting result is 

presented in [22], where the visco-plastic model was developed by including drag stress for 


4

dislocations and dislocation density hardening and material was treated as a composite of grains 

and twins. It was found that drag stress for prismatic slip is very sensitive to temperature in contrast 

to basal and pyramidal slip. Different factors can influence the deformation pattern in magnesium 

and magnesium alloys. Besides temperature, these also include ageing [23]. It was found that in 

the initial range of deformation, ageing promotes twinning over slip, but the presence of 

precipitates leads to thinner twins. Upon unloading, further forward twinning as well as de-

twinning are observed.

The CRSS values can be estimated on the basis of hardness measurement [24,25], e.g. in paper 

[26] the nanoindentation technique was used to study the influence of the alloying element Nd on 

the CRSS values of various sliding systems in the MN11 alloy. The nanoindentation technique has 

been intensively developed in the last decade and recently an attempt was made to analyse the

problem of CRSS uncertainty [25]. The main advantage of this technique is that the elastic-plastic 

properties can be tested using a very small test volume of the material [27,28]. Moreover, the 

technique is very fast compared to conventional macroscopic examination techniques such as 

compression or tensile testing. However, the hardness measurement only provides information 

about mechanical properties at the surface and a shallow depth below the surface. In addition, the 

use of crystallographic models is necessary to interpret the experimental results [26]. In general, 

this method is used to test the mechanical properties and residual stresses in the near-surface zone 

modified by, among others, shot-penning, surface mechanical attrition treatment (SMAT) or layer 

deposition [29,30].

Another approach to the study of deformation mechanisms in magnesium was proposed using 

simulations based on the molecular dynamics (MD) method [31,32]. The calculations developed 

using MD are directly comparable to experimental results of mechanical tests on very small 

samples. It should be noted that a series of interesting observations were obtained by performing 

compression tests on micro- and nanopillar magnesium samples [33–35]. In the case of 

compression along the <c> axis of micropillar samples, pyramidal slip was observed and 

subsequently, due to a misalignment of loading force, a massive basal slip was observed. 

Additionally, compression twinning was observed in nanopillar samples, followed by basal slip 

inside a formed twin. On the other hand, when tensile strain was imposed along the <c> axis,

tensile twinning was activated [34]. Next, when the crystal <c> axis was strongly tilted from the 

loading direction, the basal slip was predominant. And finally, tensile twinning dominated when 


5

compressive stress was applied perpendicularly to the <c> axis [35]. The calculations made using 

MD generally confirm the above experimental results.

Acoustic emission is another useful technique for studying the micromechanical behaviour of 

materials, especially the twinning nucleation process [36–41]. Acoustic emission occurs during 

sample deformation and may come from various sources that are difficult to distinguish. One of 

the first and most popular methods based on acoustic emission is the so-called hit-based method, 

in which the full duration of the examined event can be recorded. A characteristic feature of 

acoustic emission is the registration of sound waves coming from different sources, which allows 

these sources to be identified using spectral analysis. An example of a technique that uses this 

dependency is called adaptive sequential k-means (ASK) [41,42]. This method was used to test a 

magnesium alloy and allowed to demonstrate significant activity of the primary and twin systems 

during mechanical tests carried out in different directions for a sample with a significant texture 

[38,39]. It is worth noting that acoustic emission is a method complementary to diffraction studies, 

especially neutron diffraction (presented below). The combination of these methods allows the 

mechanisms of plastic deformation to be described and the dynamics of these processes to be 

studied [41].

The above discussion shows that, in the case of the nanoindentation method used to determine 

CRSS, the results are obtained for the near-surface volume, while the results of the acoustic method 

are rather qualitative. Therefore, the commonly used method for determination of the CRSS value 

is based on diffraction measurements of the lattice strains during mechanical tests, such as tensile 

or compression tests. In principle, the CRSSs can be determined directly from the experiment if 

the stress state in the polycrystalline material is measured at the grain scale. Various methods have 

been used to measure residual stresses, i.e. stresses remaining in the material after processing 

[13,15,30,43,44]. The most direct methods for determining the residual and applied stresses in 

polycrystalline materials are based on the measurement of lattice strains using neutron or X-ray 

diffraction [13,15,43,45–49]. From the point of view of the representativity of results, 

measurements for a large volume containing a large number of polycrystalline grains are 

particularly useful. Such measurements are possible using neutron radiation [13,50,51] or high-

energy synchrotron radiation [13,49,51], which additionally enable measurements inside the 

sample. One of the very important advantages of the diffraction technique is the ability to measure 


6

stresses for individual phases of polycrystalline materials [52–54] and even for individual grains 

or groups of grains [13,55–59].

An interesting methodology for determination of the grain stresses and then CRSS values was 

presented in [59], where the lattice strains in Ti-8.6Al alloy were measured using monochromatic 

high energy synchrotron radiation (diffraction microscopy technique) during a tensile test. The

measurement was performed in transmission mode and the sample was rotated around the loading 

direction. The evolution of stress tensor was determined from the lattice strain measured for 421 

large grains having an average size of 106.8 μm. Then the dependence of the maximal resolved 

stresses (RSS) on four slip systems vs. applied macroscopic stress was presented. It was assumed 

that the CRSS values can be determined from such a relationship, averaged for all grains, as the 

point at which the trend of the graph changes when the slipping system is activated. However, it 

should be emphasised that the discrepancy of the resolved shear stresses for different grains is 

large, and the uncertainty of the determined values is not given. In addition, this methodology 

cannot be applied for small grains of a dozen μm or less, which are typically found in 

polycrystalline materials subjected to mechanical processing such as rolling.

In [55], the resolved shear stresses for slip systems activated in pure titanium were determined 

directly from the experiment using a similar method as above (diffraction of high energy 

synchrotron radiation). The measurements were carried out for a limited number of single grains 

with an average size of about 100 μm. The CRSS values for basal and prismatic slip systems were 

determined based on the evolution of the RRS and grain orientations as a function of the applied 

load. To do this, from all available grains, those that exhibited lattice rotation either about the <c>-

axis or an axis perpendicular to it (being indicative of exclusive prismatic or basal slip, 

respectively) were checked for their maximum RSS on the presumed slip systems. Using this 

method, CRSS values were determined for only two slip systems, and the results are not 

representative of a large number of grains. Such methodology cannot be used for a sample 

containing fine grains, which is the case of plastically deformed polycrystalline materials.

The method usually used to determine CRSS values and hardening parameters for large 

statistics of small grains is the TOF (time of flight) neutron diffraction experiment, e.g. 

[17,19,54,60–66]. During the tensile/compression test, the lattice strains are measured in situ in 

two directions of the scattering vector, i.e., along the applied load and in the transverse direction. 

For each direction, the measurement is performed using many reflections hkl, i.e., the average 


7

strains of the lattice are measured for grain volumes for which the scattering vector is perpendicular 

to the (hkl) plane. Unfortunately, on the basis of the data obtained in this way, stresses in individual 

grains or groups of grains cannot be directly determined from experiment and an elastic-plastic 

model of a polycrystalline material must be used to find the variables characterizing 

crystallographic slips and the twinning process. Typically, the CRSS values and hardening 

parameters (for slip and/or twin systems) are varied in the model calculations by trial and error to 

best match the model lattice strains vs. applied stress relationship with analogous experimental 

data. The comparison is made for different hkl reflections (i.e., different groups of grains), but only 

for the two directions of the scattering vector. At the same time, the model and experimental stress-

strain dependences are compared. This method was used to study the same extruded magnesium 

alloy AZ31, initially using the EPSC (elastic-plastic self-consistent) model [60,61] and then the 

EVPSC (elastic-viscoplastic self-consistent) model [62]. The lattice strains were measured in situ

in the direction of the applied load and in the transverse direction during tensile and compression 

tests conducted in the direction of extrusion. As a result, different CRSS values were obtained if 

different types of models (EPSC or EVPSC [60,61]) or different approximations of the twinning 

process (in EPSC model in [60–62]) were used. This means that the results of the analysis of 

experimental data depend on the model applied for interpretation. It should also be emphasised

that in calculations, the initial CRSS values and their subsequent changes are usually described by 

different laws, e.g. the Voce law [38,61,63,67] or the hardening law based on dislocation density 

[68,69], which can also affect the results obtained by the trial-and-error method.

Another problem with the trial-and-error method is the number of model parameters that are 

changed in order to fit the calculation results to the experimental data. This is especially important 

when not all CRSS and hardening parameters are known, and lattice strains are measured in only 

two directions. Our experience in such data processing has shown that the results obtained are not 

always unique. Some progress in this aspect was proposed in [17], where a model with a highly 

reduced number of parameters was used.

The above remarks lead to the conclusion that new methods of CRSS determination directly 

from diffraction measurements deserve attention. The lack of such methods that would give 

representative and unambiguous results for a large number of small polycrystalline grains (with 

sizes of a dozen μm or smaller) is the motivation for this work. The aim of the work is to develop 

a diffraction method based on the TOF neutron diffraction technique, enabling direct experimental 


8

determination (without the use of a model) of unambiguous CRSS values. These experimental 

CRSSs can be then used in the EPSC model to determine the hardening parameters (by the trial-

and-error method). In this way, the ambiguity of the obtained results and their dependence on the 

theoretical assumptions of the model is avoided or significantly reduced. 

The novel methodology for CRSS determination is based on the crystallite group method 

(CGM), which can be used to determine stresses for groups of grains having a given orientation. 

Such an experiment seems to be very promising due to the high statistics of the grains for which 

the measurement is performed. For the first time, CGM was used for the magnesium alloy AZ31 

in [18], where the stress evolution was measured for four selected crystal orientations during an in

situ tensile test. As a result, the CRSS value was determined for the basal system. The purpose of 

this work is to determine the CRSS value for non-basal slip systems and for the twinning process. 

The values determined in this way will constitute reliable basic data determined for a representative 

number of polycrystalline grains. The main advantage of the method developed in this work is that 

the obtained CRSS values are determined in an unambiguous manner together with the 

measurement uncertainties.

Another important goal of this work is to determine, for the first time experimentally, stresses 

in grains with selected orientations in order to explain the huge difference in the mechanical stress-

strain diagrams obtained for various load tests performed in different directions on a sample with 

a strong texture. Moreover, the measured partitioning of the load between grains will allow us to 

verify the intergranular interactions in the elastic-plastic model, which can differ from those 

assumed in self-consistent models (Eshelby type of interaction [70]), as shown for example in [71],

in the case of pearlitic steel. The verified and modified elastoplastic self-consistent (EPSC) model 

will be used to predict the evolution of crystallographic texture during plastic deformation, which 

will be compared with experimental data.

2.
Experimental methods and material characterization

2.1 Material

The studied material was hot-rolled magnesium alloy AZ31, the chemical composition of which 

is shown in Table 1. The alloy orientation map and crystallographic texture, determined by the 

EBSD (Electron backscatter diffraction) technique, are presented in Fig. 1; a strong basal texture 


9

component is visible. It was found that the average grain size of the alloy is 12.2 μm with a 

standard deviation of 7.9 μm. An example diffractogram of the initial undeformed material and of 

the sample loaded with a stress of ΣRD = 247 MPa in the rolling direction (RD) are shown in 

Fig. 2.

To measure the stress components using neutron diffraction, three loading experiments were 

performed; tensile in the rolling direction (later called RDT) [18], compression in the normal 

direction (NDC), and compression in the rolling direction (RDC).

Fig. 1. EBSD orientation map (a) and (0001) pole figure for the initial undeformed sample

(b).

a)
b)

RD

TD


10

Fig. 2. Comparison of the diffractograms for the initial undeformed AZ31 magnesium sample 

and the sample under compressive load ( ΣRD = −247 MPa) in the rolling direction (RD), 

measured on the EPSILON - MDS diffractometer (see Fig. 5). The scattering vector was parallel 

to the RD. A change in texture is visible, especially in the 002 reflection, resulting from the 

appearance of a tensile twin orientation.

Ex situ experiments (before neutron diffraction) were done first, using the same stress rig and 

the same conditions as during in situ neutron measurements, to precisely plan the distribution of 

measuring steps.

Table 1. Chemical composition of magnesium alloy AZ31 according to material specification.

Element
Al
Zn
Mn
Cu
Mg

Composition (wt %)
2.5-3.5
0.7-1.3
0.2-1.0
0.05
94.15-96.55

2.2 Crystallite group method


11

The experimental methodology used in this work allows the determination of the CRSS values

based on the measurement of stresses performed for large grain statistics by neutron diffraction. 

For this purpose, the crystallite group method (CGM) was used [13,18,57,58] and as shown in the 

data analysis below, for the first time CRSS values can be determined together with the estimated 

uncertainties.

The crystallite group method is based on the measurement of the average stress for groups of 

grains having similar lattice orientations. The measurement of lattice strains is performed in 

different directions of the scattering vector (along which the lattice strain is determined) using 

different reflections hkl. The idea is to choose such experimental conditions for which the lattice 

strains are measured for the selected group of grain. Therefore, the scattering vector is

perpendicular to the crystallographic plane (hkl) corresponding to the lattice orientation of this 

group, i.e., the measurements are done at the so-called poles 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙 representing normals to 

the planes (hkl). The orientations of poles 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙 can be presented on a pole figure as shown 

in Fig. 5 in [18] and Figs. 5 and 7 in the present paper.

The experimental realization of the conditions described above depends on the technique used. 

In [18], the method of angular dispersion with monochromatic radiation was used, and in this case, 

the selection of the appropriate pole 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙 is carried out by:

-
selection of scattering angle 2θ to satisfy the Bragg relation for a given hkl reflection coming 

from the (hkl) plane and corresponding to the chosen pole 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙,

-
alignment of the normal to selected (hkl) plane along scattering vector by changing sample 

orientation relative to the laboratory (e.g., the appropriate 𝜓 and 𝜙 angles corresponding to  

𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙 pole are set using the Eulerian cradle).

For the energy-dispersive diffraction method, e.g., the time-of-flight (TOF) technique used in 

this work, experimental data for multiple hkl reflections are available simultaneously for a given 

orientation of the scattering vector and constant scattering angle  2θ (due to a continuous spectrum 

of wavelength). However, in the used equipment it is not possible to change the orientation of the 

sample with respect to scattering vector. Therefore, the selection of an appropriate pole 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙

must be carried out through:


12

-
selection of the reflection hkl from the available diffraction pattern which corresponds to 

the given (hkl) plane for the chosen pole 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙 (all available reflections are measured 

with the same constant orientation of the scattering vector characterised by given 𝜓 and 𝜙

angles),

-
if more detectors are available the selection of appropriate reflection hkl is repeated for each 

detector (i.e., for different orientations of the scattering vector).

Therefore, the difference between the two techniques consists in the selection of hkl reflections 

that satisfy the Bragg condition for the selected (hkl) plane. It should also be emphasised that the 

angular dispersion method (with the Eulerian cradle) allows for a strict selection of the set of 

𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙 poles corresponding to the orientation of the lattice; however, the lattice strains 

corresponding to the given lattice orientations are measured consecutively and not at the same 

time. This leads to long measurements during which some (usually small) relaxation of the applied 

macrostress may occur during plastic deformation. On the contrary, the dispersion energy method 

used in this work allowed the measurement of lattice strains for many poles 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙

simultaneously thanks to the use of a continuous spectrum of wavelength and nine detectors with 

different orientations relative to the incident beam (scattering vector 2θ = 90° for all detectors, 

details are given below). In this way, nine scattering vector orientations are available for a sample 

fixed in a tensile/compression rig, and each detector simultaneously measures the diffraction 

pattern with different hkl reflections. Then, each diffractogram is analysed to find reflections from 

planes (hkl) corresponding to the given lattice orientations. However, it should be emphasised that 

the directions of the scattering vectors are usually not strictly parallel to the normals to the selected 

planes (hkl). When selecting the poles, the criterion was adopted that the difference between the 

normal to the plane (hkl) and the scattering vector should not exceed 5º.

2.3 Experiments

To determine the stresses for given groups of grains with selected orientations (Figs. 3 and 4), 

in situ neutron diffraction measurements of lattice strains were performed for samples subjected 

to various uniaxial loads. The first experiment (RDT) was carried out on a TKSN 400 (HK9) 

diffractometer at the Nuclear Physics Institute in Řež (Czech Republic) [72]. Due to the availability 

of a monochromatic beam with a wavelength of λ=1.1580 Å, the measurements were made using 

the angle dispersive method. To perform lattice strains measurements for the selected orientations 


13

A, B, C and D (see Fig. 3 and Fig. 4), the tensile rig was mounted in the Eulerian cradle (Fig. 5a). 

The sample was a 2 cm long bar with a square cross section of 4 mm per side. The experimental 

setup used at the TKSN 400 diffractometer is shown in Fig. 5, where the orientation of the 

scattering vector Δk
⃗⃗⃗⃗ relative to the 𝑥𝑖 coordinate system (in which the stress tensors 𝜎𝑖𝑗 are 

defined) is determined through the angles 𝜓 and 𝜑 (being changed by Eulerian cradle rotations). 

The coordinates of this orientation in the pole figure are shown in Fig. 5b. The results of these

measurements have already been published [18] and reprocessed data are used in this work to 

complete the analysis of new RDC and NDC experiments.

It should be emphasised that in all experiments presented in this paper (RDT, RDC and NDC), 

the 𝑥3 axis corresponding to the central point of the pole figure was chosen as parallel to the 

direction of the applied load, which simplifies both the analysis and the presentation of the results. 

The orientations of the sample directions RD, TD and ND (rolling direction, transverse direction 

and normal direction) in relation to the 𝑥𝑖 axes are given in Table 2. The coordinates of poles for 

different lattice plane normals corresponding to the orientations A, B, C and D selected in the RDT 

experiment for lattice strains measurements are presented in Table A1.1 (see Appendix 1).

Fig. 3 Visualisation of orientations examined during all experiments. 


14

Fig. 4 Experimental ODF obtained from EBSD measurements for the initial undeformed 

sample. The crystal orientations studied in this work are marked: (a) on full ODF graph, (b) on 
slice for 1=90o.

a)                                                                                                      b)

Fig. 5. (a) Scheme of Eulerian cradle used on TKSN 400 (HK9) diffractometer to change the 
orientation of the sample with respect to the scattering vector Δk
⃗⃗⃗⃗ by changing angles 𝜓 and 𝜑, 

while reflection ℎ𝑘𝑙 is chosen by setting scattering angle 2𝜃. (b) Selected pole 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙 in pole 
figure for which the lattice strain is measured in the crystallite group method.


15

Table 2. Orientations of 𝑥𝑖 axes with respect to sample directions for non-rotated sample (𝛼 =

0°).

Experiment
RDT  and  RDC
NDC

Orientations of 𝑥𝑖 axes
𝑥1||TD, 𝑥2||ND, 𝑥3||RD
𝑥1||TD, 𝑥2||RD, 𝑥3||ND

The next two experiments (NDC and RDC) were performed on the EPSILON-MDS (Multi 

Detector System) diffractometer at the Frank Laboratory for Neutron Physics (FLNP) in the Joint 

Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna (Russia) [73]. The time diffractometer is placed at 

the IBR-2 pulse reactor in the JINR and uses the time-of-flight (TOF) method. Samples measured

during in situ experiments had a cylindrical shape and their initial dimensions were 24.04 mm 

length and 13.9 mm diameter in the NDC experiment and 27.4 mm length and 13.9 mm diameter 

in the RDC experiment. In this case, the energy dispersive method was used, and the lattice strains 

were measured in the directions defined by nine detectors having given orientations with respect 

to the sample mounted in the compression rig. The measurement geometry of the detector groups 

of this instrument is presented in Fig. 6. In both experiments (NDC and RDC), the same orientation 

of the coordinate system 𝑥𝑖 with respect to instrument was used for stress tensor (𝜎𝑖𝑗) definition,

while the orientations of the RD, ND, and ND sample directions in relation to 𝑥𝑖 coordinates were 

different for NDC and RDC measurements (see Table 2).


16

Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of detector banks at the EPSILON-MSD diffractometer showing in 
figure (a) the directions of the diffracted beams denoted by wave vectors 𝑘⃗ 𝑖 (for each vector the 
incident beam is perpendicular to 𝑘⃗ 𝑖, i.e., 2θ=90°). Two example scattering vectors ∆𝑘
⃗⃗⃗⃗ 2 and ∆𝑘
⃗⃗⃗⃗ 8, 

shown in figure (b), are placed on the plane containing the incident wave vector 𝑘⃗ 𝑖𝑛𝑐 and diffracted 
wave vectors 𝑘⃗ 2 and 𝑘⃗ 8, respectively. The system 𝑥𝑖 is defined by the unit vectors 𝑥̂𝑖 given by the 
relations: : 𝑥̂3 = ∆𝑘
⃗⃗⃗⃗ 2/|∆𝑘
⃗⃗⃗⃗ 2|, 𝑥̂1 = −∆𝑘
⃗⃗⃗⃗ 8/|∆𝑘
⃗⃗⃗⃗ 8| and 𝑥̂2 = 𝑥̂3 × 𝑥̂1.

The compression rig allowed the cylindrical sample to be rotated by any angle α about its axis 

(parallel to 𝑥3), which increased the number of measured orientations. One turn of 𝛼 = 90° (which 

brings the ND direction to the 𝑥1 axis) was done during the RDC experiment. In addition, the 

combination of detector geometry and sample symmetry enabled measurements for multiple poles, 

corresponding to many orientations used in further analysis. In the NDC experiment, the 

orientations measured were A, B, D, F and G, while in the RDC experiment these were A, B, D, F 

and G'. These orientations are marked on the orientation distribution function (ODF, see Fig. 4) 

and their visualisation is showed in Fig. 3. The coordinates of poles 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙 for different lattice 

plane normals used in the measurements of lattice strains in these experiments are listed in Table 

A1.1 (see Appendix 1). Examples of orientations used in the NDC and RDC experiments are also 

presented by pole figures in Fig. 7, where the positions of scattering vectors corresponding to the 

detectors and their symmetrical counterparts are marked, considering the symmetries resulting 

from the crystallographic texture of the sample (the load is in the centre of each pole figure). It 

should be emphasised that the positions of the scattering vector (or equivalent) do not exactly 

coincide with the poles, therefore only the closest position (discrepancy less than 5º) was selected 

for the analysis.


17

Fig. 7. Poles 𝑃(𝜓, 𝜙)ℎ𝑘𝑙 used to determine the stresses for different grain orientations and 

experiments are marked with black dots. The orientations of the scattering vectors corresponding 
to the nine detectors of the EPSILON-MDS diffractometer are indicated by the red stars L1-L9, 
while the blue stars L1'-L9' are used for the equivalent position determined by texture symmetry 
and sample rotation during the experiment. The poles assigned to the positions of the scattering 
vector or equivalent are in the green circles.

During each experiment, the force was applied until the specified stress value was obtained, after 

which the rig was stopped to maintain a constant sample strain. When entering the range of plastic 

deformations, after each load increase, the macroscopic stresses determined from the force sensor 

decreased until stabilization; therefore, diffraction measurements were postponed by 30 minutes. 

a   rie  a io   A, e  erime      
    rie  a io   B, e  erime      

c   rie  a io    , e  erime      
    rie  a io    , e  erime      


18

Macroscopic stress-strain curves obtained for each of the experiments determined at constant 

macrostrain as the average of the values measured at the beginning and end of the diffraction 

measurement are presented in Fig. 8. These averages directly correspond to the lattice strains 

determined in situ in diffraction measurement. It is worth noting that there is a large difference in 

the mechanical behaviour of the sample depending on the direction and sign of the applied load. 

During the RDC experiment, a plateau occurred during which the twins were created. 

Fig. 8. Results of three different tests conducted for the tested alloy AZ31. Each value of the 

macrostress applied - force divided by the cross section of the sample.

3.
Direct determination of grain stresses and CRSS values

3.1 Determination of stresses for a given orientation

The important goal of this work is to determine experimentally the stresses for selected groups 

of crystallites, both those which are very numerous due to crystallographic texture, but also those 

which are very few and do not play a significant role during the deformation process. The stress 

evolution for a given grain orientation was determined using the crystallite group method 

[13,18,57,58], i.e. from the set of lattice strains measured during a tensile/compression test for 

appropriate ℎ𝑘𝑙 reflections and orientations of the scattering vector, corresponding to the poles 


19

assigned to the tested grains – see Table A1.1 (see Appendix 1). It should be emphasised that for 

a given reflection hkl, the lattice deformation is measured in the direction of the scattering vector, 

which is normal to the crystallographic planes (hkl). The orientation of the scattering vector is 

determined by the angles 𝜓 and 𝜑. The stresses 𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅 for selected groups of crystallites were 

determined from experimental lattice strains, using the least square method [74], based on the 

relation:

< 𝜀(𝜑, 𝜓) >ℎ𝑘𝑙=

<𝑑>ℎ𝑘𝑙−<𝑑>ℎ𝑘𝑙

0

<𝑑>ℎ𝑘𝑙

0
= 𝐹𝑖𝑗

𝑅(ℎ𝑘𝑙, 𝜑, 𝜓) 𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅
(1)

Where the 𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅 tensor is defined always with respect to the 𝑥𝑖 system of coordinates (see Figs. 

5 and 6), and < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙 and < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0
are the interplanar spacings measured in the direction of 

the scattering vector (given by angles 𝜓 and 𝜑) using hkl reflection for the sample under applied 

load and for the initial non-loaded sample, respectively. 𝐹𝑖𝑗

𝑅(ℎ𝑘𝑙, 𝜑, 𝜓) are the so-called X-ray 

stress factors or diffraction elastic constants calculated by the Reuss approach [13,43,75,76], which 

relate the lattice strains measured for a selected group of crystallites with the stress tensor 𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅 for 

this group (assuming the same 𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅 for all grains in the group).

It should be emphasised that lattice strains for twins cannot be determined directly from the 

measurements due to the lack of twin orientations in the initial non-deformed sample. Therefore, 

the values of < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0
(needed in Eq. 1) for twin orientations were recalculated from an 

interpolation method that used the interplanar spacing available in the initial sample and measured 

with different detectors. In the calculations presented in Appendix 2a, the standard uncertainties 

of the values < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0
determined in this way were estimated. This approach was previously used 

in [61].

The uncertainty analysis of the stresses determined in this work is described in detail in [15]

and Appendix 2b, and is based on the least squares method given in [74].

The 𝐹𝑖𝑗

𝑅(ℎ𝑘𝑙, 𝜑, 𝜓) factors were calculated from the ODF presented in Fig. 4 and the single 

crystal 
elastic 
constants: 
C11 =
59.3 GPa, 
C33 =
61.5 GPa, 
C44 =
16.4 GPa, 

C12 = 25.7 GPa, C13 = 21.4 GPa [77], using the Reuss model [13,43], considered as the proper

approach for the groups of studied crystallites [76]. In this model, the same stress is assumed for 


20

grains belonging to a given group. It should also be emphasized that the choice of coefficients 

𝐹𝑖𝑗

𝑅(ℎ𝑘𝑙, 𝜑, 𝜓) or single crystal elastic constants (as in [13,18,57,58]) in the data analysis is 

irrelevant due to the almost isotropic properties of Mg crystals [78], leading to negligible 

differences obtained for both choices.

The first analysed experiment was the tensile test performed in the rolling direction (RD). In 

Fig. 9, the grain stresses for orientations A, B, C and D versus the macroscopic stress 

corresponding to the applied load are shown. The sets of strains used for stress determination are 

shown in [18] and in Table A1.1 (Appendix 1). Because of the sample and texture symmetry, only 

the non-zero principal stresses 𝜎𝑖𝑖

𝐴 and 𝜎𝑖𝑖

𝐵 were assumed for the A and B orientations. In the case 

of the orientation C, the non-zero 𝜎23

𝐶 component is also shown (defined with respect to coordinate 

system 𝑥𝑖). This shear stress can be different from zero because the crystallite axis <c> is tilted 

from the 𝑥2 axis (normal to the surface of the sample, i.e., ND) toward the direction 𝑥3 (RD) along 

which the tensile force was applied (see Fig. 3 and Table 2). Therefore, these axes of the stress 

tensor defined with respect to the sample system may not coincide with the principal stress axes. 

Finally, in the case of D orientation only the 𝜎33

𝐷 component was determined because the strains 

were measured only in two directions. Additionally, the results of the EPSC model are shown in 

Fig. 9 (they are discussed in Section 4.2).

Analysing the experimentally determined components of stress tensor, it can be noticed that in 

the beginning of compression test (Σ𝑅𝐷 smaller than about 70-90 MPa) the grain stresses are 

practically equal to the applied load, i.e.  𝜎33

𝐴,𝐵,𝐶,𝐷 = Σ𝑅𝐷 and other stress components are equal to 

zero (see Fig. 9). This means that, due to the low elastic anisotropy of crystallites, the stresses at 

all grains having different lattice orientations are almost equal. However, when plastic deformation 

begins (Σ𝑅𝐷 between 70-90 MPa), the partitioning of stresses between grains starts. A higher 

tensile stress in the loading direction is observed at grains having orientation A and B (with the 

<c> axis parallel to the ND, i.e., 𝜎33

𝐴,𝐵 > Σ𝑅𝐷). Simultaneously, the value of 𝜎11

𝐴,𝐵 remains almost 

equal to zero, while a small compressive stress, 𝜎22

𝐴,𝐵 < 0, is generated. The deviation of the grain 

stress components from the macroscopic values increases with increasing applied load. The 

opposite behaviour is demonstrated by the “tilted grains” with orientations C and D, for which the 

tensile stress in the direction of the load decreases comparing to the macroscopic value (𝜎33

𝐶,𝐷 <

Σ𝑅𝐷). This means that plastic deformation occurred for the grains D and C, causing transfer of a 


21

part of the load to other grains that remain elastic. Representatives of the still elastically deformed 

grains are those with the A and B orientations (for such grains, the stress 𝜎33

𝐴,𝐵 is greater than the 

macroscopic stress Σ𝑅𝐷). The interaction between grains in the direction perpendicular to the load 

is more complex than in the loading direction and it could be explained for example by the EPSC 

model.

Fig. 9. Evolution of grain stresses for the orientations A, B, C and D versus macrostress RD

during the tensile test performed along the RD compared with the model using threshold
approximation (see Section 4). The evolution of macroscopic stress RD is drawn with a dotted
line. The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties calculated according to Appendix 2b.

Subsequently, it can be noticed that for Σ𝑅𝐷 > 125 MPa the trend of the plots obtained for the 

orientations A and B again changes, i.e., the deviation of the grain stresses from the macroscopic 

values stabilizes and does not increase anymore. This can be interpreted as the beginning of plastic 


22

deformation for the grains A and B. At the same time, a change in the behaviour of stresses also 

takes place for the grains C and D, i.e., greater stress is transferred to these grains in response to 

the plastic deformation of the grains with orientations such as A and B. It should be emphasised 

that the 𝛴𝑅𝐷 thresholds, where the trends of plots change, cannot be directly used in Schmid’s law 

to determine RSS values for activated slip systems because of the occurrence of intergranular 

stresses. Therefore, in this work the calculation of the RSS is based on the stress tensor components 

determined for selected orientations using neutron diffraction.

In the second and the third experiments, the sample was compressed in the ND and RD 

directions, respectively. The set of reflections used for lattice strain measurements is shown in

Table A1.1 (see Appendix 1) and it was assumed that due to the sample and crystal symmetry,

only the non-zero principal stresses 𝜎𝑖𝑖

𝐴 were determined for the orientation A, while in the case of 

orientations D, F, G and G’ the non-zero 𝜎23

𝐷,𝐹,𝐺,𝐺′ component was additionally determined. 

Similarly, as in the previous experiment, this shear stress can be different from zero because the 

crystallite axis <c> is tilted from the 𝑥3 (ND) sample axis (along which the compressive force was 

applied) towards the direction 𝑥2 (RD). The results of stress component evolution during the NDC 

experiment are presented in Fig. 10 for orientations A, D, F and G (the result for orientation B was 

almost identical with the one for orientation A, due to texture and crystal symmetry). Similarly as 

in Fig. 9, the results of the EPSC model are shown but are analysed in Section 4.2.

Analogically as in the previous experiment, it can be noticed that at the beginning of the test 

(for |Σ𝑁𝐷| smaller than about 70-90 MPa) the grain stresses are practically equal to the applied 

load, i.e.  𝜎33

𝐴,𝐵 = Σ𝑁𝐷, and the other stress components are equal to zero (cf. Fig. 10). This confirms 

that the crystallites exhibit low crystal anisotropy leading to the same value of stress for all grains 

having different lattice orientations. However, when plastic deformation starts (at about |Σ𝑁𝐷| ≈

70 – 90 MPa), greater compressive stresses in the loading direction are observed at grains having 

orientation A and B (i.e., |𝜎33

𝐴,𝐵| > |Σ𝑁𝐷|), and simultaneously non-zero tensile stress tensor 

components 𝜎11

𝐴,𝐵 ≈ 𝜎22

𝐴,𝐵 > 0 are generated at the transverse directions. The deviation of the grain 

stress components from the macroscopic values increases with increasing load. The opposite 

behaviour is demonstrated by the “tilted grains” with orientations D, F and G, for which the 

compressive stress in the direction of the load decreases comparing to the macroscopic value 

(|𝜎33

𝐷,𝐹,𝐺| < |Σ𝑁𝐷|). Additionally, for these grains the non-zero stresses are generated in the 


23

directions perpendicular to the load, but their behaviour is complex. Similarly, as in the previous 

experiment, transfer of the stress from plastically deformed grains (e.g., D, F and G orientations) 

to elastically deformed ones (e.g., orientations A and B) occurred. Subsequently, it can be noticed 

that for |Σ𝑁𝐷| > 180 MPa the trend of the plots obtained for the orientations A and B changes

again, and the deviation of the grain stresses from the macroscopic values does not increase. This 

means the beginning of plastic deformation for the grains A and B. The changes in the behaviours 

of stresses at grains D, F and G are not significant for |Σ𝑁𝐷| > 180 MPa. 

Fig. 10. Evolution of the grain stresses for orientations A, D, F and G versus macrostress |ND|

during the compression test performed along the ND compared with a model using threshold
approximation (see Section 4). The evolution of macroscopic stress ND is drawn with a dotted
line. The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties calculated according to Appendix 2b.

In the third experiment, a compressive load in the direction of the RD was applied, and in this 

case the twinning process took place at about |Σ𝑅𝐷| ≈ 90 MPa for a significant number of grain 


24

orientations. Before the twinning process, insignificant deviations of the stresses from the 

macroscopic stress were observed for the studied orientations A, B and G’ (cf. Fig.11).

Fig. 11. Evolution of the grain stresses for orientations A, B, T and G’ versus macrostress 

|RD| during the compression test performed along the RD compared with a model using threshold 
approximation. The grains having B orientation are transformed to twins (T-orientation) at 
approximately |RD|=90 MPa. The evolution of macroscopic stress RD is drawn with a dotted line. 
Very similar results were obtained for the continuous approximation (for details concerning the 
model see Section 4). The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties calculated according to 
Appendix 2b.

During twinning occurring at approximately constant load, the twins (orientation T) are formed 

mostly from crystallites having B orientation, which completely disappeared. The new twins, when 

they are born, exhibit compressive stress 𝜎33

𝑇 , for which the absolute value |𝜎33

𝑇 | is slightly smaller 

than the absolute value of macrostress |Σ𝑅𝐷|, but the value |𝜎33

𝑇 | rises along with increasing of the 

load and quickly exceeds the value |Σ𝑅𝐷|. Subsequently, the deviation of the |𝜎33

𝑇 | from |Σ𝑅𝐷|

value increases until the |Σ𝑅𝐷| reaches about 220 MPa, where the deviation stabilizes. The 


25

transverse stresses 𝜎11

𝑇 and 𝜎22

𝑇 are tensile; they start from zero value and progressively increase

until |Σ𝑅𝐷| ≈ 220 MPa. This behaviour is characteristic for the elastically deformed grains in the 

plastically deformed material, i.e., elastic grains accumulate higher stresses as compared to 

macrostress. The A-oriented grains also transform into twins; this transition is slower and some of 

them persist longer compared to the B-oriented grains. The value |𝜎33

𝐴 | for the A grains is higher

than |Σ𝑅𝐷| at the beginning, but with increasing load, the |𝜎33

𝐴 | approaches the macroscopic value 

|Σ𝑅𝐷|, while the stresses in the direction perpendicular to the load are small and tensile or they are 

close to zero. The behaviour of the G’- oriented grains is similar to that observed in the NDC

experiment, i.e., the absolute value in the load direction |𝜎33

G’| rises more slowly than the 

macroscopic value |Σ𝑅𝐷| when plastic deformation begins.

3.2   Determination of CRSS for slip and twinning systems

Having determined the evolution of the 𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅 stresses for grains having different orientations 

during three different modes of deformation, the resolved shear stresses (RSS) for different slip 

and twin systems can be calculated. Then by analysing the behaviour of chosen RSS for specific 

grain orientations during three different tests, the CRSS values for these systems can be found. For 

this purpose, the following rules to find out the active slip or twin system were applied:

-
a potentially active system is one for which the RSS takes the maximum value among all 

symmetrically equivalent slip systems – this system is activated when its RSS reaches the CRSS 

value (Schmid criterion),

-
when the system is activated, the RSS on this system starts to grow more slowly or does 

not change significantly – the RSS value for the active system is considered as the CRSS value, 

-
if the evolution of the RSS on more than one system indicates their activation at the same 

sample load, another experimental test should be analysed to select the system actually activated, 

-
the slip systems for which the values of the RSS calculated from measured tensor 𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅 are 

very low, i.e. less than about 10 MPa (or lower than zero in the case of twin system), are treated 
as inactive – this concerns systems for which the Schmid factor calculated for the uniaxial applied 
stress equals zero.


26

Using the above rules, the analysis of the measurement results was carried out considering the 

potential possibility of activation of the slip and twin systems during the three conducted 

experiments when plastic deformation begins. The behaviours of the transverse stresses and shear 

stress 𝜎23

G’ (which is expected, similarly as in the RDT experiment) for this grain orientation are 

caused by interaction between grains; therefore, their evolution should be explained by the model

(cf. Section 4.2). 

-
In the case of the tensile test performed in the RD, the basal slip system cannot be activated 

in the grains having A and B orientations because the load applied to the sample is parallel to the 

basal plane, leading to zero value of the Schmid factor for macrostress Σ𝑅𝐷. The RSS on the tensile

twin system is negative, therefore twinning cannot occur. The other slip systems can be active for 

such grain orientations. On the other hand, the basal system and all other systems can be activated 

for C orientation. 

-
During the compression test in the ND, the only potentially active system for the 

orientations A and B are the pyramidal <c+a> systems for which the Schmid factor is not equal to 

zero.  The RSS for twinning is negative, therefore twinning cannot occur. The other systems are 

not activated due to the zero value of the Schmid factor when uniaxial Σ𝑁𝐷 stress is perpendicular 

to the slip plane (as for the basal system), parallel to the slip plane (as for the prismatic system) or 

perpendicular to slip direction (as for basal, prismatic and pyramidal <a> systems). For the D, F 

and G orientations, all slip systems including the basal system can be active.

-
In the case of the compression test in the RD, the RSS on tensile twin system is positive 

and significant for the orientations A and B. This gives a chance to find out the value of the CRSS 

for the twinning process. The RSS evolution for G’ orientations are also considered and, in this 

case, all slip systems can be active. Moreover, for the tensile twins (T-orientation), the Schmid 

factor calculated for the Σ𝑅𝐷 stress is close to zero for the basal, prismatic, and pyramidal <a> 

systems, while for the tensile twin system the RSS is negative. Therefore, in grains having T 

orientation, only the pyramidal <c+a> systems can be activated.

Considering the above remarks, initially the evolution of the maximum RSS (among all 

symmetrically equivalent systems) for the basal system in the tilted orientations were analysed. 

The tilted orientations are those for which the <c> axis is not perpendicular to one of the directions 

RD, TD or ND and the Schmid factor is not zero for the basal system. A common feature of such 

orientations is that the basal system can be activated, while for the A, B and T orientations it is 


27

inactive due to the zero value of the Schmid factor. It was found that after the onset of plasticity,

the grain stress for the tilted orientations is always lower than the macroscopic value, i.e., these 

grains are softer than e.g. A, B and T orientations (cf. Figs. 9 - 11). The conclusion is that the 

CRSS and work hardening are the lowest for the basal system compared to other systems. The 

evolution of the maximum RSS for basal system was shown in Fig. 12 for the tilted orientations D

and F during the compression test in the ND. It is clearly visible that after the linear increase in the 

maximum RSS during elastic deformation, the value of the RSS stabilizes and does not change for 

a certain range of deformation (or even slightly decreases). The CRSS is equal to the RSS value at 

the point where the trend of the plot has radically changed, and it is determined as the average of 

the points closest to the trend change. The uncertainty of the CRSS is estimated based on 

measurement uncertainties of these points. In the case of the compression test performed along the 

ND, the mean CRSS value for the base system is 28 MPa (calculated for the D and F orientations) 

and this value was used in further analysis (cf. Table 3). In the other two experiments, the CRSS 

values are more difficult to determine.

|END|

0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04

Maximum RSS  (MPa)

0

20

40

60

80

100

Experimental data
Linear fit for elastic range
CRSS value
CRSS value uncertainty

NDC

 Orientation F, basal slip system

|END|

0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04

Maximum RSS  (MPa)

0

20

40

60

80

100

Experimental data
Linear fit for elastic range
CRSS value 
CRSS value uncertainty

NDC

 Orientation D, basal slip system

Fig. 12. Evolution of the RSS for the basal system (activated in grains having orientations D 

and F) versus sample strain |END| during the compression test performed along the ND. The error 
bars correspond to standard uncertainties of the RSS (cf. Appendix 2b). Determined CRSS values 
and their uncertainties are marked with horizontal lines.

Additionally, the values of CRSS for pyramidal systems <c+a> can be determined from the 

compression test in the ND. In this case, the evolution of maximum RSS on these systems in the 


28

grains with orientations A and B were considered. For such orientations, only pyramidal systems 

<c+a> exhibit non-zero Schmid factors. As shown in Fig. 13, a linear dependence of the maximum 

RSS versus  |Σ𝑁𝐷| during elastic deformation of the sample occurred. Subsequently, the RSS 

increases faster due to the load transfer to those grains from the grains with tilted orientations in 

which the basal system is activated. Eventually, the upward trend in RSS value suddenly slows 

down and stabilizes, which means activation of the <c+a> pyramidal systems (cf. Fig. 13). 

Therefore, the intersection of the regression lines fitted below and above the trend change can be 

identified as the point at which the RSS value equals the CRSS value. Additionally, the uncertainty 

of the CRSS value obtained in this way can be estimated by considering the maximum difference 

between the intersections of the extreme lines corresponding to the uncertainty range for both fitted 

lines. The values of the CRSS with their uncertainties for the first and the second order 

pyramidal <c+a> systems activated in grains A and B during the NDC experiment are given in 

Table 3. It is worth noting that we cannot distinguish which of the two systems (first or second 

order) is activated, it is also possible that they are activated together.

Similar analysis of the pyramidal <c+a> systems activation can be performed considering the 

twin grains (T-oriented) during the RDC test. Except for intergranular stresses, the stress state of 

the T-oriented grains in the RDC test is similar to the A and B-oriented grains in the NDC test, 

i.e., the load is parallel to the <c> axis. Based on the analysis of the maximum RSS values on the 

<c+a> systems (both first and second order), it was found that the CRSS values are slightly higher 

for the T-oriented grains compared to the A and B-oriented grains (cf. Fig. 13e, 13f and Fig. 13a-

d), i.e., twins show a higher CRSS value than the grains in the initial (undeformed) sample (cf. 

Table 3). It should be emphasised that due to the small number of experimental points and their 

significant uncertainty, the uncertainty of the CRSS value for <c+a> slip systems cannot be exactly

estimated for T-oriented twins. Therefore, the uncertainty measure was defined as the RSS interval 

determined by two experimental points closest to the point where the curve changes its trend (see

Fig. 13e, 13f, and Table 3).


29

Fig. 13. Evolution of the maximum RSS versus macroscopic compression stress shown for

pyramidal first order <c+a> systems (on the left) and for pyramidal second order <c+a> systems 
(on the right). The results from the NDC experiment are shown for A orientation (a, b) and B 
orientation (c, d). Corresponding results, but for T orientation (twins), obtained from the RDC 
experiment, are presented (e, f). The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties of RSS (cf. 
Appendix 2b). The intersection points identified as CRSS values are indicated by arrows.


30

The values of the CRSS for the pyramidal system <a> and prismatic system can be determined 

by analysing the behaviour of the RSS in the grains A and B during the tensile test in the RD. In 

the previous work (cf. [18]), it was found that from the RDT experiment it is possible to estimate 

the CRSS for the basal system; however, in the case of non-basal systems it could be concluded 

that they are activated for the RSS in the range of 62-85 MPa. It was not possible to determine 

which system among the pyramidal <a>, prismatic and pyramidal <c+a> systems is responsible 

for the initiation of plastic deformation for A- and B-oriented grains, because they all show non-

zero values of the RSS for the load applied along the RD. The NDC experiment then demonstrated 

that the determined CRSS values for pyramidal <c+a> systems are significantly higher than the

RSS value on these systems during RDT testing (compare Table 3 and Fig. 13). Therefore, 

pyramidal <c+a> systems cannot be activated, and activation of pyramidal <a> and/or prismatic 

systems must be responsible for changing the trend of the RSS versus ERD dependence during the 

RDT test. The beginning of the change in the curve trend enabled us to determine the CRSS value,

which is equal to the RSS at this point. The uncertainty of the CRSS is determined on the basis of 

the measurement uncertainties of the RSS values that are closest to the trend change. The so 

determined CRSS values for a pyramidal <a> system and prismatic system are given in Table 3

and shown in Fig. 14. As expected, these values are smaller when compared to CRSS values for 

the pyramidal <c+a> systems. For this reason, the macroscopic stress-strain curve is significantly 

lower in the RDT test compared to the NDC test. It is impossible to distinguish which of the 

systems or both systems, pyramidal <a> and prismatic, are activated, but it is worth noting that 

both systems have the same slip direction <a>.

Finally, the CRSS for the twin system can be determined from the RSS evolution occurring 

during compression along the RD. In this case, the orientation B is considered because the Schmid 

factor for the twin system in this orientation is the highest among all other orientations considered. 

As shown in Fig. 15, the maximum RSS for the twin system increases linearly and saturates 

suddenly until the plot finally ends as the B-grains disappear. The CRSS value for the tensile twin 

system can be easily determined as the arithmetic mean of three RSS for the horizontal part of the 

graph shown in Fig. 15. The CRSS uncertainty is estimated as the maximum deviation of the RSS 

from the mean value, extended by its standard uncertainty.


31

ERD

0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14

Maximum RSS  (MPa)

0

50

100

150

200
Experimental data
Linear fit for elastic range
CRSS value
CRSS value uncertainty

RDT

 Orientation A, prismatic slip system

ERD

0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14

Maximum RSS  (MPa)

0

50

100

150

200
Experimental data
Linear fit
CRSS value 
CRSS value uncertainty

RDT

 Orientation B, prismatic slip system

a)
b)

ERD

0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14

Maximum RSS  (MPa)

0

50

100

150

200

Experimental data
Linear fit
CRSS value 
CRSS value uncertainty

RDT

 Orientation A, pyramidal <a> slip system

ERD

0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14

Maximum RSS  (MPa)

0

50

100

150

200

Experimental data
Linear fit
CRSS value 
CRSS value uncertainty

RDT

 Orientation B, pyramidal <a> slip system

c)
d)

Fig. 14. Evolution of the RSS for a prismatic system and pyramidal <a> system (activated in 

grains having orientations A and B) versus sample strain ERD during the tensile test performed 
along the RD. The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties of RSS (cf. Appendix 2b).
Determined CRSS values and their uncertainties are marked with horizontal lines. 


32

|ERD|

0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030

Maximum RSS  (MPa)

0

20

40

60

80

100
Experimental data
Linear fit
CRSS mean value 
CRSS value uncertainty

RDC

 Orientation B

First order tensile twin system

Fig. 15. Evolution of the RSS for a tensile twin system (activated in grains having orientations 

B) versus sample strain |ERD| during the compression test performed along the RD. The error bars 
correspond to standard uncertainties of RSS (cf. Appendix 2b). Determined CRSS values and their 
uncertainties are marked with horizontal lines. 

The values of the CRSS determined in this work are given in Table 3 and compared with those 

obtained in [18]. As shown in this table, the previously determined CRSSs are close to the values 

obtained in this work excluding the values obtained for pyramidal <c+a> systems. Previously, it 

was found that the CRSS for all systems, excluding the basal system, are between 62-85 MPa, 

while in this work it was shown that the pyramidal <c+a> systems exhibit a CRSS higher than 

100 Mpa. In the new analysis, considering compression tests in the ND and RD, the CRSS for all 

slip systems and twin systems were determined. However, as mentioned above it is not possible to

find out which system, pyramidal <a> or prismatic or both together, are active, and the same 

concerns the second order pyramidal <c+a> systems.  


33

Table 3. CRSS values and their uncertainties determined from experiment and parameters of 

Voce law used in the modified EPSC model.

Publication 

[18]
Present work

Slip system

CRSS from 

experiment - 0

(Mpa)

CRSS from 

experiment –

0 (Mpa)

Parameters of Voce 

law used in modified 

EPSC model

(Mpa)

Basal B:  {0001}〈112̅0〉

(initial sample)
35
28.0 (3.1)
0=28, 1→0

0→0, 1→0

Prismatic P: {11̅00}〈112̅0〉

(initial sample)

62-85

67.7 (7.9)
0=68, 1=20

0=180, 1=50

Pyramidal <a>:
{11̅01}〈112̅0〉

(initial sample)

59.7 (6.9)
0=60, 1=20

0=180, 1=50

First order pyramidal <c+a> : 

{11̅01}〈1̅21̅3〉

(initial sample)

104.4 (5.6)
0=104, 1=110

0=1000, 1=80

Second order pyramidal <c+a> : 

{12̅12}〈1̅21̅3〉

(initial sample)

116.6 (3.5)
0=114, 1=110

0=1000, 1=80

First order 

tensile twin: 

{11̅02}〈1̅101〉

(initial sample)

Continuous
approach

-
49.1 (2.5)

0=45

0=650

Threshold
approach

𝑤𝑔,𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑛 = 23%

0=47

0=650

First order pyramidal <c+a>: 

{11̅01}〈1̅21̅3〉

(in the twin)

-

130

(between 108 
and 145 )

0=125, 1=110

0=1000, 1=80

Second order pyramidal <c+a>: 

{12̅12}〈1̅21̅3〉

(in the twin)

-

144

(between 120 
and 161)

0=135, 1=110

0=1000, 1=80


34

4.
Model calculations compared with experiment

In this work, a modified EPSC model based on the idea of [79] was applied to verify the 

experimental CRSS (𝜏0

𝑔,𝑠 – initial) values and to determine the hardening parameters used in the 

Voce law, approximating CRSS (𝜏𝑐𝑟

𝑔,𝑠 in deformed sample) evolution on system 𝑠 in grain 𝑔 [63]:

𝜏𝑐𝑟

𝑔,𝑠 = 𝜏0

𝑔,𝑠 + (𝜏1

𝑠 + 𝜃1

𝑠Γ𝑔) (1 − 𝑒

−

𝜃0𝑠

𝜏1𝑠 Γ𝑔

),
(2)

where: 𝛤𝑔 is the total shear strain on all active slip systems, 𝜏0

𝑠 is the current value of initial 

critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) on slip/twin system 𝑠 in grain 𝑔, while 𝜏1

𝑠, 𝜃0

𝑠 and 𝜃1

𝑠 are 

phenomenological hardening parameters for the given slip/twin system 𝑠 (equal for all grains) 

which must be found out from available experimental results and/or a model.

Self-consistent calculations [71,79,80] were performed for an input file consisting of 10,000 

spherical grains with lattice orientations statistically distributed according to the measured ODF 

(Fig. 4). The elastic properties of each grain were defined by the single crystal elastic constants 

given in Section 3.1. For twinning, additional grains were added to the calculations taking into 

account the six possible variants of tensile twins (i.e., up to six twin variants can potentially be 

created from the same parent grain). The activation and operation of slip and twin systems were 

equivalent and based on the Schmid criterion and Voce law (Eq. 2).

The initial CRSS (𝜏0

𝑔,𝑠 ) for the slip systems and tensile twin system were determined directly 

from experiments, as described in the previous sections. However, other parameters of the Voce 

law describing hardening of slip and twin systems (Eq. 2) cannot be found out without the help of 

a crystallographic model. Therefore, the experimental 𝜏0

𝑔,𝑠 values (or values close to them within 

the uncertainties) were used as input data for the EPSC calculations, while the hardening 

parameters of the Voce law were adjusted to fit the model lattice strains to the experimental ones 

(measured in the direction of the applied load) and macroscopic stress-strain curves, 

simultaneously.

It should be emphasised that the same set of parameters of the Voce law was applied for the 

three tests analysed in this work (Table 3). It was found that to fit the model values to the 

experimental ones, the interaction tensor 𝑇𝑔𝑔, describing the interaction of a grain 𝑔 with effective 

matrix (for details see [79,81]), should be multiplied by the factor 𝛼 = 1.2, i.e. :


35

𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝑔𝑔,𝛼 = 𝛼 𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝑔𝑔
(3)

where 𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝑔𝑔,𝛼 is the modified interaction tensor used to calculate the strain rate localization 

tensor 𝐴𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 and the 𝑇𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝑔𝑔 tensor is calculated for the Eshelby spherical inclusion embedded into a 

homogeneous medium characterised by the macroscopic tangent modulus tensor 𝐿𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙.

This means that the differences in the strains between grains are enlarged in comparison to those 

calculated for the spherical Eshelby inclusion by factor 𝛼, i.e., in this assumption the modified

strain localization tensor 𝑨𝒈 is given by:

𝑨𝒈
= (𝑰 − 𝛼 𝑻𝒈𝒈 𝜟𝒍𝒈)−𝟏 ≈ (𝑰 + 𝛼 𝑻𝒈𝒈 𝜟𝒍𝒈)
(4)

where 𝑰 is a fourth rank identity tensor, and 𝜟𝒍𝒈 = 𝒍𝒈 − 𝑳 is the difference between the tangent 

modulus tensors computed for the grain (𝒍𝒈) and the matrix effective modulus (L) [79].

Therefore, the interactions between grains in the modified model are shifted from those 

obtained by the self-consistent model towards the Sachs approach (assumption of homogeneous 

stresses and free strains). It should be emphasised that the above assumption is necessary to modify 

the properties of grain interactions to fit the model to the experiment because the original EPSC 

model does not correctly predict the processes occurring during elastoplastic deformation of the 

studied textured Mg alloy.

The twinning phenomena can be included into the model in various ways. In this work, twinning 

is described using two different approaches:

-
“Continuous approximation” means that when the RSS reaches the CRSS value, a twin 

grain is formed with the same stress state and CRSS as that of its parent grain, but with a new 
crystal lattice orientation. The twin grain then grows with increasing shear strain on the twin 
system, thus reducing the parent grain volume.

-
In the case of “threshold approximation”, when the RSS reaches the CRSS value, the twin 

system is activated, but no twin is formed yet. The parent grain is subjected to deformation in the 
same way as in the case of crystallographic slips, i.e., the state of stresses of the parent grain and 


36

CRSS on its slip systems change. Twin grains are formed, and their orientations are changed with 

respect to the parent after the total volume fraction of all twins 𝑤𝑔,𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑛 = 23%. 

-
In both approaches, the volume fraction of twins is proportional to the total shear strain 

𝛤𝑔,𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑛 on all twin systems in grain 𝑔, i.e., twin fraction 𝑤𝑔,𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑛 = 𝛤𝑔,𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑛 0.13
⁄
, [61,82];

including six possible variants of twins created in the same parent grain. However, in the case of 
an RDC test and a strong basal texture, up to two twin variants are created.

It should be emphasised that the only difference between “continuous” and “threshold” 

approximations is that in the latter one the twinning is postponed and after the offset of 𝑤𝑔,𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑛 = 
23%, the same procedure is applied.

The assumption introduced for the parent grains is that the grain stress does not increase when

the twin system is active. This means that during twinning, which is approximated by a 
crystallographic slip on the twin system, the parent grain is perfectly plastic. The self-hardening 
for the twin system is equal to zero, while the twin slip causes the linear hardening of other systems 

in the parent grain (hardening is described by one parameter of the Voce law, i.e., 𝜃0 given in 

Table 3).

4.1 Determination of hardening parameters

The comparison of the model prediction with the experimental results obtained for three 

different tests are shown in Figs. 16 -18. It is well seen that both the elastic lattice strains measured 

in the direction of applied load and the macroscopic stress-strain curves are well predicted by the 

modified EPSC model with Voce parameters given in Table 3. In Figs. 16 -18 two types of 

macroscopic stress-strain curves are shown: the upper line corresponds to the stress during 

increasing sample load and the lower line shows the macrostress after relaxation at constant strain. 

It should be emphasised that the results of the diffraction measurement of lattice deformations 

correspond to the sample load corresponding to the lower curve. Also, the model of elastic-plastic 

deformation should be adjusted to the lower curve. 

Some disagreement between the predicted and experimental lattice strains is observed in the 

case of the tensile test in the RD (Fig.16), i.e., qualitative agreement occurs, but the difference 

between lattice strains measured using different ℎ𝑘𝑙 reflections is larger than the model values. 

This means that the shift to the Sachs model is possibly greater than it was assumed in the modified 


37

model with 𝛼 = 1.2 (this was also suggested in the paper [18]). In the case of the compression test 

in the ND (Fig. 17), a very good agreement between experimental and predicted lattice strains as 

well as for the macroscopic stress-strain curve was found.

The above-described approximations (continuous and threshold) were used to predict the

twinning process during the compression test in the RD. For both approaches, the model results 

were well adjusted to the experimental results with the same work hardening parameter 0 and 

slightly different CRSS values (τ0), which are 1-3 MPa lower than the experimental one. In Fig. 

18, a comparison of measured lattice strains and macroscopic curve is compared with a model 

prediction assuming the threshold approach (the results of the continuous approach were very 

similar).

Fig. 16. Lattice strains measured in the direction of applied load (a) and macroscopic stress-

strain plot (b) compared with the model calculation (threshold approximation) for the tensile test 

in the RD. The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties of measured lattice strains.


38

Fig. 17. Lattice strains measured in the direction of applied load (a) and macroscopic stress-

strain plot (b) compared with the model calculation (threshold approximation) for the compression 

test in the ND. The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties of measured lattice strains.

Fig. 18. Lattice strains measured in the direction of the applied load (a) and macroscopic stress-

strain plot (b) compared with the model calculation for the compression test in the RD with
threshold approximation. The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties of measured lattice 
strains.


39

4.2 Grain stresses and load partitioning

When the model parameters are established, the stress evolution for different grains can be 

calculated and compared with the experimental results. Such a comparison is shown in Figs. 9-11 

(in Section 3.1), where the threshold approximation was used in twinning prediction. It was found 

that the choice of the type of approximation for twinning prediction is insignificant in the case of 

the tensile test in the RD and compression test in the ND, because the volume fraction of the twins 

is negligible. In the case of the compression test in the RD, a slightly better agreement between 

the model and the experimental stress localized at the twin was found for the threshold 

approximation.

In general, a very good agreement between experimental and model data was found for the three 

performed tests and different grain orientations. A significant disagreement was found only for the 

stress 𝜎33

𝐶 (C orientation) during the tensile test in the RD and for 𝜎11

𝐴 (A orientation) during the 

compression test in the RD. It should be emphasised that in the above comparison, the 

experimental data were determined for grain groups (using CGM), while the model results were 

calculated for a given (single) crystal lattice orientation. Thus, the agreement between the 

experiment and the model prediction, obtained in most cases, means that the stress tensors 

determined by the CGM method represent well the grain stresses for given lattice orientations.

To study the partitioning of the load between grains, the evolution of the grain stresses in the 

direction of applied load together with the macroscopic stress are shown in Figs. 19-21 (the 

absolute values of stresses and of sample strain are shown). The evolutions of these stresses as a 

function of the macroscopic stress |Σ𝑁𝐷| (or |Σ𝑅𝐷|) and strain |E𝑁𝐷| (or |E𝑅𝐷|) are presented.

As shown in Fig. 19a, during the tensile test along the RD, the grains having orientations A and 

B (termed “intermediate grains”) experience higher stress than the grains with orientations C and 

D (“soft grains”). This occurs because the basal system, with the lowest value of the CRSS, can 

only be activated for soft grains where the <c> axis is deviated from the ND direction. The yield 

stress for the intermediate grains depends on the CRSS of the prismatic and/or pyramidal <a> 

systems, which are higher than the CRSS for the basal system, but lower than for the pyramidal 

<c+a> system. It was found that the value of macroscopic stress is between the stresses localized 

at intermediate and soft grains. The model macrostress value is equal to the mean calculated by 

the modified EPSC model for all grains included in the model sample (crystallographic texture is 


40

taken into account in the orientation distribution of the grains). As shown in Fig. 19b, the 

macroscopic curve obtained from the model is well fitted to the experimental data, and the 

qualitative agreement between the experiment and the model was obtained for intermediate grains 

(arithmetic mean for A and B orientations), as well as soft grains (the arithmetic mean for the 

orientations C and D). As mentioned above, the quantitative discrepancy indicates that the 

difference between the loading of hard and soft grains is higher in the real sample compared to the

calculations of the modified EPSC model.  

Fig. 19. Partitioning of the macroscopic stress 33 between soft (mean for C and D) and 

intermediate (mean for A and B) grains during the tensile test in the RD. Model predictions are 

compared with experimental results. The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties of 

measured lattice strains.

The load partitioning between the hard (A and B) and soft grains (D, F, G) during compression 

along the ND is presented in Fig. 20a. In this case, a very good agreement between the model and 

the experiment was obtained. The A and B orientations are now called hard because they carry 

much more load compared to the moderate A and B orientations in the RDT experiment (cf. Fig. 

20 and Fig. 19). In the compression test in the ND, the difference between the yield stress for soft 

and hard grains is much more significant compared to the tensile test in the RD, because plastic 

deformation in hard grains occurs as a result of slip on pyramidal systems <c+a> (first or second 

order), for which the CRSS is the highest of all slip systems (Table 3). Therefore, the macroscopic 


41

stress for the sample is higher in the case of compression in the ND compared to the tensile in the

RD (cf. macroscopic curves in Fig. 19 and Fig. 20). Due to the large difference between the loading 

of hard and soft grains, the yield points of soft grains (mean for D, F and G orientation) and of 

hard grains (mean for A and B orientations) are clearly visible in Fig. 20 as changes in the curve 

trends at |Σ𝑁𝐷| ≈ 70 Mpa, |E𝑁𝐷| ≈ 0.0015 (yield stress of the soft grains) and at |Σ𝑁𝐷| ≈ 170

Mpa, |E𝑁𝐷| ≈ 0.008 (yield stress of the hard grains).

Fig. 20. Partitioning of the macroscopic stress |33| between soft (mean for D, F and G) and 

hard (mean for A and B) grains during the compression test in the ND. Model predictions are 

compared with experimental results. The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties of 

measured lattice strains.

The load partitioning between grains having different orientations during the compression test 

in the RD direction is more complex due to the twinning phenomenon. As shown in Fig. 21, all 

grains are almost equally loaded up to the stress at which the twinning is activated at about |𝛴𝑅𝐷| ≈

90 MPa. The basal system in the soft grain with orientation G’ is also activated at about this load. 

As expected, the stress |𝜎33

G’| for this grain is the lowest compared to all other grains. The B-

oriented grains transform to twins (T-oriented) and during this transition the macroscopic stress 

|Σ𝑅𝐷| practically remains constant, cf. Fig. 21b, 21d, 21f. This is why in the model, perfect 

plasticity of parent grains (B and A – oriented) was assumed, which leads to a very small increase 

of macroscopic stress up to |E𝑅𝐷| ≈ 0.03 (cf. Fig. 21b, 21d, 21f) as seen in the experimental 

macroscopic curve. The created twins (T-oriented) exhibit a smaller stress |𝜎33

T | compared to other 


42

grains, due to back stress generated during twinning (arrow in Fig. 21b, 21d, 21f). It should be 

however emphasised that the effect of back stress is much smaller than reported in [61]. Because 

in this version of the model the back stress is not taken into account (the twin grain initially has 

the same stress state as the parent), the model overestimates the stress for T-oriented grain 

compared to experimental result at the beginning of twinning process. However, it is worth noting 

that in the case of threshold approximation the stress localized at the twin grain is lower than in 

the case of continuous approximation (cf. Fig. 21a-d), because of relaxation of the stresses in the 

parent grain occurring before the twin is created at the threshold. For the greater load, the model 

stress at the twin |𝜎33

𝑇 | approaches the experimental value, and at the end of the test the agreement 

between experiment and model is very good and again better accordance was found in the case of 

the threshold approximation. In the case of A-oriented grains, the stress calculated by the model is 

lower than the experimental one, but the tendencies of the experimental and model plots agree 

qualitatively. These grains also transform into twins but stay longer in the sample, i.e., over 

|Σ𝑅𝐷| = 200 Mpa.  

It should be emphasised that an interesting interplay between the grain stresses occurs, giving 

the macroscopic sample stress which is an average over all grain stresses. The macroscopic plot 

obtained by the model is perfectly fitted to the experimental points, and the stress distribution 

between grains of different orientations is also well predicted by the model (at last qualitatively in 

the case of orientation A).

In Fig. 21b, 21d, 21e, 21f, the grain stresses|𝜎33

𝐵 | and |𝜎33

𝑇 | are shown together with the 

macroscopic stress. It is worth noting that the |𝜎33

𝐵 | stress remains constant over the plateau range,

i.e., no change in intergranular stress appears in the parent grains during the twinning process and 

the localized stress remains constant. Due to the lack of initial T-oriented grains in the undeformed 

sample, the < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0
value was estimated by interpolation as shown in Supplement 2a

(Supplementary materials). It is worth noting that the new T-oriented grains (created due to the 

twinning process) significantly affect the macroscopic behaviour of the sample. As shown in Fig. 

21e, 21f, the shape of the plot |Σ𝑅𝐷| versus |E𝑅𝐷| is enforced by the |𝜎33

𝑇 | stress evolution, and high 

macrostress value at the end of the test occurs due to the high stress localized at twins. Thus, the 

twins exhibit high yield stress and can be considered as the reinforcing grains for the studied 

sample. In the case of grains with T orientation, uniaxial stress |Σ𝑅𝐷| is perpendicular to the base 


43

plane (the basal system is not active) and perpendicular to the <a> axis (prismatic and pyramidal 

<a> are inactive), i.e., only pyramidal <c+a> systems can be activated. The CRSS for the latter 

system is the highest of all systems (see Table 3).

Fig. 21. Partitioning of the macroscopic stress |33| between soft (mean for C and D), 

intermediate (A) grains and twins (T) during the compression test in the RD. Two versions of the 
model prediction, with continuous approximation (a, b) and with threshold approximation (c, d) 
are compared with experimental results. The error bars correspond to standard uncertainties of 
measured lattice strains. 

4.3 Texture evolution

The mechanical behaviour of grains was described in the previous sections. However, it should 

be emphasised that the macroscopic properties of the sample depend not only on the properties of 

grains but also on the interaction between them as well as on the number of grains having specific 

orientations (characterised by texture). The advantage of the diffraction method is the possibility 


44

of measurement of texture evolution due to twinning and slips on crystallographic planes. 

Therefore, in this section the changes in texture (ODF) and volume fraction of twin grains,

measured using the EBSD method and neutron diffraction, are compared with the modified EPSC 

model. 


45

Fig. 28. ND - inverse pole figure maps (EBSD) for: a) initial sample, b) compressed to -2% in 

the normal direction ND, c) stretched to 2% in the rolling direction RD, d) compressed to -2% in 

the RD, e) compressed up to -3% in the RD, and f) compressed to -4% in the RD.

a) Non-deformed
d) ERD = −2%

e) ERD = −3%
b) END = −2%

f) ERD = −4%
c) ERD = 2%


46

The ODFs were determined from EBSD measurements for the samples subjected to different 

tests (Fig. 28). The ODF for the initial undeformed sample is shown in Fig. 4 and the grain 

orientations that are tested in this work are marked. The changes of texture are considered in model 

calculations, and they are compared with the experimental ones. In Fig. 29, the model and 

experimental ODFs after the tensile test in the RD up to E𝑅𝐷 = 3% are shown. It is observed that 

both model and experiment show an increase in ODF value for B orientation and a decrease for A 

orientation. These changes do not significantly influence the macroscopic properties of the sample 

nor the properties of grains because insignificant difference was found in the behaviour of A- and 

B-oriented grains (similar grain stresses were measured for A and B orientations during the tensile 

test in the RD, cf. Fig. 9). 

Fig. 29. Model predicted and experimental texture after the tensile test in the RD up to ERD=3%. 

The modified EPSC model with either continuous or threshold approximation give very similar 
results.

In the case of the compression test in the ND, the changes in the ODF are not significant after 

deformations up to E𝑁𝐷 = −4% (cf. Fig. 30). Both experiment and model show only small 

rearrangement of the preferred orientations which does not significantly change the mechanical 

properties of the sample and the individual grains. 


47

Fig. 30. Model predicted and experimental texture after the compression test in the ND up to

END=-4%. The modified EPSC model with either continuous or threshold approximation give 

practically the same result.

Certainly, the most important changes in ODF occur during the compression test in the RD due 

to the twinning process. As described above, at first the softening of the sample is caused by 

twinning, but then the created twins reinforce the sample. The experimental ODF for the 

deformation E𝑅𝐷 = −4% is compared with the modified EPSC model with continuous and 

threshold approximations for twin creation in Fig. 31. It was found that the model predicts 

qualitatively the texture evolution and better agreements between the model and experimental 

result are obtained for the continuous approximations. It is worth noting that experimental and 

model results show a significant increase in the twin fraction during the compression test 

performed in the RD (compare Fig. 31 with Fig. 4, where the twin orientation is marked).


48

Fig. 31. Experimental texture (a) after the compression test in the RD up to ERD= -4% compared 

with corresponding results predicted by the EPSC model with continuous (b) and threshold (c) 
approximation of the twin process.


49

6.   Discussion

The main purpose of this work was to develop experimental methods for investigating the 

micromechanical properties of polycrystalline materials, which enable direct determination of 

stresses for groups of grains. The neutron diffraction method (CGM) developed in this study 

showed that the components of the stress tensor can be determined for groups of grains if the lattice 

strains are determined in many directions. The TOF technique is particularly advantageous because 

it enables simultaneous determination of lattice deformations with many hkl reflections for each 

direction in which the measurement is performed. 

Using neutron diffraction and CGM, the measurements are performed for a large representative 

volume containing a huge number of polycrystalline grains. It should be emphasised that this 

method is the only one that can be used for textured polycrystals containing a wide range of grain 

sizes from a few µm up to hundreds of µm, e.g., a dozen µm as in this work. In contrast, 

synchrotron diffraction methods with high-energy X-rays can be used to determine stresses for

large grains having sizes of at least several tens of µm or larger, which is a significant limitation 

of these methods. Moreover, the representativity of such measurement is worse in comparison with 

neutron diffraction, because hundreds of grains having different orientations are available for 

analysis.

Having developed an experimental method for determination of grain stresses, the 

measurements can be carried out in situ for various loads applied to the samples. These 

measurements enable experimental studies of the behaviour of polycrystalline grains during 

elastic-plastic deformation, in particular such phenomena as slips on crystallographic planes, the 

phenomenon of twinning, stress localization in individual grains, and changes in the 

crystallographic texture during plastic deformation. In this work, the stresses were determined for 

groups of grains having different orientations in textured hot-rolled magnesium alloy AZ31. This 

is a material which, despite its almost isotropic elastic properties, shows a strongly anisotropic 

response to an applied external load caused by its significant crystallographic texture. Diffraction 

measurements of lattice strains were carried out in situ during the compression/tension of the 

sample and the stresses for selected groups of crystallites were determined using the CGM. 

As mentioned in the Introduction, methodologies for determination of CRSS values from 

nanoindentation require the use of a crystallographic model [26]. Additionally, the methods used 


50

so far, based on measurements of lattice strains, require comparison with models (excluding 

synchrotron measurements performed for large grains), which makes it impossible to estimate the 

measurement uncertainty [7,16,22,55,62,65,66,83-90]. One of the most important achievements

of the present work is the determination of the values of resolved shear stresses (RSS) and critical 

shear stresses (CRSS) for various slip systems and twinning directly from the experiment. For this 

purpose, no model assumptions were used, and the CRSS values were determined from the 

analysed trends in the evolution of the experimental RSS as a function of macrostress and/or 

macrostrain values. The values determined from the experiment were obtained with their 

uncertainties, excluding the CRSS for the <c+a> pyramidal systems for the twin orientation (in the 

latter case, due to an insufficient number of measuring points, the uncertainty was estimated only 

roughly). It should be emphasised that the uncertainties of the determined CRSS values were 

calculated for the first time. The important advantage of the new method presented in this paper is 

that the results are unambiguous and do not depend on the assumptions used in the model. 

Thanks to the stress evolution measurements for different grain groups, it was possible for the 

first time to determine experimentally the stress distribution between crystallites having different 

lattice orientations with respect to the applied load. There are four characteristic groups of grains: 

hard, intermediate, soft, and those for which the twinning phenomenon occurs. Hard grains are 

those for which the plastic process takes place much later, by activation of the pyramidal slip 

systems <c+a> showing the highest CRSS value, while the other slips and twinning cannot be 

activated due to the nearly zero and negative RSS values. Soft grains are those grains in which 

basal slip having the lowest CRSS value is activated, while the intermediate grains are those for 

which the prismatic <a> and / or the pyramidal <a> systems are activated, and other slips and 

twinning remain inactive. In the fourth group of grains, the twinning phenomena can occur, leading 

to the saturation of grain stress regardless of the slip systems activity.

It is well known that the partitioning of stresses between the grains plays a key role in the 

macroscopic response of the sample depending on the combination of the type and direction of the 

applied load with a sharp crystallographic texture. It should be emphasised that in the present work 

the partitioning between different groups of grains was for the first time determined qualitatively, 

directly from diffraction experiment. It was shown that the macroscopic behaviour of the sample 

is always between the high stresses localised at harder grains and low stresses at softer grains (the 


51

macroscopic stress is equal to the average over volume of all grains). Due to the different types 

(compressive or tensile) and orientations of the applied load, most grains with the preferred texture 

orientations exhibit very different plastic behaviour leading to the macroscopic anisotropy of the 

sample. As shown in this work, the greatest macroscopic stresses can be achieved when for most 

crystallites the applied compressive force is parallel to the c-axis, i.e., when the load is parallel to 

the ND. Due to such geometrical relationships, the value of the RSS greater than zero for A and B 

orientations can be achieved only for pyramidal slip systems <c+a>, which can be easily calculated 

from the Schmid law. Therefore, most grains are hard, and the sample is also hard. It has been 

shown that grains having orientations A and B exhibit higher stresses than macroscopic stresses, 

while for inclined grains (orientations C and D) the stresses are lower. Different situations take 

place during the tensile test in the RD, when for the preferred orientations the twin systems remain 

inactive (RSS is less than zero), the basal system is also inactive (RSS is equal to zero), and the 

prismatic <a> and/or pyramidal <a> systems activate for the majority of grains (A and B) at an 

intermediate level of the applied load (much lower than when the compressive load was parallel 

to ND). Due to the low value of the stress applied to the sample, the RSS values on the <c+a> slip 

systems are also too low to activate them. This is an intermediate sample response. As a result, the 

stresses at A and B orientations are higher than the macroscopic value, while the inclined 

orientations D, E and F exhibit lower values of stresses. In the third experiment (compression in 

RD), the most complex sample response was observed, and the shape of the macroscopic stress-

strain curve is significantly affected by the twinning phenomena. For a small value of the applied 

load, the twinning process occurred for the preferred texture orientations, leading to saturation of 

the macroscopic stress-strain curve, i.e., plastic deformation took place without visible hardening. 

However, as most of the grains jumped to the twin orientations, significant sample hardening 

occurred as the twin orientation exhibited the c-axis parallel to the tensile load applied along the 

RD. This means that the orientations of the twin are hard, and the twins can carry the greatest load 

(higher stress) compared to other grains and macroscopic stress, which has been shown 

experimentally. The stresses at the T-oriented grains (twins) are better predicted by the modified 

EPSC model with threshold approximation compared to continuous approximation. In all tests 

carried out, the lowest stress is always found at inclined soft grains in which the basal system is 

activated. These grains soften the sample and reduce macrostresses.


52

To check the agreement of the EPSC model with the obtained experimental results, the 

measured CRSS values were entered into the calculations as input data. After adjusting the model 

to the experimental data by changing hardening parameters (used in the Voce law), a full 

qualitative agreement was achieved in terms of the evolution of lattice strains, stresses at particular 

grains, and macroscopic stresses. It should be emphasised that to achieve a very good agreement 

between the three experiments and the corresponding model calculations, the assumption of the 

self-consistent model was slightly modified by shifting the type of intergranular interaction 

towards the Sachs assumption. It was found that during plastic deformation, the total 

incompatibility strains are about 20% greater than those predicted by the self-consistent approach, 

i.e., weaker intergranular interaction takes place comparing to the self-consistent Eshelby type 

model. 

The most difficult problem in the conducted analysis concerns hardening related to the twin 

systems. Two approaches were considered in this work. In the first one, the transformation of the 

parent grains into twins occurs continuously from the beginning and the twin grains obtain the 

same stress state and CRSS as the parent. However, it is well known that the twinning nucleation 

does not occur continuously but rapidly as a change of a part of the parent grain into a twin having 

a different orientation [91]. Therefore, in the second approach, the twin system is initially active, 

but it does not produce a twin, up to the given threshold. In this case, the hardening of the slip 

systems occurs, and the twin grain created after the threshold is harder. Moreover, the stress relaxes 

during the creation of the twin i.e., back stress is produced due to the eigenstrain of the twin 

transformation. So-called threshold approximation shows much better agreement with the 

experimental results compared to continuous approximation, and explains the significant initial 

hardness of the twin grains, which play a role in the reinforcement during the subsequent sample 

deformation. The threshold is physically explained by some energy barrier that must be overcome 

to form a twin and has also been used in previous works, e.g. [61]. In this model, the twin is 

suddenly created when its relative calculated volume reaches 23%. 

The evolution of the crystallographic texture was also studied and agreement between the 

model and experimental texture was found. The evolution of texture was found to be better 

estimated under the continuous assumption compared to the threshold model. 

As known from the literature, the mechanism of twinning is not so easy to describe. Therefore, 

the main problem of this work was the prediction of the twinning phenomena in model 


53

calculations. Especially, the criterion of twinning initialisation in the present work (and usually in 

literature [61]) is based on Schmid law and a single CRSS value over which most of the systems 

are activated leading to a plateau on the macroscopic stress-strain plot. However, it is well known 

that twinning is initialized before the beginning of the plateau, as was determined from acoustic 

emission experiments, e.g., [39]. This process was not observed in the present work and potentially 

can be seen in diffraction if the tendency of the RSS is carefully studied during elastic and small 

plastic deformation, before plateau on the stress-strain plot (this experiment is planned). Moreover,

twinning can be initiated by such processes as autocatalytic twin nucleation leading to appearance

of shear bands [20]. The latter mechanism of twin nucleation cannot be studied directly by 

diffraction and Eshelby type models which do not consider spatial heterogeneity of the occurring 

processes.  

It is worth noting that the twin nucleation process and the stress values at the newly formed 

twins were not accurately predicted using the EPSC model. Therefore, other methods (e.g., visco-

elasto-plastic self-consistent VEPSC model) for simulation of twinning process should be tested 

using the experimental results obtained in this work. Special attention should be paid to the study 

of the twin formation process at the beginning of deformation and before the plateau observed on 

the stress-strain plot. 

7.    Conclusions

1) A new experimental methodology based on in situ neutron diffraction measurements of the 

stresses at the groups of grains was proposed and successfully applied for an AZ 31 

textured magnesium alloy subjected to three modes of elastoplastic deformation. 

2) The different mechanical behaviours were determined for different groups of grains which 

can be classified as hard, intermediate, and soft, depending on the orientation of the slip 

and twin systems with respect to the grain stresses.

3) For the first time, RSS evolutions and then CRSS values were determined directly from 

the diffraction experiment for all activated slip and twin systems, and the uncertainties of 

these values were estimated.


54

4) The experimentally determined CRSS values were used in the modified EPSC model 

(towards a Sachs model) reducing the number of adjusted parameters.  As a result, a set of 

hardening parameters (Voce's laws) was found for which the predicted lattice strains and 

macroscopic stress-strain plots are closest to the experimental ones, simultaneously for all 

tests. 

5) After determining all the parameters characterizing the slip and twin systems, the evolution 

of the model texture was compared with that obtained directly from the experiment. A good 

agreement between the model and experimental lattice strains and macroscopic curve was 

obtained.

Acknowledgments

This work was financed by a grant from the National Science Centre, Poland (NCN), No.

UMO-2021/41/N/ST5/00394.

P. K. has been partly supported by: the EU Project POWR.03.02.00-00-I004/16; European 

Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under Grant Agreement No. 857470 and 
the European Regional Development Fund via the Foundation for Polish Science International 
Research Agenda PLUS program Grant No. MAB PLUS/2018/8.

The research project was partly supported by the program “Excellence initiative – research 

university" for the AGH University of Science and Technology. 

The neutron diffraction experiments used in this work were partly performed during the period 

2017-2019 at JINR in Dubna (Russia) and the purchase of samples/reagents/ancillary equipment 
was partly financed by the joint JINR/AGH projects No. PWB/389-24/2017, PWB/254_24/2018 
and PWB/129-23/2019.

Measurements partly were carried out at the CANAM infrastructure of the NPI CAS Řež. The 

employment of the CICRR infrastructure supported by MEYS project LM2023041 is 
acknowledged.

Data availability

The raw and processed data required to reproduce results presented in this publication are 

available on https://doi.org/10.58032/AGH/RBP5WX

References

[1]
B.C. Suh, M.S. Shim, K.S. Shin, N.J. Kim, Current issues in magnesium sheet alloys: Where do 
we go from here?, Scr. Mater. 84–85 (2014) 1–6. 


55

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCRIPTAMAT.2014.04.017.

[2]
Z. Yang, J.P. Li, J.X. Zhang, G.W. Lorimer, J. Robson, Review on Research and Development of 
Magnesium Alloys, Acta Metall. Sin. (English Lett. 21 (2008) 313–328. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1006-7191(08)60054-X.

[3]
M. Arul Kumar, I.J. Beyerlein, C.N. Tomé, A measure of plastic anisotropy for hexagonal close 
packed metals: Application to alloying effects on the formability of Mg, J. Alloys Compd. 695 
(2017) 1488–1497. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.10.287.

[4]
T. Al-Samman, X. Li, Sheet texture modification in magnesium-based alloys by selective rare 
earth alloying, Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 528 (2011) 3809–3822. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2011.01.080.

[5]
H. Ding, X. Shi, Y. Wang, G. Cheng, S. Kamado, Texture weakening and ductility variation of 
Mg-2Zn alloy with CA or RE addition, Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 645 (2015) 196–204. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2015.08.025.

[6]
W.J. Kim, J.B. Lee, W.Y. Kim, H.T. Jeong, H.G. Jeong, Microstructure and mechanical properties 
of Mg-Al-Zn alloy sheets severely deformed by asymmetrical rolling, Scr. Mater. 56 (2007) 309–
312. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scriptamat.2006.09.034.

[7]
S.R. Agnew, Ö. Duygulu, Plastic anisotropy and the role of non-basal slip in magnesium alloy
AZ31B, in: Int. J. Plast., 2005: pp. 1161–1193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2004.05.018.

[8]
Z. Zeng, J.F. Nie, S.W. Xu, C.H.J. Davies, N. Birbilis, Super-formable pure magnesium at room 
temperature, Nat. Commun. 8 (2017) 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-01330-9.

[9]
M.A. Kumar, I.J. Beyerlein, Influence of plastic properties on the grain size effect on twinning in 
Ti and Mg, Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 771 (2020) 138644. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2019.138644.

[10]
H. Mezouara, L. Dlimi, A. Salih, M. Afechcar, H. Zniker, Evaluation of the measurement 
uncertainty of the stiffness modulus: Test case of indirect tensile on cylindrical specimens, Int. J. 
Metrol. Qual. Eng. 12 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1051/ijmqe/2021006.

[11]
K. Dhoska, S. Tola, A. Pramono, I. Vozga, Evaluation of measurement uncertainty for the 
determination of the mechanical resistance of the brick samples by using uniaxial compressive 
strength test, Int. J. Metrol. Qual. Eng. 9 (2018) 12. https://doi.org/10.1051/IJMQE/2018012.

[12]
A. Gunay, S. Fank, T. Gulmez, N.M. Durakbasa, Calculation of measurement uncertainty for 
plastic (ABS) material in flexural testing, Int. J. Metrol. Qual. Eng. 4 (2013) 29–33. 
https://doi.org/10.1051/ijmqe/2012034.

[13]
V. Hauk, Structural and Residual Stress Analysis by Nondestructive Methods, 1997. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-444-82476-9.50022-0.

[14]
A.K. Tiwari, A. Kumar, N. Kumar, C. Prakash, Investigation on micro-residual stress distribution 
near hole using nanoindentation: Effect of drilling speed, Meas. Control (United Kingdom). 52 
(2019) 1252–1263. https://doi.org/10.1177/0020294019858107.

[15]
M. Marciszko-Wiąckowska, A. Oponowicz, A. Baczmański, C. Braham, M. Wątroba, M. Wróbel, 
M. Klaus, C. Genzel, A novel approach for nondestructive depth-resolved analysis of residual 
stress and grain interaction in the near-surface zone applied to an austenitic stainless steel sample 
subjected to mechanical polishing, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed. 194 (2022) 111016. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2022.111016.


56

[16]
S. Kaboli, P.C. Burnley, In-situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction deformation and EPSC modeling of 
AZ31 Mg alloy, Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 739 (2019) 99–104. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2018.10.008.

[17]
Q. Chen, L. Hu, L. Shi, T. Zhou, M. Yang, J. Tu, Assessment in predictability of visco-plastic self-
consistent model with a minimum parameter approach: Numerical investigation of plastic 
deformation behavior of AZ31 magnesium alloy for various loading conditions, Mater. Sci. Eng. 
A. 774 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2020.138912.

[18]
A. Baczmański, P. Kot, S. Wroński, M. Wróbel, M. Wroński, J. Pilch, M. Muzyka, K. 
Wierzbanowski, Y. Zhao, L. Le Joncour, M. François, B. Panicaud, Direct diffraction 
measurement of critical resolved shear stresses and stress localisation in magnesium alloy, Mater. 
Sci. Eng. A. 801 (2021) 140355. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2020.140400.

[19]
O. Muránsky, D.G. Carr, P. Šittner, E.C. Oliver, In situ neutron diffraction investigation of 
deformation twinning and pseudoelastic-like behaviour of extruded AZ31 magnesium alloy, Int. J. 
Plast. 25 (2009) 1107–1127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2008.08.002.

[20]
K. Hazeli, J. Cuadra, P.A. Vanniamparambil, A. Kontsos, In situ identification of twin-related 
bands near yielding in a magnesium alloy, Scr. Mater. 68 (2013) 83–86. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCRIPTAMAT.2012.09.009.

[21]
B. Zhou, L. Wang, P. Jin, H. Jia, H.J. Roven, X. Zeng, Y. Li, Revealing slip-induced extension 
twinning behaviors dominated by micro deformation in a magnesium alloy, Int. J. Plast. 128 
(2020) 102669. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPLAS.2020.102669.

[22]
K.J. Tam, M.W. Vaughan, L. Shen, M. Knezevic, I. Karaman, G. Proust, Modelling the 
temperature and texture effects on the deformation mechanisms of magnesium alloy AZ31, Int. J. 
Mech. Sci. 182 (2020) 105727. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJMECSCI.2020.105727.

[23]
J. Wang, M.R.G. Ferdowsi, S.R. Kada, P.A. Lynch, Z. Wang, J.A. Kimpton, M.R. Barnett, Stress 
relaxations during cyclic loading-unloading in precipitation hardened Mg-4.5Zn, Acta Mater. 205 
(2021) 116531. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2020.116531.

[24]
G. Nayyeri, W.J. Poole, C.W. Sinclair, S. Zaefferer, Measurement of the critical resolved shear 
stress for basal slip in magnesium alloys using instrumented indentation, Scr. Mater. 156 (2018) 
37–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scriptamat.2018.07.003.

[25]
Z. Zhao, M.R. Ruiz, J. Lu, M.A. Monclús, J.M. Molina-Aldareguía, T.R. Bieler, P. Eisenlohr, 
Quantifying the Uncertainty of Critical Resolved Shear Stress Values Derived from Nano-
Indentation in Hexagonal Ti Alloys, Exp. Mech. 62 (2022) 731–743. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11340-021-00813-7.

[26]
R. Sánchez-Martín, M.T. Pérez-Prado, J. Segurado, J. Bohlen, I. Gutiérrez-Urrutia, J. Llorca, J.M. 
Molina-Aldareguia, Measuring the critical resolved shear stresses in Mg alloys by instrumented 
nanoindentation, Acta Mater. 71 (2014) 283–292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2014.03.014.

[27]
Z. Li, K. Herrmann, F. Pohlenz, A comparative approach for calibration of the depth measuring 
system in a nanoindentation instrument, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed. 39 (2006) 547–552. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2005.12.010.

[28]
A.L.M. Vargas, E. Blando, R. Hübler, Elasto – Plastic materials behavior evaluation according to 
different models applied in indentation hardness tests, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed. 139 (2019) 
134–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2019.01.090.

[29]
J. Garcia-Martin, R. González-Fernández, B. Calleja-Saenz, D. Ferreño-Blanco, Measurement of 


57

hardness increase for shot-peened austenitic TX304HB stainless steel tubes with electromagnetic 
Non-Destructive testing, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed. 149 (2020) 106925. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2019.106925.

[30]
R. Moharrami, M. Sanayei, Developing a method in measuring residual stress on steel alloys by 
instrumented indentation technique, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed. 158 (2020) 107718. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2020.107718.

[31]
H. Fan, J.A. El-Awady, Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Orientation Effects during Tension, 
Compression, and Bending Deformations of Magnesium Nanocrystals, J. Appl. Mech. Trans. 
ASME. 82 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4030930.

[32]
M.S. Hasan, R. Lee, W. Xu, Deformation nanomechanics and dislocation quantification at the 
atomic scale in nanocrystalline magnesium, J. Magnes. Alloy. 8 (2020) 1296–1303. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jma.2020.08.014.

[33]
Z.H. Aitken, H. Fan, J.A. El-Awady, J.R. Greer, The effect of size, orientation and alloying on the 
deformation of AZ31 nanopillars, J. Mech. Phys. Solids. 76 (2015) 208–223. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2014.11.014.

[34]
Q. Yu, L. Qi, K. Chen, R.K. Mishra, J. Li, A.M. Minor, The nanostructured origin of deformation 
twinning, Nano Lett. 12 (2012) 887–892. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/NL203937T/SUPPL_FILE/NL203937T_SI_005.QT.

[35]
K.E. Prasad, K. Rajesh, U. Ramamurty, Micropillar and macropillar compression responses of 
magnesium single crystals oriented for single slip or extension twinning, Acta Mater. 65 (2014) 
316–325. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2013.10.073.

[36]
K. Máthis, P. Beran, J. Čapek, P. Lukáś, In-situ neutron diffraction and acoustic emission 
investigation of twinning activity in magnesium, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 340 (2012) 012096. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/340/1/012096.

[37]
M.A. Lebyodkin, I. V. Shashkov, T.A. Lebedkina, K. Mathis, P. Dobron, F. Chmelik, Role of 
superposition of dislocation avalanches in the statistics of acoustic emission during plastic 
deformation, Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 88 (2013) 042402. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.88.042402.

[38]
K. Máthis, G. Csiszár, J. Čapek, J. Gubicza, B. Clausen, P. Lukáš, A. Vinogradov, S.R. Agnew, 
Effect of the loading mode on the evolution of the deformation mechanisms in randomly textured 
magnesium polycrystals - Comparison of experimental and modeling results, Int. J. Plast. 72 
(2015) 127–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2015.05.009.

[39]
J. Čapek, M. Knapek, P. Minárik, J. Dittrich, K. Máthis, Characterization of deformation 
mechanisms in Mg alloys by advanced acoustic emission methods, Metals (Basel). 8 (2018) 644. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/met8080644.

[40]
C.R. Heiple, S.H. Carpenter, Acoustic Emission Produced by Deformation of Metals and Alloys, 
J. Acoust. Em. 6 (1987) 177. https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1987JAE.....6..177H/abstract 
(accessed February 3, 2023).

[41]
J. Čapek, K. Máthis, B. Clausen, J. Stráská, P. Beran, P. Lukáš, Study of the loading mode 
dependence of the twinning in random textured cast magnesium by acoustic emission and neutron 
diffraction methods, Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 602 (2014) 25–32. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2014.02.051.

[42]
A. Sibil, N. Godin, M. R’Mili, E. Maillet, G. Fantozzi, Optimization of acoustic emission data 


58

clustering by a genetic algorithm method, J. Nondestruct. Eval. 31 (2012) 169–180. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10921-012-0132-1.

[43]
U. Welzel, J. Ligot, P. Lamparter, A.C. Vermeulen, E.J. Mittemeijer, Stress analysis of 
polycrystalline thin films and surface regions by X-ray diffraction, 2005. 
https://doi.org/10.1107/S0021889804029516.

[44]
H. Dong, X. Liu, Y. Song, B. Wang, S. Chen, C. He, Quantitative evaluation of residual stress and 
surface hardness in deep drawn parts based on magnetic Barkhausen noise technology, Meas. J. 
Int. Meas. Confed. 168 (2021) 108473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2020.108473.

[45]
A. Umapathi, S. Swaroop, Measurement of residual stresses in titanium alloys using synchrotron 
radiation, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed. 140 (2019) 518–525. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2019.04.021.

[46]
S. Ao, C. Li, Y. Huang, Z. Luo, Determination of residual stress in resistance spot-welded joint by 
a novel X-ray diffraction, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed. 161 (2020) 107892. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2020.107892.

[47]
J. Serafinczuk, L. Pawlaczyk, K. Moszak, D. Pucicki, R. Kudrawiec, D. Hommel, X-ray 
diffraction studies of residual strain in AlN/sapphire templates, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed. 200 
(2022) 111611. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2022.111611.

[48]
A. Baczmański, E. Gadalińska, S. Wroński, L. Le Joncour, B. Panicaud, M. François, C. Braham, 
V. Klosek, A.M. Paradowska, Study of Stresses in Texture Components Using Neutron 
Diffraction, 2013. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/MSF.768-769.289.

[49]
F. Heilmeier, R. Koos, P. Hornberger, J. Hiller, K. Weraneck, M. Jakobi, A.W. Koch, W. Volk, 
Calibration of cast-in fibre Bragg gratings for internal strain measurements in cast aluminium by 
using neutron diffraction, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed. 163 (2020) 107939. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2020.107939.

[50]
C. Genzel, I.A. Denks, J. Gibmeier, M. Klaus, G. Wagener, The materials science synchrotron 
beamline EDDI for energy-dispersive diffraction analysis, Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. 
Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 578 (2007) 23–33. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2007.05.209.

[51]
P.J. Withers, Depth capabilities of neutron and synchrotron diffraction strain measurement 
instruments. II. Practical implications, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 37 (2004) 607–612. 
https://doi.org/10.1107/S0021889804012750.

[52]
S. Wroński, A. Baczmański, R. Dakhlaoui, C. Braham, K. Wierzbanowski, E.C. Oliver, 
Determination of the stress field in textured duplex steel using the TOF neutron diffraction 
method, Acta Mater. 55 (2007) 6219–6233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2007.07.044.

[53]
Y. Zhao, S. Wroński, A. Baczmański, L. Le Joncour, M. Marciszko, T. Tokarski, M. Wróbel, M. 
François, B. Panicaud, Micromechanical behaviour of a two-phase Ti alloy studied using grazing 
incidence diffraction and a self-consistent model, Acta Mater. 136 (2017) 402–414. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2017.06.022.

[54]
V. Hounkpati, S. Fréour, D. Gloaguen, V. Legrand, J. Kelleher, W. Kockelmann, S. Kabra, In situ 
neutron measurements and modelling of the intergranular strains in the near-β titanium alloy Ti-
β21S, Acta Mater. 109 (2016) 341–352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2016.02.065.

[55]
L. Wang, Z. Zheng, H. Phukan, P. Kenesei, J.S. Park, J. Lind, R.M. Suter, T.R. Bieler, Direct 
measurement of critical resolved shear stress of prismatic and basal slip in polycrystalline Ti using 


59

high energy X-ray diffraction microscopy, Acta Mater. 132 (2017) 598–610. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2017.05.015.

[56]
P.F. Willemse, B.P. Naughton, C.A. Verbraak, X-ray residual stress measurements on cold-drawn 
steel wire, Mater. Sci. Eng. 56 (1982) 25–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/0025-5416(82)90179-3.

[57]
B. Ortner,  On the selection of measurement directions in second-rank tensor ( e . g . elastic strain) 
determination of single crystals , J. Appl. Crystallogr. 22 (1989) 216–221. 
https://doi.org/10.1107/s0021889888014141.

[58]
R. Dakhlaoui, V. Klosek, M.H. Mathon, B. Marini, Orientation stress field analysis in 
polycrystalline bcc steel using neutron diffraction, Acta Mater. 58 (2010) 499–509. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2009.09.028.

[59]
D.C. Pagan, J. V. Bernier, D. Dale, J.Y.P. Ko, T.J. Turner, B. Blank, P.A. Shade, Measuring Ti-
7Al slip system strengths at elevated temperature using high-energy X-ray diffraction, Scr. Mater. 
142 (2018) 96–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scriptamat.2017.08.029.

[60]
S.R. Agnew, D.W. Brown, C.N. Tomé, Validating a polycrystal model for the elastoplastic 
response of magnesium alloy AZ31 using in situ neutron diffraction, Acta Mater. 54 (2006) 4841–
4852. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2006.06.020.

[61]
B. Clausen, C.N. Tomé, D.W. Brown, S.R. Agnew, Reorientation and stress relaxation due to 
twinning: Modeling and experimental characterization for Mg, Acta Mater. 56 (2008) 2456–2468. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2008.01.057.

[62]
H. Wang, P.D. Wu, C.N. Tomé, J. Wang, Study of lattice strains in magnesium alloy AZ31 based 
on a large strain elastic-viscoplastic self-consistent polycrystal model, Int. J. Solids Struct. 49 
(2012) 2155–2167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2012.04.026.

[63]
C.J. Neil, J.A. Wollmershauser, B. Clausen, C.N. Tomé, S.R. Agnew, Modeling lattice strain 
evolution at finite strains and experimental verification for copper and stainless steel using in situ 
neutron diffraction, Int. J. Plast. 26 (2010) 1772–1791. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2010.03.005.

[64]
B. Clausen, T. Lorentzen, M.A.M. Bourke, M.R. Daymond, Lattice strain evolution during 
uniaxial tensile loading of stainless steel, Mater. Sci. Eng. A. (1999). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-5093(98)00878-8.

[65]
O. Muránsky, D.G. Carr, M.R. Barnett, E.C. Oliver, P. Šittner, Investigation of deformation 
mechanisms involved in the plasticity of AZ31 Mg alloy: In situ neutron diffraction and EPSC 
modelling, Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 496 (2008) 14–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2008.07.031.

[66]
H. Wang, B. Clausen, L. Capolungo, I.J. Beyerlein, J. Wang, C.N. Tomé, Stress and strain 
relaxation in magnesium AZ31 rolled plate: In-situ neutron measurement and elastic viscoplastic 
polycrystal modeling, Int. J. Plast. 79 (2016) 275–292. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2015.07.004.

[67]
B. Clausen, T. Lorentzen, T. Leffers, Self-consistent modelling of the plastic deformation of 
F.C.C. polycrstals and its implications for diffraction measurements of internal stresses, Acta 
Mater. 46 (1998) 3087–3098. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-6454(98)00014-7.

[68]
W. Wen, M. Borodachenkova, C.N. Tomé, G. Vincze, E.F. Rauch, F. Barlat, J.J. Grácio, 
Mechanical behavior of low carbon steel subjected to strain path changes: Experiments and 
modeling, Acta Mater. 111 (2016) 305–314. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2016.03.075.


60

[69]
M. Wroński, M.A. Kumar, R.J. McCabe, K. Wierzbanowski, C.N. Tomé, Deformation behavior of 
CP-titanium under strain path changes: Experiment and crystal plasticity modeling, Int. J. Plast. 
148 (2022) 103129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2021.103129.

[70]
J.D. Eshelby, The determination of the elastic field of an ellipsoidal inclusion, and related 
problems, Collect. Work. J. D. Eshelby. 241 (2007) 209–229. https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-
4499-2_18.

[71]
E. Gadalińska, A. Baczmański, C. Braham, G. Gonzalez, H. Sidhom, S. Wroński, T. Buslaps, K. 
Wierzbanowski, Stress localisation in lamellar cementite and ferrite during elastoplastic 
deformation of pearlitic steel studied using diffraction and modelling, Int. J. Plast. 127 (2020) 
102651. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2019.102651.

[72]
E.I. Litvinenko, V. Ryukhtin, A.A. Bogdzel, A. V. Churakov, G. Farkas, C. Hervoches, P. Lukas, 
J. Pilch, J. Saroun, P. Strunz, V. V. Zhuravlev, Upgrade of detectors of neutron instruments at 
Neutron Physics Laboratory in Řež, Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. 
Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 841 (2017) 5–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2016.10.024.

[73]
K. Walther, C. Scheffzuek, A. Frischbutter, Neutron time-of-flight diffractometer epsilon for strain 
measurements: Layout and first results, Phys. B Condens. Matter. 276–278 (2000) 130–131. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-4526(99)01378-2.

[74]
W.H. Press, S.A. Teukolsky, W.T. Vetterling, B.P. Flannery, NUMERICAL RECIPES Third 
Edition-Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing, Third Edition, CAMBRIDGE 
UNIVERSITY PRESS, 2007. www.cambridge.org.

[75]
A. Baczmanski, P. Lipinski, A. Tidu, K. Wierzbanowski, B. Pathiraj, Quantitative estimation of 
incompatibility stresses and elastic energy stored in ferritic steel, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 41 (2008) 
854–867. https://doi.org/10.1107/S0021889808023911.

[76]
U. Welzel, E.J. Mittemeijer, Applicability of the Crystallite Group Method to Fibre Textured 
Specimens, Mater. Sci. Forum. 443–444 (2004) 131–134. 
https://doi.org/10.4028/WWW.SCIENTIFIC.NET/MSF.443-444.131.

[77]
Simmons G and Wang H, Single Crystal Elastic Constants and Calculated Aggregate Properties, 
1977.

[78]
D. Tromans, Elastic Anisotropy of HCP Metal Crystals and Polycrystals, Ijrras. 6 (2011) 462–483.

[79]
P. Lipinski, M. Berveiller, Elastoplasticity of micro-inhomogeneous metals at large strains, Int. J. 
Plast. 5 (1989) 149–172. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-6419(89)90027-2.

[80]
A. Baczmański, Y. Zhao, E. Gadalińska, L. Le Joncour, S. Wroński, C. Braham, B. Panicaud, M. 
François, T. Buslaps, K. Soloducha, Elastoplastic deformation and damage process in duplex 
stainless steels studied using synchrotron and neutron diffractions in comparison with a self-
consistent model, Int. J. Plast. 81 (2016) 102–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2016.01.018.

[81]
M. Berveiller, O. Fassi-Fehri, A. Hihi, The problem of two plastic and heterogeneous inclusions in 
an anisotropic medium, Int. J. Eng. Sci. 25 (1987) 691–709. https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-
7225(87)90058-9.

[82]
P.G. Partridge, The crystallography and deformation modes of hexagonal close-packed metals, 
Metall. Rev. 12 (1967) 169–194. https://doi.org/10.1179/mtlr.1967.12.1.169.

[83]
M.H. Yoo, Slip, twinning, and fracture in hexagonal close-packed metals, Metall. Trans. A. 12 


61

(1981) 409–418. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02648537/METRICS.

[84]
D. Sun, M. Ponga, K. Bhattacharya, M. Ortiz, Proliferation of twinning in hexagonal close-packed 
metals: Application to magnesium, J. Mech. Phys. Solids. 112 (2018) 368–384. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2017.12.009.

[85]
M. Zecevic, I.J. Beyerlein, M. Knezevic, Activity of pyramidal I and II <c+a> slip in Mg alloys as 
revealed by texture development, J. Mech. Phys. Solids. 111 (2018) 290–307. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2017.11.004.

[86]
A. Staroselsky, L. Anand, A constitutive model for hcp materials deforming by slip and twinning: 
Application to magnesium alloy AZ31B, Int. J. Plast. 19 (2003) 1843–1864. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749-6419(03)00039-1.

[87]
S.R. Agnew, A. Singh, C.A. Calhoun, R.P. Mulay, J.J. Bhattacharyya, H. Somekawa, T. Mukai, B. 
Clausen, P.D. Wu, In-situ neutron diffraction of a quasicrystal-containing Mg alloy interpreted 
using a new polycrystal plasticity model of hardening due to {10.2} tensile twinning, Int. J. Plast. 
100 (2018) 34–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2017.09.005.

[88]
W. Wen, M. Borodachenkova, C.N. Tomé, G. Vincze, E.F. Rauch, F. Barlat, J.J. Grácio, 
Mechanical behavior of Mg subjected to strain path changes: Experiments and modeling, Int. J. 
Plast. 73 (2015) 171–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2014.10.009.

[89]
H. Wang, P.D. Wu, C.N. Tomé, J. Wang, A constitutive model of twinning and detwinning for 
hexagonal close packed polycrystals, Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 555 (2012) 93–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MSEA.2012.06.038.

[90]
J. Čapek, J. Stráská, B. Clausen, K. Máthis, Twinning evolution as a function of loading direction 
in magnesium, in: Acta Phys. Pol. A, 2015: pp. 762–764. 
https://doi.org/10.12693/APhysPolA.128.762.

[91]
Y. Paudel, D. Giri, M.W. Priddy, C.D. Barrett, K. Inal, M.A. Tschopp, H. Rhee, H. El Kadiri, A 
review on capturing twin nucleation in crystal plasticity for hexagonal metals, Metals (Basel). 11 
(2021) 1373. https://doi.org/10.3390/met11091373.

Appendix 1.
The set of poles used for stress determination by using the 

crystallite group method.

Table A1.1 Examined poles for crystal orientations A - G' of AZ31 magnesium during normal 

direction compression (NDC), rolling direction tensile (RDT), and rolling direction compression 

(RDC) tests.

No.
(ℎ𝑘𝑖𝑙)
Ψ [°]
𝜑 [°]
No.
(ℎ𝑘𝑖𝑙)
Ψ [°]
𝜑 [°]

Orientation A, Experiment: NDC
Orientation B, Experiment: RDT

1
0001
0.00
0.00
1
101̅0
0.00
0.00


62

2
12̅10
90.00
0.00
2
112̅0
30.00
0.00

3
11̅02
46.00
35.00
3
011̅0
60.00
0.00

4
101̅4
14.81
97.46
4
1̅21̅0
90.00
0.00

5
1̅010
90.00
90.00
5
0001
90.00
90.00

6
01̅12̅
46.00
154.08
6
011̅3
74.60
61.60

7
1̅21̅0
90.00
180.00
7
101̅3
58.00
90.00

8
11̅02̅
46.00
205.92
Orientation C. Experiment: RDT

9
101̅4̅
14.81
263.00
1
12̅12
0.00
0.00

10
101̅0
90.00
270.00
2
011̅3
88.47
74.61

11
01̅12
46.00
334.08
3
0001
60.00
90.00

Orientation B. Experiment: NDC
4
202̅1
82.60
13.00

1
0001
0.00
0.00
5
101̅1
76.36
24.77

2
12̅10
90.00
90.00
Orientation D. Experiment: RDT

3
11̅02
46.00
125.00
1
1̅013
90.00
90.00

4
101̅4
14.81
187.46
2
101̅1
0.00
0.00

5
1̅010
90.00
180.00
Orientation A. Experiment: RDC

6
01̅12̅
46.00
244.08
1
12̅10
0.00
0.00

7
1̅21̅0
90.00
270.00
2
101̅0
90.00
0.00

8
11̅02̅
46.00
295.92
3
1̅010
90.00
0.00

9
101̅4̅
14.81
353.00
4
112̅2
60.00
215.00

10
101̅0
90.00
0.00
5
21̅1̅2
60.00
35.00

11
01̅12
46.00
64.08
6
0001
90.00
90.00

Orientation D. Experiment: NDC
7
0001̅
90.00
270.00

1
11̅02
̅̅̅̅
14.81
262.53
Orientation B. Experiment: RDC

2
11̅03
0.00
0.00
1
202̅1̅
14.81
97.47

3
101̅3
60.00
125.26
2
202̅1
14.81
262.53

4
21̅1̅0
60.00
305.26
3
101̅0
0.00
0.00

5
01̅13
60.00
55.00
4
12̅10
90.00
0.00

6
12̅10
60.00
235.00
5
1̅21̅0
90.00
180.00

7
11̅01
90.00
270.00
6
11̅02
71.30
136.00

8
11̅01
90.00
90.00
7
11̅01
60.00
215.00

9
112̅0
90.00
0.00
8
11̅02̅
71.30
226.00

10
1̅1̅20
90.00
180.00
9
01̅12
71.30
316.00


63

Orientation F. Experiment: NDC
10
01̅12̅
71.30
46.00

1
22̅01̅
14.81
262.53
11
01̅11
60.00
35.00

2
11̅01̅
0.00
0.00
12
0001
90.00
90.00

3
11̅02̅
14.81
97.47
13
0001̅
90.00
270.00

4
101̅1̅
47.22
25.92
Orientation D. Experiment: RDC

5
01̅11̅
47.22
154.00
1
101̅1
0.00
0.00

6
101̅1
71.29
315.81
2
101̅2
14.80
97.00

7
01̅11
71.29
225.81
3
01̅13̅
47.20
116.00

8
112̅0
90.00
0.00
4
01̅14
47.20
116.00

9
1̅1̅20
90.00
180.00
5
01̅13
60.00
125.00

Orientation G. Experiment: NDC
6
101̅3
90.00
270.00

1
11̅02̅
0.00
0.00
7
11̅03
47.20
63.00

2
11̅01̅
14.80
277.47
8
11̅04
47.20
63.00

3
112̅0
90.00
0.00
9
101̅3
90.00
270.00

4
1̅1̅20
90.00
180.00
10
101̅3
90.00
90.00

5
101̅2
71.29
135.81
 rie  a io  G’. E  erime  :    

6
01̅12
71.00
44.00
1
101̅2
0.00
0.00

7
101̅3
60.00
125.26
2
101̅1
14.81
262.53

8
12̅12
88.10
255.31
3
101̅3
14.81
97.00

Orientation A. Experiment: RDT
4
101̅4
14.81
97.00

1
12̅10
0.00
0.00
5
11̅03̅
60.00
125.00

2
11̅00
30.00
0.00
6
11̅04̅
60.00
125.00

3
21̅1̅0
60.00
0.00
7
101̅2̅
90.00
270.00

4
101̅0
90.00
0.00
8
01̅13
60.00
55.00

5
0001
90.00
90.00
9
01̅14
60.00
55.00

6
11̅03
62.70
72.70
10
101̅2̅
90.00
90.00

7
101̅3
90.00
58.00
Orientation F. Experiment: RDC

8
101̅1
90.00
28.00
1
101̅3
0.00
0.00

2
101̅2
14.81
262.53

3
11̅04
47.20
116.00

4
11̅03̅
60.00
125.00

5
12̅10
90.00
180.00

6
101̅1̅
90.00
270.00


64

7
1̅21̅0
90.00
0.00

Appendix 2.
Strain and stress determination – problem uncertainty 

analysis 

a) Determination of the interplanar spacings for reflections absent in the 

initial sample

In the study of AZ31 alloy, the lattice strains were determined based on Equation 1 (in the 

publication) in which the difference between interplanar spacing in the sample under load 

(< 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙) and those in the initial sample were calculated (< 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0 ). This minimises the possible 

systematic errors in peak position determination. However, in the case of the twin grains arising 

during compression in the RD, the grains with orientations corresponding to the twins were not 

present in the initial sample, therefore the necessary interplanar spacings < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0
were not 

available. This especially concerns the absence of diffraction peaks for 002 and 004 reflections in 

the detector L2 measuring the interplanar spacings in the direction of the load applied along the  

RD. Thus, the values of the < 𝑑 >002

0,𝐿2 and < 𝑑 >004

0,𝐿2 were found using the interpolation method,

in which the available interplanar spacings < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0,𝐿2 and < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0,𝐿5 measured respectively by L2 

and L5 detectors were used. To do this, the ratios of interplanar spacings for the corresponding 

reflections ℎ𝑘𝑙 were calculated (except for reflections 002 and 004):

𝑥ℎ𝑘𝑙 =

<𝑑>ℎ𝑘𝑙

0,𝐿2

<𝑑>ℎ𝑘𝑙

0,𝐿5 .
(AS2.1)

Then, linear regression was used to fit the straight lines, assuming the dependence:

𝑥ℎ𝑘𝑙 = 𝐴 < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0,𝐿5+ 𝐵
(A2.2)

The unknown 𝑥002 and 𝑥004 values and their standard uncertainties were found from the fitted 

lines (Eq. S2.2) for measured < 𝑑 >002

0,𝐿5 and < 𝑑 >004

0,𝐿5 values as shown in Fig. A2.1. Finally, the 

values:


65

< 𝑑 >002

0,𝐿2= 𝑥002 < 𝑑 >002

0,𝐿5 and  < 𝑑 >004

0,𝐿2= 𝑥004 < 𝑑 >004

0,𝐿5
(A2.3)

were found. 

The combined standard uncertainty of the determined interplanar spacing 𝑢(< 𝑑 >002

0,𝐿2) was 

calculated from standard uncertainties 𝑢(𝑥002) and  𝑢(< 𝑑 >002

0,𝐿5) , using the law of propagation 

of uncertainty (LPU). In the same way, the uncertainty 𝑢(< 𝑑 >004

0,𝐿2) was found. The procedure 

described above was applied for the data obtained before (𝜔 = 0°) and after sample rotation about 

the sample axis (𝛼 = 90°) (Fig. A2.1), and the results are given in Table .

dhkl (nm)

0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30

x = dL2 / dL5

0.9996

0.9998

1.0000

1.0002

1.0004

1.0006

1.0008

L5 (w=0°) to L2 (w=0°) detector
x(d)=0,000382(78)d+0,99959(14)
L5 (w=0°) to L2 (w=90°) detector
x(d)=0,000563(91)d+0,99920(17)
Calculated x for 002 and 004 reflect.

100

101

102

103

112

202

100

101

102

201
004

002

110
110

201
112

202

103

Fig. A2.1 The dependences of 𝑥ℎ𝑘𝑙 vs.  < 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0,𝐿5 fitted by straight lines based on which the 

𝑥002 and 𝑥004 values were interpolated for the measured < 𝑑 >002

0,𝐿5 and < 𝑑 >004

0,𝐿5 values.

Table S2.1 Determined < 𝑑 >002

0,𝐿2 and < 𝑑 >004

0,𝐿2 interplanar spacings for the sample before 

rotation (𝛼 = 0°) and  rotated around the RD||𝑥2 axis by 𝛼 = 90°. 

Reflection
𝛼 (°)
< 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0,𝐿2 (nm)
𝑢(< 𝑑 >ℎ𝑘𝑙

0,𝐿2) (nm)

002 
0°
0.260232
0.000065


66

004 
0°
0.129791
0.000032

002 
90°
0.260253
0.000076

004 
90°
0.129771
0.000035

b) Stress and CRSS determination - uncertainty analysis

The procedure is based the normalized goodness of fit (GoF) χ2, which is defined as: 

𝜒2 =

1

𝑁−𝑀 ∑
(

〈𝜀(𝜑𝑛,𝜓𝑛)〉ℎ𝑘𝑙

𝑒𝑥𝑝−〈𝜀(𝜑𝑛,𝜓𝑛)〉ℎ𝑘𝑙

𝑐𝑎𝑙

𝑢(〈𝜀(𝜑𝑛,𝜓𝑛)〉ℎ𝑘𝑙

𝑒𝑥𝑝)
)

2

𝑁
𝑛=1
,
(A2.4)

where 〈𝜀(𝜑𝑛, 𝜓𝑛)〉(ℎ𝑘𝑙)

𝑒𝑥𝑝 and 〈𝜀(𝜑𝑛, 𝜓𝑛)〉ℎ𝑘𝑙

𝑐𝑎𝑙 are respectively the experimental and calculated 

lattice parameters, 𝑢(〈𝜀(𝜑𝑛, 𝜓𝑛)〉ℎ𝑘𝑙

𝑒𝑥𝑝) is the standard uncertainty of 〈𝜀(𝜑𝑛, 𝜓𝑛)〉ℎ𝑘𝑙

𝑒𝑥𝑝 for the n-th

measurement (obtained from procedure for analysis of diffraction data), and N and M are the 

number of measured lattice strains and number of fitting parameters, respectively. 

In the stress analysis performed in this work, the values of lattice strains given by Eq. 1 are 

fitted to experimental data using the General Linear Least Squares (GLLS) method in which the 

solution is obtained by applying the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) procedure described by 

Press et al. [74]. In this procedure, the stress components 𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅 are considered as model adjustable 

parameters which are estimated by fitting the model (c.f. Eq. 1) to available experimental lattice 

strains using GLLS  analysis. The standard uncertainties of so obtained stresses 𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅 are calculated 

as the square roots from the obtained variances 𝑢2(𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅) multiplied by χ2, i.e., 𝑢(𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅) =

√𝑢2(𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅) ∗ 𝜒2 [74]. Such an estimation is made to take into account the impact of uncertainties 

𝑢(〈𝜀(𝜑𝑛, 𝜓𝑛)〉ℎ𝑘𝑙

𝑒𝑥𝑝) in the obtained results through the definition of χ2 given by Eq. A2.4. The so 

obtained uncertainties are presented as the error bars in Figs. 9-11.   

The uncertainties of the RSS values were calculated as the combined standard uncertainties 

calculated from the 𝑢(𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝐶𝑅) uncertainties and they are presented in Figs. 22-27, Figs. 12-15  and 

Figs. A3.1-A3.5 as the error bars.


