Optimizing multi-user indoor sound communications with acoustic 

reconfigurable metasurfaces

Hongkuan Zhang1,4, Qiyuan Wang1,4,5, Mathias Fink2, Guancong Ma1,3†

1Department of Physics, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong

2Institut Langevin, ESPCI Paris, Université PSL, CNRS, Paris 75005, France

3Shenzhen Institute for Research and Continuing Education, Hong Kong Baptist University,

Shenzhen 518000, China

4Contributed equally to this work. 

5Present address: Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Japan

†Email: phgcma@hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

Sound in indoor spaces forms a complex wavefield due to multiple scattering encountered 

by the sound. Indoor acoustic communication involving multiple sources and receivers thus 

inevitably suffers from cross-talks. Here, we demonstrate the isolation of acoustic 

communication channels in a room by wavefield shaping using acoustic reconfigurable 

metasurfaces (ARMs) controlled by optimization protocols based on communication 

theories. The ARMs have 200 electrically switchable units, each selectively offering 0 or 𝝅

phase shifts in the reflected waves. The sound field is reshaped for maximal Shannon 

capacity and minimal cross-talk simultaneously. We demonstrate diverse acoustic 

functionalities over a spectrum much larger than the coherence bandwidth of the room, 

including multi-channel, multi-spectral channel isolations, and frequency-multiplexed

acoustic communication. Our work shows that wavefield shaping in complex media can 

offer new strategies for future acoustic engineering.

Introduction

Most indoor spaces are complex acoustic cavities, wherein the sound fields are scrambled by 

reflections and multiple scattering1. Such environments are never ideal for acoustic communication:

the multiple scattering leads to cross-talk, the disorder garbles conversations and decreases

speech intelligibility. In this work, by a successful crossover of adaptive wavefield shaping2,3, 

acoustic metasurfaces4,5, information and communication theories6,7, we
experimentally 

demonstrate the control of complex indoor sound fields for optimal acoustic communications

between multiple sources and receivers by acoustic reconfigurable metasurfaces (ARMs) that 


2

provides binary phase control. The idea is to modify the room environment by wavefield shaping to 

physically optimize multiple communication channels between various sources and receivers. 

Up to now, adaptive wavefield shaping has revolutionized the control of light8–10, 

microwave11–13, and sound14,15 in complex media. A plethora of functionalities have been realized, 

such as focusing and imaging through opaque materials3,16,17, perfect transmission through 

disordered media18,19, depth-targeted energy delivery20, spatiotemporal control of complex fields11–

14, chaos-assisted analog computing21,22. In particular, adaptive wavefield shaping can either

synthesize the input wavefield or modify the complex media such that an input wave optimally

couples to open transmission eigenchannels of a medium for high transmission efficiency18,19. Such 

an approach has been shown to benefit microwave-based communications13. However, unlike 

telecommunications that can benefit from signal processing provided by sophisticated modern 

electronics, such as filtering, sound communications are directly conducted among humans who 

do not naturally process such capabilities. The phenomenon of the cocktail party effect in the 

human auditory system allows individuals to selectively attend to specific sounds23, facilitating the 

reduction of cross-talk in multi-channel communications. Nevertheless, in complex environments, 

the cognitive capacity of the human perception system is limited. For this reason, optimal sound 

communications present a unique set of challenges and are so far beyond reach in complex 

environments. Here, to optimize sound communications and information transfer between multiple 

sources and receivers in a room, we first measure the multi-spectral channel matrix that connects, 

at each frequency, the sources and receivers in the room. It encapsulates the disordered nature of 

the complex sound field but contains few degrees of freedom, and therefore it is easy to handle.

We measure this channel matrix for different configurations of ARMs. The first of its kind, the ARMs

modify the reflection phase and function as tunable mirror that on-demand control the phases of 

the reflected waves, which effectively alter boundary conditions of a portion of the room. Each unit 

cell of the metasurfaces provides, on demand, a two-state phase shift (0 or ). By driving the ARMs 

using optimization schemes that target selected properties of the channel matrices, we successfully 

demonstrate diverse functionalities, including channel isolation and cross-talk elimination, 

frequency-multiplexed channel conditioning, as well as other, more flexible controls for acoustic 

communications. In particular, we demonstrate the control of multi-spectral sound fields covering a 

spectrum much larger than the coherence bandwidth of the room and the striking effect of crosstalk-

free simultaneous music playback with two sources, each playing a different music piece. Our work 

opens broad horizons for future sound-scaping and other acoustic engineering.

Results

Channel matrix for acoustic communication in a complex acoustic environment. For each sound 

frequency 𝑓, a channel matrix, denoted 𝐇(𝑓) with ℎ𝑖𝑗 as entries, directly connects the sources and 

receivers by 𝐑 = 𝐇 ⋅ 𝐒, where 𝐒 and 𝐑 are the source and receiver vectors. A simple example is 


3

shown in Fig. 1a, which has two loudspeakers (sources) and two microphones (receivers).

Apparently, both 𝐒 and 𝐑 are 2 × 1 vectors, and the channel matrix is 2 × 2 in dimension6. In 

general, the sounds picked up by the two receivers are mixtures of signals emitted from the two 

sources that are further garbled by the multiple scatterings by the boundaries and various objects. 

Our lab is a furnished room with an irregular shape (Fig. 2a). It is a random media in the 

reverberating regime, and the sound field inside is disordered in character (see Methods and 

Supplementary Note 2 for more details). Therefore, ℎ𝑖𝑗 are suitably represented by complex 

random numbers6,24. Note that 𝐇 generically has no symmetry and is not Hermitian. Thus, its

eigenvectors, if exist, are not orthogonal in general, i.e., the eigenchannels are generically not 

independent. It follows that one cannot achieve channel separation by choosing 𝐒. Instead, we

must alter 𝐇 itself.

According to Shannon's law in information theory, the optimal channel capacity is 

determined by the singular value distribution of the channel matrix6. Consider an 𝑁 × 𝑁 channel 

matrix, to achieve maximum channel capacity, i.e., 𝑁 independent channels, the channel matrix is 

required to have maximum entropy, which is directly related to the effective rank of 𝐇 as25

𝑅eff(𝐇) = exp(𝐸),
(1)

where 𝐸 = − ∑
𝑝𝑘 ln 𝑝𝑘

𝑁
𝑘=1
is the Shannon entropy, and 𝑝𝑘 = 𝜎𝑘/(∑
𝜎𝑖

𝑁
𝑖=1
) are the normalized 

singular values of 𝐇 . A higher effective rank indicates a greater number of independent 

eigenchannels available in the channel matrix. For an 𝑁 × 𝑁 channel matrix, the effective rank 

theoretically ranges from 1 to 𝑁. Upon reaching the full effective rank, all 𝑝𝑘 become identical, 

indicating that the eigenvectors of 𝐇 are nearly orthogonal. In this case, the channels are minimally 

mixed. Therefore, the first goal of our approach is to achieve channel independence by maximizing

𝑅eff for a given acoustic configuration. 

However, channel independence alone is insufficient for acoustic communications 

because, even with independent channels, the receivers can still concurrently detect signals from 

multiple sources. This does not pose a problem for telecommunication scenarios because once 𝐇

is known, such mixing (wave superposition) can be removed by either tailoring the emission or by 

signal post-processing. However, because acoustic communications commonly involve humans, 

who obviously lack such signal-processing capabilities, the acoustic channels have to be further 

optimized to eliminate signal superpositions. For example, in Fig. 1b, it is ideal for microphone 1 to 

only detects the acoustic signal from loudspeaker 1 but nothing from loudspeaker 2. This requires

𝐇 to take a diagonal form. Hence, we introduce a second parameter 𝑤1 that characterizes the 

degree of diagonalization

𝑤1(𝐇) =

∑
|ℎ𝑖𝑗|
𝑖≠𝑗

∑
𝑖=𝑗|ℎ𝑖𝑗|
.
(2)

Obviously, when Eq. (2) vanishes, 𝐇 is diagonal. 

The two considerations together give an objective function


4

𝒢1(𝐇) = [𝑁 − 𝑅eff(𝐇)] + 𝑤1.
(3)

The minimization of 𝒢1 should yield a system that not only reaches maximal channel capacity but

also produces channels that offer one-to-one signal delivery between sources and receivers. We 

denote this condition as optimal channel isolation (OCI).

We remark that the minimization of either 𝑅eff or 𝑤1 alone is insufficient for achieving OCI, 

and it is necessary to minimize both of them simultaneously. For example, minimizing 𝑤1 alone, 

i.e., without enforcing a maximum 𝑅eff , can still reduce off-diagonal entries. But there is no 

guarantee that the diagonal entries have near-equal values. If the diagonal entries differ 

significantly, the two channels have drastically different signal-to-noise ratios, which is not optimal 

for communication purposes. For a detailed discussion on this issue and additional experiments, 

please refer to Supplementary Note 4.

Achieving OCI via adaptive wavefield shaping. Because the channel matrix encompasses 

disordered characteristics of the complex sound field and the multipath transmission of acoustic 

signals, the only way to control it is to alter the environment. Our previous works have already 

demonstrated such possibilities by extending wavefront shaping – a powerful technique previously

used for controlling the propagation of light in multiple-scattering propagation – for airborne 

sound14,15. Here, we develop a set of ARMs to serve as the sound-modulating device. The ARMs 

are based on tunable acoustic metasurfaces and are integrated as a part of the boundaries of the 

room (Fig. 2b). They consist of 200 units of tunable Helmholtz resonators (THRs)4,5,26, each with 

independently tunable resonance. The design of the THRs is shown in Fig. 2c. Simply put, the 

volume of the THR is actively adjustable by an electric motor, which shifts its resonant frequency

between two values. As a result, the reflection phase can be actively tuned between 0° and ~160°

over a broad frequency range of 1100–1850 Hz, which exceeds 3/4 octave, as shown in Fig. 2d. 

This change in reflection phases alters the waves that form the disordered sound field in the room, 

by which the channel matrix optimization is performed. See Methods for more details on the design 

of the ARMs.

Loudspeakers and microphones play the roles of sources and receivers. The channel 

matrix is determined by experimentally measuring the transfer functions between each loudspeaker 

and microphone. The spatial separations among the loudspeakers, and among the microphones, 

are larger than the correlation length, which is about half the wavelength. The distance between 

any loudspeaker and microphone is larger than the reverberating radius so that direct sound does 

not dominate the transfer functions (see Methods for more details). First, as a proof of principle, we 

demonstrate the 2-channel OCI of single-frequency sound at 1300 Hz. This is achieved by 

performing the ARMs using a climbing algorithm targeting the minimization of 𝒢1(𝐇). The results of 

40 independent realizations with uncorrelated configurations are summarized in Fig. 3. Figures 3(a, 

b) compare |ℎ𝑖𝑗| before and after the wavefield shaping. It is clearly seen that the evenly distributed 

entries are put to the diagonal and fall on the unit circle on the complex plane, and off-diagonal 


5

terms are suppressed to near zero. In Fig. 3c, we see that the process indeed raises 𝑅eff to the 

theoretical upper bound of 2, and in the meantime, 𝑤1 vanishes. These values are significantly 

different from their typical values, which, on average, converge to the prediction of Rayleigh 

channels6 [see Supplementary Note 5]. The bandwidth of the optimization effect is roughly ±4 Hz, 

which is consistent with the coherence bandwidth of the room. It is essential to point out that

optimizing the channel isolation metric at a single frequency does not statistically affect the channel 

metrics at other frequencies beyond the coherence bandwidth. Please refer to Supplementary Note 

6 for details. To demonstrate the effect of the OCI, we send with two loudspeakers two temporally 

separated "beeps" (finite-duration, gaussian-enveloped trains of sine waves centered at 1300 Hz)

and record the signals detected by two microphones. The results are plotted in Fig. 3d. Prior to 

optimization, both microphones receive two beeps, which is well expected. After OCI is obtained, 

both microphones only detect one beep and microphone 1(2) only picks up the beep from 

loudspeaker 1(2). The intensities of the desired signals received by microphones 1 and 2 have

increased by 2.8 dB and 4.6 dB, respectively, and the intensities of the unwanted signals are 

significantly suppressed by 20.7 dB and 18.4 dB, respectively. We remark that the OCI effect does 

not depend on the forms of acoustic signal from the sources, i.e., it makes no difference if 

continuous sound or temporally overlapped pulses are used instead. The purpose of using 

temporally separated signals is for better visual comparison in the figures. 

To further show the effectiveness of our approach, we compared the energy delivered by

the channels before and after OCI, which can be easily extracted from the entries of the channel 

matrices. When OCI is attained, the energy delivered by the intended channels is enhanced by 

2.11 ± 0.39 folds, whereas the energy involved in cross-talk is reduced to 0.0070 ± 0.0025. 

Frequency-multiplexed channel conditioning. The success of our approach opens a myriad of 

possibilities for controlling acoustic communications. Our ARMs can modulate the reflective phases 

over a broad frequency range. Such a capability enables broadband or frequency-multiplexed 

control. For example, by using a different objective function 𝒢2(𝐇) = [𝑁 − 𝑅eff(𝐇)] + 𝑤2, where 

𝑤2 =

∑
|ℎ𝑖𝑗|
𝑖+𝑗≠𝑁+1

∑
𝑖+𝑗=𝑁+1|ℎ𝑖𝑗|
, we can obtain a different kind of OCI: 𝐇 is maximized in channel capacity, but it 

takes an anti-diagonal form. For 2-channel cases, it means that microphone 1(2) now only detects 

signal from loudspeaker 2(1). In addition, we further leverage the bandwidth of the ARMs to achieve

frequency-multiplexing of the channels. For example, in Fig. 4, we show that the 2 × 2 channel 

matrices are simultaneously minimized for 𝒢1 at 1250 Hz, and for 𝒢2 at 1350 Hz. Because the 

frequency separation is far greater than the coherence bandwidth of the room, this essentially 

requires the simultaneous control of two independent sets of degrees of freedom (cavity modes), 

which is far more challenging than the single-frequency scenario shown in Fig. 3. Figures 4(a, b)

plot the channel matrices and the objective functions, wherein the two matrices clearly take 

diagonal and anti-diagonal forms after the optimization, respectively. The auditory effect of the 

optimization is further confirmed in Fig. 4(c-e). The two loudspeakers emit temporally separated 


6

beeps in succession with two peaks in the Fourier domain, 1250 and 1350 Hz (Fig. 4c). When the

different OCI are simultaneously attained, microphone 1 detects the first (second) beep but only 

picks the 1250-Hz (1350-Hz) components, whereas microphone 2's detection is inversed. These 

results are in stark contrast to the cases without OCI, for which two microphones always detects

two beeps (Fig. 4d, e). In terms of signal intensities at the two frequencies, it is evident that the 

desired signals are improved, and the unwanted signals are effectively suppressed (data marked 

in Fig. 4d, e).

Leveraging the multi-frequency OCI, we are able to achieve the simultaneous crosstalk-

free playback of two different pieces of music from the two separate sources. The results are 

summarized in Fig. 5 and are presented in Supplementary Movie 1. In this experiment, we selected 

two music pieces: "The C-D-E Song" and "Hot Cross Buns" (Piece A and B in Fig. 5, respectively), 

both consisting of three identical musical notes: 𝑓do = 1318 Hz, 𝑓re = 1480 Hz, 𝑓mi = 1661 Hz, 

Three independent 2 × 2 channel matrices, each representing the channels for one note, are 

simultaneously optimized by the ARMs to minimize 𝒢3, given by

𝒢3 = {2 −

1

3 ∑
do,re,mi 𝑅eff[𝐇(𝑓x)]
x
} +

1

3 ∑
do,re,mi 𝑤1[𝐇(𝑓x)]
x
.                              (4)

In Fig. 5a. we can see that the optimization can indeed produce three near-full-rank channel 

matrices in diagonal forms. Prior to the optimization, the two music pieces played from the two

loudspeakers and received by the two microphones overlap in both frequency and time domains, 

as shown in Fig. 5b (left column). For human ears, the two pieces are heavily mixed and 

indistinguishable. After the optimization, the two microphones can each pick up only the piece that 

is intended for each of them. The received spectral-temporal signals are almost identical to the 

corresponding original music piece, as shown in Fig. 5b (middle and right columns). To further 

benchmark the results, Fig. 5c plots the cross-correlation functions between the audio signals 

received by the two microphones prior to and after the optimization. The peak values of the cross-

correlation functions are raised from 0.424 and 0.495 to 0.893 and 0.930 for the two microphones, 

respectively. Moreover, the post-optimization cross-correlations are significantly improved and are 

nearly identical to the auto-correlations of the two original music pieces, as shown in Fig. 5c. Please 

view Supplementary Movie 1 to listen to the recorded audio effects of this experiment. 

The operating bandwidth of the ARMs also enables OCI over a continuous frequency band. 

An experimental example is shown in Supplementary Fig. 8.

We remark that the multi-frequency demonstrations are far more challenging to achieve 

compared to the single-frequency OCI. Because the frequency separations are far greater than the 

coherence bandwidth of the room, the wavefields are completely uncorrelated and thus the ARMs 

essentially need to simultaneously control multiple independent degrees of freedom.  

Flexible multi-user channel conditioning. We next demonstrate the versatile capability of our 

scheme by studying two cases with unequal numbers of loudspeakers and microphones, which are

rather common scenarios. The first example, with two loudspeakers and six microphones, is shown 


7

in Fig. 6(a-c). This is a type of configuration that often emerges, e.g., group discussions in a shared 

office. The channel matrix, in this case, is 6 × 2 in dimensions, and the upper bound of 𝑅eff is 2. 

We impose the demand that the microphones are separated into two groups, and each group is 

tuned in to only one loudspeaker, i.e., microphones 1-3 (4-6) wish only to capture loudspeaker 1 

(2), and ignore loudspeaker 2(1). By using the proper objective function, a channel matrix that suits 

the need is successfully produced, as shown in Fig. 6b. Similar to the above experiments, we send 

two beeps separated in time with the two loudspeakers. The signals received by the six 

microphones at different positions are shown in Fig. 6c, wherein it is clearly seen that the intended 

auditory effect is successfully achieved. Specifically, the desired signals are enhanced by an 

average of 2.9 dB, and unwanted signals are efficiently reduced by 9.7 dB.

In the second example shown in Fig. 6(d-f), the configuration is described by a 4 × 2

channel matrix. To make an interesting case, we impose a complicated set of "demands": 

microphone 1(3) only picks up loudspeaker 1(2), microphone 2 needs to detect both loudspeakers,

and microphone 4 is shielded from all sources. By using the proper objective function, the desirable 

channel matrix is indeed obtained, as shown in Fig. 6e. Similar to the above experiments, we send 

two beeps separated in time with the two loudspeakers. The signals received by the four 

microphones at different positions are shown in Fig. 6f, wherein it is clearly seen that the intended 

auditory effect is successfully achieved. Specifically, the desired signals are enhanced by 2.2 dB

on average, and the unwanted signals are efficiently reduced by 15.7 dB.

Discussion

By a successful crossover of multiple scattering media, adaptive wavefield shaping, acoustic 

metasurfaces, and communication theories, we have achieved effective control of complex 

acoustic waves. The properties of channel matrices in disordered wavefields play a crucial role. 

Unlike scattering matrices for multiple scattering media, the channel matrices are typically small-

sized random matrices. Their dimensionality is determined not by the complexity of the medium but 

by the number of sources and receivers. Hence, they obey different sets of statistical distribution 

laws compared to large-sized random matrices, in which the distribution of singular values can be 

derived from the Marčhenko-Pastur law27 (for square matrices, it becomes the quarter-circle law28). 

By using random matrix theory and probability theory, the statistical distribution of key parameters,

such as the effective rank, can be obtained numerically and theoretically, and they agree well with 

the experimental results. The relevant analyses and results are presented in Supplementary Note

5.

The wavefield modulation is achieved by the ARMs. Compared to the previous modulating 

device based on membrane-type acoustic metasurfaces14, the ARMs used here are more 

advanced in several important ways. First, they modulate the phase of the reflected waves instead 

of the transmitted waves, which means that it functions by altering the boundary conditions of the 


8

room. This implies that the implementation of ARMs requires less modification to the interior space, 

which is desirable for most real-life applications. Second, the functional bandwidth is significantly 

improved, which is not only advantageous for broadband or frequency-multiplexed applications but 

also beneficial to coherent control of time-varying sound. It is possible to enlarge the bandwidth by 

further tailoring higher-order resonant modes of building blocks or by combining panels with 

different working frequencies. Third, they contain no soft elastomer parts, which makes them far 

more reliable and durable. We also remark that the ARMs should not be considered as diffusers. 

Its function is not to scatter waves evenly in all directions for the formation of a uniform wave field. 

Instead, it scatters waves in specific ways designed to intentionally disrupt an already uniform 

reflected wave field, thereby achieving OCI.

Our approach achieves channel isolation through the physical modulation of the complex 

sound field. This is unlike any traditional strategy that often relies on restricting the sources or the 

receivers29–31, e.g., putting on a noise-blocking headsets. This research highlights that modifying 

the channel matrix during the cross-talk cancellation process can be an effective approach, offering 

new solutions and technological means in related fields.

In practical scenarios of acoustic communications, the positions of sources and receivers

are often interchanging. When the numbers of sources are equal to the receivers, i.e., the channel 

matrix is a square matrix, the system has reciprocity once OCI is achieved. In other words, no 

further optimization is required to handle the exchange of sources and receivers. However, if the 

numbers of sources and receivers are different, the corresponding channel matrix does not respect 

reciprocity. For more detailed discussion, please refer to Supplementary Note 1.

Our method relies on moderate reverberation. Therefore, for optimal performance, the 

sources and the receivers shall be greater than the reverberation radius (0.5 m in the existing 

experimental configuration). If reverberation is weak or even completely absent, direct sound 

dominates and the effectiveness of our method is compromised. (For instance, this experiment 

cannot be conducted in an anechoic chamber.) On the contrary, excessively long reverberation 

time also affects performance by increasing the correlation between the optimal states of two 

different ARMs, resulting in a reduction in the number of controllable modes and consequently 

compromising the performance of the reflector.

There are several routes that can potentially improve the overall performance of our 

channeling conditioning approach. First, our results are achieved using a rudimentary climbing 

algorithm and without prior knowledge of the acoustic environment (other than some of its basic 

properties). We anticipate that more advanced optimization algorithms can lead to better results 

and reduce the optimization time. Imaging techniques such as phase conjugation, inversed filtering, 

together with prior knowledge of the acoustic environment, are also viable routes for improving the 

outcomes32. Second, better results are expected if the phase modulation is of a finer phase 

sampling rate, e.g., a four-phase modualtion33. However, this is at the cost of longer optimization 


9

time. This is readily achievable using our current ARMs, but at the cost of long converging time.

Finally, other active acoustic designs are potentially suitable for achieving similar functionalities in 

sound-field manipulations34–37. In summary, we have demonstrated the flexible control of the

acoustic wave properties in cavities for versatile acoustic communication needs. Our results have

immense potential towards next-generation smart acoustic technologies that may revolutionize how

we manipulate, perceive, and experience sound. It may also inspire new technologies in vibration 

controls, ultrasonics, etc., and open new possibilities for manipulating wave scattering and wave 

chaos.

Methods

The properties of the experimental environment. The experiment was conducted in an 

irregularly shaped room with furniture inside. The volume of the room is 𝑉 ≈ 44 m3, and the total 

surface area is 𝐴 ≈ 78 m2 (Fig. 2a). From the averaged acoustic impulse responses38, the 

reverberation time for a 60-dB decay is found to be 𝑇60 ≈ 0.52 s38,39. The spatial standard deviations 

of the sound pressure level in the room are experimentally characterized to be 0.655 dB in 1000-

2000 Hz, and 0.562 dB in 250-8000 Hz40. A more detailed discussion can be found in 

Supplementary Note 2. Using this value, the Schroeder frequency is 𝑓S = 2,000√𝑇60/𝑉 ≈ 217 Hz, 

which is much lower than the experimental frequencies. The exponential decay time of the room is 

𝜏 = 𝑇60/ ln 106 ≈ 38 ms, which leads to a coherence bandwidth of 𝑓co = (𝜋𝜏)−1 ≈ 8.4 Hz.The modal 

density at frequency 𝑓 is given by 𝑁(𝑓) ≈ (

4𝜋𝑉

𝑐3 𝑓2 +

𝜋𝐴

2𝑐2 𝑓) 𝑓co , with 𝑐 = 343 m/s being the speed of 

sound, so the modal density ranges from ~149 at 1100 Hz to ~410 at 1850 Hz38.

Using numerical simulations (the ray acoustics module of COMSOL Multiphysics), we 

estimate the scattering mean free path ℓ ≈ 1.27 m, so the mean interval between two scattering 

events for a wave is ∆𝑡s = ℓ/𝑐 ≈ 3.7 ms. Hence, a sound wave, on average, undergoes roughly 10 

scattering events before it decays, such that the resulting field is speckle-like. The spatial 

distribution of the field amplitude follows Rayleigh distribution, which means the room is a chaotic 

cavity41,42. By applying the central limit theorem, the real and imaginary parts of the pressure both 

follows the Gaussian distribution, so the pressure amplitudes conform to the Rayleigh distribution43. 

We have confirmed such properties of the sound field by experimentally raster-scanning multiple 

planes of the sound fields in the room, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. We remark that the 

distribution is valid for most locations in the room, except for the immediate neighborhood of the 

source (within the reverberation radius), in which the direct sound dominates, and the assumption 

of ray i.i.d. is not satisfied. Therefore, all experiments are conducted with microphones outside the 

reverberation radius. 

The properties of the channel matrix. The entries of the channel matrix follow the same statistical 

distribution as the sound field, hence they are modeled using complex random numbers. The 

singular values of such matrices are not uniform, and in particular, for large random matrices, the 


10

distribution of singular values can be derived from the Marčhenko-Pastur law27. Also, the channel 

matrix need not possess any symmetry (such as transposition or Hermitian conjugation). 

Numerically, we generate the real and imaginary parts of each entry of the channel matrix as 

Gaussian random numbers. A total of 10,000 different channel matrices are numerically produced 

and their properties, including 𝑅eff , 𝑤1 , and (or) 𝑤2 are recorded for comparison with the 

experimental values. For 2 × 2 channel matrices, the average 𝑅eff is about 1.7, and 𝑤1 is about 1.2, 

which are indicated in Figs. 3c and 4b. 

The design and characterization of the ARMs. The ARMs are based on reflective acoustic 

metasurfaces that are set against the walls of the room. They are essentially tunable boundaries 

of the room as an acoustic cavity. The ARMs consist of a square array of identical THRs. There 

are a total of 200 independent units of THRs. Figure 2a illustrates the design of the THR, including 

its dimensions. The natural frequency of the Helmholtz resonance is tunable by changing the

volume of the belly. Specifically, a small stepper motor is used to turn a hoop, which can be rotated 

between two positions. The stepper motors are controlled by Arduino Mega 2560 boards 

programmed by MATLAB. At the open position, the belly is a cuboid. At the closed position, the 

partition on the hoop and the internal partitions in the belly form a cylinder with a smaller volume. 

The reflection of a single THR is characterized using an acoustic impedance tube. The natural 

frequency of the Helmholtz resonance is found to 𝑓o = 990 Hz for the open state, and 𝑓c = 1650 Hz

for the closed state, such that the two states generate a difference of 140°–160° in the reflection 

phase difference (Fig. 2b).

In the demonstration shown in the Supplementary Movie 1, the upper bound of the working 

frequency range of the ARMs is expanded to roughly 2000 Hz. This is achieved by taking the 

second-order resonance of the THR into consideration, which is at 2010 (3410) Hz in the open

(closed) state. 

Experimental procedures. The sources (loudspeakers) and receivers (microphones) are placed 

in different positions in the room under three constraints. First, their mutual separation is larger than 

the correlation length, which is about half the wavelength. Second, the microphones and the 

loudspeakers are separated by at least 1.5 m, which is larger than the reverberation radius (~0.5 

m). Third, for the same set of experiments, the distance between the microphones and 

loudspeakers are roughly the same for different configurations such that the pulses arrive at roughly 

the same time. This is to ensure that the temporal signals in each realization roughly overlap so 

that the averaging process is well-defined. (Note that this condition is imposed not for channel 

conditioning, but for the ease of data processing.) For different configurations, the positions of the 

loudspeakers and the microphones are changed by at least half a wavelength. Respecting these

three constraints, the changes are as random as possible. The loudspeakers and microphones are 

connected to NI-cDAQ-9174, with NI 9260 as outputs and NI 9234 as inputs. The device is 

controlled by a PC.  


11

The modification to the channel matrix is achieved by feedback-driven optimizations based 

on a climbing algorithm. The channel matrix is measured at each step and sent to the controlling

PC. The PC computes the relevant parameters, such as the effective rank, then the objective 

function. Then, the program instructs up to 15 randomly chosen THRs to switch the states, then 

the channel matrix is measured again. The process is repeated until the objective function 

converges to the target value. Please refer to Supplementary Note 9 for a detailed algorithm 

procedure description.

At the current stage, the optimization of a 2 × 2 channel matrix at a single frequency 

typically takes 2-5 minutes. For more complex scenarios, the optimization time will inevitably be 

longer. The main limitation is the time required for switching the states of control circuits and 

mechanical structures. To overcome this issue, potential improvements include using advanced 

control circuits like FPGA for better performance and refining the mechanical parts for faster state 

switching. More intelligent optimization algorithms can also be applied to reduce optimization time.

Data availability. The data that generate the results of this study are available from the 

corresponding authors upon request.

Code availability. The codes supporting the findings of this study are available from the 

corresponding authors upon request.

Author contributions. G. M. initialized and supervised the research. Q. W. and H. Z. performed 

the experiments. Q. W. designed and fabricated the ARMs and H. Z. performed the wavefield 

shaping. H. Z. analyzed the random sound fields. All authors analyzed the data. H. Z. and G. M. 

wrote the manuscript with inputs from Q. W. and M. F.

Acknowledgments. This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China 

(2022YFA1404400), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11922416), and the Hong 

Kong Research Grants Council (RFS2223-2S01, 22302718, A-HKUST601/18).
M.
F. 

acknowledges partial support from the Simons Foundation/Collaboration on Symmetry-Driven 

Extreme Wave Phenomena.

Competing interests. The authors declare no competing interests.

References

1.
Sheng, P. Introduction to wave scattering, localization, and mesoscopic phenomena. 

(Springer, 2006).


12

2.
Vellekoop, I. M. & Mosk, A. P. Phase control algorithms for focusing light through turbid 

media. Opt. Commun. 281, 3071–3080 (2008).

3.
Vellekoop, I. M. & Mosk, A. P. Focusing coherent light through opaque strongly scattering 

media. Opt. Lett. 32, 2309 (2007).

4.
Ma, G. & Sheng, P. Acoustic metamaterials: From local resonances to broad horizons. Sci. 

Adv. 2, e1501595 (2016).

5.
Assouar, B. et al. Acoustic metasurfaces. Nat. Rev. Mater. 3, 460–472 (2018).

6.
Tse, D. & Viswanath, P. Fundamentals of wireless communication. (Cambridge University 

Press, 2005).

7.
Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27, 379–423 

(1948).

8.
Rotter, S. & Gigan, S. Light fields in complex media: Mesoscopic scattering meets wave 

control. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, (2017).

9.
Cao, H., Mosk, A. P. & Rotter, S. Shaping the propagation of light in complex media. Nat. 

Phys. 18, 994–1007 (2022).

10. Gigan, S. Imaging and computing with disorder. Nat. Phys. 18, 980–985 (2022).

11. Kaina, N., Dupré, M., Lerosey, G. & Fink, M. Shaping complex microwave fields in 

reverberating media with binary tunable metasurfaces. Sci. Rep. 4, 6693 (2015).

12. del Hougne, P., Lemoult, F., Fink, M. & Lerosey, G. Spatiotemporal Wave Front Shaping in a 

Microwave Cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 134302 (2016).

13. del Hougne, P., Fink, M. & Lerosey, G. Optimally diverse communication channels in 

disordered environments with tuned randomness. Nat. Electron. 2, 36–41 (2019).

14. Ma, G., Fan, X., Sheng, P. & Fink, M. Shaping reverberating sound fields with an actively 

tunable metasurface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, 6638–6643 (2018).

15. Wang, Q., del Hougne, P. & Ma, G. Controlling the Spatiotemporal Response of Transient 

Reverberating Sound. Phys. Rev. Appl. 17, 044007 (2022).

16. Vellekoop, I. M., Lagendijk, A. & Mosk, A. P. Exploiting disorder for perfect focusing. Nat. 

Photonics 4, 320–322 (2010).


13

17. Bertolotti, J. et al. Non-invasive imaging through opaque scattering layers. Nature 491, 232–

234 (2012).

18. Gérardin, B., Laurent, J., Derode, A., Prada, C. & Aubry, A. Full transmission and reflection 

of waves propagating through a maze of disorder. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 173901 (2014).

19. Horodynski, M., Kühmayer, M., Ferise, C., Rotter, S. & Davy, M. Anti-reflection structure for 

perfect transmission through complex media. Nature 607, 281–286 (2022).

20. Bender, N. et al. Depth-targeted energy delivery deep inside scattering media. Nat. Phys. 18, 

309–315 (2022).

21. del Hougne, P. & Lerosey, G. Leveraging Chaos for Wave-Based Analog Computation: 

Demonstration with Indoor Wireless Communication Signals. Phys. Rev. X 8, 041037 (2018).

22. Rafayelyan, M., Dong, J., Tan, Y., Krzakala, F. & Gigan, S. Large-Scale Optical Reservoir 

Computing for Spatiotemporal Chaotic Systems Prediction. Phys. Rev. X 10, 041037 (2020).

23. Arons, B. A review of the cocktail party effect. J. Am. Voice IO Soc. 12, 35–50 (1992).

24. Tulino, A. M. & Verdú, S. Random matrix theory and wireless communications. (Now, 2004).

25. Roy, O. & Vetterli, M. The effective rank: A measure of effective dimensionality. in 606–610 

(IEEE, 2007).

26. Zhu, Y., Fan, X., Liang, B., Cheng, J. & Jing, Y. Ultrathin Acoustic Metasurface-Based 

Schroeder Diffuser. Phys. Rev. X 7, 021034 (2017).

27. Livan, G., Novaes, M. & Vivo, P. Introduction to random matrices - theory and practice. vol. 

26 (Springer Cham, 2018).

28. Popoff, S. M. et al. Measuring the Transmission Matrix in Optics: An Approach to the Study 

and Control of Light Propagation in Disordered Media. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, (2010).

29. Roginska, A. & Geluso, P. Immersive sound: The art and science of binaural and multi-

channel audio. (Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 2018).

30. Xie, B. Spatial sound: Principles and applications. (CRC Press, 2023).

31. Benesty, J., Sondhi, M. M. & Huang, Y. Springer handbook of speech processing. (Springer, 

2008).


14

32. Lerosey, G. & Fink, M. Wavefront Shaping for Wireless Communications in Complex Media: 

From Time Reversal to Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces. Proc. IEEE 110, 1210–1226 

(2022).

33. Wang, Q., Fink, M. & Ma, G. Maximizing Focus Quality Through Random Media with 

Discrete-Phase-Sampling Lenses. Phys. Rev. Appl. 19, 034084 (2023).

34. Popa, B.-I., Shinde, D., Konneker, A. & Cummer, S. A. Active acoustic metamaterials 

reconfigurable in real time. Phys. Rev. B 91, 220303 (2015).

35. Lissek, H., Rivet, E., Laurence, T. & Fleury, R. Toward wideband steerable acoustic 

metasurfaces with arrays of active electroacoustic resonators. J. Appl. Phys. 123, 091714 

(2018).

36. Koutserimpas, T. T., Rivet, E., Lissek, H. & Fleury, R. Active Acoustic Resonators with 

Reconfigurable Resonance Frequency, Absorption, and Bandwidth. Phys. Rev. Appl. 12, 

054064 (2019).

37. Tang, X. et al. Magnetoactive acoustic metamaterials based on nanoparticle-enhanced 

diaphragm. Sci. Rep. 11, 22162 (2021).

38. Kuttruff, H. Room acoustics. (CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group, 2017).

39. Beranek, L. L. & Mellow, T. J. Acoustics: sound fields, transducers and vibration. (Academic 

Press, 2019).

40. Nélisse, H. & Nicolas, J. Characterization of a diffuse field in a reverberant room. J. Acoust. 

Soc. Am. 101, 3517–3524 (1997).

41. Stöckmann, H.-J. Quantum chaos: an introduction. (Cambridge University Press, 1999).

42. Tanner, G. & Søndergaard, N. Wave chaos in acoustics and elasticity. J. Phys. Math. Theor.

40, R443–R509 (2007).

43. Mason, W. P. & Thurston, R. N. Physical acoustics: Principles and methods. vol. 17 (Acad. 

Press, 1984).


15

Figures

Fig. 1
Channel conditioning for acoustic communications. a Acoustic channels in a room are 

generically coupled, so each microphone (Mic.) captures the sound from both loudspeakers (Spk.). 

b Independent, isolated channels can be achieved by wavefield shaping using the acoustic 

reconfigurable metasurfaces (ARMs), such that loudspeakers and microphones communicate 

without interference from others.


16

Fig. 2
The experimental environment and the design of the ARMs. a The experimental 

environment, which is a furnished room of an irregular shape in the reverberating regime. b A photo 

of the ARMs consisting of a total of 200 tunable Helmholtz resonators. c Photos of the THRs that 

form the ARMs. The volume of the THRs can be altered by rotating the internal partition with a 

program-controlled motor. The upper panels show the motor mounted on a reflective backplate 

(transparent) and the external view of the THR. The lower panels show the closed and open states. 

d Experimentally measured reflection phases and amplitude reflection coefficients of the THR at 

closed (blue) and open (red) states. The black dashed curve plots the phase difference between 2 

states. The insets show the mode profiles obtained using finite-element simulation. 


17

Fig. 3
Single-frequency two-channel OCI. a The averaged entries of channel matrix before and

after achieving OCI. b The optimization processes drive the diagonal entries of the channel 

matrices to the unit circle on the complex plane, and the off-diagonal entries to zero. c Upon 

attaining OCI, notable changes in the effective ranks 𝑅eff and the degree of diagonal 𝑤1 are 

observed near 1300Hz. The black dashed lines show the prediction based on Rayleigh channels.

d The auditory effect of OCI. The two insets show the two temporally separated beeps are emitted 

by two loudspeakers. The envelops of the signal received by microphone 1 (left) and microphone 

2 (right). It is clear that prior to OCI, both microphones detect the sound from both sources (double 

peak). After OCI, microphones 1 and 2 to receive the sound from the corresponding loudspeaker, 

and cross-talks are considerably suppressed (single peak). The gray curves depict the emission. 


18

Fig. 4
Dual-frequency OCI. a The diagonal (off-diagonal) entries of the channel matrix are 

maximized at 1250 (1350) Hz. b The effective ranks and other objective parameters (𝑤1 and 𝑤2) 

prior and after OCI. Here, 𝑤1 and 𝑤2 draw a logarithmic scale. c The signal intensities emitted by 

loudspeakers 1 and 2. d, e The averaged signals received by microphones 1 and 2 before and 

after OCI at 1250 Hz d and 1350 Hz (e), respectively. All data are obtained using a short-time 

Fourier transform and only the two frequencies of interest are shown.


19

Fig. 5 Crosstalk-free simultaneous music playback from two sources. a Three 2 × 2 channel 

matrices, each for a music note (frequency indicated), are simultaneously optimized for maximal 

effective rank and degree of diagonalization. b shows the detected audio signals from two 

separated microphones when two music pieces are simultaneously played from two loudspeakers 

in the room. In the unoptimized case (left column), the signals from the two sources are heavily

mixed for both microphones. In the optimized case (middle column), both microphones receive the 

clean signals that are intended for them. As a reference, the original music signals are plotted in 

the right column. c The comparison of the cross-correlations between of the experimentally

detected signals and the original music. The cross-correlations are significantly increased by the 

optimization. The bottom row is the auto-correlations of the two music pieces as a reference.


20

Fig. 6
Two different multi-user channel conditioning scenarios. a-c A configuration of two 

loudspeakers (Spks.) and six microphones (Mics.), which is described by 6 × 2 channel matrices. 

a The desired effect is to separate the microphones into two groups, each group detects the sound 

from only one loudspeaker. b Channel matrices before (left) and after (right) the optimization. c

The time-domain signals received by microphones 1-6. The desired signals are enhanced by an 

average of 2.9 dB, and unwanted signals are suppressed by 9.7 dB. d-f A configuration of two 

loudspeakers and four microphones, described by 4 × 2 channel matrices. d shows the desired 

effect. e Channel matrices before (left) and after (right) optimization. f The time-domain signals 

received by microphones 1-4. The desired signals are enhanced by 2.2 dB on average, and the

unwanted signals are efficiently reduced by 15.7 dB.


1

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Optimizing multi-user indoor sound communications with acoustic 

reconfigurable metasurfaces

Hongkuan Zhang1,4, Qiyuan Wang1,4,5, Mathias Fink2, Guancong Ma1,3

1Department of Physics, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong

2Institut Langevin, ESPCI Paris, Université PSL, CNRS, Paris 75005, France

3Shenzhen Institute for Research and Continuing Education, Hong Kong Baptist University, 

Shenzhen 518000, China

4Contributed equally to this work. 

5Present address: Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Japan

Contents

Supplementary Notes

1. On the reciprocity of channel matrices

2. Characterizing the sound field in the laboratory

3. Maximal channel capacity

4. The roles of the effective rank 𝑅eff and parameter 𝑤1 in 𝒢1(𝐇)

5. Ensemble averages of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1

6. Measurement of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1 in the frequency range of 500-4000 Hz

7. Objective functions for optimizing 6 × 2 and 4 × 2 channel matrices 

8. OCI over a continuous band of frequency

9. The optimization algorithm

Supplementary References

Supplementary Figures


2

Supplementary Notes

1. On the reciprocity of channel matrices

Here, we discuss the issue of reciprocity of channel matrices. The sound field in the room is 

reciprocal. However, in the channel matrix between finite number sources and receivers, reciprocity 

is not always present.

To begin, we establish that the room as an acoustic cavity is reciprocal. Sound propagation 

inside the cavity is governed by acoustic wave equation that is a quadratic differential equation in 

both space and time. Therefore, both spatial reciprocity and time-reversal symmetry hold. The 

inevitable presence of dissipation does slightly break time-reversal symmetry but not to the degree 

that it breaks reciprocity. This is evident by the successful time-reversal experiments performed in 

similar rooms1,2.

Consider a channel matrix, denoted as 𝐇 with ℎ𝑖𝑗 being the entries, that connects sources (𝐒)

and receivers (𝐑). When the positions of the sources and receivers are exchanged, they are 

connected by a new channel matrix 𝐇′ with ℎ𝑖𝑗

′ being entries. It is straightforward to see that 𝐇′ =

𝐇T. The reciprocity condition of channel matrices requires 𝐇 = 𝐇′, which means 𝐇 has transpose 

invariant, i.e., 𝐇 = 𝐇T (Supplementary Fig. 1a). In general, this condition is not satisfied. For 

instance, in a 2 × 2 channel matrix, there is no guarantee that ℎ12 = ℎ12

′
and ℎ21 = ℎ21

′ . However, 

once channel isolation is attained, the channel matrix becomes a near-diagonal matrix with ℎ12 ≅

ℎ12

′
≅ 0, and ℎ21 ≅ ℎ21

′
≅ 0, so the matrix is nearly symmetric. Apparently, the reciprocity condition 

is largely satisfied (Supplementary Fig. 1b, left). The same clearly also holds for near anti-diagonal 

channel matrix (Supplementary Fig. 1b, right). Since channel isolation is same for communication 

in both directions, consequently, there is no need for re-optimization when exchanging the positions 

of the sound sources and the receivers. Such a property is desirable for real-life acoustic 

communications where the roles of source and receivers are often switching.

However,
in scenarios where the numbers of sources and receivers are unequal

(Supplementary Fig. 1c), there is no reciprocity in the channel matrix, because apparently 𝐇 ≠ 𝐇T

for rectangular matrices. Hence, re-optimization of the room configuration is in principle required

when the positions of sources and receivers are exchanged.

2. Characterizing the sound field in the laboratory

The acoustic characteristics of the experimental environment are detailed in the Methods 

section. In this supplementary note, we provide additional information regarding the spatial 

uniformity and statistical characteristics of the sound field within the laboratory through 

experimental measurements.

First, we verify the homogeneity of the sound intensity in the room, which is an important 

criterion for acoustic reverberation. We have conducted measurements of the sound fields in 8 

different planes (1.5-by-1.4 m2) in the room. These measurements involved performing two-


3

dimensional raster scans across the frequency range from 𝑓1 = 250 Hz to 𝑓2 = 8000 Hz. The 

spectral average of sound pressure levels (SPL), defined as

SPL = 10 log10 [

1

𝑓2−𝑓1 ∫ |𝑝(𝑓)|2d𝑓

𝑓2
𝑓1
], 
(S1)

is presented in Supplementary Fig. 2. Here, 𝑝(𝑓) refers to the sound pressure at frequency 𝑓. It is 

seen that the SPL is rather flat in space with some random undulations: the spatially-averaged SPL, 

denoted SPL
̅̅̅̅̅, and the standard deviation 𝜎(SPL) for the 1000-2000 Hz range are -28.96 dB and 

0.655 dB, respectively. For the 250-8000 Hz range, the corresponding values are -25.86 dB and 

0.5615 dB, respectively. It has been accepted that an acoustic field in a qualified reverberation 

room exhibits adequate diffuseness if the standard deviations remain under 1.5 dB3.

To further analyze the statistical wave characteristics, we have experimentally obtained the 

acoustic field distributions by performing several two-dimensional raster scans at different positions 

in the laboratory. The measured frequency is 1300 Hz. Four sets of results (1.0-by-1.0 m2) are 

shown in Supplementary Fig. 3. From the results, we obtain that the distributions of the real and 

imaginary parts of the sound pressure, denoted by Re(𝑝) and Im(𝑝), follow a Gaussian distribution, 

i.e., 𝜌𝐺(𝑥) =

1

√2𝜋 e−1

2𝑥2; and the acoustic magnitudes, denoted by |𝑝|, follow a Rayleigh distribution, 

i.e., 𝜌𝑅(𝑥) = 𝑥e−1

2𝑥2, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 4(a, b, c). We have further computed the 

spatial correlation of the fields, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 4d. The correlation among real 

parts follows a sinc function with an FWHM of ~0.3 𝜆, and the correlation between the real and 

imaginary parts is negligible. These properties suggest that the field is a circularly symmetric 

complex Gaussian field4. 

3. Maximal channel capacity 

Channel capacity refers to the maximum amount of information that a communication channel 

can transmit error-free during a given time duration. Several factors influence the channel capacity, 

including the channel bandwidth, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and the modulation scheme. 

Shannon’s theorem provides a mathematical formula for calculating the maximum channel capacity. 

Using this theorem, we can analyze the channel capacity of the 𝑁 × 𝑁 channel matrix 𝐇

𝐶(𝐇, 𝑆𝑁𝑅) = ∑
log2 [1 +

𝑆𝑁𝑅

𝑁 𝜎𝑖

2]
𝑁
𝑖=1
≤ 𝑁 log2 [1 +

𝑆𝑁𝑅

𝑁 ∑
(𝜎𝑖

2/𝑁)
𝑁
𝑖=1
] bits/s/Hz.
(S2)

Equation (S2) relates the channel capacity 𝐶 with the singular values 𝜎𝑖 of the channel matrix 𝐇, 

where ∑
𝜎𝑖

2
𝑁
𝑖=1
= Tr[𝐇𝐇†] can be interpreted as the total power gain of the channel matrix 𝐇 if an 

equal amount of energy is delivered by each source. Then, for the same input power and SNR, the 

channel capacity is maximized when all singular values are equal, i.e., 𝜎1 = 𝜎2 = ⋯ = 𝜎𝑁 , 

according to Jensen’s inequality.

Identical singular values also correspond to the maximum effective rank, by using the 

definition of effective rank [Eq. (1) in main text],


4

𝑅eff(𝐇) = exp(− ∑
𝑝𝑘 ln 𝑝𝑘

𝑁
𝑘=1
) ≤ exp [𝑁 ln (

1
𝑁 ∑
𝑝𝑘

−𝑝𝑘
𝑁
𝑘=1
)] ≤ 𝑁,
(S3)

where 𝑝𝑘 = 𝜎𝑘/(∑
𝜎𝑖

𝑁
𝑖=1
) are the normalized singular values of 𝐇. The equal sign holds when 𝑝𝑘 =

1/𝑁 for all 𝑘. Therefore, maximizing the effective rank also maximizes the channel capacity.

4. The roles of the effective rank 𝑅eff and parameter 𝑤1 in 𝒢1(𝐇)

In the main text, the first objective function is defined as 𝒢1(𝐇) = [2 − 𝑅eff(𝐇) ] + 𝑤1.

Apparently, it has two components, 𝑅eff and 𝑤1. The optimization of 𝑅eff maximizes the information 

entropy contained in each channel. And 𝑤1 represents the “degree of diagonalization”, its 

optimization essentially maximizes the diagonal entries and minimizes the off-diagonal entries, 

which ensures each channel delivers information from only one source. Both objectives are crucial 

for optimal channel isolation (OCI). To show this, we compared the experimental results controlled 

by three different objective functions, 𝒢1(𝐇) itself, 2 − 𝑅eff(𝐇), and 𝑤1, with 𝐇 being 2 × 2. Clearly, 

the second objective function only targets 𝑅eff and ignores the degree of diagonalization, and the 

third objective function has no explicit consideration of channel capacity. The results are displayed 

in Supplementary Fig. 5. In Supplementary Fig. 5b, it is seen that the optimization of 𝑅eff alone has

almost no effect on the degree of diagonalization. This is expected because it is perfectly normal 

for full-rank matrices to contain non-zero off-diagonal terms. In Supplementary Fig. 5c, we observe 

that the optimization of 𝑤1 , which diminishes the off-diagonal entries, also contributes to an 

increase in the averaged 𝑅eff . However, the variance in 𝑅eff is very large among different 

realizations, which is significantly different from the much smaller red shades shown in 

Supplementary Fig. 5(b, d), meaning that the channels are still mixed and the channel capacity is 

not maximized. The reason is that, without the constraint of 𝑅eff which enforces the singular values 

to be almost equal, the diagonal entries can be drastically different in values and some entries may 

even vanish. Therefore, 𝑤1 alone does not guarantee near orthogonal channels. As a result, OCI 

demands the simultaneous optimization of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1, which is encapsulated in 𝒢1(𝐇).

5. Ensemble averages of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1

The ensemble averages of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1 can be obtained numerically and analytically using 

random matrix theory and probability theory. First, it is straightforward to numerically determine the 

values. From the discussion in the second section of the Supplementary Information and the 

Methods section in the main text, the channel matrices are complex Gaussian random matrices 

(CGRM). Therefore, we generate 10,000 2 × 2 CGRM using MATLAB. Statistical analyses are 

presented as the histograms in Supplementary Fig. 6. The ensemble averages of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1 for 

these random matrices are around 1.72 and 1.18, respectively. These values are indicated by the 


5

dashed lines in Fig. 3c and Fig. 4b in the main text, which are consistent with the experimental 

measurements. 

The ensemble average of 𝑅eff can be computed using the probability density function (PDF) of 

the singular values of CGRM. According to the definition of effective rank [Eq. (1) in main text], 𝑅eff

of a 2 × 2 channel matrix is given by

𝑅eff = exp(𝐸) = exp[−𝑝1 ln 𝑝1 − 𝑝2 ln 𝑝2] = exp[−𝑝1 ln 𝑝1 − (1 − 𝑝1) ln(1 − 𝑝1)],       (S4)

where 𝑝1 =

𝜎1

𝜎1+𝜎2 and 𝑝2 =

𝜎2

𝜎1+𝜎2 are the normalized singular values, and 𝑝1 + 𝑝2 = 1. To simplify 

the expression in the following, we define a function

𝛼(𝑥) ≔ exp[−𝑥 ln 𝑥 − (1 − 𝑥) ln(1 − 𝑥)],
(S5)

and rewrite Eq. (S4) as 𝑅eff = 𝛼(𝑝1). It can be shown that the function 𝑦 = 𝛼(𝑥) monotonically 

increases in the interval 𝑥 ∈ [0,0.5], leading to a one-to-one correspondence between 𝑅eff and 𝑝1

in the interval 𝑝1 ∈ [0,0.5] and the PDF of 𝑅eff can be calculated via the PDF of 𝑝1. Consequently, 

𝑝1 is obtainable simply as the inverse function 𝑝1 = 𝛼−1(𝑅eff). Then, the PDF of 𝑅eff is given by5

𝜌𝑅eff(𝑅eff) = 𝜌1[𝛼−1(𝑅eff)] |

d

d𝑅eff [𝛼−1(𝑅eff)]|,                                     (S6)

where 𝜌1(𝑝1) is the PDF of the normalized singular value 𝑝1. The distribution of singular values of 

CGRM (the channel matrix 𝐇) can be obtained by calculating the eigenvalue distribution of the 

Wishart-Laguerre ensemble6 (𝐇𝐇† is a Wishart matrix). For 2 × 2 CGRM with singular values 𝜎1

and 𝜎2 (not necessarily ordered), the joint PDF of 𝜎1 and 𝜎2 is given by

𝑔(𝜎1, 𝜎2) =

1

8 exp [−

1

2 (𝜎1

2 + 𝜎2

2)] (𝜎1

2 − 𝜎2

2)2𝜎1𝜎2.                               (S7)

The terms exp [−

1

2 (𝜎1

2 + 𝜎2

2)] and 𝜎1𝜎2 in Eq. (S7) indicate that the singular values are unlikely to 

take extreme values, and the term (𝜎1

2 − 𝜎2

2)2 indicates that the two singular values are unlikely to 

be identical. By using Eq.(S7), we can calculate the PDF of 𝑝1 =

𝜎1

𝜎1+𝜎2 as

𝜌1(𝑝1) = ∫
∫
𝑔(𝜎1, 𝜎2)𝛿 (𝑝1 −

𝜎1

𝜎1+𝜎2) d𝜎1d𝜎2

+∞
0

+∞
0
,                              (S8)

where 𝛿(∙) is the Dirac delta function. By a substitution 𝑟1 =

𝜎1

𝜎1+𝜎2 and 𝑟2 = 𝜎2, we arrive at

𝜌1(𝑝1) = −

6(1−2𝑝1)2(−1+𝑝1)𝑝1

[1+2(−1+𝑝1)𝑝1]4 .                                                 (S9)

Substituting Eq. (S9) into Eq. (S6), we can obtain the distribution of 𝑅eff, which is plotted in 

Supplementary Fig. 6a as the red solid curve. From this result, the expectation value of 𝑅eff for  

2 × 2 CGRM is

𝑅̅eff = ∫ 𝑅 ∙ 𝜌𝑅eff(𝑅)d𝑅

2
1
≈ 1.716,                                 
(S10)

which conforms with the statistical value and the experimental values [as shown in Fig. 3c and Fig. 

4b in the main text].


6

The ensemble average of the parameter 𝑤1 can be obtained using a similar method. 

According to the definition of 𝑤1 [Eq. (2) in main text], 𝑤1 of a 2 × 2 channel matrix is given by

𝑤1 =

|ℎ12|+|ℎ21|
|ℎ11|+|ℎ22|,
(S11)

wherein the magnitudes of the channel matrices entries follow the Rayleigh distribution, and they 

fall into the range of (0, +∞). The PDF of 𝑤1, denoted by 𝜌𝑤1, can be computed using the sum and 

quotient rules of random variables. First, we calculate the distributions of the numerator in Eq. (S11), 

which are given by 

𝜌ℎ(𝑧)
= ∫0

𝑧𝜌𝑅(𝑥)𝜌𝑅(𝑧 − 𝑥)d𝑥

= ∫0

𝑧𝑥(𝑧 − 𝑥)𝑒−1

2𝑥2

𝑒−1

2(𝑧−𝑥)2

d𝑥

=

1

4 e−1

2𝑧2 [2𝑧 + √𝜋𝑒

1
4𝑧2(𝑧2 − 2)Erf (

𝑧

2)]

,               
(S12)

where 𝑧 = |ℎ12| + |ℎ21| , 𝜌𝑅(𝑥) = 𝑥e−1

2𝑥2 is the PDF of the Rayleigh distribution, and Erf(𝑥) =

2

√𝜋 ∫0

𝑥𝑒−𝑡2d𝑡 is the error function with 𝑡 being variable to be integrated over. The PDF of the 

denominator in Eq. (S11) apparently has the same form. The distribution of 𝑤1 then follows as

𝜌𝑤1(𝑤1) = ∫
𝑧𝜌ℎ(𝑧)𝜌ℎ(𝑤1𝑧)d𝑧

+∞

0
.                                        (S13)

The distribution 𝜌𝑤1(𝑤1) is plotted in Supplementary Fig. 6b as the red solid curve, which agrees 

well with the numerical result. The expectation value of the parameter 𝑤1 can be determined as 

follows:

𝑤̅1 = ∫
𝑤1𝜌𝑤1(𝑤1)d𝑤1

+∞
0
≈ 1.184. 
(S14)

This result agrees well with the experimental values shown in Fig. 3c and Fig. 4b in the main text. 

6. Measurement of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1 in the frequency range of 500-4000 Hz

Here, we provide experimental evidence that optimizing the channel isolation metric at a single 

frequency does not affect the channel isolation metric at frequencies outside the coherence 

bandwidth (about ±4.2 Hz) from a statistical averaging perspective. We performed the same 

experiment as shown in Fig. 3 in the main text, where we optimized the objective function 𝒢1(𝐇)

[Eq. (3) in the main text] at 1300 Hz but provided measurements of the effective rank 𝑅eff and 

diagonalization degree 𝑤1 over a wider frequency range of 500-4000 Hz.

The results are shown in Supplementary Fig. 7. It is seen that only at 1300 Hz 𝑅eff and 𝑤1 do 

approach the desired values of 2 and 0, respectively. However, at frequencies outside the 

coherence bandwidth, they are at the values derived from the Rayleigh channel characteristics, 

approaching values of 1.7 and 1.2, respectively.

7. Objective functions for optimizing 6 × 2 and 4 × 2 channel matrices 


7

Here, we present the objective functions used for achieving the effects shown in Fig. 6 in the 

main text. For the scenario described by 6 × 2 channel matrices [Fig. 6(a, b, c)], the entries to 

preserve are denoted by 𝐴1 = {|ℎ11|, | ℎ21|, |ℎ31|, | ℎ42|, |ℎ52|, |ℎ62|}, and the entries to eliminate are 

denoted by 𝐴0 = {|ℎ12|, | ℎ22|, |ℎ32|, | ℎ41|, |ℎ51|, |ℎ61|}. The objective function is

𝒢4(𝐇) = |2 − 𝑅eff(𝐇)| +

sum(𝐴0)

sum(𝐴1) +

std(𝐴1)

max(𝐴1),                                 (S15)

where sum(∙), std(∙) and max(∙) represent the summation, standard deviation, and maximum value, 

respectively. The minimization of the objective function 𝒢4 achieves three objectives: (i) the first 

term drives the effective rank 𝑅eff to 2, (ii) the second term serves to minimize the entries in 𝐴0, and 

(iii) the third term ensures the uniformity of the entries in 𝐴1.

Similarly, for the scenario illustrated in Fig. 6(d, e, f), which are described by 4 × 2 channel 

matrices, 
the 
goal 
is 
to 
preserve 𝐴1 = {|ℎ11|, | ℎ21|, |ℎ22|, |ℎ32|} and 
eliminate 𝐴0 =

{|ℎ12|, | ℎ31|, |ℎ41|, |ℎ42|}. Thus, the objective function is designed as 

𝒢5(𝐇) = |1.9286 − 𝑅eff(𝐇)| +

sum(𝐴0)

sum(𝐴1) +

std(𝐴1)

max(𝐴1).
(S16)

Note that because we require the entire row 4 to vanish, the upper bound of the effective rank of 

the 4 × 2 channel matrix is ~1.9286, instead of 2.

8. OCI over a continuous band of frequency 

The acoustic reconfigurable metasurfaces (ARMs) are capable of modulating the phase of the 

reflected wave over a broad bandwidth, which gives rise to the possibility of controlling acoustic 

channels over a finite band of frequency. In order to verify this capability, we have performed 30 

independent experiments to demonstrate the optimization of 2 × 2 channel matrices (based on the 

minimization of 𝒢1) over 1350 Hz to 1450 Hz. The 𝑅eff is increased to approximately 1.883 within 

the 100 Hz bandwidth, and the  𝑤1 is reduced to approximately 0.400 (corresponding to a decrease 

of about 8 dB), as shown in Supplementary Fig. 8. 

To enable OCI to be performed across a continuous frequency band, we defined the objective 

function as follows:

𝒢6 = (2 − 𝑅̅eff) + 𝑤̅1 + std(𝑅eff) + std(𝑤1),
(S17)

where 𝑅̅eff =

1

𝑁 ∑
𝑅eff[𝐇(𝑓0 + 𝑛 × 𝛿𝑓)]
𝑁
𝑛=0
, 𝑤̅1 =

1

𝑁 ∑
𝑤1[𝐇(𝑓0 + 𝑛 × 𝛿𝑓)]
𝑁
𝑛=0
are the spectrally 

averaged effective rank and degree of diagonalization, and std(∙) represent their standard 

deviations in the spectrum. We measured the channel matrix at 26 frequencies in the range of 1350 

and 1450 Hz with a frequency resolution of 4 Hz, i.e. 𝑁 = 26, 𝑓0 = 1350 Hz, 𝛿𝑓 = 4 Hz . The 

definitions of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1 follow Eqs. (1) and (2) in the main text.

9. The optimization algorithm


8

We utilized a climbing algorithm to minimize the objective function, as illustrated in 

Supplementary Fig. 9. This algorithm does not require prior knowledge of the acoustic field, but 

only relies on configuring the states of ARMs. The ARMs consist of 200 units that can only switch 

between Open state and Closed state, denoted as “0” and “1”. The iterative process is as follows:

(1) Set all unit states to “0” as the first initial state and measure the channel matrix in the room. 

The value of the objective function is then computed.

(2) Randomly select M units (M being a randomly selected integer between 1 and 15) and 

switch their states based on the initial state (changing “0” to “1” and vice versa) to create a new 

state. Then measure the channel matrix in the room and calculate the objective function.

(3) Compare the objective functions of the initial and new states, then select the better state as 

the new initial state. If the objective function remains unchanged or increases, revert to the original 

initial state.

(4) Repeat steps (2) to (3) until the objective function converges to the desired value.


9

Supplementary References

1. Yon, S., Tanter, M. & Fink, M. Sound focusing in rooms: The time-reversal approach. J. Acoust. 

Soc. Am. 113, 1533–1543 (2003).

2. Ma, G. et al. Towards anti-causal Green’s function for three-dimensional sub-diffraction focusing. 

Nat. Phys. 14, 608–612 (2018).

3. Nélisse, H. & Nicolas, J. Characterization of a diffuse field in a reverberant room. J. Acoust. Soc. 

Am. 101, 3517–3524 (1997).

4. Mason, W. P. & Thurston, R. N. Physical acoustics: principles and methods. vol. 17 (Acad. Press, 

1984).

5. Dekking, M., Kraaikamp, C., Lopuhaä, H. P. & Meester, L. E. A modern introduction to probability 

and statistics: understanding why and how. (Springer, 2005).

6. Shen, J. On the singular values of gaussian random matrices. Linear Algebra Its Appl. 326, 1–

14 (2001).


10

Supplementary Figures

Supplementary Fig. 1 On the reciprocity of channel matrices. a The reciprocity condition requires 
the channel matrix to be transpose-invariant. b Reciprocity is satisfied when the optimal channel
isolation is obtained. c Reciprocity is not satisfied if the channel matrix is not  square.


11

Supplementary Fig. 2 The spatial distributions of the spectral averages of the sound pressure 
levels (SPL) are illustrated for Planes 1-8. The calculations for the SPL are conducted for two 
frequency ranges: 1000-2000 Hz (upper) and 250-8000 Hz (bottom). The spatial means (SPL
̅̅̅̅̅) and 

standard deviations [𝜎(SPL)] of SPL are marked above each panel. Both frequency ranges exhibit 
a standard deviation of less than 0.7 dB.


12

Supplementary Fig. 3 Two-dimensional scans of the sound fields at different positions in the 

room at 1300 Hz. Each column is one set of experiment.


13

Supplementary Fig. 4 The statistical distributions of (a) Re(𝑝), (b) Im(𝑝) and (c) |𝑝|. The red 

solid curves are numerical fitting from the experimental data, and the black dashed curves 

represent theoretical models: Gaussian distributions in (a, b) and Rayleigh distribution in (c). The 

values of the sound pressure are normalized by their standard deviation. d The spatial correlations 

of the sound fields. 


14

Supplementary Fig. 5 The roles of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1 in objective function 𝒢1(𝐇). a The magnitude-

averaged entries of the channel matrix before the optimization. (b, c, d) correspond to the results 

obtained using 2 − 𝑅eff(𝐇) , 𝑤1 , and 𝒢1(𝐇) = 2 − 𝑅eff(𝐇) + 𝑤1 as the objective function, 

respectively. b Only the effective rank is optimized, and 𝑅eff is increased to the upper bound of 2 

(middle), but 𝑤1 experiences no improvement (right). c Only 𝑤1 is minimized, and 𝑤1 is significantly 

suppressed to about 0.03 (right). 𝑅eff is also improved to 1.92 (middle) due to the suppression of 

the off-diagonal entries (left). However, it is far from the ideal value of 2. d 𝑅eff and 𝑤1 are optimized 

at the same time. The 𝑅eff is increased to 1.99 (middle) and 𝑤1 is reduced to about 0.04 (right). In 

(b, c, d) the red curves are the averaged values and the red shades depict the ranges of the 

respective values in all realizations. The measured frequency is 1300 Hz. The black dashed lines 

mark 𝑅eff = 2 in the middle column and the black dashed lines in the right column indicate the 

expected value of 𝑤1 in the uncontrolled case, i.e., 𝑤1 ≈ 1.2.


15

Supplementary Fig. 6 The numerically obtained distributions of 𝑅eff (a) and 𝑤1 (b) are depicted 

as histograms. The red solid curves are the theoretical results of random matrices and probability 

theory. 


16

Supplementary Fig. 7 Measurement of 𝑅eff and 𝑤1 in the frequency range of 500-4000 Hz, with 

optimization performed solely at 1300 Hz.


17

Supplementary Fig. 8 Optimization of 2 × 2 channel matrices by minimizing 𝒢1(𝐇) over a 

continuous band of frequency spanning 100 Hz.


18

Supplementary Fig. 9 Optimization procedure of the climbing algorithm. 


