Exploring wavefunction hybridization of magnon-magnon hybrid state 

Bo Hu1, Zong-Kai Xie2, Jie Lu3, and Wei He2, * 

 

1Department of Physics, College of Sciences, Shanghai Maritime University, Shanghai 

201306, China 

2Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 

3College of Physics Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225002, 

China 

Abstract: 

We investigate magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid states using a non-Hermitian two-band 

Hamiltonian and the concept of wavefunction hybridization. By comparing our model 

with micromagnetic simulations conducted on a synthetic antiferromagnet with strong 

magnonвЂ“magnon coupling, we successfully reproduce not only the resonance 

frequencies and linewidths but also the phases and amplitudes of the magnon 

wavefunction. The hybridization effect influences the dissipation rate, leading to the 

crossing of linewidths. Additionally, we quantify the magnon hybridization within a 

magnonic Bloch sphere, which enhances the ability to manipulate hybrid magnons for 

coherent information processing.  

* Corresponding authors: hewei@iphy.ac.cn  

 

 
 


I. 
Introduction 

The hybrid quantum system based on magnon has elicited significant attention due 

to its advancements in quantum information technologies [1вЂ“4]. Understanding this 

hybrid quantum system is crucial for the development of large-scale artificial quantum 

systems [5]. The use of magnon-based functional devices in quantum technologies has 

been encouraged. The hybridization of magnons with other quasiparticles, such as 

photons, phonons, and magnons themselves, introduces new hybrid quantum systems 

that can greatly enhance their utility in quantum information processing [2,6вЂ“9]. In 

recent years, magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid systems have attracted broad interest  primarily 

due to the ease of achieving strong magnonвЂ“magnon coupling [10вЂ“13]. One of the most 

promising platforms for hybrid quantum systems is the synthetic antiferromagnetic 

system (SAF), which serves as a host for magnonвЂ“magnon coupling [9,14,15]. The 

dynamical excitations in SAF can be categorized into acoustic mode (AM) or optical 

mode (OM). MagnonвЂ“magnon coupling enables the coupling of these two magnon 

excitations, resulting in hybrid states. In the hybrid mode, the strength of magnonвЂ“

magnon coupling determines the rate of coherent information exchange. Consequently, 

a strong magnonвЂ“magnon coupling is highly desirable. To date, most research on 

magnonвЂ“magnon coupling has focused on achieving a strong coupling strength, leading 

to the emergence of a characteristic anticrossing phenomenon between the two magnon 

modes. [16,17]   

Understanding the magnon hybrid system cannot be solely achieved by measuring 

the level repulsion gap. The phenomenon of linewidth suppression or enhancement has 

been observed in magnon hybrid modes, and different explanations have been proposed 

depending on the specific hybrid system. In magnonвЂ“photon hybrid modes, it has been 

attributed to the two-mode hybridization [18вЂ“20]]. Conversely, in magnonвЂ“magnon 

hybrid modes, it has been interpreted as mutual spin pumping [21,22]. The effects of 

hybridization on linewidth in magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid modes still remain unclear. 

Recently, the dynamical phase shift between two magnets has been suggested as a 

parameter to differentiate the magnon hybrid mode in SAF. The dynamic phase shift at 


the hybrid mode is neither 0В° nor 180В° [23вЂ“25]. However, a universal theoretical 

framework is still lacking to explain and quantify this phase shift. To comprehensively 

explore magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid states, similar to atomic states described by 

wavefunctions, we propose the use of magnon wavefunctions to describe the magnon 

states. Notably, understanding and characterizing the wavefunction hybridization of 

magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid systems is crucial for coherent information encoding and 

processing. However, explicit studies focusing on magnon wavefunction hybridization 

in magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid systems are limited [26]. 

In this letter, we present a novel approach to explore the magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid 

state through the hybridization of magnon wavefunctions. To achieve this, we employ 

a non-Hermitian two-band Hamiltonian that allows us to determine the relevant 

parameters. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors obtained from our approach are in 

excellent agreement with the results obtained from a micromagnetic simulation 

conducted on a SAF. These results include the resonance frequency, linewidth, 

precession amplitude, and phase. The non-Hermitian component of our Hamiltonian is 

constructed based on the frequencyвЂ“linewidth relationship, which captures the 

characteristic Gilbert damping behavior. We selected the wavefunctions associated with 

the AM and OM as our basis sets. The coupling between these modes leads to the 

formation of a new eigen wavefunction, which is a linear combination of the two basis 

states. The wavefunction hybridization induces a mixing of the linewidths, resulting in 

the suppression of one linewidth and the enhancement of the other. The observed phase 

behavior aligns with theoretical predictions, highlighting the non-Hermitian nature of 

the wavefunction hybridization. Furthermore, we investigate the evolution of magnon 

hybridization in a magnonic Bloch sphere as a function of an external field. By 

analyzing this evolution, we gain insights into the quantitative understanding and 

characterization of magnon hybridization for magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid systems. 

II. Theoretical Model 

The phase shift alone is insufficient to fully characterize the hybridization. In 


addition to the phase shift, the weights of the AM and OM in a hybrid mode are also 

necessary. To address this, we construct a wavefunction в€… пүҢ рқ‘’пүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢрқ‘’пүҢпүҢрқђөпүҢрқ’ҺрқџЏ пүҢ

рқђөпүҢрқ’ҺрқџђпүҢ  to describe the dynamical magnetizations of the SAF. Here,  рқ’ҺрқџЏ  and рқ’Һрқџђ 

represent the time-dependent unit vectors of the top and bottom layer magnetizations, 

respectively. The wavefunction can be written more conveniently as  в€… пүҢ пүҢрқ‘’пүҢпүҢрқђөпүҢ, рқђөпүҢпүҢ
пүҢ, 

where T denotes the matrix transpose. The precession amplitudes are parameterized by 

рқђөпүҢ  and рқђөпүҢ  for the top and bottom layers, respectively. The phase рқ›ү  is introduced to 

account for the relative phase shift between the two precessional magnetizations. In this 

context, |a>пүҢ пүҢ1, 1пүҢпүҢ (рқ›ү=0В°) and |o>пүҢ пүҢпүҢ1, 1пүҢпүҢ (рқ›ү=180В°) present the eigenvectors of 

the pure AM and OM states, respectively. We illustrate the wavefunctions of pure AM 

and OM in Fig. 1(a) and consider them as the two basis wavefunctions |a> and |o>, 

respectively. The wavefunction of the magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid mode can be obtained 

as a linear combination of |a> and |o>, as depicted in Fig. 1(a). 

We employ a non-Hermitian two-band Hamiltonian to fully characterize the hybrid 

mode by calculating the magnon energy and wavefunction. Specifically, we determine 

the eigenfrequencies and eigenvectors through an effective two-band Hamiltonian that 

incorporates coherent coupling between the magnons  [27вЂ“29] as: 

  рқђ» пүҢ пүҢрқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘–рқ›Өрқ‘“пүҢ
рқ‘”/2
рқ‘”/2
рқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘–рқ›Өрқ‘“пүҢпүҢ,  (1) 

where fo, О”fo, fa, and О”fa, are the bare ferromagnetic resonance frequencies and 

linewidths for OM and AM, respectively. g is the strength of the magnonвЂ“magnon 

coupling. The two-band Hamiltonian for magnonвЂ“magnon coupling was the work of 

Chai et al., [28], but the effect of FMR linewidth was neglected in their work. Previous 

work based this non-Hermitian two-band Hamiltonian mostly focuses on the coupling-

strength-dependent energy spectra. [29] In the current work, the diagonal of Eq. (1) is 

parameterized by the complex number to make the Hamiltonian non-Hermitian or the 

dynamical part of wavefunction as the manner of damped wave. We set g as a real 

positive number, which means the absence of spin pumping. [22] After diagonalizing 

Eq. (1), the complex eigenfrequencies for two hybridized eigenmodes are obtained 

as [27]: 


  рқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ
пүҢ

пүҢ пүҢрқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘“пүҢпүҢ пүҢ
пүҢ

пүҢ пүҢрқ›Өрқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ рқ›Өрқ‘“пүҢпүҢ пүҢ
пүҢ

пүҢ пүҢО”пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘”пүҢ, (2)  

where the complex parameter О” пүҢ пүҢрқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘“пүҢпүҢ пүҢ рқ‘–пүҢв€†рқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ в€†рқ‘“пүҢпүҢ. With the assumption 

рқ›ә в‰Ғ 1, the detected resonance frequency is рқ‘…рқ‘’пүҢрқ‘“пүҢпүҢ пүҢ
пүҢ

пүҢ пүҢрқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘“пүҢпүҢ пүҢ

пүҢ

пүҢ пүҢпүҢрқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘“пүҢпүҢпүҢ пүҢ рқ‘”пүҢ. Two branches of hybrid modes are classified as f+ (upper) and f- 

(lower) branches. Also, we obtain the complex eigenvectors for the hybrid modes in 

the normalized solutions as (when gпүҢ 0): 

пүҢрқђөпүҢ
рқђөпүҢпүҢ
пүҢ
пүҢ
пүҢ

пүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢпүҢ пүҢпүҢ пүҢ
пүҢ пүҢ
g

О” пүҢ пүҢО”пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘”пүҢ пүҢ . (3) 

The new wavefunction for hybrid mode is a linear combination of |o> and |a> with the 

complex amplitude Ao and Aa, respectively. The eigenvectors in Eq. (3) are presented 

on the representation {|o>, |a>}. Conventionally, we rewrite the wavefunction as: 

в€… пүҢ пүҢрқ‘’пүҢпүҢрқђөпүҢ
рқђөпүҢ
пүҢ пүҢ пүҢрқђөпүҢ пүҢпүҢ1
1 пүҢ пүҢ рқђөпүҢ пүҢ1
1пүҢпүҢ. (4) 

It links the obscure wavefunction hybridization to the two observed parameters, 

including the amplitudes Ai (i=1,2) and phase рқ›ү. 

III. Simulation results and discussion 

To confirm the validity of Eqs. (2) and (4) on the magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid modes, 

we performed micromagnetic simulations on a SAF with in-plane uniaxial magnetic 

anisotropy (UMA). In our previous work, we observed an anisotropic magnonвЂ“magnon 

coupling in this particular type of SAF [15]. The maximum coupling strength was 

observed when the magnetic field was applied at an angle of 45В° relative to the UMA 

direction [25]. In this study, we focus on investigating the magnon hybrid nature in this 

typical scenario, with a specific emphasis on wavefunction hybridization. The 

parameters of the SAF and further details regarding the micromagnetic simulation can 

be found in the Supplementary Material. As discussed earlier, the hybridization of 

magnon wavefunctions leads to intricate dynamics, which is observed in the obtained 

dynamical signals. Fig. 1(c) shows a typical pair of dynamical traces presented by their 

polar-components m1z and m2z under the magnetic field H=300 Oe. Since the broadband 


excitation, both modes are trigged.  The traces were fitted by two damped sine waves 

рқ‘љпүҢпүҢпүҢрқ‘ҰпүҢ пүҢ рқђөпүҢпүҢрқ‘’пүҢпүҢ/пүҢпүҢпүҢ рқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘›пүҢ 2рқњ‹рқ‘“пүҢрқ‘Ұ пүҢ рқњ“пүҢпүҢпүҢ пүҢ рқђөпүҢпүҢрқ‘’пүҢпүҢ/пүҢпүҢпүҢ рқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘›пүҢ 2рқњ‹рқ‘“пүҢрқ‘Ұ пүҢ рқњ“пүҢпүҢпүҢ  to extract 

dynamical parameters of miz (i=1,2 for top and bottom layers). AiВ±,П„iВ±, and П€iВ± 

correspond to the characteristic amplitudes, decay times, and phases, respectively; f 

presents the resonance frequencies; and + and вЂ“ present the upper and lower branches, 

respectively. Then, the oscillation behavior of m1z and m2z decomposed into two 

oscillations with different resonance frequencies. Simultaneously, the linewidth was 

obtained as О”рқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ 1/2рқњ‹рқњЏпүҢ .  

The resonance frequencies and linewidths of the two branches are presented in Figs. 

2(a) and 2(b), respectively. An evident anticrossing of the dispersion curves confirms 

the presence of magnonвЂ“magnon coupling. The coupling strength, denoted as g, is 

determined as 0.43 GHz. Moreover, an intercrossing of the linewidths has been 

observed, which aligns with the predictions of Eq. (2) when рқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘“пүҢ . This finding 

implies that even when categorizing the modes as AM-like and OM-like, the linewidths 

still coincide. This phenomenon indicates that the hybridization enhances the 

dissipation rate in one mode while suppressing it in the other. To quantify Eq. (2), we 

consider the resonance frequency and linewidth of the SAF without Ku (uniaxial 

anisotropy) as the bare values, denoted as рқ‘“ and О”рқ‘“ , respectively (for a comprehensive 

explanation, please refer to the Supplementary Material). These bare values are plotted 

and marked as the calculation without g in Fig. 2. By including the coupling strength 

g=0.43 GHz, we calculate the resonance frequencies and linewidths, which are 

presented in Fig. 2. The calculated resonance frequencies closely match the real part of 

the eigenfrequencies (Eq. (2)), except for field strengths below 120 Oe. This 

discrepancy arises from neglecting the uniaxial anisotropy field when considering the 

bare рқ‘“. The trend of the linewidths is also well reproduced by the imaginary part of the 

eigenfrequencies. The slight differences (as indicated by the scaling factor in Fig. 2(b)) 

can be attributed to the neglect of the uniaxial anisotropy field, which slightly modifies 

the effective field and consequently affects the dissipation rate (Eqs. S3вЂ“S4). 

Nonetheless, the validity of Eq. (2) is confirmed, thereby establishing the two-coupled 

band model for characterizing and quantifying the magnon-magnon hybrid mode. 


The eigenvectors were calculated using Eq. (3), and then the amplitudes Ai and phase 

рқ›ү  were determined using Eq. (4) for comparison with the simulation results. These 

parameters are in good agreement with the micromagnetic simulation results. The 

amplitude ratios A1+/ A2+ for рқ‘“пүҢ branch and A2-/ A1- for  рқ‘“пүҢ branch are plotted in Fig. 

3(a), respectively. As the magnetic field increases, the ratios initially decrease and then 

increase. The minimum ratio approaches zero. A ratio value less than one indicates that 

m1 dominates рқ‘“пүҢ branch, while m2 dominates рқ‘“пүҢ branch. Fig. 3(b) illustrates the phase 

shift Оө =П€2-П€1 for the two branches as a function of the magnetic field. With increasing 

field strength, Оө changes from 0В° to 180В° for  рқ‘“пүҢ  branch , while it changes from 180В° to 

0В° for  рқ‘“пүҢ branch. This evolution of Оө indicates that one branch transitions from being 

AM-like to OM-like, while the other branch transitions from being OM-like to AM-

like. According to Eqs. (3) and (4), the presence of  в€†рқ‘“пүҢ пүҢ в€†рқ‘“пүҢ results in a complex 

value for рқ‘’пүҢпүҢ , indicating that Оө is neither 0В° nor 180В°. Therefore, the phase shift Оө is 

associated with the non-Hermitian characteristics of wavefunction hybridization [25]. 

Overall, the hybridization of magnon wavefunctions leads to asymmetric precessional 

amplitudes and a phase shift that deviates from 0В° and 180В°.  

In the context of a two-band model, the eigenvector (рқђөпүҢ, рқђөпүҢпүҢT possesses a two-fold 

symmetry and can be mapped to a pseudospin vector on a Bloch sphere [30вЂ“32]. We 

can express (рқђөпүҢ, рқђөпүҢ пүҢT as (рқ‘ђрқ‘њрқ‘ 
пүҢ

пүҢ  , рқ‘’пүҢпүҢрқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘›
пүҢ

пүҢ пүҢT with рқњѓ пүҢ 2рқ‘Һрқ‘џрқ‘ђрқ‘Ұрқ‘Һрқ‘›пүҢрқ‘Һрқ‘Џрқ‘ пүҢ
пүҢпүҢ
пүҢпүҢпүҢ ) and рқњ‘ пүҢ

arg пүҢО” пүҢ пүҢО”пүҢ пүҢ рқ‘”пүҢ пүҢ  , while рқњ‘  represents the phase shift between |o> and |a> in a 

hybrid mode. The value of рқњ‘ is depicted in Fig. S2 (please refer to the Supplementary 

Material). For the рқ‘“пүҢ branch, П† takes a small but non-zero value, whereas for the рқ‘“пүҢ 

branch, it is close to but not exactly в€’180В°. Similar to the phase рқ›ү, the complex value 

of рқ‘’пүҢпүҢ reveals that phase рқњ‘ also possesses a non-Hermitian characteristic. We designate 

the state |o> and |a> as the north and south poles of the Bloch sphere, respectively. The 

two eigenvectors correspond to a pair of pseudospin vectors on the magnonic Bloch 

sphere. This pseudospin vector ( рқњѓ, рқњ‘ ) characterizes the wavefunction |h> as a 

superposition state of |o> and |a>: |h>=рқ‘ђрқ‘њрқ‘ 
пүҢ

пүҢ |o> +рқ‘’пүҢпүҢрқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘›
пүҢ

пүҢ |a>. Fig. 4 displays the 

evolution of the calculated pseudospin vector on the Bloch sphere as a function of the 


external field. With increasing field strength, the pseudospin vector of the f+ branch 

gradually transforms from the north pole to the south pole, whereas the opposite occurs 

for the f- branch. Therefore, the magnetic field serves as an effective parameter for 

tuning the hybridization.  

The aforementioned discussions successfully quantify the modulation of resonance 

frequency, linewidth, precession amplitude, and phase, thus confirming the validity of 

the two-band model and wavefunction hybridization in describing the magnon hybrid 

state. Moreover, the hybridization presents a distinct departure from the explanation of 

mutual spin pumping for linewidth suppression or enhancement [21,22]. Further 

investigations are required to distinguish between these two different explanations. The 

asymmetry of precession amplitudes is proposed as an alternative picture of symmetry-

breaking of the wavefunction, which is the key issue to understanding and introducing 

magnonвЂ“magnon coupling in SAF. The amplitude asymmetry can be experimentally 

characterized using techniques, such as electrically-detected ferromagnetic resonance 

(FMR) [33]. Additionally, the relative phase between two magnetic layers can be 

observed clearly through time-resolved X-ray magnetic circular dichroism, with well-

designed samples [34]. The pseudospin vector on the magnonic Bloch sphere not only 

aids in characterizing the hybrid mode but also offers a means to tune the magnon state 

for quantum technology applications.  

IV. Conclusions 

In summary, we propose a non-Hermitian two coupled band model to describe the 

wavefunction hybridization in magnonвЂ“magnon hybrid modes. We select in-phase and 

out-of-phase excitations as the basis wavefunctions, and the magnonвЂ“magnon coupling 

couples them to form a hybrid mode. Comparing our model with micromagnetic 

simulation results on a symmetrical SAF with UMA, we successfully replicate the 

resonance frequencies, linewidths, and reconstruct the wavefunction, including the 

phases and amplitudes for the two layers. The observed intercrossing of linewidths 

between the two magnon bands is attributed to the wavefunction hybridization. It results 


in a mixing of the wavefunctions of the AM and OM, leading to the mixing of the 

linewidths. Furthermore, we analyze the magnon hybridization in a magnonic Bloch 

sphere as a function of the external field. Characterizing hybrid modes is a key aspect 

in understanding and developing hybrid quantum systems. Our work provides a unique 

perspective for understanding and characterizing magnon hybridization in magnon-

based quantum hybrid systems.  

Acknowledgements 

This work is supported by the National Natural Sciences Foundation of China (Grant 

Nos. 12174427, 51871235). 

 
 


References: 

1.  D. Lachance-Quirion, Y. Tabuchi, A. Gloppe, K. Usami, and Y. Nakamura, "Hybrid 
quantum systems based on magnonics," Appl. Phys. Express 12, 070101 (2019). 
2.  H. Y. Yuan, Y. Cao, A. Kamra, R. A. Duine, and P. Yan, "Quantum magnonics: when 
magnon spintronics meets quantum information science," arXiv:2111.14241 [cond-mat, 
physics:physics, physics:quant-ph] (2022). 
3.  L. Bai, M. Harder, Y. P. Chen, X. Fan, J. Q. Xiao, and C.-M. Hu, "Spin Pumping in 
Electrodynamically Coupled Magnon-Photon Systems," Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 227201 
(2015). 
4.  R. Hisatomi, A. Osada, Y. Tabuchi, T. Ishikawa, A. Noguchi, R. Yamazaki, K. 
Usami, and Y. Nakamura, "Bidirectional conversion between microwave and light via 
ferromagnetic magnons," Phys. Rev. B 93, 174427 (2016). 
5.  A. Frisk Kockum, A. Miranowicz, S. De Liberato, S. Savasta, and F. Nori, 
"Ultrastrong coupling between light and matter," Nat Rev Phys 1, 19вЂ“40 (2019). 
6.  A. Khitun, M. Bao, and K. L. Wang, "Magnonic logic circuits," J. Phys. D: Appl. 
Phys. 43, 264005 (2010). 
7.  A. V. Chumak, V. I. Vasyuchka, A. A. Serga, and B. Hillebrands, "Magnon 
spintronics," Nature Phys 11, 453вЂ“461 (2015). 
8.  P. Pirro, V. I. Vasyuchka, A. A. Serga, and B. Hillebrands, "Advances in coherent 
magnonics," Nat Rev Mater 6, 1114вЂ“1135 (2021). 
9.  Y. Li, W. Zhang, V. Tyberkevych, W.-K. Kwok, A. Hoffmann, and V. Novosad, 
"Hybrid magnonics: Physics, circuits, and applications for coherent information 
processing," Journal of Applied Physics 128, 130902 (2020). 
10.  H. Liu, D. Sun, C. Zhang, M. Groesbeck, R. Mclaughlin, and Z. V. Vardeny, 
"Observation of exceptional points in magnonic parity-time symmetry devices," Sci. 
Adv. 5, eaax9144 (2019). 
11.  J. Chen, C. Liu, T. Liu, Y. Xiao, K. Xia, G. E. W. Bauer, M. Wu, and H. Yu, "Strong 
Interlayer 
Magnon-Magnon 
Coupling 
in 
Magnetic 
Metal-Insulator 
Hybrid 
Nanostructures," Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 217202 (2018). 
12.  D. MacNeill, J. T. Hou, D. R. Klein, P. Zhang, P. Jarillo-Herrero, and L. Liu, 
"Gigahertz Frequency Antiferromagnetic Resonance and Strong Magnon-Magnon 
Coupling in the Layered Crystal CrCl 3," Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 047204 (2019). 
13.  L. Liensberger, A. Kamra, H. Maier-Flaig, S. GeprГ¤gs, A. Erb, S. T. B. 
Goennenwein, R. Gross, W. Belzig, H. Huebl, and M. Weiler, "Exchange-Enhanced 
Ultrastrong Magnon-Magnon Coupling in a Compensated Ferrimagnet," Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 123, 117204 (2019). 
14.  A. Sud, C. W. Zollitsch, A. Kamimaki, T. Dion, S. Khan, S. Iihama, S. Mizukami, 
and 
H. 
Kurebayashi, 
"Tunable 
magnon-magnon 
coupling 
in 
synthetic 
antiferromagnets," Phys. Rev. B 102, 100403 (2020). 
15.  W. He, Z. K. Xie, R. Sun, M. Yang, Y. Li, X.-T. Zhao, W. Liu, Z. D. Zhang, J.-W. 
Cai, Z.-H. Cheng, and J. Lu, "Anisotropic MagnonвЂ“Magnon Coupling in Synthetic 
Antiferromagnets," Chinese Phys. Lett. 38, 057502 (2021). 
16.  C. Dai and F. Ma, "Strong magnonвЂ“magnon coupling in synthetic 
antiferromagnets," Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 112405 (2021). 


17.  M. Li, J. Lu, and W. He, "Symmetry breaking induced magnon-magnon coupling 
in synthetic antiferromagnets," Phys. Rev. B 103, 064429 (2021). 
18.  H. Huebl, C. W. Zollitsch, J. Lotze, F. Hocke, M. Greifenstein, A. Marx, R. Gross, 
and S. T. B. Goennenwein, "High Cooperativity in Coupled Microwave Resonator 
Ferrimagnetic Insulator Hybrids," Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 127003 (2013). 
19.  L. Bai, M. Harder, Y. P. Chen, X. Fan, J. Q. Xiao, and C.-M. Hu, "Spin Pumping in 
Electrodynamically Coupled Magnon-Photon Systems," Physical Review Letters 114, 
(2015). 
20.  M. Harder, L. Bai, P. Hyde, and C.-M. Hu, "Topological properties of a coupled 
spin-photon system induced by damping," Phys. Rev. B 95, 214411 (2017). 
21.  S. Klingler, V. Amin, S. GeprГ¤gs, K. Ganzhorn, H. Maier-Flaig, M. Althammer, H. 
Huebl, R. Gross, R. D. McMichael, M. D. Stiles, S. T. B. Goennenwein, and M. Weiler, 
"Spin-Torque Excitation of Perpendicular Standing Spin Waves in Coupled YIG / Co 
Heterostructures," Physical Review Letters 120, (2018). 
22.  Y. Li, W. Cao, V. P. Amin, Z. Zhang, J. Gibbons, J. Sklenar, J. Pearson, P. M. Haney, 
M. D. Stiles, W. E. Bailey, V. Novosad, A. Hoffmann, and W. Zhang, "Coherent Spin 
Pumping in a Strongly Coupled Magnon-Magnon Hybrid System," Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 
117202 (2020). 
23.  X. Chen, C. Zheng, S. Zhou, Y. Liu, and Z. Zhang, "Manipulation of Time- and 
Frequency-Domain 
Dynamics 
by 
Magnon-Magnon 
Coupling 
in 
Synthetic 
Antiferromagnets," Magnetochemistry 8, 7 (2021). 
24.  P. Ntetsika, G. Mitrikas, G. Litsardakis, and I. Panagiotopoulos, "Mixing of 
acoustic and optical excitations in Ru/Co based multilayers," Materials Advances 
(2022). 
25.  B. Hu and W. He, "Tunable magnon-magnon coupling mediated by in-plane 
magnetic anisotropy in synthetic antiferromagnets," Journal of Magnetism and 
Magnetic Materials 565, 170283 (2023). 
26.  S. Li, K. Shen, and K. Xia, "Magnon hybridization in ferrimagnetic 
heterostructures," Phys. Rev. B 102, 224413 (2020). 
27.  P.-C. Xu, J. W. Rao, Y. S. Gui, X. Jin, and C.-M. Hu, "Cavity mediated dissipative 
coupling of distant magnetic moments: theory and experiment," Phys. Rev. B 100, 
094415 (2019). 
28.  W. Song, X. Wang, C. Jia, X. Wang, C. Jiang, D. Xue, and G. Chai, "Nonreciprocal 
emergence of hybridized magnons in magnetic thin films," Phys. Rev. B 104, 014402 
(2021). 
29.  H. M. Hurst and B. Flebus, "Non-Hermitian physics in magnetic systems," Journal 
of Applied Physics 132, 220902 (2022). 
30.  S. Yuan, C. Sui, J. Kang, and C. Jia, "Electric readout of Bloch sphere spanned by 
twisted magnon modes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 120, 132402 (2022). 
31.  S. Yu, X. Piao, and N. Park, "Designing non-Hermitian dynamics for conservative 
state evolution on the Bloch sphere," Phys. Rev. A 97, 033805 (2018). 
32.  Y. Yang, Y.-P. Wang, J. W. Rao, Y. S. Gui, B. M. Yao, W. Lu, and C.-M. Hu, 
"Unconventional Singularity in Anti-Parity-Time Symmetric Cavity Magnonics," Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 125, 147202 (2020). 


33.  S. Sorokin, R. A. Gallardo, C. Fowley, K. Lenz, A. Titova, G. Y. P. Atcheson, G. 
Dennehy, K. Rode, J. Fassbender, J. Lindner, and A. M. Deac, "Magnetization dynamics 
in synthetic antiferromagnets: Role of dynamical energy and mutual spin pumping," 
Phys. Rev. B 101, 144410 (2020). 
34.  D. A. Arena, E. Vescovo, C.-C. Kao, Y. Guan, and W. E. Bailey, "Weakly coupled 
motion of individual layers in ferromagnetic resonance," Physical Review B 74, (2006). 

 

 

 
 


Fig.1   

 

 

 

Fig.1 (a) (color online) The diagram of two basis magnon wavefunction |a>, |o>, and 

the wavefunctions hybridization mediated by magnon-magnon coupling to form a 

magnon-magnon hybrid mode, respectively. (b) The diagram of magnetization 

configuration in a synthetic antiferromagnet. The easy axis is along x-axis. The 

magnetic field is applied in xy plane with ОёH azimuth angle along the x-axis direction. 

(c) The magnetization oscillations of m1z (black) and m2z (red) as the total signal, the 

signal for lower and upper frequencies, respectively. 

 

 

 
 


Fig.2 

 
 

Fig.2 (a) The resonance frequencies and (b) frequency-linewidths for the two magnon 

branches at the function of external field. The simulation values are obtained from the 

micromagnetic simulation and the calculation values are obtained from Eq. (2), 

respectively. 

 

 
 


FIg.3 

 

Fig.3 (a)The amplitude ratio and (b) the phase shift Оө between two layer of the hybrid 

magnon mode at the function of external field. The simulation values are obtained from 

the micromagnetic simulation and the calculation values are obtained from Eq. (4), 

respectively. 

 
 


Fig. 4 

 

 

 

Fig. 4 (color online) Hybridization pseudo-spin state |h>=рқ‘ђрқ‘њрқ‘ 
пүҢ

пүҢ|0> +рқ‘’пүҢпүҢрқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘›
пүҢ

пүҢ|1> of the 

magnonic Bloch sphere. The red dots correspond to  рқ‘“пүҢ  branch and the blue dots 

correspond to  рқ‘“пүҢ branch, respectively. 

 


