Strain Effects on Auger-Meitner Recombination in Silicon

Kyle Bushick1, 2 and Emmanouil Kioupakis1, a)

1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan,

Ann Arbor, MI, USA

2)Materials Science Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore,

CA, USA

(Dated: 13 December 2023)

We study the effects of compressive and tensile biaxial strain on direct and phonon-

assisted Auger-Meitner recombination (AMR) in silicon using first-principles calcula-

tions. We find that the application of strain has a non-trivial effect on the AMR rate.

For most AMR processes, the application of strain increases the AMR rate. However,

the recombination rate for the AMR process involving two holes and one electron is

suppressed by 38% under tensile strain. We further analyze the specific phonon con-

tributions that mediate the phonon-assisted AMR mechanism, demonstrating the

increased anisotropy under strain. Our results indicate that the application of tensile

strain increases the lifetime of minority electron carriers in p-type silicon, and can be

leveraged to improve the efficiency of silicon devices.

a)Electronic mail: kioup@umich.edu

1

arXiv:2309.09927v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  15 Dec 2023


Auger-Meitner recombination (AMR) is a non-radiative recombination process intrinsic to

semiconductor materials that involves three carriers. In AMR, an electron-hole pair recom-

bines across the band gap, transferring the excess energy through the Coulomb interaction

to a third carrier, either an electron or a hole, which is itself promoted to a higher energy

state. If the third carrier is an electron, we denote this as the electron-electron-hole (eeh)

process, while if the third carrier is a hole, we denote this as the hole-hole-electron (hhe) pro-

cess. Furthermore, AMR can occur either in a direct manner, where energy and momentum

are strictly conserved between the participating carriers, or in an indirect (phonon-assisted)

manner, where one of the carriers can absorb or emit a phonon, relaxing the momentum

conservation constraints and enabling excitations to a broader range of high-energy states.

Historically, this process has been known as Auger recombination, but the renaming to

Auger-Meitner aims to recognize the contributions of Lise Meitner in the discovery of the

effect.1 In silicon, AMR acts as a loss mechanism, limiting the efficiency of numerous devices

including solar cells,2–5 transistors,6,7 and diodes.6,8

In many functional applications, applying a small amount of strain is a technique that

can be used to tune the material properties and improve device performance.9–11 This is

the case both for silicon and for other materials.12–18 However, there is little work in the

literature on the effects of strain on AMR in silicon, a deficiency we aim to address in our

work. Ultimately, it is of interest to modulate the AMR rate in devices – either to mitigate

its effects as a non-radiative loss mechanism19–21 or to intentionally increase the generation

of hot carriers.22–24 In the case of silicon devices, we are mostly interested in the former.

Considering AMR is an intrinsic material property that is independent of defects present

in the material, engineering solutions that aim to improve the chemical purity or structural

quality are not viable methods to control the AMR rate. However, affecting the underlying

electronic structure is a viable option for controlling the AMR rate. As has been shown

in previous work on InGaAs/InGaAsP quantum well lasers, the application of compres-

sive strain is a viable strategy to suppress AMR by affecting the valence band curvature

and therefore the availability of holes that satisfy both momentum and energy conservation

constraints.25 While this specific AMR-suppression mechanism does not translate to bulk

silicon – for which direct hhe AMR is negligible compared to other AMR pathways26 – there

may be other modifications to the band structure that affect the AMR rate. Specifically, the

application of biaxial strain allows one to alter the valley and band degeneracy of electrons

2


and holes. In the case of the electrons in silicon, the six-fold valley degeneracy is split,

with the valleys along the direction of crystal compression (four in-plane for compressive

and two out-of-plane for tensile biaxial strain) lowering in energy. For holes, the valence

band maximum is at the Γ-point, so there is no valley degeneracy, however the applica-

tion of strain reduces the band degeneracy with one and two band(s) lowering in energy

under the application of compressive and tensile biaxial strain, respectively. These effects

are illustrated in Fig. 1 (we cover the strain effects on the phonon dispersion in the Sup-

plementary Material). In the context of AMR, these alterations to the band structure lead

to non-trivial impacts on the recombination rates, emphasizing the need for first-principles

characterization techniques.

FIG. 1. Effects of biaxial strain on the band structure of silicon. 1% compressive (a), unstrained

(b), and 1% tensile (c) conditions are shown. The left inset shows a zoomed view of the valence

band edges, while the right inset shows the relative occupation of the conduction band valleys in

the first Brillouin zone. The grey dotted lines are guides to the eye to show the conduction band

energy splitting.

In this Letter, we apply our first-principles methodology to characterize the effects of

compressive and tensile biaxial strain on both the direct and phonon-assisted AMR rate

in crystalline silicon. We show that the AMR coefficient increases for both eeh and hhe

AMR under compressive strain, as well as eeh AMR under tensile strain. Notably, we find

a ∼40% reduction in the hhe AMR coefficient under tensile strain. We also analyze the

contributions of different phonon modes to the phonon-assisted AMR process under various

strain conditions. Finally, we discuss how our findings can inform the application of strain

to improve silicon device performance.

Our calculation methodology uses eigenvalues, wave functions, and electron-phonon cou-

3


pling matrix elements generated by density functional theory (DFT) and density functional

perturbation theory (DFPT) calculations, which we obtain using the Quantum ESPRESSO

code27–29 within the local density approximation (LDA) for the exchange-correlation functional.30,31

We use a Troullier-Martins32 norm-conserving pseudo-potential throughout our calculations.

We use a relaxed lattice parameter of a = 5.379 ˚A for the unstrained structure. To obtain

the biaxially strained structures, we adjust the in-plane lattice constants (X and Y) by

∓1% and allow the out-of-plane Z direction to relax. This gives us an out-of-plane lattice

parameter of 5.420 ˚A for the compressive biaxial strain condition and 5.337 ˚A for the tensile

biaxial strain condition.

We chose to study this magnitude of strain because it is readily achievable in real systems

and leads to sizable valley (> 170 meV) and band (> 125 meV) energy splitting for the

electrons and holes, respectively (Fig. 1a,c). It is important to achieve splitting much larger

than kT (∼26 meV) to ensure that carriers selectively occupy the lower-energy states, since

otherwise the AMR rates would be approximately equal to those of unstrained Si. While

we expect a smooth transition from the unstrained to the 1% strain AMR values as energy

splitting goes from zero to >kT, once a substantial polarization of the state occupancies is

achieved, further increases to the strain are not expected to yield large variations in the AMR

coefficients. Since the spin-orbit splitting is only ∼45 meV in silicon,33,34 the band-structure

splitting effects are dominated by strain. Furthermore, work by Zacharias, Scheffler, and

Carbogno on unstrained silicon has shown that the electron-phonon renormalization of the

band gap is approximately 60 meV at 0 K and less than 100 meV at 300 K.35 The explicit

inclusion of these effects is beyond the scope of our work, but we expect the electron-phonon

renormalization to be similar for the energy-split states, and thus it should only have a

minor effect on the AMR coefficients in strained silicon. The 1% strain value is therefore

sufficiently high enough to achieve the full effects of strain on the AMR coefficients, while

simultaneously being low enough to realize experimentally.

We calculated the LDA eigenvalues on an 8 × 8 × 8 Brillouin-zone sampling grid and

interpolated them to fine grids using the maximally localized Wannier function method36 and

the Wannier90 code.37 While we performed G0W0 (GW) calculations to obtain quasiparticle

corrections to the LDA eigenenergies for all three structures, we found that in all cases the

GW corrections were effectively rigid shifts to the band gaps (Fig. S2). To avoid the added

complexity of performing Wannier-function interpolation on the GW quasiparticle energies

4


to arbitrary k-points, we opted to rigidly shift the band gaps to 1.00 eV for the compressed

system, 1.12 eV for the unstrained system, and 0.95 eV for the tensile system.
These

values were chosen because they are consistent with the experimental value for unstrained

silicon,38 the LDA band gap differences between the strained and unstrained structures, as

well as with experimental band-gap values for strained silicon reported in the literature.39 To

calculate the AMR coefficients, we used the same converged Brillouin zone sampling grids

of 50 × 50 × 50 and δ-function broadenings of 0.1-0.2 eV discussed in our previous work.26

We use a temperature of 300 K and free-carrier concentration of 1018 cm−3 throughout our

calculations. Under these conditions, Coulomb-enhancement effects to the AMR rate that

arise from many-body interactions are weak and can be safely ignored.26,40

FIG. 2. Effects of strain on the eeh and hhe AMR coefficients in silicon. The contributions from

the direct process are shown in gold, while the contributions from the phonon-assisted process are

shown in blue. Direct hhe is forbidden by momentum conservation under all strain conditions, and

only the hhe process is reduced by the application of tensile strain.

To perform our AMR calculations for strained silicon, we applied first- and second-order

time dependent perturbation theory in the Fermi’s golden rule framework, as outlined in

our previous work on unstrained silicon.26 From these calculations we obtain the AMR rate,

R = dN

dt = CV n3, where the carrier density n = N

V denotes the number of free carriers N per

volume V , and C is the AMR coefficient. For direct AMR, we make no assumptions about the

Brillouin-zone distribution of the free carriers as a function of strain conditions, and there are

therefore no differences in our approach compared to those discussed in Refs. 26 and 41. As

we show in the insets of Fig. 1 and Fig. S3 in greater detail, the majority (>97%) of electrons

5


Strain Condition Ceeh,dir Ceeh,pa
Chhe,dir
Chhe,pa

−1% strain
1.45
4.17
0.0000293
2.32

No strain
0.932
2.35
0.0000194
2.05

+1% strain
2.04
5.62
0.00000489
1.27

TABLE I. Calculated AMR coefficients under different strain conditions. All values are in units of

×10−31 cm6s−1.

occupy the lower-energy conduction band valley (while the holes are primarily restricted

to the top valence band).
Given this information and the assumptions needed for the

computational tractability of the phonon-assisted calculations (that the periodic part of the

wave functions of carriers are approximately equal to those of the nearest band extremum),

we restrict N C
valley = 4 for compressive strain and N C
valley = 2 for tensile strain. Similarly,

we restrict N V
band = 2 for compressive strain and N V
band = 1 for tensile strain. This captures

the effects of strain on the band structure while keeping the calculation computationally

feasible. We do not include the effects of spin-orbit splitting in our calculations, as the

energy splitting due to strain is approximately 3× stronger, as we discuss above.

Using our computational approach outlined above, we report the eeh and hhe AMR

rates across the three strain conditions (compressive, unstrained, and tensile) in Fig.
2

and Table I. We break down the total AMR coefficient in terms of the direct and phonon-

assisted contributions. As expected, our results for the unstrained system are consistent with

past work, both theoretical and experimental.26,42–44 The similarity between our unstrained

values and past results indicates the validity of using the LDA eigenvalues with a rigid shift

in place of the GW quasiparticle energies. Under the application of compressive strain,

we find Ceeh,dir increases by 56%, Ceeh,pa increases by 77%, Chhe,dir increases by 51%, and

Chhe,pa increases by 13%. In the case of tensile strain, we find Ceeh,dir increases by 119%,

Ceeh,pa increases by 139%, Chhe,dir decreases by 75%, and Chhe,pa decreases by 38%. Under

all strain conditions, the direct hhe AMR process is effectively forbidden due to momentum

conservation, and so hhe AMR is entirely accounted for by the phonon-assisted process.

As we show, applying strain generally increases the AMR rate, with the exception of hhe

under tensile strain. This is largely consistent with previous work on strained germanium,

which found that both direct and phonon-assisted AMR increased under strain, though

6


these results coincide with an indirect-to-direct band gap transition in germanium, which

we attribute as the cause for the differing behavior.45

Two competing effects alter the AMR rate due to the symmetry and degeneracy breaking

induced by strain: (1) selective occupation of bands with reweighted matrix elements, and

(2) a reduced number of recombination channels. The interplay between these two effects

is clearly seen in Fig. 3, where f -type (eeh) AMR is eliminated in the tensile condition,

but the strength of the g-type and intravalley processes is significantly enhanced. Note that

since both holes for hhe AMR occupy the same Γ valley, there is no distinction between

their initial valley arrangement. Further discussion of the valley analysis is included in the

Supplementary Material. Since we expect a decrease in AMR due to the reduction of re-

combination channels but consistently observe an increase in the AMR rates, we conclude

that the selective band occupancy dominates the effects of strain on AMR. However, the

non-trivial effects on the AMR coefficient that result from the competition and interplay be-

tween these strain-induced mechanisms highlights the need for the first-principles approach

employed in this investigation.

FIG. 3.
Breakdown of eeh AMR for direct and phonon-assisted processes in strained silicon.

The broken valley degeneracy affects the effective carrier concentration and available scattering

pathways for the low-energy electrons. The most notable effect is the elimination of f -type AMR

under tensile strain. The inset plot in (b) serves as a visual key for the different recombination

types, with the colors matching the bar colors (intravalley = blue, g-type = orange, f -type =

green).

An additional benefit of leveraging first-principles calculations is the ability to obtain in-

sights into the underlying mechanisms of AMR. Figure 4 details the contributions of different

phonons to the overall phonon-assisted AMR process, expressed in terms of distributions

7


FIG. 4. Phonon decomposition of the phonon-assisted eeh (solid black) and hhe (dashed red)

AMR coefficients. (a-c) show the dependence of the AMR coefficient on the phonon frequency for

the compressive, unstrained, and tensile systems. The distribution is mostly consistent across the

strain conditions, with the hhe process becoming relatively weaker compared to the eeh process

under strain. The eeh process under tensile strain shows the emergence of a new contribution

by phonons at 45 meV. (d-f) show the AMR distribution as a function of phonon wave-vector

magnitude across the three strain conditions. The qualitative observations are consistent with the

energy decomposition, though the tensile eeh process also shows a prominent peak corresponding

to q ≈ ∆Z.

over phonon energy and phonon momentum. The integration of these distributions yields

the total AMR coefficient. The three-dimensional momentum distribution is shown in Fig.

S4. We find that the distribution over phonon modes are reweighted through the applica-

tion of strain. These effects are most clearly seen in the eeh process under tensile strain,

but are present under all conditions. Of particular note for the phonon-assisted eeh AMR

under tensile strain is the emergence of a third peak at a phonon energy of 45 meV, as well

as a prominent renormalization at the phonon wave vector magnitude of 0.55 a.u.-1, which

corresponds to phonons with q ≈ ∆Z, i.e., the momentum of the low-energy out-of-plane

8


electron valley. The magnitude of this phonon mode contribution also indicates a larger

matrix element for this transition under tensile strain. The effects of compressive strain

on the distribution are less pronounced, which is intuitive given that the band structure

more closely resembles that of the unstrained system and no recombination pathways are

forbidden, unlike in the tensile case. We also analyze the excited electron distribution in

the Supplementary Material (Fig. S5), highlighting the anisotropy of the direct eeh AMR

process.

Our results not only provide insights into the microscopic mechanisms governing AMR

in strained silicon, but also into the potential application of strain to improve silicon device

performance. Indeed, silicon devices are incredibly varied and technologically critical. They

encompass diverse electronic and optoelectronic applications from solar cells to transistors,

playing a critical role in both our energy and computing infrastructure. In many of these

applications, AMR is known to act as a loss mechanism, which reduces their overall efficiency

and performance. This is notable in solar cells, transistors, thyristors, and p-n junctions

more generally.2–7,46 Unfortunately, it is challenging to adjust one intrinsic material property

(e.g., band gap, mobility, carrier lifetime) by strain in isolation. While we focus on the effects

of strain on AMR in this Letter, we note the fact that both compressive and tensile biaxial

strain decreases the band gap of silicon.
Other works have also discussed the effects of

strain on the carrier mobility, which is a property of great importance to many devices.47

Specifically, applying strain on the order of ∓1% leads to a reduction of the band gap on

the order of 150 meV and non-trivial changes to the electron and hole mobilities. While

the application of strain mostly leads to an increase in the AMR rate, we have shown that

1% tensile strain reduces the hhe AMR rate by 38%. Considering the combined effects of

tensile strain on increasing the in-plane electron mobility47 and suppressing the hhe AMR

rate (i.e., increasing the lifetime of electrons in p-type materials), strain engineering may

be a route to increase the performance of devices utilizing minority electron carriers in a

p-type region. We note, however, that tensile strain also reduces the out-of-plane electron

mobility.47 Unfortunately, it is unlikely this approach could be directly applied to the p-

type regions of silicon solar cells, where thicknesses on the order of 200 µm preclude the

coherent application of strain. The performance of other devices such as transistors, however,

which are significantly smaller, may be able to benefit by the application of tensile strain.

Indeed, any application where the ideality factor ranges between 2/3 and 1 (i.e., AMR is

9


the lifetime-limiting process) could leverage this strain engineering approach to improve

efficiency.2,8 Future studies may also investigate the non-trivial dependence of the AMR

coefficients on the magnitude of strain, optimizing the interplay between the various effects

for specific applications.

In summary, we apply our first-principles methodology to investigate the effects of com-

pressive and tensile biaxial strain on Auger-Meitner recombination in silicon. The applica-

tion of strain alters the electronic structure and leads to an increase in the AMR coefficient

in all cases except hhe AMR under tensile biaxial strain, where AMR is reduced by ∼40%.

We demonstrate that the effects of strain are non-trivial and give rise to qualitatively dis-

tinct behavior for the phonon-assisted AMR process. Our findings inform the application

of strain to affect device performance, highlighted by increased minority carrier lifetimes in

p-type regions.

See the Supplementary Material for additional information on (1) the strain effects on

the phonon dispersion (2) the quasiparticle corrections and band gap shifts, (3) the carrier

distribution changes under strain, (4) valley analysis of the electrons in the eeh process, (5)

three-dimensional plots of the phonon contributions, and (6) distribution of excited carriers.

The authors have no conflicts to disclose.

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding

author upon reasonable request.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank David Young for useful discussions. This work is supported as part of the Com-

putational Materials Sciences Program funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of

Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award No. DE-SC0020129. This work used resources

of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing (NERSC) Center, a DOE Office of

Science User Facility supported under Contract No. DE-AC02–05CH11231. K.B. acknowl-

edges the support of the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced

Scientific Computing Research, Department of Energy Computational Science Graduate

Fellowship under Award Number DE-SC0020347.
K.B.’s editing of this manuscript was

performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore

National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.

10


REFERENCES

1D. Matsakis, A. Coster, B. Laster,
and R. Sime, “A renaming proposal:
“The

Auger–Meitner effect”,” Physics Today 72, 10–11 (2019).

2M. Green, “Limits on the open-circuit voltage and efficiency of silicon solar cells imposed

by intrinsic Auger processes,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 31, 671–678 (1984).

3T. Tiedje, E. Yablonovitch, G. Cody, and B. Brooks, “Limiting efficiency of silicon solar

cells,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 31, 711–716 (1984).

4M. J. Kerr, A. Cuevas, and P. Campbell, “Limiting efficiency of crystalline silicon solar

cells due to Coulomb-enhanced Auger recombination,” Progress in Photovoltaics: Research

and Applications 11, 97–104 (2003).

5Q. Su, H. Lin, G. Wang, H. Tang, C. Xue, Z. Li, X. Xu, and P. Gao, “Limiting-Efficiency

Assessment on Advanced Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells with Auger Ideality Factor and

Wafer Thickness Modifications,” Authorea (2023), 10.22541/au.167930468.87567881/v1.

6M. Shibib, F. Lindholm, and J. Fossum, “Auger recombination in heavily doped shallow-

emitter silicon p-n-junction solar cells, diodes, and transistors,” IEEE Transactions on

Electron Devices 26, 1104–1106 (1979).

7M. Tyagi and R. V. Overstraeten, “Minority carrier recombination in heavily-doped sili-

con,” Solid-State Electronics 26, 577–597 (1983).

8M. Leilaeioun and Z. C. Holman, “Accuracy of expressions for the fill factor of a solar

cell in terms of open-circuit voltage and ideality factor,” Journal of Applied Physics 120,

123111 (2016).

9G. Tsutsui, S. Mochizuki, N. Loubet, S. W. Bedell, and D. K. Sadana, “Strain engineering

in functional materials,” AIP Advances 9, 030701 (2019).

10Z. Dai, L. Liu, and Z. Zhang, “Strain Engineering of 2D Materials: Issues and Opportu-

nities at the Interface,” Advanced Materials 31, 1805417 (2019).

11Y. Miao, Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, R. Shi,
and T. Zhang, “Strain Engineering: A Boosting

Strategy for Photocatalysis,” Advanced Materials 34, 2200868 (2022).

12H. Omi, D. J. Bottomley, Y. Homma,
and T. Ogino, “Wafer-scale strain engineering

on silicon for fabrication of ultimately controlled nanostructures,” Physical Review B 67,

115302 (2003).

13M. Ieong, B. Doris, J. Kedzierski, K. Rim, and M. Yang, “Silicon Device Scaling to the

11


Sub-10-nm Regime,” Science 306, 2057–2060 (2004).

14D. J. Paul, “Si/SiGe heterostructures: from material and physics to devices and circuits,”

Semiconductor Science and Technology 19, R75–R108 (2004).

15P. Chidambaram, C. Bowen, S. Chakravarthi, C. Machala, and R. Wise, “Fundamentals

of silicon material properties for successful exploitation of strain engineering in modern

CMOS manufacturing,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 53, 944–964 (2006).

16C. R¨odl, T. Sander, F. Bechstedt, J. Vidal, P. Olsson, S. Laribi, and J.-F. Guillemoles,

“Wurtzite silicon as a potential absorber in photovoltaics: Tailoring the optical absorption

by applying strain,” Physical Review B 92, 045207 (2015).

17S. Meesala, Y.-I. Sohn, B. Pingault, L. Shao, H. A. Atikian, J. Holzgrafe, M. G¨undo˘gan,

C. Stavrakas, A. Sipahigil, C. Chia, R. Evans, M. J. Burek, M. Zhang, L. Wu, J. L. Pacheco,

J. Abraham, E. Bielejec, M. D. Lukin, M. Atat¨ure, and M. Lonˇcar, “Strain engineering

of the silicon-vacancy center in diamond,” Physical Review B 97, 205444 (2018).

18W. Cai, J. Wang, Y. He, S. Liu, Q. Xiong, Z. Liu,
and Q. Zhang, “Strain-Modulated

Photoelectric Responses from a Flexible α-In2Se3/3R MoS2 Heterojunction,” Nano-Micro

Letters 13, 74 (2021).

19A. M. Itsuno, J. D. Phillips,
and S. Velicu, “Design of an Auger-Suppressed Unipolar

HgCdTe NBνN Photodetector,” Journal of Electronic Materials 41, 2886–2892 (2012).

20W. K. Bae, L. A. Padilha, Y.-S. Park, H. McDaniel, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga, and V. I.

Klimov, “Controlled Alloying of the Core–Shell Interface in CdSe/CdS Quantum Dots for

Suppression of Auger Recombination,” ACS Nano 7, 3411–3419 (2013).

21J. Piprek, “Analysis of efficiency limitations in high-power InGaN/GaN laser diodes,”

Optical and Quantum Electronics 48, 471 (2016).

22R. Singh, W. Liu, J. Lim, I. Robel, and V. I. Klimov, “Hot-electron dynamics in quantum

dots manipulated by spin-exchange Auger interactions,” Nature Nanotechnology 14, 1035–

1041 (2019).

23C. Livache, W. D. Kim, H. Jin, O. V. Kozlov, I. Fedin, and V. I. Klimov, “High-efficiency

photoemission from magnetically doped quantum dots driven by multi-step spin-exchange

Auger ionization,” Nature Photonics 16, 433–440 (2022).

24S. Du, J. Yin, H. Xie, Y. Sun, T. Fang, Y. Wang, J. Li, D. Xiao, X. Yang, S. Zhang,

D. Wang, W. Chen, W.-Y. Yin,
and R. Zheng, “Auger scattering dynamic of photo-

excited hot carriers in nano-graphite film,” Applied Physics Letters 121, 181104 (2022).

12


25W. W. Lui, T. Yamanaka, Y. Yoshikuni, S. Seki, and K. Yokoyama, “Optimum strain for

the suppression of Auger recombination effects in compressively strained InGaAs/InGaAsP

quantum well lasers,” Applied Physics Letters 64, 1475–1477 (1994).

26K. Bushick and E. Kioupakis, “Phonon-assisted Auger-Meitner Recombination in Silicon

from First Principles,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 076902 (2023).

27P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L.

Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. D. Corso, S. D. Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi,

R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos,

N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia,

S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, and R. M. Wentzcov-

itch, “QUANTUM ESPRESSO: A modular and open-source software project for quantum

simulations of materials,” Journal of Physics Condensed Matter 21, 395502 (2009).

28P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra,

R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, N. Colonna, I. Carnimeo, A. D. Corso,

S. de Gironcoli, P. Delugas, R. A. DiStasio, A. Ferretti, A. Floris, G. Fratesi, G. Fu-

gallo, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, F. Giustino, T. Gorni, J. Jia, M. Kawamura, H.-Y. Ko,

A. Kokalj, E. K¨u¸c¨ukbenli, M. Lazzeri, M. Marsili, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, N. L. Nguyen,

H.-V. Nguyen, A. O. de-la Roza, L. Paulatto, S. Ponc´e, D. Rocca, R. Sabatini, B. Santra,

M. Schlipf, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, I. Timrov, T. Thonhauser, P. Umari, N. Vast,

X. Wu,
and S. Baroni, “Advanced capabilities for materials modelling with Quantum

ESPRESSO,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 465901 (2017).

29P. Giannozzi, O. Baseggio, P. Bonf`a, D. Brunato, R. Car, I. Carnimeo, C. Cavazzoni,

S. de Gironcoli, P. Delugas, F. F. Ruffino, A. Ferretti, N. Marzari, I. Timrov, A. Urru,

and S. Baroni, “Quantum ESPRESSO toward the exascale,” The Journal of Chemical

Physics 152, 154105 (2020).

30D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, “Ground State of the Electron Gas by a Stochastic

Method,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 566–569 (1980).

31J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger, “Self-interaction correction to density-functional approxima-

tions for many-electron systems,” Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048–5079 (1981).

32N. Troullier and J. L. Martins, “Efficient pseudopotentials for plane-wave calculations,”

Phys. Rev. B 43, 1993–2006 (1991).

33G. Bona and F. Meier, “Observation of the spin-orbit splitting at the valence band edge of

13


silicon by spin-polarized photoemission,” Solid State Communications 55, 851–855 (1985).

34S. Ponc´e, F. Macheda, E. R. Margine, N. Marzari, N. Bonini, and F. Giustino, “First-

principles predictions of Hall and drift mobilities in semiconductors,” Phys. Rev. Res. 3,

043022 (2021).

35M. Zacharias, M. Scheffler, and C. Carbogno, “Fully anharmonic nonperturbative theory

of vibronically renormalized electronic band structures,” Phys. Rev. B 102, 045126 (2020).

36N. Marzari, A. A. Mostofi, J. R. Yates, I. Souza, and D. Vanderbilt, “Maximally localized

Wannier functions: Theory and applications,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1419–1475 (2012).

37G. Pizzi, V. Vitale, R. Arita, S. Bl¨ugel, F. Freimuth, G. G´eranton, M. Gibertini, D. Gresch,

C. Johnson, T. Koretsune, J. Iba˜nez-Azpiroz, H. Lee, J.-M. Lihm, D. Marchand, A. Mar-

razzo, Y. Mokrousov, J. I. Mustafa, Y. Nohara, Y. Nomura, L. Paulatto, S. Ponc´e, T. Pon-

weiser, J. Qiao, F. Th¨ole, S. S. Tsirkin, M. Wierzbowska, N. Marzari, D. Vanderbilt,

I. Souza, A. A. Mostofi, and J. R. Yates, “Wannier90 as a community code: new features

and applications,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 32, 165902 (2020).

38W. Bludau, A. Onton,
and W. Heinke, “Temperature dependence of the band gap of

silicon,” Journal of Applied Physics 45, 1846–1848 (1974).

39J. Mungu´ıa, G. Bremond, J. M. Bluet, J. M. Hartmann,
and M. Mermoux, “Strain

dependence of indirect band gap for strained silicon on insulator wafers,” Applied Physics

Letters 93, 102101 (2008).

40A. Richter, S. W. Glunz, F. Werner, J. Schmidt, and A. Cuevas, “Improved quantitative

description of Auger recombination in crystalline silicon,” Phys. Rev. B 86, 165202 (2012).

41E. Kioupakis, D. Steiauf, P. Rinke, K. T. Delaney, and C. G. V. D. Walle, “First-principles

calculations of indirect Auger recombination in nitride semiconductors,” Physical Review

B 92, 035207 (2015).

42J. Dziewior and W. Schmid, “Auger coefficients for highly doped and highly excited sili-

con,” Applied Physics Letters 31, 346–348 (1977).

43R. H¨acker and A. Hangleiter, “Intrinsic upper limits of the carrier lifetime in silicon,”

Journal of Applied Physics 75, 7570–7572 (1994).

44M. Govoni, I. Marri, and S. Ossicini, “Auger recombination in Si and GaAs semiconduc-

tors: Ab initio results,” Physical Review B 84, 075215 (2011).

45S. Dominici, H. Wen, F. Bertazzi, M. Goano, and E. Bellotti, “Numerical evaluation of

Auger recombination coefficients in relaxed and strained germanium,” Applied Physics

14


Letters 108, 211103 (2016).

46S. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2006).

47D. Yu, Y. Zhang, and F. Liu, “First-principles study of electronic properties of biaxially

strained silicon: Effects on charge carrier mobility,” Physical Review B 78, 245204 (2008).

15


Supplementary Material for Strain Effects on Auger-Meitner

Recombination in Silicon

Kyle Bushick1,2 and Emmanouil Kioupakis1

1) Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,

USA

2) Materials Science Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA

Strain Effects on Silicon Phonon Dispersion

While the application of 1% biaxial strain leads to significant qualitative differences in

the electronic band structure, the effects on the phonon dispersion are less notable, and

modify the phonon energies by at most ∼1.2 meV, though for the lower-energy modes,

which dominate the phonon-assisted AMR process, the splitting is about half as large.

These shifts in the phonon energies are consistent with the shifts of the peak in Fig. 4(a-

c), which are at 17.2, 18.2, and 18.4 meV for the compressive, unstrained, and tensile

conditions, respectively. As a result, it affects the dominant phonon occupancies (and hence

the corresponding phonon-assisted AMR coefficients) by no more than 9%.

While the phonon splitting is small, the lifting of degeneracies for both electron bands

and phonon modes will affect the electron-phonon matrix elements. We expect that the

electron-phonon matrix elements will increase between states of the same symmetry while

being suppressed between states of different symmetries. This effect is combined with the

symmetry-breaking effects on the Coulomb matrix elements to yield the variations to the

AMR coefficients in Figs. 2 and 3.

16


FIG. S1.
Phonon dispersion along high-symmetry paths for silicon under (a) compressive, (b)

unstrained, and (c) tensile strain conditions. The strain induced symmetry breaking leads to small

variations (< 2 meV) to the phonon energies. Plots (d-f) show the details of the optical branches,

where the effects of strain are most prominent.

GW Quasiparticle Corrections

We compute the GW corrections to the local density approximation (LDA) band-structure

eigenvalues under all strain conditions tested. We perform these calculations on an 8×8×8

Brillouin-zone (BZ) sampling grid with a 35 Ry dielectric-matrix cutoff and a 30 Ry screened

Coulomb cutoff. As we show in Fig. S2, the scissor correction slope is effectively zero for

all bands, and therefore the effects of GW corrections can be readily approximated with a

rigid shift of the eigenvalues across all strain conditions.

17


FIG. S2. Difference between the GW quasiparticle energies and the LDA eigenvalues as a function

of LDA eigenvalue energy shown within 1 eV from the corresponding band edges for (a) compressive,

(b) unstrained, and (c) tensile strain conditions.

Initial Electron Distribution for Direct AMR

Under the ±1% strain conditions we tested, the valley splitting is strong enough that the vast

majority of electrons occupy the low-energy valleys. Figure S3 shows the visual enumeration

of the BZ sampling k-points that fall within our selected energy cutoff – within approximately

200 meV of the conduction band minimum – accounting for 99.9% of the charge density.

Specifically, 796 of 804 sampling k-points in the compressive system and 345 of 354 sampling

k-points in the tensile system belonging to the low-energy valleys. Therefore, the assumption

we make for the phonon-assisted calculations – that the periodic part of the wave functions of

all electrons can be approximated by that at the extremum of the low-energy corresponding

valley – is justified.

FIG. S3. Occupation/sampling of conduction band valleys under strain conditions. The low-energy

valleys account for the vast majority of contributing electronic states.

18


Valley Analysis for eeh AMR

We extend our valley analysis of the eeh process in unstrained silicon26 to the strained

conditions. We follow the same naming convention used for phonon-scattering processes to

delineate the different valley arrangements of the initial states of the two low-energy electrons

(also shown visually in the inset of Fig. 3b of the main text): the intravalley process (blue)

corresponds to both electrons originating in the same conduction band valley, the g-type

process (orange) is for electrons that originate in opposite conduction band valleys, and

finally in the f -type process (green) the electrons originate in perpendicular valleys. As we

show in Fig. 3 of the main text, for both the direct and phonon-assisted eeh processes,

the f -type recombination – involving electrons from perpendicular valleys – is effectively

eliminated for the tensile-strain condition despite the fact that it is the dominant pathway

in the unstrained crystal. While this is the most drastic example of strain effects, we also

observe a notable increase in the intravalley process under both compressive and tensile

strain conditions. For direct eeh, this increase is approximately proportional to the electron

concentration increase in each valley (1.28× for compressive and 3.6× for tensile). These

increases are approximately 3× larger for the phonon-assisted process, with scaling of 4.23×

and 8.59× for the compressive and tensile cases, respectively. Overall, the total eeh AMR

coefficient under strain conditions increases with respect to unstrained silicon because the

effects of symmetry breaking due to strain increases the matrix elements and outweighs the

decrease in available recombination pathways by the restriction of electron occupation to

fewer valleys.

Phonon Analysis for AMR

While we present the AMR distribution over phonon energies and wave-vector magni-

tudes in the main text, it is also instructive to examine the three-dimensional distribution

over phonon wave vectors in Fig. S4. The central (unstrained) figures are consistent with our

previous study,26 while the compressive and tensile plots show the anisotropy now present in

the participatory phonons – the compressive strain condition is now dominated by phonons

with primarily in-plane wave vectors, while the tensile strain condition shows stronger se-

lectivity for out-of-plane phonon wave vectors. These preferential selections are consistent

with the significant increase in the potency of the g-type process under strain.

19


FIG. S4.
The contributions by different phonon wave vectors throughout the first BZ for the

phonon-assisted eeh and hhe AMR processes as a function of strain conditions. Brighter coloration

indicates a stronger contribution to the phonon-assisted AMR process.

Excited Carrier Distributions

Our methodology also allows us to examine the BZ distribution of the excited carriers. We

find that the phonon-assisted distributions under all strain conditions are nearly equivalent

for both the eeh and the hhe processes.
This finding can be explained because strain

affects the energy offsets at the VBM and CBM by ∼150 meV, but the excited carrier is

promoted to a state ∼1 eV into the band. Given that the additional momentum provided by

phonons allows carriers to effectively access the entire momentum space, we do not expect

significant alterations to the excited carrier distributions. On the other hand, the direct eeh

process is more strictly bounded by momentum conservation, and given the anisotropy in

the starting electron distribution, we do find a consistent anisotropy in the excited electron

distribution. We show both the direct and phonon-assisted excited electron distributions for

the eeh process in Fig. S5, omitting the hhe figures since only the phonon-assisted process is

relevant and the distribution of holes is consistent across the strain conditions. Comparing to

the unstrained case, we demonstrate that, even though strain does limit the access of direct

eeh AMR to some excited states due to lack of momentum conservation, the features of the

total excited electron distribution (which is dominated by the phonon-assisted contribution)

remain qualitatively similar to the unstrained case.

20


FIG. S5. The distribution of AMR-excited electrons throughout the first BZ for the direct and

phonon-assisted eeh processes under compressive and tensile strain compared to the unstrained

condition. A cutaway is made to show the internal structure. The anisotropy of the low-energy

electrons paired with momentum conservation constraints gives rise to the anisotropy of the excited

direct Auger-Meitner electrons, while the phonon-assisted Auger-Meitner electrons are able to

scatter to states throughout the entire BZ.

21


