Scalable and Stable Ferroelectric Non-Volatile Memory at > 500 °C

Dhiren K. Pradhan,1,a David C. Moore,2,a Gwangwoo Kim,1 Yunfei He, 1 Pariasadat 

Musavigharavi,1,3 Kwan-Ho Kim,1 Nishant Sharma, 1 Zirun Han,1,4 Xingyu Du,1 Venkata S. Puli,

2 Eric A. Stach, 3 W. Joshua Kennedy,2,* Nicholas R. Glavin,2,* Roy H. Olsson III,1,* Deep 

Jariwala1,*

1Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,

19104, USA

2Materials and Manufacturing Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH, 45433, 

USA

3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 

USA

4Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA

Non-volatile memory (NVM) devices that reliably operate at temperatures above 300 oC are 
currently non-existent and remains a critically unmet challenge in the development of high-
temperature (T) resilient electronics, necessary for many emerging, complex computing and 
sensing in harsh environments. Ferroelectric AlxSc1-xN exhibits strong potential for utilization in
NVM devices operating at very high temperatures (> 500 °C) given its stable and high remnant 
polarization (PR) above 100 μC/cm2 with demonstrated ferroelectric transition temperature (TC) > 
1000 °C. Here, we demonstrate an Al0.68Sc0.32N ferroelectric diode based NVM device that can
reliably operate with clear ferroelectric switching up to 600 °C with distinguishable On and Off 
states. The coercive field (EC) from the Pulsed I-V measurements is found to be -5.84 (EC-) and 
+5.98 (EC+) (+/- 0.1) MV/cm at room temperature (RT) and found to decrease with increasing
temperature up to 600 °C. The devices exhibit high remnant polarizations (> 100 μC/cm2) which 
are stable at high temperatures. At 500 °C, our devices show 1 million read cycles and stable On-
Off ratio above 1 for > 6 hours. Finally, the operating voltages of our AlScN ferrodiodes are < 15 
V at 600 °C which is well matched and compatible with Silicon Carbide (SiC) based high 
temperature logic technology, thereby making our demonstration a major step towards 
commercialization of NVM integrated high-T computers. 

a Dhiren K. Pradhan and David C. Moore contributed equally to this work.

*Authors 
to 
whom 
correspondence 
should 
be 
addressed:
william.kennedy.21@afrl.af.mil,

nicholas.glavin.1@afrl.af.mil, rolsson@seas.upenn.edu, dmj@seas.upenn.edu.


Introduction:
Non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies that reliably operate at temperatures above 300 oC are 

not available commercially and remain a critical gap in the design of extreme environment 

electronics.1,2 There are numerous emerging harsh environment applications including aerospace, 

space exploration, oil and gas exploration, nuclear plants, mining and other applications that 

require complex computing and sensing capabilities in-situ.3-7 Current Silicon (Si)-based 

micro(nano)electronics, utilizing complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology, 

encounter reliability challenges above 200 °C and cannot retain their functional properties at high 

temperatures as the number of thermally induced carriers exceeds the doping concentration level.6,8

Extensive research has led to well-established wide-band gap semiconductor material solutions

e.g. Silicon Carbide (SiC) for logic transistors, which can effectively operate at temperatures as 

high as 800 °C,3,9-11 but the absence of NVM devices suitable for information storage hinders the 

execution of intricate computing operations at these elevated temperatures.

Incumbent nonvolatile random-access memory (NVRAM) technologies relying on 

magnetic, FLASH, phase-change, and resistive switching mechanisms rapidly degrade at  < 300 

°C.12-15 SiC electronics, being the most mature and preferred high-temperature logic platform, 

further emphasizes the importance of this pursuit. 11 Microelectromechanical system-based flash 

memory (MEM-FLASH) and nanogap resistance switching (NGS) technologies show promise for 

NVM applications at high temperatures.8,16 However, these approaches have drawbacks due to the 

presence of moving parts and the challenges associated with operating in diverse atmospheres.

Among the NVM technologies explored at temperatures exceeding 300 °C, three have received 

significant attention: flash memory, resistive memory based on oxides, and ferroelectric 

memory.17-20 Among these, only flash memory, which operates at approximately 200 °C, is a

commercially available product.1 Therefore, active research and development is necessary to 

produce stable and scalable NVM devices at temperatures > 200 °C while ensuring voltage and 

process compatibility with SiC logic, which is the most mature transistor technology capable of 

high-temperature operation.

Ferroelectric materials exhibit remanent polarization, field-driven switching, and the ability 

to retain the switched state for an extended time. This makes them well-suited for low-power 

nonvolatile memory applications as they also exhibit fast switching speed, low switching energy, 

and have potential for multibit operation.21-23 To meet the temperature demands of harsh 


environment applications, ferroelectric materials with high Curie temperatures (TC) are required 

as ferroelectric polarization and reliable switching cannot be observed if the device temperature 

exceeds the TC.24 While numerous works on perovskite oxide and hafnia/zirconia based fluorite 

oxide ferroelectric materials have shown ferroelectricity at high temperatures none have been able 

to demonstrate stable and scalable NVM device operation at  500 °C. This is mainly due to material 

drawbacks such as high atomic diffusivity, low-coercive fields, low-remnant polarizations and 

lower ferroelectric TC of the perovskite and fluorite oxide ferroelectric materials. 

In contrast wurtzite structured III-Nitride based ferroelectric AlxSc1-xN materials have

strong potential to be utilized in NVM devices, which can operate at very high temperatures as 

they concurrently exhibits high PR > 100 μC/ cm2 , large coercive field (EC) >2 MV/cm, and a very 

high ferroelectric transition temperature (TC) > 1000 °C.23 Al0.68Sc0.32N-based scaled ferroelectric 

memory devices have already been demonstrated in multiple reports with robust ferroelectricity 

even demonstrated in 5 nm thick films.21-23,25,26 Although in-situ measurements were not 

performed, it was observed that AlxSc1-xN thin films with thicknesses exceeding 400 nm, grown 

on molybdenum bottom electrodes, exhibited structural and polarization stability at temperatures 

as high as 1025 °C.27,28 Minimal changes in the remanent polarization values has been observed 

up to 400 °C for 225 nm thick ferroelectric Al0.70Sc0.30N film on a Pt (111) bottom electrode.29 The 

existence of stable and large PR at elevated temperature (> 400 °C) and thermal stability of AlxSc1-

xN up to 1100 °C make this a promising avenue for storing information in computing applications 

in harsh environments (> 500 °C). 28-30

Here, we demonstrate a 45 nm thick Al0.68Sc0.32N ferroelectric diode based NVM device

that can operate up to 600 °C at ≤ 20 V operation, ensuring compatibility with high T SiC logic 

devices.9-11
The
devices are composed of metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structures
of 

Ni/Al0.68Sc0.32N (45 nm)/Pt (111) grown on 4” Silicon wafers. We report detailed temperature 

dependent ferroelectric and NVM characteristics up to 600 °C in-situ. The temperature dependent 

DC I-V curves exhibit ferroelectric diode behavior with clear ferroelectric switching up to 600 °C

with distinguishable ON and OFF states. At 500 °C, these devices show an unprecedented 1 million 

read cycles and stable On-Off ratio for > 6 hours.


Results and Discussion:

Figure 1. (a). Schematic (b) AFM height image (c) a composite image of the AlScN device showing each 

layer (on the left is cross sectional TEM and on the right is a labeled schematic and on top is an optical 

microscopic image) (d) cross sectional TEM image of the Ni/Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt (111) MIM device.

A schematic depiction of the Ni/Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt NVM devices investigated in this study is shown 

in Fig. 1(a). First, a 45 nm thick Al0.68Sc0.32N film was deposited by co-sputtering from separate 

Al and Sc targets onto a commercially available 150 nm Pt(111)/Ti/SiO2 on Si(100) substrate.21,22

Top electrodes (TE) were then patterned using standard photolithography, followed by sputtering 


of Ni (100 nm) metal top electrodes and a lift-off process. Circular top Ni electrodes of various 

sizes were patterned on the AlScN surface (further details in supplementary Fig. S1). Fig. 1(b) 

presents the surface morphology of the top AlScN layer in the Ni/AlScN/Pt device. Surface 

topography reveals a smooth and uniform surface with a root mean squared roughness (Rrms) of ~

2.4 nm. The heterostructure's upper surface exhibits nano-scale smoothness and homogeneity, 

devoid of any microcracks, pores, or holes. A composite image of the AlScN MIM device displaying

each layer with a cross sectional TEM image on the left and a labeled schematic on the right with an 

overlaying optical microscopic image of the top surface of AlScN. A cross sectional TEM image of the 

MIM device is shown in Fig. 1(d). The TEM image confirms the existence of all the layers and

their respective thicknesses. The thickness of the Al0.68Sc0.32N layer was found to be ~ 45 (±2) nm. 

A native oxide layer of thickness ~ 4 nm was observed on the surface of AlScN film as the films 

were exposed to air prior to top Ni electrode deposition. The cross-sectional TEM image recorded 

at high resolution is also shown in Fig. S2 (further details in supplementary Fig. S2).


Figure 2. (a) Quasi-DC current (I) versus voltage (V) at selected temperatures (b) Coercive Field versus 

temperature (c) On and Off current (d) On-Off ratio at 5 V read voltage as a function of temperature for the 

Ni/Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt (111) MIM device.

To investigate the impact of temperature on ferroelectric diode characteristics, ferroelectric 

switching, and leakage current behavior, quasi-DC (0.01 Hz) I–V hysteresis measurements were 

performed at different temperatures (25-600 °C) on the MIM devices (Fig. 2(a)). Upon a positive 

voltage sweep (1 to 2: black arrows in the figure), the device undergoes a transition from high-to-

low resistance state, accompanied by a polarity shift from a negative-forward diode to a positive-

forward diode. Likewise, during a negative voltage sweep, the device exhibits a polarity change 

from a positive-forward diode to a negative-forward diode. At all temperatures, ferroelectric diode-

like behavior can be clearly observed in the Al0.68Sc0.32N devices from the change in the resistance 

upon ferroelectric switching. Positive coercive field (EC+) and negative coercive field (EC-) values 

were calculated using the first derivative of current with respect to voltage (further details in 

supplementary Figs. S3 and S4) and their temperature dependence of EC+ and EC- is depicted in 

Fig. 2 (b). The EC+ values at room temperature (RT, ~25 °C) and at 600 °C were found to be 3.16

and 2.05 (+/- 0.1) MV/cm, respectively. The EC- values at RT and at 500 °C were observed to be -

2.94 and -1.88 (+/- 0.1) MV/cm, respectively. Note that the EC- value at 600 °C is not shown Fig. 

2 (b) as it is inconclusive. Both EC+ and EC- decrease linearly with increasing temperature, 

indicating the increased thermal energy overcomes the activation barrier and facilitates the crystal 

dipole transformation associated with domain switching, matching observations previously 

reported in similar devices.29,31 The reduction of EC at high temperatures can also be correlated to 

the increased thermally activated domain wall motion.32 This appears to correlate with the Curie-

Weiss law far away from critical behavior as has been reported in other ferroelectric materials,33,34

suggesting that the devices would function well above 600 °C, which is the maximum temperature 

of the probe station used in this work. To further corroborate the ferroelectric behavior of the MIM 

devices the voltage dependence of capacitance (C–V) measurement was carried out and it exhibits 

a butterfly shaped loop indicating a non-linear capacitor. The decrease of capacitance with 

increasing of applied voltage, demonstrating ferroelectric polarization switching (see further 

details in supplementary Fig. S5) is observed.


Fig. 2 (c) shows the temperature dependence of On and Off currents at 5V read voltage, 

with both the On and Off currents increasing with rising temperature. The On-Off ratio of the 

AlScN MIM devices at 5V read voltage was calculated, and its temperature dependence is 

presented in Fig. 2 (d). The device exhibited an On-Off ratio of 8.06 at RT and 1.87 at 600 °C, and 

it decreases with increasing temperature. This reduction in On-Off ratio primarily results from an 

increase in overall leakage current arising from increasing thermal energy which reduces activation 

barrier for hopping or defect assisted tunneling transport in the AlScN.29 De-trapping of charges 

owing to domain wall motion and relaxation of the AlScN crystal lattice around defect sites may 

also contribute to an overall increase in current at high temperatures. A theoretical analysis based 

on the Poole-Frenkel emission model regarding the decrease of the On-Off ratio with increasing

temperature is included in the supplementary material in Fig. S6. Regardless, while the engineering 

of devices with enhanced On-Off ratios is the subject of an ongoing investigation and will be the 

subject of a follow up work, the absolute current difference does not diminish with increase of 

temperature (further details in supplementary Fig. S7). We suggest that a practical MIM device

integrated with logic transistors could utilize a reference capacitor in the Off state to subtract a 

baseline and read successfully at all temperatures between RT and 600 °C.


Figure 3. (a) Pulsed IV current density (J) versus electric field (E) at different temperatures (b) Pulsed IV 

current density (J) versus time (c) Coercive field (EC) vs temperature (d) PUND traces at select temperatures 

(e) Remnant polarization vs PUND voltage for each temperature and (f) Remnant polarization vs.

temperature measured at EC * 1.26 for relative consistency. Note that positive PR values at 300 °C and 

beyond are inconclusive due to the large leakage currents observed at high temperatures.

Pulsed-IV, in contrast to quasi DC-IV, provides a dynamic characterization approach to 

investigate the electrical responses of ferroelectric devices under high voltage ramp rates, allowing 

the differentiation of ferroelectric switching dynamics from leakage and capacitive charging 

contributions. We performed pulsed-IV measurements across a temperature range from RT (~25

°C) to 600 °C in 100 °C increments. We used 10 kHz excitation signals on 100 µm diameter 

devices, incrementally increasing the excitation voltage until the device failed. At this ramp rate, 

leakage current was negligible compared to ferroelectric switching and capacitive charging 

currents until one reaches high voltages comparable to dielectric breakdown voltages, enabling 

direct observation of the switching voltage. Fig. 3(a and b) depicts selected traces before the onset 

of large leakage current, displaying the EC as the maximum and minimum values for on and off 

switching, respectively. The EC+ value at RT and at 600 °C are found to be 5.98 and 4.47 (+/- 0.1) 

MV/cm, respectively whereas the EC- values at RT and at 600 °C are observed to be -5.83 and -

3.50 (+/- 0.1) MV/cm, respectively. These values are well matched with the previous reports.21,22,30

The peak current calculated from Fig. 3 (b) as a function of temperature is presented in Fig. S8. 

As has previously been observed with similar devices35 apparent EC increased with ramp rate 

(further details with various ramp rates are available in supplementary Fig. S9). Fig. 3(c) presents 

the measured EC+ and EC- plotted against temperature, values derived from the pulsed-IV as shown 

in in Fig. S10 with both exhibiting a linear reduction with respect to temperature as were observed 

with the DC-IV.

Positive-Up Negative-Down (PUND) measurements offer a time-resolved approach to probe 

the signature of ferroelectricity and to explore the polarization dynamics of AlScN ferroelectric 

devices, allowing observation of the ferroelectric response separated from leakage and capacitive 

charging.36 We performed PUND measurements at each temperature, starting at 5V pulse

amplitude, and increasing amplitude until device failure. The PUND measurement with voltage 

pulses and the current traces performed at RT are shown in Fig. S11. Fig. 3(d) illustrates select 


traces that clearly demonstrate ferroelectric switching for both positive and negative voltage pulses

up to 600 °C. Given that the onset voltage for switching and leakage both vary with temperature, 

we compare the PUND results using pulse voltages normalized to the onset of diode behavior, 

defined as the point where the pulse current becomes three times larger than the capacitive 

charging current as shown in Fig. S12. PUND traces selected as "saturated" have maximum 

voltages of 126% of this onset value for each temperature. These onset voltages were found to be 

consistent with the pulsed-IV results, dropping approximately 1.3 V per 100 °C increase. We chose

126% to create the most robust and comprehensive dataset, as this voltage represents the maximum 

similar saturation available at all temperatures, as the devices do not fully saturate before device 

failure. Fig. 3(e) illustrates the switched polarization (2PR) traces at all voltages and temperatures, 

with each trace ending at the point of device failure. Fig. 3(f) plots the remnant polarization versus 

temperature for both the P-U and N-D pulses. The positive and negative PR values were found to 

be 120 and -128 μC/cm2 at room temperature that matches well with the previous reports.21,23 As 

predicted, the magnitudes of both increased slightly with temperature due to the rise in overall 

leakage current, with the positive PR values being more affected by leakage at 300 °C and beyond 

making the positive PR values unreliable at elevated temperature.31


Figure 4. (a) >1M read endurance cycles at 5 V read voltage 500 °C (b) Retention behavior at 5 V read 

voltage at 500 °C (c) Pulse IV survival tests during 19 V write cycling at 500 °C. (d) Positive and 

negative switching voltages from test pulse IV vs. number of write cycles.

While the capacitors breakdown near the large fields required for writing, for a FE diode 

read operations can be achieved at low voltages that do not induce failure. Reads taken at 5V yield 

a current density of 10-17 mA/cm2, providing a current of 3-6 µA for 100 µm diameter pads, 

depending on the device's polarization state. This was sufficient for measurement without stressing 

the device. The evolution of these currents over cycles and time is shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), 

respectively, at 500 °C (representative current vs. time data available in Fig S13). The 1M read 

retention measurement was performed with separate runs for the On and Off devices due to timing 

restrictions on the DAQ. Greater than 1M cycles of 100 µs width were successfully read over the 

course of approximately two minutes, showing a modest decrease in the On-state current within 

the first 20k cycles, followed by a slight continuing decrease in both On and Off-state current 

density. We attribute this slope to AlScN self-annealing at high temperature, though the higher 


drop in the On-state device likely indicates heightened domain relaxation. The 6-hour retention

test (Fig. 4(b)) was performed simultaneously with On and Off devices, but due to limitations in 

the hardware, a several-minute gap occurred between the write state and the read tests. A cluster 

of 25 consecutive 5 V pulses of 100 µs width were performed every 15 seconds and averaged to 

produce the current data. The On-state current continues to drop throughout the test, reducing the 

On-Off ratio to only 1.15 by the end, but a detectable gap is still evident. Improvements in the On-

Off ratio and retention are subjects of ongoing research. However, even at this level and with the 

use of a reference pad, the state remains readable for logic device purposes. The On-Off ratio at 

RT was found to be ~ 8 and the retention behavior at RT is presented in Fig. S14.

Write longevity (Fig. 4(c) and (d)) was found to be sensitive to both write voltage and 

increasing temperature. Write endurance tests were performed in groups of 100 write pulses, 

followed by a test pulsed-IV to determine whether the device survived and observe any changes

in device properties. At RT on 100 µm diameter pads, 25 V write pulses survived for 6033 ± 379 

cycles (further details in supplementary Fig. S15). At 500 °C, devices survived 1433 ± 413 write 

cycles at 19V (Fig 4(c)) and 1233 ± 58 cycles at 20V write voltage. The EC values for the positive 

switching were observed to shift more than the negative EC during the write endurance testing, 

decreasing from 4.72 MV/cm (21.25 V) to 4.41 MV/cm (19.85 V) throughout the run, matching 

previous literature.29 The wakeup effect is observed in the first few cycles(further details in 

supplementary Fig. S16), but the high-temperature long-term EC+ drift is much higher than 

observed at RT (see supplementary Fig. S16) and has a reverse trend at the onset of EC-, which 

may be due to repeated cycles inducing domain wall motion which de-pins domains.37 However, 

no evident change occurred just before failure, and no obvious sign of impending failure is 

observed in the previous pulse. The precise mechanisms underlying the failure of these devices at 

high voltage and after numerous cycles, as well as strategies to improve their lifespan, remain the 

subject of ongoing investigation. The failure mode consistently involves a dielectric breakdown 

leading to an unrecoverable short circuit between the top and bottom pad and can be induced by 

overvoltage or excessive pressure from the probe tip on the top pad. Breakdown has been observed 

at both positive and negative voltages, typically above the switching voltage. Unlike current, the 

failure threshold varies significantly from one device to another, though the measurements 

depicted in Figs. 3 and 4 are representative. Overall, smaller devices appear to be more resilient, 

likely due to the decreased number of defects within their AlScN layer, reducing the opportunities 


for failure. This dielectric breakdown has been observed and reported previously by us25 and 

literature elsewhere.31

Conclusions:

We demonstrate ferroelectric diode based NVM devices with an MIM structure of Ni/native 

oxide/Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt (111) that can stably operate up to 600 °C. The temperature dependent 

ferroelectric properties and memory device characteristics were evaluated using quasi-DC, AC and 

pulsed IV measurements up to 600 °C. The temperature-dependent quasi-DC I-V curves exhibit 

clear ferroelectric switching up to 600 °C with distinct On and Off states.  At 500 °C, these devices 

exhibit an unprecedented 1 million read cycles and maintain a stable On-Off ratio for over 6 hours.

At elevated temperatures the write voltages of the devices remain below 15 V, demonstrating 

compatibility with SiC based logic devices. The devices demonstrated herein therefore represent 

a significant step towards realization of digital computing systems capable of operating at high 

temperatures and in a variety of harsh environment applications.

Methods

Growth of Al0.68Sc0.32N

The AlScN thin films containing 32% Sc concentration (Al0.68Sc0.32N) were grown on (111)-

oriented Pt wafers using a physical vapor deposition (PVD) system. The growth conditions, 

substrates and some aspects of device fabrication are identical to our prior published 

reports.21,22,25,38

Following the deposition of the Al0.68Sc0.32N film, a 50 nm thick Al capping layer was deposited 

on the top of it. This deposition was performed at a temperature of 150 °C with an Ar gas flow of 

20 sccm. It is worth noting that the deposition of the Al capping layer was done without breaking 

the vacuum, ensuring prevention of surface oxidation on the Al0.68Sc0.32N film. 

Device Fabrication


To create the pattern for the top electrode, the Al capping layer underwent etching using a 1% HF

solution. Subsequently, the Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt (111) samples were coated with a negative photoresist 

(NR71-3000p), followed by photolithography to define the top electrode pattern. After 

development using a RD6 developer, a 100 nm thick layer of Ni was deposited as the top electrode 

metal using a sputtering system (Kurt J. Lesker PVD 75 PRO-Line Sputterer), The deposition rate 

was set at 2.5 Å/s and took place under low pressure condition of 5 x 10-7 Torr. Then, the samples 

were immersed in a Remover PG (Photoresist Remover) for approximately 10 min, gently shaken 

to lift off any excess metal and then rinsed with deionized water. Finally, the samples were dried 

using N2 blowing. 

AFM and TEM characterizations.

To study the surface morphology of the top layer of Al0.68Sc0.32N MIM device, AFM topography 

scans were performed on the AlScN sample using an OmegaScope Smart SPM (AIST-NT) setup.

Additionally, scanning TEM characterization and image acquisition were conducted using a JEOL 

F200 instrument operated at 200 kV acceleration voltage. A cross-sectional TEM sample was 

prepared using a TESCAN S8000X system. Pt protecting layers were deposited using electron-

beam and ion-beam techniques to ensure the preservation of the sample top surfaces and to prevent 

heating effects during focused-ion-beam milling. The focused-ion-beam milling of the lamella was 

carried out at 30 keV. Subsequently, an in-situ lift-out technique was used with the assistance of a 

Kleindiek probe manipulator. The final steps involved thinning and cleaning the lamella at energies 

of 10 keV and 5 keV, respectively.

Device Characterizations

In order to characterize the device performance, several electrical measurements including current-

voltage
(I-V), capacitance-voltage (C-V) and positive-up and negative-down (PUND) 

measurements were conducted at room temperature. The PUND test involved a voltage waveform 

consisting of four monopolar pulses. The pulse width, rise/fall times, and delay (interval between 

subsequent pulses) were specified as 5 μs, 800 ns, and 10 μs, respectively. The RT measurements 

were performed in air in a Cascade Microtech (MPS-150) probe station using a Keithley 4200A 

semiconductor characterization system. For temperature-dependent measurements such as DC I-

V, pulsed I-V, PUND, the device was placed in a vacuum environment of approximately 10-4 Torr. 


These measurements were conducted in a custom MicroXact high temperature probe station using 

tungsten probes. PUND and DC-IV characterization was performed using the same Keithley 

4200A system. Pulsed I-V and write longevity measurements were performed with a Radiant 

Technologies Multiferroic II Ferroelectric Tester at 10 kHz unless otherwise specified. Read 

endurance measurements at RT were carried out by a Keithley 4200A semiconductor 

characterization system with a ±19 V DC pre-soak, followed by 5V, 100 μs square pulses for the 

read current. Similarly, the 500 °C read endurance measurements were performed with a Keysight 

B1500A Semiconductor Parameter Analyzer to accommodate limitations in the high temperature 

probe station consisted of simultaneously measuring On and Off electrodes with a ±13 V DC pre-

soak, followed by 5V, 100 μs square pulses for the read current. Read retention measurements were 

performed with a Measurement Computing USB-1808X DAQ with the 5V, 10 kHz waveform 

provided by the Keysight B1500A on electrodes switched in the same manner as the read 

endurance measurements. All electrical measurements were carried out on top Ni circular 

electrodes with a 100 μm diameter unless otherwise specified, which were positioned on the 

Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt samples. Maximum PUND, I-V, and write voltages were varied with changing 

temperature to account for temperature-variable switching voltage.

Acknowledgements

D.J., R.H.O., D.P. and G.K. acknowledge primary support for this work from AFRL via the FAST 

program. Z.H. acknowledges support from the VIPER program of the Vagelos Institute for Energy 

Science and Technology at Penn. V.S.P. acknowledges support for this work from AFRL via the 

National Research Council (NRC) senior research associate fellowship program. A portion of the

sample fabrication, assembly, and characterization were carried out at the Singh Center for 

Nanotechnology at the University of Pennsylvania, which is supported by the National Science 

Foundation (NSF) National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure Program grant NNCI-

1542153.

Author contributions

D.J., R.H.O., D.P. and G.K. conceived the devices, measurements and sample fabrication 

idea/concepts. D.P. and G.K. fabricated the samples with assistance from X.D. and measured them 

at room temperature with assistance from Y.H., N.S. and K.K. D.P. and D.M. performed all the 


high-temperature measurements with assistance from V.S.P. D.P. and D.M. analyzed all the 

electrical data. Z.H. performed the theoretical fits to the high-temperature I-V data. P.M. 

performed electron microscopy and data analysis under supervision of E.A.S. D.J., R.H.O, N.G 

and W.J.K. supervised and guided the project. D.P. and D.M. wrote the manuscript. All authors 

provided their inputs to the manuscript and supplementary information.

Data availability

All data are available in the paper and Supplementary Information are available from the 

corresponding authors upon reasonable request.

Competing Interests Statement

D.J., R.H.O., D.P., G.K. and Y.H. have a provisional patent filed on this work. The authors declare 

no other competing interests. 

References:

1
Memory 
Products 
For 
High 
Temperature, 
Harsh 
Environments, 

<https://ttsemiconductor.com/Memory-Products-For-High-Temperature-Harsh-
Environments-1003-295.html> (

2
Instruments, T. 32-Mbit High-Temp Flash Memory with Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) 
Bus.   

3
Neudeck, P. G. et al. Prolonged silicon carbide integrated circuit operation in Venus 
surface atmospheric conditions. AIP Advances 6 (2016). 

4
Balint, T. S., Cutts, J. A., Kolawa, E. A. & Peterson, C. E. in Space Exploration 
Technologies. 36-47 (SPIE).

5
Thompson, H. Application of commercial off-the-shelf technologies to aerospace gas 
turbine engine control.  (1997). 

6
Chelnokov, V. & Syrkin, A. High temperature electronics using SiC: actual situation and 
unsolved problems. Materials Science and Engineering: B 46, 248-253 (1997). 

7
Werner, M. R. & Fahrner, W. R. Review on materials, microsensors, systems and devices 
for high-temperature and harsh-environment applications. IEEE Transactions on Industrial 
Electronics 48, 249-257 (2001). 

8
Suga, H. et al. Highly stable, extremely high-temperature, nonvolatile memory based on 
resistance switching in polycrystalline Pt nanogaps. Scientific reports 6, 34961 (2016). 

9
David J. Spry, P. G. N., Liangyu Chen, Carl W. Chang, Dorothy Lukco, Glenn M. Beheim. 
Experimental Durability Testing of 4H SiC JFET Integrated Circuit Technology at 727 
Degrees Centigrade. NASA https://doi.org:https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20170000020


10
Neudeck, P. G. et al. Extreme temperature 6H‐SiC JFET integrated circuit technology. 
physica status solidi (a) 206, 2329-2345 (2009). 

11
Neudeck, P. G., Spry, D. J., Chen, L., Prokop, N. F. & Krasowski, M. J. Demonstration of 
4H-SiC digital integrated circuits above 800° C. IEEE Electron Device Letters 38, 1082-
1085 (2017). 

12
Lee, K. & Kang, S. H. Design consideration of magnetic tunnel junctions for reliable high-
temperature operation of STT-MRAM. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 46, 1537-1540 
(2010). 

13
Wong, H.-S. P. et al. Phase change memory. Proceedings of the IEEE 98, 2201-2227 
(2010). 

14
Ye, C. et al. Physical mechanism and performance factors of metal oxide based resistive 
switching memory: a review. Journal of Materials Science & Technology 32, 1-11 (2016). 

15
Muneyasu, M. et al. A 28nm Embedded SG-MONOS Flash Macro for Automotive 
Achieving 200MHz Read Operation and 2.0 MB/s Write Throughput at Tj of 170℃. IEICE 
Technical Report; IEICE Tech. Rep. 115, 15-19 (2015). 

16
Singh, P., Arya, D. S. & Jain, U. MEM-FLASH non-volatile memory device for high-
temperature multibit data storage. Applied Physics Letters 115, 043501 (2019). 

17
Morgul, M. C., Sakib, M. N. & Stan, M. in 2021 IEEE International Integrated Reliability 
Workshop (IIRW). 1-6 (IEEE).

18
Govoreanu, B. & Van Houdt, J. On the roll-off of the activation energy plot in high-
temperature flash memory retention tests and its impact on the reliability assessment. 
IEEE electron device letters 29, 177-179 (2008). 

19
Sato, K., Hayashi, Y., Masaoka, N., Tohei, T. & Sakai, A. High-temperature operation of 
gallium oxide memristors up to 600 K. Scientific Reports 13, 1261 (2023). 

20
Yang, N. et al. Ultra-wide temperature electronic synapses based on self-rectifying 
ferroelectric memristors. Nanotechnology 30, 464001 (2019). 

21
Liu, X. et al. Reconfigurable compute-in-memory on field-programmable ferroelectric 
diodes. Nano letters 22, 7690-7698 (2022). 

22
Liu, X. et al. Aluminum scandium nitride-based metal–ferroelectric–metal diode memory 
devices with high on/off ratios. Applied Physics Letters 118, 202901 (2021). 

23
Kim, K.-H., Karpov, I., Olsson III, R. H. & Jariwala, D. Wurtzite and fluorite ferroelectric 
materials for electronic memory. Nature Nanotechnology, 1-20 (2023). 

24
Damjanovic, D. Ferroelectric, dielectric and piezoelectric properties of ferroelectric thin 
films and ceramics. Reports on progress in physics 61, 1267 (1998). 

25
Zheng, J. X. et al. Ferroelectric behavior of sputter deposited Al0. 72Sc0. 28N approaching 
5 nm thickness. Applied Physics Letters 122 (2023). 

26
Kim, K.-H. et al. Scalable CMOS back-end-of-line-compatible AlScN/two-dimensional 
channel ferroelectric field-effect transistors. Nature Nanotechnology, 1-7 (2023). 

27
Islam, M. R. et al. On the exceptional temperature stability of ferroelectric Al1-xScxN thin 
films. Applied Physics Letters 118, 232905 (2021). 

28
Wolff, N. et al. Al1− xScxN Thin Films at High Temperatures: Sc-Dependent Instability and 
Anomalous Thermal Expansion. Micromachines 13, 1282 (2022). 

29
Drury, D., Yazawa, K., Zakutayev, A., Hanrahan, B. & Brennecka, G. High-Temperature 
Ferroelectric Behavior of Al0. 7Sc0. 3N. Micromachines 13, 887 (2022). 

30
Guido, R. et al. Thermal Stability of the Ferroelectric Properties in 100 nm-Thick Al0. 
72Sc0. 28N. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces (2023). 

31
Zhu, W. et al. Strongly temperature dependent ferroelectric switching in AlN, Al1-xScxN, 
and Al1-xBxN thin films. Applied Physics Letters 119, 062901 (2021). 

32
Meier, D. & Selbach, S. M. Ferroelectric domain walls for nanotechnology. Nature Reviews 
Materials 7, 157-173 (2022). 


33
Wang, J., Park, M. & Ansari, A. in 2021 IEEE 34th International Conference on Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS). 214-217 (IEEE).

34
Gao, Z. et al. Super stable ferroelectrics with high Curie point. Scientific Reports 6, 24139 
(2016). 

35
Wang, D., Wang, P., Wang, B. & Mi, Z. Fully epitaxial ferroelectric ScGaN grown on GaN 
by molecular beam epitaxy. Applied Physics Letters 119 (2021). 

36
Grigoriev, A., Azad, M. M. & McCampbell, J. Ultrafast electrical measurements of 
polarization dynamics in ferroelectric thin-film capacitors. Review of Scientific Instruments
82 (2011). 

37
Fichtner, S. et al. in 2020 Joint Conference of the IEEE International Frequency Control 
Symposium and International Symposium on Applications of Ferroelectrics (IFCS-ISAF).
1-4 (IEEE).

38
Wang, D. et al. Ferroelectric switching in sub-20 nm aluminum scandium nitride thin films. 
IEEE Electron Device Letters 41, 1774-1777 (2020). 


Supporting Information

Scalable and Stable Ferroelectric Non-Volatile Memory at > 500 °C

Dhiren K. Pradhan,1,a David C. Moore,2,a Gwangwoo Kim,1 Yunfei He, 1 , Pariasadat 

Musavigharavi,1,3 Kwan-Ho Kim,1 Nishant Sharma, 1 Zirun Han,1,4 Xingyu Du,1 Venkata S. Puli,

2 Eric A. Stach, 3 W. Joshua Kennedy,2,* Nicholas R. Glavin,2,* Roy H. Olsson III,1,* Deep 

Jariwala1,*

1Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,

19104, USA

2Materials and Manufacturing Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH, 45433, 

USA

3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 

USA

4Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA

Fig S1. Optical microscopic image of the Ni/Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt (111) MIM device.
Circular top Ni electrodes (gray) of various sizes were patterned on the AlScN (pink) surface. The 

electrical measurements were carried out on 100 and 150 µm diameter top Ni electrodes.


Fig S2. The cross-sectional TEM image of the Ni/AlScN interface of the Ni/Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt (111) MIM 
device recorded at higher resolution.


Fig. S3. Positive coercive voltage calculated from the first derivative of current with respect to voltage at 
different temperatures. 
The positive coercive field decreases with increasing temperature.


Fig. S4. Negative coercive voltage calculated from the first derivative of current with respect to voltage at 
different temperatures. 
The negative coercive field decreases with increasing temperature. Note that the negative coercive 

field value at 600 °C is not shown Fig. 2 (b) as it is inconclusive.


Fig. S5. C–V curve of the Ni/Al0.68Sc0.32N/Pt (111) MIM device measured room temperature illustrates a 
typical butterfly loop.
The butterfly-shaped loop observed in the C-V curve suggests the presence of a non-linear 
capacitor with decreasing capacitance as the applied voltage increases, which in turn indicates the 
occurrence of ferroelectric polarization switching.


Fig. S6. (Upper panel) Poole-Frenkel model fitting to HRS and LRS states of the device at various 
temperatures. (Lower Panel) Fitting of our On-Off ratio temperature dependence model to the experimental 
data.

As demonstrated in Figure S6 (upper panel), both HRS and LRS I-V characteristics of our
AlScN ferroelectric diode follow the Poole-Frenkel (P-F) emission model with the following 
expression for current density:

𝐽 ∝ 𝐸 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝑞ϕ𝐵 + √𝑞𝐸/(πϵ)

𝑘𝑇
)

An On-Off ratio is created as the internal electric field E is modulated based on the polarization of 
the ferroelectric material.  Taking 𝐸1 and 𝐸2 as the internal electric field at a fixed applied voltage 
for the HRS and LRS states of the device respectively, we can then write the On-Off ratio as the 
following:


On‐Off Ratio = R = 𝐸2

𝐸1

𝑒𝑥𝑝 [ 1

𝑘𝑇 (√𝑞𝐸2

πϵ − √𝑞𝐸1

πϵ )]

This expression allows us to clearly deduce that the On-Off ratio decreases with temperature 

according to the relation 𝑅 ∝ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (

α

𝑘𝑇) where α = (√

𝑞𝐸2
πϵ − √

𝑞𝐸1
πϵ ) . Our experimental data 

demonstrates an excellent fit (𝑅2=0.981) to this model in the 300-600 degrees Celsius regime as 
shown in lower panel of figure S6. We note that the possible presence of other limiting conduction 
mechanisms (e.g. thermionic emission) in the Off state I-V characteristics at room temperature. 
As such, it is not included in the fit to our model.

Fig. S7. Temperature dependence of absolute current difference.


We observed the decrease of On-Off ratio with increasing temperature, whereas the current 

difference (On current- Off current) was found to increase with increasing temperature. This 

indicates that the reduction in On-Off ratio is due to a larger global increase in leakage current.

Fig. S8. Temperature dependence of Peak Current.

The peak current obtained from J-t curve (Fig.3 (b)) increases with increase of temperature due to 

the decrease in available switching time as the switching voltage deceases as well as increase in 


overall leakage current arising from increasing thermal energy which reduces activation barrier for 

hopping or defect assisted tunneling transport. 

Fig. S9: Pulsed I-V rates spanning from 1Hz to 10 kHz. 
As ramp rate decreases, the switching current spreads out over the course of the pulse and becomes 

dominated by the leakage current. By 1Hz, the Pulsed-IV is almost identical to the DC-IV. Note 

that leakage current is a DC effect and is therefore not affected significantly by ramp rate, however 

higher ramp rates can survive higher voltages. 


Fig. S10: Pulsed I-V at different temperatures indicating the coercive field. 
At high ramp rates, the switching current creates a dominant peak in the IV curve. This peak clearly 

defines a switching voltage from which the coercive field was calculated. This value moves 

towards zero with increasing temperature as with DC-IV.


Fig. S11. PUND measurement performed at RT on a 100 µm diameter of top Ni electrode. The 
Positive (P), up (U), negative (N) voltage pulses are shown in the figure.
The MIM devices clearly demonstrate ferroelectric switching for both positive and negative 
voltage pulses at RT. 


Fig. S12. PUND with capacitive current and onset level. (Left) Select PUND measurements at room 
temperature showing capacitive current and increasing leakage current. (Right) Non-capacitive 
(leakage+switching) and capacitive currents plotted vs voltage. 


Because the “onset” value of the diode response was not independently measured, it was selected 

from lower PUND measurements. In general, the PUND maximum started at 5 V and was walked 

up by 500 mV increments. At low voltages, no pulse or leakage current is evident, and instead 

only a charging spike owing to capacitance (both device and parasitic) is observed. At diode onset, 

this charging is rapidly dominated, and this point was used to define diode onset. The non-

capacitive current rises quite rapidly at the onset of switching, and thus the onset threshold is not 

very sensitive to the selected ratio.

Fig. S13. (Top) Reproduction of Fig. 4b. (Bottom) Raw pulse currents for read tests demonstrating 
averaging scheme. 


The 6-hour On-Off ratio was measured via groups of 25 pulses every 15 seconds. The pulses 

were widened to 100 µs to avoid an instrumentational parasitic capacitance and resistance that 

made an obvious charging current for the first 30-50 µs or so. The last few points of all these 

pulses were averaged to produce a single data point. Note that 25 pulses were averaged for each 

data point, but only 5 are shown for clarity. Current noise is similar on both read traces because 

the reads were simultaneous, indicating instrumentational rather than device noise as the cause.

Fig. S14. Retention behavior at 5 V read voltage at RT.
At room temperature, our AlScN MIM device demonstrated a stable retention for over 6 hour 

with a stable On-Off ratio of ~8.


Fig. S15. (Top) Write endurance test at performed at RT. (bottom) comparison of peak trends in 
RT tests vs. 500 °C.
Write cycles performed at room temperature similar to Fig. 4(c). What is displayed are test Pulsed-

IV cycles in between sets of 100 write pulses to determine the health of the device. Evolution of 

the peak heights and locations is shown below. “VoltFit” refers to a parabolic fit of the top three 


data points near the IV peak, since the actual data resolution (shown as “Raw”) was too low to see 

meaningful trends.

Fig. S16. Wake-up effect observed over first ten cycles observed at (top) room temperature 
(bottom) 500 °C.
Device wake-up is a well-known phenomenon whereby depinning and domain wall motion of the 

ferroelectric domains occurs most notably in the first few switches. This is similar in mechanism 

to the observed changes seen in Fig. S15, but here the device has not been stressed prior to 


measurement. The wake-up effect in the first ten cycles at both room temperature and 500 °C are 

modest.


