arXiv:2309.06549v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  12 Sep 2023

Anharmonic coherent dynamics of the soft phonon mode of a PbTe crystal

A. A. Melnikov,1, ∗ Yu.
G. Selivanov,2 and S. V. Chekalin1

1Institute for Spectroscopy RAS, Fizicheskaya 5, Troitsk, Moscow, 108840 Russia
2P. N. Lebedev Physical Institute RAS, Moscow, 119991 Russia

We investigate the ultrafast optical response of PbTe to an intense single-cycle terahertz pulse,
resonant with the soft transverse optical (TO) phonon mode of the crystal. We detect multifrequency
oscillations of the reflectance anisotropy, which we associate with nonlinear motion of the TO phonon
oscillator excited directly by the terahertz pulse. Our observation of monotonically decaying optical
anisotropy together with second harmonic oscillations of the TO mode is an evidence of a transient
non-centrosymmetric state of the crystal lattice that can be accompanied by the ferroelectric order.
We suppose that this state is induced in the PbTe crystal by the intense terahertz pulse via alignment
of the local polar nanodomains. This hypothesis is partially supported by the observation of coherent
phonons near the satellite phonon mode frequency that are impulsively generated by a femtosecond
laser pulse and are considerably enhanced by a synchronous terahertz pulse.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Lead telluride crystals have the NaCl structure and
possess a strongly anharmonic transverse optical phonon
mode with a rather low frequency near 1 THz [1]. This
mode provides an efficient scattering channel for acous-
tic phonons and is a prerequisite for low thermal con-
ductivity and good thermoelectric properties of PbTe
[2]. Its frequency approximately follows the power law
ω ∼ (T − Tc)a, where a ∼ 0.5 and Tc is a critical temper-
ature [3]. Such behavior is typical of the so-called soft
phonon modes, which become “frozen” at T = Tc driv-
ing a displacive phase transition [4]. In the case of lead
telluride this is a virtual transition to a lower-symmetry
rhombohedral structure, which should exhibit ferroelec-
tric order, but is never realized for undoped (binary) crys-
tals. The critical temperature Tc is negative and PbTe
remains paraelectric even at temperatures close to zero.
Therefore, lead telluride is referred to as incipient ferro-
electric [5].
Bringing a PbTe crystal closer to this transition is of
interest from the point of view of fundamental physics,
as well as practical applications, such as control of fer-
roelectric polarization and increasing the thermoelec-
tric figure of merit. The energetic proximity to a non-
centrosymmetric structure and the softness of the TO
phonon mode make lead telluride crystals particularly
susceptible to various external stimuli including strain
[6], magnetic field [7], light-induced injection of charge
carriers [8]. Methods of materials engineering can be also
applied. Replacement of several percent of Pb atoms by
Ge or Sn makes PbTe crystals ferroelectric at lower tem-
peratures [1]. Ferroelectricity of intrinsic lead telluride
in the 2D limit was theoretically predicted [9].
Since the TO mode is infrared active, it is possible
also to explore a direct approach — excitation of atomic
vibrations by terahertz radiation [10, 11]. Here we re-
port a study of the ultrafast optical response of a PbTe

∗ melnikov@isan.troitsk.ru

crystal to an intense picosecond terahertz pulse resonant
with the TO phonon mode. We have found that such a
pulse induces oscillations of reflectance anisotropy of the
crystal at three distinct frequencies, which are related ap-
proximately as 1:2:3 and decrease accordingly upon cool-
ing.
We associate these oscillations, respectively, with
nonlinear coherent TO vibrations of atoms of PbTe and
with the second and third harmonics of this motion. The
oscillations are superimposed onto a monotonically de-
caying transient, which we interpret as a short-lived sym-
metry lowering of the crystal caused by alignment of the
polar local nanodomains by the intense terahertz pulse.
Though anisotropy of reflectance not necessarily implies
non-centrosymmetry of a crystal, the fact that it is the
soft phonon mode that is driven by the terahertz pulse
and the observation of its second harmonic make it pos-
sible to conjecture that this nonequilibrium state lacks
center of inversion and is accompanied by the ferroelec-
tric order.
In addition, we use near infrared femtosecond laser
pulses to generate in the PbTe crystal coherent phonons
at a frequency of ∼ 1.4 THz (∼ 6 meV), which behave
differently with respect to the observed harmonics. This
phonon mode can be related to the satellite peak of the
main TO phonon of PbTe that has been detected or the-
oretically predicted is several previous studies [12–19]. In
some of those papers this additional phonon mode was
associated by the authors with a local symmetry lower-
ing due to off-centering of the Pb atoms and formation
of correlated dipoles [2, 13, 18, 20, 21]. We have found
that an additional intense terahertz pulse synchronous
with the femtosecond pump pulse considerably increases
the amplitude of these coherent phonons. This fact is in
agreement with our hypothesis that the terahertz pulse
aligns these local dipoles inducing a macroscopic tran-
sient state with a lower symmetry.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

The crystal of lead telluride that was studied in the
present work was grown by the Czochralski method and


2

cleaved along the (100) plane.
The room-temperature
concentration of charge carriers was 3·1018cm−3 (p-type).
Measurements of the ultrafast dynamics were performed
using the standard pump-probe layout. Pump terahertz
pulses were generated via optical rectification of fem-
tosecond laser pulses with tilted front in a crystal of
lithium niobate [22]. For that purpose, we used a frac-
tion of the output beam from a regenerative Ti:sapphire
amplifier (Spitfire HP, Spectra Physics) — 1.8 mJ pulses
with a duration of 70 fs, central wavelength of 800 nm
and a repetition rate of 1 kHz. After collimation and fo-
cusing by parabolic mirrors the resultant terahertz pulses
had a peak electric field of about 500 kV/cm, a duration
of about 1 ps, while their peak frequency was near 1
THz (see Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b)). Pump pulses at the
central wavelength of 1.3 µm and with a duration of ∼
70 fs were generated by an optical parametric amplifier
(TOPAS, Light Conversion).
In order to characterize the excited state created by the
pump pulse in the PbTe crystal we detected anisotropy of
reflectance using weak probe femtosecond pulses at 800
nm. To do that we measured rotation of polarization of a
probe pulse reflected from the sample using a Wollaston
prism and a pair of amplified photodiodes. The initial
polarization of the probe beam was set to 45◦ relative
to the vertical polarization of the terahertz pulses. The
measurement was repeated multiple times for open and
closed pump beam (modulated by an optical chopper)
and the normalized difference value was calculated and
then averaged. The resulting quantity will be denoted as
ϕ throughout the text. Due to this normalization proce-
dure, it is close to zero in equilibrium. Pump and probe
beams were incident onto the sample at an angle of ∼ 15◦.
Low temperature measurements were performed with the
PbTe crystal placed inside a liquid nitrogen cryostat with
optical windows made from TPX polymer.

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1(c) shows temporal evolution of the polariza-
tion rotation ϕ of the probe pulse during and after the
illumination of the PbTe crystal by the pump terahertz
pulse. The initial part of the signal is somewhat simi-
lar to the squared electric field of the pulse and is likely
due to nearly instantaneous Kerr effect of electronic ori-
gin. This waveform is followed by strongly damped os-
cillations superimposed onto a monotonic transient. An
interesting property of this compound trace is that its
minima caused by the oscillations are always near zero,
while the resulting values are all positive (neglecting the
noise).
This can be realized only if the decay times
of the monotonic component and of the oscillations are
rather close or identical.
This feature is illustrated in
Fig. 2, where the signal ϕ(t) is fitted by the function
A0e−t/τ(1−sin(2πνt−φ)) starting from t = 250 fs, when
the pump pulse is almost over. Here τ = 0.5 ps, ν = 1.6
THz and φ = 0.8 are the decay time, the frequency and

-1
0
1
2
3

0

1

2

3

4

5

j (10

-5

 rad)

Delay tim e (ps)

(c)

 signal at 500 kV/cm

 E

2

THz

(t)

T = 295 K

0
1
2
3
4

0.0

0.1

0.2

FFT Magnitude

Frequency (THz)

(b)

-2
-1
0
1
2
3

-2

0

2

Electric field (arb. units)

Time (ps)

(a)

FIG. 1. (a) – Temporal profile of the electric field of the pump
terahertz pulse. (b) – Spectrum of the pump terahertz pulse.
(c) – Polarization rotation ϕ of the probe pulse reflected from
the PbTe crystal as a function of the pump-probe delay time
measured at room temperature (blue solid line). Normalized
squared electric field of the pump terahertz pulse in arbitrary
units (green dotted line with filled area).

the phase of the oscillations, respectively.
Oscillations in an optical response of a crystal to an
ultrashort laser pulse can often be explained by the im-
pulsive generation of coherent phonons [23]. In this case
collective vibrations of atoms periodically modulate the
refractive index of the crystal (if allowed by symmetry)
and can be detected by optical probing. Then the ap-
parent frequencies of oscillations in the decay traces cor-
respond to the frequencies of particular phonon modes.
The inset to Fig. 2 shows spectra of three traces from
the main panel that were recorded in three consecutive
measurements. Two well defined peaks are visible at ∼
1.6 THz and ∼ 2.6 THz. These values should be com-
pared to the known frequencies of lattice vibrations of
PbTe crystals.
The frequencies of the TO and LO phonon modes of
PbTe at room temperature that can be found in the lit-
erature usually lie near 1 THz and 3.3 THz, respectively


3

(see e. g. [1, 3, 18, 24]). An additional satellite peak
near 1.4–1.6 THz was also reported in a number of pa-
pers [2, 12–15, 18, 19]. However, its origin is still not clear
(see the discussion below). It should be noted that fre-
quency values obtained in different studies vary, which
is particularly true for the TO mode and is likely due
to different concentrations of free charge carriers in the
crystals under study. Herein we will refer to one of the
classical works on inelastic neutron scattering on single
crystals of PbTe for temperature dependent values of the
TO phonon frequency [3]. The crystal of PbTe studied
in that work was grown by the Czochralski method and
was p-type with carrier concentration of (3–5)·1018cm−3,
similar to our crystal. The TO frequency measured by
the authors at room temperature was 0.87 THz. Thus,
we can conclude that the oscillation frequencies detected
in our measurements at 295 K do not match the standard
phonon frequencies reported for PbTe crystals.
Moreover, symmetry considerations impose restric-
tions on the types of coherent phonons that can be de-
tected using our experimental layout. Rotation of po-
larization of the probe pulse upon reflection from the
excited sample implies a certain anisotropy of reflectance
induced by coherent motion of atoms. Therefore, in or-
der to be detected, coherent phonons should modulate
polarizability of the crystal and be Raman active. How-
ever, it was shown theoretically that for crystals with
rock-salt structure there is no first-order Raman scatter-
ing [25, 26]. The second order effect is generally much
weaker, and thus, for a perfect PbTe crystal we should
not expect oscillations in the optical anisotropy response
to an ultrashort pulse of moderate intensity.
In order to clarify the origin of the observed oscilla-
tions, we have repeated measurements at lower temper-
atures. The results obtained at 85 K for two values of
the peak electric field of the pump terahertz pulse are
shown in Fig. 3. We first note that the above-mentioned
property of the signal measured at 295 K, namely the
closeness of the decay times of the monotonic component
and of the apparent oscillations, is in general retained
at low temperatures. However, as can be seen from the
spectra of the signals in Fig.
3(b), the two peaks ob-
served at room temperature shift to lower frequencies
upon cooling, while a distinct new peak appears. An in-
teresting fact is that the frequencies of these three peaks
are related approximately as 1:2:3. The intensity of the
first peak at ω1 = 0.72 THz increases approximately lin-
ear with the peak electric field of the pump pulse, while
the second one at ω2 = 1.37 THz demonstrates clearly
nonlinear growth. The same can be said about the third
peak at ω3 = 2.19 THz only tentatively due to a lower
signal-to-noise ratio in this case.
Normalized spectra of the oscillations obtained at tem-
peratures of 85, 120, 140, 170, and 200 K are presented in
Fig. 4(a). In this case, in order to reduce noise, we per-
formed fast Fourier transform not on the original signal,
but on the autocorrelation of its oscillating part. This
procedure reproduces the frequencies of the oscillatory

0
1
2
3

0.0

0.4

0.8

1.2

1.6

j (10

-5

 rad)

Delay time (ps)

0
1
2
3
4
5

0

2

4

6

8

10

FFT Magnitude (arb. units)

Frequency (THz)

1.6

2.6

FIG. 2. A magnified view of the signal ϕ(t). The main panel
shows three traces measured in three consecutive scans (blue
solid lines). The average of these traces was shown in Fig.
1(c). The red dashed line represents a fit according to the
formula A0e−t/τ(1−sin(2πνt−φ)) (see text). The inset shows
spectra of the three traces from the main panel. The two most
prominent peaks are indicated by vertical dashed lines and the
corresponding frequency values in THz.

0
1
2
3
4

0

2

4

6

8

10

0
1
2
3
4
5

0

2

4

6

j (10

-5

 rad)

Delay time (ps)

T = 85 K

350 kV/cm

500 kV/cm

(a)

FFT Magnitude (arb. units)

Frequency (T Hz)

(b)

0.72

1.37

2.19

FIG. 3. (a) – Two traces ϕ(t) measured using pump tera-
hertz pulses with 350 kV/cm (upper curve) and 500 kV/cm
(lower curve) peak electric field strength. The upper curve
was shifted vertically for clarity. (b) – Spectra of the signals
shown in panel (a). Three spectral peaks are indicated by
vertical dashed lines with the frequency values shown in THz.

components but effectively squares their relative ampli-
tudes. It can be seen that all three spectral peaks, ω1, ω2,
and ω3, shift to lower frequencies upon cooling. A certain
narrowing of the lines is also observed, most consistently
for the most intense line at ω2. In Fig. 4(b) we compare
the recorded temperature dependence of ω1, ω2, and ω3
with the corresponding dependence of frequencies of the


4

TO phonon mode, as well as of its second and third har-
monics, calculated from the data presented in [3]. The
agreement is rather good if we neglect a certain system-
atic deviation for ω3 at lower temperatures. We have also
compared the decay rate of the monotonic component of
the reflectance anisotropy signal 1/2τ1 with the damp-
ing rate γ of the most intense oscillatory component at
ω2 (assuming the Lorentzian line shape). The value of
τ1 was determined by fitting the signal with a single ex-
ponential function, while γ was estimated as FWHM of
the corresponding spectral line. Again, we can see that
these values are close in the whole temperature range of
measurements (see Fig. 4(c)).
The experimental results described above can be ten-
tatively interpreted as follows. First, we identify the ob-
served spectral peaks at frequencies ω1, ω2, and ω3 with
the fundamental frequency of the TO phonon mode of
the PbTe crystal, and with its second and third harmon-
ics, respectively. The intense terahertz pulse is resonant
with the infrared active TO mode and drives the atomic
motion directly, creating a coherent wave packet with a
rather large amplitude. This process can in principle be
illustrated as motion of a classical oscillator in a poten-
tial that is strongly anharmonic due to anharmonicity
of the crystal lattice of PbTe and the “softness” of this
TO mode. The oscillator is nonlinear and the spectrum
of its vibration contains harmonics of the fundamental
frequency [27]. The second order nonlinearity not only
enables generation of the second harmonic but also “rec-
tifies” atomic oscillations thereby inducing a transient
distortion of the crystal lattice [28, 29].
The decay of
this distortion is monotonic and its characteristic time is
equal to the decay time of the oscillations at ω2 = 2ωT O.
This simplified model can account for the basic fea-
tures of the detected reflectance anisotropy signal. How-
ever, it contains several inconsistencies. First, the model
implies that the damping rate γ of the second harmonic
oscillations is twice larger than the damping rate γT O of
the vibrations at the fundamental frequency ωT O. Using
this relation, we can obtain from our data values of γT O
from ∼ 0.2 THz to ∼ 0.6 THz in the temperature range
100–300 K, which are considerably larger than the typ-
ical values available in the literature (see e. g. [7, 30]
for a typical ratio γT O/ωT O ∼ 0.1). More importantly,
the considerable second-order nonlinearity of atomic os-
cillations implies that the cubic symmetry of the crystal
is lowered immediately after the action of the terahertz
pulse and a transient non-centrosymmetric structure is
created. It is not clear, however, by which mechanism
the coherent TO phonons can break the inversion sym-
metry of the rock-salt structure of PbTe by themselves.
Here we note that in several recent studies on x-ray and
neutron scattering of PbTe it was argued that though the
“average” structure of the crystal is cubic, on the scale
of several unit cells there occurs dynamic off-centering
of Pb atoms, which leads to a local symmetry lowering
and formation of non-centrosymmetric polar nanoregions
[13, 20, 21]. It is possible to suppose that an intense ter-

50
100
150
200
250
300

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

0
1
2
3
4
5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

100
150
200
250
300

0.4

0.8

1.2

Frequency (THz)

Temperature (K)

w

TO

3w

TO

2w

TO

(b)

FFT Magnitude (arb. units)

Frequency (THz)

200 K

170 K

140 K

120 K

  85 K

(a)

w

1

w

2

w

3

g, 1/2t

1

 (THz)

Temperature (K)

(c)
g 

1/2t

1

FIG. 4. (a) – Spectra of the autocorrelations of the oscillating
components of the terahertz-induced signals ϕ(t), measured
at temperatures 200 K, 170 K, 140 K, 120 K, and 85 K (top
– bottom). The curves were normalized to the maximum of
the most intense peak and shifted vertically for clarity. Verti-
cal dashed lines indicate positions of the three spectral peaks
ω1, ω2, and ω3 in the spectrum obtained at 85 K. (b) – Tem-
perature dependence of ω1 (circles), ω2 (triangles), and ω3
(squares).
Solid lines illustrate temperature dependence of
the frequency of the TO phonon mode of PbTe, as well as of its
integer multiples 2ωT O and 3ωT O. The corresponding curves
were calculated using values of ω2
T O from [3]. (c) – Temper-
ature dependence of the damping rate γ of oscillations at ω2
(diamonds), evaluated as FWHM of the corresponding peak
in the spectra shown in panel (a). Empty squares indicate
values of the decay rate 1/2τ1 of the monotonic exponential
component of the signal for each temperature.

ahertz pulse aligns these fluctuating local dipoles and a
short-lived “macroscopic” excited state is formed lacking
center of inversion [31].
In this case the coherent TO
phonons generated by the same terahertz pulse and their
harmonics will be visible in the reflectance anisotropy
signal as long as this dipole-aligned state exists. The de-
cay of the latter then corresponds to the observed mono-
tonic relaxation and the damping of the oscillations at
ω2 = 2ωT O.
A notable feature that was associated with the polar
nanodomains in the above-mentioned studies was a satel-
lite peak that appeared for temperatures above ∼ 100 K


5

at slightly higher frequencies relative to the TO phonon.
This additional phonon mode at frequencies ∼ 1.4-1.6
THz was also observed experimentally and modeled nu-
merically in several previous works [2, 12–19]. An alter-
native interpretation of this mode was suggested, accord-
ing to which it results from anharmonic lattice effects,
such as the interaction of optical and acoustic phonon
modes [12, 14–16]. However, the reported temperature-
dependent behavior of the peak varies from study to
study and its origin still remains unclear.
We have performed additional measurements of the
photoinduced reflectance anisotropy of PbTe with fem-
tosecond pump pulses at 1.3 µm and detected very weak
oscillations at Ω ∼ 1.4 THz, the behavior of which dif-
fers considerably from the behavior of the coherent TO
phonons and their harmonics generated by the intense
terahertz pulse. The results are shown in Fig. 5. The
amplitude of these oscillations increases almost twofold
upon lowering the temperature from 295 K to 85 K, while
their frequency and linewidth decrease only slightly. The
observed frequency shift is, however, considerably smaller
than that of the second harmonic of the coherent TO
phonons (see Fig.
5(b)).
We have also found that at
85 K a synchronous excitation of the crystal by a tera-
hertz pulse with the peak electric field of ∼ 500 kV/cm
leads to a further increase of the amplitude of the oscil-
lations approximately by a factor of three (here synchro-
nization means temporal coincidence of the femtosecond
pulse with the peak electric field of the terahertz pulse).
In this case a small high-frequency shift of the corre-
sponding spectral line is observed. At the same time, at
room temperature the effect of the additional terahertz
excitation can be regarded as negligibly small.
The observed oscillations at Ω ∼ 1.4 THz are likely
caused by coherent phonons impulsively excited in the
PbTe crystal by the 1.3 µm femtosecond laser pulse. We
suppose that these phonons can be associated with the
fluctuating polar nanodomains of PbTe by analogy with
the previous studies, in which the satellite peak of the
TO phonon mode was detected. First, such interpreta-
tion could account for the small amplitude of the oscilla-
tions. Indeed, as we have already noted above, since the
static (or dynamic “averaged”) crystal structure of PbTe
is of the cubic rock-salt type, generation and anisotropic
detection of coherent phonons are forbidden to the first
order in phonon coordinates. Local symmetry lowering
can lift this selection rule and allow generation of weak
coherent phonons. Second, as we assumed above, an in-
tense terahertz pulse could align the local polar nanore-
gions and create a transient state with a lower symmetry
and enhance the oscillations at Ω ∼ 1.4 THz. Such effect
is indeed observed in our experiments (see Fig. 5).
The effect of cooling on these features is, however,
somewhat controversial, if we refer to the studies, in
which the satellite peak was reported, staying at the
same time in the framework of our hypothesis. In our
case both the amplitude of coherent phonons at Ω ∼ 1.4
THz and the effect of the terahertz pulse on this ampli-

0
1
2
3
4
5

-5

0

5

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

0

1

2

3

1
2
3

j (10

-5

 rad)

Delay time (ps)

(a)

1

2

3

4

FFT Magnitude (arb. units)

Frequency (T Hz)

(b)

x5

FIG. 5. (a) – Polarization rotation ϕ of the probe pulse re-
flected from the PbTe crystal as a function of the pump-probe
delay time measured under following conditions: 85 K, 1.3 µm
pump (curve 1); 85 K, 1.3 µm pump with the synchronous ter-
ahertz pulse (curve 2); 295 K, 1.3 µm pump (curve 3); 295
K, 1.3 µm pump with the synchronous terahertz pulse (curve
4). The energy density of the pump pulse at 1.3 µm was ∼
0.5 mJ/cm2. The curves were shifted vertically for clarity.
The small monotonic background in all four traces is caused
by large (∼ 10−3) isotropic reflectance changes induced by
the pump pulse and detected here due to polarization leak-
age. The inset shows a comparison of the oscillations in the
room-temperature traces 3 and 4. The view is magnified by a
factor of 5. (b) – Normalized spectra of the autocorrelations
of the oscillating components of the traces 1, 2, and 3. Verti-
cal dashed lines indicate the position of the ω2 peak at 85 K
(left line) and at 295 K (right line).

tude increase upon cooling, while the frequency shift is
relatively small. However, in most of the neutron and
x-ray scattering experiments the amplitude and the fre-
quency of the satellite peak increased considerably upon
heating starting from ∼ 100 K [2, 13, 14, 19]. Neverthe-
less, recently there was a study, in which this peak was
observed using inelastic neutron scattering even at tem-
peratures down to 5 K [19]. One numerical study [17] and
a recent paper on ultrafast terahertz emission [18] from


6

PbTe reported negligible or small frequency shifts of the
satellite peak upon lowering the temperature, similar to
our work. It should be noted also that the specific tem-
perature behavior observed in our case may be caused
by the inherent properties of the impulsive mechanism of
coherent phonon generation by an ultrashort laser pulse,
which is essentially different from the x-ray or neutron
scattering on elementary excitations. Therefore, the par-
tial disagreement of our results with several structural
studies does not necessarily contradict our interpretation.

IV.
CONCLUSION

In summary, we have studied the optical response of
PbTe to an intense nearly single-cycle terahertz pulse.
Relaxation of the induced anisotropy of reflectance of the
crystal was accompanied by oscillations at three distinct
frequencies, which we associated with the fundamental
frequency of the TO phonon mode and with its second
and third harmonics.
All three spectral peaks shifted
to lower frequencies upon cooling in accordance with
the well-established temperature dependence of the soft
TO mode of PbTe. Measured decay traces contained a
monotonic exponential transient, the characteristic time
of which was close to the lifetime of the second harmonic
oscillations in the whole temperature range covered. Ex-

citation of the PbTe crystal by a femtosecond pulse at 1.3
µm generated coherent phonons at the frequency of ∼ 1.4
THz, close to the well-known but controversial satellite of
the TO phonon mode. The damping of these oscillations,
as well as the low-frequency shift and line narrowing upon
cooling were considerably smaller than those of the sec-
ond harmonic of the TO phonon mode, while at low tem-
perature they could be enhanced by a synchronous ter-
ahertz pulse. In order to interpret the obtained results,
we supposed that the terahertz pulse aligns fluctuating
local polar nanoregions of PbTe creating a macroscopic
non-centrosymmetric state of the crystal lattice. In this
transient state the nonlinear motion of the TO phonon
oscillator, resonantly excited by the same pulse, becomes
detectable due to lifting of the selection rules. The align-
ment of local dipoles also enhances impulsive coherent
excitation of the associated satellite phonon mode by a
femtosecond laser pulse.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The reported study was funded by the Russian Science
Foundation, Project No. 23-22-00387. The authors are
grateful to Kirill Boldyrev for help with low temperature
measurements.

[1] W. Jantsch, A. Bussmann-Holder, H. Bilz, and P. Vogl,
in Dynamical Properties of IV-VI Compounds, edited by
G. Holer (Springer, Berlin, 2001).
[2] O. Delaire, J. Ma, K. Marty, A. F. May, M. A. McGuire,
M.-H. Du, D. J. Singh, A. Podlesnyak, G. Ehlers, M.
D. Lumsden, and B. C. Sales, Giant anharmonic phonon
scattering in PbTe, Nature Mater. 10, 614 (2011).
[3] H. A. Alperin, S. J. Pickart, J. J. Rhyne, and V. J.
Minkiewicz, Softening of the transverse-optic mode in
PbTe, Phys. Lett. A 40, 295 (1972).
[4] J. F. Scott, Soft-mode spectroscopy: Experimental stud-
ies of structural phase transitions, Rev. Mod. Phys. 46,
83 (1974).
[5] M. P. Jiang, M. Trigo, I. Savi´c, S. Fahy, ´E. D. Murray,
C. Bray, J. Clark, T. Henighan, M. Kozina, M. Chollet,
J. M. Glownia, M. C. Hoffmann, D. Zhu, O. Delaire, A.
F. May, B. C. Sales, A. M. Lindenberg, P. Zalden, T.
Sato, R.Merlin, and D. A. Reis, The origin of incipient
ferroelectricity in lead telluride, Nat. Commun. 7, 12291
(2016).
[6] R. M. Murphy, ´E. D. Murray, S. Fahy, and Ivana Savi´c,
Broadband phonon scattering in PbTe-based materials
driven near ferroelectric phase transition by strain or al-
loying, Phys. Rev. B 93, 104304 (2016).
[7] A. Baydin, F. G. G. Hernandez, M. Rodriguez-Vega, A.
K. Okazaki, F. Tay, G. Timothy Noe, II, I. Katayama,
J. Takeda, H. Nojiri, P. H. O. Rappl, E. Abramof, G.
A. Fiete, and J. Kono, Magnetic Control of Soft Chiral
Phonons in PbTe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 075901 (2022).

[8] M. P. Jiang, S. Fahy, A. Hauber, ´E. D. Murray, I. Savi´c
, C. Bray, J. N. Clark, T. Henighan, M. Kozina, A. M.
Lindenberg, P. Zalden, M. Chollet, J. M. Glownia, M. C.
Hoffmann, T. Sato, D. Zhu, O. Delaire, A. F. May, B. C.
Sales, R. Merlin, M. Trigo, and D. A. Reis, Observation
of photo-induced plasmon-phonon coupling in PbTe via
ultrafast x-ray scattering, Struct. Dyn. 9, 024301 (2022).
[9] X. Zhang, Z. Yang, and Y. Chen, Novel two-dimensional
ferroelectric PbTe under tension: A first-principles pre-
diction, J. Appl. Phys. 122, 064101 (2017).
[10] X. Li, T. Qiu, J. Zhang, E. Baldini, J. Lu, A. M. Rappe,
and K. A. Nelson, Terahertz field–induced ferroelectric-
ity in quantum paraelectric SrTiO3, Science 364, 1079
(2019).
[11] T. F. Nova, A. S. Disa, M. Fechner, and A. Cavalleri,
Metastable ferroelectricity in optically strained SrTiO3,
Science 364, 1075 (2019).
[12] H. Burkhard, G. Bauer, and A. Lopez-Otero, Submil-
limeter spectroscopy of TO-phonon mode softening in
PbTe, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 67, 943 (1977).
[13] K. M. O. Jensen, E. S. Boˆzin, C. D. Malliakas, M. B.
Stone, M. D. Lumsden, M. G. Kanatzidis, S. M. Shapiro,
and S. J. L. Billinge, Lattice dynamics reveals a local
symmetry breaking in the emergent dipole phase of PbTe,
Phys. Rev. B 86, 085313 (2012).
[14] C. W. Li, O. Hellman, J. Ma, A. F. May, H. B. Cao,
X. Chen, A. D. Christianson, G. Ehlers, D. J. Singh, B.
C. Sales, and O. Delaire, Phonon Self-Energy and Ori-
gin of Anomalous Neutron Scattering Spectra in SnTe
and PbTe Thermoelectrics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 175501


7

(2014).
[15] C. W. Li, J. Ma, H. B. Cao, A. F. May, D. L. Abernathy,
G. Ehlers, C. Hoffmann, X. Wang, T. Hong, A. Huq, O.
Gourdon, and O. Delaire, Anharmonicity and atomic dis-
tribution of SnTe and PbTe thermoelectrics, Phys. Rev.
B 90, 214303 (2014).
[16] Y. Chen, X. Ai, and C. A. Marianetti, First-Principles
Approach to Nonlinear Lattice Dynamics: Anomalous
Spectra in PbTe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 105501 (2014).
[17] G. A. S. Ribeiro, L. Paulatto, R. Bianco, I. Errea, F.
Mauri, and M. Calandra, Strong anharmonicity in the
phonon spectra of PbTe and SnTe from first principles,
Phys. Rev. B 97, 014306 (2018).
[18] B. Guzelturk, M. Trigo, O. Delaire, D. A. Reis, and A.
M. Lindenberg, Dynamically Tunable Terahertz Emis-
sion Enabled by Anomalous Optical Phonon Responses
in Lead Telluride, ACS Photonics 8, 3633 (2021).
[19] Z. Li, S. Li, J.-P. Castellan, R. Heid, Y. Xiao, L.-D. Zhao,
Y. Chen, and F. Weber, Anomalous transverse optical
phonons in SnTe and PbTe, Phys. Rev. B 105, 014308
(2022).
[20] E. S. Boˆzin, C. D. Malliakas, P. Souvatzis, T. Proffen,
N. A. Spaldin, M. G. Kanatzidis, and S. J. L. Billinge,
Entropically Stabilized Local Dipole Formation in Lead
Chalcogenides, Science 330, 1660 (2010).
[21] B. Sangiorgio, E. S. Bozin, C. D. Malliakas, M. Fechner,
A. Simonov, M. G. Kanatzidis, S. J. L. Billinge, N. A.
Spaldin, T. Weber, Correlated Local Dipoles in PbTe,
Phys. Rev. Mater. 2, 085402 (2018).
[22] A. G. Stepanov, J. Hebling, and J. Kuhl, Efficient gen-
eration of subpicosecond terahertz radiation by phase-
matched optical rectification using ultrashort laser pulses

with tilted pulse fronts, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 3000
(2003).
[23] T. Dekorsy, G. C. Cho, and H. Kurz, Coherent phonons
in condensed media, in Light Scattering in Solids VIII,
edited by M. Cardona and G. G¨untherodt (Springer,
Berlin, 2000).
[24] W. Cochran, R. A. Cowley, G. Dolling and M. M. El-
combe, The Crystal Dynamics of Lead Telluride, Proc.
R. Soc. Lond. A 293, 433 (1966).
[25] M. Born and M. Bradburn, The theory of the Raman
effect in crystals, in particular rock-salt, Proc. R. Soc. A
188, 161 (1947).
[26] J. R. Ferraro, Factor group analysis for some common
minerals, Appl. Spectrosc. 29, 418 (1975).
[27] A. von Hoegen, R. Mankowsky, M. Fechner, M. F¨orst,
and A. Cavalleri, Probing the interatomic potential of
solids with strong-field nonlinear phononics, Nature 555,
79 (2018).
[28] M. F¨orst, C. Manzoni, S. Kaiser, Y. Tomioka, Y. Tokura,
R. Merlin, and A. Cavalleri, Nonlinear Phononics as an
Ultrafast Route to Lattice Control, Nat. Phys. 7, 854
(2011).
[29] T. Kahana and D. M. Juraschek, Light-induced weak fer-
romagnetism through nonlinear magnonic rectification,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18656 (2023).
[30] H. Burkhard, G. Bauer, A. Lopez-Otero, Far-Infrared Re-
flectivity of PbTe Films on NaCl Substrates, Solid State
Commun. 18, 773 (1976).
[31] B. Cheng, P. L. Kramer, Z.-X. Shen, and M. C. Hoff-
mann, Terahertz-Driven Local Dipolar Correlation in a
Quantum Paraelectric, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 126902
(2023).


