Theoretical study on spintronic and optical property prediction of doped magnetic
Borophene

S. Koley1∗

1 Department of Physics, Amity Institute of Applied Sciences,
Amity University Kolkata, West Bengal, 700135, India

Two dimensional materials are attracting new research for optoelectronics and spintronics due
to their unique physical properties.
A wide range of emerging spintronic devices are achieved
from parent and doped two dimensional materials. First-principles electronic structure calculations
of a two- dimensional monolayer of borophene in its P6/mmm form is explored in this study. The
electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of doped borophene are analyzed for doping with lithium,
sodium, and magnesium. Density functional theory calculations advocate their good dynamical and
thermal stability. Spin-polarized electronic properties of these materials are observed to be useful
for predicting new spintronic materials. Additionally optical analysis exhibits the absorption peaks
in monolayers along the in-plane direction. These properties of doped magnetic borophene suggest
the material to be a suitable candidate for designing optoelectronic devices. The most competent
spintronic material among three different doped borophenes is lithium doping that can imply a
promising avenue for the fast-growing electronics industry.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been celebrated
since the first synthesis of graphene as it displays ex-
ceptional conductivity properties which are lacking in its
bulk crystal form1,2. The 2D material demonstrates a
wide range of unique optical, electronic, and thermal
properties, hence has enormous applications in recent
technology3–5. A considerable amount of research con-
tinues to explore new 2D materials: silicene, phospho-
rene, borophene,6–11chalcogenides12–15 and layered bi-
nary compounds like GeP, GeAs, SiP16,17.
The com-
mon structural property among these materials is ex-
treme thinness which dramatically changes the physical
properties as compared to the corresponding bulk mate-
rials.
Borophene, a single layer of boron atom, has been syn-
thesized at laboratory in different phases like Pmmn,
β12, ξ318.
Strength, flexibility, and metallic attributes
of this material have initiated ample research on their
mechanical properties, thermal conductivity, electronic
structure stability, superconductivity, optical properties,
and atomic adsorption18. Depending on the structural
orientation and doping, borophene turns out to be a good
conductor of heat and electricity. Additionally phonon-
mediated superconductivity is observed at a TC of 25.3K.
A more remarkable discovery was a two-dimensional
phase of boron with space group Pmmn showing tilted
Dirac cone in its electronic band structure19. Borophene
has low atomic weight and excellent electrical perfor-
mances; moreover it’s source is less expensive. Overall
the structure is tunable which escalates its practical ap-
plications and research interest.
Boron has the electronic structure [He]2s22p1 with three
valence electrons and is located in between nonmetallic
carbon and metallic beryllium in the periodic table. The
electronic configuration itself provides both metallicity
and nonmetallicity owing to the radius of 2p orbit which

FIG. 1.
(Color Online) Crystal structure of pristine
borophene in P6/mmm phase with three inequivalent boron
atoms.

is close to the 2s orbit radius. Hence, the rich electronic
structure and bonding between the boron atoms make
its 2D structure different from other 2D materials. How-
ever the magnetic phase diagram and doping dependence
on borophene remains largely unexplored. Amidst differ-
ent structures of borophene only the P6/mmm structure
shows suitable spin polarization. With the goal of uncov-
ering 2D magnetic materials for superior spintronic and
optical applications, the investigated structure is doped
with both electron and hole. Present study quantifies the
optical and spintronic properties of borophene for differ-
ent doping. Spintronic application of doped borophene
then can be used as new zero gap spintronic materials.

arXiv:2309.07546v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  14 Sep 2023


2

 

FIG. 2. (Color Online) Density functional theory band struc-
ture of parent borophene for (a) up-spin and (b) down-spin.
Up-spin shows a comparably larger gap than down spin.

II.
METHODS

Electronic structure of borophene was estimated us-
ing density functional theory calculations based on the
Perdew-Burke- Ernzerhof (PBE) generalized gradient ap-
proximation (GGA) for exchange-correlation functional,

along with full potential linearized augmented plane
wave(FP-LAPW) method as executed in WIEN2K20. A
kinetic energy cutoff of 20 eV was applied for the plane
waves to get the electronic wave functions. The k-space
integration was performed using a 10×10×1 Monkhorst-
Pack k-point mesh centered at Γ-point.
Atomic coor-
dinates and lattice constants were entirely relaxed un-
til the forces were smaller than 0.001eV/˚A. The opti-
cal terms, such as imaginary and real parts of dielec-
tric tensor, and reflectivity were calculated within the
WIEN2K code. The interstitial wave functions were ex-
panded in terms of plane waves with a cut-off parame-
ter of RMT × Kmax=8.5, where RMT and Kmax denote
the smallest atomic sphere radius and the largest k vec-
tor in the plane-wave expansion, respectively. The op-
tical terms were evaluated using a dense k-point mesh
of 15 × 15 × 1 Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack with fixing
Lorentzian broadening of 0.05 eV.

III.
RESULTS

In accordance with structural symmetry of P6/mmm
borophene the unit cell consists of three types of in-
equivalent boron atoms. Three inequivalent atomic po-
sitions of boron are B1(0.0,0.0,0.5), B2(0.362,0.181,0.5),
and B3 (0.576,0.153,0.434). The lattice parameters are
chosen to be a = b = 11.40 ˚A, and c = 37.73 ˚A. Fig-
ure.1 shows the crystal structure of parent borophene.
The hexagonal unit cell is doped with other atoms for
hole and electron doping.
Doping site is chosen to be
(0.0,0.0,0.5) point with 6/mmm symmetry for an ener-
getically favourable scenario (in all the position stability
of the atom is checked through scf calculated total en-
ergy, finally minimum energy structure is chosen for fur-
ther calculation.) A phonon spectra that shows real fre-
quency dispersion was achieved using the force-constant
method and the PHONOPY package21. This proves the
stability of the doped material (shown in supplementary
data). The different local environment of distinct boron
atoms predicts that they can exhibit different chemical
and physical properties.
The inequivalence of the boron atoms changes the con-
tribution of each atom to the electronic properties of the
material. Figure.2a and 2b demonstrate the electronic
band diagram of parent borophene in a spin-polarized
case (spin polarized density of states for parent mate-
rial is attached in supplementary material). For up spin
(Figure.2a) the band diagram shows a prominent indi-
rect band-gap of 0.5 eV while for a down spin (Figure.2b)
the conduction band and valence band shows tilted Dirac
type structure close to high symmetry Γ point in recipro-
cal space. Linear dispersion around Fermi energy of the
down spin band diagram confirms characteristic features
of Dirac semimetals. Thus, the parent borophene in fer-
romagnetic structure is a direct narrow-gap semiconduc-
tor as the down spin conduction band and valence band
are close to Fermi level. An earlier calculation for mag-


3

 
 

FIG. 3. (Color Online) Spin-polarized DFT band structures for Li((a) and (d)), Na((b) and (e)), and Mg((c) and (f)) doping.
(a),(b) and (c) is for the up spin and others are for the down spin. The six plots are for doping concentrations of 20 %.

netic borophene22 corroborates with the band structure
of parent borophene.
Spin-polarized band structure and density of states of
three doped systems (i.e. Li, Na, and Mg ) is plotted in
Figure.3(a-f) and Figure.4(a-c) (partial density of states
for three doping is included in supplementary section).
The parent band structure establishes that the system
can be tuned from semiconductor to half metal and semi-
conductor to metal with suitable doping.
Band struc-
tures of doped borophene reveals that the doped systems
show metallicity owing to the bands having finite weight
at the Fermi level. The distinct behavior in electronic
band structures can be originated from the electronic
structure of the foreign elements and their correspond-
ing positions in the periodic table. Compared to boron;
lithium, and sodium have two fewer, and magnesium has
one fewer valence electrons and they are adjacent to each
other in the periodic table. As sufficient electrons are
not present to form required covalent bonds surrounding
the atoms, the studied new structures can be described
as hole doped systems. A doping of hole type shifts the
Fermi energy downward into the valence band and Dirac
nature can be observed above the Fermi level only. While

there are two structurally symmetric Dirac cones present
in the down spin band diagram of parent borophene, the
Dirac structure gets shifted in all the doped borophene.
Additionally the shifting of the Dirac point depends on
the type of dopant atoms. The lattice symmetry break-
ing depends on the atomic radius difference between the
dopant and parent atom. These findings suggest parent
and doped borophene in this structure can be a promising
candidate for spintronic applications.

IV.
SPINTRONIC PROPERTIES

An ideal spintronic material is selected by the num-
ber of spin-polarized carriers of a system. These proper-
ties were quantified by the number of spin-up and spin-
down charge carriers in the doped borophenes. In this
case, spintronic order parameter (λ) is defined as follows
to measure the degree of spin polarization and compare
them for finding most competent dopant,

λ = n↑ − n↓

n↑ + n↓
(1)


4

 
 

FIG. 4. (Color Online) Spin-polarized DFT density of states for three dopants, (a) Li doping, (b)Na doping, (c) Mg doping.
The down spin density of states is multiplied by -1 for presentation.

 0

 0.1

 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
 11
 12

λ

Z

 0

 0.6

3
12

m

Z

FIG. 5. (Color Online) Spintronic order parameter plot with
atomic number. Inset shows the plot of magnetization (de-
fined as the difference in number densities of up and down
spin) with atomic number. It shows decrease in the order pa-
rameter and magnetization with increasing atomic number.

where n↑ and n↓ are the numbers of carriers respectively
for up and down spins. Large spin polarization demands
λ to be higher and thus make a suitable candidate for a
spintronic system.

The main panel of figure.5 portrays λ for three doped
systems which decreases with an increase in atomic num-
ber of dopants (Figure.5 main panel).
This property
of dopant implies elements having lower atomic number
than boron can be employed to improve spintronic prop-
erties. The calculated λ shows a smaller value that can be
increased with external parameters such as pressure and
biasing. In this work, the energetically favorable struc-

ture is selected for these doped structures, however fur-
ther research is required to understand whether other el-
ements can yield similar energetically favorable scenario.
Albeit the parent borophene in its crystal structure shows
magnetism and is a satisfactory element for spintronic
applications, the present study suggests doping will en-
hance the applicability.
Doped borophene does not have any gap in its elec-
tronic band structure. Similar results were obtained in
earlier work on the intercalated phosphorene23 and other
zero gap materials24,25. Besides, the doped borophene
also has the difference between the number densities of
the major and the minor spin states, which give rise to
magnetic properties in the system. In the inset of Fig-
ure.5, the magnetization, m = (n↑ − n↓)µB is plotted as
a function of atomic number. The trend of m shows a
decrease in magnetization values with atomic number.
The concept of a gapless spintronic semiconductor24

material is well established and finding new gapless spin-
tronic materials is an emerging research area.
This
study aims to get new spintronic material.
Doped
borophene showing zero-gap state, are superior to pris-
tine borophene since zero energy is required to excite
electrons from the valence band to the conduction band
in doped system.

V.
OPTICAL PROPERTIES

Motivated by semiconducting behavior of parent mate-
rial, the optical properties of doped borophene are stud-
ied to predict optoelectronic application of these mate-
rials. The imaginary part of dielectric function was es-
timated by applying a density functional theory method
constructed through WIEN2K software.
The assessed
electronic structures of doped borophenes discussed ear-


5

 
 

FIG. 6. (Color Online) The imaginary part of the dielectric function obtained from DFT calculation for three dopants, (a) Li,
(b)Na, and (c) Mg. The in-plane and out-of-plane contribution is shown in all three cases.

lier in the results are the basis to interpret the imaginary
part of the dielectric functions for three different systems.
The optical terms for polarization of light parallel to the
plane are dominant because of the strong depolarization
effect in 2D planar geometry.
The structures of three
doped borophenes have geometrical symmetry along the
x- and y-axis. The imaginary part of the dielectric func-
tion can also be defined as optical absorption spectra of
these doped borophenes for the in-plane and out-of-plane
polarized directions which is illustrated in Figures.(6a-
6c). The corresponding real parts of the dielectric func-
tions are shown in the inset. The first peak of in-plane
dielectric spectra occurs around 0.5 eV for the Li, Na,
and Mg doped borophenes. Consequently, the first peaks
of absorption spectra for all doped systems are in the
near-infrared range of wavelength along the in-plane di-
rection. These observation confirms that, the excitations
for in-plane polarization are largely found within the low-
frequency region, whereas, the excitations for perpendic-
ular polarization, are found within the higher frequency
regime. The similar observation was reported earlier for
parent borophene26.

VI.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

This study demonstrates density functional theory
study of the magnetic and optical properties of Li,
Na, and Mg-doped borophene in spin-polarized system.
Borophene is a member of newly found 2D Dirac systems
in its different structures and has potential application

because of its high capacity, outstanding electronic and
ionic conductivity in metal ion batteries as an anode ma-
terial in its different structures; however the research in-
terest on its application as the spintronic materials is re-
cent. Parent borophene in this p6/mmm structure shows
half-metallic nature with up-spin showing semiconduct-
ing nature and down spin showing metallic behavior.
Doping induces vanishing of gap but doped borophene
remains spin-polarized. While the main characteristics
are common in all doped crystals but the nature of spin
polarization varies with different dopant. The detailed
assessment into spin-dependent properties shows magne-
tization, and reveals that spintronic order parameter(λ)
decreases with increasing atomic number.
In addition
the imaginary part of the dielectric functions of all three
doped materials are characterized by in-plane maxima
around 0.5 eV (corresponding to near-infrared region)
and out-of-plane maxima around 3.0 eV (corresponding
to visible region). The lowest energy excitations demon-
strate almost similar characteristics in all the doped ma-
terials.

In conclusion, Li, Na and Mg doping of borophene
shows similar electronic and optical properties.
The
optical absorption threshold of all the materials shows
promising applications because of photoemission in vis-
ible and near- infrared region. Spintronic properties re-
veal better performance for doping with lighter atoms
which labels Li as the best among three. Thus this study
suggests the potential for fine tuning the properties of
borophene using doping.


6

VII.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The author declares no conflict of interest.

VIII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

SK acknowledges the Department of Science and
Technology women scientist grant SR/WOS-A/PM-

80/2016(G) for financial support.

∗ sudiptakoley20@gmail.com
1 Novoselov, K. S. et al., Electric field effect in atomically
thin carbon films. Science, 306, 666 (2004).

2 Avouris, P. and Dimitrakopoulos, C., Graphene: synthesis
and applications. Materials Today, 15, 86 (2012).

3 Mak, K.F. and Shan, J., Photonics and optoelectronics of
2D semiconductor transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat.
Photonics, 10, 216 (2016).

4 Wang, Q. H., et al., Electronics and optoelectronics of two-
dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat. Nan-
otechnol. 7, 699 (2012).

5 Chhowalla, M. et al., The chemistry of two-dimensional
layered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets. Nat.
Chem., 5, 263 (2013).

6 Randivir, E P., Brownson, Dale A. C., and Banks, C.E., A
decade of graphene research: production, applications and
outlook. materialstoday, 17, 426 (2014).

7 Rubab A. et al., Advances in ultrathin borophene materi-
als. Chemical Engineering Journal, 401, 126109 (2020).

8 Molle, A. et al., Silicene, silicene derivatives, and their
device applications Chemical Society Reviews, 47, 6370
(2018).

9 Kou, L., Chen C., and Smith S C., Phosphorene: Fabrica-
tion, Properties, and Applications. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.,
6 2794 (2015).

10 Chen H. et al., First principles study of P-doped borophene
as anode materials for lithium ion batteries. Applied Sur-
face Science, 427, 198 (2018).

11 Zhang, W. et al., Strain-engineering tunable electron mo-
bility of monolayer IV-V group compounds. Nanoscale, 10,
16750 (2018).

12 Taraphder, A. et al., Preformed Excitonic Liquid Route
to a Charge Density Wave in 2H-TaSe2. Physical Review
Letters, 106, 236405 (2011).

13 Koley, S. et al., Preformed excitons, orbital selectivity, and
charge density wave order in 1T-TiSe2. Physical Review B,
90, 115146 (2014).

14 Koley, S., Pressure driven phase transition in 1T-TiSe2, a
MOIPT+ DMFT study. Solid State Communications, 251,

23 (2017).

15 Koley S., Mohanta N. and Taraphder A., Charge density
wave and superconductivity in transition metal dichalco-
genides. Eur. Phys. J. B, 93 77 (2020).

16 Beck C.G. and Stickler R., Crystallography of SiP and
SiAs Single Crystals and of SiP Precipitates in Si. J. Appl.
Phys., 37, 4683 (1966).

17 Donohue P. and Young H., Synthesis, structure, and su-
perconductivity of new high pressure phases in the systems
GeP and GeAs. J. Solid State Chem., 1, 143 (1970).

18 Wang Z. Q., L`‘u T. Y., Wang H.Q., Feng Y.P., Zheng
J.C.,Review of borophene and its potential applications.
Front. Phys., 14, 23403 (2019).

19 Lopez-Bezanilla A. and Littlewood Peter B., Electronic
properties of 8-Pmmn borophene. Phys. Rev. B, 93,
241405(R) (2016).

20 Blaha P., Schwarz K., Madsen G.K.H., Kvasnicka D., and
Luitz J., WIEN2k:
An APW+lo program for calculat-
ing the properties of solids. J. Chem. Phys., 152, 074101,
(2020).

21 Togo A., et al., First principles phonon calculations in ma-
terials science. Scr. Mater., 108, 1 (2015).

22 Zhu M-H, et al., Magnetic borophenes from an evolution-
ary search. Phys. Rev. B, 99, 205412 (2019).

23 Koley S., and Basu S., Intercalated phosphorene for
improved spintronic applications. IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, 57, 1 (2020).

24 Wang X., Xue Dou S., and Znang C., Zero-gap materials
for future spintronics, electronics and optics. NPG Asia
Materials, 2, 31 (2010).

25 Yue Z., et al., Spin-Gapless Semiconductors. small, 16,
1905155 (2020).

26 Peng B., Zhang H., Shao H., Xu Y., Zhang R., Zhu
H., The electronic, optical, and thermodynamic properties
of borophene from first-principles calculations. J. Mater.
Chem. C, 4, 3592 (2016).


