GaAs nano-ridge laser diodes fully fabricated in a 

300 mm CMOS pilot line

Yannick De Koninck1,a, Charles Caer1,*, Didit Yudistira1,*, Marina Baryshnikova1, 

Huseyin Sar1, Ping-Yi Hsieh1,2, Saroj Kanta Patra1,b, Nadezda Kuznetsova1,c, Davide 

Colucci1,3, Alexey Milenin1, Andualem Ali Yimam3, Geert Morthier3, Dries Van 

Thourhout3, Peter Verheyen1, Marianna Pantouvaki1,d, Bernardette Kunert1,*, Joris 

Van Campenhout1,*

1imec, Kapeldreef 75, Leuven, 3001, Belgium.

2KU Leuven, Kapeldreef 75, Leuven, 3001, Belgium.

3Photonics Research Group, Ghent University-imec, Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 126, Gent, 

9052, Belgium.

aPresent address: NVidia Corporation, Roskilde, 4000, Denmark.

bPresent address: AMS-OSRAM International GmbH, Regensburg, 93055, Germany.

cPresent address: Micro- Nano Systems, KU Leuven, Kapeldreef 75, Leuven, 3001, Belgium.

dPresent address: Microsoft Corporation, Cambridge, CB1 2FB, United Kingdom.

*Corresponding authors: Charles Caer (charles.caer@imec.be), Didit Yudistira 

(didit.yudistira@imec.be), Bernardette Kunert (bernardette.kunert@imec.be), Joris 

Van Campenhout (joris.vancampenhout@imec.be)

Silicon photonics is a rapidly developing technology that promises to revolutionize 

the way we communicate, compute, and sense the world [1,2,3,4,5,6]. However, the 

lack of highly scalable, native CMOS-integrated light sources is one of the main 

factors hampering its widespread adoption. Despite significant progress in hybrid 

and heterogeneous integration of III-V light sources on silicon [7,8,9,10,11,12], 

monolithic integration by direct epitaxial growth of III-V materials remains the 

pinnacle in realizing cost-effective on-chip light sources. Here, we report the first 

electrically driven GaAs-based multi-quantum-well laser diodes fully fabricated on 

300 mm Si wafers in a CMOS pilot manufacturing line. GaAs nano-ridge waveguides 

with embedded p-i-n diodes, InGaAs quantum wells and InGaP passivation layers 

are grown with high quality at wafer scale, leveraging selective-area epitaxy with 

aspect-ratio trapping. After III-V facet patterning and standard CMOS contact 

metallization, room-temperature continuous-wave lasing is demonstrated at 

wavelengths around 1020 nm in more than three hundred devices across a wafer, 

with threshold currents as low as 5 mA, output powers beyond 1 mW, laser 

linewidths down to 46 MHz, and laser operation up to 55 °C. These results illustrate 

the potential of the III-V/Si nano-ridge engineering concept for the monolithic 

integration of laser diodes in a Si photonics platform, enabling future cost-sensitive 

high-volume applications in optical sensing, interconnects and beyond.


Silicon photonics enables the miniaturization and mass manufacturing of optical systems for a 

growing set of applications [13,14,15,16]. However, the lack of native, low-cost coherent light 

sources is a major roadblock for ubiquitous adoption of the technology, especially for future high-

volume cost-sensitive applications, such as chip-to-chip optical interconnects in machine-learning 

systems [17], fibre-to-the-X applications [18], or optical sensors for consumer devices [19,20]. In 

many of today’s datacom products, the light sources are manufactured and tested separately on 

their native III-V substrates, and subsequently hybrid integrated on the silicon photonics wafers in 

the form of micro-assembled laser packages [21] or through high-precision flip-chip assembly 

[7,8,9]. Owing to the sequential nature and high-precision requirement of such assembly processes, 

the manufacturing throughput of these integration solutions may not scale to meet the aggressive 

density, cost and volume targets for future products. To address these challenges, a variety of 

hybrid and heterogeneous III-V integration techniques with better scaling potential are currently 

being developed and commercialized. Micro-transfer printing enables parallel, back-end-of-line 

integration of pre-fabricated III-V components with higher throughput and integration density 

[22,23,24].  A front-end-of-line alternative is heterogeneous III-V integration, involving the die-to-

wafer bonding of non-patterned III-V device layer stacks directly on the silicon photonics wafer with 

subsequent III-V device patterning and CMOS-based back-end-of-line metal interconnect 

formation. This approach has been thoroughly developed over the past several years [10,11,12] 

and is now available in at least two commercial manufacturing lines [25,26]. However, deep cost 

reductions and wide adoption of this technology in mainstream CMOS fabs may be hampered by 

the remaining need for die-to-wafer bonding and expensive III-V donor substrates used for epitaxial

III-V growth, much of which are disposed as waste during the manufacturing process, raising 

additional concerns around health, safety and environmental sustainability.

For these reasons, the direct epitaxial growth of high-quality III-V optical gain materials 

selectively on the desired device locations on large-size silicon photonics wafers remains a highly 

sought-after objective. Unfortunately, the large mismatch in crystal lattice parameters and thermal 

expansion coefficients between III-V and Si materials inevitably initiates the formation of crystal 

misfit defects, which are known to deteriorate laser performance and reliability. To reduce the 

defectivity in the III-V layers, multiple research groups have developed thick buffer layers and 

strained superlattice layers with great success [27–29]. In particular, GaAs-based laser stacks 

featuring InAs quantum-dot (QD) optical gain regions have unlocked tremendous progress in the 

performance and reliability of monolithically integrated lasers on Si, leveraging the improved 

tolerance of QDs against residual crystal defects, as compared to conventional quantum-well laser 

designs [30]. However, these results have been limited to die-level demonstrations only. Thick 

buffer layers are difficult to implement on large-diameter wafers, as they are prone to formation of 

cracks and other defects arising from thermally induced stress. Recently, encouraging extensions 

of this work have been reported, featuring epitaxial growth in deep pockets etched in a silicon-

oxide masking layer on 300 mm [31] and 200 mm silicon photonics wafers [32]. However, the 


molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) employed for the deposition of the QD gain stack is intrinsically 

non-selective, resulting in the deposition of a polycrystalline III-V film outside of the targeted 

trenches, potentially hampering subsequent wafer-scale integration processes.

Selective-area growth (SAG) of III-V materials on patterned Si wafers by metalorganic 

vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE) represents a compelling integration approach, arguably with better 

scalability potential than MBE. Selectivity can be easily achieved in vapor-phase epitaxy, and as 

such, the III-V material can be deposited only where it is needed. The confinement of misfit defects 

is achieved by starting the growth of the III-V layers in deep and narrow trenches, etched in a 

dielectric masking layer on the Si wafer, a technique referred to as ”aspect-ratio trapping” (ART) 

[33–35]. Various ART architectures are currently being explored and efficient defect reduction has 

been reported without the need for thick buffer layers [36–38]. Consequently, issues with wafer 

warpage and crack formation in the wafer-scale deposited III-V layers are much less pronounced. 

Over the past several years, we have developed the concept of nano-ridge (NR) engineering, a 

SAG-based integration approach applying ART for defect reduction, followed by the growth of low-

defectivity III-V nano-ridges outside of the trenches. By careful tuning of the MOVPE process 

parameters, the nano-ridge dimensions, shapes and composition can be accurately engineered, 

independent from the starting trench dimensions. Optimized nano-ridge structures typically feature 

threading dislocation densities well below 105 cm-2, up to 100x lower than for optimized blanket 

buffer layers (see Methods and Supplementary Information Epitaxy and crystal defects). 

Previously, we successfully applied the nano-ridge engineering concept to realize a variety of 

heterostructures, in-situ doping profiles and surface passivation layers in various III-V material 

systems such as GaAs, InAs, GaSb and InGaAs [39–45], leading to first device demonstrations 

including optically pumped lasers [46], heterojunction bipolar transistors [47] (HBTs) and wafer-

scale GaAs-based p-i-n photodetectors with record-low dark currents on Si [48].

In this paper, we exploit the III-V nano-ridge engineering concept to demonstrate, to the 

best of our knowledge, the first full wafer-scale growth and fabrication of electrically pumped GaAs-

based lasers on standard 300 mm (001) Si wafers, entirely in a CMOS pilot manufacturing line. 

Leveraging the low defectivity in GaAs nano-ridge structures, the lasers employ an optical gain 

region based on InGaAs multiple quantum wells (MQW), embedded in an in-situ doped p-i-n diode 

and effectively passivated with an InGaP capping layer, all monolithically grown on 300 mm Si 

wafers. Using on-wafer GaAs nano-ridge p-i-n monitor photodetectors for wafer-scale 

measurements, more than 300 nano-ridge devices were found to lase around 1020 nm wavelength 

in continuous-wave operation at room temperature, with threshold currents as low as 5 mA, slope 

efficiencies as high as 0.5 W/A, and up to 1.75 mW total emitted optical power. Furthermore, an 

early reliability test revealed continuous lasing during at least 500 h of room-temperature operation, 

with only a mild increase in threshold current and constant slope efficiency. We believe that these 

results represent a significant milestone towards the manufacturing of scalable and energy efficient 

light sources for low-cost optical interconnects, optical sensors and beyond.


Results

Laser structure and fabrication

Leveraging wafer-scale processes, several thousands of GaAs nano-ridge devices including lasers, 

photodetectors and test structures are fabricated on a standard 300 mm silicon wafer, as shown 

in Fig. 1a-c. Each GaAs nano-ridge structure is formed by selective-area epitaxy, initiated with the 

growth of n-type doped GaAs in a high aspect-ratio trench patterned in the n-type doped silicon 

substrate (see fig. 1c). The epitaxy process conditions are tuned to form box-shaped structures 

outside of the trench, with embedded p-i-n heterojunction. The optical gain region consists of three 

compressively strained InGaAs quantum wells (QW) with 20% In content in the non-intentionally-

doped (nid) GaAs layer (fig. 1d), and the nano-ridge is capped by an InGaP passivation layer. The 

n-type contacts of the GaAs p-i-n diodes are formed by standard Cu metallization and W plugs 

landing on the heavily n-type doped top surface of the silicon wafer, which is in turn electrically 

connected to the n-type GaAs epitaxial layer. The p-type contact is formed by a second row of W 

plugs, punching through the InGaP passivation layer and landing in the p-type doped GaAs top 

contact layer (see Extended Data Fig. 1 and Methods for fabrication details). To minimize loading 

effects and improve uniformity during the epitaxy process, the nano-ridge structures are grown in 

regular arrays with a pitch of 1 micrometer (fig. 1c). 

A cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF-) scanning transmission electron 

microscopy (STEM) image with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) of a fabricated device 

is shown in fig 1e, and highlights the In-containing layers, the full passivation of the nano-ridges 

outside the trenches by the InGaP layer, as well as the embedded InGaAs quantum wells. The 

HAADF-STEM image in fig. 1f shows the full extent of the nano-ridge cross-section, revealing a 

well-controlled nano-ridge geometry from the Si-substrate to the top Cu electrode, as well as the 

top W contact plug piercing through the InGaP layer and landing in the p+-GaAs contact layer. A 

close-up view of the active region (dark-field (DF-)STEM in fig. 1g shows defect-free InGaAs QWs

and GaAs barriers, while a close-up view of the high aspect-ratio trench (DF-STEM, fig. 1h) shows 

efficient trapping of threading dislocations (TDs) at the bottom of the n-GaAs region near the silicon 

interface. Finally, the longitudinal HAADF-STEM image in fig. 1i further illustrates the effective 

trapping of threading dislocations, which remain confined to the bottom of the ART trench.

As part of the wafer-scale fabrication process, laser cavities are formed in the GaAs nano-

ridges by dry etching two facets with an angle of 12°, yielding approximately 5 % facet reflectivity 

(fig. 2a). On one side of the laser cavities, on-chip monitor photodetectors are implemented in the 

same epitaxial layers as the nano-ridge lasers, while the other facet adjoins a larger etched area 

enabling out-of-plane optical emission.

A key aspect to achieve lasing in the GaAs nano-ridges resides in optimizing the pitch of 

the W plugs contacting the p-GaAs layer. For dense contact pitch designs, the strong spatial 

overlap between the optical mode propagating in the GaAs nano-ridge waveguide and the W plugs 


induces very large optical losses that prohibit lasing. Yet, efficient lasing operation is obtained for 

laser designs with a relatively large W plug pitch (pCON35=4.8 µm). In these designs, mode beating 

of the fundamental TE00 and the higher-order TE02 mode results in a periodic interference pattern 

that minimizes the optical intensity locally underneath the W plugs, as illustrated by the simulated 

mode profiles shown in fig. 2c-d. This mode-beating behaviour enables low-loss optical 

propagation through the NR laser structure (fig. 2c), while in the case of a tighter W pitch (fig. 2e) 

(pCON35=0.3 µm), the optical field decays quickly due to the strong absorption from the W contacts 

(see Methods and Supplementary Information for further discussion regarding p-contact plug pitch 

optimization, calculated mirror reflectivity and simulated internal losses). In addition, the strong 

optical confinement in the NR, inferred from the 2D finite difference (2D FD) calculations, yields a

confinement factor  between the 3 QWs and the optical mode as large as 8 %, which is 

instrumental for compensating the large intracavity total optical loss at threshold:

Γ𝑔th = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑚 (1)

where gth is threshold gain, i is the laser internal and m is the total mirror loss.

The test configuration used for the wafer-scale characterization of the devices is shown in 

fig. 2b: three electrical probes are deployed to simultaneously drive the nano-ridge lasers and 

probe the photodetectors, while a multi-mode fibre (MMF) optical probe is used to collect part of 

the upwards radiated laser emission, for subsequent power and spectral analysis. Alternatively, as 

depicted in fig. 2f, one laser facet can be cleaved to form a mirror with approximately 40 % 

reflectivity, while the other facet remains facing the nano-ridge photodiode. This configuration 

enables more efficient collection of the laser emission, using a butt-coupled single-mode lensed 

fibre, allowing for in-depth analysis of the laser performance at the die level.

Die-level laser results

First, we discuss die-level laser measurements to unambiguously demonstrate laser operation in 

the cleaved-facet GaAs nano-ridge devices. In a first measurement, we drive the nano-ridge laser 

with a continuous-wave current at room temperature and collect the laser output from the cleaved 

facet by a large-area photodetector. Fig. 3a shows the measured optical output power and diode 

voltage as a function of laser drive current, i.e. the L-I-V plot for a cleaved device with a cavity 

length of 1.16 mm. The L-I curve reveals a threshold current as low as 4.5 mA, and a single-facet 

output power of up to 0.7 mW at a bias current of 20 mA. The dashed line represents the calculated 

L-I response, obtained by solving the laser rate equations (see Methods and Supplementary 

Information). The model accurately predicts the measured threshold current and is in reasonable 

agreement with the measured slope efficiency. The V-I curve shows a diode characteristic with 

turn-on voltage of 1.4 V. Above the turn-on voltage, a non-linear V-I response can be observed, 

originating from the non-ohmic and relatively high contact resistance in the widely spaced contact 

plugs to the p-type GaAs layer (see Supplementary Information).


To gain additional insights into the nano-ridge laser properties, we measured a similar, 

1.4mm long laser in a different test configuration (fig 2f), where the large-area photodetector is 

replaced by a lensed single-mode fibre (SMF) connected to an optical spectrum analyser (OSA). 

The optical spectra recorded as a function of laser current are displayed in fig. 3b, showing single-

mode laser emission around 1023 nm across a wavelength span of 50 nm. A zoom-in of the same 

spectra (see fig. 3c) shows a threshold current Ith of 6 mA and a redshift of the laser wavelength 

up to 0.4 nm without any mode hopping with increasing drive current. To confirm that the device is 

indeed operating as a laser, we also carried out a linewidth measurement using a self-homodyne 

setup (see Methods and Supplementary Information for further reading). From the measured 

radiofrequency (RF) beat note depicted in fig. 3d, we infer a linewidth of 46 MHz at a current bias 

Ibias of 15 mA (Ibias>2Ith). Finally, the inset in fig. 3d illustrates a side mode suppression ratio (SMSR) 

exceeding 30 dB at this drive current, ensuring that the RF beat note originates from a single 

longitudinal mode of the nano-ridge laser.

Wafer-level laser results

Next, we discuss the fully wafer-scale fabricated lasers with two etched facets. As a first example, 

a nano-ridge laser with a 2 mm long cavity was probed on the wafer and the optical emission was 

measured using the on-chip photodetector (PD) on one side and a MMF on the other side. The I-I 

plot depicted in fig. 4a shows a threshold current of 7.5 mA and a maximum photocurrent of 71.5 

µA at a bias of 17.5 mA. By considering the measured PD responsivity of 0.65 A/W [48] and the 

simulated LD-to-PD coupling efficiency of 12.5% (see methods), we infer a total emitted power of 

up to 1.76 mW, and a 1.33 % wall-plug efficiency, which agrees well with the laser model. 

Subsequently, we carried out full 300 mm wafer-scale measurements to assess the reproducibility 

of our nano-ridge laser results, using the on-wafer photodetectors. As depicted in figure 5, we 

measured three sets of nano-ridge lasers with different lengths (fig. 5a: L=1 mm, fig. 5b: L=1.5 mm 

and fig. 5c: L=2 mm) across a full wafer, gathering statistics regarding process variability and length 

dependence of the laser threshold, output power and slope efficiency. The performance metrics of 

more than 300 functional nano-ridge lasers were extracted and are displayed in fig. 5a-c. The 

calibration previously performed on single nano-ridge devices is used to estimate the total optical 

power radiated by the two facets of the lasers. Mean threshold current values of 5.9 mA, 8.1 mA 

and 9.3 mA were measured for 1 mm, 1.5 mm and 2 mm long lasers, respectively. The mean slope 

efficiencies are 8.3 µA/mA, 6.1 µA/mA and 4.9 µA/mA, or 0.33 W/A, 0.22 W/A and 0.19 W/A, 

respectively. These measured values are in good agreement with predicted values using the laser 

model. For L=1 mm, the minimum threshold current is smaller than 6 mA for a large fraction of 

lasers and as low as 4.5 mA (1.2 kA/cm2), while the estimated maximum total output power 

exceeds 1.25 mW at a bias current lower than 10 mA, reaching a wall-plug efficiency of 3.3%. For 

L=1.5 mm, the minimum measured threshold current is 5.5 mA while the maximum total output 

power exceeds 1.5 mW at a bias current lower than 15 mA. Finally, for L=2 mm, the minimum 


measured threshold current is 7.1 mA (0.93 kA/cm2) while the maximum total output power 

exceeds 1.75 mW at a bias current of 18 mA.

The relatively large spread in measured threshold current, slope efficiency and output 

power across the wafer originates from variability of the wafer-scale processes, which have not yet 

been optimized for uniformity: first, variations in GaAs NR width and height across the 300 mm 

wafer originating from the MOVPE process variability induce changes in the confinement factor 

within the InGaAs quantum wells, as well as in the mode-beating periodicity, which in turn 

increases the absorption loss from the metal contact. Second, wafer-scale variation of the 

InGaP/GaAs etch process needed to land the W vias on the p-GaAs layer and residual topography 

after the planarization steps required for the back-end-of-line (BEOL) processing may lead to 

shorted or open-circuit electrodes. The wafer-scale variability is further illustrated in fig. 5f, which 

depicts the distribution of the mean threshold current per die for 1-mm long lasers (see also 

Extended Data Fig. 3). The lowest threshold current values are found mostly in a ring-like shape 

at half the diameter of the 300 mm wafer. We note that this wafer map is made after binning of the 

tested devices, resulting in the removal of the dies at the edge of the wafer that contained only 

light-emitting diodes or short circuits, due to the failure modes described above.

The temperature dependence of the nano-ridge lasers was investigated by mounting the 

tested wafer on a stage with a temperature controller and recording the L-I curves (fig. 4b). For a 

2 mm long NR laser, single-mode lasing was observed at a temperature up to 55 °C, with a 

threshold current of 30 mA at 55 °C, compared to 7.5 mA at 25 °C. A fit of the temperature 

dependent threshold current and slope efficiency yields characteristic temperatures T1=29 K and 

T2=94.9 K, respectively (See Extended Data Fig. 2). 

As an early investigation into the reliability of the nano-ridge lasers, we carried out an on-

wafer stress test on one of the best performing, 2-mm long nano-ridge lasers. We biased the laser 

at 1.5 Ith at room temperature and monitored the output power, slope efficiency and threshold 

current (fig. 4c, see Methods for additional information regarding the stress conditions). While the 

threshold current increased from 6.1 to 7.3 mA, the degradation showed a decelerating trend and 

the slope efficiency stayed largely constant. The NR laser remained operational during at least 500 

h of stress time, exceeding the previously reported record lifetime of 200 hours for GaAs-based 

QW lasers directly grown on silicon [49].

Discussion

To the best of our knowledge, the presented work marks the first monolithic III-V laser diode 

integration on 300 mm Si wafers entirely carried out in a CMOS manufacturing pilot line, without 

the need for any III-V substrates or bonding steps. High-quality active GaAs waveguides are grown 

by MOVPE applying nano-ridge engineering, mitigating any major issues related to wafer bow or 

crack formation as typically encountered in blanket III-V layers epitaxially grown on silicon. Despite 

their sub-micrometre-scale cross-sectional dimensions, the GaAs/Si nano-ridge structures feature 


efficient carrier injection and generate strong optical gain at 1-micrometre wavelengths, enabled 

by the record-low crystal defectivity in epitaxially grown GaAs on Si and effective passivation by 

the InGaP capping layer. These attributes are instrumental for robust steady-state laser operation 

at room temperature and above, as demonstrated in this paper with threshold current densities 

comparable with conventional laser designs and below 1 kA/cm2. In the demonstrated nano-ridge 

lasers, an optical multi-mode beating effect mitigates part of the optical losses induced by the top 

metal contacts, which is equally essential to achieving the low threshold currents and slope 

efficiencies as high as 0.5 A/W. Furthermore, the grating structure formed by the periodic metal 

plugs enables single-mode laser operation, with linewidths comparable or smaller than those 

realized in typical vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs).

A key remaining challenge is to demonstrate the long-term reliability of the monolithic 

GaAs-on-silicon nano-ridge lasers. It is well known that quantum-well based lasers on silicon are 

particularly sensitive to the presence of threading dislocations, and a reliable quantum-well laser 

essentially needs to have a dislocation-free active region [50]. As shown in the supplementary 

materials, we estimate the threading-dislocation density in our GaAs nano-ridges to be below 

6x104 cm−2, or equivalently, on average one dislocation per 4 mm of nano-ridge length. As such, 

many of the tested lasers are expected to be dislocation free, providing a positive outlook for 

achieving long reliability lifetimes. Several devices have indeed shown encouraging room-

temperature operating lifetimes beyond 100 h, and the dominant failure mode observed so far is 

related to the high current density (> 150kA/cm2) in the top metal plugs, which need to be sparsely 

populated to realize low optical loss in the current laser designs. An in-depth reliability analysis is 

ongoing and will be reported elsewhere.

We see multiple opportunities to go beyond the current demonstration. First, the nano-

ridge cross section can be improved to decouple the optical modes from the metal contacts, 

enabling a much higher density of p-type contact plugs while retaining low internal optical loss. 

This will lower the operating voltage and improve wall-plug efficiencies, while also reducing current 

density and electrical resistance in the top metal contacts, leading to improved reliability. Next, the 

laser operating wavelength can be extended towards the O-band by growing nano-ridges with 

higher In-content [51] or alternatively using InAs quantum dots as the optical gain material. Last, 

the nano-ridge lasers can be optically coupled with (amorphous) silicon waveguides [52]. Coupling 

the GaAs nano-ridge to silicon and silicon nitride waveguides enables the implementation of 

external-cavity diode lasers, with better controlled laser wavelengths and reduced laser noise.

Such GaAs-Si-SiN integrated photonics platform is expected to enable future cost-sensitive 

applications in optical interconnects, optical sensing and beyond.


References

[1] Arrazola, J. M. et al. Quantum circuits with many photons on a programmable nanophotonic 

chip. Nature 591, 54–60 (2021).

[2] Mohanty, A. et al. Reconfigurable nanophotonic silicon probes for sub-millisecond deep-brain 

optical stimulation. Nature Biomedical Engineering 4, 223–231 (2020).

[3] Shastri, B. J. et al. Photonics for artificial intelligence and neuromorphic computing. Nature 

Photonics 15, 102–114 (2021).

[4] Khial, P. P., White, A. D. & Hajimiri, A. Nanophotonic optical gyroscope with reciprocal 

sensitivity enhancement. Nature Photonics 12, 671–675 (2018).

[5] Rickman, A. The commercialization of silicon photonics. Nature Photonics 8, 579–582 (2014).

[6] Spencer, D. T. et al. An optical-frequency synthesizer using integrated photonics. Nature 557, 

81–85 (2018).

[7] Nagarajan, R. et al. 2.5 D Heterogeneous Integration for Silicon Photonics Engines in Optical 

Transceivers. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 29, 1–10 (2022).

[8] Bian, Y. et al. 3D Integrated Laser Attach Technology on a 300-mm Monolithic CMOS Silicon 

Photonics Platform. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 29, 1–19 (2023).

[9] Marinins, A. et al. Wafer-Scale Hybrid Integration of InP DFB Lasers on Si Photonics by Flip-

Chip Bonding With sub-300 nm Alignment Precision. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in 

Quantum Electronics 29, 1–11 (2022).

[10] Ramirez, J. M. et al. III-V-on-Silicon Integration: From Hybrid Devices to Heterogeneous 

Photonic Integrated Circuits. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 26, 1–13 

(2020).

[11] Fujii, T. et al. Multiwavelength membrane laser array using selective area growth on directly 

bonded InP on SiO2/Si. Optica 7, 838–846 (2020).

[12] Xiang, C. et al. Narrow-linewidth III-V/Si/Si3N4 laser using multilayer heterogeneous 

integration. Optica 7, 20–21 (2020).


[13] Margalit, N., et al. Perspective on the future of silicon photonics and electronics. Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 118, 220501 (2021),

[14] Zhang, W. & Yao, J. Silicon photonic integrated optoelectronic oscillator for frequency-

tunable microwave generation. Journal of Lightwave Technology 36, 4655–4663 (2018).

[15] Wang, J. et al. Multidimensional quantum entanglement with large-scale integrated optics. 

Science 360, 285–291 (2018).

[16] Fotiadis, K. et al. Silicon photonic 16 x 16 cyclic AWGR for DWDM O-band interconnects. 

IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 32, 1233–1236 (2020).

[17] Khani, M. et al. SiP-ML: high-bandwidth optical network interconnects for machine learning 

training, In Proc. ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication Conference, 657-675 

(SIGCOMM 2021).

[18] Coomans, W. et al. XG-fast: the 5th generation broadband. IEEE Communications Magazine

53, 83–88 (2015).

[19] Luetzenburg, G., Kroon, A. and Bjørk, A. A. Evaluation of the Apple iPhone 12 Pro LiDAR for 

an application in geosciences. Scientific Reports 11, 22221 (2021).

[20] Driscoll, J. B., Perea, P., Kauffman, A., Zilkie, A. J. & Steeg, B. V. Pioneering Silicon 

Photonics for Wearable Sensors, Th1A.6 (Optica Publishing Group, 2023).

[21] De Dobbelaere, P. et al. Packaging of silicon photonics systems, W3I–2 (Optica Publishing 

Group, 2014). 

[22] Justice, J. et al. Wafer-scale integration of group III–V lasers on silicon using transfer printing 

of epitaxial layers. Nature Photonics 6, 610–614 (2012). 

[23] Zhang, J. et al. Transfer-printing-based integration of a III-V-on-silicon distributed feedback 

laser. Optics Express 26, 8821–8830 (2018).

[24] Hermans, A. et al. High-pulse-energy III-V-on-silicon-nitride mode-locked laser. APL 

Photonics 6, 096102 (2021). 


[25] Intel Labs Announces Integrated Photonics Research Advancement (2022). URL 

https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/newsroom/news/intel-labs-announces-integrated-

photonics-research-advancement.html.

[26] Tower Semiconductor Announces World’s First Heterogeneous Integration of Quantum Dot

Lasers on its Popular SiPho Foundry Platform PH18 (2023). URL 

https://towersemi.com/2023/03/02/03022023/.

[27] Shi, B. et al. MOCVD grown low dislocation density GaAs-on-V-groove patterned (001) Si for 

1.3 µm quantum dot laser applications. Applied Physics Letters 114 (2019).

[28] Chen, S. et al. Electrically pumped continuous-wave III–V quantum dot lasers on silicon. 

Nature Photonics 10, 307–311 (2016). 

[29] Wan, Y., Li, Q., Geng, Y., Shi, B. & Lau, K. M. InAs/GaAs quantum dots on GaAs-in-V-

grooved-Si substrate with high optical quality in the 1.3 µm band. Applied Physics Letters 107

(2015).

[30] Liu, A. Y. et al. Reliability of InAs/GaAs Quantum Dot Lasers Epitaxially Grown on Silicon. 

IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 21, 690–697 (2015).

[31] Shang, C. et al. Electrically pumped quantum-dot lasers grown on 300 mm patterned Si 

photonic wafers. Light: Science & Applications 11, 299 (2022). 

[32] Wei, W.-Q. et al. Monolithic integration of embedded III-V lasers on SOI. Light: Science & 

Applications 12, 1–11 (2023). 

[33] Fiorenza, J. G. et al. Aspect Ratio Trapping: A Unique Technology for Integrating Ge and III-

Vs with Silicon CMOS. ECS Transactions 33, 963 (2010).

[34] Li, J. Z. et al. Defect reduction of GaAs epitaxy on Si (001) using selective aspect ratio 

trapping. Applied Physics Letters 91 (2007).

[35] Waldron, N. et al. Integration of InGaAs Channel n-MOS Devices on 200mm Si Wafers 

Using the Aspect-Ratio-Trapping Technique. ECS Transactions 45, 115 (2012).


[36] Wen, P. et al. Waveguide coupled III-V photodiodes monolithically integrated on Si. Nature 

Communications 13, 909 (2022).

[37] Han, Y., Xue, Y. & Lau, K. M. Selective lateral epitaxy of dislocation-free InP on silicon-on-

insulator. Applied Physics Letters 114 (2019).

[38] Xue, Y. et al. High-speed and low dark current silicon-waveguide-coupled III-V 

photodetectors selectively grown on SOI. Optica 9, 1219–1226 (2022).

[39] Kunert, B. et al. III/V nano ridge structures for optical applications on patterned 300 mm 

silicon substrate. Applied Physics Letters 109 (2016). 

[40] Kunert, B., Guo, W., Mols, Y., Langer, R. & Barla, K. Integration of III/V Hetero-Structures By 

Selective Area Growth on Si for Nano- and Optoelectronics. ECS Transactions 75, 409 (2016).

[41] Kunert, B. et al. How to control defect formation in monolithic III/V heteroepitaxy on (100) Si? 

A critical review on current approaches. Semiconductor Science and Technology 33, 093002 

(2018). 

[42] Baryshnikova, M. et al. Nano-Ridge Engineering of GaSb for the Integration of InAs/GaSb 

Heterostructures on 300 mm (001) Si. Crystals 10 (2020).

[43] Kunert, B. et al. Application of an Sb surfactant in InGaAs nano-ridge engineering on 300 

mm silicon substrates. Crystal Growth & Design 21, 1657–1665 (2021).

[44] Van Thourhout, D. et al. In Chapter eight - nano-ridge laser monolithically grown on (001) si 

(eds Lourdudoss, S., Bowers, J. E. & Jagadish, C.) Future Directions in Silicon Photonics, Vol. 

101 of Semiconductors and Semimetals 283–304 (Elsevier, 2019).

[45] Mols, Y. et al. Structural analysis and resistivity measurements of InAs and GaSb fins on 

300mm Si for vertical (T)FET. Journal of Applied Physics 125 (2019).

[46] Shi, Y. et al. Optical pumped InGaAs/GaAs nano-ridge laser epitaxially grown on a standard 

300-mm Si wafer. Optica 4, 1468–1473 (2017).

[47] Vais, A. et al. First demonstration of III-V HBTs on 300 mm Si substrates using nano-ridge 

engineering. In International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) 9.1.1-9.1.4 (IEEE, 2019) 


[48] Ozdemir, C. I. et al. Low Dark Current and High Responsivity 1020nm InGaAs/-GaAs Nano-

Ridge Waveguide Photodetector Monolithically Integrated on a 300-mm Si Wafer. Journal of 

Lightwave Technology 39, 5263–5269 (2021).

[49] Kazi, Z. I., et al. Realization of GaAs/AlGaAs Lasers on Si Substrates Using Epitaxial Lateral 

Overgrowth by Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 40, 4903 (2001).

[50] Hasegawa, Y., Egawa, T., Jimbo, T. & Umeno, M. Influences of dark line defects on 

characteristics of AlGaAs/GaAs quantum well lasers grown on Si substrates. Japanese Journal 

of Applied Physics 34, 2994 (1995). 

[51] Colucci, D. et al. Unique design approach to realize an O-band laser monolithically 

integrated on 300 mm Si substrate by nano-ridge engineering. Opt. Express 30, 13510–13521 

(2022).

[52] Shi, Y. et al. Novel adiabatic coupler for III-V nano-ridge laser grown on a Si photonics 

platform. Opt. Express 27, 37781–37794 (2019). 

[53] Coldren, L. A., Corzine, S. W. & Mashanovitch, M. L. Diode lasers and photonic integrated 

circuits (John Wiley & Sons, 2012).


Fig. 1 | Wafer-scale integration of GaAs nano-ridge lasers on Si. a, Photograph of a 

fabricated 300 mm Si wafer containing thousands of GaAs devices. b, Close-up view of a 

fabricated 300 mm wafer showing multiple dies. c, Cross-sectional scanning electron micrograph 

(XSEM) of a GaAs nano-ridge array after epitaxy, before encapsulation in oxide. d, Sketch of the 

cross-section of a GaAs nano-ridge device highlighting the various layers, including the InGaAs 

quantum wells, p-i-n diode, InGaP passivation layer and metal contacts. e, Energy dispersive X-

ray spectroscopy (EDS) image of a nano-ridge cross-section highlighting the In-containing layers. 

f, High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF-) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)  

picture of a transverse cut of a GaAs nano-ridge device. g, Dark-field (DF-)STEM close-up view 

of the InGaAs quantum wells embedded in the unintentionally doped (uid)-GaAs. h, DF-STEM 

close-up view of the n-GaAs/n-Si interface confirming aspect ratio trapping (ART) of threading 

dislocation (TD) defects. i, HAADF-STEM picture of a longitudinal cut of a nano-ridge device, 

showing an isolated W plug contacting the p-GaAs layer.


Fig. 2 | GaAs Nano-ridge laser test cell with on-wafer photodetectors for wafer-scale 

characterization. a, Bird’s eye view of a nano-ridge structure, showing the Fabry-Perot laser 

formed by two etched facets, the inline photodetector on the bottom right, and the common 

ground electrode on the bottom left. Dummy GaAs NRs and the encapsulating oxide are omitted 

in the drawing for clarity. Inset: Cross-section HAADF-STEM image of an etched GaAs facet. b, 

3D drawing of the wafer-scale test configuration depicting light radiated upwards by the left facet 

and collected by an MMF and 3 electrical probes driving the NR laser and monitoring the NR PD. 

c, 3D FDTD simulated electric-field intensity plot at wavelength of 1030 nm, projected in the yz 

plane, for a device with a W top-contact pitch of 4.8 µm. Multi-mode beating is observed with a 

period of 1.6 µm, minimizing the optical-field intensity at the W contacts and enabling low optical 

propagation losses. d, TE00 and TE02 electric-field mode profiles at and in-between the W plug 

locations. e, 3D FDTD simulation of a NR device with a dense W contact pitch of 0.3 µm, 

showing a rapid field decay induced by strong optical absorption loss. f, 3D drawing similar to b, 

showing the measurement configuration for a cleaved-facet device, with a single mode fibre 

collecting the laser output and 3 electrical probes.


Fig.3 | Die-level measurement of a single-cleaved-facet GaAs nano-ridge laser. a, Room 

temperature L-I-V curves of a 1.16 mm long nano-ridge laser, showing good agreement between 

measurements (blue solid line) and model (black dashed line), and revealing a threshold current 

of 4.1 mA and a single-sided slope efficiency of 0.047 W/A. The I-V curve (orange solid line) 

shows a diode turn-on voltage of 1.4 V. Inset: microscope image of the die-level test setup. b, 

Optical output spectra of the tested laser for bias currents ranging from 3 to 20 mA, showing 

single-mode emission across a wavelength span of 50 nm. c, Close-up view of the same spectra 

centred around 1023.6 nm, highlighting the absence of mode hopping. Inset: intensity map 

showing single-mode mode-hop-free lasing with a 0.4 nm redshift of the laser wavelength. d, 

Measured RF power spectrum (blue line) of the tested laser at a bias current of 15 mA, with a 

superimposed Voigt fit yielding a linewidth of 46 MHz. Inset: Optical output spectrum of the laser 

showing a side-mode suppression ratio (SMSR) exceeding 30 dB.


Fig.4 | On-wafer measurement of an etched-facets GaAs nano-ridge laser. a, L-I-V curves of 

a 2-mm long nano-ridge laser, showing solid agreement between the measurement (blue solid 

line) and the model (black dashed line), and indicating a threshold current of 7.5 mA and a slope 

efficiency of 6.45 µA/mA (0.25 W/A). The I-V curve (orange solid line) reveals a diode turn-on 

voltage of 1.5 V. Inset: microscope image of the wafer-level test configuration, showing a MMF 

and 4 electric probes. b, Measured fibre-coupled L-I curves of a 2-mm long GaAs laser for 

different temperatures, showing CW lasing up to 55 °C (see also Extended Data Fig. 2). c, Early 

reliability test, showing continuous room-temperature laser operation up to 500 h at a bias 

current of 9.17 (1.5Ith) mA, with a 20 % increase in threshold current, 40 % relative power change

at fixed bias and no significant change in the slope efficiency.


Fig.5 | Full wafer-scale measurements of etched-facets GaAs nano-ridge lasers. I-I and L-I  

plots from 300 functional nano-ridge lasers using the on-wafer photodetectors for measuring 

laser output, for a, 1-mm long lasers, b, 1.5-mm long lasers, and c, 2-mm long lasers. The right 

y-axis indicates the total output power radiated by the two laser facets. d, Measured threshold-

current distribution across the wafer. e, Measured slope-efficiency distributions for the three laser 

lengths. In d and e, each grey dot represents a value extracted from a single device. The red 

dots represent the threshold current and slope efficiency for different laser lengths as predicted 

by the laser rate-equation model. f, Wafer map showing the mean threshold current per die for 1 

mm long nano-ridge lasers (see also Extended Data Fig. 3).


Methods
Laser modelling
The mode profile, field overlap with the quantum wells and total internal loss were simulated 
considering the dimensions of fabricated nano-ridge devices, using the 2D finite-difference (FD) 
method with Ansys Lumerical software. Optimization of the W plug pitch to minimize propagation 
loss, and estimation of etched mirror reflectivity and fibre collection efficiency was carried out using 
3D finite-difference time-domain simulations in Ansys Lumerical software. The electrical injection 
efficiency and carrier loss rates were simulated using the technology computer-assisted design 
(TCAD) Poisson solver in Synopsis Sentaurus software. Finally, the laser threshold current and 
slope efficiency were computed using Python-based codes solving the standard laser rate 
equations, enabling us to correlate the simulated parameters with the measured data. We express 
the general form of these equations as [53]:

𝑑𝑁
𝑑𝑡 = 𝜂𝑖𝐼

𝑞𝑉𝑎

− 𝐴𝑁 − 𝐵𝑁2 − 𝐶𝑁3 − 𝑣𝑔𝑔0 log ( 𝑁

𝑁𝑡𝑟

) 𝑁𝑝

𝑑𝑁𝑝
𝑑𝑡 = (Γ𝑣𝑔𝑔0 log (

𝑁

𝑁𝑡𝑟) − 𝛾𝑝) + Γ𝛽𝐵𝑁2 ,

where 𝑁 and 𝑁𝑝 are the carrier and photon densities, 𝜂𝑖 is the carrier injection efficiency extracted 
from the TCAD simulation, 𝐼 is the injected current, 𝑞 is the electron charge and 𝑉𝑎 is the active 
volume. 𝐴, 𝐵 and 𝐶 are the Schockley-Read-Hall recombination, the bimolecular recombination 
and the Auger coefficients, respectively. 𝑣𝑔 is the group velocity, 𝑔0 the gain coefficient and 𝑁𝑡𝑟
the transparency carrier density. Γ is the confinement factor, i.e., the fraction of the optical mode 
confined in the quantum wells, 𝛾𝑝 is the cavity photon loss rate and 𝛽 is the spontaneous emission 
factor. The different parameters and their respective values are detailed in Supplementary 
Information.

Device fabrication
The devices are processed on 300 mm silicon wafers with {001} orientation, starting with the 
formation of 300 nm tall Si ridges and subsequent oxide deposition and planarization following a 
standard shallow trench isolation (STI) process typical in CMOS foundries, and n-type ion 
implantation of Si. The Si ridges are subsequently wet etched using tetramethylammonium 
hydroxide (TMAH) to form V-shaped trenches in the STI oxide, with two {111} facets used as the
starting surface for subsequent III-V epitaxy. GaAs p-i-n nano-ridges containing three In0.2Ga0.8As 
quantum wells and capped by an In0.5Ga0.5P passivation layer are grown in one process step using 
metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE). The Si wafers are then coated with oxide and 
planarized. Laser mirrors and photodiode facets are subsequently patterned using DUV 
lithography and III-V dry etch. Next, the wafers are again coated with oxide and planarized. 
Subsequently, the fabrication steps move to Back-End of Line (BEOL) processing to form W 
contact plugs to the p-GaAs and n-Si contact layers. Final metallization is done using a standard 
CMOS Cu Damascene process. Details of the fabrication process and GaAs epitaxy are reported 
in the Supplementary Information and a high-level process flow is depicted in Extended Data Fig. 
1.

Die-level measurements
The characterized devices were taken from a fully processed 300 mm wafer cleaved into smaller 
dies. A high-precision cleaving tool was used to form a mirror in the middle of the NR structure. 
The lasers were then characterized on a die-level probing setup using a large-area PD to extract 
the single-facet output power, while the light emitted from the other etched facet is collected by the 


in-line PD. Spectral analysis of the laser emission was carried out by collecting the emitted light 
using a butt-coupled lensed fibre connected to an optical spectrum analyser.

Laser linewidth measurements
The laser linewidth was measured on a cleaved sample using a self-homodyne interferometric 
setup (see Supplementary Information for additional details of the setup), containing a 1-km long 
fibre delay line in one arm of the fiber-based Mach-Zehnder Interferometer. The resulting signal is 
recorded by a balanced photodiode and sent to an electrical spectrum analyser (ESA). The power 
spectral density (PSD) of the laser emission was measured under DC bias current, and the laser 
linewidth was extracted from a Voigt fit of the measured PSD.

Wafer-level and Reliability measurements
Wafer-scale laser characterisation was carried out using a 300-mm semi-automated wafer probe 
station outfitted with a temperature controller and a MMF to collect the laser emission, enabling 
the measurement of thousands of devices on a single wafer at high throughput. Early reliability 
measurements were carried out using the same setup, tracking the performance of one of the best 
performing GaAs NR laser diodes during a 500-h long stress test. In this test, the laser bias current 
was kept at 9.17 mA (=1.5 Ith) and the wafer stage was kept at 25 °C. Bias current sweeps were 
carried out every 20 h, and L-I plots were recorded to extract threshold current, output power and 
slope efficiency. 

Estimation of total laser output power 
The die-level measurement configuration allows an estimation of the total optical power radiated 
by both facets. Let us note the output powers at the cleaved facet and the etched facet to be 𝑃1
and 𝑃2, and their respective transmission coefficients 𝑇1 and 𝑇2. 𝑇1 and 𝑇2 are calculated through 
3D FDTD simulations (see Supplementary Information) and are evaluated to be 𝑇1=0.45 and 
𝑇2=0.30, respectively. 3D FDTD simulation is also uses to estimate the coupling efficiency of the 
laser diode into the monitor photodetector (PD), yielding 𝑇𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟→𝑃𝐷=12.5 %. This value accounts 
for the reflection at the PD facet, the beam diffraction at the laser facet and the beam divergence 
in the etched gap between the two devices. Knowing the photodiode responsivity [47] 𝑅𝑃𝐷=0.65 
A/W, the measured optical power on the cleaved-facet side is related to the measured photocurrent 
on the etched-facet side as:

𝐼𝑃𝐷 = 𝑇2

𝑇1

𝑅𝑃𝐷𝑇𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟→𝑃𝐷𝑃1

We can extend this relationship to the wafer-level measurement case, where both facets have 
equal transmission and reflection (i.e., 𝑇1 = 𝑇2 = 𝑇 and 𝑃1 = 𝑃2 = 𝑃 ), which reduces the 
relationship to:

𝐼𝑃𝐷 = 𝑅𝑃𝐷𝑇𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟→𝑃𝐷𝑃

Finally, we can express the total output power of the NR laser from the photocurrent readout, as 
depicted in fig. 5:

𝑃𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 2
𝐼𝑃𝐷

𝑅𝑃𝐷𝑇𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟→𝑃𝐷

Data availability
The measured and presented datasets in this study are available from B.K. or J.V.C. upon 
reasonable request.

Code availability
The evaluation scripts and employed models are available from B.K. or J.V.C. upon reasonable 
request.


Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge support from the staff of imec’s 300 mm pilot line.

Funding
This work was funded by imec’s industry-affiliation R&D program on Optical I/O.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
B.K. and J.V.C. initiated the project. Y.D.K., D.Y., M.P, B.K. and J.V.C. designed the NR devices. 
Y.D.K. and S.K.P. performed TCAD modelling of the devices. Optical simulations were carried out 
by Y.D.K., D.Y., and D.C. Definition of the process flow was done by D.Y., M.P., B.K. and J.V.C. 
M.B., D.C. and B.K. executed NR growth and conducted crystal characterization. Coordination of 
the wafer fabrication in the 300 mm CMOS pilot line was done by D.Y., N.K., P.V. and M.P. H.S. 
carried out electrical and optical measurements on die level and wafer level, P.-Y.H. performed 
early reliability tests. N.K. developed the die level setup and performed initial die level 
measurement. A.M. developed the III-V etch. A.A.Y. built the self-homodyne interferometric setup, 
performed linewidth measurements of NR lasers and analysed the results under supervision from 
G.M. and D.V.T. C.C. conducted theoretical investigation of the NR laser. Y.D.K., C.C. D.Y., D.V.T, 
B.K. and J.V.C. supervised the project and analysed the results. C.C. and J.V.C. wrote the 
manuscript with inputs from all the authors.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Charles Caer, Didit 
Yudistira, Bernardette Kunert or Joris Van Campenhout.


Extended Data Fig.1 | High-level process flow of the GaAs nano-ridge device fabrication. a
Starting with a 300 mm silicon wafer (001). b Silicon ridge patterning. c STI oxide deposition and 
n++-implantation. d Si trench patterning. e MOVPE growth of GaAs nano-ridges. f Oxide 
deposition and planarization. g III-V dry etch, oxide deposition and planarization. h Oxide re
deposition and planarization. i W plug contact formation. j Cu damascene metallization.


Extended Data Fig.2 | Temperature and current-dependent measurements of a 2-mm long 
single-mode NR laser. a L-I characteristics for temperatures ranging from 25 to 60 °C, showing 
the large spontaneous emission below threshold. b Threshold current as a function of 
temperature extracted from a, yielding a characteristic temperature 𝑇1 of 29.0 K. c Slope 𝜂𝑑 as a 
function of temperature extracted from a, yielding a characteristic temperature 𝑇2 of 94.9 K. d
Optical spectra at a current of 35 mA for temperatures ranging from 25 to 60 °C, showing SMSR 
exceeding 20 dB up to 55 °C, while the laser is at threshold when tested at 60 °C. e Laser 
wavelength as a function of temperature, showing a linear slope of 71.1 pm/K extracted from the 
optical spectra in d. f Optical spectra at a temperature of 25 °C for currents ranging from 20 to 35 
mA, showing a SMSR exceeding 30 dB. g Laser wavelength as a function of current, showing a 
linear slope of 13.6 pm/mA extracted from the optical spectra in f.


Extended Data Fig. 3 | Wafer maps of the mean threshold current and mean slope 
efficiency for the different laser lengths. Wafer maps showing the distribution of the mean 
threshold current per die for (a) 1-mm long (b) 1.5-mm long, and (c) 2-mm long nano-ridge 
lasers. Wafer maps showing the distribution of the mean slope efficiency per for (d) 1-mm long 
(e) 1.5-mm long, and (f) 2-mm long nano-ridge lasers










Supplementary information to GaAs nano-ridge laser 

diodes fully fabricated on 300 mm CMOS pilot line

S1. Mirror reflectivity

The mirror reflectivity at the cleaved facet is calculated with 3D FDTD (Ansys Lumerical software). We consider normal 
incidence of a Gaussian beam (with 0.5 µm mode-field diameter) at the nano-ridge (NR)/air interface (fig. S1a). We get the 
transmission and reflection spectra displayed in fig. S1b, yielding 45 % and 37 % at the wavelength range of interest (near 
1020 nm). Finally, the far field radiation pattern is depicted in fig. S1c, showing strong beam divergence along the horizontal 
axis. 

Fig. S1. a, Cross-section of the simulated structure along the propagation axis, with the broad Gaussian source directly launched in the NR 

and the two monitors to detect the transmitted and reflected part of the beam. b, Reflection and transmission spectrum. c, Simulated far-field 

profile of the beam radiated by the NR cleaved facet.

We also carried out 3D FDTD simulations to assess the impact of the etched facet angle. As this etched facet forms the second
mirror of the NR laser cavity, it is essential to evaluate the influence of the sidewall angle on the mirror reflection and 
transmission. This is also important for estimating the amount of power coupled to the inline photodiode (PD) and radiated 
vertically for light collection with a multimode fibre (MMF). Our simulation results are depicted in fig. S2. We consider an 
etched area filled with oxide along the NR axis characterized by its sidewall angle φ, its depth D and its length L (fig. S2a). In 
the simulation cell, three monitors are placed such as to detect the reflected power by the etched facet, the transmitted power 
through the inline PD facet and the power scattered upward and collected by an MMF. An inset showing a cross-sectional high-
angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of the etched (fig. S2a) indicates 
that for our fabricated devices, the sidewall angle is 12° while the etch depth is 1000 nm. We estimate from the laser rate 
equation model that a minimum reflection of 2.5 % is required to reach threshold (dashed line in fig. S2b-c). We observe that 
for our etched facets, the reflection is ~5 % when L is 4 µm (fig. S2b) and 1 µm (fig. S2c). The transmission into the inline PD 
is estimated to be around ~12.5 % (fig. S2d), while ~1 % of the power is scattered upwards (fig. S2e). This estimation enables 
to correlate the collected photocurrent with the total emitted power from the NR laser.

Fig. S2. a, Cross-section of the simulated structure along the propagation axis, with the broad Gaussian source directly launched in the NR 
and the three monitors to detect the transmitted and reflected part of the beam along the NR axis, as well as the power scattered upwards, 

emulating the case of light collection with a multi-mode fibre. Inset shows an HAADF-STEM picture of an etched facet, showing an etch depth 
around 1000 nm and a sidewall angle of 12°. b, Facet reflection as a function of sidewall angle for various etch depths D in the case of a gap 

L=4 µm. c, Facet reflection as a function of sidewall angle for various etch depths D in the case of a gap L=1 µm. d, Transmission into the 

inline photodiode as a function of sidewall angle for various etch depths. e, Power radiated into free space as a function of sidewall angle for 

various etch depths D in the case of a gap L=4 µm.

a
b
c

a

b
c

d
e


S2. Laser rate equations

The standard laser rate equations describe the intracavity dynamics of carrier and photon densities 𝑁 and 𝑁𝑝 [1]:

𝑑𝑁
𝑑𝑡 = 𝜂𝑖𝐼

𝑞𝑉𝑎

− 𝐴𝑁 − 𝐵𝑁2 − 𝐶𝑁3 − 𝑣𝑔𝑔0 log ( 𝑁

𝑁𝑡𝑟

) 𝑁𝑝

𝑑𝑁𝑝
𝑑𝑡 = (Γ𝑣𝑔𝑔0 log ( 𝑁

𝑁𝑡𝑟

) − 𝛾𝑝) 𝑁𝑝 + Γ𝛽𝐵𝑁2

Recalling that the laser is at threshold when the modal gain exactly compensates the total loss of the laser, we set the threshold 
modal gain as:

Γ𝑔𝑡ℎ = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑚

This allows us to readily express the threshold carrier density:

𝑁𝑡ℎ = 𝑁𝑡𝑟 exp (𝛼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑚

Γ𝑔0

)

Since we are operating our lasers in continuous wave, we can reduce the rate equations to the steady-state case. As no 
stimulated emission occurs at threshold, we get:

0 = 𝜂𝑖𝐼𝑡ℎ

𝑞𝑉𝑎

− 𝐴𝑁𝑡ℎ − 𝐵𝑁𝑡ℎ

2 − 𝐶𝑁𝑡ℎ

3

0 = −𝛾𝑝𝑁𝑝 + Γ𝛽𝐵𝑁2

We finally obtain the threshold current value:

𝐼𝑡ℎ = 𝑞𝑉𝑎

𝜂𝑖

(𝐴𝑁𝑡ℎ + 𝐵𝑁𝑡ℎ

2 + 𝐶𝑁𝑡ℎ

3 )

As the gain is clamped at threshold, we can express above threshold the steady-state carrier density rate equation:

𝜂𝑖𝐼
𝑞𝑉𝑎

− 𝑞𝑉𝑎

𝜂𝑖

(𝐴𝑁𝑡ℎ + 𝐵𝑁𝑡ℎ

2 + 𝐶𝑁𝑡ℎ

3 ) − 𝑣𝑔𝑔𝑡ℎ𝑁𝑝 = 0

With appropriate substitutions, we have:

𝑣𝑔𝑔𝑡ℎ𝑁𝑝 = 𝜂𝑖𝐼

𝑞𝑉𝑎

− 𝜂𝑖𝐼𝑡ℎ

𝑞𝑉𝑎

We get the linear relationship between intracavity photon density and the injected current:

𝑁𝑝 =
𝜂𝑖

𝑞𝑉𝑎𝑣𝑔𝑔𝑡ℎ

(𝐼 − 𝐼𝑡ℎ)

To obtain the total output power, we can readily express the energy stored in the cavity:

𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑣 = ℏ𝜔𝑁𝑝

𝑉𝑎
Γ

The total output power corresponds to the energy loss rate through the mirrors, that is:

𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡 = 𝑣𝑔𝛼𝑚𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑣

By applying the appropriate substitutions, we get:

𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡 =
𝜂𝑖𝛼𝑚

𝛼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑚

ℏ𝜔
𝑞 (𝐼 − 𝐼𝑡ℎ) = 𝜂𝑖𝜂𝑑

ℏ𝜔
𝑞 (𝐼 − 𝐼𝑡ℎ)

Where 𝜂𝑑 = 𝛼𝑚/(𝛼𝑚 + 𝛼𝑖) is the slope efficiency. The output power per facet can be expressed by adding a coefficient 𝐹1(2)
derived from the facet reflectivity 𝑟1(2) and transmittivity 𝑡1(2):

𝐹1(2) =

𝑡1(2)

2

(1 − 𝑟1(2)

2
) + 𝑟1(2)

𝑟2(1) (1 − 𝑟2(1)

2
)


The expression of 𝐹1(2) also accounts for lossy mirrors when 𝑟1(2)

2
+ 𝑡1(2)

2
< 1. We can therefore relate the measured output 

power at each facet 𝑃1(2):

𝑃1(2) = 𝐹1(2)𝜂𝑖𝜂𝑑

ℏ𝜔
𝑞 (𝐼 − 𝐼𝑡ℎ)

To model our NR devices using the laser rate equation model, we summarize the different parameter definitions and their 
respective values in Table 1.

Parameter name
Definition
Value
Source

𝜼𝒊
QW injection efficiency
0.85
TCAD simulations

𝒒
Electron charge
1.6021892 × 10−19 C
Fundamental constant

𝑽𝒂
Active volume
𝑁𝑄𝑊 × ℎ𝑄𝑊 × 𝑊𝑄𝑊 × 𝐿
HAADF-STEM

𝑵𝑸𝑾
Number of quantum wells
3
HAADF-STEM

𝒉𝑸𝑾
Quantum well thickness
12 nm
HAADF-STEM

𝑾𝑸𝑾
Quantum well width
400 nm
HAADF-STEM

𝑳
Laser length
1, 1.5 and 2 mm
Designed

𝑨
Shockley-Read-Hall 

coefficient

4 × 107 s
From measurement fit

𝑩
Bimolecular recombination 

coefficient

1 × 10−10 cm3. s−1
Ref [2]

𝑪
Auger recombination 

coefficient

3.5 × 10−30 cm6. s−1
Ref [2]

𝒗𝒈
Group velocity
𝑐/𝑛𝑔
Ansys Lumerical

Simulations

𝒈𝟎
Gain coefficient
1200 cm−1
Ref [3]

𝑵𝒕𝒓
Transparency carrier 

density

1.8 × 1018 cm3. s−1
Ref [3]

𝚪
Confinement factor
𝑁𝑄𝑊 × Γ0 = 0.08
Ansys Lumerical 

Simulations

𝑹𝟏
Etched facet reflection 

coefficient

0.05
Ansys Lumerical

Simulations

𝑹𝟐
Etched / cleaved facet 
reflection coefficient

0.05 / 0.37
Ansys Lumerical 

Simulations

𝜶𝒎
Mirror loss
1
𝐿 log (
1

√𝑅1𝑅2

)
Ansys Lumerical 

Simulations

𝜶𝒊
Internal loss
57 cm−1
Ansys Lumerical 

Simulations

𝜸𝒑
Photon decay rate
𝑣𝑔 × (𝛼𝑖 + 𝛼𝑚)
= 0.5432 THz

Ansys Lumerical 

Simulations

𝜷
Spontaneous emission 

factor

1.5 × 10−2
From measurement fit

Table 1: List of parameters and their respective values used to model our NR lasers.

S3. Optical loss

The intracavity photon loss rate 𝛾𝑝 is a key attribute driving laser performance. A high mirror loss rate 𝑣𝑔𝛼𝑚 is desired to 
maximize the output power and wall-plug efficiency through a large slope efficiency 𝜂𝑑, but competes with the need to have a 
small intracavity photon loss rate 𝛾𝑝 to minimize the threshold current, as the total intracavity loss can in some cases exceeds 
the maximum achievable modal gain, preventing lasing operation.

In the demonstrated nano-ridge lasers, the presence of W vias in the vicinity of the active region induces optical scattering 
and absorption. These vias pierce through the InGaP passivation layer and land on the p-doped GaAs layer to form the anode. 
The arrangement of these W plugs with respect to the NR waveguide requires a careful optimization. Fig. S3 shows the optical 
loss spectrum for a one-dimensional array of tungsten contact plugs with 150 nm plug diameter and 300 nm plug pitch (50 % 
fill factor) in blue, similarly to the case depicted in fig. 2e in the main text. The loss spectrum is calculated using 3D FDTD 
simulations by launching the fundamental TE mode into the laser waveguide and observing the transmission through a 
segment of fixed length with tungsten plugs. The resulting optical loss is relatively flat across wavelength and is as high as 
1500 cm−1. Such a high loss number cannot be compensated by the gain from the quantum wells and therefore prevents the 
device from lasing. We observe that the propagating light quicky decays as shown in fig. 2e from the main text.

The absorption loss can be reduced by reducing the plug density. By increasing the pitch from 0.3 µm to 4.8 µm while keeping 
the plug diameter fixed at 150 nm, the plug density is reduced by a factor of 16 which should result in a similar decrease in 
optical loss. Figure S1 shows the simulated loss spectrum by 3D FDTD for this configuration in orange. As expected, the 
baseline loss decreases by roughly a factor of 16 from 1500 cm−1 down to 100 cm−1. However, the loss spectrum is no longer
flat but displays several dips where the optical loss reaches values as low as 19 cm−1 at a dip wavelength near 1040 nm.


To understand the nature of these low loss dips, we have investigated light propagation through the nano-ridge waveguide 
structure. First, let us consider the nano-ridge waveguide without the tungsten contact plugs. This waveguide supports 
multiple eigenmodes. The 5 modes with the lowest orders are shown in Table 2 at a wavelength of 1020 nm, from TE00 to TE11. 

When we inspect the field profile from the 3D FDTD simulation with 4.8 µm plug pitch at the dip wavelength (see fig. S2), we 
observe a beating pattern with a 1.6 µm beating period. The CON35 pitch is a multiple of the beating period and the field 
profile is aligned in such a way that there is minimal interaction between the optical field and the tungsten plug, resulting in 
low optical loss. The engineering of the interference patterns between these two modes through the optimization of the p-
contact pitch is crucial to reduce the internal loss to a level that enables to reach threshold. As we have seen, setting the CON35 
pitch to 4.8 µm in our case allows reducing the optical loss down to 19 cm−1.

S4. Linewidth measurements

The self-homodyne interferometric setup used to measure the laser linewidth of various devices is depicted in fig. S5a. The 
device under test (DUT) is electrically probed by DC needles connected to a Keithley current source. A current compliance is 
set to 20 mA to prevent from damaging the laser diode. The laser light is collected at the cleaved facet forming one of the laser 
cavity mirrors by a lensed fibre. This fibre is connected to a fibered Mach-Zehnder interferometer containing a polarization 
controller (PC) in one arm and a 1 km long fibre delay line in the other arm. The combined signal from the two arms is collected 
by a balanced photodiode (400 MHz balanced photodetector Thorlabs PDB471C-AC) and the electrical readout signal is sent 
to an Electrical Spectrum Analyzer (Rhode & Schwartz 100 Hz-13 GHz), enabling extraction of the laser phase noise. No 

Table 2. Simulations showing nano-ridge cross-section supporting multiple higher order modes with different effective indices.

Fig. S4. a, Simulated electric field propagation along the z axis, showing a beating pattern with a period of 1.6 µm. b, Cross-section taken 
below the W plug, showing the TE00 mode profile pushed away from the top surface of the NR and well confined in the centre of the NR. c, 
Cross-section of the NR away from the plug at the middle of the beating pattern, showing the TE02 mode extending across the NR vertical 

a

b
c


acousto-optic modulator (AOM) is used in the setup to offset the frequency due to lack of AOM in the laser wavelength range 
(~ 1030 nm) in our setup. No optical isolator is placed in front of the DUT, making the laser unshielded from parasitic 
reflections and yielding to an overestimate of the laser linewidth.

In addition to the electrical power spectral density shown in the main text, electrical power spectra of 10 additional devices 
are shown in fig. S5b. The RF power spectra of the measured beat notes are measured at a bias current of 15 and 18 mA, i.e., 

Fig. S3. W contact induced loss as function of wavelength in the case of very dense pitch of 0.3 µm (blue) and in the case of the dense plug 

array with a sparse pitch of 4.8 µm (orange), showing nearly two orders of magnitude reduction of absorption loss near 1040 nm.

Wavelength (nm)

Fig. S5. a, Schematic of the self-homodyne interferometric setup used to measure the laser linewidth. b, Electrical spectra of 11 

measured lasers with superimposed Voigt fit (dashed lines).


> 2Ith. The linewidths extracted using a Voigt fit range from 46 MHz for the best device (as shown in the main text) up to 186 
MHz and are reported in table 3. The difference in linewidths is manifold: 

1.
The laser performance is affected by nano-ridge shape variability across the wafer, impacting the threshold current, 
the slope and the SMSR.

2.
Laser performance depends on the interaction of multiple optical modes, which in turn depends on the (varying) 
nano-ridge laser dimensions  (Fabry-Perot cavity design with transverse mode beating, trench width design for 
aspect ratio trapping, p-contact W plug pitch design). 

3.
The laser is not shielded from optical feedback with an optical isolator.

4.
The laser operates at a moderate bias current (~2 Ith) in order to prevent laser failure. 

5.
No active stabilization besides temperature control is applied to the DUT.

Nonetheless, the measured linewidths place our nano-ridge lasers between commercial distributed feedback (DFB) lasers (≤
1MHz) and vertical cavity surface emission lasers (VCSELs) (> 1 GHz) [4]. More importantly, these measurements confirm 
that our nano-ridge devices are lasing and are not in an amplified spontaneous regime. Additionally, we compare the measured 
linewidths with the theoretical expression of the modified Schawlow-Townes linewidth [5]:

Δ𝜈𝑆𝑇 = ℏ𝜔𝑣𝑔Γ𝑔𝑡ℎ𝑛𝑠𝑝𝛼𝑚

8𝜋𝜂𝑑𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡

(1 + 𝛼2),

Where 𝑛𝑠𝑝 is the population inversion factor, typically around 1.25-1.75, and 𝛼 is the well-known linewidth enhancement 
factor, typically around 4-6 for quantum well lasers. By assuming 𝑛𝑠𝑝 = 1.5 and 𝛼 = 4.5, and by setting the total output power 
of one of our NR lasers to 2.3 mW (for a cleaved facet output power of 0.5 mW), we get  Δ𝜈𝑆𝑇 =30 MHz, which is in line with 
the best measured linewidth (Δ𝜈 =46 MHz) among the devices that were tested.

We expect to strongly reduce the laser linewidth in future designs by suppressing the beating modes, by improving the p-
contact scheme allowing to operate at much large currents and by introducing DFB grating in the nano-ridge devices to reduce 
𝛼𝑚. Future experiments will also expand the laser characterization to include relative intensity noise (RIN) measurements 
and extend the bias current range to larger values to observe reduction of the Schawlow-Townes linewidth.

S5. Epitaxy and crystal defects

Nano-ridge engineering of the III-V nano-ridges (NRs) on trench-patterned Si was carried out by metal-organic vapor phase 
epitaxy (MOVPE) in a 300 mm deposition chamber applying tertiarybutyl arsine (TBAs), tertiarybutyl phosphine (TBP), 
trimethyl arsine (TMAs), triethylgallium (TEGa), trimethylgallium (TMGa) and trimethylindium (TMIn) as group-V and -III 
precursors, respectively. Silane (SiH4) and carbon tetrabromide (CBr4) were used to achieve n- and p-doped layers. Before the 

Fig. S6. a, Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the surface of an array of NRs. b, Cathodoluminescence (CL) image of the same area, 

showing only a single defect in an area covering more than 60 × 60 μm2, assessing the very low threading dislocation density in our NR 

Device Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Measured linewidth (MHz)
46
70.7
132.6
82
85.8
56.7
87.2
124.7
67
162.7
186

Table 3. Measured linewidth for each tested devices, ranging from 46 to 186 MHz.


III-V deposition, the patterned Si wafers were loaded into an Siconi chamber from Applied Materials for the native oxide 
removal from the {111} Si surfaces at the trench bottom at temperatures below 200 °C. The GaAs nucleation was done at 
360 °C applying TEGa before the growth temperature was raised to 590 °C for the n-doped GaAs (~5× 1018 cm-3) trench filling 
and first n-doped box formation using TMGa. The undoped InGaAs/GaAs multi-quantum well (MQW) stack was deposited at 
570 °C and the TMIn/TMGa+TMIn ratio was adjusted to achieve an In-concentration of about 21% inside the QWs. The p- and 
p+-doped GaAs layers (~1× 1019 and 5× 1019 cm-3) were grown at 580 and 550 °C, respectively, and the InGaP layer added 
at high growth temperature again. The TBAs/III, TMAs/III and TBP/III ratio were varied between 4 and 60 as a function of 
the material, doping and growth temperature.

The threading dislocation and planar defect densities of the GaAs NR were investigated before by electron channelling contrast 
imaging (ECCI) and the results are reported in [6,7]. Especially for narrow trenches (< 120 nm), the misfit defect density was 
so low that our ECCI investigation did not provide sufficient defect statistics. To explore a larger sample area, we applied 
cathodoluminescence (CL) on a cleaved wafer piece at 77 K to reduce carrier mobility. The inspected die area was chosen at 
a wafer radius of about 75 mm. 10 images were acquired where each image covers about 60 NRs with a length of 64 µm to 
achieve good defect statistics. Fig. S6 shows a representative image pair: (a) is the standard top-view scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) image to identify any NR line cuts and/or surface particles and (b) the corresponding CL image integrated 
over the complete emission spectra. A dark spot in CL can be caused by the presence of a threading dislocation but also by any 
NR line cut or particle. In this investigation we did not distinguish the defect character but considered every indication of a 
dark spot as a defect. This led to a final defect density based on this first CL investigation of 6 × 104 cm−2.

Planar defects such as micro twins and stacking faults lie in a crystallographic plane perpendicular to the trench line. They
penetrate the complete NR volume and always reach the NR surface. However, they do not cause any dark spot in CL of NRs. 
This is caused by the fact that no partial dislocation, always present at the end of a planar defect, remains inside the NR volume 
as it would be the case for a planar defect in a blanket two-dimensional layer. This conclusion is also supported by the 
observation that the planar defect density of the GaAs NRs, which is in the range of 0.1-0.5 µm-1 (defect per micrometre NR 
length) [6], is much higher than the extracted dark spot density in CL.

S6. Spontaneous emission factor

We extract the spontaneous emission factor 𝛽 from the I-I curve of one of our lasers and we fit it with the laser rate equation 
model. From the fig. S7, we infer a 𝛽 as large as 1.5× 10−2. We attribute this large 𝛽 to the fact that the nano-ridge lasers 
operate below threshold as a SLED (Superluminescent light emitting diode) [8] due to the low mirror reflectivity (5 %) and 
the strong optical confinement.

Fig. S7 I-I plot of a 2mm long laser (blue solid line) showing good agreement with a modelled laser with a 𝛽 = 0.015 (black dashed line).

S7. GaAs-Si diode resistance

We note in the main text that the laser diodes have a relatively large operating voltage of 3-4 V  (see fig. 4a). To assess the 
origin of this large diode voltage, we compare the J-V characteristics (current density vs. diode voltage) of multiple laser diodes 
(𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35= 4.8 µm) with photodetectors (𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35= 0.3 µm), suspecting the sparsity of the W plug contacting the p-GaAs (i.e., a 
large contact pitch  𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35) as a main contributor to high device resistance. As shown in fig. S8a, a voltage of ~3.5V enables  a 
current density of ~1 kA. cm−2 when 𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35= 4.8 µm, while in the case of 𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35= 0.3 µm, it enables  a much higher current 
density of 3-4 kA. cm−2. From the J-V characteristics, we extract the associated series resistances at a voltage of 4 V for the two 
configurations. We infer a mean series resistance of 57 Ω. mm for 𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35= 0.3 µm and 115 Ω. mm for 𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35= 4.8 µm, showing 
a two-fold increase as shown in the box plots in fig. S8b. While a 𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35 of 4.8 µm is key in achieving lasing through mode 
beating minimizing optical loss below the W plug in our current designs, we see room for improving the laser diode operating 


voltage and resistance in future designs by moving the W plugs away from the active region and increasing the W plug density.
Furthermore, increasing the doping level in the p-type GaAs contact layer will help to realize ohmic contacts to further reduce 
operating voltage and improve wall-plug efficiency [9]. 

Fig. S8 a J-V characteristics measured across the wafer for a p-contact W plug pitch (𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35) of 0.3 µm (blue) and 4.8 µm (orange), showing an 

increase of diode voltage for the case of sparse W plugs, up to 4 V at current density 𝐽=1 kA. cm−2. b Extracted series resistance, showing a 

two-fold increase in series resistance when 𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35= 4.8 µm compared to 𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑛35= 0.3 µm.

References

[1]
Coldren, L. A., Corzine, S. W. & Mashanovitch, M. L. Diode lasers and photonic integrated circuits (John Wiley & Sons, 2012).

[2]
Strand, T. A. et al. Low regrowth-interface recombination rates in InGaAs-GaAs buried ridge lasers fabricated by in situ 
processing. Appl. Phys. Lett. 66, 1966–1968 (1995)

[3]
Tsvid, G., et al. Spontaneous Radiative Efficiency and Gain Characteristics of Strained-Layer InGaAs–GaAs Quantum-Well 
Lasers. IEEE J. Quant. Electron. 44, 732-739 (2008).

[4]
Haglund, E. et al. 25 Gbit/s transmission over 500 m multimode fibre using 850 nm VCSEL with integrated mode filter. 
Electron. Lett. 48, 517-519 (2012).

[5]
Henry, C. H. Theory of the Linewidth of Semiconductor Lasers. IEEE J. Quant. Electron. QE-18, 259-264 (1982).

[6]
Kunert, B. et al. How to control defect formation in monolithic III/V heteroepitaxy on (100) Si? A critical review on current
approaches. Semiconductor Sci. Technol. 33, 093002 (2018).

[7]
Baryshnikova, M. et al. Nano-Ridge Engineering of GaSb for the Integration of InAs/GaSb Heterostructures on 300 mm 
(001) Si. Crystals 10 (2020).

[8]
Zhao, Y. et al. Spontaneous emission factor for semiconductor superluminescent diodes. J. Appl. Phys. 85, 3945-3948 
(1999).

[9]
Hsieh, P.-Y., et al. Advanced Current–Voltage Model of Electrical Contacts to GaAs-and Ge-Based Active Silicon Photonic 
Devices. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices (2023).


