Micromagnetics of ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic nanocomposite materials.
Part I: Towards the mesoscopic approach

Sergey Erokhin,1, ∗ Dmitry Berkov,1 and Andreas Michels2

1General Numerics Research Lab, Kahlaische Str. 4, D-07745 Jena, Germany
2Department of Physics and Materials Science, University of Luxembourg,
162A Avenue de la Faiencerie, L-1511 Luxembourg, Grand Duchy of Luxembourg

In the first of two articles, we present here a novel mesoscopic micromagnetic approach for simulat-
ing materials composed of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic phases. Starting with the atomistic
modeling of quasi one-dimensional systems, we explicitly show how the material parameters for the
mesoscopic model of an antiferromagnet can be derived. The comparison between magnetization
profiles obtained in atomistic and mesoscopic calculations (using a Heusler alloy as an example)
proves the validity of our method. This approach opens up the possibility to recover the details of
the magnetization distribution in ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic materials with the resolution of
a few nanometers covering length scales up to several hundreds of nanometers.

Keywords: micromagnetics, Heusler alloys, magnetic nanocomposites, antiferromagnets, neutron scattering

I.
INTRODUCTION

The discovery of strong ferromagnetism of Ni2MnIn
precipitates embedded in an antiferromagnetic (AFM)
NiMn matrix [1] revealed that Heusler-based materials,
which have potential applications in the areas of mag-
netic shape memory, magnetocaloric, and giant magne-
toresistance, might possess an extremely large coercivity
at room temperature. Indeed, in [2] it was demonstrated
that the coercive field of such precipitates exceeds 5 T,
which is remarkable for a rare-earth-free ferromagnetic
(FM) material.
Detailed structural and magnetic characterization of
the samples, including annealing-time and annealing-
temperature studies of the segregation process [3] and
FM resonance measurements [4], supported earlier pre-
sumptions of the existence of 5 to 50 nm-sized inclusions
that possess FM-like properties. The most significant ex-
perimentally observed feature was a vertical shift of the
extracted hysteresis loop of ferromagnetic precipitates [2]
suggesting a strong exchange coupling of the precipitates
to the AFM matrix. Additionaly, the shape of the ex-
tracted magnetization loop, especially its abrupt magne-
tization jump near zero field, suggested that the system
is composed of at least two different magnetic phases.
We emphasize that the described functional properties
are not the unique prerogative of this compound: simi-
lar FM properties are observed in other Heusler alloys
too and are reported for Ni50Mn50−xSbx in [5] and for
Ni50Mn50−xSnx in [6].
The aim of this computational research is the devel-
opment of a comprehensive mesoscopic micromagnetic
model for materials consisting of FM and AFM phases,
such as Heusler-type alloys. Mesoscopic calculations are
needed due to two reasons: first, the sizes of the FM
crystallites are relatively large (in these materials up to

∗ s.erokhin@general-numerics-rl.de

50 nm), rendering simulations in frames of an atomistic
model not feasible due to their enormous computational
effort; second, investigations of collective phenomena in
such systems are highly desirable.
At the same time,
initial simulations at the atomic level are nevertheless
necessary, because experimentally measured mesoscopic
material parameters for both AFM and FM phases are
lacking. Our model, which integrates both atomistic and
mesoscopic simulations, enables a micromagnetic analy-
sis of the system and furnishes a detailed quantitative
account of the corresponding remagnetization processes.
The crucial aspect of our study is the comparison of re-
sults obtained using our model with the previously cited
experimental data.

This two-parts article is organized as follows: the
present (first) part explains the atomistic and mesoscopic
approaches to the micromagnetic model of Heusler al-
loys and provides all the necessary prerequisites for the
three-dimensional (3D) mesoscopic calculations; the sec-
ond part [7] contains the results of this full 3D model, and
a quantitative comparison to the experimentally mea-
sured hysteresis loop of the material under study.
As
a first step, we conducted a thorough literature search
of lattice constants, total magnetic moments, anisotropy
constants, and Curie temperatures of the constituent
materials provided by experimental studies and density
functional theory (DFT) calculations (Sec. II). Next, we
mapped those parameters on a simplified atomic lat-
tice structure and choose the model to describe the ex-
change interaction between the different magnetic phases
(Sec. III). In order to have the possibility to validate our
results and present them in the most convenient form
of magnetization profiles, we restrict ourselves at this
stage to simulations of quasi 1D structures (Sec. IV).
This methodology allows us to determine all the required
mesoscopic parameters by comparing the magnetization
distributions obtained by mesoscopic and atomistic cal-
culations (Sec. V). The developed approach is then gen-
eralized to 3D systems, comprising FM precipitates in an
AFM matrix.

arXiv:2309.17131v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  29 Sep 2023


2

In the second part [7], we employ mesoscopic micro-
magnetic modeling to simulate a single FM inclusion in
an AFM matrix, allowing us to reveal the details of the
magnetization distribution inside both FM and AFM
constituents of this system. We explicitly demonstrate
that the model where the AFM matrix is treated as be-
ing monocrystalline, is qualitatively incorrect, because
it does not lead to a hysteretic magnetization reversal
process, in strong contradiction to experimental observa-
tions. To resolve this issue, we introduce a model where
the AFM matrix is polycrystalline, taking into account
magnetic interactions between its different crystallites,
thus obtaining the AFM/FM polycrystalline nanocom-
posite.
Finally, we provide a quantitative comparison
between the experimentally observed magnetization loop
and our simulation results, demonstrating the validity of
our model.

II.
STRUCTURAL AND MAGNETIC
PARAMETERS

To find out which parameters are known reliably
enough to be used in atomistic simulations, we have per-
formed a thorough search in the literature devoted to ex-
perimental results and DFT calculations of FM and AFM
phases. Experimental data obtained by x-ray diffraction
demonstrate that Ni2MnIn has a crystal structure of L21
type (cubic austenitic state) with a lattice parameter a
that is slightly above 6 ˚A [8, 9]. A detailed study of the
structural and magnetic properties [10], including cumu-
lative experimental results from various scientific groups,
allows to conclude that this FM material has a low Curie
temperature of TC = 310 K and a total magnetic mo-
ment of µtot = 4.1 µB/f.u. (µB = Bohr magneton); cor-
responding parameters (required for the modeling) are
listed in Table I. For structural and magnetic parameters
of other Heusler alloys with compositions different from
that studied here, Ni50Mn34In16 and Ni50Mn35In15, but
demonstrating similar magnetic properties, see [11] and
[12], respectively.

a (˚A) µtot (µB/f.u.) TC (K)
Ref.

6.071
4.1
290
[8]
6.072
4.1
300
[9]
6.07
4.2
310
[10, 13]

TABLE I. Lattice parameter a, total magnetic moment µtot,
and Curie temperature TC of of Ni2MnIn determined experi-
mentally with corresponding references.

First principles calculations for this material (see Ta-
ble II) provide the value of the lattice parameter a, which
is close to the experimental data. Unfortunately, the cal-
culated total magnetic moment substantially depends on
the particular DFT methodology. Therefore, we have re-
lied on experimental data for µtot in our simulations of
this FM material.

a (˚A) µtot (µB/f.u.) Ref.

−
3.7
[14]
6.0624
4.22
[15]
6.053
4.33
[16]
6.072
4.13
[17]
−
4.3
[18]

TABLE II. Lattice parameter a and total magnetic moment
µtot of Ni2MnIn obtained by first principles calculations.

The tetragonal structure of AFM NiMn has been deter-
mined by x-ray and neutron diffraction experiments [19,
20].
In these studies it was also found that the mag-
netic moment of Ni atoms in this structure is almost zero,
while the atomic magnetic moment on the Mn sublattices
is about 4 µB. Magnetic measurements [20] revealed a
N´eel temperature of TN = 1070 K, which is extremely
high compared to typical antiferromagnets (525 K for
NiO and 293 K for CoO). Experimentally obtained lattice
parameters, magnetic moments, and N´eel temperatures
for NiMn are collected in Table III. We also note that

a (˚A) c (˚A) µ(+,−)
Mn
(µB)
TN (K)
Ref.

3.174 3.524
4.0
1140
[19]
3.74
3.52
3.8 ± 0.3
1072 ± 40 [20]

TABLE III. Experimental parameters of NiMn: lattice pa-
rameters a and c, atomic magnetic moment µ of Mn sublat-
tices, and N´eel temperature TN.

this AFM material is the subject of recent investigations,
including the characterization of exchange-bias systems
based on NiMn films [21, 22] and NiMn/CoFe multilayers
used in microwave applications [23].
First principles calculations
[24–27] (see Table IV)
yielded values for the magnetic moment of Mn atoms
which are considerably smaller compared to the corre-
sponding experimental results; hence, we have used the
latter values for our atomistic simulations (see Table III).

µ(+,−)
Mn
(µB)
TN (K) Ref.

3.29
−
[24]
3.2
1187
[25]
3.2 (LSDA), 3.4 (GGCs)
−
[26]

TABLE IV. Magnetic moment µ of Mn sublattices and N´eel
temperature TN of NiMn obtained by first principles calcula-
tions (LSDA: local spin-density approximation; GGCs: gen-
eralized gradient corrections).

We are not aware of any experimental data for
anisotropy constants of the AFM phase (only the
anisotropy type is known).
Taking into account that
these constants are essential for atomistic simulations,
we have searched for ab initio calculations of correspond-
ing values. Unfortunately, this approach faces significant
challenges for ab initio theories based on the local spin-
density formalism.
In accordance with experiment, ab
initio studies have found that the preferred orientation


3

of magnetic moments is perpendicular to the tetragonal
axis of the elementary cell, but the value of even the first-
order anisotropy coefficient strongly differs in dependence
on the specific ab initio method:
−1.7 × 106 erg/cm3

in [26] versus −9.65 × 106 erg/cm3 in [24]. Determina-
tion of the next-order (in-plane) magnetic anisotropy en-
ergy [26] predicted an orientation of magnetic moments
along the edges of the tetragonal cell, resulting in the in-
plane anisotropy value to be only 8 % of its out-of-plane
counterpart. It was pointed out by the authors that the
latter value is at the limit of accuracy of such a calcula-
tion. We have decided to use the values obtained in [26],
as a more advanced method utilizing generalized gradi-
ent corrections is used in this study. Experimental and
theoretical investigations of anisotropy in the FM phase
are absent. However, a large magnetization drop at zero
field seen in the hysteresis of the FM phase [2] suggests
a very low anisotropy coefficient value for this phase.
First principles calculations were also used to study
the exchange stiffness in monocrystalline NiMn [27] and
the corresponding intergrain exchange coupling for thin
films [28]. The latter study demonstrated that this cou-
pling remains significant even in the presence of relatively
large spatial shifts of neighboring atomic planes.

III.
ATOMIC LATTICE STRUCTURE AND
MAPPING OF MAGNETIC PARAMETERS

Simulations of a real AFM/FM interface are not fea-
sible, because there are too many unknown structural
parameters related to the corresponding interfacial dis-
order.
For this reason we have mapped the atomistic
parameters described in the previous section onto a sim-
ple cubic lattice. Examples of generated structures are
presented in Fig. 1, where the colored spheres indicate
the positions of atoms belonging to the different phases
or sublattices. Red and yellow spheres represent atoms
belonging to the different sublattices of the AFM, blue
spheres—atoms of the soft FM phase. The aim of this
figure is to illustrate that even for a simple cubic lat-
tice there exist several possibilities to arrange the atoms
at the AFM/FM interface, which will change the corre-
sponding exchange interaction.
Note that in our model we do not explicitly introduce
a pinned intermediate layer between the FM precipitates
and the AFM matrix as done in [1] to explain the verti-
cal shift of the hysteresis loop. The reasons are twofold:
first, the parameters of such a layer would be completely
unknown, increasing the number of adjustable parame-
ters of our model; second, such a layer is not necessary
to explain neither the high coercivity of the system nor
the vertical shift of the magnetization loop, as it will be
shown in the next sections. Therefore, the atomic mag-
netic moments of the FM phase are directly coupled with
the moments of the AFM phase via exchange-coupling
coefficients between the atoms of different phases.
The following atomistic results are obtained using a

FIG. 1. Part of the simulated atomistic structures contain-
ing the AFM/FM interfaces: red and yellow spheres represent
atoms belonging to different AFM sublattices; blue—atoms
of the soft ferromagnet (FM inclusions). Colored planes show
the planes occupied by atoms of the same type. (a) Structure
with an averaged zero interphase exchange between FM and
AFM phases due to the equal fractions of atoms belonging to
different sublattices of the AFM phase on the interface bound-
ary. (b) Structure with the maximal interphase exchange cou-
pling on both sides of a FM inclusion. The quasi 1D structure
used in actual simulations consists of ∼20000 atoms arranged
on a simple cubic lattice.

FIG. 2. Tetragonal anisotropy surface (left) and its fourfold
symmetry in the x-y-plane (right) obtained for parameters of
a NiMn AFM.

system of atoms arranged on a cubic lattice with dimen-
sions of Nx×Ny×Nz = 333×8×8. Its length L = 100 nm
is chosen in such a way that it can easily incorporate a
domain wall (e.g., Bloch and N´eel types) appearing in
both AFM and FM phases.
Periodic boundary condi-
tions in all directions are applied. At the current stage,
the magnetodipolar interaction is not included, because
we expect that the major contribution to the system en-
ergy comes from the exchange interaction (both within
the FM and AFM phases, and from the interphase ex-
change coupling) and the strong intrinsic anisotropy of
the AFM matrix. If necessary, the magnetodipolar inter-
action can added and evaluated using the lattice-Ewald
method.
Atomistic magnetic parameters (magnetic moment µs


4

and anisotropy coefficient k) found in the literature for
both phases (see Sec. II) were mapped to the correspond-
ing mesoscopic values using the data presented in Sec. II
and the standard relations

µs = MsVa

nat
= Msa3

nat
, k = KVa

nat
= Ka3

nat
.
(1)

Here, nat is the number of atoms per unit cell and Va de-
notes the unit cell volume. For our case of a simple cubic
lattice, we have nat = 1 and Va = a3. An elementary cell
size of a = 0.3 nm has been chosen, close to the corre-
sponding parameter of materials under consideration.
The anisotropy energy density of the tetragonal mag-
netocrystalline anisotropy of the AFM phase has the fol-
lowing form (see Fig. 2):

ϵa = K1 sin2 θ + K2 sin4 θ + K
′
2 sin4 θ cos 4ϕ,
(2)

where θ and ϕ are the polar and azimuthal angles. For
an easy-plane anisotropy type, K1 < 0 and K2 = 0.
The constant K
′
2 defines the basal-plane anisotropy of the
fourth order. As it can be seen from comparison of the
constants K1 and K
′
2 (see Table V) and from Fig. 2, for
our AFM material the anisotropy energy is dominated
by the easy-plane anisotropy and slightly disturbed by
the fourfold symmetry in the x-y-plane.
For the FM
phase, the standard cubic anisotropy type was chosen.
As the exact value of the anisotropy constant K1 of the
FM phase is unknown, we have chosen a small value for
this parameter, typical for a soft FM material. Table V
contains the values of magnetization and anisotropy con-
stants used as input in our mesoscopic simulations and
critical temperatures used to calculate the interatomic
exchange coefficients for atomistic modeling.

Ni2MnIn
(FM)
NiMn
(AFM)

Ms (G)
720
± 716
anisotropy symmetry
cubic
tetragonal
K (erg/cm3)
K1 = 1.0 × 104
K1 = −1.7 × 106

K
′
2 = 0.136 × 106

TC(N) (K)
310
1070

TABLE V. Mesoscopic magnetic parameters used in the sim-
ulations.

To determine the interatomic exchange constants Jij,
we have used the mean-field expression

Jij = 3kBTC

z
,
(3)

which establishes the connection between these constants
and the Curie temperature TC of the ferromagnetic ma-
terial; here, kB is the Boltzmann constant and z is the
number of nearest neighbors in the atomic lattice (we
omit the correction factor in this expression whose value
is usually close to unity). For our choice of the elemen-
tary cell geometry (simple cubic lattice), z = 6 for both
FM and AFM phases.
The exchange constant for the
AFM material obeys the same expression, but with the

FIG. 3. Magnetization curve of an uniaxial AFM with param-
eters taken from Table V. Black solid line—result of the nu-
merical modeling using our atomistic approach. Blue arrows
indicate critical field values obtained analytically [29]: spin-
flop field Hsf and AFM disruption field Hex.

N´eel temperature TN instead of TC in Eq. (3) and the
minus sign before the whole expression used due to the
AFM exchange between sublattices.
Finally, the interatomic exchange coupling JAFM↔FM
between FM and AFM phases is determined in our model
by the equation

JAFM↔FM = κ JFM + |JAFM|

2
,
(4)

where JFM and JAFM are the exchange constants of the
FM and AFM phases and the dimensionless coefficient
0 ≤ κ ≤ 1 accounts for the possible weakening of the
interphase exchange due to interphase boundary imper-
fections. Note that for the quasi 1D atomistic simulations
shown below we have used the geometry shown in Fig. 1,
where only one of two AFM sublattices is exchange cou-
pled to the FM phase.
As a test for our atomistic simulations, we have com-
pared numerically computed magnetization curves for
a homogeneous uniaxial AFM with the corresponding
critical fields derived analytically (see [29] for details).
For the parameters of the uniaxial AFM listed in Ta-
ble V, this analytical theory predicts an AFM disrup-
tion field of Hex = 660 kOe and a spin-flop field of
Hsf = 9.2 × 104 kOe. Figure 3 shows that both values
are perfectly reproduced in our simulations.
We note
that these values are important for the further model-
ing: they show that if the external field does not exceed
660 kOe (66 T), the nearest-neighbor magnetic moments
in the cubic AFM remain in the perfect antiparallel con-
figuration. All the following results have been obtained
in external fields satisfying this condition.
In order to validate our method for FM materials, a
standard calculation of the Bloch-wall profile was car-
ried out using the well known material parameters of


5

FIG. 4.
Magnetization profiles of Bloch walls obtained in
atomistic simulations of the FM phase for the cases of (a) uni-
axial and (b) cubic anisotropy. Solid blue lines represent the
mz component of the unit magnetization vector field m, solid
green lines encode the my component.
Red line is the an-
alytical solution for the Bloch wall in an uniaxial material
(see main text). Thin blue and green lines are initial mag-
netization profiles (before applying the energy minimization
procedure). Materials parameters for Co were assumed.

Co.
First, following the scheme explained above, the
saturation magnetization Ms = 1440 G, the first-order
anisotropy coefficient K1 = 4.1 × 106 erg/cm3, and the
exchange coefficient calculated using TC = 1360 K were
mapped onto a simple cubic lattice. In the starting mag-
netization configuration, atomic magnetic moments were
arranged according to the magnetization profile shown in
Fig. 4 with the thin blue line, while the moments at both
ends were fixed in opposite directions. The energy min-
imization procedure in the absence of an external field
produces a magnetization profile along the x direction of
the sample, which can be compared to the known analyt-
ical solution for a uniaxial anisotropy. If the anisotropy
axis is in the z direction, the corresponding expression
has the form Mz/Ms = − tanh [
�

K1/A(x − L/2)], where
A is the mesoscopic exchange-stiffness constant.
Plot-
ting this expression with the standard exchange stiffness
for Co, A = 3.1 × 10−6 erg/cm, we obtain a remarkable
agreement between the analytical result and the atom-
istic simulations, as shown in Fig. 4(a). For illustrative
purposes and for further comparison with the correspond-
ing wall profile in NiMn, the same parameters were used
to obtain the Bloch wall in a FM with a cubic anisotropy
[Fig. 4(b)].
The same procedure as described above has been ap-

FIG. 5. (a) Magnetization profiles of Bloch walls obtained
in atomistic simulations using two AFM sublattices (red and
yellow lines) in NiMn with magnetic parameters taken from
Table V. (b) The same as in (a), but with the magnetic
anisotropy coefficients increased by one order of magnitude.
Thin lines are initial magnetization profiles.

plied to the AFM NiMn with a tetragonal magnetocrys-
talline anisotropy and the y-z-plane chosen as the easy
anisotropy plane.
Figure 5 displays the magnetization
profiles of the two AFM sublattices, which is qualita-
tively the same as for the cubic FM shown in Fig. 4(b).
For a relatively small in-plane anisotropy constant, we
obtain here a tanh-like Bloch-wall magnetization profile
that is too close to the initial approximation (sin-like in
this instance). For this reason, we had to perform addi-
tional calculations with an enlarged magnetic anisotropy
constant with the result shown in Fig. 5(b).
This en-
largement ensures the accuracy in the determination of
the exchange-stiffness constant.

IV.
QUASI ONE-DIMENSIONAL MODEL:
ATOMISTIC SIMULATION RESULTS

At this point, all the necessary parameters for the
atomistic micromagnetic simulations in frames of our
model are defined. In the following, we present selected
results obtained using the quasi 1D model described
above and discuss hysteresis loops and magnetization dis-
tributions at particular external fields.
In our study we have varied three parameters of the
model, whose variations may lead to strong changes
in the magnetization reversal process: the size dFM of


6

FIG. 6. Remagnetization curves of the FM phase for vari-
ous exchange couplings κ between the FM inclusion (thick-
ness: dFM = 12.6 nm) and the AFM matrix with an y-z easy
plane anisotropy.

the FM inclusion, the exchange weakening κ on the
AFM/FM boundary, and the orientation of the AFM
anisotropy axes with respect to the external field direc-
tion, along which the z-axis of our coordinate system was
directed. Therefore, the parameter space of our simula-
tions is as follows (with cFM the FM volume fraction):

• size of the FM inclusion: dFM = 3 . . . 50 nm
(cFM = 3 . . . 50 %)

• exchange weakening: κ = 0.0 . . . 1.0

• anisotropy-planes orientation of the AFM phase:
easy-plane anisotropies in the x-z, y-z, or x-y co-
ordinate planes .

Figures 6 and 7 display the results of the atomistic model-
ing. Hysteresis loops for different combinations of the pa-
rameters listed above are shown. The change of the hys-
teresis loops under the variation of the exchange weak-
ening κ between the AFM and FM phases is presented
in Fig. 6 for the example of a FM inclusion with a size
of dFM = 12.6 nm. Without the coupling between the
phases (κ = 0), the FM inclusion reverses its mag-
netization at a very small negative external field due
to the weak magnetocrystalline anisotropy of the FM
phase.
When the coupling strength increases, the co-
ercive field increases up to 5 kOe for this size, while for
much smaller inclusions the coercivity achieves 20 kOe
(data not shown). If the coupling strength is constant
(Fig. 7), the coercivity decreases for larger inclusion sizes.
Independent on the inclusion size, the magnetization re-
versal follows the same scenario: an abrupt magnetization
rotation of a significant fraction of magnetic moments of
the FM phase, followed by the gradual remagnetization
of remaining moments at higher fields.
The orientation of the anisotropy axes in the AFM
phase with respect to the external field (see Fig. 1) de-
fines the type of domain wall that is responsible for the

-30
-20
-10
0
10

-0.5

-0.25

0

0.25

0.5

 3.0 nm
 6.6 nm
12.6 nm
18.6 nm
24.6 nm
30.6 nm
36.6 nm
49.6 nm

FIG. 7. Remagnetization curves of the FM phase for various
sizes dFM of a FM inclusion in an AFM matrix with an y-
z easy plane anisotropy.
Exchange weakening between the
phases is κ = 0.2.

FIG. 8.
Magnetization profiles for the quasi 1D model at
the coercive field for a structure with dFM = 12.6 nm. Red
and yellow lines represent the mz profiles of different AFM
sublattices; blue line—mz of the soft FM inclusion. In the
upper image, the exchange weakening is κ = 0.05, in the
lower image κ = 1.0 (perfect coupling).

magnetization reversal in the FM phase. For instance,
a x-z easy plane anisotropy in the AFM results in N´eel-
type walls in the FM inclusion, while a y-z easy plane
leads to Bloch-type walls. The third case of a x-y easy
plane demonstrates significant deviations from the per-
fectly aligned state already at positive fields, because in
this geometry the magnetic moments are initially mag-
netized in the direction that is perpendicular to the easy
plane (the magnetization reversal curve in this case is
symmetric with a zero coercivity). The considerations
presented above are valid for coupled AFM/FM systems
(i.e., with κ > 0).
In the following, we discuss in Figs. 8 and 9 the details
of the remagnetization processes for small and large FM
inclusions. Figure 8 shows the magnetization distribution
at the coercive field of the system with dFM = 12.6 nm.


7

FIG. 9. The same as in Fig. 8, but for a structure with dFM =
36.6 nm.

FIG. 10. Test fit using atomistic and mesoscopic parameters
of Co. Red line—analytical solution for uniaxial anisotropy;
blue circles—atomistic simulation result;
green crosses—
result of the mesoscopic simulation using the exchange-
stiffness constant Aex shown in the inset, which was obtained
by fitting the mesoscopic profile to the atomistic one.

The FM inclusion is almost in a single-domain state and
already a strongly reduced exchange coupling (κ = 0.05)
is sufficient to deflect the magnetic moments on both
sides of the AFM/FM boundary. However, the coupling
strength is not large enough as to eliminate the disconti-
nuity in the magnetization distribution between the two
phases. On the contrary, the magnetization profile in a
system with the perfect coupling (κ = 1.0) is continuous
(lower panel in Fig. 8).
An inclusion with dFM = 36.6 nm, being almost three
times larger than dFM = 12.6 nm, can easily incorporate
a significantly inhomogeneous magnetization configura-
tion in spite of the weak coupling (Fig. 9). The strongly
coupled system (κ = 1.0) demonstrates how the magneti-
zation state in the FM phase might significantly influence
the distribution of magnetic moments in the AFM state.
From the experimental point of view, such a magnetiza-
tion profile is expected to give rise to a strong small-angle
neutron scattering (SANS) signal [30]. Therefore, using
SANS, it should be possible to obtain some (indirect)

FIG. 11. Results of the fitting of domain-wall profiles for the
determination of the mesoscopic exchange coupling. (a) AFM
material:
red and yellow circles—atomistic simulation re-
sults for Bloch walls in two AFM sublattices; green crosses—
mesoscopic fit using the exchange stiffness B shown in the
inset.
(b) FM phase: blue circles—atomistic result; green
crosses—mesoscopic fit using different spatial regions, indi-
cating the pinning of the domain wall at the center.

information on the magnetization state of magnetic mo-
ments belonging to the AFM phase in the neighborhood
of the FM inclusion.

V.
TOWARDS THE MESOSCOPIC APPROACH

The typical sizes of simulated structures in atomistic
simulations (especially in 3D) are limited to several hun-
dreds of interatomic distances in each spatial direction.
Therefore, for the modeling of the remagnetization pro-
cess in 3D systems with sizes of hundreds of nanometers,
the transition to the mesoscopic length scale is manda-
tory.
In this section, we describe the steps necessary
to introduce and validate the corresponding mesoscopic
model.
First, in order to implement a mesoscopic model for
an AFM, it is necessary to introduce an effective vector
that describes the direction of the magnetic moments in
the AFM sublattices with a spatial resolution of a few
nanometers (analogous to the standard procedure in mi-
cromagnetics). This vector coincides with the magnetiza-
tion direction of one of the sublattices and is antiparallel
to the moments of the second sublattice (under the above
described limitation of the external field magnitude). In
the following discussion, we will refer to this vector as a
descriptor of the spatial distribution of magnetization in


8

FIG. 12. Comparison of atomistic and mesoscopic magnetization profiles at different external field values (see insets) (κ = 1;
dFM = 30 nm). Atomistic approach: red and yellow lines correspond to the AFM sublattices; blue lines—FM phase. Mesoscopic
approach: magenta line—AFM; green line—FM. Note that there is no analogue of the yellow line in the mesoscopic approach.

FIG. 13. Comparison of the remagnetization curves of the
FM phase for (a) atomistic and (b) mesoscopic simulations
and for different values of the exchange weakening κ on the
AFM/FM interface (see legend in the left panel). Note that
while the curves for large couplings (κ ≥ 0.5) are quite similar,
the behavior for small (but nonzero) κ is very different.

the AFM phase.
Second, in analogy to conventional micromagnetics, we
have to define the size of finite elements having a constant
“magnetization” (usually a few nanometers, 3.5 nm in our
case) and all the interaction coefficients both within one
phase and between the different phases. The mesoscopic
saturation magnetization and anisotropy coefficient for a
FM and for both sublattices of an AFM can be derived
from their atomistic counterparts using Eqs. (1). In order
to obtain the mesoscopic exchange-stiffness constant Aex
and its analogue for the AFM phase Bex, it is necessary
to employ a special fitting procedure due to the (weakly)
nonlocal nature of the exchange interaction. This proce-
dure consists of finding such an exchange-stiffness con-
stant for which the mesoscopically simulated Bloch-wall
profile coincides with its atomistic counterpart.
As a test calculation (see Fig. 10), we have used the

magnetic materials parameters of Co, obtaining again
for the exchange-stiffness constant the textbook value
of 3.1 × 10−6 erg/cm. Figure 11 presents the results of
the fittings for AFM and FM phases, giving the val-
ues Bex = 2.9 × 10−6 erg/cm for the AFM phase and
Aex = 0.6 × 10−6 erg/cm for FM phase.
In the latter
case an enlarged anisotropy constant was used in order
to increase the accuracy of the fit (see the discussion re-
lated to Fig. 5). We have also pinned the domain wall at
the center of the simulated region (x = 50 nm) to keep
the magnetization profile symmetric.
Next, we have compared the magnetization profiles ob-
tained by the atomistic and mesoscopic modeling for the
system containing a FM inclusion within the AFM phase.
This comparison is of special importance, because it al-
lows us to draw the conclusion about the reliability of
the mesoscopic approach for the following simulations.
Corresponding plots are shown in Fig. 12. We note that
atomistic and mesoscopic calculations were performed in-
dependently, only using the magnetic materials param-
eters corresponding to the respective spatial scale. As
a result, we achieved an excellent match between atom-
istic and mesoscopic approaches that allows us to study
the magnetization distribution in AFM/FM composites
at a length scale of the order of hundreds of nanometers,
while resolving its details at the nanometer scale.
Special attention deserves the relation between the
exchange-weakening coefficients κ present in both the
atomistic and mesoscopic methods.
This relation is
highly nontrivial, because these coefficients lead in differ-
ent approaches to the weakening of the exchange coupling
between two very different “building blocks” of corre-
sponding models. We have revealed this relation by com-
paring remagnetization curves obtained by both meth-
ods. The result is presented in Fig. 13, where the same
values for the exchange-weakening coefficient 0 ≤ κ ≤ 1
for the two approaches have been used.


9

VI.
CONCLUSION

In the first of two articles, we have presented a com-
bined atomistic/mesoscopic approach for micromagnetic
simulations of systems containing coupled ferromagnetic
(FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) phases. The reliabil-
ity of the atomistic simulations was tested using single-
phase FM and AFM materials, where we have simulated
Bloch-wall magnetization profiles and compared them
with analytical results for the same system. Further, the

developed methodology was validated by comparing the
results of mesoscopic simulations with the correspond-
ing ones of atomistic modeling for quasi one-dimensional
systems, being either single-phase or consisting of a FM
inclusion within an AFM phase. In the second part [7],
we will extend our simulation methodology to polycrys-
talline systems and show that the experimentally found
large coercivity of ∼5 T for a Heusler-type alloy [2] can
be naturally explained by the pinning of the FM phase
via the extremely hard AFM.

[1] A. C¸akır, M. Acet, and M. Farle, Sci. Rep. 6, 28931
(2016).

[2] F. Scheibel, D. Spoddig, R. Meckenstock, T. Gottschall,
A. C¸akır, T. Krenke, M. Farle, O. Gutfleisch, and
M. Acet, Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 192406 (2017).

[3] L. Dincklage, F. Scheibel, A. C¸akır, M. Farle, and
M. Acet, AIP Advances 8, 025012 (2018).

[4] F. Scheibel, D. Spoddig, R. Meckenstock, A. C¸akır,
M. Farle, and M. Acet, AIP Advances 7, 056425 (2017).

[5] Z. Wanjiku,
A. C¸akır,
F. Scheibel,
U. Wiedwald,
M. Farle, and M. Acet, Journal of Applied Physics 125,
043902 (2019).

[6] A. C¸akır, H. N. Koyun, M. Acet, and M. Farle, Journal of
Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 499, 166265 (2020).

[7] S. Erokhin, D. Berkov, and A. Michels, Phys. Rev. B
108, xyzabc (2023).

[8] T. Krenke, M. Acet, E. F. Wassermann, X. Moya,
L. Ma˜nosa, and A. Planes, Physical Review B 73,
10.1103/PhysRevB.73.174413 (2006).

[9] T. Kanomata, T. Yasuda, S. Sasaki, H. Nishihara,
R. Kainuma, W. Ito, K. Oikawa, K. Ishida, K.-U. Neu-
mann, and K. Ziebeck, Journal of Magnetism and Mag-
netic Materials 321, 773 (2009).

[10] T.
Miyamoto,
W.
Ito,
R.
Umetsu,
R.
Kainuma,
T. Kanomata, and K. Ishida, Scripta Materialia 62, 151
(2010).

[11] R. Umetsu, W. Ito, K. Ito, K. Koyama, A. Fujita,
K. Oikawa, T. Kanomata, R. Kainuma, and K. Ishida,
Scripta Materialia 60, 25 (2009).

[12] R. Y. Umetsu, A. Fujita, W. Ito, T. Kanomata, and
R. Kainuma, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 23,
326001 (2011).

[13] T. Miyamoto, W. Ito, R. Y. Umetsu, T. Kanomata,
K. Ishida, and R. Kainuma, MATERIALS TRANSAC-
TIONS 52, 1836 (2011).

[14] V. V. Godlevsky and K. M. Rabe, Physical Review B 63,
10.1103/PhysRevB.63.134407 (2001).

[15] A. T. Zayak, P. Entel, K. M. Rabe, W. A. Adeagbo,
and M. Acet, Physical Review B 72, 10.1103/Phys-
RevB.72.054113 (2005).

[16] J. Bai, N. Xu, J.-M. Raulot, Y. D. Zhang, C. Esling,
X. Zhao, and L. Zuo, Journal of Applied Physics 112,
114901 (2012).

[17] C.-M. Li, H.-B. Luo, Q.-M. Hu, R. Yang, B. Johans-
son, and L. Vitos, Physical Review B 86, 10.1103/Phys-
RevB.86.214205 (2012).

[18] C. L. Tan, Y. W. Huang, X. H. Tian, J. X. Jiang, and
W. Cai, Applied Physics Letters 100, 132402 (2012).

[19] J. Kasper and J. Kouvel, Journal of Physics and Chem-
istry of Solids 11, 231 (1959).

[20] E. Kr´en, E. Nagy, I. Nagy, L. P´al, and P. Szab´o, Journal
of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 29, 101 (1968).

[21] S. Groudeva-Zotova, D. Elefant, R. Kaltofen, D. Tietjen,
J. Thomas, V. Hoffmann, and C. Schneider, Journal of
Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 263, 57 (2003).

[22] V. Vas’kovskiy, M. Moskalev, V. Lepalovskij, A. Svalov,
A. Larra˜naga, K. Balymov, and N. Kulesh, Journal of
Alloys and Compounds 777, 264 (2019).

[23] Y. Lamy and B. Viala, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics
42, 3332 (2006).

[24] A. Sakuma, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Mate-
rials 187, 105 (1998).

[25] T. C. Schulthess and W. H. Butler, Journal of Applied
Physics 83, 7225 (1998).

[26] D. Spis´ak and J. Hafner, Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 11, 6359 (1999).

[27] K. Nakamura, T. Ito, A. J. Freeman, L. Zhong, and
J. Fernandez-de Castro, Journal of Applied Physics 93,
6879 (2003).

[28] T. Kai, H. Fujiwara, T. C. Schulthess, and W. H. Butler,
Journal of Applied Physics 89, 7940 (2001).

[29] S. Vonsovksii, Magnetism
(Wiley, New York, 1974)
Chap. 22.

[30] A. Michels, Magnetic Small-Angle Neutron Scattering: A
Probe for Mesoscale Magnetism Analysis (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, 2021).


