Microdroplet Approach for Measuring Aqueous Solubility and Nucleation Kinetics of a 
Metastable Polymorph: The case of KDP Phase IV

Ruel Cedeno1, Romain Grossier1, Nadine Candoni1, Stéphane Veesler1*

1CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université, CINaM (Centre Interdisciplinaire de Nanosciences de Marseille), 
Campus de Luminy, Case 913, F-13288 Marseille Cedex 09, France

TOC Graphic

Abstract

Solubility and interfacial energy are two fundamental parameters underlying the competitive nucleation 
of polymorphs. However, solubility measurement of metastable phases comes with a risk of solvent-
mediated transformations which can render the results unreliable. In this work, we present a rapid 
microfluidic technique for measuring aqueous solubility of the metastable form using KDP Phase IV as a 
model system. This bracketing approach involves analyzing the dissolution behavior of crystals in contact 
with supersaturated microdroplets generated via evaporation. Then, with the help of our recently 
developed nucleation time measurement technique, together with Mersmann calculation of interfacial 
energies from solubilities, we were able to access the interfacial energies of both metastable and stable 
phases. To gain further insights into the observed nucleation behavior, we employed the Classical 
Nucleation Theory (CNT) to model the competition of polymorphs using our measured solubility and
calculated interfacial energies.  The results show that the stable form is favored at lower supersaturation 
while the metastable form is favored at higher supersaturation, in good agreement with our observations 
and experimental reports in the literature. Overall, our microfluidic approach allows access to 
unprecedentedly deep levels of supersaturation and reveals an interesting interplay between 
thermodynamics and kinetics in polymorphic nucleation. The experimental methods and insights 
presented herein can be of great interest, notably in the mineral processing and pharmaceutical industry.


INTRODUCTION

The solubility of metastable polymorphs with respect to the stable form is an important information 
required in quantifying the kinetics of competitive polymorphic nucleation. However, obtaining the 
solubility of the metastable phases can be challenging due to the risk of solvent-mediated transformation 
during measurement. This is the case for potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH2PO4 or KDP), one of the 
most important optoelectronic materials.1 While its tetragonal polymorph (Phase II, I4̅2d) is the most 
stable at ambient conditions, KDP can crystallize in several polymorphic forms depending on temperature 
and pressure.2 Recently, the high pressure monoclinic polymorph (Phase IV, P21c) that is usually accessible 
at 1.6 GPa has been crystallized at ambient conditions. This was achieved by carefully eliminating
impurities and potential heterogeneous nucleation sites such as in specially-treated glass1 or in levitating 
droplets.3 Moreover, KDP Phase IV has been shown to have interesting optical properties.1 However, due 
to the lack of solubility data for Phase IV, there has been no quantitative studies on its nucleation barrier
in comparison with the stable tetragonal Phase II. Indeed, the solubility of the metastable polymorph in 
water is difficult to measure using conventional methods4 because it readily converts to the stable 
tetragonal Phase II form upon contact with moisture.5 As a result, the interfacial energies governing the
competitive nucleation kinetics of the metastable and stable polymorphs are currently lacking.

In this work, we report a rapid microdroplet approach to estimate the ambient aqueous solubility of the 
metastable Phase IV KDP. This involves analyzing the dissolution behavior of crystals of the metastable 
phase in contact with supersaturated microdroplets, with respect to the stable phase, generated via
evaporation. Moreover, with the help of our measured solubility and classical nucleation theory, we 
calculated its interfacial energy by employing our recently-developed microdroplet-based nucleation 
measurement technique.6 Furthermore, upon applying the empirical correlation of Mersmann7 between 
solubility and interfacial energy, we analyze the interplay of thermodynamics and kinetics in the 
competitive nucleation of the metastable and stable polymorph. Our investigation on KDP polymorphs
reveal interesting insights into the competitive nucleation of stable and metastable crystals. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Solubility Measurement. The schematic diagram of the setup is shown in Figure 1a. Given that the 
solubility of the metastable polymorph is higher than that of the stable polymorph, the solution that 
would equilibrate with the metastable polymorph must be supersaturated with respect to the stable 
polymorph. To generate supersaturated solutions while avoiding the nucleation of the stable polymorph, 
we took advantage of the long nucleation times in microdroplets (i.e. nucleation time is inversely 
proportional to volume). To ensure that the evaporation rate is slow enough to reach quasi-equilibrium, 
we submerged the microdroplets in an oil bath (0.8 mm layer of PDMS 10 cSt). For perspective, sessile 
microdroplets (2-3 nL) in air would evaporate within few seconds while those under oil would take several 
hours (see Figure S1 of SI). As shown in our previous work,8 such a system maintains a uniform 
concentration distribution in the microdroplet, i.e. Peclet number << 1. As the initially saturated
microdroplet evaporates, the supersaturation S (i.e. c/csat where csat is the saturation concentration)
slowly increases. Consequently, different supersaturation levels can be achieved by varying the 
evaporation time. The supersaturation ratio S is calculated from the ratio of the volume with respect to 
the initial volume, measured from the lateral optical images. The metastable crystal is then brought in 
contact with the supersaturated microdroplet using a microcapillary. For any given supersaturation S, if 
the crystal dissolves, solubility > Sdissolve ; conversely, if the crystal grows, then the solubility < Sgrow. The 


procedure is done for several incremental supersaturation levels until a reasonable precision is achieved 
on the lower and upper bound of solubility, i.e. Sdissolve < solubility <  Sgrow.

Figure 1. (a) Schematic diagram of solubility measurement. Supersaturation is achieved via evaporation 
starting from initially saturated microdroplet. The dissolution behavior of the metastable crystal when
brought in contact with the supersaturated microdroplet is probed by lateral imaging (b) Schematic 
diagram of the interfacial energy measurement in which the probability distribution of nucleation times
is obtained from hundreds of droplets via image analysis.9 (Figure adapted from Ref.10)

Nucleation time and interfacial energy measurement. The schematic diagram of the setup is shown in 
Figure 1b based on a previously reported experiment protocol in Ref6. However, unlike NaCl that dissolves
upon exposure to humidity (RH > 75%), KDP does not absorb enough moisture to undergo deliquescence, 
preventing the use of the RH cycling technique. Thus, we modify the procedure by generating initially 
saturated microdroplets (i.e. saturation time = 0). This is done at RH close to 100% to minimize possible
evaporation during microdroplet generation. Once the desired number of microdroplets are generated, 
the RH is lowered to 10%, causing the droplets to evaporate and eventually nucleate. Using our tailor-
made evaporation model10, the supersaturation ratio of the microdroplets can be obtained as a function 
of time. Then, we employed the inhomogeneous Poisson distribution coupled with classical nucleation 
theory to extract the interfacial energy from the probability distribution of nucleation times which can be 
written as

𝑃(𝑡) = 1 − exp [− ∫
𝐽(𝑡)𝑉(𝑡)𝑑𝑡

𝑡nuc

𝑡sat

]
(1)

with P(t) as the fraction of microdroplets nucleated after time t, V(t) droplet volume at time t, tsat time at 
which the microdroplet becomes saturated and tnuc nucleation time. 

For the primary nucleation rate J(t), we used the classical nucleation theory (CNT) as


𝐽(𝑡) = 𝐴 exp [− 16𝜋

3

𝛾𝑒𝑓𝑓

3

𝜌𝑠2(𝑘𝑏𝑇)3 ln2 𝑆(𝑡)]
(2)

where A is the pre-exponential factor, γeff is the effective interfacial energy, ρs is the number density of 
formula units in the solid (2.27 × 1028 m-3 for NaCl), kbT is the thermal energy,  S(t) is the supersaturation 
expressed as the ratio of concentrations (concentration at nucleation / concentration at saturation) at 
nucleation at time t (more details in Ref8).

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Initially, we have observed that the crystal nucleated from microdroplet dissolves in the presence of the 
stable crystal (see Video 1 of SI), suggesting the formation of a more soluble metastable phase. To identify 
this phase, we characterized the crystals using powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) and compared it with the 
simulated patterns of known polymorphs. The result is shown in Figure 2a which indicates a match
between our crystals and the KDP Phase IV of Ren et al.1 While the Phase IV crystallized at high pressure
(1.6 GPa) has been observed to transform to Phase I upon pressure release,2 our Phase IV from 
microdroplets remain stable at ambient pressures as evidenced by the absence of Phase I peaks. This is 
also in agreement with Ren et al.1 The SEM image of the Phase IV shown in Figure 2b also reveals a crystal 
habit that is different from what is expected for the stable tetragonal phase II polymorph.11

Figure 2. (a) Powder X-ray diffraction pattern of the commercially available stable tetragonal polymorph
(black), crystals obtained from microdroplet (blue), and the CIF simulated patterns of Phase IV (green) 
and Phase I (red) polymorphs (b) SEM image of the crystal from microdroplet

Having confirmed the formation of KDP Phase IV, we proceed by investigating its aqueous solubility. Note
that the solubility is required in evaluating its supersaturation ratio and in turn, its associated nucleation 
free energy barrier. However, aqueous solubility measurement of a metastable form is technically 
difficult, especially in the case of KDP which has been shown to undergo transformation to the stable 
Phase II in the presence of moisture.5 Consequently, the risk of polymorphic transformation during 
measurement would render the conventional techniques unreliable.  To address this, we report the use 


of a simple approach to rapidly estimate the solubility of the metastable form. This approach takes 
advantage of microdroplets evaporating in oil wherein (1) highly supersaturated states can be achieved 
without premature nucleation of the stable form (2) uniform concentration distribution is achieved, i.e. 
Peclet number << 1, (3) slow evaporation permits sufficient crystal-solution equilibration.

To demonstrate this approach, the snapshots of the solubility measurement in shown in Figure 3
(corresponding videos 2-4 available in SI). Notice that at supersaturation ratio S = 1.5, the metastable 
crystal dissolved upon contact with the microdroplet. In contrast, at S = 2.5, the crystal grew. This suggests 
that the solubility of phase IV lies between 1.5 and 2.5. We then tested several values within this range 
and the results are displayed in Table 1.

Figure 3. Snapshots during the solubility measurement of phase IV at selected times for different 
supersaturation ratios, with respect to phase II, performed at ambient conditions (25˚C, 1 atm, 
RH=0.35).      


Table 1. Dissolution behavior of the metastable crystal inside the microdroplet as a function of 
supersaturation ratio (with respect to the stable form) in the bracketing experiment.

Supersaturation Ratio S with respect to the stable form
Outcome

1.5
dissolve

1.6
dissolve

1.7
dissolve

1.8
~constant

1.9
grow

2.5
grow

We found that at S=1.8, the crystal essentially undergoes neither dissolution nor growth, indicating an 
equilibrium. Thus, the solubility can be conservatively estimated at S = 1.8 ± 0.1 (corresponds to around 
45 ± 2 g KDP per 100 g water at 25oC)12

Figure 4. (a) Bottom-view image of sessile microdroplets (∼200 pL at saturation) used in the nucleation 
kinetic measurement performed at 25oC, 1 bar, 10% RH. This process yields KDP Phase IV as confirmed 
by PXRD. (b) Cumulative probability plot (N= 68, 46, 50 for Trials 1,2,3 respectively) as a function of 
supersaturation ratio with respect to stable form (bottom axis) and metastable form (top axis) fitted
with inhomogeneous Poisson distribution coupled with classical nucleation theory8. 

With the knowledge of the solubility of the metastable polymorph, we would be able to measure its 
interfacial energy from its probability distribution of nucleation times using the experimental setup in
Ref8. The bottom-view optical image is shown in Figure 4a and the resulting probability plots for three 
trials are presented in Figure 4b. As part of data cleaning and pre-processing of induction time results, we 
applied a statistical test (k-sample Anderson Darling test) to identify and eliminate outliers in the dataset.6


We also removed the droplets that showed evidence of droplet interactions (using the image analysis 
protocol in Ref6). Then, we calculated the supersaturation ratio as a function of dimensionless induction 
time using a tailor-made evaporation model10 (details in section S1 of SI). The calculated Peclet number 
(Pe) suggests that the droplets maintain a homogeneous concentration distribution (i.e. Pe << 1, Figure 
S2d of SI). It is worth noting that for aqueous KDP solutions, we achieved unprecedentedly deep levels of 
supersaturation (S > 6 as shown in Figure 4b) which is even higher than in levitating droplets of Lee et al 
(S ≈ 4.1).3 This can be explained in terms of the droplet size; our sessile microdroplets are thousand times 
smaller than that of Lee et al3 (30-200 pL vs 1-8 µL). Indeed, smaller droplets can achieve deeper 
supersaturation levels due to the kinetic and thermodynamic confinement effects.13

Finally, by applying a fitting method  (inhomogeneous Poisson distribution coupled with classical 
nucleation theory)8, we obtained the pre-exponential factor (log A) and the effective interfacial energy 
(γeff) as displayed in Table 1.  To evaluate the reproducibility across the 3 independent trials, we again 
applied the Anderson Darling test, which consequently confirmed that the 3 datasets have statistically 
identical distribution at 95% confidence (p-value = 0.09)

Table 1. Fitted pre-exponential factor and interfacial energy of the metastable KDP Phase IV from the 
probability distribution of nucleation times in Figure 4. 

N
log A (m-3s-1)
γeff (mJ/m2)

Trial 1
68
36.7
56.1

Trial 2
46
38.0
57.2

Trial 3
50
43.9
60.9

Mean
--
39.5 (±8%)
58.1 (±4%)

Our estimated effective aqueous interfacial energy γeff for the metastable KDP Phase IV based on the 
mean of 3 trials is 58 mJ/m2. Alternatively, fitting using the combined dataset (N= 164) resulted in γeff = 
57 mJ/m2 (which is essentially equivalent). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first experimental 
report of the aqueous interfacial energy of KDP Phase IV based on classical nucleation theory and its 
experimental solubility.

In general, metastable forms are expected to have lower γeff in comparison with the stable form. To 
estimate the γeff of the stable form, we employ the empirical correlation by Mersmann7 which can be
written as

𝛾𝑆𝐿 = 𝐾(𝑐𝑠𝑜𝑙)2/3 ln (𝑐𝑠𝑜𝑙

𝑐𝑠𝑎𝑡

)
(3)

with γSL as the interfacial energy (between crystal and solution), K as an empirical constant (identical for 
both polymorphs), and 𝑐𝑠𝑜𝑙 and  𝑐𝑠𝑎𝑡 as the equilibrium solid-state and liquid-phase concentrations (in 
mol/m3) respectively. For the stable Phase II at ambient conditions,  𝑐𝑠𝑜𝑙 = 17179 mol/m3 and  𝑐𝑠𝑎𝑡 =
1621.8 mol/m3 (see Table 1 of Ref7). For the metastable Phase IV, 𝑐𝑠𝑜𝑙 = 17032 mol/m3 (from the ratio 
of solid-state densities). Applying ratio and proportion between the stable and metastable form, the 
empirical constant K is canceled out. This effectively removes the dependence of the model prediction on 


the accuracy of the empirical fitting parameter K (originally defined as 0.414𝑘𝑏𝑇 𝑁𝐴

2/3 where kbT and NA  

correspond to thermal energy and Avogadro’s number respectively)7.

Using our measured solubility ratio of 1.8, the Mersmann correlation yields γstable/γmetastable = 1.35. Knowing 
that γmetastable= 58  mJ/m2, the effective interfacial energy barrier of the stable form (Phase II) is then 
predicted to be around 78 mJ/m2.

With the knowledge of the interfacial energies γeff of both the stable Phase II and metastable Phase IV, we 
can proceed to model the competitive nucleation of the two polymorphs using classical nucleation theory
(equation 2). Given that the mass transfer properties of the supersaturated solution (i.e. diffusivity, 
viscosity, etc) are identical in the liquid phase for both polymorphs, we can suppose that the parameter A 
(related to the mass transfer rate of the monomers towards the nucleus) is similar for both polymorphs, 
as in the analysis of Sato14 and Deij et al.15 Thus, for comparison, we can use the term (J/A) to describe the 
relative nucleation rate. Using γeff = 58 mJ/m2 for the metastable Phase IV (obtained from nucleation 
statistics) and γeff = 78 mJ/m2 for the stable Phase II (Mersmann correlation), the relative nucleation rates
as a function of supersaturation ratio (with respect to both forms) are shown in Figure 5.   

Figure 5. Relative nucleation rate ln(J/A) as a function of supersaturation ratio with respect to the stable 
phase (bottom axis) and the metastable phase (top axis).  

We observe that the stable form is favored at low supersaturations while the metastable one at high 
supersaturations. This result is consistent with the experimental observation of Lee et al.3 This 
phenomenon can be explained by the competition between thermodynamics and kinetics.16 Although the 
metastable form has a lower nucleation barrier (kinetically favored), it experiences a lower 
supersaturation  due to its high solubility (thermodynamically hindered). On the other hand, the stable 


form experiences a higher supersaturation (thermodynamically favored) but it needs to overcome a 
higher nucleation barrier (kinetically hindered). Thus, in the case of KDP, the stable Phase II dominates at 
lower concentrations because the highly soluble Phase IV is not sufficiently supersaturated. At higher 
concentrations, Phase IV dominates as it achieves sufficient supersaturation to overcome its lower 
nucleation barrier.  Overall, our microfluidic experiments and modeling study reveal interesting insights 
on the competitive nucleation of KDP polymorphs.   

CONCLUSION

In this work, we demonstrate a rapid microfluidic approach to measure the aqueous solubility and 
interfacial energy of a metastable polymorph using KDP Phase IV as a model compound. Using our 
measured solubility, we estimated its interfacial energy from its nucleation time statistics. Our results 
reveal that the KDP Phase IV is about 1.8 times more soluble in water than the stable Phase II, and its
estimated aqueous interfacial energy is around 58 mJ/m2. Applying Mersmann correlation7, the interfacial 
energy of the stable phase II is predicted to be around 78 mJ/m2. With these interfacial energies, we used 
the classical nucleation theory to model the competitive nucleation of both polymorphs and the results 
show that the stable phase is favored at lower supersaturation while the metastable phase is favored at 
higher supersaturation, which agrees with our observations and experimental reports in the literature. 
Indeed, these findings reveal an interesting interplay between thermodynamics and kinetics in 
competitive polymorphic nucleation. Moreover, our results also highlight the advantage of the small 
volume (pL range) achieved in our microdroplet approach which permits access to unprecedentedly deep 
levels of supersaturation that would otherwise be unattainable with µL scale experiments.

Our results also open routes for future investigations. Knowing that the stable form is favored at low 
supersaturations, it would be interesting to develop microfluidic platforms that offer a wider range of 
accessible concentrations and volume . Furthermore, our results can be used for comparison with other 
experimental approaches. For instance, interfacial energies can be accessed by measuring the contact 
angle of the saturated solution with the crystal face.17 Finally, the microfluidic approach presented herein 
can be used to study other polymorphic systems which are ubiquitous in the mineral processing and 
pharmaceutical industry.    

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

RC acknowledges the financial support of ANR-FACET, ANR-19-CE08-0014-02. 

REFERENCES

1.
Ren, Y.; Zhao, X.; Hagley, E. W.; Deng, L., Ambient-condition growth of high-pressure phase 

centrosymmetric crystalline KDP microstructures for optical second harmonic generation. Science 
Advances 2016, 2 (8), e1600404.
2.
Cai, W.; Katrusiak, A., Structure of the high-pressure phase IV of KH2PO4 (KDP). Dalton 

Transactions 2013, 42 (4), 863-866.
3.
Lee, S.; Wi, H. S.; Jo, W.; Cho, Y. C.; Lee, H. H.; Jeong, S.-Y.; Kim, Y.-I.; Lee, G. W., Multiple 

pathways of crystal nucleation in an extremely supersaturated aqueous potassium dihydrogen 


phosphate (KDP) solution droplet. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2016, 113 (48), 
13618-13623.
4.
Nicoud, L.; Licordari, F.; Myerson, A. S., Estimation of the Solubility of Metastable Polymorphs: A 

Critical Review. Crystal Growth & Design 2018, 18 (11), 7228-7237.
5.
Zhang, Y.; Huang, H.; Li, Y.; Liu, W.; Jiang, J.; Guo, K.; Yi, R.; Fei, Z.; Zhang, X.-a.; Mu, R.; Liu, X.; 

Chen, L.; Fang, H., Tuning crystal structure of potassium dihydrogen phosphate at ambient conditions. 
Physical Review Materials 2021, 5 (10), 103401.
6.
Cedeno, R.; Grossier, R.; Lagaize, M.; Nerini, D.; Candoni, N.; Flood, A.; Veesler, S., Nucleation in 

sessile saline microdroplets: induction time measurement via deliquescence–recrystallization cycling. 
Faraday Discuss. 2022, 235 (0), 183-197.
7.
Mersmann, A., Calculation of interfacial-tensions. J. Cryst. Growth 1990, 102, 841.

8.
Cedeno, R.; Grossier, R.; Candoni, N.; Levernier, N.; Flood, A. E.; Veesler, S., CNT effective 

interfacial energy and pre-exponential kinetic factor from measured NaCl crystal nucleation time 
distributions in contracting microdroplets. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2023, 158 (19).
9.
Grossier, R.; Tishkova, V.; Morin, R.; Veesler, S., A parameter to probe microdroplet dynamics 

and crystal nucleation. AIP Advances 2018, 8 (7), 075324.
10.
Cedeno, R.; Grossier, R.; Tishkova, V.; Candoni, N.; Flood, A. E.; Veesler, S., Evaporation 

Dynamics of Sessile Saline Microdroplets in Oil. Langmuir 2022, 38 (31), 9686-9696.
11.
Leroudier, J.; Zaccaro, J.; Ildefonso, M.; Veesler, S.; Baruchel, J.; Ibanez, A., Nucleation Control 

and Rapid Growth of KDP Crystals in Stationary Conditions. Crystal Growth & Design 2011, 11 (6), 2592-
2598.
12.
Li, W.; Yu, G.; Wang, S.; Ding, J.; Xu, X.; Gu, Q.; Wang, D.; Huang, P., Influence of temperature on 

the growth and surface morphology of Fe3+ poisoned KDP crystals. RSC Advances 2017, 7 (28), 17531-
17538.
13.
Hammadi, Z.; Candoni, N.; Grossier, R.; Ildefonso, M.; Morin, R.; Veesler, S., Small-volume 

nucleation. C. R. Phys. 2013, 14, 192.
14.
Sato, K., Polymorphic transformations in crystal growth. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 1993, 26 (8B), 

B77.
15.
Deij, M. A.; ter Horst, J. H.; Meekes, H.; Jansens, P.; Vlieg, E., Polymorph Formation Studied by 

3D Nucleation Simulations. Application to a Yellow Isoxazolone Dye, Paracetamol, and l-Glutamic Acid. 
The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2007, 111 (7), 1523-1530.
16.
Sun, W.; Ceder, G., Induction time of a polymorphic transformation. CrystEngComm 2017, 19

(31), 4576-4585.
17.
Machefer, S.; Schnitzlein, K., Experimental Study on the Effect of Polyol Admixtures on the 

Interfacial Tension of Potassium Dihydrogen Phosphate in Aqueous Solutions: Induction Time 
Experiments Versus Drop Shape Analysis. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 2009, 48 (5), 
2659-2670.


Supplementary Material for:

Microdroplet Approach for Measuring Aqueous Solubility and Nucleation Kinetics of a 
Metastable Polymorph: The case of KDP Phase IV

Ruel Cedeno1, Romain Grossier1, Nadine Candoni1, Stéphane Veesler1*

1CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université, CINaM (Centre Interdisciplinaire de Nanosciences de Marseille), Campus 
de Luminy, Case 913, F-13288 Marseille Cedex 09, France

S1. Evaporation Model 

Table S1 Numerical values used as input in evaporation model1 for aqueous KDP droplets, 
referenced at 25ºC and 1 atm.

Quantity
Symbol
Value
Unit

solubility of water in PDMS oil1
cs
8.76 
mol/m3

diffusivity of water in PDMS oil1
D
6.74 × 10-9
m2s-1

supersaturation at matching time*
Smatch
4.90
-

coefficient of density change for KDP2
b1
0.0738
-

coefficient of water activity lowering for KDP**
b2
0.130
-

solubility of KDP in water3
ceq
1.83
mol/kg

molar mass of KDP4
MNaCl
0.136
kg/mol

diffusivity of KDP in water5
Di
1.27×10-9
m2/s

density of pure water4
ρw
997
kg/m3

*measured by monitoring/interpolating the droplet volume (lateral view) as it optically disappears
**measured by fitting the evolution of droplet volume with the evaporation model

Figure S1. Evolution of relative droplet volume (V/V0)as a function of time (3 replicates) taken 
from lateral images which were used to calibrate the evaporation model (for water activity 
dependence on supersaturation ratio).


Figure S2. Model predictions for bottom-view arrays of microdroplets in terms of (a) relative 
volume V/V0 (b) supersaturation ratio (c) evaporation rate (d) Peclet number1, 6. Pe < 1 suggests 
a uniform distribution of concentration within the droplet. The droplets were subjected under 
the following conditions: RH = 0.10, S0 = 1, V0 = 205 pL, nx = 3, ny = 1 where RH is the relative 
humidity, S0 is the initial supersaturation ratio, V0 is the initial volume, nx and ny are the effective
number of intraline and interline interactions respectively. Note that we have demonstrated in 
Ref7 (section S4.4) that the resulting τ distributions are not sensitive to the choice of nx and ny.


REFERENCES

1.
Cedeno, R.; Grossier, R.; Tishkova, V.; Candoni, N.; Flood, A. E.; Veesler, S., Evaporation Dynamics 

of Sessile Saline Microdroplets in Oil. Langmuir 2022, 38 (31), 9686-9696.
2.
Takubo, H.; Makita, H., Refractometric studies of NH4H2PO4 and KH2PO4 solution growth; 

experimental setup and refractive index data. J. Cryst. Growth 1989, 94 (2), 469-474.
3.
Li, W.; Yu, G.; Wang, S.; Ding, J.; Xu, X.; Gu, Q.; Wang, D.; Huang, P., Influence of temperature on 

the growth and surface morphology of Fe3+ poisoned KDP crystals. RSC Advances 2017, 7 (28), 17531-
17538.
4.
Don, W. G.; Robert, H. P., Perry's Chemical Engineers' Handbook, Eighth Edition. 8th ed. / ed.; 

McGraw-Hill Education: New York, 2008.
5.
Mihailescu, M.; Gabor, A. R., Diffusion coefficient of potassium dihydrogen phosphate using 

holographic interferometry. Romanian Reports of Physics 2011, 56, 399-410.
6.
Gregson, F. K. A.; Robinson, J. F.; Miles, R. E. H.; Royall, C. P.; Reid, J. P., Drying Kinetics of Salt 

Solution Droplets: Water Evaporation Rates and Crystallization. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2019,
123 (1), 266-276.
7.
Cedeno, R.; Grossier, R.; Candoni, N.; Levernier, N.; Flood, A. E.; Veesler, S., CNT effective 

interfacial energy and pre-exponential kinetic factor from measured NaCl crystal nucleation time 
distributions in contracting microdroplets. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2023, 158 (19).


