Photodetector Focal Plane Arrays Integrated with 

Silicon Micropyramidal Structures in MWIR

Grant W. Bidney,1,2 Joshua M. Duran,2 Gamini Ariyawansa,2 Igor Anisimov,2

Kenneth W. Allen,3 and Vasily N. Astratov1,2,*

1Department of Physics and Optical Science, Center for Optoelectronics and Optical Communications,

University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC 28223-0001, USA

2Air Force Research Laboratory, Sensors Directorate, Wright Patterson AFB, OH 45433, USA

3Advanced Concepts Laboratory, Georgia Tech Research Institute, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA

*Tel: 1 (704) 687 8131, Fax: 1 (704) 687 8197, E-mail: astratov@uncc.edu

Abstract— Light-concentrating truncated Si micropyramidal 

arrays with 54.7˚ sidewall angles were successfully integrated with 
PtSi Schottky barrier photodetectors. Four different devices 
consisting of 10 x 10 photodetectors with 60 µm pitch combined in 
parallel were tested, where significant enhancement capability was 
demonstrated by the Si micropyramids. The device consisting of 
one hundred 22 µm square detectors monolithically integrated 
with the light-concentrating micropyramidal array displayed 
signal enhancement of up to 4 times compared to the same size 22 
µm square photodetector device without the light concentrators.

Keywords—
infrared 
photodetectors, 
Schottky 
barrier 

photodiode, light concentrators, dielectric resonance

I. INTRODUCTION

The primary goals of this research were to fabricate 

truncated Si micropyramidal arrays, integrate them with 
platinum/silicide (PtSi) Schottky barrier photodetectors, and to 
optically test thus fabricated devices in comparison with the 
reference planar photodetectors of the same size in order to 
compare the signal enhancement gained from the proposed 
mcropyramid designs. The quantum efficiency (QE) of 
conventional planar Si based photodetectors is limited because 
of Si’s indirect band gap, which results in low absorption and 
collection of photocarriers. Due to light-concentrating capability 
of Si micropyramids, after integration with the photodetectors, 
the proposed structures have a high potential for increased 
absorption and, hence, enhanced QE and photoresponse.

An additional advantage is related to the fact that the size of 

the photodetector mesa located near the top of the truncated 
micropyramid can be reduced in comparison with the standard 
planar devices, which can result in decreased thermal noise of 
the proposed devices and, potentially, increase their operation 
temperature [1-4].

A Schottky barrier is created at the interface between a metal 

such as Al, Ni, or Pt and a Si substrate. After annealing, a layer 
of metal/silicide is formed which can operate either as a mid-

wave infrared (MWIR)
or
short-wave infrared
(SWIR)

photodetector due to electron-hole pair generation and 
separation when a reverse bias is applied to the Schottky barrier.
Recently, the ability to quickly fabricate Si micropyramidal 
arrays via low-cost anisotropic wet etching techniques has
enabled the straightforward integration of Si micropyramidal 
arrays with photodetectors
through either monolithic or 

heterogenous means [4]. Previous attempts to use Si pyramid 
arrays integrated with photodetectors relied on plasmonic 
concentration mechanisms of electromagnetic (EM) power 
towards the tips of the pyramids [5]. The sidewall surface was 
metallized with Al, and the incident photons were converted into 
plasmonic excitations at the sidewall surface through 
adiabatically compressing the plasmonic excitations towards the
50 nm tip of the pyramid. The mechanism to generate electron-
hole pairs at the very tip of such metallized micropyramids were
rather complicated [5]. As a result, a photoresponse increase of 
up to 100 times was reported at λ = 1.3 µm [5]. When inverted 
micropyramids with 4 µm period were integrated with 
Cu/silicide Schottky barrier photodetectors, the photoresponse 
increased by nearly 40 times [6]. These designs required highly 
precise nanoscale fabrication and alignment of the components 
which are rather difficult to realize in practice.

In our designs, we proposed suitably large micropyramids 

with their truncated tops optically coupled to photodetectors [4]. 
The truncated micropyramids employ an optical function similar 
to that of “tapered” waveguides or, alternatively, mirror light 
concentrators in the solar cells. Our structures, however, are 
much easier to make in comparison to their nanoplasmonic 
counterparts [5] since they require a micron-scale fabrication 
accuracy achievable by standard photolithographic methods.
Since the goal was to study the signal enhancement of such 
structures instead of building a fully-functioning camera, we 
deposited Pt on the tops of individual micropyramids and 
combined 100 PtSi Schottky barrier photodetectors electrically
in parallel to simplify their characterization. Our initial results 
indicate the 22 µm square photodetectors monolithically 
integrated with micropyramidal arrays provided a signal 
enhancement of up to ~4.1, but more research is required.
Proc. of GOMACTech conference, San Diego, March 20-23 (2023).


II. FABRICATION

Fig. 1. (a, c, e, g, i, k) Microscope photos showing the steps used to fabricate the 
PtSi Schottky photodetector arrays from the top-down perspective, and (b, d, f, 
h, j, l) diagram showing the side perspective.

In order to test the effect of the three-dimensional (3-D) 

light-concentrating micropyramids have on the photoresponse 
and signal enhancement of the Schottky-barrier photodetectors, 
we compared their photoresponse with a conventional planar
detector of the same size. To this end, we used 10  10 
micropyramidal arrays with 54.7˚ sidewall angles, 60 μm pitch, 
28 μm top size, and 22.6 μm height were fabricated on a double-
side polished (100) p-type Si wafer with resistivity from 1-10 
ohm-cm and 100 nm thermal silica on both sides fabricated by 
the anisotropic wet etching technique [7, 8].

Afterwards, 
22
μm 
square 
PtSi 
Schottky 
barrier 

photodetectors were fabricated directly on the tops of these 
micropyramids, as well as on flat regions undisturbed by the 
micropyramid etching process for direct comparisons on the 
same sample. These fabrication steps are described in Fig. 1. The 
mesa size is smaller than the micropyramid top size to account 
for minor misalignment, as well as corner undercutting of the 
micropyramid tops, displayed in Fig. 1(a).

In order to first create the photodetector mesas, 

photolithography was necessary to create the photoresist pattern 
as shown in Fig. 1(c, d).  The sample was cleaned with solvent 
and AZ15nXT photoresist was spin coated to achieve a 
thickness of ~5.5 μm, which was necessary to completely cover 
the micropyramid sidewalls. The sample was then exposed with 
a Heidelberg DWL 66+ laser writer to achieve the final pattern.
Afterwards, the sample was dipped in 7:1 buffered oxide etchant 
(BOE) to remove any native silicon dioxide (SiO2) that may 
have formed, and then 1 nm of Pt was deposited with an electron 
beam (e-beam) evaporator. The photoresist was then removed to 
reveal the PtSi photodetector mesas, as shown in Fig. 1(e, f). No 
annealing was necessary for realizing the Schottky-barrier 
photodetector properties due to the high deposition temperature 
as well as the thinness of the Pt layer.

The next step was to passivate the sample in order to isolate 

the photodetectors. 200 nm of SiO2 was deposited through 
plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), then
~6.2 μm thick AZP4620 photoresist was spin coated and 

exposed to reveal the result shown in Fig. 1(g, h). Afterwards, 
the sample was placed in a 7:1 BOE bath to create a small 5 μm 
wide hole through the SiO2 layer above the PtSi photodetectors, 
and the photoresist was removed such that the sample was ready 
for metal deposition, as shown in Fig. 1(i, j).

The final fabrication step was to deposit metal to create 

electrical contacts for testing, as well as to combine all 100 
individual photodetectors together in parallel to simplify 
characterization. Similar photolithography steps were utilized 
with AZ15nXT photoresist. Afterwards, 5 nm of chromium (Cr) 
and 300 nm of gold (Au) were deposited with an e-beam 
evaporator to create the n-contact on the PtSi layer, as well as 
the p-contact on the doped Si as shown in Fig. 1(k, l). The 
photoresist was then removed, and the sample was epoxied to 
the chip carrier such that the center four photodetectors could be 
back-side illuminated for device characterization.

III. DEVICE CHARACTERIZATION AND ANALYSIS

Light-concentrating truncated Si micropyramidal arrays 

with 54.7˚ sidewall angles were successfully integrated with 
PtSi Schottky barrier photodetectors. Four different devices 
consisting of 10  10 photodetectors with 60 µm pitch combined 
in parallel were tested with: (i) planar 57 µm square mesas
shown in Fig. 2(a), (ii) planar 22 µm square mesas shown in Fig. 
2(b), (iii) 22 µm square mesas on top of truncated 
micropyramids shown in Fig. 2(c) (two samples A and B were 
tested). The representative tested sample A with 10  10 
micropyramids is shown in Fig. 2(d). The PtSi Schottky barrier 
photodetectors were illuminated through the substrate’s
polished back surface, where light propagated through the 
substrate towards the photodetectors fabricated on the front
surface. For the devices with micropyramids, light propagated 
through the polished back surface, through the wafer, and then 
was concentrated towards the tops of the micropyramids where 
photons were partially absorbed in the PtSi region. The 
photoresponse data were measured with a Bruker V80 FTIR 
spectrometer in combination with a Keithley 428 current pre-
amplifier by illuminating the device inside the 80K LN2 dewar 
fitted with a germanium (Ge) window to minimize any ambient 
signal. The QE data were measured by changing the illumination 
source to a 500˚ C blackbody cavity, and implementing a 
chopper with a lock-in amplifier fixed at the chopper’s 
frequency.

These two measurement techniques, QE and spectral 

photoresponse, allow for direct comparisons between the four 
devices. By measuring the photoresponse, the photodetector’s 
spectral sensitivity between 2-6 µm was determined, but the 
comparison of photocurrents produced by different devices was
made difficult because of the not completely reproducible 
illumination conditions in our setup. On the other hand, by 
measuring the QE, the photoresponse scaling factor for each 
device was determined because the incident flux of photons was 
carefully taken into account, and the devices could be directly 
compared. An example of such comparison for different 
structures is illustrated in Fig. 2(e). On the other hand, the signal 
enhancement 
was 
calculated 
by 
dividing 
the 
scaled 

photoresponse from the micropyramidal photodetector arrays by 
the photoresponse from the conventional planar photodetector
arrays of the same size. These results are shown in Fig. 2(f).


Fig. 2. Microscope images of PtSi detectors consisting of (a) 57 µm squares, (b) 
22 µm squares, (c) 22 µm squares on micropyramids, and (d) a representative 
device containing 10  10 pyramids. (e) The corresponding photoresponse plot 
of the four (i-iv) tested devices. (f) The signal enhancement plot, calculated via 
dividing the signal from the micropyramidal photodetector arrays by the signal 
from the planar photodetector arrays of the same detector mesa size (22 μm).

The results of the photoresponse (Fig. 2(e)) and signal 

enhancement plots (Fig. 2(f)) experimentally demonstrate that
the micropyramids function as light concentrators, and can 
improve the detected signal. The photoresponse plot in Fig. 2(e) 
shows that the conventional planar 57 µm square photodetector 
device has the largest photoresponse however, it supposed to 
come with the largest thermal current noise determined by the 
larges area of this detector. The fact that all 22 μm square 

photodetector arrays show smaller photoresponse is expected in 
all cases since even in the case of using micropyramids the 
efficiency of collection photons by the large pyramid’s base 
towards its smaller base where we have our photodetector is still 
smaller than 100%. The main result of this comparison, 
however, is the fact that the two 22 µm square photodetector 
micropyramidal
devices
(A and B)
outperformed the 

conventional planar geometry photodetectors with the same 
size. All these 22 μm devices are expected to have a thermal 
noise reduced by the 22/57 factor compared to the largest 57 μm 
square detector.

The most important result is that although the photon 

collection efficiency of the micropyramids with 60 μm large 
base size was found to be imperfect because of the optical losses 
inside the micropyramid, the optical signal detected at the 
smaller base was still significantly higher than that for the 
conventional planar 22 µm square photodetector device. This 
suggests that although a fraction of the total power incident on 
the large base escaped from the micropyramids, either through 
sidewall leakage or due to reflection in a backward direction, 
still a significant fraction of the total power incident on the larger 
base was delivered to smaller base with the photodetector. 
Comparison with the same size (22 μm) planar photodetector in 
Fig. 2(f) shows that the micropyramids provide, on average, 
~2.6 signal enhancement for sample B and ~4.1 enhancement 
for sample A. The impact Si micropyramidal arrays have on 
improving the signal of MWIR photodetectors requires further 
studies by 
systematically 
varying 
the 
micropyramids’  

geometry.

IV. CONCLUSION

The potential advantages of the proposed Si-based 

micropyramidal arrays integrated with photodetectors compared 
to standard planar FPAs are many-fold:

i)
They allow for a reduction in the size of the photodetector 

mesa while still retaining significant photoresponse.

ii) Reduction of the mesa size means that the thermal current 
noise can be reduced and operational temperature of the device 
can be increased.

iii) In the fabricated structures a significant fraction (~25%) of 
the EM power incident on the larger base was delivered to the 
smaller base coupled to the photodetector, but the rest of the 
power was lost. Despite this loss, the delivered power was up to 
4.1 times larger than the signal measured by the same size (22 
μm) detector operating without micropyramid.

iv) This power loss is not necessarily a fundamental limitation 
of the proposed technology since, potentially, it can be reduced 
by optimizing the geometrical parameters of the micropyramids 
and improving the technology.

v) Micropyramids are capable of trapping light resonantly inside 
the active region of the photodetector, thus increasing the 
pathlength for the photons, the probability of their absorption, 
and the QE of the photodetectors, thus solving a major 
underlying problem of Si-based photodetector FPAs with 
significant application in uncooled MWIR cameras and thermal 
sensor devices.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported by Center for Metamaterials, an 

NSF I/U CRC, award number 1068050. G.W.B. and V.N.A. 
received support from the AFRL Summer Faculty Fellowship 
Program.

REFERENCES

[1]
G. W. Bidney, B. Jin, L. Deguzman, J. M. Duran, G. Ariyawansa, I. 
Anisimov, N. I. Limberopoulos, A. M. Urbas, K. W. Allen, S. D. 
Gunapala, and V. N. Astratov, "Monolithic integration of photodetector 
focal plane arrays with micropyramidal arrays in mid-wave infrared," 
Proc. SPIE 12006, Silicon Photonics XVII, 1200609 (5 March 2022); doi: 
10.1117/12.2610304

[2]
B. Jin, A. Brettin, G. W. Bidney, N. I. Limberopoulos, J. M. Duran, G. 
Ariyawansa, I. Anisimov, A. M. Urbas, K. W. Allen, S. D. Gunapala, and 
V. N. Astratov, “Light-harvesting microconical arrays for enhancing 
infrared imaging devices: Proposal and demonstration”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
199, 051104 (2021).

[3]
B. Jin, A. Brettin, G. W. Bidney, N. I. Limberopoulos,  J. M. Duran, G. 
Ariyawansa, I. Anisimov, A. M. Urbas, K. W. Allen, S. D. Gunapala, and 
V. N. Astratov, "Light-harvesting microconical arrays integrated with 
photodetector FPAs for enhancing infrared imaging devices," Proc. SPIE 
12004, Integrated Optics: Devices, Materials, and Technologies XXVI, 
120040X (5 March 2022); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2609883

[4]
B. Jin, G. Bidney, A. Brettin, N. Limberopoulos, J. Duran, G. 
Ariyawansa, I. Anisimov, A. Urbas, S. D. Gunapala, H. Li, and V. N 
Astratov, "Microconical silicon mid-IR concentrators: spectral, angular 
and polarization response," Opt. Express  28, 27615-27627 (2020).

[5]
B. Desiatov, I. Goykhman, N. Mazurski, J. Shappir, J. Khurgin, and U. 
Levy, "Plasmonic enhanced silicon pyramids for internal photoemission 
Schottky detectors in the near-infrared regime," Optica  2, 335-338 
(2015).

[6]
H.-J. Syu, H.-C. Chuang, M.-J. Lin, C.-C. Cheng, P.-J. Huang, and C.-F. 
Lin, “Ultra-broadband photoresponse of localized surface plasmon 

resonance from Si-based pyramid structures,” Photonics Res. 7(10), 
1119–1126 (2019).

[7]
G. W. Bidney, B. Jin, L. Deguzman, T. C. Hutchens, J. M. Duran, G. 
Ariyawansa, I. Anisimov, N. I. Limberopoulos, A. M. Urbas, K. W. Allen, 
S. D. Gunapala, and V. N. Astratov, "Fabrication of 3-D light 
concentrating microphotonic structures by anisotropic wet etching of 
silicon," Proc. SPIE 12012, Advanced FabricationTechnologies for 
Micro/Nano Optics and Photonics XV, 120120B (5 March 2022); doi: 
10.1117/12.2610426

[8]
G. W. Bidney, B. Jin, L. Deguzman, T. C. Hutchens, J. M. Duran, G. 
Ariyawansa, I. Anisimov, N. I. Limberopoulos, A. M. Urbas, K. W. Allen, 
S. D. Gunapala, and V. N. Astratov "Anisotropic Wet Etching of Si as a 
Fabrication Tool Enabling 3-D Microphotonics Structures and Devices," 
NAECON 2021 - IEEE National Aerospace and Electronics Conference, 
2021, pp. 146-149, doi: 10.1109/NAECON49338.2021.9696393

[9]
J. Duran and A. Sarangan, “Schottky- barrier photodiode internal 
quantum efficiency dependence on nickel silicide film thickness,” IEEE 
Photonics J. 11(1), 1–15 (2019).

[10] J. Duran, “Silicon-based infrared photodetectors for low-cost imaging 

applications,” Ph.D. thesis (University of Dayton, 2019). Available at: 
https://etd.ohiolink.edu/pg_10?::NO:10:P10_ETD_SUBID:179778

[11] V. N. Astratov, G. W. Bidney, J. M. Duran, G. Ariyawansa, and I. 

Anisimov, “Micropyramidal Photodetector Focal Plane Arrays with 
Enhanced Detection Capability,” first draft shared between co-inventors 
on 08-03-2022, the provisional patent application was filed in January 
2023.

[12] V. N. Astratov, K. W. Allen Jr., N. I. Limberopoulos, A. Urbas, and J. M. 

Duran, “Photodetector focal plane array systems and methods,” patent 
application14/587,068 filed on 12/31/2014. U.S. patent 9,362,324 (7 June 
2016).

[13] V. N. Astratov, A. Brettin, N.I. Limberopoulos, and A. Urbas, 

“Photodetector focal plane array systems and methods based on 
microcomponents with arbitrary shapes,” US patent publication number 
20190004212, 01/03/2019.


