Investigating the “Cocoon Effect” in Niobium-Copper Alloy: Metallic

Nano-Precipitate Distribution and Niobium Migration

*R. L. de Almeida1,2, J. Albino Aguiar1 and C. A. C. Passos2

1Physics Department, Federal University of  Pernambuco, 50670-901, Recife, PE, Brazil
2Physics Department, Federal University of Espírito Santo, 29075-910, Vitória, ES, Brazil

*Correspondence e-mail: ralmeida@ifi.unicamp.br & almeida.almeida@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

We report the observation of the metallic niobium migration within the molten Cu-Nb alloy

mass on the synthesis of nano-granular Cuxwt%Nb samples. We named “Cocoon Effect”. To
address the complex interplay of this molten phase separation and microstructural evolution, we
prepared a series of granular samples by rapidly cooling a molten mixture of Cuxwt%Nb, where the
niobium concentration varied (x=3,5,15,20). Our main goal in this work was not only to establish a
systematic, innovative and robust method to obtaining good quality samples, but also provide a
clear  recipe  for  obtaining  similar  systems  to  the  investigations  of  their  interesting  physical
properties. Beyond the understanding of the “Cocoon Effect” in Niobium-Copper alloys, we include
a wide complementary elsewhere investigation into the very interesting and rich superconducting
properties exhibited by the Niobium-Copper alloy. By employing a robust synthesis method, we
successfully obtained samples characterized by well-defined spherical nano-precipitates of niobium,
featuring regular sizes and grain spacing. Our study contributes not only to our understanding of the
Niobium-Copper molten phase separation, microstructure and the “Cocoon Effect” in these metallic
alloys, but also sheds light on the intricate and important implications for the development and
optimization of good quality granular metallic alloys for various applications. From our work, we
obtained  very  impressive  microstructural  results,  such  as:  dm=1.2μm,  Dm<2.2 μm and
ρ=1.785grain/ μm

2, where dm is the distance between Niobium grains, Dm is the mean diameter of

Niobium grains and  ρ is the Niobium  grain mean density in the Copper matrix. 

Key Words:
Cocoon Effect, Niobium-Copper alloy,  Metallic Nano-Precipitate, Niobium Peripherical Migration

Highlights:
→ Observation and identifiation of the “Cocoon Effect”.
→ Study of the separation and microstructural evolution of the Niobium-Copper alloys.
→ Determination of the Niobium-Copper alloys microestructural properties.
→ Complementary investigation of the superconducting properties the Niobium-Copper alloy.

1


I. INTRODUCTION

The objective of this work was to develop reliable methods for controlled fabrication of materials
and nanostructures with varying degrees of complexity for diverse applications [1-6]. Furthermore,
there  is  a  continuous  pursuit  to  comprehend  the  physical  properties  of  these  systems,  their
relationship with structural characteristics, and their reproducibility through simulations [6-9].
Recent advancements in this field have been driven by significant investments made by developed
nations in science and technology, with the study of granular materials showing great potential for
technological  applications  [9-12].  Our  investigation  is  a  meticulous  examination  of  niobium
migration within the molten alloy mass and the our study places particular emphasis on the
peripheral region, where the migration of niobium atoms plays a crucial role in the formation of the
“Cocoon Effect”. By tracking and analyzing the migration patterns of niobium, we aim to unravel
the fundamental processes and mechanisms that contribute to the observed phenomenon. This
investigation not only enhances our understanding of  the behavior of niobium and its interactions
within the Nb-Cu alloy, but clariry unexplained issues in those systems subject. Furthermore, we
aim to explore the implications of the “Cocoon Effect” on the microstructural evolution and
mechanical properties of the Nb-Cu alloy. 

By investigating the distribution and arrangement of precipitates, we can gain a deeper

understanding  of  their  influence  on  the  material's  strength,  toughness,  and  other  mechanical
characteristics. This knowledge holds significant potential for optimizing the alloy's properties and
tailoring  it  for  specific  and  applications  in  industries  such  metallurgy,  material,  aerospace,
automotive, and structural engineering. Early studies on copper-rich niobium alloys [13] revealed
intriguing possibilities for fabricating mechanically reinforced Cu-Nb normal conductors and Cu-
Nb3Sn superconducting wires. The size of niobium precipitates was found to be highly dependent
on the cooling rate [14], as the sample temperature decreased from T=1,800°C (liquid) to the
peritectic point at T=1,090°C.  

In this work, a  Cuxwt%Nb mixture was melted under T=1,800oC inside a conical radio-

frequency coil and dropped inside a water-cooled Cu crucible. The cooling rate was estimated to be
∂T /∂t ≈2,800℃/ s, producing a regular distribution on Niobium precipitates nearly of spherical
shapes, with diameters typically around or below 1,000nm. The pellets were initially suspended by
a thin tungsten wire and dropped down when a homogeneous liquid phase was attained. Plate-like
samples having typically an area of 10mm2 and 0.1mm in thickness were then obtained. To study the
Niobium-Copper system, we prepared rectangular pieces (5.0×1.5×0.1 mm3) from a considerable
number of good samples from materials with high purity, Cu (BCC) ≈0.99999 and Nb (FCC) ≈
0.99999, with different concentrations of Nb, that is, (x=3,5,15,20) in weight (mass) percent. The
preparation was done in three phases. The (FCC)-Cu matrix (BCC)-Nb  precipitates with the use of
these techniques have sizes and regular spacing and very suitable spheroidal geometry. Structural
characterization was made by Optical Microscopy and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM-
JEOLLtd). The unshown results of the experimental dc measurements Mdc[H,T,θ] - (MPMS®@ H ext

max

= 50 kOe), ac χ

ac[ T , H ,h0,υ ,θ, as well the magneto-transport measures ρdc[H,T,θ], Rdc[V,IH,T,θ],

I[V,H,T,θ] and Jc [H,T,I,θ] - (PPMS® @ H ext

max=90 kOe) will be discussed soon elsewhere.

2


II. PROCEDURE AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

II.I. THE NIOBIUM-COPPER MICROSTRUCTURE EVOLUTION

We prepared a considerable wide number of CuXwt%Nb samples with x=3,5,10,15 and 20,

from Copper and Niobium materials with high purity, e.g., Face-Centered Cubic Lattice (Cu)≈
99.999% and Body Centered Cubic (Nb)≈ 9.99%. 
The preparation of these samples was particularly difficult because high difference between the
melting  points  of  Copper  1,085  oC  and  Niobium,  above  2,477  oC  and,  from  the  melting
temperature during the cooling, there is a strong tendency of the formation of other phases between
these two materials [14] . 

The first one phase diagram for Cu-Nb alloys was constructed in [13] and the second one,

more complete, which includes two phase transformations independent of temperature, that is, a
monothetic in approximately T monothetic

(Cuxwt %) ≈1.545 oC and a perithetic reaction in T perithetic

(Cuxwt %) =1,083 oC

was showed in [15]. At this phase diagram [15], there are three phases strongly dependent on
temperature. The first phase α +β, which lies in an isotherm immediately below T perithetic

(Cuxwt %)=1,083 oC

(perithetic region) consists of both constituents of the alloy in its solid phase. The phase L+β which
is situated above T=1,083 oC and a non-isothermal line that goes up to the melting temperature of
Nb at T≈2,477 oC, depending on of the concentration x in the Cuxwt%Nb alloy. It is consisting of
copper in the liquid phase and niobium in the solid phase. This phase has a species of plateau
(monothetic region) at  T monothetic

(Cuxwt %) =1,545 oC. The third and final phase, the  L− phase which is

situated above the line delimiting the phase  L+β, and the region of the diagram where all two
constituents of the material are in their liquid phase (depending on the concentration of Nb in Cu).
The microstructure of the samples based on Cuxwt%Nb it's strongly dependent on the cooling rate
∂T /∂t of system [14,-16-18] and, we verify through that, how faster the molten CuXwt%Nb system
is brought to thermal equilibrium with the room temperature, better is the distribution and organized
size of Nb particles in the Cu matrix. The solubility of Nb in CuSNb→Cu is around  1wt % at a
temperature below T 1wt%

(S Nb→ Cu)=1,100 oC, and this solubility decreases very rapidly with the reduction of

the temperature and, at room temperature, this same solubility SNb→ Cu drops to a value less than
0.1wt % ,T 0.1wt %

(SNb→ Cu)= 300 K [16-18]. In materials cooled in rates close to those achieved in this work,

this solubility SNb→Cu does not exceed 0.15wt %. On the other hand, the border of the Nb is little
known, however, there are experimental data [18] what indicate that the solubility of Cu in Nb
SCu→Nb at temperatures close to T 0.07wt %

(S Cu→ Nb) =1,100 oC is around 0.07 wt %. In this work, to prepare the

samples, the materials were weighed, and the concentrations x in samples with stoichiometry Cuxwt
%Nb, was varied between x = 3,5,10,15 and 20. 

The subsequent step was to melt the constituent materials (Cu) and (Nb) that were taken into

the of an arc furnace chamber I T=300 K

max
=500 A. After this step, we used a RF furnace in a “molten

mass levitation configuration” to redistribute the Nb grains at the Cu matrix. A new and interesting
effect we observe during the melting of the samples in the  RF oven in an almost levitation
configuration, it was the tendency of niobium to migrate to the peripheral regions of the samples.
And there was a kind of involvement of all the melted mass by a thin Nb film. We labeled this effect
as a "Cocoon effect" because it was in fact a kind of Niobium “Cocoon” that formed in around the
melted Copper melted mass during the melting of the samples in the RF furnace. We identified the
sample regions where there was the highest Nb concentration, due to the diffusive effect during the
of RF melt process. For that, in a part of the sample labeled as Cuxwt%Nb-11-02. We identify three
regions and separated them and we put the electron beam spot of the scanning electron microscope
separately in each of these regions, to obtain more information (chemical and compositional) on the
microstructure of our samples from each region. 

3


Figure 1: Samples Cuxwt%Nb-11-02 (a) and the sample Cuxwt%Nb-10-01 (b) immediately after they are melted in the
arc furnace. If we look closely at the sample Cuxwt%Nb-11-02 (a) we perceive a typical brightness that is not
characteristic of Cu (even this sample has x=80 % by weight of Cu). Microscopy images scanning revealed the
migration of the Nb to the peripherical regions of the sample: "Cocoon Effect".

We estimate the cooling rate of the system and its limits, which take into account the measured
down time (very short τ ≈0.3 s−0.5 s) for the sample drop from the RF coil to the inside of the
refrigerated Cu crucible based on the assumption that the emission of thermal energy through
radiation by the sample and by heat transfer between the sample and the crucible to a temperature
less than or equal to T=1000 oC, where both elements are already found in the solid phase. We used
the coefficient of Copper thermal conductivity, which is 3.8 J/cm2 oC, and, from this measure made
several times for different samples niobium content, we determine the rate in two stages: The first
exclusively by radiation, taking in the emission of radiation between two bodies:

Q12=F12σ T 1

4 A1
(1)

where, Q12 is the thermal energy from the body 1 (in if the sample flows into the entire inner
chamber of the chamber, which is the body 2), F12 is the superficial fraction of any and all the
receiving area A1 of energy seen by the area that is emitting (molten sample). It is valid to consider
that for radial direction to the heat path (which is the case with our system – “spheroidal”
geometry). So, F12=1, T is the sample temperature and, the temperature σ is the Wien constant (or
Stephan-Boltzmann constant). And, to estimate with greater, as much as possible, the rate of Fourier
thermal conductivity equation

Q12=−KA(

∂T
∂l )
            (2)

In the equation 2,  K is the thermal diffusivity constant, in this case, for the Cu, which is the
dominant quantity material in the sample, and A the effective contact area between the two bodies.
Overlapping equations 1 and 2 and, with some small and easy algebraic work, we estimate the
molten sample mass cooling rate determined by the final expression:

∂T
∂l =∆T F1+∆T F2

∆l F1+∆l F2

≈2,800K /s
 (3)

4


In the figure 2 we showed optical microscopy photos from the samples after cutting and polishing to
carry measurements on the scanning electron microscopy. The sample Cuxwt%Nb-11-02 is shown
in letter a, and sample Cuxwt%Nb-10-01 is shown in the letter b (both in figure 2). We added that
this cutting geometry was chosen only for the accomplishment of the structural characterization
through the images of  Scanning Electron Microscopy. For the measures of the superconducting
properties (inductive and magneto-transport), the samples were prepared in the form of stripes, with
dimensions at least five times smaller than the shown in the figure 2 (see geometric dimensions of
stripes, de Cuxwt%Nb in the table 1). Those data will not be showed here. Sample: 

Cuxwt%Nb Samples Properties

Samples
Dimensions lxwxt
Nb: Xwt%
Mass(g)
Geometry

CuXwt%Nb-10-01
0.50x0.15x0.016cm3
X= 10
(0.270+0.0001)
Rectangular Stripe

CuXwt%Nb-10-02
0.40x0.20x0.01cm3
X= 20
(0.210+0.0001)
Rectangular Stripe

Table 1: Table containing information about structural properties of the samples CuXwt%N. We will concentrate our
discussions on the two samples mentioned in this table (Cuxwt%Nb-10-01 e Cuxwt%Nb-11-02).

 In the figures 3 and 4 we show the scanning electron microscopy images of both samples Cuxwt
%Nb. As we can see, the geometry definition of Nb grains obtained in the copper matrix is much
higher than that we had obtained the sub-micrometric grains of Nb at the previous mentioned
references.  However,  we  still  had  the  task  of  re-distribute  better  the  Niobium  nano-grains
throughout the volume of the Cu matrix. Thus, the last melting stage of the  Cuxwt%Nb  system
sample preparation, consisted of the use of a resistive furnace for a annealing of the sample system,
with the objective of reaching only melting temperature of copper,  T=1,083℃, and by the
diffusion  effects,  since  there  is  a  considerable  density  difference  between  Cu  and  Nb  of
D Nb−DCu=0.56 g/cm

3.

Figure 2: Samples Cuxwt%Nb-11-02 (a) and Cuxwt%Nb-10-01 (b) to be measured in the scanning electron microscope.

Thus, after a very smooth climb ramp temperature, ∆T /∆t=100℃/h, we raise the system to an
equal temperature a 1,100 oC. We let the system stay in this temperature for one to two hours. After
that, we reduced temperature on a faster ramp ∆T /∆t=250℃/h. The results obtained with the
spacial “rearrangement” distribution of the Nb grains in the Cu matrix can be seen in the figures 5
and 6 for the sample Cuxwt%Nb-11-02, that is much better distribution once compared with the
grain distribution on the figures 3 and 4. How can be observed in the figures 5 and 6, the

5


distribution of Nb grains in the copper matrix is quite adequate, as there is a very good regularity in
the spacing between the grains of Nb in the Cu matrix, and again, we did not find results similar to
these in the previous literature.

Figure 3: Scanning Electron microscopy images from sample Cuxwt%Nb-10-01). As can be seen, the beam energy used
for this measure was Eel=30kV , the mode of obtaining the images was the backscattered electrons The grains of Nb
in the Cu matrix have dimensions smaller than 1μm.

The geometry and granular spacing remain constant in all alloy surface. The dark spots on some
grains of Nb are due to propanone residues (C4H8O) what is it used to clean up the surface of the
samples prior to realization of the images, because. The adopted measurement method was the
backscattered electrons method, it's that in this way, it “favors” the contrast image from elements
with greater atomic number, and the carbon, the main constituent of the ketone, has an atomic
number smaller than the other two elements on the sample, and therefore the dark shadow color on
some grains of Nb. From the results of the last annealing fusion, we made a statistical analysis of
the sample Cuxwt%Nb- 11-02, using the scanning microscopy measurements, and we obtained the
results that are found in the graphic of the 7 and 9.

6


Figure 4: Electron microscopy image of scan showing the microstructure of the sample in more detail Cuxwt%Nb – 10-
01. Eel=30kV . The mode of obtaining the images was that of backscattered electrons, and the size of the grains of
Nb in the matrix is around 1μm.

Figure 5: Scaning Electron Microscopy images of showing the sample microstructure Cuxwt%Nb – with a very better

Nb grains distribution along of the matrix.

7


Figure 6: Electron microscopy image of with the microstructure of the sample Cuxwt%Nb-11-02 in details.

After completing the first stage, which consisted of preparation (growth in three merger processes),
microstructural characterization by Scanning Electron Microscopy-(SEM-JEOLLtd), e.g., qualitative
and quantitative Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy/Energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX and
EDS).

 

Figure 7: Quantitative Statistical Analysis from the microstructural properties from the sample CuXwt%Nb-11-02
carried out through the data obtained from the images of scanning electron microscopic.

As shown above, we will show the physical characterization properties for the samples Cuxwt%Nb
(x=3,5,10,15 and 20), with focus for the concentrations x=10% and 20%. We will show below
theresults  of  Mdc[H,T,θ],χ

ac[ T , H ,hExc ,υ ,θ,  ρdc[H,T,θ],  Rdc[V,IH,T,θ],  I[V,H,T,θ]  and  J[H,T,I,θ

]characterization of the superconducting properties of these granular samples.

8


II.II. The Niobium-Copper Cocoon Effect

A very interesting effect not yet reported in the scientific literature that we observed during the
melting of samples in the RF oven in a levitation configuration, was the tendency of niobium
molten liquid mass to migrate diffusively to the peripheral regions of the samples. And there was a
kind of involvement of the whole melted sample volume by a Niobium thin film (see Fig 1). We
labeled this effect the effect "Cocoon Effect" because it was, in fact, a kind of Nb “cocoon” that was
formed around the entire melted mass (Niobium+Copper) during samples melting process in the RF
furnace coil at the levitation configuration. We identified the regions of the Figure 8.

Figure 8: Scanning Electron Microscopy image of with the microstructure of the sample Cuxwt%Nb-11-02 in details of
the “Cocoon Effect”.

The regions of the sample CuXwt%Nb-11-02 was selected to be analyzed qualitatively with
measurements energy dispersive (EDX/EDS) that are shown in figure 8. The samples where there
was the highest concentration of Nb, due to the diffusion effect during theRF fusion process.
Therefore, in a part of the sample CuXwt%Nb-11-02 (whose properties are mentioned in table 1),
we identified three regions, separated them and focus the scanning microscope electron beam spot
to get more information (chemical and compositional) from the microstructure of the samples. The
graphs with such results are shown in figure 7 and 9. These results have again the migratory effect
of Nb to the ends of the samples during the fusion. We estimate the cooling rate of the system,
which take into account the falling time (very short ~ 0.03s-0.05s) of the sample, the coil to the
interior of the cooled Cu crucible, assuming that the emission of thermal energy through radiation
by the sample and through heat transfer between the sample and the crucible to a temperature lower
than or equal to 1000 oC, where both elements elements are already in the solid phase, we use the
conductivity coefficient temperature of Cu, which is 3.8 J/cm2 oC.

9


Figure 9: Dispersive energy measurements (EDX) for the sample CuXwt%Nb – 11- 02. Measurement performed with
the spot of the electron beam on the: a) right b) center c) left.

Through our analysis from the our results, we obtained the following microstructural data results
from the figures 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9:


dm=1.2μm, where dm is the distance between grains.


Dm<2.2 μm, where Dm is the mean diameter of Niobium grains.


ρ=1.785grain/ μm

2, where is the mean grain density of Nb in matrix of Cu.

After finishing the first stage, which consists of preparation (growth in three fusion processes),
microstructural characterization (qualitative and quantitative, EDX/EDS data - SEM-JEOLLtd) as
shown in this work, from CuXwt%Nb samples (X=3, 5, 10, 15 and 20), we will show elsewhere
superconducting properties characterization results of the of these samples granular, with the
following measures: dc inductive experiments, Mdc[H,T,θ] on a Magnetic Property Measurement
System (MPMS® with Superconducting Quantum Interference Device-SQUID detection @ H ext

max=

50 kOe),  ac inductive magnetization χ

ac[ T , H ,hExc ,υ ,θ, magneto-transport measures, ρdc[H,T,θ],

Rdc[V,I H,T,θ], I[V,H,T,θ] and J[H,T,I,θ] using a micro Hall sensor with 10 measuring transverse
voltage  bridges  regularly  distributed  throughout  the  longer  sensor  length,  with  dimensions
5.0×0.2×0.01  mm3  at the platform Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS® @  Hext

max=90

kOe). Those results will be published soon.

III. CONCLUSION

In this study, we have successfully developed a simple, robust, and highly reproducible

method for preparing a series of nano granular metallic samples within the Cuxwt%Nb system, with
a specific focus on the stoichiometries Cu10wt%Nb and Cu20wt%Nb. Through the utilization of
SEM-JEOLLtd, we have made a complete characterization of the mopholoogic/structural properties
of these samples, enabling a comprehensive understanding of their microstructural features.

To further enhance the arrangement of niobium (Nb) grains within the copper (Cu) matrix,

we implemented an additional step after RF melting, which we refer to as matrix annealing. This
step effectively improves a very good rearrangement of Nb grains within the Cu matrix, leading to
an  optimized  granular  structure  with  enhanced  superconducting  properties.  The  developed
methodology provides a reliable and reproducible route for fabricating granular superconducting
samples in the Cuxwt%Nb system, facilitating future investigations into their physical and electrical
properties. The SEM characterization allowed us to confirm the successful formation of well-
defined Nb grains within the Cu matrix, further validating the effectiveness of the fabrication
method. The improved arrangement of Nb grains within the Cu matrix, achieved through the matrix

10


annealing step, holds promise for enhancing the physical properties of the system. In order to
improve even more the arrangement of Nb grains in the Cu matrix, we submit the system to a third
step, after RF melting, which we define as an improvement of grain rearrangement in the matrix
annealing. This step consisted of placing the system in a resistive raise the system close to Cu
melting temperature  T raise

(Cu) =1100oC (Cu melting temperature Cu  T melting

(Cu)
=1083oC) and leave the

system remain in this state for 48 hours until by difference of density and performance of viscous
(and diffusion) forces, the grains of Nb to reach the ideal dispersion configuration in the Cu matrix.
The precipitates of Nb that we obtained with the use of these techniques, have average sizes
⟨ Dm⟩≈1.0475 μm, spacing between the grains  ⟨dm⟩≈1.20 μm,  ρ=1.785grain/ μm

2 (mean grain

density of Nb over the Cu matrix, spheroidal shape geometry “well behaved” and very good quality.
Finally,  our  study  has  successfully  developed  a  reproducible  method  for  preparing  granular
superconducting samples in the Cuxwt%Nb system. The SEM characterization confirmed the
formation of well-defined Nb grains within the Cu matrix, and the matrix annealing step further
improved the arrangement of these grains.

IV. FINAL REMARKS

In a complementary work, we established the complete correlation of the microstructural

properties of these good quality Cuwt%Nb samples, with their superconducting properties through
huge  set  of  complementary  measurements,  e.g.,  dc inductive  experiments,  Mdc[H,T,θ]  ,
χ

ac[ T , H ,hExc ,υ ,θ,  ρdc[H,T,θ], Rdc[V,I H,T,θ], I[V,H,T,θ] and J[H,T,I,θ] and we have observed

effects of quantum interference in the critical current curves I c[H] or [H,T,I,θ]) with the occurrence
oscillations due the Josphson Effect coupling betwen the superconducting phase form the Niobium
grains.

V. AKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Professor Oscar Ferreira de Lima and Dr. Adelino Coelho form the

“Gleb Wataghin” Physics Institute at the State University of Campinas – Unicamp. We also thank
the Brazilian Synchrotron Light National Laboratory (LNLS) - ABTLuS - Ministry of Science,
Technology and Innovation – (MCTI) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological
Development, CNPq.

VI. REFERENCES

[1] Tarryn L. Botha et. al., "Cytotoxicity of Ag, Au and Ag-Au bimetallic nanoparticles prepared
using golden rod (Solidago canadensis) plant extract", Nature Scientific Reports, 9, 4169 (2019). &
Ma-Hsuan Ma, et al., "Non-conventional superconductivity in magnetic In and Sn nanoparticles",
Nature Scientific Reports, 12, 775 (2022). & Nadeem Baig, Irshad Kammakakam and Wail Falath
abe, "Nanomaterials: a review of synthesis methods, properties, recent progress, and challenges",
Mater. Adv., 2, 1821-1871, (2021).
[2] "Bottom-up Nanofabrication - Supramolecules, Self-Assemblies, and Organized Films", Journal
of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Edited by Katsuhiko Ariga, ISBN: 1-58883-079-9, (2009).
[3]  Junyu  Ge,  et  al.,  "Rapid  fabrication  of  complex  nanostructures  using  room-temperature
ultrasonic nanoimprinting", Nature Communications, 12, 3146 (2021).
[4] Mengmeng Guo et al., "Advanced unconventional techniques for sub-100 nm nanopatterning",
https://doi.org/10.1002/inf2.12323, (2022).
[5] Joseph R. Puryear et al., "Advanced Fabrication Techniques of Microengineered Physiological
Systems", Micromachines 11(8), 730, (2020).

11


[6] Shantanu Bhattacharya et al., "Fabrication of Nanostructures with Bottom-up Approach and
Their Utility in Diagnostics, Therapeutics, and Others",  Environmental, Chemical and Medical
Sensors, 167–198, (2018).
[7]  Mohammadreza  and  Heidari  Pebdani,  "Molecular  insight  into  structural  and  mechanical
properties of Halloysite structure", Computational Materials Science, 218, 111948, (2023).
[8]S. Torquato, et al., "Modeling of physical properties of composite materials",  International
Journal of Solids and Structures, 37, 1–2, 411-422, (2000).
[9] Jinbo Zhao, et al.,"Overview of polymer nanocomposites: Computer simulation understanding
of physical properties", Polymer, 133, 272-287, (2017) .
[10] Anna Palau, “Superconductors Complex Materials for Pratical Applications Cryoconference”,
Madrid, Spain, (2008). & “A route to developing superconducting nano-devices,’ Source: Tohoku
University, Jun 02, 2 (2015).
[11]  Y.  Miyata,  K.  Nakayama,  K.  Sugawara,  T.  Sato  &  T.  Takahashi,  “High-temperature
superconductivity inpotassium-coated multilayer FeSe thin films”,  Nature Materials,  14, 775779
(2015).
[12]  “Nanotechnology  for  High-temperature  Superconductor  Electronics:  “Large-Scale  Two-
Dimensional Arrays of Y-Ba-Cu-O Josephson Junctions”, IEEE/CSC ESAS Superconductivity News
Forum - (global edition), (2014).
[13]  F. D. Lemkey & E. R. Thompson, "Nickel and cobalt eutectic alloys reinforced by refractory
metal carbides", Metallurgical Transactions, 2, 1537–1544 (1971). & D. A. Prokosshkin and E. V.
Vasl'eva, “Alloys of Niobium”, Daniel Davey, New York, 129 (1965).
[14] Fihey J. L., et al., “On the solidification microestruture of copper-rich niobium alloys”, Journ.
of Mat. Sci. 11, 2307, (1976).
[15] D. J Chakrabarti and D. E. Laughlin, in T. B. Massalski (ed.), “Binary Alloy Phase 2nd” edn,
144, (1992).
[16] Roberge R. and J. L. Fihey, “Origin of superconductivity of copper niobium alloys”, Journ. of
Appl. Phys. 48, 1327(1977).
[17] D. Li et.al., et al., “Liquidus temperatures solidification behavior in the copper-niobium
system”, Acta Materialia 46, 11 3849 (1998).
[18] Tsuei C. C., et al., “Superconductivity of copper containing small amounts of niobium”, Journ.
of Mat. Sci., 1307 (1973).

12


