arXiv:2309.03626v2  [physics.optics]  11 Sep 2023

Phase-change nonlocal metasurfaces for dynamic wavefront manipulation

Tingting Liu,1, 2 Dandan Zhang,3 Wenxing Liu,3 Tianbao Yu,3 Feng Wu,4

Shuyuan Xiao,1, 2, ∗ Lujun Huang,5, † and Andrey E. Miroshnichenko6, ‡

1Institute for Advanced Study, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China
2Jiangxi Key Laboratory for Microscale Interdisciplinary Study, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China
3School of Physics and Materials Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China
4School of Optoelectronic Engineering, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Guangzhou 510665, China
5School of Physics and Electronic Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China
6School of Engineering and Technology, University of New South Wales, Canberra, ACT 2612, Australia

Recent advances in nonlocal metasurfaces have enabled unprecedented success in shaping the
wavefront of light with spectral selectivity, offering new solutions for many emerging nanophotonics
applications. The ability to tune both the spectral and spatial properties of such a novel class of
metasurfaces is highly desirable, but the dynamic nonvolatile control remains elusive.
Here, we
demonstrate active narrowband wavefront manipulation by harnessing quasi-bound states in the
continuum (quasi-BICs) in phase-change nonlocal metasurfaces.
The proof-of-principle metasur-
faces made of Sb2S3 allow for nonvolatile, reversible, and tunable spectral control over wavefront
and switchable spatial response at a given wavelength. The design principle mainly builds upon
the combination of the geometry phase of quasi-BICs and the dynamic tunability of phase-change
meta-atoms to tailor the spatial response of light at distinct resonant wavelengths. By tuning the
crystallization level of Sb2S3 meta-atoms, the dynamic nonlocal wavefront-shaping functionalities of
beam steering, 1D, and 2D focusing are achieved. Furthermore, we demonstrate tunable holographic
imaging with active spectral selectivity using our phase-change nonlocal metasurface. This work
represents a critical advance towards developing integrated dynamic nonlocal metasurface for future
augmented and virtual reality wearables.

Keywords: bound states in the continuum, metasurfaces, wavefront manipulation, phase-change materials

I.
INTRODUCTION

The past few decades have witnessed substantial
progress of metasurfaces in control over the light field
through subwavelength elements, as they can be designed
with a variety of geometry and materials to generate a
tailored optical response in terms of amplitude, phase,
polarization, frequency, and other degrees of freedom [1–
5].
Especially with their ability to impart a specific
phase profile using designed meta-atoms for wavefront
control, metasurfaces have provided an elegant and fash-
ionable strategy to miniaturizing and flattening various
optical systems [6–16].
The conventional metasurfaces
are designed to imprint independent and spatially vari-
ant phases onto incident light waves, and these local de-
vices would shape the wavefront over a broad range of
wavelengths due to the modulation as a function of posi-
tion. However, in many emerging imaging, sensing, and
display applications such as augmented reality (AR) and
virtual reality (VR) systems, the new functionalities that
require highly localized energy and high spectral control
over the wavefront are inaccessible by the local metasur-
faces. Most recently, several works have employed the
concept of bound states in the continuum (BICs) to re-
alize the nonlocal wavefront-shaping metasurfaces with
large quality factor (Q-factor) and spectral selectivity

∗ syxiao@ncu.edu.cn
† ljhuang@phy.ecnu.edu.cn
‡ andrey.miroshnichenko@unsw.edu.au

[17–21].
Based on the analysis of symmetry perturba-
tions to the BICs, the general method for independently
controlling local and nonlocal interaction of the metasur-
face supporting quasi-BICs is developed to shape wave-
front by spatially varying the polarization properties of
quasi-BICs only on resonance, leaving the non-resonant
light unchanged. The nanostructures such as wavefront-
selective metasurface[22] and spectrally selective metal-
enses [23–25], have been theoretically and experimentally
demonstrated, opening new pathways for future 3D dis-
play platforms that complement those of conventional
metasurfaces.

Despite the exciting advances in nonlocal metasur-
faces, the ability to realize flat optical devices with con-
trollable spectral and spatial response remains a signifi-
cant ongoing challenge for practical applications. In pre-
vious works, researchers have realized the control of mul-
tiple quasi-BICs by adding successive symmetry-breaking
perturbations to a single nonlocal metasurface, allow-
ing for wavefront manipulation at several wavelengths
[26, 27]. In principle, up to four distinct functions from
four quasi-BICs may be realized on a single metasur-
face though at the cost of denser patterning and in-
creased cross-talk.
Besides the single-layer structures,
multiple nonlocal wavefront-shaping metasurfaces can
also be stacked to mold the optical wavefront distinc-
tively at multiple wavelengths [25]. However, these ap-
proaches require delicate design and precise fabrication
techniques. Moreover, such passive metasurfaces are de-
signed to be static with fixed control over spatial and
spectral response once they are fabricated. Inspired by


2

the progress of tunable and reconfigurable nanophoton-
ics [28–31], recent efforts have explored active tunabil-
ity and reconfigurability of wavefront-shaping function-
alities in nonlocal metasurfaces. For example, by lever-
aging tunable thermo-optic coefficient of titanium diox-
ide (TiO2) material, the resonant wavelengths of quasi-
BICs in TiO2 nonlocal metasurface are thermally shifted
through refractive-index tuning, and then the thermally
switchable functionalities have been demonstrated in the
metasurface [32].
In parallel, the spatial and spectral
reconfigurability of nonlocal metasurfaces has also been
explored in a mechanically stretchable deflector consist-
ing of silicon pillars embedded in a stretchable polymer,
where resonant wavelength and deflection angle can be
simultaneously tunable via mechanical strain[33].
The
thermally tunable and stretchable metasurfaces show the
advantages of simple design, fabrication, and accessible
tuning approaches. Nevertheless, once the thermal con-
trol or mechanical strain vanishes, the spectral and spa-
tial responses of the metasurfaces recover to their initial
states.

This work employs an emerging phase-change mate-
rial, antimony trisulfide (Sb2S3), in nonlocal metasur-
faces supporting quasi-BICs for dynamic spatial and
spectral control. By tuning the crystallization level of
Sb2S3, wavefront shaping can be realized at different
wavelengths, and the optical functionalities at specific
wavelengths can be switched on to off. Compared with
the previous tuning mechanism, the approach based on
phase-change nonlocal metasurface shows that multiple
functionalities can be integrated into a single metasurface
with active, nonvolatile, and reversible tunability but
without complex patterning, affording more degrees of
freedom for light manipulations. As a proof-of-concept,
we design the Sb2S3 metasurface supporting the quasi-
BIC that is evolved from the symmetry-protected BIC
by the dimerization perturbation. The quasi-BIC obeys
the selection rules, and the system is capable of shap-
ing wavefront only across the narrow spectral bandwidth
of resonance using the geometric phase. By tuning the
crystallization level of Sb2S3 meta-atoms, the dynamic
spectral and spatial control for functionalities such as
beam steering, cylindrical lensing, and radial lensing is
demonstrated.
Furthermore, the dynamic holographic
imaging at distinct wavelengths is demonstrated, showing
the great potential of the phase-change nonlocal metasur-
faces in optical information storage and encryption. By
introducing the meta-atoms made of the phase-change
materials into the nonlocal wavefront-shaping metasur-
face, the active control of wavefront manipulation at nar-
row spectral bandwidth of the quasi-BIC resonances is
realized with the advantage of multistate, reversible, and
nonvolatile tunability, which is the first time in active
nonlocal metasurfaces. It may lead to new device con-
cepts and find great potential in optical imaging, sensing,
and display applications.

II.
DESIGN PRINCIPLE

Figure 1 is a conceptual illustration of phase-change
nonlocal metasurface enabling dynamic spatial control
at distinct resonant wavelengths by tuning the crystal-
lization level of Sb2S3. In the proposed metasurface, the
wavefront manipulation stems from the geometric phase
imparted onto the converted circularly polarized (CP)
light of transmission mode on resonance. The geometric
phase only relies on the polarization properties of quasi-
BIC from symmetry breaking. Meanwhile, the quasi-BIC
resonance of the metasurface strongly depends on the re-
fractive index of Sb2S3 meta-atoms, which is tunable by
adjusting the crystallization state of Sb2S3 through con-
trolling the external stimulus. Under the operating prin-
ciple, dynamic wavefront manipulation can be realized
at the tunable spectral resonance in a specific symmetry-
broken quasi-BIC nanostructure. As shown in Fig. 1,
the wavefront would be shaped at the resonant wave-
length when the broadband CP light illuminates onto
the quasi-BIC metasurface with a designed phase profile.
As Sb2S3 metasurface experiences phase transition from
the amorphous (a-Sb2S3) to crystalline states (c-Sb2S3),
the spectral response is shifted from λa to λc, tuning the
centered wavelength of spatial control. Especially, Sb2S3
material possesses multilevel nonvolatile tunable optical
constants and the ultrafast reversible switching ability
between the stable states. Benefiting from these advan-
tages, Sb2S3 metasurface can realize dynamic, reversible,
and nonvolatile wavefront manipulation at multiple dis-
tinct wavelengths during the phase transition process.
The proposed phase-change metasurface can manipu-
late the optical wavefront by choosing a specific wave-
length within a broad regime, which is different from the
previous nonlocal metasurfaces with only several target
working wavelengths. This can be attributed to multi-
level spectral control over wavefront in Sb2S3 metasur-
faces. The proposed metasurface has more freedoms and
higher security for information encryption.
For exam-
ple, the information decoding at a selected wavelength
requires an appropriate stimulus to transform Sb2S3 at a
given crystallization level, and misleading or useless in-
formation will be obtained either for other wavelengths
or for other improper crystallisation levels. More impor-
tantly, it offers an important solution for wearables and
AR devices.
For example, it can not only satisfy the
need to shape optical wavefront exclusively at selected
wavelengths and leave the rest of the spectrum transpar-
ent but also bring the flexibility of adaptive control with
adjusting the working wavelength of wavefront manipu-
lation. The proposed metasurfaces offer a prototype for
potential applications such as information storage and
encryption, AR and display technology.
To present the operation mechanism of the dynamic
control of the spectral and spatial response, we first elu-
cidate the evolution of the quasi-BIC resonance in the
metasurface. BICs can be characterized as nonradiating
resonant modes in an open system but without coupling


3

FIG. 1. The schematic diagram of dynamic wavefront manipulation at distinct wavelengths enabled by the proposed phase-
change nonlocal metasurfaces. Using the Sb2S3 metasurface, the wavefront of optical input is manipulated at the resonant
wavelength of quasi-BIC. Through external stimulus of light or heat, Sb2S3 meta-atom is phase changed between the amorphous
(a-Sb2S3) and crystalline states (c-Sb2S3), leading to the resonant wavelength shifting between λa and λc. Inset in the middle is
a generic scheme of the atomic distributions of the three crystallinity states including a-Sb2S3, the intermediate state referred to
semi-Sb2S3, and c-Sb2S3, which are nonvolatile stable states that can be reversibly switched during the phase transition process.
The resultant multi-state spectral shift of quasi-BIC resonance gives rise to a tunable center wavelength for the dynamic spatial
response.

to the radiating channels propagating outside the sys-
tem [34–36]. Here we focus on the symmetry-protected
BICs developed by symmetry-restricted coupling to free
space. To be excitable from free space light for real ap-
plications, the leaky quasi-BICs with finite Q-factors are
induced by a symmetry-breaking perturbation. An al-
ternative approach is the dimerization perturbation to
double the period along the real-space dimension and
halve the first Brillouin zone in momentum space.
In
Fig. 2(a), the simple structure comprising a rectangu-
lar aperture etched in a dielectric thin film is adopted
for demonstration.
Figure 2(b) shows the correspond-
ing dimerized meta-atom with a two-fold symmetry. As
compared in Figs.
2(c) and 2(d), the period-doubling
perturbation effectively folds the band structure in the
k-space, such that the bound mode that was under the
light line and not radiated to free space is folded into the
continuum at the Γ point that can be excitable by free
space light under normal incidence.
In this evolution,
the optical lifetime of such quasi-BIC can be controlled
by the perturbation strength (δ) with Q-factors varying
inversely with δ as Q ∝ δ−2, and the polarization prop-
erties are governed by selection rules specifying whether
excitation of quasi-BIC is forbidden or allowed according
to the space group of the perturbed symmetry [17, 37–
40]. Thus it is possible to attain the desired Q-factor by
adjusting the perturbation strength and realize the wave-
front control by manipulating the polarization properties
of quasi-BIC in a designed metasurface.

Then we consider the dimerized structure consisting
of two rectangular holes in Sb2S3 thin film with a thick-

ness of 150 nm on the silica substrate, categorized as
p2 space group, as shown in Fig. 2(e). To concentrate
on the dynamic wavefront control, the Q-factor engineer-
ing involved is not taken into consideration in the cur-
rent work, and we set the constant symmetry-breaking
strength of the structure as δ = 100 nm with the hole
length as L = D + δ and width W = D − δ. Indepen-
dently of this optical localisation and lifetime, the polar-
ization angle φ of the quasi-BIC coupling to free space
light can be controlled by the in-plane rotation angle α,
with a linear approximation of φ ≈ 2α, based on the se-
lection rules [17]. This is derived from the parent-child
symmetry relationship where the pmm parent space with
α = 0◦ allows for mode coupling to x polarization with
φ = 0◦ and the pmg parent space with α = 45◦ yields
coupling to y polarization with φ = 90◦. Like the con-
ventional phase-gradient metasurface, the p2 space group
system imparts the geometric phase to the converted CP
light in transmission.
Specifically, when the CP light
is incident onto the metasurface, only the linear com-
ponent in the polarization angle of φ1 ≈ 2α completely
coupling to the quasi-BIC, and subsequently, the linear
polarized light on resonance is coupled out into the free
space with decomposed CP component showing phase as
φ2 ≈ 2α for the converted part. Hence, the total geo-
metric phase of the quasi-BIC in this process is derived
as Φ = φ1 + φ2 ≈ 4α for the converted CP component,
while the phase remains unchanged for the unconverted
component due to the opposite signs canceling each other
when transforming the linear and CP components. Such
relations can be illustrated by Fig. 2(f), where the geo-


4

FIG. 2. Design of phase-change nonlocal metasurface. (a)-
(d) The evolution of quasi-BIC from the symmetry-protected
BIC via the dimerization perturbation. (a) The unperturbed
meta-atom with a rectangular aperture etched in a silicon thin
film. (b) The dimerized meta-atom. The period is a = 450
nm, the etched hole length is L = D + δ and the width
W = D − δ with δ = 100 nm and D = 225 nm. The sili-
con film with a thickness of 150 nm is used. (c) and (d) The
calculated band structures for the unperturbed meta-atoms in
(a) and for the dimerized meta-atoms in (b), respectively. The
green curve depicts the light line, and the star mark indicates
the mode of interest. (e)-(g) Design of diatomic phase-change
resonators and their optical properties. (e) Top view of the
designed meta-atoms showing its geometrical parameters of
a = 450 nm, L = 325 nm, W = 125 nm, and varying rotation
angles α. (f) The converted LCP and unconverted RCP com-
ponents’ simulated phase in transmission for the a-Sb2S3 and
c-Sb2S3 metasurfaces when the RCP is normally incident. (g)
Simulated transmission spectra of the converted LCP and un-
converted RCP component in transmission at different crys-
tallization levels when the RCP is normally incident on the
metasurface.

metric phase of quasi-BIC on resonance depends on the
rotation angle in the Sb2S3 meta-atom. When the right-
handed circularly polarized (RCP) light illuminates on
the metasurfaces, the geometric phase of the transmitted
light on quasi-BIC resonance shows an approximate re-
lation of 4α for the converted component of LCP with a
full phase coverage of 0 ∼ 2π, whereas the phase for the
unconverted component of RCP is nearly unchanged.
Compared with the common phase-change material
Ge2Sb2Te5, Sb2S3 has a wide bandgap of 1.7 ∼ 2.05
eV, showing much lower, even negligible absorption in
the near-infrared regime of interest [41–43]. The refrac-
tive index of Sb2S3 can be adjusted from 2.8 to 3.5 in
this regime (shown in Figure S1). Via appropriate stim-
ulus, including optical, thermal, and electric excitations,
Sb2S3 can be switched reversibly and quickly between the
amorphous (a-Sb2S3) and crystalline states (c-Sb2S3) or
to be an intermediate state (semi-Sb2S3). The dielectric
constant at different crystallization levels of Sb2S3 can
be derived by the Lorenz-Lorentz relation as [44–46]

εeff − 1
εeff + 2 = mεc − 1

εc + 2 + (1 − m)εa − 1

εa + 2,
(1)

where m represents the crystalline fraction ranging from
0 to 1 for the multistate intermediating between a-Sb2S3
and c-Sb2S3, εa and εc are the permittivity of a-Sb2S3
and c-Sb2S3, respectively.
Because of the tunable op-
tical constants of meta-atoms, the spectral response of
quasi-BIC in Sb2S3 metasurface will vary during these
phase transitions. The numerical calculations are per-
formed with the finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD)
method via the ANSYS Lumerical Suit.
As shown in
Fig. 2(g), the transmission spectra show a shift of res-
onance wavelength within a broad band from ∼ 1380
nm to ∼ 1550 nm between a-Sb2S3 and c-Sb2S3 meta-
surfaces. For the converted light component of interest,
namely, LCP, the peak transmission efficiencies of these
spectra are always around the maximum theoretical limit
of 0.25 in this four-port system [33]. In contrast with the
spectral shift, the geometric phase of quasi-BIC on reso-
nance mainly relying on the rotation angles is almost un-
changed, as verified by that of the a-Sb2S3 and c-Sb2S3
metasurface in Fig. 2(f). A designer phase profile can be
realized at tunable wavelengths of quasi-BIC resonances.
Of course, the wavefront shaping ability in metasurfaces
will be remarkably weakened at the non-resonance wave-
lengths due to the dramatically reduced transmission ef-
ficiency. This makes it possible to switch on and off the
spatial response at a specific wavelength by transforming
the resonant wavelength into non-resonant via varying
the crystallization levels of Sb2S3. As a result, dynamic
wavefront-shaping metasurface supporting a quasi-BIC
can be implemented by a rational synthesis of multistate
switchable spectral response in the Sb2S3 metasurface
with a spatially varying geometric phase profile. Note
that Sb2S3 is patterned into nanostructures to construct
the nonlocal metasurface instead of the spacer layer in
earlier works for active devices [47–50]. The nanofabri-


5

cation techniques have been explored and proven to be
feasible in previous experimental works [41, 43], and the
fabrication process for the proposed Sb2S3 metasurface
is illustrated in Figure S2.

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

FIG. 3.
Design of phase-change nonlocal metasurface for
dynamic beam steering at distinct wavelengths.
(a) The
schematic diagram of a super-unit cell of the dynamic beam
deflector consisting of 25 dimerized meta-atoms with spatially
varying rotation angles α from 0 to π.
When the broad-
band RCP light normally illuminates onto the metasurface,
the light with converted handedness is deflected in a narrow
band around the resonance. (b) Transmission spectra of the
nonlocal metasurface at different crystallization states of a-
Sb2S3, semi-Sb2S3, and c-Sb2S3 for RCP and LCP compo-
nent under normal RCP incidence. (c) Electric filed profiles
for RCP and LCP component at the corresponding resonant
wavelength of a-Sb2S3, semi-Sb2S3 and, c-Sb2S3 metasurface,
showing the active beam deflection at different wavelengths
of quasi-BIC resonances for converted LCP component.

Using the dimerized Sb2S3 meta-atoms with different
rotation angles for specific phase profiles, tunable spec-
tral control over wavefront and switchable spatial re-
sponse at a selected wavelength can be realized, creating
active metadevices such as beam deflectors and lenses.
For demonstration, we start from a common wavefront-
shaping function of anomalous refraction for beam steer-

ing. According to the generalized Snell’s law [6, 7], the
nonlocal wavefront-shaping metasurface with a gradient
distribution of rotation angle is devised, as shown in Fig.
3(a). The Sb2S3 meta-atoms are spatially arranged for
one period of the metasurface with varying α at each
position to linearly grade the corresponding geometric
phase along the direction orthogonal to the dimeriza-
tion, but with constant aperture dimensions and lattice
constants. When RCP light is normally incident from
the substrate side of the metasurface, the transmission
spectra for the converted LCP and unconverted RCP
component are presented in Fig. 3(b). As the crystal-
lization fraction m of Sb2S3 material changes from 0 to
1, namely a-Sb2S3 to c-Sb2S3, the resonance wavelength
of quasi-BIC shows a multi-level redshift across a wave-
length regime of ∼ 160 nm. Here, we select the interme-
diate state with m = 0.5 as the semicrystalline state of
Sb2S3 (semi-Sb2S3) to demonstrate the multilevel con-
trol.
As a consequence of the multilevel tunable wavelength
of quasi-BIC resonance, the metasurface is able to per-
form wavefront shaping at different wavelengths.
As
shown in Fig.
3(c), the converted LCP component is
refracted to 14◦ at resonance wavelength of 1381 nm
for a-Sb2S3, 15◦ at 1450 nm for semi-Sb2S3, and 16◦

at 1545 nm for c-Sb2S3, respectively.
At these corre-
sponding resonance wavelengths, ∼20% of the light is
removed from the incident beam and redirected into the
second-order diffracted beam[26]. Meanwhile, no deflec-
tion for the unconverted RCP component can be observed
in Fig. 3(c) due to the constant phase profiles. Unlike the
conventional phase-gradient metasurfaces, the designed
metasurface using resonant meta-atoms shapes the wave-
front of the converted LCP component only at resonance.
Such nonlocal wavefront-shaping ability can be verified
by comparing the field distributions of an arbitrary non-
resonant wavelength at 1500 nm (shown in Figure S3)
and the respective resonant wavelengths.
The phase-
change metasurface demonstrates the dynamic beam de-
flection for the converted LCP transmission light at dis-
tinct resonant wavelengths while remaining unchanged
for unconverted RCP or non-resonance.
Next we consider simple cylindrical metalens for dy-
namic narrowband focusing, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Un-
der the normally incident RCP light, the transmitted
LCP light is focused to a specific distance at tunable
wavelengths by varying crystallization state of Sb2S3.
The typical phase profile of the metalens with focal length
f is given by[51–54]

φr = 2π

λ0
(
�

r2 + f 2 − f),
(2)

where r =
�

x2 + y2 is the distance from arbitrary po-
sition (x, y), and λ0 is the target working wavelength.
Here, the one-dimensional metalens along x direction for
space light focusing is designed, with the phase profile
shown in Fig. 4(b). The focal length of the metalens is
100 nm, and the working wavelength is set as the same


6

FIG. 4.
Design of phase-change metasurface for dynamic
cylindrical metalens at distinct wavelengths. (a) Schematic
diagram of the dynamic narrowband focusing along x direc-
tion. When the broadband RCP light normally illuminates
onto the metasurface, the light with converted handedness
is focused in a narrow band.
(b) The phase profile of the
1D focuses on the converted LCP. (c) Transmission spectra
of the nonlocal metasurface at different crystallization states.
(d) Far-field intensity distributions near the designed focal
spot of 100 nm for RCP and LCP component at the corre-
sponding resonant wavelength of a-Sb2S3, semi-Sb2S3, and
c-Sb2S3 metasurface, showing the space light focusing at dif-
ferent wavelengths of quasi-BIC resonances for converted LCP
component.

as the resonant wavelength for a-Sb2S3 metasurface. The
spatially varying phase profile is coded by Sb2S3 meta-
atoms with different rotation angles α at corresponding
coordinate, according to the nearly linear dependence of
the geometric phase on the rotation angle of Φ ≈ 4α.
In Fig. 4(c), the transmission spectra of the cylindri-
cal metalens demonstrate that the converted LCP light
shows a peak at resonant wavelength, and the resonance
peak can be shifted from ∼1380 nm to ∼ 1550 nm by
varying the crystallization state of phase-change meta-
atoms from a-Sb2S3 to c-Sb2S3. Similarly, the resonant
wavelength shift for different Sb2S3 contributes to the
tunable spatial and spectral response. Fig. 4(d) illus-
trates the normalized intensity of the converted LCP
light fields at the corresponding resonant wavelength of a-
Sb2S3, semi-Sb2S3, and c-Sb2S3, respectively. Since the
geometric phase is fundamentally robust and emerges in

symmetry breaking, the light fields at these wavelengths
are all focused, implying the ability of spatial control at
multiwavelength within a broad spectral range. On the
other hand, for a selected wavelength, the focusing effect
can be switched on-to-off by tuning the resonant posi-
tion of quasi-BIC. The focusing intensity of fields shows
an observable increase, accompanied by the increasing
transmission peak when the meta-atoms phase changed
from a-Sb2S3 to c-Sb2S3. This can be explained by the
fact that the relatively larger refractive index of c-Sb2S3
and negligible loss account for a stronger localized light
field and, thus, stronger spatial control ability. In con-
trast with the space light focusing of the converted LCP
component, the wavefront shaping is not performed for
the unconverted RCP component in Fig. 4(d) and the
non-resonant wavelengths, for example, at λ = 1500 nm
(shown in Figure S4). Only for the converted LCP on res-
onance, the designed active cylindrical metalens exhibit
dynamic light focusing in the narrowband of quasi-BIC
resonances.
We proceed to the more complex two-dimensional (2D)
spatial control at distinct resonant wavelengths of quasi-
BICs. The phase-change metasurface for a radial lens is
designed in a simple-to-implement way, which focuses the
transmitted LCP component into a specific spot in space,
as shown in Fig. 5(a). The spatial phase profile from
Eq. (1) is presented in Fig. 5(b) with a 2D distribution
dependent on the coordinate x and y, different from the
1D cylindrical lens in Fig. 4(b). But in a similar way, the
light focusing with focal spots imaging at the focal plane
only occurs when the incident wavelengths tune around
the quasi-BIC resonance. As the geometric phase of Φ ≈
4α is imparted onto the transmitted LCP component on
quasi-BIC resonances, the phase profile can be encoded
by the 2D spatial distribution of Sb2S3 meta-atoms with
corresponding rotation angle α. Here, a nonlocal radial
metalens with a diameter of 30 µm is designed and it has
an initial working wavelength centered at the resonant
wavelength for a-Sb2S3 metasurface.
The transmission spectra of the designed metasurface
for different crystallization states of Sb2S3 are depicted
in Fig. 5(c). Compared with those of beam deflection
metasurface and the cylindrical metalens above, the res-
onances remain intact even through the various geome-
try in these metadevices. This implies that the quasi-
BIC resonance has a relatively stable resonance wave-
length and peak amplitude for the various combinations
of specific meta-atoms either in 1D or 2D. Such robust-
ness would benefit the metadevice design where the spec-
tral response can be defined by designing a single unit
cell. The transverse and longitudinal far-field distribu-
tions with the focal spots on the quasi-BIC resonances in
Fig. 5(d) show the efficient focusing ability at the cor-
responding resonant wavelength of different Sb2S3 meta-
surfaces.
The relatively larger focusing intensity of c-
Sb2S3 metasurface can be attributed to the increasing
refractive index during the crystallization process. In ad-
dition, the focal spots off-resonance for c-Sb2S3 show the


7

FIG. 5. Design of phase-change metasurface for dynamic ra-
dial metalens at distinct wavelengths. (a) Schematic diagram
of the dynamic narrowband focusing in 2D space. (b) The
spatial phase profile for the 2D focusing.
(c) Transmission
spectra of the phase-change nonlocal metasurface at different
crystallization states. (d) The transverse far-field profiles on
the focal plane and the longitudinal far-field profiles through
the focal spot, for the converted LCP component at the cor-
responding resonant wavelength of a-Sb2S3, semi-Sb2S3, and
c-Sb2S3 metasurfaces.

efficiency decreasing as the wavelengths gradually move
away from the center of the resonance (shown in Figure
S5). With several orders of magnitude smaller power at
off-resonance wavelengths than background plane wave,
the meatless can be considered functionally transparent
off-resonance. Such spectral selectivity to the crystalliza-
tion state of Sb2S3 leads to the tunability to either ma-
nipulate wavefront at a controllable wavelength or switch
on and off the function at a selected wavelength.
In the proposed phase-change nonlocal metasurface,
the flexibility to control both the spatial and spectral
response can provide abundant degrees of freedom for

implementing the narrowband wavefront manipulation
in various applications associated with optical informa-
tion processing. To demonstrate the versatility and high
performance, a phase-only meta-hologram is finally de-
signed. Using the same meta-atom library with the lenses
above, the information is coded by the geometric phases
of Sb2S3 meta-atoms that are exerted to the transmit-
ted converted component on resonance. Here, the phase
profile of the image is obtained by the Gerchberg–Saxton
algorithm and then encoded by the 2D spatial distribu-
tion of the rotation angle of Sb2S3 meta-atoms.

FIG. 6. Demonstrations of dynamic spatial and spectral con-
trol in the phase-change nonlocal metasurfaces using a phase-
only meta-hologram. Under RCP illumination, the diffraction
patterns generated by the a-Sb2S3, semi-Sb2S3, and c-Sb2S3
metasurfaces of transmitted LCP component displays images
exclusively at selected wavelengths and display misleading or
useless information for the non-resonant regime.

The simulated diffraction patterns shown in Fig. 6 are
generated by the a-Sb2S3, semi-Sb2S3, and c-Sb2S3, re-
spectively.
For comparison, the holographic images at
resonant and non-resonant wavelengths are presented.
Before the phase transition of Sb2S3 meta-atoms, namely
a-Sb2S3 metasurface, the image is only captured for
the converted LCP light at the corresponding resonant
wavelength around 1380 nm, while no image displays
at the other two non-resonant wavelengths. Similar re-
sults can be observed for the semi-Sb2S3 and c-Sb2S3
metasurfaces. Such a mapping relationship in the space-
wavelength domains for holographic imaging originated
from the fact that the geometric phase profiles in the
metasurface are fundamentally robust at different res-
onant wavelengths, with the correlated rotation angles
of meta-atoms hardly affecting the spectral response, as
shown in Fig. 2(f). These significant properties can be
applied to optical information encryption where the infor-
mation decryption requires the matching conditions be-
tween the selected wavelength and the appropriate crys-
tallization state of Sb2S3 meta-atoms. More importantly,


8

the proposed metasurface attempts to develop the optical
metadevice capable of performing dynamic operations on
incident light waves with high degrees of spectral control.
The proposed metasurface allows the transmitted infor-
mation only at selected narrowband wavelengths to be
processed, avoiding the extra optical components such as
polarizers to add the size and mass of system. It can also
achieve an adaptive selection of the operating wavelength
across a broad spectral bandwidth for information imag-
ing, display, and sensing. This may open exciting oppor-
tunities in the quest to tailor light in spectral and spa-
tial control using ultra-thin platforms for future AR/VR
wearable devices.

IV.
CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we have demonstrated phase-change
nonlocal metasurfaces capable of actively shaping light’s
spatial and spectral properties in transmission mode.
The functionality is enabled by incorporating the phase-
change meta-atoms integrated with a nonlocal wavefront-
shaping metasurface empowered by quasi-BICs. A sys-
tematic design approach is presented by combining the
nonlocal design strategies of enhanced light-matter in-
teraction of quasi-BICs and the wavefront-shaping prin-
ciple encapsulated by the generalized Snell’s law in the
phase-change metasurfaces. Leveraging spatially varying
the polarization properties of quasi-BICs for designer ge-
ometric phase profiles, the wavefront-shaping functions
for beam steering and space focusing are demonstrated
for a narrow spectral regime in Sb2S3 metasurfaces. By

switching the state of Sb2S3 between amorphous and
crystalline, the wavefront manipulation can be realized at
multiwavelength within a broad spectral range, and the
spatial response at a specific wavelength can be switched
on to off.
The presented Sb2S3 metasurface platform
can afford multistate, reversible, and nonvolatile tuning
of the spatial and spectral response, offering sufficient
design freedom to tailor the spatial response at tunable
wavelength actively. Furthermore, the dynamic control
over a single device’s spatial and spectral response en-
ables holographic imaging at selected wavelengths, which
may open the door for next-generation compact narrow-
band imaging for applications such as information stor-
age and encryption and AR/VR.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grants No.
12364045,
12304420, 12264028, and 12104105), the Natural Sci-
ence
Foundation
of
Jiangxi
Province
(Grants
No.
20232BAB211025 and 20232BAB201040), the Chen-
guang Program of Shanghai Education Development
Foundation and Shanghai Municipal Education Commis-
sion (Grant No. 21CGA55), the Shanghai Pujiang Pro-
gram (Grant No.
22PJ1402900), the Guangdong Ba-
sic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (Grant No.
2023A1515011024), the Science and Technology Program
of Guangzhou (Grant No.
202201011176), the China
Scholarship Council (Grant No. 202008420045), and the
Australian Research Council Discovery Project (Grant
No. DP200101353).

[1] A.
V.
Kildishev,
A.
Boltasseva,
and
V.
M.
Shalaev,
Planar
photonics
with
metasurfaces,
Science 339, 1232009 (2013).
[2] N. Yu and F. Capasso, Flat optics with designer meta-
surfaces, Nat. Mater. 13, 139 (2014).
[3] F. Ding, A. Pors, and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Gradient meta-
surfaces:
a review of fundamentals and applications,
Rep. Prog. Phys. 81, 026401 (2017).
[4] S. So, J. Mun, J. Park, and J. Rho, Revisiting the design
strategies for metasurfaces: Fundamental physics, opti-
mization, and beyond, Adv. Mater. , 2206399 (2023).
[5] A. Arbabi and A. Faraon, Advances in optical metal-
enses, Nat. Photonics 17, 16 (2022).
[6] N. Yu, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats, F. Aieta, J.-P. Teti-
enne, F. Capasso, and Z. Gaburro, Light propagation
with phase discontinuities: generalized laws of reflection
and refraction, Science 334, 333 (2011).
[7] S. Sun, Q. He, S. Xiao, Q. Xu, X. Li, and L. Zhou,
Gradient-index meta-surfaces as a bridge linking prop-
agating waves and surface waves, Nat. Mater. 11, 426
(2012).
[8] W. T. Chen, A. Y. Zhu, V. Sanjeev, M. Khorasanine-
jad, Z. Shi, E. Lee, and F. Capasso, A broadband achro-

matic metalens for focusing and imaging in the visible,
Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 220 (2018).
[9] R. J. Lin, V.-C. Su, S. Wang, M. K. Chen, T. L.
Chung, Y. H. Chen, H. Y. Kuo, J.-W. Chen, J. Chen,
Y.-T. Huang, J.-H. Wang, C. H. Chu, P. C. Wu,
T. Li,
Z. Wang,
S. Zhu, and D. P. Tsai, Achro-
matic metalens array for full-colour light-field imaging,
Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 227 (2019).
[10] Z. Li, C. Chen, Z. Guan, J. Tao, S. Chang, Q. Dai,
Y. Xiao,
Y. Cui, Y. Wang, S. Yu, et al., Three-
channel metasurfaces for simultaneous meta-holography
and meta-nanoprinting:
a single-cell design approach,
Laser Photonics Rev. 14, 2000032 (2020).
[11] P.
Georgi,
Q.
Wei,
B.
Sain,
C.
Schlickriede,
Y. Wang,
L. Huang, and T. Zentgraf, Optical se-
cret sharing with cascaded metasurface holography,
Sci. Adv. 7, eabf9718 (2021).
[12] Y. Guo, S. Zhang, M. Pu, Q. He, J. Jin, M. Xu,
Y. Zhang, P. Gao, and X. Luo, Spin-decoupled meta-
surface
for simultaneous detection of spin and or-
bital angular momenta via momentum transformation,
Light Sci. Appl. 10, 63 (2021).


9

[13] X. Luo, Y. Hu, X. Ou, X. Li, J. Lai, N. Liu, X. Cheng,
A. Pan, and H. Duan, Metasurface-enabled on-chip
multiplexed diffractive neural networks in the visible,
Light Sci. Appl. 11, 158 (2022).
[14] H. Ren, X. Fang, J. Jang, J. B¨urger, J. Rho, and S. A.
Maier, Complex-amplitude metasurface-based orbital an-
gular momentum holography in momentum space, Nat.
Nanotechnol. 15, 948 (2020).
[15] S.
Li
and
C.
W.
Hsu,
Thickness
bound
for
nonlocal
wide-field-of-view
metalenses,
Light Sci. Appl. 11, 338 (2022).
[16] S.
Li
and
C.
W.
Hsu,
Transmission
ef-
ficiency
limit
for
nonlocal
metalenses,
Laser Photonics Rev. , 2300201 (2023).
[17] A. C. Overvig, S. C. Malek, M. J. Carter, S. Shrestha,
and N. Yu, Selection rules for quasibound states in the
continuum, Phys. Rev. B 102, 035434 (2020).
[18] D. Sang, M. Xu, Q. An, and Y. Fu, Broadband trans-
parent and high-q resonant polarization meta-grating
enabled by a non-local geometric-phase metasurface,
Opt. Express 30, 26664 (2022).
[19] A. Overvig, Y. Kasahara, G. Xu, and A. Al`u, Demon-
stration of a polarization-agnostic geometric phase in
nonlocal metasurfaces, arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13215
(2023).
[20] H. Huang, A. C. Overvig, Y. Xu, S. C. Malek, C.-C.
Tsai, A. Al`u, and N. Yu, Leaky-wave metasurfaces for
integrated photonics, Nat. Nanotechnol. 18, 580 (2023).
[21] G.
Xu,
A.
Overvig,
Y.
Kasahara,
E.
Martini,
S.
Maci,
and
A.
Al`u,
Arbitrary
aperture
synthe-
sis with
nonlocal
leaky-wave
metasurface
antennas,
Nat. Commun. 14, 4380 (2023).
[22] A. Overvig and A. Al`u, Wavefront-selective fano resonant
metasurfaces, Adv. Photonics 3, 026002 (2021).
[23] A. Overvig and A. Al`u, Diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces,
Laser Photonics Rev. 16, 2100633 (2022).
[24] R.
Chen,
T.
Li,
Q.
Bi,
S.
Wang,
S.
Zhu,
and
Z.
Wang,
Quasi-bound
states
in
the
continuum-based
switchable
light-field
manipulator,
Opt. Mater. Express 12, 1232 (2022).
[25] S. C. Malek, A. C. Overvig, A. Al`u, and N. Yu, Multi-
functional resonant wavefront-shaping meta-optics based
on multilayer and multi-perturbation nonlocal metasur-
faces, Light Sci. Appl. 11, 246 (2022).
[26] A.
C.
Overvig,
S.
C.
Malek,
and
N.
Yu,
Multifunctional
nonlocal
metasurfaces,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 017402 (2020).
[27] Y. Zhou, S. Guo, A. C. Overvig, and A. Al`u, Multireso-
nant nonlocal metasurfaces, Nano Lett. 23, 6768 (2023).
[28] F.
Ding,
Y.
Yang,
and
S.
I.
Bozhevolnyi,
Dy-
namic metasurfaces using phase-change chalcogenides,
Adv. Opt. Mater. 7, 1801709 (2019).
[29] S. Xiao, T. Wang, T. Liu, C. Zhou, X. Jiang, and
J. Zhang, Active metamaterials and metadevices: a re-
view, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 53, 503002 (2020).
[30] J. Kim, J. Seong, Y. Yang, S.-W. Moon, T. Bad-
loe, and J. Rho, Tunable metasurfaces towards ver-
satile
metalenses
and
metaholograms:
a
review,
Adv. Photonics 4, 024001 (2022).
[31] O. A. M. Abdelraouf, Z. Wang, H. Liu, Z. Dong,
Q. Wang, M. Ye, X. R. Wang, Q. J. Wang, and H. Liu,
Recent advances in tunable metasurfaces: Materials, de-
sign, and applications, ACS Nano 16, 13339 (2022).

[32] S. C. Malek,
C.-C.
Tsai,
and N. Yu, Thermally-
switchable metalenses based on quasi-bound states in the
continuum, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13644 (2023).
[33] S.
C.
Malek,
A.
C.
Overvig,
S.
Shrestha,
and
N.
Yu,
Active
nonlocal
metasurfaces,
Nanophotonics 10, 655 (2020).
[34] C. W. Hsu, B. Zhen, A. D. Stone, J. D. Joannopou-
los, and M. Soljaˇci´c, Bound states in the continuum,
Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 16048 (2016).
[35] A.
F.
Sadreev,
Interference
traps
waves
in
an
open
system:
bound
states
in
the
continuum,
Rep. Prog. Phys. 84, 055901 (2021).
[36] L. Huang, L. Xu, D. A. Powell, W. J. Padilla, and
A. E. Miroshnichenko, Resonant leaky modes in all-
dielectric metasystems: Fundamentals and applications,
Phys. Rep. 1008, 1 (2023).
[37] K. Koshelev, S. Lepeshov, M. Liu, A. Bogdanov, and
Y. Kivshar, Asymmetric metasurfaces with high-q res-
onances governed by bound states in the continuum,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 193903 (2018).
[38] S. Li, C. Zhou, T. Liu, and S. Xiao, Symmetry-protected
bound states in the continuum supported by all-dielectric
metasurfaces, Phys. Rev. A 100, 063803 (2019).
[39] X. Wang, J. Duan, W. Chen, C. Zhou, T. Liu, and
S.
Xiao,
Controlling
light
absorption
of
graphene
at
critical
coupling
through
magnetic
dipole
quasi-bound
states
in
the
continuum
resonance,
Phys. Rev. B 102, 155432 (2020).
[40] S. Xiao,
M. Qin,
J. Duan,
F. Wu, and T. Liu,
Polarization-controlled
dynamically
switchable
high-
harmonic generation from all-dielectric
metasurfaces
governed
by dual bound states in the
continuum,
Phys. Rev. B 105, 195440 (2022).
[41] L. Lu, Z. Dong, F. Tijiptoharsono, R. J. H. Ng, H. Wang,
S. D. Rezaei, Y. Wang, H. S. Leong, P. C. Lim, J. K.
Yang, et al., Reversible tuning of mie resonances in the
visible spectrum, ACS Nano 15, 19722 (2021).
[42] L. Lu, S. Reniers, Y. Wang, Y. Jiao, and R. E. Simp-
son, Reconfigurable inp waveguide components using the
sb2s3 phase change material, J. Opt. 9, 094001 (2022).
[43] P. Moitra, Y. Wang, X. Liang, L. Lu, A. Poh, T. W.
Mass, R. E. Simpson, A. I. Kuznetsov, and R. Paniagua-
Dominguez, Programmable wavefront control in the vis-
ible spectrum using low-loss chalcogenide phase-change
metasurfaces, Adv. Mater. 35, 2205367 (2022).
[44] J. Tian, H. Luo, Y. Yang, F. Ding, Y. Qu, D. Zhao,
M. Qiu, and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Active control of anapole
states by structuring the phase-change alloy ge2sb2te5,
Nat. Commun. 10, 396 (2019).
[45] Q. Meng, X. Chen, W. Xu, Z. Zhu, X. Yuan, and
J. Zhang, High q resonant sb2s3-lithium niobate meta-
surface for active nanophotonics, Nanomaterials 11, 2373
(2021).
[46] T. Liu, Z. Han, J. Duan, and S. Xiao, Phase-change meta-
surfaces for dynamic image display and information en-
cryption, Phys. Rev. Appl. 18, 044078 (2022).
[47] S.-Y. Lee, Y.-H. Kim, S.-M. Cho, G. H. Kim, T.-Y. Kim,
H. Ryu, H. N. Kim, H. B. Kang, C.-Y. Hwang, and C.-
S. Hwang, Holographic image generation with a thin-film
resonance caused by chalcogenide phase-change material,
Sci. Rep. 7, 41152 (2017).
[48] H. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Wei, G. Geng,
and L. Huang, Switchable active phase modulation and
holography encryption based on hybrid metasurfaces,


10

Nanophotonics 9, 905 (2020).
[49] L.
Mao,
Y.
Li,
G.
Li,
S.
Zhang,
and
T.
Cao,
Reversible
switching
of
electromagnetically
in-
duced
transparency
in
phase
change
metasurfaces,
Adv. Photonics 2, 056004 (2020).
[50] T.
Liu,
X.
Fang,
and
S.
Xiao,
Tuning
nonlinear
second-harmonic
generation
in
AlGaAs
nanoan-
tennas
via
chalcogenide
phase-change
material,
Phys. Rev. B 104, 195428 (2021).
[51] X. Chen, L. Huang, H. M¨uhlenbernd, G. Li, B. Bai,
Q. Tan, G. Jin, C.-W. Qiu, S. Zhang, and T. Zent-
graf, Dual-polarity plasmonic metalens for visible light,
Nat. Commun. 3, 1198 (2012).

[52] M. Khorasaninejad, W. T. Chen, R. C. Devlin, J. Oh,
A. Y. Zhu, and F. Capasso, Metalenses at visible wave-
lengths: Diffraction-limited focusing and subwavelength
resolution imaging, Science 352, 1190 (2016).
[53] M. Zhao, M. K. Chen, Z.-P. Zhuang, Y. Zhang, A. Chen,
Q. Chen, W. Liu, J. Wang, Z.-M. Chen, B. Wang,
X. Liu, H. Yin, S. Xiao, L. Shi, J.-W. Dong, J. Zi,
and D. P. Tsai, Phase characterisation of metalenses,
Light Sci. Appl. 10, 52 (2021).
[54] J. Li, J. Li, Z. Yue, C. Zheng, G. Wang, J. Liu,
H. Xu, C. Song, F. Yang, H. Li, F. Li, T. Tang,
Y. Zhang,
Y. Zhang, and J. Yao, Structured vec-
tor field manipulation of terahertz wave along the
propagation direction based on dielectric metasurfaces,
Laser Photonics Rev. 16, 2200325 (2022).


