In operando cryo-STEM of pulse-induced charge density wave switching in TaS2

James L Hart1, Saif Siddique1, Noah Schnitzer1, Stephen D. Funni1, Lena F. Kourkoutis2,3, 
Judy J. Cha1

1. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Cornell University, United States 
2. School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, United States
3. Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Cornell University, United States
*Corresponding author: jc476@cornell.edu

The charge density wave (CDW) material 1T-TaS2 exhibits a pulse-induced 
insulator-to-metal transition, which shows promise for next-generation electronics 
such as memristive memory and neuromorphic hardware. However, the rational 
design of TaS2 devices is hindered by a poor understanding of the switching 
mechanism, the pulse-induced phase, and the influence of material defects. Here, 
we operate a 2-terminal TaS2 device within a scanning transmission electron 
microscope (STEM) at cryogenic temperature, and directly visualize the changing 
CDW structure with nanoscale spatial resolution and down to 300 μs temporal 
resolution. We show that the pulse-induced transition is driven by Joule heating, 
and that the pulse-induced state corresponds to nearly commensurate and 
incommensurate CDW phases, depending on the applied voltage amplitude. With 
our in operando cryo-STEM experiments, we directly correlate the CDW structure 
with the device resistance, and show that dislocations significantly impact device
performance. This work resolves fundamental questions of resistive switching in 
TaS2 devices critical for engineering reliable and scalable TaS2 electronics. 

Introduction:

1T-TaS2 is a layered, two-dimensional (2D) quantum material which undergoes an insulator-to-
metal transition induced by voltage pulses (Fig. 1a,b)1–4. The switching is fast, energy efficient, 
and reversible, making TaS2 attractive for device applications5,6. Moreover, the layered structure
of TaS2 may enable atomically-thin memristive or neuromorphic devices, providing ultimate 
scalability inaccessible to 3D crystals7. Nevertheless, knowledge of the switching mechanism in 
TaS2 is limited. Prior works indicate that the electrical switching is associated with the CDW 
structure (Fig. 1c)1–4,8–12. At low-temperature (< 200 K), TaS2 exhibits the commensurate (C) CDW 
phase, which is insulating12–14. At higher temperature, several metallic CDW phases exist12–14, as 
well as non-thermal CDW phases accessible with optical excitation15,16. Direct characterization of 
the CDW structure during device operation is limited. In operando scanning tunneling microscopy
studies have visualized the CDW structure before and after switching11,17, but scanning probe 
studies do not possess the time-resolution to capture the switching process, and are strictly surface 
sensitive. TaS2 switching has also been studied with in operando optical measurements8, but such 
measurements lack nanoscale spatial resolution, and only indirectly probe the CDW phase. Hence, 
our understanding of the bias-induced phase(s) is still unclear, and more importantly, the switching 
mechanism remains unknown. Most studies argue that the transition is field-induced (non-
thermal), although there are competing proposals for the microscopic mechanism1–6,8. More 
recently, several groups have claimed that Joule heating is partially or wholly responsible for 


switching based on finite element simulations9,10, as well as IR thermal imaging of a bulk crystal 
under constant bias18. A concrete understanding of the switching mechanism is critical for the 
development of TaS2 electronics. To this end, in operando measurements are needed to correlate 
the CDW structure, flake temperature, and electrical resistance of a nanoscale device.  

Here, we operate a 2-terminal TaS2 device within a scanning transmission electron microscope 
(STEM) at cryogenic temperature. Through time-resolved electron diffraction and 4D-STEM 
imaging, we quantify the CDW order parameter during electric biasing and, via strain analysis, we 
measure the local sample temperature. By directly correlating the CDW structure, flake 
temperature, and device resistance during switching, we unequivocally show that Joule heating 
drives the switching process, both for steady-state bias and short voltage pulses. Accordingly, the 
bias-induced phases correspond to thermal CDW states. We also show coupling between the CDW 
order parameter and the device resistance, and we demonstrate how local microstructural features 
(dislocations) influence device operation. These findings are crucial for the engineering and 
optimization of TaS2 devices for beyond-silicon technology. 

Results and Discussion:

The studied device is shown in Fig. 1d and 1e with optical and STEM imaging, respectively. A 
bulk 1T-TaS2 crystal was exfoliated in an Argon glove box onto a SiO2 / Si substrate, and graphite 
electrodes were placed on the TaS2 flake (channel length = 7 μm). The finished device was
transferred to an in situ TEM chip, and placed over a through-hole drilled in an amorphous SiNx
membrane. The TEM chip has Pt electrodes for in situ electric biasing, as well as a Pt coil that
allows local sample heating and thermometry from ~100 – 1000 K19,20. 


Figure 1 | TaS2 structure and temperature dependent CDW behavior. Atomic structure of 1T-
TaS2 in cross-section (a) and plan-view (b). In b, the local CDW distortion is shown, which forms 
a Star-of-David structure. c. Illustration of the C, NC, and IC CDW phases, which exhibit different 
orderings of the stars. Associated electron diffraction patterns are shown. For the C phase 
diffraction pattern, the Bragg vector a* is shown, as well as two first order CDW Q vectors (solid 
line) and one 2nd order CDW vector (dotted line). The studied device imaged optically (d) and with 
STEM high angle annular dark field imaging (e). In the center of the STEM image is a through-
hole in the SiNx membrane, which allows for electron diffraction measurements. f. Temperature 
dependence of the TaS2 resistance, CDW angle φ, CDW wavevector magnitude k, and the domain 
size DNC. The shaded regions represent the standard error. The inset shows the temperature 
derivatives of the resistance and DNC. For the inset, the x-axis units are temperature (K). The 
temperature-dependent diffraction data is shown in Supplementary Video 1.

We use electron diffraction to characterize the CDW state. The TaS2 CDW follows the Star-of-
David distortion, wherein 13 Ta atoms bunch together (Fig. 1b). In the insulating low-temperature
C phase, these stars form a long-range lattice commensurate with the atomic structure13,14. As 
shown in Fig. 1c, electron diffraction of the C phase yields sharp 1st and 2nd order CDW satellite 
peaks. The C phase CDW wavevector has an angle of φc = 13.9° relative to the Bragg wavevector 
a* and a magnitude of kc = 0.2773a*. Above ~200 K, defects in CDW known as 
discommensurations form and organize into a hexagonal network with a CDW domain size of
order ~10 nm13,14. This is the metallic nearly commensurate (NC) phase, which suppresses the 1st
order CDW peak intensity, and slightly adjusts the CDW wavevector, with φ ~ 11 – 13° and k ~ 
0.280a* – 0.285a*. Thomson et al showed that the values of φ and k determine the domain size of 
the NC phase, DNC, according to

𝐷𝑁𝐶 = 𝑎 √(2𝜋∆𝜑 360
⁄
)2 + (Δ𝑘 𝑘𝐶
⁄
)2
⁄
Equation 1


where a is the atomic lattice parameter, and Δφ and Δk are the differences in φ and k relative to 
their commensurate values14. Hence, DNC provides an appropriate order parameter to differentiate 
the C and NC phases, with DNC = ∞ for the C phase. Above ~325 K, TaS2 transitions to the 
incommensurate (IC) phase, with φ ~ 0° and k ~ 0.285a*, and Equation 1 is no longer applicable. 

We first study the CDW behavior as a function of temperature. Figure 1f shows the flake resistance 
upon heating at 0.4 K / s; the C to NC and NC to IC transitions are clearly observed. In total, the 
resistance drops by a factor of 8. Using a direct detection camera21, we collect temperature-
resolved selected area electron diffraction data simultaneous with the resistance measurements
(Supplementary Video 1). From the diffraction data, we quantify the CDW structure based on the 
2nd order CDW spots (Supplementary Note 1 and Supplementary Figure 1). The CDW angle φ and 
magnitude k are plotted in Fig. 1f, as well as the calculated DNC. In the low-temperature C phase, 
DNC ~ 500 nm. The large error bars in the C phase reflect the nature of Equation 1; small errors in 
φ and k are magnified in the propagated DNC error as Δφ and Δk → 0. Upon entering the NC phase
at ~ 200 K, DNC quickly falls to ~12 nm, and then gradually decreases to 8 nm before the flake 
enters the IC phase. By plotting the derivates dDNC / dT and dR / dT (inset), we see that the 
structural CDW transition precedes the resistive transition by ~10 K. This finding was only 
possible given our in operando multimodal experimental approach. As we show later, this result 
is relevant to device operation.

Next, we study bias-induced CDW switching using triangular voltage ramps with durations of 20 
s (Fig. 2a inset), with diffraction patterns collected at a rate of 100 Hz. These slow ramps 
effectively probe the steady-state CDW response to an applied electric field. Measurements are 
performed at ~110 K, starting in the C phase. Applying triangular voltage ramps with maximum 
voltages ranging from 0.1 to 0.7 V yields triangular current vs time curves, perfectly reflecting the 
input voltage profile and indicating no CDW switching (Fig. 2a). For this voltage range, there are 
minimal changes in the CDW structure, as seen in the domain size DNC data (Fig. 2b and 
Supplementary Video 2). In contrast, for voltages above 0.8 V, there is a sudden increase in current, 
indicating resistive switching. Concurrently, DNC rapidly falls, indicating the C to NC transition, 
quickly followed by the NC to IC phase transition (Fig. 2b, insets, Supplementary Figure 2, and 
Supplementary Video 3). As the applied voltage decreases on the second half of the voltage ramp, 
the flake recovers to the NC phase, and then slowly progresses towards the C phase over the next 
several minutes. For this device, the steady-state switching threshold is ~ 0.8 V. While the 
measured I vs V behavior is consistent with data in the literature1–4, this experiment constitutes the 
first in operando study to directly quantify the CDW order parameter during switching, and to 
identify the NC and IC phases as the bias-induced states. 


Figure 2 | Steady-state biasing and CDW switching. A. Current vs time during triangular 
voltage ramps with the maximum voltage ranging from 0.1 V to 1.2 V. The maximum voltage is 
reached at 10 s. Inset: example voltage profile, the x-axis is time (s). The color legend in a applies 
to b, c, and e as well. B. The measured CDW domain size DNC during the voltage ramps. The 
insets show diffraction snapshots acquired during the 0.8 V ramp. The full diffraction datasets for 
0.7 V and 0.8 V are shown in Supplementary Videos 2 and 3. C. Flake strain during the voltage 
ramps. D. Maximum flake temperature for voltage ramps from 0.1 to 0.8 V, calculated from the 
strain shown in c. For the 0.8 V datapoint, we show the temperature immediately prior to the C to 
NC transition. T0 is 110 K, ε is the strain, α is the effective coefficient of thermal expansion, and R 
is the flake resistance. E. Measured temperature of the SiNx membrane during voltage ramps. 
The thermometer consists of a Pt coil encompassing the flake, pictured in the inset. Scale bar is 
50 μm.

We now demonstrate that the bias-induced switching is driven by Joule heating. To measure the 
local flake temperature during bias, we extract the in-plane flake strain ε from the diffraction data 
(Fig. 2c, Supplementary Note 2). For the sub-threshold voltage pulses of ≤ 0.7 V, the strain versus 
time profiles rise and fall with the applied voltage ramp, with larger voltages leading to increased 
strains. For the 0.8 V pulse, there is a sudden increase in strain at the bias-induced CDW transition. 
Next, we convert the strain data to temperature using the effective thermal coefficient of expansion 
α for this device (Supplemental Note 2)22,23. Figure 2d plots the maximum flake temperature during 
each voltage ramp based on the strain data shown in Fig. 2c. For the 0.8 V curve, we plot the 
temperature immediately prior to the CDW transition. The data clearly shows that with biasing at 
0.8 V, the flake temperature surpasses 200 K, which is the Tc for the C to NC phase transition (Fig. 
1). Red arrows mark Tflake ~ 200 K in Figs. 2c and 2d. Thus, our data clearly shows that at the 
threshold voltage of 0.8 V, Joule heating is sufficient to raise the flake temperature to 200 K and 
thermally trigger the C to NC transition. Supporting this claim, the temperature versus voltage data 
is well fit by ΔT ~ P = V2 / R, where P is the power generated from Joule heating, V is the maximum 
applied voltage, and R is the flake resistance prior to switching. Joule heating also explains the 
rapid rise in strain (temperature) after switching at 0.8 V: as the CDW transition begins and the 


resistance drops, the power generated increases by 1 / R, which further increases the flake 
temperature and accelerates the transition. This positive feedback loop leads to sudden and 
complete CDW switching, and, consequently, a spike in the flake temperature and strain. 
Additionally, there is an inherent lattice expansion at the C to NC transition22,24, which contributes 
to the strain jump at the CDW transition. This effect also results in a remnant positive strain after 
the voltage ramp is complete. Because the CDW structure does not fully relax to the C phase within 
the measurement time-frame, the strain remains finite due to the CDW-lattice coupling (Fig. 2c, 
0.8 V curve). 

To provide an independent confirmation of Joule heating, we plot the membrane temperature 
during the voltage ramps, as measured with the Pt coil on the TEM chip (Fig. 2e). The membrane 
temperature shows the same qualitative behavior as the flake strain and temperature measurements 
(Fig. 2c and 2d), supporting the presence of Joule heating. For the 0.8 V ramp immediately prior 
to the CDW transition, the membrane temperature is ~130 K. Using a simple thermal transport 
model, we find that a membrane temperature of 130 K is consistent with a flake temperature of 
200 K (Supplementary Note 3). We also highlight that after the CDW transition, the membrane 
temperature shows a temperature spike of > 100 K, which supports the positive feedback loop 
between Joule heating and the insulator-to-metal transition. 

It follows from the Joule heating hypothesis that the time needed for switching ts should scale 
inversely with the applied voltage25,26. Specifically, a model from Fangohr et al27 predicts ts ~ 
sinh2(V-2) for a nanodevice on a 2D membrane. To evaluate this behavior, we measure the time-
resolved resistance during switching using the biasing setup shown in Fig. 3a. We pass square 
voltage pulses (durations from 3 ms down to 100 μs) through a 1 kΩ resistor in series with the 
flake, and we plot the voltage drop across the flake divided by the total applied voltage, Vflake / 
Vtotal. This ratio scales with the flake resistance; hence, a drop in Vflake / Vtotal indicates bias-induced 
switching (Fig. 3b). There is no switching for a 3 ms 1.4 V pulse, but all pulses > 1.4 V initiate 
switching, with progressively shorter switching times for larger voltage amplitudes. In operando
diffraction measurements show switching from the C to the NC phase (Fig. 3c and Supplementary 
Video 4). Moreover, the time-resolved diffraction shows that an increase in flake strain 
(temperature) precedes the CDW transition, as expected from Joule heating (Supplementary Figure
4). The Fig. 3b inset plots ts as a function of Vtotal, and the ts ~ sinh2(V-2) model provides an 
excellent fit to the data. This result further confirms the Joule heating-induced switching
mechanism. Conversely, for a non-thermal voltage induced mechanism, one would expect rapid 
(~ps) switching for all voltages above the threshold value5,6, in clear contrast with our results. The 
sinh2(V-2) fit also suggests that Joule heating can induce switching on the ns timescale, given a 
sufficiently large voltage pulse. Indeed, many literature reports of pulse-induced switching can 
reasonably be accounted for via Joule heating1–4. 


Figure 3 | Time-dependent resistive switching. a. Our biasing setup, where Vsrc is the voltage 
source used to generate square voltage pulses, and Vtotal and Vflake are measured with an 
oscilloscope. b. The measured ratio of Vflake / Vtotal for Vtotal ranging from 1.4 up to 3.6 V. We define 
the switching time ts when Vflake / Vtotal drops below 0.55, as shown with the horizontal dotted line. 
The inset plots ts versus Vtotal, along with a fit for Joule heating on a 2D membrane provided in ref. 
27. c. In operando diffraction snapshots from the 1.4 V pulse. The voltage pulse is applied at a 
time of 0 ms, although there is an uncertainty of ~0.3 ms in the diffraction pattern timestamps.
The diffraction data for this pulse is shown in Supplementary Video 4, and further analysis is 
provided in Supplementary Figure 4.

We next study coupling between the CDW order parameter and the device resistance through a 
series of short voltage pulses which are relevant for device operation. We apply pulses with Vtotal
starting at 2.0 V and increasing by 0.4 V up to 9.6 V, all with a 3 μs pulse duration, performed at 
110 K. Figure 4a shows the measured Vflake / Vtotal for a representative set of pulses. Note that the
RC time constant for this device is τ ~ 460 ns (likely due to poor impedance matching throughout 
the in situ TEM set up), which places an upper limit on device operation speed. Partial switching 
is observed for Vtotal ≥ 3.2 V, and full switching is observed for Vtotal ≥ 5 V (Supplementary Video 
5 for Vtotal = 9.6 V). This behavior is consistent with Joule heating and the ts ~ sinh2(V-2) model, 
which predicts ts = 1.1 μs for Vtotal = 5.2 V.


Figure 4 | Pulse induced CDW and resistive switching. a. Vtotal / Vflake during electric pulsing. 
Twenty consecutive pulses were performed in total, starting at 2.0 V and increasing by 0.4 V up 
to 9.6 V, with roughly 5 mins recovery time in between pulses. A representative set is shown here.
b. Time-resolved CDW domain size DNC and device resistance during pulsing. The scale bar 
shows 1 second. The measurement time resolutions are 300 μs for the CDW analysis and 12 ms 
for the device resistance. The diffraction data for the 9.6 V pulse is shown in Supplementary Video 
5. c. Comparison of the CDW domain size DNC (black) and the flake resistance (red) immediately 
after pulsing. 

The pulse-dependent evolution of the CDW structure and device resistance is shown in Fig. 4b. 
Several interesting trends are present in the data. First, as the pulse amplitude increases, the pulse-
induced DNC decreases, as does the device resistance. Thus, higher voltage pulses produce smaller 
CDW domains (thus a higher density of discommensurations), which in turn reduce the flake 
resistance. This behavior is captured in Fig. 4c, which plots the DNC and the flake resistance 
immediately after pulsing. This finding is consistent with Joule heating, with higher voltage pulses 
producing larger temperature changes. Comparing the DNC vs Vtotal and resistance vs Vtotal curves 
in Fig. 4c, we see that the structural CDW transition proceeds the electronic resistance transition. 
This trend is consistent with our earlier finding, that with heating through the C to NC transition, 
the DNC transition precedes the insulator-to-metal transition (Fig. 1f inset). Secondly, we find that 
after switching the device recovery is not complete, i.e. the switching is not fully reversible back 
to the C phase. This is evident in Fig. 4b; both the pre-pulse DNC and the device resistance steadily 
decrease after successive pulsing. We note that after the full pulsing experiment, the CDW structure 
and resistance were fully reset via heating to the IC phase and then cooling to 110 K. 

The partial irreversibility of pulse-induced switching suggests CDW pinning on local 
microstructural features. Indeed, there are many TaS2 biasing experiments which suggest increased 
CDW pinning in thin flakes3,4,8, although direct confirmation is lacking. To test this hypothesis, 
we performed real-space analysis using 4D-STEM imaging. With this method, the electron beam 
is focused to a nanoscale probe, rastered across the sample surface, and a full diffraction pattern is 
captured at each spatial coordinate28. In turn, the DNC can be mapped in real space with a spatial 
resolution of ~15 nm. For these measurements we study a separate flake, imaged optically in the 
Fig. 5a inset. While the flake is a high-quality single crystal, we observe the presence of basal 
dislocations29–31, which are revealed with a virtual-STEM image based on Bragg diffraction 
contrast (see the dark lines in Fig. 5a). We find that all exfoliated TaS2 flakes (and many exfoliated 


2D materials in general) exhibit similar dislocation structures. Figure 5b maps DNC as a function 
of constant applied bias. Initially, the DNC is mostly > 50 nm, indicating a spatially homogenous C 
phase, and the device is in high resistance state (resistance = 2.11 kΩ). With application of 0.5 V, 
the CDW remains in the C phase, and the device resistance remains high (1.99 kΩ). At 0.6 V, the 
device switches; the CDW map shows DNC ≤ 10 nm, and the resistance drops to 464 Ω. Note that 
this behavior is similar to our results in Fig. 2, albeit with a slightly lower threshold voltage, and 
the NC phase is more stable (for this flake, 0.8 V causes a transition to the IC phase). After 
releasing the applied bias, the sample resistance increases to 1.8 kΩ, and the CDW map mostly 
shows DNC > 50 nm. However, the NC phase is found to locally persist at the basal dislocations, 
with DNC ~ 30 nm adjacent to the line defects. This data suggests that after pulsing, 
discommensurations of the NC phase are pinned to dislocations, preventing complete recovery to 
the C phase. This real-space analysis provides a microscopic understanding of CDW pinning in 
TaS2 devices. 

Figure 5 | Real-space CDW imaging during bias. a. Virtual STEM image which sums all of the 
Bragg peak intensities. The dark lines are basal dislocations. The inset is an optical image of this 
flake. b. Maps of the CDW DNC as a function of applied bias. The insets show cropped diffraction 
patterns, extracted from local regions of 3 x 3 pixels. For the post-bias dataset, the top diffraction 
pattern is extracted from a dislocation, and the bottom diffraction pattern is extracted from a non-
defective region.  

Conclusion:

By operating a 2-terminal TaS2 device within the STEM at cryogenic temperature, we demonstrate 
that bias-induced switching is driven by Joule heating and a rapid thermal transition from the C to 
the NC and IC phases. In our device, this mechanism is operative for both steady-state biasing and 
μs voltage pulses. Our data also indicates that Joule heating can drive switching on the ns 
timescale. Based on this knowledge, we suggest engineering heat management of TaS2 devices, 
e.g. the thermal conductivity of the substrate and the electrode geometry, in order to efficiently 
reach Tc with minimal losses. While most of reports of TaS2 switching are consistent with Joule 
heating, we note recent claims of picosecond switching, with a switching energy seemingly below 
the heat needed for Joule heating25,26. Hence, it may be that under certain conditions, purely field-
induced switching is possible. Our finding that dislocations can pin the CDW structure and prevent 
complete recovery is relevant to the long-term reliability of TaS2 devices under continuous 
operation. Devices could also be engineered with optimized dislocation structures to help stabilize 
the NC phase after switching, which could prolong the lifetime of the pulse-induced low-resistance 
state. Dislocation engineering may also enable faster switching as well as multi-level resistance 


states. Lastly, our use of in operando biasing and cryogenic cooling, along with novel 4D-STEM 
imaging of the CDW order parameter, offers a promising route to understand device performance 
for other quantum materials32.   

References:

1.
Hollander, M. J. et al. Electrically Driven Reversible Insulator–Metal Phase Transition in 
1T-TaS2. Nano Lett. 15, 1861–1866 (2015).

2.
Vaskivskyi, I. et al. Fast electronic resistance switching involving hidden charge density 
wave states. Nat. Commun. 7, 11442 (2016).

3.
Tsen, A. W. et al. Structure and control of charge density waves in two-dimensional 1T-
TaS2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 15054–15059 (2015).

4.
Yoshida, M., Suzuki, R., Zhang, Y., Nakano, M. & Iwasa, Y. Memristive phase switching 
in two-dimensional 1T-TaS2 crystals. Sci. Adv. 1, 1–7 (2015).

5.
Mihailovic, D. et al. Ultrafast non-thermal and thermal switching in charge configuration 
memory devices based on 1T-TaS2. Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, (2021).

6.
Venturini, R. et al. Ultraefficient resistance switching between charge ordered phases in 1 
T -TaS2 with a single picosecond electrical pulse. Appl. Phys. Lett. 120, (2022).

7.
Liu, X. & Hersam, M. C. 2D materials for quantum information science. Nat. Rev. Mater.
4, 669–684 (2019).

8.
Patel, T. et al. Photocurrent Imaging of Multi-Memristive Charge Density Wave 
Switching in Two-Dimensional 1T-TaS2. Nano Lett. 20, 7200–7206 (2020).

9.
Geremew, A. K. et al. Bias-Voltage Driven Switching of the Charge-Density-Wave and 
Normal Metallic Phases in 1T-TaS2 Thin-Film Devices. ACS Nano 13, 7231–7240 (2019).

10.
Mohammadzadeh, A. et al. Evidence for a thermally driven charge-density-wave 
transition in 1T-TaS2 thin-film devices: Prospects for GHz switching speed. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 118, 093102 (2021).

11.
Walker, S. M. et al. Observation and Manipulation of a Phase Separated State in a Charge 
Density Wave Material. Nano Lett. 22, 1929–1936 (2022).

12.
Wilson, J., Di Salvo, F. & Mahajan, S. Charge-density waves and superlattices in the 
metallic layered transition metal dichalcogenides. Adv. Phys. 24, 117–201 (1975).

13.
Ishiguro, T. & Sato, H. Electron microscopy of phase transformations in 1T - TaS2. Phys. 
Rev. B 44, 2046–2060 (1991).

14.
Thomson, R. E., Burk, B., Zettl, A. & Clarke, J. Scanning tunneling microscopy of the 
charge-density-wave structure in 1T-TaS2. Phys. Rev. B 49, 16899–16916 (1994).

15.
Gerasimenko, Y. A. et al. Quantum jamming transition to a correlated electron glass in 
1T-TaS2. Nat. Mater. 18, 1078–1083 (2019).

16.
Domröse, T. et al. Light-induced hexatic state in a layered quantum material. Nat. Mater.
(2023) doi:10.1038/s41563-023-01600-6.

17.
Mraz, A. et al. Energy efficient manipulation of topologically protected states in non-
volatile ultrafast charge configuration memory devices. arXiv 1–19 (2021).

18.
Jarach, Y., Rodes, L., Ber, E., Yalon, E. & Kanigel, A. Joule-heating induced phase 
transition in 1T-TaS2 near room temperature probed by thermal imaging of power 
dissipation. Appl. Phys. Lett. 120, 083502 (2022).

19.
Goodge, B. H., Bianco, E., Schnitzer, N., Zandbergen, H. W. & Kourkoutis, L. F. Atomic-
Resolution Cryo-STEM Across Continuously Variable Temperatures. Microsc. 


Microanal. 26, 439–446 (2020).

20.
Garza, H. H. P. et al. MEMS-based sample carriers for simultaneous heating and biasing 
experiments: A platform for in-situ TEM analysis. in 2017 19th International Conference 
on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems (TRANSDUCERS) 2155–2158 (IEEE, 
2017). doi:10.1109/TRANSDUCERS.2017.7994502.

21.
Philipp, H. T. et al. Very-High Dynamic Range, 10,000 Frames/Second Pixel Array 
Detector for Electron Microscopy. Microsc. Microanal. 28, 425–440 (2022).

22.
Sezerman, O., Simpson, A. M. & Jericho, M. H. Thermal expansion of lT-TaS2 and 2H-
NbSe2. Solid State Commun. 36, 737–740 (1980).

23.
Givens, F. L. & Fredericks, G. E. Thermal expansion op NbSe2 and TaS2. J. Phys. Chem. 
Solids 38, 1363–1365 (1977).

24.
Philip, S. S., Neuefeind, J. C., Stone, M. B. & Louca, D. Local structure anomaly with the 
charge ordering transition of 1T-TaS2. Phys. Rev. B 107, 184109 (2023).

25.
Liao, G. M. et al. Dynamically tracking the joule heating effect on the voltage induced 
metal-insulator transition in VO2 crystal film. AIP Adv. 6, (2016).

26.
Li, D. et al. Joule Heating-Induced Metal–Insulator Transition in Epitaxial VO2 / TiO2
Devices. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8, 12908–12914 (2016).

27.
Fangohr, H., Chernyshenko, D. S., Franchin, M., Fischbacher, T. & Meier, G. Joule 
heating in nanowires. Phys. Rev. B 84, 054437 (2011).

28.
Ophus, C. Four-Dimensional Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (4D-STEM): 
From Scanning Nanodiffraction to Ptychography and Beyond. Microsc. Microanal. 25, 
563–582 (2019).

29.
Medlin, D. L., Yang, N., Spataru, C. D., Hale, L. M. & Mishin, Y. Unraveling the 
dislocation core structure at a van der Waals gap in bismuth telluride. Nat. Commun. 10, 
1820 (2019).

30.
Hovden, R. et al. Atomic lattice disorder in charge-density-wave phases of exfoliated 
dichalcogenides (1T-TaS2). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113, 11420–11424 (2016).

31.
Hovden, R. et al. Thickness and Stacking Sequence Determination of Exfoliated 
Dichalcogenides (1T-TaS2 , 2H-MoS2 ) Using Scanning Transmission Electron 
Microscopy. Microsc. Microanal. 24, 387–395 (2018).

32.
Hart, J. L. & Cha, J. J. Seeing Quantum Materials with Cryogenic Transmission Electron 
Microscopy. Nano Lett. 21, 5449–5452 (2021).

33.
Sikora, A. et al. Highly sensitive thermal conductivity measurements of suspended 
membranes (SiN and diamond) using a 3ω-Völklein method. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 83, 
(2012).


