1 / 28

Superfolded configuration induced low thermal conductivity in two-dimensional carbon allotropes

revealed via machine learning force constant potential

Linfeng Yu1, Kexin Dong1, Qi Yang1, Yi Zhang1, Xiong Zheng1, Huimin Wang2, Zhenzhen Qin3, and 

Guangzhao Qin1,4,5*

1National Key Laboratory of Advanced Design and Manufacturing Technology for Vehicle, College of 

Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, P. R. China

2Hunan Key Laboratory for Micro-Nano Energy Materials & Device and School of Physics and 

Optoelectronics, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan 411105, Hunan, China

3School of Physics and Microelectronics, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China

4Research Institute of Hunan University in Chongqing, Chongqing 401133, China

5Greater Bay Area Institute for Innovation, Hunan University, Guangzhou 511300, Guangdong Province, 

China

0.
Abstract

Understanding the fundamental link between structure and functionalization is crucial for the design and 

optimization of functional materials, since different structural configurations could trigger materials to 

demonstrate diverse physical, chemical, and electronic properties. However, the correlation between crystal 

structure and thermal conductivity (κ) remains enigmatic. In this study, taking two-dimensional (2D) carbon 

allotropes as study cases, we utilize phonon Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) along with machine learning 

force constant potential to thoroughly explore the complex folding structure of pure sp2 hybridized carbon 

materials from the perspective of crystal structure, mode-level phonon resolved thermal transport, and atomic 

interactions, with the goal of identifying the underlying relationship between 2D geometry and κ. We propose 

two potential structure evolution mechanisms for targeted thermal transport properties: in-plane and out-of-

plane folding evolutions, which are generally applicable to 2D carbon allotropes. It is revealed that the folded 

structure produces strong symmetry breaking, and simultaneously produces exceptionally strongly suppressed 

phonon group velocities, strong phonon-phonon scattering, and weak phonon hydrodynamics, which 

ultimately lead to low κ. The insight into the folded effect of atomic structures on thermal transport deepens 

our understanding of the relationship between structure and functionalization, which offers straightforward 

guidance for designing novel nanomaterials with targeted κ, as well as propel developments in materials 

science and engineering.

Keywords: Superfolded configuration, Thermal conductivity, Asymmetry, Janus-graphene

* Author to whom all correspondence should be addressed. E-Mail: gzqin@hnu.edu.cn


2 / 28

1.
Introduction

Two-dimensional (2D) carbon crystal structures have recently received an abundance of theoretical and 

experimental interest as an emerging material system [1–5]. They are the perfect objects for investigating 

structure-function interactions due to their various configurations and distinctive physical and chemical 

features, such as high carrier mobility, great mechanical strength, exceptional thermal stability, and large

specific surface area [6–9]. Thermal conductivity (κ), a crucial indicator for describing heat transfer 

performance in materials, is directly influenced by the internal structure and phonon transport properties. In-

depth study on the correlation of the internal structure and κ characteristics can provide powerful guidance for 

the design and application of advanced thermal functional materials [10–13], thereby promoting the 

development of the field of thermal management.

The phonon behavior in 2D materials is controlled by structural confinement and dimensionality effects, 

which differs from those observed in conventional three-dimensional (3D) materials. In 2D materials, layered 

structure restricts atomic coupling to the in-plane direction, resulting in heat conduction primarily through in-

plane phonon transport [14,15]. Compared to 3D materials, the in-plane vibrational modes of 2D crystals are 

strongly confined, leading to a higher density of phonon modes [15,16]. Furthermore, the phonon dispersion

relation in 2D materials differs from that in 3D materials. While the phonon dispersion curve in 3D materials 

typically demonstrates a linear relationship, implying proportionality between phonon energy and momentum, 

the phonon dispersion curve in 2D materials follows a quadratic function shape [15,17]. This quadratic shape 

enhances the intensity and nonlinearity of the phonon dispersion, potentially causing phonon energy shifts to 

be more sensitive and abrupt within a given range of momentum. Additionally, the phonon propagation speed 

in momentum space may not be synchronized with the frequency shift. The unique properties enable 2D 

carbon to exhibit distinct heat conduction characteristics compared to conventional 3D materials, making it 

still difficult to understand the structure-κ relationship in 2D crystal structures, especially in graphene 

derivatives and carbon nanostructures with complex topologies.

The diversity and complexity of atomic bonding types and dimensional effects make accurate estimations 

and general interpretations for the κ of the numerous carbon allotropes more challenging, but they also inspire 

strong research interest. For instance, Choudhry et al. [22] investigated the thermal transport properties of 

solely sp2 hybridized 2D carbon planar structures and discovered that the poor κ is caused by the 

superstructure's acoustic mode folding effect. Our further study [19] has revealed that the insertion of the sp3

hybrid structure may additionally trigger substantial phonon-phonon scattering, affecting the thermal transport 

properties. Interestingly, Giri et al. [20] discovered that in amorphous carbon materials, increasing the amount 

of sp3 hybridization may greatly boost the contribution of propagating modes, resulting in a four-fold increase 

in κ, which seems to be the opposite of its role in 2D carbon materials. While sp3 hybridized carbon atoms 


3 / 28

contribute an extra scattering mechanism that might boost the contribution of propagating modes and hence 

increase κ, amorphous carbon materials have carbon atoms organized chaotically. It also reveals that the 

interaction between the specific material structure and the pure sp2 (or sp3) hybrid structure affecting the heat 

transfer capability is complex, leading to the fact that the performance of κ is affected by various architectures 

and bond hybridizations.

Purely sp2-hybridized carbon atoms are arranged into planar structures in 2D carbon materials, where 

folding effects triggered by the superstructure limit the amount of heat that can be transported. The different 

folding shapes and configurations of carbon atoms may lead to different phonon propagation characteristics 

and κ. Note that the remarkable features of 2D carbon structures include not only in-plane structural folding 

but also out-of-plane morphological expansion, leaving a major gap in our understanding of the link between 

the shape of these structures and κ. A variety of out-of-plane structures, including carbon nanotubes [21,22], 

carbon nanoribbons [23,24], and graphene derivatives [25–29], are also present in the 2D carbon structure. 

These complex and rich out-of-plane designs generate various phonon propagation modes and scattering 

processes that have a significant impact on κ. However, precise κ is elusive despite the rich and complex 

carbon configurations that enable diverse
phonon
transport behaviors. Complex and asymmetric 

configurations require computational resources to perform high-order partial derivatives of potential energy, 

especially the fourth-order and above interatomic force constants, leading to expensive costs for obtaining 

thermal transport properties, while solving the phonon Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) with first-

principles calculations. As for the molecular dynamics method, it can consider higher-order phonon effects

and may exhibit higher efficiencies, such as the four-phonons in c-BAs [30], it is highly dependent on the

precise interatomic potential function. And the separation of various orders of phonon-phonon scattering is 

difficult. Hence, obtaining the κ for complex carbon configurations is often difficult due to the expensive 

computational cost of higher-order force constants and the lack of interatomic potential functions. Although 

substantial progress has been achieved in understanding the κ of 2D carbon structures [18–20,26,31–33], it is 

necessary to investigate the mechanism of different structural morphologies on the κ to gain a more 

comprehensive understanding of the phonon propagation and scattering behavior in 2D carbon structures by 

more convenient methods. By bridging these knowledge gaps, the κ of 2D carbon materials can be better 

understood and engineered to meet increasing application demands.

In this study, we exploit the phonon BTE combined with machine learning potential to investigate pure 

sp2 hybrid carbon materials with complex folded structures. Compared with traditional first-principles and 

molecular dynamics methods, machine learning force constant potential methods can efficiently evaluate 

higher-order phonon effects, and can quickly obtain potential energy surfaces and their partial derivatives 

without consuming more computing resources for asymmetric complex lattices. In this way, we focus on the 

crystal structure, phonon properties, phonon-phonon scattering and atomic interaction levels of 2D carbon 

materials, with the goal to establish a link between different geometries and heat transfer properties 

(geometry-phonon-κ) in the 2D structure. Most importantly, we propose two evolution mechanisms of thermal


4 / 28

transport properties with structure: in-plane and out-of-plane folding evolution. Note that Janus-graphene 

produces out-of-plane Janus-type buckling superfolding in addition to the in-plane 4-6-8 ring folding structure. 

The in-plane and out-of-plane double superfolding can suppress the contribution of flexible acoustic (FA)

phonons, resulting in low group velocity, weak phonon-phonon scattering, weak phonon hydrodynamic effect, 

and strong asymmetry, which finally contributes to low κ. The findings of this investigation have significant 

ramifications for our comprehension of folded atomic structures' effects on thermal transport, as well as the 

connection between structure and κ. The aforementioned findings are anticipated to be crucial in creating and 

improving the heat transfer capabilities of novel nanomaterials.

2. Results and discussion

2.1 Evolution mechanism of thermal conductivity with folded structure

To demonstrate the correlation between the folding behavior of crystal structures of different two-

dimensional carbon allotropes, Fig. 1 (a) shows two conventional folding evolution paths. All 2D carbon 

compounds exhibit sp2 bonding, which aims to block the influence of direct sp3 hybrid bonding. From path 

one, the six membered ring of graphene shrinks to a four membered ring and expands to an eight membered 

ring, forming the crystal structure of T-graphene. The 4-membered ring in T-graphene further evolved into a 

Kagome-graphene with 3-membered and 12-membered rings. Similarly, graphene can be folded into Y-

biphenylene and biphenylene with 4-6-8 membered rings along the second path. The difference is that the 

derived phase of biphenylene can fold along the direction of out of plane buckling, forming Janus graphene 

with non-chemical Janus phase, which has the same 4-6-8 rings as Y-biphenylene and biphenylene. 

Intriguingly, the κ of folded carbon allotropes is generally lower than that of unfolded carbon allotropes, 

even one to two orders of magnitude lower than that of pure hexacyclic graphene, as shown in Fig. 1(b). 

Graphene, a perfect 2D carbon allotrope, exhibits an ultrahigh κ of 2970 W/mK via machine learning force 

constant potential (MLFCP) method, serving as an initial research standard due to its perfect planarity and 

pure six-membered ring framework. The results of MLFCP are similar to our calculated results using DFT 

(3150 W/mK in Fig. S1(a)) and previous experimental results of~3000W/mK [14,34]. The thermal 

conductivity of folded T-graphene calculated by DFT method is 645 W/mK, which is lower than that of 

graphene due to low-lying acoustic phonon molecular folding [18]. Further, Kagome-graphene has a lower κ

than T-graphene based on DFT method, ~140 W/mK, and is a natural carbon-based phononic crystal with 

larger pores. Simultaneously, graphene could additionally be folded into 4-6-8 ring biphenylene [33,35], Y-

biphenylene, and Janus-graphene. Interestingly, the κ of planar biphenylene and Y-biphenylene in the x(y) 

direction are 267 (421), 330 (500) W/mK, respectively. Due to the nearly similar carbon ring composition, the 

difference in thermal conductivity between planar biphenylene and Y-biphenylene is not very significant, as 


5 / 28

has also been reported in previous studies [33,36]. On the contrary, Janus-graphene has a κ of 84 W/mK, 

putting it an order of magnitude lower than biphenylene and Y-biphenylene with the identical 4-6-8 ring. 

These results demonstrate that the reduced κ of the same sp2-hybridized 2D carbon material can be 

attributed to the folding of the in-plane folding of planar crystals, which forms phononic crystal-like carbon 

allotropes with different atomic chain configurations, thereby reducing κ. The evolution of in-plane folding is 

similar to that of phononic crystals, where the folding structure leads to the switching of related bandgaps, 

thereby altering the transport characteristics of phonons. Different ring types lead to different arrangement 

periodicity and symmetry of phononic crystals, leading to different phonon transport properties and 

diversifying κ. Note that for Janus graphene, the lower thermal conductivity compared to biphenylene and Y-

biphenylene excludes the influence of in-plane structural folding. Because Janus-graphene, biphenylene, and 

Y-biphenylene share identical 4-6-8 carbon ring, the difference between the κ of biphenylene and Y-

biphenylene is negligible. As a consequence, this dramatic difference in Janus-graphene may be traced to its 

out-of-plane superfolding to generate the Janus-configuration, which goes beyond in-plane folding to produce 

stronger phonon-phonon scattering.


6 / 28

Figure 1. Evolution trends of structure and thermal conductivity. (a) Two evolution trends of the 

structures for 2D carbon crystals with sp2 hybridization along the in-plane (orange arrow) and out-of-plane
(green arrow) directions. (b) Thermal conductivities corresponding to different lattice structures. The thermal 
conductivity of graphene comes from the machine learning potential model, while the results of other carbon 

allotropes come from density functional theory calculations. The red line highlights the ratio (R) of the 
thermal conductivity calculated by the iterative method (κITE) to that calculated by the relaxation time 

approximation method (κRTA).


7 / 28

2.2 Machine learning potential combined with phonon Boltzmann transport equation

To explore and understand the underlying fundamental link between the unique configuration of Janus-

graphene and phonon transport, machine learning methods were employed to construct interatomic force 

constant potentials to solve the phonon Boltzmann transport equation (BTE). As shown in the workflow 

diagram of Fig.2(a), the structures and corresponding energies and forces at different temperatures are 

calculated by ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD), which are used to construct the data sets required for the 

simulations. The primary purpose of the interatomic force constant potential, as opposed to the molecular 

dynamics potential of dynamics, is to compute the low-order and high-order derivatives of energy based on 

the finite displacement method to solve the BTE, indicating the larger significance for the energy and force of 

static small displacements. As shown in Figs. 2(b) and (c), the energies and forces predicted by the machine-

learned potential (MLP) were compared with the results from first-principles calculations, where the good 

agreement with each other demonstrated the potential function model's good fitting ability for predicting the 

energy and force for the perturbed configuration of Janus-graphene.
The low root mean square error of 

energies (RMSE: 18.52 meV) and forces (RMSE 38meV/A) indicates the high quality and strong robustness 

of the machine learning potential function model. In solving BTE, machine learning networks can map the 

energies and forces produced by AIMD to obtain low-order and high-order force constants. The third and 

fourth-order force constants among them are often enough to describe their anharmonicity. As a result, we 

mainly evaluate the role of three- and four-phonons, especially the former.

In machine learning networks, it is required to concentrate on an atom and encode its domain information, 

or the descriptor of the local environment. All of these descriptors must satisfy numerous types of symmetry 

criteria, including translational and rotational invariance, as well as permutation (with regard to the exchange 

of two atoms of the same sort). Descriptions are usually limited to the local environment of atoms within a 

specific cut-off radius, typically 5 or 6 Å for covalent bonds, in order to be valid in practice. We reveal the 

extent of interatomic interactions in the local environment by normalized force constants traces trace (NFCT) 

in individual neighborhoods. The interatomic force constant can be obtained as the second derivative of the 

energy E by: [19]

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑖𝜕𝑅𝑗

=

[
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑥𝜕𝑅𝑥

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑥𝜕𝑅𝑦

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑥𝜕𝑅𝑧

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑦𝜕𝑅𝑥

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑦𝜕𝑅𝑦

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑦𝜕𝑅𝑧

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑧𝜕𝑅𝑥

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑧𝜕𝑅𝑦

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑧𝜕𝑅𝑧]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

,
(1)


8 / 28

NFCT =

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅0,𝑥𝜕𝑅𝑛,𝑥 +
𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅0,𝑦𝜕𝑅𝑛,𝑦 +
𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅0,𝑧𝜕𝑅𝑛,𝑧

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅0,𝑥𝜕𝑅0,𝑥 +
𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅0,𝑦𝜕𝑅0,𝑦 +
𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅0,𝑧𝜕𝑅0,𝑧

,
(2)

where 

𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑖,𝑥𝜕𝑅𝑗,𝑥 means atomic interaction forces along the x-direction between the ith and jth atoms and labeled 

"0" means the specified initial atom. As shown in Fig. 2(d), the trained machine-learned potential can well 

reflect the atomic interactions originating from the second derivative of the potential well. It additionally 

demonstrates that distance-dependent harmonic and anharmonic interactions can arise at the cutoff radius of 6 

Å.

To validate the accuracy of the machine learning potential function model, we firstly construct the 

phonon dispersion curve of Janus-graphene and compare to density functional theory (DFT) results. The 

influence of different supercells on phonon dispersion was tested in Janus-graphene, and the 4×4×1 supercell 

was finally selected as shown in supplementary Fig. S2. The results obtained by the MLP model are in good 

agreement with those computed using DFT, as shown in Fig. 2(e, f). The distinction is that Janus-graphene has 

more phonon branches than graphene, resulting in additional phonon modes, which is due to the asymmetry in 

the inherent structure of Janus-graphene.
The acoustic phonon branch is significantly suppressed, 

demonstrating strong phonon softening. As a result, this leads to a significantly weakened contribution of the 

acoustic phonon branch that dominates the κ, contributing to an ultralow κ, as explained later. Meanwhile, as 

shown in Fig. 2(g), the three acoustic phonon branches in Janus-graphene are suppressed below 10 THz, 

where low-frequency phonons usually dominate. Acoustic phonons are frequency-confined, resulting in lower 

κ than graphene, possibly related to the asymmetry induced by out-of-plane folding. This asymmetry impedes 

or suppresses acoustic phonon mode transmission due to the Janus configuration. The convergence of multiple 

parameters, such as supercell size, grid, and anharmonic cut-off radius, is presented in Fig. 2(h) to test the 

stability of the κ computed by the potential function. Under diverse settings, the average κ of Janus-graphene 

converges to 87±13 W/mK, indicating a reliable convergence result. The above results confirm that machine 

learning combined with the force constant potential can accurately solve the phonon BTE to obtain reasonable 

phonon transport properties for Janus-graphene, which ensures the validity of further in-depth physical 

information.


9 / 28

Figure 2. Machine learning force constant potentials and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. 

(a) Workflows for thermal transport properties prediction. (b) Energy, (c) force and (d) normalized force 

constant traces of Janus-graphene. Phonon dispersion in (e) graphene and (f) Janus-graphene. (g) Cumulative 

thermal conductivity of graphene and Janus-graphene. (h) Thermal conductivity convergence test for Janus-

graphene. Taking "331-4 (or 441-6)" as an example, it means the thermal conductivity result is calculated 

using a 3×3×1 (or 4×4×1) supercell and the 4th (6th) nearest neighbor. Thermal conductivity exhibits good 

convergence when using a 4 × 4 × 1 supercell under the 6th nearest neighbor, passing through a 40 × 40 × 1 

grid.

2.3 Three-phonon and Four-phonon effects 


10 / 28

To further reveal the origin of κ with structural evolution, we will comprehensively compare the 

evolution of κ and phonon transport behavior, using Janus-graphene and graphene as typical cases. Mode-

level κ and relaxation time as functions of Brillouin zone position and frequency are depicted in Figs. 3(a) and 

(b). The phonons that contribute significantly to κ reside mostly in the low-frequency area below 10 THz, 

namely the flexible (FA) and transverse acoustic (TA) branches. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the temperature-

dependent behavior of graphene and Janus-graphene was determined using the Iterative (ITE) and relaxation 

time approximation (RTA) methods. Based on the ITE approach, the κ at 300K for Janus-graphene and 

graphene are 84 and 2790 W/mK, respectively, which are in good agreement with the DFT results as shown in 

Supplementary Fig. S1. In addition, we also compare the robustness of the force constants for graphene as 

shown in Supplementary Note S1, where the robust force constants from the MLP agree well with the DFT 

results. These results demonstrate the accuracy and robustness of machine learning-driven force constant 

potentials. Note that the κ of Janus-graphene is almost two orders of magnitude lower than that of graphene

due to the double symmetry breaking caused by in-plane and out-of-plane superfolding. However, only three-

phonon scattering is considered here, and four-phonon scattering in Janus-graphene should also be considered.

Building on the study of Mortazavi [37] and Han et al. [38], we here reformulate the four-phonon 

interface (Fourthorder_MTP.py) between the machine learning potential and the phonon BTE solver. The 

influence of the four-phonon effect on graphene κ under DFT and MLP is compared to reveal the accuracy of 

the MLP-Fourphonon process. As shown in Supplementary Fig. S3, the two can be well-matched and are 

consistent with the previous results of Feng et al. [16], revealing a high-precision description of higher-order 

force constants by the machine learning model. In addition, the mode-level group velocity and relaxation time 

considering three-phonon and four-phonon mechanisms are compared in Supplementary Fig. S4, where the 

results of the MLP method and the DFT method are in good agreement. The impact of four-phonon scattering 

on κ has been deeply discussed in some studies [14,16,34]. The role of four phonons may be significant at 

high temperatures or in some special cases, such as flat bands in AgCrSe2 [39] or huge acoustic-optical band 

gaps in BAs [40–44]. Han and Ruan et al. found that after considering four phonons, the thermal conductivity 

of graphene is approximately ~1300 W/mK [45], which is slightly higher than the previous results of Feng et 

al. [16] and our MLP method (~900W/mK). The slightly higher reason may be due to the slightly sparse grid 

grid, so we provide a denser grid-test for thermal conductivity considering four-phonon scattering in Fig. S5

in the supplementary material. However, the κ after considering the four-phonon scattering in Janus-graphene 

is 52 W/mK, but this is not a substantial order of magnitude reduction, indicating that the three-phonon 

scattering still plays a dominant role in the phonon-phonon scattering process. P3 and P4 represent the 

scattering phase spaces of three and four phonons as a dimensionless parameter, respectively, which

measure the scattering probability of three and four phonons, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3(d), P3 is 

significantly higher than P4 in Janus-graphene, especially at low frequencies, revealing the origin of relatively 


11 / 28

weak four-phonon scattering. Hence, the κ calculated based on the three-phonon effect is still acceptable in the 

subsequent analysis.

The contribution of different phonon branches for Janus-graphene to the κ is shown in Fig. 3(e). Since 

phonons follow the Bose-Einstein distribution, the contributions of all phonon branches decrease with 

increasing temperature in the temperature range of 200-800 K. The κ of Janus-graphene at 300 K is mostly 

provided by the FA, TA, and optical branches. The TA branch has contributed most, reaching 36%, which is 

substantially higher than graphene. At 300K, the contribution percentage of FA branch in graphene 

approaches 80%, nearly fully governing κ, but the FA branch in Janus-graphene occupies just 26%, a 

considerably fewer proportion than in graphene. Although after considering four phonons, the contribution of 

FA phonons in graphene can still be as high as 75%. [45] This indicates that the Janus configuration 

significantly weakens the contribution of the FA branch, leading to a decrease in κ. The contribution of the 

optical phonon branch to κ in Janus-graphene provides 27% at 300 K, which is only slightly lower than that of 

the TA branch. In contrast, the contribution of optical branches to κ in graphene is almost negligible. Since the 

presence of more phonon branches than graphene depresses the contribution of the FA branch, the optical 

branches of Janus-graphene show a significantly enhanced contribution to κ, especially at high temperatures.

Furthermore, the coupling between the mode-level phonon properties in the frequency domain interval is 

plotted in Figs. 3(d-f) for graphene and Janus-graphene, which mainly highlights the contribution distribution 

of different phonon properties to the frequency-dependent κ. In graphene, the FA branch has a particularly 

high κ density compared to other branches, which is mainly due to its weak phonon-phonon scattering rather 

than group velocity. The group velocity of the FA branch with quadratic dispersion is almost zero in the center 

of the Brillouin zone, which has led to the long-standing misperception that graphene has a relatively low κ

because zero group velocity leads to low κ in FA branch. But the high relaxation time of graphene can 

significantly enhance the thermal conductivity of FA branch, regardless of whether four phonons are 

considered, as shown in Figs. 3(e) and (f). However, In Janus-graphene, the κ density of the FA branch 

significantly decreases while the κ density of the TA branch increases significantly. The reduction of the FA 

branch is derived from both the enhanced phonon-phonon scattering contributed by the FA branch and its 

lower group velocity. The TA branch of Janus-graphene has a stronger group velocity than the FA branch, 

which can significantly increase the contribution of κ because the mode-level κ is proportional to the square of 

the group velocity. Overall, the Janus configuration weakens the contribution of the FA branch to κ in Janus-

graphene, making it not the sole dominant thermal transport property.


12 / 28

Figure 3. Thermal transport properties. (a) Temperature dependent thermal conductivity in graphene and   

Janus-graphene. (b) Three- and four-phonon scattering in phase space. (c) Temperature-dependent thermal 

conductivity contribution for different branches. (d) Brillouin zone dependence of group velocities for 

machine learning potential methods and density functional theory methods. (e) Mode-level relaxation times 

under three-phonon scattering for machine learning potential methods and density functional theory methods. 

(f) Mode-level relaxation times under three-phonon and four-phonon scattering for machine learning potential 

methods and density functional theory methods.

2.4 Phonon properties and phonon-phonon scattering

Further, representative phonon properties and scattering channels of FA, and TA branches for graphene 

and Janus-graphene are visualized in the Brillouin zone as shown in Fig. 4, which truly reflects the actual 

phonon-phonon scattering. The distributions of phonon group velocities for the FA branch in graphene and the 

FA and TA branches in Janus-graphene are plotted in Figs. 4(a), (b), and (c). Obviously, the phonon group 

velocity of the FA branch in Janus-graphene is much lower than that of graphene, contributing to the lower κ. 

In addition, the TA branch of Janus-graphene has higher phonon group velocities than the FA branch due to 

the linear dispersion relation, indicating that the TA branch contributes relatively more to the κ. Meanwhile, 


13 / 28

Figs. 4(d), (e), and (f) reveal the phonon scattering rate distributions of FA branch in graphene and FA and TA 

branches in Janus-graphene. The phonon scattering rates of FA and TA branches in Janus-graphene are almost 

an order of magnitude, but both are significantly higher than those of FA branch in graphene. The variation of 

phonon group velocity and scattering rate leads to the weakening of the contribution of the acoustic FA branch 

in Janus-graphene.

The weakening of the FA branch is structurally due to the reorganization of the phonon dispersion caused 

by the folding of the in-plane structure, which was observed in previous studies [18,31]. But it also notes that 

out-of-plane buckling superfolding also suppresses the FA branch as shown in Supplementary Fig. S6, where 

the frequency reduction of the acoustic phonon branch exhibits the phenomenon of phonon softening, i.e., the 

strong anharmonicity is due to the superfolded structure. Further insight into the effect of spatial superfolding

on anharmonicity can be obtained through the phonon-phonon scattering channel as shown in Figs. 4(g), (h), 

and (i). In the three-phonon process, the anharmonic third-order force constant can be obtained with n = 3:

E𝛼1…𝛼𝑛(𝑖1𝑗1; … ; 𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑛) =
𝜕𝑛E

𝜕𝑢1(𝑖1𝑗1), … , 𝜕𝑢𝑛(𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑛)|

0

,
(3)

where E is lattice potential energy, and 𝑢⃗ 𝑖𝑗 represents the perturbation displacement of the jth atoms in the ith 

unit. The third-order force constant can be mapped to itself in the in-plane when n=3 for 2D materials: [19]

E𝛼1,…,𝛼𝑛(𝑖1𝑗1; … ; 𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑛)(−1)𝑚 = E𝛼1,…,𝛼𝑛(𝑖1𝑗1; … ; 𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑛),
(4)

where m comes from the symmetry operation and depends on the scattering phase space. It satisfies:

E𝛼1,…,𝛼𝑛(𝑖1𝑗1; … ; 𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑛) = 0, 𝑚 𝑜𝑑𝑑
(5)

E𝛼1,…,𝛼𝑛(𝑖1𝑗1; … ; 𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑛) ≠ 0, 𝑚 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛
(6)

The phonon-phonon scattering of the FA branch in graphene [Fig. 4(g)] only involves the even-numbered FA 

phonons, i.e., FA+FATA/LA. The FA branch scattering channels involving odd numbers are suppressed due 

to the strong planar symmetry driven by the planar structure, which makes the force constant 

E𝛼1,…,𝛼𝑛(𝑖1𝑗1; … ; 𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑛) vanish when mapped to itself (m = odd). Differently, the odd number of FA mode 

scattering channels of FA+FAFA and FAFA+FA are allowed in Janus-graphene as shown in Fig. 4(h) 

owing to the broken selection rule by Janus-structure (m = even). In addition, the scattering rate contributed by 

the phonons of the TA branch is almost the same as that of the FA branch, where the two TA phonons and FA 

phonons participate in the phonon-phonon scattering as shown in Fig. 3(g). This also explains the same 

contribution of TA and FA branches to the κ [Fig. 3(e)]. Note that the strong anharmonicity in Janus-graphene 

can be attributed to the fact that the strong asymmetry violates the selection rule of phonon-phonon scattering.

Differently, although the in-plane symmetry of biphenylene and Y-biphenylene is not protected, the out-of-

plane symmetry is preserved, leading to lower κ than graphene but higher than Janus-graphene [Fig. 1(b)].


14 / 28

The out-of-plane folding effect in Janus-graphene leads to a significant breaking of the central and mirror 

symmetries, inducing a stronger anharmonicity.

Figure 4. Phonon properties and phonon-phonon scattering. Phonon group velocity along highly 

symmetric paths in (a) graphene and (b, c) Janus-graphene. Phonon-phonon scattering rates along highly 

symmetric paths in (d) graphene and (e, f) Janus-graphene. Mode-level phonon-phonon scattering channels in 

(g) graphene and (h, i) Janus-graphene. “FA”, “TA”, and “LA” represent flexible, transverse and longitudinal

acoustic phonon branches.

2.5 Phonon hydrodynamic effects


15 / 28

As we know, phonon behavior is largely constrained by the crystal structure of the material itself. As a 

result of their softness and bending stiffness, 2D materials are easily deformed in the plane, giving rise to 

flexural acoustic modes with quadratic power, i.e., FA branch. The generation of the FA branch mainly 

involves the bending vibration of atoms inside 2D materials, similar to the bending modes of thin films. Due 

to the perfectly planar structure of graphene, these phonons have very little scattering in the direction 

perpendicular to its plane, i.e., they can propagate freely within the plane. This leads to a high density of states 

for long-wavelength FA phonons, i.e., a kinetically abundant presence of this type of phonons. In graphene, 

the collective motion of these long-wavelength FA phonons can exhibit a dynamic flow similar to fluid drift, 

which is known as the phonon hydrodynamic effect [46–50]. Attenuation of the prominent FA branches in 

Janus-graphene also predictably reduces this phonon hydrodynamic effect. The difference in phonon 

hydrodynamics in graphene and Janus-graphene can be intuitively compared by ITE and RTA methods, as 

shown in Fig. 1(b). The strength of phonon hydrodynamics can roughly be assessed by comparing the κ of the 

ITE and RTA methods (H=κITE/κRTA) [19]. The smaller the H value, the weaker the hydrodynamic effect. As 

shown in Fig. 1(b), the ultralow H value in Janus-graphene reveals its weak hydrodynamic effect. 

The contribution of the relaxation times of graphene and Janus-graphene under the ITE and RTA methods 

can further reveal a significant difference in κ, as shown in Fig. 5(a), where the relative magnitudes of the 

phonon relaxation time (RT) in the ITE and RTA methods can be measured by their ratio (RTITE/RTA). The 

RTITE/RTA value of graphene is significantly higher than that of Janus-graphene and higher than 1, revealing the 

enhanced effect of phonon hydrodynamics on the thermal transport properties of graphene, while it has little 

effect on Janus-graphene. The significant difference in κ can be attributed to the significant weakening of the 

contribution of the out-of-plane acoustic phonon branch FA, and the significant weakening of the FA branch 

by the iterative method can also be captured in Janus-graphene due to the superfolded structure [Fig. 3(e)].

The significant phonon softening of the FA branch in Janus-graphene compared to graphene can also be 

trapped as shown in Figs. 2(b) and (c).

The suppression of phonon hydrodynamics in the Janus-graphene can be further attributed to the 

momentum redistribution during phonon-phonon scattering. Based on the conservation of momentum, the 

phonon scattering process can be divided into two categories: normal (N) scattering and umklapp (U) 

scattering:

𝑞 ± 𝑞′
⃗⃗⃗ =𝑞′′
⃗⃗⃗⃗ + 𝐾⃗⃗ ,
(7)

where 𝐾⃗⃗ = 0 and 𝐾⃗⃗ ≠ 0 correspond to N and U processes, respectively. In N-scattering, a collision occurs 

between two phonons, but the sum of their wave vectors remains within the unit vector of the reciprocal lattice. 

This scattering event does not change the wave vector magnitude and direction of the phonons, only their 

phase, leading to the fact that N scattering events preserve momentum. However, in U-scattering, the 

scattering between two phonons produces a wavevector that exceeds the unit vector of the reciprocal lattice. 

This means that the sum of the wave vectors has crossed the boundary of the first Brillouin zone and cannot 


16 / 28

be represented by the primitive cell vectors of the lattice. In this case, the excess momentum cannot be 

retained between the phonons, but is transferred to other parts in the lattice. Thus, the U-scattering event 

results in a loss of momentum. In phonon hydrodynamics, the relative contributions between N and U 

processes determine the propagation and depletion behavior of phonons, whose relative strength can be 

measured by their ratio (N/U). As shown in Fig. 5(b), the low-frequency phonons in Janus graphene 

contribute to the weak N process, leading to a weak phonon hydrodynamic effect due to its significantly 

suppressed FA branch. Obviously, compared with graphene, Janus-graphene exhibits a weaker phonon 

hydrodynamic effect, where its N- and U-process phonon scattering rates are almost the same (the ratio is 

approximately equal to 1), which suggests that the superfolding of the atomic structure can significantly 

suppress the phonon hydrodynamic effects in Janus-graphene.

Figure 5. Phonon hydrodynamic effect. (a) Phonon relaxation times comparison between iterative and 

relaxation time approximation methods. (b) Phonon-phonon scattering for umklapp (U) and normal (N)

processes determined by conservation of momentum.

2.6 Electronic properties and anharmonicity

The superfolded buckled structure significantly suppresses the contribution of FA branch to thermal 

conductivity, and this structure-function evolution enables us to gain deep insights from atomic interactions 


17 / 28

and anharmonicity. In graphene, two carbon atoms form a strong and stable covalent bond in pure sp2

hybridization by sharing electron pairs. In sp2 hybridization, one 2s orbital and two 2p (px and py) orbitals of 

carbon atoms are linearly combined to form three equivalent sp2 hybridization orbitals. These sp2 hybrid 

orbitals form three σ bonds in graphene, which lie in a plane and are separated by an angle of 120° from each 

other. The remaining one pz orbital is perpendicular to the plane and forms a π bond, responsible for the π 

electron conjugated system in graphene. This ideal electronic configuration exhibits strong symmetry, which 

limits the anharmonicity in the atomic vibration process due to the perfectly planar structure. Differently, the 

out-of-plane buckling significantly destroys the planar features, especially the pz orbitals of Dirac cones (for 

graphene), making the pz electrons localized in the out-of-plane direction to form a quasi-sp3 hybridization as 

shown in Fig. 6(a), i.e., dangling bond [51,52]. A dangling bond refers to a covalent bond around an atom in a 

material that is not fully saturated, resulting in the presence of unpaired electrons on the atom, which makes 

the atom more reactive. This usually happens with surface or edge atoms because they lack neighbors adjacent 

to interior atoms. In order to stabilize a surface or interface, it is usually necessary to saturate the dangling 

bonds by different methods, such as adding surface modifiers [53], hydrotreating [54], or using other 

chemicals [55] to fill these unsaturated bonds. Such modification can also significantly suppress its 

anharmonicity and enhance thermal transport properties [56,57]. 


18 / 28

Figure 6. Electronic properties and lattice anharmonicity. (a) Orbital hybridization of Janus-graphene. (b) 

3D dimensionless electron localization function comparison of graphene and Janus-graphene. (c) Comparison 

of atomic vibration potential wells of graphene and Janus-graphene. (d) Comparison of atomic vibration RMS 

displacement of graphene and Janus-graphene. Embedded are the averaged self-interactions and nearest-

neighbor interactions.

However, limited by the 2D features of Janus-graphene and its unique superfolded configuration, the 

prominent dangling bond states in Janus-graphene are activated, demonstrating strong stereochemical activity. 

The diverse electron localization behavior can be further revealed by the electron localization function (ELF):

[51]

ELF = (1 + {
𝐾(𝑟)

𝐾ℎ[𝜌(𝑟)]}

2
)

−1

,
(8)

where where 𝐾ℎ[𝜌(𝑟)] is also the normalization coefficient of 𝐾(𝑟) and is the curvature in a homogeneous 

(h) electron gas of density ρ in position r. The size of the ELF represents the distribution of electrons from 


19 / 28

fully delocalized (ELF=0) to fully localized (ELF=1). When the ELF value is greater than 0.5, it means that 

the electrons are more localized in a certain position. As shown in Fig. 6(b), the ELF potential energy surfaces 

of graphene and Janus-graphene exhibit different localized morphologies due to the unique hybridization 

evolution. The localized electrons in Janus-graphene hang in the out-of-plane direction of carbon atoms, 

which is also revealed by the inset of the 2D ELF in Fig. 6(c). In thermal vibrations, the homogeneously 

distributed ELF in graphene lead to weak anharmonic interactions in wavefunction overlap due to strong 

symmetries. In contrast, the pronounced asymmetry in the Janus-graphene induces strong nonlinear Coulomb 

forces due to out-of-plane buckling superfolding, leading to its strong anharmonicity. Strong anharmonicity 

enables further insight to be gained through the anharmonic potential well shown in Fig. 6(c), where Janus-

graphene exhibits a wider potential energy surface at the same amplitude, indicating that atoms need more 

energy to recover during vibration. Strong asymmetry and anharmonic potential wells can be reflected in the 

interatomic force constants to affect thermal transport properties, which can be quantified by the root mean 

square of atomic interactions: [59]

𝑅𝑀𝑆 = [1

9 ∑ (
𝜕2𝐸

𝜕𝑅𝑖,𝛼𝜕𝑅𝑗,𝛽

)

2
]

1
2

,
(9)

where RMS can be obtained by traversing each atom with the initial central atom, representing the interatomic 

interactions. As shown in Fig. 6(d), the RMS distribution of Janus-graphene is more inhomogeneous 

compared to that of graphene, indicating non-uniform atomic repulsion in wave function overlap. This 

inhomogeneity of RMS originates from the inhomogeneity of the force constant, leading to the renormalized 

phonon-phonon scattering, which finally leads to a significant decrease in the κ of Janus-graphene.

2.7 Universal insights into asymmetric interactions

Ultimately, it could potentially be feasible to arrive at broad conclusions about the causes of the uneven 

distribution of force constants from the folding evolution of atomic geometries. As shown in Figs. 7(a) and (b), 

carbon atoms are organized in a perfect hexagon to create planar graphene, and the bond angles between 

carbon atoms determine how the material is structured. In graphene, each carbon atom makes a covalent link 

with its three neighbors by pure sp2 hybridization, leading to bond angles that are precisely 120°. This optimal 

hexagonal arrangement causes graphene to have a honeycomb lattice structure on the plane, with carbon 

atoms grouped in a close-packed way, enabling a highly symmetrical structure. As a result, the nonlinear 

Coulomb repulsion force (or non-harmonic interaction) of the bonding and non-bonding electrons in graphene 

is easily canceled or annihilated during the thermal vibration of atoms. In other words, out-of-plane phonon-

phonon scattering is governed by a symmetry in which the odd number of FA phonons involved are mapped 

onto themselves and prohibited by the phonon selection rule. However, when the pure 6-membered ring is 

transformed into a 4-6-8 ring, the bond angle deviates from the ideal 120° in the in-plane direction. For 

biphenylene and Y-biphenylene [Fig. 1(a)], the in-plane bond angles are approximately 90°, 120°, and 180°, 


20 / 28

leading to the breaking of the central rotational and translational symmetry and thus the redistribution of the 

Coulomb repulsion between the in-plane charges. Among them, phonon-phonon scattering channels 

previously suppressed by symmetry are activated, especially those involving FA phonons. As shown in Figs. 

7(c) and (d), when the out-of-plane configuration is introduced, the Coulomb repulsion along the out-of-plane

direction is renormalized, resulting in a further broken symmetry. As a result, the role of the FA branch in 

Janus-graphene is further weakened, and no longer dominates the κ, while FA and TA co-dominate. Combined 

with suppressed phonon group velocity, strong phonon scattering and weak phonon hydrodynamic effects lead 

to lower κ. Therefore, the κ of Janus-graphene is not only lower than that of graphene, but also about an order 

of magnitude lower than that of biphenylene and Y-biphenylene [Fig. 1(b)]. Because the bond length variation 

is not as substantial owing to the identical carbon atoms, the geometric bond angle distribution has a major 

impact on the strong asymmetry, leading to various types of in-plane and out-of-plane Coulomb repulsion 

distributions, as illustrated in Fig. 7. Such a general insight can be widely used to explain the thermal transport 

properties in other 2D carbon allotropes, such as D-graphene, T-graphene and Kagome-graphene [18,31,60].

The potential mapping link between atomic-scale geometry and phonon level can also serve as a design 

foundation for thermally functional materials, as well as valuable clues for the prediction and regulation of 

thermal transport properties of abundant 2D carbon allotropes or carbon-based phononic crystals.


21 / 28

Figure 7. Folded structure-induced asymmetric atomic interactions. Schematic diagram of (a) atomic 

structure and (b) atomic interactions along the in-plane direction. Schematic diagram of (a) atomic structure 

and (b) atomic interactions along the out-of-plane direction.

3. Conclusion

In summary, we take advantage of the powerful fitting ability of machine learning methods to solve the 

phonon BTE by establishing a regression potential energy surface from DFT to MLP, thereby obtaining the 

thermal transport properties of Janus-graphene and graphene. We provide an interface module between MLIP 

and ShengBTE with respect to the fourth-order force constant, which further isolates and accounts for four-

phonon scattering effects compared to previous molecular dynamics potentials [30]. Moreover, the molecular 

dynamics method cannot consider the quantum response, but the machine learning force constant potential 

method can further consider the quantum effect, i.e., the phonon-phonon scattering of various orders. In 

addition, due to the limitations of the finite displacement method, asymmetric systems often consume massive

computing resources to calculate small displacement supercells, which increase exponentially with the order 


22 / 28

of the force constant. The powerful fitting ability of machine learning methods can quickly draw accurate 

potential energy surfaces for different configurations through the optimization of data sets [61], so as to 

quickly obtain higher-order force constants. Thus, the machine learning force constant potential method can 

provide a more convenient method for exploring the high-order phonon-phonon scattering effects in complex 

asymmetric systems.

More importantly, we propose two evolution paths of folded structure and thermal transport properties for 

pure sp2 hybridized 2D carbon structures, namely in-plane and out-of-plane folds. The κ of T-graphene and 

Janus-graphene, which consist of superfolded evolved structures, are significantly lower than those of other 

2D carbon allotropes with pure sp2 hybridization. Among them, T-graphene undergoes superfolding of 

structural evolution in the plane, thereby forming a natural phonon crystal-like carbon configuration with 3-12 

carbon rings. Differently, Janus-graphene produces out-of-plane Janus-type buckling superfolding in addition 

to the in-plane 4-6-8 ring folding structure, leading to a κ value one order of magnitude lower than that of 

biphenylene (and Y-biphenylene) and two orders of magnitude lower than that of planar graphene. A detailed 

physical picture can be obtained through Janus-graphene's structural evolution, mode-level phonon properties, 

momentum-conserving phonon-phonon scattering, electronic structure, and atomic interactions with graphene 

as a benchmark. The superfolding of the Janus structure suppresses the contribution of the FA phonon branch, 

leading to low group velocity, strong anharmonicity, weak phonon hydrodynamic effect, and strong 

asymmetry, which ultimately contributes to low κ. This study sheds new light on understanding the 

relationship between the structure and function of 2D materials, especially heat transport, and for designing 

materials with specific thermal transport properties.

4. Method

The initial data set was constructed using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) [62] based on 

density functional theory as the input of the machine learning network. In ab initio molecular dynamics, the 

4×4×1 supercell is constructed to avoid the influence of periodic boundary conditions on the system. When 

the kinetic energy cutoff is1000 eV, a 2×2×1 Monkhorst-Pack [63] k-mesh is used to sample the Brillouin 

zone until the energy and Hellmann-Feynman force accuracy converge to 10-5 eV and 10-4 eV/Å, respectively.

Based on the isothermal and isobaric (NPT) ensemble, 1000 frames of data are extracted in 50K, 150K, 300K, 

500K, and 700K, respectively, when the time step is 0.1 fs.

To fit the force constants, we used a linear programming-based Machine-Learning Interatomic Potential

(MLIP) developed by Shapeev et al. [64] to develop interatomic potential functions. The total energy of the 

configuration (𝐸𝑚
𝑀𝐿𝑃) is given by a linear combination of a set of basis functions 𝐵𝛼:

𝐸𝑚
𝑀𝐿𝑃 = ∑ 𝑉𝑚(𝒏𝑖)

𝑉

𝑖=1

,
(10)


23 / 28

𝑉(𝒏𝑖) = ∑ 𝜉𝛼𝐵𝛼(𝒏𝑖)

𝛼

,
(11)

where the basic function 𝐵𝛼 is constructed based on ith atomic environment 𝒏𝑖 via moment tensor descriptor 

and 𝜉𝛼 describes the minimized difference between MLIP and AIMD energies.

In machine learning networks, the Taylor expansion of the potential energy 𝐸𝑀𝐿𝑃 of the configuration at 

small displacements can be obtained:

𝐸𝑀𝐿𝑃 = 𝐸0

𝑀𝐿𝑃 + 1

2 ∑ Φ𝑖𝑗

𝛼𝛽r𝑖

𝛼𝑟𝑗

𝛽

𝑖𝑗
𝛼𝛽

+ 1

3! ∑ Φ𝑖𝑗𝑘

𝛼𝛽𝛾r𝑖

𝛼𝑟𝑗

𝛽𝑟𝑘

𝛾

𝑖𝑗𝑘
𝛼𝛽𝛾

+ 1

4! ∑ Φ𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝛼𝛽𝛾𝛿r𝑖

𝛼𝑟𝑗

𝛽𝑟𝑘

𝛾𝑟𝑙

𝛿

𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙
𝛼𝛽𝛾𝛿

+ ⋯ ,
(12)

where the coefficients Φ𝑖𝑗

𝛼𝛽r𝑖

𝛼𝑟𝑗

𝛽, Φ𝑖𝑗𝑘

𝛼𝛽𝛾r𝑖

𝛼𝑟𝑗

𝛽𝑟𝑘

𝛾, Φ𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝛼𝛽𝛾𝛿r𝑖

𝛼𝑟𝑗

𝛽𝑟𝑘

𝛾𝑟𝑙

𝛿 correspond to the second-order, third-order, 

and fourth-order force constants, respectively. Further, the force constants can be obtained by the finite 

displacement difference method through our recompiled thirdorder_MTP.py and Fourthorder_MTP.py code,

which provide an interface between MLIP and shengBTE. In fact, the same holds true for other potential 

functions [66,67]. Finally, the thermal conductivity is obtained by implementing shengBTE with the force 

constant as input to solve the phonon Boltzmann transport equation: [38,65]

𝜅 = 𝜅𝛼𝛼 = 1

𝑉 ∑ 𝐶𝜆𝜈𝜆𝛼

2 𝜏𝜆𝛼

𝜆

,
(13)

where 𝜏𝜆𝛼, 𝐶𝜆, and ν𝜆𝛼, and 𝑉 are relaxation time, specific heat capacity, group velocity for 𝜆 mode phonon 

along 𝛼 direction, and crystal volume, respectively. More information about the phonon BTE can be found in 

Supplementary Note S2.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52006057), the 

Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing, China (No. CSTB2022NSCQ-MSX0332), the Fundamental 

Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant Nos. 531119200237), and the State Key Laboratory of 

Advanced Design and Manufacturing for Vehicle Body at Hunan University (Grant No. 52175013). H.W. is 

supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51906097). Z.Q. is supported by 

the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.12274374, 11904324) and the China 

Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2018M642776). The numerical calculations in this paper have been done on 

the supercomputing system of the E.T. Cluster and the National Supercomputing Center in Changsha.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS


24 / 28

G.Q. supervised the project. L.Y. performed all the calculations, analysis and writing. K.D. performed the 

writing and analysis. All the authors contributed to interpreting the results. The manuscript was written by L.Y.

and K.D. with contributions from all the authors.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The Authors declare no Competing Financial or Non-Financial Interests 

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable 

request.

REFERENCES

[1]
Y. Hu et al., Synthesis of γ-Graphyne Using Dynamic Covalent Chemistry, Nat. Synth 1, 6 
(2022).

[2]
K. Kaiser, L. M. Scriven, F. Schulz, P. Gawel, L. Gross, and H. L. Anderson, An Sp-Hybridized 
Molecular Carbon Allotrope, Cyclo[18]Carbon, Science 365, 1299 (2019).

[3]
Q. Fan et al., Biphenylene Network: A Nonbenzenoid Carbon Allotrope, Science 372, 852 
(2021).

[4]
C.-T. Toh et al., Synthesis and Properties of Free-Standing Monolayer Amorphous Carbon, 
Nature 577, 7789 (2020).

[5]
L. Hou, X. Cui, B. Guan, S. Wang, R. Li, Y. Liu, D. Zhu, and J. Zheng, Synthesis of a 
Monolayer Fullerene Network, Nature 606, 7914 (2022).

[6]
W. Niu et al., Large Linear Magnetoresistance of High-Mobility 2D Electron System at 
Nonisostructural γ-Al2O3/SrTiO3 Heterointerfaces, Advanced Materials Interfaces 8, 2101235 
(2021).

[7]
L. Cheng, C. Zhang, and Y. Liu, The Optimal Electronic Structure for High-Mobility 2D 
Semiconductors: Exceptionally High Hole Mobility in 2D Antimony, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 
16296 (2019).

[8]
M. Yankowitz, S. Chen, H. Polshyn, Y. Zhang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. Graf, A. F. 
Young, and C. R. Dean, Tuning Superconductivity in Twisted Bilayer Graphene, Science 363, 
1059 (2019).

[9]
Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, 
Unconventional Superconductivity in Magic-Angle Graphene Superlattices, Nature 556, 7699 
(2018).

[10] L.-F. Yu, J.-Y. Xu, C. Shen, E. Zhou, J. Wu, H.-B. Zhang, X. Zheng, H.-M. Wang, and G.-Z. 

Qin, Realizing Ultra-Low Thermal Conductivity by Strong Synergy of Asymmetric Geometry 
and Electronic Structure in Boron Nitride and Arsenide, Rare Met. 42, 210 (2023).

[11] W.-J. Ren, S. Lu, C.-Q. Yu, J. He, and J. Chen, Carbon Honeycomb Structure with High Axial 

Thermal Transport and Strong Robustness, Rare Met. 42, 2679 (2023).


25 / 28

[12] C.-D. Zhou, B. Liang, W.-J. Huang, J.-G. Noudem, X.-J. Tan, and J. Jiang, Phonon 

Engineering Significantly Reducing Thermal Conductivity of Thermoelectric Materials: A 
Review, Rare Met. 42, 2825 (2023).

[13] D.-H. Wei, E. Zhou, J.-Y. Xu, H.-M. Wang, C. Shen, H.-B. Zhang, Z.-Z. Qin, and G.-Z. Qin, 

Insight into Vertical Piezoelectric Characteristics Regulated Thermal Transport in van Der 
Waals Two-Dimensional Materials, Rare Met. 43, 770 (2024).

[14] S. Chen, Q. Wu, C. Mishra, J. Kang, H. Zhang, K. Cho, W. Cai, A. A. Balandin, and R. S. 

Ruoff, Thermal Conductivity of Isotopically Modified Graphene, Nature Mater 11, 3 (2012).

[15] L. Lindsay, D. A. Broido, and N. Mingo, Flexural Phonons and Thermal Transport in 

Graphene, Phys. Rev. B 82, 115427 (2010).

[16] T. Feng and X. Ruan, Four-Phonon Scattering Reduces Intrinsic Thermal Conductivity of 

Graphene and the Contributions from Flexural Phonons, Phys. Rev. B 97, 045202 (2018).

[17] A. Taheri, S. Pisana, and C. V. Singh, Importance of Quadratic Dispersion in Acoustic Flexural 

Phonons for Thermal Transport of Two-Dimensional Materials, Phys. Rev. B 103, 235426 
(2021).

[18] U. Choudhry, S. Yue, and B. Liao, Origins of Significant Reduction of Lattice Thermal 

Conductivity in Graphene Allotropes, Phys. Rev. B 100, 165401 (2019).

[19] L. Yu, A. Chen, X. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Qin, and G. Qin, Softened s p 2 − s p 3 Bonding 

Network Leads to Strong Anharmonicity and Weak Hydrodynamics in Graphene+, Phys. Rev. 
B 106, 125410 (2022).

[20] A. Giri, C. J. Dionne, and P. E. Hopkins, Atomic Coordination Dictates Vibrational 

Characteristics and Thermal Conductivity in Amorphous Carbon, Npj Comput Mater 8, 1 
(2022).

[21] J. Hone, M. Whitney, C. Piskoti, and A. Zettl, Thermal Conductivity of Single-Walled Carbon 

Nanotubes, Phys. Rev. B 59, R2514 (1999).

[22] D. J. Yang, Q. Zhang, G. Chen, S. F. Yoon, J. Ahn, S. G. Wang, Q. Zhou, Q. Wang, and J. Q. 

Li, Thermal Conductivity of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes, Phys. Rev. B 66, 165440 (2002).

[23] A. V. Savin, Y. S. Kivshar, and B. Hu, Suppression of Thermal Conductivity in Graphene 

Nanoribbons with Rough Edges, Phys. Rev. B 82, 195422 (2010).

[24] J. Hu, X. Ruan, and Y. P. Chen, Thermal Conductivity and Thermal Rectification in Graphene 

Nanoribbons: A Molecular Dynamics Study, Nano Lett. 9, 2730 (2009).

[25] S. Zhang, J. Zhou, Q. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Kawazoe, and P. Jena, Penta-Graphene: A New 

Carbon Allotrope, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112, 2372 (2015).

[26] M. Raeisi, B. Mortazavi, E. V. Podryabinkin, F. Shojaei, X. Zhuang, and A. V. Shapeev, High 

Thermal Conductivity in Semiconducting Janus and Non-Janus Diamanes, Carbon 167, 51 
(2020).

[27] H. Yin, X. Shi, C. He, M. Martinez-Canales, J. Li, C. J. Pickard, C. Tang, T. Ouyang, C. Zhang, 

and J. Zhong, Stone-Wales Graphene: A Two-Dimensional Carbon Semimetal with Magic 
Stability, Phys. Rev. B 99, 041405 (2019).

[28] L. Yu, Z. Qin, H. Wang, X. Zheng, and G. Qin, Half-Negative Poisson’s Ratio in Graphene+ 

with Intrinsic Dirac Nodal Loop, Cell Reports Physical Science 3, 100790 (2022).


26 / 28

[29] L. Yu, J. Xu, B. Peng, G. Qin, and G. Su, Anisotropic Optical, Mechanical, and Thermoelectric 

Properties of Two-Dimensional Fullerene Networks, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 13, 11622 (2022).

[30] Y. Ouyang, C. Yu, J. He, P. Jiang, W. Ren, and J. Chen, Accurate Description of High-Order 

Phonon Anharmonicity and Lattice Thermal Conductivity from Molecular Dynamics 
Simulations with Machine Learning Potential, Phys. Rev. B 105, 115202 (2022).

[31] H. Dong, Z. Zhang, Z. Feng, J. Kang, D. Wu, Q. Wang, J. Li, and R. Su, Origins of Low Lattice 

Thermal Conductivity in 2D Carbon Allotropes, Journal of Materials Research and Technology 
11, 1982 (2021).

[32] F. Q. Wang, J. Yu, Q. Wang, Y. Kawazoe, and P. Jena, Lattice Thermal Conductivity of Penta-

Graphene, Carbon 105, 424 (2016).

[33] H. P. Veeravenkata and A. Jain, Density Functional Theory Driven Phononic Thermal 

Conductivity Prediction of Biphenylene: A Comparison with Graphene, Carbon 183, 893 
(2021).

[34] X. Gu, Z. Fan, H. Bao, and C. Y. Zhao, Revisiting Phonon-Phonon Scattering in Single-Layer 

Graphene, Phys. Rev. B 100, 064306 (2019).

[35] Q. Fan et al., Biphenylene Network: A Nonbenzenoid Carbon Allotrope, Science 372, 852 

(2021).

[36] P. Zhang, T. Ouyang, C. Tang, C. He, J. Li, C. Zhang, M. Hu, and J. Zhong, The Intrinsic 

Thermal Transport Properties of the Biphenylene Network and the Influence of Hydrogenation: 
A First-Principles Study, Journal of Materials Chemistry C 9, 16945 (2021).

[37] B. Mortazavi, E. V. Podryabinkin, I. S. Novikov, T. Rabczuk, X. Zhuang, and A. V. Shapeev, 

Accelerating First-Principles Estimation of Thermal Conductivity by Machine-Learning 
Interatomic Potentials: A MTP/ShengBTE Solution, Computer Physics Communications 258, 
107583 (2021).

[38] Z. Han, X. Yang, W. Li, T. Feng, and X. Ruan, FourPhonon: An Extension Module to 

ShengBTE for Computing Four-Phonon Scattering Rates and Thermal Conductivity, Computer 
Physics Communications 270, 108179 (2022).

[39] L. Xie, J. H. Feng, R. Li, and J. Q. He, First-Principles Study of Anharmonic Lattice Dynamics 

in Low Thermal Conductivity AgCrSe 2 : Evidence for a Large Resonant Four-Phonon 
Scattering, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 245901 (2020).

[40] N. K. Ravichandran and D. Broido, Phonon-Phonon Interactions in Strongly Bonded Solids: 

Selection Rules and Higher-Order Processes, Phys. Rev. X 10, 021063 (2020).

[41] L. Lindsay, D. A. Broido, and T. L. Reinecke, First-Principles Determination of Ultrahigh 

Thermal Conductivity of Boron Arsenide: A Competitor for Diamond?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 
025901 (2013).

[42] S. Li, Q. Zheng, Y. Lv, X. Liu, X. Wang, P. Y. Huang, D. G. Cahill, and B. Lv, High Thermal 

Conductivity in Cubic Boron Arsenide Crystals, Science 361, 579 (2018).

[43] S. Yue et al., High Ambipolar Mobility in Cubic Boron Arsenide Revealed by Transient 

Reflectivity Microscopy, Science 377, 433 (2022).

[44] J. Shin et al., High Ambipolar Mobility in Cubic Boron Arsenide, Science 377, 437 (2022).
[45] Z. Han and X. Ruan, Thermal Conductivity of Monolayer Graphene: Convergent and Lower 

than Diamond, Phys. Rev. B 108, L121412 (2023).


27 / 28

[46] Y. Guo and M. Wang, Phonon Hydrodynamics for Nanoscale Heat Transport at Ordinary 

Temperatures, Physical Review B 97, 035421 (2018).

[47] S. Lee, D. Broido, K. Esfarjani, and G. Chen, Hydrodynamic Phonon Transport in Suspended 

Graphene, Nat Commun 6, 6290 (2015).

[48] Y. Machida, N. Matsumoto, T. Isono, and K. Behnia, Phonon Hydrodynamics and Ultrahigh–

Room-Temperature Thermal Conductivity in Thin Graphite, Science 367, 309 (2020).

[49] S. Huberman, R. A. Duncan, K. Chen, B. Song, V. Chiloyan, Z. Ding, A. A. Maznev, G. Chen, 

and K. A. Nelson, Observation of Second Sound in Graphite at Temperatures above 100 K, 
Science 364, 375 (2019).

[50] V. Martelli, J. L. Jiménez, M. Continentino, E. Baggio-Saitovitch, and K. Behnia, Thermal 

Transport and Phonon Hydrodynamics in Strontium Titanate, Physical Review Letters 120, 
125901 (2018).

[51] S. B. Zhang and S.-H. Wei, Surface Energy and the Common Dangling Bond Rule for 

Semiconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 086102 (2004).

[52] M. E. Turiansky, A. Alkauskas, L. C. Bassett, and C. G. Van de Walle, Dangling Bonds in 

Hexagonal Boron Nitride as Single-Photon Emitters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 127401 (2019).

[53] J. Wyrick, X. Wang, P. Namboodiri, R. V. Kashid, F. Fei, J. Fox, and R. Silver, Enhanced 

Atomic Precision Fabrication by Adsorption of Phosphine into Engineered Dangling Bonds on 
H–Si Using STM and DFT, ACS Nano 16, 19114 (2022).

[54] J. Qiu, H. Wang, J. Wang, X. Yao, S. Meng, and Y. Liu, Revealing the Hydrogenated Structure 

of Silicene-
$(\ensuremath{\surd}13\ifmmode\times\else\texttimes\fi{}\ensuremath{\surd}13)R13.{9}^{\ensu
remath{\circ}}$ by Tip-Induced Dehydrogenation, Phys. Rev. B 106, 184102 (2022).

[55] M. Chatenet, S. Berthon-Fabry, Y. Ahmad, K. Guérin, M. Colin, H. Farhat, L. Frezet, G. Zhang, 

and M. Dubois, Fluorination and Its Effects on Electrocatalysts for Low-Temperature Fuel 
Cells, Advanced Energy Materials 13, 2204304 (2023).

[56] X. Wu, V. Varshney, J. Lee, T. Zhang, J. L. Wohlwend, A. K. Roy, and T. Luo, Hydrogenation 

of Penta-Graphene Leads to Unexpected Large Improvement in Thermal Conductivity, Nano 
Letters 16, 3925 (2016).

[57] Z. Liu, X. Wu, V. Varshney, J. Lee, G. Qin, M. Hu, A. K. Roy, and T. Luo, Bond Saturation 

Significantly Enhances Thermal Energy Transport in Two-Dimensional Pentagonal Materials, 
Nano Energy 45, 1 (2018).

[58] A. Lou, Q.-B. Liu, and H.-H. Fu, Enhanced Thermoelectric Performance by Lone-Pair 

Electrons and Bond Anharmonicity in the Two-Dimensional Ge 2 Y 2 Family of Materials with 
Y = N , P, As, or Sb, Phys. Rev. B 105, 075431 (2022).

[59] G. Qin and M. Hu, Accelerating Evaluation of Converged Lattice Thermal Conductivity, Npj 

Comput Mater 4, 3 (2018).

[60] P. Ying, T. Liang, Y. Du, J. Zhang, X. Zeng, and Z. Zhong, Thermal Transport in Planar Sp2-

Hybridized Carbon Allotropes: A Comparative Study of Biphenylene Network, Pentaheptite and 
Graphene, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 183, 122060 (2022).


28 / 28

[61] K. Xu, Y. Hao, T. Liang, P. Ying, J. Xu, J. Wu, and Z. Fan, Accurate Prediction of Heat 

Conductivity of Water by a Neuroevolution Potential, The Journal of Chemical Physics 158, 
204114 (2023).

[62] G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, “Efficient Iterative Schemes for Ab Initio Total-Energy 

Calculations Using a Plane-Wave Basis Set,” Phys. Rev. B, Vol. 54, Pp. 11169-11186, (1996).

[63] H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Special Points for Brillouin-Zone Integrations, Phys. Rev. B 13, 

5188 (1976).

[64] I. S. Novikov, K. Gubaev, E. V. Podryabinkin, and A. V. Shapeev, The MLIP Package: 

Moment Tensor Potentials with MPI and Active Learning, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2, 
025002 (2021).

[65] W. Li, J. Carrete, N. A. Katcho, and N. Mingo, ShengBTE: A Solver of the Boltzmann 

Transport Equation for Phonons, Computer Physics Communications 185, 1747 (2014).

[66] Z. Fan et al., GPUMD: A Package for Constructing Accurate Machine-Learned Potentials and 

Performing Highly Efficient Atomistic Simulations, The Journal of Chemical Physics 157, 
114801 (2022).

[67] H. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Han, and W. E, DeePMD-Kit: A Deep Learning Package for Many-Body 

Potential Energy Representation and Molecular Dynamics, Computer Physics Communications 
228, 178 (2018).


