A Josephson Parametric Oscillator-Based Ising Machine

S. RazmkhahŌłŚ, M. Kamal*, N. YoshikawaŌĆĀ, M. Pedram*

December 13, 2023

Abstract

Ising machines (IMs) have emerged as a promising solution for rapidly solving NP-complete combinatorial
optimization problems, surpassing the capabilities of traditional computing methods. By efficiently deter-
mining the ground state of the Hamiltonian during the annealing process, IMs can effectively complement
CPUs in tackling optimization challenges. To realize these IMs, a bi-stable oscillator is essential to emu-
late the atomic spins and interactions of the Ising model. This study introduces a Josephson parametric
oscillator (JPO)-based tile structure, serving as a fundamental unit for scalable superconductor-based
IMs. Leveraging the bi-stable nature of JPOs, which are superconductor-based oscillators, the proposed
machine can operate at frequencies of Ōł╝7.5GHz while consuming significantly less power (by three orders
of magnitude) than CMOS-based systems. Furthermore, the compatibility of the proposed tile structure
with the Lechner-Hauke-Zoller (LHZ) architecture ensures its viability for large-scale integration. We
conducted simulations of the tile in a noisy environment to validate its functionality. We verified its op-
erational characteristics by comparing the results with the analytical solution of its Hamiltonian model.
This verification demonstrates the feasibility and effectiveness of the JPO-based tile in implementing
IMs, opening new avenues for efficient and scalable combinatorial optimization in quantum computing.

1
Introduction

As semiconductor fabrication technology approaches its physical limits, the conventional scaling of semicon-
ductors, which has driven the growth in integration density and operating speed of CMOS-based designs, is
reaching its end [1, 2]. Therefore, exploring alternative technologies and architectures beyond CMOS that
can enhance systemsŌĆÖ performance and energy efficiency is essential. One solution to improve the efficiency
of conventional computers is developing accelerator platforms for todayŌĆÖs computing-intensive applications,
such as artificial intelligence (AI), optimizations, pattern recognition, bio-informatics, and novel material
simulations, that can keep up with the growing complexity of these problems.
Many of the computational problems encountered in current applications become increasingly intractable
as the problem size scales up. This exponential increase in computational resources and time needed to solve
such problems poses a significant challenge [3]. Combinatorial optimization problems are often known to be
nondeterministic polynomials (NP-complete), implying that finding the exact optimal solution can require
exponential time in the worst-case scenario.
A promising approach for solving NP-complete problems involves identifying physical phenomena that
can be modeled as a combinatorial problem. By mapping the original problem onto a physical system, we
can leverage the systemŌĆÖs inherent properties and dynamics to solve the problem. As the system reaches
a stable state, the outcome represents the solution to the initial combinatorial optimization problem and
solves the problem efficiently.

ŌłŚMing Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
ŌĆĀDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Yokohama National University, Yokohama, Japan.

1

arXiv:2309.03407v3  [quant-ph]  12 Dec 2023


An intriguing physical system with a combinatorial model is the behavior of free electronsŌĆÖ spins within
a materialŌĆÖs lattice. The materialŌĆÖs lattice vibrates as it heats up, causing the electrons to move more freely.
As the material cools down, the interaction force between electrons and the lattice exceeds the electronsŌĆÖ
kinetic energy. Consequently, the electrons settle into a configuration that minimizes the latticeŌĆÖs energy.
This phenomenon was initially mathematically described by Ernst Ising [4]. In the Ising model, each spin
can either be up or down. The spinŌĆÖs behavior in the Ising model is determined by an energy function that
relies on the states of the neighboring spins known as the Ising Hamiltonian. The electron configuration in
the minimum value of this function determines the state of the matter.
Solving NP-complete problems using the Ising Model (IM) can offer a significant speedup compared to
conventional computers [5]. Thus, mapping NP-complete problems onto the Ising Model is advantageous,
as finding the solution is equivalent to finding the ground state of the systemŌĆÖs Hamiltonian. Additionally,
IMs are highly effective in formulating and solving quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO)
problems [6]. This makes them a powerful tool for addressing a variety of optimization challenges.
IMs can be implemented using various interacting bistable oscillators as basic building blocks, such
as optical parametric oscillators (OPO) [7, 8], CMOS-based electronic oscillators [9, 10], spintronics and
magnetic systems [11], and quantum annealers [12].
While optical systems offer notable benefits for implementing Ising model solvers, including high process-
ing speed and minimal noise levels, they face challenges related to integration limitations, bulkiness, and the
need for long optical fibers [10]. Another approach involves CMOS-based implementations for realizing the
Ising model [13, 14, 15]. Although CMOS-based implementations offer simplicity through techniques like
iterative annealing in memory (AIM), they still encounter delay and energy consumption challenges.
Superconductor electronics (SCE) offer an alternative to semiconductors, providing higher computing
speed and reduced power consumption [16, 17, 18]. Quantum annealers, like DW2Q [19], utilize supercon-
ducting qubits representing electron spins, enabling high-speed operations through magnetic flux interactions.
However, quantum annealers face challenges related to the sparse ŌĆØChimeraŌĆØ coupling graph architecture,
which necessitates problem modifications and minor embedding methods [20]. Additionally, achieving sub-
Kelvin temperatures for observing quantum states adds complexity and costs to these systems.
This paper introduces a practical superconductor-based IM system that operates at 4.2K. A key compo-
nent of our approach is the utilization of Josephson parametric oscillators (JPOs) [21] as the fundamental spin
elements within the IM. We propose a JPO structure that enables the formation of a four-body interaction
network, a tile (plaquette), composed of six JPOs. The tile represents the fundamental building block in the
IM architecture based on the LHZ (Lechner, Hauke, and Zoller) approach [22]. Through inductive coupling,
we establish controllable interactions between the JPOs by manipulating the phase differences between pairs
of JPOs. These interactions drive convergence towards the minimum energy state of the Hamiltonian during
the annealing process.

2
Ising Machine

An Ising machine determines the configuration states that minimize the interaction energy between spins.
In this context, the Ising Hamiltonian for N spins can be expressed as,

H = ŌłÆ

N
’┐Į

i=1
hiŽāi ŌłÆ

N
’┐Į

j,i
JijŽāiŽāj
(1)

where Žāi (Ōłł ŌłÆ1, +1) is the ith spin, Jij is the coupling interaction between the ith and jth spins, and hi is
the local field of the ith spin.
The IM can solve the QUBO problem by mapping it onto the Ising Hamiltonian. This involves substitut-

2


ing the variable x (Ōłł 0, 1) in the QUBO with 1

2(Žā ŌłÆ 1) in the Ising Hamiltonian. By finding the ground state
of H, IM can effectively solve NP-complete combinatorial problems. However, achieving universal annealing
requires control over each two-body interaction (Jij). The challenge of physically implementing the IM for
large-scale problems arises from the all-to-all interactions among spins represented by the interaction matrix
J. The LHZ IM was introduced to address scalability in [24]. The LHZ architecture offers a compact solution
by eliminating the need for all-to-all interactions between spins.
In the LHZ IM, logical bits Žāi define the Ising Hamiltonian (1), while physical bits ╦£Žāi represent the relative
configuration of two logical bits along a specific connection edge Jij. Parallel and anti-parallel alignments
correspond to 1 and 0, respectively. By treating optimization parameters Jij as local magnetic fields, the
LHZ structure achieves full programmability with local control. The system size expands from N logical bits
to K = N(N ŌłÆ 1)/2 physical bits to accommodate all interaction matrix elements.
The physical bits form a 2-D triangular configuration, with N ŌłÆ 1 bits in the base and decreasing levels
above, ending in a single bit at the apex. An additional row of N ŌłÆ 2 fixed physical qubits with a spin value
of ŌĆÖ1ŌĆÖ completes the architecture. Each tile represents a four-spin interaction pattern. Fig. 1 illustrates an
example tile structure employed within the LHZ architecture with four logical JPOs, and two ancillary JPOs
enforcing the constraints Cl. The constant term is added to ensure term Cl is always negative.

Figure 1: A general structure of the JPO-based tile. S1 to S4 are the JPO-based spin nodes that are coupled
together, and Sa1 and Sa2 are JPO-based ancilla spins which are used to impose the constraint Cl. Ccnst is
the offset value added to ensure that Cl is always negative in the tile structure.

The increased degrees of freedom is balanced by K ŌłÆ N + 1 constraints Cl, ensuring an even number
of spin-flips along any closed loop in the logical bit.
These constraints can be implemented using local
interactions in simple square-lattice geometry. Consequently, the optimization problem is encoded as,

H =

K
’┐Į

k=1
Jk ╦£Žāi +

KŌłÆN+1
’┐Į

l=1
Cl
(2)

The vector Jk encompasses all K elements of the interaction matrix Jij, effectively converting the optimiza-
tion parameters into local fields that can be easily controlled and applied to the physical bits. Furthermore,
the constraint Cl associated with the lth tile can be defined as,

Cl = ŌłÆC╦£Žā(l,n)╦£Žā(l,s)╦£Žā(l,w)╦£Žā(l,e)
(3)

This equation represents the 4-body interaction between the physical bits (the north, east, south, and
west) within the tile, with a penalty parameter of C. By applying the annealing process and reaching the

3


ground state of H, the solution to the optimization problem can be determined (except for a global inversion)
by appropriately reading out a selection of N ŌłÆ 1 physical bits from the total of N(N ŌłÆ 1)/2 available.

3
Superconductor-based Components

3.1
Josephson Parametric Oscillator (JPO)

Superconductor circuits offer unique quantum behavior at a macro scale, making them well-suited for inno-
vative circuitry. Conduction in these circuits is facilitated by super-currents from Cooper pairs that act as
quasiboson particles. Like photons in optical circuits, Cooper pairs possess the same wave function. However,
unlike photons, Cooper pairs extensively interact due to their electric charge. This distinction enables the
creation of bistable parametric oscillators, similar to OPOs, using superconductor circuits. These oscillators
can be coupled and scaled up, integrating numerous oscillators on a single chip.
At the heart of most superconductor circuits, including JPOs, lies the Josephson junction (JJ). A JJ
forms at weak links within a superconductor, generating a constant current due to the phase difference in
the wave function at the junctionŌĆÖs terminals. The behavior of super-currents in JJs is described by the
Josephson DC and AC equations [25].
Considering the Josephson equation pair, it is evident that the JJ possesses an inductance that relies on
the magnetic flux or the current passing through it. This inductance can be determined by equation 4 as,

LJJ =
┬»h

2eIC
=
╬”0

2ŽĆIC
,
(4)

where LJJ is the inductance observed across the JJ, and ╬”0 is the quantum of magnetic flux. The nonlinear
relationship between phase and current in the JJ makes it an excellent candidate for nonlinear circuits and
oscillators in different devices such as superconductor quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) and qubits
[26, 27, 28].
A SQUID is formed by connecting two JJs in parallel with a superconductor loop, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
The components of the SQUID include L1, L2, IC1, and IC2. The SQUID can be described as a single
JJ whose critical current is IC = IC1 + IC2, and it is correlated with the applied flux to the SQUID loop.
Therefore, the current of the SQUID can be modulated through magnetic coupling. In situations where the
loop inductance value of the SQUID is small, the inductance value can be calculated as follows:

LSQUID =
┬»h

2eIC

1

| cos(ŽĆ╬”ext/╬”0)|,
(5)

╬”ext represents the external magnetic flux in the SQUID loop, and Žå denotes the SQUID phase. In Josephson
parametric oscillators (JPOs), we utilize the SQUID as a variable inductance, which can be controlled
through external magnetic coupling. This capability enables the modulation of the oscillation frequency.
Fig. 2 illustrates the resonator and SQUID loop combination, forming the JPO. The resonance frequency
can be finely adjusted by altering the external flux on the SQUID loop.
Calculating the JPOŌĆÖs resonance frequency requires evaluating signal attenuation across various frequen-
cies while considering the circuit as a simple quarter-wavelength resonator. Therefore, it becomes crucial
to determine the impedance of the resonator. The surface impedance of a superconductor, also known as
optical conductivity, can be estimated using ZimmermanŌĆÖs approximation of the Mattis-Bardeen equation
[29]. In these equations, the real part of impedance, Žā1, is due to quasi-particles, and the imaginary part,
Žā2, corresponds to the super-current. The overall resonance frequency can be determined by combining the
impedance of the resonator and the SQUID from Equation 5. A DC flux would shift the inductance to match

4


Figure 2: Circuit schematic of the Josephson parametric oscillator used as a cell to emulate the spin resonance.
For symmetry we assume that L1 = L2 = 7.5pH, IC1 = IC2 = 80┬ĄA with 15 Ōä” shunt resistances, and the
CS = 4.5pF. The resonator frequency is at 7.5 GHz.

the frequency of oscillation. Therefore, the resonance frequency can be calculated as follows:

Žē0 = Žēr

’┐Į
1 + LSQUID(╬”ext) + L1/2

Lr

’┐Į
,
(6)

where Lr represents the inductance of the resonator. In this work, we set Žē0 to 7.5 GHz as the desired
resonance frequency. Fig. 3 illustrates the variation of the resonance frequency when an external flux is
applied to the SQUID loop through the Idc current source.
In this figure, we calculated the oscillation
frequency of the JPO, considering the parameters and limitations of the MIT LL SFQee5 process. The

Figure 3: Resonator frequency calculation result with different applied DC currents. The material is Nb,
and the characteristics are chosen to match the MIT LL SFQee5 process.

parameter modulated in the JPO is the critical current of the SQUID. By coupling a small RF magnetic
signal to the SQUID loop, the critical current, and consequently the inductance parameter, can be modulated,
leading to a slight change in the resonance frequency. If the frequency of the pumped RF signal is twice
the circuitŌĆÖs resonance frequency, in our case, 15GHz, it will deposit energy into the circuit until oscillation
is sustained. Hence, the JPO is classified as a parametric oscillator. The JPO exhibits two stable points
corresponding to the SQUIDŌĆÖs 0 and ŽĆ phases. At these two phases, the flux in the SQUID is quantized to
ŽĢ0, representing the state of minimum energy.

5


3.2
Tile (Plaquette)

The proposed tile employs coupled JPOs to realize spin interactions. The coupling between JPOs is achieved
through magnetic coupling in an inductive loop, as depicted in Fig. 4. The compact structure of the tile,
compatible with commercial superconductor fabrication processes, features a coupler circuit highlighted in
black. The coupler consists of a superconductor loop and a constant voltage source acting as an offset, which
is pumped with the same frequency as the JPOs but at zero phase. Adjusting the pump signal allows the
interaction between JPOs to be programmed in the IM.
An LHZ-compatible superconductive tile comprises six physical JPOs. Four are the main spins (JPOs),
while the remaining two are ancillary bits. The physical coupling values of the main JPOs are identical,
while the coupling values of the ancillary JPOs are twice as large. These coupling values can be modified
by introducing a phase difference between the pump frequencies of the JPOs and the offset phase of the
coupler loop.
A phase difference of 0 corresponds to fully coupled JPOs, while a phase difference of ŽĆ
results in negative coupling. The tile structure solves combinatorial problems with up to four variables,
while scalability is achieved by interacting multiple tiles based on the LHZ architecture. Considering each
JPO as a spin, the total energy of this circuit can be expressed as,

E =

4
’┐Į

i=1
Ji╦£Žāi ŌłÆ Ja1╦£Žāa1

4
’┐Į

i=1
╦£Žāi ŌłÆ Ja2╦£Žāa2

4
’┐Į

i=1
╦£Žāi ŌłÆ Ccnst

4
’┐Į

i=1
╦£Žāi
(7)

where Žāi represents the logical JPOs, and Žāa1 and Žāa2 are the ancillary JPOs. Ji represents the external
field interaction, and Ja1 and Ja2 correspond to the ancillary interactions with the other JPOs. These values
depend on the coupling values determined by physical coupling and the phase of the pump, as stated. The
constant value Ccnst guarantees that the four-body interaction between the logical JPOs (’┐Į4
i=1 Žāi) is always
positive.
The adjustment of parameter values in the superconductive tile can be achieved by modifying the phase
of the pumpŌĆÖs current source. It is crucial to satisfy this constraint in the context of the LHZ structure,
where the number of spins with positive (negative) orientation must always be even, which is achieved by the
ancillary JPOs, and the penalty term should always be negative, which is fulfilled by appropriately adjusting
the parameter Ccnst [22].
Furthermore, it should be noted that the ancillary JPOs are physically decoupled from each other and
do not directly interact. When considering the external field effect on the logical JPOs (Jb) and the value
of the ancillary JPOs (Ja), the expression for the plaquette energy (7) can be rewritten as:

E =

4
’┐Į

i=1
Jb╦£Žāi ŌłÆ (╦£Žā6Ja + ╦£Žā5Ja + Ccnst)

4
’┐Į

i=1
╦£Žāi
(8)

The ancillary interaction described in this equation will result in ground energy values similar to equation
(2), which characterizes the interactions in LHZ. Consequently, these ancillary interactions enable us to
map the current pair-to-pair interaction circuit to the quadratic interaction of a tile required for the LHZ
Hamiltonian implementation. As mentioned earlier, altering the coupling values of the ancillary JPOs allows
us to choose the expected ground states of the tile, enabling the mapping of different problems onto it.
For instance, letŌĆÖs assume that all the logical JPOs have the same coupling value and the same interaction
strength, denoted by Jb. In contrast, we assign random values to the ancillary interactions, Ja, that are
physically twice as strong as the value of the logical interactions (i.e., Ja = 2Jb). Table 1 illustrates the
stable minimum energy states achieved in the circuit that depend on the values the ancillary JPOs settle into.
When the ancillary settle into the |00Ō¤® state, they force the physical JPOs to go to the |1111Ō¤® state. When
we set the ancillas to |01Ō¤® or |10Ō¤®, only two logical JPOs can settle into the |1Ō¤® state, and finally, in case the
ancillas are settled at the |11Ō¤® state, they force the physical JPOs to go to the |0000Ō¤® state. This satisfies the
ground state condition of the LHZ tile, where only even numbers of similar states should exist in a single tile.

6


Figure 4: A tile for the scalable architecture of IM. The structure has six JPOs, four as the logic and two as
the ancilla. The coupler connects all JPO cells and provides interaction between them.

Table 1:
The energy of different arrangements of spins for a sample coupling set tile. Here we consider the
ancillary JPOsŌĆÖ physical coupling twice the logical JPOs.

Physical
JPO state
Ancilla
JPO state
Total
energy

|1111Ō¤®
|00Ō¤®
E = 4Jb ŌłÆ 2Ja ŌłÆ JC = ŌłÆJC
|1110Ō¤®
|00Ō¤® or |11Ō¤®
E = 2Jb ┬▒ 2Ja ŌłÆ JC = 2Jb ŌłÆ JC
|1100Ō¤®
|10Ō¤®
E = ŌłÆJC
|1000Ō¤®
|11Ō¤® or |00Ō¤®
E = ŌłÆ2Jb ┬▒ 2Ja ŌłÆ JC = 2Jb ŌłÆ JC
|0000Ō¤®
|11Ō¤®
E = ŌłÆ4Jb + 2Ja ŌłÆ JC = ŌłÆJC

4
Evaluation and Discussion

4.1
Analytical modeling of Ising Hamiltonian

To evaluate the functionality of the proposed tile circuit, we analytically modeled the Hamiltonian of a
four-body interaction within the tile structure. For this, we have implemented equation 8 by considering
noise using QuTip: Quantum toolbox in Python [30]. In this case, the Hamiltonian formulation was

H =

4
’┐Į

i=1
JiŽā(z)
i
ŌłÆ Ct

4
’┐Į

i=1
Žā(z)
i
+ UN
(9)

where Ji represent external field parameters, while Ct represents the interaction arising from the coupler
(Ct = Žāx
5 ├Ś Ja + Žāx
6 ├Ś Ja + J,C), and the terms Žā(z) correspond to PauliŌĆÖs z matrix.
Additionally, we
incorporate UN as a noise component generated by multiplying a thermal coefficient by a pseudo-random
energy distribution.
The minimum energy states of the tile are investigated by introducing all the possible states and measuring
the minimum energy value of the tile based on its Hamiltonian equation introduced in equation 9. Then,
based on the number of times the circuit is settled on a state, we calculate the distribution probability. The
result for the probability of the states is shown in Fig. 5. Here, the tile settles on the states that the number
of 1ŌĆÖs are even, as shown in Table 1. When we set the external field values to a specific point, with half of

7


Figure 5: Analytical modeling result of a tile that will be used for large-scale integration of IM. Here, the
penalty term is positive, and the external field values are swiped so that the circuit can show all the possible
states.

the interactions being positive and half negative, the function settles only in two ground states as depicted
in Fig. 6. These two cases shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 confirm that the solution of quantum Hamiltonian
agrees with LHZ structure.

Figure 6: Analytical modeling result of a tile that will be used for large-scale integration of IM. The external
field values are fixed so that the circuit only settles on two of the minimum states.

4.2
Analog simulation setup

We selected the MITLL SFQ5ee fabrication process for the proposed superconductor-based spin and tile.
The MITLL process allows for a high current density of 100 ┬ĄA/┬Ąm2 for JJs. This process involves nine
superconductor metal layers that facilitate the wiring and interconnect between JPOs and control circuits.
Our design simulated a JPO with a resonance frequency of 7.5 GHz, which was pumped at 15 GHz.
We introduced thermal noise into the studied circuits to ensure more realistic simulation results. Ther-
mal noise arises from the presence of normal electrons in normal metals and superconductors when the
temperature exceeds absolute zero. This noise has two effects on superconductor circuits. The first effect,
Johnson noise, can be modeled as white noise and applied to the circuitŌĆÖs resistances [31]. The second effect
of thermal noise in the circuit is due to interactions between Cooper pairs and normal electrons in the JJ. As
the temperature increases, this noise causes slight variations in the JJŌĆÖs current-voltage (I-V) characteristic

8


and can be modeled as Brown noise [32]. Fig. 7 illustrates the change in the I-V characteristic of our junction
in the presence of Brown noise at different temperatures. Semi-stochastic white noise sources were added

Figure 7: Effect of Brownian noise on Josephson I-V characteristic.

paralleled to resistances in the circuitŌĆÖs netlist at the sources that apply bias and pump currents. Its value is
given by IN = ŌłÜ4RTKB, where T represents the noise temperature, KB denotes the Boltzmann constant,
and R signifies the resistance value. To analyze the circuitŌĆÖs behavior and specifically observe its oscillation,
we utilized the SPICE-based simulator JoSIM. We performed simulations and obtained time-domain results.
Then fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the time-domain results was calculated to extract the frequency and
phase characteristics. The state of the JPO is determined via its phase.

4.3
Analog simulation results

Fig. 8 illustrates the FFT output of the SQUID loopŌĆÖs voltage obtained from simulating a single JPO cell.
As shown, the resonance frequency of the JPO is precisely at 7.5GHz, half of the IpumpŌĆÖs frequency. We ran
multiple simulations with different random initial conditions. We observed that the measured phase settles
in two distinct values, indicating the presence of two states with a phase difference of ŽĆ.
ItŌĆÖs important to acknowledge that numerical simulators, such as JoSIM, have certain limitations re-
garding time step, simulation duration, and the FFT algorithm. Consequently, the phase states observed
may not be precisely 0 and ŽĆ, exhibiting slight variations. However, these variations are still distinguish-
able, identifying the two distinct phase states. This demonstrates the functionality of the simple JPO and
establishes the |ŽĆŌ¤® state as ŌĆØ1ŌĆØ and the |0Ō¤® state as ŌĆØ0.ŌĆØ To change the interaction between two JPOs, we
can manipulate the phase values in the pump signal. When two JPOs start with the same pump phase,
constructive interference occurs, resulting in maximum coupling between them. Conversely, destructive in-
terference occurs when there is a phase difference of ŽĆ between the JPOs, leading to minimal coupling. The
same destructive and constructive patterns can be used in ancillary JPOs to change the penalty term of the
tile.
To validate the functionality of the tile, we implemented the tile design as depicted in Fig. 4 and compared
the simulation results of the circuit with the Hamiltonian formulation. Initially, we simulated the tile by
applying all possible states to the JPOs in the tile. In this scenario, the ancillary JPOs were set at ŽĆ

2 , and
we initialized the JPOs with random phases selected from the set 0, ŽĆ. In the four-parameter problem, there
exist 16 different states, and in this study, all the states with an even number of 1ŌĆÖs are possible solutions
(see Section 2 and the states shown in Table 1). We conducted 1k simulations; the outcomes are depicted
in Fig. 9. The expected solutions are the eight states with their respective probabilities shown. The slight
differences in the probabilities of the states result from the added noise to the bias and pump sources, as

9


Figure 8: Amplitude and Phase of the Simulated JPO Cell. Following simulation with JoSIM, Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) analysis reveals distinct phase states at the resonance frequency obtained from multiple
simulations.

well as the applied offset to the interaction. Considering the added noise, our current design can settle in
all the ground states in all cases. By setting the ancillary bits at half the phase and fixing the main JPOs

Figure 9: Results for 1k simulations on the 4-spin system with all the same interaction on a 4-node tile for
20ns at random input points. The states we expect are at even parities. The results converge to the right
answer in all of the cases in a noisy environment.

phase values, we performed 1k simulations and observed the results illustrated in Fig. 10. These simulation
results align with the outcomes obtained when the ancillary JPOs were in the |10Ō¤® state, as shown in Table
1.
The results consistently converged to the correct states in all the runs.
As depicted in Fig. 10, the
probabilities of obtaining each state as the answer were equal, and any slight differences in the probabilities
can be attributed to the added noise. These findings agree with the emulation results illustrated in Fig. 6.

10


Figure 10: Simulation result for 1k run on the 4-parameter network with fixed phase values on JPOs on a
4-node complete graph ran for 20ns. The states we expect are |0101Ō¤® and |1010Ō¤®.

5
Summary and Conclusion

Superconductor electronics offer a potential solution for high-speed and low-energy computing compared
to conventional devices. However, their unique properties have been largely overlooked in developing novel
computing applications. In this study, we leveraged the nonlinear phase response of Josephson junctions to
design and simulate a network of oscillators capable of solving Ising Hamiltonian problems.
The Josephson Parametric Oscillators (JPOs), operating at a frequency of 7.5 GHz, are interconnected
through a coupler circuit. By utilizing four logical JPOs and two ancillary JPOs, we constructed a unit cell
with quadratic interaction between JPOs known as a tile, which forms the building block of a large-scale
Ising machine solver using the LHZ architecture.
To validate our design, we studied the Hamiltonian energies of the tile in two different scenarios and
compared them with the numerical simulation results. We simulated it in a noisy environment, and the circuit
stabilized in a few nanoseconds in all cases. The comparison between the calculation and numerical simulation
showed a perfect match and satisfied the LHZ conditions. Therefore, the tile is suitable for implementation
in the LHZ structure. Overall, our findings demonstrate the immense potential of superconductor electronics
in computing, particularly for tackling computationally intensive problems through the utilization of Ising
solvers based on Josephson junctions.

acknowledgments

This work has been funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under the project Expedition: Discover
(Design and Integration of Superconducting Computation for Ventures beyond Exascale Realization) grant
number 2124453.
The authors thank Beyza Zeynep Ucpinar, Mustafa Altay Karamuftuoglu, and Yasemin Kopur for their help
on this work.

11


References

[1] S. E. Thompson and S. Parthasarathy, MooreŌĆÖs law: the future of Si microelectronics., Materials Today
9, 20 (2006).

[2] F. Peper, The End of MooreŌĆÖs Law: Opportunities for Natural Computing?, New Generation Computing
35, 253 (2017).

[3] S. Aaronson, Guest Column: NP-complete problems and physical reality, ACM SIGACT News 36, 30
(2005).

[4] E. Ising, Beitrag zur Theorie des Ferromagnetismus, Zeitschrift f┬©ur Physik 31, 253 (1925).

[5] V. S. Denchev, S. Boixo, S. V. Isakov, N. Ding, R. Babbush, V. Smelyanskiy, J. Martinis, and H. Neven,
What is the Computational Value of Finite-Range Tunneling?, Physical Review X 6, 031015 (2016).

[6] Y. Imanaka, T. Anazawa, F. Kumasaka, and H. Jippo, Optimization of the composition in a composite
material for microelectronics application using the Ising model, Scientific Reports 11, 3057 (2021).

[7] A. Marandi, Z. Wang, K. Takata, R. L. Byer, and Y. Yamamoto, Network of time-multiplexed optical
parametric oscillators as a coherent Ising machine, Nature Photonics 8, 937 (2014).

[8] T. Inagaki, K. Inaba, R. Hamerly, K. Inoue, Y. Yamamoto, and H. Takesue, Largescale Ising spin
network based on degenerate optical parametric oscillators, Nature Photonics 10, 415 (2016).

[9] D. I. Albertsson and A. Rusu, Highly reconfigurable oscillator-based Ising Machine through quasiperiodic
modulation of coupling strength, Scientific Reports 13, 4005 (2023).

[10] A. Mallick, Z. Zhao, M. K. Bashar, S. Alam, M. M. Islam, Y. Xiao, Y. Xu, A. Aziz, V. Narayanan,
K. Ni, and N. Shukla, CMOS-compatible Ising machines built using bistable latches coupled through
ferroelectric transistor arrays, Scientific Reports 13, 1515 (2023).

[11] K. Y. Camsari, R. Faria, B. M. Sutton, and S. Datta, Stochastic p-bits for invertible logic, Physical
Review X 7, 031014 (2017).

[12] R. Hamerly, T. Inagaki, P. L. McMahon, D. Venturelli, A. Marandi, T. Onodera, E. Ng, C. Langrock,
K. Inaba, T. Honjo, et al., Experimental investigation of performance differences between coherent ising
machines and a quantum annealer, Science advances 5, eaau0823 (2019).

[13] M. Yamaoka, C. Yoshimura, M. Hayashi, T. Okuyama, H. Aoki, and H. Mizuno, A 20k-Spin Ising Chip
to Solve Combinatorial Optimization Problems With CMOS Annealing, IEEE Journal of Solid-State
Circuits 51, 303 (2016).

[14] J. Chou, S. Bramhavar, S. Ghosh, and W. Herzog, Analog Coupled Oscillator Based Weighted Ising
Machine, Scientific Reports 9, 14786 (2019).

[15] T. Wang and J. Roychowdhury, Oim: Oscillator-Based Ising Machines for Solving Combinatorial Opti-
misation Problems, in Unconventional Computation and Natural Computation, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science (Springer International Publishing, 2019) pp. 232ŌĆō256.

[16] S. Razmkhah and P. Febvre, Superconductor Quantum Electronics, Beyond-CMOS: State of the Art
and Trends, 295 (2023).

[17] I. I. Soloviev, N. V. Klenov, S. V. Bakurskiy, M. Y. Kupriyanov, A. L. Gudkov, and A. S. Sidorenko,
Beyond MooreŌĆÖs technologies: operation principles of a superconductor alternative, Beilstein Journal of
Nanotechnology 8, 2689 (2017).

12


[18] K. Berggren, Quantum computing with superconductors, Proceedings of the IEEE 92, 1630 (2004).

[19] R. Hamerly, T. Inagaki, P. L. McMahon, D. Venturelli, A. Marandi, T. Onodera, E. Ng, E. Rieffel, M.
Fejer, S. Utsunomiya, et al., Quantum vs. optical annealing: benchmarking the OPO Ising machine and
D-wave, in CLEO: QELS Fundamental Science, Optica Publishing Group, pp. FTu4AŌĆō2 (2018).

[20] V. Choi, Minor-embedding in adiabatic quantum computation: I. the parameter setting problem. Quan-
tum Information Processing, Quantum Information Processing 7, 193 (2008).

[21] P. Krantz, A. Bengtsson, M. Simoen, S. Gustavsson, V. Shumeiko, W. D. Oliver, C. M. Wilson, P.
Delsing, and J. Bylander, Single-shot read-out of a superconducting qubit using a Josephson parametric
oscillator, Nature Communications 7, 11417 (2016).

[22] W. Lechner, P. Hauke, and P. Zoller, A quantum annealing architecture with all-to-all connectivity from
local interactions, Science Advances 1, e1500838 (2015).

[23] S. Razmkhah, A. Bozbey, and P. Febvre, Superconductor modulation circuits for Qubit control at
microwave frequencies, arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.06667 (2022).

[24] Y. Susa and H. Nishimori, Variational optimization of the quantum annealing schedule for the Lechner-
Hauke-Zoller scheme, Physical Review A 103, 022619 (2021)

[25] K. K. Likharev, Dynamics of Josephson junctions and circuits (Routledge, 2022).

[26] Z. R. Lin, K. Inomata, K. Koshino, W. D. Oliver, Y. Nakamura, J. S. Tsai, and T. Yamamoto, Josephson
parametric phase-locked oscillator and its application to dispersive readout of superconducting qubits,
Nature Communications 5, 4480 (2014).

[27] Y. Salath┬┤e, M. Mondal, M. Oppliger, J. Heinsoo, P. Kurpiers, A. Poto╦ćcnik, A. Mezzacapo, U. Las
Heras, L. Lamata, E. Solano, S. Filipp, and A. Wallraff, Digital Quantum Simulation of Spin Models
with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics, Physical Review X 5, 021027 (2015)

[28] R. Barends, A. Shabani, L. Lamata, J. Kelly, A. Mezzacapo, U. L. Heras, R. Babbush, A. G. Fowler and
et al., Digitized adiabatic quantum computing with a superconducting circuit, Nature 534, 222 (2016).

[29] W. Zimmermann, E. H. Brandt, M. Bauer, E. Seider, and L. Genzel, Optical conductivity of BCS
superconductors with arbitrary purity, Physica C: Superconductivity 183, 99 (1991).

[30] J. Johansson, P. Nation, and F. Nori, Qutip 2: A python framework for the dynamics of open quantum
systems, Computer Physics Communications 184, 1234 (2013).

[31] T. Hall, J. A. Delport, and C. J. Fourie, Determination of the Bit Error Rate Due to Thermal Noise
Using JoSIM Superconducting Circuit Simulator and the Monte Carlo Method, IEEE Transactions on
Applied Superconductivity 33, 1 (2023).

[32] V. Ambegaokar and B. I. Halperin, Voltage Due to Thermal Noise in the DC Josephson Effect, Physical
Review Letters 22, 1364 (1969).

13


