Perfect Coulomb drag in a dipolar excitonic insulator

Phuong X. Nguyen1, Liguo Ma1, Raghav Chaturvedi1, Kenji Watanabe2, Takashi 

Taniguchi2, Jie Shan1,3,4*, Kin Fai Mak1,3,4*

1School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA

2National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Japan

3Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA

4Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Ithaca, NY, USA

*Email: jie.shan@cornell.edu; kinfai.mak@cornell.edu

These authors contributed equally: Phuong X. Nguyen, Liguo Ma, Raghav Chaturvedi

Excitonic insulators (EIs), arising in semiconductors when the electron-hole binding 
energy exceeds the band gap1–3, are a solid-state prototype for bosonic phases of 
matter4–12. Unlike the charged excitations that are frozen and unable to transport 
current, the neutral electron-hole pairs (excitons) are free to move in EIs. However, 
it is intrinsically difficult to demonstrate exciton transport in bulk EI candidates13–18. 
The recently emerged dipolar EIs based on Coulomb-coupled atomic double 
layers4,19–24 open the possibility to realize exciton transport across the insulator 
because separate electrical contacts can be made to the electron and hole layers. Here 
we show that the strong interlayer excitonic correlation at equal electron and hole 
densities in the MoSe2/WSe2 double layers separated by a 2-nm barrier gives rise to 
‘perfect’ Coulomb drag. A charge current in one layer induces an equal but opposite 
drag current in the other. The drag current ratio remains above 0.9 up to about 20 K 
for low exciton densities. As exciton density increases above the Mott density25, the 
excitons dissociate into the electron-hole plasma abruptly, and only weak Fermi liquid 
frictional drag is observed. Our experiment moves a step closer to realizing exciton 
circuitry26 and superfluidity.

Main
The dipolar excitonic insulator (EI) of interest is realized in double layer structures made 
of two semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayers that support a 
type-II band alignment21 (Fig. 1a). The two TMD monolayers, which are separated by a 
thin dielectric spacer, are separately contacted by metallic electrodes and form the two 
plates of a parallel-plate capacitor (Fig. 1b). The application of an interlayer bias voltage, 
𝑉b, splits the electron and hole chemical potentials by 𝑒𝑉b, and reduces the charge gap to
ƐG − 𝑒𝑉b for quasiparticle excitations from the zero-bias band gap, ƐG, of the double layer 
(Fig. 1a). (Here 𝑒 is the elementary charge.) When the charge gap becomes smaller than 
the exciton binding energy, ƐG − 𝑒𝑉b < Ɛb, spontaneous formation of dipolar (interlayer) 
excitons is favorable. An EI has been demonstrated by recent thermodynamic 


measurements21,24. The separate electron- and hole-contacts to the EI also provide an 
electrical reservoir for dipolar excitons with continuously tunable density, 𝑛X, and 
chemical potential, 𝑒𝑉b (Ref. 19,20). 

The Coulomb drag effect is a sensitive probe of the correlation effect between two spatially 
separated conductors27. The Coulomb interactions between the two layers here enable an 
electric current flowing in one layer (𝐼drive) to induce a voltage drop (𝑉drag) in the other 
(Fig. 1d). If the second layer is part of a closed circuit, a net current (𝐼drag) will flow in that 
circuit (Fig. 1c). The drag current is typically much smaller than the drive current because 
the Coulomb interactions are heavily screened. Here we show essentially perfect Coulomb 
drag up to about 20 K in the dipolar EI based on TMD electron-hole double layers. Such a 
large drag current ratio (𝐼drag/𝐼drive) has been observed only in the context of exciton 
transport in the quantum Hall regime demonstrated in Coulomb-coupled quantum wells28–

30 and graphene double layers31–34. In contrast to the high magnetic fields required in these 
earlier studies, the strong exciton binding under zero magnetic field and the dispersive 
excitonic band in TMD double layers present a new regime for the studies of exciton 
transport35–37.

Device operation and excitonic insulator
Our sample consists of Coulomb-coupled MoSe2/WSe2 double layers with nearly 
symmetric top and bottom gates (Fig. 1b). Details on the device design and fabrication are 
described in Methods. These devices are divided into the channel and contact regions, in 
which the two TMD monolayers are separated by thin (5-6 layers) and thick (10-20 nm)
hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) spacers, respectively. They are angle-misaligned to further 
suppress interlayer tunneling in the channel region. The MoSe2 (Mo) and WSe2 (W) layers 
are contacted by bismuth and platinum electrodes to achieve electron and hole transport 
measurements, respectively. The interlayer bias voltage 𝑉b is applied to inject electron-
hole pairs into the channel. The top and bottom gate voltages (𝑉tg and 𝑉bg, respectively) 
further allow independent control of the electron-hole density imbalance in the double layer 
through the symmetric combination, 𝑉g = (𝑉tg + 𝑉bg)/2, and the perpendicular electric 
field through the antisymmetric combination, Δ = (𝑉bg − 𝑉tg)/2. In the channel region, 
the electric field reduces the band gap; but in the contact regions, because of the much 
thicker hBN spacer, Δ is able to heavily electron- and hole-dope the Mo and W layers, 
respectively, to substantially reduce the metal-semiconductor junction resistances. Junction 
resistances on the order of several kΩ’s at 1.5 K can be achieved. The contact regions are 
thus charge reservoirs for efficient exciton injection into the channel region21. 

We identify the EI phase of the double layer using the capacitance measurements as 
reported in an earlier study21 (Methods, Extended Data Fig. 2). Both the penetration (𝐶P) 
and interlayer (𝐶I) capacitances are measured as a function of 𝑉g and 𝑉b at Δ = 5.5 V and
temperature T ≈ 1.5 K. They characterize the charge and exciton compressibilities21, 
respectively. Figure 2a illustrates 𝐶P normalized by its geometric value (𝐶gg). The large 


penetration capacitance at small bias voltages marks the ii region with both layers being 
charge-neutral. Its boundary, denoted by two black dashed lines, traces the band edge of 
the electron and hole layers. Particularly, the band edge of the hole layer is fixed at 𝑉g = 0 
because the layer is grounded. Varying the gate voltage across each boundary introduces 
doping in one of the layers (the pi and in regions). At sufficiently large bias voltages, both 
layers become doped (the pn region). Further, the simultaneous interlayer capacitance 
measurement (Extended Data Fig. 2b) identifies the dash-dotted line, above which the 
electron-hole pairs are injected into the channel. The enclosed triangular region is therefore 
an EI, which at low temperatures is charge insulating but hosts an equilibrium dipolar 
exciton fluid. The exciton binding energy Ɛb ≈ 30 meV is approximately given by the 
difference between the bias voltage at the tip of the triangle (0.52 V), beyond which the 
excitons dissociate into free electrons and holes, and the base of the triangle (0.49 V), at 
which excitons are just injected into the double layer channel. The channel band gap ƐG is 
reduced from the intrinsic value of 1.6 eV to 0.52 eV by antisymmetric gating Δ.

Perfect Coulomb drag
We study Coulomb drag in our device using the drag counterflow geometry illustrated in 
Fig. 1c.  Specifically, we drive an electron current in the Mo layer using a small ac in-plane 
bias (5-10 mV) and measure the drag current in the W layer (Methods). Figure 2b and 2c 
show, respectively, the 𝑉g- and 𝑉b-dependence of the drive and drag currents at 1.5 K (see 
Extended Data Fig. 3 for results from driving the W layer). As expected, a finite 𝐼drive is 
observed whenever the Mo layer is turned on, that is, in the in, pn and EI regions; and the 
current increases with increasing electron doping. The discrepancy between the transport 
and capacitance results near the Mo band edge in the in region is likely related to the large 
contact resistance in the Mo layer in the device (see Methods and Extended Data Fig. 5).
In contrast, a 𝐼drag hot spot is observed only near the EI region; it decays rapidly with both 
increasing 𝑉b and 𝑉g. The former increases the exciton density, and the latter, the electron-
hole density imbalance. In addition, 𝐼drag always flows in the opposite direction of 𝐼drive
(Extended Data Fig. 4).

Below we focus on the case of equal electron and hole densities in the double layer (along 
the white dashed line in Fig. 2a). The more general case of finite electron-hole density 
imbalance involving a Bose-Fermi mixture38,39 and screened excitonic interactions will be 
examined in future studies. Figure 3a shows the current amplitude in two layers at 1.5 K
as a function of 𝑉b or electron-hole pair density, 𝑛P. The pair density is obtained from the 
interlayer capacitance measurement, 𝑛P = ∫

𝐶I
𝑒 𝑑𝑉b (Extended Data Fig. 2c). The drive 

current turns on sharply at 𝑉b ≈ (ƐG − Ɛb)/𝑒 when excitons are first injected into the 
channel, followed by a moderate increase with increasing 𝑉b. The small deviations of the 
drive current from a smooth monotonic 𝑉b-dependence are device specific; they are likely 
related to the junction imperfections and require systematic studies to understand the 
origin. Remarkably, 𝐼drag is nearly identical to 𝐼drive (but with opposite sign) until the bias 
reaches a threshold, 𝑉b ≈ ƐG/𝑒, beyond which 𝐼drag vanishes abruptly. The corresponding 


pair density is 𝑛M ≈ 3.2 × 1011 cm-2. Figure 3a also shows that the tunneling current 
𝐼tunnel between the two layers is negligible and cannot compromise the drag measurements.

The lower panel of Fig. 3a shows the measured drag current ratio at 1.5 K. It displays 
‘perfect’ Coulomb drag in the EI region and negligible Coulomb drag in the free electron 
and hole region with 𝑛P > 𝑛M. The temperature and pair density dependence of the drag 
current ratio is summarized in Fig. 3b, and representative density line cuts are illustrated 
in Fig. 3c. In general, Coulomb drag decreases with increasing temperature and pair density 
with the exception of the region near 𝑛𝑀 at low temperatures, where a non-monotonic
temperature dependence is observed. Essentially perfect Coulomb drag (𝐼drag/𝐼drive >
0.9) persists up to about 20 K at low pair densities. 

When exciton transport dominates over the free carrier transport in the double layer 
channel, perfect Coulomb drag is expected because a steady current of electrons driven 
through one layer has to be accompanied by an equal current of holes in the other layer28. 
In contrast, when the electrons and holes are unbound, only small frictional drag is 
expected27. In the case of Fermi liquids, the phase space of electrons and holes available 
for Coulomb drag increases with temperature, and the drag current ratio scales 
quadratically with temperature at low temperatures27. The observed ‘perfect’ Coulomb 
drag in our experiment therefore demonstrates the dominance of exciton transport in the EI 
region at low temperatures. The temperature dependent Coulomb drag in this regime can 
be captured by the exciton thermal dissociation effect40. In this simple model (solid lines 
in Fig. 3c), the frictional drag and the contact resistance are negligible, and the exciton to
charge carrier mobility ratio is the only fitting parameter and assumed to be temperature 
independent (Methods). The excitons can also be ionized into an electron-hole plasma at 
low temperatures by the state filling effect when the pair density exceeds the Mott 
density40. The latter corresponds to the abrupt vanishing of the drag current near 𝑛M at low 
temperatures, and 𝑛M is the Mott density. In the high-density electron-hole plasma regime, 
Coulomb drag increases with temperature at low temperatures by the phase space argument 
(𝑛p = 5 × 1011, Fig. 3c).

Excitonic insulator-to-metal transition
We measure the drag resistance of our device to directly probe the transition from an EI to 
an electron-hole plasma using the open-circuit geometry shown in Fig. 1d. Here we bias 
𝐼drive in the Mo layer and measure the drag voltage drop in the W layer, 𝑉drag, by a 
voltmeter with 100 MΩ input impedance. In this measurement geometry, the drag 
resistance, 𝑅drag = 𝑉drag/𝐼drive, reflects the charge resistance of the double layer (see the 
circuit model in Extended Data Fig. 1d and Methods). It is ultimately connected to the drag 
current measurement above. In the EI region at low temperatures (where the exciton 
conductivity far exceeds the charge conductivity and the frictional drag conductivity), the 

two quantities are simply related, 

𝐼drag
𝐼drive =

1

1+𝑅WC/𝑅drag, via the contact resistance (𝑅WC) in 

the drag layer (see Extended Data Fig. 1f). The good agreement between the measured drag 


current ratio and the inferred one from 𝑅drag using 𝑅WC ≈ 7 kΩ in Extended Data Fig. 7
supports the validity of the relation for a wide range of temperatures and pair densities. The 
contact resistance value is independently verified by a two-terminal resistance 
measurement in the W layer (Extended Data Fig. 5).

Figure 4a shows the temperature dependence of 𝑅drag at varying pair densities. As 
temperature decreases, 𝑅drag increases for small 𝑛P’s (an insulating behavior) and 
decreases for large 𝑛P’s (a metallic behavior). A variation in 𝑅drag by nearly six orders of 
magnitude is observed at 1.5 K. On the metallic side, a Fermi liquid frictional drag, 𝑅drag ≈
𝐴𝑇2, is observed in the low-temperature limit 27,41 (Extended Data Fig. 6). And a non-
monotonic temperature dependence is also visible near the Mott density 𝑛M. 

We analyze the observed insulator-to-metal transition by identifying the resistance at the 
critical density, 𝑅c, as the one that displays a power-law temperature dependence42 (dashed 
line). The corresponding density agrees well with the Mott density 𝑛𝑀. We then normalize 
the temperature dependent 𝑅drag at other densities by 𝑅c. We are able to collapse all the 
temperature dependent resistances 𝑅drag/𝑅c into two groups, exhibiting an insulating and 
metallic behavior, respectively, by normalizing 𝑇 using a density-dependent temperature 
scale, 𝑇0 (inset, Fig. 4a). The temperature scale 𝑇0 vanishes continuously towards the Mott 
density 𝑛𝑀 from both sides (Extended Data Fig. 9). On the insulating side, it is well 
correlated with the EI charge gap (≈ ∫ (𝐶P/𝐶gg) 𝑑𝑉g) obtained from the penetration 
capacitance measurement. The charge gap summarized in Fig. 4b carries a relatively large 
systematic uncertainty induced by the finite ac bias voltage in the penetration capacitance 
measurement. On the metallic side, we summarize in Fig. 4b the coefficient 𝐴 from fitting 
the temperature dependent 𝑅drag to 𝐴𝑇2 at low temperatures. The coefficient increases by 
three orders of magnitude when 𝑛P approaches 𝑛M from above. The combined results of a 
continuously vanishing charge gap (and 𝑇0) and a diverging 𝐴 coefficient when the pair 
density approaches the Mott density from two sides suggest a possible continuous excitonic 
insulator-to-metal transition43.

We make a further interesting observation that the coefficient 𝐴 from our experiment scales 
with pair density as 𝐴 ∝ (𝑛P − 𝑛M)−3 (solid line, Fig. 4b). This resembles, but at the same 
time differs from, the theoretical prediction of 𝐴 ∝ (𝑛P)−3 for frictional drag from the 
interlayer Coulomb scattering27,44. The reset of the pair density by the Mott density 
suggests a vanishing effective electron/hole Fermi energy (or a diverging electron/hole 
effective mass) at 𝑛M (Ref. 27,44). The reset is beyond the current understanding. Future 
theoretical studies taking into account the BEC-BCS crossover45 and the possible Mott 
transition at 𝑛M are required to understand the density dependence of 𝐴 as well as the non-
monotonic temperature dependence of 𝑅drag near 𝑛M (BEC and BCS stand for Bose-
Einstein condensation and Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer, respectively).


Conclusions
We have demonstrated essentially perfect Coulomb drag up to about 20 K in a gate-tunable 
excitonic insulator realized in TMD atomic double layers separated by a thin hBN barrier. 
The drag resistance measurement has further revealed an excitonic insulator-to-metal 
transition at the Mott density. These studies are enabled by successfully establishing 
separate electrical contacts to the electron and hole components of the excitonic insulator. 
The perfect Coulomb drag here demonstrates pure exciton transport across the excitonic 
insulator. The relatively large contact resistance of the present device limits the ability to 
settle whether the exciton transport here is dissipationless, that is, whether there is exciton 
superfluity. Future multiple exciton terminal measurements that can drive an exciton 
current and simultaneously measure the exciton chemical potential drop along the channel 
should be able to set strict limits on any dissipation occurring in the exciton channel.

Methods
Device design and fabrication
In Extended Data Fig. 1a,b, we show an optical image and a schematic for our dual-gated 
WSe2/hBN/MoSe2 transport device to illustrate the basic design geometry. The top and 
bottom gates consist of few layer graphite gate electrodes and ~10 nm thick hBN 
dielectrics. The overlap region between the top gate, bottom gate and the TMD double layer
defines the measurement channel and the two exciton contacts, which are shaded red and
blue, respectively, in the optical image. In the channel region (region I in the schematic),
the hBN barrier is around 1.5-2 nm thick (measured by atomic force microscopy); this 
thickness is optimized to suppress the interlayer tunneling current while maintaining a large 
exciton binding energy (~30 meV). In the exciton contact regions (region II in schematic), 
the two thick hBN barriers (10-20 nm) result in heavily doped regions of free electrons and 
holes (no exciton binding) under a perpendicular electric field; these regions serve as 
electrical reservoirs for efficient exciton injection and absorption in and out of the channel. 

Outside the channel region, the flow of exciton must be converted into flows of free 
electron and holes in the electrical wires. It is therefore crucial to have good electrical
contacts to the monolayer TMDs for simultaneous electron and hole transport at low 
temperatures (down to 1.5 K).  We chose platinum (Pt) that has a large work function to 
match the valence band edge of monolayer WSe2 (Ref. 46); this consistently yields < 10 kΩ
contact resistance at temperatures down to 1.5 K. For the monolayer MoSe2 conduction 
band edge, we used bismuth (Bi) 47, a semimetal with a small work function; it can also 
achieve < 10 kΩ contact resistance at T = 1.5 K but has a lower yield compared to the Pt
contacts. 

In addition, we designed a sample geometry such that the metal-TMD contact regions
(region III in the schematic) are gated by only one gate (as seen in the optical image, the 
WSe2 contact pins W10 to W14 are covered only by the top gate, and the MoSe2 contact 
pins Mo6 to Mo9 are covered only by the bottom gate). With this specific design and the 
large perpendicular electric field from the antisymmetric gate voltage Δ = 5.5 V (large 
negative top gate and positive bottom gate voltages), we guarantee that the metal-TMD


contact regions are heavily doped (more than the exciton contact regions) by holes for Pt-
WSe2 and by electrons for Bi-MoSe2 for low contact resistances. Note that it remains
challenging to obtain a device with multiple good contacts in each layer and a good
geometry for exciton injection, mainly due to the variability of the mechanical stacking 
and microfabrication process detailed below. For our main device at T = 1.5 K, all five 
WSe2 contacts (W10 to W14) are around 5-7 kΩ in contact resistance; the two MoSe2
contacts (Mo8 and Mo9) are around 5 kΩ; the MoSe2 contact Mo7 is around 3 MΩ; and
the MoSe2 contact Mo6 was mechanically broken during fabrication.

We fabricated our device using the layer-by-layer dry transfer technique reported by Ref.
48. The flakes were obtained from mechanical exfoliation of bulk TMD crystals (HQ 
Graphene) onto Si/SiO2 substrates. The layers were then picked up sequentially at ~50 °C 
using a polymer stamp made of a thin layer of polycarbonate on a polypropylene-
carbonate-coated polydimethylsiloxane block. At each step, careful alignment of the layers 
(up to 1 um lateral precision) is essential to achieve the ideal device geometry, especially 
for the exciton contacts. The completed stack (9 layers in total) was then released onto an 
amorphous quartz substrate with pre-patterned Pt electrodes to make contacts to the WSe2
monolayer and to the gate electrodes. The residual polycarbonate film was removed in 
chloroform and isopropanol. Amorphous quartz substrates were chosen for minimal 
parasitic capacitance background. The top graphite gate was then etched to define multiple 
contacts for the WSe2 layer. We used standard e-beam lithography followed by reactive-ion 
etching by oxygen plasma (Oxford Plasmalab80Plus). Lastly, we made Bi contacts to the 
MoSe2 layer by a second e-beam lithographic step to define the contact regions, followed 
by Bi deposition in a thermal evaporator at a rate of 0.5 Å/s. Since Bi oxidizes in air, we 
evaporated the metal as the last step to guarantee the best MoSe2-Bi interface; we also
cannot use the standard pre-patterned electrodes scheme for WSe2 on Pt. 

Coulomb drag measurements
We examine the exciton transport properties using two different configurations: the open-
circuit and closed-circuit Coulomb drag measurements. Extended Data Fig. 1c,d show the 
circuit diagrams. In order to choose the driving layer, we first performed resistance 
measurements on each TMD layer separately to determine the contact resistances for each 
layer (Extended Data Fig. 5). We chose the Mo layer as the driving layer because of its 
much larger contact resistance (up to 3 MΩ) compared to that in the W layer (about 7 kΩ).
As a result of the large Mo contact resistance, a proper closed-circuit Coulomb drag 
measurement cannot be performed if we chose the W layer as the driving layer because it 
would act like an open-circuit element. 

We applied a 10 mV (RMS) AC bias voltage at 7.33 Hz to drive the Mo layer through a 1:1 
voltage transformer, which was connected to a 10 kΩ potentiometer to distribute the AC
voltage on the two ends of the driving layer. This can reduce the AC coupling between the 
TMD layers by minimizing the AC interlayer potential difference in the channel. A DC
voltage source was also connected to middle of the potentiometer to apply the interlayer 
bias voltage 𝑉𝑏 between the driving (Mo) and the drag (W) layers. We further connected a 
150 kΩ resistor in series with the driving layer; we measured the voltage drop across this 
resistor to obtain the driving current.  


In the closed-circuit measurement, we shorted the drag layer so that a drag current can flow. 
We used a current preamplifier and a SR830 lock-in amplifier to measure the drag current. 
In the open-circuit measurement, we connected the two ends of the drag layer to a voltage 
amplifier with 100 MΩ input impedance and directly measured the voltage drop between
the two ends using a SR830 lock-in amplifier in order to obtain the drag resistance.

We carried all of the measurements in a closed-cycle He4 cryostat (Oxford TeslatronPT) 
down to 1.5 K temperature. The measurement results are largely independent of the 
excitation amplitude (3–20 mV) and frequency (7 Hz to 37 Hz).

Capacitance measurements
Details of the capacitance measurements have been reported by Ref. 21. In short, we 
measured the penetration capacitance of the bilayer system to determine the electrostatic 
phase diagram. We applied a 5 mV (RMS) AC bias voltage at 737 Hz to the bottom gate,
which induces a change in the carrier density, 𝑑𝑛, in the top gate. This density change was 
measured by a low-temperature capacitance bridge based on a GaAs high-electron-
mobility-transistor (HEMT). We also measured the interlayer capacitance between the 
TMD layers to determine the pair density in the channel. We applied a 5 mV (RMS) bias
voltage at 1.577 kHz to the Mo layer and collected the displacement current from the W 
layer. The in-phase component is the tunneling current while the 90-degree out-of-phase 
component is proportional to the change in the pair density, 𝑑𝑛𝑃; the complex current was
measured by the low-temperature HEMT transimpedance amplifier and the SR830 lock-in 
amplifier. 

Modeling the Coulomb drag ratio and drag resistance
Extended Data Fig. 1e shows a circuit model that describes the electron, hole and exciton 
current flows in the bilayer. For a given applied in-plane electric field 𝐸e in the Mo layer, 
the current density 𝐽e in the same layer has two contributions, one due to free electrons with 
conductivity 𝜎e = 𝑛e𝑒𝜇e and the other due to excitons with conductivity 𝜎X = 𝑛X𝑒𝜇X. 
Similarly, the current density in the drag layer 𝐽h has contributions from the free holes 
(𝜎h = 𝑛h𝑒𝜇h) and the excitons (𝜎X). [Here 𝑛e(h) and 𝜇e(h) denote the free electron (hole)
density and mobility, respectively.] The transport in the bilayer system can be described by 
a conductivity tensor Σ (Ref. 49) as:

(𝐽e
𝐽h) = Σ (𝐸e

𝐸h) = ( 𝜎X + 𝜎e
−𝜎X − 𝜎D

−𝜎X − 𝜎D
𝜎X + 𝜎h ) (𝐸e

𝐸h).
(1)

The drag conductivity 𝜎D describes the frictional drag from the free electrons and free 
holes. For the open-circuit measurement, we have 𝐽h = 0 and can obtain the drag resistance 
(for a channel length approximately equal to the channel width, see Extended Data Fig. 1a) 
as:

𝑅drag ≈

𝐸h
𝐽e =

𝜎X+𝜎D
det Σ .
(2)


For the closed-circuit measurement, the drag layer acts like a battery with an external load 
resistance equal to the total contact resistance in the W layer, 𝑅WC; we have 𝐸h ≈ −𝐽h𝑅WC
for a channel length approximately equal to the channel width. We can obtain an expression 
for the drag current ratio:

|
𝐽h
𝐽e| ≈

𝜎X+𝜎D

𝜎X+𝜎e+(det Σ)𝑅WC =

1

𝜎X+𝜎e
𝜎X+𝜎D+

𝑅WC
𝑅drag 

. 
(3)

Note that the final result on the right of Eqn. (3) is exact and independent of the channel 
geometry because the geometry dependence is cancelled in the factor 

𝑅WC
𝑅drag . Finally, by 

assuming 𝜎X ≫ 𝜎e, 𝜎D, which is a good approximation for 𝑛P < 𝑛M and at low 
temperatures, we get  |

𝐽h
𝐽e| ≈

1

1+

𝑅WC
𝑅drag 

as discussed in the main text; this approximate result 

is equivalent to a lumped circuit diagram shown in Extended Data Fig. 1f. Based on the 
measured drag resistance and the drag current ratio, we can confirm that this approximate 
expression works well for a wide range of exciton densities and temperatures for 𝑅WC ≈
7 𝑘Ω (Extended Data Fig. 7). Moreover, independent two-terminal measurements verify 
𝑅WC ≈ 7 𝑘Ω (Extended Data Fig. 5).

Temperature dependence of the drag current ratio
In the EI phase (𝑛P < 𝑛M), we can assume small frictional drag (𝜎X ≫ 𝜎D) and small 
contact resistance (𝑅WC ≪ 𝜎e

−1) and obtain

|
𝐽h
𝐽e| ≈

σX

𝜎X+𝜎e =

𝑛X

𝑛X+𝑛e(𝜇e/𝜇X) . 
(4)

We can use the Saha equation to estimate the free carrier density due to thermal 
dissociations of excitons at finite temperatures 40,49:

𝑛e2

𝑛X =

𝑘B𝑇

2𝜋ħ2/m∗ 𝑒−𝜀b/𝑘B𝑇, 
(5)

where 𝑚∗ is the exciton effective mass. For a fixed pair density 𝑛P = 𝑛e + 𝑛X, the exciton 
binding energy ℇb can be obtained from penetration capacitance measurements (Extended 
Data Fig. 8). We can then solve for 𝑛𝑒 and 𝑛𝑋 using Eqn. (5) and fit the experimental 
temperature dependence of the drag current ratio using Eqn. (4). The only fitting parameter 
is the mobility ratio (𝜇𝑒/𝜇𝑋), which is 2, 2.8 and 3.3 for 𝑛𝑃 = 1, 2 and 31011 cm-2, 
respectively.

Acknowledgements
We thank Allan MacDonald, Liang Fu, Sankar Das Sarma, Peter Littlewood and Erich 
Mueller for many helpful discussions. 


References
1.
Jérome, D., Rice, T. M. & Kohn, W. Excitonic Insulator. Phys. Rev. 158, 462–475 
(1967).

2.
HALPERIN, B. I. & RICE, T. M. Possible Anomalies at a Semimetal-Semiconductor 
Transistion. Rev. Mod. Phys. 40, 755–766 (1968).

3.
Keldysh, L. V. & Kopaev, Y. V. Possible instability of the semimetallic state toward 
coulomb interaction. Fiz Tverd Tela 6, 2791 (1964).

4.
Fogler, M. M., Butov, L. V. & Novoselov, K. S. High-temperature superfluidity with 
indirect excitons in van der Waals heterostructures. Nat. Commun. 5, 4555 (2014).

5.
Su, J.-J. & MacDonald, A. H. How to make a bilayer exciton condensate flow. Nat. 
Phys. 4, 799–802 (2008).

6.
Lozovik, Y. E. & Yudson, V. I. A new mechanism for superconductivity: pairing 
between spatially separated electrons and holes.

7.
Zhu, X., Littlewood, P. B., Hybertsen, M. S. & Rice, T. M. Exciton Condensate in 
Semiconductor Quantum Well Structures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 1633–1636 (1995).

8.
Butov, L. V. Condensation and pattern formation in cold exciton gases in coupled 
quantum wells. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 16, R1577 (2004).

9.
López Ríos, P., Perali, A., Needs, R. J. & Neilson, D. Evidence from Quantum Monte 
Carlo Simulations of Large-Gap Superfluidity and BCS-BEC Crossover in Double 
Electron-Hole Layers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 177701 (2018).

10. Conti, S. et al. Chester Supersolid of Spatially Indirect Excitons in Double-Layer 

Semiconductor Heterostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 057001 (2023).

11. Joglekar, Y. N., Balatsky, A. V. & Das Sarma, S. Wigner supersolid of excitons in 

electron-hole bilayers. Phys. Rev. B 74, 233302 (2006).

12. Baranov, M. A., Dalmonte, M., Pupillo, G. & Zoller, P. Condensed Matter Theory of 

Dipolar Quantum Gases. Chem. Rev. 112, 5012–5061 (2012).

13. Cercellier, H. et al. Evidence for an Excitonic Insulator Phase in 1T-TiSe2. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 99, 146403 (2007).

14. Kogar, A. et al. Signatures of exciton condensation in a transition metal 

dichalcogenide. Science 358, 1314–1317 (2017).

15. Wakisaka, Y. et al. Excitonic Insulator State in Ta2NiSe5 Probed by Photoemission 

Spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 026402 (2009).

16. Du, L. et al. Evidence for a topological excitonic insulator in InAs/GaSb bilayers. Nat. 

Commun. 8, 1971 (2017).

17. Sun, B. et al. Evidence for equilibrium exciton condensation in monolayer WTe2. Nat. 

Phys. 18, 94–99 (2022).

18. Jia, Y. et al. Evidence for a monolayer excitonic insulator. Nat. Phys. 18, 87–93 (2022).
19. Wu, F.-C., Xue, F. & MacDonald, A. H. Theory of two-dimensional spatially indirect 

equilibrium exciton condensates. Phys. Rev. B 92, 165121 (2015).

20. Xie, M. & MacDonald, A. H. Electrical Reservoirs for Bilayer Excitons. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 121, 067702 (2018).

21. Ma, L. et al. Strongly correlated excitonic insulator in atomic double layers. Nature

598, 585–589 (2021).

22. Wang, Z. et al. Evidence of high-temperature exciton condensation in two-dimensional 

atomic double layers. Nature 574, 76–80 (2019).


23. Burg, G. W. et al. Strongly Enhanced Tunneling at Total Charge Neutrality in Double-

Bilayer Graphene-WSe2 Heterostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 177702 (2018).

24. Qi, R. et al. Thermodynamic behavior of correlated electron-hole fluids in van der 

Waals heterostructures. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.13265 (2023).

25. Mott, N. F. The transition to the metallic state. Philos. Mag. 6, 287–309 (1961).
26. Banerjee, S. K., Register, L. F., Tutuc, E., Reddy, D. & MacDonald, A. H. Bilayer 

PseudoSpin Field-Effect Transistor (BiSFET): A Proposed New Logic Device. IEEE 
Electron Device Lett. 30, 158–160 (2009).

27. Narozhny, B. N. & Levchenko, A. Coulomb drag. Rev. Mod. Phys. 88, 025003 (2016).
28. Nandi, D., Finck, A. D. K., Eisenstein, J. P., Pfeiffer, L. N. & West, K. W. Exciton 

condensation and perfect Coulomb drag. Nature 488, 481–484 (2012).

29. Tiemann, L. et al. Exciton condensate at a total filling factor of one in Corbino two-

dimensional electron bilayers. Phys. Rev. B 77, 033306 (2008).

30. Eisenstein, J. P. & MacDonald, A. H. Bose–Einstein condensation of excitons in 

bilayer electron systems. Nature 432, 691–694 (2004).

31. Liu, X., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T., Halperin, B. I. & Kim, P. Quantum Hall drag of 

exciton condensate in graphene. Nat. Phys. 13, 746–750 (2017).

32. Zeng, Y. et al. Evidence for a Superfluid-to-solid Transition of Bilayer Excitons. 

Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.16995 (2023).

33. Li, J. I. A., Taniguchi, T., Watanabe, K., Hone, J. & Dean, C. R. Excitonic superfluid 

phase in double bilayer graphene. Nat. Phys. 13, 751–755 (2017).

34. Liu, X. et al. Crossover between strongly coupled and weakly coupled exciton 

superfluids. Science 375, 205–209 (2022).

35. Sun, Z., Kaneko, T., Golež, D. & Millis, A. J. Second-Order Josephson Effect in 

Excitonic Insulators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 127702 (2021).

36. Balatsky, A. V., Joglekar, Y. N. & Littlewood, P. B. Dipolar Superfluidity in Electron-

Hole Bilayer Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 266801 (2004).

37. Hu, J., Rigosi, A. F., Newell, D. B. & Chen, Y. P. Thermoelectric transport in coupled 

double layers with interlayer excitons and exciton condensation. Phys. Rev. B 102, 
235304 (2020).

38. Dai, D. D. & Fu, L. Strong-coupling phases of trions and excitons in electron-hole 

bilayers 
at 
commensurate 
densities. 
Preprint 
at

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.00825 (2023).

39. Amelio, I., Drummond, N. D., Demler, E., Schmidt, R. & Imamoglu, A. Polaron 

spectroscopy of a bilayer excitonic insulator. Phys. Rev. B 107, 155303 (2023).

40. Manzke, G., Semkat, D. & Stolz, H. Mott transition of excitons in GaAs-GaAlAs 

quantum wells. New J. Phys. 14, 095002 (2012).

41. Gorbachev, R. V. et al. Strong Coulomb drag and broken symmetry in double-layer 

graphene. Nat. Phys. 8, 896–901 (2012).

42. Dobrosavljevic, V., Trivedi, N. & Valles Jr, J. M. Conductor insulator quantum phase 

transitions. (Oxford University Press, USA, 2012).

43. Li, T. et al. Continuous Mott transition in semiconductor moiré superlattices. Nature

597, 350–354 (2021).

44. Hwang, E. H., Sensarma, R. & Das Sarma, S. Coulomb drag in monolayer and bilayer 

graphene. Phys. Rev. B 84, 245441 (2011).


45. Vu, D. & Sarma, S. D. Excitonic phases in a spatially separated electron-hole ladder 

model. arXiv.org https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16305v1 (2023).

46. Movva, H. C. P. et al. Density-Dependent Quantum Hall States and Zeeman Splitting 

in Monolayer and Bilayer WSe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 247701 (2017).

47. Shen, P.-C. et al. Ultralow contact resistance between semimetal and monolayer 

semiconductors. Nature 593, 211–217 (2021).

48. Wang, L. et al. One-Dimensional Electrical Contact to a Two-Dimensional Material. 

Science 342, 614–617 (2013).

49. Efimkin, D. K. & Galitski, V. Anomalous Coulomb Drag in Electron-Hole Bilayers 

due to the Formation of Excitons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 046801 (2016).


Figures

Figure 1 | Coulomb drag measurements in a dipolar excitonic insulator. a, Type-II 
band alignment of the MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure with an interlayer band gap ƐG. An 
interlayer bias voltage 𝑉b is applied to separate the electron (solid dot) and hole (empty 
dot) chemical potentials and to reduce the charge gap of the bilayer to ƐG − 𝑒𝑉b. An EI 
spontaneously forms when 𝑉b > (ƐG − Ɛb)/𝑒. b, Cross-section schematic of the dual-
gated WSe2/hBN/MoSe2 transport device. The W layer, Mo layer, graphite gates, and hBN 
dielectrics are colored in blue, orange, grey and light blue, respectively. 𝑉g and Δ are the 
symmetric and antisymmetric combinations of the top and bottom gate voltages. Under a 
large perpendicular electric field ∝ Δ, the contact regions with thick hBN spacer (~10-20 
nm) are heavily doped with free electrons and holes, allowing exciton injection and exciton 
flow through the channel region with thin BN spacer (~2 nm). c,d, Schematic for the 
closed-circuit (c) and open-circuit (d) drag measurement. A bias current 𝐼drive is applied 
to the Mo layer; the W contacts are shorted through an ammeter to measure the drag current
𝐼drag in c, and in d the W contacts are connected to a voltmeter to measure the open circuit 
drag voltage 𝑉drag.


Figure 2 | Exciton transport and electrostatics phase diagram. a, Dependence of the 
normalized penetration capacitance 𝐶P/𝐶gg on 𝑉b and 𝑉g, where 𝐶gg is the gate-to-gate 
geometric capacitance. The five distinct regions in the electrostatics phase diagram are 
separated by the black dashed and dash-dotted lines that mark the TMD band edges (see 
Ref. 21 for details). Here i, p and n denote, respectively, the intrinsic, hole-doped and 
electron-doped layer. The system is incompressible in the ii region, where both layers are 
intrinsic, and in the EI region (the triangular area enclosed by the black dashed and dash-
dotted lines), where an equilibrium exciton fluid emerges. The white dashed line marks 
equal electron and hole densities. b,c, Drive current in the Mo layer (b) and drag current in 
the W layer (c) as a function of 𝑉b and 𝑉g. The Mo layer is turned on in the in, pn and EI 
regions. Large drag current is observed in the EI region. A weaker drag current is also 
observed outside the EI region for a slightly electron- and hole-doped EI. All measurements 
were carried out at T = 1.5 K.


Figure 3 | Perfect Coulomb drag. a, Top: Dependence of the drive current, drag current 
and the tunneling current (multiplied by 100) on 𝑉b at T = 1.5 K.
Bottom: The 

corresponding dependence of the drag current ratio on the pair density. Perfect drag is 
observed in the EI region, where negligible tunneling current is observed. The drag current 
ratio quickly drops to zero outside the EI region. b, Drag current ratio as a function of the
pair density and temperature. c, Temperature dependence of the drag current ratio at 
selected pair densities. Empty dots and solid lines are the experimental data and the 
theoretical fits described in the main text. Near perfect Coulomb drag is observed at low 
pair densities and below about 20 K. All data were acquired along the white dashed line in 
Fig. 2a.


Figure 4 | Excitonic insulator-to-metal transition. a, Temperature dependence of the 
drag resistance at varying pair densities 𝑛P. The dashed curve is the critical resistance 
curve, 𝑅c, at the Mott density 𝑛M ≈ 3.2 × 1011 cm-2, which separates the insulating and 
metallic behavior at low and high pair densities, respectively. The inset shows the critical 
scaling of the resistance curves, which collapse into two groups (one metallic and one 
insulating) around 𝑛M. The resistance curves are scaled by 𝑅c at 𝑛M and the temperature is 
scaled by a density-dependent temperature scale 𝑇0. b, Dependence of the EI charge gap 
(solid triangles) and the coefficient 𝐴 (empty dots) on the pair density 𝑛P. The charge gap 
is obtained from penetration capacitance measurements (see Methods); the error bar 
represents the systematic uncertainty induced by the finite AC bias voltage in the 
penetration capacitance measurement. The coefficient 𝐴 = 𝑅drag/𝑇2 is obtained by fitting 
the temperature dependent frictional drag at 𝑛P > 𝑛M (Extended Data Fig. 6). The solid 
red line plots the scaling 𝐴 ∝ (𝑛P − 𝑛M)−3. The vertical dashed line marks the Mott density
𝑛M.


Extended Data Figures

Extended Data Figure 1 | Coulomb-coupled bilayer device and measurement 
circuitry. a, Optical image of the double layer device. The top graphite gate (purple dashed 
line), bottom graphite gate (purple solid line), W (blue) and Mo (orange) layers are 
outlined. The blue shaded regions mark the two exciton contacts, and the orange shaded 
region the excitonic channel. The Pt contacts to the W layer are numbered W10 to W14, 
and the Bi contacts to the Mo layer are numbered Mo6 to Mo9. b, Schematic showing the 
doping profile in the device. Lighter to darker orange/blue color represents increasing 
doping densities. Region I is the exciton channel, region II is the exciton contact and region 
III is the heavily doped metal contact region. The contacts are connected according to the 
circuit diagrams in c (closed-circuit) and d (open-circuit). e, Simplified circuit model of 
the bilayer system (left and right block for the electron and hole layer, respectively). There 
are two parallel conduction channels: 𝜎𝑋 for excitons and 𝜎𝑒 (ℎ) for free electrons (holes).
f, Lumped circuit model in the limit of 𝜎X ≫ 𝜎e, 𝜎D (see Methods). 


Extended Data Figure 2 | Capacitance measurements. a,b, Dependence of the 
normalized penetration capacitance 𝐶P/𝐶gg (a) and interlayer capacitance 𝐶I/𝐶2L (b) on 𝑉b
and 𝑉g measured at T = 1.5K; 𝐶2L is the Mo-to-W geometrical capacitance. Both maps are 
used to determine the electrostatics phase diagram in Fig. 2a. The dashed lines denote the 
Mo and W band edges. Since 𝑉b is applied to the Mo layer while the W layer remains 
grounded, the W valance band edge is non-dispersive while the Mo conduction band edge 
disperses with a slope of -1. c, Dependence of 𝐶I (black) and 𝑛P (red) on 𝑉b at equal electron 
and hole densities. 𝑛P is obtained by integrating 𝐶I with respect to 𝑉b.


Extended Data Figure 3 | Additional Coulomb drag measurement results. a,b, Drive 
current in the W layer (a) and drag current in the Mo layer (b) as a function of 𝑉b and 𝑉g at 
T = 1.5 K. The W layer is turned on in the pi and pn regions. Large drag current is observed 
in the EI region. Compared to Fig. 2b,c, the large contact resistance in the Mo layer (~ MΩ) 
results in a substantially suppressed drive current in the EI region. The measurement is 
therefore similar to an open-circuit measurement (W drive and Mo open circuit) although 
it is connected in the closed-circuit geometry. Although there is still an exciton current 
flow in this measurement geometry, perfect Coulomb drag is not observed here because of 
the effective open-circuit geometry. c, Drag resistance as a function of 𝑉b and 𝑉g at T = 1.5 
K measured by the geometry shown in Fig. 1d. Large drag resistance (~ MΩ) is observed
in the EI region. The drag resistance changes by over six orders of magnitude. 


Extended Data Figure 4 | Determination of the drag current flow direction. a,c, Drag 
current in the W layer as a function of 𝑉b and 𝑉g at T = 1.5 K measured with the connection 
shown on the right of the same row. The currents are of opposite sign for the two different 
measurement geometries. b,d, The corresponding absolute drag current ratios are shown. 
The results here allow us to determine the current flow direction in the W layer and 
therefore demonstrate that the drive and drag currents flow in the opposite direction in the 
exciton channel of the device. 


Extended Data Figure 5 | Transport properties of each TMD layer. Top: Dependence 
of the normalized penetration capacitance on 𝑉g (bottom axis) and the free carrier density 
𝑛c (top axis). The dashed lines mark the conduction and valence band edges (CB and VB, 
respectively), beyond which a sharp drop in the penetration capacitance is observed as the 
system is doped with free electrons/holes. Bottom: The corresponding dependence for the 
two-terminal (2t) and four-terminal (4t) resistances of each TMD monolayer at zero 
interlayer bias voltage 𝑉b = 0. The results here characterize the transport properties of each 
TMD layer separately. Only the 2t-resistance can be measured for the Mo layer (pink) 
while both the 2t- and 4t-resistances can be measured for the W layer (red and black). All 
of the results here were obtained at T = 1.5 K.


Extended Data Figure 6 | Frictional drag resistance beyond the Mott density. a-d, 𝑇2

dependence of the Drag resistance at pair densities beyond the Mott density. The different 
panels show data at different pair density range. For the fitting range T < 10 K, the pair 
density depends only on the bias voltage 𝑉b but not on the temperature. The dashed lines 
are the linear fits to the data to obtain the coefficient 𝐴.


Extended Data Figure 7 | Relationship between the drag current ratio and the drag 
resistance. a, The drag current ratio as a function of the pair density and temperature at 
equal electron and hole densities calculated from the drag resistance data using the 

expression 

𝐼drag
𝐼drive =

1

1+𝑅WC/𝑅drag (with 𝑅WC = 7 kΩ). b, The actual measured drag current 

ratio at T = 1.5 K (same as Fig. 3b). The calculation in a reproduces the actual data in b. c-
e, Dependence of the drag current ratio on the bias voltage at selected temperatures. The 
black curves are the actual data and the red curves are the results reproduced from the 

calculation 

𝐼drag
𝐼drive =

1

1+𝑅WC/𝑅drag.


Extended Data Figure 8 | Determination of the charge gap. a, Zoom-in view of the 
normalized penetration capacitance as a function of 𝑉b and 𝑉g at 1.5 K. The red triangle is 
the EI region. b, Dependence of the normalized penetration capacitance (blue) and the 

calculated charge chemical potential Δ𝜇 ≈ 𝑒∫ (

𝐶𝑃
𝐶𝑔𝑔) 𝑑𝑉𝑔 (red) on 𝑉g at 𝑉b = 0.49 V. A 

charge gap of about 32 meV can be obtained by the size of the chemical potential jump
(bound by the dashed lines). c, Dependence of Δ𝜇 on 𝑉g at varying 𝑉b from 0.49 V to 0.53 
V. A continuously vanishing charge gap with increasing 𝑉b is observed.


Extended Data Figure 9 | Critical scaling analysis of the excitonic insulator-to-metal 
transition. a, Scaled drag resistance as a function of the pair density and temperature in 
log scale. It suggests a quantum critical fan around the Mott density 𝑛M = 3.2 × 1011 cm

-

2. b, Pair density dependence of the temperature scale 𝑇0 that collapses the resistance curves 
in the inset of Fig. 4a. It continuously vanishes towards the Mott density (dashed line) from 
both sides. 


