Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

The dotTHz Project: A Standard Data
Format for Terahertz Time-Domain Data
and Elementary Data Processing Tools

Jongmin Lee1, Chi Ki Leung1, Mingrui Ma1, Jasper
Ward-Berry1, Supawan Santitewagun1 and J. Axel Zeitler1*

1Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology,
University of Cambridge, Philippa Fawcett Drive, Cambridge,
CB3 0AS, United Kingdom.

*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): jaz22@cam.ac.uk;

Abstract

From investigating molecular vibrations to observing galaxies, terahertz
technology has found extensive applications in research and development
over the past three decades. Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy and
imaging have experienced significant growth and now dominate spec-
tral observations ranging from 0.1 THz to 10 THz. However, the lack of
standardised protocols for data processing, dissemination, and archiv-
ing poses challenges in collaborating and sharing terahertz data between
research groups. To tackle these challenges, we present the dotTHz
project, which introduces a standardised terahertz data format and the
associated open-source tools for processing and interpretation of dotTHz
files. The dotTHz project aims to facilitate seamless data processing and
analysis by providing a common framework. All software components are
released under the MIT licence through GitHub repositories to encourage
widespread adoption, modification, and collaboration. We invite the ter-
ahertz community to actively contribute to the dotTHz project, fostering
the development of additional tools that encompass a greater breadth
and depth of functionality. By working together, we can establish a com-
prehensive suite of resources that benefit the entire terahertz community.

Keywords: terahertz, time-domain spectroscopy, open-source, CaTx,
CaTSper

1

arXiv:2309.05510v1  [physics.data-an]  11 Sep 2023


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

2
Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing

1 Introduction

Despite the unique characteristics and potential applications of terahertz
radiation, its practical exploitation only began in the late 1980s with the
groundbreaking development of subpicosecond photoconductive antennas by
Smith, Austen, and Nuss [1]. These antennas played a pivotal role in over-
coming the challenges associated with generating and accurately detecting
terahertz radiation, which were the primary obstacles to its practical use.
Building upon these advancements, Hu and Nuss [2] further emphasised
the exceptional opportunities provided by terahertz time-domain imaging,
extending its scope beyond spectroscopy. This capability has accelerated the
expansion of terahertz technology into non-destructive testing applications,
including art conservation, industrial product quality testing, and concealed
explosive detection. Today, terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS)
is widely applied in various fields spanning fundamental science to industrial
engineering applications [3, 4]. Following its introduction as a highly specialised
tool by a small group of research laboratories, terahertz time-domain spec-
troscopy has evolved into a large field of study with a user base that ranges from
expert scientists with decades of experience in time-domain technology to gen-
eral laboratory technicians running samples on commercial turnkey THz-TDS
instruments.
A distinct advantage of THz-TDS is its ability to simultaneously measure
the amplitude and the phase information of the electric field. This distin-
guishes it from most infrared spectroscopy techniques since it allows for the
direct extraction of the complex refractive index and the complex dielectric
constant without relying on the Kramers-Kronig relation. The working princi-
ple of THz-TDS involves acquiring a time-domain waveform followed by data
processing to transform the time-domain data into a frequency-domain spec-
trum. This spectral information is heavily affected by the parameter settings
in data acquisition and processing. Therefore, an in-depth understanding of
the signal processing routine and the parameters used is essential to achieve
reproducible and meaningful spectral analysis. While commercially available
THz-TDS systems often provide a bundled software package for analysing the
measured data, it is not always transparent what steps are carried out pre-
cisely, what assumptions are made and what parameters are used. This lack of
transparency can result in unintended variations in data analysis methodology
and the resultant spectral data for measurements on instruments from differ-
ent vendors for the same sample but measured or processed using different
software.
As a result, many research groups in the terahertz time-domain field
develop their own analysis tools. However, the use of a multitude of incompat-
ible data structures complicates the exchange and application of these tools.
In the case of custom-built spectrometers, simple ASCII text files are com-
monly used to store data for individual measurements. This approach requires
manual differentiation between sample and reference data for each measure-
ment. Furthermore, essential metadata, such as sample thickness, temperature,


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing
3

or concentration, is typically logged manually in laboratory notebooks and is
not captured in the digital file, making it challenging to re-analyse old data
or share it with colleagues from different groups. For commercial systems,
some instruments utilise binary file structures with varying degrees of com-
plexity. Still, the often proprietary nature of these file formats, combined with
the undocumented file architecture that can change between software package
releases, makes exchanging information difficult and renders it impossible to
re-analyse archived data once the software package has been updated. A stan-
dardised data format is needed to facilitate collaboration, reproducibility, and
the long-term accessibility of terahertz spectroscopy data.
Our research group has utilised a set of in-house developed MATLAB script
tools that have gradually evolved over decades. While these tools have pro-
vided us with excellent flexibility in data analysis, they have also resulted in
redundant code and posed challenges in properly documenting the code and
maintaining a comprehensive understanding of the algorithms. Additionally,
with the growth of the group and the availability of more instruments, we have
faced the increasing burden of managing large volumes of data.
To address these issues, we recently decided to enhance the usability of our
tools with a graphical user interface (GUI) for more intuitive, interactive and
efficient analysis. However, when we shared these newly developed tools with
collaborators, compatibility issues arose due to diverse data formats used by
different commercial and home-built spectrometers. Similarly, collaborations
among individuals and groups in the terahertz community are often limited to
users of a specific TDS system or require laborious and manual data conversion
to utilising existing signal processing routines. Such barriers hinder progress
within the scientific community.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a solution by introducing a stan-
dardised dotTHz format for terahertz time-domain data, the Cambridge THz
Converter (CaTx) to facilitate the adoption of this data format, and the Cam-
bridge THz Spectrum Analyser (CaTSper) as a simple GUI-based processing
platform for THz-TDS data analysis. Both software tools have been released
as open source under the MIT licence [5, 6]. We are also actively developing
additional tools that will be shared in due course. Moreover, comprehensive
information including processing methods, step-by-step user guides, and inline
code annotations can be accessed through the online documentation [7].

2 The dotTHz Data Format

2.1 Format Structure

Terahertz time-domain waveforms comprise a series of numeric values repre-
senting the amplitude of the electric field as a function of time. To extract
the optical constants from such data for a specific sample, it is necessary to
record both the time-domain waveform of the sample and a reference wave-
form, along with essential information about the measurement settings and
sample metadata. This implies the need to manage and store at least a pair


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

4
Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing

/measurement001
Datasets

Group

ds1, ex) sample dataset
ds2, ex) reference 1 dataset

Attributes (metadata)
ds3, ex) reference 2 dataset

md1, ex) thickness, temperature, etc.
md2, ex) experimental parameters
md3 

Group

/measurement002
Datasets

Attributes

Fig. 1: The hierarchical structure of the dotTHz data format: multiple mea-
surements with associated metadata can be stored in a single dotTHz file.

of data files for each measurement. For the sake of simple and efficient data
management, the dotTHz project adopts the hierarchical data format version
5 (HDF5) [8]. The HDF5 format was initially developed by a collaboration
between the U.S. National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA)
and the U.S. Department of Energy’s Advanced Simulation and Computing
Program (ASC) to deal with extensive and complex data. By embracing the
same principle, the dotTHz data format delivers the following key advantages
to users:

1. Simple data structure for easy handling
2. Logical data organisation for efficient data retrieval and referencing
3. Direct attachment of essential metadata for convenient automated process-
ing and analysis

4. Ability to process specific subsets of data from large files
5. Ability to store different types of data in a single dataset
6. High-speed performance with contiguous and uncompressed datasets
7. Wide platform support as an open-source format
8. Easy data sharing with all information stored in a single file

The dotTHz file follows a specific structure: for each measurement, a
group of datasets corresponding sample and reference measurements is stored
together with the attributes that contain the metadata, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
The attributes can have various forms, such as numeric value, numeric vec-
tor, and string (Table 1), enabling efficient extraction and referencing of
information during subsequent analysis and data processing.
It is essential to emphasise that a single dotTHz file has the capability to
accommodate multiple measurements. This enables the consolidation of data
pertaining to a time series of measurements or variable temperature measure-
ments of the same sample within a single file. Furthermore, this approach
facilitates and simplifies the archiving and sharing of experimental data.


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing
5

Table 1: The dotTHz file datasets and attributes and the minimum requirement for a dataset as defined by this standard.

No.
Item
MATLAB format
HDF5 dataset/attribute
Requirement

1
Number
numeric value
optional prefix
auto-numbering
2
Name
string scalar
dataset name
necessary

3
Description
string scalar
attribute (description)
4
Instrument Profile
string scalar
attribute (instrument)
5
User Profile
string scalar
attribute (user)

6
Date
string scalar
attribute (date)
7
Time
string scalar
attribute (time)
8
Mode
string scalar
attribute (mode)
9
Coordinates
numeric vector
attribute (coordinates)

10
Metadata Description
string scalar
attribute (mdDescription)

11
Metadata 1
numeric value/vector, string scalar
attribute (md1)
12
Metadata 2
numeric value/vector, string scalar
attribute (md2)
13
Metadata 3
numeric value/vector, string scalar
attribute (md3)
14
Metadata 4
numeric value/vector, string scalar
attribute (md4)
15
Metadata 5
numeric value/vector, string scalar
attribute (md5)
16
Metadata 6
numeric value/vector, string scalar
attribute (md6)

17
dotTHz Version
string scalar
attribute (thzVer)

18
Dataset Description
string scalar
attribute (dsDescription)

19
Dataset 1
numeric matrix
dataset (ds1)
necessary
20
Dataset 2
numeric matrix
dataset (ds2)
21
Dataset 3
numeric matrix
dataset (ds3)
22
Dataset 4
numeric matrix
dataset (ds4)


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

6
Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing

2.2 Example Use Cases

In the following we would like to outline a selection of representative use case
scenarios of how we envisage the dotTHz file format being used in the terahertz
community going forward.

2.2.1 THz-TDS measurement of pellet

For a typical THz-TDS experiment of a single sample the file will contain
the time-domain waveform of the sample and one reference. The minimum
metadata required will comprise of the sample thickness. Optionally, a single
dotTHz file can contain the measurements of multiple samples and references
or multiple measurements of the same sample and reference under varying
conditions, such as a function of time or temperature for dynamic observa-
tions and the conditions can be conveniently stored as additional metadata to
facilitate subsequent analysis.

2.2.2 THz-TDS measurement of thin film or layered structure

For a thin film or multilayered measurement case the metadata will contain
the thickness of each layer in either multiple metadata slots as a single value
or one slot as a numeric vector.

2.2.3 THz pump-probe measurement

Since terahertz pump-probe measurements require two references, three
datasets can be used for each measurement as Dataset 1, Dataset 2, and
Dataset 3 for sample, reference, and pumped-reference, respectively.

2.2.4 THz time-domain imaging

Typically time-domain imaging datasets have identical metadata except one
distinguishing parameter, such as scanning coordinates or scanning times. Con-
sequently, a dotTHz file can store metadata exclusively with the first dataset,
while the remaining datasets only need to contain the differing parameters.
This approach prevents redundant data storage.

2.2.5 Potential Use Cases With Non Time-Domain Data

The dotTHz Dataset space can be used for any matrix form of datasets, pro-
viding compatibility to non time-domain data. However, it will be necessary
to set up a minimum outline for the dataset allocation for each applications
domain to keep its consistency and compatibility with subsequent analysis
tools. The following is an example of two frequency-domain cases, and these
can be updated for better applications along with analysis tool development.

VNA measurement

Four sets of S-parameter datasets can be stored in Dataset 1 to 4, and each
dataset will contain three rows for frequency, amplitude, and phase vectors.


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing
7

CaTSper
THz-TDS Analyser

CaTTrans
THz Liquid Transport Analyser

CaTPor

THz Data
Standardised Analysis Tools

THz Porosity Analyser

*.tprj
*.dat
*.csv
*.txt

*.thz
CaTx

Instrument A

Instrument B

Instrument C

Converter 
Engine

Metadata

Fig. 2: A schematic diagram of the dotTHz project workflow. Terahertz data
obtained from different spectrometers can be converted into a standardised
dotTHz file, then analysed using standardised analysis tools.

FMCW imaging data

Similar to VNA measurement datasets, frequency, in-phase, and quadrature
signals can be grouped as a dataset. While datasets can currently store up-to
four sets, this limitation is due to the current converter tool’s display space
and can be easily extended with minor modification of the tool.

3 Data Processing Tools

In the absence of native support for the dotTHz files on THz-TDS instrument
acquisition software, the first step of the workflow is to convert the existing
data and metadata into the dotTHz data format using CaTx [5] (Fig. 2).
The initial release of CaTx supports reading and converting the raw output
data from commercial spectrometers provided by TeraView, Menlo Systems,
and Toptica. This conversion process enables researchers to analyse, compare,
and review THz-TDS datasets acquired and stored with different instruments
and platforms. The tools were developed using MATLAB (MathWorks, Mas-
sachusetts, USA), and they require MATLAB to be installed before use. It
is worth mentioning that all source codes are freely accessible without any
licence protection, hoping Python versions of the tools will also be developed
and shared. As the dotTHz project gains active support from the terahertz
community, a comprehensive list of readily available tools will be accessible
through the online community space.

3.1 Cambridge THz Converter (CaTx)

The Cambridge THz Converter (CaTx) is the core component of the dotTHz
project. It streamlines and consolidates data from experiments that are stored
across multiple files into a unified, standardised format. Its primary function is
to combine time-domain sample waveforms, reference waveforms, and accom-
panying metadata, including sample thickness, temperature, or specific details
about the sample’s form. By structuring and packaging this information into
a single file, researchers can easily access and analyse the data in a more
organised and convenient manner (Fig. 3).


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

8
Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing

THz Data

.thz File

Profiles (*.xls)

Metadata (*.xls)

CaTx

- Instrument, user

- Thickness, temperature, etc.

 MATLAB m file
Converter Engine

Cell Structure
HDF5 Format

Datasets
THz Data

Attributes
Metadata

Group

Fig. 3: An example of CaTx consolidating a dataset, its corresponding meta-
data and profile into a single dotTHz file. Multiple datasets, and their metadata
and profiles from different sources can be imported and stored as a single dot-
THz file.

CaTx calls a converter engine function to accommodate the diverse time-
domain waveforms of independent THz-TDS systems. To work with a specific
system, users can select an appropriate engine from the converter engine list on
the CaTx GUI. These engines are MATLAB script-based functions located in
the /Engines sub-folder. While several converter engines are readily available
in the online repository for major THz-TDS systems, researchers may need
to modify existing engines or create new ones for their systems. In such case,
they can refer to the online documentation or the inline annotations provided
with the existing engines [7].
Operating CaTx is a straightforward process, requiring just a few clicks on
the GUI. The converter will extract and organise the available data from the
measurements into a table, as depicted in Fig. 4b. Users can import metadata
from a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet or edit it directly via the GUI table.
The profile manager, accessible under the second tab titled “Instruments
and Users” in Fig. 4c, provides a convenient way to store and manage user
and terahertz instrument information as attributes attached to their respective
datasets. User profiles allow for the inclusion of ORCID, name, email, and
affiliation details. Terahertz instrument profiles encompass information such
as the instrument model, manufacturer, and location. While both profiles are
optional, they can be easily updated using the corresponding Microsoft Excel
spreadsheets. Finally, all datasets and their corresponding metadata can be
exported in a single dotTHz file.
CaTx serves to provide a versatile platform for organising and converting
data obtained from various projects and sources into a single, systematic, and
simplified dotTHz file. This capability makes the converter highly valuable for
processing terahertz data acquired from collaborators or from the literature,
especially when the data is not stored in a familiar and compatible format.
By enabling the consolidation of data into a standardised format, the con-
verter streamlines the data integration process and enhances the efficiency of
subsequent analysis.


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing
9

(a) CaTx’s launch interface (template mode) displays entry
templates for each row with HDF5 format explanation for
various applications.

(b) The measurements and metadata tab of CaTx displays
the terahertz data and metadata that will be stored in the
dotTHz file. Metadata can be imported from a Microsoft
Excel spreadsheet or directly input into the displayed table.


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

10
Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing

(c) The instruments and users tab of CaTx allows details
of the instrument and user to be added, and selected for
specified datasets.

Fig. 4: Examples of CaTx’s graphic user interfaces.

3.2 Cambridge THz Spectrum Analyser (CaTSper)

The Cambridge THz Spectrum Analyser (CaTSper) [6] has been designed as an
analysis tool compatible with the dotTHz files. As with additional standardised
analysis tools for other applications that are currently under development,
CaTSper operates on the dotTHz files generated by CaTx, enabling terahertz
time-domain data processing and analysis through a user-friendly interface.
CaTSper is organised into three sections, each dedicated to manipulating
specific data formats: time-domain data, frequency-domain data, and extracted
optical parameters. These sections are accessible through separate tabs on the
GUI (Fig. 5), ensuring user consistency, convenience and expandability. The
following provides a brief overview of each tab’s functionalities, while more
detailed explanations can be found in the online documentation [7].

• Tab 1: Time Domain

– Plot time-domain waveforms
– Fourier transform of the time-domain waveforms with user-defined trun-
cation window and various window functions

• Tab 2: Frequency Domain

– Plot frequency-domain spectra


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing
11

– Calculate optical parameters based on the spectrum and the associated
metadata

– Plot absorption coefficients, refractive indices, and dielectric constants

• Tab 3: Data Manipulation

– Extract the data of interest
– Calculate and display the extracted data in various forms
– Save the extracted data in MATLAB .mat format

The user interface of CaTSper is designed to be self-explanatory, enabling
users to easily modify parameters and processing options at each stage of the
analysis. Furthermore, CaTSper allows for the convenient processing of the
same dataset with different parameter settings, providing the ability to observe
and evaluate the impact of parameter settings on the results. This workflow
facilitates the real-time review of processed data, assisting users to make imme-
diate adjustments to parameters and functions at each step before progressing
to the next. If no further modifications are necessary, users can seamlessly
progress through CaTSper workflow for data analysis. Processed data can be
stored as a MATLAB m-file or assigned to the MATLAB workspace at any
stage. In addition, as an open-source tool, CaTSper’s terahertz data process-
ing is completely transparent, allowing users to have full visibility into the
analysis procedures and algorithms used.
In the initial release of CaTSper the software supports a basic processing
routine to extract the optical constants from simple pellet slabs. Further work
has commenced to gradually extend the functionality to allow for more com-
plex geometries, such as layered structures and thin films, to provide a more
comprehensive tool. In particular, work is ongoing to implement the Nelly tool
[9] into CaTSper.

4 Conclusion

The dotTHz project was initiated to reduce terahertz data analysis efforts and
at the same time foster collaborations in the terahertz community. We have
taken the initiative in designing and introducing CaTx and CaTSper, which
aim to standardise the processing and analysis of terahertz data obtained from
different terahertz systems. These tools were successfully deployed as part of
the data analysis routine in the group. We hope that the dotTHz format may
facilitate the development of many other advanced data analysis tools within
our community, building on the excellent work by many colleagues [10–12] as
well as facilitating establishing databases, reference datasets and supporting
standardised testing approaches of novel devices and technologies [13] in the
future.
The dotTHz project is an ongoing endeavour, and additional open-source
standardised terahertz analysis tools for different applications and data manip-
ulation methods will be developed in the future. We invite researchers from
the terahertz community to join and contribute to this development. We also


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

12
Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing

(a) The time domain tab of CaTSper displays the sam-
ple details and the time domain data. Sample details can
be added and parameters such as frequency range, window
function can be specified for fast Fourier transform.

(b) The frequency domain tab of CaTSper displays the
Fourier transformed frequency-domain data, calculates and
plots the optical parameters of transmittance, absorption,
refractive index and dielectric constant.

strongly encourage scientists, engineers, and developers to download the tools
from the online repository, thoroughly test them, make necessary modifica-
tions, and contribute back to enrich the dotTHz project. Through the dotTHz
project, we aim to bring the terahertz community closer together, foster collab-
orations, and facilitate further advancements in the terahertz field. We firmly
believe that by standardising and simplifying data analysis and processing, we


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing
13

(c) The data manipulation tab of CaTSper enables sec-
ondary data processing by using the selected variables and
user-specified equations. Data from specific frequencies can
also be extracted and plotted against a selected parameter.

Fig. 5: Examples of CaTSper’s graphic user interfaces.

can attract and encourage more individuals to explore the vast potential of
terahertz technology and its numerous applications.

Supplementary information.
Not applicable

Acknowledgments.
We would like to express our sincere appreciation to
Prince Bawuah from Menlo Systems, Germany, Sivaloganathan Kumaran
and Harvey Beere from the Semiconductor Physics Group at the Cavendish
Laboratory, University of Cambridge, UK; Johanna K¨olbel and Daniel Mit-
tleman from Brown University, USA; Jean-Paul Guillet and Patrick Mounaix
from the University of Bordeaux, France; Withawat Withayachumnankul from
the University of Adelaide, Australia; Hungyen Lin from the University of
Lancaster, UK; Riccardo Degl’Innocenti from Queen Mary University, UK;
Emma MacPherson from the University of Warwick, UK; Martin Koch from
the Philipps-University Marburg, Germany; and Andrew Burnett, Univer-
sity of Leeds, UK for their valuable contributions, suggestions, ideas and
encouragement.
In particular we would like to thank Jens Neu from the University of North
Texas and Uriel Tayvah both formerly of the Schmuttenmaer Lab at the Uni-
versity of Yale, USA for their enthusiasm and support in integrating the Nelly
package (https://github.com/YaleTHz/nelly) into CaTSper in an upcoming
release.
Through our collaboration the dotTHz project has been greatly enriched
and the development of the compatible tools has been advanced.


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

14
Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing

Declarations

• Funding: Not applicable
• Competing interests: Not applicable
• Ethics approval: Not applicable
• Consent to participate: Not applicable
• Consent for publication: Not applicable
• Availability of data and materials: Online repository
• Code availability : Online repository
• CRediT Author Contributions: Jongmin Lee: Conceptualisation, Software,
Writing - Original Draft, Chi Ki Leung: Validation, Data Curation, Writ-
ing - Original Draft, Writing - Online Repository Documentation, Software
- Inline Annotations Mingrui Ma: Validation, Data Curation, Writing -
Online Repository Documentation, Jasper Ward-Berry: Validation, Data
Curation, Supawan Santitewagun: Validation, Data Curation, Writing -
Review & Editing J Axel Zeitler: Conceptualisation, Supervision, Project
Administration, Writing - Review & Editing

If any of the sections are not relevant to your manuscript, please include the
heading and write ‘Not applicable’ for that section.

References

[1] Smith, P.R., Auston, D.H., Nuss, M.C.: Subpicosecond photoconducting
dipole antennas. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 24(2), 255–260
(1988). https://doi.org/10.1109/3.121

[2] Hu, B.B., Nuss, M.C.: Imaging with terahertz waves. Optics Letters
20(16), 1716 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1364/ol.20.001716

[3] Leitenstorfer, A., Moskalenko, A.S., Kampfrath, T., Kono, J., Castro-
Camus, E., Peng, K., Qureshi, N., Turchinovich, D., Tanaka, K., Markelz,
A., Havenith, M., Hough, C., Joyce, H.J., Padilla, W., Zhou, B., Kim,
K.-Y., Zhang, X.-C., Jepsen, P.U., Dhillon, S., Vitiello, M.S., Linfield,
E.H., Davies, A.G., Hoffmann, M., Lewis, R., Tonouchi, M., Klarskov,
P., Seifert, T., Gerasimenko, Y., Mihailovic, D.D., Huber, R., Boland, J.,
Mitrofanov, O., Dean, P., Ellison, B., Huggard, P., Rea, S., Walker, C.,
Leisawitz, D., Gao, J.R., Li, C., Chen, Q., Valusis, G., Wallace, V.P.,
MacPherson, E., Shang, X., Hesler, J., Ridler, N., Renaud, C., Kallfass, I.,
Nagatsuma, T., Zeitler, A., Arnone, D., Johnston, M., Cunningham, J.:
The 2023 Terahertz Science and Technology Roadmap. Journal of Physics
D: Applied Physics (2023). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6463/acbe4c

[4] Dhillon, S.S., Vitiello, M.S., Linfield, E.H., Davies, A.G., Hoffmann, M.C.,
Booske, J., Paoloni, C., Gensch, M., Weightman, P., Williams, G.P.,
Castro-Camus, E., Cumming, D.R.S., Simoens, F., Escorcia-Carranza, I.,
Grant, J., Lucyszyn, S., Kuwata-Gonokami, M., Konishi, K., Koch, M.,


Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Standardising terahertz time-domain experimental data and processing
15

Schmuttenmaer, C.A., Cocker, T.L., Huber, R., Markelz, A.G., Taylor,
Z.D., Wallace, V.P., Zeitler, J.A., Sibik, J., Korter, T.M., Ellison, B., Rea,
S., Goldsmith, P., Cooper, K.B., Appleby, R., Pardo, D., Huggard, P.G.,
Krozer, V., Shams, H., Fice, M., Renaud, C., Seeds, A., St¨ohr, A., Naftaly,
M., Ridler, N., Clarke, R., Cunningham, J.E., Johnston, M.B.: The 2017
terahertz science and technology roadmap. Journal of Physics D: Applied
Physics 50(4), 043001 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6463/50/4/
043001

[5] Terahertz Applications Group, University of Cambridge: CaTx (2023).

https://github.com/dotTHzTAG/CaTx

[6] Terahertz Applications Group, University of Cambridge: CaTSper (2023).

https://github.com/dotTHzTAG/CaTSPer

[7] Terahertz Applications Group, University of Cambridge: The dot-
THz Project Documentation (2023). https://github.com/dotTHzTAG/
Documentation

[8] The HDF Group: The HDF Group’s HPC program (2018). https://www.
hdfgroup.org/2015/08/hdf-group-hpc-program/

[9] Tayvah, U., Spies, J.A., Neu, J., Schmuttenmaer, C.A.: Nelly: A
user-friendly
and
open-source
implementation
of
tree-based
com-
plex
refractive
index
analysis
for
terahertz
spectroscopy.
Analyt-
ical
Chemistry
93(32),
11243–11250
(2021)
https://arxiv.org/abs/
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.1c02132. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.analchem.1c02132. PMID: 34355556

[10] Pupeza, I., Wilk, R., Koch, M.: Highly accurate optical material parame-
ter determination with thz time-domain spectroscopy. Opt. Express 15(7),
4335–4350 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1364/OE.15.004335

[11] Peretti, R., Mitryukovskiy, S., Froberger, K., Mebarki, M.A., Eliet, S.,
Vanwolleghem, M., Lampin, J.-F.: Thz-tds time-trace analysis for the
extraction of material and metamaterial parameters. IEEE Transactions
on Terahertz Science and Technology 9(2), 136–149 (2019). https://doi.
org/10.1109/TTHZ.2018.2889227

[12] Greenall, N.R.: Parameter Extraction and Uncertainty in Terahertz Time-
Domain Spectroscopic Measurements (2017). https://etheses.whiterose.
ac.uk/19045/

[13] Vogel, T., Mansourzadeh, S., Nandi, U., Norman, J., Preu, S., Saraceno,
C.J.: Photoconductive receivers at 1030 nm for high average power pulsed
THz detection (2023)


