Access to the full 3D Brillouin zone with time resolution, using a new tool for

pump-probe ARPES

Paulina Majchrzak,1 Yu Zhang,2 Andrii Kuibarov,3 Richard Chapman,2 Adam Wyatt,2

Emma Springate,2 Sergey Borisenko,3 Bernd B¨uchner,3 Philip Hofmann,1 and Charlotte

E. Sanders2

1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center,

Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark

2)Central Laser Facility, STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,

Research Complex at Harwell, Harwell, OX11 0QX, United Kingdom

3)Leibniz IFW Dresden, Helmholtzstr.
20, 01069 Dresden,

Germany

(Dated: 22 September 2023)

Here we report the first time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (TR-

ARPES) with the new Fermiologics “FeSuMa” analyzer. The new experimental setup

has been commissioned at the Artemis laboratory of the UK Central Laser Facility.

We explain here some of the advantages of the FeSuMa for TR-ARPES and dis-

cuss how its capabilities relate to those of hemispherical analyzers and momentum

microscopes. We have integrated the FeSuMa into an optimized pump-probe beam-

line that permits photon-energy- (i.e., kz-) dependent scanning, using probe energies

generated from high harmonics in a gas jet. The advantages of using the FeSuMa

in this situation include the possibility of taking advantage of its “fisheye” mode of

operation.

PACS numbers: 73.20.At,73.20.r,07.81.a,07.05.Fb

1

arXiv:2309.11535v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  20 Sep 2023


I.
INTRODUCTION

Pump-probe time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (TR-ARPES) presents

challenges, both with respect to light sources and to detection, that do not arise in “static”

ARPES measurements of systems at equilibrium. In this paper, we describe the commission-

ing of the newly-developed “FeSuMa” analyser on a beamline for high-harmonic generation

(HHG) at the UK Central Laser Facility’s Artemis Laboratory. We demonstrate efficient ac-

quisition of high-quality ARPES spectra of optically pumped excitations close to the Fermi

level, and we use the FeSuMa’s “fisheye” measurement mode in combination with the beam-

line’s capability to switch rapidly between ultraviolet photon energies that are generated

as high harmonics in an Ar gas jet. We suggest that this measurement configuration offers

major benefits as a cost-efficient laboratory-scale approach to time-resolved TR-ARPES.

A.
State of the Art in Pump-Probe TR-ARPES

Compared to its static equivalent, an ultrafast TR-ARPES measurement adds a “pump”

laser pulse, which—arriving at a well-defined delay time ∆ before the system is probed—

promotes the system into an optically excited state. The transient, out-of-equilibrium state

and its evolution in time are the subject of study. Both the probe and the pump pulses

must be short (i.e., must have narrow width in the time domain) relative to the time scales

of the physical phenomena to be measured, and the pulse train of the pump must be well

synchronized to that of the probe. The pulse widths and the pulse synchronization determine

the limits of time resolution in the experiment.

1.
Background: Light Sources

Pump-probe methods require the simultaneous generation of synchronized pulse trains of

very different energies. In TR-ARPES, an infrared (IR) or visible pulsed beam is needed for

excitation, while an ultraviolet (UV) or extreme ultraviolet (XUV) beam probes the system

via photoexcitation. The Fourier limit places a strict boundary on the energy resolution

achievable in an experiment, depending on what time resolution is needed (or, vice versa,

if energy resolution is critical, then the Fourier limit determines the maximum achievable

time resolution). The demands on the resolution are set by the time and energy scales of

2


the physical phenomena of interest: for example, studies of electron-electron interactions

typically demand time resolution of no worse than tens of fs1.

Light sources commonly used to supply the pulsed ultraviolet probe beam include tabletop

laser setups2,3 and free-electron lasers2,4,5.
This paper deals with tabletop laser setups.

Wavelengths down to approximately 115 nm (i.e., energies up to approximately 11 eV) are

achievable with commercial off-the-shelf laser systems6. However, even at 11 eV, one can

access only a relatively small section of momentum space up to approximately 1.3 ˚A−1. Off-

the-shelf laser systems cannot generate photons in the tens-of-eV range that allows ARPES

to access the full three-dimensional (3D) Brillioun zone of most crystalline materials, or that

gives access to shallow-lying core-level states. To reach this range in a tabletop setup, one

typically relies on HHG—usually in a gas jet3,7.

It is possible to use a single powerful laser to generate both the IR pump and the HHG

XUV beam. An advantage of this approach is that the pulse trains of the two beams are

automatically synchronized. The method works by taking the IR beam from a commercial

laser system and splitting it into two parts, one of which is used to generate HHG, and the

other of which is sent along a separate beam path for use as a pump. A movable delay stage

in one of the beamlines (typically the pump beamline) controls the pulse separation ∆, and

then the two beams are recombined.

In a 3D-dispersing system, the probe photon energy determines which part of the 3D

Brillouin zone is measured.
Control of the probe energy also allows for optimization of

photoemission intensity in electronic states of interest, via control of final state and matrix

element effects8–12. While this is the basis for photon-energy-dependent synchrotron-based

studies of out-of-plane-dispersing “kz” states, the situation is more challenging for laser-

based experiments: while a synchrotron (or FEL) undulator can generate probe photons

with continuously tunable energy across a wide range13, no such continuous spectrum is

possible with laser-based HHG. Rather, HHG produces a “frequency comb” of odd-ordered

harmonics14 (Fig. 1(b)). A single frequency from the comb can be selected with a com-

bination of reflective and transmissive optics15.
At Artemis, we take an alternative ap-

proach, using a grating monochromator, which spatially separates the frequencies of the

HHG comb into a “fan”, and a slit that picks out a single frequency from the fan7,16. When

the monochromator is properly aligned, any frequency in the comb can be quickly selected

on-the-fly, which provides great flexibility to choose different photon energies7. The power

3


of this type of approach has recently been demonstrated16.

2.
Background: Photoelectron Detection and Analysers

The best-established technology for photoelectron spectroscopy is the hemispherical anal-

yser (HA). This tool measures photoemission intensity as a function of momentum and en-

ergy across a wide range of binding energies and with energy resolution that is better than

1 meV17. The HA has been the workhorse of the photoemission community, and is likely to

remain so for the foreseeable future. Moreover, state-of-the art HA technology increasingly

incorporates advanced features; for example, spin detection. However, if electronic states of

interest do not correspond to a single set of emission angles along the slit direction of the

analyzer, then multiple HA measurements must be taken—either by rotating the sample

in front of the analyzer, or by applying “deflector” voltages to the electron lens column in

order to sample emission angles away from the slit direction. This works well, but can be

a challenge in the context of pump-probe measurements, where each data set is intrinsi-

cally time consuming (on account of the need to acquire spectra at multiple time delays).

When important physics arise simultaneously in multiple parts of the Brillouin zone, or

when photon-energy-dependent measurements will cause the 3D Brillouin zone to shrink

and expand on the detector, an alternative approach to detection is desirable. Moreover, in

the case of short-pulse pump-probe applications, the high energy resolution of the analyser

greatly exceeds the Fourier limit of the short light pulses.

Recent years have seen rapid advancements in new types of analyser technologies18–20.

Some are based on time-of-flight (ToF), among which are various types of photoemission

electron microscopes (PEEMs) and momentum microscopes (MMs)21. These new techniques

are powerful, permitting sophisticated momentum-space and real-space mapping, but they

also present new challenges. In the case of PEEM and ToF-MM, a large potential difference

must be applied between the sample and the objective lens of the electron optics. Because

these are close together (on the order of several mm), there is a possibility of dielectric

breakdown across the small vacuum gap and, as a result, sample damage. Another challenge,

in the case of pulsed-probe measurements, arises with space charge effects in the electron

optics5. This latter issue is discussed below.

Very recently, a new type of simple, economical, and yet highly effective photoelec-

4


tron analyser has been developed. The working principle—similar to that of velocity map

imaging22,23—has been described in a recent paper24. From the point of view of pump-probe

measurements, we find that this new analyser, which is available commercially under the

name“FeSuMa” (“Fermi Surface Mapper”), offers advantages over other types of analysers

for some of the most commonly required types of pump-probe ARPES measurements. The

technology offers an efficient approach to measurement of the full Brillouin zone. It has a very

straightforward application to states near the Fermi surface, which are the primary states

of interest for many pump-probe ARPES studies; however, it can also probe deeper-lying

states, including shallow-lying core levels. When used on a beamline with photon-energy

control, it offers an efficient method for 3D measurements of kz-dispersing states. Addition-

ally, its user-friendly operation and compact profile make it easy to incorporate into crowded

lab spaces and into vacuum chambers that might contain several other tools for various other

types of measurements. In the sections that follow, we describe how these advantages have

been integrated into our tabletop HHG beamline at Artemis to take advantage of the special

capabilities of the FeSuMa in the context of pump-probe ARPES measurements.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

A.
Optical Setup

In Fig. 1, we present the layout of the Artemis optical setup for the tests described here.

The pump and probe pulses are generated from the output of a 1-kHz Ti:Sapphire laser

(upgraded from the RedDragon, KMLabs) with a pulse energy of about 3 mJ at 790 nm.

The bandwidth is approximately 50 nm, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The output laser beam is split

into two parts, with 80% focused onto a 200 µm Ar gas jet, via a lens of 500-mm focal length,

for HHG. An example of the resulting XUV spectrum—i.e. the frequency comb—is shown in

panel (b). For these conditions, the usable high-harmonic energies range from approximately

17 eV to 45 eV, with a maximum photon flux of about 1010 photons/second/harmonic at

27 eV. A single harmonic is selected by a time-preserving grating monochromator25. To

avoid space-charge effects, which are discussed in Section IV B, the photon flux was reduced

to 108 photons/second/harmonic by an adjustable slit after the monochromator.

The remaining 20 percent of the output beam is used for pumping, either at its fundamen-

5


Red Dragon
1 kHz
λ = 790 nm
Gas jet
  
Monochromator

Toroidal
mirror

HWP QWP

DS

DS

I (a.u.)

840
800
760

λ (nm)

a

I (a.u.)

40
35
30
25
20
15
E (eV)

b

280
240
200

c
d

FeSuMa

BS

e

I (a.u.)

θHWP (°)

200 μm

Pump
Probe

FIG. 1. (a) The spectrum of the Ti:Sapphire laser, centered at about 790 nm with a bandwidth

of approximately 50 nm.
(b) High-harmonics spectrum generated in the argon gas jet.
The

maximum photon flux is approximately 1010 photons/second/harmonic at 27 eV. A time-preserving

monochromator is used to choose between the probe energies. (c) Calibration curves for the incident

pump polarisation, acquired as measured intensity through a polarizer after the QWP as the HWP

is rotated. (d) The spot sizes of the probe (80 µm, FWHM) and pump beams (250 µm, FWHM),

captured by FeSuMa. (e) A simplified schematic of the experimental setup. The locations of delay

stages are labeled “DS,” while “BS” indicates an 80-20 beam splitter.

tal wavelength or after frequency-doubling or -quadrupling by beta barium borate crystals.

A delay stage in the pump beamline enables time-resolved measurements. A half-wave plate

(HWP) and a quarter-wave plate (QWP) are added into the pump beamline for polarization

control: Fig. 1(c) shows calibration data for the HWP rotation angle (QWP angle was held

fixed). The pump beam is finally focused on the sample, using a lens with focal length of

1.5 m. The pump and probe beams reach the sample almost collinearly, with an angle of 45◦

relative to the sample normal when the sample is at normal emission relative to the detec-

tor. The pump fluence is about 2 mJ/cm2, with pump spot size of approximately 250 µm at

FWHM (450 µm at 1/e2 width). The XUV spot size of about 80 µm is measured roughly by

the size of the spot on a scintillating crystal, and confirmed by the FeSuMa in Direct Mode

(see Section II B). The images of the two beam spots recorded by FeSuMa are presented in

Fig. 1(d). The time resolution is determined from the auto-correlation spectrum, as shown

in the Supplementary Material26.

6


B.
Working Principles of FeSuMa

The FeSuMa is a new type of ARPES analyser that combines Fourier electron optics with

retarding field techniques24. The lens of the device consists of several cylindrical elements

that represent the simplest element of electron optics—the Einzel lens. It focuses parallel

electron beams, originating from the sample surface, into corresponding points in the focal

plane. This is similar to the action of a convex optical lens which makes a Fourier trans-

formation of light. The novelty of the approach is in placing the detector, a multichannel

plate (MCP), directly in the focal plane, and applying a retarding potential, Vr, to the front

of the MCP. In practice, the focal points lie not on a plane but on a curved surface, and

the detector is placed so as to achieve a reasonable balance between angular acceptance and

angular resolution. The signal is amplified by a pair of MCPs in “chevron” geometry, and

is converted into photons by a phosphorus screen. A camera outside the vacuum captures

the image and sends it to the computer for further processing.

By setting Vr such that only Fermi-level electrons can reach the detector from an un-

pumped sample, one can observe the Fermi surface map directly on the screen. In order

to obtain information about electrons with higher binding energies, Vr is reduced step-by-

step while the detector collects the integrated signal. Subsequent differentiation results in

a conventional photoemission spectrum. An example of such a measurement is in Fig. 2(a),

where we show a Bi core-level spectrum acquired from the Bi(111) surface26. The spin-

orbit splitting in the Bi 5d doublet is well resolved when the spectrum is differentiated, in

Fig. 2(b). In like manner, to obtain the intensity distribution of a photoemission signal

from valence states as a function of momentum and energy, a three-dimensional data set

is recorded and then differentiated along the energy axis across a smaller range of energies

close to the Fermi level. We show the example for the case of Bi(111) in Fig. 2(c), where the

Fermi surface, momentum distribution, and underlying dispersion of the electronic states

are visible. Due to the semimetallic nature of bulk Bi, the photoemission intensity at the

Fermi level is dominated by surface states27. The bulk and surface Brillouin zone (BZ) of

Bi(111) is provided in Fig. 2(d) for reference.

The FeSuMa operates in three regimes: Fourier Mode, Direct Mode and Optical Mode.

Within the first of these regimes, there are actually three settings, characterized by an-

gular acceptances of ±8◦, ±14◦ and ±16◦. Angular acceptance in the Fourier modes can

7


FeSuMa output
Diff. data

I (arb. u.)
dI/dE (arb. u.)

a
Differential scan: Bi(111)

E-EF (eV)

-1.5

-1.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

-2.0

-1.0

0.0

E-EF (eV)

-2.0

-1.0

0.0

E-EF (eV)

0.5 Å-1
0.5 Å-1

Bi 5d

VB

Bi(111)

E-EF (eV)

25

20

15

10

5

0

b
c

kx

ky

Bi (111)
surface BZ
d

Γ
Λ

M
Γ
K

L
X

U
W

T

kx
ky

Γ
M
M

Γ
K
K

FIG. 2. (a) Example of static angle-integrated raw data obtained from Bi(111) by scanning the

retarding potential Vr (hν = 37.4 eV, sample measurement temperature 300K). (b) Same data as

in (b), after differentiation. The core-level spectrum of Bi(111) is now well resolved. (c) Example

of an (E, kx, ky)-resolved data set, acquired without optical pumping from Bi(111) (hν = 22.4 eV,

sample measurement temperature 78K). The directions of the cuts correspond to the directions of

the lines (matched in colour to the frames of the two spectra) in the constant-energy contour at left.

Note the scale bar at the bottom: high-symmetry points ¯K and ¯M are outside the range shown in

the panel. The asymmetry of intensity in the cut along ¯M-¯Γ- ¯M arises from matrix element effects

that can be seen clearly in the constant energy slices at left. (d) Schematic of the Bi BZ, with

high-symmetry points labeled. Panel (d) is adapted from Ref.28.

be extended by applying a bias potential (see discussion below and Fig. 5)—a technique

that is also used in conventional ARPES29. The FeSuMa’s ability to instantly detect the

angular distribution of intensity allows the parameters to be quickly adjusted, minimising

the distortion of the electric field caused by any non-cylindrical symmetry in the sample

environment.

In the Direct Mode, the lens projects an image of the electron source in real coordinates;

thus, it can be used to characterize and track the beam spot in two dimensions (see Fig. 1(d)).

This is a significant advantage in comparison with conventional HAs, where only one spatial

coordinate, corresponding to the direction along the entrance slit, is accessible. Since the

MCP is sensitive to UV photons, Direct Mode can also be used to detect reflected or scattered

light from surface features and sample edges, and thus either to track the position of the

photon beam or to find flat portions of the surface (since no photons should enter the

8


analyser from a flat sample region if the electron signal is optimised).

We finally mention here an advantage of the FeSuMa for pump-probe experiments: unlike

in HAs and MMs, electron trajectories in the FeSuMa (being an order of magnitude shorter)

do not pass through auxiliary focal planes or crossing points. In HAs, there are two imaging

planes and one crossing point where electron trajectories are brought together (e.g., Ref.30),

and Coulombic electron-electron interactions are presumably enhanced at such points. It is

generally desirable to avoid such space charge effects, as they degrade angular and energy

resolution. In the case of MMs, electron-electron interactions both inside the focusing column

and in front of the objective lens are complex and problematic5,19,31. The FeSuMa’s design,

which reduces the effects of space charge inside the electron optics, is beneficial to pump-

probe measurements. This will be discussed further below.

III.
PROOF OF PRINCIPLE DATA

In the following, we summarise the versatile applications of the FeSuMa analyser when

coupled with a pump-probe setup. To facilitate comparison with similar approacheas involv-

ing HAs and MMs19, we benchmark the capabilities of the system using a widely studied

layered transition metal dichalcogenide, cleaved bulk trigonal prismatic tungsten diselenide

(2H-WSe2). Bulk WSe2 is an indirect bandgap semiconductor32 with a hexagonal BZ that

is sketched in Fig. 3(a). Its valence band maximum (VBM) is located at the Γ-point, and

the conduction band minimum (CBM) at the Σ-valley, in between Γ and K. Upon optical

excitation with a circularly polarized infrared pulse, the material exhibits spin-, valley-, and

layer-polarisation33.

We start by demonstrating a simple approach to a common (but historically challenging)

application of TR-ARPES: namely, characterization of excited carrier relaxation between

local conduction band minima in different parts of the BZ. In Fig. 3(b), we present the

evolution of excited state signals that have been collected with Vr set so as to probe just

above the Fermi level. Since every electron with a kinetic energy greater than eVr is collected

by the FeSuMa, all the unoccupied states can be monitored concurrently, regardless of their

energy dispersion. A comprehensive discussion of the dynamics, both for bulk and single-

layer WSe2, can be found in multiple publications (e.g. Refs.33–35). Here, we simply highlight

that the FeSuMa allows detection of localised charge populations in a large portion of the

9


Δt (ps)
5
4
3
2
1
0

100 200
0

(ii)

(i)

(iii)

K

Σ

c
b (i) Δt = 20 fs
(ii) Δt = 50 fs
(iii) Δt > 1.5 ps

K

0.4 Å-1

Σ
K

Σ

Δt (ps)

M
Γ

K

K’

Σ

Σ’

M
Γ
K

A

2H-WSe2
a

Σ

H
X

FIG. 3. (a) Surface (dark blue) and three-dimensional (green) Brillouin zones of 2H-WSe2. (b) (kx,

ky) slices corresponding to different stages of the ultrafast evolution of the system after pumping

with s-polarized light at 800 nm (probe photon energy hν = 22.6 eV, sample temperature 78K). The

sample is rotated such that ¯Γ is at the left edge of the detector. The ¯K and ¯Σ points of the Brillouin

zone are labeled. (i) Just after the optical excitation, only ¯K-points are populated. (ii) Within

50 fs of the optical excitation, electrons can be seen to transfer from the ¯K-valleys to ¯Σ-valleys.

Retarding potential is set such that E −EF = 0.65 eV. (iii) At longer times after the pump arrival,

all of the excited electronic population has either transferred to the ¯Σ-points or has already relaxed

fully. (c) Ultrafast dynamics of 2H-WSe2: orange (green) markers denote photoemission intensity

difference, relative to pre-pumped intensity, integrated over the ¯K(¯Σ)-points of the Brillouin zone.

These temporal dynamics are in good agreement with previously published results19,33.

BZ simultaneously, allowing for identification of scattering pathways in the material. The

time traces in Fig. 3(c) were collected over 20 mins, corresponding to 36 s of acquisition per

frame. As can be seen in the figure, the statistics are excellent, despite having been acquired

with a low probe flux of only 108 photons/second.

We note certain limitations of the efficient approach just described: here, time-resolved

measurements are performed by integration, maintaining Vr at a set value. The analysis of

data acquired in this way can be challenging if there are multiple excitations at different

binding energies but similar k; furthermore, access to information about band curvatures is

restricted. Of course, the dataset can be extended to four dimensions (kx, ky, E, ∆), simply

by sweeping Vr in the manner described above (leading to longer acquisition times).

An advantage that the FeSuMa shares with PEEM and momentum microscopy is the

capability for maintaining a fixed sample geometry while mapping the momentum space.

10


Incident light polarisation can remain fixed and photoemission matrix elements unchanged

throughout an experiment, and one can straightforwardly extract information such as dichro-

ism from excited-state populations. In Fig. 4(a), we show the excited carrier distributions

that arise in 2H-WSe2 pumped with four polarisations: linear vertical (LV), linear horizon-

tal (LH), circular right (CR), and circular left (CL). Here, the choices of photon energy and

acceptance angle do not image the whole BZ, but allow us to simultaneously see dynamics

at the inequivalent ¯K- and ¯K’-points and at the corresponding ¯Σ- and ¯Σ’-points. The ex-

citation with linearly polarised light leads to negligible linear dichroic (LD) contrast in the

population at ¯K- and ¯Σ-points. Pumping with LH light produces a strong signal around

the ¯Γ-point; this is a known consequence of multi-photon photoemission process enhanced

by this polarisation36,37. On the other hand, we see significant circular dichroic (CD) signal

at the adjacent ¯K- and ¯K′-points. This arises due to a combination of (1) the primarily

two-dimensional character of the states at ¯K- and ¯K′, and (2) the surface sensitivity of the

ARPES measurement33,38. Indeed, the low photoelectron kinetic energies in the measure-

ments described here mean that these spectra are highly sensitive to the physics of the

topmost atomic layer of the crystalline structure39.

A full movie of dynamics in a different material system—Bi(111)—is available in the

Supplementary Materials26.

A powerful aspect of the Artemis setup is its ability to switch efficiently between different

HHG probe energies. (See also Ref.16.) This is possible because of carefully optimized optical

alignment in the beamline and fine angular control of the final toroidal focusing mirror.

Thus, we can coarsely map the out-of-plane dispersion of unoccupied states, in a manner

analogous to that by which the occupied-state kz-dispersion is obtained at synchrotron

light sources. We demonstrate this principle in Fig. 4(b). Varying the probe energy leads

to strikingly different excited state signals across the BZ. The lowest-lying conduction-band

states along the K-H path are nearly non-dispersive40, and are visible at all photon energies.

However, the scattering from K to Σ is well captured at only one probe energy, 22.4 eV.

In this connection, we note both that the out-of-plane dispersion along the Σ-X path is

more pronounced than that along K-H path40, and also that the photoemission matrix

elements are presumably enhanced at particular probe energies10,16,41. The first of these

points highlights the importance of thoughtful HHG photon-energy selection in studies of

materials in which 3D-dispersing band structures play an important role; this is the case, for

11


a
b
Pump polarization dependence
hνHHG dependence

LV
LH

CR
CL
CD

LD

0.5 Å-1

pos
neg
max
min

22.5 eV
28.5 eV
34.4 eV
16.1 eV

t ~ t0

t >> t0

0.5 Å-1

Γ
K
Σ

Γ
K
Σ

K
H

Σ
X

kz 
0
π/c

K
H

Σ
X

kz 
0
π/c

FIG. 4. (a) Spin- and valley-polarised excited carriers in the surface electronic band structure of

2H-WSe2 along the ¯Γ-¯K high-symmetry line. At left, adapted from Ref.33, red and blue color-

coding in the band structure plot refers to the spin polarisation of the bands. Light and dark

arrows symbolise right- and left-circular polarisation of the pump pulse. The data shows pump

polarization-dependent measurements of excited-state spectra. The labels at the upper right-hand

corners indicate linear vertical (LV) and horizontal (LH) polarizations, linear dichroism (LD) as a

difference plot of LH-LV, circular right (CR) and left (CL) polarizations, and circular dichroism

(CD) as a difference plot of CL-CR. Probe energy was 22.6 eV, and the spectra were collected at

the time delay of 200 fs. (b) Probe-photon-energy-dependent excited-state spectra at the peak of

excitation (top row) and at 200 fs after the excitation (bottom row). The probe photon energy is

indicated at the upper right-hand corner at the top of each column. The out-of-plane electronic

dispersion along Σ-X leads to a photon-energy-dependence in the photoemission intensity of the

states projected into ¯Σ. Meanwhile, the states along K-H are nearly non-dispersing, and thus the

photoemission intensity in those states is nearly independent of probe photon energy. The schematic

of the out-of-plane-dispersing band structure is adapted from Ref.33. Data were acquired with Vr

set such that E − EF = 0.65 eV.

example, in Weyl candidates Co3Sn2S242 and PtTe243. The second points to the possibility

of using matrix element effects to optimise signal-to-noise for all types of samples, including

those with a primarily 2D electronic character.

12


A
B
C
D

Γ

Μ

FIG. 5.
(a) Electric fields between sample and FeSuMa analyser for normal operation mode (top)

and when ”fisheye voltage” is applied (bottom). Calculated with SIMION44. (b) Fermi surface

of Bi(111) taken with probe energy of 16.2 eV, with increasing “fisheye voltage” applied. (The

focusing conditions were optimized at condition ii, with the result that the focusing conditions

are slightly non-optimal in (i) and (iii) and the image appears off-centre on the detector.) (c)

Workflow for applying the corrections required for datasets acquired with “fisheye voltage”. (i)

Conversion between position on the MCP, (x, y), to emission angle, θx, θy, based on the calibration

radial function (red curve) obtained from ray tracing. (ii) Angle-to-momentum transformation.

(iii) Angular and radial corrections to the image based on the expected symmetry of the intensity

distribution. Black dot-dashed lines represent the portions of the image that need correction, while

arrows indicate the direction of the corrections.

IV.
ADDITIONAL TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS

A.
“Fisheye” Data Acquisition

Applying a bias voltage to the sample holder is a very convenient approach to increase the

momentum field of view29. Due to the additional component of the field towards the analyser

(shown schematically in Fig. 5(a)), electron trajectories are bent, and electrons that initially

13


deviate strongly from the lens axis are nevertheless able to enter the analyser. Thus, using

photon energies of only 16.2, 22.2, 28.6, and 34.2 eV, we cover portions of the momentum

space at the Fermi level that are much larger than we would otherwise be able to access

without the fisheye voltage, achieving radii of 0.81, 0.88, 0.9, and 0.97 ˚A−1, respectively.

The drawback of this approach is that it can lead to distortions resulting from the presence

of the electrical field, especially when cylindrical symmetry around the lens axis is broken

by the sample’s immediate environment (i.e., non-cylindrical sample holder, manipulator

shape, cables, etc.). Because we can easily see the momentum distribution “live” before

acquiring a spectrum, we can take some steps to minimize distortions by adjusting of the

geometry of the experiment. Further processing after the measurement, based on purely

symmetry-driven considerations, allows us to eliminate all visible distortions of the angular

distribution. This will now be explained.

We introduce two types of corrections to deal with angular and radial distortions, taking

as our starting point the known symmetries of our material systems. In the angular case, we

are concerned with a segment of the dataset where there are distortions like those illustrated

schematically by black dashed lines in the left panel of Fig. 5(c)(iii). We take the two axes

A and B, as indicated by dashed lines leading to the red and green triangles, respectively,

in the left panel of Fig. 5(c)(iii). In the affected segment of the data we then shift all points

that lie along the A-axis onto the B-axis. For all other points in this segment, a linear

interpolation then squeezes the part of the image that lies to the left of B and stretches the

part of the image that lies to the right of B.

For the radial correction, we show an illustrative example in Fig. 5(iii). In this simple

cartoon, we only need to correct one portion of the image that is obviously compressed

relative to the others. Identifying the two points C and D that lie along the same axis

(orange and purple triangles in the central panel of Fig.
5(c)(iii)), we perform a linear

interpolation such that C is moved onto D, and all other points in a segment are stretched

(or squeezed) linearly while keeping the centre of the image intact.

B.
Space-charge

As sketched schematically in Fig. 6(a), space charge arises due to Coulombic repul-

sive interactions within the dense cloud of photoelectrons emitted from the sample surface,

14


leading to energy shifts and distortions of electron trajectories as they move towards the

analyser45,46.
The resultant photoemission spectra exhibit reduced effective energy- and

momentum-resolution, as well as other artifacts, such as shifting of spectra and possible

“ghost” peaks46. The energy shift and broadening are illustrated schematically in Fig. 6(b).

In addition to the fact that a dense cloud of Coulombically interacting photoelectrons can be

generated by the probe pulse, the pump beam can produce an unwanted cloud of “slow” sec-

ondary electrons via multiphoton photoemission and emission from surface defects47. This

latter effect can contribute additional space-charge effects.

In our setup, photoemitted electrons are tightly confined in space and time only once, at

the sample surface, before they interact with the MCP24. This is an advantageous situation

relative to HAs and MMs, where additional focal planes and spatial confinement can cause

further Coulombic interaction5,18,19. Moreover, in a ToF, a long-range electric field develops

as slow electrons produced by the pump propagate through the lens tube, and fast valence

electrons experience an accelerating or decelerating force, depending on the time delay,

culminating in a “fake” time-zero at a large (tens-of-ps) time delay5.
These effects are

largely avoided in the FeSuMa. The retarding voltage readily repels the slowest secondaries—

possibly even at the very entrance of the lens column, depending their kinetic energies—so

as to reduce their interaction with the other photoelectrons in the lens tube.

Of course, the severity of distortions always depends also on XUV beam diameter and on

pulse energy48. At the relatively low 1-kHz repetition rate of the Artemis set-up that was

used for this particular experiment, the choice of photon flux was a compromise between the

space-charge and the acquisition time required to achieve sufficient signal-to-noise ratio. In

future experiments on the Artemis 100-kHz beamline, we expect to see this issue partially

remedied.

In Fig.
6(c), we characterise the spectral modifications due to probe-induced space-

charge. We use Bi(111) spectra to estimate the shift of the Fermi edge, which occurs across

the entire investigated XUV range as a function of flux46. Fig 6(d) shows the pump-induced

Fermi-edge shift. The pump-induced spectral distortions exhibit a complex dependence on

the time delay, and are present over a range of several picoseconds after temporal overlap49.

The secondary-electron population scales non-linearly with the nth-power of the laser flu-

ence and, in general, affects primarily the low kinetic energy portion of a spectrum. These

pump-fluence-dependent measurements were made at a time delay of 150 fs before the op-

15


c
d
Probe
Pump

F (mJ cm-2)

ΔE (eV)

IPD (pA)

0.8

0.4

0

200 300
100

0.8

0.4

0.0

12 16
8
4
0

t = 0
z = 0

t >> 0
z >> 0

Ek

E0

dEf

dE0

a

- -

Ef
-
-

b

-
-

-- -
- -

-

ΔE (eV)

FIG. 6.
(a) Cartoon of space-charge generated in a pump-probe photoemission experiment.

Coulombic interactions occur between charged particles in a dense cloud of photoemitted elec-

trons. (b) Qualitative impact of space-charge on photoemission spectra. Dark (light) blue peaks

represent the electron distribution just after photoemission (after travel towards the analyser). (c)

Measured probe-induced peak shift of the spectrum at the peak of excitation, as a function of

probe photon flux (measured as photocurrent IPD induced in a photodiode that can be extended

into the beampath. Error bars are estimated from the standard deviation in detected photoelec-

tron counts.) (d) Measured pump-induced peak shift of the Fermi edge before the excitation, as a

function of pump fluence. (Horizontal error bars estimated from typical fluctuation in pump power

as measured with power meter26, vertical error bars determined by uncertainty in fitting the FL

shift).

tical excitation, in order to exclude the affects of real ultrafast dynamics happening in the

sample. Up to a fluence of approximately 5 mJ cm−2, the spectra are virtually unaltered

by any pump-induced space-charge. Above this threshold, the spectral shift shows a power

dependence of F x (x = 2.7 ± 0.1), in agreement with a previous study of the excitation with

a 1.55 eV pump47.

V.
CONCLUSIONS

The FeSuMa offers a simple, affordable approach to high-quality pump-probe photoemis-

sion measurements, particularly for time-resolved ARPES of valence and conduction states

near the Fermi level. Like certain PEEM-based approaches, it permits measurement of dy-

namics spanning the entire Brillouin zone. In the context of an HHG beamline that permits

scanning of the probe energy, the fisheye mode of operation offers particular benefit for

16


studies of 3D-dispersing states. The FeSuMa is highly complementary to hemispherical an-

alyzers, and constitutes an attractive option for laboratory-scale measurements of electron

dynamics. Measurements of conduction-band dynamics in layered 2H-WSe2 yield excellent

agreement with previously published results based on momentum microscopy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Phil Rice, Alistair Cox, and the CLF Engineering Section for technical sup-

port; and Drs.
James O. F. Thompson and Marco Bianchi for helpful discussion.
We

acknowledge funding from VILLUM FONDEN through the Centre of Excellence for Dirac

Materials (Grant No. 11744) and from the Independent Research Fund Denmark (Grant

No. 1026-00089B). Work at the Artemis Facility is funded by the UK Science and Tech-

nology Facilities Council. The research leading to these results has received funding from

LASERLAB-EUROPE (grant agreement no. 871124, European Union’s Horizon 2020 re-

search and innovation programme).

Supplementary material is available online. It includes a movie of data acquired with

the FeSuMa across a range of delay times before and after an optically pumped excitation

in Bi(111)/Bi2Se3, and information about the time resolution and laser stability on the

beamline used for this experiment.

REFERENCES

1H. Petek and S. Ogawa, “Femtosecond time-resolved two-photon photoemission studies of

electron dynamics in metals,” Prog. Surf. Sci. 56, 239–310 (1997).

2X. Zhou, S. He, G. Liu, L. Zhao, L. Yu, and W. Zhang, “New developments in laser-based

photoemission spectroscopy and its scientific applications: a key issues review,” Reports

on Progress in Physics 81, 062101 (2018).

3T. Suzuki, S. Shin,
and K. Ozaki, “HHG-laser-based time- and angle-resolved photoe-

mission spectroscopy of quantum materials,” J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 251,

147105 (2021).

4P. Grychtol, N. Kohlstrunk, J. Buck, S. Thiess, V. Vardanyan, D. Doblas-Jimenez, J. Ohne-

sorge, S. Babenkov, M. Dommach, D. La Civita, M. Vannoni, K. Rossnagel, G. Sch¨onhense,

17


S. Molodtsov, and M. Izquierdo, “The SXP instrument at the European XFEL,” Journal

of Physics: Conference Series 2380, 012043 (2022).

5D. Kutnyakhov, R. P. Xian, M. Dendzik, M. Heber, F. Pressacco, S. Y. Agustsson, L. Wen-

thaus, H. Meyer, S. Gieschen, G. Mercurio, A. Benz, K. B¨uhlman, S. D¨aster, R. Gort,

D. Curcio, K. Volckaert, M. Bianchi, C. Sanders, J. A. Miwa, S. Ulstrup, A. Oelsner,

C. Tusche, Y.-J. Chen, D. Vasilyev, K. Medjanik, G. Brenner, S. Dziarzhytski, H. Redlin,

B. Manschwetus, S. Dong, J. Hauer, L. Rettig, F. Diekmann, K. Rossnagel, J. Demsar,

H.-J. Elmers, P. Hofmann, R. Ernstorfer, G. Sch¨onhense, Y. Acremann, and W. Wurth,

“Time- and momentum-resolved photoemission studies using time-of-flight momentum mi-

croscopy at a free-electron laser,” Review of Scientific Instruments 91, 13109 (2020).

6Q.-J. Peng, N. Zong, S.-J. Zhang, Z.-M. Wang, F. Yang, F.-F. Zhang, Z.-Y. Xu, and X.-J.

Zhou, “DUV/VUV all-solid-state lasers: Twenty years of progress and the future,” IEEE

J. Quantum Electron. 24, 1–12 (2018).

7F. Frassetto, C. Cacho, C. A. Froud, E. Turcu, P. Villoresi, W. A. Bryan, E. Springate,

and L. Poletto, “Single-grating monochromator for extreme-ultraviolet ultrashort pulses,”

Opt. Express 19, 19169–19181 (2011).

8A. Damascelli, Z. Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen, “Angle-resolved photoemission studies of the

cuprate superconductors,” Reviews of Modern Physics 75, 473–541 (2003).

9J. A. Sobota, Y. He, and Z.-X. Shen, “Angle-resolved photoemission studies of quantum

materials,” Reviews of Modern Physics 93, 025006 (2021).

10F. Boschini, D. Bugini, M. Zonno, M. Michiardi, R. P. Day, E. Razzoli, B. Zwartsen-

berg, M. Schneider, E. H. da Silva Neto, S. dal Conte, S. K. Kushwaha, R. J. Cava,

S. Zhdanovich, A. K. Mills, G. Levy, E. Carpene, C. Dallera, C. Giannetti, D. J. Jones,

G. Cerullo, and A. Damascelli, “Role of matrix elements in the time-resolved photoemis-

sion signal,” New Journal of Physics 22, 23031 (2020).

11I. Gierz, J. Henk, H. H¨ochst, C. R. Ast,
and K. Kern, “Illuminating the dark corridor

in graphene: Polarization dependence of angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy on

graphene,” Physical Review B 83, 121408 (2011).

12I. Gierz, M. Lindroos, H. H¨ochst, C. R. Ast,
and K. Kern, “Graphene sublattice sym-

metry and isospin determined by circular dichroism in angle-resolved photoemission spec-

troscopy,” Nano Letters 12, 3900–3904 (2012).

18


13W. B. Peatman, Gratings, Mirrors, and Slits: Beamline Design for Soft X-Ray Synchrotron Radiation So

(Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, Amsterdam, 1997).

14P. Jaegl´e, “Vacuum ultraviolet lasers,” in Vacuum Ultraviolet Spectroscopy, edited by

J. A. R. Samson and D. L. Ederer (Academic Press, London, 2000) pp. 101–118.

15M. Puppin, Y. Deng, C. W. Nicholson, J. Feldl, Schr¨oter, H. Vita, P. S. Kirchmann,

C. Monney, L. Rettig, M. Wolf, and R. Ernstorfer, “Time- and angle-resolved photoemis-

sion spectroscopy of solids in the extreme ultraviolet at 500 kHz repetition rate,” Rev. Sci.

Instrum. 90, 023104 (2019).

16M. Heber, N. Wind, D. Kutnyakhov, F. Pressacco, T. Arion, F. Roth, W. Eberhardt,

and K. Rossnagel, “Multispectral time-resolved energy–momentum microscopy using high-

harmonic extreme ultraviolet radiation,” Review of Scientific Instruments 93, 083905

(2022).

17H. Iwasawa, E. F. Schwier, M. Arita, A. Ino, H. Namatame, M. Taniguchi, Y. Aiura, and

K. Shimada, “Development of laser-based scanning µ-ARPES system with ultimate energy

and momentum resolutions,” Ultramicroscopy 182, 85–91 (2017).

18G. Sch¨onhense, K. Medjanik, and H.-J. Elmers, “Space-, time- and spin-resolved photoe-

mission,” Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 200, 94–118 (2015).

19J. Maklar, S. Dong, S. Beaulieu, T. Pincelli, M. Dendzik, Y. W. Windsor, R. P. Xian,

M. Wolf, R. Ernstorfer, and L. Rettig, “A quantitative comparison of time-of-flight mo-

mentum microscopes and hemispherical analyzers for time- and angle-resolved photoemis-

sion spectroscopy experiments,” Review of Scientific Instruments 91, 123112 (2020).

20C. Tusche, Y.-J. Chen, L. Plucinski,
and C. M. Schneider, “From photoemission mi-

croscopy to an “all-in-one” photoemission experiment,” e-J. Surf. Sci. Nanotechnol. 18,

48–56 (2020).

21S. Suga, A. Sekiyama, and C. Tusche, Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Bulk and Surface Electronic Structur

2nd ed. (Springer Nature, Switzerland, 2021) pp. 351–416.

22A. T. J. B. Eppink and D. H. Parker, “Velocity map imaging of ions and electrons us-

ing electrostatic lenses: Application in photoelectron and photofragment ion imaging of

molecular oxygen,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68, 3477–3484 (1997).

23M. Stei, J. von Vangerow, R. Otto, A. H. Kelkar, E. Carrascosa, T. Best, and R. Wester,

“High resolution spatial map imaging of a gaseous target,” Journal of Chemical Physics

138, 214201 (2013).

19


24S. Borisenko, A. Fedorov, A. Kuibarov, M. Bianchi, V. Bezguba, P. Majchrzak, P. Hof-

mann, P. Baumg¨artel, V. Voroshnin, Y. Kushnirenko, J. S´anchez-Barriga, A. Varykhalov,

R. Ovsyannikov, I. Morozov, S. Aswartham, O. Feia, L. Harnagea, S. Wurmehl, A. Ko-

rdyuk, A. Yaresko, H. Berger,
and B. B¨uchner, “Fermi surface tomography,” Nature

Communications 13, 4132 (2022).

25F. Frassetto, S. Bonora, P. Villoresi, L. Poletto, E. Springate, C. A. Froud, I. C. E.

Turcu, A. J. Langley, D. S. Wolff, J. L. Collier, S. S. Dhesi, and A. Cavalleri, “Design

and characterization of the XUV monochromator for ultrashort pulses at the ARTEMIS

facility,” in Proc. SPIE, Vol. 7077 (2008) p. 707713.

26See Supplemental Material for a movie of a representative three-dimensional dataset and

for details about time resolution and laser stability.

27Y. M. Koroteev, G. Bihlmayer, J. E. Gayone, E. V. Chulkov, S. Bl¨ugel, P. M. Echenique,

and P. Hofmann, “Strong spin-orbit splitting on Bi surfaces,” Physical Review Letters 93,

046403 (2004).

28T. Hirahara, T. Nagao, I. Matsuda, G. Bihlmayer, E. V. Chulkov, Y. M. Koroteev, P. M.

Echenique, M. Saito,
and S. Hasegawa, “Role of spin-orbit coupling and hybridization

effects in the electronic structure of ultrathin bi films,” Physical Review Letters 97, 146803

(2006).

29N. Gauthier, J. A. Sobota, H. Pfau, A. Gauthier, H. Soifer, M. D. Bachmann, I. R.

Fisher, Z.-X. Shen,
and P. S. Kirchmann, “Expanding the momentum field of view in

angle-resolved photoemission systems with hemispherical analyzers,” Review of Scientific

Instruments 92, 123907 (2021).

30T. J. M. Zouros and E. P. Benis, “The hemispherical deflector analyser revisted. I. Motion

in the ideal 1/r potential, generalized entry conditions, Kepler orbits and spectrometer

basic equation,” Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 125, 221–248

(2002).

31B. Sch¨onhense, K. Medjanik, O. Fedchenko, S. Chernov, M. Ellguth, D. Vasilyev, A. Oel-

sner, J. Viefhaus, D. Kutnyakhov, W. Wurth, H. J. Elmers, and G. Sch¨onhense, “Multidi-

mensional photoemission spectroscopy—the space-charge limit,” New Journal of Physics

20, 033004 (2018).

32W.-T. Hsu, L.-S. Lu, D. Wang, J.-K. Huang, M.-Y. Li, T.-R. Chang, Y.-C. Chou, Z.-Y.

Juang, H.-T. Jeng, L.-J. Li, and W.-H. Chang, “Evidence of indirect gap in monolayer

20


WSe2,” Nature Communications 8, 929 (2017).

33R. Bertoni, C. W. Nicholson, L. Waldecker, H. H¨ubener, C. Monney, U. De Giovannini,

M. Puppin, M. Hoesch, E. Springate, R. T. Chapman, C. Cacho, M. Wolf, A. Rubio,

and R. Ernstorfer, “Generation and evolution of spin-, valley-, and layer-polarized excited

carriers in inversion-symmetric WSe2,” Physical Review Letters 117, 277201 (2016).

34M. Puppin, C. W. Nicholson, C. Monney, Y. Deng, R. P. Xian, J. Feldl, S. Dong,

A. Dominguez, H. H¨ubener, A. Rubio, M. Wolf, L. Rettig, and R. Ernstorfer, “Excited-

state band structure mapping,” Physical Review B 105, 075417 (2022).

35J. Mad´eo, M. K. L. Man, C. Sahoo, M. Campbell, V. Pareek, E. L. Wong, A. Al-Mahboob,

N. S. Chan, A. Karmakar, B. M. K. Mariserla, X. Li, T. F. Heinz, T. Cao, and K. M.

Dani, “Directly visualizing the momentum-forbidden dark excitons and their dynamics in

atomically thin semiconductors,” Science 370, 1199–1204 (2020).

36L. Miaja-Avila, C. Lei, M. Aeschlimann, J. L. Gland, M. M. Murnane, H. C. Kapteyn, and

G. Saathoff, “Laser-assisted photoelectric effect from surfaces,” Physical Review Letters

97, 113604 (2006).

37M. Keunecke, M. Reutzel, D. Schmitt, A. Osterkorn, T. A. Mishra, C. M¨oller, W. Ben-

necke, G. S. M. Jansen, D. Steil, S. R. Manmana, S. Steil, S. Kehrein, and S. Mathias,

“Electromagnetic dressing of the electron energy spectrum of Au(111) at high momenta,”

Physical Review B 102, 161403 (2020).

38J. M. Riley, F. Mazzola, M. Dendzik, M. Michiardi, T. Takayama, L. Bawden, C. Granerød,

M. Leandersson, T. Balasubramanian, M. Hoesch, T. K. Kim, H. Takagi, W. Meevasana,

P. Hofmann, M. S. Bahramy, J. W. Wells,
and P. D. C. King, “Direct observation of

spin-polarized bulk bands in an inversion-symmetric semiconductor,” Nature Physics 10,

835–839 (2014).

39M. P. Seah and W. A. Dench, “Quantitative electron spectroscopy of surfaces: A standard

data base for electron inelastic mean free paths in solids,” Surf. Interface Anal. (1979),

10.1002/sia.740010103.

40D. Voß, P. Kr¨uger, A. Mazur, and J. Pollmann, “Atomic and electronic structure of WSe2

from ab initio theory: Bulk crystal and thin film systems,” Physical Review B 60, 14

311–14317 (1999).

41S. Moser, “An experimentalist’s guide to the matrix element in angle resolved photoemis-

sion,” Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 214, 29–52 (2017).

21


42D. F. Liu, Q. N. Xu, E. K. Liu, J. L. Shen, C. C. Le, Y. W. Li, D. Pei, A. J. Liang, P. Dudin,

T. K. Kim, C. Cacho, Y. F. Xu, Y. Sun, L. X. Yang, Z. K. Liu, C. Felser, S. S. P. Parkin,

and Y. L. Chen, “Topological phase transition in a magnetic Weyl semimetal,” Physical

Review B 104, 205140 (2021).

43M. Yan, H. Huang, K. Zhang, E. Wang, W. Yao, K. Deng, G. Wan, H. Zhang, M. Arita,

H. Yang, Z. Sun, H. Yao, Y. Wu, S. Fan, W. Duan, and S. Zhou, “Lorentz-violating type-

II Dirac fermions in transition metal dichalcogenide PtTe2,” Nature Communications 8,

257 (2017).

44D. A. Dahl, “SIMION for the personal computer in reflection,” International Journal of

Mass Spectrometry 200, 3–25 (2000).

45S. Hellmann, K. Rossnagel, M. Marczynski-B¨uhlow, and L. Kipp, “Vacuum space-charge

effects in solid-state photoemission,” Physical Review B 79, 035402 (2009).

46S. Passlack, S. Mathias, O. Andreyev, D. Mittnacht, M. Aeschlimann,
and M. Bauer,

“Space charge effects in photoemission with a low repetition, high intensity femtosecond

laser source,” Journal of Applied Physics 100, 024912 (2006).

47L.-P. Oloff, K. Hanff, A. Stange, G. Rohde, F. Diekmann, M. Bauer, and K. Rossnagel,

“Pump laser-induced space-charge effects in HHG-driven time- and angle-resolved photo-

electron spectroscopy,” Journal of Applied Physics 119, 225106 (2016).

48S. Hellmann, T. Ott, L. Kipp, and K. Rossnagel, “Vacuum space-charge effects in nano-

ARPES,” Physical Review B 85, 075109 (2012).

49S. Ulstrup, J. C. Johannsen, F. Cilento, A. Crepaldi, J. A. Miwa, M. Zacchigna, C. Ca-

cho, R. T. Chapman, E. Springate, F. Fromm, C. Raidel, T. Seyller, P. D. C. King,

F. Parmigiani, M. Grioni, and P. Hofmann, “Ramifications of optical pumping on the in-

terpretation of time-resolved photoemission experiments on graphene,” Journal of Electron

Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 200, 340–346 (2015).

22


Supplementary Materials to “Accessing the full 3D Brillouin zone plus time

resolution, with high harmonic generation and a new approach to detection”

Paulina Majchrzak,1 Yu Zhang,2 Andrii Kuibarov,3 Richard Chapman,2 Adam Wyatt,2

Emma Springate,2 Sergey Borisenko,3 Bernd B¨uchner,3 Philip Hofmann,1 and Charlotte

E. Sanders2

1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center,

Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark

2)Central Laser Facility, STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,

Research Complex at Harwell, Harwell, OX11 0QX, United Kingdom

3)Leibniz IFW Dresden, Helmholtzstr.
20, 01069 Dresden,

Germany

(Dated: 22 September 2023)

1

arXiv:2309.11535v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  20 Sep 2023


I.
SAMPLE PREPARATION

The Bi(111) surface was prepared by Bi deposition from a homemade evaporator onto

a freshly cleaved Bi2Se3 crystal in vacuum conditions of low-10−9 mbar.
We estimated

the growth rate as approximately 0.7–0.8 ˚A/s, on the basis of calibration with a quartz

crystal monitor (Inficon XTC/3 with UHV bakeable sensor). After approximately 20 nm

of deposition, we gently annealed the film at less than circa 250°C for 10 min. Then we

repeated the growth procedure. We estimated the final Bi film thickness at approximately

37 nm.

The growth chamber is connected directly to the analysis chamber (separated by a gate

valve), for fully in-vacuo transfer.

The 2H-WSe2 bulk crystal was obtained commercially from HQ Graphene. The sample

was cleaved in-situ with a Kapton tape, at a pressure of 2 × 10−9 mbar.

2


II.
BEAMLINE TIME RESOLUTION

In Fig. 2, we show an auto-correlation trace of the fundamental beam obtained by TiPA

(Light Conversion Ltd.). The full-width half-maximum (FWHM) of the auto-correlation

peak is approximately 57 fs, which corresponds to a Gaussian pulse width of about 40 fs.

40

30

20

10

0

Intensity (a.u.)

-200
-100
0
100
200

Time (fs)

Gauss FWHM=56.7fs

FIG. 1. The auto-correlation measurement of the fundamental beam (from a TiPA, Light Conver-

sion Ltd). The FWHM of the Gaussian fit gives 57 fs.

3


III.
PUMP STABILITY

The pulse-to-pulse stability of this laser system is typically around 2%. The stability of

the power, averaged over a second—which is more relevant than pulse-to-pulse stability to

time-integrated pump-probe measurements—is generally around 0.4%. We note, however,

that the stability of the pump is not critical to the results of the present study.

0.190

0.185

0.180

0.175

0.170

Power (W)

1500
1000
500
0

Time (s)

RMS stablitlity(Std.dev/mean)=0.42%

FIG. 2. Representative measurement of laser stability, as measured on the pump beam by a power

meter (UP19S-15S-H5, Gentec-EO, Inc.) over a period of 30 min. Each data point is the average

of 6 readings over the course of 1 s. The root mean square (RMS) stability is 0.4%.

4


