1

Identifying and abating copper foil impurities to optimize graphene 

growth

N. Reckinger1,* and B. Hackens1

1IMCN/NAPS, Université catholique de Louvain, Chemin du Cyclotron 2, 1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, 
Belgium.

* Corresponding author: E-mail address: nicolas.reckinger@uclouvain.be (N. Reckinger).

Keywords: graphene, chemical vapor deposition, copper foils, impurities, electropolishing.


2

Abstract

Copper foil impurities are hampering scalable production of high-quality graphene by chemical 

vapor deposition (CVD). Here, we conduct a thorough study on the origin of these unavoidable 
contaminations at the surface of copper after the CVD process. We identify two distinct origins for the 
impurities. The first type is intrinsic impurities, originating from the manufacturing process of the 
copper foils, already present at the surface before any high-temperature treatment, or buried into the 
bulk of copper foils. The buried impurities diffuse towards the copper surface during high-temperature 
treatment and precipitate. The second source is external: silica contamination arising from the quartz 
tube that also precipitate on copper. The problem of the extrinsic silica contamination is readily solved 
upon using an adequate confinement the copper foil samples. The intrinsic impurities are much more 
difficult to remove since they appear spread in the whole foil. Nevertheless, electropolishing proves 
particularly efficient in drastically reducing the issue.


3

Introduction

Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on metallic catalysts is arguably the most promising method 

for graphene production at the industrial scale.1 Owing to their easy handling, accessibility and low-
cost, copper foils are the substrates of choice for graphene CVD growth. Since the CVD growth of 
graphene on copper is a surface-mediated process, it is substantially affected by the physical and 
chemical properties of the copper surface. Despite their huge popularity, copper foils present several 
downsides, related to their manufacturing process, adversely impacting the structural quality and the 
homogeneity of CVD graphene grown on top of them: uncontrolled crystallography, uneven 
topography (notably rolling striations) and impurities (at the surface and in the bulk). Tackling these 
issues is imperative for the reproducible synthesis of high-quality graphene on copper foils for future 
applications.

The control of the crystallographic orientation of copper foils has received considerable 

attention over the last years.2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 The preparation of smooth copper foils was also given 
wide consideration in the scientific literature. Methods such as electropolishing (EP)13,14,15,16,17,18 and 
chemical mechanical polishing19 can significantly reduce the roughness of copper foils. Alternatively, 
some research groups even produced their own copper foils to have a tighter control on their 
roughness by copper electrodeposition on a smooth, single-crystalline substrate and peeling-off.20,21,22

A few research groups analyzed the superficial chemical composition of copper foils from 

different suppliers, before or/and after graphene CVD growth. They all reported the presence of
contaminants, regardless of the supplier or of the foil purity for a given supplier. They inferred that the 
impurities were of endogenous origin (segregating from the bulk of the copper foil during thermal 
treatment23,24,25 or already present at the surface of the as-received foils4,26,27,28) or of exogenous origin 
(arising from the quartz tube24,29,30,31,32,33,34
or back streaming from downstream system 

components21). Depending on their nature, these contaminants can catalyze the formation of 
graphene adlayers,26,28 or also inhibit the growth of graphene, thereby creating holes28 or dot defects 
in graphene,34 or even etch graphene.33 Impurities inside copper foils can also cause grain boundary 
pinning and prevent the growth of copper grains. Copper foils can also sometimes be coated with thin 
anticorrosion metallic oxide films that must be removed before CVD growth. 13,18,35,36

The variety of the adverse effects of impurities in copper illustrates the need for reproducible 

methods, both to prepare impurity-free copper foils and also to prevent any contamination inside the 
CVD reactor during the growth itself. Many different pretreatment techniques have been proposed to 
prepare a clean and smooth copper surface. A first group of cleaning techniques involves a superficial 
chemical treatment in various liquids such as acetic acid,35,14,15,16,37,38,39 solvents,40 water,14,41 inorganic 
acids (dilute HNO3,14,27 dilute HCl27,42,43), FeCl3,14,44 Cr or Ni etchants,27 or a sequence of two chemicals.26

They can be used to remove more or less efficiently the contaminants at the surface. However, they
are useless against impurities located in the bulk of the foils that diffuse to the copper surface and 
precipitate during high-temperature (HT) processes, in particular during graphene growth. In contrast, 
the popular EP is more aggressive since it eliminates a non-negligible copper thickness from the foil, 
but it presents the joint advantage of removing surface and bulk contaminants and yielding a smooth 
surface. On the other hand, various methods were used to avoid the deposition of silica particles from 
the fused silica tube during CVD growth, either by working under a pressure three times higher than 
atmospheric pressure29 or by confining the samples within a copper foil enclosure,30 within an internal 
coaxial alumina screen tube and a tantalum sample holder32 or within a heat-resisting box (whose 
precise nature was not mentioned by the authors).34


4

As already mentioned in 2015 by Wang et al., nanoparticles contamination is frequently 

observed in postgrowth scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of copper foils in the scientific 
literature. Today, despite the existing cleaning protocols, the simple examination of SEM or atomic
force microscopy images found in a sample of recent papers12,45,46,47 clearly reveals that the problem 
of contaminations is either not solved or is considered as secondary or even purely and simply swept 
under the carpet. In addition, many research groups understandably focus their attention mainly on 
the study of graphene and resort often only to optical microscopy or/and low/medium magnification 
SEM. In that case, the nanoscale details of the copper surface are not visible and impurity nanoparticles 
are thereby eluded. Nevertheless, considering its considerable impact on the CVD growth of graphene
on copper foils, this is an important problem to solve if one is to draw reliable conclusion on intrinsic 
graphene nucleation mechanisms, kinetics, adlayer formation, etc. Overcoming this impurity-related 
lack of control is also a crucial step towards reaching standardized and industrial-scale graphene 
growth protocols.

In contrast with the very little attention paid in general by research papers to elucidate the 

nature and the origin of the copper foil contaminations in the framework of graphene growth, we have 
made it the central focus of the present article. Based on the existing body of literature, we conduct a 
systematic and thorough investigation. Our work aims to contribute to bridging the reproducibility gap 
faced by large-scale graphene synthesis.48 For this purpose, we have observed and analyzed in detail 
the nature and the origin of the various types of contaminations that we systematically obtain after 
growing graphene on untreated copper foils. We have determined that the copper substrates were 
plagued by two distinct types of contaminants: (1) intrinsic impurities either already present at the 
surface of the copper foil under the form of micrometer-sized particles or impurities segregating from 
the copper bulk to the surface and precipitating after thermal treatment and (2) silica contamination
originating from the furnace’s quartz tube. In order to avoid the deposition of silica contamination, we 
have enclosed the copper substrates between two heat-resistant sapphire wafers separated by a small 
gap. In addition, EP was implemented to prepare a clean and smooth copper surface before CVD 
growth. We observe a significant reduction of the contaminants on copper after CVD, but without 
reaching total elimination. We believe that the present efforts towards contaminant characterization, 
and the strategy that we describe to avoid them, will provide a firm basis for more reproducible and 
standardized high-quality graphene growth.

Experimental

Preparation of the copper substrates

Electropolishing. Copper foil pieces with a size of 2 × 2.5 cm2 (cut from a 15 × 15 cm2 foil, 

Advent Research Materials, 50 μm-thick, purity 99.9%) are used as starting substrates. The adopted EP 
procedure is inspired from Miseikis et al.,49 with several adaptations. The homemade EP setup 
comprises a Schiefferdecker glass staining trough and one (or two) copper (1-mm-thick) electrodes 
(7.5 × 4 cm2) for the cathode (see Fig. S1(a)). Before EP, we immerse the copper piece in acetic acid to 
remove the superficial copper oxide layer and get a clean copper surface. It is then connected to the 
power source, as the anode, via an electric cable terminated with a copper alligator clip. The cable is 
fixed to a stand. We only polish a surface of 2 × 2 cm2 since the top of the copper piece where the 
alligator clip is attached is not immersed in the EP solution. After de-oxidation, the copper piece is 
rinsed in running deionized (DI) water. Next, the cathode is placed against the wall of the trough 
opposite to the anode which is placed at 1 cm from the wall. It is very important to keep the same
geometry for obtaining reproducible results. After positioning the electrodes and connecting them to 
the power source, we add the electrolyte solution, composed of a 10:5:5:1 mixture of DI water, 


5

phosphoric acid (87%), ethanol and isopropanol, plus 16 g/l of urea per liter of DI water. We then apply 
a 9 V voltage to the anode, resulting in a ~1 A current for 1 min. When EP is finished, the copper piece 
is immediately rinsed in running DI water for 5 min, kept in vertical position and still attached to the 
alligator clip. This ensures a fast transfer to DI water after polishing in order to produce a clean copper 
surface without polishing residues. The copper piece is further rinsed with isopropanol and stored in 
the same liquid to avoid oxidation in air. Figure S1(b) illustrates a typical copper foil piece after EP.

Electron beam evaporation. The copper thin films were deposited on sapphire or copper foils

at room temperature (at a pressure of ∼2 × 10−7 mbar) by evaporation of 99.999% pure copper pellets 
from Kurt J. Lesker.

Graphene CVD growth

The CVD reactor is a horizontal hot-wall split furnace (MTI corporation) fitted with a quartz 

tube (1.2 meter-long, 4-inch outer diameter). The copper sample is first put on the unpolished side of 
a sapphire wafer (C-plane (0001), 3-inch diameter, 600-µm-thick, and single-side polished) to avoid Cu 
to be stuck on it, itself deposited on a quartz boat and inserted into the horizontal hot-wall split 
furnace’s quartz tube at room temperature. After sealing the tube, it is pumped down to a pressure 
below 2 × 10-2 mbar. An argon flow is then fed into the tube until atmospheric pressure is restored.
This preliminary purge ensures that the oxygen concentration in the tube is well controlled (equal to 
the residual oxygen in the argon canister, i.e. 1 ppm).50 The CVD procedure is directly inspired and 
slightly adapted from our previous works performed in a different CVD equipment.4,36 This testifies to 
the transferability and interoperability of our growth process.51 The temperature-time profile is 
presented in Fig. S2. First, the temperature of the furnace is increased from room temperature to 1050 
°C during 1 h under a 300 sccm flow of argon and kept at 1050 °C for an additional duration of 30 min. 
Next, 200 sccm of Ar/H2 (10% H2 in Ar) are introduced for 20 min. Just after, dilute methane (200 ppm 
in Ar) at a flow rate of 30-40 sccm is injected during 1 h for graphene growth. Finally, the power supply 
is shut down and the furnace is left to cool down naturally in the same gas mixture. Note that, in the 
text below, annealing designs the exact same process but without injecting methane in the tube.

Preparation of the copper foil cross-section

Since the copper foils are very flexible, the copper foil piece is first sandwiched between two 

rigid 1-mm-thick copper plates glued with cold mounting epoxy (EpoFix from Struers). The copper foil 
piece was cut so as to comprise an electropolished zone and an unpolished zone (see Fig. S3(a)). The 
sandwich is left to dry for 24 h in air at room temperature. It is then included vertically in a flat, 
cylindrical mold filled with epoxy and again left to dry for 24 h. A dicing saw is used to cut the obtained 
cylinder in the middle, in a plane parallel to its circular faces (see Fig. S3(b)). One of the two halves is 
then used for the polishing procedure. The following steps were performed to prepare the copper foil 
cross-section: (1) grinding with SiC paper (P1200 grit), (2) polishing with diamond abrasive of 9 µm and 
then 6 µm in size, and (3) finishing step with 50-nm silica colloids. For SEM imaging, it was next covered 
with a thin conductive carbon layer. In order to determine correctly the copper etch rate, the backside 
of the electropolished copper foil piece used for the cross-section was protected by blue tape to 
prevent EP (see Fig. S1(c)). If not, copper will be etched slightly as well, even if not as much as the front 
side.

Characterization techniques

The SEM images were recorded with a Zeiss Ultra 55 microscope in in-lens detector mode at 

an electron energy of 2 keV in most cases. Energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was performed 


6

in another Zeiss Ultra 55 fitted with a Quantax Bruker system (with a silicon drift detector detector) at 
5 or 15 keV. The optical microscopy images were obtained with a Zeiss Axio Imager Vario.

Results and discussion

To facilitate the reading of the present paper, Fig. 1 schematically summarizes all of the 

experiments conducted during our investigation. We start our investigation with the common
observation that, after heating at HT (see the details in the Experimental section), as-received
(untreated) copper foil surfaces inspected by SEM at sufficiently high magnification are systematically 
decorated with micro- and nanoparticles standing out from the surface (see Figs. 2 and S4, the latter 
summarizing in a single SEM image all the adverse impacts of impurities on graphene growth).
Noteworthy, micrometer-sized particles can already be found at the surface of as-received copper foils
(see Fig. 2(a)). After HT treatment, such particles remain essentially intact but spread radially, forming 
a circular halo around them (see Fig. 2(b)). Such circular halos with a microparticle in the center are 
observed on all the inspected copper pieces after HT annealing, still in low concentration. By means of
EDX, we have determined that the particle shown in Fig. 2(b) is composed mostly of aluminum oxide 
(AlOx), with a small amount of magnesium (see Figs. S5(a) and (b)). On a total of ten such microparticles 
analyzed by EDX on eight different samples, three were composed of silicon oxide (SiOx), six of AlOx
(two with some magnesium) and one was a mixture of both (for comparison, see Table S1 summarizing
reported elemental compositions of impurities on as-received copper foils). Since our work is 
performed in cleanrooms where silicon wafers are manipulated (most probably a very common 
situation in graphene-oriented laboratories), one could argue that the SiOx particles could come from 
the environment. However, considering the care taken in avoiding any cross contamination, this 
possibility is very unlikely. On the other hand, this argument can certainly be dismissed in the case of 
AlOx-bearing particles. One could therefore reasonably assert that these microparticles were already 
present at the surface of copper and result from their manufacturing process.


7

Figure 1: Schematic representation of all the experiments performed in this work. All the figure 
references are also associated to the corresponding process step.


8

Figure 2: SEM images of (a) a microparticle on an as-received copper foil piece, (b) the same 
microparticle after HT treatment, (c) grey patches, (d) bright-contrasted nanoparticles, (e) a close-up 
view of such a nanoparticle, and (f) similar contaminations on copper foils from another manufacturer
(Alfa Aesar).

Another type of contamination observed in SEM images of all the samples appears as sinuous,

zebra-striped or ocellated patches displaying a light grey contrast (named “grey patches”) (see Fig. 
2(c)). These contaminations are strongly correlated to the morphology of the copper surface and their 
appearance and shape seem to depend on the crystallographic texture of the copper surface. They are 


9

too thin to be analyzed directly by EDX. Nevertheless, they are often found in the vicinity of thicker 
grey patches, yielding specific signatures in the EDX signal (see Figs. S5(c) and (d)). The EDX analysis 
shows that these sinuous structures are composed of AlOx. Nanoparticles displaying a bright SEM 
contrast are also present all over the copper surface, either in association with the grey patches or 
isolated (see Fig. 2(d)). They are often spotted along topographic features of the copper surface such 
as grain boundaries and rolling striations either because it is energetically favorable to settle there or
because it provides an easier segregation path (see Fig. S6). If one examines one of these nanoparticles 
by SEM at high magnification, one can observe that they comprise a central region (a “lenticular 
nanoparticle”) surrounded by a greyish dendritic halo or corona (see Fig. 2(e)). Since they are quite 
small and thin, they are challenging to analyze by EDX. Nevertheless, by reducing the electron-beam 
energy to 5 keV (instead of the usual 15 keV) and using point-mode analysis, the composition of three
of these lenticular nanoparticles could be determined to be a mixture of AlOx (mostly) and SiOx (see 
Figs. S5(e) and (f)), meaning that they are likely of endogenous origin (as discussed above). We have 
tried to identify the exact chemical nature of the halo by EDX as well under the same conditions, but 
to no avail probably because it is much too thin to give an exploitable signal. Note that the same type 
of contaminations (grey patches and lenticular nanoparticles with a halo) can be found on the popular 
25-µm-thick Alfa Aesar copper foils after CVD as well (see Fig. 2(f)).

Previous literature has reported contaminations arising from the quartz tube.32 The authors 

showed that copper evaporated from the copper foil at low pressure (LP) and HT can diffuse into the 
tube’s quartz walls, causing its devitrification and the emission of SiO vapors. These vapors can then 
condense as SiOx nanoparticles on copper and on the growing graphene. In the present work, even 
though we perform the CVD process at atmospheric pressure, our equipment is also used for growing 
graphene by LPCVD. Therefore, it cannot be excluded that our samples suffer from the same type of 
contamination. To check for this, a simple confinement structure (see Fig. S7) was built by stacking two 
3-inch sapphire wafers (see the experimental section) onto each other and separating them by means 
of four 3-mm-high high-purity copper cylinders (the copper pellets used for electron beam 
evaporation, see the experimental section). One as-received copper foil piece was placed between the 
two sapphire wafers, at the center, and another one was placed over the top sapphire wafer, left 
unprotected.

A striking difference showed up after observing the surface of the two samples by SEM after 

CVD growth: both samples were covered with lenticular nanoparticles, but these nanoparticles were 
surrounded by a dendritic halo only in the case of the unprotected sample (see Fig. 3(a)) and not for 
the covered one (see Fig. 3(b)). Moreover, interestingly enough, dendritic halos appear exclusively 
around lenticular nanoparticles sitting on copper and not if incorporated in graphene (see Fig. 3(a)). In 
Fig. 3(a), we can also notice that, as mentioned before, the lenticular nanoparticles can be found along 
copper grain boundaries. Based on the previous observations, we hypothesize that the lenticular 
nanoparticles serve as nuclei for the formation of the dendritic coronae. Since the halos nucleate 
exclusively on copper, they should be composed of a material showing a strong affinity for copper 
compared to graphene. It is plausible that they are made up of SiOx (or possibly CuSixOy) condensing 
from SiO in vapor phase during the cooling step. In addition, it is worth noting that, contrary to a 
complex enclosure,32 a simple stack such as ours is sufficient to prevent the condensation of the 
dendritic corona. This difference may be ascribed to the LP conditions used by the authors. 
Shivayogimath et al.21 have also reported very similar dendritic contaminations that they have 
attributed instead to fluorocarbons backstreaming from the oil pump of the vacuum system. We 
believe this possibility to be less likely since our CVD system is fitted with a dry pump and is operated 
at atmospheric pressure during most of the CVD process. We have also performed another CVD growth 
to probe the size of the zone of exclusion by placing four samples arranged in a cross (see Fig. S7(a)) 


10

inside the surface delimited by the copper pillars (~4×5 cm2). The conclusion is identical: the copper 
surface remains free of dendritic contamination in that area (see Fig. S8).

Figure 3: (a) SEM image of the surface of a copper sample piece grown (a) without or (b) with 
protection. Above (respectively, below) the dotted blue line, the surface is covered with graphene.
Dendritic halos are observed only in the case of the unprotected sample.

After identifying and finding a way to eliminate a first extraneous source of contamination, we 

pursue our study by focusing on the necessary pre-treatment to remove the impurity particles 
inevitably present on the as-received copper foils. Among all the existing cleaning techniques as 
described in the introductory part, we choose to adopt EP in order to, at the same time, clean and 
make the copper surface smoother. First, Figs. 4(a) and (b) demonstrate, at a macroscopic scale, the 
efficiency of EP in terms of contamination inhibition where a polished and an unpolished area of the 
same copper foil piece after HT annealing are compared by SEM at low magnification (the inset to Figs.
4(a) and (b) shows a photograph of the corresponding copper foil piece). It can be clearly seen that the 
grey patches are no more visible in the electropolished zone. Then, by means of SEM at higher 
magnification, Figs. 4(c) and (d) compare the surface of a copper foil piece after EP and after CVD 
graphene growth at the same place (see Fig. S9 for the proof), respectively. At the same magnification, 
the inset to Figs. 4(c) and (d) illustrates the rough surface of an as-received copper foil, exhibiting rolling 
striations and defects. By comparing Fig. 4(c) and the inset, we can see plainly that EP is playing its part 
by smoothing out the rolling striations and thereby strongly reducing the average roughness of the 
copper foil piece. As a consequence, the copper grains become clearly apparent. Moreover, no 
contamination particles can be seen on the flat, electropolished copper surface, while it also appears 
covered with shallow cavities with average diameter around 100 nm (see Fig. 4(c)). More often than 
not, these recesses contain nanoscale particles (possibly contamination) but they escape detection by 
EDX because of their very small size (see Fig. S10). As seen in Fig. 4(d), after CVD, the copper surface is 
reconstructed (grain growth), is very smooth, but is nevertheless still covered with a few lenticular 
nanoparticles of the same type as mentioned previously.


11

Figure 4: Low-magnification SEM image of the surface an electropolished 2 × 2.5 cm2 copper foil piece 
after HT treatment in the (a) electropolished and (b) unpolished areas. The inset shows a photograph 
of the same piece, the dotted white line indicating the separation between the electropolished (below) 
and unpolished (above) areas. (c) SEM image of the surface of a copper foil piece just after EP. (d) SEM 
image of the same spot after HT treatment. The inset illustrates the surface of an unpolished copper 
foil piece at the same magnification.

The previous observations suggest that impurities are preferentially buried relatively close to 

the surface of copper foils and can diffuse towards the surface during HT annealing. By preparing and 
inspecting the cross-section of an electropolished copper foil piece, we have determined that about 
five micrometers of copper are removed after the process, under our EP conditions (see Fig. S11). Since 
EP removes these superficial copper layers, the impurities included in it are simultaneously eliminated, 
although not completely (as testified by the presence of a few lenticular nanoparticles). EP leads 
nevertheless to a much cleaner copper surface after CVD. Finally, in order to further improve the 
cleanliness of the copper surface, we have also performed the same kind of experiments with a copper 
foil piece annealed at HT before EP. The underlying idea would be to first segregate the impurities (all 
of them, if possible) buried into the copper bulk to the surface and next to remove them by EP. From 
Figs. 5(a-c) showing SEM images at moderate magnification of the same area before EP (and after 
annealing), after EP and after CVD graphene growth, we can draw the same conclusion about EP
drastically inhibiting the occurrence of contaminants at the surface of copper. Nevertheless, SEM 
inspection at higher magnification can reveal that lenticular nanoparticles are still present, even 


12

though the amount of contamination is much weaker after EP (see Fig. 5(d)). We have also verified 
that doubling the EP time (2 min) does not result in further reducing the amount of contamination
after CVD growth (see Fig. S12). This indicates that impurities are in fact likely distributed over the 
entire thickness of copper foils, albeit in smaller concentration in the bulk than close to the surface.

Figure 5: SEM image of the surface of a copper foil piece (a) after HT treatment, (b) after EP, and (c) 
after a second HT treatment, at the same place. (d) High magnification SEM view in the same condition 
as (c).

We now provide a quantitative evaluation of the amount of residual contamination 

nanoparticles after HT treatment of an electropolished copper foil piece. Since there may be some 
spatial variability inherent in the stochastic nature of diffusion processes and in the random 
distribution of impurities in the copper matrix, it is not sufficient to rely on a unique image. Therefore, 
we have analyzed SEM images in 70 random places all over the surface (see Fig. S13(a)), 20 at a ×3000 
magnification (each image covering an area of ~1100 µm2) and 50 at a ×10000 magnification (each 
image covering an area of ~100 µm2) to compare the reliability of the data analysis as a function of the 
chosen magnification. For each magnification, Table 1 gives the average value (µ), the standard 
deviation (σ) and the coefficient of variation (σ/µ) of the number of nanoparticles per 100 µm2, the 
relative nanoparticle surface density, and the mean nanoparticle size. Figure S13(b) illustrates the data 
extraction procedure, based on a particle identification algorithm in the Gwyddion software.52 Figure 


13

6 compares the histograms obtained for the ×3000 and ×10000 magnifications, respectively. In the 
×10000 magnification case, the high coefficient of variation reflects the high spatial variability in terms 
of nanoparticle count per image (thus per 100 µm2). As observed in Figure 6, it can indeed vary 
between 0 (for 7 images) and 199 (for one image). Note, however, that except for that very high value, 
all the other nanoparticle counts lie below 45 and the average value (µ = 11.5) is low. The surface 
occupied by the nanoparticles is also globally very low (on average, 0.012 µm2) since the nanoparticles 
are themselves very small (41.6 nm on average). In the ×3000 magnification case, the trend is similar 
for the three extracted parameters. As with the ×10000 magnification case, the nanoparticle number 
was also significantly higher for one image. On average, the nanoparticle count per 100 µm2 is 
nevertheless quite low, around 6. We can thus conclude that data analysis for the two magnifications 
yield similar results, provided we consider a high enough number of images. However, a difference 
between the two magnifications can be pointed out. The fact that 7 images present no nanoparticle 
for the ×10000 magnification can appear surprising at first sight. It can reflect the fact that the ×10000 
magnification images are relatively small compared to the interparticle distance. Indeed, in the ×3000 
magnification case, no spotless image could be found since their much larger size (11 times larger) 
makes that very improbable. In consequence, it could be an artifact related to the small image size. 
This illustrates the difficult compromise that must be made between the size of the image (it must not 
be too small to be statistically relevant) and the very small size of the nanoparticles (the image must 
be small enough to properly evidence the nanoparticles). This justifies precisely why this investigation 
was conducted at two magnifications. Moreover, it also indicates that the impurities are distributed 
very heterogeneously in the copper bulk, as testified by the high spatial variability noted above. The 
impurities possibly form clusters (as suggested by the two outlier values with a very high nanoparticle 
number in Figure 6) separated by cleaner areas. For reference, in Figs. S13(c) and (d), we plot the 
nanoparticle number per image for each magnification. We did not conduct the same analysis with an 
unpolished copper piece for comparison since, as visible in Fig. 5(a), the coverage in contamination can 
vary a great deal depending on the copper grain orientation.

Magnification
×10000
×3000

µ
σ
σ/µ
µ
σ
σ/µ

Nanoparticle number per 
100 µm2

11.5
28.7
2.5
6.4
11.9
1.9

Relative 
nanoparticle 

surface density [%]

0.012
0.015
1.22
0.018
0.019
1.05

Mean nanoparticle size 
[nm]

41.6
19.5
0.47
61.9
14.6
0.23

Table 1: Summary of the results obtained from the statistical analysis of nanoparticles at the surface 
of an electropolished and HT-treated copper foil piece.


14

Figure 6: Histograms of the number of 100 µm2 regions as a function of the number of nanoparticles 
per 100 µm2 region for the ×3000 and ×10000 magnifications, respectively.

In order to consolidate our previous hypotheses on the origin of the impurities, we have 

conducted a series of additional control experiments. First, a 1-µm-thick highly pure copper film was 
deposited by electron beam evaporation on sapphire pieces cut from a 3-inch wafer (see the 
Experimental section). One copper-covered sapphire piece was confined between the two sapphire 
wafers separated by copper pillars and a second one was placed on the top sapphire wafer, as done 
before for copper foil pieces (see Fig. 3). As expected, after CVD, the copper surface of the covered 
copper/sapphire sample is much cleaner compared to its copper foil piece counterpart (see Fig. 7(a))
because of the huge difference in purity. Occasionally, we could find a few contamination 
nanoparticles possibly coming from the residual impurities contained in the copper source used for 
electron beam evaporation. Figure 7(b) shows a SEM image of the exposed sample. Interestingly, one 
can notice the presence of nanoscale contaminations reminiscent of the dendritic corona visible in Fig. 
3(a). This confirms that this type of contamination nucleates on any impurity or asperity present on 
the copper surface and originates from a source exterior to the copper substrate. This also points out 
that even highly pure copper/sapphire substrates are not totally exempt from impurities.


15

Figure 7: SEM image of the surface of a copper/sapphire substrate (a) with and (b) without protection,
after HT treatment.

Secondly, considering that the contaminations are mostly composed of SiOx and AlOx, we have 

investigated their removal with dilute hydrofluoric acid (2% HF) for a sample that was electropolished 
and HT-treated. We have observed that copper fluoride particles form on copper after exposing a 
slightly oxidized copper surface (the “native oxide” arising from conservation under air) to 2% HF (see 
Fig. S14). Consequently, we systematically de-oxidize the surface of copper with glacial acetic acid just 
before HF treatment. Next, we have determined the time required for entirely removing the lenticular 
particles. Figures 8(a) and (b) show that an etching time of 2 min removes most nanoparticles but not 
all of them. This may arise from slight differences in chemical composition between nanoparticles. The 
HF treatment also degrades the smoothness of the copper surface and the apparent roughness seems 
to vary slightly depending on the copper grain crystallographic orientation (see Fig. 8(c)). Note also 
that a small recess is left in copper after nanoparticle removal with dilute HF (see Figs. 8(d) and (e)).
This image also illustrates that the simple fact of imaging the copper surface in a SEM modifies how 
dilute HF affects the copper morphology. Indeed, the surface of copper in Fig. 8(e) is not degraded 
while it should be. This can be explained by the fact that during the SEM scan, a thin carbon film is 
deposited on the surface which acts as a protective mask during exposure to dilute HF (see Figs. 8(f) 
and (g)).


16

Figure 8: SEM images of the same region of a copper foil piece (after CVD growth) (a) before and (b) 
after treatment in dilute HF for 2 min to remove the contamination nanoparticles. (c) SEM image 
showing that the surface of copper is affected differently depending on the copper grain 
crystallographic orientation. Panels (d) and (e) compare the same lenticular nanoparticle before and 
after etching in dilute HF. (f) SEM image of an area of the same copper foil piece, after the dilute HF 
treatment. The area located at the bottom was observed by SEM before the treatment (rectangles 
resulting from scanning) and observed a second time in that image. (g) Zoom on the small region in 
the red rectangle in panel (f) illustrating how the copper surface is less affected if the area was imaged 
using the SEM before the dilute HF treatment because of a masking effect due to carbon deposition.


17

Compared to a bare copper surface, we have also noticed that many lenticular nanoparticles 

are more difficult to remove when embedded in graphene (see Figs. 9(a) and (b)). As seen in Fig. 9(c), 
larger contaminations causing holes in the graphene film are readily removed within a 2-min exposure 
to HF while lenticular nanoparticles may remain. Figure 9(d) even suggests that the nanoparticle visible 
in the image is covered by graphene, greatly complicating its access to any liquid. Indeed, it cannot be 
excluded that impurities continue to segregate to the copper surface even after graphene growth and 
that nanoparticles are thus sandwiched between copper and graphene. By increasing the immersion 
time in dilute HF to 10 min, the copper surface appears rougher but all the lenticular nanoparticles 
could be stripped away from the surface, both for bare and graphene-covered copper (see Figs. 10(a) 
and 9(e), respectively). We hypothesize that HF can reach the nanoparticle via nanoscopic defects in 
graphene. In Fig. 9(e), we can also spot the imprint left in copper by etched nanoparticles and the 
polygonal holes left in graphene due to graphene etching by hydrogen during CVD catalyzed by the 
same nanoparticles,33 reflecting its hexagonal symmetry. The HF dip is thus a practical method to reveal 
defects in graphene. Even after cleaning with HF, Fig. 10(b) discloses the reoccurrence of lenticular 
nanoparticles after a second CVD growth. This confirms again that impurities are not depleted from 
the inside of the copper foil piece and that they can diffuse and precipitate at the surface after another 
CVD growth. Note that, in Fig. 10, the same area is inspected by SEM before and after CVD (see Fig. 
S15 for the proof).


18

Figure 9: (a) SEM image of the same copper foil piece as in Fig. 8. The red rectangle delimits a zone 
(magnified in (b)) where nanoparticles seem embedded in graphene. Panel (c) shows a SEM image of 
another area of the same graphene flake where, in contrast, much larger particles have been removed. 
Panel (d) exemplifies a SEM image of a residual lenticular nanoparticle at high magnification. (e) SEM 
image showing the imprint left in copper by etched nanoparticles and the geometric holes left in 
graphene due to hydrogen etching of graphene during CVD by the same nanoparticles. This copper foil 
piece was treated in dilute HF for 10 min after CVD.


19

Figure 10: SEM image of the surface of a copper foil piece (a) after dilute HF treatment for 10 min and 
(b) after CVD growth, at the same place.

With the same idea in mind, we have also compared the same area of a copper foil piece after 

one CVD growth (see Fig. 11(a)) and after a second one (see Fig. 11(b)) with no intermediary treatment. 
From Fig. 11(b), it can be seen once again that more nanoparticles can precipitate at the surface. Note 
here that the copper grains were not reconstructed after the second CVD growth, greatly facilitating 
the identification, contrary to Fig. S15 for which the comparison procedure was more complicated. 
This difference can be explained by the fact that the copper piece in Fig. S15 was cut in smaller pieces 
before the second CVD growth. The simple fact of cutting the copper foil piece induces a new grain 
reconstruction in the sub-pieces after another CVD process. Moreover, it is also worth noting that this
sample was completely enclosed by means of a clean quartz petri dish during the CVD process (see Fig. 
11(c)), similar to the box technique.34 Before, we have ensured that the quartz petri dish itself 
introduces no contamination by performing a CVD process with a copper/sapphire sample enclosed in 
the dish (see Fig. 11(d) as a proof). This definitively excludes an external source for the contaminations. 
In conclusion, this means that our HT treatment is too short to fully deplete the bulk of the copper foil 
from the impurities it contains.


20

Figure 11: SEM images of a copper foil piece at the same spot before (a) and after (b) a second CVD 
growth. (c) Photograph of the quartz petri dish enclosing two copper foil pieces. (d) SEM image of a 
copper/sapphire sample, enclosed in the dish during the CVD process, after the CVD growth. The red 
rectangle comprises a nanoparticle to prove that the image is not out of focus.

It is worth discussing here the possibility that contamination may originate from lateral 

migration (for instance from improperly removed impurity particles or from the unpolished area (see 
the EP protocol) instead of segregation. Wang et al.23 have indeed reported previously that impurity 
nanoparticles become mobile above 850 °C and could move over the duration of the CVD process (up 
to 250 µm in the straight-line, worst-case scenario for a CVD duration of 1h30). However, the authors 
also report that their movement is random, which strongly limits their travel distance. Figure 2(b) also 
confirms that nanoparticles arising from a micrometer-sized particle remain mostly concentrated 
around it, as testified by the circular halo of limited spatial extension. Consequently, in case a residual 
microparticle is left accidentally on copper following EP, the contamination will remain very local and 
it seems very unlikely that it may contaminate all the sample. We have also taken SEM images on both 
sides of the divide separating the unpolished and polished areas of a copper foil piece after CVD at a 
fixed abscissa and moving the sample down by steps of a few millimeters (see Fig. S16). The 


21

demarcation between the two areas appears clearly. This demonstrates that the unpolished area 
constitutes no “reservoir” of impurities that could contaminate the clean, polished zone and that if 
there were some lateral migration of impurities, it must be very limited. In all plausibility, we can
therefore attribute the occurrence of the nanoparticles to segregation from the bulk rather than from 
drift at the surface of copper.

Based on the latter observation and with the hope of blocking the segregation of contaminants 

to the surface of copper, we have deposited by electron beam a 1-µm-thick high-purity copper film on 
two types of samples: an as-received copper foil piece and a copper foil piece covered by a monolayer 
of graphene. In both cases, the situation is the same: the high-purity copper layer is not sufficient to 
prohibit the segregation of impurities during CVD growth (see Fig. S17). It should not come as a surprise 
since, at the working temperature of 1050 °C, close to the copper fusion temperature (~1085 °C), the 
copper atoms are highly mobile and a copper layer cannot act as a stopping layer.

Even though the results of the previous experiments advocate strongly for impurity 

segregation from the copper bulk, they are still only indirect evidence of the presence of impurities in 
the interior of copper foils. In the next experiment, in order to provide a more direct proof, we have 
fully etched a copper foil piece deposited on a clean Si sample (see Fig. S18) in ammonium 
peroxydisulfate in order to collect any insoluble residues on the silicon surface. Prior to etching, the 
copper foil piece was immersed in 2% HF for 24 h to remove any SiOx and AlOx impurities on the copper 
surface. This way, we make sure that only impurities present in the copper bulk sediment on silicon. 
After etching, we have rinsed the silicon sample with water as gently as possible to avoid the impurities 
to be washed away. We have found residues showing up as aggregates of nanoparticles as well as 
micrometer-sized particles (see Fig. S19). In these aggregates, EDX analyses have evidenced the 
presence of metals like Cr, Sn and Fe (these metals being insoluble in ammonium persulfate) as well 
as elemental P and SiOx. On the other hand, without surprise, the microparticles exhibited chemical 
compositions very similar to the two types of particles found at the surface on as-received foils, i.e.
AlOx (with some Na) et SiOx. In this way, we undoubtedly confirm the presence of impurities in the bulk
of copper foils.

As a complementary experiment, with the hope of directly observing impurity microparticles, 

we have also investigated their presence in the copper foil cross-section. We could indeed find a few
potential candidates, one of them could be identified by EDX as composed of SiOx. However,
considering the fact that the composition of that particle is not distinctive enough (AlOx would have 
been more irrefutable), that the polishing process itself could incur contamination (see the preparation 
protocol in the experimental section) and that large enough particles are rare (as inferred from our 
sedimentation experiment) and therefore difficult to find, it is preferable to remain inconclusive. It is 
worth noting that we have also observed nanoscale cavities in the copper foil cross-section (see Fig. 
S20), as already mentioned above at the copper surface after EP.

In the final experiment, a graphene sheet grown on an electropolished copper foil piece (with 

the top edge, where the alligator clip is attached, left unpolished, see Fig. S1(b)) is transferred onto a 
SiO2 (285 nm)/Si substrate. Figures 12(a) and (b) exhibit two optical microscopy images of the 
electropolished and of the unpolished areas of that graphene sheet, respectively. The graphene film
seen in Fig. 12(a) is continuous, mostly monolayer, with some adlayers inevitably present under such 
growth conditions (<5% coverage).36 In Fig. S21(a), showing the same zone as Fig. 12(a) at lower 
magnification, a few shapeless regions (highlighted in red rectangles) exhibiting a darker contrast and 
a larger surface compared to typical adlayers can be observed occasionally. This type of regions (see a 
SEM view focusing on one of them in Fig. S21(b)), named branch-like multilayer graphene regions, 
were reported previously for graphene grown under similar conditions to ours, on the same type of 


22

copper foil and in the same CVD equipment.50 They were attributed to the local accumulation of 
impurities in the vicinity of the copper surface during thermal annealing under residual oxygen. 
Another type of multilayer graphene region that could be observed once in a while are, as we believe, 
a linear version of the branch-like multilayer graphene regions, showing up as scars (see Fig. S21(c)).
In stark contrast, on the unpolished zone (see Fig. 12(b)), the graphene film is covered with a much 
higher density of graphene adlayers, branch-like and scar-like multilayer graphene regions compared 
to the electropolished side. This observation is a supplementary testimony to the preponderant role 
of EP in considerably decreasing the quantity of contamination diffusing to the copper surface during 
HT processes.

Figure 12: (a) Optical microscopy image of a graphene sheet synthesized on an electropolished copper 
foil piece and transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate. (b) The same graphene sheet grown in the small 
area left unpolished (top border) of the copper foil piece.

Conclusion

Even though the investigated copper foils are pure at 99.9%, the remaining 0.1% impurities 

constitute a real nuisance in the context of reproducible and defect-free graphene growth. EP has not 
only proved useful for smoothening out the copper surface but also to remove the first copper 
micrometers where most impurities appear to reside. The amount of contamination after CVD growth 
was in consequence strongly reduced after EP, but not completely suppressed. Achieving full impurity
removal is not possible with pre-growth superficial chemical treatments. Albeit indirectly or semi-
indirectly, our bulk impurities segregation/precipitation scenario during HT treatment is supported by 
a large body of evidence. The present results could be further corroborated by dynamic, in situ
studies23 to go beyond the before/after comparison of SEM images and by analyzing in more details 
the chemical composition of nanoparticles by appropriate surface techniques such as scanning Auger
microscopy.53 As a final remark, the results of this study strongly advocate in favor of home-made 
copper foils by electrodeposition,20,21,22 still very confidential nowadays.


23

Acknowledgments

B. H. (Senior Research Associate) acknowledges financial support from the F.R.S.-FNRS 

(Belgium). The present research was funded by the Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles through the ARC 
grant No. 21/26-116, by the Flag-Era JTC project "TATTOOS" (grant No. R.8010.19) and by the European 
Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation program under grant agreement No. 101099139 
("FLATS" project). The authors would also like to thank Laurence Ryelandt and the LACaMi platform 
for their technical and scientific support, as well as Benjamin Huet for useful discussions.


24

References

1 L. Lin, B. Deng, J. Sun, H. Peng, Z. Liu, Bridging the gap between reality and ideal in chemical vapor deposition 
growth of graphene, Chem. Rev. 118 (2018) 9281–9343.
2 L. Brown, E. B. Lochocki, J. Avila, C.-J. Kim, Y. Ogawa, R. W. Havener, D.-K. Kim, E. J. Monkman, D. E. Shai, H. I. 
Wei, M. P. Levendorf, M. Asensio, K. M. Shen, J. Park, Polycrystalline graphene with single crystalline electronic 
structure, Nano Lett. 14 (2014) 5706–5711.
3 V. L. Nguyen, B. G. Shin, D. L. Duong, S. T. Kim, D. Perello, Y. J. Lim, Q. H. Yuan, F. Ding, H. Y. Jeong, H. S. Shin, S. 
M. Lee, S. H. Chae, Q. A. Vu, S. H. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Seamless stitching of graphene domains on polished copper 
(111) foil, Adv. Mater. 27 (2015) 1376–1382.
4 N. Reckinger, X. Tang, F. Joucken, L. Lajaunie, R. Arenal, E. Dubois, B. Hackens, L. Henrard, J.-F. Colomer,
Oxidation-assisted graphene heteroepitaxy on copper foil, Nanoscale 8 (2016) 18751–18759.
5 H. Wang, X. Xu, J. Li, L. Lin, L. Sun, X. Sun, S. Zhao, C. Tan, C. Chen, W. Dang, H. Ren, J. Zhang, B. Deng, A. L. Koh, 
L. Liao, N. Kang, Y. Chen, H. Xu, F. Ding, K. Liu, H. Peng, Z. Liu, Surface monocrystallization of copper foil for fast 
growth of large single-crystal graphene under free molecular flow, Adv. Mater. 28 (2016) 8968–8974.
6 H. D. Phan, J. Jung, Y. Kim, V. N. Huynh, C. Lee, Large-area single-crystal graphene grown on a recrystallized 
Cu(111) surface by using a hole-pocket method, Nanoscale 8 (2016) 13781–13789.
7 X. Xu, Z. Zhang, J. Dong, D. Yi, J. Niu, M. Wu, L. Lin, R. Yin, M. Li, J. Zhou, S. Wang, J. Sun, X. Duan, P. Gao, Y. Jiang, 
X. Wu, H. Peng, R. S. Ruoff, Z. Liu, D. Yu, E. Wang, F. Ding, K. Liu, Ultrafast epitaxial growth of metre-sized single-
crystal graphene on industrial Cu foil, Sci. Bull. 62 (2017) 1074–1080.
8 S. Jin, M. Huang, Y. Kwon, L. Zhang, B.-W. Li, S. Oh, J. Dong, D. Luo, M. Biswal, B.V. Cunning, P.V. Bakharev, I. 
Moon, W.J. Yoo, D.C. Camacho-Mojica, Y.-J. Kim, S.H. Lee, B. Wang, W.K. Seong, M. Saxena, F. Ding, H.-J. Shin, 
R.S. Ruoff, Colossal grain growth yields single-crystal metal foils by contact-free annealing, Science 362 (2018) 
1021–1025.
9 M. Wu, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, Z. Zhang, Y. Duan, J. Dong, R. Qiao, S. You, L. Wang, J. Qi, D. Zou, N. Shang, Y. Yang, H. 
Li, L. Zhu, J. Sun, H. Yu, P. Gao, X. Bai, Y. Jiang, Z.-J. Wang, F. Ding, D. Yu, E. Wang, K. Liu, Seeded growth of large 
single-crystal copper foils with high-index facets, Nature 581 (2020) 406–410.
10 Y. Li, L. Sun, Z. Chang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Liang, B. Chen, Q. Ding, Z. Zhao, R. Wang, Y. Wei, H. Peng, L. Lin, Z. Liu, 
Large single-crystal Cu foils with high-index facets by strain-engineered anomalous grain growth, Adv. Mater. 32 
(2020) 2002034.
11 L. Li, T. Ma, W. Yu, M. Zhu, J. Li, Z. Chen, H. Li, M. Zhao, J. Teng, B. Tian, C. Su, K.P. Loh, Fast growth of centimeter-
scale single-crystal copper foils with high-index planes by the edge-incision effect, 2D Mater. 8 (2021) 035019.
12 W. Yao, J. Zhang, J. Ji, H. Yang, B. Zhou, X. Chen, P. Bøggild, P.U. Jepsen, J. Tang, F. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Liu, B. Wu, 
J. Dong, Y. Liu, Bottom-up-etching-mediated synthesis of large-scale pure monolayer graphene on cyclic-
polishing-annealed Cu(111), Adv. Mater. 34 (2022) 2108608. 
13 S. Chen, H. Ji, H. Chou, Q. Li, H. Li, J.W. Suk, R. Piner, L. Liao, W. Cai, R.S. Ruoff, Millimeter-size single-crystal 
graphene by suppressing evaporative loss of Cu during low pressure chemical vapor deposition, Adv. Mater. 25 
(2013) 2062–2065.
14 I. Vlassiouk, M. Regmi, P. Fulvio, S. Dai, P. Datskos, G. Eres, S. Smirnov, Role of hydrogen in chemical vapor 
deposition growth of large single-crystal graphene, ACS Nano 5 (2011) 6069–6076.
15 Y. Hao, M.S. Bharathi, L. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Chen, S. Nie, X. Wang, H. Chou, C. Tan, B. Fallahazad, H. Ramanarayan, 
C.W. Magnuson, E. Tutuc, B.I. Yakobson, K.F. McCarty, Y.-W. Zhang, P. Kim, J. Hone, L. Colombo, R.S. Ruoff, The 
role of surface oxygen in the growth of large single-crystal graphene on copper, Science. 342 (2013) 720–723.
16 Z. Luo, Y. Lu, D.W. Singer, M.E. Berck, L.A. Somers, B.R. Goldsmith, A.T.C. Johnson, Effect of substrate roughness 
and feedstock concentration on growth of wafer-scale graphene at atmospheric pressure, Chem. Mater. 23 
(2011) 1441–1447.
17 L. Zhan, Y. Wang, H. Chang, R. Stehle, J. Xu, L. Gao, W. Zhang, Y. Jia, F. Qing, X. Li, Preparation of ultra-smooth 
Cu surface for high-quality graphene synthesis, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13 (2018) 340. 
18 B. Zhang, W.H. Lee, R. Piner, I. Kholmanov, Y. Wu, H. Li, H. Ji, R.S. Ruoff, Low-temperature chemical vapor 
deposition growth of graphene from toluene on electropolished copper foils, ACS Nano 6 (2012) 2471–2476.
19 G.H. Han, F. Güneş, J.J. Bae, E.S. Kim, S.J. Chae, H.-J. Shin, J.-Y. Choi, D. Pribat, Y.H. Lee, Influence of copper 
morphology in forming nucleation seeds for graphene growth, Nano Lett. 11 (2011) 4144–4148.
20 H.K. Yu, K. Balasubramanian, K. Kim, J.-L. Lee, M. Maiti, C. Ropers, J. Krieg, K. Kern, A.M. Wodtke, Chemical 
vapor deposition of graphene on a “peeled-off” epitaxial Cu(111) foil: a simple approach to improved properties, 
ACS Nano 8 (2014) 8636–8643.


25

21 A. Shivayogimath, D. Mackenzie, B. Luo, O. Hansen, P. Bøggild, T.J. Booth, Probing the gas-phase dynamics of 
graphene chemical vapour deposition using in-situ UV absorption spectroscopy, Sci. Rep. 7 (2017) 6183.
22 F. Pizzocchero, B.S. Jessen, L. Gammelgaard, A. Andryieuski, P.R. Whelan, A. Shivayogimath, J.M. Caridad, J. 
Kling, N. Petrone, P.T. Tang, R. Malureanu, J. Hone, T.J. Booth, A. Lavrinenko, P. Bøggild, Chemical vapor-
deposited graphene on ultraflat copper foils for van der Waals hetero-assembly, ACS Omega 7 (2022)
22626−22632.
23 Z.-J. Wang, G. Weinberg, Q. Zhang, T. Lunkenbein, A. Klein-Hoffmann, M. Kurnatowska, M. Plodinec, Q. Li, L. 
Chi, R. Schloegl, M.-G. Willinger, Direct observation of graphene growth and associated copper substrate 
dynamics by in situ scanning electron microscopy, ACS Nano 9 (2015) 1506–1519.  
24 T. Yasunishi, Y. Takabayashi, S. Kishimoto, R. Kitaura, H. Shinohara, Y. Ohno, Origin of residual particles on 
transferred graphene grown by CVD, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 55 (2016) 080305.
25 D.-T. Nguyen, W.-Y. Chiang, Y.-H. Su, M. Hofmann, Y.-P. Hsieh, Solid-diffusion-facilitated cleaning of copper foil 
improves the quality of CVD graphene, Sci. Rep. 9 (2019) 257.
26 A.T. Murdock, C.D. van Engers, J. Britton, V. Babenko, S.S. Meysami, H. Bishop, A. Crossley, A.A. Koos, N. 
Grobert, Targeted removal of copper foil surface impurities for improved synthesis of CVD graphene, Carbon 122 
(2017) 207–216.
27 S.M. Kim, A. Hsu, Y.-H. Lee, M. Dresselhaus, T. Palacios, K.K. Kim, J. Kong, The effect of copper pre-cleaning on 
graphene synthesis, Nanotechnology 24 (2013) 365602.
28 L. Fan, K. Wang, J. Wei, M. Zhong, D. Wu, H. Zhu, Correlation between nanoparticle location and graphene 
nucleation in chemical vapour deposition of graphene, J. Mater. Chem. A. 2 (2014) 13123–13128.
29 S. Suzuki, T. Nagamori, Y. Matsuoka, M. Yoshimura, Threefold atmospheric-pressure annealing for suppressing 
graphene nucleation on copper in chemical vapor deposition, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 53 (2014) 095101.
30 R.M. Jacobberger, M.S. Arnold, Graphene growth dynamics on epitaxial copper thin films, Chem. Mater. 25 
(2013) 871–877.
31 D.H. Jung, C. Kang, M. Kim, H. Cheong, H. Lee, J.S. Lee, Effects of hydrogen partial pressure in the annealing 
process on graphene growth, J. Phys. Chem. C. 118 (2014) 3574–3580.
32 N. Lisi, T. Dikonimos, F. Buonocore, M. Pittori, R. Mazzaro, R. Rizzoli, S. Marras, A. Capasso, Contamination-free 
graphene by chemical vapor deposition in quartz furnaces, Sci. Rep. 7 (2017) 9927.
33 Y. Zhang, Z. Li, P. Kim, L. Zhang, C. Zhou, Anisotropic hydrogen etching of chemical vapor deposited graphene, 
ACS Nano 6 (2012) 126–132.
34 X. Xu, R. Qiao, Z. Liang, Z. Zhang, R. Wang, F. Zeng, G. Cui, X. Zhang, D. Zou, Y. Guo, C. Liu, Y. Fu, X. Zhou, M. 
Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, E. Wang, Z. Tang, D. Yu, K. Liu, Towards intrinsically pure graphene grown on copper, Nano 
Res. 15 (2022) 919–924.
35 A.T. Murdock, A. Koos, T.B. Britton, L. Houben, T. Batten, T. Zhang, A.J. Wilkinson, R.E. Dunin-Borkowski, C.E. 
Lekka, N. Grobert, Controlling the orientation, edge geometry, and thickness of chemical vapor deposition 
graphene, ACS Nano 7 (2013) 1351–1359.
36 N. Reckinger, M. Casa, J.E. Scheerder, W. Keijers, M. Paillet, J.-R. Huntzinger, E. Haye, A. Felten, J. Van de 
Vondel, M. Sarno, L. Henrard, J.-F. Colomer, Restoring self-limited growth of single-layer graphene on copper foil 
via backside coating, Nanoscale 11 (2019) 5094–5101.
37 H. Wang, G. Wang, P. Bao, S. Yang, W. Zhu, X. Xie, W.-J. Zhang, Controllable synthesis of submillimeter single-
crystal monolayer graphene domains on copper foils by suppressing nucleation, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134 (2012) 
3627–3630.
38 C.A. Howsare, X. Weng, V. Bojan, D. Snyder, J.A. Robinson, Substrate considerations for graphene synthesis on 
thin copper films, Nanotechnology 23 (2012) 135601.
39 H. Kim, I. Song, C. Park, M. Son, M. Hong, Y. Kim, J.S. Kim, H.-J. Shin, J. Baik, H.C. Choi, Copper-vapor-assisted 
chemical vapor deposition for high-quality and metal-free single-layer graphene on amorphous SiO2 substrate, 
ACS Nano 7 (2013) 6575–6582.
40 C.M. Orofeo, H. Hibino, K. Kawahara, Y. Ogawa, M. Tsuji, K. Ikeda, S. Mizuno, H. Ago, Influence of Cu metal on 
the domain structure and carrier mobility in single-layer graphene, Carbon 50 (2012) 2189–2196.
41 W. Wu, L.A. Jauregui, Z. Su, Z. Liu, J. Bao, Y.P. Chen, Q. Yu, Growth of single crystal graphene arrays by locally 
controlling nucleation on polycrystalline Cu using chemical vapor deposition, Adv. Mater. 23 (2011) 4898–4903.
42 L. Liu, H. Zhou, R. Cheng, W.J. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Shaw, X. Zhong, Y. Huang, X. Duan, High-yield chemical 
vapor deposition growth of high-quality large-area AB-stacked bilayer graphene, ACS Nano 6 (2012) 8241–8249.
43 H. Zhou, W.J. Yu, L. Liu, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, X. Duan, Chemical vapour 
deposition growth of large single crystals of monolayer and bilayer graphene, Nat Commun. 4 (2013) 2096.
44 L. Gan, Z. Luo, Turning off hydrogen to realize seeded growth of subcentimeter single-crystal graphene grains 
on copper, ACS Nano 7 (2013) 9480–9488.


26

45 D. Huang, Y. Duan, L. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhang, F. Ding, J. Guo, X. Huang, Z. Li, H. Shi, Graphene growth across the 
twin boundaries of copper substrate, Adv. Funct. Mater. 32 (2022) 2202415.
46 Y. Li, H. Liu, Z. Chang, H. Li, S. Wang, L. Lin, H. Peng, Y. Wei, L. Sun, Z. Liu, Slip-line-guided growth of graphene, 
Adv. Mater. 34 (2022) 2201188.
47 J. Li, A. Samad, U. Schwingenschlögl, B. Tian, M. Lanza, X. Zhang, Morphology-control growth of graphene 
islands by nonlinear carbon supply, Adv. Mater. 34 (2022) 2206080.
48 P. Bøggild, Research on scalable graphene faces a reproducibility gap, Nat. Commun. 14 (2023) 1126.
49 V. Miseikis, D. Convertino, N. Mishra, M. Gemmi, T. Mashoff, S. Heun, N. Haghighian, F. Bisio, M. Canepa, V. 
Piazza, C. Coletti, Rapid CVD growth of millimetre-sized single crystal graphene using a cold-wall reactor, 2D 
Mater. 2 (2015) 014006.
50 B. Huet, J.-P. Raskin, Role of Cu foil in-situ annealing in controlling the size and thickness of CVD graphene 
domains, Carbon 129 (2018) 270–280.
51 M. Hakami, G. Deokar, J. Smajic, N.M. Batra, P.M.F.J. Costa, Can a procedure for the growth of single-layer 
graphene on copper be used in different chemical vapor deposition reactors?, Chem. - Asian J. 16 (2021) 1466–
1474.
52 D. Nečas, P. Klapetek, Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data analysis, Cent. Eur. J. Phys. 10 (2012)
181–188.
53 T. Liang, G. He, G. Huang, Y. Kong, W. Fu, H. Chen, Q. Wang, H. Iwai, D. Fujita, Y. Liu, M. Xu, Graphene nucleation 
preferentially at oxygen-rich Cu sites rather than on pure Cu surface, Adv. Mater. 27 (2015) 6404–6410.


