Dual-Polarization Phase Retrieval Receiver in 

Silicon Photonics

Brian Stern, Hanzi Huang, Haoshuo Chen, Kwangwoong Kim, and Mohamad Hossein Idjadi

Nokia Bell Labs, Murray Hill, New Jersey, USA

Abstract

We demonstrate a silicon photonic dual-polarization phase retrieval receiver. The receiver

recovers phase from intensity-only measurements without a local oscillator or transmitted 

carrier. We design silicon waveguides providing long delays and microring resonators with 

large dispersion to enable symbol-to-symbol interference and dispersive projection in the phase 

retrieval algorithm. We retrieve the full field of a polarization-division multiplexed 30-GBd 

QPSK and 20-GBd 8QAM signals over 80 km of SSMF.

Introduction

Short-reach optical communication continues to push to higher capacities while also 

demanding low-cost devices [1,2]. Coherent optics provide benefits such as receiver sensitivity 

and spectral efficiency to support high capacity, but the requirement of a wavelength-aligned 

local oscillator (LO) at the receiver adds complexity and cost to these devices. On the other 

hand, direct-detection systems, which only measure the intensity at the receiver, are simple and 

low cost, but they face capacity limitations, being unable to detect complex-valued modulation 

formats and also facing spectral fading due to chromatic dispersion in fiber [3]. There are also 

self-coherent schemes which transmit a carrier with the signal instead of using an LO. However, 

the carrier consumes transmitter signal power, and a high carrier-signal power ratio (CSPR) can 

lead to nonlinear impairments during fiber transmission and reduced receiver sensitivity [4].

Similarly, single-sideband detection systems also require co-transmitting a carrier [5,6].

The recently proposed phase retrieval receiver upends many of these difficult trade-offs [7–


9]. This receiver can recover the phase of an incoming signal, including one encoded in 

complex-valued modulation formats, without an LO or transmitted carrier of any kind, despite 

using direct detection. A phase retrieval receiver uses a combination of dispersive propagation 

and symbol-to-symbol interference to reconstruct the full field, including phase, from the 

intensity-only measurements [10]. The wavelength alignment is relaxed compared to coherent, 

and requiring only a passive receiver can support lower-cost devices. Phase retrieval is robust 

in the presence of chromatic dispersion in fiber, and finally, because no carrier is needed, the 

CSPR is not a constraint.

Silicon photonics is an ideal platform on which to implement these receiver technologies in

massively manufacturable, low-cost devices [11]. Coherent and self-coherent receivers

requiring an LO or carrier have previously been demonstrated using silicon photonics [12–19]. 

We recently reported a carrier-less silicon photonic phase retrieval receiver for a single 

polarization [20]. However, practical systems require handling changes in polarization during 

transmission. Further, leveraging both polarizations doubles the total capacity.

Here we report the first fully integrated, carrier-less silicon photonic phase retrieval receiver 

using polarization-division multiplexing (PDM). The chip includes silicon microring 

resonators, waveguide delay lines, and integrated high-speed photodiodes. We show 

transmission of dual polarization (DP) quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) signals and DP-

8QAM (quadrature amplitude modulation) signals over 80 km of standard single mode fiber

(SSMF) using the integrated receiver.

Phase Retrieval with Direct Detection

In order to retrieve the full fields of signals using direct detection without a carrier, we employ 

a space-time diversity phase retrieval approach [8]. In summary, the two polarizations are first 

demultiplexed using a polarization beam splitter rotator (PBSR) (Fig. 1). Next, each 

polarization is processed as four intensity-only measurements. One of these four branches 


includes a large dispersion D to relate the phase to an amplitude modulation. The other three 

branches include varying time delays Δti to produce symbol-to-symbol interference. Using 

these measurements, the digital signal processing (DSP) uses a modified Gerchberg-Saxton 

(GS) algorithm to retrieve the signals’ full fields [8].

Polarization, Dispersion, and Delays On-Chip

We implement the phase retrieval receiver in silicon by designing a photonic circuit with the 

three key components of the approach: polarization management, large dispersion, and long 

delay lines.

The input to the chip is an edge-coupled inverse taper waveguide which provides low-loss 

coupling for both polarizations (Fig. 2). Next, a PBSR splits the two polarizations and converts 

both to the quasi-transverse electric (TE) mode. The loss of the silicon PBSR is lower than 1 

dB and the polarization crosstalk is lower than ‑20 dB. Then, each channel is sent to a separate, 

mirrored copy of the subsequent elements of the receiver.

We achieve a large on-chip dispersion by designing microring resonators to introduce 

spectrally varying group delay [20,21]. Figure 3(a) shows our approach. The three silicon 

resonators are all strongly over-coupled (κ1=23%, κ2=31%, and κ3=39%) and their resonances 

are detuned from each other. This results in a large peak group delay for each resonance with 

minimal extinction ratio (Fig. 3(b)). The simulated insertion loss is around 0.2 dB and the 

dispersion (slope of the group delay) is -95 ps/nm, which is sufficient for space-time diversity 

phase retrieval. Integrated heaters are used to tune the rings, but owing to their intentionally 

low Q, the performance is not overly sensitive to alignment. Large on-chip dispersion could 

also be achieved using chirped Bragg gratings [22].

The delay lines must incorporate long waveguide lengths with very low loss in a small area 

on-chip. To accomplish this, we use wide multimode waveguides to minimize propagation loss 

from the sidewalls. Additionally, to avoid exciting higher-order modes, we use Euler bends 


rather than circular arcs. By spiraling the waveguides into a compact shape, we fit delay lengths 

of L2 = 1.3 cm and L3 = 2.2 cm, or ~120 ps and ~200 ps, respectively (Fig. 2). These correspond 

to symbol-to-symbol interference of 3.5 and 6 symbol periods at 30 GBd.

The remainder of the receiver in Fig. 2 consists of splitters of photodiodes. Each polarization 

signal is split with a 1x4 multimode interferometer (MMI) to the dispersion and time delay 

branches. The three delay line branches interfere using a 3x3 MMI. The MMIs have simulated 

losses of 0.14 and 0.13 dB, respectively. Each branch is detected by an integrated germanium 

photodiode with a nominal bandwidth over 40 GHz.

Fabrication and Assembly

The phase retrieval receiver is fabricated at a foundry on 300 mm silicon-on-insulator (SOI) 

wafers with 220 nm device layer thickness.

We assemble the fabricated device (3.3 mm × 1.4 mm) into a packaged module (Fig. 4). We 

mount the chip on a thermo-electric cooler (TEC) and attach a lensed fiber to the input 

waveguide (with estimated loss below 2 dB). We wirebond the heaters to a fanout board and 

use a high-speed probe to measure the photodiodes.

Experimental Results

We first investigate the performance of the ring resonators. The waveguide after the rings 

includes a tap off to measure the spectral response of the rings and infer that they provide the 

proper dispersion performance. From here, we observe the resonances of each ring on an optical 

spectrum analyzer (OSA) and use the integrated heaters to tune them (Fig. 5). We see that the 

transmission spectrum matches the expected profile from Fig. 3(b). The loss across the ~60

GHz bandwidth is around 1 dB.

Next, we demonstrate recovery of dual-polarization, complex-valued signals using the 

integrated receiver. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 6. First, an external-cavity laser 

near 1530 nm is sent to a DP in-phase and quadrature Mach-Zehnder modulator (DP-IQ-MZM) 


that is driven by a four-channel digital-to-analog converter (DAC) using a Nyquist-shaped 30-

GBd QPSK signal of length 212. The total launch power before transmission is ‑2.5 dBm. After 

propagating through 80 km of SSMF, the signal is amplified and filtered, with an optical signal-

to-noise ratio (OSNR) of 27.7 dB and 7.3 dBm of optical power to the integrated receiver. The 

on-chip photodiodes are biased to -2 V and are measured with a high-speed probe. The electrical 

signals are then captured at 80 GS/s using two four-channel digital storage oscilloscopes. In the 

DSP, the state of polarization is determined by estimating the coupling and phase offset 

parameters of the Jones matrix by minimizing the mean error between the measured and 

expected intensities of a training sequence. To perform the phase retrieval, we use the GS 

algorithm [8] with a block length of 4,096 samples at two samples per symbol. The algorithm 

includes intensity pre-equalization and selective phase reset, as well as amplitude, bandwidth, 

and pilot symbol constraints to improve convergence.

The measured QPSK constellations for both polarizations are shown in Fig. 7(a-b), with a 

bit error rate (BER) of 8.8 × 10-4 at 27.7 dB OSNR, which is below the 7% forward error 

correction (FEC) threshold. Additionally, we transmit DP-8QAM signals at 20 GBd and apply 

the phase retrieval algorithm. We measure 8QAM constellations for both polarizations (Fig. 

7(c-d)) with BER 5.1 × 10‑3 at 31.1 dB OSNR. The BERs for both modulation formats versus 

OSNR are plotted in Fig. 7(e). We believe the photodiode probing setup presently limits the 

bandwidth and could be improved to lower the BER further, but nevertheless the phase retrieval 

is robust and achieves BER below the FEC threshold. 

Conclusion

We have presented the first demonstration of a silicon photonic phase retrieval receiver which

recovers the full field without a carrier or LO. The dispersion and delay lines needed for the 

space-time diversity phase retrieval algorithm are implemented by carefully designing the 

silicon waveguide components. We show transmission of high-speed DP-QPSK and DP-8QAM 


signals over 80 km of fiber with low BERs. Because it does not require a carrier, our approach 

is compatible with conventional coherent transmitters. Compared to coherent systems, direct 

detection-based phase retrieval could allow for a colorless transmitter and therefore an uncooled 

laser, reducing power consumption [9]. The low cost and small footprint of such a receiver in 

silicon photonics highlights our approach’s benefits in optical networks from data centers to 

mobile fronthaul.

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Di Che, Xi Chen, Nicolas K. Fontaine, and Robert Borkowski for fruitful 

discussions.

References

1. C. Xie and B. Zhang, “Scaling Optical Interconnects for Hyperscale Data Center 

Networks,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 110, no. 11, pp. 1699–1713, Nov. 2022.

2. V. Houtsma and D. van Veen, “High Speed Optical Access Networks For This Decade 

And The Next (Invited),” in 2022 IEEE Photonics Conference (IPC), Nov. 2022.

3. X. Chen, C. Antonelli, A. Mecozzi, D. Che, and W. Shieh, “Chapter 10 - High-capacity 

direct-detection systems,” in Optical Fiber Telecommunications VII, A. E. Willner, Ed., 
Academic Press, 2020.

4. M. Zhang, Y. Chen, W. Li, J. Chen, T. Tong, Z. Hu, et al., “Amplifier-free Low-CSPR 

Polarization-Division-Multiplexing Self-Homodyne Coherent Receiver for ZR 
Transmission,” in 2022 European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC), Sep. 
2022.

5. J. Lowery and J. Armstrong, “Orthogonal-frequency-division multiplexing for dispersion 

compensation of long-haul optical systems,” Opt. Express, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 2079–2084, 
Mar. 2006.

6. S. T. Le, K. Schuh, F. Buchali, T. Drenski, A. Hills, M. King, and T. Sizer, “Optical 

Single-Sideband Direct Detection Transmissions: Recent Progress and Commercial 
Aspects,” in 2020 European Conference on Optical Communications (ECOC), Dec. 2020.

7. H. Chen, N. K. Fontaine, J. M. Gené, R. Ryf, D. T. Neilson, and G. Raybon, “Dual 

Polarization Full-Field Signal Waveform Reconstruction Using Intensity Only 
Measurements for Coherent Communications,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 38, 
no. 9, pp. 2587–2597, May 2020.

8. H. Chen, N. K. Fontaine, M. Mazur, L. Dallachiesa, Y. Zhang, H. Huang, et al., 

“140G/70G Direct Detection PON with >37 dB Power Budget and 40-km Reach Enabled 
by Colorless Phase Retrieval Full Field Recovery,” in 2021 European Conference on 
Optical Communication (ECOC), Sep. 2021.


9. H. Huang, H. Chen, N. K. Fontaine, Y. Song, M. Mazur, L. Dallachiesa, Y. Zhang, C. Ye, 

D. Van Veen, V. Houtsma, R. Ryf, and D. T. Neilson, “Experimental Characterization of 
Colorless Phase Retrieval Under Ultrafast Wavelength Drift for Upstream PON 
Transmission,” in 2022 Optical Fiber Communications Conference and Exhibition 
(OFC), Mar. 2022, pp. 1–3.

10. H. Chen, N. K. Fontaine, R.-J. Essiambre, H. Huang, M. Mazur, R. Ryf, and D. T. 

Neilson, “Space-Time Diversity Phase Retrieval Receiver,” in 2021 Optical Fiber 
Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC), Jun. 2021, pp. 1–3.

11. Rahim, A. Hermans, B. Wohlfeil, D. Petousi, B. Kuyken, D. V. Thourhout, and R. G. 

Baets, “Taking silicon photonics modulators to a higher performance level: state-of-the-art 
and a review of new technologies,” AP, vol. 3, no. 2, p. 024003, Apr. 2021.

12. R. Doerr, L. Chen, D. Vermeulen, T. Nielsen, S. Azemati, S. Stulz, G. McBrien, X.-M. 

Xu, B. Mikkelsen, M. Givehchi, C. Rasmussen, and S. Y. Park, “Single-Chip Silicon 
Photonics 100-Gb/s Coherent Transceiver,” in Optical Fiber Communication Conference: 
Postdeadline Papers (2014), paper Th5C.1, Optical Society of America, Mar. 2014.

13. P. Dong, X. Chen, K. Kim, S. Chandrasekhar, Y.-K. Chen, and J. H. Sinsky, “128-Gb/s 

100-km transmission with direct detection using silicon photonic Stokes vector receiver 
and I/Q modulator,” Optics Express, vol. 24, no. 13, pp. 14208–14214, Jun. 2016.

14. J. Verbist, J. Zhang, B. Moeneclaey, W. Soenen, J. Van Weerdenburg, R. Van Uden, C. 

Okonkwo, J. Bauwelinck, G. Roelkens, and X. Yin, “A 40-GBd QPSK/16-QAM 
Integrated Silicon Coherent Receiver,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 28, no. 
19, pp. 2070–2073, Oct. 2016.

15. Y. Tong, Q. Zhang, X. Wu, C. Shu, and H. K. Tsang, “112 Gb/s 16-QAM OFDM for 80-

km Data Center Interconnects Using Silicon Photonic Integrated Circuits and Kramers–
Kronig Detection,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 37, no. 14, pp. 3532–3538, Jul. 
2019.

16. S. Ishimura, T. Fukui, R. Tanomura, G. Soma, Y. Nakano, and T. Tanemura, “64-QAM 

Self-Coherent Transmission Using Symmetric Silicon Photonic Stokes-Vector Receiver,” 
in Optical Fiber Communication Conference 2022, paper M4J.6, Optica Publishing 
Group, Mar. 2022.

17. H. Ahmed, L. Vera, L. Iotti, R. Shi, S. Shekhar, and A. Rylyakov, “A Dual-Polarization 

Silicon-Photonic Coherent Receiver Front-End Supporting 528 Gb/s/Wavelength,” IEEE 
Journal of Solid-State Circuits, pp. 1–12, 2023.

18. J. Li, Z. Wang, H. Ji, X. Li, H. Chen, R. R. Unnithan, W. Shieh, and Y. Su, “Silicon 

Photonic Carrier-Assisted Differential Detection Receiver With High Electrical Spectral 
Efficiency for Short-Reach Interconnects,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 41, no. 
3, pp. 919–925, Feb. 2023.

19. Y. Hu, X. Li, D. Mao, M. S. Alam, E. Berikaa, J. Zhang, S. Bernal, A. Samani, M. E. 

Mousa-Pasandi, M. O’Sullivan, and D. V. Plant, “Silicon Photonic Phase-Diverse 
Receiver Enabling Transmission of >Net 250 Gbps/λ Over 40 km for High-Speed and 
Low-Cost Short-Reach Optical Communications,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 
41, no. 12, pp. 3680–3687, Jun. 2023.

20. B. Stern, H. Chen, K. Kim, H. Huang, J. Zhao, and M. H. Idjadi, “Silicon Photonic Direct-

Detection Phase Retrieval Receiver,” in 2023 European Conference on Optical 
Communication (ECOC), Oct. 2023.


21. C. K. Madsen, G. Lenz, A. J. Bruce, M. A. Capuzzo, L. T. Gomez, T. N. Nielsen, and I. 

Brener, “Multistage dispersion compensator using ring resonators,” Optics Letters, vol. 
24, no. 22, pp. 1555–1557, Nov. 1999.

22. B. Stern, H. Chen, K. Kim, and N. K. Fontaine, “Large Dispersion Silicon Bragg Grating 

for Full-Field 40-GBd QPSK Phase Retrieval Receiver,” Journal of Lightwave 
Technology, vol. 40, no. 22, pp. 7358–7363, Nov. 2022.


Figures

Figure 1. Schematic of a phase-retrieval receiver, including elements providing dispersion D, 

time delays Δt, photodiodes, and digital signal processing (DSP).

Figure 2. Diagram of the integrated phase retrieval receiver.


Figure 3. (a) Diagram of a set of microrings along a bus waveguide, (b) Simulation of the 

transmission and group delay of the set of rings. The group delay contributions of the 

individual rings are shown as dotted lines.

Figure 4. (a) Microscope image of the fabricated receiver chip. (b) Photograph of the 

assembled module.

Figure 5. OSA measurement of the rings’ spectrum.


Figure 6. Diagram of the experimental setup for the phase retrieval receiver. ECL: external 

cavity laser, EDFA: erbium doped fiber amplifier, VOA: variable optical attenuator.

Figure 7. (a-d) Measured QPSK and 8QAM constellations for each polarization, (e) 

Measured BER vs. OSNR.


