 

 

The Interplay Between Imprint, Wake-Up Like Effects and Domains in Ferroelectric 
Al0.70Sc0.30N 
 
    Maike Gremmel* and Simon Fichtner 
 
 
Simon Fichtner, Maike Gremmel. 
Department of Material Science, Kiel University, Kaiserstraße 2, 24143 Kiel, Germany 
Email: magr@tf.uni-kiel.de 
 
Simon Fichtner 
Fraunhofer Institute of Silicon Technology (ISIT), Fraunhoferstraße 1,25524 Itzehoe, Germany 
Email: simon.fichtner@isit.fraunhofer.de  
 
 
Keywords: ferroelectric, imprint, wake-up, domains, thin film, scandium 
 
 
Abstract: 
 
This paper investigates wake-up and imprint in ferroelectric Al0.70Sc0.30N films. The study 

employs a series of I-V and P-E measurements with varying electric field amplitudes and voltage 
cycles as well as structural investigation via Scanning Electron Microscopy to understand the origin 
and underlying principle of wake-up and imprint as well as their relation. It is shown that the material 
can be considered wake-up free, however inherent imprint and imprint shift in combination with 
minor loops result in a wake-up like effect. We introduce a proposition to explain the influence of 
initial switching cycles on domains, their stabilization and corresponding changes in imprint. 
Unipolar fields and temperature investigations are used to explore the reversibility of imprint and 
ways to program it, while partial switching is applied to investigate domain propagation and support 
the aforementioned approach. It is concluded, that after an energetically more demanding domain 
nucleation, domain wall motion can switch the majority of polarization in Al1-xScxN. As a 
consequence, the presence of initial domains reduces the coercive field in respect to unipolar films. 
 

 
 


 

 

1. Introduction 

Ferroelectricity is defined as the ability to switch the spontaneous electric polarization present in 
certain materials with a non-centrosymmetric crystal structure with the help of an external electric 
field. This property has been found to offer promising solutions in various fields such as non-volatile 
information storage, sensors and actuators.[1–3] As a field driven effect, ferroelectricity allows 
particularly energy efficient device operation.[3]  
Al1-xScxN and related wurtzite-type solid solutions are a novel class of ferroelectric thin film 
materials that offer huge spontaneous polarizations, very good long term stability, as well as 
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) compatibility.[4–6] This makes them attractive 
candidates for use in microelectronic devices, where such properties are often critical. The 
extraordinary temperature stability of Al1-xScxN also allows for its use in high-temperature 
applications, [4] while the high coercive field (Ec) of Al1-xScxN also enables its scalability to very thin 
layers while maintaining sufficient resistance to depolarization.[7–9]  
These properties of wurtzite-type ferroelectrics make them a potent solution for use in a variety of 
applications, including compact and low-power electronics, sensors, and actuators. 
In the context of bringing wurtzite-type ferroelectrics like Al1-xScxN to applications, a 
comprehensive understanding of common phenomena in ferroelectrics will be required. This includes 
the wake-up and imprint of their polarization vs. electric field (P-E) hysteresis loops. While imprint is 
defined as an asymmetric ferroelectric hysteresis loop where one polarization state is preferred over 
the other, [10–13] wake-up describes the increase of remanent Polarization Pr over a number of switching 
cycles.[14] Both effects are in principle undesired properties that can lead to a device failure and therefor 
have to be characterized and addressed. In this paper, we highlight the hitherto unreported connection 
between wake-up like effects, imprint and domain propagation in wake-up free Al1-xScxN films. 
While studies on wake-up in fluorite- and perovskite-type ferroelectric films have already provided a 
good understanding of processes inside these materials, little is known to date about wake-up in the 
novel wurtzite type ferroelectrics.[15–18] Wake-up was reported on recently by different groups for this 
new material class, albeit with no general behavior or mechanism available to date.[19–23] One possible 
mechanism is introduced by Zhu et al. for Al1-xBxN, where they attribute wake-up to the nucleation 
and growth of stable inversion domains.[19] By repeatedly switching the films, the number of stable 
inversion domains increases, which lead to a higher volume fraction getting switched in subsequent 
cycles. Therefor the remanent polarization Pr increases up to the point where the full volume is 
inverted. On the other hand Al1-xScxN was previously claimed to be wake-up free, albeit without in-
depth analysis.[24] Therefore, no clear understanding of the general mechanisms of wake-up like 
behavior in wurtzite-type thin films exists to date, while the same applies for the imprint which is often 
found in P-E loops of these films.[25]  
Therefore the aim of this work will be to answer the question if, first of all, wake-up in our sputter-
deposited Al1-xScxN films exists, how the imprint evolves, what could be at their origin and how do 
they compare with previous reports from the class of the wurtzite-type ferroelectrics as well as 
ferroelectrics in general.  
This work is separated into three sections. In the first, wake-up is investigated on Al70Sc30N films 
via current density vs. electric field (I-V) measurements and the results are compared to Al1-xBxN. 
Further, the evolution of imprint up to 104 switching cycles is analysed. In the second part, the 
influence of the inversion domains on the electrical response/ I-V peaks is investigated, supported by 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) polarity investigations after wet etching. An explanatory model 
for the interplay between imprint, wake-up like effects and domains will be specified and delimitated 
from the approach for Al1-xBxN. In a third part, thermal annealing is applied to investigate possible 
domain growth and the influence on imprint. 


 

 

2. Experimental 

For the investigation of wake-up, capacitor structures with 420 nm thick Al1-xScxN films where 
prepared on oxidized Si (100) covered by a 100 nm Mo bottom electrode on a 100 nm AlN seedlayer. 
The Al1-xScxN films were grown in an Evatec MSQ 200 magnetron sputter tool by cosputtering 
from two single element targets. The Sc concentration was measured to be 30 at% by SEM EDX.  
Details regarding the deposition process were published elsewhere.[26] As top electrode, 100 nm Mo 
was used and structured by a mixture of phosphoric and sulfuric acid (PWS).[27] 
For electrical characterization, current over electric field loops were measured with a triangular 
voltage signal without prepolarization in an aixACCT TF 2000. Polarization over electric field loops 
were obtained through integration of these loops. Coercive fields were determined by a fit of the I-V 
peaks (See supporting information Figure S4). PUND measurements (Positive up negative down) for 
leakage compensation were omitted, as the additional voltage pulses cause a distortion of the coercive 
fields, i.e. have a direct effect on the observed evaluation of the hysteresis loops. 
For additional structural investigations the capacitor structures were etched in hot (80°C) 
phosphoric acid (80% H3PO4: 20% H2O) at different states of cycling and investigated with scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM, Zeiss Ultra 55 Plus). Futhermore, X-ray diffraction on similar samples 
was performed in a previous study.[4] 
Thermal annealing in a Nabertherm muffle furnace LTS/11 was used for investigation of domain 
growth and imprint shift at elevated temperature. 

3. Results and Discussion 

3.1 
Wake-Up Like Effects and Imprint in Al1-xScxN 

Initially, we discuss under which measurement conditions our ferroelectric Al0.70Sc0.30N films 
feature wake-up like effects, while in general they can be considered wake-up free. Here, we follow 
the standard definition of wake-up as an increasing remanent Polarization (Pr) over the number of 
voltage cycles the material has seen. [10–13] 
First, a series of I-V measurements with 30 cycles was performed with an electric field amplitude 
of 4.7 MVcm-1. For an amplitude of 4.7 MVcm-1, Pr in the first switching cycle is virtually equal to 
the Pr after 30 cycles, therefor the film can be considered wake-up free (Figure 1a, positive fields). 
However a negative imprint (Ec+ < |Ec-|) of all hysteresis loops is visible, where Ec+ is the positive 
coercive field and Ec- the negative respectively. When the sum of positive and negative coercive field 
is plotted against the number of cycles, a clear decrease of this sum becomes obvious (Figure 1c). Ec+ 
is slightly increasing during the first 20 cycles before it starts to decrease exponentially around 100 
cycles (Figure 2). |Ec-| decreases exponentially right from the start up to 104 cycles and with a larger 
exponent than Ec+. This leads to a narrower hysteresis and constant reduction of imprint up to the point, 
where both coercive fields are nearly the same.  
Measurements at only < 5% lower voltage amplitudes instead show a strong increase of Pr in the 
initial cycles which can appear as a classical wake-up effect without measurements at higher fields. 
The lower the amplitude, the more cycles are necessary to wake-up the material, similarly to that was 
reported by Zhu et al.[19] From the P-E loops in Figure 1d it becomes evident, that the hysteresis loops 
of the cycles during wake-up are not saturated for negative fields while the positive side clearly is. 
This, and the Ec- shift implies that these measurements correspond to minor loops relative to Ec-. With 
an additional bias field of -0.4 MVcm-1, and thus a voltage signal which is more overlapping with the 
initial form of the P-E curve, it is again possible to reach full polarization without wake-up. The shift 
of the negative coercive field as present in the measurements at higher field appears as well. A 
comparison of Pr for samples experiencing wake-up and biased ones is displayed in Figure 1e. All 
corresponding I-V loops are included in the supporting information Figure S1. While the biased 
measurement reaches 120 µCcm-2 in the first cycle, without it the measurement only approaches this 


 

 

value after 10 cycles (Figure 1f). Due to the proximity to the breakdown field of the films, the data 
contains an unneglectable amount of leakage, leading to an overestimation of the true remanent 
polarization of up to 30µCcm-2. 
We interpret these results such, that initial minor loops gradually transform into saturated loops 
mainly through an increasing Ec-. This increase in Ec- then shifts the hysteresis loop inside the probed 
voltage interval. Since virtually the whole volume of the film can however be switched in the first 
loop, provided a high enough voltage is selected, and a saturated Pr is available in this loop, the term 
wake-up free can be applied to our Al1-xScxN films.  
This nonetheless raises the question what is the origin of the imprint and the varying coercive 
fields we observe, which are responsible for the wake-up like behavior of the minor loops.  

 
Figure 1 : a) P-E loops at 4.7 MVcm-1 and a frequency of 211 Hz. b) Corresponding shift of Ec+ and 
Ec- over the first 20 cycles on a pristine sample. In c) the sum (Ec+ + Ec-) is shown as a representation 
of the initial imprint shift calculated from values of b. d) P-E loops at 4.1 MV/cm and 211Hz without 
and e) with a bias field of -0.36 MVcm-1 for the first 30 cycles on a pristine capacitor on the same 
sample. F) Pr+ over cycles for sample exhibiting wake-up like behavior and the biased sample. 
  


 

 

 
Figure 2 : Positive and negative coercive field at 211 Hz normalized by the initial Ec+ for different 
samples. Pad 1 and 3 correspond to Figure 1 a-c) and e) accordingly.  
 
We consider a similar explanation as given by Zhu et al. for Al1-xBxN (formation of permanent 
inversion domains), to be responsible for the variation of Ec and therefore also the wake-up like effects 
as well as the imprint[19]. Unlike for Al1-xBxN, we do however not consider these regions to necessarily 
correspond to real inversion domains in all cases (especially for the initial minority polarization), but 
as more general defect sites that allow nucleation of the initial minority polarization at reduced 
energies. In general wurtzite Al1-xScxN can exhibit two polarities (Figure 3). In respect to the Al and 
Sc atoms the three equivalent Nitrogen bonds can either point down, towards the substrate, described 
as Metal-polar (M-polar) or up, towards the growth direction, described as Nitrogen polar ( N-polar). 
Consequently, during repeated switching, the originally exclusively N-polar film, starts to acquire 
more and more regions were the nucleation of M-polarity is energetically more favorable. These 
regions then serve as nucleation sites for the subsequent switching events from N- to M-polarity. Thus, 
they reduce the absolute value of Ec-, by allowing energetically less expensive domain wall motion.  
This mechanism is sketched in Figure 4. The smaller shift of Ec+ in comparison to Ec- is attributed to 
the as grown N-polarity which therefor is already energetically favored from the beginning and 
switching does not improve as much.  
   While Zhu et al. consider stable inversion domains to grow from top and bottom electrode for E 
> Ec and remain there even after switching back, we did not find direct evidence for the existence of 
stable M polar residues after switching to N polarity at the film surface.[14] This was investigated by 
wet etching. Capacitors with different switching states were submerged in Chromium etchant for about 
1 minute to remove the Mo electrode. Subsequently, the Al1-xScxN layer was etched in H3PO4 at 80°C 
for 1 minute. While N-polar Al1-xScxN etches in H3PO4, M-polar films are virtually inert.[25] Despite a 
line along the former electrode edge, the surface for fully N-polar capacitors in as deposited state and 
capacitors cycles >70 times appear the same. No remaining M-polar inversion domains are visible on 
the switched regions (Error! Reference source not found. 3). For M-polar capacitors, a clear 
interface towards the surrounding N-polar region is observed, again demonstrating the general 
feasibility to determine the local surface polarity of wurtzite-type films. Since we did not observe 
remaining M-polar regions on the top of films switched to positive saturation, we conclude that in N-
polar state no M-polar domains remain at the electrodes. Instead, switching likely introduces regions 
where the nucleation of M-polarity becomes energetically more favorable resulting in the lowered 
coercive field and therefore reduced imprint. These regions are most likely situated under the upper 


 

 

electrode, as etching a film switched to only about 50% M-polarity yielded a virtually closed M-polar 
surface (Figure 3), strongly suggesting that switching originates from the upper interface. After 
apparently saturating M-polarity, we did however see indications for real residual N-polar domains at 
the bottom of the films, which can serve as starting points for domain propagation while back-
switching. In our previous work, we could image such regions via TEM polarity determination and 
also conclude on their presence indirectly through a reduced piezoelectric coefficient.[28] Their 
presence might also explain why the N-polar polarity remains favorable during 1000’s of cycles 
(Figure 2).  

 
 

Figure 3: SEM images of N polar and M polar capacitors after removing the electrode and 
anisotropic etching of the surface. Top left: as deposited capacitor, N-polar, Top right: > 70 cycles 
N-polar, bottom left: 1 cycle 100% Pr, M-polar, bottom right: 1 cycle < 50% Pr. M-polar. 

We therefore propose the following explanation for the initial switching cycles after deposition:  
 During the first transition from N- to M-polarity, switching begins with nucleation at the top electrode, 
which then progresses through the film towards the bottom electrode by domain wall motion, where 
typically N-polar residuals remain. These serve as initial sites from which domain wall propagation 
switches the film back from M- to N-polarity, while regions more favorable for the nucleation of M-
polar unit cells remain at the top. That the initial presence of small minority domains can have a 
profound impact on Ec and thus the energy required to initiate switching, is demonstrated in detail in 
the following section. 
 

 
 


 

 

Figure 4: Sketch for domain nucleation and propagation in ferroelectric Al1-xScxN.  
1 - capacitor in as deposited N-polar state, 2 - nucleation and growth of M-polar domains under the 
influence of E, 3 - fully switched film at Pr- ,4 - fully switched film at Pr+ at >1 cycle.  
 
To investigate whether the stabilized imprint after the first cycles is reversible, I-V curves were 
measured at 211 Hz before and after 5 unipolar cycles (0.1 Hz) with all voltage peaks of either 
exclusively positive or negative polarity. Applications of a negative field to a sample that was cycled 
40 times resulted in a shift of the peaks and a reduced imprint as shown in Figure 5. This shift was 
reversible by an introduction of a positive field. Similar effects are typically explained by charge 
injection, migration of mobile charges or dipolar defect rotation.[11,14] For Al1-xScxN these 
mechanisms are however not able to fully explain the variation of the IV response. In first 
approximation a charge distribution should affect both coercive fields equally, yet the shift of the 
positive field is stronger pronounced. For charge migration one can further argue that starting from 
a negative imprint, either a higher positive carrier density is present at the top electrode, or a negative 
carrier density at the bottom electrode. A positive field in both cases would therefor lead to a more 
homogeneous distribution of the defects, reducing the imprint. However the imprint shifts in the 
opposite direction, bringing us to the conclusion, that migration of charges is not the driving force. 
A sketch of the mechanism is added in the supporting information Figure S3. 
A similar argumentation is true for the dipolar defects: The internal field would only allow for the 
positive end of the majority of the dipole defects to face towards the top electrode. Therefore a 
positive applied field should rotate these, reducing the internal field and a negative applied field 
should increase the imprint. This is again opposite to the observations of this work and can therefore 
be ruled out as the driving mechanism.  
 In contrast to that, the direction of the shifts is coherent with our proposed explanation of domain 
growth which also provides a reasonable explanation as to why both coercive fields do not shift in 
unison. When a negative field is applied to the sample, the N-polar film is switched to M-polarity. 
Keeping the field applied reduces the residual N-polar inversion domains and in return N polarity 
requires higher fields to switch in subsequent cycles. Therefore the hysteresis is shifted to lower 
imprint, especially on the positive side. For a positive field, the stabilization is reversed. Switching 
to M-polarity requires larger fields and the hysteresis shifts back to a higher imprint. 
 
 

 
Figure 5: I-V measurements of the Al0.70Sc0.30N film at 211 Hz. A triangular unipolar field of -4.7 
MVcm-1 was applied 5 times at 0.1 Hz before measuring the blue curve. Afterwards the same was 
done with a positive amplitude corresponding to the red plot. 


 

 

 
3.2 
Nucleation Trough Partial Switching and its Effect on EC 

To further support our interpretation of the origins of imprint and the resulting wake-up like 
behavior of minor P-E loops in Al1-xScxN, we investigated the interplay between nucleation and the 
continuation of polarization switching in more detail. The influence of nucleation and the subsequent 
growth of inversion domains on the electrical properties becomes especially clear in the observation 
of I-V peaks during and after partial unipolar switching. In the first cycle a minor loop (90% of Ec) 
was applied to partially switch an N-polar film to M-polarity (or vice-versa, the switching 
polarization was kept between 5% and 25% of 2Pr for each case). During the second pulse, the 
previously partially switched polarity was saturated. A third pulse was used to fully switch the sample 
back to its initial polarity and the forth pulse to reach saturation in M-polarity (or N-polarity) again 
in a single step to determine the full polarization. These measurements were conducted on both 
pristine and repeatedly switched samples as well as under different frequencies between 50 Hz and 
700 Hz. 
As shown in Figure 6, the current peaks of the minor loop (1st cycle) as well as the peak from the 
4th cycle (after full inversion to M polarity) start to increase at a field of about 3.5 MVcm-1 with the 
same slope. The 2nd cycle (full cycle after minor loop) however starts at 3 MVcm-1, right where the 
1st peak recedes to. Additionally, the 2nd peak is broader, consequently has a lower current density 
and the coercive field is reduced as well. Measurements at different frequencies and for both 
polarities give comparable results as shown in the supplement Figure S2.  
 

 
 
Figure 6: a) I-V measurement with previous nucleation cycle, pulse train and corresponding b) P-E 
measurements at 211 Hz. Blue and red are subsequent unipolar measurements with triangular voltage 
amplitude of -3.9 MVcm-1 and -4.6 MVcm-1 respectively. The yellow and gray curves were also measured with 


 

 

-4.6 MVcm-1. c, d) I-V measurements at 211 Hz for both initial polarities. E, f) I-V and P-E measurement with 
pulse 1 at full amplitude. 

By using the approach of inversion domains from the last section and applying it to the results of 
the unipolar measurements, the 1st and 4th loop can be considered to be in a polarization state with 
fewer and/or smaller inversion domains. In the first step, the applied field induces the nucleation of 
further domains at higher electric fields. Therefor growth also takes place at these higher fields even 
though less energy would be necessary for the domains to expand. This becomes evident from the 
fact that polarization continues to switch even after reducing the voltage below the initial onset of 
the switching current. For the 1st cycle this results in a counter clockwise current peak. For the 2nd 
cycle, where inversion domains are already present from the 1st loop, the domains already grow at 
lower electric fields, while further nucleation might start at higher electric field. Consequently, Ec+ 
appears to be reduced by about 10%. This suggests that the majority of the volume can be addressed 
through domain wall motion from the initial domains. In addition, the overall displacement current 
peak becomes broader as the domain growth originating from the initial domains is nonetheless likely 
not able to progress to the whole sample volume. Because similar results were obtained for both 
polarities of pristine films as well as capacitors that were already switched over 2000 times, most 
inversion domains appear to be resolved by switching.  
 
3.3 
Effect of Temperature on Imprint and Inversion Domains 

Since the Al1-xScxN P-E loops still exhibit a noticeable imprint after thousands of cycles and 
annealing of PZT and HfO was reported to be an effective way to manipulate the center of the 
hysteresis loop, this section is focused on investigating the effect of temperature on imprint in Al1-

xScxN. [18,29] Therefor, in the first step N- and M-polar capacitors were either annealed for 10 minutes 
at different temperatures or held for different time intervals at 100 °C and 200 °C. Both temperatures 
are well below the temperature of phase transition,[4] nonetheless, the different temperatures and time 
intervals result in varying shifts of imprint. While for fully M-polar capacitors, the negative imprint 
decreases and even becomes positive for longer time and/or higher temperatures, the imprint in N-
polar pristine samples gets more pronounced (Figure 7 a,b). The variation of the hysteresis center 
along the field axis in the pristine polarization state is 3 to 5 times smaller than the shift of inversely 
poled capacitors. 
In the second step a partially switched sample was heated to 200 °C for 10 min to see whether 
inversion domains grow, vanish or are otherwise influenced by additional thermal energy. For this, 
as a reference, a capacitor was first cycled ~50 times with a field amplitude of -4.7 MVcm-1. 
Afterwards a unipolar field of -4.1 MVcm-1 was introduced to partially switch the film to M-polarity, 
followed by a unipolar field of 4.7 MVcm-1 to ensure full reversal to N-polarity. For the actual 
measurement the capacitor was partially switched to M-polarity as described before (-4.1 MVcm-1), 
annealed and then fully switched back to N-polarity with 4.7 MVcm-1.  
For the partially M-polar sample (Figure 7d), the introduction of temperature resulted in an 
unexpected shift of the positive switching current towards more positive voltages, even though the 
great majority of the film can still be expected to be N-polar. Therefore, the shift is opposite to the 
shift of the fully N-polar films.  
The slight increase of I-V area from the preheated to post heated curve at positive fields is a result 
of the induced shift of the Ec- by cycling that also increased the switched volume of the negative pre-
pulse (see light blue vs. purple curve).  
One possible explanation for the imprint shift is a classical defect driven mechanism as proposed 
for PZT or HfO, where charged defects migrate along the direction of an incompletely screened 
polarization and therefor change the internal electric field and imprint accordingly.[16,18] With this 
mechanism, however it is not possible to explain the Ec shift in the partially switched sample (Figure 
7d). This mechanism furthermore would not agree with the imprint shift observed after applying 


 

 

unipolar fields as discussed for figure 6. If charged defects were the reason for the change in imprint, 
the response to the applied field would have to be reversed. A positive field would distribute defects 
more evenly throughout the sample, reducing the internal imprint. As the opposite is observed and 
discussed in the previous section, imprint shift by electric fields and annealing would be separate 
mechanisms. 
The more likely explanation, which also agrees to the imprint shift induced by electric fields, is 
again the stabilization of the present polarization of the films due to structural changes/defects that 
favor the nucleation or presence of a certain polarity. As the films during deposition grow in the N-
polar state at elevated temperature, this polarization state is already stabilized in the process. M-
polarity on the other hand is energetically not favored in as deposited films. The introduction of 
temperature to these films enables the reduction and reorientation of structural defects, making it 
easier to switch to M-polarity, while at the same time making it harder to switch back to N-polarity. 
The imprint shift therefor is much stronger for M-polar than for N-polar films. From the partially 
switched film it becomes evident, that existing minority domains do neither grow nor shrink. 
However, because minority-polar volume was still stabilized locally during the annealing, it became 
harder to switch back and the imprint became less negative. 
 

 
 
Figure 7: a) Sum of Ec of as deposited and inversely poled Al0.70Sc0.30N capacitors vs. 
temperature. b) Sum of Ec at 200 °C vs time. c) P-V loops of capacitor at room temperature and 
heated to 200 °C for 10 min. d) I-V measurement of a capacitor partially switched in negative 
direction (pre heating) and fully switched afterwards in positive direction (post heating) 
compared to same measurement without heating. The measurements shown in d) were conducted 


 

 

to confirm the nucleation based explanation. The colors in the pulse train added as an inlet refer 
to the colors of the curves. 

4. Conclusion 

Ferroelectric Al1-xScxN films were investigated for wake-up and imprint. While the films 
experience a wake-up like behavior when cycled with minor loops in the range of the coercive field, 
they reach full Pr when the voltage amplitude is sufficiently above the coercive field and therefor can 
be considered wake-up free. We attribute the wake-up like behavior to a shift in the imprint of the 
films, which is due to the emergence of regions which either are stable inversion domains or at least 
regions were the as grown minority polarization is favored. For our N-polar films, this results in a 
pronounced reduction of Ec- during the initial switching events. This way minor loops turn into major 
loops and Al1-xScxN films appear to feature wake-up.  
Based on these observations, previous studies and SEM imaging of anisotropically etched 
surfaces, an explanation is proposed for the initial switching cycles. For N-polar films, M-polarity 
propagates from the top-electrode through the film, likely by domain wall motion. At the bottom 
electrode N-polar inversion domains remain and serve as initial sites for back-switching while in 
switched N-polar film regions remain at top electrode which are more favorable for nucleation of M-
polar domains, therefor leading to a reduces negative Ec and shift in imprint in consecutive cycles. 
Imprint was further investigated under the influence of unipolar fields which were found to 
destabilize and reduce oppositely oriented inversion domains (or regions, were such inversions are 
energetically more favorable) present in the film, therefor shifting the hysteresis to higher or lower 
electric fields. 
The general presence of inversion domains was also found to lower the energy required for full 
polarization inversion in partially switched films such that the coercive field is reduced and the I-V 
peak broadens in the consecutive cycles. We attribute this to a mechanism were a larger volume of 
the films becomes addressable to energetically less demanding domain wall motion in the presence 
of already switched sample volume, in line with our explanation for imprint.  
Furthermore temperature was also found to stabilize the polarization present in the heated films 
and be able to shift the imprint close to 0 MVcm-1 for 10 min at 200 °C. This way temperature offers 
an opportunity to program imprint to a desired value. No domain growth at elevated temperatures 
was observed. 
 
 

Conflict of interest: 

We declare no conflict of interest 
 

Acknowledgements: 

This Work was funded by the project “ForMikro-SALSA” (Project-ID 16ES1053) from the 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
(BMBF) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation), 
Project-ID 458372836. 
  
 
 
 
Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) 


 

 

 
Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) 
 
Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))
 
 

References 

 
[1] 
R. Bez, A. Pirovano, Mater Sci Semicond Process 2004, 7, 349. 
[2] 
B. W. Wessels, Annu Rev Mater Res 2007, 37, 659. 
[3] 
A. I. Khan, A. Keshavarzi, S. Datta, Nat Electron 2020, 3, 588. 
[4] 
M. R. Islam, N. Wolff, M. Yassine, G. Schönweger, B. Christian, H. Kohlstedt, O. 
Ambacher, F. Lofink, L. Kienle, S. Fichtner, Appl Phys Lett 2021, 118, 232905. 
[5] 
S. Fichtner, G. Schönweger, F. Dietz, H. Hanssen, H. Züge, T.-N. Kreutzer, F. Lofink, H. 
Kohlstedt, H. Kapels, M. Mensing, 2023 7th IEEE Electron Devices Technology & 
Manufacturing Conference (EDTM) 2023, 1. 
[6] 
P. Wang, D. Wang, S. Mondal, M. Hu, J. Liu, Z. Mi, Semicond Sci Technol 2023, 38, 
043002. 
[7] 
G. Schönweger, M. R. Islam, N. Wolff, A. Petraru, L. Kienle, H. Kohlstedt, S. Fichtner, 
physica status solidi (RRL) – Rapid Research Letters 2022, 2200312. 
[8] 
S. Fichtner, G. Schönweger, F. Dietz, H. Hanssen, H. Züge, T.-N. Kreutzer, F. Lofink, H. 
Kohlstedt, H. Kapels, M. Mensing, in IEEE EDTM, 2023. 
[9] 
G. Schönweger, N. Wolff, M. R. Islam, M. Gremmel, A. Petraru, L. Kienle, H. Kohlstedt, S. 
Fichtner, 2023. 
[10] Y. Zhou, H. K. Chan, C. H. Lam, F. G. Shin, J Appl Phys 2005, 98, DOI 
10.1063/1.1984075. 
[11] M. Grossmann, O. Lohse, D. Bolten, U. Boettger, T. Schneller, R. Waser, J Appl Phys 2002, 
92, 2680. 
[12] M. Alexe, C. Harnagea, D. Hesse, U. Gösele, Appl Phys Lett 2001, 79, 242. 
[13] A. Gruverman, B. J. Rodriguez, A. I. Kingon, R. J. Nemanich, J. S. Cross, M. Tsukada, Appl 
Phys Lett 2003, 82, 3071. 
[14] T. Schenk, M. Hoffmann, J. Ocker, M. Pešić, T. Mikolajick, U. Schroeder, ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 2015, 7, 20224. 
[15] T. Y. Lee, K. Lee, H. H. Lim, M. S. Song, S. M. Yang, H. K. Yoo, D. I. Suh, Z. Zhu, A. 
Yoon, M. R. MacDonald, X. Lei, H. Y. Jeong, D. Lee, K. Park, J. Park, S. C. Chae, ACS 
Appl Mater Interfaces 2019, 11, 3142. 
[16] P. Yuan, G. Q. Mao, Y. Cheng, K. H. Xue, Y. Zheng, Y. Yang, P. Jiang, Y. Xu, Y. Wang, 
Y. Wang, Y. Ding, Y. Chen, Z. Dang, L. Tai, T. Gong, Q. Luo, X. Miao, Q. Liu, Nano Res 
2022, 15, 3667. 
[17] J. Y. Park, D. H. Choe, D. H. Lee, G. T. Yu, K. Yang, S. H. Kim, G. H. Park, S. G. Nam, H. 
J. Lee, S. Jo, B. J. Kuh, D. Ha, Y. Kim, J. Heo, M. H. Park, Advanced Materials 2023, 
2204904. 
[18] W. L. Warren, D. Dimos, G. E. Pike, B. A. Tuttle, M. V. Raymond, R. Ramesh, J. T. Evans, 
Appl Phys Lett 1995, 67, 866. 
[19] W. Zhu, F. He, J. Hayden, Z. Fan, J. I. Yang, J. P. Maria, S. Trolier-McKinstry, Adv 
Electron Mater 2021, 2100931, 1. 
[20] K. Ferri, S. Bachu, W. Zhu, M. Imperatore, J. Hayden, N. Alem, N. Giebink, S. Trolier-
McKinstry, J.-P. Maria, J Appl Phys 2021, 130, 44101. 


 

 

[21] A. Phys, D. Wang, P. Wang, B. Wang, P. Wang, 2021, 111902, DOI 10.1063/5.0060021. 
[22] R. Shibukawa, S. L. Tsai, T. Hoshii, H. Wakabayashi, K. Tsutsui, K. Kakushima, Jpn J Appl 
Phys 2022, 61, SH1003. 
[23] S. K. Ryoo, K. Do Kim, H. W. Park, Y. Bin Lee, S. H. Lee, I. S. Lee, S. Byun, D. Shim, J. 
H. Lee, H. Kim, Y. H. Jang, M. H. Park, C. S. Hwang, Adv Electron Mater 2022, 8, DOI 
10.1002/AELM.202200726. 
[24] P. Wang, D. Wang, S. Mondal, M. Hu, Y. Wu, T. Ma, Z. Mi, ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
2022, 15, 18022. 
[25] S. Fichtner, N. Wolff, F. Lofink, L. Kienle, B. Wagner, J Appl Phys 2019, 125, DOI 
10.1063/1.5084945. 
[26] S. Fichtner, N. Wolff, G. Krishnamurthy, A. Petraru, S. Bohse, F. Lofink, S. Chemnitz, H. 
Kohlstedt, L. Kienle, B. Wagner, J Appl Phys 2017, 122, 35301. 
[27] S. Marauska, V. Hrkac, T. Dankwort, R. Jahns, H. J. Quenzer, R. Knöchel, L. Kienle, B. 
Wagner, Microsystem Technologies 2012, 18, 787. 
[28] N. Wolff, S. Fichtner, B. Haas, M. R. Islam, F. Niekiel, M. Kessel, O. Ambacher, C. Koch, 
B. Wagner, F. Lofink, L. Kienle, J Appl Phys 2021, 129, 34103. 
[29] D. J. Kim, S. H. Kim, J. P. Maria, A. I. Kingon, Materials Research Society Symposium - 
Proceedings 1999, 541, 469. 
  
 


Supporting Information: 
 

 
Figure S1: a) I-V loops at 4.7 MVcm-1 and a frequency of 211 Hz. b) I-V loops at 4.1 MV/cm and 
211Hz without and c) with a bias field of -0.36 MVcm-1 for the first 30 cycles on a pristine capacitor 
on the same sample.  

 

 
 
Figure S2: Unipolar measurements. A) P-E measurement corresponding to figure 6c at 211Hz, b,c) 
I-V measurements at 50Hz. 

 
 

 

Figure S3: a) Mechanism of charge migration in different external fields with the resulting internal 
field Eimp. Left: no external field, center: positive external field and right: negative external field 

 


 
Figure S4: I-V measurement of a capacitor structure with a fit of the switching peaks. The Fit is used 
to determine the precise coercive field during cycling (see Figure 1)  

 


