1

Notice: This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under Contract No. DE-AC0500OR22725 with the 
U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for 
publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-
wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for the United 
States Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of federally 
sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-
plan).


2

Title: When the atoms dance: exploring mechanisms of electron-beam induced modifications of 
materials with machine-learning assisted high temporal resolution electron microscopy

Authors: Matthew G. Boebinger1*, Ayana Ghosh2, Kevin M. Roccapriore1, Sudhajit Misra1, Kai Xiao1, 
Stephen Jesse1, Maxim Ziatdinov1,2, Sergei V. Kalinin3, Raymond R. Unocic1*

1 Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA

2 Computational Science and Engineering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA

3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA

Abstract:

Directed atomic fabrication using an aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope 
(STEM) opens new pathways for atomic engineering of functional materials. In this approach, the electron 
beam is used to actively alter the atomic structure through electron beam induced irradiation processes. 
One of the impediments that has limited widespread use thus far has been the ability to understand the 
fundamental mechanisms of atomic transformation pathways at high spatiotemporal resolution. Here, 
we develop a workflow for obtaining and analyzing high-speed spiral scan STEM data, up to 100 fps, to 
track the atomic fabrication process during nanopore milling in monolayer MoS2. An automated feedback-
controlled electron beam positioning system combined with deep convolution neural network (DCNN) 
was used to decipher fast but low signal-to-noise datasets and classify time-resolved atom positions and 
nature of their evolving atomic defect configurations. Through this automated decoding, the initial atomic 
disordering and reordering processes leading to nanopore formation was able to be studied across various 
timescales. Using these experimental workflows a greater degree of speed and information can be 
extracted from small datasets without compromising spatial resolution. This approach can be adapted to 
other 2D materials systems to gain further insights into the defect formation necessary to inform future 
automated fabrication techniques utilizing the STEM electron beam. 

Introduction:

The rapidly evolving landscape of science and technology demands unprecedented precision in 

materials fabrication, pushing the boundaries of traditional manufacturing techniques. Atomically precise 
fabrication has emerged as a transformative approach that promises unparalleled control over the 
structure and properties of materials at the atomic scale. This precision is essential for unlocking 
breakthroughs in diverse fields, including quantum sensing and communications [1-4]. Recently, it has 
been shown that the electron beam can be used as an exceptionally precise tool for direct fabrication on 
the atomic scale, the approach dubbed the atomic forge [5]. As the pursuit of atom-by-atom construction 
of materials gains momentum [2, 6-16], it becomes imperative to deepen our understanding of the 
underlying processes involved in atomic disordering and reordering. This knowledge is crucial in informing 
the development of future atomic fabrication techniques for novel functional applications. By 
comprehending and identifying the mechanisms behind defect formation, it becomes possible to tailor 
defects within two-dimensional (2D) materials to exhibit specific electronic, magnetic, or optical 
properties [17-26]. Such tailored defects hold the potential to revolutionize the performance and 


3

functionality of 2D materials, opening exciting avenues for scientific exploration and technological 
innovation in diverse fields. In this paper, we aim to explore the intricate relationship between  defect 
formation processes and electron beam irradiation, offering insights into the design principles for 
atomically precise fabrication and the creation of functional materials with tailored properties.

While traditional synthesis methods, such as top-down or bottom-up synthesis have been used 

extensively for 2D materials [27, 28], these methods do not reach the needed length scales required for 
atomic structure fabrication. With the advent of using the sub-Å e- beam of a scanning transmission 
electron microscope (STEM) as a direct fabrication tool in recent years, information has already been 
gathered on the effect that the e- beam irradiation has on various 2D materials [11-16, 29-33]. This 
technique relies on the localized defect generation caused by the highly energetic electrons. The primary 
mechanism for electron beam damage is believed to be the knock-on effect, where the electron transfers 
enough kinetic energy to the nucleus to displace it from the atomic structure [33-36]. The knock-on energy 
is determined by the momentum transfer from the electron to the nucleus and the binding energy of the 
atom in the lattice. However, in most materials, atomic manipulation can be observed well below this 
knock-on threshold, stimulating the development of alternative theories for this process. In previous 
work, Susi proposed the additional role of the phonons to the displacement [33]. At the same time, 
Lingerfelt and Meunier proposed and developed theories based on the local electronic excitations to the 
antibonding states and subsequent isomerization of the excited bond, akin to the photochemical effects 
[37, 38]. Additionally, recently TMD semiconductors/semimetals have been seen to suffer from beam 
induced charging. At slower scan speeds sample charging can modify the effective knock-on threshold
energy. Regardless, by controlling these atomic interactions, different defects and structures can be 
written into the atomic structure of 2D materials [11-16, 29-33]. Through precise control with the e- beam 
these defects can be fabricated while limiting the overall damage to the surrounding atomic structure 
adding more functionality to possible devices made with 2D materials. 

Here we used the transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) MoS2, as the model system to explore 

the structural changes associated with defect and nanopore formation. As a model system, defect 
engineering within TMDs have been of interest in recent years as different atomic defects [39-42], 
nanopores [17, 24, 43], and nanowire structures [16, 21, 44-46] fabricated within the monolayer have 
been shown to have beneficial for electronic and optical properties. Using an external beam control 
system operating at high temporal resolution, the atomic reordering and disordering that initially takes 
place during e- beam irradiation was recorded. These images were then decoded using the ELIT workflow 
[47, 48] to process the images and display atomic trajectories and the formation of different defect 
structures. This workflow allowed for more information to be extracted from small datasets without losing 
out on temporal or spatial resolution.

To acquire the atomically resolved images required for these experiments, an aberration-

corrected STEM was used in conjunction with an external beam control system that allows for 
simultaneous imaging and atomic fabrication. A custom-built beam control system was used for these 
studies due to the difficulties introduced from traditional STEM raster scanning [49-51]. The standard 
usage of these methods results in high quality atomic resolution data, but at the expense of slower 
scanning rates that result in higher e- beam irradiation to the samples and less frequent updates on the 
beam-induced modifications. However, when using the STEM e- beam as the fabrication tool, greater 
control at higher temporal resolution is needed for automated feedback control. Therefore an external 
beam control system, that was developed at ORNL, was used to control the scanning pathways the beam 


4

takes while simultaneously imaging [6, 8, 31, 49-51]. Through this novel beam control system, a spiral scan 
path is used where single frequency drive signals to the scan coils is employed, enabling acquisition of 
atomically resolved images at speeds of up to 100 frames per second (fps) [51]. The utilization of a spiral 
path eliminates sharp changes in scan velocity from one line to the next and mitigates the flyback duration 
associated with traditional raster scan profiles, enabling much faster imaging speeds without distortion, 
improved temporal resolution from frame to frame, and therefore reduced electron dose to the material 
per frame while using standard beam steering magnetic coils. At the periphery the beam is moving faster 
likely causing less charge build-up localizing the beam irradiation effects to the center of the FOV frames. 
Remaining image distortion resulting from high-speed imaging can be mitigated using subsequent image 
correction methods [50, 51]. However, at such high imaging speeds, averaging times per pixel are lower 
and result in lower signal-to-noise ratios in each frame. Here we show that through the development and 
application of advanced post-processing techniques and sophisticated data analytics, we are able to 
extract critical information from the images (specifically, atomic positions and species) that can be used 
to better understand beam-induced material transformations as they occur. Furthermore, the beam 
control system is built with automation and feedback that is used to assess beam damage from frame to 
frame and automatically stop imaging after a specified damage threshold has been crossed (discussed 
further below).   

In this study, a workflow incorporating deep learning (DL) networks was employed to decode 

individual frames captured during this rapid image acquisition. Distinguishing features in atomically 
resolved experiments, such as scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and scanning transmission electron 
microscopy (STEM), differ from classifying objects commonly found in publicly available datasets like 
CIFAR and ImageNet [52, 53]. While previous DL networks have been designed and implemented for 
accurate image analysis of molecular [54] and atomically resolved data, [55-59]  they typically require 
high-quality data for precise model predictions. In this work, a network was utilized for image 
segmentation of nearly identical objects, namely atoms, while also quantifying prediction uncertainty to 
adapt to images originating from different experimental or simulation setups. Analysis of the acquired 
datasets presented challenges due to material lattice distortions, image drifts, and variations in imaging 
parameters, resulting in an out-of-drift distribution effect that reduces the accuracy of traditional deep 
convolutional neural network (DCNN) model predictions. To address this issue, the ensemble learning-
iterative training (ELIT) workflow proposed and developed by Ghosh et al. was implemented here [47, 48]. 
This approach demonstrated how a DL workflow could be applied to STEM data, allowing for adaptation 
to changes in imaging conditions. Within the ELIT workflow, multiple U-Net models were trained with 
random initialization parameters. The ensemble training phase aimed to select artifact-free models for 
feature selection, while the iterative phase directed the network's attention towards recognized features 
to identify unknowns while considering pixel-wise uncertainty. By following this process, the models 
successfully identified the location and type of each atom within the frame with a high degree of certainty. 
Through the utilization of the ELIT workflow, these small datasets were effectively decoded, uncovering 
new insights into various materials systems while simultaneously increasing the speed and information 
content.

Results and Discussion:


5

The experimental workflow from data acquisition to processing and decoding can be seen in 

Figure 1. The process starts with the creation of ideal simulated training to give a baseline for the models 
constructed later to iterate from (Figure 1a). To begin crystal models of pristine molybdenum disulfide’s 
atomic structure, with a random assortment of sulfur sites deleted, were used as training data. These 
sulfur site point defects were introduced into the training data to simulate the defect generation that 
occurs during the e- beam fabrication therefore it was deemed necessary to train the model on the 
distinction of sites with both two overlapping sulfur atoms, as is seen in the ideal crystal structure, and 
sites with only a single sulfur atom. STEM images were then simulated using the variation of the multislice 
algorithm within the abTEM package developed by Madsen et al. [60, 61] Using these simulated images, 
corresponding circular masks with a fixed radius were constructed classifying each atomic site 
appropriately. Once created, these image and mask pairs were augmented through random cropping, 
rotations, zooming-in, contrast variations and through the application of blurring, Gaussian and Poisson 
noise to replicate real experimental data more accurately. An example of a final simulated image mask 
pair can be seen in the block inset of Figure 1a. 

The experimental data was acquired using an aberration corrected Nion UltraSTEM100 operating 

at 60kV with a spatial resolution of ~1Å. The custom-built scanning feedback and electron beam control 
system was controlled using LabView software to acquire atomically resolved image datasets with the 
high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector. A schematic of this system’s operation can be seen in 
Figure 1c.  The spiral beam pathway discussed previously was used for these experiments to maximize the 
temporal resolution without sacrificing spatial resolution. Prior to each fabrication step, predetermined 
parameters were set for the maximum number of spirals  (i.e. the maximum e- irradiation dosage) as well 
as the spiral size and speed. These spirals are made to maintain content frequency drive signal to the scan 
coils to avoid frequency dependance. The dose profile can be controlled to a certain degree, but by default 
there is less dose in the periphery as there is a lower density of the scan path points at the edge of the 
FOV. For these experiments the spiral field of view was maintained at around 1.5 to 2.5 nm in diameter 
for atomic resolution, with a temporal resolution ranging from 5 to 100 fps (200-10 milliseconds). During 
the fabrication process, the beam control system acquired an image after each scan and plotted the 
average intensity of each frame, which, as the formation of defects began within the MoS2 monolayer, 
lowered as the process continued, supporting the notion of material ejection. After reaching a pre-
determined intensity threshold, the fabrication process was stopped, and the experimental datasets were 
exported to study the atomic disordering that took place prior to nanopore formation. Due to the need 
to increase this system’s speed, the exported data results in few pixels per frame, therefore pre-
processing of this data was needed prior to decoding through the DCNN models. The data was first resized, 
and images were cropped appropriately to match the square image training data pixel to angstrom ratio 
before applying similar blurring and noise application as was previously used for the training data. 


6

Figure 1: Block diagram of the steps in the experimental workflow: (a) Simulate the training data: The 
initial block consisted of constructing the simulated training data. First STEM images are simulated and 
then their associated labeled mask pairs created, followed by data transforms. (b) The Ensemble Learning 
and Iterative Training workflow is then demonstrated as the training and experimental data is input and 
several DCNN models are output comparing the fit between the model constructed off the simulated data 
vs. the experimental. These models are then compared against one another until an ideal model is 
selected. (c) A schematic of the experimental automated feedback-controlled beam control experiment 
that allows for in situ monitoring and study of the atomic disordering of MoS2 using high temporal 
resolution. (d) The output of the models from the ELIT workflow is then fed through post-processing filters 
before feature finding can be performed.

With both simulated and experimental data acquired, the ensemble learning and iterative training 

workflow (ELIT) workflow, as demonstrated by Ghosh et al. [47], was used to identify features from the 
low resolution data using these datasets as the initial training set and inputs respectively (Figure 1b). This 
approach is known to result in the overdetermination of the atomic sites, to avoid this problem several 
post-processing steps were taken before features could be extracted. The output from these models 
unrealistically oversampled the certain atomic sites on several frames, labeling overlapping atoms on 
single sites. A nearest neighbor filter was created and used to correct this issue as the last step in Figure 
1d. This filter consisted of three major steps: a nearest neighbor distance filter, using atom finding to 
locate the correct sites, and finally a filter refinement. The first step consisted of a nearest neighbor 
distance filter that found the clusters of problem sites by setting a distance threshold of ~0.85 Å, which 
is about half the distance between the nearest atoms to avoid single sites being identified as different 
classes multiple times. This was followed by implementing atom finding through the STEMtool package 
developed by Mukherjee et al. [62] on the decoded images for each class, being Mo sites (red points), 
projected S sites with two atoms (S2, yellow points), and projected S sites with only one S atom (S1, green 
points), to find the correct center of mass for each site. After these coordinates were found, they were 
cross-correlated with the clusters of decoded coordinates found from the first step, with the mislabeled 


7

sites being deleted. This left us with a fully decoded image and associated coordinate list for each frame 
within the dataset. This decoded data could then be used for feature finding.

Figure 2: Initial (i) and Final (ii) frames taken of the atomic disordering shown at different stages of 
decoding. (a) The raw experimental image data before any processing. (b) Pre-processing of the 
experimental data was performed by first denoising the data and then using a gaussian filter. (c) The 
decoded results of the ELIT workflow are plotted over the gaussian-filtered experimental frame. As seen, 
there are several sites that are labeled incorrectly, resulting in clusters of atoms that are not realistic. (d) 
The results of the nearest neighbor filter with the redundant points and incorrect labeling removed from 
the frame. Every frame shown has the same field of view of 2.56x2.56 nm.

Due to the effectiveness of the ELIT workflow in decoding the experimental data, the temporal 

resolution was able to be pushed to much higher limits using this beam control system while still being 
capable of gathering structural information from the atomic disordering. Frames taken at different 
temporal resolutions and their associated decoded frames are shown in Figure 3. Scan rates varying from 
10 to 100 fps were performed using the external beam control system. Frames were then successfully 
decoded as seen in the ii and v frames, with red representing the Mo atoms, green the S2 sites, and blue 
the S1 sites. The processed data with the corrected coordinates can also be seen with the same color 
distinctions as used previously. The pre-processing and decoding begin to breakdown at 100 fps as the 
bright Mo are the only sites that can be reliably identified due to lack of current for each scan. However 
even at 50 fps, with each frame being acquired every 20 ms, atomic resolution is still fully achievable, and 
the S sites can be correctly identified as containing a VS (S1) or two S atoms (S2). 


8

Figure 3: (a-d) Initial (i) and final (iv) frames of taken at different scan rates at 10, 20, 50 and 100 fps.
These slides were then decoded into the Mo (red), S2 (green), and S1 (blue) classes in (ii) and (v) 
respectively. The corrected coordinates are overlaid onto the processed frames (iii) and (vi) respectively. 
Every frame has the same field of view of 1.6x1.6 nm.

With the image datasets fully decoded into the possible atomic sites, information can be obtained 

as to the stoichiometry, structure and atomic movement that takes place prior to the nanopore formation. 
By retaining the classifier information, the exact number of Mo and S atoms within the field of view being 
irradiated can be tracked and recorded along with the associated dose. Using these decoded frames the 
average dosage (assuming an average beam current of around 50 pA for the day)  required to cause initial 
atomic disordering as well as form sulfur single vacancy line (SVL) defects and point defects (9.0 ±
4.5 × 108 𝑒− 𝑛𝑚2
⁄
) that act as the nucleation site for expanding nanopores can be tracked for each 

experimental milling process. On average, we find that initial disordering takes a dose of 3.3 ±
2.3 × 108 𝑒− 𝑛𝑚2
⁄
to begin. After initial deformation, an additional 1.3 × 108 𝑒− 𝑛𝑚2
⁄
is needed to 

form SVLs, when they did form ~75% of the time. From disordering to formation of a vacancy point defect, 
or hole, an additional dose of  5.7 × 108 𝑒− 𝑛𝑚2
⁄
is applied to the MoS2 field of view. The dosage required 

to induce atomic transformations was found to generally be dependent on the speed of the scanning 
parameters with the slower scans with longer dwell times inducing atomic transformations more rapidly. 
However, the dosage required for each respective transformation was found to be irregular even within 
similar settings indicating other parameters outside of only dosage influencing the formation of these 
defects. Additionally, trends in the location of the initial disordering and defect can be studied in each 
milling dataset. As expected, the nucleation of the nanopore is entirely dependent on the location of the 
atomic disordering with the center of the frame requiring on average, lower dosage to begin forming in 
the center of the frame. When the initial defects begin forming at the edge of the frame, they take much 
longer to grow due to lower local dosage. It was also found that smaller fields of view result in the 
disordering further from the center of the field of the view.

Outside of general dosage trend, atomic tracking can be conducted between frames. Tracking is 

done by finding the closest identified atom between frames within a set distance threshold, if this distance 


9

is overcome, the atom has either been ejected or completely displaced. However, this threshold is large 
enough to observe the atomic shift both Mo and S species exhibit during disordering. Several examples of 
the spatiotemporal trajectories of single atomic sites at different acquisition rates were gathered in a 
brush diagram in Figure 4 allowing for the atomic disordering of both Mo (red) and S (blue for S2 site and 
green for S1 site or a single S vacancy) to be clearly observed. By tracking the classifier of the atom sites 
the formation of single and double VS is clearly shown as well. 

In Figure 4a, the 5 fps experiment demonstrates the clear switch between S2 and S1 sites 

throughout the milling process. As a split in the lattice forms (Fig. 4a(iii)) prior to the opening of the 
nanopore the tracking become erratic and the distance between selected neighboring Mo and S sites 
increases before the S site disappears in some frames. Figure 4b shows a smaller field of view at a faster 
acquisition of 10 fps and clearly shows the formation of sulfur single vacancy line (SVL) defects. In the final 
frame in (iii) several of these SVL defects converge together before a nanopore begins to form. In the 
tracking plot one can clearly see when the sulfur vacancy, that makes up one SVL forms, which is quickly 
followed by the Mo and S site to move closer together as SVLs cause a distortion as the lattice compresses. 
In the 20 fps experiment in Figure 4c, the nanopore forms early in the top left corner of the field of view. 
As the nanopore grows, the Mo and S atom tracking can be seen to slowly shift as the lattice is compressed 
while the nanopore grows. Additionally, the S site remains S2 even after extended e- beam irradiation, 
this was likely due to the formation of the nanopore. Finally in the 50 fps experiment in Figure 4d, the 
more random movement of the tracking column associated with higher temporal resolution better 
captures erratic nature of atomic motion within crystal structures while being exposed to e- beam 
irradiation. All of these examples clearly emphasize that atomic structural information can be acquired 
even at 50 fps without relying upon highly specialized equipment or modifications to the electron optics.


10

Figure 4: (a-d) Analysis from 5, 10, 20 and 50 fps acquired milling processes. (i) The initial processed frame 
with the selected Mo and S site selected to be tracked. (ii) A three dimensional plot that tracks the location 
and movement and change in the class of the atomic site with red = Mo, blue = S2, and green = S1 site or 
single VS. (iii) The final processed frame showing the location of the atomic species or where the site was 
removed. Image FOV in (a) 3.0x3.0 nm and (b-d) 1.6x1.6 nm

Full frames of the tracking can be plotted and trends in the data can be clearly seen to a greater 

degree than single atomic columns. Highlighted here are the example 10 and 50 fps datasets in Figure 5. 
In the 10 fps the shift in the later frames as the lattice is compressed on the right side of the FOV can be 
seen as the SVL grows before the formation of a line defect neighboring the SVL. In the top view of the 50 
fps scan, one can observe the atomic disordering near the bottom of the field of view as a nanopore 
nucleates and then expands. Throughout the reaction the nearest neighbor distance of each location can 
be tracked demonstrating the capability to track atomic disordering and lattice distortion of the structure 
and directly tie these changes to the dosage applied to the system. Additionally, when observing the global 
data, as expected, it was found that the percentage of Mo and S that left the field of view prior to the 
formation of a nanopore was independent of the speed of acquisition. To form the nanopore the number 
of Mo decreased by a percentage of 7±9% while a lot more S left the system at 51±9%. The small decrease 
and large error associated with the Mo atom count can be attributed to the atomic disordering and lattice 
shift that occur as a nanopore forms. When considering the decrease in S, this much larger percentage of 


11

S removal is to be expected as S is preferentially removed from the  MoS2 lattice during electron beam 
irradiation. Additionally, this percentage makes theoretical sense as, after nanopore formation, a common 
edge reconstruction in the MoS2 system is the formation of the Mo6S6 nanowire edge structure. 
Decreasing the local quantity of S by roughly 50% satisfies the local stoichiometry needed to facilitate the 
formation of this structure. 

Figure 5: (a-b) Tracking of the full frames (i-iv) of different scans taken at 10 and 50 fps respectively going 
from pristine lattice (i) to the disordering and formation of defects (ii-iii) until the formation of the 
nanopore (iv). The decoded tracking of the full frame of the atom sites, viewed from both the top (v) and 
side (vi) view to see the atomic motion in the xy plane as well as in time.

Conclusions:

In summary, this study demonstrates the successful enhancement of temporal resolution in STEM 

imaging without direct modifications to the electron microscope optics. By employing custom scan control 
with image processing techniques and implementing the ELIT workflow to develop a DCNN, a significant 
increase in the speed of determination of atomic position and species information at high speeds  in STEM 
imaging was achieved. This approach facilitated a more comprehensive investigation of the kinetics 
involved in the defect formation process. The application of DCNN-enabled decoding of low-quality, high-
temporal-resolution data provided valuable insights into the atomic disordering and reordering process. 
Specifically, the experiments focused on the MoS2 materials system, utilizing a beam control system 
capable of data acquisition at scanning rates of up to 100 fps, resulting in small datasets with resolutions 
as low as 64x64 pixels. Through image processing, atomic resolution was attained, and the ELIT workflow
successfully decoded the data into Mo, S2, and S1 classes, enabling accurate tracking of these elements 
throughout the milling process. This workflow enables the extraction of more useful information from 
small datasets without compromising temporal or spatial resolution. The integration of machine learning 


12

and beam control techniques in this manner holds the potential for the development of different electron 
beam control methodologies and a deeper understanding of early defect formation and hole nucleation 
and growth and edge state formation in 2D materials. These findings have implications for advancing 
atomic fabrication processes and fostering autonomous atomic-level control.

Methods:

Sample preparation:

Chemical vapor deposition was used to synthesize the MoS2 monolayers at a growth temperature 

of 750 °C using a hinged tube furnace (Lindberg/Blue) equipped with a 2 in. diameter quartz tube. SiO2
(300 nm)/Si was used as a growth substrate. These substrates were first cleaned with isopropanol and 
then spin-coated with perylene-3,4,9,10- tetracarboxylic acid tetrapotassium salt before being dried and 
placed face-down above an alumina crucible containing MoO3 powder (∼5 mg) (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich). 
This crucible was then inserted into the center of the quartz tube. Another crucible was filled with S 
powder (∼0.7 g) (99.998%, Sigma-Aldrich) and inserted at a region located 20 cm upstream from the other 
crucible in the quartz tube. When the center of the tube reaches 750 °C center of the tube, the 
temperature at the S powder crucible was around 180 °C. The tube was then evacuated to ∼5 mTorr. At 
this point a 70 sccm (standard cubic centimeters per minute) flow of Ar at atmospheric pressure was 
established. The furnace was heated to 750 °C with a ramping rate of 30 °C/min and held at this 
temperature for 4−6 min. The furnace is allowed to naturally cool down to room temperature.

These MoS2 monolayers are then transferred from the SiO2/Si substrate onto gold mesh holey 

carbon Quantifoil TEM grids using a wet transfer process for STEM imaging. PMMA (Poly(methyl 
methacrylate)) was spun coated onto the SiO2/Si substrate with monolayer MoS2 crystals on the surface 
at 500 rpm for 15 s followed by 3000 rpm for 50 s. The PMMA-coated sample was then placed into a 1 M 
KOH solution to remove the SiO2 substrate. This leaves the PMMA film with the MoS2 monolayer on the 
solution surface. The KOH residue was then rinsed from the sample film with DI water. A TEM grid was 
then placed into a funnel filled with DI water. Using a glass slide the washed PMMA/MoS2 film was then 
transferred to float on the DI water. As the water drains the film is then placed onto the TEM grid. The 
samples are then baked to dry at 80 °C before being placed into acetone to soak for 12 hours to remove 
remaining PMMA before a final rinse in IPA, leaving a clean monolayer surface. Prior to STEM experiments, 
the specimens were baked at 160°C in vacuum overnight to reduce surface contamination. 

STEM imaging:

An aberration corrected Nion UltraSTEM100 electron microscope were used for all the STEM 

imaging experiments while operating at 60kV. The custom-built scanning feedback control system 
described in this study was based on a National Instruments DAQ (PXIe-6124) and field-programmable 
gate array (FPGA) system (PXIe-7856R) in a PXIe-1073 chassis that was interfaced with the beam control 
system of the Nion UltraSTEM100 for spiral scans. Input coordinates from customizable MatLab code were 
then put into a LabView program that was used to control the STEM scan coils to position the focused 
STEM probe along well-defined scanning pathway shapes. The custom scan control system has a 
maximum IO rate of 2M Samples/s.  


13

Author Contributions:

MGB conducted STEM experiments, constructed DCNN and performed data analysis and was the 
primary contributor in writing the manuscript. SM, KMR and AG provided assistance and guidance with 
the coding and data analysis with additional support in the construction of the DCNN from AG, MZ and 
SVK. SJ provided experimental assistance with the beam control system during STEM experiments. RRU 
provided guidance during experiment planning. All authors additionally contributed and approved the 
final manuscript.

Acknowledgements:

All STEM experimental work was performed at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS), 

which is a US Department of Energy, Office of Science User Facility at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The 

synthesis of MoS2 was performed by Kai Xiao and development of the scan control was supported by the 

U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering. 

References:

1.
Iannaccone, G., et al., Quantum engineering of transistors based on 2D materials 
heterostructures. Nature Nanotechnology, 2018. 13(3): p. 183-191.

2.
Wyrick, J., et al., Atom‐by‐Atom Fabrication of Single and Few Dopant Quantum Devices.
Advanced Functional Materials, 2019. 29(52): p. 1903475.

3.
Fölsch, S., et al., Quantum dots with single-atom precision. Nature nanotechnology, 2014. 9(7): 
p. 505-508.

4.
Narang, P., et al., Quantum materials with atomic precision: artificial atoms in solids: ab initio 
design, control, and integration of single photon emitters in artificial quantum materials.
Advanced Functional Materials, 2019. 29(52): p. 1904557.

5.
Kalinin, S.V., A.Y. Borisevich, and S. Jesse, Fire up the atom forge. Nature, 2016. 539: p. 485-487.

6.
Dyck, O., et al., Building Structures Atom by Atom via Electron Beam Manipulation. Small, 2018. 
14(38): p. 1801771.

7.
Tai, K.L., et al., Atomic‐Scale Fabrication of In‐Plane Heterojunctions of Few‐Layer MoS2 via In 
Situ Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy. Small, 2020. 16(3): p. 1905516.

8.
Dyck, O., et al., Variable voltage electron microscopy: Toward atom-by-atom fabrication in 2D 
materials. Ultramicroscopy, 2020. 211.

9.
Silver, R., et al., Atomic precision fabrication of quantum devices down to the single atom 
regime. SPIE Advanced Lithography. Vol. 11610. 2021: SPIE.

10.
Khajetoorians, A.A., et al., Creating designer quantum states of matter atom-by-atom. Nature 
Reviews Physics, 2019. 1(12): p. 703-715.

11.
Su, C., et al., Engineering single-atom dynamics with electron irradiation. Science Advances, 
2019. 5.

12.
Susi, T., et al., Towards atomically precise manipulation of 2D nanostructures in the electron 
microscope. 2D Materials, 2017. 4.


14

13.
Susi, T., J.C. Meyer, and J. Kotakoski, Manipulating low-dimensional materials down to the level 
of single atoms with electron irradiation. Ultramicroscopy, 2017. 180: p. 163-172.

14.
Tripathi, M., et al., Electron-Beam Manipulation of Silicon Dopants in Graphene. Nano Lett, 2018. 
18(8): p. 5319-5323.

15.
Zagler, G., et al., Beam-driven dynamics of aluminium dopants in graphene. 2D Materials, 2022. 
9(3): p. 035009.

16.
Boebinger, M.G., et al., The Atomic Drill Bit: Precision Controlled Atomic Fabrication of 2D 
Materials. Advanced Materials, 2023: p. 2210116.

17.
Ritter, K.A. and J.W. Lyding, The influence of edge structure on the electronic properties of 
graphene quantum dots and nanoribbons. Nature materials, 2009. 8(3): p. 235-242.

18.
Cheng, F., et al., Controlled growth of 1D MoSe2 nanoribbons with spatially modulated edge 
states. Nano letters, 2017. 17(2): p. 1116-1120.

19.
Xu, H., et al., Oscillating edge states in one-dimensional MoS2 nanowires. Nature 
communications, 2016. 7(12904).

20.
Hu, G., et al., Work Function Engineering of 2D Materials: The Role of Polar Edge 
Reconstructions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 2021. 12(9): p. 2320-2326.

21.
Sang, X., et al., In situ edge engineering in two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat 
Commun, 2018. 9(1): p. 2051.

22.
Magda, G.Z., et al., Room-temperature magnetic order on zigzag edges of narrow graphene 
nanoribbons. Nature, 2014. 514(7524): p. 608-611.

23.
Saab, M. and P. Raybaud, Tuning the magnetic properties of MoS2 single nanolayers by 3d 
metals edge doping. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2016. 120(19): p. 10691-10697.

24.
Yin, X., et al., Edge nonlinear optics on a MoS2 atomic monolayer. Science, 2014. 344(6183): p. 
488-490.

25.
Fung, V., et al., Inverse design of two-dimensional materials with invertible neural networks. npj 
Computational Materials, 2021. 7(1).

26.
Gutiérrez, H.R., et al., Extraordinary room-temperature photoluminescence in triangular WS2
monolayers. Nano letters, 2013. 13(8): p. 3447-3454.

27.
Mannix, A.J., et al., Synthesis and chemistry of elemental 2D materials. Nature Reviews 
Chemistry, 2017. 1(2): p. 0014.

28.
Dong, R., T. Zhang, and X. Feng, Interface-assisted synthesis of 2D materials: trend and 
challenges. Chemical reviews, 2018. 118(13): p. 6189-6235.

29.
Qi, Z.J., et al., Correlating Atomic Structure and Transport in Suspended Graphene Nanoribbons.
Nano Letters, 2014. 14(8): p. 4238-4244.

30.
Dyck, O., et al., Direct matter disassembly via electron beam control: electron-beam-mediated 
catalytic etching of graphene by nanoparticles. Nanotechnology, 2020. 31(24): p. 245303.

31.
Dyck, O., et al., Atom-by-atom fabrication with electron beams. Nature Reviews Materials, 2019. 
4(7): p. 497-507.

32.
Hudak, B.M., et al., Directed Atom-by-Atom Assembly of Dopants in Silicon. ACS Nano, 2018. 
12(6): p. 5873-5879.

33.
Susi, T., J.C. Meyer, and J. Kotakoski, Quantifying transmission electron microscopy irradiation 
effects using two-dimensional materials. Nature Reviews Physics, 2019. 1(6): p. 397-405.

34.
Kretschmer, S., et al., Formation of defects in two-dimensional MoS2 in the transmission electron 
microscope at electron energies below the knock-on threshold: the role of electronic excitations.
Nano letters, 2020. 20(4): p. 2865-2870.

35.
Komsa, H.-P., et al., Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides under Electron 
Irradiation: Defect Production and Doping. Physical Review Letters, 2012. 109(3).


15

36.
Yoshimura, A., et al., First-principles simulation of local response in transition metal 
dichalcogenides under electron irradiation. Nanoscale, 2018. 10(5): p. 2388-2397.

37.
Yoshimura, A., et al., Quantum theory of electronic excitation and sputtering by transmission 
electron microscopy. Nanoscale, 2022. Advance Article.

38.
Lingerfelt, D.B., et al., Understanding beam-induced electronic excitations in materials. Journal 
of Chemical Theory and Computation, 2020. 16(2): p. 1200-1214.

39.
Wang, S., et al., Detailed atomic reconstruction of extended line defects in monolayer MoS2. ACS 
nano, 2016. 10(5): p. 5419-5430.

40.
Chen, Q., et al., Ultralong 1D vacancy channels for rapid atomic migration during 2D void 
formation in monolayer MoS2. ACS nano, 2018. 12(8): p. 7721-7730.

41.
Chen, J., et al., In situ high temperature atomic level dynamics of large inversion domain 
formations in monolayer MoS 2. Nanoscale, 2019. 11(4): p. 1901-1913.

42.
Lin, Y.-C., et al., Atomic mechanism of the semiconducting-to-metallic phase transition in single-
layered MoS2. Nature nanotechnology, 2014. 9(5): p. 391-396.

43.
Hu, G., et al., Superior electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution at engineered non-stoichiometric two-
dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide edges. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2019. 
7(31): p. 18357-18364.

44.
Lin, J., et al., Flexible metallic nanowires with self-adaptive contacts to semiconducting 
transition-metal dichalcogenide monolayers. Nat Nanotechnol, 2014. 9(6): p. 436-42.

45.
Murugan, P., et al., Assembling Nanowires from Mo−S Clusters and Effects of Iodine Doping on 
Electronic Structure. Nano Letters, 2007. 7(8): p. 2214-2219.

46.
Kibsgaard, J., et al., Atomic-Scale Structure of Mo6S6 Nanowires. Nano Letters, 2008. 8(11): p. 
3928-3931.

47.
Ayana Ghosh, B.G.S., Ondrej Dyck, Sergei V Kalinin, Maxim Ziatdinov, Ensemble learning-iterative 
training machine learning for uncertainty quantification and automated experiment in atom-
resolved microscopy. npj Computational Materials, 2021. 7(1).

48.
Ziatdinov, M., et al., AtomAI framework for deep learning analysis of image and spectroscopy 
data in electron and scanning probe microscopy. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2022. 4(12): p. 
1101-1112.

49.
Jesse, S., et al., Direct atomic fabrication and dopant positioning in Si using electron beams with 
active real-time image-based feedback. Nanotechnology, 2018. 29(25): p. 255303.

50.
Sang, X., et al., Precision controlled atomic resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy 
using spiral scan pathways. Scientific Reports, 2017. 7(1): p. 43585.

51.
Sang, X., et al., Dynamic scan control in STEM: spiral scans. Advanced Structural and Chemical 
Imaging, 2016. 2(1).

52.
Krizhevsky, A. and G. Hinton, Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

53.
Deng, J., et al. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. in 2009 IEEE conference on 
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2009. Ieee.

54.
Ziatdinov, M., A. Maksov, and S.V. Kalinin, Learning surface molecular structures via machine 
vision. Npj Computational Materials, 2017. 3: p. 31.

55.
Rashidi, M. and R.A. Wolkow, Autonomous Scanning Probe Microscopy in Situ Tip Conditioning 
through Machine Learning. Acs Nano, 2018. 12(6): p. 5185-5189.

56.
Ziatdinov, M., et al., Deep Learning of Atomically Resolved Scanning Transmission Electron 
Microscopy Images: Chemical Identification and Tracking Local Transformations. Acs Nano, 
2017. 11(12): p. 12742-12752.

57.
Gordon, O.M., et al., Automated Searching and Identification of Self-Organized Nanostructures.
Nano Letters, 2020. 20(10): p. 7688-7693.


16

58.
Horwath, J.P., et al., Understanding important features of deep learning models for 
segmentation of high-resolution transmission electron microscopy images. npj Computational 
Materials, 2020. 6(1): p. 108.

59.
Lee, C.-H., et al., Deep Learning Enabled Strain Mapping of Single-Atom Defects in Two-
Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenides with Sub-Picometer Precision. Nano Letters, 2020. 
20(5): p. 3369-3377.

60.
Madsen, J. and T. Susi, abTEM: <i>ab Initio</i> Transmission Electron Microscopy Image 
Simulation. Microscopy and Microanalysis, 2020. 26(S2): p. 448-450.

61.
Madsen, J. and T. Susi, The abTEM code: transmission electron microscopy from first principles.
Open Research Europe, 2021. 1: p. 24.

62.
Mukherjee, D. and R. Unocic, STEMTooL: An Open Source Python Toolkit for Analyzing Electron 
Microscopy Datasets. Microscopy and Microanalysis, 2020. 26(S2): p. 2960-2962.


