1

Discovering Novel Halide Perovskite Alloys using Multi-Fidelity Machine
Learning and Genetic Algorithm
Jiaqi Yang,1 Panayotis Manganaris,1 and Arun Mannodi-Kanakkithodi1

Materials Engineering, Purdue University, 701 W Stadium Ave, West Lafayette, 47907, Indiana,
USA

(*Electronic mail: amannodi@purdue.edu)

(Dated: 23 October 2023)

Expanding the pool of stable halide perovskites with attractive optoelectronic properties is crucial to addressing current
limitations in their performance as photovoltaic (PV) absorbers. In this article, we demonstrate how a high-throughput
density functional theory (DFT) dataset of halide perovskite alloys can be used to train accurate surrogate models for
property prediction and subsequently perform inverse design using genetic algorithm (GA). Our dataset consists of
decomposition energies, band gaps, and photovoltaic efficiencies of nearly 800 pure and mixed composition ABX3
compounds from both the GGA-PBE and HSE06 functionals, and are combined with ∼ 100 experimental data points
collected from the literature. Multi-fidelity random forest regression models are trained on the DFT + experimental
dataset for each property using descriptors that one-hot encode composition, phase, and fidelity, and additionally include
well-known elemental or molecular properties of species at the A, B, and X sites. Rigorously optimized models are
deployed for experiment-level prediction over > 150,000 hypothetical compounds, leading to thousands of promising
materials with low decomposition energy, band gap between 1 and 2 eV, and efficiency > 15%. Surrogate models are
further combined with GA using an objective function to maintain chemical feasibility, minimize decomposition energy,
maximize PV efficiency, and keep band gap between 1 and 2 eV; hundreds more optimal compositions and phases
are thus discovered. We present an analysis of the screened and inverse-designed materials, visualize ternary phase
diagrams generated for many systems of interest using ML predictions, and suggest strategies for further improvement
and expansion in the future.

INTRODUCTION

The importance of engineering and optimizing halide perovskites (HaPs) for use as absorbers in next-generation solar cells
cannot be overstated. There is a deluge of experimental and computational work on this topic emerging every single day2–6;
even if such attempts appear to be plateauing, incremental improvements are important and motivate more comprehensive inves-
tigations. Record power conversion efficiencies were recently reported by multiple sources for perovskite-based tandem solar
cells7,8. Curiously, there seems to be ever more room for better performance by tailoring the ABX3 composition (for canonical
3D crystalline perovskites) in terms of the number and nature of species that inhabit the A/B/X sites, dopants, phase stability,
interfaces, and defects9. Of course, HaPs may also adopt the double perovskite structure or a 2D phase via the use of organic
spacers, and be used in both single-junction or tandem solar cells with wide or low band gap semiconductors.

Our research group has made several contributions to the HaP literature over the last few years, reporting updates on dis-
covering promising new materials using density functional theory (DFT)-based computational screening and machine learning
(ML)9–12. In 2022, we published a major study on using DFT-ML to design novel B-site mixed ABX3 HaPs with desired
stability, band gap, photovoltaic (PV) figure of merit, and defect tolerance10. In a review paper in 2022, we covered several
similar efforts from the literature utilizing high-throughput (HT) computations and ML models trained on small, medium, or
large datasets of perovskite properties, to drive the discovery and understanding of HaPs9. Recently, we published another
comprehensive study on generating one of the largest known DFT datasets of pseudo-cubic HaP alloys, with mixing allowed at
A, B, or X sites, from multiple DFT functionals, resulting in (a) a thorough analysis of how common cation and anion choices
and types of mixing affect the stability and optoelectronic properties, (b) an understanding of how different levels of theory in
DFT reproduce experimentally measured properties, and (c) an open-access dataset that can be utilized by anybody for data
mining and ML endeavors11. We followed up this study by extending the DFT dataset to a series of non-cubic HaPs in multiple
prototype phases, using multiple semi-local and non-local DFT functionals, as well as applying varying degrees of octahedral
distortions and strain and different types of ionic ordering in alloys12.

In the present contribution, we build upon our prior work and present multi-fidelity ML regression models13 trained on our
existing multi-phase multi-functional HaP dataset of ∼ 103 points or so, leading to accurate predictions across hundreds of thou-
sands of possible compounds, screening of promising candidates, and inverse design using genetic algorithm (GA) to expand
the scope of materials selection beyond HT-screening. We create a fusion dataset of HaPs containing three properties, namely

arXiv:2310.13153v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  19 Oct 2023


2

the decomposition energy, electronic band gap, and spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency (SLME)14, estimated from two
types of DFT functionals—the semi-local GGA-PBE (570 data points), and non-local hybrid HSE06 with spin-orbit coupling
(SOC) (347 data points). This dataset of 917 DFT points is further enhanced with 97 experimental data points collected from
the literature15,16, reporting HaP compositions and their measured band gap and photo-conversion efficiency (PCE). Figure
1(a) shows a standard pseudo-cubic 2×2×2 perovskite supercell, and Figure 1(b) shows the chemical space considered in our
work in terms of A, B, and X species, with MA and FA representing organic molecules methylammonium and formamidinium,
respectively. Figure 1(c) further shows the format of the dataset, with every compound represented in terms of a 14-dimensional
composition vector (capturing fractions of the 5 A species, 6 B species, and 3 X species in any compound), a 36-dimensional
“elemental properties" vector10,11 (12 weight-averaged properties each for A, B, and X site species, such as ionic radius, elec-
tron affinity, etc.), and one of four prototype perovskite phases it could adopt—cubic, tetragonal, orthorhombic, or hexagonal.
Additional columns represent the source of the data (PBE, HSE, or experiment), and the properties of interest: decomposition
energy or ∆H, band gap or Egap, and SLME (or PCE from experiment).

A
B
X

MA
Pb
I

FA
Sn
Br

Cs
Ge
Cl

Rb
Ba

K
Sr

Ca

Composition 

(14-dim)

Elemental 
(36-dim)

Phase
Source of Data
Properties

Cubic
Tetra
Ortho
Hex
PBE
HSE
Expt
ΔH
Egap
SLME

DFT (PBE & HSE) 

+ Expt. Multi-

Fidelity Dataset

Descriptors: 
Comp, Elem, 
Phase, Fidelity

Single- and 
Multi-Fidelity 
Regression 

Models

Enumeration, 
Prediction & 

Screening

Inverse Design 
using Genetic 

Algorithm

New discovery 
at experiment 

fidelity

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 1. (a) An example pseudo-cubic 2x2x2 HaP supercell. (b) The chemical space of ABX3 HaPs studied in this work. (c) The perovskite
dataset formatted for multi-fidelity ML, including all inputs (composition, elemental properties, phase, and fidelity) and outputs (decompo-
sition energy, band gap, and PV efficiency or SLME). (d) The perovskite design workflow showing data formatting, regression optimization,
prediction, GA, and screening steps.

The use of “multi-fidelity" learning13,17,18 (or multi-task learning19,20) is motivated by the fact that different DFT func-
tionals work well for different HaP compositions, and accuracy compared with experiments is not as trivial as one would
imagine. While GGA-PBE, including variants such as PBEsol (improved PBE for solids21) and PBE-D3 (explicit van der
Waals corrections22), reproduces lattice parameters and stability reasonably well, it is typically inaccurate for electronic, optical,
and defect properties9. Hybrid HSE06 is much better for optoelectronic properties, but is expensive, especially when SOC is
incorporated for the relativistic effects of heavy atoms such as Pb10,11. For hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HOIPs) such as
MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, PBE without SOC often reproduces the experimental band gap as well as HSE+SOC. While HSE+SOC
should work for inorganic HaPs in general, this is not always the case, as the mixing fraction α in HSE06 (default value of α
= 0.25) could itself be tuned; e.g., it was shown that for CsPbI3, α = 0.41 reproduces the band gap more accurately23, while α
= 0.50 works best for cubic FAPbI312. We posit that the true relationship between the perovskite chemistry, DFT functional,
and experimental properties, is enormously complex, and by learning from a fusion dataset containing properties from multiple
levels of theory as well as from experiments, comprehensive experiment-fidelity predictions could be achieved across a wide
chemical space. Such models would exploit inherent correlations between DFT and experiments, as well as expand the reach of
experimental predictions beyond the range of chemistries for which measured data is currently available, provided DFT data is
indeed available in these unexplored spaces.

The remainder of this manuscript presents details of the ML approaches and subsequent screening and inverse design, fol-
lowed by a systematic discussion of the results. The overall methodology is shown in Figure 1(d), going from compiling
the DFT+Expt dataset of properties and descriptors to training several single- and multi-fidelity regression models, resulting
in enumeration, prediction and screening of promising candidates and inverse design of new compounds using GA, closing
the experiment-fidelity perovskite design loop. We discuss the accuracy and merits of all single- and multi-fidelity regression


3

models based on random forest regression, and furthermore, present an analysis of the best compounds from screening and GA,
in terms of the frequencies of occurrence of various chemical species and different types of mixing at cation or anion sites. All
data and models are openly available to the community and will serve not only the discovery of novel HaPs for optoelectronic
applications, but also provide a fertile playground for testing of a variety of ML techniques.

(a)
(b)

FIG. 2. The perovskite dataset divided in terms of source of data (DFT-PBE, DFT-HSE, or experiment) and perovskite phase (cubic, tetragonal,
orthorhombic, and hexagonal). (a) Band gap plotted against decomposition energy. (b) PV efficiency plotted against the band gap.

METHODS

Compiling the HaP Dataset

The entire HaP dataset is pictured in Figure 2, divided in terms of the source of data (PBE, HSE, or Expt) and the perovskite
phase (cubic, tetragonal, orthorhombic, or hexagonal). This data is compiled from our recent publications10–12. A majority
of the data is for the cubic phase as a result of our initial high-throughput investigation10,11, whereas the non-cubic data was
generated in follow-up work12. 570 data points are from PBE, 347 from HSE, and 97 from experiments15,16, resulting in a
combined dataset of 1014 points. The decomposition energy (∆H) shows how likely the ABX3 compound is to decompose to
AX and BX2 phases, with a mixing entropy contribution included as well, giving a convenient per formula unit (p.f.u.) metric for
perovskite stability10,11. Egap comes from accurate PBE and HSE electronic structure computations using dense k-point meshes,
and from the experimental literature where techniques ranging from UV-vis absorption to photoluminescence spectroscopy have
been applied15,16. SLME is derived at 5µm sample thickness from the DFT-computed optical absorption spectrum based on
previously developed approaches14,24, and is combined with measured PCE values reported from solar cells based on different
HaP compositions. All DFT data are restricted to HaP compositions with any A, B, or X constituent (shown in Figure 1(b))
occurring only in fractions of n/8 (n = 0, 1, 2, ... 8), such that geometry optimization and subsequent electronic and optical
calculations could be performed using the special quasirandom structures (SQS) approach25 in 2×2×2 (cubic) or 2×2×1 (tetra,
ortho, hex) supercells. Other specific DFT details and data analysis can be found in past publications10–12.

The Egap vs ∆H plot in Figure 2(a) shows that while there are dozens of compounds from all phases that lie in the ∆H < 0.5
eV (a relaxed threshold) and 1 eV < Egap < 2 eV range, a majority of the compounds, primarily cubic, are in the undesirable
ranges. Figure 2(b) shows that PV efficiencies peak around Egap ∼ 1.5 eV and the favorable region (SLME/PCE > 15%) is
dominated by cubic compounds, though that might just be a factor of the current dataset not containing as many non-cubic
structures. From both plots, it is evident that only 10 to 20% of the entire dataset of 1014 points show desired stability and
optoelectronic properties. The compounds in this dataset cover the 14-dimensional ABX3 chemical space adequately (including
5 A species, 6 B species, and 3 X species), in terms of how often and in what mixing fraction any particular species appears in
the compound11,12. In reality, this space is practically infinite, as mixing fractions could be as low or high as possible (and not
just n/8 fractions), and any number of ions could be mixed together to create high entropy perovskites. Thus, a major motivation
of this work is that learning from a modest dataset of the order of 103 points, one could, in theory, make predictions for 105


4

Data Fidelity Total Data Points
Phases (Data Points)
Properties

PBE
570
Cubic (469), Tetra (34), Ortho (37), Hex (30) ∆H, Eg, SLME

HSE
347
Cubic (246), Tetra (34), Ortho (37), Hex (30) ∆H, Eg, SLME

Expt.
97
Phases assigned from DFT-ML Predictions
Eg, PCE

TABLE I. Description of the perovskite dataset used for training ML models in this work, in terms of total number of data points, data points
per perovskite phase, and the properties available.

to 106 points (or beyond) which would include all intermediate compositions and mixing fractions missing from the original
dataset, and perform more comprehensive screening and design. Table I presents details of the PBE, HSE, and experimental
datasets in terms of the number of data points for each phase and the available properties.

Training Single- and Multi-Fidelity Surrogate Models

The dataset is formatted as shown in Figure 1(c) and fed into a random forest regression (RFR) algorithm for rigorous training
and optimization of predictive models for each property. Standard data science and ML practices are applied: an 80-20 train-test
split is used for the entire dataset, 5-fold cross-validation is applied, and grid-based hyperparameter optimization is performed.
Relevant modules are imported from the Scikit-learn library26 and all our code is available on Github27. Four types of descriptors
are used as input (X) to the RFR models for predicting property Y (∆H, Egap, SLME/PCE):

1. 14-dimensional composition vector: This encodes the HaP composition in terms of the fraction (between 0 and 1) of every
A/B/X species in the compound.

2. 36-dimensional elemental properties vector: This uses 12 distinct well-known properties (the full list is provided in Table
S1 in the SI) to represent the A, B, and X site constituents, using a weighted fraction when there is mixing at any site.

3. 4-dimensional phase vector: This one-hot encodes whether the perovskite phase is cubic, tetragonal, orthorhombic, or
hexagonal.

4. 0-dim, 2-dim, or 3-dim fidelity vector: This one-hot encodes the source of the data (PBE, HSE, or Expt)13,19.

Three different types of RFR models are trained:

1. PBE, HSE, and Expt. single-fidelity (SF) models: The source of the data is not an input here, so a total of 54 dimensions
are used as X and separate models are trained to predict ∆H, Egap and SLME each from PBE and HSE, as well as Egap
and PCE just from experiments. These models are subsequently referred to as PBE-sf, HSE-sf, and Expt-sf, respectively.

2. PBE+HSE multi-fidelity (MF) models: A 2-dim data source vector is included to yield a 56-dimensional X, used as input
to predict the three properties simultaneously from both functionals based on the dataset of 917 DFT points. The advantage
here is that the reach and prediction accuracy of the smaller and more expensive HSE dataset can be enhanced by utilizing
its correlations with the supposedly inferior but larger PBE dataset. These predictions will be referred to as PBE-mf1 and
HSE-mf1, respectively.

3. PBE+HSE+Expt MF models: A 3-dim data source vector is included to yield a 57-dimensional X, which is used as input
to predict Egap and SLME or PCE simultaneously from PBE, HSE, and Expt based on the combined DFT-Expt dataset
of 1014 points. A clear advantage is that the applicability of the much smaller experimental dataset can be enhanced by
utilizing its correlations with the PBE and HSE data. These predictions will be referred to as PBE-mf2, HSE-mf2, and
Expt-mf2, respectively.

RFR results after training and optimization are visualized in terms of parity plots between ground truth values (actual PBE,
HSE, or Expt) on the x-axis and ML predictions on the y-axis, separately for each property and each source of data. It should
be noted that the ultimate test of the model’s predictive power is its performance on unseen data points, and ideally, one must
look at the quality of prediction for every data point when it is considered as part of the test set. To achieve this, we adopt the
following ensemble-based strategy: every SF and MF RFR model is trained 5000 times across each dataset, with an 80-20 split,
such that every single data point is considered in the test set approximately 1000 times. Effective test set predictions are then
achieved for all points as a mean over their ∼ 1000 test predictions (also yielding the standard deviation, which serves as a rough
uncertainty in prediction for any point). Thus, final parity plots, which will be presented and discussed later, show only test
predictions for all PBE, HSE, and Expt points.


5

Enumeration, Prediction, and Screening

Since only a small subset of possible ABX3 compositions is used for the DFT+ Expt dataset, we generate a much larger
dataset of “hypothetical" HaP compositions by populating the 14-dim composition vector with fractions of n/8, such that the A
components sum up to 1, B components sum up to 1, and X components sum up to 3. A similar approach was applied in other
works as well10,28. To keep this combinatorial dataset somewhat tractable, we restrict it to only one type of mixing at a time
(i.e., there will not be mixing at A site and B or X sites simultaneously) and only mixing fractions of n/8. This leads to a total
of 37,785 unique compositions including thousands of A-site mixed, B-site mixed, and X-site mixed compounds each, which is
transformed to 151,140 data points considering them in four phases each. All compounds are converted into descriptors and fed
to the best RFR models, eventually resulting in prediction of their PBE/HSE-fidelity ∆H as well as experiment-fidelity Egap and
PV efficiency. Screening is performed to obtain the subset of these > 150,000 compounds with low decomposition energy, band
gap between 1 and 2 eV, and PV efficiency > 15%.

Inverse Design using GA

Finally, we move beyond the constraints of the restricted chemical space considered for enumeration, to perform a more
efficient design of HaP compositions in any phase that satisfy conditions of DFT stability and experiment-level optoelectronic
properties. A constrained or clamped Genetic Algorithm (GA) is used for this purpose29–31, using a procedure wherein hundreds
of arbitrary ABX3 compositions are generated, with any kind of mixing allowed at A, B, or X sites, in any of the four phases,
and a complex objective function is defined for each compound taking the following factors into account:

1. Chemical feasibility: Constituent fractions at A, B, and X sites should respectively sum up to 1, 1, and 3.

2. Suitability of modeling via DFT: Mixing fractions are restricted to be n/8, n/27, or n/64 (where is a positive integer), such
that any composition could be simulated using a 2×2×2, 3×3×3, or 4×4×4 supercell.

3. Stability: ∆H should be minimized to maintain maximum likelihood of perovskite formability. The HSE-level ∆H predic-
tion is used here.

4. Optoelectronic properties: Egap should be in between 1 and 2 eV and PV efficiency should be as high as possible, with
both predictions at experiment-fidelity.

During any GA run, new HaP compositions are generated using concepts such as crossover, elitism, and mutation, so as to
minimize the objective function, yielding a plot between GA generation and objective function, eventually resulting in the best
material that satisfies all criteria. Running this several hundred times leads to a massive list of attractive materials that further
improve on the compounds derived from enumeration → prediction → screening. Here, we run GA multiple times with different
types of inputs, such as restricting the phase to be cubic or tetragonal, restricting the B-site to consider only Pb, Sn, and Ge,
or to not consider Pb at all in a bid to achieve Pb-free perovskites, etc. Final results can be visualized for different families of
HaPs in terms of PV efficiency vs band gap plots for hundreds of stable compounds. The "geneticalgorithm2" package is used
for running the GA models32.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

DFT-Only Single-Fidelity and Multi-Fidelity RFR Models

Figure 3 shows the PBE-sf and HSE-sf models for ∆H, Egap, and PV efficiency, with PBE and HSE data points presented
on the same plot. The parity plots show effective test predictions, averaged over an ensemble of 5000 models, for all 917
data points from PBE and HSE. High accuracy is achieved for both ∆H and Egap, with RMSE values of 0.17 eV and 0.23 eV
respectively for PBE, and 0.20 eV and 0.30 eV respectively for HSE. These are errors of 5% or less considering the range of
values of both properties across the PBE and HSE datasets, indicating a 95% accuracy. Given that there are between 5 and 12
atoms p.f.u. in any HaP compound, the ∆H RMSE converts to ∼ 20-40 meV/atom, which are highly competitive with other ML
formation energy predictions in the literature33,34. The same can be said for Egap prediction errors between 0.2 and 0.3 eV as
well35,36. Predictions errors for PBE and HSE SLME are higher on average, with RMSE values of 2.12% and 1.78% respec-
tively; these errors are ∼ 10% of the total range of values, and show that the composition-based descriptors may not be sufficient
for highly accurate prediction of PV efficiency. This is not a surprise, as the optical absorption spectra are likely sensitive to


6

1 0
1
2
3

1
0
1
2
3

rmse_pbe = 0.17 eV
rmse_hse = 0.20 eV

Decomposition Energy (eV)

PBE
HSE

1
3
5
7

1

3

5

7

rmse_pbe = 0.22 eV
rmse_hse = 0.30 eV

Band Gap (eV)

0
8
16 24

0

8

16

24

rmse_pbe = 2.12 %
rmse_hse = 1.78 %

PV Efficiency (%)

Ground Truth

ML Prediction

FIG. 3.
Single-fidelity random forest regression models trained for decomposition energy, band gap, and PV efficiency, separately on the
DFT-PBE and DFT-HSE datasets. Parity plots capture effective averaged test predictions (over 5000 models) for every data point, and RMSE
values are shown separately for PBE and HSE.

the perovskite structure and would thus affect the SLME prediction. Furthermore—especially when experimental data will be
included in training—there are many factors beyond the perovskite composition alone, including the solar cell architecture, inter-
faces, and external conditions, that influence the PV efficiency. Nevertheless, the focus of current work is on determining upper
limit efficiencies as a function of HaP compositions and eventually screening materials which are likely to show high efficiencies.

1 0
1
2
3

1
0
1
2
3

rmse_pbe = 0.15 eV
rmse_hse = 0.12 eV

Decomposition Energy (eV)

PBE
HSE

1
3
5
7

1

3

5

7

rmse_pbe = 0.17 eV
rmse_hse = 0.20 eV

Band Gap (eV)

0
8
16 24

0

8

16

24

rmse_pbe = 1.78 %
rmse_hse = 1.35 %

PV Efficiency (%)

Ground Truth

ML Prediction

FIG. 4. Multi-fidelity random forest regression models trained for decomposition energy, band gap, and PV efficiency, based on a combined
DFT-PBE + DFT-HSE dataset. Parity plots capture effective averaged test predictions (over 5000 models) for every data point, and RMSE
values are shown for PBE and HSE.

Next, the DFT-only MF models are trained for each property by adding 2 descriptors indicating whether the data source is
PBE or HSE, leading to PBE-mf1 and HSE-mf1 predictions. Results are presented in Figure 4, showing an improvement in
performance over the SF models, with models once again picturing averaged test-only predictions over 5000 models. PBE and
HSE ∆H models show RMSE values of 0.15 eV and 0.12 eV respectively. Egap predictions also represent slight improvement,
with PBE RMSE of 0.17 eV and HSE RMSE of 0.20 eV, while SLME predictions show marked improvement with RMSE of
1.78% for PBE and 1.35% for HSE. While ∆H and Egap values in the HSE dataset cover a wide range of values, it can be seen
from Figures 2(b), 3, and 4 that the HSE SLME values clearly occur in a smaller range than the PBE SLME values, which is an
artifact of the nature of this dataset and has been explained in prior work11. As such, we expect the MF models to theoretically
expand the reach of the HSE predictions to new regions in the chemical space that might show higher PV efficiencies, something
that may not be possible with SF models given the interpolative nature of regression models. Generally, the PBE and HSE ∆H
values, both SF and MF1 predictions, have a good correlation and can be equally trusted, but given the low test prediction RMSE
of 0.12 eV, the HSE-mf1 ∆H model should provide the best way for new prediction and screening of the bulk stability of HaPs.


7

RFR Models for Experiment-Fidelity Predictions

Finally, multiple approaches are used for making predictions on the experimental data points, and to eventually achieve
accurate and general experiment-fidelity predictions. An important shortcoming of the dataset had to be overcome here: while
we could collect experimental data on nearly 100 points from the literature which included their chemical composition, band gap,
and PV efficiency (and some other solar cell-relevant quantities15), there was almost never sufficient information available about
the corresponding perovskite phase. An exhaustive search of every composition in the experimental literature to determine its
preferred phase is beyond this scope of the current study, though it can and should be performed in the future. Furthermore, many
studies do not explicitly report the likely phase of the material, though diffraction patterns and spectroscopic measurements are
reported, making it difficult to definitively assign phase information to any compound, which makes a computational estimate
a better approach. As such, we apply the following strategy to create a 4-dimensional phase vector (corresponding to cubic,
tetragonal, orthorhombic, or hexagonal phase) for every experimental data point:

1. The PBE-sf ∆H is predicted for all 100 compounds considered in all 4 phases.

2. Predictions are made over an ensemble of 5000 models as described earlier, and the most stable phase (which of the four
phases has the lowest predicted PBE ∆H?) is noted each time.

3. A score between 0 and 1 is assigned to each of the 4 dimensions of the phase vector based on the relative frequency of
occurrence of any phase as the most stable. For instance, for the compound FASnI3, the cubic phase fraction is found to
be 0.57 and the hexagonal phase fraction is 0.41.

4. With all 54 dimensions (including composition, phase, and elemental property vectors) now available for all experimental
data points, single-fidelity models could be trained, and this data can be added to the DFT data along with a 3-dimensional
fidelity vector to train the new MF models.

(a)
(b)

FIG. 5.
DFT-ML predictions compared to experimental values for (a) single-fidelity PBE and HSE models, and (b) DFT-only multi-fidelity
models. Expt vs DFT RMSE values are shown separately for PBE and HSE.

In the absence of any experimental data, one might wonder how the DFT-predicted Egap and SLME compare with measured
values. A comparison of DFT vs experiments has been performed for a small set of compounds in past work, and the general
understanding is that PBE and HSE errors are quite large for a lot of compounds10–12. To examine this effect further, we
used the PBE-sf, HSE-sf, PBE-mf1, and HSE-mf1 models to make predictions on all 97 experimental data points, using the
54-dimensional inputs described above. The DFT-ML SF and MF predictions of Egap are plotted against actual experimental
values in Figure 5(a) and (b) respectively: it can be seen that PBE-sf predictions have the lowest RMSE of 0.4 eV, with all
other predictions lying in the ∼ 0.6 eV RMSE range. These errors are clearly too high, and certain compounds are especially
poorly predicted, with errors larger than 1.5 eV at times. Corresponding parity plots comparing PBE-sf, HSE-sf, PBE-mf1, and
HSE-mf1 predictions of SLME with experimental PCE are presented in Figure S1, showing that there is essential no correlation
between the DFT-ML and experimental values of PV efficiency.

Next, SF models were trained for the experimental Egap and PCE, and effective test predictions for all 97 points based on an
ensemble of 5000 models are presented in Figure 6. Egap predictions show a very low RMSE of 0.11 eV, though a caveat is


8

1
2
3

1

2

3

rmse = 0.11 eV

Band Gap (eV)

0
8
16
24

0

8

16

24

rmse = 3.65 %

PV Efficiency (%)

Ground Truth

ML Prediction

FIG. 6.
Experiment-only single-fidelity RFR predictions for (a) band gap, and (b) PV efficiency, with effective test predictions and corre-
sponding RMSE shown.

the lower range of values in the experimental dataset, whereas RMSE on PCE predictions is much higher at 3.72%. Although
the Expt-sf models could already be used for making experiment-fidelity predictions on hundreds of thousands of hypothetical
compounds, it would be limited and erroneous given the narrow chemical space in the experimental dataset compared to the DFT
dataset—where explicit care was taken to involve all chemical species in roughly equal proportions across all the compounds.
Thus, a DFT-Expt MF model might serve high-throughput predictions better.

PBE-mf2, HSE-mf2, and Expt-mf2 prediction performances are pictured in Figure 7. PBE and HSE Egap predictions show
similar RMSE of 0.17 eV and 0.19 eV respectively, similar to the MF1 models. The same is true for SLME predictions where
the PBE RMSE is 1.72% and the HSE RMSE is 1.29%. Expt-mf2 Egap RMSE is 0.14 eV and PCE RMSE is 3.62%. These
predictions are again quite similar to the Expt-sf performances, but are vastly more useful for their applicability across new
regions of the HaP chemical space. We believe that the MF2 models learn inherent relationships between Expt, PBE, and HSE
values, and are thus capable of making experiment-fidelity predictions for chemistries that have been studied from PBE and/or
HSE. Table II lists the test RMSE values for all three properties from many different RFR models, with the values in bold
showing the lowest errors for any specific property at any fidelity.

1
3
5
7

1

3

5

7

rmse_pbe = 0.17 eV
rmse_hse = 0.19 eV
rmse_expt = 0.09 eV

Band Gap (eV)

PBE
HSE
Expt.

0
8
16
24

0

8

16

24

rmse_pbe = 1.72 %
rmse_hse = 1.29 %
rmse_expt = 2.24 %

PV Efficiency (%)

Ground Truth

ML Prediction

FIG. 7. Multi-fidelity random forest regression models trained for the band gap and PV efficiency from DFT-PBE, DFT-HSE, and experiment.
Parity plots capture effective test predictions averaged over 5000 models, and RMSE values are shown separately for PBE, HSE, and Expt.


9

Understanding Feature Importance

Figure S2 shows the Pearson coefficient of linear correlation37 plotted between the 56-dimensional vector representing every
compound in the DFT-mf1 dataset (PBE + HSE data), against the three properties of interest. The primary observations here
are very similar to past publications10–12. Increasing the K fraction will lead to an increase in ∆H and thus make the compound
less stable, while the FA fraction has the exact opposite effect. ∆H is highly negatively correlated with features such as the ionic
radius and atomic number of the A-site cation, showing that larger cations (to a point) are best for perovskite stability. While
Ca, Sr, and Ba lead to a heavy increase in Egap, it is very negatively correlated with the electron affinity, ionization energy, and
electronegativity of the B-site cations. The SLME shows the opposite trends to what is found for Egap, with increase in the
B-site electron affinity, ionization energy, and electronegativity leading to an increase in efficiency. Interestingly, we generally
find low correlation between the phase/fidelity and the properties, except for the positive correlation between the cubic phase
and both the ∆H and the Egap, which is likely a consequence of the dominance of cubic structures in the dataset that means a
majority of the unstable compounds as well as a majority of the wide band gap compounds are cubic.

To understand the contributions of various features better, we plotted the feature importance values for all descriptor dimen-
sions as obtained from the best RFR models, in Figure S3. It can be seen that the main contributions to ∆H are from the A and
X species, as well as from the elemental properties that highlight the size of the A-site cations and X-site anions—similar to
the observations from Figure S2. For Egap and PV efficiency, there is an obvious dominance from the B-site electronegativity
followed by the electron affinity and ionization energy, showing that the optoelectronic properties are heavily determined by the
B-site cations (and a little bit from the X-site anions) and have almost no sensitivity to the A-site species. Figure S4 shows
the Egap and PV efficiency for the entire dataset of 1014 points plotted against the B-site electronegativity, showing a rough
correlation, especially for the DFT data.

RFR Model
∆H RMSE (eV) Egap RMSE (eV) PV Efficiency RMSE (%)

PBE-sf
0.17
0.23
2.12

HSE-sf
0.20
0.30
1.78

Expt-sf
-
0.11
3.65

PBE-sf vs Expt.
-
0.40
5.45

HSE-sf vs Expt.
-
0.60
5.48

HSE-sf vs Expt., shifted
-
0.31
-

PBE-mf1
0.15
0.17
1.78

HSE-mf1
0.12
0.20
1.35

PBE-mf1 vs Expt.
-
0.59
5.28

HSE-mf1 vs Expt.
-
0.62
5.50

PBE-mf1 vs Expt., shifted
-
0.34
-

HSE-mf1 vs Expt., shifted
-
0.36
-

PBE-mf2
-
0.17
1.72

HSE-mf2
-
0.19
1.29

Expt-mf2
-
0.09
2.24

TABLE II. Root mean square error (RMSE) in test set prediction for the three properties from multiple single- and multi-fidelity models.

Prediction and Screening at Experiment-Fidelity

Next, predictions are made for the expanded set of 151,140 compounds populated across the same HaP chemical space. It
should be noted that for any given compound, PBE or HSE computations would at least require at least 12 to 24 hours of CPU
time (on approximately 128 cores) for estimating the three properties, which would correspond to over 200 years of computing
time for > 150,000 compounds. Experimental investigation of all these materials would take even longer. The ML predictions,
on the other hand, require only seconds for several compounds, and can be made for hundreds of thousands of compounds in
mere minutes. Figure 8 along with Figures S5 and S6 show the HSE-mf1 ∆H, Expt-mf2 Egap, and Expt-mf2 PCE predicted for
the 37,785 unique compositions in four different phases, as ∆H vs Egap and Egap vs PV efficiency plots.

It can immediately be seen that (i) general shape and distribution of the plots is the same as the DFT-Expt dataset pictured in
Figure 2, and (ii) there are now hundreds of more compounds that exist in the desirable ranges of ∆H < 0.2 eV, Egap between 1
and 2 eV, and PCE > 15%. We find that 3610 compounds out of the 151,140 fulfil each of these criteria, which represents 2.4%
of the entire population. 1180 of these compounds are cubic, 856 tetragonal, 889 orthorhombic, and 685 hexagonal. Further,


10

(a)
(b)

FIG. 8. A glimpse of high-fidelity predictions made over ∼ 150,000 HaPs: (a) Predicted band gap (from Expt-mf2) plotted against predicted
decomposition energy (from HSE-mf1) for cubic compounds, and (b) predicted PV efficiency (from Expt-mf2) plotted against predicted band
gap for tetragonal phase compounds.

HSE-MF1 Decomp < 0.2 eV
1 eV < Expt-MF2 Gap < 2 eV
Expt-MF2 PV efficiency > 15%

Enumeration à Screening

FIG. 9.
Frequencies of occurrence of the 14 chemical species within the list of 3610 promising compounds obtained via enumeration,
prediction, and screening.

a majority of these compounds are B-site mixed (2036 in numbers) while 1364 compounds are A-site mixed, and only about
200 compounds have halogen mixing. Figures S5 and S6 further show that the shapes of the plots look generally similar for
different phases, and there are some empty regions which will likely be covered by other intermediate compositions we have
not considered in this enumeration exercise. Thus, we are able to use the multi-fidelity DFT-Expt predictions to screen > 3600
compounds with multiple desired properties. A further examination of the chemical space of the screened compounds, presented
in Figure 9, shows that FA followed by Cs and MA are the most prevalent A-site cations, Pb, Ge, and Sn are most common at
the B-site, while nearly all the compounds are Iodides. This is consistent with the most typical HaP compositions used in high
efficiency solar cells arising from FA-MA-Cs mixing at the A-site and a predominance of Pb and I at the other sites. Table III
shows the total number of screened compounds divided in terms of the predicted perovskite phase and type of mixing (pure,
A-mixed, B-mixed, or X-mixed).

Discovery at Experiment-Fidelity using GA

The GA results are presented in Figure 10, where part (a) shows a typical GA run in the form of the objective function being
minimized plotted against the generation number (a maximum of 100 generations is run each time), and part (b) shows the


11

PV efficiency plotted against Egap for compounds obtained from nearly 3000 different GA runs. It should be noted here that
the GA models utilize the HSE-mf1 prediction for ∆H and Expt-mf2 predictions for Egap and PCE, and mixing is allowed to
happen in many different fractions, often simultaneously at A, B, and X sites. Every GA run requires 2 to 5 minutes on average
for the 14-dimensional composition space with pre-trained RFR models for property prediction. We run GA models for four
different subsets of the chemical space (D1, D2, D3, and D4), and show results for them in Figure 10(b). These datasets have
been explained in terms of their constituent chemical species in Table IV; e.g., D2 represents Pb-free perovskites whereas D4
represents the much smaller space of (Cs-MA-FA)PbI3 perovskites.

Objective function = 

f(decomp, gap, PV efficiency)

Objectives / constraints:

Ø ΣiAi = 1, ΣjBj = 1, ΣkXk = 3
Ø fractions: n/64, n/27, n/8
Ø minimize decomp energy
Ø maximize PV efficiency
Ø bandgap ∈ {1 eV – 2 eV}

Generation

Minimized Function

(a)
(b)

FIG. 10. (a) An example GA run presented in terms of the objective function plotted against the number of generations, showing the property
and chemical feasibility constraints. (b) Predicted (experiment-fidelity) PV efficiency plotted against band gap for ∼ 3000 compounds from
several GA runs; all compositions are chemically meaningful and have decomposition energy < 0.2 eV p.f.u.

Since many different constraints are applied in the objective function, the best compounds obtained from a GA run may not
be completely stoichiometrically accurate or meet every property target. As can be seen in Figure 10(b), while all compounds
essentially fulfill the Egap requirement (as well as the stability requirement, which is not plotted here), PCE is not always higher
than 15%. We find that across all the GA runs, there are a total of 1703 chemically meaningful ABX3 alloys which satisfy
conditions for all three properties; 484 of these compounds are cubic, 428 are tetragonal, 431 are orthorhombic, and 360 are
hexagonal phase compounds. We also find that the total number of promising compounds increases when the chemical space be-
comes less complex—that is, a 5-dimensional space given by Cs-MA-FA-Pb-I leads to many more compounds with the targeted
properties than the 14-dimensional space of K-Rb-Cs-MA-FA-Ca-Sr-Ba-Ge-Sn-Pb-I-Br-Cl. This is both a consequence of the
difficulty of optimization in a high-dimensional space and the ease of finding attractive materials in the Cs-MA-FA-Pb-I space
which are already among the best for stability and high efficiency. Figure 10(b) further shows that there are scores of Pb-free
HaPs (D2) with high PV efficiencies, which opens up an important avenue towards eliminating Pb from solar cell perovskites.
Many of the compounds are 14-dim, which means they are allowed to contain any species, while the remaining compounds are
restricted to contain the most common species found in the experimental literature, namely Cs, MA, and FA at A-site, Pb, Sn,
and Ge at the B-site, and Br/I at the X-site.

An examination of the frequencies of occurrence in the GA-screened list of 1703 compounds is presented for the chemical
spaces D1, D2, D3, and D4 in Figure 11, with the results somewhat more interesting than the compounds screened from pure
enumeration and prediction. In D1 and D2, we find FA and MA are the most prevalent at the A-site, followed by Cs, with Rb
and K clearly preferred in smaller mixing fractions. Sn, Ge, and Pb are again the most common B-site cations, and Br makes a
considerable appearance at X although I remains the king. In the total absence of Pb, Sn and Ge majorly dominate the B-site.
Figure 11(a) and (b) reveal that the best combination of properties could potentially be achieved using some combination of FA
and MA at the A-site with small quantity of Cs, Sn and Ge at the B-site, and I with potentially small quantities of Br or Cl at the
X-site. Further, the lower-dimensional chemical spaces D3 and D4 in Figure 11(c) and (d) respectively show a preference for
FA, Pb, and I, with Cs and Br being useful in smaller fractions, but Sn and Ge still holding their own.


12

Phase All Screened Compounds Pure A-mixed B-mixed X-mixed

All
3610
9
1364
2036
201

Cubic
1180
3
473
626
78

Tetra
856
2
290
510
54

Ortho
889
2
361
470
56

Hex
685
2
240
430
13

TABLE III. Number of ML-screened compounds with all properties in desirable ranges, namely ∆H (HSE-mf1) < 0.2 eV, Egap (Expt-mf2)
between 1 and 2 eV, and PCE (Expt-mf2) > 15%. The screened compounds are divided based on their predicted phase and type of mixing.

Chemical Space
Description
Screened Compounds Cubic Tetragonal Orthorhombic Hexagonal

D1
(K-Rb-Cs-MA-FA)(Ca-Sr-Ba-Ge-Sn-Pb)(I-Br-Cl)3
226
80
51
58
37

D2
Pb-free, (K-Rb-Cs-MA-FA)(Ca-Sr-Ba-Ge-Sn)(I-Br-Cl)3
297
90
70
71
66

D3
(Cs-MA-FA)(Ge-Sn-Pb)(I-Br)3
381
114
107
102
58

D4
(Cs-MA-FA)PbI3
799
200
200
200
199

TABLE IV. The number of GA-screened compounds obtained for different chemical sub-spaces (D1, D2, D3, and D4), divided in terms of the
perovskite phase.

Visualizing Composition-Property Spaces using ML Predictions

Using ML predictions made across the set of 151,140 HaP compounds in different phases, it is now possible to visualize
how the phase stability and computed properties vary in specific families of compounds, such as with increasing Sn concentra-
tion in Pb-Sn mixed compounds. Here, we pick a few interesting and important chemical spaces and visualize their property
variations using ternary diagrams. Figure 12 shows the Expt-mf2 Egap and Expt-mf2 PV efficiency for the chemical spaces
Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, and FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, plotted as ternary color maps with Ge, Sn, and Pb representing the
three sides of the triangle. It can be seen that in the Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3 series, maximum Egap > 1.5 eV is shown by Pb-dominated
compositions, minimum Egap ∼ 1.1 eV by Sn-dominated compositions, whereas Ge generally leads to more intermediate
Egap values. MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3 compounds show very similar Egap trends where in FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3 compounds, a dominance
of Pb or Ge leads to higher Egap values in the ∼ 1.8 eV range. The highest PV efficiencies are obtained by majority Pb
compositions with some Sn and Ge added in all three series of compounds, leading to values > 12% for MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, >
15% for Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, and ∼ 18% for FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3. It can also be seen that majority Ge compositions in FA(Ge-Sn-
Pb)I3 lead to much lower PV efficiencies around 13%, so Pb-based compositions may still be crucial to achieve high efficiencies.

Figures S7 to S12 further show ternary plots for the phase stability (cubic vs tetra vs ortho vs hex), the HSE-mf1 ∆H, and
the Expt-mf2 Egap and PV efficiency, across the chemical spaces Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, Cs(Ge-
Sn-Pb)Br3, MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)Br3, and FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)Br3. Such diagrams could be trivially plotted for any binary, ternary, or
even higher-dimensional chemical spaces of interest, and can be navigated to determine the likely phase and bulk stability of
any composition as well as their optoelectronic properties. It can be seen that the Cs-iodides generally prefer the tetragonal
phase while the Cs-bromides prefer the orthorhombic phase. Nearly all compositions are stable w.r.t. decomposition in either
series, and the highest PV efficiencies ∼ 13% for the bromides are achieved with Sn-dominance at the B-site. The MA-based
iodides and bromides are nearly always tetragonal and show good bulk stability. Maximum efficiencies are obtained from mixed
compounds with intermediate Pb fractions. Finally, the FA-based compounds are almost always stable in the hexagonal phase,
except for a small area of cubic stability in the iodides. Sn-dominant FA-bromides provide a peak PV efficiency around 10%,
but the real pay-off comes from Pb-dominant iodides. The entire FA HaP space is highly stable against decomposition with ∆H
values < -1 eV p.f.u.

CONCLUSIONS

In summary, several single-fidelity and multi-fidelity random forest regression models were trained for predicting the decom-
position energy, band gap, and photovoltaic efficiency of halide perovskites at both DFT and experiment fidelity, resulting in the
discovery of hundreds of promising new candidates via high-throughput screening and genetic algorithm. This work is based
on an innovative approach of fusing experimental data from the literature with multiple types of DFT computed properties, and
the unique representation of every material in terms of its composition and phase, well-known elemental or molecular properties
of species at the cation and anion sites, and one-hot encoding fidelity information. All DFT data, optimized RFR models, and
predictions made on hundreds of thousands of hypothetical compounds, are openly available to the community. GA enabled the
efficient design of compositions beyond the limits of brute-force enumeration in certain mixing fractions, and provides an avenue


13

D1: (K-Rb-Cs-MA-FA)(Ca-Sr-Ba-Ge-Sn-Pb)(I-Br-Cl)3
(a)
D2: (K-Rb-Cs-MA-FA)(Ca-Sr-Ba-Ge-Sn)(I-Br-Cl)3
(b)

D3: (Cs-MA-FA)(Ge-Sn-Pb)(I-Br)3
(c)
D4: (Cs-MA-FA)PbI3
(d)

FIG. 11. Frequencies of occurrence of the 14 chemical species within the list of 1703 promising compounds obtained from GA, for subsets
of the chemical space: (a) D1, (b) D2, (c) D3, and (d) D4.

for continuous discovery and improvement with infusion of more data and expanding the chemical space. Composition-property
distributions are visualized in terms of ternary diagrams generated using ML predictions, revealing the most promising regions
of B-site mixed (with Pb, Sn, and Ge) Cs/MA/FA iodides and bromides, and such exercises could easily be repeated for any
chemical sub-spaces of interest. Limitations of the current work arise in terms of the experimental data only covering a small
range of band gaps, any compound only represented as a single data point although it may posses dozens of polymorphs with
varying properties, known issues with the DFT functionals, and the lack of consideration of other essential properties such as
defect behavior and electron/hole mobilities. Each of these factors will be explored in future work; some of our ongoing work
includes additional benchmarking of functionals for HaPs and the use of crystal graph-based neural networks for property pre-
diction based on entire crystal structures as input. We anticipate that our datasets will serve many data mining and ML efforts,
both within our group and from the community in general, and significant improvements will further be made in terms of data
and ML approaches.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

There are no conflicts to declare.

DATA AVAILABILITY

Tabulated data is included as spreadsheets in the supporting documents. All DFT data and ML models, including python
scripts in Jupyter notebooks, can be found on Github: https://github.com/mannodiarun/perovs_mfml_ga.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was performed at Purdue University, under startup account F.10023800.05.002 from the Materials Engineering de-
partment. This research used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), the Laboratory
Computing Resource Center (LCRC) at Argonne National Laboratory, and the Rosen Center for Advanced Computing (RCAC)


14

Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, Band Gap (eV)

Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, PV Efficiency (*100 %)

FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, Band Gap (eV)

FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, PV Efficiency (*100 %)

MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, Band Gap (eV)

MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3, PV Efficiency (*100 %)

FIG. 12.
Ternary property diagrams showing the band gap and PV efficiency from Expt-mf2 predictions, plotted for the chemical spaces
Cs(Pb-Sn-Ge)I3, FA(Pb-Sn-Ge)I3, and MA(Pb-Sn-Ge)I3.

clusters at Purdue.

REFERENCES

1J.Y. and P.M. contributed equally to this work.
2M. I. H. Ansari, A. Qurashi,
and M. K. Nazeeruddin, “Frontiers, opportunities, and challenges in perovskite solar cells: a critical review,” Journal of
Photochemistry and Photobiology C: Photochemistry Reviews 35, 1–24 (2018).
3W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan, and S.-H. Wei, “Halide perovskite materials for solar cells: a theoretical review,” Journal of Materials Chemistry A 3,
8926–8942 (2015).
4J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians, and P. V. Kamat, “Intriguing optoelectronic properties of metal halide perovskites,” Chemical Reviews 116, 12956–13008
(2016).
5T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes, and D. Cahen, “Hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites: Low-cost semiconductors with intriguing charge-
transport properties,” Nature Reviews Materials 1, 15007 (2016).
6P. Cui, D. Wei, J. Ji, H. Huang, E. Jia, S. Dou, T. Wang, W. Wang, and M. Li, “Planar p-n homojunction perovskite solar cells with efficiency exceeding 21.3
%,” Nature Energy 4, 150–159 (2019).
7Website, “https://www.pv-tech.org/oxford-pv-posts-28-6-efficiency-on-commercial-perovskite-silicon-tandem-cell/,” PV Tech (2023).
8Website, “https://www.pv-magazine.com/2023/05/30/kaust-claims-33-7-efficiency-for-perovskite-silicon-tandem-solar-cell/,” PV Magazine (2023).
9J. Yang and A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, “High-throughput computations and machine learning for halide perovskite discovery,” MRS BULLETIN (2022),
doi:10.1557/s43577-022-00.
10A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi and M. K. Y. Chan, “Data-driven design of novel halide perovskite alloys,” Energy Environ. Sci. 15, 1930–1949 (2022).
11J. Yang, P. Manganaris, and A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, “A high-throughput computational dataset of halide perovskite alloys,” Digital Discovery , – (2023).
12J.
Yang
and
A.
Mannodi-Kanakkithodi,
“First
principles
investigation
of
polymorphism
in
halide
perovskites,”
In
Preparation,
preprint:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16095 (2023).
13C. Chen, Y. Zuo, W. Ye, X. Li, and S. P. Ong, “Learning properties of ordered and disordered materials from multi-fidelity data,” Nat Comput Sci 1, 46–53
(2021).
14M. Bercx, N. Sarmadian, R. Saniz, B. Partoens, and D. Lamoen, “First-principles analysis of the spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency of photovoltaic
absorber layers for cuau-like chalcogenides and silicon,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18, 20542–20549 (2016).
15O. Almora, D. Baran, G. C. Bazan, C. Berger, C. I. Cabrera, K. R. Catchpole, S. Erten-Ela, F. Guo, J. Hauch, A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, T. J. Jacobsson, R. A. J.
Janssen, T. Kirchartz, N. Kopidakis, Y. Li, M. A. Loi, R. R. Lunt, X. Mathew, M. D. McGehee, J. Min, D. B. Mitzi, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Nelson, A. F.
Nogueira, U. W. Paetzold, N.-G. Park, B. P. Rand, U. Rau, H. J. Snaith, E. Unger, L. Vaillant-Roca, H.-L. Yip, and C. J. Brabec, “Device performance of
emerging photovoltaic materials (version 1),” Advanced Energy Materials 11, 2002774 (2021).
16T. J. e. a. Jacobsson, “An open-access database and analysis tool for perovskite solar cells based on the fair data principles,” Nature Energy 7, 107–115 (2022).


15

17A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, M. Y. Toriyama, F. G. Sen, M. J. Davis, R. F. Klie, and M. K. Chan, “Machine-learned impurity level prediction for semiconductors:
the example of cd-based chalcogenides,” npj Computational Materials 6 (2020), 10.1038/s41524-020-0296-7.
18G. Pilania, J. Gubernatis, and T. Lookman, “Multi-fidelity machine learning models for accurate bandgap predictions of solids,” Computational Materials
Science 129, 156–163 (2017).
19C. Kuenneth, A. C. Rajan, H. Tran, L. Chen, C. Kim, and R. Ramprasad, “Polymer informatics with multi-task learning,” Patterns 2, 100238 (2021).
20T. Iraki, L. Morand, J. Dornheim, N. Link, and D. Helm, “A multi-task learning-based optimization approach for finding diverse sets of microstructures with
desired properties,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing (2023), 10.1007/s10845-023-02139-8.
21G. I. Csonka, J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, P. H. T. Philipsen, S. Lebègue, J. Paier, O. A. Vydrov, and J. G. Ángyán, “Assessing the performance of recent
density functionals for bulk solids,” Phys. Rev. B 79, 155107 (2009).
22S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich, and H. Krieg, “A consistent and accurate ab initio parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (dft-d) for the
94 elements h-pu,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 132, 154104 (2010).
23S. Wang, K. F. Tse, A. Boyko, and J. Zhu, “Defect calculations using a combined scan and hybrid functional in γ-cspbi3,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 24,
3420–3428 (2022).
24K. Choudhary, M. Bercx, J. Jiang, R. Pachter, D. Lamoen,
and F. Tavazza, “Accelerated discovery of efficient solar cell materials using quantum and
machine-learning methods,” Chemistry of Materials 31, 5900–5908 (2019).
25Z. Jiang, Y. Nahas, B. Xu, S. Prosandeev, D. Wang, and L. Bellaiche, “Special quasirandom structures for perovskite solid solutions,” Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter 28, 475901 (2016).
26F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos,
D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research 12, 2825–2830
(2011).
27A. M.-K. et al., “Github,” https://github.com/mannodiarun/perovs_mfml_ga (2023).
28P. Manganaris, J. Yang, and A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, “Multi-fidelity machine learning for halide perovskite band gap predictions,” In Preparation , – (2023).
29P. C. Jennings, S. Lysgaard, J. S. Hummelshøj, T. Vegge, and T. Bligaard, “Genetic algorithms for computational materials discovery accelerated by machine
learning,” npj Computational Materials 46, 2057–3960 (2019).
30M. P. Lourenço, J. Hostaš, L. B. Herrera, P. Calaminici, A. M. Köster, A. Tchagang, and D. R. Salahub, “Gamaterial—a genetic-algorithm software for
material design and discovery,” Journal of Computational Chemistry 44, 814–823 (2023).
31J. Kern, L. Chen, C. Kim, and R. Ramprasad, “Design of polymers for energy storage capacitors using machine learning and evolutionary algorithms,” Journal
of Materials Science 56, 19623–19635 (2021).
32R. S. et al., “Github,” https://github.com/PasaOpasen/geneticalgorithm2 (2022).
33C. J. Bartel, A. Trewartha, Q. Wang, A. Dunn, A. Jain, and G. Ceder, “A critical examination of compound stability predictions from machine-learned
formation energies,” npj Computational Materials 6, 97 (2020).
34G. G. C. Peterson and J. Brgoch, “Materials discovery through machine learning formation energy,” Journal of Physics: Energy 3, 022002 (2021).
35Y. Zhuo, A. Mansouri Tehrani, and J. Brgoch, “Predicting the band gaps of inorganic solids by machine learning,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters
9, 1668–1673 (2018).
36C. Gao, X. Yang, M. Jiang, L. Chen, Z. Chen, and C. V. Singh, “Machine learning-enabled band gap prediction of monolayer transition metal chalcogenide
alloys,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 24, 4653–4665 (2022).
37J. Benesty, J. Chen, Y. Huang, and I. Cohen, “Pearson correlation coefficient,” in Noise Reduction in Speech Processing (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2009) pp. 1–4.


Supplemental material to "Discovering Novel Halide Perovskite Alloys using
Multi-Fidelity Machine Learning and Genetic Algorithm"

Jiaqi Yang,1, Panayotis Manganaris,1 and Arun Mannodi-Kanakkithodi,1

1School of Materials Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA

(a)
(b)

FIG. S1. DFT-ML SLME plotted against experimental PCE for (a) single-fidelity RFR model, and (b) multi-fidelity RFR model.

K

Rb

Cs

MA

FA

Ca

Sr

Ba

Ge

Sn

Pb

Cl

Br

I

Cubic

Tetra

Ortho

Hex

PBE

HSE

A_ion_rad
A_BP

A_MP

A_dens

A_at_wt

A_EA

A_IE

A_hof

A_hov

A_En

A_at_num

A_period

B_ion_rad
B_BP

B_MP

B_dens

B_at_wt

B_EA

B_IE

B_hof

B_hov

B_En

B_at_num

B_period

X_ion_rad
X_BP

X_MP

X_dens

X_at_wt

X_EA

X_IE

X_hof

X_hov

X_En

X_at_num

X_period

Decomp

Band Gap

SLME

Correlation: Descriptors vs DFT Properties

0.5

0.0

0.5

Correlation Coefficient

FIG. S2. Pearson coefficients of linear correlation between the 56-dimensional descriptors (for the PBE+HSE dataset) and the three properties
computed from PBE and HSE.


Descriptor Label
Descriptor Meaning

K_frac
K fraction over A sites

Rb_frac
Rb fraction over A sites

Cs_frac
Cs fraction over A sites

MA_frac
MA fraction over A sites

FA_frac
FA fraction over A sites

Ca_frac
Ca fraction over B sites

Sr_frac
Sr fraction over B sites

Ba_frac
Ba fraction over B sites

Ge_frac
Ge fraction over B sites

Sn_frac
Sn fraction over B sites

Pb_frac
Pb fraction over B sites

Cl_frac
Cl fraction over X sites

Br_frac
Br fraction over X sites

I_frac
I fraction over X sites

Cubic
1 if cubic, 0 if not

Tetra
1 if tetragonal, 0 if not

Ortho
1 if orthorhombic, 0 if not

Hex
1 if hexagonal, 0 if not

PBE
1 if data is from PBE, 0 if not

HSE
1 if data is from HSE, 0 if not

Expt
1 if data is from Expt, 0 if not

A_ion_rad
Ion radius of A site elements

A_BP
Boiling point of A site elements

A_MP
Melting point of A site elements

A_dens
Density of A site elements

A_at_wt
Atomic weight of A site elements

A_EA
Electron affinity of A site elements

A_IE
Ionization energy of A site elements

A_hof
Heat of formation of A site elements

A_hov
Heat of vaporization of A site elements

A_En
Electronegativity of A site elements

A_at_num
Atomic number of A site elements

A_period
Period number of of A site elements

B_ion_rad
Ion radius of B site elements

B_BP
Boiling point of B site elements

B_MP
Melting point of B site elements

B_dens
Density of B site elements

B_at_wt
Atomic weight of B site elements

B_EA
Electron affinity of B site elements

B_IE
Ionization energy of B site elements

B_hof
Heat of formation of B site elements

B_hov
Heat of vaporization of B site elements

B_En
Electronegativity of B site elements

B_at_num
Atomic number of B site elements

B_period
Period number of of B site elements

X_ion_rad
Ion radius of X site elements

X_BP
Boiling point of X site elements

X_MP
Melting point of X site elements

X_dens
Density of X site elements

X_at_wt
Atomic weight of X site elements

X_EA
Electron affinity of X site elements

X_IE
Ionization energy of X site elements

X_hof
Heat of formation of X site elements

X_hov
Heat of vaporization of X site elements

X_En
Electronegativity of X site elements

X_at_num
Atomic number of X site elements

X_period
Period number of of X site elements

TABLE SI. Explanation of every descriptor dimension used in this work, enabling the development of RFR models and subsequent predictions
on new materials.


Decomposition 

Energy

Band Gap

SLME / PCE

(a)

(b)

(c)

A, X species

Size of A 
cations

X atom 
density

B-site electron affinity 

& electronegativity

B-site 

electronegativity

FIG. S3. Importance values of each feature from multi-fidelity random forest regression trained on the combined PBE, HSE, and Expt dataset,
for (a) decomposition energy, (b) band gap, and (c) PV efficiency.


(a)
(b)

FIG. S4. PBE, HSE, and expt. properties plotted against B-site electronegativity: (a) band gap, and (c) PV efficiency.

1 0
1
2
3

0

2

4

6

Cubic

1 0
1
2
3

0

2

4

6

Tetra

1 0
1
2
3

0

2

4

6

Ortho

1 0
1
2
3

0

2

4

6

Hex

HSE-MF1 Decomp. Energy (eV p.f.u.)

Expt-MF2 Band Gap (eV)

FIG. S5.
Visualization of the ML-predicted properties across the expanded chemical space of ∼ 150,000 compounds, in terms of band gap
(Expt-mf2) vs decomposition energy (HSE-mf1) plots.


0
2
4
6

0

5

10

15

20
Cubic

0
2
4
6

0

5

10

15

20
Tetra

0
2
4
6

0

5

10

15

20
Ortho

0
2
4
6

0

5

10

15

20
Hex

Expt-MF2 Band Gap (eV)

Expt-MF2 PV Efficiency (%)

FIG. S6. Visualization of the ML-predicted properties across the expanded chemical space of ∼ 150,000 compounds, in terms of PV efficiency
(Expt-mf2) vs band gap (Expt-mf2) plots.

Phase Stability

Hex

Ortho

Tetra

Cubic

HSE-MF1 Decomp. Energy (eV p.f.u.)
Expt-MF2 Band Gap (eV)
Expt-PCE (*100 %)

ML-predicted property visualization: Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3 Perovskites

FIG. S7. Ternary property diagrams showing the predicted phase stability, decomposition energy, band gap, and PV efficiency for Cs(Ge-Sn-
Pb)I3 perovskites.


Phase Stability

Hex

Ortho

Tetra

Cubic

HSE-MF1 Decomp. Energy (eV p.f.u.)
Expt-MF2 Band Gap (eV)
Expt-PCE (*100 %)

ML-predicted property visualization: Cs(Ge-Sn-Pb)Br3 Perovskites

FIG. S8. Ternary property diagrams showing the predicted phase stability, decomposition energy, band gap, and PV efficiency for Cs(Ge-Sn-
Pb)Br3 perovskites.

Phase Stability

Hex

Ortho

Tetra

Cubic

HSE-MF1 Decomp. Energy (eV p.f.u.)
Expt-MF2 Band Gap (eV)
Expt-PCE (*100 %)

ML-predicted property visualization: MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3 Perovskites

FIG. S9.
Ternary property diagrams showing the predicted phase stability, decomposition energy, band gap, and PV efficiency for MA(Ge-
Sn-Pb)I3 perovskites.

Phase Stability

Hex

Ortho

Tetra

Cubic

HSE-MF1 Decomp. Energy (eV p.f.u.)
Expt-MF2 Band Gap (eV)
Expt-PCE (*100 %)

ML-predicted property visualization: MA(Ge-Sn-Pb)Br3 Perovskites

FIG. S10. Ternary property diagrams showing the predicted phase stability, decomposition energy, band gap, and PV efficiency for MA(Ge-
Sn-Pb)Br3 perovskites.

Phase Stability

Hex

Ortho

Tetra

Cubic

HSE-MF1 Decomp. Energy (eV p.f.u.)
Expt-MF2 Band Gap (eV)
Expt-PCE (*100 %)

ML-predicted property visualization: FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)I3 Perovskites

FIG. S11.
Ternary property diagrams showing the predicted phase stability, decomposition energy, band gap, and PV efficiency for FA(Ge-
Sn-Pb)I3 perovskites.


Phase Stability

Hex

Ortho

Tetra

Cubic

HSE-MF1 Decomp. Energy (eV p.f.u.)
Expt-MF2 Band Gap (eV)
Expt-PCE (*100 %)

ML-predicted property visualization: FA(Ge-Sn-Pb)Br3 Perovskites

FIG. S12.
Ternary property diagrams showing the predicted phase stability, decomposition energy, band gap, and PV efficiency for FA(Ge-
Sn-Pb)Br3 perovskites.


