Direct observation of altermagnetic band splitting in CrSb thin films

S. Reimers,1 L. Odenbreit,1 L. ˇSmejkal,1, 2 V. N. Strocov,3 C. Constantinou,3 A. B. Hellenes,1

R. Jaeschke Ubiergo,1 W. H. Campos,1 V. K. Bharadwaj,1 A. Chakraborty,1 T. Denneulin,4

Wen Shi,4 R. E. Dunin-Borkowski,4 S. Das,5, 6 M. Kl¨aui,1, 7 J. Sinova,1, 8 and M. Jourdan*1

1Institut f¨ur Physik, Johannes Gutenberg-Universit¨at Mainz, 55099 Mainz, Germany
2Inst. of Physics Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Cukrovarnick´a 10, Praha 6, Czech Republic
3Paul Scherrer Institut, CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland
4Ernst Ruska-Centre for Microscopy and Spectroscopy with Electrons,
Forschungszentrum J¨ulich, 52425 J¨ulich, Germany
5Department of Physics and Astronomy, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
6Center for Quantum Science and Engineering, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
7Centre for Quantum Spintronics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology NTNU, 7491 Trondheim, Norway
8Department of Physics, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-4242, USA

Altermagnetism represents an emergent collinear magnetic phase with compensated order and
an unconventional alternating even-parity wave spin order in the non-relativistic band structure.
We investigate directly this unconventional band splitting near the Fermi energy through spin-
integrated soft X-ray angular resolved photoemission spectroscopy. The experimentally obtained
angle-dependent photoemission intensity, acquired from epitaxial thin films of the predicted alter-
magnet CrSb, demonstrates robust agreement with the corresponding band structure calculations.
In particular, we observe the distinctive splitting of an electronic band on a low-symmetry path
in the Brilliouin zone that connects two points featuring symmetry-induced degeneracy. The mea-
sured large magnitude of the spin splitting of approximately 0.6 eV and the position of the band
just below the Fermi energy underscores the significance of altermagnets for spintronics based on
robust broken time reversal symmetry responses arising from exchange energy scales, akin to ferro-
magnets, while remaining insensitive to external magnetic fields and possessing THz dynamics, akin
to antiferromagnets.

* email: Jourdan@uni-mainz.de

INTRODUCTION

Altermagnets (AMs) represent a new recently recog-
nized class of magnetically ordered materials with a
collinear alignment of identical magnetic moments, which
exhibit an alternating spin polarization pattern within
the electronic bands in reciprocal space [1–5]. This ex-
ceptional property has sparked substantial interest in ex-
ploring innovative applications in the realm of spintron-
ics. The goal is to harness the combined advantages pre-
sented by antiferromagnets (AFs), encompassing ultra-
fast dynamics [6] and resilience in the presence of external
magnetic fields [7], all while capitalising on the substan-
tial transport and optical effects [8–10] conventionally
ascribed solely to spin-polarized currents and strongly
spin-split bands observed in ferromagnets and ferrimag-
nets. Consequently, these materials have the potential to
lay the foundation for groundbreaking device concepts.
In a manner akin to conventional collinear antiferro-
magnets, AMs are comprised of sublattices that exhibit
ferromagnetic ordering in each sublattice, but an antipar-
allel inter-sublattice alignment, leading to compensated
collinear order. As with antiferromagnets, this compen-
sated order is protected by a symmetry that interchanges
the antiparallel sublattices and rotates their spin under

time reversal. In conventional AFs this sublattice inter-
changing symmetry involves parity (inversion) or trans-
lation combined with time reversal, which leads to a
non-relativistic spin-degenerate band structure through
Kramer’s theorem.
In contrast, in AMs the crystallo-
graphic sites of these anti-aligned sublattices are only
interconnected through a rotation (proper or improper,
symmorphic or nonsymmorphic), enforcing the alternat-
ing spin-splitting of exchange origin in the band struc-
ture, whose non-magnetic phase is often dominated by
crystal fields (CEFs). However, due to symmetry rea-
sons, the band splitting appears only along low-symmetry
paths within the Brillouin zone. Comparable effects have
been theoretically predicted for materials exhibiting non-
collinear magnetic ordering, which breaks both time and
crystal symmetry, as discussed in previous works [11–16].

The spin-splitting phenomenon observed in AMs holds
profound relevance in the context of spintronics, as it has
the potential to generate substantial spin polarized cur-
rents with long coherence length scales. These currents
have been proposed for applications such as manipulat-
ing the magnetic order within a ferromagnetic layer po-
sitioned on top of an AM layer, the so-called spin splitter
effects predicted in Ref.[17]. This unique transport effect
of AMs has been substantiated through the detection of a
spin torque stemming from the anticipated AM material
RuO2 [18–20]. Additionally, as predicted for AMs [3], the
observation of an anomalous Hall effect has been docu-
mented not only in RuO2, as discussed in Ref. [21], but

arXiv:2310.17280v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  20 Feb 2024


2

also in Mn5Si3and MnTe [22, 23]. For RuO2, recent ex-
perimental observation of a magnetic circular dichroism
in angle-resolved photoemission spectra have provided
evidence for an altermagnetic band structure [24]. How-
ever, the magnitude of the altermagnetic band-splitting
and the precise positioning of the relevant states with re-
spect to the Fermi surface remain uncharted territories in
experimental observations. So far only for MnTe, exper-
imental evidence for altermagnetic band splitting were
reported [25–27]. In the context of AMs for spintronics,
the primary goal is to attain a substantial spin-splitting
within the conduction bands in close proximity to the
Fermi surface. While in conventional AFs spin-splitting
originates from spin-orbit coupling with maximum ob-
served values of ≃ 100 meV [30], for AMs, density func-
tional theory (DFT) calculations have predicted a one
order of magnitude larger spin-splitting of the valence
bands.
Given the importance of this parameter in the realm
of spintronic applications, the validation of this spin-
splitting magnitude through experimental means be-
comes paramount in comprehensively evaluating the po-
tential of altermagnets for spintronics. In this study, we
explore the electronic bands in epitaxial thin films of
the altermagnet CrSb. We employ spin-integrated soft
X-ray angular-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (SX-
ARPES) to probe these bands. Though we do not probe
the spin, the observation of band dispersions, which are
in agreement with band structure calculations implying
spin splitting, provides strong evidence for an altermag-
netic band structure of CrSb. Through a direct compar-
ison with band structure calculations in the ordered and
the unordered phase, we demonstrate a large magnitude
of the spin-splitting of approximately 0.6 eV near the
Fermi energy.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Altermagnetic band spin-splitting in CrSb –
Among metallic altermagnets, CrSb distinguishes itself
by large predicted band splitting [2] and an ordering
temperature significantly exceeding room temperature.
Hexagonal CrSb orders magnetically at TN=700 K [29]
with ferromagnetic (001) planes, which are coupled an-
tiferromagnetically along the easy c-axis [32]. Figure 1,
panel a, depicts the crystal structure of the compound.
Panel b zooms into the local crystallographic environ-
ment of the magnetic sublattices. Along the c-axis, the
triangular arrangements of the Sb atoms above and be-
low each Cr sublattice are rotated by 60o with respect to
each other. This is the origin of the for each Cr sublat-
tice different orientation of the anisotropic crystal elec-
tric field (CEF). Interchanging the local environment of
the sublattices results in a swapping of the spin polariza-
tion of the altermagnetically split bands (within a single

FIG. 1.
Structure of CrSb. a) Crystal structure. Blue:
Cr atoms, Red: Sb atoms. Drawn with VESTA [31]. b) Local
environment of the Cr sublattices with antiparallel alignment
of the magnetic moments. c) Brillouin zone of CrSb showing,
e. g., the P-Q-P path, for which altermagnetically split bands
are expected. d) Altermagnetic band structure calculations
without SOC for the P-Q-P path. The color of the bands indi-
cates the spin polarization. e) Altermagnetic band structure
calculations with SOC for the P-Q-P path. f) Band structure
of the non-magnetic state (with SOC).

magnetic domain). Our epitaxial thin films represent an
experimental realization of this crystal structure with an
unknown size of sample regions with identical local sub-
lattice environment (see Supplementary Material).
Panel c shows the Brillouin zone of CrSb, indicating
three paths discussed below. Previous calculations have
predicted significant altermagnetic band splitting, along
the low-symmetry path Γ-L [1]. Here, we consider in par-
ticular the likewise low symmetry Q-P path, as this di-
rection is best accessible with our experimental geometry.
The Q point is situated halfway between the Γ-point and
the M-point, the P-point is halfway between the A- and
the L-point. Thus, the Q-P path cuts the Γ-L path at its
center, where the largest altermagnetic band splitting is
expected. The corresponding band structure along P-Q-
P, calculated without spin-orbit coupling (SOC), shows a
large altermagnetic band splitting with the spin polariza-
tion of the bands changing sign at the Q-point (Fig. 1d).
SOC induces minor additional band shifts only (panel e),
thus, it is not significant for the formation of the alter-
magnetic band splitting indicated by the pink arrows. To
demonstrate the role of the exchange interaction for the
formation of the altermagnetic band structure, we show
in panel f a non-magnetic calculation of CrSb. Again,
the anisotropic CEF results in an energy splitting of the


3

projections of the electronic states on the crystallograph-
ically distinct Cr sublattices. However, compared to the
altermagnetic case, the bands show a qualitatively very
different dispersion. Thus, the exchange interaction does
not just add rigid spin dependent energy shifts to the
bands, i. e. , it is k-dependent.
This means that even
without an analysis of the spin orientation the altermag-
netic state can be clearly distinguished from the non-
magnetic state based on the k-dependence of the elec-
tronic bands.
The electronic states within high-symmetry planes,
which include the Q and P points, display degener-
acy. Consequently, along high-symmetry k-space paths
on these planes, which are conventionally investigated
by ARPES, the altermagnetic band splitting is absent.
Along these spin degenerate paths, our calculations align
closely with previously reported findings [33].
In con-
trast, for the low-symmetry path that links Q and P, as
previously discussed (Fig. 1, d and e), substantial spin
splitting of the bands is anticipated. To confirm the va-
lidity of the band structure calculations, and in particular
to probe the magnitude of the altermagnetic band split-
ting, we perform SX-ARPES investigations of epitaxial
CrSb(100) thin films.
Band structure investigation by SX-ARPES –
The analysis of ARPES data hinges on the accurate
identification of distinctive directions in reciprocal space.
Thus, it becomes imperative to experimentally ascertain
the characteristic high-symmetry points within the Bril-
louin zone. We identify the centre of the Brillouin zone
(Γ-point) by scanning the photon energy, which corre-
sponds to a scan in k-space along the direction perpen-
dicular to the CrSb(100) sample surface (parallel to the
Γ-M direction, Fig. 1c). The resulting ARPES intensity
I(k) at the Fermi energy is shown in Fig. 2, panel a,
and correspond to a cut through the Fermi surface in
the Γ-M-K plane. A cut through the perpendicular Γ-K-
A plane, measured with a fixed photon energy (775 eV)
selecting one of the Γ-points from panel a, is shown in
panel b. Both 2-dimensional constant-energy I(k) cuts
at the Fermi energy are in good agreement with the cal-
culated 3-dimensional Fermi surface shown in panel c,
providing evidence for the validity of the calculation and
quality of the samples. The observed strong variation of
the ARPES intensity from different Brillouin zones will
be discussed below.
We now discuss specific directions in k-space with and
without altermagnetic band splitting and contrast the
ARPES intensity I(E, k) with band structure calcula-
tions for selected paths traversing the Brillouin zone. To
enhance the comparability with the experimental data,
we incorporate spin-orbit coupling (SOC) into the cal-
culations. While the angle-dependent photoemission in-
tensity does not precisely replicate the electronic band
structure owing to distinct photoemission matrix ele-
ments [34], it does allow for the direct observation of

distinctive band structure features.
To investigate the
altermagnetic band splitting in the CrSb(100) films us-
ing ARPES, we specifically opt for the Q-P path, as
shown in Fig. 1. This chosen path is aligned parallel to
the sample surface, facilitating the direct imaging of the
corresponding ARPES intensity I(E, k) with our exper-
imental detector setup.
This low-symmetry path with
large altermagnetic spin-splitting is parallel to the high
symmetry Γ-A path, which, by symmetry, shows no spin
splitting. Consequently, we can measure both paths in k-
space with the same experimental geometry but different
photon energies, selecting different values of kz. Since
the wave vector k of the photoemitted electrons resides
within a crystallographic mirror plane of CrSb (as illus-
trated in Supplementary Information, Fig. S5b), we take
into consideration the parity selection rules [35] by ac-
quiring spectra with both p- and s-polarized photons.
Furthermore, the ARPES data contains an ±k asym-
metry induced by the photon momentum due to the 9o

grazing photon incidence from the positive k-value side
in Figs. 3 and 4 (see the experimental geometry in the
Supplementary Information, Fig. S5a).
Figure 3 presents a comparison between the ARPES in-
tensity I(E, k) and band structure calculations for both
k-space paths discussed above.
The background sub-
tracted ARPES raw data covering three Brillouin zones
is shown together with the superimposed band structure
calculations in the same plot. To provide a comprehen-
sive understanding of the relationship between ARPES
intensity and band structure calculations for CrSb, we
first discuss the overall data trends acquired over a wider
energy range.
For the high-symmetry Γ-A path (panels a and b),
the consistency between the ARPES data and the band
structure calculations is evident, irrespective of the cho-
sen Brillouin zone and photon polarization. In all figures,
the calculated band structure’s energy scale has been
rigidly shifted by ≈ 150 meV for better energy align-
ment.
For the low-symmetry Q-P path (panels c and d), the
situation is more complex.
Here, a pronounced polar-
ization dependence, which is discussed in the Supple-
mentary Information in the framework of selection rules,
and a forward-backward scattering asymmetry inherent
to the ARPES geometry (see Methods) is discernible.
Furthermore, for this path, a strong alternation of the
ARPES intensity from Brillouin zones to Brillouin zone
is observed. These effects are embedded in the matrix
elements describing the transition from the occupied to
the photoemitted electronic states [34]. Nevertheless, it
is possible to provide an intuitive explanation: the alter-
nating ARPES intensity likely arises from an interference
effect associated with the periodic arrangement of the Cr
atoms within the CrSb unit cell (as depicted in Fig. 1a).
These atoms alone correspond to a Brillouin zone that is
doubled along the c-direction compared to the actual full


4

FIG. 2.
Experimental and theoretical Fermi surface of CrSb. Comparison of the SX-ARPES intensity I(k) at the
Fermi energy obtained in the Γ-M-K plane (panel a) and in the Γ-K-A plane (panel b) with the calculated 3-dimensional Fermi
surface shown in panel c. The corresponding Brillouin zone and high symmetry points are superimposed for clarity.

FIG. 3.
Wide energy range ARPES intensity and band structure calculations. The SX-ARPES intensity I(E, k)
is shown with the corresponding superimposed band structure calculations. a: High symmetry Γ-A path with p-polarized
photons. b: Γ-A path with s-polarized photons. c: Low-symmetry Q-P path with p-polarized photons. b: Q-P path with
s-polarized photons.

CrSb cell. The inclusion of the Sb atoms can be viewed
as a minor perturbation, which primarily preserves the
physical scattering potential of the Cr-only states. How-
ever, formally, it leads to the folding of the Cr bands into
a Brillouin zone half the size of the original CrSb Bril-
louin zone. Consistently, our calculations shown in the
Supplementary Information demonstrate a strong Cr d-

orbital character of the electronic states. In ARPES, this
translates into a periodicity of the photoemission inten-
sity that aligns with the doubled formal Brillouin zone.
Thus, bands with a strongly alternating ARPES intensity
have mainly Cr character. However, when taking into ac-
count both photon polarizations and all Brillouin zones
collectively, the experimental data is consistent with the


5

band structure calculations across a broad spectrum of
binding energies for the Q-P path.
Altermagnetic band splitting observed by SX-
ARPES – Next, we focus our attention to the energy
range in proximity to the Fermi energy, a region where
the altermagnetic band splitting is anticipated and holds
particular relevance for practical applications.
Within
our experimental setup, direct observation of the alter-
magnetic band splitting becomes feasible for the Q-P
path, as depicted in Fig. 4. The most significant splitting
is highlighted by the pink arrows in the superimposed
band structure calculation. Within the ARPES data, the
majority of bands are most distinctly observable within
the central Brillouin zone, particularly when employ-
ing p-polarized photons, as shown in panel a and back-
ward scattering (photon grazing incidence from positive
k-value direction). In this context, the energetically lower
branch of altermagnetically split band is prominently
discernible in the experimental data. Conversely, when
employing s-polarized photons, as displayed in panel b,
this lower branch is notably absent, indicating the pres-
ence of an essentially even-parity state with respect to
the scattering plane as discussed in detail in the Sup-
plementary Information.
In Fig. S5, we show that the
altermagnetically split band has mainly the character
of a Cr dx2−y2 orbital.
The anticipated energetically
higher branch of the split band is less conspicuous in
the experimental data and becomes overshadowed by the
forward-backward scattering asymmetry. Therefore, in
panels c to e, we present the ARPES results from the
central Brillouin zone acquired with p-polarized photons
after symmetrization and filtering. With this procedure,
both branches of the altermagnetically split band become
clearly discernible. To enhance visibility and to pinpoint
the centers of the split band branches with greater pre-
cision, we have computed a Laplacian image the ARPES
raw data. The application of the Laplace operator en-
hances the positions of maximum curvature within the
ARPES intensity (see Methods). Consequently, the dis-
tinctive features of both branches become pronounced,
allowing for a comprehensive comparison with the band
structure calculations superimposed onto the experimen-
tal data.
In panel c, the filtered ARPES intensity is partially
superimposed with the altermagnetic band structure cal-
culation for comparison, showing a good agreement of
the main features. In particular, the altermagnetic band
splitting, as indicated by the pink arrows in the calcu-
lation, is now conspicuously evident in the experimental
data. The lower branch of this splitting, which was al-
ready discernible in the non-symmetrized ARPES raw
data (central Q-P path in Fig. 4a) aligns remarkably well
with a region of elevated ARPES intensity. Conversely,
the upper branch appears faint in the raw data, but be-
comes now distinctly discernible. Based on the experi-
mental results, we estimate the altermagnetic band split-

ting of our epitaxial CrSb(100) thin films to amount to
0.6 eV.
The experimentally identified upper branch is posi-
tioned approximately 200 meV lower in energy compared
to the band structure calculated assuming the published
hexagonal lattice parameters (a = 4.123˚A, c = 5.47˚A
[28]). However, our thin films feature slightly different
lattice parameters of a = 4.1˚A and c = 5.58˚A (see Sup-
plementary Information). Panel d shows that with these
parameters the calculated upper branch of the altermag-
netically split band is pushed towards the lower branch
resulting in an improved agreement with the experimen-
tal data. With such a strong effect of strain on the upper
branch, the remaining discrepancies between theory and
experiment could be explained by additional small lat-
tice distortions in the surface region of the CrSb thin
film mainly probed by SX-ARPES (top 1-2 nm).
In the Supplementary Information, we additionally
show the symmetrized ARPES intensity (raw data) be-
fore application of the Laplacian filter. In such a repre-
sentation, the upper band is barely noticeable. Neverthe-
less, the magnitude of the altermagnetic band splitting
can also be estimated directly from this raw data and
amounts consistently to 0.6 eV.
For comparison, we show in panel d the superposi-
tion of the non-magnetic band structure calculation (see
also Fig. 1f) with the experimental ARPES data, show-
ing a lack of consistency as expected for an altermagnetic
material. This is most obvious in the region of highest
ARPES intensity around the Q point at a binding en-
ergy of ≃ 1 eV and in the region where the upper branch
of the altermagnetically split band has been identified in
panel c.
In summary, we have combined experimental SX-
ARPES investigations with first-principles calculations
to identify the altermagnetic band structure of CrSb.
Good agreement was obtained, both regarding the course
of the dispersion branches as well as the polarization de-
pendence of the ARPES intensity. In particular, we have
detected band degeneracy at specific k-space points sit-
uated on high-symmetry planes perpendicular to the c-
axis. These planes encompass Q within the central plane
containing the Γ point and P, which is positioned at the
boundary of the Brillouin zone.
Along the trajectory
that connects these points, we observe the anticipated
altermagnetic band splitting.
The fundamental hallmark of altermagnetism lies in
such spin splitting of electronic valence bands, for which
our results furnish direct experimental evidence focusing
on CrSb.
While similar results on the band structure
were reported very recently for MnTe [26], CrSb stands
out due to the significant magnitude of the band splitting,
quantified to be 0.6 eV in our measurements, and the no-
table energetic placement of the strongly split band po-
sitioned just below the Fermi energy. This specific ener-
getic positioning holds crucial significance in the context


6

FIG. 4.
Band splitting near the Fermi energy. The spin integrated SX-ARPES intensity I(E, k) just below the Fermi
energy is shown with the corresponding superimposed spin resolved band structure calculations. a: High symmetry P-Q path
with p-polarized photons. b: P-Q path with s-polarized photons. Panels c and d show the symmetrized ARPES intensity (after
application of an Laplacian filter enhancing the visibility of the bands) from the central Brillouin zone for p-polarization with
the superimposed altermagnetic band structure calculation. c compares with a calculation based on bulk lattice parameters
[28], d with a calculation based on the experimentally determined parameters of the CrSb thin films, which results in improved
agreement. Panel d show the same ARPES data superimposed with a non-magnetic band structure calculation. Here, the
missing agreement emphasises the importance of the exchange interaction.

of potential spin-polarized currents. Consequently, our
results establish the fundamental groundwork for poten-
tial spintronic applications leveraging the emerging class
of altermagnetic materials.

METHODS

Film preparation
Epitaxial CrSb(100) thin films of 30 nm thickness
were grown by dc magnetron sputtering from a single
multi-segment Cr/Sb target on GaAs(110) substrates.
After deposition at a substrate temperature of ≃ 300oC,
the sample was annealed in-situ at a temperature of
≃ 400oC for 15 min. As shown in the Supplementary
Information by X-ray and electron diffraction as well
as by transmission electron microscopy, the thin films
are fully epitaxial with the in-plane hexagonal c-axis of
CrSb(100) aligned parallel to the in-plane (001)-direction
of the GaAs(110) substrate.

SX-ARPES measurements and data evaluation
After the electron diffraction (reflection high-energy
electron diffraction, RHEED) based confirmation of a
structurally well-ordered sample surface (see Supple-

mentary Information), the epitaxial thin films were
transported to the ARPES endstation using a vacuum
suitcase. The main advantage of SX-ARPES regarding
investigations of the three-dimensional band structure
of CrSb is the high intrinsic resolution in the surface-
perpendicular electron momentum [36]. The SX-ARPES
investigations were performed at the ADRESS beam-
line [37, 38] of the Swiss Light Source.
The ARPES
endstation uses an experimental geometry with 9o

grazing light incidence angle. As the direction of light
incidence and the angle dispersive direction (detector
slit orientation) are in the same plane see Fig. S5a of the
Supplementary Information), the photon momentum
creates a forward-backward scattering asymmetry in
the photoemission intensity .
The measurements were
conducted at a temperature of 12 K, with varying the
photon energy from 320 eV to 1000 eV. Γ points were
identified, e. g., at photon energies of 775 eV and 935 eV.
The total energy resolution including thermal broad-
ening varied from 50 meV to 100 meV in this energy
range. All ARPES data shown in this manuscript was
visualized using the Matlab program ARPESView (by
V. N. Strocov, [39]), which subtracts an angle-integrated
background from the raw data.
Beyond this, panel
c of Fig. 4 shows symmetrized data, i. e., the ARPES


7

image was mirrored along the kz = 0 axis and added
to the original data. The band enhancement shown in
the right figure of panel c was obtained using the Fiji
distribution of the image processing software ImageJ,
specifically by applying the function FeatureJ: Laplacian.

Band structure calculations
The experimental results were compared with calcula-
tions based on ab initio spin-density functional theory
with local-density approximation. We performed the ab
initio electronic structure calculations for CrSb (Space
group P63/mmc, No.
194) with the pseudopotential
Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) [40], using
the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) + SOC generalized
gradient approximation (GGA) [41–43].
For the order
phase, we used a 6 × 6 × 5 k-grid, an energy cut-off
of 400 eV, switched off symmetrization and converged
the self-consistency and energy band calculations within
an energy convergence criterion of 10−5 eV.
For the
nonmagnetic phase, we used a 15x15x9 k-point grid, an
energy cut-off of 400 eV, and a convergence criterion of
10−6 eV. The lattice parameters are a = b = 4.103 ˚A
and c = 5.463 ˚A, corresponding to experimental values.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The raw data of the XRD and ARPES line graphs
shown in this study have been deposited in the Zenodo
database under accession code 10.5281/zenodo.10531915.

[1] ˇSmejkal, L., Sinova, J., Jungwirth, T Beyond Con-
ventional Ferromagnetism and Antiferromagnetism: A
Phase with Nonrelativistic Spin and Crystal Rotation
Symmetry. Phys. Rev. X 12, 031042 (2022).

[2] ˇSmejkal, L., Sinova, J., Jungwirth, T. Emerging Research
Landscape of Altermagnetism. Phys. Rev. X 12, 040501
(2022).

[3] ˇSmejkal, L., Gonz´alez-Hern´andez, R., Jungwirth, T.,
and Sinova, J. Crystal time-reversal symmetry breaking
and spontaneous Hall effect in collinear antiferromagnets.
Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz8809 (2020).

[4] Hayami, S., Yanagi, Y., Kusunose, H. Momentum-
Dependent Spin Splitting by Collinear Antiferromagnetic
Ordering. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 88, 123702 (2019).

[5] Mazin, I. I., Koepernik, K., Johannes, M. D. and ˇSmejkal,
L. Prediction of unconventional magnetism in doped
FeSb2. Prod. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118, e2108924118
(2021).

[6] Kampfrath,
T.,
Sell,
A.,
Klatt,
G.,
Pashkin,
A.,
M¨ahrlein, S., Dekorsy, T., Wolf, M., Fiebig, M., Leit-
enstorfer, A., and Huber, R. Coherent terahertz control
of antiferromagnetic spin waves. Nat. Phot. 5, 31 (2011).

[7] Bodnar, S. Yu., Skourski, Y., Gomonay, O., Sinova, J.,
Kl¨aui, M., Jourdan, M. Magnetoresistance Effects in the
Metallic Antiferromagnet Mn2Au. Phys. Rev. Appl. 14,
014004 (2020).

[8] Shao,
D.-F.,
Zhang,
S. H.,
Li,
M.,
Eom,
C. B.,
Tsymbal, E. Y. Spin-neutral currents for spintronics.
Nat. Commun. 12, 7061 (2021).

[9] ˇSmejkal, L., Hellenes, A. B., Gonz´alez-Hern´andez, R.,
Sinova, J., Jungwirth, T. Giant and Tunneling Mag-
netoresistance in Unconventional Collinear Antiferro-
magnets with Nonrelativistic Spin-Momentum Coupling.
Phys. Rev. X 12, 011028(2022).

[10] Gurung,
G.,
Shao,
D.-F.,
Tsymbal,
E. Y. Extraor-
dinary Tunneling Magnetoresistance in Antiferromag-
netic Tunnel Junctions with Antiperovskite Electrodes.
arXiv:2306.03026 (2023).

[11] ˇSmejkal, L., MacDonald, A. H., Sinova, J., Nakatsuji,
S., and Jungwirth, T. Anomalous Hall antiferromagnets.
Nat. Rev. Mat. 7, 482 (2022).

[12] Chen, H., Niu, Q., MacDonald, A. H. Anomalous Hall
Effect Arising from Noncollinear Antiferromagnetism.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 017205 (2014).

[13] ˇZelezn´y, J., Zhang, Y., Felser, C., Yan, B., Spin-
Polarized Current in Noncollinear Antiferromagnets.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 187204 (2017).

[14] Suzuki, M.-T., Koretsune, T., Ochi, M., Arita, R. Cluster
multipole theory for anomalous Hall effect in antiferro-
magnets. Phys. Rev. B 95 094406 (2017).

[15] Yuan, L.-Z., Wang, Z., Luo, J.-W., Rashba, E. I., Zunger,
A. Giant momentum-dependent spin splitting in cen-
trosymmetric low-Z antiferromagnets. Phys. Rev. B 102
014422 (2020).

[16] Gurung, G., Shao, D.-F., Tsymbal, E. Y. Transport spin-
polarization of noncollinear antiferromagnetic antiper-
ovskites. Phys. Rev. Mat. 5 124411 (2021).

[17] Gonz´alez-Hern´andez, R., ˇSmejkal, L., V´yborn´y, K., Ya-
hagi, Y., Sinova, J., Jungwirth, T., and ˇZelezn´y, J. Ef-
ficient Electrical Spin Splitter Based on Nonrelativis-
tic Collinear Antiferromagnetism. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126,
127701 (2021).

[18] Bose, A., Schreiber, N. S., Jain, R. J.,Shao, D. F., Nair,
H. P., Sun, J., Zhang, X. S., Muller, D. A., Tsymbal,
E. Y., Schlom, D. G., Ralph, D. C. Tilted spin current
generated by the collinear antiferromagnet ruthenium
dioxide. Nat. Electr. 267 (2022).

[19] Bai, H., Feng, X. Y., Zhou, Y. J., Su, R. X., Liao, L. Y.,
Zhu, W. X., Chen, X. Z., Pan, F., Song, C. Observation
of Spin Splitting Torque in a Collinear Antiferromagnet
RuO2. Phys. Rev. Lett., 128, 197202 (2022).

[20] Karube, S., Tanaka, T., Sugawara, D., Kadoguchi, N.,
Kohda, M., Nitta, J. Observation of Spin-Splitter Torque
in Collinear Antiferromagnetic RuO2. Phys. Rev. Lett.
129, 137201 (2022).

[21] Feng, Z., Zhou, X., ˇSmejkal, L., Wu, L., Zhu, Z., Guo,
H., Gonz´alez-Hern´andez, R., Wang, X., Yan, H., Qin, P.,
Zhang, X. Wu, H., Chen, H., Meng, Z., Liu, L., Xia,
Z., Sinova, J., Jungwirth, T., Liu, Z. An anomalous Hall
effect in altermagnetic ruthenium dioxide. Nat. Electr. 5,
735 (2022).

[22] Reichlov´a, H., Seeger, R. L., Gonz´alez-Hern´andez, R.,
Kounta, I., Schlitz, R., Kriegner, D., Ritzinger, P.,
Lammel, M., Leivisk¨a, M., Petˇr´ıˇcek, V., Doleˇzal, P.,
Schmoranzerov´a, E., Bad’ura, A., Thomas, A., Baltz,
V., Michez, L., Sinova, J., Goennenwein, S., Jungwirth,


8

T., ˇSmejkal, L. Macroscopic time reversal symmetry
breaking arising from antiferromagnetic Zeeman effect.
arXiv:2012.15651 (2021).

[23] Gonz´alez-Betancourt,
R. D.,
Zub´aˇc,
J.,
Gonz´alez-
Hern´andez, R., Geishendorf, K., ˇSob´aˇn, Z., Springholz,
G., Olejn´ık, K., ˇSmejkal, L., Sinova, J., Jungwirth,
T., Goennenwein, S. T. B., Thomas, A., Reichlov´a, H.,
ˇZelezn´y, J., Kriegner, D. Spontaneous Anomalous Hall
Effect Arising from an Unconventional Compensated
Magnetic Phase in a Semiconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett.
130, 036702 (2023).

[24] Fedchenko, O., Min´ar, J., Akashdeep, A., D’Souza,
S. W., Vasilyev, D., Tkach, O., Odenbreit, L., Nguyen,
Q. L., Kutnyakhov, D., Wind, N., Wenthaus, L., Scholz,
M.,
Rossnagel,
K.,
Hoesch,
M.,
Aeschlimann,
M.,
Stadtm¨uller, B., Kl¨aui, M., Sch¨onhense, G, Jakob, G.,
Jungwirth, T., ˇSmejkal, L., Sinova, J., Elmers, H. J. Ob-
servation of time-reversal symmetry breaking in the band
structure of altermagnetic RuO2. Sci. Adv. 10, eadj4883
(2024).

[25] Lee, Suyoung, Lee, Sangjae, Jung, Saegyeol, Jung, Jiwon,
Kim, Donghan, Lee, Yeonjae, Seok, Byeongjun, Kim,
Jaeyoung, Park, Byeong Gyu, Smejkal, Libor, Kang,
Chang-Jong, and Kim Changyoung, Broken Kramers’
Degeneracy in Altermagnetic MnTe. Phys. Rev. Lett.
132, 036702 (2024).

[26] Krempask´y, J., ˇSmejkal, L., D’Souza, S. W., Hajlaoui,
M., Springholz, G., Uhl´ırov´a, K., Alarab, F., Constanti-
nou, P. C., Strokov, V. N., Usanov, D., Pudelko, W. R.,
Gonz´alez-Hern´andez, R., Birk Hellenes, A., Jansa, Z.,
Reichlov´a, H., ˇSob´aˇvn, Z., Gonzalez Betancourt, R. D.,
Wadley, P., Sinova, J., Kriegner, D., Min´ar, J., Dil, J. H.
and Jungwirth, T. Altermagnetic lifting of Kramers spin
degeneracy. Nature 626, 517 (2024).

[27] Osumi, T., Souma, S., Aoyama, T., Yamauchi, K.,
Honma, A., Nakayama, K., Takahashi, T., Ohgushi, K.,
Sato, T. Observation of Giant Band Splitting in Alter-
magnetic MnTe. arXiv:2308.10117v1 (2023).

[28] Kjekshus, A., and Walseth, K. P., On the Properties of
the Cr1+xSb, Fe1+xSb, Co1+xSb, Ni1+xSb, Pd1+xSb, and
Pt1+xSb Phases. Acta Chem. Scan. 23, 2621 (1969).

[29] Takei, W. J., Cox, D. E., and Shirane, G. Magnetic Struc-
tures in the MnSb-CrSb System. Phys. Rev. 129, 2008
(1963).

[30] Elmers, H. J., Chernov, S. V., D’Souza, S. W., Bom-
manaboyena, S. P., Bodnar, S. Yu., Medjanik, K.,
Babenkov, S., Fedchenko, O., Vasilyev, D., Agustsson,
S. Y., Schlueter, C., Gloskovskii, A., Matveyev, Yu.,
Strocov, V. N., Skourski, Y., ˇSmejkal, L., Sinova, J.,
Min´ar, J., Kl¨aui, M., Sch¨onhense, G., and Jourdan, M.
N´el Vector Induced Manipulation of Valence States in the
Collinear Antiferromagnet Mn2Au. ACS Nano 20, 17554
(2020).

[31] Momma,
K.
and
Izumi,
F.
VESTA
3
for
three-
dimensional visualization of crystal, volumetric and mor-
phology data. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 44, 1272 (2011).

[32] Snow, A. I. Neutron Diffraction Invesitgation of the
Atomic Moment Orientation in the Antiferromagnetic
Compound CrSb. Phys. Rev. 85, 365 (1952).

[33] Park, I. J., Kwon, S., and Lake, R. K. Effects of filling,
strain, and electric field on the N´eel vector in antiferro-
magnetic CrSb. Phys. Rev. B 102, 224426 (2020).

[34] Moser,
S.
An
experimentalist’s
guide
to
the
ma-
trix element in angle resolved photoemission. J. Electr.

Spec. Rel. Phen. 214, 29 (2017)).

[35] Gobeli, G., Allen, F. G., and Kane, E. O. Polarization
evidence for momentum conservation in photoelectrice-
mission from germanium and silicon. Phys. Rev. Lett. 12,
94 (1963).

[36] Strocov,
V. N.,
Shi,
M.,
Kobayashi,
M.,
Monney,
C., Wang, X., Krempasky, J., Schmitt, T., Patthey,
L.,
Berger,
H.,
and
Blaha,
P.
Three-Dimensional
Electron Realm in VSe2
by Soft-X-Ray Photoelec-
tron Spectroscopy:
Origin of Charge-Density Waves.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 086401 (2012).

[37] Strocov, V. N., Schmitt, T., Flechsig, U., Schmidt, T.,
Imhof, A., Chen, Q., Raabe, J., Betemps, R., Zimoch,
D., Krempasky, J., Wang, X., Grioni, M., Piazzalunga,
A., Patthey, L. High-Resolution Soft X-Ray Beamline
ADRESS at the Swiss Light Source for Resonant Inelas-
tic X-Ray Scattering and Angle-Resolved Photoelectron
Spectroscopies. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 17, 631 (2010).

[38] Strocov, V. N., Wang, X., Shi, M., Kobayashi, M., Krem-
pasky, J., Hess, C., Schmitt, T., Patthey, L. Soft-X-Ray
ARPES Facility at the ADRESS Beamline of the SLS:
Concepts, Technical Realisation and Scientific Applica-
tions. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 21, 32 (2014).

[39] https://www.psi.ch/en/sls/adress/manuals
[40] Kresse,
G.,
and
Furthm¨uller,
J.
Efficient
iterative
schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a
plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).

[41] Kresse, G., and Furthm¨uller, J. Efficiency of ab-initio
total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors
using a plane-wave basis set. Computat. Mater. Sci. 6, 15
(1996).

[42] Bl¨ochl,
P. E.
Projector
augmented-wave
method.
Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994).

[43] Perdew, J. P., Burke, K., and Ernzerhof, M. Generalized
Gradient Approximation Made Simple. Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 3865 (1996).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge funding by the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) -
TRR 173 - 268565370 (projects A05 (M.J.), with con-
tribution from A01 (M.K.)), by the Horizon 2020 Frame-
work Program of the European Commission under FET-
Open Grant No. 863155 (s-Nebula) (M.K., M.J.), by EU
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-14 pro-
gramme under grant agreement No. 101070287 (SWAN-
on-chip) (M.K., M.J.), and by the TopDyn Center
(M.K.).
We acknowledge the Swiss Light Source for
time on beamline ADRESS under Proposal 20222058
(M.J.). L.S. and A.B.H. acknowledges support from the
Johannes Gutenberg-Universit¨at Mainz TopDyn initia-
tive. R.J.U., W.H.C., and V.K.B. acknowledge funding
from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) grant
no. TRR 173 268565370 (project A03). A.B.H., A.C.
and J.S.acknowledge funding from Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG) grant no.
TRR 288 - 422213477
(Projects A09 and B05).
The STEM investigations
were funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Re-


9

search and Innovation Programme under grant agree-
ment 856538 (project “3D MAGIC”) (M.K., R.E.D.-B.).
We acknowledge support by H.-J. Elmers (JGU Mainz)
for the Laplacian filter application.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

S.R. and M.J. wrote the paper with contributions by
J.S.; S.R., L.O. and M.J. prepared the samples and
performed and evaluated the SX-ARPES investigations
supported by V.N.S. and C.C.; L.S., A.B.H., R.J.U.,
W.H.C., V.K.B., and A.C. provided the band structure
calculations; S.D. provided the Fermi surface calculation;
T.D., W.S. and R.E.D-B contributed the STEM investi-
gations. M.K. contributed to the discussion of the results
and provided input; M.J. coordinated the project.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Characterization of the epitaxial CrSb(100)
thin films
X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of epitaxial CrSb
thin films in the Bragg-Brentano geometry, as depicted
in Fig. S1, unequivocally confirms their (100)-orientation
and exceptional phase purity. The CrSb (h00)-peaks are
the only visible X-ray peaks besides the peaks originat-
ing from the GaAs substrate and sample holder. All ob-
served peaks, both in specular (panel a) as well as in
off-specular geometry (panel b) agree well with Powder-
Cell XRD simulations assuming a hexagonal CrSb crystal
structure with space group no. 194 and lattice parameters
a = 4.1˚A and c = 5.58˚A, as shown in Fig. 1. The XRD
rocking curve shown in panel c indicates a moderate mo-
saicity (tilt range of the 001-axis) of ≃ 0.5o resulting in
broadening of the ARPES data in k∥. It is worth not-
ing that, as per the results obtained from the PowderCell
simulations, the scattering intensities of observable peaks
in the specular geometry represent only a minute fraction
in comparison to the strongest off-specular peak. Specif-
ically relating to the strongest off-specular XRD-peak,
which is the (101) peak, the simulation yields the fol-
lowing relative intensities of the specular peaks shown in
Fig. S1: (100): 0.2%, (200): 0.08%, (300): 7.49%.
The in-plane orientation and the existence of a highly
structured atomic arrangement at the sample surface are
exemplified through the inclusion of the reflection high-
energy electron diffraction (RHEED) image, inserted as
an inset within Fig. S1.
The high degree of crystallographic ordering in the
bulk of the thin film samples is further underscored by
the scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM)
images, presented in Fig. S2.
Panel a provides a perspective along the [001] in-plane
direction, panel b along the [100] in-plane direction of a
CrSb(100) epitaxial thin film, with the CrSb lattice de-
picted for reference.
Notably, there are no discernible
signs of disorder. It is important to acknowledge that
due to the inherent thickness averaging within the TEM
lamella, the interchangeability of the local Sb environ-
ment within the antiferromagnetic Cr sublattices remains
beyond visualization. Thus, we cannot make any state-
ment about the size of sample regions with identical local
Sb environment of the Cr sublattices.
Some degree of disorder at the CrSb(100) surface (in-
terface with the SiN capping layer), specifically the ab-
sence of a well-defined termination, is visible in panel c.
Regarding the photoemission results, the associated lim-
ited translational invariance parallel to the sample sur-
face is presumably the origin of blurring observed in the
experimental results. Furthermore, the reduced surface
order is likely to quench potential surface states.
Evaluating intensity line profiles though columns of


10

FIG. 5.
S1: X-ray and electron diffraction. a Θ/2Θ
scan of a 30 nm CrSb(100) epitaxial thin film grown on a
GaAs(110) substrate. The inset shows the RHEED image of
the sample, demonstrating a well-ordered sample surface with
full in-plane orientation. b ϕ-scan of the off-specular CrSb 101
and 10¯1 peaks showing the in-plane order of the sample with
the associated 2-fold in-plane symmetry. c Rocking curve of
the specular CrSb 300 peak showing a moderate mosaicity of
≃ 0.5o

.

atoms oriented perpendicular to the CrSb/Si3N4 inter-
face, we identified a reduced distance (5-15%) between
the last two Sb layers at the interface compared to the
deeper layers. Such lattice distortions in the surface re-
gion could explain the discrepancies remaining in Fig. 4d
(of the main manuscript) between the band structure cal-
culations and the ARPES results.
For obtaining the STEM images, an electron trans-
parent cross-section lamella was prepared using a 30 kV
focused Ga+ ion beam and scanning electron microscope
(FIB-SEM) FEI Helios platform. The ion beam energy
was decreased to 5 kV for the final thinning steps.
Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was
carried out using a TFS Spectra TEM equipped with a
Schottky field emission gun operated at 300 kV, a CEOS
probe aberration corrector and a high angle annular
dark-field detector (HAADF).

Identification of the bands along P-Q-P
The altermagnetically split bands appear only faint
in the raw data.
However, they are directly visible in
the symmetrized ARPES intensity (raw data) shown in
Fig. S3a. Panel c shows line profiles of the intensity at

k-values indicated by the yellow lines in panel a. The up-
per branch of the altermagnetically split band shows up
as a shoulder feature in these profiles. Consistent with
the altermagnetic band structure, this shoulder feature is
absent for the profiles obtained at the Q and P points. A
side-by-side comparison of panels a and b confirms that
the application of the Laplace filter emphasizes the bands
correctly. The “spots” in the filtered image correspond
to crossing points of bands, which result in an increased
emission intensity.
One reason for the observed band broadening in the
experimental data is the mosaicity of the epitaxial thin
films shown in Fig. S1c, with a rocking curve width of
≃ 0.5o corresponding to ∆k∥ ≃ 0.1˚A for 900 eV photons.
Another possible contribution to broadening effects both
in energy as well as in momentum could be a relatively
small size of sample regions with fully single crystalline
order, specifically including the coherent local order of
the Sb environment of the Cr sublattices. As swapping
the local environment swaps the CEF at the Cr sublat-
tices, this is expected to specifically show up in the char-
acteristic altermagnetic band structure features.
This in general to be expected effect also result in a
swapping of the spin polarization of the altermagneti-
cally split bands, even within a single magnetic domain.
Thus, it presents a major challenge for potential future
spin-resolved ARPES investigations, as averaging over
such growth domains will result in averaging the spin
polarization to zero.

Orbital character of the valence states
To identify the orbital character of the electronic
bands showing the altermagnetic splitting, we show in
Fig. S4a the projections on the Cr as well as on the Sb
atomic orbitals. The dominant Cr character is obvious
from the comparison of the calculated spectral weights
of the orbitals.
This result is fully consistent with
the experimentally observed periodicity of the ARPES
intensity from BZ to BZ, as discussed in the main text.
Furthermore, we show in panel b the projections of the
electronic bands on the s-, p-, and d-orbitals of Cr. We
observe, that the major contribution originates from
d-orbitals, which we discuss below in the framework of
selection rules in photoemission spectroscopy.

Selection rules in photoemission along along
Q − P in CrSb(100)
Selection rules governing photon polarization are appli-
cable when the scattering plane in the experimental setup
aligns with a mirror plane inherent to the crystal struc-
ture under investigation [31]. In Fig. S5a, the geometry of
our photoemission experiment is shown. Both vector of
grazing photon incidence indicated by the green line and
the k-dispersive direction of the energy analyzer define
the scattering plane shown in red. For the given sam-
ple orientation required for probing the Q-P path, this


11

FIG. 6.
S2: STEM images of an epitaxial CrSb(100) thin film. a: view along [001]-direction, b: view along [100]-
direction, with corresponding superimposed representation of the crystal structure (blue: Cr atoms, orange: Sb atoms.) c:
view along [100]-direction in the surface/ upper interface region probed by SX-ARPES.

FIG. 7.
S3: Identification of bands in the raw data.
a: Symmetrized ARPES raw data I(E, k) along P-Q-P with
the three yellow lines indicating the k-positions at which line
profiles of I were evaluated. Panel b shows the corresponding
Lapace filtered data for direct comparison. c: Line profiles
of the ARPES intensity (raw data) from panel a, with the
intensity maximum of line 2 corresponding to the minimum
of the lower branch of the altermagnetically split band and
the shoulder feature corresponding to the upper branch.

scattering plane coincides with a mirror plane of CrSb as

shown in Fig. S5b (Cr atoms shown in blue, Sb in orange).
Thus, for p-polarization of the photons, the photoemis-
sion intensity is dominated by electronic states, which are
even with respect to the scattering/ mirror plane. An ex-
ample of such a state is the dx2−y2 orbital shown in the
schematic representation of our set-up.

We have observed the characteristic altermagnetic
band structure features along the P-Q-P path with p-
polarised, but not with s-polarised photons.
To check
the consistency of this experimental result with the band
structure calculations, we now discuss the spectral weight
of the projections of the CrSb electronic states on both
the atomic Cr and Sb orbitals. Our calculations clearly
show that the spectral weight of the valence band is dom-
inated by the Cr states. Thus, we plot the projection on
these in Fig. S5.

Panel d shows the projections on the Cr d-orbitals,
which are even with respect to the scattering/ mirror
plane indicated in panels a and b, i. e. on those, which
are selected by the p-polarised photons in the ARPES ex-
periment. Panel e shows those, which are odd, i. e. which
are selected by s-polarised photons. Comparing the pro-
jections with the full band structure calculation super-
imposed to the experimental data, it is obvious that the
characteristic altermagnetically split band has mainly the
character of the d-orbitals, which are even with respect to
the scattering/ mirror plane of the experiment. In partic-
ular, the strongest contribution stems from the dx2−y2-
orbital indicated in panel a. Thus, the experimental re-
sult and the band structure calculations are fully consis-
tent.


12

FIG. 8.
S4: Orbital character of the electronic states. a: Projection of the electronic states on the Cr (left) and Sb
(right) atomic orbitals. The color scale indicates the spectral weight. b Projection of the Cr s- (left), p- (center) and d-orbitals
(right). The color scale indicates the spectral weight, i. e. bands with low spectral weight appear faint in the plots
.


13

FIG. 9.
S5: Experimental geometry and selection rules. a: Schematic representation of the experimental geometry.
The scattering plane (y,z-plane) contains both the incoming photon beam indicated by the green arrow (p-polarisation, i. e.
polarisation parallel to the scattering plane) as well as the angular dispersive direction of the detector. The blue plane shows
the sample surface (x,z-plane) and the blue arrows indicate the orientation of the CrSb lattice, i. e. , the CrSb(100) thin film
is oriented with its [001]-direction parallel to the z-axis as indicated. b: Perspective representation of a CrSb unit cell, view
parallel to the [001]-axis (blue: Cr atoms, orange: Sb atoms). c: SX-ARPES results obtained with p-polarised photons and
superimposed altermagnetic band structure. d: Projection of the CrSb electronic states on Cr d-orbitals, which are even with
respect to the scattering/ mirror plane. These are selected by the p-polarisation of the photon beam. The color scale indicates
the spectral weight. e: Projection of the CrSb electronic states on Cr d-orbitals, which are odd with respect to the scattering/
mirror plane (selected by s-polarised photons).


