Cultivating Metal Whiskers by Surface Plasmon Polariton Excitation

Vamsi Borra1, Daniel G. Georgiev1 and Victor G. Karpov2

1 Department of EECS, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43606-3390, U.S.A.

2 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43606-3390, U.S.A.

ABSTRACT

This work presents a preliminary experimental study on the possibility to initiate growth of 
whiskers on the surfaces of some technologically important metals utilizing the enhanced electric 
field of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs).  The results provide evidence that a relatively high 
concentration of what appear to be whisker nuclei form in the region where SPPs were excited, 
whereas no such changes are observed on the untreated surface. 

INTRODUCTION

Metals that are extensively used in electronics manufacturing, such as tin (Sn), zinc (Zn), 

and related alloys, often show electrically conductive hair-like crystalline structures on their 
surfaces, referred to as whiskers. Whiskers can lead to current leakage and short circuits in 
sensitive electronic equipment causing significant losses and, in some cases, catastrophic failures
in the automotive, airspace and other industries[2,3]. The mechanism responsible for whisker 
formation and growth remains mysterious after decades of research. Some theories attribute 
metal whisker growth to stress relieving phenomena, but those never lead to any quantitative 
estimate of whisker parameters. A recent electrostatic theory[3] provides a quantitative estimates 
of the whisker nucleation along with their growth rates and length distributions, which are
consistent with many observations on whiskers growth and morphology. It proposes that the 
imperfections on metal surfaces can form small patches of net positive or negative electric 
charge leading to the formation of the anomalous electric field which governs the whisker 
development in those areas. An external electric field, which can be either constant (DC) or 
varying with time (AC) at high frequencies (including optical), can then further metal whiskers 
growth by means of lowering the free energy of the system.

In this work, which is still in progress, we report on the possibility of initiating and 

controlling the growth of whiskers by taking advantage of the enhanced AC electric field at the 
metal surface on which SPPs are generated. The Otto and Kretschmann prism-based methods are 
well established and studied attenuated total reflection geometries for indirect optical excitation
of SPPs on the surface of metals and metal films. Generating SPPs on low-loss metal films such
as Ag and Au is generally straightforward. However, generating SPPs on the surfaces of metals
with large damping losses, such as Sn and Zn, is challenging as the energy of the incident field is 
largely absorbed in the process of coupling to the SPPs[4], [5]. In the present study, optically 
smooth Sn and Zn thin, films fabricated by vacuum evaporation, are subjected to SPPs excitation 
to begin the whisker growth. We used optical and electron microscopy techniques to confirm the 
nucleation. 


EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 

Because of conservation laws requirements, direct coupling between the photon and SPPs 

is unattainable. Prism coupling techniques or near field probe based ones  can be used to address 
this problem, i.e., providing momentum matching[4], [6] [7], [8]. Otto and Kretschmann 
geometries have been extensively used for generating SPPs on the metal surfaces as reported in 
most of the available literature. In our experiment, Otto configuration suits best because it
provides a reasonable SPPs propagation range and also offers the opportunity of using relatively 
thick metal films or bulk metal samples, even when accounting for the intrinsic experimental 
difficulty of maintaining a required micron-scale gap (td in Fig.1). Our experimental setup is 
schematically represented in figure1. Here, εp, εd and εm are the dielectric constants of prism, 
dielectric material and metal film respectively. td and tm are thickness of dielectric material and 
metal film.

Figure 1. Experimental setup.

The fabrication of optically smooth Sn films by vacuum based methods turned out to be 

somewhat challenging but we developed a method for achieving it[9]. Thin films are mounted on 
to the plano side of a UV grade fused silica plano-convex cylindrical lens serving as the Otto 
prism (from Thorlabs, n=1.460 at 588nm). Air plays the role of a dielectric layer between the 
metal and the prism for our case. We employed a 100mW CW semiconductor laser system 
(λ=662nm, model OBIS 660 by Coherent) to excite the SPPs. The reflected power from the 
metal surface with respect to various incident angles is recorded using a silicon photodiode based 
power probe (from Coherent) to verify the generation of SPPs on the metal film. The SPPs 
excitation experiment was first performed on noble metal films, such as Ag (small damping
loss), in order to verify our ability to form the SPPs with our setup and then later reproduced the 
same on the Sn metal which has high damping loss. The exposed surfaces were examined by 
optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) subsequently for identifying the 
nucleation site of the whiskers.


DISCUSSION

If the polarized laser beam with electric field in TM mode is incident on the metal film,

which is mounted on the prism, and its angle of incidence (ϴi) is slightly greater than the critical 
angle for total reflection, an evanescent wave is formed on the metal surface. The evanescent 
wave can excite the natural modes of oscillations of the electrons at the metal surfaces. These 
collective oscillations form SPPs that propagate parallel to the surface but decay very quickly in 
the direction normal to the surface. Their existence can be indirectly probed by recording 
reflectance as a function of the angle of incidence. The deep minimum observed beyond the 
critical angle in the recorded reflectance curve authenticates their presence. Some literature 
suggests that the angle of incidence at which the reflectivity exhibits a deep minimum is not the 
same as the angle (ϴp) of incidence at which SPPs have maximum intensity. The difference in ϴi
and ϴp ranges in ±0.3̊ for noble metals (Ag, Au, etc.) due to their small damping losses;, 
unfortunately it may vary between 25̊ - 35̊ for metals with large damping losses (Fe, Sn, Zn, etc.)
[4], [5].

Theoretical calculations

The field enhancement between the prism and the metal surface can be calculated with 

the Fresnel reflection and transmission coefficients. The Fresnel reflection R123 and transmission 
T123 coefficient equations for our experimental setup are derived using equations 2 and 3 in Ref. 
[10].

Figure 2. Three-layered dielectric structure.

In figure 2, r12 and t12 are the Fresnel coefficients between the prism (layer-1) and air 

(layer-2). Similarly, r23 and t23 are the Fresnel coefficients between the air (layer-2) and metal 
(layer-3). Here td is the distance that separates the prism and the metal surface. A computer 
program is formulated using the above mentioned equations to find the optimized value of td
such that the magnitude of the reflected wave is at its minimum. The program was designed to 
solve the above equations with a range of td values by varying the incident angle of the laser 
beam. These simulations have been performed for Ag and Sn metal surfaces separately.

Simulation and Experiment on Ag metal film

The dielectric function of the metallic thin film is denoted by ε = ε1 + iε2. The imaginary 

part (ε2) of the dielectric function plays a crucial role in the optical absorption in the metal. At 
our laser wavelength (λ=662nm), the dielectric function of Ag is taken from this literature[11]. 
The refractive index for prism and air are considered as np=1.460 (from manufacturer) and nair=1 
respectively. Upon solving the Fresnel equations with our program, td = 0.8µm and the deep 
minimum in the reflectivity when incidence angle is 45.09̊ are obtained, shown in figure 3(a). In 


the experiment the deep minimum occurred at incidence angle of 48.67̊, shown in figure 3(b). 
This slight difference can be attributed to the inaccuracy in mounting the prism onto the rotating 
stage. Overall, this observation validates our experimental setup and the proof that we are 
generating SPPs on Ag metal film.

Figure 3. Reflectance vs. angle of incidence for Ag films (a) Simulation (b) Experiment.

Simulation and Experiment on Sn metal film

Having successfully generated SPPs on the low damping Ag films, we performed a 

similar experiment on the high damping Sn metal films. At λ=662nm, the dielectric function of 
Sn is taken from this literature[12]. As expected, the SPP dip is shifted significantly (shown in 
figure 4) due to a larger damping. From the experimental plots we conclude that the SPPs 
occurred when incidence angle is 68̊. This shift can also be observed on other metals (Fe, Zn 
etc.) that have significantly large imaginary part (ε2) in the dielectric function[4], [5]. For our 
case the Sn’s ε2 is around 13 times the value of Ag.

Figure 4. Experimental Reflectance vs. angle of incidence for Sn films.

Scanning electron microscope scans

Having identified the deep minimum experimentally, we left the laser at that incidence 

angle (68̊) for 5 hours at 100mW incident power. The figure 5 and 6 are the scanning electron 
microscope (SEM) images of the sample outside the irradiated spot and on the spots respectively. 
The scanned area in figure 5 doesn’t show any sign of surface features formation away from the 
irradiated spot. To the contrary, the irradiated spot in the figure 6(a) and 6(b) show the clear sign 

Observed dip

(a)
(b)


of localized features that we attribute to whisker nuclei. The observed densities of such nuclei are
quite high at the irradiated spot. A closer look (shown in figure 6(b)) at those nuclei reveals
whisker like structure growing vertical to the sample surface. The direction of whisker growth 
aligns well with the SPPs field direction. 

Figure 5. No sign of nuclei.

Figure 6. SEM scans of the laser irradiated samples.

CONCLUSIONS

This experimental observation has important implications: (1) it can experimentally

verify some aspects of the electrostatic theory of metal whiskers using SPPs and (2) it paves a 
way to the controllable formation of whiskers. The latter would allow the development of 
accelerated failure testing methods of electronic components, which is currently not possible due 
to the random and unpredictable nature of whiskers formation. We also anticipate that these 
nuclei can be grown into a fully grown whisker with further applied electric field; this part of our 
work is still in progress. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors would like to thank the University of Toledo’s EECS department, and the 

University of Toledo Graduate Student Association (GSA) for providing the financial support to 

(b)
(a)


present this work. This work has benefitted from technical help with the deposition of films, 
provided by the Wright Center for Photovoltaics Innovation and Commercialization (PVIC) at 
the University of Toledo.

REFERENCES

[1]
NASA, “NASA Goddard Space Flight Center tin whisker homepage.” [Online]. 
Available: http://nepp.nasa.gov/whisker/failures/index.htm. [Accessed: 11-Apr-2015].

[2]
J. Brusse, “Metal Whisker Discussion (Tin and Zinc Whiskers),” 2004. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.calce.umd.edu/lead-free/other/BRUSSE_ACI.pdf. [Accessed: 11-
Apr-2015].

[3]
V. G. Karpov, “Electrostatic Theory of Metal Whiskers,” Phys. Rev. Appl., vol. 1, no. 4, p. 
044001, May 2014.

[4]
E. F. Y. Kou and T. Tamir, “Incidence angles for optimized ATR excitation of surface 
plasmons,” Appl. Opt., vol. 27, no. 19, pp. 4098–4103, 1988.

[5]
R. D. Olney and R. J. Romagnoli, “Optical effects of surface plasma waves with damping 
in metallic thin films.,” Appl. Opt., vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 2279–82, 1987.

[6]
W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux, and T. W. Ebbesen, “Surface plasmon subwavelength optics,”
Nature, vol. 424, no. 6950, pp. 824–830, 2003.

[7]
D. Sarid, “Long-Range Surface-Plasma Waves on Very Thin Metal Films,” Phys. Rev. 
Lett., vol. 47, no. 26, pp. 1927–1930, Dec. 1981.

[8]
F. Y. Kou and T. Tamir, “Range extension of surface plasmons by dielectric layers,” Opt. 
Lett., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 367–369, May 1987.

[9]
V. Borra, D. Georgiev, and V. Karpov, “Fabrication of optically smooth Sn thin films ( 
Manuscript in preparation),” 2015.

[10]
T. Tsang, T. Srinivasanrao, and J. Fischer, “Surface-Plasmon Field-Enhanced Multiphoton 
Photoelectric-Emission From Metal-Films,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 8870–8878, 
1991.

[11]
A. D. Rakić, A. B. Djurišić, J. M. Elazar, and M. L. Majewski, “Optical properties of 
metallic films for vertical-cavity optoelectronic devices,” Appl. Opt., vol. 37, no. 22, pp. 
5271–5283, Aug. 1998.

[12]
E. T. A. R. A. MacRae, “Optical Properties of Vacuum-Evaporated White Tin*,” Phys. 
Rev., vol. 162, no. 3, pp. 615–620, 1967.


