Uniting Weyl semimetals and semiconductors in a family of arsenides 

Wojciech Pacuski 

Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, 

 ul. Pasteura 5, 02-093, Warsaw, Poland 

Wojciech.Pacuski@fuw.edu.pl 

In this preview, we discuss how to combine concepts of Weyl fermions, 
amazing electronic properties of bulk Weyl semimetals, and advances in 
molecular beam epitaxy with the needs of semiconductor industry, through 
the fabrication of TaAs thin films. 

 

Since the inception of molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), arsenides such as GaAs 
and AlAs have been at the forefront of interest for material scientists testing 
basic concepts of epitaxy. The development of high electron mobility transistors 
(HEMTs) based on MBE-grown GaAs/AlAs interface has amplified this interest, 
and arsenide HEMTs have become a prominent industrial application of MBE, 
serving as an integral part of our everyday life by powering various devices, 
including mobile phones. For a long time, the primary tool to improve the 
performance of such electronic devices was enhancing electron mobility through 
better ultra-high vacuum conditions and avoiding unnecessary dopants in MBE 
chambers. However, there is limited room for further improvements using this 
approach, prompting theoretical and experimental physicists to explore various 
other concepts to enhance electric performance (Fig. 1). 

Fig. 1. We are on the way from theory of Weyl fermions, experimental demonstrations of great 
electronic properties of bulk TaAs crystals to more scalable methods such as molecular beam 
epitaxy of TaAs on GaAs substrate. Similar methods are already used for production of 
electronic devices. 

As
Ta

GaAs


The general strategy involves shaping the electronic band structure of materials 
to lower the effective mass and eventually making electrons behave like 
massless fermions. Moreover, leveraging symmetry and topology helps to avoid 
electron scattering by blocking unnecessary channels and taking advantage of 
surface states. While such properties are difficult to find among insulators, 
metals, or traditional semiconductors, they are not so rare among semimetals – 
materials with separated bands for electrons and holes but with zero or almost 
zero energy gap between them. Unfortunately, most of these fascinating 
semimetals, known as topological semimetals, are quite exotic materials, not 
very compatible with the present semiconductor industry. They are first 
identified theoretically and then confirmed experimentally using bulk samples. 
Present challenge lies in growing thin films of high quality with electron transport 
properties similar to theoretical predictions or properties already obtained in 
bulk samples. 

Various difficulties arise when trying to grow such semimetals. Interesting 
topological semimetals usually have very different structures and chemical 
compositions compared to the accessible large-size, high-quality substrates used 
in epitaxy. Additionally, many topological semimetals require heavy metal 
elements, such as Cd or Hg, which are volatile and generally avoided in common 
technologies due to health risks. Moreover, introducing such volatile group-II 
elements into pure arsenide chambers poses the risk of unintentional electrical 
doping. Therefore, the semiconductor industry would benefit from the 
development of a topological semimetal system that is compatible with already 
existing, acceptable, and tested solutions. 

This almost perfect compatibility with the present semiconductor industry is the 
central point of the recently published paper in Matter titled "Thin film TaAs: 
developing a platform for Weyl semimetal devices" by Jocienne N. Nelson et al. 
[1]. For semiconductor technology, the epitaxy of arsenide-based semimetals is 
a great opportunity to extend possibilities without any risk. Tantalum, a key 
component in this research, is not volatile (effective sublimation requires about 
3000 C), making it safe to be used as a molecular source in any MBE chamber 
without the risk of unintentional doping with tantalum elements. Epitaxial 
growth of TaAs can be realized on standard GaAs substrates, which share a 
common anion – a highly favorable situation in the technology of 
heterostructures. TaAs belongs to the promising family of Weyl semimetals [2,3], 
which hold great promise for high mobility, including surface scattering-free 
conduction channels. Moreover, in the same family of Weyl semimetals, there 


are equally compatible materials such as NbAs, TaP, or NbP. Growing them in 
one chamber opens perspectives for Weyl semimetal alloys (e.g., (Ta,Nb)As), 
heterostructures (e.g., quantum wells), and superlattices of Weyl semimetals, 
which can further shape the electronic band structure and multiply the number 
of highly conductive interfaces. 

For Weyl semimetals physics intensively developed last 8 years, TaAs epitaxy is 
a great chance to demonstrate large-scale solutions, to gain inspiration for the 
calculation of novel structures combining various layers, which were not 
accessible in bulk version. Moreover, epitaxy will also introduce several 
interesting challenges, such as the presence of strain, defects, proximity of 
surfaces, various positions of the Fermi level, and interfaces between not 
perfectly oriented grains. 

It is worth noting that plotting a rich phase diagram illustrating the growth 
conditions of TaAs and demonstrating TaAs properties as a function of epitaxial 
layer thickness [1] required the deposition of a relatively large amount of 
tantalum, which is much more challenging than what one would expect from 
standard epitaxy of more volatile elements. For example, in the first papers 
about epitaxial [4] and thin polycrystalline [5] TaAs layers, which appeared less 
than a year ago, the available growth rates were in the order of a few 
nanometers per hour, and the amount of accessible Ta corresponded to 10-30 
nm of TaAs. This limitation was due to the use of very thin tantalum rods, which 
were quickly consumed during growth. In contrast, in the case of pulsed laser 
deposition (PLD) techniques, the limitations were related to the amount of 
arsenic, which evaporates quickly from TaAs [6]. As shown in the present paper 
[1], thicker TaAs epilayers exhibit two orders of magnitude higher mobility and 
magnetoresistance, but unfortunately still not as high as in the case of bulk 
samples [3]. However, this is just the beginning, and there is enormous potential 
for inventions that can increase electron mobility. 

 

The author acknowledges financial support from the National Science Centre 
(Poland) grant number 2021/41/B/ST3/04183. 

The author declares no competing interests. 

During the preparation of this work the author used Grammarly and ChatGPT in 
order to correct grammar and spelling. After using these tools, the author 


reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the 
content of the publication. 

[1] Jocienne N. Nelson, Anthony D. Rice, Rafał Kurleto, Amanda Shackelford, 
Zachary Sierzega, Peipei Hao, Bryan S. Berggren, Chun-Sheng Jiang, Andrew G. 
Norman, Megan E. Holtz, John S. Mangum, Ian A. Leahy, Karen N. Heinselman, 
Hervé Ness, Mark Van Schilfgaarde, Daniel S. Dessau, Kirstin Alberi, Thin film 
TaAs: developing a platform for Weyl semimetal devices, Matter 6 (2023) 2886.    

doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2023.06.018 

[2] S.-Y. Xu, I. Belopolski, N. Alidoust, M. Neupane, G. Bian, C. Zhang, R. Sankar, 
G. Chang, Z. Yuan, C.-C. Lee, S.-M. Huang, H. Zheng, J. Ma, D. S. Sanchez, B. Wang, 
A. Bansil, F. Chou, P. P. Shibayev, H. Lin, S. Jia, M. Z. Hasan, Discovery of a Weyl 
fermion semimetal and topological Fermi arcs, Science 349 (2015) 613–617. 

doi:10.1126/science.aaa9297 

[3] B. Q. Lv, H. M. Weng, B. B. Fu, X. P. Wang, H. Miao, J. Ma, P. Richard, X. C. 
Huang, L. X. Zhao, G. F. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Dai, T. Qian, and H. Ding,  Experimental 
Discovery of Weyl Semimetal TaAs, Phys. Rev. X 5 (2015) 031013. 

doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.5.031013 

[4] J. Sadowski, J. Z. Domagała, W. Zajkowska, S. Kret, B. Seredyński, M. Gryglas-
Borysiewicz, Z. Ogorzałek, R. Bożek, W. Pacuski, Structural properties of TaAs 
Weyl semimetal thin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy on GaAs(001) 
substrates, Cryst. Growth Des. 22 (2022) 6039. 

doi.org/10.1021/acs.cgd.2c00669 

[5] Wilson Yanez, Yongxi Ou, Run Xiao, Supriya Ghosh, Jyotirmay Dwivedi, Emma 
Steinebronn, Anthony Richardella, K. Andre Mkhoyan, and Nitin Samarth, Giant 
Dampinglike-Torque Efficiency in Naturally Oxidized Polycrystalline TaAs Thin 
Films, Phys. Rev. Applied 18 (2022) 054004. 

doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.18.054004 

[6] Shien Li, Zefeng Lin, Wei Hu, Dayu Yan, Fucong Chen, Xinbo Bai, Beiyi Zhu, Jie 
Yuan, Youguo Shi, Kui Jin, Hongming Weng, Haizhong Guo, Exploration of growth 
conditions of TaAs Weyl semimetal thin film using pulsed laser deposition,  
Chinese Phys. B 32 (2023) 047103.  

doi.org/10.1088/1674-1056/acb913  


