The interplay between exciton- and phonon-induced superconductivity might 
explain the phenomena observed in LK-99

Junhui Cao1,2 and Alexey Kavokin1,2,3

1Westlake University, School of Science, 18 Shilongshan Road, Hangzhou 310024, 
Zhejiang Province, China

2Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Institute of Natural Sciences, 18 Shilongshan 
Road, Hangzhou 310024, Zhejiang Province, China

3Spin-Optics laboratory, St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg 198504, 
Russia

Keywords: Superconductor, exciton, BCS theory, Meissner effect

The experimental results hinting at the room temperature and ambient pressure 

superconductivity and magnetic levitation in LK-99 attracted an unprecedented interest. 
While attempts of other teams to reproduce the reported observations on similar 
samples failed so far, it seems worthwhile to try building a theoretical model that would 
explain the ensemble of the available data. One of important features that needs to be 
explained is an apparent contradiction between an extremely high critical temperature 
Tc and rather modest critical magnetic field Bc and critical current jc reported for LK-
99. We show theoretically, that these data may be quantitatively reproduced assuming 
the interplay between exciton- and phonon-induced superconductivity, while the 
conventional 
BCS 
or 
Brinkman-Rice-Bardeen-Cooper-Schriefer 
(BR-BCS)

mechanisms would result in a much higher Bc for the same Tc.

1. Introduction

The initial excitement induced by the reports on the room temperature and 

ambient pressure superconductivity [1] and magnetic levitation [2] by Lee et al was 
quickly replaced by disappointment caused by the failure of the first attempts of several 
other groups to reproduce the reported findings in samples of LK-99 prepared following 
the technology described by Lee et al and showing nearly identical X-ray patterns with 
their sample [3-7]. On the other hand, one could argue that it is very likely that 
polycrystalline samples produced in different labs may differ in their meso- and 
macroscopic structure, especially in what concerns the geometry of interface layers that 
seem to play a crucial role in the observed effects. There is no reason to assume that the 
reported experimental findings [1,2] are fake. More likely, the non-reproducibility of 
the data by other groups may be explained by a poorly studied and described fabrication 
technology. It might have happen than out of thousands of samples produced following 
by available guidelines only one or two would possess the morphology required to 
exhibit the reported electrical and magnetic properties. Still, the reported results are 
worth discussing. The claim of superconductivity has been supported by several sets of 


data showing the current-voltage dependencies taken at different temperatures and 
magnetic fields. These data allow to extract would be critical current and magnetic field 
as functions of temperature. As our analysis below shows these dependencies are rather 
non-trivial. Their possible interpretation with use of a gap equation is in the focus of 
this study. We publish it because the corresponding (may be strongly different) sets of 
experimental data will sooner or later be produced by other groups which are now 
involved in studies of LK-99. In this context, our theoretical analysis may appear to be 
timely and useful.

In what follows we compare the experimental temperature dependencies of the 

critical current and critical magnetic field with predictions of various models and 
conclude that neither Brinkman-Rice-Bardeen-Cooper-Schriefer (BR-BCS) nor flat 
band BCS superconductivity model, evoked by some recent theories [8], can 
qualitatively explain the observed dependencies. Namely, the experimental ratio of the 
critical magnetic field to critical temperature appears to be significantly lower than what 
one would anticipate. In order to resolve this controversy, we develop a model based 
on the interplay between the exciton- and the phonon-induced superconductivity [9-12]. 
We start from the concept of a superconducting quantum well (SQW) proposed by the 
authors of Refs. 1,2 and argue that an SQW may support stable dipole-polarized 
excitons formed by electrons from a quantization subband situated above the Fermi 
level and holes from the subband below the Fermi level. Scattering of conductivity
electrons with dipole polarized excitons is expected to be more efficient than the 
electron-phonon scattering, and it may lead to Cooper pairing [11]. The interplay 
between the exciton-mediated and photon-mediated superconductivity may result in a 
strong increase of Tc [12] while the critical magnetic field is much less affected and it 
remains relatively low [13]. We adapt the model of [12] to the specific experimental 
conditions of LK-99 and perform the numerical calculations that yield a reasonably
good agreement with the experiment [1,2] with a minimum of free parameters. In 
particular, we reproduce in detail the experimental temperature and magnetic field 
dependencies of the critical current. To our knowledge, none of the previous analysis 
no matter supporting or negating superconductivity addressed these important 
experimental features that may be considered as a signature of LK-99. A good
agreement between the predictions of the excitonic model developed here and the 
experiment might shed light on the origin of the observed phenomena.

2. Theory

In order to directly compare predictions of several models, we shall analyze the 

gap equation represented in the integral form [11]:

Δ(𝜉, 𝑇) = ∫

Ω

0

𝑈0(𝜉 − 𝜉')Δ(𝜉′, 𝑇) tanh ( 𝐸

2𝑘𝐵𝑇)

2𝐸
d𝜉′,
(1)

where Δ is the superconducting gap, 𝑘𝐵 is the Boltzmann constant, 𝑈0 is the effective 
electron-electron interaction potential , 𝜉 is the electron energy difference with respect 
to the Fermi energy, 𝐸 = √𝜉′2 + Δ2(𝜉′, 𝑇). The cutoff for the integral Ω is usually 
associated with the Debye frequency, that is the maximum frequency for the lattice 
vibrations. In the simplest approximation, 𝑈0(𝜉) is assumed to be constant below the 
Debye frequency. The critical magnetic field 𝐵𝑐 and critical current density 𝑗𝑐 are 
linked with the temperature-dependent value of the gap function at zero energy by the 
relations [12]:


𝐵𝑐 = √𝜇0𝑁(0)Δ(0),
(2)

𝑗𝑐 = 𝑒𝑁(0)Δ(0)

ℏ𝑘𝐹

,
(3)

where 𝜇0 is the vacuum permeability, 𝑁(0) the electron density of states near the Fermi 
surface, and ℏ𝑘𝐹 the electron Fermi momentum.

In what follows we show that the experimental findings of Refs. [1,2] cannot be 

reproduced within the BCS theory [14] even if the unrealistically high electron-phonon 
coupling strength is assumed. In contrast, the interplay of exciton- and phonon-induced 
Cooper pairing might explain the observed phenomena. The exciton mechanism for 
electron-electron coupling was initially proposed for virtual excitons in hybrid metal-
semiconductor heterostructures [9,10]. It has never been evidenced experimentally, to 
our knowledge, most likely because the coupling strength of spatially separated 
electrons and excitons is usually too weak. Here we shall take advantage of the updated 
version of this mechanism proposed by Laussy et. al. [11]. We shall assume that real 
excitons do exist in the structure and their wavefunctions strongly overlap with free 
electron (free hole) wavefunctions. This is likely to be the case in the context of a 
superconducting quantum well (SQW) that is formed due to local strains in LK-99 
according to Ref. 1. Such a quantum well would be characterized by a set of electronic 
subbands, some of which would be fully occupied and some would be fully empty at 
zero temperature. The subband that contains the Fermi level would be partially 
occupied and it would mostly contribute to the conductivity.

At non-zero temperatures, a significant number of electrons would be situated 

in the first subband above the Fermi level, and a significant number of holes would be 
situated at the subband below the Fermi level. If the binding energy of excitons formed 
by such electron-hole pairs exceeds the energy splitting between relevant subbands, 
these excitons would be stable even at zero temperature, and a sort of the excitonic 
insulator (Mott insulator) phase would be formed in the plane of SQW. This excitonic 
insulator could coexist with a free electron (hole) gas in a partly filled subband. 
Scattering of excitons with electrons from this subband would trigger an excitonic 
mechanism of Cooper pairing qualitatively similar to the familiar phonon-induced 
Cooper pairing (see the diagram in Fig. 1).

The differences of the exciton-induced and phonon-induced Cooper pairing are

in the energy dependences of the corresponding coupling potentials. Compared with 
the electron-phonon interaction, the electron-exciton interaction might be much 
stronger as it is governed by the Coulomb interaction of electrons with dipole-polarised 
excitons in the same SQW. The energy dependence of the exciton contribution to the 
electron-electron interaction potential would be governed by the density of excited 
exciton states that is expected to be staircase-like due to the multitude of subbands 
where excitons may be scattered to.


Figure 1. (a) Confinement of excitons in a triangular superconducting quantum well 
(schematic). The horizontal dashed lines indicate the quantization of energy levels, with 
the wavefunction (Airy function) shown above. The first three levels of electrons above 
Fermi energy are denoted as 𝐸1,2,3. (b) A diagram of the exciton mediated electron-
electron scattering, showing the momentum 𝑸 transfer by the exciton mechanism.

In order to evaluate the exciton-induced electron-electron interaction potential 

let us consider a model SQW that might be formed due to the local strain in LK-99. It 
is well known that the electronic band bending occurs at the interface of two different 
materials with a disparity of chemical potential, resulting in the formation of a built-in 
electric field at the surface or interface [15]. In most part of cases, such as the 
AlGaAs/GaAs heterojunctions and organic interfaces [16], the bending effect leads to 
the formation of a nearly triangular potential well (Fig.1a) [17, 18], which induces the 
energy quantization of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG), whose Hamiltonian 

writes 𝐻(𝑧) = 𝑇 + 𝑉(𝑧) = −

ℏ2∇2

2𝑚 + 𝐹𝑧. Ref. 1 argues that the similar potential is 

formed in LK-99 due to the replacement of some of led ions by copper ions. Figure 3e 
of Ref. 1 schematically shows this potential, while its exact shape remains unknown. 
Here, to be specific, we assume the steepness of the triangular potential 𝐹 = 0.5 meV ⋅
nm−1. This value is a parameter of the model. The wavefunctions of electrons in 
triangular quantum wells are Airy functions [19], given by

φ𝑖 = 𝜋

√3 √𝜉 [ 𝐽1

3
(2
3 𝜉𝑖

3
2) + 𝐽−1

3
(2
3 𝜉𝑖

3
2)],
(4)

𝜉𝑖 = ( 2𝑚𝑒

ℏ2𝐹2)

1
3

(𝐹𝑧 − 𝐸𝑖),

where 𝑚𝑒 is the electron effective mass, 𝐽𝑖 are the Bessel functions, and 𝑖 ∈ {1,2,3, … }
indicates the index of the quantization subband. An infinitely high barrier is assumed 
for 𝑧 < 0. We shall consider the excitonic scattering between three subbands whose 
energies are 𝐸1 = 16.87 meV, 𝐸2 = 29.50 meV, 𝐸3 = 39.84 meV, respectively, see 
the scheme in Fig.2a. The scattering of a conductivity electron with an exciton kicks
the corresponding exciton out from its ground sate (𝑘 = 0) of the first subband and 
brings it to an excited state (𝑘 ≠ 0) of the same subband, or to one of the higher energy 
subbands. Note that the exciton scattering as a whole particle can be reduced to the 
simultaneous electron and hole scatterings. In the next estimations we shall evaluate 
the magnitude of the electron-exciton scattering assuming that it is dominated by 
electron-electron repulsion. 


For the electron-exciton interaction in the first subband, Skopelitis et al [12] and Sedov 
et. al. [20] expressed the effective electron-bogolon coupling constant as 𝜂1 =

𝑋4𝐿2𝑑2𝑒4𝑛𝑝2𝐴𝑁(0)

𝑔0𝜀2
, where 𝑋 = 1 is the Hopfield coefficient for exciton, 𝐿 = 20 nm is the 

average electron-exciton spacing, 𝑑 = 10 nm the exciton dipole length, 𝑛𝑝 the exciton 
density, 𝐴 is the normalization area, 𝑁(0) is the free electron density of states at the 
Fermi surface, 𝑔0 is the interaction constant, 𝜀 is the dielectric permittivity of the 
background. We estimate 𝑋 = 1, 𝐿 = 5 nm, 𝑑 = 7 nm, 𝑛𝑝= 5 × 1010 cm−2, 𝑁(0) =
𝑚𝑒
𝜋ℏ2, 

𝑔0
𝐴 ~3 𝑚eV [21] and 𝜀 = 6𝜀0. According to the Fermi golden rule, the probability 

of an electronic transition from the first subband to the second one is 𝑃1→2 =
∫ |⟨𝜑2|𝜑1⟩|2 𝐷(𝐸) 𝑑𝐸, where 𝜑1 and 𝜑2 are the wavefunctions given by Eq.4. For a 
two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG), the electron density of states 𝐷(𝐸) =

𝑚𝑒
𝜋ℏ2 is 

independent of energy. The ratio of electron scattering probabilities from the first to the 

second subband and within the first subband 𝜂2 =

𝑃1→2
𝑃1→1 𝜂1. Where 

𝑃1→2
𝑃1→1 =

|⟨𝜑2|𝜑1⟩|

2

|⟨𝜑1|𝜑1⟩|

2 =

0.7466 . The cut-off frequency of the electron-electron interaction channels 
corresponding to the exciton scattering within the first and the second subband must be 
close to the energy splittings between the corresponding subbands. We shall assume 
Δ1 = 𝐸2 − 𝐸1 = 12.63 meV, Δ2 = 𝐸3 − 𝐸2 = 10.34 meV, respectively, for the first 
two steps of the interaction potential. We shall neglect steps caused by the exciton 
scattering to the third, firth etc subbands as the probability of such scatterings would be 
very low.

In this approximation, the total effective electron-electron interaction potential profile 
is composed by the two-step electron-exciton interaction potential with magnitudes 
𝜂1,2 and the comparatively lower magnitude electron-phonon interaction potential
having a cut-off at the Debye energy, as shown in Fig.2b.

Figure 2. (a) The subband structure of the considered model SQW. Blue and orange 
arrows indicate intra/inter-subband scattering channels. (b) Three-step effective 
electron-electron interaction potential profile. 𝜂0,1,2 are the magnitudes of the 
components of the interaction potential due to the electron-phonon, electron-exciton 
(intra-subband) and electron-exciton (inter-subband) scatterings, respectively.

3. Results and discussions


We shall be solving the gap equation (1) by the iteration method, accounting for

the hybrid exciton-mediated and phonon-mediated electron-electron interaction 
potential shown in Fig. 2(b). We set the Debye temperature at 500 K that is close to the 
experimental values reported in Ref. 1. The effective electron-electron interaction 
constants are evaluated as 𝜂1 = 4.00, 𝜂2 = 2.98, 𝜂0 = 0.30. Fig.3 shows the results of 
our model calculation compared to the experiment data of Lee et al [1]. We find a 
reasonably good agreement between the theory and the experiment. In Fig.3a, the 
critical current reaches about 250 mA at 300 K, then it monotonically decreases with 
the temperature increase, in full agreement with the experiment. The critical current 
dependence on the magnetic field given by Eqs. (1-3) is nearly linear and it repeats the 
experimental data very closely.

Figure 3. (a) Dependence of the critical current on temperature, and (b) shows the 
dependence of the critical current on magnetic field at T=270 K. The red solid curves 
show the results of our model calculation, while the points are experimental data 
adapted from [1] with the black lines being guides for an eye.

The results of our calculation are compared with predictions by the conventional 

phonon-BCS theory and by the BR-BCS model brought up by Hyun-Tak Kim [22] (see 
the Appendix A). In the calculations within the BCS and BR-BCS models, we have 
intentionally tuned up the electron-electron interaction strength in order to fit Tc. For
the BCS model calculation, the electron-phonon coupling constant is set to 𝜂0 = 3.2, 
which is unrealistically large, unless we deal with the flat-band superconductivity.
Fig.4a shows the calculated temperature dependences of the superconducting gap Δ(0). 
One can see that the model developed in the present work yields the lowest gap as 
compared to the BCS and BR-BCS models. At zero temperature, our model yields the 
gap of 43.69 meV, while the BCS theory and the BR-BCS theory predict the gap 
energies of 60.79 meV and 55.37 meV, respectively. The inset shows the prediction of 
the phonon BCS model assuming a realistic electron-phonon coupling strength and
electronic density of states (no flat bands). It yields the zero-temperature gap value of 
only 0.03 meV.

Figure 4(b) shows the critical magnetic field calculated using Eq. (2) as a 

function of temperature within the three above mentioned models. One can see that our 
present model yields the lowest value of the critical magnetic field in a wide 
temperature range: from zero till the room temperature. This is not surprising, as our 
model predicted the lowest superconducting gap. Figure 4(c) shows the critical current 
calculated as a function of the magnetic field at the room temperature. It is worth 
noticing that both the critical magnetic field and critical current obtained within our 
model are the smallest among all models. The critical magnetic field is 3000 Oe (0.3


Tesla) and the critical current is 300 mA at 290 K. These results are in agreement with 
the experiment, while the calculations within the BCS and BR-BCS models deviate 
from the experiment quite strongly.

We explain this difference between the predictions of three models by the 

interplay of two mechanisms of superconductivity resulting in a specific three-step 
interaction potential within our model. The non-trivial energy dependence of the 
interaction potential leads to the smoother dependence of Δ(0) on temperature as 
compared to the other models. Due to this smooth temperature dependence of Δ(0), 
very high critical temperatures may coexist with relatively modest critical magnetic 
field and critical current.

Figure 4. (a) The temperature dependence of the superconducting gap, (b) the 
temperature dependence of the critical current,(c) the critical current vs magnetic field
at T=290 K. The red solid curve, the blue dashed curve and the green dash-dotted curve 
show the results obtained from within the model developed in this work, the 
conventional BCS theory and the BR-BCS theory, respectively. The inset to Figure 4(a) 
shows the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap obtained within the BCS 
model assuming a realistic value of the electron-phonon coupling constant.

4. Conclusion

In conclusion, we have reproduced the experimental dependencies of the critical 

current on temperature and magnetic field in LK-99 within the model assuming an 
interplay between exciton- and phonon-induced superconductivity in superconducting 
quantum wells. We have also checked that the conventional BCS model and the BR-
BCS model evoked in Ref. 2 would lead to the critical current and critical magnetic 
field strongly exceeding the experimental values. Clearly, our estimations are inexact 
as we do not know that exact shape of the superconducting quantum wells in LK-99. It 
is no more than the hypothesis. Still, it allows one to explain the apparent controversy 
between the extremely high value of Tc reported in Refs. [1,2] and relatively modest 
critical current and magnetic field values. 

We would like to note at this point that, while the exciton-induced 

superconductivity is a theoretical concept that still lacks experimental confirmation, it 
is worth attention of the community in view of a rapidly expanding class of systems 
and materials where free electrons and excitons may coexist. Clearly, when the concept 
was brought forward by Bardeen and Ginzburg that was not the case. One should expect 
that the excitonic mechanism will strongly manifest itself sooner or later, which justifies 


our effort to analyse its potential impact on the temperature dependencies of critical 
current and critical magnetic field.

Finally, we would like to emphasize that we do not consider one-dimensional 

superconductivity in this work. Rather, we believe that two-dimensional 
superconducting layers may be formed in the interface regions of polycrystalline LK-
99 sample. Two-dimensional superconductivity could be responsible for the reported 
SQUID data [1]. A further experimental analysis of the morphology of LK-99 samples 
and spatial location of insulator and superconductor phases is needed in order to 
conclude on the validity of our analysis.

We thank Professor Anvar Zakhidov for many enlightening discussions.

References:

[1] Sukbae Lee, Ji-Hoon Kim, Young-Wan Kwon, The First Room-Temperature 
Ambient-Pressure Superconductor, arXiv:2307.12008 [cond-mat.supr-con] (2023).

[2] Sukbae Lee, Jihoon Kim, Hyun-Tak Kim, Sungyeon Im, SooMin An, and Keun Ho 
Auh, Superconductor Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O showing levitation at room temperature and 
atmospheric pressure and mechanism, arXiv:2307.12037 [cond-mat.supr-con] (2023)

[3] Qiang Hou, Wei Wei, Xin Zhou, Yue Sun, Zhixiang Shi, Observation of zero 
resistance above 100 K in Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O, arXiv: 2308.01192v1.

[4] Lowe, Derek (1 August 2023). "A Room-Temperature Superconductor? New 
Developments". Chemical News. "In the pipeline" (blog). American Association for 
the Advancement of Science. Archived from the original on 1 August 2023. 
Retrieved 1 August 2023 – via Science.org

[5] Li Liu, Ziang Meng, Xiaoning Wang, Hongyu Chen, Zhiyuan Duan, Xiaorong Zhou, 
Han Yan, Peixin Qin, Zhiqi Liu , Semiconducting transport in Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O 
sintered from Pb2SO5 and Cu3P, arXiv:2307.16802 (2023).

[6] S. Zhu, W. Wu, Zh. Li, J. Luo, First order transition in Pb10-xCux(PO4)6O 
(0.9<x<1.1) containing Cu2S,  arXiv:2308.04353 (2023).

[7] Dan Garristo, LK-99 isn’t a superconductor — how science sleuths solved the 
mystery, Nature doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-023-02585-7.

[8] S.M. Griffin, Origin of correlated isolated flat bands in copper-substituted lead 
phosphate apatite, https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.16892, (2023); Junwen Lai, Jiangxu 
Li, Peitao Liu,Yan Sun, and Xing-Qiu Chen, First-principles study on the electronic 
structure of Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O (x=0, 1), arXiv: 2307.16040v1 (2023).

[9] D. Allender, J. Bray, and J. Bardeen, Model for an Exciton Mechanism of 
Superconductivity, Phys. Rev. B 7, 1020 (1973).

[10] V. L. Ginzburg, High-temperature superconductivity–dream or reality?Usp. Fiz. 
Nauk. 118, 315 (1976) [Sov. Phys. Usp., 19, 174 (1976)].

[11] F. P. Laussy, A. V. Kavokin, and I. A. Shelykh, Exciton-polariton mediated 
superconductivity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 106402 (2010).


[12] P. Skopelitis, E.D. Cherotchenko, A.V. Kavokin and A. Posazhennikova, Interplay 
of Phonon and Exciton-Mediated Superconductivity in Hybrid Semiconductor-
Superconductor Structures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 107001 (2018).

[13] A. Kavokin and A. Zakhidov, Comment on: The interpretation of room-
temperature superconductivity experiments in LK-99, Materials Today. doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2023.08.008.

[14] J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieffer, Theory of Superconductivity, Phys. 
Rev. 108, 1175 (1957).

[15] R. Dingle, H. L. StOrmer, A. C. Gossard, and W. Wiegmann, Electron Mobilities 
in Modulation-Doped Semiconductor Heterojunction Superlattices, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
33, 665-667 (1978).

[16] P. Zhang, H. Wang and D. Yan, Dramatically Improved Electron Transport 
Performance by A Deep Triangular Potential Well in Organic Field-Effect Transistors, 
J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 53, 01LT01, (2020).

[17] A. N. Khondker and A. F. M. Anwar, Analytical Models for AlGaAs/GaAs 
Heterojunction Quantum Wells, Solid-State Electronics 30, 847-852 (1987).

[18] A. Mahajan1 and S. Ganguly, An Analytical Model for Electron Tunneling In 
Triangular Quantum Wells, Semicond. Sci. Technol. 36, 055012, (2021).

[19]
J. Cao and A. Kavokin. Optical Properties of Magnetic Monopole 

Excitons. Condens. Matter, 8, 43 (2023).

[20] E. Sedov, I. Sedova, S. Arakelian, G. Eramo and A. Kavokin, Hybrid Optical Fiber 
for Light Induced Superconductivity, Scientific Reports, 10, 8131 (2020).

[21] F. Tassone and Y. Yamamoto, Exciton-Exciton Scattering Dynamics in A 
Semiconductor Microcavity and Stimulated Scattering into Polaritons, Phys. Rev. B 59, 
10830 (1999).

[22] H. Kim, Room‑Temperature‑Super Conducting Tc Driven By Electron Correlation, 
Scientific Reports, 11, 10329 (2021).

Appendix A. BR-BCS theory

In the BR-BCS theory [22], the electron-electron correlations are taken into 

account as a correction to the traditional BCS theory. The critical temperature given by
this model writes:

𝑇𝑐 = 𝐶(𝑧)𝑇𝐷

∗𝑒

−coth 𝑧

𝜆𝐵𝐶𝑆

∗
,

with 𝐶(𝑧) ≡

1

2 exp [− coth(𝑧) ∫ (ln 𝑥 / cosh2 𝑥)𝑑𝑥

𝑥
0
], 𝑧 =

𝑇𝐷
2𝑇𝑐, 𝑇𝐷

∗ = 𝜌

1
3𝑇𝐷 and 𝜆𝐵𝐶𝑆

∗
=

𝐴𝜆𝐵𝐶𝑆 being the “renormalized” Debye temperature and electron-phonon coupling 
constant in the sense of Landau’s Fermi liquid theory. The renormalization factor 𝐴 =

𝑁0∗

𝑁0 =

𝜌

1
3

1−𝜅𝐵𝑅𝜌4 is defined as the ratio of correlated electron density of states 𝑁0

∗ and free 

electron density of states 𝑁0.


Recent calculations performed within the density functional theory have shown 

a flat band with the bandwidth of around 130 meV for LK-99 [8]. Based on this, we 
assume the renormalization factor 𝐴 to be around 40 for electrons in the 2D plane and 
𝜅𝐵𝑅 to be 1. 𝜆𝐵𝐶𝑆 = 0.035, and 𝐶(𝑧) = 2.48 for the Debye temperature of 500 K and 
the critical superconducting temperature of 370 K. These are the parameters assumed 
for the calculation within the BR-BCS model presented in this paper.


