Uniaxial compression of 3D printed samples with voids: laboratory

measurements compared with predictions from Effective Medium

Theory

Filip P. Adamus1, Ashley Stanton-Yonge1, Thomas M. Mitchell1, David Healy2, and Philip G. Meredith1

1Department of Earth Sciences, University College London, London, UK

2School of Geosciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK ,

adamusfp@gmail.com
ashley.sesnic.18@ucl.ac.uk
d.healy@abdn.ac.uk
tom.mitchell@ucl.ac.uk
p.meredith@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

3D printing technology offers the possibility of producing synthetic samples with accurately defined

microstructures. As indicated by effective medium theory (EMT), the shapes, orientations, and sizes of

voids significantly affect the overall elastic response of a solid body. By performing uniaxial compression

tests on twenty types of 3D-printed samples containing voids of different geometries, we examine whether

the measured effective elasticities are accurately predicted by EMT. To manufacture the sample, we

selected printers that use different technologies; fused deposition modelling (FDM), and stereolithography

(SLA). We show how printer settings (FDM case) or sample cure time (SLA case) affect the measured

properties. We also examine the reproducibility of elasticity tests on identically designed samples. To

obtain the range of theoretical predictions, we assume either uniform strain or uniform stress. Our study

of over two hundred samples shows that measured effective elastic moduli can fit EMT predictions with

an error of less than 5% using both FDM and SLA methods if certain printing specifications and sample

design considerations are taken into account.
Notably, we find that the pore volume fraction of the

designed samples should be above Ōēł 1% to induce a measurable softening effect, but below Ōēł 5% to

produce accurate EMT estimations that fit the measured elastic properties of the samples. Our results

highlight both the strengths of EMT for predicting the effective properties of solids with low pore fraction

volume microstructural configurations, and the limitations for high porosity microstructures.

1

arXiv:2310.13956v1  [physics.geo-ph]  21 Oct 2023


1
Introduction

The elasticity of a material containing voids (empty pores) or inclusions (fluid-filled or solid pores) can

be approximated using effective medium theory (EMT). The theory allows one to homogenise a medium

and view its response on a larger scale.
In turn, understanding how the microstructure (pores shape,

orientation, and size) influences the overall response is beneficial in many disciplines, such as materials

science, biomechanics, rock mechanics, seismology, oil and gas exploration, among others.

Probably the first steps in treating a material as effectively elastic were done by Voigt (1889), Reuss

(1929), and Bruggeman (1937). Their works were followed and greatly developed by Hill (1952), Eshelby

(1957), Hashin (1959), and Bristow (1960); researchers inspired by problems in metallurgy. Subsequently,

their averaging approach was expanded by Walsh (1965), Budiansky (1965), Hill (1965), OŌĆÖConnell & Bu-

diansky (1974), Kachanov (1980), Oda et al. (1984), Zimmerman (1986), and Sayers & Kachanov (1991)

who described how the specific geometry of ellipsoidal pores and cracks affect the stiffness (compliance)

of a solid; a rock in particular.
Independent efforts were made in the field of seismology by Postma

(1955), Backus (1962), Schoenberg & Douma (1988), and Schoenberg & Helbig (1997), who focused on

layered inhomogeneities or long and thin cracks instead of ellipsoidal shapes. Nevertheless, their approaches

give approximately equal predictions when the layered features are viewed as a series of aligned penny-shaped

cracks (Schoenberg & Douma, 1988). All effective elasticity approximations utilised by the aforementioned

authorsŌĆöand numerous researchers not mentioned hereinŌĆöshare the same concept, that the elasticity of

the constituents (i.e., solid matrix and inhomogeneities) can be averaged to predict the overall mediumŌĆÖs

stiffness under given boundary conditions. Because there is no single recipe on how to do it, authors often

use the notion of ŌĆØeffective medium theoryŌĆØ to refer to this general concept of averaging. The EMT goes

beyond elasticity, with its origins in electromagnetic properties of materials; it makes an essential part of a

multidisciplinary field called micromechanics (Kachanov & Sevostianov, 2018).

The EMT prediction for even the simple scenario of a single void embedded in a homogeneous matrix is

not straightforward. The approximation is unequivocal only if 1) the background is isotropic or transversely

isotropic, 2) the void is ellipsoidal, and 3) the void is very small. In the case that one of the first two

conditions is not satisfied, an analytical solution cannot be obtained (Kachanov & Sevostianov, 2018). In

the case that the void is relatively large, then the prediction will vary depending on the assumption chosen,

due to the boundary effects (Hill, 1952). Then, the so-called apparent, and not effective, elasticity parameters

are considered (Huet, 1990). One possibility is to assume uniform strain throughout the sample. Another is

to assume uniform stress. Either assumption leads to an approximately identical result if the inhomogeneity

2


is small, but are discrepant for larger sizes. This discrepancy also arises if there are more than one void that

interact with each other, thus disturbing the stress and strain fields. If the distribution of voids is sparse,

then the so-called non-interactive approximations are proposed (Kachanov, 1992). If voids are close together

or even overlapping slightly, the interaction effect needs to be taken into consideration (Hill, 1965).

Early studies on ceramics with spherical pores have confirmed empirically the usefulness of EMT (Walsh,

1965). However, empirical validation becomes more difficult in the case of strongly oblate or prolate spheroids,

shapes that may be good approximations for cracks present in e.g., rocks. Because geomaterials usually have

complex microstructures, the empirical validation of EMT using rocks is limited. For instance, we can verify

that cracks of known orientation reduce the magnitude of specific parameters in the elasticity tensor (Brantut

& Petit, 2022), and therefore weaken the rocks, as predicted by the theory. However, the magnitude of the

effect remains difficult to evaluate due to uncertainties in crack geometries, crack concentration, and crack

interactions.

There have been attempts to examine EMT on synthetic materials, where the microstructure is much better

constrained. One approach is to place polymeric inhomogeneities inside a previously prepared sandy ma-

trix,with the polymeric materials being subsequently removed by chemical or thermal processes, leaving voids

behind (Santos et al., 2017). Another method involves rubber pieces placed in epoxy glass (Henriques et al.,

2018). Alternatively, one may try to use laser etching to create cracks in glass (Stewart et al., 2013). Finally

and more recently, researchers used 3D printing technology to create synthetic samples with pores (Huang

et al., 2016; Zerhouni et al., 2019).

To our knowledge, researchers have used either manufacturing or 3D printing samples having small inhomo-

geneities onlyŌĆösuch as highly concentrated small pores (Ndao et al., 2017; Zerhouni, 2019; Dugarov et al.,

2022). Pores of a much smaller size than the wavelength are required for acoustic measurements in order to

satisfy the quasi-static assumption of EMT. This way, a full elasticity tensor can be obtained at the expense

of inaccuracy in the manufacture of small pores. Besides the inaccuracy in microstructure design, small

pores do not soften the material significantly and limit the possibility of interaction validation. In other

words, small pores must be densely packed in order to obtain a measurable weakening effect on stiffnesses.

In turn, one cannot clearly distinguish the impact of interactions from the effect of pore concentration itself.

Also, the small size of pores impedes fluid injection to measure the poroelastic response of such samples. All

the aforementioned problems can be overcome if larger inhomogeneities are considered. A downside of such

a solution, though, is that the acoustic measurements are heavily degraded due to the static assumption

violation. Also, the theoretical prediction is not unequivocal due to the impact of the choice of boundary

conditions.

3


In this paper, we used fused deposition modelling (FDM) and stereolithography (SLA), two standard 3D

printing technologies, to produce twenty different type of samples that contain relatively large voids with

different geometries. Our samples are uniaxially compressed, and they behave elastically within a significant

range of deformation.
We obtain the elastic components of the stiffness matrix (YoungŌĆÖs modulus and

PoissonŌĆÖs ratio) from the experimental measurements, and attempt to validate EMT empirically. Pores are

designed to be large enough to highlight the softening effect and ensure that the impact of void interactions

is pronounced. Also, the sizes of voids might facilitate future fluid injection tests. 3D printing provides a

very high accuracy of the desired microstructure that may overcome the above-mentioned manufacturing

methodologies. Although 3D printing was developed in the 1980s, to our knowledge, only a few works have

used this technology in the context of effective elasticity measurements (Huang et al., 2016; Ndao et al.,

2017; Zerhouni, 2019; Dugarov et al., 2022).

Our research fills the gap in EMT validation studies for a variety of reasons. First, different geometries of

voids are designedŌĆöinstead of dense microcracks onlyŌĆöthat are large enough to enhance the softening effect

and overcome measurement errors. Also, we propose various interaction configurations that have not been

previously examined experimentally. Further, we performed novel experiments where cylindrical samples

containing twenty different void microstructures, printed with two different technologies, were deformed

under uniaxial compression. Finally, we report results from over two hundred samples in total, which means

that our experimental validation is less prone to random errors.

2
Main problems addressed

In this paper, we discuss three main issues regarding uniaxial compression tests of 3D-printed samples with

voids.
First, we attempt to understand how the differences between 3D printing technologies and their

specifications may affect the effective YoungŌĆÖs modulus measurements. Second, we present the impact of

YoungŌĆÖs modulus measurement methodology.
Third, and most importantly, we focus on whether EMT

accurately predicts YoungŌĆÖs modulus given the issues mentioned above.

2.1
3D printing technologies

3D printing has revolutionized the manufacturing industry, and numerous different printing technologies

have emerged during the past decades, including Stereolithography (SLA), Selective Laser Sintering, Fused

Deposition Modelling (FDM), Digital Light Process, and PolyJet, among others. These technologies range in

price, accessibility, post-printing processing requirements, printing resolution, and surface finishing quality.

4


Two standard 3D printing technologies were used in this study: SLA and FDM.

Stereolithography, patented in 1986, is the worldŌĆÖs pioneering 3D printing technology. This method is a type

of additive manufacturing process that employs a laser source to solidify liquid-state, light-reactive resin into

solid polymers through a process called photopolymerization. A Computer-Aided Design (CAD) model is

imported into the 3D printer which then constructs the object layer by layer (with 0.1 mm resolution). This

is achieved by focusing the laser source, by which it selectively solidifies the liquid resin, precisely following

the cross-sectional images of the 3D model. The resulting products usually require post-printing treatment.

They are first immersed in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to remove any residual, uncured resin. Subsequently,

an additional curing step under heat may be needed to finalize the polymerization reaction, which brings

the material to its optimal mechanical properties. The SLA method is known for producing highly detailed

and accurate objects with seamless surface finishes. This makes it an optimal choice for a wide range of

applications, including prototyping, jewelry craftsmanship, and dental modelling, among others. Once the

resin is hardened, though, it cannot be recycled. Discarded parts need to be disposed as household waste.

Fused Deposition Modelling is a widely used, cost-effective 3D printing technology. As in SLA printing, FDM

also constructs CAD modelled objects by additive manufacture of the model cross-sections. A thermoplastic

filament, in our case, biodegradable, polyactic acid (PLA), is fed into a heated nozzle that melts the material

and then precisely extrudes it onto the build platform, constructing the object layer by layer. FDM printing

is characterised by the lowest entry and material price of the 3D printing market, by very simple usage, and

for having the lowest environmental impact with respect to other 3D printing technologies (Li et al., 2017).

The latter is mainly due to its lower process energy consumption and the possibility of reusing or recycling

its wasted products. These factors make FDM a highly popular choice for proof of concept purposes and

prototyping. However, the level of accuracy and precision that FDM can offer is limited by the diameter of

the circular orifice of the nozzle tip (in our case 0.4 mm). In addition, the layer-by-layer deposition (with

0.1 mm of resolution) limits the quality of curved surfaces, causing a grainy surface finishing.

The ability of defining the exact shape, position, orientation, and density of the pore microstructure in a

homogeneous matrix makes 3D printing highly attractive for evaluating the predictive capacity and limita-

tions of EMT. In the context of 3D printing for EMT testing purposes, the starting material needs to be as

isotropic, non-porous, and homogeneous as possible. Because both SLA and FDM printed objects are built

layer by layer, some anisotropy is to be expected in the mechanical properties of printed materials. Mechan-

ical anisotropy has been shown to be low (Ōēł 1%) for SLA printed objects (Kazmer, 2017) although it can

be affected by the prescribed resolution/layer thickness (Chockalingam et al., 2006). A helium pycnometer

was used to measured the connected porosity of our 3D printed cylindrical samples, obtaining a porosity of

5


1.2% for whole SLA printed samples.

By contrast, mechanical anisotropy can be significant for FDM printed samples
(Kazmer, 2017).
The

magnitude of mechanical anisotropy is affected by several printing parameters, which define the drawing

pattern to be followed by the nozzle tip. One or more perimeters are first drawn to delimit the objectŌĆÖs

boundary. Then, the nozzle tip moves back and forth at a prescribed angle (raster angle) to fill the delimited

perimeter(s). The prescribed amount of delimiting perimeters, the raster angle, and the layered structured of

the samples will determine the mechanical anisotropy of FDM printed samples (Mohamed et al., 2015). To

verify the magnitude of anisotropy of FDM printed samples, we performed acoustic velocity measurements

on four PLA cubes (30 mm3) with two perimeters, rectilinear infillŌĆöthe only recommended pattern for

100% infillŌĆöand default other printing specifications. Our results indicated 0.8% ŌłÆ 3.3% of anisotropy in

the direction orthogonal to layering compared with parallel, which can be considered as a satisfactory in

the context of EMT predictions.
Another potential issue is caused by the air gaps between layers and

rasters that result in an intrinsic porosity for FDM 3D printed samples of around 5%, as measured by a

helium displacement pycnometer. Main aforementioned features of both 3D printing technologies are listed

in Table 1.

Feature
SLA
FDM
in favour of

Resolution and accuracy
higher
lower
SLA
Surface finishing
smooth
not smooth
SLA
Mechanical anisotropy
lower
higher
SLA
Porosity
1%
5%
SLA
Post-printing processing
required
not required
FDM
Printer and material cost
higher
lower
FDM
Environmental impact
higher
lower
FDM

Table 1: Comparison of features between SLA and FDM 3D printing technologies in the context of EMT testing

2.2
YoungŌĆÖs modulus measurements

YoungŌĆÖs modulus is defined as the slope of the elastic (straight-line) portion of a stress-strain curve. If the

slope is taken between two stress-strain points, the modulus is the change in stress divided by the change

in strain. In general, brittle materials such as metals, certain plastics, and rocks will exhibit steeper slopes

and higher moduli values than ductile materials such as rubber. Importantly, the values of YoungŌĆÖs moduli

may differ depending on the derivation methodology.

Dean et al. (1995) distinguish at least three terms used to specify the YoungŌĆÖs modulus value; tangent

modulus, chord modulus, and secant modulus. The first term describes a modulus obtained from a tangent

line to the stress-strain curve. According to the ASTM standards for compression measurements of rigid

6


plastic materials (ASTM-D695), a tangent line should be constructed at any point in the straight-line part,

whereas if there is no clearly linear region, one should construct a tangent to reach the maximum (steepest)

slope of the curve. The second term describes a modulus measured from the selected start and end points

of the curve. A line is drawn between these two points and the slope of that line is recorded as the modulus.

Finally, the secant modulus is a particular type of chord modulus, where the start point is defined as the

origin of the stress/strain curve.

As reported by Malkowski et al. (2018), based on over two hundred compressed rock samples, YoungŌĆÖs

moduli values differ significantly based on the choice of the start and end points for the modulus calculation.

They specified these points based on: 1) the lower and upper elastic limits of the curve (if an elastic part

is perfectly linear, this approach is equivalent to the ASTM-D695 tangent method), 2) 20% and 80% of the

ultimate strength (cord modulus), and 3) 0% and 50% of the ultimate strength (secant modulus). Their

analysis indicates a large discrepancy in results between the secant modulus and the two former methods

(circa 23%) due to the inelastic crack compaction occurring in the initial part of the curve. Malkowski et al.

(2018) suggest that, in the case of sedimentary rocks, the secant modulus measure is inadequate, whereas

chord modulus of a narrower range (e.g., 30%ŌĆō70% of ultimate strength) might be the most efficient measure

of YoungŌĆÖs moduli.

In this paper, our primary goal is to consider the impacts of the voids on the elastic moduli of materials. These

impacts might be different depending on the YoungŌĆÖs moduli derivation methodology chosen. Therefore,

similarly to Malkowski et al. (2018), we compare different YoungŌĆÖs moduli measures but on plastic samples

(see Section 3.3). The comparison itself thus becomes an important part of the study.

2.3
Effective medium predictions

In this section, we discuss the elastic moduli that we measure during uniaxial tests, the properties that are

required to obtain the theoretical predictions, and we indicate how these predictions are calculated.

In a uniaxial compression test, the components of the principal stress tensor can be written as Žā1 ╠Ė= 0,

Žā2 = 0, and Žā3 = 0. In every test, we measure the axial strain in the direction of compression thatŌĆö

invoking HookeŌĆÖs lawŌĆö is equal to ╬Ą1 = S1111Žā1, where SijkŌäō denotes the forth-order compliance tensor.

Additionally, if a sample is isotropic or transversely isotropic (TI) with the symmetry axis aligned with the

compression direction, we measure the radial strain that is equal to ╬Ąr = ╬Ą2 = ╬Ą3 = S1122Žā1. The above

elastic properties can be expressed as YoungŌĆÖs modulus and PoissonŌĆÖs ratio, namely, E := Žā1/╬Ą1 = 1/S1111

and ╬Į := ŌłÆ╬Ąr/╬Ą1 = ŌłÆS1122/S1111, respectively. In the case of a compression test of a plain sample, both

7


YoungŌĆÖs modulus and PoissonŌĆÖs ratio are background moduli used in the theoretical predictions, as explained

later. In the case of a sample with a void (that usually induces anisotropy of lower symmetry than TI), we

measure YoungŌĆÖs modulus only, which is the effective parameter.

Effective properties of a medium with a single inhomogeneity (e.g., void) can be predicted differently de-

pending on the boundary conditions we choose. If stress is assumed to be uniform under the absence of the

inhomogeneity, then according to e.g., Shafiro & Kachanov (1997),

Seff
ijkŌäō = S0
ijkŌäō + ŽĢHijkŌäō + ŽĢŌłåHijkŌäō ,
(1)

where S0
ijkŌäō is the background compliance tensor, ŽĢ is the inhomogeneity volume fraction, HijkŌäō is the

compliance increase due to void presence, and ŌłåHijkŌäō is the compliance correction factor due to the presence

of fluid or solid in the void. If displacement, not stress, is assumed to be uniform, then

Seff
ijkŌäō =
’┐Į
C0
ijkŌäō + ŽĢNijkŌäō + ŽĢŌłåNijkŌäō
’┐ĮŌłÆ1 ,
(2)

where C0
ijkŌäō is the background stiffness tensor, NijkŌäō is the stiffness decrease due to the presence of the void,

and ŌłåNijkŌäō is the stiffness correction factor due to the presence of fluid or solid in the void. In this paper,

we do not consider fluid or solid filling of the void; hence, the last term in (1)ŌĆō(2) equals zero. We use

(1) and (2) to obtain the maximum and minimum predicted value of YoungŌĆÖs modulus, respectively. Both

expressions give approximately equal values if the void is small. The range of prediction rises with larger ŽĢ.

HijkŌäō and NijkŌäō can be derived analytically for ellipsoids embedded in an isotropic or TI background. They

depend on a) void shape, b) void orientation, and c) background PoissonŌĆÖs ratio. The exact expressions for

HijkŌäō and NijkŌäō are presented in e.g., Kachanov & Sevostianov (2018) (Appendix A). Therefore, the range of

effective YoungŌĆÖs modulus can be predicted if we know the geometry of the void, and we measured YoungŌĆÖs

modulus and PoissonŌĆÖs ratio of the plain sample, since the same elastic properties are assumed to describe

the background of the sample with a void.

In the case of multiple voids, if one assumes that the distance between inhomogeneities is great enough, then

the stress at the boundary of each void region is nearly the same as at the boundary of the body. We can

write the so-called non-interaction approximation (NIA) as

Seff
ijkŌäō = S0
ijkŌäō +
’┐Į

m
ŽĢ(m)H(m)
ijkŌäō ,
(3)

where superscript m describes each void in the medium. If the displacement at the boundary of each void

8


region is nearly the same as at the boundary of the body, we get a dual version of NIA,

Seff
ijkŌäō =

’┐Į

C0
ijkŌäō +
’┐Į

m
ŽĢ(m)N (m)
ijkŌäō

’┐ĮŌłÆ1

.
(4)

In the case where voids are relatively close to each other, the interaction between them may disturb the stress

and displacement field.
This is why several interaction schemes, such as the self-consistent, differential,

Maxwell, or Mori-Tanaka schemes, were proposed (Kachanov, 1992). Nevertheless, all of them use NIA

as a building block and predict effective compliances within the range provided by expressions (3)ŌĆō(4).

Also, unless voids are parallel, these schemes are difficult to apply in the cases of anisotropy (Kachanov

& Sevostianov, 2018). Further, they are designed to take into account larger concentrations of randomly

oriented voids. Since in this paper we consider cases that are both anisotropic and with low concentration of

voids, we focus on whether the measured values of YoungŌĆÖs moduli fall into the range of NIA dual predictions

only; which is sufficient for our purposes.

3
Experiments

3.1
Experimental setup: uniaxial compression

3D printed samples were subjected to uniaxial compression using a servo-controlled uniaxial load frame in

the Rock and Ice Physics Laboratory of University College London (Figure 1a). Samples were loaded at a

constant strain rate of 10ŌłÆ5sŌłÆ1 until yielding. Axial strain was continuously measured using an external linear

variable differential transformer (LVDT) displacement transducer, while load was recorded using a 200kN

load cell. Corrections were applied to the axial displacement data to account for machine stiffness. Intact

(plain) 3D printed cores were uniaxially deformed while taking continuous measurements of circumferential

strain using an LVDT extensometer (Figure 1b). The correction applied to convert from linear displacement

(LVDT output) to circumferential strain is detailed as follows. The initial aperture angle ╬Ėi is obtained from

the initial sample radius Ri, the total chain length lc = 7ll, where ll is the link length, and extensometer rod

radius r from,

╬Ėi = 2ŽĆ ŌłÆ
lc

Ri + r.
(5)

9


The circumferential strain ŽĄc is calculated from the differential LVDT output ╬┤l = lf ŌłÆ li (see Figure 1b) as,

ŽĄc =
2ŽĆ╬┤l

sin(╬Ėi/2) + cos(╬Ėi/2)(ŽĆ ŌłÆ ╬Ėi/2).
(6)

(a)

­Ø£ā!

­Øæģ!

­ØæÖ"

­ØæÖ!
­Øæ¤

(b)

Figure 1: a) 3D printed sample loaded in the uniaxial frame. b) Extensometer and parameters to obtain circumferential
strain.

3.2
Samples: configuration and preparation

We designed twenty types of cylindrical samples having different configurations of voids. These samples

were 62.5 mm long with a diameter of 25 mm. This way, the 2.5 proportion between length and diameter

suggested by ASTM-D695 and rock experimentalists e.g. (Paterson & Wong, 2005) is achieved. We divided

the samples into two groups designed for two phases of experiments.
In the preliminary phase of tests

(numbering of samples preceded with 1), we compressed only five types of cores that are either plain or have

a single void (samples 1.1ŌĆō1.5). Their simple configuration allowed us to verify the influence of 3D printer

type, specifications (or cure time), and long-crack edge effects on the results (see Section 4.5). Subsequently,

in the second phase, we chose the best performingŌĆöin the context of measurement/prediction errorŌĆö3D

printer and specification to perform experiments on fifteen types of cores having voids with diminished

edge effect and more complicated configurations (samples 2.1ŌĆō2.15). Let us discuss the configuration and

preparation of the samples from each group separately.

The longitudinal and cross-sections of samples designed for the preliminary phase of experiments are depicted

in Figure 2. Concise description of the voids geometries can be found in Table 2. Sample 1.1 is necessary to

obtain the elastic properties of the background material that are used in the theoretical calculations (3)ŌĆō(4).

10


Theoretically, a void with a very low aspect ratio makes the softening more pronounced, an this effect should

be even more significant if the volume of the pore increases. Therefore, samples 1.2 and 1.4 were designed

to verify the influence of pore volume along with the possible effects of decreasing the distance between pore

boundary and sample edge. Samples 1.3 and 1.5 contain one prolate ellipsoid and one sphere, respectively.

The sizes of voids are designed in such a way as to overcome the limitation of printer resolution and make

the softening significant enough for it to be easily measurable. The samples were printed using FDM (Prusa

i3 MK3S+ printer) and SLA (Form3+ printer) technologies. In the case of FDM printing, we used PLA

as the filament material. We set 100% rectilinear infill and select two different options for wall thicknesses

(perimeters); our samples have either two or five perimeters. In Figure 4, we present half-printed samples

having two perimeters. It can be seen that the low aspect ratio of cracks in samples 1.2 and 1.4 leads to

some printing imperfections. Also, the visual effect that the number of perimeters has on the edges of both

the sample and the internal void can be appreciated in Figure 3.

In the case of the SLA printing, we used standard grey resin. The manufacturer suggests putting freshly

printed material in IPA (alcohol) and heating it to make the fabric stiffer. In this paper, we go beyond this

suggestion and check two other procedures: a) IPA cleaning and cure for a month without heating, b) IPA

cleaning and cure for a week without heating, and c) IPA cleaning, heating (60ŌŚ”C), and fast cure (between 4

hours to 2 days). This way, we verify the influence of a cure time on the sample stiffness and compare it with

the influence of the heating. In Figure 5, we present cleaned SLA samples cut in half. While cutting them,

we noticed the remaining residual resin inside the voids that may have an influence on sample stiffness, as

shown in Figure 6.

Figure 2: Geometry of samples designed for the preliminary phase of the experiments, where dimensions are in millimetres.
Sample 1.1 is plain, whereas samples 1.2 and 1.4 consist of strongly oblate spheres having a 0.1 aspect ratio.

The longitudinal and cross-sections of samples designed for the final phase of experiments are depicted in

11


sample
void type
radius [mm]
aspect ratio
number of voids
orientation

1.1
ŌĆö
ŌĆö
ŌĆö
0
ŌĆö

1.2
oblate spheroid
2.5
0.1
1
horizontal

1.3
prolate spheroid
1.5
10
1
vertical

1.4
oblate spheroid
10
0.1
1
horizontal

1.5
sphere
4
1
1
ŌĆö

Table 2: Description of samples designed for the preliminary phase of the experiments. All voids are placed in the centre of
the sample.

Figure 3: Effect of prescribed perimeters in FDM (two in the left, five to the right).

Figure 4: Half-printed FDM samples having two perimeters used in the preliminary phase of experiments. Samples have
brims that prevent their detachment from the bed.

12


Figure 5: Printed and deformed SLA samples cut in half with voids cleaned

Figure 6: Residual resin present in the uncleaned void of SLA.

13


Figure 7; the concise description of voidsŌĆÖ geometries can be found in Table 3. Samples 2.1 and 2.2 contain

a sphere and a prolate spheroid, respectively. They are similar to samples 1.5 and 1.3, but the volume

fraction of the voids is larger to augment the softening effect. In the remaining samples, 2.3ŌĆō2.15, we focus

on crack-like shapes that are crucial in the context of e.g., geomaterials. These samples consist of either

isolated, overlapping, or crossing oblate spheroids having a 0.2 aspect ratio and radius of 8 mm. The radius

of the voids is smaller than that of sample 1.4; this way, the edge effect is diminished and potential collapse

of the crack is inhibited. By contrast, the aspect ratio is augmented to a) avoid printing imperfections, b)

keep a significant softening effect, c) keep it flat enough to be considered a crack, and d) allow fluid injection

in the future. Samples 2.3 and 2.4 are designed to verify the influence of a crack-like void orientation. We

designed other samples to verify the possible influence of interactions between two vertical cracks (samples

2.5 and 2.8), horizontal cracks (samples 2.6 and 2.9), and vertical and horizontal cracks (samples 2.7, 2.10,

and 2.11). Further, samples 2.12ŌĆō2.15 may allow us to measure the significant softening effect (as compared

to plain sample 1.1) and interaction influence of a moderate crack concentration; the total volume fraction of

voids in samples 2.12ŌĆō2.13 is ŽĢ Ōēł 5.6% and in samples 2.14ŌĆō2.15 is ŽĢ Ōēł 11.2%. Note that the overlapping of

the samples is small enough to keep the crack-like shapes but perhaps sufficient to equilibrate pore pressure

in future fluid injection experiments.
In this phase of experiments, all samples are printed using FDM

technology and have two perimeters. The interior of each void (either isolated, overlapping, or crossing) type

is shown in Figure 8.

14


Figure 7: Geometry of samples designed for the final phase of experiments, where dimensions are in millimetres. Samples
2.3ŌĆō2.15 consist of either isolated, overlapping, or crossing oblate spheroids having a 0.2 aspect ratio and 8mm of radius.

15


sample
void type(s)
number of voids
void centre to sample centre [mm]
orientation(s)

2.1
sphere, a = 8mm
1
0
ŌĆö

2.2
prolate spheroid
1
0
vrt.
a = 5mm, ╬│ = 3

2.3
oblate spheroid
1
0
vert.

2.4
oblate spheroid
1
0
hor.

2.5
oblate spheroids
2
18/-18
vrt./vrt.

2.6
oblate spheroids
2
11.6/-11.6
hor./hor.

2.7
oblate spheroids
2
14.8/-14.8
vrt./hor.

2.8
oblate spheroids
2
7.7/-7.7
vrt./vrt.

2.9
oblate spheroids
2
1.3/-1.3
hor./hor.

2.10
oblate spheroids
2
7.7/-1.3
vrt./hor.

2.11
oblate spheroids
2
0/0
vrt./hor.

2.12
oblate spheroids
4
18.75/3.35/-22.55/-25.15
vrt./vrt./hor./hor.

2.13
oblate spheroids
4
15.4/0/-9/-11.6
vrt./vrt./hor./hor.

2.14
oblate spheroids
8
18.75/3.35/-12.15/-14.75/
vrt.x2/hor.x6
-17.35/-19.95/-22.55/-25.15

2.15
oblate spheroids
8
15.5/0.1/-8.9/-11.5/
vrt.x2/hor.x6
-14.1/-16.7/-19.3/-21.9

Table 3: Description of samples designed for the final phase of experiments. All voids are centred horizontally. The distance
measured from the void centre towards the bottom of the sample is positive. Orientations of the voids are listed in descending
order starting from the uppermost void. All oblate spheroids have a radius a = 8mm and aspect ratio ╬│ = 0.2.

16


(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)
(e)
(f)

Figure 8: Half-printed FDM samples having two perimeters, used in the final phase of experiments. Each type of printed
void is shown. These configurations are present in a) sample 2.1, b) sample 2.2, c) samples 2.3, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.10, 2.12ŌĆō2.15,
d) samples 2.4, 2.6, 2.7, 2.9, 2.10, 2.12ŌĆō2.15, e) sample 2.11, and f) samples 2.14ŌĆō2.15. All cores have brims that prevent their
detachment from the bed.

17


3.3
Moduli definitions and measurement repetitions

As mentioned in Section 2.3, we measure either YoungŌĆÖs modulus and PoissonŌĆÖs ratio (plain samples) or

YoungŌĆÖs modulus only (samples with voids). We subjectively choose four pairs of start and end points on

the strain-stress curve to define the limits for YoungŌĆÖs moduli:

ŌĆó 15% and 30% of the yield strength, E15ŌłÆ30,

ŌĆó 25% and 50% of the yield strength, E25ŌłÆ50,

ŌĆó 25% and 75% of the yield strength, E25ŌłÆ75,

ŌĆó lower and upper elastic limits, Eel.

For instance,

E15ŌłÆ30 =
0.30 Žāy ŌłÆ 0.15 Žāy

u(0.30 Žāy) ŌłÆ u(0.15 Žāy) ├Ś l,
(7)

where Žāy is the stress at yield, u is the displacement measured by LVDT, l is the sampleŌĆÖs average length.

In the case of FDM, the yield strength is determined based on the first peak of the stress-strain curve. In

the case of SLA, yield is difficult to determine unequivocally due to the continuous growth of stress with

displacement. Therefore, we arbitrarily choose a threshold of 6% strain to obtain the reference point (yield

strength approximation) used to calculate the limits of YoungŌĆÖs modulus. To define the PoissonŌĆÖs ratio, we

first estimate two ranges of stresses that correspond to the elastic part of axial and radial curves. Second, we

choose a common range of stress thatŌĆöin a set theory senseŌĆöis the intersection of the two aforementioned

ranges. This way, the parts of ╬Ą1 and ╬Ąr needed for PoissonŌĆÖs ratio computation are unequivocally determined.

Our compression experiments and modulus measurements are less prone to random errors due to the repe-

titions of 3D printing and testing of identically designed samples. This way, more reliable average values of

moduli can be obtained. Table 4 lists the number of repetitions of valid measurements for each sample type

of this study. Note that the plain sample (1.1) has the most repetitions; this is due to its importance for the

EMT calculations.

4
Results

4.1
Stress-strain curves

Results of axial strain as a function of stress are plotted for the five preliminary-phase microstructural

configurations (samples 1.1-1.5) (Figure 9). Selected curves are plotted for a) FDM printed samples with 2

perimeters (FDMt), b) FDM printed samples with 5 perimeters (FDMv, c) SLA printed samples tested after

18


YM valid measurements
PR valid measurements

sample 1.1
sample 1.2ŌĆō1.5
sample 2.1ŌĆō2.15
sample 1.1

FDMt (two perim.)
12
6
6
5

FDMv (five perim.)
12
6
ŌĆö
4

SLAm (month cure)
3
3
ŌĆö
3

SLAw (week cure)
3
3
ŌĆö
3

SLAf (fast cure, heated)
3
3
ŌĆö
3

Table 4: Number of repetitions of valid YoungŌĆÖs moduli and PoissonŌĆÖs ratio measurements for each sample type

month of post-printing curing time at room temperature (SLAm), d) SLA after a week of curing time at

ambient temperature (SLAw) and e) SLA after curing in a heated chamber at 60ŌŚ”C for one hour, and then

post-curing at ambient temperature for a minimum time of four hours and a maximum of two days (SLAf).

Curves are plotted up to their yield points, displaying their elastic ranges and the portions of the curves

considered for elasticity modulus computation. Circumferential strain as a function of stress is plotted for a

plain FDMt sample, displaying the ranges considered for PoissonŌĆÖs ratio determination.

It can be seen that FDM printed samples are stiffer and stonger with respect to SLA samples, and that the

printing pattern (numbers of delimiting perimeters) does not significantly affect their mechanical behavior,

although samples printed with two perimeters (FDMt) consistently display higher stiffness and higher yield

strength with respect to those with five delimiting contours (FDMv) for all preliminary-phase samples except

for 1.4. SLA printed samples are relatively soft, elasto-plastic materials. Curing time and method have a

significant influence on the mechanical properties of SLA printed samples. Two days of curing time within a

heated chamber at 60ŌŚ”C is shown to be the most effective method to drive the material to higher mechanical

strength. In addition, samples cured for one month are consistently stiffer and stronger than samples cured

for one week.

The microstructural configuration of samples does not significantly affect the mechanical properties of

preliminary-phase 3D printed samples, except for the 1.4 microstructural design, which notably alters the

deformation mechanism of FDM printed samples. This design has the largest void fraction and smallest

distance from void to sample edge. Predictably, this microstructural configuration induces a significant soft-

ening effect and causes a different deformation mechanism by which the pore boundaries collapse at lower

stress due to stress concentrations at the thin walls surrounding the pore (Figure 10).

PoissonŌĆÖs ratio measurements for plain FDM samples printed with two and five perimeters (FDMt, FDMv)

and SLA samples with the previously described curing methods (SLAm, SLAw, SLAf) are indicated in Table

5.

19


Figure 9:
Selected stress-strain curves for samples 1.1-1.5 that are FDM with two perimeters (FDMt) or five perimeters
(FDMv), SLA cured for a month (SLAm), a week (SLAw), or heated and fast-cured for less than two days (SLAf). Elastic
parts, yield points and the range of curve to obtain E15ŌłÆ30 are presented. Additionally, the left-upper figure presents the
circumferential and volumetric strains of plain FDM sample having two perimeters (FDMt). The PoissonŌĆÖs ratio is obtained
based on the elastic portion of the circumferential strain that lies within elastic part of the axial strain.

20


FDMt
FDMv
SLAm
SLAw
SLAf

╬Į0 = 0.41
╬Į0 = 0.38
╬Į0 = 0.42
╬Į0 = 0.42
╬Į0 = 0.45

Table 5: PoissonŌĆÖs ratio for plain FDM and SLA samples.

Figure 10: Inelastic deformation mechanism due to pore space collapse in FDM printed sample with a large oblate pore
(1.4).

4.2
Mean YoungŌĆÖs modulus of plain FDM samples

The average YoungŌĆÖs modulus calculated from the arithmetic mean of 12 and 6 repeated tests for plain FDM

samples, and samples 1.2ŌĆö1.5, respectively, are shown in Figure 11 and listed in Table 6 for the four modulus

determination methods described in section 2.2. YoungŌĆÖs modulus of plain samples consistently lie between

2.6 and 2.7GPa, and display a scatter of ┬▒0.2GPa. Results do not follow a Gaussian distribution, although

this is likely due to insufficient number of tested samples. These results highlight the need for considering

means calculated from a significant statistical sample size to obtain meaningful and representative results

for the elasticity modulus of 3D printed samples.

YoungŌĆÖs modulus results vary depending on the portion of the elastic range chosen for modulus computation.

The higher magnitudes are obtained using the 25 to 50% portion of the elastic range. FDMt samples display

a consistently higher YoungŌĆÖs modulus with respect to FDMv, although the difference is not significant

(0.05GPa or less).

4.3
Effect of post-printing curing methods for the mechanical behaviour of SLA

samples

Samples 1.1ŌĆö1.5 were printed using the SLA method and treated with the curing procedures described in

Section 4.1 (1 month at room temperature, 1 week at room temperature, 1 hour in 60ŌŚ”C chamber). Three

series of samples 1.1-1.5 were printed, treated, and tested for each curing method. Two additional series

21


Figure 11:
Distributions of experimentally obtained YoungŌĆÖs modulus for plain FDM samples having either two or five
perimeters. In total, there were twentyŌĆōfour samples tested. Results in each chart are grouped into twelve bins.

1.1t
1.1v
1.1t & 1.1v

E15ŌłÆ30
mean
2.69
2.64
2.67
range
2.52 ŌłÆ 2.83
2.44 ŌłÆ 2.77
2.44 ŌłÆ 2.83

E25ŌłÆ50
mean
2.73
2.68
2.71
range
2.61 ŌłÆ 2.79
2.46 ŌłÆ 2.77
2.46 ŌłÆ 2.79

E25ŌłÆ75
mean
2.64
2.61
2.62
range
2.50 ŌłÆ 2.73
2.44 ŌłÆ 2.77
2.44 ŌłÆ 2.77

Eel
mean
2.63
2.59
2.61
range
2.54 ŌłÆ 2.70
2.41 ŌłÆ 2.70
2.41 ŌłÆ 2.70

Table 6: Experimentally obtained YoungŌĆÖs modulus for plain FDM samples having either two (sample 1.1t, twelve tests) or
five perimeters (sample 1.1v, twelve tests). Mean values and ranges of differently defined modulus are given.

22


of samples were tested immediately after heating (no curing time). This workflow was followed to evaluate

the repeatability of results for printed samples following the same post-printing processing. Calculations of

E25ŌłÆ50 for the different series processed using the same method, for each curing procedure, are displayed in

Figure 12. The YoungŌĆÖs modulus (E25ŌłÆ50) axis ranges are set purposely to allow visualisation of the scatter of

results between different series. The scatter in E25ŌłÆ50 is overall relatively low, and below 0.2 GPa. However,

there is a consistent trend in the magnitude of YoungŌĆÖs modulus between series. For example, series 2 of 1

month-cured samples have consistently higher E25ŌłÆ50 magnitudes for all 1.1ŌĆö1.5 samples with respect to

series 1 and 3, which were subjected to equal post-printing procedures. Similar trends are observed for all

curing methods, indicating a clear influence of printing batch on the resulting mechanical properties. This

observation highlights the difficulty of repeatability for SLA printed samples, even after following the same

post-processing procedures.

The effect of the elapsed time between the curing of whole SLA samples and the execution of the uniaxial

test to determine the mechanical properties of SLA samples is displayed in Figure 13 for samples that were

printed, cured in a 60ŌŚ”C chamber, and tested after 15 minutes to 2.5 hours. It can be seen that the elapsed

time between heating and conducting the deformation experiments correlates positively with stiffness, i.e.,

allowing the samples to cool has a hardening effect on SLA printed samples.

4.4
Elastic and inelastic ranges for FDM and SLA samples

Figure 14 displays results from the strain-curves from tests on preliminary phase FDM and SLA printed

samples split into the average percentages of the lower inelastic phase (origin to lower elastic limit), elastic

phase (lower to upper elastic limits) and the upper inelastic phase (upper elastic limit to yield point). FDM

samples deform elastically over a wider range of stress, with an average of 61.7% of the stress-strain curves.

This average is significantly decreased by sample 1.4, which displays a much smaller elastic range due to the

different deformation mechanism driven by the pore space collapse. Average elastic ranges for the secondary

phase of FDM printed samples (Figure15) are likely more representative of the mechanical behavior of FDM

samples, as none of them displays pore space collapse. They display an average elastic range of 72.4% of the

total stress-strain curve.

By contrast, SLA printed samples experience a consistent, albeit smaller, elastic range of 49.3%.
The

microstructural configuration of sample 1.4 does not produce deformation due to pore space collapse in SLA

printed samples. However, it is important to note that the yield point for SLA printed samples is less well

defined. To avoid arbitrary definitions, the yield point of SLA samples was assumed to correspond to 6% of

axial strain, throughout.

23


Figure 12: Effective YoungŌĆÖs moduli obtained from compression tests of SLA samples. They were printed in a series of five
samples 1.1ŌĆö1.5. Cores were cured for a month, week, were heated with a short cure (between 4 hours and 2 days) or almost
no cure. The results show that series differ from each other, and particular printing sessions may affect the stiffness of samples.

24


Figure 13: Effect of a cure time of heated samples. Decreasing temperature leads to the stiffening of the samples.

Figure 14: Elastic and inelastic parts (in percentages) of an average curve of each FDM and SLA sample type, where the
curve ends at the yield strength. In the case of FDM, the yield is determined based on the flat part of the curve. In the case of
SLA, yield is difficult to determine; hence, it is assumed to correspond to 6% of strain. For FDM, on average, the elastic part
takes 61.7% of the curve. For SLA, on average, the elastic part takes 49.3% of the curve.

25


Figure 15: Elastic and inelastic parts (in percentages) of an average curve of each FDM secondary phase sample, where the
curve ends at the yield strength. On average, the elastic part takes 72.4% of the curve.

4.5
Prediction range from EMT using plain samples results

Now that we have confidently determined the elastic properties of plain SLA and FDM printed samples

(section 4.2), we can use these results to compute the predicted effective modulus for each sample with

voids. However, EMT predictions may not be unequivocal; as they depend on the boundary conditions

chosen for theoretical calculations (uniform stress or uniform strain). As a result, for certain pore geometries,

different boundary conditions can result in different predicted magnitudes for equal void configurations. In

such cases, the prediction of effective YoungŌĆÖs modulus from EMT is a range, and not a single magnitude.

Herein, we describe the effect that pore space volume and shape have on the range of predictions by EMT.

Theoretically, the larger the softening effect caused by a void, the larger the range of estimation isŌĆō meaning

that the prediction becomes equivocal and, hence, less accurate. Both the softening effect and the prediction

range are affected by the interplay of the voidŌĆÖs orientation, shape, and size. For the sake of analysis, let us

assume a single, horizontal, oblate void, such as those embedded in samples 1.2, 1.4 and 2.4, within a FDM

printed sample with two perimeters (FDMt, E0 = 2.69 GPa, and PoissonŌĆÖs ratio of ╬Į0 = 0.41). If we consider

a fixed shape of the horizontal spheroidal void and we increase its radius (e.g., samples 1.2 and 1.4), then

the increased volume of the void leads to higher inaccuracy of EMT prediction (Figure 16). By contrast, in

the case of a fixed volume of the horizontal void (e.g., samples 2.4 and 1.4), the EMT inaccuracy is affected

by the aspect ratio of the spheroid; the lower the aspect ratio, the higher the inaccuracy.

26


Figure 16: Ranges of predictions for FDM samples based on background YoungŌĆÖs modulus, E0 = 2.69 GPa, and background
PoissonŌĆÖs ratio, ╬Į0 = 0.41. The range of prediction increase with the augmentation of the radius of the designed crack, and
with the decrease of the aspect ratio of the ellipsoid.

4.6
Comparison with predictions from Effective Medium Theory

The measured effective elastic modulus of 3D printed samples, considering four different ranges for elasticity

modulus computation (E15ŌłÆ30, E25ŌłÆ50, E25ŌłÆ75 and the whole elastic portion of the curves), are plotted

along with the predicted range for effective YoungŌĆÖs modulus calculated from EMT for each microstructral

configuration for a) FDM, preliminary phase printed samples (Figure 17), b) SLA, preliminary phase printed

samples (Figure 18), and c) secondary phase, FDM printed samples (Figure 19). Details of the plotted values

and the computed error of experimental results with respect to EMT predictions are listed in Tables 7, 8

and 9 in the Appendix. The error between measured and predicted values was calculated as follows:

|R| = |Epredicted ŌłÆ Emeasured|

|Epredicted|
├Ś 100%
(8)

where Emeasured is the average effective YoungŌĆÖs modulus (averaged over a number of repetitions), and

Epredicted is the middle value within the EMT prediction range.

The results of effective YoungŌĆÖs modulus for FDM secondary phase samples correspond to the arithmetic

mean of six tested samples per sample type, and are plotted normalised with respect to the measured

YoungŌĆÖs modulus of plain cores. The best fit to EMT predictions is achieved for effective moduli computed

with E15ŌłÆ30, and for samples printed with two perimeters, which display very small errors of 0.94%, 0.23%,

and 1.08% for samples 1.2, 1.3, and 1.5, respectively. The mismatch between measurements and predictions is

27


highest for sample 1.4 (deformed due to pore space collapse) for any printing set-up and modulus calculation.

Measured effective modulus for samples 1.4 are between 5.95% and 65.6% lower than EMT predictions.

The details of computed effective YoungŌĆÖs modulus and comparison with EMT predictions for SLA printed

samples are displayed in Table 8 and Figure 18. Results are shown for each curing method (1 month cure

SLAm, 1 week cure SLAw, fast and heated cure SLAf) and for different portions of the elastic curve used

for modulus computation. The closest results in terms of matching EMT predictions are achieved with 1

month cured samples (SLAm). The misfit between measurements and predictions are 1.06%, 0.55% and

0.39% for samples 1.2, 1.3, and 1.5, respectively, using E15ŌłÆ30 from the stress vs strain curves. Higher errors

are consistently observed for sample 1.4, with a mismatch ranging between 11.3% and 22.4%. In contrast to

FDM samples, EMT predictions underestimate the effective modulus for this microstructural arrangement

with respect to measurements on SLA printed samples.

Comparisons between EMT prediction with respect to measured effective moduli for secondary phase FDM

printed samples (Figure 19, Table 3) reveal that, as previously observed, lower mismatches between measure-

ments and predictions are obtained using the E15ŌłÆ30 range of the stress vs strain curve, although results are

not significantly affected by the modulus computation method. Overall, the best fits to predictions (error

below 5%) are obtained for samples with simple microstructural arrangements (either one or two pores) and

with lower pore volume fraction (below 3%), which is the case for samples 2.3ŌĆö2.11. The effective YoungŌĆÖs

modulus for sample 2.2 (prolate pore, 5.12% porosity) is consistently underestimated by EMT predictions

by 9-10%. By contrast, EMT overestimates the effective modulus of sample 7 (1 oblate plus 1 prolate pore)

with respect to measurements, by 4-9%. The effective modulus for two overlapping oblate pores (sample 9)

is underestimated by EMT predictions by 7-9.5%.

More complex pore arrangements such as those constituting the internal structure of samples 2.12ŌĆö2.15

display the highest errors between measurements and predictions.
The higher pore fraction volume of

these samples causes a larger softening effect, which results in a wider prediction range from EMT. Effective

modulus measurements for samples 2.12 and 2.13 (ŽĢ Ōēł 5.6%) lie 6-11.4% above the upper limit of the effective

modulus range predicted by EMT. By contrast, measured moduli for samples 2.14 and 2.15 (ŽĢ Ōēł 11.2%) lie

approximately 150% above the upper bound of the predicted range.

28


Figure 17:
Effective YoungŌĆÖs moduli obtained from compression tests of FDM samples (arithmetic mean of results from
six tested prints per sample type). Results are normalised by YoungŌĆÖs modulus of the average plain core taken from Table 6.
Samples have either two or five perimeters. Each figure corresponds to different measures of YoungŌĆÖs moduli. The relative
error [%] between mean EMT predictions and mean uniaxial results are presented. The best fit, on average 2.73%, appears for
YoungŌĆÖs moduli measured within the 15%-30% yield range and for samples having two perimeters.

29


Figure 18:
Effective YoungŌĆÖs moduli obtained from compression tests of SLA samples (arithmetic mean of results from
three tested prints per sample type). Results are normalised by YoungŌĆÖs modulus of the average plain core taken from Table 8.
Samples were cured for a month (m), week (w), or were heated (h) with a short cure (up to two days). Each figure corresponds
to different measures of YoungŌĆÖs moduli. The relative differences [%] between mean EMT predictions and mean uniaxial results
are presented. The best fit, on average 4.07%, appears for YoungŌĆÖs moduli measured within the elastic range and for samples
being cured for a month.

30


Figure 19: Effective YoungŌĆÖs moduli obtained from compressions of FDM plain samples (arithmetic mean of results from
twelve tested prints) and fifteen types of FDM cores with designed voids (arithmetic mean of results from six tested prints per
sample type). All samples have two perimeters. Each figure corresponds to different measures of YoungŌĆÖs moduli. The relative
error [%] between mean EMT predictions and mean uniaxial results are presented. The best fit, on average 23.6%, appears for
YoungŌĆÖs moduli measured within the 15%-30% yield range.

31


5
Discussion

We have produced and subjected to uniaxial compression over two hundred 3D printed samples using two

different printing technologies, considering distinct printing specifications and post-printing processing meth-

ods, and twenty different microstructural configurations. This thorough approach allows us to confidently

state the strengths and limitations of 3D printing to emulate solids with voids and the capacity of effective

medium theory to predict their effective elastic properties. We first discuss the methods and practices that

we have seen to optimize the fit of measured elastic moduli with EMT predictions. We then examine the

constraints on sample dimension and microstructural design that need to be considered for manufacturing

representative porous media.

5.1
3D printing methods and practices for best fit to EMT predictions

The best fit between measured and predicted elasticity moduli for FDM printed samples (error less than

5%, Table 7) were obtained by specifying two contour perimeters, and by computing YoungŌĆÖs modulus

using 15-30% of the stress/strain curve. Our results suggest that the inherent anisotropy in the background

medium produced by the printing method (depositional layering, raster angle), the inter-layer porosity, and

the limited resolution of the printing method, does not impact significantly on the capacity of FDM samples

to emulate a solid medium with voids, when sample design considerations are taken into account (see the

following section).

SLA printed samples can also be used to produce controlled porous media. The best fit of measured effective

elastic properties with respect to EMT predictions (error below 1%, Table 8) is achieved by curing the printed

samples for extended periods (one month in our case), and by considering E15ŌłÆ30 (as above). Successful

results using SLA printing methods to match EMT predictions were also obtained by Zerhouni et al. (2019).

Importantly, though, our results indicate that repeatability using SLA printed samples is more difficult

to achieve. The mechanical properties of SLA samples appear to be affected by uncontrolled factors (e.g.

ambient temperature) that cause slightly different results between printed batches, even if subjected to equal

post-printing processing. In consequence, meaningful comparisons between elastic properties of SLA cores

should always be done on samples printed in the same batch.

We can conclude that both FDM and SLA methods can be used to emulate representative solids with a

controlled void space whose effective elastic properties can be predicted by EMT. However, the need for

long curing times of SLA samples, along with the difficulty of repeatability, added to the higher cost of

this technology and the impossibility of recycling its wasted products, makes FDM a more convenient and

32


equally effective method for this purpose.

5.2
Considerations for microstructural design: pore volume fraction and edge

effect

In order to produce 3D printed samples of an homogeneous medium with voids that can be significantly

compared to predictions from EMT, some considerations need to be taken into account. First, the pore

volume fraction needs to be sufficient to induce a measurable softening effect, but, at the same time, too

large pore volume fraction results in an equivocal, wide range of estimation by EMT that fails to predict the

measured effective moduli of samples.

We observe that, for a pore fraction of ŽĢ Ōēł 5.6%, such as that prescribed for samples 2.12 and 2.13, the range

of effective moduli estimations from EMT becomes too wide, and lie below the measured effective properties

of 3D printed samples.
Results become extremely inaccurate for a pore volume fraction of ŽĢ Ōēł 11.2%

(samples 2.14, 2.15) with errors above 150% (Table 9).

More detailed comparisons can be made between samples with a single pore, equal shape and orientation,

but different pore volume fractions. Samples 1.3 and 2.2 both contain a single, prolate, vertical pore, but

with pore volume fractions of ŽĢ = 0.46% and ŽĢ = 5.12%. The misfit between measurements and EMT

predictions were 0.23% and 9.34%, respectively. The effect of increased pore volume is smaller when pores

are spherical. Sample 1.5 (ŽĢ = 0.87%) displayed a prediction error of 1% whereas sample 2.1 (ŽĢ = 7%) had

a 2.4% error with respect to predictions. Samples 1.2, 1.4 and 2.4 all contain a single, horizontal, oblate

pore but with volume fractions of ŽĢ = 0.02%, ŽĢ = 1.4%, ŽĢ = 1.4%, the latter with an aspect ratio of 0.2 as

opposed to 0.1. The best fit to predictions was obtained for the smaller pore (error of 0.94%), while samples

1.4 and 2.4 displayed errors of 8% and 6%, respectively.

From these results, it is tempting to conclude that smaller pore volume fractions allow EMT to better predict

measured values. However, very small pores induce a negligible softening effect on samples. In these cases

(e.g. sample 1.2, ŽĢ = 0.02%) the measured and predicted effective YoungŌĆÖs modulus lie within the range of

measurements of plain sample modulus, which makes this comparison meaningless. A pore volume fraction of

above Ōēł 1% induces a measurable softening effect, and is therefore interesting for EMT evaluation purposes.

We obtained errors of less than 5% with respect to predictions for samples with either ŽĢ = 1.4% or ŽĢ = 2.8%

(samples 2.3, 2.5, 2.6, 2.8, 2.10, 2.11) and for ŽĢ = 5.2%, if the pore is spherical (sample 2.1).

Interestingly, a good fit between measurements and predictions was also obtained for overlapping pores

(e.g. samples 2.8, 2.10, 2.11), in which the NIA is non-valid. Overall, experimental results show that closer

33


interactions augment measured effective elasticity as compared to samples where voids are not overlapping,

resulting in EMT predictions underestimating the effective properties of samples with interacting pores.

It is also relevant to note that although the volume of the oblate, horizontal pores in samples 1.4 and 2.4 are

the same, the increased aspect ratio of the pore in sample 2.4 (0.2) with respect to sample 1.4 (0.1) reduced

the distance between void boundary and sample edge by 1 mm, which was enough to avoid the edge effect

and a deformation mechanism dominated by pore space collapse. A distance of Ōēł 4 mm from pore boundary

to the sample edge is therefore recommended to avert pore collapse.

Finally, the mean error between predicted and measured effective moduli considering samples 1-13 of the

secondary printing phase lie between 2-5% (Table 9, column 16). This averaged error increases to up to 25%

when also considering samples 2.14, 2.15 (Table 9, column 17). These results highlight the strengths of EMT

for predicting the effective properties of solids containing large, and even interacting, voids, as long as the

pore volume fraction lies below Ōēł 5%.

5.3
Future perspectives: pore-fluid injection into 3D printed samples for undrained

poroelasticity tests

When porous, elastic materials saturated with fluids are subjected to stress changes that may reduce or

increase the volume of pore space, the fluids within them experience a change in pore fluid pressure, which

can significantly influence the strength and deformation of materials (Biot, 1941, 1955). The most significant

poroelastic effects occur in ŌĆÖundrainedŌĆÖ conditions, that is, when fluids are trapped within a poorly connected

pore space and cannot immediately flow in response to stress changes. The undrained poroelastic response

of a material subjected to a change in mean stress can be predicted using the relation (Skempton, 1954; Rice

& Cleary, 1976):

Ōłåpu = BŌłåŽām
(9)

where Ōłåpu is the change in pore fluid pressure, ŌłåŽām the change in mean stress, and B is the SkemptonŌĆÖs

coefficient, a scalar for isotropic materials and a tensor for anisotropic solids and/or with an anisotropic pore

space (Wang, 2000). Obtaining direct measurements of B in the laboratory is a challenging feat, even for the

ŌĆÖsimpleŌĆÖ isotropic case. As a result, the effect of pore space fabric on the poroelastic response of materials

has been only predicted by means of theoretical simulations (Sayers & Kachanov, 1995).

3D printed samples with voids would enable the injection of pore fluids into their isolated pores and to conduct

34


compression experiments while measuring in-situ pore fluid pressure change, using methods adapted from

Brantut & Aben (2021) and/or Proctor et al. (2020). This workflow would lead to direct quantification of

poroelastic parameters, which added to the absolute control of pore space fabric that 3D printing methods

offer, would allow to fully describe the effect of pore geometry anisotropy on the poroelastic response of

materials. This overarching goal constitutes the major motivation for the present study, and is currently a

work in progress.

6
Conclusions

We have fabricated over two hundred 3D printed samples with voids of different sizes and geometries, using

two printing technologies and various specifications, and compared their measured effective properties with

predictions from EMT. From this large amount of data, we can conclude that both FDM and SLA printing

technologies can emulate homogeneous solids with voids whose effective elastic properties can be predicted

by EMT with an error of less than 5%, if certain specifications and considerations are taken into account:

ŌĆó Best results for FDM printed samples are obtained by specifying two contour printing perimeters, and

when 15 to 30% of the stress/strain curve is considered for effective elastic modulus computation.

ŌĆó Best results for SLA printed samples are obtained by longer, post-printing, curing times (one month

in our case).

ŌĆó Although the accuracy obtained for SLA and FDM samples can be similar, the lower cost of FDM,

added to the necessity of long curing times plus identified issues with repeatability and recyclability for

SLA printed samples, makes FDM overall more convenient for the manufacture of solids with voids.

ŌĆó The pore volume fraction of the designed porous samples needs to be above 1% to induce a measur-

able softening effect. However, a pore volume fraction above 5% results in equivocal, wide range of

estimation by EMT that fails to predict the measured effective moduli of samples.

ŌĆó Better fits are obtained for spherical pores with respect to horizontally and vertically oriented pores.

ŌĆó Close interactions between voids leads to a diminished softening effect that is thus overestimated by

EMT predictions.

ŌĆó A minimum distance of 16% of the sample diameter from the pore boundary to the sample edge should

be prescribed for FDM printed samples to avoid an inelastic deformation mechanism through pore

space collapse.

35


Acknowledgements

This research was supported financially by the NERC grant: ŌĆ£Quantifying the Anisotropy of Poroelasticity in

Stressed RockŌĆØ, NE/N007826/1 and NE/T00780X/1. We would like to thank Vitalik Ivanov, Chirs Harbord

and Tongzhang Qu for their help in various laboratory tasks.

A
Tables

36


1.1t
1.2t
1.3t
1.4t
1.5t
1.1t ŌłÆ 1.5t
1.1v
1.2v
1.3v
1.4v
1.5v
1.1v ŌłÆ 1.5v

exp. E15ŌłÆ30
2.69
2.66
2.65
2.06
2.62
2.54
2.64
2.56
2.68
1.99
2.53
2.48

exp. span
0.31
0.26
0.29
0.23
0.18
ŌłÆ
0.33
0.35
0.30
0.14
0.14
ŌłÆ

th. E15ŌłÆ30
ŌłÆ
2.69
2.66
2.25
2.65
2.60
ŌłÆ
2.63
2.61
2.22
2.60
2.51

th. range
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.07
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.06
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ

|R|m
15ŌłÆ30 [%]
ŌłÆ
0.94
0.23
8.66
1.08
2.73
ŌłÆ
2.84
2.62
10.1
2.68
4.55

|R|cls
15ŌłÆ30 [%]
ŌłÆ
0.94
0.22
5.65
1.07
1.97
ŌłÆ
2.84
2.62
7.74
2.66
3.97

exp. E25ŌłÆ50
2.73
2.69
2.69
0.79
2.68
2.31
2.68
2.62
2.69
0.75
2.64
2.28

exp. span
0.19
0.19
0.21
0.11
0.16
ŌłÆ
0.31
0.32
0.16
0.11
0.15
ŌłÆ

th. E25ŌłÆ50
ŌłÆ
2.72
2.69
2.28
2.68
2.60
ŌłÆ
2.68
2.65
2.25
2.64
2.55

th. range
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.07
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.06
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ

|R|m
25ŌłÆ50 [%]
ŌłÆ
1.31
0.35
65.6
0.20
16.9
ŌłÆ
2.14
1.59
66.8
0.06
17.6

|R|cls
25ŌłÆ50 [%]
ŌłÆ
1.31
0.34
64.4
0.19
16.6
ŌłÆ
2.14
1.58
65.9
0.04
17.4

exp. E25ŌłÆ75
2.64
2.61
2.61
0.94
2.59
2.27
2.61
2.54
2.59
0.91
2.56
2.24

exp. span
0.23
0.10
0.18
0.07
0.10
ŌłÆ
0.32
0.23
0.20
0.10
0.11
ŌłÆ

th. E25ŌłÆ75
ŌłÆ
2.63
2.60
2.21
2.59
2.51
ŌłÆ
2.60
2.58
2.19
2.56
2.48

th. range
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.07
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.06
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ

|R|m
25ŌłÆ75 [%]
ŌłÆ
0.79
0.02
57.6
0.22
14.7
ŌłÆ
2.36
0.52
58.3
0.21
15.4

|R|cls
25ŌłÆ75 [%]
ŌłÆ
0.79
0.01
56.2
0.20
14.3
ŌłÆ
2.36
0.51
57.2
0.20
15.1

exp. Eel
2.63
2.61
2.61
2.00
2.56
2.48
2.59
2.49
2.56
1.94
2.52
2.42

exp. span
0.17
0.17
0.24
0.33
0.15
ŌłÆ
0.29
0.28
0.19
0.25
0.24
ŌłÆ

th. Eel
ŌłÆ
2.62
2.60
2.20
2.58
2.50
ŌłÆ
2.59
2.56
2.18
2.55
2.47

th. range
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.07
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.06
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ

|R|m
el [%]
ŌłÆ
0.46
0.75
8.95
0.88
2.76
ŌłÆ
3.55
0.15
11.1
1.18
3.99

|R|cls
el [%]
ŌłÆ
0.46
0.74
5.95
0.86
2.00
ŌłÆ
3.55
0.14
8.76
1.17
3.40

Table 7: Mean experimental (exp.) and theoretical (th.) YoungŌĆÖs moduli for five FDM sample types, along with the span of the experimental results, range of theoretical
predictions, and the relative errors. Samples have either two (subscript t) or five perimeters (subscript v). Predictions are made based on mean YoungŌĆÖs moduli and PoissonŌĆÖs
ratios of plain samples (1.1t or 1.1v). |R|m
Y stands for the relative error of the mean prediction (central value within the predicted YoungŌĆÖs modulus range) with respect to the
mean measurement, |R|cls
Y
denotes the relative error of the closest prediction (value within the predicted YoungŌĆÖs modulus range) with respect to the mean measurement, where
Y is replaced by 15 ŌłÆ 30, 25 ŌłÆ 50, 25 ŌłÆ 75, or ŌĆśelŌĆÖ indicating YoungŌĆÖs moduli calculation method.

37


1.1m
1.2m
1.3m
1.4m
1.5m
1.1m ŌłÆ 1.5m
1.1w
1.2w
1.3w
1.4w
1.5w
1.1w ŌłÆ 1.5w
1.1f
1.2f
1.3f
1.4f
1.5f
1.1f ŌłÆ 1.5f

exp. E15ŌłÆ30
1.45
1.43
1.42
1.39
1.42
1.42
1.20
1.10
1.14
1.16
1.12
1.15
1.52
1.41
1.51
1.51
1.51
1.49

exp. span
0.07
0.06
0.10
0.04
0.15
ŌłÆ
0.12
0.29
0.06
0.09
0.08
ŌłÆ
0.11
0.06
0.12
0.11
0.03
ŌłÆ

th. E15ŌłÆ30
ŌłÆ
1.44
1.43
1.21
1.42
1.38
ŌłÆ
1.20
1.19
1.00
1.18
1.15
ŌłÆ
1.52
1.51
1.25
1.50
1.44

th. range
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.04
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.04
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.07
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ

|R|m
15ŌłÆ30 [%]
ŌłÆ
1.06
0.55
14.9
0.39
4.24
ŌłÆ
8.13
4.54
15.3
5.19
8.29
ŌłÆ
7.11
0.13
21.4
1.09
7.42

|R|cls
15ŌłÆ30 [%]
ŌłÆ
1.06
0.55
11.1
0.37
3.27
ŌłÆ
8.13
4.53
11.1
5.17
7.24
ŌłÆ
7.11
0.12
14.5
1.07
5.71

exp. E25ŌłÆ50
1.44
1.42
1.41
1.34
1.36
1.39
1.14
1.12
1.10
1.09
1.12
1.12
1.47
1.40
1.44
1.46
1.49
1.45

exp. span
0.09
0.06
0.09
0.09
0.12
ŌłÆ
0.07
0.14
0.02
0.01
0.02
ŌłÆ
0.13
0.10
0.05
0.11
0.05
ŌłÆ

th. E25ŌłÆ50
ŌłÆ
1.44
1.42
1.20
1.42
1.37
ŌłÆ
1.14
1.13
0.95
1.12
1.09
ŌłÆ
1.47
1.45
1.20
1.44
1.39

th. range
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.04
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.04
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.07
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ

|R|m
25ŌłÆ50 [%]
ŌłÆ
1.47
0.74
11.3
3.95
4.37
ŌłÆ
1.44
2.19
14.4
0.23
4.57
ŌłÆ
4.20
0.76
21.7
3.51
7.54

|R|cls
25ŌłÆ50 [%]
ŌłÆ
1.47
0.73
7.57
3.94
3.43
ŌłÆ
1.44
2.18
10.3
0.21
3.53
ŌłÆ
4.20
0.75
14.8
3.49
5.82

exp. E25ŌłÆ75
1.30
1.28
1.27
1.22
1.24
1.26
1.03
1.02
0.99
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.29
1.26
1.30
1.30
1.34
1.30

exp. span
0.08
0.05
0.08
0.08
0.11
ŌłÆ
0.08
0.11
0.05
0.03
0.04
ŌłÆ
0.12
0.10
0.11
0.10
0.03
ŌłÆ

th. E25ŌłÆ75
ŌłÆ
1.29
1.28
1.08
1.28
1.23
ŌłÆ
1.03
1.02
0.86
1.01
0.98
ŌłÆ
1.29
1.28
1.06
1.27
1.22

th. range
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.04
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.06
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ

|R|m
25ŌłÆ75 [%]
ŌłÆ
1.31
1.12
12.8
3.00
4.56
ŌłÆ
1.29
3.07
13.7
1.60
4.91
ŌłÆ
1.97
1.48
22.3
5.05
7.70

|R|cls
25ŌłÆ75 [%]
ŌłÆ
1.31
1.11
9.01
2.99
3.60
ŌłÆ
1.28
3.06
9.59
1.58
3.88
ŌłÆ
1.97
1.48
15.4
5.03
5.97

exp. Eel
1.39
1.38
1.37
1.32
1.33
1.36
1.13
1.08
1.06
1.10
1.09
1.09
1.46
1.39
1.49
1.46
1.47
1.45

exp. span
0.05
0.06
0.05
0.08
0.12
ŌłÆ
0.09
0.19
0.06
0.02
0.02
ŌłÆ
0.14
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.09
ŌłÆ

th. Eel
ŌłÆ
1.39
1.37
1.16
1.36
1.32
ŌłÆ
1.13
1.12
0.94
1.11
1.08
ŌłÆ
1.46
1.44
1.19
1.43
1.38

th. range
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.04
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.04
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.07
┬▒0.00
ŌłÆ

|R|m
el [%]
ŌłÆ
0.08
0.05
14.1
2.40
4.16
ŌłÆ
4.58
5.18
16.5
2.52
7.19
ŌłÆ
4.33
3.40
22.4
2.55
8.18

|R|cls
el [%]
ŌłÆ
0.08
0.04
10.3
2.38
3.20
ŌłÆ
4.58
5.16
12.3
2.50
6.13
ŌłÆ
4.33
3.40
15.5
2.53
6.45

Table 8: Mean experimental (exp.) and theoretical (th.) YoungŌĆÖs moduli for five SLA sample types, along with the span of the experimental results, range of theoretical
predictions, and the relative errors. Samples are cured for a month (subscript m), a week (subscript w), or are fast-cured and heated (subscript f). Predictions are made based
on mean YoungŌĆÖs moduli and PoissonŌĆÖs ratios of plain samples (1.1m, 1.1w, or 1.1f). |R|m
Y stands for the relative error of the mean prediction (central value within the predicted
YoungŌĆÖs modulus range) with respect to the mean measurement, |R|cls
Y
denotes the relative error of the closest prediction (value within the predicted YoungŌĆÖs modulus range)
with respect to the mean measurement, where Y is replaced by 15 ŌłÆ 30, 25 ŌłÆ 50, 25 ŌłÆ 75, or ŌĆśelŌĆÖ indicating YoungŌĆÖs moduli calculation method.

38


2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.13
2.14
2.15
2.1ŌĆō2.13
2.1ŌĆō2.15

exp. E15ŌłÆ30
2.28
2.58
2.57
2.31
2.55
2.19
2.19
2.67
2.38
2.40
2.37
2.23
2.25
2.18
2.09
2.38
2.35

exp. span
0.15
0.15
0.62
0.40
0.58
0.34
0.79
0.34
0.17
0.27
0.26
0.35
0.09
0.16
0.12
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ

th. E15ŌłÆ30
2.34
2.36
2.64
2.46
2.60
2.21
2.41
2.60
2.21
2.41
2.41
2.10
2.10
0.86
0.86
2.37
2.17

th. range
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.08
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.08
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.12
┬▒0.12
┬▒0.86
┬▒0.86
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ

|R|m
15ŌłÆ30 [%]
2.43
9.34
2.84
6.10
1.83
1.20
9.13
2.93
7.51
0.34
1.68
6.41
7.29
152
142
4.54
23.6

|R|cls
15ŌłÆ30 [%]
1.26
8.12
2.83
5.37
1.76
0
8.18
2.86
3.86
0
0.64
0.48
1.31
26.2
20.9
2.82
5.58

exp. E25ŌłÆ50
2.36
2.64
2.61
2.46
2.60
2.23
2.28
2.71
2.40
2.42
2.43
2.32
2.30
2.25
2.17
2.44
2.41

exp. span
0.21
0.20
0.64
0.37
0.42
0.22
0.82
0.22
0.12
0.19
0.26
0.26
0.19
0.17
0.19
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ

th. E25ŌłÆ50
2.37
2.40
2.68
2.49
2.63
2.24
2.44
2.63
2.24
2.44
2.44
2.13
2.13
0.87
0.87
2.40
2.20

th. range
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.08
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.08
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.13
┬▒0.13
┬▒0.87
┬▒0.87
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ

|R|m
25ŌłÆ50 [%]
0.40
10.2
2.67
1.29
1.05
0.50
6.52
3.14
7.14
0.90
0.45
9.12
8.11
157
149
3.96
23.8

|R|cls
25ŌłÆ50 [%]
0
8.95
2.65
0.53
0.99
0
5.53
3.07
3.51
0
0
3.04
2.08
28.7
24.3
2.33
5.56

exp. E25ŌłÆ75
2.34
2.59
2.52
2.41
2.53
2.20
2.25
2.64
2.37
2.40
2.40
2.28
2.29
2.19
2.13
2.40
2.37

exp. span
0.20
0.21
0.66
0.32
0.39
0.22
0.77
0.26
0.14
0.19
0.27
0.27
0.19
0.14
0.17
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ

th. E25ŌłÆ75
2.29
2.32
2.59
2.41
2.54
2.17
2.36
2.54
2.17
2.36
2.36
2.06
2.06
0.84
0.84
2.32
2.13

th. range
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.08
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.08
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.12
┬▒0.12
┬▒0.84
┬▒0.84
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ

|R|m
25ŌłÆ75 [%]
2.18
12.0
2.87
0.02
0.67
1.63
4.57
3.77
9.47
1.65
1.49
10.8
11.4
160
153
4.81
25.0

|R|cls
25ŌłÆ75 [%]
0.98
10.8
2.86
0
0.60
0
3.56
3.70
5.76
0.60
0.44
4.64
5.22
29.8
26.3
3.01
6.35

exp. Eel
2.27
2.55
2.51
2.34
2.49
2.15
2.21
2.62
2.33
2.35
2.34
2.23
2.24
2.16
2.10
2.36
2.33

exp. span
0.24
0.14
0.71
0.38
0.54
0.36
0.83
0.23
0.09
0.19
0.27
0.23
0.13
0.18
0.22
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ

th. Eel
2.28
2.31
2.58
2.40
2.53
2.16
2.35
2.53
2.16
2.35
2.35
2.05
2.05
0.84
0.84
2.32
2.12

th. range
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.03
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.08
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.00
┬▒0.08
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.02
┬▒0.12
┬▒0.12
┬▒0.84
┬▒0.84
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ

|R|m
el [%]
0.69
10.6
2.75
2.37
1.61
0.25
6.25
3.35
7.68
0.07
0.61
9.07
9.28
156
149
4.20
24.0

|R|cls
el [%]
0
9.36
2.74
1.62
1.55
0
5.26
3.28
4.03
0
0
2.99
3.19
28.2
24.5
2.62
5.78

Table 9: Mean experimental (exp.) and theoretical (th.) YoungŌĆÖs moduli for fifteen FDM sample types, along with the span of the experimental results, range of theoretical
predictions, and the relative errors. Predictions are made based on mean YoungŌĆÖs moduli and PoissonŌĆÖs ratios of a plain sample 1.1t. |R|m
Y stands for the relative error of the
mean prediction (central value within the predicted YoungŌĆÖs modulus range) with respect to the mean measurement, |R|cls
Y
denotes the relative error of the closest prediction
(value within the predicted YoungŌĆÖs modulus range) with respect to mean measurement, where Y is replaced by 15 ŌłÆ 30, 25 ŌłÆ 50, 25 ŌłÆ 75, or ŌĆśelŌĆÖ indicating YoungŌĆÖs moduli
calculation method.

39


References

Backus, G. E. (1962). Long-wave elastic anisotropy produced by horizontal layering. J. Geophys. Res., 67,

4427ŌĆō4440.

Biot, M. A. (1941). General theory of three-dimensional consolidation. J. Appl. Phys., 12, 155ŌĆō164.

Biot, M. A. (1955). Theory of elasticity and consolidation for a porous anisotropic solid. J. Appl. Phys., 26,

182ŌĆō185.

Brantut, N., & Aben, F. M. (2021). Fluid pressure heterogeneity during fluid flow in rocks: new laboratory

measurement device and method. Geophys. J. Int., 225, 968ŌĆō983.

Brantut, N., & Petit, L. (2022). Micromechanics of rock damage and its recovery in cyclic loading conditions.

Geophys. J. Int., 233, 145ŌĆō161.

Bristow, J. R. (1960). Microcracks, and the static and dynamic elastic constants of annealed and heavily

cold-worked metals. J. Appl. Phys., 11, 81ŌĆō85.

Bruggeman, D. A. G. (1937). Berechnung verschiedener physikalischer Konstanten von heterogenen Sub-

stanzen. III. Die elastischen Konstanten der quasiisotropen Mischk┬©or- per aus isotropen Substanzen. Ann.

Phys., 421, 160ŌĆō178.

Budiansky, B. (1965). On the elastic moduli of some heterogeneous materials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 13,

223ŌĆō227.

Chockalingam, K., Jawahar, N., & Chandrasekhar, U. (2006). Influence of layer thickness on mechanical

properties in stereolithography. Rapid Prototyping Journal, 12(2), 106ŌĆō113.

Dean, G., Loveday, M., Cooper, P., Read, B., Roebuck, B., & Morrell, R. (1995). Aspects of modulus

measurement. In: Materials Metrology and Standards for Structural Performance, (pp. 150ŌĆō209).

Dugarov, G. A., Kolesnikov, Y. I., Fedin, K. V., Orlov, Y. A., & Ngomayezwe, L. (2022). Acoustic mea-

surements on synthetic fractured samples made using FDM 3D printing technology. In: Processes in

GeoMedia, 4, 9ŌĆō16.

Eshelby, J. D. (1957). The determination of the elastic field of an ellipsoidal inclusion, and related problems.

Proc. R. Soc. A, 241, 376ŌĆō396.

Hashin, Z. (1959). The moduli of an elastic solid, containing spherical particles of another elastic material.

Nonhomogeneity in Elasticity and Plasticity, 9, 463ŌĆō478.

40


Henriques, J. P., de Figueiredo, J. J. S., Santos, L. K., Macedo, D. L., Coutinho, I., da Silva, C. B., Melo,

A. L., Sousa, M., & Azevedo, F. L. (2018). Experimental verification of effective anisotropic crack theories

in variable crack aspect ratio medium. Geophys. Prosp., 66, 141ŌĆō156.

Hill, R. (1952). The elastic behaviour of a crystalline aggregate. Proc. Phys. Soc. A, 65, 349ŌĆō354.

Hill, R. (1965). A self-consistent mechanics of composite materials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 13, 213ŌĆō222.

Huang, L., Stewart, R. R., Dyaur, N., & Baez-Franceschi, J. (2016).
3D-printed rock models: Elastic

properties and the effects of penny-shaped inclusions with fluid substitution. Geophys., 81, 1NDŌĆōZ53.

Huet, C. (1990). Application of variational concepts to size effects in elastic heterogeneous bodies. J. Mech.

Phys. Solids, 38, 813ŌĆō841.

Kachanov, M. (1980). Continuum model of medium with cracks. J. Eng. Mech., 106, 1039ŌĆō1051.

Kachanov, M. (1992). Effective elastic properties of cracked solids: critical review of some basic concepts.

Appl. Mech. Rev., 45, 304ŌĆō335.

Kachanov, M., & Sevostianov, I. (2018). Micromechanics of Materials, with Applications. Springer.

Kazmer, D. (2017). Three-dimensional printing of plastics. In Applied plastics engineering handbook, (pp.

617ŌĆō634). Elsevier.

Li, Y., Linke, B. S., Voet, H., Falk, B., Schmitt, R., & Lam, M. (2017). Cost, sustainability and surface

roughness qualityŌĆōa comprehensive analysis of products made with personal 3d printers. CIRP Journal

of Manufacturing Science and Technology, 16, 1ŌĆō11.

Malkowski, P., Ostrowski, L., & Brodny, J. (2018). Analysis of YoungŌĆÖs modulus for Carboniferous sedi-

mentary rocks and its relationship with uniaxial compressive strength using different methods of modulus

determination. J. Sustain. Min., 17, 145ŌĆō157.

Mohamed, O. A., Masood, S. H., & Bhowmik, J. L. (2015). Optimization of fused deposition modeling

process parameters: a review of current research and future prospects. Advances in manufacturing, 3,

42ŌĆō53.

Ndao, B., Do, D.-P., & Hoxha, D. (2017). P- and S-wave anisotropy to characterise and quantify damage

in media: laboratory experiment using synthetic sample with aligned microcracks. Geophys. Prosp., 65,

181ŌĆō200.

OŌĆÖConnell, R. J., & Budiansky, B. (1974). Seismic velocities in dry and saturated cracked solids. J. Geophys.

Res., 79, 5412ŌĆō5426.

41


Oda, M., Suzuki, K., & Maeshibu, T. (1984). Elastic compliance for rock-like materials with random cracks.

Soils Found., 24, 27ŌĆō40.

Paterson, M., & Wong, T.-F. (2005). Experimental Rock DeformationŌĆöThe Brittle Field. Springer, Berlin,

2nd ed.

Postma, G. W. (1955). Wave propagation in a stratified medium. Geophys., 20, 780ŌĆō806.

Proctor, B., Lockner, D., Kilgore, B., Mitchell, T., & Beeler, N. (2020). Direct evidence for fluid pres-

sure, dilatancy, and compaction affecting slip in isolated faults. Geophysical Research Letters, 47(16),

e2019GL086767.

Reuss, A. (1929). Berechnung der Flie├¤grense von Mischkristallen auf Grund der Plastizit┬©atsbedingung f┬©ur

Einkristalle. Z. Angew. Math. Mech., 9, 49ŌĆō58.

Rice, J. R., & Cleary, M. P. (1976). Some basic stress diffusion solutions for fluid-saturated elastic porous

media with compressible constituents. Reviews of Geophysics, 14(2), 227ŌĆō241.

Santos, L. K., de Figueiredo, J. J. S., Macedo, D. L., & de Melo, A. L. (2017). A new way to construct

synthetic porous fractured medium. J. Pet. Sci. Eng., 156, 763ŌĆō768.

Sayers, C., & Kachanov, M. (1991). A simple technique for finding effective elastic constants of cracked

solids for arbitrary crack orientation statistics. Int. J. Solids Struct., 7, 671ŌĆō680.

Sayers, C., & Kachanov, M. (1995). Microcrack-induced elastic wave anisotropy of brittle rocks. J. Geophys.

Res., 100, 4149ŌĆō4156.

Schoenberg, M., & Douma, J. (1988). Elastic wave propagation in media with parallel fractures and aligned

cracks. Geophys. Prospect., 36, 571ŌĆō590.

Schoenberg, M., & Helbig, K. (1997). Orthorhombic media: Modeling elastic wave behavior in a vertically

fractured earth. Geophys., 62, 1954ŌĆō1974.

Shafiro, B., & Kachanov, M. (1997). Materials with fluid-filled pores of various shapes: Effective elastic

properties and fluid pressure polarization. Int. J. Solids Struct., 34, 3517ŌĆō3540.

Skempton, A. (1954). The pore-pressure coefficients a and b. Geotechnique, 4(4), 143ŌĆō147.

Stewart, R. R., Dyaur, N., Omoboya, B., de Figueiredo, J. J. S., Willis, M., & Sil, S. (2013). Physical

modeling of anisotropic domains: Ultrasonic imaging of laser-etched fractures in glass. Geophys., 78,

1JFŌĆōZ24.

42


Voigt, W. (1889). Ueber die Beziehung zwischen den beiden Elastizit┬©atskonstanten Isotroper K┬©orper. Ann.

Phys., 274, 573ŌĆō587.

Walsh, J. B. (1965). The effect of cracks on the compressibility of rock. J. Geophys. Res., 70, 381ŌĆō389.

Wang, H. (2000). Theory of linear poroelasticity with applications to geomechanics and hydrogeology, vol. 2.

Princeton university press.

Zerhouni, O. (2019). A study on the effective elastic properties of random porous materials : 3D Printing,

Experiments and Numerics. PhD Thesis, Institut Polytechnique de Paris.

Zerhouni, O., Tarantino, M., & Danas, K. (2019). Numerically-aided 3d printed random isotropic porous

materials approaching the hashin-shtrikman bounds. Composites Part B: Engineering, 156, 344ŌĆō354.

Zimmerman, R. W. (1986). The effect of cracks on the compressibility of rock. J. Appl. Mech., 53, 500ŌĆō504.

43


