1 / 21

Pressure-induced non-monotonic crossover of steady relaxation dynamics in a

metallic glass

Xin Zhang,1,5 Hongbo Lou,1,5 Beatrice Ruta,2,* Yuriy Chushkin,3 Federico Zontone,3 Shubin Li,2

Dazhe Xu,1 Tao Liang,1 Zhidan Zeng,1 Ho-kwang Mao,1,4,* Qiaoshi Zeng1,4,*

1. Center for High Pressure Science and Technology Advanced Research, Pudong, Shanghai 201203, P.R. China

2. Université Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Institut Lumière Matière, Campus LyonTech - La 

Doua, F-69622, Lyon, France

3. ESRF- The European Synchrotron, CS 40220, 38043 Grenoble, France

4. Shanghai Key Laboratory of Material Frontiers Research in Extreme Environments (MFree), Shanghai 

Advanced Research in Physical Sciences (SHARPS), Pudong, Shanghai 201203, P.R. China

5 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
* To whom correspondence should be addressed: zengqs@hpstar.ac.cn, beatrice.ruta@univ-lyon1.fr, or 

maohk@hpstar.ac.cn

Abstract

Relaxation dynamics, as a key to understand glass formation and glassy properties, 
remains an elusive and challenging issue in condensed matter physics. In this work, in 
situ high-pressure synchrotron high-energy x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy has 
been developed to probe the atomic-scale relaxation dynamics of a cerium-based 
metallic glass during compression. Although the sample density continuously increases, 
the collective atomic motion initially slows down as generally expected and then 
counter-intuitively accelerates with further compression (density increase), showing an 
unusual non-monotonic pressure-induced steady relaxation dynamics crossover at ~3 
GPa. Furthermore, by combining in situ high-pressure synchrotron x-ray diffraction, 
the relaxation dynamics anomaly is evidenced to closely correlate with the dramatic 
changes in local atomic structures during compression, rather than monotonically
scaling with either sample density or overall stress level. These findings could provide 
new insight into relaxation dynamics and their relationship with local atomic structures 
of glasses.

Classification: Physical Science, Applied Physical Sciences

Keywords: High pressure, metallic glass, relaxation dynamics, wide-angle x-ray 
photon correlation spectroscopy.


2 / 21

Main text

Below glass transition temperatures, Tg, glasses fall out of equilibrium (breakdown 

of ergodicity) due to their slow dynamics with respect to the experimental timescales; 

hence, dynamic relaxation into equilibrium states naturally and inevitably occurs all the 

time, considerably affecting the properties of glasses (1, 2). Therefore, enduring 

theoretical and experimental efforts have been devoted to understanding the glass 

relaxation dynamics over decades, especially their structural basis, i.e., the relationship 

between dynamic relaxation and the atomic structures of glasses (3).

Although lacking long-range translational symmetry, the local structure of 

seemingly disordered glasses still shows identifiable order, which may play a critical 

role in determining their structures and properties (4). Therefore, using the local 

structural order (e.g., short-range order, SRO, and medium-range order, MRO) as 

structural indicators to correlate with dynamic relaxation phenomena has attracted 

considerable research interests (5-13). In theories and simulations of glasses and glass 

formation, many local structural quantities, such as cooperatively rearrangement region

(5), locally favored structures (6-8, 11), and ‘softness’ (9, 10), are proposed, which

reveal complex scenarios of relaxation or aging at the atomic scales. However, it is 

rather difficult to verify these scenarios experimentally even in simple atomic glasses

without complex intramolecular structure and freedom, like metallic glasses (MGs) 

(14).

Previous experimental investigations on the relaxation dynamics of glasses mainly 

rely on the macro-relaxation behavior of a given physical property, such as the dielectric 

constant or loss modulus (14). However, because these physical properties reflect the 

relaxation of the entire system, it is challenging to correlate them with local glass 

structures directly. Recent technical improvements in x-ray photon correlation 

spectroscopy (XPCS) have enabled measurements of collective particle motions of 

glassy samples with a high resolution in reciprocal space and broad coverage in the 

time scale (15). By utilizing this approach, various microscopic dynamic processes have 

been explored, including atomic diffusion and phase transformations (16-18), 


3 / 21

relaxation and aging dynamics in colloidal suspensions or gels (19, 20), ferrofluids, 

ferromagnets and ferroelectrics (21, 22), and MGs (23-28). In the case of MGs, as a 

simple atomic glass system, many interesting and unusual phenomena that are 

otherwise inaccessible have been observed by wide-angle high-energy XPCS, which 

sheds new light on the glass relaxation dynamics. For example, the compressed 

exponential relaxation revealed in atomic glasses (23, 24), anti-aging phenomenon 

observed in an ultrastable glass (25), and abrupt intermittent fluctuations (26) revealing

the complexity of local relaxation events and the existence of a multi-step relaxation 

process in MGs (26-28). On the other hand, conventional tuning approaches, such as 

plastic deformation (29) and thermal cycling (30), can effectively alter the energy states

and corresponding relaxation dynamics in MGs. However, the change in atomic

structures is subtle or not noticeable (31), suggesting likely decoupling of the structure 

and relaxation behavior in those glasses.

To overcome the challenges encountered in previous experiments for addressing 

the relationship between relaxation dynamics and glass structures, we deliberately 

introduced dramatic structural tuning of MGs by applying high pressure while

simultaneously probing the atomic-scale relaxation behavior by developing in situ high-

pressure synchrotron high-energy XPCS (32). As a fundamental parameter dictating the 

states of matter, pressure is a powerful tool that can readily change the density of MGs 

by tens of percentage during compression (above the GPa level) and also could tune the 

atomic structure significantly, even with pressure-induced polyamorphic phase 

transitions in MGs (33). Actually, besides cooling (changing both thermal energy and 

volume), a liquid can be also vitrified by increasing pressure (only changing volume) 

under isothermal conditions. Understanding pressure dependence of glass properties is 

crucial to provide the complete physical description of glassy phenomenon. Under 

pressure, the previously proposed dynamics-sensitive structural indicators and critical 

parameters, such as the local atomic packing (cluster distribution), free volume, 

diffusion, internal stress level of an MG, etc, can be gradually and effectively altered

but without changes of thermal energy, offering a unique and quantitative opportunity 


4 / 21

to clarify the correlation between relaxation dynamics and atomic structural features in 

glasses.

Specifically, in this work, by combining synchrotron wide-angle high-energy 

XPCS with a diamond anvil cell (DAC), we developed the in situ high-pressure and 

high-energy XPCS technique and performed it on a cerium-based MG. We show that 

the microscopic structural relaxation process is not monotonically altered as typically 

expected with the pressure-induced density and stress increase. Instead, it shows an 

anomalous dynamics crossover at ~3 GPa. The dynamics below ~3 GPa follows a 

normal pressure-induced slowing down while it accelerates rapidly above ~3 GPa. The 

coincidence of the dramatic local structural change revealed at ~3 GPa by in situ high-

pressure synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement indicates a coupling with

the dynamics anomaly and dramatic structural changes.

A polyamorphous cerium-based MG, Ce68Al10Cu20Co2, was chosen as the model 

system for the current study due to its well-known pressure-sensitive atomic structures

and relatively low (near room temperature) glass transition temperature (Tg ~360 K) (34, 

35), which largely facilitates the XPCS measurement of glass dynamics in a feasible 

time scale (a few thousand seconds) at room temperature (~0.86 Tg at 0 GPa) with 

obvious structural tuning at moderate pressures. Details about the MG sample synthesis 

and characterization can be found in Methods and Supporting information (SI) Fig. S1. 

The in situ high-pressure XPCS experiments were performed using a symmetric DAC 

and a partially coherent x-ray beam with a high incident energy of 21.0 keV at beamline 

ID10 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), Grenoble, France.

During the high-pressure XPCS experiments, special attention was paid to the stability 

of the sample position and pressure (fluctuation < 0.01 GPa) since it is crucial for a 

reliable XPCS measurement (32). More details can be found in Methods and SI Fig. S2.

Figures 1a-e show the time evolution of the atomic-scale dynamics at different 

pressures captured by XPCS at qp (the wave vector of the principal diffraction peak 

position) with the two-time intensity correlation function (TTCF). This function maps 

the instantaneous correlation between the intensity scattered at subsequent delay times 


5 / 21

t1 and t2 and can be considered as a time-resolved version of the more common time 

average intensity auto-correlation functions, g2(q, t). Since the pressure in the DAC is 

manually increased and the required waiting time for stabilizing pressure is pressure

and stress rate dependent, this work only focuses on the final stationary regime of 

relaxation, as shown in Fig. 1, without including the initial aging process right after 

each pressure increase (aging is strain-rate and waiting-time dependent (26-28)). At 

each pressure, the width of the reddish diagonal contour, proportional to the relaxation 

time, remains almost constant in the measuring time window shown in Figs. 1a-e, 

indicating that steady dynamics were measured (15). It should be noted that slight aging 

still presents at 2.9 GPa, a signature of the persistent structural changes at this pressure,

even at around three hours after changing pressure. Although this aging may 

underestimate the real steady relaxation time, it does not conceal the unusual evolution 

of the dynamics with further compression to higher pressures. For compression below 

~3 GPa, the atomic motion slows down with increasing pressure. Then, it dramatically 

accelerates at pressures higher than ~3 GPa, as signaled by the increasingly thinner 

diagonal contours of the TTCFs at higher pressures. 

We average each TTCF plot over the entire measuring time window to get 

quantitative information on the relaxation process. The time average intensity auto-

correlation functions, g2(q, t), are shown in Fig. 1f. These functions were then fitted to

a 
modified 
Kohlrausch-Williams-Watts 
(KWW) 
function: 
𝑔2(𝑞𝑝, 𝑡) = 𝑎 +

𝑐[exp(−2(𝑡/𝜏)𝛽)](20), where τ is the relaxation time, β is the shape parameter, a is the

baseline involving the influence from the high-pressure environment (e.g., the diamond 

anvils and the pressure medium, see more details in Methods and SI text I), and 𝑐 =

𝛾𝑓𝐷−𝑊

2
is the product between the experimental contrast γ and the square of the 

nonergodicity parameter of the glass. The g2 function describes the decay of density 

fluctuations and provides quantitative information on the relaxation dynamics at the 

atomic scale. The pressure-dependent fitting parameters are shown in Figs. 2a-c. Details 

about the data analysis are provided in Methods and SI text I. In agreement with the 

TTCFs, the fitted relaxation time, τ, does not change monotonically with pressure, but 


6 / 21

peaks at ~3 GPa, then decreases with further compression. In the previously reported 

temperature-variant XPCS experiments on MGs, τ usually changes monotonously with 

temperature during steady relaxation (23), although more heterogeneous dynamics have 

been reported during aging or stress relaxation (26, 28). According to the pressure 

dependence of τ below 3 GPa, although there are only three data points, the apparent 

activation volume according to the framework of the transition state theory, Va ~10 Å3

can be roughly estimated according to the relation (36), Va= RT (d ln τ / d P)T, where 

R is the gas constant, T is temperature, and P is pressure. This roughly obtained 

activation volume value for relaxation of MGs under high pressures is comparable to 

the average atomic volume in the MGs, which is also close to those determined by

dynamic mechanical analysis under tension stress on La-, Pd-, and Zr-based MGs (37).

In contrast, the negative pressure dependence of steady relaxation time above 3 GPa 

(Fig. 2a) suggests a “negative” activation volume of ~-10 Å3, which, in contrast, is quite 

unusual and cannot be explained by any classical models. Unlike the anomalous 

behavior of relaxation time, the shape parameter, β, keeps almost constant at ~1.8 in 

the studied pressure range (Fig. 2b). The contrast, c, slightly increases with pressure

(Fig. 2c). The behavior of these two parameters will be discussed later.

Due to the close critical pressures, it is likely that the apparent dynamics 

crossover at ~3 GPa revealed by τ during compression might be associated with the 

structural polyamorphic transition from low-density amorphous (LDA) to high-density 

amorphous (HAD) states at a few GPa in many Ce-bearing MG (38, 39). The atomic 

structure evolution of the Ce68Al10Cu20Co2 MG with increasing pressure was further 

determined by in situ high-pressure XRD following the same compression protocol of 

the XPCS experiments to address the underlying mechanism of the dynamics anomaly 

and to clarify the structural transition scenario. According to the in situ high-pressure 

XRD data, the structure factor, S(q), at different pressures and the corresponding 

reduced pair distribution function (PDF) curves in real space can be derived and are 

shown in Fig. 3 and 4, respectively. The inverse of the principal peak position, 2π/qp,

versus pressure, as shown in Fig. 3c, indicates that density increases monotonously over 


7 / 21

the entire pressure range but with accelerated rates through the polyamorphic transition

zone (34), whose inflection point nearly coincides with the turning pressure of τ.

Moreover, pronounced changes can be observed in the first peak of G(r) (R1, the 

first atomic shell) during compression. For quantitative analysis, the first peak of G(r), 

R1, can be deconvoluted into two subpeaks, denoted as r11 and r12 (see Fig. 4a). Based 

on a simple hard-sphere model, the r11 mainly consists of contribution from the Ce-Cu 

atomic pairs, while the r12 is dominated by the contribution from Ce-Ce atomic pairs at 

ambient conditions (see details in SI text II). During compression of a Ce-bearing MG, 

a double-well potential of the Ce-Ce pairs will emerge, more and more “big” Ce atoms 

with localized 4f electrons will gradually transform into “small” Ce atoms with 

delocalization of 4f electrons accompanied by dramatic atomic volume collapse (38, 

39). Therefore, more and more Ce atoms initially in the r12 sub-shell will be squeezed 

into the r11 sub-shell (redistribution of atoms in SRO), leading to a remarkable shape 

change (r11 peak intensity increases at the expense of the r12 peak intensity) of the first 

peak of G(r) during compression. Figs. 4b-d show the variation of sub-peak positions 

(r11, r12) and the peak area of the first peak (A) as a function of pressure, which reflect 

the changes in the average bond length and coordination numbers in the two sub-shells 

of the nearest neighbor environment. The monotonic increase of the peak area (Fig.4b) 

indicates the typical pressure-induced densification, consistent with simulation results 

in other Ce-based MGs during compression (38). Fitting details of the two sub-peaks 

can be found in SI Fig.S5. Similar crossover phenomena can be observed in both Figs. 

4c and 4d at ~3 GPa, in good agreement with the crossover of the relaxation time

revealed by XPCS. Dramatic variation in SRO will inevitably extend into MRO

(connection between SRO clusters) and thus to the corresponding collective atomic 

motion. Details about the extended structural changes in MRO and G(r) data in a 

broader r range are provided in SI text III.

The coincidence of the critical pressures for the dynamic crossover and the 

structural polyamorphic transition indicates an explicit correlation between them. At 

first glance, a transition from the LDA to HDA phases would naturally lead to an 


8 / 21

alternation of the glassy properties, including relaxation dynamics. However, given that 

the monotonic density increases with pressure through the polyamorphic transition, 

relaxation dynamics is expected to simply slow down according to the classical “free 

volume” model (40). A simple structural basis for micro-relaxation in MGs is escaping 

from a “cage” (an atom jumps away from its surrounding atoms). If the local atomic 

structure is “simply” compressed or shrunk under pressure, the “cage effect” is expected 

to be enhanced. Therefore, we should observe an accelerated slowing down of 

dynamics through the polyamorphic transition zone with faster density increase. 

However, against this expectation, a sharp turn around to accelerated dynamics 

accompanies the polyamorphic transition. The non-monotonic evolution of the 

dynamics behavior with respect to monotonic density increase is unexpected and 

counter-intuitive. According to the prominent changes in SRO over the same pressure 

range, as shown in Fig. 4c and 4d, it is suggested that the relaxation behavior revealed 

by XPCS might relies more on specific SRO details and their influence at extended 

length scale (rather than simply scaling with overall density). In different MG systems, 

dominant SROs are different, so their roles in relaxation behavior may vary from one 

to another. For example, the characteristic atomic cluster in Cu64Zr36 MG is full 

icosahedra (Voronoi index <0, 0, 12, 0>) (41), but in Mg65Cu25Y10 MG, bicapped

square antiprisms (<0, 2, 8, 0>) and tricapped trigonal prisms (<0, 3, 6, 0>) are 

dominant clusters (42). Evidence of a strict relation between local atomic structures and 

collective motion has been recently reported for a supercooled metallic liquid (43). 

The LDA and HDA states of the Ce68Al10Cu20Co2 MG differ significantly in their 

SRO, which supports the important role of local atomic structure in affecting glass 

relaxation dynamics. It has to be noted that the pressure-induced polyamorphism is 

caused by the change of electronic structure in the Ce atoms (39). The electronic 

structure transition is directly coupled with the atomic rearrangement during the 

polyamorphic transition. During the polyamorphic transition, a double-well feature 

emerges in the Ce-Ce interatomic potential with a relatively small barrier between the

two potential wells, which replaces the regular single-well potential (38, 39). According 


9 / 21

to a recent simulation work dealing with pressure-induced structural rejuvenation (44), 

this emerging two-state feature in potential could lead to structural rejuvenation and 

therefore accelerated relaxation dynamics. Although the pressures studied in this work 

are below 10 GPa because of the hydrostatic pressure limit of the 4:1 methanol-ethanol 

pressure medium (45), the relaxation dynamics are expected to slow down again when 

the polyamorphic transition completes at high enough pressures. But relaxation 

dynamics also could become even more complex if extreme pressure-induced structural 

rearrangement dominates. However, all these speculations need further experimental 

efforts to clarify in the future. 

In addition to the anomaly of relaxation time, the structure dependence of other 

fitting parameters is also interesting and inspiring. The shape parameter, β, reflects the 

nature of the relaxation mode. A compressed decay (β > 1) is common in MGs and 

usually suggests a collective ballistic motion of atoms due to internal stress (23). In 

previous studies, β exhibits temperature independence until heated to the glass 

transitions region, which suggests its density (thermal expansion) independence but 

high sensitivity to the frustrations or ordering of local structures (46). Moreover, the 

origin of compressed decay (β > 1) is proposed to be structural, e.g., microscopic 

collapse (47, 48), long-range microscopic spatial correlations (49), clustering of 

icosahedra (24), or elastic frustration (50) in many hard or soft materials. In this work, 

β remains constant within error bars, suggesting its independence from changes in the 

SRO and density of a glass and also agrees with recent results on other MGs at the glass 

transition (43). In contrast, another parameter, c, is found to couple with glass structures. 

This parameter is related to the nonergodicity factor of the glass, which is associated

with the elasticity of the glass and could provide indirect information on the occurrence 

of faster secondary relaxation processes (51). In the macroscopic limit, the 

nonergodicity level is related to the elastic properties of the glass, and it usually 

increases with increasing stiffness in the material (52), which is consistent with our 

observation, as shown in Fig. 2c. Due to the relatively large fitting uncertainty of c, a 

crossover at ~3 GPa in the pressure dependence of c is not conclusive, which needs 


10 / 21

future efforts to clarify as well.

In this work, the XPCS signals are only collected at the principal diffraction peak 

position, qp, in reciprocal space, which reflect collective atomic motion, but whether it 

corresponds to a well-defined length scale in real space is still controversial (53).

Further exploration with XPCS data collected over a wide wave vector range (q-

dependence of dynamics) could help to address this issue. It should be noted that the 

pressure-induced dynamics anomaly should not be limited to the specific composition 

(the Ce-based MG just facilitates the experiments with relatively low pressures to 

observe the dynamics anomaly) since pressure-induced structural rearrangement could 

be general in multicomponent MGs at high enough pressures (44). Generally, the 

pressure-induced changes of τ (probably c as well) could correspond to the pressure-

induced evolution of the metabasin in the energy basin of MGs from the potential 

energy landscape point of view (54). Therefore, applying pressure to MGs might lead 

to an evolution of local relaxation behavior (tuning the roughness of the potential

energy basins), offering a promising tool for the experimental exploration of the long-

sought Gardner transition in atomic glasses as well (55).

In summary, by combining in situ high-energy high-pressure XPCS and XRD 

techniques, an anomalous relaxation behavior at the atomic scale was discovered in the 

Ce68Al10Cu20Co2 MG, which shows a steady relaxation dynamic crossover at ~3 GPa 

with opposite pressure dependence below and above the critical pressure. Pressure-

induced monotonic crossover has been previously reported in ionic liquids with 

enhanced slowing down of relaxation dynamics, which suggests a liquid-to-liquid 

transition (56). In contrast, it is quite unusual to observe a non-monotonic crossover 

from normal pressure-induced slowing down turning around to acceleration in 

relaxation dynamics. By analyzing the detailed structural information in S(q) and G(r) 

data derived from XRD, this relaxation anomaly is suggested to couple with the 

dramatic modification in local structures induced by the pressure-induced structural 

polyamorphic transition. Our findings demonstrate that the relaxation dynamics do not 

simply scale with overall glass density (free volume content (57)) or overall stress level. 


11 / 21

Instead, there is a strong correlation between the variation of relaxation dynamics and 

local atomic structure (potential energy landscape) details of MGs. The experimental 

methods successfully demonstrated in this work highlight the feasibility and effectivity 

of involving pressure as a powerful parameter to explore the structural relaxation 

dynamics at the atomic level and its relationship with atomic structures in MGs by 

employing in situ high-pressure high-energy XPCS. This technique could enable the 

atomic-level dynamics exploration with pressures up to hundreds of GPa without 

limitation in types of materials (different physical structures and chemical natures) (32).

Materials and Methods

Sample preparation. Ce68Al10Cu20Co2 (nominal composition) MG ribbons were 

prepared by arc-melting pure elements (>99.9 at.%) and melt-spinning master ingots 

under a high-purity argon atmosphere. Their glass nature was confirmed by x-ray 

diffraction (XRD) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (SI Fig. S1). 

Initialization was performed to eliminate the difference in thermal history among the 

as-prepared ribbon samples. Specifically, all the samples were heated up to 360 K with 

a heating rate of 20 K/min and then cooled down to room temperature with a ballistic 

cooling rate.

In situ high-pressure XPCS. In situ high-pressure XPCS experiments were performed 

using a symmetric DAC at beamline ID10 of ESRF, Grenoble, France. We used a 

partially coherent x-ray beam with a high incident energy of 21.0 keV to effectively 

penetrate the two diamond anvils (~1.2 mm each, ~2.4 mm in total thickness) with the 

transmission of ~75.4%. The x-ray beam size of ~10 μm × 10 μm defined by rollerblade 

slits was smaller than the sample size, which helps to avoid signals from the sample 

edges (with plastic deformation during sample cutting) and the crystalline gasket. The 

speckle patterns were collected in a wide-angle transmission geometry by a CdTe 

Maxipix detector (512 × 512 pixels, pixel size of ~ 55 μm) placed downstream of the 

DAC with 2𝜃 ≈16° at 0 GPa. The accurate 2θ value is pressure dependent and was 

determined by scanning the detector position along 2θ to find the intensity maximum 

at each pressure as the first principal diffraction peak position (qp) of the 


12 / 21

Ce68Al10Cu20Co2 MG. Sets of ~1500 images were taken with 5 s exposure time per 

frame and analyzed according to the following equation:

𝑔2(𝑞, 𝑡) =

〈〈𝐼(𝑞,𝑡1)𝐼(𝑞,𝑡2)〉𝑝〉

〈〈𝐼(𝑞,𝑡1)〉𝑝〉〈〈𝐼(𝑞,𝑡2)〉𝑝〉
(1)

Where < ⋯ >𝑝 denotes an ensemble average over all the pixels of the detector, and 

< ⋯ > is the temporal average.

The high-pressure samples were cut from the thermally initialized MG ribbons 

with an appropriate size (~90  90  20 μm3) to fit the sample chamber in the DAC. 

Tiny ruby balls were used as pressure calibrants loaded along with the MG sample. The 

culet size of the diamond anvils is ~300 μm. The gasket is T301 stainless steel, which 

was pre-indented to ~20 GPa in the DAC. The sample chamber is a hole (~150 μm in 

diameter) drilled by laser in the indent center of the pre-indented gasket. The 4:1 

methanol-ethanol (4:1 M-E) mixture was loaded into the DAC as the pressure-

transmitting medium, which can provide a hydrostatic pressure condition with no first-

order phase transition below ~10 GPa (45). A schematic illustration of the experimental 

setup and sample image loaded in the DAC are shown in SI Fig. S2.

As the development and demonstration of in situ high-pressure, high-energy XPCS 

technique, many experimental details were carefully evaluated to ensure the reliability 

of the XPCS data. Special attention was paid to the sample stability since it is critical 

for a reliable XPCS measurement. Firstly, the DAC was firmly fixed onto the sample 

stage, and its spatial stability was checked by sample position scanning before and after 

each XPCS measurement. The pressure was increased manually by minimal steps up to 

each target pressure. Before performing XPCS experiments, the pressure inside the 

DAC was continuously monitored by the ruby fluorescence peak position to ensure a 

constant pressure value with time-dependent pressure fluctuations less than 0.01 GPa. 

Approximately three hours of waiting time (between each pressure increase and final 

XPCS data collection) were taken to stabilize the sample chamber pressure to ensure a 

steady relaxation signal detection. After each XPCS experiment, the pressure inside the 

DAC was rechecked to evaluate its stability during the XPCS experiments, which 

always remained constant. In addition, before loaded into the DAC, the as-prepared 


13 / 21

ribbon sample was initialized by pre-heating into the supercooled liquid region (to 

eliminate additional stresses induced by fast quenching during sample synthesis). To 

avoid the influence of shear bands at the sample edges due to mechanical cutting, the 

x-ray beam was accurately located at the sample center by x-ray absorption scanning at 

each pressure, which also ensures probing the same sample volume (the sample center) 

for all the pressure points. The background XPCS signal from the high-pressure 

environment was carefully checked by shining an x-ray beam on the pressure medium 

away from the MG sample through the two diamond anvils. No apparent correlation 

signal was observed at those specific 2θ angles in the background signal (the constant 

background signal may differ from one specific DAC to another). The data at 0 GPa

was collected on the same sample loaded in the DAC before adding the 4:1 M-E 

pressure medium. More experimental details can be found in the SI Appendix.

In situ high-pressure XRD experiments. In situ high-pressure XRD experiments with 

an x-ray wavelength of 0.3344 Å (37.08 keV) and a beam size of ~3.5 μm × 4.0 μm 

focused by a Kirkpatrick–Baez mirror were performed at beamline 13-ID-D of

Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), USA. The same 

sample loading protocol as described above for the XPCS experiment was used for the 

in situ high-pressure XRD experiment. During the experiments, the pressure difference 

measured before and after each exposure was found to be less than 0.2 GPa. The 

background patterns were collected at each pressure by shining the x-ray beam off the 

sample but through the pressure medium and diamond anvils inside the sample chamber. 

The data at 0 GPa was collected on a sample at ambient conditions outside of the DAC. 

Raw two-dimensional x-ray diffraction patterns were integrated to obtain the intensities 

I(q) using Dioptas software.

The total scattering factor, S(q) (q = 4πsinθ/λ, λ is the x-ray wavelength, and 2θ is 

the angle between the incident and diffraction x-ray beam), and the reduced pair 

distribution functions, G(r), were derived from I(q) using the PDFgetX3 software 

package. S(q) is obtained from the coherently scattered intensity 𝐼𝑐𝑜ℎ(𝑞),

𝑆(𝑞) = 1 + 𝐼𝑐𝑜ℎ(𝑞) − 〈𝑓2〉

〈𝑓〉2
(2)


14 / 21

where 〈𝑓〉 = ∑
𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖(𝑞)
𝑛
𝑖=1
and 〈𝑓2〉 = ∑
𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖=1

2 (𝑞)
𝑛
𝑖=1
 , in which 𝑐𝑖 corresponds to 

the atomic fraction of the component 𝑖 having an x-ray atomic scattering factor 𝑓𝑖(𝑞). 

The G(r) function was derived from the Fourier transform of the S(q) by the following 

relation,

𝐺(𝑟) = 4𝜋𝑟[(𝜌(𝑟) − 𝜌0] = 2

𝜋 ∫ 𝑞[𝑆(𝑞) − 1] ∙ 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑞𝑟) 𝑑𝑞

∞

0

(3)

where ρ(r) is the pair density function, and ρ0 is the average atom number density. 

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Prof. Jichao Qiao from Northwestern Polytechnical University, Dr. 
Wenge Yang from HPSTAR, and Prof. Howard Sheng from George Mason University
for their helpful discussions, Dr. X.H Chen, Dr. S.Y. Chen, F.J. Lan, and M.B. Sun 
from HPSTAR for their help with the experimental preparation, Dr. Gaston Garbarino 
from ESRF for his help with the in situ high-pressure XPCS experiments, Dr. Vitali 
Prakapenka and Dr. Eran Greenberg from University of Chicago for their help with in 
situ high-pressure XRD experiments, and Freyja O’Toole for her language editing. The 
authors acknowledge financial support from Shanghai Science and Technology 
Committee, China (No. 22JC1410300) and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Novel Extreme 
Condition Materials, China (No. 22dz2260800). The in situ high-pressure high-energy 
XPCS experiments were performed at beamline ID10, ESRF. The in situ high-pressure 
XRD experiments were performed at beamlines 13 ID-D of GSECARS, APS, ANL. 
GSECARS is supported by NSF (EAR-1634415) and DOE (DE-FG02-94ER14466). 
APS is supported by DOE, Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES), under Contract DE-
AC02-06CH11357. B.R. acknowledges the financial support from the European 
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation program (Grant Agreement No. 948780).

Reference
1.
C. A. Angell, K. L. Ngai, G. B. McKenna, P. F. McMillan, S. W. Martin, Relaxation in 

glassforming liquids and amorphous solids. J. Appl. Phys. 88, 3113-3157 (2000).

2.
R. C. Welch et al., Dynamics of glass relaxation at room temperature. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 

265901 (2013).

3.
P. G. Debenedetti, F. H. Stillinger, Supercooled liquids and the glass transition. Nature 410, 

259-267 (2001).

4.
J. Ding, E. Ma, Computational modeling sheds light on structural evolution in metallic 

glasses and supercooled liquids. Npj Comput. Mater. 3, 1-12 (2017).

5.
V. Lubchenko, P. G. Wolynes, Theory of structural glasses and supercooled liquids. Annu. 

Rev. Phys. Chem. 58, 235-266 (2007).

6.
A. J. Dunleavy, K. Wiesner, R. Yamamoto, C. P. Royall, Mutual information reveals multiple 

structural relaxation mechanisms in a model glass former. Nat. Commun. 6, 1-8 (2015).


15 / 21

7.
H. Tong, H. Tanaka, Structural order as a genuine control parameter of dynamics in simple 

glass formers. Nat. Commun. 10, 1-10 (2019).

8.
F. Turci, G. Tarjus, C. P. Royall, From glass formation to icosahedral ordering by curving 

three-dimensional space. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 215501 (2017).

9.
E. D. Cubuk et al., Identifying structural flow defects in disordered solids using machine-

learning methods. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 108001 (2015).

10.
S. S. Schoenholz, E. D. Cubuk, D. M. Sussman, E. Kaxiras, A. J. Liu, A structural approach to 

relaxation in glassy liquids. Nat. Phys. 12, 469-471 (2016).

11.
Y. C. Hu, F. X. Li, M. Z. Li, H. Y. Bai, W. H. Wang, Five-fold symmetry as indicator of dynamic 

arrest in metallic glass-forming liquids. Nat. Commun. 6, 8310 (2015).

12.
Y.-C. Hu et al., Configuration correlation governs slow dynamics of supercooled metallic 

liquids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, 6375-6380 (2018).

13.
B. Wang et al., Understanding Atomic-Scale Features of Low Temperature-Relaxation 

Dynamics in Metallic Glasses. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7, 4945-4950 (2016).

14.
W. H. Wang, Dynamic relaxations and relaxation-property relationships in metallic glasses. 

Prog. Mater. Sci. 106, 100561 (2019).

15.
Y. Chushkin, C. Caronna, A. Madsen, A novel event correlation scheme for X-ray photon 

correlation spectroscopy. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 45, 807-813 (2012).

16.
M. Leitner, B. Sepiol, L.-M. Stadler, B. Pfau, G. Vogl, Atomic diffusion studied with coherent 

X-rays. Nat. Mater. 8, 717-720 (2009).

17.
L. Müller et al., Slow aging dynamics and avalanches in a gold-cadmium alloy investigated 

by x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 105701 (2011).

18.
F. Perakis et al., Diffusive dynamics during the high-to-low density transition in 

amorphous ice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 8193-8198 (2017).

19.
F. Schosseler, S. Kaloun, M. Skouri, J. P. Munch, Diagram of the aging dynamics in laponite 

suspensions at low ionic strength. Phys. Rev. E 73, 021401 (2006).

20.
A. Fluerasu, A. Moussaïd, A. Madsen, A. Schofield, Slow dynamics and aging in colloidal 

gels studied by x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. E 76, 010401 (2007).

21.
O. G. Shpyrko et al., Direct measurement of antiferromagnetic domain fluctuations. Nature

447, 68-71 (2007).

22.
S. Gorfman et al., Ferroelectric domain wall dynamics characterized with X-ray photon 

correlation spectroscopy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, E6680-E6689 (2018).

23.
B. Ruta et al., Atomic-scale relaxation dynamics and aging in a metallic glass probed by 

x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 165701 (2012).

24.
Z. W. Wu, W. Kob, W.-H. Wang, L. Xu, Stretched and compressed exponentials in the 

relaxation dynamics of a metallic glass-forming melt. Nat. Commun. 9, 5334 (2018).

25.
M. Lüttich et al., Anti-aging in ultrastable metallic glasses. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 135504 

(2018).

26.
Z. Evenson et al., X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy reveals intermittent aging 

dynamics in a metallic glass. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 175701 (2015).

27.
A. Das, P. M. Derlet, C. Liu, E. M. Dufresne, R. Maaß, Stress breaks universal aging behavior 

in a metallic glass. Nat. Commun. 10, 1-9 (2019).

28.
P. Luo et al., Nonmonotonous atomic motions in metallic glasses. Phys. Rev. B 102, 054108 

(2020).


16 / 21

29.
J. Pan et al., Extreme rejuvenation and softening in a bulk metallic glass. Nat. Commun. 9, 

1-9 (2018).

30.
S. V. Ketov et al., Rejuvenation of metallic glasses by non-affine thermal strain. Nature

524, 200-203 (2015).

31.
J. Pan, Y. P. Ivanov, W. H. Zhou, Y. Li, A. L. Greer, Strain-hardening and suppression of 

shear-banding in rejuvenated bulk metallic glass. Nature 578, 559-562 (2020).

32.
Q. Zeng, In situ high-pressure wide-angle hard x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy: A 

versatile tool probing atomic dynamics of extreme condition matter. Matter Radiat. 

Extrem. 8, 028101 (2023).

33.
H.-K. Mao, X.-J. Chen, Y. Ding, B. Li, L. Wang, Solids, liquids, and gases under high pressure. 

Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 015007 (2018).

34.
Q. Zeng et al., General 2.5 power law of metallic glasses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 1714-

1718 (2016).

35.
Q. Zeng et al., Pressure-induced elastic anomaly in a polyamorphous metallic glass. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 110, 221902 (2017).

36.
G. Williams, Complex dielectric constant of dipolar compounds as a function of 

temperature, pressure and frequency. Part 1 . General relations and a consideration of 

models for relaxation. Trans. Faraday Society 60, 1548-1555 (1964).

37.
L. T. Zhang et al., Sluggish dynamics of homogeneous flow in high-entropy metallic 

glasses. Scr. Mater. 214, 114673 (2022).

38.
H. W. Sheng et al., Polyamorphism in a metallic glass. Nat. Mater. 6, 192-197 (2007).

39.
Q.-s. Zeng et al., Origin of pressure-induced polyamorphism in Ce 75 Al 25 metallic glass. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 105702 (2010).

40.
M. H. Cohen, D. Turnbull, Molecular Transport in Liquids and Glasses. J. Chem. Phys. 31, 

1164-1169 (1959).

41.
J. Ding, Y.-Q. Cheng, E. Ma, Full icosahedra dominate local order in Cu64Zr34 metallic 

glass and supercooled liquid. Acta Mater. 69, 343-354 (2014).

42.
J. Ding, Y. Cheng, E. Ma, Charge-transfer-enhanced prism-type local order in amorphous 

Mg65Cu25Y10: Short-to-medium-range structural evolution underlying liquid fragility 

and heat capacity. Acta Mater. 61, 3130-3140 (2013).

43.
N. Neuber et al., Disentangling structural and kinetic components of the α-relaxation in 

supercooled metallic liquids. Commun. Phys. 5, 316 (2022).

44.
A. D. Phan, A. Zaccone, V. D. Lam, K. Wakabayashi, Theory of Pressure-Induced 

Rejuvenation and Strain Hardening in Metallic Glasses. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 025502 (2021).

45.
X. Chen et al., Structural transitions of 4: 1 methanol–ethanol mixture and silicone oil under 

high pressure. Matter Radiat. Extrem. 6, 038402 (2021).

46.
B. Ruta, E. Pineda, Z. Evenson, Relaxation processes and physical aging in metallic glasses. 

J. Phys. Condens. Matter 29, 503002 (2017).

47.
J. P. Bouchaud, E. Pitard, Anomalous dynamical light scattering in soft glassy gels. Eur. 

Phys. J. E 6, 231-236 (2001).

48.
E. E. Ferrero, K. Martens, J.-L. Barrat, Relaxation in yield stress systems through elastically 

interacting activated events. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 248301 (2014).

49.
P. Chaudhuri, L. Berthier, Ultra-long-range dynamic correlations in a microscopic model 

for aging gels. Phys. Rev. E 95, 060601 (2017).


17 / 21

50.
M. Bouzid, J. Colombo, L. V. Barbosa, E. Del Gado, Elastically driven intermittent 

microscopic dynamics in soft solids. Nat. Commun. 8, 1-8 (2017).

51.
V. M. Giordano, B. Ruta, Unveiling the structural arrangements responsible for the atomic 

dynamics in metallic glasses during physical aging. Nat. Commun. 7, 1-8 (2016).

52.
B. Ruta et al., Acoustic excitations in glassy sorbitol and their relation with the fragility and 

the boson peak. J. Chem. Phys. 137, 214502 (2012).

53.
B. Wu, T. Iwashita, T. Egami, Atomic Dynamics in Simple Liquid: de Gennes Narrowing 

Revisited. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 135502 (2018).

54.
P. Charbonneau, J. Kurchan, G. Parisi, P. Urbani, F. Zamponi, Fractal free energy landscapes 

in structural glasses. Nat. Commun. 5, 1-6 (2014).

55.
K. Trachenko, A. Zaccone, Slow stretched-exponential and fast compressed-exponential 

relaxation from local event dynamics. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 33, 315101 (2021).

56.
Z. Wojnarowska et al., Pressure-induced liquid-liquid transition in a family of ionic 

materials. Nat. Commun. 13, 1342 (2022).

57.
S. Chen et al., Reversible linear-compression behavior of free volume in a metallic glass. 

Phys. Rev. B 105, 144201 (2022).


18 / 21

Figures :

Fig 1. Two-time correlation functions of the Ce68Al10Cu20Co2 MG measured at qp

(principal diffraction peak position, as a function of pressure) by XPCS at 
different pressures during compression. From (a) to (e), the pressures are 0, 1.1, 
2.9, 5.6, and 8.2 GPa, respectively. Pressure dependence of intensity correlation 
functions is shown in (f). The lines are the best fits to a modified KWW model 
function.


19 / 21

Fig 2. The fitting parameters of the intensity correlation functions. Pressure dependence 

of the relaxation time τ (a), the shape parameter β (b), and the contrast c (c). A 
clear crossover occurs at ~3 GPa for τ. The decay time is fixed at 1.006 during 
the fitting of all the data for a proper comparison (see SI Appendix). Vertical error 
bars are from the KWW model function fitting. Pressure uncertainty is smaller 
than the symbol size.


20 / 21

Fig 3. Correlation between structural changes revealed by structure factor, S(q), in 

reciprocal space with relaxation dynamics. (a) S(q) data from 1.0 to 9.8 GPa
during compression. A close correlation between the relaxation dynamics and 
structural evolution is revealed by comparing the pressure dependence of 
relaxation time τ measured by XPCS (b) and the inverse of the principal peak 
position 2π/qp in S(q) (c). The data point at 0 GPa is from an ambient condition 
data without a DAC. The dotted and dashed lines and gray zones are guides to 
the eye. Error bars in (c) are smaller than the symbol size. It should be noted that 
due to the discrete data points and the complex pressure dependence in (b) and 
(c), the exact values of the critical pressures for the changes in (b) and (c) are 
challenging to be determined. 


21 / 21

Fig 4. Structural changes revealed by reduced PDF, G(r), in real space. (a) The first 

peak of G(r), R1, as a function of pressure from 1.0 to 9.8 GPa during 
compression. The arrows point to the directions of sub-peak intensity changes.
(b) Pressure dependence of the peak area (A) of R1. Pressure dependence of the 
first sub-peak position (r11) (c) and the second sub-peak position (r12) (d) both 
show a crossover at ~3 GPa. Dashed lines are guides to the eye.


