Understanding the effect of curvature on the magnetization 
reversal of three-dimensional nanohelices  
 
J. Fullerton1*, A. R. C. McCray1,2, A. K. Petford-Long1,3 and C. Phatak1,3** 

 

1 Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois, USA 
2 Applied Physics Program, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA 
3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA 
 
Email: *jfullerton.anl.gov, **cd@anl.gov 
 
Abstract 
Comprehending the interaction between geometry and magnetism in three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures is of 
importance to understand the fundamental physics of domain wall (DW) formation and pinning. Here, we use focused 
electron beam-induced deposition to fabricate magnetic nanohelices with increasing helical curvature with height. 
Using electron tomography and Lorentz transmission electron microscopy, we reconstruct the 3D structure and 
magnetization of the nanohelices. The surface curvature, helical curvature and torsion of the nanohelices are then 
quantified from the tomographic reconstructions. Furthermore, by using the experimental 3D reconstructions as inputs 
for micromagnetic simulations we can reveal the influence of surface and helical curvature on the magnetic reversal 
mechanism. Hence, we can directly correlate the magnetic behavior of a 3D nanohelix to its experimental structure. 
These results demonstrate how control of geometry in nanohelices can be utilized in the stabilization of DWs and 
control of the response of the nanostructure to applied magnetic fields.  
 
Introduction 

With 
advancing 
nanofabrication 

methods, it is now possible to fabricate 
complex, three-dimensional (3D) magnetic 
nanostructures 
[1-13]. These 
structures 

possess intricate spin textures that can be 
controlled by altering the geometry of the 
system [4, 14, 15]. A key nanostructure in the 
field of 3D nanomagnetism is the nanohelix, 
largely studied due to its intrinsic geometric 
chirality and curvature. The curvature will 
strongly influence the spin textures that form 
and the resulting magnetic behavior of the 
system. Strong spin-chirality coupling has 
been observed in nanohelical and curved 
systems, as well as geometry driven effects 
on domain wall formation and motion [5, 16-
18]. A helical wire is defined by its helical 
radius and pitch, which then describe the 
helical curvature and torsion, which are 
defined as: 

 

𝜅 =

|"|

"!#$! , 𝜏 =

|$|

"!#$!, (1) 

 

respectively, where 𝑟 is the helical 

radius and 2𝜋𝑐 is the helical pitch [19]. The 
technique focused electron beam-induced 
deposition (FEBID) allows direct fabrication 
of magnetic 3D nanostructures with fine 
geometric control [6, 20]. This allows us to 
directly print complex magnetic nanohelices 
with multiple turns and non-uniform helical 
curvature and torsion [1, 4, 5]. It has already 
been shown that different values of helical 
curvature and torsion can influence the 
formation and motion of domain walls in 
nanohelices [4, 21, 22]. Hence, creating a 
non-uniform helical curvature and torsion 
within the same structure could be utilized to 
control the locations at which domain walls 
form. Hence, it is important to control and 
quantify the 3D geometry to then allow us to 
influence and understand the resulting 
magnetic behavior as it is of interest for 
applications such as domain wall memories 
[1]. As such, 3D spintronic structures could 
potentially provide a route to high density, 


low power computing and data storage 
devices.  

Micromagnetic simulations are a 

powerful tool to represent and explain 
experimental results [4, 5]. However, 
computational structures often represent 
idealized version of the experimental 
structures and can miss real geometrical 
variations and features, thereby not fully 
representing the complexity of the system. 
These geometrical features can be of 
importance 
as 
nucleation 
site 
for 

magnetization reversal, for domain wall 
pinning or cause local variations in spin 
textures. Therefore, to accurately predict and 
understand the magnetic behavior of a 
nanostructure we require a method to take 
these features into account.  

In this work, we will present 

complementary experimental reconstructions 
and micromagnetic simulations of the 
magnetization in two nanohelices of non-
uniform curvature and torsion. The helices 
were fabricated by FEBID and subsequently 
characterized 
by 
transmission 
electron 

microscopy 
(TEM). 
Through 
electron 

tomography, we reconstruct the 3D geometry 
of the helices. This enables us to quantify 
parameters that describe the nanohelix such 
as the Gaussian surface curvature, the helical 
curvature and torsion. Lorentz TEM (LTEM) 
was used to determine the magnetic phase 
shift and reconstruct projected magnetic 
induction maps. The reconstructed geometric 
structure 
is 
then 
directly 
used 
in 

micromagnetic simulations to verify the as-
grown experimental states and subsequently 
to correlate the magnetic reversal behavior to 
the 
experimentally 
observed 
nanohelix 

geometry. 

 

Results 

Two left-handed cobalt nanohelices 

were fabricated by FEBID on SiOx TEM 
membranes. The FEBID process is shown in 
Figure 1(a) for a Co2(CO)8 precursor. During 

the fabrication, an accelerating voltage of 10 
kV, a beam current of 33 pA and an incoming 
gas flux of ∆𝑃 = 3 × 10%& Torr were used. 
The nanohelices were fabricated using stream 
files allowing for their curvature to be 
defined using computer aided design. As 
such, the helical pitch of the nanohelices is 
controllably decreased during growth. The 
result is nanohelices with increasingly tighter 
spirals with increasing height. Figures 1(b) 
and (c) show bright-field TEM images of 
helix 1 and 2, respectively. The diameter of 
the nanohelices is 80 nm, but this decreases 
during the final turn. Helix 1 is defined to 
have a slower decrease of pitch than that of 
helix 2. To accurately quantify the geometric 
parameters, we performed a tomographic 
reconstruction of the structure of both 
helices. Tomographic data were collected by 
imaging the sample at tilt angles from -70° to 
+70° in steps of 2° between ±70° and ±60° 
and in steps of 5° between −60° and +60°, at 
a magnification of 8000´. The tilt series were 
then aligned, and the geometric structure was 
reconstructed using the TomoJ plugin for 
ImageJ and Tomviz [23, 24]. Figures 2(a) and 

Figure 1: (a) Schematic of the FEBID process for 
growing magnetic nanohelices with the cobalt 
precursor, Co2(CO)8. (b, c) TEM images of 
fabricated nanohelices that have decreasing helical 
pitch with height. The structure shown in (b) will be 
referred to as helix 1, and the structure in (c) will be 
referred to as helix 2. 

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 


2(e) show the 3D reconstructions of helix 1 
and 2, respectively. Both reconstructions are 
colored by the Gaussian surface curvature, 
calculated 
using 
Paraview 
[25]. 
The 

Gaussian curvature is different from the 
helical curvature, 𝜅, defined above and 
instead quantifies the curving of the surface 
of a structure such as a saddle-shape, convex 
or concave surface [26]. Understanding 
Gaussian curvature is important as it affect 
the variation of surface normals which in turn 
can affect the magnetization. In both cases, 
the Gaussian curvature is negative (blue) on 
the inside of the helix and positive (red) on 
the outside, as expected [27]. In Fig. 2(b) and 
2(f), we plot the average Gaussian curvature 
of the inner (blue) and outer (red) surface of 
the helix as a function of height for helix 1 
and 2, respectively. The Gaussian curvature 
is mostly constant (with some variation, due 

to bumps on the wires) until the very top of 
the helices where the structures become 
thinner, and hence the curvature increases.  

In Figs. 2(c) and 2(g), we quantify the 

helical curvature, 𝜅, as a function of height of 
the nanohelix. The helical curvature increases 
with height due to the tighter helical spirals. 
For helix 1 (Fig. 2(c)) there is a slow increase 
of curvature at the bottom and top of the 
structure, with a faster increase around the 
mid-point. The growth of helix 2 however, 
begins with both a higher value of curvature 
and a faster increase of curvature. This rate of 
increase then slows down towards the top of 
the structure, as for helix 1. Both structures 
show an overall decrease in torsion from the 
bottom to the top, as shown in Fig. 2(d) and 
2(h). This trend is expected as the torsion 
depends largely on the helical pitch, which 
decreases with height in both structures.  

Figure 2: 3D tomographic reconstruction of the helix 1 (a) and helix 2 (e) colored by the Gaussian surface 
curvature (see color scale). (b, f) Averaged Gaussian surface curvature as a function of height for the inner (blue) 
and outer (red) surface of the helices. (c, g) Calculated helical curvature (d, h) and torsion vs. height for helix 1 
and 2 respectively. 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 


After analyzing the structure of the 

nanohelices, we now look to determine their 
magnetization through both LTEM and 
micromagnetic simulations, which we carried 
out using MuMax3 [28]. Both helices were 
imaged in their as-grown state, without 
exposure to an external magnetic field. The 
magnetic induction of the nanohelices was 
reconstructed by collecting through-focus 
series of images and using the transport of 
intensity equation method [29]. Figures 3(a) 
and 
3(d) 
show 
colormaps 
of 
the 

experimentally 
reconstructed 
magnetic 

induction for helix 1 and helix 2 respectively. 
In both cases we observe an alternating 
pink/blue contrast along the length of the 
helix due to the spiraling structure. This 
indicates that the magnetization is likely in a 
single domain state where the spins follow 
the shape of the helix along its length. 

The tomographic reconstructions, 

shown in Fig. 2, not only allow analysis of the 
geometry but can aid in understanding the 
magnetic behavior of the nanohelices. The 
reconstructed mesh that defines the surface of 
the helix geometry can be discretized into 
cubes (3 ´ 3 ´ 3 nm in this case, with edge 
smoothing to avoid staircase artefacts) and 
input into MuMax3 to allow the magnetic 
state of each helix to be directly simulated. A 
saturation magnetization of 900 kAm-1 and 
an exchange stiffness of 10-11 Jm-1 was used 
to be representative of FEBID cobalt [5, 12]. 
Figs. 3(c) and 3(f) show simulated single 
domain 
states 
for 
both 
nanohelices 

(initialized as a uniform magnetization with 
Mz along -z for helix 1, and along +z for helix 
2). The reconstructed magnetic phase images 
from the simulations in Figs. 3(b) and 3(e) 
match those of the experiments, confirming 
the presence of a single domain as-grown 
magnetization state in both helices. At the 
base of the simulated helices there appears to 
be a vortex-like magnetic configuration that 
is more pronounced in helix 2 (Fig. 3(f)). This 
is likely a consequence of the stray field 

produced at the ends and the fact that the 
structure is wider at the base. These magnetic 
vortices would be difficult to see in the 
reconstructed phase however, due to the tilt 
angle required when imaging.  

In addition to verifying the as-grown 

magnetic states, the 3D reconstructions can 
allow us to further explore the magnetic 
behavior of the nanohelices, giving insights 
into the effect of varying helical curvature 
and torsion on the magnetization reversal 
behavior. In Figure 4, we plot the 
magnetization reversal process in the 
presence of an axial magnetic field, applied 
opposite to the initial uniform magnetic 
states. The field was applied at an angle that 
is 1° off the z-axis to break the symmetry of 
the simulation (to avoid computational 
artefacts) and was increased in steps of 0.5 
mT. Fig. 4(a) shows this process for helix 1, 

Figure 3: (a, d) Experimentally reconstructed 
projected magnetic induction maps. (c, f) Simulated 
remanent magnetic states using the geometries 
determined from the experimental tomographic 
reconstructions. (b, e) Simulated magnetic induction 
maps calculated from the magnetic configurations 
shown in (c) and (f) for helix 1 (a, b, c) and 2 (d, e, 
f). 

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

(d) 
(e) 
(f) 


starting from a single domain state with Mz 
along -z. At an applied field of 25 mT, the 
start of the magnetization reversal process is 
nucleated at the bottom of the helix. Here, the 
magnetization becomes more vortex-like as 
the +Mz-component of magnetization is 
increased. At 26 mT, a small growth of the 
area with a positive Mz is seen (shown in 
red). At 26.5 mT, the bottom two turns of 
helix 1 switch rapidly to a state with a 
positive value of Mz. This creates a vortex 
domain wall at the top of the helix where the 
curvature is higher (shown in more detail in 
Fig. 4(b)). The exact location of this domain 
wall coincides with an area of increased 
Gaussian surface curvature, which likely acts 

as a pinning location. The domain wall 
remains until an applied field of 38 mT at 
which field the magnetization in the helix has 
been fully reversed. The process observed 
here shows that variations in surface 
curvature can help nucleate and stabilize 
domain walls. Hence, the surface curvature 
could be used to control the location and 
propagation of domain walls. 

In Fig. 4(c), we explore the reversal 

process for helix 2 by applying an increasing 
field along the -z direction. As with helix 1, 
the reversal process in helix 2 is nucleated 
from the base of the structure. This is because 
it is wider than the top, and hence more 
suitable for the vortex-like textures that form. 

Figure 4: Simulated magnetization reversal using the tomographic reconstructions of helix 1 and 2, respectively 
(a, c). (b) Close-up view of the region enclosed in the gray box in (a), showing the vortex domain wall created 
during reversal in helix 1 at 26.5 mT. (d) Close-up view of the region enclosed in the gray box in (b), showing the 
double vortex texture formed during reversal in helix 2 at -18 mT. 

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 
(d) 


With increasing negative field, the vortex at 
the base of the helix propagates through the 
structure as a domain wall leading to reversal 
of the magnetization. Linked vortex textures 
form during this process, allowing the growth 
of regions with negative Mz regions and 
shrinkage of regions with positive Mz. Fig. 
4(d) shows a close-up view of the pair of 
vortices that form in the center of the 
structure at an applied field of -18 mT 
(location shown by the gray box in Fig. 4(c)). 
Here, we observe two left-handed vortices 
where the central region with negative Mz 
region grows with applied field. At an applied 
field of −26 mT, the field fully reverses the 
magnetization relative to the initial state 
except at the base of the helix where the 
vortex remains until higher fields. The 
increased curvature and curvature gradient of 
helix 2, with respect to that of helix 1, allows 
the stabilization of complex non-linear spin 
textures during reversal. This is largely due to 
the wire becoming more transverse to the 
applied field with increased helical curvature. 
Most of the magnetization in helix 1 is 
reversed over a range of 1.5 mT, with a 
further 11.5 mT required to expel the vortex 
domain wall pinned at the top. The reversal 
process for helix 2, however, is a more 
gradual process over a range of 16 mT. 
However, for both helices we observe that 
regions of higher curvature and lower torsion 
promote the formation and stability of non-
linear spin textures such as vortices and 
domain walls.  

The 
experimentally 
fabricated 

nanohelices discussed above display a well-
defined trend of increasing curvature with 
height. Through micromagnetic simulations, 
we can correlate the magnetic behavior with 
the geometric curvature. However, the trend 
of torsion as a function of height is less clear. 
Therefore, we now discuss the behavior of 
three simulated helices (shown in Figure 5) 
each with a fixed curvature but with torsion 
that increases linearly with height. As 

previously discussed, the geometry of a 
helical wire depends on the helical radius and 
pitch, which also define the helical curvature 
and torsion. Hence, we can parameterize the 
equation of a helix to depend only on the 
curvature and torsion: 

 

𝑋 =

|𝜅|

𝜅' + 𝜏' cos(𝐻) , 𝑌 =

|𝜅|

𝜅' + 𝜏' sin(𝐻), 

Z = 2π

|(|

)!#(! 𝐻, (2) 

 

where X, Y and Z are the coordinates of the 
helical wire (see Fig. 5), and H is the height. 
Using these equations, we defined three 
helical structures with values of the torsion, 
𝜏, increasing linearly between 0.05 and 25 
𝜇𝑚%* and with constant values of the helical 
curvature, 𝜅, = 20, 10 and 5 𝜇𝑚%*. Figs. 5(a), 
(c) and (e) show the relaxed, remanent 
magnetic state for each helix initialized with 
a uniform value of +Mx (left) or +My (right). 
An initial magnetization transverse to the 
long axis of the helix was used to encourage 
the formation of domain walls within the 
structure. For each value of curvature, the 
domain walls that form are asymmetric 
transverse domain walls and typically form 
for values of 𝜏 = 8–16 𝜇𝑚%*, showing that 
domain 
walls 
are 
more 
stable 
with 

intermediate vales of torsion. Only one 
domain wall is observed outside this range of 
torsion values, and this forms for 𝜏 = 5 𝜇𝑚%* 
and  𝜅 = 5 𝜇𝑚%* (Fig. 5(c) left), with the 
stability being increased by having a 
curvature and torsion of a similar magnitude. 
In comparison to the simulations using the 
nanohelix shapes obtained experimentally 
from the tomographic reconstructions, we see 
that domain walls are stabilized at areas of 
similar magnitude of torsion and curvature 
(i.e., further up the helices). For all three 
nanohelices shown in Fig. 5, no domain walls 
are formed at areas of high torsion. Hence, 
the trend of decreasing torsion seen towards 
the top of both experimental helices may also 


assist in stabilizing the domain walls that 
form.  
 
Conclusion 

In summary, we have utilized FEBID 

to create nanohelices with curvature and 

torsion that vary with height. We have 
demonstrated the ability to controllably 
create nanostructures of complex geometry, 
and 
by 
using 
electron 
tomographic 

reconstruction of the nanohelices in 3D, we 
can obtain quantitative information about the 

Figure 5: Simulated remanent magnetic states after initial magnetization configurations with uniform values of 
Mx (left) or My (right), for 𝜅 = 20 (a), 10 (c) and 5 (e) 𝜇𝑚"#. The nanohelices are colored according to the Mz 
component, and domain walls are marked with *. Graphs of the x- and y-coordinate of the helical nanowire (left), 
helical pitch and radius (middle), and helical curvature and torsion (right) as a function of z-coordinate for 𝜅 = 20 
(b), 10 (d) and 5 (f) 𝜇𝑚"#.  

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 
(d) 

(e) 
(f) 


surface curvature, helical curvature and 
torsion as a function of height. We then used 
the 3D reconstructions as inputs for the shape 
of 
the 
nanohelices 
in 
micromagnetic 

simulations, whereby we were able to verify 
the single domain states observed in the as-
grown magnetic phase reconstructions of the 
nanohelices. Our simulations also enabled us 
to explore the magnetization reversal 
behavior of the two nanohelices, and to link 
the spin textures that form directly to the 
experimentally 
fabricated 
geometry. 

Variations in surface curvature can provide 
pinning sites for domain walls, while areas of 
higher helical curvature allow the formation 
of more non-linear spin textures during the 
reversal process. Further simulations on 
computationally defined structures revealed 
that intermediate values of torsion (of 
comparable 
magnitude 
to 
the 
helical 

curvature) are required for initialization of 
domain walls, which was also reflected in the 
experimental structures.  

The results presented here aid in 

understanding how 3D geometric effects 
could be integrated into domain wall-based 
devices. Further experiments could include 
the fabrication of nanohelices of controlled 
varying curvature and torsion in order to 
precisely create and move domain walls. We 
would 
then 
look 
to 
initialize 
and 

experimentally reconstruct non-linear 3D 
magnetic textures through vector field 
tomography [30, 31]. 

 

Methods 

Nanofabrication. The two cobalt 

nanohelices were fabricated using focused 
electron beam-induced deposition in an FEI 
Nova dual beam FIB/SEM. The precursor gas 
used was Co2(CO)8 with a working pressure 
of 3 × 10%& Torr, accelerating voltage of 10 
kV and a beam current of 33 pA. The 
structures were grown using stream files that 
contained a series of x and y pixel coordinates 
and dwell times for each point. The 

nanohelices were grown directly onto SiOx 
TEM grids before being transferred to the 
TEM with minimal exposure to air and 
external magnetic fields.  

Transmission electron microscopy. 

The electron tomography and magnetic phase 
reconstruction were performed in a JEOL 
2100F LTEM instrument operating at 200 kV 
with an imaging CS corrector. The samples sit 
in a low field environment to avoid affecting 
their as-grown magnetic state.  

Tomographic data were collected by 

imaging the sample at tilt angles from −70° 
to +70° in steps of 2° between ±70° and 
±60° and in steps of 5° between −60° and 
+60°, at a magnification of 8000x. The 
images were then aligned using cross-
correlation using the TomoJ plugin in 
ImageJ. This aligned tilt series was used to 
create the 3D reconstructions using TomoViz. 
The 
surface 
Gaussian 
curvature 
was 

calculated using the curvature filter in 
Paraview. The data was smoothed to remove 
high curvature artefacts, but not overly 
smoothed such that the structure was altered. 
The 
3D 
reconstruction 
meshes 
were 

discretized using the Voxelize function in 
PyVista. A model with voxels of size 3x3x3 
nm was created and inputted in to MuMax3 
to simulate the magnetization of the 
nanohelices. 

The reconstruction of the magnetic 

phase of the nanohelices was performed by 
taking a series through-focus bright field 
images from −640 to +640 𝜇𝑚 (in 15 steps). 
A second through-focus series was recorded 
with the samples flipped 180° to be able to 
separate the magnetic and electrostatic phase 
shift. The retrieval of the magnetic phase was 
performed using the transport of intensity 
equation method using the open source 
PyLorentz code developed in our group. 
PyLorentz was also used for simulating the 
magnetic phase from the output of the 
MuMax3 simulations of the nanohelices. 
 


Acknowledgments 

This work was funded by the US 

Department of Energy, Office of Science, 
Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials 
Science and Engineering Division. Work 
performed at the Center for Nanoscale 
Materials, a U.S. Department of Energy 
Office of Science User Facility, was 
supported by the U.S. DOE, Office of Basic 
Energy Sciences, under contract no. DE-
AC02-06CH11357. 

 

References 
[1] 
Phatak C, Miller C S, Thompson Z, 
Gulsoy E B and Petford-Long A K 
2020 Curved three-dimensional cobalt 
nanohelices for use in domain wall 
device applications ACS. Appl. Nano 
Mater. 3 6009 

[2] 
Phatak C, Liu Y, Gulsoy E B, Schmidt 
D, Franke-Schubert E and Petford-
Long A K 2014 Visualization of the 
magnetic structure of sculpted three-
dimensional cobalt nanospirals Nano 
Lett. 14 2 759 

[3] 
Sanz-Hernández D, Hamans R F, 
Osterrieth J, Liao J, Skoric L, Fowlkes 
J D, Rack P D, Lippert A, Lee S F, 
Lavrijsen and Fernández-Pacheco A 
2018 Fabrication of scaffold-based 3D 
magnetic nanowires for domain wall 
applications Nanomatter. 8 483 

[4] 
Donnelly C, Hierro-Rodriguez A, 
Abert C, witte K, Skoric L, Sanz-
Hernández D, Finizio S, Meng F, 
McVitie S, Raabe J, Suess D, Cowburn 
R and Fernández-Pacheco 2022 A 
Complex free-space magnetic field 
textures induced by three-dimensional 
magnetic 
nanostructures 
Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 17 136 

[5] 
Sanz-Hernández D, Hierro-Rodriguez 
A, Donnelly C, Pablo-Navarro J, 
Sorrentino A, Pereiro E, Magén C, 
McVitie S, de Teresa J M, Ferrer S, 
Fischer P and Fernández-Pacheco A 

2020 
Artificial 
double-helix 
for 

geometrical 
control 
of 
magnetic 

chirality ASC Nano 14 8084 

[6] 
Skoric L, Sanz-Hernández D, Meng F, 
Donnelly C, Merino-Aceituno S and 
Fernández-Pacheco A 2020 Layer-by-
layer growth of complex shaped three-
dimensional 
nanostructures 
with 

focused electron beams Nano Lett. 20 
184 

[7] 
Askey J, Hunt M O, Langbein W and 
Ladak S 2020 Use of two-photon 
lithography with a negative resist and 
processing 
to 
realise 
cylindrical 

magnetic nanowires Nanomat. 10 429 

[8] 
May A, Hunt M, Berg A V D, Hejazi A 
and Ladak S 2019 Realisation of a 
frustrated 3D magnetic nanowire lattice 
Commun. Phys. 2 13 

[9] 
Llandro J, Love D M, Kovács A, Caron 
J, Vyas K N, Kákay A, Salikhov R, 
Lenz K, Fassbender J, Scherer M R J, 
Cimorra C, Steiner U, Barnes C H W, 
Dunin-Borkowski R E, Fukami S and 
Ohno H 2020 Visualizing magnetic 
structure in 3D nanoscale Ni-Fe Gyroid 
networks Nano Lett. 20 3642 

[10] Pip P, Treves S, Massey J R, Finizio S, 

Luo Z, Hrabec A, Scagnoli V, Raabe J, 
Phillippe L, Heyderman L J, Donnelly 
C 2022 X-ray imagin of the magnetic 
configuration of a three-dimensional 
artificial spin ice building block APL 
Mater. 10 101101 

[11] Bran C, Fernandez-Roldan J A, del 

Real R P, Asenjo A, Chubykalo-
Fesenko O and Vazquez M 2021 
Magnetic configurations in modulated 
cylindrical nanowires Nanomater. 11 
600 

[12] Sahoo S, May A, van Den Berg A, 

Mondal A K, Ladak S and Barman A 
2021 Observation of coherent spin 
waves in a three-dimensional artificial 
spin ice structure Nano Lett. 21 4629 


[13] Bhattacharya D, Chen Z, Jensen C J, 

Liu C, Burks E C, Gilbert D A, Zhang 
X, Yin G and Liu K 2022 3D 
interconnected 
magnetic 
nanowire 

networks 
as 
potential 
integrated 

multistate memristors Nano Lett. 22 
10010 

[14] Fullerton 
J, 
Hierro-Rodriguez 
A, 

Donnelly C, Sanz-Hernandez D, Skoric 
L, MacLaren D A and Fernandez-
Pacheco A 2023 Controlled evolution 
of three-dimensional magnetic states in 
strongly coupled cylindrical nanowire 
pairs Nanotechnol.  34 125301 

[15] Brajuskovic V and Phatak C 2021 

Understanding curvature effects on the 
magnetization reversal of patterned 
permalloy Archimedean spirals Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 118 152409 

[16] Strubel R, Tsymbal E Y and Fischer P 

2021 Magnetism in curved geometries 
J. Appl. Phys. 129 210902 

[17] Skoric 
L, 
Donnelly 
C, 
Hierro-

Rodriguez A, Cascales Sandoval M A, 
Ruiz-Gomez S, Foerster M, Nino M A, 
Belkhou R, Abert C, Suess D and 
Fernandez-Pacheco A 2022 Domain 
wall automotion in three-dimensional 
magnetic helical interconnectors ACS 
Nano. 16 8860 

[18] Skoric L, Donnelly C, Abert C, Hierro-

Rodriguez A, Suess D and Fernandez-
Pacheco 
A 
2021 
Micromagnetic 

modelling of magnetic domain walls in 
curved cylindrical nanotubes and 
nanowires Appl. Phys. Lett. 118 
242403 

[19] Weisstein E W Helix. Wolfram 

MathWorld; 
Wolfram 
Research: 

Champaign, IL 

[20] Pablo-Navarro J, Magén C and de 

Teresa J M 2018 Purified and 
crystalline three-dimensional electron-
beam-induced-deposits: the successful 
case of cobalt for high-performance 

magnetic 
nanowires 
ASC 
Appl. 

Nanomater. 1 38 

[21] Yershov K V, Kravchuk V P, Sheka D 

D and Gaididei Y 2016 Curvature and 
torsion effects in spin-current driven 
domain wall motion Phys. Rev. B 93 
094418 

[22] Pylypovskyi, O., Phatak, C., Volkov, 

O. (2022). Effects of Curvature and 
Torsion on Magnetic Nanowires. In: 
Makarov, D., Sheka, D.D. (eds) 
Curvilinear Micromagnetism. Topics 
in Applied Physics, vol 146. Springer, 
Cham. 

[23] MessaoudiI C, Boudier T, Sorzano C 

and Marco S 2007 TomoJ: tomography 
software 
for 
three-dimensional 

reconstruction 
in 
trans-mission 

electron microscopy BMC Bioinf. 8 288  

[24] Schwartz J, Harris C, Pietryga J, Zheng 

H, Kumar P, Visheratina A, Kotov N 
A, Major B, Avery P, Ercius P, Ayachit 
U, Geveci B, Muller D A, Genova A, 
Jiang Y, Hanwell M and Hovden R 
2022 Real-time 3D analysis during 
electron tomography using tomviz Nat. 
Commun, 13 4458 

[25] Utkarsh A 2015 The paraview guide: a 

parallel 
visualization 
application 

Kitware 

[26] Weisstein E W Gaussian Curvature. 

Wolfram 
MathWorld; 
Wolfram 

Research: Champaign, IL 

[27] Taylor J A, Bratton B P, Sichel S R, 

Blair K M, Jacobs H M, DeMeester K 
E, Kuru E, Gray J, Biboy J, 
VanNieuwenhze M S, Vollmer W, 
Grimes C L, Shaevitz J W and Salama 
N R 2020 Distinct cytoskeletal proteins 
define zones of enhanced cell wall 
synthesis in Helicobacterpylori eLife 9 
52482 

[28] Vansteenkiste A, Leliaert J, Dvornik 

M, Helsen M, Garcia-Sanchez F and 
van Waeyenberge B 2014 The design 


and verification of MuMax3 AIP Adv. 
4 107133 

[29] McCray A R C, Cote T, Li Y, Petford-

long A K and Phatak C 2021 
Understanding complex magnetic spin 
textures 
with 
simulation-assisted 

Lorentz 
transmission 
electron 

microscopy Phys. Rev. Appl. 15 
044025 

[30] Phatak C, Beleggia M and de Graef M 

2008 Vector field electron tomography 
of magnetic materials: theoretical 
development Ultramicroscopy 6 503 

[31] Wolf D, Biziere N, Sturm S, Reyes D, 

Wade T, Niermann T, Krehl J, Warot-
Fonrose B, Büchner B, Snoeck E, Gatel 
C and Lubk A 2019 Holographic vector 
field electron tomography of three-
dimensional nanomagnets Commun. 
Phys. 2 87  
 


