1 
 

Improved iron-tolerance in recycled aluminum alloys via direct strip casting process 

L. Jiang1*, R.K.W. Marceau1, T. Dorin1 

1Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, 75 Pigdons Road, Waurn Ponds, Victoria, 
Australia 3216 

l.jiang@deakin.edu.au 

Graphical Abstract 

 

 

Abstract 

Recycled aluminum alloys are pivotal for sustainable manufacturing, offering strength, durability, and 
environmental advantages. However, the presence of iron (Fe) impurities poses a major challenge, 
undermining their properties and recyclability. Conventional manufacturing processes result in coarse 
Fe-rich intermetallic compounds that limit the tolerance of Fe content and negatively influence 
performance of advanced aluminum alloys. To address this, rapid solidification techniques like direct 
strip casting have been explored. In this work, a detailed study of the strip cast microstructure was 
conducted by scanning electron microscopy, electron backscattered diffraction and atom probe 
tomography. Our results reveal that alloys produced by DSC exhibit significantly refined 
microstructures and are free from coarse Fe-rich intermetallics, thereby retaining the majority of Fe in 
solid solution. These findings indicate that strip casting significantly enhances Fe-tolerance in 
aluminum alloys, making it an attractive process for future aluminum recycling, with implications for 
sustainable high-performance applications. 

 

Keywords: Aluminum recycling, Fe tolerance, intermetallics, direct strip casting 


2 
 

1. Introduction 

Recycled aluminum alloys are indispensable materials in today's sustainable manufacturing practices, 
offering a compelling combination of strength, durability, and environmental benefits. These alloys, 
derived from various sources of aluminum scrap, hold significant potential for reducing energy 
consumption and minimizing environmental impact when compared to primary aluminum production 
[1, 2]. However, their widespread adoption faces a critical challenge: the presence of iron (Fe) impurities, 
which tend to accumulate during recycling processes and severely compromise the alloys' properties 
and recyclability. 

Fe, as the most common impurity in aluminum alloys, plays a notorious role in diminishing their 
corrosion resistance and mechanical properties. Unlike other metallic alloys, aluminum has a very 
limited solubility for Fe, maximum 0.05 wt.% at 650°C [3]. In conventional manufacturing, Fe mostly 
forms coarse intermetallic compounds, such as AlFe and AlFeMnSi, which not only exacerbate pitting 
corrosion but also limit the tolerance of Fe content in high-performance aluminum alloys. This 
constraint is particularly detrimental in aerospace and marine industries demanding low Fe levels, where 
the content is required to be less than 0.1 wt.% [2, 4]. Consequently, finding innovative solutions to 
enhance the Fe tolerance of recycled aluminum alloys is of paramount importance to promote their 
sustainability and utilization in critical applications. 

One promising avenue for overcoming the challenges posed by Fe impurities in recycled aluminum 
alloys is through rapid solidification techniques that offer the advantage of refinement of the 
intermetallics. Direct strip casting (DSC) is an advanced near-net-shape casting technique that processes 
liquid aluminum directly into sheet, which offers significant cost reduction and energy savings [5]. The 
solidification rate of DSC is high, 102 to 104 °C/s [6], leading to the formation of fine-grain 
microstructure [5, 7]. In our previous work [8], direct strip casting has been proven to effectively refine 
Fe-rich intermetallic compounds in aluminum alloys and consequently enhance the alloy’s corrosion 
resistance. This observation demonstrates the immense potential of direct strip casting in improving the 
recyclability of aluminum alloys. Nevertheless, a comprehensive examination of the microstructure 
generated through direct strip casting in aluminum alloys remains unexplored, which is essential for the 
future utilization of DSC within the aluminum recycling sector. 

This contribution explores the effects of DSC on the microstructure, intermetallics, and solid solution 
composition of various Al-Fe alloys by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), electron 
backscattered diffraction (EBSD), and atom probe tomography (APT). This work aims to pave the way 
for sustainable practices that not only extend the recyclability of aluminum but also enable the 
utilization of recycled alloys in high-performance applications where Fe content is traditionally a 
limiting factor.  

 

2. Materials and experiments 

In this study, we examined aluminum alloys with different Fe concentrations. The specific chemical 
compositions of these alloys are detailed in Table 1. Fe content of 0.1 wt.% was chosen because many 
high-performance aluminum alloys maintain a tolerance threshold below 0.1 wt.%. To further our 
research objectives, we intentionally elevated the Fe contents to 1.0 and 2.5 wt.%. This was done to 
assess the potential of direct strip casting in increasing Fe tolerance within aluminum alloys and to 
highlight the impact of Fe on both the microstructure and the overall properties of the material. 

The experiments on direct strip casting were conducted using a lab-scale simulator, known as a dip 
tester, designed at Deakin University. This dip tester simulates the initial interaction between the molten 
material and the twin-roll caster's rolls during the twin-roll direct strip casting process [9]. The observed 
solidification rate reached approximately 500 °C/s. Each composition was produced through direct strip 
casting. Additionally, an Al-2.5Fe alloy was crafted using sand casting in a 3 kg rectangular mold, 


3 
 

achieving a solidification rate of about 0.1 °C/s, similar to traditional industrial casting methods. The 
casting methods and cooling rate measurements are described in more detail in our previous work [8].  

 

Table 1. Chemical compositions (wt.%) of the studied alloys. 

Alloy
Fe
Al

Al-0.1Fe
0.1
bal.

Al-1.0Fe
1.0
bal.

Al-2.5Fe
2.5
bal.

 

Samples SEM and EBSD observations were prepared by taking sections perpendicular to the casting 
direction. The sectioned specimens were manually ground and polished with silicon carbide papers, 
followed by 6, 3 and 1 µm polycrystalline diamond suspensions. The initial polishing was conducted 
with active oxide polishing suspension (OPS) for 2 min. To improve the sample quality for the EBSD 
characterization, the samples were then polished by using vibration polishing with OPS for at least 12 
hrs. SEM images were taken using the backscattered electron (BSE) detector in a JEOL JSM 7800F 
SEM instrument, equipped with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and EBSD detectors, with an 
operating voltage of 20 kV. For the EBSD experiments, the step sizes ranged from 0.5 µm. The EBSD 
scan data was analyzed using HKL Channel 5 software (Oxford Instruments HKL, Denmark). 

APT experiments were conducted to determine the chemical composition of the solid solution as well 
as the local distribution of elements. These experiments were performed on a Local Electrode Atom 
Probe (LEAP 5000 XR, CAMECA) instrument with a pulse fraction of 20%, a pulse repetition rate of 
250 kHz, a detection rate of 0.5%, and a specimen temperature of 25 K. APT samples were electro-
polished with a standard two-step process [10]. APT data reconstruction and analysis was performed 
using CAMECA AP Suite 6 containing the Integrated Visualization Analysis Software (IVAS). 
Background subtraction was performed using the background correction tool in IVAS. 

 

3. Results and discussion 

Figure 1 shows the BSE images of the studied alloys, comparing those produced via strip casting (Fig. 
1a-c) with the Al-2.5Fe alloy produced via sand casting (Fig. 1d). Notably, the alloys produced through 
strip casting exhibit an elongated grain structure aligned with the solidification direction. This is 
consistent with the previous literature [8, 11]. Interestingly, the strip cast microstructure is increasingly 
refined with increasing Fe content, as shown in Fig. 1 a-c. This phenomenon is attributed to the solute 
effect that is traditionally explained through growth restriction theory [12-14]. As solidification 
progresses, the Fe in the melt preferentially segregates in the liquid adjacent to the solid-liquid interface, 
which impedes the movement of the grain boundaries and thereby slows down the growth of the solid 
phase. Additionally, there are no discernible coarse particles in the Al-0.1Fe and Al-1.0Fe strip cast 
alloys, evident in Fig. 1 a & b, which suggests that most of the Fe in these alloys remains in solid 
solution, preventing it from diffusion and the formation of precipitates during the rapid solidification. 
Unlike the Al-0.1Fe and Al-1.0Fe strip cast alloys, the Al-2.5Fe alloy produced by direct strip casting 
exhibits a combination of eutectic and elongated structure. Furthermore, when examining the Al-2.5Fe 
alloy produced via sand casting (Fig. 1d), the formation of coarse intermetallics with a needle-like 
morphology in the inter-dendritic regions are observed. These intermetallics range in size from 20 to 
300 µm with an area fraction of ~ 20%. In contrast, these coarse intermetallics are absent in the strip-
cast Al-2.5Fe alloy, as shown in Fig. 1c. 


4 
 

 

Figure 1. BSE imaging of the studied alloys: (a) Al-0.1Fe alloy produced by DSC, (b) Al-1.0Fe 
produced by DSC, (c) Al-2.5Fe produced by DSC, and (d) Al-2.5Fe alloy produced by sand casting. SD 
represents solidification direction. 

 

To further investigate the difference in the microstructure of the Al-2.5Fe alloys produced by sand 
casting and strip casting, in-situ EBSD and EDS were carried out, as shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen 
from Fig. 2 a & b that the grains of the Al-2.5Fe alloy produced by sand casting are significantly coarser 
with an average diameter of 350 ± 121 µm, which is about 3 times larger than that observed in the Al-
2.5 alloy produced by strip casting (111.7 ± 54.5 µm). Grain refinement through rapid solidification 
associated with strip casting has been reported previously in the literature [5, 15], where high 
undercooling is achieved.  

The EDS mapping result in Fig. 2c suggests that the coarse needle-shape intermetallic phases in the 
sand cast Al-2.5Fe alloy that are enriched in Fe are likely the Al3Fe (sometimes described as Al13Fe4) 
phase that is commonly seen in Al-Fe binary alloys [8, 16, 17]. Due to the slow solidification of sand 
casting, the following high-temperature equilibrium eutectic reaction occurs: 𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿 → 𝛼𝛼𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 + 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴3𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹, 
which is known to occur over the temperature range from 652 – 655°C in aluminum-rich alloys [16]. 
However, these coarse Fe-rich particles are not observed in the alloy produced by direct strip casting 
(Fig. 2d). Instead, the EDS result in Fig. 2d shows that there are refined eutectic Fe-rich phases in the 
Al-2.5Fe alloy produced by strip casting. Upon closer examination of Fig. 2 b & d, it can be found that 
the Fe-rich phase primarily forms along the low angle boundaries, possibly dendritic boundaries. 
According to literature, the refined Fe-rich phase could be identified as the metastable compound Al9Fe2, 
previously observed in rapidly solidified Al-Fe alloys, especially at cooling rates exceeding 20°C/s [16]. 
The emergence of the metastable Fe phase during rapid solidification can be attributed to the 
progressively increasing supercooling and to the change in conditions for nucleation and growth [16].  


5 
 

 

Figure 2. (a) & (b) are the EBSD-derived grain orientation maps for the Al-2.5Fe alloys produced by 
sand casting and strip casting, respectively. The inverse pole figure (IPF) color legend shown on the 
right applies to both EBSD images. (c) and (d) are the corresponding EDS maps for the Fe distribution 
within the same regions shown in (a) and (b), although note the scale bar changes. 

 

Atom probe tomography (APT) is the most accurate tool for near atomic resolution concentration 
measurement [18]. To determine the Fe content in solid solution, APT analyses were carried out to 
evaluate the matrix Fe concentration of the Al-2.5Fe alloy material produced by sand casting and strip 
casting. Fig. 3 shows three-dimensional reconstructions that map the atomic-scale distributions of Al 
and Fe atoms (in cyan and pink colors, respectively) for these materials. Notably, both Al and Fe are 
uniformly dispersed within these data volumes for both material conditions. It is not surprising that no 
discernible presence of Fe-rich compounds was captured given the analysis volume dimensions are on 
the order of a few tens of nm as shown in Fig. 2. This suggests that both APT data represent the matrix 
of the two alloys, proving invaluable for determining the chemical composition of the solid solution. In 
APT analysis, time-of-flight-based mass-to-charge state spectrum peak overlap occurs for AlH+ and 
Fe2+ isotopes at 28 Da, and for AlH+, AlH2+ and Fe2+, at 29 Da. Here, this issue was carefully addressed 
using the peak decomposition tool within IVAS, by comparing the relative natural abundance of the 
elemental isotopes. Table 2 gives the decomposed and background-corrected composition of the matrix 
of the Al-2.5Fe alloys produced via sand casting and strip casting. It can be seen that the amount of Fe 
in solid solution of the strip cast Al-2.5Fe alloy is ~ 0.90 ± 0.06 at.% (1.90 ± 0.13 wt.%), which is 
significantly higher than that of the alloy produced by sand casting at 0.21 ± 0.01 at.% (0.44 ± 0.02 
wt.%). This indicates that more Fe is retained in the solid solution during strip casting compared to 
traditional sand casting. Conversely, the loss of Fe (~ 0.60 wt.%) in the solid solution of the Al-2.5Fe 
alloy produced by strip casting still results from the formation of metastable Al9Fe2 compounds, as 
shown in Fig. 2d. Nevertheless, comparison of the SEM and APT results for the two alloy manufacturing 
processes highlights the capability of direct strip casting to avert the formation of coarse Fe 
intermetallics by forcing Fe into the solid solution by almost 10 times as much. The measured Fe content 
in solid solution in the sand-cast alloy exceeded the equilibrium solubility (0.03 at.%) [19, 20] and this 
could be due to a couple of factors. Firstly, non-equilibrium solidification could occur in some regions 


6 
 

where Fe atoms might get trapped within the solid solution [16]. Secondly, there could be Fe micro-
segregation commonly seen in traditional casting processes [21, 22], particularly inter-dendritic areas 
where the Fe concentration is higher. Notwithstanding, the marked difference observed between the two 
samples clearly indicates that strip casting retains a higher amount of Fe in solid solution. 

 

Figure 3. Reconstructed APT maps of Al (cyan) and Fe (pink) for the Al-2.5Fe alloys produced by (a) 
sand casting and (b) strip casting. 

 

Table 2. Summary of the background-corrected chemical composition (at.%) of the matrix of the Al-
2.5Fe alloy produced by sand casting and strip casting, derived from the APT results. 

Casting
Al
Fe
Other elements

Sand casting
97.42 ± 0.15
0.21 ± 0.01
Bal.

Strip casting
95.86 ± 0.18
0.90 ± 0.06
Bal.

 

In summary, the detailed microstructural analyses presented in this work demonstrates that direct strip 
casting has the capability to refine the grain microstructure, free from coarse intermetallics, and retain 
a considerable amount of Fe in solid solution in Al-Fe alloys. This contrasts with the material from 
traditional sand casting, where coarse and needle-shaped Fe intermetallics dominate the microstructure 
with much less Fe in the matrix. The absence of these coarse and needle-shaped Fe intermetallics in the 
strip-cast aluminum alloys has been reported to improve the alloy’s corrosion resistance significantly 
[8]. In addition, as the Fe content in solid solution increases, the strip-cast microstructure is increasingly 


7 
 

refined, which further improves the corrosion performance of the alloy [23, 24]. Furthermore, 
increasing the Fe content in solid solution coupled with grain refinement can enhance the alloy strength 
through a combination of solid solution hardening and Hall-Petch strengthening, and the absence of 
coarse and needle-like Fe particles can serve to avoid ductility loss. These properties are especially 
advantageous for alloys with high Fe content that demanding high ductility, such as 1xxx aluminum 
alloys [16]. As such, this work demonstrates the transformative potential of direct strip casting in 
aluminum alloy recycling, particularly to enhance the tolerance of Fe typically considered a harmful 
impurity, yet frequently accumulated during aluminum recycling processes.  

 

4. Conclusions 

1) Alloys produced by strip casting exhibited an elongated grain structure aligned with the 
solidification direction, with the microstructure increasingly refined with higher Fe content.  

2) In contrast, the sand-cast Al-2.5Fe alloy exhibited coarser grains with an average diameter 
approximately three times larger than strip-cast Al-2.5Fe. Additionally, coarse needle-shape Fe-
rich intermetallic phases were found in the sand cast alloy, while these were notably absent in 
the strip-cast counterpart. 

3) APT analysis of the strip-cast Al-2.5Fe alloy measured the Fe content in solid solution to be 
1.90 ± 0.13 wt.%, which is significantly higher than that measured in the sand-cast alloy (0.44 
± 0.02 wt.% Fe). 

4) Rapid solidification during direct strip casting can substantially enhance the tolerance of 
aluminum alloys to Fe, rendering it an appealing process for future aluminum recycling 
endeavors. 

 

5. Acknowledgements 

The authors acknowledge the use of instruments at the Deakin Advanced Characterisation Facility. 
Funding from the Australian Research Council Discovery Project grant scheme (DP130101887) is also 
acknowledged. 

 

Conflict of Interest Statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no 
conflict of interest. 

 

References 

[1] T.G. Gutowski, S. Sahni, J.M. Allwood, M.F. Ashby, E. Worrell, The energy required to produce 
materials: constraints on energy-intensity improvements, parameters of demand, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 371(1986) 
(2013) 20120003. 
[2] D. Raabe, D. Ponge, P.J. Uggowitzer, M. Roscher, M. Paolantonio, C. Liu, H. Antrekowitsch, E. 
Kozeschnik, D. Seidmann, B. Gault, F. De Geuser, A. Deschamps, C. Hutchinson, C. Liu, Z. Li, P. 
Prangnell, J. Robson, P. Shanthraj, S. Vakili, C. Sinclair, L. Bourgeois, S. Pogatscher, Making 
sustainable aluminum by recycling scrap: The science of “dirty” alloys, Progress in Materials Science 
128 (2022) 100947. 
[3] M. Shakiba, N. Parson, X.G. Chen, Effect of homogenization treatment and silicon content on the 
microstructure and hot workability of dilute Al–Fe–Si alloys, Mater. Sci. Eng. A 619 (2014) 180-189. 
[4] E.A. Starke, J.T. Staley, Application of modern aluminum alloys to aircraft, Progress in Aerospace 
Sciences 32(2-3) (1996) 131-172. 
[5] M. Ferry, Direct strip casting of metals and alloys, Woodhead Publishing2006. 


8 
 

[6] S. Sahoo, Review on vertical twin-roll strip casting: a key technology for quality strips, Journal of 
Metallurgy 2016 (2016). 
[7] T. Haga, M. Ikawa, H. Watari, K. Suzuki, S. Kumai, High-Speed Twin Roll Casting of Thin 
Aluminum Alloy Strips Containing Fe Impurities, MATERIALS TRANSACTIONS 46(12) (2005) 
2596-2601. 
[8] T. Dorin, N. Stanford, N. Birbilis, R.K. Gupta, Influence of cooling rate on the microstructure and 
corrosion behavior of Al–Fe alloys, Corrosion Science 100 (2015) 396-403. 
[9] L. Jiang, The effect of molybdenum on precipitation behaviour in low-carbon strip-cast steels 
containing niobium, Deakin University, 2018. 
[10] M.K. Miller, R.G. Forbes, Atom-probe tomography: the local electrode atom probe,  (2014). 
[11] M.-S. Baek, K. Euh, K.-A. Lee, Microstructure, tensile and fatigue properties of high strength Al 
7075 alloy manufactured via twin-roll strip casting, Journal of Materials Research and Technology 9(5) 
(2020) 9941-9950. 
[12] A. Cibula, The mechanism of grain refinement of sand castings in aluminum alloys, J. Inst. Met 
76(321) (1949) 1950. 
[13] Z. Fan, F. Gao, Y. Wang, H. Men, L. Zhou, Effect of solutes on grain refinement, Progress in 
Materials Science 123 (2022) 100809. 
[14] J. Spittle, Grain refinement in shape casting of aluminium alloys, Taylor & Francis, 2006. 
[15] G. Liang, Y. Ali, G. You, M.-X. Zhang, Effect of cooling rate on grain refinement of cast aluminium 
alloys, Materialia 3 (2018) 113-121. 
[16] N.A. Belov, A.A. Aksenov, D.G. Eskin, Iron in aluminium alloys: impurity and alloying element, 
CRC Press2002. 
[17] D. Panahi, D.V. Malakhov, M. Gallerneault, P. Marois, Influence of cooling rate and composition 
on formation of intermetallic phases in solidifying Al–Fe–Si melts, Canadian Metallurgical Quarterly 
50(2) (2011) 173-180. 
[18] B. Gault, A. Chiaramonti, O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, P. Stender, R. Dubosq, C. Freysoldt, S.K. 
Makineni, T. Li, M. Moody, J.M. Cairney, Atom probe tomography, Nature Reviews Methods Primers 
1(1) (2021) 51. 
[19] B.D. Saller, T. Hu, K. Ma, L. Kurmanaeva, E.J. Lavernia, J.M. Schoenung, A comparative analysis 
of solubility, segregation, and phase formation in atomized and cryomilled Al–Fe alloy powders, Journal 
of Materials Science 50 (2015) 4683-4697. 
[20] B.D. Saller, G. Sha, L.M. Yang, F. Liu, S.P. Ringer, J.M. Schoenung, Iron in solution with 
aluminum matrix after non-equilibrium processing: an atom probe tomography study, Philosophical 
Magazine Letters 97(3) (2017) 118-124. 
[21] Z.T. Liu, C. Wang, Q. Luo, J. You, X.L. Zhou, J. Xu, Y.T. Mo, J.W. Song, M. Zha, H.Y. Wang, 
Effects of Mg contents on the microstructure evolution and Fe–bearing phase selection of Al–Mg–Si–
Fe alloys under sub–rapid solidification, Materialia 13 (2020) 100850. 
[22] B. Dutta, M. Rettenmayr, Microsegregation and its effects on quantity and morphology of 
secondary phases during solidification of Al-Fe-Si alloys, Materials Science and Technology 18(12) 
(2002) 1428-1434. 
[23] E. Kus, Z. Lee, S. Nutt, F. Mansfeld, A comparison of the corrosion behavior of nanocrystalline 
and conventional Al 5083 samples, Corrosion 62(2) (2006) 152-161. 
[24] E. Sikora, X. Wei, B. Shaw, Corrosion behavior of nanocrystalline bulk Al-Mg-based alloys, 
Corrosion 60(04) (2004). 

 


