Self-assembly of the chiral donor-acceptor 

molecule DCzDCN on Cu(100)

Robert Ranecki, Benedikt Baumann, Stefan Lach, Christiane Ziegler

RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau, Department of Physics and Research Center OPTIMAS,  

Erwin-Schroedinger-Str. 56, 67663 Kaiserslautern (Germany)

Organic-inorganic interface, Donor-acceptor molecules, Self-assembled structures, chiral 

resolution, Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, hybrid interface state, UPS, 

IPES

Abstract: Donor-acceptor (D-A) structured molecules are essential components in organic 

electronics. The respective molecular structure of these molecules and their synthesis are

primarily determined by the intended area of application. Typically, D-A molecules promote 

charge separation and transport in organic photovoltaics (OPV) or organic field-effect 

transistors (OFET). D-A molecules showing a larger twist angle between D and A units are,

e.g., extremely important for the development of high internal quantum efficiency in organic 

light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). A prototypical molecule of this D-A type is DCzDCN (5-(4,6-

diphenyl-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)benzene-1,3-dinitrile). In most cases, these molecules are only 

investigated regarding their electronic and structural interaction in bulk aggregates but not in 

ultra-thin films supported by a metallic substrate. Here, we present growth and electronic 

structure studies of DCzDCN on a Cu(100) surface. In a complementary approach, through the 

use of Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Spectroscopy (STM and STS), we were able to 

view both the adsorption geometry and the local electronic states of the adsorbed molecules in 


direct comparison with the integral electronic structure of the DCzDCN/CU(100) interface 

using Ultraviolet and Inverse Photoemission Spectroscopy (UPS and IPS). The orientation of 

the molecules with the donor part towards the substrate results in a chiral resolution at the 

interface due to the molecular as well as the substrate symmetry and additional strong molecular

electrostatic forces. Thus, the formation of various bulk-unlike homochiral structures and the 

appearance of hybrid interface states (HIS) modifies the molecular electronic properties of the 

DCzDCN/Cu(100) system significantly compared to that of a single DCzDCN molecule. This 

may be not only useful for optoelectronic applications but also in organic spintronics.


Donor/acceptor (D-A) systems and molecules are among the most important building blocks in 

the field of molecular electronics. The choice of D-A-molecules and interfaces is very diverse, 

depending on the application. Especially for D-A systems used in optoelectronic devices, 

research ranges from nanostructured molecular heterojunctions
1-3 to systems with 

intramolecular charge transport 4-7 and D-A modifications by targeted interaction with a 

substrate 8. Especially for the applications in highly effective light emitting diodes  (OLED),

special requirements are placed on the D-A systems used there 7,9. Of particular interest are D-

A systems that use reverse intersystem crossing (rISC) to massively increase fluorescence yield. 

Such so-called TADF molecules (thermally activated delayed fluorescence) are widely used in 

current high-efficiency OLED devices 10. The DCzDCN  molecule (Fig. 1) was designed as a 

universal host material for TADF OLEDs (organic light-emitting diodes) 11.

Figure 1 Molecular structure of DCzDCN calculated by DFT. The phthalonitrile part (upper 

part in the blue dashed box) and the carbazole parts (green dashed box) are oriented in a tilted 

(59°) and twisted configuration. The calculated total molecular dipole of 0 = 4.1 D and its 

perpendicular part of 3.51 D are shown.


It combines a weak carbazole D-unit also acting as hole transport unit (green dashed box in Fig. 

1) and a strong phthalonitrile A-unit for electron transport (upper part in the blue dashed box in 

Fig. 1). Both units are coupled via a twisted biphenyl link. Biphenyl compounds are rotamers 

by themselves, but in the DCzDCN, the substituents add axial chirality. Thus, two enantiomers 

are present in the bulk phase. Furthermore, the twisting of the D-A units against each other 

causes localization of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) on the D unit and the 

highest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) on the A unit. This localization of the two 

frontier orbitals is the cause of the occurrence of an rISC in this molecule. The estimation of 

the energies of the two frontier orbitals has so far only been determined within the framework 

of cyclic voltammetry measurements (CV) 11. Thereby, an electron affinity of -3.26 eV and an 

ionization potential of -6.14 was found. However, TADF-active substances are not only usable 

for OLEDs, but there are a lot more possible applications for these materials, like bioimaging 

probes or oxygen sensors 12,13. It is also conceivable to exploit the rISC in the context of an 

organic spintronic application. Since many of these extended applications, outside the typical 

use in an OLED device, usually imply interaction with some kind of a supporting substrate, the 

interaction with a Cu(100) substrate was investigated in this study. Particularly in the case of 

molecules that are typically only used in thick layers, often little is known about their adsorption 

behavior. However, adsorption on a surface can lead to new molecular organization units, that 

are not necessarily predictable from the known structures in thick layers or the single molecule. 

This can be, for example, a surface template effect, which can lead to the modification of the 

intermolecular dipole interaction and thus of the opto-electronic properties 14. It is therefore 

important to choose the broadest possible analytical approach for such systems. For this 

purpose, a complementary in situ approach by means of Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and 

Spectroscopy (STM and STS) and Ultraviolet and Inverse Photoemission Spectroscopy (UPS 

and IPS) was used. Here, in addition to the topographic information from the STM, particular 

attention was paid to the combined discussion of the single molecular spectroscopy received by 


the STS measurements and the integral information from the whole DCzDCN/Cu(100) 

interface by UPS/IPES. Using this approach, the detection of possible hybrid interface states 

(HIS) in the region around the Fermi level can also be spatially resolved on the molecule.

Results

Scanning Tunneling Microscopy

Fig. 2 a-d show constant current topography images obtained at 9.5 K of 0.25 ML - 0.9 ML of 

DCzDCN molecules deposited onto the Cu(100) surface kept at room temperature. From the 

UPS and IPES data for the 1 ML coverage, we were able to estimate that we need a relatively 

high bias voltage application to ensure that the deeply-in-energy-lying boundary orbitals will 

be involved in the tunneling processes. Therefore, we performed STM images at the relatively 

high bias voltage of ±3 V but with a low current setpoint of 50 pA to provide large enough tip-

molecule separation.

At the early stage of growth (Fig. 2a), there is both a decoration of the terrace steps and a 

distributed adsorption on the large-scale (ranging up to 200 nm) atomically flat terraces. In the 

case of a negligible interaction of the molecules with the Cu substrate, only a preferential 

decoration of the edges and a resulting layer/island growth would occur. The additional 

formation of molecular clusters thus hints at a hybridization with the metallic surface, which 

will later be discussed in the UPS section.


Fig. 2 a-c) STM constant current topography image obtained at 9.5 K, 50 pA, for sub-

monolayer DCzDCN coverage on Cu(100): a) 0.25 ML 50 nm × 50 nm (bias voltage 3 V), b) 

0.25 ML 50 nm × 50 nm  (bias voltage -3 V). Various recurring uniform molecular clusters are

characterized with respect to their increasing size (a-1D). c) 0.9 ML showing molecular 1D 

self-assembly structures along two perpendicular crystalline directions (bias voltage 3 V). For 

comparison, the inset shows an atomically resolved STM image of the clean Cu(100) surface 

obtained at a bias voltage of 50 mV and a current setpoint of 300 pA. d) Zoom into the white 

frame of c), showing the "tire track"-like 1D structures with two different homochiral domain 

structures (A,B). The yellow arrow shows the transition between two such domains.


Going into details of the STM contrast topography images, the comparison of Fig. 2a (3 V) 

and Fig. 2b with reverse bias (-3 V) shows that some parts of the molecular adsorbates are much 

more prominent (brighter) than the other parts. The detailed analysis of reverse bias (-3 V) 

topography images in Fig. 2b implies that the same parts of the molecular structure are more 

prominent for both polarities. Taking into account the molecular boundary orbitals from the 

DFT calculations for the occupied states (see supporting materials Fig. S1 orange area), a 

narrow energy range is found in which both the MOs with an exclusive localization on the two 

carbazole units and an MO with a localization on the phthalonitrile biphenyl moiety are found.

In the selected energy range, units localized on the phthalonitrile biphenyl moiety are, in 

particular, dominant for the unoccupied states. Therefore, we attributed the brighter parts of the 

molecular structures to the phthalonitrile unit. This means the preferred adsorption geometry of 

the DCzDCN molecules is upright in a face-on position with respect to the carbazole units on 

the Cu(100) surface. Furthermore, in Fig. 2b four types of repeating structures can be 

distinguished (marked by a-c and 1D). As the coverage increases to 0.95 ML (Fig. 2c), the 

DCzDCN molecules form mainly ”tire track”-like 1D structures, preferably growing in two 

directions perpendicular to each other. Furthermore, even at almost full ML coverage (Fig 2c), 

we can see that molecules still prefer to find free vacancies on the surface instead of starting a 

second layer, which is a clear indication of interaction with the substrate.

The high-resolution STM images of the cluster units identified in Fig. 2b shown in Fig. 3

indicate that structures a-c are, in fact, single molecules, dimers, and tetramers.  


Fig. 3 Submolecular resolution images of the different molecular clusters identified in Fig. 2. 

a) Single DCzDCN molecule. Shown on the right is the overlay of the image with the MOs in 

question for the bias voltage used. b) Dimer structure with M-(-) chirality. On the right, an

electrostatic potential map of the dimer shows the centers of electrostatic interaction. c) 

Tetramer forming a homochriral M-(-) phase. On the right, overlay of the image with a tetramer 

model d) 1D homochiral (M-(-)) “tire track”-like structure formed by dimer pairs. On the right, 

overlay of the image with a staggered dimer model., The alternating flat carbazole (green 

arrow) area and the vertical phthalonitrile biphenyl moiety (yellow arrow) are clearly visible. 

As shown in Fig. 3a, submolecular resolution reveals the nature of the different molecule 

clusters in Fig. 2. Related to structure a in Fig. 2b, Fig. 3a shows a single DCzDCN molecule. 

The clear resolution of the respective double-ring structure of the carbazole units in direct 

contact with the substrate is evident. The angled (see Fig. 1) and, thus, eccentric structure of 

the phthalonitrile biphenyl moiety relative to the carbazole plane can also be seen very clearly 

in Fig. 3a. This submolecular structure is also consistent with the superposition of MOs 

expected in the bias region used, which illustrates the particularly exposed tunneling channel 

across the phthalonitrile group, as shown in Fig. 3a. Therefore, we assign the three structures 


to a = single molecule, b = dimer, and c = tetramer. All the structures found result from the 

strong electrostatic interactions between the vertical phthalonitrile biphenyl moieties. Such 

interactions can be nicely illustrated by the electrostatic potential map (ESP) of the single 

molecule (Fig. S2 supporting information and Fig. 3b - d ). The strong interaction of the 

negative nitrile groups (red color in the ESP representation) of one molecule with the positive 

aromatic phthalonitrile part (blue color in the ESP representation) of another molecule leads to 

a dimerization. This is also favored by the vertical angle of 59° of the phthalonitrile biphenyl 

moiety, then pointing to each other. The comparison of the molecule structure and the STM 

image of a dimer pair (Fig. 3b) also shows that only two identical rotamers (M-(-) here) form a 

dimer pair. The same mechanism also leads to the formation of the square tetramers in Fig. 3c. 

Also for the tetramers, a homochirality is maintained. At sub-ML coverage, in addition to a few 

clearly identifiable ensembles, dimeric and predominantly tetrameric structures can be found. 

The evaluation of the individual ensembles in Fig. 2b shows that 72% of all assignable 

structures are tetramers (see supporting information Fig. S3). This changes when a coverage 

near 1 ML is reached. Now, the tetramers are no longer the dominating structures. “Tire track”-

like 1D structures (Fig. 2c+d and Fig. 3d) are formed. This “tire track” structure is built of 

staggered dimer pairs, as shown in the overlayer with the ESP model in Fig. 3d. For each of the 

two enantiomers, two homochiral 1D domains rotated by 90° with respect to each other are 

found. The occurrence of only two or four building blocks and their 1D ("tire track" structure) 

or assemblies can be explained via 2D molecular self-organization symmetry operations 15, see 

also supporting information Chapter 4. The possible number of energetically favorable 

equivalent molecular orientations depends, on the one hand, on the molecular symmetry itself, 

on the other hand, on the symmetry of the substrate. Because the Cu(100) substrate has a 

fourfold symmetry and the DCzDCN molecule is not mirror symmetric in 2D, in total, eight

energetically most favorable positions are possible. Therefore, for the  DCzDCN molecule, no 

other than four- and two-fold assemblies can be expected. 


Furthermore, despite the fact that the DCzDCN itself is chiral, it is remarkable that the 1D linear 

structures are always built from the same enantiomers. Mixed racemic domains, as were found 

for other chiral molecules on the Cu(100) surface at higher coverage 16, could not be identified 

for the 1D phases. This phase separation is clearly evident and can be seen, e.g., at the domain 

boundary between two homochiral phases A (M-(-)) and B (P-(+)), in Fig. 3d (yellow arrow).

Just the domain structure of the "tire track" structure shows a significantly higher number of 

left-handed M-(-) chiral domains than P-(+) right-handed ones. Such behavior clearly indicates 

chiral resolution for the system DCzDCN/Cu(100). The two possible 90° orientations of the 1D 

structures are slightly different for the two enantiomers (rotated by 5°). From the STM image 

in Fig. 2c, we determine the two overall directions for the enantiomers as [016] and [061] for 

the 1D M-(-) phase, and [014], [041]for the 1D P-(+) phase. 

Fig. 4:  Tentative adsorption model showing the possible adsorption positions of the individual 

dimer pairs for the 1D homochiral M-(-) phase. The experimentally observed overall direction 

[016] of this phase is marked by a green line. For simplicity, the centers of the aromatic 

carbazole units are indicated by the red circular areas, and the phthalonitrile group is indicated 

by a blue circular area. The respective monomer orientation [012]is indicated by red dashed 

lines.


In a tentative model, the adsorption positions of the dimer building blocks within the 1D

structure are constructed. We chose an approach that has been used for other aromatic systems 

on Cu(100) 16. The starting point is the adsorption position of benzene on the hollow site of a 

Cu(100) surface, as indicated by DFT calculations 17. The result is shown in Fig. 4. In the model, 

the observed [016] direction of the 1D M-(-) phase can actually be reproduced. The individual 

dimer building blocks have a [012] orientation. The shown model perfectly fits with the 

observed 1D M-(-) phase in Fig. 6d. The two carbazole moieties interacting with the substrate 

are at an angle of 43° to each other. This results in an almost ideal arrangement with respect to 

the existing four-fold hollow adsorption sites of the Cu(100) substrate. Nevertheless, especially 

in view of the axial chirality of the DCzDCN molecule, the possibility of an STM-induced 

chirality change must also be considered. Such a tip-induced chirality change of individual 

molecules was recently demonstrated on a diphenyl carbene adsorbed on a copper surface. 

Similar to our system, the rotation about a C-C-C axis is partially fixed on the copper surface 

and causes a chirality change 18. However, we have not observed any direct evidence for a tip-

induced change in the chirality of individual DCzDCN molecules in our investigations.  

Photoemission spectroscopy

The formation of molecule clusters on flat terraces in the sub-ML range indicates interaction 

between the DCzDCN molecules and the Cu(100) surface. To identify any kind of interaction 

between adsorbed molecules and metal substrates, the coverage dependence of the electronic 

structure upon adsorption is measured. Therefore, UPS and IPS spectra were subsequently 

acquired with increasing coverage to determine the molecular orbitals and possible hybrid 

interface states (HIS), as well as changes in the surface dipole .  will change by any kind 

of charge transfer between substrate and molecule and/or charge redistribution at the 

organic/metal interface, and is, in addition, often a first indication of the orientation of polar 

molecules like DCzDCN on the surface.


Ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy/ Inverse photoemission spectroscopy

The coverage dependence of  UPS spectra is shown in Fig. 5. The spectrum for the clean copper 

surface is dominated by the intense Cu 3d peaks centered around -3 eV and the broad s-p plateau 

between -2 eV and the Fermi edge (EF). The development of the work function Φ (for details, 

see supporting material, Fig. S4) and, therefore, ΔΦ, which we get from the changes of the 

secondary cut-off (Fig. 5 a), was evaluated with increasing evaporation time of DCzDCN up to 

230 min, corresponding to a coverage >> 2ML and thus approximately bulk-like behavior. 

Fig. 5:
HeI UPS spectra for increasing coverage (evaporation time) of the system 

DCzDCN/Cu(100): a) Secondary electron cut-off; b) valence region up to the Fermi level (EF). 

Dashed lines mark states with irregular attenuation of intensity. The positions marked with 

arrows show the energetic shift of the spectra during the transition from monolayer to 

multilayer (for further details, see text).


The initial value for the work function of a clean Cu(100) surface is  = 4.65±0.05 eV and 

corresponds very well with values found in the literature 19,20. The evaluation of the work 

function (Fig. 5 a) and Fig. S4) with an increasing DCzDCN coverage shows a continuous 

decrease of  and, therefore, an increase of a positive surface dipole . Furthermore, the 

saturation behavior of  for an evaporation time of 80 min clearly indicates the formation of 

the first monolayer (ML) with a corresponding work function of  = 4.19 eV. A typical value 

of 3.99 eV for higher coverage (230 min) in the multilayer region (>> 2ML) was further used 

as the reference value for the bulk work function bulk of DCzDCN in the energy level diagram 

shown later in Fig. 9.

There are three main causes for the change in the work function: The first effect is the general 

Pauli push-back effect, which is always present at a metallic surface in interaction with an 

organic molecule 21. It will always decrease . 

The second is the perpendicular part of the molecular dipole moment 0 to the surface dipole 

(as is the case for DCzDCN, see Fig.1), which depends on the adsorption geometry of the 

molecules. A standing adsorption geometry leads either to a negative  in the case of 

adsorption via the carbazole units or to a positive  in the case of adsorption via the 

phthalonitrile moiety. From the STM results, we thus expect an increase in work function. 

The third is the bond dipole (BD), which quantifies the charge rearrangements at the interface 

caused by any hybridization between an adsorbed molecule and the substrate. (Because of the 

metallic substrate, a purely integer charge transfer (CT) can be excluded because it is based on 

tunneling through insulating layers 22,23.) Therefore, the BD reflects the net charge transfer 

between the metal surface and the molecule, generated by the degree of hybridization. While 

the calculation of the real BD requires DFT calculations based on the knowledge of the 

hybridization of the molecular states with the mostly d-like states of the metal surface, the 


possibility of a charge rearrangement at such an organic/metallic interface can already be 

estimated via the chemical potentials of the substrate and the molecule, with the electronic 

charge transferred from the species with the higher chemical potential to the one with the lower 

chemical potential. This can be estimated in a simple approach by the so-called finite-difference 

approximation, which defines the chemical potential of the molecule as the negative of the 

average of the first ionization potential IP and the electron affinity EA,  = -(IP+EA)/2 24.The 

chemical potential of the Cu(100) substrate can thus be derived from Φ, leading to

(Cu) = -4.65 eV. Measuring EA and IP of the >>2ML thick layer of DCzDCN by inverse 

photoelectron spectroscopy (IPES) and UPS, we found EA = 3.14 eV and IP = 5.59 eV. The 

chemical potential of pristine DCzDCN can then be estimated to (DCzDCN) = -4.39 eV. 

Therefore, within the framework of this assessment, the direction of a CT will be from the 

DCzDCN to the Cu-substrate. Such a CT would decrease  Because we see an overall 

decrease of  (Fig. S4), Pauli repulsion and CT together more than counteract the effect of 

the orientation of the molecular dipole.

Looking at the development of the valence band structure in Fig. 5b, we can first see a shift of 

the parts of the UPS spectra by 0.33 eV, which correlates with the change from mono- to 

multilayer growth (red arrows in Fig. 5xa). In the main part of the UPS spectra in Fig. 5b, which 

is dominated by the Cu 3d peaks around -3 eV, we see unusual intensity damping behavior

(marked by the red dashed lines) that is not consistent with a simple continuous attenuation of 

the Cu 3d states by scattering of the photoelectrons at the hybrid interface. Such an irregular 

damping behavior is just as typical for the appearance of purely molecular as for new hybrid 

interface states (HIS). To check the reason for this irregular damping, we analyzed the UPS and 

IPES spectra for a ML and a thicker layer >>2ML in detail (Fig. 6). 


Fig. 6: Detail spectra of the occupied (left part) and the unoccupied electronic structure of 

the DCzDCN/Cu(100) interface (80 min red) and a bulk-like layer of DCzDCN (230 min 

purple/blue). For more details, substrate-subtracted spectra were used in the case of the ML 

coverage (80 min) (inset) and the second derivative of the spectra for the bulk-like layer (230 

min). For evaluation of the IPES data, an additional IPES spectrum of the pristine Cu(100) 

substrate is shown (black). The IPES spectra are also given as difference spectra. Additionally, 

a theoretical total DOS from DFT calculations for the single molecule DCzDCN up to the 

LUMO-2 state (grey part) and the resulting molecular orbitals for the HOMO and the LUMO 

are also shown (for further details, see text). 

For this purpose, we chose the method of difference spectra due to the interfering 3d intensities 

of the substrate in the spectrum for a ML. Thus, by subtracting a normalized substrate 

background, the pure molecular or hybrid states can be highlighted. Spectra of thicker layers, 


moreover, are often washed out with respect to the finer structures. Therefore, the second 

derivative of the spectra was used to make these details visible again. In order to obtain a 

complete picture of the electronic structure of the system DCzDCN/Cu(100 and bulk-like 

DCzDCN, the unoccupied states were determined by using IPES (Inverse Photoemission 

Spectroscopy) on these two layers. Also for the IPES spectra, we subtracted the Cu substrate 

background. The resulting data sets are shown in Fig. 6. By comparing the total density of states 

(TDOS Fig. 6 shaded gray), obtained by DFT calculations (see also Fig. S1 supporting 

information) on the single molecule, with the UPS spectrum of the bulk-like layer (Fig. 6

purple), a very good agreement and thus assignment to single molecular states could be 

achieved. For this layer, the signature of the HOMO can be identified at -2.3 eV and the HOMO 

onset at 2.0 eV. Comparing the spectra for the thicker layer with the ML spectra, it can be seen 

that the peak associated with the HOMO is slightly shifted towards EF. Also, the peak structure 

between -4 and -3 eV changes especially through the appearance of an additional peak structure 

at -3.5 eV, which cannot be identified in the bulk-like structure. Also noticeable is an apparent 

slight increase in the density of states for the ML in the region between 2.0 eV and the Fermi 

edge. This region is determined only by the substrate's flat s-p band, so a subtraction of the 

substrate background can be omitted here. Fig. 7 clearly shows that a simple intensity decrease 

occurs only directly at the edge of the d-states of the substrate. In the entire other region, a 

significant increase in the density of states is found up to 0.3 eV below EF. Despite its quite 

weak intensity, such an increase of a DOS signature in the band gap region of the undisturbed 

molecule is a clear indication of the formation of a HIS between the DCzDCN and the Cu 

surface.


Fig. 7: Detail spectra of the valence band region around the Fermi level for 1 ML. A clearly

increasing intensity after adsorption of the DCzDCN indicates the formation of HIS in this 

region.

For the unoccupied states, unfortunately, the IPES spectra are also dominated by the substrate-

related states, as one can see for the pristine Cu(100) IPES spectra in Fig. 6 (black). The main 

peak structure at 0.4 eV is related to a p bulk-band transition (BSCu) 25. The second structure,

S1, is attributed to the surface resonance of crystal-induced states 26. Because the S1 feature is 

susceptible to adsorbates, it is strongly quenched. The step-like feature n1 is attributed to the 

image potential state pinned to the vacuum level. For the ML, the feature corresponding to the 

LUMO at 2 eV can be seen, while the Cu bulk band transition (B) and the Cu surface resonance

(S1) are clearly quenched. From the difference spectra (red dotted line with the red filled area 

under the curve), the onset of the LUMO orbitals at 1.1 eV can be determined. For the bulk-

like layer (230 min deposition, blue dotted line with the blue filled area under the curve), the 

onset of the LUMO orbitals shift toward the Fermi level down to 0.8 eV, and the whole peak 

structure is significantly extended. Thus, the data from the UPS and IPES analysis clearly show 


that common hybrid interface states between the DCzDCN and the Cu surface build up in the 

first ML. Because of the existence of a HIS, the appearance of a BD is the consequence. 

Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy

Since the determination of electronic densities of states by UPS always represents only an 

integral snapshot over a larger surface area, the region up to 3 eV below the Fermi level was 

investigated by means of tunneling spectroscopy (STS). As a single molecule spectroscopy, 

STS allows direct access to electronic states with submolecular resolution. Thus, the role of 

individual molecular regions in the framework of the total DOS can be better identified.


Fig. 8:  dI/dV point spectroscopy curves (STS spectra). The point spectroscopy curves and their 

related locations (shown as spots in the corresponding inset on high-resolution STM 

topography images) are marked by black and red curves. Color code: red = phthalonitrile 

acceptor moiety, black = carbazole donor moiety. a) for a monomer, b) a dimer, c) a tetramer,

and d) the 1D “tire track” structure. Inset: UPS spectra (green) showing HIS structure (green 

area); similar structures are connected by red dashed lines. For comparison, the peaks (blue 

line) and the onset (orange line) of the HOMO and LUMO from UPS/IPES measurements are 

shown in b) and d). Stabilization parameters: 50 pA and 3.5 V for (a,b), 50 pA and 3 V for (c,d). 

In Fig. 8, dI/dV point spectroscopy curves (STS spectra) for single molecules up to the 1D “tire 

track” structure are shown. Since we know the orientation of DCzDCN molecules from the 

STM topography images, we extended our point measurements to two distinct positions on the 

molecule. The first position is located on the carbazole moiety in direct contact with the Cu 

substrate. The second position is on the phthalonitrile/biphenyl moiety, which protrudes out of 

the surface. As we know from the DFT calculations, the LUMO region is mostly related to the 

phthalonitrile/biphenyl moiety, the HOMO region is mostly at the carbazole moiety (Fig. S1 

supporting information). This is reflected by the dI/dV curves in Fig. 8. 

We are aware that the validity of dI/dV measurements is critical at higher bias voltages. The 

validity of the commonly used Tersoff-Hamann model 27 may already be exceeded at the 

voltages used. However, the PES/IPES measurements provide independent information about 

the surface/molecular states. In this combination, assignments of states clearly beyond 1 eV 

above or below EF are possible 28. Thus, we take our PES data as a hint to assign the STS peaks 

to the respective molecular orbitals. For this purpose, the PES peak position (blue lines) and the 

onset (orange line) of the HOMO and LUMO are marked. From this, we assign the structure at 

3 V in the region of the unoccupied states to the LUMO on the acceptor part 

(phthalonitrile/biphenyl moiety) of the molecule. In the region of occupied states, the HOMO 


at -2.3 V is located at the donor part (carbazole moiety) of the molecule. These structures can 

be found in all stages, from the monomer to the 1D structure. Going from the monomer to the 

dimer, all the structures in the spectra for the occupied as well as the unoccupied states are only 

slightly shifted to higher binding energy. In the transition to the tetramer and the 1D "tire track" 

structure, the states of the occupied and unoccupied regions each move toward the Fermi level. 

This effect can be attributed to a polarization effect by the surrounding molecules, i.e., the 

influence of the transient local electrostatic environment (screening) induced as a response to 

instantaneous localized charge added or removed during tunneling spectroscopy. This effect is 

well known in PES experiments and has recently also been observed by STS performed on 

molecular adsorbates 29,30. The stabilization reduces the measured ionization potential (observed 

as an upshift of HOMO energy) and increases the electron affinity (observed as a downshift of 

LUMO energy 31. Because of this effect and the fact that the spectra from the 1D structure in 

Fig. 8d were made on a comparable surface coverage as the PES shown in the inset and the 

IPES in Fig. 6, the comparison of the peaks and the onset energies for the LUMO and the 

HOMO between the STS spectra and the values from the PES/are allowed. Fig. 8d also shows 

that in the region between the HOMO onset at -2 V and the Fermi level, densities of states are 

also found as in the PES spectrum. Since these densities of states are relatively small, the 

question arises whether these stem purely from tunneling from the substrate into the gap of the 

organic layer or are genuine new HIS structures. If we consider the energetic position of the 

first occupied molecular orbitals, they are in the direct range of the Cu d states. This is a typical 

situation, which is predestined for a resonant interaction of organic MOs in the framework of 

an adsorption model, according to Newns-Anderson-Grimley 32,33. Here, the MOs of the organic 

adsorbate coupled with the Cu d states would lead to exactly such a new density of states, which 

is strongly broadened in the direction of EF, i.e., a HIS (see supporting material Fig. S5). Thus, 

from the comparison between the STS and PES/IPES data, the energy level diagram in Fig. 9 

can be constructed.


Fig. 9:  Energy level diagram and transport gap EG,T, as it results from the analysis of the 

UPS/IPES and STS data for a ML and UPS/IPES for a multilayer. The onset for the HIS region 

(green area) starts at -0.4 eV. Also shown are the HOMO and LUMO levels from the literature

[y,] calculated from cyclic voltammetric measurements (CV, orange). 

The HOMO and LUMO levels, calculated from the reduction and oxidation potentials measured 

by cyclic voltammetry (CV), are already described in the literature 11 for the pure DCzDCN. 

This can be compared with the energy levels found for the multilayer system (Multi-L) (see 

Fig. 9). A transport gap of ETG = 2.7 eV, determined by the onsets of the occupied and 

unoccupied states for the respective systems, is found for the condensed DCzDCN. The slight 

deviations of the values for the multilayer compared to the values from the CV measurements

come, first of all, from a different polarization behavior of the individual molecules in solution 

compared to the condensed phase. 


For the DCzDCN/Cu(100) interface (ML spectra), the values change. The formation of a HIS 

by hybridization of the carbazole units of the DCzDCN with the d-states of the Cu substrate 

leads to a significant change of -0.9 eV in the ETG and furthermore to a modification of the 

donor properties of the carbazolic part of the molecule itself. All this will directly affect the 

donor-acceptor interaction and, therefore, the exciting states, which determine the optical

behavior of the adsorbed molecule compared to the single one.

Summary

In this study, we investigated the interaction of the TADF active donor-acceptor molecule 

DCzDCN with a Cu(100) surface. By analyzing STM images with sub-molecular resolution, 

an exclusively standing orientation of the molecules with their phthalonitrile acceptor moiety

protruding from the surface plane is found. This adsorption geometry enables the carbazole 

moiety, the donor part of the molecule, to interact with the Cu substrate. Because of an axial 

chirality of the DCzDCN molecules, two enantiomers exist (M-(-), P-(+)). Adsorption at lower 

coverage on the Cu(100) surface leads to the formation of homochiral building blocks of di-

and above all tetramers. At higher coverage, instead of the previously dominant tetramers, 

individual dimer building blocks are found that assemble into homochiral "tire track"-like 1D 

structures. For each of the two groups, we found two mutually perpendicular preferred 

directions, with slightly different orientation and slight preference for the M-(-) phase. The 

driving force behind all of these self-ordering processes is, on the one hand, an interplay 

between the fourfold symmetry of the Cu(100) surface and the arrangement of the two carbazole

units relative to each other, which is favorable, especially for this substrate. On the other hand,

a strong coulomb force triggered interaction between the acceptor moiety of neighboring 

molecules enables the actual formation of di- and tetramers. The observation of only homochiral 

1D structures in the ML range with a slight excess of M-(-) dimer-determined phases suggests 


that chiral resolution occurs at the DCzDCN / Cu(100) interface. Through a combined in situ 

analysis of the electronic structure of the DCzDCN/Cu(100) interface by both the integral 

measurement methods UPS/IPES and the single-molecule spectroscopy by STS, the formation 

of a hybrid interface state at this interface could be identified. The hybridization can be

explained in the framework of a Newns-Anderson-Grimley adsorption model via the interaction 

of the molecular states in the HOMO region of the DCzDCN with the d-states of the Cu 

substrate. The HIS is mainly localized at the donor part of the molecule. The new density of 

states reduces the transport gap of the adsorbed molecule by 0.9 eV compared to the value for 

the free molecule. It turns out that in a ML of DCzDCN molecules on a Cu(100) surface, new 

bulk-unlike structures with modified electronic properties were formed because of chiral 

resolution at the interface. The question of effects on the excited molecular states as well as the 

directly related optical properties of the system DCzDCN/Cu(100) are therefore exciting 

questions to be answered in case of using such a system for further, maybe new (opto-) 

electronics applications. In further studies, this system will, in addition, be studied in the context 

of a possible chemically induced spin-polarization.

Methods

Experiments were performed by using an ultrahigh vacuum multi-chamber system (PREVAC, 

Rogów, Poland), allowing sample transport among preparation and analysis chambers under a 

base pressure below 2·10-10 mbar.

Sample preparation

Single crystal Cu(100) (MaTecK, Jülich, 99.999% purity, <0.1° orientation accuracy, 

<0.03 µm surface roughness) was cleaned by repeated cycles of Ar+ ion bombardment at 1 kV 

and subsequent annealing to 500°C. The quality of the crystal surface was examined by using 


photoelectron spectroscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy. DCzDCN molecules 

(Luminescence Technology Corp. New Taipei City, Taiwan, sublimated 99%) were thermally 

evaporated at 240°C and deposited under UHV conditions onto the clean Cu(100) single crystal 

surface kept at room temperature. The deposition rate was controlled by a using quartz 

microbalance and by a comparison of STM/UPS measurements.

Photoemission measurements

Photoemission studies were performed with a hemispherical energy analyzer PHOIBOS 150. 

(SPECS Surface Nano Analysis GmbH, Berlin) For ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, a 

conventional gas discharge lamp was used with an excitation energy of 21.22 eV for the He I 

line. During photoelectron collection, the chamber pressure was kept at 10-10 mbar, and on 

samples -6 V bias was applied to ensure accurate determination of the low kinetic energy cut-

off. Work function has been determined from secondary electron cut-off in normal emission. 

Inverse photoelectron spectroscopy measurements were performed using a homemade setup 

equipped with an EGPS-2B electron source (Kimball Physics, Wilton, USA) with a barium 

oxide cathode. The sample was moved after each scan to avoid film damage.

STM/STS measurements

Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy in situ measurements were performed by 

using a Pan-Scan microscope (RHK Technology, Troy, USA) operating with a closed cycle 

cryostat, enabling measurements at 9.5K (on a sample). Tungsten tips were produced by 

electrochemical etching, while further in situ annealing and sputtering cycles allowed oxide 

film removal. The STM images were acquired in constant current mode with a relatively high 

bias voltage (up to 3V) and low tunneling current (50 pA) and then processed by Gwyddion 

open-source SPM analysis software. STS curves were acquired by using the internal RHK lock-

in amplifier at 4 kHz modulation frequency and 50 meV modulation amplitude. The relatively 


high modulation amplitude for a wide range (-4V;3.5V) and relatively strong shifts provide 

sufficient resolution while ensuring a high signal for spectra collection. Curves were discarded 

if the current jump indicated alteration or reorientation of a molecule.

TDOS and single molecular geometry calculations

The optimized single molecular geometry calculations for the DCzDCN were carried out using 

DFT with a Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional and the def2-TZVPP basis set, as 

implemented under GAUSSIAN03 34. For the electrostatic potential map ESP, an isoval of 

0.0004 was used. For the TDOS spectra, each Kohn Sham eigenstate from the single molecular 

ground state calculations was broadened by a Gaussian function of 0.2 eV FWHM.

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Authors

S. Lach

E-mail: lach@physik.uni-kl.de

RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau

Erwin Schrödinger Str. 56

D-67663 Kaiserslautern

R. Ranecki 

E-mail: ranecki@physik.uni-kl.de

0631 205 4600

RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau

Erwin Schrödinger Str. 56

D-67663 Kaiserslautern


Funding Sources

This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research 

Foundation) - TRR 173-268565370 Spin + X (projects No. B05).

Supporting information includes:

TDOS and MO-symmetry by single molecule DFT calculations

Electrostatic potential map ESP

Structural assignment of individual assemblies for sub-monolayer coverage

Symmetry considerations for the system DCzDCN-Cu(100)

Coverage dependence of the work function 

HIS formation following the Newns-Anderson-Grimley adsorption model

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) -

TRR 173-268565370 Spin + X (project No. B05) is greatly appreciated.

REFERENCES

(1) Wang, R.; Mao, H. Y.; Huang, H.; Qi, D. C.; Chen, W. Scanning Tunneling Microscopy 
and Photoelectron Spectroscopy Investigation of the Sexithiophene: C60 Donor-Acceptor 
Nanostructure Formation on Graphite. J. Appl. Phys.
2011, 109, 84307. DOI: 

10.1063/1.3573779.
(2) Oteyza, D. G. de; Garci-a-Lastra, J. M.; Corso, M.; Doyle, B. P.; Floreano, L.; Morgante, 
A.; Wakayama, Y.; Rubio, A.; Ortega, J. E. Customized Electronic Coupling in Self-Assembled 
Donor-Acceptor Nanostructures. Adv. Funct. Mater.
2009, 19, 3567–3573. DOI: 

10.1002/adfm.200901374.
(3) Chen, W.; Zhang, H. L.; Huang, H.; Chen, L.; Wee, A. T. S. Self-Assembled Organic 
Donor/Acceptor Nanojunction Arrays. Appl. Phys. Lett.
2008, 92, 193301. DOI: 

10.1063/1.2920199.
(4) Zegkinoglou, I.; Ragoussi, M.-E.; Pemmaraju, C. D.; Johnson, P. S.; Pickup, D. F.; Ortega, 
J. E.; Prendergast, D.; La Torre, G. de; Himpsel, F. J. Spectroscopy of Donor−π–Acceptor 
Porphyrins for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells. J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 13357–13364. DOI: 
10.1021/jp402590u.


(5) Bergkamp, J. J.; Decurtins, S.; Liu, S. X. Current Advances in Fused Tetrathiafulvalene 
Donor-Acceptor Systems. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44, 863–874. DOI: 10.1039/c4cs00255e.
(6) Amacher, A.; Yi, C.; Yang, J.; Bircher, M. P.; Fu, Y.; Cascella, M.; Grätzel, M.; Decurtins, 
S.; Liu, S. X. A Quinoxaline-Fused Tetrathiafulvalene-Based Sensitizer for Efficient Dye-
Sensitized Solar Cells. Chem. Commun. 2014, 50, 6540–6542. DOI: 10.1039/c4cc02696a.
(7) Uoyama, H.; Goushi, K.; Shizu, K.; Nomura, H.; Adachi, C. Highly Efficient Organic 
Light-Emitting Diodes from Delayed Fluorescence. Nature 2012, 492, 234–238. DOI: 
10.1038/nature11687.
(8) Meier, T.; Pawlak, R.; Kawai, S.; Geng, Y.; Liu, X.; Decurtins, S.; Hapala, P.; Baratoff, A.; 
Liu, S.-X.; Jelínek, P.; Meyer, E.; Glatzel, T. Donor-Acceptor Properties of a Single-Molecule 
Altered by On-Surface Complex Formation. ACS nano 2017, 11, 8413–8420. DOI: 
10.1021/acsnano.7b03954.
(9) Zou, S.-J.; Shen, Y.; Xie, F.M.; Chen, J.-D.; Li, Y.-Q.; Tang, J.-T. Recent advances in 
organic light-emitting diodes: toward smart lighting and displays Mater. Chem. Front. 2020, 4, 
788-820. DOI: 10.1039/C9QM00716D.
(10) Godumala, M., Suna Choi, S., Choa M. J., Choi, D. H. Thermally activated delayed 
fluorescence blue dopants and hosts: from the design strategy to organic light-emitting diode 
applications. J. Mater. Chem. C. 2016, 4, 11355-11381. DOI: 10.1039/C6TC04377A.
(11) Cho, Y. J.; Yook, K. S.; Lee, J. Y. A Universal Host Material for High External Quantum 
Efficiency Close to 25% and Long Lifetime in Green Fluorescent and Phosphorescent OLEDs. 
Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 4050–4055. DOI: 10.1002/adma.201400347.
(12) Tao, Y.; Yuan, K.; Chen, P.; Xu, X.; Li, H.; Chen, R.; Zheng, Ch.; Zhang, L.; Huang, W. 
Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence Materials Towards the Breakthrough of 
Organoelectronics Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 7931-7958. DOI: 10.1002/adma.201402532. 
(13) Yang, Z.; Mao, Z.; Xie, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, S.; Zhao, J.; Xu, J.; Chi, Z.; Aldredb, P. M. 
Recent advances in organic thermally activated delayed fluorescence materials. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 2017,46,915-1016. DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00368K.
(14) Kny, A., J.; Reimer, M.; Al-Shamery, N.; Tomar, R.; Bredow, T.; Olthof, S.; Hertel, D.; 
Meerholz, K.; Sokolowski, M. Chiral self-organized single 2D-layers of tetramers from a 
functional donor–acceptor molecule by the surface template effect. Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 
10319-10329. DOI: 10.1039/d3nr00767g.
(15) Kurzweil, H., Stellmacher, B., The Theory of Finite Groups: An Indroduction. Springer-
Verlag New York  2004.
(16) Vidal, F.; Delvigne, E.; Stepanow, S.; Lin, N.; Barth, J. V.; Kern, K. Chiral Phase 
Transition in Two-Dimensional Supramolecular Assemblies of Prochiral Molecules. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 28, 10101–10106. DOI: 10.1021/ja0525049.
(17) Lorente, N.; Hedouin, M. F. G.; Palmer, R. E.; Persson, M. Chemisorption of benzene and 
STM dehydrogenation products on Cu(100). Phys. Rev. B 2003, 68, 155401. DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.68.155401.
(18) Cao, Y.; Mieres-Perez, J.; Rowen, J. F.; Sanchez-Garcia, E.; Sander, W.; Morgenstern, 
K. Chirality control of a single carbene molecule by tip-induced van der Waals interactions. 
Nature Communications, 2023, 14/1, 4500. DOI:10.1038/s41467-023-39870-y.
(19) Schmidt, C.; Witt, A.; Witte, G. Tailoring the Cu(100) Work Function by Substituted 
Benzenethiolate Self-Assembled Monolayers. J. Phys. Chem. A 2011, 115, 7234–7241. DOI: 
10.1021/jp200328r.
(20) Heskett, D.; Strathy, I.; Plummer, E. W.; Paola, R. A. de. Photoemission and Electron-
Energy-Loss Spectroscopy Investigation of CO+K/Cu(100). Phys. Rev. B 1985, 32, 6222–6237. 
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.32.6222.
(21) Crispin, X.; Gaskin, V.; Crispin, A.; Cornil, J.; Lazzaroni, R.; Salaneck, W. R.; Bredas, 
J.-L. Characterization of the Interface Dipole at Organic/ Metal Interfaces. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc.2002, 124, 8131-8141. DOI: 10.1021/ja025673r.


(22) Braun, S.; Salaneck, W. R.; Fahlman, M. Energy-Level Alignment at Organic/Metal and 
Organic/Organic Interfaces. Adv. Mater. 2009, 21, 1450-1472 DOI: 10.1002/adma.20080289.
(23) Hofmann, O. T.; Rinke, P.; Scheffler, M.; Heimel, G. Integer versus Fractional Charge 
Transfer at Metal(/Insulator)/Organic Interfaces: Cu(/NaCl)/TCNE. ACS Nano 2015, 9, 5, 
5391–5404. DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.5b01164.
(24) Parr, R. G.; Pearson, R. G. Absolute Hardness: Companion Parameter to Absolute 
Electronegativity. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 7512-7516.
(25) Altmann, W.; Dose, V.; Goldmann, A.; Kolac, U.; Rogozik, J. Angle-Resolved 
Bremsstrahlung Isochromat Spectroscopy of Cu(100) and Cu(110). Phys. Rev. B 1984, 29, 
3015–3021. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.29.3015.
(26) Goldmann, A.; Dose, V.; Borstel, G. Empty Electronic States at the (100), (110), and (111) 
Surfaces of Nickel, Copper, and Silver. Phys. Rev. B 1985, 32, 1971–1980. DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.32.1971.
(27) Tersoff, J.; Hamann, D. R. Theory of the scanning tunneling microscope. Physical Review 
B 1985, 31(2), 805–813. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.31.805.
(28) Proehl, H.; Toerker, M.; Sellam, F.; Fritz, T.; Leo, K. Comparison of ultraviolet 
photoelectron spectroscopy and scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements on highly 
ordered ultrathin films of hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene on Au(111). Phys. Rev. B 2001, 63,
205409. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.63.205409.
(29) Cochrane, K. A.; Schiffrin, A.; Roussy, T. S.; Capsoni, M.; Burke, S. A. Pronounced 
Polarization-Induced Energy Level Shifts at Boundaries of Organic Semiconductor 
Nanostructures. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 8312. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms9312.
(30) Sato B. N.; Seki, K.; Inokuchi H. Polarization Energies of Organic Solids Determined by 
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy. J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1981, 77, 1621–1633. 
DOI: 10.1039/F29817701621.
(31) Valeev, E. F.; Coropceanu, V.; Da Silva F., D. A.; Salman, S.; Bredas, J.-L. Effect of 
Electronic Polarization on Charge-Transport Parameters in Molecular Organic Semiconductors. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 9882–9886. DOI: 10.1021/ja061827h.
(32) Anderson P.W., Localized Magnetic States in Metals, Phys. Rev. Rev. 1961, 124, 41-53 
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.124.41.
(33) Newns D. M., Self-Consistent Model of Hydrogen Chemisorption, Phys. Rev. Rev. 
1969,178, 1123-1135 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.178.1123.
(34) GAUSSIAN03, Rev. B1, Gaussian Inc., Pittsburg PA 2003.


Supporting Information:

Self-assembly of the chiral donor-acceptor 

molecule DCzDCN on Cu(100)

Robert Ranecki, Benedikt Baumann, Stefan Lach, Christiane Ziegler

Department of Physics and Research Center OPTIMAS,  Erwin-Schroedinger-Str. 56,

67663 Kaiserslautern (Germany)

1.
TDOS and MO-symmetry by single molecule DFT calculations

Fig. S1: Calculated TDOS for a single DCzDCN molecule using PBE and the def2-TZVPP basis set.

Also shown are the most important molecular boundary orbitals and their assignment to the TDOS.


2.
Electrostatic potential map ESP

The image in Fig. S2 shows the electrostatic potential map ESP with isosurface (isoval=0.0004) 

calculated by DFT using PBE and the def2-TZVPP basis set, showing the charge density distributions

for DCzDCN (ESP contours are color-coded from blue (positive) to red (negative) potentials.

Fig. S2: Electrostatic potential map ESP with isosurface (isoval=0.0004) for a single DCzDCN 

molecule (color-code blue = positive, red =negative)

3.
Structural assignment of individual assemblies for sub-monolayer coverage

Fig. S3: Structural assignment of individual assemblies with submonolayer coverage corresponding to 

Fig. 2b in the main paper.


We have investigated the different assemblies of DCzDCN in the sub-monolayer region. This showed 

that 72% of all unambiguously assignable structures are tetramers and a roughly equal distribution of 

14% dimeric and 12% building "tire track" structures.

4.
Symmetry considerations for the system DCzDCN-Cu(100)

The found di-/tetramers, as well as the 1D "tire track" structure of dimer pairs, can be explained via 2D 

molecular self-organization symmetry operations 1. The possible number of energetically favorable 

equivalent molecular orientations depends, on the one hand, on the molecular symmetry but also on the 

symmetry of the substrate. The number of observable molecular adsorbate orientations Norient is related 

to the number of elements of the substrate rotational symmetry group Ci-surf and the number of elements 

of the largest subgroup C’k-Mol of the molecular rotational symmetry group Cj-mol being also a subgroup 

of Ci-Surf. Considering the set of rotations on the four-fold symmetric Cu(100) substrate, the set will be:

S = {rotate 0°, rotate 90°, rotate 180°, rotate 270°} indicating the geometric operation (in our case, 

rotation by 90°)  

Ci-Surf = C4-Surf = {rotate 0° = 360°, rotate 90°, rotate 180°, rotate 270°} = 4

Because of the chiral character of the DCzDCN molecule, there is only one possible geometric operation 

S={rotate 360°}; therefore, we get C’k-Mol = 1.

Then, for the system DCzDCN/Cu(100), we find

In case the molecule is not mirror-symmetric in 2D, which is the case for the DCzDCN, the number of 

energetically most favorable positions doubles. Therefore, for the DCzDCN molecule, no other than 

four- and twofold assemblies can be expected 1. 

𝑁𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡 = 𝐶4−𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓

𝐶1−𝑀𝑜𝑙

′
= 4


5.
Coverage dependence of the work function 

Fig. S4: Coverage dependence of the work function  for the system DCzDCN/Cu(100)

The work function  shows a uniformly decreasing value until saturation at 4.19 eV, indicating the 

formation of the first ML. A typical value of 3.99 eV for higher coverage in the multilayer region 

(>> 2ML) was found and further used as the reference value for the bulk work function of DCzDCN.

6.
HIS formation following the Newns-Anderson-Grimley adsorption model

A schematic comparison of the effects on the electronic structure of a chemisorbed molecule concerning 

the interaction with sp- and/or d-bands of a metallic substrate, following the Newns-Anderson-Grimley 

adsorption model is shown in Fig. S5 2,3.


Fig. S5:  Coupling of molecular states to the d-band structure of a metal substrate following the Newns-

Anderson-Grimley adsorption model (partly adapted from 4). a) Coupling of a discrete organic state to 

the sp-band of a metal substrate, b) Coupling to the d-band structure of a metal substrate, c) Resulting 

adsorbate DOS depending on the width and energetic position of the d-DOS on the d-band structure of 

the metallic substrate.

References

[1] Kurzweil, H., Stellmacher, B. The Theory of Finite Groups: An Indroduction. Springer-Verlag 

New York 2004

[2] Anderson P.W. Localized Magnetic States in Metals, Phys. Rev. Rev. 1961, 124, 41-53 DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRev.124.41.

[3] Newns D. M. Self-Consistent Model of Hydrogen Chemisorption, Phys. Rev. Rev. 1969, 178, 

1123-1135 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.178.1123.

[4] Raman, A.S., Vojvodic, A. Energy Trends in Adsorption at Surfaces. In: Andreoni, W., Yip, S. 

(eds) Handbook of Materials Modeling. Springer International Publishing AG (2018).


