Atomic engineering of interfacial polarization switching
in van der Waals multilayers

Madeline Van Winkle1, Nikita Dowlatshahi1, Nikta Khaloo1, Mrinalni Iyer1,2, Isaac M.
Craig1, Rohan Dhall3, Takashi Taniguchi4, Kenji Watanabe5, and D. Kwabena Bediako1,6,*

1Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
2Department of Chemistry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
3Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
4International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki,
Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan
5Research for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan
6Chemical Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
*Correspondence to: bediako@berkeley.edu

In conventional ferroelectric materials, polarization is an intrinsic property lim-

ited by bulk crystallographic structure and symmetry.
Recently, it has been

demonstrated that polar order can also be accessed using inherently non-polar

van der Waals materials through layer-by-layer assembly into heterostructures,

wherein interfacial interactions can generate spontaneous, switchable polariza-

tion.
Here, we show that introducing interlayer rotations in multilayer vdW

heterostructures modulates both the spatial ordering and switching dynamics

of polar domains, engendering unique tunability that is unparalleled in conven-

tional bulk ferroelectrics or polar bilayers. Using operando transmission electron

microscopy we show how changing the relative rotations of three WSe2 layers

produces structural polytypes with distinct arrangements of polar domains, lead-

ing to either a global or localized switching response. Introducing uniaxial strain

generates structural anisotropy that yields a range of switching behaviors, coer-

civities, and even tunable biased responses. We also provide evidence of physical

coupling between the two interfaces of the trilayer, a key consideration for con-

trolling switching dynamics in polar multilayer structures more broadly.

1

arXiv:2311.17300v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  29 Nov 2023


Ferroelectric (FE) materials with three-dimensional lattices have been employed in an ar-

ray of applications, including nonvolatile memory, actuators, and sensors, for decades.1,2

However, further miniaturization of electronic devices relies on the realization and manip-

ulation of polar order in atomically thin crystals, such as two-dimensional van der Waals

(vdW) materials. While many bulk, layered vdW crystals are naturally centrosymmetric

and therefore non-polar, layer-by-layer assembly of individual vdW layers has been used to

build non-centrosymmetric 2D heterostructures possessing an out-of-plane, interfacial po-

larization that can be switched via sliding of one layer. This bottom-up approach greatly

expands the number of potential 2D FE candidates and has been demonstrated in various

common vdW materials, including hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)3,4 and transition metal

dichalcogenides (TMDs).5–10

Much of the work in the field thus far has centered on polar bilayer heterostructures; however,

recently it was demonstrated that interfacial polarization is cumulative in multilayer systems,

enabling access to a ladder of polarization states depending on the number of layers and the

translational offsets between them.8,9 In this study, we use operando transmission electron

microscopy (TEM) to show how controlling the relative rotations between atomic layers in

twisted trilayer tungsten diselenide (TTL-WSe2) dictates the arrangement of polar domains

in the resulting structure, offering control over a global versus local switching response. We

also observe that uniaxial strain engineers a range of switching dynamics, including moir´e

anti-ferroelectric, ferroelectric, and distinctively, biased responses. Further, important in-

teractions between the two interfaces of the trilayer are observed through coupling between

intralayer strain and consequent switching behavior as well as pinning between commensu-

rately stacked domain walls, providing insight into the cooperative nature of polarization

switching in multilayer heterostructures and offering new routes to electrical control over

interlayer twist angle in moir´e superlattices.

2


Fig. 1: Twisted trilayer WSe2 polytypes and assignment of polar domains. a,
Schematic of twisted trilayer (TTL) WSe2 device on a silicon nitride (Si3N4) membrane for
operando TEM studies. Hexagonal boron nitride, hBN. Graphite, Gr.b, Low-energy atomic
stacking configurations for parallel-stacked trilayer WSe2, with the out-of-plane polarization
direction (+P or –P) at each interface indicated by arrows. ABC and CBA configurations
have equal and opposite non-zero net polarizations, while ABA and BAB configurations
have no net polarization. c, Illustrations of two main TTL polytypes, the A-twist-A′ (AtA′)
type and twist-A-B′ (tAB′) type.
d,e, Dark-field (DF) TEM images of AtA′ and tAB′

WSe2 devices, respectively, obtained using the [10¯10] Bragg reflection. f,g, Four-dimensional
STEM (4D-STEM) virtual DF images from boxed regions in d,e. Arrows indicate the local
direction of polarization at the two trilayer interfaces. h,i, Color legends for virtual DF
images in f,g, respectively, relating pixel color to the normalized cumulative first and second
order Bragg disk intensities (ΣI⟨1010⟩ and ΣI⟨1210⟩) obtained from the local experimental
convergent beam electron diffraction pattern.
Plotted points indicate normalized values
calculated for high-symmetry stacking configurations using multislice simulations.

3


Polar domain order in twisted trilayer WSe2 polytypes

Samples were prepared using a dry transfer method and consist of the twisted trilayer

(stacked with a parallel orientation between WSe2 layers) sandwiched between thin hBN

dielectric sheets (each < 15 nm thick) and few-layer graphite electrodes (see Methods and

Supplementary Section 1). The full heterostructure is thin enough for transmission of an

incident electron beam, enabling TEM imaging of the device while simultaneously applying

an out-of-plane electric field across the sample (Fig. 1a). Due to the presence of a rotational

offset between the WSe2 layers, there is a spatial variation in the crystallographic stacking or-

der, referred to as a moir´e superlattice, throughout the trilayer; however, as a consequence of

spontaneous relaxation of this superlattice,11–13 four configurations with the lowest stacking

energy comprise the majority of the moir´e structure. Of these, the ABC and CBA stacking

types have equal and opposite non-zero net polarization due to uncompensated charge trans-

fer at the two stacked interfaces, while the ABA and BAB stackings have no net polarization

due to mirror symmetry (Fig. 1b). The spatial arrangement of polar and non-polar domains

depends on the relative rotations between the WSe2 sheets. In the A-twist-A′ (AtA′) poly-

type, the outer layers (layers 1 and 3) are nearly aligned (0◦ < θ13 < 0.1◦) while the middle

layer (layer 2) is rotated further (θ12 > θ13). In the twist-A-B′ (tAB′) polytype the bottom

and middle layers are nearly aligned (0◦ < θ12 < 0.1◦) while the top layer is rotated further

(θ23 > θ12) (Fig. 1c).

To view the moir´e structure in these two polytypes we use dark-field TEM (DF-TEM),

which is a diffraction-based imaging technique that can be used to filter signal in multi-

component structures,11,14 making it well-suited for the observation of buried interfaces. As

shown in the DF-TEM images in Fig. 1d,e, the AtA′ and tAB′ polytypes produce distinct

moir´e patterns. In the AtA′ polytype we observe a kagome-like pattern superimposed on a

triangular superlattice. Since θ12 > θ13, the longer lengthscale kagome structure is attributed

to the moir´e between the outer layers and the shorter triangular structure to the moir´e

between the outer layers and middle layer. In the tAB′ polytype there are two superimposed

4


triangular superlattices; the superlattice with the longer (shorter) periodicity comes from the

bottom and middle (middle and top) layers since θ23 > θ12. The diffraction contrast observed

in the DF-TEM images arises from differences in local stacking and from the presence of a

global tilt of the sample away from the zone axis (Supplementary Section 2).15

To identify which regions of the observed moir´e structures have a net polarization, we use

interferometric four-dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy (4D-STEM, Fig.

1f,g). This imaging technique relates the intensities in interfering electron diffraction disks to

the local translational offset between layers (Supplementary Section 3) and therefore can be

used to map out the stacking order throughout the moir´e.13,16–18 We first perform multislice

simulations to calculate the cumulative diffraction intensity for the ⟨1010⟩ and ⟨1210⟩ Bragg

peaks for the high-symmetry stacking orders in both polytypes (Fig. 1h,i). These computed

values are then compared to the experimental 4D-STEM diffraction intensities (Supplemen-

tary Section 3) to assign the stacking order in each domain in the scan region. In the AtA′

polytype, we find that the ABC and CBA (i.e., polar) domains are localized in the kagome-

like structures, alternating in the points of each star, and on either side of elongated domain

walls, the origin of which will be discussed later. Meanwhile the tAB′ polytype is divided

into large sections containing either ABC or CBA stacking domains in periodic triangular

arrangements. We note that interferometric 4D-STEM is purely a structural diagnostic and

therefore can not be used to measure the local polarization (P) direction (i.e., net +P versus

-P); however, the polarization direction in each domain can be confirmed by observing the

response to an applied electric field, which we discuss next.

Polarization switching in AtA′ polytype

The distinct arrangements of polar domains in the AtA′ and tAB′ trilayers suggest that these

two polytypes will behave differently in an applied field. We first investigate the structural

response in the AtA′ polytype.
Fig.
2a shows how one of the star structures from the

sample in Fig. 1d distorts under application of an electric bias. At zero field, the ABC

(-P) and CBA (+P) regions are approximately the same size because they are energetically

5


Fig. 2:
Polar domain dynamics in AtA′ WSe2.
a, Sample DF-TEM images and
b, corresponding plot of normalized net polarization (dA) as a function of applied field
(E) for a minimally heterostrained AtA′ kagome-like structure. c, Low-magnification DF-
TEM image of a slightly heterostrained (< 0.03%) AtA′ WSe2 sample with polar domain
walls (PDW). PDW orientations (θPDW) overlaid in color. White numbered boxes highlight
regions analyzed in d–g. d–g, Sample DF-TEM images and corresponding plots of dA versus
E for PDWs with a (d,e) gradual and (f,g) sharp switching response. Colored stars mark
initial positions and colored dashed arrows show scan directions. h, PDW polarizability
(δdA/δE) versus orientation (θPDW). Shading highlights two groups of PDWs, one with
gradual (Type I) and one with sharp (Type II) switching. Asterisks in c,h mark PDW with
sequential switching, analyzed further in Fig. 3. White and black arrows in a,d,f indicate
local polarization at the two trilayer interfaces. Light blue lines in a,d,f mark regions used for
analysis in b,e,g, respectively. All DF-TEM images produced from [10¯10] Bragg reflection.
Differences in sample tilts cause variability in intensities of ABC and CBA domains.

6


degenerate. As a negative (positive) bias is applied, this degeneracy is lifted and the ABC

(CBA) regions grow while the CBA (ABC) regions shrink (Supplementary Video 1). To

quantify this change, we define an order parameter, dA, which is the normalized relative

area of the ABC and CBA domains, described by Eq.1:

dA = ACBA − AABC

ACBA + AABC
(1)

Previous studies have demonstrated that this order parameter can be used as a proxy for

net polarization.10 The variation in dA in the star structure is plotted as a function of

field (E) in Fig. 2b, showing an approximately linear relationship with minimal structural

hysteresis or remnant net polarization. In polar twisted bilayers, this behavior has been

referred to as a moir´e anti-ferroelectric response (MAFE)10 and is a direct consequence of the

moir´e structure, wherein the topology of the moir´e domain wall network precludes complete

switching of polar domains.19–21 We do not observe structural distortions in the surrounding

non-polar regions (Supplementary Section 4) except as a consequence of deformation of

nearby polar domains, such as in the center of the star in Fig. 2a.

It is also common for moir´e structures to acquire heterostrain during sample fabrication,

where one or more layers are uniaxially stretched relative to the adjacent layer(s).22–24 Moir´e

structures with a large periodicity are particularly susceptible to substantial distortions even

in the presence of a small atomic scale heterostrain (Supplementary Section 5).25 A DF-

TEM image of an AtA′ sample with a very slight misalignnment between the outer layers

(θ13 < 0.03◦) and an estimated heterostrain < 0.03% (Supplementary Fig. 9) is shown in

Fig. 2c. This sample contains extended polar domain walls (PDWs) in the longer lengthscale

moir´e rather than a kagome-like pattern. Similar elongated domain walls have been observed

in heterostrained twisted trilayer graphene.13 Interestingly, in this heterostrained sample we

observe two groups of PDWs with different responses to an applied field (Supplementary

Videos 2–4). The first type displays a gradual response to the field (Fig. 2d,e) where the

ABC and CBA domains steadily grow and shrink during biasing. However, the second type

7


has a much sharper response where the polar domains rapidly flip between ABC and CBA

stacking (Fig. 2f,g), similar to an untwisted polar heterostructure but on a much shorter

lengthscale (10s rather than 100s of nm). Additionally, this second domain wall type has

structural hysteresis and a remnant net polarization at zero field, a FE response. In the PDW

shown in Fig. 2f,g, the coercivity is relatively small due to the small domain size; however

some FE PDWs, discussed in the next section, exhibit a larger coercivity. Uniquely, the

polar domains in the heterostrained twisted trilayer structures shown here are not confined

by the same topology as either a twisted bilayer or a non-heterostrained twisted trilayer,

enabling a true ferroelectric response in a moir´e material for the first time.

To understand the origin of the different switching responses exhibited by these two groups

of domain walls, we calculate the polarizability for various PDW segments with different ori-

entations for the sample shown in Fig. 2c. Here, polarizability, the ease with which the net

polarization switches, is equivalent to the slope of dA versus E (δdA/δE). Fig. 2c illustrates

the orientation of the PDWs in the sample (θPDW) and Fig. 2h relates the polarizability

of a selection of these PDWs to their average orientation (additional information in Supple-

mentary section 6). Based on this investigation, it is evident that, for this sample, PDWs

oriented around 60-90◦ relative to the x-axis have a polarizability that is roughly 3-4 times

lower than PDWs oriented closer to 0◦. Knowing that domain polarizability is affected by

domain anisotropy in twisted bilayers,10,26 the phenomenon we observe could be attributed to

uniaxial heterostrain present in the superimposed small moir´e, which is oriented on average

around 72◦ relative to the x-axis in this sample (Supplementary Fig. 10). This heterostrain

introduces global structural anisotropy in the trilayer, as seen by the distortion of the trian-

gular moir´e unit cells, which could produce a preferential sliding axis for domain switching,

analogous to an easy axis for spin reorientation in magnetic systems.27,28 Overall, it is clear

that polarization switching in the AtA′ trilayer is influenced by the uniaxial strain fields in

all three WSe2 layers collectively.

8


Fig. 3: Biased polarization from heterostrain gradients in AtA′ polytype. a,b,
Maps of heterostrain in the smaller moir´e (ϵ12), c,d, sample DF-TEM images at different
applied fields, and e,f, plots of normalized net polarization (dA) as a function of applied
field (E) for two PDWs, one with θ12 = 0.23◦(a,c,e) and the other with θ12 = 0.52◦(b,d,f).
Vertical dashed lines in e,f highlight shift of the center of the hysteresis loop away from
0 V/nm for each biasing cycle pictured. g, Map of ϵ12 and h, sample DF-TEM images at
different applied fields for a PDW with a variation in ϵ12 along the length of the domain
wall (average θ12 = 0.41◦). i, Plots of dA as a function E for each of the six polar domains
pictured in g,h. ϵL : ϵR and ϵB : ϵT indicate the heterostrain ratio between small moir´e
domains on either the left (L) and right (R) side (a–d) or bottom (B) and (T) (g–i) of the
PDW. In c,d,h white and black arrows indicate polarization at the two interfaces of select
domains and light blue lines mark polar regions used for the calculation of dA. All DF-TEM
images produced from the [10¯10] Bragg reflection.

9


Heterostrain control of polarization bias

Some PDWs run through a heterostrain gradient where the small moir´e is considerably more

distorted on one side of the domain wall than the other. For example, in the regions shown

in Fig. 3a,b, the magnitude of heterostrain between layers 1 and 2 (ϵ12) is approximately

twice as large on the left side of the PDW compared to the right side (ϵL : ϵR = 1.9). In both

regions, which have different interlayer twist angles between the outer and middle layers (θ12),

we observe that the polar domains localize on the less heterostrained half of the PDW at zero

field. It has been demonstrated that the presence of anisotropic strain in multilayer graphene

further increases the energy of the rhombohedral (ABC/CBA) stacking types relative to the

Bernal (ABA/BAB) stacking.29 Presuming that WSe2 behaves similarly, we rationalize that

the observed preferential alignment of polar domains at zero field arises from an intrinsic

thermodynamic bias generated by the appreciable difference in heterostrain between the

sides of the PDW. Plotting dA versus E (Fig. 3e,f) over two or three biasing cycles, we see

that this energetic preference toward one polarization state at zero field ultimately shifts the

hysteresis curve along the electric field axis. We note that the enhanced coercivity of these

two PDWs compared to that shown in Fig. 2g likely stems from a combination of structural

factors, such as domain size, local distortions of the small moir´e after polarization switching,

and random variations in structural pinning sites at the ends of the domain wall segments

pictured. Nevertheless, it is evident that the heterostrain gradient effectively pins the polar

domains along one scan direction to produce a consistently biased FE response.

Remarkably, this asymmetry in the polarization curve can be systematically tuned down

to the length scale of an individual polar domain. To demonstrate, we consider a PDW

in a continuously varying heterostrain gradient. Fig. 3g illustrates that ϵ12 is smaller on

the bottom side of the PDW than on the top for domains 1–4 and vice versa for domains

5–6. Based on this variation in the direction of the heterostrain gradient, at zero field polar

domains 1–4 align on the bottom side of the PDW and polar domains 5–6 align on the

top, as shown in Fig. 3h. As a field is applied, each domain responds independently in a

10


domino-like fashion (Fig. 3h), where the field necessary for polarization switching is directly

correlated to the magnitude and direction of the local heterostrain gradient (Fig. 3i). These

results demonstrate that coupling strain engineering30–32 with moir´e engineering could offer

a route for precise, spatially localized manipulation of interfacial polarization.

Polar domain switching in tAB′ polytype

Next we discuss how the tAB′ polytype responds to an applied field. Whereas the AtA′

polytype had a highly localized polarization switching response, the tAB′ structure globally

deforms under application of an electric field (Fig. 4a, Supplementary Videos 5,6). The tAB′

polytype is quite similar structurally to a twisted bilayer considering that both the large and

small moir´e patterns in the tAB′ trilayer relax into triangular domains.11,13,16 With this in

mind, we analyze the field-dependent structural distortions in both moir´e lengthscales of the

tAB′ structure and compare them to analogous twisted WSe2 bilayers in Fig. 4b (twisted

bilayer images provided in Supplementary Video 7). We do not observe marked differences

in behavior between the smaller moir´e in the trilayer (θ23 = 0.25◦) and a twisted bilayer

with a similar interlayer rotation (θ = 0.31◦). Interestingly, the larger moir´e in the trilayer

(θ12 < 0.05◦), has a considerably lower polarizability than its twisted bilayer counterpart

(θ ≈ 0.03◦).

DF-TEM images of the tAB′ structure show that the domain walls of the larger moir´e are

roughly commensurate with the domain walls in the smaller moir´e, and as a field is applied,

these two sets of domain walls appear to be pinned to one another (Fig.
4c).
At one

point, around -0.01 V/nm, the domain wall of the large moir´e de-pins from that of the small

moir´e and jumps to an adjacent domain wall in the small moir´e, leading to the S-shaped

polarization curve in Fig. 4b. To quantitatively analyze this pinning effect, we track how

the side lengths (λ) of the triangular domains in the small moir´e (from Fig. 4c) evolve as

a function of field along the length of one of the large moir´e domain walls over three cycles

of biasing. The results illustrate that the small moir´e domains stretch anisotropically as the

large moir´e deforms in response to the field, particularly at positive field values (Fig. 4d).

11


Fig. 4: Polarization switching in tAB′ polytype. a, DF-TEM images for a tAB′-type
WSe2 trilayer over a series of applied fields, produced from the [10¯10] Bragg reflection. b,
Normalized relative area of light versus dark domains (dA) as a function of applied field (E),
describing deformation of the large and small moir´e of the twisted trilayer (TTL) shown in
a (θ12 < 0.05◦ and θ23 = 0.25◦) compared to analagous twisted bilayer (TBL) structures
(θ ≈ 0.03◦ and θ = 0.31◦). The area used for analysis of the small moir´e in the TTL is
boxed in white in a. The full sample area in a was used for analysis of the TTL large moir´e.
c, Magnified DF-TEM images showing pinning of a domain wall in the large TTL moir´e to
domain walls in the smaller moir´e as a field is applied. Images produced from the [1¯100]
Bragg reflection. d,e, Plots tracking evolution of side length (λ) and local twist angle (θ23)
for a row of small moir´e domains shown in c over three cycles of biasing. Side lengths used
for d are marked with orange lines in c. f,g, Corresponding average values of λ and θ23,
respectively, over the course of three biasing cycles (demarcated by yellow, red, and blue
shading and described by the applied field profile illustrated in h). Averages calculated from
the section of d and e boxed in white.

12


This increase in the periodicity of the small moir´e could be facilitated by either a reduction

in the local interlayer rotation in these domains or by a reduction in local lattice mismatch.

Considering that one or more layers are sliding and stretching in response to the applied

field, it is unlikely that the local lattice mismatch between layers is decreasing (we would

expect the converse instead), and therefore we conclude that changes in local rotational

offset between the middle and top layers (θ23, Fig. 4e) drive the observed deformation of

the small moir´e domains. Fig. 4f,g shows how the average values of λ and θ23 evolve for a

group of domains from the region in Fig. 4c over three biasing cycles (field profile in Fig.

4h), showing that the small moir´e length increases and the local twist angle decreases by up

to factor of two as a result of pinning between the domain walls across the two interfaces.

Importantly, these results indicate that the interfaces in polar multilayer heterostructures

are not decoupled from one another and cooperative effects can influence observed switching

dynamics, such as the reduction in polarizability observed in Fig. 4b. Notably, the results

in Fig. 4c–e also demonstrate an electrical route to controlling superlattice wavelength in

moir´e structures.

Fig. 5: Design principles for tuning polarization switching dynamics in twisted
WSe2 trilayers. Summary of the various types of polar domain structures studied in this
work and their respective switching responses.

13


Conclusions

Two-dimensional vdW materials have exhibited promise as FE components in emerging

technologies33,34 due to their robustness to depolarization at atomic thicknesses,35–41 their

compatibility with silicon-based device schemes, and their ability to be stacked into multi-

component heterostructures with sought-after functionalities, such as FE field-effect transis-

tors (FE-FETs)42 and multiferroic devices.43,44 Here, we have revealed that a diverse range

of polarization switching dynamics can be accessed in twisted trilayer heterostructures due

to the presence of more than one moir´e periodicity as well as interactions between all three

layers, as summarized in Fig. 5. Namely, changing relative rotations between layers and

intralayer uniaxial strain fields leads to a variety of polar domain structures with different

polarizabilities, coercivities, and intrinsic thermodynamic biases. This work paves the way

for engineering polarization switching and structural dynamics in polar multilayer systems,

particularly as developments in 2D heterostructure fabrication and strain engineering con-

tinue to advance.
For example, variations in the arrangements of polar domains in the

AtA′ versus tAB′ structures as well as the highly localized nature of preferential polarization

states in the AtA′ polytype opens avenues for the design of structures and surfaces with

deterministically patterned polarization. Even in untwisted polar vdW multilayers, manipu-

lation of intralayer strain could afford control over consequent switching dynamics. In moir´e

multilayers comprised of semiconducting vdW materials, including WSe2, such variability in

polar order and switching responses could also lead to the emergence of exotic, electrically-

tunable moir´e exciton responses, beyond those that have been previously observed in bilayer

heterostructures.45

14


Methods

Sample preparation

Monolayer WSe2 (HQ Graphene), 2–5 layer graphite (Graphene Supermarket Kish graphite)

and < 15 nm-thick hBN (grown by collaborators T.T. and K.W.) were mechanically ex-

foliated onto SiO2/Si substrates and selected based on optical contrast and atomic force

microscopy measurements.
Heterostructures were fabricated using the cut-and-stack dry

transfer method.46 A tungsten scanning tunneling microscope (STM) tip was first used to cut

each WSe2 monolayer into three pieces. A polybisphenol-A-carbonate/polydimethylsiloxane

(PC/PDMS) stamp was then used to pick up the top graphene electrode followed by the top

hBN and the first third of a pre-cut WSe2 monolayer. The remaining WSe2 portions were

then sequentially rotated and picked up to construct the desired trilayer structure, followed

by pick-up of the bottom hBN and finally the bottom graphite. We note that Device 2

(Supplementary Table 1) had hBN only on the top but shows similar behavior to the other

devices which had hBN on both sides of the WSe2. The final stacks were stamped onto

Protochips electrical e-chips with 5 µm wide holes and Au pre-patterned electrodes in a

four-point configuration and were then annealed under vacuum at 350◦C to improve adhe-

sion to the substrate. Lastly, custom electrical contacts were made from the pre-patterned

electrodes to the top and bottom graphite sheets using e-beam lithography followed by re-

active ion etching and thermal evaporation of Cr/Au (2 nm/100 nm). Further details and

images of devices are provided in Supplementary Section 1.

Electron microscopy imaging

Electron microscopy was performed at the National Center for Electron Microscopy in the

Molecular Foundry at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
Dark-field TEM images

were collected using a Gatan UltraScan 1000 camera on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Titan-

class microscope operated at 60 kV. Three frames each with an acquisition time of 5 s

were summed to produce each dark-field image. A bias voltage was applied between top

and bottom graphite electrodes of each device during imaging using a Protochips Aduro

15


double-tilt biasing holder connected to a Keithley 2650 sourcemeter. Selected area electron

diffraction patterns were collected on the same microscope at 60 kV using a Gatan Orius

830 camera, summing 16 frames with an exposure time of 0.1 s each.

Four-dimensional STEM datasets were acquired using a Gatan K3 direct detection camera

located at the end of a Gatan Continuum imaging filter on a TEAM I microscope (aberration-

corrected Thermo Fisher Scientific Titan 80–300). The microscope was operated in energy-

filtered STEM mode at 80 kV with a 10 eV energy filter centred around the zero-loss peak (to

reduce background from inelastic scattering), an indicated convergence angle of 1.71 mrad,

and a beam current of 40–50 pA. These conditions yield an effective probe size of 1.25 nm

(full-width at half-maximum value). Diffraction patterns were collected using a step size of 2

nm with 200 x 200 beam positions, covering an area of 400 nm x 400 nm. The K3 camera was

used in full-frame electron counting mode with a binning of 4 × 4 pixels in each diffraction

pattern and an energy-filtered STEM camera length of 800 mm. Diffraction patterns were

acquired with an exposure time of 13 ms per pattern, which is the sum of multiple counted

frames.

4D-STEM data analysis

Analysis of 4D-STEM data was performed using Python on a personal computer. Published

modules47 were used for Bragg disk detection and integration to yield virtual dark-field

images (Supplementary Fig. 5). All other code was custom written by the authors. Multislice

simulations were carried out using the ABTEM48 software package. Additional details are

provided in Supplementary Section 3.

16


References

1.
Haertling, G. H. Ferroelectric ceramics: history and technology. J. Am. Ceram. 82,

797–818 (1999).

2.
Mikolajick, T., Schroeder, U. & Slesazeck, S. The past, the present, and the future of

ferroelectric memories. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 67, 1434–1443 (2020).

3.
Yasuda, K., Wang, X., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T. & Jarillo-Herrero, P. Stacking-

engineered ferroelectricity in bilayer boron nitride. Science 372, 1458–1462 (2021).

4.
Vizner Stern, M. et al. Interfacial ferroelectricity by van der Waals sliding. Science 372,

1462–1466 (2021).

5.
Wang, X. et al. Interfacial ferroelectricity in rhombohedral-stacked bilayer transition

metal dichalcogenides. Nat. Nanotechnol. 17, 367–371 (2022).

6.
Weston, A. et al. Interfacial ferroelectricity in marginally twisted 2D semiconductors.

Nat. Nanotechnol. 17, 390–395 (2022).

7.
Rog´ee, L. et al. Ferroelectricity in untwisted heterobilayers of transition metal dichalco-

genides. Science 376, 973–978 (2022).

8.
Deb, S. et al. Cumulative polarization in conductive interfacial ferroelectrics. Nature

612, 465–469 (2022).

9.
Meng, P. et al. Sliding induced multiple polarization states in two-dimensional ferro-

electrics. Nat. Commun. 13, 7696 (2022).

10.
Ko, K. et al. Operando electron microscopy investigation of polar domain dynamics in

twisted van der Waals homobilayers. Nat. Mater. 22, 992–998 (2023).

11.
Yoo, H. et al. Atomic and electronic reconstruction at the van der Waals interface in

twisted bilayer graphene. Nat. Mater. 18, 448–453 (2019).

12.
Weston, A. et al. Atomic reconstruction in twisted bilayers of transition metal dichalco-

genides. Nat. Nanotechnol. 15, 592–597 (2020).

13.
Craig, I. M. et al. Local atomic stacking and symmetry in twisted graphene trilayers.

Preprint at arXiv:2303.09662 (2023).

17


14.
Huang, P. Y. et al. Grains and grain boundaries in single-layer graphene atomic patch-

work quilts. Nature 469, 389–392 (2011).

15.
Sung, S. H., Schnitzer, N., Brown, L., Park, J. & Hovden, R. Stacking, strain, and

twist in 2D materials quantified by 3D electron diffraction. Phys. Rev. Mater. 3, 064003

(2019).

16.
Kazmierczak, N. P. et al. Strain fields in twisted bilayer graphene. Nat. Mater. 20,

956–963 (2021).

17.
Zachman, M. J. et al. Interferometric 4D-STEM for lattice distortion and interlayer

spacing measurements of bilayer and trilayer 2D materials. Small 17, 2100388 (2021).

18.
Van Winkle, M. et al. Rotational and dilational reconstruction in transition metal

dichalcogenide moir´e bilayers. Nat. Commun. 14, 2989 (2023).

19.
Alden, J. S. et al. Strain solitons and topological defects in bilayer graphene. Proc.

Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 11256–11260 (2013).

20.
Enaldiev, V. V., Ferreira, F. & Fal’ko, V. I. A scalable network model for electrically

tunable ferroelectric domain structure in twistronic bilayers of two-dimensional semi-

conductors. Nano. Lett. 22, 1534–1540 (2022).

21.
Engelke, R. et al. Topological Nature of dislocation networks in two-dimensional moir´e

materials. Phys. Rev. B 107, 125413 (2023).

22.
Huder, L. et al. Electronic spectrum of twisted graphene layers under heterostrain.

Physical review letters 120, 156405 (2018).

23.
Edelberg, D., Kumar, H., Shenoy, V., Ochoa, H. & Pasupathy, A. N. Tunable strain

soliton networks confine electrons in van der Waals materials. Nat. Phys. 16, 1097–1102

(2020).

24.
Lau, C. N., Bockrath, M. W., Mak, K. F. & Zhang, F. Reproducibility in the fabrication

and physics of moir´e materials. Nature 602, 41–50 (2022).

25.
Cosma, D. A., Wallbank, J. R., Cheianov, V. & Fal’Ko, V. I. Moir´e pattern as a

magnifying glass for strain and dislocations in van der Waals heterostructures. Faraday

Discussions 173, 137–143 (2014).

18


26.
Molino, L. et al. Ferroelectric switching at symmetry-broken interfaces by local control

of dislocation networks. Adv. Mater., 2207816 (2023).

27.
Johnson, M., Bloemen, P., Den Broeder, F. & De Vries, J. Magnetic anisotropy in

metallic multilayers. Rep. Prog. Phys. 59, 1409 (1996).

28.
Paes, V. Z. & Mosca, D. H. Effective elastic and magnetoelastic anisotropies for thin

films with hexagonal and cubic crystal structures. J.Magn. Magn. Mater. 330, 81–87

(2013).

29.
Geisenhof, F. R. et al. Anisotropic strain-induced soliton movement changes stacking

order and band structure of graphene multilayers: implications for charge transport.

ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2, 6067–6075 (2019).

30.
Lee, D. et al. Giant flexoelectric effect in ferroelectric epitaxial thin films. Phys. Rev.

Lett. 107, 057602 (2011).

31.
Jeon, B. C. et al. Flexoelectric effect in the reversal of self-polarization and associated

changes in the electronic functional properties of BiFeO3 thin films. Adv. Mater. 25,

5643–5649 (2013).

32.
Hou, W. et al. Nonvolatile ferroelastic strain from flexoelectric internal bias engineering.

Phys. Rev. Appl. 17, 024013 (2022).

33.
Wu, M. Two-dimensional van der Waals ferroelectrics: Scientific and technological op-

portunities. ACS Nano 15, 9229–9237 (2021).

34.
Wang, C., You, L., Cobden, D. & Wang, J. Towards two-dimensional van der Waals

ferroelectrics. Nat. Mater., 1–11 (2023).

35.
Chang, K. et al. Discovery of robust in-plane ferroelectricity in atomic-thick SnTe.

Science 353, 274–278 (2016).

36.
Liu, F. et al. Room-temperature ferroelectricity in CuInP2S6 ultrathin flakes. Nat. Com-

mun. 7, 1–6 (2016).

37.
Ding, W. et al. Prediction of intrinsic two-dimensional ferroelectrics in In2Se3 and other

III2-VI3 van der Waals materials. Nat. Commun. 8, 14956 (2017).

38.
Cui, C. et al. Intercorrelated in-plane and out-of-plane ferroelectricity in ultrathin two-

dimensional layered semiconductor In2Se3. Nano. Lett. 18, 1253–1258 (2018).

19


39.
Fei, Z. et al. Ferroelectric switching of a two-dimensional metal. Nature 560, 336–339

(2018).

40.
Yuan, S. et al. Room-temperature ferroelectricity in MoTe2 down to the atomic mono-

layer limit. Nat. Commun. 10, 1775 (2019).

41.
Higashitarumizu, N. et al. Purely in-plane ferroelectricity in monolayer SnS at room

temperature. Nat. Commun. 11, 2428 (2020).

42.
Huang, W. et al. Gate-coupling-enabled robust hysteresis for nonvolatile memory and

programmable rectifier in van der Waals ferroelectric heterojunctions. Adv. Mater. 32,

1908040 (2020).

43.
Gong, C., Kim, E. M., Wang, Y., Lee, G. & Zhang, X. Multiferroicity in atomic van

der Waals heterostructures. Nat. Commun. 10, 2657 (2019).

44.
Dou, K., Du, W., Dai, Y., Huang, B. & Ma, Y. Two-dimensional magnetoelectric mul-

tiferroics in a MnSTe/In2Se3 heterobilayer with ferroelectrically controllable skyrmions.

Phys. Rev. B 105, 205427 (2022).

45.
Huang, D., Choi, J., Shih, C.-K. & Li, X. Excitons in semiconductor moir´e superlattices.

Nature Nanotechnology 17, 227–238 (2022).

46.
Kim, K. et al. van der Waals heterostructures with high accuracy rotational alignment.

Nano Lett. 16, 1989–1995 (2016).

47.
Savitzky, B. H. et al. py4DSTEM: A software package for four-dimensional scanning

transmission electron microscopy data analysis. Microsc. Microanal. 27, 712–743 (2021).

48.
Madsen, J. & Susi, T. The abTEM code: transmission electron microscopy from first

principles. ORE 1, 13015 (2021).

Data Availability

All dark-field TEM images supporting the findings of this study are contained within the

main text and supplementary files. Raw 4D-STEM data sets will be publicly accessible on

Zenodo upon publication of the manuscript.

20


Code Availability

The computer code for generation of colored stacking order maps and multislice simulations

is available from the authors upon request.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) under award

no. DMR-2238196 (D.K.B.). M.V. acknowledges support from a University of California,

Berkeley Philomathia Graduate Fellowship. I.M.C. acknowledges support from a University

of California, Berkeley Berkeley Fellowship and a National Defense Science and Engineering

Graduate (NDSEG) Fellowship under contract FA9550-21-F-0003 sponsored by the Air Force

Research Laboratory (AFRL), the Office of Naval Research (ONR) and the Army Research

Office (ARO). Work at the Molecular Foundry, LBNL was supported by the Office of Science,

Office of Basic Energy Sciences, the U.S. DOE under Contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231.

Other instrumentation used in this work was supported by grants from the Gordon and

Betty Moore Foundation EPiQS Initiative (Award no. 10637, D.K.B.), Canadian Institute

for Advanced Research (CIFAR–Azrieli Global Scholar, Award no. GS21-011, D.K.B.), and

the 3M Foundation through the 3M Non-Tenured Faculty Award (no. 67507585, D.K.B.).

K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the Elemental Strategy Initiative conducted by

the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan (grant no. JP-

MXP0112101001) and Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Grants-in-Aid for Scien-

tific Research (KAKENHI; grant nos. 19H05790, 20H00354 and 21H05233).

Author Contributions

M.V.W. and D.K.B. conceived the study.
M.V.W., N.D., and N.K. designed and fabri-

cated the samples. M.V.W. and R.D. acquired TEM and 4D-STEM data. M.I. performed

multislice simulations with input from I.M.C.. I.M.C. wrote the code used for generation

of color-coded virtual dark-field images. T.T. and K.W. provided the bulk hBN crystals.

M.V.W. processed and analyzed the data. M.V.W. and D.K.B. wrote the manuscript with

21


input from all co-authors.

Competing Interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional Information

Correspondence and requests for materials should be emailed to D.K.B.

(email: bediako@berkeley.edu).

22


