 

 

1

Placement of Biological Membrane Patches in a 

Nanofluidic Gap with Control over Position and 

Orientation 

Francesca Ruggeri1,a, Christian Schwemmer1,a, Mirko Stauffer2, Philippe M. Nicollier1, 
Jacqueline Figueiredo da Silva1, Patrick D. Bosshart2, Kirstin Kochems3, Dimitrios 
Fotiadis2, Armin Knoll1, Heiko Wolf1*  
 

1IBM Research – Zurich, Säumerstrasse 4, 8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland 
2Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, 
Switzerland 
3Experimental Physics and Center for Biophysics, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbrücken, 
Germany 

a contributed equally 
* corresponding author: hwo@zurich.ibm.com 
 
Keywords 
membrane deposition, membrane protein, nanofluidic confinement, surface potential 
 

This is the peer reviewed version of the following article: [Ruggeri, F.; Schwemmer, C.; 
Stauffer, M.; Nicollier, P. M.; Figueiredo Da Silva, J.; Bosshart, P. D.; Kochems, K.; Fotiadis, 
D.; Knoll, A.; Wolf, H. Placement of Biological Membrane Patches in a Nanofluidic Gap With 
Control Over Position and Orientation. Adv Materials Inter 2022, 9 (23), 2200941.], which 
has been published in final form at [https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.202200941]. This article 
may be used for non-commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and Conditions 
for Use of Self-Archived Versions. This article may not be enhanced, enriched or otherwise 
transformed into a derivative work, without express permission from Wiley or by statutory 
rights under applicable legislation. Copyright notices must not be removed, obscured or 
modified. The article must be linked to Wiley’s version of record on Wiley Online Library and 
any embedding, framing or otherwise making available the article or pages thereof by third 
parties from platforms, services and websites other than Wiley Online Library must be 
prohibited. 
 
 


 

 

2

Abstract  

Purple membranes from the archaeon Halobacterium salinarum consist of two-dimensional 
crystals of the light-driven proton pump bacteriorhodopsin, which convert photons into a 
proton gradient across the cell membrane. This functional feature and the structural rigidity 
make them appealing candidates for integration into biomimetic devices. To this end, and in 
order to carry out their function, purple membranes must be positioned in the correct 
orientation at the position of interest. Precise placement and control over the orientation of 
nanoscale objects still constitutes a formidable challenge. Here we show that isolated purple 
membrane patches can be transported and positioned at predefined locations in nanofluidic 
confinement, with control over their orientation at the target sites. The transport is achieved 
through a rocking Brownian motor scheme, while the controlled deposition of the membranes 
is realized by engineering the surface potential of a fluid-filled nanofluidic slit. This controlled 
manipulation of purple membrane patches outlines a new pathway towards the integration of 
biological or other delicate supramolecular structures into top-down-fabricated patterns, for the 
assembly of nanoscale hybrid devices that serve as a light-driven source of (chemical) energy. 
 
 

Introduction 

A component that converts radiant energy into chemical energy is a desirable building block 
for nanoscale devices.[1] Such devices might be applied as artificial chemical nanoreactors 
where they can drive and fuel chemical reaction cycles or chemical reaction networks.[2] Light-
driven chemical signaling is also conceivable.[3] Certain transmembrane proteins can supply 
such functionality. The membrane protein bacteriorhodopsin (bR) is an example of a light-
driven proton pump that is found in very high concentrations in biological membrane patches, 
called purple membranes (PMs), of the archeon Halobacterium salinarum (previously known 
as Halobacterium halobium).[4]  
PMs consist of about three quarters of bR and one quarter of lipids that occupy the interstitial 
spaces between the proteins.[4,5] bR forms trimers, which are densely packed in a hexagonal 
lattice, as first discovered by X-ray diffraction and electron microscopy,[6,7] and later also 
observed by atomic force microscopy (AFM).[8] Isolated PM patches typically have dimensions 
of 500 nm (diameter) but size can vary depending on preparations. The dense packing of bR 
renders purified PM patches fairly stiff[9] and shapes them into flat platelets. In a typical 
photocycle, bR undergoes several spectroscopically detectable conformational changes during 
which a proton is pumped from the inside to the outside of the cell.[5] The established proton 
gradient is used by the bacterium to fuel the synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Thus, 
the bR proton pumping activity is inherently directional. bR consists of seven transmembrane 
a-helices with N- and C-termini of the protein at the extracellular and cytoplasmic side, 
respectively. The structural and physicochemical composition of PMs (e.g., amino acid side 
chains in the loops connecting the transmembrane a-helices and the charge of lipid head 
groups) predicts an overall negative charge with a much stronger negative potential on the C-
terminal intracellular side.[10] However, experiments reveal a significantly smaller dipole than 


 

 

3

theoretically predicted.[10] This is supposed to be caused by bivalent cations that are tightly 
bound to some of the anionic sites in the membranes, screening part of the charged groups.[11] 
Even though results vary, a majority of experiments still finds more negative surface charge on 
the cytoplasmic side where the C-terminus of the bR protein is located.[10] Overall, the PM 
patches are negatively charged and stable in ultrapure water (Millipore) at pH 6 – 7, without 
additional buffering agents. 

Given the inherent asymmetry in their functionality, an integration of the PMs in any 

kind of device necessitates control over their orientation. Surface adsorption of PMs with a 
preferential orientation has been previously demonstrated by engineering the substrate surface 
charge[12,13] or by functionalizing one side of the membranes with a specific linker.[14] 
However, control over the specific position of adsorption, at the level of the individual 
membrane patch, was not possible using those methods. The adsorption of PMs on Si/SiO2[15] 
or SiNx[16] nanopores yields both orientations.  

Today, it is still a challenge to manipulate and integrate delicate biological building 

blocks into artificial devices without damage. To address this issue, a range of trapping 
methods have been developed over the years to control and study biological objects in a state 
comparable to their free state (i.e., without surface tethering). The most common methods are 
based on polarizability-dependent external fields (e.g., optical tweezers) that suffer from an 
unfavorable scaling of trap depth with the volume of the particle, with a limited range of 
applicability for small biomolecules. It has been shown[17] that high optical or electrical fields 
may even cause a disruption of the structural integrity of the object of interest (protein 
unfolding). 
On the contrary, the Electrostatic Fluidic Trap principle, first demonstrated by Krishnan and 
collaborators,[18,19] has recently been applied to biomolecules with a charge magnitude ranging 
from 1 to 100e (where e is the charge of one electron), and as small as a single fluorophore.[20] 
The typical Electrostatic Trap device comprises a nanofluidic slit of 100-200 nm gap height 
(2h), in which one side is made of glass, while the other consists of an oxide and is patterned 
with circular indentations of a typical depth, d, and diameter, D (Figure 1a). The glass and 
oxide surfaces acquire a net charge when in contact with an aqueous solution: in order to 
maintain electroneutrality in the system the surface charge of the slit walls is balanced by an 
equal number of counterions of opposite charge, partially adsorbed to the surface in the Stern 
layer, and partially forming the diffuse electrical double-layer.[21] The distribution of 
counterions of valence z at any coordinate zp in the vertical plane is governed by the Boltzmann 
formula,  

n(zp) = n0 exp[-zey(zp)/kBT] 
 
 
 
    (Eqn. 1), 

where y is the electrostatic potential and n0 is the number density of molecules at the surface, 
kB is Boltzmann’s constant and T the temperature of the system. In the case of flat surfaces, the 
resulting 1D electrostatic potential, obtained by solving the Poisson-Boltzmann equation for 
y(zp), can be approximated by the linearized expression  

y(zp) = ys exp(-k zp)  
 
 
 
(Eqn. 2). 

Here k-1 is the Debye length, typically 10-50 nm, that is proportional to 1/√𝑐 , where c is the 
salt concentration in the solution. ys  is an effective surface potential, related to the surface 


 

 

4

charge via the pH of the aqueous solution, as modeled by Behrens and Grier.[22] The potential 
at the nanofluidic slit midplane ym, resulting from the superposition of the electrostatic 
potential arising from the two charged surfaces in the slit of gap height 2h, is ym = 2ys exp(-
kh). If we create a circular indentation of a depth d > k-1 in one of the surfaces of the slit, the 
local potential minimum approaches zero. This perturbation of the local electrostatic landscape 
creates a potential well of depth ym for a point-like charged particle sampling the slit. The total 
electrostatic free energy W for said point-object of charge q is qym.[19] In general, stable 
trapping (for a time t > 10 ms) of molecules is achieved for W ≥ 3 kBT.[20] In previous work, 
we measured trapping energies in the range of 3 to 7 kBT, depending on the gap distance 
between two negatively charged glass/glass or glass/polymer surfaces, using 60 nm Au 
nanoparticles as test objects.[23] As highlighted by Eqn. 2, electrostatic trapping in a nanofluidic 
slit provides higher confinement at low salt concentration, c < 1mM, thereby maximizing k-1 

(typically between 10 and 30 nm in our experiments) and thus ym..  

The nanofluidic apparatus is also capable of transporting objects to the desired trapping 

sites by so-called “Rocking Brownian Ratchets”. These entail a combination of asymmetric 
electrostatic potentials and a net-zero oscillating force, externally applied, which create a flow-
free transport of nano-objects in the slit.[24]   
Here, we illustrate how our experimental method, generating electrostatic landscapes, provides 
the unprecedented ability to transport, trap and deposit PMs with control over both location 
and orientation, thus providing a path towards hybrid devices with precisely integrated 
biological components adding crucial functionality. 

 

 

Results and Discussion 

Membrane trapping. We used the nanofluidic confinement apparatus described earlier[24,25] 
for our experiments. In brief, the setup consists of an interferometric scattering microscopy 
(ISCAT) configuration integrated with a movable nanofluidic slit, controlled by a piezo-
electric stage. Nanometer-precision in the control of the gap allowed us to finely tune the 
electrostatic potential (see Eqn. 2). The top cover of the nanofluidic slit is a cover glass 
containing a pillar with an area of 80 µm by 80 µm and a height of 30 µm, surrounded by 4 
electrodes in a cross-shaped configuration. The lower surface of the nanofluidic slit is a 
substrate patterned with circular traps, fabricated using thermal scanning probe lithography (t-
SPL).[26,27] In t-SPL, a heat-sensitive resist (polyphthalaldehyde, PPA) is selectively removed 
using a heated AFM tip, which also allows us to pattern complex 3D shapes on the 
nanoscale.[28,29] Patterns in the resist were transferred into a subjacent SiO2 layer by reactive 
ion etching (RIE) (for details see Methods). We prepared arrays of 9 by 9 (or 6 by 7) circular 
holes of 1.2 – 1.5 µm diameter, D, and a depth, d, of 15-30 nm (Figure S1). In the array, the 
distance between the centers of the holes was 2 µm. Several arrays of traps were patterned with 
a distance of 50 µm to 100 µm from each other (Figure S2). This gave us the possibility to 
perform several runs of membrane deposition during one experiment by simply moving to 
another trap array.  


 

 

5

Membranes were dispersed in ultrapure water at a concentration of 0.1 – 0.2 mg ml-1 

without any further addition of salts or buffer. For the trapping experiments, 25 µl of membrane 
solution were placed on the patterned substrate already positioned in the nanofluidic setup. 
Then, the cover slide containing the glass pillar and the electrodes was lowered into contact 
with the drop, creating a slit of controlled gap height. 
 

 

Figure 1. Trapping and transport of PM patches in nanofluidic confinement. (a) Scheme 
of a negatively charged PM trapped in nanofluidic confinement. (b) ISCAT image (contrast-
enhanced, see Methods) of an array of traps with captured membranes. The membranes are 
clearly visible as bright spots with a darker edge. (c) Scheme of a PM being transported in a 
ratchet. (d) Screenshots from a movie (Movie S2) at different time steps, demonstrating the 
transport of membranes. The arrows indicate the direction of movement. The colors mark the 
same membrane in each of the frames. Scale bars are 5 µm. 
 

 


 

 

6

Despite of their thickness of only about 5 - 6 nm, the PM patches produced a contrast in ISCAT 
which allowed us to image the PMs in the nanofluidic gap and track their position.  As expected 
given their smaller scattering cross-section, the contrast of the ISCAT images was less 
pronounced than that observed for 60 nm gold nanoparticles (NPs).[30] A frame directly taken 
from a short movie (Movie S1) shows the array of traps with some traps having captured a PM 
patch, however, with low contrast (Figure S3a). Subtraction of the static background (for the 
detailed procedure see Methods) enhanced the contrast of PMs against the trap floor by a factor 
of about three (from 14% to 45%) and yielded an image with the membranes clearly discernable 
(Figure 1b), thus, demonstrating that label-free optical imaging of individual PM patches is 
possible with the ISCAT setup. 
When sampling an unpatterned area of the bottom substrate, or when the gap height was large 
(hence, y small) PMs were floating freely, undergoing Brownian motion. The membranes did 
not show unspecific adsorption to the surfaces. When the nanofluidic gap was reduced to about 
200 nm, the membranes were repelled by both like-charged surfaces and preferentially stayed 
in the circular holes (i.e., they were “trapped”), as schematically shown in Figure 1a. We point 
out that, although their location was confined, the membranes were still thermally fluctuating 
and were not adsorbed to the substrate (Movie S1). Upon increasing the gap height, the 
potential barriers decreased (W < 5 kT), allowing the PMs to jump between traps or even escape 
the array.  
Typically, we transported membranes towards the patterned area and into the potential wells 
using an electroosmotic flow produced by an AC electric field with a DC bias (0.5 V AC, 0.5 
V DC bias) applied to the electrodes. By adjusting the gap height with the movable pillar and 
with the aid of the DC bias, it was also possible to direct a membrane from one neighboring 
trap to another within a given array. The cross-shaped electrode configuration on the pillar was 
used to define the direction of motion along the x or y direction of the array. 
 

Membrane transport. The fact that the membranes can be both trapped and directed by an 
electroosmotic flow indicates that they might be prone to directional transport in an asymmetric 
ratchet potential. Thus, we tested their behavior in a rocking Brownian motor.  

We prepared ratchet patterns in PPA using t-SPL (scheme Figure 1c). For the 

experiments with PMs, we used the ratchet patterns in PPA without further transfer into the 
oxide layer. Note that ratchets patterned in PPA can also be transferred into the substrate 
material when an integration with other patterns (e.g. traps) is required.[31] This transfer will 
not change the function of the device if the substrate attains a similar charge as the polymer. 
The experimental setup and instrument were the same as described for Au NPs in an earlier 
publication,[24] only the lateral dimensions of the ratchet were larger to accommodate the larger 
diameter of the PM patches. The ratchet period was 3 µm, with a width of 1.5 µm. The 
maximum depth of the ratchet teeth was 20 nm (Figure S4). The rocking potential applied by 
the pillar electrodes had peak voltages of 1.0 - 1.7 V and frequencies between 0.5 and 2 Hz. In 
Figure 1d, snapshots that were taken at intervals of 6 s from a movie (Movie S2) are presented. 
It can be observed how the membranes in the ratchet move around the track formed by the 
ratchet teeth. The membranes in the ratchet have a drift velocity of 8.6 ± 3.1 µm s-1 (forward 


 

 

7

tilt, 1 V, 1 Hz). Importantly, the results show that a directed transport of the biological 
membranes can be achieved without a net fluid flow.  
We envision this capability as a powerful tool to transport individual membranes along 
predefined paths and to specific trapping sites, to generate complex networks in future 
experimental implementations. 
 

Membrane deposition. PMs that are confined in the circular holes of the trap arrays can be 
permanently deposited by decreasing the nanofluidic gap to near contact (2h ~k-1). In this 
configuration, the membranes approach the trap surface enough for Van der Waals forces to 
overcome electrostatic repulsion and hydration layer forces.[23] We note that after this 'move 
into contact' the membranes are permanently adsorbed to the surface, and do not re-disperse 
once the gap is opened again or the sample is dried. It is important to point out that the 
membranes in the traps did not experience any simultaneous mechanical contact to both the 
pillar and the trap bottom during deposition, as the geometrical depth of the indentations was 
always 10 – 25 nm larger than the thickness of the biological membranes (5-6 nm). The 
possibility of immobilizing the membranes enabled us to perform several deposition cycles on 
a given trap array by alternating between opening (replenishing the membrane concentration 
over the observed area) and reducing the nanofluidic gap. The analysis of deposited membranes 
was performed by AFM after removing the substrates from the confinement apparatus, 
removing excess liquid, and drying (Figure S5, S6a). In some cases, scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) was used additionally for the analysis of deposited membranes (Figure S6b, 
c). 
 

Membrane orientation. To control the orientation of the membranes prior to their deposition 
on the substrate, we engineered the surface potential at the top and bottom of the trapping sites 
independently, thus energetically favoring one or the other membrane orientation. To this end, 
we prepared two kinds of trapping substrates, one with all interfaces made of SiO2 (Type A) 
(Figure 2a) and a second one with side walls made of SiO2 but a bottom surface of Al2O3 (Type 
B) (Figure 2b). 

In addition to unmodified 'wild type' PMs, we applied PMs with a deca histidine (His10)-

tag attached to the bR protein to determine and control membrane orientation. Previous studies 
of PM orientation relied on membrane features visible in high-resolution electron 
microscopy,[12] high-resolution AFM,[32] or antibodies that are specific to one side of the 
membranes.[33] Our His10-tagged PMs come in two varieties with the His-tag attached either at 
the bR C-terminus (cytoplasmic side, C-His) or the bR N-terminus (extracellular side, N-His). 
The His-tag modification was produced by genetic engineering of a H. salinarum strain as 
described previously[34,35] and in the Methods section.  
 

 

 


 

 

8

Figure 2. Orientation of His-tag-modified PM patches in nanofluidic confinement and 
after deposition. (a), (b) Scheme of an asymmetrically charged PM in nanofluidic confinement 
with its orientation dependent on the surface charge of the trap. (c)-(f) Scheme of bR in the 
membrane with a His-tag attached on C-terminus or N-terminus of bR, and an antibody 
attached depending on accessibility of the His-tag. Transmembrane a-helices of bR are 
displayed as cylinders and colored based on a rainbow coloring scheme. Protein termini are 
labeled with “N” (extracellular, N-terminus) and “C” (cytoplasmic, C-terminus), respectively. 
Membrane and lipids are shown in a faded red tone. The surface where bR is adsorbed is shown 
in light grey. 
 


 

 

9

The His-tag served two purposes: (1) as an easy marker for the orientation detection of the PM 
patches and (2) to create an increased charge asymmetry between the different sides of the 
membrane patches.  

For marking the His-tag, we used fluorescently labelled antibodies specific to the His-

tag, which were applied after the deposition of the membranes. Only when PM patches were 
presenting their His-tag on top, the His-tag could be recognized by the antibody and the 
membranes showed fluorescence (schemes in Figure 2c-f). PM patches deposited with the His-
tag towards the substrate surface were not accessible to the antibody and thus remained dark. 
A comparison of fluorescence images and AFM (or SEM) data of the same area revealed the 
ratio of orientation of the membranes (overlay of fluorescence image and SEM in Figure 3d). 

For the charge distribution of the His-tagged PMs, the contribution of the His-tag itself 

to the surface charge of the membranes had to be considered. The pH of the unbuffered 
solutions of both C-terminal His-tagged and N-terminal His-tagged membranes was measured 
to be 6.3. The imidazole side chain of the histidine has a pKa of 6 [36] which means that in 
unbuffered solutions a significant number of His-tags carry a positive charge and that the His-
tag contributes to an asymmetric charge distribution on the membranes.  

In the described experiments, the addition of buffer was generally avoided to maintain 

a high Debye length and thereby a strong trapping potential (Eqn. 2). The use of 1 mM TRIS-
HCl buffer at pH 8 decreases the Debye length to approximately 10 nm. Accordingly, stable 
trapping and membrane deposition is achievable at smaller gap distances. 

After each deposition experiment, an antibody assay was performed. Control 

experiments with wild type PM patches (on Type B traps) showed no fluorescence from 
antibody binding, thus excluding any unspecific binding of the antibodies on the PM surfaces. 
 


 

 

10

 

Figure 3. Observation of PM patches after deposition in Type B (alumina bottom) traps. 
(a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of an array of circular traps, many of them 
containing deposited PMs with C-terminal His-tag (C-His). Membranes exhibit a darker 
contrast. (b) AFM image of the same array as in a). (c) Fluorescence microscopy image of the 
same array. Membranes with anti-His-antibody show green fluorescence. (d) Overlay of 
fluorescence and SEM image demonstrating that most of the deposited membranes are 
presenting the His-tag and being recognized by the antibody. Scale bars are 2 µm. 
 

Traps formed entirely of SiO2 (Type A). In the traps entirely made of SiO2 (Type A), the 
membranes were consistently deposited with the His-tag facing the bottom of the trap, i.e., 
displaying no fluorescence. For the analysis, we only counted traps with either a single 
membrane patch or several membrane patches that were not overlapping or folded over. Traps 
containing overlapping membrane patches or aggregates of membranes were easily identified 
in the AFM scans through the height of the membrane structures. These frequently displayed 
fluorescence, because part of the membrane (or the PM patch on top of a first membrane) was 
positioned with the His-tag facing upward. Sometimes, aggregates of several membrane 


 

 

11

patches were trapped and displayed fluorescence because of the high probability of some His-
tag surface of the aggregate being accessible to the antibodies. Such traps were also excluded 
from the evaluation. However, such multilayer or aggregate assemblies, typically fluorescent, 
were a useful internal control of the functionality of the antibody assay. Figure 4 shows the 
ratios of fluorescent and dark single layer PM patches for the different traps and membrane 
types. In the SiO2-bottomed traps, only 1% of membrane patches were found to be fluorescent 
for both membrane variants (C-His or N-His).  
 

 

Figure 4.  Distribution of PM orientation in different trap types. Graph showing the ratio 
of dark and fluorescent membranes in the array traps, indicating their orientation (fluorescent 
= His-tag up; dark = His-tag down). Each bar represents at least 100 membranes from at least 
seven trap arrays and from at least 2 independent deposition experiments. Error bars show the 
standard deviation of the averaged results of all trap arrays for each combination of trap type 
and membrane type. The comparison clearly shows that silica surfaces induce deposition with 
the His-tag facing down in almost every case, while the alumina surface promotes a much 
larger fraction of His-tag facing up. 
 

Traps with an Al2O3 bottom (Type B). Substrates for the preparation of alumina-bottom trap 
arrays comprise a sandwich layer structure with 15 nm of alumina and 20 nm of SiO2 on top. 
t-SPL-patterned trap arrays were transferred by RIE into the SiO2 with the alumina serving as 
a stop layer, thus exposing alumina exclusively at the bottom of the traps (for details see 
Methods). 
Alumina surfaces commonly have their isoelectric point at higher pH values (pH 7 - 9)[37] than 
SiO2 and are thus expected to carry a positive surface charge in water at pH values < 7. We 
expected the alumina bottom traps to be more attractive for membrane surfaces of a larger 
negative potential and therefore less attractive for the His-tag labelled side of the membranes 
(scheme Figure 2b). Nevertheless, traps with Al2O3 on the bottom did not cause any direct 
adsorption of membranes from solution by opposite-charge attraction. This was substantiated 
by the lack of membranes adsorbed in the trapping sites of control fields, which were not 


 

 

12

directly under the pillar (2h >> 1 µm, and ym ~ 0) during the deposition process. This indicates 
that the alumina surface does not have a strong positive surface potential under our 
experimental conditions. We performed zeta-potential measurements of alumina surfaces 
prepared by atomic layer deposition (ALD) at pH levels similar to those of the trapping 
experiments and found values between 20 and 35 mV. However, surface zeta potential may 
vary depending on the exact process of preparation and might be less positive in the traps after 
the RIE process that was used to remove the SiO2. Still, we consistently observed a stronger 
confinement of the membrane patches in Al2O3-bottom traps than in SiO2 traps at comparable 
slit gaps (data not shown), suggesting a higher trapping potential of the Al2O3-bottom traps.  

Permanent deposition of the membranes in the alumina-bottom traps was achieved by 

completely closing the gap. Comparing the ratio of fluorescent and dark membranes (Figure 4) 
deposited in alumina-bottom traps to those of the silica surface traps, one can see a significant 
increase of fluorescent PMs, i.e., membranes exposing their His-tag on the top side. Note that 
the measured ratios of fluorescent PMs are only a lower boundary estimate for the His-tag-up 
orientation because the antibody assay has a limited efficiency. A small number of membrane 
patches (< 10%) might not carry His-tags and the binding efficiency of the antibody to the His-
tag is not 100%. To estimate the efficiency of the antibody assay, we performed an efficiency 
test in bulk solution (for details see Methods). We found efficiency values of 63% and 70% for 
the antibody binding to the N-terminal and the C-terminal labelled membranes, respectively. 
Thus, the real values for alumina-bottom traps, estimated by the conditional probability rule, 
could be as high as 70% and 89% for the N-His and the C-His bR PM versions, respectively. 
Of course, this also must be considered for the ratios of orientation in silica surface traps, but 
even when accounting for the limited efficiency of the antibody assay in the same way, the 
fraction of His-tag-up membranes does not increase above 2%. 

 

Simulations. It is remarkable that the position of the His-tag (N- or C-terminus) is the critical 
factor for the final orientation of the membranes and that the charge asymmetry that is already 
present in the wild type[10] is overridden by the His-tag. This provides us with a handle to 
achieve both membrane orientations, i.e., pumping direction of the bR, by choosing the 
necessary combination of His-tag modification and surface potential. However, the symmetric 
charge conditions of the walls for the SiO2 traps (see Figure 2a) should not lead to a preferred 
orientation of the membrane. In order to understand the observed asymmetric deposition in 
more detail, we employed finite element simulations using Fenics.[38]  

We modeled the membrane as a spherical disc of 200 nm radius and 6 nm thickness in 

a weak electrolyte with a Debye length of 20 nm, resembling experimental conditions as 
determined by conductivity measurements. The surface charge of the membrane was set to be 
-2 electrons per protein area (11.4 nm2) on one side[10] and +0.1 electrons per protein area on 
the His-tagged side. For the charge of the confining surfaces we assumed symmetric charging 
of the glass and the silica surface of 0.5 mC m-2, consistent with the results of Behrens et al.[22]  
More details can be found in the Supporting Information. Figure 5 shows the result of the 
simulations.  
For the symmetric charge boundary conditions of the SiO2 traps, we indeed find similar 
trapping energies of 13.8 kBT (cyan line) and 13.3 kBT (blue line) for the membrane with the 


 

 

13

negative charge facing up or down, respectively. The magnitude of the trapping energies is 
consistent with the experimental observations that the membranes are stably trapped, but their 
difference of only 0.5 kBT cannot explain the observed orientation control of 99%. Note, 
however, that the equilibrium height of the membrane above the well is determined by its 
orientation. The positively charged side weakens the repulsion of the overall negatively 
charged membrane from the wall and causes the membranes to reside close to the wall facing 
this interface. Upon further reduction of the gap distance the free energy minimum disappears 
and is replaced by a gradient towards the closer wall causing the membranes to deposit there. 
Thus, the simulation suggests that all membranes with a high (negative) charge facing upward 
are deposited on the substrate (i.e., in the trap) while membranes with the opposite orientation 
are deposited onto the glass pillar, consistent with the observed deposition asymmetry. Indeed, 
we found PMs deposited on the pillar when examining the pillar surface by AFM after the 
deposition experiment (data not shown), corroborating this interpretation.  
 
 

 

Figure 5. Finite element simulation results. a) The electrostatic potential of a membrane 
trapped in a well of 300 nm radius and 20 nm depth. The gap distance is 200 nm. The white 
dotted lines indicate the position of the walls. b) Free energy curves of the membrane 
positioned over a silica well (blue and cyan) and alumina well (black and red). The negatively 
charged side of the membrane is facing the well for the cyan and the red curves. The curves at 
the bottom depict the simulated probability density of the vertical position in the gap.  
 

In the case of alumina at the bottom of the trap the situation is different. We find in the 
simulations that positive surface charges on the substrate always provide an unstable situation 
without minima in the free energy curves. Therefore, we assumed a weakly negative alumina 
charge density of -0.003 mC m-2. In this case the trapping energies are -25.0 (red curve) and 
- 22.8 kBT (black curve), providing an energy gain of 2.2 kBT for the experimentally favored 
orientation of the negative charge facing down (red curve). The other orientation is still 
modeled to reside very close to the substrate and it would be transferred onto the substrate upon 
decreasing the gap distance. The observed results can be explained, if in this case all 


 

 

14

membranes are deposited on the substrate due to the weak charge on the substrate. Moreover, 
the energy difference of 2.2 kBT is larger than the thermal energy and causes flipping of a 
fraction of wrongly oriented membranes. This is consistent with the experimentally observed 
weaker control of the orientation in the case of alumina traps. Moreover, the number of 
deposited membranes per deposition step was higher on alumina compared to silica, which 
corroborates the interpretation that all trapped membranes were deposited on the substrate. 
 
Conclusion 
We have shown that nanofluidic confinement in combination with an ISCAT setup can be used 
for the label-free imaging and manipulation of biological entities. Our objects of interest, PMs, 
are characterized by a directional functionality (light-driven proton pump), hence control of 
their orientation is crucial for their activity. We were able to trap, transport and immobilize PM 
patches at pre-defined trapping sites. Tuning of the materials used to fabricate the lithographic 
structures, employed for electrostatic confinement, yielded unprecedented fine control over the 
membrane orientation within the trapping site.  

The nanofluidic apparatus, combined with the tunability of both geometry and surface 

properties of the trapping substrate, constitutes a powerful tool for the manipulation and 
integration of supramolecular bio-structures into top-down-fabricated patterns, an essential 
prerequisite for the development of functional hybrid devices. 
 

Methods 
All chemicals and solvents without a special supplier specification were purchased from 
Sigma-Aldrich. The pH was measured with a handheld pH Meter (Horiba). Zeta-potential 
measurements were performed with a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Panalytical). 
 
Substrate fabrication. The samples in our experiments originated from a highly doped silicon 
wafer and were diced to a size of 8 mm x 8 mm. We fabricated two types of trapping devices, 
Type A and B. Type A were additionally thermally oxidized to a thickness of 500 nm and 
featured a silica surface throughout the array of trapping sites. We would like to point out that 
silica is expected to develop a negative charge when in contact with an aqueous solution at 
neutral pH. In the next step, Type A samples were coated with a solution of 9 wt% of the 
thermally sensitive resist polyphthalaldehyde (PPA) (Phoenix 81, Allresist), dissolved in 
anisole. The PPA solution was spin coated at 3000 rpm and annealed at 110°C for 2 min, 
resulting in an 80 nm thick layer of PPA. We defined the trap locations via thermal scanning 
probe lithography (t-SPL), using a home-built instrument[29] or the commercial instrument 
Nano Frazor Scholar (Heidelberg Instruments Nano).  

The PPA was patterned via a heated tip (tip heater nominally between 950 and 1250°C), 

capacitively pulled into contact with the substrate. The local decomposition of the PPA resulted 
in cylindrically shaped indentations, all the way through the polymer. Each device contained 
arrays of 9x9 or 7x6 cavities, 1.2 - 1.5 µm in diameter, arranged with a spacing of 2 µm. After 
an oxygen descum, the pattern was transferred to a depth of 20 nm in the silica layer, using 
Reactive Ion Etching (RIE). We utilized a mixture of CHF3, argon and oxygen gases (12, 38 
and 1 sscm, respectively) with a power of 100 W and 30 mbar chamber pressure. 


 

 

15

Type B devices were fabricated by covering the bare silicon wafer with alumina using atomic 
layer deposition (ALD, Picosun). We deposited 15 nm of alumina at 300°C, and immediately 
covered this layer with 20 nm of SiO2, also via ALD (Oxford Instruments). After this step, the 
devices were covered by PPA and patterned as described above. The RIE etch in this case 
ensued the complete removal of silica from the bottom of the voids, and resulted in exposed 
alumina, which is expected to attain a positive charge in contact with an electrolyte at pH 7. 
The thickness of silica essentially defined the depth of the indentations since the alumina film 
acts as a stopping layer when using the same RIE recipe as for Type A devices.  

Type A and B devices can be re-used after a cleaning procedure: The devices were 

sonicated for 20 min in 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution. After washing with copious 
amounts of DI water they were dried and treated with a 200 W oxygen plasma twice for 30 s 
with a break of 1 min (Tepla AG). 
 

Engineering, homologous expression and isolation of PMs containing N- and C-
terminally His10-tagged bacteriorhodopsin. A C-terminal His10-tag was introduced into the 
gene encoding bacterio-opsin (bop) by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the forward 
primer 5’-AAA AGG ATC CGA CGT GAA GAT GGG GC-3’ and the reverse primer 5’-AAA 
AAA GCT TGA TTC AGT GGT GAT GAT GGT GAT GAT GGT GGT GAT GTC CGT 
CGC TGG TCG CGG CCG CGC-3’.[35] The N-terminal His10-tag was engineered as described 
previously.[34] The genetically engineered bR variants were cloned into the shuttle vector pHS 
blue and transformed and expressed homologously in the bop-deficient H. salinarum strain 
L33.[35,39] Isolation of PMs containing the engineered BR variants was performed using 
established protocols.[9,35,39–41] Briefly, H. salinarum cells were harvested and lysed by osmotic 
shock in ultrapure water. After removal of cell debris by three centrifugation steps (1x 4300g, 
10 min, 4°C; 2x 7600g, 10 min, 4°C), PMs were isolated using four rounds of 
ultracentrifugation (2x 55000g, 1 h, 4°C; 2x 60000g, 1 h, 4°C) followed by resuspension in 
ultrapure water. The concentration of bR in the sample was determined by chromophore-based 
absorption spectrometry at 568 nm using a molar extinction coefficient of 63,000 l mol−1 
cm−1.[42] The His-tagged PMs are very stable for several months. Periodic routine quality 
analyses of His-tagged PMs by sodium dodecylsulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
(SDS-PAGE) analysis indicate no degradation of bacteriorhodopsin over time and by exposure 
to day light. 

Membranes were dispersed in ultrapure water at a concentration of 0.1 – 0.2 mg ml-1 

without any further addition of salts or buffer. The dispersion was stable over weeks in the 
refrigerator. Before use, pre-diluted aliquots were taken from the refrigerator, allowed to reach 
room temperature and vortexed for a few seconds to disperse settled membranes. 
 
Antibody assay. We removed the sample from the nanofluidic confinement stage, carefully 

removing excess liquid without completely drying the substrate. In order to avoid unspecific 

deposition of the antibody on the substrate surface, we then applied SuperBlock (Thermo 

Fisher) solution. The SuperBlock solution was left on the sample for 10 min. Then the liquid 

was carefully removed again without complete drying and antibody solution (20 µl, His-tag 


 

 

16

monoclonal antibody-Alexa Fluor 488, Thermo Fisher) (20 µg ml-1 in PBS, pH 7.4) was 

applied to the pattern for 30 min. Next, the sample was rinsed with ultrapure water (2 x 100 µl) 

and dried in a gentle stream of argon. Sample arrays were first analyzed with the fluorescence 

microscope (Axiotech, Zeiss), followed by the capture of AFM images (Dimension V, Bruker) 

for the same fields. In one case scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Leo 1550, Zeiss) 

were taken as well. Fluorescence images were captured with µManager[43] and analyzed with 

ImageJ.[44] AFM images were edited and analyzed with Gwyddion.[45] 

 

Antibody efficiency test. We incubated one sample each of the C-terminal His-tag and the N-
terminal His-tag PMs with the antibody solution. For this, we mixed the corresponding 
membrane stock solution (25 µl , 0.2 mg ml-1) with the antibody stock solution (50 µl, 0.02 mg 
ml-1). After 1 h, any excess or unbound antibody was removed by 4 cycles of centrifugation 
(4000 rpm, 20 min, Eppendorf 5424) and re-dispersion in ultrapure water. Next, a drop of the 
solution was left to dry on an alumina surface. After drying, the samples were analyzed by 
fluorescence microscopy and SEM. An overlay of the two imaging techniques provides a ratio 
of fluorescent to non-fluorescent membranes. In this control experiment all His-tagged surfaces 
are accessible to the antibodies, because the binding takes place in solution. Also, the 
fluorescence of the membranes does not depend on their orientation, because the binding of 
the antibody takes place before the adsorption to the surface. 
 
Statistical Analysis. For each combination of trap type (SiO2, Al2O3) and membrane type (C-
His, N-His) at least two independent experiments, together representing at least 7 trap arrays 
and at least 100 membranes were evaluated for the ratio of dark and bright membranes. The 
ratios of the individual trap arrays for one combination of trap type and membrane type were 
averaged and the result, with standard deviation as error bars, plotted in Figure 4. 
 
Filter to enhance contrast in the ISCAT images. Due to the small difference in refractive 
index of the membranes and the surrounding fluid, the membranes had low contrast in the 
ISCAT images. To enhance their visibility, we first recorded a 20 s long video of trapped 
membranes, probing the trap potentials at a frame rate of 100 fps. In the next step, we 
determined the temporal median of the video which eliminated all moving objects, i.e., the 
membranes, and delivered a static background. Then, we took a single frame from the middle 
of the video and divided it by the static background. The resulting image was then rescaled 
such that it encompassed a full range of 12bit again. In the last step, the rescaled image was 
overlaid with the static background at a ratio of 30 to 70. 
 
FEM modelling. We performed all computations on a desktop computer using finite element 
software. The calculation was performed using the Fenics[38] software package. Meshes were 
prepared using Gmsh[46] and solutions were inspected using Paraview.[47] For more details, see 
SI. 
 


 

 

17

Data Availability 
Data available from the authors upon reasonable request. 
 

Acknowledgements 
We thank the Cleanroom Operations Team of the Binnig and Rohrer Nanotechnology Center 
(BRNC) for their help and support. Funding was provided by the European Research Council 
(StGno. 307079, PoC Grant no. 825794) and by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF; 
grant 200021_179148).  This work is part of a project that has received funding from the 
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie 
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 812868. D.F. acknowledges funding from the 
University of Bern, the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF; grant 310030_184980) and 
the Swiss National Centre of Competence in Research (NCCR) Molecular Systems 
Engineering. 
 
 
Author contributions 
M.S., P.D.B., and D.F. prepared PM patches. F.R., C.S., P.M.N., J.F.S., K.K., A.K., and H.W. 
performed experimental work in trap fabrication, nanofluidic confinement and analysis of 
membrane orientation. H.W., C.S., and A.K. analyzed acquired data. A.K. performed FE 
simulations. All authors contributed to manuscript preparation. 
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 

References 

[1] C. D. Bostick, S. Mukhopadhyay, I. Pecht, M. Sheves, D. Cahen, D. Lederman, Rep. 

Prog. Phys. 2018, 81, 026601. 

[2] S. Hirschi, M. Stauffer, D. Harder, D. J. Müller, W. Meier, D. Fotiadis, CHIMIA 2016, 

70, 398. 

[3] R. R. Birge, R. B. Gross, A. F. Lawrence, in Mol. Electron. (Eds: G. Mahler, V. May, M. 

Schreiber), CRC Press, 2020, pp. 333–358. 

[4] D. Oesterhelt, W. Stoeckenius, Nature. New Biol. 1971, 233, 149. 
[5] R. H. Lozier, R. A. Bogomolni, W. Stoeckenius, Biophys. J. 1975, 15, 955. 
[6] A. E. Blaurock, W. Stoeckenius, Nature. New Biol. 1971, 233, 152. 
[7] R. Henderson, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 1977, 6, 87. 
[8] D. J. Müller, J. B. Heymann, F. Oesterhelt, C. Möller, H. Gaub, G. Büldt, A. Engel, 

Biochim. Biophys. Acta BBA - Bioenerg. 2000, 1460, 27. 

[9] R. Petrosyan, C. A. Bippes, S. Walheim, D. Harder, D. Fotiadis, T. Schimmel, D. 

Alsteens, D. J. Müller, Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 3624. 

[10] R. Jonas, T. G. Ebrey, Photochem. Photobiol. 1990, 52, 1163. 
[11] M. Dunach, M. Seigneuret, J. L. Rigaud, E. Padros, Biochemistry 1987, 26, 1179. 
[12] K. A. Fisher, K. Yanagimoto, W. Stoeckenius, J. Cell Biol. 1978, 77, 611. 
[13] Z. Li, X. Xu, F. Yu, J. Fei, Q. Li, M. Dong, J. Li, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2022, 61, DOI 

10.1002/anie.202116220. 


 

 

18

[14] M. Hara, T. Majima, J. Miyake, S. Ajiki, H. Sugino, H. Toyotama, S. Kawamura, Appl. 

Microbiol. Biotechnol. 1990, 32, DOI 10.1007/BF00173725. 

[15] R. P. Gonçalves, G. Agnus, P. Sens, C. Houssin, B. Bartenlian, S. Scheuring, Nat. 

Methods 2006, 3, 1007. 

[16] D. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Li, Y. Han, P. Hu, K. Ma, M. Sheves, Y. Jin, ACS Nano 2022, 

16, 1589. 

[17] Y. Pang, R. Gordon, Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 402. 
[18] M. Krishnan, N. Mojarad, P. Kukura, V. Sandoghdar, Nature 2010, 467, 692. 
[19] F. Ruggeri, F. Zosel, N. Mutter, M. Różycka, M. Wojtas, A. Ożyhar, B. Schuler, M. 

Krishnan, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 488. 

[20] F. Ruggeri, M. Krishnan, Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 3773. 
[21] J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, Elsevier, Acad. Press, 

Amsterdam, 2011. 

[22] S. H. Behrens, D. G. Grier, J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 115, 6716. 
[23] S. Fringes, C. Schwemmer, C. D. Rawlings, A. W. Knoll, Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 8855. 
[24] M. J. Skaug, C. Schwemmer, S. Fringes, C. D. Rawlings, A. W. Knoll, Science 2018, 

359, 1505. 

[25] S. Fringes, F. Holzner, A. W. Knoll, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 2018, 9, 301. 
[26] H. Wolf, Y. K. R. Cho, S. Karg, P. Mensch, C. Schwemmer, A. Knoll, M. Spieser, S. 

Bisig, C. Rawlings, P. Paul, F. Holzner, U. Duerig, in 2019 Pan Pac. Microelectron. 
Symp. Pan Pac., IEEE, Kauai, HI, USA, 2019, pp. 1–9. 

[27] S. T. Howell, A. Grushina, F. Holzner, J. Brugger, Microsyst. Nanoeng. 2020, 6, 21. 
[28] R. Garcia, A. W. Knoll, E. Riedo, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 577. 
[29] A. W. Knoll, D. Pires, O. Coulembier, P. Dubois, J. L. Hedrick, J. Frommer, U. Duerig, 

Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 3361. 

[30] S. Fringes, M. Skaug, A. W. Knoll, J. Appl. Phys. 2016, 119, 024303. 
[31] P. Nicollier, C. Schwemmer, F. Ruggeri, D. Widmer, X. Ma, A. W. Knoll, Phys. Rev. 

Appl. 2021, 15, 034006. 

[32] D. Fotiadis, A. Engel, in At. Force Microsc., Humana Press, New Jersey, 2003, pp. 291–

304. 

[33] D. J. Müller, C. A. Schoenenberger, G. Büldt, A. Engel, Biophys. J. 1996, 70, 1796. 
[34] P. R. Laskowski, M. Pfreundschuh, M. Stauffer, Z. Ucurum, D. Fotiadis, D. J. Müller, 

ACS Nano 2017, 11, 8292. 

[35] M. Stauffer, S. Hirschi, Z. Ucurum, D. Harder, R. Schlesinger, D. Fotiadis, Methods 

Protoc. 2020, 3, 51. 

[36] J. M. Berg, J. L. Tymoczko, L. Stryer, Biochemistry, W.H. Freeman, New York, 2012. 
[37] M. Kosmulski, CRC Press, Surface Charging and Points of Zero Charge, Taylor & 

Francis, Boca Raton, 2009. 

[38] M. Alnæs, J. Blechta, J. Hake, A. Johansson, B. Kehlet, A. Logg, C. Richardson, J. 

Ring, M. E. Rognes, G. N. Wells, Arch. Numer. Softw. 2015, 3, 9. 

[39] V. I. Gordeliy, R. Schlesinger, R. Efremov, G. Büldt, J. Heberle, in Membr. Protein 

Protoc., Humana Press, New Jersey, 2003, pp. 305–316. 

[40] D. Oesterhelt, W. Stoeckenius, in Methods Enzymol., Elsevier, 1974, pp. 667–678. 
[41] M. Pfreundschuh, D. Harder, Z. Ucurum, D. Fotiadis, D. J. Müller, Nano Lett. 2017, 

DOI 10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b00941. 

[42] D. Oesterhelt, B. Hess, Eur. J. Biochem. 1973, 37, 316. 
[43] A. D. Edelstein, M. A. Tsuchida, N. Amodaj, H. Pinkard, R. D. Vale, N. Stuurman, J. 

Biol. Methods 2014, 1, 10. 

[44] C. A. Schneider, W. S. Rasband, K. W. Eliceiri, Nat. Methods 2012, 9, 671. 
[45] D. Nečas, P. Klapetek, Open Phys. 2012, 10, DOI 10.2478/s11534-011-0096-2. 


 

 

19

[46] C. Geuzaine, J.-F. Remacle, Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 2009, 79, 1309. 
[47] J. Ahrens, B. Geveci, C. Law, in Vis. Handb., Elsevier, 2005, pp. 717–731. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


