Strong Light-Matter Coupling Facilitated Charge Carrier Transport in Cavity Organic Solar 
Cells  
 

Yahui Tang,1,2 Alexandra Stuart,1 Timothy van der Laan,2 and Girish Lakhwani 1* 

1 ARC Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science, School of Chemistry, The University 
of Sydney, Australia 

2 CSIRO Manufacturing, Australia 

*Corresponding author. Email: girish.lakhwani@sydney.edu.au 

 
Abstract 

Strong light-matter coupling has shown great potential for modifying the 

electro-optical properties of semiconducting materials in recent years. In the strong 

coupling regime, excitons and cavity photons form new states named exciton-

polaritons, with their properties a hybrid of each constituent. Herein, we report strong 

coupling observed in solution-processed donor:acceptor bulk-heterojunction organic 

solar cells (OSCs) evidenced by the observed Rabi splitting of ~300 meV and the effects 

of strong coupling on OSC operations. Combining the transient photovoltage decay 

measurement and nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy, our results reveal that 

the effective charge carrier lifetimes are longer in cavity devices, attributed to the 

reduced bimolecular recombination. It is also found that access to CT state(s) of higher 

energy is enabled in cavity devices. This study demonstrates that strong coupling can 

effectively modify the device- and photo-physics in OSCs and opens a new pathway 

for engineering more efficient OSCs. 
 


Introduction 

Strong light-matter coupling in organic microcavities is capable of modifying the 

electro-optical properties of molecular systems without changing their chemical structures.(1, 

2) By placing molecules into an optical cavity in which the cavity mode is resonant with the 

optical transitions that form excitons in molecules, strong coupling between excitons and cavity 

photons can occur and produce new hybrid states named polaritons.(3–6) Polariton states feature 

properties from both their light and matter components, which makes them highly delocalized 

compared to the excitons (often Frenkel type) in organic semiconductors. (7, 8) It has been 

reported, for example, that polaritons in organic Fabry–Pérot cavities can propagate over 

hundreds of nanometres,(9) and surface Bloch wave polaritons can even propagate through 

ultrafast ballistic motion in the strong coupling regime.(10) In addition, strong coupling can 

lead to enhanced charge transport.(11–13) The boost in charge carrier mobilities of organic field-

effect transistors under the strong coupling regime has been experimentally demonstrated for 

both n- and p-type organic semiconductors. (12, 13) These unique properties of polaritons have 

inspired a wide range of applications.(14)  

One of the emerging applications, cavity organic solar cells (OSCs) in the strong 

coupling regime, has captured more attention in recent years. (15–19) The photoactive layer in 

organic solar cells typically consists of an electron-donating (donor) and an electron-accepting 

(acceptor) material. The blend solutions of two materials are spin-coated to form a bulk-

heterojunction (BHJ) structure, in which the donor and acceptor are intermixed to achieve 

efficient photocurrent generation, with a schematic shown in Fig. 1(D). Photocurrent 

generation in BHJ organic solar cells includes four steps: (i) exciton formation following the 

photon absorption; (ii) exciton diffusion to the donor:acceptor interfaces; (iii) charge 

separation, including the formation of an intermediate charge transfer (CT) state and the 

subsequent dissociation into free charges; (iv) charge transport and collection. Strong coupling 

has the potential to improve OSC operations for multiple reasons. Firstly, with the polaritons 

exhibiting a longer diffusion length than excitons, they have a better chance of reaching the 

donor:acceptor interfaces, thus minimizing the loss at step (ii) through exciton recombination. 

(15, 16) Secondly, the new energy channeling pathway from the lower polariton state to the 

charge transfer state has been shown to be highly efficient in planar heterojunction 

donor:acceptor photodetectors and photovoltaics and can potentially improve step (iii).(16) Last 

but not least, the charge carrier transport may also be increased, since an increase in 

photoconductivity was observed for common OSC materials, such as P3HT and N2200, when 


they are they were coupled to a plasmonic cavity in a transistor configuration.(12, 13)  Studies 

on strong coupling in donor:acceptor heterojunctions has mostly focused on the ultrafast 

dynamics of the photophysical processes in the cavity,(16, 17, 20) while the slow dynamics of 

charges in cavity devices are yet to be investigated.(21) 

Herein, we report the charge carrier dynamics in both working cavity devices and cavity 

samples (thin film sandwiched between planar silver cavities). The active materials used are 

PTB7-Th (donor) and PC71BM (acceptor), and the cavity is designed to couple the excitons 

generated on the donor material, which is a semi-crystalline conjugated polymer. There are 

multiple reasons why we chose to use these materials. The morphology of blend films of this 

system is well-understood and relatively uncomplicated, with diffraction measurements 

showing the molecular packing orientation of PTB7-Th remains almost unchanged compared 

to its neat form.(22) Also, the addition of common solvent additive DIO to the blend improves 

the intermixing of the donor and acceptor material, breaking the polymer phase into smaller 

domains.(23) Given that the absorption peaks of PTB7-Th and PC71BM are separated, this has 

a similar effect as diluting the polymer using a transparent matrix such as PMMA while 

maintaining a BHJ structure favourable for efficient charge separation and transport in organic 

solar cells. Taking all the above considerations, the chosen system is, therefore, an ideal 

platform for investigating the effect of strong light-matter coupling on photo-physics and 

device operations. 

In this study, the evidence of strong coupling in the BHJ cavity samples and devices is 

presented, with distinct polariton peaks and dispersion behaviour observed in the angle-

resolved reflectance measurements. The corresponding polariton peaks also appear in the 

external quantum efficiency spectra and the electroluminescence spectra of devices, suggesting 

that polariton states exist and, most importantly, are involved in the photocurrent generation in 

devices. The energy of the CT state(s) was found to be higher in cavity devices, as measured 

by electroluminescence and external quantum efficiency of devices. In addition, the charge 

carrier lifetimes of the reference and cavity devices were obtained from transient photovoltage 

(TPV) measurements and compared at the same charge carrier densities, with the charge carrier 

densities estimated using the transient photocurrent (TPC) measurement. Importantly, we 

found that the incorporation of polaritons leads to a longer effective charge carrier lifetime in 

cavity devices, which we attributed to reduced bimolecular recombination due to a smaller 

Langevin reduction coefficient, with the trend in TPV reproduced by transient drift-diffusion 


simulations. We verified that such longer charge carrier lifetimes are not due to resistance or 

capacitance effect in the electrical circuit, as the nanosecond transient absorption (TA) 

measurement on cavity film shows the same trend. This work demonstrates that strong coupling 

can be used to effectively manipulate the photo- and device physics of OSCs. Although it does 

not lead to an apparent efficiency increase in this case, because more than half of the light was 

blocked by the additional silver layer of 25 nm introduced to form the Fabry-Perot cavity, it is 

not an intrinsic limitation of the strong coupling phenomenon. Novel open cavity designs may 

be developed and used in the future to minimize this loss and improve overall device 

efficiencies. 

 
 
 


Results 
  

 

Fig. 1. Strong coupling and bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) donor:acceptor organic solar cells. 
Schematic of (A) exciton-polariton and (B) Rabi splitting. (C) Absorption of the neat PTB7-
Th and PC71BM film, and blend film (PTB7-Th:PC71BM of 1:1.5 ratio). (D) The normalized 
absorption spectrum of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend film of 1:1.5 blend ratio, and the (1-
Reflectance) spectrum of the corresponding cavity sample measured with a 45° incident angle. 
The cavity measured have a structure of Ag (25 nm)/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/Ag (100 nm). The 
thickness of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM layer in the cavity is measured to be 170 ± 10 nm by a 
profilometer. (E) The dispersion curves of upper polariton (UP), middle polariton (MP), and 
lower polariton (LP) were measured by angle-dependent reflectance, along with the fitting to 
a coupled-oscillators model shown as dashed lines of the same colour corresponding to each 
polariton branch. (F) Ratio-dependence of Rabi splitting. 

The donor and acceptor materials studied are PTB7-Th and PC71BM, respectively, with 

their chemical structures and absorption spectra of spin-coated films presented in Fig.1(C). The 

donor material PTB7-Th is a semi-crystalline conjugated polymer with two distinct vibronic 

peaks at around 642 and 710 nm, implying the formation of HJ aggregates in the neat film.(24)  

The acceptor material PC71BM is a fullerene derivative, which mainly absorbs below 550 nm. 

The vibronic peaks of PTB7-Th remain the same in the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend film of 1:1.5 


ratio, which indicates the aggregation of PTB7-Th in the blend is similar to the neat film. It has 

also been reported that diffraction measurements show the molecular packing of PTB7-Th 

remains almost unchanged in the PTB7-Th:PC71BM blend prepared with similar procedures, 

with PTB7-Th showing a face-on preferential orientation in the blend and neat films.(22)  

The PTB7-Th: PC71BM blend films are sandwiched between a thin Ag layer (25 nm) 

and a thick Ag layer (100 nm) to form a Fabry-Perot cavity. The thickness of the BHJ layer is 

designed for the cavity photon to couple with the PTB7-Th absorption peak. Compared to the 

absorption of bare blend films, the (1-Reflectance) spectrum of the cavity sample shows 

significant changes with distinct peak splitting around two vibronic features of PTB7-Th are 

observed as shown in Fig.1(D). Specifically, the resonant cavity shows three peaks 

corresponding to upper polariton (UP), middle polariton (MP), and lower polariton (LP) modes 

at 598 nm, 666 nm, and 758 nm, respectively. To confirm the system is in the strong light-

matter coupling regime, we measured angle-resolved reflectance given that the polariton states 

are dispersive to the in-plane vector.(25) The full set of angle-dependent spectra are shown in 

Fig. S6, and the peak positions of each polariton state are extracted and plotted against the 

angle of incidence in Fig.1(E). As shown in Fig.1(E), three polariton branches demonstrate a 

clear anti-crossing behaviour, which can be fitted to a coupled oscillator model to extract the 

Rabi-splitting values. Good agreement between the data and fitting was achieved, with the 

Rabi-splitting values obtained as Ω! = 0.26 eV and Ω" = 0.32 eV, with Ω! referring to the 

splitting between UP and MP, and Ω"  referring to the splitting between MP and LP, 

respectively. The value of Ω" is larger than the linewidth of the corresponding excitonic peak 

(Ex.1) and cavity photon mode (see Fig. S2 and Table S2 for details). The value of Ω! is close 

to the linewidth of the excitonic peak (Ex.1), but only LP is expected to interact with charge 

generation/process as the energy transfer from UP/MP is much faster than these processes.(17)  

The obtained PC71BM is not coupled to the cavity in this case because the energy of cavity 

photons and the excitons do not match. This has been previously observed in a similar material, 

PCBM, which also did not show strong coupling at room temperature.(17) Experimental 

evidence for this is also shown in Fig. 2(F), where as the PTB7-Th content increases, the Rabi 

splitting increases accordingly. 


 

Fig. 2. Photovoltaic performance of reference and cavity devices. (A) The schematic of bulk 
heterojunction reference and cavity devices. The cavity device has an additional Ag layer of 
25 nm compared to the reference. (B) The normalized external quantum efficiencies (EQE) of 
the cavity and reference organic solar cells, with three peaks corresponding to the upper 
polariton (UP), middle polariton (MP), and lower polariton (LP) states shown for the cavity 
device. (C) The light current density vs. voltage (JV) characteristics of the cavity and reference 
organic solar cell devices under 1 sun illumination. (D) The dark JV characteristics of the 
reference and cavity devices. 

The photovoltaic performance of the reference and cavity device under AM 1.5G 

illumination is shown in Fig.2(A) and summarized in Table 1. The cavity device has an 

architecture of ITO/Ag/ZnO/PEIE/BHJ/MoOx/Ag, with the BHJ layer having a thickness 

of 106 ± 6 nm in the resonant cavity device. The short-circuit current density (JSC) of the 

cavity device is 10.6 mA/cm2, which is lower than the reference device. This is expected 

because the upper Ag layer of 25 nm blocks more than half of the light. To quantify the 

optical loss caused by the thin Ag mirror, we performed transfer wave matrix simulations 

using the commercial software Setfos. This analysis provides a JSC of 7 mA/cm2 if we only 

consider the optical effect introduced by the Ag mirror, that is, the optical loss from the 


upper Ag layer is around 60%. Details of the simulation are given in the supplementary 

materials. Comparing the simulated and measured values, the measured JSC of the cavity 

device is ~20% higher than that of the simulated JSC which only considers optical loss. 

This suggests that the strong coupling (not simulated) leads to enhanced photocurrent 

generation, which is not accounted for by the optical simulation. The open-circuit voltage 

(VOC) of the cavity device is 0.04 V lower, but it is likely due to the decreased incident 

light intensity. The dark current density – voltage (JV) curves of the reference and cavity 

device are identical, as shown in Fig 2(D), which confirms the shunt resistance and series 

resistance are identical in both devices. Similar to the reflectance spectra, three peaks 

corresponding to polariton branches are also observed in the spectral response of the cavity 

device measured as the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum. As shown in Fig. 2(B), 

three peaks corresponding to the UP, MP, and LP appear at 598 nm, 666 nm, and 758 nm, 

respectively. Unlike in the reference device, the current generation of the cavity device is 

mostly from the polariton peaks rather than the PC71BM absorption. The unnormalized 

EQE in Fig.S4 shows that the EQE of the cavity device is larger than the reference device 

in the region ~760–790 nm, which corresponds to the LP peak, while it is lower in other 

wavelength regions due to the optical loss caused by Ag layer of 25 nm. In contrast to the 

polariton region, the EQE in the region corresponding to PC71BM absorption is reduced to 

around 30% of the reference device (see Fig.S4 in supplementary materials). 

 

Table 1. Photovoltaic parameters of the cavity and reference devices. The averaged values and 
standard deviations are from 5 devices. 

Device 

JSC 

(mA/cm2)

*Simulated 

JSC 

(mA/cm2)

VOC 

(V) 

Fill Factor 
Efficiency 

(%) 

Reference 
18 ± 1
17 
0.77 ± 0.01 0.56 ± 0.04
8.0 ± 0.5

Cavity 
13 ± 2
7 
0.73 ± 0.01 0.49 ± 0.04
4.6 ± 0.9

*Transfer wave matrix simulations were conducted in commercial software Setfos to estimate 
the optical loss caused by the additional Ag (25nm) layer in cavity devices. The polariton effect 
is not simulated. 

 

 

 


 

Fig. 3. Electroluminescence and ECT of reference and cavity devices. (A) External quantum 
efficiency (EQE) and Electroluminescence (EL) of devices under linear scale. (B) Fitting of 
EQE and EL for extracting the energy of CT state (ECT), with all the fitting parameters 
summarized in Table S3. 

The electroluminescence (EL) spectrum of the cavity device also differs 

significantly from that of the reference device, as shown in Fig.3(A). The lower polariton 

peak appears in the electroluminescence (EL) spectrum of the cavity device, symmetric to 

the LP peak in the EQE spectrum with respect to the intersection of the EQE and EL. The 

peak at around 1.45 eV is more likely emission from excitonic species, similar to that of 

the peak (at ~ 1.4 eV) observed for the reference device but showing a blue shift of ~0.05 

eV. The regime below the exciton peak in the EL spectrum of the reference device can be 

attributed to the emission of charge transfer (CT) state, as the same system has been studied 

and reported by multiple references. (26, 27) Such a regime is also observed in the cavity 

device, which we, therefore, attribute to the emission of the CT state. Compared to the 

reference device, the cavity device shows a blue shift of EL in the CT regime (the feature 

at ~1.3 eV), suggesting there is a change in the energy of the CT state (ECT). To estimate 


the change of ECT, the region assigned to CT state in EQE and EL spectra are 

simultaneously fit into two Gaussian line shapes,(28) obtaining values of ECT for both the 

reference and cavity devices. The fitting for both the reference and cavity device is shown 

in Fig.3(B), with the ECT used as a shared fitting parameter during the fitting of both EL 

and EQE spectra and is determined as the cross point of the fitted Gaussian lines. More 

details about the fitting are given in Fig.S8 and Table S4. The obtained ECT is 1.44 eV for 

the reference device, similar to the values reported by the literature.(26, 27) The obtained 

ECT for the cavity device, in contrast, is 1.51 eV, which is 0.07 eV (~ 3 kBT) higher than 

that of the reference, suggesting that the access to charge transfer state(s) of higher energies 

are enabled in the cavity device. 

In addition, effective charge carrier lifetimes are found to be longer in cavity 

devices. The charge carrier lifetimes are determined by transient photovoltage (TPV) 

measurement and calibrated to the charge carrier densities measured using transient 

photocurrent (TPC) at different intensities.(29, 30) Fig. 4(A) and (B) show the intensity-

dependent decay of photovoltage of the reference and cavity devices, respectively. The 

decay lifetime of both devices is dependent on the intensity of incident light, which is 

expected because the dominant recombination mechanism of PTB7-Th:PC71BM devices 

at the open-circuit condition is bimolecular recombination, which is dependent on the 

product of charge carrier densities. Since the upper 25 nm Ag mirror in the cavity device 

blocks more than half of the incident light, it is thus important to compare the charge carrier 

lifetime at the same charge carrier densities rather than just relying on the absolute 

intensity of incident light. TPC was thus measured at different intensities, with the 

intensity-dependent charge carrier densities obtained by integrating the decaying tail after 

the light is turned off. The intensity-dependent TPC curves and the intensity-dependent 

extracted charge carrier intensities are given in Fig.S9, and the obtained charge carrier 

density is shown in Fig. 4(C). The obtained charge carrier lifetimes from TPV are plotted 

against the charge carrier densities from TPC of the same light intensities to present an 

effective comparison between the charge carrier lifetimes of reference and the cavity 

device in Fig. 4(D). Significantly, the charge carrier lifetime is longer in the cavity device 

when the charge carrier densities are equal, which suggests that the recombination rate of 

charges is lower in the cavity device, which features polariton states. The bimolecular 

recombination mechanism of PTB7-Th:PC71BM is reduced Langevin recombination, with 

the bimolecular recombination rate described by:(31) 

𝑅 =

#$%!&%"'(

")
(𝑛𝑝 − 𝑛*

")                                             Equation 1 


in which the bimolecular recombination rate (R) is reduced by multiplying a Langevin 

reduction coefficient (γ) compared to an ideal Langevin recombination rate. Other 

parameters in the equation include electron/hole carrier mobilities (𝜇+/-), electron/hole 

densities (𝑛/𝑝), and intrinsic carrier densities (𝑛*). Typical values of γ are < 0.2, with a 

smaller γ leading to a lower recombination rate, and thus a longer charge carrier lifetime 

in TPV measurement. We demonstrate the effect of varying γ on the TPV measurement in 

Fig.4(E) by transient drift-diffusion simulation, in which we show that a larger γ indeed 

leads to a slower decay in TPV measurement. Parameters used for simulation are presented 

in Table.S3, and the physical meaning of this observation will be discussed later. 

 

Fig. 4. Longer charge carrier lifetime in the cavity device. Intensity-dependent transient 
photovoltage decay of (A) reference device and (B) cavity device. (C) Intensity-dependent 


charge carrier lifetime and densities. The charge carrier lifetime was estimated by integrating 
the tails of transient photocurrent decay. (D) The lifetime comparison of reference and cavity 
devices at different charge carrier densities. (E) Simulation showing the effect of reduced 
Langevin reduction coefficient (γ) in TPV measurements. As γ decreases, the decay becomes 
slower in TPV measurements, showing longer effective charge carrier lifetimes. 
 

We verified the effect of strong coupling using nanosecond transient absorption 

(TA). Fig. 5(A) and (B) show TA spectra of a reference sample (bare blend film) and 

cavity sample, exciting at 532 nm. The cavity sample used for TA had 25 nm Ag on both 

sides, in order to collect TA in both transmittance (∆A) and reflectance (∆R) modes. 

Further, TA data of the cavity sample measured in reflectance mode at 45° and 

transmittance mode at 0° is shown in the Supplementary Material, along with TA data of 

neat PTB7-Th. The reference sample shows a PTB7-Th ground-state bleach (GSB) around 

730 nm, and an ESA around 1200 nm that has previously been attributed to the absorption 

of CT states/charge separated (CS) states,(32) or hole polarons.(33) CS states and hole 

polarons are similar in this context and cannot be distinguished in TA, we therefore 

consistently address these states as charges in the following discussion. There is 

additionally a small GSB due to PC71BM at 470 nm. At the excitation fluences used for 

TA in this study, neat PTB7-Th films, reference sample (blend film), and cavity sample 

(blend cavity) all show significant fluence-dependent spectra and decays, indicating the 

presence of bimolecular processes. For blend and neat PTB7-Th films, higher excitation 

fluences result in a significantly faster decay of the CT state/charges ESA, as well as the 

formation of an ESA at 600 nm due to an unknown species (SM Figures 2 and 5 in TA 

part). The exact mechanism of the formation of this species is unclear. However, we 

observe that in blend films, less of this species is formed than in neat PTB7-Th, and the 

CT state/charges ESA lives longer at equivalent fluences, indicating that the bimolecular 

process(es) is suppressed upon the addition of PC71BM. Further detail on bimolecular 

processes in non-cavity films can be found in the supplementary materials. 


 

Fig. 5. Polariton effect in TA of resonant cavities. Nanosecond TA spectra of PTB7-

Th: PC71BM of 1:1.5 blend ratio (A) reference sample and (B) cavity sample, exciting at 532 
nm and 460 μJ cm−2. The cavity sample has a structure of Ag(25m)/BHJ/Ag(25nm). The full 
spectra shown were measured at 45° from the normal to the sample. The kinetic traces in (C) 
show the decay of the ground state bleach at 0° and 45° in transmittance mode, and at 45° in 
reflectance mode. The cavity sample was not measured in the NIR due to poor probe 
transmittance in that region. 

The TA spectra of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM cavity sample differ from the reference 

sample. Most notably, the PTB7-Th GSB is obscured by a derivative-like feature around 

750–800 nm. Similar features have been observed in numerous cavity transient absorption 

studies, and in part correspond to a phenomenon referred to as polariton contraction.(34–

36) The strength of the light-matter coupling, and thus the energies of upper and lower 

polaritons, are proportional to the number of chromophores in the system, in this case 

PTB7-Th chromophores in the ground state. After the cavity is excited, there are fewer 

ground-state chromophores, causing a reduction in the Rabi splitting and a “contraction” 

of polariton energies.(36) This contraction causes changes in the ground-state absorption 

or reflectance spectra with excitation, which results in derivative-like signals in the TA 

spectrum. Changes in the ground-state absorbance and reflectance also arise from 

excitation-induced changes in cavity length or refractive indices.(36) The positive signal 

around 800 nm observed in the cavity TA, therefore, does not necessarily correspond to 

an excited-state absorption. The dynamics and decay of this feature should be 


representative of the total excited state or charge population, in the same way that the 

dynamics of the bare film GSB represent all excited states and charges. 

Given that there is clearly excitation fluence dependence in both reference and 

cavity samples, it is of interest to determine whether the lifetimes of the CT states/charges 

are changed in the cavity. Fig.5(C) shows the decay of the PTB7-Th GSB in the reference 

sample and the derivative feature in the cavity sample, excited at 460 μJ cm−2. This 

excitation fluence was chosen as it is high enough to show some bimolecular 

recombination, but low enough that the decay of the GSB still primarily reflects the decay 

of hole polarons, rather than the 600 nm absorbing product. The decay was measured at 

this excitation fluence at 0° and 45°. At 0°, the decay of the bare and cavity film is 

essentially the same within error. However, at 45°, when the cavity is resonant with the 

PTB7-Th absorption, the cavity decay is slower in both transmittance and reflectance 

modes. The cavity was measured at higher incident excitation fluence to ensure that the 

internal fluence experienced by the active layer was comparable to the reference sample. 

There is a level of uncertainty in the transmittance of the Ag layer, so the cavity was 

measured at the upper and lower bounds of the incident excitation fluence corresponding 

to an internal fluence of 460 μJ cm−2, giving the shaded blue areas in Fig.5(C). The actual 

internal fluence of the cavity is likely larger than this, as the bottom Ag layer will reflect 

some of the excitation pulses, providing a second chance for the active layer to absorb it. 

Since this would only increase the cavity decay further, we can conclude that at the same 

or even higher fluences, the cavity decay is slower. This result is consistent with the longer 

lifetimes observed for cavities in TPV measurements, although the absolute magnitudes 

of the fluence and lifetimes are different. The cavity sample used in TA has a different 

configuration, and TA is measured under different conditions (i.e. in the absence of an 

external field and charge transporting layers), so we do not expect the magnitudes of these 

values to be comparable. 

 
 


Discussion  

 

Fig. 6. Polariton effects. Compared to the reference device, the cavity device mainly shows 
three changes: (i) The polariton states are involved in the photocurrent generation, opening a 
new charge generation pathway. (ii) Although the lower polariton has lower energy than the 
excitons (mainly singlet state in this donor:acceptor system), the CT state shows a 70 meV blue 
shift. (iii) The longer charge carrier lifetime measured in TPV and TA, which is likely a result 
of lower CT relaxation rate 𝑘. or faster CT dissociation rate 𝑘/. 

The previous studies on cavity donor:acceptor OSCs mainly focused on ultrafast 

dynamics and aimed to directly probe the formation of charges from the new channel opened 

by the polariton states. Specifically, DelPo et al. identified the additional charge generation 

pathway from polaritons,(17) and Wang et al. reported that the rate of energy transfer is 

increased two- to threefold in the strong coupling regime.(16) We instead studied the slow 

photophysical processes by measuring the nanosecond transient absorption of cavity samples 

as well as the transient photovoltage (TPV) decay of functioning devices. Such a slow process 

can be interpreted as the dynamics of recombination/transport of charge carriers. Significantly, 

we found that the charge carrier lifetime is longer in the cavity, with nanosecond TA and the 

TPV showing a consistent trend.  

The physical implications of our results are discussed below. Since the dominant 

recombination in the studied system (namely PTB7-Th:PC71BM) is reduced Langevin 

recombination, the decay of charges is limited by two processes: (i) the encounter of 

charges/formation of the CT; (ii) the subsequent relaxation of the CT state.(29, 30, 37) The 

formation rate of CT is dependent on the charge carrier densities and can be described as 

Langevin type recombination, while the possibilities of CT relaxation after formation is 

determined by the competition between the re-dissociation and the CT relaxation,(38) as 

illustrated in Fig.6.  The Langevin reduction coefficient 𝛾 is usually added to account for such 

an effect in device modelling as shown by Equation 1, and it is argued that 𝛾~

0#

0#&0$ by Burke 

et al.(38) Therefore, the longer charge carrier lifetime observed in TPV and TA is likely a result 


of a fast CT dissociation rate and/or a slower CT relaxation rate, which leads to longer effective 

charge carrier lifetimes in TPV and TA measurements. This might be related to the blue shift 

of the CT state measured by the EQE in the sub-bandgap region (CT absorption) and the 

electroluminescence in the infrared region (CT emission). Although the exact origin of the blue 

shift is hard to determine here, such a change observed in the cavity is not strange. A similar 

phenomenon was observed experimentally before in all-optical pump-push-probe spectroscopy 

measurements on polymer:fullerene blends. (39) In these measurements, an additional push (an 

infrared optical excitation) was applied to recover the excited, delocalized band states which 

are higher in energy than the lowest-lying CT state and can facilitate long-range charge 

separation. (39) As theoretical calculations predict, the cavity-induced polaron decoupling in 

the strong coupling regime can modify the photophysical response of molecular aggregates that 

involve nuclear rearrangements in the excited states. (40) It is therefore likely that the polaron 

decoupling in cavities can realize the same effect in working devices as applying a push pulse 

in spectroscopic measurements of films. 

Our results show that strong coupling can lead to a lower Langevin reduction coefficient 

in PTB7-Th:PC71BM cavity OSC devices, which is a potential pathway for improving 

photovoltaic performance. To evaluate the benefits of a smaller Langevin reduction coefficient, 

we performed steady-state drift-diffusion simulations and found that the improvement can 

indeed be significant, especially for the devices that have lower mobilities. As shown in Fig. 

S24, a smaller γ can lead to a substantial increase in both JSC and VOC, especially for low 

mobilities systems. For systems with mobilities of 1012 cm2 V-1, a 1.5 times increase in the 

power conversion efficiency (PCE) is predicted in the simulations decreasing γ from 0.1 to 

0.001, as shown in Fig. S24(D). Indeed, it has been observed recently that some non-fullerene 

acceptor-based systems have a smaller Langevin reduction coefficient compared to the 

fullerene-based systems, which leads to a higher fill factor and lower recombination loss.(41) 

While material design and synthesis can be a potential way of realizing a smaller Langevin 

reduction coefficient, our results demonstrate that strong coupling can be an alternative 

approach for this purpose. 

To conclude, strong light-matter coupling is demonstrated in BHJ donor:acceptor OSCs 

and is shown to modify the photo- and device physics. In particular, we found that the overall 

photocurrent generation is enhanced in these devices if the optical loss introduced by the thin 

silver layer is accounted for. More importantly, we show that the CT state shows a blue shift 


of around 70 meV, along with a longer charge carrier lifetime in the cavity device. The longer 

charge carrier lifetime is attributed to a smaller Langevin reduction coefficient, which has the 

potential to lead to significant efficiency improvement for OSCs of low mobilities according 

to drift-diffusion simulations. From the perspective of engineering, replacing the planar metal 

mirror with other open cavity designs could reduce the optical loss and lead to a pathway 

toward an apparent power conversion efficiency increase in cavity solar cell devices. 

Materials and Methods 

Materials: PTB7-Th (#YY22138CH) and PC71BM (#MY11007PI) were purchased from 1-

Material Inc. 

Device fabrication: ITO glasses were cleaned subsequentially using acetone and isopropanol 

in an ultrasonic bath for 15 minutes each, followed by 15 min UV-ozone treatment. The 

inverted devices have ITO/Zno/PEIE/BHJ/MoOx/Ag structures. The ZnO was spin-coated on 

the cleaned ITO substrates using half-diluted ZnO nanoparticle ink purchased from Infinity PV 

(5.6% w/v in IPA), producing ZnO layers of around 40 nm. The nanoparticle ink was filtered 

using 0.45 𝜇𝑚 PTFE filters before use. The ZnO films are annealed at 120 °C for 2 min after 

spin-coating. After the ZnO films preparation, PEIE(Polyethylenimine) layer was spin-coated 

on top using 0.1 wt% PEIE in IPA. The PTB7-Th:PC71BM layer was spin-coated on top of the 

ITO/ZnO/PEIE substrate from the solution of 1:1.5 ratio dissolved in dichlorobenzene (DCB) 

and 3% solvent additive 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO). After the active layer is deposited, the MoOx 

layer (10 nm) and Ag layer (100 nm) are thermally evaporated in a vacuum evaporator. 

Device characterization: The Current density-voltage (JV) curves fabricated devices are first 

measured using a source-measure unit (Keithley 2450) under AM1.5G simulated sunlight 

produced by a  solar simulator (Oriel LCS-100TM Small Area Sol1) with the intensity 

calibrated by a silicon reference cell. The device parameters were then extracted from the 

measured JV curves. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was then measured using an 

integrated system IQE 200B from Oriel Instruments. 

Steady-state optical measurement: The steady-state absorption was measured by the Cary-

60 spectrophotometer, and the steady-state emission was measured by the Cary Eclipse 

fluorescence spectrometer. The angle-resolved reflectance was measured by varying the angle 


of incident white light (NKT, Compact) using a goniometer and then collected with an 

integrating sphere, which is fibre-coupled to an Ocean Optics Flame spectrometer.  

Transient absorption: Transient absorption (TA) measurements were performed on a 

commercial nanosecond-timescale TA spectrometer (Ultrafast systems, EOS). The excitation 

pulse was a 532 nm pulse at 1 kHz repetition rate (Innolas) with a spot size of 0.4 mm at the 

sample and with polarization rotated to magic angle relative to the probe pulse. The probe pulse 

was generated from a photonic crystal fiber-based supercontinuum laser (Ultrafast systems, 

EOS). The probe pulse was split into a signal and reference beam and focused onto the sample 

with a 0.1 mm FWHM spot size. The probe was set at either 0° or 45° from the normal to the 

plane of the sample. The excitation pulse was less than 5° away from the probe pulse.  

Transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV): TPC and TPV were all 

measured using the all-in-one characterization platform, Paios (Fluxim AG, Switzerland). The 

white LED that comes with the Paios setup was used for both measurements. Square light 

pulses of 500 μs were used during TPC measurement.  In TPV measurement, a resistor of 1MΩ 

was used so that the device is under the open-circuit condition. During the measurement, a 

small light pulse (10%) was applied to offset light intensities, and the offset intensity-dependent 

voltage decay was recorded. 

References 

1.  
T. W. Ebbesen, Hybrid Light-Matter States in a Molecular and Material Science Perspective. Acc Chem Res 49, 
2403–2412 (2016). 

2.  
M. Hertzog, M. Wang, J. Mony, K. Börjesson, Strong light–matter interactions: a new direction within 
chemistry. Chem Soc Rev 48, 937–961 (2019). 

3.  
C. Schneider, K. Winkler, M. D. Fraser, al -, Y. Yang, H. Weng, H. Zhang, W. Zhao, M. S. Skolnick, T. A. 
Fisher, D. M. Whittaker, Strong coupling phenomena in quantum microcavity structures. Semicond Sci Technol 
13, 645 (1998). 

4.  
J. J. Hopfield, D. G. Thomas, Polariton absorption lines. Phys. Rev. Lett. 15, 22–25 (1965). 

5.  
D. G. Lidzey, D. D. C. Bradley, M. S. Skolnick, T. Virgili, S. Walker, D. M. Whittaker, Strong exciton–photon 
coupling in an organic semiconductor microcavity. Nature 395, 53–55 (1998). 

6.  
R. P. Sabatini, B. Zhang, A. Gupta, J. Leoni, W. W. H. Wong, G. Lakhwani, Molecularly isolated perylene 
diimides enable both strong exciton–photon coupling and high photoluminescence quantum yield. J. Mater. 
Chem. C 7, 2954–2960 (2019). 

7.  
J. Schachenmayer, C. Genes, E. Tignone, G. Pupillo, Cavity-enhanced transport of excitons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
114, 196403 (2015). 

8.  
G. G. Rozenman, K. Akulov, A. Golombek, T. Schwartz, Long-Range Transport of Organic Exciton-Polaritons 
Revealed by Ultrafast Microscopy. ACS Photonics 5, 105–110 (2018). 

9.  
R. Pandya, A. Ashoka, K. Georgiou, J. Sung, R. Jayaprakash, S. Renken, L. Gai, Z. Shen, A. Rao, A. J. Musser, 
Tuning the Coherent Propagation of Organic Exciton-Polaritons through Dark State Delocalization. Adv. Sci 9, 
2105569 (2022). 

10.  
M. Balasubrahmaniyam, A. Simkhovich, A. Golombek, G. Sandik, G. Ankonina, T. Schwartz, From enhanced 
diffusion to ultrafast ballistic motion of hybrid light–matter excitations. Nat. Mater. 22, 338–344 (2023). 

11.  
D. Hagenmüller, J. Schachenmayer, S. Schütz, C. Genes, G. Pupillo, Cavity-Enhanced Transport of Charge. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 223601 (2017). 


12.  
K. Nagarajan, J. George, A. Thomas, E. Devaux, T. Chervy, S. Azzini, K. Joseph, A. Jouaiti, M. W. Hosseini, 
A. Kumar, C. Genet, N. Bartolo, C. Ciuti, T. W. Ebbesen, Conductivity and Photoconductivity of a p-Type 
Organic Semiconductor under Ultrastrong Coupling. ACS Nano 14, 10219–10225 (2020). 

13.  
E. Orgiu, J. George, J. A. Hutchison, E. Devaux, J. F. Dayen, B. Doudin, F. Stellacci, C. Genet, J. 
Schachenmayer, C. Genes, G. Pupillo, P. Samorì, T. W. Ebbesen, Conductivity in organic semiconductors 
hybridized with the vacuum field. Nat. Mater. 14, 1123–1129 (2015). 

14.  
D. J. Tibben, G. O. Bonin, I. Cho, G. Lakhwani, J. Hutchison, D. E. Gómez, Molecular Energy Transfer under 
the Strong Light–Matter Interaction Regime. Chem Rev 123, 8044–8068 (2023). 

15.  
V. C. Nikolis, A. Mischok, B. Siegmund, J. Kublitski, X. Jia, J. Benduhn, U. Hörmann, D. Neher, M. C. Gather, 
D. Spoltore, K. Vandewal, Strong light-matter coupling for reduced photon energy losses in organic 
photovoltaics. Nat Commun 10, 3706 (2019). 

16.  
M. Wang, M. Hertzog, K. Börjesson, Polariton-assisted excitation energy channeling in organic heterojunctions. 
Nat Commun 12, 1874 (2021). 

17.  
C. A. Delpo, S. U. Z. Khan, K. H. Park, B. Kudisch, B. P. Rand, G. D. Scholes, Polariton Decay in Donor-
Acceptor Cavity Systems. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 12, 9774–9782 (2021). 

18.  
G. Zhang, X. K. Chen, J. Xiao, P. C. Y. Chow, M. Ren, G. Kupgan, X. Jiao, C. C. S. Chan, X. Du, R. Xia, Z. 
Chen, J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zou, H. Yan, K. S. Wong, V. Coropceanu, N. Li, C. J. Brabec, J. 
L. Bredas, H. L. Yip, Y. Cao, Delocalization of exciton and electron wavefunction in non-fullerene acceptor 
molecules enables efficient organic solar cells. Nat Commun 11, 3943 (2020). 

19.  
B. Liu, X. Huang, S. Hou, D. Fan, S. R. Forrest, Photocurrent generation following long-range propagation of 
organic exciton–polaritons. Optica 9, 1029–1036 (2022). 

20.  
X. Zhong, T. Chervy, S. Wang, J. George, A. Thomas, J. A. Hutchison, E. Devaux, C. Genet, T. W. Ebbesen, 
Non-Radiative Energy Transfer Mediated by Hybrid Light-Matter States. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55, 6202–6206 
(2016). 

21.  
R. Bhuyan, J. Mony, O. Kotov, G. W. Castellanos, J. Gómez Rivas, T. O. Shegai, K. Börjesson, The Rise and 
Current Status of Polaritonic Photochemistry and Photophysics. Chem Rev 123, 10877–10919 (2023). 

22.  
W. Huang, E. Gann, L. Thomsen, C. Dong, Y.-B. Cheng, C. R. McNeill, W. Huang, E. Gann, Y. Cheng, C. R. 
McNeill, L. Thomsen, C. Dong, Unraveling the Morphology of High Efficiency Polymer Solar Cells Based on 
the Donor Polymer PBDTTT-EFT. Adv. Energy Mater. 5, 1401259 (2015). 

23.  
G. J. Hedley, A. J. Ward, A. Alekseev, C. T. Howells, E. R. Martins, L. A. Serrano, G. Cooke, A. Ruseckas, I. 
D. W. Samuel, Determining the optimum morphology in high-performance polymer-fullerene organic 
photovoltaic cells. Nat Commun 4, 2867 (2013). 

24.  
F. C. Spano, C. Silva, H- and J-Aggregate Behavior in Polymeric Semiconductors. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 65, 
477–500 (2014). 

25.  
D. G. Lidzey, D. D. C. Bradley, M. S. Skolnick, T. Virgili, S. Walker, D. M. Whittaker, Strong exciton–photon 
coupling in an organic semiconductor microcavity. Nature 395, 53–55 (1998). 

26.  
K. D. Rosenthal, M. P. Hughes, B. R. Luginbuhl, N. A. Ran, A. Karki, S.-J. Ko, H. Hu, M. Wang, H. Ade, T.-Q. 
Nguyen, K. D. Rosenthal, M. P. Hughes, B. R. Luginbuhl, N. A. Ran, A. Karki, M. Wang, T.-Q. Nguyen, S.-J. 
Ko, H. Hu, H. Ade, Quantifying and Understanding Voltage Losses Due to Nonradiative Recombination in Bulk 
Heterojunction Organic Solar Cells with Low Energetic Offsets. Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1901077 (2019). 

27.  
N. Zarrabi, O. J. Sandberg, S. Zeiske, W. Li, D. B. Riley, P. Meredith, A. Armin, Charge-generating mid-gap 
trap states define the thermodynamic limit of organic photovoltaic devices. Nat Commun 11, 5567 (2020). 

28.  
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs, J. V. Manca, Relating the open-circuit voltage to interface 
molecular properties of donor:acceptor bulk heterojunction solar cells. Phys. Rev. B 81, 125204 (2010). 

29.  
R. Hamilton, C. G. Shuttle, B. O’Regan, T. C. Hammant, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, Recombination in annealed 
and nonannealed polythiophene/fullerene solar cells: Transient photovoltage studies versus numerical modeling. 
J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 1, 1432–1436 (2010). 

30.  
A. Foertig, J. Kniepert, M. Gluecker, T. Brenner, V. Dyakonov, D. Neher, C. Deibel, Nongeminate and 
Geminate Recombination in PTB7:PCBM Solar Cells. Adv. Funct. Mater. 24, 1306–1311 (2014). 

31.  
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, P. W. M. Blom, Bimolecular recombination in polymer/fullerene bulk 
heterojunction solar cells. Appl Phys Lett 88, 052104 (2006). 

32.  
J. M. Szarko, B. S. Rolczynski, S. J. Lou, T. Xu, J. Strzalka, T. J. Marks, L. Yu, L. X. Chen, Photovoltaic 
Function and Exciton/Charge Transfer Dynamics in a Highly Efficient Semiconducting Copolymer. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 24, 10–26 (2014). 

33.  
A. B. Matheson, A. Ruseckas, S. J. Pearson, I. D. W. Samuel, Hole delocalization as a driving force for charge 
pair dissociation in organic photovoltaics. Mater. Horiz. 6, 1050–1056 (2019). 

34.  
B. Liu, V. M. Menon, M. Y. Sfeir, Ultrafast thermal modification of strong coupling in an organic microcavity. 
AIP Adv. 6, 16103 (2021). 

35.  
B. Liu, V. M. Menon, M. Y. Sfeir, The Role of Long-Lived Excitons in the Dynamics of Strongly Coupled 
Molecular Polaritons. ACS Photonics 7, 2292–2301 (2020). 


36.  
S. Renken, R. Pandya, K. Georgiou, R. Jayaprakash, L. Gai, Z. Shen, D. G. Lidzey, A. Rao, A. J. Musser, 
Untargeted effects in organic exciton-polariton transient spectroscopy: A cautionary tale. J. Chem. Phys. 155, 
154701 (2021). 

37.  
C. G. Shuttle, B. O’Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, J. De Mello, J. R. Durrant, 
Experimental determination of the rate law for charge carrier decay in a polythiophene: Fullerene solar cell. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 093311 (2008). 

38.  
T. M. Burke, S. Sweetnam, K. Vandewal, M. D. McGehee, Beyond Langevin recombination: How equilibrium 
between free carriers and charge transfer states determines the open-circuit voltage of organic solar Cells. Adv. 
Energy Mater. 5, 1500123 (2015). 

39.  
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. Van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. 
Cornil, D. Beljonne, R. H. Friend, The role of driving energy and delocalized states for charge separation in 
organic semiconductors. Science  335, 1340–1344 (2012). 

40.  
F. Herrera, F. C. Spano, Cavity-Controlled Chemistry in Molecular Ensembles. Phys Rev Lett 116, 238301 
(2016). 

41.  
Y. Wu, Y. Li, B. van der Zee, W. Liu, A. Markina, H. Fan, H. Yang, C. Cui, Y. Li, P. W. M. Blom, D. 
Andrienko, G. J. A. H. Wetzelaer, Reduced bimolecular charge recombination in efficient organic solar cells 
comprising non-fullerene acceptors. Sci Rep 13, 4717 (2023). 
  
 

Acknowledgments 
The authors thank Dr. Trevor Smith, Dr. James Hutchinson, and Dr. Rohan Hudson 
from The University of Melbourne, and Dr. Anthony Chesman from CSIRO for helpful 
discussions. Y.T., A.S. and G.L thank the funding support by the Australian Research 
Council Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science (funding grant number CE170100026) 
 
Funding: Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Exciton Science 
CE170100026 

 

 

 

 

 


