 

 

 

Digital twins’ kinetics of virtual free-radical copolymerization of vinyl monomers 
with stable radicals. 3. N-isopropyl acrylamide  

Elena F. Sheka  

Institute of Physical Researches and Technology, Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia    
(RUDN University), 117198 Moscow, Russia;  

sheka@icp.ac.ru 

Abstract: The first experience of virtual free-radical copolymerization (FRCP) of vinyl monomers 
with 
stable 
radicals 
in 
the 
framework 
of 
the 
digital 
twins 
(DTs) 
concept 

(arXiv:2309.11616 [physics.chem-ph] and arXiv:2311.02752 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]) is  extended to 
N-isopropyl acrylamide (NIPA). The virtualization of the chemical process is based on the concept 
of a chain reaction that covers a set of elementary reactions (ERs) and is the most suitable for 
quantum chemical treatment. The calculations were performed using a semi-empirical version 
of the unrestricted two-determinant Hartree-Fock approximation. Once input in the reaction 
solution, providing free-radical polymerization of NIPA, the fullerene C60 captures the formed 
monomer-radicals and terminates the polymerization. The obtained virtual kinetic data, 
providing the appearance of an induction period at the initial stage of the NIPA polymerization, 
are in full agreement with experimental reality.  
 

Keywords:  digitalization of polymerization; vinyl monomers; free-radical polymerization; digital 
twins approach; energy graphs; activation energy; N-isopropyl acrylamide; fullerene C60 
 

1. Introduction 

 
The digitalization, recently proposed for the free-radical polymerization of vinyl monomers [1-3], 
rests on three pillars. First in this group is the concept of polymerization as a chain reaction 
consisting of a set of elementary reactions occurring in superposition [4-8]. This concept 
underlies a set of digital twins (DTs) [9,10] that represent the starting chemicals of the reactions 
and their final products. The second pillar concerns the consideration of a sufficiently large 
number of the reactions and their products in the same way, taking into account the spin features 
of the considered DTs, radical most of them. In the field of quantum chemical computing, tools 
based on the semiempirical two-determinant Hartree-Fock approximation has so far been best 
handled this role. A special format for working with a large set of results obtained, presented in 
the form of matrix tabulating, is the third pillar. This format allows us to propose an universal 
“polymerization passport” (PP) of the polymerizable medium under study. The availability and 
high facility of computational methods makes it possible to issue such a passport to almost any 
reaction system. The passports themselves, on the one hand, are purely individual with respect 
to any of the reaction participants. On the other hand, they represent an informative source of 
knowledge concerning the process under study. The first application of the PP approach took 


place for the free-radical polymerization (FRP) of methyl methacrylate and its free-radical 
copolymerization (FRCP) with fullerene C60 and another stable radical TEMPO [2]. Then more 
detailed study was performed for styrene [3]. This work is devoted to the PP issue to the FRP of 
N-isopropyl acrylamide (NIPA) and its FRCP with C60.  
 
 
2. Polymerization passport of NIPA  
 
Necessary information regarding the FRP and FRCP of vinyl monomers, the need to introduce PP 
and its advantages in describing specific systems have been discussed earlier [1-3]. In this work, 
the main attention is focused on issuing the PP for the polymerizable medium, the main 
monomer participant of which is NIPA. As mentioned, PP is an extremely individual “purely 
personal” document containing data related to a clearly defined set of chemical reagents in the 
reaction solution. In this work, we will talk about the NIPA FRP initiated by the free radical, 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁ 
produced in the course of the thermal decomposition of 2,2′-azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN), and 
its FRCP with the C60 fullerene. The data listed in Table 1 are the main part of the PP. The 
nomination of elementary reactions and/or corresponding DTs is disclosed in Table 2. The second 
mandatory page of the passport is given by Figure 1, which presents graphic images of 
equilibrium structures, the data for which are given in Table 1. As seen, this table consists of three 
parts. The first parts contains the above mentioned nominations, related to both reactions and 
the relevant DTs that are important for the consideration of the FRP and FRCP under study. The 
second part involves thermodynamic descriptors related to the considered reactions expressed 
in terms of coupling energies 𝐸𝑐𝑝𝑙 of their final products. The third part presents kinetic 
descriptors of the studied reactions expressed in terms of association activation energies 𝐸𝑎𝑎 ≡
𝐸𝑎 [1]. All the digit data are obtained exploiting software CLUSTER-Z1 [11,12], based on the 
semiempirical AM1 version of the unrestricted two-determinant Hartree-Fock (UHF) 
approximation [13]. Bold-marked 𝐸𝑎 values listed in the table were evaluated when constructing 
the relevant barrier profiles of the DTs decomposition (see detailed description of the technique 
elsewhere [1-3]).  
 
Figure 1 presents equilibrium structures of the considered DTs related to the FRCP of NIPA 

with C60.  The main participants of the reaction, which are the headings of Table 1 added with 𝑀, 
are given in Figure 1a. NIPA oligomer-radicals, concerning the FRP of the latter (data in the yellow 
cells of the table), are given in [1] and are not presented in the figure. In contrast, all four 
members of the NIPA FRCP with C60 (the content of light pink cells of the table) are given in Figure 
1b. The barrier profiles of the dissociation of the latters are shown in Figure 2a and b. Among the 
latters, the attention should be particularly given to Figure 2a. It exhibits results of the 
decomposition of fullerenyl 𝐹𝑀, which is formed by a two-dentant coupling of NIPA molecule 
with fullerene. The corresponding intermolecular junction is of 2,2-cyclo addition form. Evidently, 
the junction breaking concerns two sp3C-C bonds. This can happen by elongation and breaking of 
both bonds either simultaneously, or one-by-one sequentially. These two ways are presented in 
the figure revealing a quite significant difference in the 𝐸𝑎 values in the two cases. At the same 
time, as seen in the figure, the maximum positions of all the graphs are clearly vivid, thus 
evidencing the position of the transition state 𝐸𝑆𝑇 inside the region, marked with blue band. The 
latter marks the dispersion of the 𝑅𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡

𝐶−𝐶 of 2.11±0.1 Å that determines maximum length of the 

sp3C-C bond, above which the bond becomes radicalized thus revealing the start of its breaking 
[14,15]. Figure 2b presents the barrier profiles of the decomposition of three monofullerenyls  
𝐹𝑀⦁, 𝐹𝑅𝐴𝑀, and 𝐹𝑅𝐴, which alongside with the above considered 𝐹𝑀 constitute a fullerene C60 
family of DTs, once of interest from the standpoint of the reaction under consideration. As can 
be seen from the figure, in all the cases, the DT decomposition is caused by the rupture of a single 


sp3C-C bond, accompanied by a significant dispersion of the critical value of its length. This 
somewhat blurs the structure of the graphs under study in the region of their maxima and makes 
the determination of the critical value of the bond length less certain. Noteworthy is the fact that 
the 𝐹𝑅𝐴𝑀 dissociation  turns out to be barrier-free. 
 

Table 1. Elementary reactions and their final DT products supplemented with 
virtual thermodynamic and kinetic descriptors related to the FRCP of NIPA with 
fullerene C60, while initiated with 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁ free radical 

 

𝑅𝐴𝑀•
𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁

𝑅𝐴⦁

𝐶60
𝐹

Digital twins

𝑀
𝑅𝐴𝑀2

·•∙
𝑅𝐴𝑀•
2-dentate
1-dentate

𝐹𝑀
𝐹𝑀⦁

𝑅𝐴𝑀•
(𝑅𝐴𝑀)2
𝑅𝐴𝑅𝐴𝑀
𝐹𝑅𝐴𝑀

𝑅𝐴⦁
-
-
𝐹𝑅𝐴

Thermodynamic descriptors 𝑬𝒄𝒑𝒍, kcal/mol 1)

𝑀

-25,378(2)
-23.51 (3)
-24.05 (4)

−5.675

(1)
-26.483
0.598

𝑅𝐴𝑀•
-
-
-40.161

𝑅𝐴⦁
-
-
-20.137

Kinetic descriptors 𝑬𝒂, kcal/mol 1,2)

𝑀

8.39 (2)
7.74 (3) 3)

8.49 (4) 3)

19.09 (1)
17.29 (1) 4)

27.79 (2)
20.01

𝑅𝐴𝑀•
-
-
0.023

𝑅𝐴⦁
-
-
9.398

 

                 1) Digits in brackets mark the number of monomers in the oligomer chain. 

                                                  2) Bold data are determined from the barrier profiles similar to shown  

in  Figure 2.  

                                                 3) Non-bold data are calculated by using Evans-Polanyi-Semenov  

relation presented in [3].  

                                                                            4) Digits in brackets indicate one-dentant and two-dentant coupling of 

NIPA with C60, respectively.   

 
 
3. Virtual and real kinetics of the FRCP of NIPA with fullerene C60 
 
NIPA stands somewhat apart from the bulk of vinyl monomers, which is due to the water 
solubility of its copolymers with C60 fullerene, in contrast to the dominant majority of vinyl 
polymers that are insoluble in water. Water-solubility is of particular interest due to the promise 
of NIPA polymers use in biology and medicine, for example, as nanocontainers for the delivery of 
drugs to ‘sick’ cells. They can also be used for water purification from microimpurities or 
extraction from aqueous solutions of valuable substances present in low concentrations. The 
copolymerization reaction of NIPA with fullerene C60 is described in detail in works [17,18]. In this 
study, special attention is paid to the kinetics of the initial stage of the reaction, represented in 
terms of the time dependence of the percentage monomer conversion 𝑥(𝑡) in Figure 2c. As seen 
in the figure, the evident feature of the dependence concerns the long IP of practically zero 
amplitude with respect to the abscissa. The IP length is the largest of known for vinyl polymers 


up today. It means that input of small additive of C60 into the chemicl reactor terminates the NIPA 
polymerization for about several hours, after which a rapid occurrence of the process takes place 
similarly to that observed for styrene or methyl methacrilate, for example.  
 
 
Table 2. Elementary reactions of the initial stage of the free-radical copolymerization of NIPA with 
fullerene C60 
 

 

1) 𝑀, 𝑅, 𝐹  mark DT’s chemical attribution to NIPA, initiating free radical 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁, and fullerene C60, respectively. 
Superscript black spot distinguishes radical species. 
 
 
 

 

 
 

Figure 1. Equilibrium structures of digital twins related to the FRCP of NIPA with fullerene C60. (a) Digital 
twins, representing headings of Table 1. Colored image of C60 exhibits a specific spin density distribution 
over the molecule carbon atoms, thus marking their variable chemical activity [16]. (b) Digital-twin 
monofullerenyls produced by intermolecular interaction of C60 with NIPA, both two-dentant 𝐹𝑀 and one-
dentant 𝐹𝑀⦁ coupling as well as by trapping of either free radical (𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁) 𝐹𝑅𝐴 or monomer-
radical 𝐹𝑅𝐴𝑀. UHF AM1 calculations. 
 


 
 
Considering the picture of the kinetics of FRCP, presented by the values of 𝐸𝑎 in Table 1, 

one can clearly conclude that it is this type of reaction, similar to that observed experimentally, 
that could be expected for NIPA in the presence of small additions of fullerene. Indeed, the active 
participation of fullerene in copolymerization is determined by three elementary reactions  
𝐹𝑀⦁, 𝐹𝑅𝐴,  and 𝐹𝑅𝐴𝑀.  The first one determines the polymerization of NIPA on fullerene, caused 
by the formation of a monomer-radical 𝐹𝑀⦁. As can be seen from the table, the formation of this  
 
 

 

 
Figure 2. (a) and (b) Energy graphs, presented virtual barrier profiles of the decomposition of the following 
DTs: monofullerenyl 𝐹𝑀, related to two-dentant coupling of NIPA with fullerene and decomposed either 
through elongation of the two bonds simultaneously, or through one-by-one bond sequentially (a);  
monofullerenyls  𝐹𝑀⦁, 𝐹𝑅𝐴 and 𝐹𝑅𝐴𝑀 related to the reactions of the same name. UHF AM1 calculations. 
(c) Empirical kinetics of the 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁-initiated FRCP of NIPA with fullerene C60. T=600C; o-DCB solvent; 
[NIPA]=0.73 mol/L; [AIBN]=0.24 mol/L; [C60]=6.7x10-3mol/L. Digitalized data of Ref. 17. 

 
fullerenyl is accompanied by a positive coupling energy, as a result of which 𝐸𝑎𝑑 > 𝐸𝑎𝑎, so that 
the generation of 𝐹𝑀⦁ is kinetically unfavorable. In contrast to the case, the formation of 
fullerenyls 𝐹𝑅𝐴, and 𝐹𝑅𝐴𝑀 is kinetically favorable, but the huge difference between their 
activation energies makes it possible to simply forget about the first of them. Thus, in a reaction 
solution, containing fullerene C60, the 𝐹𝑅𝐴𝑀 reaction has an evident kinetic advantage, which 
determines the capture of the 𝑅𝐴𝑀⦁ monomer-radical by the fullerene and thus stops the 
polymerization of the monomer. The extremely low value of its activation energy makes this 
capture practically barrier-free, while the following chain of the rate constants related to the 
fullerene-associated reactions looks like 
 

𝑘𝑟𝑚

𝐹
≫ 𝑘𝑅

𝐹 ≫ 𝑘1𝑚

𝐹 . 

 

This is in perfect agreement with the reality: the addition of fullerene stops the free-radical 
polymerization of NIPA, which resumes after the added C60 is fully consumed. 


 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
This work completes a series of studies of virtual free-radical copolymerization of vinyl monomers 
with small additives of stable radicals, such as TEMPO and C60 fullerene [2,3]. The digitalization 
of the thermodynamic and kinetic descriptors of this process, undertaken for the first time, 
showed that these radicals influence free-radical polymerization of the bodies completely 
differently. The input of TEMPO inhibits the latter in all the cases manifesting itself in the same 
way, regardless of the chemical composition of the reaction solutions. The inhibition capacity is 
dictated by a single elementary reaction of capturing the monomer-radical 𝑅𝑀⦁ initiated by a free 
one, the rate constant of which (𝑘𝑟𝑚

𝑆 ) occurs the highest. In practice, this feature is revealed by 

the presence of an induction period in the time dependence of monomer conversion 𝑥(𝑡) in the 
initial stage of polymerization with the amplitude of its change close to zero, while its duration is 
governed with the TEMPO content [19,20]. 

In the case of fullerene C60, the situation is drastically changed. Not one, but three 

elementary reactions may influence the FRP of monomers. These are the formation of monomer-
radical 𝐹𝑀⦁, initiated with fullerene (𝑘1𝑚

𝐹 ); the capture of free radicals-initiators 𝑅⦁ with C60  𝐹𝑅 

(𝑘𝑅

𝐹); and the capture of monomer-radical 𝑅𝑀⦁ with fullerene 𝐹𝑅𝑀 (𝑘𝑟𝑚

𝐹 ). All the reactions 

provide the formation of different fullerenyls, thermodynamics and kinetics of which depends on 
the chemicals attached to the C60 core according to the general rules of the fullerene 
nanochemistry [16]. Actually, the magnitudes of the above rate constants respond to changing 
in chemical content right away, which causes a change in the arrangement of each of these 
constants in their order from large to small. Thus, the rate constant 𝑘𝑅

𝐹 leads the order in the case 

of methyl methacrylate, polymerized being initiated with 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁; 𝑘1𝑚

𝐹  does the same in the case 

of styrene, but is replaced with 𝑘𝑟𝑚

𝐹  when 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁 is replaced with benzoyl peroxide; 𝑘𝑟𝑚

𝐹  

determines first steps of the FRP of NIPA, initiated with 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁. Evidently, the FRCP of vinyl 
monomers with fullerene C60 cannot be described with a unique appearance in all the cases, 
while the latter is highly individual depending on atomic structure of monomers and free radicals, 
initiating the reaction.  
 
The virtual variability of the first stage of the FRCP of the monomers with fullerene C60 

discussed above finds its confirmation in reality. Thus, the domination of the reaction 𝐹𝑅 means 
the reduction of the current concentration of free radicals, which should slow down the 
polymerization of monomers and should be represented empirically as a decrease in the slope of 
the 𝑥(𝑡) curve with respect to the time axis. The decrease should progress when the 
concentration of C60 increases [2]. It is this behavior of the 𝑥(𝑡) dependencies that are observed 
empirically for the FRCP of methyl methacrylate, initiated with 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁, in the presence of C60 
[19].   
 
The domination of 𝑘1𝑚

𝐹  in the case of the FRCP of styrene with C60 means that the first 

reaction, occurred in the chemical solution with the monomer, 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁 and fullerene, is the 
formation of the monomer-radical 𝐹𝑀⦁, which provides the polymerization of styrene on 
fullerene. The reaction proceeds until all the amount of fullerene is consumed, after which the 
routine styrene polymerization proceeds as if it were in the FRP case. Accordingly, 𝑥(𝑡) curve 
should contain two fractions related to two ways of the monomer polymerization, the former 
related to the polymerization stimulated with and occurred on fullerene and the latter once 
pretty similar to the FRP of styrene under the same conditions. In reality, the former fraction of 
the 𝑥(𝑡) curve should be of extremely low intensity because of three-order magnitude difference 
in the concentration of fullerene and monomer [3]. It is this type of the 𝑥(𝑡) curves that is 
obtained empirically for the FRCP of styrene, initiated with  𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁⦁, in the presence of C60 [19].  


The domination of the 𝐹𝑅𝑀 reaction characterized with rate constant 𝑘𝑟𝑚

𝐹  was revealed 

virtually twice, related to styrene [3] and NIPA. In the former case, as was said, it occurs when 
𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁 initiator is substituted with benzoyl peroxide. In the NIPA case, 𝐴𝐼𝐵𝑁 remains at place. 
Obviously, the occurrence of the 𝐹𝑅𝑀 reaction means a complete impossibility of the monomer 
polymerization, because of which 𝑥(𝑡) curve should begin with a classical induction period with 
close-to-zero amplitude with respect to the time axis. The duration of the period is governed with 
the fullerene concentration since the monomer polymerization can start only after all the C60 
content is consumed. This polymerization itself should be identical to that one occurred in the 
absence of fullerene. It is this type of 𝑥(𝑡) curves that are observed empirically for styrene, 
initiated with 𝐵𝑃⦁ [20] and NIPA [17].  
 
The current study showed that basic chain-reaction concept involving a discrete set of 

independent elementary reactions is reasonably valid for the FRP of vinyl monomers. Following 
from this “polymerization-passport”-based approach is highly productive, on the one hand, and 
allows to share friendly the responsibility of the polymerizable system study between virtual and 
real experiments. Modern quantum chemistry is able to construct required passports within wide 
limits. As a consequence, digitalization of polymerization reactions may prove to be a broad 
platform for introducing this approximation into polymer science and technology. 
 
Acknowledgments. This paper has been supported by the RUDN University Strategic Academic 
Leadership Program. 

 
References 

1. Sheka, E.F. Virtual free radical polymerization of vinyl monomers in view of digital 

twins. Polymers 2023, 15, 2999. 

2. Sheka, E.F. Digital twins kinetics of virtual free-radical copolymerization of vinyl 

monomers with stable radicals. 1. Methyl methacrylate. arXiv:2309.11616  
[physics.chem-ph], 2023, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.11616. 

3. Sheka, E.F. Digital twins’ kinetics of virtual free-radical copolymerization of vinyl 

monomers with stable radicals. 2. Styrene. arXiv:2311.02752 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2311.02752 

4. H.W. Starkweather, H.W.; Taylor, G.B. The kinetics of the polymerization of vinyl 

acetate. JACS 1930, 52, 4708-4714.  

5. Semenov, N.N. Tsepnyie Reakcii (Chain Reactions) Goschimizdat: Moskva, 1934 (in 

Russian).  

6. Bagdasar’yan, Kh.S., Teoriya radikal’noi polimerizatsii (Free_Radical Polymerization 

Theory), Moscow: Nauka, 1966. (in Russian). 

7. Gol’dfein, M.D.; Kozhevnikov, N.V.; Trubnikov, A.V. Kinetika i mekhanizm regulirovaniya 

protsessov obrazovaniya polimerov (Kinetics and Control of Polymerization Processes), 
Saratov: Saratov. Gos. Univ., 1989. 

8. Pross, A. Theoretical and Physical Principles of Organic Reactivity, Wiley, New York, 

1995. 

9. Rasheed, A.; San, O.; Kvamsdal,T. Digital twins: Values, challenges and enablers from a 

modeling perspective. IEEE Access 2020, doi: 0.1109/ACCESS.2020.2970143. 

10. Sheka, E.F. Digital Twins in graphene’s technology. arXiv.2208.14926. 
11. Zayets, V. A. CLUSTER-Z1: Quantum-Chemical Software for Calculations in the s,p-Basis. 

Inst. Surf. Chem. Nat. Ac. Sci. of Ukraine: Kiev, 1990; (in Russian). 


12. Berzigiyarov, P.K.; Zayets, V.A.; Ginzburg, I.Ya.; et al.  NANOPACK: Parallel codes for 

semiempirical quantum chemical calculations of large systems in the sp- and spd-basis.  
Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2002, 88, 449-462. 

13. Dewar M.J.S.; Zoebisch, E.G.; Healey, E.F.; Stewart, J.J.P. AM1: A new general purpose 

quantum mechanical molecular model. J.Amer.Chem.Soc. 1985, 107, 3902-3909. 

14. Sheka, E.F. Stretching and breaking of chemical bonds, correlation of electrons, and 

radical properties of covalent species, Adv. Quant. Chem. 2015, 70, 111-161. 

15. Sheka, E.F. Private Archive of Computed Data, 2016, partially published [46,49]. 
16. Sheka, E.F. Fullerenes. Nanochemistry, Nanomagnetism, Nanomedicine, Nanophotonics. 

CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton, 2011. 

17. Atovmyan, E.G.; Grishchuk, A.A.; Estrina, G.A.; Estrin, Ya.I. Formation of star-like water-

soluble polymeric structures in the process of radical polymerization of N-
isopropylacrylamide in the presence of C60. Russ. Chem. Bull., Int. Ed. 2016, 65, 2082—
2088.  

18. Atovmyan, E. G. On the relationship between the fullerene reactivity and degree of 

substitution. Russ. Chem. Bull., Int. Ed. 2017, 66, 567-570.  

19. Yumagulova, R. Kh.; Kuznetsov, S. I.; Diniakhmetova, D. R.; Frizen, A. K.; Kraikin, V. A.; 

Kolesov. S. V. On the initial stage of the free-radical polymerizations of styrene and 
methyl methacryate in the presense of fullerene C60. Kinetics and Catalysis 2016, 57, 
380–387. 

20. Yumagulova, R. Kh.; Kolesov, S.V.  Specific features of reactions between fullerene C60 

and radicals stabilized by conjugation in the process of radical polymerization. Bullet, 
Bashkir University 2020, 25. 47-51.  DOI: 10.33184/bulletin-bsu-2020.1.8 

  

 


