IOP Publishing
Journal Title

Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX 
https://doi.org/XXXX/XXXX

xxxx-xxxx/xx/xxxxxx
1
© xxxx IOP Publishing Ltd

Control and sorting of eccentric all-dielectric core-
shell nanoparticles using two counter-propagating 
plane waves

Ricardo Martín Abraham-Ekeroth1-4, Marcelo Lester1-3

1 Instituto de Física Arroyo Seco (IFAS), Pinto 399, 7000 Tandil, Argentina
2 Centro de Investigaciones en Física e Ingeniería del Centro de la Provincia de Buenos Aires 
(UNCPBA-CICPBA-CONICET), Campus Universitario UNCPBA, 7000 Tandil, Argentina
3 Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Godoy Cruz 2290 
(C1425FQB) Buenos Aires, Argentina
4 Universitat Jaume I, Av. Vicent Sos Baynat, s/n, 12071 Castelló de la Plana, Spain

E-mail: abraham@uji.es

Received xxxxxx
Accepted for publication xxxxxx
Published xxxxxx

Abstract

Many typical nanoscale structures consist of dielectric nanoparticles with an inevitable oxide-generated coating around them. 
Depending on the fabrication techniques, these coatings may not be homogeneous, and their distortion can cause problems in 
the applications of such systems. Based on finite element simulations, inhomogeneous core-shell nanoparticle systems are 
numerically studied when illuminated with two counter-propagating plane waves in the optical range. It is found that the 
electromagnetic field distortions caused by the inhomogeneous system under Mie resonance conditions allow the system to 
exhibit controllable one-directional impulsion and rotation, which mainly depends on the offset between the core and shell. The 
overall geometry and composition of the system also dictate the type of resonance being excited. Overall, this “photonic 
thruster” effect consisting of an accelerating and spinning projectile would provide stability to particle movement and 
additionally establish a method to distinguish inhomogeneous from homogeneous particles. The method can be scaled to a wide 
range of nanoscale dielectric particles. Thus, the results are useful for detecting defects in nanosystems with a simple concept 
and may open avenues for improving nanoparticle synthesis methods.

Keywords: optical forces and torques, core-shell nanoparticles, Mie resonances, eccentricity, all-dielectric metamaterials, 
inhomogeneous shells, optical traps, photonic propulsion

1.
Introduction

The ability to manipulate matter with light is nowadays an 

accessible tool since many applications have proven to be 
extremely useful,
like microscopy
[1–4],
light
sail 

development [5], living cells’ characterization, manipulation, 
and 
surgery
[6–11], 
microrheology
[12,13], 
cancer 

theragnosis [9,14], cooling of gases by laser radiation [15,16], 
tracking of bacteriae and viruses [17], and remote sampling
[18], along with others.

Furthermore, the core-shell nanoparticle systems have 

become essential in the nanoscale for several reasons. They 
can serve as multifunctional sensors or smart drug-delivery 
vehicles in biology and medicine [19]. They can be regarded 
as a simplified form of metamaterials, as they combine two or 
more materials with distinct properties within hybrid 
nanoparticles, thus offering the potential to enhance or 
customize their characteristics [20,21]. Protecting the core/s 
with shell layers that may even be incompatible with each 
other is one of the best advantages of this type of structures


Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX
Abraham-Ekeroth R.M. et al

2

over the others [22]. Currently, precise synthesis methods can 
imbue these nanoparticles with highly advantageous 
properties such as thermal stability, solubility, and low 
toxicity [21–23]. Consequently, these attributes render the 
particles suitable for a wide range of applications, including 
drug delivery and detection [21], bioimaging, sensors [24,25], 
solar cell development, removal of heavy metals [22], and 
surface modification [23], to name just a few.

In particular, the use of all-dielectric core-shell nanoparticles 
can represent specific advantages over their counterparts due 
to simple reasons[24,25]. For example, all-dielectric 
nanoparticles can support electric and magnetic volumetric 
resonances (Mie resonances) [26,27], which involve hot spots 
within the materials at their lowest-energy modes [28]. This is 
distinct from nano systems that support surface resonances 
like surface plasmons, which create hot spots near tips or 
surfaces, potentially making the particles invasive in their 
surroundings [29,30]. Consequently, an appropriate design of 
all-dielectric coated particles can lead to lower energy loss 
than designs using metallic nanoparticles. For instance, the 
dielectric function of the shell layer can be optimized for the 
miniaturization of dielectric capacitors in electronic and 
electrical systems [31,32]. All-dielectric particles can also
exhibit 
enhanced 
high-index 
sensitivity 
for 
sensing 

applications [33]. Even a variety of natural systems like a 
living cell or active matter can sometimes be conceived as all-
dielectric core-shell systems [34,35].

However, although many core-shell nanoparticle types are on 
demand [36–39], the precise control of the particle fabrication 
is still far from being achieved. For example, the yolk–shell 
structure has recently shown excellent physical and chemical 
properties, thus showing great potential in many fields, such 
as lithium-ion batteries, drug delivery, nanoreactors, and 
catalysis [40,41]. This sort of structure can even represent 
particles with movable or isolated cores to gain some 
flexibility, including volume expansion. Nonetheless, this and 
many other kinds of complex core-shell systems may present 
deficient ripening processes or undesirable final structures, 
thus failing their application purposes [42]. Moreover, the 
healing of structures with defects has become an active 
research field to improve the efficiency of fabrication 
methods, especially those based on ripening processes or 
techniques involving dramatic volume change that eventually 
leads to particle fracture. [40,43]. On the other hand, breakable 
shells can become also essential [44]. Therefore, core-shell 
flexible designs with controllable inhomogeneities allow for 
multifield sensing or mass/energy storage for industrially
scalable products [20,45]. 

In this regard, efficient separation or sorting methods are 
essential for the development of manipulation of nanoscale 
devices required for high demand manufacturing purposes.

Many classes of procedures have been established for particle 
sorting, a few involving complex physical-chemical processes 
[21,23,46]. Others are based on purely physical phenomena, 
such as optical forces. [12,47–49]. However, most of these 
methods become difficult to apply because they involve 
heavy-duty instruments, or lack control of monodispersity, 
stability, repetitiveness, or result economically inviable
[20,36,37,39,50].

In this work, a method to sort core-shell nanoparticles is 
presented based on the resonant properties of all-dielectric 
systems and the symmetry breaking that occurs when there are 
defects in the particles, like inhomogenous shells. As the 
illumination is composed of two counter-propagating optical 
waves with equal circular polarization, the scattered fields of 
the system turn out very sensitive to any rupture of the 
illumination symmetry. This numerical study focuses on the 
example with a silicon core and silica shell as the latter can 
exist as a byproduct of the oxidation of the core [51–53].
Silicon is usually regarded as one of the best cores in core-
shell structures for energy storage [40]. In addition, its optical 
properties (high contrast) make it suitable for the excitation of 
electric and magnetic resonances [28]. In any case,  the results 
in this paper remain general and independent of size, specific 
geometry, and constitution of the particles. A previous study 
on similar structures can be found in Ref. [12]. However, such 
work has just reported particle rotation effects on small 
systems. Here, a wide range of sizes is studied, and another 
important result is presented, namely, the net propulsion effect 
when inhomogeneous shells are present in the sample.

2.
Methods

Figure 1 shows the geometry under study. Two counter-
propagating plane waves of the same handedness, namely, 
left-handed circular polarization (LCP), constitute the incident 
field upon the system. The scattering body is composed of a 
silicon core (Si)-silica shell (SiO2) nanoparticle, whose core 
being in the displaced position 𝑑⃗, different in general from the 
whole particle centre in the origin of the cartesian coordinate 
system. 𝑑⃗ can also be characterized by the angles and radius 
defined in spherical coordinates, i.e., (𝑑, 𝜑, 𝜃). The following 
dimensionless variable definitions were calculated from the 
electromagnetic fields which are solution of the problem,

𝑄𝑎𝑏𝑠 =

4

𝐴𝑝𝑐𝜀0|𝐸0|2 ∫
𝑉𝑝 𝑅𝑒{𝐽̅. 𝐸̅∗ − 𝑖𝜔𝐵̅. 𝐻̅∗}𝑑𝑉
,
(1)

𝑄𝑠𝑐𝑎 =

4

𝐴𝑝𝑐𝜀0|𝐸0|2 ∮
𝑅𝑒{𝐸̅𝑠𝑐𝑎 × 𝐻̅𝑠𝑐𝑎
∗ }𝑛̆𝑑𝑠
𝑆𝑝
,
(2)

Where 𝑄𝑎𝑏𝑠 and 𝑄𝑠𝑐𝑎 are the optical efficiencies for the 
particle in vacuum, 𝑉𝑝 [𝑆𝑝] is the particle volume 
[surface], and 𝐴𝑝 is the area of the particle transversal to 
the illumination. 𝑛̆ is the versor normal to the surface 𝑆𝑝.


Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX
Abraham-Ekeroth R.M. et al

3

The total time-averaged force 〈𝐹̅〉 and torque 〈𝑁̅〉 exerted on 
the particle can be calculated using the surface integrals,

〈𝐹̅〉 =

1
2 ∮
𝑆𝑝 𝑅𝑒{〈𝑇̿〉. 𝑛̆}𝑑𝑠
,
(3)

〈𝑁̅〉 =

1
2 ∮
𝑆𝑝 𝑛̆ × 𝑅𝑒{〈𝑇̿〉. 𝑛̆}𝑑𝑠
,
(4)

where 〈𝑇̿〉 is the time-averaged Maxwell stress tensor, 
whose form for time-harmonic fields is given explicitly 
by

〈𝑇̿〉 = 𝜀0𝐸̅⨂𝐸̅ + 𝜇0𝐻̅⨂𝐻̅ −

1
2 (𝜀0|𝐸̅|2 + 𝜇0|𝐻̅|2)𝐼̿,   (5)

where ⨂ is the outer product and 𝐼̿ is the unit tensor. In this 
way, all the corresponding dimensionless variables are 
defined in a way similar to that for Ref. [54] for suitability; 
the efficiencies 

𝑄𝑎𝑏𝑠 =

4

𝐴𝑝𝑐𝜀0|𝐸0|2 ∫
𝑉𝑝 𝑅𝑒{𝐽̅. 𝐸̅∗ − 𝑖𝜔𝐵̅. 𝐻̅∗}𝑑𝑉
,

(1)

𝑄𝑠𝑐𝑎 =

4

𝐴𝑝𝑐𝜀0|𝐸0|2 ∮
𝑅𝑒{𝐸̅𝑠𝑐𝑎 × 𝐻̅𝑠𝑐𝑎
∗ }𝑛̆𝑑𝑠
𝑆𝑝
,
(2) 

are equally defined, and the mechanical variables are defined 

as
𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑑 =

〈𝐹𝑧〉

𝜔𝐸

𝑡𝑜𝑡𝐴𝑝,
𝑁̅′𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑛 =

〈𝑁̅ 𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑛〉
𝜔𝐸

𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑉𝑝.  The electromagnetic 

fields 𝐸̅, 𝐵̅, 𝐻̅, 𝐸̅𝑠𝑐𝑎, 𝐻̅𝑠𝑐𝑎 and their conjugates were thus 
calculated by simulations based on a finite element method 
(FEM) performed by the authors on a Python code and tested 
extensively (no details shown here for brevity).

Figure 1: (Colour online) Definition of geometry, materials, and 
illumination configuration. The offset's distance and angles are 

defined by the vector 𝑑⃗, following the usual spherical coordinate 
system.

3.
Results and Discussion

The discussion centres around a main illustrative example 

for a 300 nm particle with a 100 nm core and then briefly 
extends to other ranges in the nanoscale. The characteristic
spectra of optical efficiencies are discussed in (3.1). Then, the 
study deals with core offsets parallel to the illumination axis, 
where a resonant “thruster” effect is obtained, see (3.2). A 
broader discussion about arbitrary offset directions for a 
particular offset value is made in (3.3). Finally, the study of 
(3.2) is extended in subsection (3.4) to include the radiation 
pressure at other nanoscale particle sizes.

Figure 2: (Colour online) Spectra of optical efficiencies for several 
offset values. (a) [(b)] absorption [scattering]. Black solid [thin] line 
for the homogeneous shell (zero offset) [bare silicon, no shell]. E and 
M labels indicate the electric and magnetic dipolar resonances 
derived from near fields around the silicon core. The label E+M 


Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX
Abraham-Ekeroth R.M. et al

4

means a hybrid resonance due to the overlapping between E and M 
modes.

3.1. Optical behaviour: efficiencies.

Figure 2 a [b] shows the spectra of absorption [scattering] 

efficiency for several values of the offset magnitude along the 
z direction. Black thick [thin] corresponds to a concentric 
core-shell system [bare core]. Note that the particle varies their
optical intensities, but almost no resonance shifts occur. 
Moreover, the nature of the Mie resonances can be deduced 
from an analysis of the curves by comparison with the results 
for a bare core and the behavior of the near fields (not shown 
for brevity)[26]. As a result, just two volume modes appear for 
the illustrative case with a relatively small size 300-100 nm; 
the lowest energy (longest wavelength) mode is the magnetic 
dipole (M), while the highest energy (shortest wavelength) is 
the electric mode (E). Despite this classification, when the 
core is somehow surrounded by the SiO2 shell, the overlapping
between the M and E modes is so strong it makes the 
resonance a hibrid mode (labeled E+M in Figure 2), as a 
product of the interaction between the core and the shell.
Although the efficiencies respond to an alteration in the 
system, such as the core-shell offset, they are not enough to 
completely characterize the system nor identify in which 
direction the offset is located, especially under symmetric 
illumination conditions (see Figure 1). On the other hand, the 
mechanical inductions on the particle are expected to contain 
more information of the near-fields [28,55,56].

3.2. Resonant “thruster” effect for parallel offsets.

As the two optical modes labeled E+M and M proved to be 
more sensitive to the offset’s variation, Figure 3 shows the 
forces and torques exerted on inhomogenous particles as a 
function of the z-offset for three resonance locations, namely, 
440 nm (E+M mode), 490 (M), and 800 nm, this latter 
constituting an out-of-resonance example. Surprisingly, a net 
radiation force (Figure 3a) and torque (b) appear due to the 
multiple interactions between the core and shell as soon as the 
offset ceases to be zero. As can be seen from the curves, the 
phenomenon is resonant: it is almost zero out of resonance and 
increases as the intensity of the resonance does. Moreover, it 
results proportional to the offset distance from the particle’s 
centre. In particular, there is a crossing point between the 
curves for 440 and 490 nm in the torque so that the maximum 
is achieved for the highest possible value of offset under M 
resonance.

Note that both mechanical reactions occur simultaneously

and in a preferential direction since the offset is assumed in 
the positive z-axis. This “thruster” phenomenon provides the
particle with both propulsion and spin, therefore self-
stabilizing its movement as in a rocket system. Remarkably, 
this effect represents a potential detection mechanism for 
identifying inconsistencies in particle fabrication. The particle 

itself will be compelled to move and spin in the same direction 
as anomalous particles, akin to how they behave in a velocity-
mass selector.

.
Figure 3: (Colour online) Force (a) and Torque (b) as a function of 
the offset (𝑑) along z for three different wavelengths: Electric (E) and 
magnetic (M) resonances, and the non-resonant wavelength at 800
nm. The wavelength locations of the resonances correspond 
approximately to those for 𝑄𝑠𝑐𝑎 in Figure 2.

Following the study, a natural question arises: How will the 
particle move if it is arbitrarily oriented with its anomaly in a
direction different from the illumination’s? This is the subject 
of the next subsection.

3.3. Mechanical predictions for arbitrary offsets.

Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the net force [torque] (a) [(b)]
exerted on the particle’s centre of mass (CM) for the 
resonances E+M, at 440 nm, and M at 490 nm, respectively.


Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX
Abraham-Ekeroth R.M. et al

5

In other words, each arrow begins at the exact location of the 
CM of the particle and is appropriately scaled. The arrows in 
Figure 4a [b] are scaled by a factor 2.5 × 10−3 [7.5 × 10−3]. 
In Figure 5, the arrows in both panels are scaled by a factor of 
0.01. For a better visualization, the red [blue] arrows 
distinguish the movement along the positive [negative]
orientation in the z-axis. The three-dimensional perspectives 
of these maps are also chosen carefully to allow the reader to 
better comprehend how the particles would move.

In general, all the maps show mirror symmetry around a plane 
of high symmetry, i.e., 𝑧 = 0. As can be seen in the arrow 
maps, Figures 4 and 5, the tendency of the particle to go up or 
down in the illumination direction (along the z-axis) is very 
evident. Those positions for the particle’s CM out of the plane 
𝑧 = 0 imply a net radiation force in the direction of the 
anomaly, Figure 4a. In a cluster of dispersed particles, this 
phenomenon would allow, in principle, a clear separation of 
homogeneous particles, namely, particles with perfect shells, 
from anomalous ones.

The effect becomes more complex as some rotations are 
induced simultaneously (panels b in Figures Figure 4 and Figure
5). The mirrored, vortex-like shape of the torque maps in these 
panels reveals that the particle’s CM would try to self-locate 
on the z-axis of symmetry if it is out of the plane 𝑧 = 0.. The 
reader is reminded that the torque arrows show the tendency 
of the CM to rotate or spin around the direction given by these 
vectors or, equally, in local planes perpendicular to them.
Notice that the force arrows are larger around the “equator 
regions”, which means a higher relative magnitude than 
around the poles. On the contrary, the torques are greater in
the regions between the equator and the poles. This fact 
supports the hypothesis that the particle finds more stability 
when its CM is along the z-axis.

By comparing Figures Figure 4 and Figure 5, it is evident that
the overlapping of modes is also present in the near fields that 
produce the mechanical results. However, the relative 
magnitude of the force arrow around the polar regions is 
higher for the E+M than for the M mode, which gives the map 
in Figure 4a more aspect of a “balloon” than in Figure 5a.

There is another phenomenon that is worth mentioning in 
Figure 4 and Figure 5. In the equator CM positions, the resultant 
force would push the particle in a direction opposite to its 
anomaly. This pulling-force “circle” without rotation around 
the equators highlights the symmetry conditions of the 
illumination and produce instability for the particle when its
CM lies on the 𝑧 = 0 plane.

Figure 4: (Colour online) Net mechanical variables for the particle’s 
centre of mass (CM) for several values of offset angles 𝝋, 𝜽 at E+M 
resonance, i.e., 440 nm. Each arrow is the net (a) [(b)] force [torque] 
at the position (𝒙, 𝒚, 𝒛) of the CM. Red [Blue] arrows for z>0 [<0] 
position of the CM.

3.4. Variation of the radiation pressure with the size. 

Study of the size dependence.

Finally, with the aim to complete a parametric study, let’s vary 
the size of the system beyond the example 100-300 nm when 
the offset is kept again along the z-axis. For conciseness, the 
results correspond to a set of particles with geometric 
similarity, as follows. If the minimum distance 𝛿 between core 
and shell is defined as 𝛿 = 𝑅𝑏 − 𝑅𝑎 − 𝑑, where 𝑅𝑎, 𝑅𝑏 are 

respectively the core and shell radii, the scales 𝛿 2𝑅𝑎
⁄
and 

𝛿 2𝑅𝑏
⁄
are kept constant while varying the particle’s size. 


Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX
Abraham-Ekeroth R.M. et al

6

Figure 5: (Colour online) Idem Fig. 4 for the magnetic (M) resonance, 
at 490 nm.

The line shown in Figure 6 corresponds to the radiation 
pressure exerted on the particle as a function of 𝛿. The analysis 
of the torques is avoided for brevity. The line points were 
obtained by getting the maximum of the spectra of forces at 
the location of the M dipolar resonance, or lowest-energy 
mode, since several multipolar resonances are excited when 
the particle size increases. Noticeably, a linear trend is 
obtained as 𝛿 varies, which would help identify the particles 
or calibrate the device if the method of particle separation 
were applied. 

Note that no resonance appears below the value 𝛿 = 10 nm,
provided that such a small core cannot support Mie resonances 
of volume type as to continue the trend of geometric-similar 
systems. In any case, smaller values of 𝛿 would result in 
unrealistic since non-local corrections to the constitutive 
parameters are likely to appear due to quantum effects.

Figure 6: (Colour online) Study of the radiation force exerted on the 
particle as a function of the size for particles with geometrical 
similarity. The black line is the location of the lowest-energy
magnetic resonance as a function of the minimum distance between 
the core and the shell, . 

4.
Conclusion

A method of detection of particle anomalies/particle sorting 

is proposed from a simple optical illumination by taking profit 
of the resonant properties of all-dielectric core-shell 
nanoparticles. In a broad range of nanoparticle sizes, the 
lowest-energy volumetric Mie resonances induce strong 
anisotropic mechanical inductions on the whole particle, such 
as unbalanced radiation pressure and particle rotations. These
results are based on the symmetry breaking produced by 
inhomogeneous shells under symmetric illumination. The 
symmetry breaking induces anisotropic forces from the 
electromagnetic interaction between the core and the shell of 
the systems. In particular, the mechanical variables carry the 
information of that interaction through their dependence on 
the near fields. Remarkably, the relatively strong dipolar 
magnetic resonance (lowest-energy mode) sets an acceptable
linear dependence of the optomechanics on the size of the 
particles, which allows for complete particle discrimination 
from inhomogeneous to homogenous shells. As the forces 
induced also grow with increasing offset values for a fixed 
size, the concept is capable in principle to distinguish degrees 
of anomalies in a range of values for the eccentricity. The fact 
that torques also arise from the induction would also matter in 
other applications different from particle selectors such, for 
instance, nanoprinting, nanoscale measurements of viscosity, 
and light sail propulsion, among others.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank CONICET and IFAS-

UNCPBA for their funding and workplaces to allow for 
discussions on the topic. R.M.A.-E. also acknowledges 


Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX
Abraham-Ekeroth R.M. et al

7

partial support by the DYNAMO project (101046489), funded 
by the European Union, but the views and opinions expressed 
are, however, those of the authors only and do not necessarily 
reflect those of the European Union or the European 
Innovation Council. Neither the European Union nor the 
granting authority can be held responsible for them.

Conflicts of interest

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 

absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

References

[1]
Pralle A, Florin E-L, Stelzer E H K and Hörber J K H 
2000 Photonic Force Microscopy: A New Tool 
Providing New Methods to Study Membranes at 
the Molecular Level Single Molecules 1 129–33

[2]
Lester M, Arias-González J R and Nieto-
Vesperinas M 2001 Fundamentals and model of 
photonic-force microscopy Opt. Lett., OL 26 707–
9

[3]
Arias-González J R, Nieto-Vesperinas M and 
Lester 
M 
2002 
Modeling 
photonic 
force 

microscopy with metallic particles under plasmon 
eigenmode excitation Phys. Rev. B 65 115402

[4]
Magazzù A and Marcuello C 2023 Investigation of 
Soft Matter Nanomechanics by Atomic Force 
Microscopy 
and 
Optical 
Tweezers: 
A 

Comprehensive Review Nanomaterials 13 963

[5]
Swartzlander G A 2022 Theory of radiation 
pressure on a diffractive solar sail J. Opt. Soc. Am. 
B, JOSAB 39 2556–63

[6]
Ashkin A and Dziedzic J M 1987 Optical Trapping 
and Manipulation of Viruses and Bacteria Science
235 1517–20

[7]
Ashkin A and Dziedzic J M 1989 Internal cell 
manipulation using infrared laser traps. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 86 7914–8

[8]
Guck J, Ananthakrishnan R, Cunningham C C and 
Käs J 2002 Stretching biological cells with light J. 
Phys.: Condens. Matter 14 4843

[9]
Remmerbach T W, Wottawah F, Dietrich J, Lincoln 
B, Wittekind C and Guck J 2009 Oral cancer 
diagnosis by mechanical phenotyping Cancer Res
69 1728–32

[10]
Arbore C, Perego L, Sergides M and Capitanio M 
2019 Probing force in living cells with optical 
tweezers: from single-molecule mechanics to cell 
mechanotransduction Biophys Rev 11 765–82

[11]
Shakoor A, Gao W, Zhao L, Jiang Z and Sun D 2022 
Advanced tools and methods for single-cell 
surgery Microsyst Nanoeng 8 1–21

[12]
Sun Q, Dholakia K and Greentree A D 2021 Optical 
Forces and Torques on Eccentric Nanoscale Core–
Shell Particles ACS Photonics 8 1103–11

[13]
Volpe G, et al 2023 Roadmap for optical tweezers 
J. Phys. Photonics 5 022501

[14]
Shah B P, Pasquale N, De G, Tan T, Ma J and Lee 
K-B 2014 Core–Shell Nanoparticle-Based Peptide 
Therapeutics and Combined Hyperthermia for 
Enhanced Cancer Cell Apoptosis ACS Nano 8 
9379–87

[15]
Hänsch T W and Schawlow A L 1975 Cooling of 
gases by laser radiation Optics Communications
13 68–9

[16]
Hillberry L E, Budker D, Rochester S M and Raizen 
M G 2023 Efficient cooling of high-angular-
momentum atoms J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys.
56 155301

[17]
Kishimoto T, Masui K, Minoshima W and 
Hosokawa C 2022 Recent advances in optical 
manipulation of cells and molecules for biological 
science 
Journal 
of 
Photochemistry 
and 

Photobiology C: Photochemistry Reviews
53 

100554

[18]
Li H, Cao Y, Zhou L-M, Xu X, Zhu T, Shi Y, Qiu C-W 
and Ding W 2020 Optical pulling forces and their 
applications Adv. Opt. Photon., AOP 12 288–366

[19]
Schärtl W 2010 Current directions in core–shell 
nanoparticle design Nanoscale 2 829–43


Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX
Abraham-Ekeroth R.M. et al

8

[20]
Caruso F 2001 Nanoengineering of Particle 
Surfaces Advanced Materials 13 11–22

[21]
Singh R and Bhateria R 2021 Core–shell 
nanostructures: 
a 
simplest 
two-component 

system with enhanced properties and multiple 
applications Environ Geochem Health 43 2459–82

[22]
Khatami M, Alijani H Q, Nejad M S and Varma R S 
2018 
Core@shell 
Nanoparticles: 
Greener 

Synthesis Using Natural Plant Products Applied 
Sciences 8 411

[23]
Rosales A and Esquivel K 2020 SiO2@TiO2 
Composite 
Synthesis 
and 
Its 
Hydrophobic 

Applications: A Review Catalysts 10 171

[24]
Alessandri I 2013 Enhancing Raman Scattering 
without Plasmons: Unprecedented Sensitivity 
Achieved by TiO2 Shell-Based Resonators J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 135 5541–4

[25]
Bontempi N, Vassalini I and Alessandri I 2018 All-
dielectric core/shell resonators: From plasmon-
free SERS to multimodal analysis Journal of 
Raman Spectroscopy 49 943–53

[26]
García-Etxarri A, Gómez-Medina R, Froufe-Pérez 
L S, López C, Chantada L, Scheffold F, Aizpurua J, 
Nieto-Vesperinas M and Sáenz J J 2011 Strong 
magnetic response of submicron Silicon particles 
in the infrared Opt. Express, OE 19 4815–26

[27]
Zhang C, Xu Y, Liu J, Li J, Xiang J, Li H, Li J, Dai Q, 
Lan S and Miroshnichenko A E 2018 Lighting up 
silicon nanoparticles with Mie resonances Nat 
Commun 9 2964

[28]
Ekeroth R M A 2018 Optical properties of coupled 
silicon nanowires and unusual mechanical 
inductions J. Opt. 20 095002

[29]
Novotny L and Hecht B 2006 Principles of Nano-
Optics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

[30]
Maier S A 2007 Plasmonics: Fundamentals and 
Applications
(New 
York: 
Springer 

Science+Business Media LLC)

[31]
Zhou Y, Liu Q, Chen F, Zhao Y, Sun S, Guo J, Yang 
Y and Xu J 2020 Significantly enhanced energy 
storage in core–shell structured poly(vinylidene 
fluoride-co-
chlorotrifluoroethylene)/BaTiO3@polyurea 
nanocomposite films J Mater Sci 55 11296–309

[32]
Zhang Q-P, Du F-Y, Liu X, Lv J-H, He L, Li J-L, Li Y-T 
and Zhou Y-L 2023 Optimizing the dielectric 
constant of the shell layer in core–shell structures 
for enhanced energy density of polymer 
nanocomposites Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 25 
18030–7

[33]
Ma C, Liu Y, Zhao F, Xu F, Yan J, Li X, Guan B-O, 
Yang 
G 
and 
Chen 
K 
2020 
Loss-favored 

ultrasensitive refractive index sensor based on 
directional scattering from a single all-dielectric 
nanosphere J. Mater. Chem. C 8 6350–7

[34]
Cayre O J, Chagneux N and Biggs S 2011 Stimulus 
responsive core-shell nanoparticles: synthesis and 
applications of polymer based aqueous systems 
Soft Matter 7 2211–34

[35]
Betal S, Saha A K, Ortega E, Dutta M, 
Ramasubramanian A K, Bhalla A S and Guo R 2018 
Core-shell magnetoelectric nanorobot –
A 

remotely controlled probe for targeted cell 
manipulation Sci Rep 8 1755

[36]
Demirörs A F, van Blaaderen A and Imhof A 2009 
Synthesis of Eccentric Titania−Silica Core−Shell 
and Composite Particles Chem. Mater. 21 979–84

[37]
Li L, Zhang L, Xing S, Wang T, Luo S, Zhang X, Liu 
C, Su Z and Wang C 2013 Generalized Approach to 
the Synthesis of Reversible Concentric and 
Eccentric Polymer-Coated Nanostructures Small 9 
825–30

[38]
Li Y and Liu B 2017 Core–Shell SiO2-PS Colloids 
with Controlled Eccentric Ratio ACS Publications

[39]
Robinson 
D 
A 
and 
White 
H 
S 
2019 

Electrochemical 
Synthesis 
of 
Individual 

Core@Shell and Hollow Ag/Ag2S Nanoparticles 
Nano Lett. 19 5612–9


Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX
Abraham-Ekeroth R.M. et al

9

[40]
Liu N, Wu H, McDowell M T, Yao Y, Wang C and 
Cui Y 2012 A Yolk-Shell Design for Stabilized and 
Scalable Li-Ion Battery Alloy Anodes Nano Lett. 12 
3315–21

[41]
Si M, Lin F, Ni H, Wang S, Lu Y and Meng X 2023 
Research progress of yolk–shell structured 
nanoparticles and their application in catalysis 
RSC Adv. 13 2140–54

[42]
Park J H, Jin S-M, Lee E and Ahn H S 2021 
Electrochemical 
synthesis 
of 
core–shell 

nanoparticles 
by 
seed-mediated 
selective 

deposition Chem. Sci. 12 13557–63

[43]
Zhang Q, Peng X, Nie Y, Zheng Q, Shangguan J, 
Zhu C, Bustillo K C, Ercius P, Wang L, Limmer D T 
and Zheng H 2022 Defect-mediated ripening of 
core-shell nanostructures Nat Commun 13 2211

[44]
Windbergs M, Zhao Y, Heyman J and Weitz D A 
2013 Biodegradable Core–Shell Carriers for 
Simultaneous Encapsulation of Synergistic Actives 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135 7933–7

[45]
El-Toni A M, Habila M A, Labis J P, ALOthman Z A, 
Alhoshan M, Elzatahry A A and Zhang F 2016 
Design, synthesis and applications of core–shell, 
hollow core, and nanorattle multifunctional 
nanostructures Nanoscale 8 2510–31

[46]
Liu C, Gong H, Liu W, Lu B and Ye L 2019 
Separation 
and 
Recycling 
of 
Functional 

Nanoparticles Using Reversible Boronate Ester 
and Boroxine Bonds Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 58 4695–
703

[47]
Burns M M, Fournier J-M and Golovchenko J A 
1990 Optical Matter: Crystallization and Binding in 
Intense Optical Fields Science 249 749–54

[48]
Hayat A, Mueller J P B and Capasso F 2015 Lateral 
chirality-sorting optical forces Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 112 13190–4

[49]
Yadav A S, Tran D T, Teo A J T, Dai Y, Galogahi F 
M, Ooi C H and Nguyen N-T 2023 Core–Shell 
Particles: From Fabrication Methods to Diverse 
Manipulation Techniques Micromachines 14 497

[50]
Chen T, Yang M, Wang X, Tan L H and Chen H 2008 
Controlled 
Assembly 
of 
Eccentrically 

Encapsulated Gold Nanoparticles J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 130 11858–9

[51]
Priebe M and Fromm K M 2015 Nanorattles or 
Yolk-Shell Nanoparticles-What Are They, How Are 
They Made, and What Are They Good For? Chem. 
Eur. J. 21 3854–74

[52]
Wu P, Guo C, Han J, Yu K, Dong X, Yue G, Yue H, 
Guan Y and Liu A 2018 Fabrication of double core–
shell Si-based anode materials with nanostructure 
for lithium-ion battery RSC Advances 8 9094–102

[53]
Cannon P, Freeland B, Jaquiery M, McGlynn E and 
Gaughran J 2022 Single-step functionalization of 
silicon nanoparticles providing efficient DNA 
binding Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical 
and Engineering Aspects 648 129217

[54]
Abraham-Ekeroth R M 2023 Numerical study of 
magneto-optical binding between two dipolar 
particles under illumination by two counter-
propagating waves Frontiers in Nanotechnology 5

[55]
Abraham 
Ekeroth 
R 
M 
2018 
New 

Characterization of Plasmons in Nanowire Dimers 
by Optical Forces and Torques Plasmonics 13
1817–31

[56]
Ekeroth R M A 2019 Optical forces and torques 
exerted on coupled silica nanospheres: novel 
contributions due to multiple scattering J. Opt. 21
045001


