Critical assessment of water enthalpy characterization
through dark environment evaporation

Andrew Caratenuto1 and Yi Zheng1,2

1Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Northeastern
University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
2Department of Chemical Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Corresponding author: y.zheng@northeastern.edu

Abstract

Comparative evaporation rate testing in the absence of solar irradiation is a widely
adopted method for establishing and characterizing a reduced vaporization enthalpy of
water within an interfacial solar evaporator. However, the assumption of equal energy
input between cases is not generally valid, and renders this characterization method
misleading. Larger evaporation rates result from interfacial evaporators in dark condi-
tions, mostly due to expanded surface areas. This causes greater evaporation rates, more
evaporative cooling, and larger temperature differentials with the environment. We
provide theoretical and experimental evidence to prove that the observed temperature
differences are sufficient to cause large differences in environmental energy input, such
that an equal energy input cannot be assumed. Evaluation of our experimental data
within a transient analytical model enables quantification of these energy input differ-
ences and calculation of the vaporization enthalpy. These results show that differences
in evaporation rate correspond to differences in energy input, and that vaporization
enthalpy is not reduced below the theoretical value. The magnitude of increased energy
input also agrees well with the increase of dark environment evaporation rates typically
reported for interfacial evaporators, providing an alternative explanation to vapor-
ization enthalpy reduction for previous literature results. Further, we exemplify that
the results of this characterization method contradict differential scanning calorimetry
results, which are often used to make conclusions about vaporization enthalpy reduc-
tion and water state modification within evaporator materials. Thus, we conclude that
this method should not be used to make conclusions about vaporization enthalpy reduc-
tions within interfacial evaporator materials. These results emphasize that the current
understanding of vaporization enthalpy reduction within evaporator materials requires
re-evaluation.

1

arXiv:2311.12881v2  [physics.app-ph]  28 Dec 2023


Keywords: Solar evaporation, desalination, reduced vaporization enthalpy, interfacial
evaporation, dark environment

Introduction

With the global water crisis becoming increasingly pervasive, research into effective mit-
igation methods has become very popular in recent years. Within this field, a boom of
publications has emerged in the sub-field of interfacial solar evaporation, whereby solar irra-
diance can produce clean water with high efficiency via thermal evaporation [1]. A great
number of interfacial evaporation devices have been demonstrated for this purpose, designed
to float on the surface of non-purified brine water, absorb solar irradiance, and continuously
evaporate the impure water [2]. Once evaporated, the purified water can be condensed for
use, typically within some variation of a solar still.
To enhance water yield, it is highly desirable to maximize the efficiency of the evap-
oration process, typically by reducing parasitic energy losses to the environment. For an
interfacial evaporator under solar irradiance, the steady-state evaporative heat flux can be
described by

qevap = ˙mhfg = ηqsol,
(1)
where ˙m, hfg, η, and qsol are the evaporation rate, water phase change enthalpy, evaporation
efficiency, and incident solar power, respectively. The evaporation efficiency describes the
amount of incident solar irradiance used for the evaporation process, which may be reduced
below 100% by parasitic heat losses from convection, radiation, and conduction [2].
In an ideal case under 1 sun (1000 W m−2) irradiance, the maximum theoretically achiev-
able evaporation rate is approximately 1.5 kg m−2 h−1. Despite this, many researchers have
obtained evaporation rates far above this limit, even without fully isolating the evaporation
system from parasitic heat losses [1, 3–10].
The typical explanation for this phenomena, introduced by Prof. Guihua Yu and col-
leagues in 2018, is that the vaporization enthalpy of water within the interfacial evaporators
is reduced, thereby reducing the energy required to vaporize a given mass of water and
allowing evaporation rates in excess of the theoretical limit [3]. The proposed mechanism
for this enthalpy reduction involves a weakening of the hydrogen bond network of water (or
“water activation”), resulting from interactions with the hydrophilic porous structure of the
interfacial evaporator (usually a hydrogel). They further postulate that water, in this mod-
ified state, may evaporate more readily in the form of clusters, with some hydrogen bonds
still intact [3, 4]. After this point, the clusters may break apart outside of the system (i.e.,
above the evaporator), reducing the energy requirement for the evaporator itself.
A variety of characterization methods were employed to defend this hypothesis, many
of which are frequently used in contemporary studies to justify evaporation rates above the
theoretical limit and prove that the vaporization enthalpy of water has been reduced. One
of the most commonly-used methods involves evaluating evaporation rates in the absence of
solar irradiance (i.e., in a dark environment). In the dark environment evaporation test, the
mass loss of identical water-filled beakers – one of pure water, and one with the interfacial
evaporator placed on top – is monitored over an extended duration. With the assumption

2


Fig. 1 Mechanism of enhanced dark environment evaporation from an interfacial evaporator
with enlarged surface area. The larger surface area increases evaporation, inducing greater evaporative
cooling, thus lowering the temperature of the evaporator and allowing it to harvest additional energy from
the environment.

that the energy input from the environment (which facilitates pseudo-steady evaporation
over the test period) is equal between the two beakers during the process, one can conclude
that

( ˙mhfg)H2O = ( ˙mhfg)evap.
(2)
Thus, if the evaporation rate of the interfacial evaporator is higher than that of pure water
in these conditions, this method offers a simple indicator that the vaporization enthalpy of
water within the evaporator must be reduced [1, 3].
However, deeper investigation reveals that this method produces misleading results that
should not be used to justify a reduced vaporization enthalpy, due to the invalidity of the
equal energy input assumption. In this work, we show both theoretically and experimentally
that differences in the dark environment evaporation rate are primarily due to differences in
evaporation surface area, which invalidates the assumption of equal energy input (Fig. 1).
It is illustrated that energy input discrepancies due to differences in system temperatures
are proportional to differences in evaporation rates. Modeling results show good agreement

3


with the experiment, supporting these findings. Finally, we provide data to show that differ-
ential scanning calorimetry methods, which are commonly used to characterize vaporization
enthalpy, are not in agreement with the results of the dark environment test.

Theoretical Analysis and Hypothesis

Left at rest in ambient conditions, water in a beaker will spontaneously evaporate as liquid
molecules at the interface gain enough energy to overcome surface binding energy. In doing
so, energy exits the water system through the latent heat of the exiting water vapor. This
energy output manifests as a sensible heat reduction in the remaining liquid water, cooling
the water. As the water temperature falls below the ambient temperature via evaporative
cooling, the water will begin to receive energy from the environment due to the tempera-
ture differential, compensating for evaporative energy losses. Pseudo-steady evaporation is
achieved when the net energy input from the environment is equal to the energy output
due to evaporation [11, 12].
It is well known that evaporation rates are heavily dependent on the interfacial area, and
that enlarging the evaporation surface will accelerate mass transfer. Many interfacial evapo-
rators possess significantly enlarged surface areas, typically obtained via an internal porous
structure, which intrinsically enhances the natural evaporation rate [13, 14]. Furthermore,
other factors such as pressure modification within a porous structure or the modification of
surface energies may further enhance evaporation [1, 15]. All of these factors are generally
desirable for increasing the evaporation rate, which can be clearly shown by an enhancement
of evaporation under dark conditions.
However, these evaporation-enhancing factors have not been shown to inherently reduce
the total energy requirement of evaporation. Under steady evaporation conditions, evapora-
tive cooling must be balanced by energy from the environment via radiation, convection, and
conduction. Energy input from any of these mechanisms is proportional to the temperature
difference between the ambient environment and the surface(s) of the evaporation system.
Therefore, for a fixed ambient temperature, an evaporation system with lower temperatures
at steady state will receive a greater energy input from the environment.
In the context of a typical comparative dark environment test, the enhanced natural
evaporation of the interfacial evaporator will induce greater cooling, which in turn induces
a greater environmental energy input. This temperature difference may appear small –
often less than 1 °C between the water and evaporator systems – yet as will be shown, can
cause appreciable discrepancies between the energy input of the two systems. As a result,
the interfacial evaporation device receives significantly more energy input, and can sustain
enhanced evaporation rates in comparison to water without relying on the hypothesis of
reduced vaporization enthalpy. In short, enhanced evaporation resulting from the properties
of the interfacial evaporator produces a greater evaporative cooling effect, which enables
greater environmental heat fluxes that can maintain larger evaporation rates (Fig. 1).

Theoretical heat transfer model

To prove that the temperature differences which result from disparate evaporation rates are
not negligible in a comparative dark environment evaporation test, theoretical calculations
are performed. Consider a beaker of diameter d and height H filled with water, placed on

4


a thick piece of insulating foam. In general, convective and radiative transfer between a
surface of the beaker and the environment can be described by the following equations [11]:

qconv = Aihi(T∞ − Ti)
(3)

qrad = Aiεiσ(T 4
∞ − T 4
i ).
(4)

In these equations, the subscript i is used to designate the appropriate surface of the
beaker. A is the area of the surface, h is the convection coefficient, T∞ is the ambient
temperature, T is the beaker surface temperature, ε is the emissivity of the surface, and σ is
the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. The Nusselt number is used to calculate natural convection
coefficient for the horizontal top surface and vertical walls of the beaker, respectively, as [11]:

NuL = 0.54Ra1/4
L
for RaL < 107

NuL = 0.15Ra1/3
L
for RaL ≥ 107
(5)

and

NuL =
�
0.825 +
0.387Ra

1
6
L

[1 + ( 0.492

P r )
9
16 ]
8
27

�2
.
(6)

Air properties are evaluated at the average temperature between the ambient and the
surface. The wall of the beaker is assumed to have negligible thermal resistance due to
its low thickness. The beaker is also assumed to be insulated on the side and/or bottom
surfaces (depending on the case). For simplicity, steady state is assumed, such that changes
in sensible heat can be neglected. The accuracy of these assumptions will be revisited in
later sections with respect to the experimental results.
The emissivities of the water, beaker, and evaporator are taken as 0.96, 0.95, and 0.93,
respectively. The diameter and height of the beaker are 41 and 40 mm, respectively, and
the Stefan-Boltzmann constant is taken as 5.67×10−8 W m−2 K−4. When the side walls
of the beaker are considered, the side wall temperature is assumed to be 0.3 °C above the
evaporation surface temperature for the water and 1.1 °C for the evaporator, based on our
experimental observations and previous results in the literature. The calculation also limits
the wall temperatures from exceeding the ambient temperature and limits the evaporator
wall from exceeding the water wall temperature, as either case is not likely to occur in a
practical scenario.
Using these methods, the environmental energy input for a beaker undergoing steady
evaporation is quantified. By modeling and comparing beakers with different surface temper-
atures in the same ambient conditions, the energy impact of these temperature differentials
is quantified. In this way, an input energy enhancement factor, which describes the excess
energy input brought on by lower system temperatures (as may result due to the enhanced
evaporation of an interfacial evaporator), can be defined as

fin,evap = Uin,evap

Uin,H2O
,
(7)

5


Fig. 2 Theoretical modeling results. Input energy enhancement factor fin,evap as a function of water
and interfacial evaporator surface temperatures under a fixed ambient temperature T∞. (A) and (B) present
results for cases of insulated and non-insulated side walls of the beakers, respectively, at T∞ = 20 °C. (C)
and (D) show the same two cases with an ambient temperature of T∞ = 25 °C

where Uin,evap and Uin,H2O represent the net input energy from the environment to the
interfacial evaporator and water system, respectively. Thus, the energy enhancement factor
provides a reasonable estimate for the energy input differences between the water and
evaporator systems during a comparative dark environment evaporation test.

Analytical results

The results of these theoretical analyses are shown in Fig. 2. First, an ambient temperature
of 20 °C is studied, with water surface temperatures ranging from 17 – 19.5 °C (y-axis).
The interfacial evaporator beaker is designated with a temperature difference from 0 to 3
°C below that of the pure water (x-axis). From Fig. 1a, it is immediately apparent that

6


even small surface temperature differences can cause quite large differences in energy input.
The energy input to the evaporator system can exceed 1.5 times that of the water system
even with a temperature differential less than 1 °C. At greater differentials, the evaporator
system can easily obtain 2-3 times as much energy from the environment as the pure water
system.
As expected, the energy input enhancement factor fin,evap is heavily dependent on the
chosen temperature differential between the water and evaporator systems, as all heat trans-
fer components are directly proportional to this quantity. In addition, if the chosen water
temperature is closer to the ambient temperature, the relative energy gain from the cor-
responding evaporator case is larger. This is because the ratio of the evaporator-ambient
temperature difference and the water-ambient temperature difference becomes quite large
in these cases.
When the sides of the beaker are not insulated (i.e., convective and radiative heat transfer
from the sides is considered), the evaporator generally receives less heat transfer for a given
surface temperature differential, as seen in Fig. 2b. This is due to the fact that the side
wall temperatures are higher than those of the evaporation surface, and that the evaporator
wall temperature is set with a larger differential than that of the water. As a result, the
difference in energy input for a given surface temperature differential is slightly subdued.
In addition, the choice of ambient temperature has a minimal impact, which is expected
(Fig. 2c–d). The ambient temperature essentially only modifies the convection coefficients
through the air properties, and in the range of temperatures modeled here, air does not
experience property changes that majorly impact convection. Thus, the impact of ambient
temperature is minimal in comparison to the temperature differentials, which emerge as the
obvious driving factors. Together, these observations indicate that the conclusions are largely
setup and environment-independent, and thus transferable to comparative dark environment
tests across different laboratory environments and for various common beaker setup choices
(insulated or non-insulated).
The most important takeaway of the analytical results concerns the magnitude of the
differences in energy input. The model indicates that temperature differences in the range
of 0 – 3 °C may provide the evaporator with far more energy than the water system, more
than doubling its energy input in many cases. Thus, this enhanced energy input would
explain evaporation rates of interfacial evaporators which exceed those of water by similar
factors without necessitating claims of reduced vaporization enthalpy.

Experimental validation

Evaporation tests

To further support these claims, the comparative dark environment test is performed (Fig.
3). The interfacial evaporator chosen for these tests is a simple melamine foam (MF) sponge,
exemplified previously as an interfacial solar evaporator [7]. This evaporator demonstrates
superb water transport, high hydrophilicity, and has an open-porous structure with an
average pore diameter of approximately 30 µm, as seen from the SEM images (Fig. 3b and
S1). Two beakers containing DI water are placed side by side in blocks of insulation, as
shown in Fig. 3a and S2. The MF sponge is placed on the water surface of the evaporator
beaker, in direct contact with the DI water, with its top surface in line with the mouth of

7


Fig. 3 Experimental results for comparative dark environment evaporation test. (A) Dark
environment system setup. (B) SEM image of the open porous structure of the MF sponge evaporator.
(C) 24-h dark environment evaporation rate and average evaporation surface temperature for the DI water
and MF sponge evaporation systems. (D) System temperatures during the evaporation test. (E) IR camera
images of both systems during the test, showing their disparate evaporation surface temperatures.

the beaker. Temperatures of each evaporation system and the environment are monitored
using an IR camera and confirmed with thermocouples, and the mass of each beaker is
weighed before and after 24 h to determine the mass loss by evaporation. Further details
are provided in the Experimental methods section.
The experimental results confirm our key hypothesis: the interfacial evaporator system
maintains notably lower temperatures than the DI water system throughout the entirety of
the test. While both systems display a fairly consistent temperature differential with the
ambient after an initial transient period, the MF sponge maintains a temperature nearly
1.1 °C below that of the DI water surface under identical ambient conditions, as shown in
Fig. 3c–d.
As expected, the use of the interfacial evaporator yields an enhanced evaporation rate,
as shown in Fig. 3c. The DI water beaker achieves an evaporation rate of 0.084 kg m−2 h−1

during the 24-h test. In contrast, the MF sponge achieves a 35% higher evaporation rate
over the same period (0.113 kg m−2 h−1). The porous structure of the MF sponge enhances
the evaporation rate primarily due to its enlarged evaporation area; its pore sizes are in
the double-digit micron range, which is not expected to cause any appreciable difference in
internal pressure [7, 16]. However, this characteristic has no effect on the energy required
for water to evaporate from its porous structure. Instead, its ability to maintain higher
evaporation rates is due to its lower interfacial temperatures (clearly seen in the IR camera
images of Fig. 3e), which allow for a greater energy input from the environment.

8


Transient model

To support these conclusions, transient analyses are performed on the experimental tem-
perature data. The energy balance for the entire beaker during the test can be expressed
as

qevap = ˙mhfg = qconv + qrad + qcond + qsens,
(8)

where qcond and qsens represent conductive and sensible heat contributions. This equation is
consistent with earlier theoretical descriptions of the evaporation process, where energy loss
from evaporation is balanced by cooling of the water itself and environmental energy inputs.
This relationship enables quantification of the energy transfer components and estimation of
the vaporization enthalpy of each beaker, which will further illustrate that the assumption
of equal energy input is invalid, and that there is no reduction in vaporization enthalpy.
A transient, axisymmetric heat transfer model is run for each beaker using the Matlab
PDE toolbox [17]. The boundary condition at the top surface for each time step is set
as the experimentally measured surface temperature of the evaporation surface. The side
and bottom walls are designated with conductive heat flux boundary conditions, based on
measured values of the insulation thickness and thermal conductivity, and water properties
are approximated as constant due to the low range of temperatures. Further information
regarding model input parameters is provided in Supplementary Note 1.
Based on these inputs, the temperature distribution inside the beaker is calculated at
each time step over the 24 h test period. The solution is nonlinear, as conductive and
sensible heat inputs are determined based on the resulting temperature field. Transient
convective and radiative inputs at the evaporation surface are determined using Eqs. 3 –
5. The ambient air temperature is used for the convection calculation, while the enclosure
wall temperature is used for the radiative calculation. Thus, all contributing energy input
components are determined for the experimental test.
Figure 4 provides the results of these analyses. From Fig. 4a and c–d, the bottom
and mean surface temperatures of each beaker are higher than the evaporation surface,
as expected. The maximum temperature is maintained at the bottom of each beaker, as
it is farthest from the cold evaporation surface while still receiving energy input from the
surroundings. Model mean and bottom temperatures respond accordingly to changes in
ambient and surface temperatures, yet are temporally delayed due to the large specific
heat of water. At all times, the entire MF sponge beaker maintains bulk and interface
temperatures below that of the DI water beaker.
The cumulative energy input from each heat transfer mechanism is shown in Fig. 4b.
For all mechanisms, the MF sponge beaker receives significantly more energy than the
DI water beaker. The lower temperatures of the MF sponge system induce greater heat
transfer through an increased temperature differential with the environment, resulting in
approximately 40% more energy input for most heat transfer mechanisms. For convection,
this percent increase is even larger, nearing 60%. Convection input to the MF sponge system
is enhanced not only by an increased environmental temperature differential, but also by a
slight increase in the convection coefficient (Fig. S4). Even the sensible heat contribution,
though small, is enhanced by the lower system temperatures of the MF beaker. Conduction
from the side walls emerges as a key contributor to the energy input of both systems.
However, it is important to note that the side wall area is nearly 4 times as large as the

9


Fig. 4 Experimental analysis using transient model. (A) Temporal data for experimental system
and resulting system temperatures based on transient model. Solid, dashed and dotted lines for beaker
systems represent the surface (experimental), bulk mean (model), and bottom (model) temperatures, respec-
tively. (B) Cumulative energy input from different environmental heat transfer mechanisms over the 24-h
test period. Yellow markers denote percent increase in each component when the MF sponge is used, cor-
responding to the right axis. Modeled axisymmetric temperature profiles within the beakers at (C) 1 h and
(D) 24 h. (E) Calculated vaporization enthalpy determined from the transient model analysis. The dotted
line indicates the theoretical enthalpy value of 2460 J g−1. Error bars indicate model results based on an
IR camera measurement uncertainty of ± 0.05 °C. The secondary purple bar shows the erroneous enthalpy
value for the MF sponge that would be obtained if the equal energy input assumption were used.

top or bottom surfaces, over which the other environmental inputs act upon. Thus, on
the basis of heat flux, convection and radiation on the top evaporation surface are the
largest contributors. This outcome is expected, as the largest environmental temperature
differential exists at this location.
By combining these results with Eq. 8, the vaporization enthalpy of each beaker can be
calculated, shown in Fig. 4e. Analysis of the water beaker yields an enthalpy value of 2370
J g−1, while that of the MF sponge beaker is 2546 J g−1. The values of both beakers agree
with the theoretical value of 2460 J g−1 [18] within less than 4%. This result illustrates
clearly that the vaporization enthalpy of water within the MF sponge is not reduced, but
that the assumption of equal energy input used in the comparative dark environment test
is invalid. The MF sponge receives a greater energy input based on its lower temperatures,
which corresponds with great accuracy to its enhanced evaporation rate. If the equal energy
input assumption were employed for this test, a vaporization enthalpy value of 1823 J g−1

would have been established. Thus, it is easy to see how misleading results of vaporization
enthalpy reduction are obtained using this method. These experiments and analyses show
clearly that, when energy inputs from the environment are properly accounted for, there is

10


Fig. 5 Differential scanning calorimetry. Heat flow curves for DI water and saturated MF sponge at
(A) high temperatures and (B) low temperatures. Transition enthalpies, obtained through integration, are
provided in the plots.

no indication of vaporization enthalpy reduction. Further support for the reliability of these
analyses is provided in Supplementary Note 2 and Fig. S5.

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) verification

Finally, the MF evaporator is characterized using DSC to further support these conclusions.
DSC data is used to characterize transition enthalpies, and features of the heat flow curves
can be analyzed for further information [1, 4]. DSC scans at high and low temperatures
are frequently used for interfacial evaporators to prove their modified water state and/or
reduced vaporization enthalpy, either on their own, or in conjunction with dark environment
test data.
In Fig. 5, the DSC scan of pure water over the boiling point yields a vaporization enthalpy
value close to the theoretical value, and shows a steep characteristic decline after all water is
vaporized. As can be seen in Fig. 5a, high-temperature DSC scans for pure water and the MF
sponge show very similar results. Both profiles yield vaporization enthalpy values close to the
theoretical value of water. The vaporization enthalpy of water in the MF sponge decreases
by only 2% in comparison to pure water, and the two profiles have a similar characteristic
steepness after the peak is reached. In contrast, interfacial evaporators with modifications in

11


water state will show DSC enthalpy values well below that of pure water, typically showing
reductions of 20% or more (vaporization enthalpy values below 2000 J g−1). A broader, less
steep profile is usually seen as well, and heat flow activity may persist past 100 °C, both of
which are attributed to the modified state of water within the evaporators [1, 3, 4]. None
of these factors are visible for the MF sponge; hence, high-temperature DSC scans do not
indicate any reduction in the vaporization enthalpy of water within the MF sponge. We
note that the shift of the MF sponge heat flow to higher temperatures is due to a slightly
larger mass of water used in this test.
The DSC can also be used at low temperatures to gain information about the bonding
state of water. Typically, for a modified water state as is commonly seen in hydrogels, the
melting onset will shift well below 0 °C, and the melting enthalpy often decreases [1, 4, 19].
However, both the DI water and MF sponge show a melting onset very close to 0 °C (Fig.
5b). Both melting enthalpies are close to the theoretical value (334 J g−1), and agree with
one another within less than 3%.
Together, these low and high temperature DSC results clearly show that neither the
vaporization enthalpy nor the hydrogen bonding state of water within the MF sponge are
modified with respect to those of bulk water. Despite this, the dark environment test on its
own would indicate a reduced vaporization enthalpy if the assumption of equal energy input
were used. We note that discrepancies between reduced enthalpy values characterized via
dark environment or DSC methods are common, and are usually attributed to differences in
the degree of dehydration experienced by the evaporator within each test [3] . However, in
such scenarios in the literature, both the dark environment and DSC tests indicate a reduced
enthalpy, typically with slightly different values. In contrast, our results show no indication
of a reduced enthalpy from the DSC. Thus, we posit that DSC and dark environment
characterization methods must not characterize the same phenomena regarding vaporization
enthalpy, as they produce contradictory results.

Discussion

The data and analyses reported herein clearly illustrate that comparative dark environment
evaporation tests are not suitable for characterizing the reduced vaporization enthalpy of an
interfacial evaporator. Enlarged evaporation surface areas or other evaporator characteris-
tics may increase the evaporation rate in a dark environment, but this does not inherently
modify the energy requirement of evaporation. Rather, increased evaporative cooling allows
the evaporator system to reach a lower steady state temperature, enabling it to harvest
more environmental energy due to a greater temperature differential. Crucially, theoretical
and experimental results show that the magnitude of this enhanced energy input is pro-
portional to the enhanced evaporation observed in a dark environment. Furthermore, DSC
results, which are commonly used to corroborate claims of reduced vaporization enthalpy in
interfacial evaporators, are inconsistent with the dark environment results presented. Thus,
it is concluded that comparative dark environment tests are not a valid method for estab-
lishing or quantifying a reduced vaporization enthalpy in an interfacial evaporator system,
as the key assumption of equal energy input is not accurate.
To thoroughly and accurately demonstrate this concept, well-controlled experiments and
detailed analytical models have been employed. However, the utility of simple theoretical

12


Table 1 Literature reports of reduced vaporization enthalpy (and associated ratio of evaporation
increase) characterized using the dark environment evaporation method.

Material
hfg,evap(J g−1)
f ˙mevap

Carbon cloth [15]
2069
1.19
PPy/Carbon cloth [15]
1715
1.43
Titanium suboxide powder [9]
-
2.33
PVA-PPy hydrogel [3]
1377
1.75
PVA-chitosan hydrogel [4]
1030
2.38
Adobe brick [5]
1153
2.06
Carbonized manure [8]
1276
2.02
MF sponge + Black 3.0 [7]
1377
1.75
Carbonized wood [6]
2069
1.19
Carbon foam [20]
2013
1.22
Lignocellulose aerogel [10]
1434
1.71

calculations in demonstrating this phenomenon is also apparent. If Fig. 2 were used to
analyze the experimental data given in Fig. 3, an input energy increase of about 45% would
have been noted, corresponding to a MF sponge evaporation rate about 45% larger than
that of DI water. This is an overestimate, largely due to sensible heat and conductive
contributions which are not accounted for. However, as most energy input mechanisms
increase by roughly the same magnitude when the MF sponge is used, this simple method
does offer a relatively close approximation, useful for benchmarking other reports in the
literature.
Previous accounts of reduced enthalpy from dark environment evaporation tests are
widespread in the literature. Table 1 shows literature reports of reduced enthalpy obtained
via the dark environment evaporation method (hfg,evap). These values range from approxi-
mately 1000 – 2000 J g−1. Based on Eq. 2, the enhancement factor of evaporation from the
interfacial evaporator can be defined as f ˙mevap = hfg,evap/hfg,H2O. The reported values of
hfg,evap correspond to f ˙mevap values in the 1 – 2.5 range.
Looking back at the model results of Fig. 2, these accounts of reduced enthalpy could
easily be explained by small variations in interfacial temperature during the dark environ-
ment tests as opposed to differences in vaporization enthalpy. It is difficult to assess past
reports in the context of our model, as experimental temperatures during dark environ-
ment tests are scarcely reported. However, recent works show that water-evaporator surface
temperature differences up to nearly 3 °C are certainly reasonable [9]. In addition, many of
these comparative tests are not performed concurrently, meaning that the water and evap-
orator systems may experience differences in ambient temperature and humidity. This can
lead to even further discrepancies in the environmental energy input, especially due to the
influence of humidity. Considering these factors, the vaporization enthalpy reductions that
are typically reported using the dark environment evaporation rate test correspond well
with the magnitude of model-predicted excess energy input for a reasonable range of tem-
perature differentials. Although some references report higher ratios of evaporation increase
than our experimental results, we attribute this to the fact that our tests, being performed
concurrently, maintain better control of ambient conditions than many literature reports,
which may perform evaporation tests at separate times. The MF sponge also has a limited
surface area enhancement due to its relatively large pore sizes, and is unlikely to have any

13


impact on internal pressure [7, 14]. Considering these factors, differences in environmen-
tal energy input provide a far more likely explanation for the disparate evaporation rates
observed in comparative dark environment tests throughout the literature, as opposed to a
reduction in vaporization enthalpy.
With the context of these experimental results, it is important to comment on the con-
troversial role of the dark environment evaporation rate in the analysis of a solar-driven
evaporation system [12, 21]. Often, the dark environment evaporation rate is subtracted
from the evaporation rate under solar irradiance to obtain a dark-excluded evaporation
rate. The goal of this is to isolate the impact of incident irradiation on the evaporation sys-
tem from that of natural evaporation. However, we posit that this is unnecessary, especially
when calculating the evaporation efficiency. Pseudo-steady dark environment evaporation
is maintained due to environmental energy input, which stems from a negative tempera-
ture differential between the evaporation system and the environment. This environmental
energy input typically does not manifest during an illuminated solar evaporation test, as
this negative temperature differential does not exist. If all regions of the evaporator itself
are elevated above the ambient temperature, there will not be energy input from the sur-
roundings. Thus, in a properly isolated evaporation rate test, the evaporator should not
receive excess energy from the environment, and there is no need to subtract the evapora-
tion rate from such a source, as noted by Li et al [12]. Exceptions to this include cases with
unique geometries designed to harvest environmental energy input [13, 22]. However, even
for these exceptions, the surrounding energy input is highly dependent on ambient con-
ditions (temperature and humidity), which influence input heat transfer and evaporation
rate. In an illuminated evaporation rate test, these conditions will certainly be modified,
and the input energy cannot be assumed to be the same as that of a dark environment test.
While the dark environment rate may be subtracted in these cases for an estimate of the
pure, solar-driven evaporation, this method provides, at best, only a conservative estimate
[12]. For these reasons, simply subtracting the dark environment evaporation rate from the
solar-driven evaporation rate is inaccurate and unnecessary for the calculation of the solar-
to-vapor conversion efficiency in most systems, as the environmental energy input which
sustains dark evaporation is not identical (and in most cases does not manifest) in a typical
illuminated test.
Finally, recent discussions in the literature call into question our current understanding
of reduced enthalpy of evaporation during continuous interfacial solar evaporation pro-
cesses. A modification of the water state clearly manifests in many materials (most notably
hydrogels), and produces a reduced value of the DSC-measured enthalpy along with solar-
driven evaporation rates above the theoretical limit [1]. However, when considering the
energy balance of the entire system, the enthalpy of the water prior to inundation within
the hydrogel is unchanged from its theoretical bulk value. Thus, in a continuous system,
energy should be consumed to raise the water’s enthalpy from the bulk value to the mod-
ified value when it is absorbed into the hydrogel - which must consume energy, as noted
by Ducker [23]. For this reason, it seems impossible that reductions in water vaporization
enthalpy would manifest in a continuous evaporation system if the phenomena were based
purely on a modification of the bonding state of hydrogel-absorbed water. Our experimental
data lends support to this theory. Firstly, it shows that typical claims of enthalpy reduction
in a continuous evaporation test are likely invalid, offering the alternative explanation of

14


energy input discrepancies. In addition, it illustrates the contradictory nature of continuous
(dark environment) and non-continuous (DSC) enthalpy characterization methods. Rather,
alternative theories which involve extra energy input coming from outside of the evapora-
tion system would provide a more reasonable explanation, such as those which posit the
breakup of released water clusters outside of the evaporator system [24]. This would also
help explain how many evaporation materials besides hydrogels are capable of breaking
the theoretical limit even without a modification of the water state. Further efforts by the
scientific community are vital to advance our understanding of the complex vaporization
phenomena which occur during solar-driven evaporation. A deeper understanding of how
the vaporization energy requirement may be effectively reduced, materials which facilitate
these phenomena, and suitable characterization methods will provide significant progress
towards global sustainability.

Conclusion

In this work, a critical assessment of reduced enthalpy characterization through dark envi-
ronment evaporation testing is performed. The assumption of equal energy input between
a water system and an interfacial evaporator system is analyzed both theoretically and
experimentally. In both cases, the environmental energy input to the interfacial evapora-
tion system is shown to significantly exceed that of the water system. The excess energy
input within the experimental test is calculated using a transient analytical model, and it
is found that the enhancement in evaporation for the interfacial evaporator agrees with the
enhancement of energy input due to lower evaporator temperatures. This data illustrates
that the assumption of equal energy input is not valid, and that reduced values of enthalpy
obtained using this characterization method are not accurate. Recent uses of the dark envi-
ronment characterization method in the literature are analyzed with respect to these results,
and it is found that the magnitude of previously reported dark environment data matches
well with our explanation of excess energy input. Discrepancies between differential scan-
ning calorimetry methods are also discussed, emphasizing that the current understanding
of vaporization enthalpy reduction in interfacial evaporation systems requires clarification
and deeper investigation.

Experimental methods

Commercially-available melamine foam sponges are obtained from South Street Designs
Company (UPC: 089902974060). The sponge is rinsed 3 times with DI water and ethanol
before use. It is cut to a 41 mm diameter to fit within the test beaker during evaporation
tests. Evaporation tests were performed over a test period of 24 h in a closed darkroom
environment. Two polypropylene beakers containing DI water were placed side-by-side,
undisturbed during the entire test period. The MF sponge is placed on the water surface
of the evaporator beaker, in direct contact with the DI water. It is pushed into the beaker
until its top surface is in line with the mouth of the beaker. The beakers were surrounded
on the sides by 42 mm of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) insulation foam (measured thermal
conductivity of 0.065 W m−1 K−1). The beakers were placed on top of 38 mm of polystyrene
(PS) insulation foam (measured thermal conductivity of 0.047 W m−1 K−1) and another
12.7 mm of PVC insulation foam. Insulation boards were firmly secured to one another to

15


diminish contact resistance. Temperatures were monitored using the FLIR A655C thermal
camera with a resolution of 640 × 480 using a 25° lens. Temperatures for evaporator system
surfaces were taken as the average over each respective surface. Transparent acrylic sheets
were positioned around the setup to reduce the impact of ambient temperature and wind
fluctuations during the test. This enclosure is not air-tight, so that evaporating water vapor
will not accumulate locally. Ambient temperature was monitored using a thermocouple
positioned inside of the wind-covered area. An additional thermocouple was secured to the
inside of one acrylic sheet to monitor the temperature of the walls inside the enclosure.
The enclosure wall temperature was used as the surrounding temperature for the radiative
transfer calculation. Agreement between thermocouple and IR temperatures within ± 0.05
°C is confirmed prior to testing. The mass of each water-filled test beaker (plus evaporator,
when applicable) was weighed before and after each test period using the RADWAG PS
1000 electronic scale. Masses were not continuously monitored by the scale to avoid excess
heat input from the scale, and to allow the two beakers to remain sufficiently close to one
another to achieve identical ambient conditions. As the evaporation surface temperature
drops very rapidly once the beakers are prepared during setup, the initial temperature of
the bulk water used to fill each beaker is measured via thermocouple prior to each test,
within 5 min of the start time. This temperature is used as the initial domain temperature in
the analysis. Humidity was monitored during each test using the WS-2000 weather station
with the WH32B sensor. The humidity during the comparative test was 18.6 ± 2.1%.
Differential scanning calorimetry curves were performed on the TA Instruments Q2000 DSC
under Argon flow (50 ml min−1) using a ramp rate of 5 °C min−1. Thermal conductivity is
characterized using the HotDisk TPS 2500s. SEM images were obtained from the Supra 25
SEM using an acceleration voltage of 5 kV.

Author contributions

Andrew Caratenuto: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Writing
– Original Draft, Visualization; Yi Zheng: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing – Review
& Editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Dr. Randall Erb and Daniel Braconnier for facilitating the
differential scanning calorimetry measurements. This project is supported by the National
Science Foundation through grant number CBET-1941743.

Conflicts of interest

The authors declare no competing interests.

References

[1] Wei, D., Wang, C., Zhang, J., Zhao, H., Asakura, Y., Eguchi, M., Xu, X. & Yamauchi,
Y.
Water Activation in Solar-Powered Vapor Generation.
Advanced Materials
n/a, 2212100 (2023).
URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adma.
202212100. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202212100.

16


[2] Tao, P., Ni, G., Song, C., Shang, W., Wu, J., Zhu, J., Chen, G. & Deng, T. Solar-
driven interfacial evaporation. Nature Energy 3, 1031–1041 (2018). URL https://www.
nature.com/articles/s41560-018-0260-7. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-018-0260-7.

[3] Zhao, F., Zhou, X., Shi, Y., Qian, X., Alexander, M., Zhao, X., Mendez, S., Yang,
R., Qu, L. & Yu, G. Highly efficient solar vapour generation via hierarchically nanos-
tructured gels. Nature Nanotechnology 13, 489–495 (2018). URL https://www.nature.
com/articles/s41565-018-0097-z. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-018-0097-z.

[4] Zhou, X., Zhao, F., Guo, Y., Rosenberger, B. & Yu, G. Architecting highly hydrat-
able polymer networks to tune the water state for solar water purification. Science
Advances 5, eaaw5484 (2019).
URL https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.
aaw5484. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaw5484.

[5] Caratenuto, A., Xie, L., Gu, L., Tian, Y., Liu, X., Wang, C., Su, M. & Zheng, Y.
Adobe bricks as zero-material-cost solar evaporators for water-scarce regions. Desali-
nation 546, 116199 (2023). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0011916422006543. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2022.116199.

[6] Guan, Q.-F., Han, Z.-M., Ling, Z.-C., Yang, H.-B. & Yu, S.-H. Sustainable Wood-Based
Hierarchical Solar Steam Generator: A Biomimetic Design with Reduced Vaporization
Enthalpy of Water. Nano Letters 20, 5699–5704 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.nanolett.0c01088. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.0c01088.

[7] Liu, X., Tian, Y., Chen, F., Ahlgren, R., Zheng, Y., Su, M., Xiao, G. & Zheng,
Y. An efficient and scalable strategy for ultrablack-paint-enabled solar-driven steam
generation.
Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 234, 111436 (2022).
URL

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092702482100475X.
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.solmat.2021.111436.

[8] Tian, Y., Liu, X., Li, J., Deng, Y., DeGiorgis, J. A., Zhou, S., Caratenuto, A.,
Minus, M. L., Wan, Y., Xiao, G. & Zheng, Y. Farm-waste-derived recyclable pho-
tothermal evaporator. Cell Reports Physical Science 2, 100549 (2021). URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666386421002605. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.xcrp.2021.100549.

[9] Yang, B., Zhang, Z., Liu, P., Fu, X., Wang, J., Cao, Y., Tang, R., Du, X., Chen, W., Li,
S., Yan, H., Li, Z., Zhao, X., Qin, G., Chen, X.-Q. & Zuo, L. Flatband -Ti3O5 towards
extraordinary solar steam generation. Nature 1–8 (2023). URL https://www.nature.
com/articles/s41586-023-06509-3. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06509-3.

[10] Li, Z., Zhang, Y., Huang, Q., Chen, Z., Wang, W. & Li, W. Tailorable Lignocellulose-
Based Aerogel to Achieve the Balance between Evaporation Enthalpy and Water
Transport Rate for Efficient Solar Evaporation.
ACS Applied Materials & Inter-
faces 15, 11827–11836 (2023). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.2c22615. https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acsami.2c22615.

17


[11] Incropera, F. P. & Incropera, F. P. (eds) Fundamentals of heat and mass transfer 6th
ed edn (John Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2007).

[12] Li, X., Ni, G., Cooper, T., Xu, N., Li, J., Zhou, L., Hu, X., Zhu, B., Yao, P. & Zhu,
J. Measuring Conversion Efficiency of Solar Vapor Generation. Joule 3, 1798–1803
(2019). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2542435119302788.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2019.06.009.

[13] Liu, X., Tian, Y., Chen, F., Caratenuto, A., DeGiorgis, J. A., ELSonbaty, M., Wan,
Y., Ahlgren, R. & Zheng, Y.
An Easy-to-Fabricate 2.5D Evaporator for Efficient
Solar Desalination. Advanced Functional Materials 31, 2100911 (2021). URL https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adfm.202100911. https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.202100911.

[14] Bongarala, M., Hu, H., Weibel, J. A. & Garimella, S. V. A figure of merit to characterize
the efficacy of evaporation from porous microstructured surfaces. International Journal
of Heat and Mass Transfer 182, 121964 (2022). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0017931021010693. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.
2021.121964.

[15] Yu, Z., Gu, R., Tian, Y., Xie, P., Jin, B. & Cheng, S.
Enhanced Interfacial Solar
Evaporation through Formation of Micro-Meniscuses and Microdroplets to Reduce
Evaporation Enthalpy. Advanced Functional Materials 32, 2108586 (2022). URL https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adfm.202108586. https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.202108586.

[16] Hou, Q., Xue, C., Li, N., Wang, H., Chang, Q., Liu, H., Yang, J. & Hu, S.
Self-
assembly carbon dots for powerful solar water evaporation.
Carbon 149, 556–563
(2019). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0008622319304233.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2019.04.083.

[17] Partial Differential Equation Toolbox. URL https://www.mathworks.com/help/pde/.

[18] Moran, M., Shapiro, H., Boettner, D. & Bailey, M.
Fundamentals of Engineering
Thermodynamics 7 edn (John Wiley & Sons).

[19] Nakaoki, T. & Yamashita, H. Bound states of water in poly(vinyl alcohol) hydrogel
prepared by repeated freezing and melting method.
Journal of Molecular Struc-
ture 875, 282–287 (2008).
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S002228600700364X. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2007.04.040.

[20] Serrano, J. M., Liu, T., Guo, D., Croft, Z. L., Cao, K., Khan, A. U., Xu, Z., Nouh,
E., Cheng, S. & Liu, G.
Utilization of Block Copolymers to Understand Water
Vaporization Enthalpy Reduction in Uniform Pores. Macromolecules 55, 4803–4811
(2022). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.macromol.2c00092. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.macromol.2c00092.

18


[21] Luo, X., Shi, J., Zhao, C., Luo, Z., Gu, X. & Bao, H.
The energy efficiency of
interfacial solar desalination.
Applied Energy 302, 117581 (2021).
URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261921009570. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.apenergy.2021.117581.

[22] Tang, J., Zheng, T., Song, Z., Shao, Y., Li, N., Jia, K., Tian, Y., Song, Q., Liu, H.
& Xue, G.
Realization of Low Latent Heat of a Solar Evaporator via Regulating
the Water State in Wood Channels. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 12, 18504–
18511 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c01261. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.0c01261.

[23] Ducker, W. A.
Decreasing the Energy of Evaporation Using Interfacial Water: Is
This Useful for Solar Evaporation Efficiency?
ACS Omega 8, 19705–19707 (2023).
URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.3c01300.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.
3c01300.

[24] Tu, Y., Zhou, J., Lin, S., Alshrah, M., Zhao, X. & Chen, G. Plausible photomolecular
effect leading to water evaporation exceeding the thermal limit. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 120, e2312751120 (2023). URL https://www.pnas.org/
doi/10.1073/pnas.2312751120. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2312751120.

19


Supplementary information:
Critical assessment of water enthalpy characterization
through dark environment evaporation

Andrew Caratenuto1 and Yi Zheng1,2

1Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Northeastern
University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
2Department of Chemical Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Corresponding author: y.zheng@northeastern.edu

Fig. 1 SEM images of MF sponge evaporator.

1

arXiv:2311.12881v2  [physics.app-ph]  28 Dec 2023


Fig. 2 Comparative dark environment experimental test setup.

Supplementary Note 1

Transient heat transfer model
Using the entire beaker as a control volume, the transient energy balance for each beaker is

qevap = ˙mhfg = qconv + qrad + qcond + qsens.
(1)
In this equation, qevap, ˙m, hfg, qconv and qrad maintain their definitions from equations in
the main text. Conduction and sensible heat contributions are not neglected in this analysis
for accuracy. Conductive heat transfer manifests from side and bottom heat fluxes through
the insulation layers. The geometry of the beaker within the insulation block is a cylinder
within a square; thus, typical plane wall or radial conduction treatment is not appropriate.
Instead, the conduction shape factor S is used [1]:

S =
2πH

ln( 1.08w

d
),
(2)

where w is the width of the insulating block, and H and d are the height and diameter
of the beaker, respectively. With the relation qcond = Skins∆T, where kins is the thermal
conductivity of the insulating block, the heat rate due to conduction can be determined.
However, the insulation blocks are placed side-by-side, such that one side of the insulation
blocks are touching (Fig. S2). We assume that no conductive heat transfer occurs from this
face due to the lack of contact with the ambient air. For this reason, we approximate the
entire conduction contribution as qcond = 0.75Skins∆T to account for this condition. In
reality, this condition induces a small asymmetric contribution in the experimental case.
However, the magnitudes of the heat transfer rates are sufficiently small, such that this
asymmetry is not expected to make a significant contribution. This is also evidenced by

2


IR camera images, which show a symmetric temperature distribution on the evaporation
surface. For these reasons, the conductive heat flux on the boundary of the cylinder is set as

q′′
cond = 0.75Skins
T∞ − Ti

πdH
,
(3)

where the outer temperature of the insulation is assumed to be equal to the ambient tem-
perature. For the bottom surface of the beaker, the standard plane wall conduction equation
is used due to the parallel geometry [1]:

q′′
cond = kins
T∞ − Ti
Lπ(d/2)2 ,
(4)

where L is the bottom insulation layer thickness.
The sensible heat contribution qsens is expressed as [1]:

qsens = ρV cp
∆Tmean

∆t
.
(5)

The water density, specific heat, and beaker volume are given by ρ, cp, and V , respectively.
∆Tmean is the difference in the bulk mean temperature of water over the corresponding
time step ∆t. A time step of 1 min is used, which is verified as sufficiently small to achieve
convergence.
The boundary condition at the top surface for each time step is set as the experimen-
tally measured surface temperature of the evaporation surface. For the rest of the domain,
the initial temperature is set as the bulk water temperature of water used to fill the beakers,
measured just before the start of the experiment. The side and bottom walls are designated
with conductive heat flux boundary conditions based on Eqs. 3 and 4, respectively. Insu-
lation thermal conductivity and thickness are set based on the experimentally measured
values of the surrounding insulation, as given in Experimental Methods, and temporal data
is used for the ambient temperature. Water properties k, cp, and ρ are set as 0.6 W m−1

K−1, 4182 J kg−1 K−1, and 999 kg m−3, respectively [2]. Changes in volume and/or mass
are not considered based on the small evaporated mass over the course of the experiment.

3


Fig. 3 Distribution of heat transfer mechanisms for each evaporation system.

Fig. 4 Time-dependent heat transfer mechanisms for each evaporation system during the 24-h test.

4


Supplementary Note 2

Evaporation boundary condition at top surface
To further support our experimental and modeling results, an alternative version of the
transient model is simulated, as shown in Fig. S5. In this model, the side and bottom
boundary conditions are identical to those described in the main text, as are the given
water properties and the initial temperatures of the beaker. The top boundary condition is
modified as a heat flux condition based on the evaporative heat flux. Because convection and
radiation also occur at this surface, the top surface heat flux boundary condition is set as:

q′′
top = qconv + qrad − qevap

Atop
.
(6)

Equations for convective, radiative, and evaporative heat fluxes are identical to those
given in the main text. The evaporative heat flux of each beaker is assumed to be a con-
stant. Its value is obtained based on the 24-h averaged evaporation rate and a vaporization
enthalpy value of 2460 J g−1. The result of this model provides the temperature distribu-
tion within the beaker, which allows for the comparison of the experimentally-measured top
surface temperature with the result of the model. Both the DI water and MF sponge cases
show relatively good agreement with the experimental result, maintaining similar responses
to modifications in the ambient temperature. This provides an additional method to illus-
trate that the measured evaporation rates and temperature data are reliable, as they are
physically consistent with the energy balance in multiple versions of this model. Deviations
from the measured temperatures result from several factors. For one, the evaporation rate is
not likely constant throughout the test, and may change slightly based on ambient humid-
ity and temperature variations. In addition, evaporation will actually begin prior to this
test period during setup, although this setup time is minimized (kept to 5 min or less in
practice). Also, the top surface is initialized as the first experimental temperature measure-
ment, while the rest of the beaker is initialized at the measured bulk water temperature.
In combination, these latter two factors result in a sharp increase in surface temperature,
followed by a sharp decrease thereafter. However, both of these effects dissipate in the very
early stages of the simulation.

5


Fig. 5 Alternative model results, using the evaporation boundary condition as described in Supplementary
Note 2.

6


References

[1] Incropera, F. P. & Incropera, F. P. (eds) Fundamentals of heat and mass transfer 6th
ed edn (John Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2007).

[2] Moran, M., Shapiro, H., Boettner, D. & Bailey, M.
Fundamentals of Engineering
Thermodynamics 7 edn (John Wiley & Sons).

7


