≃

≃

Sb2S3-Based Optical Switch Exploiting the 
Brewster Angle Phenomenon 

DIEGO PÉREZ-FRANCÉS,1,‡ GONZALO SANTOS,1,‡ JOSEF RESL,2 MARIA
LOSURDO,3 YAEL GUTIÉRREZ,3,4 AND FERNANDO MORENO1,*

1Department of Applied Physics Faculty of Sciences, University of Cantabria, 39005 Cantabria, Spain. 
2Center for Surface and Nanoanalytics (ZONA), Johannes Kepler Universität, A-4040 Linz, Austria. 
3CNR ICMATE, Corso Stati Uniti 4, I-35127 Padova, Italy. 
4Physics Department, University of Oviedo, 33007 Oviedo, Spain. 
‡ Both authors contributed equally to this work. 
*morenof@unican.es

Abstract:   Optical switches based on phase change materials (PCMs) hold great promise 
for various photonic applications such as telecommunications, data communication, optical 
interconnects, and signal processing. Their non-volatile nature as well as rapid switching speeds 
make them highly desirable for developing advanced and energy-efficient optical communication 
technologies. Ongoing research efforts in exploring new PCMs, optimizing device designs, and 
overcoming existing challenges are driving the development of innovative and high-performance 
optical switches for the next generation of photonics applications. In this study, we design and 
experimentally demonstrate a novel optical amplitude switch design incorporating PCM antimony 
trisulfide (Sb2S3) based on the Brewster angle phenomenon. 

© 2023 Optica Publishing Group under the terms of the Optica Open Access Publishing Agreement 

1.
Introduction

Recent advancements in nanofabrication have led to significant technological breakthroughs 
in devices that rely on the interaction between light and nanostructured materials. [1, 2] As     
a result, nanophotonics has gained considerable attention across various fields, ranging from 
fundamental research to practical applications. [3–7] The increasing importance of high-speed 
data processing with minimal energy consumption has spurred the utilization of light for signal 
transmission and processing. [8] By employing nanostructures, the energy requirements and 
interaction timescales can be greatly reduced, enabling the integration of multiple devices that 
possess the ability to control, modulate, and process light signals with high speed and energy 
efficiency in the same chip. [9] The pursuit of more versatile nanophotonic devices has led to 
the exploration of phase-change materials (PCMs), offering the potential to create tunable and 
switchable nanophotonic systems through the modulation of their optical properties via external 
stimuli. [10–12] Reconfigurability offers significant advantages over conventional fixed-function 
devices by allowing dynamic adjustments in real-time, thus meeting the evolving demands of 
many photonic applications such as reconfigurable photodetectors, [13] reflective pixels, [14] 
integrated phase modulators, [15] tunable metasurfaces, [16–18] optical memories, [19] and in 
particular of optical switches. [20–22] 
So far, reported optical switches are based on PCMs rely on Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST). GST is a 
consolidated technology for rewritable optical disk storage and non-volatile electronic memories 
due to its high thermal stability, fast switching speed, and ability to undergo numerous rewriting 
cycles. [12,23,24] Most of GST based switches rely on absorption modulation because of the huge 
contrast in the extinction coefficient 𝑘 at 1550 nm between crystalline (𝑘 1.49) and amorphous 
(𝑘 0.12) phases. However, the high optical losses in GST make this material impractical for 
large-scale photonic integrated circuits (PICs) where light is guided through numerous phase 
change photonic routers. [25] Additionally, the optical losses of GST limit its exploitation for 


≈

≃

applications where phase modulation is required without affecting the amplitude of the signal. 
Moreover, because of the increasing extinction coefficient 𝑘 at shorter wavelengths for both 
phases, the integration of GST in photonic devices such as tunable metasurfaces operating in the 
visible or near infrared (near IR) becomes impractical. [16, 17] 
In order to overcome this limitation, wide-bandgap PCMs are currently being investigated. 
These novel PCMs provides low-loss or even zero loss operation from the visible to mid IR 
range. [15, 25] Sb2S3 has been recently proposed as low-loss PCM. [26] In its crystalline form, 
Sb2S3 has a band gap of 1.6 eV, while the amorphous phase has the absorption edge at 2.2 eV, 
enabling a low-losses spectra region (extinction coefficient 𝑘 = 0) extending from 1.6 eV to the 
IR with a modulation in the refractive index Δ𝑛 0.5. [27] Sb2S3 has already been exploited in 
the design of reconfigurable structural color platforms, [28] as well as amplitude and phase light 
modulation in all-dielectric metasurfaces [16, 17] and Mach Zendher interferometers (MZIs) 
operating in the C- and O- communication bands. [29] 
In this work, amorphous and crystalline samples of Sb2S3 are optically and structurally 
characterized to explore their potential in the design of an optical amplitude switch based on 
the Brewster angle phenomenon. [30] The Brewster angle corresponds to the angle where light 
with a specific polarization (polarization parallel to the plane of incidence, i.e., 𝑝-polarization) 
is completely transmitted through a transparent interface without any reflection. The value of 
the Brewster angle depends on the refractive index of both materials at the reflective interface. 
Thus, the Brewster angle is strongly affected by the phase of the PCM. When the non-reflection 
condition (i.e., Brewster angle) is met for one of the Sb2S3 phases, upon phase-change the 
Brewster condition is broken, leading to light reflection at the interface, and producing an optical 
contrast in reflection that can be harnessed for optical switching applications. Sb2S3 is the 
alternative low-loss PCM with larger transparency window. i.e, spectral range beyond which 
neither of the material’s phases experience optical losses. This is really important for the optical 
switch based on Brewster angle, as this phenomenon only takes place if the material is transparent 
to light (neglectable extinction coefficient 𝑘 0) .Under this optical switch configuration, we 
experimentally demonstrate an optical contrast of 22 dB. Noteworthy, we theoretically predict 
that this contrast could be further enhanced by tailoring the incident angle and the wavelength of 
the beam. These findings highlight the potential of using the Brewster angle effect in developing 
efficient optical switch devices based on low-loss wide band gap PCMs such as Sb2S3. 

2.
Methods

2.1. Sample fabrication

Sb2S3 films were deposited by chemical bath deposition (CBD) at 15°C using antimony chloride 
(SbCl3) and sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3) as precursors. At that temperature, SbCl3 was 
dissolved in 2.5 g of acetone and 16.2 g of Na2S2O3 was dissolved in 100 mL of deionized (DI) 
water. These two solutions were mixed, and then DI water was added to obtain a total volume of 
178 ml of the liquid phase. The final mixture was vigorously stirred for 15 minutes. The glass 
substrates were cleaned in 5% NaOH at 90°C followed by 1N HCl, and absolute ethanol. After 
rinsing in DI water, the glass slides were dried at 80°C and then immersed in a vertical position 
in a beaker. The most important aspect for controlling the thickness in CBD is the deposition 
time. The duration the substrate is immersed in the deposition bath directly impacts the thickness. 
Longer deposition times generally result in thicker films, while shorter times produce thinner 
ones. Timing is essential for achieving the desired thickness. The Sb2S3 deposition time was 
between 2 - 4 h to have a film thickness in the range 100 nm to 1 𝜇m. 


×

×

⟨ ⟩ + ⟨ ⟩ 

⟨ ⟩ 
⟨ ⟩ + ⟨ ⟩ 

2.2. Optical characterization 

The optical properties of Sb2S3 thin films, namely the pseudodielectric function 𝜖 = 𝜖1 𝑖 𝜖2 
= ( 𝑛 𝑖 𝑘 )2, being 𝑛 and 𝑘 the refractive index and extinction coefficient respectively, were 
measured from 0.75 (1650 nm) to 6.00 eV (205 nm) at room temperature using spectroscopic 
ellipsometry (Woollam 2000) operating at an angle of incidence varying from 55 to 75°. 
Annealing of the as-deposited Sb2S3 was performed inside an enclosed heating cell for 
ellipsometry (Linkam THMSEL600). [31] The sample was initially placed on the heating block 
and ellipsometric measurements were taken at room temperature at 70°. The cell was then 
sealed, and a purging process with Ar was performed to remove oxygen and prevent oxidation. 
The sample was subsequently heated at a rate of 25 °C/min until it reached 265°C, inducing 
crystallization. The temperature of 265°C was maintained for at least 35 minutes to ensure 
stability in the ellipsometric readings, indicating the completion of the crystallization process. 
Finally, the temperature was gradually decreased at the same rate using N2 cooling. 

2.3. Strcutural characterization 

Films, both as deposited and after an annealing cycle, were structurally characterized by Raman 
spectroscopy. The characterization was performed with a Horiba LabRam Aramis VIS 100 
microscope objective (NA = 0.90) and excitation wavelength of 𝜆 = 532 nm. Raman spectroscopy 
measurements were performed to address the crystallinity of the CBD Sb2S3 before and after 
annealing. 

2.4. Reflectance measurements 

2.4.1. Spectral 

The optical system used for the spectral reflectance measurements is composed of a motorized 
Nikon Eclipse (ME600D) microscope with a 10 objective (NA = 0.30), an Ocrean Optics 
USB200 spectrograph, and a spectral source OSL2 Fiber Illuminator. The reflectance spectra 
were processed and analyzed using in-house software fixing an integration time of 300 ms and an 
average scan of 30 cycles. 

2.4.2. Angular 

For the angular reflectance measurements, the sample was placed on a rotating platform. The 
incident beam, coming from a polarized Helium-neon laser (𝜆 = 633 nm), was reflected on the 
sample and then collected in a photodetector (NewPort-MODEL 818) connected to an optical 
power meter (NewPort-MODEL 1830-C). 

2.5. Reflectance measurements 

The reflectance of multilayer structures was calculated using the Transfer Matrix Method 
(TMM). [32] TMM allows to calculate the reflectance spectrum of an arbitrary system of 
homogeneous and non-magnetic multilayers by establishing conditions for the electric field 
along the boundary of two consecutive media. In the present case, the reflectance spectra of the 
fabricated system were calculated using the TMM in a multilayer configuration that mimicks the 
experimental configuration (air/ Sb2S3/SiO2). To take into account the effect of the microscope 
objective in the spectral reflectance measurement set-up, it has been considered the sum of all 
the reflected light that arrives to the objective lens. It has been angularly modelled with a normal 
distribution of mean 0 and standard deviation 𝜃 = sin−1(NA) where NA is the numerical aperture 
microscope objective (NA = 0.30). 


≃

+

±

±

+

3.
Results

Figure 1(a) shows the Raman spectrum of a typical as-grown Sb2S3 film. The Raman spectrum 
is dominated by two broad features at 140 and 300 cm−1 assigned to Sb-S and S = S vibrational 
modes. The Raman spectrum after the annealing process plotted in Fig. 1(b) shows a series of 
sharp peaks assigned to vibrational modes A𝑔 at 157, 191, 284 and 303 cm−1, B1𝑔 at 238 cm−1

and B2𝑔 at 125, 313 and 303 cm−1. 
Figure 1(c) shows the complex refractive index (𝑛 
𝑖𝑘) of both 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3.  The 
complex refractive indices of 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 were derived from ellipsometric analysis [33] 
using a three-media air/film/substrate model, where the SiO2 (glass) substrate was experimentally 
measured prior deposition and, the 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 layers were parameterized using the 
Cody–Lorentz oscillators model. [34] The optical band gap for each phase are at 2.1 eV and 1.8 
eV respectively. Both values are in good agreement with other values reported in literature. [27] 
The thickness determied from the ellipsometric fitting were 290 
10 for 𝑎-Sb2S3 nm and 255 
10 nm for 𝑐-Sb2S3 . The discrepancy in thickness between both phases can be attributed to 
surface roughness and/or oxidation of the film surface. Figure 1(d) shows the refractive index 
contrast between 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3. In general, a higher refractive index contrast results in 
the possibility of wider light amplitude/phase modulation. In the transparency region where 
𝑘 𝑎𝑚 = 𝑘𝑐𝑟 = 0, the refractive index contrast is Δ𝑛 ≈ 0.5. This value is comparable to that 
measured by Delaney et al. in RF sputtered Sb2S3 films, i.e., Δ𝑛 ≈ 0.6. [15] 

Fig. 1. Raman spectra of (a) 𝑎-Sb2S3 and (b) 𝑐-Sb2S3. (c) Complex refractive index, 
𝑛    𝑖𝑘, of 𝑎-Sb2S3  and 𝑐-Sb2S3.  (d) Refractive index contrast Δ𝑛 and Δ𝑘 between 
𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3. 


≈

≈

±

To create amplitude and phase modulators, the simplest configurations involves using a thin-
film material with tunable complex permittivity. For this purpose, we examined a multilayer 
system designed to operate as an amplitude modulator in reflectance configuration consisting of 
a Sb2S3 film deposited on SiO2 substrates. 
In order to test the accuracy of the proposed theoretical model based in the TMM, reflectance 
measurements on the fabricated 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 films on SiO2 were performed at normal 
incidence with unpolarized light and compared with equivalent simulated values. Figures 2(a,b) 
show the reflectance of the 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 films respectively. The black line represents the 
mean reflectivity, while the shadowed indicates the standard deviation. Individual reflectance 
measurements are displayed in Figure S1. The reflectance spectrum for 𝑎-Sb2S3 in Fig. 2(a) 
shows a main dip at 625 nm that, upon amorphous to crystalline phase-change, shifts to higher 
wavelengths ( 675 nm, see Fig. 2(b)) due to the higher refractive index of the crystalline phase. 
The calculated reflectance for the 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 films on SiO2 using the model described 
above are shown in Figs. 2(c,d). The black line represents the mean reflectance value and the 
shadowed region indicate the reflectance values covered by including the 10 nm error in the 
thickness determination of the films. The calculated reflectance spectra reproduce well the main 
features and their spectral shift upon amorphous-to-crystalline phase-change. Differences in the 
amplitude between the simulated and experimental reflectance spectra might be attributed to 
surface roughness not considered in the model. 


±

Fig. 2. Reflectance measurements at normal incidence for (a) 𝑎-Sb2S3 and (b) 𝑐-Sb2S3. 
The black line represents the mean reflectance, while the shadowed region indicates 
the standard deviation. Simulated reflectance for (c) 𝑎-Sb2S3 and (d) 𝑐-Sb2S3.The 
black line represents the mean reflectance value and the shadowed region indicate the 
reflectance values covered by including the 10 nm error in the thickness determination 
of the films. 

In this study, we propose a novel optical amplitude switch design to work in reflectance 
configuration incorporating PCM Sb2S3 and based on the Brewster angle phenomenon. Under 
the simplest approximation, i.e., considering air and the PCM Sb2S3 semi-infinite media, the 
Brewster angle 𝜃𝐵 is given by 

𝜃𝐵 = arctan(𝑛PCM/𝑛𝑎𝑖𝑟 ) 
(1) 

where nPCM and nair are the refractive index of the phase change material and air, respectively. 
The Brewster phenomenon on Sb2S3 films was investigated through reflectance measurements 
for fixed wavelength 𝜆 = 633 nm using 𝑝-polarized light and modifying the angle of incidence. 
Figures 3(a,b) shows the angular dependent reflectance measurements taken on the 𝑎-Sb2S3 
and 𝑐-Sb2S3 films respectively. The black line indicates the mean reflectivity values, while the 
shadowed region represents the standard deviation. Individual reflectance measurements are 
shown in Fig. S2. These measurements are supported by simulated angular dependent reflectance 
calculations under the same conditions (same angles of incidence and excitation wavelength) 


±

using the developed theoretical model based on TMM. For these simulations the dielectric 
functions and thicknesses have been extracted from experimental ellipsometric measurements. 
The calculated reflectance for 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 is shown in Figs. 3(c,d) respectively. The 
black line represents the mean reflectance value and the shadowed region indicate the reflectance 
values covered by including the 10 nm error in the thickness determination of the films. 
Experimental and simulated values are in good agreement. The angle at which the reflectance 
reaches its minimum corresponds to the Brewster angle. 
Figure 3e summarizes the value of the the Brewster angle for both 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 as 
determined in three different ways: (𝑖) the Snell’s law (equation (1)), (𝑖𝑖) from the minima in the 
experimental reflectance spectra, and (𝑖𝑖𝑖) from the minima in the simulated reflectance spectra. 
The Brewster angle for 𝑎-Sb2S3 cannot be directly obtained from the experimental data because 
of the absence of a well defined minimum in the reflectance curve (see Fig. 3(a)). This effect can 
be attributed to the presence of some residual 𝑠-polarized (i.e., polarization perpendicular to the 
plane of incidence) light in the beam during the experimental measurements (see Fig. S3). 
The primary reason for the disparities in the Brewster angle values obtained through the TMM 
calculations and the Snell’s law lies in the assumptions made during the derivation of equation 
(1). The latter relies solely on the refractive index of the materials at the interface, namely Sb2S3 
and air. However, in the case of a stack of nanostructured materials as the one studied here 
(i.e., air/PCM/SiO2), the Brewster angle is influenced by both the thicknesses and refractive 
index of the materials forming all the stack. These parameters govern the multiple reflections 
occurring at the various interfaces within the stack, leading to the observed variations. Therefore, 
as demonstrated in 3(e), the value of the Brewster angle obtained using the TMM, which consider 
the reflection at all the interfaces in the system, is in better agreement with the value from the 
experimental measurements. 
Another consideration relies in the fact that the Brewster phenomenon is observed at interfaces 
between non-absorbing materials (i.e., extinction coefficient 𝑘 = 0). This condition is met 
when the photon energy of the incident beam lies below the absorption onset of both materials 
forming the interface. In contrast, if the one or both materials exhibit absorption (i.e., extinction 
coefficient 𝑘 ≠ 0), a similar effect can be observed know as pseudo-Brewster. [30] Under the 
pseudo-Brewster condition, the reflectance minimum increases deviating from absolute zero 
reflectance of the pure Brewster phenomenon. Understanding this distinction is crucial for 
optimizing optical devices based on this phenomenon and manipulating light properties under 
this condition. 
In the reflectance values of Figs. 3(b,d), obtained using an incident wavelength of 𝜆 = 633 nm, 
the refractive index of 𝑐-Sb2S3 shows non-zero extinction coefficient (i.e., complex refractive 
index equal to 2.750 +0.035𝑖). Therefore, for 𝑐-Sb2S3, the pseudo-Brewster condition is met and a 
non-zero value of the reflectance minimum is obtained. Therefore, considering the absorption 
onsets of both 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 (i.e., 1.6 and 2.2 eV respectively), to meet the pure Brewster 
condition in both phases simultaneously, operating wavelengths higher than 688 nm are needed. 


±

Fig. 3. Reflectance measurements at a wavelength of 𝜆=633 nm modifying the incident 
angle for (a) 𝑎-Sb2S3 and (b) 𝑐-Sb2S3. The black line represents the mean reflectivity, 
and the shadowed region indicates the standard deviation. The black arrow pointing the 
minimum of the curve indicates the Brewster angle (𝜃𝐵). Simulated reflectance at a 
wavelength of 𝜆=633 nm modifying the incident angle for (c) 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 
(d). The black line represents the mean reflectance value and the shadowed region 
indicate the reflectance values covered by including the 10 nm error in the thickness 
determination of the films.(e) Brewster angle for 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 considering 
Snell equation (blue), simulations based on the TMM (yellow) and experiment (red). 
The error estimated from the Brewster angle from the simulations and experimental data 
is 2° and 1° respectively. The Brewster angle obtained from equation (1) is considered 
without error. 

Figures 4(a,b) show the simulated reflectance for 𝑝-polarized light as a function of the angle of 
incidence and wavelength for both air/𝑎-Sb2S3/SiO2 (𝑅𝑎𝑚) and air/𝑐-Sb2S3/SiO2 (𝑅𝑐𝑟 ) systems 
studied in this work. The continuous and dashed black lines represent the minima in the 
reflectance spectra, i.e., the Brewster angles for 𝑎-Sb2S3 and 𝑐-Sb2S3 respectively. To evaluate 
the amplitude switching of the system upon amorphous-to-crystalline Sb2S3 phase-change, Fig. 


| |

| |

4c shows the calculated optical contrast, 𝐶, in decibels (dBs) defined as 

𝐶 = 10 log(Rcr/Ram) 
(2) 

The highest optical contrasts (blue and red spots) match the maximums and minimums of the 
Brewster angle as a function of the wavelength. The highest absolute value of the calculated 𝐶 is 
33 dBs. To demonstrate it, reflectance as a function of the wavelength has been measured for 
an angle of incidence of 55° (see white vertical line Fig. 4𝑐). The experimental and simulated 
spectral reflectance values are shown in Figure S4. Figure 4d compares the simulated and 
experimental 𝐶 spectra for an angle of incidence 55°. Interestingly, this angle matches the 
Brewster angle of air/𝑎-Sb2S3/SiO2 at 1045 nm, and of air/𝑐-Sb2S3/SiO2 at 660 and 1190 nm. 
Therefore, for this specific angle incidence, 𝐶 present three maximum values as shown Fig. 4d. 
Both experimental and simulated line shapes of the 𝐶 spectra are in good agreement with small 
shifts of the minima/maxima. Nevertheless, experimental values of the maxima of 𝐶 are lower 
as compared with the calculated ones, probably due to undesired effects such as surface roughness 
or residual 𝑠-polarized light in the incident beam. The maximum value of 𝐶 experimentally 
measured is 𝐶 = 22 dB at 1080 nm as opposed to the theoretically predicted value of 𝐶 = 33 dBs 
at 1045 nm. The values of 𝐶 reported here under the Brewster condition underscore the capacity 
to harness the Brewster angle effect in the development of high 𝐶 optical switches. 
For a practical implementation of the present proposed optical switch, a light guide should 
be designed on top of the PCM in such a way that the light entering the switching system hits 
the surface separation guide-PCM, at the Brewster condition for one of the PCM phases (OFF 
state) and not for the other (ON state). The reflected energy is in turn symmetrically collected 
to continue its propagation along the guide. Under this configuration, the switching condition 
can be even improved by using a symmetrical arrangement in such a way that the guide and the 
substrate are manufactured with the same material. It is important to highlight that the reflected 
electromagnetic energy for the ON state is low, of the order of 1% of the incident one, but this is 
not a serious drawback for the switching purposes given the high values of 𝐶 obtained. Different 
PCMs are suitable for this application. The choice of PCM is directly linked to the specific region 
of the spectrum in which the optical switch operates. As previously mentioned, it’s important 
to highlight that the Brewster phenomenon exclusively emerges when the material presents no 
losses, precisely when it falls within the optical transparency window of the PCM. 
For completeness and as an example, Figs.4(e,f) shows the simulated optical contrast in dBs, 
considering 𝑝-polarization, as a function of angle of incidence and wavelength for amorphous 
and crystalline samples while maintaining an equal thickness for both phases (255 nm and 290 
nm, respectively). Ensuring equal film thickness in both phases upon phase-change promotes 𝐶. 
For instance, at an angle of incidence of 55°, the maximum value of 𝐶 experimentally measured 
of 22 dB at 1080 nm and theoretically predicted to be 𝐶 = 33 dBs at 1045 nm, is increased to 𝐶 = 
38 dBs at 930 and 1050 nm by keeping the thickness of the layer to either 255 nm or 290 nm 
respectively. 


Fig. 4. Simulated reflectance for 𝑝-polarized light as a function of the angle of incidence 
and wavelength for (a) air/𝑎-Sb2S3/SiO2 (𝑅𝑎𝑚) and (b) air/𝑐-Sb2S3/SiO2 (𝑅𝑐𝑟 ). The 
continuous and dashed black lines represent the points of minimum reflectance in  
the spectrum, corresponding to the respective Brewster angles. (c) Simulated optical 
contrast in decibels (dBs) (𝐶 = 10log10(Rcr/Ram)) for 𝑝-polarization as a function of 
the angle of incidence and wavelength. (d) Calculated and experimentally measured 𝐶 
spectra in dBs for an incident angle of 55°. Simulated optical contrast in decibels (dBs), 
for 𝑝-polarization, as a function as a function of the angle of incidence and wavelength 
amorphous and crystalline samples with equal thickness of (e) 255 nm and (f) 290 nm 
for both phases. 


4.
Conclusions

In conclusion, we conducted optical and structural characterizations on both amorphous and 
crystalline samples of Sb2S3 with the aim of investigating the feasibility of designing an amplitude 
optical switch based on the Brewster angle phenomenon working on the reflectance configuration. 
The designed optical switch consist of a simple stack of PCM Sb2S3 film on a SiO2 substrate. 
Under this configuration, we successfully experimentally demonstrated an optical contrast of 
22 dB upon amorphous-to-crystalline phase change of the Sb2S3 film. To implement this 
configuration in an optical circuit, a light guide should be designed on top of the PCM in such a 
way that the light entering the switching system hits the surface separation, guide-PCM, under the 
Brewster condition for one of the PCM phases (OFF state) and not for the other (ON state). The 
contrast between both states can be even improved by using a symmetrical arrangement: guide 
and substrate made of the same material. These findings demonstrate the potential of leveraging 
the Brewster angle effect in the development of efficient optical switch devices, paving the way 
for novel advancements in the field of optoelectronics and nanophotonics for communications 
and optical memories applications. 

Funding. European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (No 899598 – PHEMTRON- 
ICS) 

Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge Pedro Valle for reflectance measurements and helpful 
discussion. 

Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 

Data availability. Data underlying the results presented in this paper are not publicly available at this time 
but may be obtained from the authors upon reasonable request. 

Supplemental document. See Supplement 1 for supporting content. 

References 

1.
A. F. Koenderink, A. Alu, and A. Polman, “Nanophotonics: Shrinking light-based technology,” Science 348, 516–521
(2015). 
2.
Z. Chai, A. Childress, and A. A. Busnaina, “Directed assembly of nanomaterials for making nanoscale devices and
structures: Mechanisms and applications,” Acs Nano 16, 17641–17686 (2022).
3.
M. Caldarola, P. Albella, E. Cortés, M. Rahmani, T. Roschuk, G. Grinblat, R. F. Oulton, A. V. Bragas, and S. A.
Maier, “Non-plasmonic nanoantennas for surface enhanced spectroscopies with ultra-low heat conversion,” Nat.
communications 6, 7915 (2015).
4.
T. S. van Zanten, M. J. Lopez-Bosque, and M. F. Garcia-Parajo, “Imaging individual proteins and nanodomains on
intact cell membranes with a probe-based optical antenna,” Small 6, 270–275 (2010).
5.
L. Dykman and N. Khlebtsov, “Gold nanoparticles in biomedical applications: recent advances and perspectives,”
Chem. Soc. Rev. 41, 2256–2282 (2012).
6.
S. Lal, S. Link, and N. J. Halas, “Nano-optics from sensing to waveguiding,” Nat. photonics 1, 641–648 (2007).
7. A. Sobhani, M. W. Knight, Y. Wang, B. Zheng, N. S. King, L. V. Brown, Z. Fang, P. Nordlander, and N. J. Halas,
“Narrowband photodetection in the near-infrared with a plasmon-induced hot electron device,” Nat. communications
4, 1643 (2013).
8.
A. Krasnok and A. Alu, “Active nanophotonics,” Proc. IEEE 108, 628–654 (2020).
9.
S. Zhu, P. Qiu, X. Shan, R. Lin, Z. Wang, Z. Jin, X. Cui, G. Zhang, and P. Tian, “High-speed long-distance visible light
communication based on multicolor series connection micro-leds and wavelength division multiplexing,” Photonics
Res. 10, 1892–1899 (2022).
10. J. von Keitz, J. Feldmann, N. Gruhler, C. Ríos, C. D. Wright, H. Bhaskaran, and W. H. Pernice, “Reconfigurable
nanophotonic cavities with nonvolatile response,” ACS Photonics 5, 4644–4649 (2018).
11. Z. Fang, R. Chen, J. Zheng, and A. Majumdar, “Non-volatile reconfigurable silicon photonics based on phase-change
materials,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 28, 1–17 (2021).
12. M. Wuttig, H. Bhaskaran, and T. Taubner, “Phase-change materials for non-volatile photonic applications,” Nat.
photonics 11, 465–476 (2017).
13. G. Santos, M. Georghe, C. Cobianu, M. Modreanu, M. Losurdo, Y. Gutiérrez, and F. Moreno, “Plasmonic hot-electron
reconfigurable photodetector based on phase-change material Sb2S3,” Opt. Express 30, 38953 (2022).
14. S. G. C. Carrillo, L. Trimby, Y. Y. Au, V. K. Nagareddy, G. Rodriguez-Hernandez, P. Hosseini, C. Ríos, H. Bhaskaran,
and C. D. Wright, “A Nonvolatile Phase-Change Metamaterial Color Display,” Adv. Opt. Mater. 7 (2019).


15. M. Delaney, I. Zeimpekis, H. Du, X. Yan, M. Banakar, D. J. Thomson, D. W. Hewak, and O. L. Muskens, “Nonvolatile
programmable silicon photonics using an ultralow-loss Sb2Se3 phase change material,” Sci. Adv. 7 (2021).
16. S. Abdollahramezani, O. Hemmatyar, H. Taghinejad, A. Krasnok, Y. Kiarashinejad, M. Zandehshahvar, A. Alù, and
A. Adibi, “Tunable nanophotonics enabled by chalcogenide phase-change materials,” Nanophotonics 9, 1189–1241
(2020). 
17. P. Moitra, Y. Wang, X. Liang, L. Lu, A. Poh, T. W. Mass, R. E. Simpson, A. I. Kuznetsov, and R. Paniagua-
Dominguez, “Programmable Wavefront Control in the Visible Spectrum Using Low-Loss Chalcogenide Phase-Change
Metasurfaces,” Adv. Mater. p. 2205367 (2022). 
18. G. Santos, M. Losurdo, F. Moreno, and Y. Gutiérrez, “Directional Scattering Switching from an All-Dielectric Phase
Change Metasurface,” Nanomaterials 13, 496 (2023).
19. C. Ríos, N. Youngblood, Z. Cheng, M. Le Gallo, W. H. P. Pernice, C. D. Wright, A. Sebastian, and H. Bhaskaran,
“In-memory computing on a photonic platform,” Sci. Adv. 5 (2019).
20. M. Stegmaier, C. Ríos, H. Bhaskaran, C. D. Wright, and W. H. P. Pernice, “Nonvolatile All-Optical 1 × 2 Switch for 
Chipscale Photonic Networks,” Adv. Opt. Mater. 5, 1600346 (2017).
21. P. Xu, J. Zheng, J. K. Doylend, and A. Majumdar, “Low-Loss and Broadband Nonvolatile Phase-Change Directional
Coupler Switches,” ACS Photonics 6, 553–557 (2019).
22. J. Parra, J. Navarro-Arenas, M. Kovylina, and P. Sanchis, “Impact of GST thickness on GST-loaded silicon waveguides
for optimal optical switching,” Sci. Reports 12, 9774 (2022).
23. C. D. Wright, Y. Liu, K. I. Kohary, M. M. Aziz, and R. J. Hicken, “Arithmetic and biologically-inspired computing
using phase-change materials,” Adv. Mater. 23, 3408–3413 (2011).
24. C. Ríos, M. Stegmaier, P. Hosseini, D. Wang, T. Scherer, C. D. Wright, H. Bhaskaran, and W. H. Pernice, “Integrated
all-photonic non-volatile multi-level memory,” Nat. photonics 9, 725–732 (2015).
25. Z. Fang, R. Chen, J. Zheng, and A. Majumdar, “Non-Volatile Reconfigurable Silicon Photonics Based on Phase-Change
Materials,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 28, 1–17 (2022).
26. M. Delaney, I. Zeimpekis, D. Lawson, D. W. Hewak, and O. L. Muskens, “A New Family of Ultralow Loss Reversible
Phase-Change Materials for Photonic Integrated Circuits: Sb2S3 and Sb2Se3 ,” Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 2002447
(2020). 
27. Y. Gutiérrez, A. P. Ovvyan, G. Santos, D. Juan, S. A. Rosales, J. Junquera, P. García-Fernández, S. Dicorato, M. M.
Giangregorio, E. Dilonardo et al., “Interlaboratory study on Sb2S3 interplay between structure, dielectric function,
and amorphous-to-crystalline phase change for photonics,” iScience 25, 104377 (2022).
28. H. Li, X. Zhang, F. Zhou, X. Xiao, Y. Xu, and Z. Zhang, “Tunable color gamut based a symmetric microcavity
governed by sb2s3,” Opt. Commun. 508, 127683 (2022).
29. L. Lu, S. F. Reniers, Y. Wang, Y. Jiao, and R. E. Simpson, “Reconfigurable InP waveguide components using the
Sb2S3 phase change material,” J. Opt. 24, 094001 (2022).
30. R. M. A. Azzam, “Fresnel’s interface reflection coefficients for the parallel and perpendicular polarizations: global
properties and facts not found in your textbook,” in Polarization Analysis and Measurement II, vol. 2265 D. H.
Goldstein and D. B. Chenault, eds., International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE, 1994), pp. 120 – 140.
31. Y. Gutiérrez, S. Espinoza, M. Zahradník, K. Khakurel, J. Resl, C. Cobet, K. Hingerl, M. Duwe, P. Thiesen, and
M. Losurdo, “Characterizing optical phase-change materials with spectroscopic ellipsometry and polarimetry,” Thin 
Solid Films 763, 139580 (2022).
32. M. Born, E. Wolf, A. B. Bhatia, P. C. Clemmow, D. Gabor, A. R. Stokes, A. M. Taylor, P. A. Wayman, and W. L.
Wilcock, Principles of Optics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999).

33. J. Resl, Y. Gutiérrez, and M. Losurdo, “Database of new phase change materials (versión 2)
https://zenodo.org/records/8128162,” Zenodo (2023).
34. A. Ferlauto, G. Ferreira, J. Pearce, C. Wronski, R. Collins, X. Deng, and G. Ganguly, “Analytical model for the
optical functions of amorphous semiconductors and its applications for thin film solar cells,” Thin Solid Films
455-456, 388–392 (2004).


