 
 

1 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

Quantifying Nonradiative Recombination and Resistive Losses in 

Perovskite Photovoltaics: A Modified Diode Model Approach 

 

Minshen Lin1, Xuehui Xu2, Hong Tian2, Yang (Michael) Yang2*, Wei E. I. Sha3*, and Wenxing 

Zhong1* 

 

1College of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. 

2State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, Institute for Advanced Photonics, College of 

Optical Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China 

3State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, College of Information Science and Electronic 

Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China 

*Authors to whom correspondence should be addressed: yangyang15@zju.edu.cn, weisha@zju.edu.cn, and 

wxzhong@zju.edu.cn 

 

Keywords: perovskite photovoltaic, loss quantification, device model 

 

Abstract 

Pinpointing the origin of inefficiency can expedite the process of optimizing the efficiency of 

perovskite photovoltaics. However, it is challenging to discern and quantify the different loss 

pathways in a complete perovskite photovoltaic device under operational conditions. To 

address this challenge, we propose a modified diode model that can quantify bulk/interface 

defect-assisted recombination and series/shunt resistive losses. By adopting drift-diffusion 

simulation as the benchmark, we explore the physical meanings of the modified diode model 

parameters and evaluate the performance of the model for simulation parameters spanning 

many orders of magnitude. Our evaluation shows that, in most practical cases, the proposed 

model can accurately quantify all the aforementioned losses, and in some special cases, it is 

possible to identify the predominant loss pathway. Moreover, we apply the modified diode 

model to our lab-produced devices (based on Cs0.05FA0.95PbI3 perovskites), demonstrating its 

effectiveness in quantifying entangled losses in practice. Finally, we provide a set of guidelines 

for applying the modified diode model and interpreting the results. Source code available at 

https://github.com/WPT-Lab124/Modified-Diode-Model. 

1. Introduction 

With over ten years of development, perovskite photovoltaics have shown tremendous 

improvement in both efficiency[1] and stability[2]. The record efficiency of single-junction 


 
 

2 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

perovskite photovoltaics has reached 25.8%, rivaling that of crystalline silicon photovoltaics[3]. 

However, such efficiency is still below the thermodynamic efficiency limit of 31%, as predicted 

by the Shockley-Queisser formulation[4]. To improve the performance of perovskite 

photovoltaics, strategies involving modification of materials or even device structures are often 

adopted[5]. In this respect, during the exploration of a more performant device, it is not 

uncommon for the modified devices to fall short of the expected efficiency. This requires 

devising an effective strategy that can facilitate targeted efficiency improvement, which relies 

on the understanding and identification of each loss mechanism inside the device. 

The losses in photovoltaics fall into three categories—optical loss, recombination loss, and 

resistive loss[6]. Recombination and resistive losses are also known as the electrical losses. 

Under 1-Sun irradiance, the performance of perovskite photovoltaics is predominantly limited 

by the defect-assisted recombination either in the perovskite bulk or at the perovskite/transport 

layer interfaces, while under higher irradiances or in devices with comparatively large areas, 

resistive loss can predominate[7]. These losses are coupled via carrier kinetics such that 

disentangling one from the others demands detailed modeling of the device behavior. In the 

literature, experimental techniques such as steady-state photoluminescence[7–9], time-resolved 

photoluminescence 
(TRPL)[7–10], 
impedance 
spectroscopy[11,12], 
and 
ideality 
factor 

measurement[13–18] have been used to analyze the non-radiative recombination losses. More 

recently, a light-intensity approach has been proposed to help in the explanation of electrical 

losses[5]. Though these methods are useful guides in particular cases, they cannot provide 

comprehensive information regarding all the electrical losses, or quantify each loss. 

Generally, drift-diffusion (DD) simulations[19–21] and circuit model analysis[22–25] are used to 

analyze and quantify the losses in photovoltaics, with necessary parameters retrieved by 

experimental techniques. In DD simulations, a large number of parameters are required and 

accurate determination of some critical parameters such as interface recombination velocity is 

challenging; hence, such modeling is inconvenient and sometimes difficult to apply during the 

iterations of device optimization. On the other hand, circuit models can analyze the performance 

with measured current density-voltage (J-V) curves, via curve fitting, which is easy to 

implement. However, in classic circuit models such as single- and double-diode models[24,25], 

the parameters regarding dark current density and ideality factor have ambiguous physical 

meanings such that they cannot be directly associated with the recombination processes in 

perovskite photovoltaics. Besides, in the recently developed circuit models for perovskite 

photovoltaics[22,23], the focus is on the explanation of internal charge distribution and ideality 

factor, instead of loss quantification. 


 
 

3 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

Aiming at both accurate loss modeling and clear physical meaning, in this study, we 

introduce and analyze the modified diode (MD) model, applied in such a way that it can discern 

and quantify the following losses: 1) Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination loss occurred 

in the perovskite bulk; 2) SRH recombination loss occurred at the perovskite/transport layer 

interfaces; 3) series resistance loss that usually results from the lateral conduction in the 

transparent electrode and the geometry of the device[5,7,26]; 4) shunt resistance loss due to the 

defects and voids-induced current leakage[6]. By adopting DD simulation as the benchmark, 

first, we explore the physical meanings of each parameter in the MD model. Then, we 

comprehensively evaluate the accuracy of the MD model for device parameters (in DD 

simulation) spanning many orders of magnitude that cover most of the practical cases. Such 

evaluation also includes high irradiance applications, considering that perovskite photovoltaics 

are potential candidates for concentrator[27,28] and optical wireless power transfer[29,30] 

technologies. Moreover, we analyze how mobile ions in the perovskite layer can affect the 

accuracy of the model in describing recombination currents, and then apply the MD model to 

our lab-produced devices, demonstrating its capability in quantifying entangled losses in 

practice. Finally, we provide a set of guidelines for applying the MD model and interpreting the 

results. We make the source code (implemented in MATLAB) open-source online[31], which 

can hopefully facilitate the design of efficiency-targeted optimization strategies for researchers 

in this field. 

2. Modeling and Evaluation 

2.1. Theory of Modified Diode Model 

The MD model draws certain characteristics from both the detailed balance model and the 

circuit models for photovoltaics, providing a way to discern recombination and resistive losses 

in practical devices. In the detailed balance model, ideal contacts and infinitely high carrier 

mobilities are assumed for the limiting case so that the quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) 

equals 𝑞𝑉—the product of the elementary charge, 𝑞, and the applied voltage, 𝑉. In this way, 

the radiative recombination current can be described in terms of the QFLS (as a function of 𝑉), 

connecting the external applied voltage with the internal carrier kinetics. To utilize similar 

relations and to incorporate resistances as with circuit models, in the MD model, we attribute 

the resistive losses produced by lateral conduction in the transparent electrode and geometry 

effects[5,7,26] to a lumped series resistance, 𝑅!, such that the QFLS approximates 𝑞(𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!), 

where 𝐽 is the output current density. With this generalization and to account for non-radiative 

recombination losses, the current density-voltage (𝐽𝑉) relation is given by 


 
 

4 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

𝐽 = 𝐽"# − 𝐽$(𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!) − 𝐽%$(𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!) − 𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!

𝑅!#

,
(1) 

where 𝐽"# is the photocurrent density, 𝐽$ is the radiative recombination current density, 𝐽%$ is 

the non-radiative recombination current density, and 𝑅!# is the shunt resistance, representing 

the defects and voids-induced current leakage[6]. The photocurrent density can be calculated by 

the absorption of the illumination spectrum; likewise, the radiative recombination current 

density is determined, according to the principle of detailed balance, by the absorption of the 

dark spectrum. 

Of greater interest in practical devices is the non-radiative recombination, which is comprised 

of several components representing different recombination pathways. In perovskite 

photovoltaics, recombination losses are predominantly due to the Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) 

recombination either in the perovskite bulk or at the perovskite/transport layer interfaces[7]. 

Second-order radiative recombination and third-order Auger recombination may predominate 

with higher carrier concentrations. However, as assessed by an extraction-dependent rate 

equation model, radiative and Auger recombination prevail only when the illumination 

irradiance is over several hundreds of Suns[28]. In this work, we analyze the performance of 

perovskite photovoltaics up to 50 Suns; in such cases, radiative and Auger recombination 

currents are smaller than SRH recombination currents by several orders of magnitude. Thereby, 

we only consider the currents due to SRH recombination in Eq. (1). In order to differentiate 

between bulk and interface SRH recombination, we introduce two recombination current 

densities of similar form into the MD model, 

𝐽&'(

)*+, = 𝑞𝐿𝛾)*+,𝑛- /exp 3𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!

2𝑘.𝑇/𝑞8 − 19 ,
(2) 

𝐽&'(

-/
= 𝑞𝑈-/ ;exp < 𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!

𝑛-0

-/𝑘.𝑇/𝑞

= − 1> ,
(3) 

where 𝛾)*+,  is the bulk SRH recombination rate, 𝐿 is the active layer thickness, 𝑛-  is the 

intrinsic carrier density of the active layer material, 𝑈-/ is the interface SRH recombination rate, 

and 𝑛-0

-/ is the ideality factor for interface SRH recombination. The detailed derivation of these 

equations is given in Supplementary Note 1, along with the necessary assumptions. Later 

sections of this paper discuss the justification of these assumptions in more detail. Besides, one 

reason why we fix the value of the ideality factor for bulk SRH recombination is that if the 

ideality factors for both recombination pathways are allowed to vary, then interpreting bulk 

SRH recombination current as interface SRH recombination current or vice versa is of no 

difference in terms of curve fitting, which can lead to questionable uniqueness of the retrieved 

parameters. 


 
 

5 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

2.2. Simulation Study 

To explore the accuracy of the MD model, we use DD simulation results as the benchmarks, 

assessing how well Eq. (2) and Eq. (3) capture the recombination currents. The assessment 

procedure is described in the following: 

1) First, the well-established DD simulator, SCAPS-1D[32], is used to produce the 𝐽𝑉 curves—

more precisely, the 𝐽𝑉 data points. 

2) Then we retrieve the unknown parameters in the MD model such that the reproduced 𝐽𝑉 

curves (data points) have minimum residuals with respect to the simulation results. This is 

essentially a curve-fitting problem. Since 𝑅!  and 𝑛-0

-/  are in the exponential terms, we 

leverage the Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm[33,34] to solve such non-linear least 

squares problem. 

3) Finally, we use the retrieved parameters to solve the recombination currents, Eq. (2-3), for 

comparison with the DD simulation results. 

To begin with, we consider the pin-type device consisting of indium tin oxide (ITO, 150 

nm)/PTAA (8 nm)/perovskite (700 nm)/C60 (30 nm)/Ag (100 nm). The parameter values for 

DD simulations are mostly adopted from the literature[7,14], in which the bulk SRH 

recombination lifetime and interface SRH recombination velocity are extracted from 

photoluminescence experiments. Unless particularly specified, the parameter values in the rest 

of the article are consistent with those listed in Table S1. In addition, we include a series 

resistance of 1 Ω ∙ cm1 and a shunt resistance of 102 Ω ∙ cm1 to model the resistive losses. For 

the purpose of clearly interpreting the MD model, we introduce three regions—low-voltage 

region, exponential region, and consumer region—to describe the operation of photovoltaics 

specified by different voltages. The low-voltage region refers to the part in the 𝐽𝑉 curve where 

the current density almost stays constant with increasing applied voltage, starting from the 

voltage corresponding to the photocurrent. The exponential region refers to the other part where 

the current density grows drastically with applied voltage[15]. We choose the maximum power 

point (MPP) voltage to distinguish between these two regions for 1-Sun irradiance, and for 

higher irradiances, we choose the voltage where the exponential tail starts. Besides, we refer to 

the region where the applied voltage is greater than the open-circuit voltage as the consumer 

region since in this region the device consumes energy. 

At the first attempt, we allow all the five unknown parameters in the MD model 

(𝛾)*+,, 𝑈-/, 𝑛-0

-/, 𝑅!, 𝑅!#) to vary within a broad range (from 0 to 1031) in the course of curve 

fitting. Figure 1 (a) shows the DD simulated and MD model fitted 𝐽𝑉 curves. These two 𝐽𝑉 

curves exhibit negligible fitting errors, which, however, does not guarantee that the MD model 


 
 

6 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

captures all the information. In Fig. 1(b), the simulated and fitted recombination currents are 

depicted. In the exponential region, it is evident that the fitted recombination currents do not 

correctly describe the corresponding simulated recombination currents; instead, the fitted bulk 

SRH recombination current accounts for the predominant simulated interface SRH 

recombination current, which can lead to false loss analysis. To tackle this problem, we leverage 

Figure 1. Current density‑voltage relations of perovskite photovoltaics. (a-b) Curve fitting with the MD model, 

allowing all the five parameters listed in the inset table to vary. (c-f) Curve fitting with the MD model, allowing 

the four parameters listed in the inset table to vary. Drift diffusion (DD) simulation and modified diode (MD) 

model fitting results are given in (a), (c), and (e). The current densities due to different loss pathways calculated 

by the MD model using retrieved parameters are compared with the corresponding simulation results in (b), (d), 

and (f). The irradiance of illumination (AM 1.5G spectrum) is 1 Sun in (a-d) and 50 Suns in (e-f). 


 
 

7 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

the bulk SRH recombination lifetime. The bulk SRH recombination rate, 𝛾)*+,, derived from 

the SRH recombination formulation, equals to 1/2𝜏)*+, in case of mid-gap traps and 𝑛 = 𝑝, 

where 𝜏)*+, is the SRH recombination lifetime. This lifetime is an input parameter in the DD 

simulations, and in practical devices, can be measured by TRPL experiments[7,10]. Given a 

known 𝜏)*+,, we can fix the value of 𝛾)*+, and only retrieve the values of the remaining four 

parameters (𝑈-/, 𝑛-0

-/, 𝑅!, 𝑅!#) by curve fitting. Using this strategy, we implement the procedure 

again. Fig. 1(c) shows the newly fitted 𝐽𝑉 curve with retrieved parameter values listed in the 

inset table. Noticeably, the fitted recombination currents, depicted in Fig. 1(d), accurately 

follow the respective simulation results in the exponential region. This fitting result suggests 

that the MD model is capable of describing and discerning different SRH recombination 

mechanisms, so long as the bulk SRH recombination lifetime is given. Similarly, we implement 

the assessment procedure to the same device but increase the illumination irradiance to 50 Suns. 

As shown in Fig. 1(e-f), the MD model well captures the predominant interface SRH 

recombination current. Though the fitted bulk SRH recombination current is less than the 

simulation result, this introduces negligible error in terms of loss analysis, because the bulk 

SRH recombination only takes up a small portion of the overall loss. 

So far, we have not discussed the resistive components, which are also of great importance 

in many devices. As shown in the inset table in Fig. 1, the retrieved values of 𝑅! are slightly 

greater than the given value in the simulation. Potentially, this error originates in the enhanced 

recombination loss due to non-ideal transportation, which is not associated with the external 

series resistance that we additionally include. On the other hand, the retrieved values of 𝑅!# 

seem to deviate far from the given value in the simulation. Yet from Fig. 1(d) and Fig. 1(f), we 

can see that in the MD model, the current density that flows through 𝑅!#  serves as a 

compensation for the SRH recombination current in the low-voltage region, since in this region, 

the recombination current does not exponentially grow with applied voltage. The increase of 

recombination current with respect to applied voltage can be understood in terms of the 

accumulated carrier concentrations in the absorption layer: 1) Under illumination, the photo-

generated carriers are not completely extracted due to finite carrier mobilities, part of which 

accumulate in the absorption layer contributing to recombination. 2) At relatively low applied 

voltages, the carrier concentration in the absorption layer is the sum of the predominant 

accumulated photo-generated carrier concentration and the voltage-injected carrier 

concentration, which have a slower-than-exponential (almost linear) increase with respect to 

the applied voltage. Since this increase approximates a linear process, in the MD model, it is 

naturally attributed to the shunt resistance by curve fitting. 3) With increasing applied voltage, 


 
 

8 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

the electrically injected carriers gradually form a background concentration that outweighs the 

accumulated photo-generated carriers such that the carrier concentration and the recombination 

currents follow the exponential increase with respect to voltage. These behaviors can also be 

observed in Fig. S1, where carrier distribution and QFLS at different voltages are demonstrated. 

We can therefore confirm that 𝑅!# in the MD model takes on an additional role in describing 

the recombination currents in the low-voltage region, which increases non-exponentially with 

applied voltage. 

Using the retrieved parameters, we can quantitatively evaluate the electrical losses due to 

different recombination pathways and resistances. However, the impact of each loss pathway 

is not independent of the others. For example, compared to smaller series resistance, a larger 

one not only produces a higher resistive loss, but can also build up larger QFLS inside the 

device, which inevitably leads to higher recombination losses. Thus, simply calculating each 

loss in terms of power consumption (e.g., at maximum power point) cannot provide useful 

information. To separate the impact of each loss mechanism, we evaluate the power conversion 

efficiency (PCE) gains by excluding one specific loss pathway at a time. Figure 2 depicts the 

results of loss analysis by both DD and MD models, where we individually exclude bulk SRH 

recombination, interface SRH recombination, shunt resistance, and series resistance to calculate 

the corresponding PCE gains. Moreover, to clearly present the results that indicate the relative 

importance of each loss pathway, the PCE gains are normalized to unity. The details of such 

calculation are provided in Supplementary Note 3. In Fig. 2(a), under 1 Sun irradiance, the 

normalized PCE gain predicted by the MD model shows some noticeable errors with respect to 

the DD simulation results. In fact, these errors are quite small before normalization. For 

example, the absolute PCE gain by excluding the bulk SRH recombination is 0.55% in the DD 

Figure 2. Loss analysis using both drift-diffusion simulation (DD) and modified diode (MD) model for (a)

1 Sun irradiance and (b) 50 Suns irradiance. The impact of each loss pathway is illustrated in terms of the 

normalized PCE gain, which is determined by the PCE gain excluding that loss. 


 
 

9 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

model and 0.40% in the MD model; the absolute PCE gain by excluding the interface SRH 

recombination is 1.66% in the DD model and 1.47% in the MD model. Therefore, we can still 

use the MD model to predict the PCE gain with confidence, and the major reason to use 

normalized data is to show their relative importance. Besides, the origin of these errors is 

traceable. As listed in Fig. 1, the MD model tends to retrieve a slightly larger value of 𝑅!, which 

can lead to a small overestimation of PCE gain by excluding 𝑅!. Likewise, having a slightly 

larger 𝑅!  during calculation can in turn underestimate the PCE gains by excluding other 

recombination pathways. We also notice that the PCE gain due to excluding 𝑅!# is only visible 

in the MD model. As analyzed previously, the shunt resistance describes the recombination 

currents in the low-voltage region, which is different from the external shunt resistance in the 

DD simulations that models the current leakage; thereby, excluding 𝑅!# in the MD model in 

effect excludes that certain amount of recombination, leading to the efficiency gain. Despite 

such an error, we should still keep track of the shunt resistance because, in some devices where 

current leakage is severe, the PCE gain calculated by the MD model can produce consistent 

results. An example is shown in Fig. S2 where a small 𝑅!# of 100 Ω ∙ cm1 is introduced into 

the simulation for modeling current leakage; in this case, the shunt current described by the MD 

model corresponds exactly to the current leakage. Figure 2(b) depicts the normalized PCE gain 

under 50 Suns irradiance. The results show very small errors compared to the 1 Sun case, 

meaning that the MD model accurately determines the relative importance of each loss pathway. 

Importantly, for both irradiances, the crucial information of the efficiency limiting factors, in a 

relative or absolute manner, is successfully predicted by the MD model. Therefore, the MD 

model is capable of providing valuable design guidance towards higher efficiency devices, for 

both 1 Sun and high irradiance applications. 

There is one more parameter in the MD model, 𝑛-0

-/ , which requires further scrutiny. 

Normally, the ideality factor of a photovoltaic device is determined by the Suns-𝑉45 method 

rather than curve fitting[14,15,17]. These two methods can give distinct values of ideality factors 

for the same device. Here, we explore the physics behind the ideality factor retrieved by curve 

fitting, which turns out to be an important reason why the MD model performs as expected. In 

the MD model and other circuit models, the ideality factor is given as a voltage-independent 

parameter. The curve-fitting process picks up the value for the ideality factor such that the 

recombination current of the exponential form fits the simulated recombination current. With 

this notion, we can calculate the differential ideality factor for each simulated recombination 

current by perceiving them as Eq. (2-3) at every data point. Namely, for the entire 𝐽𝑉 curve, the 

recombination current is assumed to have the form 


 
 

10 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

𝐽$65 = 𝐽4 exp H𝑞(𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!)

𝑛-0𝑘.𝑇
I ,
(4) 

where 𝐽$65 denotes the recombination current density of any type, 𝐽4 is the dark current density, 

and 𝑛-0 is the ideality factor. Though such perception is not accurate in the low voltage region 

where the carrier concentration is not predominated by voltage injection, the fitting results in 

Fig. 1 indicate that the exponential region is of most relevance to the recombination currents in 

the MD model, whereas 𝑅!# describes the low-voltage region recombination. This also suggests 

that so long as the ideality factor in the exponential region is not a strongly voltage-dependent 

parameter, we can retrieve a constant value of the ideality factor that reflects the average 

information of the exponential growth. Based on the previous studies[14,15,17], we additionally 

take series resistance into account to calculate the phenomenological differential ideality factor, 

𝑛-0 =
𝑞

𝑘.𝑇 3𝑑 ln 𝐽$65

𝑑𝑉
8

73

31 − 𝑑𝐽$65

𝑑𝑉 𝑅!8 .
(5) 

The detailed derivation is given in Supplementary Note 4. With Eq. (5), we can calculate 𝑛-0 

as a function of applied voltage for both interface and bulk SRH recombination currents, for 

the same device under 1 Sun illumination. Figure 3 depicts the 𝑛-0 for each simulated SRH 

recombination current (as those shown in Fig. 1(d)), in addition to the ideality factor determined 

by the Suns-𝑉45 method. In agreement with the above analysis, the retrieved value of 𝑛-0

-/, 1.533, 

which is slightly greater than the minimum differential ideality factor, lies in the exponential 

region of the 𝐽𝑉 curve, capturing the average information of the exponentially increasing 

recombination currents. Further, we reduce the interface recombination velocity to 1 cm/s, in 

order to simulate a device where bulk SRH recombination predominates. As shown in Fig. 3(b), 

Figure 3. Ideality factor as a function of voltage calculated by both Suns-𝑉!" method and Eq. (5). (a) The 

analyzed device has parameters listed in Table S1, inside of which the interface SRH recombination 

predominates. (b) The same device but with reduced interface recombination velocity (𝑆#$ = 1 cm/s) is 

analyzed, inside of which the bulk SRH recombination predominates. 


 
 

11 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

the corresponding ideality factor for the bulk SRH recombination current turns out to be very 

close to 2 in the exponential region, justifying our approach to using a fixed ideality factor for 

bulk SRH recombination current. There are two reasons that underline the emergence of this 

constant ideality factor: 1) In the exponential region, the carriers in the bulk of the perovskite 

are predominated by electrical injection, whose product follows an exponential increase with 

QFLS according to the Boltzmann statistics, i.e., 𝑛𝑝 = 𝑛-

1 exp(QFLS/𝑘.𝑇) . 2) With more 

carriers injected by increasing voltage, the electrons and holes tend to establish charge neutrality 

in the perovskite bulk, i.e., 𝑛 = 𝑝. This can be explained by the decrease in Debye length, 𝐿8 =

U𝜀𝑘.𝑇/𝑞1𝑛, which reflects the ability of carriers to screen out net charge and establish charge 

neutrality[35]. The higher the concentration of carriers, the shorter the Debye length and the 

better the balance in electron and hole concentrations. Such balance, combined with the carrier 

statistics, allows us to reduce the bulk SRH recombination current to a simpler form where the 

ideality factor is 2 (Supplementary Note 2). Besides, in both Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(b), we notice 

that the differential ideality factor of the predominant recombination current is greater than that 

obtained by the Suns-𝑉45 method, which is attributed to finite carrier mobilities and resistive 

effects in the literature[15,17]. Therefore, the above analysis shows that the retrieved ideality 

factor by curve fitting has a clear physical meaning related to how recombination currents grow 

in an average sense, and the discrepancy between the values in our work and those in the 

literature14 is reasonable since those values are derived from the Suns-𝑉45 method. 

2.3. Accuracy Evaluation 

In general cases, perovskite photovoltaics can have various parameters, different material 

compositions, and even distinct device structures such as nip type. In order to evaluate the 

performance of the MD model applied to general cases, we introduce a cost function that adds 

up a particular form of residuals, 

𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 = [

|𝐽88 − 𝐽98.| + |𝐽88

$65 − 𝐽98.

$65 |

𝑁 × 𝐽"#

:

-;3

,
(6) 

where 𝐽88 and 𝐽98. are the output current densities, 𝐽88

$65 and 𝐽98.

$65  are the SRH recombination 

current densities, and N is the number of data points. The subscripts, DD and MD, denote that 

the current density is either from DD simulation or calculated by MD model. We use this cost 

function for three reasons. First, the raw residual, |𝐽88 − 𝐽98.|, is included because this directly 

reflects how well the fitting result is. Second, given that the SRH recombination currents 

predominate in the cases we consider, the errors introduced by these currents, |𝐽88

$65 − 𝐽98.

$65 |, 

should be taken into account, and other recombination currents are neglected. Third, the errors 

are weighted to the photocurrent, 𝐽"#, such that the cost is normalized with respect to the 


 
 

12 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

irradiance. With these considerations, the cost function weighs the evaluation metric of major 

concern, i.e., how accurate the MD model describes the SRH recombination currents and output 

current in comparison to DD simulations: the smaller the cost function, the better the MD model 

performs. 

In simulations, numerous parameters can be varied to produce 𝐽𝑉 curves that exhibit different 

features. Out of these parameters, we mostly care about those that are directly related to 

recombination and resistances; therefore, we modify bulk SRH recombination lifetime, 

interface SRH recombination velocity, series resistance, and shunt resistance to evaluate the 

MD model via the cost function. To clearly visualize the cost function, we vary two simulation 

parameters simultaneously, avoiding high dimensional data. We perform the evaluation 

procedures as follows. First, starting from the device analyzed in the previous sections, 

simulation parameters are modified in broad ranges that cover most of the practical cases. For 

example, the bulk SRH recombination lifetime varies from nanoseconds to microseconds, 

corresponding to the bad and good bulk layers that can be possibly made in practice. Besides, 

parameters are varied in a nested way such that the interactive impact of both parameters on the 

cost function can be assessed. Second, each 𝐽𝑉 curve simulated in the first step is then analyzed 

by the MD model, retrieving the values for lumped circuit parameters. Finally, using the 

retrieved parameters, we can calculate cost functions for each combination of simulation 

parameters. 

Figure 4 illustrates the contour plot of cost as a function of bulk SRH recombination lifetime 

and interface SRH recombination velocity for devices under 1 Sun and 50 Suns illumination. 

The device parameters are consistent with those in Table S1, except that the perovskite layer 

Figure 4. Contour plots of cost as a function of bulk SRH recombination lifetime and interface SRH 

recombination velocity for (a) 1 Sun irradiance and (b) 50 Suns irradiance. The cost function evaluates the 

accuracy of the MD model in describing the SRH recombination currents and the output current in 

comparison to DD simulations. A small value of the cost function indicates high accuracy. 


 
 

13 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

thickness is 760 nm (close to the measured thickness of our lab-produced device in the next 

section). Having examined case by case, we notice that a cost function lower than 0.15 for 1 

Sun irradiance and 0.2 for 50 Suns irradiance always indicates good fitting, where the 

predominant recombination current density falls in the close proximity of the simulated one in 

the exponential region. Therefore, these two values are chosen as the lower bounds of the cost 

function in Fig. 4, serving as the benchmark values to discern the goodness of fitting results. 

For reference, the cost function for the device in Fig. 1 is 0.02 under 1 Sun irradiance, and 0.06 

under 50 Suns irradiance, representing very good fitting. 

In Fig. 4(a), there are two noticeable trends worth discussing. 1) First, increasing the interface 

SRH recombination velocity to a very high level can lead to a slight increase in the cost function. 

This trend, evidenced by the fitting results in Fig. S3, is associated with the shunt resistance in 

the MD model. As mentioned previously, the shunt resistance takes on the role of describing 

recombination currents that are non-exponential in the low-voltage region. When SRH 

recombination is severe, the retrieved shunt resistance can be greatly reduced, but a shunt 

resistance with a fixed value cannot perfectly describe the variation in current density in the 

low-voltage region, thus introducing errors into the model. 2) The second trend is that 

diminishing bulk SRH recombination lifetime to the order of several nanoseconds increases the 

cost function dramatically. This trend is related to the way we use the MD model where the 

bulk SRH recombination current has a fixed coefficient and a fixed ideality factor. In a device 

with severe bulk SRH recombination, the open circuit voltage can drop below a certain level 

such that the voltage-injected carrier concentrations in the bulk cannot sustain charge neutrality. 

Therefore, using a fixed ideality factor of 2, which results from equal carrier concentrations, 

can make retrieved parameters deviate from their actual values, thereby increasing the cost 

function. In Fig. S4, we can see that for a device with a bulk SRH recombination lifetime of 10 

ns, the bulk SRH recombination current calculated by the MD model does not closely follow 

the simulated one, thereby introducing errors in the exponential region. Besides, the shunt 

resistance accounts for part of the recombination current that further introduces errors in the 

low-voltage region, as in the case where interface SRH recombination is severe. 

For the same reasons, similar trends can be observed for the same device under 50 Suns 

irradiance, as shown in Fig. 4(b), except that the variation in the cost function is less uniform 

and the range for good fitting is larger. Thus, it is possible to retrieve accurate parameters even 

with a very low bulk SRH recombination lifetime, so long as 𝐽𝑉  curves under various 

irradiances (e.g., 50 Suns) are available. Besides, in Fig. S3 and S4, we notice that although the 

cost function is large in the case of severe SRH recombination, if we attribute the shunt current 


 
 

14 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

to the predominant recombination current, the loss analysis can be more accurate. Moreover, 

the accuracy of parameters retrieved under various irradiances can be different, which suggests 

a way of validating the accuracy of parameters by applying the MD model to the same device 

under various irradiances: if parameters retrieved under different irradiances are close or equal, 

then it is more likely that the fitting results are accurate. 

Next, we study the impact of resistances on the cost function. Figure S5(a-b) illustrates the 

contour plot of cost as a function of series resistance and shunt resistance for devices under 1 

Sun and 50 Suns illumination. Notably, the cost function at 1 Sun irradiance is uniformly lower 

than 0.03, indicating that the accuracy of the MD model is unrelated to the values of resistances. 

Under 50 Suns illumination, however, cost functions with high values (around 0.9) exhibit a 

patterned distribution when series resistance is large. These outliers, examined by individual 

fitting, turn out to be resultant from inappropriate initial guesses. In Fig. S5(c), we apply the 

MD model using two different sets of initial guesses for the same device that has a series 

resistance of 10 Ω ∙ cm1 and a shunt resistance of 1000 Ω ∙ cm1 under 50 Suns irradiance; the 

cost function is 0.896 for the first set of initial guesses with apparently inaccurate fitting results, 

while the cost function is 0.039 for the other set of initial guesses with very accurate fitting 

results. Such a phenomenon occurs because the algorithm can get stuck at the local minimum, 

suggesting that a randomized set of initial guesses can be used in order to avoid the local 

minimum and achieve good fitting. This feature can be easily incorporated into the model via 

several times of fitting with randomized initial guesses, in which the fitting result with the least 

residual can be selected as the final result. Furthermore, since irradiance may affect the accuracy 

of fitting, we can use the parameters retrieved from a specific irradiance that is accurate as the 

initial guess for fitting under other irradiances. We adopt this strategy by using the series 

resistance retrieved under 1 Sun as the initial guess for fitting under 50 Suns. The result is 

shown in Fig. S5(d), where the cost function for all resistance values under consideration is 

uniformly below 0.07. Therefore, we can conclude that the values of resistances do not have an 

impact on the accuracy of the MD model. 

In sum, the MD model can discern and quantify different loss pathways in most of the 

practical cases, whose accuracy is associated with both interface and bulk SRH recombination. 

Two special cases, where fitting results can be erroneous, require further interpretation. First, 

in the case where bulk SRH recombination lifetime is on the order of several nanoseconds or 

worse, the fitting errors can be significant, and we should directly conclude from the TRPL 

results that the bulk of the absorption layer needs to be optimized first. Second, when interface 

SRH recombination is severe, with a good bulk layer and negligible current leakage, a large 


 
 

15 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

fitting error in the low-voltage region may be introduced because the usage of a fixed 𝑅!# that 

in part takes on the role of describing recombination currents. In this case, we should attribute 

the loss due to shunt resistance in the MD model to interface SRH recombination so that the 

loss analysis can be more accurate. With the knowledge gained from the above analysis, in the 

following section, we apply the MD model to our lab-produced devices and quantify the 

corresponding losses in each case. The results give us useful information on the losses in our 

devices, which in turn validates the effectiveness of this approach. 

3. Experiments 

Before analyzing our experimental results, it is necessary to discuss the ion migration that 

gives rise to hysteresis in many perovskite devices. The mobile ions in the perovskite absorber 

can lead to an extra complication in interpreting the results obtained by the MD model. 

Although the well-established DD simulator (SCAPS-1D) is widely used in the literature to 

study perovskite photovoltaics[7,14,36–38], it does not incorporate the mobile ions in the perovskite 

layer. To investigate the performance of the MD model in the presence of mobile ions, we 

simulated two sets of steady-state 𝐽𝑉 curves incorporating mobile ions with SolarDesign[39] and 

IonMonger[40]. The reason for studying steady-state 𝐽𝑉 curves is that the effect of ions in steady 

states is unchanged and the practical performance of photovoltaics is evaluated at steady-state 

maximum power points. The device parameters and simulation details are given in 

Supplementary Note 2. In the first set of results, bulk SRH recombination is the predominant 

loss pathway. As shown in Fig. S6, the impact of ions on the steady-state 𝐽𝑉 curves has a 

negative correlation with the bulk SRH recombination lifetime, which is consistent with the 

trend in Fig. 4, suggesting the broad applicability of the MD model. However, the perceptible 

differences, though being small for large bulk SRH recombination lifetime, raise concern 

regarding the accuracy of describing bulk SRH recombination by Eq. (2), which is a function 

of QFLS and relies on charge neutrality. Accounting for mobile ions, the electric field in the 

device can be modified by an inhomogeneous distribution of ionic charges, potentially affecting 

charge neutrality via the redistribution of electrons and holes. Fortunately, the ionic charges 

tend to accumulate at the interfaces, resulting in the field screening effect[41,42] such that the 

carriers inside distribute even more freely, thereby enhancing charge neutrality. Figure S7 

illustrates the ionic and electronic distributions and the corresponding band diagrams, which 

can be used to analyze device performance in the presence of ions. At thermal equilibrium, the 

ions (and the vacancies) accumulate at the perovskite-transport-layer interfaces, resulting in 

band bending at the interfaces and band flattening in the perovskite bulk. From the perspective 

of classical pn-junction theory[43], the accumulated charges at the interfaces form two depletion 


 
 

16 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

regions. Upon illumination, the depletion regions shrink immediately and part of the ionic 

charges are screened by the carriers, which will then diffuse into the perovskite bulk. This ionic 

diffusion process semibounds the carriers, leading to a decrease in transient currents. After 

sufficient illumination time, the ionic and electronic charges will reach a steady state with fewer 

interfacial ions. Under high irradiances or large applied voltages, the electronic charges prevail 

in the device, and the impact of ion accumulation on carrier distributions in steady states is thus 

smaller[43]. Moreover, the MD model captures the dynamics of recombination currents in the 

exponential region (where the applied voltage is large), suggesting that the MD model can be 

applied to steady-state 𝐽𝑉  curves effectively. As shown in Fig. S8(a), the predominant 

recombination current computed by the MD model can follow the simulated result in the 

exponential region. Such consistency suggests that in the presence of ions (accumulating at the 

interfaces), QLFS still has the exponential form of 𝑞(𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!), which is confirmed by the 

energy level diagrams shown in Fig. S8(c-d) and the charge distribution diagrams shown in Fig. 

S9. The second set of results is simulated for the device with predominant interface SRH 

recombination. As shown in Fig. S10, the impact of ions on the steady-state 𝐽𝑉 curves depends 

on the SRH recombination velocities at the interfaces. The ions may increase or decrease the 

steady-state performance, depending on the properties of transport layers[44]. In both cases, the 

MD model can accurately capture the predominant loss current (as shown in Fig. S8(b)), 

because Eq. (3) has a variable ideality factor. Therefore, the trend in Fig. 4 can be used as the 

accuracy indicator for the MD model applying to steady-state 𝐽𝑉 curves, showing where the 

losses can be analyzed effectively. Moreover, with the development of fabrication technology, 

perovskite photovoltaics that are less affected by ions[45] are expected to lead future research 

and promote the commercialization of perovskite photovoltaics[46]. 

To explore the capability of the MD model in practice, we apply it to two types of devices 

that both use Cs0.05FA0.95PbI3 as the active layer composition, but are made in different 

conditions. The perovskite layer of Device 1 was prepared in ambient air with a humidity of 

60%, while Device 2 was made in the N2 glove box with standard procedure. Both devices are 

of pin type shown in Fig. S11 and the fabrication details are specified in Supplementary Note 

5. Figure 5 depicts the measured 𝐽𝑉 curves for both devices under AM 1.5G illumination with 

a sampling rate of 5 NPLCs and 100 data points per scan (NPLC, number of power line cycles, 

is the unit that Keithley source meters use to specify scanning rates; the sampling method we 

adopted corresponds to a scanning rate of ~0.1 V/s). Noticeably, the 𝐽𝑉  curves only show 

negligible hysteresis, indicating that the operating points are close to their steady states. To 

verify this, we additionally measured a set of steady-state current density values by holding the 


 
 

17 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

voltage at fixed levels for ~60 seconds and sampling at the same rate of 5 NPLCs. The range 

and average values of the recorded steady-state data points are given in Fig. S12, which are in 

close proximity to the forward and reverse 𝐽𝑉 curves. Also, for both devices during steady-state 

measurement, we notice that the current density only fluctuates within a small range, rather than 

shifting towards higher or lower values. Therefore, the forward and reverse 𝐽𝑉 curves are close 

to the steady states, and in what follows, we apply the MD model to both forward and reverse 

𝐽𝑉 curves, analyzing the underlying losses in these devices. 

In order to describe the bulk SRH recombination current in Eq. (2), we measure the active 

layer thickness, the bulk SRH recombination lifetime (for describing 𝛾)*+,), and the bandgap 

of the active layer (for estimating 𝑛-). The active layer thickness is ~750 nm for both devices, 

measured by a step profiler (Supplementary Note 5). As shown in Fig. S13, the bandgaps of 

perovskite in both devices are ~1.55 eV, measured by an ultraviolet-visible spectrometer. From 

TRPL results (Fig. S14), the bulk SRH recombination lifetime is 21 ns for Device 1, and 398 

ns for Device 2. With all these data, we apply the MD model to both devices, retrieving the 

values for lumped parameters, then calculating the corresponding 𝐽𝑉 curves and quantifying 

losses in terms of normalized PCE gain shown in Fig. 5. 

Figure 5. (a-c) Current density‑voltage relations of our lab-produced perovskite photovoltaics (Device 1, 

Device 2, and Device 2 with passivated interface). The MD model fitted 𝐽𝑉 curves are also depicted in the 

corresponding figures, with retrieved parameters listed in the inset table for both forward- and reverse-scan 

𝐽𝑉 curves. (d-f) Normalized PCE gains for each loss pathway, calculated based on the retrieved MD model 

parameters. 


 
 

18 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

Since in terms of recombination lifetime, Device 2 has a ~20 times better perovskite bulk 

layer than Device 1, it is expected that the analysis via the MD model can lead to some 

differences in loss quantification. As can be observed, in Fig. 5(a), the fitted 𝐽𝑉 curves for 

Device 1 deviate slightly from the measured ones at the voltages where the exponential tail 

starts, and Fig. 5(d) shows that the bulk SRH recombination is the predominant loss pathway 

in terms of normalized PCE gain. On the contrary, the fitting errors are extremely small for 

Device 2 in both scan directions, and the loss quantification in Fig. 5(e) shows that the interface 

SRH recombination loss dominates. These results are consistent with the simulation results in 

Fig. 4, where devices with severer bulk SRH recombination can have greater fitting errors. The 

results also show that the differences in recombination lifetime can be successfully translated 

into the differences in loss quantification via the MD model, indicating that the MD model is 

capable of discerning and quantifying losses in perovskite photovoltaics in practice. Moreover, 

the MD model provides us with the guidance on optimizing the device: the PCE of Device 1 

can be greatly improved by diminishing the bulk SRH recombination, which is already 

accounted for in Device 2; on the other hand, to improve the PCE of Device 2, the most effective 

strategy is to passivate the interfaces. Following this guidance, we passivate the perovskite/BCP 

interface of Device 2 with n-octylammonium iodide (OAI), to further examine the performance 

of the MD model. The 𝐽𝑉 curves of the interface-passivated Device 2 are shown in Fig. 5(c), 

which, compared with those of non-passivated Device 2, have a slight increase in open-circuit 

voltage (~0.05 V) and short-circuit current density (~0.4 mA/cm2). In Fig. 5(f), these slight 

differences translate into a significant boost of bulk SRH recombination loss and a decrease in 

interface SRH recombination loss, meaning that the predominant loss pathway shifts from 

interface SRH recombination to bulk SRH recombination. This phenomenon reveals that using 

(OAI) is an effective way of passivating the perovskite/BCP interface if the MD model is 

accurate, and since the strategy of passivation using organic onium salts is validated in many 

literatures[47–49], this in turn corroborates the effectiveness of the MD model applied in practical 

devices. 

Next, to evaluate the high irradiance performance of the MD model, we measure the 𝐽𝑉 

curves for Device 2 under irradiances up to 5 W/cm1 (50 Suns), and apply the MD model to 

these 𝐽𝑉 curves. The light source is a 760 nm diode laser, whose power is measured by an 

integrating sphere photodiode power sensor (Thorlabs S142C), and the sampling rate is still 

fixed at 5 NPLCs. The fitting results are shown in Fig. 6(a-f) and the retrieved lumped parameter 

values are listed in Table S2. It is significant that the fitting results are quite accurate for all 

these irradiance levels, which strongly indicates that the MD model captures the behaviors of 


 
 

19 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

the devices under high irradiances and ionic effects are indeed negligible in this device. Besides, 

we notice that: 1) The retrieved values for series resistance are of the same level (~0.4 Ω ∙ cm1). 

As discussed previously, such consistency indicates the accuracy of the fitting results. 2) Fitting 

errors at short circuit are slightly growing with increasing irradiance. In line with the simulation 

results shown in Fig. S3, these growing errors are introduced due to the usage of a fixed 𝑅!# in 

the MD model, which in part takes on the role of describing recombination currents in the low-

voltage region. With increasing irradiance, the recombination currents in the low-voltage region 

become more pronounced, and thus, a fixed 𝑅!# cannot fully capture such dynamics. This 

inconsistency also corroborates the fact that, in this device, the current leakage is negligible and 

the loss due to 𝑅!# in the MD model should be attributed to the predominant recombination 

loss. Figure 6(g) shows the normalized PCE gains for each loss pathway at different irradiance 

Figure 6. (a-f) Current density‑voltage relations of Device 2 under laser (760 nm) irradiances from 

0.1 W/cm% to 5 W/cm%. The MD model fitted 𝐽𝑉 curves are also depicted in the corresponding figures. (g)

The normalized PCE gain of each loss pathway as a function of laser irradiance. 


 
 

20 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

levels. The losses due to interface SRH recombination and series resistance are the two major 

competing loss pathways in this device. Below 2 W/cm1  (20 Suns), the interface SRH 

recombination is the predominant loss; with increasing irradiance, the series resistance 

gradually becomes predominant. This is consistent with the results in the simulation study 

shown in Fig. 2, and the reason why series resistance loss becomes predominant can be 

understood with the MD model from another perspective: in terms of power density, the loss 

due to 𝑅! can be directly calculated by 𝐽1𝑅! as per Joule’s law, where the current density, 𝐽, 

approximately scales linearly with irradiance; therefore, the power loss due to 𝑅!  has a 

quadratic growth rate with respect to irradiance, which will take a larger proportion under 

higher irradiances. 

To sum up, in this section, the experimental study demonstrates that the MD model is capable 

of discerning and quantifying electrical losses in perovskite devices, for both 1 Sun and high 

irradiance applications. Notably, the details of fitting results are consistent with those in the 

simulation studies, which further validates the effectiveness of this approach. 

4. Guidelines for Applying the MD Model 

For reference, we summarize the procedures that we use to analyze the devices in this paper 

as a set of guidelines. With the following steps, one can use the MD model to quantify and 

analyze the losses in perovskite photovoltaics: 

1) Measure the 𝑱𝑽 curve of the device. The MD model is expected to be performant when 

applied to steady-state 𝐽𝑉 curves even in the presence of mobile ions. Thus, the scanning 

rate during measurement should be low enough for the completion of ionic motions, or a 

set of stabilized currents at fixed voltages (SCFV) can be measured to directly produce the 

steady-state 𝐽𝑉 curve[50]. 

2) Measure the necessary parameters for describing bulk SRH recombination. To 

properly describe the bulk SRH recombination current in Eq. (2), the active layer thickness, 

the bulk SRH recombination lifetime (for describing 𝛾)*+,), and the active layer bandgap 

(for estimating 𝑛-) need to be measured. 

3) Apply the MD model to the JV curves measured in Step 1 with the parameters 

measured in Step 2. For convenience, one can directly use our MATLAB implementation 

to apply the MD model, which is open-source online[31]. 

4) Quantify the losses in terms of normalized PCE gain. The effect of a loss mechanism in 

a complete device under operational conditions can be quantified by a specific indicator 

such as the normalized PCE gain proposed in this paper. One can also devise other 

indicators, so long as the dependence among different losses is taken into account. After 


 
 

21 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

pinpointing the predominant loss pathway, one can refer to Table S4 to devise 

corresponding optimization strategies. 

5) Interpret the results if the fitting error is large. There are several cases that can cause a 

large fitting error. First, if the bulk SRH recombination lifetime is on the order of several 

nanoseconds or worse, the fitting error may be large; in this case, we should conclude from 

the TRPL results that the bulk of the absorption layer needs to be optimized first. Second, 

in the case of severe interface SRH recombination or high irradiance, with a good bulk layer 

and negligible current leakage, a large fitting error in the low-voltage region may be 

introduced because the usage of a fixed 𝑅!# that in part takes on the role of describing 

recombination currents; despite the error, the fitting results in the exponential region are 

accurate (as in Fig. 6), so the retrieved parameters can still be used to analyze losses. Third, 

a large error can be introduced if the algorithm used by the MD model gets stuck at local 

minimums with inappropriate initial conditions. One can use a randomized set of initial 

guesses to obtain the results with the minimum error. The causes of large fitting error and 

the corresponding solutions are summaried in Tabls S5. 

5. Future Research 

As a circuit model that can accurately quantify electrical losses, the MD model can be 

generalized or included in a larger framework, in order to solve different problems. Here, we 

list three potential research topics where the MD model can play an important role: 

1) The MD model can be coupled with an optical model such as the transfer matrix method to 

extend the analysis that includes optical loss. Since the MD model can accurately quantify 

electrical losses, the accuracy of the overall loss analysis can be improved. 

2) The MD model itself can be generalized to other photovoltaic technologies where two 

competing recombination processes are entangled, so long as the characteristic of one 

process can be identified by experimental techniques. 

3) The MD model can be applied as the elementary component in a distributed circuit 

model[51,52] so as to analyze two-dimensional effects, such as non-uniform illumination, 

distributed resistance, and so forth. 

6. Conclusion 

In this work, the MD is proposed to quantify bulk/interface defect-assisted recombination 

and series/shunt resistive losses. Combined simulation and experimental studies show that in 

most practical cases, the MD model can accurately quantify all the aforementioned losses, and 

in some special cases including severe bulk or interface SRH recombination, it is possible to 

pinpoint the predominant loss pathway. Moreover, at higher irradiances, the MD model also 


 
 

22 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

demonstrates good performance with high accuracy in both simulation and experimental studies, 

which makes it feasible for evaluating photovoltaics in applications such as concentrators and 

optical wireless power transfer. Finally, we provide a set of guidelines for applying the MD 

model and interpreting the results. We make the source code freely available online, which will 

hopefully facilitate the design of efficiency-targeted optimization strategies for researchers in 

this field. 

 

Supporting Information 

Supporting Information is available from xxx 

 

Acknowledgements 

Minshen Lin and Xuehui Xu contributed equally to this work. 

 

References 

[1]  
Jeong, M. et al. (2020). Stable perovskite solar cells with efficiency exceeding 24.8% 

and 0.3-V voltage loss. Science. DOI: 10.1126/science.abb7167. 

[2]  
Bai, S. et al. (2019). Planar perovskite solar cells with long-term stability using ionic 

liquid additives. Nature. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-019-1357-2. 

[3]  
Green, M. et al. (2021). Solar cell efficiency tables (version 57). Progress in 

Photovoltaics: Research and Applications. DOI: 10.1002/pip.3371. 

[4]  
Sha, W.E. et al. (2015). The efficiency limit of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. 

Applied Physics Letters. 

[5]  
Glowienka, D. and Galagan, Y. (2022). Light Intensity Analysis of Photovoltaic 

Parameters for Perovskite Solar Cells. Advanced Materials. DOI: 

10.1002/adma.202105920. 

[6]  
Sha, W.E.I. et al. (2018). Quantifying Efficiency Loss of Perovskite Solar Cells by a 

Modified Detailed Balance Model. Advanced Energy Materials. DOI: 

10.1002/aenm.201701586. 

[7]  
Stolterfoht, M. et al. (2018). Visualization and suppression of interfacial recombination 

for high-efficiency large-area pin perovskite solar cells. Nature Energy. DOI: 

10.1038/s41560-018-0219-8. 

[8]  
Habisreutinger, S.N. et al. (2017). Dopant-Free Planar n–i–p Perovskite Solar Cells 

with Steady-State Efficiencies Exceeding 18%. ACS Energy Letters. DOI: 

10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00028. 


 
 

23 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

[9]  
Chang, J. et al. (2016). Boosting the performance of planar heterojunction perovskite 

solar cell by controlling the precursor purity of perovskite materials. Journal of 

Materials Chemistry A. DOI: 10.1039/C5TA08398B. 

[10]  Krückemeier, L. et al. (2021). Understanding Transient Photoluminescence in Halide 

Perovskite Layer Stacks and Solar Cells. Advanced Energy Materials. DOI: 

10.1002/aenm.202003489. 

[11]  Almora, O. et al. (2018). Discerning recombination mechanisms and ideality factors 

through impedance analysis of high-efficiency perovskite solar cells. Nano Energy. 

DOI: 10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.03.042. 

[12]  Juarez-Perez, E.J. et al. (2014). Role of the Selective Contacts in the Performance of 

Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters. DOI: 

10.1021/jz500059v. 

[13]  Calado, P. et al. (2019). Identifying Dominant Recombination Mechanisms in 

Perovskite Solar Cells by Measuring the Transient Ideality Factor. Physical Review 

Applied. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.11.044005. 

[14]  Caprioglio, P. et al. (2020). On the Origin of the Ideality Factor in Perovskite Solar 

Cells. Advanced Energy Materials. DOI: 10.1002/aenm.202000502. 

[15]  Tress, W. et al. (2018). Interpretation and evolution of open-circuit voltage, 

recombination, ideality factor and subgap defect states during reversible light-soaking 

and irreversible degradation of perovskite solar cells. Energy & Environmental Science. 

DOI: 10.1039/C7EE02415K. 

[16]  Wetzelaer, G.A.H. et al. (2011). Origin of the dark-current ideality factor in 

polymer:fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells. Applied Physics Letters. DOI: 

10.1063/1.3651752. 

[17]  Kirchartz, T. et al. (2013). On the Differences between Dark and Light Ideality Factor 

in Polymer:Fullerene Solar Cells. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters. DOI: 

10.1021/jz4012146. 

[18]  Agarwal, S. et al. (2014). On the Uniqueness of Ideality Factor and Voltage Exponent 

of Perovskite-Based Solar Cells. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters. DOI: 

10.1021/jz5021636. 

[19]  Sherkar, T.S. et al. (2017). Improving Perovskite Solar Cells: Insights From a Validated 

Device Model. Advanced Energy Materials. DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201602432. 

[20]  Da, Y. et al. (2018). Quantifying energy losses in planar perovskite solar cells. Solar 

Energy Materials and Solar Cells. DOI: 10.1016/j.solmat.2017.09.002. 


 
 

24 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

[21]  Ren, X. et al. (2017). Exploring the Way To Approach the Efficiency Limit of 

Perovskite Solar Cells by Drift-Diffusion Model. ACS Photonics. DOI: 

10.1021/acsphotonics.6b01043. 

[22]  Courtier, N.E. (2020). Interpreting Ideality Factors for Planar Perovskite Solar Cells: 

Ectypal Diode Theory for Steady-State Operation. Physical Review Applied. DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevApplied.14.024031. 

[23]  Moia, D. et al. (2019). Ionic-to-electronic current amplification in hybrid perovskite 

solar cells: ionically gated transistor-interface circuit model explains hysteresis and 

impedance of mixed conducting devices. Energy & Environmental Science. DOI: 

10.1039/C8EE02362J. 

[24]  Ishaque, K. et al. (2011). Simple, fast and accurate two-diode model for photovoltaic 

modules. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells. DOI: 10.1016/j.solmat.2010.09.023. 

[25]  Chenni, R. et al. (2007). A detailed modeling method for photovoltaic cells. Energy. 

DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2006.12.006. 

[26]  Lin, Q. et al. (2017). Considerations for Upscaling of Organohalide Perovskite Solar 

Cells. Advanced Optical Materials. DOI: 10.1002/adom.201600819. 

[27]  Wang, Z. et al. (2018). High irradiance performance of metal halide perovskites for 

concentrator photovoltaics. Nature Energy. DOI: 10.1038/s41560-018-0220-2. 

[28]  Lin, Q. et al. (2018). Hybrid Perovskites: Prospects for Concentrator Solar Cells. 

Advanced Science. DOI: 10.1002/advs.201700792. 

[29]  Nguyen, D.H. et al. (2021). Toward Thing-to-Thing Optical Wireless Power Transfer: 

Metal Halide Perovskite Transceiver as an Enabler. Frontiers in Energy Research. 

[30]  Ishikawa, R. et al. (2020). Widegap CH3NH3PbBr3 solar cells for optical wireless 

power transmission application. Applied Physics Letters. DOI: 10.1063/5.0010009. 

[31]   Modified Diode Model, https://github.com/WPT-Lab124/Modified-Diode-Model. 

[32]  Burgelman, M. et al. (2000). Modelling polycrystalline semiconductor solar cells. Thin 

Solid Films. DOI: 10.1016/S0040-6090(99)00825-1. 

[33]  Marquardt, D.W. (1963). An Algorithm for Least-Squares Estimation of Nonlinear 

Parameters. Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. DOI: 

10.1137/0111030. 

[34]  Levenberg, K. (1944). A Method for the Solution of Certain Non-Linear Problems in 

Least Squares. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics. 

[35]  Alamo, J.A. del (2017). Integrated Microelectronic Devices: Physics and Modeling 1st 

Edition, Pearson. 


 
 

25 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

[36]  Wolff, C.M. et al. (2021). Orders of Recombination in Complete Perovskite Solar Cells 

– Linking Time-Resolved and Steady-State Measurements. Advanced Energy 

Materials. DOI: 10.1002/aenm.202101823. 

[37]  Stolterfoht, M. et al. (2019). The impact of energy alignment and interfacial 

recombination on the internal and external open-circuit voltage of perovskite solar 

cells. Energy & Environmental Science. DOI: 10.1039/C9EE02020A. 

[38]  Caprioglio, P. et al. (2019). On the Relation between the Open-Circuit Voltage and 

Quasi-Fermi Level Splitting in Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells. Advanced Energy 

Materials. DOI: 10.1002/aenm.201901631. 

[39]   SolarDesign. A photovoltaic device simulation and design platform, freely available 

online at solardesign.cn. 

[40]  Courtier, N.E. et al. (2019). IonMonger: a free and fast planar perovskite solar cell 

simulator with coupled ion vacancy and charge carrier dynamics. Journal of 

Computational Electronics. DOI: 10.1007/s10825-019-01396-2. 

[41]  A. Belisle, R. et al. (2017). Interpretation of inverted photocurrent transients in organic 

lead halide perovskite solar cells: proof of the field screening by mobile ions and 

determination of the space charge layer widths. Energy & Environmental Science. DOI: 

10.1039/C6EE02914K. 

[42]  Calado, P. et al. (2016). Evidence for ion migration in hybrid perovskite solar cells with 

minimal hysteresis. Nature Communications. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13831. 

[43]  Lan, D. (2020). The physics of ion migration in perovskite solar cells: Insights into 

hysteresis, device performance, and characterization. Progress in Photovoltaics: 

Research and Applications. DOI: 10.1002/pip.3203. 

[44]  Courtier, N.E. et al. (2019). How transport layer properties affect perovskite solar cell 

performance: insights from a coupled charge transport/ion migration model. Energy & 

Environmental Science. DOI: 10.1039/C8EE01576G. 

[45]  Ighodalo, K.O. et al. (2023). Negligible Ion Migration in Tin-Based and Tin-Doped 

Perovskites. Angewandte Chemie. DOI: 10.1002/ange.202213932. 

[46]  Li, N. et al. (2020). Towards commercialization: the operational stability of perovskite 

solar cells. Chemical Society Reviews. DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00573H. 

[47]  Chiba, T. et al. (2018). Anion-exchange red perovskite quantum dots with ammonium 

iodine salts for highly efficient light-emitting devices. Nature Photonics. DOI: 

10.1038/s41566-018-0260-y. 


 
 

26 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

[48]  Jiang, Q. et al. (2019). Surface passivation of perovskite film for efficient solar cells. 

Nature Photonics. DOI: 10.1038/s41566-019-0398-2. 

[49]  J. Yoo, J. et al. (2019). An interface stabilized perovskite solar cell with high stabilized 

efficiency and low voltage loss. Energy & Environmental Science. DOI: 

10.1039/C9EE00751B. 

[50]  B. Dunbar, R. et al. (2017). How reliable are efficiency measurements of perovskite 

solar cells? The first inter-comparison, between two accredited and eight non-

accredited laboratories. Journal of Materials Chemistry A. DOI: 

10.1039/C7TA05609E. 

[51]  García, I. et al. (2011). Analysis of Chromatic Aberration Effects in Triple-Junction 

Solar Cells Using Advanced Distributed Models. IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics. DOI: 

10.1109/JPHOTOV.2011.2171671. 

[52]  Galiana, B. et al. (2005). A 3-D model for concentrator solar cells based on distributed 

circuit units. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices. DOI: 

10.1109/TED.2005.859620. 

 

 
 


 
 

27 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

Supporting Information  

 

 

Quantifying Nonradiative Recombination and Resistive Losses in 

Perovskite Photovoltaics: A Modified Diode Model Approach 

 

Minshen Lin1, Xuehui Xu2, Hong Tian2, Yang (Michael) Yang2*, Wei E. I. Sha3*, and Wenxing 

Zhong1* 

 

1College of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. 

2State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, Institute for Advanced Photonics, College of 

Optical Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China 

3State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, College of Information Science and Electronic 

Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China 

*Authors to whom correspondence should be addressed: yangyang15@zju.edu.cn, weisha@zju.edu.cn, and 

wxzhong@zju.edu.cn 

 

Note 1. Defect-assisted recombination current from Shockley-Read-Hall model 

The Shockley-Read-Hall model[1] describes the defect-assisted recombination rate as 

𝑈&'( ≈ 𝑛𝑝 − 𝑛-

1

𝜏"𝑛 + 𝜏%𝑝 ,
(S1) 

where 𝜏% and 𝜏" are the respective defect-assisted recombination lifetimes for electrons and 

holes, inversely proportional to the concentration of defect states. As discussed in Section II, 

with higher applied voltage, more carriers are electrically injected into the bulk of the device 

and charge neutrality can gradually establish. This process is also illustrated in Fig. S1, where 

a device with predominant bulk SRH recombination is analyzed in terms of energy level and 

carrier concentration distributions. Moreover, the quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) is equal 

to 𝑞(𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!) in the MD model, and 𝑛𝑝 = 𝑛-

1 exp(QFLS/𝑘.𝑇). In this case (𝑛 ≈ 𝑝), Eq. (S1) 

can be simplified to 

𝑈&'( =
𝑛𝑝 − 𝑛-

1

e𝜏" + 𝜏%fU𝑛𝑝

= 𝛾)*+,𝑛- /exp 3𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!

2𝑘.𝑇/𝑞8 − 19 ,
(S2) 

where 𝛾)*+, = 1/(𝜏" + 𝜏%) is the bulk SRH recombination coefficient. Integrating over the 

length of the absorption layer, 𝐿, we have the bulk SRH recombination current density, 


 
 

28 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

𝐽)*+,

&'( = 𝑞𝑈&'(𝐿 = 𝑞𝐿𝛾)*+,𝑛- /exp 3𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!

2𝑘.𝑇/𝑞8 − 19 .
(S3) 

Likewise, the interface SRH recombination at the transport layer/perovskite interface can be 

described by the SRH formulation as 

𝑈&'(

-/
≈ 𝑛7𝑝< − 𝑛-

7𝑛-

<

𝑛7/𝑆" + 𝑝</𝑆%

,
(S4) 

where the superscripts of ±  denote quantities evaluated at either the transport layer or 

perovskite side of the interfaces, and 𝑆%, 𝑆" are electron and hole recombination velocities[2]. 

However, at the interfaces, there is no simple relation between electron and hole densities that 

can be captured for simplifying Eq. (S4); hence, we use Eq. (3) with two undetermined 

parameters to describe the interface recombination current via curve fitting. 

Note 2. Drift diffusion simulations 

To study the performance of the modified diode (MD) model, we use drift-diffusion (DD) 

simulation results as the benchmarks for comparison. We use the well-established DD simulator, 

SCAPS[3], to produce the simulation results without regard to mobile ions. Unless particularly 

specified, the devices in DD simulations have the parameter values listed in Table S1. Besides, 

in the DD simulations, the radiative recombination coefficient is determined in such a way that 

the volumetric radiative recombination current equals the areal radiative recombination current 

calculated by the principle of detailed balance. This setting fulfills the principle of detail balance 

and in the limiting case, the DD simulations can reproduce the detailed balance limits[4]. In the 

course of curve fitting, all the parameters in the MD model are allowed to vary within a broad 

range (from 0 to 1031). 

To investigate the impact of ions on the steady-state performance of perovskite photovoltaics, 

SolarDesign[2] and IonMonger[3] are used to simulate the 𝐽𝑉 curves with varying ionic vacancy 

densities. The device parameters used for simulation are mostly the same as the template 

device[3], except for the parameters associated with bulk and interface SRH recombination, 

which are given in Table S3. 

The details of modeling methods are described as follows. The governing equations of the 

drift-diffusion model without regarding to mobile ions are: 

⎩
⎪
⎨

⎪
⎧ 𝛻 ⋅ (𝜀$𝛻𝜓) = 𝑞(𝑛 − 𝑝),

𝜕𝑛
𝜕𝑡 = 1

𝑞 𝛻 ⋅ 𝐽% + 𝐺 − 𝑅,

𝜕𝑝
𝜕𝑡 = − 1

𝑞 𝛻 ⋅ 𝐽" + 𝐺 − 𝑅,

(S10) 


 
 

29 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

where 𝐽% = −𝑞𝜇%𝑛∇𝜓 + 𝑞𝐷%∇𝑛  and 𝐽" = −𝑞𝜇"𝑝∇𝜓 − 𝑞𝐷"∇𝑝  are the electron and hole 

current densities, respectively. The electron (hole) diffusion coefficient satisfies the Einstein 

relation 𝐷%(") = 𝜇%(")𝑘.𝑇/𝑞  and 𝜇%(")  is the electron (hole) mobility. Furthermore, 𝐺 =

𝐺"# + 𝐺0?$, is the total generation rate, where 𝐺"# is the photon generation and 𝐺0?$, is the 

dark generation at thermal equilibrium. Similarly, 𝑅 = 𝑅$?0 + 𝑅%4%$?0 is the recombination 

rate at non-equilibrium states where 𝑅$?0 is the radiative recombination rate and 𝑅%4%$?0 is the 

non-radiative recombination rate. 

In perovskite photovoltaics, the non-radiative recombination is mainly due to the following 

defect-assisted Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination. The bulk SRH recombination rate 

is given by 

𝑅&'( =
𝑛𝑝

𝜏%(𝑝 + 𝑝@) + 𝜏"(𝑛 + 𝑛@),
(S11) 

where 𝜏% and 𝜏" are the lifetimes of excess electrons and holes, respectively. The trap level 𝐸@ 

in the bandgap is used to compute the densities of electrons and holes with respect to the trap 

level, i.e., 𝑛@ = 𝑁A exp[(𝐸@ − 𝐸A)/𝑘.𝑇]  and 𝑝@ = 𝑁B exp[(𝐸B − 𝐸@)/𝑘.𝑇] . Similarly, the 

SRH recombination fluxes 𝑅&'(

C
 and 𝑅&'(

(
 at the interfaces are given by[3] 

𝑅&'(

C,( =
𝑛7𝑝<

1

𝑣%

C,( (𝑝< + 𝑝@

<) +
1

𝑣"

C,( (𝑛7 + 𝑛@

7)

,
(S11) 

where the superscripts ± denote quantifies evaluated at either the left- or right-hand side of the 

perovskite/transport layer interfaces, respectively. 

To account for mobile ions in the perovskite layer, in Eq. (S10), Poisson’s equation needs to 

be modified to include the immobile cation vacancies 𝑁E and halide ion vacancy density 𝑃; also, 

a continuous equation for ions needs to be added. 

⎩
⎪⎪
⎨

⎪⎪
⎧𝛻 ⋅ (𝜀$𝛻𝜓) = 𝑞(𝑛 − 𝑝 + 𝑁E − 𝑃),

𝜕𝑛
𝜕𝑡 = 1

𝑞 𝛻 ⋅ 𝐽% + 𝐺 − 𝑅,

𝜕𝑝
𝜕𝑡 = − 1

𝑞 𝛻 ⋅ 𝐽" + 𝐺 − 𝑅,

𝜕𝑃
𝜕𝑡 = ∇ ⋅ 𝐹F,

(S12) 

where 𝐹F = 𝐷G∇𝑃 + 𝜇G𝑃∇𝜓 is the flux of ion vacancy density, and 𝐷G and 𝜇G are the ionic 

diffusion coefficient and mobility, respectively. 

Note 3. Loss analysis 


 
 

30 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

To study the impact of each loss pathway on the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 

photovoltaics, we introduce an approach to calculating the normalized PCE gains. As discussed 

in Section 2.2, the influences of each loss are coupled in such a way that reducing one loss can 

give rise to a decrease in the others. We choose the maximum power point (MPP) of the device, 

where the PCE is evaluated, as the point of interest for comparison. Based on the device 

involving all losses at hand, in the DD simulation or the MD model, we exclude each loss 

pathway one at a time and calculate the PCE gains with respect to each loss. In the DD 

simulation, we exclude the loss pathway by making the corresponding simulation parameter 

inactive, while in the MD model, we do this by deleting the corresponding term in Eq. (1): for 

example, we exclude 𝑅! by setting the value of 𝑅! to zero yet keeping others the same, or we 

just delete the term 𝐽&'(

)*+, to exclude the effect of bulk SRH recombination. In this way, we can 

evaluate the impact of each loss, and normalize them as the normalized PCE gain: 

Normalized PCE Gain =
PCE Gain without Loss 𝑖

∑ PCE Gain without Loss 𝑖
-

× 100%.
(S5) 

This indicator can be viewed as a quantity that describes the influence of a loss pathway in 

percentage, which demonstrates their relative importance in a complete device. 

Note 4. Differential ideality factor in the presence of series resistance 

Taking series resistance into account, the recombination current is given by 

𝐽$65 = 𝐽4 exp H𝑞(𝑉 + 𝐽𝑅!)

𝑛-0𝑘.𝑇
I .
(S6) 

Assuming that the ideality factor, 𝑛-0, and the series resistance, 𝑅!, are independent of applied 

voltage (this is consistent with the parameter retrieval process of curve fitting that produces 

voltage-independent parameters), we can find an expression for 𝑛-0 by differentiating the above 

equation with respect to 𝑉, i.e., 

𝑑𝐽$65
𝑑𝑉 = 𝐽$65

𝑞

𝑛-0𝑘.𝑇 31 + 𝑑𝐽

𝑑𝑉 𝑅!8 .
(S7) 

Reordering the terms, we have 

𝑛-0 =
𝑞

𝑘.𝑇 3𝑑 ln 𝐽$65

𝑑𝑉
8

73

31 + 𝑑𝐽

𝑑𝑉 𝑅!8 .
(S8) 

In the exponential region of the 𝐽𝑉 curve, 𝐽$65 is the predominant current density loss such that 

𝑑𝐽/𝑑𝑉 = −𝑑𝐽$65/𝑑𝑉. Thus, we can substitute 𝐽$65 in place of 𝐽, 

𝑛-0 =
𝑞

𝑘.𝑇 3𝑑 ln 𝐽$65

𝑑𝑉
8

73

31 − 𝑑𝐽$65

𝑑𝑉 𝑅!8 .
(S9) 


 
 

31 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

Using Eq. (S9), the calculated 𝑛-0 varies with voltage, and the retrieved value lies in the 

exponential region, close to the minimum differential ideality factor, as shown in Fig. 3. 

Note 5. Device Fabrication and Characterization 

The devices in this paper were made from commercially available products. C60, FAI, PbI2, 

CsI, n-Octylammonium Iodide (OAI), and BCP were purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light 

Technology Corporation. Dimethyl formamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), acetone, 

and chlorobenzene (CB) isopropanol (IPA), were purchased from J&K Scientific. Meo-2PACz 

were purchased from TCI(Shanghai)Development Co., Ltd. ITO substrates (86% transmittance, 

15 Ohm·sq-1) were purchased from South China Xiangcheng Technology Co., Ltd. 

The ITO glasses were sequentially cleaned in deionized water, acetone, and IPA by 

sonication for 5 min. Before deposition of the hole transporting layer, all ITO glasses were 

further cleaned for 20 min by a UV-ozone machine. To deposit the hole transporting layer, 

0.4mg/ml Meo-2PACz iso-propyl alcohol solution was spin-coated onto ITO glasses at 5000 

rpm for 30 s in the N2 glove box and annealed at 100 ℃ for 10 min. The HTL thickness was 

measured to be 10 nm. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing 645.5 mg 

PbI2, 228.7 mg FAI, 28.3 mg CsI, and 200 μL DMSO in 800 μL DMF solvent. All the solutions 

were stirred at 60 ℃ over 2 hours and filtered with a 0.22 μm polytetrafluoroethylene filter 

before use. The perovskite layer of Device 1 was prepared in ambient air with a humidity of 

60%, while Device 2 was made in the N2 glove box with standard procedure. The perovskite 

films with thicknesses of 750 nm were deposited by two-step spin-coating progress at first 1000 

rpm for 10 s with a ramp of 1000 rpm·s-1, and then 4000 rpm for 25 s with a ramp of 4000 

rpm·s-1. 200 μL chlorobenzene (CB) was dropped onto the film ~10 s before the end of the 

procedure and then annealed at 100 ℃ for 10 min under a different atmosphere. For the 

interface-passivated sample, 50ul of OAI (1mg/ml in IPA) was spun onto the perovskite layer 

with a speed of 5,000 rpm for 30 s without annealing. After that, 25nm C60, 5nm BCP, and 100 

nm Ag were coated onto the prepared sample by the thermal evaporation method sequentially. 

The standard current density-voltage (𝐽𝑉) measurements and stabilized current at fixed 

voltage measurements were carried out by a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5G 

illumination from the xenon arc lamp of a Class A solar simulator. The light intensity was 

calibrated by a reference mono-crystalline Si solar cell. The 𝐽𝑉 measurements under laser 

irradiance were carried out by a Keithley 2460 source meter under the illumination of a 760 nm 

laser. The irradiance of the laser was measured by an integrating sphere photodiode power 

sensor (Thorlabs S142C). The ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorbance measurements were 

conducted with an Agilent Cary 7000 UV-Vis spectrometer. The thicknesses of the films were 


 
 

32 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

measured by XF-WSBX-2200125 Step-Profiler. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) 

spectra were measured with a home-setup confocal fluorescence system at room temperature 

by a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) module (PicoHarp 300), a scratch pad 

memory (SPAD) detector (IDQ, id100) with an instrument response function of ~100 ps, and a 

picosecond 532 nm laser. 

 
 


 
 

33 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

 

 
 

 

Figure S1. Energy level and carrier density distributions in the device with predominant bulk SRH 

recombination. (a-b) The distributions under an applied voltage of 0 V. (c-d) The distributions at open-

circuit voltage. The irradiance is 1 Sun for all cases. It is noticeable in (b) and (d) that with higher applied 

voltage, more carriers are injected into the bulk of the device and charge neutrality establishes. 

 

Figure S2. Current density‑voltage relations of a device with severe shunt current leakage. The shunt 

current density calculated by MD model is consistent with the simulation result. 


 
 

34 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

 
 
 

 

Figure S3. Current density‑voltage relations of a device with severe interface SRH recombination. It is 

noticeable that the large recombination current in the low-voltage region bends the 𝐽𝑉 curve in a similar 

way as with 𝑅&'. However, such increase in recombination current with respect to applied voltage cannot 

be perfectly described by 𝑅&' with a fixed value, thereby introducing errors into the cost function. 

 

Figure S4. Current density‑voltage relations of a device with severe bulk SRH recombination (10 ns 

recombination lifetime). 


 
 

35 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

 
 
 
 

 

Figure S5. Contour plots of cost as a function of series resistance and shunt resistance. (a-b) is calculated 

by a fixed initial guess for 𝑅&, 1 Ω ∙ cm%, in the MD model. The outlier with a very high cost function is 

further analyzed in (c), where we can see that a good initial guess for 𝑅& is critical for the accuracy of 

curve fitting. With this knowledge, in (d), we use the retrieved values of 𝑅& in (a) as the initial guesses 

for fitting the 50 Suns curves, where uniformly low cost-function is achieved, showing that this strategy 

(or randomized initial guess) can help retrieve precise parameter values and validate model accuracy. 


 
 

36 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

 
 

 
 

Figure S7. Ionic and electronic distributions and the corresponding band diagrams in perovskite 

photovoltaics: (a) in thermal equilibrium; (b) immediately upon illumination; (c) after sufficient time of 

illumination. 

 

Figure S6. Simulated current density‑voltage relations incorporating mobile ions for the device with 

predominant bulk SRH recombination. The bulk SRH recombination lifetimes are (a) 100 ns, (b) 10 ns, 

(c) 1 ns, and (d) 0.1 ns, respectively. The results are simulated with SolarDesign; identical trends can be 

reproduced by IonMonger. 


 
 

37 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

 

 

Figure S8. MD model fitting for steady-state 𝐽𝑉 curves incorporating 10%( m)* ionic vacancies. (a) The 

predominant loss pathway is bulk SRH recombination. (b) The predominant loss pathway is interface 

SRH recombination. (c) Energy level diagram for bulk SRH recombination limited device at maximum-

power-point voltage. (d) Energy level diagram for bulk SRH recombination limited device at open-circuit 

voltage. 

 

Figure S9. Ion vacancy density, carrier density, and electric potential distribution in the device with 

10%( m)* ionic vacancies at open-circuit voltage. 


 
 

38 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

 
 
 

 

Figure S10. Simulated current density‑voltage relations incorporating mobile ions for the device with 

predominant interface SRH recombination. The interface SRH recombination velocities are (a) 0.1 m/s, 

(b) 1 m/s, (c) 10 m/s, and (d) 100 m/s, respectively. The results are simulated with SolarDesign; 

identical trends can be reproduced by IonMonger. 

 

Figure S11. Device structure of the perovskite photovoltaics used in the experiments. 


 
 

39 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

 

 

Figure S14. TRPL decay of the perovskite films. Device 1 and Device 2 denote that the film is made in 

the same condition as the corresponding device. 

Figure S12. Current density‑voltage relations of Device 1, Device 2, and interface-passivated Device 2. 

The range and average values of the recorded steady-state data points at specific voltages are also 

depicted in the corresponding figures. 

 

Figure S13. UV-vis absorbance as a function of wavelength. 


 
 

40 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

Table S1. Device parameters used for drift-diffusion simulations 

Parameter 
Symbol
Value 
Unit 

Thickness of PTAA 
𝑑+,--
10
nm

Thickness of perovskite 
𝑑./0!
700
nm

Thickness of C12
𝑑312
30
nm

Electron affinity of PTAA 
𝐸-,5677
2.5
eV

Bandgap of PTAA 
𝐸8,5677
3
eV

Electron affinity of perovskite 
𝐸-,9:;<
3.9
eV

Bandgap of perovskite 
𝐸8,9:;<
1.6
eV

Electron affinity of C12
𝐸-,=12
3.9
eV

Bandgap of C12
𝐸8,=12
1.8
eV

Work function of ITO 
𝑊>,?
5.4
eV

Work function of Ag 
𝑊-@
4.0
eV

Relative dielectric constant of PTAA 
𝜖5677
3.5
/

Relative dielectric constant of perovskite 
𝜖9:;<
22
/

Relative dielectric constant of C12
𝜖=12
5
/

Effective density of states in PTAA 
𝑁3/B,C6D
1 × 10%2
cm)*

Effective density of states in perovskite 
𝑁3/B,9:;<
3.1 × 10EF
cm)*

Effective density of states in C12
𝑁3/B,=12
1 × 10%2
cm)*

Carrier mobilities in PTAA 
𝜇5677
1.5 × 10)G
cm%/(Vs)

Carrier mobilities in perovskite 
𝜇9:;<
1
cm%/(Vs)

Carrier mobilities in C12
𝜇=12
1 × 10)%
cm%/(Vs)

Effective doping density in PTAA 
𝑁-

)
0
cm)*

Effective doping density in C12
𝑁H

I
0
cm)*

Electron lifetime for bulk SRH recombination* 
𝜏J
500
ns

Hole lifetime for bulk SRH recombination* 
𝜏.
500
ns

SRH recombination velocity at ETL/perovskite interface*
𝑆K,L/./0!M
2000
cm/s

SRH recombination velocity at HTL/perovskite interface*
𝑆N,L/./0!M
200
cm/s

Temperature 
𝑇
298
K

Radiative recombination coefficient 
𝐵0OP
9.8 × 10)E%
cmG/s

Capture cross section 
σ
1 × 10)E(
cm%


 
 

41 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

Thermal velocity 
𝑣Q'
1 × 10R
cm/s

External series resistance* 
𝑅&
1
Ω ∙ cm%

External shunt resistance* 
𝑅&'
1 × 10R
Ω ∙ cm%

Note: The parameter values are adopted from the references[6, 7], except the thickness of the perovskite layer 

and the parameters marked with asterisk symbols (indicating that they can be varied during the simulations). 

 

Table S2. Retrieved MD model parameters for Device 2 under laser illumination 

Irradiance 
(W/cm2)

Scan 

Direction
𝑅𝑠 (Ω ⋅ cm2)
𝑅𝑠ℎ (Ω ⋅ cm2)
𝑈𝑖𝑓 (s−1cm−2)
𝑛𝑖𝑓

0.1 
F 
0.416 
1.343e3 
1.719e8 
1.930

R 
0.439 
5.189e2 
3.930e7 
1.808

1.0 
F 
0.370 
4.892e1 
1.317e13 
3.511

R 
0.383 
8.607e1 
4.805e12 
3.239

2.0 
F 
0.380 
3.164e1 
2.053e13 
3.450

R 
0.390 
4.823e1 
1.348e13 
3.325

3.0 
F 
0.401 
3.734e1 
3.375e13 
3.493

R 
0.392 
3.907e1 
2.072e13 
3.325

4.0 
F 
0.363 
5.189 
1.607e13 
3.170

R 
0.380 
1.791e1 
2.581e13 
3.257

5.0 
F 
0.366 
6.389 
2.050e13 
3.165

R 
0.384 
9.737 
1.506e13 
3.053

 

Table S3. Device parameters used for drift-diffusion simulations incorporating ion migration 

Predominant 
Recombination 
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 

Bulk SRH 

recombination 

Electron pseudo-lifetime for SRH 
100-0.1 
ns 

Hole pseudo-lifetime for SRH 
100-0.1 
ns 

Electron recombination velocity for SRH
10−5
m/s 

Hole recombination velocity for SRH 
10−5
m/s 

Interface SRH 
recombination 

Electron pseudo-lifetime for SRH 
105
ns 

Hole pseudo-lifetime for SRH 
105
ns 

Electron recombination velocity for SRH
0.1-100 
m/s 

Hole recombination velocity for SRH 
0.1-100 
m/s 

 


 
 

42 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

Table S4. Optimization strategies for different loss pathways 

Predominant Loss Pathway 
Optimization Strategies 

Bulk SRH recombination 

- Compositional engineering 
- Dimensionality engineering 
- Morphology optimization 
- Crystallization control

Interface SRH recombination 

- Interface defect passivation 
- Band-level alignment 
- Morphology Control

Series resistance 

- Metal grid 
- Transport layer doping 
- High mobility transparent conduction layers 

Shunt resistance 
- Reducing manufacturing defects 
- Reducing low-voltage recombination currents 

 

Table S5. Causes to large fitting error and corresponding solutions 

Causes to large fitting error 
Solutions 

Low bulk SRH recombination lifetime 
Referring to TRPL results 

High interface SRH recombination velocity 
Identifying contributions of shunt resistance 

Algorithm falling into local minimum 
Using random sets of initial parameters 

 

Table S6. Comparison between the MD model and classical models for photovoltaics 

Model 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Applications 

Drift-

Diffusion 
Models 

- Physical insight 
- Broad applicability 
- Steady-state and 
 transient behavior 

- Too many parameters 
- Questionable parameter
 uniqueness 
- Parameter sensitivity 
- Numerical complexity

- Study device physics
- Study complex 
 device structures 
- Predict performance

Classical 

Diode 
Models 

- Rapid computation 
- Parameter extraction

- Over-simplified  
 parameters 
- Limited physical 
interpretability

- Predict performance
- Design PV modules 
 and arrays 

MD Model 
(this work)

- Accurate loss 
 quantification 
- Clear parameter 
 physical meanings 

- Domain-specific 
- Fitting error can be  
 large in certain cases 

- Quantify losses in 
 perovskite PVs 
- Predict performance

 

 

 

 
 


 
 

43 
 

This paper has been published in Solar RRL. DOI: doi.org/10.1002/solr.202300722 

References 

[1] Shockley, W. & Read Jr, W. Statistics of the recombinations of holes and electrons. Physical 

review 87, 835 (1952). 

[2]  SolarDesign. A photovoltaic device simulation and design platform, freely available online 

at solardesign.cn. 

[3] Courtier, N. E., Cave, J. M., Walker, A. B., Richardson, G. & Foster, J. M. IonMonger: a 

free and fast planar perovskite solar cell simulator with coupled ion vacancy and charge 

carrier 
dynamics. 
Journal 
of 
Computational 
Electronics 
18, 
1435-1449, 

doi:10.1007/s10825-019-01396-2 (2019). 

[4] Burgelman, M., Nollet, P. & Degrave, S. Modelling polycrystalline semiconductor solar 

cells. 
Thin 
Solid 
Films 
361-362, 
527-532, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-

6090(99)00825-1 (2000). 

[5] Ren, X., Wang, Z., Sha, W. E. I. & Choy, W. C. H. Exploring the Way To Approach the 

Efficiency Limit of Perovskite Solar Cells by Drift-Diffusion Model. ACS Photonics 4, 

934-942, doi:10.1021/acsphotonics.6b01043 (2017). 

[6]  Stolterfoht, M. et al. (2018). Visualization and suppression of interfacial recombination for 

high-efficiency large-area pin perovskite solar cells. Nature Energy. DOI: 10.1038/s41560-

018-0219-8. 

[7]  Caprioglio, P. et al. (2020). On the Origin of the Ideality Factor in Perovskite Solar Cells. 

Advanced Energy Materials. DOI: 10.1002/aenm.202000502. 

 


