1

Gigahertz-rate-switchable wavefront shaping through integration of 
metasurfaces with photonic integrated circuit

Haozong Zhong,a, † Yong Zheng, a, † Jiacheng Sun, b, † Zhizhang Wang, b Rongbo Wu, a

Ling-en Zhang, a Youting Liang, a Qinyi Hua, a Minghao Ning, a Jitao Ji, b Bin Fang, c Lin 
Li, a, e, * Tao Li, b, * Ya Cheng, a, d, e, * Shining Zhu b, *

aState Key Laboratory of Precision Spectroscopy, School of Physics and Electronic Science, East China Normal 
University, Shanghai 200241, China
bNational Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, 210093, China
cCollege of Optical and Electronic Technology, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou 310018, China
dState Key Laboratory of High Field Laser Physics and CAS Center for Excellence in Ultra-Intense Laser Science, 
Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics (SIOM), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 201800, 
China
eCollaborative Innovation Center of Extreme Optics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China

*Lin Li, lli@lps.ecnu.edu.cn; Tao Li, taoli@nju.edu.cn; Ya Cheng, ya.cheng@siom.ac.cn; Shining Zhu, 
zhusn@nju.edu.cn

†These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract: Achieving spatiotemporal control of light at high-speeds presents immense possibilities for various 
applications in communication, computation, metrology, and sensing. The integration of subwavelength metasurfaces 
and optical waveguides offers a promising approach to manipulate light across multiple degrees of freedom at high-
speed in compact photonic integrated circuit (PICs) devices. Here, we demonstrate a gigahertz-rate-switchable 
wavefront shaping by integrating metasurface, lithium niobite on insulator (LNOI) photonic waveguide and electrodes 
within a PIC device. As proofs of concept, we showcase the generation of a focus beam with reconfigurable arbitrary 
polarizations, switchable focusing with lateral focal positions and focal length, orbital angular momentum light beams 
(OAMs) as well as Bessel beams. Our measurements indicate modulation speeds of up to gigahertz rate. This 
integrated platform offers a versatile and efficient means of controlling light field at high-speed within a compact 
system, paving the way for potential applications in optical communication, computation, sensing, and imaging.

Keywords: Metasurface, photonic integrated circuit (PIC), lithium niobite on insulator (LNOI), high-speed 
modulation

Introduction:

The remarkable multiple degrees of freedom (DOFs) possessed by light, including large 

bandwidth and high-speed transmission capabilities, make photonic technology an extremely 

promising platform for high-speed communication and high-performance computing in 

information science1-3. Over the last decade, metasurfaces have emerged as an unprecedented 

approach for manipulating light in various DOFs using compact, artificial two-dimensional 

nanostructures4,5. Metasurfaces have demonstrated significant promise for a wide range of 

applications in both fundamental science and industry, including wavefront shaping6,7, polarization 


2

control8-10, imaging11,12, spectrometry13,14, computation15. Recently, considerable research efforts 

have been devoted to developing metasurfaces to achieve tunable or reconfigurable functionalities3

16. A high-speed spatiotemporally controlled metasurface possesses the potential to facilitate novel 

physics and practical applications within the realm of photonic technology. Numerous materials 

and strategies are proposed to empower tunable metasurfaces, including the utilization of phase 

change materials, liquid crystal, thermo-optic effect and electro-optic effect17 18-22. However, 

effectively exploring tunability in multiple DOFs with high-speed and sufficient efficiency 

remains a significant challenge in metasurface research.

On the other hand, photonic integrated circuits (PICs) represent an alternative to traditional 

electronic technologies by utilizing light. Diverse applications have been demonstrated with PICs, 

including high-speed optical communication, signal processing, computing, and emerging 

technologies in quantum, biomedicine, and sensing23-28. Particularly, the advent of lithium niobate 

on insulator (LNOI) has propelled PICs as a promising platform for future high-speed electro-optic 

(EO) integrated devices29, such as high-performance modulators30,31, frequency combs32,33, 

polarization controllers34,35, and quantum optics circuits36,37. However, the full utilization of the 

DOFs of light in traditional two-dimensional PICs has not been realized, thereby limiting their 

application in optical information technologies. Recently, the integration of metasurfaces with 

waveguides has enabled PICs to manage multiple DOFs of light in both free space and waveguides 

with on-chip devices, providing a highly integrated platform for efficient photonics management38. 

A variety of applications have been reported with the guided-wave-driven metasurfaces, such as 

mode conversion39,40, on-chip lenses41,42, holography43,44, OAM generator3,45-48, as well as 

polarization control49,50. Nevertheless, achieving high-speed wavefront shaping and switching 


3

capabilities through the integration of metasurfaces, photonic waveguides, and electrical circuits 

remains a significant scientific and technological challenge for PICs and metasurfaces. 

In this work, we propose and demonstrate a gigahertz-rate-switchable wavefront shaping by 

integrating metasurfaces with LNOI PICs. An arbitrary polarized light could be generated by 

combing a waveguide with two orthogonally propagated modes and nanoscatters at the specific 

positions45. Through the introduction of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) and a phase shifter 

together with two pairs of electrodes, both the amplitude and the phase of the two orthogonal 

modes could be managed, enabling the generation of light with arbitrary polarizations spanning 

the entire surface of Poincaré sphere at high-speed. Meanwhile, a well-designed polarization 

dependent metasurface is introduced to achieve the desired functionality and facilitate high-speed 

modulation or switching. With this stratagem, switchable focusing with lateral focal positions and 

focal length, OAMs as well as Bessel beams are demonstrated. By effectively combining the 

propagation phase and geometric phase of birefringent nanostructures within this waveguide 

scheme, we demonstrate the switchability of these functionalities could be in arbitrary orthogonal 

polarizations. The switching speed reaches gigahertz rates, while the modulation speeds can be 

optimized to reach hundreds of gigahertz using tailored electrodes and LNOI PIC waveguides. 

This approach provides a versatile and efficient means of controlling light propagation in a 

compact and integrated system with simple electrical wiring and low power consumption, and 

promises important advantages in scenarios such as optical communication, computation, sensing, 

and imaging.


4

Results and Discussion 

Figure 1. (a) Schematic diagram of PIC-driven metasurface device with LNOI, the red arrow is the direction of optical 
axis. (b) The zoomed-in scheme of the integrated metasurface, depicted with the fictitious wavefront of the waveguide 
modes. (c) The simulated static electric field when a 1 V voltage is applied between the electrodes, superimposed with 
the simulated optical field profile of the TE0 mode in the LN ridge waveguide. The black dashed lines indicate the 
electrodes. They have a height of 300 nm and are spaced apart by 6.5 μm. The top width of the LN ridge waveguide 
is 1μm, and the etch depth is 210 nm.

Figure 1(a) schematically show the PIC-driven metasurface device. Two fundamental 

transverse-electric (TE0) modes from LN ridge waveguides are transform into two orthogonally 

propagated TE0 modes in the slab waveguide. This transformation is achieved through the use of 

adiabatic tapers, as illustrated within the dashed square in Fig. 1(a). The zoomed-in view of the 

region is provided in Fig. 1(b). The electromagnetic wave in the slab waveguide can be expressed 

as: 

y

(
)

(
)

x
n
x

y
n

i
x

xy
i
y

Ae
E

Be







+

+




= 







(1)

Where A, B, 𝜑𝑥 and 𝜑𝑥represent the amplitudes and initial phase of the two guided waves, 

respectively. 𝛽𝑥, 𝛽𝑦 are the propagation constants of the guided waves in slab waveguide. The 

near orthogonal nature of the two transverse components of the electric field enables the synthesis 

of a wide range of polarization states across the entire surface of the Poincaré sphere. This 


5

synthesis is achieved by manipulating the amplitudes and phase lags (∆φ = 𝜑𝑥 + 𝑥𝑛𝛽𝑥 − 𝜑𝑦 −

𝑦𝑛𝛽𝑦) of the two components. To enable high-speed modulation, an electrically controlled Mach-

Zehnder interferometer (MZI) and a phase shifter are utilized to modulate the amplitude and phase 

of the two components. Subsequently, guided-wave-driven silicon metasurfaces are strategically 

positioned on the slab waveguide, with specific uniform polarizations, to generate variety 

electrically controlled functionalities. These functionalities can be manipulated at high speeds, 

offering enhanced control and versatility. 

The device is designed and fabricated on a X-cut LNOI platform to provide the best electro-

optical performance. Considering of the anisotropy of X-cut LN, both TE0 modes are specifically 

designed to propagate at a 45° angle to the short optical axis of LN. This arrangement ensures that 

the wave-vectors βx=βy and maintains a symmetric polarization distribution, as shown in Fig. 1(a). 

To precisely get the polarization distribution on the waveguide, we perform a finite-difference time 

domain (FDTD) simulation to get the amplitude and phase evolution over the slab waveguide at

the experiment wavelength of 1550 nm as shown in the supplementary materials (SM) Fig. S1. 

Directional couplers (DC) are employed to achieve the tunable splitting function of the MZI, 

having a center-to-center spacing of 4.5μm and a length of 300μm. Meanwhile, ground-signal-

ground (G-S-G) electrodes are used in the inner and outer phase shifters of MZI to induce phase 

shifts in a single-drive push–pull configuration, so that the electric field induce phase shifts in both 

arms with equal magnitude but opposite sign. The simulated optical field profile of the TE0 mode 

in the LN ridge waveguide together with the static electric field between the electrodes are shown 

in Fig. 1(c), exhibiting well overlap of the two fields. 

The PIC-driven metasurface is initially investigated to showcase a functionality with arbitrary 

reconfigurable polarization. In order to demonstrate the feasibility of this approach, a focusing 


6

beam achieved with silicon nano-cylinder metasurface is investigated. The Jones matrix of 

isotropic silicon nano-cylinders are given by 𝑒𝑖𝛼 (1
0

0
1), where α is the propagation phase of 

the nano-cylinders. The electromagnetic wave extracted to free space by silicon cylinders can be 

expressed as:

(
)
(
)

(
)
(
)

1
0

0
1

x
n
x
x
n
x

y
n
y
y
n
y

i
x
i
x

xout

i
y
i
y

yout

i
i
E

e
Ae

e

e
Ae

E
B
Be














+
+

+
+









=
=









 










(2)

Thus, the phase profile of free space electromagnetic wave is depended on location of the 

silicon cylinders. On the other hand, to generate a focused beam in free space, the phase of light 

scattered from the metasurface has a distribution described below

2
2
2
2
( , )
(
)
x y
x
y
f
f


= − 
+
+
−
(3)

where f is the distance between the device plane and the focal plane, that is, the focal length. 

Then, the metasurface is constructed by arranging this set of silicon cylinders on top of the slab 

waveguide to extracted the desired polaritons state with the phase profile for focusing. Here, the 

focal length is designed to be f= 50 μm. The silicon cylinders have the identical dimensions, with 

radius of R=100 nm and height of H=1000 nm. The detailed design process of the metasurface 

array and the fabrication process are described in Supplementary Material Sections 2 and 7, 

respectively. Figure 2(a) displays the microscope image of the fabricated device, where the 

electrodes have a length of 5 mm and a gap of 6.5 μm between them. Figure 2(b) shows the 

scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the fabricated metasurface. We captured the three-

dimensional (3D) scattered light field distribution above the device using a home-built optical 

setup (SM section 6). An image recorded at X-Z plane is illustrated in Fig. 2(c), revealing a distinct 

focal spot with a full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of approximately 2 μm.


7

By adjusting the voltages applied to the electrodes of the MZI and the phase shifter, the 

polarization state of focal spot can be dynamically manipulated. To evaluate the performance of 

the reconfiguration polarizations of our device, two triangle wave signals with frequencies of 1 

KHz and 100 KHz are applied to the electrodes of the MZI and phase shifter, respectively. The 

peak-to-peak drive voltages (Vpp) are set to 9.2 V, corresponding to a phase shift of approximately 

2π. The blue dots in Figure 2(d) depicts the measured sampling points on the Poincaré sphere (The 

schematic diagram of the experimental setup is presented in SM, section 6 and the corresponding 

measured Stokes parameters is presented in SM, section 7), representing the polarization states of 

the focal spot. The polarization extinction ratio (PER) was measured to be approximately 20 dB 

(SM section 3). The majority of the Poincaré sphere's surface is covered, with the exception of two 

areas near the north and south poles. This deviation is mainly due to imperfections in the 

fabrication process, resulting in a splitting ratio of the directional coupler (DC) in the MZI that 

deviates from the ideal 50:50 ratio. This issue can be addressed by employing an additional 

electrically controlled interferometer to improve the splitting ratio34. Figure 2(e) depicts the well 

stability of the generated polarization state, indicating its robustness. Figure 2(f) showcases the 

switching performance between two polarizations, highlighting the high repeatability of 

polarization generation. By adjusting the voltages applied to the electrodes, transitions between 

any polarized states within the blue region of Figure 2(d) can be achieved with the same level of 

stability and repeatability. These results exhibit the promising capability of our device for 

wavefront shaping with well control over reconfigurable arbitrary polarization states.


8

Figure 2. (a) The microscope image of the fabricated device. The length of the two sets of electrodes are 0.5mm.  (b) 
SEM image of the fabricated metasurface on the waveguide. (c) The measured intensity profile at X-Z plane. (d) The 
measured polarization states on the Poincaré sphere of the focal spot. The blue dots on the Poincaré sphere represent 
the polarization states of the focal spot obtained from experimental testing. (e) Stokes parameters of one of the 
generated polarization state (45° linear polarization as shown in the inset) as a function of time. (f) The Stokes 
parameters by switching between two generated polarization states.

In addition to enabling the generation of a single wavefront with reconfigurable polarizations, 

this scheme has the capability to achieve high-speed switchable multi-functionalities through the 

incorporation of polarization-dependent metasurfaces, which holds tremendous potential for a 

wide range of applications. To exhibit this capability, we first introduce a geometric metasurface 

to the PIC device, enabling the realization of two focal points with orthogonal polarizations at 

different lateral positions. The metasurface composes of two sets of silicon nanobars as shown in 

Fig. 3(a), which are designed to realize two focuses based on left circular polarization (LCP) and 

right circular polarization (RCP) states, respectively. The two sets of nanostructures are spatially 

multiplexed with a near face centered square unit with the period of the effective wavelength of 

the TE0 mode in the slab waveguide (SM section 2). In this arrangement, the two sets of 

nanostructures are positioned in locations with the same local polarization ψ. By adjusting the 

voltages applied to the electrodes, the local polarization ψ can be dynamically switched between 

LCP and RCP states. Through this control mechanism, the scattered light can be switched between 


9

the two designed focal spots, respectively. Meanwhile, the unwanted co-polarization noise will be 

greatly suppressed due to the phase mismatch45 .

Figure 3. (a) The schematic of the switchable metasurface design. (b) SEM image of the fabricated metasurface 
structure. (c-e) Calculated results of focuses under different local polarization states ψ depicted in the figures. (f-h) 
The corresponding experimental results. The polarization states are realized by applying different voltages shown in 
the figures to the electrodes, respectively. (i) The intensity of the right focus in panel f as a function of applied voltage. 
(j) Peak electro-optic amplitude for modulation frequencies up to 2 GHz.

In the experiment, the silicon nanobars have a uniform length (L) of 300 nm, width (W) of 100 

nm, and height (H) of 1000 nm. The corresponding SEM image of fabricated metasurface on the 

slab waveguide is shown in Fig. 3(b). The two focuses are designed at x= 5μm and x=-5μm, 

with the center of the metasurface array serving as the origin of coordinates. The focal length is 


10

set to f = 50 μm for both spots. Figure 3 (f-h) show the recorded images of the focuses at different 

voltages for the phase control. The voltage of the MZI is offset to ensure equal amplitudes in the 

two arms. By adjusting the voltages applied to the phase shifter, the scattered energy gradually 

transitions between the two focal spots. The experimental results align well with the calculated 

images based on the corresponding designed locally polarizations, as shown in Fig. 3(c-e). This 

result demonstrates the effectiveness of the adopted strategy. A video illustrating the dynamic 

modulation process is provided in the supplementary material.

To accurately assess the modulation performance, we integrated the recorded focal intensities 

in Fig. 3 and observed an extinction ratio of approximately 10.2 dB. The electro-optical tunability 

of the device was evaluated by directing the light from one focus to a high-speed photon detector 

(FINISAR XPDV21x0(RA)) for analysis (SM section 6). The measured Vπ of the device is 

approximately 4.6 V as shown in Fig. 3(i) (corresponding to a Vπ·L of 2.3 V·cm). Figure 3 (j) presents 

the peak electro-optic modulation amplitude for frequencies up to 2 GHz. The result indicates the 

electro-optic bandwidth of the sample is around 1.4 GHz, providing clear evidence of its gigahertz 

tunability. Furthermore, the switching speed could be further improved to hundreds of gigahertz 

by carefully optimized the electrodes and waveguide design.  

Apart from the ability to vary the lateral positions of the focal points, this scheme also enables 

dynamic switching of the focal length, which holds great significance and garners plenty of 

attentions51,52. To demonstrate this concept, two different sets of nanostructures are designed, 

resulting in two focal points with focal lengths of f= 35μm and f= 50μm, respectively. Figure 4(d-

f) shows the recorded images of the focuses by varying the voltage applied to the phase shifter, 

which agree well to the calculated results (Fig. 4(a-c)). The focal points can be dynamically adjusted 

between these two states or any intermediate states. These integrated lenses with high-speed 


11

switchable focal positions and lengths holds promise for future high-speed portable imaging 

applications, opening up new possibilities in the field. 

The high-speed switchable wavefront shaping technique holds immense potential for various 

applications such as optical communications, imaging, optical computation, sensing, and more. 

Particularly, the generation of optical orbital angular momentum (OAM) with a large modulation 

bandwidth is of significant importance in the realm of optical communication53. We replace the 

focus beams with two OAMs with different topological numbers and locations by mapping the 

required phase distributions to the two sets of metasurfaces. Fig. 4(j-l) shows the typical recorded 

OAM images by varying the voltages applied to the electrode of the phase shifter, which agree 

well with the calculated results under certain corresponding polarizations shown in Fig. 4(g-i). The 

left OAM beam is designed with l=+1 in LCP state and the right one is designed with l=-1 in RCP 

state. The results exhibit that the integrated device has the capability to dynamically manipulate 

OAM beams with various topological numbers, offering promising applications in optical 

communications and manipulations. These findings indicate the feasibility of utilizing a geometric

phase-based spatial multiplexing multi-channel device within our platform.


12

Figure 4. (a-c) Calculated results of switchable focal length under different local polarization states depicted in the 
figures.  (d-f) The corresponding experimental results realized by applying different voltages to the electrodes as 
shown in the figures, respectively. (g-i) Calculated results of switchable OAM beams with switchable topological 
charges under different local polarization states depicted in the figures. (j-l) The corresponding experimental results 
realized by applying different voltages to the electrodes as shown in the figures, respectively.

The aforementioned multi-function switchable devices are designed with a geometric phase 

constraint limited to circular polarizations. Indeed, it is important to note that this constraint can 

be extended to encompass any arbitrary orthogonal polarization states by considering the 

geometric phase and propagation phase of birefringent nanostructures for free-space light54. It 

holds significant importance in applications involving polarization optics, offering enhanced 

versatility and adaptability. However, this scheme is still awaiting clarification in the guided-wave-

driven metasurfaces due to the overlapping of in-plane waveguide mode and the nanostructures. 

Meanwhile, the scattering efficiency of the nanostructures on the waveguide exhibits a strong 


13

dependence on their size, and this behavior differs significantly from the transmission 

characteristics of metasurfaces in the free-space configuration. Here, we present the successful 

engineering and dynamic switching of wavefront in arbitrary polarization states with the 

metasurface on PIC device. When a birefringent nanostructure scatters the waveguide mode with 

an arbitrary local polarization of Ψ1, the scattered light can be decomposed into a pair of 

orthogonal polarization states Ψ2+ and Ψ2-, respectively. The two decomposed components can 

be expressed as:

2
1
ˆ
x
xy
i

xy
y

T
T

O e
T
T






 

=







(4)

Where
2ˆ


represent the projection operators for the polarization states of Ψ2+ andΨ2-, 

respectively. 𝑂±
and 𝜑± are the amplitude and phase of the scattered light after the projection 

operation, respectively.
Considering the physical characteristics of linear birefringent 

metasurfaces and their ability to consistently convert input polarization states into output 

polarization states with arbitrary phase delays, it is necessary for the input and output polarization 

states to be a pair of orthogonal polarization states. On the other hand, the required Jones matrix 

x
xy

xy
y

T
T

T
T










could be implemented by utilizing rectangular nanostructures and adjusting their 

dimensions to impose arbitrary phase delays upon two orthogonal polarization states. The 

aforementioned outcome can be comprehended as the amalgamation of both the propagation and 

geometric phases within a singular component. By simultaneously adjusting the size and 

orientation of the birefringent nanostructure, it becomes possible to impart desired phases onto the

orthogonal polarization states. To design the nanostructure with desired Jones matrix, we built a 

phase-amplitude response library with regard to the rectangular nanostructure dimensions on slab 


14

waveguide using full-wave simulations (SM section 5). Here, the width and the length of the 

nanostructure are varied between 100 nm to 500 nm and the height is 1000 nm as above structures. 

The amplitude and the phase of the scattering upon different dimensions are shown in Fig. 5 (a-b). 

A genetic algorithm is employed to retrieve the required dimensions for the desired Jones matrix 

with near uniform scattering intensity. Finally, arbitrary phase profiles in the independent 

polarization channels could be realized by spatially arranging the retrieved nanostructures.

Figure 5. (a) The simulated intensity and (b) phase of the scattered light when the rectangular nanostructure's length 
and width varies from 100 to 500 nm. (c) SEM image of the fabricated metasurface for Bessel beams. (d-f) Calculated 
results of switchable Bessel beams under different local polarization states depicted in the figures. (g-i) The 
corresponding experimental results by adjusting voltages applied to the electrodes, respectively. (j-l) The 
corresponding cross-section images along the white dashed lines in panel g-i, respectively.

Similar to the geometric phase based metasurfaces demonstrated above, by varying the 

polarization distribution within the planar waveguide region, we can switch the wavefronts 

designed upon the arbitrary independent polarization channels. As an example, here we 

demonstrate an integrated generation of switchable Bessel beams with arbitrary polarizations, 

which have garnered significant interest across a wide range of research fields. The polarization 


15

states of the two Bessel beams are designed with 1/√5[2
𝑒𝑖𝜋/4]𝑇 and
1/√5[1
2𝑒5𝑖𝜋/4]𝑇, 

respectively. Figure 5(c) depicts the SEM images of fabricated sample. Figure 5 (g-i) illustrate the 

featured images through the adjustment of voltages applied to the MZI and the phase shifter. It is 

clearly shown the formation of Bessel beams in different directions (±5°) of the scattered light, 

these adjustments align with the calculation results displayed in Fig. 5 (d-f), considering the 

corresponding polarizations. Figure 5 (j-l) shows the recorded lateral images along the white dash 

lines in Fig. 5 (g-i), respectively. The integrated generation of switchable non-diffracting Bessel 

beams with arbitrary polarization states demonstrates the feasibility of our method for achieving 

switchable functionalities in any arbitrary polarization state. Moreover, it introduces exciting new 

prospects for applications involving special beam characteristics.

We have demonstrated the capability of wavefront shaping and switching upon any orthogonal 

polarization states. Indeed, this high-speed switchable scheme could also be extended to 

nonorthogonal polarization states as well. By incorporating complex unit cell, interleave design, 

as well as artificial intelligence, the traditional limitation of two independent orthogonal channel 

could be broken, enabling the realization of more polarization-determined and switchable 

channels9. This strategy not only enables the generation of specialized optical beams but also 

facilitates the implementation of various switchable and complex functionalities. In addition to 

generate switchable wavefronts in uniform polarization states, the PIC-driven metasurface exhibits 

the potential to produce complex vector wavefronts. Furthermore, this approach can also utilize 

alternative high-speed modulation PIC platforms and mechanisms, in addition to LNOI, such as 

carrier depletion, enabling increased levels of integration and compatibility with CMOS 

technology. The out-of-plane extraction efficiency of the integrated metasurface in our device can 

reach to 11% with numerical simulation, which can be further improved by optimizing the 


16

geometric parameters of the metasurfaces and the waveguide50,55 (SM, section 8). These factors 

expand the applicability across a wide range of fields and applications. 

In summary, we have proposed and demonstrated an integrated electro-optical platform with 

PIC-driven metasurface on LNOI. By integrating an electrically controlled Mach-Zehnder 

interferometer (MZI) and a phase shifter, we construct a focusing beam with high-speed adjustable 

polarizations across almost the entire surface of the Poincaré sphere. Based on the reconfigurable 

polarizations across the waveguide, switchable focusing beams with lateral focal positions and 

focal lengths, OAM beams and Bessel beams are demonstrated. Our approach opens up 

possibilities for achieving more switchable functionalities with complex polarizations. The 

modulation bandwidth is measured to be 1.4 GHz and it is potential to be improved to hundreds 

of gigahertz based on the electro-optical effect of LN. The demonstrated high-speed switchable 

PIC-driven metasurface provides a promising platform for a variety of applications in high-

capacity optical communication, fast optical computation, imaging and sensing. This integrated 

platform offers significant opportunities for advancing these fields and enabling a wide range of 

practical applications.

Code and Data Availability

Structural parameters, simulated and experimental data have been provided within the main text 

and Supplementary Material of this paper. All the other data that support the findings of this study 

are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. 

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China 2019YFA0705000, 

National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant Nos. 12192251, 12274134, 12174186，


17

62288101), Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (NO. 21DZ1101500), 

Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (2023ZKZD35), Shanghai Pujiang Program 

(20PJ1403400). The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References

1.
A. M. Shaltout, V. M. Shalaevand M. L. Brongersma. "Spatiotemporal light control with active 

metasurfaces," Science 364, eaat3100 (2019).

2.
T. Zhou et al., "Large-scale neuromorphic optoelectronic computing with a reconfigurable diffractive 

processing unit," Nature Photonics 15, 367-373 (2021).

3.
W. Shi, Y. Tianand A. Gervais. "Scaling capacity of fiber-optic transmission systems via silicon 

photonics," Nanophotonics 9, 4629-4663 (2020).

4.
N. Yu and F. Capasso. "Flat optics with designer metasurfaces," Nature materials 13, 139-150 (2014).

5.
A. H. Dorrah and F. Capasso. "Tunable structured light with flat optics," Science 376, eabi6860 (2022).

6.
N. Yu et al., "Light propagation with phase discontinuities: generalized laws of reflection and 

refraction," science 334, 333-337 (2011).

7.
L. Deng et al., "Structured Light Generation Using Angle‐Multiplexed Metasurfaces," Advanced 

Optical Materials, 2300299 (2023).

8.
M. Liu et al., "Multifunctional metasurfaces enabled by simultaneous and independent control of phase 

and amplitude for orthogonal polarization states," Light: Science & Applications 10, 107 (2021).

9.
B. Xiong et al., "Breaking the limitation of polarization multiplexing in optical metasurfaces with 

engineered noise," Science 379, 294-299 (2023).

10. L. Deng et al., "On‐demand mode conversion and wavefront shaping via on‐chip metasurfaces," 

Advanced Optical Materials 10, 2200910 (2022).

11. S. Colburn, A. Zhanand A. Majumdar. "Metasurface optics for full-color computational imaging," 

Science advances 4, eaar2114 (2018).

12. T. Li et al., "Revolutionary meta-imaging: from superlens to metalens," Photon. Insights 2, R01 (2023).


18

13. M. Faraji-Dana et al., "Compact folded metasurface spectrometer," Nature communications 9, 4196 

(2018).

14. F. Yesilkoy et al., "Ultrasensitive hyperspectral imaging and biodetection enabled by dielectric 

metasurfaces," Nature Photonics 13, 390-396 (2019).

15. A. Cordaro et al., "Solving integral equations in free space with inverse-designed ultrathin optical 

metagratings," Nature Nanotechnology, 18 (2023).

16. Q. He, S. Sun and L. Zhou. "Tunable/reconfigurable metasurfaces: physics and applications," Research 

2019, 16 (2019).

17. G. Kafaie Shirmanesh et al., "Dual-gated active metasurface at 1550 nm with wide (> 300) phase 

tunability," Nano letters 18, 2957-2963 (2018).

18. J. Park et al., "All-solid-state spatial light modulator with independent phase and amplitude control for 

three-dimensional LiDAR applications," Nature nanotechnology 16, 69-76 (2021).

19. A. Komar et al., "Dynamic beam switching by liquid crystal tunable dielectric metasurfaces," Acs 

Photonics 5, 1742-1748 (2018).

20. M. Rahmani et al., "Reversible thermal tuning of all‐dielectric metasurfaces," Advanced Functional 

Materials 27, 1700580 (2017).

21. I.-C. Benea-Chelmus et al., "Gigahertz free-space electro-optic modulators based on Mie resonances," 

Nature Communications 13, 3170 (2022).

22. H. Weigand et al., "Enhanced electro-optic modulation in resonant metasurfaces of lithium niobate," 

ACS Photonics 8, 3004-3009 (2021).

23. E. A. Rank et al., "Toward optical coherence tomography on a chip: in vivo three-dimensional human 

retinal imaging using photonic integrated circuit-based arrayed waveguide gratings," Light: Science & 

Applications 10, 6 (2021).

24. J. C. Norman et al., "Perspective: The future of quantum dot photonic integrated circuits," APL 

photonics 3, 030901 (2018).


19

25. M. Xu et al., "High-performance coherent optical modulators based on thin-film lithium niobate 

platform," Nature communications 11, 3911 (2020).

26. A. Liu et al., "Wavelength division multiplexing based photonic integrated circuits on silicon-on-

insulator platform," IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 16, 23-32 (2009).

27. J. Mower et al., "High-fidelity quantum state evolution in imperfect photonic integrated circuits," 

Physical Review A 92, 032322 (2015).

28. S. Arafin and L. A. Coldren. "Advanced InP photonic integrated circuits for communication and 

sensing," IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 24, 1-12 (2017).

29. Y. Qi and Y. Li. "Integrated lithium niobate photonics," Nanophotonics 9, 1287-1320 (2020).

30. C. Wang et al., "Integrated lithium niobate electro-optic modulators operating at CMOS-compatible 

voltages," Nature 562, 101-104 (2018).

31. M. He et al., "High-performance hybrid silicon and lithium niobate Mach–Zehnder modulators for 100 

Gbit s− 1 and beyond," Nature Photonics 13, 359-364 (2019).

32. M. Zhang et al., "Broadband electro-optic frequency comb generation in a lithium niobate microring 

resonator," Nature 568, 373-377 (2019).

33. C. Wang et al., "Monolithic lithium niobate photonic circuits for Kerr frequency comb generation and 

modulation," Nature communications 10, 978 (2019).

34. Z. Lin et al., "High-performance polarization management devices based on thin-film lithium niobate," 

Light: Science & Applications 11, 93 (2022).

35. X. Sun et al., "Thin-film lithium niobate polarization modulator without polarization diversity," Optics 

Express 30, 30592-30599 (2022).

36. U. A. Javid et al., "Ultrabroadband entangled photons on a nanophotonic chip," Physical Review 

Letters 127, 183601 (2021).

37. A. W. Elshaari et al., "Hybrid integrated quantum photonic circuits," Nature Photonics 14, 285-298 

(2020).


20

38. A. Boes et al., "Status and potential of lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI) for photonic integrated 

circuits," Laser & Photonics Reviews 12, 1700256 (2018).

39. Y. Meng et al., "Optical meta-waveguides for integrated photonics and beyond," Light: Science & 

Applications 10, 235 (2021).

40. Z. Li et al., "Controlling propagation and coupling of waveguide modes using phase-gradient 

metasurfaces," Nature nanotechnology 12, 675-683 (2017).

41. S. Kim et al., "Photonic waveguide to free-space Gaussian beam extreme mode converter," Light: 

Science & Applications 7, 72 (2018).

42. C. Xie et al., "Bifocal focusing and polarization demultiplexing by a guided wave-driven metasurface," 

Optics Express 29, 25709-25719 (2021).

43. Y. Shi et al., "Augmented reality enabled by on‐chip meta‐holography multiplexing," Laser & 

Photonics Reviews 16, 2100638 (2022).

44. Y. Ding et al., "Metasurface-dressed two-dimensional on-chip waveguide for free-space light field 

manipulation," ACS photonics 9, 398-404 (2022).

45. B. Fang et al., "Manipulating guided wave radiation with integrated geometric metasurface," 

Nanophotonics 11, 1923-1930 (2021).

46. Z. Xie et al., "Ultra-broadband on-chip twisted light emitter for optical communications," Light: 

Science & Applications 7, 18001-18001 (2018).

47. X. Guo et al., "Molding free-space light with guided wave–driven metasurfaces," Science advances 6, 

eabb4142 (2020).

48. N. Zhou et al., "Ultra-compact broadband polarization diversity orbital angular momentum generator 

with 3.6× 3.6 μm2 footprint," Science advances 5, eaau9593 (2019).

49. L. Li et al., "Plasmonic polarization generator in well-routed beaming," Light: Science & Applications 

4, e330-e330 (2015).

50. J. Ji et al., "Metasurface-Enabled On-Chip Manipulation of Higher-Order Poincaré Sphere Beams," 

Nano Letters 23, 2750-2757 (2023).


21

51. J. Kim et al., "Tunable metasurfaces towards versatile metalenses and metaholograms: a review," 

Advanced Photonics 4, 024001-024001 (2022).

52. M. Y. Shalaginov et al., "Reconfigurable all-dielectric metalens with diffraction-limited performance," 

Nature communications 12, 1225 (2021).

53. J. B. Mueller et al., "Metasurface polarization optics: independent phase control of arbitrary orthogonal 

states of polarization," Physical review letters 118, 113901 (2017).

54. A. M. Yao and M. J. Padgett. "Orbital angular momentum: origins, behavior and applications," 

Advances in optics and photonics 3, 161-204 (2011).

55. R. Wu et al., "High-production-rate fabrication of low-loss lithium niobate electro-optic modulators 

using photolithography assisted chemo-mechanical etching (PLACE)," Micromachines 13, 378 (2022).


22

Supplementary material for “Gigahertz-rate-switchable wavefront shaping 
through integration of metasurfaces with photonic integrated circuit”

Haozong Zhong,a, † Yong Zheng, a, † Jiacheng Sun, b, † Zhizhang Wang, b Rongbo Wu, a

Ling-en Zhang, a Youting Liang, a Qinyi Hua, a Minghao Ning, a Jitao Ji, b Bin Fang, c Lin 
Li, a, e, * Tao Li, b, * Ya Cheng, a, d, e, * Shining Zhu b, *

aState Key Laboratory of Precision Spectroscopy, School of Physics and Electronic Science, East China Normal 
University, Shanghai 200241, China
bNational Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, 210093, China
cCollege of Optical and Electronic Technology, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou 310018, China
dState Key Laboratory of High Field Laser Physics and CAS Center for Excellence in Ultra-Intense Laser Science, 
Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics (SIOM), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 201800, 
China
eCollaborative Innovation Center of Extreme Optics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China

*Lin Li, lli@lps.ecnu.edu.cn; Tao Li, taoli@nju.edu.cn; Ya Cheng, ya.cheng@siom.ac.cn; Shining Zhu, 
zhusn@nju.edu.cn

S1: The amplitude and phase evolution in the slab waveguide

Figure S1. (a) Simulated amplitude evolution associated with the guided mode in the taper and slab waveguide. (b) 
The phase evolution in slab waveguide.

Here, we present the variations in amplitude and phase of waveguide mode during its 

propagation from an adiabatic taper to a planar waveguide. Figure S1(a) illustrates the process, 

where light travels from a single mode ridge waveguide to a slab waveguide through an adiabatic 

taper of 200 μm. The mode size gradually increases to 60 μm, further enlarging within the slab 

waveguide, resulting in a region of uniform amplitude. In this case, the width at the end of taper is 

60 μm. By designing the length and width of the taper, the area of uniform amplitude can be further 

optimized. Figure 1(b) illustrates the phase evolution of light within the slab waveguide, presenting 


23

an arc-shaped phase profile. Fitting results indicate that the center of the arc corresponds to the 

starting point of the taper. Although the arcs have very large radii of curvature, they can be 

approximated as near planar waves within a limited area. Based on the simulation result, the 

precise polarization states distribution, which formed by the superposition of the two orthogonally 

propagated waveguide modes, could be retrieved. The functionalities in the main text are also 

designed based on the simulated amplitude and phase evolution, taking into account the non-planar 

nature of the waveguide modes.

The slab waveguide mode will travel a relatively long distance within the device before it 

reaches the boundary of the waveguide after passing through the metasurface. Meanwhile, the 

waveguide mode in the slab gradually expands after passing through the tapers as illustrated in 

Figure S1. (a). Consequently, following the long-distance propagation, when the light encounters 

the boundary and is reflected back, the intensity of the guided mode light will be significantly 

attenuated. In addition, the design of the metasurface relies on the wavefront and the propagation 

direction of the waveguide mode, while the reflected light dose not consistent with them. As a 

result, the influence of the reflected light on the performance of the device can be safely 

disregarded.

S2: Design of polarization dependent guided-wave-driven metasurface

Once we obtain the amplitude and phase evolution in the planar waveguide for the two 

orthogonally propagated channels, we can extract the actual distribution of identical polarizations 

ψ on the waveguide. These distributions appear as a series of lines, similar to the dashed lines 

shown in Fig. 3(a) in the main text. The polarization state can be dynamically modulated to any 

desired state by adjusting the voltages applied to the electrodes of the MZI and the phase shifter. 


24

Without loss of generality, here we take LCP state as the reference design polarization as an 

example. By considering the phase evolution, we can also identify a series of arcs with the same 

phase (as shown in Fig. S1(b)). These arcs, together with the lines of identical polarization, form 

an array of crosses, where the metasurface nanostructures will be located. To achieve the desired 

beam (beam 1), the metasurfaces are designed to fulfill the corresponding phase and amplitude 

distributions based on the LCP state. Simultaneously, another array of crosses can be obtained by 

introducing a phase difference of π to the previous series of arcs, and aligning them with the lines 

of identical polarization. We can design a separate metasurface to generate a different beam (beam 

2) based on the right circularly polarized (RCP) state.

When the polarization of the lines is adjusted to be LCP, only beam 1 can be formed, while 

only beam 2 can be formed when the polarization is adjusted to be RCP. It is worth noting that the 

choice of the reference design polarization can be arbitrary, as discussed in the main text.

S3:
The polarization extinction ratio of the generated beam 

Figure S2. (a) The cross-section image of the focal spot in Figure 2(c) at X-Y plane. (b) The corresponding image 
after performing polarization analyzing at the orthogonal polarization state. (c) The recorded image with increased 
exposure time by twenty times.

We performed measurements to determine the polarization extinction ratio (PER) of the focal 

point. In Fig. S2(a), we show a cross-sectional image of the focal spot in Fig. 2(c) in the main text 

at the X-Y plane. Fig. S2(b) displays the corresponding image after polarization analysis at the 

orthogonal state. It can be observed that the focal spot disappears after polarization filtering. To 


25

retrieve the energy of the spot under this condition, we increased the exposure time of the camera 

by a factor of twenty. The resulting image is presented in Fig. S2(c), where the focal spot is not 

visible, indicating a high degree of polarization purity. Let P1 and P2 represent the integrated 

intensities of the two focal positions in Figure S2(a) and Figure S2(c), respectively. The PER of 

the focal spot can be calculated using the formula 10 * log10( (20 * P1) /P2). The calculated value 

is 20.79 dB, indicating a minimum PER of 20 dB for the focal spot.

S4 Calculation of the propagation process of scattered light

This section introduces the calculation of the propagation of electromagnetic waves using the 

Huygens-Fresnel principle. According to this principle, each point on a wavefront can be regarded 

as a secondary wave source. By superimposing the amplitudes and phases of these secondary wave 

sources, the wavefront at the next moment can be obtained. In the calculation, each metasurface 

structure is treated as a point source. The initial amplitudes and phases of these point sources are 

determined by considering the simulated data of individual nanostructures and the propagation 

conditions of the waveguide mode. Based on the principles of the Huygens-Fresnel principle, the 

distribution of the light field in surrounding space can be derived with these point sources. 

S5: Simulation of individual element of guided-wave-driven metasurface

Figure S3. (a) Simulation schematic of metasurface structure of different sizes. (b) Schematic of a unit cell of the 
metasurface.


26

Different from the simulation method for the unit cell of metasurface in free space, the periodic 

boundary condition cannot be directly applied to the guided-wave-driven metasurface. In order 

to accurately evaluate the scattering performance of the nanostructure, we employed a 5x5 

metasurface array arranged on a waveguide for convenient simulation. It is observed that the 

amplitude and phase of the scattered light do not exhibit significant variations in larger arrays. The 

period of the array is chosen to match the effective wavelength of the waveguide mode, allowing 

for near-plane scattering. The waveguide width is set to 10μm to create a mode spot area large 

enough to accommodate the TE fundamental mode. This ensures that the entire array operates 

within a region of uniform amplitude. By varying the length and width of the nanostructures within 

the range of 100nm to 500nm, we obtained the intensity and phase of the scattered light associated 

with the corresponding nanostructures interacting with the waveguide mode.

S6: Optical measurement setups 


27

Figure S4. (a) The optical measurement setup to image the scattered light from the device. (b) The optical 
measurement system to characterize the modulation performance. The optical components within the yellow dashed 
box represent the polarization analysis system, which can be removed when polarization analysis is not required. (c) 
The test result under modulation by a 1 GHz sinusoidal voltage signal.

Figure S4(a) illustrates the measurement setup, where a 1550 nm laser passes through a 

polarization controller and is coupled to the waveguide on the sample via a single-mode fiber lens. 

The scattered light from the metasurface is collected by an objective lens and then imaged with a 

CCD camera. The objective lens is mounted on a high-precision translation stage for z-direction 

displacement. By gradually adjusting the translation stage along z-direction, the images are 

captured at different heights and subsequently overlapped to reconstruct a three-dimensional 

stereoscopic image. 

Meanwhile, this setup can be utilized for polarization state characterization. For this purpose, 

an polarization analyzing system is employed before the CCD camera. To characterize the of 

polarization reconfigurable performance of the device at high speed, the CCD camera is replaced 

with a high-speed Avalanche Photodiode (Thorlabs, APD430C/M, DC - 400 MHz). By adjusting 

the quarter waveplate and polarizer, precise derivation of the Stokes parameters is achieved [1]. In 

addition, the polarization state is characterized using a commercial polarization analyzer (PA) 

(Thorlabs PAX1000IR2/M) for lower modulation speeds and longer measurement durations.

Figure S4(b) illustrates the experimental setup employed for characterizing the high-speed 

modulation performances. The light emitted by the metasurface is coupled into a fiber and 

amplified using an Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifier (EDFA). Subsequently, the light is detected by 

a high-speed photon detector (FINISAR XPDV21x0(RA)). Finally, the optoelectronic detector's 

signal is collected by an oscilloscope (Tektronix MSO64B). Figure S4(c) illustrates the test result 

under modulation by a 1 GHz sinusoidal voltage signal. To examine the polarization properties of 


28

the modulated light, a set of polarization analyzing systems can be added before the coupling 

system, as depicted in the figure.

S7：Analysis of the Performance of the Polarization State Reconfiguration

Figure S5. (a) Theoretical analysis of time-varying Stokes parameters when applying triangle wave signals with 
frequencies of 1 kHz and 100 kHz to the electro-optic phase shifters, respectively, and (b) the corresponding 
polarization states' distributions on the Poincaré sphere. (c) Theoretical analysis of time-varying Stokes parameters 
considering uneven splitting ratio in the directional coupler, and (d) the corresponding polarization states' distributions 
on the Poincaré sphere. (e) The measured Stokes parameters as a function of time when applying the two triangle 
wave signals to the phase shifters, respectively, and (f) the corresponding polarization states' distributions on the 
Poincaré sphere. Here the blue dots represent the polarization states of the focal spot.

In order to assess the performance of the polarization reconfiguring with our device, two 

triangle wave signals with frequencies of 1 KHz and 100 KHz are applied to the electrodes of the 

Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) and phase shifter, respectively. In this scenario, the optical 

electrical field of the two guided waves can be expressed as follows [2]: 

(|a⟩
|b⟩) = 𝐶𝜑 × 𝐶DC × 𝐶𝜃 × 𝐶DC × (|1⟩

0 )
(S1)


29

where CDC, Cθ and Cφ are the transfer matrices of directional couplers, first and second phase 

shifters, respectively. |1⟩ is the input optical electrical field. |a⟩ and |b⟩ represent optical 

electrical field of the two guided waves at the tapers, corresponding to the relevant portion of 

Equation (1) in the main text:

|a⟩ + |b⟩ = [𝐴𝑒𝑖𝜑𝑥

𝐵𝑒𝑖𝜑𝑦]
(S2)

Figure S5. (a) shows theoretical analysis of time-varying Stokes parameters when applying 

triangle wave signals with frequencies of 1 kHz and 100 kHz to electro-optic phase shifters, with 

ideal 1:1 splitting ratio in the directional couplers. However, the splitting ratio of the directional 

couplers is difficult to reach 1:1 due to the fabrication imperfections. Additionally, the waveguides 

here support higher order modes, which could be excited with the fiber lenses in the waveguide 

mode coupling process. These higher order modes will impact the reconfigurated polarizations of 

the focal spot, though their intensities are much weaker than the fundamental mode. Figure S5. (c, 

d) present the theoretically calculated results after taking these factors into account. Here, we 

assume a splitting ratio of 5:4 between the two ports of the directional coupler, and a ratio of 10:1 

between the fundamental mode and higher order modes. The results show that these two factors 

significantly impact the Stokes parameters, and the polarization states cannot fully cover the 

surface of the Poincaré sphere. Figure S5. (e, f) displays the experimentally measured Stokes 

parameters and the corresponding reconfigured polarization states of the focus on the Poincaré 

sphere. The distribution of the polarization states agrees with the theoretical analysis in Figure S5. 

(c,d). Further development will be addressed in the future work to improve the performance. An 

additional electrically controlled interferometer can be introduced to improve the splitting ratio 

and make the reconfigured polarization state fully cover the Poincaré sphere. Meanwhile, 

stratagems to filter out high-order modes can be involved to reduce the impact of high order modes. 


30

S8: The efficiency of the device 

The out-of-plane extraction efficiency of the integrated metasurface is quantified as the ratio 

of the optical power carried by the generated beams to the optical power within the input guided 

waves. Under these prescribed conditions, we conducted numerical simulations to the 

metasurfaces depicted in Figures 2. (b), Figures 3. (b) and Figures 5. (c), to assess their efficiency. 

The results indicate efficiencies of 0.2%, 6%, and 11% respectively. In experimental endeavors, 

the overall efficiency is contingent upon the coupling efficiency between the fiber lens and the 

waveguide mode, the propagation loss of LN waveguide, and the  out-of-plane extraction 

efficiency of the metasurface. Specifically, the coupling efficiency between the fiber lens and the 

waveguide mode was quantified at about -7dB. The propagation loss within the LN waveguide is 

of a magnitude low enough to be negligibly significant. As a result, the overall efficiency of the 

devices is estimated to be approximately 0.04%，1.2% and 2.2%5,6. The overall efficiency can be 

further increased by optimizing the geometric parameters of the metasurfaces, the underneath 

waveguide and the coupling method between the fiber mode and the waveguide mode.

S9: Fabrication methods 

Our device is fabricated on a 4-inch X-cut LNOI wafer. It is composed of a 500 nm-thick LN 

layer bonded to a buried silica (SiO2) layer on a silicon support substrate with a thickness of 500 

μm. The fabrication process involved the utilization of Photolithography Assisted Chemo-

Mechanical Etching (PLACE) technology for photonic integrated circuits (PICs) [3]. 


31

The fabrication process of PIC comprises four main steps. Firstly, a 600 nm-thick chromium 

(Cr) film is deposited onto the surface of the LNOI substrate using magnetron sputtering. 

Subsequently, the Cr film on the LNOI sample is patterned into the waveguide mask utilizing a 

space-selective femtosecond laser system (PHAROS, LIGHT CONVERSION Inc.). Following 

that, a chemo-mechanical polishing (CMP) process is employed to selectively etch the thin film of 

lithium niobate using a wafer polishing machine (UNIPOL802, Kejing Inc.). In this step, the 

lithium niobate thin film, protected by the Cr mask, remains intact after the CMP process and 

served as the waveguides. Finally, the fabricated structure is immersed in a chromium etching 

solution to remove the Cr mask.

After completing the LN waveguide fabrication, two layers of LOR5B film and AZ5214 film 

are spin-coated on the sample. Subsequently, an ultraviolet (UV) exposure is conducted to define 

the electrode patterns. After the development process, a 300 nm-thick gold film is deposited onto 

the wafer. Then, a lift-off process is employed to transfer the patterns.

Following the electrode fabrication, a layer of α-Si is deposited on the chip using plasma-

enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). Subsequently, the metasurface patterns are written 

on an electron beam resist (PMMA) through electron beam lithography (EBL). After development, 

a lift-off process is employed to define the chromium pattern and served as a hard mask for the 

following dry etching process. The α-Si pattern is transferred afterwards by dry etching process 

with a mixture of C4F8 and SF6 plasma (HSE200, Naura) and a remove of Cr hard mask [4].

References

1.
Schaefer, Beth, et al. "Measuring the Stokes polarization parameters." American Journal of 

Physics 75.2 (2007): 163-168.


32

2.
Z. Lin et al., "High-performance polarization management devices based on thin-film lithium niobate," 

Light: Science & Applications 11, 93 (2022).

3.
Lin, Jintian, et al. "Advances in on-chip photonic devices based on lithium niobate on 

insulator." Photonics Research 8.12 (2020): 1910-1936.

4.
Ji, Jitao, et al. "Metasurface-Enabled On-Chip Manipulation of Higher-Order Poincaré Sphere 

Beams." Nano Letters 23.7 (2023): 2750-2757.

5.
J. Ji et al., "Metasurface-Enabled On-Chip Manipulation of Higher-Order Poincaré Sphere Beams," 

Nano Letters 23, 2750-2757 (2023)

6.
R. Wu et al., "High-production-rate fabrication of low-loss lithium niobate electro-optic modulators 

using photolithography assisted chemo-mechanical etching (PLACE)," Micromachines 13, 378 (2022).


