1

Schottky photodetectors with transparent conductive oxides for photonic integrated circuits

J. Gosciniak1*, J. B. Khurgin2#

1ENSEMBLE3 sp. z o.o., Wolczynska 133, 01-919 Warsaw, Poland
Corresponding authors: *jeckug10@yahoo.com.sg and #jakek@jhu.edu

2Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 
21218, USA

Abstract
Silicon photonics has many attractive features but faces a major issue: inefficient and slow 
photodetection in the telecom range. New metal-semiconductor Schottky photodetectors based on 
intraband absorption address this problem, but their efficiency remains low. We suggest that by 
creating a junction between silicon and a transparent oxide with appropriate doping, which results in 
a real permittivity close to zero (known as the epsilon near zero or ENZ regime), detection efficiency 
could increase by more than tenfold. Using Aluminum Zinc Oxide (AZO) as an example, we design an 
optimized AZO/Si slot photonic waveguide detector that could potentially reach an efficiency of several 
tens of percent, in contrast to a few percent for a metal/Si Schottky detector. This increase is primarily 
due to the lower density of states in AZO compared to metal, along with superior coupling efficiency 
and strong absorption within a 10 nm slot.

Introduction
The rapidly growing demand of data traffic all around the world already redirects the industry to 
photonic integrated circuits (PICs) as an alternative to electronics that can be fabricated on traditional 
silicon wafers [1, 2]. In such a way, it takes advantage of the existing production infrastructure of the 
electronic semiconductor industry where the entire photonic systems with lasers, waveguides, filters, 
couplers, modulators, and photodetectors can be integrated into the chips [3, 4]. Among those 
different components, photodetectors and modulators are the main building blocks of the 
optoelectronic link that provide signal conversion between electronic and photonic domains [3, 4]. 
Compared to modulators, which perform electrical-to-optical signal conversion, photodetectors 
perform inverse conversion, i.e., from the optical to the electrical domain. In addition, integrating the 
detector on-chip can improve responsivity by reducing the volume of active material that can generate 
thermal noise [5].
Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs) take full advantage of available electronic semiconductor technology 
that is based on CMOS-compatible materials [4]. Thus, photodetectors that are based on the same 
material platform are under a huge interest as they can provide low cost and high fabrication 
possibilities. However, as silicon is the preferred material of choice from this aspect, it cannot be used 
for the photodetection of radiation at the telecom band (1300-1600 nm) because the photon energy is 
lower than its energy bandgap (~1.12 eV). 
For this reason, several detectors based on intraband absorption in Si-compatible materials have been 
suggested and put into practice. These detectors encompass photo-thermoelectric (PTE) detectors [6-
8] employing 2D materials like graphene and bolometric detectors, which also make use of graphene
[9, 10] or TCO materials [11]. These detectors exhibit a sub-picosecond temporal response due to their 
dependence on electron temperature rather than lattice temperature. The “hot” carrier temperatures 
can reach thousands of degrees and then decrease quickly, in the matter of hundreds of femtoseconds. 
However, it should be noted that the efficiency of PTE is relatively low [7, 12], while in bolometric 
detectors the large DC current is required to obtain reasonable AC signal [9]. PTE and bolometric 
detectors also suffer from excessive noise [7, 9, 12, 13].


2

A more promising photodetection approach that can address these limitations involves internal 
photoemission (IPE), where a Schottky barrier is established at a metal-semiconductor interface with 
an energy level lower (0.2-0.8 eV) than that of the Si bandgap [14-20]. Nonetheless, these detectors 
also exhibit low efficiency, primarily due to various factors. The most evident ones are: (a) the limited 
containment of optical modes within the metal, attributed to the high absolute permittivity of metals; 
(b) low transport efficiency caused by fast electron-electron (EE) scattering, preventing many “hot”
carriers from reaching the barrier; and, perhaps most significantly, (c) the reflection of carriers that do 
manage to reach the barrier due to the high density of states near the Fermi level of the metal. The 
latter problem is partially alleviated in IPE detectors incorporating graphene4, which points one in the 
direction of looking for alternative materials for IPE detection. 
Here we propose substituting metal with a transparent conductive oxide (TCO) material [21-32], using 
aluminum zinc oxide (AZO) [22, 23] as an illustrative example. TCO materials have recently garnered 
attention in the context of nonlinear devices [25-29] and optical modulators [30-32], with a specific 
focus on their operation within the "Epsilon Near Zero" (ENZ) regime, where the real part of the 
permittivity approaches zero [28-31]. Notably, some remarkable results have been reported. Yet, there 
remains a stubborn fact: TCO materials respond to both electrical and all-optical modulation signals 
based on the plasma (Drude) dispersion of free carriers [25, 26]. Consequently, TCO devices inherently 
exhibit substantial insertion losses, thereby limiting their practical applications, despite a considerable 
number of enthusiastic publications. At the same time, in the photodetector large absorption is not an 
impediment, but rather an advantage, and it is perhaps here that TCO ability of absorb wide wavelength 
range of infrared and visible radiation in a small volume can make TCO’s materials of choice for 
integrated Si-compatible photonics.  
With this in mind, this paper presents an analysis of employing TCO for internal photoemission (IPE) 
detection. We highlight the advantages of TCO while also acknowledging potential drawbacks that 
could impact performance. Although our analysis is preliminary due to the scarcity of experimental 
data, it is worth noting that it suggests a potential improvement on the order of magnitude when 
compared to metal IPE detectors. We hope that this finding will capture the interest of the 
experimentalist community and contribute to the advancement of integrated silicon photonics

Operation principle of the Schottky photodetector in metals and TCO’s
The operation principle of Schottky photodetectors relies on the absorption of photons by metals that 
is accomplished by internal photoemission (IPE) across the Schottky junction between metal (usually 
Au) and semiconductor (usually n-doped or p-doped Si) [14-20] and is illustrated in Fig. 1a. The energy 
E is counted from the Fermi level; hence the bottom of conduction band is far below (at -5.5 eV to be 
precise). The carriers are photoexcited from within a slice of energies -ℏω<E<0 and end up within the 
range 0<E<ℏω.  The fraction of carriers with energies above Schottky barrier Φ has a chance of being 
ejected from metal into semiconductor. Note that the density of states in the range -ℏω <E< ℏω does 
change much and this density is high since the Fermi wavevector is large - 12nm-1 [33, 34]. This density 
of states is much higher than wavevector in the semiconductor (Si) which is in the range of 0 to 0.3nm-

1. This mismatch presents a serious obstacle to effective injection as will be explained further on. 
In a typical TCO the situation is different as shown in Fig. 1(b). The Fermi level is relatively small, about 
0.65 eV for the AZO operating near ENZ point with carrier concentration of Nc~7·1026 m-3 [25-27]. Since 
ℏω>EF the carriers are excited from the filled states with -EF<E<0 where the density of states is non-
uniform. Therefore, excited states energy distribution ℏω-EF<E<ℏω maintains (until electron-electron
(EE) scattering causes redistribution of “hot” carriers) the same parabolic distribution in the band with 
more carriers having energies above the barrier than in the case of metal with the same value of energy 
barrier. Furthermore, the Fermi wavevector is not as high as in metal, only 2.74 nm-1 [33. 34], i.e.,


3

comparable to the Fermi wavevector in Si. All of it greatly improves the chances of electron injection 
into the Si.

Fig. 1. Internal photoemission across the Schottky barrier between (a) metal and semiconductor and 
(b) TCO and semiconductor.

The process of photon-induced emission of electrons from metals to semiconductors is based on the 
Fowler proposal and was described by Spicer [21]. It consists of a three main steps: (1) generation of 
“hot” electrons in the metal through the absorption of light, (2) diffusion of a portion of “hot” electrons 
to the metal/semiconductor interface before thermalization, and (3) injection of “hot” electrons with 
sufficient energy and correct momentum into the conduction band of the semiconductor through the 
IPE process. We shall consider these steps one by one but first we will describe the layout of the 
proposed TCO detector.

Proposed Schottky photodetector layout and field concentration in it.
The proposed photodetector arrangement is shown in Fig. 2a and comprises a thin layer of TCO 
material with a thickness of 10 nm, placed between two 20nm thick layers of n-doped Si (𝑁𝑐 =
5 × 1024 𝑚−3) and topped with a rib of undoped Si that 400 nm wide 260 nm high. The Si and AZO are 
separately contacted and reverse biased is applied to the Schottky junction formed on both top and 
bottom surfaces of TCO layer. The Schottky barrier height between TCO and silicon lays in a desired
energy range of 0.4-0.6 eV [35-40] for detecting radiation of NIR wavelength of 1550 nm (0.8 eV).
Different combinations of TCO’s and semiconductors like SiGe or TiO2 and etc., can be used to change 
the barrier height to adjust for operation at different wavelengths.
In previous Schottky photodetectors, plasmonic waveguides were utilized [14-20], but they suffered 
from poor coupling efficiency between photonic waveguides and photodetectors, resulting in reduced 
responsivity (as indicated in Ref. [14] and [17]). In our proposed waveguide-integrated photodetector, 


4

our simulations suggest that the coupling efficiency exceeds 90%, thereby increasing the amount of 
power contributing to photocurrent generation.

Fig. 2. (a) Geometry of the proposed TCO-based photodetector organized in the photonic rib waveguide 
arrangement. (b) Dispersion of complex permittivity (real and imaginary parts) of AZO as a function of 
wavelength. (c) Mode effective index and mode attenuation as a function of carrier concentration.

The proposed TCO detector offers many noteworthy advantages. The first is its impressive coupling 
efficiency. The second, equally significant feature, is its capacity to concentrate optical energy within 
an ultra-thin slot, just a few nanometers thick. In this confined space, the energy is efficiently absorbed 
close to the Schottky barriers, which facilitates emission across these barriers. This capability arises 
from the continuity of the normal component of electrical displacement at the interface of two 
materials. As seen from Fig. 2b the permittivity of the AZO changes as a function of Al doping and 
reaches minimum (ENZ point) at around 𝑁𝑐~7 ∙ 1026 𝑚−3 which causes field to concentrate inside AZO 
layer with ensuing increase in absorption. The mode attenuation at ENZ point was calculated at αabs=2.2 
μm-1 (Fig. 1c) thus, less than 1 μm long photodetector is sufficient to absorb half of the power coupled 
to a photodetector. 
The significant field enhancement at the ENZ point is visually evident in Fig. 3, where the field 
distribution in the TM mode is depicted in both the ridge waveguide without (on the left) and with AZO
(on the right). This results in nearly a tenfold increase in the field strength, which corresponds to a 
remarkable 100-fold enhancement in energy density. The process of field enhancement in thin layer of 
TCO material arranged in photonics and plasmonic waveguide structure was in detail described in our 
previous papers in Ref. [25, 26]. It is worth highlighting that the real part of the effective index 
experiences a marginal change of just 0.2 %. This suggests that light can be readily coupled from the 
conventional Si rib waveguide into the detector.


5

Fig. 3. (a, b) Electric field profile (Ey component) for structure (a) without AZO layer and (b) with the AZO layer at 
the ENZ wavelength. (c, d) Electric field profile (Ey component) in normal to the TCO layer (dashed white line in 
b) and (e, f) along the TCO layer (white dashed line in a) for structure (c, e) without TCO layer and (d, f) with TCO 
layer.

“Hot” carrier generation mechanisms in TCO
Having explored the "extrinsic" benefits of the suggested TCO Schottky photodetectors, which 
encompass efficient coupling and absorption in thin layers, our focus now shifts to the "intrinsic" 
characteristics that, in our view, are poised to greatly elevate the performance of the proposed TCO 
Schottky detector above that of metal-based ones.  
We start by delineating the difference between the “hot” carrier generation mechanisms in metals and 
in TCO materials. According to Ref. [41, 42], four mechanisms exist but only two are relevant to the 
TCOs. Interband absorption is obviously not pertinent due to ZnO bandgap (3.44 eV) being much larger 
than photon energy of 0.8 eV. Furthermore, absorption assisted by electron-electron (EE) scattering 
occurs only for Umklapp processes, when one of the photoexcited “hot” carriers ends up in the 
adjacent Brillouin zone. In noble metals Fermi surface practically touches the Brillouin zone boundary 
making Umklapp processes highly probable, but in TCO’s the Fermi surface is deep inside the Brillouin 
zone, therefore absorption enabled by EE scattering is not allowed. It is worth noting that while EE-
assisted absorption is inhibited, the EE scattering, the primary process for carrier thermalization, is 
allowed and will be further discussed. Both interband and EE scattering assisted absorption produce 
lower energy carriers, hence their absence benefits efficiency of injection across the Schottky barrier
as elaborated in the next section.
Two applicable absorption mechanisms remain. The first is absorption facilitated by phonons, 
impurities, and defects. In contrast to noble metals, all TCOs including AZO, are highly polar materials. 
The relevant phonon scattering mechanism in these materials is scattering by longitudinal optical (LO) 
phonons [43, 44] – a more potent process than the acoustic phonon scattering prevalent in metals. The 
scattering rate by LO phonons in ZnO was estimated using theoretical framework and found to be 
𝛾𝐿𝑂~0.7 ∙ 1014 𝑠−1 comparable to that in another polar wurtzite material GaN, on the scale of 
𝛾𝐿𝑂~0.5 − 1 ∙ 1014 𝑠−1[45]. However, this scattering rate is considerably lower than the measured rate 


6

of up to 2.8 ∙ 1014 𝑠−1 at 𝑁𝑐 = 6.67 ∙ 1026 𝑚−3 obtained by fitting the experimental data at different 
electron densities in Al-doped ZnO [27]. Clearly, some other mechanism must be present, and that 
mechanism is scattering by ionized Al3+ donors which becomes dominant at densities exceeding 
~1026 𝑚−3. By applying the theory of scattering by screened ionized donors in degenerately doped 
semiconductors [43] we derive 𝛾𝑑~3 ∙ 1014 𝑠−1 at 𝑁𝑐 = 7 ∙ 1026 𝑚−3. Therefore, scattering by ionized 
donors emerges as the dominant mechanism contributing to absorption. Unlike phonon and especially 
EE scattering, ionized donor scattering is elastic, with significant implications [43, 44].
The last mechanism is Landau damping or surface-assisted absorption, which is absorption enabled by 
the fact that when an electron collides with the surface (or the "wall"), momentum can be transferred 
between the electron and the entire lattice, similar to when an electron collides with a phonon or 
defect. The absorption rate due to Landau damping (LD) is expressed by 𝛾𝐿𝐷 = 3𝑣𝐹/8𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑓, where 
Fv

is the Fermi velocity and the effective thickness is defines as 𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑓 = ∫ 𝐸

2 𝑑𝑉/ ∫ 𝐸⊥

2 𝑑𝑆, i.e., the volume

to surface ratio of the mode in the TCO and E⊥ is the normal component of the electric field at the 
TCO-Si interface. For a considered structure not-surprisingly deff~5 nm, i.e., one half of the TCO 
thickness, while Fermi velocity is 0.9·106 m/s which brings LD rate to γLD=7·1013 s-1, or about a quarter 
of the ionized donor scattering rate γid. The “hot” carriers generated by surface collisions, i.e., Landau 
damping, are all located within a thin layer of thickness ΔL =vF/ν~4.2 nm, from the surface where ν is 
optical frequency (200 THz for wavelength of 1550 nm). 
In TCOs, all absorption processes, including phonon/ionized donor-assisted and LD, generate “hot”
carriers with energy as high as ℏω above Fermi level. This presents an advantage for TCOs over metals, 
where EE-assisted scattering generates lower-energy “hot” carriers. However, to leverage this 
advantage, it is crucial for the “hot” carriers to reach the Schottky barrier without energy loss.

Hot carrier transport efficiency 
Before reaching the Schottky barrier, “hot” carriers may undergo a scattering process, often referred 
to as a "collision," which can either preserve or reduce their energy. If the collision is purely elastic, 
such as in the case of ionized donor scattering, only the momentum of the “hot” carrier is affected, 
while their energy remains unchanged. Additionally, the direction of momentum is minimally altered, 
with a preference for forward scattering. However, the situation differs when LO phonon scattering 
comes into play. In this scenario, the energy of electrons is reduced by the energy of an LO phonon, 
which is approximately 0.072 eV [46]. This reduction is significant enough to have a detrimental impact 
on the likelihood of emission over the energy barrier. Nonetheless, the most significant factor is EE 
scattering. During each EE-scattering event, the energy of the “hot” electron is distributed among three 
entities: the original electron and a newly generated electron-hole pair, which usually makes the energy 
insufficient to overcome the barrier. It should be reiterated here, that while the EE-scattering assisted 
absorption (Umklapp process) is not allowed in TCO, the EE scattering that does not involve photon is 
indeed permissible.
In the absence of dependable experimental data for AZO, we conduct calculations for total (which 
encompasses spin-preserving and spin-flip) EE scattering, following the theoretical framework [44], and 
obtain the result γEE=6·1013 s-1 which is somewhat less that EE scattering rate in gold (1014 s-1) which 
may be attributed to the stronger screening by polar lattice in ZnO. We can now establish the mean 
free path length (LMFP) for quasi-ballistic carriers, which refers to carriers that have undergone only 
elastic collisions as 𝐿𝑀𝐹𝑃~𝑣ℎ𝑜𝑡/(𝛾𝐿𝑂 + 𝛾𝐸𝐸), where 
vhot
is the velocity of “hot” electron with energy 

above the barrier, i.e., on average about 𝑣ℎ𝑜𝑡~0.95 × 106 𝑚/𝑠. Consequently, the mean free path for 
quasi-ballistic carriers is approximately 8 nm. Given the 10 nm thickness, this suggests that at least 70-
80 % of “hot” carriers will successfully reach one of the interfaces. As a result, we can draw the 
conclusion that the transport efficiency in TCOs surpasses what can be attained in metals. This is 


7

primarily due to the fact that light is absorbed within a narrow barrier, and Schottky barriers are 
established on both sides of this barrier.

“Hot” carriers’ injection efficiency
The quasi-ballistic carriers whose  energy distribution is depicted in Fig. 1a and b arrive at the interface 
with angular distribution R(θ) - for carriers generated through phonon/impurity-assisted absorption 

their distribution is 𝑅𝑝ℎ,𝑖 =

3

4 𝑐𝑜𝑠2 𝜃 +

1

4, while for the carriers generated via Landau damping (LD) is 

𝑅𝐿𝐷(𝜃) = 2| 𝑐𝑜𝑠3 𝜃 | [41, 42]. 
For TCO, about 75% of carriers arise from impurity scattering, and the remaining 25% are due to LD, 

leading to the effective distribution 𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝜃) =

1
16 (8|𝑐𝑜𝑠3 𝜃| + 9 𝑐𝑜𝑠2 𝜃 + 3). For metals we assume a 

similar distribution. 

Fig. 4. Density of states and ranges of in-plane wavevectors 𝑘|| and corresponding angles 𝜃𝑚𝑎𝑥 that allow 
injection into Si from (a) metal (Au) and (b) TCO (AZO).

The electron wavevector in the “emitter”, whether it's a metal or TCO, is equal to 𝑘𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)(𝐸) =

√2𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)(𝐸 + 𝐸𝐹)/ℏ2 , where the effective mass of TCO (here Al-doped AZO) at the Fermi level of 

0.65 eV is assumed at 𝑚𝑇𝐶𝑂 = 0.35𝑚0 [27, 33, 34] as shown in Fig. 4. The states located on the 
spherical surface with this radius possess sufficient energy to surmount the barrier. However, due to 
the conservation of in-plane momentum, only states with an in-plane wavevector 𝑘∥ smaller than 

wavevector in silicon, 𝑘𝑆𝑖(𝐸) = √2𝑚𝑇(𝐸 − Φ)/ℏ2, where 𝑚𝑇 = 0.2𝑚0 [41, 42] is a transverse 
effective mass in silicon.  These states are graphically shown as a cone in Fig. 4 with maximum 
permissible injection angle, subtending this cone:

𝜃𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐸, Φ𝐵) = sin−1 √

𝑚𝑇

𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)

𝐸 − Φ𝐵
𝐸𝐹 + 𝐸
(1)

The angular injection range for Transparent Conductive Oxides (TCO) is notably wider when contrasted 
with that of metallic materials. For example, assuming reasonable values of E=0.7 eV, i.e., slightly lower 
than a provided photon energy of 0.8 eV, ΦB=0.6 eV, EF,TCO=0.65 eV and EF,m=5.5 eV for TCO and gold 
respectively, one obtains θmax,TCO=11.9° and θmax,m=3.2° which, as anticipated, is poised to have 
substantial implications. Indeed, the extraction efficiency is:

𝜂𝑒𝑥𝑡(ℏ𝜔, 𝛷𝐵) = 2 × 2 ∫
𝑓𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)(𝐸, ℏ𝜔) ∫
𝑇(𝜃)𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝜃)𝑠𝑖𝑛 𝜃 𝑑𝜃𝑑𝐸
(2)

𝜃𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐸,𝛷𝐵)

0

ℏ𝜔

𝐸0,𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)


8

where the first factor of two arises from the degeneracy of two longitudinal valleys in Si into which 
injection takes place. The other factor of 2 stems from presence of the Schottky barrier on both sides 
of the absorbing layer (the metal detector with thin layer of metal in the middle of the plasmonic mode
has been previously proposed in Ref. [19]. Here, it allows us a fairer comparison between TCO and 
metal). According to Fig. 1a in the case of metal, the lower limit of energy is 𝐸0,𝑚 = 0, and the 
normalized energy distribution is uniform, 𝑓𝑚 = 1/ℏ𝜔. In contrast, Fig. 1b illustrates the situation with 
TCO, where the lower limit of energy is 𝐸0,𝑇𝐶𝑂 = ℏ𝜔 − 𝐸𝐹, and the normalized energy distribution 
exhibits 
a 
parabolic
profile,
𝑓1,𝑇𝐶𝑂(𝐸, ℏ𝜔) = (3/2)(1/(2𝐸𝐹 − ℏ𝜔)3/2)(𝐸 + 𝐸𝐹 − ℏ𝜔)1/2.  

Subsequently, the transmission coefficient is determined as

𝑇(𝜃) = 1 −

𝑘𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)⊥
𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂) − 𝑘𝑠,⊥

𝑚𝐿

𝑘𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂),⊥
𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂) + 𝑘𝑠,⊥

𝑚𝐿

(3)

where the longitudinal components of wavevectors are 𝑘𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂),⊥ = 𝑘𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)(𝐸) 𝑐𝑜𝑠 𝜃 and 𝑘𝑆𝑖,⊥ =

√2𝑚𝐿(𝐸 − Φ)/ℏ2 − 𝑘𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)

2
𝑠𝑖𝑛2 𝜃 𝑚𝐿/𝑚𝑇. Prior to performing exact calculation, one can simplify 

the expression for extraction efficiency under assumption of all angles being small, i.e., 𝑠𝑖𝑛 𝜃 ≈ 𝜃 and 
obtain for the metal:

𝜂𝑒𝑥𝑡,𝑚(ℏ𝜔, Φ𝐵) ≈ 4

𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑓(0)

4ℏ𝜔

𝑚𝑇
𝑚0

(ℏ𝜔 − Φ𝐵)2

(𝐸𝐹 + Φ𝐵)
(4)

i.e., essentially a Fowler formula. For the TCO we additionally make a reasonable assumption that since 
the energy of carriers capable of surpassing the barrier lays in the range ΦB<E<ℏω we use 
approximation 𝐸~(ℏ𝜔 + Φ𝐵)/2 for all the terms with exception of E-ΦB so that 

𝜂𝑒𝑥𝑡,𝑇𝐶𝑂(ℏ𝜔, Φ𝐵) ≈ 3

2

𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑓(0)

𝐸𝐹

3/2

𝑚𝑇
𝑚𝑇𝐶𝑂

(𝐸𝐹 − ℏ𝜔

2 + Φ𝐵

2 )

1
2

𝐸𝐹 + ℏ𝜔

2 + Φ𝐵

2

(ℏ𝜔 − Φ𝐵)2
(5)

which also resembles the Folwler’s formula The ratio of the extraction efficiencies is then 

𝜂𝑒𝑥𝑡,𝑇𝐶𝑂
𝜂𝑒𝑥𝑡,𝑚

= 3

2

𝑚0

𝑚𝑇𝐶𝑂

𝐸𝐹,𝑚 + Φ𝐵

𝐸𝐹,𝑇𝐶𝑂

ℏ𝜔

𝐸𝐹,𝑇𝐶𝑂

(1 − ℏ𝜔 − Φ𝐵

2𝐸𝐹,𝑇𝐶𝑂 )

1/2

1 + ℏ𝜔 + Φ𝐵

2𝐸𝐹,𝑇𝐶𝑂

(6)

Three factors appear to contribute the most to the enhanced extraction efficiency of TCO. In order of 
importance, they are:

1.
Much lower value of Fermi energy in TCO (almost a factor of 10)

2.
Lower effective mass in TCO (factor of 3)

3.
More favorable parabolic energy distribution of photoexcited carriers in TCO (factor of 1.5) 

The final ratio is approximately on the scale of 1/2, suggesting that one can anticipate an enhancement 
by a factor of approximately 20-25. In Fig. 5, we present the extraction efficiency for metal (Au) (Fig. 
5a) and TCO (AZO) (Fig. 5b). The dashed lines labeled as (I) in both graphs correspond to the 
approximations provided in Eq. 4 and 5, respectively. On the other hand, curves labeled as (II) are 
derived from the exact formula defined by Eq. 2, assuming perfect transmission (T=1) with the cone of 
allowed angles 𝜃 ≤ 𝜃𝑚𝑎𝑥. Evidently, the approximations remain valid, and upon examining the curves, 


9

the ratio of extraction efficiencies for TCO/Si and Au/Si junctions falls within the range of 24 to 26, 
consistent with the estimate presented in Eq. 6. Upon accounting for the partial reflection at the 
interfaces, the extraction efficiency, as indicated by curves (III), experiences a reduction. For Au/Si 
interfaces, this reduction ranges from a factor of two at very low barrier heights ΦB=0.2 eV to a factor 
of 3.5 at ΦB=0.6 eV. In the case of AZO/Si interfaces, the reduction is somewhat less, and the ratio of 
extraction efficiencies falls within the range of 29-32, as illustrated in Fig. 6, curve (a). The additional 
increase in the ratio can be attributed to the fact that the velocity mismatch responsible for reflections 
in Eq. 3 is lower for TCO/Si junctions compared to Au/Si junctions.

Fig. 5. The dependence of the extraction efficiency of the “hot” carriers on barrier height for (a) Au/Si and (b) 
AZO/Si junctions.  The graphs in both (a) and (b) correspond to (I) – approximations Eq. 4 and Eq. 5, (II) exact 
result for a smooth interface without considering reflections, (III) exact results for smooth interface, accounting 
for reflections as per Eq. 2, and (IV) – results for rough interface with complete relaxation of momentum 
conservation restrictions as in Eq. 7.

Numerous experimental [47-49] and theoretical [49] works have shown that the “hot” carriers 
extraction efficiency frequently surpasses the predictions established for smooth interfaces when 
roughness is introduced at the interface. This phenomenon is primarily attributed to the relaxation of 
the in-plane momentum conservation rule, particularly in the case of highly irregular interfaces where 
this rule is no longer strictly enforced. Consequently, electrons acquire the ability to transition into any 
state above the energy barrier within silicon. Additionally, they can undergo reflection into any state 
within the metal or TCO, provided that energy conservation is upheld. The permissible scattering states 
all lie upon the spherical surface of equal energy within the metal or TCO, or upon an ellipsoidal surface 
within silicon, as shown in Fig. 4. According to Fermi Golden Rule, the rate of scattering in a given 
direction depends only on the density of final states so, assuming densities of states ρm(TCO) and ρSi, the 
extraction efficiency can be expressed as


10

𝜂𝑒𝑥𝑡,𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)(ℏ𝜔, Φ𝐵) = ∫
𝑓𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)(𝐸)

ℏ𝜔

Φ𝐵

2𝜌𝑆(𝐸)

2𝜌𝑠(𝐸) + 𝜌𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)(𝐸) 𝑑𝐸

= (
𝑚𝑠

𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)

)

3/2

∫
𝑓𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂)

ℏ𝜔

Φ𝐵

(𝐸)

2 (𝐸 − Φ𝐵)1/2

(𝐸 + 𝐸𝐹)1/2

2 (𝐸 − Φ𝐵)1/2

(𝐸 + 𝐸𝐹)1/2 (
𝑚𝑠

𝑚𝑚(𝑇𝐶𝑂))

3/2

+ 1

𝑑𝐸
(7)

where the factor of two is due to extraction from both sides of the metal (TCO) layer, and the density-
of-state effective mass for Si takes into account the fact that injection takes place only into two 

longitudinal valleys, 𝑚𝑠 = 22/3𝑚𝐿

1/2𝑚𝑇

2/3 = 0.52𝑚0. The results are shown in Fig. 5a, b as curves (IV). 

The extraction coefficient for metals increases tenfold and reaches a respectable, if not spectacular,
few percentage points. For the TCO, on the other hand  the extraction efficiency can reach few tens of 
percent which puts them in the range of sensitivities normally associated with the best interband 
detectors. Given the superior operational speed of Schottky detectors, this represents a meaningful 
advancement. However, even further enhancement in the extraction efficiency is expected for a lower 
Fermi energy level that corresponds to the lower carrier concentration into TCO. In this scenario, the 
extraction efficiency of close to 80 % is expected. 

Fig. 6. Ratio of extraction efficiencies from AZO and Au. (a) Smooth interface and (b) rough interface, with the 
constraints of momentum conservation being entirely removed.

The enhancement in TCO extraction efficiency, compared to metals, varies from approximately 30-fold 
for smooth interfaces to less than 10 for rough interfaces. This behavior is anticipated, as the extraction 
efficiency at rough AZO/Si interfaces (curve IV in Fig. 5b) inevitably plateaus, unable to attain 100%.
However, further reduction of the Fermi level in TCO below 0.65 eV, as examined in this paper, should 
bring the extraction efficiency closer to 100 %.
It is important to note that a meaningful comparison between metals and TCOs is only valid when the 
Schottky barrier heights and surface roughness are similar. While engineering these parameters is 
challenging, it is feasible. With this caveat, considering the substantial enhancement in extraction 
efficiency (as shown in Fig. 5a and b), paired with improved transport efficiency due to different 
scattering mechanisms, better coupling efficiency, and the ability to absorb light in a nanometer-scale 
layer, it is not unreasonable to anticipate a potential order of magnitude improvement in overall 
sensitivity by replacing metals with TCOs in Schottky interband detectors. Further enhancement in the 
extraction efficiency is expected for a thinner TCO layers as the distance to one of the interfaces can be 
reduced while the field enhancement in TCO will be further enhanced, thus, more energetic carriers 
can be produced with higher probability to reach one of the interfaces. The choice of 10 nm thickness 
of the TCO presented in this paper was solely motivated by the fabrication capabilities.


11

The novelty of this paper relies on replacing the metal by TCO material as an absorbing layer and two 
side transport of “hot” carrier through the interface in the Schottky-based photodetectors. Thus, over 
60-fold for smooth interfaces and 20-fold for rough interfaces increases in the extraction efficiency can 
be expected what in combination with a high efficiency of light coupling to the photodetector can 
opens a new door in on-chip photodetectors.

Conclusions
In this study, we have investigated the potential use of transparent conductive oxides, specifically AZO, 
as a material for intraband Schottky barrier detection in the telecom range, with a focus on Si photonics. 
We have also provided a rough estimate of the detector's performance. While the proposed design 
here may not be considered optimal, and the obtained numerical values are all approximate, relying 
on several reasonable assumptions, the primary conclusion is unmistakable: the anticipated 
performance of the TCO-based detector is at least an order of magnitude superior to that of metal-
based detectors. The factors contributing to the heightened sensitivity of the detector are as follows:

1.
The utilization of a photonic waveguide in the Transparent Conductive Oxides (TCO) design, as 
opposed to a plasmonic waveguide, results in significantly improved light coupling efficiency 
into the detector when compared to metal-based detectors.

2.
Absorption takes place entirely within the thin active TCO layer, in close proximity to Schottky 
barriers on both sides of the layer.

3.
The predominant scattering mechanism within TCO materials involves scattering by ionized 
donors, which is an elastic process that does not alter the energy of “hot” carriers. This is in 
contrast to electron-electron scattering, which is prevalent in metals and leads to energy 
relaxation on a femtosecond time scale.

4.
The energy distribution of photo-excited carriers in TCO materials exhibits is favorable skewed
towards higher energies above the Schottky barrier, as compared to metals.

5.
Of paramount importance is the fact that both the effective mass and Fermi wavevector, and 
thus the density of states, are substantially lower in TCOs when compared to metals. This 
characteristic significantly enhances the likelihood of electron injection into silicon.

With this, we express hope that this study will capture the attention of the scientific community and 
set in motion the experimental efforts required for the development of practical silicon-compatible 
detectors in the telecom wavelength range.

Acknowledgements 
J.G. thanks the “ENSEMBLE3 - Centre of Excellence for Nanophotonics, advanced materials and novel 
crystal growth-based technologies” project (GA No. MAB/2020/14) carried out within the International 
Research Agendas program of the Foundation for Polish Science co-financed by the European Union 
under the European Regional Development Fund and the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation program Teaming for Excellence (Grant Agreement No. 857543) for support of this work. 
J.K. has never been more obliged to his friends and colleagues Prof. P. Noir and Dr. S. Artois for their 
support and long stimulating discussions. 

References
1.
W. Bogaerts, D. Taillaert, B. Luyssaert, P. Dumon, J. Van Campenhout, P. Bienstman, D. Van 
Thourhout, R. Baets, V. Wiaux, and S. Beckx, “Basic structures for photonic integrated circuits is 
Silicon-on-insulator,” Opt. Express 2004, 12(8), 1583-1591.

2.
F. Kish, V. Lal, P. Evans, et al., “System-on-Chip Photonic Integrated Circuits,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. 2018, 
24(1), 1-20.


12

3.
L. Chen, K. Preston, S. Manipatruni, and M. Lipson, “Integrated GHz silicon photonic interconnect 
with micrometer-scale modulators and photodetectors,” Opt. Express 2009, 17(17), 15248-15256.

4.
Y. Urino, T. Shimizu, M. Okano, et al., „First demonstration of high-density optical interconnects 
integrated with laser, optical modulators, and photodetectors on single silicon substrate,” Opt. 
Express 2011, 19(26), B159-B165.

5.
J. Goldstein, H. Lin, S. Deckoff-Jones, M. Hempel, A.-Y. Lu, K. A. Richardson, T. Palacios, J. Kong, J. 
Hu, and D. Englund, “Waveguide-integrated mid-infrared photodetection using graphene on a 
scalable chalcogenide glass platform,” Nat. Commun. 2022, 13(1), 1-8.

6.
X. Gan, R.-J. Shiue, Y. Gao, I. Meric, T. F. Heinz, K. Shepard, J. Hone, S. Assefa, and D. Englund, “Chip-
integrated ultrafast graphene photodetector with high responsivity,” Nature Phot. 2013, 7, 883-
887.

7.
X. Lu, L. Sun, P. Jiang, X. Bao, “Progress of Photodetectors Based on the Photothermoelectric Effect,”
Adv Mater 2019, 31 (50), 1902044.

8.
J. Gosciniak, M. Rasras, J. B. Khurgin, „Ultrafast plasmonic graphene photodetector based on the 
channel photothermoelectric effect,” ACS Photonics 2020, 7(2), 488-498.

9.
P. Ma, Y. Salamin, B. Baeuerle, A. Josten, W. Heni, A. Emboras, J. Leuthold, “Plasmonically enhanced 
graphene photodetector featuring 100 Gbit/s data reception, high responsivity, and compact size,”
ACS Photonics 2018, 6(1), 154-161.

10. J. Gosciniak, J. B. Khurgin, “On-chip ultrafast plasmonic graphene hot electron bolometric 

photodetector,” ACS Omega 2020, 5 (24), 14711-14719.

11. J. Gosciniak, “Integrated bolometric photodetectors based on transparent conductive oxides from 

near- to mid-infrared wavelengths,” arXiv 2023, arXiv:2309.14454.

12. A. Pospischil, M. Humer, M. M. Furchi, D. Bachmann, R. Guider, T. Fromherz, and T. Mueller, “CMOS-

compatible graphene photodetector covering all optical communication bands,” Nat. Photonics
2013, 7, 892.

13. S. Schuler, D. Schall, D. Neumaier, B. Schwarz, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and T. Mueller, “Graphene 

Photodetector Integrated on a Photonic Crystal Defect Waveguide,” ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 4758-
4763.

14. I. Goykhman, U. Sassi, B. Desiatov, N. Mazurski, S. Milana, D. De Fazio, A. Eiden, J. Khurgin, J.

Shappir, U. Levy, “On-chip integrated, silicon–graphene plasmonic Schottky photodetector with 
high responsivity and avalanche photogain,” Nano Letters 2016, 16(5), 3005-3013.

15. I. Goykhman, B. Desiatov, J. B. Khurgin, J. Shappir, and U. Levy, “Waveguide based compact silicon 

Schottky photodetector with enhanced responsivity in the telecom spectral band,” Opt. Express
2012, 20, 28594–28602.

16. I. Goykhman, B. Desiatov, J. Shappir, J. B. Khurgin, and U. Levy, “Model for quantum efficiency of 

guided mode plasmonic enhanced silicon Schottky detectors,” arXiv 2014, arXiv:1401.2624.

17. S. Muehlbrandt, A. Melikyan, T. Harter, et al. “Silicon-plasmonic internal-photoemission detector 

for 40 Gbit/s data reception,” Optica 2016, 3, 741–747.

18. M. Grajower, U. Levy, and J. B. Khurgin, “The Role of Surface Roughness in Plasmonic-Assisted 

Internal Photoemission Schottky Photodetectors,” ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 4030–4036.

19. J. Gosciniak, F. B. Atar, B. Corbett, and M. Rasras, “Plasmonic Schottky photodetector with metal 

stripe embedded into semiconductor and with CMOS-compatible titanium nitride,” Scientific 
Reports 2019, 9(1), 6048.

20. J. Gosciniak, F. B. Atar, B. Corbett, and M. Rasras, “CMOS-compatible titanium nitride for on-chip 

plasmonic Schottky photodetectors,” ACS Omega 2019, 4(17), 17223-17229.

21. W. E. Spicer, “Photoemissive, Photoconductive, and Optical Absorption Studies of Alkali-Antimony 

Compounds,” Phys. Rev. 1958, 112, 114-122.


13

22. H. Hosono, D. Paine, and D. Ginley, “Handbook of Transparent Conductors,” Springer Science & 

Business Media, New York, 2010.

23. J. Loureiro, N. Neves, R. Barros, et al., “Transparent Aluminum Zinc Oxide thin films with enhanced 

thermoelectric properties,” J. Mater. Chem. A 2014, 2, 6649-6655.

24. K. B. Spooner, A. M. Ganose, and D. O. Scanlon, “Assessing the limitations of transparent conducting 

oxides as thermoelectrics,” J. Mater. Chem. A 2020, 8, 11948.

25. J. Gosciniak, Z. Hu, M. Thomaschewski, V. J. Sorger, J. B. Khurgin, “Bistable All-Optical Devices 

Based on Nonlinear Epsilon-Near-Zero (ENZ) Materials,” Laser Photonics Rev. 2023, 17(4), 
2200723.

26. J. Gosciniak, J. B. Khurgin, „Transparent conductive oxides and low loss nitride-rich silicon 

waveguides as building blocks for neuromorphic photonics,” arXiv 2023, arXiv:2308.00178.

27. S. Saha, A. Dutta, C. DeVault, B. T. Diroll, R. D. Schaller, Z. Kudyshev, X. Xu, A. Kildishev, A. V. M. 

Shalaev, A. Boltasseva, “Extraordinarily large permittivity modulation in zinc oxide for dynamic 
nanophotonics,” Materials Today 2021, 43, 27-36.

28. J. Baxter, A. Perez-Casanova, L. Cortes-Herrera, A. Cala Lesina, I. De Leon, and L. Ramunno, 

“Dynamic Nanophotonics in Epsilon-Near-Zero Conductive Oxide Films and Metasurfaces: A 
Quantitative, Nonlinear, Computational Model,” Adv. Photonics Res. 2023, 4, 2200280.

29. M. Z. Alam, I. D. Leon, and R. W. Boyd, “Large optical nonlinearity of indium tin oxide in its epsilon-

near-zero region,” Science 2016, 116, 795.

30. A. Campione, M. G. Wood, D. K. Serkland, S. Parameswaran, J. Ihlefeld, T. S. Luk, J. R. Wendt, K. M. 

Geib, G. A. Keeler, “Submicrometer Epsilon-Near-Zero Electroabsorption Modulators Enabled by 
High-Mobility Cadmium Oxide,” IEEE Photonics J. 2017, 9(4), 6601307.

31. I. C. Reines, M. G. Wood, T. S. Luk, D. K. Serkland, S. Campione, “Compact epsilon-near-zero silicon 

photonic phase modulators,” Opt. Express 2018, 26(17), 21594-21605.

32. R. Amin, J. K. George, S. Sun, et al. “ITO-based electro-absorption modulator for photonic neural 

activation function,” APL Mater. 2019, 7, 081112.

33. S. Sarkas, I. W. Un, and Y. Sivan, “Electronic and Thermal Response of Low-Electron-Density 

Materials to Ultrafast Optical Illumination,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 2023, 19, 014005.

34. I.-W. Un, S. Sarkar, and Y. Sivan, “Electronic-Based Model of the Optical Nonlinearity of Low-

Electron-Density Drude Materials,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 2023, 19, 044043.

35. S. Eymur, and N. Tugluoglu, “Frabrication and characterization of Au/MO/n-Si (MO: ZnO, In2O3, 

Al2O3) Schottky diodes grown by RF Magnetron sputtering,” New Materials, Compounds and 
Applications 2021, 5(2), 122-131.

36. K. Mensah-Darkwa, R. O. Ocaya, A. G. Al-Sehemi, D. Yeboah, A. Dere, A. A. Al-Ghamdi, R. K. Gupta, 

F. Yakuphanoglu, Optoelectronic enhancement of ZnO/p-Si Schottky barrier photodiodes by (Sn, Ti) 
co-doping,” Physica B 2023, 667, 415155.

37. Z. Wu, W. Duan, A. Lambertz, D. Qiu, M. Pomaska, Z. Yao, U. Rau, L. Zhang, Z. Liu, and K. Ding, “Low-

resistivity p-type a-Si:H/AZO Hole Contact in High-efficiency Silicon Heterojuncion Solar Cells,” 
Applied Surface Science 2021, 542, 148749.

38. G. G. Pethuraja, R. E. Welser, A. K. Sood, Ch. Lee, N. J. Alexander, H. Efstathiadis, P. Haldar, and J. L. 

Harvey, “Current-Voltage Characteristics of ITO/p-Si and ITO-n-Si Contact interfaces,” Advances in 
Materials Physics and Chemistry 2012, 2, 59-62.

39. R. Jaramillo, A. Youssef, A. Akey, F. Schoofs, S. Ramanathan, and T. Buonassisi, “Using Atom-Probe 

Tomography to Understand ZnO:Al/SiO2/Si Schottky Diodes,” Phys. Rev. Applied 2016, 6, 034016.

40. V. Melnik, B. Romanyuk, V. Kladko et al., „Formation and Transient Photovoltaic Properties of 

ZnO/Si Isotype Heterojunctions by Magnetron Sputtering,” Nanomaterials and Nanocompsites, 
Nanostructure Surfaces, and Their Applications, Springer Proceedings in Physics, vol 246, 2020.


14

41. J. B. Khurgin, “Fundamental limits of hot carrier injection from metal in nanoplasmonics,” 

Nanophotonics 2020, 9(2), 453-471.

42. J. Aizpurua, M. Ashfold, F. Baletto, et al., “Dynamics of hot electron generation in metallic 

nanostructures: general discussion,” Faraday discussion 2019, 214, 123-146.

43. B. K. Ridley, “Quantum processes in semiconductors,” Oxford University Press, USA: 2013.
44. J. Singh, “Electronic and optoelectronic properties of semiconductor structures,” Cambridge 

University Press: 2007.

45. V. A. Jhalani, J.-J. Zhou, M. Bernardi, „Ultrafast Hot Carrier Dynamics in GaN and Its Impact on the 

Efficiency Droop,” Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 5012-1019.

46. R. Cuscó, E. Alarcón-Lladó, J. Ibáñez, L. Artús, J. Jiménez, B. Wang, M. J. Callahan, “Temperature 

dependence of Raman scattering in ZnO,” Physical Review B 2007, 75 (16), 165202.

47. A. Giugni, B. Torre, A. Toma, et al., “Hot-electron nanoscopy using adiabatic compression of surface 

plasmons” Nature Nanotechnology 2013, 8, 845.

48. D. C. Ratchford, A. D. Dunkelberger, I. Vurgaftman, J. C. Owrutsky, and P. E. Pehrsson,

“Quantification of Efficient Plasmonic Hot-Electron Injection in Gold Nanoparticle TiO2 Films,”
Nano Letters 2017, 17(10), 6047-6055.

49. M. Grajower, B. Desiatov, N. Mazurski, J. Shappir, J. B. Khurgin, and U. Levy, “Optimization and 

Experimental Demonstration of Plasmonic Enhanced Internal Photoemission Silicon Schottky 
Detectors in the Mid-IR,” ACS Photonics 2017, 4(4), 1015-1020.


