TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

Disorder- and magnetic field-tuned fermionic superconductor-insulator transition             

in MoN thin films. Transport and STM studies. 

M. Kuzmiak,1,2 M. Kopčík,1,2 F. Košuth,1,3 V. Vaňo1,2, J. Haniš1, T. Samuely3, V. Latyshev3, O. Onufriienko1,   

V. Komanický3, J. Kačmarčík1, M. Žemlička4, M. Gmitra1, P. Szabó1, and P. Samuely1

1Centre of Low Temperature Physics, Institute of Experimental Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, SK-04001 Košice, 

Slovakia

2Department of Physics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Informatics, Technical University of Košice, 

SK-04001 Košice, Slovakia

3Centre of Low Temperature Physics, Faculty of Science, P. J. Šafárik University, SK-04001 Košice, Slovakia

4QphoX B.V., Elektronicaweg 10, 2628XG Delft, Netherlands

Abstract

Superconductor-insulator transition (SIT) driven by disorder and transverse magnetic field has been 

investigated in ultrathin MoN films by means of transport measurements and scanning tunneling microscopy
and spectroscopy. Upon decreasing thickness, the homogeneously disordered films show increasing sheet 
resistance Rs, shift of the superconducting transition Tc to lower temperatures with the 3 nm MoN being the last 
superconducting film and thinner films already insulating. Fermionic scenario of SIT is evidenced by 
applicability of the Finkel’stein’s model, by the fact that Tc and the superconducting gap  are coupled with a 
constant ratio, and by the spatial homogeneity of the superconducting and electronic characteristics. The 
logarithmic anomaly found in the tunneling spectra of the non-superconducting films is further enhanced in 
increased magnetic field due to the Zeeman spin effects driving the system deeper into the insulating state and 
pointing also to fermionic SIT.

Magnetotransport, superconductor-insulator transition, STM, tunneling spectroscopy, strongly disordered ultrathin 

superconducting MoN films

1 Introduction

A quantum phase transition from superconducting to 

insulating state (SIT) can be induced in quasi two-
dimensional systems by disorder or magnetic field. This 
transition occurs at the critical disorder, where the 
electron’s mean free path is extremely small and the Ioffe-
Regel parameter, the product of the Fermi momentum and 
the mean free path kFl is close to unity [1,2]. We distinguish 
two SIT mechanisms depending on whether the growing 
disorder affects the amplitude or the phase of the 
superconducting wave function [2]. At the loss of long-
range phase coherence superconducting condensate melts 
into locally coherent superconducting islands which can 
survive even in the insulating state [3]. This is termed a
bosonic SIT. A fermionic SIT occurs when disorder reduces 
the electronic screening of the Coulomb interaction and the 
amplitude of the wave function is suppressed. Then, 
transition temperature Tc
and superconducting order 

parameter/gap  disappear at once and a bad metallic phase 
is formed before a transition to the insulating state at even 
higher disorder [4]. 

The bosonic SIT has been observed by scanning 

tunneling spectroscopy in TiN, InOx, NbN and a-MoGe 
showing emergence of local superconducting puddles with 
varying 
superconducting 
gap 
present 
on 
both 

superconducting and insulating sides of the transition and a 
pseudogap above critical temperature Tc or magnetic field 
Bc2 [5–11]. Loss of phase coherence can also be manifested 
by variation of the coherence peaks height of the 
superconducting tunneling spectra among
individual 

puddles [9,12,13]. Recent scanning tunneling microscopy 
(STM) experiments of Dutta et al. [14] performed on 
ultrathin a-MoGe films near critical disorder show a Bose 
(bad) metallic state above the critical field still revealing 
traces of superconducting gap. Then, in both scenarios 
quantum transition from superconducting to bad metallic 
state may happen before the insulating state is achieved.

At fermionic SIT when increased Coulomb interaction 

is operative, neither pseudo-gap above Tc or Bc2, nor spatial 
variation of the superconducting gap
appear, i.e. 

“fermionic” systems are spatially homogeneous at 
homogeneous disorder. Recently, Carbillet et al. [15,16]
showed that inhomogeneities of the gap on the scale much 
larger than the superconducting coherence length  can 
appear in the fermionic SIT as well. This is due to emerging 
inhomogeneities of the normal state where the strength of 
the Altshuler-Aronov effect varies. Early tunneling 
experiments performed on planar tunnel junctions 
suggested a fermionic mechanism for the SIT in Bi and 
PbBi/Ge thin films [17,18]. In our works on disordered 
ultrathin MoC films [19,20]
we presented a direct 


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

evidence that Tc and  are simultaneously suppressed and
superconductivity remains spatially homogeneous very 
close to SIT. When SIT was driven by magnetic field 
oriented perpendicularly to the heavily disordered but still 
superconducting MoC film, surprisingly, the Zeeman 
paramagnetic effects dominated over orbital coupling on 
both sides of the transition [20]. 

Here, we present studies on MoN films starting from 

30 nm thickness down through the whole SIT where 3 nm 
MoN is the last superconducting film and thinner films no 
longer
exhibit superconductivity on large scale as 

evidenced by resistive measurements. Based on our 
transport and low-temperature STM measurements we 
show that the SIT in MoN thin films tuned by both disorder 
and/or magnetic fields is realized by the fermionic pathway. 
In particular, the spin-dependent AA effect in insulating 
state points to the dominance of Zeeman effects supporting 
the fermionic scenario.

2 Experimental

Molybdenum forms several nitrides including cubic 

γ-phase of Mo2N, tetragonal -Mo2N and hexagonal 
-MoN [21]. The γ-phase has a superconducting transition 
at about 5 K [22,23]. Recently, Tsuneoka et al.
[24]

prepared series of thin γ-phase Mo2N films down to 1.5 nm 
thickness showing the SIT. Here, we have prepared the high 
quality Mo2N thin films with t = 30, 10, 5, 3, 2, 1.5 nm 
thicknesses by reactive magnetron sputtering onto 
a sapphire substrate from a Mo target in an argon-nitrogen 
mixture gas atmosphere. The crystal structure of the films 
was characterized by X-ray diffraction. Our films reveal 
a face-centered cubic crystalline structure, which is typical 
for a γ-Mo2N phase [25,26]. 

The basic characterization of our samples was done by 

transport measurements. A more detailed discussion can be 
found in the Suppl. Mat. [27], where the determination of 
the Ioffe-Regel parameter [1] is explained and the analysis 
of our data in terms of the Finkel’stein’s model [4] is also 
described. We applied scanning tunneling microscopy 
(STM) measurements to study the quasiparticle density of 
states (DOS) of our samples. The experiments were 
performed in a homemade STM system immersed in a 
Janis SSV 3He cryostat, which allows measurements down 
to T = 0.3 K in magnetic fields up to B = 8 T. A gold STM 
tip was used to measure the ex-situ prepared samples. At 
each point of the sample surface, first a topography was 
acquired with the feedback loop on, then the feedback loop 
was turned off and the tunneling current was recorded while 
sweeping the bias voltage, all on the grid of 128x128 
topography points.

The tunneling conductance was calculated by 

numerical differentiation of the I-V curves. The dI(V)/dV 
spectra measured through the tunnel junction between a 

normal metal and a superconductor can be described by the 
equation

𝑑𝐼(𝑉)

𝑑𝑉
= 𝑁 ∫

∞

−∞

𝑁𝑆(𝐸) [− ∂𝑓(𝐸 + 𝑒𝑉)

∂𝑒𝑉
] 𝑑𝐸,
(1)

where 𝐸 = 𝑒𝑉 is the energy and the derivative of the Fermi 
distribution in the square brackets represents thermal 
smearing.𝑁 is the constant DOS of the metallic tip and 𝑁𝑆
represents the superconducting DOS, resp. The BCS theory 
defines 𝑁𝑆 as

𝑁𝑆(𝐸) = Re (
𝐸

√𝐸2 − 𝛥2) ,
(2)

where ∆ is the superconducting energy gap. Tunneling 
spectra with spectral smearing higher than the thermal 
broadening can be described by the phenomenological 
modification of the BCS DOS of Dynes [28]
who 

introduced a complex energy E = E’-iΓ, where Γ is the 
spectral smearing parameter. The non-zero value of this 
parameter can be connected with pair-breaking centers at 
the tunnel junction area [29]. If the superconductor is in the 
normal state and  = 0, the DOS will be constant in the case 
of standard metals. However, in the case of highly 
disordered metals, we must account for corrections related 
to the enhanced electron-electron interaction. According to 
the Altshuler-Aronov (AA) theory of 2D systems [30,31]
this is manifested by a logarithmic reduction of the normal 
state DOS at Fermi energy down to the thermal energy 
defined by the measuring temperature. The standard AA 
correction is not a function of the applied magnetic field. 
However, when the electron spins are taken into account in 
the particle-hole channel the AA correction to the 
normalized 
DOS 
𝑁𝑁(𝐸) = 1 − 𝛿𝑁
reveals 
field 

dependence, described as [31]

𝛿𝑁(𝐸, 𝑇, 𝐵) ≈ 𝐴 {𝑓(𝐸, 𝛤0)

+ 𝜆1

2𝜆0

[𝑓(𝐸, 𝛤0)

+ 1

2 ∑ 𝑓(𝐸 + 𝛼𝐸𝑍, 𝛤0)

𝛼=±1

]}

(3)

where A includes all constants and parameters of the 
tunneling barrier, f is the logarithmic function defined 
in [20] with arguments normalized to the thermal energy 
and 𝐸𝑍 = 2µ𝐵𝐵 is the Zeeman energy, with µ𝐵 being the 
Bohr magneton and B magnetic field. The constants of 𝜆0
and 𝜆1 describe the interaction of an electron and a hole 
with total spin 0 and 1, respectively and 𝛤0 is responsible 
for the broadening of the AA logarithmic singularity [20].
The first and the second terms originate from the interaction 
of the electron and the hole with a zero projection of the 
total spin on the direction of the magnetic field, and the 
third (and fourth) term from interactions with opposite 
spins. In the case when the ratio 𝜆1 2𝜆0
⁄
is from interval 

〈−1/3,0〉 at zero magnetic field the logarithmic anomaly of 
the first term is partly compensated by three equal 


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

logarithmic terms with opposite sign. In the presence of 
applied magnetic field a part of the electronic DOS at the 
Fermi energy is removed due to spin polarization and two 
singularities/maxima should appear at 𝐸 = ±𝐸𝑍. Then, the 
logarithmic singularity/minimum at the Fermi level is more 
pronounced than it was in the zero-field case.

3 Results

The temperature dependencies of the sheet resistance 

Rs(T) obtained on 30, 10, 5, 3, 2 and 1.5 nm thin MoN films 
at temperatures from 100 K down to 0.3 K are shown in 
Fig. 1a). The thickest 30 nm sample shows an almost 
temperature independent sheet resistance down to the 
superconducting transition at Tc = 5.83 K. With reducing 
film thickness the normal state sheet resistance Rs increases, 
the derivative dRs/dT becomes negative and a gradual shift 
of the superconducting transition typical for homogenously 
disordered systems is visible down to Tc = 2.8 K in the case 
of the 3 nm sample. The evolution of this disorder-tuned 
superconductor-insulator transition can be followed in 
Fig. 1b), where the critical temperature Tc
(blue 

symbols - left scale) and the Ioffe-Regel parameter kFl
(green symbols - right scale) are shown as the function of 
the film thickness. The inset of Fig. 1b) shows Tc as a 
function of the sheet resistance Rs by open black symbols. 
The solid red line is the fit to the Finkel’stein’s formula [4]
with the fitting parameters of the critical resistance 
Rcr = 2.3 kΩ where the superconductivity terminates, the 
critical temperature of the bulk phase Tc0 = 6.34 K and the 
elastic scattering time τ = 2.66 × 10-16 s.
The rapid 

decrease of the kFl values with reducing film thickness and 
the low value of kFl ~ 1.4 determined at the 3 nm sample 
suggest that this superconducting sample is in the near 
proximity 
to 
critical 
disorder. 
From 
transport 

measurements in transverse magnetic field the upper 
critical magnetic field was also determined, see Fig. S1 and 
S2 in Suppl. Mat. [27].

Low temperature STM measurements were performed 

to study the surface topography of our thin films. Figure S3 
presented in the Suppl. Mat. [27] shows typical topography 
images of the MoN thin films from both sides of the SIT. 
The samples had clean surfaces with continuous and 
compact polycrystalline structure. The images shown in 
Fig. S3 [27] can be characterized by the average surface 
corrugations ~ 1.2 nm, 0.5 nm and 0.35 nm for the 30 nm, 
3 nm and 2 nm sample, respectively. The sharp, well 
defined grain boundaries and the low averaged surface 
corrugations point to high quality of the studied thin films.

In Fig. 2, representative temperature dependencies of 

the STM tunneling spectra measured on 30, 3, and 2 nm 
samples are shown in panels a), b), and c), respectively. The 
upper panels show 3D plots of the zero-field temperature 
dependencies of the dI(V)∕dV spectra. The spectra taken on 
30 nm and 3 nm samples reveal standard superconducting 

features. At increased temperature the superconducting gap 
structure bordered by symmetrical coherence peaks is 
suppressed at Tc and at higher temperatures constant normal 
state tunneling spectra are visible. The value of the 
superconducting energy gap 
and its temperature 

dependence in both sets of the samples have been 
determined from fitting to Dynes modification of the BCS 
DOS. The fitting curves (open symbols) and experimental 
data (lines) at the indicated temperatures are shown in the 
corresponding lower panels. We can see clearly that the 
model describes the experimental data perfectly. The 
obtained temperature dependencies of the energy gap are 
shown in Fig. S4 of the Suppl. Mat. [27]. The gap values 
reveal 
BCS-like
temperature 
dependencies 
with 

Δ(0) = 0.87 meV, 
 ~ 0.06 meV, 
Tc = 5.6 K, 

2Δ(0)/kBTc ~ 3.6 
for 
30 nm 
and 
Δ(0) = 0.44 meV,

 ~ 0.4 meV, Tc = 2.9 K, 2Δ(0)/kBTc ~ 3.55 for the 3 nm 
sample. Figure 2c) shows the effect of temperature on the 
tunneling spectrum measured on the non-superconducting 
2 nm 
film. 
No 
coherence 
peaks 
indicative 
of 

superconductivity are observed at the lowest temperature 
T = 0.5 K but the spectrum reveals a logarithmic-like 
reduction towards zero-bias voltage. We fit our 
experimental data to the thermally smeared AA correction, 
defined in (3). The curve taken at the lowest temperature is 
fit 
by
parameters: 
A = -0.26, 
𝜆1 2𝜆0
⁄
= -0.12, 

0 = 0.15 meV and B = 0 T. In the fits at higher 
temperatures, only the temperature was changed and the 
smearing parameter varied slightly in the range of 5 %. The 
agreement between our data (lines) and the thermally 
smeared AA correction (symbols) fit indicates, that what 
we observe is not the temperature dependence of the 
logarithmic reduction, but only the effect of increased 
thermal smearing with energy ~ kBT. 

We also studied the effect of perpendicular magnetic 

field on the tunneling spectra on samples with thicknesses 
of 30 nm, 3 nm, 2 nm and 1.5 nm at T = 0.5 K. The 
magnetic dependence of the dI(V)∕dV spectra measured on 
the thickest 30 nm superconducting sample shown in 
Fig. S5 in Suppl. Mat. [27] reveals a classical behavior. In 
increasing field, the position of gap-like peaks shifts to 
lower voltage and the gap gradually closes. This process 
can be better followed in the side view shown in the inset 
of Fig. S5 and in top view of Fig. S6a) in Suppl. Mat. [27]. 
The upper critical magnetic field of the 30 nm sample is 
above the range of our experimental set-up (Fig. S2 in 
Suppl. Mat. [27]), so we could not detect a full transition to 
the normal state. 

The main panels at the top of Fig. 3 show 3D plots of 

the effect of perpendicular magnetic field on the tunneling 
spectra on the 3 nm, 2 nm and 1.5 nm thin films. The insets 
show side views of the corresponding magnetic 
dependencies. Fig. 3a) plots the effect of magnetic field on 
the thinnest (3 nm) superconducting sample that is close to 
the critical disorder. Again, at increasing field the gap peaks 
are getting more smeared and the in-gap area is gradually 


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

filled but remarkably, the gap-peak position remains 
unchanged and before the conductance dI(V)∕dV gets 
completely flat at the upper critical magnetic field 
Bc2 ~ 5 T, the “gap” structure holds and is even enhanced in 
further increased field.
The both effects are also 

documented in  Fig. S6 b) of Suppl. Mat. [27]). We have 
seen similar effects of the magnetic field on ultrathin MoC 
films in our previous paper [20], where we studied the 
magnetic field induced SIT in these samples. The both 
unusual features were described by the Zeeman effect on 
the density of states, namely, the constant position of the 
gap peak as due to spectral broadening of the Zeeman split 
superconducting gap peaks and enhanced gap in the normal 
state due to Zeeman effect on spin dependent AA correction 
to DOS. There, based on the work of [29], to describe the 
total DOS we used  the product of 𝑁(𝐸) = 𝑁𝑆

𝐷(𝐸)𝑁𝑁(Ω), 

where NSD is the Dynes modification of the BCS DOS (2) 
with smearing parameter , 𝑁𝑁(Ω)
represents
spin 

dependent AA corrections defined in (3), and the energy-
dependent 
parameter 
Ω(𝐸) = Re [√(𝐸 + 𝑖Γ)2 − Δ2]

ensures the balance of quasiparticles after the transition to 
the superconducting state. Here, we employ this model to 
describe the magnetic field dependence of the tunneling 
spectra measured on our 3 nm thin MoN superconducting 
sample. We started to fit our spectra in the normal state at 
B = 8 T 
without 
superconducting 
contribution. 
We 

determined the values of the parameters A = -0.3, 
𝜆1 2𝜆0
⁄
= -0.24, 0 = 0.31 meV which we used to fit the 

complete magnetic dependence down to B = 0 T. During 
the fit in the superconducting state at B < Bc2 we used only 
the value of the energy gap as a fit parameter, which we 
varied according to formula Δ = Δ(0)√1 − 𝐵/𝐵𝑐2, in 
agreement with our results on MoC [20]. The bottom panel 
of Fig. 3a) shows the results of our fit (open symbols) 
together with selected experimental curves from the upper 
panel (solid lines). The magnetic field dependence of the 
AA correction used during the fit is shown in Fig. S7 of the 
Suppl. Mat. [27].
It can be seen that the small 

AA correction at B = 0 T with the ZBC value of ~ 0.95 is 
enhanced by ~ 20 % to the value of ~ 0.75 at B = 8 T. 

While in the 3 nm MoN film and similarly in MoC 

films in our previous study [20] superconductivity and AA 
effect interfere, in the thinner MoN samples one can focus 
on the AA effects only. As can be seen in Fig. 3b) and c) 
the AA effect (reduction of the DOS at Fermi energy) gets 
stronger on the thinner and more disordered 1.5 nm sample 
compared to 2 nm MoN film. The most importantly, also 
the amplifying effect of magnetic field on the AA reduction
is unambiguously detected, here: the zero-bias conductance 
drops by roughly ~ 10 % from ~ 0.67 on 2 nm film and 
~ 4 % from 0.52 for the 1.5 nm film when the magnetic 
field is increased from B = 0 to 8 T. 

To describe these magnetic field dependencies

quantitatively, we fit the spectra at selected magnetic fields
as shown in the lower panels of Fig. 3b) and c). Since these

samples are not superconducting, the superconducting 
contribution from the total density of states falls out, and 
we can fit the tunnel spectra to the DOS defined as 
𝑁𝑁(𝐸) = 1 − 𝛿𝑁 according to formula (3). We started to 
fit the spectra again at the highest field B = 8 T, where we 
obtained the following fitting parameters: A = -0.26, 
𝜆1 2𝜆0
⁄
= -0.12, 0 = 0.17 meV for the 2 nm sample and 

A = - 0.23, 𝜆1 2𝜆0
⁄
= -0.035, 0 = 0.14 meV for the 1.5 nm 

sample. At lower magnetic fields only the value of 0 was
slightly corrected by less then 3 %. 

As a result, the spin dependent AA correction to the

normal density of states describes well the effect of 
magnetic field in the both non-superconducting samples, 
and also in our thinnest 3 nm superconducting sample. In 
the 
latter 
case 
remarkably,
the 
field 
dependent 

AA correction contributes very weakly (< 4 %) to the total 
DOS in the superconducting state at B < Bc2 (Fig. S7 in 
Suppl. Mat. [27]). 

In Fig. 4, we compare the AA effect in zero magnetic 

field in 3 nm, 2 nm, and 1.5 nm samples. In the case of 3 nm 
sample, we plot only the fitting curve of the contribution of 
the AA effect because in the experiment the total DOS 
comprises also the superconducting part. One can see a 
rapid enhancement of the AA correction upon decreasing 
the thickness/increasing disorder which is even amplified 
by the fact that spin dependent contributions partly 
compensating the leading AA term are also diminished with 
disorder. 

4 Discussion

In the following we argue that the SIT introduced in 

our thin MoN films by disorder and magnetic field follows 
the fermionic scenario. 

First
argument 
is 
based 
on 
the 
fact 
that 

superconducting transition temperature Tc versus the films 
sheet resistance Rs in Fig. 1 follows the predictions of the 
Finkel’stein’s model based on enhanced Coulomb effects 
leading to suppression of the amplitude of the order 
parameter and Tc at once [4]. This finding has also been 
documented in our transport measurements on strongly 
disordered MoC films [19] and in other materials as for 
example MoGe films [32]. Tsuneoka et al. [24] who 
prepared a series of MoN films from 60 nm down to 1.5 nm 
with Tc decreasing from 6.6 K down to 2.5 K and the SIT 
transition at about 5 nm thin films also argued that Tc
depression obeys the fermionic scenario according to the 
amplitude fluctuation in the order parameter. They could fit 
Tc as a function of the sheet resistance to the Finkel’stein’s 
model with the following parameters: the bulk Tc0 = 6.45 K, 
the critical resistance Rcr = 2 kΩ and the elastic scattering 
time τ = 1.6 × 10-16 s values very close to ours. It should be 
noted that the suppression of Tc with increasing value of Rs
has also been observed in systems with an evident bosonic 
SIT, hence the validity of the Finkelstein model is a 


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

necessary but not a sufficient condition of the fermionic 
model [11].

Second evidence supporting the fermionic SIT is based 

on 
the 
fact 
that 
with 
increasing 
disorder 
the 

superconducting 
energy 
gap 
 and 
the 
transition 

temperature are suppressed simultaneously and the 
superconducting coupling is constant, not depending on the 
increasing disorder. In our case it is so and the coupling 
parameter is 2Δ(0)/kBTc ~ 3.5 - 3.6 for the 30 nm film down 
to 3 nm MoN (see Fig. S4 in [27]). This has also been 
observed in our previous paper in MoC films [19].

Third
argument employs the fact that spectral 

characteristics on increasingly disordered superconductors 
remains homogeneous, i.e. a long-range coherence holds 
and no local variations of the superconducting gap emerge. 
We have studied the superconducting energy gap locally by 
the STM measurements on all our superconducting samples 
down to 3 nm thickness close to the critical disorder. The 
gap maps constructed from these measurements, as well as 
the zero-bias conductance maps (ZBC) demonstrate the 
homogeneity of the superconducting state on the flat 
regions of the investigated surfaces. Homogeneity of
tunneling spectra measured on the 3 nm sample along a 40 
nm white line from Fig. 5a) is presented in the form of top 
view on spectra in Fig. 6a).

We also studied the coherence-peaks height map on 

the 3 nm sample, which could reflect the loss of phase 
coherence, too [9,12,13]. Before constructing this map, we 
normalized all tunneling spectra to the contribution of the 
AA effect at B = 0 T (black symbols in Fig. 4) determined 
from fit in Fig. 3. In contrast to experiment on NbN [9] we 
could not find any distinct variations in the coherence peak 
heights. On the other hand, we admit that with the high 
spectral smearing with  ~ 0.4 it would be difficult. 

In some areas of the 3 nm thin superconducting film, 

islands a few nanometers wide with slightly different values 
of the superconducting energy gap than in other locations 
are observed. However, as already shown in our previous 
paper [33] such a variation occurs at the places with slightly 
more pronounced protrusions/thicknesses of the film and a 
good correlation exists between the topography and the gap 
maps. The thicker the area the bigger the energy gap  and 
the smaller the spectral smearing . As we have already 
shown on MoC disordered films [34] the effect is connected 
with the pair-breaking fields at the interface between the 
substrate and the thin film.

Obviously, the question may arise how close to SIT the 

disordered films would have to be for bosonic effects to 
occur, and whether our 3 nm MoN was that close. For 
example, 
in 
strongly 
disordered 
NbN [10]
and 

α-MoGe [11] thin films, samples thicker than 8 nm and 
5 nm, resp., exhibit an evident fermionic scenario with a 
spatially homogeneous BCS-like gap, but on thinner 
samples with higher disorder, spatial inhomogeneities 
appear. Therefore, we study here for the first time not only 
strongly disordered superconducting samples near SIT but 

also non-superconducting MoN films that are already on 
the other side of the transition. Remarkably, the spectral 
maps taken on the 3 nm samples above Bc2 and the spectral 
maps taken on the non-superconducting 2 nm and 1.5 nm 
samples measured at any field show no spatial variations 
regardless of any corrugations. While for the 3 nm MoN 
film in superconducting state the zero-bias conductance 
map taken at zero field in Fig 5b) reveals small variations 
in agreement with the topography in Fig 5a) (see for 
example the spots in the white ovals, where an increase of 
about 1 nm in the topography corresponds to a 30 - 50 % 
lower ZBC due to locally bigger superconducting gap), on 
the contrary, the ZBC map in c) taken at 7.5 T, i.e. above 
Bc2, features no areas correlated with topography, only 
noise with approx. 5 % dispersion. In Fig. 5d), the 2 nm 
MoN topography shows higher and lower spots, but no 
spatial changes are observed in the ZBC maps measured at 
0 T and 5 T (see e) and f), respectively) except
experimental noise. Similar ZBC maps without apparent 
spatial changes were also observed on the 1.5 nm sample. 
The 40 nm long linecuts, measured on the surfaces of the 
superconducting 3 nm thin film in the normal state above 
Bc2 and non-superconducting 2 nm and 1.5 nm thin films at 
B = 0 T shown in Fig. 6 b), c), d), respectively, also point 
to the homogeneity of the measured spectra. 

Carbillet 
et 
al. [15,16]
pointed 
out 
that 

inhomogeneities of the superconducting gap can appear due 
to local variations of the Altshuler-Aronov effect. They 
modeled the AA correction as dI/dV ~ V and showed the 
local variations in the -maps on a rather long scale. We 
have also analyzed the spectral maps measured on 3 nm (at 
7.5 T), 2 nm and 1.5 nm MoN films at different fields on
surfaces typically 50 × 50 nm2 in a similar way but our -
maps did not show any observable variations. However, we 
admit that it is not ruling out their existence completely, 
because of the small size of the studied surfaces and high
spectral smearing of the MoN spectra.

Fourthly, we show, that the transverse magnetic field 

applied to the thin films in close proximity to SIT acts 
through paramagnetic Zeeman spin-splitting effect. In the 
previous work [20] on 3 nm superconducting MoC film 
paramagnetic Zeeman effects dominated on both sides of 
the field-tuned SIT. The critical magnetic field Bc2(T) 
showed square root temperature dependence typical for 
paramagnetic pair breaking, the Zeeman effect was found 
in the superconducting density of states below 𝐵𝑐2, and at 
higher fields, in the normal state a depleted DOS due to
Altshuler-Aronov 
effect 
was 
detected. 
Also, 
the 

logarithmic AA anomaly in DOS present in the STM 
spectra at Bc2 was enhanced upon increasing magnetic field 
driving the system deeper into the insulating state. The
MoN films close to SIT indicate very similar effects. The 
spin-dependent and spatially homogeneous AA effect on 
superconducting 3 nm and thinner non-superconducting
samples is identified. Obviously this can be observed only 
in systems where the magnetic field acts on quasiparticles 


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

through Zeeman splitting. Therefore, it is very important 
that the magnetic field dependence of the superconducting 
energy gap (B) ~ √1 − 𝐵/𝐵𝑐2 typical for the presence of 
paramagnetic pair breaking of Cooper pairs was necessary
in the fits on the 3 nm superconducting sample. The 
temperature dependence of the critical magnetic field 
Bc2(T) of our sample shown in Fig. S2 [27] also indicates 
the dominance of paramagnetic effects. This follows not 
only from the square-root curvature of Bc2(T) in the vicinity 
of Tc (red dashed line) but also from the high value of 
Bc2(0) ~ 4.5 - 5 T close to the Clogston limit (𝐵𝑃[T] ≃
1.8𝑇𝑐[K]) [35], which for the superconductor with 
Tc = 2.9 K is 𝐵𝑃 = 5.2 T. The determination of the Bc2
values from our transport measurements is described in 
detail in the Suppl. Mater. [27]. Thus, in strongly disordered 
MoN thin films, when a transverse magnetic field is 
applied, Zeeman spin effects dominate both in the 
superconducting and the normal states.

The dominance of spin splitting effects has also been 

observed in systems that are close to the metal-insulator 
transition and exhibit “bad metallic” behavior due to strong 
electron correlations. Bogdanovich et al. [36] have shown 
that in boron-doped Si:B samples, the metal-insulator 
transition is controlled predominantly by electron 
correlations and orbital effects are unimportant despite 
strong spin-orbit effects. 

5 Conclusions

MoN films reveal a transition from superconducting to 
insulating/bad metallic phase upon decreasing thickness 
from 30 nm to 1.5 nm. The superconducting transition 
temperature is gradually shifted from about 6 K to 2.7 K in 
the case of 3 nm films accompanied by decreasing 
Ioffe-Regel parameter approaching unity. Films thinner
then 3 nm are already non-superconducting. The shift of Tc
is also accompanied by the increase of the sheet resistance 
and can be modelled by the Finkel’stein’s model for the 
enhanced electron interaction providing the critical sheet 
resistance Rcr = 2.3 kΩ where the superconductivity 
terminates. The scanning tunneling microscopy and 
spectroscopy measurements prove that Tc
and the 

superconducting gap  are coupled with a constant ratio for 
all films and that the superconducting DOS and the normal-
state Altshuler-Aronov DOS corrections are spatially 
homogeneous and no emergent granularity appears on 
either sides of SIT. The logarithmic AA DOS correction, is 
enhanced in increased magnetic field due to the Zeeman 
spin effects driving the system deeper into the insulating 
state. All this is pointing to purely fermionic SIT scenario 
in the system. 

Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge helpful 
conversations with M. Grajcar and R. Hlubina. 

Funding Information This work was supported by the 
projects 
APVV-20-0425, 
APVV-20-0324, 
VEGA 

2/0058/20, VEGA 1/0743/19, IMPULZ IM-2021-42, the 
EU ERDF Grant No. VA SR ITMS2014+ 313011W856, by 
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and 
Innovation Programme under Grant Agreement No. 
824109 (European Microkelvin Platform), the COST action 
CA21144 (SUPERQUMAP) and by U.S. Steel Košice.

References

[1]
A. F. Ioffe and A. R. Regel, Non-Crystalline, 
Amorphous and Liquid Electronic Semiconductors, 
Prog. Semicond. 4, 237 (1960).

[2]
V. F. Gantmakher and V. T. Dolgopolov, 
Superconductor–Insulator 
Quantum 
Phase 

Transition, Phys.-Usp. 53, 1 (2010).

[3]
M. P. A. Fisher, Quantum Phase Transitions in 
Disordered Two-Dimensional Superconductors, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 923 (1990).

[4]
A. M. Finkel’stein, Superconducting Transition 
Temperature in Amorphous Films, Pisma Zh. Eksp. 
Teor. Fiz. 45, 37 (1987) [Sov. Phys. JETP Lett 45, 
46 (1987)].

[5]
B. Sacépé, C. Chapelier, T. I. Baturina, V. M. 
Vinokur, M. R. Baklanov, and M. Sanquer, 
Disorder-Induced 
Inhomogeneities 
of 
the 

Superconducting 
State 
Close 
to 
the 

Superconductor-Insulator Transition, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 101, 157006 (2008).

[6]
B. Sacépé, C. Chapelier, T. I. Baturina, V. M. 
Vinokur, M. R. Baklanov, and M. Sanquer, 
Pseudogap in a Thin Film of a Conventional 
Superconductor, Nat. Commun. 1, 1 (2010).

[7]
B. Sacépé, T. Dubouchet, C. Chapelier, M. 
Sanquer, M. Ovadia, D. Shahar, M. Feigel’man, 
and L. Ioffe, Localization of Preformed Cooper 
Pairs in Disordered Superconductors, Nat. Phys. 7, 
239 (2011).

[8]         M. Chand, G. Saraswat, A. Kamlapure, M. Mondal, 

S. Kumar, J. Jesudasan, V. Bagwe, L. Benfatto, V. 
Tripathi, and P. Raychaudhuri, Phase Diagram of 
the Strongly Disordered S-Wave Superconductor 
NbN Close to the Metal-Insulator Transition, Phys. 
Rev. B 85, 014508 (2012).

[9]
A. Kamlapure, T. Das, S. C. Ganguli, J. B. Parmar, 
S. Bhattacharyya, and P. Raychaudhuri, Emergence 
of 
Nanoscale
Inhomogeneity 
in 
the 

Superconducting State of a Homogeneously 
Disordered Conventional Superconductor, Sci. 
Rep. 3, 1 (2013).

[10]
Y. Noat et al., Unconventional Superconductivity in 
Ultrathin Superconducting NbN Films Studied by 
Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B 
88, 014503 (2013).


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

[11]
S. Mandal, S. Dutta, S. Basistha, I. Roy, J. 
Jesudasan, V. Bagwe, L. Benfatto, A. Thamizhavel, 
and 
P. 
Raychaudhuri, 
Destruction 
of 

Superconductivity through Phase Fluctuations in 
Ultrathin α-MoGe Films, Phys. Rev. B 102, 
060501 (2020).

[12]
K. Bouadim, Y. L. Loh, M. Randeria, and N. 
Trivedi, Single- and Two-Particle Energy Gaps 
across the Disorder-Driven Superconductor–
Insulator Transition, Nat. Phys. 7, 884 (2011).

[13]
G. Lemarié, A. Kamlapure, D. Bucheli, L. 
Benfatto, J. Lorenzana, G. Seibold, S. C. Ganguli, 
P. Raychaudhuri, and C. Castellani, Universal 
Scaling of the Order-Parameter Distribution in 
Strongly 
Disordered 
Superconductors, 
Phys.

Rev. B 87, 184509 (2013).

[14]
S. Dutta, J. Jesudasan, and P. Raychaudhuri, 
Magnetic Field Induced Transition from a Vortex 
Liquid to Bose Metal in Ultrathin α-MoGe Thin 
Film, Phys. Rev. B 105, L140503 (2022).

[15]
C. Carbillet, S. Caprara, M. Grilli, C. Brun, T. Cren, 
F. Debontridder, B. Vignolle, W. Tabis, D. 
Demaille, L. Largeau, K. Ilin, M. Siegel, D. 
Roditchev, and B. Leridon, Confinement of 
Superconducting Fluctuations Due to Emergent 
Electronic Inhomogeneities, Phys. Rev. B 93, 
144509 (2016).

[16]
C. Carbillet, V. Cherkez, M. A. Skvortsov, M. V. 
Feigel'man, F. Debontridder, L. B. Ioffe, V. S. 
Stolyarov, K. Ilin, M. Siegel, D. Roditchev, T. 
Cren, and C. Brun, Spectroscopic Evidence for 
Strong 
Correlations 
between 
Local 

Superconducting Gap and Local Altshuler-Aronov 
Density of States Suppression in Ultrathin NbN 
Films, Phys. Rev. B 102, 024504 (2020).

[17]
J. M. Valles, R. C. Dynes, and J. P. Garno, Electron 
Tunneling Determination of the Order-Parameter 
Amplitude 
at 
the 
Superconductor-Insulator 

Transition in 2D, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3567 (1992).

[18]
S. Y. Hsu, J. A. Chervenak, and J. M. Valles, 
Magnetic Field Enhanced Order Parameter 
Amplitude Fluctuations in Ultrathin Films near the 
Superconductor-Insulator Transition, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 75, 132 (1995).

[19]
P. Szabó, T. Samuely, V. Hašková, J. Kačmarčík, 
M. Žemlička, M. Grajcar, J. G. Rodrigo, and P. 
Samuely, Fermionic Scenario for the Destruction 
of Superconductivity in Ultrathin MoC Films 
Evidenced by STM Measurements, Phys. Rev. B 93, 
014505 (2016).

[20]
M. Žemlička, M. Kopčík, P. Szabó, T. Samuely, J. 
Kačmarčík, P. Neilinger, M. Grajcar, and P. 
Samuely, 
Zeeman-Driven 
Superconductor-

Insulator Transition in Strongly Disordered MoC 
Films: Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and 

Transport Studies in a Transverse Magnetic Field, 
Phys. Rev. B 102, 180508(R) (2020).

[21]
K. Inumaru, K. Baba, and S. Yamanaka, Structural 
Distortion and Suppression of Superconductivity in 
Stoichiometric B1-MoN Epitaxial Thin Films, 
Phys. Rev. B 73, 052504 (2006).

[22]
B. T. Matthias and J. K. Hulm, A Search for New 
Superconducting Compounds, Phys. Rev. 87, 799 
(1952).

[23]
G. Hägg, Röntgenuntersuchungen Über Molybdän-
Und Wolframnitride, Z. Phys. Chem. 7, 339 (1930).

[24]
T. Tsuneoka, K. Makise, S. Maeda, B. Shinozaki, 
and F. Ichikawa, Localization and Pair Breaking 
Parameter 
in 
Superconducting 
Molybdenum 

Nitride Thin Films, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 29, 
015701 (2016).

[25]
H. Ihara, Y. Kimura, K. Senzaki, H. Kezuka, and 
M. Hirabayashi, Electronic Structures of B1 MoN, 
Fcc Mo2N, and Hexagonal MoN, Phys. Rev. B 31, 
3177 (1985).

[26]
M. Kozejova, V. Latyshev, V. Kavecansky, H. 
You, S. Vorobiov, A. Kovalcikova, and V. 
Komanicky, Evaluation of Hydrogen Evolution 
Reaction Activity of Molybdenum Nitride Thin 
Films on Their Nitrogen Content, Electrochim.
Acta 315, 9 (2019).

[27]
See Supplemental Material below.

[28]
R. C. Dynes, V. Narayanamurti, and J. P. Garno, 
Direct Measurement of Quasiparticle-Lifetime 
Broadening in a Strong-Coupled Superconductor, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1509 (1978).

[29]
F. 
Herman 
and 
R. 
Hlubina, 
Microscopic 

Interpretation of the Dynes Formula for the 
Tunneling Density of States, Phys. Rev. B 94, 
144508 (2016).

[30]
B. L. Altshuler, A. G. Aronov, and P. A. Lee, 
Interaction Effects in Disordered Fermi Systems in 
Two Dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 1288 (1980).

[31]
B. L. Altshuler and A. G. Aronov, Electron-
Electron Interactions in Disordered Systems, 
edited by A. L. Efros and M. Pollak, Modern 
Problems in Condensed Matter Sciences Vol. 10 
(Elsevier Science/North-Holland, New York, 
1985), p. 1.

[32]
J. M. Graybeal and M. R. Beasley, Localization and 
Interaction Effects in Ultrathin Amorphous 
Superconducting Films, Phys. Rev. B 29, 4167 
(1984).

[33]
M. Kuzmiak, M. Kopčík, F. Košuth, V. Vaňo, P. 
Szabó, V. Latyshev, V. Komanický, and P. 
Samuely, 
Suppressed 
Superconductivity 
in 

Ultrathin Mo2N Films Due to Pair-Breaking at the 
Interface, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 35, 1775 
(2022).

[34]
V. Hašková, M. Kopčík, P. Szabó, T. Samuely, J. 
Kačmarčík, O. Onufriienko, M. Žemlička, P. 


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

Neilinger, M. Grajcar, and P. Samuely, On the 
Origin of In-Gap States in Homogeneously 
Disordered Ultrathin Films. MoC Case, Appl.
Surf. Sci. 461, 143 (2018).

[35]
A. M. Clogston, Upper Limit for the Critical Field 
in Hard Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 9, 266 
(1962).

[36]
S. Bogdanovich, P. Dai, M. P. Sarachik, and V. 
Dobrosavljevic, 
Universal 
Scaling 
of 
the 

Magnetoconductance of Metallic Si:B, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 74, 2543 (1995).

Figures:

Fig. 1: a) Evolution of the temperature dependencies of the sheet resistance RS(T) with various thicknesses 
of MoN thin films. Film thicknesses are shown above the respective curves. b) The main panel shows 
thickness dependencies of the critical temperature TC (blue color, symbol ◻) and the Ioffe-Regel parameter 
kF.l (green color, symbol ⚪). The TC values have been determined at 50 % of the normal state sheet 
resistance. The inset shows the dependence of the normal state sheet resistance RSN on the critical 
temperature TC (black △ symbols). The red curve is a fit to the Finkel'stein’s model with fitting parameters 
given in the legend. The analysis of the transport data is detailly described in the Suppl. Mat. [27].


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

Fig. 2: color plots of the typical STM tunneling spectra measured on MoN thin films with 30, 3 and 2 nm 
thicknesses at different temperatures at B = 0 T a), b), c) are shown in the upper panels. All spectra have 
been normalized to their values at 3 mV bias. The tunneling spectra from a) and b) were fitted to Dynes 
formula, spectra from c) to Altshuler-Aronov effect defined in formula (1) including thermal smearing in 
all cases. Selected experimental curves from the upper panels (lines) and the fitting curves (symbols) are 
shown in the corresponding lower panels. 


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

Fig. 3: color plots of the typical STM tunneling spectra measured on MoN thin films with 3, 2 and 1.5 nm 
thicknesses at different magnetic fields at T = 0.5 K a), b), c) are shown in the upper panels. All spectra 
have been normalized to their values at 3 mV bias energy. The magnetic field dependencies from a) and 
b) correspond to spectra shown in Fig. 2b) and c). The tunneling spectra from a) were fitted to Dynes 
formula including Altshuler-Aronov corrections, spectra from b) and c) to Altshuler-Aronov effect defined 
in formula (3) including thermal smearing in both cases. Selected experimental curves from the upper 
panels (lines) and the fitting curves (symbols) are shown in the corresponding lower panels. The horizontal 
black lines at each set are positioned to the conductance values (at B = 8 T) 0.75, 0.6 and 0.48 for 3, 2 and 
1.5 nm thin films, respectively.


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

Fig. 4: Typical tunneling spectra measured in the non-superconducting samples with 1.5 and 2 nm 
thicknesses (pink and blue line, resp.) at T = 0.5 K. The fitting curves to Altshuler-Aronov model are 
shown with symbols of corresponding color. The black symbols show the theoretically calculated 
Altshuler-Aronov contribution to the total DOS at the superconducting 3 nm sample at B = 0T. All curves 
were normalized to their 5 mV bias values.


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

Fig. 5: Surface topographies a), d) and the corresponding Zero-Bias-Conductance (ZBC) maps b), c), e), 
f) of the superconducting 3 nm (left panels) and non-superconducting 2nm (right panels) MoN thin films
taken at indicated magnetic fields. 3 nm sample shows protrusions as this in the oval in a) which is reflected 
also in deeper ZBC data in the oval in b) taken in superonducting state at T = 0.5 K and B = 0 T while 
above Bc2 this contrast is lost, see c). Protrusions found in fully non-superconducting 2 nm sample in d) 
has no reflections in either of ZBC maps in e) and f). 


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

Fig. 6: Typical 40 nm long linecuts of the tunneling spectra constructed from the spectral maps measured 
on 3 nm thin film in the superconducting (T = 0.5 K and B = 0 T) and normal state (B = 7.5 T > Bc2) in a) 
and b), respectively, and on non-superconducting 2nm and 1.5nm thin films (T = 0.5 K and B = 0 T), c) 
and d), respectively. Tunneling spectra in a) are taken along the white line in Fig. 5a). Figures b)-d) are 
plotted in the same color scale, shown above b).


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

Supplemental Material

Disorder- and magnetic field-tuned fermionic superconductor-insulator transition             

in MoN thin films: Transport and scanning tunneling microscopy

M. Kuzmiak,1,2 M. Kopčík,1,2 F. Košuth,1,3 V. Vaňo1,2, J. Haniš1,3, T. Samuely3, V. Latyshev3, O. Onufriienko1,              V. 

Komanický3, J. Kačmarčík1, M. Žemlička4, M. Gmitra1, P. Szabó1, and P. Samuely1

1Centre of Low Temperature Physics, Institute of Experimental Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, SK-04001 

Košice, Slovakia

2Department of Physics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Informatics, Technical University of Košice, 

SK-04001 Košice, Slovakia

3 Institute of Physics, Faculty of Science, Pavol Jozef Šafárik University in Košice, SK- 04001 Košice, Slovakia

4QphoX B.V., Elektronicaweg 10, 2628XG Delft, Netherlands

Magnetotransport measurements

The magnetotransport measurements have been performed with a standard DC four-probe technique, where four 50 
µm silver wires were attached with silver paste to the edges of the 5 × 5 mm2 sample The magnetic field was 
applied perpendicular to the plane of the MoN thin films. The sheet resistance RS as a function of temperature T was 
measured down to 1.4 K using an Oxford Instruments VTI system, at lower temperatures down to T = 0.3 K in 
PPMS and Janis SSV 3He refrigerator. Fig. S1 shows our magnetotransport data obtained on 30 nm a), 10 nm b) and 
3 nm c) thin films at magnetic fields marked in the legends. The upper critical magnetic field Bc2(T) was determined 
at 90% of the normal state sheet resistances of the RS(T) curves measured at fixed magnetic fields (Fig. S2). While 
Bc2(T) curves of the 30 nm and 10 nm thin films show conventional linear temperature dependencies near Tc typical 
for orbital pair breaking, the critical field of the 3 nm thin film reveales a negative curvature with a square root 
dependence ∝ √𝑇𝑐 − 𝑇 (red dashed line). The change in the curvature of the Bc2(T) dependencies near Tc from linear 
to square root indicate that in our samples with increasing disorder the pair-breaking mechanism changes from 
orbital (30 nm and 10 nm films) to paramagnetic (3 nm film) [Y. Matsuda and H. Shimahara, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 76, 
(2007) 051005]. To confirm we also applied a different method, the well-known Ullah-Dosey scaling procedure for 
2D superconductors to determine the Bc2 values on the 3 nm thin films [S. Ullah and A.T. Dorsey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
44 (1991) 262]. Ullah and Dorsey (UD) proposed a scaling of  the superconducting fluctuation conductivity related 
to the fluctuations of the amplitude and the phase of the order parameter. Then the fluctuation conductivity σ2D
scales as

Δ𝜎2D

UD(𝑇, 𝐵) = √𝑇𝜇0

𝐵 𝑓2D [𝐴 𝑇 − 𝑇c(𝐵)

√𝑇𝐵/𝜇0

],

where f2D is an unknown scaling function, and A is an appropriate constant characterizing the material. The 
fluctuation conductivity Δ was determined by subtracting the normal state conductivity from the actual 
conductivity, calculated from resistive transitions above 65% of the normal state sheet resistance. According to this 
equation, the scaled experimental  Δ𝜎(𝑇, 𝐵) curves at correct values of the Tc(B)’s should collapse on one single 
curve enabling direct determination of the normal state transition Tc at different magnetic fields (or Bc2 at different 
temperatures).


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

FIGURE S1. Temperature dependencies of the sheet resistance RS(T) measured in MoN 30 nm a), 10 nm b), and 3 nm c) thin 
films at indicated magnetic fields. 

FIGURE S2. a) Bc2 of MoN films with thicknesses of 30 nm (green symbols), 10 nm (blue symbols), and 3 nm (red symbols) 
determined from transport data shown in Fig. S1 at 90 % of the normal state sheet resistance. The black asterisks  show Bc2
values of the 3 nm thin film, determined from the Ullah-Dorsey scaling procedure for 2D superconductors. b) The Ullah-Dorsey 
scaling curves, calculated from the resistive transitions, shown in Fig. S1 c).

Figure S2b) shows our transport data of the 3nm thin film from Fig S1c) after succesfull UD scaling. The values of 
Bc2(T) determined by this method are indicated in Figure S2a) by black asterisks. It is evident that the Bc2(T) 
determined by UD scaling is close to the values determined from the RS(T) curves at the 90% transition and both 
criteria give a square root dependence of Bc2(T) close to Tc. 

Finkel’stein’s analysis of the transport data

The critical temperatures of the thin films as the function of the corresponding sheet resistances were analyzed in the 
framework of the widely used Finkel’stein's model [4]. In this theory the reduced Tc upon increased disorder is 
supposed to be the result of the increased Coulomb interaction. The decreasing Tc is directly related to the increase 
of Rs as

𝑇c = 𝑇𝑐0exp(−1/𝛾){[1 + 𝐿]/[1 − 𝐿]}1/√2𝑟 ,

where L = √(𝑟/2)/(𝛾 − 𝑟/4), 𝛾 = 1/ln(𝑘B𝑇co𝜏/ħ), and 𝑟 = 𝑅s/(2𝜋2ħ/𝑒2), 𝑇𝑐0 is the Tc of the bulk sample and τ 
is the elastic scattering time of electrons. This model enables to estimate the value of the critical sheet resistance Rc
at which the SIT occurs.
The level of disorder has been characterized with the Ioffe-Regel product of kFl, which approaches unity near critical 
disorder [1]. Its value was calculated from the expression

𝑘𝐹𝑙 = ħ(3𝜋2)2/3

𝑒5/3
[𝑅𝐻

1/3

𝑅𝑆 𝑡 ].

The Hall coefficient 𝑅𝐻 was determined from Hall measurements realized in a Quantum Design Physical Properties 
Measurement System (PPMS).


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

STM topograghy measurements

FIGURE S3. STM surface topographies of the MoN samples were measured at 30, 3 and 2 nm thicknesses in respective a), b) 
and c). The image sizes were 200 x 200 nm2 a), 300 x 300 nm2 b), and 100 x 100 nm2 c). The measuring parameters are: 
V = 50 mV, I = 1.1 nA, T = 1 K a), V = 42 mV, I = 3.4 nA, T = 0.45K b), and V = 90 mV, I = 0.5 nA, T = 0.5K c). The insets 
show graphs of the the corrugation analysis, with 1.2 nm averaged corrugation for the 30 nm sample a) 0.5 nm for the 3 nm 
sample and 0.35 nm for the 2 nm sample, resp.  

Temperature dependencies of the superconducting energy gap

FIGURE S4. Temperature dependencies of the 
superconducting energy gap Δ(T) of 30 nm a) and 3 nm b) 
thin MoN  films (open symbols) determined from fitting to 
Dynes formula. The  color symbols  are fitting values of Δ
and  of the curves shown in the lower panels of Fig. 2 in 
the main text. The red lines show predictions of the BCS 
theory. The fitting parameters are:  Δ(0) = 0.87 meV,   Tc 
= 5.6 K, 2Δ(0)/kBTC = 3.6 for the 30 nm and 
Δ(0) = 0.44 meV, TC = 2.9 K, 2Δ(0)/kBTC = 3.55 for 3 nm 
sample. 

Magnetic field dependencies of the tunneling spectra

FIGURE S5. a) 3D plot of the magnetic field dependence 
of the typical tunneling spectra measured on 30 nm thin 
MoN film. The inset show the side view of the same 
dependence.This figure is a direct supplement to Fig. 3 in 
the main text.


TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS
JOURNAL GOES HERE

FIGURE S6. Top views of the magnetic field dependencies of the tunneling spectra presented in Fig. S5 and Fig. 3a) of the main 
text for 30 nm a) and 3 nm b) MoN thin films. The dashed lines emphasize the evolution of the gap-peak position with increased 
magnetic field.

Theoretical magnetic field dependence of the Altshuler-Aronov effect in 3 nm thin MoN film

FIGURE S7. Theoretical magnetic field dependence of the  
Altshuler-Aronov effect in 3 nm thin MoN film used at the 
fitting procedure of the magnetic field dependence shown 
in Fig. 3a) of the main text.  The short black horizontal 
lines below the curves show the value of 0.75.


