1

Real-time Autonomous Control of a Continuous Macroscopic Process as 
Demonstrated by Plastic Forming

Shun Muroga1*, Takashi Honda2, Yasuaki Miki1, Hideaki Nakajima1, Don N. Futaba1, Kenji Hata1

1: Nano Carbon Device Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba 

Central 5, 1-1-1, Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8565, Japan

2: Research Association of High-Throughput Design and Development for Advanced Functional Materials (ADMAT), 

Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8568, Japan

*Corresponding author. E-mail: muroga-sh@aist.go.jp

Abstract

To meet the demands for more adaptable and expedient approaches to augment both research and manufacturing, we 

report an autonomous system using real-time in-situ characterization and an autonomous, decision-making processer 

based on an active learning algorithm. This system was applied to a plastic film forming system to highlight its 

efficiency and accuracy in determining the process conditions for specified target film dimensions, importantly,

without any human intervention. Application of this system towards nine distinct film dimensions demonstrated the 

system ability to quickly determine the appropriate and stable process conditions (average 11 characterization-

adjustment iterations, 19 minutes) and the ability to avoid traps, such as repetitive over-correction. Furthermore, 

comparison of the achieved film dimensions to the target values showed a high accuracy (R² = 0.87, 0.90) for film 

width and thickness, respectively. In addition, the use of an active learning algorithm afforded our system to proceed 

optimization with zero initial training data, which was unavailable due to the complex relationships between the 

control factors (material supply rate, applied force, material viscosity) within the plastic forming process. As our 

system is intrinsically general and can be applied to any most material processes, these results have significant 

implications in accelerating both research and industrial processes.

1. Introduction

All things in daily life possess a form or shape, which is determined based on its function, such as for ease of handling, 

motion, or construction. Such macroscopic forms and their manufacturing processes are intrinsically connected to 

diverse industry sectors including plastics, rubber, food, and pharmaceuticals. In various systems, slurries, pastes, 

and high-temperature melts are precisely controlled and engineered in macroscopic forming processes to produce 

diverse commonplace products in mass-quantities, for example tapes, rods, and sheets (Figure 1a). Thus, these 

macroscopic forming processes play a vital role in the creation of everyday products. However, with the increasingly

changing needs of the user, the target properties consequently change. This demands a more adaptable approach to 

fabrication and process control. Thus, the manual adjustment and “tuning” of the manufacturing processes which 

entail a wide range of parameters can be labor and time intensive. Against this backdrop, significant effort has been 

placed in research to advance from automated process control to autonomous process control.


2

Autonomy is a concept one step beyond the conventional idea of automation, as it incorporates the ability for 

independent decisions-making, which, in principle, completely removes the need for human intervention. This 

paradigm frees the human “operators” to focus attention on other scientific or industrial issues, particularly those not 

suited to automation or autonomous systems. Recently, research into the development of autonomous systems, i.e.,

“autonomization,” has been intensively pursued worldwide especially in the field of materials exploration, such as 

organics, inorganics, and nanomaterials. In the case of organics, there have been reports on optimizing chemical

synthesis in batch[1] and flow reactors[2–4], as well as the exploration of organic solar cells[5], organic semiconductors[6], 

photocatalysts[7], and photo-curable resins[8]. For inorganics, the application of autonomous systems has been 

reported involving thin-film synthesis[9,10] and combustion synthesis[11], along with the investigation of magnetic 

materials[12] and phase-change memory materials[13]. Regarding nanomaterials, autonomization has been applied to 

the chemical vapor deposition synthesis of carbon nanotubes for investigating such aspects as growth rates and 

physical structures [14,15] Furthermore, the use of autonomization has also been applied to the exploration of process 

protocols. For example, Attia et al. successfully performed autonomous exploration to devise a six-step charging 

protocol that improved battery longevity.[16] In addition, Nagai et al. autonomously identified a stepwise heating 

protocol that reduced defects during the drying process of fuel cell slurries [17]. These examples demonstrate the 

diversity in the applicability of autonomous control in the various research fields to accelerate research. 

In contrast, autonomization for macroscopic forming processes has not received significant attention, and the research 

in this area is surprisingly underdeveloped given its significance to manufacturing. This may be, in part, due to the

difficulty in integrating several separate disciplines, such as precision automation, autonomous control, and system 

integration. While some research has focused on autonomous batch forming processes using 3D printers [18,19], no 

research has been conducted on the autonomization of continuous macroscopic forming, despite its direct 

applicability to numerous continuous synthesis processes as well as its paramount importance for industrial mass 

production. To achieve autonomous control for a continuous forming process, a “closed-loop” system equipped with 

an autonomous decision-making process and control based on real-time characterization data, such as dimensional 

and/or property characterization is required as the process does not halt.

Here, we report an autonomous system for a continuous macroscopic process using real-time in-situ characterization 

feedback (Figure 1b). As a demonstration, we applied our autonomous system to the plastic forming into films to 

highlight its efficiency and accuracy in achieving diverse target dimensions without human intervention. In this study, 

our system controlled the entire plastic forming process, where plastic pellets are fed, melted, transported, and 

extruded through a die (i.e., slit), cooled and collected onto a roll[20,21]. The system was also equipped with real-time

in-situ thickness and width monitoring to appropriately balance the various process parameters (material feed rate, 

draw rate, and applied heat), as illustrated in Figure 1c. Because of the complex relationships between these factors, 

the balancing of these factors was critical for not only determining conditions for targeted film dimensions, but also

to ensure film uniformity[22]. In addition, our system showed “instability avoidance” (i.e., ability to avoid being 


3

trapped within a parameter space of unstable states). Accuracy and efficiency of this system were demonstrated by 

the rapid convergence for nine diverse target values spanning different combinations of widths and thicknesses. 

Importantly, the decision-making section of our system was based on an active learning algorithm, which required 

no prior training, and target values could be achieved in an average of 11 iterations (~19 minutes). As this system is 

intrinsically general, it can be applied to any type of material process, and thus we believe that our findings will 

significantly promote the autonomization of continuous forming processes, paving the way for broader applications 

and implementations in the numerous research and industrial fields. 

2. Results and Discussion

2.1 Demonstration of Autonomous Forming Process

To begin, we demonstrate the ability of our system to efficiently and independently determine the conditions to

fabricate a film of specified dimensions (width/thickness) by employing an active learning processer to guide the 

autonomous operation. The sequence of states (i.e. “trajectory”) following the progress is shown in Figure 1d. The 

progression of process adjustments is depicted as a transition from blue to red, with red indicating the endpoint. Star-

shaped markers indicate the target positions for width and thickness, and the circular markers represent the states

during the progression of the convergence process. In viewing this trajectory, we can make three observations. First, 

the conditions to fabricate the film with the target width and thickness were achieved in eight characterization-

adjustment iterations, which required only 24 minutes to complete. This highlights one of the features of this system, 

process efficiency, which would be challenging to achieve through manual operation. This achievement is particularly 

exceptional because the system was not provided with any prior training and without using preset responses as used 

in commercial air-conditioning systems. Second, the trajectory appears incomprehensible to human understanding as 

it appears to be completely random in nature. However, by calculating and plotting relative root mean square at each 

iteration, the clear reduction in error indicates the apparent gradual target convergence, which is interrupted twice 

with two abrupt increases in error (Figure 1d, inset). This behavior is significant and inherent to the active learning 

process and underscores that the happenings in the active learning process surpass human comprehension. Third, this 

demonstration shows an important feature of our system: “instability avoidance,” which we describe as the ability to 

avoid falling within a parameter domain of unstable conditions from which it becomes trapped due to the decision-

making algorithm (Figure 2). This is analogous to repeated overcorrection in numerical analysis, which is well known 

by oscillations about the convergence point in the Newton Method. To further demonstrate this point, we applied our 

system to optimize the process conditions for a target film width and thickness using two different approaches: 

conventional control and real-time, active learning. In the case where conventional control was employed, which 

involved sequential exploration the process conditions and process-adjustment decisions based on gradient to

determine how to modulate one of the current process conditions (Figure 2a). While conventional systems can be 

used for some situations, our results show that it was unable to find the optimal control conditions for the target 

values of width and thickness. Instead, the system became trapped as discussed earlier and failed to converge to the 

target value. In contrast, when using real-time active learning, the model decisively and, on occasion, drastically 

changed process conditions, while maintaining a balance between the unexplored regions within the process 

conditions and the range that was projected to be closer to the target (Figure 2b). In doing so, this algorithm 


4

demonstrated “instability avoidance” and efficiently converged to the target values. We interpret that this behavior 

was the source of the two abrupt increases in error in the root mean error plot of Figure 1d, inset. In fact, in this test, 

the conventional process control was unable to reach the target values even after 30 minutes; whereas, target values 

were achieved in about 8 minutes with our active learning-based autonomous control. Taken together, these

autonomous optimization results demonstrate improvement in process optimization efficiency, robustness and 

importantly, remove the need for human intervention. 

2.2 Configuration of the Autonomous Forming System

Next, we describe the key components of our autonomous forming system. Our autonomously-controlled forming 

process consists of key primary components: 1) the plastic forming component; 2) the in-situ evaluation component; 

and 3) the autonomous processor. The plastic forming component represents the mechanical material fabrication and 

manufacturing section of our system. This section controllably feeds plastic pellets (master batch) into a hopper, 

applies heat to melt and coalesce the beads to form a cohesive molten unit, extrudes this molten plastic through a slit-

shaped die to form the basic cross-sectional shape, which is then cooled and collected (Figure 1a). Each aspect of 

this process: feed rate, temperature, and draw rate represent the critical interconnected parameters which must be 

mutually adjusted to avoid instability, such as the generation of wrinkles caused by “draw resonance phenomena”, 

where the film exhibits fluctuations or resonances in its dimensions, as the process attempts to find a stable condition

(Figure 1c). The in-situ evaluation component provides real-time diagnostics of the film dimensions (width and 

thickness), which then streams into the autonomous processor as a basis for the next decision (e.g. adjustment or 

hold) (Figure 1b). In this text, we denote this cycle as “characterization-adjustment” iterations. Leveraging the 

birefringence of plastics to vividly capture the appearance of the film, real-time detection of the formed plastic shape 

was made possible using a setup involving commercially available polarizers and a digital camera. Thickness 

information was accurately and rapidly acquired using a laser displacement meter. Together, these two evaluations 

afforded real-time evaluation of two key physical film dimensions, width and thickness. 

The autonomous processor section represents the core of our system as it accepts process and evaluation data, 

interpretates this data, decides the appropriate process adjustment, and sends these orders to the plastic forming 

component (Figure 1b). As previously mentioned, due to the complex relationship between the process parameters 

on the resulting film, such as material grade and temperature-dependent rheological properties, pre-accumulated data 

for training can often be lacking. Therefore, the autonomous processor was designed using an active learning 

algorithm, which allows for autonomous control of the macroscopic forming process, even for materials without any 

pre-existing data (i.e., training data). In active learning, an untrained model is gradually trained, which progressively 

improves its predictive accuracy over time by interactively selecting conditions. This method of development is 

analogous to child development, where initially there is no knowledge and general understanding. Then, through 

gradual learning from various sensory inputs, the child learns numerous causal relationships, i.e. gains knowledge. 

In principle, provided sufficient characterization and controls, the evolved model is expected to achieve the level of 

a “skilled-craftsman”.


5

In our system employing active learning, the relationship between the process conditions and the target is sequentially 

trained by the model. A critical step during this training is the formulation of strategies to determine the ensuing 

process conditions. Two key aspects here are: (1) aiming for multiple targets of different orders, such as width (~10s 

mm) and thickness (~sub-mm), and (2) setting the criteria to efficiently determine the next set of conditions amidst 

uncertain predictions with a limited number of experimental data points. In this study, we introduced the relative root 

mean squared error for multiple targets of different orders, transforming into a single objective function for 

optimization. Furthermore, we applied Bayesian optimization with an acquisition function called "Expected

Improvement" to efficiently explore optimal process conditions. This metric considers both the proximity to the 

desired target from the data obtained thus far and the uncertainty in the regions of unexplored process conditions. By 

introducing these techniques into the active learning process, we achieved a closed-loop system that afforded 

autonomous control of the process and thereby removed the need for human intervention, while also accounting for 

multiple targets. 

2.3 Versatility Demonstration of Autonomous Forming Process to Diverse Target Values

To demonstrate the ability of this system to determine process conditions for diverse target dimensions both 

accurately and efficiently, nine different targets were selected spanning different combinations of width and thickness. 

The system was directed to autonomously achieve these values similar to that described in Section 2.1 (Figure 3a). 

As a whole, target values were achieved with exceptional efficiency as evidenced by an average of 11 

characterization-adjustment iterations, which corresponded to an average processing time of 19 minutes. The most 

rapid target required only 3 iterations (1.4 minutes), while the relatively “slowest” required 32 iterations (50 minutes). 

We would like to note that while 32 iterations in a 50-minute period appears long, this equates to one iteration every 

1.56 minutes and exemplifies the advantages of autonomous control versus manual operation: rapid measurement-

adjustment iteration and untiring ability to make data-driven decisions. To highlight the accuracy of autonomous 

operation, we compared the target widths and thicknesses to the achieved values (Figure 3b and Figure 3c, 

respectively), which show excellent agreement. The coefficient of determination (R²) between the target and 

controlled values as a quantitative indicator of the control accuracy was estimated to be R² = 0.87 for width and 0.90 

for thickness, which numerically shows the level of accuracy and importantly that our system can autonomously 

control the dimensions of the film with high accuracy and efficiency.  

2.4 Interpretation of the Results 

Taken together, our results demonstrate a system capable of autonomous manufacturing forming process of plastic 

films based on active learning to make process-adjustment decisions both accurately and efficiently to achieve 

targeted material dimensions. Here, we would like to discuss several aspects of our results.  

As we examine the resultant process conditions for the nine target values as a whole, the complexity of the solutions 

from the autonomous processor can be observed (Figure 3d,e,f). We cannot fully explain the optimization results of 

a three-parameter process, because the solution is likely not unique and dependent on the initial conditions and 

specific trajectory during the learning process. However, in examining these results, we can make some observations 


6

from a material perspective. First, we observe that the trends of the determined process conditions for the feed rate 

differ from that of the draw rate and the temperature. As the target width and thickness decreases, we observe uniform 

and regular changes in both the draw rate and the temperature from small width and thickness to large width and 

thickness. This is explained by the strong sensitivity of the plastic viscosity to small (~10°C) changes in temperature. 

For example, while operating at the same shear rate the plastic viscosity decreases by 30% from 1315 Pa s at 270°C 

to 931 Pa s at 280°C (Figure S1). Therefore, within our range of selected target values, temperature adjustment 

appeared relatively minor except for the most extreme decrease in dimensionality, where it was increased to improve 

plastic fluidity. In contrast, the draw rate behavior shows higher speeds for decreased target widths and thicknesses, 

corresponding to the need for greater shear for dimensional reduction. However, we observe the most interesting 

behavior in the feed rate, i.e. material supply. The most glaring feature is the discontinuity across the target conditions

(Figure 3d). We believe that this result exemplifies the unbiased decision-making process of our system, as its goal 

is to find a stable process condition to achieve a given target value. Despite the divergence from the other feed rate 

values, balance between with the viscosity (i.e., temperature) and draw rate were achieved. Thus, the system we 

developed can autonomously determine the unbiased process conditions appropriate for numerous target values. 

2.5 Implications and Challenges of Our Autonomous Forming Process

The performance of our system presented here represents significant implications towards the future of the unmanned 

operation of continuous processes for both research and manufacturing. Specifically, our results highlight the benefits 

of autonomous control compared to conventional control, such as reduced measurement-adjustment iteration time, 

efficient condition selection, and objective decision-making (i.e., absence of human bias). Furthermore, manual 

operation requires the need for analysis and deliberation, which results in lost operation time; whereas autonomous 

control can perform these tasks nearly immediately while also affording data-driven selection of unexplored process 

conditions that provide the greatest increase in value. Thus, optimization can be pursued at early stages of data 

acquisition, even without extensive pre-existing process data.  

Finally, we would like to discuss areas of improvement. While our system has demonstrated exceptional autonomous 

optimization, we do recognize some areas of improvement. First, higher required accuracy would require more 

measurement-adjustment iterations, thus longer optimization times. Therefore, for our current system, the target 

accuracy must be predetermined. In the future, we expect that target accuracy to be an autonomous determination by 

the system. Second, within our current system, the range of process conditions is predefined. This aspect is important 

not only from the perspective of control efficiency but also in terms of human and machine safety. For instance, in 

the case of this study, insufficient heating combined with high feed rate would result in excessive torque in the 

machine which could result in damage. In this context, we set the upper and lower limits based on the material 

rheological properties and the behavior of the process. We would expect that the addition of real-time system 

diagnostics would be a natural next step to allow the autonomous processor to independently determine parametric 

boundaries. In addition, autonomous control models combining domain knowledge of materials with large-scale 

language models is expected to represent a significant role in determining the control range for process conditions 

considering the nature of materials. Third, we expect that the additional process controls, such as roller temperature, 


7

ambient and humidity, and equipment geometry would add both versatility and accuracy.

3. Conclusion

We have demonstrated an autonomous and continuous macroscopic forming process based on an active learning 

decision-making algorithm. This system was demonstrated in the manufacture of plastic film forming as a model 

system. Equipped with real-time in-situ evaluation, the film properties were accurately captured and used as inputs

to the autonomous processor as the measurement-adjustment iteration to realize autonomous control of process 

conditions governing material input, draw force, and heating, without human intervention. Moreover, it was 

demonstrated that even when the target width and thickness of the film were altered, the constructed system could 

autonomously adjust to the optimal process conditions with high precision. Importantly, due to the actively learning-

based processor, zero training was required prior to assigning film dimensional targets which were achieved on an 

average of 11 iterations (~19 minutes). These results demonstrate the high efficiency of our system to autonomously 

determine process conditions without the need for human intervention. The proposed method in this study is general 

and can be extended to most any types of research and manufacturing processes involving continuous forming of 

materials from synthesis to slurries, pastes, and melts. We believe that our findings will significantly promote the 

autonomization of continuous processes, paving the way for broader applications and implementations in the various 

fields. 

4. Experimental Section

Material

A commercially available polycarbonate pellet (Panlite L1225-LL, Teijin Limited) was used for the macroscopic 

forming process in this study. The rheological properties of this polycarbonate were measured using an oscillatory 

shear rheometer (AR-2000, TA Instruments, Inc.) as shown in Figure S1. 

Continuous Macroscopic Process

The plastic film forming process was chosen as a typical macroscopic forming process in this study. The pellets were 

fed into the hopper, melted, and extruded into a T-shaped die, subsequently cooled by air and rollers to form the shape 

of the film. Our developed process was consisted of following five units: (1) a compounding machine (Labo-

plastomill 10C100, Toyo Seiki Co., Ltd.), (2) a co-rotating twin-screw extruder unit (2D15W, Toyo Seiki Co., Ltd.) 

with a screw diameter of 15 mm, a screw aspect ratio of 17, and two heating blocks, (3) a T-shaped coat-hanger die 

(MT-60B, Toyo Seiki Co., Ltd) with a slit width of 60 mm, (4) a film haul-off unit (FT2B8, Toyo Seiki Co., Ltd.)

with a thermostatic circulating oil bath (NTT-20G, Tokyo Rikakikai Co., Ltd.) to keep the roller temperature constant, 

and (5) a loss-in-weight feeder (AD-4826A, A&D Company, Limited.) for controlling the feed rate of the pellets to 

the twin-screw extruder. The appearance of our developed process is shown in Figure S2. 

In-situ Evaluation

A digital single-lens reflex camera (ILCE-6600 & SEL18135, SONY Corporation) and a flat panel light-emitting 


8

diode (TH2-83X75SW, CCS, Inc.) were used to observe the appearance of the film. In addition, two linear polarizer 

sheets (MLPH40L-2, MeCan Imaging, Inc.) and a 1/4 wavelength sheet (MCR140N-2, MeCan Imaging, Inc.) with 

a retardation of 140 nm were introduced for the crossed Nicols polarization setup with a sensitive tint plate. The main 

optical axis of the 1/4 wavelength sheet was parallel to the flow direction of the film, while those of the linear polarizer 

sheets were rotated ±45 degrees from the flow direction. The edges of the film were detected by the image processing 

based on Hough transform (Figure S3.). A laser displacement meter (CL-P015, Keyence Corporation) was also 

placed on the roller to measure the film thickness. 

Autonomous Real-time Process Control

To achieve autonomous process control, we introduced active learning and decision making based on acquisition 

function. In essence, active learning guides the autonomous optimization process by prioritizing where to try next, 

focusing on the most potentially informative conditions. This method is more efficient than traditional methods 

because it strategically selects the most valuable trials, reducing the number of trials required to optimize the 

conditions. A Gaussian process regressor based on the Matérn 3/2 kernel function and with a length scale of 1.0 was 

used to link the relationship between process conditions and target properties. The objective function was set to the 

negative of the relative mean squared error between the target properties (width, thickness) normalized by their target 

values. The reason for introducing the ”relative” means squared error is to normalize the differences in the number 

of digits of the properties. For example, the width range is 10 – 40 mm, while the thickness range is 0 - 0.1 mm. The 

acquisition function for determining the next process conditions was the expected improvement (EI). This approach 

focuses on a balance between exploring the uncertain parameter space and exploiting the best parameter predicted 

by a probabilistic model from previous results. In the context of conducting real-time active learning, it is vital to 

ensure that the process conditions, particularly the temperature, have reached a steady state. Therefore, a situation 

where the process temperature falls within the range of the set value ±0.5℃ is considered a balanced state. In this 

state, the average width and thickness of the film are calculated to serve as inputs for the active learning process.

Some examples of the autonomous control in this study are shown in Figure S4. 

Computational Environment

A commercial workstation was used to connect all instruments of the system and to run the autonomous control

program. The specification of the workstation is Windows 10 for Workstation operating system with a central 

processing unit of AMD EPYC 7702P (64 cores, 128 threads, 2.0GHz clock speed), a graphics processing unit of

NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090, and 128GB of memory (eight 16GB DDR4-3200 ECC registered memories). The 

program of autonomous control was performed on a computational environment of python=3.9.7, cuda=11.4.152, 

with numpy=1.21.5, pandas=1.3.5, scikit-learn=1.0.1, matplotlib=3.5.1, opencv-python=4.5.4.60, and modAL[23]. 

Acknowledgments

We appreciate Mr. Tomohisa Hayashida, Mrs. Megumi Terauchi for their technical support of the experiments. The 

authors are grateful to Dr. Toshiya Okazaki, Dr. Hiroshi Morita, Dr. Ken Kokubo for their support. This work was 

supported by a project (JPNP16010) commissioned by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development 


9

Organization (NEDO).

Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Author Contributions

Conceptualization: S.M., K.H., Methodology: S.M., Software: S.M., T.H., Formal Analysis: S.M., Investigation: S.M., 

Y.M., H.N., D.N.F. Visualization: S.M., D.N.F., Supervision: K.H., Writing – Original Draft: S.M. Writing - Review 

& Editing: D.N.F. Specifically, S.M. designed all experimental setup, developed the software of the autonomous 

control, conducted experiments and calculations, and prepared this paper. T.H. developed the software for the real-

time connection of multiple instruments. Y.M. contributed to the twin-screw extruder. H.N. contributed to the laser 

displacement meter. D.N.F. contributed to the investigation of the results, visualization, and writing the manuscript. 

K.H. supervised and managed the project. 

Data Availability

Additional supporting data generated during the present study are available from the corresponding author upon 

reasonable request.

Keywords: autonomous process control, active learning, Bayesian optimization, macroscopic forming process, 

plastic film

References

[1] M. Christensen, L. P. E. Yunker, F. Adedeji, F. Häse, L. M. Roch, T. Gensch, G. dos Passos Gomes, T. Zepel, M. 

S. Sigman, A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. E. Hein, Commun. Chem. 2021, 4, 112.

[2] A. M. Schweidtmann, A. D. Clayton, N. Holmes, E. Bradford, R. A. Bourne, A. A. Lapkin, Chem. Eng. J. 2018, 

352, 277.

[3] M. Rubens, J. H. Vrijsen, J. Laun, T. Junkers, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 3183.

[4] S. T. Knox, S. J. Parkinson, C. Y. P. Wilding, R. A. Bourne, N. J. Warren, Polym. Chem. 2022, 13, 1576.

[5] S. Langner, F. Häse, J. D. Perea, T. Stubhan, J. Hauch, L. M. Roch, T. Heumueller, A. Aspuru‐Guzik, C. J. Brabec, 

Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 1907801.

[6] C. Kunkel, J. T. Margraf, K. Chen, H. Oberhofer, K. Reuter, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 2422.

[7] B. Burger, P. M. Maffettone, V. V. Gusev, C. M. Aitchison, Y. Bai, X. Wang, X. Li, B. M. Alston, B. Li, R. Clowes, 

N. Rankin, B. Harris, R. S. Sprick, A. I. Cooper, Nature 2020, 583, 237.

[8] T. Erps, M. Foshey, M. K. Luković, W. Shou, H. H. Goetzke, H. Dietsch, K. Stoll, B. von Vacano, W. Matusik, 

Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, eabf7435.

[9] B. P. MacLeod, F. G. L. Parlane, T. D. Morrissey, F. Häse, L. M. Roch, K. E. Dettelbach, R. Moreira, L. P. E. 

Yunker, M. B. Rooney, J. R. Deeth, V. Lai, G. J. Ng, H. Situ, R. H. Zhang, M. S. Elliott, T. H. Haley, D. J. Dvorak, 

A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. E. Hein, C. P. Berlinguette, Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eaaz8867.


10

[10] R. Shimizu, S. Kobayashi, Y. Watanabe, Y. Ando, T. Hitosugi, APL Mater. 2020, 8, 111110.

[11] B. P. MacLeod, F. G. L. Parlane, C. C. Rupnow, K. E. Dettelbach, M. S. Elliott, T. D. Morrissey, T. H. Haley, O. 

Proskurin, M. B. Rooney, N. Taherimakhsousi, D. J. Dvorak, H. N. Chiu, C. E. B. Waizenegger, K. Ocean, M. 

Mokhtari, C. P. Berlinguette, Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 995.

[12] Y. Iwasaki, R. Sawada, E. Saitoh, M. Ishida, Commun. Mater. 2021, 2, 31.

[13] A. G. Kusne, H. Yu, C. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Hattrick-Simpers, B. DeCost, S. Sarker, C. Oses, C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, 

A. V. Davydov, R. Agarwal, L. A. Bendersky, M. Li, A. Mehta, I. Takeuchi, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 5966.

[14] P. Nikolaev, D. Hooper, F. Webber, R. Rao, K. Decker, M. Krein, J. Poleski, R. Barto, B. Maruyama, npj Comput.

Mater. 2016, 2, 16031.

[15] J. Chang, P. Nikolaev, J. Carpena-Núñez, R. Rao, K. Decker, A. E. Islam, J. Kim, M. A. Pitt, J. I. Myung, B. 

Maruyama, Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 9040.

[16] P. M. Attia, A. Grover, N. Jin, K. A. Severson, T. M. Markov, Y.-H. Liao, M. H. Chen, B. Cheong, N. Perkins, Z. 

Yang, P. K. Herring, M. Aykol, S. J. Harris, R. D. Braatz, S. Ermon, W. C. Chueh, Nature 2020, 578, 397.

[17] K. Nagai, T. Osa, G. Inoue, T. Tsujiguchi, T. Araki, Y. Kuroda, M. Tomizawa, K. Nagato, Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 

1615.

[18] A. E. Gongora, B. Xu, W. Perry, C. Okoye, P. Riley, K. G. Reyes, E. F. Morgan, K. A. Brown, Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, 

eaaz1708.

[19] J. R. Deneault, J. Chang, J. Myung, D. Hooper, A. Armstrong, M. Pitt, B. Maruyama, MRS Bulletin 2021, 46, 

566.

[20] J. Vlachopoulos, D. Strutt, Mater. Sci. Technol. 2003, 19, 1161.

[21] M. Vincent, B. Vergnes, Y. Demay, T. Coupez, N. Billon, J.-F. Agassant, Can. J. Chem. Eng. 2002, 80, 1143.

[22] J. S. Lee, H. W. Jung, H.-S. Song, K.-Y. Lee, J. C. Hyun, J. Nonnewton. Fluid Mech. 2001, 101, 43.

[23] T. Danka, P. Horvath, (Preprint) arXiv:1805.00979, v2, submitted: Dec 2018.


11

Figure 1. Autonomous Continuous Macroscopic Process (a) Schematic of continuous macroscopic forming process. 

(b) Proposed system of autonomous control of continuous macroscopic process with a closed-loop optimization of 

experiments with in-situ evaluation and calculations of decision making based on active learning. (c) Complexity of 

material, force, heat balances in continuous macroscopic forming process. (d) Trajectory of autonomous control of 

film dimensions (width and thickness). The inset figure represents changes in root mean squared error of targeted

film dimensions. 


12

Figure 2. Effects of Autonomous Control. Comparison of time-series profiles of feed rate, draw rate, temperature, 

and film properties (width, thickness) under (a) conventional and (b) autonomous control.


13

Figure 3. Application of Autonomous Control to Different Target Conditions. (a) A set of target width and thickness 

for autonomous control. Comparison of the accuracy of autonomous control of (b) width and (c) thickness. Selected 

conditions of (d) feed rate, (e) draw rate, () temperature for autonomous control of nine different target conditions.


14

Supporting Information

Real-time Autonomous Control of a Continuous Macroscopic Process as 
Demonstrated by Plastic Forming

Shun Muroga*, Takashi Honda, Yasuaki Miki, Hideaki Nakajima, Don N. Futaba, Kenji Hata


15

Figure S1. Rheological properties of the polycarbonate used in this study. (a) Temperature and (b) shear rate 

dependence on complex viscosity. 


16

Figure S2. Appearance of the developed autonomous continuous macroscopic forming process.


17

Figure S3. In-situ evaluation of films using real-time image processing. (a) A typical cross-Nicols polarized image 

of the film. (b) Comparison of the width calculated by real-time image processing and that measured by digital caliper.


18

Figure S4. Autonomous control of different film targets. (a) Trajectory of width and thickness during autonomous 

control and (b) corresponding relative root mean squared error for each control step. 


