Molecular beam epitaxy growth of superconducting tantalum germanide
Patrick J. Strohbeen,1 Tathagata Banerjee,2 Aurelia M. Brook,1 Ido Levy,1 Wendy L. Sarney,3 Jechiel van Dijk,2

Hayden Orth,2 Melissa Mikalsen,2 Valla Fatemi,2 and Javad Shabani1, a)

1)Center for Quantum Information Physics, Department of Physics, New York University, New York,
NY 10003 USA
2)School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
3)Army Research Directorate, DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD 20783 USA

(Dated: 3 December 2024)

Developing new material platforms for use in superconductor-semiconductor hybrid structures is desirable due to limi-
tations caused by intrinsic microwave losses present in commonly used III/V material systems. With the recent reports
on tantalum superconducting qubits that show improvements over the Nb and Al counterparts, exploring Ta as an al-
ternative superconductor in hybrid material systems is promising. Here, we study the growth of Ta on semiconducting
Ge (001) substrates grown via molecular beam epitaxy. We show that at a growth temperature of 400◦C the Ta diffuses
into the Ge matrix in a self-limiting nature resulting in smooth and abrupt surfaces and interfaces with roughness on the
order of 3-7 Å as measured by atomic force microscopy and x-ray reflectivity. The films are found to be a mixture of
Ta5Ge3 and TaGe2 binary alloys and form a native oxide that seems to form a sharp interface with the underlying film.
These films are superconducting with a TC ∼ 1.8−2K and H⊥
C ∼ 1.88T, H∥
C ∼ 5.1T. These results show this tantalum
germanide film to be promising for future superconducting quantum information platforms.

Superconductor-semiconductor (S-Sm) hybrid material
platforms have been of interest in the last few decades for
studying mesoscopic superconductor physics1, the search for
topological superconductivity2,3, and most recently for the de-
velopment of new voltage-tunable qubits, couplers, and other
superconducting circuit elements4–6.
However, due to the
complexity of the material requirements (e.g. interface rough-
ness, band alignment, etc.), growth of these structures is not
straightforward. Furthermore, in terms of the latter applica-
tion in superconducting circuitry for circuit quantum electro-
dynamics (cQED) applications, high intrinsic losses in the
community standard Al-InAs system4 have motivated mate-
rial exploration studies to search for materials better suited to-
wards these cQED applications. On the other hand, recent ad-
vancements in the Si-Ge alloy system present these materials
to be highly promising for low-microwave loss materials7–16

for quantum information applications.
In terms of superconducting materials, implementation of
tantalum metal is also extremely interesting for cQED devices
due to the fact that it forms a well-behaved native oxide for
superconducting microwave applications17–19. Additionally,
recent studies showed that this behavior of Ta also propagates
to high-performance cQED devices20,21. In this context, ma-
jor increases in qubit coherence times are caused by low in-
trinsic two-level system (TLS) losses within the Ta metal na-
tive oxide, Ta2O520,21. However, implementation of this ma-
terial into S-Sm hybrid materials requires significant effort in
terms of understanding the film growth parameters to promote
smooth interfaces/surfaces. Thus, further study of Ta and Ta-
alloys is of interest for investigation of new superconductor-
semiconductor (S-Sm) hybrid material systems.
Here, we report the diffusion-limited growth (diffusion-
growth) of tantalum germanide films via molecular beam
epitaxy (MBE). This technique is similar to what has been

a)corresponding author: jshabani@nyu.edu

previously employed to study superconducting contacts in
GaAs/AlGaAs systems22. We evaluate our grown films via
a suite of structural and electronic materials characterization
and present the chemical composition, structure, and super-
conductivity behavior of this material.
We demonstrate a
unique growth method that forms uniform, wafer-scale thin
films of homogeneous chemical composition and thickness
that make this material system highly promising for future ap-
plication in superconducting cQED devices.

The tantalum germanide films are grown on 50.8mm
Ge(001) substrates in a custom solid-source molecular beam
epitaxy system (Mod Gen II) equipped with three electron
beam sources and hydrogen cleaning capabilities. The inter-
nal manifold around the sources is water-cooled and no LN2
cryo-paneling is used during this deposition. The substrates
are first etched ex-situ in deionized water at 90◦C for 15 min-
utes and then immediately loaded into vacuum on indium-free
blocks. The substrates are initially outgased in the growth re-
actor at 200◦C for 15 minutes, before slowly increasing tem-
perature to 550◦C to anneal for 10 minutes. We confirm the
removal of the surface oxide via in-situ reflection high-energy
electron diffraction (RHEED) monitoring. We use the pres-
ence of a well-defined and sharp (2x1) surface reconstruction
of the Ge (001) facet to indicate the removal of any native
oxide the reforms during the substrate mounting process. Ta
deposition was done using a water-cooled vertical EBVV e-
beam source from MBE Komponenten at an emission current
of 180mA in a 6kV acceleration field. The films are grown at
400◦C, immediately following the Ge oxide removal. Due to
passive heating from the Ta source, deposition was conducted
in three cycles of 10 minutes each, allowing the chamber to
cool for 15 minutes between deposition cycles to prevent sig-
nificant outgassing from the chamber walls.

Figure 1 presents x-ray diffraction data taken using a
Bruker D8 Discovery lab source diffractometer with a da
Vinci configuration and a conditioned Cu Kα1 source. A col-
limator and 1mm slit are used to reduce the effects of substrate

arXiv:2312.01038v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  2 Dec 2024


2

bowing in select measurements. All scans are measured in a
double crystal configuration. An out-of-plane θ − 2θ scan is
presented in Fig. 1a in which the only reflection visible is
the substrate Ge (004) reflection at 66deg. X-ray reflectivity
(XRR) measurements are taken after removing the collimator
and reducing the slits to 0.2mm. The XRR results are pre-
sented in Figure 1b, showing extremely sharp interfaces for
the amorphous film. The fit is initialized assuming a two-layer
model for the film structure with the primary layer being a
film of tantalum germanide, composition TaGe2, and the sec-
ondary layer being a thin native oxide layer of composition
Ta2Ge2O9. Since the density is unknown due to the amor-
phous nature, we allow the scattering length density (SLD) to
vary in the fitting procedure. The results of the fit are shown
below in table I. The feature that is not captured by our fitting
model we speculate is related to the dot-like features observed
in the atomic force microscopy (AFM) image seen in Figure
1c. These features are well dispersed across the sample sur-
face and are all nominally a uniform thickness and may be the
cause of this spurious peak that is not captured by our two-
layer model. The roughness values for the fits are initialized
at 7 ˚A, the roughness we measured in AFM, but then is al-
lowed to vary for both layers individually.

Layer
SLD
(10−6/ ˚A2)

thickness
( ˚A)

Roughness
( ˚A)

Tantalum
Germanide
93.97
175.1
3.6

Native
Oxide
64.95
24.4
9.3

TABLE I. X-ray reflectivity fitting results.

From the fits we extract scattering length densities (SLD)
for total internal reflection x-ray scattering in the XRR mea-
surements. Using Eqn. 1 below we then calculate the product
of ρ f1/Ma, relating the SLD from the fit back to the material
density and scattering factor.

Re(SLD) = ρNare

Ma
f1
(1)

Where ρ is the material density, Na is Avogadro’s constant,
re is the classical electron radius ∼ 2.818 × 10−15 m, Ma is
the molar mass, and f1 is the real part of the atomic scattering
factor of the compound. We calculate values of 5.54cm−3 and
3.83cm−3 for the tantalum germanide and native oxide layers,
respectively.
Crystallinity and interface structure of the tantalum ger-
manide film is examined with scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM) in a JEOL ARM200F, equipped with a
spherical aberration corrector for probe mode, and operated
at 200 keV. The samples were prepared with cross-sectional
tripod polishing to 20 µm thickness, followed by shallow an-
gle Ar+ ion milling with low beam energies([1]3 keV), and
LN2 stage cooling in a PIPS II ion mill. Exemplary transmis-
sion electron microscopy images are shown in Figure 2, where
we observe sharp interfaces and well-defined film and oxide

regions of thicknesses ∼18.7 nm and ∼2.2 nm for the film
and oxide, respectively, which are in good agreement with the
XRR measurements. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDS) was conducted in an Oxford Aztec system and is pre-
sented in Fig. ?? in the Supplemental material. From com-
positional mapping, a thickness of ∼18.2 nm for the film is
found, in good agreement with our TEM imaging.
For an accurate determination of the full film composition,
Rutherford Backscattering Spectroscopy measurements were
conducted via EAG Eurofins, using a Cornell measurement
geometry. The He++ ion beam energy was set to 2.275 MeV
He++, and the detector was placed at an angle of 160◦ from
the ion beam path. A second grazing incidence detector was
placed at 100◦ to increase measurement accuracy. Fig. 2b
presents the RBS data collected at the detector 160◦ from
the beam path. From these measurements we calculate the
film stoichiometry to be ∼ 58.5 ± 0.5 : 41.5 ± 1 Ta:Ge ra-
tio, or a chemical formula of roughly Ta3Ge2. Using the Ta-
Ge binary phase diagram24, the film is likely a solid solution
of 86.3% Ta5Ge3 and 13.7% TaGe2. Exact composition of
the oxide layer is unable to be determined via RBS. Depth-
resolved X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) shows a
nominally constant composition throughout the film layer, as
seen in the Supplementary Materials in Fig. ??, similar to
what is observed in the EDS measurement. The composition
of the film as measured in XPS is more consistent with the
RBS measurement and the oxide region is similar to what is
observed in EDS. We note that the three different methods of
RBS, XPS, and EDS report varying Ta concentrations where
XPS reports the film to be Ta-rich, EDS reports a stark Ta de-
ficiency, and RBS reports a Ta5Ge3-rich mixture of Ta5Ge3
and TaGe2 phases. For the remainder of this work, we take
the RBS measurement to be the true absolute measure of film
composition.
For determining the density of the film, we use the value
of composition as reported from our RBS measurements. As-
suming random distribution of elemental species in the two
distinct layers, we then calculate the expected average mate-
rial density to be 14.39g/cm3 for the tantalum germanide lay-
ers, respectively. Comparing against the density of the crys-
talline form, approximated to be 13.82g/cm325,26 for the bi-
nary solution, this amorphous film exhibits a ∼4% increase
in density. This increase in density is attributed to the amor-
phous nature of the film, which has been seen previously for
pure germanium27.
Magnetotransport measurements of this material are done
in an Oxford Triton dry dilution refridgerator with a base
temperature of 15mK and a single direction magnet with a
maximum field of 14T. Samples are cleaved down to roughly
5x5mm chips. Contacts on the chip are made by annealing In-
Sn eutectic into the four corners in a Van der Pauw geometry
which are then contacted to the sample board via gold wires.
The results of these measurements are presented in Figure 3.
We see a sharp transition to a zero resistance state at roughly
2K upon cooldown, as shown in Figure 3a. To investigate the
field dependance, we sweep out-of-plane and in-plane mag-
netic field as shown in Figs.
3b and c, respectively.
The
resistance surface presented in Fig. 3b shows a very sharp


3

transition from the superconducting phase to the normal state,
suggestive of type 1 superconductivity. This is observed in the
tight spread of 0.9Rn, 0.5Rn, and 0.1Rn contours overlaid on
the color map. For out-of-plane field configuration we observe
a critical applied field of HC ∼ 1.88T. The critical field fitting
gives us a critical temperature of roughly 1.8K. This temper-
ature is similar to the reported range of TC of 2.3K-2.75K for
compositions of x=17-55% in the TaxGe1−x alloy system28,
which also agrees well with our RBS composition data. With
an in-plane field configuration we measure a critical applied
field of HC ∼ 5.1T that also exhibits a sharp superconducting
transition up to 1K. We present this data in Fig. 3c in which
we overlay the 0.9Rn, 0.5Rn, and 0.1Rn contours. The varia-
tion in sheet resistance between Fig. 3b and Figs. 3a and c are
a result of oxidation in the film over the course of roughly six
months causing an increase in film resistance. The measure-
ments were otherwise conducted on the exact same sample.
In conclusion, we presented here the growth, structure,
and transport characteristics of diffusion-grown tantalum ger-
manide thin films grown via MBE. The tantalum germanide
films are formed by a semi-rate-limited diffusion process in
which the e-beam evaporated Ta diffuses into the surface that
preserves a 3 : 2 Ta:Ge composition ratio within the film re-
gion. These films form a small native oxide layer with sharp
interfaces and exhibit a roughly 4% increase in material den-
sity.
Transport shows a reasonable critical temperature of
∼1.8-2K, but more we find a critical out-of-plane and in-plane
critical field of H⊥
C ∼ 1.88T and H∥
C ∼ 5.1T, respectively.
With such a high critical field, ease of semiconductor inte-
gration, and the preservation of sharp S-Sm interfaces, this
material shows promise for integration into cQED devices.

I.
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

The supplemental material contains additional details on
the EDS and XPS experimental considerations and analysis.
The data presented herein shows the depth-resolved elemen-
tal profiles for the tantalum germanide film as an image via
EDS as well as XPS core level measurements as a function of
sputtering depth.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to acknowledge funding support for
this project by AFOSR award FA9550-21-1-0338. We grate-
fully acknowledge the use of facilities and instrumentation
supported by NSF through the Cornell University Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center DMR-1719875.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

1F. Rahman, T. J. Thornton, R. Huber, L. F. Cohen, W. T. Yuen,
and
R. A. Stradling, “Superconductor-semiconductor interaction effects in
mesoscopic hybrid structures,” Phys. Rev. B 54, 14026–14031 (1996).

2V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov, S. R. Plissard, E. P. A. M. Bakkers,
and L. P. Kouwenhoven, “Signatures of majorana fermions in hybrid
superconductor-semiconductor nanowire devices,” Science 336, 1003–
1007 (2012).

3E. Prada, P. San-Jose, M. W. A. de Moor, A. Geresdi, E. J. H. Lee, J. Kli-
novaja, D. Loss, J. Nygåd, R. Aguado, and L. P. Kouwenhoven, “From
andreev to majorana bound state in hybrid superconductor-semiconductor
nanowires,” Nat. Rev. Phys. 2, 575–594 (2020).

4L. Casparis, M. R. Connolly, M. Kjaergaard, N. J. Pearson, A. Kringhøj,
T. W. Larsen, F. Kuemmeth, T. Wang, C. Thomas, S. Gronin, G. C. Gard-
ner, M. J. Manfra, C. M. Marcus, and K. D. Petersson, “Superconducting
gatemon qubit based on a proximitized two-dimensional electron gas,” Nat.
Nanotechnol. 13, 915–919 (2018).

5G. Burkard, M. J. Gullans, X. Mi,
and J. R. Petta, “Superconductor-
semiconductor hybrid-circuit quantum electrodynamics,” Nat. Rev. Phys.
2, 129–140 (2020).

6W. M. Strickland, B. H. Elfeky, J. O. Yuan, W. F. Schiela, P. Yu, D. Lan-
gone, M. G. Vavilov, V. E. Manucharyan, and J. Shabani, “Superconducting
resonators with voltage-controlled frequency and nonlinearity,” Phys. Rev.
Appl. 19, 034021 (2022).

7M. Sandberg, V. P. Adiga, M. Brink, C. Kurter, C. Murray, M. Hopstaken,
J. Bruley, J. S. Orcutt, and H. Paik, “Investigating microwave loss of sige
using superconducting transmon qubits,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 124001
(2021).

8G. Scappucci, C. Kloeffel, F. A. Zwanenburg, D. Loss, M. Myronov, J.-J.
Zhang, S. D. De Franceschi, G. Katsaros, and M. Veldhorst, “The germa-
nium quantum information route,” Nat. Rev. Mater. 6, 926–943 (2021).

9M. Lodari, O. Kong, M. Rendell, A. Tosato, A. Sammak, M. Veldhorst,
A. R. Hamilton, and G. Scappucci, “Lightly strained germanium quantum
wells with hole mobility exceeding one million,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 120,
122104 (2022).

10A. Sarkar, Z. Wang, M. Rendell, N. W. Hendrickx, M. Veldhorst, G. Scap-
pucci, M. Khalifa, J. Salfi, A. Saraiva, A. S. Dzurak, A. R. Hamilton, and
D. Culcer, “Electrical operation of planar Ge hole spin qubits in an in-plane
magnetic field,” Phys. Rev. B 108, 245301 (2023).

11M. Myronov, J. Kycia, P. Waldron, W. Jiang, P. Barrios, A. Bogan, P. Co-
leridge, and S. Studenikin, “Holes outperform electrons in group IV semi-
conductor materials,” Small Sci. 3, 2200094 (2023).

12J. M. Hartmann, N. Bernier, F. Pierre, J. P. Barnes, V. Mazzocchi,
J. Krawczyk, G. Lima, E. Kiyooka, and S. De Franceschi, “Epitaxy of
group-IV semiconductors for quantum electronics,” ECS Trans. 111, 53
(2023).

13M. Myronov, P. Waldron, P. Barrios, A. Bogan, and S. Studenikin, “Electric
field-tuneable crossing of hole Zeeman splitting and orbital gaps in com-
pressively strained germanium semiconductor on silicon,” Commun. Mater.
4, 104 (2023).

14Y.-X. Li, Z. Kong, S. Hou, G. Wang, and S. Huang, “Quantum transport
quality of a processed undoped Ge/SiGe heterostructure,” Phys. Rev. B 108,
045303 (2023).

15A. Tosato, V. Levajac, J.-Y. Wang, C. J. Boor, F. Borsoi, M. Botifoll, C. N.
Borja, S. Martí-Sánchez, J. Arbiol, A. Sammak, M. Veldhorst, and G. Scap-
pucci, “Hard superconducting gap in germanium,” Commun. Mater. 4, 23
(2023).

16Z. Kong, Z. Li, G. Cao, J. Su, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Ren, H. Li, L. Wei,
G.-p. Guo, Y. Wu, H. H. Radamson, J. Li, Z. Wu, H.-o. Li, J. Yang, C. Zhao,
T. Ye, and G. Wang, “Undoped strained ge quantum well with ultrahigh
mobility of two million,” ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15, 28799–28805
(2023).

17L. Y. L. Shen, Superconductivity in d- and f-Band Metals, edited by D. H.
Douglass (Springer, 1972).

18E. G. Spencer and J. M. Rowell, “Superconductivity of Ta-Zr films pro-
duced by co-sputtering,” IEEE Trans. Magn. MAG-17, 322–325 (1981).

19D. W. Face, D. E. Prober, W. R. McGrath, and P. Richard, “High qual-
ity tantalum superconducting tunnel junctions for microwave mixing in the
quantum limit,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 48, 1098–1100 (1986).

20A. P. M. Place, L. V. H. Rodgers, P. Mundada, B. M. Smitham, M. Fitz-
patrick, Z. Leng, A. Premkumar, J. Bryon, A. Vrajitoarea, S. Sussman,


4

G. Cheng, T. Madhavan, H. K. Babla, X. H. Le, Y. Gang, B. Jäck, A. Gye-
nis, N. Yao, R. J. Cava, N. P. de Leon, and A. A. Houck, “New material plat-
form for superconducting transmon qubits with coherence times exceeding
0.3 milliseconds,” Nat. Commun. 12, 1779 (2021).

21R. A. McLellan, A. Dutta, C. Zhou, Y. Jia, C. Weiland, X. Gui, A. P. M.
Place, K. D. Crowley, X. H. Le, T. Madhavan, Y. Gang, L. Baker, A. R.
Head, I. Waluyo, R. Li, K. Kisslinger, A. Hunt, I. Jarrige, S. A. Lyon, A. M.
Barbour, R. J. Cava, A. A. Houck, S. L. Hulbert, M. Liu, A. L. Walter, and
N. P. de Leon, “Chemical profiles of the oxides on tantalum in state of the
art superconducting circuits,” Advanced Science 10, 2300921 (2023).

22J. R. Gao, J. J. B. Kerkhof, M. Verwerft, P. Magnée, B. J. van Wees, T. M.
Klapwijk, and J. T. M. De Hosson, “Analysis of superconducting Sn/Ti
contacts to GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures by electorn focusing,” Semi-
cond. Sci. Technol. 11, 621–624 (1996).

23G. Vignaud and A. Gibaud, “REFLEX: a program for the analysis of specu-
lar X-ray and neutron reflectivity data,” J. Appl. Cryst. 52, 201–213 (2019).

24A. Augusto Araújo Pinto da Silva, G. C. Coelho, C. A. Nunes, P. A. Suzuki,
J. M. Fiorani, N. David, and M. Vilasi, “Experimental determination of the
Ta-Ge phase diagram,” J. Alloys Compd. 576, 38–42 (2013).

25L. H. Brixner, “X-ray study and thermoelectric properties of the
NbSixGe2−x and the TaSixGe2−x systems,” J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 25, 257–
260 (1963).

26F. Yuan, S. Forbes, K. K. Ramachandran, and Y. Mozharivskyj, “Struc-
ture and physical properties of Cr5B3-type Ta5Si3 and Ta5Ge3,” J. Alloys
Compd. 650, 712–717 (2015).

27J. R. Blanco, P. J. McMarr, J. E. Yehoda, K. Vedam, and R. Messier, “Den-
sity of amorphous germanium films by spectroscopic ellipsometry,” J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. A 4, 577–582 (1986).

28A. K. Ghosh and D. H. Douglass, “Superconductivity in transition metal-
germanium systems,” J. Low Temp Phys. 27, 487–512 (1977).


5

FIG. 1. X-ray diffraction characterization of tantalum germanide film. (a) Out-of-plane θ-2θ scan. The only distinct reflection is from the Ge
substrate. (b) X-ray reflectivity measurement of the tantalum germanide film. The fit is done using REFLEX23 standalone reflectivity fitting
software, assuming two layers of composition TaGe2 and Ta2Ge2O9 as initial conditions. (c) 10µmx10µm AFM image of tantalum germanide
surface. RMS value of 7 ˚A was used as the initial roughness for the XRR fitting.

FIG. 2. TEM imaging of tantalum germanide film. (a) Zoomed-out
image of tantalum germanide lamella that shows sharp interfaces at
the oxide-film and film-substrate interfaces. (b) RBS trace for the
tantalum germanide film. The black dots and trace are the experi-
mental data and the purple line is the model fit. The inset presents
the model used to generate the fit.


6

FIG. 3. Magnetotransport data of tantalum germanide film. (a) Cooldown trace of sheet resistance, RS. We see a zero-resistance transition
near 2K. (b) RS map as a function of applied out-of-plane field and temperature. Lines are fits to the 0.9, 0.5, and 0.1Rn values. (c) RS map
for in-plane magnetic field configuration.


Supplemental Material for Molecular beam epitaxy growth of
superconducting tantalum germanide
Patrick J. Strohbeen,1 Tathagata Banerjee,2 Aurelia M. Brook,1 Ido Levy,1 Wendy L. Sarney,3 Jechiel van Dijk,2

Hayden Orth,2 Melissa Mikalsen,2 Valla Fatemi,2 and Javad Shabani1, a)

1)Center for Quantum Information Physics, Department of Physics, New York University, New York,
NY 10003 USA
2)School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
3)Army Research Directorate, DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD 20783 USA

(Dated: 3 December 2024)

FIG. S1. EDS measurement of the film and native oxide regions.
The datapoints in the right-hand plot are averages across the entire
frame on the left-hand side and the overlaid black line traces are the
sigmoid fits to the composition edge profiles. The dashed lines are
the normalized X-ray emission line signals at the detector.

Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy. Energy disper-
sive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) data is collected using an Ox-
ford Aztec system and is presented in S1 in both the nor-
malized atomic concentration and normalized Ge K-, Ta L-,
and O K-edge signals. We fit the EDS profiles to a sigmoid
function? , the form of which is presented in Eq. S1, where
C is a scaling parameter that defines the maximum concen-
tration, x0 is the midpoint of the function, V is the baseline
concentration, and τ is the rate of change across the interface.
The results of these fits are presented in Table S1, where we
report the “Max” value as the summation of the base value
and the C parameter from the fit.

f(x) =
C

1+exp( x0±x

τ ) +V
(S1)

Using the sigmoid fitting results, we define the film thick-
ness as the value of xsur f
0
− xback
0
. From this, we measure a
thickness of ∼18.2 nm for the film, where we define xback
0
as
the average value between the germanium and tantalum ger-
manide fits,which agrees well with our value extracted from

a)corresponding author: jshabani@nyu.edu

Layer
Base, V
(At.%

Max, (Base + C)
(At.%)

Rate, τ
(At.% /nm)

x0
(nm)

Germanium
Backside
0.86
0.50
-1.33
-22.8

TaxGe1−x
Surface
0.10
0.40
1.12
-4.5

TaxGe1−x
Backside
0.05
0.37
1.13
-22.6

TABLE S1. EDS sigmoid fitting results.

the TEM imaging. We define the composition of the TaxGe1−x
region to be the average tantalum composition across the film
region, ∼38.5%. Taking this value, we estimate the tanta-
lum germanide phase to have a Ta : Ge ratio of ∼ 38.5 : 61.5.
From this composition we approximate the stoichiometry of
the film to be ∼Ta2Ge3. From the EDS we also estimate the
native oxide to have a O : Ta : Ge ratio of ∼ 56 : 22 : 22. From
this, we approximate the stoichiometry of the oxide region
to be ∼Ta2Ge2O9, or a solution of one part Ta2O5 and two
parts GeO2. However, EDS is well known to underestimate
elemental species, which we attribute to inaccuracies such as
oxidation during sample transfer, lineshape overlaps, and not
having a well-defined standard for this material? . Further-
more, experimental considerations such as insufficient dead-
time at the detector can cause high energy X-rays to wash out
the signal from the low energy X-rays, which has been ob-
served previously in oxide materials? . This effect is observed
in the large discrepancy between the measured signal at the
detector (dashed lines in Fig. S1) and the resulting At. %.
Therefore, we use the EDS profiles presented here exclusively
to report spacial homogeneity of the Ta species as well as de-
fine the thickness of the film region.
X-ray Photoemission Spectroscopy. Depth profiling was
done with X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) in a
Thermo Nexsa G2 Surface Analysis System with a chamber
pressure of ∼ 3.2×10−7 mBar. The excitation used for these
measurements were a monochromated Al Kα x-ray source
(hν = 1486.6 eV) focused to a spot size of 400 µm. The
measurements were conducted with an energy resolution of
0.4 eV and the Fermi level was calibrated to a silver stan-
dard inside the analysis chamber. Etching was conducted us-
ing monoatomic Ar ions at a constant etch rate until 575 s, at
which point the etch rate was tripled. This tripling of etch rate
is presented as a tripling of etch time in Fig. S2. Cycling time
between etches was kept below 5 minutes to limit re-oxidation

arXiv:2312.01038v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  2 Dec 2024


2

FIG. S2. (a) Atomic concentration of Ta, Ge, and O core levels as a
function of effective etch time. (b) Ta:Ge ratio. Dashed lines indicate
the ratios for Ta5Ge3 and TaGe2. We note the nominally constant
composition across the film.

of the surface. Core level fitting was done assuming a Voigt
lineshape using CasaXPS with a Shirley background subtrac-
tion. To extract atomic percentages, core levels are normal-
ized to the integrated intensity of the O 1s core level.

Temperature Dependent Measurement.
Data was
recorded every 5s while the thermometer only updates every
2 minutes, resulting in clusters of 23 data points at each tem-
perature. The material undergoes a superconducting transition
partway during this time period, as such we are reporting the
temperature at which the transition starts.


