1

3D observations discover a new paradigm in rubber elasticity

Z. Wang, S. Das*, A. Joshi*, A.J.D. Shaikeea§ and V.S. Deshpande§

Author Affiliations:
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK

* Authors contributed equally

§ Corresponding authors: A.J.D. Shaikeea: ajds3@cam.ac.uk

V.S. Deshpande: vsd@eng.cam.ac.uk


2

Summary paragraph
The mechanical response of rubbers has been ubiquitously assumed to be only a function of 
the imposed strain. Using innovative X-ray measurements capturing the three-dimensional 
spatial volumetric strain fields, we demonstrate that rubbers and indeed many common 
engineering polymers, undergo significant local volume changes. But remarkably the overall 
specimen volume remains constant regardless of the imposed loading. This strange behaviour 
which also leads to apparent negative local bulk moduli is due to the presence of a mobile phase 
within these materials. Combining X-ray tomographic observations with high-speed 
radiography to track the motion of the mobile phase we have revised classical thermodynamic 
frameworks of rubber elasticity. The work opens new avenues to understand not only the 
mechanical behaviour of rubbers but a large class of widely used engineering polymers.

Rubber elasticity is the generic term describing the behaviour of polymeric solids made up of 
flexible chains which are joined together to form a three-dimensional network. These solids 
have the capacity to sustain very large deformations followed by complete recovery. It is one 
of the most established branches of the mechanics of solids with detailed molecular theories 
[1-7] supporting macroscopic measurements [7-11] of the deformation behaviour and more 
recent multiscale insights [12] improving properties such fatigue resistance. The ubiquitous 
feature of all elastomeric models for rubbers is that the Helmholtz free-energy is written purely 
as a function of temperature and deformation, and no other state variable. In fact, this is the 
widely accepted definition of a rubber or elastomer. Here using detailed three-dimensional (3D) 
X-ray computed tomography (XCT) strain measurements and high-speed radiography, 
supported by laser measurements and two-dimensional digital image correlation (DIC), we 
demonstrate that the understanding of rubber elasticity needs revision. Our findings show that 
rubbers/elastomers, and synthetic polymers, including thermoplastics require new state 
variables to describe their deformation behaviour. This has wide-ranging and significant 
implications for understanding the mechanical responses of polymer composites.

We have developed a laboratory-based XCT method, dubbed “Flux Enhanced Tomography for 
Correlation (FETC)”, to non-intrusively measure full field 3D strains in nominally 
homogeneous solids ranging from polymers to metals. FETC (Extended Data Fig. 1 and 
Supplementary S1) captures subtle variations in density or heterogeneities such as differences
in crosslinking densities in polymers by separating out the grayscale distinctions in the X-ray 
attenuation spectra (Fig. 1a). This provides a natural speckle pattern in the material, which we 
leverage to perform digital volume correlation (DVC) [13-15] and an in-situ multi-stage 
loading protocol (Fig. 1a, Methods). We then derive volumetric spatial distributions of 
displacement fields, enabling precise measurement of all 9 components of the deformation 
gradient 𝐹𝑖𝑗. An inherent advantage of FETC is that it does not use artificial tracer particles to 
provide the speckle for the DVC and therefore the measurements directly reflect the innate 
material response.

Large local volume changes but specimens remain incompressible
Silicone rubber is considered an exemplar rubber and extensively characterised by combining 
micro-mechanical models of rubber elasticity with measurements [7, 16]. We first consider 
cylindrical Silicone rubber specimens (Methods) of height 𝐻 and diameter 𝐷 which are glued 
to platens (Fig. 1b) and tested in tension or compression by applying an axial displacement rate 


3

𝑈̇ and measuring the conjugate axial force 𝑃. The glued ends imply that the deformation field 
is spatially heterogenous with the specimen under tensile loading thinning at mid-section but 
constrained at the platens (Fig. 1c). The nominal tensile stress 𝜎∞ ≡ 4𝑃/(𝜋𝐷2) versus strain
𝜀∞ ≡ 𝑈/𝐻 responses (Fig. 1d) for an imposed quasi-static rate 𝜀̇∞ = 10−3 s−1 are in line with 
expectations of an elastomer, viz. the behaviour is reversible, shows some non-linearity at 
larger deformations and the stiffness increases with decreasing aspect ratio 𝐻/𝐷. FETC 
provides a rich dataset on the deformation modes with the evolution of the spatial distributions 
of 𝐹𝑖𝑗 with 𝜀∞ (Extended Data Fig. 2). The first interesting observation presents itself when 
we examine the evolution of the spatial distribution of the volumetric strain Δ𝑉/𝑉0 ≡
det (𝐹𝑖𝑗) − 1 within the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Movie S1). Clearly, 
the specimen does not deform in an incompressible manner as widely assumed for many 
elastomers but rather undergoes local volumetric strains of ~ ± 10% (laser measurements 
independent of FETC further confirm these results; see Extended Data Fig. 3). That in itself 
may not be remarkable as compressible rubber elasticity has also been proposed [9, 17] 
although without a molecular basis but more often in the context of porous rubbers or foams
[18]. The real surprise here is that under tensile loading we observe a mixture of compressive 
and dilatory volumetric strains with the central core of the specimen losing volume and an outer 
cylindrical shell gaining volume (Fig. 1c). The puzzle becomes more perplexing when we 
observe that the overall specimen volume remains constant over all loading stages, i.e., 
〈𝑉/𝑉0〉 = 〈det (𝐹𝑖𝑗)〉 ≈ 1; see Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 2a (here 〈⋅〉 denotes the volume-
average over the whole specimen). The overall incompressibility of the specimen is also 
confirmed from tomographic reconstruction of the specimen outline (Extended Data Fig. 3a).
These conclusions that deformation is accompanied by local volume changes of ±10% but the 
specimen remains incompressible also extend to compressive loading (Extended Data Fig. 4). 

To further investigate whether the specimen level volume constraint is a material property and 
not restricted to the stress-state generated within the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen, we performed tensile 
tests on specimens with a wide range of aspect ratios (the stress triaxiality reduces and becomes 
more uniaxial with increasing 𝐻/𝐷). These measurements (Fig. 1e) clearly illustrate that while 
there are large local volume (~ ± 10%) changes, the specimen volume is always conserved. 
However, with increasing specimen aspect ratio, the central portion of the specimen becomes 
increasingly spatially uniform and deforms in a nearly incompressible manner with regions of 
volumetric deformation restricted to the regions near the glued loading platens where gradients 
of the strain are present. The immediate question then arises is whether existing elastomeric 
models can capture these observations? We employed the finite element model updating 
(FEMU) [19-21] method to infer elastomeric constitutive model parameters for three common 
elastomeric models from the spatial data of 𝐹𝑖𝑗. No model was able to capture this mixture of 
volumetric dilation and compaction observed in the FETC measurements (Supplementary S2).

Deformation gradients drive the motion of a mobile phase
The current hyperelastic models cannot capture the observations is likely related to the fact that 
the volumetric deformations occur when strain/stress gradients are large (recall effect of 𝐻/𝐷
in Fig. 1e). We confirmed that the apparent effect of strain gradients does not result in a
specimen size effect (Supplementary S3). This motivated us to investigate the effect of strain 
gradients in a more controlled setting. Four-point bending of a beam (Fig. 2a) imposes a pure 
bending moment over the section of length 𝑠1 between the central rollers. The measured 
moment 𝑀 versus curvature 𝜅 relation (Fig. 2b) for a beam with a square cross-section ℎ × ℎ
and subjected to a loading rate 𝜅̇ℎ is approximately linear with negligible loading/unloading 
hysteresis. Further the response is independent of loading rates over 3 orders of magnitude. 


4

This apparent macroscopic elastic behaviour is also confirmed by relaxation tests (Fig. 2c) 
where we linearly ramped up the curvature over a time period 0 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡𝑅 and then held the 
curvature constant (inset of Fig. 2c): the moment increases linearly during the ramp and then 
remains constant with no relaxation. While these are behaviours expected of a rubber our next 
major finding occurs while examining the distributions of the volumetric strains Δ𝑉/𝑉0
calculated from 𝐹𝑖𝑗 (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Movie S2). We observe that the rubber gains 
volume on the compressive side of the beam and loses volume on the tensile side with the 
strains again on the order of ±10% (see Extended Data Fig. 3 for independent validation 
experiments using 3D DIC for the surface strain components). These unexpected volumetric 
strains occur even though the central section of the beam is under pure bending; see Fig. 2e for 
selected components of the Green-Lagrange strain. The as-cast Silicone rubber is isotropic and 
homogeneous (Supplementary S3), and it is immediately clear that no existing theory for 
rubbers/elastomers can capture this response as it will require a negative bulk modulus. In fact, 
thermodynamic consistency arguments therefore suggest that state variables in addition to 
deformation (and temperature) are required to formulate the Helmholtz free-energy of Silicone 
rubber.

The observation that there are local volume changes accompanied by overall incompressibility 
of the specimen drives the hypothesis that there exists an incompressible mobile phase within 
the rubber. The transport of this phase then induces local volume changes but with global 
volume conservation. The micro-mechanical rationale for a mobile phase is that synthetic 
rubbers such as Silicone rubber are produced by a polymerisation reaction [22, 23] which might 
leave a certain fraction of the polymer un-crosslinked. The rubber is therefore comprised of a 
crosslinked polymer network and an un-crosslinked component that is mobile within the open 
structure crosslinked network (Supplementary S4). To investigate the presence of such a 
mobile phase, we manufactured a “composite” Silicone rubber beam where half of the beam 
contained 5% wt. ZnI2 dissolved into the catalyst (which serves as an X-ray tracer) and the 
other half is pure Silicone rubber (Fig. 3a and Methods). This composite beam was then 
subjected to 4-point bending with the neutral axis of bending delineating the halves of the beam 
with and without the tracer. Tomographic reconstructions of the beam subjected to curvatures
𝜅ℎ = ±0.24 are included in Fig. 3b, i.e., the beam was successively bent with the tracer portion 
on the tensile and compressive side of the beam, respectively. The dissolved tracers spread out 
from the compressive side onto the tensile side but there is little transport observed when the 
tracers are on the tensile side (the motion of the tracers is reversible with the XCT 
reconstructions of the undeformed beam prior to and after loading/unloading indistinguishable; 
see Supplementary Movie S3). Given that adhesion between ZnI2 and Silicone rubber is 
excellent (Methods) these observations definitively show that there exists a mobile phase 
within the rubber. The dissolved ZnI2 is attached proportionally to the mobile un-crosslinked 
polymer and the immobile crosslinked polymer: the observed motion of the tracers is associated 
with the transport of the mobile phase.

It is now apparent that the concentration of the mobile phase is a key additional state variable 
that is required to describe the mechanical behaviour of the Silicone rubber. But an additional 
anomalous feature of the rubber is that the material can volumetrically expand under 
compressive hydrostatic stress even though observations (Fig. 3b) show that material egresses 
out of the compressive region. Expansion in the presence of a compressive hydrostatic stress 
implies a negative contribution from the hydrostatic component of the mechanical work. Thus, 
unlike in hydrogels [24-26] and theories of other materials [27-29] involving a mobile phase, 
the driving force for the egress of un-crosslinked phase cannot be pressure. Rather we 
hypothesize that the un-crosslinked phase comprises non spherical molecules such as 


5

dimers/trimers. The shape of these molecules implies that this phase does not induce pure 
volumetric straining but a combination of volumetric and deviatoric straining
(Supplementary S4). Then positive deviatoric work associated with the un-crosslinked phase 
provides the driving force for the egress/ingress of the un-crosslinked phase. We have 
developed thermodynamically consistent model based on this hypothesis (Supplementary S4). 
Under isothermal conditions the Helmholtz free-energy is a function of not only the 
deformation parameterised by 𝐹𝑖𝑗 but also the occupancy 𝜃 of the un-crosslinked phase in the 
crosslinked network (𝜃 is directly related to the concentration of the mobile phase). A key 
feature of the free-energy is the non-isotropic straining due to the mobile un-crosslinked phase 
which also implies that deformation induces reversible anisotropy of the Silicone rubber. 
Predictions of the equilibrium (i.e., for loading at the limiting rate 𝜅̇ → 0) moment 𝑀 versus 
normalised curvature 𝜅ℎ response (Fig. 2b) and the spatial variation of the volumetric strain 
(Fig. 3c) across the beam thickness at 𝜅ℎ = 0.24 are in excellent agreement with 
measurements. The corresponding predictions of the normalised concentration 𝜃̅ of the mobile
phase across the beam thickness (Fig. 3c) also confirm that that phase egresses out of the 
compressive region in line with observations in Fig. 3b (𝜃̅ = 1 is the normalised concentration 
in the undeformed state so that 𝜃̅ < 1 and 𝜃̅ > 1 indicate a reduction and increase, respectively 
in the concentration of the mobile phase compared to the undeformed state). While the 
continuum model presented here demonstrates that a thermodynamically consistent theory can 
be constructed to describe the strange behaviours reported here, a deeper molecular level 
understanding remains to be established: qualitative understandings of molecular mechanisms 
are discussed in Supplementary S4. 

Direct observations of the motion of the mobile phase
An immediate implication of our finding of a mobile phase within the rubber is that we expect 
the rubber to have a rate dependent response that is dictated by the mobility of the mobile 
phase. Such a behaviour would then, even in terms of macroscopic load versus displacement 
measurements, be inconsistent with hyperelastic models usually used to describe the 
deformation of rubbers. However, in line with behaviours of rubbers reported in the literature, 
our measurements too show little or no rate dependence of the response over more than 3 orders 
of magnitude in 𝜅̇ℎ (Fig. 2b) and similarly no relaxation (Fig. 2c). These measurements are 
seemingly incompatible with the notion of a mobile phase: a sufficiently high mobility such 
that the spatio-temporal distribution of the mobile phase is independent of 𝜅̇ℎ but only 
dependent on the level of loading 𝜅ℎ could rationalise this apparent inconsistency. To visualise 
this spatio-temporal distribution we repeated the step loading 4-point test with the composite 
Silicone rubber beam (Fig. 3a) but now obtaining radiographs at an interframe times of 0.5 s
to visualise the real time motion of the dissolved ZnI2 tracers (Methods). A montage of the 
radiographs (Fig. 3d and Supplementary Movie S4) for the 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 s−1 test loaded to 
𝜅∞ℎ = 0.48 (𝜅∞ ≡ 𝜅̇𝑡𝑅) shows that the tracers move from the compressive side to the tensile 
side of the beam as anticipated. But remarkably the transport is rapid: the position 𝑋𝑓 of the 
ZnI2 front is plotted in Fig. 3e (Supplementary S3) and we observe that the front travels a 
distance ℓ ≈ 2.7 mm over the duration 𝑡𝑅 = 4 s of the step loading and reaches its final steady-
state concurrently at the end of the step at 𝑡 = 𝑡𝑅. Thus, the transport of the mobile phase is so 
rapid that even at strain rates on the order of 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 s−1 the beam remains approximately 
in equilibrium resulting in no observed rate dependence of the response. 

Given this understanding of the kinetics, we extended our model to include the mobility of the 
mobile phase (Supplementary S4).  The fact that there is no observed rate dependence of the 
response even at 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 s−1 suggests an estimate for the effective diffusion co-efficient of 


6

the mobile phase to be 𝐷 ≈ ℓ2𝜅̇/𝜅∞ = 1.8 × 10−6 m2s−1. This is an unrealistically high linear 
diffusion co-efficient (typical diffusion co-efficient for water in hydrogels are ~10−8 m2s−1 −
10−9 m2s−1 [30, 31]). We rationalise the fast transport in our model by arguing that transport 
of the mobile phase differs somewhat from conventional Darcy flow [32, 33] of a Newtonian 
fluid through a porous network (the crosslinked network in this case). Given that the mobile 
phase is a polymer we hypothesize that it behaves as a shear thinning fluid [34] where the 
resistance to flow (or viscosity) reduces with increasing strain rate. Consequently, a linear 
diffusion co-efficient cannot be defined for the mobile phase [35]. Using shear thinning 
parameter values that makes the dissipation rate of the mobile phase to be nearly independent
of flux (Supplementary S4) provides excellent agreement with the measurements. These 
predictions are included in Figs. 2b and 2c for the rate dependence of the moment curvature 
and relaxation responses, respectively. The model also predicts the temporal evolution of the 
position of the front of the tracer particles (Supplementary S4) for the case shown in Fig. 3d
and two additional cases: (i) a slower rate of 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.012s−1 to the same final curvature  𝜅∞ℎ =
0.48 and (ii) the same rate of 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12s−1 loaded to a lower curvature of  𝜅∞ℎ = 0.24. The 
predictions and the corresponding measurements (Fig. 3e) are in excellent agreement 
confirming that the transport of the mobile phase is sufficiently rapid that the tracer front 
position is only dependent on the current value of the imposed curvature over the loading rates 
investigated here.

Outlook
We have reported numerous counterintuitive behaviours of a Silicone rubber that are contrary 
to the current understanding of rubber elasticity. These include: (i) the existence of a mobile 
phase which results in large local volume changes (±10%) while the specimen volume remains 
unchanged; (ii) dilation under compressive hydrostatic pressures concurrent with the egress of 
the mobile phase and (iii) extremely high mobility within the rubber. Taken together it is now 
clear why this behaviour had to-date eluded researchers: (a) traditional techniques only 
measured global or specimen level volume changes and (b) the very high mobility implies that 
material rate dependence does not manifest itself at the usual loading rates used to investigate 
properties of rubbers. These findings while indeed intriguing raise the question whether they 
are rather niche and without broader implications. The key requirement for the strange 
behaviours reported here is the existence of a mobile phase which is the outcome of an 
incomplete polymerisation reaction. Many synthetic engineering polymers are produced by 
such reactions, and they include widely used thermoplastics like Nylon and high-density 
polyethylene (HDPE). Thus, it is conceivable that similar effects are not restricted to rubbers 
but also present in engineering plastics. To test this, we performed three-point bend 
experiments (Fig. 4a) on Silicone rubber, Nylon6 (Supplementary Movie S5) and HDPE beams 
of identical geometries (Methods). The measured imposed load 𝑃 versus central roller 
displacement 𝑈 response is shown in Fig. 4b illustrating the very different mechanical 
responses of these three materials. The rubber has a recoverable response while the Nylon6 and 
HDPE are not only significantly stiffer but also undergo plastic or permanent deformation upon
unloading. The measured spatial distributions of the volumetric strains Δ𝑉/𝑉0 at 𝑈 = 4 mm
included in Fig. 4c clearly show large local volumetric deformations. But again, when averaged 
over the specimen 〈𝑉/𝑉0〉 = 〈det (𝐹𝑖𝑗)〉 ≈ 1 for all these materials. Moreover, consistent with 
the 4-point bending results on the Silicone rubber we observe local dilation on the compressive 
side of the 3-point bend specimen for all these materials. Together these findings suggest that 
the phenomena we have uncovered are rather general and apply to a wide range of synthetic 
polymers.


7

The FETC method we have developed has broad applications to the emerging field of data-
driven mechanics. To-date most studies [36-38] developing Machine Learning (ML) methods 
for constitutive law development have employed only synthetic data. This is due to lack of 
measurement techniques that provide 3D data: FETC fills this gap. Moreover, measured data 
using FETC opens doors for new discoveries such as those reported here with wide ranging 
implications for mechanical constitutive models of engineering rubbers and polymers. For 
example, the plastic response of polymers is often thought to be incompressible but with a 
pressure dependence on the yield [39-41]. This has motivated a range of non-associated flow 
plastic models for polymers which often result in thermodynamic inconsistencies. Here we 
suggest that there exists a mechanism that motivates revisiting mechanical models for rubbers 
and polymers including an understanding of the effect of strain/stress gradients within 
polymers when these materials are used as matrices in composite materials. 

References
[1] James, H.M., Guth, E. (1943). Theory of the Elastic properties of rubber, Journal of 
Chemical Physics, 11, 455-481.
[2] James, H.M., Guth, E. (1944). Theory of the elasticity of rubber. Journal of Applied
Physics, 15, 294-303.
[3] Flory, P.J. (1944). Network structure and the elastic properties of vulcanized rubber. 
Chemical Reviews, 35, 51-75. 
[4] Flory, P.J., Rehner, J. (1943). Statistical mechanics of cross-linked polymer networks. I. 
The Journal of Chemical Physics, 11, 512-520. 
[5] Treloar, L.R.G. (1943). The elasticity of a network of long-chain molecules. I. Transactions 
of the Faraday Society, 39, 36-41. 
[6] Treloar, L.R.G. (1943). The elasticity of a network of long-chain molecules. II. 
Transactions of the Faraday Society, 39, 241-246. 
[7] Arruda, E.M., Boyce, M.C. (1993). A three-dimensional model for the large stretch 
behavior of rubber elastic materials. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 41, 389-
412.
[8] Treloar, L.R.G. (1944). Stress-strain data for vulcanized rubber under various types of 
deformation. Transactions of the Faraday Society, 42, 59-70. 
[9] Rivlin, R.S. (1948). Large elastic deformations of isotropic materials. I. Fundamental 
concepts. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, 240, 459-490.
[10] Rivlin, R.S., Saunders, D.W. (1951). Large elastic deformations of isotropic materials, 
VII. Experiments on the deformation of rubber. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London. Series A, 243, 251-288.
[11] Mooney, M. (1940). A theory of large elastic deformation. Journal of Applied Physics,
11, 582–592.   
[12] Steck, J., Kim, J., Kutsovsky, Y., Suo, Z. (2023) Multiscale stress deconcentration 
amplifies fatigue resistance of rubber. Nature, 624, 303-308
[13] Gillard, F., Boardman, R., Mavrogordato, M., Hollis, D., Sinclair, I., Pierron, F., Browne, 
M. (2014). The application of digital volume correlation (DVC) to study the microstructural 
behaviour of trabecular bone during compression, Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of 
Biomedical Materials, 29, 480-499.
[14] Dall’Ara, E., Tozzi G (2022), Digital volume correlation for the characterization of 
musculoskeletal tissues: Current challenges and future developments. Frontiers in
Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 10, doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2022.1010056.
[15] Buljac, A., Jailin, C., Mendoza, A., Neggers, J., Taillandier-Thomas, T., Bouterf, A., 
Smaniotto, B., Hild, F., Roux, S. (2020) Digital Volume Correlation: Review of Progress and 


8

Challenges. In: Lin, M.T., et al. Advancements in Optical Methods & Digital Image 
Correlation in Experimental Mechanics, Volume 3. Conference Proceedings of the Society for 
Experimental Mechanics Series, Springer.
[16] Martins, P.A.L.S., Natal Jorge, R.M., Ferreira, A.J.M. (2006). A Comparative Study of 
Several Material Models for Prediction of Hyperelastic Properties: Application to Silicone-
Rubber and Soft Tissues. Strain, 42, 135-147.
[17] Yao, Y., Chen, S., Huang, Z. (2022). A generalized Ogden model for the compressibility 
of rubber-like solids. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 380, 20210320.
[18] Storåkers, B. (1986). On Material Representation and Constitutive Branching in Finite 
Compressible Elasticity. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 34, 125-145.
[19] Avril, S., Pierron, F. (2007). General framework for the identification of constitutive 
parameters from full-field measurements in linear elasticity. International Journal of Solids 
and Structures, 44, 4978-5002.
[20] Molimard, J., Riche, R.Le, Vautrin, A., Lee, J.R., (2005). Identification of the four 
orthotropic plate stiffnesses using a single open-hole tensile test. Experimental Mechanics, 45,
404-411.
[21] Ereiz, S., Duvnjak, I., Jiménez-Alonso, J.F. (2022). Review of finite element model 
updating methods for structural applications. Structures, 41,684-723.
[22] Harkous, A., Colomines, C., Leroy, E., Mousseau, P., Deterre, R. (2016). The kinetic 
behavior of Liquid Silicone Rubber: A comparison between thermal and rheological 
approaches based on gel point determination. Reactive and Functional Polymers, 101, 20-27.
[23] de Buyl, F., Hayez, V., Harkness, B., Kimberlain, J., Shephard, N. (2023). Advances in 
structural silicone adhesives, In Dillard, D.A. Advances in Structural Adhesive Bonding 
(Second Edition), Woodhead Publishing, 179-219.
[24] Flory, P.J. (1942). Thermodynamics of high polymer solutions. The Journal of Chemical 
Physics, 10, 51-61. 
[25] Huggins, M.L. (1941). Solutions of long chain compounds. The Journal of Chemical 
Physics, 9, 440-440.
[26] Cai, S., Suo, Z. (2011). Mechanics and chemical thermodynamics of phase transition in 
temperature-sensitive hydrogels. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 59, 2259-
2278.
[27] Sofronis, P., McMeeking, R.M. (1989). Numerical analysis of hydrogen transport near a 
blunting crack tip. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 37, 317-350.
[28] Purkayastha, R.T., and McMeeking, R.M. (2012). A linearized model for lithium-ion 
batteries and maps for their performance and failure. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 79, 
031021.
[29] Bohn, E., Eckl, T., Kamlah, M., and McMeeking, R.M. (2013). A model for lithium 
diffusion and stress generation in an intercalation storage particle with phase change. Journal 
of the Electrochemical Society, 160, A1638-A1652.
[30] Hu, Y., Chen, X., Whitesides, G.M., Vlassak, J.J., Suo, Z. (2011). Indentation of 
polydimethylsiloxane submerged in organic solvents. Journal of Materials Research, 26, 785-
795.
[31] Hu, Y., Zhao, X., Vlassak, J.J., Suo, Z. (2010). Using indentation to characterize the 
poroelasticity of gels. Applied Physics Letters, 96, 121904.
[32] Biot, M.A. (1941). General Theory of Three‐Dimensional Consolidation. Journal of
Applied Physics, 12, 155-164.
[33] Rice, J.R., Cleary, M.P. (1976). Some Basic Stress-Diffusion Solutions for Fluid-
Saturated Elastic Porous Media with Compressible Constituents. Reviews of Geophysics and 
Space Physics, 14, 227-241.


9

[34] Vergne, P. (2007) Super Low Traction under EHD & Mixed Lubrication Regimes. In 
Erdemir, A., Martin, J.M. Superlubricity, Elsevier Science, 427-443.
[35] Airiau, C., Bottaro, A. (2020). Flow of shear-thinning fluids through porous media. 
Advances in Water Resources, 143, 103658.
[36] Thakolkaran, P., Joshi, A., Zheng, Y., Flaschel, M., De Lorenzis, L., Kumar, S. (2022). 
NN-EUCLID: Deep-learning hyperelasticity without stress data. Journal of the Mechanics and 
Physics of Solids, Volume 169, 105076.
[37] Flaschel, M., Kumar, S., De Lorenzis, L. (2022). Discovering plasticity models without 
stress data. npj computational materials, 8, 91, doi.org/10.1038/s41524-022-00752-4.
[38] Mozaffar, M., Bostanabad, R., Chen, W., Bessa, M.A. (2019). Deep learning predicts path-
dependent plasticity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116, 26414-26420.
[39] Silano, A.A., Pae, K.D., Sauer, J.A. (1977). Effects of hydrostatic pressure on shear 
deformation of polymers. Journal of Applied Physics, 48, 4076-4084.
[40] Spitzig, W.A., Richmond, O. (1979). Effect of hydrostatic pressure on the deformation 
behavior of polyethylene and polycarbonate in tension and in compression. Polymer
Engineering and Science, 19, 1129-1139.
[41] Sanomura, Y. (2003). Constitutive Equation for Plastic Behavior of Hydrostatic-Pressure-
Dependent Polymers. Materials Science and Research International, 9, 243-247.

Methods
Fabrication of Silicone rubber specimens
We employed the Polycraft GP3481-F RTV mould-making Silicone rubber. This is a two-part 
material comprising the Polycraft GP3481-F RTV base which when mixed with the Polycraft 
RTC-10F/VF catalyst results in a room temperature condensation curing reaction. The base 
and catalyst were mixed in ratio 20:1 (by weight) and poured into Perspex moulds to produce 
specimens of the required geometry. The cast rubber was then cured for 48 hrs at 4°C to slow 
the curing process. This allowed any trapped air bubbles to escape. The samples were de-
moulded after a further 4 days of curing at room temperature. We confirmed the absence of 
porosity in the samples; see high resolution scanning electron micrographs and XCT images in 
Supplementary Figs. S1a and S1b. The HDPE and Nylon specimens were machined from 12 
mm thick sheets of (HD-PE300 corresponding to 0.3 million g mol−1) and Nylon6 (cast 
polyamide 6), respectively.  All specimen geometries along with specimen dimensions are 
detailed in Supplementary Table S1. 

The composite Silicone rubber beams with the ZnI2 tracers were manufactured using the same 
protocol except that the beam was cast in two parts. A mixture comprising the base and 5% by 
wt. ZnI2 dissolved into the catalyst and was first poured into the mould to cast the bottom half 
of the beam. Subsequently, we poured a mixture comprising just the base and catalyst to 
produce a beam with the tracers below the neutral axis (Fig. 3a). To confirm the adhesion of 
ZnI2 to Silicone rubber we painted patterns of ZnI2 on the surface of Silicone rubber specimens. 
It was clear that the ZnI2 adhered to the rubber and this was further evidenced by deforming 
the specimens and observing that the ZnI2 pattern deformed conformally with the surface of 
the rubber (Supplementary Fig. S2).

In-situ X-ray tomography rigs
To facilitate in-situ mechanical loading of specimens in conjunction with the high accuracy X-
ray tomography of required for FETC, we developed bespoke loading rigs (Fig. 1a and 
Supplementary Fig. S3). The versatility of the testing stage allows for seamless adaptation to 
accommodate various fixtures, including tensile jaws, compression platens as well as 4-point


10

and 3-point bending rigs (Supplementary Fig. S3). As is typical, our tomography acquisition 
and reconstruction processes were calibrated for cylindrical sample geometries. This is ideal 
for the cylindrical shapes of our compression/tension specimens. To ensure accuracy of the 
reconstructions for the bending specimens, we developed bending fixtures to allow the bend
tests to be conducted such that the longitudinal direction of the beam was vertical. This implied 
a near axisymmetric scan geometry during the rotation of the stage. All jigs and fixtures were 
made from acrylic/Perspex, and the loading frame was built from 5 mm thick Perspex tubes 
(Supplementary Fig. S3).  The selection of these materials was guided by their low X-ray 
attenuation properties which ensured minimal interference with X-rays, and a reduction in the
X-ray scattering to mitigate against scan artifacts. For load measurement, a precision 100 N 
load cell was employed, while crosshead displacements were monitored using a vernier scale 
with a 1 μm resolution. 

X-ray tomography method for FETC
X-ray tomographs were obtained using the Nikon XTH 225 ST system. X-rays were generated 
using a Tungsten source (target), and a 2000 pixel × 2000-pixel CCD detector with a resolution 
of 150 μm pixel−1 captured the transmitted X-rays. Geometric magnification achieved via the 
location of the detector and sample stage relative to the X-ray source enhanced the resolution 
of the scans to 30 μm. Copper filters were introduced at the X-ray source to eliminate low-
energy X-rays in the Bremsstrahlung spectrum, mitigating beam hardening effects at the 
specimen-air interface. These filters are also crucial for the FETC method to enable an increase 
in flux without oversaturating the detector (Supplementary S1). We employed an exposure time 
of 1 s to strike a balance between a reasonable scan time (~50 minutes for 3142 projections) 
while also maintaining a high signal-to-noise ratio (the photon count through the specimen is 
at least 1.5 times the background noise of the detector). To optimize the X-ray source, we 
initially adjusted the anode voltage to achieve a transmissivity of ~30% through the specimen, 
with the digital gain kept at a minimum. Subsequently, the current was increased until it 
reached a point of oversaturation on the detector. Various thicknesses of copper filters (ranging 
from 0.1 mm to 1 mm) were then employed to further increase the flux by progressively 
increasing the anode current until the spot size of the X-ray source at 30 W attained the desired 
scan resolution of 30 μm (Supplementary Table S1 lists the X-ray scan parameters for all 
measurements reported here). Tomographic reconstruction using scans of the 3142 projections 
was performed using a backpropagation algorithm and beam hardening corrections applied 
using polynomial curves to ensure the mean deviation in gray values between the centre and 
the edge of the specimen was less than 10%. The resulting reconstructed volumes were 
exported as uncompressed .raw files and imported into VGStudioMax 2022.4 for post-
processing analysis. The in-situ loading, using the rigs described above, was interrupted 
periodically to acquire scans via this protocol. Examples of reconstructed images at various 
stages of the loading are shown in Supplementary Fig. S4. Detailed verifications of the FETC 
observations were performed using laser and 3D digital image correlation (3D DIC) 
measurements (Supplementary S3 and Extended Data Fig. 3). At-least 3 repeat tests were 
conducted for each measurement reported here to confirm reproducibility of the results.

Fast radiographs for observation of the motion of the tracers
The 50 mins required for each tomographic scan implied that we could not observe via 
tomography the anticipated rapid motion of the ZnI2 tracers attached to the mobile phase. We 
therefore developed a protocol to acquire 2D radiographs at an interframe time of 500 ms 
during 4-point bend tests. In radiographs we need to minimise any parallax error associated 
with the X-ray cone being emitted. For this we made two modifications: (i) we switched from 
the Tungsten (W) target used for tomography to a Molybdenum (Mo) target which reduces the 


11

cone angle of the emitted X-rays from ~40o to ~20o and (ii) employed a collimation
rectangular slit (Fig. 3a) of size 10 mm × 15 mm made from a 5 mm thick steel plate that was 
placed near the source. This created a near collimated X-ray beam over a 10 mm × 15 mm
widow to visualise a portion of the beam undergoing deformation (Fig. 3a). Radiographs 
(Fig. 3d) were captured utilizing X-rays generated at 50 kVp (limited by the Mo target) and 
10 W
power.
These radiographs were used to extract the tracer front position 

(Supplementary S3) as a function of time (Fig. 3e) and the reproducibility confirmed via at-
least 3 repeat tests.

Digital Volume Correlation (DVC) analysis
The uncompressed “.raw” volume files were loaded into the commercial software 
VGStudioMax 2022.4 and organised sequentially in order of the loading stages. For example, 
for the tension results shown in Fig. 1 scans were conducted at displacement increments of 
Δ𝑈 = 2 mm. In the initial DVC analysis, two stages corresponding to 𝑈 = 0 mm and 2 mm
were loaded into the analysis and designated as Volume A and Volume B, respectively. Before 
initiating the DVC analysis, the air within Volume A was eliminated using a region grower 
algorithm based on the gray value range within the Silicone rubber. An ~300 μm layer of air 
around the specimen was retained in Volume A to delineate the boundary. The Perspex platens
were also incorporated in the cropped Volume A. This inclusion served as a reference for 
optimizing the global DVC analysis. Subsequently, the DVC analysis module was activated, 
and a correlation was performed between Volume A and Volume B. The correlation box was 
optimised during the analysis, and we typically achieved converged results for the displacement 
field with a correlation box comprising 10 × 10 × 10 voxels (with a voxel size of ~ 30 μm). 
We performed numerous checks on the converged displacement field including (i) agreement 
with the platen displacements and (ii) correct prediction of the overall deformed shape of the 
specimen. The resultant displacements were then exported to a cubic mesh of the same size as 
the correlation window. This DVC analysis process was repeated for each consecutive loading 
stage and the total deformation gradients determined using a multi-stage analysis 
(Supplementary S1). 

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge funding from the UKRI Frontier Research grant “Graph-based 
Learning and design of Advanced Mechanical Metamaterials” with award number 
EP/X02394X/1.


12

Figure 1: Globally incompressible deformation of Silicone rubber accompanied by local 
volume changes. (a) The loading setup, with in-situ XCT imaging. The computed grayscale 
tomograph of a  600 μm cube within a cylindrical Silicone rubber specimen obtained from 
FETC illustrates the inherent speckle within the material. (b) Cylindrical Silicone rubber 
specimens of varying aspect ratios 𝐻/𝐷 glued to platens and subjected to uniaxial tension. (c) 
XCT image of the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen deformed to 𝜀∞ = 0.21 along with the evolution of the 
spatial distribution of volumetric strain Δ𝑉/𝑉0 on internal planes with increasing strain 𝜀∞. (d) 
The nominal tensile stress 𝜎∞ versus strain 𝜀∞ curves for specimens with aspect ratios in the 
range 1 ≤ 𝐻/𝐷 ≤ 10 and (e) comparison of the volumetric strains at 𝜀∞ = 0.21 for the range 
of specimen aspect ratios investigated here. In (c) and (e) the volumetric strains are plotted on 
the deformed configuration, and we include for each case the volumetric deformation 〈𝑉/𝑉0〉
averaged over the whole specimen.


13

Figure 2: Bending of the Silicone rubber provides insights into deformation mechanisms.
(a) Sketch of the 4-point bending apparatus with leading dimensions labelled (dimensions listed 
in Supplementary Table S1). (b) Comparison of the measured and predicted moment 𝑀 versus 
normalised curvature 𝜅ℎ response for selected loading rates 𝜅̇ℎ. (c) Measurements and 
predictions of the moment relaxation response for step loading under 4-point bending. The 
inset shows a sketch of the loading history with the imposed curvature increasing linearly up 
to time 𝑡 = 𝑡𝑅 such that the final curvature is 𝜅∞ ≡ 𝜅̇𝑡𝑅. (d) Spatial distribution of volumetric 
strain Δ𝑉/𝑉0 within the beam bent to 𝜅∞ℎ = 0.24 and (e) corresponding distributions of 
selected components of the Green-Lagrange strain 𝐸𝑖𝑗. 


14

Figure 3: Evidence of the presence of a mobile phase within Silicone rubber and 
measurements of its mobility. (a) X-ray tomographic reconstruction of a composite Silicone 
rubber beam with dissolved ZnI2 in the lower half serving as an X-ray tracer. The sketch shows 
the setup of the fast radiography 4-point bend setup with the collimation slit. The definition of 
the local co-ordinate system 𝑥3

′ fixed to the neutral axis of the beam is also indicated. (b) X-

ray tomographic reconstructions of the composite beam subjected a normalised curvature 𝜅ℎ =
±0.24. The two curvatures correspond to bending of the beam with the tracers on tensile and 
compression side, respectively. (c) Predictions and measurements of the variation of the 
volumetric strain Δ𝑉/𝑉0 as well as predictions of the normalised concentration 𝜃̅ of the mobile 
phase across the thickness of the beam subjected to 𝜅ℎ = 0.24. (d) Montage of radiographs 
showing a central section of the composite beam subjected to a step loading 4-point bend 
experiment with 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 s−1 and 𝑡𝑅 = 4 s (i.e. 𝜅∞ℎ = 0.48). (e) Comparison between 
measurements and predictions of the tracer front position 𝑋𝑓 as a function of normalised time
𝑡/𝑡𝑅. The two cases with 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 s−1 (𝜅∞ℎ = 0.48 and 0.24) correspond to 𝑡𝑅 = 4 s and 
2 s. Error bars associated with the measurements are included (Supplementary S3). In (d & e) 
time 𝑡 = 0 corresponds to the instant that loading commenced.


15

Figure 4: Local compressibility but global incompressibility is a phenomenon that is 
observed for a range of synthetic polymers ranging from rubbers to engineering 
thermoplastics. (a) X-ray tomographic reconstruction of the 3-point bending apparatus with 
leading dimensions labelled (dimensions listed in Supplementary Table S1). (b) The measured 
applied load 𝑃 versus displacement 𝑈 of central roller for the 3-point bending of geometrically 
identical Silicone rubber, Nylon6 and HDPE beams. (c) Distributions of the volumetric strains 
Δ𝑉/𝑉0 within the Silicone rubber, Nylon6 and HDPE beams deformed to 𝑈 = 4 mm. The 
strains are plotted on the deformed configurations of the beam. In each case we include the 
volumetric deformation 〈𝑉/𝑉0〉 averaged over the whole specimen.


16

Extended Data Figures

Extended Data Figure 1: The principle of FETC. (a) The experimental setup of a 2D 
phantom to illustrate the idea to magnify the phase contrast in nominally homogeneous 
materials. (b) The linear attenuation co-efficients 𝜇𝑗 of the 3 materials used in the 2D phantom 
versus X-ray photon energy and the corresponding detection quantum efficiency (DQE) of the 
100 μm thick Silicon sensor array detector used in the measurements. (c) Predictions of the 
normalized transmitted intensities 𝑖̂ ≡ 𝑖/𝑖0 for the 3-phase of the phantom as a function of the 
photon energy of a monochromatic X-ray source. The normalized detector cut-off limit 𝑖cr/𝑖0
based on the detector DQE from (b) is also indicated for an X-ray flux corresponding to a 
50 μA electron current. (d) The measured radiograph of the 2D phantom with a Copper X-ray 
target using a 25 kVp source and a 50 μA electron current. (e) Effect of increasing electron 
current to 150 μA on the transmitted intensities and the detector cut-off. (f) Radiograph of the 
2D phantom with a Copper X-ray target using a 25 kVp source and a 150 μA electron current. 
(g) The energy spectrum using a Tungsten target with 40 kVp source and current of 150 μA
with and without a 0.25 mm thick copper filter. (h, i) Adding a 0.25 mm thick copper filter 
between the X-ray source and 2D phantom allows all phases of the phantom to be distinguished 
using a Tungsten target with 40 kVp source and current of 150 μA.


17

Extended Data Figure 2: Spatial distributions of the measured deformation gradients. 
Spatial distribution of selected components of 𝐹𝑖𝑗 on a diametrical plane within the cylindrical 
Silicone rubber specimens subjected to tension. We include the components 𝐹11, 𝐹33, 𝐹13 and 
det(𝐹𝑖𝑗) at three levels of 𝜀∞ for the (a) 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 and (b) 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimens. The 
deformation gradients are plotted on the deformed configuration. 


18

Extended Data Figure 3: Measurements independent of X-ray setup to validate the FETC 
observations. (a) Tension/compression tests on the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimen measuring the axial 
and radial strains on a central disc of height ℎ0 = 1.2 mm using laser gauges. The insets show 
a wireframe of the deformed configuration (extracted from the FETC measurements to 
demonstrate that the central section remains planar) as well as the definition volume change as 
measured via the laser extensometers. The volumetric strains of the central disc as a function 
of the imposed axial displacement 𝑈 are plotted and compared with the corresponding FETC
measurements averaged over the same volume. The measurements of the volume of the entire 
specimen using the FETC measurements of det (𝐹𝑖𝑗) and the specimen outline from the X-ray 
tomographs (labelled 〈𝑉/𝑉0〉 − 1) are also included. (b) Comparison between distributions of 
the Green-Lagrange strains 𝐸11 and 𝐸13 on the surface of the Silicone rubber beam in 3-point 
bending (geometry identical to Fig. 4) using 3D digital image correlation (3D DIC) and FETC 
measurements. The good agreement not only confirms the fidelity of FETC but also 
demonstrates that there is negligible radiation damage on the Silicone rubber specimens due to 
the X-rays. See Supplementary S3 for details of the methods.


19

Extended Data Figure 4: Compression of Silicone rubber. (a) The compressive nominal 
stress 𝜎∞ versus strain 𝜀∞ responses of specimens glued to platens and with aspect ratios 
𝐻/𝐷 = 1 and 𝐻/𝐷 = 2. (b) Spatial distribution of det (𝐹𝑖𝑗) on a diametrical plane within the 
specimen for three values of 𝜀∞. (c) Selected components of 𝐹𝑖𝑗 on a diametrical plane within 
the cylindrical Silicone rubber specimen. We include the components 𝐹11, 𝐹22, 𝐹33 and 𝐹13 at 
three levels of compressive strain 𝜀∞ within the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimen. All spatial distributions 
are plotted on the deformed configuration.


1

Supplementary Text

S1: Flux-enhanced tomography for digital volume correlation
S2: Fitting of hyperelastic models to Silicone rubber data
S3: Additional experimental results & techniques
S4: A thermodynamically consistent rubber elasticity framework with a mobile species

Supplementary S1: Flux-enhanced tomography for digital volume correlation

S1.1: Tomography to enhance contrast for digital volume correlation
A two-dimensional (2D) phantom comprising 3 phases arranged in a checkboard (Extended 
Data Fig. 1) is used to illustrate the principle of flux enhanced tomography to magnify gray 
value contrast in nominally homogeneous materials. The 3 phases of the phantom are standard 
polymers viz. Silicone rubber, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and polyethylene (PE). Then 
given a X-ray photon intensity 𝑖0(𝐸) per unit photon energy 𝐸 incident on the phantom, the 
transmitted intensity per unit energy at location 𝒙 where phase 𝑗 is present is given in terms of 
X-ray attenuation co-efficient 𝜇𝑗
of phase 𝑗
by Beer-Lamberts law as 𝑖(𝒙, 𝐸) =

𝑖0(𝐸) exp(−𝜇𝑗ℎ) where we do not sum over phases as in the 2D phantom each photon only 
travels through one phase of thickness ℎ ≈ 100 μm (Extended Data Fig. 1a). The variation of 
the linear attenuation co-efficients 𝜇𝑗 with X-ray photon energy 𝐸 for the three phases is known 
[1] and illustrated in Extended Data Fig. 1b. The corresponding normalized transmitted 
intensities 𝑖̂ ≡ 𝑖/𝑖0 are included in Extended Data Fig. 1c with the upper and lower bound 
corresponding to phase 𝑗 = 1 (Silicone rubber) and 𝑗 = 3 (PE), respectively. Given a 
monochromatic X-ray source (e.g., with a photon energy of 25 keV) an ideal detector (with 
100% detection efficiency) will measure a spatial distribution of intensities over 𝑗 = 1, … 3 to 
give the spatial distribution of phases in the 2D phantom.

However, all practical detectors have a finite quantum efficiency and the detection quantum 
efficiency (DQE) of a 100 μm thick Silicon detector [2] is included in Extended Data Fig. 1b 
(a DQE of x % means that only the fraction x/100 of the photons incident on the detector 
contribute to the electron current from the detector with a sufficiently low noise to signal ratio). 
Thus, for a monochromatic source, the detector is unable to produce a sufficient detection 
current (i.e., detection of incident photons does not have a sufficiently low noise to signal ratio) 
when the transmitted X-ray intensity 𝑖 < 𝑖cr = 𝑖ref(1 − DQE) where 𝑖ref is a constant related 
to the exposure time and electrical system measuring the electron flux from the detector. We 
estimated 𝑖ref for our Nikon XTH-225 ST and the corresponding detection cut-off threshold is 
included in Extended Data Fig. 1c. We now observe that at 𝐸 = 25 keV the measurable 
transmitted flux is severely limited by the detector sensitivity such that the high attenuation 
phases 𝑗 = 2,3 are expected to be “blacked out”. We employed a copper target with a 25 kVp 
source and a 50 μA electron flux to produce a near monochromatic X-ray beam with a photon 
energy 𝐸 ≈ 20 keV. The resulting measured radiograph (Extended Data Fig. 1d) indicates that 
the richness of the phase differences within the 2D phantom are not captured: the “speckle” on 
this radiograph is very coarse compared to the ground truth (Extended Data Fig. 1a) as the 𝑗 =
2,3 phases with a high attenuation are blacked-out and thereby merged in the radiograph.


2

Detector sensitivity is thus the limiting factor to observe the speckle that is inherent in the low 
phase contrast 2D phantom that we have designed to illustrate the FETC principle. An obvious 
solution to this problem is to increase the transmitted flux by enhancing the photon flux 𝑖0
incident on the phantom (this can be achieved by increasing the flux of electrons impacting the 
X-ray target). Then while the normalized transmitted flux 𝑖̂ remains unchanged, the normalized 
critical detection flux 𝑖cr/𝑖0 reduces by the factor that 𝑖0 is increased by since 𝑖ref is a detector 
property that is unaffected by 𝑖0. Increasing 𝑖0 by a factor of 2 is expected to bring the all the 
phases in the phantom within the detection limits (Extended Data Fig. 1e). We then repeated 
radiograph of the phantom (Extended Data Fig. 1a) by keeping the copper target and source 
voltage unchanged but increasing the electron flux from 50 μA to 150 μA. The corresponding 
increase in the X-ray photon flux allows the detector to differentiate between all the phases in 
the phantom; see radiograph in Extended Data Fig. 1f.

While the copper target generates a near monochromatic X-ray beam, the energies are low (soft 
X-rays) and insufficient to penetrate most realistic specimens. Common laboratory-based X-
ray sources therefore use Tungsten (W) which generates a polychromatic X-ray beam including 
high energy X-rays. The wide spectrum of X-ray photon energies for a standard source 
excitation voltage of 40 kVp and a W target is shown in Extended Data Fig. 1g [3]. The 
transmitted flux through a location 𝒙 of the 2D phantom where phase 𝑗 is present, as measured 
by the detector, is then

𝑖𝑇 = ∫ {𝑖0 exp(−𝜇𝑗ℎ𝑗) − 𝑖cr}𝑑𝐸

∞

0

.
(1.1)

Here {∙} denotes the Macaulay bracket which ensures that a transmitted current below the 
detection threshold is not included (note we are neglecting the negligible attenuation due to 
air).  A radiograph with a 40 kVp source and a current of 150 μA is shown in Extended Data 
Fig. 1h. However, regions of “whiteouts” are now observed. The whiteout effect is understood 
as follows. Observe from the Tungsten spectrum in Extended Data Fig. 1g that there is a high 
flux at low energies. Therefore, at these low energies 𝑖𝑇 is high for the low attenuation phases 
since both transmission is high and 𝑖cr is low. Then recalling that the detector (for a given 
exposure time) saturates when the flux exceeds a value 𝑖sat, the low attenuation phases get 
merged as the detector saturates. This problem was avoided in the monochromatic beam as low 
photon energies that contribute to the whiteout did not exist. The whiteout drawback of the 
polychromatic beam cannot be solved by reducing the flux 𝑖0 as that leads to blackout as seen 
in Extended Fig. 1d. Rather it is to filter out the low energy X-ray photons impacting the 2D 
phantom. We did this using a 0.25 mm thick copper filter placed between the X-ray source and 
the 2D phantom (Extended Data Fig. 1a). The corresponding radiograph (Extended Data 
Fig. 1i) using a 40 kVp source and current of 150 μA shows that the whiteout problem is now 
eliminated, and the detector differentiates between all the phases in the phantom. The 
combination of high X-ray fluxes along with the filtering of the low energy X-ray photons 
enables us to generate tomographs suitable for correlation in nominally homogenous materials. 
We call this method flux enhanced tomography for correlation (FETC).

We illustrate FETC using a cylindrical Silicone rubber specimen (Methods) of diameter 28 mm 
and height 56 mm using a W target, source voltage 150 kVp, 0.25 mm Cu filter and currents 
ranging from 100 μA to 200 μA. The computed grayscale tomograph of a  600 μm cube within 
the cylindrical specimen is shown in Fig. S1 for increasing currents along with the 
corresponding histograms of gray value pixel counts within the cube. Clearly increasing current 
significantly enhances contrast within the specimen by differentiating between the phases with 


3

mild X-ray contrast in the nominally homogenous Silicone rubber. This contrast obtained via 
FETC serves as a speckle for digital volume correlation (DVC).

S1.2
Large deformation digital volume correlation (DVC)

The problem in DVC to compute strain distributions in a large deformation process is that the 
correlation algorithm fails to converge much like in digital image correlation (DIC). Both DIC 
and DVC rely on finding the maximum correlation array between pixel intensity array subsets 
on two or more corresponding images. This gives the translational and rotational shift between 
the images. However, extreme deformations means that pixel intensity array subsets (known 
as the correlation boxes) themselves distort so that images of two consecutive deformation 
states can no longer be accurately correlated: in DIC the probability of correlation drops to less 
than 10% for deformations more than 30% [4]. We therefore developed a large deformation 
DVC procedure which involves only correlation between sequential states of deformation 
where the incremental deformation is small enough to allow for a high correlation co-efficient. 
These incremental deformations are then combined to give the overall large deformations. 
However, in each increment of deformation the displacements are computed in a Eulerian 
frame that is fixed in space (i.e., the laboratory frame within which the X-ray scans are 
conducted) and thus displacements are computed at a different set of material points for each 
increment of deformation. An algorithm akin to remeshing in finite element (FE) computations 
is therefore employed to interpolate the displacements and additively compute the 
displacements over the full deformation on a fixed set of material points.

As a first step we computed the displacement between consecutive loading increments using 
the global correlation algorithm [5-6] implemented in VGStudioMax 2022.4. These 
incremental displacement fields were then fed into the multi-step DVC algorithm. The principle 
of the multi-step DVC approach is demonstrated in Fig. S5. The displacement field of the 
(𝑛 − 1) step comes from the DVC analysis between the (𝑛 − 1) and 𝑛 steps. However, the 
DVC analysis outputs the displacement field in the form of the three orthogonal displacements 
𝑢𝑖 at individual points in a 3D grid with the fixed Eulerian coordinates. This means that the 
discrete displacement field outputted by the DVC analysis for step (𝑛 − 1) (which is calculated 
as the increment in displacement between steps (𝑛 − 1) and 𝑛) need not be at the same material 
point as that for step 𝑛 that is calculated as the increment in displacement between steps and 𝑛
and (𝑛 + 1). Consequently, the displacement field of the material points cannot be tracked 
through multiple steps.

We now illustrate the multi-step DVC approach using a Lagrangian/Eulerian finite element 
setting as a basis to explain the basic idea. Prior to deformation the material is discretised into 
fixed material points akin to a Lagrangian finite element mesh with the nodes of the mesh 
following material points. Similarly, space is also discretised into a grid that is fixed in space 
(i.e., a Eulerian grid) on which the DVC analysis between two consecutive steps outputs the 
displacement field. The nodes of the Lagrangian mesh are then located within the Eulerian 
DVC mesh and the displacement of the nodes of the Lagrangian mesh incremented by the 
incremental DVC displacement. This then provides not only the total displacement of the 
material points associated with nodes of the Lagrangian mesh but also the spatial position of 
the Lagrangian nodes to locate within the Eulerian grid for the next increment of the DVC 
analysis. To visualise this procedure, we show in Fig. S5 a cube of material (nodes labelled A 
through E) in step (𝑛 − 1) and the deformation and motion of this cube through steps 𝑛 and 
(𝑛 + 1). The DVC analysis between steps (𝑛 − 1) and 𝑛 give the displacements on the 
Eulerian grid. The incremental displacement for example of Lagrangian node E of the cube 
between steps (𝑛 − 1) and 𝑛 is then determined by first locating node E in step (𝑛 − 1) within 


4

the Eulerian grid. It lies within the Eulerian grid surrounded by Eulerian grid nodes 1 through 

8 as shown in the inset of Fig. S5. Then the incremental displacement {Δ𝑢(𝐸)}

(𝑛−1) in vector 

form of the material point associated with node E between steps (𝑛 − 1) and 𝑛 is given by

{Δ𝑢(𝐸)}

(𝑛−1) = [𝑁(𝜻(𝐸))]{𝑑}(𝑛−1),
(1.2)

where [𝑁] is the matrix of shape function of the Eulerian grid element with nodes 1-8,  𝜻(𝐸) the 
parametric co-ordinates of the material point E within this grid element and {𝑑}(𝑛−1) the vector 
of incremental DVC obtained displacements of the Eulerian nodes 1-8 between steps (𝑛 − 1)
and 𝑛. The total displacement of node E is then

{𝑢(𝐸)}

(𝑛−1) = {𝑢(𝐸)}

(𝑛−2) + {Δ𝑢(𝐸)}

(𝑛−1),
(1.3)

and the location {𝑋(𝐸)}

(𝑛) of node E for the analysis between steps 𝑛 and (𝑛 + 1) is given by 

{𝑋(𝐸)}

(𝑛) = {𝑋(𝐸)}

(0) + {𝑢(𝐸)}

(𝑛−1),
(1.4)

where {𝑋(𝐸)}

(0) is the location of node E in the undeformed state. This allows for the process 

to be repeated for the incremental displacements between steps 𝑛 and (𝑛 + 1) with node E now 
again located within the Eulerian grid for step 𝑛 (it is now seen to lie in the Eulerian grid 
surrounded by grid nodes 11-18) as shown in Fig. S5. While here for the sake of clarity we 
have explained the multi-step DVC in terms of finite element shape functions, we implemented 
this procedure using 3D cubic B-splines [5] to ensure smooth deformation gradients.

S1.3
Description of the in-situ X-ray setups

We constructed a bespoke loading rig to conduct a range of in-situ mechanical tests. The driver 
behind this was to ensure minimal interference of the loading frame with the X-rays while 
acquiring the scans for the tomographic reconstruction: FETC requires especially accurate 
reconstructions to ensure accurate inference of the displacement field. A sketch of the loading 
fixture along with important dimensions and materials used is shown in Fig. S3. The rig was 
fixed to the loading stage of the XCT setup and rotated about the vertical axis to acquire the 
scans for the reconstructions. Another important feature of the setup is that we could modify it 
to change the type of loading we wanted to impose (we used it to perform tensile tests, 
compression tests, 4-point bending and 3-point bending). In addition, the setup permitted us to 
bring the specimens very close to the X-ray source (Fig. S3) to ensure maximum geometric 
magnification and thereby resolution. The setup was able to measure axial loads and imposed
displacements as described in the Methods Section.

Sketches of the three main setups used in this study are shown in Fig. S3, viz. 
tension/compression of cylinders, 4-point bending and 3-point bending. Leading dimensions 
and materials used for these setups are also indicated. As discussed in the Methods section the 
bend tests were conducted with the longitudinal axis of the beam vertical: this ensured a near 
axisymmetric geometry about the vertical axis which significantly enhanced the quality of the 
reconstructions. Consequently, while the imposed bending displacements were measured in the 
in-situ setup we did not measure the corresponding loads. The measured moments/loads shown 
in Figs. 3 and 4 were performed independently with the loading fixtures rotated so that the 
longitudinal axis of the beam is horizontal. No X-ray reconstructions were conducted during 
these tests when the beams were horizontal. However, repeat tests confirmed the near complete 
reproducibility of the measured load versus displacement responses implying that it suffices to 


5

use the load measured from independent tests to relate the FETC measurements of the strain 
field to the measured macroscopic load-displacement responses of the beams.

Supplementary S2: Fitting of hyperelastic models to Silicone rubber data
Full field measurements of displacements (and thereby strains) can be used to determine 
material parameters and/or constitutive models. This has been done extensively using surface 
displacement data obtained via digital image correlation (DIC) [7]. The methods to solve the 
inverse problem of material parameter determination include virtual fields method (VFM) [8] 
and finite element model updating (FEMU) [9]. Here we use FEMU to fit 3 widely used 
hyperelastic models for rubber, viz. Neo-Hookean [10], Arruda-Boyce [11] and Mooney-
Rivlin [12] to the FETC measurements of the 3D full-field displacement fields.

The experiments we consider in this section are the tension experiments on the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 and 
𝐻/𝐷 = 2 Silicone rubber cylinders glued to platens (Fig. 1b). This glued boundary condition 
results in a spatially varying strain field through which an appropriate constitutive model and 
parameters can be determined. The primary observables in the experiments are the point-wise 
displacement fields within the specimen as a function of the imposed platen displacement 𝑈
and the corresponding load 𝑃 versus displacement 𝑈 response. An illustration of this data for 
for the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen is shown in Fig. S6 where we include spatial distributions of the 
three components 𝑢𝑖 of the displacement for an imposed displacement 𝑈 = 6 mm and 
measured 𝑃 versus 𝑈 response. The full-field measurements of 𝑢𝑖 were conducted at ℳ loading 
stages and we define displacement and force residuals based on these measurements. The 
displacement residual1 at loading stage 𝑗 is given by 

ℛ𝑢

(𝑗) ≡ 1

𝒩 ∑ √

∑
(𝑢𝑖

(𝑘,𝑗),exp − 𝑢𝑖

(𝑘,𝑗),sim)

2
3
𝑖=1

∑
(𝑢𝑖

(𝑘,𝑗),exp)

2
3
𝑖=1

𝒩

𝑘=1

,
(2.1)

where 𝑢𝑖

(𝑘,𝑗),exp and  𝑢𝑖

(𝑘,𝑗),sim are the measured and simulated displacement components in the 

𝑖 direction at the 𝑘 = 1, … 𝒩 material points and at loading stage 𝑗. The total displacement 
residue then follows as

𝒞𝑢 ≡ 1

ℳ ∑ ℛ𝑢

(𝑗)

ℳ

𝑗=1

.
(2.2)

Similarly, the force residual is 

𝒞𝑃 ≡ √

∑
ℳ (𝑃(𝑗),exp − 𝑃(𝑗),sim)2
𝑗=1

∑
ℳ (𝑃(𝑗),exp)2
𝑗=1

,
(2.3)

where 𝑃(𝑗),exp and 𝑃(𝑗),sim are the measured and simulated loads, respectively at loading stage 
𝑗. The total cost function is then [13]

𝒞 ≡ 𝒞𝑢 + 𝒞𝑃 .
(2.4)

S2.1:
The hyperelastic models

We considered 3 hyperelastic models widely used in the literature to describe the deformation 
of rubber. These models are defined in terms of the invariants of the deformation given by

1 If √∑
(𝑢𝑖

(𝑘,𝑗),exp)

2
3
𝑖=1
≤ 10−5𝑈 we neglect the contribution from material point 𝑘 at loading stage 𝑗.


6

𝐽 = 𝜆1𝜆2𝜆3;
𝐼1 = 𝜆1

2 + 𝜆2

2 + 𝜆3

2;
𝐼2 = 𝜆1

2𝜆2

2 + 𝜆2

2𝜆3

2 + 𝜆1

2𝜆3

2,
(2.5)

where 𝜆1, 𝜆2, 𝜆3, are the 3 principal stretches. It is then useful to define invariants of the 
isochoric deformation as 𝐼̅1 ≡ 𝐽−2/3𝐼1 and 𝐼̅2 ≡ 𝐽−4/3𝐼2. The strain energy density function 𝑊
is then written in terms of (𝐽, 𝐼1̅, 𝐼̅2). The first Piola Kirchhoff stress 𝑃𝑖𝑗 (or nominal stress) and 
then determined from 𝑊 by

𝑃𝑖𝑗 ≡ 𝜕𝑊

𝜕𝐹𝑖𝑗

,
(2.6)

where 𝐹𝑖𝑗 is the deformation gradient 𝐹𝑖𝑗. We used the hyperelastic models and the associated 
parameters as implemented in commercial finite element (FE) package ABAQUS [14] and here 
we summarise these models:

(i)
A compressible Neo-Hookean model which has no 𝐼̅2 dependence and two material
parameters 𝐶10 and 𝐷1 such that

𝑊 ≡ 𝐶10(𝐼̅1 − 3) + 1

𝐷1

(𝐽 − 1)2.
(2.7)

(ii)
The Mooney-Rivlin model [12] which is a generalisation of the Neo-Hookean 
model. It has an 𝐼̅2 dependency and three material parameters 𝐶10, 𝐶01 and 𝐷1 so 
that

𝑊 ≡ 𝐶10(𝐼̅1 − 3) + 𝐶01(𝐼̅2 − 3) + 1

𝐷1

(𝐽 − 1)2.
(2.8)

(iii)
The Arruda-Boyce model [11] is a micro-mechanically motivated model again with 
no 𝐼̅2 dependency. Several of the parameters follow directly from micro-mechanical 
considerations, and this reduces the numbers of fitting parameters to three labelled 
here as 𝐶1, 𝐷1 and 𝜆𝑚. The strain energy density function is given by

𝑊 ≡ 𝐶1 ∑ 𝛼𝑖 ( 1

𝜆𝑚
2 )

(𝑖−1)
4

𝑖=1

(𝐼̅1

𝑖 − 3𝑖) + 1

𝐷1

(𝐽2 − 1

2
− ln 𝐽),
(2.9)

where 𝛼1 = 1/2, 𝛼2 = 1/20, 𝛼3 = 11/1050 and 𝛼4 = 19/7000.

S2.2:
Implementation of the FEMU method

The FEMU method was implemented by coupling the package ABAQUS which performed the 
FE calculations to a Python script where a gradient-free Nelder-Mead [15] algorithm was 
implemented. The Nelder-Mead algorithm optimised the hyperelastic model parameters to 
minimize the cost function (2.4). The ABAQUS hyperelastic calculations were performed 
using 8-noded brick elements (C3D8 in the ABAQUS notation) with elements of size ~ 0.1mm. 
All displacements degrees of freedom were constrained to zero on the bottom surface of the 
cylinders and displacements 𝑢1 = 𝑢2 = 0 along with 𝑢3 = 𝑈 applied on all the nodes on the 
top surface. The work conjugate to the displacement 𝑈 is the applied force 𝑃. 

The calculations were performed as follows. An initial guess of the material parameters for the 
chosen hyperelastic model was made and the displacements and corresponding loads computed 
via FE calculations performed in ABAQUS. These displacements and loads were exported to 
a Python script running the Nelder-Mead algorithm to minimise the function (2.4). At every 
step the Nelder-Mead algorithm then provides new guesses of the hyperelastic model 


7

parameters, and the steps are repeated until a converged minimum is obtained. The values of 
the hyperelastic model parameters at this minimum are taken as the parameters that best fit the 
measured data. This procedure was used to infer the optimal model parameters from the 
measured data for tensile loading of the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 and 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimens. These optimal 
parameters along with corresponding values of the cost function are listed in Tables S2a and 
S2b for the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 and 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimens, respectively. To give a sense of the dominant 
residual we include in Table S2 both 𝒞𝑢 and 𝒞𝑃 in addition to the sum 𝒞: in all cases the 
displacement residuals are significantly greater than the force residue for reasons that we now 
proceed to discuss.

S2.3:
Summary of results

The best fit predictions of the nominal stress 𝜎∞ versus nominal strain 𝜀∞ for the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1
and 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimens using the best fit parameters for the 3 hyperelastic models are shown 
in Figs. S7a and S7b and compared with the measurements. All three models agree to a very 
high level of accuracy with the measurements as already suggested by the force residuals 𝒞𝑃
in Table S2. The displacement residuals 𝒞𝑢 are ≫ 𝒞𝑃 and we thus anticipate poor agreement 
of the deformation fields within the specimen.

Comparisons between the measured and predicted distributions of 𝐹33 and 𝐹23 on a diametrical 
plane through the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen are shown in Figs. S8 and S9, respectively for three 
stages of loading. Overall, the agreement between measurements and predictions seems 
reasonable although there are some discrepancies especially near the platens. However, a major 
discrepancy is observed when comparing predictions and measurements of det (𝐹𝑖𝑗); see 
Fig. S10. While the measurements show a mixture of dilation and contraction as discussed in 
the main text the predictions are pointwise nearly incompressible with det(𝐹𝑖𝑗) ≈ 1 throughout 
the specimen for all three hyperelastic models. In fact, the predictions show that the hydrostatic 
stress is tensile throughout the specimen and even if we reduced the bulk modulus to allow 
volumetric straining, a mixture of contraction and dilation would not be predicted by these 
hyperelastic models. The corresponding predictions for the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimen shown in 
Figs. S11-S13 are qualitatively similar with again the main discrepancy being in det(𝐹𝑖𝑗). This 
discrepancy is not particularly surprising as these hyperelastic models will always only predict 
either negligible volume change (for a high bulk modulus) or volumetric dilation under tensile 
hydrostatic stress states.

The fact that the predictions of 𝜎∞ versus 𝜀∞agree with measurements (Fig. S7) is somewhat 
misleading too. Recall that the hyperelastic model parameters predicted by FEMU differ 
somewhat for the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 and 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimens; see Tables S2. To illustrate the 
discrepancy, we include in Fig. S14a predictions of the 𝜎∞ versus 𝜀∞ of the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen 
with parameters inferred from the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimen for all the 3 hyperelastic models. 
Similarly, we also use the models (with parameters extracted from the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 tensile test) to 
predict the 3-point bending response of the Silicone rubber beam (Fig. 4). This comparison 
shown in Fig. S14b again emphasises that the hyperplastic models cannot capture even the load 
versus displacement measurements with sufficient accuracy over a range of loading states (or 
specimen geometries).


8

Supplementary S3: Additional experimental results & techniques

S3.1:
Isotropy of the Silicone rubber and homogeneity of the specimens

To confirm the isotropy of the as-cast Silicone rubber we cut 10 mm cubes from the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2
(𝐷 = 28 mm) cylindrical specimens from three locations within the cylinder (Fig. S15a). 
These specimens were then glued to platens similar to the cylindrical specimens of Fig. 1b and 
tested in compression. The compression tests were also conducted in the 3 orthogonal 
directions marked in Fig. S15a. The compressive responses in the 𝑥1

′ −directions for three 

cubes from the 3 locations are plotted in Fig. S15b while in Fig. S15c we include the response 
of the cube from location 2 in the three orthogonal directions. The data in Figs. S15b and S15c 
confirms that the as-cast Silicone rubber displays no orientational bias and that the specimen 
is spatially homogeneous. 

S3.2:
Absence of size dependence of the response of Silicone rubber

The rather strange behaviour we report in terms of large local volumetric strains, but overall 
incompressibility of the Silicone rubber specimen been shown to be associated with gradients 
in the strain field. Dependence of material response on not only the strains but also the gradient
of strain is well-established especially in the context of metal plasticity [16-17]. Such gradient 
dependence introduces a length-scale into the material properties. This usually implies that 
tests on geometrically self-similar specimens of varying sizes result in deformation fields that 
do not self-similarly scale. As a consequence, the macroscopic stress versus strain responses 
are not independent of specimen size. While such size dependence of the properties of Silicone 
rubber at mm length scales has never to-date been reported, the self-similarity of the fields has 
never been confirmed due to the lack of suitable 3D measurement techniques. Given our FETC 
technique we decided to confirm this self-similarity for the tensile response of the glued 𝐻/𝐷 =
2 specimen.

Consider two geometrically self-similar 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimens: (i) 𝐷 = 28 mm which is the 
standard size specimen in Fig. 1 and (ii) a smaller 𝐷 = 14 mm specimen. The measured tensile 
𝜎∞ versus 𝜀∞ responses for these two specimens are included in Fig. S16a. To within 
experimental variabilities the responses of the two specimens are identical. This is very much 
in line with expectation from usual rubber elasticity models. Next consider the deformation 
fields. Spatial distributions of selected components of 𝐹𝑖𝑗 as well as det(𝐹𝑖𝑗) on a diametrical 
plane within the cylindrical specimens are included in Fig. S16b for both specimen sizes and 
an imposed strain 𝜀∞ = 0.21. The deformation gradients are shown on the deformed 
configuration and the specimen images scaled so that images for both specimens are of the 
same size. This allows an easy check of the self-similarity of the fields. We clearly observe that 
the fields are indeed self-similar, and this confirms that the strange behaviour we observe 
cannot be attributed to usual gradient elasticity models [18].

S3.3:
Verification of the FETC measurements and confirmation of lack of radiation damage

The FETC is a novel technique to measure strains in 3D volumes of nominally homogeneous 
materials without using tracer particles. Given that this is a new technique we performed 
independent measurements to provide confidence on the fidelity of the FETC measurements. 
These measurements conducted outside the X-ray setup also provide evidence that there is 
negligible X-ray damage to the Silicone rubber. Two types of independent measurements were 
performed:

(i)
Measurement, using laser extensometers, of the volume change of a central disc of 
height ℎ0 during tension/compression loading of the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 (𝐷 = 28 mm) 


9

cylindrical Silicone rubber specimen. These laser extensometer measurements were 
compared with the corresponding FETC measurements (Extended Data Fig. 3a).

(ii)
Comparison between 3D digital image correlation (3D DIC) and FETC 
measurements of the surface strains for 3-point bending of the Silicone rubber 
specimen (Extended Data Fig. 3b).

First consider the cylindrical specimen that we tested in both compression and tension but now 
outside the X-ray tomography setup. Symmetry of the loading implies that on the central 
horizontal plane through the cylinder (parallel to the 𝑋1 − 𝑋2 plane), the shear strains vanish. 
This implies that a central cylindrical disc of height ℎ0 ≪ 𝐻 (Extended Data Fig. 3a) remains 
cylindrical under tension/compression loading (we shall a posteriori confirm this).  We 
measured the change in diameter and height of a central cylindrical section of initial height 
ℎ0 = 1.2 mm during compression/tension loading. The change in height was measured using 
a reflective axial laser extensometer with an accuracy of ±10 μm while the change in diameter 
𝐷 of the specimen was measured with an emissive-receptive laser also with an accuracy of 
±10 μm. Denoting the diameter of the disc in the deformed state as 𝑑 (with 𝑑 = 𝐷 in the 
undeformed state) the change in volume of this central cylindrical disc for a given imposed 
axial displacement 𝑈 on the cylindrical specimen is given by

Δ𝑉 = 𝜋

4 (𝑑2ℎ − 𝐷2ℎ0),
(3.1)

where ℎ is the current height of the central cylindrical disc at the imposed displacement 𝑈. The 
volumetric strain then follows as Δ𝑉/𝑉0 where 𝑉0 = 𝜋𝐷2ℎ0/4. These measurements of 
volumetric strain of this disc are plotted in Extended Fig. 3a as a function of 𝑈 (for both 
compression and tensile loading) and marked as “Laser”. The disc loses volume under 
compressive loading and gains volume under tensile loading. Also included in Extended Fig. 3a 
is a measurement of the volumetric strain of the entire specimen based on the outline of the 
specimen as determined from the X-ray tomographic reconstruction (marked 〈𝑉/𝑉0〉 − 1). 
While the volume change of the central disc over the loading history varies from approximately 
−10% to ~10%, the specimen volume changes by less than ±1%. Clearly, this implies that 
when the central disc loses volume other parts of the specimen gain volume and vice versa in 
line with the full-field FETC measurements.

To confirm the accuracy of the FETC results we include in Extended Data Fig. 3a 
measurements of the volumetric strain of the central cylindrical disc and the specimen using 
the FETC measurements of det(𝐹𝑖𝑗). Specifically, we calculate the volumetric strain of the 
central disc as 〈det(𝐹𝑖𝑗)〉 − 1 where 〈⋅〉 is now the volume average over the material points 
within the disc (this is marked FETC in Extended data Fig. 3a). Similarly, the volumetric strain 
of the entire specimen is also calculated from the FETC as 〈det(𝐹𝑖𝑗)〉 − 1 with 〈⋅〉 now denoting 
the volume average over the material points within the entire specimen (again marked EFTC 
in Extended Data Fig. 3a). Excellent agreement between all the sets of measurements provides 
confidence in the FETC measurements of strains within the specimens and also shows that the 
strange behaviour, which is also observed outside the X-ray setup, is not associated with X-ray 
radiation damage.

An important assumption made in the laser measurements of the volume change of the central 
disc is that it remains cylindrical under the imposed deformations. To confirm this assumption, 
we revert to the FETC measurements and include in Extended Data Fig. 3a a wiremesh view 
of a diametrical plane through the deformed specimen (𝑈 = −12 mm): in the wiremesh each 
node of the wiremesh denotes a material point. The wiremesh in the undeformed state is a 


10

rectangular grid and so the deformed grid provides an immediate visualisation of the material 
strain. The zoom-in of the deformed mesh around the central disc (shown to better illustrate 
any shear strains) confirms that the disc remains cylindrical under the imposed deformation.
The vanishing shear deformation gradients in Extended Data Fig. 3b also confirms the 
symmetry of the deformation.

We now consider the 3-point bending of the Silicone rubber beam, again outside the X-ray 
setup but using the loading fixture for the data reported in Fig. 4 (see Supplementary Section 
S1 for details of the loading fixture). The 3-point bending test was conducted in conjunction 
with 3D digital image correlation (3D DIC) performed using the GOM ARAMIS dual camera 
system. The measurements provide the displacements 𝑢𝑖 (𝑖 = 1,2,3) of material points on the 
surface of the beam parallel to the 𝑋1 − 𝑋3 plane (Extended Data Fig. 3b). From these 
measurements we calculate the surface Green-Lagrange strains as

𝐸𝑖𝑗 ≡ 1

2 [𝜕𝑢𝑖

𝜕𝑋𝑗

+ 𝜕𝑢𝑗

𝜕𝑋𝑖

+ 𝜕𝑢𝑘

𝜕𝑋𝑖

𝜕𝑢𝑘
𝜕𝑋𝑗

].
(3.2)

The 3D DIC measurements of 𝐸11 and 𝐸13 are included in Extended Data Fig. 3b at two 
imposed displacements 𝑈. These measurements show that the deformation of the beam is via 
a combination of bending and shearing as 𝐸11 and 𝐸13 are of the same order. The 3D DIC 
measurements (which include contributions from all three displacement components on the 
surface) can then then directly be compared with the volumetric FETC measurements. The 
FETC measurements give all components of 𝐸𝑖𝑗 throughout the beam volume and we extracted 
the distributions of 𝐸11 and 𝐸13 on the specimen surface corresponding to the 3D DIC 
measurements. The excellent agreement between the 3D DIC and FETC measurements shown 
in Extended Data Fig. 3b provide further evidence of the fidelity of the FETC measurements
and the absence of X-ray radiation damage on the surfaces of the Silicone rubber.

S3.4: Tracking the front of the tracers in the fast radiography measurements
The fast radiography measurements are discussed in the main text with the technique described 
in the Methods section. Here we describe (i) the protocol for generating the colour-toned 
radiographs as presented in Fig. 3d (𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 s−1 loaded to 𝜅∞ℎ = 0.48) and (ii) the 
procedure for extracting the tracer front from the radiographic images (Fig. 3e).

The radiographs generate grayscale images (Fig. S17a), showing distinctive grayscale 
distributions corresponding to the two constituent materials of the composite beam: ZnI2 (with 
gray values in the range ~5000 to ~25000) and Silicone rubber (gray values of ~65000). The 
air around the beam, being oversaturated, does not manifest in the histogram. This 
oversaturation of air is intentional, allowing for a large separation in the gray values between 
ZnI2 and Silicone rubber within the detector’s range (0 to 65535). To enhance visual 
representation in the main text (Fig. 3d), we employed a tonal colour scheme for the 
radiographs, utilizing a feature provided by the Xtek acquisition software from Nikon. The 
colour scheme is as follows: blue represents the oversaturated air, red denotes Silicone rubber, 
and grey signifies the presence of ZnI2. Notably, no opacity is applied to the gray value of 
ZnI2, preventing the red colour of Silicone rubber from overlaying in areas where ZnI2 is 
predominant in the composite beam. This deliberate choice enables a clear distinction of the 
moving ZnI2 tracer front within the Silicone rubber beam.

To determine the tracer front location, we analyse the grayscale radiographs without the tonal 
colour scheme (Fig. S17a). Consider the radiograph depicted in Fig. S17b, where we introduce 
a local coordinate system, denoted as 𝑥1

′ − 𝑥3

′, positioned at the midpoint of the beam (i.e., the 


11

neutral axis) and fixed to that specific material point. This coordinate system translates with 
the beam motion. The variation of gray values with 𝑥3

′ along 𝑥1

′ = 0 is plotted in Fig. S17b for 

the state of the beam at 𝑡 = 0 s. At 𝑡 = 0 s, the gray values are ~ 20000 for 𝑥3

′ < 0 (below the 

neutral axis). A distinct jump in gray value occurs for the portion of the beam without ZnI2 and 
reaches ~65000. The state of the beam and the corresponding gray value distribution is shown 
in Fig. S17c at 𝑡 = 2 s. At this time the ZnI2 front is progressing upwards (towards the tensile 
side of the beam) and is clear from the observed drop in gray value from ~65000 to ~20000; 
compare the 𝑡 = 0 s and 𝑡 = 2 s gray value distributions shown in Fig. S17c. Around the tracer 
front, the gray values fluctuate between ~65000 and ~20000 corresponding to the non-uniform
progression of ZnI2 through the beam thickness (i.e., in the 𝑥2

′ −direction). We define the front 

position as lowest value of 𝑥3

′ where the fluctuations commence, and this is labelled as “q” in 

Fig. S17c. This definition is used consistently for all other times (Fig. S17d). At each time, we 
repeated this procedure at 10 locations 𝑥1

′ along the imaged portion of the beam (Fig. S17a) 

and define the front position 𝑋𝑓 in Fig. 3e as the average location of “q” over these 10 locations. 
The error bars indicate the variation of the front position over these 10 locations. It is worth 
emphasizing that the tracer front remains stationary for times 𝑡 > 𝑡𝑅 in line with the idea that 
the mobile phase keeps pace with the loading rate. 

Supplementary S4: A thermodynamically consistent rubber elasticity framework with a 
mobile species
Most synthetic rubbers are synthesised by a polymerisation and/or crosslinking reaction which 
transforms the highly viscous polymer into an insoluble rubber-like solid. Typically, the 
crosslinking or curing reaction is initiated by addition of a curing agent or a catalyst. Peroxide, 
condensation and addition curing are the three mechanisms by which Silicone can be 
crosslinked [19-20]: the commercial Silicone rubber we employed is a two-part condensation 
curing Silicone. The Silane crosslinker and catalyst are packaged together as one reactive 
component, with the mixture of polymer and filler as the second unreactive component. Once 
mixed they produce a crosslinking reaction. However, this crosslinking is never complete with 
some fraction of the molecules remaining un-crosslinked. Based on observations reported in 
the main text these small and un-crosslinked molecules are mobile within the crosslinked 
polymer network. This physics is absent in the classical models for rubbers and is the source 
of their poor predictive capability (Supplementary S2). Further, the measurements (Fig. 2) 
strongly suggest that the hydrostatic component of the mechanical work can be negative in 
Silicone rubber: such behaviour is absent in classical hydrogel theories which also include 
mobile species. This motivates us to develop a new thermodynamically consistent model for 
the deformation behaviour of rubbers. 

S4.1:
Summary of key experimental observations with a discussion on mechanisms

The first key surprising finding made in this study is that there exists a mobile species within 
the Silicone rubber. It seems reasonable to assume that this mobile species comprises the un-
crosslinked molecules within the rubber. However, there are multiple observations associated 
with this mobility which require interpretation. These include:

(i)
The volumetric strain is negative at material points where the mobile species fluxing 
into (compare Figs. 2d and 3b). Conversely, the hydrostatic strain is positive at 
locations where mobile species fluxes out.

(ii)
From the 4-point bend experiment we deduce that the hydrostatic stress is positive 
at locations where the volumetric strain is negative and vice versa. Thus, the 
hydrostatic mechanical work is negative in this case.


12

(iii)
The transport rate of the mobile species is surprisingly high with direct observations 
showing it moves a distance ℓ ≈ 2.7 mm in time 𝑡 = 4 s (the 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 with 
𝜅∞ℎ = 0.48 case in Fig. 3e). This implies an effective linear diffusion co-efficient 
𝐷 = ℓ2/𝑡 = 1.8 mm2s−1. 

Before proceeding to develop a continuum model to show that these observations fit within a 
thermodynamically consistent framework, we hypothesise on possible molecular mechanisms 
associated with these surprising findings. We emphasize here that the molecular mechanisms 
are hypotheses: a detailed understanding of the molecular origins of these mechanisms is 
beyond the scope of the current study. The microstructure of the rubber is envisaged to be an 
open-celled porous deformable elastic network comprising the crosslinked polymer with the 
un-crosslinked molecules partially filling the pores as sketched in Fig. S18a.  These pores are 
expected to be a few nanometers in size and the un-crosslinked molecules move through these 
pores in a manner akin to fluid flowing through a porous media [21]. However, the nano size 
of the pores brings in additional physics that is usually neglected or plays little role for flow in 
a porous medium with mm scale pores. We shall now discuss the above three observations in 
the context of this microstructural model.

The first surprising finding is that the rubber volumetrically contracts when the concentration 
of the mobile species increases. This is opposite to expectations where we typically anticipate 
an increasing concentration of a mobile species results in volumetric expansion, e.g. diffusion 
of hydrogen in Fe [22]. However, there also exist examples of the opposite effect including for 
Li ions in layered materials such as NMC (Nickel Manganese Cobalt oxides) [23] or NWO 
(Niobium Tungsten Oxides) [24]. These materials exhibit a non-monotonic variation of the 
volumetric strain with increasing Li concentration. However, these battery materials have a 
crystallographic structure and therefore the mechanisms associated with this behaviour differ 
from the rubber being investigated. Nevertheless, they serve as examples to show that 
volumetric strain need not increase with the concentration of a mobile species. To explain the 
volumetric contraction with increasing concentration of the mobile species in Silicone rubber 
recall our hypothesised microstructure (Fig. S18a) where the un-crosslinked molecules are 
within the pores in the crosslinked network. Given the nano size of the pores, capillary forces 
between the fluid-like un-crosslinked phase and the crosslinked network are expected to play 
an important role. Capillary forces are known to deform micro/nanostructures and even result 
in their collapse [25]. Here we envisage that as this mobile phase flows into the empty pores, 
capillary forces collapse these pores resulting in the observed macroscopic volumetric 
contraction (Fig. S18b).

Next consider the observation that the volumetric contraction occurs in the presence of 
hydrostatic tension (and vice versa) resulting in negative hydrostatic work. Such negative 
hydrostatic work is not forbidden by thermodynamic constraints so long as the total work 
remains positive. In fact, volumetric expansion under hydrostatic compression is often 
observed in granular media [26]: in this case the negative hydrostatic work is compensated by 
the positive deviatoric work. We thus envisage that the strain associated with a change in 
concentration of the un-crosslinked phase is not purely hydrostatic but also has a deviatoric 
component. In fact, similar observations have also been reported for Li in the NMC [23] and 
NWO [24] crystals referred to above. Again, the mechanism causing deviatoric (shear) strains 
in rubber cannot be those associated with Li intercalation in layered crystals. Rather here we 
envisage the mechanism of shearing to be that sketched in Fig. S18. The mobile fluid-like un-
crosslinked phase is assumed to be comprised of non-spherical molecules. The fluid-like nature 
of the phase combined with the non-spherical molecular shapes implies that the phase has a 


13

strong tendency to nematically order [27]. This implies that strains associated with this phase 
are not purely hydrostatic but also have a large deviatoric component as illustrated in Fig. S18; 
compare the states in Figs. S18a and S18b where we show that the pores in the deformed state 
are elongated along the long axis of the un-crosslinked molecules.

Finally consider the high transport rate of the un-crosslinked phase. The inferred linear 
diffusion co-efficient is 𝐷 = 1.8 mm2s−1. This is at-least 2 orders of magnitude higher than 
the diffusion rate of water in hydrogels [28-29]. The flow of a fluid through a porous medium 
is usually described by Darcy’s law where the flux 𝑗𝑖 is given in terms of the permeability 𝓀 of 
the porous medium and the Newtonian viscosity 𝜔 of the fluid as

𝑗𝑖 = − 𝓀

𝜔

𝜕𝑝
𝜕𝑋𝑖

,
(4.1)

where 𝜕𝑝/𝜕𝑋𝑖 is the pressure gradient. The permeability 𝓀 is usually assumed to depend on 
the square of the pore size [30] and thus the flux for a given pressure gradient decreases with 
decreasing pore size and increasing viscosity. The basic physics that motivates the form of 
(4.1) is that with decreasing pore size, the strain rate within the fluid increases and a larger 
pressure drop is required to impose this strain rate. Equivalently, if the pore size increased or 
the fluid viscosity is decreased the pressure drop is reduced for the same flux. The pore size in 
Silicone rubber is the spacing of the crosslinked network and is thus expected on be on the 
order of a few nanometers. At this length scale, if the un-crosslinked polymer behaved akin to 
a Newtonian fluid, its viscosity would need to be about 2 orders of magnitude less than that of 
water to explain the high transport rates observed in Figs. 3d and 3e. This is unrealistic. Rather 
a more realistic explanation is that the un-crosslinked polymer behaves as a non-Newtonian 
shear thinning fluid [31] whose viscosity decreases with increasing strain rate. In the case of 
the crosslinked network with nanopores, the strain rates are very high for any realistic flux and 
thus the effective viscosity will be very low. This implies a significantly larger effective
diffusion co-efficient. The question is how realistic is it that the un-crosslinked polymer 
behaves like a shear thinning fluid? Shear thinning behaviour is often observed in polymeric 
systems including for example paint. The precise physics of shear thinning in polymers is not 
fully understood but one explanation is as follows. At rest, the polymers molecules are 
entangled but when undergoing deformation, the highly anisotropic polymer molecules start to 
disentangle. This leads to reduced molecular interactions and a reduction in the viscosity. This 
overall picture of anisotropic molecules of the un-crosslinked phase is consistent with the idea 
of a deviatoric strain associated with a change in the concentration of the un-crosslinked phase 
as discussed above.

S4.2:
Thermodynamic framework for the deformation of Silicone rubber

Here we present a thermodynamically consistent model for the deformation response of 
Silicone rubber. The aim is not to capture the measurements to a very high degree of accuracy 
but rather to demonstrate that the rather counter-intuitive observations fit within a framework 
that does not violate basic thermodynamic considerations. For simplicity and clarity, we 
present the model in a small strain framework, but it can be readily extended to a finite strain 
setting. 

In addition to temperature 𝒯, we write the Helmholtz free-energy in terms of two state 
variables: (i) the total strain 𝜀𝑖𝑗 and (ii) the molar concentration 𝑐 (per unit undeformed volume 
of the rubber) of the un-crosslinked phase. Let 𝑐𝑅 denote the molar concentration of the sites 
for the un-crosslinked molecules in the undeformed (reference) state and we define an 
occupancy 𝜃 ≡ 𝑐/𝑐𝑅 (with 𝜃 = 𝜃0 in the reference state) of the sites for the un-crosslinked 


14

molecules. This mobile un-crosslinked phase is assumed to induce a “swelling” strain. Our 
measurements show that that the hydrostatic strain can be tensile in locations where the 
hydrostatic stress is compressive (Fig. 2). To create a thermodynamically consistent theory we 
hypothesize that the mobile phase induces a combination of volumetric and deviatoric strains. 
Denote the three principal swelling strains by 𝑒[1], 𝑒[2] and 𝑒[3] along their corresponding 
principal directions 𝑞𝑘

[𝑝] (𝑝 = 1,2,3). These are assumed to co-incide with the principal 

directions 𝑛𝑘

[𝑝] (𝑝 = 1,2,3) of 𝜀𝑖𝑗 such that in modular arithmetic2 notation 

𝑞𝑘

[𝑝+ℓ (mod 3)] = 𝑛𝑘

[𝑝]
,
(4.2)

and the shift ℓ takes values ℓ = (0,1,2). The swelling strain 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑠 then follows as 𝜀𝑘𝑗

𝑠 𝑛𝑗

[𝑝] =

𝑒[𝑝+ℓ (mod 3) ]𝑛𝑘

[𝑝]. The total strain is additively decomposed into an elastic component 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙 and 

the swelling component such that 𝜀𝑖𝑗 = 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑠 and the shift ℓ chosen to minimise 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙. 

This choice sets the alignment of the principal directions of the swelling strains with the total 
strains. The Helmholtz energy of the rubber is written as a sum of two components: (i) elastic 
energy due to the deformation of the crosslinked network and (ii) an entropy of mixing of the 
un-crosslinked molecules with the sites for these molecules such that 

𝐹(𝜀𝑖𝑗, 𝑐, 𝒯) ≡ [𝜆

2 (𝜀𝑘𝑘

𝑒𝑙 )

2 + 𝐺 erf ( 𝜂

𝜂0

) 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙]

+ 𝑅𝒯𝑐𝑅[𝜃 ln 𝜃 + (1 − 𝜃) ln(1 − 𝜃)],

(4.3)

where 𝑅 is the universal gas constant and 𝒯 the absolute temperature. In (4.3) 𝜆 and 𝐺 are the 
first and second Lame parameters, respectively such that the first term represents the elastic 
energy while the second term is the contribution from the entropy of mixing. In the elastic 
energy there is a term associated with the strain triaxiality

𝜂 ≡

√(2/3)𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑑𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑑

|𝜀𝑘𝑘|
,
(4.4)

where the deviatoric strain 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑑 ≡ 𝜀𝑖𝑗 − 𝛿𝑖𝑗𝜀𝑘𝑘/3 with 𝛿𝑖𝑗 the Kronecker delta. This term was 

introduced for the following reason. Recall from Supplementary S3 that the rubber is an 
isotropic material and thus in the absence of imposed deviatoric strains we require the rubber 
to have a purely hydrostatic response. To ensure that this remains the case independent of the 
choice of 𝑒[𝑝] we introduce the strain triaxiality term in (4.3) such that the contribution to the 
elastic energy due to the shear modulus vanishes for vanishing total deviatoric strains. In (4.3),  
𝜂0 sets the triaxiality range over which we apply these additional considerations to ensure 
isotropy come into play and a choice 𝜂0 ≪ 1 implies that this additional term only serves as a 
regularising parameter. Given the Helmholtz free-energy 𝐹, the material stress and the 
chemical potential of the un-crosslinked species follow as

𝜎𝑖𝑗 ≡ 𝜕𝐹

𝜕𝜀𝑖𝑗

|

𝑐,𝒯

,
(4.5)

and

𝜇 ≡ 𝜕𝐹

𝜕𝑐|

𝜀𝑖𝑗,𝒯

,
(4.6)

respectively. 

2 Modular arithmetic is the system of arithmetic for integers where the numbers “wrap around” when reaching a 
certain value, called modulus. For example, in a 12-hour clock if it is 7:00 now in 8 hours it will be 3:00 since the 
clocks “wraps around” every 12 hours. Thus, in (4.2) if 𝑝 = 3 & ℓ = 2; 𝑝 + ℓ (mod 3) = 2.


15

Now consider a rubber specimen occupying a domain Ω subjected to surface tractions 𝑇𝑖 = 𝑇𝑖

0

on a portion 𝑆𝑇 and displacements 𝑢𝑖 = 𝑢𝑖

0 on a portion 𝑆𝑈 of the boundary 𝑆 of the domain  

Ω. The potential energy of this system then

Π(𝑢𝑖, 𝑐) = ∫ 𝐹𝑑Ω

Ω

− ∫ 𝑇𝑖

0𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑆

𝑆𝑇

,
(4.7)

and at equilibrium we then require that the total variation 𝑑Π = 0. Then using (4.5) and (4.6) 
it follows that under isothermal conditions

∫ 𝜎𝑖𝑗𝛿𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑑Ω

Ω

+ ∫ 𝜇𝛿𝑐𝑑Ω

Ω

= ∫ 𝑇𝑖

0𝛿𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑆

𝑆𝑇

,
(4.8)

where the strains are related to displacement via 𝜀𝑖𝑗 ≡ 0.5(𝑢𝑖,𝑗 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑖). Since the variation in 
displacement and concentration are arbitrary it follows that 

∫ 𝜎𝑖𝑗𝛿𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑑Ω

Ω

= ∫ 𝑇𝑖

0𝛿𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑆

𝑆𝑇

,
(4.9)

and

∫ 𝜇𝛿𝑐𝑑Ω

Ω

= 0.
(4.10)

The total amount of the un-crosslinked phase in the specimen is a constant (i.e., the un-
crosslinked phase does not leave or enter the specimen). Therefore, ∫ 𝛿𝑐𝑑Ω = 0
Ω
. It then 

follows from (4.10) that at equilibrium the chemical potential of the un-crosslinked phase 
throughout the specimen is a constant such that 𝜇 = 𝜇0 with 𝜇0 set by the conservation law 
∫ 𝑐𝑑Ω = 𝑐𝑅𝜃0Ω
Ω
. Similarly, applying the divergence theorem to (4.9) we recover the usual 

stress equilibrium relation 𝜎𝑖𝑗,𝑗 = 0 with boundary conditions 𝑇𝑖

0 = 𝜎𝑖𝑗𝑚𝑗 on 𝑆𝑇 where 𝑚𝑗 is 

the outward normal to 𝑆𝑇. 

To complete the formulation, we now need to specify a constitutive relation between 𝑒[𝑝] and 
the concentration 𝑐 of the un-crosslinked phase. Physical considerations impose important 
restrictions on the relation between 𝑒[𝑝] and 𝑐 as follows.  Recall that the measurements suggest 
that the overall volume of the specimen is conserved such that ∫ 𝜀𝑘𝑘𝑑Ω = 0
Ω
irrespective of 

the nature of the loading. Given that the elastic strains are strongly dependent on the nature of 
the loading it is therefore reasonable to assume that  𝜀𝑘𝑘

𝑒𝑙 contributes negligibly to 𝜀𝑘𝑘 (i.e., the 

rubber is elastically nearly incompressible implying that 𝐺/𝜆 → 0) with the volumetric strains 
predominantly set by the swelling strains 𝑒[𝑝]. Then the constraint ∫ 𝜀𝑘𝑘𝑑Ω = 0
Ω
reduces to 

∫ 𝜀𝑘𝑘

𝑠 𝑑Ω = 0
Ω
. Let 𝜀𝑘𝑘

𝑠 = 𝑓(𝑐) so that

∫ 𝑓(𝑐)𝑑Ω

Ω

= 0,
(4.11)

and ∫ 𝑐 𝑑Ω = 𝑐𝑅𝜃0Ω
Ω
as the total number of molecules of the un-crosslinked phase is 

conserved. Then 

∫ 𝜕𝑓

𝜕𝑐 𝛿𝑐 𝑑Ω

Ω

= 0,
(4.12)

where 𝛿𝑐 is an arbitrary variation. But the conservation of un-crosslinked phase implies that 
∫ 𝛿𝑐 𝑑Ω = 0
Ω
and thus (4.12) can only hold for arbitrary 𝛿𝑐 if 𝜕𝑓/𝜕𝑐 is a constant, i.e. 𝜀𝑗𝑗

𝑠 is a 

linear function of 𝑐. We thus choose the form 𝑓(𝑐) = 𝜀𝑗𝑗

𝑠 = 𝑘(𝜃0 − 𝜃), where 𝑘 is a material 

constant so that (4.11) is always satisfied. 


16

Given the above constraint on the form of the volumetric swelling strain we propose that the 
principal swelling strains written in terms of 𝜃̅ ≡ 𝜃/𝜃0 take the form

𝑒[1] = 𝑘𝜃0𝛼1(1 − 𝜃̅); 𝑒[2] = 𝑘𝜃0𝛼2(1 − 𝜃̅);

𝑒[3] = 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝛼1 − 𝛼2)(1 − 𝜃̅),
(4.13)

where the material parameters (𝛼1, 𝛼2) govern the extent of the deviatoric swelling strains. For 
example, with the choice 𝛼1 = 𝛼2 = 1/3 the swelling is purely volumetric (as typically 
assumed for hydrogels). This completes the specification of the constitutive model for rubber 
in the equilibrium setting. 

S4.3: Extension to the non-equilibrium setting
We now wish to determine the kinetic laws for the case where loading is sufficiently fast that 
the specimen may not be under equilibrium conditions at every stage of the loading. Recall that 
the rate of change of potential energy Π̇ of the system satisfies the inequality Π̇ ≤ 0 so that

Π̇ = ∫ (𝜎𝑖𝑗𝜀̇𝑖𝑗 + 𝜇𝑐̇)𝑑Ω

Ω

− ∫ 𝑇𝑖

0𝑢̇ 𝑖𝑑𝑆

𝑆𝑇

≤ 0.
(4.14)

The decrease in potential energy drives a dissipation rate 𝑑̇ due to the transport of the mobile 
phase with a flux 𝑗𝑖, i.e. Π̇ = − ∫ 𝑑̇ 𝑑Ω
Ω
. We define a dissipation potential ΦD defined such that 

𝑑̇ = 𝑗𝑖

𝜕ΦD
𝜕𝑗𝑖

.
(4.15)

To motivate the functional form of ΦD we extend the usual Darcy flow mechanism of flow of 
a Newtonian fluid through a porous medium to the case where the fluid is shear thinning. 
Analogous to Darcy flow, the gradient of the chemical potential drives the flux of the mobile 
phase. The flux in case of a shear thinning fluid is then assumed to be given in terms of a 
reference flux 𝑗0 and a mobility 𝑀 by

𝑗𝑖 = −𝑗0 (𝑀𝑐𝑅𝜃

𝑗0

| 𝜕𝜇
𝜕𝑋𝑖

|)

1
𝑁

sign ( 𝜕𝜇

𝜕𝑋𝑖

),
(4.16)

where 0 < 𝑁 ≤ 1 is the shear thinning exponent of the mobile phase. The relation (4.16) 
reduces to a Newtonian fluid for 𝑁 = 1 while in the limit 𝑁 & 𝑗0/𝑀 → 0 the flux 𝑗𝑖 → ∞ for a 
finite spatial gradient of the chemical potential, i.e., we expect equilibrium corresponding 
vanishing gradients of the chemical potential to be established nearly instantaneously.

To establish the form of ΦD we first relate 𝜇 and 𝑗𝑖 to the dissipation rate. Taking the rate form 
of the potential energy (4.7) we obtain

Π̇ (𝑢̇ 𝑖, 𝑐̇) = ∫ 𝜎𝑖𝑗𝜀̇𝑖𝑗𝑑Ω

Ω

+ ∫ 𝜇𝑐̇𝑑Ω

Ω

− ∫ 𝑇𝑖

0𝑢̇ 𝑖𝑑𝑆

𝑆𝑇

.
(4.17)

Then using stress equilibrium condition (4.9) this reduces to

Π̇ = ∫ 𝜇𝑐̇𝑑Ω

Ω

= ∫ 𝜕𝜇

𝜕𝑋𝑖

𝑗𝑖𝑑Ω

Ω

,
(4.18)

where we have used the divergence theorem along with the conservation law 𝑐̇ = −𝑗𝑖,𝑖 and the 
boundary condition that there is no flux of the material in/out of the specimen such that 𝑗𝑖𝑚𝑖 =
0 on the boundary 𝑆 (with outward normal 𝑚𝑖) of the domain Ω. Then recalling that 

Π̇ = − ∫ 𝑑̇ 𝑑Ω

Ω

,
(4.19)

it follows that 


17

𝑑̇ = −𝑗𝑖

𝜕𝜇
𝜕𝑋𝑖

=
𝑗0

2

𝑀𝑐𝑅𝜃 (𝑗𝑖𝑗𝑖

𝑗0

2 )

(𝑁+1)/2

.
(4.20)

Then from the definition (4.15) of ΦD the dissipation potential follows as

ΦD =
1

(𝑁 + 1)

𝑗0

2

𝑀𝑐𝑅𝜃 (𝑗𝑖𝑗𝑖

𝑗0

2 )

(𝑁+1)/2

.
(4.21)

This relation reduces to the well-established dissipation potential for Fickian diffusion, viz.

ΦD =
𝑗𝑖𝑗𝑖

𝑀𝑐𝑅𝜃 ,
(4.22)

For the choice 𝑁 = 1 with 𝑀 the linear mobility of the mobile species. Given ΦD we can then 
re-obtain the flux relation (4.16) by following Onsager [32-33] (also see [34]), viz, define an 
augmented potential 

Ψ(𝑢̇ 𝑖, 𝑗𝑖) ≡ Π̇ + ∫ ΦD𝑑Ω

Ω

,
(4.23)

such that the kinetic path that the system follows satisfies 𝛿Ψ = 0. Then taking variations with 
respect to the kinetic variables (𝑢̇ 𝑖, 𝑗𝑖) and noting that the variations 𝛿𝑢̇ 𝑖 and 𝛿𝑗𝑖 are independent 
it follows that

∫ 𝜎𝑖𝑗𝛿𝜀̇𝑖𝑗𝑑Ω

Ω

= ∫ 𝑇𝑖

0𝛿𝑢̇ 𝑖𝑑𝑆

𝑆𝑇

,
(4.24)

and the flux is given by (4.16) with boundary condition 𝑗𝑖𝑚𝑖 = 0 on the boundary 𝑆 and the 
flux related to the concentration via the conservation law 𝑐̇ = −𝑗𝑖,𝑖.

S4.4: Analysis of the 4-point bend test
In a 4-point bend test (Fig. 2a), the central section of length 𝑠1 between the two inner rollers is 
under pure bending. We define a co-ordinate system 𝑥𝑖

′ with the origin at the centre of the beam 

and use the above constitutive model to analyse a beam of thickness ℎ, under plane stress 
conditions, in pure bending along the 𝑥1

′ direction (Fig. S19a). The total strain-rate fields are 

independent of 𝑥1

′ and given by

𝜀̇11 = 𝜅̇𝑥3

′; 𝜀̇12 = 𝜀̇13 = 0,
(4.25)

in terms of the imposed curvature rate 𝜅̇. The problem specification is completed with the plane 
stress boundary condition 𝜎22 = 0 and the traction conditions 𝑇𝑖 = 0 on 𝑥3

′ = ±ℎ/2. Under 

these conditions the principal directions coincide with the global co-ordinate system 𝑥𝑖

′ such 

that the principal stresses are Σ1 = 𝜎11, Σ2 = 𝜎22 and Σ3 = 𝜎33. Then the relation between 
principal stresses Σ𝑖 and corresponding principal strains ℰ[𝑖] (defined by 𝜀𝑘𝑙𝑛𝑙

[𝑖] = ℰ[𝑖]𝑛𝑘

[𝑖]) is 

given by

Σ𝑖 = 𝜆[ℰ[1] + ℰ[2] + ℰ[3] − 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)] + 2𝐺erf ( 𝜂

𝜂0

) (ℰ[𝑖] − 𝑒[𝑖])
(4.26)

+𝐺

∂ [erf ( 𝜂

𝜂0)]

𝜕ℰ[𝑖]
[(ℰ[1] − 𝑒[1])

2 + (ℰ[2] − 𝑒[2])

2 + (ℰ[3] − 𝑒[3])

2],

and chemical potential is


18

𝜇 = 𝜆𝑘

𝑐𝑅

[ℰ[1] + ℰ[2] + ℰ[3] − 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)]

−2𝐺erf ( 𝜂

𝜂0

) [(ℰ[1] − 𝑒[1]) 𝜕𝑒[1]

𝜕𝑐 + (ℰ[2] − 𝑒[2]) 𝜕𝑒[2]

𝜕𝑐

+ (ℰ[3] − 𝑒[3]) 𝜕𝑒[3]

𝜕𝑐 ] + 𝑅𝒯 ln
𝜃

1 − 𝜃.

(4.27)

Recall that the principal directions of the swelling strains are chosen to coincide with the 
principal directions of total strains so as to minimise 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙. Here we choose 𝛼1 = −𝛼2 = −1

and therefore the choice 𝑞𝑘

[𝑖] = 𝑛𝑘

[𝑖] minimises 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒𝑙. This implies

𝑒[1] = −𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅); 𝑒[2] = 𝑒[3] = 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅).
(4.28)

With the swelling strains now known in terms of 𝜃 the expressions for the stresses and chemical 
potential can be further simplified. The equilibrium condition 𝜎𝑖𝑗,𝑗 = 0 combined with the 
traction boundary condition  𝑇3 = 0 on 𝑥3

′ = ±ℎ/2 implies that Σ3 = 0. Then from (4.26) it 

follows that ℰ[2] = ℰ[3] such that (4.26) and (4.27) reduce to

Σ1 = 𝜆[𝜅𝑥3

′ + 2ℰ[3] − 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)] + 2𝐺erf ( 𝜂

𝜂0

) [{𝜅𝑥3

′ + 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)}]
(4.29)

+ 𝐺

∂ [erf ( 𝜂

𝜂0)]

𝜕ℰ[1]
[{𝜅𝑥3

′ + 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)}2 + 2{ℰ[2] − 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)}

2] ,

and

𝜇𝑐𝑅 = 𝜆𝑘[𝜅𝑥3

′ + 2ℰ[3] − 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)]

− 2𝐺𝑘erf ( 𝜂

𝜂0

) [{𝜅𝑥3

′ + 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)}

− 2{ℰ[3] − 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)}] + 𝑅𝒯𝑐𝑅ln
𝜃

1 − 𝜃,

(4.30)

respectively. The condition that Σ2 = Σ3 = 0 can then be used to determine ℰ[3] from the 
relation 

𝜆[𝜅𝑥3

′ + 2ℰ[3] − 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)] + 2𝐺erf ( 𝜂

𝜂0

) [{ℰ[3] − 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)}]
(4.31)

+𝐺

∂ [erf ( 𝜂

𝜂0)]

𝜕ℰ[3]
[{𝜅𝑥3

′ + 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)}2 + 2{ℰ[3] − 𝑘𝜃0(1 − 𝜃̅)}

2] = 0.

Finally, we need a condition to determine 𝜃. The evolution of 𝜃 depends on the kinetics of 
transport of the un-crosslinked species and we first consider the limiting case of loading with 
𝜅̇ → 0. In this limit the chemical potential is given by the equilibrium condition 𝜇 = 𝜇0: this 
constant chemical potential is determined by writing 𝜃 in terms of 𝜇0 from (4.30) and then 
calculating 𝜇0 from the conservation constraint

1
ℎ ∫
𝜃̅𝑑𝑥3

′

ℎ/2

−ℎ/2

= 1.
(4.32)

Now consider the case of a finite 𝜅̇ where the concentration of the un-crosslinked species may 
not be in equilibrium. In this case, the flux of the un-crosslinked species is given by


19

𝑗3 = −𝑗0 (𝑀𝑐𝑅𝜃

𝑗0

| 𝜕𝜇
𝜕𝑥3

′|)

1
𝑁

sign ( 𝜕𝜇

𝜕𝑥3

′),
(4.33)

which combined with the conservation law gives the overall differential equation for 
concentration of the un-crosslinked species as

𝑐𝑅

𝜕𝜃
𝜕𝑡 = 𝑗0 (𝑀𝑐𝑅

𝑗0

)

1
𝑁 𝜕

𝜕𝑥3

′ [𝜃 | 𝜕𝜇

𝜕𝑥3

′|

1/𝑁

sign ( 𝜕𝜇

𝜕𝑥3

′)],
(4.34)

with initial conditions 𝜃 = 𝜃0 ∀ 𝑥3

′ at time 𝑡 = 0 and boundary conditions 𝑗3 = 0 at 𝑥3

′ =

±ℎ/2. Thus, we need to solve equations (4.31) and (4.34) together with the boundary 
conditions to obtain solutions for 𝜃(𝑥3

′) and ℰ[3](𝑥3

′). 

S4.5: Material parameters and comparison with measurements
The model requires the specification of the following 5 parameters (in addition to the choice 
we have made of 𝛼1 = −𝛼2 = −1) in the equilibrium limit of an infinitesimal loading rate. 
These are the shear modulus 𝐺, the Poisson ratio3 𝜈, the constant 𝑅𝒯𝑐𝑅 governing the entropy 
of mixing, the swelling strain constant 𝑘 and the occupancy 𝜃0 of the mobile phase in the 
undeformed configuration. These parameters were determined as follows. The Poisson ratio 
was selected to be 𝜈 = 0.45 so that the rubber is nearly elastically incompressible and then 𝐺
chosen to match the moment versus curvature relations. The parameters 𝑅𝒯𝑐𝑅, 𝑘 and 𝜃0 were
chosen together to obtain the measured strain (ℰ[3] and volumetric strain 𝜀𝑘𝑘) distributions 
within the beam.

Now consider the parameters governing the transport of the un-crosslinked polymer. In general, 
two additional parameters are required, viz. 𝑁 and 𝑀𝑗0

(𝑁−1) to fully characterise the non-linear 

transport. However, the measurements show that the response of the Silicone rubber is nearly 
rate independent over the 3 decades of loading rates investigated here. This implies that 
equilibrium is attained much faster than the loading rates we have considered in this study. 
Within the framework presented here this implies that the un-crosslinked phase is an 
approximately rate independent shear thinning fluid with 𝑁, 𝑗0/𝑀 → 0. In this limit 
equilibrium with vanishing spatial gradients of 𝜇 is attained instantaneously, i.e., the problem 
reduces to the equilibrium problem discussed in Section S4.2. All the parameters inferred for 
Silicone rubber are listed Table S3 and comparisons between the simulations and 
measurements are included in Figs. 2 and 3 of the main text.

S4.6: Simulation of the tracer mobility measurements
The tracer radiographs (Fig. 3d) were the key measurements that provided evidence of the rapid 
transport of the un-crosslinked species. Those measurements (Fig. 3e) shows that the spatial 
distribution of mobile phase is independent of the loading rate. It is thus critical to simulate the 
motion of these tracers in the limit 𝑁 → 0. In this limit time is no longer an independent 
parameter and thus we need to re-cast the transport equations of Section S4.3.

Mass conservation of the un-crosslinked species is written as

𝜕𝑐
𝜕𝜅 = − 𝜕𝑗̂3

𝜕𝑥3

′,
(4.35)

where time 𝑡 = 𝜅/𝜅̇ and 𝑗̂3 ≡ 𝑗3/𝜅̇. Here 𝜕𝑐/𝜕𝜅 is known from the equilibrium solution 
procedure of Section S4.4, i.e. given by (4.25) - (4.32). The normalised flux is therefore

3 𝜈 is related to the first Lame parameter via 𝜆 ≡ 2𝐺𝜈/(1 − 2𝜈).


20

𝑗̂3(𝑥3

′) = − ∫
𝜕𝑐(𝑥̅3)

𝜕𝜅
𝑑𝑥̅3

𝑥3′

−ℎ/2

,
(4.36)

since 𝑗̂3(𝑥3

′ = −ℎ/2) = 0. We shall now use this flux to determine the motion of the tracers. 

The tracer particles were assumed to be attached to a fraction 𝜒0 of the un-crosslinked 
molecules and this concentration is approximately constant over the region −ℎ/2 ≤ 𝑥3

′ ≤ ℎ𝑇

0

where 𝑥3

′ = ℎ𝑇

0 is initial position of the tracer front as seen in Fig. S17a. To avoid a step 

function, we assumed a smooth distribution of the initial tracer concentration given by

𝑐𝑇

0 = 𝜒0𝑐𝑅

2
[erf {− 𝑥3

′ − ℎ𝑇

0

ℎ𝜀

} + 1],
(4.37)

where the constant ℎ𝜀 ≪ ℎ is a regularising parameter that smoothens the step function of the 
initial concentration of the tracers; see Fig. S19b for a plot of (4.37) for the choice ℎ𝑇

0 =

−0.6 mm and selected values of ℎ𝜀/ℎ (in Fig. S19b we use the experimental parameters of the 
beam thickness and ℎ𝑇

0 from Fig. 3d). Recall that the tracers are attached to the un-crosslinked 

molecules and thus their motion follows directly from the flux of the un-crosslinked species. 
In particular, given the current tracer concentration 𝑐𝑇(𝑥3

′), the flux of the tracers is 𝑗𝑇 =

𝑗3𝑐𝑇/𝑐 and the evolution of the tracer concentration follows from the conservation equation 
𝑐̇𝑇 = −𝜕𝑗𝑇/𝜕𝑥3

′, i.e.

𝜕𝑐𝑇
𝜕𝑡 = − 𝜕

𝜕𝑥3

′ (𝑗3

𝑐𝑇
𝑐 ).
(4.38)

We then re-cast this equation using the transformations 𝑡 = 𝜅/𝜅̇ and 𝑗̂3 ≡ 𝑗3/𝜅̇ as

𝜕𝑐𝑇
𝜕𝜅 = − 𝜕

𝜕𝑥3

′ (𝑗̂3

𝑐𝑇
𝑐 ) .
(4.39)

This equation, with  𝑗̂3 given by (4.36) is solved with the initial condition (4.37) along with 
boundary conditions 𝑗𝑇 = 0 on 𝑥3

′ = ±ℎ/2 to determine the motion of the front of the tracer 

particles. 

Solution of this transport equation requires the specification of three additional parameters, viz. 
ℎ𝜀, ℎ𝑇

0 and 𝜒0. The initial position of the tracer front ℎ𝑇

0 follows directly from the radiographs 

(Fig. 3d) while ℎ𝜀 is a numerical parameter that we choose to be as small as possible but still 
allowing the numerical calculations to converge. Our tests demonstrated that ℎ𝜀 = 0.01ℎ
suffices. Finally, we need to choose 𝜒0. This parameter is not precisely known but given that 
approximately 5% by wt. ZnI2 was dissolved into the catalyst we take 𝜒0 = 0.05: we shall 
subsequently show that the choice of 𝜒0 over the range 0.005 ≤ 𝜒0 ≤ 0.2 has a minimal effect 
on the predictions.

Predictions of the spatio-temporal evolution of 𝑐𝑇 with the measured value of ℎ𝑇

0 = −0.6 mm

(and choice 𝜒0 = 0.05) are shown in Fig. S20a for the experimentally applied loading protocol, 
viz. 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 s−1 over 0 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 4 s and 𝜅̇ℎ = 0 for 𝑡 > 4 s. The tracer concentration evolves 
such that the tracer concentration reduces near the compressive side of the beam and increases 
near the front of the tracers. We define the position 𝑥𝑓 of the “front” as the value of 𝑥3

′ where 

𝑐𝑇 is a maximum (with 𝑥𝑓 = ℎ𝑇

0 at 𝑡 = 0). The predicted temporal variation of 𝑥𝑓 for this case 

is included in Fig. S20b. Comparisons between the measurements and these predictions of the 
tracer front are included in Fig. 3e and show excellent agreement. Calculations for predictions 
of the spatio-temporal evolution of 𝑐𝑇 for two additional values of 𝜒0 are included in Figs. S21a 
and S21b. These results are nearly indistinguishable (and also nearly identical to the predictions 
in Fig. S20a). This demonstrates that the value of 𝜒0 has a negligible influence on the 
predictions.


21

Supplementary References
[1] Hubbell, J.H., Seltzer, S.M., (2004).  X-Ray Mass Attenuation Coefficients, NIST Standard 
Reference Database 126, dx.doi.org/10.18434/T4D01F.
[2] Pauwels, K., Douissard, P.A. (2022). Indirect X-ray detectors with single-photon sensitivity. 
Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 29, 1394-1406. 
[3] Kelsey, C.A. (1984). The Physics of Radiology. In Johns, H.E., Cunningham, R., Medical 
Physics, 11, 731-732.
[4] Gonzalez, J., Knauss, W.G. (1998). Strain inhomogeneity and discontinuous crack growth 
in a particulate composite. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 46, 1981-1995.
[5] Rueckert, D., Sonoda, L.I., Hayes, C., Hill, D.L., Leach, M.O., Hawkes, D.J. (1999). 
Nonrigid registration using free-form deformations: application to breast MR images. IEEE 
Transactions on Medical Imaging, 18, 712-721. 
[6] Klein, S., Pluim, J.P.W., Staring, M., Viergever, M.A. (2008). Adaptive Stochastic Gradient 
Descent Optimisation for Image Registration. International Journal of Computer Vision, 81, 
227–239.
[7] Hild, F., Roux, S. (2006). Digital Image Correlation: from Displacement Measurement to 
Identification of Elastic Properties – a Review. Strain, 42: 69 80.
[8] Avril, S., Pierron, F. (2007). General framework for the identification of constitutive 
parameters from full-field measurements in linear elasticity. International Journal of Solids 
and Structures, 44, 4978-5002. 
[9] Ereiz, S., Duvnjak, I., Jiménez-Alonso, J.F. (2022). Review of finite element model 
updating methods for structural applications, Structures,41,684-723.
[10] Treloar, L.R.G. (1975). The Physics of Rubber Elasticity, Clarendon Press, Oxford, Third 
Edition.
[11] Arruda, E.M., Boyce, M.C. (1993). A three-dimensional model for the large stretch 
behavior of rubber elastic materials. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 41, 389-
412.
[12] Rivlin, R.S. (1948). Large elastic deformations of isotropic materials. I. Fundamental 
concepts. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, 240, 459-490.
[13] Mathieu, F., Leclerc, H., Hild, F., Roux, S. (2015). Estimation of elastoplastic parameters 
via weighted FEMU and integrated-DIC. Experimental Mechanics, 55, 105-119.
[14] ABAQUS (2012). Analysis User’s Manual. Version 6.12, Dassault Systemes Simulia, Inc.
[15] Nelder, J.A., Mead, R. (1965). A simplex method for function minimization. Computer 
Journal, 7, 308-313.
[16] Fleck, N.A., Hutchinson, J.W. (1997). Strain gradient plasticity. Advances in Applied 
Mechanics, 33, 295-361.
[17] Chakravarthy, S.S., Curtin, W. (2011). Stress-gradient plasticity. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 108, 15716-15720.
[18] Mindlin, R.D. (1965). Second gradient of strain and surface tension in linear elasticity. 
International Journal of Solids and Structures, 1, 417-438.
[19] Harkous, A., Colomines, C., Leroy, E., Mousseau, P., Deterre, R. (2016). The kinetic 
behavior of Liquid Silicone Rubber: A comparison between thermal and rheological 
approaches based on gel point determination. Reactive and Functional Polymers, 101, 20-27.
[20] de Buyl, F., Hayez, V., Harkness, B., Kimberlain, J., Shephard, N. (2023). Advances in 
structural silicone adhesives, In Dillard, D.A. Advances in Structural Adhesive Bonding 
(Second Edition), Woodhead Publishing, 179-219.
[21] Biot, M.A. (1941). General Theory of Three‐Dimensional Consolidation. Journal of
Applied Physics, 12, 155-164.
[22] Sofronis, P., McMeeking, R.M. (1989). Numerical analysis of hydrogen transport near a 
blunting crack tip. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 37, 317-350.


22

[23] de Biasi, L., Kondrakov, A.O., Geßwein, H., Brezesinski, T., Hartmann, P., Janek, J. 
(2017). Between Scylla and Charybdis: Balancing Among Structural Stability and Energy 
Density of Layered NCM Cathode Materials for Advanced Lithium-Ion Batteries, The Journal 
of Physical Chemistry, 121, 26163-26171.  
[24] Merryweather, A.J., Jacquet, Q., Emge, S.P., Schnedermann, C., Rao, A., Grey, C.P. 
(2022). Operando monitoring of single-particle kinetic state-of-charge heterogeneities and 
cracking in high-rate Li-ion anodes. Nature Materials, 21, 1306-1313.
[25] Kim, I., Mun, J., Hwang, W., Yang, Y., Rho, J. (2020). Capillary-force-induced collapse 
lithography for controlled plasmonic nanogap structures. Microsystems & Nanoengineering, 6, 
65.
[26] Rowe, P.W. (1962). The Stress-Dilatancy Relation for Static Equilibrium of an Assembly of 
Particles in Contact. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, 269, 500-527.
[27] Onsager, L. (1949). The effects of shape on the interaction of colloidal particles. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 51, 627-659.
[28] Hu, Y., Chen, X., Whitesides, G.M., Vlassak, J.J., Suo, Z. (2011). Indentation of 
polydimethylsiloxane submerged in organic solvents. Journal of Materials Research, 26, 785-
795.
[29] Hu, Y., Zhao, X., Vlassak, J.J., Suo, Z. (2010). Using indentation to characterize the 
poroelasticity of gels. Applied Physics Letters, 96, 121904.
[30] Carman, P.C. (1937). Fluid flow through granular beds. Transactions, Institution of 
Chemical Engineers, London, 15, 150-166
[31] Vergne, P. (2007) Super Low Traction under EHD & Mixed Lubrication Regimes. In 
Erdemir, A., Martin, J.M. Superlubricity, Elsevier Science, 427-443.
[32] Onsager, L., (1931). Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. I. Physical Review, 37, 
405-426.
[33] Onsager, L., (1931). Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. II. Physical Review, 
38, 2265-2279.
[34] Suo, Z., (1997). Motions of microscopic surfaces in materials. Advances in Applied 
Mechanics, 33, 193-294. 


23

Supplementary Figures

Figure S1: Images to show the absence of porosity in the as-cast Silicone rubber. (a) Scanning 
electron microscope (SEM) and (b) a 3D XCT reconstructed image. (c) The computed 
grayscale tomograph of a  600 μm cube within a cylindrical Silicone rubber specimen using a 
Tungsten target with a 150 kVp source and increasing currents. The corresponding histogram 
of grayscale pixel counts within the cube are also indicated.


24

Figure S2: XCT reconstructed images of the Silicone rubber beam with a ZnI2 pattern painted 
on the surface. (a) The undeformed with the “Halloween style” ZnI2 lettering painted on the 
surface. (b) The beam stretched in uniaxial tension to 30% strain along the longitudinal axis. 
The reconstructed image shows that the ZnI2 pattern deforms conformally with the beam.


25

Figure S3: Sketches of the in-situ loading setups. (a) The loading rig within the XCT setup (b) 
the compression/tension, 4-point bending and 3-point bending test fixtures. In each case we 
have marked leading dimensions and the materials used.


26

Figure S4: Examples of reconstructed X-ray tomographs at selected loading stages for the 
Silicone rubber (a)  𝐻/𝐷 = 1 cylindrical specimen loading in tension and (b) beam in 3-point 
bending. 


27

Figure S5: (a) Schematic of the multi-stage DVC analysis. A material cube (coloured blue) 
with nodes labelled A through E is marked and its deformation tracked through steps (𝑛 − 1), 
𝑛 and (𝑛 + 1). The fixed Eulerian grid (coloured black) on which the incremental DVC 
displacements {𝑑} are evaluated is also shown and then converted to incremental material point 
displacements {Δ𝑢}. (b) An example of the material displacement field computed using the 
multi-stage DVC analysis for compression of the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 cylindrical Silicone rubber 
specimen. We only show the displacement component 𝑢3. 


28

Figure S6: An example of the data used in the FEMU analysis is shown for the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1
cylindrical specimen (𝐷 = 28 mm) loaded in tension. (a) All three components of the 
displacement field shown in a diametrical plane through the specimen for an imposed 
displacement 𝑈 = 6 mm and (b) the measured load 𝑃 versus displacement 𝑈 response. 


29

Figure S7: Comparisons between predictions of hyperelastic models and measurements of the 
nominal stress 𝜎∞ versus nominal strain 𝜀∞ for the tensile tests on the (a) 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 and 𝐻/𝐷 =
2 specimens (𝐷 = 28 mm). In (a) and (b) the models are calibrated by the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 and 
𝐻/𝐷 = 2 data, respectively. 


30

Figure S8: Comparisons between the measured and predicted distributions of 𝐹33 on the 
central plane through the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen (𝐷 = 28 mm) for three stages of loading. The 
models are calibrated using the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 measurements.


31

Figure S9: Comparisons between the measured and predicted distributions of 𝐹23 on the 
central plane through the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen (𝐷 = 28 mm) for three stages of loading. The 
models are calibrated using the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 measurements.


32

Figure S10: Comparisons between the measured and predicted distributions of det(𝐹𝑖𝑗) on the 
central plane through the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen (𝐷 = 28 mm) for three stages of loading. The 
models are calibrated using the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 measurements.


33

Figure S11: Comparisons between the measured and predicted distributions of 𝐹33 on the 
central plane through the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimen (𝐷 = 28 mm) for three stages of loading. The 
models are calibrated using the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 measurements.


34

Figure S12: Comparisons between the measured and predicted distributions of 𝐹23 on the 
central plane through the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimen (𝐷 = 28 mm) for three stages of loading. The 
models are calibrated using the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 measurements.


35

Figure S13: Comparisons between the measured and predicted distributions of det(𝐹𝑖𝑗) on the 
central plane through the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimen (𝐷 = 28 mm) for three stages of loading. The 
models are calibrated using the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 measurements.


36

Figure S14: Comparison between measurements and hyperelastic model predictions using the 
parameters inferred by FEMU from the 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 tensile test. The (a) tensile nominal stress 
𝜎∞ versus nominal strain 𝜀∞ of the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 specimen and (b) 3-point bending response of 
the Silicone rubber beam from Fig. 4. 


37

Figure S15: (a) Sketch of the cylindrical Silicone rubber specimen indicating locations where 
cubes were cut from. A local co-ordinate system 𝑥𝑖

′ is also indicated on the cubes. (b) The 

measured compressive nominal stress versus nominal strain responses of these cubes cut from 
the three locations and tested in the 𝑥1

′ −direction. (c) The compressive response of the cube 

from location 2 in the 3 orthogonal directions. The compressive responses were measured with 
the specimens glued to platens.


38

Figure S16: (a) Comparison between the measured nominal tensile stress 𝜎∞ versus nominal 
strain 𝜀∞ response of geometrically self-similar 𝐻/𝐷 = 2 Silicone rubber specimens with 𝐷 =
28 mm and 14 mm. (b) The corresponding FETC measurements of spatial distributions of 
det(𝐹𝑖𝑗) , 𝐹33 and 𝐹23 on a diametrical plane through the specimens at an applied strain 𝜀∞ =
0.21. The specimen images have been scaled so that images for both specimen sizes are of the 
same size. The measured deformation gradient distributions are plotted on the deformed 
configuration.


39

Figure S17: (a) The radiographs showing the motion of the front of the ZnI2 tracers in the 4-
point bend experiment reproduced from Fig. 3d without the colour tone. The histogram of gray 
values at 𝑡 = 0 s is also shown along with a local co-ordinate system 𝑥1

′ − 𝑥3

′ with origin 

located at the mid-point (neutral axis) of the beam. The fixed local co-ordinate system is fixed 
to that material point so that it translates with the beam. The variation of the gray values with 
𝑥3

′ at 𝑥1

′ = 0 at (b) 𝑡 = 0 s and (c) 𝑡 = 2 s. In (b) and (c) we show locations “a, b, c” and “p, q, 

r” respectively on the beams and these are marked in the plotted variation of the gray values. 
In (c) the gray value variation for both 𝑡 = 0 s and 𝑡 = 2 s is included to indicate the movement 
of the tracer front. (d) The variation of the gray values with 𝑥3

′ at 𝑥1

′ = 0 are plotted for times

𝑡 = 2 s, 4 s and 8 s. The front remains stationary for 𝑡 > 𝑡𝑅, where 𝑡𝑅 = 4 s. This is clearly 
seen in the final graph in (d) where we include the gray value variations for both 𝑡 = 4 s and 
8 s.


40

Figure S18: Sketch of the envisioned microstructure of the Silicone rubber comprising a 
network of the crosslinked polymeric chains with the un-crosslinked non-spherical molecules 
fully or partially filling the pores. (a) The undeformed or reference configuration subjected to 
a spatial gradient of loading similar to bending and (b) the deformed configuration where the 
un-crosslinked molecules have migrated from the region of compressive stresses to the region 
of tensile stresses. This migration is accompanied by dilation of the pores on the compressive 
side (and vice versa) as well as changes in the shapes of the pores associated with the nematic 
ordering (alignment) of the non-spherical molecules. To better illustrate the deformation of the 
crosslinked network, the undeformed network is simplified as a square grid in (a) and shown 
as white lines in (b) along with the deformed crosslinked network. The dilation due to reduction 
in attractive forces between the un-crosslinked molecules and the network is illustrated by the 
pale background while the darkened background denotes the increased attractive forces causing 
the contraction of the pores.


41

Figure S19: (a) Sketch of the pure bending problem analysed along with the co-ordinate 
system 𝑥1

′ − 𝑥3

′. (b) Plot of the normalized initial (𝑡 = 0) tracer concentration distribution 

𝑐𝑇

0/(𝜒0𝑐𝑅) given by (4.37) for selected choices of the regularising parameter ℎ𝜀/ℎ. The 

distribution is shown for the beam size in Fig. 3d and the measured value of ℎ𝑇

0 = −0.6 mm.


42

Figure S20: Predictions of the evolution of the tracer concentration 𝑐𝑇 for the experimentally 
applied loading protocol, viz. 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 s−1 over time period 0 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 4 s and 𝜅̇ℎ = 0 for 𝑡 >
4 s and the measured value of ℎ𝑇

0 = −0.6 mm. (a) Spatio-temporal evolution of 𝑐𝑇/𝑐𝑅. The 

definition of the tracer front position 𝑥𝑓 is indicated. (b) Corresponding prediction of the 
temporal evolution of 𝑥𝑓. All predictions are shown for the choice 𝜒0 = 0.05. 


43

Figure S21: Predictions corresponding to Fig. S20 but with different choices of 𝜒0. Spatio-
temporal evolution of 𝑐𝑇/𝑐𝑅with choices (a) 𝜒0 = 0.005 and (b) 𝜒0 = 0.2. The definition of 
the tracer front position 𝑥𝑓 is indicated.


44

Supplementary Tables

Specimens
Anode 
material

Thickness 
of Cu filter

Source 

voltage (kVp)

Cylinder

(Silicone 
rubber)

𝐻 = 28 mm, 𝐷 = 28 mm
Tungsten
0.25 mm 
155

𝐻 = 56 mm, 𝐷 = 28 mm
Tungsten
0.25 mm
155

𝐻 = 28 mm, 𝐷 = 14 mm
Tungsten
0.35 mm
150

𝐻 = 112 mm, 𝐷 = 28 mm
Tungsten
0.25 mm
155

𝐻 = 120 mm, 𝐷 = 12 mm
Tungsten
0.50 mm
165

Beam

(Silicone 
rubber)

ℎ = 𝐵 = 10 mm, 𝐿 = 70 mm

𝑠 = 50 mm
(3-point bend)

ℎ = 𝐵 = 10 mm, 𝐿 = 70 mm

𝑠1 = 30 mm, 𝑠2 = 60 mm

(4-point bend)

Tungsten
0.25 mm
180

ℎ = 𝐵 = 10 mm, 𝐿 = 70 mm

𝑠1 = 30 mm, 𝑠2 = 60 mm

(4-point bending of composite 

beam with ZnI2 tracers)

Tungsten
0.25 mm
135

ℎ = 𝐵 = 10 mm, 𝐿 = 70 mm

𝑠1 = 30 mm, 𝑠2 = 60 mm
(Fast radiography 4-point 
bending of composite beam 

with ZnI2 tracers)

Molybdenum
0.10 mm
50

Beam
(HDPE)

ℎ = 𝐵 = 10 mm, 𝐿 = 70 mm

(3-point bend)

Tungsten
0.10 mm
120

Beam

(Nylon6)

ℎ = 𝐵 = 10 mm, 𝐿 = 70 mm

(3-point bend)

Tungsten
0.10 mm
125

Table S1: Dimensions and materials of all specimens investigated here. The definitions of the 
geometric parameters are in Fig. 1 for the cylindrical specimens and in Figs. 2 and 4 for the 4-
point and 3-point bending specimens, respectively. The table also provides the radiography 
parameters for all test configurations considered in this study. All tests using the W target were 
conducted at a power of 30 W while the Mo target tests used a power of 10 W.


45

(a)

Model
Model parameters
𝓒𝒖
𝓒𝑷
𝓒

Neo-Hookean
𝐶10 = 0.083 MPa
𝐷1 = 0.768 MPa−1

0.244
0.030
0.274

Arruda-Boyce
𝐶1 = 0.154 MPa

𝜆𝑚 = 5.275

𝐷 = 0.397 MPa−1

0.228
0.016
0.244

Mooney-Rivlin
𝐶10 = 0.072 MPa
𝐶01 = 0.023 MPa
𝐷1 = 1.977 MPa−1

0.296
0.029
0.324

(b) 

Model
Model parameters
𝓒𝒖
𝓒𝑷
𝓒

Neo-Hookean
𝐶10 = 0.07 MPa

𝐷1 = 0.179 MPa−1

0.131
0.013
0.143

Arruda-Boyce
𝐶1 = 0.135 MPa

𝜆𝑚 = 3.872

𝐷 = 0.286 MPa−1

0.132
0.013
0.145

Mooney-Rivlin
𝐶10 = 0.065 MPa
𝐶01 = 0.011 MPa
𝐷1 = 1.413 MPa−1

0.154
0.013
0.167

Table S2: The optimal parameters for the hyperelastic modules as deduced by the FEMU 
analysis along with the corresponding values of the optimised cost functions 𝒞𝑢,  𝒞𝑃 and 𝒞. 
This data is shown for properties inferred from the tensile tests on the (a) 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 and (b)
𝐻/𝐷 = 2 specimens with 𝐷 = 28 mm.


46

Material parameter

𝐺
0.42 MPa

𝜈
0.45

𝑘
2

𝜃0
0.05

𝑅𝒯𝑐𝑅
0.2 MPa

Table S3: The material parameters for the thermodynamically consistent model for Silicone 
rubber. These parameters are used for all the predictions shown in Figs. 2 and 3. 


47

Supplementary Movies

Movie S1: A walkthrough into the volume of the 𝐻/𝐷 = 1 Silicone rubber specimen (Fig. 1e) 
subjected to a nominal strain 𝜀∞ = 0.21 showing the spatial variation of Δ𝑉/𝑉0.

Movie S2: A walkthrough into the volume of the 4-point bend specimen Silicone rubber 
specimen (Fig. 2d) showing the spatial variation of Δ𝑉/𝑉0 at nominal strain 𝜅ℎ = 0.24 .

Movie S3: A walkthrough into the volume of the bent composite beams (Fig. 3b) to show 
transport of the ZnI2 tracers when the tracers were present on the (a) on the compressive side 
and (b) on the tensile side.

Movie S4: Video stitched together from the radiographs of Fig. 3d of the composite beam
subjected to a step loading 4-point bend experiment with 𝜅̇ℎ = 0.12 s−1 and 𝑡𝑅 = 4 s (i.e., 
maximum 𝜅ℎ = 0.48). The total time of the experiment is 𝑡 = 10 s and shows there is no 
motion of the tracer beyond 𝑡𝑅 = 4 s. The video was constructed from radiographs with an 
interframe time of 0.5 s.

Movie S5: A walkthrough into the volume of the 3-point bend specimen of the commercial 
Nylon6 (Fig. 4c) showing the spatial variation of Δ𝑉/𝑉0 at a displacement 𝑈 = 4 mm.


