This paper has been accepted for publication at the AAAI 2024 Workshop on AI to Accelerate Science and Engineering

Position Paper on Materials Design – A Modern Approach

Willi Großmann1, Sebastian Eilermann1, Tim Rensmeyer1,
Artur Liebert1, Michael Hohmann1, Christian Wittke1, Oliver Niggemann1

1Institute of Automation Technology
Helmut-Schmidt-Universit¨at / Universit¨at der Bundeswehr Hamburg,
Holstenhofweg 85, 22043 Hamburg, Germany

Abstract

Traditional design cycles for new materials and assemblies
have two fundamental drawbacks. The underlying physical
relationships are often too complex to be precisely calculated
and described. Aside from that, many unknown uncertainties,
such as exact manufacturing parameters or materials compo-
sition, dominate the real assembly behavior. Machine learn-
ing (ML) methods overcome these fundamental limitations
through data-driven learning. In addition, modern approaches
can specifically increase system knowledge. Representation
Learning allows the physical, and if necessary, even sym-
bolic interpretation of the learned solution. In this way, the
most complex physical relationships can be considered and
quickly described. Furthermore, generative ML approaches
can synthesize possible morphologies of the materials based
on defined conditions to visualize the effects of uncertainties.
This modern approach accelerates the design process for new
materials and enables the prediction and interpretation of re-
alistic materials behavior.

Introduction

The traditional design of new materials and their production
are based on exploratory research and heuristic methodol-
ogy (Morgan and Jacobs 2020; Butler et al. 2018; Schmidt
et al. 2019). Newer approaches use computer-aided model-
ing of materials properties and integrate them into the mate-
rials design process. This enables a more efficient screening
process for possible theoretical solutions (Ramprasad et al.
2017; Sousa, Baptista, and Marques 2021). But materials
properties are still described spatially using physical mod-
els. These models are always based on an idealized theoret-
ical morphology.
This is where state-of-the-art laboratory-based computed
tomography (CT) can create CTs of the real morphology.
It is an accurate and fast way to digitize materials and as-
semblies morphologies over statistically relevant volumes
and with appropriate resolution (Furat et al. 2019; Michael
et al. 2021; Ditscherlein et al. 2020). Once a digital image
of the morphology is available, superimposed numerical so-
lutions of the partial differential equations can approximate
the effective materials properties (Lu et al. 2020; Neumann
et al. 2020). However, numerical solving is associated with
an enormous computational effort. In addition, uncertainties
in the theoretical description with physical models, for ex-

ample due to the system complexity or the non-ideal behav-
ior of some components, remain undescribed.
Data-driven methods close the gap between empirical ob-
servation and physical modelling. Neural networks have be-
come the dominant approach for data-based modeling in
many complex areas (Redmon et al. 2016; Ronneberger, Fis-
cher, and Brox 2015; Silver et al. 2018). Their success is
largely due to their ability as universal function approxi-
mators and the existence of highly efficient optimization al-
gorithms (Kingma and Ba 2015). However, in many neural
network architectures, the purely data-based approach limits
their ability to extrapolate to data that is very different from
the training data (Szegedy et al. 2014). Nevertheless, neural
networks are successfully used to create models for mate-
rial properties (Baiocco, Tagliaferri, and Ucciardello 2017;
Duan and Li 2021; Guo et al. 2021; Schmidt et al. 2019).
Unfortunately, the black-box nature of neural networks
means that the learned function is usually uninterpretable
by a human. This makes it difficult to use the trained model
to gain deeper insights into the physical principles that lead
to the observed properties of the materials, or even to as-
sess the reliability of the model prediction. As a response
to the aforementioned shortcomings of standard neural net-
works, several alternative approaches have been developed
that improve these models by learning physical concepts of
varying degrees of interpretability. (Zhao et al. 2023; Furat
et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2022)
One promising method in this domain is representation
learning (RepL). The aim of this field is to create mod-
els which are capable of mapping observations of a system
into representations that are useful for making downstream
predictions for the system (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent
2013). These representations usually offer an improved de-
gree of interpretability and are often explicitly designed for
that purpose (Kingma and Welling 2014; Higgins et al. 2017;
Schmidt and Lipson 2009; Udrescu and Tegmark 2020). A
number of research hypotheses (RH) arise from this context.
The proposed solution takes these into account and enables
a faster and more efficient material design process.
RH 1: The solution is based on a formalization of ma-
terials designs that capture the relevant materials properties
and serve as input to a surrogate model. Such a model must
be developed based on requirements and uncertainties from
manufacturing processes.

arXiv:2312.10996v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  18 Dec 2023


RH 2: The network typologies (Bayesian Generative Au-
toencoders) and the corresponding algorithms (active learn-
ing, RepL) must be developed for this domain. Neural net-
works for time series – which would be suitable – are an
on-going research field in ML (Hewamalage, Bergmeir, and
Bandara 2021; Koprinska, Wu, and Wang 2018). Here too, a
training strategy must be developed.
RH 3: To extract an explicit, formula-based material
model from the neural network, several research directions
exist: From symbol-regression based-approaches (Brunton,
Proctor, and Kutz 2016), via questions-based algorithms
(Iten et al. 2020) to approaches which define priors on la-
tent variables (Kingma and Welling 2014). Here a suitable
algorithm and neural network type must be identified and
verified.
RH 4: Materials morphologies need to be encoded into a
set of feature vectors that are automatically extracted from
CT data. Some of these features are straight-forward (e.g.,
density), while others will require novel image-processing
strategies. In related applications, convolutional neural net-
works have proven to be particularly suitable for this.
RH 5: CT data can be used to quantify the effects of manu-
facturing processes. This knowledge enables high-resolution
conditional generative neural networks (generative adversar-
ial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) or denois-
ing diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) (Ho, Jain, and
Abbeel 2020)) to synthesize CTs based on material and man-
ufacturing parameters. For this purpose, a suitable experi-
mental design must be created. In addition, the algorithms
must consider highly modal and diverse conditions.

State of the Art

The author group traditionally works on the edge between
computer science and automation technology. Focus are
ML and artificial intelligence methods for cyber-physical
systems including RepL (Diedrich, Maier, and Niggemann
2019; Niggemann et al. 2021). Considering a-priori knowl-
edge to improve ML is one big research topic. Therefore,
technical systems are characterized by the abundance of
a-priori knowledge such as system structures and physical
laws. As a result, methods of machine learning require less
data and become extrapolable. Furthermore, causal relation-
ships are used to calculate optimizations (Ehrhardt, Heesch,
and Niggemann 2023; Otto, Vogel-Heuser, and Niggemann
2018; von Birgelen et al. 2018). These partly subsymbolic
representations are used to abstract logical symbols from the
physical systems (Bunte, Li, and Niggemann 2020). to gen-
erate surrogate models (Diedrich and Niggemann 2022).
For several years now we have been abstracting these
skills into the sub-area of computational materials design
or – from an algorithmic perspective – spatial neural net-
works. Often neural networks are used to analyze materials,
e.g. to identify characteristics (Grednev et al. 2023; Groß-
mann, Horn, and Niggemann 2022).
This also includes the use of surrogate models to replace
slow solver-based simulations when designing new materi-
als (Rensmeyer et al. 2023) with generative and probabilistic
neural networks (Niggemann et al. 2023).

Physics Based Machine Learning

The ideal physical behavior of materials can often be ap-
proximated using well-known partial differential equations
(PDEs). However, the numerical solution of these equations
is computationally intensive for high temporal and spatial
resolutions. In addition, classic deep learning approaches
fail due to a lack of labeled data. Physics-informed neural
networks (PINNs) solve this contradiction (Cai et al. 2021;
Yang, Meng, and Karniadakis 2021; Mao, Jagtap, and Kar-
niadakis 2020).
These models learn the unknown parameters in an oth-
erwise known (partial) differential equation. To do this, the
neural network is trained to interpolate between the known
data points in a way that corresponds to the known form of
the equation. The unknown parameters of the equation are
treated as neural network parameters and optimized by gra-
dient descent alongside the actual neural network parameters
(Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019).
An alternative to PINNs for settings where the govern-
ing equations are not already partially known is offered by
an uncertainty-based active learning strategy. They have es-
tablished themselves as an extremely valuable approach in
areas where labeling data requires significant effort (Ren
et al. 2021). These methods have proven capable of sub-
stantially reducing the amount of required data to train a
neural network model, by only labeling data on which the
model still has a high degree of uncertainty (Tharwat and
Schenck 2023). Additionally, this approach makes the re-
sulting model more robust to outliers, as exploiting uncer-
tainty in the labeling process can be used to bias the dataset
toward outlier configurations (Lin et al. 2021).

Generative Systems Modelling

An alternative for the spatial system description, taking
complex (boundary) conditions into account, are generative
AI approaches such as GANs or DDPMs. CTs help here as
training data to create realistic morphologies.
For example, GANs are used to generate a large number
of CT images that have similar properties to the training im-
ages (Su et al. 2022). In other approaches, the correspond-
ing three-dimensional (3D) structure is derived from two-
dimensional (2D) images (Feng et al. 2020; Zhang et al.
2021). Henkes and Wessels (2022) proposes an extended
method that uses a Wasserstein loss (Arjovsky, Chintala, and
Bottou 2017) to generate 3D microstructures with the same
properties as the original data.
However, to create morphologies with defined and chang-
ing properties, conditions-based approaches must be con-
sidered. Although there are already some approaches from
the field of medical technology (Jiang et al. 2020; Peng
et al. 2023; Habijan and Gali´c 2022) and materials de-
sign (D¨ureth et al. 2023; Janssens, Huysmans, and Swen-
nen 2020), the underlying conditions are not multimodal or
high-dimensional.
Feature engineering methods help with subsequent auto-
mated CT segmentation or classification, as well as design
evaluation (Damewood et al. 2023). Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) are used successfully here (Gobert et al.


T = E ⌦ B

validation: σ

= {σ, p(r)}

training: p(r)

Training Data

Demand for

new Data

f(x) = xsin... . . .

Surrogate Model

Figure 1: Tiered strategy to learn materials laws; a targeted experimental program will generate realistic morphologies r and reference data
σ. Direct physical modeling merges experimental data E with bulk data B from databases to generate large scale feature-property data T .
This is then used to learn a surrogate model in form of a Bayesian generative neural network autoencoder. This autoencoder can both in an
active learning sense request new data points. But it can also be a basis for the generation of a symbol model, e.g. using algorithms from the
field of explainable AI.

2020; Ziabari et al. 2023). However, a disadvantage of this
approach is the poor interpretability of the learned features.
The aim of these intermediate steps is a closed ML frame-
work that covers the entire materials design process (Ka-
lidindi et al. 2022; Pei et al. 2021). The list of the previous
approaches shows the possibility for abstract and idealized
descriptions of materials behavior. However, since only the
idealized materials behavior is described there, uncertainties
regarding production and composition are not taken into ac-
count. Furthermore, explicit, interpretable, or formula-based
substitution models are missing.

Systems Representation

RepL is the process of automatically discovering and ex-
tracting meaningful patterns and features from raw data, en-
abling more effective and efficient machine learning mod-
els. Autoencoders and variational autoencoders (Kingma
and Welling 2014) have become highly utilized methods
for the extraction of physically meaningful representations
of a systems observations. Nautrup et al. and Iten et al.
(Iten et al. 2020; Nautrup et al. 2022) use these methods to
identify the relevant variables of a physical system that are
necessary for downstream computations and representation
in a simple and interpretable way. Variational autoencoders
have also been used to improve the interpretability of latent
variables by producing discrete encodings of observations
(Dupont 2018; Fortuin et al. 2019; van den Oord, Vinyals,
and kavukcuoglu 2017). The learning of discrete represen-
tations has been one of the main focuses of RepL and could
potentially be used to identify different modes of behavior
of materials properties.
Champion et al. (Champion et al. 2019) use an autoen-
coder to map the observation of the physical system to a suit-
able representation. A symbolic regression of the extracted
features is then performed. The symbolic form describes the
desired properties of a physical system and have varying de-
grees of complexity depending on the chosen basis. In do-
ing so, they describe the transition into the field of system
identification. The algorithmic formulas are derived from
observed data to model the behavior of dynamic systems.

Solution
ML, CT, and experiments are combined here, to automat-
ically construct transferable and interpretable constitutive
materials laws, which are currently missing for the design
of many complex material composites. As a result, a new
method is developed to learn surrogate models for materials
and assemblies.

Surrogate Design Model
A bottleneck in traditional materials design is the time con-
suming design-test-cycle: Each new material has to be de-
signed, produced and then experimentally tested. Direct sim-
ulation is only a partial solution, as both modeling and sim-
ulation tasks are time-consuming, require a high level of
expertise and significant computational resources to solve
even small domains. A solution for the problem is a machine
learning surrogate model which is a simplified and compu-
tationally less expensive model that serves as a substitute for
time-consuming simulations or expensive computations.
Based on bulk materials data, a model generation func-
tion can be learned that maps new materials designs onto
materials models. Such predictions can be used to try other,
new materials designs. Maybe better: Even if this neural
network-based approach yields less quantitative precision
for a single material. Unbiased learning of a predictive
model can still be expected to be qualitatively more predic-
tive than traditional ad hoc heuristics.
Such an approach is sketched in Figure 1: The strategy
is three-fold. A targeted experimental program generates a
range of materials from which CTs are synthesized to create
a data set of typical morphologies. The synthesised materi-
als are then tested for their properties to generate a valida-
tion dataset E, while the CTs are feed into the second layer
of physical modelling. The main purpose of this layer is to
efficiently expand the training set by overlaying the mor-
phologies with available bulk properties to simulate the be-
havior of a much larger set of materials. This wouldn’t be
possible experimentally. The layer thoroughly maps the re-
lationship between bulk properties and morphologies. These
are expressed by feature vectors build from materials prop-
erties (e.g., porosity ϵp, tortuosity τ, strut lengths l etc.) It
also implements a map p(r) → {ϵp, τ, ...} through image-


Material

Composition

Process

…

Manufacturing 
Configuration

A
B
AB

Functional Space

Generative Neural 
Network

Synthetic 
Tomography

Surrogate 
Model

Evaluation

Figure 2: Closed framework for morphological system description. A generative neural network synthesizes possible tomo-
graphies (CTs) of material composites or assemblies based on predefined manufacturing configurations. The morphological
representation enables the visualization of various manufacturing influences. A surrogate model is based on the spatial repre-
sentation and describes the physical properties. This finally enables an evaluation of the materials design

processing techniques, which encodes CTs into feature vec-
tors. This large-scale dataset underpins the training phase.
Based on this data – augmented with and validated against
real experiments – a neural network is trained. Later during
the operation phase, new materials designs – expressed by
the feature vectors and materials properties – become input
to this network which then predicts the probable correspond-
ing materials model.

Algorithmic Representation

Because these materials models come in form of a neural
network, explainability and traceability become challenges.
For this reason, explicit, formula-based models are extracted
from the neural network. Such models resemble closely cur-
rent manual materials models but can qualitatively differ as
a function of provided feature vectors. However, to prevent
neural networks from remaining black boxes, changes to the
network topology and learning process are required. For this
(see also Figure 1) a surrogate model in form of a neural net-
work is learned. This model replaces the previous physical
simulations but has the advantage of predicting the mate-
rials behavior very quickly. Using such a surrogate model
has several advantages: (i) Its topology can be optimized
towards the symbolic formula extraction, e.g. by disentan-
glement of latent variables (RepL). (ii) By using Bayesian
principles of uncertainty estimation, the surrogate model can
actively ask for more data points when needed. (iii) The sur-
rogate model can be created in a way which supports inter-
and extrapolation – mainly by adding physical information
to the network topology and the priors on latent variables.
Finally, symbolic formula extraction algorithms and algo-
rithms from the field of explainable AI are used to extract
symbolic formulas. These learned formulas guide the design
process, e.g. by helping to identify optimal materials designs
for specific tasks or identifying promising candidates for tar-
geted experiments.

Morphological Representation

Due to a symbolic description, the physical materials behav-
ior can be theoretically interpreted. However, the generated

equations are often difficult to interpret in practice due to
their complexity. Another way to better understand system
relationships is to synthesize materials structures in the form
of tomography. This approach is visualized in Figure 2.
The generative part uses CTs as training data. These are
labeled with manufacturing configurations such as mate-
rial compositions and process parameters. Under these high-
dimensional conditions, a GAN or DDPM is trained to syn-
thesize high-resolution 3D tomography data. In the opera-
tion phase, the respective influence on the morphological
structure is analyzed by varying the conditions. Analogous
to the unsupervised approach mentioned above, a surrogate
model is then used to learn and represent the materials be-
havior. Finally, the design draft is evaluated.

Conclusion

A comprehensive approach that integrates ML, CTs and ex-
periments is presented. This solves the lack of transferable
and interpretable materials laws for complex composite ma-
terials and assemblies. The surrogate design model provides
an efficient way to overcome the traditional bottleneck in the
design-test cycle.
The algorithmic representation ensures the interpretabil-
ity of the neural network-based models. The extraction of
explicit, formula-based models enhances understanding and
facilitates meaningful contributions to materials design.
In addition, the morphological representation provides a
visual understanding of the materials system through syn-
thesis of 3D tomography data. This enables the analysis of
manufacturing influences on morphological structures and
provides valuable insights into the material design process.
The proposed framework not only streamlines the mate-
rials design process but also empowers researchers with a
powerful tool to explore and predict the behavior of com-
plex material composites. By combining CTs synthesis and
explainable AI, this modern approach opens opportunities
for the rapid and informed design of materials with tailored
properties.


Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the project ”KIBIDZ –
Intelligente Brandgefahrenanalyse f¨ur Geb¨aude und Schutz
der
Rettungskrafte
durch
K¨unstliche
Intelligenz
und
Digitale Brandgeb¨audezwillinge” by the Zentrum f¨ur
Digitalisierungs-
und
Technologieforschung
der
Bun-
deswehr (dtec.bw®).

References

Arjovsky, M.; Chintala, S.; and Bottou, L. 2017. Wasserstein
generative adversarial networks. In International conference
on machine learning, 214–223. PMLR.

Baiocco, G.; Tagliaferri, V.; and Ucciardello, N. 2017. Neu-
ral Networks Implementation for Analysis and Control of
Heat Exchange Process in a Metal Foam Prototypal Device.
Procedia CIRP, 62: 518–522.

Bengio, Y.; Courville, A. C.; and Vincent, P. 2013. Repre-
sentation Learning: A Review and New Perspectives. IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 35(8): 1798–1828.

Brunton, S. L.; Proctor, J. L.; and Kutz, J. N. 2016. Discover-
ing governing equations from data by sparse identification of
nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 113(15): 3932–3937.

Bunte, A.; Li, P.; and Niggemann, O. 2020. Learned Ab-
straction: Knowledge Based Concept Learning for Cyber
Physical Systems. In Beyerer, J.; Maier, A.; and Niggemann,
O., eds., Machine Learning for Cyber Physical Systems, 43–
51. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Butler, K. T.; Davies, D. W.; Cartwright, H.; Isayev, O.; and
Walsh, A. 2018. Machine learning for molecular and mate-
rials science. Nature, 559(7715): 547–555.

Cai, S.; Wang, Z.; Wang, S.; Perdikaris, P.; and Karniadakis,
G. E. 2021. Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Heat
Transfer Problems. Journal of Heat Transfer, 143(6).

Champion, K.; Lusch, B.; Kutz, J. N.; and Brunton, S. L.
2019. Data-driven discovery of coordinates and governing
equations.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, 116(45): 22445–22451.

Damewood, J.; Karaguesian, J.; Lunger, J. R.; Tan, A. R.;
Xie, M.; Peng, J.; and G´omez-Bombarelli, R. 2023. Repre-
sentations of materials for machine learning. Annual Review
of Materials Research, 53: 399–426.

Diedrich, A.; Maier, A.; and Niggemann, O. 2019. Model-
Based Diagnosis of Hybrid Systems Using Satisfiability
Modulo Theory. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 33(01): 1452–1459.

Diedrich, A.; and Niggemann, O. 2022. On Residual-based
Diagnosis of Physical Systems. Engineering Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, 109: 104636.

Ditscherlein, R.; Furat, O.; de Langlard, M.; Martins de
Souza e Silva, J.; Sygusch, J.; Rudolph, M.; Leißner, T.;
Schmidt, V.; and Peuker, U. A. 2020.
Multiscale Tomo-
graphic Analysis for Micron-Sized Particulate Samples. Mi-
croscopy and Microanalysis, 26(4): 676–688.

Duan, J.; and Li, F. 2021. Transient heat transfer analysis of
phase change material melting in metal foam by experimen-
tal study and artificial neural network. Journal of Energy
Storage, 33: 102160.
Dupont, E. 2018. Learning Disentangled Joint Continuous
and Discrete Representations. In Bengio, S.; Wallach, H.;
Larochelle, H.; Grauman, K.; Cesa-Bianchi, N.; and Gar-
nett, R., eds., Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc.
D¨ureth, C.; Seibert, P.; R¨ucker, D.; Handford, S.; K¨astner,
M.; and Gude, M. 2023. Conditional diffusion-based mi-
crostructure reconstruction. Materials Today Communica-
tions, 35: 105608.
Ehrhardt, J.; Heesch, R.; and Niggemann, O. 2023. Learn-
ing Process Steps as Dynamical Systems for a Sub-Symbolic
Approach of Process Planning in Cyber-Physical Production
Systems. In European Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(ECAI).
Feng, J.; Teng, Q.; Li, B.; He, X.; Chen, H.; and Li, Y. 2020.
An end-to-end three-dimensional reconstruction framework
of porous media from a single two-dimensional image based
on deep learning. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering, 368: 113043.
Fortuin, V.; H¨user, M.; Locatello, F.; Strathmann, H.; and
R¨atsch, G. 2019. SOM-VAE: Interpretable Discrete Repre-
sentation Learning on Time Series. In ICLR (Poster).
Furat, O.; Finegan, D. P.; Yang, Z.; Kirstein, T.; Smith, K.;
and Schmidt, V. 2022. Super-resolving microscopy images
of Li-ion electrodes for fine-feature quantification using gen-
erative adversarial networks. npj Computational Materials,
8(1): 68.
Furat, O.; Leißner, T.; Bachmann, K.; Gutzmer, J.; Peuker,
U.; and Schmidt, V. 2019. Stochastic Modeling of Multi-
dimensional Particle Properties Using Parametric Copulas.
Microscopy and Microanalysis, 25(3): 720–734.
Gobert, C.; Kudzal, A.; Sietins, J.; Mock, C.; Sun, J.; and
McWilliams, B. 2020. Porosity segmentation in X-ray com-
puted tomography scans of metal additively manufactured
specimens with machine learning. Additive Manufacturing,
36: 101460.
Goodfellow, I.; Pouget-Abadie, J.; Mirza, M.; Xu, B.;
Warde-Farley, D.; Ozair, S.; Courville, A.; and Bengio, Y.
2014. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems, 27.
Grednev, S.; Steude, H. S.; Bronder, S.; Niggemann, O.; and
Jung, A. 2023.
AI-Assisted Study of Auxetic Structures.
Acta Polytechnica.
Großmann, W.; Horn, H.; and Niggemann, O. 2022. Im-
proving remote material classification ability with thermal
imagery. Sci Rep 12, 17288.
Guo, K.; Yang, Z.; Yu, C.-H.; and Buehler, M. 2021. Artifi-
cial intelligence and machine learning in design of mechan-
ical materials. Materials horizons, 8 4: 1153–1172.
Habijan, M.; and Gali´c, I. 2022.
Generation of Artificial
CT Images using Patch-based Conditional Generative Ad-
versarial Networks. In 2022 7th International Conference
on Smart and Sustainable Technologies (SpliTech), 1–5.


Henkes, A.; and Wessels, H. 2022. Three-dimensional mi-
crostructure generation using generative adversarial neu-
ral networks in the context of continuum micromechanics.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
400: 115497.
Hewamalage, H.; Bergmeir, C.; and Bandara, K. 2021. Re-
current Neural Networks for Time Series Forecasting: Cur-
rent status and future directions. International Journal of
Forecasting, 37(1): 388–427.
Higgins, I.; Matthey, L.; Pal, A.; Burgess, C.; Glorot, X.;
Botvinick, M.; Mohamed, S.; and Lerchner, A. 2017. beta-
VAE: Learning Basic Visual Concepts with a Constrained
Variational Framework.
In International Conference on
Learning Representations.
Ho, J.; Jain, A.; and Abbeel, P. 2020. Denoising diffusion
probabilistic models. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 33: 6840–6851.
Iten, R.; Metger, T.; Wilming, H.; del Rio, L.; and Renner,
R. 2020. Discovering Physical Concepts with Neural Net-
works. Phys. Rev. Lett., 124: 010508.
Janssens, N.; Huysmans, M.; and Swennen, R. 2020. Com-
puted tomography 3D super-resolution with generative ad-
versarial neural networks: Implications on unsaturated and
two-phase fluid flow. Materials, 13(6): 1397.
Jiang, Y.; Chen, H.; Loew, M. H.; and Ko, H. 2020. COVID-
19 CT Image Synthesis With a Conditional Generative Ad-
versarial Network. Ieee Journal of Biomedical and Health
Informatics, 25: 441 – 452.
Kalidindi, S. R.; Buzzy, M.; Boyce, B. L.; and Dingreville,
R. 2022. Digital Twins for Materials. Frontiers in Materials,
9.
Kingma, D.; and Welling, M. 2014. Auto-Encoding Varia-
tional Bayes. In 2nd International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Kingma, D. P.; and Ba, J. 2015.
Adam: A Method for
Stochastic Optimization. In 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations).
Koprinska, I.; Wu, D.; and Wang, Z. 2018. Convolutional
Neural Networks for Energy Time Series Forecasting. In
2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks,
1–8.
Lin, Q.; Zhang, L.; Zhang, Y.; and Jiang, B. 2021. Search-
ing Configurations in Uncertainty Space: Active Learning
of High-Dimensional Neural Network Reactive Potentials.
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 17(5): 2691–
2701. PMID: 33904718.
Lu, X.; Bertei, A.; Finegan, D. P.; Tan, C.; Daemi, S. R.;
Weaving, J. S.; O’Regan, K. B.; Heenan, T. M. M.; Hinds,
G.; Kendrick, E.; Brett, D. J. L.; and Shearing, P. R. 2020.
3D microstructure design of lithium-ion battery electrodes
assisted by X-ray nano-computed tomography and mod-
elling. Nature Communications, 11(1): 2079.
Mao, Z.; Jagtap, A. D.; and Karniadakis, G. E. 2020.
Physics-informed neural networks for high-speed flows.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
360: 112789.

Michael, H.; Iacoviello, F.; Heenan, T. M. M.; Llewellyn, A.;
Weaving, J. S.; Jervis, R.; Brett, D. J. L.; and Shearing, P. R.
2021. A Dilatometric Study of Graphite Electrodes during
Cycling with X-ray Computed Tomography. Journal of The
Electrochemical Society, 168(1): 010507.

Morgan, D.; and Jacobs, R. 2020. Opportunities and chal-
lenges for machine learning in materials science. Annual
Review of Materials Research, 50: 71–103.

Nautrup, H. P.; Metger, T.; Iten, R.; Jerbi, S.; Trenkwalder,
L. M.; Wilming, H.; Briegel, H. J.; and Renner, R. 2022. Op-
erationally meaningful representations of physical systems
in neural networks. Machine Learning: Science and Tech-
nology, 3(4): 045025.

Neumann, M.; Stenzel, O.; Willot, F.; Holzer, L.; and
Schmidt, V. 2020. Quantifying the influence of microstruc-
ture on effective conductivity and permeability: Virtual ma-
terials testing. International Journal of Solids and Struc-
tures, 184: 211–220.
Physics and Mechanics of Random
Structures: From Morphology to Material Properties.

Niggemann, O.; Stein, B.; Vodencarevic, A.; Maier, A.; and
Kleine B¨uning, H. 2021. Learning Behavior Models for Hy-
brid Timed Systems. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, 26(1): 1083–1090.

Niggemann, O.; Zimmering, B.; Steude, H.; Augustin, J. L.;
Windmann, A.; and S. Multaheb, S. 2023. Digital Transfor-
mation, chapter Machine Learning for Cyber-Physical Sys-
tems. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Vieweg.

Otto, J.; Vogel-Heuser, B.; and Niggemann, O. 2018. Auto-
matic Parameter Estimation for Reusable Software Compo-
nents of Modular and Reconfigurable Cyber-Physical Pro-
duction Systems in the Domain of Discrete Manufacturing.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 14(1): 275–
282.

Pei, Z.; Rozman, K. A.; Do˘gan, ¨O. N.; Wen, Y.; Gao, N.;
Holm, E. A.; Hawk, J. A.; Alman, D. E.; and Gao, M. C.
2021. Machine-Learning Microstructure for Inverse Mate-
rial Design. Advanced Science, 8(23): 2101207.

Peng, J.; Qiu, R. L. J.; Wynne, J. F.; wei Chang, C.; Pan, S.;
Wang, T.; Roper, J. R.; Liu, T.; Patel, P. R.; Yu, D. S.; and
Yang, X. 2023. CBCT-Based synthetic CT image generation
using conditional denoising diffusion probabilistic model.
Medical physics.

Raissi, M.; Perdikaris, P.; and Karniadakis, G. 2019.
Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning frame-
work for solving forward and inverse problems involving
nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Compu-
tational Physics, 378: 686–707.

Ramprasad,
R.;
Batra,
R.;
Pilania,
G.;
Mannodi-
Kanakkithodi, A.; and Kim, C. 2017. Machine learning in
materials informatics: recent applications and prospects.
npj Computational Materials, 3(1): 54.

Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; and Farhadi, A. 2016.
You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection.
In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 779–788.


Ren, P.; Xiao, Y.; Chang, X.; Huang, P.-Y.; Li, Z.; Gupta,
B. B.; Chen, X.; and Wang, X. 2021. A Survey of Deep
Active Learning. ACM Comput. Surv., 54(9).
Rensmeyer, T.; Craig, B.; Kramer, D.; and Niggemann, O.
2023. High Accuracy Uncertainty-Aware Interatomic Force
Modeling with Equivariant Bayesian Neural Networks.
Preprint, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.03694.
Ronneberger, O.; Fischer, P.; and Brox, T. 2015.
U-Net:
Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmenta-
tion. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention, 234–241. Springer International Publishing.
Schmidt, J.; Marques, M. R. G.; Botti, S.; and Marques, M.
A. L. 2019. Recent advances and applications of machine
learning in solid-state materials science. npj Computational
Materials, 5: 83.
Schmidt, M.; and Lipson, H. 2009.
Distilling Free-Form
Natural Laws from Experimental Data. Science, 324(5923):
81–85.
Silver, D.; Hubert, T.; Schrittwieser, J.; Antonoglou, I.; Lai,
M.; Guez, A.; Lanctot, M.; Sifre, L.; Kumaran, D.; Graepel,
T.; Lillicrap, T.; Simonyan, K.; and Hassabis, D. 2018. A
general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess,
shogi, and Go through self-play. Science, 362(6419): 1140–
1144.
Sousa, S.; Baptista, A.; and Marques, A. 2021.
Material
Design-for-eXcellence Framework – Application to Com-
posites. In Brabazon, D., ed., Encyclopedia of Materials:
Composites, 290–301. Oxford: Elsevier.
Su, J.; Xiao, G.; Zhang, H.; and Li, B. 2022. Microstruc-
ture reconstruction of porous copper foams based on deep
convolutional generative adversarial networks with physical
characteristics of materials. International Journal of Data
Science and Analytics, 14(1): 89–97.
Szegedy, C.; Zaremba, W.; Sutskever, I.; Bruna, J.; Erhan,
D.; Goodfellow, I. J.; and Fergus, R. 2014. Intriguing prop-
erties of neural networks. CoRR, abs/1312.6199.
Tharwat, A.; and Schenck, W. 2023. A Survey on Active
Learning: State-of-the-Art, Practical Challenges and Re-
search Directions. Mathematics, 11(4).
Udrescu, S.-M.; and Tegmark, M. 2020. AI Feynman: A
physics-inspired method for symbolic regression. Science
Advances, 6(16): eaay2631.
van den Oord, A.; Vinyals, O.; and kavukcuoglu, k. 2017.
Neural Discrete Representation Learning.
In Guyon, I.;
Luxburg, U. V.; Bengio, S.; Wallach, H.; Fergus, R.; Vish-
wanathan, S.; and Garnett, R., eds., Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
von Birgelen, A.; Buratti, D.; Mager, J.; and Niggemann, O.
2018. Self-Organizing Maps for Anomaly Localization and
Predictive Maintenance in Cyber-Physical Production Sys-
tems. Procedia CIRP, 72: 480–485.
Yang, L.; Meng, X.; and Karniadakis, G. E. 2021. B-PINNs:
Bayesian physics-informed neural networks for forward and
inverse PDE problems with noisy data. Journal of Compu-
tational Physics, 425: 109913.

Ye, Z.; Kumar, Y. J.; Sing, G. O.; Song, F.; and Wang, J.
2022. A Comprehensive Survey of Graph Neural Networks
for Knowledge Graphs. IEEE Access, 10: 75729–75741.
Zhang, F.; Teng, Q.; Chen, H.; He, X.; and Dong, X. 2021.
Slice-to-voxel stochastic reconstructions on porous media
with hybrid deep generative model. Computational Mate-
rials Science, 186: 110018.
Zhao, X.; Gong, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Yao, W.; and Chen, X. 2023.
Physics-informed convolutional neural networks for temper-
ature field prediction of heat source layout without labeled
data.
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence,
117: 105516.
Ziabari, A.; Venkatakrishnan, S.; Snow, Z.; Lisovich, A.;
Sprayberry, M.; Brackman, P.; Frederick, C.; Bhattad, P.;
Graham, S.; Bingham, P.; et al. 2023. Enabling rapid X-ray
CT characterisation for additive manufacturing using CAD
models and deep learning-based reconstruction. npj Compu-
tational Materials, 9(1): 91.


