Integrating Superregenerative Principles in a Compact, Power-Efficient NMR/NQR
Spectrometer: A Novel Approach with Pulsed Excitation

Tomas Sikorsky, Andrzej Pelczar, Stephan Schneider, Thorsten Schumm

aAtominstitut, TU Wien, Stadionallee 2, Vienna, 1020, Austria

Abstract

We present a new approach to Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance (NQR)/Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, the
Damp-Enhanced Superregenerative Nuclear Spin Analyser (DESSA). This system integrates Superregenerative principles with
pulsed sample excitation and detection, offering significant advancements over traditional Super-Regenerative Receivers (SRRs).
Our approach overcomes certain limitations associated with traditional Super-Regenerative Receivers (SRRs) by integrating direct
digital processing of the oscillator response delay time (Td) and an electronic damp unit to regulate the excitation pulse decay time
(Te). The essence is combining pulsed excitation with a reception inspired by, but distinct from, conventional SRRs. The damp unit
allows a rapid termination of the oscillation pulse and the initiation of detection within microseconds, and direct digital processing
avoids the need for a second lower frequency which is used for quenching in a traditional SRRs, thereby avoiding the formation of
sidebands. We demonstrate the effectiveness of DESSA on a NaClO3 sample containing the isotope Chlorine-35 where it accurately
detects the NQR signal with sub-kHz resolution.

Keywords: Nuclear Spectroscopy, Super-Regenerative Receiver, SRR, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, NMR, Nuclear Quadrupole
Resonance, NQR, Marginal Oscillation

1. Introduction

Efforts to develop more efficient and practical detection tech-
niques are at the forefront of research in Nuclear Quadrupole
Resonance (NQR) and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy [1, 2, 3]. NMR/NQR were initially developed as
a continuous wave (CW) methods, using a static magnetic field
and varying the frequency of the RF probe field [4, 5]. How-
ever, by the 1950s, the CW methods were superseded mainly by
pulsed techniques that offered higher resolution and greater sen-
sitivity [6]. These methods, which include Fourier-transform
NMR, made use of short pulses of the RF excitation field and
measurement of the resulting Free Induction Decay (FID) sig-
nals, providing a greater wealth of information about the sam-
ple [7]. In the 1980s, a method called NQR began to gain recog-
nition for its potential in detecting explosives and narcotics. It
is conceptually analogous to NMR but detects the interaction of
the nuclear quadrupole moment with the sample-intrinsic elec-
tric field gradient at the nucleus position, in contrast to nuclear
dipole moments interacting with externally applied magnetic
field in NMR [8, 9].
The Super-Regenerative Receiver (SRR) is a detection
method that was originally used in Continuous Wave (CW)
NQR spectrometers [10, 11]. However, the SRR has limita-
tions related to frequency stability [12], a potential for gener-
ating sidebands of detected NMR/NQR signals [13], and line
shape distortions [14, 15, 16]. These drawbacks have limited
the performance of the SRR in various applications [17]. Our
work focuses on enhancing the traditional SRR method by in-
tegrating it with pulsed excitation.

Traditional super-regenerative receiver (SRR) spectrometer
operation is based on regenerative amplification. Absorption
of radiation by the sample affects the rate of decay of oscilla-
tions and therefore the level remaining at the moment of suc-
cessive pulse buildup [18]. This affects the behavior of the cir-
cuit, which is periodically interrupted by a quench signal [19].
The quenching creates a series of decaying oscillations whose
amplitude is proportional to the strength of the received sig-
nal [20]. This process leads to amplification, allowing for the
detection of NMR/NQR signals [21].

Our method differs conceptually from this operation mode.
The conventional SRR methodology involves continuous am-
plification and quenching on some sampling frequency that re-
quires subsequent demodulation. Our technique directly mea-
sures the delay time (Td), which is the time interval between the
activation of the quench (interrupting the sample excitation) and
the onset of the subsequent oscillation triggered by the signal
emitted by the sample (see Figure 2). In doing so, we not only
avoid the need for demodulation, which prevents the forma-
tion of sidebands, but also ensure that signal detection depends
solely on the induced response of the sample, rather than ab-
sorption. Similar to pulsed NMR techniques, our method uses
a transmitted excitation pulse. For the response reception, we
use SRR principles to measure the amplitude of the NMR/NQR
signal at a very short interval around point t0 (as shown in Fig-
ure 2). In SRR, the sensitivity period is the short time interval
around the closure of the quench unit and the reactivation of
the oscillatory unit (t0). The delay time (Td) of the pulse is
mainly influenced by the signal amplitude during the sensitive

Preprint submitted to Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research
December 15, 2023

arXiv:2312.08491v1  [physics.ins-det]  13 Dec 2023


period [14, 22]. Our design is enhanced and automated by di-
rect digital processing of the regeneration time delay (Td) and
the use of a dedicated electronic damping circuit to shorten the
decay time (Te) of the excitation pulse.

2. Design and Features

We present the Damp-Enhanced Superregenerative Nuclear
Spin Analyser (DESSA), a spectrometer designed for low
power consumption, compactness and versatility. DESSA is
capable of recording NMR/NQR spectra, revealing resonances
and their linewidths from NMR/NQR active materials.
The
DESSA has most of its components on a single circuit board.
The oscillator unit is generating the excitation RF signal. The
damp and quench units are controlling the spectrometer’s be-
havior. A transceiver coil mounted on the board both excites
and detects the resonance signals of the sample. A control unit
is galvanically isolated from the main board. This unit con-
trols the damp and quench switches and contains a frequency
adjustment module. All components are enclosed in a cooper
Faraday cage, shielding the DESSA against external electro-
magnetic noise such as radio stations.

[logic H]

0V

0V

pQ

nCLR

D

nCLK

Damp Switch

Quench Switch

Damp Unit

Quench Unit

Td

Control Unit

Timer

Timer gate

Event recorder

Edge detector

Bias

Event

Oscillator Unit

Faraday cage

Figure 1: Illustrates the layout of the DESSA units. The oscillator unit, situ-
ated close to the sample, is responsible for generating the excitation pulse. The
event recorder, logs key events within the experimental sequence. The quench
and damp switches, used for controlling the RF pulse, are represented in green
and red, respectively. The control unit operating the oscillator, quench, and
damp switches. All key components are mounted on a single circuit board and
enclosed in a Faraday cage to prevent interference from external electromag-
netic disturbances.

The primary component of the DESSA is the oscillator unit.
Upon activation, this oscillator produces an RF pulse to interact
with the nuclear spins of the target material. When this RF pulse
is resonant with the nuclear spin transitions in the sample, the
spins are excited from their equilibrium state. After the end of
the RF pulse, these spins generate an oscillatory response signal
at their resonance frequency.
After the suppression of the RF oscillation pulse by the
quench and damp units, the oscillator unit is re-activated, al-

lowing for the formation of a subsequent oscillation pulse. If
the on-resonance condition was satisfied, the response signal
from the sample facilitates a faster buildup of the next oscilla-
tion pulse. The faster pulse buildup is an indicator of resonance
match.

Td
Td

t0
t0

C
B
A

Damp Switch Status
Quench Switch Status

3.6

2.4

1.2

0.0

-1.2

-2.4

-3.6

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

Sample magnetiztation [A/m]

×10-5

D

Figure 2: Illustrates the behavior of the oscillator unit to quench and damp
units. The upper part of the figure shows the status of the damp and quench
switches with green and red lines, respectively. Below, the oscillatory behavior
(blue) and envelope (black) illustrate the behavior in three distinct scenarios.
Pulse A shows a standard quenching process without the damp unit, where the
generated FID signal (red) is masked by a slowly decaying residual RF signal
from the excitation pulse. Pulse B decays faster as a result of the damp unit,
and the NMR/NQR signal amplitude is greater than the residual signal from
the excitation pulse. The off-resonance pulse C leads to a longer delay time of
the following pulse D due to an absence of a sample response. The short delay
time of the pulse B is due to the absence of damping. The sensitive period
of the receiver is marked as t0. Oscillations are depicted with their frequency
scaled down by a factor of 100 (blue curve). The FID, has a relaxation time
of T2∗=10 µs. The relaxation has been shortened for illustration purposes. The
threshold that determines the rising edge of the oscillation buildup is show as
black dashed line. The figure illustrates the behavior of DESSA’s oscillator unit
under different conditions. It does not represent an experimental sequence.

The analog signal edge detection element monitors the os-
cillator amplitude. This element activates when the amplitude
surpasses a predefined voltage threshold. Its principal function
is to determine (Td), which is the interval between the moment
the quench unit is deactivated and the instant the analog signal
edge detection element acknowledges the amplitude surpass-
ing the predefined threshold (see Figure 2). The direct digital
processing of Td value indicates the degree of excitation of the
target sample nuclei by a reduction of (Td) in the case of a res-
onance.
Essential to the DESSA’s design are the quench and damp
units. The quench unit’s role is to turn off the oscillator unit,
which halts the energy flow into the oscillator. However, the
energy in the circuit reverberates and decays on the timescale
of tens of µs (see Figure 2). The damp unit, working in tandem
with the quench unit, puts the circuit into a critically damped

2


mode, which is the fastest method for damping the oscillations.
This is essential because the response signal produced but a
sample (if excited on resonance) is many orders of magnitude
smaller in magnitude than the oscillation pulse, and the ma-
jority of NMR/NQR signals decay on the timescale of tens of
µs due to fast spin-spin relaxation (T∗
2). By minimizing the time
between the end of the excitation pulse and the beginning of the
detection phase, we have significantly enhanced the sensitivity
of DESSA.
The DESSA can be tuned to different frequencies by using a
variable capacitor. This allows for precise tuning of the oscilla-
tor unit’s resonance frequency, which is essential for detecting
different nuclear spin resonances. This makes the DESSA an
effective tool for various spectroscopic applications. The con-
trol unit is essential to its operation as a spectrometer. It records
and stores the Td values as a function of the scanned frequen-
cies. The data obtained is then compared with a frequency-
dependent baseline that varies smoothly (mostly linearly) with
frequency. When the Td value decreases below this baseline, it
indicates a decrease in delay time, signifying the on-resonance
excitation of the nuclear spin resonance with the DESSA’s fre-
quency.

29.922
29.926
29.930
29.934
29.938

Frequency [MHz]

15.95

16.00

16.05

16.10

16.15

16.20

Delay Time [µs]

Amplitude: 0.13 µs
FWHM: 0.28 kHz
SNR: 37.70

Fit
Data

Figure 3: The delay time response of a super-regenerative receiver (SRR) ex-
cited by varying frequencies, using NaClO3 as the sample. Each data point is an
average of 2048 repetitions, with an excitation time of 160 microseconds and a
recovery time of 100 milliseconds. The data was fitted with a Gaussian curve
with a linear baseline.

The DESSA NMR/NQR spectrometer is designed to oper-
ate in a small flip angle regime. This means that the nutation
frequency is either smaller or comparable to the inverse of the
sample’s relaxation time (T∗
2), indicating a weak coupling. With
a modest power consumption of only 0.5 watts for the oscillator
unit and 5 watts for the control unit. The low power operation
also allows for battery operation, making it an ideal device for
applications in outdoor or low-energy environments.
To benchmark the sensitivity of the DESSA, we conducted
a test using an anhydrous crystalline sodium chlorate (NaClO3)
sample. The sample weighed approximately 0.2 grams and was
housed in a standard 5 mm NMR tube. The DESSA’s oscillator
unit was tuned to the nuclear quadrupole resonance frequency

of the Chlorine-35, the transition from m = 1

2 to m = 3

2. The ex-
periment was performed at ambient temperature of 20 ◦C. The
nutation frequency was 1.5 kHz and the effective flip angle was
around 12◦. The cooper solenoid coil with 13 turns and 8 mm
length gave the Q factor of around 100. The resulting signal has
an excellent signal-to-noise ratio and sub-kHz resolution. The
resolution is limited by the sample temperature stability, rather
than by the spectrometer. NaClO3 drifts at 3 kHz K−1 at room
temperature [23].

Figure 4: The photo shows the DESSA circuit board with a white cylindrical
sample tube mounted on copper blocks.

3. Outlook and summary

The DESSA brings a new way to detect nuclear spin reso-
nance by combining established techniques with the advantages
of compactness (measuring just one cubic decimeter) and low
power consumption (averaging around 5.5 watts). DESSA has
many potential applications, particularly in quality control, an-
alytical chemistry, drug development, and magnetic resonance

3


imaging. Its compactness and low power requirements make it
an ideal solution for outdoor and in-field research. Due to its
low RF emissions, the device is well suited for environments
that are sensitive to radio frequency (RF) pulses.

Acknowledgements

We thank Julia Pfitzer and Herman Scharfetter for the charac-
terization of the NaClO3 NQR properties, and to Ren´e Sedmik
and Michael Bartokos for enriching discussions. We would also
like to express our gratitude to Martin Pressler and Jan Welsch
for their work in preparing the NaClO3 sample.
This work
is part of the thorium nuclear clock project that has received
funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gramme (Grant Agreement No. 856415). The research was
supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) Projects: I5971
(REThorIC) and P 33627 (NQRclock). We would like to ac-
knowledge that the technology used in this study is subject to a
patent pending status (Patent Application No. A50991/2023)

References

[1] T. Sugiki, K. Furuita, T. Fujiwara, C. Kojima, Current nmr techniques for
structure-based drug discovery, Molecules 23 (1) (2018) 148.

[2] H. D. Schultz, Applications of nuclear quadrupole resonance spectrome-
try to analytical chemistry, Applied Spectroscopy 25 (3) (1971) 293–304.

[3] A. C. Gilby, Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance Spectroscopy and Its Ap-
plication to Chemistry, Springer US, Boston, MA, 1970, pp. 142–157.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-8121-1_11.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4684-8121-1_11

[4] E. M. Purcell, H. C. Torrey, R. V. Pound, Resonance absorption by nuclear
magnetic moments in a solid, Physical review 69 (1-2) (1946) 37.

[5] R. Pound, Nuclear electric quadrupole interactions in crystals, Physical
Review 79 (4) (1950) 685.

[6] E. L. Hahn, Spin echoes, Physical review 80 (4) (1950) 580.
[7] R. R. Ernst, W. A. Anderson, Application of fourier transform spec-
troscopy to magnetic resonance, Review of Scientific Instruments 37 (1)
(1966) 93–102.

[8] A. N. Garroway, M. L. Buess, J. B. Miller, B. H. Suits, A. D. Hibbs,
G. A. Barrall, R. Matthews, L. J. Burnett, Remote sensing by nuclear
quadrupole resonance, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing 39 (6) (2001) 1108–1118.

[9] J. N. Latosin´nska, Applications of nuclear quadrupole resonance spec-
troscopy in drug development, Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery 2 (2)
(2007) 225–248.

[10] E. H. Armstrong, Some recent developments of regenerative circuits, Pro-
ceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers 10 (4) (1922) 244–260.

[11] H. Dehmelt, H. Kruger, Pure quadrupole resonance in solids, Naturwis-
senschaften 37 (1950) 111.

[12] V. Hughes, F. Hartley, A new approach to frequency scanning in an
nqr spectrometer (electronically controlled frequency shift), Journal of
Physics E: Scientific Instruments 8 (12) (1975) 1027.

[13] V. Rehn, C. Dean, Side-band suppression for self-quenched superregen-
erative spectrometers, Review of Scientific Instruments 31 (1) (1960) 72–
73.

[14] F. X. Moncunill-Geniz, P. Pala-Schonwalder, O. Mas-Casals, A generic
approach to the theory of superregenerative reception, IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems I: regular papers 52 (1) (2005) 54–70.

[15] J. L. Bohorquez, A. P. Chandrakasan, J. L. Dawson, Frequency-domain
analysis of super-regenerative amplifiers, IEEE Transactions on Mi-
crowave Theory and Techniques 57 (12) (2009) 2882–2894.

[16] J. Smith, D. Tong, An improved super-regenerative spectrometer for nu-
clear quadrupole resonance spectroscopy, Journal of Physics E: Scientific
Instruments 1 (1) (1968) 8.

[17] S. Melnick, R. Trepanier, E. Sullivan, M. Whitehead, Determination of
apparent spin-spin relaxation time t2 using a super-regenerative spectrom-
eter, Journal of Molecular Structure 58 (1980) 337–348.

[18] J. Graybeal, C. Cornwell, Nuclear quadrupole spectra of the chloroace-
tonitriles, The Journal of Physical Chemistry 62 (4) (1958) 483–485.

[19] D. Hoffmann, R. Pietsch, J. Kummer, A pocket computer frequency-
controlled nqr spectrometer, Journal of Physics E: Scientific Instruments
12 (9) (1979) 837.

[20] M. Bogaard, S. Hacobian, W. Hay, E. Sullivan, Quench frequency effects
on the nuclear quadrupole resonance of some halogen compounds, Aus-
tralian Journal of Chemistry 17 (6) (1964) 611–621.

[21] A. Narath, W. O’Sullivan, W. Robinson, W. Simmons, Low frequency
superregenerative oscillator design for the detection of broad-line nuclear
magnetic resonances, Review of Scientific Instruments 35 (4) (1964) 476–
480.

[22] S. Hern´andez, A. Su´arez, Analysis of superregenerative oscillators in non-
linear mode, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques
67 (6) (2019) 2247–2258.

[23] T.-C. Wang, Pure nuclear quadrupole spectra of chlorine and antimony
isotopes in solids, Physical Review 99 (2) (1955) 566.

4


