 

 

 

A newly developed 10kA-level HTS conductor: 
innovative tenon-mortise-based modularized 
conductor (TMMC) based on China ancient 
architecture 

Jinxing Zheng1,*, Yuan Cheng1,2, Lei Wang1, Fei Liu1, Haiyang liu1, Ming Li1, and Lei 
Zhu1 

1 Hefei Institutes of Physical Science. Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei230031.China 
2 University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China 
 
E-mail: jxzheng@ipp.ac.cn 
 
 
 
 

Abstract 

We propose a new type of high-temperature superconducting (HTS) conductor concept: 
modularized conductors (MC) connected by Chinese traditional tenon-mortise (TM) 
connection structure, reffered as TMMC. The conductor consists of multiple concentric round 
sub-conductors with slots for stacking REBCO tapes. Innovatively, the REBCO stacks in the 
adjacent sub-conductors are arranged with the fully-misaligned configuration to enhance the 
critical current’s isotropy with respect to magnetic field and reduce ac loss. For example, the 
angle between the adjacent stacks in the two adjacent sub-conductors is 45o if each sub-
conductor contains 4 REBCO stacks.  In order to construct the fully-misaligned configuration, 
the sub-conductors are designed with two open half-circular formers and connected by tenon-
mortise structure which makes the conductor modulrized and simply to assembly and 
disassembly. Based on the design concept, a prototype conductor containing 160 REBCO tapes 
distributed in the four concentric sub-conductors is fabricated. The conductor’s measured 
critical current is 13.69 kA at 77 K and sefl-field, which is consistent to the simulaiton result. 
In order to further improve the TMMC’s engineering critical current density (Jce) and bending 
performance, we propose two enhancement approaches: reducing the former’s thickness and 
re-arrange stacks in the outer sub-conductors. With the enhancements, both TMMC’s radius 
and Jce are comparable to the existing slotted-core conductor. The study shows the TMMC’s 
advantages of non-twisted structures, easy assembly, high-current carrying and low ac losses, 
which makes it promising for constructing large-scale scientific devices. 

Keywords: tenon-mortise structure, modularized HTS conductor, TMMC, REBCO tapes, ac loss 

 

1. Introduction 

The 
second-generation 
(2G) 
high-temperature-

superconducting (HTS) materials, namely the rare-earth-
barium-copper-oxide (REBCO) tapes, are promising in 
manufacturing both small-aperture high-static-field (>30 T) 


 

 
2 
 

 

solenoid coils [1,2] and giant magnets under transient 
electromagnetic environment for large-scale scientific devices, 
such as fusion reactors [3] due to the outstanding current-
carrying capacity and good mechanical stability [4]. The 
small-aperture high-static-field coils possess relatively simple 
structures consisting of pancakes which are wound with one 
single tape. However, the single-tape conductor results in high 
inductance, which makes the coil carry currents of no more 
than a few hundred amperes under very slow current-changing 

rate [5]. To achieve transient high field in a meter-class large-
scale device, the conductors require low inductance and kA-
class current. Therefore, the first task and challenge of 
employing REBCO tapes in large-scale scientific devices is to 
manufacture a high-current cable/conductor.  

Several conductor/cable designs have been proposed using 

REBCO tapes, and most of them present the twisted or 
transposed concepts, constituting cable-in-conduit conductors 
(CICC) inspired by the low-temperature-superconducting

 

 

Figure 1.  the structure of the modularized conductor connected by tenon-mortise structure  

  

(LTS) cables and conductors [6], such as Roebel assembled 
coated conductor cable (RACC) [7], a Roebel-structure   
transposed cable (X cable) [8], twisted-stacked-tape cable, 
TSTC [9], Quasi-round TSTC (QisTAc) [10], slotted-core 
cable-in-conduit conductors [11], conductor on round core 
[12], conductor-in-tube cables (CIT) [13], round soldered-
twisted stacked [14], CrossConductor [15], and twisted Quasi-
Isotropic strand [16]. The main reason for manufacturing LTS 
conductors with twisting is to avoid instabilities of LTS 
materials. Instead, the stability of HTS is much higher than 
LTS, HTS conductors can be made of non-twisted tapes, such 
as non-twisted stacked tapes assembled in rigid structure [17] 
and Quasi-Isotropic strand [18]. Nevertheless, twisting, as an 
approach to reducing inductance mismatch, improving even 
current distribution in tapes and reducing AC loss, is 
employed to enhance the performance of HTS conductors [19]. 
However, recent studies showed that non-twisted HTS cables’ 
inductance variation is typically less than 2%, which results in 
slight effect of uneven current distribution, and the reduction 
by twisting is less than 36% in terms of ac loss for HTS cables 

[6]. Therefore, the benefits of performance enhancement 
brought by the twisting is limited with comparison to the much 
easier fabrication process of non-twisted conductors. 

Meanwhile, considering of the highly anisotropic 

properties and remarkable ac loss effects of REBCO tapes, 
optimized structures are also employed in the non-twisted 
HTS conductors. For example, tapes are arranged vertically 
and horizontally in the Quasi-Isotropic strand to reduce the 
anisotropic values of critical current with repect to magnetic 
field [18]. It is meaningful to explore more arrangement 
configurtions of REBCO stacks to enhance the performance 
of non-twisted conductors. But this would be restricted by 
soldering structure, in which slots for stacking REBCO tapes 
are limited to unidirectional directions. Besides, the 
conductors are difficult to disassembly and repaire when the 
REBCO stacks are soldered with the conductor’s former as a 
while one. Modularized conductors without soldering will be 
a promising concept to solve the issues, and this type of 
conductor has not been developed before. 

Step 1: copper former and

ReBCO stack

ReBCO
stack

Copper
former

Step 2: Install tenon to
complete the first layer

Tenon

Installation hole for tenon

Step 3: Complete the assembly of the
second layer (45° between it and 1st
layer)

. . . . .

TMMC cable (45° arrangement for Sub -conductor)

1st layer

Tenon

1st layer

2nd layer

3rd layer

4st layer

Jacket

Insulation

ReBCO stack

Tenon

ReBCO stack

China ancient architecture
Tenon-mortise

2nd layer


 

 
3 
 

 

In this paper, we propose a new type of HTS conductor 

concept: modularized conductors (MC) which are assembled 
without soldering but Chinese traditional tenon-mortise (TM) 
connection structure, therefore the new conductor is referred 
as TMMC. The article is structured as follows. Section 2 
introduces the idea and concept design of the modularized 
conductor baded on tenon-mortise connection.  The detailed 
optimization process of designing the stacks’ configuration is 
presented in Section 3. A prototype conductor with 4 
concentric sub-conductors is fabricated and its critical current 
at 77 K and self-field is measured and simulated in Section 4. 
Section 5 gives the discussions about enhancing the TMMC’s 
engineering critical current density  and reducing ac losses 
further. 

2. Modularized conductor based on tenon-mortise 
structure 

Figure 1 illustrates the structure and assembly process of 

the proposed Tenon-Mortise Modularized Conductor (TMMC) 
composing of multiple concentric round sub-conductors with 
varying diameters. The innermost central channel (diameter 6 
mm) is used for coolant flow. Each sub-conductor consists of 
slotted metal formers with REBCO stacks in the slots. The 
surfaces of the REBCO tapes are distributed along the 
circumferences of the formers to reduce the influence of 
perpendicular magnetic fields on critical current and ac loss. 
Innovatively, the two adjacent sub-conductors are assembled 
with the fully-disaligned configuration, which is determined 
by the angle between the centers of two REBCO stakcs in the 
adjacent sub-conductors. For instance, if each sub-conductor 
holds 4 REBCO stacks, the max misalignement angle is 45 
degrees, as demonstrated in figure 2. This fully-misaligned 
configuration is quite different from the previous conductor 
layout with slotted former/core, in which the slot number is 
fewer and tapes in each slot are stacked in unidirection 
direction [11]. The new configuration significantly improves 
critical current isotropy with respect to magnetic field and 
reduces ac losses, which has been verified based on 
simulations in Section 3. 

A challenge is to maintain the misaligned configurations of 

REBCO stacks in the different sub-conductors. In order to 
facilitate manufacturing long conductors, we design the sub-
conductors consisting two open half-cirlces, which are 
connected as a complete round sub-conductor by the tenon-
mortise structure inspired by the traditional Chinese 
connection method used in architecture, furniture, and 
instruments. The connection structure bascially includes two 
components: convex (tenon) and concave (mortise) parts, 
which have many variants in practical. In our design, the 
swallow-tailed tenons and mortises are used to joint the two 
open half-circles, as shown in figure 1. The tenon-mortise 
joints in the outer sub-conductor align with the slots of 
REBCO stacks in the adjacent inner sub-conductor and the 

misaglignment configuration generates. Additional shallow 
grooves perpendicular to the tape stacking slots are cutted, 
therefore, the swallow-tailed tenons can stabilize the REBCO 
stacks and prevent sub-conductor’s movement in axial and 
circumferential directions when they are inserted into the 
mortises and grooves. 

Since the assembly of sub-conductors is independent from 

each other, the conductor is easily fabricated to multiple layers 
to carry high currents, which makes the first successful 
development of a modularized REBCO conductor. However, 
the bending performance and engineering current density of 
the conductor will be decreased because of the multiple-layer 
structures which results in larger diameters. To solve the 
issues, one can minimise the thicknesses of the formers, and 
besides re-arrange the REBCO stacks in the outer sub-
conductors, which are discussed in Section 5. 

3. The optimization process for TMMC 

3.1 Effects of stack’s arrangement on the conductor’s 
ac loss 

Firstly, we design a simplified conductor with 4 stacks and 

2-layer tapes per stack to investigate the effects of tape’s 
arrangement in different layers on the conductor’s ac losses. 
Different tape-layout structures are characterized by the 
misalignment angle (a) between the centre of the two layers 
of tapes, whose maximum angle is 45 degrees in this case from 
figure 2. 

Different configurations with various angles are simulated 

by H formulation and finite-element method [20]. Considering 
magnetic field (H) as the dependent variable, the Maxwell’s 
equations can be solved as: 

𝐽 = 𝛻 × 𝐻
(1) 

𝐸 = 𝜌 ∙ 𝐽
(2) 

𝜌 =
𝐸!

𝐽!(𝐵) .
𝐽

𝐽!(𝐵).

"#$

(3) 

𝛻 × 𝐸 = −𝜇%

𝜕𝐻
𝜕𝑡
(4) 

where E is the induced electric field and J is the transporting 
current density. Jc is the tape’s critical current density. Ec=1E-
4 V/m is the value of voltage criterion for critical current 
measurement, and n=25 is defined from DC measurement of 
the superconductor’s highly non-linear I-V characteristic. The 
Kim-like model [21] is used to describe the anisotropic 
dependence of the tape’s critical current density on magnetic 
field, and the fitting equation of Jc at 4.2 K is defined as: 

𝐽!(𝐵) =
𝐽!%

⎝

⎛1 +

8𝑘&𝐵∥

& + 𝐵(

&

𝐵%

⎠

⎞

)
(5)

 

where Jc0=3.74e11 A/m2, B0=1.67279 T, k=9.13e-3, and 
a=0.76939 can be found in [22]. Integral method is employed 


 

 
4 
 

 

to impose current in the conductors and implemented by 
global constraint in the finite-element software. 

 

Figure 2. Change of two-layer conductor’s ac loss with the 
misalignment angle between the adjacent tapes. 

 
Normalized AC losses are calculated by dividing values at 

different angles by those at α=0 degree, representing the 
traditional unidirectional tape-stacking configuration. In the 
following, we refer the slotted-core conductor with groves in 
a single-layer former as the unidirectional-stack conductor.  
Figure 2 demonstrates that as the angle increases, AC losses 
first rise and then decline. Comparing losses at α=0 and α=45 
degrees, the latter is about 30%-50% of the former, indicating 
significant 
AC 
loss 
reduction 
with 
fully-misaligned 

configurations. It is important to note that AC losses show 
minor increases at low currents beyond a 35-degree 
misalignment angle but diminish at higher currents. To 
facilitate manufacturing, the fully-misaligned configuration 
with a fixed angle is chosen. 

A question arises when stacking more-layer REBCO tapes. 

Take the example of a 3-layer conductor: should the third layer 
be stacked with the maximum misalignment angle calculated 
from the adjacent layers (e.g. α=45 degrees with 4 tapes in 
each layer), or should all three layers be considered as a whole 
to reconstruct a fully-misaligned configuration (e.g. α=30 
degrees), as shown in figure 3. The comparison indicates that 
the configuration with the maximum misalignment angle 
derived from the two adjacent layers results in lower AC 
losses. 

 

Figure 3. Comparisons of ac loss in 3-layer conductors with 
different stacking configurations. 

These studies indicate that REBCO-based conductors’ ac 

losses are significantly affected by the stacking configurations. 
We can reduce losses by re-arranging tapes with the maximum 
misaligement angle between the tapes in the adjacent layers. 

3.2 Layer number affecting the conductor’s critical 
current and ac loss 

Above studies demonstrate that minimal AC losses occur 

when adjacent layers of tapes are distributed at the maximum 
misalignment angle. In practical high-current conductor 
manufacturing with many tape in one stack, it is not possible 
to misalign every single tape as one layer. Consequently, only 
a limited number of layers can be misaligned, with tapes in 
each layer still stacked unidirectionally. 

In this part, we investigate the impact of the layer numbers 

on the conductor's electromagnetic properties. The conductor 
contains 160 REBCO tapes distributed in the former with 4 
slots around a circular cooling channel. In the conventional 
stacked conductor, each stack comprises 40 REBCO tapes, 
marked by 1 layer in figure 4. 

Following the misaligned configuration, we construct 

conductors with 2, 3, and 4 layers, with adjacent layers aligned 
at 45 degrees. Initially, we examine the critical currents of 
these four conductors under an external magnetic field of 20 
T at 4.2 K using the load-line method. As the critical current 
of REBCO tapes strongly depends on the angle between the 
tapes and the magnetic field, we vary this angle from 0 to 45 
degrees to assess the effect of layer numbers on the anisotropy 
of critical currents with respect to the magnetic field. As 
presented in figure 4, the critical current isotropy in even 
layers is superior to that in odd layers. In odd layers, isotropy 
improves with an increasing number of layers, while isotropy 
in 2 and 4 layers remains similar. 
 

 

Figure 4. Variations of conductors’ critical currents with 
respect to external magnetic field at 20 T and 4.2 K. 

Meanwhile, we calculate the conductors’ ac losses with 

peak currents of 8 kA at self-field. The accumulated ac losses 


 

 
5 
 

 

in one cycle are presented in figure 5, which shows that ac 
losses get smaller with more layers, and the reduction is 
limited as layers are built more. Thus, we design a 4-layer 
conductor in the study to balance the ac loss reduction and 
fabrication process. 

 

Figure 5. Variations of conductors’ ac losses at self-field. 

4. Fabrication and performance test of the prototype 
TMMC 

4.1 Parameters of the prototype TMMC 

We have manufactured a prototype TMMC according to 

the above design concept, which consists of 4 concentric sub-
conductors (referred as layer 1 to 4 from inside out) 
accommodating a total of 160 REBCO tapes. Each sub-
conductor has 4 slots with 10 tapes in each, as shown in figure 
6. Geometric parameters of the prototpye TMMC are give in 
table 1. 

The 
REBCO 
tapes 
are 
produced 
by 
Shanghai 

Superconductor with 4 mm width and 144 A self-field critical 
current at 77 K. The tape’s anisotropic dependence of critical 
current on magnetic field is measured and calculated in 
simulations by interpolation function of the data. The 
numerical models for calculating conductor’s critical current 
are implemented based on H formulation, in which the 
superconducting region is considered as a whole to carry 
current so that the non-uniform current repartition among 
tapes can be presented. Besides, the MAX criterion is selected 
as the criteria determining conductor’s critical current, which 
means that when the voltage drop per unit length reaches the 
critical value Ec (1μV/cm) in at least one tape, the imposed 
current is considered as the conductor’s critical current [23]. 
According to the simulations, the estimated critical currents of 
the prototype 1-layer and 4-layer TMMCs are 4.072 kA and 
15.328 kA, respectively, at 77 K and self-field. 

4.2 Ic measurement for the prototype TMMC 

REBCO tapes are longer than the formers of the sub-

conductors in the cable fabrication [24][25], so that the tapes 
and the ends of the prototype TMMC can be soldered with two 
copper joints, shown in figure 6. It is imperative to observe 
that the temperature during joint welding must not surpass 

200°C [26]. Currents are injected into REBCO tapes through 
the joints. In the experiment, the prototype TMMC is 
immersed in a liquid nitrogen (LN2) tank, and the copper joints 
connect with the direct current (DC) source. The temperature 
of the conductor is considered to be 77 K when liquid nitrogen 
ceases to boil [27][28]. 

 

Table 1. Geometric parameters of the prototype TMMC. 

Parameters 
Value 

Sub-conductor number 
4 

Slot number in each sub-conductor 
4 

Tape number in each slot 
10 

The depth of each slot 
2 mm 

Cable length 
800 mm 

Outer and inner diameters of layer 1 
10 mm/ 4 mm

Outer and inner diameters of layer 2 
17 mm/ 11 mm

Outer and inner diameters of layer 3 
24 mm/ 18mm

Outer and inner diameters of layer 4 
31 mm/ 25 mm

 
Firstly, we measure the critical current of the prototype 

TMMC with only 1-layer sub-conductor contining 40 tapes, 
whose data is depicted in the figure 7. The measured value is 
4012 A at 77 K and self-field, which does not differ 
significantly from the predicted one.  

 

 

Figure 7.  Ic measurement for one-layer TMMC. 
 
Then, we implement the Ic measurement of the complete 

prototype TMMC with 4 concentric sub-conductors. The 
experimental equipments and parameters are given in figure 
8a-b and table 2. 

 

 


 

 

Figure 6. The prototype TMMC: the Tendon-tenon connection and the assemly of TMMC conductor 
 
Table 2. Parameters of DC experiment for Ic measurement. 

Parameters 
Value 

DC source 
100 kA 

Voltage acquisition equipment 
EF721 

Signal acquisition frequency 
10 Hz 

dI/dt 
50 A/s 

Vth 
70 uV 

Estimated Ic 
15 kA 

In the experiment of ReBCO cable, it is customary to 

employ multiple voltage probes for the purpose of discerning 

the state of the cable [29][30]. Figure 8(c) illustrates voltage 
probes soldered on the TMMC: V1 and V3 for measuring 
conductor joint voltage, and V2, V4, and V5 for recording 
voltage within the superconducting segments. Since the length 
between V2 probes is 700 mm, the threshold voltage (Vth) for 
determining critical current is set at 70 μV, taking into account 
base voltage and noise removal. 

Figures 9(a) and 9(b) present data of currents and voltages 

during the measurement processes. The resistance of the joints 
on both sides is 110 nΩ and 140 nΩ, respectively. The voltages 
are significantly increased when the TMMC transits from 
superconducting to non-superconducting states. The measured 
critical currents (Ic) of the 4-layer prototype TMMC at 77 K 
under self-field and additional external 0.7 T are 13.69 kA and 
10.58kA, respectively. 

TMMC cable

Joint

HTS stack

Tenon

Copper
former

Step 1: copper former

and ReBCO stack

Step 2: Install tenon to
complete the first layer

Step 3: Complete the assembly of the
second layer (45° between it and 1st layer)

45° arrangement for

Sub -conductor

Tenon


 

                       (a)                                                    (b) 

 

 

(c) 

 

Figure 8.  Ic measurement for TMMC: (a) DC source and the prototype TMMC; (b) Hall sensor and TMMC; (c) the voltage 

probes for conductor. 

 

 
 

(a)                                                                                        (b) 

Figure 9. Ic of the prototype TMMC at 77 K: (a) Ic under self-field, (b) Ic under self-field and external 0.7 T.

 

5. Discussions 

5.1 Enhancing conductor’s critical current density 

Although the structure of concentric sub-conductors 

connected by tenon-mortise joints makes the conductor 
modularized and easy to be assembled, the multiple formers 
influence the conductor’s engineering critical current density 
compared with the traditional stacked-tape conductors. And 
the engineering critical current density is 55 A/mm2 in the 
slotted-core conductor [11]. One can increase the engineering 
critical current density by reducing the former’s thickness, 
while this is limited considering of the former’s mechanical 
strength. For example, the critical current and its density of the 
originally manufactured TMMC with each-layer former’s 
thickness of 4.5 mm are predicted to be 15.33 kA and 11.06 
A/mm2, respectively. And if we reduce the former’s thickness 
to 2.0 mm, the two parameters are 13.93 kA and 36.64 A/mm2, 
respectively. 

 

Figure 10. Enhancing the conductor’s critical current density 
with less sub-conductors. The gray lines in every sub-
conductor represent the joints of the two half-circles. 

Here, we discuss another approach that is cutting more slots 

in the outer concentric formers based on the above proposed 
structures so that fewer sub-conductors are needed, as shown 
in figure 10. Taking the 2mm-thickness former as an example, 
we re-arrange the 4 stacks in the layer 4 into the layer 2 and 3. 
After the enhancement, the conductor’s critical current at 77 
K, self-field and its engineering critical current density are 
13.51 kA and 53.09 A/mm2, which is comparable to the that 
of the unidirectional-stack conductor. Besides, the diameter of 


 

 
8 
 

 

the all formers in the enhanced configuration is 18 mm, close 
to that of the slotted-core conductor (diameter 19 mm) [11], 
therefore, bending the TMMC to manufacture magnets is 
feasible. In the current design, the enhanced TMMC’s 
engineering critical current density is similar to that of the 
slotted-core conductor, but it can be significantly improved 
with the approach of re-arranging the stacks in the outer sub-
conductors compared to the latter when the conductor contains 
more tapes. Because more slots can be cut in the larger-radius 
formers of TMMC to contain more tapes, while the tapes can 
be only stacked in unidirectional direction in the traditional 
slotted-core conductor. 

5.2 AC loss comparison study 

AC losses of the prototype TMMC with different radii are 

calculated under the same engineering current density, and 
compared with the traditional unidirectional stacks. The 
normalized current density distributions and ac losses of 
different conductors are shown in figure 11 and 12. The 
conductors with varying thicknesses of formers carry different 

transporting currents, while keep same engineering current 
densities and current ramping rate (500 A/s). Triangle-wave 
currents are applied in the whole conductor therefore, non-
even current distributions are considered. From figure 11, it 
can be seen that the imposed currents are mostly distributed in 
the outmost tapes, and the current penetration becomes 
shallower with the TMMC’s former reducing because of the 
increased 
engineering 
critical 
current 
density. 

Correspondingly, the TMMC’s ac loss is significantly 
influenced by the conductor’s radius too, shown in figure 12. 
With the former of sub-conductor decreasing by 1 mm, the 
peak loss of TMMC during the initial current-imposing period 
reduces by more than 75%. When the former’s thickness 
reduces to 2 mm, the ac loss of TMMC is close to that of the 
traditionally unidirectional-stack conductor. And among all 
the conductors, the enhanced configuration based on the 2-mm 
former TMMC achieves the minimum ac losses. Due to the 
increased engineering critical current density, the peak loss 
reduces by 57% and 35% compared with the non-enhanced 
2mm-former TMMC and unidirectional-stack conductor, 
respectively. 

 

 


 

 
9 
 

 

Figure 11. Distributions of normalized current density in conductors: (a)-(d) represent TMMCs (160 tapes) with 4.5-mm, 
3.5-mm, 2.5-mm and 2-mm formers, respectively. (e) is the enhanced configuration based on the 2-mm former.  (f) represents 
the traditionally unidirectional-stack conductor.

6. Conclusions 

In this paper, a new kind of HTS modularized conductor 

(MC) concept is proposed, in which the conductor consists of 
multiple concentric half-circle sub-conductors connected by 
Chinese traditional tenon-mortise (TM) structure. Therefore, 
the proposed HTS conductor is referred as TMMC. 
Innovatively, the REBCO stacks are arranged by the fully-
disalligned configurations of the adjacent sub-conductors, 
which benefits for improving the isotropy of conductor’s 
critical current on magnetic field and reducing ac loss. 

According to the design concept, prototype TMMCs are 

manufactured. The measured critical currents of 1-layer and 
4-layer TMMCs are 4.012 kA and 13.69 kA, respectively, at 
77 K and self-field, which are close to the predicted values of  
4.072 kA and 15.328 kA. 

In order to further improve the TMMC’s engineering 

critical current density (Jce) and bending performance, we 
propose two enhancment approaches to reduce TMMC’s 
radius: reducing the former’s thickness and re-arrange stacks 
in the outer sub-conductors. With the enhancements, the 
TMMC’s Jce is increased by 4 times. The TMMC’s radius, Jce 
and ac losses are comparable to the unidirectional-stack 
conductor, which makes it feasible to construct magnets. 

With the advantages of non-twisted structures, easy 

assembly, high-current carrying capacity and low ac losses, 
the proposed tenon-mortise modularized conductor is 
promising for constructing large-scale scientific devices. And 
we are planning to implement more tests to verify the 
performances of TMMC and promote it to be employed more 
widely. 

 

Figure 12. AC losses comparisons of TMMCs with different radii and traditionally unidirectional stack’s conductor under the 
same carrying current density. 

 

Acknowledgements 

 This work was supported by the National Natural Science 

Foundation of China General Program 52077211, by the 
National Science Found for Excellent Young Scholars of 
China 52222701, and by the Anhui Province Key Research 
and Development Plan 2022i01020019. 

 

References 

[1] Liu J, Wang Q, Qin L, Zhou B, Wang K, Wang Y, Wang L, Zhang Z, Dai 
Y, Liu H, Hu X, Wang H, Cui C, Wang D, Wang H, Sun J, Sun W and Xiong 
L 2020 Supercond. Sci. Technol. 33 03LT01 
[2] Hahn S, Kim K, Kim K, Hu X, Painter T, Dixon I, Kim S, Bhattarai K R, 
Noguchi S, Jaroszynski J and Larbalestier D C 2019 Nature 570 496–9 


 

 
10 
 

 

[3] Bruzzone P, Fietz W H, Minervini J V, Novikov M, Yanagi N, Zhai Y and 
Zheng J 2018 Nucl. Fusion 58 103001 
[4] Barth C, Mondonico G and Senatore C 2015 Supercond. Sci. Technol. 28 
045011 
[5] Laan D C van der, Noyes P D, Miller G E, Weijers H W and Willering G 
P 2013 Supercond. Sci. Technol. 26 045005 
[6] Uglietti D, Kang R, Wesche R and Grilli F 2020 Cryogenics 110 103118 
[7] Goldacker W, Frank A, Heller R, Schlachter S I, Ringsdorf B, Weiss K-P, 
Schmidt C and Schuller S 2007 IEEE Trans. Appl. 17 3398–401 
[8] Wang J, Kang R, Chen X, Yang C, Wang Y, Wang C and Xu Q 2022 
Superconductivity 3 100019 
[9] Takayasu M, Chiesa L, Bromberg L and Minervini J V 2011 IEEE Trans. 
Appl. 21 2340–4 
[10] Shi Y, Liu F, Liu H, Tan Y, Zhang X, Jin H, Yu M, Lei L and Guo L 
2020 IEEE Trans. Appl. 30 1–4 
[11] Celentano G, De Marzi G, Fabbri F, Muzzi L, Tomassetti G, Anemona 
A, Chiarelli S, Seri M, Bragagni A and della Corte A 2014 IEEE Trans. Appl. 
24 1–5 
[12] Mulder T, Dudarev A, Mentink M, Silva H, van der Laan D, Dhallé M 
and ten Kate H 2016 IEEE Trans. Appl. 26 1–5 
[13] Li W, Sheng J, Zheng J, Shen B, Hu R, Ye H, Hong Z and Jin Z 2021 
IEEE Trans. Appl. 31 1–5 
[14] Uglietti D, Wesche R and Bruzzone P 2014 IEEE Trans. Appl. 24 1–4 
[15] Wolf M J, Bayer C M, Fietz W H, Heller R, Schlachter S I and Weiss K-
P 2016 IEEE Trans. Appl. 26 1–4 
[16] Nie Y, Wang Y, Lu Y, Yuan X and Wang J 2020 I IEEE Trans. Appl. 30 
1–5 
[17] Ito S, Yusa N, Yanagi N, Tamura H, Sagara A and Hashizume H 2016 
IEEE Trans. Appl. 26 1–10 
[18] Wang Y, Baasansuren S, Xue C and Hasegawa T 2016 IEEE Trans. Appl. 
26 1–6 
[19] Oh S, Kim H W, Nam S, Chu Y, Oh D K, Choi H, Lee J T, Kim W, Jeong 
Y S, Chang H, Lee J and Hahn S 2023 IEEE Trans. Appl. 33 1–5 
[20] Hong Z, Campbell A M and Coombs T A 2006 Supercond. Sci. Technol. 
19 1246–52 
[21] Y. B. Kim, C. F. Hempstead, and A. R. Strnad 1962 Phys. Rev. Lett. 9, 
306. 
[22] Hong W, Hu L, Wu Y, Miao P, Liu H, Liu F and Yi S 2023 Supercond. 
Sci. Technol. 36 075010 
[23] Zermeño, V., Sirois, F., Takayasu, M., Vojenciak, M., Kario, A. and 
Grilli, F., 2015 Supercond. Sci. Technol. 28(8) 085004. 
[24] Yangyang Shi, Tao Ma, Shaotao Dai, Huan Jin and Jinggang Qin, 2023 
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 36 115011. 
[25] K Yagotintsev, V A Anvar, P Gao, M J Dhalle1, T J Haugan, D C Van 
Der Laan, J D Weiss, M S A Hossain and A Nijhuis, 2020 Supercond. Sci. 
Technol. 33 085009. 
[26] T. Mulder, A. Dudarev, D. C. van der Laan, M. G. T. Mentink, M. Dhalle, 
and H. H. J. ten Kate 2015 IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. 102 012026 
[27] Wenrong Li, Haosheng Ye, Jie Sheng, Junjie Jiang, Boyang Shen, 
Zhuyong Li, Zhiyong Hong, and Zhijian Jin 2020 IEEE Trans. Appl. 
Supercond. 30 4801105. 
[28] S. S. Fu, M. Qiu, J. H. Zhu, H. M. Zhang, J. Gong, X. Zhao, W. J. Yuan, 
and J. B. Guo 2018 IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 28 
[29] Jinwoo Han , Woo-Seok Kim , Kyeongdal Choi , and Ji-Kwang Lee  2022 
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 32 5900705 
[30] J Zhao, S Y Gao, B H Wu, X S Yang, B Shen, W Chen and Y Zhao  2022 
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 35 115007 


