Breaking the Baud Rate Ceiling of Electro-Optic Modulators Using Optical 

Equalization Technique

Hengsong Yue, Nuo Chen, and Tao Chu*

Hengsong Yue, Nuo Chen, and Tao Chu 

College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, 

Hangzhou 310027, China

E-mail: chutao@zju.edu.cn

Keywords: optical equalization technique, ultrahigh baud rate signal generation, dual-

drive Mach-Zehnder modulator, silicon modulator, on-off keying modulation

This study presents an effective optical equalization technique for generating 

ultrahigh baud rate signals. The equalization technique was demonstrated using a 

dual-drive Mach-Zehnder modulator (DDMZM) with two-phase shifters having 

different bandwidths, which can be achieved by adjusting the structural design of the 

modulator or by incorporating varying bias voltages. When the two phase shifters are 

driven by appropriately sized driving signals, their partially offsetting response 

significantly reduces the rise and fall times of the output signal. The experiments were 

conducted using silicon DDMZMs without digital signal processing (DSP). In an 

experiment utilizing a low-speed silicon modulator, the on-off keying (OOK) 

modulating speed was improved from 30 to 90 Gbaud. In an experiment utilizing a 

high-speed silicon modulator, the OOK modulating speed was improved from 100 to 

128 Gbaud, which approached the limit of our testing system. This remains the 

highest baud rate achieved by an all-silicon modulator without DSP. This technique 

breaks the baud rate ceiling of the modulator and has the potential to enable silicon 

modulators to operate at 200 Gbaud and beyond. The versatility of this method 

extends to a wide range of optoelectronic platforms, encompassing thin-film lithium 

niobate and indium phosphide modulators.


1. Introduction

Motivated by the exponential growth in data traffic, optical communications and 

interconnections have been extensively researched over the years owing to their high 

speed and economic feasibility.[1,2] Electro-optic modulators, which convert electrical 

signals into optical signals, are an essential component of these systems and play a 

crucial role in determining the communication speed.[3–5] Remarkable progress has 

been made in the development of modulators over the years.[6–18] These modulators 

can operate at frequencies up to one hundred GHz and reach data transmission rates 

up to several hundred Gbit/s by employing advanced modulation formats.[19–22]

However, the limited baud rate of modulators has impeded further enhancement of the 

data transmission rate because of inherent bandwidth limitations, primarily caused by 

factors such as dielectric loss, conductor loss, parasitic resistance, and capacitance.[23–

26] These parasitic components affect the signal rise and fall times, thereby limiting 

the baud rate.

Several methods have been proposed for addressing this issue. One method 

involves increasing the modulator bandwidth. For example, slow-wave electrodes 

have been used to achieve velocity matching between optical and electrical 

waves.[14,27] This is accomplished by using a periodic structure that slows the 

propagation of electrical signals in the electrode. In other works, substrate-removed 

modulators have been proposed, which employ an etching process to remove the 

silicon underneath the modulator, thereby enhancing the radio frequency 

performance.[16,28] Slow-light waveguides composed of Bragg gratings were 

incorporated into a silicon modulator, resulting in a record-high EO bandwidth and 

ultra-compact footprint.[29] However, these approaches have limitations, such as 

increased complexity, fabrication challenges, narrow optical bandwidth, potential loss 

issues, and weakened mechanical stability. 

Another method is to use optical equalization techniques, which aim to compensate 

for the distortion introduced by the modulator and improve signal quality. For 

instance, optical-domain feed-forward equalization (FFE) using a segmented 


electrode Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) extends the MZM bandwidth without 

using equalized drivers.[30,31] The equalized traveling-wave MZM was also designed 

based on the concept of built-in feedback equalization, which makes use of the 

intrinsic delay of the traveling-wave electrodes and feedback circuit.[25] Additionally, 

an on-chip optical equalizer enables monolithic integration of a silicon in-

phase/quadrature modulator with an optical equalizer, resulting in an open optical eye 

diagram and improved optical signal-to-noise ratio.[32] Moreover, the frequency 

response of the filter was mapped to the modulator response by embedding a finite-

impulse response (FIR) filter in the slow-wave modulator, consequently achieving an 

enhanced electro-optical bandwidth.[33] However, the limitations of these methods 

include the dependence on segmented electrode Mach-Zehnder modulators, potential 

complexity and constraints in circuit design, reliance on integrated circuit fabrication, 

and the need for additional optical devices and circuit resources.

In this study, we propose an optical equalization technique to effectively overcome 

the inherent performance limitations of modulators, enabling the generation of 

ultrahigh baud rate signals. This innovation eliminated the need for resonant 

structures, thereby preserving a wide optical bandwidth. This technique uses a dual-

drive Mach-Zehnder modulator (DDMZM) with two phase shifters of different 

bandwidths, which can be achieved through adjustments in the structural design or the 

incorporation of diverse bias voltages. A phase shifter with a high bandwidth is 

referred to as a high-speed phase shifter, and one with a low bandwidth is referred to 

as a low-speed phase shifter. The high-speed phase shifter was driven by a large 

amplitude signal, whereas the low-speed phase shifter was driven by a small 

amplitude signal. Their partially offsetting response reduced the rising and falling 

times of the DDMZM, showing the potential to significantly improve the quality of 

optical eye diagrams. Low-speed and high-speed modulator speed-up experiments 

were conducted using silicon DDMZMs, respectively, to investigate the 

characteristics and capabilities of this technique, as well as to demonstrate the 

generation of ultrahigh baud rate signals. In the low-speed modulator speed-up 

experiment, on-off keying (OOK) modulating speed was increased from 30 to 90 


Gbaud. In the high-speed modulator speed-up experiment, owing to the limited 

bandwidth of the experimental system, the OOK modulating speed increased from 

100 to 128 Gbaud. However, this still represents the highest baud rate attained using 

an all-silicon modulator without digital signal processing (DSP). Considering the 

notable progress made through experiments, it is feasible to allow a relatively low 

baud rate to increase to 200 Gbaud, or potentially even higher. The proposed optical 

equalization technique demonstrated the potential to achieve even higher baud rates 

for modulators, creating new possibilities for the development of ultrahigh speed 

optical communications.

2. Result and discussion

2.1. Theoretical Analysis.

Figure 1 shows a schematic of the proposed optical equalization technique, which 

uses a DDMZM with a specialized configuration. Unlike the conventional DDMZM, 

this DDMZM was configured as a two-phase shifter with different bandwidths. 

Bandwidth differentiation can be accomplished through various methods, such as 

altering the length or doping concentration of the phase shifters and applying different 

junction bias voltages.[6,20,34,35] A high-speed phase shifter refers to one with high 

bandwidth, whereas a low-speed phase shifter refers to one with low bandwidth. The 

original electrical signal is amplified using two electrical amplifiers with distinct 

amplification factors, generating a pair of electrical signals with diverse amplitudes. 

An electrical signal with a higher amplitude was fed into the high-speed phase shifter, 

whereas an electrical signal with a lower amplitude was fed into the low-speed phase 

shifter. These electrical signals are loaded onto two optical carriers through phase 

shifters. The phase of the two optical carriers changes at different rates because the 

bandwidths of the phase shifters are different. Additionally, the depth of the phase 

shift varies owing to the different amplitudes of the electrical signals. In this context, 

the phase variation rate refers to the speed at which the phase of the optical carrier 


signal changes, whereas the phase shift depth represents the amount of phase shift 

applied to the optical carriers. Increasing the phase variation rate and decreasing the 

phase shift depth resulted in shorter rise and fall times. Assuming that the DDMZM 

operates at the quadrature point, the two optical signals interfere with each other on 

the multimode interference coupler, resulting in the subtraction of the phase shifts and 

their conversion into changes in the optical intensity. The phase-shift depth was 

suppressed during the subtraction process. The phase variation rate closely aligns with 

that of the high-speed phase shifter owing to the minor impact of the low-speed phase 

shifter. Consequently, there is a notable improvement in the rise and fall times 

compared with the high-speed phase shifter, resulting in the production of an 

equalized optical signal at the output.

Figure 1. Schematic of the proposed optical equalization technique based on a 

DDMZM with specialized configuration.

The effectiveness of the optical equalization technique was demonstrated by 

simulating the time responses of electrical and optical signals, as illustrated in Figure 

2. The 3 dB bandwidths of the high-speed and low-speed phase shifters were assumed 

as 60 GHz and 20 GHz, respectively. Their frequency response followed the silicon 

traveling wave MZM at velocity and impedance matching.[36] The two-phase shifters 

were driven by an ideal square-wave signal at 40 GHz with the normalized waveform 

depicted in Figure 2a. The time responses of the high-speed and low-speed phase 

shifters are shown in Figure 2b,c, respectively. They also depicted the intrinsic time 


response of the DDMZM without employing the aforementioned equalization 

technique. Benefit from higher bandwidth, the rise and fall times of the curve in 

Figure 2b are clearly shorter than the rise and fall times of the curve in Figure 2c. The 

amplitude of the curve in Figure 2c is notably suppressed because of the weak 

response of the low-speed phase shifter at high frequencies. Assuming that both the 

phase shifters have the same modulation efficiency and are driven by electrical signals 

with the same amplitude, the equalized response can be derived by subtracting Figure

2c from Figure 2b. This output is depicted in Figure 2d and was obtained using the 

multimode interference coupler shown in Figure 1. The equalized response displays a 

flat top, whereas Figure 2b,c exhibit consistently curved responses, indicating a 

remarkable enhancement in the signal shape compared with the inherent time 

response of the DDMZM without using the equalization technique.

Figure 2. Time response of the a) electrical signal, b) high-speed phase shifter, c)

low-speed phase shifter, and d) equalized output signal.


Figure 3. Simulated step response with and without equalization. a) Ideal step signal 

applied to the phase shifters. b,c) Step responses of the phase shifters at 3 dB 

bandwidth of  60 GHz and 20 GHz, respectively. d-f) Step responses of the 

equalized output signals at EF of 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4.

Furthermore, to evaluate the effectiveness of the optical equalization technique 

numerically, the step response was simulated, as shown in Figure 3. An ideal step 

signal is used to drive the phase shifters, and the normalized waveform is shown in 

Figure 3a. The resulting step responses of the high-speed and low-speed phase shifters 

at the 3 dB bandwidth of 60 GHz and 20 GHz are displayed in Figure 3b,c, 

respectively, revealing rise times of 5.6 and 16.8 ps. The equalization factor is defined 

as the ratio of the step-response amplitudes of the low-and high-speed phase shifters 

when the equalization technique is applied. It can be tuned by adjusting the proportion 

of the driving signal amplitudes for the low-speed and high-speed phase shifters. The 

step responses of the equalized output signals can be obtained by subtracting the 

response of the low-speed phase shifter multiplied by EF from the response of the 

high-speed phase shifter, owing to the interference of optical signals on the 

multimode interference coupler. The normalized equalization outcomes for EFs of 

0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 are visually depicted in Figure 3d-f, with a clear overshoot on the 

waveform. The promising feature of signal overshoot has the potential to counteract 


performance degradation in other parts of the system, thereby enabling high-speed 

operation of the modulator. The corresponding rise times of 4.4, 3.8, and 3.2 ps 

correspond to bandwidths of 76, 88, and 105 GHz, respectively. This represents 

bandwidth enhancements of 27, 47, and 75% respectively, compared to the bandwidth 

of the high-speed phase shifter. This substantially enhanced effective bandwidth helps 

overcome the bandwidth limitation of the modulator, facilitating the generation of 

ultrahigh baud rate signals.

2.2. Experimental Results.

In this section, we demonstrate an optical equalization technique using silicon 

DDMZMs. The two identical phase shifters in the silicon DDMZM can easily be set 

up as high- and low-speed phase shifters because the bandwidth of the silicon electro-

optic phase shifter is related to the bias voltage of the PN junction. This section 

presents two experiments: a low-speed modulator speed-up experiment to 

comprehensively investigate the characteristics and capabilities of the optical 

equalization technique, and a high-speed modulator speed-up experiment to explore 

the generation of ultrahigh baud-rate signals that could reach the bandwidth limit of 

the experimental system. The low-speed modulator speed-up experiment employs a 

low-speed silicon modulator with long phase shifters, whereas the high-speed 

modulator speed-up experiment uses a high-speed modulator with short phase 

shifters.

2.2.1. Low-speed Modulator Speed-up Experiment.

A low-speed silicon DDMZM was fabricated using the complementary metal-

oxide-semiconductor process provided by the Semiconductor Manufacturing 

International Corporation. A micrograph of the silicon DDMZM is shown in Figure 

4. The silicon DDMZM consists of two carrier-depletion-based phase shifters, one 

functioning at a high speed and the other at a low speed. Each phase shifter has a 


length of 3 mm. The Mach-Zehnder interferometer has a 50 μm path length difference 

between the two arms, which enables the adjustment of the optical carrier wavelength 

to change the operating point. The optical waveguide had a width of 450 nm, and a 

lateral PN junction was formed in the optical waveguide. The insertion loss of the 

device was 4 dB. Two grating couplers, each with an insertion loss of 4.1 dB, are used 

to couple the optical signal to and out of the chip.

Figure 4. Micrograph of the low-speed silicon DDMZM. G: ground; S: signal.

Figure 5 illustrates the experimental setup used to demonstrate the optical 

equalization technique on a low-speed silicon DDMZM. The optical carrier was 

generated by a C-band tunable laser source (Santec TSL550) and amplified with an 

erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) before being coupled to the silicon DDMZM 

via a grating coupler. Polarization alignment was achieved using a polarization 

controller. The 128 Gbps 2:1 multiplexer (SHF C603 B) accepted two serial data 

streams from the bit pattern generator (SHF 12104A), resulting in a high-baud-rate 

electrical OOK signal. The signal was amplified by a 60 GHz amplifier (SHF S804 

B), and then split by a 40 GHz power splitter. One output was passed through an 

electrical attenuator to obtain EF related to its attenuation ratio of the electrical 

attenuator. Subsequently, the bias voltages generated by the two independent DC 

power sources are combined with the two outputs via the bias tees. These outputs are 

subsequently loaded onto the silicon DDMZM using a 40 GHz GSGSG probe and 

terminated with external 50 Ω loads. The silicon DDMZM applies optical 

equalization technology while converting electrical signals into optical signals. At the 

output of the DDMZM, the modulated signal undergoes amplification from an 


additional EDFA after which it is linked to a digital serial analyzer (DSA). Optically 

equalized OOK eye diagrams without DSP were obtained using DSA.

Figure 5. Experimental setup for demonstrating optical equalization technique on a 

low-speed silicon DDMZM. TLS: tunable laser source; EDFA: erbium-doped fiber 

amplifier; PC: polarization controller; DSA: digital serial analyzer; BPG: bit pattern 

generator; MUX: multiplexer; PS: power splitter; EA: electrical attenuator.

Figure 6 shows the OOK eye diagrams obtained at various baud rates and EFs. In 

the EF = 0 scenario, which represents the un-equalized condition, only the high-speed 

phase shifter is driven, while the driving signal for the low-speed phase shifter is 

terminated with an external 50 Ω load following the power splitter. The high-speed 

phase shifter is driven with a Vpp of 3.6 V, whereas the Vpp values of the low-speed 

phase shifter are 1.3, 2.2, and 2.7 V at EFs of 0.36, 0.61, and 0.75, respectively. The 

bias voltage of the high-speed phase shifter was maintained at 6 V, whereas that of the 

low-speed phase shifter was continuously adjusted during the experiment to obtain an 

optimal eye diagram. This optimization is necessary because an excessively low bias 

voltage can cause a significant overshoot and degrade the eye diagram. Nonetheless, 

during the experiment, the bias voltage for the low-speed phase shifter was kept 

below 4 V. The maximum baud rate for the open-optical eye diagrams increased as 

EF increased, as shown in Figure 6. At EF = 0, the open-optical eye diagram had a 

maximum baud rate of only 30 Gbaud, which was limited by the bandwidth of the 

low-speed silicon DDMZM. Additionally, the diagram displays significant distortion 


and noise, indicating poor signal quality. However, when EF = 0.36, 0.61, and 0.75, 

the baud rates of the open-eye diagram are 60, 80, and 90 Gbaud, respectively. The 

increase in EF significantly improved the high-speed performance, which is in line 

with the bandwidth enhancement in the step-response simulation. In low-speed 

scenarios, theoretically, an increase in EF reduces the extinction ratio (ER), owing to 

the subtraction of the responses of the two-phase shifters. Indeed, when EF = 0, the 

limited bandwidth constrains the ER, leading to the gradual reduction in the ER 

observed only at EF = 0.36, 0.61, and 0.75. The experimental results indicated that the 

optical equalization technique approximately tripled the baud rate of the open-eye 

diagram, which can serve as a reference for its improvement ratio in high-speed 

scenarios.

Figure 6. OOK eye diagrams at different baud rates and EFs for low-speed silicon 

DDMZM. ER: extinction ratio; N/A: not applicated.

2.2.2. High-speed Modulator Speed-up Experiment.

Figure 7 shows a micrograph of the high-speed silicon DDMZM fabricated on a 

silicon-on-insulator wafer at Advanced Micro Foundry. The DDMZM is an improved 

version of the previously introduced low-speed silicon DDMZM. Each phase shifter 

has a length of 1 mm to achieve a higher modulating speed. At the end of the traveling 

wave electrode, two 50 Ω on-chip terminators are connected in parallel to achieve a 


terminal impedance of 25 ohms. The silicon DDMZM exhibited an insertion loss of 

3.1 dB, and each grating coupler had an insertion loss of 3.8 dB.

Figure 7. Micrograph of the high-speed silicon DDMZM. G: ground; S: signal.

The experimental setup shown in Figure 8 is similar to that of the low-speed 

system described previously. They shared a C-band tunable laser source, two EDFAs, 

a polarization controller, a bit pattern generator, a multiplexer and a DSA. However, 

in this experiment, the pair of differential electrical OOK signals from the multiplexer 

were amplified using two 60 GHz amplifiers. One of the signals passed through a 

broadband balun (BAL-0067) to convert the phases of the two signals from opposite 

to identical and introduced an attenuation in the amplitude of the electrical signal, 

which served as an EF of 0.5. The resulting signals were then combined with the bias 

voltages via bias tees before being loaded onto a high-speed silicon DDMZM.


Figure 8. Experimental setup for demonstrating optical equalization technique on a 

high-speed silicon DDMZM. TLS: tunable laser source; EDFA: erbium-doped fiber 

amplifier; PC: polarization controller; DSA: digital serial analyzer; BPG: bit pattern 

generator; MUX: multiplexer.

Figure 9a,b show the OOK eye diagrams of the high-speed silicon DDMZM at 2 

EFs of 0 and 0.5, respectively. The driving signal of the high-speed phase shifter has a 

Vpp of 5 V, whereas that of the low-speed phase shifter is 2.5 V when EF = 0.5. The 

bias voltages for the high-speed and low-speed phase shifters were 5 V and 3.2 V, 

respectively. When EF = 0, the maximum baud rate of the open-eye diagram is 100 

Gbaud. The eye diagrams are significantly improved in Figure 9b, where the eye 

diagrams between 90 and 110 Gbaud are clearly open without significant degradation. 

Additionally, an open-eye diagram of 128 Gbaud was achieved with an ER of 1.89 

dB, which was even higher than that of 90 Gbaud when EF = 0. The apparent 

degradation of the eye diagrams from 110 to 128 Gbaud can be attributed to the 

limited bandwidth of the electrical amplifiers and the 128 Gbps multiplexer, which 

restricts the maximum achievable baud rate to 128 Gbaud. Nevertheless, this is still 

the highest baud rate achieved without DSP for an all-silicon modulator. By 

referencing the efficacy of the optical equalization technique observed in the 

experiments, the implementation of this technique has the potential to enable silicon 

modulators to achieve baud rates of 200 Gbaud and beyond without requiring 

specifically designed modulators or equalizers.


Figure 9. OOK eye diagrams at 2 EFs of a) 0 and b) 0.5 for high-speed silicon 

DDMZM.

3. Conclusions

This study proposes an optical equalization technique to overcome the performance 

limitations of modulators and generate signals with an ultrahigh baud rate. Optical 

equalization is achieved by making the two arms of the DDMZM have different 

bandwidths and then applying drive signals with appropriate amplitudes. The 

subtraction of the responses of the two arms considerably reduces the rise and fall 

times of the output signal, thereby significantly improving the signal quality. Both 

low-speed and high-speed modulator speed-up experiments were conducted using 

low-speed and high-speed silicon DDMZM, respectively. A low-speed modulator 

speed-up experiment demonstrated a substantial improvement ratio, increasing the 

baud rate of the generated signal from 30 to 90 Gbaud. However, in the high-speed 


modulator speed-up experiment, owing to the limited bandwidth of the experimental 

system, the baud rate of the generated signal only increased from 100 to 128 Gbaud. 

Nonetheless, this is the highest baud rate achieved using an all-silicon modulator 

without DSP. Referring to the improvements observed in the experiments, there is the 

potential to enhance the baud rate of silicon modulators to exceed 200 Gbaud. It 

should be noted that the optical equalization technique is not limited to silicon 

platforms, being highly versatile and adaptable to other integrated platforms and 

discrete devices. The breakthrough in the modulator baud rate paves the way for the 

applicability of silicon modulators in future ultrahigh speed communications and 

fosters advancements across various optoelectronic platforms. This represents a 

significant advancement in the development of future-oriented communication. 

4. Experimental Section/Methods

4.1. Sample fabrication.

The low-speed silicon DDMZM was manufactured by Semiconductor Manufacturing 

International Corporation. The silicon modulator is comprised of two identical carrier-

depletion phase shifters, each with a length of 3 mm and a fill factor of 91%. The 

intrinsic region was periodically inserted to prevent current from flowing through the 

optical waveguide. The traveling wave electrode has a signal line width of 10 μm and 

a 5 μm gap between the signal and ground lines. The lateral PN junction in the optical 

waveguide is offset by 50 nm from the center to the N-doped region. Heavily doped 

regions were used to form an ohmic contact with the metal electrode, spaced 750 nm 

from the edge of the optical waveguide, to obtain a tradeoff between optical 

absorption loss and modulating speed. The insertion loss of the low-speed silicon 

DDMZM was 4 dB.

The high-speed silicon DDMZM was manufactured by Advanced Micro Foundry, 

with each phase shifter having a length of 1 mm. The high-speed silicon DDMZM has 

a traveling wave electrode size equivalent to that of the low-speed version, with two 

on-chip terminators of 50 Ω placed in parallel at the end of the traveling wave 


electrode, resulting in a terminal impedance of 25 Ω. The optical waveguide had a 

width of 500 nm and slab thickness of 70 nm. Lateral PN junctions were formed at the 

center of the optical waveguide, whereas heavily doped regions were located 700 nm 

from the edge of the waveguide. The insertion loss of the high-speed silicon DDMZM 

was 3.1 dB.

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge the funding support from the National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (62035001).

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding

author upon reasonable request. 

References

[1] R. G. Beausoleil, M. McLaren, N. P. Jouppi, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quant. 2013, 19, 

3700109.

[2] K. Wang, C. Lim, E. Wong, K. Alameh, S. Kandeepan, E. Skafidas, J. Lightwave 

Technol. 2019, 37, 627.

[3] M. Lee, H. E. Katz, C. Erben, D. M. Gill, P. Gopalan, J. D. Heber, D. J. McGee, 

Science 2002, 298, 1401.

[4] C. Haffner, D. Chelladurai, Y. Fedoryshyn, A. Josten, B. Baeuerle, W. Heni , T. 

Watanabe, T. Cui, B. Cheng, S. Saha, D. L. Elder, L. R. Dalton, A. Boltasseva, 

V. M. Shalaev, N. Kinsey, J. Leuthold, Nature 2018, 556, 483.

[5] D. Renaud, D. R. Assumpcao, G. Joe, A. Shams-Ansari, D. Zhu, Y. Hu, N. 

Sinclair, M. Loncar, Nat. Commun. 2023, 14, 1496.


[6] M. Xu, M. He, H. Zhang, J. Jian, Y. Pan, X. Liu, L. Chen, X. Meng, H. Chen, Z. 

Li, X. Xiao, S. Yu, S. Yu, X. Cai, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 3911.

[7] Y. Ogiso, J. Ozaki, Y. Ueda, H. Wakita, M. Nagatani, H. Yamazaki, M. 

Nakamura, T. Kobayashi, S. Kanazawa, Y. Hashizume, H. Tanobe, N. Nunoya, 

M. Ida, Y. Miyamoto, M. Ishikawa, J. Lightwave Technol. 2020, 38, 249.

[8] M. He, M. Xu, Y. Ren, J. Jian, Z. Ruan, Y. Xu, S. Gao, S. Sun, X. Wen, L. Zhou, 

L. Liu, C. Guo, H. Chen, S. Yu, L. Liu, X. Cai, Nat. Photonics 2019, 13, 359.

[9] Y. Zhang, L. Shao, J. Yang, Z. Chen, K. Zhang, K.-M. Shum, D. Zhu, C. H. 

Chan, M. Lončar, C. Wang, Photon. Res. 2022, 10, 2380.

[10]M. Liu, X. Yin, E. Ulin-Avila, B. Geng, T. Zentgraf, L. Ju, F. Wang, X. Zhang, 

Nature 2011, 474, 64.

[11]V. Sorianello, M. Midrio, G. Contestabile, I. Asselberghs, J. Van Campenhout, C. 

Huyghebaert, I. Goykhman, A. K. Ott, A. C. Ferrari, M. Romagnoli, Nat. 

Photonics 2018, 12, 40.

[12]R. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Ma, Y. Yang, Q. Li, A. E.-J. Lim, G.-Q. Lo, K. Bergman, T. 

Baehr-Jones, M. Hochberg, J. Lightwave Technol. 2014, 32, 2240.

[13]G. T. Reed, G. Z. Mashanovich, F. Y. Gardes, M. Nedeljkovic, Y. Hu, D. J. 

Thomson, K. Li, P. R. Wilson, S.-W. Chen, S. S. Hsu, Nanophotonics 2014, 3, 

229.

[14]D. Patel, S. Ghosh, M. Chagnon, A. Samani, V. Veerasubramanian, M. Osman, 

D. V. Plant, Opt. Express 2015, 23, 14263.

[15]S. Yu, T. Chu, Photon. Res. 2017, 5, 124.

[16]M. Li, L. Wang, X. Li, X. Xiao, S. Yu, Photon. Res. 2018, 6, 109.

[17]A. Melikyan, N. Kaneda, K. Kim, Y. Baeyens, P. Dong, J. Lightwave Technol.

2020, 38, 2872.

[18]D. Mao, M. S. Alam, M. Parvizi, E. El-Fiky, A. Abdo, N. Ben-Hamida, D. V. 

Plant, Opt. Express 2022, 30, 32990.

[19]M. Sakib, P. Liao, C. Ma, R. Kumar, D. Huang, G.-L. Su, X. Wu, S. 

Fathololoumi, H. Rong, presented at Conf. on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO), 

San Jose, California, May and 2021.


[20]C. Wang, M. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Bertrand, A. Shams-Ansari, S. Chandrasekhar, 

P. Winzer, M. Lončar, Nature 2018, 562, 101.

[21]G.-W. Lu, J. Hong, F. Qiu, A. M. Spring, T. Kashino, J. Oshima, M.-a. Ozawa, 

H. Nawata, S. Yokoyama, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 4224.

[22]L. Alloatti, R. Palmer, S. Diebold, K. P. Pahl, B. Chen, R. Dinu, M. Fournier, J.-

M. Fedeli, T. Zwick, W. Freude, C. Koos, J. Leuthold, Light Sci. Appl. 2014, 3, 

e173.

[23]M. Xu, X. Cai, Opt. Express 2022, 30, 7253.

[24]H. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Zhang, D. Zhang, Q. Liao, J. He, S. Hu, B. Zhang, L. Wang, 

X. Xiao, N. Qi, S. Yu, Photon. Res. 2020, 8, 1776.

[25]J. Gao, K. Zhu, H. Wu, J. Lightwave Technol. 2022, 40, 3872.

[26]M. Xu, S. Gao, H. Tan, X. Cai, presented at Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC), 

San Diego, California, March and 2022.

[27]P. Kharel, C. Reimer, K. Luke, L. He, M. Zhang, Optica 2021, 8, 357.

[28]G. Chen, K. Chen, R. Gan, Z. Ruan, Z. Wang, P. Huang, C. Lu, A. P. T. Lau, D. 

Dai, C. Guo, L. Liu, APL Photon. 2022, 7, 026103.

[29]C. Han, M. Jin, Y. Tao, B. Shen, H. Shu, H. Wang , presented at Opt. Fiber 

Commun. Conf. (OFC), San Diego, California, March and 2022.

[30]T. N. Huynh, N. Dupuis, R. Rimolo-Donadio, J. E. Proesel, D. M. Gill, C. W. 

Baks, A. V. Rylyakov, C. L. Schow, W. M. J. Green, B. G. Lee, J. Lightwave 

Technol. 2016, 34, 5129.

[31]B. G. Lee, N. Dupuis, J. Orcutt, H. Ainspan, J. E. Proesel, J. Ayala, K. Nummy, 

C. W. Baks, D. M. Gill, M. Meghelli, W. M. J. Green, J. Lightwave Technol.

2019, 37, 89.

[32]P. Dong, C. Xie, L. L. Buhl, Y.-K. Chen, J. H. Sinsky, G. Raybon, J. Lightwave 

Technol. 2015, 33, 1191.

[33]L. Breyne, J. Lambrecht, M. Verplaetse, X. Yin, G. Roelkens, P. Ossieur, J. 

Bauwelinck, J. Lightwave Technol. 2021, 39, 1777.

[34]J. Zhou, Q. Zhang, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quant. 2022, 28, 1.

[35]J. Zhou, J. Wang, L. Zhu, Q. Zhang, J. Lightwave Technol. 2020, 38, 272.


[36]H. Yu, W. Bogaerts, J. Lightwave Technol. 2012, 30, 1602.


