Li-decorated BC3 nanopores: Promising materials for hydrogen storage

I. Cabriaa, A. Lebonb, M. B. Torresc,∗, L. J. Gallegod, A. Vegaa

aDepartamento de F´ısica Teo´rica, Ato´mica y O´ ptica, Universidad de Valladolid, ES-47011 Valladolid, Spain

bLaboratoire de Chimie Electrochimie Mole´culaire et Chimie Analytique, Universite´ de Brest, UMR CNRS 6521, F-29285 Brest,

France

cDepartamento de Matema´ticas y Computacio´n, Escuela Polite´cnica Superior, Universidad de Burgos, ES-09006 Burgos, Spain

dA´rea de F´ısica de la Materia Condensada, Departamento de F´ısica de Part´ıculas, Facultad de F´ısica, Universidad de

Santiago de Compostela, ES-15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain

Abstract

In the quest of new absorbent for hydrogen storage, we investigate the capacities of slit pores formed

by two BC3 sheets decorated with Li atoms. Their hydrogen storage capacities are determined using
density- functional theory in conjunction with a quantum-thermodynamic model that allows to simulate
real operating conditions, i.e., finite temperatures and different loading and depletion pressures applied to
the adsorbent in the charge-delivery cycles. We show that the capacities of the adsorbed hydrogen phase
of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores are larger than those reported recently for graphene and Li-decorated
borophene slit pores. On the other hand, the usable volumetric and gravimetric capacities of Li-decorated
BC3 slit pores can meet the targets stipulated by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) for onboard
hydrogen storage at moderate temperatures and loading pressures well below those used in the tanks
employed in current technology. In particular, the usable volumetric capacity for pore widths of about 10
Å meets the DOE target at a loading pressure of 6.6 MPa when depleting at ambient pressure. Our results
highlight the important role played by the rotational degree of freedom of the H2 molecule in determining
the confining potential within the slip pores and their hydrogen storage capacities.

Keywords: Hydrogen storage, 2D materials, boron-based materials, Li-decorated 
materials, density-functional theory, statistical physics

1. Introduction

One of the most important challenges in the XXI century is the energy. The enormous consumption

of fossil fuels such as petroleum, natural gas and coal derived from the needs of modern society, and the
ecological problems related to the pollution and greenhouse gases, have led to the need to find new low-
cost, environmentally-friendly energy sources that can support the sustainability and the global energy
demands. In this context, hydrogen has emerged as a promising alternative to replace fossil fuels in the
future. Some companies and governmental and non-governmental institutions across the globe are
developing strategies and making massive investments toward the “hydrogen economy” [1–4], which is
expected to be a socioeconomic reality on a relevant scale in the next decades.

∗Corresponding author
Email address: begonia@ubu.es (M. B. Torres)

November , 2023


2

Hydrogen is really an ideal fuel because it is lightweight (it has the highest energy density of all com-

mon fuels by weight, but the lowest energy density by volume), highly abundant, and the by-product of its
combustion is simply water vapour (i.e., no CO2 and other harmful gases are produced). The
overwhelming majority of hydrogen on earth is chemically bound as H2O. Thus, whether hydrogen can be
considered a clean form of energy or not depends on the primary energy that is used to split water. A
way to obtain “green hydrogen” is to use wind or sunlight in combination with photovoltaic cells to
produce water-splitting electrolysis [5–7]. However, the use of hydrogen energy at a large scale still needs
some scientific and technological barriers to be overcome. The most critical problem is storage, in spite
of the advances that have already been made in this area during the last decades [2, 8–13].

High-pressure storage of hydrogen in the gas form, cryogenic storage in liquid form and hydride-based

storage in the solid form have several inconveniences [3, 14, 15], and in the last years other possibilities
have been explored. In particular, extensive theoretical efforts have been performed to investigate the
hydrogen storage ability of carbon nanostructures, which are light and have a high accessible surface
area, such as carbon nanotubes [16, 17], graphene [18], pillared graphene [19], sandwiched graphene-
fullerene composites [20] and graphene slit pores [21]. These last nanostructures can be considered as
simple models for the pores existing in nanoporous carbon materials like activated carbons [22] and
carbide-derived carbons [23]. 
Experimental studies have been performed on several carbon

nanostructures such as single-walled carbon nanotubes [24], nanoporous spongy graphene [25], few-layer
graphene-like flakes [26] and nanoporous activated carbon cloths [27], among others. In microporous
frameworks, by optimizing the pore size of the carbon nanostructures, it is possible to increase the
hydrogen affinity due to the overlap of the potentials from the pore walls.

There are specific requirements for a material to be a good candidate for onboard hydrogen storage.

The targets stipulated by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) for 2025 are a reversible gravimetric
hydrogen storage capacity of 5.5 wt.% and a reversible volumetric hydrogen storage capacity of 0.040
kg/L at room temperature and moderate pressure [28]. To  achieve reversible storage of H2 at those
conditions, the binding energy needs to be 0.2–0.6 eV per H2 molecule, i.e., in a range between
physisorption and chemisorption [29, 30]. We note that the DOE 2025 targets refer to the usable
capacity, also known as the working or delivery capacity. The usable capacity is defined as the
difference between the capacity of the full tank at maximum pressure (the loading pressure) and the
capacity remaining in the tank at the depletion, back or minimum pressure required to run the fuel cell
(the depletion pressure) [28, 31–33]. Today’s fuel cell cars use compressed hydrogen gas, squeezing about
5 kg into a 70 MPa carbon fibre reinforced tank. Such high loading pressure requires to use a heavy and
expensive fuel container, besides a lot of energy to compress the gas. The goal, therefore, is to find an
appropriate adsorbent with a good capacity at a lower loading pressure, allowing to use light-weight,
inexpensive, and more conformable pressure tanks as well as to reduce the energy penalty for
compressing the gas. The depletion pressure of most hydrogen systems typically lies between 0.3 and
0.8 MPa, but it could be reduced to ambient pressure.

In general, the studies performed so far on carbon nanotubes and graphene-based systems have shown

that those materials, in pristine form, do not fulfill the H2-binding energy criterion. However, it has been
proposed that those nanostructures could be used to construct hydrogen storage media if they are decorated
with atoms of carefully selected species, such as early transition, alkali and alkali-earth metals (see, e.g.,
Refs. [34, 35] and those cited therein). It should be pointed out that those theoretical studies give
predictions for the total and/or the excess capacities, not for the usable or delivery capacities.

Concurrently with the research on carbon-based nanostructures, there has been a growing interest in re-

cent years in two-dimensional (2D) materials beyond graphene, and some of them have been investigated
for their possible use as hydrogen storage media, including phosphorene [36–39], borophene [40–42] (two
examples of monoelemental 2D materials with different properties from those of graphene), carbon
nitrides[29, 30] and MXnes [43, 44], among others. The case of borophene is particularly striking: boron


3

is carbon’s neighbour in the periodic table and has similar valence orbitals, but its electron deficiency
prevents it from forming a graphene-like honeycomb structure. However, due to the similar atomic radius
of boron and carbon (and to the fact that boron atoms can substitute carbon atoms in the graphene
structure without activation barrier [45]), it is possible to form substitutional boron doped ordered forms
of graphene without altering practically the honeycomb geometry. In fact, recent phonon spectra and ab
initio molecular dynamics calculations have shown that a graphene-like BC3 sheet composed of hexagonal
carbon rings connected to its six neighboring carbon rings through six isolated boron atoms is
mechanically and thermally stable in free standing form [46]. However, it should be pointed out that the
experimental realization of the BC3 sheet dates back to 1986, when it was synthesized for the first time as
a lustrous film of metallic appearance
by the chemical reaction of benzene and boron trichloride at 800 ◦C [47]. Subsequently, a BC3 honeycomb
sheet with excellent crystalline quality was grown over the entire macroscopic surface area of NbB2(0001)
[48–51]. Strategies to keep the structural integrity, i.e., the absence of defects, in the synthesis of the BC3
monolayer to be used in practical applications (for instance, as gas sensor [52]) have recently been
proposed by Yong et al. on the basis of first-principles calculations [53].

Unlike graphene, in which the π electrons are located over the entire carbon lattice, the carbon rings

of the BC3 sheet have an aromatic character, with six π electrons located over each carbon atom, and they
are separated by anti-aromatic hexagons composed by boron and carbon atoms without π electrons. The
electron deficiency of each boron atom creates a “hole-carrier” in the valence band of the bulk BC3
material, thus producing greater electric conductivity than that of graphite [47]. The BC3 sheet has a
semiconducting behavior, and the observed metallic appearance of the bulk sample arises from the
interaction between neighboring BC3 layers [54].

The hydrogen storage capacity of the Li-decorated BC3 sheet has been studied recently by means of

standard density-functional theory (DFT) calculations [55–58]. Those studies reveal that the Li atoms are
strongly adsorbed on the BC3 sheet without clustering, which facilitates the reversible hydrogen adsorption
and desorption. More specifically, in Ref. [58] it was shown that the binding energy of the Li atom on the
BC3 sheet exceeds the cohesive energy of the Li bcc bulk structure. This is because the boron atom has one
electron less than the carbon atom, so that the BC3 sheet is an electron-deficient system, making the Li
atom to be strongly bounded. Additionally, specific calculations showed that when two Li atoms are
adsorbed on the BC3 sheet, the configuration in which the Li atoms stay together is 0.35 eV higher in
energy than that when they remain isolated, indicating that the Li atoms can be individually dispersed on
the BC3 sheet [58]. On the other hand, the results of Ref. [58] show that not only the decorating metal
atom but also the BC3 sheet plays an important role in the hydrogen storage process, because the boron
atoms of the sheet improve the induced electric field between the adatoms and the sheet. It should be
pointed out that the DFT studies performed in Refs. [55–58] provide information on whether or not the
binding energy enters the window required for reversible adsorption as well as the total gravimetric
hydrogen storage capacity (not the usable capacity). However, the DFT is a formalism for the (T = 0 K)
ground state, whereas the experiments and the sorption-desorption process carried out for porous
materials, which are the common adsorbents, take place at finite temperature and moderate pressures.

The aim of the work presented here is to provide realistic predictions for the volumetric and

gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of a porous material containing Li-decorated BC3 slit pores. To
incorporate finite temperature and pressure, we combine results obtained from DFT calculations with
those inferred from a quantum-thermodynamic model [21, 59–62]. A similar methodology has been used
recently by us to investigate the hydrogen storage capacity of Li-decorated borophene slit pores, which
were found to be optimal for hydrogen storage at low temperature [59]. As it will be shown, an absorbent
material containing Li-decorated BC3   slit pores would allow to use loading pressures well below 70
MPa.  But, in a wider context, what may be even more relevant is that the methodology employed in this
paper can be used to give accurate predictions of the usable capacities of porous materials in general, thus
providing a useful guide for the design of efficient systems for hydrogen storage.


4

Regarding the way we use to simulate the local environment of a porous material based on BC3, it

is important to remark that the pioneering experiments by Franklin [63] and the results of more recent
experimental studies on nanoporous carbons [64, 65] showed that these materials are mainly composed by
slit-shaped pores, with a pore width distribution in the range of several to hundred angstroms. Previous
calculations for graphene slit pores (i.e., two parallel graphene sheets separated by a distance in the range
of nanometers) confirm that the local environment of porous carbon materials is well captured by means of
such slit pores [21, 60, 61]. In the present work, slit pores made of two parallel BC3 sheets in their most
stable honeycomb configuration are used in the simulations. As indicated above, the stability of this sheet
has recently been confirmed by phonon spectra and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations [46], and it
has also been tested by us as a preliminary step of our calculations. The main objective of the present work
is to find the optimal values of the pore width, temperature and pressure for efficient volumetric and
gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of an hypothetical BC3-based porous material. To the best of our
knowledge, no experimental data on these kinds of systems are yet available, and we expect that our
predictions can stimulate the investigation of their hydrogen storage capacities in the laboratory.

The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is divided in three subsections, where

we give some details of the DFT approach used, of the quantum-thermodynamic model employed, and of
the method applied to compute the adsorbed, total and usable hydrogen storage capacities. In Section 3 we
describe the structural results and the method used to determine the confining potential of the H2 molecule
in the Li-decorated BC3 slit pore. In Section 4 we present and discuss our results for the adsorbed and
total hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores. Section 5 is devoted to the presentation
and discussion of the usable hydrogen storage capacities of these kinds of pores. Finally, in Section 6, we
summarize the main conclusions of our work.

2. Computational methodology

2.1. Technical details of the DFT calculations

To optimize the structures, as well as to calculate the three-dimensional interaction potential energy

between a H2 molecule and one layer of the Li-decorated BC3 slit pore, V(x, y, z), we performed DFT
calculations as implemented in the VASP code [66, 67], which solves the Kohn-Sham equations within
the projector-augmented wave (PAW) approach [68]. A cut-off energy of 500 eV was used for the plane-
wave basis and the Brillouin zone was sampled using a 6 × 6 × 1 k-point grid after the corresponding k-
sampling convergence test. The width of the Gaussian smearing was 0.01 eV. A distance of 30.308 Å
between periodic images of the sheet along the normal to the surface ensures that they do not interact.
The GGA(PBE)+D3 functional [69] was used in the calculations, which includes dispersion interaction
corrections. These corrections are essential for describing weakly interacting systems. Relaxations were
performed using the conjugate-gradient method until the remaining force acting on the atoms was less
than 0.01 eV/Å. The accuracy for convergence of total energies was 10−5 eV/unit cell. Dipole correction
of the total energy was used to remove spurious dipole interactions between the periodic images.

Before determining the potential confining the H2 molecule in the Li-decorated BC3 slit pore, we

calculated the stable configuration of the pristine BC3 sheet using the DFT methodology described
above. Subsequently, we investigated the optimal Li decoration of the BC3 sheet, and, finally, we
performed fully relaxed calculations to determine the most stable locations of a H2 molecule on the Li-
decorated BC3 sheet. The results of all these calculations are presented and discussed in Section 3.


5

2.2. Quantum-thermodynamic model

The quantum-thermodynamic model used in this work [21, 59–61], which is an improved version of

that proposed by Patchkovskii et al. [62], is based on the thermodynamic equilibrium between the
adsorbed and the compressed phases of the hydrogen gas inside the slit pore. That is, the H2 molecules
stored by physisorption on the pore surfaces form the adsorbed phase, and the H2 molecules stored only
by compression (without interacting with the pore surfaces) form the compressed phase.

Fig. 1 is a schematic representation of a slit pore formed by two parallel Li-decorated BC3 sheets.

Through this paper, we shall consider that the width of the Li-decorated BC3 pore is the distance w
between the Li layers. The volume of the slit pore is Vpore = S w, where S is the surface of the sheet.
The phases of hydrogen stored inside the pore are shown at the right-hand side of the same figure. The
(pore-width dependent) full interaction potential of the H2 molecule inside the slit pore is the sum of
the interaction potentials of the H2  molecule with the two parallel layers, placed from each other at a
distance w, i.e., Vslit pore(x, y, z; w) = V(x, y, z) + V(x, y, w − z), where the two terms are calculated as
described in Section 3.

Fig. 1. Li-decorated BC3 slit pore of width w. B, C and Li atoms are shown with sepia, gray and purple balls, respectively. The panel 
on the right is a schematic picture of the masses involved in a slit pore.

It is worth to note that the mass of hydrogen stored in the slit pore (the total mass of the stored

hydrogen) is the sum of the masses of the adsorbed hydrogen (sum of blue and violet masses in Fig. 1)
and the compressed hydrogen (red molecules in Fig. 1), not included in the adsorbed phase. The blue,
violet and red masses of Fig. 1 correspond respectively to those of the A, B and C regions shown in the
lower panel of Fig. 1 of the work by Parilla et al. [70]. Hence, the mass of the “adsorbed hydrogen” of our
work corresponds to the “absolute adsorption” (A+B in the work by Parilla et al.) and the “mass
compressed” gas corresponds to the mass of the “free gas” (C in that work). The adsorbed and compressed
hydrogen phases occupy different volumes, Vadsorbed and Vcompressed, respectively.

Since the slit pore creates a confining region of nanometric dimensions for the H2 molecules, quantum

confinement effects arise, i.e., the energy of the H2 molecule is quantized. The energies Ei of the quantum
states of the hydrogen molecule are calculated by solving the corresponding Schrödinger equation. The
partition function of the adsorbed hydrogen phase, Zads, is then obtained as

Zads=∑

i=1

n

exp  (− ϵi/k BT )
(1)

where kB is the Boltzmann constant. The equilibrium constant between the adsorbed and compressed
phases is given by


6

K eq= Zads

Zcom

                                                                             (2)

where the partition function of the compressed (or free) phase, Zcom, is obtained as

Zcom=(d− 2dexcl)√2mk BT /h

2                                              (3)

being m the mass of one hydrogen molecule and dexcl an exclusion distance due to the steep repulsive part
of the interaction potential near the pore layers. In the thermodynamic equilibrium, the equilibrium
constant Keq is related to the pressures of the compressed (or external) and adsorbed phases, Pext and Pads,
through the equation

ln K eq=1/RT ∫

Pext

Pads

vmol ( p,T )dP                                                                             (4)

where R is the gas constant and vmol(P, T ) is the molar volume of the compressed hydrogen, which is given
by the Mills-Younglove equation of state of H2 [21, 61, 71, 72]

vmol (P,T )=∑

i=1

n

ci f i (P,T )
(5)

where fi(P, T ) = gj(P)hk (T ), with j = int((i − 1)/ 25), k = i − l and l = 25 j. There are 30 gj(P)

functions 
and 25 hk (T ) functions, with j running from 0 to 29 and k from 1 to 25. The units are: vmol(P, T ) in
cm3/mol, P en MPa and T in Kelvin. The coefficients ci and the functions gj(P) and hk (T ) can be found
in the Supporting Information of Ref. [21]. By solving Eq. 5, we obtain Pads for each value of Pext , and
from the Mills-Younglove equation of state we find the molar volume of the adsorbed hydrogen phase,
vmol(Pads, T ). The masses of the two phases are calculated when the thermodymanic equilibrium between
them is reached. We note that the use of a real equation of state for H2 (the Mills-Younglove equation of
state contains 750 parameters and enables accurate description of the states of H2 in wide ranges of
temperature and pressure [21]) allows to introduce, in an indirect way, the interactions between the H2
molecules in the free or compressed phase. A comparative analysis of the gravimetric and volumetric
hydrogen storage capacities of nanoporous carbons, simulated as graphene slit-shaped pores, has recently
been made in Ref. [73] using various theoretical models.

In the present work, the quantum-thermodynamic model has been applied to calculate the volumetric

and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores of widths between 4.6 and 40 Å,
temperatures between 77 and 350 K, and pressures between 0.5 and 70 MPa.

2.3. Definitions of the volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities

The volumetric capacity, vc, of the adsorbed hydrogen phase at P and T is calculated, in kg of H2/L, by

means of the equation

vc = vc(P, T ) = massH adsorbed(P,T)

Vpore

(6)

being massH adsorbed(P, T ) the mass of the adsorbed hydrogen in kg and Vpore the volume of the pore in 
liters. The mass of the adsorbed hydrogen is obtained, in kg, as

mass H adsorbed=

M (H 2)

vmol(Pads,T )

V adsorbed                                                    (7)


7

mass

where Vadsorbed is the volume, in liters, of the adsorbed phase, M(H2) is the molar mass of H2 in kg/mol,
0.00201588 kg/mol, and vmol(Pads, T ) is the molar volume of the adsorbed phase in L/mol. Vadsorbed = S

wads, where wads is the width of the adsorbed phase, computed as indicated in detail in Ref. [59].

The gravimetric capacity, gc, of the adsorbed hydrogen phase at P and T is calculated, in wt.%, as

100 massH adsorbed (P, T )

gc = gc(P, T ) =

H adsorbed(P,T) + mass adsorbentmaterial

(8)

where massadsorbent material is the mass of the adsorbent material (i.e., that of the slit-shaped pore) in kg. The
slit pore is composed by two sheets and this is taken into account in the calculation of massadsorbent material
and gc.

The total volumetric and gravimetric capacities are given by similar equations to those of the adsorbed 

hydrogen phase, but using the total mass of the stored hydrogen, massH total(P, T ), i.e.,

massH total(P, T )

vc,total = vc,total(P, T) =
Vpore

(9)

gc ,total=gc ,total (P,T )=
100 massH total(P,T )

mass H total(P,T )+massadsorbentmaterial

                              (10)

where massH total(P, T ) includes the mass of the adsorbed hydrogen phase and that of the compressed
hydrogen phase, not included in the adsorbed phase. The latter is obtained as the product of the volume
occupied by the compressed hydrogen, Vcompressed, and the free-hydrogen density.

The capacities defined above give the amount of total hydrogen that can be stored at a given pressure

and temperature. For practical purposes, however, the relevant quantities are the usable capacities, which
are those to which the DOE 2025 conditions refer. The usable mass of hydrogen stored at a given pressure
P (loaded state) and temperature T is the difference between the total mass of hydrogen stored at these P
and T and the total stored mass at the depletion pressure and the same temperature T [28, 31–33]. The
usable volumetric and gravimetric capacities are defined using the usable mass of stored hydrogen.

3. Structural results and determination of the confining potential

Before explaining the way we used to determine the confining potential, we discuss the predicted

structures of the pristine and the Li-decorated BC3 sheets. The pristine BC3 sheet is constituted by boron
hexagons with carbon hexagons inside (left-hand panel of Fig. 2). The primitive cell of the BC3 sheet has
eight non- equivalent atoms, of which six are carbon atoms and two are boron atoms. The upper panel of
Fig. 2 shows the supercell structure used in our calculations (with interatomic distances obtained after
relaxation), which has three times the size of the BC3 primitive cell. We  found that the optimal Li-
decorated structure is similar to that reported by Zhao et al. [56] using the LDA(CA) functional [74, 75],
i.e., it has four Li atoms adsorbed on one side of the supercell, occupying the central positions of the
external rings (right-hand panel of Fig. 2). The distance between the Li atoms and the C6 hexagon was
found to be 1.57 Å, a value that increased until 1.63 Å for the C4B2 hexagon and the Li-Li distance is 4.48
Å. The average binding energy of the Li atoms on the sheet, calculated as Eb  = (E(BC3) + 4E(Li) −
E(Li-BC3))/4, is 1.81 eV, which is larger than the experimental cohesive energy of bulk Li (1.63 eV
[76]). We note that the binding energy of a Li atom on graphene has been reported to be 1.096 eV [77].


8

As the boron atom has one less electron than the carbon atom, the BC3 sheet is electron deficient, so that
the Li atoms are strongly bonded to the BC3 sheet due to an electronic transfer from them to the sheet.

Fig. 2. Structures of the BC3 sheet (lef panel) and of the supercell used in our calculations after relaxation (upper panel). The right
panel shows the (supercell) structure of the Li-decorated BC3 sheet, with H2 molecules at the locations corresponding to the global
minimum (1) and a local minimum (2) of the interaction potential between the H2 molecule and the Li-decorated BC3 sheet. The
lower panel shows the interaction potential curves around those minima. B, C, Li and H atoms are shown with sepia, gray, purple and
white balls, respectively, and the numbers are atom-atom distances in Å.

We performed a series of tests to confirm the dynamic stability of the Li-decorated BC3 structure, i.e.,

the absence of Li clustering effects. This is an important point to be taken into account when analyzing the
ability of a metal-decorated material for hydrogen storage. To this end, we first computed several diffusion
paths for the movement of a Li atom of the Li/BC3 system on the BC3 surface, and the results are shown in
Fig. 3. It can be seen that the diffusion of the Li atom involves energy barriers of more than 0.5 eV. These
energy barriers are significant and sufficient to block the movement of the Li atoms around their
equilibrium positions, since room temperature corresponds to about 0.025 eV. A similar effect has been
observed in the case of the Li-popgraphene system [78].

On the other hand, we investigated possible configurations of the Li/BC3 system with a Li2  dimer

and a Li4 cluster, with rhombic and tetrahedral geometries, to check their relative stabilities. Fig. 4
shows the relaxed structures and their energies with respect to that of the structure shown in the right-
panel of Fig. 2 (again displayed in Fig. 4 as structure A). The structure with a Li2 dimer placed on the BC3
sheet (structure B) is energetically 0.44 eV less favorable than the structure A. The structure in which the
four Li atoms are placed above the central hexagons of the BC3 sheet forming a rhombus (C) and the
tetrahedral structure (D) are respectively 0.75 eV and 1.62 eV less favorable than the structure A. It
should also be pointed out that if a free Li2 dimer is placed above the BC3 sheet and it is allowed to
relax, the dimer dissociates when it approaches the sheet surface without energy barrier.


9

Fig. 3. Diffusion paths for the movement of a Li atom of the Li/BC3 system on the sheet surface, starting from its equilibrium
position, and their corresponding energy profiles (right). B, C and Li atoms are shown with sepia, gray and purple balls,
respectively.

This occurs independently of the initial orientation of the free Li2 dimer. Similar results are obtained when
a Li4 cluster is placed on the BC3 sheet and it is allowed to relax approaching the BC3 surface. The results
of all these calculation confirm that the Li atoms tend to be dissociated on the BC3 sheet, and that the most
stable structure of the Li/BC3 system is that shown in the right-hand panel of Fig.  2, in keeping with the
results reported in Refs. [55–58]

Next, we determined the most stable locations (positions and orientations) of a H2 molecule on the

Li-decorated BC3 sheet. Those locations correspond to different local minima of the interaction potential
energy, defined as

V(x, y, z) = E(H2@Li-BC3) + E(H2) − E(Li-BC3)
(11)

where E(H2@Li-BC3), E(H2) and E(Li-BC3) are the energy of H2 at (x, y, z) on the Li-decorated BC3
sheet, the energy of an isolated H2 molecule and the energy of the Li-decorated BC3 sheet, respectively,
and z is the distance between the H2 molecule and the surface of the sheet. For the interest of the readers,
we show in Figs. S1 and S2 of the Supporting Information the locations of the H2 molecule on the Li-
decorated BC3 sheet for the first six local minima of the interaction potential, and the interaction potential
curves around those minima, as obtained in our calculations using the GGA(PBE)+D3 functional [69]
(note that the values given in Fig. S2 are the H2-binding energies, i.e., the sign-reversed potential energies).
The global minimum of the potential is at -0.28 eV, and the H2 molecule is situated almost
perpendicularly to the Li-decorated BC3 sheet on a carbon atom (location 1 in Fig. 2). Another minimum
is at -0.22 eV, and the H2 molecule is on top of a Li atom, almost parallel to the sheet (location 2 in Fig.
2). The H-H distance of the adsorbed H2 molecule is 0.78 Å, a value slightly higher than the experimental
value of 0.741 Å [79, 80]) in vacuum, which reveals the interaction between the molecule and the Li-
decorated BC3 sheet.

We note that the optimal orientation of the H2 molecule at the different local minima of the interaction

potential differs, with a noticeable energy cost when rotating the H2 molecule away from its equilibrium
orientation, an important fact to consider for accurate determination of the confining potential, as it will
be shown below. For instance, in the local minimum in which the H2 molecule is above a Li atom and
its orientation is parallel to the Li-decorated BC3 sheet, the energy penalty when imposing a perpendicular


10

Structure A: 0.00

Structure D: 1.62

Fig. 4. Different configurations of the Li/BC3 system with their relative energies in eV.

orientation is 0.17 eV, a huge amount considering that for achieving reversible storage the H2-binding
energy needs to be 0.2-0.6 eV per molecule. And what is more important, imposing a fixed orientation of
the H2 molecule on the whole Li-decorated BC3 sheet prevents it from locating the actual minima of the
confining potential. This point will be discussed in detail below.

For comparative purposes, in Fig. S2 of the Supporting Information we show the interaction

potential curves around the six main local minima of the potential, as obtained using the LDA(CA) [74,
75], GGA(PBE) [81, 82] and GGA(PBE)+D3 functionals [69]. The dispersion corrections are not
included in the LDA(CA) and GGA(PBE) functionals. Our results show that, around the equilibrium
positions, the values predicted with the GGA(PBE)+D3 functional are lower than those derived using the
LDA(CA) and higher than those obtained with the GGA(PBE). However, for H2-sheet distances larger than
about 3.5 Å, a crossing takes place and the GGA(PBE)+D3 functional predicts lower values of the
interaction potential.

We now focus on the determination of the confining potential. In order to see the effect of considering

a fixed orientation of the H2 molecule, we selected the orientation corresponding to the global minimum of
the potential and displaced the molecule, with this orientation fixed, on a xy grid, with ∆x = ∆y = 0.20 Å.
Hence, for the xy plane, 1081 points were considered in a single point calculation mode. The process was
repeated at different values of z, from 1.5 to 6.5 Å, with an interval of ∆z = 0.20 Å. This calculation mode
turned out to be problematic as the H atom with the lower z could sit very close to one of the Li decorating
atoms. This resulted in strongly anti-bonding energy that could even reach tens of eV. The upper panel of
Fig. 5 shows the resulting potential for z = 2.831 Å.

It is then clear that one has to perform most realistic (and computationally much more demanding)

calculations by including the rotational degree of freedom of the adsorbed H2 molecule. To this end, we
performed calculations by fixing only the center of the H2 molecule according to its position in the xy plane.
To be more precise, the height of the center of mass of the H2 molecule with respect to the BC3 layer was
selected to be z = 2.831 Å, which corresponds to the global minimum of the interaction potential, and the

Structure B: 0.44

Structure C: 
0.75


11

Fig. 5. Interaction potential energy between a single H2 molecule in the plane z = 2.831 Å and the Li-decorated BC3 sheet, projected
on the xy plane. The upper and lower panels correspond to the cases of fixed and non-fixed orientations of the H2 molecule,
respectively.

orientation was relaxed for each of the 1081 points of the xy grid, all at z = 2.831 Å. In our protocol, the
H-H distance was kept fixed to the distance found for the global minimum, that is, dH−H = 0.78 Å. The
optimal spherical polar and azimuthal angles at each point were determined using the Nelder-Mead
simplex algorithm. The lower panel of Fig. 5 shows the confining potential for z = 2.831 Å. Not only
the actual local minima are now captured, but the interaction potential energy is noticeably more binding.
After the computations for the 1081 points at z = 2.831 Å, the obtained polar and azimuthal angles for
each position on the grid were taken over for the other z values, namely, in the range from z = 1.5 to 6.5
Å. Additional calculations were carried out to verify that this is a good approximation. After obtaining
the interaction potential energy in the upper half of the cell, the interaction potential energy in the lower
half of the cell was obtained by symmetry.

The values of the interaction potential energy obtained in the DFT calculations at the (x, y, z) grid

points were fitted to a piece-wise function V(x, y, z). The grid has 1081 (x, y) different points or
regions. The interaction potential energies corresponding to the point or region i, (xi, yi), were fitted to an
analytic function of the shape

V (xi , yi , z)=A (i)e

−B (i) z+∑

i=1

9

C (i , j)z

−2 j
(12)

The set of the 1081 local or regional functions of this type form a piece-wise analytic function, which is
the interaction potential energy V(x, y, z). This piece-wise function was used in the quantum-
thermodynamic calculations to obtain the hydrogen storage capacities.

In Fig. 6 we show the deepest V(z) curve among all the V(z) curves that were obtained when the

rotational degree of freedom of the H2 molecule was included in calculating the interaction potential
between the molecule and the Li-decorated BC3 sheet. The curve is compared with that found for the
interaction between the H2 molecule and graphene using the optB88-vdW functional [59]. The V(z) curve
for the Li-decorated BC3 sheet has a much larger depth (-0.28 eV/molecule against -0.08 eV/molecule).
This fact anticipates, at a qualitative level, the much larger volumetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-
decorated BC3 slit pores, as it will be seen in the following section.


12

Fig. 6. Interaction potential energies between a H2 molecule and graphene and the Li-decorated BC3 sheet as functions of the H2
molecule-surface distance.

4. Adsorbed and total hydrogen storage capacities of the Li-decorated BC3 slit pores

The DOE 2025 conditions refer to the usable hydrogen storage capacities, but for a clear understanding

of these quantities it is necessary to analyze first the behaviour of the adsorbed and total hydrogen storage
capacities and their dependence on the main parameters, pore width, pressure and temperature.

The adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores are shown in Fig. 7 as

functions of the pore width, at 298.15 K and pressures of 5 and 25 MPa. For comparison, in the same
figure we also show the capacities that we obtained for these kinds of pores when the confining potential
was determined by considering a fixed orientation of the H2 molecule, as well as the results that have been
reported for graphene slit pores at 298.15 K and 25 MPa [61].

Fig. 7. Adsorbed volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores as functions of the pore
width, at 298.15 K and pressures of 5 and 25 MPa. Also shown are the capacities that have been predicted for graphene slit pores at
298.15 K and 25 MPa [61] (black curves).

We first note that the adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores are much

larger than those of graphene slit pores. In fact, at 5 MPa, the former capacities are greater than the latter at
25 MPa.


13

On the other hand, the adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores that are obtained
when the confining potential was derived by imposing a fixed orientation of the H2 molecule are noticeably
smaller than those predicted when the molecule is allowed to rotate and accommodate into its most stable
orientation. In the latter case, the volumetric capacity has two relative maxima at the two pressures, 5 and 25
MPa, a behaviour not found when the orientation of the H2 molecule is fixed. As indicated in the previous
section, the confining potential when the orientational degree of freedom of the H2 molecule is included in
the calculations is more binding and captures all the local minima, which causes the volumetric capacity to
increase; as the mass of the adsorbed hydrogen increases, the gravimetric capacity increases as well. Fig. 2
shows that, besides the global minimun of the interaction potential between the H2 molecule and the Li-
decorated BC3 sheet at -0.28 eV, there is another local minimum at -0.22 eV, in which the H2 molecule is
on top of a Li atom. In the slit pore there are two layers of minima of the potential, in correspondence with
the two layers of adsorbed Li atoms on each layer. Therefore, there is very likely a correspondence between
the topology of the sheet and the evolution of the adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities as a function of the
pore width. That peculiarity could be the origin of the shoulders observed in the capacities at a pore width
of 8.5 Å (see Fig. 7). Overall, this means that more hydrogen can be stored further away from each BC3
layer of the slit pore, and consequently the capacities increase for wider pores. It should also be noted that
the difference between the hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores at 5 and 25 MPa is
rather small for small pore widths, but then increases and reaches a constant value for (relatively) large pore
widths, a behaviour that is reflected in the usable hydrogen storage capacities, as it will explained in the next
section.

Maximum values of the hydrogen storage capacities at two positions implies that the range of optimal

values of the pore width is larger. This latter result is important, because in real nanoporous materials there
is not a single pore width but a pore-width distribution, and the experimentalists can be interested in the
center and the standard deviation of the distribution. The highest values of the adsorbed hydrogen storage
capacities of the Li-decorated BC3 slit pores are summarized in Table 1. Additional information about the
adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities can be found in Sects. 2 and 3 of the Supporting Information.

Table 1: Highest adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities of the Li-decorated BC3 slit pores at 298.15 K. wmaxvc and wmaxgc are the
corresponding pore widths in Å. The pressure P is in MPa, vc in kg/L and gc in wt.%.

H2 orientation
P
wmaxvc
vc
wmaxgc
gc

non-fixed
25
6.4
0.067
10.9
3.938

non-fixed
5
6.3
0.061
10.4
3.071

fixed
25
7.0
0.052
8.9
2.569

fixed
5
6.8
0.045
7.2
2.090

We now discuss the dependence of the adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities on the pressure. The results

of our calculations for Li-decorated BC3 slit pores of widths 6.4 and 10.9 Å at room temperature are plotted
in Fig. 8. Those pore widths correspond to the highest adsorbed volumetric capacity (0.067 kg/L) and the
highest adsorbed gravimetric capacity (3.938 wt.%), respectively, at room temperature and 25 MPa (see
Fig. 7 and Table 1).

The shapes of the capacities vs pressure curves for both pore widths is similar: at low pressures, both

capacities increase very fast, even exponentially, and then they increase slowly reaching constant or
asymptotic values at high pressures. However, although the shapes of the volumetric capacity vs pressure
curves for the two pore widths is similar, there are important differences that will be relevant when
studying theusable volumetric capacities. 


14

Fig. 8. Adsorbed volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores of widths 6.4 and 10.9 Å, as
functions of the pressure, at 298.15 K.

As it can be noticed in Fig. 8, at low pressures (for instance, 0.5 MPa), the adsorbed volumetric capacity
for the 6.4 Å pore is much higher than for the 10.9 Å pore, and hence the difference between the
adsorbed volumetric capacities at 25 and 0.5 MPa is much smaller for the 6.4 Å pore than for the 10.9 Å
pore. This means that the usable volumetric capacity at 25 MPa for the 6.4 Å pore will be much smaller
than that for 10.9 Å pore. Therefore, in spite of the high numerical value of the asymptote of the adsorbed
volumetric capacity for the 6.4 Å pore and that this asymptotic value is higher than the asymptotic value
for the 10.9 Å pore, the usable capacity is much smaller for the 6.4 Å pore than for 10.9 Å pore. The results
of our calculations for the usable hydrogen storage capacities of the Li-decorated BC3 slit pores will be
discussed in detail in the next section. It should be noted that, at high pressures, the adsorbed volumetric
capacity for the 6.4 Å pore is higher than for the 10.9 Å pore, while the adsorbed gravimetric capacity has
the opposite behaviour due to the smaller density of the 10.9 Å pore (larger pore width and, hence,
smaller density). More specifically, at high pressures, we obtain vc(6.4)/vc(10.9) = 1.125, while
gc(6.4)/gc(10.9) = 0.667. Using the approximate Eq. S2 of the Supporting Information, we can write

gc (6.4)
gc (10.9) ≈ vc (6.4)

vc (10.9)

6.4
10.9 ≈ 0.661 (13 )

 which is very close to the exact value, 0.667.

As regards the dependence of the adsorbed hydrogen storage capacities on temperature, the results for

pore widths of 10 and 35 Å at pressures of 0.5, 25 and 35 MPa and temperatures between 77 and 300 K
have been plotted in Fig. 9. Both capacities decrease as the temperature increases for all pore widths and
pressures. The capacities are very high at low temperatures, but the important point is the difference
between the capacities at P = 35 or 25 MPa and at 0.5 MPa. This difference is the main part of the usable
capacity. As it can be noticed, at low temperatures the 35-0.5 and 25-0.5 MPa adsorbed capacity differences
are much smaller than at room temperatures for the two pore widths studied. For instance, for a pore width
of 10 Å the difference is 0.004 kg/L at 77 K, while at 300 K it is 0.036 kg/L, which is about ten times
higher. For a pore width of 35 Å, those differences are 0.0016 kg/L and 0.0108 kg/L at 77 and 300 K,
respectively. Hence, for the 35 Å pore the adsorbed capacity difference at room temperature is about seven
times the difference that exits at low temperature. Another important result is that the adsorbed capacity
difference increases as the temperature increases (see Fig. 9). The increase is approximately linear with the
temperature for the 10 Å pore and more abrupt for the 35 Å pore. All these results reflect the potential
conditions of Li-decorated BC3 nanoporous systems to be used as effective media for hydrogen storage at
room temperature.


15

Fig. 9.  Adsorbed volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores of widths 10 and 35 Å, 
as functions of the temperature, at 0.5, 25 and 35 MPa.

In the remaining of this section, we discuss the dependence of the total hydrogen storage capacities

(that is, those that include the contribution of the compressed hydrogen phase) on the pore width, pressure
and temperature. We remind that this is the required data for determining the usable hydrogen storage
capacities. Some of the main results obtained in our calculations are shown in Fig. 10 by means of colour
maps. Additional information, also used in the discussion presented below, is provided in Fig. S5 of the
Supporting Information.

The total capacities versus pore width and temperature are shown in the upper panels of Fig. 10 for a

pressure of 35 MPa. The highest total volumetric capacities, about 0.1 kg/L, are obtained for pore widths
around 11 Å at low temperatures. The highest total gravimetric capacities are about 15 wt.% and are
obtained also at low temperatures for larger pore widths, 40 Å. In the upper panels of Fig. S5, we show
the results for a lower pressure of 25 MPa. For pore widths between 5 and 15 Å, the volumetric and
gravimetric capacities are about 0.06-0.07 kg/L and 4-6 wt.%, respectively. Those values, although very
high, should not be compared with the DOE 2025 targets.

The total capacities versus pore width and pressure are shown in the middle panels of Fig. 10 at room

temperature, 298.15 K. The highest total volumetric capacity is about 0.06 kg/L, and it is found for pore
widths of 5-10 Å and pressures larger than 1 MPa. The highest total gravimetric capacity, about 8 wt.%, is
obtained for wide pores, 40 Å, and a high pressure, 70 MPa. At a low temperature of 77 K (middle panels
of Fig. S5), the highest total volumetric capacity is about 0.1 kg/L, and it is found for pore widths of 8-12
Å, independently of the pressure. The highest total gravimetric capacity is about 18 wt.% and corresponds


16

Fig. 10. Total volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores as functions of the pore width
and temperature at 35 MPa (upper panels), of the pore width and pressure at 298.15 K (middle panels) and of the temperature and
pressure for a pore width of 10 Å (lower panels).

to wide pores, 40 Å, and pressures equal or larger than 50 MPa.

Finally, the total capacities versus temperature and pressure for a pore of width 10 Å are shown in the

lower panels of Fig. 10. The highest total volumetric and gravimetric capacities are about 0.1 kg/L and 7
wt.%, respectively, at 70 MPa and 77 K. The dependence on the pressure and temperature for a pore width
of 35 Å (lower panels of Fig. S5) is similar, but the numerical values are different. The highest total
volumetric and gravimetric capacities are in this case about 0.06 kg/L and 16 wt.%, respectively, at 70 MPa
and 77 K.

5. Usable hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores

The data reported in the previous section were used to calculate the usable hydrogen storage capacities

of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores. We compute those capacities as a function of the main variables that could
be controlled in the design and operation of these possible nanoporous adsorbents: the pore width, the
pressure and the temperature. Our aim is to determine if there are ranges of these variables that satisfy the
DOE 2025 requirements. Some results are presented in Fig. 11 by means of colour maps, and additional
information is provided in Fig. S6 of the Supporting Information.

1.00
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

1.00
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

1.00
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

18
16
14
12
10
8
6

4
2
0


14

8

4

12

6

2

0

4

17

1.00
18

0.08
16

0.06
12

0.04
10

0.02
6

0.00
2
0

1.00
18
0.08
16

0.06
14

0.04
10

0.02
8

0.00
4

0

18

1.0
16
0.08
14
12

0.06
10
0.04
8

0.02
6

0.00
2
0

Fig. 11. Usable volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores as functions of the pore width
and temperature at 35 MPa (upper panels), of the pore width and pressure at 298.15 K (middle panels) and of the temperature and
pressure for a pore width of 10 Å (lower panels).

The usable capacities have been plotted versus the pore width and the temperature for pressures of 35

MPa (upper panels of Fig. 11) and 25 MPa (upper panels of Fig. S6). The usable volumetric capacity is
high and reaches the DOE 2025 target in two different regions at both loading pressures: for narrow slit
pores (9-12 Å) at room or near room temperatures (250-350 K), and for wide slit pores (25-40 Å) at low
temperatures (77-125 K). On the other hand, for P = 35 MPa, the usable gravimetric capacity reaches the
DOE 2025 target in the region of wide pores and the temperature range 77-300 K. Both DOE 2025 targets
are reached simultaneously for wide pores (25-40 Å) below room temperature. It is important to notice that,
at low temperature, the usable capacities are small for pore widths smaller than 25 Å.

The dependence of the usable capacities on the pore width and pressure can be noticed in the middle

panels of Fig. 11 at room temperature, 298.15 K. The usable volumetric capacities reach the DOE 2025
target  in a triangular region with P ≥ 50 MPa and pore widths between 8 and 20 Å, and the usable
gravimetric capacities reach the DOE 2025 target in a region of P ≥ 25 MPa and w ≥ 20 Å. The usable
capacities reach both targets simultaneously at room temperature and high pressures (P ≥ 56 MPa) for w ≥
20 Å. However, it should be noted that the DOE 2025 conditions were established for on board practical
applications, i.e., for moderate pressures of about 25-35 MPa or below. It can be seen in the middle panels
of Fig. S6 that, at 77 K, the DOE 2025 volumetric target is reached for P ≥ 30 MPa and w ≥ 25 Å. The


18

gravimetric target is also reached in the upper right triangular region of the pressure-pore width panel, but
in this case for P ≥ 10 MPa and w ≥ 20 Å.

Finally, the usable capacities for a pore width of 10 Å are plotted in the lower panels of Fig. 11 versus

the thermodynamical variables. The usable volumetric capacity for such a small pore width reaches the
DOE 2025 target in the upper right corner of the T-P map, at T ≥ 300 K and P ≥ 40 MPa. As regards the
usable gravimetric capacity, the results of our calculations indicate that for this small pore width it is not
possible to reach the DOE 2025 target in the range of temperatures and pressures considered in our study.
For a larger pore width of 35 Å (lower panels of Fig. S6), the usable volumetric capacities reach the DOE
2025 target in the upper left corner, that is, at P ≥ 40 MPa and T ≤ 200 K. The usable gravimetric
capacities, on the other hand, reach the DOE 2025 target in a large upper region limited by a line from (30
MPa, 77 K) to (40 MPa, 350 K). Both targets are reached simultaneously for this larger pore width at low
temperatures and high pressures.

In summary, the analysis presented above indicates that the usable hydrogen storage capacities of Li-

decorated BC3 slit pores reach the DOE 2025 targets in several regions of the pore width, temperature and
pressure.  Temperatures  close  to  room  temperature  and  moderate  pressures  (≤ 35  MPa)  define  the
appropriate operating conditions for practical applications. At those conditions, the usable volumetric
capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores reach the DOE 2025 target (0.04 kg/L) for small pore widths (9.0-
12.0 Å) and for 30-35 MPa. In those conditions, the usable hydrogen storage gravimetric capacity lies
between 2.4 and 3.2 wt. %, which is twice smaller than the DOE 2025 gravimetric target. The usable
gravimetric capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pore reach the DOE 2025 target (5.5 wt. %) for larger pore
widths (27-40 Å) and 20-35 MPa. But in those conditions the volumetric capacity lies between 0.021 and
0.032 kg/L, lower than the DOE 2025 volumetric target.

The ultimate goal is to find an absorbent able to work at rather low loading pressures, for the reasons

indicated in the Introduction of this work. The calculations of the usable capacities presented above were
carried out for a depletion pressure of 0.5 MPa. The loading-depletion pressure window can be easily
modified to scan different  sorption-desorption conditions. In Fig. 12, the usable capacities  at  room
temperature have been plotted as a function of the loading pressure for two different values of the depletion
pressure, 0.1 MPa (room pressure) and 0.5 MPa. It can be noticed in Fig. 12 that the usable volumetric
capacity reaches the DOE 2025 target at a loading pressure of 6.6 MPa when the depletion pressure is 0.1
MPa. This is a quite relevant result of the present work. To the best of our knowledge, no other absorbent
material with usable volumetric capacity beyond the DOE 2025 target, and working at such a low loading
pressure, has been proposed so far. Such a low loading pressure means that a conformable, cheap, and
light tank could be employed; that a much less energy cost would be required to pressurize the gas as
compared with current tanks working at 70 MPa (or even at 35 MPa); and that the device would improve
in security. The usable gravimetric capacities, on the contrary, do not reach the DOE 2025 target at those
conditions.

With a more general perspective, we want to emphasize that our methodology allows to determine the

usable hydrogen storage capacities in porous materials characterized by a pore size distribution, which is the
common scenario. In that case, the hydrogen storage capacities could be easily calculated as the average of
the data obtained for the different pore widths.

6. Conclusions

In this work, we have presented an extensive computational study of the hydrogen storage capacities

of slit pores constituted by two parallel BC3 sheets decorated with Li atoms. The methodology employed
combines density-functional theory, which is used to obtain the structures and the interaction potential
energy


19

Fig. 12. Usable volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of a Li-decorated BC3 slit pore of width 10 Å at 298.15 K, as
functions of the loading pressure and the depletion pressure.

of a H2 molecule within the Li-decorated BC3 slit pores, and a quantum-thermodynamic model that allows
to obtain the adsorbed, total and usable volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities. Our
results highlight the important role played by the rotational degree of freedom of the H2 molecule in
determining the confining potential within the slip pores and their hydrogen storage capacities.

Earlier DFT studies on the hydrogen storage capacities of the BC3 sheet and other adsorbents [55–58]

were not realistic and overestimated the capacities, because they did not consider pores formed by two
parallel sheets, but just one sheet, i.e., they did not investigate the dependence of the hydrogen storage
capacity on the pore width, the temperature and the pressure. But the most important flaw of those studies,
in our opinion, is that they did not calculate the usable hydrogen storage capacities, which are the relevant
quantities when identifying new materials as potential hydrogen storage media, as it has been established
by the U.S. DOE.

Our results show that the usable volumetric hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated BC3 slit pores

of width 9.0-12.0 Å reach the DOE 2025 volumetric target, 0.040 kg/L, at room temperatures, 300-320
K, and moderate pressures, 30-35 MPa, but the usable gravimetric capacities are about two times smaller
than the DOE 2025 target, 5.5 wt.%, for those pore widths, temperatures and pressures. Hence, a hydrogen
vehicle using an onboard deposit with this porous material inside would have the same autonomy than a
fossil fuel based vehicle at room temperatures and moderate pressures, but the deposit would be about two
times heavier. We have found that the usable volumetric capacity reaches the DOE 2025 target at a loading
pressure of 6.6 MPa when the depletion pressure is 0.1 MPa. This is a quite relevant result of the present
work. To the best of our knowledge, no other absorbent material with usable volumetric capacity beyond
the DOE 2025 target, and working at such a low loading pressure, has been proposed so far. Such a low
loading pressure means that a conformable, cheap, and light tank could be employed, that a much less
energy cost would  be required to pressurize the  gas as compared with current tanks  working  at high
pressures, and that the device would improve in security.

As it is well known, the identification of adsorbent materials meeting all the targets established by the

U.S. DOE is a challenging problem. The results presented in this work can be useful for both theoretical
and experimental researchers in the area. Real BC3 nanoporous materials should consist in a network of
slit-shaped BC3 pores with a pore size distribution in the range of several to hundreds Å. The results of our
investigation, in which we have studied pores widths up to 40 Å, strongly suggest that the usable
volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities of such nanoporous materials, doped with Li
atoms, could be probably close to the DOE 2025 targets.

Acknowledgments


20

This research was financially supported by the Spanish MICINN (Grant PGC2018-093745-B-I00) and

the Xunta de Galicia (GRC ED431C 2020/10). We also acknowledge the use of the high performance
computing equipment of the Pole de Calcul Intensif pour la Mer (DATARMOR, Brest) and the Centro de
Proceso de Datos - Parque Cientifico (UVa).

References

[1] T. Capurso, M. Stefanizzi, M. Torresi, S. M. Camporeale, Review perspective of the role of hydrogen

in the 21st century energy transition, Energy Conversion and Management 251 (2022) 114898.

[2] A. M. Oliveira, R. R. Beswick, Y. Yan, A green hydrogen economy for a renewable energy society,

Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering 33 (2021) 100701.

[3] J.  O.  Abe,  A.  P.  I.  Popoola,  E.  Ajenifuja,  O.  M.  Popoola,  Hydrogen  energy,   economy

and storage: Review and recommendation, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44 (2019) 15072–86.
doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.04.068.

[4] M. Ball, M. Weeda, The hydrogen economy-vision or reality?, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 40 (2015)

7903–7919.

[5] M. S. Herdem, D. Mazzeo, N. Matera, C. Baglivo, N. Khan, Afnan, P. M. Congedo, M. G. D. Giorgi,

A brief overview of solar and wind-based green hydrogen production systems: Trends and standard-
ization, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy (in press).

[6] M. David, C. Ocampo-Martinez, R. Sanchez-Pen˜a, Advances in alkaline water electrolyzers: A

review, J. Energy Storage 23 (2019) 392–403.

[7] M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel, D. Stolten, A comprehensive review on pem water electrolysis, Int.

J. Hydrogen Energy 38 (2013) 4901–4934.

[8] C. Tarhan, M. A. Cil, A study on hydrogen, the clean energy of the future: Hydrogen storage

methods, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 40 (2021) 102676.

[9] S. Koohi-Fayegh, M. A. Rosen, A review of energy storage types, applications and recent

developments, J. Energy Storage 27 (2020) 101047.

[10] J. Andersson, Gronkvist, Large-scale storage of hydrogen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44 (2019) 11901–

11919.

[11] R. Moradi, K. M. Groth, Hydrogen storage and delivery: Review of the state of the art technologies

and risk and reliability analysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44 (2019) 12254–12269.

[12] A. M. Abdalla, S. Hossain, O. B. Nisfindy, A. T. Azad, M. Dawood, A. K. Azad, Hydrogen

production, storage, transportation and key challenges with applications: A review, energy
conversion and management, Energy Conversion and Management 165 (2018) 602–627.

[13] S. Niaz, T. Manzoor, A. H. Pandith, Hydrogen storage: Materials, methods and perspectives,

renewable and sustainable energy reviews, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 50 (2015)
457–469.

[14] D. J. D. Malardier-Jugroot, Review of hydrogen storage techniques for on board vehicle applications,

Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 38 (2013) 14595–14617. doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.07.058.

[15] L. Schlapbach, A. Züttel, Hydrogen storage materials for mobile applications, Nature 414 (2001)


21

353– 358.

[16] J. J. Zhao, A. Buldum, J. Han, J. P. Lu, Gas molecule adsorption in carbon nanotubes and nanotube

bundles, Nanotechnology 13 (2002) 195–200. doi:10.1088/0957-4484/13/2/312.

[17] S. M. Lee, Y. H. Lee, Hydrogen storage in single-walled carbon nanotubes, Appl. Phys. Lett. 76

(2000) 2877–2879.

[18] D. Boukhvalov, M. Katsnelson, A. Lichtenstein, Hydrogen on graphene: electronic structure, total

energy, structural distortions and magnetism from first-principles calculations, Phys. Rev.  B 77
(2008) 035427.

[19] G. K. Dimitrakakis, E. Tylianakis, G. E. Froudakis, Pillared graphene: A new 3-D network

nanostructure for enhanced hydrogen storage, Nano Lett. 8 (2008) 3166–3170.

[20] Z.  Ozturk,  C.  Baykasoglu,  M.  Kirca,  Sandwiched  graphene-fullerene  composite:  A  novel

3-D nanostructured material for hydrogen storage, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 41 (2016)
6403–6411. doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.03.042.

[21] I. Cabria, M. J. Lpez, J. A. Alonso, Simulation of the hydrogen storage in nanoporous carbons with

different pore shapes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 36 (2011) 10748–10759.

[22] M. Jordà-Beneyto, F. Suarez-Garcia, D. Lozano-Castello, D. Cazorla-Amoros, A. Linares-Solano,

Hydrogen storage on chemically activated carbons and carbon nanomaterials at high pressures,
Carbon 45 (2007) 293–303.

[23] R. K. Dash, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, Synthesis, structure and porosity analysis of microporous and

mesoporous carbon derived from zirconium carbide, Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 86 (2005)
50– 57.

[24] A. C. Dillon, K. M. Jones, T. A. Bekkedahl, C. H. Kiang, D. S. Bethune, M. J. Heben, Storage of

hydrogen in single-walled carbon nanotubes, Nature 386 (1997) 377–379.

[25] N. Kostoglou, G. Constantinides, G. Charalambopoulou, T. Steriotis, K. Polychronopoulou, Y. Li,

K. Liao, V. Ryzhkov, C. Mitterer, C. Rebholz, Nanoporous spongy graphene: potential
applications for hydrogen adsorption and selective gas separation, Thin Solid Films 596 (2015)
242–249. doi:10.1016/j.tsf.2015.06.060.

[26] N. Kostoglou, A. Tarat, I. Walters, V. Ryzhkov, C. Tampaxis, G. Charalambopoulou, T. Steriotis,

C. Mitterer, C. Rebholz, Few-layer graphene-like flakes derived by plasma treatment: a potential
material for hydrogen adsorption and storage, Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 225 (2016) 482–487.

[27] N. Kostoglou, C. Koczwara, C. Prehal, V. Terziyska, B. Babic, B. Matovic, G. Constantinides, C.

Tam- paxis, G. Charalambopoulou, T. Steriotis, S. Hinder, M. Baker, K. Polychronopoulou, C.
Doumanidis, O. Paris, C. Mitterer, C. Rebholz, Nanoporous activated carbon cloth as a versatile
material for hydro- gen adsorption, selective gas separation and electrochemical energy storage,
Nano Energy 40 (2017) 49–64.

[28] Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy, Fuel Cell Technologies Office, DOE technical

tar- 
gets 
for
 
onboard 
hydrogen 
storage
 
for 
light-duty
 vehicles,

https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/doe- 
technical-targets-onboard-hydrogen-storage-light-duty-

vehicles, accessed January 13, 2023 (2018).


22

[29] Y. Yong, S. Hu, X. Yuan, R. Gao, Q. Hou, Y. Kuang, Computational evaluation of Ca-decorated

nanoporous CN monolayers as high capacity and reversible hydrogen storage media, Int. J. Hydro-
gen Energy 47 (2022) 29371–29381. doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.06.242.

[30] S. Hu, Y. Yong, Z. Zhao, R. Gao, Q. Zhou, Y. Kuang, C7N6 monolayer as high capacity and re-

versible hydrogen storage media: A DFT study, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 46 (2021) 21994–22003.
doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.04.053.

[31] D. P. Broom, C. J. Webb, G. S. Fanourgakis, G. E. Froudakis, P. N. Trikalitis, M. Hirscher, Concepts

for improving hydrogen storage in nanoporous materials, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44 (2019) 7768–
7779.

[32] M. D. Allendorf, Z. Hulvey, T. Gennett, A. Ahmed, T. Autrey, J. Camp, E. S. Cho, H. Furukawa,

M. Haranczyk, M. Head-Gordon, S. Jeong, A. Karkamkar, D.-J. Liu, J. R. Long, K. R. Meihaus, I. H.
Nayyar, R. Nazarov, D. J. Siegel, V. Stavila, J. J. Urban, S. P. Veccham, B. C. Wood, An assessment
of strategies for the development of solid-state adsorbents for vehicular hydrogen storage, Energy
Environ. Sci. 11 (2018) 2784–2812. doi:10.1039/C8EE01085D.

[33] M. Schlichtenmayer, M. Hirscher, The usable capacity of porous materials for hydrogen storage, Appl.

Physics A 122 (2016) 379. doi:10.1007/s00339-016-9864-6.

[34] A. Lebon, J. Carrete, L. J. Gallego, A. Vega, Ti-decorated zigzag graphene nanoribbons for hydrogen

storage. A van der Waals-corrected density-functional study, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 40 (2015)
4960– 4968.

[35] T. Yildirim, S. Ciraci, Titanium-decorated carbon nanotubes as a potential high-capacity hydrogen

storage medium, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 175501.

[36] M. Garara, H. Benzidi, M. Lakhal, M. Louilidi, H. Ez-Zahraouy, A. El Kenz, M. Hamedoun, A.

Benyoussef, A. Kara, O. Mounkachi, Phosphorene: a promising candidate for H2 storage at room
temperature, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44 (2019) 24829–24838. doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.07.194.

[37] S. Haldar, S. Mukherjee, F. Ahmed, C. V. Singh, A first principles study of hydrogen storage in

lithium decorated defective phosphorene, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 42 (2017) 23018–23027.

[38] Z. Y. Yu, N. Wan, S. Y. Lei, H. Yu, Enhanced hydrogen storage by using lithium decoration on

phosphorene, J. Appl. Phys. 120 (2016) 024305.

[39] Q. F. Li, X. G. Wan, C. G. Duan, J. L. Kuo, Theoretical prediction of hydrogen storage on Li-

decorated monolayer black phosphorus, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 47 (2014) 465302.

[40] A. Lebon, R. H. Aguilera del Toro, L. J. Gallego, A. Vega, Li-decorated Pmmn8 phase of borophene

for hydrogen storage. A van der Waals corrected density-functional study, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44
(2019) 1021.

[41] L. Li, H. Zhang, X. Cheng, The high hydrogen storage capacities of Li-decorated borophene, Comput.

Mater. Sci. 137 (2017) 119–124.

[42] S. Er, G. A. de Wijs, G. Brocks, DFT study of planar boron sheets: a new template for hydrogen

storage, J. Phys. Chem. C 113 (2009) 18962.

[43] Y. Liu, H. Du, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, M. Gao, H. Pan, Superior catalytic activity derived from a two-

dimensional ti3c2 precursor towards the hydrogen storage reaction of magnesium hydride, Chem.
Commun. 52 (2016) 705–708.


23

[44] Q. Hu, D. Sun, Q. Wu, H. Wang, L. Wang, B. Liu, A. Zhou, J. He, MXene: A new family of

promising 
hydrogen storage medium, J. Phys. Chem. A 117 (2013) 14253–14260.

doi:10.1021/jp409585v.

[45] R. B. Pontes, A. Fazzio, G. M. Dalpian, Barrier-free substitutional doping of graphene sheets with

boron atoms: Ab initio calculations, Phys. Rev. B 79 (2009) 033412.

[46] B. Mortazavi, M. Shahrokhi, M. Raeisi, X. Zhuang, L. F.  C. Pereira, T.  Rabczuk, Outstanding

strength, optical characteristics and thermal conductivity of graphene-like BC3 and BC6N
semiconductors, Carbon 149 (2019) 733–742.

[47] J. Kouvetakis, R. B. Kaner, M. L. Sattler, N. Bartlett, A novel graphite-like material of

composition BC3, and nitrogen-carbon graphites, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun (1986) 1758–
1759doi:10.1039/C39860001758.

[48] C. Oshima, BCx layers with honeycomb lattices on an NbB2(0001) surface, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter

24 (2012) 314206. doi:10.1088/0953-8984/24/31/314206.

[49] H. Yanagisawa, T. Tanaka, Y. Ishida, E. Rokuta, S. Otani, C. Oshima, Phonon dispersion curves of

stable and metastable BC3 honeycomb epitaxial sheets and their chemical bonding: Experiment and
theory, Phys. Rev. B 73 (2006) 045412.

[50] A. Ueno, T. Fujita, M. Matsue, H. Yanagisawa, C. Oshima, F. Patthey, H.-C. Ploigt, W.-D. Schneider,

S. Otani, Scanning tunneling microscopy study on a BC3 covered NbB2(0 0 0 1) surface, Appl.
Physics A 600 (2006) 3518–3521. doi:10.1016/j.susc.2006.07.007.

[51] H. Tanaka, Y. Kawamata, H. Simizu, T. Fujita, H. Yanagisawa, S. Otani, C. Oshima, Novel

macroscopic 
BC3 
honeycomb 
sheet, 
Solid 
State 
Commun. 
136 
(2005) 
22–25.

doi:10.1016/j.ssc.2005.06.025.

[52] Z. Zhao, Y. Yong, R. Gao, S. Hu, Q. Zhou, X. Su, Y. Kuang, X. Li, Adsorption, sensing and

optical properties of molecules on BC3 monolayer: First-principles calculations, Materials Science
and Engineering B 271 (2021) 115266. doi:10.1016/j.mseb.2021.115266.

[53] Y. Yong, X. Yuan, R. Gao, S. Hu, Z. Zhao, Y. Kuang, Controllable repairing the single vacancies of

BC3 monolayer using CO and BF molecules: A first-principles study, Results in Physics 35 (2022)
105365. doi:10.1016/j.rinp.2022.105365.

[54] D. Tomanek, R. M. Wentzcovitch, S. G. Louie, M. L. Cohen, Calculation of electronic and structural

properties of BC3, Phys. Rev. B 37 (1988) 3134–3136.

[55] S. Aydin, M. S¸ ims¸ek, The enhancement of hydrogen storage capacity in Li, Na and Mg-

decorated BC3 graphene by CLICH and RICH algorithms, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 44 (2019)
7354–7370. doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.01.222.

[56] I. Zhao, Z. Dai, P. Sui, W. Wang, Hydrogen storage capacity of Li-adsorbed BC3 sheet tuned by the

Li atom coverage rate, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 75 (2014) 1137–1140. doi:10.1016/j.jpcs.2014.04.001.

[57] Y. Li, T. Hussain, A. De Sarkar, R. Ahuja, Hydrogen storage in polylithiated BC3 monolayer sheet,

Solid State Commun. 170 (2013) 39–43.

[58] Z. Yang, J. Ni, Li-doped BC3 sheet for high-capacity hydrogen storage, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100 (2012)

183109. doi:10.1063/1.4711038.

[59] I. Cabria, A. Lebon, M. Torres,  L. Gallego, A. Vega, Hydrogen storage capacity of Li-decorated


24

borophene and pristine graphene slit pores: a combined ab-initio and quantum-thermodynamic study,
Appl. Surf. Sci. 562 (2021) 150019.

[60] I. Cabria, Simulations of volumetric hydrogen storage capacities of nanoporous carbons: Effect of

dispersion interactions as a function of pressure, temperature and pore width, Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy 45 (2020) 5697–5709. doi:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.03.071.

[61] I. Cabria, M. J. Lo´pez, J. A. Alonso, The optimum average nanopore size for hydrogen storage

in carbon nanoporous materials, Carbon 45 (2007) 2649–2658.

[62] J. S. Tse, S. N. Yurchenko, L. Zhechkov, T. Heine, G. Seifert, Graphene nanostructures as tunable

storage media for molecular hydrogen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102 (2005) 10439–10444.

[63] R. E. Franklin, Crystallite growth in graphitizing and nongraphitizing carbons, Proc. Roy. Soc.

(London) 209 (1951) 196–218.

[64] M.-S. Park, S.-E. Lee, M. I. Kim, Y.-S. Lee, CO2 adsorption characteristics of slit-pore shaped

activated carbon prepared from cokes with high crystallinity, Carbon Lett. 16 (2015) 45–50.

[65] J.  Guo,  J.  R.  Morris,  Y.  Ihm,  C.  I.  Contescu,  N.  C.  Gallego,  G.  Duscher,  S.  J.  Pennycook,

M. F. Chisholm, Topological defects: Origin of nanopores and enhanced adsorption performance in 
nanoporous carbon, Small 8 (2012) 3283–3288.

[66] G. Kresse, J. Furthmu¨ller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using

a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54 (1996) 11169–11186.

[67] G. Kresse, J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals, Phys. Rev. B 47 (1993) 558-

561.

[68] P. E. Blöchl, Projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B 50 (1994) 17953–17979.

[69] S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich, H. Krieg, A consistent and accurate ab initio parametrization of

density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 elements H-Pu, J. Chem. Phys. 132
(2010) 154104.

[70] P. Parrila, K. Gross, K. Hurst, T. Gennet, Recommended volumetric capacity definitios and protocols

for accurate, standardized and unambiguous metrics for hydrogen storage materials, Appl. Physics A
(2016)    122–201doi:10.1007/s00339-016-9654-1.

[71] B. A. Younglove, Thermophysical properties of fluids I. Argon, ethylene, parahydrogen, nitrogen,

nitrogen trifluoride and oxygen, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Suppl. 11 (1982) 1–356.

[72] R. L. Mills, D. H. Liebenberg, J. C. Bronson, L. C. Schmidt, Equation of state of fluid n-H2 from P-

V-T and sound velocity measurements to 20 kbar, J. Chem. Phys. 66 (1977) 3076–84.

[73] I. Cabria, Comparison of theoretical methods of the hydrogen storage capacities of nanoporous

carbons, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 46 (2021) 12192–12205.

[74] D. M. Ceperley, B. J. Alder, Ground state of the electron gas by a stochastic method, Phys. Rev. Lett.

45 (7) (1980) 566–569.

[75] J. P. Perdew, A. Zunger, Self-interaction correction to density-functional approximations for many-

electron systems, Phys. Rev. B 23 (1981) 5048.

[76] F. W. Averill, Calculation of the cohesive energies and bulk properties of the alkali metals, Phys. Rev.


25

B 6 (1972) 3637–3642. doi:doi:10.1103/physrevb.6.3637.

[77] K. T. Chan, J. B. Neaton, M. L. Cohen, First-principles study of metal adatom adsorption on

graphene, Phys. Rev. B 77 (2008) 235430.

[78] P. Alvarez-Zapatero, A. Herrero, A. Lebon, L. J. Gallego, A. Vega, Ab initio study of lithium

decoration of popgraphene and hydrogen storage capacity of the hybrid nanostructure, Int. J.
Hydrogen Energy 46 (2021) 15274.

[79] N.
C.
WebBook,
webbook.nist.gov/chemistry, accessed January 21, 2023 (2022). 
doi:

10.18434/T4D303.

[80] K. P. Huber, G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure. IV. Constants of Diatomic 

Molecules, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1979. doi:10.1007/978-1-4757-0961-2.

[81] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 77 (1996) 3865–3868.

[82] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Errata: Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 78 (1997) 1396.


26

Supporting Information

Li-decorated BC3 nanopores. Promising materials for

hydrogen storage

I. Cabriaa , A. Lebon b , M. B. Torres c, L. J. Gallego d , A. Vega a

a Departamentode Fı́sica Teórica, Atómica y Óptica, Universidad de Valladolid, ES-47011 Valladolid,

Spain

b Laboratoire de Chimie Electrochimie Moléculaire et Chimie Analytique, Université de Brest, UMR

CNRS 6521, F-29285 Brest,France

c Departamento de Matemáticas y Computación, Escuela Politécnica Superior, Universidad de Burgos, ES-

09006 Burgos, Spain

d Área de Fı́sica de la Materia Condensada, Departamento de Fı́sica de Partı́culas, Facultad de Fı́sica,

Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, ES-15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain

Keywords:  Hydrogen  storage,  2D  materials,  boron-based  materials,  Li-decorated  materials,  density-
functional theory, statistical physics


27

1. Local minima of the interaction potential and comparison of the potentials obtained with
the different exchange-correlation functional


28


29

2. Exact and approximated relationships between the adsorbed volumetric and
gravimetric hydrogen
storage capacities
There is an exact relationship between the adsorbed volumetric and gravimetric hydrogen storage capacities.
According to Eq. 6 of the main text, the mass of the adsorbed hydrogen is given by 
massH adsorbed (P,T) =vc (P, T)Vpore . In the case of slit-shaped pores, mass adsorbent material = σads 2S , here σ ads is the
mass surface density of a sheet of the slit pore and S is the surface of one sheet. The origin of the factor 2 is
that the slitpore is formed by two sheets. Hence, Eq. 8 of the main text can be written exactly as

 gc= 100 vc⋅w

vc⋅ w+2σads

= 100 x

x+1 (S1)

being x = vc w/2σads > 0, a dimensionless magnitude.

We now note that the adsorbed volumetric capacity as a function of the pore width w has some maximum and
then decreases slowly towards a constant value (see Fig. 7 of the main text). Hence, according to the exact
Eq. S1, the adsorbed gravimetric capacity is an increasing function of the variable x, but not an increasing
function of w. To be more precise, gc is an increasing function of the product vcw, since the mass surface
density, σads , is constant for slit pores of the same type, as can be noticed in Table S1.

The ranges of values of the adsorbed volumetric capacity, the pore width and the product of these two
quantities are shown in Table S2.

The data in Tables S1 and S2 prove that v c w is smaller or much smaller than 2σ ads . The dimensionless
magnitude x in Table S2 shows how much small is v c w compared to 2σ ads : it is between 0.0002 and 0.4.
Therefore, it is a reasonable approximation to make x/(x + 1) ≈ x for graphene and Li-decorated BC 3 slit


30

pores with a small value of x. Applying this approach to Eq. S1, we obtain the approximate equation

gc≈100 x=100 vc⋅ w

2σads

(S2)

The exact and the approximated (Eq. S2) adsorbed gravimetric capacities for Li-decorated BC3 slit pores at
298.15 K and 25 MPa are compared in Fig. S3. As it can be noticed, the approximation is very good.

When comparing the adsorbed gravimetric capacities of graphene and Li-decorated BC3 slit pores, it must
be taken into account that the surface densities of their corresponding sheets are very similar (see Table S1).
Hence, the differences in the adsorbed gravimetric capacities of the slit pores can be mainly ascribed to
differences in the adsorbed volumetric capacities. Inserting the approximation σgraphene ≈ σLi−decorated BC3 into
Eq. S2, it can be obtained, for the same pore width w, the approximated equation

gc(BC3Li)

gc (graphene) ≈

vc(BC3Li)

vc (graphene)

 (S3)

In order to test this equation, we have plotted in Fig. S4 the ratio of the adsorbed gravimetric capacities,

gc(BC3Li)

gc (graphene)

 vs the ratio of adsorbed volumetric capacities, vc(BC3Li)

vc (graphene)

, at 298.15 K and 25 MPa for

pore widths between 4.6 and 20 Å. The graph proves that Eq. S3 is very well satisfied. That equation contains
two approximations explained before: x/(x + 1) ≈ x, where x = vcw/2σads, and σ graphene≈σ Li−decoratedBC3.


31

3. Location of highest gravimetric capacity

According to Eq. S2, the adsorbed gravimetric capacity is approximately proportional to the product vcw.
Therefore, the maximum value of gc is not located at the maximum value of vc , but at the maximum value of
vcw. Let’s call wmaxgc the value of the pore width for which the maximum of gc is found. The derivative of gc
with respect to w must be zero at that point. This implies that

(

dvc
dw)w=wmaxgc

wmaxgc+vc(wmaxgc)=0(S4)

This equation turns into

w maxgc=

− vc(wmaxgc)

(

dvc
dw)

w=wmaxgc

(S5)

Now, we focus in the region in which w > wmaxvc , where wmaxvc is the location of the maximum of the
volumetric capacity. The derivative of v c with respect to w is negative in that region (see Fig. 7 of the main
text). Hence, Eq. S5 turns finally into

w maxgc=

vc(wmaxgc)

|(

dvc
dw)

w=wmaxgc|

(S6)

The absolute value of the derivative or slope of the adsorbed v c in that region when the orientation of the H 2
molecule is not fixed is smaller than for the fixed orientation. Besides, in the mentioned region, v c is larger
for the non-fixed orientation than for the fixed orientation. Therefore, according to Eq. S6, the pore width
corresponding to the maximum of the adsorbed gravimetric capacity (wmaxgc ) for the non-fixed orientation is
larger than for the fixed orientation, i.e., the highest adsorbed gravimetric capacities for the non-fixed
orientation are located at larger pore widths, as it can be observed in the results shown in Fig. 7 and Table 1
of the main text.


32

4. Additional results for the total and usable hydrogen storage capacities of
Li-decorated BC3 slitpores


33


34

Acknowledgments This research was financially supported by the Spanish MICINN (Grant PGC2018-
093745-B-I00) and the Xunta de Galicia (GRC ED431C 2020/10). We also acknowledge the use of the high
performance computing equipment of the Pole de Calcul Intensif pour la Mer (DATARMOR, Brest) and the
Centro de Proceso de Datos - Parque Cientifico (UVa).


