1 
 

Understanding heat dissipation factors for fixed-tilt and single-

axis tracked open-rack photovoltaic modules: experimental 

insights 

 

Johannes Pretorius1*, Shaun Nielsen1 

1Department of Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, Stellenbosch University 

Private Bag X1, Matieland, 7602, Stellenbosch, South Africa 

*Corresponding author, jpp@sun.ac.za 

 

Abstract 

This paper presents the results of long-term experiments conducted on fixed-tilt (FT) and 

single-axis tracked (SAT) open-rack photovoltaic (PV) modules in South Africa. Utilizing 

Faiman's heat dissipation model and data filtering method, the study demonstrates favourable 

comparisons of FT experimental results with literature, while yielding novel heat dissipation 

factors for SAT modules. Enhanced heat dissipation is observed in no/low wind conditions for 

SAT modules compared to FT modules. Analyses reveal the influence of plane-of-array (POA) 

irradiance, wind speed and direction on module temperature, with SAT modules exhibiting 

greater heat dissipation stability. An investigation into data filtering methods suggests minor 

sensitivity for both configurations, with a slightly more pronounced impact on SAT modules. 

Assessments comparing module temperature predictions using diverse heat dissipation factors 

for FT modules reveal negligible sensitivity. This suggests that exact heat dissipation factor 

values may not be crucial for accurate predictions of module temperature in FT open-rack 

systems. Annual power output simulations using PVsyst software demonstrate a 2.9% and 

3.3% enhancement for FT and SAT configurations, respectively, when employing 

experimentally determined heat dissipation factors. These findings highlight the importance of 

realistic, configuration-specific heat dissipation factors in optimizing PV system performance, 

particularly in the competitive context of modern PV power plant construction and techno-

economic calculations. 

Keywords: solar PV; renewables; heat transfer; open-rack; single-axis tracking 

 

 


2 
 

1. Introduction 

The power output of solar PV arrays is affected by their operational efficiency, which in turn 

depend on the temperatures experienced by the module cells. Heat dissipation from PV 

modules plays a major role in determining module temperature, with the effectiveness of heat 

dissipation in PV arrays being influenced by the installation configuration [1]. The accurate 

calculation of heat dissipation therefore merits careful consideration when designing and 

analysing PV systems.  

Module efficiency reductions with temperature are universal, regardless of mounting 

configuration or module type. For each degree rise in module operating temperature, typical 

conversion efficiency reductions of 0.3% - 0.5% have been reported [2]. 

Various steady-state models for predicting PV module temperature have been proposed. 

Among these, an early study by Ross [3] determined a coefficient for relating module 

temperature to ambient temperature and POA irradiance. A study by Servant [4] developed a 

heat exchange model based on experimental measurements for module temperature, ambient 

temperature, POA irradiance and wind speed. From the site measurements, three coefficients 

are obtained to define his model. King et al. [5] measured the same parameters during their 

experiments. Testing considered open-rack and insulated modules and the model included 

coefficients to account for differences in configuration. An energy balance approach is 

followed by Mattei et al. [6] to produce an experimentally validated model which predicts 

module temperature and proposes relations for evaluation of an overall heat dissipation factor. 

Faiman [7] conducted experiments on seven different types of PV modules in open-rack 

configuration and proposed a simple model based on the Hottel-Whillier-Bliss equation [8, 9]. 

His method uses linear regression to obtain two heat dissipation constants that describe the heat 

transfer from the module to the environment. Semi-empirical explicit correlations are presented 

by Skoplaki et al. [10], together with a dimensionless mounting parameter to account for 

different setups. Work by Kaplani and Kaplanis [11] develop a thermal model and use 

experimental data to assess the dependence of module temperature on wind direction and 

speed, as well as module inclination and orientation. Santos et al. [12] presents a review paper 

on the available module temperature prediction models in literature. Kaplanis et al. [13] 

evaluates several of the semi-empirical models which have been proposed for the prediction of 

PV module temperature. They develop their own compact model which accounts for deviation 

of operating conditions from Standard Operating Conditions, efficiency, ageing, geometry, and 


3 
 

cell technology. The model is employed to predict module temperatures for a range of 

configurations, including fixed-tilt and double-axis tracked open-rack systems.  

The model by Faiman [7] has been widely adopted as basis for the calculation of module 

temperatures during PV system design and sizing. The commercial software PVSyst [14], for 

example, utilizes the Faiman model in its determination of heat dissipation from a PV array. 

The user is required to input specific heat dissipation factors based on the module 

configuration, whereafter the software calculates annual power output based on the annualized 

meteorological data at the location (solar irradiation, ambient temperature, and wind speed).  

The PV module temperature according to this model is calculated from: 

𝑇𝑇𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 = 𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎 + �
𝐻𝐻

𝑈𝑈0′+𝑈𝑈1′·𝑉𝑉𝑤𝑤� 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 

where the modified heat dissipation factors 𝑈𝑈0
′  and 𝑈𝑈1
′ are determined using: 

𝑈𝑈0
′ =
𝑈𝑈0
𝜂𝜂0−𝜂𝜂𝑒𝑒 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 

𝑈𝑈1
′ =
𝑈𝑈1
𝜂𝜂0−𝜂𝜂𝑒𝑒  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 

In this context, 𝑈𝑈0 is the constant heat dissipation factor, which encompasses the influence of 

radiation and natural convection heat transfer with the environment. The factor 𝑈𝑈1, on the other 

hand, represents the wind-dependent heat dissipation factor. Lastly, ηo and ηe denote the optical 

and electrical efficiency of the PV module, respectively, while H is the POA irradiance. 

A number of research studies, utilizing Faiman’s model, have performed experimental 

investigations to determine Faiman’s heat dissipation factors for PV modules in various 

installation configurations. Most of this work has focussed on open-rack applications, while 

some building-integrated PV (BIPV) [13, 15, 17, 18], building-attached PV (BAPV) [13, 16, 

17] and floating solar PV (FPV) [19] scenarios are also considered.   

The focus of this paper is on PV module heat dissipation for FT and SAT open-rack 

applications, according to the Faiman approach. Considering this emphasis, the following 

contributions from literature for FT installations are noteworthy. Faiman [7] himself obtains 

values for 𝑈𝑈0
′ = 25 W/m2K and 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 6.8 Ws/m3K. A long-term experimental study by Koehl et 

al. [20] in the Negev desert and at an Alpine site in Germany attain average values of 

𝑈𝑈0
′ = 27- 28 W/m2K and 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 6-8 Ws/m3K. The PV modules were tested using resistive loads 

that allow module operation near their maximum power point. Their study implemented a data 

filtering approach according to the IEC 61853-2 standard [21], which also adopts the Faiman 


4 
 

method for the calculation of module temperature. In their investigation, Barykina and Hammer 

[22] assessed the heat dissipation factors at five distinct locations where open-rack modules 

were deployed. Their observations, conducted over a span of six months, indicated the 

following variations in heat dissipation factors for poly-crystalline silicon modules: 

𝑈𝑈0
′ = 30- 42 W/m2K and 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 3-8 Ws/m3K. 

There is a lack of available literature that addresses heat dissipation factors specifically for 

SAT open-rack PV configurations.  

It is also worth noting that PVsyst employs default (unaccented) heat dissipation factors of 

𝑈𝑈0 = 29 W/m2K and 𝑈𝑈1 = 0 Ws/m3K for any open-rack installation. The 𝑈𝑈0 is effectively 

inflated to account for the contribution of wind, due to the potential unreliability of site-specific 

wind data. 

As seen in the preceding information, even the literature on a single PV configuration (FT 

open-rack) presents a spectrum of values for heat dissipation factors. This seems to suggest the 

case-specific nature of these factors, or alternatively a sensitivity of the values to certain 

conditions, test details or even data processing methods. 

This paper undertakes experiments at the same site to compare FT and SAT open-rack PV 

configurations. It introduces a novel aspect by developing heat dissipation factors specifically 

for SAT configurations. Additionally, the paper conducts an in-depth data analysis with the 

goal of quantifying the interplay between various variables that impact heat dissipation factors. 

Furthermore, it assesses the sensitivities of heat dissipation factors to daily fluctuations and 

evaluates the impact of different data filtering methods. 

2. Experimental methodology 

This section describes details of the test site, experimental setup, equipment, method, and data 

processing. 

2.1 Test site 

All tests were conducted at the Stellenbosch University Renewable Energy Center (SUNREC) 

facility, located approximately 10 km outside Stellenbosch, South Africa. Experimental 

measurements for several solar photovoltaic and solar thermal projects are hosted at the facility. 

The site consists of open farmland, which is ideal for measurements on PV arrays in open-rack 

configuration. 

 


5 
 

2.2 Experimental layout and equipment 

Figure 1 shows the layout of the experiment at SUNREC, where the PV modules installed in 

SAT (modules 1 and 2) and FT (modules 3 and 4) configurations are depicted. Modules 1 and 

2 were mounted on the available space of a single-axis tracker forming part of other ongoing 

measurements on site. This tracker runs North-South, meaning that tracking rotates from East 

to West during the day. The FT modules 3 and 4 were mounted on a structure with fixed tilt, 

facing due North. Table 1 offers a summary of the test site coordinates (including height above 

mean sea level (HAMSL) and height above ground level (HAGL)), PV module specifications, 

and setup details for the two mounting configurations.  

During the testing period, PV module temperature, meteorological conditions, and SAT 

position data was monitored at the site. A schematic of the equipment position and connections 

is presented in Figure 2. 

 

Figure 1: Layout of experiment at SUNREC 

 
 


6 
 

Table 1: Test site, PV module specification and setup overview 

Parameter
Specification / value

PV module
CS3W-420P

PV cell type
Poly-crystalline

Module dimensions
2108x1048x40 mm

Nominal max. power
420 W

Latitude
-33.853427°

Longitude
18.823940°

HAMSL
177 m

HAGL
1.5 m

Configuration
FT
SAT

No. of modules
2
2

Orientation
Portrait
Landscape

Tracking
-
East-West

Tilt angle
31°
0°

Module azimuth
0°
0°

 

 

Figure 2: Schematic of equipment position and connections 

 

The measurement system was selected to provide wireless transmission of data, remote 

monitoring and access to data, as well as data storage. PV module temperature was measured 


7 
 

at the central and corner cells of each module, using two T-type thermocouples. The exposed 

junctions of the thermocouples were affixed to the back surface of each module using 

aluminium tape. Another shielded T-type thermocouple was used as a secondary measurement 

of ambient temperature. These nine thermocouples connected to a 12-channel Lord TC-link-

200 temperature sensor node, which logs and transmits the data wirelessly to a Lord WSDA 

base station. The TC-link node operates using lithium batteries, with a 12 V backup battery. A 

50 W solar panel charges the backup battery via a Pulse Width Modulator (PWM) charge 

controller. The node and its power supply were fitted in a weatherproof enclosure close to the 

PV modules.  

A Lord G-link 200 accelerometer node was installed on the SAT torque tube. This sensor 

logged and transmitted the tilt angle of the SAT modules wirelessly to the base station. The 

tracker undergoes a continuous adjustment process, starting horizontally in the morning and 

making subsequent adjustments at five-minute intervals throughout the day. This sequential 

modification results in a linear alteration of the tracker's angle, allowing it to continually align 

with the sun's position. When shading is detected, the tracker readjusts to a relatively horizontal 

position during the nighttime hours. 

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 3: (a) In-plane pyranometer for FT modules, (b) In-plane pyranometer for SAT modules, 
(c) Weather station 

 

Solar irradiance, ambient temperature, and wind speed were measured using a Campbell 

Scientific portable CR310 weather station [23]. Figure 1 and Figure 3 (c) show the weather 

station, which was installed approximately 5 m away from each mounting structure. The 

primary ambient temperature measurement was recorded using a shielded HygroVUE5 digital 

temperature sensor. Wind speed and direction measurements were obtained via a R.M. Young 

03002 wind sentry and vane. The POA irradiance was determined by positioning Kipp & Zonen 


8 
 

CMP10 pyranometers in-plane with the FT and SAT structures, as depicted in Figure 3 (a) and 

(b) respectively. Further specifications of the instruments used to measure the experimental 

variables are listed Table 2. 

Table 2: Experimental variables and corresponding instrument specifications 

Variable
Sensor
Accuracy
Range

H
Kipp & Zonen CMP10
7 - 14 μV/W/m2
Measuring:
0 to 4000 W/m2 

Operating: 
-40 to 80 °C 
Spectral: 
285 to 2800 nm 

𝑉𝑉𝑤𝑤
R.M. Young 03002
±0.5 m/s
Measuring:
0 to 50 m/s 
Operating: 
-50 to 50 °C 

Tmod 
T-type thermocouple
±1 °C
-200 to 200 °C

Tamb 
HygroVUE5
±0.4 °C
-40 to 70 °C

 

Maximum power point tracking (MPPT) charge controllers were not at our disposal for this 

investigation; however, load resistors were available. Although load resistors cannot guarantee 

that the PV modules function precisely at their maximum power point, they do ensure that the 

modules operate as close to real-world installations as our available experimental equipment 

allows. The connection of modules to load resistors also facilitates comparisons with previous 

research that utilized resistive loads in their experimental setups. We connected the load 

resistors in series to our four PV modules.  

The base station facilitates communication between the node and a personal computer (PC). It 

manages the wireless data transmission within the network and enables real-time data 

visualization and up-to-date data collection. It connects to the PC via Universal Serial Bus 

(USB) and interfaces with compatible software, which stores the recorded data for remote 

access. 

The PC was situated within a repurposed shipping container on site, positioned approximately 

90 m away from the modules. To enable remote data collection and system monitoring, a 

mobile router was linked to the PC, which had remote access capabilities. An Uninterruptible 

Power Supply (UPS) was installed to guarantee continuous power supply and data collection. 


9 
 

The weather data was gathered using Campbell Scientific’s CR300 datalogger. The PC400 

datalogger support software was used for unit programming and remote data collection via PC 

and the LoggerLink app allowed for data collection directly to a mobile phone. 

2.3 Test method 

All instruments were calibrated prior to testing. After commencement of the experiment, data 

was collected 24 hours a day. Instruments recorded averaged values over 1-minute intervals. 

Data was accessed remotely, while periodic site visits were done to check the equipment and 

setup condition. 

2.4 Data processing 

The module temperature models developed for steady state analysis typically determine 

parameters used to model a representative value of the average temperature across a module 

and an average across an array in the case of power output simulations. In this work, the module 

temperature was calculated by averaging the two thermocouple measurements for each module. 

Fluctuations in conditions during testing can influence the accuracy of a model and filtering is 

applied to limit the analysis to times of relatively stable conditions. Such filtering is standard 

practice for thermal measurements on PV modules and the IEC 61853-2 standard [21] has 

defined measurement and filtering requirements. 

The main concern of this study and associated results was developing heat dissipation factors 

according to the Faiman model, and as such the decision was made to implement the filtering 

strategy originally deployed by Faiman [7], with data points taken as averaged values over 5-

minute intervals with the following filters: 

• Clear sky days – no irradiance fluctuation during analysis period. 

• Analysis between 10:00 and 14:00. 

The reason for this period of data selection was to reduce noise in the data resulting from 

dividing small numbers by small numbers [7]. This occurrence would readily occur early or 

late in the day with smaller temperature differences. Before and after this period it is also 

expected to see larger changes to irradiance which is not suitable for a steady state model.  

In addition to the above strategy from [7], the IEC standard [21] was used as a guideline, and 

the following criteria were also incorporated into the data processing procedure: 

• Acceptable analysis should consist of data points from at least ten different days, each 

of those days should have at least ten data points before and after solar noon. 


10 
 

• Use 5-minute average wind speeds when plotting. A range of data points along the x-

axis should cover at least 4 m/s. 

• From all acceptable data points, calculate the average module temperature and plot 

𝐻𝐻/(𝑇𝑇𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 − 𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎) as a function of the 5-minute average wind speed. Use linear 

regression to determine the slope and intercept (𝑈𝑈1
′ and 𝑈𝑈0
′ respectively) of the model. 

• Report dates of experiment and the heat dissipation factors 𝑈𝑈0
′ and 𝑈𝑈1
′. 

The standard [21] encompasses a broader set of criteria for data collection, data filtering, and 

evaluation details when compared to the methodology employed in this research. Our 

equipment and data sampling method does, however, provide sufficient accuracy to be 

comparable with testing according to the letter of the standard. The study’s approach to filtering 

does not deviate from the idea of presenting steady state data. Rather, it is in keeping with 

Faiman’s original work, with valuable criteria from the standard [21] adding quality to the data 

set while being practically achievable within the scope of this study.  

The standard [21] goes on by noting that heat dissipation factors are ultimately used in the 

calculation of annualized energy yield and advises to check the coefficient impact on yields, 

and not only considering parameter uncertainty. This comparison will be conducted in Section 

4, wherein we will assess the impact of the acquired heat dissipation factors on PV annual 

energy yield simulations through the utilization of PVsyst. 

3. Experimental results and discussion 

This section presents the experimental results. Initially, a normalized distribution of the main 

experimental variables is given to provide context on the range of environmental conditions 

experienced during testing. Thereafter, general trends of the measured parameters are shown. 

Subsequently, we present the heat dissipation factors acquired for both FT and SAT 

configurations, followed by an exploration of the distinctions and the corresponding heat 

transfer mechanisms. The sections that follow explore the relationships between irradiance, 

wind speed and module temperature, and investigate the sensitivity of heat dissipation factor 

values to the method of data filtering and daily variations.  

3.1 Environmental conditions 

Histograms of wind speed (Vw), ambient temperature (Tamb) and POA irradiance (H) are shown 

in Figure 4 and Figure 5 for the respective FT and SAT data sets.  


11 
 

 

Figure 4: Histogram of measured parameters for FT configuration 

 

 

Figure 5: Histogram of measured parameters for SAT configuration 

 

Data was collected during the period 30/03/2023 to 07/08/2023, where 44 days of a possible 

131 met the criteria specified for a clear sky day. Due to tracker limitations, only 20 days 

proved satisfactory for inclusion into the final SAT data set. Normalizations are done using the 

following maximum parameter values: 𝑉𝑉𝑤𝑤,𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚 = 6.37 𝑚𝑚/𝑠𝑠, 𝐻𝐻𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚 = 1175.2 𝑊𝑊/𝑚𝑚2, 


12 
 

𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎,𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚 = 32.8℃ for the FT data set and 𝑉𝑉𝑤𝑤,𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚 = 6.19 𝑚𝑚/𝑠𝑠, 𝐻𝐻𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚 = 996.7 𝑊𝑊/𝑚𝑚2, 

𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎,𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚 = 28.4℃ for the SAT data set. 

From Figure 4 and Figure 5, the distributions for wind speed and ambient temperature are 

predictably similar for measurements at the same site, except for slight variations due to the 

difference in final data set between the configurations. The histogram for POA irradiance for 

the FT modules shows a relatively symmetrical distribution, compared to the left-skewed 

distribution of the SAT configuration. These distributions are functions of the typical daily 

variation of H for the two different configurations (see Figure 6), the irradiance conditions 

during the seasons when testing occurred and the variation in comparative final data set. 

3.2 Daily trends 

Figure 6 presents a comparison of the POA irradiance experienced by the FT and SAT modules 

on a typical test day.  

 

Figure 6: Comparative plot of POA irradiance on a typical test day 

 

The impact of the tracker, which maintains high irradiance on the surfaces of the SAT modules 

throughout a significant portion of the day, is clearly evident. Despite the irradiance 

enhancement provided by the tracker, the FT modules still experience greater daily maximum 

POA irradiance due to their North-facing orientation.  

Experimental measurements for three selected days of the testing period are shown in Figure 7 

to Figure 9. Data is presented for the isolated test window between 10:00 and 14:00, as 

previously discussed.  


13 
 

 

Figure 7: Plot comparison of the experimental conditions on 13/03/2023 for the FT (solid lines) 
and SAT (dotted lines) configurations 

 

Figure 8: Plot comparison of the experimental conditions on 30/04/2023 for the FT (solid lines) 
and SAT (dotted lines) configurations 

 

A number of trends are visible from these plots. In Figure 7, the module temperature 

demonstrates an inverse relationship with the wind speed profile, decreasing as the wind speed 

increases and vice versa as the wind speed reduces. The effect of POA irradiance on module 

temperature is also evident. Earlier in the day, the FT module temperature is lower than the 

SAT module temperature, while later in the day this trend is reversed. The relative module 

temperatures align with the magnitude of the POA irradiance experienced on the respective FT 

and SAT modules. 


14 
 

 

Figure 9: Plot comparison of the experimental conditions on 25/06/2023 for the FT (solid lines) 
and SAT (dotted lines) configurations 

 

Figure 8 shows that, during a day of low wind speed, the module temperatures follow the trends 

of the corresponding POA irradiance curves closely. Under these conditions, module 

temperature differences of approximately 10-15°C between the FT and SAT modules are 

observed. In contrast, for a day with similar irradiance trends but higher wind speed, as in 

Figure 9, module temperatures differences between the configurations are minimal.  

The daily trends therefore unmistakably affirm the anticipated significant impact of irradiance 

on module temperatures, as it governs the heat flux absorbed by the modules. Simultaneously, 

wind speed plays a crucial role in facilitating heat dissipation from the modules, contributing 

to the observed temperature variations. 

3.3 Heat dissipation of FT and SAT configurations 

Figure 10 summarizes the experimental data for the FT configuration. In this figure, Equation 1 

is manipulated to plot 𝐻𝐻/(𝑇𝑇𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 − 𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎) versus wind speed, which represents the effective 

heat dissipation characteristic of the modules. Over the testing period, 3378 5-minute averaged 

data points were collected between 10:00 and 14:00. An increasing trend is observed, which 

indicates the expected enhancement in heat dissipation from the modules with wind speed. 

Higher levels of scatter at higher wind speeds indicate that heat dissipation is more sensitive 

under these conditions, potentially also due to some wind speed fluctuations occurring at such 

times. 


15 
 

 

Figure 10: Plot of H/(Tmod – Tamb) versus wind speed for the FT configuration, and the 
associated linear fit for all clear sky 5-minute data points 

 

Performing linear regression using the method of least squares on the collected data enabled 

the determination of the 𝑈𝑈0
′ and 𝑈𝑈1
′ heat dissipation factors. The obtained values of 

𝑈𝑈0
′ = 25.7 W/m2K and 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 9.8 Ws/m3K compare well to those initially determined by 

Faiman [7] (𝑈𝑈0
′ = 25 W/m2K, 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 6.8 Ws/m3K, R2 = 0.63). The R2 value here is higher but 

has included data from more clear sky days over a longer period. Owen et al. [24] attained 

open-rack heat dissipation factors of 𝑈𝑈0
′ = 26.5 W/m2K and 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 5.2 Ws/m3K at a tilt angle of 

23°. Their experimental site was located on a rooftop solar laboratory while the current 

SUNREC site is open farmland at ground level. This suggests that 𝑈𝑈1
′ is sensitive to the local 

wind conditions experienced at the test site.  

A mean module temperature prediction was also produced from the above data, which resulted 

in a Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of 2.55°C. Faiman [7] and Owen et al. [24] reported a 

RMSE of 1.86°K and 3.72°C respectively. Barykina and Hammer [22] conducted a validation 

using 15-minute averages which resulted in an average RMSE of 1.94°C for the polycrystalline 

modules across five test sites. The RMSE magnitude for the FT configuration of this study is 

therefore comparable to previous research. 

Turning to the SAT configuration in Figure 11, 1746 acceptable data points were obtained for 

5-minute averaged intervals between 10:00 and 14:00. The SAT results exhibit an improved 


16 
 

correlation to a linear trend (R2 = 0.85) compared to the FT setup, with consistent heat 

dissipation increases with higher wind speed. Notably, there is an absence of significant scatter 

at higher wind speeds in the SAT plot. 

 

Figure 11: Plot of H/(Tmod – Tamb) versus wind speed for the SAT configuration, and the 
associated linear fit for all clear sky 5-minute data points 

 

Extracted from the SAT data are heat dissipation factors of 𝑈𝑈0
′ = 29.9 W/m2K and 

𝑈𝑈1
′ = 9.7 Ws/m3K, which achieve an improved RMSE of 1.44°C compared to the FT scenario. 

The similarity in 𝑈𝑈1
′ values between the SAT and FT configurations implies that the 

determination of this value is significantly influenced by site conditions and the comparable 

level of exposure from the open-racked FT and SAT modules. The achieved 𝑈𝑈0
′ value is higher 

than for the FT configuration. Given the absence of prior literature on SAT configurations, 

further discussion will compare these results with those of the FT configuration. 

As previously mentioned, the SAT configuration produced less usable data than the FT 

configuration. To enable a direct comparison, the FT data set was restricted to the same 1746 

intervals utilized for the SAT evaluation. This adjustment did not significantly impact the 

values of the heat dissipation factors, with the values changing slightly to 𝑈𝑈0
′ = 25.6 W/m2K 

and 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 10.3 Ws/m3K for the FT modules. 

The time average plots of Figure 12 to Figure 14 show the average value of the variable in the 

data set at each time over the duration of the limited comparable time period, with the 


17 
 

maximum and minimum values included, for both the FT and SAT configurations. The trends 

of Figure 12 are the same as those presented in Figure 6, but limited to times between 10:00 

and 14:00. 

Figure 12: Time average plot of POA irradiance for the FT (left) and SAT modules (right) 

Figure 13: Time average plot of module temperature for the FT (left) and SAT modules (right) 

 

The module temperature trends of Figure 13 plainly follow the corresponding irradiance trends 

of Figure 12, and show that the temperatures experienced by the FT modules are consistently 

higher than those of the SAT modules. 


18 
 

Figure 14: Time average plot of effective heat dissipation for the FT modules (left) and the SAT 
modules (right) 

 

As noted in Section 3.2, the main drivers of module temperature are POA irradiance and wind 

speed. From Figure 12 it is clear that the POA irradiance on the East-West tracking SAT 

modules is very consistent, but significantly lower compared to the North-facing FT modules 

between 10:00 and 14:00 over the test period. The respective FT and SAT wind-dependant heat 

dissipation factors of 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 9.7 Ws/m3K and 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 10.3 Ws/m3K are comparable, indicating a 

similar forced convection cooling effect for both configurations during times of significant 

wind speed. Under no / low wind conditions, the higher 𝑈𝑈0
′ = 29.9 W/m2K factor of the SAT 

modules versus 𝑈𝑈0
′ = 25.7 W/m2K for the FT modules indicates enhanced heat dissipation for 

the tracking modules. The SAT modules spend significant time between 10:00 and 14:00 at 

lower inclination angles than the FT modules. In terms of natural convection, at lower 

inclination angles the front surface of the SAT modules would experience rising thermals, 

while the front surface of the FT modules would experience a stable boundary layer as the air 

rises over the inclined surface. This would produce a higher heat transfer rate for the SAT 

modules. The rear surfaces of both the SAT and FT modules would experience a stable 

boundary layer, while the heat dissipation from the SAT rear surface would be lower due to 

the low inclination. Radiation losses from the SAT rear surface to a cooler ground surface 

would be higher than for the FT modules, due to a higher view factor with the ground. 

Figure 15 indicates that wind direction also plays a role in the heat dissipation characteristics 

of the FT and SAT modules. In this figure, a Northerly wind is denoted by 0° and a Southerly 

wind by 180°. The prevailing winds on site are generally from a Southerly or Westerly (270°) 

direction. 


19 
 

 

Figure 15: Colour bar of wind direction over the plot of H/(Tmod - Tamb) versus wind 
speed for the FT (left) and the SAT (right) configurations 

 

The left-hand side of Figure 15 indicates that greater heat dissipation is achieved from the FT 

modules with the wind from the South compared to the North. This finding correlates with the 

numerical and experimental observations of Glick et al. [25] for PV arrays. During times of 

higher winds from the South, the wind blows straight onto the back surface of the FT modules, 

while a Northerly wind blows into the front surface of the modules. Based on the insights by 

[25], it is expected that for Southerly winds, the flow will accelerate over the back face as it is 

forced underneath the module, while significant flow separation and recirculation will occur 

on the front face. During a North wind, little flow acceleration is expected over the front face, 

as the surface faces upward, with some recirculation and separation of flow over the back face. 

The acceleration and heightened mixing effects induced by Southerly winds consequently lead 

to superior heat dissipation compared to that with Northerly winds.  

In contrast, the SAT modules would experience boundary layer development over the front and 

rear surfaces during Southerly winds, as these would effectively act as flat plates relative to the 

wind direction. Based on forced convection heat transfer theory, heat dissipation from the SAT 

module surfaces would therefore be lower compared to the FT modules. A comparison of the 

left- and right-hand side of Figure 15 confirms enchanced heat dissipation factors for the FT 

modules during Southerly winds, which contributes to the slightly higher overall 𝑈𝑈1
′ value for 

this configuration. 

Figure 15 also shows that during low-speed winds (0-1 m/s) from the West, the SAT modules 

experience greater heat dissipation than the FT setup. Our hypothesis is that enhanced heat 


20 
 

dissipation is observed on the less inclined upper surface of the SAT modules due to more 

pronounced natural convection effects, as opposed to the heat transfer occurring across the 

comparatively stable boundary layer on the more inclined top surface of the FT module. As 

these conditions account for a significant portion of the overall data set, it results in the boosted 

𝑈𝑈0
′ value for the SAT configuration compared to the FT setup. 

Ultimately, the right-hand plot of Figure 14 indicates higher overall heat dissipation from the 

SAT modules over the test period. 

3.4 Interactions between irradiance, wind speed and temperature difference 

Figure 16 and Figure 17 display the relationships between heat dissipation, POA irradiance, 

wind speed and temperature difference for FT and SAT modules. 

 

Figure 16: Colour bar of temperature difference over the plot of H/(Tmod-Tamb) versus 
wind speed for the FT (left) and SAT (right) configurations 

 

Figure 16 clearly indicates the role that increasing wind speed has in reducing the temperature 

difference (effectively module temperature). Figure 17, in turn, shows a clear relationship 

between the temperature difference and POA irradiance. At constant wind speed, higher POA 

irradiance correlates to higher temperature difference. For constant POA irradiance, increasing 

wind speed causes a decreasing temperature difference. The temperature difference correlates 

well with different combinations of POA irradiance and wind speed. 

As discussed in the previous section, these figures confirm the following interesting findings 

when comparing the FT and SAT configurations:  


21 
 

• Higher overall module operating temperatures for the FT modules, therefore enhanced 

heat dissipation from SAT modules. This is especially clear under no / low wind 

conditions. 

• A greater level of data scatter for the FT modules, due to a larger range of irradiance 

incident on the North-facing surface as well as a sensitivity to wind direction. 

 

Figure 17: Colour bar of POA irradiance over the plot of H/(Tmod-Tamb) versus wind 
speed for the FT (left) and SAT (right) configurations 

 

3.5 Filtering effects 

In this section, we address the impact of the chosen data filtering approach on the predicted 

heat dissipation. While this study utilized the filtering approach of Faiman [7] (as motivated in 

Section 2.4), others ([20, 22]) have employed the specifications of the IEC 61853-2 standard 

[21]. The standard specifically rejects data according to the following filters: 

• Low irradiance filter: Irradiance values below 400 W/m2. 

• Irradiance fluctuations filter: Irradiance values for a 10-minute interval when the 

irradiance varies by more than 10% from the irradiance value during the preceding 10-

minute interval. 

• Wind fluctuations and gust filter: Wind speed values in a 10-minute interval which 

includes a deviation of the instantaneous wind speed below 0.25 m/s or gusts larger 

than +200% from the 10-min average. 

To evaluate the influence of filtering approach, the complete FT and SAT 5-minute averaged 

data sets between 30/03/2023 and 07/08/2023 were filtered according to the above method. For 


22 
 

the SAT configuration, periods of tracker malfunction were excluded from the pre-filtered data 

set. Figure 18 and Figure 19 present graphical comparisons of the remaining data after 

employing the filtering approach of [7] (a) and [21] (b). Of the available 34142 data points, for 

the FT configuration, 5166 points pass the IEC filters compared to 3378 for the Faiman filtering 

method. For the SAT configuration, of the available 24114 data points, 3072 points pass the 

IEC filters compared to 1746 points using the Faiman approach. 

 

Figure 18: Plot of H/(Tmod – Tamb) versus wind speed for the FT configuration, and the 
associated linear fit for (a) all clear sky 5-minute data points (b) anytime data with IEC [21] 
filters 

 

Figure 19: Plot of H/(Tmod – Tamb) versus wind speed for the SAT configuration, and the 
associated linear fit for (a) all clear sky 5-minute data points (b) anytime data with IEC [21] 
filters 

 

The IEC filtering method exhibits increased scatter because it encompasses data from diverse 

conditions throughout the testing period. The level of scatter amplification for the SAT 

configuration is more severe. While these modules may experience irradiance levels above the 


23 
 

minimum limit, small temperature differences between the module and ambient are often 

encountered early and late in the day. This makes the heat dissipation factor values particularly 

sensitive and prone to scatter away from the linear trend. In contrast, the Faiman method 

isolates the most stable conditions for data collection. While the IEC method selectively filters 

out only the most adverse conditions, it is not stringent enough to minimize variability to the 

extent observed in the clear sky plot. 

Table 3 shows a comparison of the heat dissipation factors derived from the data of Figure 18 

and Figure 19. Despite the differences in scatter for the FT modules, the overall results are very 

similar. This is not quite the case for the SAT modules, where differences in overall heat 

dissipation factors are more significant. 

Table 3: Comparative heat dissipation factors for FT and SAT configurations, showing effect of 
data filtering approach 

Filters
𝑼𝑼𝟎𝟎

′ (W/m2K)
𝑼𝑼𝟏𝟏

′ (Ws/m3K)
R2

FT clear sky (10:00-14:00)
25.7
9.8
0.80

FT IEC 61853-2
26.6
9.9
0.59

SAT clear sky (10:00-14:00)
29.9
9.7
0.85

SAT IEC 61853-2
26.2
11.2
0.55

 

Table 4 displays the heat dissipation factors reported by various sources for FT open-rack PV 

module configurations. The factors obtained in this study, through either filtering approach, 

align well with those found in the literature. Except for [22], the 𝑈𝑈0
′ values exhibit remarkable 

similarity across sources, whereas a range of 𝑈𝑈1
′ values is observed. The heat loss factors 

employed by PVsyst for the simulation of open-rack installations are also included for 

comparison.  

Table 4: Heat dissipation factors and temperature prediction comparison across 
literature sources for FT configuration 

Configuration
𝑼𝑼𝟎𝟎

′ (W/m2K)
𝑼𝑼𝟏𝟏

′ (Ws/m3K)
RMSE (°C)

Clear sky (10:00-14:00)
25.7
9.8
2.39

IEC 61853-2
26.6
9.9
2.38

Owen et al. [24] 23° tilt
26.5
5.2
2.82

Faiman [7]
25.0
6.84
2.65

Koehl et al. [20] Negev year 2
26.9
6.1
2.57

Barykina and Hammer [22]
34.5
4.44
2.52

PVsyst [14]*
41.4
0
3.07

 
*Assuming 𝜂𝜂𝑚𝑚 = 0.8 and 𝜂𝜂𝑒𝑒 = 0.1, as per [7] 


24 
 

To determine the sensitivity of module temperature prediction to specific heat dissipation 

factors, the following evaluation is performed. The evaluation is limited to the FT configuration 

only, due to the availability of published heat dissipation factors from other researchers. Based 

on the current study’s unfiltered data set (representing day and nighttime), the heat dissipation 

factors for each of the literature sources are used in turn to predict module temperature. The 

actual measured module temperatures are then compared to the predictions and a RMSE value 

is calculated for each model. It is expected that the heat dissipation factors defined by this work 

provide the best RMSE, since they are derived from the data set of measured temperature used 

in the prediction. Yet, results show that the heat dissipation factors from literature provide very 

similar results in terms of RMSE, even with the range of 𝑈𝑈0
′ and 𝑈𝑈1
′ values noted. It is 

interesting to note that the predictions by PVsyst show the greatest error. 

Three noteworthy conclusions can be drawn from these results. First, although the IEC filtering 

method had a more scattered plot and lower R2 value of fit compared to Faiman’s filtering 

approach, there was no inaccuracy as a result. Therefore, using the simpler Faiman method of 

filtering instead of the IEC filters shows no loss in accuracy when predicting the module 

temperature.  

Second, except for PVsyst, the heat dissipation factors from all relevant sources predicted 

module temperature for the FT open-rack configuration within 0.5°C of each other. This seems 

to suggest that the exact values of the heat dissipation factors are not crucial in the accuracy of 

predicting module temperature for FT open-rack modules. We believe that this insensitivity 

stems from the high level of exposure of both surfaces of open-rack installations to the 

environment. It would be our expectation that different BAPV systems, for example, would 

show greater sensitivity to the specific configuration and local conditions of the particular 

setup. It should however be noted that our above analysis considered heat dissipation factors 

within certain limits, as well as a single data set, and it is consequently not clear whether this 

finding will always be valid for FT open-rack systems. 

Thirdly, results suggest that it is preferable to consider both heat dissipation factors for 

prediction of module temperatures instead of an inflated 𝑈𝑈0
′ value only, even if accurate 

information is not available. 

3.6 Daily variation effects 

Among the 44 days with clear skies, Figure 20 highlights data from three specific days for the 

FT configuration, each distinguished by colour. The figure scrutinizes the behaviour and 


25 
 

impact of these days on the data set. Notably, two outlier days (depicted in red and blue) and 

one day which aligns with the linear trend (depicted in green) are observed. 

For the day marked by green indicators, the rising trend in heat dissipation factors corresponds 

to a gradual increase in wind speed spanning a considerable range throughout the day. During 

this period, there is minimal fluctuation in instantaneous wind speed, resulting in limited gusts 

and consequently, little variation in heat dissipation factors around the trendline. 

 

Figure 20: Daily variation in heat dissipation from FT modules for three selected days 

 

Figure 21: Comparison of daily variation in heat dissipation from FT (left) and SAT (right) 
modules over the same three days 

 

The days represented by red and blue data exhibit similar magnitudes of POA irradiance, wind 

speed, and ambient temperature. However, there is a notable difference in wind speed 


26 
 

fluctuation between the red and blue days, contributing to distinct scatter patterns on the graph. 

Despite comparable atmospheric conditions, module temperatures are higher for the blue data. 

Consequently, the ratio of H to the temperature difference (𝑇𝑇𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚 − 𝑇𝑇𝑎𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑎) is lower for the blue 

data due to the higher denominator, causing the data points to lie below the trendline. The 

variance in module temperature between these two days is attributed to differences in wind 

direction. 

Figure 21 presents a comparison of daily variations on heat dissipation for the FT and SAT 

modules, over the same three days. The selected days are different to those in Figure 20 due to 

tracker limitations for the SAT configuration on the indicated days, which did not allow for 

comparison. The data presented in Figure 21 clearly indicates that, during days with low wind 

conditions, the FT modules exhibit a deviation below the established trendline. Conversely, 

under identical ambient conditions, the SAT modules consistently conform to the linear 

trendline. In instances of elevated wind speeds, the data for both configurations tend to be in 

closer proximity to the trendline. These observations again highlight the variability in heat 

dissipation from FT modules, the enhanced heat dissipation capability of the SAT modules 

during low wind, and the relatively similar heat losses during higher wind conditions. 

4. Implication of results 

The implications of the configuration-specific heat dissipation factors which were obtained in 

this study are investigated through simulation. The annual electricity output of systems with 

each mounting configuration is determined using PVsyst version 7.4. Equations 2 and 3 are 

used, together with the assumptions noted below, to convert the accented heat dissipation 

factors to the 𝑈𝑈0 and 𝑈𝑈1 input values that PVsyst requires. For each configuration, the following 

scenarios were simulated: 

1. Modelled configuration using default heat dissipation factors defined by PVsyst. 

2. Modelled configuration using the configuration-specific heat dissipation factors 

obtained in this study. 

PVsyst has no values specifically for the SAT configuration, and only presents values for open-

rack applications. As such, the simulations below employed the PVsyst default open-rack heat 

dissipation factors as inputs for both FT and SAT scenarios. The mounting / tracking input 

parameters are detailed in Table 5. The overall system parameters chosen for the FT/SAT 

simulations are given in Table 6. 


27 
 

Table 5: FT and SAT mounting / tracking input parameters 

FT
SAT

Tilt angle
31°
0°

Module azimuth angle
0°
0°

PV tracker min. angle
-
-50°

PV tracker max. angle
-
50°

 

Table 6: FT / SAT system simulation input parameters 

Parameter
Value

PV module
CS3W-420P 1500 V

Optical efficiency (𝜂𝜂𝑚𝑚)
0.8

Electrical efficiency (𝜂𝜂𝑒𝑒) 0.1
Inverter
Fronius Symo 6.0 kW

Geographical site
Stellenbosch, South Africa

Nb of module in series
12

Nb of strings
1

 

The optical efficiency of the PV module is in the range of 0.8–0.9 [7]. The PV module has an 

electrical efficiency 𝜂𝜂𝑒𝑒 of 0.19 under Standard Test Conditions (STC). Faiman [7] noted an 

efficiency around 0.1 for normal operating temperatures. Based on these values, the difference 

between optical efficiency and electrical efficiency, 𝜂𝜂𝑚𝑚 − 𝜂𝜂𝑒𝑒 used in the simulations was 0.7. 

The ~5 kW PV system sizing was chosen for its modelling simplicity. The system allows the 

PV array to be connected to one string and connected to an inverter where there is no limit to 

the annual energy generated.  

The heat dissipation factors for the FT and SAT simulation scenarios and the annual electricity 

output for each are given in Table 7. 

Table 7: Heat dissipation factor inputs and annual output comparison 

Parameter 
FT
SAT

1
2
1
2

𝑈𝑈0 (W/m2K)
29
17.99
29
20.93

𝑈𝑈1 (Ws/m3K)
0
6.86
0
6.79

Annual electricity output (kWh)
9899
10190
10634
10989

 

Simulation results show increases in predicted annual output of 2.9% and 3.3% for FT and SAT 

open-rack systems respectively, when implementing configuration-specific heat dissipation 

factors compared to PVsyst defaults. These results are significant, especially when viewed in 

the light of increasing competition between bids for construction of modern PV power plants 


28 
 

and the required accuracy of techno-economic calculations. These findings emphasize the 

advantages of more realistic and configuration-specific heat dissipation factors.  

5. Conclusion 

This study conducted long-term experiments for FT and SAT open-rack PV modules at a site 

in South Africa. The heat dissipation model and data filtering method of Faiman was employed, 

which entails the consideration of clear sky day data only between 10:00 and 14:00.  

The results of the FT experiments compare favorably to results from literature, producing 

𝑈𝑈0
′ = 25.7 W/m2K and 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 9.8 Ws/m3K from the linear data regression analysis for the heat 

dissipation factors. Experiments on SAT modules extract heat dissipation factors of 

𝑈𝑈0
′ = 29.9 W/m2K and 𝑈𝑈1
′ = 9.7 Ws/m3K, which represent a novel contribution in the field. 

These values indicate that enhanced heat dissipation is experienced at no / low wind conditions 

for SAT modules compared to FT modules. 

An exploration into selected days and averaged data over the test period reveals a clear 

relationship between module temperature, POA irradiance and wind speed. Evaluations plainly 

confirm lower module temperatures due to boosted heat dissipation from SAT modules in 

relation to FT modules.  

Interestingly, wind direction plays a secondary but not insignificant role in the heat dissipation 

of FT modules, while heat dissipation from SAT modules seems to be insensitive to wind 

direction. Greater variability in heat dissipation is observed from FT modules compared to SAT 

modules, due to the larger range of incident irradiance onto the FT surfaces and the sensitivity 

to wind direction. 

An investigation examining the impact of data filtering methods on heat dissipation 

characteristics evaluated the methodologies proposed by Faiman and the IEC 61853-2 

standard. It concludes that the heat dissipation factors for SAT modules are somewhat more 

sensitive to the specific filtering method employed compared to FT modules.  

A further analysis on FT systems sequentially employs heat dissipation factors from various 

sources for predicting module temperature based on the current study’s full data set. RMSE 

values for each model fall within 0.5°C of each other, indicating that precise values of heat 

dissipation factors are likely not critical for reliable forecasts of module temperature for FT 

open-rack systems. It is expected that the same will not be true for PV systems which are less 

exposed to the ambient environment, such as BAPV configurations. 


29 
 

The study finally conducts annual power output simulations using the commercial software 

PVsyst. Simulations evaluate FT and SAT configurations, comparing performance when 

implementing PVsyst’s default heat dissipation factors versus the experimentally determined 

heat dissipation factors from the study. Results show a 2.9% and 3.3% enhancement in annual 

power output for the FT and SAT configurations respectively when utilizing the experimental 

heat dissipation factors. These findings carry significance, particularly in the context of 

growing competition in tendering for the construction of contemporary PV power plants and 

the heightened importance of precise techno-economic calculations. The results underscore the 

benefits of utilizing heat dissipation factors that are realistic and tailored to the specific 

configuration. 

Nomenclature 

Variables 

H 
 
Plane-of-array irradiance (W/m2) 

R2 
 
Coefficient of determination 

T 
 
Temperature (°C) 

U 
Heat dissipation factor (W/m2K or Ws/m3K) 

V 
 
Speed (m/s) 

Subscripts  

0 
  
Constant 

1 
  
Wind-dependant 

amb   
Ambient 

e 
  
Electrical 

mod   
PV module 

o 
  
Optical 

w 
  
Wind 

Superscripts  

‘ 
  
Modified 

Greek symbols 

η 
 
Efficiency (%)  
 

Abbreviations  

BAPV  
Building-attached photovoltaic 

BIPV  
Building-integrated photovoltaic 


30 
 

FT 
 
Fixed-tilt 

HAGL  
Height above ground level 

HAMSL 
Height above mean sea level 

IEC 
 
International Electrotechnical Commission 

MPPT  
Maximum power point tracking 

PC 
 
Personal computer 

POA  
Plane-of-array 

PV 
 
Photovoltaic 

PWM  
Pulse width modulation 

RMSE  
Root mean square error 

SAT 
 
Single-axis tracked 

SUNREC 
Stellenbosch University Renewable Energy Center 

UPS 
 
Uninterruptible power supply 

USB 
 
Universal Serial Bus 

 
Data availability statement 

The data supporting the findings of this study are available upon reasonable request from the 

corresponding author. 

Funding statement 

No specific funding was utilized for the completion of this research.  

Conflict of interest disclosure 

The authors confirm that no conflicts of interest exist. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to thank the Thermofluids division of the Mechanical and Mechatronic 

Engineering Department at Stellenbosch University for the sponsorship of test equipment used 

in this study. 

References 

[1] SAPVIA, 
2022. 
Solar 
PV 
Installation 
Guidelines. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 

https://lcproofing.co.za/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/SAPVIA_PV-GuidelinesV01_05-

17.pdf (Accessed 2 November 2023). 


31 
 

[2] Stein, J.S., Schroedter-Homscheidt, M., De Brabandere, K., Suri, M., Remund, J., 

Sengupta, M., Lorenz, E., Driesse, A., Winter, S., Hammer, A. et al. 2017, PV 

Performance Modeling Methods and Practices. Results from the 4th PV Performance 

Modeling Collaborative Workshop. Report IEA-PVPS T13-06:2017. 2017. Available 

online: 
https://iea-pvps.org/wp-

content/uploads/2020/01/T13_Report_PV_Performance_Modeling_Methods_and_Practi

ces_FINAL_March_2017.pdf (accessed on 2 November 2023). 

[3] Ross, R.G. 1976. Interface design considerations for terrestrial solar cell modules. 

Proceedings of the 12th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist's Conference, 801-806. Baton 

Rouge L.A. 

[4] Servant, J.M. 1986. Calculation of the cell temperature for photovoltaic modules from 

climatic data. Proceedings of the 9th Biennial Congress of ISES-Intersol, 85: 370. 

Montreal, Canada. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-033177-5.50311-2. 

[5] King, D.L., Boyson, W.E. and Kratochvill, J.A. 2004. Photovoltaic Array Performance 

Model. SAND2004-3535, December 2004. 

[6] Mattei, M., Notton, G., Cristofari, C., Muselli, M. and Poggi, P. 2006. Calculation of the 

polycrystalline PV module temperature using a simple method of energy balance. 

Renewable Energy 31 (4): 553-567. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2005.03.010. 

[7] Faiman, D. 2008. Assessing the outdoor operating temperature of photovoltaic modules. 

Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 16 (4): 307-315. DOI: 

10.1002/pip.813. 

[8] Hottel, H.C. and Whillier, A. 1958. Evaluation of flat plate collector performance. 

Transactions of the Conference on the Use of Solar Energy. University of Arizona Press 

2 (1): 74. 

[9] Bliss, R.W. 1959. The derivations of several ‘plate efficiency factors’ useful in the design 

of flat-plate solar-heat collectors. Solar Energy 3: 55. DOI: 10.1016/0038-

092X(59)90006-4. 


32 
 

[10] Skoplaki, E., Boudouvis, A.G. and Palyvos, J.A. 2008. A simple correlation of the 

operating temperature of photovoltaic modules of arbitrary mounting. Solar Energy 

Materials and Solar Cells 92: 1393-1402. DOI: 10.1016/j.solmat.2008.05.016. 

[11] Kaplani, E. and Kaplanis, S. 2014. Thermal modelling and experimental assessment of the 

dependence of PV module temperature on wind velocity and direction, module orientation 

and inclination. Solar Energy 107: 443-460. DOI: 10.1016/j.solener.2014.05.037. 

[12] Santos, L.d.O., de Carvalho, P.C.M. and Filho, C.d.O.C. 2022. Photovoltaic Cell 

Operating Temperature Models: A Review of Correlations and Parameters. IEEE Journal 

of Photovoltaics 12 (1): 179-190. DOI: 10.1109/JPHOTOV.2021.3113156. 

[13] Kaplanis, S., Kaplani, E. and Kaldellis, J.K. 2022. PV temperature and performance 

prediction in free-standing, BIPV and BAPV incorporating the effect of temperature and 

inclination on the heat transfer coefficients and the impact of wind, efficiency and ageing. 

Renewable Energy 181: 235-249. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2021.08.124. 

[14] PVsyst-photovoltaic 
software, 
2023. 
[online] 
Available 
at 

https://www.pvsyst.com/help/thermal_loss.htm (accessed 3 November 2023). 

[15] Assoa, Y.B., Mongibello, L, Carr, A. et al. 2017. Thermal analysis of a BIPV system by 

various 
modelling 
approaches. 
Solar 
Energy 
155: 
1289-1299. 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.solener.2017.07.066.  

[16] Kumar, N., Reddy, P. and Praveen, K. 2017. Optimal energy performance and comparison 

of open rack and roof mount mono c-Si photovoltaic Systems. Energy Procedia 117: 136-

144. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2017.05.116. 

[17] Kumar, N., Sudhakar, K. and Samykano, M. 2019. Performance comparison of BAPV and 

BIPV systems with c-Si, CIS and CdTe photovoltaic technologies under tropical weather 

conditions. 
Case 
Studies 
in 
Thermal 
Engineering 
13: 
100374. 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.csite.2018.100374. 

[18] Martin-Chivelet, N., Polo, J., Sanz-Saiz, C., Nunez Benitez, L.T., Alonso-Abella, M, and 

Cuenca, J. 2022. Assessment of PV module temperature models for building-integrated 

photovoltaics (BIPV). Sustainability 14: 1500. DOI: 10.3390/su14031500. 


33 
 

[19] Dörenkämper, M., Wahed, A., Kumar, A., de Jong, M., Kroon, J., and Reindl, T. 2021. 

The cooling effect of floating PV in two different climate zones: A comparison of field 

test data from the Netherlands and Singapore. Solar Energy 219: 15–23. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2020.11.029. 

[20] Koehl, M., Heck, M., Wiesmeier, S. and Wirth, J. 2011. Modeling of the nominal 

operating cell temperature based on outdoor weathering. Solar Energy Materials & Solar 

Cells 95: 1638-1646. DOI: 10.1016/j.solmat.2011.01.020. 

[21] International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC 61853-2, 2016. Photovoltaic (PV) 

Module Performance Testing and Energy— Part 2: Spectral Responsivity, Incidence 

Angle and Module Operating Temperature Measurements. [online] Available at: 

https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/25811#additionalinfo. 

[22] Barykina, E. and Hammer, A. 2017. Modeling of photovoltaic module temperature using 

Faiman model: Sensitivity analysis for different climates. Solar Energy 146: 401-416. 

DOI: 10.1016/j.solener.2017.03.002. 

[23] Campbell Scientific, 2023. [online] Available at: https://www.campbellsci.co.za 

(accessed 24 November 2023). 

[24] Owen, M., Pretorius, J.P., Buitendag, B., Nel, C. 2023. Heat dissipation factors for 

building-attached PV modules. Available at SSRN, DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.4119337. 

[25] Glick, A., Ali, N., Bossuyt, J. Calaf, M., Raúl Bayoán, C. 2020. Utility-scale solar PV 

performance enhancements through system-level modifications. Scientific Reports 10: 

10505. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-66347-5. 


