Probing photo-induced granular superconductivity in K3C60

thin films with an ultrafast on-chip voltmeter

J. D. Adelinia1†, E. Wang1†, M. Chavez-Cervantes1, T. Matsuyama1, M. Fechner1, M. Buzzi1, 

G. Meier1, A. Cavalleri1,2

1 Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter, Hamburg, Germany

2 Department of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom

† These authors contributed equally to this work

The physics of optically-induced superconductivity remains poorly understood, 

with questions that range from the underlying microscopic mechanism to the 

macroscopic electrical response of the non-equilibrium phase. In this paper, we 

study optically-induced superconductivity in K3C60 thin films, which display

signatures of granularity both in the equilibrium state below Tc and in the non-

equilibrium photo-induced phase above Tc.  Photo-conductive switches are used to 

measure the ultrafast voltage drop across a K3C60 film as a function of time after 

irradiation, both below and above Tc. These measurements reveal fast changes 

associated with the kinetic inductance of in-grain superconductivity, and a slower 

response attributed to the Josephson dynamics at the weak links. Fits to the data

yield estimates of the in-grain photo-induced superfluid density after the drive and 

the dynamics of phase slips at the weak links. This work underscores the increasing 

ability to make electrical measurements at ultrafast speeds in optically-driven 

quantum materials, and demonstrates a striking new platform for optoelectronic 

device applications. 


Optical excitation at mid-infrared and terahertz frequencies has emerged as a powerful 

technique for controlling non-equilibrium functional phenomena in quantum materials1, 

including
magnetism2,3,
transient 
topological
phases4,5, 
and 
photo-induced 

superconductivity6-16. 

In the case of optically-manipulated superconductivity, a number of experiments have 

focused on the alkali-doped fulleride K3C60 (Fig. 1a). Transient superconducting-like 

optical features have been observed for mid8-10- and far12-infrared excitation at base

temperatures far above the equilibrium superconducting transition temperature Tc. In 

these experiments, which were performed in pressed powder pellets, a long-lived phase 

with vanishing electrical resistance has been reported10, further underscoring the 

similarities with an equilibrium superconductor.

These experiments have recently been complemented by a study in K3C60 thin films11, 

which were integrated into an optoelectronic platform5,11,17-20 to study the transport 

properties at picosecond timescales. New evidence for a photo-induced superconducting-

like response was obtained from these measurements, including those arising from 

characteristic nonlinear current-voltage behaviour that is absent in the metallic phase. A 

key feature of the non-equilibrium response was that the photo-induced phase had a non-

linear current response with vanishing critical current, an effect that is also observed in 

equilibrium for temperatures in the range 0.6Tc < T < Tc, and associated with a granular 

response. The response in these films was found to be smaller and to survive up to lower 

temperature than previously reported for powder samples8-10,12.

Here, we report measurements of the voltage dynamics after photo-excitation in the 

presence of a quasi-DC current bias, enabling a systematic study of non-equilibrium 

granular superconductivity. An optoelectronic device incorporating a K3C60 thin film was 


used to detect ultrafast voltage changes after photo-excitation. These measurements were 

performed both for base temperatures T < Tc, for which the equilibrium superconductor 

is disrupted or strongly weakened by mid-infrared excitation, and for base temperatures 

T > Tc, for which a photo-induced superconducting-like response is observed.

Thin films of K3C60 were grown on sapphire substrates via molecular-beam epitaxy. An

atomic force micrograph of the sample surface is shown in Fig. 1b. The resistance of the

K3C60 thin film vs temperature was measured in DC in a two-contact configuration (Fig.

1c), and exhibits a broad superconducting transition with Tc = 19 K, which reflects a 

granular response in the temperature range 12 K < T < 19 K. The current-dependence of 

the resistance, as measured under a quasi-DC bias [see supplementary], is shown in Fig. 

1d. Nonlinear current-voltage characteristics, typical for superconductivity, were seen at

temperatures below Tc.

Figure 1 | Crystal structure and equilibrium transport properties of thin-film K3C60.  a, Unit 
cell of K3C60. C60 molecules are represented in blue, and are situated at the lattice points of a face-
centred cubic lattice. Potassium atoms are represented in orange. b, Atomic force microscopy 
image of the MBE-grown C60 thin film before doping with Potassium. Grains of approximately 
100-nm size are visible. c, Two-contact DC measurement of resistance vs temperature of the K3C60
thin film. d, Two-contact quasi-DC measurement of resistance vs current, for the temperatures 
8 K, 10 K, 12 K, 15 K, and 25 K.


The device architecture for the ultrafast transport measurements is illustrated in Fig. 2a. 

The K3C60 samples were connected to the signal line of a coplanar waveguide, which 

allowed for voltage transients to propagate at frequencies of up to 1 THz.11,17,19 The 

coplanar waveguide was contacted to photo-conductive switches21 on both sides of the 

sample, which were used to detect the transient voltages. The switches consisted of 

patches of amorphous silicon, which becomes conductive when excited with an ultrafast 

laser pulse in the visible spectrum5,21. When photo-excited under a voltage bias, the 

switches launched current pulses with duration determined by the lifetime of the photo-

excited carriers (< 1 ps) and a total charge proportional to the voltage bias, thus enabling 

sampling of transient voltages. By varying the time delay between the K3C60 excitation

pulse (pump) and the switch trigger pulse (probe), a quantitative voltage measurement 

was obtained with sub-picosecond time resolution.

Figure 2 | Ultrafast voltmeter.  a, Device architecture. An MBE-grown K3C60 thin film was 
incorporated into a coplanar waveguide, and biased with a quasi-DC current. The K3C60 was then 
excited with a 300-fs duration, 7-μm wavelength laser pulse at a fluence of 5 mJ/cm2 (indicated in 
red). The resulting perturbation to the voltage drop across the K3C60 thin film generated two 
electrical pulses which propagated left and right along the coplanar waveguide. The electrical 
pulses were detected on the left and right using silicon photo-conductive switches, which were 
operated with 250-fs gating pulses at 515-nm wavelength (indicated in cyan). b, Sketch of the 
voltage across the device. The blue (red) line represents the voltage profile in the superconducting 
(normal) state of K3C60. The arrows represent the voltage changes at the positions of the photo-
conductive switches during an ultrafast phase transition.


The K3C60 thin film was biased with a voltage pulse of 500-ns duration, long enough for 

the local current to stabilise (see supplementary Fig. S6). After a constant current flow 

was established, the K3C60 was excited with a laser pulse of 300-fs duration, 7-μm 

wavelength, and 5-mJ/cm2 excitation fluence. In-current photo-excitation of the K3C60

caused changes in the voltage drop across the sample (Fig. 2b). On the ultrafast timescales 

probed in the measurement, the voltage in the device was effectively floating, so changes 

in voltage across the K3C60 thin film resulted in equal and opposite voltage pulses 

propagating in the left and right directions. The voltage pulses were then detected at the 

photo-conductive switches as transient variations in the voltages V1 and V2. The switches 

were operated with laser pulses of 250-fs duration at 515-nm wavelength.

The first set of measurements was carried out at temperatures below Tc. In this regime,

the photon energy of the excitation pulse was larger than the energy gap of the 

equilibrium superconducting state in K3C60.22 In this regime, mid-infrared excitation is 

expected to break Cooper pairs into unpaired electrons and disrupt superconductivity23,

either partially or completely depending on the pump fluence. Hence, for this type of 

excitation of the equilibrium superconducting state, an increase in the voltage drop across 

the sample is expected24,25(Fig. 3a).

The measured pump-induced changes in V1 and V2 (henceforth referred to as ΔV1 and 

ΔV2) are plotted in Fig. 3b as a function of pump-probe delay. All voltages are normalised 

by a factor 𝑉0, which, for the measurements below Tc, is defined as the applied current 

multiplied by the sample resistance at 20 K. ΔV1 exhibited a step-like increase with a rise 

time of approximately 1 ps. ΔV2 displayed equal and opposite behaviour to ΔV1. For the 

given direction of applied current, this indicates an increase in the total voltage drop 

across the sample, consistent with disruption of superconductivity. The total pump-

induced change in voltage drop can be calculated as ΔV1 – ΔV2. Fig. 3c displays the pump-


induced change in voltage drop across the K3C60 thin film as a function of pump-probe

delay for different temperatures below Tc. Fig. 3d displays the same normalised change in 

voltage drop as a function of applied current. Each data point in the current dependence 

is the mean value of the time-trace within a 6-ps window centred at 6-ps delay. At 8 K, the 

pump-probe signal was constant with the applied current up until 2 mA, above which the 

signal exhibited a step-like decrease. The step was consistent with the critical current of 

Figure 3 | Photo-induced voltage dynamics in K3C60 (T < Tc).  a, Sketch of the voltage across 
the device. The voltage profile changes from the equilibrium superconducting state (black) to the 
disrupted state (red) upon photo-excitation. b, Pump-induced change in voltage on left and right 
of sample vs pump-gate delay, measured at 8 K. c, Pump-induced change in voltage drop across 
sample vs pump-gate delay, measured at 8 K, 10 K, 12 K, and 15 K, with an applied current of 
0.3 mA. d, Pump-induced change in voltage drop across sample vs applied current, measured at 
the same temperatures as in (c). Each data point is the mean value of the time-trace within a 6-ps 
window centred at 6-ps delay. The error bars represent the standard error of the mean change in 
voltage drop. All voltages are normalized by a factor V0, which is defined for the measurements 
below Tc as the applied current multiplied by the sample resistance at 20 K.


the equilibrium superconducting state (Fig. 1d). Upon increasing temperature, the pump-

probe signal began to decrease at lower currents and the step broadened.

The reduction in pump-probe signal with increasing temperature and current are

consistent with the onset of resistivity in the equilibrium superconducting state before 

excitation. This is well-understood quantitatively when comparing these results to a 

circuit model to simulate the voltage dynamics. Two factors govern the physics of this 

model. First, disruption of superconductivity involves a transformation of charge carriers 

from Cooper pairs to resistive quasiparticles23. Thus, the carrier dynamics should be well-

captured by using a two-fluid model consisting of a resistive channel in parallel with a 

purely inductive channel. Second, the granular constitution of the K3C60 thin film impedes 

dissipationless superconducting transport at temperatures just below the bulk Tc, as 

evidenced in equilibrium by the broadened superconducting transition (Fig. 1d). This is 

understood to result from thermally-activated phase slips between grain boundaries, and

can be modelled using a resistively- and capacitively-shunted Josephson junction (RCSJ) 

model26. We therefore incorporate the RCSJ model into the superconducting channel of a 

two-fluid model, forming a granular two-fluid model, in order to simulate the voltage 

dynamics in a granular superconductor (Fig. 4b).

The voltage dynamics for the disruption of superconductivity under a DC current bias 

were simulated by numerically solving the circuit equations for the granular two-fluid 

model under a changing superfluid density (more details in supplementary material). The 

effect of temperature was modelled by considering thermal fluctuations in the phases of 

the order parameters of the superconducting grains, which result in thermally-activated

phase slips and the onset of resistivity at temperatures close to Tc. We have assumed that, 

before time-zero, the superfluid density 𝑛𝑠 depends on temperature 𝑇 following the

relation27


𝑛𝑠 ∝ 1 − (𝑇 𝑇𝑐
⁄
)4.
(1)

At time-zero, the superfluid density was assumed to reduce from 𝑛𝑠(𝑇) to zero, as shown 

in Fig. 4c. The calculated voltage transients are displayed in Fig. 4d and Fig. 4e as functions 

Figure 4 | Disruption of superconductivity with a granular two-fluid model.  a, Sketch of a 
granular material with Cooper pairs and quasiparticles. Cooper pairs tunnel across grain 
boundaries, whilst thermal phase fluctuations disrupt phase coupling between the different 
superconducting grains. b, Circuit diagram of the granular two-fluid model used to represent the 
K3C60 sample. The superfluid channel (highlighted in purple) consists of a typical RCSJ model 
extended to include the kinetic inductance of the superconducting grains. The resistive 
quasiparticle channel is highlighted in orange. c, Time-dependent superfluid density used in the 
disruption simulation at 8 K. The superfluid fraction is assumed to reduce to zero at 0-ps delay. d, 
Simulated change in voltage drop across sample vs delay, for base temperatures of 8 K, 10 K, 12 K, 
and 15 K, with an applied current of 0.3 mA. e, Simulated change in voltage drop across sample vs 
applied current, for the same base temperatures as in (d). All voltages are normalized by a factor
V0, which is defined for the measurements below Tc as the applied current multiplied by the 
sample resistance at 20 K.


of delay and current, respectively. The results from the granular two-fluid model exhibit 

strong agreement with the experimental results in Fig. 3.

In a second set of measurements, we examined the photo-induced non-equilibrium state 

at temperatures above Tc. The experimental setup was identical to the previous 

measurements below Tc. Before photo-excitation, a voltage drop was present across the 

metallic K3C60 thin film corresponding to its equilibrium state resistance and the applied

bias current. In this case, for the conditions in which non-equilibrium superconductivity 

is induced, a decrease in voltage drop upon photo-excitation is expected (Fig. 5a).

The measured ΔV1 and ΔV2 for photo-excitation at 25 K are plotted in Fig. 5b as a function 

of pump-probe delay. All voltages are normalised by a factor V0, which, for the 

measurements above Tc, is defined as the applied bias multiplied by the sample resistance 

at the measurement temperature. The signs of ΔV1 and ΔV2 were reversed compared to 

the measurements below Tc, indicating a reduction in voltage drop upon photo-excitation

and an increase in the conductivity of the sample. ΔV1 became negative after photo-

excitation, with dynamics present on two timescales; a fast, negative spike was present 

immediately after time-zero, which was followed by a slow decrease of ~10-ps duration.

ΔV2 displayed equal and opposite behaviour to ΔV1. Fig. 5c displays the pump-induced 

change in voltage drop across the K3C60 thin film as a function of pump-probe delay for 

different temperatures above Tc. The magnitude of the voltage change decreased with 

increasing temperature, until the sign of the response was reversed at 80 K. The positive 

response at high temperatures was also qualitatively different; only a single rise and 

decay was observed.

Fig. 5d displays the voltage change as a function of the applied current. Each data point in 

the current dependence is the mean value of the time-trace within a 5-ps window centred 

at 11-ps delay. At 25 K, linear behaviour in current was observed for small currents. Above 


2 mA, the signal became nonlinear with the applied current. Upon increasing the 

temperature, the onset of the nonlinear behaviour was shifted to lower currents. The 

nonlinear effect was also reduced alongside the signal magnitude at higher temperatures; 

Figure 5 | Photo-induced voltage dynamics in K3C60 (T > Tc).  a, Sketch of the voltage across 
the device. The voltage profile changes when the sample is photo-excited from the equilibrium 
metallic state (black) into the nonequilibrium superconducting-like state (blue). The dotted blue 
line represents a superconducting-like state that has finite resistivity due to the effects of 
granularity. b, Pump-induced change in voltage on left and right of sample vs pump-gate delay, 
measured at 25 K. c, Pump-induced change in voltage drop across sample vs pump-gate delay, 
measured at 25 K, 35 K, 50 K, 60 K, 80 K, and 100 K, with an applied current of 1 mA. d, Pump-
induced change in voltage drop across sample vs applied current, measured at the same 
temperatures as in (c). Nonlinear I-V behaviour is observable, which is also suppressed with 
increasing temperature. Each data point is the mean value of the respective time-trace within a 
5-ps window centred at 11-ps delay. The error bars represent the standard error of the mean. All 
voltages are normalized by a factor V0, which is defined for the measurements above Tc as the 
applied current multiplied by the equilibrium sample resistance at the measurement 
temperature.


the positive voltage change at 100 K was linear in current across the whole measurement 

range.

To interpret the experimental data above Tc, we consider the two-fluid dynamics of the 

charge carriers upon photo-excitation, in addition to the previously-discussed role of 

granularity in the photo-induced state.11 We attribute the fast response in the data to a 

change in the kinetic inductance of the K3C60 thin film. The kinetic inductance 𝐿𝐾 of a 

superconductor is given by25

𝐿𝐾 = 𝛼

𝑛𝑠

,
(2)

where 𝛼 is a constant that depends on the material geometry and the effective mass of the 

charge carriers. A change in the superfluid density will therefore change the kinetic 

inductance. When this occurs in an applied current 𝐼, this generates an additional voltage

𝑉𝐾 = 𝐼 𝑑𝐿𝐾

𝑑𝑡 ∝ − 𝐼

𝑛𝑠2

𝑑𝑛𝑠
𝑑𝑡 .
(3)

For an increase in superfluid density, this voltage is negative, which is consistent with the 

measurement.

We speculate that the subsequent slow dynamics result from the stabilisation of thermal 

phase fluctuations. In the case that the phase is highly disordered upon photo-excitation, 

the initial resistivity of the photo-excited state at early delays would be left unchanged 

from that of the metallic state. As the phase thermalizes, the rate of thermally-induced 

phase slips decreases, and the resistivity drops on a timescale of several picoseconds.

Nevertheless, the phase slip rate at longer delays would be significant due to lattice 

heating, resulting in finite resistivity in the long-lived state after photo-excitation.


In order to model the dynamical system, we extend our treatment of the photo-induced 

state to the previously-discussed granular two-fluid model. The superfluid fraction (Fig. 

6a, solid line) was assumed to increase from zero to a finite value at time-zero, with a rise 

time of 300 fs, and to subsequently decay exponentially in time with a time constant of 

150 ps (see supplementary, fitting from lifetime data of Ref. 11). The Josephson phase was 

assumed to start highly disordered and strongly fluctuating after photo-excitation. Then, 

the thermal phase fluctuations reduce within the first few picoseconds as the electrons 

thermalize with the lattice28,29. The electron and lattice temperatures after photo-

excitation were determined by the mid-infrared pump pulse energy absorbed by the K3C60

sample30-32 (see supplementary for details). The rate of thermally-induced phase slips is 

estimated in Fig. 6a (dashed line) by considering thermal hopping over a washboard 

Figure 6 | Photo-induced superconductivity with a granular two-fluid model.  a, Time profile 
of superfluid fraction for the simulation of the photo-excited state. The superfluid fraction 
(purple) is assumed to increase from zero to a finite value at 0-ps delay, and then to decay 
exponentially with a time constant of 150 ps. The thermally induced phase slip rate (dashed grey 
line) relates to the thermal energy imparted by the pump pulse. It is large at 0-ps delay and decays 
to match the lattice temperature at longer delays. b, Simulated change in voltage drop across 
sample vs delay, using peak superfluid fraction as the fitting parameter, for base temperatures of 
25 K, 35 K, 50 K, and 60 K, with an applied current of 1 mA. All voltages are normalized by a factor
V0, which is defined for the measurements above Tc as the applied current multiplied by the 
equilibrium sample resistance at the measurement temperature. c, Light-induced ‘superfluid 
fraction’ vs temperature as obtained from the fitting procedure described in the text. The blue 
symbols indicate granular two-fluid model fits to the voltage data on the granular thin films. The 
purple shaded region indicates temperatures below the equilibrium Tc.


potential. The circuit simulation at each temperature was used to fit the slow response in 

the data at 10-ps delay, using the peak superfluid fraction at time-zero as a fitting 

parameter. Other parameters, such as the rise and decay times for the superfluid fraction,

were left unchanged between temperatures.

The fits are displayed in Fig. 6b. The two-timescale dynamics seen in the measurement 

are also present in the circuit calculations, with a fast, negative voltage spike appearing at 

time-zero, followed by a slower dip in voltage. The superfluid fraction fitting parameter is 

plotted in Fig. 6c as a function of temperature, and decreases with increasing temperature.

For temperatures of 80 K and above, the experimental data no longer display a reduction 

in resistivity and are represented with a superfluid fraction of zero in place of a fit. One 

possible reason for the difference between the temperature scaling reported here and 

previous reflectivity measurements8-10 is the fact that lower frequencies are probed in 

transport, where thermally-induced phase-slip effects may be more pronounced.

The nonlinear I-V characteristics in this measurement (Fig. 5d) are qualitatively different 

to those reported for measurements with picosecond current pulses.11 For the data 

reported here, the current is applied before photo-excitation. The measurement therefore 

does not distinguish between the effect of the current on the non-equilibrium state and 

suppression of the photo-susceptibility due to the current. The signal from the non-

equilibrium phase at 25 K persists at larger currents than the signal from the equilibrium 

superconducting state. Furthermore, for photo-excitation below Tc, we observe a reversal 

in sign of the signal for applied bias currents above the critical current (Fig. 3d), which 

may indicate a revival of superconductivity under large applied currents.

In summary, we report ultrafast voltage measurements on K3C60 thin films upon in-

current photo-excitation, and characterized the response of the system for both the 

photo-induced disruption of the equilibrium low-temperature superconductor, as well as 


the regime in which a photo-induced superconducting state is achieved. We report a 

reduction in voltage drop when exciting into the non-equilibrium state above Tc. A two-

fluid model based on a granular superconductor was used to interpret these findings. The 

data are consistent with a change in the kinetic inductance upon photo-excitation, 

followed by a slow reduction in resistivity which can be attributed to thermalization of 

phase fluctuations. The new understanding extracted from these data complements that 

obtained for the case of cuprates6,7, for charge transfer salts14,15, and for K3C60 powders8-

10,12, for which the responses were compatible with optically-induced bulk 

superconductivity. The ultrafast voltmeter platform developed here can be extended to 

other non-equilibrium superconductors and is crucial to understanding inhomogeneities 

and quenched dynamics in these systems.

References

1
Basov, D. N., Averitt, R. D. & Hsieh, D. Towards properties on demand in quantum 
materials. Nature Materials 16, 1077-1088 (2017). 

2
Radu, I. et al. Transient ferromagnetic-like state mediating ultrafast reversal of 
antiferromagnetically coupled spins. Nature 472, 205-208 (2011). 

3
Disa, A. S. et al. Photo-induced high-temperature ferromagnetism in YTiO3. 
Nature 617, 73-78 (2023). 

4
Wang, Y. H., Steinberg, H., Jarillo-Herrero, P. & Gedik, N. Observation of Floquet-
Bloch States on the Surface of a Topological Insulator. Science 342, 453-457 
(2013). 

5
McIver, J. W. et al. Light-induced anomalous Hall effect in graphene. Nat Phys 16, 
38-41 (2020). 

6
Fausti, D. et al. Light-induced superconductivity in a stripe-ordered cuprate. 
Science 331, 189-191 (2011). 

7
Hu, W. et al. Optically enhanced coherent transport in YBa2Cu3O6.5 by ultrafast 
redistribution of interlayer coupling. Nature Materials 13, 705-711 (2014). 

8
Mitrano, M. et al. Possible light-induced superconductivity in K3C60 at high 
temperature. Nature 530, 461-464 (2016). 


9
Cantaluppi, A. et al. Pressure tuning of light-induced superconductivity in K3C60. 
Nature Physics 14, 837-841 (2018). 

10
Budden, M. et al. Evidence for metastable photo-induced superconductivity in 
K3C60. Nature Physics 17, 611-618 (2021). 

11
Wang, E. et al. Superconducting nonlinear transport in optically driven high-
temperature K3C60. Nature Communications 14, 7233 (2023). 

12
Rowe, E. et al. Resonant enhancement of photo-induced superconductivity in 
K3C60. Nature Physics (2023). 

13
Cremin, K. A. et al. Photoenhanced metastable c-axis electrodynamics in stripe-
ordered cuprate La1.885Ba0.115CuO4. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 116, 19875-19879 (2019). 

14
Buzzi, M. et al. Photomolecular High-Temperature Superconductivity. Physical 
Review X 10, 031028-031028 (2020). 

15
Buzzi, M. et al. Phase Diagram for Light-Induced Superconductivity in κ-(ET)2-X. 
Physical Review Letters 127, 197002 (2021). 

16
Isoyama, K. et al. Light-induced enhancement of superconductivity in iron-based 
superconductor FeSe0.5Te0.5. Communications Physics 4, 160 (2021). 

17
Wood, C. D. et al. On-chip terahertz spectroscopic techniques for measuring 
mesoscopic quantum systems. Review of Scientific Instruments 84 (2013). 

18
Gallagher, P. et al. Quantum-critical conductivity of the Dirac fluid in graphene. 
Science 364, 158-162 (2019). 

19
Yoshioka, K., Kumada, N., Muraki, K. & Hashisaka, M. On-chip coherent frequency-
domain THz spectroscopy for electrical transport. Applied Physics Letters 117
(2020). 

20
Potts, A. M. et al. On-Chip Time-Domain Terahertz Spectroscopy of 
Superconducting Films below the Diffraction Limit. Nano Letters 23, 3835-3841 
(2023). 

21
Auston, D. H. Picosecond optoelectronic switching and gating in silicon. Applied 
Physics Letters 26, 101-103 (1975). 

22
Degiorgi, L., Briceno, G., Fuhrer, M. S., Zettl, A. & Wachter, P. Optical 
measurements of the superconducting gap in single-crystal K3C60 and Rb3C60. 
Nature 369, 541-543 (1994). 

23
Owen, C. S. & Scalapino, D. J. Superconducting State under the Influence of 
External Dynamic Pair Breaking. Physical Review Letters 28, 1559-1561 (1972). 

24
Testardi, L. R. Destruction of Superconductivity by Laser Light. Physical Review B
4, 2189-2196 (1971). 

25
Heusinger, M. A., Semenov, A. D., Nebosis, R. S., Gousev, Y. P. & Renk, K. F. 
Nonthermal Kinetic Inductance Photoresponse of Thin Superconducting Films. 
IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 5, 2595-2598 (1995). 

26
Ambegaokar, V. & Halperin, B. I. Voltage Due to Thermal Noise in the DC 
Josephson Effect. Physical Review Letters 22, 1364-1366 (1969). 

27
Tinkham, M. Introduction to Superconductivity, 2nd Edition.  (Dover Publications, 
Inc., 2004).

28
Elsayed-Ali, H. E., Norris, T. B., Pessot, M. A. & Mourou, G. A. Time-resolved 
observation of electron-phonon relaxation in copper. Physical Review Letters 58, 
1212-1215 (1987). 

29
Sun, C. K., Vallée, F., Acioli, L., Ippen, E. P. & Fujimoto, J. G. Femtosecond 
investigation of electron thermalization in gold. Physical Review B 48, 12365-
12368 (1993). 


30
Semenov, A. D., Nebosis, R. S., Gousev, Y. P., Heusinger, M. A. & Renk, K. F. Analysis 
of the nonequilibrium photoresponse of superconducting films to pulsed 
radiation by use of a two-temperature model. Physical Review B 52, 581-581 
(1995). 

31
Sobolewski, R. Ultrafast dynamics of nonequilibrium quasi-particles in high-
temperature superconductors. SPIE 3481, 480-491 (1998). 

32
Allen, K. & Hellman, F. Specific heat of C60 and K3C60 thin films for T=6—400 K. 
Physical Review B 60, 11765-11772 (1999). 

Acknowledgements

The research leading to these results received funding from the European Research 

Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-

2013)/ERC Grant Agreement No. 319286 (QMAC, A.C.). We acknowledge support from 

the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) via the Cluster of Excellence 'CUI: Advanced 

Imaging of Matter' - EXC 2056 - project ID 390715994 and the priority program SFB925. 

Eryin Wang received funding from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. We thank 

Rashmi Singla for her help on the optical setup. We thank Michael Volkmann, Elena König, 

and Peter Licht for their technical assistance. We are also grateful to Benedikt Schulte, 

Boris Fiedler, and Birger Höhling for their support in the fabrication of the electronic 

devices used on the measurement setup, and to Jörg Harms for assistance with graphics.


1

Probing photo-induced granular superconductivity in K3C60

thin films with an ultrafast on-chip voltmeter

J. D. Adelinia1†, E. Wang1†, M. Chavez-Cervantes1, T. Matsuyama1, M. Fechner1, M. Buzzi1,

G. Meier1, A. Cavalleri1,2

1 Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter, Hamburg, Germany

2 Department of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom

† These authors contributed equally to this work

Supplementary information

Contents
S1. Experimental setup..................................................................................................................................2

S2. Device fabrication process....................................................................................................................5

S3. Device and sample characterisation .................................................................................................8

S3.1. Determination of the quasi-DC current...................................................................................8

S3.2. Photo-carrier lifetime in the photo-conductive switches ................................................9

S3.3. Waveguide characterisation.....................................................................................................10

S3.4. K3C60 thin film characterisation...............................................................................................11

S4. Data analysis............................................................................................................................................13

S4.1. Subtraction of 0-mA signal........................................................................................................13

S4.2. Subtraction of the offset .............................................................................................................14

S4.3. Subtraction of reflections...........................................................................................................15

S4.4. Calibration of the transient voltage changes......................................................................16

S5. Voltage dynamics simulation............................................................................................................19

S5.1. Voltage due to kinetic inductance for time-dependent carrier densities................19

S5.2. Estimation of heating due to the pump pulse ....................................................................21

S5.3. Granular two-fluid model ..........................................................................................................23

S6. Additional data.......................................................................................................................................27

S6.1. Photo-excitation below Tc..........................................................................................................27

S6.1.1. Measurements with low excitation fluence................................................................27

S6.1.2. Photo-excitation above the critical current................................................................28

S6.2. Photo-excitation above Tc..........................................................................................................29

S6.2.1. Fluence dependence............................................................................................................29

S6.2.2. Current dependence vs fluence.......................................................................................30


2

S1. Experimental setup

Figure S1 | Experimental setup.  a, Optical part of the setup. Optical components are abbreviated 
as follows: AGS – silver thiogallate crystal, BBO – beta barium borate crystal, BS – beam splitter, C 
– mechanical chopper, DM – dichroic mirror, DS – delay stage, OPA – optical parametric amplifier, 
YAG – yttrium aluminium garnet. The wavelength of the optical pulses is represented by the 
colour: 1030 nm (black), 515 nm (green), 1200 nm (yellow), and 7 µm (red). b, Optical microscope 
image of the experimental device, showing connections to the external electronics.


3

A diagram of the experimental setup is displayed in Fig. S1. The optical part of the setup 

is based on a Pharos laser, which outputs pulses of 250-fs duration and 400-µJ pulse 

energy, with a wavelength centred at 1030 nm, at 50-kHz repetition rate. Part of the pulse 

energy is converted to 515-nm wavelength via second harmonic generation. This was 

used to operate the photo-conductive switches. The remainder serves as the input for an 

optical parametric amplifier (OPA) based on silver thiogallate (AGS)33, which outputs

mid-infrared pulses centred at 7-µm wavelength (43 THz) with 1-THz bandwidth. These 

were used to excite the K3C60 thin film. The mid-infrared pulses were chopped at a 

frequency of ~1 kHz. Optical delay lines were used to scan the mutual time delay between 

the 515-nm pulses and the mid-infrared pulses.

Transient currents in each detection line were sent into in-house custom-built 

transimpedance amplifiers with a flat frequency dependence, an optimised −3-dB point 

at 3 kHz, and an amplification factor of 2x109 V/A. The voltage output of the 

transimpedance amplifiers were then sent into lock-in amplifiers, which were trigged at 

the chopping frequency of the mid-infrared pulses. Data from the lock-in amplifier was 

acquired digitally using custom software written in LabVIEW. 

The wavelength of the mid-infrared pulses was characterised using Fourier-transform 

infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. The spectrum is displayed in Fig. S2. The spot size of the 

mid-infrared beam in the device plane was determined using knife-edge measurements, 

and is displayed in Fig. S3.


4

Figure S2 | FTIR spectrum of the mid-infrared pulses.  a, Interference pattern in the time 
domain. b, Fourier transform of the data in (a).

Figure S3 | Knife-edge measurements of the mid-infrared spot size.  a, Intensity vs horizontal 
position of the edge. b, Intensity vs vertical position of the edge.


5

S2. Device fabrication process

An illustration of the device fabrication process is displayed in Fig. S4. The photo-

conductive switches and the coplanar waveguide were fabricated on a sapphire substrate 

using a laser lithography and electron-beam evaporation process. For the lithography 

steps, a two-layer photoresist was used. LOR 7B formed the bottom layer and ma-P 1205 

formed the light-sensitive top layer. The lithography was carried out using a µPG 101 laser 

writer, and the exposed photoresist was developed in ma-D 331/S. First, patches were 

Figure S4 | Device fabrication process.  a-e, Lithography and deposition steps. f, Resistivity of 
a KxC60 sample during potassium doping. The arrow indicates optimal doping at the resistivity 
minimum.


6

written and developed in the photoresist and a 200-nm layer of silicon was deposited to 

form the photo-conductive switches (Fig. S4a). The lift-off process was then carried out 

by using Remover PG to dissolve the photoresist overnight. Next, the waveguide structure 

was written and 10 nm of titanium was deposited, followed by 280 nm of gold (Fig. S4b), 

after which an identical lift-off process was conducted.

The next step was the deposition of C60 into the waveguide. C60 dissolves in the organic

chemicals used in the photo-lithography process, so a disc of 150-µm thick sapphire was 

used for the shadow mask instead (Fig. S4c). The disc had a 20-µm x 30-µm hole in the 

centre, which was aligned to the middle of the device under an optical microscope using 

micrometre translation stages, and held in place using silver epoxy. The construction was 

transferred to a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber and degassed overnight at 300°C 

prior to growth. The device temperature was then reduced to 200°C and monitored using 

a pyrometer for the C60 deposition. The C60 source temperature was 380°C, providing a 

growth rate of ~1 nm/min.

For the electrical contact between the sample and the waveguide, an additional 

evaporation step of titanium/gold was carried out using a different sapphire mask 

(Fig. S4d).

The C60 thin film was then doped by depositing potassium from an effusion cell source, 

while monitoring the resistance of the film (Fig. S4e). The resistance of the K𝑥C60

decreases upon initial doping, and reaches a minimum at 𝑥 = 3. A typical resistivity 

profile as a function of doping time is shown in Fig. S4f. To obtain homogeneous 

stoichiometry, doping was carried out in cycles consisting of one hour of doping, followed 

by six hours of annealing. During the doping cycles, the device was kept at 200°C and the 

potassium source at 100°C. During the anneal cycles, the doping was paused and the 


7

device temperature was increased to 300°C, facilitating the diffusion of potassium within 

the sample.

K3C60 is highly sensitive to oxygen. As such, the doped thin film needed to be sealed to 

prevent oxidation while maintaining optical and electrical access. The sealing structure is 

illustrated in Fig. S5. Before the doping took place, the device was attached to a sapphire 

plate, and electrical feedthroughs were fabricated from a sapphire ring and Torr Seal 

vacuum epoxy. After doping, this construction was transferred to an argon-purged glove 

box in a high-vacuum suitcase, and sealed with an inner indium ring, a diamond window, 

and vacuum epoxy. The inner indium ring serves to prevent sample damage due to 

outgassing when the epoxy cures, while the epoxy itself provides a more stable seal after

removal from the glove box. The device was then contacted to a printed circuit board via 

the electrical feedthroughs and transferred to the optical cryostat for measurements.

Figure S5 | Device sealing.  Illustration of the construction used to seal the device after doping.


8

S3. Device and sample characterisation

S3.1. Determination of the quasi-DC current

A quasi-DC current was applied to the K3C60 sample prior to photo-excitation. Flat-top 

voltage pulses of 500-ns duration were used for this in order to minimise current-induced 

heating of the sample. To determine the current flowing through the sample when the 

voltage pulse was present, the setup depicted in Fig. S6a was used. A known resistance R 

was connected in series between the voltage pulse generator and the sample device via 

coaxial cables. For measurements below and above Tc, resistances of 300  and 100 

were used, respectively. The voltages before the resistor 𝑉𝑇 and before the sample device 

𝑉𝑆 relative to ground were monitored using an oscilloscope. An example measurement for 

a pulsed bias of 400 mV is displayed in Fig. S6b. The stabilised voltage values could be 

read out at a time of 300 ns. The current flow 𝐼 in the device was then obtained from the 

equation 𝐼 = (𝑉𝑇 − 𝑉𝑆)/𝑅.

Figure S6 | Measurement of the applied current.  a, Measurement setup with a pulsed electrical 
bias of 500-ns duration. b, Voltage drop across the sample (𝑉𝑆) and sample + resistor (𝑉𝑇) as a 
function of time for a 400-mV applied bias.


9

S3.2. Photo-carrier lifetime in the photo-conductive switches

The photo-carrier lifetime in the excited photo-conductive switches is a significant factor 

affecting the time resolution of the experiment. To determine the lifetime, the 

experimental setup shown in Fig. S7a was used. Current pulses were launched from 

switch 1 by applying a DC voltage bias to one end and exciting the switch with a 515-nm 

laser pulse. The launched current pulse was then detected at switch 3. The detection 

switch used was directly opposite the launching switch, in order to minimise dispersion 

Figure S7 | Photo-carrier lifetime measurement.  a, Measurement setup. A DC voltage bias was 
applied to one switch, and the launched pulses were detected at the opposite switch. b, Switch 
response functions for different exponential decay constants 𝜏𝑑. c, Autocorrelation of the switch 
response functions in (b), compared with the measured data when launching from different 
switches.


10

of the current pulse in the waveguide. The detected current pulse was therefore a 

correlation between the response function of switch 1 and that of switch 3.

The experimental data for the correlation of the two opposite switches was compared 

with the autocorrelation of a model switch response function for different decay times. 

For the model switch response, an error-function rise with a rise time of 250 fs was used, 

followed by an exponential decay. The rise time of 250 fs corresponds to the duration of 

the exciting laser pulse. Model switch response functions for different decay times are 

plotted in Fig. S7b. The autocorrelations of these model response functions are compared 

to the experimental data in Fig. S7c. The model pulse with a decay time of 300 fs provides 

the best fit to the data.

This approach assumes that the decay times for each switch (1 and 3) are similar, which 

is reasonable because the shape of the measured signal was independent of the 

measurement direction (circular vs square data points). The experimental data also did 

not change significantly with temperature.

S3.3. Waveguide characterisation

Another important factor affecting the time resolution of the experiment is the dispersion 

in the coplanar waveguide. To determine the impact of this, the frequency-dependent 

transmittance in a 200-µm long waveguide was simulated in CST studio suite. The result 

is shown in Fig. S8a. The transmittance drops off sharply at high frequencies, with the 

−3-dB point at approximately 700 GHz.


11

The simulated frequency-dependent complex impedance is shown in Fig. S8b. Both real 

and imaginary components display little variation within the experimental bandwidth. 

The real component Re[Z] is approximately 59 , while the imaginary component Im[Z] 

is  0.2  and is therefore negligible.

S3.4. K3C60 thin film characterisation

A line profile from an AFM micrograph of the C60 film edge is displayed in Fig. S9, showing 

a film thickness of approximately 100 nm.

Figure S8 | Waveguide characterisation.  a, Simulated transmittance versus frequency of a 200-
µm long section of the coplanar waveguide. b, Real and imaginary components of the wave 
impedance versus frequency.


12

The resistance vs temperature of the K3C60 thin film, as measured in a two-contact 

geometry, is displayed in Fig. S10. The measurement displays a decrease in the sample 

resistance with decreasing temperature, consistent with the metallic behaviour indicated 

by previous studies34,35. The measurement was carried out with a DC current bias of 1 µA.

Figure S9 | Edge of the K3C60 thin film.  Line cut of an AFM micrograph of the sample.

Figure S10 | Resistance vs temperature of the K3C60 thin film.


13

S4. Data analysis

The raw experimental data for the temperatures 8 K and 25 K is displayed in Fig. S11. The 

full analysis procedure is detailed below.

S4.1. Subtraction of 0-mA signal

Figure S11 | Raw transient voltage changes across the photo-excited K3C60 thin film. a,
Transient voltage changes measured at 8 K with an applied current of 0.3 mA. b, Transient voltage 
changes measured at 25 K with an applied current of 1.0 mA.

Figure S12 | Transient voltage changes upon photo-excitation without current. a, Zero-bias 
voltage changes measured at 8 K. b, Zero-bias voltage changes measured at 25 K.


14

The first step in analysis was to subtract the signal measured at 0 mA bias from the 

measured data at finite bias. The mid-infrared pulse has finite intensity in the gap between 

the K3C60 thin film and the waveguide. As such, the excitation pulse can couple into the 

waveguide and induce an electrical signal, which would be detected concurrently with the 

photo-induced changes in voltage drop. This effect is small, but since it is also present 

when there is no quasi-DC current flowing in the device, it can nevertheless be isolated 

and subtracted. The 0-mA signals at 8 K and 25 K are displayed in Fig. S12, and were much 

smaller than the measured signal at finite bias.

S4.2. Subtraction of the offset

Figure S13 | Offset before time-zero. a, Transient voltage changes at 8 K (lines), and the offset 
before 0-ps delay (squares). b, Illustration of the leakage current through an inactive photo-
conductive switch.


15

A constant-in-time offset was also observed in the raw data for each measurement. The 

offset before 0-ps delay is shown in Fig. S13a as a function of applied current for the 

measurements below Tc, alongside the voltage at 10-ps delay. The offset is proportional 

to the magnitude of the signal, and therefore likely results from currents flowing into the 

detection line as leakage currents (Fig. S13b). This results in a voltage at the amplifier that 

is independent of the arrival time of the switch trigger pulse. A constant offset was 

therefore subtracted from the data to compensate for this.

S4.3. Subtraction of reflections

Reflections were subsequently subtracted from the resulting data. A zoomed-out optical

microscope image of the device geometry is displayed in Fig. S14. Additional pairs of 

photo-conductive switches can be seen on the left and right sides of the image. In the 

experiment, a voltage pulse originated at the K3C60 thin film (image centre) and 

propagated outwards along the waveguide towards the detection switches 1 and 2. 

Figure S14 | Sources of reflections. A zoomed-out microscope image of the device. The transient 
voltage changes propagate towards the detection switches (red arrow), after which reflections 
from the sample (green arrow) and from an additional pair of switches (blue arrow) occur.


16

Without loss of generality for the discussion of reflections, we will consider the leftward 

propagating pulse. At switch 1, the pulse is partially reflected back towards the sample 

and partially transmitted. The reflected pulse is again reflected from the sample and 

returns to switch 1 (green arrow), while the transmitted pulse is reflected from the 

leftmost pair of switches (blue arrow) and returns to switch 1 at a later time.

The arrival time of the reflected pulses can be estimated as follows. We consider the 

distance 𝑑1 between switch 1 and the K3C60 thin film, the distance 𝑑2 between switch 1 

and the leftmost pair of switches, and the effective relative dielectric constant of the 

coplanar waveguide on the sapphire substrate. We have 𝑑1 = 280 µm and 𝑑2 = 600 µm.

The effective relative dielectric constant 𝜖𝑟 = (𝜖𝐴𝑙2𝑂3 + 1)/2 = 5.27, giving a pulse 

propagation speed 𝑣 = 0.43𝑐. The arrival times 𝑡𝑛 for the reflections can be calculated as

𝑡𝑛 = 2𝑑𝑛

𝑣 ,
(4.1)

giving 4.3 ps and 9.2 ps for the distances 𝑑1 and 𝑑2, respectively.

Copies of the measured data, scaled to 5 % and 15 % and offset in time by 4.3 ps and 

9.2 ps, respectively, were subtracted. This provided a clear plateau in the data below Tc, 

and reflections were subtracted from the data above Tc using the same parameters.

S4.4. Calibration of the transient voltage changes

In order to calibrate the magnitude of the transient voltage changes, a DC voltage bias 𝑉𝑏

was applied to the photo-conductive switch as depicted in Fig. S15a. The switch was 

illuminated with laser pulses at 515-nm wavelength, which were chopped at a frequency 

of ~1 kHz. Upon illumination, a voltage 𝑉𝑑 was detected using the same amplification 


17

chain as in the experiment. Figs. S15b and S15c display 𝑉𝑑 versus 𝑉𝑏 for switches 1 and 2 

at a device temperature of 25 K. The switch response was linear for all temperatures. 

Therefore, given only the detected voltage, the ratio of 𝑉𝑏 to 𝑉𝑑 provided a calibration 

factor 𝜅𝑆 relating the measured voltage at switch 𝑆 to the voltage present in the 

waveguide.

However, directly using the 𝜅𝑆 obtained from this measurement is expected to 

underestimate the magnitude of the voltage changes for two reasons. First, a travelling 

voltage pulse in the coplanar waveguide will be partially reflected from the photo-

conductive switch. This can be accounted for by considering the transmittance of the 

switch. With the detected reflections discussed in S4.3, we see that the second reflection 

Figure S15 | Photo-conductive switch calibration. a,
Measurement schematic. b,

Representative calibration curve for switch 1. c, Representative calibration curve for switch 2.


18

of 15 % magnitude (blue arrow in Fig. S14) involves the transmission from one pair of 

switches and the reflection from the other pair. It follows that the switch transmittance 𝑇

for the transient voltages in the experiment can be estimated using 𝑇(1 − 𝑇) = 0.15. This 

gives 𝑇 ≈ 0.8. We can therefore account for reflections by scaling the calibration factor 

obtained previously by 𝜅𝑆 → 𝜅𝑆/0.8 = 1.25𝜅𝑆.

Second, the laser pulses incident on the switch will result in heating and an increase in DC 

conductivity, leading to a leakage current. This effect will last as long as the thermal 

dissipation time of several nanoseconds. The leakage current therefore provides an 

additional contribution to 𝑉𝑑 in the calibration measurement. This means that the 

detected voltage with a DC bias is larger than with a several-picosecond voltage bias of 

the same magnitude.

Fig. S16 displays the ultrafast voltmeter data from the K3C60 thin film at 8 K, calibrated 

using a calibration factor of 1.25𝜅𝑆 (grey data points), alongside the simulated voltage 

Figure S16 | Comparison of preliminarily calibrated data with simulation. Transient voltage 
changes at 8 K with a 0.3 mA bias, calibrated using a scaling factor of 1.25𝜅𝑆, alongside the 
simulated voltage changes for disruption of superconductivity.


19

changes for disruption of superconductivity (red line). A calibration factor of ~1.5𝜅𝑆

ensured consistency between the measurements at 8 K and the disruption simulation, and 

is consistent with a small underestimation due to leakage current in the calibration 

measurement. A calibration factor of 1.5𝜅𝑆 was therefore used for all measurements at 

every temperature. Nevertheless, a systematic uncertainty exists in the magnitude of the 

voltage changes.

S5. Voltage dynamics simulation

S5.1. Voltage due to kinetic inductance for time-dependent carrier densities

Kinetic inductance is an inductive electronic behaviour that arises due to the inertia of the 

charge carriers.36 One way to understand this behaviour in a conductor is to consider the 

equations of motion of charge carriers in an electric field, neglecting scattering. We 

consider a material of length 𝐿 and cross-sectional area 𝐴, with an electric field 𝐸 applied 

Figure S17 | Kinetic inductance derivation.


20

along the direction of 𝐿, as illustrated in Fig. S17. For a charge carrier with charge 𝑒 and 

mass 𝑚𝑒, the equation of motion for the velocity 𝑣 is given by

𝑑𝑣
𝑑𝑡 = − 𝑒𝐸

𝑚 .
(5.1)

Assuming, for now, that the charge carrier density 𝑛 is constant, the current density 𝐽 can 

then be calculated as

𝑑𝐽
𝑑𝑡 = 𝑛𝑒2

𝑚𝑒

𝐸.
(5.2)

We now make use of the material geometry to extract a voltage-current relation, under 

the assumption of a spatially uniform electric field. This gives

𝑉 = ( 𝑚𝑒

𝑛𝑒2) (𝐿

𝐴) 𝑑𝐼

𝑑𝑡 ,
(5.3)

which displays equivalent behaviour to an inductor, and can be written as

𝑉 = 𝐿𝐾

𝑑𝐼
𝑑𝑡 ,
(5.4)

where the kinetic inductance is therefore defined as

𝐿𝐾 = (𝑚𝑒

𝑛𝑒2) (𝐿

𝐴) .
(5.5)

For a time-dependent carrier density, the current density is instead given by

𝑑
𝑑𝑡 (𝐽

𝑛) = 𝑒2

𝑚𝑒

𝐸,
(5.6)

and the voltage-current relation becomes

𝑉 = 𝐿𝐾

𝑑𝐼
𝑑𝑡 + 𝐼 𝑑𝐿𝐾

𝑑𝑡 .
(5.7)


21

S5.2. Estimation of heating due to the pump pulse

In a granular superconductor, the onset of resistivity at temperatures just below Tc is 

understood to result from thermal fluctuations in the phase of the order parameter, which 

disrupt Josephson tunnelling across the grain boundaries.37,38 In order to consider the role 

this plays in the photo-induced superconducting-like state, the thermal fluctuations were 

estimated by accounting for the heating effect of the mid-infrared pump pulse.

First, the absorbed fraction of the mid-infrared pulse energy was estimated to be 30 % of 

the incident energy using a 3-layer multireflection model, where the optical properties 

from Ref. 34 were used. The absorbed energy 𝐸𝐴𝑏𝑠 is therefore given by 𝐸𝐴𝑏𝑠 =

0.3 × 𝐹𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 × 𝜋𝑟𝑃𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒

2
, where 𝑟𝑃𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒 is the radius of the laser focus. To calculate the 

incident power, a Gaussian laser pulse with a full-width-half-maximum of 300 fs was 

scaled such that its integral was equal to 𝐸𝐴𝑏𝑠, as displayed in Fig. S18a.

To calculate the increase in carrier and lattice temperature in the K3C60 thin film, a two-

temperature model with the following form was used39,40

𝑐𝑒

𝑑𝑇𝑒
𝑑𝑡 = − 𝑐𝑒

𝜏𝑒−𝑝

(𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝑝) + 𝑃(𝑡)
(5.8)

𝑐𝑝

𝑑𝑇𝑝
𝑑𝑡 = 𝑐𝑒

𝜏𝑒−𝑝

(𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝑝) − 𝑐𝑝

𝜏𝑒𝑠

(𝑇𝑝 − 𝑇0),
(5.9)

where 𝑇𝑒 and 𝑇𝑝 are the electron and phonon temperatures, respectively, 𝑐𝑒 and 𝑐𝑝 are the 

electron and phonon specific heat capacity, 𝜏𝑒−𝑝 is approximately the electron-phonon 

scattering time, and 𝜏𝑒𝑠 is the “escape time”, representing the rate of heat transfer from 

the thin film to the substrate.


22

For films of tens of nanometres in thickness, the escape time 𝜏𝑒𝑠 is several nanoseconds 

in duration and is not important on the timescales of this experiment.39 A value of 3 ns 

was used here. Measurements in other metals have found values for the electron-phonon 

relaxation time 𝜏𝑒−𝑝 of ~1 ps. In the simulations reported here, 𝜏𝑒−𝑝 = 0.8 ps provided 

the best fit to the data.

The value of the phononic specific heat capacity was obtained from fits to calorimetry 

data41, where 𝑐𝑝(𝑇) was approximated as linear within the range of 0 – 300 K. For the 

electronic specific heat capacity 𝑐𝑒(𝑇) = 𝛾𝑇𝑒, a value of 𝛾 = 3.7 × 10−2 J/kg K2 was used.

The calculated 𝑇𝑒 and 𝑇𝑝 for a 5-mJ/cm2 excitation fluence are displayed in Fig. S18b. The 

electron temperature rises sharply during the excitation, and the lattice temperature 

increases on longer timescales due to electron-phonon scattering, with the electron and 

lattice temperatures stabilising at ~300 K after several picoseconds. The thermal phase 

Figure S18 | Estimation of pump-induced heating. a, Absorbed power for a Gaussian pulse with 
a fluence of 5 mJ/cm2. b, Calculated electron temperature (𝑇𝑒) and lattice temperature (𝑇𝑝) vs time 
for photo-excitation of K3C60 with the Gaussian pulse shown in (a).


23

fluctuations in the granular two-fluid model simulation were assumed to follow the 

electron temperature calculated here.

S5.3. Granular two-fluid model

The full circuit model used for the simulations is displayed in Fig. S19. The granular two-

fluid model, highlighted in red, was biased with a DC current. In the experiment, the 

transient voltage changes were detected at the photo-conductive switch positions after 

propagating along the coplanar waveguide, which had a wave impedance of 𝑍𝑊. To

separate the transient voltage changes in the simulation, the DC bias was isolated via low-

pass filters as shown in Fig. S19.

Following the treatment discussed previously42, the granular K3C60 sample was modelled

Figure S19 | Full circuit model for granular two-fluid model simulations. The model for the 
sample is highlighted in red. The right part of the circuit represents the impedance of the coplanar 
waveguide.


24

as an array of grains. From the atomic force microscopy measurement shown in Fig. 1 of 

the main text, the grain size was 100 nm × 100 nm × 20 nm, meaning the full array for the 

20 µm × 20 µm × 100 nm sample was a 200 × 200 × 5 structure of grains. We can write 

the number of grains in each direction as 𝑁𝐿 = 200, 𝑁𝑊 = 200, and 𝑁𝐻 = 5, where 𝑁𝐿, 𝑁𝑊, 

and 𝑁𝐻 represent the number of grains along the length, width, and height of the sample,

respectively. The length is defined along the orientation parallel to the waveguide. The 

voltage changes across the length of the whole sample Δ𝑉𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 could be related to the 

voltage changes across a single grain boundary Δ𝑉𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 by

Δ𝑉𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 = Δ𝑉𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑁𝐿
⁄
.
(5.10)

Voltage changes across the whole sample could therefore be simulated by simulating the 

voltage changes across a single grain boundary.

Determination of circuit parameters

The resistance 𝑅𝑁 of the normal channel was given by 𝑅𝑁 = 𝑅0 𝑓𝑁
⁄
, where 𝑅0 is the K3C60

thin film resistance, accounting for contact and wire resistance by subtracting the 

measured resistance far below Tc, and 𝑓𝑁 is the fraction of normal carriers. Likewise, the 

resistance at the grain boundary 𝑅𝐽 for the superconducting state was given by 

𝑅𝐽 = 𝑅0 𝑓𝑆
⁄
, where 𝑓𝑆 is the fraction of supercarriers. Fundamentally, 𝑓𝑁 + 𝑓𝑆 = 1.

Resistances were scaled down to a single grain as 𝑅 × (𝑁𝑊 × 𝑁𝐻/𝑁𝐿) .

The kinetic inductance for each channel was determined in the same way, with the 

inductance of the normal channel given by 𝐿𝑁 = 𝐿0/𝑓𝑁 and that of the superconducting 


25

channel given by 𝐿𝑆 = 𝐿0/𝑓𝑆. The total kinetic inductance 𝐿0 of the sample was estimated 

using equation (5.5). For the 20 µm × 20 µm × 100 nm thin film of K3C60, with a carrier 

density 𝑛 = 1.6 × 1025 m-3, as extracted from optical reflectivity measurements43, 

𝐿0 = 22 pH was obtained. Inductances were scaled down to a single grain as 

𝐿 × (𝑁𝑊 × 𝑁𝐻/𝑁𝐿).

The capacitance for a single grain boundary 𝐶 was estimated to be 𝐶 ≈ 10−17 F, following 

Ref. 44.

The critical current 𝐼𝑐 of the Josephson junction was also considered to be proportional to 

the carrier density, following 𝐼𝑐 = 𝐼𝑐(𝑇) × 𝑓𝑆. The temperature dependence of the critical 

current was given by 𝐼𝑐(𝑇) = 𝐼𝑐(0 K)[1 − (𝑇 𝑇𝑐
⁄
)1.5].45 All currents, including the critical 

current, were also scaled down to a single grain as 𝐼/(𝑁𝑊 × 𝑁𝐻).

Finally, voltages were calculated for a single grain, and scaled up to the full sample as 

𝑉 × 𝑁𝐿.

Circuit equations

The following circuit equations were derived from the granular two-fluid model:

2Δ𝑉 = 𝐼𝑁𝑅𝑁 − 𝑉0 + 𝐿𝑁

𝑑𝐼𝑁
𝑑𝑡 + 𝐼𝑁

𝑑𝐿𝑁
𝑑𝑡 ,
(5.11)

𝐼𝑁𝑅𝑁 + 𝐿𝑁

𝑑𝐼𝑁
𝑑𝑡 + 𝐼𝑁

𝑑𝐿𝑁
𝑑𝑡 = 𝑉𝐽 + 𝐿𝑆

𝑑𝐼𝑆
𝑑𝑡 + 𝐼𝑆

𝑑𝐿𝑆
𝑑𝑡 ,
(5.12)

and

𝐼𝐷𝐶 − 2Δ𝑉

𝑍𝑊

= 𝐼𝑁 + 𝐼𝑆,
(5.13)


26

where 𝑉0 is the initialised voltage across the sample, and other parameters are defined as 

displayed in Fig. S19. The voltage 𝑉𝐽 refers to the voltage drop across the resistively- and 

capacitively-shunted Josephson junction, and was governed by the following equations46:

𝑑𝑉𝐽
𝑑𝑡 = 1

𝐶 (𝐼𝑆 − 𝐼𝐶 sin θ − VJ

RJ

− in(t)) ,
(5.14)

and

𝑑𝜃
𝑑𝑡 = 2𝑒𝑉𝐽

ℏ
.
(5.15)

The current 𝑖𝑛(𝑡) represents the noise current associated with the thermal phase 

fluctuations. A white-noise frequency spectrum was used with a zero-mean Gaussian 

amplitude distribution. The full-width half-maximum of the amplitude distribution was 

determined by comparing the equations of motion for the Josephson phase with the 

Langevin equation, giving √2𝑘𝐵𝑇/𝑅𝐽 . The circuit equations were rearranged to the form 

used for the numerical calculation:

𝑑Δ𝑉
𝑑𝑡 = 𝑍𝑊(𝐿𝑁 + 𝐿𝑆)

𝐿𝑁𝐿𝑆

{− [2 +
𝐿𝑁

𝑍𝑊(𝐿𝑁 + 𝐿𝑆)

𝑑𝐿𝑆
𝑑𝑡 ] Δ𝑉

+ [𝑅𝑁 + 𝑑𝐿𝑁

𝑑𝑡 −
𝐿𝑁

𝐿𝑁 + 𝐿𝑆

(𝑅𝑁 + 𝑑𝐿𝑁

𝑑𝑡 + 𝑑𝐿𝑆

𝑑𝑡 )] 𝐼𝑁 + 𝐼𝐷𝐶𝐿𝑁

𝐿𝑁 + 𝐿𝑆

𝑑𝐿𝑆
𝑑𝑡

+ (𝑉𝐽 − 𝑉𝐽0 − 𝑉0)},

(5.16)

𝑑𝐼𝑁
𝑑𝑡 =
1

𝐿𝑁 + 𝐿𝑆

[− 𝐿𝑆

𝑍𝑊

𝑑Δ𝑉
𝑑𝑡 − 1

𝑍𝑊

𝑑𝐿𝑆
𝑑𝑡 Δ𝑉 − (𝑅𝑁 + 𝑑𝐿𝑁

𝑑𝑡 + 𝑑𝐿𝑆

𝑑𝑡 ) 𝐼𝑁 + 𝐼𝐷𝐶

𝑑𝐿𝑆
𝑑𝑡 ] ,
(5.17)

𝑑𝑉𝐽
𝑑𝑡 = 1

𝐶 [𝐼𝐷𝐶 − Δ𝑉

𝑍𝑊

− 𝐼𝐶 sin 𝜃 − 𝑉𝐽

𝑅𝐽

− in(t)] ,
(5.18)


27

𝑑𝜃
𝑑𝑡 = 2𝑒𝑉𝐽

ℏ
.
(5.19)

S6. Additional data

S6.1. Photo-excitation below Tc

S6.1.1. Measurements with low excitation fluence

The data for photo-excitation below Tc displayed in Fig. 3 of the main text was taken with 

an excitation fluence of 5 mJ/cm2. This resulted in a large increase in temperature of the 

K3C60 thin film and hindered the recovery of the superconducting state. The recovery of 

the superconducting state is expected to result in a negative voltage drop due to the 

Figure S20 | Low-fluence photo-excitation below Tc. Normalised voltage changes versus 
pump-probe delay for photo-excitation at 8 K with a fluence of < 0.1 mJ/cm2. Data were taken with 
a bias current of 0.3 mA.


28

decrease in kinetic inductance.47 By photo-exciting the sample with a much smaller 

excitation fluence of < 0.1 mJ/cm2, the heating of the sample was significantly reduced. 

The voltage changes upon low-fluence photo-excitation at 8 K are displayed in Fig. S20, 

where a negative voltage change can be seen at around 10-ps delay.

S6.1.2. Photo-excitation above the critical current

A negative change in voltage drop was also observed upon photo-excitation of the K3C60

thin film at temperatures below Tc, when the applied bias current was above the critical 

current of the equilibrium superconducting state. The time-resolved change in voltage for 

photo-excitation at 8 K under a 4-mA bias is displayed in Fig. S21. A two-timescale voltage 

response was also observed under these conditions, analogous to the voltage changes 

observed for the photo-induced state above Tc.


29

S6.2. Photo-excitation above Tc

S6.2.1. Fluence dependence

The fluence-dependent voltage changes for photo-excitation at 25 K are shown in Fig. S22.

At low fluences, the photo-induced voltage change had a shorter lifetime, and followed an 

exponential decay rather than the two-timescale behaviour observed at high fluences. 

Upon increasing the fluence, the voltage changes increased in magnitude and the spike-

and-dip structure emerged, saturating at approximately 5 mJ/cm2.

Figure S21 | Photo-excitation above Ic. Normalised voltage changes versus pump-probe delay 
for photo-excitation at 8 K with an applied current of 4 mA (~2Ic). Data were taken with a fluence 
of 5 mJ/cm2.


30

S6.2.2. Current dependence vs fluence

Figure S22 | Fluence dependence for the photo-induced state above Tc. Normalised voltage 
changes versus pump-probe delay for photo-excitation at 25 K for mid-infrared excitation 
fluences of 0.5, 1, 3, 5, and 10 mJ/cm2. Data were taken with applied current of 1 mA.

Figure S23 | Fluence dependence of the nonlinear I-V behaviour. Normalised voltage changes 
versus current for photo-excitation at 25 K, with mid-infrared excitation fluences of 1, 3, and 
5 mJ/cm2.


31

Fig. S23 displays the current dependence of the voltage changes at different fluences. 

Although the signal was reduced for smaller excitation fluence, a nonlinear current 

dependence was still observed at 1 mJ/cm2.


32

References

33
Kozich, V., Moguilevski, A. & Heyne, K. High energy femtosecond OPA pumped by 
1030nm Yb:KGW laser. Optics Communications 285, 4515-4518 (2012). 

34
Degiorgi, L. et al. Optical properties of the alkali-metal-doped superconducting 
fullerenes: K3C60 and Rb3C60. Physical Review B 49, 7012-7025 (1994). 

35
Klein, O., Grüner, G., Huang, S. M., Wiley, J. B. & Kaner, R. B. Electrical resistivity of 
K3C60. Physical Review B 46, 11247-11249 (1992). 

36
Meservey, R. & Tedrow, P. M. Measurements of the Kinetic Inductance of 
Superconducting Linear Structures. Journal of Applied Physics 40, 2028-2034 
(1969). 

37
England, P., Venkatesan, T., Wu, X. D. & Inam, A. Granular superconductivity in 
R1Ba2Cu3O7−δ thin films. Physical Review B 38, 7125-7128 (1988). 

38
Abraham, D. W., Lobb, C. J., Tinkham, M. & Klapwijk, T. M. Resistive transition in 
two-dimensional arrays of superconducting weak links. Physical Review B 26,
5268-5271 (1982). 

39
Semenov, A. D., Nebosis, R. S., Gousev, Y. P., Heusinger, M. A. & Renk, K. F. Analysis 
of the nonequilibrium photoresponse of superconducting films to pulsed radiation 
by use of a two-temperature model. Physical Review B 52, 581-581 (1995). 

40
Sobolewski, R. Ultrafast dynamics of nonequilibrium quasi-particles in high-
temperature superconductors. SPIE 3481, 480-491 (1998). 

41
Allen, K. & Hellman, F. Specific heat of C60 and K3C60 thin films for T=6—400 K. 
Physical Review B 60, 11765-11772 (1999). 

42
Wang, E. et al. Superconducting nonlinear transport in optically driven high-
temperature K3C60. Nature Communications 14, 7233 (2023). 

43
Mitrano, M. et al. Possible light-induced superconductivity in K3C60 at high 
temperature. Nature 530, 461-464 (2016). 

44
McIver, J. W. et al. Light-induced anomalous Hall effect in graphene. Nat Phys 16, 
38-41 (2020). 

45
Tinkham, M. Introduction to Superconductivity, 2nd Edition.  (Dover Publications, 
Inc., 2004).

46
Ambegaokar, V. & Halperin, B. I. Voltage Due to Thermal Noise in the DC Josephson 
Effect. Physical Review Letters 22, 1364-1366 (1969). 

47
Heusinger, M. A., Semenov, A. D., Nebosis, R. S., Gousev, Y. P. & Renk, K. F. 
Nonthermal Kinetic Inductance Photoresponse of Thin Superconducting Films. 
IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 5, 2595-2598 (1995). 


