Efficient Superconductor Arithmetic Logic Unit for Ultra-Fast
Computing

Sasan Razmkhah1,2* and Ali Bozbey1†

1Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, TOBB University of Economics
and Technology, Sogutozu, Ankara, 06560, Turkey.
2Current Affiliation: Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Southern California, 3740 McClintock, Los Angeles, 90089, CA, USA.

*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): razmkhah@usc.edu;
Contributing authors: bozbey@etu.edu.tr;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract

We present a 4-bit Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) utilizing superconductor technology. The ALU serves
as the central processing unit of a processor, performing crucial arithmetic and logical operations. We
have adopted a bit-parallel architecture to ensure an efficient and streamlined design with minimal
fanin/fanout and optimal latency. In terms of fabrication, the ALU has been fabricated using a
standard commercial process. It operates at an impressive clock frequency exceeding 30 GHz while
consuming a mere 4.75 mW of power, including applied reverse current, encompassing static and
dynamic components. The ALU contains over 9000 Josephson junctions, with approximately 7000 JJs
dedicated to wiring, delay lines, and path balancing, and it has over 18% bias margin. Designed as
a co-processor, this arithmetic logic unit will work with external CMOS memory and processors via
interface circuits. Thorough testing and validation of the ALU’s functionality have been conducted
with digital and analog simulations, and all the components were fabricated and measured within a
4 K pulse-tube cryocooler. Experimental verification has confirmed the successful operation of both
the arithmetic and logic units. These results have been analyzed and are presented alongside the
experimental data to provide comprehensive insights into the ALU’s behavior and capabilities.

Keywords: Superconductor Electronics, Arithmetic Logic Unit, VLSI, Efficient Computing

1 Introduction

In the pursuit of high-speed and low-power com-
puting, there is a growing demand for alterna-
tive logic families to complement CMOS tech-
nology. Recent advancements in superconductor
logic technology and superconducting very large-
scale integration (VLSI) circuit fabrication have
enabled the design of complex rapid single flux

quantum (RSFQ) circuits and structures with a
significant number of Josephson junctions inte-
grated onto a single chip [1, 2]. These break-
throughs have paved the way for the development
of logic circuits that consume orders of mag-
nitude less power than CMOS and operate at
considerably higher frequencies [3].
Power consumption poses a critical challenge
in large-scale computer systems, contributing to

1

arXiv:2312.09386v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  14 Dec 2023


carbon emissions and sustainability concerns [4].
The issue also extends to CMOS interconnections
and cooling on a smaller scale. With the growth
of internet traffic, AI model training, and cloud
computing, data center facilities are expanding
rapidly. The reliance on cloud computing and arti-
ficial intelligence in cellular and mobile devices
further amplifies the need for support [5, 6]. The
Department of Energy (DoE) and the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
are actively working on optimizing and mini-
mizing power consumption in these systems [7].
Since 2010, however, the data center landscape
has changed dramatically due to more efficient
computing. However, by 2018, global data center
workloads and compute instances had increased
more than 6×, whereas data center internet proto-
col (IP) traffic had increased by more than 10× [8].
This has a significant environmental impact and
raises whether computing efficiency can compete
with the increasing data demand [9]. However,
limited information is publicly available due to the
private nature of these facilities.
Energy consumption in logic devices arises
from various sources, including resistors used for
circuit biasing, energy dissipation in intercon-
nects, and bit loss during circuit switching. The
Shannon-Neuman-Landauer limit [10] defines the
theoretical threshold for energy dissipation in logic
gates due to bit loss during switching. Supercon-
ductor technology offers the potential to approach
power consumption near this theoretical limit.
Over the past few decades, researchers have
dedicated significant efforts to developing sta-
ble superconducting processors and co-processors
[11–13]. Among the early endeavors, Semenov
et al. embarked on designing arithmetic logic
units (ALUs) using RSFQ logic in the 1990s
[14]. Their work focused on a bit-serial architec-
ture with approximately 5000 junctions and aimed
to achieve a clock frequency of up to 20 GHz.
Another notable milestone in RSFQ processor
implementation was the FLUX project by Bunyk
et al. at SUNY Stony Brook in 2001 [11]. They
aimed to fabricate a 16-bit ALU incorporating
registers and an instruction set memory support-
ing over 30 commands. The chip they designed
contained over 90000 junctions and occupied an
area of 10×15mm2. Building upon this, Bunyk et
al. continued their research on ALU architecture
and developed the FLUX-1 microprocessor in 2003

[15]. The Flux-1 chip was an 8-bit microproces-
sor designed for a frequency of 20 GHz, featuring
a parallel partitioned architecture encompassing
63000 Josephson junctions within a 10 × 10mm2

area. In 2004, Kang et al. from Incheon University
in South Korea designed an RSFQ ALU employing
half adders in a serial pipeline architecture [16]. In
2006, M¨uller et al. from Stellenbosch University
in South Africa developed a superconductor ALU
using RSFQ-AT gates [17].
One of the notable ongoing efforts in the field
is led by Fujimaki et al. at Nagoya University in
Japan. In 2015, they successfully designed a 4-bit
bit-slice Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) integrated
with a 32-bit RSFQ microprocessor [13]. To fab-
ricate the circuits, they employed the advanced
process (ADP), a nine-layer Nb process with a cur-
rent density of 10 kA/cm2. The chip had dimen-
sions of 3×1.7 mm2 and operated at a clock fre-
quency of 50 GHz. Fujimaki’s laboratory group at
Nagoya University has also developed the CORE-
e series of RSFQ-based microprocessors, which
are general-purpose microprocessors with random
access memories and bit-serial architecture [18].
They continued their work and developed an 8-bit
processor with 100TOPs/W in [19].
However, all these circuits were tested in liq-
uid helium cryostats, which are not commercially
viable for widespread application due to high oper-
ational costs and limited operation time. In this
work, we aimed to design an Arithmetic Logic
Unit (ALU) utilizing RSFQ logic to test it in a
closed-cycle cryostat system and demonstrate the
capability of the technology for commercial use.
We use a parallel bit propagation data path. The
parallel architecture, although relatively complex
compared to the serial ALU, offers a significantly
higher speed at the expense of a higher bias cur-
rent. The architecture is pipelined, and new data
and instruction sets can applied in each clock
cycle. In this study, we provide a comprehensive
explanation of the ALU’s structure, followed by
circuit-level design, digital and analog simulations,
and the layout design of the circuit. Additionally,
we present the experimental test setup and mea-
surement results for the individual arithmetic and
logic units, providing valuable insights into their
performance and functionality.

2


2 Architecture

A processor requires an Arithmetic Logic Unit
(ALU), reliable and dense cache memory, and
efficient data buses. However, a reliable dense
memory design remains challenging in RSFQ tech-
nology [20, 21]. One potential solution is incor-
porating a superconductor ALU as a co-processor
alongside a CMOS processor. Integrating a CMOS
processor with an RSFQ ALU can eliminate the
need for extensive memory at the superconductor
stage. A relatively small register memory would
suffice for storing commands and in-line data,
while the primary memory resides on the CMOS
circuit. The CMOS circuits could be positioned in
the first stage of the cryocooler at 55K, leveraging
the benefits of both technologies.
It is important to note that the RSFQ clock
operates at a significantly higher frequency than
the CMOS clock. Therefore, input and output
stages are required to buffer the data and enable
seamless communication between the RSFQ and
CMOS processors without compromising com-
putational speed or data integrity. These buffer
registers would store the data and instruction sets
and synchronize the clocks of both CMOS and
RSFQ circuits. The input buffer of the input stage
would store the data using the incoming CMOS
clock and transfer it to the RSFQ ALU utilizing
a series of fast clock pulses precisely timed on the
chip. This ensures efficient data transfer and coor-
dination between the two processing units while
harnessing the advantages of their respective clock
frequencies.

Table
1:
Parallel
ALU
operations and the select
bits for each operator.

Operation
S0
S1
S2

XOR (A ⊕ B)
10
10
11
OR (A|B)
11
11
11
AND (A&B)
10
11
11
NOT ( A)
11
10
11
ADD (A + B)
00
10
10
SUB (A − B)
10
10
10
MUL (A × B)
XX
11
10

When designing an Arithmetic Logic Unit
(ALU), there are various architectural choices

Fig. 1: A simplified block diagram of parallel
ALU showing the connection between arithmetic
and logical operators. The fast and slow clock
distribution is not shown here.

available for the arithmetic unit. The architec-
ture for each unit is selected based on the number
of levels and complexity. Adders can be serial,
parallel, bit-sliced, and Kogge-Stone architectures
[12, 22–24] while multiplier can be serial, parallel,
array, Wallace tree, Booth, and many more. Each
architecture has its advantages and disadvantages.
SFQ gates have a fanout of one, and they rely on
clocked operations and can be pipelined for high
throughput. As the architecture becomes more
complex, the clock tree consumes significant power
and introduces delays that drop the clock fre-
quency. The Kogge-Stone architecture offers suit-
able delay and latency characteristics. However,
as demonstrated in our previous work, its com-
plex clock tree and high fanout result in increased
power consumption and a larger circuit footprint
[24]. Although less complicated than Kogge-Stone,
the ripple carry adder exhibits higher output
latency when scaled. On the other hand, while the
serial architecture is easily scalable, it becomes
less practical for higher bit numbers, and the out-
put delay and data path imbalance can limit the
benefits of the fast clock offered by RSFQ tech-
nology. Nonetheless, many RSFQ logic units have
been designed using the serial architecture due
to its ease of implementation and the ability to
increase the number of bits simply by cascading
the units [12, 13, 22, 25, 26].
For our specific design, we have opted for the
parallel datapath for the ALU with a ripple carry
adder and array multiplier. Fig. 1 illustrates the

3


block diagram of our chosen method. The compo-
nents of this ALU include a 4-bit multiplier, 4-bit
logic gates (And, Or, Xor, and inverter gates),
adder and subtractor circuits, and three flag bits.
Overall, the ALU comprises eight direct instruc-
tion sets. The operators and their corresponding
instruction sets are listed in Table 1. To facili-
tate seamless integration with CMOS, the ALU
generates three flag signals: Zero, Negative, and
Carry. The clock output pin determines the criti-
cal path of the signal and provides the handshake
for the interface circuits. Input and output regis-
ters have been designed and fabricated to interface
with CMOS and synchronize the inputs, instruc-
tions, and outputs, ensuring efficient data flow
and coordination. The interface circuits will buffer
data and match the low-speed CMOS clock to the
high-speed SFQ clock.

3 Results and Discussion

Before fabrication, we simulated all sub-circuits
to ensure their correct functionality. This pre-
fabrication simulation allowed us to verify the
performance of each sub-part within the ALU
design. Subsequently, these sub-parts were fabri-
cated independently, and we tested them in our
measurement setup. This rigorous testing process
ensured that each component of the ALU met the
desired specifications and performed as intended.

3.1 Simulation Results

The units and all the interface circuits were tested
individually with precise cell-based verilog mod-
els. then the ALU underwent digital simulation
using Verilog, with various bias values employed
to assess the latency and operational character-
istics for all possible input combinations. The
digital simulation results for the ALU, as imple-
mented in Verilog, are presented in Fig. 2(a). This
figure illustrates the application of all possible
input combinations to the circuit, with the result-
ing outputs analyzed and evaluated. To examine
the ALU’s performance under different bias con-
ditions, the bias was swept within a ±25% around
the design value of 2.5 mV, ensuring a compre-
hensive investigation of the ALU’s functionality
across a range of biases and operation in ±18%
margin was observed. While digital simulation is
faster, analog circuit-level simulation will give us

(a) Verilog simulation

(b) Jsim simulation

Fig. 2: ALU digital (a) and analog (b) simulation
results. (a) Verilog simulation for the ALU was
run on all the possible input patterns, and the
results were verified. A) The result for the adder as
the inputs change. B) Result for the multiplier. C)
Result for the Josephson OR gate. (b) The JSIM
analog simulation of the ALU circuit on its most
critical path (The clock tree).

more precise results. To conduct analog simula-
tion, we utilized JSIM, a Spice-based simulator
designed explicitly for Josephson junction-based
circuits [27]. The simulation focused on monitor-
ing the output clock signal along the most critical
path within the chip, considering various bias val-
ues. Fig. 2(b) illustrates the logic unit’s input

4


and output clock signals along this critical path.
By simulating the latency of the output signal
on this path, we determined that the expected
latency under design conditions is approximately
one nanosecond. The analog simulation provided
valuable insights into the performance and timing
characteristics of the ALU design. However, due to
the scale and complexity of the circuit, unlike Ver-
ilog simulation for analog, a few selected patterns
on the most critical path were tested.

3.2 Fabricated Circuits

The circuit design for the ALU was implemented
based on the parallel datapath, utilizing the CON-
NECT cell library [28]. Subsequently, the fabri-
cated circuits were produced at AIST CRAVITY
(now known as QuFAB) using the STP2 process
[29]. Fig. 3 showcases that the 4-bit array mul-
tiplier circuit is one of the most complex circuit
blocks within the ALU design. This particular cir-
cuit operates within two clock cycles, representing
a significant component of the overall functional-
ity of the ALU. In Fig. 4, we present the fabricated

(a) Schematic of a 4-bit multi-
plier

(b) Multiplier chip fabricated
with STP2.

Fig. 3: Multiplier circuit fabricated for 4-bit mul-
tiplication. To reduce the number of delay JTLs, a
DFF state is added to the multiplier, and it needs
two clock cycles to generate a result.

circuit for the buffer stage located at the input
of the ALU. These buffers play a crucial role in
receiving the outputs from the CMOS stage and
loading them in conjunction with a signal from
CMOS. The data is then serialized and pipelined,
allowing for faster unloading to the input regis-
ter of the ALU using a high-speed RSFQ clock.

This configuration significantly enhances the com-
munication bandwidth with the CMOS mem-
ory, facilitating an efficient and continuous data
stream.
The fabrication process employed in this study
incorporates 4 Nb layers, and the transmission
lines also occupy a specific area within the circuit.
However, if a denser process such as ADP and MIT
LL SFQee5 [30, 31] with 9 Nb layers were utilized,
the interconnects could be positioned beneath the
active elements using passive transmission lines
[32], resulting in a more compact, power-efficient
and densely integrated circuit design.

Fig. 4: 4-bit 4 to 1 multiplexer circuit used in
the input register. This unit matches the inputs’
frequency to the high RSFQ frequency by four.

3.3 Measurement Setup

In this work, we conducted the measurements
using a custom-designed closed-cycle cryocooler
system. We employed the Janis 4K pulse-tube
Cryocooler
with
Sumitomo
F-50
compressor,
which offers a cooling power of 500 mW at 4.2
K. To minimize chip holder vibration, mechani-
cal damping braids were installed at both the first
and second stages, as depicted in Fig. 5. These
damping braids effectively reduced the vibration
of the 4 K stage by one order of magnitude; how-
ever, they also decreased the cooling power of the
second stage from 500 mW to 250 mW.
Operating relatively large circuits within a
closed-cycle refrigerator system necessitates con-
sidering specific conditions. One significant chal-
lenge with such circuits is the current bias.
Although power consumption for RSFQ circuits

5


Fig. 5: The 4K Pulse-tube cryocooler used for
the tests. The flat wiring provides good thermal
isolation but limits the input frequency to 2.5GHz.
RF and µ-metal shields are essential for testing
large RSFQ circuits.

is typically much lower than the cooling capac-
ities of the cryocooler due to the low operating
voltage levels of 2.5 mV, they may require high
current levels, leading to Joule heating in the
wires. Good electrical conductors are usually good
thermal conductors too. Hence the bias lines can-
not have a very small resistance and must carefully
consider the trade-offs between Joule heating and
thermal heat load [33]. The high current levels
passing through the wires diminish the excess
cooling power of the cryocooler, particularly in the
second stage. We utilized an intermediate temper-
ature point of approximately 8 K within the cold
head to achieve thermal anchoring of the bias and
signal lines. This approach reduces the thermal
load on the 4.2 K stage compared to the direct con-
nection to the 1st stage at 45 K. We refer to this
anchor point as the middle stage. Fig. 5 illustrates
the wiring and damping braids of the test system.
Twisted Be-Cu wires were employed for DC bias
lines, with a single wire resistance of 2.1Ω between
room temperature and the chip holder. Approx-
imately 0.6Ω exists within that value between
the middle and second stages. Shielded co-planar
Be-Cu flexible flat cables were utilized for high-
frequency data transmission from the first to the
second stage [34]. Sem semi-rigid copper coaxial
cables were implemented from the second stage to
the chip. The heating occurring at the chip surface
results in a temperature gradient between the chip
and the cold head, affecting the superconductor’s
state and leading to chip heating despite signifi-
cant power remaining at the second stage [35]. A
new packaging method, as shown in Fig. 6, was

Fig. 6: ALU chip packaging for implementation in
the cold head of the cooler. The chip is placed and
wire-bonded on the high-frequency PCB, and then
we add Stycast epoxy for better contact between
the PCB copper substrate and the chip surface.

employed for the ALU chip and its components to
enhance power restrictions on the chip and accom-
modate large current surges. Detailed information
regarding the system and packaging method can
be found elsewhere [35].
Superconductor integrated circuits are sus-
ceptible to magnetic fields due to their reliance
on Josephson Junctions. While external fields,
such as the Earth’s magnetic field, can be easily
attenuated using high permeability shields, spe-
cial attention must be given to the magnetic fields
generated by the high current bias levels within
the circuits. To mitigate the effect of the magnetic
field resulting from bias currents, we employed the
controlled ground return current method, which
involves applying a negative value of the bias cur-
rent in a nearby ground contact [36]. However, one
drawback of this method is that it increases the
DC bias currents flowing through the bias lines,
effectively doubling the applied circuit’s current.

3.4 Experimental Results

We utilized a pattern generator system with a
bandwidth of 600 MHz to generate the input sig-
nals and clock waveform for our experiments. We
employed a precise multi-channel current source
to provide the input bias currents for the cir-
cuits with low bias values. The output signals were
sampled using a data acquisition card or logic

6


analyzer after passing through a low-noise ampli-
fier with a maximum gain of 60 dB. It is worth
noting that the amplifiers limit the system’s band-
width at low frequencies. All instruments were
controlled through a system PC to ensure minimal
user interference during the tests.
The functionality of the ALU sub-circuits was
confirmed by applying various signal patterns at
lower frequencies. The logic unit is designed to
perform four functions: XOR, NOT, AND, and
OR. The clock tree of the logic unit is distributed,
ensuring that all delays from different cells are
identical. Fig. 7 displays the measurement results
for a simple Josephson AND logic gate in our test
setup. The multiplexer stage is crucial in deter-

Fig. 7: Measurement results of the single J-
AND gate. The input signal level to the DC/SFQ
cell should be 1mA, provided by a 50mV source
through a 50Ω resistor. The output is measured
from the SFQ/DC cell, and the value is about
100µV after 500× amplification becomes 50mV.

mining the outputs based on the supplied selected
bits. In our design, the instruction set signals were
applied to multiplexers using clocked toggle flip-
flop (T1) cells. The outputs of these cells were
then fed into JAND cells, and their outputs were
merged to generate the desired signal as the out-
put. Fig. 8(a) illustrates the result obtained for a
toggle flip-flop-based multiplexer.

The input and output registers are crucial
in communicating between the RSFQ ALU and
the CMOS processor. Fig. 8(b) illustrates the
measurement results for the input register. As
depicted in the figure, the four inputs from the
CMOS stage are converted into four pulses syn-
chronized with the correct clock cycles. The RSFQ
ALU operates in a pipeline manner, ensuring that
the outputs are processed in the same order as
the inputs. This allows efficient data transfer and
synchronization between the RSFQ ALU and the
CMOS processor. The adder circuit was initially

(a) Multiplexer measurement (b)
Demultiplexer
measurement

Fig. 8: Multiplexer and demultiplexer circuits’
measurement results. (a) Multiplexer 2 × 1 circuit
experimental results. Similar to the AND gate, the
input values are 50mV, and the output is ampli-
fied to be 50mV. (b) The measurement result of
the input register (demultiplexer 1 × 4).

designed using the Kogge-Stone (KS) architecture.
However, due to the large size of the KS adder and
the limited chip size, we had to change the design
to a carry-look-ahead architecture. This modified
design used clocked toggle flip-flop (TFF) cells
as full adders. Additionally, to enable the sub-
tract function, an XOR logic gate was introduced
before the second input’s register of the adder, and
the two’s complement of the second register was
created.
The multiplier circuit was also designed using
full adders and could perform 4-bit multiplica-
tion in just two clock cycles. Fig. 9 displays the
result obtained for the multiplier cell with two
different input signals. It is worth noting that
this multiplier circuit is one of the most complex
circuits ever tested in a closed-cycle cryocooler,
comprising over 2000 junctions and requiring a
bias current of 350mA. To assess the quality of

7


Fig. 9: The measurement result for the 4-bit
multiplier cell. The voltages are acquired from a
Textronix oscilloscope paired with a logic ana-
lyzer. a) 2×4 and b) 3×5. The inputs were applied
from a pattern generator with variable probes set
to 50mV. The outputs were measured on a Tek-
tronic oscilloscope with four analog input channels
for amplifier output and multiple digital input
channels connected to the pattern generator to
monitor the applied data. The multiplier needs
two clock signals to generate output.

the fabricated chip and measure the chip’s surface
temperature at different bias values, a series of
DC-SQUIDs (Superconducting Quantum Interfer-
ence Devices) were placed on the chip. Monitoring
the I-V characteristic of these SQUIDs provides
valuable insights into the chip’s quality. Addition-
ally, these measurements confirmed the presence

of a temperature gradient between the cold head
and the chip.
After ensuring the correct operation of the
individual components of the arithmetic logic unit
(ALU), we combined them to form the complete
circuit, as depicted in Fig. 10. The ALU com-
prises over 9000 Josephson junctions (JJs) and
requires approximately 950 mA of bias current.
As stated before, to mitigate the susceptibility of
RSFQ circuits to magnetic fields, we employed
the controlled ground return current method [36].
Considering the excess cooling power of 185mW
available even after accounting for the Joule heat-
ing at the bias lines at 4.2 K, it is theoretically
possible to maintain the ALU at 4.2 K with a bias
current of 1900 mA, resulting in a total power
consumption of 4.75 mW.

Fig. 10: The fabricated ALU with STP2 process
[37]. 1) The XOR gates at the input of the adder
for subtraction, 2) Carry look-ahead adder stage,
3) Multiplier stage, 4) Logic Unit with NOT,
AND, OR, and XOR gates, 5) The multiplexer
stages, 6) Zero flag, 7) Series SQUIDs for temper-
ature and fabrication parameter measurement.

8


4 Conclusion

We have successfully designed, tested, and vali-
dated all the necessary components to develop a
4-bit arithmetic logic unit (ALU) with supercon-
ductor logic circuits. Apart from the arithmetic
and logic circuits, we have also designed and tested
interface sub-circuits to facilitate the synchronous
operation of the RSFQ ALU with external CMOS
circuits. The simulation results have exhibited a
bias margin of approximately ±18% for the com-
plete ALU, indicating a robust operational range.
Moreover, a custom-made pulse-tube cryocooler
has effectively demonstrated all the sub-circuits,
showcasing satisfactory bias margins. In addition
to the successful development and testing, we
have fabricated a complete ALU, which will be
further employed as a co-processor within a multi-
chip-module setup. This integration will enhance
processing capabilities and expand functionalities
with other computational units.

Acknowledgments.
TUBITAK supported this
work with project number 111E191.
The circuits were fabricated in the clean
room for analog-digital superconductivity CRAV-
ITY (now QuFAB) of the National Institute
of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST) with the standard process 2 (STP2).
The authors thank Prof. A. Fujimaki (Nagoya
Univ., Japan) and his associates for kindly provid-
ing CONNECT cells.

References

[1] K. K. Likharev and V. K. Semenov, ”RSFQ
logic/memory
family:
A
new
Josephson-
junction technology for sub-terahertz-clock-
frequency digital systems,” Appl. Supercond.
IEEE Trans. On, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 3–28,
(1991).

[2] S. Razmkhah and P. Febvre, “Supercon-
ducting Quantum Electronics,” in Beyond-
CMOS, ch. 8, pp. 295–391, (2023).

[3] D. S. Holmes and E. P. DeBenedictis, ”Super-
conductor Electronics and the International
Roadmap for Devices and Systems,” 2017
16th International Superconductive Electron-
ics Conference (ISEC), Naples, Italy, pp. 1-3,
doi: 10.1109/ISEC.2017.8314240, (2017).

[4] Jin, Chaoqiang, et al. ”A review of power con-
sumption models of servers in data centers.”
Applied Energy 265: 114806, (2020).

[5] Sun, Lanfang, et al. ”Edge-cloud comput-
ing and artificial intelligence in internet of
medical things: architecture, technology and
application.” IEEE Access 8: 101079-101092,
(2020).

[6] Saeik, Firdose, et al. ”Task offloading in Edge
and Cloud Computing: A survey on math-
ematical, artificial intelligence and control
theory solutions.” Computer Networks 195:
108177, (2021).

[7] “
DOE
Explains...Exascale
Com-
puting”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.energy.gov/science/doe-
explainsexascale-computing.

[8] Masanet, Eric, et al. ”Recalibrating global
data center energy-use estimates.” Science
367.6481: 984-986, (2020).

[9] Siddik, Md Abu Bakar, Arman Shehabi,
and Landon Marston. ”The environmen-
tal footprint of data centers in the United
States.”
Environmental
Research
Letters
16.6: 064017, (2021).

[10] I. L. Markov, ”Limits on fundamental limits
to computation,” Nature, vol. 512, no. 7513,
p. nature13570, Aug. (2014).

[11] M. Dorojevets, P. Bunyk, and D. Zinoviev,
”FLUX chip: design of a 20-GHz 16-bit ultra-
pipelined RSFQ processor prototype based
on 1.75- mu;m LTS technology,” IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 326–332,
Mar. (2001).

[12] T. V. Filippov et al., ”20GHz Operation
of an Asynchronous Wave-Pipelined RSFQ
Arithmetic-Logic Unit,” Phys. Procedia, vol.
36, pp. 59–65, (2012).

[13] G. M. Tang, K. Takata, M. Tanaka, A.
Fujimaki, K. Takagi, and N. Takagi, ”4-bit
Bit-Slice Arithmetic Logic Unit for 32-bit
RSFQ Microprocessors,” IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1–6, Jan.

9


(2016).

[14] P. Bunyk and V. K. Semenov, ”Design of an
RSFQ microprocessor,” IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3325–3328, Jun.
(1995).

[15] M. Dorojevets and P. Bunyk, ”Architectural
and implementation challenges in designing
high-performance RSFQ processors: a FLUX-
1 microprocessor and beyond,” IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 446–449,
Jun. (2003).

[16] J.-Y. Kim, S. Kim, and J. Kang, ”Construc-
tion of an RSFQ 4-bit ALU with half adder
cells,” IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 308–311, Jun. (2005).

[17] H. R. Gerber, C. J. Fourie, W. J. Per-
old, and L. C. Muller, ”Design of an asyn-
chronous microprocessor using RSFQ-AT,”
Appl. Supercond. IEEE Trans. On, vol. 17,
no. 2, pp. 490–493, (2007).

[18] M. Tanaka et al., ”Development of Bit-
Serial RSFQ Microprocessors Integrated with
Shift-Register-Based Random Access Memo-
ries,” in 2015 15th International Supercon-
ductive Electronics Conference (ISEC), pp.
1–3, (2015).

[19] Nagaoka, Ikki, et al. ”Demonstration of
an energy-efficient, gate-level-pipelined 100
TOPS/W arithmetic logic unit based on
low-voltage rapid single-flux-quantum logic.”
2019
IEEE
International
Superconduc-
tive Electronics Conference (ISEC). IEEE,
(2019).

[20] T. V. Duzer et al., ”64-kb Hybrid Josephson-
CMOS 4 Kelvin RAM With 400 ps Access
Time and 12 mW Read Power,” IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond., vol. 23, no. 3, pp.
1700504–1700504, Jun. (2013).

[21] M. Tanaka, R. Sato, Y. Hatanaka, and
A. Fujimaki, ”High-Density Shift-Register-
Based Rapid Single-Flux-Quantum Memory
System for Bit-Serial Microprocessors,” IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond., vol. 26, no. 5, pp.
1–5, Aug. (2016).

[22] A. Fujimaki, M. Tanaka, T. Yamada, Y.
Yamanashi, H. Park, and N. Yoshikawa, ”Bit-
Serial Single Flux Quantum Microprocessor
CORE,” IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. E91-C,
no. 3, pp. 342–349, Mar. (2008).

[23] Y. Ando, R. Sato, M. Tanaka, K. Takagi,
N. Takagi, and A. Fujimaki, ”Design and
Demonstration of an 8-bit Bit-Serial RSFQ
Microprocessor: CORE e4,” IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1–5, Aug.
(2016).

[24] M. Ozer, M. Eren C¸elik, Y. Tukel, and A.
Bozbey, ”Design of RSFQ wave pipelined
Kogge–Stone Adder and developing custom
compound gates,” Cryogenics, vol. 63, pp.
174–179, Sep. (2014).

[25] M. Dorojevets, C. L. Ayala, N. Yoshikawa,
and
A.
Fujimaki,
”8-Bit
Asynchronous
Sparse-Tree
Superconductor
RSFQ
Arithmetic-Logic Unit With a Rich Set of
Operations,” IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond.,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1700104–1700104, (2013).

[26] T. Filippov, M. Dorojevets, A. Sahu, A.
Kirichenko, C. Ayala, and O. Mukhanov,
”8-Bit Asynchronous Wave-Pipelined RSFQ
Arithmetic-Logic Unit,” IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 847–851, Jun.
(2011).

[27] E. S. Fang and T. Van Duzer, ”A Joseph-
son integrated circuit simulator (JSIM) for
superconductive electronics application,” Ext
Abstr 2nd ISEC Tokyo Jpn., pp. 407–410,
(1989).

[28] S. Yorozu, Y. Kameda, H. Terai, A. Fuji-
maki, T. Yamada, and S. Tahara, ”A single
flux quantum standard logic cell library,”
Phys. C Supercond., vol. 378–381, Part 2, pp.
1471–1474, Oct. (2002).

[29] M. Hidaka, S. Nagasawa, T. Satoh, K. Hin-
ode, and Y. Kitagawa, ”Current status and
future prospect of the Nb-based fabrication
process for single flux quantum circuits,”
Supercond. Sci. Technol., vol. 19, no. 3, p.
S138, Mar. (2006).

10


[30] S. Nagasawa et al., ”Nb 9-Layer Fabrica-
tion Process for Superconducting Large-Scale
SFQ Circuits and Its Process Evaluation,”
IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. E97-C, no. 3, pp.
132–140, Mar. (2014).

[31] S. K. Tolpygo et al., ”Advanced Fabrication
Processes for Superconducting Very Large-
Scale Integrated Circuits,”
IEEE Transac-
tions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 26,
no. 3, pp. 1-10, April (2016).

[32] S. Razmkhah and A. Bozbey, ”Design of
the Passive Transmission Lines for Differ-
ent Stripline Widths and Impedances,” IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond., vol. 26, no. 8, pp.
1–6, (2016).

[33] V. V. Dotsenko et al., ”Integration of a 4-
Stage 4 K Pulse Tube Cryocooler Prototype
With a Superconducting Integrated Circuit,”
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 1003–1007, Jun. (2009).

[34] H. Engseth, R. Rafique, I. Kataeva, S. Intiso,
and A. Kidiyarova-Shevchenko, ”Room Tem-
perature Interface for RSFQ Digital Signal
Processor,” IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond.,
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 979–982, Jun. (2007).

[35] S. Razmkhah and A. Bozbey, ”Packaging
for SFQ Circuits Providing Increased Com-
plexity for Closed Cycle Cryocoolers,” IEEE
Trans Appl Supercond, (2018).

[36] H.
Terai,
S.
Yorozu,
A.
Fujimaki,
N.
Yoshikawa, and Z. Wang, ”Signal integrity
in large-scale single-flux-quantum circuit,”
Phys.
C
Supercond.,
vol.
445–448,
pp.
1003–1007, Oct. (2006).

[37] Sasan
Razmkhah
Low
power
high-speed
computing using rapid single flux quantum
circuits
http://earsiv.etu.edu.tr:
80/xm-
lui/handle/20.500.11851/3405,
Publisher:
TOBB ETU,(2018).

11


