1

Structure of rotator phases formed in C13-C21 alkanes

and their mixtures: in bulk and in emulsion drops

Diana Cholakova*, Martin Pantov

Slavka Tcholakova, Nikolai Denkov

Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Engineering

Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Sofia University,

1 James Bourchier Avenue, 1164 Sofia, Bulgaria

*Corresponding authors:

Dr. Diana Cholakova

Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Engineering

Sofia University

1 James Bourchier Ave.,

Sofia 1164

Bulgaria

E-mail: dc@dce.uni-sofia.bg

Tel: +359 2 8161624

Paper published in Crystal Growth & Design; doi: 10.1021/acs.cgd.3c01083


2

ABSTRACT

Crystallization of alkane mixtures has been studied extensively for decades. However, majority of 

the available data consider the behaviour of alkanes with chain length of 21 C-atoms or more. 

Furthermore, important information about the changes of the unit cell structure with temperature

is practically absent. In this work, the phase behaviour of several pure alkanes CnH2n+2, with n

ranging between 13 and 21, and their binary, ternary or multi-component equimolar mixtures are

investigated by X-ray scattering techniques. Both bulk alkanes and oil-in-water emulsions of the 

same alkanes were studied. The obtained results show formation of mixed rotator phases for all 

systems with chain length difference between the neighbouring alkanes of Δn ≤ 3. Partial demixing 

is observed when Δn = 4, yet the main fraction of the alkane molecules arranges in a mixed rotator 

phase in these samples. This demixing is suppressed if an alkane with intermediate chain length is

added to the mixture. Interestingly, a steep temperature dependence of the interlamellar spacing in 

mixed rotator phases was observed upon cooling at temperatures down to 10°C below the melting

temperature of the mixture. The volumetric coefficient of thermal expansion of the rotator phases 

of mixed alkanes (αV ≈ 2 × 10-3 °C-1) is around 10 times bigger compared to that of the rotator 

phases of pure alkanes. The experiments performed with emulsion drops containing the same 

alkane mixture while stabilized by different surfactants, showed that the surfactant template also 

affects the final lattice spacing which is observed at low temperatures. In contrast, no such 

dependence was observed for drops stabilized by the same surfactant while having different initial 

diameters – in this case only the initial temperature of the crystallization onset was affected.

Keywords: alkane, crystallization, emulsion drops, surfactant, wax, SAXS, DSC


3

1. Introduction

The simplest organic molecules, linear n-alkanes (denoted hereafter as Cn), are known to 

have complex phase behavior. When cooled from melt, they undergo one or more phase transitions 

to phases with an intermediate structure, called rotator phases (R), before forming the most stable 

crystalline phase (C) at low temperature [1-8]. Molecules in rotator phases form a layered structure, 

while the position of the molecules within the layers are not completely fixed, i.e. the molecules 

retain some mobility to rotate/oscillate around their long axis. The number and type of the rotator 

phases which form upon cooling/heating of bulk single-component alkane depend primarily on the 

alkane chain length [4-9]. 

The structure and properties of the rotator phases have been studied extensively in the last 

century after the pioneer work of Müller [1]. Initially, the rotator phases were found to form in 

odd-numbered alkanes with n ≥ 17 and in even-numbered alkanes with more than 22 C-atoms

[2,4,6]. These rotator phases are thermodynamically “stable” and form at temperature TLR, higher 

than the temperature at which the liquid-to-crystal transition, TLC, would be observed in the 

absence of rotator phase. Later studies of Sirota et al. [9] showed that shorter-chain even-numbered 

alkanes do not crystallize directly from melt, but form “metastable” (for C18 and C20) or “transient”

(C16) rotator phases. Both metastable and transient rotator phases have higher Gibbs energy 

compared to that of the crystalline phase and form at temperature TLR < TLC. Nonetheless, while 

the transient rotator phases are usually observed for several seconds to a few minutes only, the 

metastable rotator phases form in a given temperature interval upon cooling and may exist for a 

much longer period (up to several hours) [8,9].

The stability of the rotator phases depends not only on the length of the alkane chain but 

also on the length scale of the entities studied [8]. Significantly improved stability of the rotator 

phases is observed when the alkanes are confined in micro- or nano-environments, for example –

in polymeric microcapsules [8,10-13], porous matrices [8,14-16], or emulsion drops [17-20]. In a 

recent study [21], employing X-ray synchrotron technique we evidenced the formation of two 

distinct metastable rotator phases within hexadecane (C16) droplets. These droplets were stabilized 

by surfactants with hydrophobic tails that were similar in length to or longer than the alkane chain. 

In contrast, no such phases were detected for bulk C16 in our experiments, whereas earlier studies 

indicated the formation of transient rotator phase in bulk hexadecane in approx. 10 % of the

cooling experiments [9,21]. The orthorhombic rotator phase structure observed experimentally in 


4

hexadecane emulsion droplets, stabilized by appropriate long-chain surfactants, has been 

reproduced recently by molecular dynamics simulations [22,23].

Alkane mixing is also known to enhance the stability of rotator phases. This effect is 

usually explained with a reduction in the interlayer coupling interaction, combined with an

increase in the lamellar surface roughness and void volume [13,24]. These combined effects result 

in a significantly expanded temperature range for the rotator phase existence, 
( )
R
m
RC
T
T
n
T

=
−
, 

where 
n

n

n
= n
is the molar average chain length, 
n is the molar fraction of chain length n, Tm

≡ TRL is the melting temperature of the mixture, and TRC is the temperature at which the rotator-to-

crystal phase transition is observed. For example, ΔTR ≈ 11°C for C17, whereas it becomes around 

25°C for a binary equimolar mixture of two consecutive chain length alkanes and increases further

to 33°C for a binary mixture with Δn = 2 [24].

The mixing behavior depends primarily on the alkane chain length difference in the 

mixture, denoted as Δn = n2 – n1. Using a simple thermodynamic analysis and Bragg-Williams 

approximation for the solid-solution lattice [25], Matheson and Smith established that the complete 

mixing into a mixed solid solution occurs when the following condition is met:

nmax < 1.224 nmin – 0.411,
(1)

where nmax and nmin represent the number of C-atoms in the longer and shorter alkanes present 

within the mixture, respectively [26]. This condition is not fulfilled when the Van der Waals’s 

length of the longer alkane exceeds the length of the “lattice cell” of the smaller partner, thus 

making the ideal mixing highly improbable [26]. In this case, a partial or complete phase separation 

is expected. We note that for alkanes with chain lengths between 14 and 20 C-atoms, this rule 

predicts the formation of miscible phases when the chain length difference is up to 3 C-atoms,

whereas mixtures with larger Δn are predicted to phase separate. Several alternative criteria for 

alkane miscibility have been proposed [27-29], however, they yield similar results for alkanes with 

chain lengths of interest in the present study. For n > 25 C-atoms, minor disparities in the predicted 

maximum Δn values are observed between the different models.

Alkane mixtures have been studied extensively because such mixtures are widely used in

several industrial and technological applications. For example, this topic is of great importance for 

the petroleum industry, where most of the problems in the production, transportation and refining 

of crude oil arise primarily from the precipitation of paraffin waxes (mixtures of long n-alkanes) 


5

from liquid oil [30-32]. Alkane mixtures are also widespread in various biological waxes, such as

beeswax, candelilla wax, and cocoon wax [33-35]. These mixtures are part of the thin epicuticular 

layer that coats the cuticle of insects and plants, regulating their wetting properties [36-38], and 

are present even in the cerebrum cortex of animals as constituents of the myelin and chromatin 

within the nuclei of cerebral cells [35,39]. The petrolatum, widely used in cosmetics as 

moisturizing agent, is also an example of alkane mixtures (with n between 25 and 70) [40].

The phase behavior of longer alkanes has been studied also, due to their wide range of 

applications. Numerous phase diagrams have been developed for binary mixtures of alkanes with 

chain lengths from 21 to 41 C-atoms, see Figure 1a,b [7,8,24,27,41-45]. Additionally, Mondieig 

and co-authors published several phase diagrams for binary mixtures with shorter chain lengths

[45]. Using the available experimental data from the literature, Wang et al. proposed a predictive 

nonrandom two liquid equation able to predict the solid-rotator phase equilibrium in binary n-

alkane mixtures [27]. While to a lesser extent, ternary [7,31,46-48] or more complex alkane 

mixtures involving long chain alkanes have been also investigated, often due to their relevance to 

diesel fuel properties [7,47-51]. Generally, it is expected that the increase of the number of 

components in the mixture leads to enhanced tolerance in Δn after which a phase separation shall

occur. In other words, a third component with an intermediate chain length acts as a

“compatibilizer” to promote the mixture stability [24,48].

Co-crystallizing binary alkane mixtures with n ≤ 20 usually form rotator phase RI, 

characterized by a face-centered orthorhombic lattice (space group Fmmm), see Ref. [47]. A 

bilayer stacking sequence is observed, where the long parameter of the unit cell (c) is equal to two 

molecular lengths, see Figure 1c. Using the distance between the -CH3 end-groups and an estimate 

for the gaps between the planes of two consecutive molecular layers, the interlamellar spacing, d,

can be estimated as [7,49]:

𝑑 =

𝑐

2 ≈ 1.2724(𝑛̄ − 1) + 3.1476 Å  
(2)

Usually, this formula tends to underestimate the actual interlamellar spacing as determined by 

experimental measurements. The excess distance observed is attributed to the inherent disorder 

among the layers of stacked molecules within the mixture [7,49]. According to the longitudinal 

disorder model proposed by Dorset [51], the differences in the molecular volumes in the mixed 

alkane molecules are compensated by longitudinal molecular shifts within the individual lamellae. 

This lamellae should remain sufficiently flat to facilitate the nucleation of subsequent lamellae. It 


6

was proposed that mixtures with low variation in chain length (Δn ≤ 2) arrange using interchain 

mixing, whereas at bigger chain length differences, the end-chains of longer molecules are twisted

and/or folded [45,48].

Figure 1. (a-b) Phase diagrams for binary alkane mixtures composed of two consecutive chain 
length alkanes (a) and alkanes differing by two C-atoms in chain length (b). The temperature range 
of existence of the rotator phase below the bulk melting temperature of the mixture is shown as a 
function of the average chain length. Adapted from Refs. [8,24]. (c) Schematic representation of 
the orthorhombic unit cell with its parameters a, b, c. The molecular arrangement with respect to 
the (Oxz) and (Ozy) planes is illustrated for odd-numbered alkanes. Note that the c parameter is 
twice the molecular length due to the ABAB… bilayer stacking sequence.

Despite the satisfactory level of the general understanding of the equilibrium phase 

behavior of alkane mixtures, the information about the structural changes occurring upon 

temperature variation are rather scarce. Sirota et al. [24] showed that depending on the range or 

rotator phase existence, ΔTR, the area per molecule jump observed upon rotator-to-crystal 

transition decreased from ca. 0.93 Å2 for ΔTR = 12°C to ca. 0.25 Å2 when ΔTR = 33°C (in both 

cases Δn = 2 and the alkane chain length was varied between 20 and 30 C-atoms). These values 


7

are significantly smaller compared to those reported for pure alkanes, where ΔA ≈ 1.5 Å2 for C17, 

C19, or C21 [52]. This comparison shows that the structure of the mixed rotator phases, upon 

temperature decrease, becomes much closer to the final crystalline structure, in contrast to the

single alkane systems [24,45]. However, such data is missing for mixtures with shorter chain

lengths, where the molecules are expected to be more mobile. 

Furthermore, n-alkanes are known to exhibit the phenomenon of surface freezing, i.e. they 

form ordered monolayer of molecules atop molten alkanes. This monolayer can exist at 

temperatures up to 3°C higher than the bulk melting temperature [8,53]. Hence, it is reasonable to 

expect that the molecular structure may also be influenced by the surface-active components

adsorbed on the emulsion drop surface. Such surfactant adsorption layers could potentially serve 

as templates for the crystallization of alkane molecules within the emulsion drops.

In the present study the rotator phases formed in several binary, ternary or multi-component 

equimolar n-alkane mixtures are investigated by SAXS/WAXS techniques employing both 

synchrotron and laboratory radiation sources. We provide also results obtained with pure alkanes

for comparison. Experiments with bulk and emulsified alkane mixtures were performed to obtain 

both qualitative and quantitative (temperature resolved) structural information for the molecular 

arrangement in the studied samples. The effects of several different surfactants and of the drops 

size were studied for the emulsified alkanes. 

2. Materials and methods

2.1 Materials

Nine n-alkanes and their mixtures were studied. The alkane chain lengths were varied 

between 13 (tridecane) and 21 (heneicosane) C-atoms. All alkanes were with purity > 99% and 

were purchased from TCI (C13, C15, C19 and C21) or from Sigma-Aldrich (C14, C16, C17, C18 and 

C20). The alkanes were used as received.

The investigated equimolar alkane mixtures were prepared by weighting the necessary 

amounts of alkanes, followed by melting the mixture and its homogenization. Five binary mixtures 

(C15 + C17, C16 + C17, C16 + C18, C15 + C19 and C17 + C19), two tertiary mixtures (C15 + C17 + C19

and C14 + C16 + C18) and a seven-component mixture comprising all alkanes with chain lengths 

between 14 and 20 C-atoms, denoted as C14-to-C20, were examined. The chosen mixtures had 

molar average chain length n between 16 and 17, except for C17 + C19, where n = 18. Two chain 


8

length differences were defined for mixtures having three or more mixed components: maximal 

chain length difference, Δnmax = nmax – nmin, and minimal chain length difference, Δnmin, defined as 

the smallest difference between homologous with similar chains, see Table 2 in Section 3.2.1

below.

Four different nonionic surfactants were used for stabilization of the studied alkane

emulsions. Three of them were polyoxyethylene alkyl ethers, CnEOm: C18EO20 (trade name Brij 

S20, purchased from Sigma-Aldrich), C22EO30 (Nonidac 22-30, purchased from Sasol) and C16EO8

(NIKKOL BC-8SY, Nikko Chemicals). Emulsions stabilized by polyoxyethylene sorbitan 

monostearate C16SorbEO20 (Tween 40, Sigma-Aldrich) were also investigated. We note that Brij 

S20, Nonidac 22-30 and Tween 40 are commercial grade surfactants containing a broad range of 

ethoxy groups, with the one indicated in the chemical formula being the most abundant [54,55]. 

The C16EO8 surfactant is a specially synthesized compound, composed exclusively of this specific 

molecular type (purity 100% as stated by the producer). The surfactants were used as received for 

preparation of 1 wt. % aqueous solutions. Deionized water purified using Elix 3 module (Millipore, 

USA) was used, with a resistivity > 18 MΩ.cm. The selected surfactant concentration is 

considerably higher than the critical micellization concentration for these substances [56].

2.2 Methods

Emulsions preparation and characterization

The investigated emulsions contained monodisperse droplets, prepared by membrane 

emulsification technique [57]. Shirasu porous glass (SPG) membranes with pore diameters of 5, 7 

and 10 µm were used in the emulsification process, yielding drops with diameters about three 

times bigger than the pore diameter. More detailed explanations about the emulsification process 

are available in our previous studies, see Refs. [21,58]. The mean volume-surface diameter of the 

drops, 
3
2

32
/
ini
i
i

i
i

d
d
d
d
=
=

, are used in the text. They were determined by optical microscopy 

observations with an AxioImager.M2m microscope (Zeiss, Germany) and Image Analysis Module 

of Axio Vision Software. More details about the procedure are available in Refs. [21,58].


9

SAXS/WAXS (SWAXS) measurements

The X-ray scattering measurements with emulsified samples were conducted in Elettra 

Sincotrone, Trieste, Italy, at the Austrian SAXS beamline. The experiments were performed at a 

fixed cooling and heating rate of 0.75°C/min. The experimental setup was similar to the one used 

in our previous study [21]. Briefly, 2D SAXS detector Pilatus3 1M was used simultaneously with 

a Pilatus 2D 100k for collection of the WAXS signal. The working energy was 8 keV (λ ≈ 1.54 

Å). The samples were placed in cylindrical special glass capillaries (WJM Glass, Germany) with 

an outer diameter of 1.5 mm, length 80 mm and wall thickness 0.01 mm. These capillaries were 

then placed in an aluminum thermostatic chamber connected to a thermostat. The precise 

temperature was measured using a calibrated thermocouple probe positioned in a neighboring 

orifice of the chamber. Silver behenate and p-bromobenzoic acid were used for SAXS and WAXS 

calibration, respectively. The correct temperature measurement was evidenced by measuring the 

melting points of several pure bulk alkanes, illustrative data is available in Ref. [21]. The measured 

melting points were always very close to those reported in the literature for the respective alkanes.

SWAXS experiments were conducted also using Xeuss 3.0 equipment (Xenocs, France) 

on bulk samples and selected emulsion samples. Capillaries with 1 mm outer diameter were used. 

X-rays with wavelength λ ≈ 1.54 Å (Cu-Kα radiation) were utilized, and the scattered signal was 

captured by an EIGER2 4M detector positioned at a sample-to-detector distance of 286 mm. Silver 

behenate and lanthanum hexaboride were used for detector calibration. Temperature control was

achieved using the HFSX350 high-temperature stage (Linkam Scientific Instruments Ltd., UK) 

equipped with a T96 temperature controller and a LNP96 liquid nitrogen pump capable of 

achieving temperatures well below 0°C.

The spectra presented in this article have been shifted along the y-axis for clarity. The 

scattering of the sample holder has been subtracted to obtain correct intensities for all emulsion 

samples. The same procedure was applied to the bulk samples when necessary. However, due to 

the comparatively lower intensity of the X-ray source in the Xeuss apparatus compared to the 

synchrotron radiation source, the original curves for the bulk samples are presented in the text. The 

only difference between the subtracted and original curves is the presence of the Kapton peak in 

the latter, with a maximum at a scattering vector of q ≈ 3.26 nm-1. The background subtraction 

notably enhanced the signal-to-noise ratio in the baseline, particularly evident when the data are 

presented in logarithmic scale, where the secondary and ternary reflection SAXS peaks are 


10

visualized much better, without changing in any way the essential information analyzed in the 

paper, see Supporting Information Figure S1 for comparison. Throughout the main text, a 

logarithmic scale has been applied to the y-axis in all graphs.

To obtain the precise peak positions we analyzed the acquired signal with a Gaussian 

function, or performed peak deconvolution analysis involving two or more Gaussian functions in 

the cases of double or more complex peaks. All d-spacings (respectively, c lattice parameter 

values, c = 2d) are obtained by averaging data from the first (002), second (004), and third (006) 

order reflections (when available). Experimental data obtained in at least two independent 

experiments are used for this averaging procedure.

The a and b unit cell parameters were determined from the WAXS spectra using the 

relation known to be applicable for an orthorhombic unit cell [59]:

2
2
2

2
2
2
2

1
h
k
l

d
a
b
c
=
+
+
,
(3)

where h, k and l are the Miller indices and d is the interplanar spacing, determined from the peak 

position using the relation: d = 2π/q. Note that RI phase has face-centered lattice, therefore 

reflections are present only when h, k and l have the same parity, i.e. they are all even or all odd 

numbers. 

DSC measurements

The differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments were performed on Discovery 

DSA 250 equipment (TA Instruments, USA). The studied sample was places in TZero aluminium 

hermetic pan and sealed with TZero lid using the TZero press before the measurement. The 

samples were cooled and heated at a fixed rate of 0.75°C/min. Before the first cooling, the samples 

were heated to a temperature at least 10°C higher than the melting temperature of the studied 

sample and maintained at this temperature for 5-10 minutes to ensure that the crystal memory of 

the samples had been completely erased. In preliminary experiments, we tested also longer storage 

periods in a molten state, but we did not observe any significant difference in the cooling/heating 

curves obtained after 5 min or 60 min storage in molten state. At least 3 individual cooling/heating 

runs were performed with each studied alkane mixture to check for the results reproducibility. 

Experiments were performed with some of the pure alkanes studied as well (data not shown). The 

observed phase transition temperatures were identical to those reported in the literature for the 

respective alkanes.


11

3. Experimental results and discussion

3.1 Phase behavior of bulk pure odd-numbered alkanes (C13 to C21)

This section presents the main features of the rotator and crystalline phases observed in 

bulk odd-numbered alkanes with chain lengths between 13 and 21 C-atoms. The even-numbered 

alkanes were not included in this analysis because, as explained in the introduction, the R phase 

observed in them is very short living and difficult to observe.

Figure 2. Structure of bulk odd-numbered alkanes. (a) SWAXS spectra of C13 alkane acquired 
upon 0.75°C/min cooling from melt. The L-to-R phase transition begins at TLR ≈ -8°C. All 
molecules remain arranged in R phase until -22°C. The beginning of the R-to-C phase transition is 
detected at -23°C, see the double peaks in the WAXS spectra indicating the co-existence between 
the two phases. This transition ends at ca. -32°C. At lower temperatures the C phase is observed
solely. We note that the background has not been subtracted from the signal, thus the Kapton peak 
remains visible and slightly overlap with the primary (002) reflection. (b-d) Temperature 
dependences of: (b) interlamellar spacing d = c/2; (c) cell parameters a (circles) and b (squares); 
(d) area per molecule for various pure alkanes studied. The error bars in (b-d) represent the 


12

standard deviations calculated across values obtained from at least 3 independent experiments. 
Empty symbols show data for R phases and full symbols – for C phases. Different colors are used 
to distinguish different alkanes: C13 – red; C15 – green; C17 – blue; C19 – pink and C21 – dark blue.

Figure 2a shows a typical temperature resolved SWAXS spectra for a pure odd-numbered 

alkane. These particular spectra were obtained in an experiment with C13 sample. Upon cooling, 

the molten alkane undergoes a liquid-to-solid phase transition after which the alkane molecules 

arrange in R phase, TLR ≈ -8°C. This R phase is thermodynamically stable, persisting within a 

specific temperature range before the R-to-C phase transition begins at a lower temperature (TRC ≈ 

-23°C for C13, determined from the WAXS spectra). The first order phase transition from R-to-C

phase is easily detected from the WAXS spectra due to the significant change in the area per 

molecule, reflected in changes of the a and b parameters in the unit cell, and associated peak shifts. 

Note that the position of the SAXS peaks remain relatively unchanged during this transition, as 

the lattice spacing remains similar. Under the applied experimental conditions, i.e. cooling with 

0.75°C/min rate, the transition from rotator to crystalline phase is not instantaneous. Instead, the 

R and C phases are observed simultaneously in a certain temperature interval before the R phase 

disappears completely. In the case of C13, the R-to-C transition ends slightly below -30°C. No 

further phase changes are observed when the temperature is decreased further. The observed shifts 

in the peak positions within the WAXS region are entirely due to the decreased thermal energy of 

the molecules as the temperature decreases, compare the positions of the (111) and (200) peaks at 

-29°C and -50°C in Figure 2a for illustration of this effect.

The acquired structural data allowed us to completely characterize the variations of the 

FCC lattice parameters with temperature (denoted as a, b and c), see red symbols in Figure 2b-d. 

As seen from the graphs, the lattice parameter a decreases as the temperature decreases for both R

and C phases. Interestingly, the parameter b has an opposite behavior – it increases in R while

decreasing in C phase upon temperature decrease. Despite the opposing behavior of a and b within 

the R phase, the overall area per molecule, denoted as A, diminishes while decreasing temperature, 

Figure 2d. This observation confirms the expected structural impact of temperature reduction. 

Therefore, the increase in parameter b as temperature decreases facilitates a faster decrease in the 

a dimension. This adjustment is necessary due to the partial rotational mobility of the alkane 

molecules arranged in rotator phase. Once the rotator-to-crystal phase transition occurs, both a and 

b dimensions begin to decrease. Furthermore, the obtained structural data shows that the slopes of 


13

the a(T) and b(T) linear dependences decrease after the R-to-C phase transition. This is expected 

considering that the molecules in the crystalline phase exhibit substantially reduced mobility

compared to those in the rotator phase. 

Figure 3. Chain length dependences for the temperature dependent slopes (a,b) and 
intercepts (c,d) for functions f(T) = xT + y, where f ≡ a, b, c/2 or A. (a,c) Rotator phases; (b,d) 
Crystalline phases.

Similar analyses were conducted on the other odd-numbered pure bulk alkanes with chain 

lengths between 15 and 21 C-atoms. The summarized results are presented in Figures 2b-d and 3, 

and Supporting Information Tables S1 and S2. Several important trends emerge from the obtained 

results: the longer hydrocarbon chain results in an increase of the temperature derivatives in R

phase, viz. the unit cell structure of longer alkanes changes faster upon unit temperature change 

compared to the change observed in shorter alkanes, see Figure 3a. For example, the area per 


14

molecule for C13 changes at a rate of approximately dA/dT ≈ 0.02 Å2/°C. This value increases 

almost linearly reaching ≈ 0.03 Å2/°C for the C19 alkane. The subsequent odd-numbered alkane in 

the homologous series, C21, experiences a notably higher rate of change in its area per molecule 

with temperature, dA/dT ≈ 0.10 Å2/°C, see Supporting Information Table S1. This increase is most 

probably related to the increased number of structural defects within the rotator phase of C21 

alkane, e.g. end-gauche, kink or double-gauche conformers. These defects are known to amplify 

substantially with the chain length increase for R phases, while their number is comparable among 

the different chain length alkanes in the C phase [60,61]. Accordingly, the temperature derivatives 

observed in the C phase do not depend significantly on the alkane chain length, see Figure 3b. 

Therefore, the significantly higher (absolute) values of temperature derivatives for C21 are 

explained with the gradual conformation changes to all-trans conformers as the temperature 

decreases.  

The initial area per molecule, which can be reliably determined for R phase, once it is 

formed upon cooling from L, also increases when the alkane chain length increases, it is ca. 19.4 

Å2 for C13 and 19.8 Å2 for C21, see Supporting Information Table S1. The smallest area per 

molecule in R is ca. 19.0 Å2 for C13 and 19.5 Å2 for C21. Similar trends are also evident for the 

area per molecule in crystalline phase. In this case, the absolute values for the largest possible area 

(as it decreases with decreasing temperature) are ≈ 18.5 Å2 for C13 and around 18.7 Å2 for C21. All 

reported areas are determined with an accuracy of approximately ± 0.05 Å2. 

The obtained results show that the R phase of medium chain odd-numbered alkanes can 

tolerate about 0.3-0.4 Å2 change in the area per molecule before the R-to-C phase transition is 

observed. This value does not depend significantly on the alkane chain length, at least for 13 ≤ n

≤ 21 odd-numbered alkanes, investigated in the current study. Furthermore, by combining the 

maximal ΔA found in R phase with the data for the temperature derivatives in different chain length 

alkanes, it becomes possible to explain the experimental observation that the temperature range of 

R phases existence in odd-numbered alkanes diminishes as the alkane chain length increases. For 

example, the temperature difference Tm - TCR = 12.6°C for C13 and 8.5°C for C21 [2]. The average 

change in the area per molecule upon R-to-C phase transition for medium chain odd-numbered 

alkanes (C13 to C21), determined from the data obtained in the current study, is ΔARC ≈ 0.6 ± 0.1Å2.


15

Table 1. Coefficients for temperature and chain length dependences of unit cell parameters and 
area per molecule: 
(
)
(
)
,
f T n
gn
m T
pn
r
=
+
+
+ . The formula is applicable to odd-numbered 

alkanes with chain lengths between 13 and 19 C-atoms in R phase, and for n =13 to 21 in the C
phase. This applies within the temperature range wherein a specific phase of a given alkane exists.
The numbers in brackets denote the maximal standard deviations for the respective constant. The 
constants g and m are given in units of Å/°C, while p and r constants are expressed in Å for a(T, 
n), b(T, n) and c/2(T, n) functions, whereas for A(T, n) the units are Å2/°C and Å2, respectively.

(
, )
f T n

Constants for R phases
Constants for C phases

g
m
p
r
g
m
p
r

(
, )
a T n
1.6 × 10-2

(9.1×10-5)

-1.1 × 10-2

(1.5×10-3)

-7.8 × 10-2

(4.2×10-3)

8.71
(0.07)

1.3 × 10-4

(2.8×10-5)
≈ 0
-1.0 × 10-3

(8.2×10-4)

7.44
(0.01)

(
, )
b T n
-6.4 × 10-4

(2.5×10-5)

7.3 × 10-3

(4.0×10-4)

1.4 × 10-2

(4.9×10-3)

4.88
(0.08)

-2.7 × 10-5

(9.9×10-6)

1.0 × 10-3

(1.7×10-4)

-4.3 × 10-3

(1.5×10-3)

5.06
(0.03)

(
, )
2
c T n
1.9 × 10-2

(7.4×10-4)

-2.4 × 10-2

(1.2×10-2)

1.25
(0.02)

2.29
(0.35)

1.3 × 10-4

(3.9×10-5)

-1.8 × 10-3

(6.9×10-4)

1.27
(0.03)

1.87
(0.47)

(
, )
A T n
1.5 × 10-3

(2.3×10-4)

1.5 × 10-3

(2.3×10-4)

-0.14
(0.01)

21.35
(0.16)

2.2 × 10-4

(8.9×10-5)

3.8 × 10-3

(1.5×10-3)

-1.8 × 10-2

(7.6×10-3)

18.82
(0.13)

Using the temperature dependent data presented in Figure 2, we derived equations that 

encompass both the chain length and temperature effects, i.e.
(
, )
f T n , where T is the temperature 

expressed in degrees Celsius, n is the alkane chain length, and f denotes the function of interest (a, 

b, c or A). To do this, we plotted the slopes and intercepts of the linear temperature dependences 

determined from the experimental data as a function of the alkane chain length, see Figure 3. The 

resulting trends exhibited linearity for odd-numbered alkanes with chain length 13 ≤ n ≤ 19 in R

phase and ≤ 21 for the C phase (note that alkanes of shorter or longer lengths were not studied 

here). Thus, by combining the derived equations with the initial linear temperature dependences, 

we obtained a combined expression for 
(
, )
f T n :

(
)
( )
( )
(
)
,
f T n
x n T
y n
gn
m T
pn
r
=
+
=
+
+
+
(4)

The constants g, m, p and r in equation 4 were determined for each data set, see Table 1. By using 

these values, one can calculate a(T, n); b(T, n); c(T, n) and A(T, n) functions for an arbitrary 

temperature within the temperature interval of existence of R and C phase for odd-numbered 

alkanes with chain lengths between 13 and 21 C-atoms. A comparison between the experimentally 

measured parameters and those calculated using the derived dependences is presented in 

Supporting Information Table S2. The error between the values calculated using these formulas 


16

and the experimentally obtained ones is ca. 1% for a(T, n) and A(T, n), and  ≈ 1.5 to 2% for b(T, 

n) and c(T, n) dependences. 

We note that the derived equations are linear with respect to T and n. The linearity in the 

c(n) dependence can be easily explained considering the fact that the long lattice parameter c

depends mainly on the alkane chain length, as discussed in the Introduction section, see also eq. 2 

above [7,49]. The short lattice parameters (a and b) do not depend significantly on the chain length, 

as they show the distances between the alkane molecules in the layer, see Figure 2c. However, 

they depend strongly on the temperature. This dependence can be explained considering the 

specific thermal molecular motions. The thermal expansion is known to occur in a continuous way 

[62]. A theory for the thermal expansion of crystalline solids has been developed by Grüneisen

[63]. According to this theory, the thermal expansion of the solids is associated with the so called 

‘thermal pressure’ which originates from the lattice vibrations. The thermal pressure increases with 

the increase of temperature. In alkane systems, the anisotropic thermal pressure along the a and b

axes arises from the rotational and torsional vibrations of the chains, resulting in different thermal 

expansions of the a and b lattice parameters. The observed thermal effects for the third lattice 

parameter c, has been explained with changes of the thickness of the plane of voids, situated 

between the adjacent lamellas [62]. Linear changes in the lattice parameters upon change of 

temperature was shown also for pentacontane sample (C50H102) via molecular dynamics 

simulations [64].

The newly obtained data allowed us to calculate also the thermal expansion coefficients αf

see Supporting Information Table S3, defined as [62]:

0

1

f

p

df

f
dT



=





(5)

where f is either of the unit cell parameters (a, b or c) or the unit cell volume V. Here f0 is the 

reference value of the studied parameter. The volumetric expansion coefficient for the rotator 

phases of pure odd-numbered alkanes with n = 13-19 was αV,R ≈ 1.5 × 10-4 °C-1, whereas for the 

orthorhombic crystalline phases it was more than twice smaller, αV,C ≈ 6.3 × 10-5 °C-1. We note 

that the derived values are in a good agreement with those published in the literature, for example 

αV,C ≈ 4.2 × 10-4 °C-1 for the triclinic lattice of C16 and C18, see Ref. [65]. Similar values as the 

presently obtained ones are also shown for αa and αb in Refs. [62,66].


17

The results obtained for odd-numbered pure alkanes serve as a reference for discussing the 

results obtained with alkane mixtures, which are presented in the following section. 

3.2 Structure of rotator phases formed in mixed alkanes

In this section, we present the experimental results obtained from equimolar binary, 

ternary, and more complex alkane mixtures. Experiments with both bulk and emulsified mixtures 

were performed, aiming to understand whether any significant difference exists between the 

temperature dependent rotator phases in these two types of systems. The experiments with oil-in-

water emulsions allowed us to assess how the surfactant chain length and confinement size (viz. 

the drop size) affect the phase structures. The results are organized as follows: Section 3.2.1 shows 

a series of illustrative temperature resolved SWAXS spectra, elucidating the main types of phase 

behavior characterized in the present study; Section 3.2.2 illustrates the impact of surfactant 

properties and initial drop size on the rotator phase structure; Section 3.2.3 summarizes the 

temperature and chain length dependencies of unit cell parameters, as determined from the 

experimental results. 

3.2.1 Characterization of the studied mixtures

Figures 4, 5, 7 and 8 present DSC and SWAXS spectra for the binary C16 + C17 and C15 + 

C19, ternary C15+C17+C19 and the seven-component C14-to-C20 mixtures. The phase behavior of 

these samples illustrates all main features observed with the various medium chain length alkane 

mixtures which is schematically illustrated in Figure 6.

The C16 + C17 sample is an example of binary mixture in which a complete miscibility is 

expected, because Δn = n1 – n2 = 1 < 4, as previously shown [45]. In contrast, the chain length 

difference in C15 + C19 mixture is Δn = 4, hence a phase separation is expected, see eq. 1. The 

behavior of the ternary mixture C15 + C17 + C19 and that of the seven-component equimolar mixture 

C14-to-C20 is of interest as well, as these samples represent more intricate systems wherein two 

distinct chain length differences can be identified: the maximal difference between the shortest 

and longest alkane in the mixture, Δnmax = nmax – nmin = 4 or 6, while the minimal chain length 

difference is Δnmin = 2 or 1. Therefore, these mixtures are examined to determine whether their

phase behavior aligns more with mixtures forming solid solutions or with mixtures that phase 


18

separate upon liquid-to-solid transition. The results for all studied mixtures are summarized in 

Table 2 below and in Supporting Information Tables S3 and S4.

C16 + C17 mixture (Δn = 1)

The results for the phase behavior of the simplest binary mixture with Δn = 1, C16 + C17, 

are presented in Figure 4. A liquid-to-rotator phase transition is observed for this sample at T ≈ 

16°C upon gradual cooling with 0.75°C/min from melt. Note that this temperature is lower than 

the respective bulk melting points of both alkanes, Tm(C16) ≈ 18°C and Tm(C17) ≈ 22°C. The mixed 

rotator phase formed is of type RI with an orthorhombic lattice, which is typical for the odd-

numbered alkanes, despite the fact that the studied mixture contains one odd-numbered alkane and 

one even-numbered alkane. This mixed R phase persists in the sample down to ca. -6°C, at which 

point the R-to-C phase transition occurs. The crystallization process (rotator-to-crystal phase 

transition) within the C16 + C17 alkane mixture ends at ca. -10°C, see Figure 4a.

During heating, the sequence of phase transitions occurred in the reverse order: the 

crystalline phase transformed into a rotator phase initially, which persisted until the sample 

reached its final melting point. This observation shows that the RI phase is thermodynamically 

stable. The complete melting of the sample ended at T ≈ 19°C. Notably, this temperature is slightly 

lower than the bulk melting temperature of pure C17, Tm(C17) ≈ 22°C [8]. This reduction in melting 

temperature can be attributed to the molecular solubility of the heptadecane molecules within the 

shorter hexadecane molecules which possess a lower melting temperature, Tm(C16) ≈ 18°C. 

Additionally, the inherent defects within the R phase structure, arising from the chain length 

mismatch, contribute to a decrease in the overall enthalpy measured upon phase transition in the 

mixture. The total enthalpy for the mixture is a sum of the enthalpies for L-to-R and R-to-C

transitions, ΔHtot (C16+C17) = ΔHLR + ΔHRC ≈ 214.5 ± 2.5 J/g. In contrast, the phase transition 

enthalpies for pure C16 and C17 alkanes are ≈ 215 J/g and 230 J/g, respectively, viz. the enthalpy 

of the 1:1 molar mixture could be as high as 222 J/g. The enthalpy of the L-to-R transition in the 

mixture, ΔHLR, constitutes about 87% of the total enthalpy.

A comparison of the interlamellar spacing observed in the rotator phases of pure 

hexadecane and heptadecane, and their equimolar mixture is presented in Figure 4d. In the mixed 

C16 + C17 rotator phase, the interlamellar spacing is intermediate between that of the two individual 

alkanes in the mixture. Specifically, it is roughly by 0.5 Å shorter compared to the one measured 

with C17, and by about 0.7 Å longer compared to that with C16. The temperature-resolved analysis 


19

further reveals that the rate of change in d-spacing with temperature for the mixed C16 + C17 rotator

phase is about three times lower compared to that observed in pure C17. Despite this, the slope of 

the area per molecule variation with temperature, dA/dT, is only about 20% lower than that for C17, 

although the temperature interval of existence of the R phase in C16 + C17 mixture is about twice 

bigger compared to that for pure C17. Consequently, the mixed C16 + C17 rotator phase 

accommodates a 60% larger alteration in the area per molecule before transitioning into C phase. 

This corresponds to ΔA ≈ 0.5-0.6 Å2 in the mixed system compared to ΔA ≈ 0.3-0.4 Å2 in the pure 

alkane systems.

Figure 4. Phase behavior of C16 + C17 alkane mixture. (a,c) SAXS spectra obtained upon 
cooling of the bulk (a) and emulsified (c) mixture. Note that the R-to-C phase transition is observed 
below 0°C, hence it is not seen in the spectra for emulsified sample which is studied at T > 0°C to 
prevent the aqueous phase crystallization. The studied emulsion contains drops with d ≈ 18 µm, 
which are stabilized by C16EO8 surfactant. (b) DSC thermogram obtained upon cooling and 
heating of the studied bulk mixture. (d) Comparison of the interlamellar spacing of the mixed C16
+ C17 rotator phase determined in three independent experiments: empty pink squares: emulsion 
sample, synchrotron measurements; empty blue circles: emulsion sample, Xeuss 3.0 experiment,
and full green triangles: bulk mixture, Xeuss 3.0. The dashed lines represent the interlamellar 
spacings for the rotator phases of pure alkanes – blue for C17, data from Section 3.1, and purple 
for C16 – data from experiments with emulsion samples presented in Ref. [21].


20

We note that no significant differences were observed between the experimental results 

obtained with bulk and emulsified alkane mixtures, see Figure 4a,b,d. Therefore, experiments on

emulsions with a synchrotron radiation source were used to characterize the R phase structures 

within the mixed alkanes. Furthermore, studies were conducted to assess the influence of the initial 

drop size and of the surfactant molecular characteristics on the rotator phase structure, see Section 

3.2.2 below. For some of the examined samples, experiments with bulk alkanes were performed 

as well, aiming to demonstrate directly the R-to-C phase transition. This approach was adopted to 

eliminate any potential impact from the aqueous phase crystallization on the observed scattering 

spectra at subzero temperatures. 

C14-to-C20 mixture (Δnmin = 1, Δnmax = 6)

The experimental results obtained with the most complex 7-component mixture studied, 

containing all alkanes with chain lengths between 14 and 20 C-atoms, mixed in equimolar ratio,

are presented in Figure 5. The main phase transitions observed in this sample remain qualitatively 

similar to those observed in the simpler C16 + C17 mixture, following the L-to-R-to-C sequence. 

The C14-to-C20 mixture comprises alkane homologous with bulk melting temperatures spanning 

from 5°C (for C14) to 37°C (for C20). Consequently, the temperature ranges in which distinct phase 

transitions are observed deviate notably from those observed in the binary C16 + C17 mixture, see 

Figure 5d. 

The L-to-R transition within the C14-to-C20 mixture, observed upon 0.75°C/min cooling 

from the melt, begins with a significant subcooling, occurring at a temperature slightly below 

20°C. This transition spans a broad temperature interval. The temperature range in which about 

78% of the total crystallization enthalpy is released by the alkane mixture is about 16°C (viz. 

between 19°C and 3°C) for C14-to-C20 sample, see Figure 5d,e. In contrast, the equivalent range 

for the C16 + C17 mixture is only 4°C, see Supporting Information Figure S2 for comparison. 

Moreover, approximately 57% of the total enthalpy of the L-to-C transition is released for C16 + 

C17 mixture during the first degree Celsius following the initiation of L-to-R transition, in contrast 

to merely 16% for the C14-to-C20 mixture. Similar results are obtained when the SAXS peak areas 

are analyzed as a function of the temperature. 

The gradual phase transition within the complex 7-component mixture notably influences 

the interlamellar spacing, see Figure 5a,e. The initial interlamellar spacing, determined from the 

bulk experiments (where the nucleation begins at slightly higher temperatures compared to the 


21

emulsion experiments) is ca. 26 Å. This value diminishes to d ≈ 24.6 Å at T ≈ 9°C where almost 

all molecules adopt the R phase arrangement, see the steep decrease in the d-spacing shown in 

Figure 5e. A similar decrease in d(T) was observed in the emulsion experiments, albeit yielding a 

slightly shorter final d-spacing, most probably reflecting the ordering influence of the surfactant 

adsorption layer, see the empty pink squares in Figure 5e and the related discussion for the role of 

surfactant in Section 3.2.2. Upon further temperature decrease, the rate of change in the d(T) 

function diminishes significantly, decreasing by an order of magnitude (from ca. 0.13 Å/°C to 

0.013 Å/°C) and becomes comparable to that observed in bulk pure alkanes or in the simpler C16

+ C17 binary mixture where all molecules arrange in R phase. Summarized data can be found in 

Table 2 below. 

Figure 5. DSC and SAXS spectra for seven-component equimolar mixture C14-to-C20. (a,b) 
SAXS spectra obtained upon cooling (a) and subsequent heating (b) of 18 µm emulsion droplets, 
dispersed in C18EO20 surfactant. (c) SWAXS spectra obtained upon cooling of the bulk mixture. 
(d) DSC thermogram. (e) Interlamellar d-spacings determined from the bulk (full green triangles) 
and emulsion experiments (empty pink squares). The dashed blue line shows the cumulative 
enthalpy function obtained by integration of the cooling DSC thermogram shown in (d). The three
vertical black dashed lines denote the regions in which the d-spacing changes abruptly its 
temperature dependence. See text for more detailed explanations.


22

The 1.4 Å decrease of the d-spacing observed in the beginning of the L-to-R phase 

transition (at T > 10°C) is slightly bigger than the space required for a single -CH2- group, i.e. for 

the presence of kink defect corresponding to a sequence gauche-trans-gauche in an otherwise 

stretched chain (ΔL ≈ 1.27 Å in this case [62]). Notably, although the R phase formation proceeds 

in a wide temperature interval, all molecules are observed to form a single mixed rotator phase. 

This result suggests that the individual molecular species remain mixed together during the L-to-

R phase transition without phase separation into distinct domains with predominant content of 

longer or shorter alkanes (which would crystallize independently, resulting in the emergence of 

two or more distinctive interplanar spacings). A plausible molecular arrangement leading to this 

outcome is depicted schematically in Figure 6a. Note that this behavior is distinctly different from 

the one observed with mixed monoacid triglyceride systems studied previously [67]. 

Interestingly, the alterations in the interlamellar spacing in response to temperature changes 

are completely reversible. Upon heating the samples, an opposite shift in the peak maximum 

towards lower scattering vectors is observed, see Figure 5b. A comparison between the 

interlamellar spacing as a function of the temperature in the sample observed upon cooling and 

heating, shows that the two curves are slightly shifted with respect to the temperature owing to the 

subcooling phenomenon observed upon cooling. However, the temperature derivatives observed 

upon cooling and heating are very similar, see Supporting Information Figure S3a.

The rotator-to-crystal phase transition occurs over a wide temperature range, starting at 

around -10°C and extending to T ≈ -30°C, see Figure 5c,d. This phase transition led to phase 

separation of the alkane molecules, resulting in the formation of two phases with distinct 

interlamellar spacings, d ≈ 23.4 Å and 25.7 Å (determined at T ≈ -40°C). These values are 

comparable to those measured with pure C17 and C19 at this temperature, ≈ 23.5 Å and 26.0 Å, 

respectively. Analysis of peak areas reveals that around 60% of all molecules are arranged within 

the phase with the shorter d-spacing, while the remaining 40% constitute the second phase. 

However, considering that the C19 and C20 molecules collectively represent about 28.6% of all 

alkane molecules in the sample, it becomes evident that the crystal phase characterized by a longer 

d-spacing encompasses molecules with n < 19 as well. 


23

Figure 6. Schematic representation of the mixing/demixing behavior within rotator phases 
formed in samples of alkanes with various chain lengths. (a) C14-to-C20 mixture. All molecules 
arrange together in a single mixed R phase. The interlamellar thickness evolution observed in the 
temperature range between the onset of R phase formation and the bulk melting temperature of the 
shortest alkane in the mixture is also schematically illustrated. (b) C15 + C19 binary mixture. Pure 
C19 domains are observed to co-exist with two types of mixed C15 + C19 domains with different 
characteristic interlamellar spacing, due to the different C15 and C19 fraction contained within these 
two types of domains. Note that in the bulk samples, pure C15 domains (≈ 1% peak area) are also 
observed.

The domain size analysis using Sherrer equation [68] showed similar temperature 

dependence as the one observed for d(T), see Supporting Information Figure S3b. The average 

domain size calculated for the emulsion samples at temperatures between 1 and 9°C was D ≈ 140 

nm ± 16 nm, whereas at higher temperatures the domain size showed slow linear increase with 

temperature at a rate of dD/dT ≈ 3 nm/°C.

The obtained results from the C14-to-C20 mixture reveal that the inclusion of alkanes with 

intermediate chain lengths between the shortest and the longest components in the mixture 


24

suppresses the anticipated phase separation in R phase. However, this effect does not prevent the 

phase separation when the crystalline phase emerges. Accordingly, no phase separation was

observed within the rotator phases of the investigated emulsified ternary mixtures, C14 + C16 + C18

and C15 + C17 + C19, see Table 2 below.

C15 + C19 mixture (Δn = 4)

Next, as an example of a system in which phase separation is observed upon liquid-to-

rotator phase transition, we present and discuss the behavior of C15 + C19 binary equimolar alkane 

mixture. Upon cooling from the melt, the formation of C19 domains was observed, Figure 7a,b and 

schematics shown in Figure 6b. However, the amount of these domains was significantly lower 

than the total quantity of C19 molecules present in the mixture (50%). 

The peak corresponding to pure C19 comprised ≈ 3-4% of the total peak area in emulsified 

samples, and increased to about ≈ 20-25% when investigating bulk C15 + C19 mixture, Figure 7. 

The remaining C19 molecules formed a mixed rotator phase with the shorter pentadecane 

molecules. Furthermore, formation of pure C15 domains was observed when the bulk samples were 

studied. The area of this peak represented to a mere 1% of the total peak area, Figure 7d. Although 

this phase was not identified in the emulsified samples, its existence cannot be entirely ruled out, 

considering that the intensity of the respective peak might not be sufficient to observe the latter in 

the background noise (note that the oil volume fraction in the studied emulsions is about 10-20% 

only). 

The rotator-to-crystal phase transition in the bulk sample started at T ≈ -9°C and finished 

at T ≈ -20°C, see the WAXS curves in Figure 7b and the DSC thermogram in Supporting 

Information Figure S4. The partial mixing/demixing observed in the rotator phase was preserved 

also in the crystalline phases, Figure 7b.

Interestingly, within the C15 + C19 mixture, the formation of (at least) two distinct mixed 

rotator phases with different interlamellar spacings is observed, see the asymmetric SAXS peaks 

in Figure 7a,b and the examples for their deconvolution analyses presented in Figure 7c,d. The 

precise interlamellar spacings determined from these analyses are shown with empty symbols in 

Figure 7e. These values closely resemble that of pure C17 alkane. The dependence d(T) for this 

mixture follows a similar course to that observed in the C14-to-C20 mixture. A rapid decrease in 

the d-spacing (d(c/2)/dT ≈ 0.33 Å/°C) is observed upon the onset of R phase, occurring at 


25

temperatures above the bulk melting temperature of pure C15. As the temperature drops below the 

bulk melting temperature of C15, this rate diminishes. 

Figure 7. Structural characterization of the binary C15 + C19 mixture. (a,b) SAXS/WAXS 
spectra obtained upon cooling from melt of emulsified (a) and bulk (b) alkane mixture. The 
emulsion contains 18 µm drops, stabilized by C16EO8 surfactant. (c) Peak deconvolution analysis 
of the SAXS spectra obtained at T = 0.9°C for the sample shown in (a). (d) Peak deconvolution 
analysis of the SAXS spectra obtained at T = -2.0°C for the bulk mixture. (e) Interlamellar spacing
as a function of temperature for the bulk (red circles) and emulsified (blue and green triangles) 
samples. The size of the symbols in the graph corresponds to the peak area of the respective phase. 
The size of the full green triangles (showing the d-spacing in the C19 domains) has been increased 
3 times to make them visible on the graph, and the size of the red circle showing the formation of 
C15 domains in the bulk sample has been increased 20 times.

We note that similar phase separation behavior was reported for C10 + C20 binary (Δn = 10) 

and the ternary C10 + C14 + C20 (Δnmin = 4 and Δnmax = 10) alkane mixtures in Ref. [48]. Using 


26

molecular dynamics simulations, the authors showed that these mixtures crystallized forming 

domains of single alkane species.

C15 + C17 + C19 mixture (Δnmin = 2, Δnmax = 4)

Finally, we present results for the phase behavior of the ternary C15 + C17 + C19 mixture, 

see Figure 8. Our aim is to clarify the impact of introducing a third component, with an 

intermediate chain length, into the partially phase separating C15 + C19 mixture.

The SAXS spectra obtained with emulsified mixture, Figure 8a, showed the formation of 

a single mixed R phase with an interlamellar spacing of d ≈ 24.9 Å at high temperature (≈ 17.5°C). 

This value decreased to d ≈ 24.0 Å at T ≈ 2°C. Once again, two main regions were observed in the 

d(T) plot – a steep decrease observed at T > Tm(C15), followed by a region in which the interlamellar 

spacing decreased at rate similar to that observed with pure alkanes, see Supporting Information

Figure S5a. Similarly, two distinct regions were observed in the domain size dependence on

temperature for this mixture, see Supporting Information Figure S5b. In the low temperature range

(T ≤ 12°C), the average crystalline domain size was D ≈ 120 nm ± 25 nm, whereas at T > 12°C –

the domain size increased at a rate of dD/dT ≈ 6 nm/°C upon increase of temperature.

In contrast, the bulk mixture of C15 + C17 + C19 showed a different phase behavior, see 

Figure 8b. Instead of a single Gaussian peak, as in the case of the emulsified sample, the spectra 

for the bulk ternary mixture revealed broad and asymmetric peaks for the rotator phase peaks (these 

are (002) and (004) peaks). This result suggests the presence of various rotator phase domains 

within the sample. Along with a phase similar to that found in the emulsified sample, three 

additional domain types were identified, allowing to perform a sufficiently good peak 

deconvolution analysis, see Supporting Information Figure S5c. These phases exhibited similar d-

spacings, spanning the range between ca. 23 and 25 Å. This similarity indicates that various 

molecule types likely coexist within these phases, albeit possibly with different ratios or with 

various degrees of structural defects within the lamellar structure, see Figure 6b where similar 

phenomenon in C15 + C19 mixture is illustrated. 

Similar results were obtained also for C15 + C17 and C17 + C19 binary alkane mixtures for 

which Δn = 2, see Figure 9 for illustrative results with C15 + C17 mixture and Supporting 

Information Figure S6 for results obtained with C17 + C19 mixture. For these samples, we observed 

the formation of a single mixed rotator phase in the emulsified samples, whereas at least two 


27

different types of domains formed in the bulk samples. These results further confirm that the 

observed phase behavior in the alkane mixtures is primarily governed by the smallest chain-length 

difference which can be defined for a given mixture, as well as by the confinement size.

Figure 8. SAXS spectra of C15 + C17 + C19 ternary mixture. (a) Emulsion sample, prepared with 
C18EO20 surfactant solution, dini ≈ 18 µm. (b) Bulk mixture.

In the next Section 3.2.2 we discuss the impact of the initial drop size and of surfactant 

type on the structure of the mixed rotator phases. An overview of the unit cell parameters and their 

temperature dependency is provided in Section 3.2.3 and in Supporting Information Table S4.

3.2.2 Effect of the initial drop size and of surfactant type for the R phases formed in 

mixed alkane droplets 

The effect of the molecular characteristics of the surfactant used for emulsion stabilization 

(hydrophobic chain length and hydrophilic headgroup size), along with the initial drop size, was 

systematically explored concerning the structure of the rotator phases formed within the mixed C15

+ C17 emulsified alkane system. This binary mixture has chain length difference Δn = 2 and,

therefore, it forms a single mixed rotator phase. The d(T) dependence is expected to be similar to 

that observed in C14-to-C20 or C15 + C19 mixtures, see Figures 5e and 7e above, i.e. a steeper 

decrease in the interlamellar spacing at temperatures higher than the bulk melting temperature of 

the shortest alkane in the mixture (in this case, C15), followed by a second region in which the 


28

interlamellar spacing experiences considerably slower alterations. This behavior was indeed 

observed experimentally, see Figure 9.

Figure 9. Effect of surfactant type and initial drop size on the C15 + C17 mixed rotator phase 
structure. (a) Interlamellar spacing measured for 32 µm drops, stabilized by different surfactants: 
C16EO8 (red triangles), C18EO20 (green circles) and C22EO30 (blue squares). (b-c) Interlamellar 
spacing for 18 µm (empty pink circles) and 32 µm (full green circles) drops, stabilized by C18EO20
surfactant. The same dataset is presented as a function of temperature (b) and as a function of the 
subcooling in the sample (c). The subcooling, ΔT, is defined as: ΔT = TLR – T, where TLR is the 
temperature at which the rotator phase is initially detected in the sample (TLR ≈ 11.7°C for 32 µm 
drops and ≈ 9.4°C for 18 µm drops) and T is the temperature at which a given data point was
acquired.

Figure 9a presents the experimental results obtained with C15 + C17 emulsion drops with 

similar diameters, dini ≈ 32 µm, stabilized by non-ionic alcohol ethoxylated surfactants with 

different structures, CnEOm. The hydrophobic tail length, n, was varied between 16 and 22 C-

atoms, while the number of sequentially connected ethoxy units, m, ranged from 8 to 30. Previous 

studies involving similar emulsion systems demonstrated that, upon cooling, the drops 

spontaneously undergo shape transformations, transitioning into diverse fluid polyhedra, 

triangular, tetragonal or hexagonal platelets, rod-like particles or even thin fibers [69]. The 

currently studied emulsions also undergo drop shape transformations prior to the formation of 

rotator phase in the entire drop volume, see Supporting Information Figure S7. These deformations 

are governed by the formation of thin multilayers of plastic rotator phases, adjacent to the drop 

surface. These ordered layers (with thickness between ca. 2-3 up to 20-30 layers) appear before 

the entire oily phase contained within the droplets transition from a liquid state to a rotator phase 

[21]. 


29

The newly obtained results show that the surfactant structure affects to some extend the d-

spacing observed at low temperatures. Surfactants with longer tails prompt the formation of phases 

with shorter interlamellar spacing, whereas slightly longer repeat distance of the layers is observed 

at equivalent temperatures when the same drops are dispersed in surfactant with shorter 

hydrophobic tail, Figure 9a. The average difference in the thickness between the rotator phases

formed in drops, stabilized by C16EO8 and C22EO30 surfactants is approximately 6.5 pm (this 

comparison is based on data obtained at temperatures between 1 and 5°C). Although this difference 

is relatively small, the experimental results obtained with synchrotron radiation source were with 

excellent reproducibility and confirmed this conclusion. Statistical analysis of the averaged data,

obtained from 2-3 independent experiments for each emulsion sample proved that the obtained 

values are statistically different from one another. Furthermore, the structuring role of the 

surfactant adsorption layer was further confirmed by the results obtained with C18EO20 surfactant 

for which intermediate d-values were observed between those for C16EO8 and C22EO30 surfactants, 

see the green circles in Figure 9a.

The results highlighting the effect of the initial drop size are presented in Figure 9b,c. Two 

distinct samples were investigated, with drop diameters of ≈ 18 and 32 µm. The obtained results 

for the interlamellar spacings plotted as a function of temperature, Figure 9b, showed a significant 

difference between these two samples. For example, at T = 8.5°C the d-spacing is ≈ 22.66 Å in the 

sample with smaller drops and ≈ 22.51 Å in the sample with bigger drops. Once the temperature 

is decreased below 5°C, however, this difference diminishes and the interlamellar spacings in the 

two samples become identical. 

Further analysis of the obtained results, showed that the observed effect is governed by the 

initial temperature at which the rotator phase begins to form. The nucleation process occurs with 

an approximately 2°C difference between the two samples. This variation is attributed to the 

decreased probability for nucleation in smaller droplets, a phenomenon described by the well-

known subcooling effect. In general, smaller drops require higher degrees of subcooling to trigger

the nucleation process, due to their reduced material content [8,70,71]. Therefore, when the same 

dataset is plotted as a function of the subcooling, ΔT = TLR – T, the two dependences merge 

together, see Figure 9c. The subcooling value ΔT is defined as the difference between the 

temperature at which the rotator phase is initially detected in the sample, TLR, and the temperature 

which the particular data point is collected. This result shows that the confinement size, at least at 


30

the micrometer scale, influences the initial nucleation temperature, but it does not affect the rotator 

phase structure. Note that the present results cannot be directly related to the surface freezing 

phenomenon and its temperature dependence, as our previous results with similar oil-in-water 

emulsions showed that the SAXS experiments, even when performed with synchrotron radiation 

source, are unable to detect the formation of 1-2 layers of ordered molecules [21].

3.2.3 Discussion of the temperature dependence of the unit cell parameters

Table 2 summarizes the results obtained with various emulsion samples studied. These

results show that the phenomenon of phase separation within these samples is determined by the 

smallest chain length difference in the mixture, Δnmin. For example, C14-to-C20 mixture arranges 

into a single rotator phase, whereas a partial phase separation is observed in the C15 + C19 mixture. 

Notably, the predominant fraction of the molecules in C15 + C19 mixture arrange in a mixed R

phase. About 25% of the molecules (mainly C19) were observed to phase separate in the bulk 

sample, whereas this percentage was significantly lower (ca. 3-4%) in the emulsified samples. The 

addition of hydrocarbons with intermediate chain length suppresses the phase separation within 

the rotator phase. These findings are schematically illustrated in Figure 6. The obtained data 

evidence that the temperature range of existence of the mixed R phase expands when larger number 

of components with larger disparities in their chain lengths are mixed. 

The interlamellar spacings for the RI phases determined in the current study are in general 

agreement with the spacings that can be calculated using the equation derived by Dirand and co-

authors, see eq. 2 above [7,49]. The newly obtained data show that the deviation between the 

calculated interlamellar spacing and the one measured experimentally is linearly proportional to 

the greatest chain length difference within the mixture, see Supporting Information Figure S8. The 

slope of this dependence equals 0.1268. Consequently, we propose a refined equation that accounts 

for the increased lamellar surface roughness and the presence of void volumes:

(
)
max
1.2724
1
3.1476
0.1268
2
c
d
n
n
=

−
+
+

Å   
(6)

Using this equation, we calculated successfully the observed interlamellar spacings in the 

mixed R phases at T ≈ 2°C (R2 = 0.995) for all studied mixtures, except for C14 + C16 + C18. This 

particular mixture comprised even-numbered alkanes, which are known to exhibit very short living 

transient R phases within their bulk samples and metastable R phases within emulsion drops when 

taken as individual components [9,19-21]. Instead, the mixing of these alkanes results in the 


31

formation of a thermodynamically stable rotator phase in a wide temperature interval. However, 

the interlamellar spacing of the R phase measured in the absence of C14 (for C16 + C18 system) or 

in its presence within the ternary mixture, remained practically the same. This observation shows

that the inclusion of C14 molecules does not influence the interlamellar spacing. The root cause of 

this deviation from the general trend requires further in-depth investigation. Such effect was absent

when analyzing mixtures of odd-numbered alkanes, such as C15 + C17 and C15 + C17 + C19, where 

the addition of C15 led to an overall decrease in the lamellar spacing, as expected, due to the 

decrease in the molar average chain length within the sample.

Similarly to the rotator phases formed by pure alkanes, the unit cell parameter a in the 

mixed R phases decreased as the temperature decreased, see Supporting Information Table S4. 

Conversely, the shorter length of the orthorhombic unit cell, parameter b, increased as the 

temperature decreased. The a(T) and b(T) dependencies showed linear behavior at temperatures 

slightly below the onset of rotator phase formation. The slopes of these trends depended on the 

complexity of the mixture – mixtures with larger Δnmax exhibited greater slopes (in absolute

values). Nonetheless, the temperature resolved structural analysis of the mixtures showed a 

consistent decrease in the area per molecule at a rate of (2.7 ± 0.3) ⨉ 10-2 Å2/°C across all 

investigated mixtures with molar average chain lengths n between 16 and 17. Notably, this value 

is identical to the one obtained for pure heptadecane, see Figure 3a and Supporting Information

Table S1. 

As elucidated in the previous two sections, the c(T) dependencies for mixed samples with 

Δn > 1 exhibit two distinct regions. At elevated temperatures exceeding the bulk melting point of 

the shortest alkane in the mixture, c(T) function experiences a rapid decline. This decline is 

attributed to the ongoing L-to-R phase transition proceeding in the sample. As the temperature 

within the sample approaches the melting point of the shortest alkane in the mixture, the rate of 

change in the c(T) dependence decreases by about 10 times, approaching the values observed for 

R phases of pure alkanes.

The thermal expansion coefficients (see eq. 5) for rotator phases of mixed alkanes are 

summarized in Supporting Information Table S3.  Notably, the volumetric expansion coefficient 

for rotator phases of mixed alkanes turn out to be about 10 times higher compared to those

observed for pure alkanes, αV,R ≈ 2.0 × 10-3 °C-1 for alkane mixtures, whereas αV,R ≈ 1.5 × 10-4 °C-

1 for the rotator phases of C13 to C19 bulk pure alkanes.


32

Table 2. Summarized data obtained from the experiments with alkane mixtures. TLR is the temperature at which the rotator phase is 
initially detected, and ΔTR = TRL - TRC is the temperature range in which it is observed to exist before the transition into the crystalline 
phase begins. These temperatures are determined upon cooling from SWAXS cooling experiment with bulk samples. Their accuracy is 
about ± 2°C, as in most of the experiments we took a single spectrum at each 2°C. The rest of the data presented in the table is obtained 
from experiments with emulsion samples (T > 0°C). Similar data for the pure alkanes is available in Supporting Information Table S1.

(1) Temperature derivatives for a(T) and b(T) are determined for 10°C ≤ T ≤ 20°C.

(2) All temperature derivatives are calculated for the mixed R phases.

(3) All temperature derivatives are calculated from data obtained at T < 12°C.

Alkane 
mixture
Δnmax
Δnmin
n
TLR, 
°C

TRC, 
°C

ΔTR, 
°C

Phases formed 
upon cooling
(emulsions)

d at

T = 2°C, 

Å

d(c/2)/dT, Å/°C

da/dT, 
Å/°C

db/dT, 
Å/°C

dA/dT, 
Å2/°C

High T
stdev ≈ 

0.02

Low T

C16 + C17
1
1
16.5
16
-6
22
1 mixed
23.0
-
0.002
0.015
-0.004
0.023

C15 + C17
2
2
16
12
-20
32
1 mixed
22.5
0.10
0.008
0.021
-0.007
0.027

C16 + C18
2
2
17
20
-10
30
1 mixed
23.8
0.08
0.003
0.023
-0.007
0.032

C17 + C19 (1)
2
2
18
24
-3
27
1 mixed
24.7
0.05
0.002
0.022
-0.007
0.025

C14 + C16 + C18
4
2
16
19
-8
27
1 mixed
23.8
0.04
0.003
0.018
-0.006
0.026

C15 + C17 + C19
4
2
17
20
-10
30
1 mixed
24.0
0.13
0.006
0.028
-0.011
0.025

C15 + C19 (2)
4
4
17
19
-8
27
2 mixed R + C19

23.8
24.1

26.1 (C19)

0.33
0.027
0.029
-0.012
0.027

C14-to-C20 (3)
6
1
17
22
-12
36
1 mixed
24.2
0.13
0.013
0.035
-0.015
0.028


33

4. Conclusions

The present study investigates the temperature dependent characteristics of rotator phases 

formed in both pure and mixed linear alkanes with chain length varied between 13 and 21 C-atoms. 

Empirical equations have been defined to describe the unit cell parameters for the rotator and 

crystalline phases of odd-numbered alkanes, as a function of alkane chain length and temperature.

The results obtained from experiments conducted with both bulk and emulsified mixed 

alkane samples revealed that confinement at the micrometer scale does not influence the structure 

of the rotator phases. Single mixed R phase was formed in all emulsified samples when the smallest 

chain length difference between the homologous in the mixture was Δnmin ≤ 2. A partial phase 

separation was observed for the sample with Δnmin = 4. However, even in this sample, the main 

fraction of the molecules assembled into mixed solid solution. This partial phase separation can be 

suppressed by introducing an additional component with an intermediate chain length into the 

sample, thereby reducing Δnmin. Phase separation was not observed in the emulsified samples 

prepared using such ternary mixtures of alkanes, whereas several diverse domain types with 

similar interlamellar spacings were detected in the corresponding bulk mixtures.

The interlamellar spacing within mixed rotator phases is primarily determined by the molar 

averaged chain length in the mixture, as previously demonstrated [7,49]. Additionally, an extra

term is introduced to the established relation to account for the increased void volume resulting 

from the disparity in chain lengths. The present results show that for mixtures which do not phase 

separate upon cooling and which contain at least one odd-numbered alkane, this additional term is 

≈ 0.127 Δnmax. 

Interestingly, a significant shift in the SAXS peak position toward higher q-values, 

corresponding to smaller d-spacings, was consistently observed across all mixed samples 

investigated where Δn ≥ 1 at temperatures close to the temperature at which the liquid-to-rotator 

phase transition began. The DSC data, along with the scattering peak area analysis, showed that 

this L-to-R phase transition is not instantaneous, rather it occurs over a relatively broad temperature 

range. Typically, this range extends until the bulk melting temperature of the shortest alkane in the 

mixture is nearly approached. The observed temperature shift of the peaks at lower temperatures 

was comparable to that exhibited by the rotator phases of pure alkanes.

The experiments involving emulsions with various drop sizes and diverse surfactants

showed that the confinement size primarily impacts the initial temperature at which the formation 


34

of the R phase starts. Smaller emulsion drops exhibited a more pronounced subcooling, attributed 

to the reduced probability of rotator phase nucleus formation. The surfactant adsorption layer was 

found to exert a minor impact on the interlamellar spacing of the R phases – slightly shorter d-

spacings were observed for drops stabilized by surfactants with longer saturated hydrocarbon tails.

These results contribute to a deeper understanding of the intricate structure of intermediate 

rotator phases. These phases are important in wide array of applications, ranging from engineering, 

food science, cosmetics, and even essential processes within living organisms.

Supporting Information: Table with coefficients describing the linear temperature dependences 

of lattice parameters for bulk odd-numbered alkanes; Tables with unit cell parameters measured 

at different temperatures and thermal expansion coefficients for rotator and crystalline phases of 

the studied alkanes/alkane mixtures; SAXS/WAXS spectra of C13 and C17 + C19 binary mixture; 

Cumulative enthalpy released upon cooling of C16 + C17 and C14-to-C20 alkane mixtures; 

Comparison – interlamellar spacing measured upon cooling and heating for C14-to-C20 alkane 

mixture; Average crystalline domain size as a function of temperature for C14-to-C20 and 

C15+C17+C19 emulsified alkane mixtures; DSC thermogram for C15 + C19 mixture; Interlamellar 

spacing and peak deconvolution analysis for C15 + C17 + C19 alkane mixture; Microscopy pictures 

obtained upon cooling of C15 + C17 emulsion droplets; Rotator phase interlamellar spacing 

dependence on Δnmax. 

Acknowledgements:

The study was funded by the Bulgarian Ministry of Education and Science, under the National 

Research Program “VIHREN”, project ROTA-Active (no. KP-06-DV-4/16.12.2019). The 

research leading to part of the results has been supported by the project CALIPSOplus under Grant 

Agreement 730872 from the EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation HORIZON 

2020, under the execution of project 20217121 with proposer D.C. The authors thank Dr. Barbara 

Sartori and Dr. Heinz Amenitsch (Elettra Sincrotron, Trieste, Italy) for their valuable help during 

the SAXS/WAXS synchrotron measurements. The authors are grateful to Ms. Desislava 

Glushkova and Mrs. Sonya Tsibranska-Gyoreva (Sofia University) for their help during the 

synchrotron measurements. The authors acknowledge the possibility to use Xeuss 3.0 equipment 


35

purchased for execution of project BG05M2OP001-1.002-0012, Operational Program “Science 

and Education for Smart Growth”, Bulgaria.

Contributions:

D.C. – conceptualization; methodology; investigation; validation; formal analysis; visualization; 

writing – original draft, review and editing; project administration; funding acquisition.

M.P. – investigation; visualization; formal analysis; writing – original draft.

S.Tc. – conceptualization; supervision; writing – review and editing; funding acquisition.

N.D. – conceptualization; supervision; writing – review and editing; funding acquisition.


36

References

1. Müller, A. An X-ray Investigation of Normal Paraffins Near Their Melting Points. Proc. R 

Soc. London, Ser. A 1932, 138, 514-530. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1932.0200

2. Small, D.M. The Physical Chemistry of Lipids. From Alkanes to Phospholipids; Plenum, New 

York, 1986.

3. Mnyuks, Y.V. The Structure of Normal Paraffins and Their Solid Solutions. J. Struct. Chem.

1960, 1, 346-365. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00748864

4. Sirota, E. B.; King, H.; Singer, D.; Shao, H. Rotator Phases of the Normal Alkanes: An X-Ray 

Scattering Study. J. Chem. Phys. 1993, 98, 5809-5824. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.464874

5. Srivastava, S. P.; Handoo, J.; Agrawal, K. M.; Joshi, G. C. Phase-Transition Studies in n-

Alkanes and Petroleum-related Waxes. A Review. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 1993, 54, 639-670. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3697(93)90126-C

6. Sirota, E.; Singer, D. J. Phase Transitions Among the Rotator Phases of the Normal Alkanes.

Chem. Phys. 1994, 101, 10873-10882. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.467837

7. Dirand, M. Normal Alkanes, Multialkane Synthetic Model Mixtures, and Eeal Petroleum 

Waxes: Crystallographic Structures, Thermodynamic Properties, and Crystallization. J. Chem. 
Eng. Data 2002, 47, 115-143. https://doi.org/10.1021/je0100084

8. Cholakova, D.; Denkov, N. Rotator Phases in Alkane Systems: In bulk, Surface Layers and 

Micro/Nano-Confinements.
Adv. 
Colloid 
Interface 
Sci.
2019,
269,
7-42. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2019.04.001

9. Sirota, E.; Herhold, A. Transient Phase-Induced Nucleation. Science 1999, 283, 529-532. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.283.5401.529

10. Zhang, X.-X.; Fan, Y.-F.; Tao, X.-M.; Yick, K.-L. Crystallization and Prevention of 

Supercooling of Microencapsulated N-Alkanes. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2005, 281, 299-306. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2004.08.046

11. Xie, B.; Liu, G.; Jiang, S.; Zhao, Y.; Wang, D. Crystallization Behaviors of N-Octadecane In 

Confined Space: Crossover of Rotator Phase from Transient to Metastable Induced by Surface 
Freezing. J. Phys. Chem. B 2008, 112, 13310-13315. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp712160k

12. Cao, F.; Yang, B. Supercooling Suppression of Microencapsulated Phase Change Materials by 

Optimizing Shell Composition and Structure. Appl. Energy 2014, 113, 1512-1518. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.08.048

13. Gao, X.; Fu, D.; Su, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Wang, D. Phase Transition Behavior of a Series of Even N-

Alkane Cn/Cn+2 Mixtures Confined in Microcapsules: From Total Miscibility to Phase 
Separation Determined by Confinement Geometry and Repulsion Energy. J. Phys. Chem. B
2013, 117, 13914-13924. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp406896n

14. Wang, X.; Wei, Y.; Zhang, D.; Lan, X. Phase Behaviors of N-Octacosane in Nanopores: Role 

of 
Pore 
Size 
and 
Morphology. 
Thermochimica 
Acta
2020, 
690,
178687. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tca.2020.178687


37

15. Wang, L. P.; Sui, J.; Zhai, M.; Tian, F.; Lan, X. Z. Physical Control of Phase Behavior of 

Hexadecane 
in 
Nanopores.
J. 
Phys. 
Chem. 
C
2015,
119,
18697-18706. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b03728

16. Huber, P.; Soprunyuk, V. P.; Knorr, K. Structural Transformations of Even-Numbered N-

Alkanes 
Confined 
in 
Mesopores.
Phys. 
Rev. 
E
2006, 
74,
031610. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.74.031610

17. Montenegro, R.; Landfester, K. Metastable and Stable Morphologies During Crystallization of 

Alkanes 
in 
Miniemulsion 
Droplets.
Langmuir
2003,
19,
5996-6003. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/la027019v

18. Ueno, S.; Hamada, Y.; Sato, K. Controlling Polymorphic Crystallization of N-Alkane Crystals 

in Emulsion Droplets Through Interfacial Heterogeneous Nucleation. Cryst. Growth Des.
2003, 3, 935–939. https://doi.org/10.1021/cg0300230

19. Shinohara, Y.; Kawasaki, N.; Ueno, S.; Kobayashi, I.; Nakajima, M.; Amemiya, Y. 

Observation of the Transient Rotator Phase of N-Hexadecane in Emulsified Droplets with 
Time-Resolved Two-Dimensional Small- and Wide-Angle X-ray Scattering. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2005, 94, 097801. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.097801

20. Shinohara, Y.; Takamizawa, T.; Ueno, S.; Sato, K.; Kobayashi, I.; Nakajima, M.; Amemiya,

Y. Microbeam X-ray Diffraction Analysis of Interfacial Heterogeneous Nucleation of N-
Hexadecane Inside Oil-in-Water Emulsion Droplets. Cryst. Growth Des. 2008, 8, 3123-3126. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/cg701018x

21. Cholakova, D.; Glushkova, D.; Valkova, Z.; Tsibranska-Gyoreva, S.; Tsvetkova, K.; 

Tcholakova, S.; Denkov, N. Rotator Phases in Hexadecane Emulsion Drops Revealed by X-
ray 
Synchrotron 
Techniques.
J. 
Colloid 
Interface 
Sci.
2021,
604,
260-271. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2021.06.122

22. Iliev, S.; Tsibranska, S.; Ivanova, A.; Tcholakova, S.; Denkov, N. Computational Assessment 

of Hexadecane Freezing by Equilibrium Atomistic Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. 
Colloid Interface Sci. 2023, 638, 743-757. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2023.01.126

23. Burrows, S. A.; Lin, E. E.; Cholakova, D.; Richardson, S.; Smoukov, S. K. Structure of the 

Hexadecane Rotator Phase: Combination of X-ray Spectra and Molecular Dynamics 
Simulation. J. Phys. Chem. B 2023, 127, 7772-7784. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.3c02027

24. Sirota, E. B.; King, H. E. Jr.; Shao, H. H.; Singer, D. M. Rotator Phases in Mixtures of N-

Alkanes. J. Phys. Chem. 1995, 99, 798-804. https://doi.org/10.1021/j100002a050

25. Bragg, W. L.; Williams, E. J. The Effect of Thermal Agitation on Atomic Arrangement in 

Alloys. Proc. Royal Soc. A 1934, 145, 699-730. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1934.0132

26. Matheson Jr, R. R.; Smith, P. A Simple Thermodynamic Analysis of Solid-Solution Formation 

in Binary Systems of Homologous Extended-Chain Alkanes. Polymer 1985, 26, 288-292.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-3861(85)90042-4


38

27. Wang, X.; Li, S.; Bai, H.; Liu, C. New Predictive Nonrandom Two Liquid Equation for Solid–

Liquid Phase Equilibrium in N-Alkanes Mixture with Multiple Solid Solutions. Ind. Eng. 
Chem. Res. 2019, 58, 18411-18421. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.9b03678

28. Dorset, D. Chain Length and the Cosolubility of N-Paraffins in the Solid State.

Macromolecules 1990, 23, 623-633. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma00204a040

29. Coutinho, J. A. P. Predictive Local Composition Models: NRTL and UNIQUAC and Their 

Application to Model Solid-Liquid Equilibrium of N-Alkanes. Fluid Phase Equilibria 1999, 
159, 447-457. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-3812(99)00085-0 1999

30. Paunovic, I.; Mehrotra, A. K. Liquid–Solid Phase Transformation of C16H34, C28H58 and 

C41H84 and Their Binary and Ternary Mixtures. Thermochimica Acta 2000, 356, 27-38 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-6031(00)00503-7

31. Senra, M.; Panacharoensawad, E.; Kraiwattanawong, K.; Singh, P.; Fogler, H. S. Role of N-

Alkane Polydispersity on the Crystallization of N-Alkanes from Solution. Energy Fuels 2008,
22, 545-555. https://doi.org/ 10.1021/ef700490k

32. Jackson, A. S. M.; Goberdhan, D.; Dowding, P. J.; Roberts, K. J. Solution Crystallisation of 

Single and Mixed N-Alkanes, Within the Homologous Series C16 to C23 from Representative 
Hydrocarbon 
Fuel 
Solvents.
Fluid 
Phase 
Equilibria
2023,
57,
113705. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2022.113705

33. Morales-Rueda, J.; Dibildox-Alvarado, E.; Charo-Alonso, M.; Weiss, R.; Toro-Vazquez, J. 

Thermo-Mechanical Properties of Candelilla Wax and Dotriacontane Organogels in Safflower 
Oil. Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol. 2009, 111, 207-215. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejlt.200810174

34. Kameda, T.; Akino, T.; Kojima, K. Wax Components of Larval Cocoon Silk of the Hornet 

Vespa 
Analis
Fabricius.
Anal. 
Bioanal. 
Chem.
2007,
387,
2895-2902.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-007-1137-y

35. Kotel'nikova, E.; Platonova, N.; Filatov, S. Identification of Biogenic Paraffins and Their 

Thermal 
Phase 
Transitions.
Geol.
Ore 
Deposits
2007, 
49,
697-709. 

https://doi.org/10.1134/S1075701507080041

36. Drijfhout, F.; Kather, R.; Martin, S. The Role of Cuticular Hydrocarbons in Insects (Chapter 

3). In Behavioral and Chemical Ecology; Zhang, W., Liu, H., Eds.; Nova Science Publishers, 
Inc., 2009; p. 91–114.

37. Leyva-Gutierrez, F.; Wang, T. Rotator Phases of Aliphatic Aldehydes and Implications for 

Wax 
Crystal 
Growth 
in 
Plants.
Cryst. 
Growth 
Des.
2023,
23,
2351-2360. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.cgd.2c01350

38. Leyva-Gutierrez, F.; Wang, T. Crystallinity and Water Vapor Permeability of N-Alkane, 

Alcohol, Aldehyde, and Fatty Acid Constituents of Natural Waxes. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2021,
60, 14651-14663. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.1c02924


39

39. Cassagne, C.; Darriet, D.; Bourre, J. Biosynthesis of Very Long Chain Fatty Acids by the 

Sciatic Nerve of the Rabbit. FEBS Lett. 1977, 81, 51-54. https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-
5793(78)80399-8

40. van Heugten, A. J. P; Landman, J.; Petukhov, A. V.; Vromans, H. Study of Petrolatum 

Structure: Explaining its Variable Rheological Behavior. Int. J. Pharm. 2018, 540, 178-184.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2018.02.016

41. Jouti, B.; Provost, E.; Petitjean, D.; Bouroukba, M.; Dirand, M. Phase Diagram of N-Tricosane 

and 
N-Pentacosane 
Mixtures.
Mol. 
Cryst. 
Liq. 
Cryst.
1996,
287,
275-283. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/10587259608038764

42. Dirand, M. Binary Mixtures of N-Alkanes. Phase Diagram Generalization: Intermediate Solid 

Solutions, 
Rotator 
Phases.
Mol. 
Cryst. 
Liq. 
Cryst.
1996,
275,
293-304. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/10587259608034082

43. Snyder, R. G.; Clavell-Grunbaum, D.; Strauss, H. L. Spinodal Phase Separation of Unstable 

Solid-State Binary N-Alkane Mixtures. J. Phys. Chem. B 2007, 111, 13957-13966. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jp076414x

44. Provosta, E.; Balesdenta, D.; Bouroukba, M.; Petitjean, D.; Dirand, M.; Ruffier-Meray, V. 

Phase Diagram of N-Hexacosane and N-Octacosane: Experimental Determination and 
Calculation.
J. 
Chem. 
Thermodynamics
1999,
31,
1135-1150. 

https://doi.org/10.1006/jcht.1999.0526

45. Mondieig, D.; Rajabalee, F.; Metivaud, V.; Oonk, H. A. J.; Cuevas-Diarte, M. A. N-Alkane 

Binary 
Molecular 
Alloys. 
Chem. 
Mater.
2004,
16,
786-798. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/cm031169p

46. Nouar, H.; Petitjean, D.; Bouroukba, M.; Dirand, M. Ternary Mixtures of N-Docosane, N-

Tricosane and N-Tetracosane. Revue de l’Institut Français du Pétrole 1998, 53, 21-26. 
https://doi.org/10.2516/ogst:1998004

47. Craig, S. R.; Hastie, G. P.; Roberts, K. J.; Gerson, A. R.; Sherwood. J. N.; Tack, R. D. 

Investigation into the Structures of Binary-, Tertiary- and Quinternary- Mixtures of N-Alkanes 
and Real Diesel Waxes Using High-Resolution Synchrotron X-ray Powder Diffraction. J. 
Mater. Chem. 1998, 8, 859-869. https://doi.org/10.1039/A706532I

48. Yamamoto, T. Molecular Dynamics of Crystallization in N-Alkane Mixtures. Polymer 2016,

99, 721-733. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2016.07.089

49. Chevallier, V.; Provost, E.; Bourdet, J. B.; Bouroukba, M.; Petitjean, D.; Dirand, M. Mixtures 

of Numerous Different N-Alkanes: 1. Structural Studies by X-ray Diffraction at Room 
Temperature – Correlation Between the Crystallographic Long c Parameter and the Average 
Composition 
of 
Multi-Alkane 
Phases. 
Polymer
1999,
40,
2121-2128. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-3861(98)00410-8

50. Chevallier, V.; Petitjean, D.; Bouroukba, M.; Dirand, M. Mixtures of Numerous Different N-

Alkanes: 2. Studies by X-ray Diffraction and Differential Thermal Analyses with Increasing 
Temperature. Polymer 1999, 40, 2129-2137. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-3861(98)00409-1


40

51. Dorset, D. L. The Crystal Structure of Waxes. Acta Crystallogr. B 1995, 51, 1021-1028. 

https://doi.org/10.1107/s0108768195005465

52. Doucet, J.; Denicolo, I.; Craievich, A. X‐ray Study of the ‘‘Rotator’’ Phase of the Odd‐

Numbered Paraffins C17H36, C19H40, and C21H44. J. Chem. Phys. 1981, 75, 1523. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.442185

53. Ocko, B. M.; Wu, X. Z.; Sirota, E. B.; Sinha, S. K.; Gang, O.; Deutsch, M. Surface Freezing 

in 
Chain 
Molecules: 
Normal 
Alkanes.
Phys. 
Rev. 
E
1997,
55,
3164. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.55.3164

54. Sandra, K.; Sandra, P.; Vanhoenacker, G.; Steenbeke, M. Profiling Nonionic Surfactants 

Applied in Pharmaceutical Formulations by Using Comprehensive Two-Dimensional LC with 
ELSD and MS Detection. LCGC North America 2018, 36, 385-393. 

55. Trathnigg, B.; Kollroser, M.; Rapper, C. Liquid Exclusion Adsorption Chromatography, A 

New Technique for Isocratic Separation of Nonionic Surfactants. III. Two-Dimensional 
Separation of Fatty Alcohol Ethoxylates. J. Chromatograph. A 2001, 922, 193-205. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0021-9673(01)00938-4

56. Patist, A.; Bhagwat, S. S.; Penfield, K. W.; Aikens, P.; Shah, D. O. On the Measurement of 

Critical Micelle Concentrations of Pure and Technical-Grade Nonionic Surfactants. J. Surf. 
Det. 2000, 3, 53-58. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11743-000-0113-4

57. Christov, N. C.; Danov, K. D.; Danova, D. K.; Kralchevsky, P. A. The Drop Size in Membrane 

Emulsification Determined from Balance of Capillary and Hydrodynamic Forces. Langmuir
2008, 24, 1397-1410. https://doi.org/10.1021/la702306f

58. Cholakova, D.; Denkov, N.; Tcholakova, S.; Lesov, I.; Smoukov, S. K. Control of Drop Shape 

Transformations in Cooled Emulsions. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2016, 235, 90-107. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2016.06.002

59. Waseda, Y.; Matsubara, E.; Shinoda, K. X-ray Diffraction Crystallography: Introduction, 

Examples and Solved Problems. Springer, 2011.

60. Goworek, T.; Zaleski, R.; Wawryszczuk, J. Observation of Intramolecular Defects in N-

Alkanes C25H52-C29H60 by the Positron Annihilation Method. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 394, 90-
92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2004.06.116

61. Craievich, A. F.; Denicolo, I.; Doucet, J. Molecular Motion and Conformational Defects in 

Odd-Numbered 
Paraffins.
Phys. 
Rev. 
B
1984,
30,
4782-4787. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.30.4782

62. Strobl, G. R. Molecular Motion, Thermal Expansion, and Phase Transitions in Paraffins: A 

Model 
for 
Polymers.
J. 
Polymer 
Sci.: 
Polymer 
Symp.
1977,
59,
121-142. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/polc.5070590109

63. Gruneisen, E. Handbuch der Physik, Springer, Berlin, 1926.


41

64. Kreitmeier, S. N.; Liang, G. L.; Noid, D. W.; Wunderlich, B. Molecular Dynamics Simulation 

of the Temperature Dependence of Lattice Parameters of Alkane Crystals During Cooling. J. 
Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 1995, 91, 2601-2608. https://doi.org/10.1039/FT9959102601

65. Tang, X. Crystal Structures, Phase Behaviour and Kinetics Associated with the Crystallization 

of 
Octadecane, 
Hexadecane, 
and 
Mixtures 
Thereof. 
PhD 
Thesis, 
2017. 

https://etheses.whiterose.ac.uk/17693/

66. Takamizawa, K.; Ogawa, Y.; Oyama, T. Thermal Behavior of N-Alkanes from n-C32H66 to n-

C80H162, Synthesized with Attention Paid to High Purity. Polymer J. 1982, 14, 441-456. 
https://doi.org/10.1295/polymj.14.441

67. Cholakova, D.; Tcholakova, S.; Denkov, N. Polymorphic Phase Transitions in Bulk 

Triglyceride 
Mixtures.
Cryst. 
Growth 
Des.
2023,
23,
2075-2091. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.cgd.2c01021

68. Miranda, M. A. R.; Sasaki, J. M. The Limit of Application of the Sherrer Equation. Acta Cryst.

2018, A74, 54-65. https://doi.org/10.1107/S2053273317014929

69. Cholakova, D.; Valkova, Z.; Tcholakova, S.; Denkov, N.; Smoukov, S. K. “Self-shaping” of 

Multicomponent 
Drops.
Langmuir
2017,
33,
5696-5706. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b01153

70. Kashchiev, D. Nucleation: Basic Theory with Applications, Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford, 

2000.

71. Gunther, E.; Schmid, T.; Mehling, H.; Hiebler, S.; Huang, L. Subcooling in Hexadecane 

Emulsions. Int. J. Refrig. 2010, 33, 1605-1611. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrefrig.2010.07.022


42

Supporting Information

Structure of rotator phases formed in C13-C21 alkanes

and their mixtures: in bulk and in emulsion drops

Diana Cholakova*, Martin Pantov

Slavka Tcholakova, Nikolai Denkov

Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Engineering

Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Sofia University,

1 James Bourchier Avenue, 1164 Sofia, Bulgaria

*Corresponding authors:

Dr. Diana Cholakova

Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Engineering

Sofia University

1 James Bourchier Ave.,

Sofia 1164

Bulgaria

E-mail: dc@dce.uni-sofia.bg

Tel: +359 2 8161624


43

Supporting Table S1. Linear dependences describing the thermal behavior of rotator and 
crystalline phases of bulk pure alkanes. Coefficients for the linear equations of lattice 
parameters a, b and c, and the area per molecule A. In the last column – the maximal (Amax) and 
minimal areas (Amin) per molecule determined from the experimental data are presented for R. For 
C phase, Amax is presented only, as Amin depends on the minimal temperature reached in a given 
experiment. Note that the slopes of the different quantities obtained in C phases are one order of 
magnitude smaller compared to those for R phases.

Alkane

a(T) = xT + y
b(T) = xT + y
c/2(T) = xT + y
A(T) = xT + y
Areas, Å2

x, Å/°C
y, Å
x, Å/°C
y, Å
x, Å/°C
y, Å
x, Å2/°C
y, Å2

Rotator phases
Amax
Amin

C13
0.9 ⨉ 10-2
7.69
-1.1 ⨉ 10-3
5.08
6.0 ⨉ 10-4
18.44
2.0 ⨉ 10-2
19.5
19.4
19.0

C15
1.3 ⨉ 10-2
7.56
-2.3 ⨉ 10-3
5.07
5.3 ⨉ 10-3
20.97
2.4 ⨉ 10-2
19.2
19.4
19.1

C17
1.7 ⨉ 10-2
7.40
-3.8 ⨉ 10-3
5.12
3.9 ⨉ 10-3
23.57
2.7 ⨉ 10-2
18.9
19.6
19.2

C19
1.9 ⨉ 10-2
7.22
-4.9 ⨉ 10-3
5.16
1.4 ⨉ 10-2
25.88
2.9 ⨉ 10-2
18.7
19.7
19.3

C21
3.9 ⨉ 10-2
6.43
-2.1 ⨉ 10-2
5.74
5.7 ⨉ 10-2
27.02
9.5 ⨉ 10-2
17.8
19.8
19.5

Crystalline phases
Amax

C13
1.6 ⨉ 10-3
7.43
5.8 ⨉ 10-4
5.02
< 1 ⨉ 10-4
18.52
6.1 ⨉ 10-3
18.6
18.5

C15
1.9 ⨉ 10-3
7.42
6.7 ⨉ 10-4
4.98
< 1 ⨉ 10-4
20.67
7.2 ⨉ 10-3
18.5
18.6

C17
2.3 ⨉ 10-3
7.42
5.6 ⨉ 10-4
4.99
2.2 ⨉ 10-4
23.50
7.8 ⨉ 10-3
18.5
18.6

C19
2.7 ⨉ 10-3
7.41
4.7 ⨉ 10-4
4.98
9.0 ⨉ 10-4
26.08
8.4 ⨉ 10-3
18.5
18.7

C21
2.5 ⨉ 10-3
7.42
4.1 ⨉ 10-4
4.99
1.1 ⨉ 10-3
28.51
7.7 ⨉ 10-3
18.5
18.7


44

Supporting Table S2. Unit cell parameters for bulk odd-numbered pure alkanes measured 
for different temperatures. The values calculated using eq. 3 from the main text are also shown 
for comparison. The values for rotator phases are shown with red, while those for crystalline phases 
are shown with blue color.

T, °C

Experimentally measured 

values

Calculated values using eq. 3 
and coefficients from Table 1

a, Å
b, Å
c/2, Å
a, Å
b, Å
c/2, Å

Tridecane - C13H28

-8
7.618
5.091
18.514
7.618
5.075
18.478

-11
7.586
5.095
18.516
7.591
5.078
18.478

-15
7.545
5.101
18.517
7.552
5.082
18.477

-19
7.512
5.103
18.515
7.514
5.087
18.477

-21
7.497
5.104
18.514
7.504
5.088
18.476

-30
7.383
5.003
18.430
7.371
4.989
18.377

-50
7.342
4.988
18.409
7.337
4.976
18.378

-60
7.325
4.982
18.409
7.320
4.970
18.379

-80
7.296
4.972
18.396
7.286
4.957
18.380

-90
7.268
4.962
18.386
7.269
4.950
18.380

Pentadecane - C15H32

10
7.683
5.050
21.027
7.669
5.071
21.011

8
7.672
5.053
21.014
7.643
5.076
21.003

4
7.611
5.063
20.979
7.592
5.085
20.987

0
7.559
5.072
20.977
7.540
5.094
20.971

-5
7.407
4.986
20.897
7.411
4.997
20.915

-14
7.388
4.978
20.640
7.393
4.991
20.913

-24
7.369
4.972
20.462
7.373
4.985
20.910

-60
7.298
4.948
20.458
7.303
4.964
20.903

Heptadecane - C17H32

20
7.733
5.041
23.651
7.706
5.050
23.617

17
7.679
5.053
23.636
7.657
5.061
23.594

13
7.613
5.068
23.623
7.593
5.075
23.563

11
7.586
5.075
23.616
7.561
5.083
23.548

6
7.436
4.993
23.499
7.431
4.994
23.459

-1
7.418
4.989
23.497
7.416
4.990
23.455

-8
7.402
4.985
23.496
7.401
4.987
23.452

-14
7.389
4.982
23.494
7.387
4.983
23.449

-20
7.376
4.978
23.493
7.374
4.980
23.446


45

Supporting Table S2 – continued

T, °C

Experimentally measured 

values

Calculated values using eq. 3 
and coefficients from Table 1

a, Å
b, Å
c/2, Å
a, Å
b, Å
c/2, Å

Nonadecane - C19H40

30
7.796
5.013
26.294
7.807
5.003
26.298

27
7.730
5.033
26.241
7.749
5.018
26.264

24
7.670
5.047
26.225
7.691
5.033
26.229

22
7.646
5.052
26.175
7.652
5.043
26.206

16
7.454
4.986
26.094
7.455
4.990
26.008

10
7.439
4.983
26.089
7.441
4.987
26.003

0
7.412
4.978
26.080
7.416
4.982
25.996

-5
7.398
4.976
26.075
7.404
4.980
25.992

Heneicosane - C21H44

40
8.146
4.873
29.274

n/a (equation is not applicable)
35
7.779
5.021
28.740

32
7.717
5.040
28.544

25
7.482
4.990
28.542
7.482
4.984
28.561

21
7.471
4.988
28.532
7.471
4.983
28.557

10
7.440
4.984
28.524
7.441
4.978
28.546

0
7.417
4.980
28.509
7.414
4.974
28.536

-20
7.369
4.972
28.493
7.360
4.965
28.515


46

Supporting Table S3. Thermal expansion coefficients. The thermal expansion coefficients are 

defined as:

0

1

f

p

df

f
dT



=





, where f is either of the unit cell parameters (a, b, or c) or the unit cell 

volume, V = abc for orthorhombic lattice. f0 is the reference value of the studied parameter. For all 
alkane mixtures – the values measured at temperature T = 2°C were taken as reference values. For 
the rotator phases of pure alkanes – f0 values were taken at the lowest temperature at which the 
rotator phase existence is observed, whereas for the crystalline phases – the values 
measured/calculated for T = -40°C were used as reference values.

Alkane/alkane 

mixture
αa, °C-1
αb, °C-1
αc, °C-1
αV, °C-1

Bulk odd-numbered alkanes – rotator phases

C13
1.25 × 10-3
-0.22 × 10-3
0.03 × 10-3
1.26 × 10-4

C15
1.73 × 10-3
-0.45 × 10-3
0.25 × 10-3
1.53 × 10-4

C17
2.17 × 10-3
-0.74 × 10-3
0.16 × 10-3
1.47 × 10-4

C19
2.49 × 10-3
-0.96 × 10-3
0.52 × 10-3
1.55 × 10-4

C21
7.26 × 10-3
-4.14 × 10-3
3.25 × 10-3
2.43 × 10-4

Bulk odd-numbered alkanes – crystalline phases

C13
2.20 × 10-4
1.16 × 10-4
< 1 × 10-5
5.32 × 10-5

C15
2.63 × 10-4
1.35 × 10-4
< 1 × 10-5
6.30 × 10-5

C17
3.12 × 10-4
1.13 × 10-4
< 1 × 10-5
6.57 × 10-5

C19
3.64 × 10-4
9.45 × 10-5
3.5 × 10-5
7.02 × 10-5

C21
3.43 × 10-4
8.16 × 10-5
3.7 × 10-5
6.46 × 10-5

Alkane mixtures – rotator phases(1)

C16 + C17
2.06 × 10-3
-0.77 × 10-3
- / 0.11 × 10-3
1.37 × 10-3

C15 + C17
2.75 × 10-3
-1.39 × 10-3
4.44 × 10-3 / 0.36 × 10-3
2.32 × 10-3

C16 + C18
3.09 × 10-3
-1.34 × 10-3
3.36 × 10-3 / 0.13 × 10-3
2.01 × 10-3

C17 + C19
2.98 × 10-3
-1.42 × 10-3
3.58 × 10-3/ 0.18 × 10-3
1.34 × 10-3

C14 + C16 + C18
2.29 × 10-3
-1.05 × 10-3
1.68 × 10-3 / 0.13 × 10-3
1.36 × 10-3

C15 + C17 + C19
3.58 × 10-3
-2.08 × 10-3
3.12 × 10-3 / 0.25 × 10-3
1.92 × 10-3

C15 + C19
3.76 × 10-3
-2.32 × 10-3
13.7 × 10-3 / 1.12 × 10-3
1.77 × 10-3

C14-to-C20
4.55 × 10-3
-3.01 × 10-3
5.37 × 10-3 / 0.54 × 10-3
2.89 × 10-3

(1) The two values given for αc are calculated using the two different slopes from Table 2 in the 

main text.


47

Supporting Table S4. Experimentally measured unit cell parameters for rotator phases 
formed in the studied equimolar alkane mixtures. The data is obtained in the experiments with 
emulsified samples at different temperatures.

T, °C
Unit cell parameters 
T, °C
Unit cell parameters

a, Å
b, Å
c/2, Å
a, Å
b, Å
c/2, Å

C16 + C17
C14 + C16 + C18

18
7.781
4.995
23.076
18
7.815
4.964
23.851

16
7.747
5.005
23.052
16
7.779
4.984
23.824

12.5
7.685
5.024
23.057
12.5
7.715
5.013
23.810

10
7.642
5.035
23.045
10
7.652
5.027
23.801

8
7.612
5.042
23.036
8
7.633
5.031
23.797

4.5
7.564
5.051
23.034
4.5
7.569
5.046
23.790

2
7.537
5.056
23.032
2
7.548
5.050
23.787

C15 + C17
C15 + C17 + C19

14
7.862
4.949
22.769
18
8.027
4.859
24.692

13
7.846
4.952
22.661
16
8.013
4.881
24.662

12
7.825
4.964
22.633
12
7.940
4.901
24.110

10
7.790
4.980
22.559
10
7.817
4.950
24.051

7
7.715
5.000
22.513
7
7.732
4.981
24.034

4
7.652
5.022
22.509
4
7.657
5.008
24.037

2
7.628
5.033
22.508
2
7.632
5.017
24.015

C16 + C18
C15 + C19 (main mixed R)

18
7.874
4.951
23.899
10
8.047
4.920
24.185

14
7.737
4.994
23.837
8
7.935
4.973
24.159

10
7.662
5.020
23.839
7
7.905
4.987
24.141

7
7.631
5.023
23.831
4
7.819
5.020
24.121

2
7.482
5.063
23.822
2
7.760
5.045
24.114

C17 + C19
C14-to-C20

21
7.841
4.916
24.775
18
8.002
4.868
25.405

15
7.661
4.985
24.755
15
7.993
4.867
24.806

10
7.576
5.009
24.747
10
7.960
4.878
24.340

8
7.551
5.015
24.744
8
7.919
4.899
24.294

4
7.507
5.024
24.737
4
7.722
4.983
24.213

2
7.489
5.028
24.732
2
7.700
4.990
24.202


48

Supporting Figure S1. SAXS/WAXS spectra of C13 bulk alkane obtained upon cooling. (a) 

Original data presented as y-axis in logarithmic scale. (b-c) The same signal as shown in (a) but 

with subtracted background. The background subtraction only increases the signal to noise ratio 

in the background without affecting the rest of the signal in any way. (b) shows the graph with y-

axis in log scale and (c) in linear scale. The secondary and ternary reflections of the main (002) 

peak become much more pronounced when a logarithmic scale is employed.


49

Supporting Figure S2. Comparison between the cumulative enthalpy released upon cooling of 

bulk C14-to-C20 mixture (red curve) and bulk C16 + C17 mixture (green curve). The temperature 

range in which about 78% of the total enthalpy is released upon cooling of the samples is ≈ 16°C 

for C14-to-C20 mixture, whereas it is just 4°C for C16 + C17 sample.


50

Supporting Figure S3. (a) Interlamellar spacing measured upon cooling (blue symbols) or heating 

(red symbols) for C14-to-C20 mixture dispersed as droplets in C18EO20 surfactant solution. The 

temperature dependence of the interlamellar spacing follows identical dependence upon both 

cooling and heating. The temperature derivatives are: d(c/2)/dT ≈ 0.011 Å/°C for T < 8°C;

d(c/2)/dT ≈ 0.133 Å/°C upon cooling and ≈ 0.136 Å/°C upon heating at T > 8°C. The difference 

in the interlamellar spacing measured at a given temperature > 8°C upon cooling and heating is 

attributed to the delay in rotator phase formation observed upon cooling. This delay arises due to 

the subcooling needed for rotator phase nucleus formation. (b) Average domain size calculated 

using Sherrer equation (constant K = 0.9, λ ≈ 1.54 Å) for the investigated C14-to-C20 emulsions. 


51

Supporting Figure S4. DSC thermogram for C15 + C19 bulk alkane mixture. The cooling signal 

is shown with the blue curve, while the heating signal is shown with red. The percentage area of 

the cooling peak as a function of temperature is shown with the dashed green line. Dashed blue 

and red lines show the baselines for the heat flow signals.


52

Supporting Figure S5. C15 + C17 + C19 mixture. (a) Interlamellar spacing for ternary C15 + C17

+ C19 alkane mixture dispersed in C16EO8 surfactant. The data is from cooling experiment 

presented in Figure 7a in the main text. (b) Average crystallites domain size calculated using 

Sherrer equation (constant K = 0.9, λ ≈ 1.54 Å).(c) Peak deconvolution analysis for the SAXS 

spectra measured for bulk C15 + C17 + C19 alkane mixture at T = 2°C. Four different phases with 

similar d-values are needed to describe well the (002) and (004) peaks. The original signal is shown 

with black curve. The red, green, light blue and dark blue curves show the four separate Gaussian 

peaks used in the deconvolution analysis. The cumulative peak is shown with pink dashed line

(which overlaps with the experimentally acquired signal shown in black).


53

Supporting Figure S6. Phase behavior of C17 + C19 binary mixture. (a,b) SWAXS spectra 

obtained for: (a) emulsified in C18EO20 and (b) bulk sample. All molecules arrange in a single 

mixed rotator phase when emulsified, whereas several individual types of domains appear in the 

bulk mixture. (c) DSC thermogram.


54

Supporting Figure S7. Optical microscopy images obtained upon 0.75°C/min cooling for 

emulsion drops composed of C15 + C17 alkane mixture and dispersed in Tween 40 surfactant 

solution. Spontaneous drop shape shifting is observed upon cooling. Details about the 

experimental set-up used to prepare these images are available in Refs [1,2]. Scale bars = 50 μm.

References:

1. D. Cholakova, N. Denkov, S. Tcholakova, I. Lesov, S.K. Smoukov, Control of drop shape 

transformations in cooled emulsions, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 235 (2016) 90-107. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2016.06.002

2. D. Cholakova, Z. Valkova, S. Tcholakova, N. Denkov, S.K. Smoukov, “Self-shaping” of 

multicomponent 
drops, 
Langmuir 
33 
(2017) 
5696-5706. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b01153


55

Supporting Figure S8. Deviation of the rotator phase interlamellar spacing from its 

theoretical value. Experimental data (dmeas) obtained at T = 2°C, when subtracted from the 

calculated interlamellar spacing using the equation 
(
)
1.2724
1
3.1476
dcalc
n
=
−
+
Å, are presented 

relative to the maximal chain length difference in the studied alkane mixtures, Δnmax. A linear 

increase of this difference is observed with an increase in Δnmax for all studied samples, except for

C14 + C16 + C18 mixture. In this specific case, the inclusion of the shorter C14 alkane does not lead 

to decrease in the overall spacing in comparison to that measured for C16 + C18 mixture. Instead,

Δnmax is increased, leading to this deviation. All remaining data are described by the linear relation: 

max
0.1268
meas
calc
d
d
n
−
=

.


