Cryogenic platform to investigate strong microwave cavity-spin coupling in
correlated magnetic materials

Aulden K. Jones,1, 2 Martin Mourigal,1 Andrew M. Mounce,2 and Michael P. Lilly2

1School of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
2Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, USA

We present a comprehensive exploration of loop-gap resonators (LGRs) for electron spin reso-
nance (ESR) studies, enabling investigations into the hybridization of solid-state magnetic materi-
als with microwave polariton modes. The experimental setup, implemented in a Physical Property
Measurement System by Quantum Design, allows for ESR spectra at temperatures as low as 2
Kelvin. The versatility of continuous wave ESR spectroscopy is demonstrated through experiments
on CuSO4·5H2O and MgCr2O4, showcasing the g-tensor and magnetic susceptibilities of these ma-
terials. The study delves into the challenges of fitting spectra under strong hybridization conditions
and underscores the significance of proper calibration and stabilization. The detailed guide pro-
vided serves as a valuable resource for laboratories interested in exploring hybrid quantum systems
through microwave resonators.

I.
Introduction

Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy is a
versatile experimental technique to study and con-
trol the dynamics of spin-dense and dilute mate-
rial systems through microwave-induced spin tran-
sitions under an applied magnetic field. The tech-
nique can be implemented in continuous wave (CW)
and pulsed forms, providing direct determinations
of a system’s g-tensor, relaxation times, and mag-
netic susceptibilities. The low-frequency nature of
ESR in the X-band (≈ 10 GHz), requires microwave
resonators. This can be seen through the relative
frequency (ν0) of the induced ∆ms = ±1 transitions
compared to the thermal energy of the samples at
equilibrium (1 GHz ≈ 0.048K). In the kBT ≫ ¯hν0
regime, thermal excitations lead to weak popula-
tion differences and absorption between magnetic
states [1]. By enhancing light-matter interactions,
resonators produce a corresponding increase in mi-
crowave sensitivity, allowing small changes in sample
inductance to be detected.
Recent experimental work has focused on study-
ing magnetic quantum phases and hybrid quantum
states that emerge from spin-microwave photon in-
teractions in cavities. Applications range from quan-
tum information and material control [2, 3] to un-
derstanding exotic magnetism [4, 5]. But investigat-
ing the low-energy spectral response of correlated
materials with electron-spin-based resonance tech-
niques has long offered unique advantages, with ex-
periments testing exquisite theories of magnon frac-
tionalization into spinon pairs in low-dimensional
spin systems [6, 7] and spin-orbital quantum mag-
nets [8, 9]. Sensitivity to the spinon continuum is
associated with an increasing resonance linewidth
with decreasing temperature. However, in practice,
thermal fluctuations obscure the observation of these

collective quantum phenomena. Gaining a more pre-
cise picture thus requires performing measurements
at sub-Kelvin temperatures beyond the limit of most
commercial and very high magnetic-field experimen-
tal set-ups.
Additionally, strong spin-lattice coupled materials
typically show no visible ESR spectra due to their
rapid relaxation rates. In these cases, phonons dissi-
pate absorbed microwave energy, resulting in broad
spectral peaks that only become observable in the
low-temperature, single-Kelvin regime, where relax-
ation rates slow and lattice vibrations die out [3].
This is the case with many rare-earth-based quan-
tum magnets.
This manuscript reports a straightforward cryo-
genic implementation of loop-gap resonators (LGRs)
to investigate the feasibility of different magnetic
quantum materials to hybridize with a microwave
polariton mode down to T ≈ 10 K. Our work inte-
grates past results demonstrating the utility of LGRs
to control hybrid quantum systems [2] and to ob-
tain traditional ESR spectra on molecular magnets
using a commercial Quantum Design Physical Prop-
erty Measurement System (PPMS) [10]. The flexi-
bility of LGRs and our low-cost setup not only en-
ables sub-X-band ESR spectroscopy (ν ≈ 3–6 GHz)
inside a cryostat environment but also serves as a
platform to characterize the potential for strong cou-
pling between microwave resonators and spin-dense,
correlated materials. We demonstrate our approach
on two magnetic insulators described by a Heisen-
berg exchange Hamiltonian and hosting quantum
and classical spin-liquid correlations, respectively.
We also review the relevant technical concepts in
the hope of helping successful implementations by
other laboratories and paving the way for our future
implementation in a dilution refrigerator reaching
sub-Kelvin temperatures.

arXiv:2312.04750v2  [cond-mat.str-el]  31 Jan 2024


2

(a)
(b)
(c)

Sample Loop 

𝑟!

𝑡
𝑤

𝑧

𝑟"

Flux Return Loops 

Resonator

Coupling 

Loop 

50 Ω

coax line

Support 
Material

Stub Tuner

Multi-Function

Probe

(d)

CuSO4 5H2O

Vector Network Analyzer 

(e)
(f)
A
B

(g)

FIG. 1. (Continued on the following page.)

II.
Design Experimental Set-Up and Method

A.
Resonators

A critical component in conventional ESR spec-
troscopy and many hybrid quantum systems setups

is the microwave resonant structure that hosts the
sample or system of interest. Maximizing microwave
sensitivity in ESR typically requires maximizing the
product of the resonator quality factor (Q) and fill-


3

FIG. 1. (a) Loop gap resonator diagram showing the relevant geometric parameters that were selected to obtain a
desired resonance frequency as originally described [11]. The geometric parameters of the resonator used throughout
this study are r0 = 2.3 mm, r1 = 1.5 mm, t ≈ 0.07 mm, w = 2.5 mm, w = 4.0 mm. (b) View of the CuSO4·5H2O
sample studied inside the LGR. The sample is secured at the bottom with a strip of kapton tape. The crystal shown
here has been cut to form a cylinder extending along the entire z length of the LGR. While no attempt was made to
accurately align the triclinic unit-cell for either of the two distinct Cu ions in the crystal structure, it should be noted
that the cylindrical axis of the cut crystal falls along the b-axis of the triclinic cell [12]. Approximating the cavity
filling factor by the sample to sample-space volume ratio yields η ≈ 0.5. (c) Image of the CuSO4·5H2O crysral loaded
LGR with PCB coupling loop attached outside of the probe.
(d) Diagram showing every microwave component
utilized in setup B for low-temperature measurements down to T = 10 K (for data reported here) or T = 1.8 K
(base temperature). The one-port vector network analyzer (VNA) generates and detects the signal, with a maximum
frequency up to νmax = 6 GHz. The stub-tuner changes the characteristic impedance of the coax transmission line to
critically couple to the LGR-sample system at the resonance frequency. This process ensures that the maximum power
is transferred to the load, or resonator. Next, the signal is transferred to the sample via a 1.2-meter-long SMA to
SMP semi-rigid cable, where it interfaces with the PCB coupling loop. (e) The schematic shows the first experimental
setup (setup A) at the bottom of the PPMS multi-function probe (MFP). Arrows label each primary component.
Going from top to bottom, the 50 Ω semi-rigid coax fed through the center rod is connected to an additional length
of coax via an SMP to SMA adapter. This added section is terminated in a single turn of the center conductor
soldered to the outer casing. It forms a loop that transmits the VNA signal to the resonator through its mutual
inductance with one of the outer return flux loops. The aluminum loop-gap resonator is secured to the platform by
a 3D-printed support box that tightly fits the bottom section of the resonator. This box is attached to the bottom
MFP puck with a quick-drying adhesive. (f) Diagram of setup B, with the main improvement being the stabilized
PCB coupling loop suspended 1.2 mm above the LGR body via a u-shaped FR4 spacer to prevent electrical contact.
Each copper trace on the PCB is terminated onto an SMP male connector that leads to the transmission line. The
LGR, spacer, and PCB are all adhered to each other via GE varnish, which provides stability during measurements.
The bottom of the LGR is mounted to a right-angled puck attached via GE varnish. (g) Smith chart from the VNA
once the experiment is loaded into the cryostat. The blue S11 trace shows how the impedance of the setup changes
periodically as a function of frequency, with only the LGR resonance frequency at critical coupling as labeled by the
red marker in the center of the plot. The periodicity of the frequency change exactly matched what we would expect
for an open coax cable of the length used in these experiments. This particular Smith chart was taken for MgCr2O4
at room temperature, but a similar form is seen throughout all measurements across temperatures.

ing factor (η). For this study, we utilized lumped-
element resonators known as loop-gap resonators
(LGRs).
These structures were first developed in
the 1980’s for nuclear [13] and electron [14] magnetic
resonance studies in sub X-band frequencies. While
LGRs are limited to an accessible frequency range of
ν0 = 2–8 GHz and operate with much smaller qual-
ity factors (Q = ν0/∆ν), their significant filling fac-
tors (η) and homogeneous field (BMW), makes them
ideal for strong coupling to bulk magnetic materials
in low-temperature environments.
The specific design we adopted uses a three-loop,
two-gap structure first described in 1984 for ESR
and electron-nuclear double resonance spectroscopy
(ENDOR) spectroscopy [11], and recently utilized
in experiments investigating quantum transduction
phenomena [2, 3]. One of the primary benefits of a
multi-loop and gap resonator is the ability to man-
age and contain the returning magnetic flux path-
ways in a microwave experiment, making them ideal
to use in cryostats and dilution refrigerators where
large superconducting magnets limit the free space
available to construct an experiment.
The geometric parameters that determine an
empty LGR resonance frequency and quality fac-
tor are shown in Fig. 1(a) following their previous

description in Ref. [11].
For the experiments car-
ried out in this work, aluminum LGRs were created
with a manual milling machine in two halves to cre-
ate t = 70 µm sized gaps.
The two halves were
then attached with a silver-based conductive epoxy
to form the full resonator. While this manufactur-
ing approach does yield lower quality factors than
precision-machined LGRs [2], we find them adequate
to observe the necessary spectra for our demonstra-
tional experiments; future studies will be carried out
on higher-quality resonators.
While modeling a desired LGR sample size and
frequency is possible with the design equations in
the early literature [11], this only resulted in pre-
dictions accurate within |ν0−νcalc| ≈ 1 GHz of the
experimental resonance frequency. Instead, we uti-
lized COMSOL Multiphysics to simulate and find
the eigen-frequencies and modes for many of our res-
onator designs. In the following, we refer to ν0 as
the main resonance frequency of interest for our ex-
periments.

B.
Sample Selection

To explore strong cavity-material coupling in sam-
ples that are known to host correlated spin physics,


4

we chose to investigate two transition-metal based
Heisenberg antiferromagnets: the one-dimensional
S = 1/2 quantum liquid CuSO4·5H2O and the three-
dimensional S = 3/2 classical spin-liquid MgCr2O4.
While these materials have been well studied us-
ing a host of experimental techniques, from tradi-
tional and high-field ESR to inelastic neutron scat-
tering experiments [15, 16], our experiments inves-
tigate the ability of these systems to strongly hy-
bridize with a cavity mode over a range of tem-
peratures.
These samples were chosen due to
their well-characterized ESR response, availability
as high-quality large single-crystals fitting our LGR
(Fig. 1(b)), and distinctly different magnetic behav-
ior regarding magnetic excitation bandwidth and the
role of quantum correlations.

C.
Microwave Generation, Detection and
Transport in Cryogenic Environment

A R60 1-Port 6 GHz Vector Network Analyzer
(VNA) from Copper Mountain Technologies was
used as the microwave source and detector. A dia-
gram of the finalized microwave setup used is shown
in Fig. 1(d).
The signal from the VNA was fed
into a stub tuner using a procedure detailed in
Ref. [17].
A semi-rigid coax cable was then used
to transmit the microwave signal through a her-
metically sealed union to the bottom of a Quan-
tum Design cryogen-free Physical Property Measure-
ment System (PPMS) equipped with a 14 T super-
conducting magnet and reaching base temperature
of T = 2 K. The experiment itself used Quantum
Design’s Multi-Function Probe (MFP), which pro-
vided enough space for the sample-LGR assembly.
The coupling structure and the right-angle mount
secured the LGR with the loops applied perpendic-
ular to the DC field.

D.
Microwave Coupling

Mutual inductive coupling was utilized between the
LGR body and the coaxial transmission line, see
e.g.
Fig. 1(c).
In practice, two different coupling
setups were used, labeled setup A and B in Fig. 1(e)
and (f), respectively.
Maximizing the microwave
power transferred to the resonator is important and
characterized by the degree to which critical cou-
pling is achieved.
Critical coupling, or matching,
occurs when the impedance of the transmission line
equals that of the resonator. This condition mini-
mizes reflected microwave power, and various meth-
ods to create these matching networks for LGRs are
well documented [18]. The coupling for each setup
was optimized by analyzing the Smith chart for the
VNA frequency range of interest.
In setup A, we

attempted to critically couple by physically moving
the inductive loop on the end of the coax line on the
bench top. While this allowed us to get a detectable
signal, it was distinctively over-coupled and limited
our ability to fine-tune the setup inside the cryostat.
We improved flexibility using a stub tuner, which
controlled the impedance of the coax line to match
the resonator at its resonance frequency, as seen in
figure 1(d). This facilitated in-situ tuning before the
ESR field sweeps inside the cryostat. In setup B, a
printed circuit board (PCB) coupling loop was used
with an additional FR4 material as a spacer between
the LGR body and the copper trace. This provided
a more stable configuration that experienced mini-
mal drift as the experiment was cooled from room
temperature inside the cryostat. More details of our
set-up are provided in the caption of Fig. 1.

E.
Sample Preparation and Orientation

For high sensitivity of ESR response, including at
room temperature, the resonators and the samples
had to match in size to ensure a high filling factor.
For CuSO4·5H2O, this entailed polishing a large crys-
tal down to the size of the LGR sample loop, while
floating-zone grown MgCr2O4 crystals [19] were ob-
served to already fit well within the first LGR sam-
ple radius of 2.3 mm, Fig. 1(b). While CuSO4·5H2O
fit well within the resonator, the exact orientation
of the crystal was not determined, as an exact g-
factor determination was second to observing an ini-
tial ESR response for the experimental setup. The
sample in setup A was adhered to the resonator with
Kapton tape, which crossed over one side of the sam-
ple loop, and can be seen behind the CuSO4·5H2O
crystal in Fig. 1(b).
Setup B utilized GE varnish
to cement both samples. For MgCr2O4, the nearly
Heisenberg nature of the magnetism meant that pre-
cise sample alignment was also not necessary for this
demonstration study.

F.
Sample-Resonator Mounting

The sample-resonator union in setup A was mounted
onto a 3D-printed holder with an open rectangular
slot to firmly secure the bottom section of the res-
onator away from the sample loop and return flux
paths. This slot was then mounted onto an electric
transport puck built for the PPMS multi-function
probe (MFP) so that the entire setup was attached
to the rest of the probe.
The bottom of the 3D
printed slot was adhered with super glue to ensure
the setup would not move during the experiment.
The next step was to feed through a semi-rigid coax
cable, threading it through the center hole on the
head section of the MFP. One of the more tedious


5

(a)
(b)

FIG. 2. (a) Diagnostic plot for continuous wave ESR spectra for CuSO4·5H2O at room temperature using set-up A
with ν0 = 4.64 GHz. The top section shows the color-plot of the magnetic field, microwave frequency, and scattering
parameter S11, created by taking a VNA trace every 10 Oe step of the orthogonal DC field (B0). Each VNA trace
was then fit to a standard Lorentzian to obtain the full width at half minimum (FWHM) and thus the Q-factor,
Q = νres/∆ν. The black dotted line marks the location of the minimum S11, characterizing the resonance frequency,
while the white dotted line marks the edges of the FWHM for each trace. The bottom section shows the fitted Q
factors as a function of field, allowing for our results to be compared to traditional ESR plots. The slight asymmetry
and drift were determined to be caused by the real component of susceptibility (χ′) changing as a function of field and
is best explained by the high filling factor making the experiment more sensitive to these slight resonant frequency
changes, as previously described in Ref. [5]. (b) Same plot for MgCr2O4 with ν0 = 4.61 GHz.

parts of the design was attaching the coupling loop
to the bottom of this coax line. For the room tem-
perature setup described here (setup A), the cou-
pling loop was made of a stripped piece of coax where
the central conductor was twisted and soldered to
the outer conductor to form an inductive coupling
loop. This coax termination transmitted the VNA
signal into the loop-gap resonator, which then inter-
acted with the sample. A combination of Teflon and
adhesive was used to secure the coupling loop to the
side of the MFP probe sample space, whose orienta-
tion is shown in Fig. 1(e). Stabilizing the coupling
loop was a crucial part of taking these first room
temperature measurements, as any movement would
produce an unwanted signal superimposed on top of
the material spectra. It should be noted that while
the varnish method of stabilizing the resonators and
coupling was useful, future design will utilize a more
standard designed structure with brass screws and
mounting components.

G.
Measurement Protocol

The DC magnetic field of the PPMS was applied
along the vertical direction and was then swept be-
tween B0 = 0 Oe to 3000 Oe in steps of 10 Oe. At
each point, the field was allowed to equalize for a
few seconds before a S11 trace was taken, where
S11 = Preflected/Pincident is the RF power reflection
coefficient at a given frequency. The raw data con-
sisted of csv files of the VNA traces taken over a
1.5 GHz span centered on each sample-cavity res-
onance frequency. To get an overview of the data
and observe if hybridization of the cavity polaritons
and material spins occurred, the ESR spectra would
be visualized as a 3D colormap by plotting the S11
vs.
frequency (GHz) traces as a function of B0.
This technique follows those used by other studies
[2, 3, 20].


6

III.
Results

A.
Room Temperature

The room-temperature results (“diagnostic plots”
using setup A) for both CuSO4·5H2O and MgCr2O4
in their uncorrelated paramagnetic regime are pre-
sented in Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(b), respectively. Both
compounds show a clear ESR response at room tem-
perature, as visible, for CuSO4 · 5H2O, from the
broadening by around 4 MHz of the VNA frequency
lineshape ∆ν beyond the baseline full-width at half-
maximum of ∆ν0 ≈ 14 MHz and slight shift of
the peak frequency νres with respect to ν0.
For
MgCr2O4, broadening by around 2 MHz occurred
from the ∆ν0 ≈ 15 MHz baseline. Calculating the
Q-factor Q(B0) = νres(B0)/∆ν and plotting ver-
sus the applied magnetic field yields an unaligned
g-factor of g ≈ 2.27 for CuSO4 · 5H2O, while the
line-width of the ESR response was measured to be
∆B = 90 Oe full-width-half maximum, centered at
a resonance field of Bres = 1460 Oe.
MgCr2O4,
on the other hand, displayed a much broader re-
sponse, characteristic of its highly correlated param-
agnetic spins, with a Weiss constant of ΘW = −346
K for MgCr2O4 [16] compared to ΘW = −0.6 K for
CuSO4·5H2O. The measured g-factor for MgCr2O4is
g ≈ 2.03, while the line-width was ∆B = 850 Oe
FWHM, centered at Bres = 1620 Oe. Both g-factor
measurements agree with previously reported results
[12, 21]. The cavity’s quality factor (measured off-
resonance) was approximately 320 in these condi-
tions. While this low-quality factor can hinder sen-
sitivity, the large filling factor (η > 0.4) can com-
pensate for this deficiency, allowing us to reach the
regime of strong spin-photon hybridization at low
temperatures.

B.
Data Analysis

Results obtained at low temperatures using setup
B are presented for CuSO4·5H2O and MgCr2O4 in
Fig. 3 and 4, respectively. Before discussing these re-
sults, we present our data analysis approach in more
detail, given that several strategies to reduce the raw
data from the VNA are possible once the cavity and
sample excitation mode hybridize.
One of the key advantages of the VNA method of
ESR detection is being able to separate both the real
(χ′) and imaginary (χ”) components of complex sus-
ceptibility simultaneously [20, 22]. In conventional
ESR, only the reactive (χ′) or dispersive (χ”) com-
ponent is measured on a single resonance frequency.
This can be directly detected via the reflected mi-
crowave power, or the signal can commonly be con-

verted to a DC voltage via a Schottky diode, and
is related to spectrometer parameters of operation
through [23]

VESR = χ”ηQL
�

Z0P,

where Z0 is the characteristic impedance of the
transmission line (typically 50Ω), P the input mi-
crowave power to the sample-resonator system, and
QL is the loaded quality factor defined as QL =
νres/∆ν with the sample inside the resonator. Many
commercial ESR spectrometers utilize an automated
frequency control (AFC) circuit to stabilize the cav-
ity resonance and optimize the reflected microwave
output for a specific sample size [24].
It is possi-
ble to approximate this frequency stabilized reso-
nance and thus observe the data in a traditional ESR
format by tracking how QL changes with DC mag-
netic field, similar to the techniques of other studies
[10, 25]. There exist many analysis techniques origi-
nating from the superconducting circuits community
to accurately determine the quality factor of a res-
onating circuit from a VNA trace, whether it be a
Smith or |S11| plot, and reduce the effects of back-
ground signal from environmental factors [26].

C.
Cryogenic Response and Hybridization

It becomes difficult to accurately fit a VNA trace
when the cavity-spin system becomes hybridized.
This situation occurs in setup B when CuSO4·5H2O
is cooled below T = 50 K, see Fig. 3(a) which
displays a strong avoided crossing phenomena be-
tween the cavity mode and the Zeeman split para-
magnetic excitation of the sample reaching up to
∆B ≈ 1200 Oe. In that situation, the original cen-
tral resonance frequency disappears, and two weaker
hybridized modes emerge, which become difficult to
fit and determine a full width at half max (FWHM)
value to extract the Q-factor. Compounding this ef-
fect is the periodic background signal coming from
the length of coax cable used in the experiment. For
this reason, the Q-factors for each trace, shown in
Fig. 3(b) are determined from a simplified fit that ex-
tracts the maximum value of |S11| at the resonance
position and collects the nearest data points at half
that value to determine the frequency FWHM and
the Q-factor.
This procedure neglects the raised
|S11| baseline produced by the background coax-
signal, resulting in a broader FWHM determination
than the actual value. However, the negative impact
is only observed at the resonance matching condi-
tion when the signal broadens to its most consider-
able extent for CuSO4·5H2O and results in the Q-
factor appearing to reach a zero value. This quick
drop to Q ≈ 0 at resonance matching can be seen


7

(a)
(b)

(c)

FIG. 3. (a) Color plots for CuSO4·5H2O temperature-dependent spectra measured with setup B and displaying the
increase in spin-cavity hybridization with decreasing temperature for T = 300 K, 50 K, and 10 K. Each hybridized
trace is centered around a g-value similar to the one reported with setup A, with the only deviations occurring for
slight changes in crystal orientation between experiments. The data was collected during a single cool-down. Color
plots are created from the raw S11 trace data at field increments of 10 Oe, and their analysis is described in the text
and presented in the other sections of this caption. The frequency (ν0 = 5.03 GHz) is the resonance frequency of
the sample-cavity system at zero field for each measurement. (b) Q-factor vs. magnetic field plots for 10 to 50 K
in 10 K steps. (c) Background subtracted VNA traces for the data between the grey arrows in the last plot of (a).
Despite slight, unwanted features arising from an imperfect background subtraction, such as the positive regions in
S11, hybridized modes clearly form on either side of the central cavity-resonance frequency as the field sweeps towards
and away from the expected peak ESR absorption. The legend to the side labels the field of each trace.

for the two lowest temperatures in Fig. 3(b). While
plotting Q(B) is primarily used in traditional ESR,
here it allows a depiction of how spin-polarition
coupling strength is increasing, as our zeroth-order
Lorentzian fitting program outlined in the text can
accurately obtain the VNA dip linewidth up to the
regime where hybridization makes fitting with the
coax background impossible and Q → 0 (as seen in
the plot).
In contrast to CuSO4·5H2O, the temperature de-
pendent results for MgCr2O4, Fig 4(a), display no
strong hybridization.
The Q-factor vs.
magnetic

field plots shown in Fig 4(b) allow for a traditional
ESR interpretation, and the decreasing paramag-
netic response as the sample approaches TN ≈ 15 K
is consistent with previous reports for MgCr2O4[21].
Usually, matching at the resonance condition be-
tween the DC field and the microwave frequency pro-
duces a decreased loaded quality factor that can be
measured as the ESR response. This behavior was
observed in our set-up A, see Fig. 2.
This result
is usually explained in textbooks [24] (and observed
in experiments [25]) as more energy is dissipated by
flipping paramagnetic spins or generating magnons,


8

(a)
(b)

(c)

FIG. 4. (a) Color plots for MgCr2O4 temperature-dependent spectra over the same three temperatures of T = 300 K,
50 K, and 10 K as in Fig. 3(a); however, no hybridization is observed as the temperature is decreased (ν0 = 5.02 GHz
for this set-up). The g-factor is still consistent with the one reported earlier. Results were collected during a single
cool-down from 300 K to 10 K in setup B as previously described in figure 3. (b) Q-factor vs. field plots for 20 to
70 K in 10 K steps. (c) Raw VNA traces for MgCr2O4 over the entire swept spectra in 100 Oe steps for the 50 K
measurement. While no observed response can be detected on the last two heat maps of (a), looking at the raw data
here does show that both the sample-cavity resonance frequency and the linewidth change as we pass the resonant
matching condition in a similar fashion as seen for CuSO4·5H2O. The side legend labels the field of each trace.

resulting in a quality factor decrease. However, this
is not always the case, as can be seen in Fig. 4(b),
where the quality factor increases upon reaching the
resonance condition. Instead, this data can be bet-
ter understood as the magnetic material changing
the reactance and thus the coupling of the cavity-
sample system to the transmission line. Whether or
not the magnetic material causes the quality factor
to increase or decrease depends on how close the off-
resonance Lorentzian is to critical coupling and if the
resonance frequency change associated with match-
ing takes the peak closer or further to the critical
coupling condition. If the system is critically cou-
pled or close to it, reaching resonance will always de-
crease the quality factor. Still, an increasing quality

factor can be observed when the setup is far enough
from critical coupling. This shows why it is essential
to properly characterize the state of coupling for a
microwave setup. The magnitude and positioning of
the ESR response is still sample-dependent, so even
off of the critical coupling condition, we are able to
obtain significant results. Once the stub tuner was
adjusted to reach closer to critical coupling, the same
temperature-dependent results in Fig. 4(b) were re-
peated, but this time with a quality factor that de-
creased as expected (results not show).
In Fig. 3(c) shows every VNA trace taken between
1500 to 1800 Oe for CuSO4·5H2O, where strong hy-
bridization is seen to occur between the two grey
arrows located in the bottom plot of Fig. 3(a).


9

These traces have each been modified by subtract-
ing the same background trace from each profile.
This is to remove the repeated coax signal previously
mentioned and observe the pure cavity-sample re-
sponse of each. However, it can be seen that periodic
irregularities still exist in that there are slight pro-
trusions above 0 dB at the frequencies of 4.950 GHz,
5.025 GHz, and 5.100 GHz. It should be noted that
it was confirmed that this background signal was
from the coax cable by using the well-known expres-
sion:

Cable Length =
c

2∆f√ϵR
,

which produces a length of 1.4 m for Teflon’s dielec-
tric constant, and a frequency dip separation of 75
MHz.
This matched the length of the cable used
to within a centimeter, confirming the signal’s ori-
gin. The background trace was created by stitching
together the trace at 1600 Oe from the lowest fre-
quency collected to the central resonant frequency
(νres = 5.025 GHz) with the trace at 1700 Oe from
the central resonant frequency to the highest fre-
quency collected. This allows the background sig-
nal to be reconstructed by adding opposing trace
sections near the avoided level crossing that re-
veal opposite sections of the true background that
the sample-LGR resonant response is superimposed
onto. For VNA traces of MgCr2O4 over its entire
swept spectra in 100 Oe intervals, shown in Fig. 4(c),
no background trace is subtracted since no strong
hybridization occurs, meaning the frequency region
of interest does not span a large enough region for
the coax signal to obscure any results.
With the
background trace subtracted for CuSO4·5H2O, the
faint hybridized modes are seen for traces around
the center of B = 1660 Oe.

D.
Interpretation

Overall, the primary difference between the two sam-
ple spectra studied down to T
= 10 K is that
CuSO4 · 5H2O is seen to strongly hybridize with
the cavity mode, increasing the degree of hybridiza-
tion with a decreasing temperature.
At the same
time, MgCr2O4 shows no hybridization with the res-
onator environment despite experimental considera-
tions such as filling factor, resonance frequency, and
mode-volume confinement being the same.
An expression showing the coupling strength be-
tween antiferromagnetic spins and the microwave
cavity is provided by [3]:

G =

�

πNνresµ0

¯hVres
µBη,

(a)
(b)

FIG. 5.
(a) Derivative of S11 with respect to mag-
netic field (B) as a function of frequency and field for
CuSO4 · 5H2O at 10 K. While this merely plots the
field derivative of the data shown in the bottom plot
of Fig. 3(a), taking the derivative in such a way allows
for the removal of the majority of unwanted resonances
caused by the coax cable. However, the effects of such
cable resonances can still be seen in the amplitude in-
creases at ±75 MHz, where they intersect with the po-
lariton modes.
The horizontal white dashed line (ν0)
marks the primary cavity mode, while the diagonal white
dashed line marks the CuSO4·5H2O eigenfrequency (νs)
that intersects with the cavity mode. (b) Reconstructed
and normalized |S11| as a function of VNA frequency at
B = 1660 Oe. By taking the integral of the S11 deriva-
tive at this resonance field, the vacuum Rabi splitting
(∆), and thus the magnon-polariton coupling strength
(G), can be approximated as ∆ = 2G/(2π) ≈ 160 MHz.
Asymmetry in the two Lorentzian peaks is likely caused
by a combination of unwanted interference with the up-
per cable resonance and a slight drift in the bare cavity
resonance during the measurement. For this reason, a
conservative range of our coupling strength is between
G/2π ≈ 50 to 80 MHz.

where N is the number of magnetic ions in the sam-
ple, Vres is the cavity mode volume, and η is the
filling factor. This expression illustrates the depen-
dence of coupling strength on the ratio of cavity res-
onance frequency (νres) to mode volume character-
istic of microwave resonators and explains the ne-
cessity of small-volume LGRs. To approximate the
coupling strength for CuSO4 ·5H2O at T = 10 K,
the 1st derivative of S11 with respect to the field
(B) is taken and then plotted in a fashion similar
to [28]. The results are shown in Fig. 5(a). Tak-
ing the derivative of S11 in this way helps to remove
the constant signal created by the coax cable and
allows a more precise determination of the avoided
level crossing. With a large part of the coax signal
removed in the derivative, numerically integrating
the derivative trace at Bres ≈ 1660 Oe gives a de-


10

cent approximation of the vacuum Rabi splitting,
as shown in Fig. 5(b). The gap between peaks is
given as ∆ = 2G/(2π) ≈ 160 MHz. The asymme-
try in the peaks is likely due to unwanted features
from the coax signal that still influence the recon-
structed S11 data. Based on this figure, the coupling
strength is estimated to be G/2π ≈ 50 to 80 MHz,
with a more precise estimate requiring experimental
improvements to eliminate the cable resonances or
modeling the spin-cavity Hamiltonian.
The lack of hybridization for MgCr2O4 is spec-
ulated to arise from its more strongly correlated
paramagnetic spins that produce a broad ESR re-
sponse even at room temperature. However, observ-
ing sample-cavity coupling differences between these
two samples demonstrates that our setup probes
both the hybridization and magnetic response across
a wide range of temperatures in a relatively simple
experimental architecture.

IV.
Conclusion

This manuscript reports the design and implementa-
tion of loop-gap resonators (LGRs) for electron spin
resonance (ESR) on quantum materials and hybrid
quantum system studies using microwave polariton
modes. The experimental setup is low-cost and im-
plemented in cryogenic equipment commonly found
in laboratories worldwide.
First experiments were conducted on single-
crystals of paramagnetic salts down to T = 10 K.
Although the precise interpretation in terms of mi-
croscopic models is still under development, our find-
ings indicate that sample-embedded loop gap res-
onators (LGRs) with high filling factors serve as
unique and flexible probes for studying magnetic
susceptibilities and strong spin-polariton coupling in
hybrid quantum systems. Expanding upon previous
studies that validate the viability of LGRs [2, 3, 27],
our work applies them to investigate spin-liquid can-
didate materials of interest in quantum materials re-
search. We highlight that this technique bridges the
gap between well-established, traditional magnetic
resonance studies and novel investigations of hybrid-
quantum systems and heterostructures at low tem-
peratures.
Our report hopes to assist other experimental
groups in developing effective microwave resonance
methods for studying bulk magnetic samples. Our

method not only facilitates the acquisition of mag-
netic susceptibility data but also enables the acces-
sible modification of the spin’s electromagnetic en-
vironment by inducing strong spin-polariton modes.
By implementing our two setups on a widespread
controllable platform, the Physical Property Mea-
surement System (PPMS), along with accessible mi-
crowave equipment (stub tuner and network ana-
lyzer), and by providing a detailed step-by-step anal-
ysis process, including aspects not commonly re-
ported in the literature, we contribute to the broader
understanding of these techniques.
In our future research endeavors, we plan to
enhance our experimental setup by introducing
precision-machined resonators, optimizing the mi-
crowave bridge,
and conducting experiments at
lower temperatures in a dilution refrigerator. This
upgraded configuration goes beyond mere integra-
tion with a network analyzer; it promises heightened
control and versatility. Additionally, our upcoming
studies aim to explore the time-domain response of
the strongly coupled states identified in this work.
We expect that these advancements will not only
contribute to our understanding of an effective and
accessible technique but also drive progress in the
fields of condensed matter and quantum informa-
tion.

Acknowledgments

The work at Georgia Tech was supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under award NSF-DMR-
1750186 (A.K.J., M.M.). This work was performed,
in part, at the Center for Integrated Nanotechnolo-
gies, an Office of Science User Facility operated for
the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of
Science.
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-
mission laboratory managed and operated by Na-
tional Technology and Engineering Solutions of San-
dia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell
International, Inc., for the U.S. DOE’s National Nu-
clear Security Administration under contract DE-
NA-0003525. The views expressed in the article do
not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. DOE
or the United States Government. We are grateful
to Oleg Starykh for nudging us into the realm of
ESR in quantum magnets and Henrik Rønnow for
pointing out invaluable references to us.

[1] van der Est A 2016 Continuous-wave EPR vol 5 pp
1411–1422 ISBN 9780470058213

[2] Ball J R, Yamashiro Y, Sumiya H, Onoda S,
Ohshima T, Isoya J, Konstantinov D and Kubo
Y 2018 Applied Physics Letters 112 204102 ISSN


11

0003-6951 publisher: American Institute of Physics
URL
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/
1.5025744

[3] Everts J R, King G G G, Lambert N J, Kocsis S,
Rogge S and Longdell J J 2020 Physical Review B
101 214414

[4] Libersky M, McKenzie R, Silevitch D, Stamp P and
Rosenbaum T 2021

[5] Yang Y 2023 Investigation of Electro-Nuclear Spin
States in LiHoF4 Using Cavity-Magnon-Polariton
Technique Ph.D. thesis EPFL Lausanne

[6] Oshikawa M and Affleck I 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett.
82(25) 5136–5139 URL https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.82.5136

[7] Povarov K Y, Smirnov A I, Starykh O A, Petrov
S V and Shapiro A Y 2011 Physical Review Letters
107 037204

[8] Luo Z X, Lake E, Mei J W and Starykh O A 2018
Physical Review Letters 120 037204

[9] Sichelschmidt J, Schlender P, Schmidt B, Baenitz M
and Doert T 2019 Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 31 205601 URL https://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/1361-648X/ab071d

[10] Joshi G, Kubasek J, Nikolov I, Sheehan B, Costa
T A, All˜ao Cassaro R A and Friedman J R
2020 Review of Scientific Instruments 91 023104
ISSN 0034-6748 publisher:
American Institute
of Physics URL https://aip.scitation.org/doi/
10.1063/1.5133074

[11] Wood R L, Froncisz W and Hyde J S 1984
Journal of Magnetic Resonance (1969) 58 243–
253 ISSN 00222364 URL https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0022236484902142

[12] Bissey
J
C,
Berger
R
and
Servant
Y
1995
Solid State Communications
93 243–247 ISSN
0038-1098 URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0038109894006628

[13] Hardy W N and Whitehead L A 1981 Review
of Scientific Instruments
52 213–216 (Preprint
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1136574) URL https://
doi.org/10.1063/1.1136574

[14] Froncisz
W
and
Hyde
J
S
1982
Journal
of
Magnetic
Resonance
(1969)
47
515–521
ISSN
0022-2364 URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0022236482902219

[15] Mourigal M, Enderle M, Kloepperpieper A, Caux
J S, Stunault A and Ronnow H M 2013 Nature
Physics 9 435–441 ISSN 1745-2473 URL https:
//doi.org/10.1038/Nphys2652

[16] Bai X, Paddison J, Kapit E, Koohpayeh S, Wen
J J, Dutton S, Savici A, Kolesnikov A, Granroth
G, Broholm C, Chalker J and Mourigal M 2019
Physical Review Letters 122 097201 URL https:
//doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.097201

[17] Eisenach E R, Barry J F, Pham L M, Rojas R G,
Englund D R and Braje D A 2018 Review of
Scientific Instruments 89 ISSN 0034-6748 094705
(Preprint
https://pubs.aip.org/aip/rsi/article-
pdf/doi/10.1063/1.5037465/16140529/094705 1 online.pdf)
URL https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5037465

[18] Rinard G, Quine R W, Eaton S S and Eaton G R
1993 Journal of Magnetic Resonance, Series A 105
137–144 URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:98346578

[19] Koohpayeh S, Wen J J, Mourigal M, Dutton S,
Cava R, Broholm C and McQueen T 2013 Jour-
nal of Crystal Growth 384 39–43 ISSN 0022-0248
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0022024813005915

[20] Libersky M M, Silevitch D M and Kouki A 2019 De-
sign of a loop-gap resonator with bimodal uniform
fields using finite element analysis 2019 22nd Inter-
national Conference on the Computation of Electro-
magnetic Fields (COMPUMAG) pp 1–4

[21] Blanchard C, Deville A, Boukenter A, Champagnon
B and Duval E 1986 Journal de Physique 47 1931–
1937 ISSN 0021-1038 URL https://doi.org/10.
1051/jphys:0198600470110193100

[22] Yang Y, Babkevich P, Gaal R, Zivkovic I and
Ronnow H M 2023 Cavity-magnon-polariton spec-
troscopy of strongly hybridized electro-nuclear spin
excitations in lihof4 (Preprint 2309.05051)

[23] Rinard G A and Eaton G R 2005 Loop-gap res-
onators Biomedical EPR, Part B: Methodology, In-
strumentation, and Dynamics Biological Magnetic
Resonance ed Eaton S R, Eaton G R and Berliner
L J (Springer US) pp 19–52

[24] Poole C P 1996 Electron Spin Resonance: A Com-
prehensive Treatise on Experimental Techniques
(Courier Corporation) ISBN 978-0-486-69444-3

[25] Collett C A, All˜ao Cassaro R A and Friedman J R
2016 Phys. Rev. B 94(22) 220402 URL https://
link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.94.220402

[26] Petersan P J and Anlage S M 1998 Journal of Ap-
plied Physics 84 3392–3402 ISSN 0021-8979 URL
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.368498

[27] McKenzie R D, Libersky M, Silevitch D M and
Rosenbaum T F 2022 Phys. Rev. A 106(4) 043716

[28] Yu, C. X., Zihlmann, S., Abadillo-Uriel, J. C., et al.
2023 Nat. Nanotechnol. 18, 741–746. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41565-023-01332-3


