 
1

Room-Temperature Silicon Carbide Maser:  

Unveiling Quantum Amplification and Cooling 

Andreas Gottscholl1,2,a), Maximilian WagenhГ¶fer1, Valentin Baianov1, Vladimir Dyakonov1, 
Andreas Sperlich1,b) 

1Experimental Physics 6 and WГјrzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence ct.qmat,     
 

Julius-Maximilians-UniversitГӨt WГјrzburg, 97074 WГјrzburg, Germany 

2NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, 
USA 

a) Electronic mail: andreas.p.gottscholl@jpl.nasa.gov 

b) Electronic mail: andreas.sperlich@uni-wuerzburg.de 

Abstract 

We present the very first demonstration of a maser utilizing silicon vacancies (VSi) within 4H 
silicon carbide (SiC). Leveraging an innovative feedback-loop technique, we elevate the 
resonator's quality factor, enabling maser operation even above room temperature. The SiC 
maser's broad linewidth showcases its potential as an exceptional preamplifier, displaying 
measured gain surpassing 10dB and simulations indicating potential amplification 
exceeding 30dB. By exploiting the relatively small zero-field splitting (ZFS) of VSi in SiC, the 
amplifier can be switched into an optically-pumped microwave photon absorber, reducing 
the resonator's mode temperature by 35 K below operating conditions. This breakthrough 
holds promise for quantum computing advancements and fundamental studies in cavity 
quantum electrodynamics. Our findings highlight SiC's transformative potential in 
revolutionizing contemporary microwave technologies. 

Introduction 

Lasers have become an indispensable part of our everyday lives. From high-power lasers 
in manufacturing technology to high-precision lasers in metrology or monochromatic light 
sources for research, lasers and their enormous applicable potential is ubiquitous [Kawahito 
et al. 2018, Udem et al. 2022]. The fundamental process of stimulated emission based on a 
population inversion is however older than the laser and was previously investigated for 
microwave photons instead of optical ones [Lamb et al. 1964, Gordon et al. 1955] which is 
also known as a maser (microwave amplification of stimulated emission). 

A broad application of a maser, however, is currently not predictable. So far masers were 
only used as low-noise amplifier and clock-standards depending on their linewidth and 
stability. This is owed to the very unfavorable operating conditions such as vacuum 
techniques for free-electron and atomic masers and cryogenic temperatures for solid state 
masers [Konoplev, et al. 2006, Kleppner, et al. 1962, Siegman et al. 1964]. Therefore, the 
enormous (and so far unpredictable) potential of masers has not yet been exploited.  

Despite these challenges, recent advancements in spin-defect masers and other 
approaches, such as the exploitation of Floquet systems [Jiang et al. 2021], have opened 
new possibilities for overcoming these limitations. Among spin-defect masers, which 
promise fast and versatile application due to their comparatively simple design, there are 


 
2

two known systems so far [Rodriguez et al. 2023]: On the one hand Oxborrow et al 
presented the first room temperature maser using organic materials (e.g. pentacene-based) 
with a pulsed maser output at 1.45 GHz, which is currently developed towards a continuous 
wave (CW) output [Oxborrow et al. 2012, Breeze et al. 2015, Breeze et al. 2017, Wu et al. 
2020, Ng et al. 2023]. On the other hand, room temperature masers were demonstrated with 
NVвҖ“ centers in diamond providing enhanced thermal and mechanical properties [Breeze et 
al. 2018, Zollitsch et al. 2023, Wu Q et al. 2023].  Due to its EPR-based (electron 
paramagnetic resonance) principle it operates at a X-band frequency of 9.2 GHz in a CW 
mode. In general, its frequency can be tuned to an arbitrary frequency by the external 
magnetic field and is only limited to the resonance frequency of the used resonator. Besides 
the existing maser systems, another promising candidate are silicon vacancies in 4H silicon 
carbide (SiC) [Arroo et al. 2021, Kraus et al. 2014, Gottscholl et al. 2022]. Their very small 
ZFS of only 2рқҗ· в„Һ
вҒ„
= 70 MHz makes the SiC maser attractive for applications within the entire 

communication band, since a small ZFS corresponds to a very broad frequency tunability, 
since population inversion of the maser transition is reached already for small bias magnetic 
fields. However, a fully operating maser has been illusive so far. SiC is known as a well-
established semi-conductor material in industry and can be fabricated on wafer-scale. Thus, 
a maser based on this standard material would make the new generation of spin-defect 
masers вҖ“ besides an exciting platform for cavity quantum dynamics вҖ“ to a gamechanger in 
our everyday life microwave applications with the potential of revolutionizing state-of-the-art 
preamplifiers and coherent microwave sources [Rodriguez et al. 2023]. 

In this work we present for the very first time a SiC-based maser. We are analyzing the 
linewidth and output patterns regarding output frequency and swept external magnetic field. 
The simplest configuration with SiC in a resonator and optically pumped by a laser reveals 
a low output power at T = 110 K. To address critical parameters and enhance output power, 
we study key influences, including the optical pumping of the gain medium and the quality 
(Q-factor) of the resonator. The latter is achieved by the implementation of a feed-back loop 
which enables an artificial enhancement of the effective Q-factor. Together with a theoretical 
model solving the Langevin equations (see [Jin et al. 2015] for details) we can estimate the 
potential of a SiC-based maser. Addressing these issues, we demonstrate masing 
exceeding room temperature operation at 315 K (due to laser heating). Moreover, we 
present a SiC-based low noise amplifier by inserting an external microwave signal into our 
device. Furthermore, by shifting the magnetic field up by 5 mT to address the de-populated 
spin transition, we invert the amplification effect and we can use our system as an optically-
pumped microwave photon absorber. With this effect we are able to demonstrate a 
microwave refrigerator by reducing the mode temperature of the used microwave 
frequencies by 35 K. Finally, we compare the properties of SiC with those of other maser 
systems and highlight the large potential of these results for quantum computing based on 
superconducting qubits. 

Silicon Carbide as gain medium 

The basic principle of a maser is identical to a conventional laser and is illustrated in Figure 
1a [Oxborrow et al. 2012, Breeze et al. 2018]. The maser consists of three major parts: 1) a 
gain material, 2) an optical pumping in order to achieve a non-equilibrium condition 
(population inversion) and 3) a resonator in which the gain material is placed which 
enhances the interaction of microwaves and gain material. In the following we want to 
discuss the different components. 


 
3

1) Gain material based on SiC: For the gain material we choose a wide-spread material 
which can hosts spin defects with energy levels that enable transitions in the microwave 
photon energy regime. Since SiC can host a variety of different spin defects which reveal an 
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signature, these defects are perfect candidates for 
a potential maser. One of the most investigated spin defects is the silicon vacancy V2 in the 
polytype 4H SiC. Especially, the spin polarization of this system under optical excitation is 
substantial for a gain medium. The pumping scheme is shown in Figure 1b. The system 
possesses a quartet ground spin state (S=3/2), which can be optically excited by photons in 
the near infrared [Orlinski et al. 2003, Kraus et al. 2014].  

2) Optical pumping: Since the excited state relaxes spin-dependent, we end in a spin 
polarization of the ground state. Similar to a laser, a maser also requires a population 
inversion. To achieve this inverted population difference, we apply an external magnetic field 
of вү«2.5 mT (corresponding to 70 MHz). This overcomes the ground state level anti-crossing 
(GSLA), where the energy levels are differently distributed due to the Zeeman effect 
[Anisimov et al. 2016]. If now an incoming microwave photon possesses the same energy 
as the Zeeman-split transition energy, it leads to an avalanche of coherent microwave 
photons [Breeze et al. 2018]. The incoming photon can be part of a signal if the maser is 
used as a low noise amplifier, or it can start due to spontaneous emission which leads to a 
maser as a coherent microwave source. To achieve a sufficient coupling of the microwaves 
to the spin system, a resonator with a high quality is required. 

3)  High-Q resonator: The resonator for the here-reported SiC maser consists of two parts: 
a cylindrical metallic copper resonator and a dielectric sapphire core in the center which 
contains the SiC gain material. The sapphire ring concentrates the microwaves in the center, 
reducing the ohmic losses in the copper wall and leading to a higher Q-factor, which is the 
figure of merit for the resonator's quality. The magnetic field components of the microwaves 
are illustrated in purple in Figure 1a. A coupling antenna outcouples the created microwaves 
into a standard SMA cable to enable characterization of the microwave output and finally 
use the maser as a coherent microwave source. A detailed analysis of the resonator is given 
in the SI. 

 
 


 
4

SiC-based maser 

In order to demonstrate a SiC-based maser, microwave amplifier and refrigerator in this 
work, the standard measurement method is the detection of the microwave intensity in a 
specific frequency band with a spectrum analyzer attached to the end of the SMA cable of 
the coupling antenna (see Figure S1 for detailed setup description). The external magnetic 
field is tuned by using magnetic field coils within the range of the expected 
emissive/absorptive transition. In principle an arbitrary magnetic field can be used above the 
ground state level anti-crossing (GSLA). However, the corresponding frequency has to fit to 
the resonance frequency of the resonator which is in the case 9.3 GHz corresponding to a 
resonant magnetic field of about B+вүҲ333 mT. The resonator is incorporated in a cryostat to 
perform measurements at lower temperatures (T=110 K). In this environment the population 
inversion is easier to achieve due to the longer spin-lattice relaxation times [Simin et al. 
2017]. Furthermore, the Q-factor is higher since the ohmic losses are reduced in the cooper 
walls. The noise level due to thermal microwave photons is around -130dBm. Figure 1c 
shows the frequency resolved output power of this configuration for a swept magnetic field 
around the resonant condition (B+=333.19 mT) and a sufficient high pump power (PLaser=450 
mW) of an 808 nm excitation. The intensity of the color map represents the microwave output 
power which reveals a pattern with three narrow features: one pronounced signal in the 
center and two outer peaks. To study it more in detail the bottom figure reveals the average 

Figure 1: Silicon carbide-based maser: a Basic principle: maser output is achieved by 
optical pumping of the gain material (SiC) in a high-Q resonator inside an external 
magnetic field. b Pumping scheme of the gain material: a population inversion is created 
by an external magnetic field which can be used for the maser process (pink). The second 
spin polarized transition (blue) can be used for a microwave refrigerator. c Maser output 
measurement while sweeping the magnetic field at T=110 K: the color map reveals a 
broad emission peak displayed in the frequency domain (left plot) and over the magnetic 
field (bottom plot). The microwave power plotted vs. the magnetic field is the average 
maser output power in between the two dashed lines. A narrow peak is observed at the 
resonant transition B=B+ with two satellite peaks according to hyperfine interaction with 
29Si isotopes. The inset illustrates the setup configuration, a detailed description can be 
found in Figure S4 of the SI. 


 
5

maser power within the two dashed white lines. We can now clearly extract a narrow peak 
with a linewidth of 0.021 mT (corresponding to 588 kHz) and a total amplitude of -125dBm 
(corresponding to ~300 aW). This small signal is attributed to the silicon vacancy since it 
arises at the correct magnetic field and shows two additional satellite peaks. These are 
related to the 29Si isotopes surrounding the silicon vacancies with a natural abundance of 
4.7%, leading to a shifted resonance condition due to hyperfine splitting (150 ОјT). With this 
measurement, we demonstrate the first SiC-based maser in a CW mode. However, as we 
can see for the slice in the frequency domain (left subfigure of Figure 1c) the signal rises 
just marginally from the thermal background. In order to enhance the output power and 
realize room temperature masing, we address critical parameters such as optical pumping 
and the Q-factor of the resonator. 

Q-boosted maser 

In general, the generation of microwave photons |рқ‘Һ|! can be quantified by solving the 
Langevin equations as described elsewhere [Jin et al. 2015] which leads to: 

|рқ‘Һ|! =

"#$!"

!#$

%
рқ‘Ғ вҲ’

"%$!"

!#$

%
рқ‘Ҷ&  
[1] 

Here, the pump rate рқң” is given by the effective optical pump power рқ‘ғ'()*+ = рқң”&'

( , рқӣҫ,- = рқ‘Ү.

#. 

is the spin lattice relaxation rate, Пү/ and рқ‘„ are the frequency and quality factor of the 
resonator, respectively. рқ‘Ғ is the number of participating spins and рқ‘Ҷ& = )*)$

+,-  the number of 

polarized spins mainly given by the coupling constant рқ‘” and the collective decay rate Оә! вүҲ 2

рқ‘Ү2

вҲ— 

limited by the coherence time рқ‘Ү!

вҲ—. In order to realize a working maser, a microwave output is 

required, thus |рқ‘Һ|! > 0 defines the maser threshold. Inserted into equation [1] the following 
expression can be derived as limit for the necessary Q-factor: 

рқ‘„ вүҘ

"%$!"
"#$!"

3*"$
456-  
[2] 

In Figure 2a, we show the expected microwave power according to equation [1] for our SiC 
maser for a broad range of different Q-factors and optical pump powers. Two thresholds are 
relevant: the pump threshold Пү > рқӣҫ,- (vertical grey dashed line) and the maser threshold 
according to equation [2] (black dashed curve).  The pump threshold is mainly given by the 
рқ‘Ү. time and can be exceeded by increasing the pump power. The maser threshold, however, 
strongly depends on the coupling and the coherence time рқ‘Ү!

вҲ— of the system and can be 

reached by increasing the quality factor of the resonator. 

 


 
6

With the used parameter set (see SI for more details) we explain the very low maser power 
of Figure 1c by a maser being directly at the maser threshold. The measurement of Figure 
1c and also the following measurements are inserted as points into the simulation. We now 
aim to enhance the SiC maser by further entering the masing regime. This improvement can 
be achieved either by increasing the coherence time or by changing the resonator 
properties. The first can be realized by isotopical purification of 28SiC [Simin et al. 2016, 
Lekavicius et al. 2022] but is not in the scope of this work. A more continuous method of 
studying the maser involves changing the quality of the resonator in use. A very powerful 
tool is the implementation of a feedback-loop enabling an artificial enhancement of the Q-
factor (see Figure S5 for details) [Lesage et al. 1981, Wu H et al. 2023]. In general, the Q-
factor is defined by the energy losses per cycle. However, if the resonator is feed with its 
own microwave output, the energy losses can be reduced and the Q-factor is enhanced 
artificially. This is achieved by an outcoupling of the microwaves with the same antenna as 
in the previous measurement, but half of the signal (-3dB) is amplified and inserted phase-
corrected back into the resonator. Now, we are able to boost the Q-factor of measurement 
Figure 1c by a factor of 5 which is illustrated in Figure 2a (grey and purple circles). 

The feedback-loop driven maser measurement of the frequency resolved output power 
versus the swept magnetic field is depicted in Figure 2b. We choose a narrower magnetic 
field range in order to study the shape of the microwave peak in magnetic field direction. 
The color map reveals an S-shape pattern which is due to the overlap of the Lorentzian peak 
contribution in f-direction and a Lorentzian peak in B-direction due to the natural line width 
of the EPR transition [Breeze et al. 2018]. The output power is reaching to almost -80dBm 
(several fW) making it already usable for practical applications. A cross section through the 

Figure 2: Q-boosted maser at 110 K. a Theoretical model of a SiC-based maser: the 
masing regime is indicated by the black dashed line while the grey dashed curve shows 
the pump threshold for achieving a population inversion. B Maser output of a feedback-
loop (FB) driven maser at 110 K: the left sub-plot displays a sharp peak in the frequency 
domain while the bottom graph shows the in-resonance cross-section over the magnetic 
field. The inset illustrates the setup configuration, a detailed description can be found in 
Figure S5. c The observed maximum maser output for a large range of optical pumping 
power and Q-factors. All measurements are inserted in the theoretical model (a). 


 
7

center of the S-shape is depicted in the bottom sub-plot of Figure 2b. The linewidth 0.001mT 
of the microwave output is much narrower than in the previous measurement of Figure 1c 
(factor of 21). We performed several feedback-loop driven maser measurements (see Figure 
S14) to study the influence of Q-factor and microwave power which are depicted in Figure 
2c. We can observe that the maser output strongly depends on the Q-factor which coincides 
with the simulation. For higher Q-factors, a lower laser power is required to reach the maser 
threshold. The measured values are also inserted into the simulated masing regime. 
However, the output power is still lower than the expected ideal output power of the 
simulation which is mainly owed to coupling losses of the antenna but also losses between 
the many connectors of the SMA components of the setup (see SI for signal discussion of 
the setup). Nevertheless, we can present a drastic improvement of the signal quality and 
strength by an artificial enhancement of the Q-factor which reveals the large potential of this 
SiC-based maser. 

SiC-based maser at room temperature 

The so far presented results were all performed at cryogenic temperatures (T=110 K). To 
enable masing even above room temperature, we use the Q-boosted approach to lower the 
maser threshold. In Figure 3 a maser output measurement at 315 K is presented. The 
temperature is slightly above room temperature since a sufficient high optical pump power 
of 617 mW is required to overcome the maser threshold. At this temperature, the resonance 
condition occurs at lower magnetic fields due to the lower resonance frequency of the 
thermally expanding resonator dimensions (see Figure S10 for temperature dependence). 
The observed signal contains two features: first, a very intense microwave output at the 
resonant conditions (f=fR and B=B+) and second, a continuous trace with variable frequency. 
The first signal (the actual maser output) reveals a very high microwave output of -40dBm. 
This is related to the very sensitive feedback loop which has to be set to a high amplifying 
mode in order to reach the maser threshold at room temperature. This amplification mode 
is visible in a cross-section, as depicted in the bottom sub-plot of Figure 3. A massive 
increasing of the broadening can be observed in comparison to the previous measurements. 
The reason is, that the signal is already reaching the maser regime with the Q-boosted 
resonator for magnetic fields at the edges of the magnetic resonance condition. The maser 
output with frequency resolution, however, is narrower as displayed on the left of Figure 3. 
This linewidth can be considered as the actual linewidth of the maser, representing the 
frequency domain used in practical applications. The broad plateau with its linewidth of 0.04 
mT is in fact a large advantage since it demonstrates the stability of the maser over magnetic 
field fluctuations. If this peak would be narrower, the maser output would collapse for a small 
magnetic field deviation which limits the application of the proposed maser device. The most 
critical component we observed is the stability of the resonator frequency of our device. If 
the frequency shifts due to temperature fluctuations/drifts, the whole maser frequency is 
shifting accordingly. This resonance frequency change can be observed when analyzing the 
continuous trace since this signal contribution is related to thermal photons within the 
resonator, which are amplified by the very sensitive feedback loop. These can be used for 
tracking the resonance frequency without performing Q-factor measurements. Therefore, 
the random trace directly provides insights into the resonance frequency shift of our systems 
and highlights this most critical aspect for a stable maser device. For future applications, the 
resonance frequency has to be stabilized/controlled to get a reliable maser output frequency. 


 
8

 

To conclude, a SiC-based maser has been realized. At low temperatures the maser 
threshold can be directly reached, and stable maser operation has been observed with a 
very narrow signal output. Using a feedback loop, the Q-factor is artificially enhanced, 
enabling masing even above room temperature. However, so far, this yields a relatively 
broad signal due to the used feedback loop. Therefore, the use as a signal amplifier would 
be intriguing. Especially for frequency-modulated signals, which are often the basis of our 
everyday communication protocols, a broader frequency range is preferred, thus making the 
presented SiC maser an ideal candidate for low-noise preamplifiers. In the following, we 
address and investigate the capability of our system for amplifier applications. 

SiC-based amplifier 

Besides the application of a maser as a coherent microwave source, the SiC maser can be 
used as a low noise amplifier of weak microwave signals. The configuration is identical to 
the setup of the feedback-loop, with the exception that an external signal is fed into the 
resonator instead of its own microwave output (see inset in Figure 4 and Figure S4 for 
details). We analyzed this behavior by inserting weak microwave signals with one antenna 
and measuring the output by the second antenna while sweeping the magnetic field. The 
result is depicted in Figure 4a. The horizontal line is the inserted constant microwave signal 
(which is within the linewidth of the resonator). While sweeping the magnetic field, we can 
observe an amplification of the signal at the resonant magnetic field. A cross section is 
shown in the bottom sub-plot of Figure 4a. We choose the magnetic field sweep broad 
enough to also study the influence of the 29Si hyperfine peaks. The optically-pumped gain 
medium amplifies the signal by 7dB (1.8dB for hyperfine peaks) which makes it ideal for a 
low-noise preamplifier. No broadening of the signal can be observed, as depicted in the left 
sub-plot of Figure 4a (рқҗө = рқҗө%: amplifier on, рқҗө вү  рқҗө%: amplifier off). To reveal the full potential 

Fig.3: Q-boosted maser at T=315 K: The color map reveals a high output power of -
40dBm (white region) at f=fR and B=B+. The purple trace is given by the amplified 
thermal photons inside the cavity (see text for details). A cross section at a non-
resonant magnetic field Bвү B+ (grey) shows an enhancement effect of thermal 
microwave photons.


 
9

of this preamplifier, we simulated the gain for different Q-factors and different pump powers 
which is shown in Figure 4b. In principle, the amplifier can amplify weak signals by several 
orders of magnitude. This theoretical model is verified by further measurements with varied 
Q-factors (shown in blue) and variable pump power (shown in green). The corresponding 
measurements are displayed in Figure 4c. The amplification can be enhanced by increasing 
the Q-factor as well as by increasing the optical pump power. Thus, we observe the highest 
amplification of the signal by 11dB for a laser power of 500 mW. In general, we can also 
observe and simulate that the amplification is higher for weaker signals which is shown with 
the orange circles in Figure 4c (see Figure S13 for corresponding simulations).  

 

SiC-based refrigerator 

Besides using SiC as a coherent microwave source and a low-noise amplifier, this system 
can also be utilized in reverse as an optically-pumped microwave absorber. This leads to an 
effective cooling of the microwave mode temperature and can be used as a refrigerator, as 
described in the following. 

 

Fig.4:  SiC-based amplifier using the maser transition at T=110 K. a Color map of the 
measured microwaves: a narrow purple line is given by the inserted microwave signal. As 
soon as the system is in resonance, the signal is amplified by the maser (bright white spot 
at B=B+). The cross sections in the frequency domain and over the magnetic field are 
displayed in the left and bottom sub-plots, respectively. The inset illustrates the setup 
configuration, a detailed description can be found in Figure S6. b Theoretical model of the 
amplifier: the color represents the expected amplification/attenuation. c Measured gain 
depending on Q-factor, pump power (PLaser) and signal input power (PMW), respectively. 


 
10

 

In order to demonstrate an optically-pumped microwave absorber, we use the same setup 
as for the amplifier (see Figure 4) but a slightly shifted magnetic field value (рқҗө = рқҗө#). Since 
silicon vacancies in SiC possess a S = 3/2 spin system, there are three possible (вҲҶрқ‘ҡ) = Вұ1) 
microwave transitions: рқҗө#, рқҗө7, рқҗө%. While the latter transition is emissive and can be used for 
an amplification of microwaves (as described and used before), the two others are 
absorptive transitions. The center transition рқҗө7 carries a population difference given by the 
Boltzmann statistic. Therefore, the spin temperature рқ‘Ү)89: of this transition is always given 
by the environmental temperature рқ‘Ү7. The рқҗө# transition, however, can be optically spin 
polarized (polarization рқ‘ғ) [Fischer et al. 2018, Gottscholl et al. 2022]. This results in a 
reduced spin temperature lower than the temperature of the environment:  

рқ‘Ү)89: =

;<

!=0>(:;12(@) [3] 

Instead of probing the spin temperature, we can use the polarization to absorb microwave 
photons, thereby reducing the number of photons in the cavity. Effectively the temperature 
of a specific microwave mode is reduced to a temperature рқ‘ҮBCD*. To calculate the value, we 
use PlanckвҖҷs law of blackbody radiation [Rybicki et al. 1919]: 

рқҗө(рқ‘Ү) =

!;E3

F-

.

*G8H &4

506I#. 
[4] 

Figure 5: SiC-based refrigerator. a Color map of the measured microwaves: a narrow cyan 
line is given by the inserted microwave signal. As soon as the system is in resonance the 
signal is attenuated due to induced spin flips of the VSi. The cross sections over frequency 
and magnetic field are displayed in the left and bottom sub-plots, respectively. The inset 
illustrates the setup configuration. A detailed description can be found in Figure S6. b 
Measuring the absorbed microwaves for various input powers: a microwave cooling 
(attenuation) of -1.7dB can be estimated. c Simulation of the required microwave cooling 
to achieve a specific mode temperature for various environmental temperatures. The 
value of Figure 5b is inserted as well as the data from other publications in order to 
compare the potential of different material systems (see main text for details).


 
11

We define the microwave cooling (attenuation) рқҗ¶DJ according to the gain of an amplifier as 
the logarithmical ratio of the pristine signal and the modified signal. The number of thermal 
photons for a specific temperature and frequency is proportional to the spectral radiance 
рқҗө(рқ‘Ү). Therefore, the microwave cooling can be described as: 

рқҗ¶DJ = 10 рқ‘ҷрқ‘” D

J(K789:)

J(K;) E = 10 рқ‘ҷрқ‘” F

*G8H &4

506;I#.

*G8H
&4

506789:I#.G [5] 

Thus, the mode temperature mainly depends on the measured microwave cooling рқҗ¶DJ and 
the environmental temperature рқ‘Ү7: 

рқ‘ҮBCD*(рқҗ¶DJ) =

;<

=0L:M.71<90

2; H*G8H &4

506;I#.I%.N

 [6] 

To study this effect and the potential of SiC as a mode cooling device, we insert a microwave 
signal into the cavity by one antenna and measure the outgoing microwaves after interacting 
with the spin system with the second antenna. The corresponding color map for a magnetic 
field sweep over the absorptive transition (рқҗө#) is displayed in Figure 5a. Again, the cross 
sections through the resonance position are displayed in the left and bottom sub-plots, 
respectively. The attenuation of the signal over the frequency can in fact be barely registered 
and seems to be in the range of noise. However, since it is a logarithmic scale, the absolute 
difference at the peak position is more than one order of magnitude larger than the absolute 
difference at the baseline. Whether this effect originates from the defect can be observed 
more clearly if the cross-section is set along the incident frequency and the signal is plotted 
over the magnetic field. In the bottom sub-plot the silicon vacancy transition with its hyperfine 
peaks can clearly be observed, resulting in an attenuation of -1.7dB (-0.7dB for hyperfine 
peaks). To address the cooling capability, we varied the microwave power over almost eight 
orders of magnitude (see Figure 5b). Therefore, we are able to extrapolate the absorbance 
to the thermal photon basis. As expected, the slope is equal to 1 and the global absorbance 
(offset of the fit) is -1.7dB. Thus, we can estimate a temperature reduction of вҲҶрқ‘Ү = 35 рқҗҫ 
(вҲҶрқ‘Ү вүҲ 15 рқҗҫ for hyperfine peak) according to equation [6]. This microwave power-
independent absorbance is observable even for high powers (-40dBm) without any 
saturation effects, highlighting the broad potential of an optically pumped absorber.  

Finally, we want to compare the here extracted value of вҲҶрқ‘Ү = 35 рқҗҫ with other existing 
systems and discuss the future application but also the limits of this system. Figure 5c 
summarizes the significant potential of optically pumped refrigerators. The simulation 
illustrates the required attenuation to achieve a specific mode temperature at various 
environmental temperatures. We choose a logarithmic scale to cover the regime required 
for superconducting qubits, which are used in state-of-the-art quantum computers [Arute et 
al. 2019]. This may be one of the most desirable applications for an optically pumped SiC-
based refrigerator. The whole simulation is performed for microwave photons of 9.3 GHz in 
order to insert the measured value, however, the simulation for other frequencies differs only 
slightly as shown in Figure S15 (simulation for 1 and 10 GHz). Therefore, it is also possible 
to insert other results of mode cooling based on different systems such as NV diamond 
(green diamond) and pentacene (pink pentagon) [Fahey et al. 2022, Wu et al. 2021]. All 
recently published results are in the same order of magnitude of absorbance and cover a 
broad range of temperatures. Nevertheless, the potential is much larger, since we can 
calculate the spin temperature as a limit for the mode temperature. We can use different 


 
12

spin polarization values of several materials вҖ“ all possible candidates for optically pumped 
attenuators (depicted with a white margin). Besides рқ‘үO9

# in SiC (cyan circle) and NV in 

diamond (green diamond), we also choose less-common systems such as рқ‘Ҷрқ‘–рқ‘ү7 in diamond 
(purple diamond) and the boron vacancy (рқ‘үJ

#) in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) (orange 

hexagon) [Green et al. 2017, Gottscholl et al. 2020]. All materials exhibit comparable values 
and SiC performs well at both, mode temperature and spin temperature. Despite 
comparable properties, SiC has the highest potential especially in the field of quantum 
computing. In the following we want to focus on superconducting transmon qubits based on 
aluminum structures as it is the case for example for Googles sycamore processor [Arute et 
al. 2019].  

Application for quantum computing 

In order to realize a transmon qubit, an aluminum line has to be cooled down to 1.2 K to 
reach superconductivity [Cochran et al. 1958, Jeffrey et al. 2014]. However, in practice the 
system is cooled down into the mK regime to suppress thermal photons. By replacing the 
silicon substrate with an irradiated silicon carbide substrate, a mK cooling can be avoided 
since the suppressing of thermal photons can be achieved by the рқ‘үO9

# cooling effect within 

the substrate. Since the qubits are also in the GHz regime, the required magnetic field values 
are quite comparable to the values mentioned in this paper. (Local) optical pumping results 
in an absorbance of the microwaves and therefore, the resonator can be вҖңcooledвҖқ before 
starting the initialization procedure of the qubit. Here, the optical pumping should not be 
critical to the <1 K devices, since much lower optical power is required in this temperature 
range. To reach the required spin polarization, the pump rate has to be in the order of the 
spin lattice relaxation rate which depends strongly on the temperature for SiC [Simin et al. 
2017]. Therefore, only a few ОјW of laser power (рқ‘ғ'()*+~рқ‘Ү7

#P)  are required to reach a 

sufficient spin polarization, which should not affect the critical temperature of the 
superconducting aluminum. One of the most important aspects of a quantum computer and 
its qubits is a precise readout of the states. In state-of-the-art quantum computers this is 
realized by a state-dependent detuning of the resonance frequency of a readout resonator 
[Jeffrey et al. 2014]. The tiny signal needs to be amplified by 100dB with a cascade of low-
noise amplifiers in order to reach power levels high enough to exceed the thermal 
background outside of the cryostat where the experimental hardware is located. The quality 
of the LNAs is the limiting component to distinguish between different quantum states of the 
qubit. Here, we propose to use a SiC-based amplifier as the first low-noise pre-amplifier. A 
simple switching of the magnetic field results in an enhanced readout of the system by tuning 
the resonance of the silicon vacancies to the same frequency as the readout resonator. In 
this context, we want to highlight that a unique feature of the silicon vacancy is the very 
small zero-field splitting parameter. This results in a very small required magnetic field 
(Вұ2.5 mT) to switch between the refrigerator and the amplifier. NV diamond is not applicable 
for an easy switchable amplifier/refrigerator device since magnetic fields of Вұ102.5 mT are 
required. The magnetic field can also be used for tuning the resonance frequency of 
flux/squid-based qubits [Paauw et al. 2009, Kim et al. 2019,], thus, even the Вұ2.5 mT for the 
V2 defect might be critical. Here, we want to highlight that SiC hosts a large variety of defects 
with different zero-field splittings which can be chosen depending on the application. As an 
example, we demonstrate in Figure S16 that the V1 defect shows emission/absorption 
properties comparable to those of the here-studied V2 defect. Therefore, a similar maser 


 
13

device can be realized using the V1 defect with the advantage that switching between 
amplifier/refrigerator requires only Вұ163 ОјT. 

Conclusion 

In summary, our study marks a significant milestone by introducing the first continuous-wave 
SiC-based maser. Employing an innovative feedback loop, we successfully enhance the Q-
factor, enabling precise control of critical parameters necessary for a robust and coherent 
microwave source, even beyond room temperature. Through comprehensive simulations, 
we underscore the vast potential inherent in the SiC-based maser technology. Furthermore, 
our research showcases SiC's remarkable low-noise preamplification capability, achieving 
an impressive 10dB amplification in these initial proof-of-concept studies. Additionally, our 
demonstration of SiC's capacity for microwave mode cooling and its potential integration 
with quantum computers employing transmon qubits is promising for future technological 
advancements. Given SiC's established presence in the industry and its scalability for large-
scale production, our findings amplify the transformative potential of SiC in contemporary 
microwave technologies. This breakthrough heralds a new era in maser-based applications, 
paving the way for innovative advancements and practical implementations across various 
fields. 

 

References  

[Anisimov et al. 2016]: Anisimov, A. N., Simin, D., Soltamov, V. A., Lebedev, S. P., Baranov, 
P. G., Astakhov, G. V., & Dyakonov, V. (2016). Optical thermometry based on level 
anticrossing in silicon carbide. Scientific reports, 6(1), 1-5.  

[Arroo et al. 2021]: Arroo, D. M., Alford, N. M., & Breeze, J. D. (2021). Perspective on room-
temperature solid-state masers. Applied Physics Letters, 119(14), 140502. doi: 
10.1063/5.0061330  

[Arute et al. 2019]: Arute, F., Arya, K., Babbush, R., Bacon, D., Bardin, J. C., Barends, R., 
Biswas, R., Boixo, S., Brandao, F. G., Buell, D. A., Burkett, B., Chen, Y., Chen, Z., Chiaro, 
B., Collins, R., Courtney, W., Dunsworth, A., Farhi, E., Foxen, B., Fowler, A., Gidney, C., 
Giustina, M., Graff, R., Guerin,  K., Habegger,  S., Harrigan, M. P., Hartmann, M. J., Ho, A., 
Hoffmann, M., Huang, T., Humble, T. S., Isakov, S. V., Jeffrey, E., Jiang, Z., Kafri, D., 
Kechedzhi, K., Kelly, J., Klimov, P. V., Knysh, S., Korotkov, A., Kostritsa, F., Landhuis, D., 
Lindmark, M., Lucero, E., Lyakh, D., MandrГ , S., McClean, J. R., McEwen, M., Megrant, A., 
Mi, X., Michielsen, K., Mohseni, M., Mutus, J., Naaman, O., Neeley, M., Neill, C., Niu, M. Y., 
Ostby, E., Petukhov, A., Platt, J. C., Quintana, C., Rieffel, E. G., Roushan, P., Rubin, N. C., 
Sank, D., Satzinger, K. J., Smelyanskiy, V., Sung, K. J., Trevithick, M. D., Vainsencher, A., 
Villalonga, B., White, T., Yao, Z. J., Yeh, P., Zalcman, A., Neven, H. and Martinis, J. M. 
(2019). Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor. Nature, 
574(7779), 505-510.  

[Breeze et al. 2015]: Breeze, J., Tan, K. J., Richards, B., Sathian, J., Oxborrow, M., & Alford, 
N. M. (2015). Enhanced magnetic Purcell effect in room-temperature masers. Nature 
Communications, 6(1), 1-6. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7215 (2015) 


 
14

[Breeze et al. 2017]: Breeze, J. D., Salvadori, E., Sathian, J., Alford, N. M., & Kay, C. W. 
(2017). Room-temperature cavity quantum electrodynamics with strongly coupled Dicke 
states. npj Quantum Information, 3(1), 1-5. doi: 10.1038/s41534-017-0041-3 

[Breeze et al. 2018]: Breeze, J. D., Salvadori, E., Sathian, J., Alford, N. M., & Kay, C. W. 
(2018). Continuous-wave room-temperature diamond maser. Nature, 555(7697), 493-496. 
doi: 10.1038/nature25970 

[Carter et al. 2015]: Carter, S. G., Soykal, Г–. O., Dev, P., Economou, S. E., & Glaser, E. R. 
(2015). Spin coherence and echo modulation of the silicon vacancy in 4 HвҲ’ SiC at room 
temperature. Physical Review B, 92(16), 161202. 

[Cochran et al. 1958]: Cochran, J. F., & Mapother, D. E. (1958). Superconducting transition 
in aluminum. Physical Review, 111(1), 132.  

[Fahey et al. 2022]: Fahey, D. P., Jacobs, K., Turner, M. J., Choi, H., Hoffman, J. E., 
Englund, D., & Trusheim, M. E. (2022). Steady-state microwave mode cooling with a 
diamond NV ensemble. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03462.  

[Fischer et al. 2018]: Fischer, M., Sperlich, A., Kraus, H., Ohshima, T., Astakhov, G. V., & 
Dyakonov, V. (2018). Highly efficient optical pumping of spin defects in silicon carbide for 
stimulated 
microwave 
emission. 
Physical 
Review 
Applied, 
9(5), 
054006. 
doi: 

10.1103/PhysRevApplied.9.054006  

[Gordon et al. 1955]: Gordon, J. P., Zeiger, H. J., & Townes, C. H. (1955). The maserвҖ”new 
type of microwave amplifier, frequency standard, and spectrometer. Physical review, 99(4), 
1264. 

[Gottscholl et al. 2020]: Gottscholl, A., Kianinia, M., Soltamov, V., Orlinskii, S., Mamin, G., 
Bradac, C., Kasper, C., Krambrock, K., Sperlich, A., Toth, M., Aharonovich, I., & Dyakonov, 
V. (2020). Initialization and read-out of intrinsic spin defects in a van der Waals crystal at 
room temperature. Nature Materials, 19(5), 540-545. doi: 10.1038/s41563-020-0619-6  

[Gottscholl et al. 2022]: Gottscholl, A., WagenhГ¶fer, M., Klimmer, M., Scherbel, S., Kasper, 
C., Baianov, V., Astakhov, G. V., Dyakonov, V. and Sperlich, A. (2022). Superradiance of 
Spin Defects in Silicon Carbide for Maser Applications. Front. Photonics 3:886354. doi: 
10.3389/fphot.2022.886354 

[Green et al. 2017]: Green, B. L., Mottishaw, S., Breeze, B. G., Edmonds, A. M., DвҖҷHaenens-
Johansson, U. F. S., Doherty, M. W.,Williams, S. D., Twitchen, D.J. and Newton, M. E. 
(2017). Neutral silicon-vacancy center in diamond: Spin polarization and lifetimes. Physical 
review letters, 119(9), 096402. 

[Jeffrey et al. 2014]: Jeffrey, E., Sank, D., Mutus, J. Y., White, T. C., Kelly, J., Barends, R., 
Chen, Y., Chen, Z., Chiaro, B., Dunsworth, A., Megrant, A., OвҖҷMalley, P. J. J.,Neill, C., 
Roushan, P., Vainsencher, A., Wenner, J., Cleland, A. N. and Martinis, J. M. (2014). Fast 
accurate state measurement with superconducting qubits. Physical review letters, 112(19), 
190504. 

[Jiang et al. 2021]: Jiang, M., Su, H., Wu, Z., Peng, X., & Budker, D. (2021). Floquet maser. 
Science Advances, 7(8), eabe0719. 


 
15

[Jin et al. 2015]: Jin, L., Pfender, M., Aslam, N., Neumann, P., Yang, S., Wrachtrup, J., & 
Liu, R. B. (2015). Proposal for a room-temperature diamond maser. Nature 
Communications, 6(1), 1-8. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9251  

[Kawahito et al. 2018]: Kawahito, Y., Wang, H., Katayama, S., & Sumimori, D. (2018). Ultra 
high power (100 kW) fiber laser welding of steel. Optics letters, 43(19), 4667-4670. 

[Kim et al. 2019]: Kim, S., Shrekenhamer, D., McElroy, K., Strikwerda, A., & Alldredge, J. 
(2019). Tunable superconducting cavity using superconducting quantum interference device 
metamaterials. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 1-9. 

[Kleppner et al. 1962]: Kleppner, D., Goldenberg, H. M., & Ramsey, N. F. (1962). Theory of 
the hydrogen maser. Physical Review, 126(2), 603. 

[Konoplev et al. 2006]: Konoplev, I. V., McGrane, P., He, W., Cross, A. W., Phelps, A. D. R., 
Whyte, C. G., Ronald, K. and Robertson, C. W. (2006). Experimental study of coaxial free-
electron maser based on two-dimensional distributed feedback. Physical review letters, 
96(3), 035002. 

[Kraus et al. 2014]: Kraus, H., Soltamov, V. A., Riedel, D., VГӨth, S., Fuchs, F., Sperlich, A., 
Baranov, P. G., Dyakonov, D. & Astakhov, G. V. (2014). Room-temperature quantum 
microwave emitters based on spin defects in silicon carbide. Nature Physics, 10(2), 157-
162. doi: 10.1038/nphys2826  

[Lamb et al. 1964]: Lamb Jr, W. E. (1964). Theory of an optical maser. Physical Review, 
134(6A), A1429. 

[Lekavicius et al. 2022]: Lekavicius, I., Myers-Ward, R. L., Pennachio, D. J., Hajzus, J. R., 
Gaskill, D. K., Purdy, A. P.,Yeats, A.L. Brereton, P. G., Glaser, E. R., Reinecke, T. L. and 
Carter, S. G. (2022). Orders of Magnitude Improvement in Coherence of Silicon-Vacancy 
Ensembles in Isotopically Purified 4 H-SiC. PRX Quantum, 3(1), 010343. 

[Lesage et al. 1981]: Lesage, P., & Audoin, C. (1981). Frequency stability of an oscillating 
maser: Analysis of the effect of an external feedback loop. IEEE Transactions on 
Instrumentation and Measurement, (3), 182-186.  

[Ng et al. 2023]: Ng, W., Wen, Y., Attwood, M., Jones, D.C., Oxborrow, M., Alford, N.M. and 
Arroo, D.M., 2023. Maser-in-a-Shoebox': a portable plug-and-play maser device at room-
temperature and zero magnetic-field. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09269. 

[Orlinski et al. 2003]: Orlinski, S. B., Schmidt, J., Mokhov, E. N., & Baranov, P. G. (2003). 
Silicon and carbon vacancies in neutron-irradiated SiC: A high-field electron paramagnetic 
resonance study. Physical Review B, 67(12), 125207. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.67.125207 

[Oxborrow et al. 2012]: Oxborrow, M., Breeze, J. D., & Alford, N. M. (2012). Room-
temperature solid-state maser. Nature, 488(7411), 353-356. 

[Paauw et al. 2009]: Paauw, F. G., Fedorov, A., Harmans, C. M., & Mooij, J. E. (2009). 
Tuning the gap of a superconducting flux qubit. Physical review letters, 102(9), 090501. 

[Rodriguez et al. 2023]: Rodriguez, C.B., 2023. Room-temperature solid-state masers as 
low-noise amplifiers to facilitate deep-space missions using small spacecraft. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2308.00848. 


 
16

[Rybicki et al. 1991]: Rybicki, G. B., & Lightman, A. P. (1991). Radiative processes in 
astrophysics. John Wiley & Sons. 

[Siegman et al. 1964]: Siegman, A. E., Quate, C. F., Bjorkholm, J., & Francois, G. (1964). 
Frequency Translation of an HeвҖ“Ne Laser's Output Frequency by Acoustic Output Coupling 
Inside the resonant Cavity. Applied Physics Letters, 5(1), 1-2. 

[Simin et al. 2016]: Simin, D., Soltamov, V. A., Poshakinskiy, A. V., Anisimov, A. N., Babunts, 
R. A., Tolmachev, D. O., Mokhov, E. N., Trupke, M., Tarasenko, S. A., Sperlich, A., Baranov, 
P. G., Dyakonov, V. and Astakhov, G. V. (2016). All-optical dc nanotesla magnetometry 
using silicon vacancy fine structure in isotopically purified silicon carbide. Physical Review 
X, 6(3), 031014. 

[Simin et al. 2017]: Simin, D., Kraus, H., Sperlich, A., Ohshima, T., Astakhov, G. V., & 
Dyakonov, V. (2017). Locking of electron spin coherence above 20 ms in natural silicon 
carbide. Physical Review B, 95(16), 161201. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.95.161201 

[Udem et al. 2002]: Udem, T., Holzwarth, R., & HГӨnsch, T. W. (2002). Optical frequency 
metrology. Nature, 416(6877), 233-237.  

[Wu et al. 2020]: Wu, H., Xie, X., Ng, W., Mehanna, S., Li, Y., Attwood, M., & Oxborrow, M. 
(2020). Room-temperature quasi-continuous-wave pentacene maser pumped by an 
invasive Ce: YAG luminescent concentrator. Physical Review Applied, 14(6), 064017. 

[Wu et al. 2021]: Wu, H., Mirkhanov, S., Ng, W., & Oxborrow, M. (2021). Bench-Top Cooling 
of a Microwave Mode Using an Optically Pumped Spin Refrigerator. Physical Review 
Letters, 127(5), 053604. 

[Wu H et al. 2023]: Wu, H., Yang, S., Oxborrow, M., Jiang, M., Zhao, Q., Budker, D., Zhang, 
B. and Du, J., 2022. Enhanced quantum sensing with room-temperature solid-state masers. 
Science Advances, 8(48), eade1613. 

[Wu Q et al. 2023]: Wu, Q., Zhang, Y., Wu, H., Su, S.L., Liu, K.K., Oxborrow, M., Shan, C. 
and MГёlmer, K., 2022. Superradiant Masing with Solid-state Spins at Room Temperature. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.01864. 

[Zollitsch et al. 2023]: Zollitsch, C.W., Ruloff, S., Fett, Y., Wiedemann, H.T., Richter, R., 
Breeze, J.D. and Kay, C.W., 2023. Maser Threshold Characterization by Resonator Q-
Factor Tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10811. 

 

 
 


 
17

Acknowledgement 

This research was funded by the European Research Council (ERC) (Grant agreement No. 
101055454) and the German Research Foundation DFG (DFG-DY 18/13-1). A.G., V.B., 
A.S., and V.D. acknowledge financial support from the DFG through the WГјrzburg-Dresden 
Cluster of Excellence on Complexity and Topology in Quantum Matter - ct.qmat (EXC 2147, 
project-id 39085490). The study was supported by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California 
Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (contract 80NM0018D0004). 

 

Author information 

Authors and Affiliations 

NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 
California, USA 

Andreas Gottscholl 

Experimental Physics 6 and WГјrzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence ct.qmat,  
  

Julius-Maximilians-UniversitГӨt WГјrzburg, 97074 WГјrzburg, Germany 

Andreas Gottscholl, Maximilian WagenhГ¶fer, Valentin Baianov, Vladimir Dyakonov, 
Andreas Sperlich 

 

Contributions 

A.G., M.W. and A.S. designed and realized the home-made spectrometer. A.G. and M.W. 
performed theoretical calculations of the relevant parameters affecting the maser threshold 
and performed all measurements. V.B. designed the microwave resonator which was 
characterized by A.G.. A.G., V.D. and A.S. wrote the manuscript. A.S. conceived the idea 
and supervised the project together with A.G.. All authors discussed the results and 
commented on the manuscript. 
 


 
18

Supplementary Information 

for: 

Room-Temperature Silicon Carbide Maser:  

Unveiling Quantum Amplification and Cooling 

Andreas Gottscholl1,2,a), Maximilian WagenhГ¶fer1, Valentin Baianov1, Vladimir Dyakonov1, 
Andreas Sperlich1,b) 

1Experimental Physics 6 and WГјrzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence ct.qmat,     
 

Julius-Maximilians-UniversitГӨt WГјrzburg, 97074 WГјrzburg, Germany 

2NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, 
USA 

a) Electronic mail: andreas.p.gottscholl@jpl.nasa.gov 

b) Electronic mail: andreas.sperlich@uni-wuerzburg.de 

Figure S1: Self-built setup for Q-factor, electron paramagnetic resonance, (Q-boosted) maser, 
amplifier and refrigerator measurements. 


 
19

 Setup Details 

The main results of this work were all recorded with one single self-built setup. Since the 
here-reported microwave bridge enables six different modes of operation, we will focus on 
the different signal paths separately for each measurement in the next sections. The whole 
setup is illustrated in Figure S1. As a microwave source we used an Anritsu MG 3694C. 
Most of the components are commercially available: As coupler we used a -10dB Mini-
Circuits ZUDC10-02183-S+ (left) and a -20dB Radiall R433724700 (right). The isolators 
Aerotek I2E1L1FF are integrated to block unwanted microwave reflections. For 
combiner/splitter we used Mini-Circuits ZFRSC-183-S+, while the detection is performed 
with a detector diode Advanced Control Components ACTP-1504P, a mixer Marki 
M10412LA, a lock-in amplifier Signal Recovery 7230 and a spectrum analyzer WSA 5000 
(see the following section for detailed measurement explanations). To compensate 
microwave losses, we used a Miteq AFS4.08001200-10.200 LNA (right) and a Narda 
N62448-243 (left). A microwave switch Mini-Circuits MSP2TA-18-12+ as well as two 
modified Rotary Vane attenuators with added servo motors are controlled via an Arduino. 
For phase corrections we used two analog phase shifters from an old Bruker E300 
microwave bridge, which are controlled via the DAC of the lock-in amplifier. For optical 
pumping we used an 808 nm-laser K808FANFA-15.00W from BWT which provides a 
variable power of 0-15000 mW. 

Q-factor measurement: 

Figure S2: Setup for Q-factor measurements: the microwave frequency is swept while the output 
is on/off-modulated. The reflected microwave power is measured via a detector diode and a lock-
in amplifier. 


 
20

The basis for all measurements reported in this paper is the determination of the Q-factor of 
the resonator and in particular its resonance frequency. This is accomplished by sweeping 
the frequency of an inserted microwave probe while measuring the reflected microwave 
power. Via a circulator the reflected microwaves are separated from the inserted 
microwaves and detected with a detector diode. Since the measurement provides a very 
high signal-to-noise ratio only a very small amount of the signal is required. Thus, we use a 
coupler with -20dB which transmits most of the signal for the EPR measurement (see next 
section). The detection of the small signal is realized with a lock-in amplifier. We choose an 
on/off modulation of the microwaves in order to observe the reflection directly, which results 
in a quantitative analysis of the Lorentzian dip providing information about under/over-
coupling or critical coupling of the resonator (see Figure S9). This calibration routine for the 
maser/amplifier/refrigerator is performed with an active laser output since a small heating 
leads to a drift of the resonance frequency. Thus, we start with further measurements as 
soon as the Q-factor measurements reveals a stable resonance frequency. 

 

Electron Paramagnetic Resonance: 

Figure S3:  Setup for electron paramagnetic resonance: The microwave frequency is fixed to the 
resonance frequency of the resonator. The main part of the microwaves drives phase-adjusted 
the local oscillator of a mixer. A small part is attenuated to a sufficiently low power and interacts 
with the sample. The remaining microwaves are detected via the mixer and the lock-in amplifier. 
 


 
21

With the previous measurement we extracted the correct frequency regime (рқ‘“ вүҲ рқ‘“Q). Besides 
the frequency, a maser/amplifier/refrigerator requires also the correct magnetic field range 
(рқҗө вүҲ рқҗөВұ). A perfect measurement for probing the resonance condition of the spin system is 
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR). Again, the microwave reflection is measured, but 
the swept quantity is the magnetic field using a pair of Helmholtz coils (see Figure S3). The 
microwave output is fixed to the resonance frequency рқ‘“Q in a continuous wave mode. To 
enhance the signal-to-noise ratio we are using the same lock-in amplifier (second input), 
and the magnetic field is sinusoidally modulated with a pair of small modulation coils. The 
interacting microwaves are attenuated (0-60dB) to avoid saturation of the spin system.  

The main part of the microwaves is guided through the first coupler to drive the local 
oscillator of the mixer. A phase shifter is implemented to phase-adjust the microwaves, thus 
providing the correct phase of the down-converted intermediate frequency. The remaining 
down-converted frequency is identical to the modulation frequency and recorded by the lock-
in amplifier. Besides the information of the resonant magnetic field (рқҗө вүҲ рқҗөВұ), EPR reveals 
the spin polarization of the system (see [Fischer et al. 2018] and [Gottscholl et al. 2020] for 
details). Thus, the pump threshold for the maser can be estimated with EPR. 

Maser: 

Figure S4:  Setup for maser measurements: The sample is excited via a laser within an external 
magnetic field. The emitted microwaves are amplified (to compensate losses) and guided to a 
spectrum analyzer. 


 
22

For the maser output measurement, the magnetic field range is arranged according to the 
previous EPR experiment and the frequency range of the recording spectrum analyzer is 
adjusted to the resonance frequency of the resonator. To compensate several losses (e.g. 
inserted splitter for the next measurement type), a LNA is inserted.  

 

Q-boosted Maser: 

The artificial enhancement of the Q-factor is realized by a feed-back loop. The Q-boosting 
is activated by closing the microwave switch. 50% of the output signal after the LNA are 
amplified by a second amplifier. To avoid an overdrive the gain is controlled by attenuating 
(0-60dB) the previously amplified signal. After phase adjustment via a phase shifter, the 
microwaves are inserted back into the resonator. 

 
 

Figure S5:  Setup for Q-boosted maser measurements: By closing the microwave switch, the 
feed-back loop can be activated. After amplification (+attenuation) and phase adjustment the 
microwaves are inserted back into the resonator. Only a part of the signal is guided to the 
spectrum analyzer. 


 
23

Amplifier/Refrigerator: 

The amplifier and refrigerator are analyzed by inserting a test signal into the system. The 
frequency is adjusted to the resonance frequency and the magnetic field within the range of 
the resonant condition. The amplifier (refrigerator) can be switched off by an off-resonance 
magnetic field рқҗө вү  рқҗө% ( рқҗө вү  рқҗө#). As soon as the magnetic field is in the range of the 
resonance condition рқҗө = рқҗө% ( рқҗө = рқҗө#), the spin system interacts with the microwaves and 
the amplification (absorption) is recorded with the spectrum analyzer. 

Resonator Design 

Different parameters were varied iteratively to find the most suitable resonator for the 
maser/amplifier/refrigerator. We started with an empty brass and copper resonator with 
dielectric sapphire core and compared the influence of conductance on the Q-factor (see 
Figure S7). As expected, the copper resonator provides a higher value. Therefore, we 
continued with height-dependent measurements (see Figure S8 a and b). Here, we already 
included the gain material to find the best constellation for a SiC-based device. We further 
changed the diameter of the resonator with the highest Q-factor from the height-dependent 
measurements to get the highest value of Q=17600 (see Figure S8). To increase the Q-
factor even more we can either under couple the system or cool down the resonator to 

Figure S6:  Setup for amplifier/refrigerator measurements: an arbitrary microwave signal is 
inserted into the resonator by one antenna. A second antenna detects the output signal. The 
amplifier (refrigerator) can be switched on for рқҗө = рқҗө% ( рқҗө = рқҗө#) and off for рқҗө вү  рқҗө% ( рқҗө вү  рқҗө#), 
respectively. 
 


 
24

reduce ohmic losses (see Figure S9). The highest value of Qmax=85000 was reached for a 
temperature of T=87 K. This was approximately the lowest possible temperature of the liquid 
nitrogen cryostat, since the whole ensemble has to be cooled resulting in thermal losses. 
However, as soon as the laser is activated the temperature stabilizes around T=110 K. 

 

Figure S7: Influence of the resonator material on the quality of the resonator: Due to the higher 
conductivity the ohmic losses are reduced in a copper resonator in comparison to a brass 
resonator with identical dimensions. The Q-factor values are shown here for an empty cavity (with 
sapphire, but without silicon carbide). 
 


 
25

 

Figure S8. Influence of the resonator dimensions on the Q-factor: a The height в„Һ is varied as well 
as the diameter рқ‘‘ of the copper resonator filled with silicon carbide in order to find the highest Q-
factor. b First, the height is varied. With increasing height, the resonance frequency shifts towards 
lower frequencies (absorption due to the microwave bridge background is indicated with a dashed 
line). c We chose the resonator with the highest Q-factor and enhanced the value by changing 
the diameter (relative frequency used due to large resonance frequency shift of 78 MHz). 


 
26

 

Maser/Amplifier simulation and experimental data 

Simulations according to [Jin et al. 2015] were performed with the following parameter set: 

Parameter 
Value 
Source 

рқӣҫ,-
26 s-1
рқ‘Ү.

#.(T=110 K)  

рқ‘Ғ
2.19 вҲҷ 1013 
see Figure S11 

Пү/
2ПҖ вҲҷ 9.3 GHz 
Q-factor measurement 

рқ‘Ү!

вҲ—
100 ns
estimated value  

рқ‘”
0.5 s-1
see Figure S12 

P
1-10000 mW 
laser power range 

рқ‘„
104-106
FB-loop range 

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

9.43
9.42
9.41
9.40
9.39
9.38

300

250

200

150

100

Q вүҲ 27000
Q вүҲ 16000

f) вүҲ 9.378GHz
f) вүҲ 9.430 GHz

Normalized Reflection

a

b

Temperature

Microwave Frequency (GHz)

T=290 K

T=85 K

T=85 K
T=290 K

Figure S9. Quality factor variation of the resonator without feedback loop: The Q-factor can be 
varied slightly by moving the coupling antenna in and out of the resonator. Depending on an over 
coupled (blue), critically coupled (yellow) and under coupled (red) state, the resonator reaches 
values up to 30000 at room temperature (black circles) and 85000 at cryogenic temperatures 
(grey diamonds). To study resonators with even higher values an artificial enhancement 
(feedback-loop) is required.

Figure S10. Temperature dependence of the resonator: The resonance frequency is shifting by 
approximately 50 MHz within a temperature range from 85-290 K due to thermal expansion. The 
Q-factor is measured at 290 K and 85 K. Between the two resonances, an automatic frequency 
control locks the resonance frequency of the resonator and provides intermediate frequencies for 
the whole temperature range. 


 
27

 

рқӣҫ,-: The value of 26 s-1 is extracted from [Simin et al. 2017] for a temperature of T=110 K.  

рқ‘Ғ: The number of participating spins is determined by dark EPR. The corresponding 
measurement is depicted in Figure S11. A piece of the SiC wafer (irradiated with 2MeV 
electrons with a fluence of 2вҲҷ1017 cm-2) was investigated in a Bruker Magnettech ESR5000 
at room temperature (Figure S11 a). We used the left transition (Figure S11 b) and compared 
the double integral (area of the bottom plot) with the value of a reference sample with a 
known spin number (BDPA in Figure S11c: n=3.6вҲҷ1017). Thus we extracted a spin number 
of 2.7вҲҷ1012 for the SiC sample resulting in a spin density of 2.27вҲҷ1015 cm-3. The total volume 
of the sample used for the maser/amplifier/refrigerator is 0.0344 cm3 resulting in a total spin 
number of 7.8вҲҷ1013. The spin number for one transitions (see Figure 1b) is reduced to  2

- вҲҷ

56.1% вҲҷ 7.8 вҲҷ 10.S = 2.19 вҲҷ 10.S taking the two transitions (рқҗө%and рқҗө#) and the isotopic ratio of 
silicon (see [Gottscholl et al. 2022] for detailed discussion) into account. 

Пү/: The value of 2ПҖ вҲҷ 9.3 GHz is based on Q-factor measurements. Small variations can be 
observed between the measurements, however, the difference is in the MHz regime.  

рқ‘Ү!

вҲ—: In general, the value is expected in the range of several 100 ns [Carter et al. 2015, 

Lekavicius et al. 2022]. Here, we choose a typical literature value of about 100 ns since we 
are dealing with a large ensemble where magnetic field inhomogeneities have a greater 
impact. An experimental determination is not possible, since the magnetic field 
inhomogeneity (which limits the рқ‘Ү!

вҲ— time) is not comparable between different setups. Pulsed 

measurements are not realized in the here reported setup due to the long ring-down time of 
the high-Q resonator. Nevertheless, a precise knowledge of this value is not required, since 
a small deviation of the actual value leads to only a small shift of the used model 
parameter рқ‘”.  

рқ‘”: There is no easy access to the coupling of the microwave photons and the spins. 
Therefore, we used this parameter as a free parameter to model our whole system. We used 
the maser measurement with a small output power (result of Figure 1c) as a reference point 
for the maser threshold, since all other maser measurements provide a much higher maser 
output. Thus, we varied the coupling рқ‘” which results in a shift of the maser threshold in Q-
factor direction. A few examples are shown in Figure S12. We choose a value of рқ‘” = 0.50 
s-1 which fits the experimental data quite well. 

P: The value of the laser power is swept in the range of 1 mW and 10 W since this is within 
the experimental achievable range (K808FANFA-15.00W laser from BWT). 

рқ‘„: The Q-factor axis was plotted for 104-106. Values of 104-105 are reached by an under 
coupling of the resonator (see Figure S9). Values exceeding 105 are only possible via a 
feed-back loop which can be automatically activated and controlled by a microcontroller.  

 


 
28

 

Figure S11: Quantitative EPR measurements for determining the absolute spin number. a Room 
temperature continuous wave EPR measurement without illumination of a SiC sample used in 
this paper. b Zoom into the left transition in order to get only the contribution of the V2 defect. The 
double integral is proportional to the absolute spin number n. c EPR spectrum of a reference 
sample (BDPA) with known spin number. 

Figure S12. Maser simulations for different couplings рқ‘”: a: рқ‘”=0.25 s-1, b: рқ‘”=0.50 s-1 and c: рқ‘”=1.00 
s-1. The grey circle illustrates the maser measurement of Figure 1c. Since the output power is 
very small, we expect the maser threshold to be in this parameter range. Thus, we can adjust the 
unknown value of the coupling accordingly. 


 
29

Further measurements and simulations 

 

Figure S13. Power dependent SiC-based amplifier: a Measured gain for various input powers. b-
d Simulations for different microwave input powers (-55dBm, -85dBm, -115dBm). A higher gain 
is expected for smaller incoming signals, which fits qualitatively to the experimental observation.


 
30

 

 

 
 

Figure S14. Overview of Q-boosted maser measurements for different laser power and Q-factors: 
This figure summarizes the data sets which were used in the main text in Figure 2c. a Extracted 
microwave power for different Q-factors and pump powers. b Maser measurements for Q-factors 
of 162000 (orange), c 122000 (blue) and d 106000 (green). The color maps represent the 
microwave output power (pink) analog to Figure 2b in the main text. As expected from the 
simulations, masing occurs for higher Q-factors at lower pump powers. 
 


 
31

 

Figure S15. Simulation of the required microwave cooling to achieve a specific mode temperature 
for various environment temperatures: a The color map reveals the potential for a device 
operating a 1 GHz. To address the applicability, we inserted two cross sections at 1 K (as a 
reverence value for superconducting qubits) and 295 K (for room temperature application) 
displayed in green and orange, respectively. b Reveals the required cooling to reach a specific 
mode temperature. c and d display the same simulations for a 10 GHz system.  


 
32

 

Figure S16. Comparison of the silicon vacancies V1 and V2: The detected microwaves (integrated 
EPR signal) under illumination reveal the absorptive and emissive character of both defects at 
different magnetic fields. For proof-of-concept measurements, the V2 is favored since the effect 
of emission and absorption is larger and therefore easier to test for an amplifier/refrigerator. For 
future application of a magnetic switching of amplifier and microwave cooling devices (e.g. 
quantum computing) we recommend the V1 defect, since the field difference of the absorptive 
and emission transition is in the range of вҲҶрқҗө вүҲ 325 ОјT due to the smaller ZFS. 
 


