Effect of Crystallographic Orientation on the 
Potential Barrier and Conductivity of Bessel 

Written Graphitic Electrodes in Diamond

Akhil Kuriakosea,b, Andrea Chiappinic, Pietro Apràd, and Ottavia Jedrkiewicza

a.
Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN)-CNR, Udr di Como, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, 

Italy; akuriakose@studenti.uninsubria.it, ottavia.jedrkiewicz@ifn.cnr.it 

b.
Dipartimento di Scienza e Alta Tecnologia, Università dell’Insubria, Via Valleggio 11, 22100 Como, 

Italy; 

c.
Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie (IFN)-CNR, CSMFO and FBK Photonics Unit, Trento, Italy; 

andrea.chiappini@ifn.cnr.it

d. Department of Physics and “NIS” Inter-departmental Centre, University of Torino National Institute of 

Nuclear Physics, sect. Torino, Via Pietro Giuria 1, 10125, Torino, Italy;

Correspondence: ottavia.jedrkiewicz@ifn.cnr.it

Abstract

Ultrafast laser micromachining can be used to promote diamond graphitisation, enabling the creation 

of electrically conductive wires embedded in the diamond matrix. In this context, the presence of a 

potential barrier in the conductivity of transverse graphitic wires fabricated by pulsed Bessel beams 

without sample translation across 500 μm thick monocrystalline CVD diamond has been studied. In 

particular, the role of the crystallographic orientation has been analysed. The morphology and the 

conductivity of the obtained electrodes have been studied using optical microscopy and current-

voltage measurements, while the structural changes have been investigated by means of micro-Raman 

spectroscopy. By using different laser writing parameters, we have explored the features of different 

electrodes in a (100) and a (110) oriented diamond crystal respectively. We show that in addition to 

the use of specific pulse energies and durations (in the fs and ps regimes), the crystallographic 

orientation of the sample plays an important role in reducing or eliminating the potential barrier height 

of the IV electrical characterization curves. In a (110) oriented sample, it is possible to eradicate the 

potential barrier completely even for graphitic wires fabricated at low pulse energy and in the fs pulse 

duration regime, in contrast to the (100) oriented-crystal case where the barrier is generally observed. 


The effect of thermal annealing of the diamond samples on the resistivity of the fabricated micro-

electrodes has also been investigated. In (110) oriented diamond, resistivities lower than 0.015  cm 

have been obtained.

Keywords: Laser micromachining, Bessel beams, diamond, crystallographic orientation, graphitic 
electrodes, potential barrier

1.Introduction

Diamond is an excellent material platform thanks to its unique properties such as high thermal 

conductivity, good biocompatibility, high radiation stability, remarkable hardness and high chemical 

resistivity [1, 2]. Moreover, the presence of NV centres in diamond has attracted a lot of attention due 

to their potential applications in quantum communication and sensing at nanoscale regime [3]. 

Another prominent feature of diamond is that it can be converted to graphite-like carbon thus creating 

conductive channels within a sample that is insulating in nature [4]. Such electrodes, which are used 

as electric field generators, find numerous applications in photonic chips [5], radiation detectors [6],

microfluidic sensing systems [3] and biosensing [7]. There are many techniques for conductive 

electrode fabrication in diamond such as thermal annealing, ion beam lithography and laser writing. 

Annealing the diamond sample under vacuum around 1700o C can lead to the formation of a graphitic 

layer on the surface resulting in the generation of a conductive region independent of surrounding gas 

pressure [8]. Ion beam lithography operates by irradiating diamond with ion beams at keV or MeV 

energy levels, promoting the creation of lattice defects. These defects enable the transformation of 

the damaged region into graphite if a critical threshold (graphitization threshold) [9-10] is exceeded.

Fabrication of microstructures in different transparent materials using ultrafast lasers has emerged as 

an excellent tool for the precise modification of the same. Thanks to the multiphoton absorption and 

avalanche ionization, the non-linear absorption of the ultrashort pulses helps in avoiding collateral 

damages due to thermal effects thus resulting in a modification of the material within a confined 

volume [11]. This spatial confinement, together with laser-beam scanning or sample translation, 

makes it possible to fabricate different microstructures in three dimensions within the bulk of the 

material. In diamond, a conventional Gaussian beam can be used for the optical breakdown of the 

material due to the local transformation of diamond into graphite at the focused beam waist. As a 

result, a conducting graphitized region is formed in the insulator and a uniform translation of the laser 

focus throughout the crystal induces the formation of a wire-like graphitized region with a length of 


our choice [12]. The optical breakdown generates one or more initial graphitic seeds inside diamond 

and the modified region continues as an extension toward the laser beam as a graphitization wave 

thanks to the good absorption of radiation by graphite. Taking advantage of this graphitization wave, 

it is possible to create conductive microstructures within the diamond bulk in any orientation [13].

Recently, finite energy Bessel beams [14] (i.e., Bessel–Gauss beams) which are characterised by a 

cylindrical symmetry and a transverse profile featured by an intense central spot surrounded by 

weaker concentric rings resulting in an elongated non-diffracting zone have been utilised for in-bulk 

modification of transparent materials. Thanks to this elongated focal length (also known as Bessel 

Zone) where the central beam core is resistant to diffraction spreading, sample translation along the 

beam propagation direction for in-depth microstructuring is not required in contrast to the standard 

laser processing techniques using focused Gaussian pulses [15-16]. Due to their self-reconstruction 

property and their elongated focal zone, finite energy Bessel beams are ideal not only for internal 

microstructuring but also for high-impact technological applications such as high-speed cutting, 

welding or drilling of transparent materials [17-20].

Fabrication of graphitic microwires in diamond bulk using pulsed Bessel beams was initially reported 

by Canfield et al. [21], and a detailed study of the resulting micro-electrodes as a function of the laser 

writing parameters was recently presented by our group in [22], where resistivity values on the order 

of 0.04  cm were obtained thanks to an optimization of the Bessel pulse energy and duration. In 

there, the presence of a potential barrier in the electrical measurements related to the graphitic wires 

generated in the femtosecond regime was shown but not addressed in a detailed manner. The potential 

barrier refers to the voltage gap only after which the electrode shows a perfectly ohmic behaviour. Its 

presence affects the quality of the electrode and to have good conductivity values, it is of utmost 

importance to avoid such barriers. The presence of a potential barrier in laser written graphitic wires 

fabricated with Gaussian beams has been addressed in [23] for a (100) oriented diamond, as a function 

of different laser writing parameters. In contrast, here, in this work, where the graphitic electrodes are 

fabricated without sample translation nor beam aberration correction techniques, using the advantage 

of an elongated focus of the Bessel beam injected orthogonally to the top surface of the samples, we 

show that in addition to the use of specific pulse energies and durations (both in the fs and ps regimes), 

the crystallographic orientation of the sample (i.e. having a (100) or (110) top surface plane) plays an 

important role in reducing or eliminating during the IV electrical characterization measurements, the 

potential barrier. The latter turns out in fact to be linked to the resulting resistivity of the electrodes

as well. We also investigate the effect of thermal annealing of the diamond samples not only on the 

potential barrier but especially on the resistivity of the fabricated micro-wires. We shall see that the 

electrodes fabricated in a sample with (110) orientation do not exhibit any kind of barrier irrespective 


of the pulse energy and pulse duration used during the laser fabrication. Moreover, electrodes 

fabricated in the picosecond regime show no trace of barrier throughout a wide range of pulse energy

values. Furthermore, the correlation between potential barrier and conductivity variation with respect 

to various laser writing parameters is also discussed in detail, and we report some of the lowest 

resistivity values that, compared to the literature, can be achieved with laser micromachining 

techniques.

2.Materials and Methods

2.1 Micromachining set-up and samples

The fabrication of conductive micro-electrodes perpendicular to the diamond surface was performed 

by means of a 20-Hz Ti:Sapphire amplified laser system (Amplitude) which delivers  40-fs transform-

limited pulses at 790 nm wavelength in the mJ pulse energy range. Thanks to the laser compressor 

which can be detuned to change the pulse duration, it is possible to work at both femtosecond and 

picosecond regimes. This is crucial since pulse duration can influence the barrier height in the 

conductivity of an electrode as shown later in section 3.2. The results reported in this paper are related 

to a pulse duration of 200 fs and 10 ps respectively. As described in detail in [22], a 5 mm (full width 

at half maximum) Gaussian beam (with linear polarization) is converted into a Bessel beam (BB) 

after passing it through a fused silica axicon with a 178o apex angle. Thanks to a telescopic system 

formed by a 250 mm focal length lens (L1) and a 0.45 N.A. 20× microscope objective (fobj = 9 mm), 

the final beam at the sample position is featured by 12o cone angle, a central core size of about 2.7 

µm and a total Bessel zone of 700 µm. As shown in Fig.1, the Bessel beam, whose final non diffractive 

length is on the order of the diamond thickness, was sent orthogonally towards the sample placed on 

a micrometer precision 3D motorized stage (driven by SCA, system control application software, 

Altechna Rnd, Vilnius, Lithuania). The microfabrication of the graphitic wires was thus performed in 

a transverse configuration and without any sample translation.

Note that in the micromachining experiments the pulse energy was varied in a range such that the BB 

central core is the only portion of the beam which undergoes nonlinear absorption and interacts with 

the diamond sample, leading to microstructures with transverse size in the micrometer range. For a 

precise adjustment of the energy, a motorized attenuator consisting of a polarizer and rotating 

halfwave plate (Watt Pilot, Altechna Rnd, Vilnius, Lithuania) was placed just after an optical shutter

used to select the number of laser pulses. 


Fig:1 a) Schematic representation of the Bessel beam formation by an axicon with the transverse intensity 

profile recorded by the CCD at the sample position, b) Micromachining set up for a transverse Bessel beam 

writing of the sample.

As described in [22], a real-time observation of the sample surfaces (both top and bottom) was

performed during the micromachining thanks to a backlighting Light Emitting Diode (LED) placed 

below the transparent sample and an imaging system using a lens and a CCD (not shown in the figure).

This helps in setting up the relative positioning of the Bessel beam non-diffracting length with respect 

to the sample thickness, in order to have a symmetrical intensity distribution of the beam core across 

the sample to guarantee the formation of complete through-wires. As already discussed in [22], this 

also prevents strong and destructive interaction at the air/diamond interface where beam reshaping 

occurs because of the sudden change in the refractive index [24]. 

The diamond sample was placed on the motorized stage and aligned in both x and y axis (thanks to 

micrometer screws of the support) to make sure it is flat (within an error limit of 2 µm), in order to 

fabricate orthogonal wires with respect to the sample top and bottom surfaces. The Bessel beam 

micromachining was performed in multiple shot regime and, as already mentioned and shown in Fig. 

1, the laser pulses were injected orthogonally to the sample surface. During the laser exposure the 


graphitic electrode starts growing from the bottom surface towards the top. It has been found that 

around 600 pulses are required to grow an electrode of length 500 µm in 10 ps regime and a minimum 

of 7000 in case of 200 fs regime. We believe this disparity arises from the fact that because of the 

higher intensity for a given energy, of a fs pulse with respect to the ps one, the damage on the top 

surface of the sample which is larger, can act as a barrier and lead to distortions for the incoming 

beam, in addition to the fact that the formed graphite at the air material interface will absorb part of 

the light. Nevertheless, due to its inherent conical energy reservoir for its formation, the Bessel beam 

gets recreated after a small distance depending on the size of the damage [25]. The fact that the BB 

undergoes an interruption could be the reason for which, in the fs regime, it takes more pulses for the 

graphitic wire to fully grow from bottom to the top of the sample. We mention that the growth rate of 

graphitic electrodes within the diamond bulk will be addressed in a future work. All the electrodes 

reported in this work have been created by sending 9000 Bessel pulses on the sample in both fs and 

ps laser machining regimes.

Here, we have explored the role of different laser writing parameters and of the crystallographic 

orientation on the potential barrier and thus on the conductivity of the graphitic wires fabricated. For 

this purpose, two samples were considered – a monocrystalline type IIa CVD diamond with (100) 

orientation and another sample of the same type with a (110) orientation, both produced by MB 

Optics. The dimensions of the samples are 5 mm × 5 mm ×0.5 mm. 

2.2 Current-voltage measurements

The electrical characterisation
of the fabricated electrodes (featured by voltage-current 

measurements) was carried out by using conductive layers on the top and bottom surfaces of the 

diamond samples [22]. In particular, on one surface a silver metal deposition was carried out covering 

the end of the graphitic electrode (one end of the graphitic wires). In order to isolate one electrode 

from the others in order to avoid a short circuit during the electrical measurements, a mask was created 

by milling aluminium film (15 µm of thickness) with a nanosecond-pulsed Nd:YAG laser emitting in 

the IR (1064 nm), VIS (532 nm) or UV (355 nm) [26]. The mask dimensions were 250 × 250 µm2 in 

area. Metal deposition for the fabrication of the electrodes was carried out using a thermal evaporator.

The thickness of the deposition was 400 nm. The other side of the sample was fixed on a silicon wafer 

using silver paste thus completing the whole circuit (See [22] for details). 

The current-voltage characterization was then conducted with a 2-probe configuration (tungsten-

carbide microprobes controllable with micrometric accuracy) in a custom probe station. The probes 


were connected to a high-precision KeithleyTM 6487 voltage source, communicating with a 

computer through a LabVIEW system, which, in turn, measures the I-V curves. A “Leica Essential 

M50” optical microscope with an achromatic objective with magnification 0.63×, focal length of 

148.2 mm and an eyepiece magnification of up to 100× interfaced with the I-V chamber allows for 

the accurate positioning of the microprobes on the sample. 

2.3 Micro-Raman spectroscopy

Micro-Raman spectroscopy using a Labram Aramis John Yvon Horiba system with a DPSS laser 

source at 532  nm, was performed in order to characterize the effective transformation of diamond 

into amorphous or graphitic-like carbon (featured by the presence of sp2 hybridized carbon) in the 

laser-written microstructures. The system was also equipped with a confocal microscope, an 1800 

line mm-1 grating, and an air-cooled CCD camera. The Raman signal collected in a backscattering 

configuration with a 100× objective, can achieve a spatial resolution of about 1 µm. 

2.4 Thermal annealing

In the study presented here, the role of thermal annealing on the potential barrier change or the 

resistivity change was also investigated. To this end, the diamond samples were annealed thermally 

in ultra-high vacuum at 950o for 1 hour. The home-made annealing chamber consisted of a heating 

stage (HTR1002) made up of a unique combination of a dielectric ceramic material (Pyrolytic Boron 

Nitride) and an electrically conductive material (Pyrolytic Graphite). The dimensions are 50 mm × 

60 mm with a thickness of around 1.40 mm [27]. It works in high vacuum condition reaching up to 5 

× 10-8 mbar; the heating process starts only at 5 × 10-6 mbar. The heating stage is equipped with a 

type C thermocouple to read the actual temperature and a cover for heat shielding. The heater 

controller model is HC3500 by Tectra.

Note that the IV curves shown in this paper refer to the electrical characterization of the graphitic 

electrodes performed after annealing of the diamond samples.

3.Results and Discussions

In this section, we present the results of the Bessel beam micromachining of two samples of 

monocrystalline synthetic diamond featured by (100) orientation and (110) orientation respectively. 

In addition to study the effect of different laser writing parameters such as pulse energy and pulse 

duration, we shall focus on understanding the role of the crystallographic orientation on the 


morphology, the structural modification, and the IV characteristics (and on the presence or absence 

of a potential barrier) of the graphitic microwires obtained. We will thus compare the obtained results 

in the two different types of samples. In both cases, the electrode formation in the bulk follows the 

same mechanism. Under Bessel beam irradiation in the multiple shot regime, the formation of a 

graphite globule (sp2 carbon) gets initiated at the bottom surface within the bulk. This can be 

explained by considering the reduced damage threshold and a higher local beam intensity at this 

position thanks to the constructive interference of the beam due to Fresnel reflections occurring on 

each diamond-air interface [22, 24]. Once the first transition of diamond to sp2 carbon is completed, 

the process continues as a graphitization wave until it reaches the top surface since the incoming 

pulses get absorbed by the already transformed portion [12]. By injecting adequate number of pulses, 

electrodes of any length can be drawn within the diamond bulk.

3.1 General Morphology by optical characterization

The study of the electrodes fabricated in two differently oriented diamond crystals started with an 

analysis of the morphology of the 500 m long graphitic wires obtained. The Bessel beam laser 

writing was performed in two different pulse duration regimes (femtosecond and picosecond 

regimes), and with the purpose of exploring the extremities of this chosen range, we used 200 fs and 

10 ps pulses. The energy was varied in the micro Joule range. The structure and morphology of the 

microstructures obtained were observed under an optical microscope.  In Fig. 2 in the top row, we 

show the wires fabricated with 200 fs pulses and a pulse energy of 2.5 μJ both in the (100) and (110) 

oriented crystals. In the bottom row we present the wires fabricated with 10 ps pulses and pulse 

energies of 2.5 J and 5 J, for the (110) oriented sample and the (100) oriented sample respectively. 

Note that the pulse energies chosen here are the threshold values for the generation of a complete 

graphitic microstructures in the two samples for the pulse durations used. 

We can notice that the wires fabricated with 200 fs pulse duration (Figs. 2(a) and (b)), are featured by

less cracks in comparison to those fabricated with 10 ps pulses (Fig. 2(c) and (d)), for both (100) and 

(110) oriented samples. The cracking effect at higher pulse durations can be attributed to the decrease 

in density of the transformed region compared to the untouched diamond. When a portion of the 

diamond lattice is converted to a graphitic-like phase under laser irradiation, its density becomes 

lower, resulting in a volume increase at that point and thus in an internal strain formation [28]. Since 

the diamond graphitization process takes just a few picoseconds [29], a graphitic globule of minimal 

dimension is formed without collateral damage in the case of wires fabricated with 200 fs short pulses. 

On the contrary, a large amount of energy is still deposited even after the formation of the first globule 


in case of higher pulse durations (such as the 10 ps pulses) leading to an enhanced cracking since the 

local strain overcomes the tensile strength of the diamond due to volume increase. It is worth noting 

that even when there is a cracking effect, the dimension of the main lobe remains the same irrespective 

of the pulse duration. In addition, the preferential cracking direction of the electrode towards (111)

orientation, when machining a (100) cut diamond crystal, has already been observed and discussed 

in [30], and is attributed due to the lowest cleavage energy along that plane. In addition, as the energy 

increases, the length of the crack also increases irrespective of pulse duration [22].

If we focus on the differences in the morphology of the electrodes fabricated in the two differently 

oriented crystals, we can observe that the transverse size (≈ 1 m) of the graphitic wires fabricated in 

the (110) oriented diamond crystal is smaller than that (≈ 2.5 m) of those fabricated in a (100)

oriented one, irrespective of the chosen energy or pulse duration. This can be noticed in the images 

of Fig. 2. In addition, the graphitic wires are more uniform with comparatively less cracks in the (110)

cut sample as it is evident from Figs. 2(b) and 2(d).

The difference in the cracks direction along the wires fabricated in (100) and (110) cut samples has 

been explained by preferable cracking of the diamond crystal along (111) planes, which are turned at 

different angles depending on the chosen direction of observation [13]. When the diamond sample is 

irradiated orthogonally to the (100) crystallographic plane, the (111) planes are placed at an angle of 

35.5o with respect to the direction of the laser beam (as confirmed by the cracks direction in Fig. 2(c).

On the other hand, when the diamond sample is irradiated through the (110) crystallographic plane,

the cleaved (111) planes are placed either parallel or perpendicular to the beam (see for instance later 

on the resulting cracks in Fig. 4).


Fig. 2 Optical microscope images and relative zoom of the graphitic wires fabricated by Bessel beam with 200 

fs (top row) and 10 ps pulses (bottom row) in a (100) cut diamond sample ((a) and (c) respectively), and in a 

(110) cut sample ((b) and (d) respectively). The pulse energy used here was the one just above minimum 

threshold value for the formation of the graphitic wires, namely 2.5 J for (a), (b) and (d), and 5 J for (c).

This results in smoother graphitic microstructures in the (110) oriented crystal especially at lower 

energy and lower pulse duration (Fig. 2.b). In this case, thanks to an energy close to the threshold, 

even though the cracking phenomena exists, the cracks are typically aligned in the direction of the 

electrode growth thus making it a single line without collateral damage.  However, it was observed 

that at higher fabrication energies, the cracking effect is more pronounced. In fact, the laser writing 

experiments performed in this study showed that the morphology of the electrodes fabricated in the

(100) and (110) oriented diamonds is different with respect to their continuity along the sample 

thickness. In particular, when increasing the pulse energy of the Bessel beam, we noticed that while

in the first case ((100) orientation) the wires keep a continuous nature, the wires fabricated in the 

second case ((110) orientation) are featured by the presence of different segments separated by 

microcracks or microexplosions (leading to graphitic globules) along the whole microstructure. This 


phenomenon has been reported by Pimenov et.al. [31]. While the electrode formation is generally 

defined on the basis of graphitization wave [12], it also includes self-sustaining propagation of 

ionization wave as well. This means, while working in the multiple shot regime, the modification at 

a particular point in the diamond bulk can also lead to ionization of defects and the resultant seed 

electrons can be injected to the neighbouring undamaged region. These seed electrons can kick start 

an avalanche ionization and initiate transformation of that unmodified region even when the laser 

beam is absent. Therefore, the graphitized microstructure continues to grow into the bulk of diamond 

until the laser intensity at the front of the growing structure becomes less than a certain threshold 

value required for optical breakdown; therefore, at that point the ionization process together with the 

production of seed electrons stop. Figure 3 shows some of the wires fabricated in the (110) cut 

diamond sample both for 200 fs (Figs. 3(a) and (b)) and 10 ps pulse durations (Figs. 3(c) and (d)), 

and for two different pulse energy values higher than the material modification threshold value. It is 

worth mentioning that even though these electrodes seem to be featured by different segments (in 

contrast to those presented in Fig. 2 (b) and (d)), they turned out to be well connected (as confirmed 

by the IV characterisation we then performed and whose results will be shown later on). 

Fig. 3. Optical microscope images of the graphitic wires fabricated by Bessel beam in a (110) cut diamond

sample with 200 fs pulse duration ((a) and (b)) and 10 ps pulse duration ((c) and (d)), showing the irregular

nature of the microstructures along their length. The scale bar clearly shown in (b) is the same for all the 

presented images.

Finally, at even higher energies, the wires fabricated in the (110) cut sample turned out to be 

completely discontinuous. Instead of having a fully grown electrode, they formed a discrete set of 

graphitic modifications lines or isolated globules, as shown in Fig. 4 for the case of a microstructure 


obtained with 7 J and 200 fs Bessel pulses. Notice, that the presence of discrete globules in the 

fabrication was already observed by Kononenko et. al [13,32] in the case of standard laser writing 

with sample translation and explained in terms of a phenomenon called “incubation effect” occurring 

at higher machining fluences.

Fig. 4. Optical microscope image and relative zoom of a segmented microstructure fabricated in a (110) cut 

diamond sample by a 200 fs Bessel beam with pulse energy of 7 J.

On the other hand, nonlinear effects and self-focusing of the Bessel beam propagating in amorphous 

transparent materials have already been studied in the literature [33], but have not yet deeply 

investigated for crystals, although possible effects of a Gaussian beam self-focusing in diamond were

hypothesized in [32]. In our case, we believe that what occurs in this high energy fabrication regime 

in a (110) cut diamond could be also the result of the high intensity distribution of the BB core in the 

central region of the sample thickness, favouring from local initial cracks (because of the orientation 

of the (111) plane), the separate growth of independent graphitic segments along the total Bessel focal 

zone. An investigation of the plasma distribution in diamond, formed during the radiation-matter 

interaction along the Bessel zone, and in different energy regimes, is the object of a separate and 

future experiment.

3.2 Electrical and structural characterization

A detailed study of the electrical properties of the fabricated in-bulk electrodes has been conducted, 

before and after thermal annealing of the diamond samples, with a focus on the evolution of the 

potential barrier height with respect to the different crystallographic orientations and beam 

parameters. Around twenty graphitic wires were fabricated on two CVD diamond samples with 


respectively (100) and (110) crystallographic orientation, by varying the pulse energy between 1 to 

10 μJ, and with two different pulse durations (200 fs and 10 ps); and their resistance/resistivity was 

measured with a current–voltage measurement set-up as detailed in the methodology section. For all 

the tests mentioned in this work, we used a voltage range of -450 to 450 V, a compliance current of 

25 mA, a step value of 5 V and a measurement time of 300 ms. The current-voltage (IV) tests for each 

electrode were conducted multiple times resulting in a standard deviation error of 5 %.

Femtosecond fabrication regime

In Figure 5, we show for illustration the measured IV curves measured after thermal annealing, related 

to two electrodes fabricated with a pulse energy of 3.5 μJ and a pulse duration of 200 fs, for the two 

different crystal orientations (100) and (110) respectively. We observe a clear difference between the 

curves of Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 5(b). The electrode fabricated in the first case ((100) orientation) shows 

the presence of a potential barrier close to 20 V which, in contrast, is absent in the second case ((110) 

orientation). In addition, the resistance of the former electrode is 420.5 kΩ while the latter has a 

resistance of 117 kΩ, which is significantly lower. In this case the resistivity turns out to be equal to 

0.018 Ω cm, in contrast to the resistivity value of 0.41 Ω cm for the analogous electrode fabricated 

with same laser parameters in the (100) cut sample.


Fig. 5 Measured IV graphs after thermal annealing of graphitic electrodes respectively fabricated in a (100) 

oriented (a) and a (110) oriented (b) diamond crystal with a Bessel beam featured by a 200 fs pulse with 

energy of 3.5 J.

The improved conductance and the absence of a barrier for the electrode fabricated orthogonally to 

the (110) surface with respect to the one fabricated orthogonally to the (100) surface indicates, as a 

result of the BB machining with given pulse duration and pulse energy, that in that case a better 

transformation of diamond into sp2 carbon occurs. We believe this is due to a higher heating of the 

diamond bulk in the (110) cut sample compared to (100) cut sample, leading a to better breakage of 

sp3 into sp2 phase. Generally, the simplest and general explanation for the intensive diamond heating 

which results in the transformation and creation of sp2 carbon is the dissipation of energy absorbed at 

the front of the modified region progressively growing from the bottom to the top surface. The key 


factor affecting the diamond graphitization under laser irradiation is diamond cracking in front of the 

modified region. The cracks provide structural defects activating the graphitization process within the 

heated diamond region. In case of (110) oriented diamond crystal, an additional heating mechanism 

has been reported by Kononenko et al. [13]. This, also known as enhancement of direct plasma-

assisted absorption of laser radiation in diamond due to intensified local diamond ionization, has a 

positive impact on diamond ionization as a result of local electric field enhancement in the 

microcracks generated in the front of the graphitization wave in addition to the normal heating. The 

reason for this secondary heating effect lies in the fact that when the graphitic wire is fabricated 

orthogonally to the (110) plane, the crack tip is situated close to the beam axis, where the Bessel core 

intensity can reach the maximum value. The appearance of long cracks in the direction of beam axis 

may have a resonant effect thus increasing the diamond ionization. As a consequence, this should 

result in increased graphitization rate and thus, better transformation of diamond into amorphous 

carbon and graphitic phases.

Moreover, it is worth noting that even if the laser modified portion of the diamond bulk looks uniform 

and continuous (as the microstructures shown in Fig.2), there is a higher chance that in the

microscopic regime, that may not be the case. Instead, there could be some microscopic gaps between 

each graphitic globule and thus, to have a continuous path for the charge transfer, these gaps should 

be overcome [23]. The voltage required to break down the gap is the potential barrier/breakdown 

voltage, which we observe in Fig. 5(a), where the IV curve for the electrode fabricated in the (100) 

cut sample is reported. In contrast, in the case of the electrode fabricated in the (110) cut sample, the 

microscopic gaps between the graphitic globules are reduced to a great extend thanks to the greater 

heating mechanism discussed above. Also, as said above, the fact that the diamond cracking during 

the graphitization process occurs in the beam propagation direction, i.e. along the wire, helps in 

enhancing the structural transformation of diamond into sp2 carbon, as confirmed by the higher 

conductivity of the electrode. The same behaviour has been observed for a wide range of pulse 

energies used in the fabrication of wires orthogonal to the (110) face, as no trace of barrier potential 

has been observed in any of the electrodes fabricated with our laser parameters (as reported also later 

on in table 3).

In order to investigate the crystalline structural changes and the extend of the material transformation

after the laser-matter interaction, micro-Raman spectroscopy was performed on the wires fabricated 

in the two diamonds featured by different crystallographic orientation. The laser beam used for the 

measurement was focused at the top of the electrodes in correspondence with the centre of the 

transverse section of the wires extremity, where we expect a higher concentration of graphite, as 

previously discussed [22]. In Figure 6, we present the spectra recorded in the central part of two wire 


cross-sections corresponding to two electrodes fabricated with a pulse energy of 3.5 J at 200 fs in

the (100) cut sample (a) and in the (110) cut sample (b) respectively. In both cases it is possible to 

observe three characteristic peaks: a sharp, narrow peak at 1332.2 cm-1 (corresponding to diamond), 

and two smaller, broader peaks centered at  1335 cm-1 and 1590 cm-1 corresponding respectively 

to graphite D (“disorganised”) and to graphite G (“organised”) respectively [34, 35]. In order to better 

understand the effect of the laser micromachining on the two different diamond samples, the Raman 

spectra have been “deconvolved” considering the contribution of diamond and of amorphous carbon 

phases through a fitting procedure as described by A. Dychalska et al. [36].

Fig. 6 Micro-Raman spectra recorded at the top of two electrodes fabricated with 200 fs pulse duration and 3.5 

J energy in a (100) cut sample (a) and a (110) cut sample (b) respectively.

The presence of additional peaks (D (1335 cm-1)) and G (1590 cm-1)) together with the diamond peak 

(1332.2 cm-1) in case of both electrodes fabricated suggest that there is a conversion from sp3 to sp2

carbon phases thus transforming the diamond into a mixture of amorphous carbon and graphite 

through laser writing irrespective of the sample orientation. On the other hand, the two spectra 

reported in the figure present some differences. In the case of the wire created orthogonally to the 

(100) plane, the intensity of the diamond peak remains high while it is suppressed in the case of the 

wire fabricated orthogonally to the (110) plane. The opposite happens for the G-peak which correlates 

to the presence of graphite. The G-peak is slightly more pronounced for the latter electrode compared 


to the former one. From the spectra, it is possible to estimate the ratio of the graphite G peak to the

diamond peak which, in turn, can give a measure of the graphite content inside the electrodes 

fabricated in two samples with different orientations [37]. This ratio is higher for the electrode of the 

(110) cut sample, while it is lower for the electrode of the (100) cut sample. Therefore, the indication 

of a higher content of graphite in the (110) oriented crystal is consistent with the greater electrode 

conductivity (and possibly with the absence of potential barrier) highlighted before from the IV 

measurements. Also note that the intensity ratio between the disordered D peak and the graphite G 

peak, I(D)/I(G), being less than one for the spectrum relative to the electrode fabricated orthogonally 

to the (110) sample, indicates that in that case there is more graphite portion than amorphous carbon

in its sp2 state [3]. 

Picosecond fabrication regime

The electrical characterization of the graphitic wires fabricated with 10 ps pulse duration was 

performed for a comparison with the results presented so far. None of the resulting electrodes showed 

a trace of potential barrier in the resistivity measurements, at any pulse energy regime, and in both 

crystallographic orientations (in accordance with the results of [22] presented in the (100) cut sample 

case). In Figure 7, we present IV curves related to wires fabricated with 10 ps pulse duration and with 

two different pulse energies in both (100) and (110) oriented samples. The lower energy values chosen 

for each crystallographic orientation correspond to the minimum energy thresholds for the graphitic 

wire formation (as also mentioned in relation to Fig. 2).


Fig. 7 Measured IV graphs of electrodes fabricated at 10 ps with a pulse energy of 5 J (a) and 10 J (b) in the 

(100) cut sample, and with a pulse energy of 2.5 J (c) and 3.5 J (d) in the (110) cut sample.

The resistances related to Figs. 7 (a) and (b) are found to be 50 kΩ and 31 kΩ while those related to 

(c) and (d) are 151 kΩ and 116 kΩ respectively. It is worth noting that the pulse energy used for the 

generation of the wires orthogonal to the (100) plane is higher than in the other case, and this explains 

the lower resistance values shown by the IV curves of the electrodes fabricated in the (100) oriented 

diamond sample, as we have observed that the conductance increases when increasing the Bessel 

beam pulse energy (up to a certain value) [22]. Therefore, note that a direct comparison of resistance 

and resistivity values between wires fabricated in this picosecond regime in the two differently 

oriented samples, is not possible for fixed laser writing parameters. It is also worth mentioning that it 

is more challenging to fabricate well connected electrodes with higher pulse energies in (110) cut 

samples, as the graphitic microstructures formed in the diamond bulk in that case are then featured 

by segmentation, as discussed in section 3.1. The absence of any potential barrier for any pulse energy 

regime at 10 ps, for both crystal orientations, may be explained by recalling that a better

transformation of diamond into sp2 carbon occurs in case of longer pulse durations [22, 38]. 


3.3 Role of pulse energy

As it has already been established that the pulse energy used in the micromachining process can 

influence the conductivity of the electrode obtained [22], in this work, we explored in particular the 

role of the Bessel pulse energy in the appearance of a barrier potential, comparing the results in the 

two differently oriented diamond samples ((100) cut and (110) cut). For this study we concentrated 

our attention on graphitic microstructures fabricated in the femtosecond pulse regime (200 fs pulse 

duration) where the presence of a barrier potential at least in the (100) cut sample was already 

observed (as shown before). Pulse energy values ranging from 1 J to 6 μJ were chosen for the 

fabrication of the graphitic wires in both samples (note that above 6 uJ in the (110) cut sample we do 

not have continuous wires). In Figure 8, we report the evolution of the potential barrier height with 

respect to the pulse energy used, retrieved from the IV measurements performed.

Fig. 8 Evolution of the potential barrier height with respect to the pulse energy used in the fabrication of the 
microelectrodes with 200 fs Bessel pulses in two samples with (100) and (110) crystallographic orientation
respectively. The measurements error bars are within the size of the symbols used.

It is well evident that the electrodes fabricated respectively in the (100) and (110) oriented samples 

behave differently when it comes to the dependence of the barrier height with respect to the pulse 

energy used for the laser fabrication. While the low energy electrodes fabricated orthogonally to the 

(100) plane show a huge potential barrier in the electrical characterization, this is nil for those 

fabricated orthogonally to the (110) plane. In fact, in all cases, for the wide range of energy values 

investigated in our experiment, the electrodes fabricated in this second sample showed no trace of 

barrier potential. At the same time, for the electrodes created in the (100) cut sample, we observe a 

trend in the evolution of the potential barrier height, the latter being very high at low pulse energies 

but then progressively decreasing for increasing energy values, till disappearing completely at 6 J.


A similar trend is observed in the evolution of the resistivity values that can be extracted from the IV 

measurements. Table 1 summarizes the resistivity evaluated for the graphitic microstructures

fabricated at different pulse energies in both diamond samples orientations.

Energy (μJ)
Resistivity (Ω cm) – (100) cut
Resistivity (Ω cm) – (110) cut

1
169
0.044

2.5
6.3
0.043

3.5
0.41
0.018

4.5
0.3
0.018

6
0.128
0.013

Table 1: Evolution of resistivity with respect to pulse energy of microelectrodes fabricated with 200 fs Bessel 

pulses.

The resistivity of the electrodes fabricated in the (100) oriented crystal follows the same trend as the 

barrier potential height itself, decreasing for increasing pulse energies. Notice that for 1 J both the 

barrier potential height and the resistivity are featured by extremely high values. On the other hand,

in the case of the (110) oriented sample, the resistivity values are low irrespective of the energy values

used for the laser fabrication, also in line with the fact that in this case no potential barrier was 

revealed.  A resistivity decrease as the energy is increased, is also observed. 

Although we know that the femtosecond regime of laser machining in diamond generally leads to 

graphitic wires with lower conductivity compared to long pulse durations [22], here for a (110) cut 

diamond sample we proved that in this regime it is possible to obtain low resistivity values, in 

particular a resistivity of 0.013  cm, as in the case of the microelectrode fabricated with a Bessel 

pulse of 200 fs duration and 6 J energy. Finally note that the lower resistivity values measured in 

the (110) oriented sample are not only due to the smaller core size of the graphitic wires fabricated in 

the latter, but also to the resistance values retrieved from the IV measurements, which turned out to 

be systematically smaller than those relative to the wires of the (100) oriented sample, for a given 

pulse energy. As an example, from the IV curves reported in Fig. 5 and corresponding to 

microelectrodes fabricated with 200 fs pulses and energy of 3.5 J, we find a resistance value of 420 

k in the (100) substrate, and 117 k in the (110) substrate, respectively.”


3.4 Role of thermal annealing

As also stated at the end of section 2, the results just presented refer to the characterization of the 

fabricated electrodes in the diamond samples, after thermal annealing of the latter. 

In this section, we present for completeness a comparison of the potential barrier height and the 

resistivity values obtained before and after the thermal annealing of the samples. The results of the 

electrical characterization are summarized in Table 2 and Table 3, referring respectively to the 

electrodes fabricated in the (100) and (110) oriented diamond samples.

Energy (μJ)
Barrier (V) before 

annealing

Barrier (V) after 

annealing

Resistivity (Ω cm) 

before annealing

Resistivity (Ω cm) 

after annealing

1
295
295
200
169

2.5
245
245
14.7
6.3

3.5
45
45
0.44
0.41

4.5
25
25
0.31
0.3

6
0
0
0.135
0.128

Table 2: Evolution of potential barrier height and resistivity values of the electrodes fabricated by Bessel beam 

in a (100) cut sample at 200 fs for different pulse energies and characterized before and after thermal annealing.

Energy (μJ)
Barrier (V) before 

annealing

Barrier (V) after 

annealing

Resistivity (Ω cm) 

before annealing

Resistivity (Ω cm) 

after annealing

1
0
0
0.047
0.044

2.5
0
0
0.048
0.043

3.5
0
0
0.028
0.018

4.5
0
0
0.023
0.018

6
0
0
0.023
0.013

Table 3: Evolution of potential barrier height and resistivity values of the electrodes fabricated by Bessel beam 

in a (110) cut sample at 200 fs for different pulse energies and characterized before and after thermal annealing.


The results clearly highlight that the barrier potential height, when it exists, remains the same before 

and after annealing, irrespective of the pulse energy chosen or the sample orientation. The only 

variable that shows an evolution is the resistivity which tends to decrease after the thermal annealing

of the samples. We notice though, that even in this scenario, the improvement of the conductivity is 

not uniform. The electrodes fabricated at low pulse energy which had really high resistivity values

before annealing show a huge difference and present a lower resistivity after annealing, especially 

those for the (100) oriented sample. But, as the pulse energy used for the fabrication increases and 

the resistivity decreases, the variation after annealing gets reduced and eventually it becomes almost 

negligible. For the electrodes fabricated in the (110) cut sample, the change in the resistivity of the 

electrodes is not so pronounced. One of the possible explanations for this kind of trend could be that 

at low energy, as for the micromachining of the (100) cut sample, the transformation of the crystalline 

structure of diamond into sp2 phase is only partial, and thus with the annealing it gets enhanced thanks 

to the thermal effects. But this process of better transformation may occur only in the regions where 

the partial graphitization already occurred during laser machining, before annealing. On the other 

hand, as the barrier potential is the voltage required to breakdown the gaps between nanocrystalline 

graphite sheets, this remains constant as the thermal annealing affects only the portion that has already 

been transformed. At the same time, as we use higher pulse energies in the laser writing, the 

graphitization process (with maximum conversion of sp3 phase into sp2 carbon) is already efficient, 

as already discussed, and therefore there may be only little or no room for annealing to have a visible 

effect on the conductivity, leading thus to a minimal resistivity difference (before and after annealing)

in the case of electrodes fabricated at higher energies. As for the electrodes fabricated in the (110) cut

sample, they behave as the electrodes fabricated in the higher pulse energy regime in the (100) cut

sample, where an efficient graphitization process already occurs during the laser-matter interaction, 

leading to very small resistivity values of the wires and thus, negligible resistivity difference before 

and after annealing.

Conclusion

In this work, the graphitic microelectrodes have been fabricated in monocrystalline 500 m thick

CVD diamond samples with orientations (100) and (110) respectively, by using a pulsed Bessel beam 

in the femtosecond and picosecond regime, impinging orthogonally to the sample surface. The 

optimization of the morphology and conductivity of the electrodes has been done by using different 

laser writing parameters. Different characterisation techniques such as optical microscopy, current-


voltage tests and micro-Raman measurements have been used to analyse the morphological, 

electrical, and structural features of the electrodes. 

We have shown that in addition to the use of specific pulse energies and durations, the crystallographic 

orientation of the sample can have a prominent influence in reducing or eliminating the potential 

barrier height of the laser written graphitic electrodes. With this study, the impact of the 

crystallographic orientation of the diamond samples on the overall quality of an electrode has been

clearly demonstrated as the graphitic wires fabricated orthogonally to the (110) plane showed no trace 

of potential barrier in any energy regime or pulse duration, in contrast to those fabricated orthogonally 

to the (100) oriented-crystal case where the barrier is generally observed, especially when obtained 

with low pulse energy and 200 fs pulses. We believe that thanks to the additional heating mechanism 

that arises from the directionality of cracking during the fabrication of the wire, the possible 

microgaps that may exist between the graphitic globules that are generated along the beam path, are 

drastically reduced in (110) cut samples resulting, therefore, in this case, in high quality electrodes 

with good conductivity and a barrier potential height definitely negligible.

A comparison between the micro-Raman spectra recorded for wires fabricated in the fs regime in the 

two differently oriented samples indicated that there is a better transformation of diamond into 

graphite when the wires are fabricated orthogonally to the (110 plane). From the morphological point 

of view, we have shown that in addition of being thinner (1 m size approximately), the electrodes 

fabricated in the (110) cut sample present a smoother core than those obtained in the (100) cut sample, 

especially at low energy regime. On the other hand, in the (110) oriented sample, micromachining 

with higher energies (larger than 6 J with the geometry of our Bessel beam) leads to the breakage of 

the graphitic microstructures, possibly due to incubation effects and also nonlinear propagation 

effects of the Bessel beam inside the bulk. This acts as a limit to explore a wide high energy regime

for the generation of continuous electrodes throughout the whole sample thickness. 

The effect of thermal annealing of the diamond samples, on the resistivity of the fabricated micro-

electrodes has also been investigated. We found that while there is indeed a reduction in the resistivity 

after the annealing process especially for the wires fabricated with low energy pulses in both the 

samples, the barrier potential height which was present in the IV curves in the (100) oriented sample,

remains, on the other hand, the same.

In the (110) oriented diamond, resistivities lower than 0.015  cm have been obtained, namely 0.013 

Ω cm for a 1 m transverse size electrode, which, to the best of our knowledge, is one of the lowest 

values compared to the literature results and the lowest using Bessel beams. In addition, it is the 


lowest value achieved for an in-bulk graphitic micro-electrode written perpendicular to the surface of 

the sample by laser micromachining. 

With this study we have found some particular conditions for an improvement of the overall quality 

of the laser written electrodes in terms of morphology (uniformity of the wires) and conductivity 

values. This opens the way to the fast fabrication by pulsed Bessel beams without any sample 

translation, of graphitic electrodes with different geometries and configurations that may find their 

applications not only for sensing in photonic and microfluidic chips, but also in the case of 3D 

diamond detectors for highly energetic radiation, to be used for instance in nuclear physics and 

medical dosimetry.

Authorship contribution statement

O. J. conceived, supervised the micromachining experiments, discussed the results and revised the 

entire manuscript. A. K. realized the micromachining of the diamond samples, analysed the results, 

and wrote the first manuscript draft. Raman measurements were performed and analysed by A. C. 

The electrical measurements were performed by A. K under the supervision of P. A. All authors 

revised the manuscript.

Declaration of competing interests

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Acknowledgements

O. J. would like to thank David Moran from Glasgow University, and all the authors would like to 
thank Federico Picollo, Adam Britel, and Paolo Olivero from Torino University for useful 
discussions, as well as Vanna Pugliese for helping with the annealing processes.

This research has received funding from the European Union’s H2020 Marie Curie ITN project 
LasIonDef (GA n.956387) and QuantDia (FISR2019-05178) funded by Ministero dell’Istruzione, 
dell’Università e della Ricerca, and from the bilateral scientific cooperation project CNR-RS (UK) 
(2022-2023) entitled “Laser-patterned diamond superconducting single-photon sensors”.


References

1. Handbook of Industrial Diamonds and Diamond Films, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1998.

2. J. Tapper. Diamond detectors in particle physics. Reports on Progress in Physics 63, 8 (2000), 

1273–1316. https://doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/63/8/203

3. V. Bharadwaj, O. Jedrkiewicz, J. P. Hadden, B. Sotillo, M. R. Vázquez, P. Dentella, T. T. 

Fernandez, A. Chiappini, A. N. Giakoumaki, T. L. Phu, M. Bollani, M. Ferrari, R. Ramponi, P. E. 

Barclay, S. M. Eaton, 2019. Femtosecond laser written photonic and microfluidic circuits in 

diamond. Journal of Physics: Photonics 1, 022001. https://doi.org/10.1088/2515-7647/ab0c4e 

4. V. I. Konov. Laser in micro and nanoprocessing of diamond materials, Laser Photonics Reviews

6 (2012), 739–766. https://doi.org/10.1002/lpor.201100030

5. B. Sotillo, V. Bharadwaj, J. P. Hadden, M. Sakakura, A. Chiappini, T. T. Fernandez, S. Longhi, 

O. Jedrkiewicz, Y. Shimotsuma, L. Criante, R. Osellame, G. Galzerano, M.  Ferrari, K. Miura, R.  

Ramponi, P. E. Barclay, S. M. Michael Eaton, 2016. Diamond photonics platform enabled by 

femtosecond laser writing. Scientific Reports 6, 35566. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep35566

6. C. Bloomer, M. E. Newton, G. Rehm, P. S. Salter. A single-crystal diamond X-ray pixel detector 

with embedded graphitic electrodes. Journal of Synchrotron Radiation 27, 3 (2020), 599-607.  

https://doi.org/10.1107/S160057752000140X

7. V.Carabelli, A. Marcantoni, F. Picollo,  A. Battiato, E. Bernardi, A.Pasquarelli, P.Olivero, 

and E. Carbone, Planar Diamond-Based Multiarrays to Monitor Neurotransmitter Release and 

Action Potential Firing: New Perspectives in Cellular Neuroscience, ACS Chem. Neurosci.8, 2 

(2017), 252–264. https://doi.org10.1021/acschemneuro.6b00328

8. V. R. Howes. The graphitization of diamond, Proceedings of the Physical Society 80 (1962) 

648–662. https://doi.org/10.1088/0370-1328/80/3/310

9. A. Battiato, M. Lorusso, E. Bernardi, F. Picollo, F. Bosia, D. Ugues, A. Zelferino, A. Damin, 

J. Baima, N.M. Pugno, E.P. Ambrosio, P. Olivero, Softening the ultra-stiff: Controlled variation 

of Young’s modulus in single-crystal diamond by ion implantation, Acta Materiala, 116 (2016) 

95-103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2016.06.019


10. F Picollo, D Gatto Monticone, P Olivero, B A Fairchild, S Rubanov, S Prawer and E

Vittone,
Fabrication and electrical characterization of three-dimensional graphitic 

microchannels 
in 
single 
crystal 
diamond,
New
J.
Phys. 14 053011 
(2012). 

https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/14/5/053011

11. R. R. Gattass, E. Mazur. Femtosecond laser micromachining in transparent materials, Nature

Photonics 2 (2008), 219-225. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2008.47

12. K. K. Ashikkalieva, Laser-Induced Graphitization of Diamond Bulk: The State of the Art (A 

Review), 
Physics 
of 
Wave 
Phenomena 
30 
(2022), 
1-16. 
https://doi.org/10.3103/

S1541308X22010034

13. T. V. Kononenko, E. V. Zavedeev, V. V. Kononenko, K. K. Ashikkalieva, V. I. Konov. 

Graphitization wave in diamond bulk induced by ultrashort laser pulses, Applied Physics A 119 

(2015), 405-414.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339-015-9109-0

14. J. Durnin, J. J. Miceli, Jr., and J. H. Eberly, Diffraction-free beams, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1499 

(1987). https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.58.1499

15. J. Durnin, J. J. Miceli, J. H. Eberly, Comparison of Bessel and Gaussian beams, Optics Letters 

13 (1988), 79-80. https://doi.org/10.1364/ol.13.000079

16. M. Duocastella, C.B. Arnold, Bessel and annular beams for materials processing, Laser and 

Photonics Reviews 6 (2012), 607-621. https://doi.org/10.1002/lpor.201100031

17. M.  K. Bhuyan, O. Jedrkiewicz, V. Sabonis, M. Mikutis, S. Recchia, A Aprea, M. Bollani, P. 

Di Trapani, High-speed laser-assisted cutting of strong transparent materials using picosecond 

Bessel beams, Applied Physics A 120 (2015), 443-446. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00339-015-

9289-7

18. R. Stoian, M. K. Bhuyan, G. Zhang, G. Cheng, R. Meyer, F. Courvoisier, Ultrafast Bessel 

beams: advanced tools for laser materials processing, Advanced Optical Technologies 7 (2018), 

165–174. https://doi.org/10.1515/aot-2018-0009

19. A. Kuriakose, M. Bollani, P. Di Trapani, O. Jedrkiewicz, 2022. Study of Through-Hole Micro-

Drilling in Sapphire by Means of Pulsed Bessel Beams. Micromachines 13(4), 624. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/mi13040624

20. R. Meyer, M. Jacquot, R. Giust, J. Safioui, L. Rapp, L. Furfaro, P.-A. Lacourt, J. M. Dudley, 

and F. Courvoisier, Single-shot ultrafast laser processing of high-aspect-ratio nanochannels using 

elliptical 
Bessel 
beams, 
Optics 
Letters 
42 
(2017), 
4307-4310.

https://doi.org/10.1364/OL.42.004307


21. B. K. Canfield, L. M. Davis, 2017. Evaluation of Bessel beam machining for scalable 

fabrication of conductive channels through diamond. Proceedings of the SPIE 10092, Laser based 

Micro and Nanoprocessing XI, 100921U.  https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2252615

22. A. Kuriakose, A. Chiappini, B. Sotillo, A. Britel, P. Aprà, F. Picollo, O. Jedrkiewicz. 

Fabrication of conductive micro electrodes in diamond bulk using pulsed Bessel beams. Diamond 

and 
Related 
Materials, 
Volume 
136 
(2023). 
110034. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diamond.2023.110034

23. I. Haughton, I. Lopez Paz, M. McGowan, A. Oh, A. Porter, P. S. Salter, O. Allegre, 2021. 

Barrier potential for laser written graphitic wires in diamond. Diamond and Related Materials 

111, 108164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diamond.2020.108164

24. M. D. Crisp, N. L. Boling, G. Dubé, Importance of Fresnel reflections in laser surface damage 

of 
transparent 
dielectrics, 
Applied 
Physics 
Letters 
21 
(1972), 
364-366. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1654414

25. Anguiano Morales, M. D. Iturbe Castillo, S. Chavez Cherdal, Conical dynamics of Bessel 

beams, Optical Engineering 46 (7), 078001 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1117/1.2752167

26. F. Picollo, S. Rubanov, C. Tomba, A. Battiato, E. Enrico, A. Perrat-Mabilon, C. Peaucelle, 

T.N. Tran Thi, L. Boarino, E. Gheeraert, P. Olivero, Effects of high-power laser irradiation on 

sub-superficial graphitic layers in single-crystal diamond, Acta Materialia 103 (2016), 665-671. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2015.10.046

27. https://tectra.de/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/PBN_PG_heaters.pdf

28. B. Sotillo, A. Chiappini, V. Bharadwaj, J. P. Hadden, F. Bosia, P. Olivero, M. Ferrari,  R. 

Ramponi, P. E. Barclay, and S. M. Eaton, Polarized micro-Raman studies of femtosecond laser 

written stress-induced optical waveguides in diamond, Appl. Phys. Lett. 112 (2018) 031109; 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5017108

29. V.N. Strekalov, V.I. Konov, V.V. Kononenko, S.M. Pimenov, Early stages of laser 

graphitization of diamond, Applied Physics A 76 (2003), 603-607. https://doi.org/ 

10.1007/s00339-002-2014-3


30. R. H. Telling, C. J. Pickard, M. C. Payne, J. E. Field, Theoretical Strength and Cleavage of 

Diamond, 
Physical 
Review 
Letters 
84 
(2000), 
5160-5163. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.84.5160

31. S. M. Pimenov, B. Neuenschwander, B. Jäggi, V. Romano. Effect of crystal orientation on 

picosecond-laser bulk microstructuring and Raman lasing in diamond, Applied Physics A 114 

(2014), 1309-1319. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339-013-7953-3

32. T.V. Kononenko, M. Meier, M.S. Komlenok, S.M. Pimenov, V. Romano, V.P. Pashinin, V.I. 

Konov. Microstructuring of diamond bulk by IR femtosecond laser pulses, Applied Physics A 90 

(2008), 645–651. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339-007-4350-9

33. P. Polesana, M. Franco, A. Couairon, D. Faccio, and P. Di Trapani, Filamentation in Kerr 

media from pulsed Bessel beams, Phys. Rev. A77, 043814 (2008).

34. D. S Knight, W.B. White, Characterization of diamond films by Raman spectroscopy. Journal 

of Materials Research 4 (1989), 385–393. https://doi.org/10.1557/JMR.1989.0385

35. V.N. Apakina, A.L. Karuzskii, M.S. Kogan, A.V. Kvit, N.N. Melnik, Yu.A. Mityagin, V.N. 

Murzin, A.A. Orlikovsky, A.V. Perestoronin, S.D. Tkachenko, N.A. Volchkov Studies of 

nanoscale structure and its transformation in pulsed-laser deposited dense diamond-like carbon 

films Diamond and Related Materials 6, (1997), 564-568. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0925-

9635(96)00629-2

36. Anna Dychalska, P. Popielarski, Wojciech Franków, K. Fabisiak, K. Paprocki, Mirosław 

Szybowicz Study of CVD diamond layers with amorphous carbon admixture by Raman scattering 

spectroscopy, Materials Science-Poland 33 (2015) 799-805. https://doi.org/10.1515/msp-2015-

0067 

37. S. A. Murphy, M. Booth, L. Li, A. Oh, P. Salter, B. Sun, D. Whitehead, A. Zadoroshnyj, Laser 

processing in 3D diamond detectors, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research 

Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 845 (2017), 136-

138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2016.04.052

38. S. Lagomarsino, M. Bellini, C. Corsi, S. Fanetti, F. Gorelli, I. Liontos, G. Parrini, M. Santoro, 

S. Sciortino, Electrical and Raman-imaging characterization of laser-made electrodes for 3D 

diamond 
detectors, 
Diamond 
and 
Related 
Materials 
43 
(2014), 
23-28. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diamond.2014.01.002



