The influence of sonication on the thermal behavior of muscovite 

and biotite

Luis A. Pérez-Maquedaa,*, José M. Blanesa, José Pascualb, José L. Pérez-Rodrígueza

aInstituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Sevilla, CSIC, Universidad de Sevilla, Américo Vespucio s/n 41092 Sevilla, Spain

bDepartamento de Ingeniería Civil, Materiales y Fabricación, ETSII, Universidad de Málaga, Plaza, Ejido s/n 29013 Málaga, Spain

Received 2 November 2002; accepted 9 April 2003

Abstract

The differences on the thermal behavior (DTA-TG) of mica samples measured before and after sonication have been studied. 

Sonication treatment produces important modifications in the thermal behavior of muscovite and biotite samples. For muscovite, it 
produces a broadening and decrease in temperature of the dehydroxylation and crystallization effects, reaching a steady stage after 
40 h treatment time. For biotite, the original single peak profile for the dehydroxylation of the untreated sample is converted into a 
two peaks profile after sonication, the intensity of the low temperature peak increases with sonication time, while the intensity of the 
high temperature peak decreases. The modification of the thermal behavior for sonicated samples has been correlated to the particle 
size distribution effect produced by the sonication treatment. It has been also observed that the cup tip of the sonication equipment 
contaminates the samples releasing titanium of its composition.

Keywords: Micas; Particle size; Sonication; Thermal properties

1. Introduction

Micas are minerals of significant commercial impor-

tance due to their physical properties. These minerals 
remain stable at high temperature and have interesting 
electrical properties. Therefore, they are used in appli-
cations where it is required high-temperature stability 
and electrical properties.1

The thermal behavior of micas has been extensively 

studied. Thus, studies on the dehydroxylation of dioc-
tahedral micas, such as celadonite and glauconite, have 
shown that during dehydroxylation cations migrate
from cis into trans-octahedra and have five-fold coordi-
nation.2 For muscovite, Mackenzie et al.3 have sug-
gested an homogeneous dehydroxylation mechanism 
forming a dehydroxylate in which the aluminum is pre-
dominantly 5-coordinate. On the other hand Guggen-
heim et al.4 have found a very broad peak in the 
differential thermogravimetric (DTG) trace of a mica 
sample that they interpreted as two overlapping poorly 
resolved dehydroxylation peaks. These two peaks have

* Corresponding author.

E-mail address: maqueda@cica.es (L.A. Pe´ rez-Maqueda).

been explained by considering that the Al–OH bond is 
greatly affected by the coordination number of neigh-
boring polyhedron. When neighboring polyhedron are
in octahedral coordination, the hydroxyl group is lost 
at lower temperatures than when neighboring poly-
hedron are in five-fold coordination (after partial 
dehydroxylation).

Mechanical treatment are of great importance in the 

preparation and processing of raw materials.5 Micas are 
often used in ground forms. Mica may be dry ground 
(yielding particles in the range from 1.2 mm to 150 mm), 
wet ground (95–45 mm), or micronized ( < 53 mm). When 
studying grinding treatments emphasis has been placed 
on the impact of milling on the physicochemical prop-
erties of the initially coarse powder, and its influence on 
the transformation of the solid.6,7 It is well known that
grinding of clay minerals produces various effects on their 
structure and properties.8 The significant processes 
involved in the preparation of ceramic raw materials have 
been extensively studied, specially those for kaolinite,9,10

montmorillonite or bentonite,11 illite,12 pyrophyllite,13

talc,14 and vermiculite.15

It has been observed that grinding of clays produces 

progressive amorphyzation when grinding time increa-


ses.16 In many cases this treatment yields heterogeneous 
hardly aggregated materials with modified chemical 
reactivity. All these effects are useful for some processes, 
but they are important drawbacks for many of the 
applications of mica, where it is important to have small 
particle diameters while maintaining the crystalline 
structure in order to retain the properties of mica. An 
alternative method for particle size reduction is sonica-
tion. Cavitational collapse of bubbles on solid surfaces 
leads to micro jet and shock-wave impacts on the sur-
face of the solids, together with interparticle collisions 
which can result in particle size reduction.17,18 Recently, 
micron and submicron-sized vermiculite flakes were 
prepared from a natural macroscopic vermiculite sam-
ple by sonication.17,19 The resulting materials were 
crystalline, as assayed by X-ray diffraction.20

Particle size distribution is a very sensitive issue in the 

thermal behavior of materials. The importance of this 
issue has been recognized in the literature and authors 
have observed changes in the profiles of the thermal 
transformation of solid when performing experiments 
under 
both 
isothermal 
and 
non-isothermal 
con-

ditions.21—24 For kinetically driven process, it has been 
shown in a theoretical work22 that the shape and aver-
age temperature of the thermogravimetric curves are 
affected by the particle size distribution. This change does 
not necessarily imply a modification in the kinetic para-
meters (activation energy, pre-exponential parameter of 
Arrhenius, kinetic model) of the reaction.

Clay minerals subjected to grinding experience parti-

cle size reduction together with other important trans-
formations, such as amorphyzation, aggregation of
small particles into larger units and contamination. The 
influence of grinding on the thermal behavior of miner-
als has been extensively studied.16,25—28 However, until 
now, no consideration has been given to the effect of 
sonication on the thermal behavior of minerals. The 
purpose of this work is to show the effect of sonication 
on the thermal behavior of muscovite and biotite, spe-
cial attention is given to the effect of particle size dis-
tribution. In addition, the influence of the possible 
contamination induced by the tip cups of the ultrasound 
equipment on the thermal analysis and new phases pro-
duced is investigated.

2. Experimental

2.1. Materials

A muscovite from Fuente Obejuna (Co´ rdoba, Spain) 

and a biotite from Santa Olalla (Huelva, Spain) were 
used as starting materials.29 Both samples consist of pla-
telets of about 10 cm in length and 0.5 cm in thickness. 
Previously to the sonication treatment, samples were 
lightly ground using a knife-mill and sieved under 2 mm.

2.2. Sonication

A high-intensity ultrasonic horn (Misonix inc.), that 

consists of a solid titanium rod connected to a piezo-
electric ceramic, and a 20 KHz, 750 W power supply 
were used. The horn tip was introduced into a 
thermostated
(20
◦C)
double-jacket
reactor.
Three 

grams of < 2 mm flakes were mixed with 100 cm3 of 
freshly deionized water and subjected to ultrasounds for 
periods ranging between 10 and 100 h.

2.3. X-ray diffraction analysis

Diffraction patterns were obtained using a dif-

fractometer (Kristalloflex D-500 Siemens) at 36 kV and
26 mA with Ni-filtered CuKa radiation and a graphite 
monochromator.

2.4. Nuclear magnetic resonance measurements

High-resolution solid-state 29Si and 27Al magic angle 

spinning (MAS) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectra of powdered samples were recorded at 79.49 and
104.26 MHz, respectively, in a Bru¨ ker MSL-400 spec-
trometer. Measurements were conducted at room tem-
perature 
with 
tetramethylsilane 
(TMS) 
and

[Al(H2O)6]3+ as external references.

2.5. Thermal study

Thermogravimetric analysis (TG), differential ther-

mogravimetric analysis (DTG) and differential thermal 
analysis (DTA) were carried out simultaneously in static 
air or argon flow (500 cm3 min—1) with an automatic 
thermal analyzer system (Seiko, TG/DTA 6300). Mica 
(muscovite and biotite) samples of about 50 mg were 
loosely packed into a platinum holder and were ther-
mally treated at a heating rate of 10 ◦C min—1.

2.6. Scanning electron microscope study

The samples were studied by scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM) using a Jeol JSM-5400 model. The 
samples were covered with a thin gold film and analyzed 
by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) using a 
Link-ISIS Si/Li detector. The mean size (length, L) of 
the plate-like particles was evaluated by measuring the 
length in the longest direction of around 100 particles
for each sample.

2.7. Particle size distribution

The mass fraction versus particle diameter plots have 

been obtained by a deposition–centrifugation separa-
tion procedure described in the literature30 followed by 
the gravimetric quantification of the different fractions.


2.8. Chemical analysis

Chemical quantification of Ti in bulk samples was 

carried out using a sequential
X-ray fluorescence 

spectrometer (Siemens, SRS 3000).

3. Results

The 27Al and 29Si NMR analysis of the untreated

and sonicated muscovite samples (figures not shown) 
did not show at the atomic scale any modification in the 
coordination of aluminum or silicon.29 Thus, for both 
sonicated and untreated samples, the 27Al spectra 
showed the typical bands corresponding to aluminum in 
octahedral and tetrahedral sites3,31 and the 29Si spectra 
showed a peak attributed to Si(Si2Al) environment.3,32
Additionally, the X-ray diffraction patterns of the 
original and sonicated muscovite and biotite samples 
indicated that sonication does not produce significant 
structural changes in the samples. Thus, the diffraction 
lines of both untreated and sonicated samples remained 
unchanged, except for the broadening of the lines, that 
could be attributed to the delamination and crystallite 
size reduction,17 and to the change in the relative

Fig. 1. Scanning electron micrographs of muscovite (a) and biotite (b) 
samples sonicated for 40 h.

intensity of the diffractions due to textural effects.33
These results indicate that the structure of the micas is 
maintained after the sonication treatment in contrast 
with those results previously obtained for ground clay 
minerals,9,13,16,25—27 where even short milling treatments 
produce significant structure modifications.

The gradual size reduction on sonication of muscovite 

and biotite was revealed by SEM (Fig. 1). During soni-
cation treatment, the original stacking layers of musco-
vite and biotite are delaminated and the lamellar 
phyllosilicate mineral particles are broken by mechan-
ical impact induced by sonication producing a decrease 
in particle size. The evolution of the particle length with 
sonication time (Fig. 2) shows for the muscovite an 
important decrease of particle length with sonication 
time up to a limit reached for 40 h. For the biotite, the 
particle length decreases in the entire sonication range 
studied here. The particle lengths of the sonicated 
samples are larger for biotite than for muscovite.

The mass fraction as a function of the particle dia-

meter plots for the muscovite and biotite samples soni-
cated for 40 h are presented in Fig. 3. These plots show 
that the sonicated samples are not monodispersed but 
constituted of different particle size fractions in the
range of micron and submicron sizes. It is also clear 
from this figure, as it was also revealed from SEM 
measurements, that the sonicated biotite sample has a 
larger particle size than the muscovite one.

DTG diagrams carried out in argon flow of untreated 

and sonicated muscovite samples in the range from 300 
to 1000 ◦C, where dehydroxylation of muscovite takes 
place, are shown in Fig. 4. The weight loss of the

Fig. 2. Evolution of the mean size (length) as a function of the 
sonication time for biotite (&) and muscovite (*).


untreated sample begins at 650 ◦C and reaction is over
at 920 ◦C. The total weight loss agrees with the theore-
tical one calculated for an ideal muscovite (≈4.70%). 
This theoretical weight loss is assumed to be due entirely 
to the structural water lost by dehydroxylation as esti-
mated from the crystal structure. Sonication modifies
the DTG profile (Fig. 4). The relatively sharp weight
loss centered at 824 ◦C for the untreated sample is con-
verted into a much broader weight loss shifted to lower 
temperatures. Thus, the DTG maximum for the sample 
sonicated for 10 h (Fig. 4b) appears at 700 ◦C (125 ◦C 
lower than for the untreated sample). Longer sonication 
times produce even a more pronounced shifting of this 
DTG peak. This shifting effect reaches a limit for 40 h 
sonication time (maximum at 640 ◦C, Fig. 4c). In addi-
tion to this weight loss, a new weight loss is observed for 
the sonicated samples in the range from 300 to 450 ◦C 
that appears as a shoulder in the DTG trace (Fig. 4b–d). 
This weight loss also increases with sonication time up 
to a limit reached for 40 h treatment time.

Since X-ray diffraction and NMR studies have shown 

that sonication does not produce significant changes in 
the mica crystalline structure or Al and Si coordination, 
the effect of sonication on the thermal behavior of the 
muscovite could be attributed to changes in the particle

Fig. 3. Mass fraction as a function of the particle diameter for the 
muscovite (a) and biotite (b) samples sonicated for 40 h.

size distribution. The importance of particle size in the 
thermal reactivity of solids have been recognized in lit-
erature.21—24 Theoretical studies22 have shown that, for 
kinetically controlled processes, the shape of the TG-
DTG traces and the average temperature of the process 
are affected by the particle size distribution. Thus, in
two identical samples with different particle size dis-
tribution, the differences in their thermal behavior could 
be attributed to the particle size effect and not necessa-
rily to a change in the kinetic mechanism or in the 
kinetic parameters (activation energy or pre-exponential 
factor of Arrhenius).

For the muscovite sample, there is a correlation 

between the effect of sonication on particle size reduc-
tion and the changes in the thermal behavior. Thus, the 
thermal behavior changes while the particle size is 
reduced, that is up to 40 h treatment time, remaining 
unchanged for longer treatments times. The particle size 
reduction produced by sonication facilitates the dehy-
droxylation of the muscovite as observed by the shifting 
of the main weight loss toward lower temperature. In 
addition, the new borders created by the particle size 
reduction should be responsible of the low temperature 
(300–450 ◦C) due to weakly bonded OH groups placed 
on these borders.

Fig. 4. DTG curves obtained under argon flow at a heating rate of 
10 ◦C m—1 for the muscovite before (a) and after sonication for 10 h 
(b), 40 h (c), and 100 h (d).


In order to study the influence of the particle size dis-

tribution on the thermal behavior of the sonicated 
muscovite, DTG plots of the different fractions with 
different particle sizes separated by the deposition–cen-
trifugation procedure were recorded for the sample 
sonicated for 40 h under argon atmosphere. Fig. 5
shows the DTG traces for the different size fractions 
after normalization and multiplication by the amount of 
sample as taken from Fig. 3, the overall curve resulted
of adding up of the DTG traces of the different fractions 
is also included (solid line). It is clear from this figure 
(Fig. 5) that the overall trace resulting of adding up the 
contribution of all the fractions has the same shape as
the DTG trace shown in Fig. 4b for the muscovite 
sonicated for 40 h. Fig. 5 allows to discriminate the 
influence of the different particle sizes on the DTG
trace. Thus, the fractions with smaller particle size have 
a more siginificant contribution to the low temperature 
weight loss than the larger particles. In addition, the 
main weight loss with a maximum in the DTG at 640 ◦C 
is the result of the contributions of all the fractions in 
such a way that the smaller particles dehydroxylate at 
lower temperature than the larger ones. The broadening 
of the DTG peak of the sonicated samples is also due to 
the contribution of the different particle size fractions. 
These results illustrate the effect that the changes in the 
mean particle size and particle size distribution have on 
the thermal dehydroxylation of muscovite.

The DTA curve of the original muscovite carried out 

in argon flow (Fig. 6a) shows two endothermic peaks, 
one with a minimum at 825 ◦C and the other with a 
minimum at 1145 ◦C. The temperature of former endo-
thermic peak matches that of the weight loss in the
DTG curve (Fig. 4a) and corresponds to dehydroxyla-
tion. The endothermic peak at higher temperatures 
represent recrystallization into leucite, corundum and

Fig. 5. DTG traces of the different fractions with different particle
sizes separated by the deposition–centrifugation procedure recorded
for the muscovite sample sonicated for 40 h under argon flow at a 
heating rate of 10 ◦C m—1. The overall curve resulted of adding the 
DTG traces corresponding to the different fractions is plotted as a

mullite, as was confirmed by X-ray diffraction of the 
sonicated muscovite samples heated to 1250 ◦C (figure 
not shown). The products of recrystallization may vary 
somewhat for different natural muscovite samples.34 In 
Fig. 6b, it has been included the DTA of the sample 
sonicated for 100 h. For this sample, the dehydroxylation 
effect is also broadened and shifted to lower tempera-
tures as compared with that of the untreated material. 
The evolution of this peak is identical to that observed 
for the DTG trace (Fig. 4). The DTA effect at tempera-
ture higher than 900 ◦C suffers also broadening and 
shifting to lower temperature with the sonication time. 
The shifting of the higher temperature endothermic
peak has also been observed for ground muscovite.34

Fig. 6c shows the DTA diagram recorded in static air 

for the sonicated muscovite sample. The endothermic 
effects described above for the experiments performed in 
argon are also observed in the DTA traces recorded in 
air. However, an additional exothermic effect at 682 ◦C
is present in treated sample. TG experiments (figure not 
shown) correlate this exothermic effect with an increase 
in weight at the same temperatures. This exothermic 
effects and the corresponding weight increase may be 
only attributed to oxidation and/or nitridation of some

Fig. 6. DTA curves at a heating rate of 10 ◦C min—1 for the untreated 
muscovite in argon flow (a) and for the muscovite sonicated for 100 h 
in argon flow (b) and in static air (c).


compound present or formed during the sonication 
treatment. The chemical analysis as assayed by X-ray 
fluorescence of the muscovite and biotite samples soni-
cated for different times show similar composition, 
except for the percentages of TiO2 that suffer a remark-
able increase in relation with the untreated samples. 
Thus, the TiO2 percentages change from 0.05% for 
untreated sample to 5.33% in muscovite sonicated for 
100 h. This increase in titanium is due to the release of 
this element from the tip cup of the ultrasound equip-
ment that is manufactured of Ti. The powder X-ray 
diffraction studied of sonicated muscovite and biotite 
samples confirms the presence of titanium element that 
is oxidized to titanium oxide, rutile, during the heating
in static air (figure not shown). The muscovite sample 
after 100 h of sonication and heated at 1200 ◦C (Fig. 7A) 
is constituted by platelets particles constituted by Si, Al 
and K (Fig. 7B) that correspond to the muscovite 
material and spherical particles constituted by titanium 
oxide (Fig. 7C). These data confirm that sonicated 
samples are contaminated by particles of Ti that is

release from the tip cup of the ultrasound probe. This Ti 
is present as discrete particles mixed with the mica par-
ticles. The Ti particles are oxidized to rutile when heated 
under static air remaining as independent particles
mixed with the mica. While the importance of con-
tamination during grinding of minerals has been 
previously recognized in the literature,25,27 no data are 
published, up to our knowledge, on the contamination
of solids subjected to sonication treatment.

For biotite, sonication has also a significant effect on 

its thermal behavior. the DTG curves recorded in argon 
flow in the range 900–1225 ◦C of biotite samples before 
and after sonication are shown in Fig. 8. This tempera-
ture range has been selected because the thermal dehy-
droxylation of biotite takes place in this range. The
DTG curve for the untreated biotite (Fig. 8a) shows a 
peak with a maximum at 1160 ◦C. The weight loss cor-
responding to dehydroxylation, as would be expected
for a magnesium containing mineral, takes place at a 
considerably higher temperature than that of an alumi-
num containing mineral muscovite. After 10 h sonica-

Fig. 7. (A) Scanning electron micrograph of the muscovite sample sonicated for 100 h and heated at 1200 ◦C. (B) EDX analysis of platelets particles 
marked in the micrograph as 1. (C) EDX analysis of spherical particles marked in the micrograph as 2.


Fig. 8. DTG curves obtained under argon flow and a heating rate of
10 ◦C min—1 for the biotite sample before (a) and after sonication for
10 h (b), 20 h (c), 40 h (d), 50 h (e) and 100 h (f).

tion time, the DTG trace (Fig. 8b) shows that the peak 
centered at 1160 ◦C is broader and it is also accom-
panied by a shoulder at lower temperature. This 
shoulder is transformed into a peak at 1052 ◦C after 20 
h treatment (Fig. 8c). The intensity of this second peak 
increases with sonication time, while the intensity of the 
high temperature peak decreases. Thus, after 100 h 
treatment time the high temperature peak has almost 
disappeared and it is only present as a small shoulder 
(Fig. 8f).

In order to study the contribution of the different 

particle sizes on the thermal behavior of the biotite 
sample, the same particle size separation procedure used 
for muscovite was applied to biotite. Fig. 9 includes for 
the biotite sample sonicated for 40 h, the DTG trace of 
the different fractions with the overall curve resulted of 
adding up the contribution of all the fractions. In this 
case, as it happened for muscovite, the curve resulted of 
adding up all the individual DTG traces present the
same shape as that included in Fig. 8d for the sample 
sonicated for 40 h. Fig. 9 shows that particles larger
than 2 mm dehydroxylate at higher temperatures than 
those smaller than 2 mm. Thus, the DTG peak at higher 
temperature (with a maximum at 1160 ◦C) is due to the 
dehydroxylation of particles with an average size larger

Fig. 9. DTG traces of the different fractions with different particle
sizes separated by the deposition-centrifugation procedure recorded
for the biotite sample sonicated for 40 h under argon flow at a heating 
rate of 10 ◦C m—1. The overall curve resulted of adding the DTG tra-
ces corresponding to the different fractions is plotted as a solid line.

than 2 mm, while the lower temperature DTG peak
(with a maximum at 1050 ◦C) is mostly due to particles 
smaller than 2 mm. For biotite, unlike muscovite where 
particle size reduction is leveled off at 40 h sonication 
time, the particle size reduction takes place along the 
entire sonication time. This continuous particle size 
reduction has an effect also in the thermal behavior. 
Thus, the lower temperature peak increases while the 
high temperature effect decreases with sonication time, 
indicating that the amount of particles with sizes smaller 
than 2 mm is increasing while the amount of the larger 
ones is decreasing.

The DTA and TG performed in air for the sonicated 

biotite samples (figures not shown) also indicated con-
tamination of Ti that oxidizes during heating. This Ti 
contamination was also detected by X-ray diffraction, 
chemical analysis and SEM in a similar way as in the 
muscovite samples.

4. Conclusions

Sonication does not produce significant structural 

transformation in the mica samples. Additionally, for
the muscovite sample, it has been observed by NMR
that the coordination of Al and Si does not suffer 
modification due to the treatment. Nevertheless, the 
particle size of the samples is drastically reduced. This 
particle size reduction produces important changes in
the thermal behavior of these micas. For the muscovite 
sample, the weight losses on the DTG curve due to 
dehydroxylation and the corresponding DTA endother-
mic effect are broadened and shifted to lower tempera-
ture, until a sonication time limit is reached at 40 h, 
treatments longer than 40 h do not produce any impor-


tant change in the TG or DTA traces. This behavior 
could be correlated with the decrease of particle size up 
to 40 h sonication time followed by a leveling off. The 
broadening of the main weight loss is related to the 
effect of the particle size distribution. The weight loss in 
the range from 300 to 450 ◦C could be attributed to 
loosely OH in the borders of the particles generated by 
the sonication treatment.

For the biotite, the particle size decreases in the entire 
sonication time range studied here, and this continuous 

change has an important effect on the biotite thermal 

behavior. Thus, the only weight loss in the range from 

900 to 1200 ◦C due to dehydroxylation observed for the 
untreated biotite is converted into two different weight 
losses for the sonicated samples. The DTG trace shows 
that one of the peak increases its intensity while the 

other decreases with the sonication time. The study of

the influence of particle size distribution on the thermal 
behavior has shown that the low temperature peak is 
due to particles smaller than 2 mm while the one at 
higher temperatures is due to particles larger than 2 mm. 

The contamination of sonicated samples has been 

reported, up to our knowledge, for the first time in this 

paper. Thus, it has been observed that Ti is released 
from the sonication probe and appears as individual
particles mixed with the sonicated particles.

Acknowledgements

This publication was prepared on the basis of the 

results obtained in the frame of the project MAT 2002-
03774 of the Ministry of Science and Technology of 
Spain.

References

1. Hedrick, J. B., Mica. Am. Ceram. Soc. Bull., 1999, 78, 136–138.
2. Muller, F., Drits, V., Plancon, A. and Besson, G., Dehydroxyla-

tion of Fe3+, Mg-rich dioctahedral micas: (I) structural transfor-
mation. Clay Miner., 2000, 35, 491–504.

3. Mackenzie, K. J. D., Brown, I. W. M., Cardile, C. M. and 

Meinhold, R. H., The thermal reactions of muscovite studied by 
high-resolution solid-state 29Si and 27Al NMR. J. Mater. Sci., 
1987, 22, 2645–2654.

4. Guggenheim, S., Chang, Y.-H. and Koster van Groos, A. F., 

Muscovite dehydroxilation: high-temperature studies. Am. 
Mineralogist, 1987, 72, 537–550.

5. Ovadyahu, D., Yariv, S., Lapides, I. and Deutsch, Y., Mechan-

ochemical adsorption of phenol by tot swelling clay minerals II 
simultaneous DTA and TG study. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim.,
1998, 51, 431–447.

6. Matteazi, P. and Le Caer, G., Room temperature mechan-

osynthesis of carbides by grinding of elemental powders. J. Am. 
Ceram. Soc., 1991, 74, 1382–1390.

7. Alcala, M. D., Gotor, F. J., Perez-Maqueda, L. A., Real, C., Dianez,

M. J. and Criado, J. M., Constant rate thermal analysis (CRTA) as 
a tool for the synthesis of materials with controlled texture and 
structure. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 1999, 56, 1447–1452.

8. Grim, R. E., Clay Mineralogy. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1968.
9. Pascual, J., Zapatero, J., de Haro, M. C. J., Varona, I., Justo, A., 

Perez-Rodriguez, J. L. and Sanchez-Soto, P. J., Porous mullite
and mullite-based composites by chemical processing of kaolinite 
and aluminium metal wastes. J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 1409–
1414.

10. Miller, J. G. and Oulton, T. D., Protrotropy in kaolinite during 

percussive grinding. Clays Clay Miner., 1970, 18, 313–323.

11. Cicel, B. and Kranz, G., Mechanism of montmorillonite structure 

degradation by percussive grinding. Clay Miner., 1981, 16, 151–
162.

12. Juhasz, Z. and Somogoy, A., Grinding test with illite. Keram., 

1984, 36, 659–662.

13. Pe´ rez-Rodrı´ guez, J. L., Madrid, L. and Sa´ nchez Soto, P. J., 

Effects of dry grinding on pyrophyllite. Clay Miner., 1988, 23, 
399–410.

14. Sanchez-Soto, P. J., Wiewiora, A., Aviles, M. A., Justo, A.,

Perez-Maqueda, L. A., Perez-Rodriguez, J. L. and Bylina, P.,
Talc from Puebla de Lillo, Spain. II. Effect of dry grinding 
on particle size and shape. Appl. Clay Sci., 1997, 12, 297–
312.

15. Sanchez-Soto, P. J., Ruiz-Conde, A., Aviles, M. A., Justo, A. and 

Pe´ rez-Rodrı´ guez, J. L., Mechanochemical effects on vermiculite
and its influence on the synthesis of nitrogen ceramics. In Cera-
mic Charting the Future, ed. P. Vicenzeni. Techno Srl, Faenza 
(Italy), 1995, pp. 1383–1390.

16. Sanchez-Soto, P. J., Del Carmen Jimenez de Haro, M., Perez-

Maqueda, L. A., Varona, I. and Perez-Rodriguez, J. L., Effects of 
dry grinding on the structural changes of kaolinite powders. J.
Am. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 83, 1649–1657.

17. Perez-Maqueda, L. A., Caneo, O. B., Poyato, J. and Perez-

Rodriguez, J. L., Preparation and characterization of micron and 
submicron-sized vermiculite. Phys. Chem. Miner., 2001, 28, 61–
66.

18. Suslick, K. S., Application of ultrasound to materials chemistry. 

MRS Bull., 1996, 74, 29–34.

19. Perez-Rodriguez, J. L., Carrera, F., Poyato, J. and Perez-

Maqueda, L. A., Sonication as a tool for preparing nanometric 
vermiculite particles. Nanotechnology, 2002, 13, 382–387.

20. Wiewiora, A., Perez-Rodriguez, J. L., Perez-Maqueda, L. A. and 

Drapala, J., Particle size distribution in sonicated high- and low-
charge vermiculites. Appl. Clay Sci. (in press).

21. Kupar, P. C., Kinetics of solid-state reactions of particulate 

ensembles with size distributions. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1973, 56, 
79–81.

22. Koga, N. and Criado, J. M., Kinetic analyses of solid-state reac-

tions with a particle-size distribution. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1998, 
81, 2901–2909.

23. Lahiri, A. K., The effect of particle size distribution on TG. 

Thermochimica Acta, 1980, 40, 289–295.

24. Cooper, E. A. and Mason, T. O., Mechanism of La2CuO4 solid 

state powder reaction by quantitave XRD and impedance spec-
troscopy. J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1995, 78, 857–864.

25. Pe´ rez-Maqueda, L. A., Pe´ rez-Rodrı´ guez, J. L., Scheiffele, G. W.,

Justo, A. and Sa´ nchez-Soto, P. J., Thermal analysis of ground 
kaolinite and pyrophyllite. J. Therm. Anal., 1993, 39, 1055–
1067.

26. Pe´ rez-Rodrı´ guez, J. L. and Sa´ nchez-Soto, P. J., The influence of

dry grinding on the thermal behaviour of pyrophyllite. J. Therm. 
Anal., 1991, 37, 1401–1413.

27. Pe´ rez-Rodrı´ guez, J., Pe´ rez-Maqueda, L., Justo, A. and Sa´ nchez-

Soto, P., Influence of grinding contamination on high tempera-
ture phases of kaolinite. Ind. Ceram., 1992, 12, 109–113.

28. Wiewiora, A., Sanchez-Soto, P. J., Aviles, M. A., Justo, A.,

Perez-Maqueda, L. A., Perez-Rodriguez, J. L. and Bylina, P.,
Talc from Puebla de Lillo, Spain. I. XRD study. Appl. Clay Sci., 
1997, 12, 233–245.


29. Pe´ rez-Maqueda, L. A., Franco, F., Avile´ s, M. A., Poyato, J. and 

Pe´ rez-Rodrı´ guez, J. L., Effect of sonication on particle-size dis-
tribution in natural muscovite and biotite. Clays Clay Miner., 
2003, 51, 701–708.

30. Jackson, M. L., Soil Chemical Analysis—Advanced Course, 2nd 

edn. Published by the author, Madison, WI, 1975.

31. Sanz, J. and Serratosa, J. M., Distinction of tetrahedrally and 

octahedrally coordinated Al in phyllosilicates by NMR-spectro-
scopy. Clay Minerals, 1984, 19, 113–115.

32. Sanz, J. and Serratosa, J. M., Si-29 and Al-27 high-resolution 

MAS–NMR spectra of phyllosilicates. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 
106, 4790–4793.

33. Wiewio´ ra, A. and Weiss, Z., X-ray powder transmission dif-

fractometry determination of mica polytypes: method and appli-
cation to natural samples. Clay Miner., 1985, 20, 231–248.

34. Mackenzie, R. C., Simple phyllosilicates based on gibbsite and 

brucite-like sheets. In Differential Thermal Analysis, Vol. 1, ed.
R. Mackenzie. Academic Press, London, 1970, pp. 498–537.


