Laser-induced quenching of metastability at the Mott-insulator to metal transition

Theodor Luibrand,1 Lorenzo Fratino,2, 3 Farnaz Tahouni-Bonab,1 Amihai Kronman,4 Yoav Kalcheim,4, 5

Ivan K. Schuller,5 Marcelo Rozenberg,3 Reinhold Kleiner,1 Dieter Koelle,1 and Stefan Gu´enon1, ∗

1Physikalisches Institut, Center for Quantum Science (CQ) and LISA+, Eberhard
Karls Universit¨at T¨ubingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 14, 72076 T¨ubingen, Germany
2CNRS Laboratoire de Physique Th´eorique et Mod´elisation, CY Cergy Paris Universit´e, 95302 Cergy-Pontoise Cedex, France
3CNRS Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, Universit´e Paris-Saclay, 91405, Orsay, France
4Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Technion –
Israel Institute of Technology, Technion City, 32000 Haifa, Israel
5Center for Advanced Nanoscience, Department of Physics, University of
California — San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA92093-0319, USA

There is growing interest in strongly correlated insulator thin films because the intricate interplay
of their intrinsic and extrinsic state variables causes memristive behavior that might be used for
bio-mimetic devices in the emerging field of neuromorphic computing. In this study we find that
laser irradiation tends to drive V2O3 from supercooled/superheated metastable states towards ther-
modynamic equilibrium, most likely in a non-thermal way. We study thin films of the prototypical
Mott-insulator V2O3, which show spontaneous phase separation into metal-insulator herringbone
domains during the Mott transition. Here, we use low-temperature microscopy to investigate how
these metal-insulator domains can be modified by scanning a focused laser beam across the thin
film surface. We find that the response depends on the thermal history: When the thin film is
heated from below the Mott transition temperature, the laser beam predominantly induces metallic
domains. On the contrary, when the thin film is cooled from a temperature above the transition,
the laser beam predominantly induces insulating domains. Very likely, the V2O3 thin film is in
a superheated or supercooled state, respectively, during the first-order phase transition, and the
perturbation by a laser beam drives these metastable states into stable ones. This way, the ther-
mal history is locally erased.
Our findings are supported by a phenomenological model with a
laser-induced lowering of the energy barrier between the metastable and equilibrium states.

Strongly correlated insulator thin films are the sub-
ject of intensive research in the emerging field of neu-
romorphic computing [1–4].
If these materials are
cooled to a temperature below the transition tempera-
ture, the charge carrier mobility is considerably reduced
due to electron-electron correlation effects like the Mott-
Hubbard interaction (e.g., V2O3 [5–9]), charge trans-
fer (e.g., rare-earth nickelates [10, 11]) or dimerization
(e.g., VO2)[12]. This reduction in charge carrier mobil-
ity results in a metal-to-insulator transition (MIT) [13].
An equivalent insulator-to-metal transition (IMT) is ob-
served during heating. The electron-electron correlation
effects cause an intricate interplay of intrinsic and ex-
trinsic state variables that can be leveraged for engi-
neering neuromorphic devices [14]. One way to influence
strongly correlated insulator thin-film devices externally
is through exposure to light. For instance, light is used
to trigger resistive switching [15–18], to tune the resis-
tive switching voltage thresholds [19] or to tune the fre-
quency of relaxation oscillators [20] in VO2 devices. Fur-
thermore, because strongly correlated insulator thin-film
neuromorphic devices are usually operated in a critical
state at the onset of the IMT/MIT, their functionality
is affected by thermodynamics of phase transitions. For
instance, the hysteresis in resistance R vs temperature T
curves due to the first order MIT/IMT in VO2 is lever-

∗ stefan.guenon@uni-tuebingen.de

aged for multistate resistive switching [21–23]. In V2O3,
the MIT/IMT is accompanied by structural (corundum
to monclinic) and magnetic (paramagnetic to antiferro-
magnetic) phase transitions, providing a complex inter-
play of many degrees of freedom [24–27]. As a founda-
tion of utilizing V2O3-based neuromorphic device appli-
cations that are implementing light as an external stimu-
lus, one needs a better understanding of the phase tran-
sitions in V2O3.
We have investigated the effect of laser scanning ir-
radiation on a V2O3 thin film during the IMT/MIT by
acquiring photomicrographs.
Here we report on laser-
induced phase transitions. While at the IMT, the metal
phase is induced, the insulating phase is predominantly
induced at the MIT. The latter is surprising, because one
might expect the main effect of the laser irradiation to be
heating, which is expected to drive the system towards a
more metallic state.
The sample under investigation is a continuous 300-
nm-thick rf-sputtered V2O3 film on an r-cut sapphire
substrate with gold electrodes evaporated on top (see
Ref. [28] for details); Fig. 1(a) shows its R(T) curve for
both heating and cooling. The resistance change of four
orders of magnitude at the phase transition is a sign of
high film quality.
We used the same optical microscopy setup as in Lange
et al. [29], where we have demonstrated that the change
in reflectivity allows for imaging the separation of the
insulating and metallic phases with 0.5 µm spatial res-
olution.
As described in Refs. [30, 31], the setup is a

arXiv:2401.11889v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  22 Jan 2024


2

cryogenic combined widefield and laser scanning micro-
scope. A sketch of the experimental setup is shown in
Fig. 1(b), and a detailed description is given in Ref. [32]
(Sec. I).
For this study, the photomicrographs are acquired in
the widefield mode with an monochromatic (532 nm)
LED illumination, and the laser scanning mode is used
for exposing the sample under investigation to laser light
of 405 nm wavelength. The theoretical laser spot diame-
ter on the thin-film surface is 322 nm. We have measured
the incident laser power on the sample surface by replac-
ing the sample with a photodiode. The maximum laser
power is 919 µW. However, different laser powers were
chosen, throughout this study. For exposure, the selected
area is scanned line by line (line separation 100 nm) with
the laser in the continuous wave mode as depicted in
Fig. 1(b). During each line scan, the laser spot stays at
a position for 13 ms then it moves to the next position at
a distance of 100 nm.
The procedure to investigate the effect of laser scan-
ning irradiation is the following:

1. A photomicrograph (32×32 µm2) of the thin film is
acquired.

2. A selected area (14×14 µm2) is exposed to laser
light.

3. A second photomicrograph is acquired.

4. For the differential image, the first photomicro-
graph is subtracted from the second.

With this procedure, the laser-induced changes from the
metallic to the insulating and from the insulating to the
metallic phases are mapped.
We have exposed a V2O3 thin film by laser light at dif-
ferent temperatures during the IMT/MIT (Fig. 1). The
R(T) curve shows a hysteresis of several Kelvins due
to the first-oder nature of the IMT/MIT [7].
During
heating of the sample from 80 K to room temperature,
the heating was interrupted four times during the IMT,
and a pristine (unirradiated) 14×14 µm area was exposed
with 0.1 mW laser power according to the procedure de-
scribed above. The same procedure was chosen for cool-
ing from room temperature to 80 K with 0.6 mW laser
power. Note, that we chose different pristine areas on the
sample for each scanning procedure.
The photomicro-
graphs in Fig. 1(c),(d) (in particular, D and E) show the
characteristic herringbone domain pattern due to strain-
induced separation of the metallic and insulating phases
[29, 33]. A crucial result of this study is that during heat-
ing, mostly metallic domains are induced (dark patches in
the differential images in Fig. 1(c) and (d)), whereas dur-
ing cooling, predominantly insulating domains are cre-
ated by laser irradiation (bright patches in the differential
images in Fig. 1(c) and (d)). Furthermore, laser scanning
irradiation does not smear or destroy the herringbone do-
main patterns but modifies them by changing the ratio

before
exposure
after
exposure differential
image
before
exposure
after
exposure differential
image

metallic
insulating

laser-induced phase

(c)
(d)

(a)

metallic
insulating

160K
A

B

C

D

A

F

G

H

E

164K

166K

170K

10µm

164K

158K

157K

155K

V O
2
3

laser

scanning

widefield
imaging

(b)

temperature (K)

resistance ()

A

B

C D

E

F

G
H

120 160 200
101
105
108

FIG. 1.
(a) Zoom into the phase transition region of the
R(T) curve.
The red and blue dashed arrows indicate the
heating and cooling branch, respectively.
Inset: Full R(T)
curve of the V2O3 thin film sample under investigation with
same units as in the main graph. The capital letters mark
the set-temperatures in one thermal cycle, at which sepa-
rated squares in the V2O3 thin film were irradiated using the
laser scanning mode.
(b) Simplified schematic of the mea-
surement setup. Photomicrographs are acquired by widefield
microscopy before and after laser scanning within the dashed
square of pristine areas. (c) Photomicrograph series demon-
strating the laser scanning irradiation effect acquired during
one heating run. For the differential images, the image before
laser irradiation was subtracted from the image after scan-
ning. The image contrasts were optimized for every temper-
ature. (d) Photomicrograph series acquired during cooling,
analogous to (c).

of the metallic and insulating surface areas. In an ad-
ditional experiment on a patterned V2O3 thin film mi-
crobridge (see Fig. S2 in Ref. [32]) we show, that indeed
the laser-scanning-induced phase change has a significant
effect on the film resistivity. Moreover, we observe that
the size of the laser-induced domains is similar to the size
of the domains of the temperature-driven phase transi-
tion without laser exposure. This indicates, that domain
walls permeate the whole film, and that the laser-induced
phase transition is not only due to a surface effect.
We also modified the laser irradiation procedure to
determine the power thresholds for laser-induced phase
changes during heating and cooling (see Sec. III in


3

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.1

0.2

0.3

152
156
160
164
168
172
176
180

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

PLaser = 460µW

(c)

(b)
cooling

filling factor of

laser-induced phase

 insulating phase
 metallic phase

heating
(a)

PLaser = 460µW

filling factor of

laser-induced phase

 insulating phase
 metallic phase

filling factor of

insulating phase

temperature (K)

 heating, before exp.
 cooling, before exp.
 heating, after exp.
 cooling, after exp.

FIG. 2.
Temperature dependence of metal and insulator
filling factors affected by laser irradiation of 460 µW. (a) Fill-
ing factors of the metallic and insulating phases induced by
laser irradiation during heating. (b) Same filling factors dur-
ing cooling. (c) Filling factors of the insulating phase during
one thermal cycle.

Ref. [32] for details).
It was found that laser irradi-
ation already at relatively low power levels induces a
phase change during heating (i.e., IMT), while during
cooling (i.e., MIT), the required laser power is consider-
ably larger. Moreover, the temperature range, in which a
laser-induced phase change was observable, is larger dur-
ing IMT, compared to MIT. Hence, the heating branch
of the transition seems to be more sensitive to laser irra-
diation than the cooling branch.
For a quantitative analysis of the laser-induced phase
changes, we investigated the filling factors, i.e., the ratio
between the surface area of a particular phase and the
total surface area of interest at a laser power of 460 µW.
This laser power was chosen because it is far from the
minimum and maximum threshold values for both cool-
ing and heating (see Sec. III in Ref. [32]). As mentioned
above, the metallic and insulating thin-film areas can
be clearly distinguished by their brightness level in the
photomicrographs (see Fig. 1 and [29]). However, these
brightness levels change from micrograph to micrograph.
Therefore, the following evaluation procedure was used
for determining the filling factors. We visually inspected
the (differential) micrographs in Fiji [34] and chose an

upper and lower limit for the brightness that separates
the particular two phases. A third brightness level was
calculated by averaging the upper and lower limit. For
these three brightness values, we calculated the filling fac-
tors, which correspond to the data points and the error
bars in Fig. 2, using a Python routine.
Figure 2(a) and (b) show the temperature dependence
of the filling factors of the laser-induced metallic and in-
sulating phases during heating and cooling, respectively.
Except for the fact that in the heating case, predom-
inantly the metallic, and in the cooling case, predom-
inantly the insulating phase is created, the overall be-
havior is very similar: the laser irradiation switches a
considerable percentage of the thin-film area during the
IMT from insulating to metallic (40% at 164 K) and dur-
ing the MIT from metallic to insulating (28% at 162 K).
Furthermore, in both cases, there is a temperature inter-
val in which a smaller amount of the minor phase (insu-
lating at the IMT and metallic at the MIT) is induced
as well.
Figure 2(c) shows the filling factor of the insulat-
ing phase before and after laser irradiation. The error
bars of the before-irradiation graphs are smaller com-
pared to the after-irradiation graphs because a larger
area was used for determining the filling factors before
irradiation.
Like the R(T)-curves shown in Fig. 1(a),
the before-irradiation curves are hysteretic due to the
first-order character of the IMT/MIT phase transitions.
Most importantly, the after-irradiation curves (dashed
lines) lay between the curves before irradiation and are
almost identical for temperatures at 168 K and below
(solid lines). This implies that after irradiation, it is no
longer possible to decide (by means of the filling factor)
whether the film was in the heating or cooling branch.
In this sense, laser irradiation above the power threshold
erases the thermal history of the V2O3 thin film.
The most intriguing result of this study is that laser
irradiation predominantly induces insulating domains in
large amounts during cooling. Considering the laser spot
as a local heat source, it is not surprising that laser irra-
diation induces metallic domains since the metallic phase
is the high-temperature phase of the Mott transition. In-
deed, we observe this behavior during heating of the sam-
ple through the IMT. However, the predominant laser-
induced creation of insulating domains during cooling is
puzzling. In other words, why does the effect of laser ir-
radiation depend on the thermal history? To answer this
question, the thermodynamic nature of the MIT/IMT of
the V2O3 thin film must be considered.
The thermodynamic description of V2O3 thin films
is the subject of ongoing research [35–37]. It is recog-
nized that at the MIT, three phase transitions are cou-
pled: first, an electronic transition due to Mott-Hubbard
charge carrier localization, second, a magnetic transi-
tion from a paramagnetic-to-antiferromagnetic state, and
third, a structural transition from corundum to a mon-
oclinic crystal structure.
Furthermore, as indicated in
Ref. [29], the characteristic herringbone domain pattern


4

resembles the solutions of the Cahn-Larch´e equation de-
scribing a phase separation due to spinodal decomposi-
tion [38]. Other studies also indicate that the IMT/MIT
is associated with a spinodal instability [39, 40]. Despite
those intricate details, the R(T)-hysteresis and the asso-
ciated latent heat at the IMT and MIT clearly indicate
a first-order phase transition. Consequently, it is safe to
assume that during heating the V2O3 thin film is in a
metastable superheated state, and during cooling it is in
a metastable supercooled state. The most likely inter-
pretation of our results is that the perturbation releases
the V2O3 thin film from its metastable state, and when
the laser spot moves to a new position, the thin film re-
laxes locally into a stable state. The general details of
the perturbation induced by the laser beam are elusive
and additional effects might be at play, for instance, a
photoinduced change of the 3d-orbital occupation could
trigger the formation of metallic nanodroplets in the IMT
[41].
With respect to the MIT we measured electrical trans-
port properties during minor thermal cycles to investi-
gate how heating affects a V2O3 thin film in the criti-
cal state. This procedure emulates a heat source that
changes the temperature gradually on a large length
scale. A detailed description and discussion of these ad-
ditional experiments can be found in Ref. [32] (Sec. IV).
Although we found that a minor heating cycle can indeed
increase the resistance, the effect is not strong enough to
account for what we observed in the laser irradiation ex-
periment.
To elaborate on the matter of metastability, we dis-
cuss a phenomenological numerical model.
In a two-
dimensional (2D) resistor network, each site can either
be metallic or insulating, depending on the local temper-
ature, which is updated at every simulation step. Solv-
ing Kirchhoff’s laws, currents and voltages on each site
are determined. A first-order Landau-type free energy
functional provides stable and metastable states sepa-
rated by a barrier. The laser irradiation is implemented
in the model by decreasing the barrier height to drive
transitions between insulating and metallic states. For
each site, the escape from a metastable state was deter-
mined by comparing random numbers to Boltzmann fac-
tors with a constant number of iterations. If the escape
criterion is fulfilled, the transition probability is given
by a Boltzmann distribution; see Sec. V in Ref. [32] for
details.
Our model reproduces the hysteresis in the R(T)
curves, as shown in Fig. 3(a).
Figure 3(b) shows the
evolution of the filling factor of the insulating phase at
different laser intensities. With increasing laser intensity
the hysteresis is diminished, and eventually it is com-
pletely suppressed, similarly to the experimental results
in Fig. 2(c). In Fig. 3(c) we present a simulation series
of selected network maps before and after laser exposure
with moderate laser intensity (Γ/kB = 600 K), and their
corresponding differential images. For heating, the laser
induces predominantly metallic sites (Fig. 3(c)), for cool-

ing insulating sites (Fig. 3(d)). We note that during heat-
ing, the majority of sites goes into a metallic state (indi-
cated by black squares in the differential maps), while a
few sites revert back to an insulating state (indicated by
white squares in the differential maps); this reproduces
very well the experimental results.
Moreover, this be-
havior reverses in the cooling branch (Fig. 3(d), again in
agreement with experimental observations. So, accord-
ing to the simulations, the laser irradiation enhances the
process of relaxing the system from a metastable state.
In conclusion, we can state that a V2O3 thin film in
the metastable state at the IMT/MIT is highly suscep-
tible to a local perturbation by a focused laser beam at
the sub-micrometer scale. Whether the laser perturba-
tion predominantly creates a metallic or insulating phase
depends on whether the film is in the heating or cool-
ing branch. Our observations tell that the laser beam
brings the system from a supercooled/superheated state
to the equilibrium one, provided that the laser power
is sufficient to overcome corresponding energy barriers.
This implies, that laser scanning irradiation can be used
to effectively erase thermal history and provides a novel
method to reset memristive devices locally. Our experi-
ments may also be considered as a clear indication that
external stimuli on a strongly correlated thin film in a
critical state can result in unexpected and presumably
non-thermal effects. Non-thermal effects have been in-

A

B

C

D

before
exposure
after
exposure differential
image
before
exposure
after
exposure differential
image

(b)
(a)

(d)
(c)

metallic
insulating

laser-induced phase

metallic
insulating

filling factor of

insulating phase

resistance ()

temperature (K)
temperature (K)

increase
of 

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0

152 156 160
164 168
152 156 160
168
164

1
10

3
10

5
10

107
A

B
C

D

FIG. 3.
Results of numerical simulations based on a 2D resis-
tor network model. (a) R(T) curves; arrows indicate heating
(red) and cooling (blue) branches. (b) Filling factors of the
insulating phase vs. T, for various values of laser intensity
Γ/kB = 0 (grey circles), 600 K (green squares) and 1200 K
(purple triangles). (c) Selected network maps before laser ex-
posure, after laser exposure with Γ/kB = 600 K, and their
corresponding differential images for two temperature values
in the heating branch, as indicated with capital letters in (a).
(d) same as in (c) – for the cooling branch.


5

vestigated in ultra-fast pump-probe experiments on VO2
and V2O3 [41–45]. In contrast, in our experiment we have
a quasi-static setting.
The findings of this study may
trigger additional experimental and theoretical studies
to explore the thermodynamics of phase transitions and
local perturbations in this class of materials.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

T.L. acknowledges support from the Cusanuswerk,
Bisch¨ofliche Studienf¨orderung, F.T. acknowledges sup-
port
from
the
Landesgraduiertenf¨orderung
Baden-
W¨urttemberg and M.R. acknowledges support from the

French ANR “MoMA” project ANR-19-CE30-0020. This
project has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon Europe research and innovation programme un-
der grant agreement No.
2031928 – “Highly Energy-
Efficient Resistive Switching in Defect- and Strain- En-
gineered Mott Insulators for Neuromorphic Computing
Applications”. Views and opinions expressed are how-
ever those of the authors only and do not necessarily
reflect those of the European union or the European
research council. Work at University of California San
Diego (UCSD) was supported through an Energy Fron-
tier Research Center program funded by the US Depart-
ment of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy
Sciences, under Grant DE-SC0019273.

References

[1] I. K. Schuller, R. Stevens, R. Pino, and M. Pechan, Neu-
romorphic Computing – From Materials Research to Sys-
tems Architecture Roundtable, 10.2172/1283147 (2015).

[2] J. del Valle, J. G. Ram´ırez, M. J. Rozenberg, and I. K.
Schuller, Challenges in materials and devices for resistive-
switching-based neuromorphic computing, Journal of Ap-
plied Physics 124, 211101 (2018).

[3] A. Hoffmann, S. Ramanathan, J. Grollier, A. D. Kent,
M. J. Rozenberg, I. K. Schuller, O. G. Shpyrko, R. C.
Dynes, Y. Fainman, A. Frano, E. E. Fullerton, G. Galli,
V. Lomakin, S. P. Ong, A. K. Petford-Long, J. A. Schuller,
M. D. Stiles, Y. Takamura, and Y. Zhu, Quantum materi-
als for energy-efficient neuromorphic computing: Oppor-
tunities and challenges, APL Materials 10, 070904 (2022).

[4] T. J. Park, S. Deng, S. Manna, A. N. M. N. Islam, H. Yu,
Y. Yuan, D. D. Fong, A. A. Chubykin, A. Sengupta, S. K.
R. S. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Ramanathan, Complex
Oxides for Brain-Inspired Computing:
A Review, Ad-
vanced Materials 35, 2203352 (2022).

[5] F. J. Morin, Oxides Which Show a Metal-to-Insulator
Transition at the Neel Temperature, Physical Review Let-
ters 3, 34 (1959).

[6] D. B. McWhan and J. P. Remeika, Metal-Insulator Transi-
tion in (V1−xCrx)2O3, Physical Review B 2, 3734 (1970).

[7] D. B. McWhan,
A. Menth,
J. P. Remeika,
W. F.
Brinkman, and T. M. Rice, Metal-insulator Transitions in
Pure and Doped V2O3, Physical Review B 7, 1920 (1973).

[8] A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, and M. J. Rozen-
berg, Dynamical mean-field theory of strongly correlated
fermion systems and the limit of infinite dimensions, Re-
views of Modern Physics 68, 13 (1996).

[9] P. Limelette, A. Georges, D. Jerome, P. Wzietek, P. Met-
calf, and J. M. Honig, Universality and Critical Behavior
at the Mott Transition, Science 302, 89 (2003).

[10] J. Torrance, P. Lacorre, A. Nazzal, E. Ansaldo, and
C. Niedermayer, Systematic study of insulator-metal tran-
sitions in perovskites RNiO3 (R=Pr,Nd,Sm,Eu) due to
closing of charge-transfer gap, Physical Review B 45, 8209
(1992).

[11] S. Catalano, M. Gibert, J. Fowlie, J. ´I˜niguez, J.-M.
Triscone, and J. Kreisel, Rare-earth nickelates RNiO3:
thin films and heterostructures, Reports on Progress in

Physics 81, 046501 (2018).

[12] S. Biermann, A. Poteryaev, A. I. Lichtenstein, and
A. Georges, Dynamical Singlets and Correlation-Assisted
Peierls Transition in VO2, Physical Review Letters 94,
026404 (2005).

[13] M. Imada, A. Fujimori, and Y. Tokura, Metal-insulator
transitions, Reviews of Modern Physics 70, 1039 (1998).

[14] Y. Zhou and S. Ramanathan, Mott Memory and Neu-
romorphic Devices, Proceedings of the IEEE 103, 1289
(2015).

[15] B.-J. Kim, G. Seo, and Y. W. Lee, Bidirectional laser
triggering of planar device based on vanadium dioxide thin
film, Optics Express 22, 9016 (2014).

[16] J. Kim, S. J. Jeong, B.-J. Kim, and Y. W. Lee, Laser-
triggered current gating based on photothermal effect in
VO2 thin-film device using CO2 laser, Applied Physics B
124, 67 (2018).

[17] G. Seo, B.-J. Kim, Y. Wook Lee, and H.-T. Kim, Photo-
Assisted Bistable Switching Using Mott Transition in
Two-Terminal VO2 Device, Applied Physics Letters 100,
011908 (2012).

[18] G. Li, D. Xie, H. Zhong, Z. Zhang, X. Fu, Q. Zhou, Q. Li,
H. Ni, J. Wang, E.-j. Guo, M. He, C. Wang, G. Yang,
K. Jin, and C. Ge, Photo-Induced Non-Volatile VO2 Phase
Transition for Neuromorphic Ultraviolet Sensors, Nature
Communications 13, 1729 (2022).

[19] Y.-W. Lee, E.-S. Kim, B.-S. Shin, and S.-M. Lee, High-
Performance Optical Gating in Junction Device based on
Vanadium Dioxide Thin Film Grown by Sol-Gel Method,
Journal of Electrical Engineering and Technology 7, 784
(2012).

[20] G. Seo, B.-J. Kim, H.-T. Kim, and Y. W. Lee, Photo-
Assisted Electrical Oscillation in Two-Terminal Device
Based on Vanadium Dioxide Thin Film, Journal of Light-
wave Technology 30, 2718 (2012).

[21] T. Driscoll, H.-T. Kim, B.-G. Chae, M. D. Ventra, and
D. N. Basov, Phase-transition driven memristive system,
Applied Physics Letters 95, 043503 (2009).

[22] A. Rana, C. Li, G. Koster, and H. Hilgenkamp, Resistive
switching studies in VO2 thin films, Scientific Reports 10,
3293 (2020).

[23] X. Gao, C. M. M. Ros´ario, and H. Hilgenkamp, Multi-
level operation in VO2-based resistive switching devices,
AIP Advances 12, 015218 (2022).


6

[24] Y. Kalcheim, N. Butakov, N. M. Vargas, M.-H. Lee, J. del
Valle, J. Trastoy, P. Salev, J. Schuller, and I. K. Schuller,
Robust Coupling between Structural and Electronic Tran-
sitions in a Mott Material, Physical Review Letters 122,
057601 (2019).

[25] B. A. Frandsen, Y. Kalcheim, I. Valmianski, A. S.
McLeod, Z. Guguchia, S. C. Cheung, A. M. Hallas,
M. N. Wilson, Y. Cai, G. M. Luke, Z. Salman, A. Suter,
T. Prokscha, T. Murakami, H. Kageyama, D. N. Basov,
I. K. Schuller, and Y. J. Uemura, Intertwined magnetic,
structural, and electronic transitions in V2O3, Physical
Review B 100, 235136 (2019).

[26] J. Trastoy, A. Camjayi, J. del Valle, Y. Kalcheim, J.-P.
Crocombette, D. A. Gilbert, J. A. Borchers, J. E. Ville-
gas, D. Ravelosona, M. J. Rozenberg, and I. K. Schuller,
Magnetic field frustration of the metal-insulator transition
in V2O3, Physical Review B 101, 245109 (2020).

[27] E. Barazani, D. Das, C. Huang, A. Rakshit, C. Saguy,
P. Salev, J. del Valle, M. C. Toroker, I. K. Schuller,
and Y. Kalcheim, Positive and Negative Pressure Regimes
in Anisotropically Strained V2O3 Films, Advanced Func-
tional Materials 33, 2211801 (2023).

[28] M. K. Stewart, D. Brownstead, S. Wang, K. G. West,
J. G. Ram´ırez, M. M. Qazilbash, N. B. Perkins, I. K.
Schuller, and D. N. Basov, Insulator-to-Metal Transition
and Correlated Metallic State of V2O3 Investigated by Op-
tical Spectroscopy, Physical Review B 85, 205113 (2012).

[29] M. Lange, S. Gu´enon, Y. Kalcheim, T. Luibrand, N. M.
Vargas, D. Schwebius, R. Kleiner, I. K. Schuller, and
D. Koelle, Imaging of Electrothermal Filament Formation
in a Mott Insulator, Physical Review Applied 16, 054027
(2021).

[30] M. M. Lange, S. Gu´enon, F. Lever, R. Kleiner, and
D. Koelle, A High-Resolution Combined Scanning Laser
and Widefield Polarizing Microscope for Imaging at Tem-
peratures from 4 K to 300 K, Review of Scientific Instru-
ments 88, 123705 (2017).

[31] M. M. Lange, A High-Resolution Polarizing Microscope
for Cryogenic Imaging: Development and Application to
Investigations on Twin Walls in SrTiO3 and the Metal-
Insulator Transition in V2O3, Ph.D. thesis, Universit¨at
T¨ubingen (2018).

[32] See Supplemental Material at [URL] for details on the
sample and measurement setup, a microbridge experi-
ment, thresholds of laser scanning irradiation, analysis of
thermal effects via minor loop measurements, and Mott
resistor network simulation.

[33] A. S. McLeod, E. van Heumen, J. G. Ram´ırez, S. Wang,
T. Saerbeck, S. Gu´enon, M. Goldflam, L. Anderegg,
P. Kelly, A. Mueller, M. K. Liu, I. K. Schuller, and D. N.
Basov, Nanotextured Phase Coexistence in the Correlated
Insulator V2O3, Nature Physics 13, 80 (2016).

[34] J. Schindelin, I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig,
M. Longair,
T. Pietzsch,
S. Preibisch,
C. Rueden,
S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid, J.-Y. Tinevez, D. J. White,
V. Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri, P. Tomancak, and A. Car-
dona, Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image
analysis, Nature Methods 9, 676 (2012).

[35] C. Castellani, C. D. Castro, D. Feinberg, and J. Ran-
ninger, New Model Hamiltonian for the Metal-Insulator
Transition, Physical Review Letters 43, 1957 (1979).

[36] G. Kotliar, E. Lange, and M. J. Rozenberg, Landau The-
ory of the Finite Temperature Mott Transition, Physical
Review Letters 84, 5180 (2000).

[37] M. I. D´ıaz, J. E. Han, and C. Aron, Electrically Driven
Insulator-to-Metal Transition in a Correlated Insulator:
Electronic Mechanism and Thermal Description, Physical
Review B 107, 195148 (2023).

[38] H. Garcke and U. Weikard, Numerical Approximation of
the Cahn-Larch´e Equation, Numerische Mathematik 100,
639 (2005).

[39] T. Bar, S. K. Choudhary, M. A. Ashraf, K. Sujith,
S. Puri, S. Raj, and B. Bansal, Kinetic Spinodal Insta-
bilities in the Mott Transition in V2O3: Evidence from
Hysteresis Scaling and Dissipative Phase Ordering, Phys-
ical Review Letters 121, 045701 (2018).

[40] S. Kundu, T. Bar, R. K. Nayak, and B. Bansal, Critical
Slowing Down at the Abrupt Mott Transition: When the
First-Order Phase Transition Becomes Zeroth Order and
Looks Like Second Order, Physical Review Letters 124,
095703 (2020).

[41] A. Ronchi, P. Homm, M. Menghini, P. Franceschini,
F. Maccherozzi, F. Banfi, G. Ferrini, F. Cilento, F. Parmi-
giani, S. S. Dhesi, M. Fabrizio, J.-P. Locquet, and C. Gian-
netti, Early-Stage Dynamics of Metallic Droplets Embed-
ded in the Nanotextured Mott Insulating Phase of V2O3,
Physical Review B 100, 075111 (2019).

[42] F. Giorgianni, J. Sakai, and S. Lupi, Overcoming the
thermal regime for the electric-field driven Mott transi-
tion in vanadium sesquioxide, Nature Communications 10,
1159 (2019).

[43] A. Cavalleri, C. T´oth, C. W. Siders, J. A. Squier,
F. R´aksi, P. Forget, and J. C. Kieffer, Femtosecond Struc-
tural Dynamics in VO2 during an Ultrafast Solid-Solid
Phase Transition, Physical Review Letters 87, 237401
(2001).

[44] S. Wall, S. Yang, L. Vidas, M. Chollet, J. M. Glownia,
M. Kozina, T. Katayama, T. Henighan, M. Jiang, T. A.
Miller, D. A. Reis, L. A. Boatner, O. Delaire, and M. Trigo,
Ultrafast disordering of vanadium dimers in photoexcited
VO2, Science 362, 572 (2018).

[45] M. R. Otto, L. P. Ren´e de Cotret, D. A. Valverde-Chavez,
K. L. Tiwari, N. ´Emond, M. Chaker, D. G. Cooke, and
B. J. Siwick, How optical excitation controls the structure
and properties of vanadium dioxide, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 116, 450 (2018).


7

Supplemental material: Laser-induced quenching of metastability at the
Mott-insulator to metal transition

T. Luibrand et al.

CONTENTS

I. Sample and Measurement Setup
8

II. Microbridge experiment
9

III. Thresholds of laser scanning irradiation
10

IV. Thermal effects: minor loop experiment
10

V. Mott resistor network simulation
12

VI. References
14


8

FIG. S1.
(a) V2O3 thin-film sample under investigation. Four parallel gold electrodes are used for measuring the R(T)
relation. (b) Simplified schematic diagram of the combined widefield and laser scanning microscope. The removable mirror is
used to switch between the two operation modes.

I.
SAMPLE AND MEASUREMENT SETUP

The sample under investigation (Fig. S1(a)) is a continuous 300-nm-thick rf-sputtered V2O3 film on an r-cut
sapphire substrate. Using a shadow mask, four 2-mm-long parallel gold electrodes with a distance of 1.5 mm were
evaporated as contacts for resistance measurements. The sample is mounted in vacuum on the coldfinger of a liquid
Helium continuous-flow cryostat with a temperature range of 4.2 K to 300 K. Electric transport measurements were
performed using a Keithley 2400 SourceMeter configured as a current source.

The experimental setup is a cryogenic combined widefield and laser scanning microscope, which is described in
detail in [1, 2]. Figure S1(b) shows a simplified schematic of the microscope setup that can be operated either in the
widefield or in the laser scanning mode.

The illumination for the widefield microscope is realized by a LED with 532 nm wavelength and follows a K¨ohler
illumination scheme. The depicted field lens is used to define the illuminated sample area. After passing a beam
splitter, the light is reflected by a removable mirror and is focused onto the sample by the microscope objective
lens. The microscope objective has a high numerical aperture (NA = 0.8), which allows for a working distance of
1 mm. After reflection from the sample, the light travels the same way back, is deflected by the beam splitter and
then focused onto the sensor of a low noise sCMOS camera. This widefield microscope has a field of view (FOV) of
500×500 µm2 and a spatial resolution of 0.48 µm. The entire optical path of the widefield microscope is polarization
sensitive, which however is not relevant for this study.

The illumination for the laser scanning microscope is provided by a 405-nm-laser diode coupled into a single mode
fiber. The laser light is collimated and thereafter reflected by a fast steering mirror, that serves as scanning mirror.
In order to use this operation mode, the removable mirror is not inserted in the beam path. The laser beam is
focused onto the sample by the microscope objective lens. Assuming a Gaussian beam profile, the theoretical laser
spot diameter is 322 nm (1/e2 diameter). The FOV of the laser scanning microscope is identical with the FOV of the
widefield microscope. The polarization sensitive components and the detector unit of the laser light are not included
here, because in this study, we use the laser scanning microscope exclusively for irradiation.


9

A

B
C
D

A

167K

R = 429 
R = 413 
R = -16 

R = 338 
R = 315 
R = -23 

R = 380 
R = 433 
R = 53 

162K

161K

R = 446 
R = 485 
R = 39 

before

irradiation

after

irradiation

differential

image

before

irradiation

after

irradiation

differential

image

(b)

(c)
(d)

166K

B

C

D

(a)

3
10

2
10

3
3·10
6
10

5
10

4
10

3
10

2
10

R ()

T (K)

130
150
170

10µm

laser-induced phase

metallic
insulating
metallic
insulating

temperature (K)

resistance ()

FIG. S2.
Effect of laser irradiation on the resistance of a patterned V2O3 microbridge. (a) Schematic of planar microbridge
device under test. (b) R(T) curves; red and blue dashed arrows indicate the heating and cooling branch, respectively. Capital
letters mark the set-temperatures, at which the device was irradiated. Inset: R(T) curves on expanded T scale. (c) Photomi-
crographs demonstrating the laser irradiation effet acquired during one heating run. For the differential images, the image
before laser irradiation was subtracted from the image after scanning. The image contrasts on the microbridge were optimized
for both temperatures. The two Au electrodes used for the two point measurements are the rectangles in overload at the left
and right, respectively. The device resistance and the device resistance change due to laser irradiation are shown below the
micrographs. (d) analog to (c), but in the cooling branch.

II.
MICROBRIDGE EXPERIMENT

In order to confirm the hypothesis, that laser scanning indeed induces phase transitions, we investigated its effect on
the electrical properties of a V2O3 microbridge device in an additional experiment. The sample under investigation is
a planar microbridge device patterned in a 300-nm-thick film V2O3 thin-film (same deposition procedure as in Sec. I)
using Ar ion milling, followed by Au deposition and lift-off to define Au contacts (see Fig. S2(a) for device dimensions).
The R(T) curve Fig. S2(b) shows irregular behaviour: at the MIT/MIT, the change in resistance is only about one
order of magnitude, and the insulating state still shows a relatively low resistance, i.e., the microbridge seems to be
shunted. Possibly, it is shunted at the edges of the microbridge or the V2O3 film was not completely etched down to
the substrate during the Ar-ion milling process leaving a thin ion-damaged residual layer. Nevertheless, the device is
still suitable to qualitatively assess the effect of laser irradiation on the film resistivity.
For the two-terminal layout we assume a well-defined homogeneous current distribution in the microbridge. To
bring the sample in a defined state in the heating branch, we used a thermal cycling procedure. This implies cooling
the sample to a temperature, where the hysteresis is closed (in this case T = 80 K) followed by heating to the target
temperature. The same device was used for each laser-irradiation scan, so thermal cycling is required to bring the


10

FIG. S3.
Power thresholds vs. temperature for laser irradiation-induced phase changes. The horizontal black dashed line
indicates the laser intensity used in Fig. 2 in the main manuscript. The vertical arrows on top of the figure indicate temperatures,
at which the laser does not induce a phase change. (a) heating branch. Inset: Differential image of a laser irradiation pattern
at 160 K. The corresponding laser intensities are displayed on the left axis. At laser intensities of 827 µW and above, a phase
change is only induced at the edge of the irradiated area. The scale bar indicates 10 µm. (b) cooling branch.

sample in a defined pristine state for imaging at every single set temperature. At every set temperature – after
acquiring a widefield micrograph (see left columns of Fig. S2(c) and (d)) – a single stripe of ∼ 10 µm width across
the middle of the bridge was scanned with the laser beam (same scanning parameters as in the main manuscript).
After irradiation a widefield micrograph was acquired (see middle columns of Fig. S2(c) and (d)). The right columns
of Fig. S2(c) and (d) show differential images, i.e., the image before irradiation was subtracted from the image after
irradiation. Simultaneously, we measured the device resistance before and after laser-irradiation with a bias current
of 1 µA.
Analogous to the results shown in the main manuscript, metallic and insulating phases are induced by laser irradia-
tion, which show up as black and white patches, respectively, in the differential images. Clearly, the data obtained on
this microbride show, that in the heating branch predominantly the metallic phase is induced, and that comes with
a reduction of the device resistance. In the cooling branch, mostly the insulating phase is induced, which leads to a
significant increase of the device resistance.

III.
THRESHOLDS OF LASER SCANNING IRRADIATION

We modified the laser irradiation procedure to determine the power thresholds for laser-induced phase changes
during heating and cooling. Instead of scanning the whole 22 × 22 µm2 area with the same intensity, four 11 × 11 µm2

quadrants are exposed with different laser powers of 230 µW, 460 µW, 689 µW, and 919 µW. The two consecutive
quadrants, for which the first shows no and the next some laser-induced phase change, are chosen by examining
the corresponding photomicrographs. Following a nested interval procedure, an additional pristine area is exposed
to a quadrant pattern, with the minimum and maximum laser power corresponding to the power levels of the two
consecutive quadrants chosen before. Using the photomicrographs of this pattern, the lower and upper limits of the
laser power threshold are estimated, and these limits are averaged to calculate the threshold value.
The results are shown in Fig. S3. The temperature range, in which laser irradiation affects the V2O3 film, is larger
during heating than during cooling.
Further, the minimal power threshold in the heating branch is 11.5 µW (at
168 K and 178 K), which corresponds to a theoretical 0.3 mW/µm2 peak intensity assuming a Gaussian point spread
function. However, the minimal power threshold in the cooling branch is six times larger (69 µW, peak intensity
1.7 mW/µm2). During heating at low temperatures between 156 K and 160 K, the laser irradiation effect is reduced
for high power levels, and the induced phase changes are mainly limited to the edges of the exposed area (see inset
Fig. S3(a)). Empty markers in Fig. S3 indicate the corresponding laser power values. A similar effect was not observed
during cooling.

IV.
THERMAL EFFECTS: MINOR LOOP EXPERIMENT

Since the laser irradiation effect discussed in the main manuscript involves focusing the beam onto a very small
region, it is important to check whether the observed phenomenology could simply arise from heating. To address


11

FIG. S4.
Effect of thermal cycle on the cooling branch. R(T) curve for 100-nm-thick V2O3 including a minor temperature
cycle acquired in the middle of the cooling curve (cooling is marked by blue arrows, heating by the red arrow), starting at
Treverse =154 K (as indicated by the purple dashed line). The full thermal cycle is shown in the inset (same units as in the main
graph), heating curve is indicated in red).

this issue, we performed R vs T measurements on a continuous 100-nm-thick rf-sputtered V2O3 film on r-cut sapphire
[3], with various temperature ramp protocols which would mimic possible laser-induced heating effects.
We are
aware of the limitation of the difference between smooth adiabatic thermal cycling of the entire thin film and a local
laser-induced thermal perturbation.
Here we focus on measurements conducted on the cooling curve where the experiments on laser irradiation described
in the main manuscript showed a surprising increase in the insulating phase fraction in considerably large amounts.
To check whether a simple heating-cooling thermal cycle may induce a similar effect, we performed the following
experiments: first, we warmed the sample up to 210 K to ensure that it is in the fully metallic phase and then slowly
cooled it to Treverse =154 K which is in the middle of the resistive transition. This reversal temperature exhibits the
maximum slope of log(R) vs T, where the largest effects are expected in resistance change due to the proximity to the
percolation threshold. After reaching Treverse we performed a minor heating loop, i.e., the sample was heated up by
a certain temperature ∆T and then cooled down to 100 K. Several runs were conducted with various values of ∆T.
An example of the resistance recorded during such a procedure is shown in Fig. S4 for ∆T = 4 K which showed the
most pronounced effect, i.e., the strongest change ∆R in resistance at Treverse measured after performing the minor
heating loop. During most of this partial temperature cycle the resistance of the minor heating curve is higher than
during cooling, as expected. However, as Treverse is approached again during cooling the resistance increases and
crosses that of the minor heating curve. After completion of the minor thermal cycle, R(Treverse) = 4530 Ω, which
corresponds to an increase by ∼ 5 % over the starting resistance R(Treverse) = 4330 Ω measured before initiating the
minor temperature cycle. This increase in resistance is qualitatively similar to the effect observed in the case of laser
irradiation, where after exposure the insulating phase fraction has increased (see panels E-H in Fig. 1(d) in the main
manuscript). Contrary to the large effect observed in response to laser irradiation, which drives the film close to
thermodynamic equilibrium (increase in filling factor of the insulating phase by ∼ 20 % in the middle of the cooling
branch; see Fig. 2(c) in the main manuscript), the minor heating cycles result in only a slight increase of ∼ 5 % in
resistance as compared to the original cooling branch. We note that the minor thermal cycling loop experiments were
repeated for several ∆T values and that from ∆T = 2 K to 8 K none showed an increase in resistance at Treverse larger
than 5 %.
However, quantitatively, it is found that the effect of temperature cycling on the phase fraction is significantly smaller
than that of the laser. Considering Fig. 2(c) in the main manuscript, the filling factors of the insulating phase at 157 K
after laser exposure and at 155 K before exposure in the cooling branch yield the same value of ∼ 0.9. Hence, the impact
of the laser irradiation in terms of phase filling factors would correspond to a shift in temperature by ∆Tirr = −2 K.
That, in turn, would correspond to a relative change in resistance of ∆R/R = [R(155 K)−R(157 K)]/R(155 K)) ≈ 91 %
from Fig. 1(a) in the main manuscript. Similar considerations can be made all over the temperature range from 155 K
to 168 K in Fig. 2(c) in the main manuscript, and the relative resistance changes are always well above 5 % (see
examples in Table I).
The conclusion that the effect of minor thermal cycles is considerably smaller than that of the laser is further
corroborated by the observation that the phase fractions after laser irradiation from both the heating and cooling
curves (Fig. 2(c) in the main manuscript) collapse to approximately the same intermediate values between the curves.
If the thermal cycling had a similar effect as the laser irradiation, we would expect it to result in a significant rise


12

Supplementary Table I. Estimated relative resistance changes by laser irradiation via filling factors of the insulating phase.

T1
T2
∆Tirr = T2 − T1
filling factor of ins. phase
∆R/R = R(T2)−R(T1)

R(T2)
(K)
(K)
(K)
(%)

157
155
−2
∼ 0.9
91
160
157
−3
∼ 0.8
96
162
158
−4
∼ 0.7
83
164
160
−4
∼ 0.55
84
166
164
−2
∼ 0.4
35
168
166
−2
∼ 0.3
22

in resistance close to the mid-point value between the resistances of the cooling curve (4.33 kΩ) and heating curve
(177 kΩ) at Treverse (see Fig. S4). Since the resistance only increases to 4530 Ω we conclude that the phase fraction
after the thermal cycling is much closer to that of the cooling curve than that observed after laser irradiation.
This points to a non-trivial effect of laser irradiation which provides a pathway towards the true equilibrium between
the insulating and metallic phases by lowering the free energy barrier between them.

V.
MOTT RESISTOR NETWORK SIMULATION

We model and numerically solve our system as a Mott resistor network model as schematized in Fig. S5. A load
resistance Rload is making a voltage divider circuit with a resistor tensor network.
In order to determine the resistance of the entire network, a small bias voltage Vin is applied in order to obtain a
voltage VS across the system

VS =
RS

RS + Rload
· Vin ,
(S1)

where RS denotes the total resistance of the resistor network solved using Kirchhoff laws. Each site of our 50 × 50
grid is represented by four resistors of two possible values, Rmet and Rins.
In order to simulate the first-order transition we assume a free energy from Landau’s theory with shape [4, 5]

f(T, η) = h(T)η + p(T)η2 + cη4 .
(S2)

FIG. S5.
Schematic representation of the Mott resistor network model and simulation circuit. Light green represents insulating
sites with a high resistance Rins and the blue cells represent metallic sites with a low resistance Rmet.


13

Supplementary Table II. Constant parameters of the free energy.

Tc
TA
h0/kB
p1/kB
c/kB
(K)
(K)
(K)
(K)
(K)

160
87
-2666.67
-200
4

FIG. S6.
Functional form of the free energy f(η) of the system with the parameters given in Table. II for three selected
temperatures: T = 150 K < Tc, T = 160 K = Tc, T = 170 K > Tc. The green markers show the local maxima Ebarr, the blue
and red markers show the minima Eins and Emet of the free energy, respectively.

T is the temperature, η is an order-parameter-like quantity,

h(T) = h0 · T − Tc

Tc − TA
,
(S3)

and

p(T) = p1 · T − TA

TA
,
(S4)

with a critical temperature Tc, where the free energy is symmetric, and TA, h0, p1, c are constant parameters,
specified in Table II.
As illustrated for three selected temperatures around Tc in Fig. S6, the free energy exhibits two minima with energies
Emet and Eins and one local maximum Ebarr. The temperature dependence of the energies of these stationary points
is shown in Fig. S7.
Each resistor in the network is in a metallic state with energy Emet or in an insulating state with energy Eins. In
each simulation cycle, we assign an escape criterion to each site, dependent on whether the initial state is metallic or
insulating.

FIG. S7.
Temperature dependence of the energies Emet of the metallic state (red), Eins of the insulating state (blue) and
Ebarr of the barrier (green), computed as stationary points of Eq. (S2).


14

Supplementary Table III. Constant parameters of the simulations.

Vin
Cv
kh
Rmet
Rins
(V)
(J/K)
(J/K)
(Ω)
(Ω)

10−5
1
0.166
10
1.5 · 107

• The criterion to reach the energy barrier from the metallic state is

PMet→Barrier = e

−(Ebarr−Emet−Γ)

kBT
.
(S5)

• The criterion to reach the barrier from an insulating state is

PIns→Barrier = e

−(Ebarr−Eins−Γ)

kBT
.
(S6)

kB denotes the Boltzmann constant and Γ the energy contribution of the laser in both equations. We generate a
random number between zero and one and compare it to the escape criterion of Eq. (S5) or Eq. (S6) with a constant
number of iterations, respectively. If the escape criterion exceeds the random number, we assign a resistivity Rins, by
assuming Boltzmann weights, with probability

Pins =
e

−Eins

kBT

e

−Eins

kBT + e

−Emet

kBT
,
(S7)

or Rmet with probability

Pmet =
e

−Emet

kBT

e

−Eins

kBT + e

−Emet

kBT
.
(S8)

T is the local temperature on the site updated at each cycle by the following formula using the heat equation through
the discrete Laplacian approximation

Tij = Tsubs +
V 2

CvRij
+ 4Tij − kh

first neighboors
�

<ik>
Tik ,
(S9)

where the indices i and j denote the coordinates of the site in the network, Tsubs the substrate temperature, Cv
the specific heat of the system, kh the thermal conductivity and �first neighboors
<ik>
denotes the summation over the
first neighbouring sites around the one with coordinates ij. The constant parameters used in our calculations are
summarized in Table III.

VI.
REFERENCES

[1] M. M. Lange, S. Gu´enon, F. Lever, R. Kleiner, and D. Koelle, A High-Resolution Combined Scanning Laser and Widefield
Polarizing Microscope for Imaging at Temperatures from 4 K to 300 K, Review of Scientific Instruments 88, 123705 (2017).

[2] M. M. Lange, A High-Resolution Polarizing Microscope for Cryogenic Imaging: Development and Application to Investiga-
tions on Twin Walls in SrTiO3 and the Metal-Insulator Transition in V2O3, Ph.D. thesis, Universit¨at T¨ubingen (2018).

[3] J. Trastoy, Y. Kalcheim, J. del Valle, I. Valmianski, and I. K. Schuller, Enhanced Metal–Insulator Transition in V2O3 by
Thermal Quenching after Growth, Journal of Materials Science 53, 9131 (2018).

[4] J. del Valle, P. Salev, F. Tesler, N. M. Vargas, Y. Kalcheim, P. Wang, J. Trastoy, M.-H. Lee, G. Kassabian, J. G. Ram´ırez,
M. J. Rozenberg, and I. K. Schuller, Subthreshold firing in Mott nanodevices, Nature 569, 388 (2019).

[5] P. Stoliar, J. Tranchant, B. Corraze, E. Janod, M. Besland, F. Tesler, M. Rozenberg, and L. Cario, A leaky-integrate-and-fire
neuron analog realized with a Mott insulator, Advanced Functional Materials 27, 1604740 (2017).


