Revealing dark exciton signatures in polariton spectra of 2D materials

Beatriz Ferreira,1, ∗ Hangyong Shan,2 Roberto Rosati,3 Jamie M. Fitzgerald,3 Lukas Lackner,2

Bo Han,2 Martin Esmann,2 Patrick Hays,4 Gilbert Liebling,5 Kenji Watanabe,6 Takashi
Taniguchi,6 Falk Eilenberger,5 Sefaattin Tongay,4 Christian Schneider,2 and Ermin Malic3

1Chalmers University of Technology, Department of Physics, 412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
2Institute of Physics, Carl von Ossietzky University, Oldenburg, 26129, Germany
3Department of Physics, Philipps-Universit¨at Marburg, Renthof 7, D-35032 Marburg, Germany
4School for Engineering of Matter, Transport, and Energy,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA
5Institute of Applied Physics, Abbe Center of Photonics,
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 07743 Jena,
Germany; Fraunhofer-Institute for Applied Optics and Precision Engineering IOF,
07743 Jena, Germany; Max-Planck-School of Photonics, 07743 Jena, Germany
6Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics,
National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan

Dark excitons in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) have been so far neglected in the context
of polariton physics due to their lack of oscillator strength. However, in tungsten-based TMDs, dark
excitons are known to be the energetically lowest states and could thus provide important scattering
partners for polaritons. In this joint theory-experiment work, we investigate the impact of the full
exciton energy landscape on polariton absorption and reflectance. By changing the cavity detuning,
we vary the polariton energy relative to the unaffected dark excitons in such a way that we open
or close specific phonon-driven scattering channels. We demonstrate both in theory and experiment
that this controlled switching of scattering channels manifests in characteristic sharp changes in
optical spectra of polaritons.
These spectral features can be exploited to extract the position
of dark excitons. Our work suggests new possibilities for exploiting polaritons for fingerprinting
nanomaterials via their unique exciton landscape.

The integration of transition metal dichalco-
genides (TMDs) monolayers in optical microcavities
opens the door to a variety of applications in opto-
electronics [1–3]. This class of atomically thin nano-
materials exhibits a large oscillator strength and ex-
citon binding energies in the range of a few hundred
of meV, hence governing optoelectronic properties
even at room temperature [4–7]. TMD can also form
heterostructures, both vertical [8, 9] and lateral [10–
12]. When the exciton-photon coupling strength is
larger than the cavity dissipative rate and exciton
non-radiative decay rate, the strong coupling regime
is achieved (1(a)) [13, 14]. This leads to new eigen-
modes of the system, the exciton-polaritons [5, 14–
17].
Here, only bright excitons couple to light to
form polaritons.
In contrast, momentum-dark ex-
citons, where Coulomb-bound electrons and holes
are localized in different valleys in momentum space,
possess a large centre-of-mass momentum and thus
cannot be optically excited or radiatively recombine
[18–20].
While the importance of spin-dark excitons on
optical properties of TMD-based exciton-polaritons

∗ beatriz.ferreira@chalmers.se

has been recently considered [21], the impact of
momentum-dark excitons has been less studied due
to their negligible oscillator strength. Nonetheless,
they can still have a large influence on the scatter-
ing of polariton states [22] and, consequently, drasti-
cally change the optical response of polaritons. Here,
we present a joint theory-experiment study reveal-
ing how polariton optics allows us to map the en-
tire exciton landscape of TMD materials, including
bright and dark exciton states. Based on a micro-
scopic many-particle theory, we predict that under
certain conditions, polaritons can efficiently scatter
into dark exciton states, giving rise to sharp step-like
changes both in polariton absorption and reflection
as well as in the polariton linewidth. The prediction
is confirmed in our measurements on TMD mono-
layers integrated into fully spectrally tunable open
microcavities [23].
Interestingly, we find that cavity detuning allows
us to switch on and off phonon-driven scattering
channels between the lower polariton branch and
momentum-dark exciton states in tungsten-based
TMDs.
Depending on the detuning between the
polariton and the exciton energy, realized by chang-
ing the cavity length [24–26], we can control the
strength of the scattering rate Γ and, consequently,

arXiv:2401.04588v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  9 Jan 2024


FIG. 1.
(a) Schematic of an hBN-encapsulated TMD
monolayer integrated within a Fabry-Perot microcavity.
Light is shined on the left mirror of the cavity (I), which
can be reflected (R), transmitted (T) or absorbed (A).
(b) Critical coupling condition (reached when the total
cavity decay rate equals Γ, or twice the port decay rate)
results in a maximum polariton absorption. Sketch of the
lower polariton branch (LP) in relation to dark exciton
states in a MoSe2 and a WSe2 monolayer for (c) zero
detuning (∆ = 0) and (d) negative detuning (∆ < 0)
between the cavity mode (yellow line) and the bright
exciton state (grey line).

the polariton absorption intensity as well as the
polariton linewidth.
The strongest absorption is
obtained at the critical coupling condition when Γ
equals twice the cavity decay rate γ (Fig. 1(b)) [27].
For a sufficiently large detuning, the lower polariton
branch is pushed below the energetically lowest
dark exciton state and becomes the new ground
state, closing the scattering channel between these
states (Fig. 1(d)). This strategy has recently also
been applied to effectively brighten a dark material
and enhance its photoluminescence [21].
In our
work, we demonstrate the appearance of charac-
teristic step-like increases in the detuning-resolved
polariton linewidth, which can be associated with
specific scattering channels into dark exciton states.
This allows us to extract the energy of the involved
states and map the exciton energy landscape in
TMD materials.

Theoretical
approach:
Using
a
Wannier-
Hopfield method [17, 22, 28], we model the opti-
cal response of exciton-polaritons in TMD mono-
layers integrated within a Fabry-Perot cavity (Fig.
1(a)). The excitonic landscape is obtained by solv-
ing the Wannier equation [29–31], including DFT
input on single-particle energies [32].
The polari-

ton dispersion is obtained directly from the diago-
nalisation of the many-particle Hamiltonian in the
polariton basis under the Hopfield transformation
[14, 15, 17, 22]. The resulting lower (LP) and the up-
per polariton (UP) energies can be controlled with
the cavity length and with this, the detuning be-
tween the bright exciton and the cavity resonant
energy, ∆ = EX0 − Ec. Momentum-dark excitons
(KK′, KΛ) remain unchanged as a function of de-
tuning.
Starting from the Heisenberg equations of motion
for the coherent population of polaritons, including
the external radiation field, we obtain an Elliot-like
formula for the polariton absorption for a symmetric
cavity [17]

An
k(ω) =
4γn
kΓn
k

(∆n
k)2 + (2γn
k + Γn
k)2
,
(1)

for each polariton branch n and the in-plane mo-
mentum k. Here, we have introduced ∆n
k = ℏω−En
k
with En
k as the polariton energy and ℏω as the
energy of the incoming light. The polariton-phonon
scattering rates Γn
k are obtained within the second-
order Born-Markov approximation [33, 34]. These
rates are dominated by the scattering into exciton
states outside the light-cone, crucially including
also the momentum-dark valleys, while scattering
within the light-cone is small due to the reduced
density of state [22, 34].
In this work, we focus
on spin-conserving phonon-induced processes. The
expression for the polariton absorption corresponds
to the exciton Elliot formula, but with renormal-
ized exciton-phonon matrix elements [35, 36] now
including the excitonic Hopfield coefficients [22, 34].
The total radiative decay rate of polaritons 2γn
k,
i.e.
the sum of the photon leakage through both
ports, is given by the total cavity decay rate scaled
by the photonic Hopfield coefficient for state n
with momentum k [17, 37].
Hence, both main
contributions for the absorption scale with the
two Hopfield coefficients.
The maximum value of
absorption, A = 0.5, is obtained at the critical
coupling condition [27, 38] of 2γn
k = Γn
k, i.e. when
the leakage out of both ports of the cavity is equal to
the exciton dissipation rate [39], cf. Fig. 1(b). The
absorption equation (1) has a Lorentzian-like shape
with the full width at half maximum 2(2γn
k + Γn
k)
corresponding to the polariton linewidth.
This
quantity will be used to directly compare the
theoretical prediction with experimental results
later in the text.

Polariton Absorption: We start by studying
the detuning-resolved polariton absorption spectra

2


at 77K, calculated by numerically evaluating Eq.
(1), for hBN-encapsulated WSe2 and MoSe2.
We
consider the case of a symmetric cavity and the
TMD integrated into the center of the cavity. The
cavity parameters have been chosen to match the
experimental cavity decay rate in the full photonic
limit.
Furthermore, we consider a realistic Rabi-
splitting of 50 meV [2], and we focus on light emitted
at normal incidence, corresponding to an in-plane
momentum k = 0. Interestingly, we find a drastic
difference in the polariton absorption of tungsten-
and molybdenum-based TMDs, particularly consid-
ering the lower polariton branch, cf.
Fig.
2.
As
the cavity decay rates for WSe2 and MoSe2 are simi-
lar, the predicted difference in the absorption clearly
stems from the polariton-phonon scattering rate Γ.
In MoSe2, we find only a negligibly small absorp-
tion of the lower polariton branch, cf. Fig. 2(b). In
stark contrast, WSe2 exhibits negligibly LP absorp-
tion only for detuning values below ∆ = −38 meV.
Above this value, the LP absorption first slowly in-
creases and shows then a relatively sharp increase
at ∆=-10 and 0 meV. These values of detuning cor-
respond to polaritonic energies of approximately 16
and 12 meV above the dark exciton state, i.e. large
enough to scatter into KK’ and KΛ excitons via
emission of intervalley phonons, respectively (red
and orange lines in Fig.
2(a)).
The last increase
is larger given the stronger scattering toward KΛ
excitons, induced by its three-fold degeneracy. This
leads to an increase in both the polariton linewidth
and polariton absorption (darker blue area) as the
absorption approaches the critical coupling condi-
tion (Fig. 1(b)). Note that the slow increase start-
ing at approximately -40 meV reflects the scattering
into excitons via absorption of intervalley phonons.
The upper polariton spectra are more similar for
tungsten and molybdenum monolayers. We find a
significant polariton absorption for all detuning val-
ues for both materials. The reason is that for the up-
per polariton branch, the acoustic intravalley scat-
tering is always allowed, contrary to the case of the
LP branch [34]. The additional intervalley scatter-
ing channels into dark exciton states in WSe2 give
rise to only a slight increase in the absorption mag-
nitude. Since exciton-phonon scattering is more effi-
cient in MoSe2 than in WSe2 [40], we find a broader
linewidth and height when the intravalley scatter-
ing induced by optical emission opens up in MoSe2
above ∆ ≈ 10 meV (Fig. 2(b)).
Temperature plays a crucial role in polariton ab-
sorption as it dictates the efficiency of phonon-driven
scattering processes [22, 41].
With this in mind,
we investigate the polariton absorption as a func-

FIG. 2. Polariton absorption as a function of detuning
and energy (in relation to the bright exciton energy X0)
at zero in-plane momentum for the upper (UP) and the
lower polariton (LP) for (a) WSe2 and (b) MoSe2 mono-
layers at 77 K.

tion of detuning and temperature, both for WSe2
and MoSe2 monolayers in a cavity, cf. Figs. 3(a)
and (b). We find that, interestingly, both materi-
als show regions with negligible polariton absorp-
tion (indicated by white areas). In WSe2, we pre-
dict three regions with relatively sharp increases in
the absorption magnitude that are triggered by the
opening of specific scattering channels. We find in-
creased polariton absorption around ∆=-10 and 0
meV, which is driven by the scattering into the dark
KK′ and KΛ excitons, respectively, via emission of
LA and TA phonons. The dashed vertical lines indi-
cate the minimum LP energy required for scattering
with LA and TA phonons into the corresponding
dark exciton state. Note that these features are rel-
atively weakly temperature-dependent, and they are
still visible even at room temperature. We also find
a third relatively sharp increase in the polariton ab-
sorption for a detuning of approximately -40 meV,
now with a stronger temperature dependence. The
enhanced absorption starts to become visible only
for temperatures larger than approximately 100K.
This occurs as the scattering into the KΛ states is
only allowed via the absorption of phonons, which
is activated at sufficiently large temperatures. Note
that phonon absorption into the KK’ states is pos-
sible even for smaller detuning values (∆ = −55
for LA absorption), as this valley lies below the KΛ
state. Thus, there is no additional increase visible

3


FIG. 3. Lower polariton absorption as a function of de-
tuning and temperature for (a) WSe2 and (b) MoSe2
monolayers in a cavity. (c) Polariton absorption of WSe2
at the fixed temperature of 77K as a function of detun-
ing and momentum. The absorption increases as more
phonon-driven scattering channels into the dark exciton
states KΛ and KK′ open up, as denoted by the vertical
orange and red lines in (a). (d) Detuning-resolved lower
polariton linewidth at 77 K.

in the presented detuning range.
Overall, the absorption in MoSe2 is weaker than
in WSe2 due to the reduced effects of dark excitons
supported by the different band alignment, which
forbids the scattering via emission of phonons. At
high temperatures, a few weak step-like increases
are present due to the thermally-activated absorp-
tion of intravalley optical modes (purple) or inter-
valley phonons toward the dark KK’ valley (red). In
MoSe2, the scattering into KK’ is possible only at
high detunings because the energy of KK’ states is 9
meV above the bright exciton, in contrast to WSe2
where it lies 46 meV below the bright exciton (cf.
Fig. 1(c)).
So far, we have investigated the polariton absorp-
tion at zero momentum. Figure 3(c) shows the LP
absorption in WSe2 at a fixed temperature of 77K
as a function of detuning and momentum. For neg-
ative cavity detuning values and below k = 2 µm−1,
there is only a negligibly small absorption. The rea-

son is that there is a certain polariton access energy
required to scatter into the dark exciton states (Fig.
1(d)). Furthermore, the steep lower polariton dis-
persion allows us to show the opening of these scat-
tering channels as a function of momentum.
The
smaller the negative detuning, the lower is also the
required momentum for this scattering to occur with
critical detuning values for different channels ap-
pearing at k = 0 µm−1, cf. Fig. 3(c).
Finally, we show that not only the absorption
magnitude but also the spectral linewidth of the
lower polariton [2(2γ+Γ)] is strongly sensitive to the
opening of the detuning-driven polariton-phonon
scattering channels, cf. Fig. 3(d). For MoSe2, due
to the limited polariton-phonon scattering channels,
the LP linewidth is determined by the cavity decay
rate 4γ, i.e. on the photonic Hopfield coefficient of
the lower polariton, which decreases with increasing
detuning.
As a direct consequence, we find a
reduced LP linewidth as the detuning increases (red
line in Fig.
3(d)).
We find the same behaviour
also for WSe2 until the polariton-phonon scattering
channels start to open up at specific detuning
values, resulting in a series of sharp increases of the
LP linewidth.

Polariton linewidth: Now, we complement the
theoretical predictions with cryogenic reflectance
measurements of WSe2 and MoSe2 monolayers in a
cavity. We generalize Eq. (1) to study the reflected
signal given the asymmetric cavity-decay rates in the
two mirrors of our cavity. We utilize the full spectral
tunability of our open cavity to map the coupling
conditions of the two considered samples based on
integrated MoSe2 and WSe2 monolayers. Both ex-
periments yield a clear anti-crossing behaviour of the
upper- and lower polariton branches in the reflection
contrast study, featuring a Rabi-splitting of 20 meV
for WSe2 and a slightly reduced Rabi-splitting of 16
meV for MoSe2 To assess the role of dark excitons
in our experiment, we extract the linewidth of the
lower polariton resonance by fitting it with a Fano-
type of lineshape and plot the result as a function of
detuning.
Figure 4 shows a direct comparison between the
theoretically predicted and experimentally measured
lower polariton linewidth as a function of detuning
at a fixed temperature of 3.5 K. While for MoSe2,
we observe both in theory and experiment a smooth
increase of the LP linewidth as a function of de-
tuning (Fig.
4(a)), we find a more complex be-
haviour for WSe2 (Fig. 4(b)). We observe in the
experiment a series of step-like increases in the po-
lariton linewidth at the specific detuning values of

4


FIG. 4. Direct experiment-theory comparison. Theoret-
ically predicted (blue line) and experimentally measured
(orange dots) lower polariton linewidth obtained from
reflection measurements at 20 K for a (a) MoSe2 and (b)
WSe2 monolayer in a cavity. The thin blue line shows
the calculated linewidth without scattering into dark ex-
citon states, while the dashed line represents the intrinsic
linewidth without inhomogeneous broadening. The ver-
tical black lines denote the energy of spin-dark excitons
in experiments as well as the detuning values at which
the scattering channels with TA and LA phonons are
opened.

approximately -40, 29 and 26 meV (orange line in
Fig. 4(b)). Our theoretical predictions can repro-
duce well the latter two (blue line) and can clearly
trace back their microscopic origin to the opening
of the scattering channel toward the dark KΛ ex-
citon via the emission of TA and LA phonons, re-
spectively (cf. also Fig. 2(a)-(b)). When neglect-
ing the scattering to dark states, these character-
istic sharp increases vanish (thin blue line in Fig.
4(b)). Note that to match the experiments better,
we have slightly red-shifted the microscopically ob-
tained energy of KΛ excitons (by 6meV). The exact
position of these dark states is still under debate
in literature. In our microscopic model, we include
only spin-conserving phonon-induced scattering pro-
cesses. It is likely that the interaction with the spin-
dark KK excitons is responsible for the first increase
in the linewidth, whose broad shape is roughly cen-
tred around the energy of these states (detuning of

-40 meV).
Note that the direct comparison between theory
and
experiment
suggests
that
inhomogeneous
broadening plays an important role, as indicated
by the overall increase of the polariton linewidth
with detuning also in the ∆ ≪ 0 regime (solid lines
in Fig. 4). In contrast, for a purely homogeneous
linewidth, we predict a decrease with detuning,
the dashed blue line in Fig.
4, reflecting the
behaviour of the photonic Hopfield coefficient. This
suggests the existence of macroscopic/micrometric
inhomogeneities, e.g.
due to strain in the sam-
ple, whereas smaller-scale disorder could lead to
motional narrowing [42].
Hence, we have intro-
duced an inhomogeneous broadening enhancing
the exciton scattering in the rate Γ to match the
general experimental trend with detuning.
This
has no impact on the main message of our work,
namely the appearance of the characteristic series
of step-like increases in the polaritonic linewidth at
specific detuning values. Their observation in Fig.
4 has allowed us to experimentally determine the
relative energy of bright and dark excitons in TMD
materials via polaritonic spectra.

Conclusion: We have presented a microscopic
study
combining
material-specific
many-particle
theory with cryogenic spectroscopic measurements
to investigate polariton absorption and reflectance
in hBN-encapsulated WSe2 and MoSe2 monolayers
integrated
into
a
tunable
Fabry–Perot
cavity.
Interestingly, we find both in theory and experi-
ment the appearance of a series of characteristic
step-like increases at specific detuning values both
in polariton absorption and polariton linewidth
in WSe2 monolayers.
This behaviour is a clear
signature of the opening of phonon-driven scattering
channels between the lower polariton branch and
the dark exciton states in WSe2.
These results
show the potential of polaritons to map the full
exciton landscape, including bright and dark states
in atomically thin semiconductors.

Acknowledgements: We acknowledge funding
from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
via SFB 1083 and the regular project 524612380, as
well as from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foun-
dation via the Grant KAW 2019.0140.
The com-
putations were enabled by resources provided by
the Swedish National Infrastructure for Comput-
ing (SNIC). We also acknowledge financial support
within the projects SCHN1376 11.1 and SCHN1376
14.1, and within the program for major equipment
(INST 184/220-1 FUGG) funded by the German

5


Research Foundation (DFG) is acknowledged. Sup-
port by the Nieders¨achsisches Ministerium f¨ur Wis-
senschaft und Kultur (MWK) within the project
”DyNano” is gratefully acknowledged. B.H. grate-
fully acknowledges support from the Alexander von
Humboldt Foundation. K.W. and T.T. acknowledge
support from the JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Numbers
21H05233 and 23H02052) and World Premier Inter-
national Research Center Initiative (WPI), MEXT,
Japan.
S.T acknowledges primary support from
DOE-SC0020653 (materials synthesis), Applied Ma-
terials Inc., NSF CMMI 1825594 (NMR and TEM
studies), NSF DMR-1955889 (magnetic measure-
ments), NSF CMMI-1933214, NSF 1904716, NSF
1935994, NSF ECCS 2052527, DMR 2111812, and
CMMI 2129412.

REFERENCES:

[1] X. Liu, T. Galfsky, Z. Sun, F. Xia, E.-c. Lin, Y.-
H. Lee, S. K´ena-Cohen, and V. M. Menon, Strong
light–matter coupling in two-dimensional atomic
crystals, Nat. Photon. 9, 30 (2015).

[2] C. Schneider, M. M. Glazov, T. Korn, S. H¨ofling,
and B. Urbaszek, Two-dimensional semiconductors
in the regime of strong light-matter coupling, Nat.
Commun. 9, 1 (2018).

[3] S. Luo, H. Zhou, L. Zhang, and Z. Chen, Nanopho-
tonics
of
microcavity
exciton–polaritons,
Appl.
Phys. Rev 10 (2023).

[4] N. Lundt, S. Klembt, E. Cherotchenko, S. Bet-
zold, O. Iff, A. V. Nalitov, M. Klaas, C. P. Di-
etrich, A. V. Kavokin, S. H¨ofling, et al., Room-
temperature tamm-plasmon exciton-polaritons with
a WSe2 monolayer, Nat. Commun. 7, 13328 (2016).

[5] S. Dufferwiel, S. Schwarz, F. Withers, A. Trichet,
F. Li, M. Sich, O. Del Pozo-Zamudio, C. Clark,
A.
Nalitov,
D.
Solnyshkov,
et
al.,
Exciton–
polaritons in Van der Waals heterostructures em-
bedded in tunable microcavities, Nat. Commun. 6,
1 (2015).

[6] L. Zhang, R. Gogna, W. Burg, E. Tutuc, and
H. Deng, Photonic-crystal exciton-polaritons in
monolayer semiconductors, Nature Commun. 9, 713
(2018).

[7] J. Zhao, A. Fieramosca, K. Dini, R. Bao, W. Du,
R. Su, Y. Luo, W. Zhao, D. Sanvitto, T. C.
Liew,
et al., Exciton polariton interactions in
van der waals superlattices at room temperature,
Nat.Commun. 14, 1512 (2023).

[8] A. Ciarrocchi, F. Tagarelli, A. Avsar, and A. Kis,
Excitonic devices with van der waals heterostruc-
tures:
valleytronics meets twistronics, Nat. Rev.
Mat. 7, 449 (2022).

[9] K. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho, and

A. Castro Neto, 2d materials and van der waals het-
erostructures, Science 353, aac9439 (2016).

[10] D. Beret, I. Paradisanos, H. Lamsaadi, Z. Gan,
E.
Najafidehaghani,
A.
George,
T.
Lehnert,
J. Biskupek, U. Kaiser, S. Shree, et al., Exci-
ton spectroscopy and unidirectional transport in
MoSe2-WSe2 lateral heterostructures encapsulated
in hexagonal boron nitride, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl 6,
84 (2022).

[11] R. Rosati,
I. Paradisanos,
L. Huang,
Z. Gan,
A. George, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. Lombez,
P. Renucci, A. Turchanin, et al., Interface engi-
neering of charge-transfer excitons in 2d lateral
heterostructures, Nature communications 14, 2438
(2023).

[12] L. Yuan, B. Zheng, Q. Zhao, R. Kempt, T. Brumme,
A. B. Kuc, C. Ma, S. Deng, A. Pan, and L. Huang,
Strong dipolar repulsion of one-dimensional interfa-
cial excitons in monolayer lateral heterojunctions,
ACS nano 17, 15379 (2023).

[13] V.
Savona,
C.
Piermarocchi,
A.
Quattropani,
P. Schwendimann, and F. Tassone, Optical proper-
ties of microcavity polaritons, Phase Transit. 68,
169 (1999).

[14] H. Deng, H. Haug, and Y. Yamamoto, Exciton-
polariton Bose-Einstein condensation, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 82, 1489 (2010).

[15] J. Hopfield, Theory of the contribution of excitons
to the complex dielectric constant of crystals, Phys.
Rev. 112, 1555 (1958).

[16] L. Zhang, F. Wu, S. Hou, Z. Zhang, Y.-H. Chou,
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. R. Forrest, and
H. Deng, Van der Waals heterostructure polaritons
with Moir´e-induced nonlinearity, Nature 591, 61
(2021).

[17] J. M. Fitzgerald, J. J. Thompson, and E. Malic,
Twist angle tuning of moir´e exciton polaritons in
van der waals heterostructures, Nano Lett. 22, 4468
(2022).

[18] T. Mueller and E. Malic, Exciton physics and de-
vice application of two-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenide
semiconductors,
npj
2D
Mater.
Appl. 2, 29 (2018).

[19] E. Malic,
M. Selig,
M. Feierabend,
S. Brem,
D.
Christiansen,
F.
Wendler,
A.
Knorr,
and
G. Bergh¨auser, Dark excitons in transition metal
dichalcogenides,
Phys.
Rev.
Mater.
2,
014002
(2018).

[20] G. Bergh¨auser, P. Steinleitner, P. Merkl, R. Huber,
A. Knorr, and E. Malic, Mapping of the dark exciton
landscape in transition metal dichalcogenides, Phys.
Rev. B 98, 020301 (2018).

[21] H.
Shan,
I.
Iorsh,
B.
Han,
C.
Rupprecht,
H. Knopf, F. Eilenberger, M. Esmann, K. Yumigeta,
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, et al., Brightening of
a dark monolayer semiconductor via strong light-
matter coupling in a cavity, Nat. Commun. 13, 3001
(2022).

[22] B. Ferreira,
R. Rosati,
J. M. Fitzgerald, and

6


E. Malic, Signatures of dark excitons in exciton–
polariton optics of transition metal dichalcogenides,
2D Mat. 10, 015012 (2022).

[23] J.-C.
Drawer,
V.
N.
Mitryakhin,
H.
Shan,
S. Stephan, M. Gittinger, L. Lackner, B. Han,
G. Leibeling, F. Eilenberger, R. Banerjee, et al.,
Monolayer-based single-photon source in a liquid-
helium-free open cavity featuring 65% brightness
and quantum coherence, Nano Lett. 23, 8683
(2023).

[24] B. Besga, C. Vaneph, J. Reichel, J. Est`eve, A. Rein-
hard, J. Miguel-S´anchez, A. Imamo˘glu, and T. Volz,
Polariton boxes in a tunable fiber cavity, Phys. Rev.
App. 3, 014008 (2015).

[25] K. M¨uller, K. A. Fischer, A. Rundquist, C. Dory,
K. G. Lagoudakis, T. Sarmiento, Y. A. Kelaita,
V. Borish, and J. Vuˇckovi´c, Ultrafast polariton-
phonon dynamics of strongly coupled quantum dot-
nanocavity systems, Phys. Rev. X 5, 031006 (2015).

[26] C. Gebhardt, M. F¨org, H. Yamaguchi, I. Bilgin,
A. D. Mohite, C. Gies, M. Florian, M. Hartmann,
T. W. H¨ansch, A. H¨ogele, et al., Polariton hyper-
spectral imaging of two-dimensional semiconductor
crystals, Sci. Rep. 9, 13756 (2019).

[27] H.
Haus,
Waves
and
fields
in
optoelectron-
ics.,
PRENTICE-HALL,
INC.,
ENGLEWOOD
CLIFFS, NJ 07632, USA, 1984, 402 (1984).

[28] J. K. K¨onig, J. M. Fitzgerald, J. Hagel, D. Erken-
sten, and E. Malic, Interlayer exciton polaritons
in homobilayers of transition metal dichalcogenides,
2D Mat. 10, 025019 (2023).

[29] H. Haug and S. W. Koch, Quantum Theory of
the Optical and Electronic Properties of Semicon-
ductors: Fifth Edition (World Scientific Publishing
Company, 2009).

[30] G. Bergh¨auser and E. Malic, Analytical approach
to excitonic properties of MoS2, Phys. Rev. B 89,
125309 (2014).

[31] M. Selig,
G. Bergh¨auser,
A. Raja,
P. Nagler,
C. Sch¨uller, T. F. Heinz, T. Korn, A. Chernikov,
E. Malic, and A. Knorr, Excitonic linewidth and
coherence lifetime in monolayer transition metal
dichalcogenides, Nat. Commun. 7, 13279 (2016).

[32] A. Korm´anyos, G. Burkard, M. Gmitra, J. Fabian,
V. Z´olyomi, N. D. Drummond, and V. Fal’ko,

k·p theory for two-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenide semiconductors, 2D Mater. 2, 022001
(2015).

[33] F. Lengers, T. Kuhn, and D. E. Reiter, Phonon sig-
natures in spectra of exciton-polaritons in transition
metal dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B 104, L241301
(2021).

[34] B. Ferreira, R. Rosati, and E. Malic, Microscopic
modeling of exciton-polariton diffusion coefficients
in atomically thin semiconductors, Phys. Rev. Mat.
6, 034008 (2022).

[35] A. Thr¨anhardt, S. Kuckenburg, A. Knorr, T. Meier,
and S. Koch, Quantum theory of phonon-assisted
exciton formation and luminescence in semiconduc-
tor quantum wells, Phys, Rev. B 62, 2706 (2000).

[36] S. Brem, M. Selig, G. Berghaeuser, and E. Malic,
Exciton relaxation cascade in two-dimensional tran-
sition metal dichalcogenides, Sci. Rep. 8, 8238
(2018).

[37] C. W. Gardiner and M. J. Collett, Input and output
in damped quantum systems:
Quantum stochas-
tic differential equations and the master equation,
Phys. Rev. A 31, 3761 (1985).

[38] R. B. Adler, L. J. Chu, and R. M. Fano, Electro-
magnetic energy transmission and radiation (Wiley,
1960).

[39] J. R. Piper, V. Liu, and S. Fan, Total absorption by
degenerate critical coupling, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104,
251110 (2014).

[40] Z. Jin, X. Li, J. T. Mullen, and K. W. Kim, Intrinsic
transport properties of electrons and holes in mono-
layer transition-metal dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B
90, 045422 (2014).

[41] S. Brem, J. Zipfel, M. Selig, A. Raja, L. Waldecker,
J.
D.
Ziegler,
T.
Taniguchi,
K.
Watanabe,
A. Chernikov, and E. Malic, Intrinsic lifetime of
higher excitonic states in tungsten diselenide mono-
layers, Nanoscale 11, 12381 (2019).

[42] M. Wurdack,
E. Estrecho,
S. Todd,
T. Yun,
M. Pieczarka, S. K. Earl, J. A. Davis, C. Schnei-
der, A. G. Truscott, and E. A. Ostrovskaya, Mo-
tional narrowing,
ballistic transport,
and trap-
ping of room-temperature exciton–polaritons in an
atomically-thin semiconductor, Nat. Commun. 12,
5366 (2021).

7


