Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Cement and Concrete Research

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cemconres

Producing C-S-H gel by reaction between silica oligomers and portlandite: A
promising approach to repair cementitious materials

Rafael Zarzuelaa, Manuel Lunaa, Luis M. Carrascosaa, María P. Yesteb,c, Inés Garcia-Lodeirod,
M. Teresa Blanco-Varelad, Miguel A. Cauquib,c, José M. Rodríguez-Izquierdob,c,
María J. Mosqueraa,⁎

a TEP-243 Nanomaterials Group, Department of Physical-Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Cadiz, 11510 Puerto Real, Spain
b Department of Materials Science, Metallurgical Engineering & Inorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Cadiz, Campus Río San Pedro s/n, 11510 Puerto
Real, Cádiz, Spain
c IMEYMAT, Institute of Electron Microscopy and Materials, University of Cadiz, Spain
d Eduardo Torroja Institute for Construction Science (IETcc-CSIC), c/ Serrano Galvache 4, 28033 Madrid, Spain

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
B. calcium-silicate-hydrate (C-S-H)
D. Ca(OH)2
Impregnation treatment
Degraded concrete
Silica oligomer
Concrete repairing

A B S T R A C T

Impregnation treatments are one of the alternatives to protect concrete-based building and monuments from
weathering degradation. However, it is important to consider the chemical compatibility of the reaction products
with the building material. The impregnation product studied here consists of a silica oligomer able to poly-
merize, by a simple sol-gel process, inside the pore structure of concrete. In this work, we investigate the ability
of this impregnation treatment to produce C-S-H gel in contact with cement paste. A complete characterization of
the reaction products demonstrated that the silanol groups from silica oligomers react with the portlandite
present in the cement paste generating a material with the chemical, structural and morphological features of C-
S-H gel. Simultaneously, the 29Si NMR results indicate that the SieO units are incorporated into the existing C-S-
H, increasing its chain length. These results open the way for a simple concrete structures repairing procedure.

1. Introduction

The technological advances brought by the procedure to obtain
Portland cement and the use of reinforced concrete shaped late 19th
and 20th century architecture, giving rise to the architectural styles of
the modern era (modernism, rationalism, brutalism…). As a defining
characteristic of said styles, these new reinforced structures were often
left in fair-faced condition [1], without coatings or painting, increasing
its susceptibility to suffer degradation under aggressive environments.
The earlier manifestation of most degradation processes is the onset of
nano-and micro-cracks that is usually followed by increased porosity
[2], material loss and decreased mechanical performance [3]. In addi-
tion to these phenomena, reinforced concrete is specially affected by
the ingress of soluble CO2 and Cl− ions, which may cause de-passiva-
tion and corrosion of the reinforcements, eventually resulting in dela-
mination and structural failure. Nowadays, the current manufacturing
processes and construction techniques are designed to minimize these
issues. However, in the case of older concrete-based structures the
limited knowledge about the concrete degradation mechanisms has
given rise to a sizeable number of buildings that require repair

interventions and preventive maintenance treatments to combat their
damages.
Nowadays, the application of surface treatments, which prevent the
water ingress and fill the cracks produced by degradation, is the pre-
ferred choice for preserving historic concrete [4]. Although coatings
such as epoxy and acrylic resins are commonly employed with this aim,
they present significant drawbacks associated to thick layer formation
(0.1–1 mm) on concrete [5]. These layers can modify the aesthetic
conditions of the surface and, especially, they present low durability
due to low penetration and poor adhesion to the substrate. Impregna-
tion treatments, on the other hand, present a low viscosity, and con-
sequently have the ability to penetrate deeper (1–20 mm) and react in
situ within the pore structure of the damaged substrate, promoting
long-lasting effectiveness [5]. Different treatments based on nano-silica
dispersions, available in the market, are employed for concrete pro-
tection due to their ability to undergo pozzolanic reaction with the
portlandite and fill the pores with C-S-H. However, despite the small
particle size, these treatments have difficulties penetrating into the
smaller pores [5,6].
Silica oligomer/monomer-based sols (e.g.¸ tetraethoxysilane, TEOS)

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconres.2020.106008
Received 4 September 2019; Received in revised form 29 January 2020; Accepted 30 January 2020

⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: mariajesus.mosquera@uca.es (M.J. Mosquera).

Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

Available online 12 February 2020
0008-8846/ ©
 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecom
m
ons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

T


are widely used in the stone conservation market [7] due to their ad-
vantages and their economical cost comparable to other alternatives.
Their low viscosity allows them to penetrate deeply into the porous
structure and after polymerization, which occurs upon reaction with
environmental moisture, a stable gel with a silicon‑oxygen backbone is
formed. This SiO2 structure has a similar composition to the quartz and
silicate minerals present in a wide variety of building materials, in-
cluding the hydrated calcium silicate (C-S-H) and aluminosilicates (e.g.
strätlingite) present in concrete or the siliceous sands used as fine ag-
gregate. As the main drawbacks for these products, xerogel cracking is
produced due to the high capillary pressures inside the dense micro-
porous gel network and their effectiveness tends to be limited on car-
bonate-rich materials, such as limestone and concrete surfaces sub-
jected to intense carbonation.
In previous developments [8,9], we devised an ultrasound-assisted
synthesis to produce crack-free mesoporous xerogels by adding a small
proportion (< 0.5%) of a long chain amine which acts as a catalyst and
surfactant [10,11]. This synthesis process has been patented [12] and is
currently under exploitation. The ultrasound agitation produces a
homogeneous emulsion of water in ethoxysilanes in a short time
(< 10 min), which is stabilized by the surfactant via formation of in-
verse micelles. The micelles created by the surfactant act as nanor-
eactors, where the ethoxysilane hydrolyzes and polymerizes forming
SiO2 nuclei that eventually grow outside the micelles forming a gel
composed of densely packed nanoparticles with uniform size. The me-
soporous structure of the gel (6–20 nm pores) decreases capillary
pressure during drying and prevents cracking. An additional advantage
of this synthesis route regards the higher compatibility of the treatment
with carbonate-based materials, as observed in previous works [13].
The application of silica oligomer/monomer-based products as an
impregnation treatment on concrete has been hardly investigated, de-
spite recent studies indicating their higher effectiveness in comparison
to other impregnation products (such as sodium silicate and nanosilica)
[14,15]. However, the high pH and different composition of the cement
matrix compared to stone is likely to modify the interaction of these
products with concrete and thus, it requires to be investigated.
The effectiveness demonstrated by silica-based sols to repair de-
graded concrete structures can be clearly associated to their reactivity
in contact with cementitious substrates. It is well known that calcium-
silicate-hydrate (C-S-H) gel is a significant component in the cement
paste, giving rise to its engineering properties, and durability [16]. New
C-S-H gel could be produced into the concrete porous system as con-
sequence of reaction between silanol groups from silica-based products
and Ca2+ ions from portlandite, one of the main resultant products of
cement hydration. Furthermore, since the silica source is already so-
lubilized, this process can be faster than the pozzolanic reaction with
other (solid) silica sources such as nano-SiO2. In spite of the significance
of this feature, that would allow to repair the concrete buildings and
structures by a simple and low cost impregnation treatment, scarce
research about that can be found in the literature [17,18].
Starting from this premise, the objective of this work is to in-
vestigate the ability of the silica oligomer-based impregnation, product
previously developed and patented by our group [10,12], to produce C-
S-H gel. For this purpose, the sol-gel reaction was carried out in the
presence of portlandite paste. This system allows to simulate the con-
ditions of the concrete pore solution for studying the formation of C-S-H
gel, eliminating the interferences introduced by the C-S-H and other
silica phases of hydrated cement present originally in the cement paste.
An extensive structural, chemical and morphological characterization
of the reaction products was carried out. Once the C-S-H formation from
portlandite was evidenced, the study was carried out by using cement
paste in order to be brought closer to real conditions.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Synthesis of the impregnation product

The product employed for this study (henceforth called UCA-T) was
synthetized according to a previously developed surfactant-assisted
sol–gel method developed and patented by our group [10,12]. The
starting sol was prepared by mixing 100 ml of an oligomeric silica
precursor (TES40 WN, Wacker Chemie AG) with 0.16 ml n-octylamine
(99%, Sigma-Aldrich), which acts as a catalyst and a surfactant, and
0.5 ml de-ionized H2O. According to its technical data sheet, TES40 is a
mixture of monomeric and oligomeric ethoxysilanes with linear chains
of 4–5 SieO units and a 41% SiO2 content. The mixture was afterwards
subjected to ultrasonic agitation for 10 min utilizing an ultrasound
probe (Bandelin Ultrasonic HD3200) working at 74% amplitude in a
water bath to prevent overheating.
Xerogel samples were obtained, in order to study the product
properties, in absence of cement paste, by casting 15 ml the sol in an
open Ø85 mm Petri dish and keeping them under laboratory conditions
(20 °C, 40% RH) for gelification. Once the samples reached constant
weight, the xerogel was ground for characterization.

2.2. Reaction of the product with portlandite

A first approach to verify the ability of the product to form C-S-H
gel, was to study its reaction with portlandite paste (PP). The samples
for this study were prepared as follows: (1) A PP was obtained by
mixing, under mechanical stirring, Ca(OH)2 (90%, Scharlau) and
de‑carbonated H2O in a water/solid ratio of 0.5 (2) 2 g of the UCA-T sol
were mixed with 15 g of the PP (3) The pastes were placed in desiccator
under a N2 atmosphere with saturated humidity and left to cure (4) At
different time intervals (7 and 21 days), the reaction was stopped by
replacing the water via solvent exchange with isopropanol [19]. (4)
Isopropanol was evaporated in a vacuum oven at 35 °C during three
days. For comparison purposes, a portlandite paste without UCA-T was
also subjected to the same process (in this case, the paste was cured for
7 days).

2.3. Reaction of the product with hydrated cement paste

The second series of experiments focused on studying the interac-
tion of the impregnation product with the hydration products present in
concrete. To avoid the interferences due to the aggregates, the experi-
ments were carried out using hydrated cement paste (CP), prepared by
mixing a Cem I 42.5 R cement with de‑carbonated H2O in a 0.5 w/c
ratio. The paste was cured in a N2 atmosphere saturated with water for
28 days, and afterwards vacuum-dried at 35 °C during three days.
Prior to mixing with UCA-T, the cement paste was finely ground to a
size of < 30 μm. 15 g of the powdered cement paste was mixed with 3 g
of the UCA-T sol and stored in a N2 atmosphere saturated with ambient
water. After curing for 7 and 21 days, the hydration reactions were
stopped by replacing the water via solvent exchange with isopropanol
and, afterwards, dried in a vacuum oven at 35 °C during three days. For
comparison purposes, a sample of CP was also subjected to the same
experimental conditions.

2.4. Characterization of the samples

Structural, chemical and morphological characterization of the
xerogels and the reaction products of the sol with portlandite and ce-
ment paste was carried out by the techniques described below. Prior to
their analysis, all the solids under study were finely ground (< 30 μm).
Mineralogical and chemical analysis of the samples was performed
by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and thermo-
gravimetric analysis (TGA) techniques. The XRD patterns of the mate-
rials were obtained with a Bruker D8 advance diffractometer equipped

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

2


with a secondary monochromator, Cu tube X-ray, using Cu Kα radia-
tion. Quantitative analysis of the phases was carried out by the Rietveld
method. Compositional analysis was carried out by micro-XRF (μ-XRF)
analysis, using a Bruker S4-PIONEER equipment. The sample compo-
sitions were obtained averaging the XRF elemental maps of the pow-
dered samples spread on a plate. TGA was carried out in a SDT Q600
TA-Instruments thermobalance. The samples were heated up to 800 °C
at 5 °C/min, in a flow of O2(5%)/He (60 cm3/min). Such TGA experi-
ments were complemented by analyzing the released gases using a
quadrupole mass spectrometer (Pfeiffer, QME-200-D-35614 model) to
track MS signals and identify the desorption and decomposition pro-
ducts.
Structural characterization of the materials was performed by
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and 29Si nuclear mag-
netic resonance (29Si NMR). The samples for the FTIR measurements
were prepared in KBr pellets (1% proportion) and measured in trans-
mittance mode in the 4000–450 cm−1 range by using a IRAffinity-1S
spectrophotometer from Shimadzu. In order to perform semi-quantita-
tive analysis of the portlandite and carbonates, K3Fe(CN)6 was added
(K3Fe(CN)6/sample ratio 1:1) as an internal standard. Single-pulse (SP)
MAS-29Si NMR experiments were carried out on a Bruker ADVANCE
WB400 spectrometer equipped with a multinuclear probe. Samples of
powdered materials were packed in 4 mm zirconia rotors and spun at
8 kHz. Pulse length was 5 μs, with a recycle delay of 30 s and the
number of transients was 8000. The chemical shift values are expressed
in ppm of tetramethylsilane.
Morphological features of the materials were studied by electron
microscopy. Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM)
micrographs were registered in secondary electrons mode with a
NanoSEM 450 model from the FEI Company, working at an acceleration
voltage of 2.5 kV. The samples were prepared by directly depositing a
small amount of the powder over carbon tape placed in an aluminum
sample holder. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and Scanning
Transmission Electron Microscopy Bright Field (STEM-BF) images, were
obtained with a FEI TITAN3 Themis 60–300 microscope, operating at
an acceleration voltage of 60 kV and equipped with an energy-dis-
persive X-ray spectroscopy EDXS detector for selected area EDXS ana-
lysis. The samples were prepared by finely grounding the powders and

direct deposition over a lacey carbon-coated copper grid.

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Characterization of the impregnation product

Characterization of the UCA-T sol and the sol-gel transition are re-
ported elsewhere [10]. A summary of these properties (density, visc-
osity, surface tension, gel time and stability) can be found in supporting
information (Table S1). When stored in a closed vessel, the sol remains
stable (i.e. does not gel or change its properties), as the amount of water
is not enough to self-sustain the hydrolysis of the silica precursor. Upon
exposure to ambient moisture (20 °C, 40%RH), gel time is between 16
and 17 h, which is long enough to allow manipulation of the product in
realistic application conditions.
After the sol-gel transition, UCA-T forms a monolithic xerogel due to
the effect of the surfactant (n-octylamine), which plays two important
roles: (i) it reduces the surface tension and (ii) it promotes the forma-
tion of a particulated xerogel with a mesoporous structure. This com-
bination of surface tension reduction and increasing of pore size results
in a lowering of capillary pressure that allows monolithic xerogels to be
obtained [10].
The final weight (after 60 days) of the xerogel was a 65% of the
initial (sol) weight, a value remarkably higher than the theoretical
weight that would result from a fully realized sol-gel reaction to pro-
duce SiO2 (~40%), indicating the presence of unreacted ethoxy- groups
and/or byproducts (H2O and EtOH) trapped inside the smaller pores of
the structure.
The SEM and TEM images reveal the mesoporous structure of the
UCA-T xerogel. Specifically, the SEM micrographs (Fig. 1A, 1B) show a
globular structure, composed of a network of tightly packed SiO2 na-
noparticles with a uniform size, in line with previous observations
where it was found that the surfactant produced inverse micelles that
act as nano-reactors promoting the formation of a mesostructure [10].
The detailed micrographs of the particle structure, obtained by TEM
(Fig. 1C), show a uniform size distribution of the nanoparticles in the
20–50 nm range, with the minor presence of some particles around
70 nm. The uniform particle size clearly confirms the role played by the

Fig. 1. (A, B) SEM micrographs of the UCA-T xerogel. (C) TEM micrograph of the UCA-T xerogel.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

3


inverse micelles as nano-reactors of the mesostructured. The particle
morphology was an irregular quasi-spherical shape.
The amorphous nature of the UCA-T was confirmed by the XRD
pattern (Fig. 2A), which shows the characteristic wide and poorly de-
fined band of non-crystalline structures. The position of the band,
centered around 2θ = 22°, is typically found in the amorphous silica
gels and corresponds to the distance between Si atoms bridged by O
atoms [20,21]. The composition of the xerogel, according to the XRF
analysis, was predominantly SiO2 (99.5%) with a minor contribution of
Ca and Al impurities.
The chemical nature of the UCA-T xerogel was further evaluated by
infrared spectroscopy. The FTIR spectra (Fig. 2B) show the typical
bands of a silica xerogel. The bands at 800 cm−1 and 1080 cm−1 cor-
respond to SieO symmetric and antisymmetric stretching vibrations
from siloxane groups [22], whereas the shoulder at 1161 cm−1 is as-
sociated to SieO antisymmetric stretching vibrations in high molecular
weight siloxane chains [23]. The presence of the –CH2– and –CH3 νs
(2922 and 2852 cm−1), νa bands (1400–1480 cm−1) and δ H-C-H
(1296 cm−1) [23,24] indicates the presence of non-hydrolyzed ethoxy-
groups and/or trapped ethanol in the pores, in accordance with the
previous observations, which showed a weight loss lower than theore-
tical values. The band appearing at 970 cm−1 is characteristic of the
SieO stretching vibration of Si-OH groups [25], formed after the hy-
drolysis, that did not undergo the condensation stage.
Thermogravimetric analysis confirmed that the CeH bands in the
FTIR spectra (Fig. 2B) result from two contributions. Specifically, the

TGA curve (Fig. 2C) shows two weight losses typically found on silica
xerogels [26]. A first loss of 30% occurred at lower temperatures
(90–360 °C), associated with the evaporation of reaction byproducts
(H2O, EtOH) trapped in the pores or physisorbed on the surface as
evidenced by the signals at m/c = 18 (H2O) and m/c = 31 (EtOH) by
MS analysis of released products (Fig. S1A). The second weight loss,
representing an 8%, occurred at 460–590 °C, and corresponds to the
decomposition of non-hydrolyzed ethoxy groups from the precursor,
manifested by the release of CO2 (m/c = 44) and H2O, tracked by MS
analysis.
The progress of the hydrolysis reaction could be estimated by re-
calculating the weight losses with respect to the initial sol weight,
considering simultaneously the values obtained by TGA and the 35%
weight loss that occurred from the initial sol to the xerogel (calculations
are detailed in supporting material). The recalculated data indicate a
39% SiO2 content (practically the same as the theoretical value), a 5.2%
loss associated to unreacted ethoxy groups and a combined 54.5% loss
in hydrolysis byproducts (H2O and EtOH). The degree of hydrolysis,
calculated (see eq. 1) as the relation between the experimental weight
loss in hydrolysis byproducts and the theoretical weight loss that would
result from a fully realized reaction (60%), was estimated at 91%, in-
dicating that the majority of the silica precursor was hydrolyzed during
the process.

=
×
Degree of hydrolysis
Experimental Loss
Theoretical Loss
(%)
(%)
100
(1)

Fig. 2. Characterization of the UCA-T xerogel. (A) XRD pattern. (B) Attenuated transmission reflectance (ATR)-FTIR spectrum. (C) TGA curve. (D) 29Si NMR spectra.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

4


The MAS-29Si NMR experiments were employed to study the re-
ticulation degree of the silica structure. The NMR spectra (Fig. 2D)
showed the presence of four characteristic signals [27,28], corre-
sponding to the various coordination degrees of the Si atom. The −111
and − 102 ppm signals correspond to the Q4 (Si(O–)4 tetrahedra) and
Q3 (Si(OEt)(O–)3) species respectively, which correspond respectively
to the three-dimensional SiO2 network and the in-plane SieO units. The
width of these bands may indicate a contribution of the signals asso-
ciated with Q3 (Si(OH)(O–)3), as also suggested by the silanol band at
970 cm−1 observed in the FTIR spectra (Fig. 2B). Linear arrangements
were also evidenced by the signals at −96 ppm, attributed to Q2 (Si
(OEt)2(O–)2) species, and − 87 ppm, corresponding to Q1 species (Si
(OEt)3(O–)1). The presence of these species is in line with the in-
complete degree of hydrolysis calculated by TGA (93%) and the CeH
bands observed in the FTIR spectra. From the integrated areas under the
different signals of the 29Si NMR spectra (Fig. 2D), 54% (Q4), 22% (Q3),
14% (Q2) and 10% (Q1), it can be deduced that the majority of SieO
units (76%) are part of reticulated structures, confirming the formation
of the three-dimensional network typical of silica xerogels.

3.2. Characterization of the reaction products with portlandite

Due to the difficulty of studying all the different interactions of the
UCA-T product with a system as complex as a cement paste (i.e. pre-
sence of multiple phases, heterogeneous pore structure, varying water
content in the pores…), a first approach to study the interaction to form
C-S-H gel, was to perform a series of experiments with portlandite paste
(Ca(OH)2 + H2O). This model system was chosen considering that
portlandite is one of the hydration phases of cement, and can act as a
Ca2+ source with basic character, both of them conditions which favor
pozzolanic-like reactions with the silica source [29].
The X-ray diffractograms of the portlandite paste (PP) (Fig. 3A)
showed the presence of two crystalline phases: portlandite (Ca(OH)2)
and a lower proportion of calcite (CaCO3). The presence of calcite in-
dicates a partial carbonation, which might have been produced during
the sample preparation and analysis. The PP + UCA-T diffractograms
presented a similar profile (calcite and portlandite as the main signals),
which indicated that the reaction products are not crystalline. The only
difference was a slight broadening of the bands at 2θ = 29–30°
(Fig. 3B), which may be attributed the formation of a poorly crystalline
phase different from the amorphous silica xerogel produced by auto-

condensation of the silica oligomer (Fig. 2A). The Rietveld analysis of
this signal showed a fit to the Tobermorite 9 Å phase [30], as observed
by the improvement of the fit in Fig. S2 (χ2 decreases from 1.70 to
1.38). As described by different models, tobermorite crystalline struc-
ture can be related to the short-term ordered domains of the C-S-H gel
structure [31].
It is worth mentioning that the data obtained by XRD are in-
sufficient to confirm the nature of the possible reaction products (i.e.
SiO2 and C-S-H gels), since they are predominantly amorphous and,
therefore, they will produce weak and broad signals, which are masked
by the peaks of the crystalline phases.
The elemental composition of the portlandite and portlandite +
UCA-T pastes was analyzed by XRF (Table S2). PP was mainly com-
posed of Ca phases (ca. 98%), with a minor amount of Mg, Si and Al
impurities. The portlandite + UCA-T pastes, showed the presence of Si
phases (ca. 10%, expressed as SiO2). It is remarkable that the experi-
mental % SiO2 is lower than the nominal SiO2 proportion (assuming
that UCA-T contains 40% SiO2) added to the paste (ca. 14.6%), which
may indicate that a fraction of the silica oligomers did not react and
were washed out during the solvent exchange with ethanol. The com-
position did not significantly vary from the paste cured for 7 and
21 days.
The reactivity of the UCA-T sol with Ca(OH)2 to form C-S-H-like
products was evidenced by the FTIR spectra (Fig. 4). The spectra of the
Ca(OH)2 paste showed a characteristic intense and narrow band at
3640 cm−1, attributable to the νas OeH vibration in the Ca(OH)2
structure, along with the characteristic CO3
2– bands at 870 (δ CeO) and
1450 cm−1 (νas CeO), in line with the calcite content found by XRD
measurements (Fig. 4A). The PP + UCA-T paste spectra showed some
evident differences to the pure portlandite as a result of the reactions.
First, the area ratio between the OeH portlandite band and the internal
standard C^N band (O-H/C ≡ N) decreased from ~2 to ~1 while the
C=O/C ≡ N ratio (associated with carbonation) remained roughly the
same, confirming that a fraction of the portlandite had been consumed
during the reaction with UCA-T. No significant changes in portlandite
or carbonate proportion were observed from 7 to 21 days. In addition to
these
changes,
the
characteristic
νas
H-O-H
bands
around
3200–3500 cm−1 became evident in the portlandite + UCA-T paste
spectra. The presence of this band can be explained by different con-
tributions: (i) adsorbed H2O due to a higher surface area, (ii) hydration
H2O molecules integrated between the CaeO layers of the C-S-H
structure and (3) the presence of Si-OH groups. The intensity of this
band decreased from 7 to 21 days, which may result from two factors:
(i) a reduction in the amount of adsorbed water and (ii) the transfor-
mation of silanols into silicates as the reaction with Ca(OH)2 progresses
(or into SiO2 after auto-condensation).
The most noteworthy change observed in the spectra was the pre-
sence of a band group associated to silica, centered at 960–970 cm−1.
The position of these bands is characteristic of νas SieO stretching vi-
brations (νas) of the tetrahedral units forming part of linear chains (Q2),
present in the C-S-H structure [32]. It should be noted that the position
of the SieO bands differs from the FTIR spectra of the UCA-T xerogel
(see Fig. 2B), where the bands at 1080 and 800 cm−1 clearly indicated
the formation of a three-dimensional SiO2 network, thus confirming
that the presence of Ca2+ ions and a basic media alters the poly-
merization route of the UCA-T sol, yielding linear silica chains which
are consistent with the structures of C-S-H gel [33]. An evolution of the
structure from 7 to 21 days was evidenced by a shift of the band
maximum from 957 to 969 cm−1, which can be associated to the for-
mation of a C-S-H structure with lower Ca/Si ratios [32]. This suggests
that the hydrolyzed SiO4
− groups from the impregnation product are
able to incorporate into the C-S-H silicate chain and decrease its Ca/Si
ratio, which is consistent with the increase of the area ratio between the
silica band and the internal standard (C^N) band from 3.1 to 5.2.
Another difference with respect to the UCA-T xerogel spectra was the
total absence of the CeH bands in the presence of portlandite, which is

Fig. 3. (A) XRD diffractograms of the PP and PP + UCA-T pastes cured for 7
and 21 days. (B) Inset showing the region corresponding to the C-S-H signals. P:
Portlandite (COD 9000013), C: Calcite (COD 7022027), T: Tobermorite (COD
9005447).
COD: Crystallography Open Database, http://cod.crystallography.net.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

5


a consequence of the strongly basic pH in the reaction mixture pro-
moting a higher hydrolysis rate.
The curve fitting analysis of the 760–1200 region (Fig. 4B, C)
showed one carbonate band at 873 cm−1 and four contributions of
SieO bands: (1) the SieO stretching of Q1 tetrahedra at 820 cm−1; (2)
the asymmetric υ(SieO) Q2 band centered around 960 cm−1; (3) a band
at 1013 cm−1, which can be attributed to formation of silicates with a
higher connectivity in Ca poor gels [34]; and (4) a band around
1053 cm−1 corresponding to the reticulated SiO2 networks (Q3 and Q4).
The predominance of linear structures becomes evident by the higher

contribution of the bands at 960 and 1013 cm−1 respect to the
1053 cm−1 signal. The curve fitting analysis further evidenced the
evolution of the system from 7 to 21 days by a shift of the silicate bands
group towards higher wavenumbers, which is indicative of a higher
polymerization degree of the silica chains in C-S-H [35], and the lower
contribution of the 820 cm−1 (Q1) signal. Furthermore, a decrease in
the contribution of the 1013 cm−1 indicated that part of the silicates
have evolved towards structures with higher connectivity while the
linear chains (960 cm−1) were mostly retained.
An analysis of the phases present in the pastes was carried out by

Fig. 4. (A) FTIR spectra of the portlandite paste (PP) cured for 7 days and PP + UCA-T cured for 7 and 21 days. (B, C) Curve fitting of the Si-O-Si band group showing
the band positions and the percentage of contribution of SieO bands of PP + UCA-T cured for (B) 7 days and (C) 21 days. *K3Fe[CN]6 was added as an internal
standard.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

6


thermogravimetric analysis. In addition to the initial loss of weakly
adsorbed water, the TGA curves (Fig. 5A) showed weight losses asso-
ciated to three different processes: (1) 25–330 °C, evaporation of H2O,
adsorbed and hydration water in C-S-H, (2) 330–480 °C, Ca(OH)2 →
CaO + H2O ↑, (3) 520–660 °C, CaCO3 → CaO + CO2 ↑. The assignment
of these processes is corroborated by the evolution of the H2O (m/
c = 18) and EtOH (m/c = 46) signals of evolved gases followed by MS
analysis (Fig. S1B).
The detailed quantification results of the different components,
calculated from the stoichiometry of the reactions, can be seen in Table
S3. The portlandite paste contained a 90% Ca(OH)2 and 3% CaCO3.
After the reaction with UCA-T, the pastes presented a higher content in
H2O, which can be associated to the hydration water in C-S-H and/or
adsorbed H2O due to its high surface area. The proportion of Ca(OH)2
significantly decreased in the portlandite + UCA-T pastes, down to
values below 60%. These values are smaller than the nominal content of
Ca(OH)2 added to the initial mixture (81%, disregarding H2O and as-
suming total hydrolysis of the silica oligomer), thus confirming its re-
action with the UCA-T product. The increase in %CaCO3 was small,
indicating that carbonation barely contributed to the consumption of
Ca(OH)2. Further evidence of the reaction of the silica oligomer with Ca
(OH)2 can be found in the proportion of the residual weight, which
represented a 25–30% of the sample. The fact that these values were
higher than the SiO2 content measured by XRF (ca. 10.5%) can only be
explained if we consider that those phases incorporate Si and Ca (e.g. C-
S-H), in contrast with the practically pure SiO2 content of the xerogel
formed in absence of portlandite.
With regard to the evolution of the PP + UCA-T paste over time,
variations in the phase proportions were barely observed. Specifically,
the residue (silica phases) and the hydration water of C-S-H increased
by < 0.2 while Ca(OH)2 proportion decreased by < 0.1%, indicating a
rapid equilibration of the Ca(OH)2 reaction with the silica source. The
small magnitude of the compositional changes seems to suggest that the
evolution of the paste from 7 to 21 days is mostly the result of a re-
structuring of the calcium silicate phases.
The 29Si NMR spectra, measured for the PP + UCA-T paste cured for
21 days (Fig. 5B), confirmed the different structure of the silica units

compared to the xerogel. Specifically, the portlandite + UCA-T paste
exclusively presented peaks corresponding to Q2 (−85 ppm) and Q1

(−79 ppm) positions, indicating that the silica tetrahedral units were
predominantly forming the linear chains characteristic of C-S-H, as also
deduced by the position of the SieO bands in the FTIR spectra (Fig. 4).
The mean chain length (MCL) of the CSH gel in the PP + UCA-T, cal-
culated according to eq. 2 [36], was 2.6 units, which is intermediate
between the typical dimeric and pentameric units from jennite and
tobermorite respectively [37]. This value is consistent with C-S-H gels
with a Ca/Si ratio in the range 1.2–1.7 [38], specifically, similar MCL
values were observed for CSH gels obtained from lime and silica using a
mechanochemical process with Ca/Si ratios of 1.16 and 1.24 [36].

=
+
MCL
I Q
I Q
I Q
2
( 1)
( 2)
( 1)
(2)

Another important difference with respect to the UCA-T xerogel lies
in the shift of the Q2 and Q1 band positions. As discussed for the xerogel
(Fig. 2D), the positions −96 ppm and −87 ppm correspond to Si
(OEt)2(O–)2 and Si(OEt)3(O–) respectively [27], as a result of the in-
complete hydrolysis of the silica oligomers. On the other hand, in the
presence of portlandite, the signals appeared in positions corresponding
to the Si atoms bonded to the CaO tetrahedra at chain-end (−78 ppm)
and mid-chain (−86 ppm) positions. The position of these signals
confirms the hydrolysis of the silica oligomer incorporated into the
structure, as was suggested by the absence of CeH bands in the FTIR
spectra.
In addition to the chemical and structural characterization of the
formed C-S-H gel, the evolution of the morphological features of the
reaction products was studied by SEM. The SEM study (Fig. 6) revealed
a gradual evolution from the bare portlandite towards the growth of
characteristic C-S-H structures over the Ca(OH)2 surface. Without the
addition of UCA-T (Fig. 6A, B), the portlandite paste presented a
structure
consisting
on
agglomerated
crystals
of
varying
size
(0.25–3 μm) with a flat surface and the occasional presence of smaller
rhombohedral crystals (50–100 nm) corresponding to calcite, as also
detected by other techniques (XRD, TGA, FTIR). After 1 day curing in
the presence of UCA-T (Fig. 6C, D), a porous globular-like structure,

Fig. 5. (A) TGA and DTG curves of the portlandite paste with and without UCA-T cured for 7 and 21 days. (B) 29Si NMR of the portlandite + UCA-T paste cured for
21 days.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

7


with 50–100 nm pores, over the Ca(OH)2 grains became evident. This
newly formed phase had a completely different structure than the
compact packing of 30–70 nm particles of the UCA-T xerogel (see
Fig. 1A, B), confirming the previous observations which suggested a
change in the polymerization route of the silica oligomer. This structure
observed here resembles that of unhydrated sol-gel derived calcium
silicate cements observed in works from other authors [39].
After 7 days (Fig. 6E, F), the morphology of the structures evolved
towards a sheet-like structure with larger (100–200 nm pores) and the
coverage of the portlandite crystals was practically total, indicating the
formation of calcium silicate progressed after 1 day. Albeit poorly de-
fined, the morphological features of the reaction products at this stage
showed some resemblance to the early hydration phases of alite (C3S)
[19,40], suggesting that from day 1 to day 7 the calcium silicate phases
had started to undergo the hydration process, causing a re-arrangement
of its structure into the characteristic sheet morphology of C-S-H gel.
This
explanation
is
supported
by
the
previously
discussed

characterization techniques, which clearly showed a reaction product
with C-S-H chemical/structural features at this stage.
The evolution of the reaction products towards more defined
structures became clear after 21 days (Fig. 6E, F). More specifically, it
was observed that the sheet-like structures grew and transformed into
thin (< 20 nm) flake-like structures. These morphological features
closely resemble some of the structures of C-S-H reported by other
authors for C3S pastes cured in limewater solution [19], synthetic C-S-H
prepared via sol-gel routes [41] or pozzolanic reaction of portlandite
with nano-silica [41]. The formation of these structures is consistent
with the work by Zhang et.al [19], which reported that, when cured in
submerged conditions, sheet-like structures were favored over the
needle-like C-S-H due to the dilution of Ca2+ ions in the surrounding
liquid, leading to a reticular network structure. It should also be men-
tioned that the coverage of the Ca(OH)2 crystals was practically the
same as it was observed at 7 days suggesting that during the 7–21 days
interval the main processes occurring were the hydration and a

Fig. 6. SEM micrographs of (A, B) portlandite paste cured 7 days; portlandite paste + UCA-T cured (C, D) for 1 day; (E,F) for 7 days and (G,H) for 21 days.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

8


rearrangement of the structure, instead of the formation of new calcium
silicate.
In a similar vein to the SEM images, the TEM micrographs (Fig. 7)
showed, in further detail, the formation of the characteristic sheet-like
structures of C-S-H after 7 days, which became more defined after
21 days. The PP + UCA-T paste at 1 day showed the formation of a
structure without defining features over the Ca(OH)2 crystals. Analysis
by EDX of these amorphous structures showed that the Ca/Si ratio
greatly varied depending on the measured region, from 8.5 to 0.1 va-
lues, indicating a heterogeneous phase composition (i.e. coexistence of
calcium silicate, Ca(OH)2, calcite, SiO2 xerogel remnants…). After
curing for 7 days, the measured Ca/Si ratios of the C-S-H structures
varied between 2.3 and 3.0, which are slightly higher than the typical

ratios reported for calcium-rich C-S-H gels [36]. It should be noted that,
due to the sensitivity of the structure to the electron beam, the analysis
was performed with a large spot size and the Ca signal may be over-
estimated by the proximity of the portlandite crystals.
After curing for 21 days, the Ca/Si ratio evolved towards values in
the 1.0–1.4 range, which fit into the characteristic proportions found in
C-S-H. This decrease in the Ca/Si ratio can be explained by the increase
in the degree of polymerization of the C-S-H silica chains, in line with
the FTIR measurements, which showed a shift of the silicate bands to-
wards higher wavenumbers (Fig. 4) and a decreased contribution of the
Q1 Si band (~810–820 cm−1 in the FTIR spectra).
In light of the results obtained from the different techniques, we
propose that the reaction of the product with the Ca(OH)2 takes places

Fig. 7. TEM and STEM-BF micrographs of (A) portlandite paste cured 7 days and portlandite + UCA-T paste (B) cured for 1 day, (C, D) cured for 7 days, (E,F) cured
for 21 days.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

9


through the following stages: (i) the strongly basic media produces the
hydrolysis and cleavage of the silica oligomers during the first stages of
the process, yielding reactive silanol groups, which start to react with
the calcium released in the vicinity of the Ca(OH)2 crystals to form
calcium silicate hydrate. (ii) This reaction continues through the first
seven days, coexisting with the growth of the C-S-H gel structures. (iii)
From 7 to 21 days, the condensation continues and the silica chains in
C-S-H undergo further polymerization, causing a re-arrangement of the
structure.

3.3. Characterization of the reaction products with hydrated cement paste

Having demonstrated the ability of the UCA-T product to react with
portlandite, the following stage of the study was focused on the eva-
luation of the interactions with hydrated cement paste (CP).
Crystallographic analysis by XRD (Fig. 8) identified different char-
acteristic phases in the cement paste. The most abundant crystalline
phase was portlandite, followed by ettringite and monocaboaluminate
(AFm), resulting from the hydration of aluminum phases. Additionally,
the analysis showed the minor presence of remnant belite (C2S), and
carbonation products (calcite). A weaker broad signal appeared at
2θ = 29–30°, which can be associated to the short-ordered domains of
C-S-H, resulting from the hydration of C2S and C3S. The XRD patterns of
the CP + UCA-T displayed the same phases, although with differences
in the relative peak intensities, confirming that the reaction products
were predominantly amorphous phases. In general, it was observed that
the intensity of the portlandite signal decreased with respect to the
other phases while the calcite peaks barely increased, evidencing that
the portlandite is consumed by the reaction with the product instead of
carbonation processes. No discernable differences in the crystalline
composition were found between the CP + UCA-T cured for 7 and
21 days.
Elemental analysis by XRF of the CP showed a typical composition
of cement (see Table S4), mainly composed of CaO (69%) and SiO2
(18%), and a smaller proportion of Al and Fe (7%) oxides. In the case of
the CP + UCA-T pastes, the SiO2 content increased to ~30–31% (dif-
ferences between the pastes at 7 and 21 days were not significant),
indicating the integration of the product in the system. This value
practically matches the nominal proportion (ca. 31.9%), suggesting that
the hydrolysis rate is faster in the presence of cement paste than in the

Ca(OH)2 paste, where evidence of unreacted oligomers was observed.
The nature of the reaction products was further studied by analysis
of the FTIR spectra (Fig. 9). The CP presented the characteristic υO-H
(3300–3500 cm−1) and δO-H (~1600 cm−1) bands of H2O, corre-
sponding to the water molecules of the hydrated phases (C-S-H, et-
tringite, AFm…). The narrow OeH band at 3640 cm−1 was indicative
of the presence of portlandite. The broad signal at ~1420 cm−1 can be
attributed to νas CeO of calcite and monocarboaluminates. Finally, a
broad band group appeared in the 800–1300 cm−1 range, comprising a
shoulder at 1111 cm−1 attributed to νas SeO antisymmetric stretching
vibrations of SO4
2− groups from ettringite, a broad signal at 960 cm−1

corresponding to SieO antisymmetric stretching vibrations of SiO4
4−

groups from CSH gel and a shoulder at 875 cm−1 asigned to δ CeO
(CO3
2−) and a small shoulder at 810 cm−1 corresponding to νsSi-O Q1
in CSH gel. The CP + UCA-T spectra showed the same bands, but with
some differences in their relative intensity. More specifically, the band
at 3640 cm−1 decreased in intensity (as also observed in the portlandite
+ UCA-T pastes) due to the consumption of portlandite in the reaction
with the silica oligomers. The increased intensity of the bands corre-
sponding to hydration H2O, along with the band group associated with
the silicates evidenced the formation of new C-S-H. The intensity of the
latter bands slightly increased from day 7 to day 21, indicating the
progress of the reaction. It is also worth mentioning that the absence of
CeH bands confirmed the full hydrolysis of the silica oligomer.
The curve fitting analysis of the 750–1300 cm−1 band group
(Fig. 9B, C, D) revealed the contribution of five different signals. The
signal at 1100 cm−1 can be attributed to the υ3(SeO) from ettringite.
The ~870 cm−1 band corresponds to υ2(CeO) from carbonates. The
silica bands showed three contributions: the characteristic C-S-H bands
[32] at ~970 cm−1 and 820 cm−1, respectively associated with
Q2(SieO) and Q1(SieO) from the silicate chain, and a band with a low
contribution at ~1040 cm−1 corresponding to Q3 and Q4 SieO units.
The presence of the latter is likely a result of the carbonation process of
C-S-H.
After the reaction with UCA-T, the contribution of the 1104 cm−1

decreased overall, indicating the formation of SieO structures and/or
the reaction of the UCA-T product with the ettringite. The quantifica-
tion of the peak areas revealed an increase of the contribution of the Q2
SieO band (~970 cm−1) and a slight decrease of the Q1 SieO band
(~820 cm−1) respect to the CP, which may be indicative of a length-
ening of the silica chains in C-S-H. This fact was further evidenced by
the shift of the bands towards higher wavelengths, in line with the
observations made for the PP + UCA-T pastes (Fig. 4). In a similar vein,
the
band
associated
with
three-dimensional
silica
structures
(~1040 cm−1) shifted towards higher wavelength and showed a
slightly higher contribution. Nevertheless, the low value of the latter
suggests that the main reaction product is C-S-H gel instead of the SiO2
xerogel.
Regarding the evolution of the reaction from 7 to 21 days, it can be
observed that the SieO (Q2) and SieO (Q1) bands slightly increased,
indicating the formation of new C-S-H gel during this interval. The
position of these bands remained roughly the same, which can be in-
terpreted as an evidence that the silica chains did not undergo further
polymerization, unlike in the 0–7 days interval. On the other hand, the
fact that the 1040 cm−1 (SieO networks) and 876 cm−1 (CO3
2−) bands
did not increase suggests that the SiO2 xerogel formation and carbo-
nation processes may be considered insignificant under the experi-
mental conditions.
A more detailed characterization of the phases present in the pastes
was performed by thermogravimetric analysis. The TGA curves of the
CP and CP + UCA-T (Fig. 10) showed the same three regions: (1)
25–360 °C, H2O loss (free water, C-S-H, ettringite, AFm…) (2)
360–460 °C, Ca(OH)2 → CaO + H2O ↑, (3) 520–670 °C, CaCO3 →
CaO + CO2 ↑. The DTG revealed two peaks attributed water loss:
26–110 °C and 110–200 °C. Detailed results of the quantification of the
different components, calculated through the stoichiometry of the

Fig. 8. XRD diffractograms of the CP and CP + UCA-T pastes cured for 7 and
21 days and quantification of crystalline phase by Rietvald method. P:
Portlandite (COD 9000013), C: Calcite (COD 7022027), T: Tobermorite (COD
9005447), E: Ettringite (COD 9015084), Mc: C4AcH11 monocarboaluminate
(COD 2007668), B: Belite (COD 1535815).
COD: Crystallography Open Database, http://cod.crystallography.net.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

10


reactions, are available in Table S5.
In agreement with the FTIR spectra, the TG analysis evidenced a
decrease in the proportion of Ca(OH)2 from 24.2% in CP to 15.7% and
14.8% after 7 and 21 days mixed with UCA-T, respectively. These va-
lues are lower than the nominal proportion (c.a. 17.9%), thus con-
firming that the portlandite had been consumed during the process. The
low magnitude of the increase in %CaCO3 (< 2%) suggests that the
main process consuming the portlandite was its reaction with UCA-T
instead of the carbonation process. In a similar vein to the results from
the Ca(OH)2 pastes, the amount of water from hydrated phases in-
creased from 14.1% to 15.9%, and there was an increase in the residual

weight from 56.2% to ~61.5%, suggesting the formation of similar
reaction products (i.e. C-S-H). The partial carbonation from 7 to
21 days, observed by FTIR, was also confirmed by a 1–2% increase in
the CaCO3 proportion.

Fig. 11 shows the 29Si NMR spectra used for the structural char-
acterization of CP and CP + UCA-T after curing for 21 days. The ce-
ment paste (CP) spectra presented the characteristic signals [36,42] of
the Q1 chain end (−79 ppm) and Q2 mid-chain (−85 ppm) silica tet-
rahedra constituting the linear chains in C-S-H, aside from the Q0 sig-
nals (around −71 ppm) corresponding to the silica units present in the
anhydrous phases (alite and belite). The presence of a shoulder around

Fig. 9. (A) FTIR spectra of the CP and CP + UCA-T after 7 and 21 days. (B, D) Curve fitting of the Si-O-Si band group showing their position and percentage of
contribution, (B) CP, (C) CP + UCA-T after 7 days and (D) CP + UCA-T after 21 days. *K3Fe[CN]6 was added as an internal standard.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

11


−81 ppm can be attributed to mid-chain Si units with adjacent alu-
minum-containing (Q2(1Al)) tetrahedra [43].
In the case of the CP + UCA-T sample, the spectra showed similar
bands, with a minor contribution of the Q3 signals, indicating that the
product predominantly polymerized in the form of linear chains, in-
stead of the typical reticulated structure of silica xerogels [10,44]. This
observation can be the consequence of two different phenomena: (1)
the silica oligomers react with the portlandite present in the cement
paste to form C-S-H, as demonstrated by the experiments with the
portlandite paste and the FTIR and TGA results with CP. (2) The pro-
duct gets incorporated into the silica chains of the existing C-S-H
structure, as evidenced by an increased intensity of the Q2 signal re-
spect to Q1.
A more detailed analysis of the structural changes was carried out
through curve fitting analysis of the 29Si NMR signals (Fig. 11C, D and
Table 1). In the case of the plain CP, the Q0 band resulted from the
contribution of two signals at −71.3 and − 73.60 ppm corresponding
to belite (β-C2S) and alite (Si(5)) respectively. The Q2 signal from mid-
chain units in C-S-H (−84.6 ppm) had a lower intensity compared to
the Q1 band (−78.9 ppm). The length of the silica chains (MCL) was
estimated as 4.6 SieO units, by using the equation proposed by Ri-
chardson [43], which takes into account the presence of aluminum-
containing units (Eq. (3)).

=
+
+
+
(
)
MCL
Q
Q
Q
l
Q
Al

Q
2
1
2
2( )
2(1
)

1

3
2

(3)

Significant changes were observed in the CP after reaction with
UCA-T that indicated the integration of the silica oligomer in the
structure. On the one hand, the contribution of the Q0 signals de-
creased, indicating a progress of the hydration process. On the other
hand, the contribution of the Q2 and Q1 signals is inverted (Q2 > Q1)
compared to the paste without UCA-T. The global contribution of the
Q2(1Al) units decreased, although the Q2(1Al)/Q1 area ratio was
roughly the same as in the paste without UCA-T. As a result of the
contribution of Q2 units, the MCL increased from 4.6 to 6.0 units. This
observation evidences that the silica tetrahedral units resulting from the
UCA-T hydrolysis may be incorporated into the C-S-H gel [36,42]. The
contribution of the Q3 signals was barely significant (4%), indicating

that the xerogel formation was not favored.
The morphological features of the reaction products were observed
by Scanning Electron microscopy. Micrographs of the plain CP (avail-
able in supporting information Fig. S3) showed the characteristic
morphologies of the hydrated phases detected by other techniques: (1)
the flake-like structures of Type II C-S-H. (2) Ettringite needles. (3)
Hexagonal crystals of portlandite. After the reaction with UCA-T, the
paste showed similar features in general, and the formation of new C-S-
H structures was difficult to detect considering that this phase is already
one of the main components of the CP. Nevertheless two new structures
were observed, with globular and fibrous morphologies respectively.
The globular structure can be attributed to the formation of smaller
proportions of silica xerogel, as also observed in the FTIR spectra
(Fig. 8). The fibrous structures may be related with the newly formed C-
S-H by reaction with the portlandite. The formation of these morphol-
ogies instead of the flake-like structures is probably a result of the
different curing conditions after mixing with UCA-T, thus promoting a
different growth mechanism. This observation is in agreement with
other works, where it has been found that curing in a high %RH at-
mosphere leads to the formation of fiber-like (Type I) C-S-H structures
in cement pastes [19] due to the “whisker growth” mechanism, where
water evaporation from the surface causes the accumulation of ions in
the solution which favors the overgrowth of C-S-H.

4. Conclusions

We have demonstrated the ability of a silica oligomer based-im-
pregnation treatment, developed in our laboratory, to produce C-S-H
gel in contact with Ca+2 ions existing in porlandite, one of the com-
ponents of cementitious materials. A thorough characterization of the
products resulting from the interaction between silica oligomer and
cementitious matrix components demonstrated that the polymerization
of the silica precursor occurs through a different pathway in their
presence yielding reaction products with the structural, chemical and
morphological properties of C-SH gel, instead of the reticulated silica
xerogel that is produced by auto-polymerization of silica oligomer
chains.
Specifically, when polymerization occurred in the presence of por-
tlandite and water, the silica precursor reacted with the solubilized

Fig. 10. TGA and DTG curves of CP and CP + UCA-T cured for 7 and 21 days.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

12


Ca2+ ions, as evidenced by a gradual decrease in the amount of por-
tlandite, giving rise to an amorphous phase (according to XRD) with
silica units polymerized into linear chains (according to 29Si NMR and
FTIR) and a MCL of 3.5, in agreement with the typical structural units
of C-S-H. At early stages (1 day), the newly formed phase showed a non-
distinctive shape, which evolved in time (at 21 days) to a foil-like
morphology due to hydration processes. The integration of the silica
units into the CaO structure and the formation of the hydrated phase
was further confirmed by the evolution of the Ca/Si ratio from > 8.0 to

~1.0 values and by the shift of the FTIR bands through the reaction
time.
The experiments with the product and hydrated cement paste
mixtures showed the formation of reaction products with similar
characteristics to the ones formed after reaction with portlandite paste
by two simultaneous phenomena: (i) the silica oligomer reacts with the
free portlandite present in the cement paste (evidenced by TGA, XRD
and FTIR). (ii) The silica units are incorporated into the existing C-S-H
structure, resulting in an increased average chain length and the

Fig. 11. MAS 29Si NMR spectra of (A) CP and (B) CP + UCA-T after 21 days. (C,D) Curve fitting analysis of the respective 29Si NMR signals.

Table 1
Position and contribution (in Area %) of the bands from the 29Si NMR spectra of CP and CP + UCA-T pastes.

Sample
Clinker
Reaction product

Q0
Q1
Q2(1Al)
Q2
Q3
MCL

CEMENT PASTE
δ (ppm)
−71.23
−73.19
−78.97
−81.64
−84.64
–
–
4.65
%
4
17
37
14
28
–
–
CEMENT PASTE + UCA-T
δ (ppm)
−71.15
−73.60
−79.10
−81.40
−84.66
−90.02
−94.00
6.00
%
3
14
28
10
41
2
2

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

13


enhancement of Q2 SieO units in bridging positions (as observed by
29Si NMR). The presence of reticulated chains and structures with
xerogel morphology was marginal, indicating that the reaction with the
paste is favored respect to the auto-condensation. Further studies
should be carried out in order to determine the possible changes in
reactivity with cement pastes affected by chemical degradation pro-
cesses that decrease the portlandite content and alter the C-S-H struc-
ture (e.g. carbonation).
In light of the obtained results, the similarity of the reaction pro-
ducts with the cementitious matrix indicates a high chemical compat-
ibility with concrete and mortars.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Rafael Zarzuela: Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing - original
draft, Writing - review & editing. Manuel Luna: Investigation, Formal
analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Luis M.
Carrascosa: Investigation. María P. Yeste: Investigation, Writing -
review & editing. Inés Garcia-Lodeiro: Methodology, Resources,
Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing. M. Teresa Blanco-Varela:
Methodology, Resources, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing.
Miguel A. Cauqui: Investigation, Writing - review & editing. José M.
Rodríguez-Izquierdo: Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Project
administration. María J. Mosquera: Writing - review & editing,
Supervision, Project administration.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ-
ence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements

This project has received funding from the European Union's
Horizon 2020 - Research and Innovation Framework Programme under
grant agreement No 760858; and from Spanish Government/FEDER-EU
under research project MAT2017-84228-R.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconres.2020.106008.

References

[1] F. Sandrolini, E. Franzoni, H. Varum, R. Nakonieczny, Materiales y tecnologías en la
Arquitectura Modernista: Casos de Estudio de decoración de fachadas en Italia,
Portugal y Polonia persiguiendo una restauración racional, Inf. La Construcción. 63
(2011) 5–11, https://doi.org/10.3989/ic.10.053.
[2] Q.T. Phung, N. Maes, D. Jacques, J. Perko, G. De Schutter, G. Ye, Modelling the
evolution of microstructure and transport properties of cement pastes under con-
ditions of accelerated leaching, Constr. Build. Mater. 115 (2016) 179–192, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2016.04.049.
[3] V.H. Nguyen, B. Nedjar, J.M. Torrenti, Chemo-mechanical coupling behaviour of
leached concrete, Nucl. Eng. Des. 237 (2007) 2090–2097, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.nucengdes.2007.02.012.
[4] A. Custance-baker, S. Macdonald, Conserving Concrete Heritage Experts Meeting,
June 9–11 2014 The Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles, California, 2015.
[5] X. Pan, Z. Shi, C. Shi, T.-C. Ling, N. Li, A review on concrete surface treatment part I:
types and mechanisms, Constr. Build. Mater. 132 (2017) 578–590, https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.CONBUILDMAT.2016.12.025.
[6] P. Hou, X. Cheng, J. Qian, S.P. Shah, Effects and mechanisms of surface treatment of
hardened cement-based materials with colloidal nanoSiO2 and its precursor, Constr.
Build. Mater. 53 (2014) 66–73, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2013.11.
062.
[7] G. Wheeler, Alkoxysilanes and the Consolidation of Stone, The Getty Conservation
Institute, Los Angeles, California, 2005, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13398-014-
0173-7.2.
[8] J.F. Illescas, M.J. Mosquera, Producing surfactant-synthesized nanomaterials in situ
on a building substrate, without volatile organic compounds, ACS Appl. Mater.

Interfaces 4 (2012) 4259–4269, https://doi.org/10.1021/am300964q.
[9] J.F. Illescas, M.J. Mosquera, Surfactant-synthesized PDMS/silica nanomaterials
improve robustness and stain resistance of carbonate stone, J. Phys. Chem. C 115
(2011) 14624–14634, https://doi.org/10.1021/jp203524p.
[10] D.S. Facio, M. Luna, M.J. Mosquera, Facile preparation of mesoporous silica
monoliths by an inverse micelle mechanism, Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 247
(2017) 166–176, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micromeso.2017.03.041.
[11] R. Zarzuela, M. Luna, L.A.M. Carrascosa, M.J. Mosquera, Preserving cultural heri-
tage stone: innovative consolidant, superhydrophobic, self-cleaning, and biocidal
products, Adv. Mater. Conserv. Stone, Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2018, pp. 259–275, , https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-72260-3_12.
[12] Mosquera, M.J.; Illescas, J.F.; Facio, D.S. International Patent. No. WO2013/
121058, February 14, 2014.
[13] F. Elhaddad, L. Carrascosa, M. Mosquera, Long-term effectiveness, under a moun-
tain environment, of a novel conservation nanomaterial applied on limestone from
a Roman archaeological site, Materials (Basel) 11 (2018) 694, https://doi.org/10.
3390/ma11050694.
[14] B. Pigino, A. Leemann, E. Franzoni, P. Lura, Ethyl silicate for surface treatment of
concrete – part II: characteristics and performance, Cem. Concr. Compos. 34 (2012)
313–321, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CEMCONCOMP.2011.11.021.
[15] E. Franzoni, B. Pigino, C. Pistolesi, Ethyl silicate for surface protection of concrete:
performance in comparison with other inorganic surface treatments, Cem. Concr.
Compos. 44 (2013) 69–76, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2013.05.008.
[16] S. Goñi, F. Puertas, M.S. Hernández, M. Palacios, A. Guerrero, J.S. Dolado, B. Zanga,
F. Baroni, Quantitative study of hydration of C3S and C2S by thermal analysis, J.
Therm. Anal. Calorim. 102 (2010) 965–973, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10973-010-
0816-7.
[17] F. Sandrolini, E. Franzoni, B. Pigino, Ethyl silicate for surface treatment of concrete
- part I: pozzolanic effect of ethyl silicate, Cem. Concr. Compos. 34 (2012) 306–312,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2011.12.003.
[18] A.M. Barberena-Fernández, P.M. Carmona-Quiroga, M.T. Blanco-Varela, Interaction
of TEOS with cementitious materials: chemical and physical effects, Cem. Concr.
Compos. 55 (2015) 145–152, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2014.09.
010.
[19] Z. Zhang, G.W. Scherer, A. Bauer, Morphology of cementitious material during early
hydration, Cem. Concr. Res. 107 (2018) 85–100, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cemconres.2018.02.004.
[20] T. Gerber, B. Himmel, C. Hübert, WAXS and SAXS investigation of structure for-
mation of gels from sodium water glass, J. Non-Cryst. Solids 175 (1994) 160–168,
https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3093(94)90008-6.
[21] S.L.B. Lana, A.B. Seddon, X-ray diffraction studies of sol-gel derived ORMOSILs
based on combinations of tetramethoxysilane and trimethoxysilane, J. Sol-Gel Sci.
Technol. 13 (1998) 461–466, https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008685614559.
[22] L. Téllez, J. Rubio, E. Morales, J.L. Oteo, Synthesis of inorganic organic hybrid
materials from TEOS, TBT and PDMS.pdf, J. Mater. Sci. (2003) 1773–1780.
[23] Z. Demjen, B. Pukanszky, E. Foldes, J. Nagy, Interaction of silane coupling agents
with CaCO3, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 190 (1997) 427–436, https://doi.org/10.
1006/jcis.1997.4894.
[24] P. Innocenzi, Infrared spectroscopy of sol-gel derived silica-based films: a spectra-
microstructure overview, J. Non-Cryst. Solids 316 (2003) 309–319, https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0022-3093(02)01637-X.
[25] M.J. Mosquera, D.M. De Los Santos, A. Montes, L. Valdez-Castro, New nanoma-
terials for consolidating stone, Langmuir 24 (2008) 2772–2778, https://doi.org/10.
1021/la703652y.
[26] A. Fina, D. Tabuani, F. Carniato, A. Frache, E. Boccaleri, G. Camino, Polyhedral
oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) thermal degradation, Thermochim. Acta 440
(2006) 36–42, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TCA.2005.10.006.
[27] F. Devreux, J.P. Boilot, F. Chaput, A. Lecomte, Sol-gel condensation of rapidly
hydrolyzed silicon alkoxides: a joint Si29 NMR and small-angle x-ray scattering
study, Phys. Rev. A 41 (1990) 6901–6909, https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.41.
6901.
[28] Z. Sassi, J.C. Bureau, A. Bakkali, Structural characterization of the organic/in-
organic networks in the hybrid material (TMOS–TMSM–MMA), Vib. Spectrosc. 28
(2002) 251–262, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0924-2031(01)00158-8.
[29] A. Moropoulou, A. Cakmak, K.C. Labropoulos, R. Van Grieken, K. Torfs, Accelerated
microstructural evolution of a calcium-silicate-hydrate (C-S-H) phase in pozzolanic
pastes using fine siliceous sources: comparison with historic pozzolanic mortars,
Cem. Concr. Res. 34 (2004) 1–6, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0008-8846(03)
00187-X.
[30] S. Merlino, E. Bonaccorsi, T. Armbruster, Tobermorites; their real structure and
order-disorder (OD) character, Am. Mineral. 84 (1999) 1613–1621, https://doi.
org/10.2138/am-1999-1015.
[31] S. Papatzani, K. Paine, J. Calabria-Holley, A comprehensive review of the models on
the nanostructure of calcium silicate hydrates, Constr. Build. Mater. 74 (2015)
219–234, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2014.10.029.
[32] P. Yu, R.J. Kirkpatrick, B. Poe, P.F. McMillan, X. Cong, Structure of calcium silicate
hydrate (C-S-H): near-, mid-, and far-infrared spectroscopy, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 82
(2004) 742–748, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1151-2916.1999.tb01826.x.
[33] R.J. Kirkpatrick, J.L. Yarger, P.F. Mcmillan, P. Yu, Raman spectroscopy of C-S-H,
Tobermorite, and Jennite (1997) 7355, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1065-7355(97)
00001-1.
[34] J. Björnström, A. Martinelli, A. Matic, L. Börjesson, I. Panas, Accelerating effects of
colloidal nano-silica for beneficial calcium-silicate-hydrate formation in cement,
Chem. Phys. Lett. 392 (2004) 242–248, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2004.05.
071.
[35] M. Monasterio, J.J. Gaitero, E. Erkizia, A.M. Guerrero Bustos, L.A. Miccio,

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

14


J.S. Dolado, S. Cerveny, Effect of addition of silica- and amine functionalized silica-
nanoparticles on the microstructure of calcium silicate hydrate (C-S-H) gel, J.
Colloid Interface Sci. 450 (2015) 109–118, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2015.02.
066.
[36] E. Tajuelo Rodriguez, I.G. Richardson, L. Black, E. Boehm-Courjault, A. Nonat,
J. Skibsted, Composition, silicate anion structure and morphology of calcium sili-
cate hydrates (C-S-H) synthesised by silica-lime reaction and by controlled hydra-
tion of tricalcium silicate (C3S), Adv. Appl. Ceram. 114 (2015) 362–371, https://
doi.org/10.1179/1743676115Y.0000000038.
[37] E. Tajuelo, K. Garbev, D. Merz, L. Black, I.G. Richardson, Cement and concrete
research thermal stability of C-S-H phases and applicability of Richardson and
Groves’ and Richardson C-(A)-S-H (I) models to synthetic C-S-H, Cem. Concr. Res.
93 (2017) 45–56, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconres.2016.12.005.
[38] I.G. Richardson, Model structures for C-(A)-S-H(I), Acta Crystallogr. Sect. B Struct.
Sci. Cryst. Eng. Mater. 70 (2014) 903–923, https://doi.org/10.1107/
S2052520614021982.
[39] B.S. Lee, H.P. Lin, J.C.C. Chan, W.C. Wang, P.H. Hung, Y.H. Tsai, Y.L. Lee, A novel
sol-gel-derived calcium silicate cement with short setting time for application in
endodontic repair of perforations, Int. J. Nanomedicine 13 (2018) 261–271,

https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S150198.
[40] R. Ylmén, U. Jäglid, B.M. Steenari, I. Panas, Early hydration and setting of Portland
cement monitored by IR, SEM and Vicat techniques, Cem. Concr. Res. 39 (2009)
433–439, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconres.2009.01.017.
[41] Q. Lin, X. Lan, Y. Li, Y. Ni, C. Lu, Y. Chen, Z. Xu, Preparation and characterization of
novel alkali-activated nano silica cements for biomedical application, J. Biomed.
Mater. Res. - Part B Appl. Biomater. 95 B (2010) 347–356, https://doi.org/10.
1002/jbm.b.31722.
[42] I. García-Lodeiro, A. Fernández-Jiménez, I. Sobrados, J. Sanz, A. Palomo, C-S-H
gels: interpretation of 29Si MAS-NMR spectra, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 95 (2012)
1440–1446, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-2916.2012.05091.x.
[43] I.G. Richardson, Nature of C-S-H in hardened cements, Cem. Concr. Res. 29 (1999)
1131–1147, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0008-8846(99)00168-4.
[44] A. Depla, D. Lesthaeghe, T.S. Van Erp, A. Aerts, K. Houthoofd, F. Fan, C. Li, V. Van
Speybroeck, M. Waroquier, C.E.A. Kirschhock, J.A. Martens, 29Si NMR and UV-
raman investigation of initial oligomerization reaction pathways in acid-catalyzed
silica Sol-Gel chemistry, J. Phys. Chem. C 115 (2011) 3562–3571, https://doi.org/
10.1021/jp109901v.

R. Zarzuela, et al.
Cem
ent and Concrete Research 130 (2020) 106008

15


