1

Photonic Supercoupling in Silicon Topological Waveguides

Ridong Jia1,2, Yi Ji Tan1,2, Nikhil Navaratna1,2, Abhishek Kumar1,2, Ranjan Singh1,2,*

1Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang 

Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371, Singapore

2Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies, The Photonics Institute, Nanyang Technological 

University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore

*Email: ranjans@ntu.edu.sg

Electromagnetic wave coupling between photonic systems relies on the evanescent field typically confined
within a single wavelength. Extending evanescent coupling distance requires low refractive index contrast 
and perfect momentum matching for achieving a large coupling ratio. Here, we report the discovery of 
photonic supercoupling in a topological valley Hall pair of waveguides, showing a substantial improvement 
in coupling efficiency across multiple wavelengths. Experimentally, we realize ultra-high coupling ratios 
between waveguides through valley-conserved vortex flow of electromagnetic energy, attaining 95% 
coupling efficiency for separations of up to three wavelengths. This demonstration of photonic 
supercoupling in topological systems significantly extends the coupling distance between on-chip 
waveguides and components, paving the path for the development of supercoupled photonic integrated 
devices, optical sensing, and telecommunications.

Introduction

Direct coupling between photonic modes typically relies on evanescent wave, which decays
exponentially with distance from the mode edge to the bulk space. By strategically constructing 
and tailoring the alignment, efficient and tunable evanescent coupling can be achieved. This 
compact coupling technique plays a crucial role in numerous photonic systems such as fiber 
couplers1,2, electromagnetic sensors3–5, microscopies6, and integrated photonic devices7,8.
However, the challenge arises when the spatial separation between mode profiles exceeds the 
evanescent distance, especially when it surpasses a wavelength in free space (λ). Beyond this limit, 
the interaction between photonic modes weakens significantly, constraining the inter-system 
distance to an extremely narrow region.

A long evanescent tail can be achieved for a confined mode when there is a narrow difference in 
refractive index of the bulk space, potentially facilitating long-distant coupling. For a waveguide 
mode as an example, the evanescent field can extend over tens of wavelengths when the refractive 
index contrast between the core and cladding areas is on the order of 10-2 or even lower. However, 
achieving such precise control of the indices presents significant challenges across the entire
electromagnetic spectrum, particularly in the context of material properties for waveguiding 
networks and integrated circuit designs, although can be realized in specific scenarios such as the 
femtosecond laser directly written waveguide arrays9. Furthermore, while the evanescent field can
encompass the coupled photonic system, the coupling efficiency is highly dependent on the 
momentum matching condition. Especially in regions beyond λ, the mode experiences rapid decay
such that efficient coupling is further challenged by the sensitivity to momentum disruption. 
Therefore, achieving efficient coupling over multiple wavelengths pose significant challenges 
beyond the scope of theoretical models.

Manipulating electromagnetic wave at wavelength- or sub-wavelength-scales offers the potentials
to extend the evanescent coupling regions when maintaining coupling efficiency. The construction 


2

of spatial inhomogeneities enables precise modulations of the mode profile and momentum, that
can be accomplished through the utilization of periodic structures like photonic crystals10,11. The 
extension of mode tails and manipulation of momenta hold the potential to address the limitations
of short evanescent coupling, eliminating the dependence on perturbative defect modes12 or
external couplers13,14. However, a practical long-range coupling method is still lacking due to the
complexities associated with constructing an intermediary medium, capable of conserving the 
momentum and maintaining corresponding high energy transfer efficiency over distances beyond 
wavelengths.

Here, we propose and demonstrate a photonic supercoupling method in topological valley Hall 
system15 designed to extend the coupling distance while achieving a high coupling efficiency. The
valley-conserved momentum and the sub-wavelength valley vortex created by breaking spatial 
inversion symmetry facilitate long-range wave transition within the topological photonic bandgap. 
We exemplify its application in a waveguide coupling system on a valley photonic crystal
(VPC16,17) slab, as depicted in Fig. 1(a). Even when separated by multiple wavelengths, the ultra-
high waveguide coupling efficiency can be achieved via the structured valley-conserved vortices 
in the coupling region with 𝐶3𝑣 point group symmetry. The valley conservation property of the 
coupling region ensures efficient energy accumulation in the coupled topological waveguide, with 
an anticipated coupling ratio approaching 100%. The experimental results present an over 95% 
coupling ratio in a coupling distance of 2.7λ and a 31% coupling ratio even at a remarkable 5λ
distance. The supercoupling technique introduces a new coupling methodology that can enhance 
the performances of various on-chip topological integrated circuits18, including topological 
cavities19 and lasers20–23. The concept of supercoupling further opens the potentials for numerous 
novel photonic systems with distant energy transfer, such as supercoupled photonic chips, fiber 
optics, and cascade laser technologies.

FIG. 1. Photonic supercoupling beyond multiple wavelengths in topological Valley-Hall system. (a) Image of
waveguide supercoupling on a VPC chip. The topological waveguide mode is coupled into a secondary topological 
waveguide via valley-conserved vortices in the coupling region. A highly efficient energy transfer can be achieved 
albeit two parallel waveguides are separated 𝑚λ. (b) Schematic waveguide mode profiles ψ in index waveguide (left) 
and photonic crystal waveguide (right). The evanescent distances 𝐷 are determined by total internal reflection at the 
interface of media characterized by refractive indices 𝑛1 and 𝑛2 (or 𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓). Such evanescent tails lead to low coupling 
efficiency in long distance, challenged by manipulating evanescent length and addressing mismatched momentum. (c) 
Scheme of supercoupling in valley Hall waveguide with 𝐷 = 𝑚λ. Interfaced by mirrored VPC bulks with inversed 


3

valley Chern numbers 𝑪𝑣

±, the waveguide mode presents efficient intra-𝐾-valley momentum transitions (inset of 

Brillouin zone) exhibiting vortex behavior and providing 𝑦-directional momenta. A supercoupled VPC system 
conserves the valley momentum and enables 100% energy transfer in a long distance.

Results

In conventional index waveguide system, as illustrated in the left panel of Fig. 1(b), the mode is 
confined by total internal reflection (TIR) at the boundary of materials with refractive indices 𝑛1
and 𝑛2, respectively. As a result, the mode amplitude (ψ) decays exponentially with an evanescent 
distance 𝐷 (where ψ is 1/𝑒 of maximum), that usually restricts the coupling distance to a narrow
range (𝐷 ≪ λ). Lengthening the evanescent tail into multiple wavelengths depends on the variation 
of the material index, that poses challenges in platforms with fixed permittivity. And achieving
high coupling efficiency with such extended evanescent tail also requires an extremely long 
coupling length based on coupled mode theory. Photonic crystal waveguide can extend the 
coupling distance (right panel of Fig. 1(b)) by manipulating the periodic structure with effective 
refractive index (𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓). Similarly, efficient waveguide mode coupling mostly occurs within λ to 
avoid the disordered momenta in the bulk, that can attenuate the coupling efficiency.

In contrast, the valley-conserved VPC system provides the potential for ultra-long-distance mode
coupling. The VPC waveguide is the interface of two VPC bulks characterized by reversed valley
Chern numbers 𝑪𝑣

±, achieved through breaking the spatial inversion symmetry. The topological 

waveguide mode (kink state24) exists at this interface within the topological bandgap as shown in 
Fig. 1(c), of which the mode profile is expressed as25:

ψ(𝒓) = |ψ0|𝑒−𝑖𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑥⋅𝑥 ±α(δ)|𝑦⃗ |

where ψ0 is the maximum mode profile amplitude at the interface (𝑦 = 0), 𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑥 is the projected 
valley momentum along +𝑥-direction, and α(δ) is the decay rate along ±𝑦-direction as a function 
of the symmetry perturbation strength δ. The waveguide mode tail can be extended over several 
wavelengths (𝐷 = 𝑚λ) with a minimal δ (Fig. 1(c) and see Supporting Information (SI) S1). The 
𝐶3𝑣 symmetric unit cells in VPC bulks conserve the valley momenta as featured by on-site valley 
vortex (red circles in Fig. 1(c)). This photonic vortex refers to the in-plane electromagnetic wave
flow, resulting from the superimposition of all 𝐾-directional momenta. The symmetry-induced 
intra-𝐾-valley conversion, as shown by the first Brillouin zone in the inset of Fig. 1(c), allows for
sharp turning of the wave, circumventing defects, or attenuating backscattering. When introducing 
a coupled leaking valley-channel, these structured vortices facilitate the long-range energy transfer
by providing 𝑦-directional momenta.

The waveguide supercoupling in VPC is schemed in Fig. 2(a), integrating two parallel topological 
interfaces in the shape of an A-B-A bulk sandwich configuration. The A and B bulks present 
opposite 𝑪𝑣, and the waveguides are indicated by WG1 (green) and WG2 (black). When the valley 
momentum 𝐾⃗⃗ is injected into WG1 at 𝑥 = 0, the whole system is valley-locked, and WG1 and 
WG2 present opposite group velocities. A contradirectional coupling26,27 is achieved with pure 
valley momenta, that enables 100% energy transfer to WG2. Assuming lossless waveguiding, the 
waveguide supercoupling is expressed by the equations in 𝑥 > 0 region:

𝑑ψ1
𝑑𝑥 = −𝑗κ𝑠𝑐ψ2𝑒𝑥𝑝 (𝑗 (𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑥2 − 𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑥1 + ∑ 𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑖

𝑖

) ⋅ 𝑥 )


4

𝑑ψ2
𝑑𝑥 = 𝑗κ𝑠𝑐ψ1𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝑗 (𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑥2 − 𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑥1 + ∑ 𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑖

𝑖

) ⋅ 𝑥 )

The momentum matching between WG1 and WG2, with respective 𝑥-projected valley momenta 
𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑥1 and 𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑥2, is achieved via valley-conserved coupling area where the effective momentum is Σ𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑖,
𝑖 indicates each unit cell site. The efficient intra-𝐾-valley momentum transition gives rise to the 
rotation-invariant wave flows forming vortex array over the coupling region. The projection angle
θ𝑖 between 𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑖 and 𝑒̂𝑥 (Fig. 2(a)) can be thus expressed as θ𝑖 = θ0 + 𝑞𝑖 ⋅ 2𝜋/3 where θ0 is ±𝜋/3
for parallel waveguides, 𝑞𝑖 = 1, 2, 3. The valley-conserved momenta lead to a largely-enhanced 
supercoupling coefficient κ𝑠𝑐 enabling 100% energy transfer over 𝑚λ distance and a significantly
short coupling length. The reciprocal coupling coefficient also enables the backward complete 
coupling from WG2 to WG1 at 𝑥 < 0 region.

FIG. 2. Topological waveguide supercoupling based on in-plane valley-conserved vortex. (a) The schematic of contra-
directional parallel waveguide supercoupling. Interfaces by A-B-A bulks with opposite topological invariants, two 
topological waveguides (WG1 in green and WG2 in black) present opposite group velocity when the system is 𝐾-
valley-locked. The valley vortex array forming supercoupling loops mediates the coupling region for long distant (𝑚λ) 
100% energy transfer. (b) Valley vortex and δ-dependent topological bandgap. Left: The topological photonic band 
diagram of VPC. The topological bandgap is lifted at 𝐾 valley which is narrowed with decreased δ (grey region). 
Right: The eigenmodes exhibiting vortex behavior (Poynting vector in black arrows) with phase singularities (∠ψ in 
colormap) of unit cell A (B) with δ > 0 (δ < 0). (c) Left: Band structures of topological kink states for WG1 (green) 
and WG2 (black), characterized by opposite group velocities with tuned bandwidth versus δ . Right: The 
electromagnetic flow of state |1⟩ (δ = 0.3𝑎) composed of partial valley-vortices (green circle) along 𝑥-direction. (d) 
Zoom-in valley-conserved wave flow in the coupling region (𝑥 > 0 in (a)) with the Fourier transform results of the 
whole system and the coupling region. |1⟩ (green arrow), vortex-based wave in coupling region (red circles and arrows), 
and |2⟩ (black arrow) form supercoupling loops (blue dash) as the valley-conserved wave transfer channels.


5

The valley vortex is illustrated by the simulated unit cell eigenmode in the right panel of Fig. 2(b).
The symmetry breaking is achieved by altering the on-site equilateral triangular hole sizes from 𝑙1
= 𝑙2 to 𝑙1 ≠ 𝑙2, where 𝑙1 and 𝑙2 represent the side lengths of the triangles, and 𝑎 is the lattice 
constant. The symmetry perturbation strength is defined as δ = 𝑙1 − 𝑙2. The transverse-electric 
valley vortex is showcased for type A (δ > 0) and type B (δ < 0) unit cells by the simulated
topological phase singularities (∠ψ in colormap, ψ indicates magnetic field) and Poynting vector 
vortex (𝑆 in arrows). The simulated photonic band diagrams of the VPC unit cells are presented in 
Fig. 2(b) (left panel) where δ is from 0.1𝑎 to 0.4𝑎 (blue shadow), leading to a tunable topological 
bandgap28. The corresponding kink states also present δ-dependent bandwidth, as shown on the
left of Fig. 2(c), where a narrowly gapped kink state gives rise to an extended mode tail. Partial 
vortices exist near the interface, as presented by the simulated 𝑆 (black arrow) of |1⟩ (δ = 0.3𝑎) of
WG1 in the right panel of Fig. 2(c). Note that while pure topological waveguiding is immune to
perpendicularly leaking, the intra-valley momentum transition occurs when introducing a 
secondary valley coupled channel.

The valley-conserved vortex array in the coupling region is exhibited in Fig. 2(d) with the 
simulated 𝑆 (red arrows) in 𝑥 > 0 region. When the source waveguide is excited by state |1⟩ with 
partial vortices (green arrows), the whole system is 𝐾-valley conserved, and the chirality of region 
B is locked as counter-clockwise. The vortex flow in coupling region also presents efficient intra-
𝐾 transition while holding immunity of 𝐾 − 𝐾′ valley scattering, as illustrated by the Fourier
transform results (right panel of Fig. 2(d)). These vortex-based wave flows with effective 
momentum Σ𝐾⃗⃗ 𝑖, as well as the states |1⟩ and |2⟩ (black arrows), collectively form a series of 
supercoupling loops (blue dash) as wave transferring channels. The presences of supercoupling 
loops with enhanced 𝐾⃗⃗ ⋅ 𝑒̂𝑦 enable efficient energy accumulation in WG2, allowing for complete
wave transfer even over multiple wavelengths.


6

FIG. 3. Supercoupling at long separation distance with high coupling ratio. (a) The scheme of supercoupling through 
rectangular coupling region (red box) with distance 𝑑 and length 𝑤. The coupling ratio is represented by the powers 
transmitted from port 1 to port 2 and port 3, respectively. (b) The waveguide mode profiles against δ. Eigenmode tail 
length 𝐷 increases with decreasing δ, as presented by the normalized simulated ψ of the example interfaces. 𝐷 is 
extended into 2.7λ when δ = 0.1𝑎. (c) Transmittance |𝑆31|2 against 𝑑 and 𝑤 when δ = 0.1𝑎 at center frequency. An 
over-80% coupling effect at 𝑑 = 4λ can be achieved with certain length 𝑤 and over 95% coupling ratio can be achieved 
even when 𝑑 > 2λ. (d) Simulated wave propagating profiles when 𝑑 = 2.7λ and 𝑤 = 2.7λ (star), 13λ (triangle), and 
23λ (square), where the coupling ratios are 33%, 68%, and 87%, respectively with sufficient supercoupling loops.

To assess the coupling distance limit, we constructed a rectangular coupling region (red dashed
box) as depicted in Fig. 3(a). The coupling ratio of two parallel topological waveguides depends 
on the efficiency of each supercoupling loop and the number of loops implemented. These 
parameters are characterized by the coupling distance 𝑑 and the coupling length 𝑤, respectively.
The robust VPC waveguides are bent into a sharp angle to guide the wave rightward with
minimized bending loss24. When the wave is fed from port 1, the coupling effect can be monitored 
by observing the output powers at port 2 and port 3. δ is chosen as (0.55-0.45)𝑎 = 0.1𝑎 with an 
extended mode tail as 𝐷 = 2.7λ, shown by the variation trend of simulated eigen mode profiles in 
Fig. 3(b) (also see SI S1). Figure 3(c) illustrates the simulated power S-parameter |𝑆31|2 (colormap) 
with tuned 𝑑 and 𝑤 at center frequency. An over 95% |𝑆31|2 (region below 95% dash line) can be 
realized albeit 𝑑 > 2λ. These results indicate an ultra-highly efficient long-distant coupling process, 
significantly exceeding that of the evanescent waveguide coupling, as compared in SI S2. The 𝑤-
dependent coupling results are showcased by three simulated electromagnetic wave flows in Fig. 
3(d) (ψ in colormap). For a coupling distance of 𝑑 = 2.7λ, there is a drastic increase in energy 
coupled from WG1 to WG2 accounting for the growing number of valley-conserved supercoupling 
loops, as 𝑤 varies from 2.7λ (star) to 13λ (triangle), and to 23λ (square). The coupled |𝑆31|2 values 
are 33%, 68%, and remarkably 87% respectively. The respective coupling strength κ𝑠𝑐𝑤 are 0.65, 
1.17 and 1.68, obtained using equation |𝑆31|2 = tanh2(κ𝑠𝑐𝑤) 27. Thus, the simulated κ𝑠𝑐 is equal 
to 0.05λ−1 when 𝑑 = 2.7λ. Additional coupling results with varying δ are presented in SI S3.

Experimentally, the topological waveguide supercoupling configuration is fabricated on a 200-
μm-thick high-resistivity silicon chip in the terahertz domain, as imaged in Fig. 4(a). The VPC has 
a period of 𝑎 = 242.5 μm and perturbation of δ = 0.1𝑎, forming a topological band near the center 
frequency of 0.33 THz. The respective lengths of hole edge are 𝑙1 = 133 μm (0.55𝑎) and 𝑙2 = 109 
μm (0.45𝑎). The terahertz wave is generated utilizing a frequency multiplier (Virginia diode inc., 
see SI S4). The wave is coupled into and out of the waveguide through WR-2.8 hollow waveguides
and the silicon tapered coupler attached to the chip. The valley-vortex enables an efficient
adiabatically mode transition from plane wave to state |1⟩. The on-chip supercoupling ratio is 
represented by the ratio of transmissions through WG1 and WG2 as: 𝑅 = 𝑆31/(𝑆21 + 𝑆31), where 
𝑅 is the coupling ratio, and 𝑆21 and 𝑆31 indicate the respective transmissions. The maximum 
coupling ratios of four devices under test (with 𝑑 = 1.8λ, 2.7λ, 3.6λ, and 5λ when 𝑤 = 26𝜆) are
illustrated in the top panel of Fig. 4(b) with both simulated (red) and experimental (blue) results. 
Near the central frequency, the coupling ratios reach their peak values. Both the simulated and 
experimental results demonstrate 𝑅 values exceeding 95% when the coupling distance 𝑑 is either 
1.8λ or 2.7λ. When 𝑑 is increased to even 5λ, the simulation still shows a coupling ratio of 69%, 
while the experimental result decreases to 31%. The corresponding max 𝑆31 is also presented in 
the bottom panel of Fig. 4(b), where the simulated 𝑆31 reaches the level of 0.7 and the measured 
results are from 0.46 for 𝑑 = 2.7λ to 0.17 for 𝑑 = 5λ. This experimental transmission loss is 


7

attributed to the intrinsic material loss, particularly for a relatively lengthy on-chip propagation
path spanning up to 5 cm. And it is important to note that further extending such long coupling 
distances is possible through tailoring geometric parameters 𝑤 to introduce additional
supercoupling loops, or by adjusting the symmetry perturbation parameter δ to increase the mode 
tail distance 𝐷.

FIG.4. Experimental demonstration of waveguide supercoupling on a terahertz VPC chip. (a) Image of waveguide 
supercoupling chip. The terahertz wave is fed into the chip via port 1 and is received from port 2 and port 3. The 
topological waveguide coupling ratio is represented by ratio of transmittances through WG1 and WG2, respectively. 
The on-chip coupling distance can reach 4.7 mm (5λ). (b) The simulated and experimental results of maximum 
coupling ratio 𝑅 (top) and 𝑆31 (bottom) when 𝑑 is 1.8λ, 2.7λ, 3.6λ, and 5λ, and 𝑤 = 26λ. (c,d) The comparison of 
simulated and experimental transmittance spectra of |𝑆21|2 and |𝑆31|2 for 𝑑 = 1.8λ, 2.7λ, 3.6λ, and 5λ, respectively.

The simulated and measured on-chip terahertz transmittance spectra are illustrated in Fig. 4(c) and 
4(d) for all the four tested chips, respectively. In Fig. 4(c), the simulated results show high
transmittances of WG2 in supercoupling bandwidth (blue regions) even when 𝑑 increases into 5λ. 
In Fig. 4(d), although minor frequency shifts (< 0.01 THz) are observed when compared to the 
simulated results, there remains a high degree of consistency between simulated and experimental 


8

results. The frequency shift results from the fluctuations of chip thickness and fabrication accuracy, 
and the experimental findings indicate a power loss of 5 dB in both |𝑆21|2 and |𝑆31|2.

The waveguide supercoupling exhibits dispersive characteristics since the topological 𝐾-valley 
vortex is maximally enhanced at the center frequency. The coupling ratio reaches maximum at 
center frequency and diminishes as the frequency diverges from this point (see SI S5). The 
supercoupling process also exhibits a robustness property based on valley conservation when 
coupling into non-parallel directions (see SI S6) or when introducing defects in coupling region 
(see SI S7). Possible practical implementations of the supercoupling on an integrated chip can be 
achieved through locally adjusting δ in a tapered waveguide29 or by incorporating waveguide 
modes with asymmetric 𝐷 in each side of the interface30. These engineering techniques enrich the
on-chip supercoupling designs for innovative supercoupled photonic devices, improving the
spatial and energy efficiency.

Discussion

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the supercoupling phenomenon through a terahertz 
waveguide coupling experiment in a topological valley Hall system. Leveraging the expansive 
mode extension and the valley-conserved vortex array, we significantly enhance waveguide 
coupling distances with an ultra-high coupling ratio. Our experiments validate an efficient
coupling distance of 2.7 wavelengths with a coupling ratio of 95%, and even over 5 wavelengths 
with a reduced coupling ratio of 31%. Photonic supercoupling expands the efficiency boundaries 
of conventional evanescent coupling, unlocking possibilities for advanced supercoupled photonic
systems such as topology-protected interferometers, integrated lasers, and topological-chip-based 
polaritonics. Supercoupling also opens doors to emerging fields including on-chip supercoupled 
sensors, couplers, and spectrometers.

Acknowledgement

This work is supported by National Research Foundation (NRF) Singapore, Grant No: NRF-
CRP23-2019-0005.

Reference

1.
Mitschke, F. & Mitschke, F. Fiber optics. (Springer, 2016).

2.
Grattan, K. T. V. & Sun, T. Fiber optic sensor technology: an overview. Sens. Actuators Phys. 82, 
40–61 (2000).

3.
Taitt, C. R., Anderson, G. P. & Ligler, F. S. Evanescent wave fluorescence biosensors: Advances of 
the last decade. Biosens. Bioelectron. 76, 103–112 (2016).

4.
Mauranyapin, N. P., Madsen, L. S., Taylor, M. A., Waleed, M. & Bowen, W. P. Evanescent single-
molecule biosensing with quantum-limited precision. Nat. Photonics 11, 477–481 (2017).

5.
Navaratna, N., Tan, Y. J., Kumar, A., Gupta, M. & Singh, R. On-chip topological THz biosensors. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 123, 033705 (2023).

6.
Fish, K. N. Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence (TIRF) Microscopy. Curr. Protoc. 2, e517 (2022).

7.
Hunsperger, R. G. Integrated Optics: Theory and Technology. (Springer Science & Business Media, 
2009).

8.
Jahani, S. et al. Controlling evanescent waves using silicon photonic all-dielectric metamaterials for 
dense integration. Nat. Commun. 9, 1893 (2018).


9

9.
Chen, F. & de Aldana, J. R. V. Direct Femtosecond Laser Writing of Optical Waveguides in 
Dielectrics. in Laser Micro-Nano-Manufacturing and 3D Microprinting 185–210 (Springer, Cham, 
2020). doi:10.1007/978-3-030-59313-1_6.

10. Lu, L., Joannopoulos, J. D. & Soljačić, M. Topological photonics. Nat. Photonics 8, 821–829 (2014).
11. Cersonsky, R. K., Antonaglia, J., Dice, B. D. & Glotzer, S. C. The diversity of three-dimensional 

photonic crystals. Nat. Commun. 12, 2543 (2021).

12. Mock, A., Sounas, D. & Alù, A. Magnet-Free Circulator Based on Spatiotemporal Modulation of 

Photonic Crystal Defect Cavities. ACS Photonics 6, 2056–2066 (2019).

13. Xu, H., Dai, D. & Shi, Y. Ultra-Broadband and Ultra-Compact On-Chip Silicon Polarization Beam 

Splitter by Using Hetero-Anisotropic Metamaterials. Laser Photonics Rev. 13, 1800349 (2019).

14. Marty, G., Combrié, S., Raineri, F. & De Rossi, A. Photonic crystal optical parametric oscillator. Nat. 

Photonics 15, 53–58 (2021).

15. Mak, K. F., McGill, K. L., Park, J. & McEuen, P. L. The valley Hall effect in MoS2 transistors. 

Science 344, 1489–1492 (2014).

16. Ma, T. & Shvets, G. All-Si valley-Hall photonic topological insulator. New J. Phys. 18, 025012 

(2016).

17. Dong, J.-W., Chen, X.-D., Zhu, H., Wang, Y. & Zhang, X. Valley photonic crystals for control of 

spin and topology. Nat. Mater. 16, 298–302 (2017).

18. Ma, J., Xi, X. & Sun, X. Topological Photonic Integrated Circuits Based on Valley Kink States. 

Laser Photonics Rev. 13, 1900087 (2019).

19. Kumar, A. et al. Active Ultrahigh-Q (0.2 × 106) THz Topological Cavities on a Chip. Adv. Mater.

34, 2202370 (2022).

20. Bahari, B. et al. Nonreciprocal lasing in topological cavities of arbitrary geometries. Science 358, 

636–640 (2017).

21. Bandres, M. A. et al. Topological insulator laser: Experiments. Science 359, eaar4005 (2018).
22. Zeng, Y. et al. Electrically pumped topological laser with valley edge modes. Nature 578, 246–250 

(2020).

23. Dikopoltsev, A. et al. Topological insulator vertical-cavity laser array. Science 373, 1514–1517 

(2021).

24. Yang, Y. et al. Terahertz topological photonics for on-chip communication. Nat. Photonics 14, 446–

451 (2020).

25. Wu, X. et al. Direct observation of valley-polarized topological edge states in designer surface 

plasmon crystals. Nat. Commun. 8, 1304 (2017).

26. Saleh, B. E. & Teich, M. C. Fundamentals of photonics. (john Wiley & sons, 2019).
27. Okamoto, K. Fundamentals of Optical Waveguides. (Elsevier, 2021).
28. Tan, Y. J., Wang, W., Kumar, A. & Singh, R. Interfacial topological photonics: broadband silicon 

waveguides for THz 6G communication and beyond. Opt. Express 30, 33035–33047 (2022).

29. Flower, C. J. et al. Topological Edge Mode Tapering. ACS Photonics (2023) 

doi:10.1021/acsphotonics.3c00463.

30. Wang, H. et al. Asymmetric Topological Valley Edge States on Silicon-On-Insulator Platform. Laser 

Photonics Rev. 16, 2100631 (2022).


