Hybrid resonant metasurfaces with configurable

structural colors

Jelena Wohlwend,∗ Anna Hilti, Claudiadele Polinari, Ralph Spolenak, and

Henning Galinski

Laboratory for Nanometallurgy, Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, 8093 Z¨urich,

Switzerland

E-mail: jelena.wohlwend@mat.ethz.ch

Abstract

Metasurfaces play a key role in functionalizing light at the nanoscale.
Existing

dielectric metasurfaces, however, are often limited to geometric primitives and their

usage in emergent hybrid metasurfaces is hampered as confinement of light occurs only

in their interior. Taking inspiration from biophotonic systems in nature, we introduce

a new class of hybrid metasurfaces, which combine ordered and disordered elements.

While the ordered phase relies on non-reciprocal meta-atoms - whose breaking of the

out-of-plane symmetry enables the confinement of visible light in air, the disordered

phase exploits global plasmonic network modes and their ability to localize energy

at nanometric scales. By generating configurable structural colors with extra-ordinary

resolution, we demonstrate that coupling of these elements provides a new dimension in

the design space. We showcase that control of the local light-matter interaction enables

the creation of intricate, customizable optical patterns, which open new avenues for

information encoding and high-security features.

1

arXiv:2401.12123v1  [physics.optics]  22 Jan 2024


Introduction

”Color is crucial” - Pop artist Roy Lichtenstein’s famous quote highlights the importance

of color in art and culture, but the significance of color goes far beyond. In nature color

is a means of communication, natural selection,1 camouflage2 and self-defense.3 From the

synthesis of Prussian blue – the first synthetic pigment – to the creation of quantum dots

– used in today’s display technology, colors and their creation have always reflected scien-

tific advances and the current state of technology. Even though colors bear many complex

functions, at their core they emerge simply from the interaction of light with matter.

This is most tangible in the case of structural colors, where coloration arises from the interac-

tion of light with architectures of a size similar to the incident wavelength. Technologically,

structural colors offer various advantages, such as sustainable manufacturing processes, long-

term durability, and great versatility that allows for a broad range of applications starting

from anti-counterfeiting measures,4 adaptable camouflage,5 to color filters6 and sensors.7,8

A multitude of structural colors are found in nature, evident in the blue fruits of Viburnum

tinus,9 black feathers of birds of paradise,10 the white skin of pyjama squids,11 and the white

scale of the Cyphochilus beetle.12 In these prominent examples, the unique looks of these

fruits and animals arise from a broadband optical response of subwavelength structures in

the skin, feathers, and scales.

Intriguingly, many systems optimized by natural evolution rely on disorder as a design prin-

ciple to attain specific functions.13 An example thereof is the male peacock spider, where

hierarchical disorder of ultra-dense gratings is responsible for their angle-independent col-

oration used to attract suitable mates.14 Another example is the blue berries of Viburnum

tinus where the striking metallic blue coloration stems from disordered multilayers of a

biphasic structure of lipids and cellulose cell walls.9

While nature readily utilizes complex photonic structures comprising ordered and disordered

elements, nanophotonic systems are often limited to ordered systems. Although initial ef-

2


PMMA
a

1 µm 

aSi cups

b

metal deposition
spin-coating
electron beam exposure
sputtering

aSi

lift - off

Al-Cu-Zn

20 µm 
50 µm 

c

2 µm 

460 nm
100 nm

50 nm

Figure 1: Directed growth of amorphous silicon nanocups (a) Scheme depicting the
fabrication process of nanocup metasurfaces including (i) metal deposition (ii) spin coating
of double layer resist (iii) electron beam exposure (iv) directed growth of a-Si via sputtering
(v) lift-off. (b) Selected scanning electron micrographs of the a-Si nanocup arrays high-
lighting: open resonator structure, high uniformity, and nanometric character (side walls =
50 nm). (c) Optical micrograph of a optical pattern illustrating the formation of vibrant
colors alongside scanning electron micrographs showing the Moir´e effect of the nanocup ar-
ray.

forts have been made to embrace disorder as a design principle,15–18 so far coupled systems

that contain ordered and disordered elements, which enable local control over the light-

matter interaction, remain to be explored. This unexplored aspect in photonics, stems from

the general complexity of disordered system and the limited availability of ordered systems

containing meta-atoms which break the out-of-plane symmetry.

In this work, we present amorphous silicon (a-Si) nanocups as a versatile and scalable plat-

form to design hybrid metasurfaces (ordered dielectric element + disordered metallic ele-

ment). In these hybrid system, the out-of-plane asymetry of the dielectric nanocups enables

efficient coupling to the disordered metallic photonic element.

Silicon nanostructures are key building blocks of modern photonics and their ability to

3


strongly enhance and shape light fields at the nanoscale leads to a plethora of applications

from non-linear on-chip photonics,19 microcavities20 and sensing21 to structural colors.22

Here, at variance with the widely used geometric primitive dielectric metasurfaces (such

as disc arrays), the nanocups constitute open-resonators where the localized optical modes

reside in air. Such preferential confinement of light in a lossless medium (air) enables efficient

exchange of energy with other resonant systems, such as plasmonic network metamaterials

or quantum dots, by radiative coupling.23

We fabricate non-primitive a-Si nanocups by combining geometrical shadowing effects dur-

ing growth and far-from-equilibrium kinetics. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate the

localization of light in these nanocups by generating vibrant structural colors with high spa-

tial resolution. By introducing a disordered optical component in the form of a plasmonic

network metamaterial,24–26 we create a configurable hybrid metasurface whose optical prop-

erties rely on the local coupling of Mie-resonances (in a-Si nanocups metasurface) with a set

of plasmonic eigenmodes (in network metamaterial).

Results and Discussion

Nanocup metasurfaces were fabricated using a five-step process (Figure 1 a) encompassing

backreflector deposition, spin-coating, electron beam lithography, nanocup deposition and

lift-off. Further details on fabrication are given in the methods section. Both, the aluminum-

brass back-reflector and the amorphous silicon (a-Si) nanocups are deposited by physical

vapour deposition (PVD).

The choice of PVD for the fabrication of nanophotonic elements with non-primitive shapes

appears counterintuitive at first; as the technique is fundamentally limited to line-of-sight

deposition. Thus, when sputtered atoms impinge on non-planar substrates, such as litho-

graphic patterns with nanosized trenches or holes, shadowing effects typically prohibit con-

formal growth and result in unstable growth dynamics.

4


p

r
ht

aSi

hb
AlCuZn

a

b
c

geometric dimensions

d

Exp.

2 μm

wsw

increasing r and hb

Reflectance [%]

e

10 μm

1

10

100

400
600
800

10

100

Simulation

nanocups

(I)

Experiment

backreflector

nanocups

Reflectance [%]

(II)

f

norm E

100 nm

(I)

(II)

norm H

Sim.

Figure 2: Local color engineering with a-Si nanocups (a) Schematic illustration of
the color engineering through the change of geometrical parameters. (b) Scanning electron
micrograph of a patterned nanocup metasurface. (c) Comparison of simulated colors (from
2D simulations) and experimental colors obtained from optical micrographs of a-Si nanocup
metasurfaces, illustrating the continuous color change as function of the radius r and base
height hb. (d) Optical micrograph of a-Si nanocups forming an artistic butterfly. The radius
of the nanocups increases from top to bottom. (e) FEM simulation of the a-Si nanocup
resonator exhibiting an electric dipol resonance (I) and a magnetic dipol resonance (II) with
the top view and the cross-section of the normalized electric (I) and magnetic field (II) for the
resonance frequencies (λ = 370 nm and λ = 820 nm). The displacement current is indicated
by beige arrows. The black arrow represents the polarization direction of the incident electric
field. (f) Simulated and measured reflectance spectra of selected a-Si nanocup metasurfaces
showing the formation of an absorbing resonant state.

Still, PVD provides the unique characteristic to deposit under grazing angles. In such a

scenario stable highly non-uniform growth can be achieved, provided that re-emission effects,

due to low wall sticking and high kinetics, are strong enough to redistribute a significant

amount of particle flux to otherwise shadowed surfaces.27,28

A set of nanocup metasurfaces utilizing such directed growth conditions are presented in

Figure 1 b and c. Here, the systematic optimization of pressure and deposition rate facili-

tated the tailoring of the a-Si deposition, ensuring complete trench coverage of the inverse

nanopattern. Interestingly, predetermined breaking points form at the top of the trenches.

5


400
600
800

1

10

100

norm E

e

100 nm

a
Order 

Disorder 

2 μm
2 μm

50 µm 
50 µm 

Disorder

b
not etched
etched

c

d

crosssection

mode
coupling

Wavelength [nm]

hybrid 
system

Disordered 

Network

Si Nanocups

coupling

Backreflector

disordered

metallic

ordered
dielectric

hybrid 
system

f

200 nm

Reflectance [%]

Figure 3: Configurable order-disorder transition (a) Schematic illustration of the tran-
sition from an ordered to a combined ordered-disordered state. (b) Optical micrographs
illustrating the color change through chemical dealloying, i.e., the introduction of disorder
in the form of a disordered network metamaterial. (c) Local reflectance measurements of
the ordered and disordered states with shifting resonances indicating coupling between the
disordered network metamaterial and the nanocup array. (d) FIB-SEM cross-section of the
dealloyed state showing the formation of a disordered network out of the aluminum brass.
The a-Si nanocups on top of the network (shaded in pink) remain unaffected by the chemical
process. (e) Simulated local field enhancement on resonance (λ= 340 nm) and (f) schematic
illustration of the coupling between an a-Si nanocup and ”hot spot” of the disordered net-
work metamaterial

6


We attribute the formation of such breaking points to non-uniform growth conditions result-

ing in a thickness gradient, with the thinnest wall thickness occurring at the trenches’ top

(see Supplementary Information).

In Figure 1 b and c, selected sets of nanocups with a diameter of 460 nm and 320 nm and

periodicities of 520 nm (Figure 1 b) and 100 nm (Figure 1 c) are shown. The nanocup walls

are 47 nm thick and show a slight tapering towards the bottom (α = 8◦), which results

from the point spread function of the electron beam lithography process. Colored lettering

can be observed as the a-Si nanocups are arranged in a predefined pattern (Figure 1 c)

confirming the localization of light in the metasurface. Strikingly, the high uniformity of the

a-Si nanocup metasurface leads to the formation of Moir´e patterns in the scanning electron

micrograph (Figure 1 c), affirming the robustness of the chosen fabrication route.

The nanocups provide great design freedom enabling an elaborate control of the resonant

optical modes .29,30 Compared to nanorods or nanodisks, nanocups have additional geometric

parameters such as base height hb, sidewall width ssw, height ht which can be tailored

to control the resulting light–matter interaction (Figure 2 a).
Additionally, the out-of-

plane symmetry breaking results in non-reciprocity, i. e., the emergence of different modes

along opposite excitation directions (See Supplementary Information).31 To illustrate the full

potential of the a-Si nanocups, we perform a set of full-wave simulations on 2D projections

of the nanocups with changing geometric dimensions to study their impact on the resonant

behavior.

The simulated optical response of the a-Si nanocups is marked by a Lorentz-like dip in

reflection (Figure 2 f I). This resonance exhibits quasi-perfect attenuation of light and counts

responsible for the perceived coloration. By modelling the optical scattering of an isolated

nanocup, we can relate such resonant behavior to the emergence of an electric dipolar (ED)

mode in the nanocup (Figure 2 e). While the normalized electric field of the mode aligns

with the incident field, light is confined between the cup side walls in air (Figure 2 e). Such

7


10 µm 
10 µm 

a

Order
Disorder

5 µm 
5 µm 

b
c

Figure 4: Generating Colors with Points (a) Roy Lichtensteins ”Setting Sun” (b) optical
micrograph of nanoscale reproduction of the ”Setting sun” with a-Si nanocup metasurface
(c) Optical micrograph illustrating the color change through chemical dealloying, i.e., the
formation of a disordered optical cavity and consequent coupling between the aSi nanocups
and the disordered cavity. The subfigures at the bottom present the color centers, i. e. the
points generating the image.

confinement in air is beneficial as the mode is not impacted by damping and is in principle

able to couple to other resonant systems in the near field. At higher wavelength a magnetic

dipole mode (MD) appears due to circular displacement currents in the base of the nanocup

(Figure 2 f). When arranged in an array and placed on a backreflector, the metasurface also

exhibits a surface lattice resonance (SLR) which is confined between resonators and strongly

depends on the chosen periodicity p (See Supplementary Information).

Moreover, 3D simulations of the scattering behavior of the a-Si nanocups reveal predom-

inantly forward scattering (see Supplementary Information) enhancing the interaction be-

tween nanocups and the substrate. This is especially advantageous for efficient coupling to

a second resonating system.

With increasing cup diameter 2r the absorbance resonance undergoes a red shift resulting in

8


the formation of a full gamut of structural colors (Figure 2 c and Supplementary Information).

The calculated colors based on the 2D simulations are shown in Figure 2 c. Additionally to

the cup diameter also the periodicity p, the base height hb and the side wall thickness ssw

were investigated and have been found to influence the resulting colors (see Supplementary

Information).

We continue with the fabrication of a-Si nanocup metasurfaces with increasing cup diameter,

shown in Figure 2 c and d. In agreement with simulations, the experimentally observed

resonance of the nanocups red-shifts for an increase in cup diameter (Figure 2 f II) and

is accompanied by a broadening of the resonances.
The resulting structural colors with

increasing diameter are shown in Figure 2 c and match the simulations under the condition

that an increase in cup diameter r is accompanied by an increase in base height hb (see

Supplementary Information). The observed difference in the resonant line width between

the simulation and experiments (Figure 2 e) most likely stems from the difference in light

collection and additionally from imperfections of the a-Si nanocups. While in the simulation

the normal incident reflection is calculated, in the experiments an objective is employed

to locally measure the reflected light. The numerical aperture of the objective results in a

spread of collection angles responsible for the observed broadening of the optical response.

Drawing inspiration from the multitude of structural colors in butterflies,32,33 we engineer

a butterfly of our own (Figure 2 d). The different segments of the butterfly wings contain

a-Si nanocups of different diameters, base heights and periodicities. The structural colors

highlight the versatility, scalability and local color control down to a single pixel, i.e. a single

nanocup (see Figure 2 b).

Having established a resonant non-reciprocal meta-atom by breaking the out-of-plane sym-

metry, we can now continue and introduce a disordered photonic element.
We thereby

reconfigure the backreflector through chemical dealloying and create a hybrid metasurface

consisting of a-Si nanocups and a disordered network metamaterial (DNM) (Figure 3 a).

9


DNMs are able to trap and localize surface plasmon (SP) waves in nanometric volumes,

so-called ”hot spots”. Thus, in contrast to simple nanoparticles, the optical response of such

a network takes on a global character and can be conceptualized as a network of randomly

coupled dipoles.24,34 Chemical engineering of the initial system allows to control the network

architecture and topology - critical parameters to design the resonant modes in the system.25

Due to their high hot spot density and enhanced modal overlap, DNMs exhibit strong cou-

pling to other photonic elements, such as nanoparticles,26 rendering them ideal for hybrid

optical systems.

Using basic wet-chemistry, the plasmonic disordered network can be assembled in-place, i.e.

using the existing metasurface, by chemical dealloying of the aluminum brass backreflec-

tor. Chemical dealloying — a self-organizing process — creates an open porous nanometric

network with a variety of different curvatures and local variations in edge length and connec-

tivity (Figure 3 d).25,26 While the a-Si nanocups remain unaffected by the chemical process,

the backreflector undergoes a drastic change from a reflective metallic substrate to disordered

metamaterial with resonant modes (Figure 3 b and d).

To analyze the impact of the order-disorder transition on the local optical properties, we

compare the local reflectance of the ordered system (a-Si nanocups + backreflector) with

the disordered system (a-Si nanocups + DNM). Qualitatively, the change is visible in Figure

3 b as a color shift of the optical pattern from blue to green. This color change matches the

reflectance spectra (Figure 3 c), where a red shift of the resonance is observed (dashed blue

arrow). In the presence of the nanocups, the absorption is enhanced. Additionally, comparing

the backreflector and the disordered network, the formation of a resonant plasmonic mode

characterized by the emergence of a reflectance minimum is observed (Figure 3 d dot-dot-

dashed orange arrow).

Both the change in coloration and the shift of the resonant modes are evocative of mode

coupling. Full wave simulations of the resonant state (Figure 3 e) furthermore show the

10


local field enhancement, indicating the formation of a combined optical state. This combined

state results from highly localized energy exchange between ordered and disordered photonic

elements. Here the interplay of the out-of-plane asymmetry of the ordered elements (a-Si

nanocups) and the disorder (DNM), resulting in the equipartition of energy between all

plasmonic modes, enables configurable local control over the light–matter interactions.16,26

To illustrate such configurability between an ordered and a disordered state, we reproduced

Roy Lichtensteins ”Sinking Sun” (1964), shown in Figure 4 a. Similar to popular impres-

sionist paintings, Lichtensteins paintings - consisting of different colored points with defined

spacings between them - are most legible at a distance and increasingly abstract upon en-

largement. In our reproductions the colors are made by point-like structures, i.e. the a-Si

nanocups arranged in a pattern constructing the image. Remarkably, even single lines of a-Si

nanocups generate clearly defined colors. Across the order-disorder transition, the metasur-

face experiences a drastic change in the local structural coloration. While in the ordered

state a pastel color palette dominates, the disordered state exhibits highly saturated struc-

tural colors. Such transition underpins the change of the local-light matter interaction, that

relies on coupling between a-Si nanocup metasurface and the DNM.

The aforementioned nanoscale reproduction of the artwork demonstrates the creation of

intricate and customizable optical patterns by our hybrid metasurface. Furthermore, the

ability to engineer specific resonant states through geometric dimensions and chemical com-

positions extends the design space and makes our systems ideal for encoding information in

a visually imperceptible manner. This special property enables for example the fabrication

of high-security features that are challenging to replicate, providing an effective deterrent

against counterfeiting.

11


Conclusion

In conclusion, we have developed new class of hybrid metasurfaces based on ordered and

disordered photonic elements. The ordered dielectric nanocup metasurfaces are fabricated

by directed growth, where we take advantage of the non-uniform growth conditions of PVD

to create the out-of-plane asymmetrical nanostructures.
This simple fabrication scheme

is not restricted to a-Si and thus can readily be employed to other semiconductors such as

germanium or titanium dioxid. We showcase efficient and robust light absorption in the non-

reciprocal nanocup metasurfaces through the generation of a full gamut of structural colors.

Beyond the generation of structural colors these open resonators offer unique possibilities

for applied photonics including lasing and colloidal quantum dot electronics as the cups in

principle, can be filled with a gain medium. Furthermore, the hybrid metasurface introduced

here can serve as a testbed to study the light–matter interaction and mode coupling of ordered

and disordered components in complex photonic systems. Especially, interesting would be

study the mode hybridisation of such systems in three dimensions by energy electron loss

spectroscopy (EELS) tomography.

Experimental Section

Thin-Film Deposition: The aluminum brass backreflector, was deposited by direct DC

magnetron sputtering onto Si/SiO2 substrates. A detailed description on the selection of

the ideal aluminum brass for this purpose is given in the supplementary material.

Nanocup fabrication: The a-Si nanocups were fabricated by electron-beam exposure,

carried out using a RaithOne system operating at 30 keV acceleration voltage. The inverse

nano-pattern was generated within a double-layer PMMA electron beam resist and developed

in IPA/MIBK 3:1. Following the development, Si was deposited by magnetron sputtering

at a rate of 0.3 ˚A/s with a constant rotation speed of 10 rpm and under a gracing angle of

23.5 degrees. Finally, a lift off step was performed by immersing the sample in acetone.

12


Simulations

Three sets of simulations were performed. Firstly, simulations of the periodic arrays of a-Si

nanocups were performed using the frequency-domain solver of the commercial finite-element

package COMSOL Multiphysics 6.1 in 2D. The a-Si nanocups were modelled by assembling

rectangles into a cup shape, were the edges were rounded using the fillet function. Periodic

boundary conditions were used for the x-direction to introduce lateral periodicity, while in

the upper and lower air boundary of the simulation domain perfectly matched layers (PML)

were introduced to absorb the outgoing waves. The refractive indices of the aluminum brass

backreflector and the a-Si were extracted from ellipsometry measurements.

To simulate the scattering spectra of single nanocups again the commercial finite-element

package COMSOL Multiphysic 6.1 was used. The cup shape was generated as the difference

between two different cylinders. Perfectly matched layers were introduced in spherical shells

surrounding the nanocups. The excitation was implemented by a background plane wave.

Lastly, the introduction of disorder was modeled by introducing a FIB cross-section of the

disordered network below the a-Si nanocups in the 2D simulations. The image to curve

plugin in Comsol Multiphysics was used to convert the FIB cross-section into a curve.

Color palettes: The color palettes as well as the chromaticities were obtained from simu-

lated reflectance spectra using the commercial Software Wolfram Mathematica 12.2.

Chemical dealloying: Disordered Cu-Zn metamaterial networks were fabricated by chem-

ical dealloying of aluminum brass backreflector. The Al is thereby selectively removed by

immersing the films into a 1 M NaOH aqueous solution, where a subwavelength open-porous

disordered network is formed.25

Sample Characterisation: The refractive index as well as angle-dependent reflectance

measurements of the thin films were obtained with a M-2000 Woollam ellipsometer. Re-

flectance spectra of the nanocup metasurfaces were recorded using a custom-built microscopy

13


setup based on an inverse Zeiss Axio Observer.A1m microscope with an Ocean Optics QE-

PRO spectrometer and an Ocean Optics Halogen light source HL-2000-FHSA . An aluminum

mirror was used as calibration standard.

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge the infrastructure and support of FIRST. Electron microscopy

analysis was performed at ScopeM, the microscopy platform of ETH Z¨urich. The authors are

grateful to Maxence Men´etrey for his experimental assistance and his constructive feedback

on the manuscript. The authors also thank Marcello Pozzi and Jos´e Luis Oca˜na Pujol for

their help.

Author contributions: J.W., R.S. and H.G. conceived the research plan. J.W., A.H. and

C.P. fabricated the samples. J.W. performed simulations, sample characterisations, data

analysis and visualization. J.W. and H.G. wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed and

commented the manuscript.

Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

References

(1) Dresp, B. On the Role of Colour in the Evolution of Sexual Selection Behaviour; 2009;

pp 110–115.

(2) Duarte, R.; Stevens, M.; Flores, A. The adaptive value of camouflage and colour change

in a polymorphic prawn. Scientific Reports 2018, 8.

(3) Jeschke, J.; Laforsch, C.; Diel, P.; Diller, J.; Horstmann, M.; Tollrian, R. Predation;

2021.

(4) Teutoburg-Weiss, S.; Soldera, M.; Bouchard, F.; Kreß, J.; Vaynzof, Y.; Lasagni, A. F.

14


Structural colors with embedded anti-counterfeit features fabricated by laser-based

methods. Optics & Laser Technology 2022, 151, 108012.

(5) Zhang, W.; Tian, H.; Liu, T.; Liu, H.; Zhao, F.; Li, X.; Wang, C.; Chen, X.; Shao, J.

Chameleon-inspired active tunable structural color based on smart skin with multi-

functions of structural color, sensing and actuation. Mater. Horiz. 2023, 10, 2024–2034.

(6) Ji, C.; Lee, K.-T.; Xu, T.; Zhou, J.; Park, H. J.; Guo, L. J. Engineering Light at

the Nanoscale: Structural Color Filters and Broadband Perfect Absorbers. Advanced

Optical Materials 2017, 5, 1700368.

(7) Qin, M.; Sun, M.; Hua, M.; He, X. Bioinspired structural color sensors based on re-

sponsive soft materials. Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science 2019,

23, 13–27, Active and adaptive soft matter.

(8) Li, N.; Xiang, F.; Elizarov, M.; Makarenko, M.; Lopez, A.; Getman, F.; Bonifazi, M.;

Mazzone, V.; Fratalocchi, A. Large-Scale and Wide-Gamut Coloration at the Diffrac-

tion Limit in Flexible, Self-Assembled Hierarchical Nanomaterials. Advanced Materials

2022, 34, 2108013.

(9) Middleton, R.;
Sinnott-Armstrong, M.;
Ogawa, Y.;
Jacucci, G.;
Moyroud, E.;

Rudall, P. J.; Prychid, C.; Conejero, M.; Glover, B. J.; Donoghue, M. J.; Vignolini, S.

Viburnum tinus Fruits Use Lipids to Produce Metallic Blue Structural Color. Current

Biology 2020, 30, 3804–3810.e2.

(10) McCoy, D.; Feo, T.; Harvey, T.; Prum, R. Structural absorption by barbule microstruc-

tures of super black bird of paradise feathers. Nature Communications 2018, 9.

(11) Bell, G.; Mathger, L.; Gao, M.; Senft, S.; Kuzirian, A.; Kattawar, G.; Hanlon, R.

Diffuse White Structural Coloration from Multilayer Reflectors in a Squid. Advanced

materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.) 2014, 26.

15


(12) Vukusic, P.; Hallam, B.; Noyes, J. Brilliant Whiteness in Ultrathin Beetle Scales. Sci-

ence (New York, N.Y.) 2007, 315, 348.

(13) Rothammer, M.; Zollfrank, C.; Busch, K.; von Freymann, G. Tailored Disorder in

Photonics: Learning from Nature. Advanced Optical Materials 2021, 9, 2100787.

(14) Wilts, B. D.; Otto, J.; Stavenga, D. G. Ultra-dense, curved, grating optics determines

peacock spider coloration. Nanoscale Adv. 2020, 2, 1122–1127.

(15) Mao, P.; Liu, C.; Niu, Y.; Qin, Y.; Song, F.; Han, M.; Palmer, R. E.; Maier, S. A.;

Zhang, S. Disorder-Induced Material-Insensitive Optical Response in Plasmonic Nanos-

tructures: Vibrant Structural Colors from Noble Metals. Advanced Materials 2021, 33,

2007623.

(16) Mao, P.; Liu, C.; Song, F.; Han, M.; Maier, S.; Zhang, S. Manipulating disordered

plasmonic systems by external cavity with transition from broadband absorption to

reconfigurable reflection. Nature Communications 2020, 11.

(17) Galinski, H.; Favraud, G.; Dong, H.; Totero Gongora, J. S.; Favaro, G.; D¨obeli, M.;

Spolenak, R.; Fratalocchi, A.; Capasso, F. Scalable, ultra-resistant structural colors

based on network metamaterials. Light: Science & Applications 2016, 6, e16233.

(18) Hwang, V.; Stephenson, A.; Barkley, S.; Brandt, S.; Xiao, M.; Aizenberg, J.; Manoha-

ran, V. Designing angle-independent structural colors using Monte Carlo simulations

of multiple scattering. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2021, 118,

e2015551118.

(19) Xie, W.; Xiang, C.; Chang, L.; Jin, W.; Peters, J.; Bowers, J. E. Silicon-integrated

nonlinear III-V photonics. Photon. Res. 2022, 10, 535–541.

(20) Ossiander, M.; Meretska, M.; Rourke, S.; Sp¨agele, C.; Yin, X.; Benea-Chelmus, I.-

16


C.; Capasso, F. Metasurface-stabilized optical microcavities. Nature Communications

2023, 14.

(21) Vendamani, V. S.; Rao, S. V. S. N.; Pathak, A. P.; Soma, V. R. Silicon Nanostructures

for Molecular Sensing: A Review. ACS Applied Nano Materials 2022, 5, 4550–4582.

(22) Wenhong, Y.; Xiao, S.; Song, Q.; Liu, Y.; Wu, Y.; Wang, S.; Yu, J.; Han, J.; Tsai, D. P.

All-dielectric metasurface for high-performance structural color. Nature Communica-

tions 2020, 11.

(23) Hentschel, M.; Koshelev, K.; Sterl, F.; Both, S.; Karst, J.; Shamsafar, L.; Weiss, T.;

Kivshar, Y.; Giessen, H. Dielectric Mie voids: confining light in air. Light, Science &

applications 2023, 12, 3.

(24) Galinski, H.; Fratalocchi, A.; D¨obeli, M.; Capasso, F. Light Manipulation in Metallic

Nanowire Networks with Functional Connectivity. Advanced Optical Materials 2017,

5, 1600580.

(25) Wohlwend, J.; Sologubenko, A. S.; D¨obeli, M.; Galinski, H.; Spolenak, R. Chemical

Engineering of Cu–Sn Disordered Network Metamaterials. Nano Letters 2022, 22, 853–

859, PMID: 34738817.

(26) Wohlwend, J.; Haberfehlner, G.; Galinski, H. Strong Coupling in Two-Phase Metama-

terials Fabricated by Sequential Self-Assembly. Advanced Optical Materials 2023, 11,

2300568.

(27) Karabacak, T.; Lu, T.-M. Enhanced step coverage by oblique angle physical vapor

deposition. Journal of Applied Physics 2005, 97, 124504–124504.

(28) Cremers, V.; Puurunen, R.; Dendooven, J. Conformality in atomic layer deposition:

Current status overview of analysis and modelling. Applied Physics Reviews 2019, 6,

021302.

17


(29) van de Haar, M. A.; van de Groep, J.; Brenny, B. J.; Polman, A. Controlling magnetic

and electric dipole modes in hollow silicon nanocylinders. Opt. Express 2016, 24, 2047–

2064.

(30) Cao, L.; White, J.; Park, J.-S.; Schuller, J.; Clemens, B.; Brongersma, M. Engineering

Light Absorption in Semiconductor Nanowire Devices. Nature materials 2009, 8, 643–

7.

(31) K¨uhner, L.; Wendisch, F.; Antonov, A.; B¨urger, J.; H¨uttenhofer, L.; Menezes, L.;

Maier, S.; Gorkunov, M.; Kivshar, Y.; Tittl, A. Unlocking the out-of-plane dimension

for photonic bound states in the continuum to achieve maximum optical chirality. 2022,

(32) Ghiradella, H. Light and color on the wing: structural colors in butterflies and moths.

Appl. Opt. 1991, 30, 3492–3500.

(33) Cao, X.; Du, Y.; Guo, Y.; Hu, G.; Zhang, M.; Wang, L.; Zhou, J.; Gao, Q.; Fis-

cher, P.; Wang, J.; Stavrakis, S.; deMello, A. Replicating the Cynandra opis Butterfly’s

Structural Color for Bioinspired Bigrating Color Filters. Advanced Materials 2022, 34,

2109161.

(34) Chen, W.-J.; Hou, B.; Zhang, Z.-Q.; Pendry, J. B.; Chan, C. T. Metamaterials with

index ellipsoids at arbitrary k-points. Nature Communications 2018, 9, 2086.

18


Supplementary Information: Hybrid resonant

metasurfaces with configurable structural colors

Jelena Wohlwend,∗ Anna Hilti, Claudiadele Polinari, Ralph Spolenak, and

Henning Galinski

Laboratory for Nanometallurgy, Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, 8093 Z¨urich,

Switzerland

E-mail: jelena.wohlwend@mat.ethz.ch

Large-scale angle independent structural colors with amorphous

silicon aluminum brass

Due to their low density, aluminum brass commonly finds application in airspace. Here, how-

ever we explore their potential as backreflectors for large-scale angle independent structural

colors by targeted chemical engineering of the refractive index, i. e. alloying. For this, we

have deposited different aluminum brass compositions by physical vapor deposition (PVD)

and determined their refractive indices through elipsometry. The influence of alloying on the

refractive index of aluminum brass is discussed in the following section. The structural color

is then generated by the additional deposition of an amorphous silicon (aSi) layer on top of

the aluminum brass backreflector, schematically shown in Figure 1 a. The color response

perceived by the human eye thereby stems from the combination of a non-trivial phase shift

and phase accumulation through propagation in the lossy medium.1 We thereby receive di-

rect information on the silicon layer thickness through the color as the absorbing state of

these architectures is determined by the film thickness.

1


Figure 1: Color engineering in ultra-thin optical coatings (a) Schematic illustration of
the two layer optical coating with an aluminum brass backreflector of different compositions
and an amourphos silicon layer in different thickness ontop of it (b) Simulated color arising
from the deposition of amorphous silicon (in increments of 2 nm going to the right) on
different aluminum brass alloys, indicated with colored stars on the right. (c) Phase diagram
of the selected aluminum brass backreflectors.
The colored stars represent the selected
compositions. (d) Near-normal incident reflectance of a selected sample with a red shift
of the absorbing state with increasing thickness and (e) photograph of the selected sample
highlighting the color change with increasing Si thicknesses.

The influence of chemically engineering the backreflector is shown in Figure 1 b. There the

simulated color arising from a thin silicon layer on different backreflectors are shown. The

calculated colors are displayed in ascending thicknesses of 2 nanometers from left to right,

with the first colored square representing the color of the substrate itself (0 nanometers

of aSi). The colored symbol on the left side represents the aluminum brass composition

(Figure 1 c).
Different colors are observed ranging from brown to yellow over pink and

violett to blue depending on the backreflector as well es the thickness of the a-Si layer. In

later experiments with the a-Si nanocups only the 82 % Al, 9 % Cu and 9 % Zn was used,

to fulfill compositional requirements for the chemical dealloying process.2 Figure 1 d shows

near normal incident reflectance spectra of different Si thicknesses on a selected backreflector.

With increasing thickness the absorbing state shifts towards the near IR resulting in a blue

2


Figure 2: Angle independent colors: Angle-dependence reflectance of a selected 28
nanometer silicon film on an brass backreflector for (a) s-polarized light and (b) p-polarized
light

coloration.
An optical image of the sample is shown in Figure 1 e.
A variety of colors

starting from orange over pink to blue are generated depending on the thickness of the a-Si

layer. Angle dependent reflectance measurements are presented in Figure 2. The dark parts

of the colormap plots show low reflectance, denoting near-perfect absorbance of a specific

wavelength of light with a certain incident angle.
For s-polarized light (Figure 2 a) for

wavelengths of 590-799 nanometers the vertical bands of absorption are clearly visible. As

they stretch fully throughout the graph (reflectance minimum is persistent for angles of

incidence between 45◦ and 80◦), the absorption and thus generated color is independent of

the angle of incident. The graph for p-polarized light (Figure 2 b) does not display the same

behaviour as for s-polarized light. P-polarized light should in fact not be regarded when

considering angle-independency, as it is subject to Brewster’s angle. At this angle, which

varies for every material, there is no reflection of p-polarized light. Therefore, the detected

reflection minimum at a given incident angle could be the result of near-perfect absorption

by the silicon film or no reflection (if the incident angle corresponds to the Brewster’s angle).

3


Figure 3: Refractive index of the Al-Cu-Zn system Measured refractive index of dif-
ferent Al-Cu-Zn alloys for different compositions denoted in the schematics

Refractive indices of different aluminum brass

The frequency-dependent complex refractive index n and k from the backreflector were

measured and are presented in Figure 3. By changing the composition of the alloy, the
4


complex refractive index, can be engineered.3,4 Our measurements confirm this and show

that, except the backreflector in 3 d, the aluminum brass behaves metallic (n < k) in

the visible regime indicating that the all light is reflected. No clear correlation between

composition and the change in the refractive index can be observed.

Directed growth of the a-Si nanocup metasurface

Figure 4 illustrates the sputtering mechanisms and details leading to the formation of amor-

phous silicon (a-Si) nanocups. Material deposition for physical vapor deposition is limited

to line-of-sight deposition (shown in Figure 4 a). A tilt (< 90°) of the sputtering source

can therefore result in wall coverage of trench like structures. Furthermore, in our case, the

deposition kinetics result in non-uniform growth conditions with a thickness gradient of the

sidewall width ssw (see Figure 4 b, where an incomplete lift-off is shown). This thickness

gradient results in a predetermined breaking point (Figure 4 a, yellow star) during the lift

off. In Figure 4 b an incomplete lift-off is shown illustrating the predetermined breaking

point as well as the non-uniform growth.

Figure 4: Directed growth of a-Si nanocup metasurface (a) Schematic illustration of
the sputtering process showing the direct growth of the a-Si nanocups with the inlet show-
ing fabrication details (b) incomplete lift-of of deposited Si layer, outlining the formation
mechanism.

5


Optical response of a-Si nanocups on Si/SiO2

Figure 5 a depicts an optical micrograph of a-Si cups with different diameters and periodici-

ties grown on Si/SiO2. Reflectance curves of the different silicon nanocups are shown in 5 b.

Similar to the nanocups on aluminum brass a blue shift of the reflectance minima is observed

with increasing cup diameter. Additionally, also a broadening of the minima with increasing

cup diameter is observed (Figure 5 b). In Figure 5 c scanning electron micrographs of a-Si

nanocups on Si/SiO2 with different diameters and periodicities are presented.

Figure 5: Optical response of a-Si nanocups on Si/SiO2 (a) optical micrograph of a-Si
cup metasurfaces with different diameters (b) Reflectance measurements of a-Si cups with
different diameters and (c) scanning electron micrographs of a-Si nanocups on Si/SiO2 with
different diameters.

Color engineering by tailoring the geometrical dimensions of the

a-Si nanocups

In Figure 6 the influence of different geometrical parameters are shown. The different pa-

rameters were investigated through finite element simulations of a 2D projection of the a-Si

nanocups, namely cup diameter 2r, base height hb, width side wall wsw and the periodicity

p, i. e. spacing between the cups (Figure 6 a). Details on the simulations are given in the

6


Figure 6: Simulated color engineering: (a) Schematic illustrating the investigated geo-
metrical parameters and (b) simulated influence of base height hb and cup diameter (2r) on
the perceived color. (c) Influence of the periodicity and (d) influence of the side wall width
(wws) on the resulting color

experimental section.

Firstly the influence of an increasing cup diameter is shown in Figure 6 b. With increasing

cup diameter (2r) the color transitions from yellow to orange to pink and purple and finally

blue. Also the base height strongly influences the perceived color, shown in Figure 6 c. An

7


increasing base height shifts the color to blue for smaller diameters. Through the comparison

of the experimentally observed and simulated colors it is indicated, that an increase in cup

diameter also results in an increase in base height. This means the simulation match the

experiments best if it is assumed that an increase in diameter is accompanied by an increase

in base height. Intuitively, this can be seen as more material is deposited in a trench for

larger trench diameters. An increase in periodicity results in slight changes of the chroma

and hues of the simulated colorss (Figure 6). The increase in periodicity mainly influences

the lattice mode of the nanocups discussed in the next section. Lastly, the influence of the

side wall width is shown in Figure 6 d. The sidewall width shows only a very small influence

on the resulting colors of the a-Si nanocup metasurfaces.

Lattice Mode in Nanocup Metasurfaces

In Figure 7 a the simulated reflectance for different periodicities p are shown. With increasing

periodicities, the lattice mode shifts towards the red (Figure 7 b). Furthermore, in Figure 7 c

the normalized electric field distribution is showing the formation of lattice modes confined

between different cups with increasing lattice constants p.

Scattering behaviour of Si nanocups

In Figure 8 a the comparison of the forward and backward scattering for an a-Si nanocup

with diameter 2r= 460 nm, base height hb=30nm and wallthickness wsw=50nm is shown

additionally to the scattering crosssection for different wavelength in Figure 8 b. Predomi-

nately forward scattering is observed, this is especially interesting for the interaction of a-Si

nanocups with the substrate.

8


Figure 7: Lattice modes of a-Si nanocup metasurfaces (a) Simulated reflectance with
increasing periodicity p with (I) showing the simulated colors. (b) Enlarged cut out showing
only the lattice mode for different periodicities and (c) normalized electric field showing the
formation of a lattice mode concentrated between two cups.

Figure 8: Scattering behaviour of Silicon Nanocups (a) Simulated wavelength depen-
dent forward and backward scattering and (b) simulated scattering cross section for different
wavelength.

Non-reciprocity of Si nanocups

In Figure 9 the non-reciprocity, i. e., the simulated directional dependent response of the

a-Si nanocup metasurface is visualized. Where as the transmission is only slightly different,

the reflectance for the two different excitation directions (from the top and from the buttom

9


Figure 9: Non-reciprocity (a) From left to right simulated directional dependent re-
flectance, transmission and absorption of a-Si nanocup on SiO2 and (b) normalized electric
field distribution showing the formation different modes depending on the excitation direc-
tions.

of the 2D simulation) significantly deviates from each other. Through a change in excita-

tion direction, also , charactericed by a reflectance minima. The normalized electric field

distribution of selected modes is shown in Figure 9 b.

Configurable structural colors through order disorder transition

In Figure 10 the interaction between different nanocup arrays and the disordered network

metamaterial (DNM) are shown. Chemical deallyoing, i. e. the introduction of disorder

through the formation of a disordered network instead of the backreflecter, meaning also the

transition from a reflective to an absorptive substrate shifts the reflectance minima towards

the red for all combinations of nanocups and DNMs, visible by comparing Figure 10 a and

10


Figure 10: Configurable structural colors through order disorder transition The
schematic on the left depicts the state of the system, ordered for (a) and disordered for
(b). Furthermore, the reflectance spectra (with increasing r and hb) for both the ordered
and the disordered state are shown on the right. The colored subfigures in the reflectance
plots depict optical micrographs of the different nanocup metasurface underlining the color
change between the two states.

b. This shift in the resonant modes indicates mode coupling between the nanocup arrays

and the DNMs.

References

(1) Kats, M.; Capasso, F. Optical absorbers based on strong interference in ultra-thin films.

Laser & Photonics Reviews 2016, 10.

(2) Wohlwend, J.; Sologubenko, A. S.; D¨obeli, M.; Galinski, H.; Spolenak, R. Chemical

Engineering of Cu–Sn Disordered Network Metamaterials. Nano Letters 2022, 22, 853–

859, PMID: 34738817.

(3) Littleton, J. T. The Optical Constants of Alloys as a Function of Composition. Physical

Review (Series I) 1911, 33, 453–466.

11


(4) Das, U.; Bhattacharya, P. K. Variation of refractive index in strained InxGa1-xAs-GaAs

heterostructures. Journal of Applied Physics 1985, 58, 341–344.

12


