Percolation pathway switching in laser graphitized polyimide conducting tracks

Percolation pathway switching in laser graphitized polyimide conducting 
tracks

M J Whitfield,1 L Yip,a) S Speakman,b) and D G Hasko
Engineering Department, University of Cambridge 

(*Electronic mail: david.g.hasko@gmail.com) 

(*Electronic mail: melanie.j.whitfield218@gmail.com) 

(Dated: 12 July 2023)

Laser processing has been used to create weakly conducting tracks in polyimide film. Raman spectroscopy shows that 
these tracks consist of nanometre sized graphitic regions contained in a carbon-rich matrix. The measured temperature 
dependent and electric field dependent conduction characteristics show an activated characteristic that is consistent 
with nearest neighbour hopping. In addition, discrete percolation pathway switching events are seen when the system 
is subjected to significant disturbance from equilibrium.

Disordered electron transport is of interest for a range of de-

vice applications, including thermometry [1], ovonic memory 
[2], sensors [3] and information processing [4]. Many semi-
conductors and granular metal films show disordered transport 
behaviour, but engineering the transport properties requires 
very precise control over material composition and structure. 
A common feature of these disordered systems is the pres-
ence of highly conducting islands within a non-conducting 
matrix, where electron transport occurs through hopping over 
small gaps between these islands. Hopping is a tunnelling pro-
cess that requires these gaps to be of very small size since the 
tunnelling probability decreases exponentially with distance. 
Control over the gap distance is probably the most important 
factor in engineering disordered transport behaviour.
In this work, we investigate the electron transport character-
istics of laser graphitized tracks in polyimide (Kapton) fabri-
cated under conditions designed to realise very weak electron 
conduction. Previous work [5-14] has concentrated on real-
ising strongly conducting tracks made using high power laser 
light to degrade the polyimide at high temperature. This pro-
cess results in a rapid loss of material through the liberation 
of gases resulting from polymer chain breakup [15]. The re-
maining material is usually a porous layer consisting of a mix-
ture of (highly conductive) 2D and glassy (highly insulating) 
carbon-rich regions, as shown by Raman spectroscopy. A low 
resistance track is created when the interconnections between 
the 2D regions dominate the structure, as is the case with these 
thicker porous tracks.

Here, control of the laser processing has enabled a thin non-

porous carbon-rich layer to be formed, which allows greater 
control over the interconnections between the 2D regions. 
This is done by using a short wavelength laser to limit the 
depth of material in which the light is absorbed (see the ab-
sorbance spectra [16]). The chosen frequency of 375nm lies 
just above the point at which degradation transitions from pri-
marily photolytic to thermolytic, hence preserving the carbon 
rings which are known to align to form the graphitic con-
tent [17-20]. By adjusting the scan speed and laser power,

a)wcy20@cantab.ac.uk
b)stuart@3ttechnologies.com

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1. (a) Vertical cross-sectional diagram of device (not to scale),
(b) Raman spectra of laser carbonised conductive channel

and hence controlling the temperature profile, it is possible
to systematically create tracks from a highly conductive state 
through to highly insulating.

Exposures were carried out using an L3PM tool, manufac-

tured by 3t Technologies Limited [21]; this has a 375nm laser 
with nominal focus diameter of 10µm. Polyimide films from 
a range of sources have been tested and all behave similarly. 
A range of laser beam powers were used with the beam turned 
on and off at a frequency of 30kHz to realise controlled modu-
lation (mark-to-space) ratios at various scanning speeds in or-
der to change the exposure conditions. Higher exposure con-
ditions (70mW, 50mms−1, no modulation) realise highly con-
ducting tracks similar to those seen in previous work. These
conditions were used to form connecting leads between the 
channel (a single pass exposure track at 15mW , 75mms−1) 
with length 70µm crossing two highly conducting tracks that
were contacted using indium metal away from the device un-
der test for electrical characterisation. The laser exposed track 
has a carbon-rich deposit left at the base of a shallow trench a 
few microns in depth, as shown schematically in Fig. 1(a).

The width of this trench depends on the laser exposure con-

ditions, but the depth remains similar across this range.The


Percolation pathway switching in laser graphitized polyimide conducting tracks
2

TABLE I. Optical microsopy images (x50 magnification) for tracks
fabricated at 100mms−1 at a range of power and duty ratios

change; in this way, providing a method through which the 
electrical characteristics may be engineered - and weakly con-
ducting conditions achieved.

Laser Power

Duty Ratio

28mW
42mW
56mW
70mW

0.8

0.7

(a)

0.6

0.5
a

a Approximate field size of 10µm x 10µm

thickness of the deposit varies across the width of the track 
and is accompanied by significant texture differences, as seen 
in optical micrographs, see Table 1. Raman spectroscopy 
shows a ratio of peaks consistent with 2D graphitic regions of
size ∼1.4nm, calculated via the method given in [22], see Fig.
1(b). Assuming that the remaining material in the carbon-rich
deposit is in a glassy form and so is non-conducting, then the 
electrical conduction mechanism will depend on the strength 
of coupling between the conducting 2D regions. Conduction 
will be confined to pathways where the gaps between these 
2D regions are smallest, as shown schematically in Fig. 3(b). 
The conduction route with the most favourable combination 
of gaps for charge movement is known as a percolation path-
way. Since the 2D regions will be distributed vertically as 
well as in the plane, the percolation pathway may be very 
complex. However, due to the thermal gradient with depth 
resulting from the laser beam exposure, the greatest density 
of graphitic clusters can be expected at the channel surface. 
The width and thickness of the trench as well as the compo-
sition of the carbon-rich deposit can be systematically con-
trolled by changing the exposure conditions, as shown in the 
optical images in Table.1.

Both the presence of temperature thresholds enabling ther-

molytic degradation, and the duration at which they are 
sustained, influence the resulting chemical composition and 
macromolecular structure. This may be observed as con-
siderable colour and texture differences across 1) the width 
of the laser exposed region and 2) between optical micro-
graphs demonstrating tracks created with different exposure 
scan rate, power and duty ratio, even at the same fluence. 
Across the conditions tested, the graphitic cluster size remains 
the same, but inter-cluster spacing and channel dimensions

(b)

FIG. 2. (a) Three devices produced identically using the same chan-
nel irradiation conditions of 21mW at 75mms−1 and measured at
293K, (b) Device IV characteristics over temperature range (chan-
nel irradiation conditions of 15mW at 75mms−1)

As the extent of the laser exposure is reduced (by a com-

bination of reducing the continuous laser power and by mod-
ulation) the electrical behaviour of the device becomes more 
non-linear, see Table 1. Under these conditions alternative 
conduction pathways are cut off until electrical conduction is 
limited to a single dominant percolation pathway within the 
thickest part of the deposit, where the spacing between the 2D 
regions is expected to be smallest. Such a weak conductor 
shows a significant IV non-linearity and temperature depen-
dence, see Fig. 2(a) and (b) respectively.
In order to understand this temperature dependence, we must 
consider the different electron transport mechanisms in disor-
dered systems. Dasgupta et al [23] have suggested that the 
electrical conductivity in amorphous carbon layers with dif-
ferent sp2 and sp3 content may be due to either variable-range 
hopping of electrons at the Fermi level near room temperature, 
or due to hopping in band tails, at higher temperatures. They 
also point out that the sp2:sp3 ratio determines the dominant 
transport mechanism near room temperature. A high ratio al-
lows conduction directly by percolation just between sp2 re-
gions; but a lower value ratio would lead to conduction being 
controlled by hopping through sp3 and other non-conducting 
materials between nearby sp2 islands. In order to distinguish


Percolation pathway switching in laser graphitized polyimide conducting tracks
3

between the different transport mechanisms in amorphous car-
bon films, Godet et al [24,25] have studied the temperature 
and electric field characteristics of amorphous carbon layers. 
They conclude that the temperature dependence of the low 
field conductivity and the field dependence together may dis-
tinguish most mechanisms.
The low electric field conductivity for the data shown in 
Fig.3(a) is given in Fig. 2(b), where the data is consistent with 
a simple exponential relationship with temperature i.e. an ac-
tivated behaviour, which is consistent with nearest neighbour 
hopping. The characteristic temperature is 30K (for the fitted 
continuous curve) which is much smaller than would be ex-
pected if this temperature was due to single nm sized sp2 re-
gions, but would be consistent with a cluster of sp2 regions to-
gether acting as an island. Such clusters would be an expected 
stage in the evolution towards the continuous conducting path-
way as found in the low resistance wires. Hopping conduc-
tion in an organic semiconductor system has been studied by 
Nardes et al [26], who used a film formed by quasimetal-
lic poly3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT)-rich grains em-
bedded in continuous insulating polystyrenesulfonate (PSS) 
lamellas. The spin process used to create the film resulted
in a wider PEDOT-rich grain separation perpendicular to the 
film compared to the in-plane separation. The measured tem-
perature dependent conductivity for the in-plane direction was 
consistent with 3D variable range hopping, whereas the con-
ductivity in the perpendicular direction was consistent with 
nearest neighbour hopping. This suggests that the spacing be-
tween the sp2 regions in our laser graphitized tracks is larger 
than in the other sp2:sp3 systems studied by Dasgupta et al 
and by Godet et al.

In order to further understand the transport mechanism we

must consider the electric field dependence of the conductiv-
ity. Nardes et al [24] also derive the expected electric field 
dependence for their nearest neighbour hopping model, ob-
taining a modified conductivity (Equation 1) that includes an 
additional term proportional to the square of the product be-
tween the electric field and the localisation length for the per-
pendicular direction.

σ(F,T) ∝ σ0(0,T)[1 + 1(eFL )2]
(1)

6 kBT

Here the conductivity, σ (F, T ), may be related to L, the aver-
age hopping length, through change with F, the applied elec-
tric field, and T, the temperature.
The data shown in Figs. 2 (a) and (b) are the steady state read-
ings. A typical feature observable in the initial (<5) sweeps is 
shown in Fig. 3 (a). In this example, the initial conductivity is 
high at the start voltage of -20V, but follows an erratic pathway 
until about -10V, where the current jumps to a well defined
s-shaped characteristic. This characteristic was maintained 
until +10V was reached, when the current again became er-
ratic. As the voltage reached +20V and the sweep went back 
towards -20V, the current traced out a new s-shaped charac-
teristic with much lower conductivity. In subsequent sweeps 
the lower conductivity characteristic was maintained and this 
later behaviour was used to characterise the temperature de-

(a)

FIG. 3. (a) Current-voltage plot demonstrating pathway switching 
and history dependent behaviour. (b) Representation of 2D carbon 
clusters (blue) in a insulating matrix (yellow), possible percolation 
pathways are demonstrated through the red lines and the arrows in-
dicate the single pathway responsible for conduction

pendence.
Most models for the electric field dependence of hopping and 
related conduction mechanisms do not allow for the discon-
tinuous IV behaviour shown in Fig. 3 (a) This behaviour 
shows almost discrete switching events similar in character
to the random telegraph events observed in low electron num-
ber semiconductor devices. In such semiconductor devices, a 
switching event is seen when a trap randomly fills or empties; 
with a fixed voltage the current through the device switches 
discretely between two levels provided that the time interval 
between events is long compared to the current measurement 
time. If the switching is faster than the measurement time 
then the current value takes a weighted average bounded by 
the same two levels.
In the data shown in Fig. 3 (a), both of the non-erratic parts 
of the characteristic are consistent with the equations from the 
work of Nardes et al [24] given earlier. By fitting these two 
s-shaped regions separately we can see that the ohmic part of 
the conductivity (R0) changes by a factor of almost 60 times 
and that the electric field constant (E0) changes by a factor of
∼ 4. In the erratic part of the sweep, the measured current
is largely bounded by these the two s-shaped characteristics,
as would be expected if the switching time was much shorter 
than the measurement time.
The origin of this behaviour seems to be linked with the dis-
turbance of the system at the start of the sweep. The abrupt 
application of the min20V at the start of the sweep seems 
to cause a significant disturbance from the equilibrium state, 
which is largely relaxed during the first sweep. This distur-

(b)


Percolation pathway switching in laser graphitized polyimide conducting tracks
4

bance is likely to change trap occupancies, not only along the 
percolation pathway, but also in nearby traps. As a result, it 
is possible that some of the resistances along the pathway are 
changed or that the route of the pathway is switched. Since at 
least some of this behaviour appears abrupt, a switching of the 
pathway seems to be the more likely explanation. One possi-
ble explanation for this switching behaviour is given by Pat-
miou et al [27], who consider the effects of a Poole-Frenkel 
mechanism combined with percolating conduction in a nu-
merical study. They conclude that such systems will exhibit 
multi-valued conductivities resulting from structural modifi-
cation of the percolation pathway due to the local electric 
field, which they call ‘percolation with plasticity’. Such struc-
tural changes are the basis for operation of some types of non-
volatile memory, but require significant time and energy to be 
dissipated in order to break and make chemical bonds, which 
is much less likely in carbon based materials compared to
the materials considered by Patmiou et al. However, a sim-
ilar change in percolation pathway may occur in low electron 
number systems just by the re-arrangement of trapped charge. 
If free electrons were confined to the sp2 regions in these laser 
graphitized tracks, the small size of each region (about 1nm) 
would limit excess charge to a single electron per region due 
to Coulomb blockade (even at room temperature). Even as
a cluster of sp2 regions acting as a single island, the number 
of free electrons would be significantly limited compared to
a similar sized metal island, justifying a low electron number 
assumption.
In conclusion, this simple method of fabrication and the abil-
ity to engineer the conduction properties in these laser writ-
ten structures allows easier implementation of devices and 
circuits designed to exploit this conduction mechanism. The 
existence of percolation pathway switching with a significant 
accompanying change in device resistance will enable their 
exploitation in novel logic and memory functions.

A.
Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical 

Sciences Research Council.

B.
References

1. J. R. A. Dann et al (2019) Phys. Rev. Applied 12, 034024
2. P. Noe et al (2020) Science Advances Vol. 6 Issue 9

3. A. W. Snow et al (2015) IEEE Sensors Jnl., Vol. 15, No. 3, 
1301
4. V. G. Karpov, et al (2020) Jnl. of Physics: Complexity, 
Vol. 1, No. 3
5. J. Lin, Peng, Z., Liu, Y. et al. (2014) Nat Commun 5, 5714
6.
M. Schumann, R. Sauerbrey, M. C. Smayling. (1991) 

Applied Physics Letters, 58(4):428–430.
7. H.M.Phillips, M.C.Smayling, R.Sauerbrey (1993) Micro-
electronic Engineering, 20(1-2):73–88
8.
F Romero, A Salinas-Castillo, A Rivadeneyra, et Al. 

(2018) Nanomaterials
9. R. Srinivasan, R. R. Hall, W. D. Wilson, et Al. (1994) 
Synthetic Metals, 66(3):301–307.
10. R K Biswas, N Farid, G O’Connor, et Al. (2020) Journal 
of Materials Chemistry C, 8(13):4493–4501
11.
J. Davenas.
(1989) Applied Surface Science, 

36(1):539–544
12. J. I. Raffel, J. F. Freidin, and G. H. Chapman. (1998) 
Applied Physics Letters, 42(8):705
13.
R. Srinivasan, R. R. Hall, and D. C. Allbee. (1993) 

Applied Physics Letters, 63(24):3382–3383
14.
Christian Decker (1989) Makromolekulare Chemie.

Macromolecular Symposia, 24(1):253–263
15. F. M. Vivaldi et al., (2021) ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 
vol. 13, no. 26, pp. 30245–30260
16. H. S. Virk, P. S. Chandi, and A. K. Srivastava (2001) Bull 
Mater Sci, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 529–534
17. A Vashisth, M Kowalik, J C Gerringer, et Al. (2020). 
ACS Applied Nano Materials, 3(2):1881–1890
18. E. A. Plis, D. P. Engelhart, R. Cooper, et Al., (2019) 
Applied Sciences, vol. 9, no. 10, Art. no. 10
19. P. Zhao et al., (2020) Nano Energy, vol. 75, p. 104958
20.
L Wang, Z Wang, A N Bakhtiyari, et Al.
(2020) 

Micromachines, 11(12):1094
21. 3t Technologies Limited
22. L. G. Cançado, K. Takai, T. Enoki, et al. (2006) Applied 
Physics Letters, 88(16):163106
23. D. Dasgupta et al (1991) Phil Mag B, Vol. 63, No. 6,
1255-1266
24. C. Godet (2001) Phil. Mag. B Vol. 81 No. 2, 205-222
25. C. Godet et al (2003) Phil. Mag. B Vol. 83 No. 29,
3351-3365
26. A. M. Nardes, et al (2007) Phys. Rev. B 76, 085208
27. M Patmiou et al (2019) Appl. Phys. Letts. 115, 083507


