Hometronics – Accessible production of graphene suspensions for health 

sensing applications using only household items

Adel K.A. Aljarid†1, Jasper Winder†1, Cencen Wei†1, Arvind Venkatraman2, Oliver Tomes3,

Aaron Soul3, Dimitrios G. Papageorgiou3, Matthias E. Möbius2 and Conor S. Boland*1

1School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9QH, 

U.K.

2School of Physics, AMBER and CRANN Research Centres, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, 

Ireland.

3School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University, London, E1 4NS, U.K.

†Authors contributed equally to the work

*Corresponding Author. Email: c.s.boland@sussex.ac.uk (Conor S. Boland)

Abstract

Nanoscience at times can seem out of reach to the developing world and the general public, 

with much of the equipment expensive and knowledge seemingly esoteric to nonexperts. Using 

only cheap, everyday household items, accessible research with real applications can be shown.

Here, graphene suspensions were produced using pencil lead, tap water, kitchen appliances, 

soaps and coffee filters, with a children’s glue-based graphene nanocomposite for highly 

sensitive pulse measurements demonstrated.


Research into using liquid exfoliation (LE) methods have led to the wide-spread production of 

two-dimensional (2D) materials on a large scale.1 Particularly, the demonstration of shear 

exfoliation methods2 has made LE more viable for low-cost production via the use of household 

food processors.3,4 However, low-income institutions, third world countries and citizen science

initiatives would still struggle. As beyond the shearing device, the reagents and purifying

instruments (i.e. centrifuge) commonly applied are still economically exclusive.5 Here, we 

demonstrate that a pencil can be processed into a powder and LE in a blender to isolate a 

suspension of high-quality graphene in tap water using a coffee filter (Figure 1a). Furthermore, 

we show that by using school glue, a nanocomposite we call pencil putty (p-putty) can be 

produced for impactful health applications. The total overall costing of this project was a mere 

£76.22 (equivalent to ~$96.67, Table S1), greatly facilitating its accessibility. 

In Figures 1b – e , we show the pencil and blender (with graphene suspension contained inside

before and after blending) utilised in the study, as well as the stable graphene suspension 

produced. For the exfoliation medium, a mixture of dish soap in tap water was used. Fabric 

softener was also added to the blend to supress foaming. After several exfoliation intervals (see 

Methods), the resultant suspension was passed through a coffee filter with a pore diameter of 

~10 µm. This resulted in the collection of large particulates of unexfoliated graphite on the 

coffee filter, with the suspension that passed through gathered in a flask. Using atomic force 

microscopy (AFM) on the filtered suspension, the pencil lead was confirmed to have been 

exfoliated into nanosheets in Figure 1d. Through Raman spectroscopy in Figure 1e, the 

production of graphene was confirmed through a comparative analysis of the powdered and 

exfoliated pencil lead spectra. All characteristic modes associated with graphitic material were 

present in both samples at Raman shifts of ∼1350 cm-1, ∼1580 cm-1, and ∼2700 cm-1, which


relate to the D, G and 2D modes respectively.6 Specifically looking at the 2D modes of the 

samples, there is a downshift from the powdered (~2705 cm-1) to the exfoliated (~2697 cm-1) 

material, indicative of LE leading to multi-layered graphene.7 Using standardised spectroscopic 

metrics,8 information with regards to the graphene’s mean length (<L>) in µm,

〈𝐿〉 =
0.094

(𝐼𝐷/𝐼𝐺)𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑛𝑒 − (𝐼𝐷/𝐼𝐺)𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒

(1)

And mean layer number (<N>),

〈𝑁〉 = 1.04 ∙ [(𝐼2𝐷/𝐼𝐺)𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑒𝑛𝑒]

−2.32
(2)

can be derived from the Raman spectra. Where (ID/IG)Graphene and (ID/IG)Graphite, are the ratios 

between the D and G mode intensities for graphene and the starting graphite source

respectively. Furthermore, (I2D/IG)Graphene is the ratio between the 2D and G mode intensities.

Using Equations 1 and 2, for our home-made graphene, <L> ~ 314 ± 63 nm and <N> ~ 7.37 ± 

1.84 respectively. In comparison to standard lab processed graphene, similar aspect ratio values 

were reported.9


In addition to demonstrating purely kitchen appliance-based graphene production, we also 

show that the resultant nanosheets can be applied in an equally accessible application with 

powerful research outcomes. Using a commercial water-based polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) 

children’s glue kit, graphene could be added via solution mixing to create p-putty (Figure 2a). 

This nanocomposite was based on a boron crosslinked hydrogel created from mixing Elmer’s 

PVA glue with a boric acid solution known as Elmer’s Magic Liquid. We found that the 

addition of the graphene to pristine putty darkened the hue of the material, with the presence 

of graphene also turning the putty from an insulator to an electrical conductor (Figure S1).

Through scanning electron microscopy (SEM), the topography between the pristine (Figure 

2b) and a graphene loaded sample (Figure 2c) are also seen to greatly differ. Mechanically, the 

addition of graphene to the putty had no effect on either the Young’s modulus (Y) in Figure 2d

nor the other mechanical properties (Figures S2 and S3) of the nanocomposites as a function 

of volume fraction (Vf). This invariance in mechanical properties is a common occurrence when 

pristine graphene was mixed into a hydrogel matrix due to its hydrophobic nature.9,10 In the 

case of p-putty, it resulted in a material that remained very pliable (Movie S1). However, it 

was noted that at higher loadings (Vf ~ 0.6%), visible graphene aggregation occurred in the 

samples, which resulted in mechanical properties to marginally increase. Through rheological 

measurements in Figure 2e, a 0.4% p-putty sample behaved similarly to the unloaded 

equivalent as a function of shear strain. Both materials presented Maxwell fluid behaviour,

with a relaxation time of ~2 s and a viscosity ~3000 Pa∙s (Figure S4).

Upon the application of compressive strain (–ε), the electrical properties of p-putty were 

observed to change. In Figure 2f, fractional resistance change (ΔR/R0) as a function of –ε for a 


select range of Vf increased linearly in accordance with electromechanical theory.11 Using the 

following expression

𝐺 = ∆𝑅

𝑅0

∙ 𝜀−1
(3)

The electromechanical sensitivity (G) can be extrapolated by fitting Equation 3 to the low strain 

regimes of ΔR/R0 versus –ε curves (Figure S5), with G values plotted as a function of Vf in 

Figure 2g. As standard, G generally is a maximum near the percolation threshold due to 

minimised network connections and decreases with Vf as connections increase.12 We however 

note that due to common network necking effects,10,13 which leads to inefficient strain transfer 

to the network during deformation, G increased from ~27 at ~0.1% to ~57 at ~0.4% and 

subsequently decreased to ~45 at ~0.6%. In comparison to other hydrogel10 and mixed-phase11

nanocomposite strain sensors, G is generally < 50.14 Through Figure S5, another important 

performance metric which dictates the value of G, can also be derived from the strain limit of 

the linear regime. Working factor (W) was plotted versus Vf in Figure 2h, alongside the yield 

strain (εY). As expected,11 values for W and εY were found to overlay one another due to their 

intrinsic connection. In Figure 2i, G as a function of W showed that in the necking regime W

was invariant.10 However, in the percolation regime, W scaled with an exponent of –m.9,14

Where m is the Kraus constant and has a value of 0.5. With p-putty’s combination of 

exceedingly soft stiffness and large electromechanical sensitivity, the nanocomposite was 

capable of measuring heart rate as a function of time (Figure 2j). When held to the carotid 

artery in the neck, we report a steady state signal and through fast Fourier transform (FFT) 

analysis a healthy pulse frequency of ~1.2 Hz (equivalent to 72 bpm).


In this communication, we introduce hometronics as not only a valid way in which nanoscience 

can be accessible to all researchers and the public alike, but a simple methodology with real 

applications from our everyday surroundings. Nanoscience research need not be complex and 

by taking pencil lead processed using home appliances, we demonstrate graphene suspensions 

from household detergents. Using home-based graphene, nanocomposites from children’s glue 

can be produced to easily measure a wearer’s pulse. The accessibility of the work also leads to 

the use of the methodologies being applied in schools with students from a range of economic 

backgrounds to inspire and diversify the next generation of scientists.

Methods

Graphene Exfoliation

A Graphite Pure 2900 9B pencil was initially crushed in a mortar and pestle, then ground in a 

SQ Professional Blitz Coffee Grinder - Spice Grinding Mill - One-Touch for ~60 s.  A mass of 

2.5 g of Fairy Max Power Washing Up Liquid was then mixed with 1 L of tap water. 300 mL 

of the soap mixture was then added to a Tefal BL420840 Blendforce II Blender (Plastic Jug, 

600 W, 1.5 L) with 1 mL of Ecover Fabric Softener also added to the blender. 16 g of powdered 

pencil lead was then placed in the blender and stirred into the soap/softener/water mixture by 

hand. The blender was then turned on to the first (#1) setting for 1-minute on, 1 minute off 

intervals to reduce motor heating effects, until the total blending time reached 15 minutes. The 

solution was then transferred to a beaker and left to sit for 24 hrs. After which, the solution was 

passed through a Rombouts Italian No. 2 Coffee Filter.


Atomic Force Microscopy

Diluted graphene suspension (~ 0.01 mg/mL) was drop cast onto a heated silicon wafer (70 

°C). The wafer was then washed with deionized water to remove residual household soaps. A 

Dimension Icon Bruker in an insulated box over an anti-vibrant stage to minimize 

environmental noise and building vibrations was used for measurement. A ScanAsyst Air tip 

with a spring constant of 0.4 N m−1 and a tip-sample contact force of 5.0 nN was used.

Raman Spectroscopy

Graphene suspension (6 mg/mL) was drop cast onto a heated silicon wafer (70 °C). The wafer 

was then washed with deionized water to remove residual household soaps. For the graphite 

sample, pencil lead was crushed using the mortar and pestle and patted down onto a silicon 

wafer. Renishaw inVia confocal Raman microscope with 0.8 cm−1 spectral resolution and a 

532 nm laser (type: solid state, model: RL53250) was used for measurements. A 

2400 mm−1 grating at 100× magnification and 5 mW laser power was applied. Each sample 

curve is an average of ten spectra.

P-Putty Production

For the graphene sample preparation, 2 mL of Elmer's White PVA Glue, 1 mL of Elmer’s Glue 

Slime Magical Liquid Solution, and 0.5 mL of graphene suspension were mixed by hand for 

approximately 5 to 7 minutes. To vary the graphene loading, different concentration 

suspensions, ranging from 1 mg/mL to 10 mg/mL, were used. For the pristine putty sample, in 

place of the graphene suspension, 0.5 mL of tap water was used. For all p-putty samples, they 

were left at room temperature for 40 minutes before testing.

Scanning Electron Microscopy


The fracture surfaces of the nanocomposites were observed using scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM, FEI Inspect-F, The Netherlands) with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV. The 

nanocomposites were cryo-fractured after immersion in liquid N2 and carbon coated with a ≈5 

nm layer.

Electro-Mechanical Measurements

A Stable Micro Systems TA-TXplus texture analyser with two insulating plates was used.

Electrically conductive copper tape was attached to the inside of their faces. The copper tape

contacts were then attached to a Keithley 2614B source meter using silver wire to supply a 

current across the samples. P-putty samples cyclical in shape (diameter = 5.5 mm and length 6 

mm) were placed onto the bottom stationary plate’s copper tape contact, with the test arm 

lowering the second plate’s copper tape contact into contact with the top of the sample. Through 

this setup, mechanical (texture analyser) and electrical (source meter) data could be 

simultaneously recorded. Samples were deformed at a rate of 6 mm/min.

Rheology

For measurements, an Anton Paar MCR 302e rheometer was used. Samples was flattened prior 

to lowering the plates (25mm diameter). Gap size was 1.1mm, with normal force quickly 

settling to zero after reaching gap height. Samples were subsequently allowed to relax for 30 

minutes while oscillating the plate at low amplitude (0.1% strain amplitude at 1 Hz).

Pulse Measurements

An electronic patch made out of Ecoflex 00–30 using a previously described method was used 

to encapsulate the putty sample for testing.9 For pulse testing it was performed by Adel K.A. 

Aljarid on his own person by holding the electronic patch to the carotid artery in the neck.


Data availability

The authors declare that all data supporting the findings are available within the communication 

and/or its supplementary information. 

Supplementary Information

Supporting Information is available online and includes Table S1, Figures S1 to S5, and Movie 

S1.

Acknowledgements

C.W. and C.S.B. acknowledge funding from University of Sussex Strategic Development 

Fund. A.K.A.A. acknowledges funding through the Saudi Arabian Cultural Bureau. J.W. and 

C.S.B. acknowledge funding via the University of Sussex’s 2023 Junior Research Associate

Award Scheme. A.V. and M.E.M. acknowledge funding from Science Foundation Ireland grant 

SFI 17/CDA/4704.

Author Contributions

C.S.B. conceived and designed experiments. J.W. created all graphene suspensions for the 

study. C.W. performed AFM and Raman on the graphene suspensions. A.K.A.A. made the 

composite materials and performed electromechanical tests. O.T. performed SEM. A.V. 

performed rheological testing. C.S.B. analysed and modelled data. D.G.P., M.E.M., C.S.B. 

contributed materials, tools, and supervision. C.S.B wrote and revised the paper. A.K.A.A., 


C.W., and J.W. contributed equally to the work and may present themselves as the first author 

on their respective curriculum vitae.


Figures

Figure 1: Graphene production from household commercial items. a Scheme presenting 

graphene LPE using a pencil. b – e Photographs of the 9b pencil (b), commercial blender

before (c) and after (d) blending and a graphene suspension after sitting for 24 hrs (e). f

Representative AFM micrograph of pencil-based graphene nanosheets. Scale bar is 1000 nm.

g Raman spectroscopy of powdered and exfoliated pencil lead. Inset, closer look at 2D modes 

of the respective spectra.


Figure 2: P-putty nanocomposite. a Photograph of p-putty with 0%, 0.1%, and 0.4% graphene 

volume fraction (Vf), top to bottom. Scale bar is 2 cm. b, c SEM micrographs of pristine putty 

(b) and 0.4% p-putty (c). Scale bars are 10 µm and 25 µm respectively. d Compressive Young’s 

Modulus (Y) as a function of Vf. Solid line represents mean value. e Shear storage (G′) and loss 

(G′′) moduli of pristine and 0.4% putty versus shear strain amplitude (γ0). f Fractional resistance 

change (ΔR/R0) as a function of compression strain for a select range of Vf. Solid line is a fit of

Equation 3, where gauge factor (G) = 10. g P-putty gauge factor (G) as a function of Vf. h P-

putty working factor (W) and yield strain versus Vf. i P-putty gauge (G) and working (W) factors 

potted against one another scaled with a power-law exponent associated with the Kraus 

constant (m) in the percolation regime. j Pulse as a function of time. Insets, zoomed in view of 


pulse signal (lefthand side) and fast Fourier transform (FFT) of pulse data showing a rate of 

~1.2 Hz (righthand side). 


References

1
Pinilla, S., Coelho, J., Li, K., Liu, J. & Nicolosi, V. Two-dimensional material inks. Nat 
Rev Mater 7, 717-735 (2022).

2
Paton, K. R. et al. Scalable production of large quantities of defect-free few-layer 
graphene by shear exfoliation in liquids. Nat Mater 13, 624-630 (2014). 

3
Varrla, E. et al. Turbulence-assisted shear exfoliation of graphene using household 
detergent and a kitchen blender. Nanoscale 6, 11810-11819 (2014). 

4
Pérez-Álvarez, D. T., Brown, J. & Stafford, J. Modification of kitchen blenders into 
controllable laboratory mixers for mechanochemical synthesis of atomically thin 
materials. HardwareX 16, e00471 (2023). 

5
Ravindran, S. How DIY technologies are democratizing science. Nature 587, 509-511 
(2020). 

6
Ferrari, A. C. et al. Raman spectrum of graphene and graphene layers. Phys Rev Lett
97, 187401 (2006).

7
Ferrari, A. C. & Basko, D. M. Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool for studying the 
properties of graphene. Nature Nanotechnology 8, 235-246 (2013). 

8
Backes, C. et al. Spectroscopic metrics allow in situ measurement of mean size and 
thickness of liquid-exfoliated few-layer graphene nanosheets. Nanoscale 8, 4311-4323 
(2016).

9
Aljarid, A. K. A. et al. Smart Skins Based on Assembled Piezoresistive Networks of 
Sustainable Graphene Microcapsules for High Precision Health Diagnostics. Advanced 
Functional Materials, 2303837 (2023).

10
Aljarid, A. A. K., Doty, K. L., Wei, C., Salvage, J. P. & Boland, C. S. Food-Inspired, 
High-Sensitivity Piezoresistive Graphene Hydrogels. Acs Sustain Chem Eng 11, 1820-
1827 (2023).

11
Boland, C. S. Stumbling through the Research Wilderness, Standard Methods To Shine 
Light on Electrically Conductive Nanocomposites for Future Healthcare Monitoring. 
ACS Nano 13, 13627-13636 (2019). 

12
Boland, C. S. Approaching the Limit of Electromechanical Performance in Mixed-
Phase Nanocomposites. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 3(11), 11240-11246 (2020). 

13
Boland, C. S., Khan, U., Benameur, H. & Coleman, J. N. Surface Coatings of Silver 
Nanowires Lead to Effective, High Conductivity, High-Strain, Ultrathin Sensors. 
Nanoscale 9, 18507-18515 (2017).

14
Boland, C. S. Performance Analysis of Solution-Processed Nanosheet Strain Sensors –
A Systematic Review of Graphene and MXene Wearable Devices. Nanotechnology
(2024). 


