This document is the Accepted Manuscript version of a Published Work that appeared
in final form in Solar Energy Materials & Solar Cells 140 (2015) 249–252 after peer 
review and technical editing by the publisher. To access the final edited and published 
work see http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2015.04.009

Importance of the spectral emissivity measurements at working 
temperature to determine the efficiency of a solar selective coating

T. Echániz a, I. Setién-Fernández a, R.B. Pérez-Sáez a,n, C. Prieto b, R. Escobar Galindo b,1,

M.J. Tello a

a Departamento de Física de la Materia Condensada, Facultad de Ciencia y Tecnología, 
Universidad del País Vasco, Barrio Sarriena s/n, 48940 Leioa,

Bizkaia, Spain

b Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid, (ICMM-CSIC), Campus Cantoblanco, 28049 
Madrid, Spain

Abstract

The total emissivity of the absorbing surfaces is a critical parameter in the calculation of
the radiative thermal losses in solar thermal collectors. This is because the radiative 
heat losses have a significant economic impact on the final cost of the electricity 
produced in a solar thermal plant. This paper demonstrates the need to calculate the 
total emissivity from spectral emissivity measurements at the working temperature of 
the solar thermal collector, instead of using extrapolated values from spectral 
emissivities measured at room temperature. Usual uncertainties produced by the 
estimation of the total emissivity, in which its temperature dependence is only 
introduced by the Planck function, are analyzed.

1.
Introduction

Solar thermal collectors (STC) are especially relevant in solar thermal devices for 
producing heat from the sunlight (T < 150 °C), or producing electricity in concentrated 
solar power (CSP) plants (250 < T < 800 °C). A critical component of solar thermal 
collectors is the surface where the conversion of solar radiation into useful heat occurs. 
These solar absorbing surfaces (SAS) require very high solar absorptivity α(T) in visible 
and near infrared (NIR) wave- lengths and low total emissivity εT(T) in the NIR–mid 
infrared (MIR) spectral region [1]. These physical requirements must be achieved at the 


SAS working temperature, which can be around 600 °C in common CSP plants. There 
is a wide literature, including several reviews, see for example Refs. [1–5], studying 
SAS. At this point it is important to outline some of the early works on this subject 
where the basis of the main properties of the selective coatings was set [6–10]. 
However, the analysis of the SAS characterization literature demonstrates that, in most 
cases, the total emissivity is obtained by making use of two approximate methods. Both 
of them make use of experimental data between room temperature and 100 °C, and 
assume that the spectral emissivity ελ(λ,T) of the SAS is constant with temperature. In 
one of these methods the total emissivity is measured at a fixed temperature, usually at 
T < 100 °C using a commercial emissometer. In the other method, the εT(T) is obtained 
by using the reflectivity spectrum
measured at room temperature, R(λ), and 

extrapolating to working temperature T using the following integral:

where L(λ,T) is the Planck function for the emission of a blackbody. Both methods, the 
emissometer and reflectivity one, can give εT(T) values that significantly differ from the 
real sample emissivity at working temperature because the coating spectral emissivity 
has usually a temperature dependence in the range of wavelengths where radiative 
transfer occurs. In addition, as it can be observed in other materials [11] the coating 
can even show an atypical temperature spectral emissivity behavior. Therefore, Eq. (1) 
should be replaced by

which requires the measurement of the spectral emissivity ελ(λ,T) at the working 
temperature [12].

A simple calculation shows that small differences between the εT(T) values calculated 
by using Eqs. (1) and (2) may be important in defining the efficiency of a solar selective 
coating. An effective coating requires α(T) > 0.95 and εT(T) < 0.05 at working 
temperature (i.e. 600 °C). Therefore, certain difference between the values of the total 
emissivity obtained by Eqs. (1) and (2) produces an equivalent difference in the 
radiative thermal losses. These energy losses in the SAS increase proportionally to T4

[4]. As a consequence, the differences between using Eqs. (1) or (2) may have 
significant economic impact on the final cost of the electricity produced in a solar 
thermal plant.

This paper is focused on demonstrating, from an experimental point of view, that the 
analysis of the efficiency of a solar coating at its working temperature requires the 
calculation of εT(T) from emissivity spectrum measured at that temperature. A stack 
with two cermet layers of silicon nitride with different amounts of molybdenum over a 


silver infrared mirror layer is used as solar coating. The experimental measurements 
were carried out between 250 and 600 °C and the experimental results obtained are 
compared with those calculated by the usual approximate methods.

2.
Experimental results

Fig. 1 shows a schematic representation of the solar selective coating used in this 
paper. Experimental details about the coating preparation as well as the physical and 
chemical characterization have been given elsewhere. See Ref. [13] and references 
cited therein.

Spectral emissivity measurements were carried out with a homemade IR-radiometer 
[14] at moderate vacuum (E 10-3 mbar) during five heating cycles between room 
temperature and 600 °C. This moderate vacuum is used in a large number of industrial 
applications of solar collectors. Normal spectral emissivity is measured in each heating 
cycle at 15 different temperatures following the sequence shown in Ref. [12].

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the solar selective coating.

The radiometer allows an accurate detection of the spectral thermal radiation as well as 
its fast processing. The sample holder permits directional measurements and the 
sample chamber ensures a controlled atmosphere and moderate vacuum. The 
radiometer calibration was carried out using a modified two-temperature method [15] 
and the emissivity spectra were obtained applying the blacksur method described in 
Ref. [16]. The maximum combined standard uncertainty varies between 1% and 10% 
depending on wavelength and temperature [17]. The average uncertainty value is 
around 4%. The sample temperature was measured by means of two spot-welded 
thermocouples on the sample surface.

In Fig. 2 we plot the emissivity versus the heating cycle number for two temperatures 
and four wavelengths. Similar plots were found at other temperatures and wavelengths. 
It should be noted that after the third heating cycle changes in the emissivity value are 
smaller than the uncertainty in its measurement. It can be stated that thermal stability 
of the coating emissivity is ensured after a few initial cycles. It is an essential property if 
one wants to use a coating in a STC.


Fig. 2. Coating emissivity ε(λ,T) as a function of heating cycle for 4, 8, 14 and 20 µm at 

(a) T = 330 °C and (b) T = 600 °C.

In Fig. 3, the coating normal spectral emissivity at eight temperatures, between 250 
and 600 °C, during the fifth heating cycle is plotted. Temperature dependence can 
hardly be detected and therefore a closer look has to be taken. In Fig. 4 the emissivity 
dependence on temperature at four different wavelengths is shown. Even though the 
emissivity usually increases with temperature [18,19], at short wavelengths such as 2 
mm the emissivity decreases, whereas at longer wavelengths little or no evolution is 
appreciated. This behavior is crucial, since even small variations may be sufficient to 
give appreciable difference between calculated total emissivities from Eqs. (1) and (2). 
It is precisely the value of εT(T) which indicates if a coating shows good performance 
for high temperature solar harvesting.

Fig. 3. Normal spectral emissivity ε(λ,T) of the selective coating for eight different 
temperatures measured during the fifth heating cycle.


Fig. 4. Emissivity temperature dependence at 2, 5, 9 and 13 µm.

The comparison between the coating and substrate spectral emissivity values is an 
interesting feature when characterizing the coating efficiency. Fig. 5 shows the normal 
spectral emissivity of the coating and the substrate at 600 °C. It is observed that the 
coating spectral emissivity is appreciably lower than that of the substrate only for λ > 5 
μm.

Fig. 5. Normal spectral emissivity ε(λ,T) of the selective coating and the substrate at 

working temperature.

The interest of the results is that they can be used to calculate and analyze one of the 
fundamental physical parameters in a thermal solar coating: the radiation energy 
losses at the working temperature. For this calculation the knowledge of εT(T) at this 
temperature is necessary. What follows the differences that may exist between the 
calculation performed by Eq. (1) and those made with Eq. (2) is analyzed for the 
coating shown in Fig. 1. Here it should be noted that the integral calculation in Eqs. (1) 
and (2) is only accurate in the range of wavelengths where the emissivity spectra is 
measured with the radiometer (λ1 ≤ λ ≤ λ2) and, it requires an approximation out of that 
range, that is in the ranges 0–λ1 and λ2–∞. However, if we now consider that most of 
the losses occur in the range (λ1 ≤ λ ≤ λ2), the approximation is excellent [12].

In Fig. 6 the total emissivity (εT(T)) of the coating and the substrate as a function of 
temperature are plotted. In the figure we show the values of εT(T) for the coating 
obtained from Eq. (1) using the room temperature reflectance spectrum [4], as well as 
those calculated by the Eq. (2) using the emissivity spectrum depending on the 


temperature. The differences between the values of εT(T) for this coating at 400 °C and 
600 °C are around 8%. Furthermore, significant differences in the temperature 
dependence of the εT(T) curves obtained from Eqs. (1) and (2) are observed. The 
different temperature dependence of εT(T) makes that the selectivity ratio ξ= α/εT also 
varies with T. Thus, the ξ value at 400 °C is better with the εT(T) calculated using Eq. 
(1) and, however, the one calculated with the εT(T) calculated using Eq. (2) becomes 
better at 600 °C. For this temperature ξ600 °C = 4.1 for Eq. (2) and 3.7 for Eq. (1) [13]. 
Therefore, for the coating studied in this work, the difference between the values of 
radiative thermal losses calculated with Eqs. (1) and (2) may vary by about 8%. 
Obviously, these differences increase if the dependence of the spectral emissivity with 
temperature increases. Additionally, one must take into account that in the case of the 
coating studied in this work, the spectral emissivity dependence on temperature shows 
an emissivity decrease at short wavelengths that produces attenuation on the 
temperature dependence of the total emissivity.

Fig. 6. Total normal emissivity εT(T) of the coating obtained from radiometric 

measurements using Eq. (2), from reflectivity measurements using Eq. (1). The 

substrate results are also plotted.

Similar results, although with minor differences between the total emissivities 
calculated with Eqs. (1) and (2), were found in a coating with double cermet layer of 
silicon oxide with different amounts of molybdenum over a silver infrared mirror layer 
[12]. The close agreement between the radiometric and reflectivity measurements in 
Fig. 10 of Ref. [12] happens because in that case, due to the multilayer architecture, 
the temperature dependence of the spectral emissivity of the coating is weaker than 
the coating studied in this paper. Finally, the results of Fig. 5 also suggest that the total 
normal emissivity of the coating, and also the substrate, shows a quasi-linear behavior, 
in agreement with the electro- magnetic theory predictions [20].

3.
Conclusion

In this paper, the total emissivity values of a selective absorber surface, in the working 
temperature range (250–600 °C), obtained from spectral emissivity measurements are 
compared with those obtained from room temperature reflectivity data. Both values will 
only agree when the spectral emissivity does not depend on temperature within the 
wavelength range in which the radiative transfer is made. The differences between the 
two values introduce significant discrepancies in the calculation of radiative thermal 
losses and therefore influence, significantly, in the calculation of the economic 
profitability of solar power plants. Therefore, the interest of measuring the temperature 
dependence of the spectral emissivity is fully justified. In addition, it is essential, for 
solar selective coatings applications to assess the emissivity changes with heating 


cycles and heating rate, which can only be proven with spectral measurements at 
different temperatures. Another important aspect for the applications that can be 
studied by means of radiometric methods is the detection of possible atypical 
temperature or wavelength dependences.

Finally, it has been shown that a solar coating qualified as efficient using Eq. (1) may, 
in fact, not be efficient when a more realistic calculation is done by introducing in Eq. 
(2) experimental data of the dependence of the spectral emissivity with temperature.

Acknowledgments

This work has been carried out with the financial support of the ETORTEK and 
SAIOTEK 2013 program (Project numbers S-PC08UN07 and S-PE13UN123 
respectively) of the Basque Government in collaboration with CIC-Energigune. T. 
Echániz acknowledges the Basque Government their support through a Ph.D. 
fellowship.

References

[1]
C.E. Kennedy, Review of Mid- to High-temperature Solar Selective Absorber

Materials,NREL/TP-520-3126, National Renewable Energy Laboratory
Research, 

Colorado, 2002.

[2]
G.A. Niklasson, C.G. Granqvist., Surfaces for selective absorption of solar

energy: an annotated bibliography 1955–1981, J. Mater. Sci. 18 (1983) 3475–3534.

[3]
N. Selvakumar, H.C. Barshilia., Review of physical vapor deposited (PVD)

spectrally selective coatings for mid-and high-temperature solar thermal applications, 
Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 98 (2012) 1–23.

[4]
C.G. Granqvist, Transparent conductors as solar energy materials: a panoramic

review, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 91 (2007) 1529–1598.

[5]
F. Cao, K. McEnaney, G. Chen, Z. Ren, A review of cermet-based spectrally

selective solar absorbers, Energy Environ. Sci. 7 (2014) 1615–1627.

[6]
H. Tabor, Selective radiation. I. Wavelength discrimination, Bull. Res. Counc. Isr.

5A (1956) 119–128.

[7]
B.O. Seraphin, A.B. Meinel, Photothermal solar energy conversion and the optical 

properties of solids, in: B.O. Seraphin (Ed.), Optical Properties of Solids- New 
Developments, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1976, p. 927 (Chapter 17).

[8]
R.E. Hahn, B.O. Seraphin, Spectrally selective surfaces for photothermal solar

energy conversion, Phys. Thin Films 10 (1978) 1–69.

[9]
A.J. Sievers, Spectral selectivity of composite materials, in: B.O. Seraphin (Ed.),

Solar Energy Conversion: Solid State Physics Aspects, vol. 31 of Topics in Applied 
Physics, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1979, p. 57.

[10]
C.M. Lampert, Coatings for enhanced photothermal energy collection I. Selective 

absorbers, Sol. Energy Mater. 1 (1979) 319–341.


[11]
L. Gonzalez-Fernández, E. Risueño, R.B. Pérez-Sáez, M.J. Tello, Infrared normal

spectral emissivity of Ti–6Al–4V alloy in the 500–1150 K temperature range, J. Alloy. 
Compd. 541 (2012) 144–149.

[12]
I. Setién-Fernández, T. Echániz, L. González-Fernández, R.B. Pérez-Sáez, E. 

Céspedes, J.A. Sánchez-García, L. Álvarez-Fraga, R. Escobar Galindo, J.M. Albella, 
C. Prieto, M.J. Tello, First spectral emissivity study of a solar selective coating in the 
150–600 °C temperature, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 117 (2013) 390–395.

[13]
E. Céspedes, Men Wirz, J.A. Sánchez-García, L. Álvarez-Fraga, R. Escobar 

Galindo, C. Prieto, Novel Mo–Si3N4 based selective coating for high temperature 
concentrating solar power applications, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 122 (2014) 217–
225.

[14]
L. del Campo, R.B. Pérez-Sáez, X. Esquisabel, I. Fernández, M.J. Tello, New

experimental device for infrared spectral directional emissivity measurements in a 
controlled environment, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 77 (2006) 113111.

[15]
L. González-Fernández, R.B. Pérez-Sáez, L. del Campo, M.J. Tello, Analysis of

calibration methods for direct emissivity measurements, Appl. Opt. 49 (2010) 2728–
2735.

[16]
R.B. Pérez-Sáez, L. del Campo, M.J. Tello, Analysis of the accuracy methods for

the direct measurement of emissivity, Int. J. Thermophys. 29 (2008) 1141–1155.

[17]
L.del Campo, R.B. Pérez-Sáez, L. González-Fernández, M.J. Tello, Combined

standard uncertainty in direct emissivity measurements, J. Appl. Phys. 107 (2010) 
113510.

[18]
L. del Campo, R.B. Pérez-Sáez, M.J. Tello, X. Esquisabel, I. Fernández, Armco

iron normal spectral emissivity measurements, Int. J. Thermophys. 27 (2006) 1160–
1172.

[19]
I. Setién-Fernández, T. Echániz, L. González-Fernández, R.B. Pérez-Sáez,

M.J. Tello, Spectral emissivity of copper and nickel in the mid-infrared range between 
250 and 900 °C, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 71 (2014) 549–554.

[20]
R. Siegel, J. Howell, Thermal Radiation Heat Transfer, fourth ed., Taylor & Francis, 

Washington, 2002.


