1

Metal-organic Frameworks in Semiconductor Devices: A revised 

Version

Ranjeev Kumar Parashar1≠, Priyajit Jash1≠, Michael Zharnikov2,* and Prakash Chandra Mondal1,*

1Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh-208016, India

2Angewandte Physikalische Chemie, Universität Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 253, 69120 

Heidelberg, Germany 

E-mail: Michael.Zharnikov@urz.uni-heidelberg.de (MZ); pcmondal@iitk.ac.in (PCM)

≠These two authors equally contributed to this work.

Abstract 

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are a specific class of hybrid, crystalline, nano-porous materials 

made of metal-ion-based ‘nodes’ and organic linkers. Most of the studies on MOFs largely focused on 

porosity, chemical and structural diversity, gas sorption, sensing, drug delivery, catalysis, and separation 

applications. In contrast, much less reports paid attention to understanding and tuning the electrical 

properties of MOFs. Poor electrical conductivity of MOFs (~10-7 – 10-10 Scm-1), reported in earlier 

studies, impeded their applications in electronics, optoelectronics, and renewable energy storage. To 

overcome this drawback, the MOF community has adopted several intriguing strategies for electronic 

applications. The present review focuses on creatively designed bulk MOFs and surface-anchored 

MOFs (SURMOFs) with different metal nodes (from transition metals to lanthanides), ligand 

functionalities, and doping entities, allowing tuning and enhancement of electrical conductivity. Diverse 

platforms for MOFs-based electronic device fabrications, conductivity measurements, and underlying 

charge transport mechanisms are also addressed. Overall, the review highlights the pros and cons of 

MOFs-based electronics (MOFtronics), followed by an analysis of the future directions of research, 

including optimization of the MOF compositions, heterostructures, electrical contacts, device stacking, 

and further relevant options which can be of interest for MOF researchers and result in improved devices 

performance. 

Keywords: metal-organic frameworks, SURMOFs, electronic devices, electrical conductivity, charge 

transport


2

1. Introduction

The field of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) has experienced a tremendous evolution over recent 

decades, both in terms of fundamental studies and potential applications. MOFs are generally composed 

of metal ions or metal-ions-based clusters called ‘nodes’ and multitopic ligands called ‘arms’ or 

‘linkers’, coupled to the ‘nodes’. Bulk MOFs are commonly synthesized via a solvothermal procedure 

performed at high temperatures followed by slow cooling (2-5 oC/h). During this process, ‘nodes’ and 

‘arms’ coordinate with each other via a self-assembly process, leading to the formation of highly 

ordered, crystalline, cage-like MOFs. The journey of MOFs began in 1995 by Yaghi and team after the

discovery of the first microporous framework featuring 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate (BTC) multidentate 

group as ‘arms’ and Co2+ as ‘nodes’, held together by a coordination bond.[1,2] This thermally stable 

MOF was utilized for pyridine loading into its nanopores. Since then, MOFs have drawn enormous 

attention from the scientific community in view of their intriguing properties and diverse applications.

Large pore size and design diversity make these systems promising candidates for storing small 

molecules, gas absorption media, sensing platforms, catalytic materials, photo-responsive systems, and 

biomedical applications.[3–6] At the same time, their poor electrical conductivity, arising generally from

weak d-p orbitals interaction between transition metal ions and organic linkers, makes them unfavorable

for electronic and energy storage applications. A variety of diverse strategies has been implemented to 

enhance the electrical conductivity of MOFs, including the improvement of node-ligand coupling, the 

use of extended conjugated ligands, control over π-π stacking of the ligands, introduction of mixed 

valency compounds, the use of redox-active metals, ions, and ligands, and the loading of guest 

compounds, such as different molecules, conductive polymers, and polar solvents into the void space of 

MOFs. As the result, the conductivity could be tuned and enhanced significantly compared to the initial, 

poorly conductive MOFs. Besides the above factors affecting the material properties of a particular 

MOF, there are several other factors which should be considered and optimized upon the integration of 

MOFs into electronic devices, such as bias-induced geometry around the metal centres, temperature, 

thickness and anisotropy of the MOF films, nature of the electrodes, electronic coupling between the 

electrodes and MOF, and exact device configuration. Also, understanding the relevant charge transport 

mechanisms is still an issue, frequently assisted by temperature-dependent current-voltage (I-V) data

that give the value of the activation energy (Ea) required for the charge transport inside the MOFs. There 

is a variety of mechanistic charge transport models, such as coherent tunnelling, thermally activated 

hopping, band transport, and redox-hopping (see below). The situation in MOF films, which are usually 

thicker than 5 nm, is different from that in the thinner molecular films and is also different from that in 

organic semiconductors.[7,8] Also, recent experimental studies showed that selected lanthanide-based 

MOFs and redox-active ligand-containing MOFs represent better conductors than the conventional 

frameworks.[9–11] In particular, Dincă and co-workers demonstrated that the lanthanides-MOFs with 


3

suitable ligands feature extensive charge delocalization, revealing π-π stacking based conductivity as 

high as 1,000 Scm-1, close to metallic behaviour.[9] We discuss these systems in the present review, 

along with some other recently emerged systems showing a promising potential for electronic 

applications, such as metal-catecholate based MOFs, Ni-HITP MOFs (HITP = 2,3,6,7,10,11-

hexaaminotriphenylene), and Ga-based MOFs. The emphasis is put on the thin film MOFs and such 

relevant issues as the anisotropy of electrical conductance, tuning of conductance by external stimuli, 

its modification by doping, and the design of MOF-based devices for specific electronic applications. 

Except for these major issues, we shortly discuss such general points as the current models of electrical 

conductivity in MOFs, experimental approaches to the fabrication of thin film MOFs, and standard 

experimental techniques to measure the electrical conductance. 

More detailed information on these points and some other relevant questions in the general context of 

electrically conductive MOFs can be found in the dedicated reviews and perspectives published recently 

in various journals.[12–16] One can probably especially emphasize the recent review by Dincă and co-

authors providing comprehensive information on electrically conductive MOFs,[12] a review by R. 

Freund et al. describing the current state of designing and tuning MOF and COF (coordination polymer 

framework) properties and the respective electronic applications,[14] a review by Dincă and co-authors

highlighting ion and electron transport in MOFs,[15] and a perspective by J. Park and co-authors on band 

gap and electronic structure tuning in 2D MOFs.[16]A particular interesting example of such a MOF, 

featuring both high conductivity and a record-high surface area, was recently reported by Park and co-

workers.[17] A representative list of the earlier reviews and perspectives can be found in Ref.[12].

2. Design and fabrication of thin-film MOFs

A schematic overview of a roadmap in context of conductive MOFs and the relevant fabrication 

techniques for thin MOF films are presented in Fig. 1. Progress in the synthesis of MOF components, 

design and engineering of MOFs, and solution-based MOF chemistry has propelled a promising 

research domain called ‘SURMOFs’, led, among others, by the team of Christof Wöll.[18–20] SURMOFs 

are thin, crystalline MOF films grown on the solid substrates.[21–23] Recent progress in general strategies 

for preparation of MOFs with different dimensions, including SURMOFs in particular, is well 

described in the recent reviews by Pang and co-authors and Wöll and co-authors.[24,25] The growth of 

SURMOFs is frequently performed by layer-by-layer (LbL) method, starting from a template layer 

formed by pre-functionalization of the substrate (Fig. 2a).[25–29] The pre-functionalization step involves

the formation of a suitable self-assembled monolayer (SAM), which can serve as a chemical template 

for the subsequent SURMOF growth.[30] The successive layers are usually applied by liquid-phase 

epitaxy (LPE).[31,32] Other methods for SURMOF growth include spin coating, drop-casting, chemical 

vapor deposition, atomic layer deposition, substrate-seeded heteroepitaxy, and electrochemical 


4

deposition in which redox-active ligands and metal ions precursors are introduced into an 

electrochemical cell (Fig. 2b-d).[31,32] Among these techniques, LPE was found to be particularly 

favorable as it not only enables the formation of homo SURMOFs but heterostructures as well and

provides well-defined electrical contacts
to electrodes, crucially important for the device 

performance.[28,33] During the LPE process, performed usually in the LbL fashion, the building blocks 

of SURMOFs are assembled successively and individually compared to the ‘‘one-pot’’ reaction scheme 

applied for the solvothermal synthesis of bulk MOFs and to the spin-coating and drop-casting strategies 

applied for the preparation of SURMOFs (Fig. 2). A representative example of a SURMOF fabricated 

by the LPE process is HKUST-1 - a well-known framework comprised of copper ions and trimesic acid

(TMA), prepared as a highly oriented crystalline film with variable thickness on a carboxylic acid 

terminated SAM template on the Au substrate.[34–36] Note, however, that SAMs are generally not only 

useful as SURMOF templates but also represent a versatile platform for a broad variety of experimental 

and theoretical studies as well as for nanotechnological applications.[37–40] Several research groups have

reported the fabrication of SAM-based molecular electronic and spintronic devices incorporating 

molecules and MOFs as circuit elements.[39,41–45]

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the roadmap on the way to MOF-based electronic devices as well as diverse 
routes for MOF assembly on solid substrates used in the given context. 

The electrochemical deposition technique is another simple and robust strategy for the SURMOF 

growth. It can be categorized into three methods: (i) anodic deposition, (ii) cathodic deposition, and (iii) 

electrophoretic deposition. The key advantage of the electrochemical approach is that it allows fast 


5

growth of homo and heterostructures with variable compositions and thicknesses, suitable for electronic 

devices.[46–49]

Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the most popular techniques for fabricating SURMOFs on pre-functionalized 
substrates. The techniques include (a) LPE-LbL assembly of metal ions and organic linkers on a SAM-engineered 
substrate, (b) spin-coating, (c) drop-casting, and (d) electrochemical deposition. Vapor deposition is not shown.  

3. Breaking the bottleneck of electrical conductivity in MOFs

Despite successful use of MOFs in various electronic applications and devices, it remains a challenging 

task to understand an underlying charge conduction mechanism. The majority of MOFs feature a wide 

band gap, and the orbitals of the metal ion clusters, and redox-inert linkers do not overlap sufficiently 

to allow for effective charge transport in the framework. As a result, most of the MOFs are electrical 

insulators. The first electrically conductive MOF, CuI[CuIII(pdt)2] (pdt = pyrazine-2,3-dithiolate], was

reported in 2009 by Takaishi and co-workers.[50] This MOF utilized mixed metal ions with low and high 

oxidation states (CuI and CuIII) acting as electron donors and acceptors, respectively, and enhancing

electrical conductivity. Even though the conductivity value, σ = 6 × 10–4 Scm-1, was rather moderate, 

that work laid a foundation stone for developing further conductive MOFs and their integration with 

other elements for investigating charge transport phenomena and applications. Since then, significant

efforts have been made towards MOF-based multifunctional electronic devices, which provide us with 

a new research domain popularly known as ‘‘MOFtronics’ (MOF-based electronics). The evolution of

conducting MOF for the period of 2009-2023 is sketched in Fig. 3. It reflects the progress in the field 

due to the development of different “tools” to tune and enhance the conductivity, including the efficient 

coupling of nodes to linkers, doping with redox-active guest molecules, inclusion of polar solvents, use 

of different metal ions (mixed valency), and the introduction of lanthanides as MOF “nodes”.  


6

Figure 3. Evolution of electrically conductive MOFs for the period from 2009 to 2023. Note that this is not only 
the absolute value of the conductivity which is of importance but also introduction of new MOF systems, opening 
new perspectives for research and applications. The factors that facilitate electrical conductivity include doping, 
mix-metal ions, conductive linkers, improvement of - stacking, conformational changes, mixed valency, etc.

4. Measurements and models of electrical conductivity in MOFs

It is generally assumed that the charge transport in conductive MOFs occurs in either “through-bond” 

or ‘through-space’ fashion, relying on either band or hopping transport mode (Fig. 4).[51] There are also

several other models dealing with specific cases.[52] Note that “through-bond” charge transport is related 

to the flow of charges over metal-ligands coordination bonds; it propagates through the orbitals of 

ligands and those of metal ions (Fig. 4a). On the other hand, ‘through space’ conduction channels 

originate from non-covalent interactions between ligands. For instance, MOFs composed of extended 

π-conjugated linkers, like triphenylene, trinaphthylene, hexaazatrinaphthylene, phthalocyanine, and 

naphthalocyanine, feature strong π−π interactions between the ligands, facilitating charge transport via  

‘through space’ pathways.[53] In contrast, ‘through bond’ charge transport relies on a strong covalent 

bonding between metal centres and organic linkers, resulting in a small band gap and high charge 

mobility. In particular, this mechanism is favoured for nitrogen and sulphur-based linkers featuring well-

matched energy levels and spatial overlap with the metal d-orbitals.[54] As to the hopping transport, it is

a thermally activated process with charge carriers localized at specific sites and ‘jumping’ from these

sites to other sites (Fig. 4b).[55] The conductivity depends then strongly on temperature, as is typical for 


7

activated processes. A detailed analysis of the aforementioned charge transport mechanisms can be 

found elsewhere.[13,15,54,56,57]

Figure 4. (a) Schematic illustration of the ‘through-bond’ and ‘through-space’ charge conduction 
mechanisms in electrically conductive MOFs; (b) Schematic illustration of the hopping transport.

4.1 Measurement of electrical conductivity and its anisotropy

Charge transport properties of MOFs are best represented by their electrical conductivity, , a parameter 

that reflects the ease with which charges can propagate through MOFs or other materials, can be 

calculated according to the equation,

𝜎 =

I

V ×

𝐿

𝐴
(i) 

where I, 𝑉, L and A denote current, applied bias, the distance between the two electrodes (thickness of 

a MOF film), and the cross-sectional area of the junction, respectively. 

Conductivity of MOFs can be measured for both single crystals and polycrystalline materials in the form 

of either thin films or pellets. In polycrystalline samples, grain boundary resistance and distribution of 

different crystallographic orientations contribute to the conductivity in addition to their inherent 

conductivity which is the property of fundamental interest. Nevertheless, most of the charge transport 

measurements so far were performed on polycrystalline thin film MOFs or pellets, which are the most 

frequently used MOF samples. At the same time, measurements on single-crystal MOFs have their own 

importance since they provide the most characteristic material values, serving as references for 

polycrystalline samples and as a benchmark for applications.

The charge transport measurements are usually performed by either two-probe or four-probe

methods.[13] As electrical contacts, metal wires (Ag, Au, Cu, or Al) or conductive adhesives (carbon

paste, gold, or silver paint) are usually employed. For instance, Dincă and co-workers measured the 

conductivity of the Cd2(TTFTB) MOFs by a two-probe method, using conducting carbon paste and gold

wires to make the electrical contacts.[58] This method involves applying a known voltage or current to 

the sample and measuring the resistance (Fig. 5a). Its major drawback is the contribution of the contacts, 


8

wire resistance, and voltage drop which can be avoided by four-probe method that exclusively measures

the intrinsic conductivity of the sample (Fig. 5b-c). An extension of the four-probe method is the van 

der Pauw method, which is used when the sample is very thin or irregular in form (Fig. 5d).[56]

Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the methods used to measure electrical conductivity of MOFs. (a) Two-
probe method, (b-c) four-probe method, (d) van der Pauw method. I, V, L, W, t, and S, indicate current, 
voltage, length, width, and thickness of the sample, and the distance between the contacts, respectively.

In the context of single-crystal MOFs, we generally consider in-plane and out-of-plane conductivities. 

In-plane conductivity typically refers to the coordination bonds within the same plane of the MOF 

structure. In contrast, out-of-plane conductivity entails charge carriers moving perpendicular to the 

primary planes, often involving charge transport via hopping, or tunneling mechanism. The major 

challenges to acquire these parameters are to prepare single-crystal MOF samples with appropriate 

orientations and to contact them properly relying on the suitable crystal face. Another critical issue for 

the electrical conductivity measurements on single-crystal MOFs is the reproducibility of the results, 

affected both by the distribution of the parameters of the crystals (size, shape, purity, and morphology) 

and by the quality of the contacts. Hence, smart tactics are required to meet the above challenges. 

Toward this endeavor, Sun et al. probed the electrical conductivity of a single crystal of Cd2(TTFTB) 

MOF with a hexagonal shape for both in-plane (σ∥c) and out-of-plane (σ⊥c) directions, relying on the 

specific faces of this crystal.[58] The authors attached gold wires with tungsten probes to preclude the 

crystal from being hampered. The obtained conductivity values for σ∥c and σ⊥c orientations were 

estimated at 9.82 (±2.09) × 10-5 S/cm and 2.36 (±0.72) × 10-7 S/cm, respectively.[58] Along the same 

line, Dou et al. investigated in detail the electrical conductivity of an array of 2D anisotropic MmHHTTn

MOFs, with either M = Cu2+ or Ni2+, m = 3, and n = 2 or M = Mg2+, Co2+ or Ni2+, m = 6, and n = 3.[59]

The in-plane and out-of-plane electrical conductivity measurements were performed on hexagonal 


9

single-crystal plates and single-crystal rods, respectively. As expected, the porous, eclipsed phase 

M3HHTT2 (M = Cu2+ or Ni2+) exhibited higher in-plane than out-of-plane conductivity. In contrast, the 

dense staggered phase Co6HHTT3 showed higher out-of-plane conductivity, which was explained by 

the presence of planar Co3 clusters in this framework. It was assumed that these clusters preferentially 

facilitate charge transport perpendicular to the 2D sheets while concurrently preventing the transport 

within the sheet via narrower band dispersion or greater phonon scattering. Furthermore, for all MOFs

studied, the out-of-plane conductivity was inversely proportional to the interlayer π–π distances, except 

for Mg6HHTT3, which was explained by the absence of d orbital in its metal ions. Recently reported 

values of the orientation-specific electrical conductivities of single crystal MOFs are summarized in 

Table 1. The common trend is that in-plane conductivity is higher than out-of-plane and pellet values, 

which is understandable in view of the MOF structure.

A particularly high value of in-plain conductivity in the single-crystal MOFs, 10.96 S cm−1, was 

measured for the single crystals of the Cu-based frameworks, {[Cu2(6-Hmna)(6-mn)]·NH4}n (6-Hmna 

= 6-mercaptonicotinic acid, 6-mn = 6-mercaptonicotinate) featuring 2D copper–sulfur planes.[60] The 

key approach was to expand the (−Cu−S−)n chains to (−Cu−S−)n planes, which permits efficient charge 

transport. A particular high value of the out-of-plain conductivity, such as 150 S cm−1, was measured in 

the single crystals of Ni3(HITP)2 MOFs [3] – the system which will be discussed in detail below.

Table 1. Orientation-specific electrical conductivities of the single-crystal MOFs. Measurement 
conditions, techniques, and conductivity values for the respective polycrystalline samples (pellets) are 
provided.

Examples of 

MOFs

Measurement 

technique

Measurement 

conditions

Conductivity 

(S cm-1)

Orientation
Ref.

Cd2(TTFTB)
Single crystal 

(2-probe)

N2-atmosphere

(Glove box)

10-4
ab-axis
Sun et al. [58]

Cd2(TTFTB)
Single crystal 

(2-probe)

N2-atmosphere

(Glove box)

10-7
c-axis
Sun et al. [58]

Cd2(TTFTB)
Pellet 

(2-probe)

N2-atmosphere

(Glove box)

10-6
Random
Sun et al. [58]

Ni9(HHTP)4
Single crystal 

(4-probe)

Vacuum
2
ab-axis
Ha et al. [61]

Ni9(HHTP)4
Single crystal 

(2-probe)

Vacuum
1×10-4
c-axis
Ha et al. [61]

Ni9(HHTP)4
Pellet 
Vacuum
3.6×10−3
Random
Ha et al. [61]


10

(4-probe)

Cu3HHTT2
Single crystal 

(vdP)

Vacuum
~ 1
ab-axis
Dou et al.[59]

Cu3HHTT2
Single crystal 

(4-probe)

Vacuum
~ 0.1
c-axis
Dou et al.[59]

Cu3(HHTP)2
Single crystal 

(4-probe)

Vacuum
1.5
ab-axis
Day et al.[3]

Cu3(HHTP)2
Single crystal 

(2-probe)

Vacuum
0.5
c-axis
Day et al. [3]

Cu3(HHTP)2
Pellet

(2-probe)

Vacuum
0.1
Random
Day et al. [3]

Cu-Hmna
Single crystal 

(4-probe)

Ambient
10.96
ab-axis
Pathak et al.[57]

Ni3(HITP)2
Single crystal 

(4-probe)

Vacuum
150
c-axis
Day et al. [3]

Ni3(HITP)2
Pellet

(4-probe)

Ambient
55.4
Random
Chen et al. [62]

5. Bias-induced structural modulation yielding different conductivity in MOFs 

External stimuli, such as electric or magnetic fields, light, temperature, and pressure, can significantly 

influence the charge transport properties of MOFs. For example, McGrail and co-workers prepared

conductive MOFs composed of the TCNQ (7,7,8,8-tetracyanoqunidodimethane) linkers and Cu2+ nodes 

which could reversibly change the structural configuration in response to applied potential.[63] These 

structural changes induce either a conducting state (phase I; σ = 4.8× 10-3 S cm-1) or an insulating state

(phase II; σ = 5.8× 10-7 S cm-1). These MOFs (phase II) were incorporated in electronic devices by 

placing them between the Al foil and Cu contacts (Fig. 6a-b). The corresponding current-voltage (I-V)

curve indicates negligible current on biasing the junction from 0 to +1.3 V. In contrast, at a higher bias

of +6 V, the devices produce significant current with a little effect of the scan rates. It was found that

the insulating phase II of Cu(TCNQ) features N−Cu−N angles of 103° and 114.7° which corresponds to 

a nearly tetrahedron geometry around the Cu centres. In this structure, TCNQ linkers are parallel to each 

other but have a sizeable interplanar distance of 6.8 Å, which is too large for efficient charge transport 

across the framework (Fig. 6c, right). In contrast, the conducting phase I exhibits N−Cu−N angles of

92o and 142o corresponding to an extremely distorted tetrahedron structure, where the neighbouring

TCNQ molecules are arranged perpendicular to each other with an interplanar stacking distance of 3.24 

Å, which is shorter than the van der Waals distance of carbon atoms of 3.4 Å (Fig. 6c, left). As the 


11

result, TCNQ molecules in phase I create a columnar stack with efficient π-π interaction, while phase II 

cannot form π-π stacking due to the larger distance between the neighbouring TCNQ linkers. These

results agree qualitatively with the earlier study by another group reporting a field-induced conductance 

switching from a high (~100 kΩ) to low (~100 Ω) resistance state in the same system.[64] According to 

this study, the structure of Cu(TCNQ) MOFs exhibits a phase transformation occurring at +6 V, with an 

intermediate structural change at +3 V and (Fig. 6c). This transformation causes a change of the largest 

and lowest angles of CN- groups around the Cu centre, resulting in different TCNQ stacking, and 

porosity. These changes facilitate interaction between the d orbitals of the metal centres and the 

orbitals of the cyano-bridges, resulting in enhanced electrical conductivity. 

Figure 6. Bias-induced reversible conductivity switching of MOFs-based devices, Al/Cu(TCNQ)/Cu, between
the high (a) and low (b) resistive state (phases I and II, respectively). (c) schematic illustration of the respective
structural changes in the MOFs. Color code: gray: carbon, blue: nitrogen, and brown: copper. Phase I features a 
largely distorted tetrahedron around the Cu centre (left), while phase II represents a nearly undistorted tetrahedron 
(right). Reprinted with permission from Ref.[63]. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.

6. Photoconductive MOFs 

Light represents a versatile and non-destructive stimulus to modulate the electronic properties of photo-

responsive MOFs, relying in particular on photosensitive linkers, facilitating charge transport.[65]

Accordingly, light-driven charge transport or photo-conduction is an important domain of MOFtronics,

with such potential applications as photoswitches, photosensors, photoelectrodes, photocatalysis, and 


12

memory devices.[66–71] A representative building block in this context is spiropyran exhibiting distinct 

structural and conformational changes triggered by light.[72–75] Specifically, a neutral spyropyran (SP) 

can transform into charge-separated zwitterionic form, commonly known as merocyanine (MC) and 

featuring specific electrical properties. Accordingly, spyropyran was assumed to act as a photolinker in 

Zn2+-based MOFs with reversible photoconduction. To this end, Shustova and co-workers prepared 

photochromic MOFs featuring spiropyran as the linkers (Fig. 7a).[76] These MOFs changed their color

from green to red upon excitation with UV light (365 nm), manifesting the transformation of the SP into

MC form, featuring an extended π-conjugation (Fig. 7b). Accordingly, a significant increase in electrical 

conductivity was observed, accompanied by a correlation between the conductance and light absorption 

behaviour upon the repetitive photoisomerization cycles (Fig. 7c). However, the exact change in the 

electrical conductivity was not possible to deduce due to fast cycloreversion of the MC to SP form. The 

respective rate constants for the UV-induced transformation (kUV) and cycloreversion (kvis) were found 

to be 7.6 × 10−2 s−1 and 2.2 × 10−2 s−1, respectively. The observed photoconductivity behaviour was 

additionally visualized by integrating the SP-containing MOF pellet as a serial resistor into a single-

transistor amplifier circuit featuring a LED. As expected, the LED shone upon irradiation of the MOF

with UV light (ON state) while it got dark (OFF state) once the light was switched off (Fig. 7d, e). The 

same authors have also investigated the photoconductivity of diarylethene-containing MOFs.[76]

Diarylethene is known to undergo a light-driven transformation from the ‘open’ to ‘closed’ structure, 

which can be in particular traced by x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), with the characteristic S 

2p3/2 signal at 164.1 eV and 163.4 eV for the ‘open’, and ‘closed’ forms, respectively. Following such 

a transformation, the conductivity of the pristine, diarylethene-containing MOFs, 9.5 (± 2.1) × 10−7

Scm−1, increased to 2.9 (± 0.67) × 10−6 Scm−1 upon UV irradiation.

Another useful building block in the context of optoelectronic applications is porphyrin which is an 

excellent electron donor with a delocalized π-system and absorption in the visible region.[20]

Additionally, the Fermi level of porphyrin can be easily modulated by its coordination with different 

metals; thereby, S-scheme heterojunctions can be prepared by employing it. For instance, most recently, 

Zhu and co-workers discovered that a heterojunction consisting of an ultrathin film of positively charged 

CuTCPP(Cu) and negatively charged CuTCPP(Fe), generates a higher photocurrent than the respective 

individual MOFs.[77] The authors concluded that the high photocurrent in the heterojunction is due to 

the formation of S-scheme heterojunction, leading to the spontaneous movement of electrons from 

CuTCPP(Cu) to CuTCPP(Fe) due to the differences in their Fermi energy levels. In addition, the band 

bending at the CuTCPP(Fe)/CuTCPP(Cu) interface creates a huge driving force for efficient charge 

carrier separation. Consequently, recombination of photogenerated carriers is suppressed. This smart 

heterojunction design paves the way for the fabrication of highly efficient, MOF-based optoelectronic 

devices for practical applications such as photosensors, photoswitches, photoelectrodes, etc.


13

Figure 7. (a) Photoisomerization of spiropyran (neutral form) to merocyanine (charge separated form) in a MOF;
orange, red, blue, brown, and gray spheres represent zinc, oxygen, nitrogen, bromine, and carbon atoms, 
respectively; (b) light-driven conductance switching in a photoresponsive (red curve) and reference (black curve) 
MOFs; (c) reversible photoconductance cycles of current (top panel) and corresponding absorption signal (bottom
panel); (d) schematic illustration of photo-driven electronic modulation in MOFs; and (e) demonstration of 
enhancement in the electrical conductivity of the MOFs through LED lighting. Reprinted with permission from 
Ref.[76] Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.

A promising approach to rational design of functional photoswitchable MOFs was demonstrated 

recently by M. Mostaghimi et al.[78] Using multiscale modelling, automated workflow protocols, and 

DFT calculations, they analyzed and optimized a family of model MOFs incorporating spiropyran 

photoswitches at controlled positions. It was shown that lattice distances and vibrational flexibility 

strongly modulate the possible conduction photoswitching. The electronic coupling between the HOMO 

and LUMO orbitals of the linkers in the tested MOFs was found to increase on average more than 23 

and 65 times upon spiropyran-to-merocyanine isomerization, corresponding to the on/off ratios of 530 

and 4200, respectively. Additional decoration of the photoswitches with electron-donating or -

withdrawing groups opens a way to controlled modification between electron and hole conduction in a 

MOFs.

7. Tuning conductivity of MOFs using doping entities

Doping entities can effectively tune and significantly improve the electrical properties of MOFs. For 

instance, Farha and co-workers reported doping of the NU-1000 MOF, formed by pyrene-based linkers

and hexa-zirconium nodes, with nickel (IV) bis(dicarbollide) (NiCB).[79] The electrical conductivity was 

measured by the placement of NU-1000, NiCB, and NU-1000@NiCB into two-terminal junction 

featuring Pt interdigitated electrodes (IDEs). In the resulting I-V curves, zero slope was obtained for 


14

both NU-1000 and NiCB, whereas a non-zero slope was measured for NU-1000@NiCB, corresponding 

to an electrical conductivity of 2.7×10-7 S/cm. The remarkable enhancement of the conductivity was 

attributed to the donor-acceptor charge transfer between the pyrene-based linkers and NiCB guests.

Similarly, conducting polymer fibres embedded in MOFs lead to a significant increase in electrical 

conductivity,[80,81] which is generally attributed to charge transfer interactions between polymer chains 

surrounded by π-donor ligands as well as to high degrees of order and orientation in the polymers.[54]

For instance, the UiO-66 MOF is an insulator with a conductivity of ~10-8 S cm-1 (Fig. 8a).[82] However, 

a substantial rise in the electrical conductivity was observed when this framework was loaded with poly-

pyrrole (PPy) as well as poly 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophine (PEDOT), while preserving porosity 

comparable to the undoped MOF, which was evident from the electrical conductivity values and surface 

area measurements (Fig. 8b). As a result, these doped MOFs emerge as compelling contenders for 

energy storage devices, such as supercapacitors, batteries, etc. 

Figure 8. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the UiO-66-PPY and UiO-66-PEDOT MOFs, where 
UiO-66-PPY was synthesized by the loading with PPy followed by the oxidation with FeCl3 and UiO-66-PEDOT 
was synthesized by the loading with PEDOT followed by the oxidation with I2; color code: green: zirconium, red:
oxygen, gray: carbon; hydrogen atoms are omitted for clarity. (b) The electrical conductivity and surface area 
values for the doped and undoped (UIO-66) MOFs. Reprinted with permission from Ref.[82] Copyright 2020, 
Wiley-VCH. 

Alternative to doping with conducting polymer fibres, in situ polymerization within the frameworks can 

be performed. To this end, Ballav and co-workers reported the inclusion of monomer pyrrole (Py) into 

the nanochannels of [Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)] MOFs (NDC = 2,6-napthalenedicarboxylic acid and PCA = 4-

pyridinecarboxylic acid].[83] The subsequent treatment of these MOFs with iodine (I2) to form 

polypyrrole (PPy) within the framework resulted in color changes considered as an indication of the 

polymerization (Fig. 9 a-b).[83] Fig. 9c shows field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) 

images which prove a similar morphology of the [Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)] and [Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)]PPy 

MOFs. Energy dispersive X-ray spectra suggest the presence of nonstoichiometric and insignificant 


15

amounts of I2, corroborating its role as an initiator for oxidative polymerization of pyrrole.[84] As the 

result of this polymerization, the electrical conductivity of the pristine [Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)] MOFs (~10-

12 Scm-1) increased by nine orders of the magnitude, becoming ~10-3 Scm-1 (Fig. 9d). An additional 

evidence for the positive effect of conductive polymers was provided by Dincǎ and co-workers, who 

have reported that insulating MOFs loaded with conductive polymers turn into highly conductive 

frameworks.[12]

Figure 9. (a) Schematic illustration of the inclusion of conductive PPy as guest into the MOFs, with strong host-
guest interactions; color code: brown: cadmium, red: oxygen, gray: carbon, white: hydrogen. (b) visual color 
changes of the pristine MOF upon inclusion of monomer pyrrole and iodine, (c) FE-SEM images of the 
[Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)] and [Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)]PPy MOF films, (d) comparison of the I-V plots of 
[Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)] (green circles, pristine MOF) and [Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)]PPy (orange circles, PPy-loaded 
MOF). Reprinted with permission from Ref.[83] Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.

The band gap tuning is another tool to boost the electrical conductivity of MOF.[85–88] In this context, 

we direct readers to the most recently published perspective from the Park group, where the authors

comprehensively outline key techniques for investigating the band gap and electronic structure in MOFs 

and discuss approaches to tune these parameters.[16] A representative example is provided by the study 

of Ogihara et al., who reported a tunable band gap of 2,6-naphthalene dicarboxylate di-lithium MOF via 

Li-intercalation.[89] Due to the intercalation, the band gap was reduced to 0.9 eV enabling a hopping 

mechanism for the charge transport and, consequently, a significant increase in the electrical 

conductivity (Fig. 10a). Besides, the electrical conductivity of the intercalated MOFs was found to be 

reversibly dependent on temperature, with the conductive behaviour at 100°C and insulator behaviour

at 200°C (Fig. 10b). Thus, this engineered framework can be employed as a prototype switch for 


16

protection of electronic devices from overheating. Furthermore, the electrical conductivity of this 

framework was investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) in the frequency range 

from 100 kHz to 1 Hz. According to the respective Bode plot (Fig. 10c), the resistance of the Li-

intercalated MOF was four orders of magnitude lower than that of the pristine framework in the low-

frequency regime. The Nyquist plot of the Li-intercalated MOF exhibited a small semi-circle, 

representing the contributions of both ions and electrons to electrical conductance (Fig. 10d). In contrast, 

for pristine MOFs, a straight line was found that renders mainly a contribution of ionic conductance. 

Thus, the EIS studies provide a deep insight into the charge transport phenomena, revealing the 

contributions of specific charge carriers.[90]

Figure 10. (a) Comparison of the I-V plots of the pristine (blue line) and Li-intercalated MOFs (red line). (b) 
Temperature dependent I-V measurements. (c) Bode and (d) Nyquist plots for the pristine and Li-intercalated 
MOFs. The inset in panel (d) represents the corresponding equivalent circuit. Reprinted with permission from 
Ref.[89] Copyright 2017, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 

Another popular approach to enhance the electrical conductance of MOFs, pioneered by Allendorf and 

co-authors,[91] is doping of MOFs with redox-active moieties. Along these lines, Liu et al. synthesized 

an array of HKUST-1 SURMOFs with ~45, ~58, and ~71 nm thicknesses by varying the number of 

cycles in the LbL-LPE method.[34] The films were prepared on Au substrates engineered with a 

carboxylic-acid-terminated SAM, 9-carboxy-10-(mercaptomethyl) triptycene, denoted as CMMT. 

Subsequently, these films were loaded with ferrocene (Fc) for conductivity tuning. The pristine and Fc-

doped SURMOFs were placed into two-terminal junctions with the gold substrate serving as the bottom 

electrode and hexadecanethiol (HDT) passivated mercury drop serving as the top electrode (Fig. 11a). 


17

The respective I-V curves show a higher current density for the doped SURMOFs compared to the 

pristine ones as well as an exponential decrease of the current density (and, consequently, an increase 

in resistance) with the film thickness, corresponding to a very low decay constant (β ≈ 0.006 Å−1) (Fig. 

11b-c). The observed phenomena suggests that the long-range charge transport occurs via an incoherent 

charge-hopping mechanism. A more substantial effect was observed upon doping of HKUST-1 MOFs 

with TCNQ and fluorinated TCNQ (F4-TCNQ).[52] The conductivity of HKUST-1 MOF loaded with 

either TCNQ or F4-TCNQ was found to be at least five orders of magnitude higher than that of the 

pristine framework. This behavior was further rationalized by an extended hopping transport model

which included virtual hops through localized MOF states or molecular super exchange.

Figure 11. (a) Schematic illustration of the two-terminal junction featuring the pristine (shown in the illustration)
and Fc-doped HKUST-1 SURMOFs; note that HKUST-1 is formed by copper ion nodes and trimesic acid ligands. 
Color code: red: oxygen, blue: carbon, and black: copper ion. (b) Representative semi log J-V curves for these 
systems and the SAM-engineered substrate. (c) Semi log plots for dependence of J on the SURMOF thickness, 
showing a linear behaviour; the respective plots for the resistance are presented in the inset. Reprinted with 
permission from Ref. [34] Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.

The above experimental results were confirmed and even improved by Jung et al. by using a solution 

shearing method to synthesize a thin film of HKUST-1 MOF with a large area and high crystallinity.[92]

This film was photosynthetically doped with TCNQ, resulting in a quantifiable increment of the 

electrical conductivity by up to seven orders of magnitude. The increase in the electrical conductivity 

correlated with the soaking time required for the progressive diffusion of TCNQ molecules into the film 

and their bonding to the metal centers there. Furthermore, the conductivity of the thin films was found 

to be higher than that of the pellets, which was explained by the nearly defects-free character of these 

films, favorable for the charge transport. Several research groups have extensively studied the effect of 

halogen doping on the electrical conductivity of MOFs. Along these lines, Gupta et al. investigated the 

optical, thermoelectric, and semiconducting properties of the Cu[Cu(pdt)2] (pdt =2,3-pyrazinedithiolate) 

MOFs by infiltration with bromine vapor with varying stoichiometry ratios with respect to Cu ion.[93]

Due to such a chemical doping, copper ions in MOFs were partially oxidized, forming a mixed valency

state, Brx@CuII[CuII(pdt)2]1−x[CuIII(pdt)2]x, which facilitates the charge transport via hopping 

mechanism, resulting in a 10-fold increase in electrical conductivity. Furthermore, for x (Br2 vapor


18

fraction) > 0.5, the pristine MOFs switch from p-type to n-type semiconductor behavior. Since the metal 

ions are predominantly in the [CuIII(pdt)2]- state at the small x, holes are the dominant charge carriers,

corresponding to a p-type semiconductor. In contrast, the doped MOFs feature the [CuIII(pdt)2]- state, 

which can be easily reduced to [CuII(pdt)2]2−, with electrons as majority charge carriers, thus acting as 

n-type semiconductors.

The electrical conductivity of MOFs can also be modulated by doping with alkali metal ions, as in 

particular was demonstrated by Zhu and co-workers.[94] In the respective study, pristine MnHHB (HHB 

= hexahydroxybenzene) and MnTHBQ (THBQ = tetrahydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone) MOFs were doped 

with metal ions (Rb+ or Cs+) resulting in the MnRbHHB/THBQ and MnCsHHB/THBQ frameworks,

respectively. For the electrical conductivity measurements, the MOFs, produced initially as powders, 

were pressed to make pellets which were then assessed electrically by four-probe method. In all cases, 

an increase in the electrical conductivity upon increasing temperature (from 300K to 400K) was 

observed, which indicated a semiconducting nature of the MOFs (Fig. 12a). For instance, the electrical 

conductivity () of the MnHHB MOFs was found to be 5.4 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 300 K and 1.8 × 10−2 S 

cm−1 at 400 K. In contrast, the MnRbTHBQ and MnCsTHBQ MOFs exhibited lower conductivity of 

1.6 × 10−7 S cm−1 and 1.2 × 10−8 S cm−1 at 300 K and 7.5 × 10−6 S cm−1 and 4.8 × 10−7 S cm−1 at 400 K.

Using the Arrhenius equation, σ = σ0 exp(−Ea/kBT), with σ0 as prefactor, the activation energy for the 

charge transport (Ea) was determined at 0.128, 0.39 and 0.34 eV for MnHHB, MnRbTHBQ, and 

MnCsTHBQ, respectively (Fig. 12b). The π-π stacking distance for the MnRbTHBQ and MnCsTHBQ 

was estimated at ⁓3Å and for the MnHHB at ⁓2.93Å. It is significant that only a ~5% difference in the 

stacking distance results in a 100-fold enhancement in the electrical conductivity for MnHHB compared 

to MnRbTHBQ and MnCsTHBQ, relying on the stronger π-π interaction in the former framework.

Figure 12. (a) Plots of the electrical conductivity as a function of temperature for three different MOFs, (b)
Arrhenius-like plots of ln as a function of 1000/T. Reprinted with permission from Ref.[94] Copyright 2022, The 
Royal Society of Chemistry.


19

8. Solvent-induced conductivity modulation 

A specific kind of doping are polar solvent molecules that can modulate many properties of materials 

including electrical conductivity.[95,96] For instance, coordination of N, N-dimethylformamide (DMF) 

solvent to the unsaturated Fe centers of the Fe2(DSBDC) (DSBDC = 2,5-disulfidobenzene-1,4-

dicarboxylate) MOF enhances the electrical conductivity of this framework by a factor of ~103, from 

10-9 S cm-1 to 10-6 Scm-1.[97] Note that the electrical conductivity was measured using the paste-wire 

method, in which the pellet was sandwiched between the carbon paste and gold wire. The increase in 

the conductivity was attributed to the fractional electron transfer from the Fe center to the polar solvent

molecules. Theoretical calculations revealed that the ionization potential of DMF is lower than the work 

function of the Fe2(DSBDC) MOF by nearly 1 eV, and accordingly, electron transfer takes place when 

DMF is introduced into the MOFs.

9. Metal-catecholate based MOFs

The metal-catecholates (M-CAT) based MOFs exhibit strong charge delocalization due to the significant 

overlap of electronic states between the metal nodes and organic linkers. The combination of in-plane 

conductivity and layered structure makes them an excellent platform for creating ultrathin MOF films, 

suitable both for model studies of electrical conductivity and device fabrication. However, the 

conductivity of these films turned out to be much lower (by up to three orders of magnitude) than that 

of the respective single-crystal MOFs, making it crucial to increase their crystallinity and orientational 

order. In this context, Medina and co-workers prepared well-oriented M-CAT-1 thin films with 

thicknesses of 180-200 nm by using vapor-assisted conversion technique. These films, comprised of

2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene (HHTP) linkers and Ni2+, Co2+, and Cu2+ nodes, were subjected 

to electrical measurements and integrated into model solar cells between ITO and Al electrodes.[98] Both 

Ni2+ and Co2+ based MOFs showed symmetric current-voltage responses in the voltage ranges of ± 5 V, 

as measured by van der Pauw methods with a contact distance of 5 mm. The corresponding electrical 

conductivity values were 1.1 × 10−3 S cm−1 and 3.3 × 10−3 S cm−1, respectively. The respective solar 

cells showed diode-type behavior under AM 1.5G light illumination. It was assumed that the well-

ordered stack of molecular layers in the oriented thin films serves as an effective conduction path for 

the photogenerated charge carriers.

An alternative approach to the synthesis of highly oriented, ultrathin (10 nm) Cu-CAT-1 MOF films 

(sequential transfer of nanosheets) was reported by Carlos and co-workers, resulting in a relatively high 

electrical conductance.[99] For the charge transport studies, a thin film-based device with bottom-contact 

geometry was fabricated, using pre-patterned Au electrodes as the source and drain electrodes and SiO2

substrate and highly doped n-type Si as dielectric and gate electrodes, respectively (Fig. 13a). Optical 


20

microscopy confirms the full device coverage after the transfer of the Cu-CAT films onto the electrode 

template (Fig. 13b). A linear increment in the conductivity as a function of applied bias at room 

temperature reveals an ohmic behaviour of the MOFs (Fig. 13c). The film conductivity at room 

temperature (σ) was calculated to be ~10−4 S cm−1 which is much lower than that of the respective single 

crystals (σ = 2 × 10−1 S cm−1). The activation energy, obtained from the temperature-dependent electrical 

conductivity data (Fig. 13d), was estimated at 0.24 eV. The devices showed a nonlinear relationship 

between ln(σ(T)/σ(RT)) and T which is common for conducting polymers and could be rationalized by

the coexistence of two different conduction mechanisms. Specifically, at relatively high temperatures

(T > 240 K), the electrical conduction is dominated by thermally activated charge carriers in view of the 

relatively narrow fundamental band gap (~0.48 eV), which is double of the activation energy (Eg = 2Ea). 

In contrast, at lower temperatures (T < 240 K), the conduction is governed by a hopping mechanism,

which was further confirmed by the observed T−1/4 relationship, typical of hopping in Mott's 3D systems. 

It was assumed that the Cu-CAT-1 MOFs feature both inter- and intralayer charge transport relying on 

the π–π interactions within the framework. Note that the same authors have recently linked carbon 

nanotubes (CNT) to the ligands of UiO-68-TZDC MOF (TZDC =
4,4’-(1,2,4,5-tetrazine-3,6-

diyl)dibenzoic acid) resulting in a room temperature conductivity of the hybrid MOF-CNT wrap of 

4×10−2 Scm−1.[100]

Figure 13. (a) Schematic illustration of the Cu-CAT-based device with bottom-contact geometry; the nodes 
(copper ions) and linkers (catecholates) are drawn in blue and green, respectively. (b) Optical microscopy images 


21

of the real device before and after the transfer of the Cu-CAT-1 films onto the electrodes. (c) representative I-V
curve of the device, measured at room temperature. (d) Dependence of the relative electrical conductance on 
temperature. Reprinted with permission from Ref.[99] Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.

Recently, Dincă and coworkers reported tuning of the band gap of metal-alloyed conjugated MOFs 

(MxM’3-x)(HITP)2 (MM’ = CuNi, CoNi, CoCu; HITP = 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaiminotriphenylene)  by 

varying the metal ions ratio, leading to a  considerable increase in electrical conductivity.[62] Later, Dong 

and coworkers synthesized a novel wavy 2D c-MOF [Cu3(HFcHBC)2] composed of Cu2+ and nonplanar 

ligand 2,3,10,11,18,19-hexafluoro-6,7,14,15,22,23-hexahydroxycHBC (HFcHBC) followed by 

electrical conductivity measurement.[101]

9.1 Ni-HITP MOFs

Promising systems are 2D conductive MOFs, such as Ni3(HITP)2, which consist of 2,3,6,7,10,11-

hexaaminotriphenylene (HITP) linkers and nickel ions and show high bulk electrical conductivity (> 

5000 Sm-1). These frameworks can be particularly useful in the context of supercapacitor and battery 

applications and electrocatalysis.[102–104] The electrical conductance of these MOFs was in particular 

studied in the Si/SiO2/MOFs/Ti/Pd device configuration.[3] The rod-shaped nanocrystals of Ni3(HITP)2

with a length of ∼2 μm and a diameter of ∼200 nm were drop-casted onto Si/SiO2 substrate, followed 

by e-beam evaporation of Ti/Pd top contacts. The resulting devices showed electrical conductance (G) 

of 1.3 mS at 295 K and 0.7 mS at 1.4 K when measured by four-probe method and 0.25 mS at 295 K 

and 0.13 mS at 1.4 K when measured by two-probe method. The electrical conductance of the single 

crystal MOFs was found higher than that of the respective polycrystalline thin films, which is mostly 

related to the grain boundary contribution. Later, Ohata et al. synthesized well-oriented thin films of 

Ni3(HITP) MOFs by employing air/liquid bottom-up approach.[105] This work is one of the first reports 

on synthesizing crystalline thin MOF films with a unidirectional orientation, as ensured by synchrotron-

based X-ray crystallography. These thin films can be easily transferred onto any substrate which makes 

them superior to the frameworks fabricated by solvothermal or vapor-induced conversion method in 

which MOFs can be grown on a specific substrate only. The in-plane electrical conductivity was 

measured using a thin film device with two Au electrodes and found to be 0.6 S cm-1 for the 70 nm 

films, which was the highest of the previously reported values for nanosheets of similar thickness. The 

respective I-V plot had a linear character, suggesting the Ohmic behaviour of the electrical conductivity 

in the Ni3(HITP) films, which was ascribed to the high orientation order in these systems. The above 

results pave the way for the fabrication of highly efficient electronic devices featuring highly oriented 

MOF nanosheets. Along with the Ni-HITP MOFs, electrically conductive MOF constructed with nickel 

and 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene (HHTP) were recently reported.[106] These frameworks, 

grown by electrosynthesis, feature disc- and flower-like morphologies. The electrochemical 


22

performance of the flower-shaped frameworks greatly (up to 10 times) exceeds that of bulk Ni-HHTP, 

both in terms of gravimetric capacitances and electrochemically active surface areas.

9.2 Ga-based MOFs 

To date, the utmost efforts in modulating the electrical conductivity of MOFs have been centred around 

the tuning of ligand structures. In contrast, the role of metal ions in influencing conductivity has gained 

comparatively less attention. The electrically conducting MOFs that have been reported consist mainly 

of only a few metal ions, e.g., Ni, Cu, and Co. Notably, Dincă and co-workers have expanded the library

of electrically conducting MOFs through the pioneering synthesis of Ga metal ions-based 

frameworks.[107] They employed Ga (iii) as a metal node and 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene as 

a ligand. The conductivity of the synthesized MOF was found to be more than 3 mS/cm, which is well 

comparable to the earlier reported homologous frameworks based on the Ni(II) and Co(II) metal ions. 

The authors inferred that charge transport within the Ga-based MOFs is predominantly facilitated 

through π–π stacking interactions, leading to high electrical conductivity, similar to the Ni(II) and Co(II) 

case. This finding marks a significant breakthrough and opens new avenues for utilizing -block 

elements in MOF synthesis. 

10. Lanthanide MOFs 

Another promising alternative to the “standard” MOF systems exploiting predominantly Ni, Cu, and Co

nodes is provided by lanthanide MOFs. To this end, Dincǎ and co-workers studied the conductivity

relationship in a series of Ln-HHTP MOFs comprising HHTP ligands and lanthanide cations (Ln = Yb, 

Ho, Nd, and La), showing that the emergence of high conductivity in layered MOFs does not necessarily 

require a metal-ligand bond with highly covalent character and that interactions between organic ligands 

alone can produce efficient charge transport pathways.[108] The crystallographic structure of these MOFs 

is illustrated in Fig. 14a-c. As to the electrical properties, Yb-HHTP and Ho-HHTP, which feature

comparatively small metal ions and have more compact stacking, exhibited, as shown in Fig. 14d, much 

higher electrical conductivity than that of La-HHTP and Nd-HHTP. The structural data reveal that the 

conductivity was dominated by the stacking distance rather than by the extent of covalency between the 

respective ions and ligands. This result suggests that the charge transport takes place out-of-the plane 

instead of in-plane. Note that all Ln-HHTP MOFs showed a similar activation energy of 250 meV in the 

temperature range 225–300 K, calculated from the Arrhenius equation.

In view of the dominant role of the stacking distance in the lanthanide MOFs, tetrathiafulvalene 

tetrabenzoate (TTFTB), known for strong π–π interactions, was considered as a linker. To this end, 

Dincă and co-workers synthesized three different MOFs composed of La3+-TTFTB and denoted as 1, 2, 

and 3 via the conventional solvothermal method, varying temperature and composition of the solvent 


23

(H2O: DMF: EtOH) (Fig. 15a).[109] The strength of the π–π interactions in these MOFs, dictating the 

electrical conductivity, was mainly defined by S…S contact distance between the adjacent ligands, 

which varied across the series in the order of 1 < 2 < 3 and was estimated at 3.60, 4.08, 7.07 Å for 1, 2, 

and 3, respectively. The electrical measurements were performed by sandwiching the La3+-TTFTB MOF 

pellets between two electrical contacts, viz. carbon paste (bottom contact) and gold wire (top contact), 

as schematically shown in Fig. 15b. The charge transfer rate was found to be directly proportional to 

the extent of π-𝜋 overlapping in TTFTB which resulted in the conductivity order of 2.5 (7) × 10-6 S cm-

1, 9(4)× 10-7 S cm-1, and 1.0(5) × 10-9 S cm-1 for 1, 2, and 3, respectively. It was found that the charge 

transport in these MOFs was mediated by thermally activated hopping mechanism with activation 

energies of 0.28, 0.20, and 0.44 eV for 1, 2, and 3 respectively.   

Figure 14. (a) Crystallographic structure of Nd-HHTP MOF (top view) with the marked pore diameter; (b) Side 
view of the same structure emphasizing Nd atoms connected with the ligands. (c) Respective interlayers with a 
stacking distance of 3.1 Å. (d) Electrical conductivity values of the Ln-HHTP MOFs (Ln =Yb, Ho, Nd, and La). 
The color codes for the panels (a-c) are given in the respective panels. Reprinted with permission from Ref.[108]

Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.

Complementary to the above frameworks, Skorupskii and Dincă
recently synthesized intrinsically 

electrically conductive and structurally isotropic Eu6HOTP2 and Y6HOTP2 MOFs, consisting of 

2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaoxytriphenylene (HOTP) linkers and Eu and Y metal nodes.[110] These MOFs showed 

electrical conductivity on the order of 10−6 to 10−5 S/cm. 


24

Figure 15. (a) Schematic of the synthesis of different La3-TTFTB MOFs (1, 2, and 3) by variation of temperature 
and solvent composition. (b) Schematic illustration of MOFs-based device with an Au/H4TTFB/carbon 
configuration; color code: light blue: lanthanide, gray: carbon, dark blue: nitrogen, red: oxygen, yellow: sulfur. 
Reprinted with permission from Ref.[109] Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.

11. MOF-based devices for specific electronic applications

Research on MOFs-based electronics has drastically advanced in recent years, targeting photoelectric 

and memory devices, field-effect transistors (FETs), rectifiers, etc.[111,112] For instance, Yoon et al.

reported the first example of MOF-based resistive memory devices using γ-cyclodextrin based Rb-CD-

MOFs.[113] Recently, Pham and co-workers studied volatile threshold as well as non-volatile memory 

devices using zirconium(IV)-carboxylate-based MOFs (UiO-66). These devices showed excellent 

characteristics, such as a reasonable ON/OFF current ratio (~104), high endurance (5 × 102 cycles), and 

long-time memory retention (104 s).[114] Complementary, Ballav and co-workers designed and fabricated 

a rectifier on the MOF basis.[115] Within the respective project, these authors prepared a thin film (a 

thickness of ~700 nm) of Cu(II)-1,2,4,5-benzene tetracarboxylic acid (Cu-BTEC) on the gold substrate 

by LbL method (Fig. 16a-b) and doped subsequently a part of this film with TCNQ, creating an

electronic heterostructure resembling a typical p-n junction. The rectification ratio (RR) for the resulting 

device exceeded 105 (Fig. 16c), which is one of the best values reported so far for molecular and hybrid 

rectifiers.[45] In addition, the same group recently reported heterostructure MOFs composed of Cu3BTC2

(top-layer) and TCNQ@Cu3BTC2 (bottom layer) grown on pre-functionalized Au-coated PET 

substrate.[116] These frameworks showed a RR ≈ 105 and featured a high charge carrier concentration of 

ca. 770 × 1015 cm–2 and a high charge carrier mobility of 22.7 cm2 V–1 S–1. 


25

Figure 16. (a) Schematic view of the fabrication steps of the Cu–BTEC thin film by LPE-LbL method (ten 
repeating cycles) and its subsequent doping with TCNQ. (b) I-V plots (in-plane measurements) for undoped (blue 
and red) and doped (green and magenta) Cu-BTEC thin film. A considerable enhancement in the electrical 
conductivity was obtained upon doping. (c) I-V plots (blue and red) for the resulting device (cross-plane 
measurement) showing an RR value of ≥105. Reprinted with permission from Ref.[115] Copyright 2019, The Royal 
Society of Chemistry.

12. Conclusions and future perspectives

This review discusses recent advances made with diverse bulk MOFs and MOF thin films in context of 

controlling and tuning their electric properties, putting particular attention on the relevant fabrication 

strategies, anisotropy of conductance, most promising types of conductive MOFs, and prototype 

electronic devices using selective MOFs. However, despite a variety of promising results, integration of 

MOFs into real electronic devices is still a challenge, along with many other challenges and unresolved 

questions in the MOFtronics that need further studies and better understanding. A comprehensive list of 

the respective challenges and questions, most of which are still relevant, can be found in the recent 

review by Dincă and co-authors.[12] This list includes disentangling the properties of charge carriers in 

MOFs, realizing more examples of isotropic conduction pathways in MOFs, further development of 

mixed-metal and mixed-linker systems, further elucidation of transport mechanisms relevant for 2D 

MOFs, isolation and characterization of single layers of 2D MOFs, expanding the library of ligands for 

MOFs featuring through-space charge transport pathways, more detailed structural investigations of 

host-guest interactions in MOFs, influence of environment and atmosphere on MOF conductivity 

values, and a better documentation of the materials preparation and measurement routes.[12] In our 

opinion and in the context of the present review, this list can be complemented by the following points:

i. Fabrication of heterostructure MOFs: Heterostructure MOFs, comprised of either two different 

MOFs or differently doped MOFs (such as in Ref.[116]) would be highly important for applications. They 

can in particular behave as electrical diodes, relying on the different electrical conductance properties

of 
the 
contributing 
parts 
within 
the 
entire 
device 
configuration, 
such 
as 

electrode/MOF1/MOF2/electrode
or 
electrode/doped-MOF1/MOF1/electrode.
Also, 
reversible 


26

switching of rectifying to nonrectifying current across specifically designed heterostructure MOFs 

becomes possible.[117]

ii. Variation of MOF thickness: To our surprise, charge-transport behavior for different thicknesses of 

the same MOFs have been explored so far to a very limited extent only (see, e.g., Ref[34] and Ref[45]). 

However, such studies are necessary to derive additional knowledge regarding the relevant charge 

transport mechanism and to optimize the thickness of the MOF films for specific applications. 

iii. Role of electrodes in device fabrication: It is indisputable that electrodes play an important role in 

controlling charge transport properties of any electronic device, including MOF-based ones. In 

particular, different electrodes have most likely different coupling efficiencies with the MOF and 

different Fermi levels (EF), affecting the heights of the injection barriers at the respective interfaces

(EHOMO/LUMO-EF) and, consequently, controlling the charge injection at these interfaces.[118] Generally, 

reference measurements with identical but variable electrodes as bottom and top contacts would be 

useful to distinguish between their impact and the contribution of MOF itself. 

iv. Metal-free electrodes in device stacking: Metal-free electrodes are highly desirable for real-world 

applications as metals are costly and usually require a high vacuum deposition system. In this context, 

conductive carbon or graphene can be an excellent alternative to replace metal electrodes.[119–122] In 

particular, conductive carbon has a Fermi level like Au but is cost-effective, patternable, and suitable 

for flexible substrates. It can also impede filament formation occurring frequently in the course of top 

metal contact deposition. 

v. Impedance spectroscopy studies on MOFs devices: Further efforts are required to study and 

rationalize specific electrical parameters of MOF-based electrical devices, such as contact resistance, 

charge-transfer resistance, and capacitance. These parameters are important from both fundamental 

viewpoint and for MOF-based electronics since their knowledge helps to understand and distinguish 

their specific roles in the conduction mechanism. Conventional DC-based measurements do not deliver

these parameters in contrast to impedance spectroscopy providing them in relation to a suitable

equivalent circuit.

vi. In-depth electrochemical studies on MOFs: Adequate electrochemical measurements are necessary 

to study the redox-conductivity of MOFs. The reliable electrochemical analysis would facilitate 

understanding their double-layer capacitance, charge-transfer rate constant, etc. To date, just several

redox-active MOFs are known[11,123–125] but recent theoretical and experimental work suggests that these 

MOFs can be good electrode materials.[126]

vii. Statistics and device stability: Regretfully, many reports do not pay sufficient attention to statistics 

of the charge transport data (number of working junctions out of total measured junctions, etc.) and even 


27

less studies provide information about the stability of MOF-based electronic devices. This information 

is however important to estimate the reliability of the presented data and the real value and usability of 

the devices. 

viii. Charge transport mechanism: It is crucial to understand in-depth the charge transport in MOF-

based electronic devices including such relevant parameters like barrier height, electrode-MOF 

coupling, and intermolecular coupling. For instance, the charge injection barrier height, defined by 

EHOMO/LUMO-EF, can be minimized by choosing an appropriate electrode (known EF) for the known 

values of HOMO and LUMO. Also, the standard I-V representation of the charge transport data can be

well complemented by LnJ vs V, lnJ vs E, or LnJ vs E1/2 (J, and E stand for the current density and 

electric field, respectively) plots, which can help to decide whether the charge transport is electric filed-

dependent or not.  

ix. Theoretical models: Simulations and suitable theoretical models can help to understand better the 

physical and chemical factors governing the electrical conductivity of MOFs. In addition to these 

fundamental issues, theoretical simulations can also open new ways for the rational design of MOFs, 

beyond time- and resource-consuming trial-and-error experimental approach, which is frequently 

applied for optimization of new systems. 

x. Adapting of design ideas: Novel design ideas can be implemented. One example, is the introduction 

of built-in electric fields into MOFs, on the basis of dipolar linkers,[127] following the strategy of 

embedded dipole adapted from molecular self-assembly.[128,129] This approach creates possibilities for 

band structure engineering in MOFs and may also be used to tune the transfer of charges from donors 

loaded via programmed assembly into MOF pores.[127] Another option is the introduction of chiral 

linkers providing potentially spin-dependent charge transport, following the concept of chirality-

induced spin selectivity (CISS).[130–133] Alternative possibility of achiving spin selectivity in MOFs is 

the use of magnetic molecular building blocks, following ideas from molecular electronics.[134]

Despite many examples of exciting research work, we think that significant efforts in design, 

characterization, and understanding of functional MOFs and SURMOFs are still needed to establish and 

commercialize them as building blocks of real-world electronic devices. Hopefully, this review will 

motivate the MOF community to further efforts and systematic studies of the charge transport 

phenomena in diverse MOF systems, both in the context of fundamental science and applications. 

List of Abbreviations

A                                          Junctions area (in cm2) 
AC                                          Alternating current
ALD                       
Atomic layer deposition

BDC                                       1,4-benzene dicarboxylate


28

CAFM                                    Conducting atomic force microscopy
CB                                          Conduction band
Cdl                                          Double layer capacitance (Farad)
CFSE                                      Crystal Field Stabilization Energy
CMOS                                    Complementary metal-oxide–semiconductor
CP                                          Conjugated polymers                 
CPs                                         Coordination polymers
CV                                         Cyclic voltammetry
CVD                                       Chemical vapor deposition
DC                                          Direct current
DFT                                        Density function theory
DMF                                       Dimethyl formamide
DOS                                        Density of states
DSBDC                                   2,5-disulfidobenzene-1,4-dicarboxylate
d                                              Thickness of the molecular layers between two conductors 
ECD                                        Elctrochromic devices
ECMOFs                                 Electrically conductive metal-organic frameworks
E-field                                     Electric field (V/cm)
E/M/E                                     Electrode/molecules/electrode
EIS                                          Electrical impedance spectroscopy
ET                                           Electron transfer 
Ea 
Activation energy (eV)  

EF
Fermi levels (eV)

Eg
Band gap energy (eV)

Fc                                           Ferrocene [Fe(cyclopentadiene)2]
FMOs                                     Frontier molecular orbitals
FTO                                        Fluorine doped tin oxide
FESEM                                  Field-emission electron microscopy
HHTP                                     2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene
HKUST                                  Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
HOMO                                   Highest occupied molecular orbitals
iMOFs                                    Intercalated metal-organic frameworks
ITO                                         Indium tin oxide
J                                              Current density (Amp/cm2)
Jo
pre-factor

KB   
Boltzmann constant

kₑₜ                                            Electron transfer rate
LbL
Layer-by-layer

LPE                                        Liquid-phase epitaxy
LUMO                                   Lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals
M-CAT-1                               metal-catecholate
M/I/M                                    Metal/insulator/metal
MJs                                         Molecular junctions
MOFs                                     Metal-organic frameworks
PET                                         Polyethylene terephthalate 
PPF                                         Pyrolyzed photoresist film 
PVD                                       Physical vapor deposition
PEDOT                                  Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
R                                          Resistance (in Ohm) 
RCA                                       Radio Corporation of America
Rct
Charge-transfer (or molecular) resistance (in Ohm)   

Rs
Contact resistance (in Ohm)


29

S                                             Siemence (Ohm-1)
SAMs                                     Self-assembled monolayers
SCPs                                      Surface coordination polymers  
SEM                                       Scanning electron microscopy    
SURMOFs                             Surface-confined metal–organic frameworks
T                                            Temperature (in K)
TCNQ                                   7,7,8,8-Tetracyanoquinodimethane
TDDFT                                  Time-dependent density functional theory   
THT                                       2,3,6,7,10,11-tripheylenehexathiolate
TTFTB                                   tetrathiafulvalene tetrabenzoate
UPS                                        Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
VAC                                      Vapor-assisted conversion 
VB                                         Valence band
vdP                                        Van der Pauw
WF                                        Work function (eV)  
XPS                                       X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ZIF                                        Zeolitic imidazolate framework 
𝛼
Potential well height (eV)

β                                           Charge-transport exponential decay constant 
σ        
Electrical conductivity (S cm-1)   

ɸT
Energy barrier for coherent tunneling (eV) 

Declaration of competing interest:

The authors declare no competing interest in this review article. 

Acknowledgments

RKP gratefully acknowledge the junior research fellowships from the Council of Scientific and 

Industrial Research, New Delhi. PJ acknowledges IIT Kanpur for providing Institute postdoctoral 

fellowship. PCM acknowledges financial support from the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, 

project NO.:01(3049)/21/EMR-II, New Delhi, India and the Science and Engineering Research Board 

(Grant No. CRG/2022/005325), New Delhi, India. The authors thank Dr. Vikram Singh for fruitful 

discussions.   

References 
[1]
O. M. Yaghi, G. Li, H. Li, Nature 1995, 378, 703–706.

[2]
H. Li, M. Eddaoudi, M. O’Keeffe, O. M. Yaghi, Nature 1999, 402, 276–279.

[3]
R. W. Day, D. K. Bediako, M. Rezaee, L. R. Parent, G. Skorupskii, M. Q. Arguilla, C. H. 
Hendon, I. Stassen, N. C. Gianneschi, P. Kim, M. Dincă, ACS Cent. Sci. 2019, 5, 1959–1964.

[4]
X. Zhang, R. Lin, J. Wang, B. Wang, B. Liang, T. Yildirim, J. Zhang, W. Zhou, B. Chen, Adv. 
Mater. 2020, 32, 1907995.

[5]
J. J. Li, Z. Bin Chen, Y. H. Wang, X. S. Zhou, L. Q. Xie, Z. Shi, J. X. Liu, J. W. Yan, B. W. 
Mao, Electrochim. Acta 2021, 389, 138760.

[6]
R. Haldar, L. Heinke, C. Wöll, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 1905227.

[7]
R. L. McCreery, Acc. Chem. Res. 2022, 55, 2766–2779.

[8]
E.-D. Fung, D. Gelbwaser, J. Taylor, J. Low, J. Xia, I. Davydenko, L. M. Campos, S. Marder, 
U. Peskin, L. Venkataraman, Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 2555–2561.

[9]
G. Skorupskii, K. N. Le, D. L. M. Cordova, L. Yang, T. Chen, C. H. Hendon, M. Q. Arguilla, 
M. Dincă, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2022, 119, e2205127119.


30

[10]
F. Saraci, V. Quezada-Novoa, P. R. Donnarumma, A. J. Howarth, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2020, 49, 
7949–7977.

[11]
J. Li, A. Kumar, B. A. Johnson, S. Ott, Nat. Commun. 2023, 14, 4388.

[12]
L. S. Xie, G. Skorupskii, M. Dincă, Chem. Rev. 2020, 120, 8536–8580.

[13]
L. Sun, M. G. Campbell, M. Dincă, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 3566–3579.

[14]
R. Freund, O. Zaremba, G. Arnauts, R. Ameloot, G. Skorupskii, M. Dincă, A. Bavykina, J. 
Gascon, A. Ejsmont, J. Goscianska, M. Kalmutzki, U. Lächelt, E. Ploetz, C. S. Diercks, S. 
Wuttke, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 23975–24001.

[15]
R. A. Kharod, J. L. Andrews, M. Dincă, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 2022, 52, 103–128.

[16]
C. Lu, B. Clayville, J. Y. Choi, J. Park, Chem 2023, 9, 2757–2770.

[17]
H. T. B. Pham, J. Y. Choi, X. Fang, A. Claman, S. Huang, S. Coates, L. Wayment, W. Zhang, J. 
Park, Chem 2024, 10, 199–210.

[18]
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, M. Paradinas, C. Ocal, B. Schüpbach, A. Terfort, D. Zacher, R. A. 
Fischer, C. Wöll, Nat. Mater. 2009, 8, 481–484.

[19]
J. Liu, C. Wöll, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46, 5730–5770.

[20]
X. Liu, M. Kozlowska, T. Okkali, D. Wagner, T. Higashino, G. Brenner‐Weiß, S. M. 
Marschner, Z. Fu, Q. Zhang, H. Imahori, S. Bräse, W. Wenzel, C. Wöll, L. Heinke, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 9590–9595.

[21]
J.-L. Zhuang, A. Terfort, C. Wöll, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2016, 307, 391–424.

[22]
T. P. Vello, M. Strauss, C. A. R. Costa, C. C. Corrêa, C. C. Bof Bufon, Phys. Chem. Chem. 
Phys. 2020, 22, 5839–5846.

[23]
S. J. Lee, S. G. Telfer, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2023, 62, e202306341.

[24]
Y. Su, G. Yuan, J. Hu, W. Feng, Q. Zeng, Y. Liu, H. Pang, Chem. Synth. 2022, 3, 1.

[25]
D.-H. Chen, H. Gliemann, C. Wöll, Chem. Phys. Rev. 2023, 4, 011305.

[26]
O. Shekhah, J. Liu, R. A. Fischer, C. Wöll, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40, 1081.

[27]
A. Schoedel, C. Scherb, T. Bein, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49, 7225–7228.

[28]
L. Heinke, C. Wöll, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1806324.

[29]
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, M. Paradinas, C. Ocal, B. Schüpbach, A. Terfort, D. Zacher, R. A. 
Fischer, C. Wöll, Nat. Mater. 2009, 8, 481–484.

[30]
V. Shrivastav, Mansi, B. Gupta, P. Dubey, A. Deep, W. Nogala, V. Shrivastav, S. Sundriyal, 
Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2023, 318, 102967.

[31]
J. Liu, S. Heidrich, J. Liu, B. Guo, M. Zharnikov, U. Simon, W. Wenzel, C. Wöll, ACS Appl. 
Nano Mater. 2021, 4, 522–528.

[32]
V. Singh, P. C. Mondal, A. K. Singh, M. Zharnikov, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2017, 330, 144–163.

[33]
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, S. Kowarik, F. Schreiber, M. Paulus, M. Tolan, C. Sternemann, F. Evers, 
D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer, C. Wöll, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, 15118–15119.

[34]
J. Liu, T. Wächter, A. Irmler, P. G. Weidler, H. Gliemann, F. Pauly, V. Mugnaini, M. 
Zharnikov, C. Wöll, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 9824–9830.

[35]
D. Zacher, O. Shekhah, C. Wöll, R. A. Fischer, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2009, 38, 1418–1429.

[36]
Z. Li, J. Liu, X. Yi, W. Wu, F. Li, Z. Zhu, H. Li, J. Shi, Y. Xu, F. Zhou, W. Liu, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2022, 32, 2109541.

[37]
A. Ulman, Chem. Rev. 1996, 96, 1533–1554.

[38]
K. L. Prime, G. M. Whitesides, Science 1991, 252, 1164–1167.

[39]
J. C. Love, L. A. Estroff, J. K. Kriebel, R. G. Nuzzo, G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev. 2005, 105, 
1103–1170.

[40]
M. Carlotti, S. Soni, S. Kumar, Y. Ai, E. Sauter, M. Zharnikov, R. C. Chiechi, Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 15681–15685.

[41]
P. C. Mondal, N. Kantor-Uriel, S. P. Mathew, F. Tassinari, C. Fontanesi, R. Naaman, Adv. 
Mater. 2015, 27, 1924–1927.

[42]
S. P. Mathew, P. C. Mondal, H. Moshe, Y. Mastai, R. Naaman, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 105, 
242408.

[43]
W. Du, T. Wang, H.-S. Chu, L. Wu, R. Liu, S. Sun, W. K. Phua, L. Wang, N. Tomczak, C. A. 


31

Nijhuis, Nat. Photonics 2016, 10, 274–280.

[44]
E. Coronado, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2020, 5, 87–104.

[45]
E. Zojer, A. Terfort, M. Zharnikov, Acc. Chem. Res. 2022, 55, 1857–1867.

[46]
R. Gupta, J. Pradhan, A. Haldar, C. Murapaka, P. C. Mondal, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2023, 62, 
e202307458.

[47]
R. Gupta, P. Jash, P. Sachan, A. Bayat, V. Singh, P. C. Mondal, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2021, 
60, 26904–26921.

[48]
R. Gupta, J. A. Fereiro, A. Bayat, A. Pritam, M. Zharnikov, P. C. Mondal, Nat. Rev. Chem.
2023, 7, 106–122.

[49]
R. Gupta, S. Bhandari, S. Kaya, K. P. Katin, P. C. Mondal, Nano Lett. 2023, 23, 10998–11005.

[50]
S. Takaishi, M. Hosoda, T. Kajiwara, H. Miyasaka, M. Yamashita, Y. Nakanishi, Y. Kitagawa, 
K. Yamaguchi, A. Kobayashi, H. Kitagawa, Inorg. Chem. 2009, 48, 9048–9050.

[51]
J. Nyakuchena, S. Ostresh, D. Streater, B. Pattengale, J. Neu, C. Fiankor, W. Hu, E. D. 
Kinigstein, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 
21050–21058.

[52]
T. Neumann, J. Liu, T. Wächter, P. Friederich, F. Symalla, A. Welle, V. Mugnaini, V. Meded, 
M. Zharnikov, C. Wöll, W. Wenzel, ACS Nano 2016, 10, 7085–7093.

[53]
E. M. Johnson, S. Ilic, A. J. Morris, ACS Cent. Sci. 2021, 7, 445–453.

[54]
L. S. Xie, G. Skorupskii, M. Dincǎ, Chem. Rev. 2020, 120, 8536–8580.

[55]
A. T. Castner, H. Su, E. Svensson Grape, A. K. Inge, B. A. Johnson, M. S. G. Ahlquist, S. Ott, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 5910–5920.

[56]
C. Li, L. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Li, J. Sun, J. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Fu, Nanoscale 2021, 13, 485–509.

[57]
M. Wang, R. Dong, X. Feng, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2021, 50, 2764–2793.

[58]
L. Sun, S. S. Park, D. Sheberla, M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 14772–14782.

[59]
J.-H. Dou, M. Q. Arguilla, Y. Luo, J. Li, W. Zhang, L. Sun, J. L. Mancuso, L. Yang, T. Chen, 
L. R. Parent, G. Skorupskii, N. J. Libretto, C. Sun, M. C. Yang, P. V. Dip, E. J. Brignole, J. T. 
Miller, J. Kong, C. H. Hendon, J. Sun, M. Dincă, Nat. Mater. 2021, 20, 222–228.

[60]
A. Pathak, J.-W. Shen, M. Usman, L.-F. Wei, S. Mendiratta, Y.-S. Chang, B. Sainbileg, C.-M. 
Ngue, R.-S. Chen, M. Hayashi, T.-T. Luo, F.-R. Chen, K.-H. Chen, T.-W. Tseng, L.-C. Chen, 
K.-L. Lu, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1721.

[61]
D.-G. Ha, M. Rezaee, Y. Han, S. A. Siddiqui, R. W. Day, L. S. Xie, B. J. Modtland, D. A. 
Muller, J. Kong, P. Kim, M. Dincă, M. A. Baldo, ACS Cent. Sci. 2021, 7, 104–109.

[62]
T. Chen, J.-H. Dou, L. Yang, C. Sun, N. J. Libretto, G. Skorupskii, J. T. Miller, M. Dincă, J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 12367–12373.

[63]
C. A. Fernandez, P. C. Martin, T. Schaef, M. E. Bowden, P. K. Thallapally, L. Dang, W. Xu, X. 
Chen, B. P. McGrail, Sci. Rep. 2015, 4, 6114.

[64]
R. A. Heintz, H. Zhao, X. Ouyang, G. Grandinetti, J. Cowen, K. R. Dunbar, Inorg. Chem. 1999, 
38, 144–156.

[65]
A. Nath, V. Kumar, A. Shukla, H. N. Ghosh, S. Mandal, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2023, 62, 
e202308034.

[66]
P. C. Mondal, P. Roy, D. Kim, E. E. Fullerton, H. Cohen, R. Naaman, Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 
2806–2811.

[67]
W. F. Koehl, B. B. Buckley, F. J. Heremans, G. Calusine, D. D. Awschalom, B. B. Buckley, G. 
D. Fuchs, L. C. Bassett, D. D. Awschalom, M. W. Doherty, N. B. Manson, P. Delaney, L. C. L. 
Hollenberg, N. Aslam, G. Waldherr, P. Neumann, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, A. L. Falk, V. V 
Dobrovitski, D. D. Awschalom, V. V Dobrovitski, D. M. Toyli, F. J. Heremans, D. D. 
Awschalom, N. K. Langford, M. A. Nielsen, F. J. Heremans, C. G. Yale, B. B. Buckley, D. D. 
Awschalom, C. D. Weis, G. D. Fuchs, T. Schenkel, D. D. Awschalom, P. Zoller, J. I. Cirac, D. 
Ballester, Y. M. Wang, V. Scarani, E. Solano, A. L. Falk, C. H. Lambert, S. Mangin, B. S. D. 
C. S. Varaprasad, Y. K. Takahashi, M. Hehn, M. Cinchetti, G. Malinowski, K. Hono, Y. 
Fainman, M. Aeschlimann, E. E. Fullerton, Science 2014, 345, 1337–1340.

[68]
M. Grzelczak, L. M. Liz-Marzán, R. Klajn, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019, 48, 1342–1361.


32

[69]
L. Wang, M. Hasanzadeh Kafshgari, M. Meunier, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 2005400.

[70]
A. Hagfeldt, M. Graetzel, Chem. Rev. 1995, 95, 49–68.

[71]
I. Hnid, A. Grempka, A. Khettabi, X. Sun, J. C. Lacroix, F. Lafolet, S. Cobo, J. Phys. Chem. C
2020, 124, 26304–26309.

[72]
A. Meeks, M. M. Lerch, T. B. H. Schroeder, A. Shastri, J. Aizenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 
144, 219–227.

[73]
R. Klajn, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 148–184.

[74]
C. Li, A. Iscen, L. C. Palmer, G. C. Schatz, S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 8447–
8453.

[75]
A. B. Kanj, A. Chandresh, A. Gerwien, S. Grosjean, S. Bräse, Y. Wang, H. Dube, L. Heinke, 
Chem. Sci. 2020, 11, 1404–1410.

[76]
E. A. Dolgopolova, V. A. Galitskiy, C. R. Martin, H. N. Gregory, B. J. Yarbrough, A. M. Rice, 
A. A. Berseneva, O. A. Ejegbavwo, K. S. Stephenson, P. Kittikhunnatham, S. G. Karakalos, M. 
D. Smith, A. B. Greytak, S. Garashchuk, N. B. Shustova, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 5350–
5358.

[77]
M. Liu, J. Wen, R. Xiao, R. Tan, Y. Qin, J. Li, Y. Bai, M. Xi, W. Yang, Q. Fang, L. Hu, W. Gu, 
C. Zhu, Nano Lett. 2023, 23, 5358–5366.

[78]
M. Mostaghimi, H. Pacheco Hernandez, Y. Jiang, W. Wenzel, L. Heinke, M. Kozlowska, 
Commun. Chem. 2023, 6, 275.

[79]
C. W. Kung, K. Otake, C. T. Buru, S. Goswami, Y. Cui, J. T. Hupp, A. M. Spokoyny, O. K. 
Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 3871–3875.

[80]
G. W. Peterson, D. T. Lee, H. F. Barton, T. H. Epps, G. N. Parsons, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2021, 6, 
605–621.

[81]
S. Begum, Z. Hassan, S. Bräse, M. Tsotsalas, Langmuir 2020, 36, 10657–10673.

[82]
A. Jadhav, K. Gupta, P. Ninawe, N. Ballav, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 2215–2219.

[83]
B. Dhara, S. S. Nagarkar, J. Kumar, V. Kumar, P. K. Jha, S. K. Ghosh, S. Nair, N. Ballav, J. 
Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016, 7, 2945–2950.

[84]
A. K. Chaudhari, S. Mukherjee, S. S. Nagarkar, B. Joarder, S. K. Ghosh, CrystEngComm 2013, 
15, 9465–9471.

[85]
X. Guo, L. Liu, Y. Xiao, Y. Qi, C. Duan, F. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2021, 435, 213785.

[86]
L.-M. Yang, G.-Y. Fang, J. Ma, E. Ganz, S. S. Han, Cryst. Growth Des. 2014, 14, 2532–2541.

[87]
N. Kolobov, M. G. Goesten, J. Gascon, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 26038–26052.

[88]
P. Thanasekaran, C.-H. Su, Y.-H. Liu, K.-L. Lu, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2021, 442, 213987.

[89]
N. Ogihara, N. Ohba, Y. Kishida, Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1603103.

[90]
P. Jash, R. K. Parashar, C. Fontanesi, P. C. Mondal, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022, 32, 2109956.

[91]
A. A. Talin, A. Centrone, A. C. Ford, M. E. Foster, V. Stavila, P. Haney, R. A. Kinney, V. 
Szalai, F. El Gabaly, H. P. Yoon, F. Léonard, M. D. Allendorf, Science 2014, 343, 66–69.

[92]
S. Jung, L. Huelsenbeck, Q. Hu, S. Robinson, G. Giri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13, 
10202–10209.

[93]
S. Gupta, H. Tanaka, T. Sato, S. Ye, B. K. Breedlove, H. Iguchi, S. Takaishi, Inorg. Chem.
2022, 61, 4414–4420.

[94]
X. Wu, H. Wu, S. Wu, Y. Sun, J. Zhu, Y. Zou, W. Xu, D. Zhu, Chem. Commun. 2022, 58, 
2702–2705.

[95]
K. Barthelet, J. Marrot, D. Riou, G. Férey, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2002, 41, 281–284.

[96]
C. R. Murdock, B. C. Hughes, Z. Lu, D. M. Jenkins, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2014, 258–259, 119–
136.

[97]
L. Sun, C. H. Hendon, M. Dincǎ, Dalt. Trans. 2018, 47, 11739–11743.

[98]
A. Mähringer, A. C. Jakowetz, J. M. Rotter, B. J. Bohn, J. K. Stolarczyk, J. Feldmann, T. Bein, 
D. D. Medina, ACS Nano 2019, 13, 6711–6719.

[99]
V. Rubio-Giménez, M. Galbiati, J. Castells-Gil, N. Almora-Barrios, J. Navarro-Sánchez, G. 
Escorcia-Ariza, M. Mattera, T. Arnold, J. Rawle, S. Tatay, E. Coronado, C. Martí-Gastaldo, 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1704291.


33

[100] B. Lerma-Berlanga, N. M. Padial, M. Galbiati, I. Brotons-Alcázar, J. Albero, H. García, A. 

Forment-Aliaga, C. R. Ganivet, C. Martí-Gastaldo, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2023, 33, 2302246.

[101] J. Zhang, G. Zhou, H. I. Un, F. Zheng, K. Jastrzembski, M. Wang, Q. Guo, D. Mücke, H. Qi, Y. 

Lu, Z. Wang, Y. Liang, M. Löffler, U. Kaiser, T. Frauenheim, A. Mateo-Alonso, Z. Huang, H. 
Sirringhaus, X. Feng, R. Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 23630–23638.

[102] D. Cai, M. Lu, L. Li, J. Cao, D. Chen, H. Tu, J. Li, W. Han, Small 2019, 15, 1902605.
[103] D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C.-J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn, M. Dincă, Nat. Mater. 2017, 

16, 220–224.

[104] M. Stodolka, J. Park, ACS Cent. Sci. 2022, 8, 877–879.
[105] T. Ohata, A. Nomoto, T. Watanabe, I. Hirosawa, T. Makita, J. Takeya, R. Makiura, ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13, 54570–54578.

[106] M. Stodolka, J. Y. Choi, X. Fang, C. Lu, H. T. B. Pham, B. Check, J. Park, ACS Mater. Lett.

2024, 6, 49–55.

[107] G. Skorupskii, G. Chanteux, K. N. Le, I. Stassen, C. H. Hendon, M. Dincă, Ann. N. Y. Acad. 

Sci. 2022, 1518, 226–230.

[108] G. Skorupskii, B. A. Trump, T. W. Kasel, C. M. Brown, C. H. Hendon, M. Dincă, Nat. Chem.

2020, 12, 131–136.

[109] L. S. Xie, E. V. Alexandrov, G. Skorupskii, D. M. Proserpio, M. Dincă, Chem. Sci. 2019, 10, 

8558–8565.

[110] G. Skorupskii, M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 6920–6924.
[111] J. L. Mancuso, A. M. Mroz, K. N. Le, C. H. Hendon, Chem. Rev. 2020, 120, 8641–8715.
[112] S. Halder, A. Dey, A. Bhattacharjee, J. Ortega-Castro, A. Frontera, P. P. Ray, P. Roy, Dalt. 

Trans. 2017, 46, 11239–11249.

[113] S. M. Yoon, S. C. Warren, B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53, 4437–4441.
[114] T. Nhu Hoang Tran, T. Hoang Le, H. Kieu Thi Ta, Y. Thi Dang, L. Thuy Ho Nguyen, T. Hoang 

Le Doan, C.-K. Fang, I.-S. Hwang, T. Bach Phan, N. K. Pham, Org. Electron. 2021, 93, 
106136.

[115] A. Prasoon, B. Dhara, D. Roy, S. Rana, S. Bhand, N. Ballav, Chem. Sci. 2019, 10, 10040–

10047.

[116] P. Sindhu, N. Ballav, Inorg. Chem. 2023, 62, 10887–10891.
[117] P. Sindhu, S. Saha, U. Bhoi, N. Ballav, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2024, 2312515.
[118] R. L. McCreery, Acc. Chem. Res. 2022, 55, 2766–2779.
[119] R. L. McCreery, A. J. Bergren, Adv. Mater. 2009, 21, 4303–4322.
[120] R. L. McCreery, H. Yan, A. J. Bergren, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013, 15, 1065–1081.
[121] H. Yan, A. J. Bergren, R. L. McCreery, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 19168–19177.
[122] R.L. McCreery, Chem. Rev. 2008, 108, 2646–2687.
[123] D. Feng, T. Lei, M. R. Lukatskaya, J. Park, Z. Huang, M. Lee, L. Shaw, S. Chen, A. A. 

Yakovenko, A. Kulkarni, J. Xiao, K. Fredrickson, J. B. Tok, X. Zou, Y. Cui, Z. Bao, Nat. 
Energy 2018, 3, 30–36.

[124] J. A. Cruz-Navarro, F. Hernandez-Garcia, G. A. Alvarez Romero, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2020, 

412, 213263.

[125] B. D. McCarthy, A. M. Beiler, B. A. Johnson, T. Liseev, A. T. Castner, S. Ott, Coord. Chem. 

Rev. 2020, 406, 213137.

[126] S. Bi, H. Banda, M. Chen, L. Niu, M. Chen, T. Wu, J. Wang, R. Wang, J. Feng, T. Chen, M. 

Dincă, A. A. Kornyshev, G. Feng, Nat. Mater. 2020, 19, 552–558.

[127] A. Nefedov, R. Haldar, Z. Xu, H. Kühner, D. Hofmann, D. Goll, B. Sapotta, S. Hecht, M. 

Krstić, C. Rockstuhl, W. Wenzel, S. Bräse, P. Tegeder, E. Zojer, C. Wöll, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 
2103287.

[128] T. Abu‐Husein, S. Schuster, D. A. Egger, M. Kind, T. Santowski, A. Wiesner, R. Chiechi, E. 

Zojer, A. Terfort, M. Zharnikov, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25, 3943–3957.

[129] A. Petritz, M. Krammer, E. Sauter, M. Gärtner, G. Nascimbeni, B. Schrode, A. Fian, H. Gold, 

A. Cojocaru, E. Karner‐Petritz, R. Resel, A. Terfort, E. Zojer, M. Zharnikov, K. Zojer, B. 


34

Stadlober, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 28, 1804462.

[130] R. Naaman, Y. Paltiel, D. H. Waldeck, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2020, 11, 3660–3666.
[131] R. Naaman, Y. Paltiel, D. H. Waldeck, Nat. Rev. Chem. 2019, 3, 250–260.
[132] J. M. Abendroth, D. M. Stemer, B. P. Bloom, P. Roy, R. Naaman, D. H. Waldeck, P. S. Weiss, 

P. C. Mondal, ACS Nano 2019, 13, 4928–4946.

[133] S. Mishra, A. K. Mondal, E. Z. B. Smolinsky, R. Naaman, K. Maeda, T. Nishimura, T. 

Taniguchi, T. Yoshida, K. Takayama, E. Yashima, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 14671–
14676.

[134] Y. Wang, H. Pan, Y. Jiang, J. Li, D. Lin, S. Li, Y. Wang, S. Sanvito, S. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. C

2024, DOI 10.1039/D3TC03719C.


