 
Page 1

Complexity, Disorder, and Functionality of Nanoscale Materials 

 

Xiaoming Mao,1,2 Nicholas Kotov1,3,4 

 

1 Center for Complex Particle Systems (COMPASS), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 

48109, USA; 

2 Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA; 

3 Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA; 

4 Department of Materials Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. 

Contact authors: maox@umich.edu;    kotov@umich.edu 

 
 

Abstract 

 

Nature hosts a wealth of materials showcasing intricate structures intertwining order, 

disorder, and hierarchy, delivering resilient multifunctionality surpassing perfect crystals or 

simplistic disordered materials. The engineering of such materials through nanoparticle assembly 

represents a burgeoning field, poised with potential to yield sustainable material systems rivaling 

or exceeding biological functionalities. This review delineates the fundamental concept of 

complexity in the context of nanoscale materials. It examines methodologies for characterizing 

complexity and functionality, explores pragmatic approaches to create complex nanomaterials, and 

offers a perspective on their potential applications, guiding the trajectory of future research 

endeavors. 

Key Words: self-assembly, complex, nanostructure, biomimetic 
 
 


 
Page 2

 
1. Introduction 

The need for complexity in materials engineering lies in the pursuit of optimized and robust 

solutions that address the hard challenges posed by environmental, economic, and social boundary 

conditions for their design. Sustainable materials must exhibit a difficult-to-achieve balance of 

properties, such as strength, flexibility, and recyclability, to meet the diverse needs of various 

applications while minimizing their environmental footprint.  It is becoming increasingly clear that 

traditional crystalline materials (characterized by perfect order) and amorphous materials 

(characterized by simple uncorrelated disorder) cannot address these needs. Learning from biology, 

incorporating complexity into material design by combining order, disorder, and hierarchical 

organization enables the development of innovative structures and compositions that mimic the 

structural designs of the most advanced and adaptable systems in nature – those of living organisms.  

To increase the complexity of human-made (or synthetic) materials, whether or not the repeating 

structural patterns found in living creatures are incorporated – is the best pathway to new materials 

with enhanced performance while reducing resource consumption. The complexity will also foster 

their resilience and adaptability of these materials, ensuring that they can withstand dynamic 

environmental conditions and evolving technological requirements. Embracing complexity is, 

therefore, pivotal for the development of materials that are foundational for a sustainable future.  

The subject of complexity is significant and timely for nanostructured materials because 

they: (1) have an intrinsic ability to self-assemble into complex structures; (2) require deliberate 

design of intricate architectures to best ensure their properties like conductivity, mechanical 

strength, and catalytic activity; and (3) provide the unique opportunity to observe the emergence 

of complexity over multiple scales due to high electronic contrast and microscopic observations 

of nanoparticle (NP) dynamics. As the design of complex self-assembled nanostructures continues 


 
Page 3

to advance to benefit energy, environmental, water, biomedical, information and other 

technologies, a quantitative approach to complexity engineering of nanostructures becomes the 

forefront of materials science and technology. 

The objectives of this perspective are threefold: (1) to define the notion of complexity in 

the context of materials; (2) to establish and validify methodology(ies) of its quantification; and 

(3) to provide practical pathways for further scientific studies of complex particles, composites, 

assemblies, and biomaterials and their technical and biomedical realizations.  

2. Historic Perspective: What is Complexity?   

The subject of complexity has many faces. It represents a ubiquitous yet vague notion that 

does not have a universal agreed-upon definition based on the physical description of matter.  The 

earliest thought about complexity traces back to Aristotle, who defined complexity as “The whole 

is more than the sum of its parts” (Metaphysics, Vol. VII). Note that this is a function-based 

conceptualization of complexity, which can theoretically guide the construction of many complex 

systems and materials. 

 The first modern attempts to transition from colloquial to formal definitions of complexity 

are associated with the development of programming and information theory. The works of 

Kolmogorov,1 Solomonoff,2 and Chaitin3 in the early 1960s described complexity as the minimal 

algorithm required to fully reproduce an object and its information content. Although all three of 

these scientists worked on this subject independently, this concept is often referred to as 

Kolmogorov complexity; we will refer to it as algorithmic and information complexity or AIC.  The 

practical realization of AIC is a minimal set of symbols that fully encodes the composition and 

structure of an object. The AIC of a macroscale material reflects the minimal number of structural 

rules and parameters capable of describing its current organization and future dynamics. 


 
Page 4

Repeatable patterns found in crystals, dramatically simplify the algorithms (rules) describing their 

structural organization, and thus AIC.  At the same time, randomness of the atomic structures of 

the materials increases AIC.   

The relationship between Shannon information, algorithm design, and complexity was 

further explored in the 1980s in the publications by S. Wolfram in 1984,4 and P. Grassberger in 

1986.5   The theories of cellular automata, chaos, and fractals brought about a different notion of 

complexity in the studies by A. B. Çambel in 1992,6 S. A. Kauffman in 1993,7 M. Gell-Mann in 

1994,8 Lopez-Ruiz et al. in 1995,9 and J. Holland in 1995.10   Using information theory and AIC 

as stepping stones, their papers and books promulgated the concept of complexity as a combination 

of order and disorder (COD).  Perfect periodicity and long-range order reduce the number of rules 

governing the organization of an object.  Thus, crystalline materials, in the context of both COD 

and AIC, are much less complex than glassy materials.   However, Çambel, Kauffman, and Gell-

Mann treated randomness as one of the algorithmic rules governing the organization of a system. 

A fully stochastic system, therefore, becomes noncomplex and the information content of two 

random distributions of atoms becomes identical despite the difference in their coordinates, which 

is in full agreement with physical realities of large atomic structures.  An increase of a system’s 

randomness will therefore constitute a decrease in COD as opposed to an increase of AIC.  Another 

difference between these two concepts is that COD is no longer bound to any computational 

algorithms.   

The change in physical interpretation of complexity enabled these scientists and engineers 

to explore the relations between complexity and “big” subjects, such as the emergence of life and 

evolution of the universe. Elegant, instructive, and quantitative insights into the relationship 

between complexity and thermodynamics were also made.   The direct connection between the 


 
Page 5

complex multifractal systems of particles and their entropy and enthalpy were made by Stanley 

and Meakin in 198811  The relationships between statistical thermodynamics and complexity were 

expanded by Lopez-Ruiz et al.  in 19959  who showed the rise of complexity as the system moves 

away from equilibrium. The physics of complexity was further elaborated by P. Bak12, C. Tang, 

and K. Wiesenfeld who promulgated the idea of “self-organized criticality” (SOC). This 

phenomenon describes a dynamic macroscopic system that spontaneously evolves towards 

criticality and scale invariance, which is considered as a mechanism for the emergence of 

complexity in chaotic and noisy environments.  

The interest in complexity continued between 1990 and 2000 and expanded to the structural 

complexity found chemical and biological matter. These studies included brain and neuronal 

networks,13 biological organisms,14 chemical systems,1516,17 and nanoscale structures.18  

Particularly significant was an idea that complexity describes the structural sophistication of matter 

based on functionality rather than information content,19 which was also advocated by Kauffman7 

and Gell-Mann19 Many of these advances in the theory of complexity were stimulated by 

organization of the Santa Fe Institute - a private research organization focused on understanding 

complex systems that Gell-Mann helped to establish.   

3. Complexity and Functionality  

3.1. Functionality-based complexity 

Expanding the ideas of Aristotle, Grassberger, Holland, and Gell-Mann about an effective and 

function-based complexity, let us consider the reasons for complexity as a design metric for 

materials. The best examples of amazingly complex and universally useful chemical structures 

excelling in both performance and longevity are biological composites.  They can be found in all 

parts of the biosphere and are typically made from renewable earth-abundant nanoscale 


 
Page 6

components, which makes a particularly good case for complexity in the context of sustainability.  

High-performance biological composites are exemplified by seashell nacre,20 tooth enamel,21 

articular cartilage,22 tree roots,23 (Figure 1) and animal bones24 (Figure 2).  Their complexity 

manifests in sophisticated geometrical patterns, multiplicity of the components, abundance of 

interfaces, and multiple scales of organization. All these structural aspects are needed for them to 

perform their intended duties while reducing the energy burden on the organism and maximizing 

access to the material’s components. An iconic example of complex biomaterials are bones with 

organizational motifs spanning multiple scales from 10-10 m to 101 m with all of them being 

essential for their combination of functionalities that include lightweight load-bearing, stem cell 

differentiation, immune response modulation, and others (Figure 2).25,26 At the atomic and 

nanoscale levels, bones are based on NPs with distinct crystallinity27 The NP shape is asymmetric, 

and they are exceptionally polydisperse28  The mesoscale organization of the NPs in different 

projections includes mutual alignment and complex stochastic patterns with distinct helicity 

(Figure 2 C,D).28 The microscale and submillimeter scale organization display characteristic 

diameter of pores, asymmetry of niches, and thickness of pore walls.29  What emerges from an 

overview of these and other biomaterials as well as their human-made replicas is that the 

organizational pattern and constitutive building blocks can be different, but the combination of 

order and disorder is universal.   

 

Figure 1. Complex biomaterials.  Scanning electron microscopy images of (A) nacre;20 (B) 
tooth enamel;21 (C) articular cartilage;22 and (D) tree roots (poplar).23 

 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 


 
Page 7

The omnipresence of the correlated disorder and its direct relevance to the complexity and 

performance of the materials can be seen from different standpoints and multiple scales of 

organization.   As depicted in Figures 1 and 2, the architecture of load-bearing materials exhibits 

several universal structural traits: (1) Atomic periodicity of NPs is paired with amorphous layer at 

their interfaces30 (2) Mineral components display consistent anisotropy, but they are never the 

same size or shape; (3) Mesoscale alignment of nanorods or nanofibers is distinct and common, 

but it is also variable and imperfect even for tissue segments with similar functional requirements; 

and (4) Microscale and millimeter scale patterns have non-random pore dimensions, but their 

percolating patterns and wall connectivity are seemingly disordered. Identical observations can be 

extended to all high-performance biomaterials.  

 

The key reason for universality of these structural traits is that the combination of order 

and disorder enables hierarchical organization, which would be otherwise impossible in a perfectly 

ordered atomic or molecular, nanoscale, or microscale crystal.  Disorder is precisely what is needed 

to accommodate the scale-dependent ‘switch’ from one organizational pattern to another required 

for survival-critical physical properties determined organization of matter at different scales, for 

example, hardness and toughness, or light scattering and nutrient transport.  

Figure 2. Examples of hierarchical organization of complex biomaterials.  Transmission (A-D) 
and scanning (E) electron microscopy images of bone structure at different scales: (A, B) 
constitutive hydroxyapatite nanoparticles; 25, 26 (C, D) mesoscale assemblies of nanoparticles in 
different projections; 26 and (D) microscale organization of hydroxyapatite nanocomposite.29   

 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 


 
Page 8

 
Note that the intricate multiscale organization have, however, enthalpic and entropic 

penalties. Noncomplex materials, for instance, perfectly crystalline minerals or perfectly 

disordered glasses, are more advantageous with respect to the free energy costs and component 

availability. Nevertheless, the materials with high complexity are the ones that make a difference 

between existence and non-existence for living organisms. They support life because they excel 

not in only one task but in multiple ones at the same time.  Nacre, enamel, bone, cartilage, etc. 

require complexity because they must display high strength, high toughness, high ionic selectivity, 

high flux of nutrients, low weight longevity, and selectivity in cellular adhesion – all at the same 

time.  Monolithic blocks of calcium fluorophosphate, collagen, or their mixture exhibiting 

complete disorder or perfect order (crystallinity) will not provide the hardness, strength, and 

longevity of enamel.21 This property set requires it to be made from hydroxyapatite nanorods 

oriented along the dominant direction and interlaced with protein cushions.   

Besides examples from nature, there are numerous materials, and more generally, materials 

systems, that are neither periodic nor random, which are essential for their performance, robustness, 

and manufacturing. They span a vast range of technologies from neuromorphic computers to 

desalination membranes.    

Considering the prior studies of complexity in the context of ‘big questions’, a parallel can 

be made with other complex systems evolving under multiple boundary conditions modelled by 

Kauffman31 and Holland10  Similarly, complexity in biomaterials emerges because they must 

perform multiple tasks and conform to multiple functional requirements that would otherwise be 

impossible to fulfil. 

In the context of materials complexity can, therefore, be defined as purposeful 

performance-oriented structural organization of matter, combining order and disorder. This 


 
Page 9

definition is applicable to biological and non-biological materials, static or dynamic matter, and 

open or closed systems.  It also incorporates atomic, nanoscale, mesoscale, microscale, and 

macroscale structures relevant to understanding the interactive and malleable hierarchy in living 

and technological systems.32  The combination of order and disorder makes possible combining 

different structural motifs at multiple scales, which de facto incorporates the notion of “The whole 

is more than the sum of its parts,” where at each scale, bringing together different parts of the 

material gives rise to new complex properties, maximizing functionality.   

3.2. Quantification of Complexity  

 
The approach to complexity as a parameter relating materials organization and 

performance can be described as a generic “Goldilocks” curve (Figure 3).  Based on the necessity 

Figure 3. Effective complexity peaks between ordered and disordered limits, defining the 
“Goldilocks” zone where complex biological structures arise with outstanding features (top 
row). Simple measures of information entropy monotonically increase with disorder. 
However the effective, functionality-based complexity peaks in the middle.  Functional 
complexity of NP self-assembly (images, middle row) can be studied using theoretical 
approaches such as geometrically frustrated polyhedral assembly (bottom row).  


 
Page 10

of materials structure to satisfy multiple requirements giving rise to multiple properties, the 

complexity and performance reaches a maximum somewhere between order (i.e., perfect 

continuous crystallinity) and disorder (i.e., uncorrelated isotropic randomness).8  The earliest 

version of such a curve was found in Huberman and Hoggs’ 1986 publication.33  Similar curves 

also appeared in subsequent publications by Lopez-Ruiz et al. in 1995,9 B. Edmonds in 1995,34 

and Tononi at al. in 199813 Analogous conceptual dependencies between complexity and regularity 

also appear in very different subjects, such as art.35,36    

We note that the axis of complexity in all the Goldilocks curves proposed in this field lack 

a quantitative assessment of complexity. This vagueness represents a major roadblock for future 

studies and, theoretically, both AIC and COD interpretations of complexity can be applied to bring 

these curves closer to reality.  

Multiple approaches to quantify complexity have been proposed in the past.37  The string 

of symbols with minimal possible length for an ideal Turing computer to reproduce an object was 

a logical measure of AIC.  One obvious problem here is that AIC is dependent on a programing 

language.  A bigger problem, however, is that AIC is incomputable for any realistic object,38 which 

becomes particularly obvious for dynamic macromolecular structures relevant for chemistry or 

biology, as exemplified by a nanoscale particle or a polymer chain surrounded by water molecules.   

On the positive side, AIC can be related to entropy and entropy-related measure(s) of complexity 

were proposed by Grassberger39,Rajaram, and Castellani.40  AIC inspired measures of complexity 

based on statistics integrated with thermodynamics were put forward by Crutchfield and Young in 

198941  as well as by Lopez-Ruiz, Mancini, and Calbet in 1995.9   

Notwithstanding the significance of entropy and information content to practicality, the 

examples of biomaterials shown in Figures 1-2 indicate that measures of COD would be a better 


 
Page 11

choice for materials engineering than AIC.  Measures of COD based on geometrical parameters of 

the system were proposed by Tononi et al. in 1994,13,42 Ay et al. in 201143  and Wolf et al. in 201814 

Notably, all these approaches were inspired by biological systems.  Cumulatively, they can be 

described as different methods to divide the actual physical system (Tononi, Ay) or its 

photographic image (Wolf, Katsnelson, Koonin) into parts followed by testing whether the 

complete system (object, image, etc.) has more information than a sum of its parts.  In this regard, 

one system is higher in complexity when its generalized functionality is higher than that of another 

system. This approach and its different interpretations capture the idea of and can theoretically 

lead to a quantitative Goldilocks curve.  

3.2. Complexity of Nanoscale Assemblies 

Self-assembled nanostructures can serve as a convenient model to further our 

understanding of how complexity and functionalities are related. Varied degrees of order and 

disorder are typical for NPs and other nanoscale structures.  The latter includes a range of structures 

from nearly perfect colloidal crystals made from NPs with simple singular functionalities to 

imperfect but multifunctional assemblies from polydispersed NPs and to random agglomerates 

with limited functionalities. Additionally, the structures of inorganic nanoscale assemblies can be 

evaluated by various microscopy methods because of their higher contrast compared to of 

inorganic materials.  Finally, the variety of nanoscale materials in biology and technology is 

enormous.  The creation of a universal approach to their design that incorporates multiple 

requirements would significantly simplify the job of materials scientists.   

Prior studies of complexity were not adapted to nanoscale structures in part because a 

methodology for the structural description of nanoscale systems that combined both order and 

disorder had not yet been defined.14,43  In one recent case, the architecture of nanoassemblies were 


 
Page 12

analyzed using the toolbox of Graph Theory (GT).44  In this approach, NPs are represented as 

nodes, while the structural connectivity between them (both static and dynamic) is represented by 

edges (Figure 4).  This general description can be universally applied across all material platforms 

with nanoscale organization. Importantly, the different shapes of the NPs, despite their variability 

in size, can be represented using simple GT formalisms.  For example, nanospheroids, nanorods, 

and nanoplatelets can be described as fully connected K1, K2, and K3 graphs.  Chiral 3D structures 

with mirror asymmetric shapes can be represented by K5 graphs. All these representations of the 

constituent nanoscale building blocks correspond to the graphs of minimal complexity.  

Simplification of graph representation of the nanoscale components is needed to have consider 

contribution from unifying connectivity patterns between the building blocks.  This approach 

Figure 4. (A) Basic concept of GT description of NP assemblies. NPs with more complex 
geometry are represented as Kn complete graphs with increasing number of nodes 
depending on the shape and symmetry elements.5 (B) TEM image of chains of CdTe NPs 
forming a network and (C) their GT representation based on Kn formalism. 

B 

C 

A 


 
Page 13

allows for the calculation of the values of complexity that are most applicable to both fundamental 

studies and practical implementations. 

 
GT models of nanoscale structures and nanoassemblies can be extracted from their TEM 

and SEM images (Figure 4B, C).45  Most certainly, high-resolution 3D reconstructions of 

nanoscale materials are preferred and currently available in many research centers and universities.  

Note that graph descriptions of nanoscale structures can be applied to both size-limited nanoscale 

assemblies from NPs, nanorods and nanoplatelets, such as supraparticles, as well as to 

(semi)infinite materials, such as composites, gels, etc.  The GT approach can be extended to 

continuous materials, such as nacre, enamel, and bone.44 For long-range structural patterns with 

high stochasticity, descriptions of nanoassemblies can be made in terms of random graphs and 

networks.46–48     

For a complexity measure to serve as design parameter for materials with specific property 

sets it must reflect the hierarchical organization of the materials system. The combination of order 

and disorder can be used as a tool to attain the functionalities with different scale-dependences and 

those controlled by parameters in molecular, nanometer, micrometer, and other scales. The GT 

toolbox can describe the hierarchical organization of matter as graphs also.  For example, the 

atomic scale structure of NPs, their interface with polymers, and the particle chains that form the 

polymer can be captured by GT. While possible and practical, such descriptions have not been yet 

realized and will require the introduction of additional variables such as nodal and edge weights 

that can establish the specific scale and geometry.    

 
Once a representative graph of a nanostructure, or more generally, a material, is created, 

its complexity can be calculated.  However, there is no universally accepted measure of complexity 

(Section 3.2).  Additionally, measures developed in the classical studies of complexity have not 


 
Page 14

yet been applied to materials – nanoscale or otherwise.  Several complexity measures could 

potentially be applicable to nanostructures.  Among them are fractal exponents that describe self-

similarity across the scales calculated from the GT representations.49–53The quantitative parameters 

of resulting fractal exponents, that is, the pre-factor and fractal dimension, D, are often associated 

with complexity54 but neither pre-factor nor fractal dimension are measures of AIC or COD.  The 

concept of singular fractality could be suitable for the description of hierarchical organization of 

materials when the patterns are repeatable at different scales.  However, this is not true for the 

actual materials (Figure 1,2).  One of the reasons for combining order and disorder is the need to 

change structural patterns for different scales to accommodate realization of different properties.  

Organizational patterns with multiple structural motifs can sometimes be described by a 

single fractal exponent, such as perfectly ordered fractals represented by Sierpinski triangles, and 

random isotropic fractals represented by diffusion-limited agglomeration structures.  In a more 

general case, one can use a spectrum of fractal dimensions treated as scale- and location-dependent 

variables. These methods to describe repeatable patterns are referred to as multifractals and 

multifractal spectra.55,56 They can be a promising step toward structure-property relations for 

complex materials. While applications of multifractality to materials science are being developed, 

dependences of macroscale properties on multifractality spectrum extracted from GT 

representations can be a promising new path for research.57–59 

Another approach is the development of specialized indexes, such as the complexity index 

(CI).44 60  The calculation of CI is based on GT representations of nanoscale structures for which 

the complex organization of the material combining order and disorder are described based on the 

Kn formalism for nanoscale structures.  The use of Kn enables one to abstract the structural 

imperfections and variability of the components that make up the material.  CI for nanostructures 


 
Page 15

is designed to identify the repeatable patterns of their organization.  For example, the structure of 

NP chain can be represented by a simple graph formula in Figure 4C.   The similarity with 

common chemical formulae is not accidental because they are indeed atomic graphs.  The structure 

of more complex nanostructured materials, such as supraparticles from achiral nanosheets and 

nacre can be represented by the GT formulae in Figure 4A, where the platelets or platelet-like 

components are represented by K3 graphs.  Two key differences with atomic graphs are that (1) 

the NPs can have variable shapes including those that are atypical for atoms (Figure 4A); (2) 

equality of sizes is not required and, unlike atoms, individual NPs are expected to have 

imperfections.  

Their repeatable organizational pattern of nacre or nacre-like man-made composites, that 

is, the stacking of nanoplatelets with organic layers in between, is uniformly described by a graph 

where K3 segments are interconnected by additional edges (Figure 5A).  Alternatively, the random 

distribution of nanoplatelets in supraparticles with repeatable nonrandom size is described by the 

loop with K3 segment inside (Figure 5B).  GT representations of other complex particles both 

man-made (Figure 5C-D) and natural (Figure 5E) can also be built.  CI is then calculated as the 

limited sum of (½)n progression for the total number of edges connecting each type of node to it 

nearest neighbors, next-nearest-neighbors, second-next-nearest neighbors, etc.  If there are more 

than one type of node, the CI for each of them are added together. Calculations of CI were first 

used when the materials with a combination of order and disorder, for instance, nacre with 

polydispersed platelets with stochastic yet nonrandom shapes were considered.44 Similarly, 

complex hedgehog supraparticles with randomly organized cores and a non-randomly organized 

halo of spikes were successfully described by GT formalism where random portions of the particle 

with yen nonrandom diameter was described by loops.   


 
Page 16

CI can serve as a measure of COD complexity.  For complex particles, the rise in CI can be directly 

associated with their multifunctionality, and potentially construct a Goldilocks curve.  The rise in 

functionality is characterized by the multitude of properties controllable by organization at these 

scales.    The addition of atomic scale that describes the nanoparticles, nanorods, nanosheets, and 

the heterogeneity over the volume of the supraparticles, will increase the degrees of freedom, the 

number of nodes in GT representations, and thus, the measure of complexity.  

Concomitantly, this will also increase the number of properties that can be combined for a particle 

and the range of parameters that one property can be tuned independently of others. A recent 

proposal in this workspace was to perform real space renormalization on images and calculate the 

distances (i.e., dissimilarities) between images across consecutive steps of renormalization, and 

use the sum of these distances across the scales to define a multiscale structural complexity.61 This 

definition captures the variation of the structure as one zooms into smaller and smaller scales, 

which aligns with our definition of complexity in nanomaterials in terms of structural variation 

across scales. 

Figure 5.  Structural images (top) and GT representation (bottom) for various nanoassemblies 
(A) nacre-like composite represented  stacks of graphite oxide nanoplatelets; (B) supraparticles 
from achiral Au-S nanosheets; (C) kayak particle from achiral Au-S nanosheets; (D) coccolith-
like particles from chiral Au-S nanosheets, (E) skeleton of the algae Syracosphaera Anthos 
containing chiral microsheets.  


 
Page 17

4. Pathways to Complexity  

How can one create a complex material?  Answers to this question hold the key to technologically 

friendly pathways to scalable complex materials that exhibit a desired set of properties. Although 

many views on complexity have been proposed and many methods to predictively describe 

complex systems have been postulated, the actual pathways to real materials from real 

components that exhibit intended complex behavior and an intended set of properties, have been 

much less explored.  As often is the case with such difficult problems, some lessons can be learned 

from examining complex materials in nature. Most of them are nanostructured, self-assembled, 

and chiral.  In this section we review several models that connect these characteristics with COD 

complexity.  

Chirality: Chirality, or mirror asymmetry, arises from the spatial arrangement and chemical 

distinction of atoms, molecules, nanoparticles, supraparticles, etc. This geometric characteristic 

and associated parameters introduce a uniquely practical dimension to the topic of material 

complexity. In chemistry and biology, it is widely accepted that chiral components self-assemble 

into intricate and sophisticated structures, which often exhibit properties that are very distinct from 

their initial components. Chiral molecules and particles can also be synergistically combined with 

non-chiral counterparts. The arrangement of chiral entities, such as molecules or NPs, can lead to 

the emergence of materials with complex helical or twisted structures.62  

 
Understanding the relationship between the complexity of desirable materials and the 

chirality of their components provides a path to synthesize materials at large scale while carefully 

tuning their mechanical, optical, electronic, and biological properties. Although publications of 

empirical observations of complex materials with chiral molecules and particles are copious, the 

physicochemical mechanisms leading to their geometrical complexity are still puzzling.  This is 


 
Page 18

particularly true for nonuniformly sized nanoscale components that are essential for the scalability 

of certain processes. A direct inquiry into the dependence of chirality and complexity was made 

using a model system of supraparticles (SPs) from polydispersed gold thiolate NPs with the shape 

of nanoplatelets (K3). Because the surfaces of the NPs were coated with L- or D-cysteine (Cys) 

ligands, the flexible nanoplatelets twisted to become chiral. The resulting SPs then required K5 

representation in the GT models.  There was a clearly visible increase in the complexity of the 

self-assembled SPs as chirality increased as a result of changing the L/D-ratio from 1 to 10 (Figure 

6).  The calculation of CI values for SPs of different morphologies made at various temperatures 

and L/D-ratios demonstrated highly non-linear growth of complexity as the chirality of the system 

increases.   

This dependence can be understood in the context of competitive restrictions on the short- 

and long-range self-assembly patterns that emerge for systems with different chirality.  

Electrostatic repulsion between the components engenders the nearly universal restrictions that 

Figure 6.  (A) Phase diagram observed for complex particles from chiral Au-S nanoplatelets.  
The blue and red phases on the top and bottom correspond to coccolith-like particles with high 
complexity in Fig. 1b. (B) Mapping of CI values on phase diagram in (A). The highest EC 
values are observed for the part of the phase diagram where a triple point specific to critical 
states is observed. χ is the enantiomeric excess of chiral amino acids coating the Au-S platelets. 
tn is the temperature of the reaction.   
 

A
B
CI


 
Page 19

impose limits on particle size, which is common for SPs, vesicles, micelles, inkjet droplets, 

exosomes, intracellular compartments, etc. The complex nanoscale chiral architectures emerge 

only when restrictions are multiple, anisotropic, and competitive.  What is essential is that energy 

gains and penalties associated with these restrictions on the self-assembly of building blocks must 

be comparable.  

When none of the competing interactions and restrictions dominate, NP self-assembly 

acquires complex architectures to negotiate these conflicting requirements. For chiral NPs, the 

anisotropic restrictions associated with electrostatic repulsion are intertwined with those from 

hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic attraction, meta-ion coordination, and elastic deformation. The 

first order assessment of characteristic energies of these interactions when competitive restrictions 

result in complex architectures is 50-60 kJ/mol.44 Since the shape, charge, elasticity, hydrogen 

bond density, and composition of NPs change with L/D ratio and temperature, the characteristic 

energies also change. Thus, chirality provides the essential structural element at angstrom and 

nanometer scales for multiple restrictions to become competitive. Also important, chirality is a 

scaleless geometric property and, therefore, under favorable conditions it can be transferred from 

scale to scale and to higher scales, thereby ensuring competitive restrictions and complexity 

evolution as the size of the objects become larger.  

The practicality of the chirality pathway to complexity can be highlighted by the fact that 

the polydispersity of NPs does not impede the formation of complex architectures. For Au-Cys 

NPs with extremely high polydispersity, the complexity of the resulting SPs is considerably higher 

than those formed from other NPs. Polydispersity may actually increase the complexity of the 

supraparticles, because the presence of smaller and larger NPs with stronger and weaker twists 

enables the growing assembly to select site-suitable NPs from the mixture.63  The uniqueness and 


 
Page 20

tunability of the optical, chemical, colloidal, and potentially biological properties of these complex 

SPs suggest their broad application in asymmetric catalysis and polarization-based optoelectronics.  

The strong effect of chirality enables the scalable preparation and controllable preparation of 

complex particles in a sustainable manner and helps us to understand the origin of the astounding 

diversity and sophistication of biological nanocomposites (Figures 1,2).  Further directions in this 

area may also include evaluation of the relations between COD complexity and chirality measures, 

exemplified by Hausdorff distance, Osipov-Pickup-Dunmur index, Continuous Chirality Measure, 

and Helicity measure. Also note that Harris, Kamien, and Lubensky showed that, instead of a 

simple “handedness” parameter, an infinite hierarchy of chiral moments can be utilized as chirality 

measures. 64  

Spatiotemporal chaos: The term chaos refers to persistent random behavior resulting from 

deterministic equations with initial conditions.  The logistic map is perhaps the simplest example 

of chaos where complexity emerges from one simple iterative mapping of 𝑥!"# = 𝑟 𝑥!(1 − 𝑥!) 

for 𝑟 > 𝑟$ ≈ 3.57 through the onset of chaos, where orbits become irregular and small variations 

in the initial conditions changes drastically over time (Figure 7A).65 In this case, AIC complexity 

is small because the pattern is generated from a simple equation.  COD complexity is, nevertheless, 

 

Figure 7. (A) Deterministic chaos from the logistic map. (B) Coexistence of spiral pattern and 
spatiotemporal chaos in a Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction.66  (C) Cascading scales in 
turbulence67 (D) SOC nanoassembly of neuromorphic elements85  


 
Page 21

high with cascading time scales, where temporal correlation function vanishes at long times, 

indicating that the information of the initial conditions is “forgotten”.   

The more generalized concept, spatiotemporal chaos, describes extended systems 

involving many interacting degrees of freedom, and finite correlation in both time and space 

controlled by the time elapsed from the onset of chaos. Having “finite correlation in both time and 

space” is common in systems with stochasticity, such as statistical mechanics, but spatiotemporal 

chaos refers to how this phenomenon comes from nonlinearity, even when the system is fully 

deterministic. This concept is directly relevant for physical, chemical, and biological systems 

where complex spatial patterns arise from simple nonlinear dynamics rules.66  Other well-known 

examples include turbulence67 and spatial temporal phases in chemical pattern formation systems68 

(Figure 7B,C).   

The connections between spatiotemporal chaos and complex biosystems in nature have 

been extensively discussed in prior studies.  There is a high degree of certainty that spatiotemporal 

chaos can be a realistic pathway to complex materials.  Similar to many cases of complex materials, 

this research direction remains largely unexplored for nanostructures and other materials.   

Geometric frustration: A new route to complex structures that has been identified recently is 

geometric frustration between the building blocks, which can take the form of frustrated attraction 

and repulsion (Figure 8A), or unfitting geometric shapes.  Inability of the geometrical shapes to 

perfectly tile surfaces and fill 3D volumes without gaps or overlaps, defines the commonly 

accepted understanding of geometric frustration, and leads to complex assemblies.  Geometric 

frustration has far-reaching influences in statistical mechanics and condensed matter physics in 

many contexts from glass transitions, spin glasses, ergodicity breaking, frustrated magnetism, and 

quantum spin liquid states, giving rise to an abundance of complex phenomena. It has also been 


 
Page 22

considered as a plausible component in conjunction with SOC of biological complexity,14  where 

geometric frustrations and other restrictions lead to both compartmentalization and rugged fitness 

landscapes with non-ergodic evolution. 

Geometric frustration may be caused by chirality (Figure 8B,C). A good example is the 

assembly of twisted bundles described by Grason and Bruinsma in 2007  (Figure 8C), where the 

relative twist between neighboring fibers in a bundle assembly leads to the overall helicity.69 The 

authors showed that accumulation of stress and self-limited growth are key outcomes of geometric 

frustration in self-assembly. More generally, geometric frustration can be viewed in a broad class 

of “shape incompatibility” problems, which show up in many different forms, from ill-fitting 

polygons  (Figure 8D)70 to twisting cubes71 and frustrated tubes.72Among these challenges, a new 

route to mathematically formulate and solve the problem was to find the non-Euclidean space 

where the shapes perfectly tessellate.  This theory has been applied to tetrahedra, for which the 

ideal tessellation is the 600-cell characterized by positively curved 3D space (the 3-sphere, or S-

3), which  converges to assembled helicoids, in agreement with experiments  (Figure 8E).73 The 

generality of the theory was illustrated by its application to icosahedra, which tessellates negatively 


 
Page 23

curved space (the hyperbolic 3-space, or H-3), as well as rationalizing Euclidean space self-

assembly.74  

Far-from-equilibrium assembly: Kinetic processes far from equilibrium (FFE) generate particle-

based structures combining order and disorder as exemplified by snowflakes and fractal 

nanoassemblies.75  These are distinct from aggregates formed during spatiotemporal chaos where 

nonlinear interactions lead to complexity. Fast growth and self-regulation via feedback, 

demonstrated by exhaustion of the particle supplies, are the main mechanisms for complex 

assembly in FFE processes. A variety of experimental systems of this sort have been explored, 

although a unified theoretical framework is still lacking, due to the challenging nature of non-

equilibrium statistical mechanics. 

 

Figure 8. (A) Self-assembly of uniformly sized supraparticles from spheroidal NPs.  (B) 
Packing of two right-handed chiral molecules by fitting their “grooves”.  Short and long 
pitched molecules led to opposite handedness at the next level 64. (C) Elastic strain of fiber 
bending builds up as twisted bundles grow.66 (D) Non-tiling polygons assembles to trees, 
fibers, and bulk phases under different levels of surface tension 67. (E) non-Euclidean crystals 
of geometrically frustrated tetrahedra particles and associated assemblies in Euclidean space73. 


 
Page 24

A well-known case of FFE assembly is the dendritic growth of crystals (Figure 9A), 

originating from branching instabilities at growth interfaces, with snowflakes being the simple 

example.  The disordered version of such branching assembly, diffusion limited aggregation (DLA, 

Figure 9B), have been observed in a wide range of systems across ionic, atomic, polymeric, 

nanoparticle, and colloidal particle scales76,77.  An important case of such growth is the chemical 

conversion of ions into dendrites78(representing a safety problem in batteries and other energy 

storage devices.79)  76,77 Such branching growth under FFE conditions leads to interesting complex 

structures such as multifractals.  

  More recently, influenced by the blossoming field of active matter,80,81 using active 

driving at the particle level to control self-assembly has become a fruitful new research direction 

and led to the formation of interesting complex structures Directional motion and rotation of the 

self-assembly building blocks have led to the discovery of a variety of active assemblies 82Among 

their unique properties  motility-induced phase separation was observed (Figure 9C).83 

Self-organized criticality: An interesting and potential general pathway to complex systems based 

on molecules and NPs is SOC.  SOC links nonlinearity with critical scaling, fractality, and robust 

complex behaviors, where nonlinear dissipative systems spontaneous evolve to criticality, showing 

 

Figure 9. (A) Dendritic growth of succinonitrile crystals66 , (B) Diffusion limited 
aggregation76. (C) Compartmentalized assemblies of active rotor particles86  


 
Page 25

long-ranged spatiotemporal correlations without fine tuning.   Frustrated assemblies, for instance, 

SPs, can be treated as quasi-equilibrium states,6 which enables the use of extensive statistical 

thermodynamics to select conditions for their formation.  A strong indication that SOC pathway 

to complexity is practical are the recent data on spontaneous formation of complex memristic84 

and neuromorphic85 responses in NP and nanowire assemblies (Figure 7D). 

 
To summarize, the study of pathways to complexity in the context of nanomaterials is still 

at its infancy. Predictions of complexity theories outline an exciting future where complex 

structures lead to functionality and adaptability. Tools to synthesize such systems, fundamentally 

understand their formation mechanisms, and predict their functionalities, will be of great value. 

5. Conclusions.  The notion of “complexity” is at the crossroad between the philosophical 

methodologies of deduction and induction.  Deduction has prevailed in the methodology of physics 

research since the 19th century, where deterministic laws govern a wide variety of phenomena in 

nature.  In contrast, induction is dominant for studies of “emergence” that has gained popularity 

since the second half of the 20th century, with discoveries of critical phenomena and nonlinear 

dynamics. Emergence encompasses stochastic behaviors due to many degrees of freedom, the 

interactions of which are difficult to deduce because they are less deterministic, and the system is 

non-ergodic.   

The concept of structural complexity is at the center of emergence, where a realm of 

fascinating phenomena arises even when the system components obey very simple rules.  

Translating this point to materials design, the interactions between the materials components do 

not need to be excessively complicated and contain multiple parameters to make complex materials.  

These interactions do need to be, however, multibody, competitive, and experimentally deducible.   


 
Page 26

Scientists now have the capabilities, therefore, for fundamental and practical studies of 

complex materials, especially for nanoscale components, that satisfy many requirements and are 

experimentally convenient.  In the next few years, we can aim at better understanding of control 

and utilization of order, disorder, and hierarchy for specific property sets establishing the links 

between complexity and functionality.  We expect that dynamic nanostructured systems will be 

created demonstrating gradual emergence of the hierarchical 3D patterns with direct utility in 

energy technologies, optoelectronics, membrane science, and biomedical applications. 

Acknowledgements: The authors are grateful for the support from the National Science 

Foundation (2243104, Center for Complex Particle Systems (COMPASS)), Office of Naval 

Research (MURI N00014-20-1-2479), the Department of Defense (HQ00342010033, Newton 

Award for Transformative Ideas during the COVID-19 Pandemic), and Air Force Office of 

Scientific Research (FA9550-20-1-0265, N.K.). 

On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest. 

REFERENCES 

(1) 
Andrrey Kolmogorov. On Tables of Random Numbers . Sankhya Ser A. 1963, 369–
375. 

(2) 
Ray Solomonoff. A Preliminary Report on a General Theory of Inductive Inference. 
Report V-131 ; 1960. 

(3) 
Chaitin, G. J. On the Simplicity and Speed of Programs for Computing Infinite Sets 
of Natural Numbers. Journal of the ACM 1969, 16 (3), 407–422. 

(4) 
Wolfram, S. Computation Theory of Cellular Automata. Commun Math Phys 1984, 
96 (1), 15–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01217347. 

(5) 
Grassberger, P. Toward a Quantitative Theory of Self-Generated Complexity. 
International Journal of Theoretical Physics 1986, 25 (9), 907–938. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00668821. 

(6) 
Ali Bilal Cambel. Applied Chaos Theory - A Paradigm for Complexity, First Edition.; 
Academic Press, 1992. 

(7) 
Stuart A. Kauffman. The Origin of Order, Self-Organization and Selection in 
Evolution; Academic Press, 1993. 

(8) 
Gell-Mann, M. The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple and the 
Complex; W. H. Freeman: New York, 1994. 


 
Page 27

(9) 
Lopez-Ruiz, R.; Mancini, H. L.; Calbet, X. A Statistical Measure of Complexity. Phys 
Lett A 1995, 209, 321–326. 

(10) 
John Henry Holland. Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity ; Helix 
Books: Reading, 1995. 

(11) 
Eugene Stanley, H.; Meakin, P. Multifractal Phenomena in Physics and Chemistry. 

(12) 
Paczuski, M. Complexity, Contingency, and Criticality 
(Macroevolution/Macroeconomics/Punctuated Equilibrium); 1995; Vol. 92. 
https://www.pnas.org. 

(13) 
Tononi, G.; Edelman, G. M.; Sporns, O. Complexity and Coherency: Integrating 
Information in the Brain. Trends Cogn Sci 1998, 2 (12), 407. 

(14) 
Wolf, Y. I.; Katsnelson, M. I.; Koonin, E. V. Physical Foundations of Biological 
Complexity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America. National Academy of Sciences September 11, 2018, pp E8678–E8687. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1807890115. 

(15) 
Randić, M.; Plavšić, D. Characterization of Molecular Complexity. Int J Quantum 
Chem 2002, 91 (1), 20–31. https://doi.org/10.1002/qua.10343. 

(16) 
Randic, M.; Plavsic, D. On the Concept of Molecular Complexity. Croatica Chemica 
Acta 2002, 75 (1), 107–116. 

(17) 
Böttcher, T. An Additive Definition of Molecular Complexity. J Chem Inf Model 
2016, 56 (3), 462–470. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00723. 

(18) 
Kotov, N. A.; Stellacci, F. Frontiers in Nanoparticle Research: Toward Greater 
Complexity of Structure and Function of Nanomaterials. Advanced Materials 2008, 
20 (22). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200803045. 

(19) 
Gell-Mann, M. What Is Complexity. Complexity 1995, 1 (1). 

(20) 
Blank, S.; Arnoldi, M.; Khoshnavaz, S.; Treccani, L.; Kuntz, M.; Mann, K.; Grathwohl, 
G.; Fritz, M. The Nacre Protein Perlucin Nucleates Growth of Calcium Carbonate 
Crystals. J Microsc 2003, 212 (3), 280–291. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2818.2003.01263.x. 

(21) 
Yeom, B.; Sain, T.; Lacevic, T.; Bukharina, D.; Cha, S. H.; Waas, A. M.; Arruda, E. M.; 
Kotov, N. A. Abiotic Tooth Enamel. Nature 2017, 543 (7643), 95–98. 

(22) 
E. H. Lim; J. P. Sardinha; S. Myers. Nanotechnology Biomimetic Cartilage 
Regenerative Scaffolds. Arch Plast Surg 2014, 41, 231. 

(23) 
J. Ďurkovič, F. K. H. H. M. M. I. Č. Cell Wall Compositional and Vascular Traits of 
Hybrid Poplar Wood in Micropropagated Plants and Plants Propagated from Root 
Cuttings. New For (Dordr) 2020, 51, 119–135. 

(24) 
Bergström, L.; Sturm (née Rosseeva), E. V.; Salazar-Alvarez, G.; Cölfen, H. 
Mesocrystals in Biominerals and Colloidal Arrays. Acc Chem Res 2015, 48 (5), 
1391–1402. https://doi.org/10.1021/ar500440b. 

(25) 
Roveri, N.; Palazzo, B.; Iafisco, M. The Role of Biomimetism in Developing 
Nanostructured Inorganic Matrices for Drug Delivery. Expert Opinion on Drug 
Delivery. August 2008, pp 861–877. https://doi.org/10.1517/17425247.5.8.861. 

(26) 
Schwarcz, H. P.; Abueidda, D.; Jasiuk, I. The Ultrastructure of Bone and Its 
Relevance to Mechanical Properties. Frontiers in Physics. Frontiers Media SA 
September 5, 2017. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2017.00039. 


 
Page 28

(27) 
Roveri, N.; Palazzo, B.; Iafisco, M. The Role of Biomimetism in Developing 
Nanostructured Inorganic Matrices for Drug Delivery. Expert Opinion on Drug 
Delivery. August 2008, pp 861–877. https://doi.org/10.1517/17425247.5.8.861. 

(28) 
Schwarcz, H. P.; Abueidda, D.; Jasiuk, I. The Ultrastructure of Bone and Its 
Relevance to Mechanical Properties. Front Phys 2017, 5. 

(29) 
Kytyr, D. & P. V. & J. Ondřej. Assessment of Micromechanical Properties of 
Trabecular Bone Using Quantitative Backscattered Electron Microscopy. 13th 
Bilateral Czech/German Symposium, 2012, 1, 119–122. 

(30) 
Hewei, Z.; Shaojia, L.; Yan, W.; Yonghai, Y.; Mingrui, G.; Yangbei, L.; Xiaolong, Z.; 
Xuliang, D.; A., K. N.; Lin, G.; Lei, J. Multiscale Engineered Artificial Tooth Enamel. 
Science (1979) 2022, 375 (6580), 551–556. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abj3343. 

(31) 
Stuart A. Kauffman. A World Beyond Physics: The Emergence and Evolution of Life, 
First Edition.; Oxford University Press, 2019. 

(32) 
Mann, M. G.; Lloyd, S. Information Measures, Effective Complexity, and Total 
Information. Complexity 1996, 2, 44–52. 

(33) 
Huberman, B. A.; Hogg, T. Complexity and Adaptation. Physica D 1986, 22 (1), 
376–384. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-2789(86)90308-1. 

(34) 
Edmonds, Bruce. What Is Complexity? - The Philosophy of Complexity per Se with 
Application to Some Examples in Evolution.. . 1995. 

(35) 
Galanter, Philip. An Introduction to Complexism. Technoetic Arts 2016, 14, 9–31. 

(36) 
Galanter, P. Complexism and the Role of Evolutionary Art. 

(37) 
Remo Badii; Antonio Politi. Complexity: Hierarchical Structures and Scaling in 
Physics , first.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge , 2008; Vol. 6. 

(38) 
Gregory J. Chaitin. Information-Theoretic Limitations of Formal Systems. Journal of 
the ACM 1974, 21, 403–434. 

(39) 
Grassberger, P. Toward a Quantitative Theory of Self-Generated Complexity. 
International Journal of Theoretical Physics 1986, 25 (9). 

(40) 
Rajaram, R.; Castellani, B. An Entropy Based Measure for Comparing Distributions 
of Complexity. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 2016, 453, 35–
43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2016.02.007. 

(41) 
Crutchfield, J. P.; Young, K. Inferring Statistical Complexity. Phys Rev Lett 1989, 63 
(2), 105–108. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.63.105. 

(42) 
Tononi, G.; Sporns, O.; Edelman, G. M. A Measure for Brain Complexity: Relating 
Functional Segregation and Integration in the Nervous System. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 1994, 91 (11). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.11.5033. 

(43) 
Ay, N.; Olbrich, E.; Bertschinger, N.; Jost, J. A Geometric Approach to Complexity. 
Chaos 2011, 21 (3). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3638446. 

(44) 
Jiang, W.; Qu, Z.; Kumar, P.; Vecchio, D.; Wang, Y.; Ma, Y.; Bahng, J. H.; Bernardino, 
K.; Gomes, W. R.; Colombari, F. M.; Lozada-Blanco, A.; Veksler, M.; Marino, E.; 
Simon, A.; Murray, C.; Muniz, S. R.; de Moura, A. F.; Kotov, N. A. Emergence of 
Complexity Inhierarchically Organized Chiral Particles. Science (1979) 2020, 368 
(6491), 642-+. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz7949. 


 
Page 29

(45) 
Vecchio, D. A.; Mahler, S.; Hammig, M. D.; Kotov, N. A. Structural Analysis of 
Nanoscale Network Materials Using Graph Theory. ACS Nano 2021, 15 (8), 12847–
12859. 

(46) 
Béla Bollobás. Random Graphs; 1985. 

(47) 
Erdös, P.; Rényi, A. On the Evolution of Random Graphs. Publication of the 
Mathematical Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences 1960, 5, 17–61. 

(48) 
Newman, M. E. J.; Strogatz, S. H.; Watts, D. J. Random Graphs with Arbitrary 
Degree Distributions and Their Applications. Phys Rev E 2001, 64 (2), 26118. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.64.026118. 

(49) 
Feder, J. Fractals. In Fractals; Springer US, 1988; pp 1–243. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-2124-6_1. 

(50) 
Falconer, K. J. The Geometry of Fractal Sets. Cambridge tracts in mathematics 
1985, 85, xiv, 162. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.229.4720.1381. 

(51) 
Wei, D.-J.; Liu, Q.; Zhang, H.-X.; Hu, Y.; Deng, Y.; Mahadevan, S. Box-Covering 
Algorithm for Fractal Dimension of Weighted Networks. Sci Rep 2013, 3 (1), 3049. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep03049. 

(52) 
Cho, Y.; Shin, J.-H.; Costa, A.; Kim, T. A.; Kunin, V.; Li, J.; Lee, S. Y.; Yang, S.; Han, H. 
N.; Choi, I.-S.; Srolovitz, D. J. Engineering the Shape and Structure of Materials by 
Fractal Cut. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014, 111 (49), 17390–17395. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1417276111. 

(53) 
Xue, Y.; Bogdan, P. Reliable Multi-Fractal Characterization of Weighted Complex 
Networks: Algorithms and Implications. Sci Rep 2017, 7 (1), 7487. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-07209-5. 

(54) 
Balaban, V.; Lim, S.; Gupta, G.; Boedicker, J.; Bogdan, P. Quantifying Emergence 
and Self-Organisation of Enterobacter Cloacae Microbial Communities. Sci Rep 
2018, 8 (1), 12416. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-30654-9. 

(55) 
Ivanov, P. Ch. ; Amaral, L. A. N.; Goldberger, A. L. ; Havlin, S.; Rosenblum, M. G. ; 
Struzik, Z. R. ;; Stanley, H. E. Multifractality in Human Heartbeat Dynamics. Nature 
1999, 399 (6735), 461–465. 

(56) 
Harte, D. Multifractals; Chapman & Hall: London, 2001. 

(57) 
Vecchio, D. A.; Hammig, M. D.; Xiao, X.; Saha, A.; Bogdan, P.; Kotov, N. A. Spanning 
Network Gels from Nanoparticles and Graph Theoretical Analysis of Their 
Structure and Properties. Advanced Materials 2022, 34 (23), 2201313. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202201313. 

(58) 
Wang, M.; Vecchio, D.; Wang, C.; Emre, A.; Xiao, X.; Jiang, Z.; Bogdan, P.; Huang, Y.; 
Kotov, N. A. N. A. Biomorphic Structural Batteries for Robotics. Sci Robot 2020, 5 
(45), eaba1912. https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.aba1912. 

(59) 
Cha, M.; Emre, E. S. T.; Xiao, X.; Kim, J.-Y.; Bogdan, P.; VanEpps, J. S.; Violi, A.; 
Kotov, N. A. Unifying Structural Descriptors for Biological and Bioinspired 
Nanoscale Complexes. Nat Comput Sci 2022, 2 (4), 243–252. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00229-w. 

(60) 
Randic, M. Graph Theoretical Descriptors of Two-Dimensional Chirality with 
Possible Extension to Three-Dimensional Chirality. J Chem Inf Comput Sci 2001, 41 
(3), 639–649. https://doi.org/10.1021/ci000115m. 


 
Page 30

(61) 
Bagrov, A. A.; Iakovlev, I. A.; Iliasov, A. A.; Katsnelson, M. I.; Mazurenko, V. V. 
Multiscale Structural Complexity of Natural Patterns. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 2020, 117 (48), 30241–30251. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2004976117. 

(62) 
Yan, J.; Feng, W.; Kim, J.-Y.; Lu, J.; Kumar, P.; Mu, Z.; Wu, X.; Mao, X.; Kotov, N. A. 
Self-Assembly of Chiral Nanoparticles into Semiconductor Helices with Tunable 
near-Infrared Optical Activity. Chemistry of Materials 2020, 32 (1), 476–488. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b04143. 

(63) 
Tang, L.; Vo, T.; Fan, X.; Vecchio, D.; Ma, T.; Lu, J.; Hou, H.; Glotzer, S. C.; Kotov, N. 
A. Self-Assembly Mechanism of Complex Corrugated Particles. J Am Chem Soc 143 
(47), 19655–19667. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c05488. 

(64) 
Harris, A. B.; Kamien, R. D.; Lubensky, T. C. Molecular Chirality and Chiral 
Parameters. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1999, 71 (5), 1745–1757. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.71.1745. 

(65) 
Hilborn, R. C. Pattern Formation and Spatiotemporal Chaos: Chaos and Nonlinear 
Dynamics: An Introduction for Scientists and Engineers ; Oxford University Press, 
2000. 

(66) 
Langer, J. S. Instabilities and Pattern Formation in Crystal Growth. Rev Mod Phys 
1980, 52 (1), 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.52.1. 

(67) 
Davidson, P. Turbulence: An Introduction for Scientists and Engineers. 

(68) 
Liu, J.; She, Z.-S.; Guo, H.; Li, L.; Ouyang, Q. Hierarchical Structure Description of 
Spatiotemporal Chaos. Phys Rev E 2004, 70 (3), 36215. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.70.036215. 

(69) 
Grason, G. M.; Bruinsma, R. F. Chirality and Equilibrium Biopolymer Bundles. Phys 
Rev Lett 2007, 99 (9), 098101. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.098101. 

(70) 
Lenz, M.; Witten, T. A. Geometrical Frustration Yields Fibre Formation in Self-
Assembly. Nat Phys 2017, 13 (11), 1100–1104. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys4184. 

(71) 
Haddad, A.; Aharoni, H.; Sharon, E.; Shtukenberg, A. G.; Kahr, B.; Efrati, E. Twist 
Renormalization in Molecular Crystals Driven by Geometric Frustration. Soft 
Matter 2019, 15 (1), 116–126. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8SM01290C. 

(72) 
Hayakawa, D.; Videbaek, T. E.; Hall, D. M.; Fang, H.; Sigl, C.; Feigl, E.; Dietz, H.; 
Fraden, S.; Hagan, M. F.; Grason, G. M.; Rogers, W. B. Geometrically Programmed 
Self-Limited Assembly of Tubules Using DNA Origami Colloids. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 2022, 119 (43), e2207902119. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2207902119. 

(73) 
Serafin, F.; Lu, J.; Kotov, N.; Sun, K.; Mao, X. Frustrated Self-Assembly of Non-
Euclidean Crystals of Nanoparticles. Nat Commun 2021, 12 (1), 4925. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25139-9. 

(74) 
Philipp W.A. Schönhöfer; Kai Sun; Xiaoming Mao; Sharon C. Glotzer. Rationalizing 
Euclidean Assemblies of Hard Polyhedra from Tessellations in Curved Space. 
arXiv:2305.07786 [cond-mat.soft]. 


 
Page 31

(75) 
Köhler, J. M.; Kluitmann, J.; Knauer, A. Metal Nano Networks by Potential-
Controlled In Situ Assembling of Gold/Silver Nanoparticles. ChemistryOpen 2019, 8 
(12), 1369–1374. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/open.201900231. 

(76) 
Witten, T. A.; Sander, L. M. Diffusion-Limited Aggregation. Phys Rev B 1983, 27 (9), 
5686–5697. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.27.5686. 

(77) 
Vicsek, T. Fractal Growth Phenomena; G - Reference,Information and 
Interdisciplinary Subjects Series; World Scientific, 1992. 

(78) 
Manthiram, K.; Surendranath, Y.; Alivisatos, A. P. Dendritic Assembly of Gold 
Nanoparticles during Fuel-Forming Electrocatalysis. J Am Chem Soc 2014, 136 (20), 
7237–7240. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja502628r. 

(79) 
Tung, S.-O.; Ho, S.; Yang, M.; Zhang, R.; Kotov, N. A. A Dendrite-Suppressing 
Composite Ion Conductor from Aramid Nanofibres. Nat Commun 2015, 6, 6152. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7152. 

(80) 
Marchetti, M. C.; Joanny, J. F.; Ramaswamy, S.; Liverpool, T. B.; Prost, J.; Rao, M.; 
Simha, R. A. Hydrodynamics of Soft Active Matter. Rev Mod Phys 2013, 85 (3), 
1143–1189. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.85.1143. 

(81) 
Ramaswamy, S. The Mechanics and Statistics of Active Matter. Annu Rev Condens 
Matter Phys 2010, 1 (1), 323–345. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-
070909-104101. 

(82) 
Mallory, S. A.; Valeriani, C.; Cacciuto, A. An Active Approach to Colloidal Self-
Assembly. Annu Rev Phys Chem 2018. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physchem. 

(83) 
Cates, M. E.; Tailleur, J. Motility-Induced Phase Separation. 2014. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/((please). 

(84) 
Sibatov, R. T.; Savitskiy, A. I.; L’vov, P. E.; Vasilevskaya, Y. O.; Kitsyuk, E. P. Self-
Organized Memristive Ensembles of Nanoparticles Below the Percolation 
Threshold: Switching Dynamics and Phase Field Description. Nanomaterials 2023, 
13 (14). https://doi.org/10.3390/nano13142039. 

(85) 
Diaz-Alvarez, A.; Higuchi, R.; Sanz-Leon, P.; Marcus, I.; Shingaya, Y.; Stieg, A. Z.; 
Gimzewski, J. K.; Kuncic, Z.; Nakayama, T. Emergent Dynamics of Neuromorphic 
Nanowire Networks. Sci Rep 2019, 9 (1), 14920. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
019-51330-6. 

(86) 
Spellings, M.; Engel, M.; Klotsa, D.; Sabrina, S.; Drews, A. M.; Nguyen, N. H. P.; 
Bishop, K. J. M.; Glotzer, S. C. Shape Control and Compartmentalization in Active 
Colloidal Cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2015, 112 (34), 
E4642–E4650. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1513361112. 

  
 


