Page 1 of 27

Ubiquitous short-range order in multi-principal element alloys

Ying Han1,†, Hangman Chen2,†, Yongwen Sun1, Jian Liu3, Shaolou Wei4,#, Bijun Xie2, Zhiyu 
Zhang1, Yingxin Zhu1, Meng Li5, Judith Yang5,6, Wen Chen3, Penghui Cao2,*, Yang Yang1,*

1 Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics and Materials Research Institute, The 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 16802, USA.
2 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, Irvine, CA 
92697, USA.
3 Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
MA 01003, USA.
4 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
5 Department of Petroleum and Chemical Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 
15261, USA.
6 Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, 
USA.

† These authors contributed equally to this work.
# Currently at: Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung, 40237, Düsseldorf, Germany.
* Email of corresponding authors: caoph@uci.edu; yang@psu.edu


Page 2 of 27

Abstract:
Recent research in multi-principal element alloys (MPEAs) has increasingly focused on the 
exploration and exploitation of short-range order (SRO) to enhance material performance1-6. 
However, the understanding of SRO formation and the precise tuning of it within MPEAs remains 
poorly understood, limiting the comprehension of its impact on material properties and impeding 
the advancement of SRO engineering. Here, leveraging advanced additive manufacturing
techniques that produce samples with a wide range of cooling rates7 (up to 107 K s−1) and an 
improved quantitative electron microscopy method, we characterize SRO in three CoCrNi-based 
MPEAs to unravel the role of processing route and thermal history on SRO. Surprisingly, 
irrespective of the processing and thermal treatment applied, all samples exhibit similar levels of 
SRO, suggesting that prevalent SRO may form during the solidification process. Atomistic 
simulations of solidification verify that local chemical ordering arises in the liquid-solid interface 
(solidification front) even under the extreme cooling rate of 1011 K s−1. This phenomenon stems 
from the swift atomic diffusion in the supercooled liquid, which matches or even surpasses the rate 
of solidification. Therefore, SRO is an inherent characteristic of most MPEAs, insensitive to
variations in cooling rates and annealing treatments typically available in experiments. Integrating
thermal treatment with other strategies, such as mechanical deformation8,9 and irradiation10,11,
might be more effective approaches for harnessing SRO to achieve controlled material properties.


Page 3 of 27

Multi-principal element alloys (MPEAs), usually consisting of three or more components with 
nearly equal elemental ratios, have received extensive attention due to their excellent mechanical 
performance and damage tolerance under extreme environments12-19. A prominent example is the 
face-centered cubic (FCC) CoCrNi alloy, which exhibits the highest fracture toughness at the 
liquid helium temperature ever recorded20. MPEAs are considered random solid solutions (RSS)
with a high configurational entropy12,21, thus, often referred as medium/high entropy alloys 
(MEAs/HEAs), depending on their compositional complexity. However, more recent studies show 
that the elemental distribution in MPEAs at the atomic scale is not uniform, originating from the 
increasing significance of the enthalpy term in the Gibbs free energy as temperature decreases22. 
Therefore, the RSS state is only characteristic of the high-temperature region close to the melting 
point, at which the entropy term is considered to be predominant. At lower temperatures, local 
ordering, such as the short-range order (SRO) and local clustering1,3,4,23, will develop in MPEAs
to minimize the free energy. Specifically, the concept of tuning SRO in MPEAs has garnered 
extensive interest, not solely for its pivotal function in maintaining the stability of the FCC 
structure1, but also for its potential as an innovative parameter to facilitate enhanced properties. 
For instance, it has been reported that SRO can tune the stacking fault energy in a wide range1,
influence magnetization24, promote work-hardening3, enhance resistance to fatigue25 and 
irradiation damage6,26,27, and impact corrosion28-30. However, several critical questions must be 
resolved before harnessing SRO engineering as a novel facet of defect engineering. First, what is 
the role of SRO on the properties of MPEAs? Existing literature presents conflicting viewpoints 
on this matter. A number of investigations have suggested that SRO makes minimal, if any, 
contribution to the yield strength in FCC MPEAs31-34, while certain theoretical studies have posited 
that SRO may significantly bolster yield strength22,35-37. Second, is it possible to experimentally 
adjust the SRO degree in MPEAs across a broad spectrum to customize their properties? It is worth 
noting that the answer to this latter question is a necessary precondition to resolving the first, as
reliable research on the impact of SRO hinges upon our ability to regulate SRO in the materials 
precisely. This paper primarily seeks to address the second question due to its pivotal role, while 
also shedding light on reconciling the disparate responses to the first question.

To date, the majority of research addressing the second question has been primarily focused 

on modulating SRO by modifying processing methodologies and/or thermal treatments 
(Supplementary Fig. 1). Particularly, varying annealing temperatures, from 400˚C to 1200˚C, has 
been documented to introduce SRO in MPEAs (see Supplementary Table 1 for more details). 
Conversely, it has been observed that the yield strength of polycrystalline MPEAs adheres to the 
same Hall-Petch relationship, irrespective of the thermal treatment temperature and duration31.
And more recently experiments on single-crystal CoCrNi reveal neglectable effects of annealing 
on yield strength9. These seemingly contradictory findings underscore a critical knowledge gap in 
comprehending the kinetics underlying SRO formation—specifically, does thermal treatment 
alone serve as an effective strategy for SRO engineering in MPEAs? Here, integrating an improved 
transmission electron microscopy
(TEM)
characterization method, advanced additive 

manufacturing, and atomistic modeling, we reveal the answer to this question to be negative. Our 


Page 4 of 27

comprehensive investigation uncovers a surprising finding—SRO forms rapidly during the 
solidification process even at high cooling rates, which limits the extent to which subsequent 
annealing can alter the SRO. This discovery has significant implications for resolving the paradox 
concerning the role of SRO in strengthening FCC MPEAs. The absence of yield strength 
differences between quenched and annealed materials, as observed in many previous experiments, 
can result from the similar degree of SRO that predominately forms in solidification. Consequently, 
it is crucial to acknowledge that rapidly quenched samples retain a significant degree of SRO, thus 
deviating far from the condition of a random solid solution. Additionally, it is important to note 
that the impact of SRO on the properties of materials may not conform to a linear or monotonic 
relationship, thereby implying a complexity that necessitates meticulous quantification of SRO
and a wide range of SRO degrees in experimental samples to illuminate a comprehensive overview 
of the influence of SRO. To overcome the intrinsic constraints of thermal treatment in achieving a 
wide-ranging adjustment of SRO, researchers should contemplate incorporating alternative 
strategies in tandem with thermal treatments.

Characterization of SRO in MPEAs with various materials processing routes

Given that SRO is more energetically favorable at lower temperatures, it is conceivable 

that an increase in the cooling rate during the solidification process of MPEAs could help suppress 
SRO formation and retain the RSS state. To bolster the formation of SRO, intermediate 
temperature annealing is widely adopted, which is ultimately governed by the competing balance 
between thermodynamic driving force (which intensifies at lower temperatures) and kinetics 
(which accelerates at higher temperatures, expediting diffusion and reducing SRO formation time). 
Presumably, quenched samples are commonly deemed closely akin to an RSS, while annealed 
specimens are associated with a higher degree of SRO3,38. Nonetheless, this notion raises a few 
pertinent questions. Foremost, while it is plausible that the SRO degree is diminished in the 
quenched sample, the precise extent of this reduction remains uncertain. Additionally, the quench 
rate is processing-history-dependent, with conventional water quenching techniques delivering a 
cooling rate at the order around 10 to 102 K s-1, a rate which may still be relatively slow. 

To assess how cooling rates and thermal treatments influence SRO in MPEAs, we fabricate

MPEAs with a cooling rate spanning seven orders of magnitude using traditional casting and 
several advanced techniques, including laser-directed energy deposition (LDED) and laser powder 
bed fusion (LPBF), as illustrated in Fig. 1a. The corresponding processing cooling rates7,39,40 are 
around 101 to 102 K s-1, 103 to 105 K s-1 and 105 to 107 K s-1, respectively. Following processing, 
we also annealed the samples at 900 °C for seven days, a treatment recently reported to induce 
peak local ordering33. Our objective is to contrast the SRO in these materials, thereby discerning 
the impacts of solidification quench rates, and thermal treatment, on SRO formation. Moreover, 
we have selected CoCrNi, CoCrFeNi, and CoCrFeMnNi for comparative analysis, potentially 
revealing insights into how compositional complexity influences SRO formation. These CoCrNi-


Page 5 of 27

based MPEAs were chosen based on their compelling mechanical performance, availability of 
large experimental datasets and versatile fabrication techniques41,42. TEM, X-ray diffraction (XRD) 
and atomic-resolution STEM-EDX characterizations have verified that these CoCrNi-based 
MPEAs maintain a single phase and FCC structure even in the LPBF samples that were formed at
the highest cooling rates (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). The LPBF and LDED 
samples generally contain more dislocations than the other samples due to the fast-cooling rates. 
Also, we observe dislocation cell wall structures that are typical of these additive-manufactured 
alloys43. To confirm chemical homogeneity, we performed STEM-EDX elemental mapping for all 
samples at two different magnifications (45,000 × and 350,000 ×), offering spatial resolution of 
1.1 nm and 0.14 nm, respectively. All samples demonstrated chemical uniformity 
(Supplementary Fig. 4 to 12), except for the CoCrFeMnNi fabricated via the LPBF method 
(Supplementary Fig. 13), which exhibited some local clustering. We hypothesize that these non-
equiatomic local segregation areas might exhibit a varying degree of CSRO compared to the 
equiatomic matrix. However, since our primary objective is to determine the presence (or absence) 
of CSRO at high cooling rates, rather than comparing the extent of order between equiatomic and 
non-equiatomic alloys, this variation in SRO does not affect the reliability of subsequent 
characterizations.

It is crucial to evaluate the degree of SRO in these MPEAs using a technique that can

collect bulk-representative data. Previously, methods to characterize SRO include high-resolution 
scanning TEM (HR-STEM)4,6, resistometry9, energy-filtered selected area electron diffraction 
(EF-SAED)3,8, atomic-resolution energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS)2,4, X-ray/neutron 
scattering44, atom probe tomography (APT)23,34,45 and more recently atom electron tomography 
(AET)46. A comparison of these techniques is provided in Supplementary Table 2, showing that 
the EF-SAED method is a suitable candidate based on our selection metrics. In this study, we have 
enhanced the EF-SAED methodology by integrating sophisticated data-processing techniques and 
a more robust experimental workflow. This method, named EQ-SAED (Enhanced Quantitative 
SAED), not only obviates the need for a costly energy filter while maintaining a suitable signal-
to-noise (SNR) ratio but also provides a promising avenue for more precise, quantitative analysis. 
Our new method and the resultant characterization results are illustrated in the following.

Thin lamellas for TEM characterization were prepared from the bulk samples, with their

bright-field TEM images and corresponding SAED patterns shown in Fig. 1b. All the 
characterizations were performed with the same instrument and alignment conditions to ensure the 
robustness of the results. In prior research, diffuse spots at the ½ {3̅11} location of FCC MPEAs 
electron diffraction on [112] zone axis has been considered as direct evidence of SRO3,4 (see more 
discussions about differentiating the effects of SRO, planar defects and higher-order Laue zones 
(HOLZ) on the diffuse signals in the section for Fig. 5). Remarkably, the discernible existence of 
these diffuse spots in the SAED patterns in Fig. 1b reveals that all ten samples exhibit SRO, even 
the LPBF sample fabricated at the cooling rate of 107 K s−1. A schematic time-temperature-
transformation (TTT) diagram is plotted in Fig. 1c to facilitate the visualization of cooling rate, 
thermal processing history and the associated degree of SRO.


Page 6 of 27

Fig. 1 | Qualitative characterization of SRO in MPEAs with various thermal processing
routes. a, Schematic of the as-cast, LDED, and LPBF sample preparation method. b, Bright-field 
TEM images of the selected area and SAED patterns under the same conditions for ten samples. 
The white arrows and circles indicate the diffused spots related to SRO. c, Schematic of the TTT 
diagram of SRO, showing the difference in SRO is limited even with a wide range of cooling rates. 
Scale bars for bright-field TEM images, 500 nm. Scale bars for SAED patterns, 5 nm−1.

To scrutinize the relative degree of SRO among the different samples more quantitatively, 

we have further improved the above SAED method, which is schematically illustrated in Fig. 2a-


Page 7 of 27

f. Ten SAED images were collected consecutively for each sample with the same imaging 
condition, such as a fixed exposure time and aperture size. Then, the Bragg spots in each SAED 
image were detected by a cross-correlation algorithm, followed by the classification of Bragg spots 
into three categories: direct beam, matrix, and SRO. As shown in Fig. 2a, the accurate Bragg spot 
finding results are visualized by the red dots overlaid on the SAED patterns in Fig. 2a, sharing the 
same center as the Bragg peaks. Afterward, each SAED image is segmented into a series of square 
image tiles with the Bragg peak positioned at the center (Fig. 2 b,c). Furthermore, the tiles of the 
same type are averaged to significantly enhance the SNR, thus alleviating the need for an energy 
filter. For example, in each SAED pattern, the eight SRO-sensitive tiles closest to the direct beam
are selected for averaging. Since there are ten SAED images for each sample, thus a total of 80
tiles was used to obtain a single image of the SRO Bragg peak (Fig. 2d). The significantly 
improved SNR is clearly shown by comparing the raw images in Fig. 2c and processed images in 
Fig. 2d. To further quantitatively analyze the Bragg peak intensities, two-dimensional (2D) 
Gaussian fitting is performed, with the corresponding results for both matrix peaks and SRO shown 
in Fig. 2e, depicting excellent agreement with the experiments. To validate the quality of the 2D 
Gaussian fitting analysis, a radial-integral is performed on the 2D data (Fig. 2f), which again 
demonstrates the robustness of the method. Note that the selection of the beam current and 
exposure time in our experiments was a strategic decision aimed at enhancing the signal-to-noise 
ratio for the SRO signal and ensuring a close-parallel-beam condition. This choice inevitably led 
to the overexposure of the three brightest matrix peaks, as observed in our results. However, our 
analysis method meticulously avoids these overexposed regions during the fitting process, thereby 
ensuring the accuracy of our data. More detailed discussion can be found in Supplementary Notes 
A and Supplementary Fig. 14-17 At last, the SRO Bragg peak intensity divided by the matrix 
Bragg peak intensity, denoted as the “relative SRO intensity”, is computed to compare different 
MPEA samples with different compositions and thermal treatments (Fig. 2 g-h).

Figure 2g shows the relative SRO intensity of various CoCrNi-based MPEAs with 

different thermal treatments. A similar degree of SRO is found in these ten samples, indicating 
that the variation of cooling rates and heat treatment may not be effective in tuning SRO. To further 
understand the effect of compositional complexity, we have averaged results for the same 
composition to obtain composition-specified relative SRO intensities, along with the additional
data of a new ternary alloy (CoNiV) (Fig. 2h). When the number of elements increases, it is 
expected that the entropy term in the Gibbs free energy equation (G = H − TS, where G, H, T, and 
S denotes the Gibbs free energy, enthalpy, temperature, and entropy, respectively) will take a more 
significant role. If the enthalpy term is not significantly changed, then the system would prefer less 
SRO at the same temperature. Here, our comparison between CoCrNi, CoCrFeNi, and 
CoCrFeMnNi in Fig. 2h shows that a higher number of constitutional elements seems to reduce 
the intensity of SRO. However, the significant error bar indicates that this effect, even exists, may 
not be substantial. In stark contrast, a considerable increase in SRO is observed in the CoNiV
compared to CoCrNi-based MPEAs. This can be rationalized by considering the enthalpy changes 
led by the choice between V versus Cr, Fe, or Mn. Vanadium can form stable or meta-stable


Page 8 of 27

intermetallic compounds with Ni and/or Co, thus manifesting a higher tendency to form chemical 
SRO4. Here, our observation of a higher degree of SRO in CoNiV is consistent with previous 
characterization results by other methods47, indicating that our quantitative characterization is 
reliable. Furthermore, our results suggest that choosing the constitutional element (i.e., moderating
the enthalpy term in Gibbs free energy) is more effective in tuning SRO than adjusting the number 
of constitutional elements.

Fig. 2 | EQ-SAED characterization of SRO in MPEAs with various thermal processing routes. 
a-f, Illustration of the data processing procedure to enable more quantitative analysis of the degree 
of SRO. Each Bragg peaks in the SAED pattern (a) will be detected and labeled by the red dots in 
(b). The Braggs peaks will be further classified to create two sets of image tiles, one for the SRO 
and one for the matrix (c). The SNRs of the matrix and SRO peak are significantly improved by 
averaging the same type of image tiles, as shown in (d). Further, the 2D Gaussian fitting of the 
peaks in (e) and the radial-integral in (f) facilitate the determination of the peak intensity. The 
relative SRO intensity is calculated by normalizing the averaged SRO intensity with the averaged
matrix intensity. g, Comparison of the relative SRO intensity of the ten CoCrNi-based MPEAs 
with different processing methods. h, Comparison of the relative SRO intensity in MPEAs with 
different compositions. The error bar shows the standard deviation.


Page 9 of 27

Unraveling the mechanistic origin of SRO 

The intriguing SRO characterizations motivates a bold hypothesis that a large degree of 

SRO is formed during solidification (crystallization) temperature, at which the MPEAs are 
presumably considered to be RSS. To testify this critical hypothesis and fundamentally reveal the 
kinetics of SRO formation, we create a solidification model consisting of a growing solid front 
and liquid region, which allows us to reveal the solidification and its resultant chemical distribution
(see Fig. 3a, and Methods). The solid/liquid dual-phase model (Fig. 3a) consists of a random solid 
solution (RSS) substrate and a supercooled liquid region. The solidification front commences at 
the substrate-liquid interface (indicated by the dash lines in Fig. 3 a-f). During solidification, this 
front gradually progresses upward, accompanied by growth of solid and depletion of supercooled 
liquid (Fig. 3a,b). Using this model, we first scrutinize the evolution of chemical ordering at an 
extremely high cooling rate of 1010 K s−1 (Fig. 3c,d), which is 3 to 5 orders of magnitude higher 
than that in our LPBF samples (Fig. 1a). Surprisingly, the spatial distribution of atoms in the grown 
solid reveals augmented Ni-Ni and Co-Cr pairings in the solidified region (Fig. 3c), indicating a 
strong chemical non-randomness feature. To facilitate the quantification and visualization of the 
chemical SRO (CSRO), the corresponding spatial distribution of local pairwise order parameters,
∆αNi-Ni and ∆αCo-Cr (modified from the Warren Cowley parameters, see Methods, Supplementary 
Notes B and Supplementary Fig. 18-19 for more details), is employed. A positive/negative value 
of these parameters indicate favored/unfavored bonding in the first nearest neighbor shell, while a 
zero local pairwise order parameter represents random distribution. Our results show that SRO 
(revealed by the heterogeneous distribution of local pairwise order parameters in Fig. 3d) can 
readily form in fast solidification with an extremely fast cooling rate. 

To assess the proximity of the SRO state to its maximum achievable SRO degree through 

long-time annealing, we employed a hybrid Monte Carlo/molecular dynamic (MC/MD) approach 
to attain the equilibrium state. The results, shown in Fig. 3e,f, show only a slightly higher degree 
of local CSRO is achieved, implying the chemical distribution has closely approached the 
equilibrium at the fast solidification speed. In Fig. 3g, we compare the probability distributions of 
∆αNi-Ni and ∆αCo-Cr in the three systems, an ideal RSS, rapidly solidified state, and annealed 
equilibrium. With being zero for RSS, the mean values of ∆αNi-Ni only increase from 0.71
(solidified sample) to 0.78 (aged) after aging. Similarly, the mean values of ∆αCo-Cr show a minor 
increase, from 0.95 in the solidified to 1.04 in the annealed sample (The probability distributions 
of the other four pairwise order parameters are shown in Supplementary Fig. 20). These results 
indicate that most of the CSROs are formed during the solidification process and that heat 
treatment cannot significantly improve the CSRO, even in the samples solidified at a cooling rate 
of 1010 K s−1 which was assumed to be RSS.

To reveal spatial variation of CSRO during solidification, we characterize the values of 

∆αNi-Ni and ∆αCo-Cr along the solidification direction, mapped as a function of distance from the 
bottom to top (i.e., the z direction shown in Fig. 3a). Both ∆αNi-Ni and ∆αCo-Cr show a rapid increase 
at the boundary between the RSS substrate and just solidified region (i.e., the initial substrate-
liquid interface, as indicated by the dash lines in Fig. 3 a-f), above which the chemical order 


Page 10 of 27

quickly reaches a quasi-steady value within six atomic layers. This narrow transition zone suggests 
that the SRO mainly originates from crystallization processes, and the substrate has a negligible 
effect on the degree of its formation. To investigate the influence of cooling rate on the CSRO 
formation, we further simulate the solidification at an even higher cooling rate of 1011 K s−1. 
Although the cooling rate is 10 times higher, the formation of CSRO is still inevitable during the 
solidification of CoCrNi MEA. More details can be found in Supplementary Notes C, 
Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Fig. 21, 22.

Fig. 3 | Modeling the evolution of chemical distribution during solidification and after 
annealing. a,b, Snapshots showing the solidification process. Green represents the FCC crystal 
structure, red represents the solidification front, and purple represents the liquid. c,d, Atomic slices 
of the structure (in the x-z plane) showing the distribution of atoms (c) and the pairwise order 
parameters ∆αNi-Ni and ∆αCo-Cr after solidification (d), respectively. A threshold of 2 has been 
applied on the colorbar to enhance the contrast. Thus, the atoms with order parameters smaller than 
2 are colored by dark blue. The original result without threshold is included in Supplementary 
Fig. 19. e,f, Atomic slices of the structure (in the x-z plane) showing the distribution of atoms and 


Page 11 of 27

the pairwise order parameters ∆αNi-Ni (e) and ∆αCo-Cr after annealing (f), respectively. g, The 
probability distribution of ∆αNi-Ni and ∆αCo-Cr order parameters in the RSS, as-solidified and as-
annealed samples. h, Line profiles showing the variation of ∆αNi-Ni and ∆αCo-Cr as a function of 
solid growth distance in the solidifying direction (z-axis).

CSRO formation during solidification is a compelling process that warrants further in-

depth study. In the supercooled liquid (amorphous structure), we have found that, the same 
chemical SRO does not appear, while the structurally ordered local clusters, such as the 
icosahedron, exist (Supplementary Fig. 23-25, Supplementary Table 4-6 and Supplementary 
Notes D). Considering that crystal growth relies on the advancement of the solidification front 
(Fig. 3a), it is reasonable to hypothesize that CSRO predominantly emerges at phase 
transformation interface under non-equilibrium solidification conditions. We carefully examined 
the evolution of the solidification front by analyzing snapshots taken at 4 ps intervals (Fig. 4a,b). 
Specifically, Fig. 4a,b reveal the spatial and temporal evolution of structure and chemistry, 
respectively. The solidification front is rugged and exhibits heterogeneous movement along the
growth direction. As time elapses, the segments on the interface move upward, indicating a liquid-
solid phase transition. Intriguingly, some segments can retract by moving downward, indicating
the existence of local remelting. This could occur as the newly solidified clusters, being 
thermodynamically unstable due to the presence of dangling bonds, reconfigure locally in search 
of more energetically favorable pairs, thus lowering the potential energy, as revealed by the black 
circles in Fig. 4b. To quantify the dynamic motion of the front, we measured the net movement
distance per 4 ps along the interface (Fig. 4c). A positive value represents a net growth of 
solidification, while the opposite indicates remelting. Fig. 4c shows clearly that the solidification 
front moves in a heterogeneous manner. The segments of the solid-liquid interface that undergo 
crystal growth at the current moment may partially remelt in subsequent moments and vice versa. 
Yet, it is surprising that the detailed balance of local growth and remelting manages to constrain 
the roughness of the solidification front to just a few atomic layers, ensuring minimal variation in 
the interface height to reduce its surface area. 

The fast cooling rate and rapid solidification speed pose a question about the kinetic 

processes that can facilitate such rapid CSRO formation. The decisive question is: “Is the diffusion 
of atoms in surrounding liquid fast enough to endow the chemical ordering during solidification?”
To answer this, we compute crystal growth (solidification front) velocity and compare it with the 
atomic diffusivities in liquid. The crystal growth velocity is determined by the average growth 
distance of the solidification front as a function of time (Fig. 4d). The average growth velocity is 
9.45 nm ns−1, or 9.45 m s−1, which is significantly faster than the upper limit of crystal growth 
velocity that can be achieved in normal experiments. The diffusivities of Ni, Co, and Cr in liquid 
are estimated at 2.06 nm2 ns−1, 1.86 nm2 ns−1 and 1.65 nm2 ns−1, respectively, derived from the 
curves of mean square displacement as a function of time (Fig. 4e). In light of crystal growth 
velocity (one-dimensional) and diffusivity (three-dimensional), we illustrate atomic diffusion 
range and solidification front moved distance over 37 ps (Fig. 4f). When the crystal grows for 0.35 


Page 12 of 27

nm (2 lattice layers), the corresponding diffusion distances of Ni, Co, and Cr are 0.28 nm, 0.26 
nm, and 0.25 nm, respectively (Methods). The similarity in the crystal growth rate and the atomic 
diffusion domain sizes indicates that diffusivities in the liquid are high enough to provide the 
source of atoms for the formation of chemical ordering locally (Supplementary Notes C and 
Supplementary Fig. 22).

We propose an atomistic mechanism for the CSRO formation during solidification, as 

schematically shown in Fig. 4 g-j. The randomly distributed atoms in the liquid adjacent to solid 
front diffuse and participate in the growth of solid. Due to the attractive interactions between atoms
in the crystal solid, the favored pairs form and lead to chemical ordering, for instance, a precursor 
of Ni-Ni pair (Fig. 4g). When unfavorable atoms enter the first nearest neighbor shell of this Ni 
precursor (for instance, Co and Cr, as shown by the arrows in Fig. 4h), they can depart from the 
precursor either by interface diffusion or dissolution into liquid (i.e., remelting), leaving room for 
extra Ni atoms to diffuse in and grow the preferable Ni-Ni pairs. The subsequent growth of Ni-Ni 
pairs depicts the formation of local chemical ordering of Ni-Ni (Fig. 4i). Once the Ni atoms within 
the accessible diffusion range are exhausted, the Co and Cr atoms eventually encapsulate the Ni-
Ni nanocluster; thus, the chemical order cannot extend over a long range (Fig. 4j). The repeated 
local diffusion, solidification, and remelting (Fig. 4 g-j) act as the engine to sustain the local atomic 
reconfiguration at the solidification front, leading to the formation of CSRO even at a high cooling 
rate. While our atomistic simulations focus on the formation of SRO within the CoCrNi system, 
the findings bear broader implications when combined with our experimental results, extending 
their relevance to other MPEAs. The high concentrations of multiple principal elements provide 
the abundant sources required for chemical ordering, and the swift atomic diffusion realizes the 
process. Originating from the attractive/repulsive interactions among the constituent elements, the 
chemical order and its large extent are primarily determined by crystal growth velocity and the 
diffusivities of atoms. A discussion about the thermodynamic origin of local ordering is provided 
in Supplementary Notes E and Supplementary Fig. 26-28. 

Recent research has shown that the type of element introduced into the system plays a more 

critical role than the number of constitutional elements in modulating crystal growth velocity27. 
For instance, adding Cr can increase the growth activation energy, reducing the crystal growth 
velocity. The solid/liquid interfacial structure also impacts crystal growth velocity, particularly for 
alloys exhibiting a B2 structure. Here, a higher degree of pre-ordering in the liquid phase ahead of 
the solidification front can increase crystal growth velocity28. Conversely, the diffusivities of 
individual elements, influenced by component interactions, can be decreased by adding Cr, which 
raises the diffusion activation barrier. Hence, our study underscores the importance of considering 
the type of elements incorporated into MPEAs and their interactions when analyzing and 
predicting SRO behavior and its subsequent impact on material properties.


Page 13 of 27

Fig. 4 | Atomistic insights into the formation mechanism of CSRO at the solidification front.
a,b, Snapshots of the solidification front evolution. The top and bottom rows show the structural 
and chemical characterizations, respectively. c, The net movement distance of solidification front 
along the interface for every 4 ps. d, The solidification front's growth distance as a function of 
time. The average growth velocity is 9.45 nm ns−1. e, Mean square displacements of elements in 
the liquid as a function of time. The diffusivities for the three elements are labeled. f, Illustration 
of growth distance of solidification front and diffusion distance of elements in the liquid after the 
same duration of 37 ps. g-j, Schematic illustration of SRO formation mechanism. 


Page 14 of 27

Mechanical tuning of SRO

To investigate additional methods that could be effectively integrated with thermal 

treatment and quench rate selection for enhanced SRO tuning, we have conducted in-situ nano-
mechanical experiments using the EQ-SAED method. This allows us to elucidate the impact of 
mechanical deformation and dislocation slip on SRO. CoNiV was selected for this demonstration
as it offers a better SNR in its SRO signal (Fig. 2h), which enables more precise quantification of
the mechanical deformation effect. We fabricated a push-to-pull (PTP) setup from bulk CoNiV 
using a focused ion beam (FIB), as depicted in Fig. 5 a,b. This device offers a straightforward 
implementation of the tensile testing of a thin sample within the limited space of a TEM column, 
while ensuring stability throughout the loading process. Figure 5c illustrates that the EQ-SAED 
characterization was performed on the region circled ahead of the prefabricated crack tip at which 
the deformation concentrates. The loading curve is presented in Fig. 5d. It is important to note that 
the entire electron transparent region maintained a single-crystal structure without planar defects
during the experiments. Previous studies have noted that SRO can be disrupted by dislocations 
gliding across it5,9,22. In the case of cyclic loading, dislocations are repetitively emitted from the 
crack tip and migrate away from it during loading, and some of the dislocations are fully and 
partially recovered in the subsequent unloading. The net positive dislocation emission and gliding
in each cycle allow us to study its effect on SRO. Aligning with this theoretical speculation, we 
observed a consistent decrease in relative SRO intensity as the number of cycles increased (Fig. 
5e). A comparison of all the samples in this study is shown in Supplementary Fig. 29. Compared 
to thermal treatment and changing the cooling rate, mechanical tuning of SRO is more controllable.

Moreover, our experiment confirms the ability of the EQ-SAED method to capture SRO 

information in MPEAs quantitatively, further reinforcing its effectiveness and reliability. Recent 
studies have proposed that these diffuse signals at the ½ {3̅11} location of FCC MPEAs electron 
diffraction on [112] zone axis (a key aspect of our EQ-SAED approach) have alternative origins 
such as stacking faults48 or HOLZ49. In the case of stacking faults, we would expect an increase 
in diffuse signals during cyclic loading, due to the accumulation of plastic deformation. Conversely, 
if these signals were primarily a result of HOLZ, no significant changes should be observed during 
the cyclic loading of MEAs. Only the decrease in the SRO due to mechanical deformation aligns 
with our findings that the relative intensity of diffuse signals reduces during cyclic loading. 
Therefore, our in-situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiments provide robust 
evidence of a strong correlation between the diffuse spots on the [112] zone axis and the degree of 
SRO in the material.


Page 15 of 27

Fig. 5 | In-situ nano-mechanical testing to understand the evolution of SRO during cyclic 
loading. a, Schematic drawing of the PTP device used for cyclic loading. b, SEM image of the 
PTP setup. c, TEM image showing the boxed region in (b). d, The mechanical loading curve. e, 
Evolution of the relative SRO intensity as a function of loading cycles, underscoring the impact 
of dislocations on SRO during cyclic loading. The error bar shows the standard deviation.


Page 16 of 27

Discussion

Prior research has provided clues regarding the prevalence of SRO in MPEAs. For example, 

Li et al. employed resistometry to examine the evolution of SRO during mechanical deformation 
in single crystal CoCrNi samples9. Two sample conditions were examined: a water-quenched 
sample from 1,473 K (representing minimal ordering) and a sample subsequently annealed at 673 
K for 504 h (representing maximal ordering). Interestingly, both samples exhibited a reduction in 
resistance within the 0-6% engineering strain range, with the decrease in resistance during 
straining attributed to the disruption of SRO by dislocation movements. Remarkably, both samples 
displayed a similar maximum decrease in resistivity of 3-4% at 6% engineering strain. An 
important, albeit unmentioned, inference from these results is that the degree of SRO in the 
quenched sample might be comparable to that of the annealed sample. For another example, 
thermodynamics analysis of binary solid solutions has pointed out that the degree of SRO is a 
finite (non-zero) value in the high temperature region50. 

In this study, we demonstrate both qualitatively and quantitatively, through comprehensive 

electron microscopy characterizations, the ubiquitous nature of SRO in CoCrNi-based MPEAs, 
regardless of the cooling rates (ranging from 1 to 107 K s−1) and even after prolonged annealing 
periods. In addition, our atomistic simulations of CoCrNi solidification reveal that a substantial 
degree of SRO can form even under an extreme quench rate of 1011 K s−1 at the temperature close 
to melting. This rate is a minimum of three orders of magnitude higher than the maximum cooling 
rate achieved in our experimental setup. Our simulations further elucidate that the extent of SRO 
is primarily determined by the interplay between the crystal growth velocity and the atomic 
diffusivities within the supercooled liquid. These factors can be intricately fine-tuned by adjusting 
the cooling rate and solidification temperature. We found that as the cooling rate increases, the 
degree of SRO decreases correspondingly, due to the increased solidification front velocity and 
reduced diffusion range. Considering that the cooling rates employed in experiments to fabricate 
bulk samples typically do not exceed 107 K s−1, our results suggest that a higher degree of SRO, 
approaching the ideal degree achievable through long time annealing, is already established after 
solidification. This implies a negligible difference between samples subjected to varying thermal 
treatments, which aligns perfectly with our experimental observations. Therefore, our 
experimental results together with modeling outcomes offer convincing evidence of the ubiquitous 
nature of SRO in MPEAs.

The inescapable formation of SRO in FCC CoCrNi-based MPEAs carries significant 

implications for resolving the conundrum surrounding the impact of SRO on yield strength in these 
alloys. In the realm of body-centered cubic (BCC) MPEAs, both experimental5 and theoretical51-

54 evidence demonstrate that SRO can modify their strength. However, the scenario with FCC 
MPEAs is somewhat different. Theoretical predictions suggest a similar effect on strength due to 
SRO22,35-37, yet several experimental observations do not corroborate these expectations31-34. 
Specifically, no discernible difference has been observed between the yield strengths of samples 
with SRO and those considered RSS samples in most experiments. Hence, the manifestation of 
SRO’s role in FCC MPEAs’ yield strength remains a challenging puzzle to untangle. Our research 


Page 17 of 27

indicates that the previously utilized RSS control sample may, in fact, contain a significant degree 
of SRO. This presence of SRO calls into question the validity of the comparisons made in past 
studies. To truly elucidate the impact of SRO on the yield strength of the alloy, it is essential to 
first procure a sample that accurately represents an RSS state, one that is more devoid of SRO. 
This approach will establish a more accurate baseline for subsequent investigations.

However, acquiring an actual RSS presents a formidable challenge, mainly due to our 

limited understanding of effective methods for tuning SRO. Our experiments and modeling results 
in this study suggest that the cooling rates during solidification and the heat treatments, contrary 
to previous assumptions, do not efficiently modify SRO, at least for the equimolar CoCrNi-based 
MPEAs with concentrated solid solutions. Furthermore, the absence of an experimentally verified
TTT diagram for describing the kinetics of SRO formation makes its modulation via thermal 
treatment challenging. 

In fact, the relationship between SRO and material properties can exhibit non-monotonic 

and complex patterns. For instance, the negligible difference in yield strength between quenched 
and annealed MPEAs could imply a plateau stage. However, there might be a preceding stage 
characterized by a rapid increase in yield strength, which remains undiscovered due to the lack of 
an RSS MPEA sample experimentally. The ability to adjust SRO across a broad spectrum is crucial 
to fully probe this relationship. If the tuning range of SRO is limited, we might only explore a local
or specific behavior of the material properties, potentially missing critical turning points that only 
exist at specific levels of SRO. Hence, broad tunability of SRO not only allows for a more 
comprehensive understanding of the SRO-property relationship but also facilitates the 
identification of optimal SRO levels to achieve desired material properties.

Navigating these complexities and addressing the above challenges may necessitate 

exploring alternative strategies to modulate SRO, such as mechanical deformation, element 
substitution, irradiation, and interstitial alloying. As illustrated in Fig. 5, mechanical modulation8,9

of SRO based on their interaction with dislocations, stacking faults, and twins might be considered. 
Also, element substitution, for instance, has proven effective in encouraging local ordering. A 
prime example is the replacement of Mn with Pd in CoCrFeMnNi, which, as demonstrated by 
atomic Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) mapping, has significantly promoted local 
ordering2. In addition, irradiation has demonstrated its potential to both augment and diminish 
SRO10,11. This is due to the complex interaction between radiation-enhanced diffusion and atomic 
reshuffling during the irradiation-induced thermal spike. Fine-tuning irradiation parameters could 
thus provide an innovative approach to effectively manipulate SRO in MPEAs. Moreover, recent 
discoveries suggest that introducing spatially dispersed interstitial elements such as Carbon (C) 
and Nitrogen (N) can foster the formation of SRO55. This can be attributed to their varying 
chemical affinities with the principal elements. Integrating one or more of these alternate 
approaches with a careful control of the cooling rate and heat treatment could pave the way for 
more precise tuning of SRO in a wide range. This, in turn, could lead to more reliable experiments 
to understand SRO’s influence on material properties and performance.


Page 18 of 27

Additionally, understanding the impact of SRO on material properties necessitates a 

precise quantification of SRO due to the potentially non-monotonic nature of this relationship. A 
non-monotonic relationship suggests that small variations in SRO may significantly alter material 
properties in complex and potentially unpredictable ways. Therefore, without accurate 
measurement of SRO, it would be challenging to map this intricate relationship accurately, leading 
to misconceptions about the role of SRO. The EQ-SAED method we developed in this study is 
more quantitative than the previous EF-SAED method, and it negates the need for an energy filter, 
which considerably simplifies its application. However, this method remains semi-quantitative due 
to the inherent challenges in calibrating the exact degree of SRO. The precise quantification of 
SRO in MPEAs persists as a key hurdle in understanding the influence of SRO on material 
properties. It is crucial for future investigations to pioneer a more accurate quantification method, 
which could greatly expedite the exploration and application of diverse SRO modulation 
techniques. Such an advancement, though challenging, might be achievable through the integration 
of theoretical models grounded in a comprehensive understanding of interatomic interactions.

In conclusion, the ubiquitous presence of SRO in MPEAs, attributable to its efficient 

formation during the solidification process across a wide cooling rate range, challenges the 
efficacy of thermal treatment as a method to modulate SRO. Consequently, future research should 
invest more in combination of multiple potential factors influencing SRO formation, as well as 
understanding the nuanced impacts of SRO on specific properties of MPEAs. This continued 
research is vital to unlocking new pathways to manipulate material properties and expanding our 
comprehension of these complex alloys.


Page 19 of 27

Methods
Bulk sample preparation
Samples, including CoCrNi, CoCrFeNi, and CoCrFeMnNi, 

were prepared by traditional casting, LDED, and LPBF, respectively. The as-cast samples with the 
same composition were prepared by arc-melting constituent elements with 99.99% purity under 
an argon atmosphere. The cast ingot was flipped and remelted multiple times to ensure chemical 
homogeneity. The annealed CoCrNi sample was sealed in a quartz tube with argon and then heat-
treated at 900 °C for 7 days. LDED was conducted using an Optomec Laser Engineered Net 
Shaping (LENS) 450 system with an IPG fiber laser (400 W) at a wavelength of 1064 nm and a 
laser spot size of approximately 400 μm at the focal point. During the printing process, the chamber 
was filled with high-purity argon as an inert gas to keep the oxygen level below 20 ppm. The 
LDED typically relies on feeding powders into the melt path and molten pool created by a laser 
beam to deposit material layer-by-layer upon a substrate part or build plate. The LPBF samples 
were prepared using a commercial M290 (EOS) LPBF machine with a maximum power of 400 W 
and a focal diameter of 100 μm. All samples were prepared in an argon environment with an 
oxygen concentration of less than 1,000 ppm. The part is formed by spreading thin layers of these 
powders and fusing layers upon layer of these powders under computer control. The typical 
cooling rate for LPBF, LDED, and traditional casting is about 105 to 107 K s−1, 103 to 105 K s−1,
and 1 to 102 K s−1, respectively. The CoCrNi and CoCrFeNi samples labeled as L-DED were laser 
scanned as-cast samples using a LENS system. The CoNiV and CoCrNi samples labeled as L-PBF 
were laser scanned as-cast samples using an EOS M290 system. Only the top layers of all samples 
were used for analysis and the process parameters of LPBF and LDED are summarized in
Supplementary Table 7. XRD characterization of the bulk samples was performed on a Malvern 
Panalytical Empyrean III diffractometer. The bulk VCoNi samples for the in-situ TEM 
experiments were produced via arc-melting of the constituent elements. This process was 
succeeded by cold rolling, reducing the thickness by 55%. The samples then underwent a 
homogenization process at 1,200 °C for 5 h within an argon atmosphere before being rapidly 
cooled in ice water. A subsequent round of cold rolling was carried out, leading to a further 65% 
reduction in thickness. Finally, the sample was annealed at 1,000 °C for 10 min and then rapidly 
quenched in ice water.

TEM sample preparation
The samples underwent a TEM sample preparation 

procedure by lifting them out from the bulk sample and welding them on gold half-grids using the 
Thermo Fisher Scientific (TFS) Helios Nanofab 660 FIB. It is important to note that, for the LDED 
and LPBF samples, the lifting out of the sample was performed on the newest printed layer. This 
choice ensured that the selected region had not undergone any additional annealing processes. 
After the lift-out, the samples were thinned by Ga FIB working at 30 kV, which was subsequently 
reduced to 16 kV and then 8 kV. This process reduced the sample thickness to approximately 240 
nm. The samples used for Figs. 1-2 were then flash polished56,57 to about 100 nm to remove the 
Ga+ damaged layer, i.e., about 70 nm of thickness was removed from each side. Based on our 
Monte Carlo simulation of Ga+ implantation in CoCrNi, CoCrFeNi, and CoCrFeMnNi


Page 20 of 27

(Supplementary Fig. 30), the removed layer (~70 nm on each side) is much thicker than that of 
the damage layer induced by Ga+ ions during the FIB process (typically below 5 nm). The setup 
for flash polishing is shown in Supplementary Fig. 31a. The samples, held by gold tweezer, were 
immersed in 4% perchloric acid/ethanol solution at 12 V and around −45 °C. The polishing time 
was controlled by a timer and typically lasted between 50 ms and 200 ms, depending on the sample 
thickness. After flash polishing, the samples were washed three times in −45 °C methanol, −45 °C
ethanol, and 25 °C ethanol, respectively. The resulting sample after flash polishing is shown in 
Supplementary Fig. 31e-f. Note that the samples used for in-situ mechanical testing in Fig. 5
have not been flash-polished because it might compromise the stability of the mechanical testing 
process by etching the PTP structure or altering the crack shape, which is undesirable. The crack 
was deliberately created to localize the damage zone for a more precise capture of the SRO-
deformation relationship. A discussion of the FIB damage in this sample used in Fig. 5 is provided 
in the Supplementary Notes F.

TEM characterization and analysis
The SAED patterns were collected in TFS Talos F2 

200X2 at the same acquisition conditions on the same day, including an accelerating voltage of 
200 kV, a spot size of 1, a screen current of 0.03 nA (22,500 X magnification, with the 40 select 
area aperture inserted), a select area aperture of 40 µm, a magnification of 22,500 ×, a camera 
length of 410 mm and an image resolution of 1024×1024 and an exposure time of 1 s. The details 
of the EQ-SAED method have been presented in the main text. The data processing was performed 
with the py4DSTEM package58. The in-situ TEM mechanical experiments were performed with a 
Bruker pico-indenter (PI) 95 holder. 

Monte Carlo Simulation of ion irradiation damage caused by FIB
The simulation 

is performed by a software package called Ion irradiation in Materials 3D (IM3D) 59, which is a 
Monte Carlo simulation code based on the binary collision approximation. We used the full-
cascade mode to predict the vacancy distribution of primary radiation damage. By approximating
the ion milling angle in a typical FIB thinning process (i.e., a glancing angle of 2°, as shown in 
Supplementary Fig. 30a), the simulation of Ga+ ion damage is performed for three different 
CoCrNi-based alloy systems at 5 different Ga+ ion energies (Supplementary Fig. 30b-d).

Solidification modeling
To investigate the formation of CSRO in CoCrNi MEA, we 

established bulk models with [100], [010], and [001] orientations along the x, y, and z directions, 
respectively. The simulation cells comprised 50 × 50 × 60 unit cells and contained 600,000 atoms. 
The three elements had equal atomic ratios and were randomly distributed. A many-body 
embedded atom method (EAM) potential was employed for the CoCrNi MEA22. Periodic 
boundary conditions were applied along the x and y dimensions of the model, and the non-periodic 
boundary condition was used along the z dimension. The models were thermally equilibrated at 
1,315 K and 1,015 K by an anisotropic zero-pressure isobaric-isothermal NPT ensemble for 10 ps 
with an MD time step of 0.001 ps. Next, we fixed the atoms in the bottom 1/3 along the z-axis, and 


Page 21 of 27

the rest was heated up to 2,000 K for 50 ps for complete melting. The solid/liquid dual phase 
systems were cooled down from 2,000 K to 1,415 K (the measured melting point temperature) 
within 50 ps. The pinned atoms were released, and the system was relaxed at 1,315 K and 1,015 
K, respectively, by the microcanonical ensemble (NVE). The Nose-Hoover temperature-rescaling 
thermostat was applied to the initially fixed solid phase to absorb heat from the supercooled liquid 
and cool the system to 1,315 K and 1,015 K, respectively. The cooling rates were estimated by the 
difference of initial and final temperature of the initially liquid region over solidification time. The 
Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) was utilized to carry out 
molecular dynamics (MD) simulation60, and atomic structures were visualized by the molecular 
visualization package OVITO61. 

Degree of SRO at thermodynamic equilibrium
The ideal SRO through infinite time 

annealing could be generated by hybrid MC/MD simulation using VCSGC package62 under the 
semi-grand canonical ensemble at 1,315 K and 1,050 K, respectively. Every 100 MD steps were 
carried out between MC cycles, and 20% trial moves for each MC cycle. The chemical potential 
difference ΔμNi-Co= 0.021 eV and ΔμNi-Cr= −0.31 eV. The variance parameter К used in simulations 
was 103. Periodic boundary conditions were applied to all directions of the system. 2/3 of the bulk 
model along the z direction in the top was used to perform MC/MD simulation. The MD timestep 
was set to 0.0025 ps, and 1 million MD steps were carried out to achieve converged SRO. 

Local chemical short-range order parameter
The local short-range order was 

calculated as the nonproportional number of local atomic pairs ∆αi-j, modified from the Warren-
Cowley parameter1,63,64:

∆αi-j = Ni-j − Ni-j,0
(1)

where Ni-j is the number of i-j pairs in the first nearest neighbor shell of an i-type atom, Ni-j,0 is the 
number of i-j pairs for the random solid solution. Since there are 12 first nearest neighboring atoms 
for FCC structure, an equimolar CoCrNi would give rise to Ni-j,0 = 4 (i.e., 12 × 1/3 = 4 ). For species 
i and j, a positive ∆αi-j suggests the clustering in the first shell and the negative ∆αi-j means opposite. 
The difference between this definition of SRO parameters and the more commonly used Warren-
Cowley parameters are provided in Supplementary Notes B, showing that the definition of SRO 
parameter will not change the conclusion and reliability of this work.

Solidification front analysis and crystal growth
The crystal growth velocity is 

estimated by tracking the average locations of atoms in the solidification front as a function of 
time. In our model, it contains three identical structures. RSS substrate and solidified region have 
perfect FCC structures. Supercooled liquid shows amorphous structures. The solidification front 
belongs to the free surface of the solid, which is the boundary of FCC structures. It is identified as 
an irregular structure via OVITO. By searching the first nearest neighbors of atoms in FCC 
structures on the boundary, irregular structure atoms in the first nearest neighbors of FCC structure 


Page 22 of 27

atoms belong to the solidification front. Their positions are averaged to track the location of the 
solidification front after that. 

Ion diffusivity in liquid
The diffusion of elements in the liquid is characterized by 

diffusion coefficient D via the Einstein-Smoluchowski equation65,66,

𝐷 = 〈𝐑2〉

6dt

(2)

where d is the dimension of diffusion and is equal to 3 in our simulations. t is the time and 〈𝐑2〉 is 
the mean square displacement (MSD) of an ensemble of particles over time that can be written as 
follows:

〈𝐑2〉 = 1

N ∑|𝒓𝑖(𝑡) − 𝒓𝑖(0)|2

𝑁

𝑖=1

(3)

where N is the number of each element in the liquid, 𝒓𝑖(𝑡) is the position of atom i at time t and 
𝒓𝑖(0) is the initial position of atom i. We performed independent simulations to ensure that the 
measurement of diffusion at solidification temperatures isn’t influenced by solidification. We 
created a system with a dimension of 20a0 × 20a0 × 20a0 (a0 is lattice constant) that contained 32, 
000 atoms. Periodic boundary conditions were applied to three dimensions. The system's 
temperature was increased to 2, 000 K for 10 ps to melt the crystal completely and then relaxed at 
target temperature for 10 ps. Afterward, the MSD of each element was calculated by Equation. 3 
every 1 ps. The square root of diffusivity measures the maximum diffusion distance three-
dimensionally in the unit of time. Diffusion distance is calculated by:

𝒓 = √𝐷𝑡
(4)

where D is the diffusivity and t is the time. 


Page 23 of 27

References
1. Ding, J., Yu, Q., Asta, M. & Ritchie, R. O. Tunable stacking fault energies by tailoring local 

chemical order in crconi medium-entropy alloys. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, 8919-8924 (2018).

2. Ding, Q., Zhang, Y., Chen, X., Fu, X., Chen, D., Chen, S., Gu, L., Wei, F., Bei, H. & Gao, Y. 

Tuning element distribution, structure and properties by composition in high-entropy alloys. 
Nature 574, 223-227 (2019).

3. Zhang, R., Zhao, S., Ding, J., Chong, Y., Jia, T., Ophus, C., Asta, M., Ritchie, R. O. & Minor, 

A. M. Short-range order and its impact on the CrCoNi medium-entropy alloy. Nature 581, 283-
287 (2020).

4. Chen, X., Wang, Q., Cheng, Z., Zhu, M., Zhou, H., Jiang, P., Zhou, L., Xue, Q., Yuan, F., Zhu, 

J., Wu, X. L. & Ma, E. Direct observation of chemical short-range order in a medium-entropy 
alloy. Nature 592, 712-716 (2021).

5. Wang, L., Ding, J., Chen, S., Jin, K., Zhang, Q., Cui, J., Wang, B., Chen, B., Li, T., Ren, Y., 

Zheng, S., Ming, K., Lu, W., Hou, J., Sha, G., Liang, J., Wang, L., Xue, Y. & Ma, E. Tailoring 
planar slip to achieve pure metal-like ductility in body-centred-cubic multi-principal element 
alloys. Nat. Mater. (2023).

6. Zhang, Z., Su, Z., Zhang, B., Yu, Q., Ding, J., Shi, T., Lu, C., Ritchie, R. O. & Ma, E. Effect 

of local chemical order on the irradiation-induced defect evolution in CrCoNi medium-entropy 
alloy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 120, e2218673120 (2023).

7. DebRoy, T., Mukherjee, T., Milewski, J. O., Elmer, J. W., Ribic, B., Blecher, J. J. & Zhang, 

W. Scientific, technological and economic issues in metal printing and their solutions. Nat. 
Mater. 18, 1026-1032 (2019).

8. Seol, J. B., Ko, W.-S., Sohn, S. S., Na, M. Y., Chang, H. J., Heo, Y.-U., Kim, J. G., Sung, H., 

Li, Z., Pereloma, E. & Kim, H. S. Mechanically derived short-range order and its impact on 
the multi-principal-element alloys. Nat. Commun. 13, 6766 (2022).

9. Li, L., Chen, Z., Kuroiwa, S., Ito, M., Yuge, K., Kishida, K., Tanimoto, H., Yu, Y., Inui, H. & 

George, E. P. Evolution of short-range order and its effects on the plastic deformation behavior 
of single crystals of the equiatomic Cr-Co-Ni medium-entropy alloy. Acta Mater. 243, 118537 
(2023).

10. Su, Z., Shi, T., Shen, H., Jiang, L., Wu, L., Song, M., Li, Z., Wang, S. & Lu, C. Radiation-

assisted chemical short-range order formation in high-entropy alloys. Scr. Mater. 212, 114547 
(2022).

11. Arkoub, H. & Jin, M. Impact of chemical short-range order on radiation damage in Fe-Ni-Cr 

alloys. Scr. Mater. 229, 115373 (2023).

12. Yeh, J. W., Chen, S. K., Lin, S. J., Gan, J. Y., Chin, T. S., Shun, T. T., Tsau, C. H. & Chang, 

S. Y. Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: Novel alloy design 
concepts and outcomes. Adv. Eng. Mater. 6, 299-303 (2004).

13. Cantor, B., Chang, I., Knight, P. & Vincent, A. Microstructural development in equiatomic 

multicomponent alloys. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 375, 213-218 (2004).

14. Zhang, Y., Zuo, T. T., Tang, Z., Gao, M. C., Dahmen, K. A., Liaw, P. K. & Lu, Z. P. 

Microstructures and properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog. Mater. Sci. 61, 1-93 (2014).

15. Miracle, D. B. & Senkov, O. N. A critical review of high entropy alloys and related concepts. 

Acta Mater. 122, 448-511 (2017).

16. Gludovatz, B., Hohenwarter, A., Catoor, D., Chang, E. H., George, E. P. & Ritchie, R. O. A 

fracture-resistant high-entropy alloy for cryogenic applications. Science 345, 1153-1158 
(2014).


Page 24 of 27

17. Gludovatz, B., Hohenwarter, A., Thurston, K. V., Bei, H., Wu, Z., George, E. P. & Ritchie, R. 

O. Exceptional damage-tolerance of a medium-entropy alloy CrCoNi at cryogenic 
temperatures. Nat. Commun. 7, 10602 (2016).

18. Lu, C., Niu, L., Chen, N., Jin, K., Yang, T., Xiu, P., Zhang, Y., Gao, F., Bei, H., Shi, S., He, 

M.-R., Robertson, I. M., Weber, W. J. & Wang, L. Enhancing radiation tolerance by 
controlling defect mobility and migration pathways in multicomponent single-phase alloys. 
Nat. Commun. 7, 13564 (2016).

19. Lu, P., Saal, J. E., Olson, G. B., Li, T., Swanson, O. J., Frankel, G., Gerard, A. Y., Quiambao, 

K. F. & Scully, J. R. Computational materials design of a corrosion resistant high entropy alloy 
for harsh environments. Scr. Mater. 153, 19-22 (2018).

20. Liu, D., Yu, Q., Kabra, S., Jiang, M., Forna-Kreutzer, P., Zhang, R., Payne, M., Walsh, F., 

Gludovatz, B., Asta, M., Minor, A. M., George, E. P. & Ritchie, R. O. Exceptional fracture 
toughness of CrCoNi-based medium- and high-entropy alloys at 20 Kelvin. Science 378, 978-
983 (2022).

21. Yeh, J. W. Recent progress in high-entropy alloys. Ann. Chim. Sci. Mat. 31, 633-648 (2006).
22. Li, Q. J., Sheng, H. & Ma, E. Strengthening in multi-principal element alloys with local-

chemical-order roughened dislocation pathways. Nat. Commun. 10, 3563 (2019).

23. Hsiao, H.-W., Feng, R., Ni, H., An, K., Poplawsky, J. D., Liaw, P. K. & Zuo, J. Data-driven 

electron-diffraction approach reveals local short-range ordering in CrCoNi with ordering 
effects. Nat. Commun. 13, 6651 (2022).

24. Walsh, F., Asta, M. & Ritchie, R. O. Magnetically driven short-range order can explain 

anomalous measurements in CrCoNi. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118, e2020540118 (2021).

25. Zhang, Y. J., Han, D. & Li, X. W. Improving the stress-controlled fatigue life of low solid-

solution hardening Ni-Cr alloys by enhancing short range ordering degree. Int. J. Fatigue 149, 
106266 (2021).

26. Lu, C., Yang, T., Jin, K., Gao, N., Xiu, P., Zhang, Y., Gao, F., Bei, H., Weber, W. J., Sun, K., 

Dong, Y. & Wang, L. Radiation-induced segregation on defect clusters in single-phase 
concentrated solid-solution alloys. Acta Mater. 127, 98-107 (2017).

27. Cao, P. How does short-range order impact defect kinetics in irradiated multiprincipal element 

alloys? Accounts Mater. Res. 2, 71-74 (2021).

28. Liu, M., Aiello, A., Xie, Y. & Sieradzki, K. The effect of short-range order on passivation of 

Fe-Cr alloys. J. Electrochem. Soc. 165, C830 (2018).

29. Xie, Y., Artymowicz, D. M., Lopes, P. P., Aiello, A., Wang, D., Hart, J. L., Anber, E., Taheri, 

M. L., Zhuang, H. & Newman, R. C. A percolation theory for designing corrosion-resistant 
alloys. Nat. Mater. 20, 789-793 (2021).

30. Scully, J. R., Inman, S. B., Gerard, A. Y., Taylor, C. D., Windl, W., Schreiber, D. K., Lu, P., 

Saal, J. E. & Frankel, G. S. Controlling the corrosion resistance of multi-principal element 
alloys. Scr. Mater. 188, 96-101 (2020).

31. Yin, B., Yoshida, S., Tsuji, N. & Curtin, W. Yield strength and misfit volumes of nicocr and 

implications for short-range-order. Nat. Commun. 11, 2507 (2020).

32. Fan, Z., Li, L., Chen, Z., Asakura, M., Zhang, C., Yang, Z., Inui, H. & George, E. P. 

Temperature-dependent yield stress of single crystals of non-equiatomic Cr-Mn-Fe-Co-Ni 
high-entropy alloys in the temperature range 10-1173 k. Acta Mater. 246, 118712 (2023).

33. Zhang, M., Yu, Q., Frey, C., Walsh, F., Payne, M. I., Kumar, P., Liu, D., Pollock, T. M., Asta, 

M. D. & Ritchie, R. O. Determination of peak ordering in the CrCoNi medium-entropy alloy 
via nanoindentation. Acta Mater. 241, 118380 (2022).


Page 25 of 27

34. Inoue, K., Yoshida, S. & Tsuji, N. Direct observation of local chemical ordering in a few 

nanometer range in CoCrNi medium-entropy alloy by atom probe tomography and its impact 
on mechanical properties. Phys. Rev. Mater. 5, 085007 (2021).

35. Cao, P. Maximum strength and dislocation patterning in multi-principal element alloys. Sci. 

Adv. 8, eabq7433 (2022).

36. Jian, W., Xie, Z., Xu, S., Su, Y., Yao, X. & Beyerlein, I. J. Effects of lattice distortion and 

chemical short-range order on the mechanisms of deformation in medium entropy alloy 
CoCrNi. Acta Mater. 199, 352-369 (2020).

37. Yang, X., Xi, Y., He, C., Chen, H., Zhang, X. & Tu, S. Chemical short-range order 

strengthening mechanism in CoCrNi medium-entropy alloy under nanoindentation. Scr. Mater.
209, 114364 (2022).

38. Picak, S., Singh, P., Salas, D., Tunes, M. A., Fang, X., Zhou, L., Kramer, M. J., Chumlyakov, 

Y. I., Johnson, D. D., Arroyave, R., Ren, Y. & Karaman, I. Orientation dependence of the 
effect of short-range ordering on the plastic deformation of a medium entropy alloy. Mater. 
Sci. Eng. A, 145309 (2023).

39. DebRoy, T., Wei, H. L., Zuback, J. S., Mukherjee, T., Elmer, J. W., Milewski, J. O., Beese, A. 

M., Wilson-Heid, A., De, A. & Zhang, W. Additive manufacturing of metallic components-
process, structure and properties. Prog. Mater. Sci. 92, 112-224 (2018).

40.Hooper, P. A. Melt pool temperature and cooling rates in laser powder bed fusion. Addit. Manuf.

22, 548-559 (2018).

41. Liu, Y., Ren, J., Guan, S., Li, C., Zhang, Y., Muskeri, S., Liu, Z., Yu, D., Chen, Y., An, K., 

Cao, Y., Liu, W., Zhu, Y., Chen, W., Mukherjee, S., Zhu, T. & Chen, W. Microstructure and 
mechanical behavior of additively manufactured cocrfemnni high-entropy alloys: Laser 
directed energy deposition versus powder bed fusion. Acta Mater. 250, 118884 (2023).

42. Mooraj, S., Dong, J., Xie, K. Y. & Chen, W. Formation of printing defects and their effects on 

mechanical properties of additively manufactured metal alloys. J. Appl. Phys. 132 (2022).

43. Bertsch, K. M., Meric de Bellefon, G., Kuehl, B. & Thoma, D. J. Origin of dislocation 

structures in an additively manufactured austenitic stainless steel 316l. Acta Mater. 199, 19-33 
(2020).

44. He, Q., Tang, P., Chen, H., Lan, S., Wang, J., Luan, J., Du, M., Liu, Y., Liu, C. & Pao, C. 

Understanding chemical short-range ordering/demixing coupled with lattice distortion in solid 
solution high entropy alloys. Acta Mater. 216, 117140 (2021).

45. Li, Y., Colnaghi, T., Gong, Y., Zhang, H., Yu, Y., Wei, Y., Gan, B., Song, M., Marek, A. & 

Rampp, M. Machine learning-enabled tomographic imaging of chemical short-range atomic 
ordering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13433 (2023).

46. Moniri, S., Yang, Y., Yuan, Y., Zhou, J., Yang, L., Zhu, F., Liao, Y., Yao, Y., Hu, L. & Ercius, 

P. Three-dimensional atomic positions and local chemical order of medium-and high-entropy 
alloys. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14123 (2023).

47. Zhou, L., Wang, Q., Wang, J., Chen, X., Jiang, P., Zhou, H., Yuan, F., Wu, X., Cheng, Z. & 

Ma, E. Atomic-scale evidence of chemical short-range order in CrCoNi medium-entropy alloy. 
Acta Mater. 224, 117490 (2022).

48. Walsh, F., Zhang, M., Ritchie, R. O., Minor, A. M. & Asta, M. Extra electron reflections in 

concentrated alloys do not necessitate short-range order. Nat. Mater. 22, 926-929 (2023).

49. Coury, F. G., Miller, C., Field, R. & Kaufman, M. On the origin of diffuse intensities in FCC

electron diffraction patterns. Nature 622, 742-747 (2023).


Page 26 of 27

50. Fultz, B. in Phase transitions in materials
(ed Brent Fultz)  171-203 (Cambridge University 

Press, 2020).

51. Wang, S. D., Liu, X. J., Lei, Z. F., Lin, D. Y., Bian, F. G., Yang, C. M., Jiao, M. Y., Du, Q., 

Wang, H., Wu, Y., Jiang, S. H. & Lu, Z. P. Chemical short-range ordering and its strengthening 
effect in refractory high-entropy alloys. Phys. Rev. B 103, 104107 (2021).

52. Zhang, B., Ding, J. & Ma, E. Chemical short-range order in body-centered-cubic TiZrHfNb 

high-entropy alloys. Appl. Phys. Lett. 119 (2021).

53. Yin, S., Zuo, Y., Abu-Odeh, A., Zheng, H., Li, X.-G., Ding, J., Ong, S. P., Asta, M. & Ritchie, 

R. O. Atomistic simulations of dislocation mobility in refractory high-entropy alloys and the 
effect of chemical short-range order. Nat. Commun. 12, 4873 (2021).

54. Xun, K., Zhang, B., Wang, Q., Zhang, Z., Ding, J. & Ma, E. Local chemical inhomogeneities 

in TiZrNb-based refractory high-entropy alloys. J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 135, 221-230 (2023).

55. Su, Z., Ding, J., Song, M., Jiang, L., Shi, T., Li, Z., Wang, S., Gao, F., Yun, D., Ma, E. & Lu, 

C. Enhancing the radiation tolerance of high-entropy alloys via solute-promoted chemical 
heterogeneities. Acta Mater. 245, 118662 (2023).

56. Horváth, B., Schäublin, R. & Dai, Y. Flash electropolishing of TEM lamellas of irradiated 

tungsten. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. 449, 29-34 (2019).

57. Schemer Kohrn, A., Toloczko, M. B., Zhu, Y., Wang, J. & Edwards, D. J. Removal of FIB 

damage using flash electropolishing for artifact-free tem foils. Microsc. Microanal. 25, 1606-
1607 (2019).

58. Savitzky, B. H., Zeltmann, S. E., Hughes, L. A., Brown, H. G., Zhao, S., Pelz, P. M., Pekin, T. 

C., Barnard, E. S., Donohue, J., Rangel DaCosta, L., Kennedy, E., Xie, Y., Janish, M. T., 
Schneider, M. M., Herring, P., Gopal, C., Anapolsky, A., Dhall, R., Bustillo, K. C., Ercius, P., 
Scott, M. C., Ciston, J., Minor, A. M. & Ophus, C. Py4DSTEM: A software package for four-
dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy data analysis. Microsc. Microanal. 27, 
712-743 (2021).

59. Li, Y. G., Yang, Y., Short, M. P., Ding, Z. J., Zeng, Z. & Li, J. IM3D: A parallel Monte Carlo 

code for efficient simulations of primary radiation displacements and damage in 3D geometry. 
Sci. Rep. 5, 18130 (2015).

60. Thompson, A. P., Aktulga, H. M., Berger, R., Bolintineanu, D. S., Brown, W. M., Crozier, P. 

S., in't Veld, P. J., Kohlmeyer, A., Moore, S. G. & Nguyen, T. D. LAMMPS-a flexible 
simulation tool for particle-based materials modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum 
scales. Comput. Phys. Commun. 271, 108171 (2022).

61. Stukowski, A. Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO–the open 

visualization tool. Model. Simul. Mat. Sci. Eng. 18, 015012 (2009).

62. Sadigh, B., Erhart, P., Stukowski, A., Caro, A., Martinez, E. & Zepeda-Ruiz, L. Scalable 

parallel Monte Carlo algorithm for atomistic simulations of precipitation in alloys. Phys. Rev. 
B 85, 184203 (2012).

63. Cowley, J. Short-range order and long-range order parameters. Phys. Rev. 138, A1384 (1965).
64. Norman, N. & Warren, B. X‐ray measurement of short range order in Ag‐Au. J. Appl. Phys.

22, 483-486 (1951).

65. Einstein, A. Über die von der molekularkinetischen theorie der wärme geforderte bewegung 

von in ruhenden flüssigkeiten suspendierten teilchen. Ann. Phys. 4 (1905).

66. Von Smoluchowski, M. Zur kinetischen theorie der brownschen molekularbewegung und der 

suspensionen. Ann. Phys. 326, 756-780 (1906).


Page 27 of 27

Acknowledgements
Y.Y. acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation early career award DMR-
2145455. The authors thank Dr. Andrew M. Minor from Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
for helpful discussions. Also, the authors thank Prof. Chenyang Lu from Xi’an Jiaotong University 
and Prof. Xing Wang from The Pennsylvania State University for their advice on flash polishing
parameters.

Author contributions
Y.Y. and P.C. conceived the project. Y.H. performed all TEM sample preparation and electron 
microscopy characterization. H.C. performed the MD simulations. Y.S. and Y.H. performed the 
electron microscopy data analysis. J.L. and W.C. performed the bulk sample fabrication and the 
XRD experiments. S.W. fabricated the CoNiV bulk sample. Z.Z. performed the IM3D simulations. 
B.X. provided important feedback on the simulation data analysis. M.L. and J.Y. performed the 
in-situ TEM annealing experiment. Y.Y., P.C., Y.H., and H.C. wrote the manuscript. Y.H., H.C., 
and Y.Z. plotted the figures. All authors contributed to the discussion of the results.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Data availability
The main data supporting the findings of this study are available within this article and its 
Supplementary Information. Additional data are available from the corresponding authors upon 
reasonable request.


