Notice: This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under Contract No. DE-

AC0500OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and 

the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States 

Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or 

reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for the United States 

Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of 

federally 
sponsored 
research 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
DOE 
Public 
Access 
Plan 

(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).


Coexistence and interplay of two ferroelectric mechanisms in Zn1-xMgxO

Jonghee Yang,1,2 Anton V. Ievlev,3 Anna N. Morozovska,4 Eugene Eliseev,4 Jonathan D 

Poplawsky,3 Devin Goodling,5 Robert Jackson Spurling,5 Jon-Paul Maria,5 Sergei V. Kalinin,1*

Yongtao Liu3*

1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 

37996, USA

2 Department of Chemistry, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea

3 Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 

37830, USA 

4 Institute of Physics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 46, pr. Nauky, 03028 Kyiv, 

Ukraine

5 Materials Research Institute, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA

Corresponding emails: sergei2@utk.edu; liuy3@ornl.gov


Abstract

Ferroelectric materials promise exceptional attributes including low power dissipation, fast 

operational speeds, enhanced endurance, and superior retention to revolutionize information 

technology. However, the practical application of ferroelectric-semiconductor memory devices 

has been significantly challenged by the incompatibility of traditional perovskite oxide 

ferroelectrics with metal-oxide-semiconductor technology. Recent discoveries of ferroelectricity 

in binary oxides such as Zn1-xMgxO and Hf1-xZrxO have been a focal point of research in 

ferroelectric information technology. This work investigates the ferroelectric properties of Zn1-

xMgxO utilizing automated band excitation piezoresponse force microscopy. Our findings reveal

the coexistence of two ferroelectric subsystems within Zn1-xMgxO. We propose a "fringing-ridge 

mechanism" of polarization switching that is characterized by initial lateral expansion of 

nucleation without significant propagation in depth, contradicting the conventional domain growth 

process observed in ferroelectrics. This unique polarization dynamics in Zn1-xMgxO suggests a 

new understanding of ferroelectric behavior, contributing to both the fundamental science of 

ferroelectrics and their application in information technology.


Ferroelectric materials have been a focal point of research for over five decades because of 

their potential applications in information technology.1, 2 Ferroelectrics with two or more 

switchable polarization states separated by atomically thin walls are promising for high-density 

information storage, e.g., ferroelectric random-access memories (FeRAM)3, 4 or tunneling barriers. 

These in turn are believed to offer a constellation of exceptional attributes encompassing low 

power dissipation, fast operational speeds, enhanced endurance, and good retention. However, the 

practical implementation of ferroelectric-semiconductor memory has been hindered by the fact 

that metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology is generally incompatible with the film 

growth of traditional perovskite oxide ferroelectrics. Despite over three decades of research 

towards the integration of classical ferroelectrics and semiconductors, sustained and scalable 

solutions have not yet been found.

The discovery of ferroelectricity within hafnia solid solutions has been a disruptive 

change.5 In contrast to their perovskite counterparts, these materials can be processed via 

deposition techniques such as atomic layer deposition, which enables seamless integration into 

established semiconductor fabrication workflows.6, 7 As a consequence, the last decade has 

witnessed extensive research endeavors in the exploration of ferroelectric properties across a wide 

range of materials.7 Beyond hafnia oxide, ferroelectricity has also been unveiled in wurtzite such 

as AlxSc1-xN,8 AlxB1-xN,9-11 and Zn1-xMgxO.12 However, these emergent ferroelectric wurtzite 

materials exhibit distinctive behavior deviating from traditional perovskite ferroelectrics. These 

unique behaviors include their square ferroelectric hysteresis loops even in the presence of strong

structural disorder, the ‘wake-up’ effect where the ferroelectric response emerges or enhances after 

several polling cycles,9, 13-15 and the potential absence of a paraelectric phase. The ‘wake-up’ effect 

in Zn1-xMgxO has been found field-dependent, where Zn1-xMgxO can be woken up in 20 cycles on 

driving near the coercive field and in a single cycle on driving in excess of 4 MV/cm.14 In addition, 

strong electrochemical reactions were observed when applying an electric field on the bare surface 

of AlxB1-xN in ambient condition, such electrochemical reactions can be suppressed in a controlled 

environment with low humidity.16 Recently, it was also discovered that the atmosphere affects the 

polarization stability in a binary oxide Hf0.5Zr0.5O film.17

In this work, we investigate the polarization switching in Zn1-xMgxO with band excitation 

piezoresponse force microscopy
(BEPFM) imaging and
band excitation piezoresponse

spectroscopy (BEPS) measurements in a high throughput manner to thoroughly visualize the 


polarization dynamics. We observe highly unusual ferroelectric behavior that suggests the 

coexistence of two independent ferroelectric subsystems, the behavior is inconsistent with strong 

depolarization field coupling. We explore the detailed mechanism of this phenomena and argue 

that we observe the evidence of a new type of ferroelectric switching—fringing-ridge mechanism 

correlated with incomplete switching. Unlike a traditional domain growth process, where the 

domain propagates to depth after nucleation, in a fringing-ridge mechanism, nucleation expands 

laterally first with rare or without propagation to depth; domain propagation only happens at very 

high voltage.

Figure 1. High-throughput domain writing experiments. (a) Scheme of experimental process, 
where a DC pulse is applied to reverse the polarization and subsequently a PFM image 
measurement reveals the resultant domain created by the DC pulse; varying the DC pulse 
parameters (i.e., duration and magnitude) allows to explore the domain growth procedure. (b) 
High-throughput domain writing results of ZMO-32, where 16 pulse magnitude and 13 pulse 
duration conditions are explored (208 pulse conditions). The results show two distinct domain 
structures including shadow domains and normal domains. (c), (d) show amplified images of 
representative domains. 


To explore polarization switching in this material, we perform the exploration of the 

domain growth dynamics as a function of the bias pulse parameters for three Zn1-xMgxO samples 

with different compositions, targeting the exploration of the composition dependent domain 

growth laws. The film growth procedure can be found in Methods section. Hereinafter, we refer 

to these three samples as ZMO-32, ZMO-24, ZMO-18, respectively, according to the Mg 

composition in the films, i.e., Mg ratio in ZMO-32 is 32%. The as-grown ZMO films show a down-

polarized pristine state. The polarization can be switched by applying a direct current (DC) bias 

via a scanning probe microscopy tip. BEPFM mappings of poled ZMO films displaying the 

standard ferroelectric domains are shown in Suppl. Mat. Figure S1.

To accelerate the exploration of the large parameter spaces corresponding to the possible 

switching conditions, we developed a high throughout domain writing and imaging approach based 

on using AEcroscoPy,18, 19 a universal platform for automated experiments in scanning probe and 

electron microscopy. As shown in Figure 1a, this experiment starts with applying a DC pulse at 

the center of the image area to switch the polarization. As a next step, a high resolution BEPFM 

image measurement is performed to map the polarization state of this region. Then, the same 

measurement is performed at a different location by applying a DC pulse with a modified 

magnitude and/or duration to study the effect of DC pulse parameters on polarization switching. 

Whether the polarization can be switched depends on the magnitude and duration of the applied 

DC pulse, often larger and longer DC pulse can lead to polarization nucleation and reversal, and 

subsequent expansion of the polarization reversed domain, i.e., domain growth. Here, we can 

modify the pulse parameters and perform BEPFM maps in an automated manner, allowing us to 

conduct high throughput experimentation to systematically study the domain growth dependence

on pulse condition; also, a subsequent high resolution PFM image after each pulse allows 

visualization of more detailed local polarization state compared to an entire observing scan after 

applying all pulses. 

We first study the ZMO-32 film by applying DC pulses with a magnitude ranging from 

negative 40 V-70 V and a duration ranging from 0.1 ms to 5000 ms. Figure 1b shows the BEPFM 

amplitude results (corresponding phase results can be found in Figure S2). Each square in Figure 

1b represents an independent BEPFM measurement after applying different DC pulses, where the 

corresponding DC pulse magnitude and duration are labeled. Here 13 pulse durations and 16 pulse 

magnitudes, totaling 208 pulse conditions, are investigated. We note that previous similar 


experiments have been used for probing domain growth in materials such as LiNbO3,20-22

Hf0.5Zr0.5O,23 and BaTiO324 , and can be used to construct domain size as a function of pulse 

parameters. 

However, exploration of the domain switching in ZMO have led to the observation of very 

unusual domain dynamics. For this material, we observed two kinds of resulted domain structures, 

one is a shadow domain (domain-1) at the top left, and the other is a normal domain structure 

(domain-2) at the bottom right that shows dark amplitude contrast at domain walls. Several 

representative domain-1 amplitude and phase images are amplified in Figure 1c. Under low and/or 

short bias (e.g. Figure 1c-i), domain-1 shows weak changes in amplitude images appearing as dark 

shadow and without apparent domain walls, and no apparent changes in phase images. With bias 

increase (e.g. Figure 1c-iv), domain-1 can adopt fairly complex geometry with extremely rough 

domain walls. Increasing the pulse magnitude or duration will lead to the formation of domain-2

structures, consistent with normal polarization switching in uniaxial ferroelectric. Two 

representative domain-2 amplitude and phase images are shown in Figure 1d, domain-2 shows 

apparent domain walls and phase inversion. It seems that domain-2 overwrites domain-1, thus 

domain-1 becomes less visible when domain-2 forms. We performed another high throughput 

domain writing experiment with small DC pulses ranging from 5 V-40 V to specifically study 

evolution of shape and size of domain-1 structures. Results are shown in Figure S3, it is seen that 

the domain-1 can form when the bias is as low as 12.5 V, which is much lower than the known 

coercive voltage (~55 V for these samples) from macroscopic measurement of this sample. In 

addition, the size of domain-1 can reach hundreds of nanometers. Similar domain writing 

experiments are performed on ZMO-24 and ZMO-18 films, the results are shown in Figure S4-S7.

Two domain states are highly reproduced in films with different composition. 

The immediate interpretation of the shadow domains would be surface charging, giving 

rise to the domain-like contrast on non-ferroelectric surfaces and leading to well-known difficulties 

in interpretation of the PFM data and hysteresis loops, as explored in depth over the last two 

decades.25-28 However, we show that this explanation can be ruled out based on extensive set of 

measurements shown below, and a much more unusual and novel mechanism is realized in these 

systems. 


Figure 2. FORC hysteresis loops of three ZMO film. (a) ZMO-32. (b) ZMO-24. (c) ZMO-18.

As a next exploratory step, we probed polarization dynamics via switching spectroscopy 

measurements with acquiring of local hysteresis loops using BEPS. In these measurements, we 

applied a first order reversal curve (FORC) bias waveform, consisting of triangular pulses with 

gradually increasing amplitude, which allows to study the dynamics of polarization switching. The 

corresponding FORC waveform is shown in Figure S8 and comprises 20 cycles with amplitude

ranging from 20 to 80 V. Figure 2 shows hysteresis loops measured in ZMO films of three different 

compositions. Similar to resulted domains, hysteresis loops show two stage switching process, 

resulting in presence of small loops (loop-1) with bias amplitude up to ~50 V and large loops

(loop-2), where the small loop is located at the top side of the large loop in the pristine films. The 

small loop is stable when the DC voltage is smaller than 50 V, it quickly opens when the applied 

voltage is greater than 50 V and the loop opening is completed prior to the applied voltage reaching 

60 V, as shown in Figure S9. Accompanied by loop opening, the coercive voltage also increases 

from ~10 to ~48 V (Figure S9).

Giving both domains and hysteresis loops show two states, we propose that domain-1 and 

domain-2 links to loop-1 and loop-2, respectively. To check this, we design an experiment that 

includes a DC set-pulse (SP) before FORC-BEPS measurement, as shown in Figure 3a. We 

modified the set-pulse in an automated manner using AEcroscoPy to perform a high throughput 

exploration of the set-pulse effect on FORC-BEPS hysteresis loops. The set-pulse array we used 

here is the same as the DC pulse array in our domain writing experiments, wherein the pulse 


magnitude ranges from negative 40 V-70 V and duration ranges from 0.1 ms to 5000 ms. High-

throughput domain writing along with high-through set-pulse FORC-BEPS enable a direct 

comparison of the hysteresis loops and domains. The SP-FORC-BEPS results are shown in Figure 

3b. It is observed in Figure 3b that the small hysteresis loops move from the top side to the bottom 

side within the large hysteresis loops when the set-pulse magnitude and duration increase. A few 

representative hysteresis loops that indicate the transition of the small loop location are amplified 

in Figure 3b. A comparison of the high throughput hysteresis loops with a set-pulse and the domain 

images reveals a correspondence between the small loops position and domain formation, that is, 

with the formation of a normal domain structure (the bottom right of the high throughput domain 

map in Figure 1b) the small loops move toward the bottom side of the large loops. These results 

unambiguously establish the connection between domains and hysteresis loops, the set pulse 

defines initial state in hysteresis loops and corresponding domains. Hereinafter, we refer the 

domain-1 and small hysteresis loop as ferroelectric-subsystem-1 (FE1), the domain-2 and large 

hysteresis loop as ferroelectric-subsystem-2 (FE2). 

These studies also demonstrate that that the location change of the small loop is reversible, 

as shown in Figure 3c, the small loop can be moved back to the top side by applying a positive 

pulse, indicating the independence of the small loop. The independence of two sub polarization 

systems is very unusual, since the polarization distributions are strongly coupled through the 

depolarization field, and hence are expected to switch jointly. The high throughput SP-FORC-

BEPS measurements are also performed on ZMO-24 and ZMO-18 films, which show reproducible 

observations, as shown in Figure S10.


Figure 3. SP-FORC-BEPS hysteresis loops. (a), the measurement waveform, which comprises a 
set-pulse before FORC waveform. (b) high-throughput exploration of set pulse effects on 
hysteresis loops, a few representative loops are highlighted and amplified. (c) reversible change of 
the small loop location by applying positive and negative set-pulses.  

We also note that while two-step hysteresis loops have been observed before, the past 

models cannot explain the observation in ZMO here. For example, complex PFM loops in BiFeO3

and H-LiNbO3 are attributed to defect dynamics, however defect dynamics cannot explain the 

movement of loop-1 location and the presence of domain-1. The surface charging can be an 

explanation of shadow domains, but not hollow domains. Another explanation, such as four-well 

potential previously reported in CuInP2P6 (CIPS),29 is unlikely due to the simplicity of ZMO unit 

cell to form multiple well potential. Furthermore, it is important to interpret the observed 


phenomena in the context of unusual polarization dynamics in ZMO and similar binary oxide or 

nitride wurtzite systems. 

Figure 4. Hypotheses of two ferroelectric subsystems. (a) three possible hypotheses regarding 
two subsystems with different compositions, Hypothesis I: surface charging or selvedge 
properties, Hypothesis II: vertical tubular structures, Hypothesis III: presence of nano phase 
separation or two order parameters. (b) An SEM image of the prepared sample for the APT 
experiment, and the APT atom maps showing a homogenous elemental distribution. 

To get insight into the observed phenomena, we analyze possible scenarios for polarization 

switching. We first consider that the two ferroelectric subsystems can have three possibilities based 

on geometric localization, as shown in Figure 4a. The hypotheses are as follows:

•
hypothesis I: surface charging or selvedge properties, 

•
hypothesis II: vertical tubular structures with different compositions that switch 

independently, 


•
hypothesis III: bulk responses due to four well potential, presence of two order 

parameters, nano phase separation, or unusual domain dynamics.

To systematically explore these possibilities, we performed a set of depth- and spatially 

resolved characterization. As a first step, we performed Atom Probe Tomography (APT) to 

investigate whether there are tubular structures or phase separation. APT provides 3D 

compositional mapping with sub-nanometer resolution,30, 31 enabling unique insights into the phase 

separation and composition variation. Shown in Figure 4b are the APT results that do not display 

any compositional variation, which was also confirmed using a frequency distribution analysis 

(FDA). This result is consistent with a homogeneous atomic distributions across the cross-section 

of the film as also observed in energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) elemental maps 

(Figure S11). Similarly time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry didn’t show any chemical 

variation through-out the bulk of the film (Figure S12). This rules out hypothesis II of vertical 

tubular structure and hypothesis III of bulk phase separation. 


Figure 5. FORC hysteresis loops at a crater structure. (a) The crater structure is created in ToF-
SIMS by gradually removing the surface layer of ZMO to form a thickness gradient. (b). AFM 
topography profile of the crater structure. (c). hysteresis loops at various remaining thickness, 
where the small loop disappears when the remaining thickness smaller than 32 nm. 

To test the possibility of surface charging and surface electrochemistry, we used ion beam 

lithography to create a crater structure with a depth gradient by partially removing the materials, 

as schematically shown in Figure 5a. The AFM topography of the crater profile is displayed in 

Figure 5b. Shown in Figure 5c are hysteresis loops measured at different positions of the crater, 

each corresponds to a different depth. Noteworthily, ion beam lithography and PFM hysteresis 

loops are measured in-situ in an ultrahigh vacuum condition. If the double hysteresis loops are due 

to surface electrochemistry, it would disappear after the surface layer is removed. However, the 

double loops persist until the residual thickness is as low as 47 nm. The small loops disappear 

when the residual thickness is below 32 nm, accompanied with the disappearance of the kink in 

the large loop. This clearly evidences that the double loops are a bulk behavior, and cannot be 

attributed to surface electrochemical phenomena. 


As a next step, we consider possible bulk models, including the presence of multiple order 

parameters and low symmetry. We were able to reproduce the experimental PFM behavior by 

introducing monoclinic materials (see Suppl Mat., part II.E). However, this model is falsifiable 

and predicts formation of complex domain patterns during switching that does not agree with the 

lateral PFM experiment as shown in Figure S13 (see the domain structures in Figs. S22-S23).

Table 1. Summary of hypotheses and corresponding evidence or refutation experimental results.
Possible mechanism
Evidence/likelihood
Refutation experiment

Hypothesis I: Surface 
electrochemical 
coupling and/or 
double layer 
subsystems

The PFM studies: strong and 
weak domains, hysteresis loops, 
independent switching of minor 
and major loops

FORC PFM spectroscopy in crater 
structure: thickness evolution of 
PFM spectra during subtractive 
modification 

Hypothesis II: Vertical 
tubular structures

Two coexisting ferroelectric 
states require weak coupling via 
depolarization fields

APT and EDS indicate no chemical 
variation.
PFM indicates no nano domains

Hypothesis III: 
Presence of two order 
parameters 

Alternative explanation for the 
PFM studies 

Lateral PFM does not show in-
plane component, observed contract 
is crosstalk between vertical and 
lateral signals

Hypothesis IV: 
Observation of the 
pre-switching state

Remaining explanation
FORC PFM spectroscopy in crater 
structure: small loop disappears 
under a threshold thickness

Consequently, as summarized in Table 1, this suggests that the remaining explanation is 

the fringing-ridge model, as illustrated in Figure 6. Switching in normal ferroelectrics starts with 

nucleation, vertical and lateral growth of domain, break-through to the bottom electrode, and 

lateral domain growth, as schematically shown in Figure 6a. In ZMO, the scenario is that the partial 

switching forming the fringing-ridge domains near the film surface. Before a critical bias, the 

fringing-ridge domain does not grow laterally and rarely propagates vertically. Rather, on 

increasing pulse magnitude and duration, more fringing-ridge domains nucleate next to the original 

one. This corresponds to our observation of domain-1 in the high-throughput domain writing PFM 

results in Figure 1, where observed domain-1 structure is not individual domain but rather many 

small needle-like domains, these needle-like domains show suppressed PFM amplitude because 


PFM averages signal from regions of different polarities (needle-like domains and areas around 

them). After sufficiently high bias, one of the fringing-ridge domains, either a domain directly 

below the tip or a domain further away, breaks through to the bottom electrode. This corresponds 

to the observation of domain-2 in Figure 1. After breaking through the bottom electrode, the 

domain starts to grow laterally. The fringing-ridge mechanism is schematically shown in Figure 

6b with representative PFM image corresponding to each step in the polarization reversal process.

Figure 6. Schemes of polarization switching mechanisms. (a) polarization switching in normal 
ferroelectrics; (b) fringing-ridge mechanism in ZMO and representative PFM images 
corresponding to the switching process of fringing-ridge model.

Finally, we proceed to develop the semiqualitative model that can explain the observed 

dynamics. Following the logic behind the hypotheses 1-3, we consider in detail the polarization 

reversal in an inhomogeneous structure “ferroelectric FE1 - ferroelectric FE2” (see Suppl.Mat, 

part II), providing that the effective piezoresponse is proportional to the spontaneous polarization. 

Note that the verification of the possible bilayer-type, columnar-type or cross-type spatial 

orientations of FE1 and FE2 layers/regions can be performed experimentally. Since the spatial 


separation in chemical composition is absent, columnar-type and cross-type geometries of the FE1 

and FE2 regions should be excluded, and so only bilayer-type geometries, shown in Figure S14a 

and b, remained for our consideration. 

Below we consider the model when the concentration of free carriers and hence screening 

capability in layers “1” and “2” is different. Within our model the screening properties is defined 

by the spatial distribution of the Debye-Hückel screening radius. Due to diffusion, the bottom layer 

can be enriched by electrons coming from the bottom electrode, so that the electron concentration 

can be significantly higher in the 10-20 nm thick layer near the bottom electrode than outside this 

layer. 

Since the exact distribution of these trap states densities is unknown, we consider several 

distributions of 𝑅𝑑(𝑥3), namely the sharp step (solid curve), the diffuse step (dotted curve), and 

the maximum at the interface (dashed curve; see Figure 7b). We assume that a thin layer at the 

bottom, e.g. 20-nm, thick has a non-stoichiometric chemical composition with the maximal 

deviation from the stoichiometry in the central part of the layer (say at distance 10 nm from the 

bottom electrode).

To determine the spatial-temporal evolution of the polarization in the ZMO we use the 

Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) approach.32 Corresponding LGD free energy functional F

additively includes a bulk part – an expansion on the 2-th, 4-th, 6-th and 8-th powers of the 

ferroelectric polarization component 𝑃3 and its interaction with electric field, 𝐹𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘

𝑡𝑜𝑝 and 𝐹𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘

𝑏𝑜𝑡 ; a 

polarization gradient energy contribution, 𝐹𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑, surface and interface energies, 𝐹𝑠+𝑖𝑛𝑡. It has the 

form:

𝐹 = 𝐹𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘

𝑡𝑜𝑝 + 𝐹𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘

𝑏𝑜𝑡 + 𝐹𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑 + 𝐹𝑠+𝑖𝑛𝑡.                                 (1)

In Eq.(1) the expansion coefficients (𝛼, β, γ, 𝛿) on the polarization powers are different for the top 

layer “1” free energy, 𝐹𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘

𝑡𝑜𝑝 , where the mismatch and/or Vegard strains are absent, and for the 

bottom layer “2” free energy, 𝐹𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘

𝑏𝑜𝑡 , where the strong and anisotropic strains can be induced by 

oxygen vacancies and ions migration, and/or by the substrate. The parameters of the top layer 

correspond to the spontaneous polarization and coercive field of a bulk ZMO.7, 33 The surface 

energy via the random variations of its coefficients can define the features of the domain 

nucleation, and, in particular, the appearance of the “fringing ridge”. The spatial-temporal 


evolution of the ferroelectric polarization is determined from the coupled time-dependent LGD 

type Euler-Lagrange equations, obtained by the minimization of the free energy 𝐹, 𝛤𝑃

𝜕𝑃3
𝜕𝑡 = −

𝜕𝐹

𝜕𝑃3.

In this case, the Euler-Lagrange equations with different LGD coefficients for polarization 

are valid for both layers; and electric fields in the layers differ due the influence of charge carriers 

considered in the Debye-Hückel approximation. Dynamic hysteresis loops of local polarization 𝑃3

calculated for a slowly increasing amplitude of the tip bias (from red to magenta curves), increasing 

thickness ℎ1 from 10 nm to 60 nm and fixed ℎ2=20 nm is shown in Figure 7c.

It is seen from Figure 7c, that the increase of the top layer thickness within the range 

10 nm ≤ ℎ1 ≤ 30 nm leads to the opening of a “big” major loop with a high coercive bias, and to 

the simultaneous appearance of two “small” minor loops inside the major loop. Note that such 

minor loops seem symmetry-protected in uniaxial ferroelectrics.34 The minor loops are observed 

when the top and bottom layers have close thicknesses, ℎ1~ℎ2. Furter increase of the top layer 

thickness within the range ℎ1 ≥ 40 nm leads to the disappearance of the minor loops, and to the 

simultaneous increase of the coercive bias corresponding to the major loop. The presence of 

random surface potential induces visible irregularity of the domain structure and shifts the local 

polarization loops in both vertical and lateral directions. It seems more important that the surface 

potential breaks the symmetry of the two minor loops making one of them bigger and more 

pronounced. Black points with numbers in Figure 7d denote the stages of polarization reversal in 

the bilayer structure with ℎ1 = ℎ2 =20 nm, for which the cross-sections of the polarization 

distributions are shown. It is seen that the fringing ridge can originate, grow and intergrowth 

through both layers. It is important to note that the PFM signal is sensitive to the molar fraction of 

the material with a given polarization orientation averaged over the PFM signal generation volume, 

the probing depth in PFM is comparable to ½ of contact radius. As such, the double layers can 

consist a surface layer and a bulk layer that is detectable by PFM; in this manner, two ferroelectric 

subsystems can in principle originate from surface and bulk, respectively.


Figure 7. (a) Geometry of the considered models, “ferroelectric FE1 - ferroelectric FE2”, 
describing an inhomogeneous ZMO film between the conducting tip and the bottom 
electrode/substrate. (b) Several hypotheses (solid, dashed and dotted curves) for 𝑅𝑑(𝑥3)
distribution. (c) Dynamic hysteresis loops of local polarization 𝑃3 calculated for a slowly 
increasing amplitude of the tip bias (from red to magenta curves) and increasing thickness ℎ1 of 
ZMO bilayer, ℎ2=20 nm. (d) Polarization distributions below the probe tip calculated in the cross-
section of the are calculated for different stages of polarization reversal in the points denoted by 
numbers 1-15 at the time dependence of local polarization; ℎ1 = ℎ2 =20 nm.

This analysis illustrates that the correlated spike-like domains, named as “fringing-ridge”, 

can appear during the polarization reversal in the ZMO films. They are induced by a chemical 

pressure (Vegard strains), or/and other types of elastic defects, which concentration increases 

significantly near the surfaces and interfaces. The fringing-ridge, like shown in Figure 7a, can act 

as the new order parameter,32 which can transform the two-well potential of ZMO into the multi-

well potential. The amount and the average width of the teeth are defined in a self-consistent way,32

because these quantities determine the structure of the “effective” multi-well potential. As shown 


previously,34 a specific evolution of the potential wells can lead to the changes in the hysteresis 

loops topology from a single loop to the complex loops, similar to the ones observed in ZMO. 

To summarize, we report highly unusual ferroelectric behavior of Zn1-xMgxO, the only self-

consistent model aligned with all experimental evidence is one where two independent

ferroelectric subsystems coexist in an initially layered geometry. Using band excitation 

piezoresponse force microscopy (BEPFM) and spectroscopy (BEPS), the research highlights 

distinct polarization switching dynamics, contrary to traditional depolarization field coupling 

theories. The discovery of a fringing-ridge mechanism, characterized by lateral nucleation 

expansion without significant depth propagation, presents a novel type of ferroelectric switching. 

This diverges from the usual domain growth process observed in ferroelectrics. This could be 

indicative of more complex dynamics in similar binary oxide or nitride wurtzite systems.

The implications of these findings are significant for the semiconductor and information 

technology industries, both by linking to the macroscopic switching dynamics and suggesting 

strategies for materials optimization. The unique polarization behavior of Zn1-xMgxO, especially 

the fringing-ridge mechanism, offers insights into designing more efficient and scalable 

ferroelectric materials. These materials are vital for applications like high-density information 

storage and ferroelectric random-access memories (FeRAMs). The study enhances understanding 

of ferroelectric materials' compatibility with CMOS technology, potentially paving the way for 

innovative memory solutions with low power dissipation, fast operational speeds, enhanced 

endurance, and improved retention.

Methods

Materials Synthesis

ZMO samples are fabricated on Pt bottom electrodes on sapphire substrates. Pt is deposited by RF 

magnetron sputtering at 350 °C using a 5 nm Ti adhesion layer. ZMO films are reactively RF 

magnetron sputtered from 2” diameter Zn and Mg metal targets at room temperature. Both targets 

are 99.99% pure on a metals basis (Kurt J. Lesker). Gun power settings establish the Zn:Mg ratio. 

The sputtering atmosphere is a 1 mTorr mixture of 6:1 Ar:O2. The magnetrons are oppositely 

opposed with a 45° angle from the substrate normal, target-to-substrate distance is approximately 

5 cm. Deposition rates vary for different Zn:Mg ratios but are in the range of 15 nm/min. 4-circle 


x-ray diffraction (Panalytical Emperyan) is used to quantify film crystallinity, phase, orientation 

and thickness. Zn:Mg ratios are measured using energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (Oxford 

Instruments). 

BEPFM and BEPS

BEPFM and BEPS were measured on a commercial Cypher AFM system (Asylum Research, 

Oxford Instruments Co.), which is equipped with a band-excitation generator. A Pt/Ir coated AFM 

tip (ElectriMulti75-G (Budget Sensors)) with a nominal stiffness of 3 N m–1 was used. The 

automated experimentation was achieved via AEcroscoPy19 reported recently, where the 

experimentation workflow is programmed with Python and execution was realized via Python-

LabView-Microscope integration. 

ToF-SIMS and PFM

ToF-SIMS measurements were carried out using TOF.SIMS.5-NSC instrument combining AFM 

and ToF-SIMS in the same vacuum chamber. Bismuth liquid metal ion gun (30 keV energy, 0.5 nA 

current in DC mode and ~120 nm spot size) was used as a primary ion source for extracting of the 

sample secondary ions. Cs sputter source (1 keV energy, ~80 nA current) was used for depth 

profiling and oxygen sputter source (500 eV energy, ~100 nA current) was used for wage sputter. 

Time-of-flight mass analyzer was used for detection of the secondary ions in negative ion detection 

mode and allowed mass resolution m/m = 100 - 300. PFM and switching spectroscopy 

measurements on the crater structure were carried out using AFM in the same vacuum chamber 

with ToF-SIMS, using a suit of external electronics.

APT

Standard lift-out and annular FIB milling procedures were done using an FEI Nova 200 Dual-

Beam FIB-SEM instrument to prepare the APT specimens.35 The APT experiments were 

conducted using a CAMECA LEAP 4000XR in laser mode with a 30K base temperature, a 50 pJ 

laser energy, a 125 kHz pulse repetition rate, and a 0.5% detection rate. The reconstruction and 

data processing were performed using CAMECA’s IVAS 3.8 software package.

Acknowledgements 


This effort (materials synthesis, PFM measurements) was supported as part of the center for 3D 

Ferroelectric Microelectronics (3DFeM), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. 

Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number 

DE-SC0021118. The PFM, APT, and ToF-SIMS were supported by the Center for Nanophase 

Materials Sciences (CNMS), which is a US Department of Energy, Office of Science User Facility 

at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. ToF-SIMS characterization was conducted at the Center for 

Nanophase Materials Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility, and using 

instrumentation within ORNL's Materials Characterization Core provided by UT-Battelle, LLC 

under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. Sergei V. Kalinin 

acknowledges support from the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS) user facility 

which is a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility, project no. CNMS2023-A-

01923. A.N.M. work is supported by the Ministry of Science and Education of Ukraine (grant 

№ РН/ 23 - 2023, “Influence of size effects on the electrophysical properties of graphene-

ferroelectric nanostructures”) at the expense of the external aid instrument of the European Union 

for the fulfillment of Ukraine's obligations in the Framework Program of the European Union for 

scientific research and innovation "Horizon 2020". The authors would like to thank James Burns 

for assistance in performing APT sample preparation and running the APT experiments. The 

authors would like to acknowledge helpful discussion with Sabine M. Neumayer.

Authors Contribution

J.Y., S.V.K, and Y.L. conceived the project and co-wrote the manuscript. Y.L. developed PFM 

experimental methods. J.Y. and Y.L. performed ambient PFM measurements and results analysis. 

A.V.I. created the crater structure and performed PFM and ToF-SIMS in UHV. D.G, R.J.S, and J-

P.M synthesized materials. J.D.P performed APT characterization. S.V.K, Y.L., A.V.I, and 

A.M.N. developed hypotheses and A.M.N and E.A.E. performed simulation. All authors edited 

the manuscript.

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.


References

1.
S. Troiler-McKinstry, American Ceramic Society Bulletin 99 (1), 22-23 (2020).

2.
A. S. Bhalla and A. Saxena, Physics World 33 (11), 38 (2021).

3.
H. Ishiwara, M. Okuyama and Y. Arimoto, Ferroelectric random access memories: fundamentals 

and applications. (Springer Science & Business Media, 2004).
4.
H. Ishiwara, Journal of nanoscience and nanotechnology 12 (10), 7619-7627 (2012).

5.
T. Böscke, J. Müller, D. Bräuhaus, U. Schröder and U. Böttger, Applied Physics Letters 99 (10) 

(2011).
6.
U. Schroeder, M. H. Park, T. Mikolajick and C. S. Hwang, Nature Reviews Materials 7 (8), 653-669 

(2022).
7.
T. Mikolajick, S. Slesazeck, H. Mulaosmanovic, M. Park, S. Fichtner, P. Lomenzo, M. Hoffmann 

and U. Schroeder, Journal of Applied Physics 129 (10) (2021).
8.
S. Fichtner, N. Wolff, F. Lofink, L. Kienle and B. Wagner, Journal of Applied Physics 125 (11) 

(2019).
9.
W. Zhu, F. He, J. Hayden, Z. Fan, J. I. Yang, J. P. Maria and S. Trolier‐McKinstry, Advanced 

Electronic Materials 8 (6), 2100931 (2022).
10.
J. Hayden, M. D. Hossain, Y. Xiong, K. Ferri, W. Zhu, M. V. Imperatore, N. Giebink, S. Trolier-

McKinstry, I. Dabo and J.-P. Maria, Physical Review Materials 5 (4), 044412 (2021).
11.
J. Hayden, J. Shepard and J.-P. Maria, Applied Physics Letters 123 (7) (2023).

12.
K. Ferri, S. Bachu, W. Zhu, M. Imperatore, J. Hayden, N. Alem, N. Giebink, S. Trolier-McKinstry 

and J.-P. Maria, Journal of Applied Physics 130 (4) (2021).
13.
K. Yazawa, D. Drury, J. Hayden, J. P. Maria, S. Trolier‐McKinstry, A. Zakutayev and G. L. 

Brennecka, Journal of the American Ceramic Society (2023).
14.
L. Jacques, G. Ryu, D. Goodling, S. Bachu, R. Taheri, P. Yousefian, S. Shetty, B. Akkopru-Akgun, C. 

Randall and N. Alem, Journal of Applied Physics 133 (22) (2023).
15.
F. He, W. Zhu, J. Hayden, J. Casamento, Q. Tran, K. Kang, Y. Song, B. A. Akgun, J. I. Yang and P. 

Tipsawat, Available at SSRN 4541276.
16.
Y. Liu, A. Ievlev, J. Casamento, J. Hayden, S. Trolier-McKinstry, J.-P. Maria, S. V. Kalinin and K. P. 

Kelley, arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.03617 (2023).
17.
K. P. Kelley, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, Y. Liu, S. S. Fields, S. T. Jaszewski, T. Mimura, S. 

Calderon, E. C. Dickey and J. F. Ihlefeld, Nature Materials, 1-8 (2023).
18.
Y. Liu,  (https://yongtaoliu.github.io/aecroscopy.pyae/welcome_intro.html, 2023), Vol. 2023.

19.
Y. Liu, K. Roccapriore, M. Checa, S. M. Valleti, J.-C. Yang, S. Jesse and R. K. Vasudevan, arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2312.10281 (2023).
20.
A. V. Ievlev, A. N. Morozovska, V. Y. Shur and S. V. Kalinin, Applied Physics Letters 104 (9) (2014).

21.
A. V. Ievlev, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, V. Y. Shur and S. V. Kalinin, Nature Communications 

5 (1), 4545 (2014).
22.
A. Ievlev, S. Jesse, A. Morozovska, E. Strelcov, E. Eliseev, Y. V. Pershin, A. Kumar, V. Y. Shur and S. 

Kalinin, Nature Physics 10 (1), 59-66 (2014).
23.
S. Yun, H. Kim, M. Seo, M.-H. Kang, T. Kim, S. Cho, M. H. Park, S. Jeon, Y.-K. Choi and S. Hong, 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05374 (2023).
24.
Y. Liu, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, K. P. Kelley, R. Vasudevan, M. Ziatdinov and S. V. Kalinin, 

Patterns 4 (3) (2023).
25.
H. Qiao, D. Seol, C. Sun and Y. Kim, Applied Physics Letters 114 (15) (2019).

26.
D. Seol, B. Kim and Y. Kim, Current Applied Physics 17 (5), 661-674 (2017).

27.
N. Balke, P. Maksymovych, S. Jesse, I. I. Kravchenko, Q. Li and S. V. Kalinin, ACS nano 8 (10), 

10229-10236 (2014).


28.
R. K. Vasudevan, N. Balke, P. Maksymovych, S. Jesse and S. V. Kalinin, Applied Physics Reviews 4

(2) (2017).
29.
J. A. Brehm, S. M. Neumayer, L. Tao, A. O’Hara, M. Chyasnavichus, M. A. Susner, M. A. McGuire, 

S. V. Kalinin, S. Jesse and P. Ganesh, Nature Materials 19 (1), 43-48 (2020).
30.
T. F. Kelly and M. K. Miller, Review of scientific instruments 78 (3) (2007).

31.
B. Gault, A. Chiaramonti, O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, P. Stender, R. Dubosq, C. Freysoldt, S. K. 

Makineni, T. Li, M. Moody and J. M. Cairney, Nature Reviews Methods Primers 1 (1), 51 (2021).
32.
E. A. Eliseev, M. E. Yelisieiev, S. V. Kalinin and A. N. Morozovska, Physical Review B 105 (17), 

174110 (2022).
33.
K. H. Kim, I. Karpov, R. H. Olsson, 3rd and D. Jariwala, Nature Nanotechnology 18 (5), 422-441 

(2023).
34.
L. Baudry, I. Lukyanchuk and V. M. Vinokur, Scientific Report 7, 42196 (2017).

35.
K. Thompson, D. Lawrence, D. Larson, J. Olson, T. Kelly and B. Gorman, Ultramicroscopy 107 (2-

3), 131-139 (2007).


