Machine Learning a Universal Harmonic Interatomic Potential for Predicting
Phonons in Crystalline Solids

Huiju Lee1 and Yi Xia1, ∗

1Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, Portland State University, Portland, OR 97201, USA
(Dated: February 20, 2024)

Phonons, as quantized vibrational modes in crystalline materials, play a crucial role in determining
a wide range of physical properties, such as thermal and electrical conductivity, making their study
a cornerstone in materials science.
In this study, we present a simple yet effective strategy for
deep learning harmonic phonons in crystalline solids by leveraging existing phonon databases and
state-of-the-art machine learning techniques. The key of our method lies in transforming existing
phonon datasets, primarily represented in interatomic force constants, into a force-displacement
representation suitable for training machine learning universal interatomic potentials. By applying
our approach to one of the largest phonon databases publicly available, we demonstrate that the
resultant machine learning universal harmonic interatomic potential not only accurately predicts
full harmonic phonon spectra but also calculates key thermodynamic properties with remarkable
precision. Furthermore, the restriction to a harmonic potential energy surface in our model provides
a way of assessing uncertainty in machine learning predictions of vibrational properties, essential
for guiding further improvements and applications in materials science.

All materials are made up of atoms, which vibrate
ubiquitously, even at absolute zero temperature, due to
quantum effects. When present in periodic solids, these
vibrations can be quantized as quasiparticles, known as
phonons.
The study of phonons is an integral part of
solid-state physics and materials science, as they play an
essential role in many physical properties of materials,
including thermodynamic stability, thermal conductivity,
and electric conductivity [1]. Specifically, concerning the
fundamental thermodynamic properties, phonons are vi-
tal for materials’ finite-temperature characteristics, such
as thermal expansion, heat capacity, free energy, and lat-
tice stability.
Phonons also serve as a gene governing
energy transfer in solids, manifested in lattice heat trans-
fer [1, 2]. Furthermore, when coupled with other quasi-
particles, e.g., electrons, phonons can strongly modulate
carrier conductivity and give rise to conventional super-
conductivity [3]. However, the properties of the materials
currently contained in existing databases [4–6] are lim-
ited to those obtained by relatively simple ground state
calculations – formation energies, electronic band-gaps,
and -structures, etc. – with no dynamical information
such as phonons. The most extensive collection to date
of vibrational properties contains only several thousands
of compounds [7, 8], which are focused on the harmonic
vibrational properties. This poses a crucial limitation re-
garding the prediction of materials at ambient or higher
temperatures.
Data-driven, or machine learning (ML), approaches
are becoming a method of choice for materials design,
discovery, and property prediction, thanks to their ex-
traordinary capability of modeling complex composition-
structure-property mapping in materials [9, 10]. Conse-
quently, efforts are now being devoted to developing ML

∗ yxia@pdx.edu

models encoded with vibrational properties to overcome
the challenge due to the scarcity of data. The promis-
ing applications of ML approaches to modeling phonons
fall into two categories.
The first category highlights
ML models that use either hand-crafted descriptors or
learned representations to directly predict phonon prop-
erties, such as vibrational frequency, density-of-states
(DOS), and vibrational free energy, or incorporate such
information implicitly when predicting materials stabil-
ity without resorting to constructing interatomic poten-
tial [11–14].
For example.
Chen et al. [12] employed
the Euclidean neural network to directly predict phonon
DOS using a training set of about 1000 examples with
over 64 atom types. By capturing full crystal symme-
try, their model reproduces key features of experimental
data and even generalizes to materials with unseen ele-
ments. Similar results are demonstrated by Gurunathan
et al. [14] using the atomistic line graph neural network
(ALIGNN) on a significantly expanded database com-
posed of over 14000 phonon spectra computed at the
Brillouin center.
In another study, Nguyen et al. [13]
used deep graph neural networks to predict lattice vibra-
tional frequencies. Despite displaying low transferability
across different structure types, their model implies the
capability of deep graph neural networks to learn to pre-
dict lattice vibrational frequency when sufficient training
samples are available.
Another category of ML approaches to modeling
phonons relies on directly constructing machine learn-
ing interatomic potential (MLIP). The key idea is to
learn the statistical relation between structure and po-
tential energy without knowledge about the relevant in-
teractions.
Recent advances lead to an extensive col-
lection of MLIPs, including kernel-based learning ap-
proaches and artificial neural networks, such as Behler-
Parrinello neural network potentials (NNP) [15], Gaus-
sian approximation potentials (GAP) [16], and moment
tensor potentials (MTP) [17]. Most recently, deep learn-

arXiv:2402.11383v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  17 Feb 2024


2

FIG. 1.
A schematic showing the conversions between different representations for describing interatomic interactions.
(a) Interatomic force constants (IFCs) representation, wherein atoms and IFCs are indicated by solid spheres and springs,
respectively; (b) force-displacement (FD) representation, wherein dashed circles and solid spheres are used to denote equilibrium
and displaced atom positions, respectively; (c) Graph neural networks (GNNs) representation, wherein crystal structures are
represented by graphs with atoms as nodes and bonds between atoms as edges.

ing representations using graph neural networks (GNNs)
have been leveraged to develop machine learning univer-
sal interatomic potentials (MLUIPs) for arbitrary chem-
ical species and structures.
Specific realizations in-
clude but are not limited to, the crystal graph convolu-
tional neural networks (CGCNN) [18], the graph convo-
lution network with continuous-filter convolutional layers
(SchNet) [19], the directional message passing neural net-
work (DimeNet) [20], and the geometric message passing
neural network (GemNet) [21]. Particularly, the mate-
rial graph with three-body interactions neural network
(M3GNet) [22] model, which has been trained on den-
sity functional theory (DFT) [23, 24] crystal structure
relaxations from the Materials Project [4], demonstrates
the potential to directly predict harmonic phonon disper-
sions. However, the accuracy of the M3GNet model is
compromised despite covering broad chemistry, showing
relatively large deviations of about one Thz for averaged
phonon frequencies when compared to DFT [22].

Applying these MLUIPs to directly modeling phonons
is appealing. Meanwhile, challenges arise when one aims
to train highly accurate MLUIPs due to the limitations of
available training datasets. For example, the DFT crys-
tal structure relaxations used to train the M3GNet model
consist of only small unit/primitive cells and suffer from
relatively low DFT convergence criteria, typically used
for constructing large materials databases.
Therefore,
the resultant MLUIPs are intrinsically unreliable in yield-
ing longer-range interatomic interactions and accurate
forces, which are crucial to converge phonon calculations.
To overcome these limitations, in this letter, we propose
a strategy to leverage existing phonon databases and con-
vert these databases into a proper form suitable for train-
ing MLUIPs. This is inspired by phonon databases usu-
ally being constructed from high-quality DFT calcula-
tions of supercell structures, which can better capture
the longer-range interatomic interactions and exhibit ac-
curate forces. Afterward, we focus on constructing a spe-
cific form of MLUIPs: a machine learning universal har-
monic interatomic potential (MLUHIP) to deep learning
phonons. We show that such a restriction of the potential

energy surface to the harmonic form not only enables ef-
ficient model parameterization but also provides physics-
inspired uncertain quantification for phonon predictions.
The key of our proposed strategy relies on conver-
sions among different representations for describing inter-
atomic interactions. For example, as shown in Fig. 1(a),
existing phonon databases typically adopt an interatomic
force constants (IFCs) representations.
In contrast, a
rather different representation, for example, graph neu-
ral networks (GNNs), is used by MLUIPs, as shown in
Fig. 1(c).
To bridge the gap between the IFCs and
GNNs representation, we propose to create an inter-
mediate force-displacement (FD) representation, shown
in Fig. 1(b).
The conversion between different repre-
sentations can be achieved as follows:
the IFCs rep-
resentation can be converted into the FD representa-
tion by taking the tensor product of IFCs and random
atomic displacements, while the back conversion can be
achieved by fitting IFCs using FD dataset, for instance,
via the Compressive Sensing Lattice Dynamics (CSLD)
approach [25, 26].
Meanwhile, the conversion between
the FD and the GNNs representations can be realized
by training GNNs-based MLUIPs and conducting predic-
tions. Note that when the IFCs are limited to the second
order, as in this study, a harmonic version of GNNs-based
MLUIP (i.e., MLUHIP) will be pursued.
To evaluate the feasibility of our strategy for deep
learning harmonic phonons, we developed a GNNs-based
MLUHIP to model harmonic phonons in crystalline
solids. We used one of the largest phonon databases, i.e.,
the phonon database at Kyoto University [8], to generate
the FD training dataset for GNNs-based MLUHIP mod-
els. We chose this database because it contains DFT cal-
culations of harmonic phonons for approximately 10000
inorganic solid compounds.
These compounds cover a
broad spectrum of chemistries and structures. Specifi-
cally, there are in total 81 chemical elements across the
periodic table included in these compounds, and the re-
sultant elemental distributions are detailed in Fig. 2(a).
The corresponding crystal structures also display a di-
verse distribution of symmetries, as indicated by the var-


3

FIG. 2.
(a) A map of the frequencies of elements contained in the phonon database across the periodic table, covering
81 elements in total. (b) Distribution of symmetries (space group numbers) of the compounds in the database. (c) A table
summarizing the information of the generated force-displacement dataset.
(d) Predicted forces using our MLUHIP model
compared with the exact harmonic forces computed using the harmonic interatomic force constants for the testing dataset.

ious space group numbers in Fig. 2(b). It is worth noting
that it is crucial to attain such a diverse dataset in order
to develop an ML model that is potentially applicable to
solids across the periodic table.

Next, we prepared a broad dataset for training a
GNNs-based MLUHIP with the following procedures.
First, we carefully screened all and down-selected com-
pounds whose squared phonon frequencies are all non-
negative to ensure dynamical stability. This step ensures
that the compounds entering the training dataset are all
dynamically stable, thus making the harmonic phonon
approximation valid. This screening leads to a total num-
ber of 8229 compounds out of the original dataset. Sec-
ond, since the calculated harmonic phonon for each com-
pound in the original dataset is represented using IFCs,
we then converted the IFCs representation to the FD rep-
resentation by randomly perturbing atoms around their
equilibrium positions, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Specif-
ically, we used the quantum covariance matrix to gen-
erate random atomic displacements at 300 K following
the phonon dispersion [27, 28] (see supplemental mate-
rial). This approach is superior to an alternative method
based on small displacements (≈ 0.01 ˚A). It is because
the latter fails to account for temperature- and atom-
dependent displacements. In order to obtain a compre-
hensive force-displacement dataset, we generate random
atomic displacements for each compound over 100 super-
cell configurations, whose sizes are consistent with the su-
percell used for DFT phonon calculations. This results
in an enormous dataset consisting of about 80 million
atoms and 240 million force components, as summarized
in Fig. 2(c). Finally, we randomly split the dataset into a
training dataset, which contains 7829 compounds, out of
which 411 compounds are selected for validation, and an
additional testing dataset consisting of 400 compounds.
Note that we split the force-displacement dataset by com-
pounds instead of supercell configurations so there is no
overlap between the compounds used for training and
testing, thus ensuring more stringent criteria for validat-
ing the resultant ML models.

To train a GNNs-based MLUHIP using the constructed

FD dataset, we employed the Directional Message Pass-
ing Neural Network (DimeNet) model. DimeNet was ini-
tially introduced by Gasteiger et al. [20] to embed direc-
tional information between different atoms in a molecular
or crystal during the message passing. This strategy has
been shown to significantly improve the accuracy of pre-
dictions for molecular properties and use in molecular
dynamics simulations. We used an improved version of
DimeNet, i.e., DimeNet++ [29], for the model training to
balance accuracy and efficiency. Moreover, we took ad-
vantage of an existing implementation of DimeNet++ in
the Open Catalyst Project (OCP) [30], which implements
various kinds of MLUIP algorithms for different tasks
and provides optimized parameters for training MLUIP
models depending on the size of the dataset. Consider-
ing that our dataset contains more than 10 million atoms
and our task is to predict forces given structures, we
adopted a model specification for a complex dataset as
provided by the OCP (see supplemental material). The
model was then trained by minimizing the force predic-
tion error on the training dataset for 15 epochs, a num-
ber that is consistent with tasks of similar size within
OCP [30].
The trained model achieves a force predic-
tion mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.049 eV/˚A on the
validating dataset (see supplemental material) and 0.078
eV/˚A on the testing dataset, respectively; the latter is
shown in Fig. 2(d). Note that our testing error is simi-
lar to the value of 0.072 eV/˚A reported by the M3GNet
model [22]. The relatively large error in force prediction
may be attributed to several factors, including: (i) the
use of a finite cutoff distance for interatomic interactions,
which may omit relevant contributions from atoms just
beyond this threshold; (ii) the omission of correlations
beyond three-body interactions [29], which can play a
significant role in complex systems; and (iii) the disre-
gard for potential anharmonic interactions that become
significant with large atomic displacements.
These as-
pects, among others, could contribute to discrepancies in
predictive accuracy.

While our trained MLUHIP model predicts reason-
ably accurate forces for unseen compounds, its capability


4

FIG. 3.
Performance of the ML model on a testing dataset containing 400 unseen compounds. (a) Predicted phonon frequencies
using our trained MLHUIP model compared with direct DFT calculations. (b) Predicted vibrational free energy using our
trained MLHUIP model compared with the DFT results at 300 K. (c) Correlation between the harmonic force fitting error
(|δF|/F) from CSLD using the forces predicted by the trained MLHUIP model and the relative error in predicted phonon
frequency (|δω|/ω). (d) Mean absolute error (MAE) of the machine learned free energy (left vertical axis in blue) for the
compounds with a given maximum value of |δF|/F. Fraction of the total 400 compounds (right vertical axis in red) for a given
maximum value of |δF|/F.

of predicting the full harmonic phonon spectrum needs
to be assessed. To directly compare the predicted and
the DFT-calculated phonons, we utilized CSLD [25, 26]
to extract the IFCs using the forces predicted by our
MLUHIP model for the testing dataset. We chose not
to use the finite displacement approach implemented in
phonon software such as Phonopy [31] because it is more
sensitive to force errors due to the adopted small atomic
displacements.
The resulting IFCs were then used to
construct the dynamical matrix, diagonalized to obtain
phonon frequencies, referred to as ML phonon frequency.
As shown in Fig. 3(a), the ML phonon frequency com-
pares well with the DFT phonon frequency, achieving an
MAE of 0.24 THz (see supplemental material for the com-
parison of full phonon dispersions for the testing dataset).
These results are encouraging considering the fact that
the ML model has never seen the compounds in the
testing dataset and meanwhile they exhibit broad dis-
tribution of chemistries and structures. Using the ML
phonon frequency, we also computed various thermody-
namic properties such as vibrational free energy, vibra-
tional entropy, and heat capacity. The comparison be-
tween ML and DFT vibrational free energies at 300 K
is shown in Fig. 3(b), showing an MAE of only about
1.45 meV/atom.
Such an error is significantly smaller
than previous models [14, 32] and close to the criteria of
approximately ±1.0 meV/atom for predicting accurate
phase transition temperatures [33].
Having validated our MLUHIP model, an important
question arises concerning the uncertainty estimation
when applying the model to unseen datasets/materials.
The capability of obtaining reliable uncertainty estima-
tion is of great importance because it can be used to
determine whether or not additional DFT calculations
are required to improve model accuracy or perform ac-
tive learning. We find that the restriction of potential
energy surface to the harmonic order, as reflected in our
MLUHIP model, naturally leads to an effective assess-

ment of model uncertainty.
This is because any addi-
tional terms beyond the quadratic form that appear in
the model’s predicted forces could be viewed as model un-
certainties. Moreover, such uncertainties can be directly
quantified by estimating the force prediction error when
we fit the FD dataset by truncating at harmonic IFCs.
For example, within the CSLD framework, the relative
CSLD force fitting error (|δF|/F ≡ ||F − ΦCSu||2/||F||2,
wherein F are predicted forces by an MLUHIP model,
u are random atomic displacements, and ΦCS are fit-
ted harmonic IFCs) can be used to indicate the model
uncertainty, for instance, the error in predicted phonon
frequency. Indeed, Fig. 3(c) shows that there is a strong
correlation between |δF|/F and the relative error in pre-
dicted phonon frequency (|δω|/ω). Such a strong corre-
lation can also be found between |δF|/F and the MAE of
the predicted vibrational free energy. Fig. 3(d) shows the
cumulative distribution of errors for vibrational free en-
ergy as a function of maximum |δF|/F. It can be inferred
that we can significantly reduce the MAE of predicted vi-
brational free energy by downselecting compounds with
a given maximum value of |δF|/F. For instance, by lim-
iting |δF|/F to be about 0.1, corresponding to about half
of the total calculated compounds, we achieve a reduced
MAE error of only about 1.0 meV/atom for vibrational
free energy.
Before closing, we briefly comment on future research
directions.
Building on the current research, potential
work could explore several promising directions. First,
the implementation of more advanced machine learning
models, such as equivariant neural networks with inher-
ent symmetry [34–36], could potentially enhance the ac-
curacy and generalizability of phonon predictions. Ad-
ditionally, an important extension of this work could
involve including anharmonic properties in our models
to account for the significant impact of anharmonic ef-
fects on the thermal properties of materials, for exam-
ple, via ∆ machine learning [37] on top of our harmonic


5

model. Applying our current machine learning model to
a specific, targeted materials system and employing ac-
tive learning techniques could further testify and refine
its predictive capabilities. Moreover, the application of
our approach to complex materials such as amorphous
or disordered solids requires special attention due to the
lack of periodicity in atomic arrangement and the pres-
ence of diverse local environments, a challenge recently
has been recognized in predicting atomic-scale stiffness
in an amorphous solid system [38]. Another crucial area
for future research lies in enhancing the efficiency of the
CSLD approach.
Improvements in CSLD could expe-
dite the process of extracting interatomic force constants
from ML-predicted forces, thereby streamlining the en-
tire workflow from phonon database conversion to practi-
cal phonon spectrum prediction on a large scale.Finally,
we envision that our model is particularly suited for cal-
culating phonons in complex crystalline materials, where
the computational demands are substantial. For small
molecule materials with well-defined interatomic interac-
tions, traditional methods like molecular dynamics (MD)
may serve as a practical alternative. MD not only pro-
vides an efficient solution but also offers the advantage of
incorporating anharmonic effects, which are essential for
a comprehensive understanding of material behaviors.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates a simple yet
effective strategy for deep learning harmonic phonons
using machine learning universal interatomic potential
based on graph neural networks and existing phonon
databases. By converting the interatomic force constants
representation from existing phonon databases into a
more machine learning-friendly force-displacement rep-
resentation, we could train our model on a large and
diverse dataset, ensuring its applicability across various
materials. The model’s performance in predicting har-
monic phonon frequencies and fundamental thermody-

namic properties confirms its high accuracy and potential
for widespread application in the field of materials sci-
ence. Additionally, our approach to uncertainty quantifi-
cation, inherent in our harmonic potential energy surface
model, represents a significant step forward in the reli-
able application of machine learning models to materials
beyond those included in the training dataset. This capa-
bility to estimate uncertainty is crucial for identifying the
need for further data refinement or model improvement,
paving the way for more informed and efficient research
in materials design and discovery involving vibrational
properties.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

See supplementary material for more detailed descrip-
tions of the validation of the machine learning model,
the compressive sensing lattice dynamics approach, the
equation for generating temperature-dependent atomic
displacements, and the comparison of phonon dispersions
for the testing dataset.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

H. L. and Y. X. acknowledge support from the US
National Science Foundation through award 2317008.
We
acknowledge
the
computing
resources
provided
by
Bridges2
at
Pittsburgh
Supercomputing
Center
(PSC) through allocations mat220006p and mat220008p
from the Advanced Cyber-infrastructure Coordination
Ecosystem:
Services & Support (ACCESS) program,
which is supported by National Science Foundation
grants #2138259, #2138286, #2138307, #2137603, and
#2138296.

[1] D. Wallace, Thermodynamics of Crystals, Dover Books
on Physics (Dover Publications, 1998).

[2] W. Qian and C. Zhang, Energetic Mater. Front. 2, 154
(2021).

[3] F. Giustino, Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 015003 (2017).
[4] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards,
S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder,
and K. A. Persson, APL Mater. 1, 011002 (2013).

[5] S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, G. L. Hart, M. Jahnatek,
R. V. Chepulskii, R. H. Taylor, S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang,
O. Levy, M. J. Mehl, H. T. Stokes, D. O. Demchenko,
and D. Morgan, Comput. Mater. Sci. 58, 218 (2012).

[6] J. E. Saal, S. Kirklin, M. Aykol, B. Meredig,
and
C. Wolverton, JOM 65, 1501 (2013).

[7] G. Petretto, S. Dwaraknath, H. P.C. Miranda, D. Win-
ston, M. Giantomassi, M. J. van Setten, X. Gonze, K. A.
Persson, G. Hautier, and G.-M. Rignanese, Sci. Data 5,
180065 (2018).

[8] A. Togo, “Phonon database at kyoto university,” (2018).

[9] R. Ramprasad, R. Batra, G. Pilania, A. Mannodi-
Kanakkithodi,
and C. Kim, npj Comput. Mater. 3, 54
(2017).

[10] S. D. Griesemer, Y. Xia, and C. Wolverton, Nat. Com-
put. Sci. , 1 (2023).

[11] C. J. Bartel, S. L. Millican, A. M. Deml, J. R. Rumptz,
W. Tumas, A. W. Weimer, S. Lany, V. Stevanovi´c, C. B.
Musgrave, and A. M. Holder, Nat. Commun. 9, 1 (2018).

[12] Z. Chen, N. Andrejevic, T. Smidt, Z. Ding, Q. Xu, Y.-T.
Chi, Q. T. Nguyen, A. Alatas, J. Kong, and M. Li, Adv.
Sci. 8, 2004214 (2021).

[13] N. Nguyen, S.-Y. V. Louis, L. Wei, K. Choudhary, M. Hu,
and J. Hu, ACS Omega 7, 26641 (2022).

[14] R. Gurunathan, K. Choudhary,
and F. Tavazza, Phys.
Rev. Mater. 7, 023803 (2023).

[15] J. Behler and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 146401
(2007).

[16] A. P. Bart´ok, M. C. Payne, R. Kondor, and G. Cs´anyi,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 136403 (2010).


6

[17] A. V. Shapeev, Multiscale Modeling & Simulation 14,
1153 (2016).

[18] T. Xie and J. C. Grossman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 145301
(2018).

[19] K. Sch¨utt, P.-J. Kindermans, H. E. Sauceda Felix,
S. Chmiela, A. Tkatchenko, and K.-R. M¨uller, Adv. Neu-
ral. Inf. Process. Syst. 30 (2017).

[20] J. Gasteiger, J. Groß, and S. G¨unnemann, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.03123 (2020).

[21] J. Gasteiger, F. Becker, and S. G¨unnemann, Adv. Neu-
ral. Inf. Process. Syst. 34, 6790 (2021).

[22] C. Chen and S. P. Ong, Nat. Comput. Sci. 2, 718 (2022).
[23] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864
(1964).

[24] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
[25] F. Zhou, W. Nielson, Y. Xia, and V. Ozoli¸nˇs, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 113, 185501 (2014).

[26] F. Zhou, W. Nielson, Y. Xia, and V. Ozoli¸nˇs, Phys. Rev.
B 100, 184308 (2019).

[27] L. Monacelli, R. Bianco, M. Cherubini, M. Calandra,
I. Errea, and F. Mauri, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 33,
363001 (2021).

[28] Y. Xia, Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 073901 (2018).

[29] J. Gasteiger, S. Giri, J. T. Margraf, and S. G¨unnemann,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.14115 (2020).

[30] L. Chanussot, A. Das, S. Goyal, T. Lavril, M. Shuaibi,
M. Riviere, K. Tran, J. Heras-Domingo, C. Ho, W. Hu,
A. Palizhati, A. Sriram, B. Wood, J. Yoon, D. Parikh,
C. L. Zitnick, and Z. Ulissi, ACS Catal. (2021).

[31] A. Togo, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 92, 012001 (2023).
[32] F. Legrain, J. Carrete, A. van Roekeghem, S. Curtarolo,
and N. Mingo, Chem. Mater. 29, 6220 (2017).

[33] A. I. Duff,
T. Davey,
D. Korbmacher,
A. Glensk,
B. Grabowski, J. Neugebauer, and M. W. Finnis, Phys.
Rev. B 91, 214311 (2015).

[34] N.
Thomas,
T.
Smidt,
S.
Kearnes,
L.
Yang,
L. Li,
K. Kohlhoff,
and P. Riley, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.08219 (2018).

[35] S. Batzner, A. Musaelian, L. Sun, M. Geiger, J. P.
Mailoa, M. Kornbluth, N. Molinari, T. E. Smidt,
and
B. Kozinsky, Nat. Commun. 13, 2453 (2022).

[36] I. Batatia, D. P. Kovacs, G. Simm, C. Ortner,
and
G. Cs´anyi, Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 11423
(2022).

[37] R. Ramakrishnan, P. O. Dral, M. Rupp, and O. A. von
Lilienfeld, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11, 2087 (2015).

[38] Z.-H. Peng, Z.-Y. Yang, and Y.-J. Wang, Extreme Mech.
Lett. 48, 101446 (2021).


