The Smoke of Zaanen

Philip W. Phillips

Department of Physics and Anthony J. Leggett Institute of
Condensed Matter Theory, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Theoretical physics suffered a major loss with the death of my dear
friend Jan Zaanen on January 18. This note is my remembrance of him.

Figure 1: Jan and Christa: July 18, 2023, Leiden

Johannes (Jan) Zaanen, a resonant, much-needed, deftly insightful voice in
our field of strongly correlated quantum matter, died Jan. 18 2024 in Leiden,
the place of his birth. He was 66. I received the news from Erik van Heumen,
a colleague of his at U. Amsterdam who was handling most of Jan’s scientific
and public matters once he took ill. In fact, they had just co-written a paper,
which they submitted to Science, on the breakdown of spectral sum rules in the
underdoped regime of the copper-oxide high-temperature superconductors. This
was Jan’s favorite problem. He threw the kitchen sink at it always looking for
something new. His methodology ranged from more traditional, early Hartree-
Fock[1] studies on stripes in the cuprates ( though it was highly influential,

1

arXiv:2402.00577v1  [physics.hist-ph]  31 Jan 2024


he never recounted it fondly), the local density approximation augmented with
the Hubbard U[2] (LDA+U) to his more exotic mining[3] of the gauge gravity
duality to gain traction on the strange metal T-linear resistivity problem in the
cuprates. As we had both become gauge-gravity duality converts, we would
attend joint meetings with string theorists and discuss how to really push this
technology to realistic finite-density matter. In fact, in our last Zoom call on
Dec.
30, 2023, (a meeting for which I was an hour late because of a time-
zone mixup, Jan entreating me “We had a date, i kept hands free and now i am
waiting in vain for you, not great”) , the old problem of Sawatzky’s[4] dynamical
spectral weight transfer came up as a possible route to strange metallicity. To
the end, the strange metal remained his burning light. We had agreed to write
a joint paper on it putting all the details of Mottness into the mix. Along with
physics, Jan laid plain his frailty. Talking to me from his hospice bed, he stated
what I could see all too clearly: “I am basically paralyzed you know and the
mind is the last to go.” He talked about empathy and “humankind being pretty
nice.” He continued, “You know Philip, I am back to being human. Physics
keeps me going but now I’m human.”
Obituaries are unwieldy because of the obvious weight that goes with writing
them. What is difficult to communicate is a snapshot into the person’s actual
life, how it was like for them, not just a global summary. It is for this reason
that I have decided to bring Jan to the fore with a story.
This story, ‘The
smoke of Zaanen,’ is a love story. Not a typical one though. Most love stories
are private, lots of intimate exchanges, long looks and commitments that last.
But this one took place out in the open, typically in the front of buildings. We
all saw it happen, except the beginning. I had heard the story before but never
thought much of it. Jan always tells stories but listening to him on March 21,
2023 in the hospital as fluid was being drained from his lungs made his words
more paramount. Human frailty focuses the empathic mind. Jan was suffering
from complications from two surgeries to relieve esophageal cancer.
When I saw Jan in July (2022) in Stockholm, there was no hint of hospi-
talization in his future. At that meeting, he chose the Swedish means of trans-
portation, the stand-up two-wheel slightly motorized scooter, to get around
Stockholm. He seemed like a child again, each morning regaling me and others
within earshot of the joy of 2-wheel standing mobility around Stockholm.
I
settled for the bus, the lack of European cell service being the bridge too far, or
more aptly the expense I was not willing to incur. I saw him take off one morn-
ing with others from the workshop at Nordita and indeed he seemed a natural
at it, no reticence there. I suspected he must have ridden a rudimentary version
of the modernized Segway transport when he was young. It turns out Jan and
I spent part of our childhoods on the most southern islands in the Caribbean,
Jan in Curucao and Tobago for me. Jan was conceived on a family vacation
to Costa Rica. After a brief stint back in Curucao, he was shuttled to Leiden
where he entered the world in the very hospital in which I was then visiting him,
Leiden University Medical Center. Immediately after, they returned to Curucao
for the next three and a half years giving shape to his Caribbean roots. Perhaps
this is part of our mutual bond, he intonated.

2


Back to March 2023. In between nurses’ visits , we continued our conver-
sation. I noticed the level of the fluid in the drain container was rising. Jan
insisted it wasn’t and continued, doing things his way, another of Jan’s traits.
As a goodbye to the Caribbean, Jan’s parents took a trip to Mexico. Jan’s
father, a mechanical engineer for Shell, was on kid duty that day in the open-air
market in Mexico City as his mother was taking a break. Wandering through
the market with his sister, Mieke, born in Curucao, he noticed a quite irre-
sistible lump on the ground which he proceeded to eat. Much to his father’s
surprise, it was horse shit. Yes, Jan ate horse shit. The cure for the dysentery
that ensued was a strict diet of ripe bananas. How they managed to smuggle
enough bananas on their plane carrying them back to the Netherlands remains
a mystery, a story shrouded in Dutch customs lore: the Dutch family with a
year’s supply of bananas and an extremely hungry kid.
Like all of us who grew up in the Caribbean, winter is harsh. Hearing a
knock on the door one day, he opened it and was greeted with what seemed like
a fierce animal. It was the chill of winter, his first. Nothing in Curucao readied
him to be pierced so unceremoniously with just the opening of a door. There
was no warning, just an enduring cold. Throughout his life, Jan hated winter,
thoughts back to Curucao his only escape.
Around age 13, Jan discovered another escape, and here lies the love story.
One day his school had a class outing to the countryside in Drenthe just outside
Groningen. Two of his class mates, Marianna and Maartje took him on a hike
away from the crowd. Jan was a good-looking boy but shy and nerdy so there
was no resistance to being led by two precocious girls, also 13. They tired and
soon spotted a park bench. I know what you’re thinking but that’s not it. This
is a PG story about a nerdy school boy who would become a world-renowned
physicist, coiner of Planckian dissipation[5] and the classifier[6] of band gaps
in transition metal compounds which led to his 1985 thesis with the man who
“showed him physics,” George Sawatzky.
There is of course continuity in how we become who we are. Or perhaps
not? But we’ll see. The girls, placing Jan firmly on the bench, said, “we have
something for you.” Jan liked Maartje but was too shy to say so. Marianna
sat on his right knee and Maartje on his left. Jan heard some undecipherable
rustling but he kept his eyes closed as instructed. Was this the moment in this
nerd’s life? In a flash Jan envisioned his future as a rock and roller guitarist
(something he did try before grad school)–perfect training at hand. Ever so
carefully, Marianna took out wrapping paper and tobacco and rolled a cigarette
and placed it in between Jan’s lips.
Maartje took out a lighter and lit the
cigarette. He then opened his eyes as Maartje clasped his hand and led it to
meet the cigarette. What an introduction to smoking. “You know Philip, the
first 4 cigarettes are pretty bad, but then the fifth one, that’s an experience,”
Jan said. They returned to the group, Jan now in love. He discovered smoking
and it would forever be linked to Marianna and Maartje, each puff taking him
back to that day in Drenthe where his world changed to the Jan Zaanen we
knew.
I first met Jan in 1997/98 in Trieste and of course it was on one of his

3


notorious smoking breaks, complete with the hypnotic rolling of tobacco. He
stopped me and said he liked my talk (on the Kravchenko problem as I recall)
and proceeded to say some things I barely followed. Jan’s accent took a while
to decipher but his love for smoking was as clear as a crystal day. When I saw
him smoking in Trieste, I remember thinking why doesn’t this man just buy
the damn cigarettes in a store. With the back story revealed, I now see the
continuity. I now look back on that first meeting in Trieste differently. There
was a certain intensity and earnestness in Jan’s eyes when he smoked. It was as
if something were being revealed to him. I now have an idea what. From the first
cigarette Marianna rolled for him ever so deliberately, smoking would always
take him back to that park bench in Drenthe when he was 13. He remained
purely platonic with Maartje, and of course Marianna, but their mark on him
was indelible.
Jan was not a man of few words.
He was voluble and wide ranging in
his views on physics. I hung out with him because we had similar likes and
dislikes. He liked children, my son no exception as we spent much time together
in Kyoto. We both shared a dislike for conventional approaches to correlated
electron problems.
So strong was Jan’s drive to do something new that he
turned down a tenured job at Stuttgart for a post-doc at Bell Labs in 1987. For
him, Bell Labs “was playing on Mt Olympus.” So why not. He scaled those
heights and was rewarded with the position he filled throughout the remainder
of his life, Professor of physics at Lorentz’ institution, University of Leiden. He
was a Spinoza Award recipient, the highest honor in the Netherlands in science
as well as a member of the Dutch Royal Academy. In July 2023, many of us
convened in Leiden for a celebration of Jan’s remarkable life in physics.
Of
course the meeting was organized by Erik van Heumen. We all paid our debt
to Jan for inspiring us to think differently. Undoubtedly, his non-traditional
background as a chemist as an undergraduate prepared him to think outside
the box in theoretical physics. This commonality in our backgrounds cemented
the bond between us.
The day after the meeting, I rode a bike out to see Jan and Christa at their
home. The picture I include here is from that visit. Jan and I finally talked
about what was on my mind in March, 2023 when I visited him in Leiden Hos-
pital, quantum gravity. It turns out we were thinking about the same problem:
Penrose’s demonstration that the gravitational self energy places restrictions on
the time scale for a quantum superposition of two spatially separated objects.
One of his colleagues at Leiden, Tjerk Oosterkamp[7], is performing experiments
to test Penrose’s ideas. The synergy with Jan never ceased to surprise me. Our
conversations were always endless. It turns out Jan was writing a book about
this very problem while I was trying to link Penrose to a recent proposal by
Cotler/Strominger[8] in which unitarity is abandoned. Jan’s book, to be pub-
lished soon by Oxford Press, is entitled ironically “On Time.” That’s exactly
what he ran out of. Time. His mark on us all is indelible and his life way
too short. We will all miss Jan but his loss is harshest for his family, Christa
Buschmann, his widow, his son, Filip, his sister, Mieke, and his favorite niece,
Amber.

4


References

[1] J. Zaanen and O. Gunnarsson, “Charged magnetic domain lines and the
magnetism of high-Tc oxides,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 40, pp. 7391–7394, Oct
1989. [Online]. Available:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.40.
7391

[2] V.
I.
Anisimov,
J.
Zaanen,
and
O.
K.
Andersen,
“Band
theory
and mott insulators:
Hubbard u instead of stoner i,”
Phys. Rev.
B,
vol.
44,
pp.
943–954,
Jul
1991.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.44.943

[3] M. ˇCubrovi´c, J. Zaanen, and K. Schalm, “String theory, quantum phase
transitions, and the emergent fermi liquid,” Science, vol. 325, no. 5939,
pp. 439–444, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/
10.1126/science.1174962

[4] M. B. J. Meinders, H. Eskes, and G. A. Sawatzky, “Spectral-weight
transfer: Breakdown of low-energy-scale sum rules in correlated systems,”
Phys. Rev. B, vol. 48, pp. 3916–3926, Aug 1993. [Online]. Available:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.48.3916

[5] J. Zaanen, “Why the temperature is high,” Nature, vol. 430, no. 6999, pp.
512–513, 2004. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/430512a

[6] J. Zaanen, G. A. Sawatzky, and J. W. Allen, “Band gaps and electronic
structure of transition-metal compounds,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 55, pp.
418–421, Jul 1985. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.55.418

[7] J. van Wezel, T. Oosterkamp, and J. Zaanen, “Towards an experimental
test of gravity-induced quantum state reduction,” Philosophical Magazine,
vol.
88,
no.
7,
pp.
1005–1026,
2008.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.1080/14786430801941824

[8] J. Cotler and A. Strominger, “The universe as a quantum encoder,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.11658, 2022.

5


