1

Element-specific and high-bandwidth ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy with a coherent, extreme 

ultraviolet (EUV) source

Michael Tanksalvala1, Anthony Kos1, Jacob Wisser1, Scott Diddams2,3,4, Hans T. Nembach4,5, 

and Justin M. Shaw1

1Applied Physics Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, CO 80305

2Time & Frequency Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, CO 80305

3Electrical, Computer & Energy Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA

4Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA

5Associate, Physical Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, Colorado 

80305, USA

We applied a tabletop, ultrafast, high-harmonic generation (HHG) source to measure the element-
specific ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) in ultra-thin magnetic alloys and multilayers on an opaque Si 
substrate. We demonstrate a continuous wave bandwidth of 62 GHz, with promise to extend to 100 GHz
or higher. This laboratory-scale instrument detects the FMR using ultrafast, extreme ultraviolet (EUV) 
light, with photon energies spanning the M-edges of most relevant magnetic elements. An RF frequency 
comb generator is used to produce a microwave excitation that is intrinsically synchronized to the EUV
pulses with a timing jitter of 1.1 ps or better. We apply this system to measure the dynamics in a 
multilayer system as well as Ni-Fe and Co-Fe alloys. Since this instrument operates in reflection-mode, it 
is a milestone toward measuring and imaging the dynamics of the magnetic state and spin transport of 
active devices on arbitrary and opaque substrates. The higher bandwidth also enables measurements of 
materials with high magnetic anisotropy, as well as ferrimagnets, antiferromagnets, and short-
wavelength (high wavevector) spinwaves in nanostructures or nanodevices. Furthermore, the coherence 
and short wavelength of the EUV will enable extending these studies using dynamic nanoscale lensless 
imaging techniques such as coherent diffractive imaging, ptychography, and holography.  

Introduction

Magnetic multilayer and device structures are the fundamental building blocks of data storage and
magnetic random access memories (MRAM), as well as emerging spintronic, magnonic and spin-
orbitronic devices.1–5 As these technologies pursue faster operational speeds and push further into the 
deep nanoscale, new demands are placed on nanoscale characterization to evaluate their performance 
and elucidate the underlying physics and materials science that drives these technologies. This is 
especially true for dynamic phenomena, which have more limitations on the tools that are available for 
such studies. Ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy (FMR) is the fundamental tool for measuring these 
phenomena; by driving spin precession at around the Larmor frequency and fitting the precession 
amplitude and phase to material-dependent terms in the Landau-Lifshitz equation, FMR provides the 
ability to measure magnetic properties and dynamics in thin-film systems and devices. The spin 
precession is usually measured as a change in the microwaves absorbed, transmitted or reflected from 
the sample6,7or through transport phenomena in fully fabricated nanodevices.8 These approaches


2

average over the thickness of the sample; therefore, in more complex heterostructures FMR elucidates 
sample-averaged properties, and measuring magnetic dynamics at individual layers or interfaces 
becomes difficult.

For over a decade, x-ray detected ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy (XFMR) has served as an 
enhancement to FMR by detecting the spin precession with an element-specific probe (x-rays or extreme 
ultraviolet light). Higher-energy photons in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) or x-ray — as opposed to 
optical or microwave wavelength — provide element-specific information through direct access to 
atomic core level transitions.  In this technique, x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) and FMR are 
combined by exciting the sample with a radio frequency (RF) or microwave source that is generated 
directly from the master clock of the synchrotron, and is therefore synchronized to the x-ray pulses.9,10

The element-specific response of the sample is recorded by tuning the x-ray energy to a specific atomic 
core transition and measuring XMCD spectra at various time delays.  The ability to measure element-
resolved FMR has been important for measuring magnetic systems, since it gives the ability to decouple 
the magnetic dynamics of different layers or sublattices within a sample if the magnetic layers contain 
different magnetic elements.11–16 Such studies have uncovered the details of phenomena such as 

Figure 1. Experiment Layout: (a) Schematic of XFMR system.  Once the EUV light is generated, the 
remaining driving IR light is mostly removed and the EUV is focused onto the sample.  After reflecting 
from the sample, it reflects from a grating and is focused onto the camera.  In parallel, microwaves 
are generated from a photodiode that measures a small portion of the laser oscillator beam, and are 
then delivered to the sample to excite it near ferromagnetic resonance. (b) Simplified schematic 
showing minimum microwave components necessary to generate EUV-synchronized microwaves for 
XFMR.  More complete schematics are in Appendix B.  (c) Example data showing the ability to 
individually monitor the spin dynamics of different elements or layers within a magnetic sample. 


3

interlayer exchange10,17,18 and the presence of spin currents in nonmagnetic layers that can be used to 
identify contributions to spin-pumping.19–23 Furthermore, XFMR has been integrated into a scanning 
transmission x-ray microscopy (STXM) modality to provide such dynamic measurement with nanoscale 
resolution.24

One technical limitation of synchrotron-based, time-resolved measurements is the maximum frequency 
that can be achieved.  This limitation primarily comes from the pulse width of the electron bunches, 
which typically ranges from 50–100 ps and limits measurement frequencies to only a few GHz. The pulse 
width can be shortened by using low-alpha mode of operation, which reduces the pulse width to about 
7–10 ps.25,26 This mode of operation has been used to demonstrate XFMR bandwidths up to 
approximately 11 GHz;10,27,28 however, such bandwidths are of limited utility for many technological 
materials that have high magnetic anisotropy, short-wavelength modes that result from confinement,
and/or many materials with opposing magnetic moments such as antiferromagnets.29–33 Furthermore, 
extension to many non-magnetic phenomena, such as the measurement of phonon modes, also requires 
higher frequencies.34 While pump-probe approaches at femtosecond slicing and free electron laser 
facilities can measure ultrafast dynamics in the time domain, they do not comprise a resonant excitation 
of a particular mode. In other words, an ultrafast pulsed excitation will excite every mode and frequency 
in the system, which can make it challenging to image, isolate or separate a specific excitation —
especially if the excitation of interest is not dominant.  

Advances in tabletop light sources, such as high-harmonic generation (HHG) sources, open new 
opportunities to advance laboratory-based measurement capability to compliment the capability of 
synchrotrons. HHG sources have been used to measure ultrafast processes including magnetization 
dynamics, owing to the exceptionally small pulse width approaching the attosecond regime.35,36 In these
studies, the combination of ultrafast and element-specific capability was critical to elucidate and 
separate many phenomena including superdiffusive spin currents, ultrafast magnon generation, optically 
induced spin-transfer processes, and exchange coupling between elements in an alloy.36–44 These studies
typically rely on an optical pump-probe approach, with short pulse durations (10 to 100 fs) and intrinsic 
timing synchronization of the pump and probe naturally enabling measurements with high temporal 
resolution.  

In this paper, we report on development of the first tabletop-scale XFMR instrument (shown in Fig. 1), 
and demonstrate the highest-frequency XFMR to date, at 17 GHz.  This instrument leverages the 
femtosecond pulse duration of the EUV probe to provide an intrinsic frequency limit exceeding 10 THz. 
Our current configuration generates a phase-stable microwave excitation up to 60 GHz by using an RF 
frequency comb generator driven by a photodiode at the output of the laser oscillator. The current 
frequency limitation is set by the timing jitter of the microwaves (<1.1 ps, or > 100 GHz), as well as the 
limited precession cone angle exhibited by most samples at higher frequencies.

An important characteristic of our approach is that there is no constraint on the substrates that can be 
used since measurements can be performed in either transmission or reflection geometries.  This is 
especially advantageous when combined with imaging devices since special fabrication on membranes 
or specialized substrates such as MgO for fluorescence detection are not needed. In transmission, either 
magnetic linear dichroism (MLD) or magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) can be used.45–49 Since the 


4

shorter absorption length of EUV relative to soft-x-rays limits the thickness of the sample in which the 
EUV can probe (10~1000 nm generally, e.g. ~340 nm for 50–70 eV light in Si),50 the demonstration in this 
paper is done in reflection and uses the transverse magneto-optic Kerr effect (T-MOKE), which is 
routinely employed with linearly polarized EUV sources.36

Finally, the short-wavelength photons that span the EUV to soft-x-ray region of the spectrum are useful 
for nanoscopic imaging, given the wavelength of the photons.  In our case, the high coherence further 
enables multiple lensless imaging modalities such as coherent diffractive imaging (CDI), ptychography, 
and holography.51–53 Of import is that ptychography and other CDI techniques can be used in both 
reflection and transmission.51 Recent work also combined XFMR with x-ray reflectometry to resolve the 
dynamic response as a function of depth.54 Since EUV reflectometry combined with ptychography has 
already been demonstrated with HHG sources, this work opens up new possibilities for full 3D spatial 
imaging of high-bandwidth dynamics in nanostructures.55

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: First, we outline how we generate EUV light and use it to 
probe magnetic moments with element-specificity.  Next, we describe how we generate high-frequency 
microwaves that are phase-synchronized to our EUV pulses.  Then, we describe how we combine these 
to perform XFMR measurements.  Finally, we show XFMR results on three samples: permalloy (8.5 GHz), 
CoFe (17 GHz), and a Ni/Fe multilayer (8.5 GHz, with layer-specific dynamics).  

Experiment Methods

An overview of the setup used to generate the phase-stable microwave excitation and EUV probe is 
shown in Fig. 1. It involves two parallel components that are each seeded by a Ti:sapphire laser 
oscillator (15 fs, ~82 MHz, ~400 mW).  The first is the microwave part that generates high-frequency 
microwaves (up to >60 GHz) to excite the sample, and that are synchronized to the EUV probe with a 
controllable phase shift.  The second is the optical half that ultimately focuses femtosecond-duration 
extreme ultraviolet (EUV) light pulses onto the sample to probe the precession of spins therein. Finally, 
the EUV light that reflects from the sample is collected in a grating-based spectrometer.

Extreme Ultraviolet Light Probes Element-Specific Magnetic Moment

We use a regenerative Ti:sapphire laser amplifier to produce 3 kHz, ~1 mJ, 35 fs pulsed light with 800 nm 
wavelength.  We use this to perform high harmonic generation (HHG) by focusing it into a hollow-core 
glass capillary filled with 300–700 Torr Neon gas.  This produces a spectrum of discrete harmonics with 
photon energies spanning 35–70 eV, thus spanning the M-edges of most magnetic elements.  Moreover, 
these harmonics are separated by 3 eV, are pulsed at a 3 kHz rate with a time duration shorter than the 
driving laser (typically < 10 fs), and have a linear polarization matching that of the driving infrared (IR)
light.  We use horizontally polarized light so that the beamline can be in the plane of the optical table
even after reflecting from the sample around Brewster’s angle for the EUV.


5

Once the EUV is generated, we attenuate the driving IR using two mirrors oriented near Brewster’s angle
for the IR, and further extinguish the IR by absorbing it in thin metal foil(s) (usually 0.5 μm Al).  Then, the 
EUV passes through a variable-diameter aperture, and is focused onto the sample using a 6° angle of 
incidence (AOI), grazing-incidence toroidal mirror.  This mirror is placed 2 m from the glass capillary and 
has a focal length of 750 mm, resulting in a spot size of approximately 40 μm diameter [the width of the 
center conductor of the coplanar waveguide samples, Fig 2(c)].  Since we are using the T-MOKE 
geometry [see Fig. 2(b)], the sample is oriented near Brewster’s angle, specifically at 50° from grazing
since this angle maximizes signal from many of our samples (see Fig. 4).  We can energize a vertically-
oriented coil magnet for static T-MOKE measurements or a horizontally-oriented electromagnet for our 
XFMR studies.  Both magnetic fields are parallel to the sample plane. By reversing the direction of the 
magnetic field or (for XFMR) by toggling the RF on/off with a fixed magnetic field, we can observe the 
element-specific magnetic state of the sample as the variation of the spectral peak intensity at the 
absorption edge of each element.  In both cases, the projection of the magnetic moment onto the 
vertical direction is the detected magnetic signal — for XFMR, the signal will oscillate sinusoidally with 
the spins’ precession. Finally, the reflected EUV strikes a 400 mm toroid in a 4f imaging configuration 
(magnification of 1) and a 500 grooves/mm blazed grating (period: 2 μm) oriented in the conical 
geometry, and is collected on a scientific EUV CCD detector.  This results in a spectrum with separated 
peaks, shown in Fig. 2(a).

Figure 2. Probing Element-Specific Magnetization: (a) Example EUV spectra after reflecting from a gold 
sample (relatively flat spectral response) and from a magnetic film (permalloy).  The dips in reflectivity 
indicate the absorption edges of the elements present (Fe and Ni).  The red and blue regions indicate the 
position and width of the Fe and Ni absorption edges.  (b) Picture of the sample chamber, which is 
configured in the transverse magneto-optic Kerr effect (T-MOKE) geometry.  A coil magnet placed above 
our sample (indicated, but not shown) enables us to measure the static magnetic signal from our 
sample.  The higher-field electromagnet has an in-plane, horizontal axis; during XFMR, the spins precess 
about the horizontal axis and the projection of the resulting magnetic moment onto the vertical 
direction is the measured signal.  (c) Picture of a sample.  Each sample is a lithographically patterned 50 
Ω coplanar waveguide with magnetic layer(s) patterned on top of the center conductor.  The center 
conductor is 40 μm wide, and matches the size of the EUV focus.  An additional, much larger region of 
the same magnetic layer is patterned far from the waveguide for verification of static signals.


6

Generation of synchronized >60 GHz microwaves

The pulse width of the EUV is <30 fs, which sets an intrinsic frequency limitation well above 10 THz.  
Therefore, the practical frequency limitation for XFMR with this instrument is set by the signal-to-noise 
ratio (SNR, which is sample-dependent and decreases at higher frequency due to smaller precession 
cone angles) and the timing jitter between the microwave excitation and the EUV probe, which has a 
measured standard deviation of roughly 1.2 ps, as seen in Fig. 3(a).  

To minimize the timing jitter between the microwave excitation and the EUV probe, we generate the 
microwaves directly from the IR laser.  In particular, we use a similar approach to that taken at 

Figure 3. Using YIG-Tuned filters as a broadband phase shifter: (a,b) Timing jitter of 17 GHz and 51 
GHz microwaves, measured using a 40 GHz sampling oscilloscope.  (c) Spectrum analyzer trace 
showing that the neighboring harmonics are suppressed by >30 dB, resulting in a pure, narrow-
linewidth, sine wave excitation.  (d) Imparted phase shift as a function of YIG control current, 
showing that the same control current provides greater phase shift at higher frequencies.


7

synchrotron facilities, wherein an RF frequency comb generator (FCG) produces harmonics of the master 
clock that times the electron bunches.9,19 In this case, we adopt the Ti-sapphire oscillator itself as the 
master clock (81.6 MHz).  A portion of the oscillator beam is directed onto a photodiode, and the 
resulting electrical signal drives an RF frequency comb generator that produces harmonics up to at least 
18 GHz (> 220th harmonic). Since the oscillator is simultaneously used to seed the regenerative amplifier, 
the EUV pulses are intrinsically synchronized to the microwave radiation. 

An upper bound of the short-term phase jitter can be made by measuring the microwave signal with a 
sampling oscilloscope that is triggered on a fast photodiode (rise time: 30 ps) that views the 3 kHz laser 
that drives the HHG process.  Shown in Fig. 3(b) is a measurement of 51 GHz microwaves made in this 
way, which shows a timing jitter of 1.4 ps. Due to the limited bandwidth of the available microwave 
components, we used different configurations for 8.5 GHz, 17 GHz, and 62 GHz frequencies (see Fig. S2).  
Importantly, the timing jitter was roughly the same (<1.4 ps) for each configuration, even when we used 
additional components like frequency multipliers. The actual jitter is lower than 1.4 ps, owing to the fact 
that smaller values are beyond the measurement bandwidth of the oscilloscopes. In fact, we determined
the intrinsic jitter of the sampling oscilloscope to be 0.8 ps. After removing this contribution from the 
total jitter (1.2 – 1.4 ps), the upper limit on jitter between the comb generator and the laser amplifier is 
estimated as 1.0 – 1.1 ps. Furthermore, the timing jitter may be further improved by use of a high-speed 
photodiode as input to the FCG, instead of the current one which has 1 ns rise time. Considering this 
upper limit of timing jitter, there is no fundamental limitation to achieve measurement frequencies of 
100 GHz or higher.

While we need to excite FMR with a single frequency, the FCG outputs a large series of spectral lines that 
span several hundred harmonics of the fundamental 82 MHz repetition rate of the oscillator. As shown 
in the simplified schematic diagram in Fig. 1(b) and in the more complete diagrams in Appendix B, we 
use a pair of YIG filters as a narrow-band filter to isolate a single frequency or “tooth” of the frequency
comb [suppressing other frequencies by more than 30 dB, as shown in Fig. 3(b)]. In addition to filtering 
out undesired frequencies, the YIG filters shift the phase of the signal as they are detuned from their 
resonance; we exploit this property for use as a self-contained broadband microwave phase shifter that
requires no additional components (see Appendix A). Of course, the total phase range is limited by the 
width of the YIG resonance.  Using two YIGs in tandem (instead of one) gives a larger range of accessible 
phase shifts while keeping the amplitude relatively flat.  For the frequencies investigated here, using two 
YIG filters enables the phase to be continuously shifted over a range of at least 270 degrees (8.5 GHz), 
540 degrees (17 GHz), and with the range generally increasing in proportion to frequency [see Fig. 3(d)].

With our current setup, we are able to vary the base frequency of the FCG from 8.5 GHz to 12 GHz. This 
limitation is simply set by the bandwidth of the microwave components (including YIG filters, amplifiers, 
circulators, high-speed switch, etc.) that we had available on hand; however, standard, commercially 
available products can be used for other/wider bands -- extending both to lower and higher frequency 
ranges. In our current setup, higher frequencies are achieved by inserting frequency multipliers (2x and 
3x) that enable us to extend the output frequencies to values exceeding 60 GHz (see Appendix B). The 
advantage to this approach is that most of the circuit remains unchanged (i.e., operates at its base 
bandwidth) since the frequency multiplier is inserted just before the sample, requiring only one higher
frequency amplifier and components after the multiplier. Figure 3(a, b) shows an example of a 17 GHz 


8

signal generated by frequency doubling 8.5 GHz, and a 51 GHz signal generated by using both a 
frequency doubler and a frequency tripler. A final note is that, by introducing a circulator and a lock-in
amplifier [shown in Fig. 1(b)], we are able to perform in situ inductive FMR measurements on the 
sample.  This not only provides information about the optimal fields to use during the XFMR 
measurement, but also allows us to monitor the sample for any possible damage, heating, or other 
changes during the measurement.

XFMR Procedure

After we have generated femtosecond-duration EUV light in the appropriate range of photon energies 
(45–70 eV) and generated microwaves that are phase-synchronized to those EUV pulses, we can perform 
XFMR using the following steps.  We first set the excitation microwave frequency (e.g., to 17 GHz) by 
coarsely tuning the YIG filter currents to select a tooth of the RF frequency comb. Fine-tuning the 
currents about this point will control the phase shift of the microwaves.  To quantify this in situ, we use a 
sampling oscilloscope, which is triggered on the 800 nm laser that drives HHG, to measure the 
microwaves, and sweep the YIG voltages independently to determine the phase shift per volt (approx. 
600 deg/mA at 8.5 GHz) and the accessible range of phase shifts.  

After setting the frequency and calibrating the phase-shifting YIG control currents, we use our in situ 
inductive FMR setup to determine the magnetic fields to perform XFMR (i.e., resonance field and 
linewidth), as well as the proper microwave power to maximize our signal but suffer no effects from 
heating and ensure that we stay within the linear regime of the magnetization dynamics.  The inductive 
FMR trace will show a linear combination of the real and imaginary parts of the microwave reflected 
from the sample.  It is easiest to interpret the imaginary part, which we achieve by use of RF phase 
shifting components.

Once we know the fields over which to perform XFMR, we send EUV light onto the sample.  We can then 
measure and optimize our system using a static T-MOKE spectrum obtained by energizing a small coil 
magnet above our sample.  By switching the polarity of the current, the magnetic state of the sample will 
reverse and this will write itself onto the harmonic spectrum; in other words, the harmonic peaks at the 
photon energies within the Fe M-edge will change intensity proportionally to the magnetic moment of 
the Fe.  By measuring the distance between the grating and the camera and then counting the number 
of pixels between the specular beam and the harmonic peaks of interest, we can estimate the photon 
energy of each harmonic peak and determine which element is magnetized by using the grating 
equation (𝜆 = 𝑇 sin(𝜃) /𝑞, where λ is the wavelength, T is the period of the grating, θ is the diffraction 
angle, and q is the diffraction order).  To improve the SNR of our static T-MOKE measurements, we 
average several frames (typically 20 frames per magnetic field polarity) and generally use an exposure 
time of 5 seconds for each frame while 4x4 binning.  To avoid condensation issues on the camera sensor
due to operating in only high vacuum conditions, we do not cool the sensor.

Finally, if we fix the applied magnetic field and the YIG currents, then each EUV pulse will impinge on the 
sample at a consistent phase of the applied microwaves, and therefore at the same precessional phase 


9

of the spins within the sample.  We again use 
5 second exposure times for each frame and 
average over many frames (typically 100 with 
microwaves applied and 100 without).  A 
difference spectrum is obtained by recording 
alternating spectra with the microwaves 
turned on/off and subtracting them from each 
other.  As a result, the difference spectrum is 
proportional to the projection of the 
magnetization onto the vertical axis at a 
particular phase in the precession; as the 
phase is shifted through 360°, this measures a 
sinusoidal response. This process can be 
repeated at a series of magnetic fields to map 
out the full, element-resolved, field-swept 
ferromagnetic resonance peak.

To maximize the SNR, we adopt an on/off 
measurement scheme, in which every other 
measured spectrum is made without the 
microwave signal applied.  By subtracting the 
spectrum with the microwaves off from that 
with the microwaves on, the effect of longer-
timescale fluctuations of the EUV intensity can 
be minimized.  Since our exposure times were 
5 seconds, the effects of fluctuations on this 
timescale or shorter are not suppressed.  We 
partially correct these shorter-term 
instabilities by assuming that they are 
perfectly correlated across all the harmonic 
peaks (including those with no magnetic 
signal) and dividing all peaks by the frame-to-
frame fluctuations of the peak intensities far 
away from the magnetic absorption edges.  
This is only approximately correct, but 
consistently improves our data quality.

Sample Fabrication

Samples were fabricated using optical lithography combined with lift-off processes on thermally oxidized 
Si wafers.  The first step was to pattern the waveguide structure.  This consists of a coplanar waveguide 
(CPW) structure that is designed to mate with a commercial high-frequency end-launcher on one end. 

Figure 4. Samples and selection of measurement 
angle: The three magnetic sample structures are 
shown schematically in (a-c).  On the left are the 
structures that were deposited on top of the gold 
center conductor, and on the right are the simulated 
magnetic signal vs. photon energy and incidence 
angle for each sample.  We selected 50° from grazing 
for its sensitivity to our permalloy sample.  The other 
samples would have had higher signal at steeper 
incidence angles.


10

This connection is designed to maintain a 
50 Ohm impedance, minimizing 
reflections or losses across that transition
to/from the end launcher. The CPW then 
tapers down to a center conductor width 
of 40 μm in most cases, but other widths 
are also used. To form the CPW, 5 nm Ti 
and 100 nm of Au was evaporated and 
lifted off.  A second lithography step was 
used to define the magnetic layer of 
interest.  This was patterned on top of the 
narrow section of the CPW, as shown in 
Figure 2(c).  The magnetic material was 
then deposited using magnetron 
sputtering. In all cases, a 3 nm layer of 
TaOx was first deposited prior to 
depositing the magnetic layer in order to 
prevent electrical contact between the 
magnetic layer and the CPW.  This also 
prevents any spin-pumping losses when 
the magnetic layer is driven to FMR. After 
lift-off of the magnetic layer, the wafer 
was diced using a diamond saw.

In this study, we focus on three magnetic 
samples, whose structures are 
summarized in Figure 4. First, we 
performed XFMR on permalloy at 8.5 GHz.  
This sample could not be used to 
demonstrate XFMR at frequencies above 
11 GHz due to the magnetic field
limitation of our current setup (max μ0 H = 
180 mT).  We instead focus on a Co25Fe75
sample to achieve higher-frequency XFMR 
measurements at 17 GHz.  The increased 
saturation magnetization of µ0Ms = 2.4 T 
increases the FMR frequency to more than 
17 GHz for the magnetic fields that we 
have available.56 Finally, to show the 

ability to measure independently the dynamics of different layers within a multilayer sample, we 
measured a Ni/TaOx/Fe multilayer.

Figure 5. Element-resolved XFMR on permalloy, 8.5 GHz:
(a) The top plot shows the raw spectra, and the bottom 
plot shows an example XFMR asymmetry spectrum. 
There are peaks in the magnetic asymmetry at the M-
edges of Ni and Fe, indicating the amplitude of the 
dynamic response.  (b,c) show the measured spin 
precession vs. time for Fe and Ni.  (d,e) show the XFMR 
traces of the individual elements.  Overlaid are the 
inductive FMR measured in situ and the simultaneous fit 
of amplitude and phase.


11

XFMR Results: Permalloy at 8.5 GHz

As a first demonstration, we measured the XFMR response of a 10 nm thick Ni80Fe20 (permalloy) sample. 
The individual spectra at the microwave phase giving the maximum magnetic signal are shown in Figure 
5(a).  Two spectra are shown: one each with the microwaves turned on and turned off.  There is a small 
but measurable difference between the two spectra that measures spin precession within the sample;
this signal is significantly enhanced at the expected photon energies corresponding to the M-edges of Ni 
and Fe, and varies sinusoidally with the phase of the applied microwave excitation.  The difference 
between the two curves is related to the magnetic asymmetry, which is calculated as (Ion - Ioff)/(Ion + Ioff), 
or the difference between the intensities of the spectra when the rf field is on Ion and when it is off, Ioff
divided by the sum of the intensities.  The magnetic asymmetry is shown in the bottom half of Figure 
5(a). For the sake of visualization, we suppress the noise in the asymmetry spectra in the regions
between the harmonics where there is little to no signal; we do so by adding a large value to the 
denominator when the intensity is below a threshold that is set to a value just above the minimum 
counts in between the harmonics. This minimizes the effect of amplifying noise in the spectral region 
where there is little to no signal and/or prevent a divide by zero. It is important to note that this is not 
used in the quantitative fitting of the spectra, but solely to improve visualization.

The amplitude of the asymmetry should vary sinusoidally at the microwave driving frequency. To 
capture the amplitude and phase of the response for each element, the magnetic spectra are recorded 
at several values of the rf phase.  The amplitudes at the Fe and Ni M-edges are plotted as a function of 
the phase in Figures 5(b) and 5(c), respectively.  A sinusoid is then fit to the data, using the frequency 
measured by a spectrum analyzer during the experiment.  This process is repeated for all values of the 
applied bias field — a few examples are also shown in Figures 5(b) and 5(c).  It is clear that, as expected,
both the amplitude and phase of these sinusoidal behaviors change as the magnetic field is also 
changed.  Figure 5(d) and 5(e) are element-resolved XFMR plots.  That is to say, they show the amplitude 
(black circle) and phase (blue open triangle) obtained from the sinusoidal fits of the Fe and Ni peaks data
for several values of the applied magnetic bias field. The amplitude A and phase φ are simultaneously fit 
to the imaginary component dynamic susceptibility Im[χ] and phase φ derived from the Landau-Lifshitz 
equation as defined by the following equations7:

𝐼𝑚[𝜒(𝑓)] = 𝐴0𝐻1 [
−𝐻3

𝐻2

2 + 𝐻3

2]

𝑅𝑒[𝜒(𝑓)] = 𝐴0𝐻1 [
𝐻2

𝐻2

2 + 𝐻3

2]

𝜑 = 𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑛 [𝑅𝑒[𝜒(𝑓)]

𝐼𝑚[𝜒(𝑓)]] + 𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡

where, H1 = H +Meff, H2 = HH1+H2eff, H3 = ΔH(2H+Meff), Heff = 2πf/γµ0 is the effective field, γ is the 
gyromagnetic ratio, µ0 is the permeability of free space, f is the frequency, H is the applied field, Meff is 
the effective magnetization, ΔH is the linewidth, and A0 is an amplitude. Unique fits for Meff and Heff are 
not possible when fitting to a single resonance curve, so we set µ0Meff equal to 1 T for the fits. Since the 


12

goal of this work is not to extract values for these parameters, such an assumption was used solely to 
allow the fit to converge. The simultaneous fit is indicated in the figure as solid lines. The identical 
response between the Fe and Ni is expected based on the strong exchange coupling and standard 
models for FMR.  This provides rudimentary validation of the approach.  Furthermore, the quality of the 
simultaneous fit highlights the agreement between the measured and expected behavior as the external
bias field is swept through the ferromagnetic resonance. To confirm the measurement of the FMR, we 
overlay as a red line the field-swept FMR spectrum that we obtain via the in situ inductive method by 
measuring the amplitude of the reflected microwaves from the CPW sample structure. Good agreement 
is seen between the XFMR and inductive FMR methods. The small difference in linewidth between the 
inductive FMR and XFMR could be due to the fact that XFMR is probing a localized area of the sample, 
whereas the inductive approach is probing the entire sample which will likely have more inhomogeneity.
This is especially true given the fact that the current sample was fabricated in a lift-off process on a thick 
Au layer.  This produces edge regions with both line edge roughness and thickness variation, coupled 
with the fact that the Au underlayer itself induces additional film roughness. Finally, we note that since 
our EUV beam is focused in a roughly-Gaussian spot with a peak intensity near the center of the 
waveguide, our EUV measurements intrinsically probe the center region of the waveguide more than the 
edges.

XFMR Results: Co25Fe75 at 17 GHz

The second sample that we studied is Co25Fe75; due to its high Ms, we were able to measure XFMR at 17 
GHz even with magnetic fields as low as µ0H ≈ 150 mT.  Notably, at 50° from grazing, our setup has a low
contrast for the magnetic signal at the Co M-edge as shown in Figure 4(b). This limitation is solely due to 
the current incidence angle of our system, and can be overcome by changing this angle to 52°. 
Regardless, we are still able to measure the dynamics of each element, as shown in Figure 6 (a). Broadly 
speaking, the Co and Fe behave the same, as expected; however, without more careful data analysis, 
quantitative XFMR traces cannot be shown for Co and Fe independently (e.g., to compare phase shifts) 
due to the proximity of the Co (57–62 eV) and Fe (50–55 eV) M-edges.  

Figure 6. High-Bandwidth XFMR on Co25Fe75, 17 GHz: (a) The top plot shows the raw spectra, and the 
bottom plot shows an example XFMR magnetic asymmetry.  The Co and Fe absorption edges are 
close to each other, so the dynamics are more difficult to separate quantitatively. (b) The spin 
precession of the Fe atoms.  (c) The XFMR trace of the Fe, with the inductive FMR overlaid.


13

The inductive FMR trace shown in Figure 6(c) shows a double-resonance, which we suspect is due to 
inhomogeneity in the sample.  This material is known to have large inhomogeneity when deposited on 
rough surfaces or when non-ideal seed and capping layers are used.57 The XFMR trace also shows this
double peak structure, and the locations of the two resonances agree in both methods. As expected, 
the phase in the XFMR is not a clean arctan due to superposition of the two resonances.  The relative 
amplitudes of the two peaks are not the same in the XFMR and inductive FMR, which is likely due to the 
fact that the EUV probes only a small region (~60 μm diameter), whereas inductive FMR probes the 
entire structure. We do not think this comes from uncertainty in our XFMR data; in addition to 
estimating the error bars from the quality of the sinusoidal fits (i.e., the variance in the data), we tested 
the repeatability of the XFMR measurement by measuring at 150 mT both at the beginning and end of 
the measurement [included in Fig. 6(c)]. Within their respective error bars, these measurements at 150 
mT agree and demonstrate the stability and robustness of the measurement system.

Figure 7. Element-Resolved Dynamics in a Magnetic Multilayer, 8.5 GHz: (a) The top plot shows the 
raw spectra for static T-MOKE.  The second row shows the magnetic asymmetry from the static 
spectrum, which shows contributions at both the Ni and Fe edges.  The bottom two plots are 
representative XFMR magnetic asymmetry spectra taken at the Ni and Fe resonant fields.  The fact that 
there is no response of the Fe atoms at the Ni resonance field highlights the ability of XFMR to 
measure element-resolved dynamics.  (b) We measured XFMR at the Fe resonance and at the Ni 
resonance, and the measured element-resolved precession is shown in the rightmost plots.


14

XFMR Results: Ni/Fe Multilayer at 8.5 GHz, showing element-specific dynamics

The third and final sample in this study is a multilayer sample with Ni and Fe layers that are separated by 
an insulating 3 nm TaOx layer. The magnetic isolation of the Fe and Ni layers should yield independent 
dynamics of the layer except for some potential dipolar coupling. Figure 7(b) shows the in situ inductive 
FMR response of the sample taken at 8.5 GHz, wherein two peaks are observed. The high amplitude and 
narrow peak near 40 mT is presumably due to the Fe layer since Fe has higher Ms and lower damping 
relative to Ni.58 The broad and low amplitude peak near 120 mT is likely from the Ni, by the same 
argument.  Indeed, XFMR measurements at 40 mT reveal that the precession amplitude of the Fe layer is 
significantly higher than that of the Ni.  Given the broad linewidth of the Ni peak and the potential for 
dipolar coupling between the layers, it is not surprising to see a non-zero precession angle for Ni as well.
Repeating this measurement at μ0 H ~125 mT shows the opposite behavior, where the precession
amplitude of the Ni signal is significantly more than that of the Fe. Furthermore, in both cases there is a 
noticeable phase shift between the precession of the two elements.  Such a phase shift is to be expected 
since the resonance fields (and therefore phase shift through the resonance) are at different locations.  
Any dipolar coupling would also induce a relative phase shift.  Measurements taken at more fields across 
the resonances would in principle enable us to determine the amount and type of coupling between the 
layers. Measuring such phase shifts in structures where the coupling is more complicated (e.g., from 
spin currents or weak exchange) allows quantification of such interactions. This highlights the ability to 
separate dynamics within different layers or sublattices in scientifically interesting or industry-relevant 
samples.

Discussion and Outlook

This work shows that high-bandwidth, element-specific measurements of dynamic magnetic phenomena 
can be achieved in a laboratory. Despite the fact that no reference beam was used to correct for 
intensity fluctuations and drift, small deviations of the magnetization with cone angles below 5 degrees
were easily observed at high-frequency. Going forward, many straightforward improvements can be 
made to increase the sensitivity and SNR, allowing more subtle phenomena to be observed along with 
significantly smaller cones angles and allow for more field steps across the resonance. The latter will be 
particularly important as measurements are pushed to higher frequencies. Here, we discuss several
improvements that can be made to greatly improve performance.

First, a reference beam that provides reference spectra of the EUV light incident on the sample can be 
used to normalize and divide out intensity fluctuations on both short and long timescales.  The absence 
of this in the current setup represents one of our biggest barriers to achieving higher SNR.  The frame-to-
frame RMS intensity is approximately 5% for 5 sec exposures, and there is also similar drift on longer 
time scales. Furthermore, the fluctuations of each harmonic are not necessarily correlated (though our 
analysis assumes that they are). Such normalization is critical at synchrotrons since the beam intensity 
also varies significantly over time.  Recently, the use of a reference beam in HHG systems used to 
measure spin dynamics was shown to increase SNR by almost an order of magnitude.59–61

Second, reflection-geometry measurements as shown here can be significantly improved by 
incorporating measurements at multiple angles.39,55 This can be seen in Figure 4, which shows a 


15

calculation of the T-MOKE contrast for the samples used in this study.  This calculation was performed 
using the scattering matrix approach described in Ref. [62].  While the 50° angle of incidence (measured 
from grazing incidence) used here is near the maximum-contrast point for the Ni80Fe20 sample, we would 
achieve better SNR and better-separated Ni and Fe peaks in the Co25Fe75 and Ni/Fe multilayer samples if 
the scattering angle was changed to 52 degrees. Incorporating the ability to change the incidence angle 
easily will enable us to optimize the signal for general samples, as well as improve the depth-sensitivity 
of our measurement.

Third, while we have shown adequate synchronization of the EUV pulses to 62 GHz microwave fields, the 
timing jitter we measure supports extension to significantly higher frequencies by using commercially 
available components.  Furthermore, it may be possible to improve the timing jitter by replacing the 
photodiode that is used for the input to the frequency comb generator. We found that using a sharper 
rise time on the input to the frequency comb generator reduced the timing jitter. Since the current 
photodiode still has a relatively long rise time (low bandwidth) of 1 ns, which depending on the 
electronic noise present can produce additional timing jitter, we anticipate that using a photodiode with 
a shorter rise time will further improve the timing jitter. Also, in addition to using multipliers, 
synchronized 100+ GHz tones with higher signal-to-noise ratio can be generated by driving an 
electrooptic modulator with a 10 or 20 GHz harmonic of the 80 MHz laser repletion rate.63 We further 
note that our current Ta-sapphire oscillator is passive and lacks any active frequency stabilization.  
Femtosecond-level timing jitter between optical and electronic signals is accessible with techniques that 
employ stabilization of the underlying Ti:sapphire frequency comb mode spacing and carrier-envelope 
offset frequency.63–65

Finally, as already mentioned, this technique will be extended to include an imaging modality whereby 
the coherence of the EUV will be exploited.51,53 Lensless imaging techniques such as coherent diffractive 
imaging, ptychography, and holography have been used with EUV and x-ray light to image 
nanostructures and magnetic textures with resolution smaller than the illumination spot size and 
approaching the diffraction limit.66,67 Furthermore, these techniques provide quantitative measurement 
of the phase shift imparted by the sample, which provides a dramatic improvement in contrast to certain
sample features, such as topography and oxidation state.55 Combining such a technique with the XFMR 
instrument developed in this paper will enable us to perform dynamic, in situ measurements of 
functioning devices and elucidate the underlying physics.

Summary

We have demonstrated the ability to bring element-specific, x-ray detected ferromagnetic resonance 
spectroscopy (XFMR) to a laboratory setting.  We did so by combining a high-harmonic generation (HHG) 
light source, which generates 35–70 eV light, with an RF frequency comb generator, and were able to 
generate phase-stable microwaves (timing jitter < 1.1 ps) above 60 GHz that we can use for XFMR 
measurements at the M-edge of most magnetic elements. The instrument can perform measurements 
in transmission or reflection; we showed reflection-mode measurements here that use the transverse 
magneto-optic Kerr effect (T-MOKE) geometry for magnetic contrast even on samples with opaque 
substrates (e.g., thick silicon).  We used our instrument to perform high-frequency XFMR measurements 


16

on three samples: permalloy (8.5 GHz), Co25Fe75 (17 GHz), and a Ni/Fe multilayer sample that showed 
different dynamics in the Ni and Fe layers (8.5 GHz).

This system provides the capability in the near future to measure element-, layer-, or sublattice-specific 
dynamics in industry-relevant and scientifically interesting magnetic thin films. Moreover, by introducing 
variable-angle measurements into this system, we will enhance the SNR and depth-sensitivity of the 
technique to be able to monitor precisely the spin transport and accumulation across interfaces. Finally, 
the spatial coherence of the source, combined with the ability to synchronize electrical pulses to the EUV 
probe, lays the foundation for performing these measurements in-operando on individual or arrays of 
functional spintronic devices. 

Appendix A: Tuning the YIG Pair

We are able to tune the pair of YIG filters by using a pair of part-per-million (PPM)-stable current sources 
(one per YIG). In particular, we drive the YIGs with roughly 200 mA, and changing the current by 1 µA 
shifts the phase by roughly a degree at 8.5 GHz [shown both in Fig. 3(d) and Fig. S(1a)]. One YIG alone 
does not provide 360° phase shift at 8.5 GHz (or below) before the transmitted amplitude starts to 
decline.  By using two YIGs and sweeping the currents together, we are able to shift the microwave phase 
over a full cycle while maintaining a relatively constant microwave amplitude.  Fig. S1 shows the 
amplitude and phase of the transmitted microwaves as the YIG filters are tuned together (vertical) and 
apart (horizontal).

Figure S1. Tuning the YIG filter pair: (a) The amplitude of the transmitted microwaves is roughly 
maintained over the passband of the filters.  The dashed purple arrow shows an example range of 
approximately 360° phase shift at 8.5 GHz. (b) The phase is shifted if the YIG filter currents are 
changed together.


17

Appendix B: Complete RF Generator Schematic

Figure S2 shows the full schematic for the microwave generator that was used to generate 8.5–62 GHz.
We use frequency multipliers to achieve frequencies above 13 GHz.  Above 54 GHz, we encounter 
significant losses in our system since we exceed the bandwidth of several components, as well as the 40 
GHz sampling oscilloscope.  Despite this fact, we are still able to evaluate the timing stability and test the 
synchronization of microwaves to the EUV pulses up to 62 GHz. Figure S2 shows that we can still 
measure the synchronization our EUV pulses up to frequencies of 62 GHz, albeit with increased noise 
due to microwave losses. Additionally, the final bandpass filter fails to suppress the 41 GHz harmonic 
also output by the tripler when generating 62 GHz microwaves, leading to some beating of the signal.  
However, these are not fundamental limitations since higher bandwidth components are commercially 
available.


18

Figure S2. Complete RF Generation Circuit Schematic for up to 62 GHz: (a) The full circuit schematic for 
generating synchronized microwaves is shown.  The frequency-doubling and frequency-tripling 
electronics are omitted when generating lower frequencies.  (b-d) Traces measured with our 40 GHz 
bandwidth sampling scope when the circuit is generating 40 GHz, 57 GHz, and 62 GHz microwaves, 
respectively.  In (b), the trigger pulse (measured by a high-speed, real-time oscilloscope) is overlaid.  
Note that the beating at 62 GHz is due to exceeding the rated bandwidth of multiple components, most 
notably the final bandpass filter passes 41 GHz in addition to the desired 62 GHz.


19

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Henry Kapteyn, Margaret Murnane, and Tom Silva for valuable discussions 
and advice, and to Dmitriy Zusin and Christian Gentry for developing the multilayer reflectivity 
calculating code.  MT and JW acknowledge funding support from the National Research Council (NRC) 
Post-Doctoral Fellowship program.  HTN acknowledges support through the NIST cooperative agreement
70NANB18H006 with the University of Colorado Boulder.

References

1 D. Edelstein, M. Rizzolo, D. Sil, A. Dutta, J. DeBrosse, M. Wordeman, A. Arceo, I. C. Chu, J. Demarest, E. 
R. J. Edwards, E. R. Evarts, J. Fullam, A. Gasasira, G. Hu, M. Iwatake, R. Johnson, V. Katragadda, T. Levin, J. 
Li, Y. Liu, C. Long, T. Maffitt, S. McDermott, S. Mehta, V. Mehta, D. Metzler, J. Morillo, Y. Nakamura, S. 
Nguyen, P. Nieves, V. Pai, R. Patlolla, R. Pujari, R. Southwick, T. Standaert, O. van der Straten, H. Wu, C. . -
C. Yang, D. Houssameddine, J. M. Slaughter, and D. C. Worledge, in 2020 IEEE International Electron 
Devices Meeting (IEDM) (2020), p. 11.5.1-11.5.4.
2 D.C. Worledge, in 2022 IEEE International Memory Workshop (IMW) (2022), pp. 1–4.
3 A.V. Chumak, P. Kabos, M. Wu, C. Abert, C. Adelmann, A.O. Adeyeye, J. Åkerman, F.G. Aliev, A. Anane, A. 
Awad, C.H. Back, A. Barman, G.E.W. Bauer, M. Becherer, E.N. Beginin, V.A.S.V. Bittencourt, Y.M. Blanter, P. 
Bortolotti, I. Boventer, D.A. Bozhko, S.A. Bunyaev, J.J. Carmiggelt, R.R. Cheenikundil, F. Ciubotaru, S. 
Cotofana, G. Csaba, O.V. Dobrovolskiy, C. Dubs, M. Elyasi, K.G. Fripp, H. Fulara, I.A. Golovchanskiy, C. 
Gonzalez-Ballestero, P. Graczyk, D. Grundler, P. Gruszecki, G. Gubbiotti, K. Guslienko, A. Haldar, S. 
Hamdioui, R. Hertel, B. Hillebrands, T. Hioki, A. Houshang, C.-M. Hu, H. Huebl, M. Huth, E. Iacocca, M.B. 
Jungfleisch, G.N. Kakazei, A. Khitun, R. Khymyn, T. Kikkawa, M. Kläui, O. Klein, J.W. Kłos, S. Knauer, S. 
Koraltan, M. Kostylev, M. Krawczyk, I.N. Krivorotov, V.V. Kruglyak, D. Lachance-Quirion, S. Ladak, R. 
Lebrun, Y. Li, M. Lindner, R. Macêdo, S. Mayr, G.A. Melkov, S. Mieszczak, Y. Nakamura, H.T. Nembach, A.A. 
Nikitin, S.A. Nikitov, V. Novosad, J.A. Otálora, Y. Otani, A. Papp, B. Pigeau, P. Pirro, W. Porod, F. Porrati, H. 
Qin, B. Rana, T. Reimann, F. Riente, O. Romero-Isart, A. Ross, A.V. Sadovnikov, A.R. Safin, E. Saitoh, G. 
Schmidt, H. Schultheiss, K. Schultheiss, A.A. Serga, S. Sharma, J.M. Shaw, D. Suess, O. Surzhenko, K. Szulc, 
T. Taniguchi, M. Urbánek, K. Usami, A.B. Ustinov, T. van der Sar, S. van Dijken, V.I. Vasyuchka, R. Verba, 
S.V. Kusminskiy, Q. Wang, M. Weides, M. Weiler, S. Wintz, S.P. Wolski, and X. Zhang, “Advances in 
Magnetics Roadmap on Spin-Wave Computing,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 58(6), 1–72 (2022).
4 Q. Shao, P. Li, L. Liu, H. Yang, S. Fukami, A. Razavi, H. Wu, K. Wang, F. Freimuth, Y. Mokrousov, M.D. 
Stiles, S. Emori, A. Hoffmann, J. Åkerman, K. Roy, J.-P. Wang, S.-H. Yang, K. Garello, and W. Zhang, 
“Roadmap of Spin–Orbit Torques,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 57(7), 1–39 (2021).
5 A.V. Khvalkovskiy, D. Apalkov, S. Watts, R. Chepulskii, R.S. Beach, A. Ong, X. Tang, A. Driskill-Smith, W.H. 
Butler, P.B. Visscher, D. Lottis, E. Chen, V. Nikitin, and M. Krounbi, “Basic principles of STT-MRAM cell 
operation in memory arrays,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 46(7), 074001 (2013).
6 S.S. Kalarickal, P. Krivosik, M. Wu, C.E. Patton, M.L. Schneider, P. Kabos, T.J. Silva, and J.P. Nibarger, 
“Ferromagnetic resonance linewidth in metallic thin films: Comparison of measurement methods,” 
Journal of Applied Physics 99(9), 093909 (2006).
7 H.T. Nembach, T.J. Silva, J.M. Shaw, M.L. Schneider, M.J. Carey, S. Maat, and J.R. Childress, 
“Perpendicular ferromagnetic resonance measurements of damping and Lande#x0301g- factor in 
sputtered (Co2Mn)1-xGex thin films,” Phys. Rev. B 84(5), 054424 (2011).
8 W. Chen, G. de Loubens, J.M.L. Beaujour, A.D. Kent, and J.Z. Sun, “Finite size effects on spin-torque 
driven ferromagnetic resonance in spin valves with a Co/Ni synthetic free layer,” J. Appl. Phys. 103(7), 
(2008).


20

9 D.A. Arena, E. Vescovo, C.-C. Kao, Y. Guan, and W.E. Bailey, “Combined time-resolved x-ray magnetic 
circular dichroism and ferromagnetic resonance studies of magnetic alloys and multilayers (invited),” 
Journal of Applied Physics 101(9), 09C109 (2007).
10 G.B.G. Stenning, L.R. Shelford, S.A. Cavill, F. Hoffmann, M. Haertinger, T. Hesjedal, G. Woltersdorf, G.J. 
Bowden, S.A. Gregory, C.H. Back, P.A.J. de Groot, and G. van der Laan, “Magnetization dynamics in an 
exchange-coupled NiFe/CoFe bilayer studied by x-ray detected ferromagnetic resonance,” New J. Phys. 
17(1), 013019 (2015).
11 D.A. Arena, E. Vescovo, C.-C. Kao, Y. Guan, and W.E. Bailey, “Weakly coupled motion of individual layers 
in ferromagnetic resonance,” Phys. Rev. B 74(6), 064409 (2006).
12 G. van der Laan, and A.I. Figueroa, “X-ray magnetic circular dichroism—A versatile tool to study 
magnetism,” Coordination Chemistry Reviews 277–278, 95–129 (2014).
13 C. Klewe, Q. Li, M. Yang, A.T. N’Diaye, D.M. Burn, T. Hesjedal, A.I. Figueroa, C. Hwang, J. Li, R.J. Hicken, 
P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, G. van der Laan, and Z. Qiu, “Element- and Time-Resolved Measurements of Spin 
Dynamics Using X-ray Detected Ferromagnetic Resonance,” Null 33(2), 12–19 (2020).
14 M.K. Marcham, L.R. Shelford, S.A. Cavill, P.S. Keatley, W. Yu, P. Shafer, A. Neudert, J.R. Childress, J.A. 
Katine, E. Arenholz, N.D. Telling, G. van der Laan, and R.J. Hicken, “Phase-resolved x-ray ferromagnetic 
resonance measurements of spin pumping in spin valve structures,” Phys. Rev. B 87(18), 180403 (2013).
15 P. Warnicke, E. Stavitski, J.-S. Lee, A. Yang, Z. Chen, X. Zuo, S. Zohar, W.E. Bailey, V.G. Harris, and D.A. 
Arena, “Direct observation of symmetry-specific precession in a ferrimagnet,” Phys. Rev. B 92(10), 
104402 (2015).
16 C. Klewe, P. Shafer, J.E. Shoup, C. Kons, Y. Pogoryelov, R. Knut, B.A. Gray, H.-M. Jeon, B.M. Howe, O. 
Karis, Y. Suzuki, E. Arenholz, D.A. Arena, and S. Emori, “Observation of coherently coupled cation spin 
dynamics in an insulating ferrimagnetic oxide,” Applied Physics Letters 122(13), 132401 (2023).
17 W.E. Bailey, C. Cheng, R. Knut, O. Karis, S. Auffret, S. Zohar, D. Keavney, P. Warnicke, J.-S. Lee, and D.A. 
Arena, “Detection of microwave phase variation in nanometre-scale magnetic heterostructures,” Nature 
Communications 4(1), 2025 (2013).
18 T. Martin, G. Woltersdorf, C. Stamm, H.A. Dürr, R. Mattheis, C.H. Back, and G. Bayreuther, “Layer 
resolved magnetization dynamics in interlayer exchange coupled Ni81Fe19∕Ru∕Co90Fe10 by time 
resolved x-ray magnetic circular dichroism,” Journal of Applied Physics 103(7), 07B112 (2008).
19 G. van der Laan, “Time-resolved X-ray detected ferromagnetic resonance of spin currents,” Journal of 
Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 220, 137–146 (2017).
20 Q. Li, M. Yang, C. Klewe, P. Shafer, A.T. N’Diaye, D. Hou, T.Y. Wang, N. Gao, E. Saitoh, C. Hwang, R.J. 
Hicken, J. Li, E. Arenholz, and Z.Q. Qiu, “Coherent ac spin current transmission across an 
antiferromagnetic CoO insulator,” Nat Commun 10(1), 5265 (2019).
21 J. Li, L.R. Shelford, P. Shafer, A. Tan, J.X. Deng, P.S. Keatley, C. Hwang, E. Arenholz, G. van der Laan, R.J. 
Hicken, and Z.Q. Qiu, “Direct Detection of Pure ac Spin Current by X-Ray Pump-Probe Measurements,” 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 117(7), 076602 (2016).
22 M. Dąbrowski, T. Nakano, D.M. Burn, A. Frisk, D.G. Newman, C. Klewe, Q. Li, M. Yang, P. Shafer, E. 
Arenholz, T. Hesjedal, G. van der Laan, Z.Q. Qiu, and R.J. Hicken, “Coherent Transfer of Spin Angular 
Momentum by Evanescent Spin Waves within Antiferromagnetic NiO,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124(21), 217201 
(2020).
23 Y. Pogoryelov, M. Pereiro, S. Jana, A. Kumar, S. Akansel, M. Ranjbar, D. Thonig, D. Primetzhofer, P. 
Svedlindh, J. Åkerman, O. Eriksson, O. Karis, and D.A. Arena, “Nonreciprocal spin pumping damping in 
asymmetric magnetic trilayers,” Phys. Rev. B 101(5), 054401 (2020).
24 T. Schaffers, T. Feggeler, S. Pile, R. Meckenstock, M. Buchner, D. Spoddig, V. Ney, M. Farle, H. Wende, S. 
Wintz, M. Weigand, H. Ohldag, K. Ollefs, and A. Ney, “Extracting the Dynamic Magnetic Contrast in Time-
Resolved X-Ray Transmission Microscopy,” Nanomaterials 9(7), 940 (2019).


21

25 M.G. Silly, T. Ferté, M.A. Tordeux, D. Pierucci, N. Beaulieu, C. Chauvet, F. Pressacco, F. Sirotti, H. 
Popescu, V. Lopez-Flores, M. Tortarolo, M. Sacchi, N. Jaouen, P. Hollander, J.P. Ricaud, N. Bergeard, C. 
Boeglin, B. Tudu, R. Delaunay, J. Luning, G. Malinowski, M. Hehn, C. Baumier, F. Fortuna, D. Krizmancic, L. 
Stebel, R. Sergo, and G. Cautero, “Pump−probe experiments at the TEMPO beamline using the low-α 
operation mode of Synchrotron SOLEIL,” J Synchrotron Rad 24(4), 886–897 (2017).
26 G. Materlik, T. Rayment, and D.I. Stuart, “Diamond Light Source: status and perspectives,” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 
373(2036), 20130161 (2015).
27 S. Pile, S. Stienen, K. Lenz, R. Narkowicz, S. Wintz, J. Förster, S. Mayr, M. Buchner, M. Weigand, V. Ney, J. 
Lindner, and A. Ney, “Nonstationary spin waves in a single rectangular permalloy microstrip under 
uniform magnetic excitation,” Phys. Rev. B 105(9), 094415 (2022).
28 S. Bonetti, R. Kukreja, Z. Chen, D. Spoddig, K. Ollefs, C. Schöppner, R. Meckenstock, A. Ney, J. Pinto, R. 
Houanche, J. Frisch, J. Stöhr, H.A. Dürr, and H. Ohldag, “Microwave soft x-ray microscopy for nanoscale 
magnetization dynamics in the 5–10 GHz frequency range,” Review of Scientific Instruments 86(9), 
093703 (2015).
29 S. Mizukami, F. Wu, A. Sakuma, J. Walowski, D. Watanabe, T. Kubota, X. Zhang, H. Naganuma, M. 
Oogane, Y. Ando, and T. Miyazaki, “Long-Lived Ultrafast Spin Precession in Manganese Alloys Films with a 
Large Perpendicular Magnetic Anisotropy,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106(11), 117201 (2011).
30 S. Mizukami, S. Iihama, N. Inami, T. Hiratsuka, G. Kim, H. Naganuma, M. Oogane, and Y. Ando, “Fast 
magnetization precession observed in L10-FePt epitaxial thin film,” Applied Physics Letters 98(5), 
052501-052501–3 (2011).
31 J.M. Shaw, H.T. Nembach, and T.J. Silva, “Determination of spin pumping as a source of linewidth in 
sputtered Co${}_{90}$Fe${}_{10}$/Pd multilayers by use of broadband ferromagnetic resonance 
spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev. B 85(5), 054412 (2012).
32 M. Jaris, W. Yang, C. Berk, and H. Schmidt, “Towards ultraefficient nanoscale straintronic microwave 
devices,” Phys. Rev. B 101(21), 214421 (2020).
33 A. Barman, S. Wang, O. Hellwig, A. Berger, E.E. Fullerton, and H. Schmidt, “Ultrafast magnetization 
dynamics in high perpendicular anisotropy [Co∕Pt][sub n] multilayers,” Journal of Applied Physics 101, 
09D102 (2007).
34 S. Wei, and M.Y. Chou, “Phonon dispersions of silicon and germanium from first-principles 
calculations,” Phys. Rev. B 50(4), 2221–2226 (1994).
35 T. Popmintchev, M.-C. Chen, P. Arpin, M.M. Murnane, and H.C. Kapteyn, “The attosecond nonlinear 
optics of bright coherent X-ray generation,” Nature Photon 4(12), 822–832 (2010).
36 C. La-O-Vorakiat, M. Siemens, M.M. Murnane, H.C. Kapteyn, S. Mathias, M. Aeschlimann, P. Grychtol, 
R. Adam, C.M. Schneider, J.M. Shaw, H. Nembach, and T.J. Silva, “Ultrafast Demagnetization Dynamics at 
the $M$ Edges of Magnetic Elements Observed Using a Tabletop High-Harmonic Soft X-Ray Source,” 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 103(25), 257402 (2009).
37 S. Mathias, C. La-O-Vorakiat, P. Grychtol, P. Granitzka, E. Turgut, J.M. Shaw, R. Adam, H.T. Nembach, 
M.E. Siemens, S. Eich, C.M. Schneider, T.J. Silva, M. Aeschlimann, M.M. Murnane, and H.C. Kapteyn, 
“Probing the timescale of the exchange interaction in a ferromagnetic alloy,” PNAS 109(13), 4792–4797 
(2012).
38 D. Rudolf, C. La-O-Vorakiat, M. Battiato, R. Adam, J.M. Shaw, E. Turgut, P. Maldonado, S. Mathias, P. 
Grychtol, H.T. Nembach, T.J. Silva, M. Aeschlimann, H.C. Kapteyn, M.M. Murnane, C.M. Schneider, and 
P.M. Oppeneer, “Ultrafast magnetization enhancement in metallic multilayers driven by superdiffusive 
spin current,” Nat Commun 3, 1037 (2012).
39 E. Turgut, D. Zusin, D. Legut, K. Carva, R. Knut, J.M. Shaw, C. Chen, Z. Tao, H.T. Nembach, T.J. Silva, S. 
Mathias, M. Aeschlimann, P.M. Oppeneer, H.C. Kapteyn, M.M. Murnane, and P. Grychtol, “Stoner versus 


22

Heisenberg: Ultrafast exchange reduction and magnon generation during laser-induced 
demagnetization,” Phys. Rev. B 94(22), 220408 (2016).
40 M. Hofherr, S. Häuser, J.K. Dewhurst, P. Tengdin, S. Sakshath, H.T. Nembach, S.T. Weber, J.M. Shaw, T.J. 
Silva, H.C. Kapteyn, M. Cinchetti, B. Rethfeld, M.M. Murnane, D. Steil, B. Stadtmüller, S. Sharma, M. 
Aeschlimann, and S. Mathias, “Ultrafast optically induced spin transfer in ferromagnetic alloys,” Science 
Advances 6(3), eaay8717 (2020).
41 P. Tengdin, C. Gentry, A. Blonsky, D. Zusin, M. Gerrity, L. Hellbrück, M. Hofherr, J. Shaw, Y. Kvashnin, E.K. 
Delczeg-Czirjak, M. Arora, H. Nembach, T.J. Silva, S. Mathias, M. Aeschlimann, H.C. Kapteyn, D. Thonig, K. 
Koumpouras, O. Eriksson, and M.M. Murnane, “Direct light–induced spin transfer between different 
elements in a spintronic Heusler material via femtosecond laser excitation,” Science Advances 6(3), 
eaaz1100 (2020).
42 S. Jana, J.A. Terschlüsen, R. Stefanuik, S. Plogmaker, S. Troisi, R.S. Malik, M. Svanqvist, R. Knut, J. 
Söderström, and O. Karis, “A setup for element specific magnetization dynamics using the transverse 
magneto-optic Kerr effect in the energy range of 30-72 eV,” Review of Scientific Instruments 88(3), 
033113 (2017).
43 H. Liu, R. Knut, S. Saha, R.S. Malik, K. Jatkar, R. Stefanuik, J. Söderström, J.E. Shoup, D. Khadka, T.R. 
Thapaliya, S.X. Huang, A. Gupta, O. Karis, D. Karaiskaj, and D.A. Arena, “Optical and extreme UV studies 
of spin dynamics in metallic and insulating ferrimagnets,” Journal of Applied Physics 130(24), 240901 
(2021).
44 I. Vaskivskyi, R.S. Malik, L. Salemi, D. Turenne, R. Knut, J. Brock, R. Stefanuik, J. Söderström, K. Carva, 
E.E. Fullerton, P.M. Oppeneer, O. Karis, and H.A. Dürr, “Element-Specific Magnetization Dynamics in Co–
Pt Alloys Induced by Strong Optical Excitation,” J. Phys. Chem. C 125(21), 11714–11721 (2021).
45 J.L. Ellis, K.M. Dorney, D.D. Hickstein, N.J. Brooks, C. Gentry, C. Hernández-García, D. Zusin, J.M. Shaw, 
Q.L. Nguyen, C.A. Mancuso, G.S.M. Jansen, S. Witte, H.C. Kapteyn, and M.M. Murnane, “High harmonics 
with spatially varying ellipticity,” Optica, OPTICA 5(4), 479–485 (2018).
46 D.D. Hickstein, F.J. Dollar, P. Grychtol, J.L. Ellis, R. Knut, C. Hernández-García, D. Zusin, C. Gentry, J.M. 
Shaw, T. Fan, K.M. Dorney, A. Becker, A. Jaroń-Becker, H.C. Kapteyn, M.M. Murnane, and C.G. Durfee, 
“Non-collinear generation of angularly isolated circularly polarized high harmonics,” Nature Photonics 
9(11), 743 (2015).
47 O. Kfir, P. Grychtol, E. Turgut, R. Knut, D. Zusin, D. Popmintchev, T. Popmintchev, H. Nembach, J.M. 
Shaw, A. Fleischer, H. Kapteyn, M. Murnane, and O. Cohen, “Generation of bright phase-matched 
circularly-polarized extreme ultraviolet high harmonics,” Nat Photon 9(2), 99–105 (2015).
48 K. Yao, F. Willems, C. von Korff Schmising, I. Radu, C. Strüber, D. Schick, D. Engel, A. Tsukamoto, J.K. 
Dewhurst, S. Sharma, and S. Eisebitt, “Distinct spectral response in $M$-edge magnetic circular 
dichroism,” Phys. Rev. B 102(10), 100405 (2020).
49 B. Vodungbo, A.B. Sardinha, J. Gautier, G. Lambert, C. Valentin, M. Lozano, G. Iaquaniello, F. Delmotte, 
S. Sebban, J. Lüning, and P. Zeitoun, “Polarization control of high order harmonics in the EUV photon 
energy range,” Opt. Express, OE 19(5), 4346–4356 (2011).
50 B.L. Henke, E.M. Gullikson, and J.C. Davis, “X-Ray Interactions: Photoabsorption, Scattering, 
Transmission, and Reflection at E = 50-30,000 eV, Z = 1-92,” Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 54(2), 
181–342 (1993).
51 J. Miao, T. Ishikawa, I.K. Robinson, and M.M. Murnane, “Beyond crystallography: Diffractive imaging 
using coherent x-ray light sources,” Science 348(6234), 530–535 (2015).
52 J. Miao, P. Charalambous, J. Kirz, and D. Sayre, “Extending the methodology of X-ray crystallography to 
allow imaging of micrometre-sized non-crystalline specimens,” Nature 400(6742), 342–344 (1999).
53 N. Bukin, C. McKeever, E. Burgos-Parra, P.S. Keatley, R.J. Hicken, F.Y. Ogrin, G. Beutier, M. Dupraz, H. 
Popescu, N. Jaouen, F. Yakhou-Harris, S.A. Cavill, and G. van der Laan, “Time-resolved imaging of 


23

magnetic vortex dynamics using holography with extended reference autocorrelation by linear 
differential operator,” Sci Rep 6(1), 36307 (2016).
54 D.M. Burn, S.L. Zhang, G.Q. Yu, Y. Guang, H.J. Chen, X.P. Qiu, G. van der Laan, and T. Hesjedal, “Depth-
Resolved Magnetization Dynamics Revealed by X-Ray Reflectometry Ferromagnetic Resonance,” Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 125(13), 137201 (2020).
55 M. Tanksalvala, C.L. Porter, Y. Esashi, B. Wang, N.W. Jenkins, Z. Zhang, G.P. Miley, J.L. Knobloch, B. 
McBennett, N. Horiguchi, S. Yazdi, J. Zhou, M.N. Jacobs, C.S. Bevis, R.M. Karl, P. Johnsen, D. Ren, L. Waller, 
D.E. Adams, S.L. Cousin, C.-T. Liao, J. Miao, M. Gerrity, H.C. Kapteyn, and M.M. Murnane, 
“Nondestructive, high-resolution, chemically specific 3D nanostructure characterization using phase-
sensitive EUV imaging reflectometry,” Science Advances 7(5), eabd9667 (2021).
56 M.A.W. Schoen, D. Thonig, M.L. Schneider, T.J. Silva, H.T. Nembach, O. Eriksson, O. Karis, and J.M. Shaw, 
“Ultra-low magnetic damping of a metallic ferromagnet,” Nat Phys 12(9), 839–842 (2016).
57 E.R.J. Edwards, H.T. Nembach, and J.M. Shaw, “${\mathrm{Co}}_{25}{\mathrm{Fe}}_{75}$ Thin Films 
with Ultralow Total Damping of Ferromagnetic Resonance,” Phys. Rev. Applied 11(5), 054036 (2019).
58 M.A.W. Schoen, J. Lucassen, H.T. Nembach, B. Koopmans, T.J. Silva, C.H. Back, and J.M. Shaw, 
“Magnetic properties in ultrathin $3d$ transition-metal binary alloys. II. Experimental verification of 
quantitative theories of damping and spin pumping,” Phys. Rev. B 95(13), 134411 (2017).
59 P.C. Johnsen, S.A. Ryan, C. Gentry, A. Grafov, H. Kapteyn, and M. Murnane, “A beamline for ultrafast 
extreme ultraviolet magneto-optical spectroscopy in reflection near the shot noise limit,” Review of 
Scientific Instruments 94(3), 033001 (2023).
60 Y. Esashi, N.W. Jenkins, Y. Shao, J.M. Shaw, S. Park, M.M. Murnane, H.C. Kapteyn, and M. Tanksalvala, 
“Tabletop extreme ultraviolet reflectometer for quantitative nanoscale reflectometry, scatterometry, and 
imaging,” Review of Scientific Instruments 94(12), 123705 (2023).
61 K. Yao, F. Willems, C. von Korff Schmising, C. Strüber, P. Hessing, B. Pfau, D. Schick, D. Engel, K. 
Gerlinger, M. Schneider, and S. Eisebitt, “A tabletop setup for ultrafast helicity-dependent and element-
specific absorption spectroscopy and scattering in the extreme ultraviolet spectral range,” Review of 
Scientific Instruments 91(9), 093001 (2020).
62 J. Zak, E.R. Moog, C. Liu, and S.D. Bader, “Magneto-optics of multilayers with arbitrary magnetization 
directions,” Phys. Rev. B 43(8), 6423–6429 (1991).
63 T.M. Fortier, A. Rolland, F. Quinlan, F.N. Baynes, A.J. Metcalf, A. Hati, A.D. Ludlow, N. Hinkley, M. 
Shimizu, T. Ishibashi, J.C. Campbell, and S.A. Diddams, “Optically referenced broadband electronic 
synthesizer with 15 digits of resolution,” Laser & Photonics Reviews 10(5), 780–790 (2016).
64 A. Bartels, S.A. Diddams, C.W. Oates, G. Wilpers, J.C. Bergquist, W.H. Oskay, and L. Hollberg, 
“Femtosecond-laser-based synthesis of ultrastable microwave signals from optical frequency references,” 
Opt. Lett., OL 30(6), 667–669 (2005).
65 A. Bartels, S.A. Diddams, T.M. Ramond, and L. Hollberg, “Mode-locked laser pulse trains with 
subfemtosecond timing jitter synchronized to an optical reference oscillator,” Opt. Lett., OL 28(8), 663–
665 (2003).
66 M. Holler, M. Guizar-Sicairos, E.H.R. Tsai, R. Dinapoli, E. Müller, O. Bunk, J. Raabe, and G. Aeppli, “High-
resolution non-destructive three-dimensional imaging of integrated circuits,” Nature 543(7645), 402–406 
(2017).
67 A. Rana, C.-T. Liao, E. Iacocca, J. Zou, M. Pham, E.-E.C. Subramanian, Y.H. Lo, S.A. Ryan, X. Lu, C.S. Bevis, 
R.M. Karl Jr, A.J. Glaid, Y.-S. Yu, P. Mahale, D.A. Shapiro, S. Yazdi, T.E. Mallouk, S.J. Osher, H.C. Kapteyn, 
V.H. Crespi, J.V. Badding, Y. Tserkovnyak, M.M. Murnane, and J. Miao, “Direct observation of 3D 
topological spin textures and their interactions using soft x-ray vector ptychography,” (2021).


