1 

 

Scaling and flow profiles in magnetically confined liquid-in-liquid channels 

Arvind Arun Dev1,2, Florencia Sacarelli3, G Bagheri3, Aleena Joseph1, Anna Oleshkevych1,                

E Bodenschatz4,5,6,7, Peter Dunne1, Thomas Hermans3* and Bernard Doudin1* 

 

1Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPCMS UMR 7504, 23 Rue du Loess, 67034 Strasbourg, France  

2School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 

3 Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR7140, 4 Rue Blaise Pascal, 67081 Strasbourg, France 

4Laboratory for Fluid Physics, Pattern Formation and Biocomplexity, Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and   

Self-Organization, Göttingen 37077, Germany. 

5Institute for Dynamics of Complex Systems, University of Göttingen, Göttingen 37077, Germany. 

6Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853. 

7Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853. 

 

Ferrofluids kept in place by permanent magnet quadrupoles can act as liquid walls to surround a 
second non-magnetic inside, resulting in a liquid fluidic channel with diameter size ranging from mm 
down to less than 10 µm. Micro particle tracking velocimetry (µPTV) experiments and modeling show 
that near ideal plug flow is possible in such liquid-in-liquid channels due to the reduced friction at 
the walls. The measured fluids velocity profiles agree with the predictions of a hydrodynamic model 
of cylindrical symmetry with a minimal set of hypotheses. By introducing symmetry breaking 
elements in the system, we show how unique velocity and flow properties can be obtained. Our 
liquid-in-liquid confinement opens new possibilities for < 10 µm-sized microfluidics with low 
pressures and low shear, with flow characteristics not attainable in comparable solid-wall devices. 

 
1. Introduction 
In the realm of fluid mechanics, there is a need of new approaches to diminish friction in fluid 
flow [1–5] and therefore limit the transport energy loss [6,7]. A low friction environment can 
exist under exotic conditions like super fluidity at low temperature [8], nanofluidic channels 
(nanopores) made up of atomically flat crystals  [9], or superfluid like behaviour of bacterial 
suspensions [10]. These specific physical conditions allow a velocity flow profile that 
approaches plug flow with a constant velocity, in stark contrast to the expected parabolic 
behaviour predicted by Poiseuille’s flow profile constrained by no-slip boundary conditions. 
However, a room temperature system with low wall friction and thus low shear to transport 
delicate particles or cell is rare and feasible only with the use of lubricants in coaxial flows [11], 
or infused in channel surfaces  [11–13]. The use of such lubricating layers is restricted by their 
limited robustness, arising from drainage of the lubricant or the occurrence of hydrodynamic 
instabilities [14–16]. Pioneering work in the 80s demonstrated friction reduction by trapping 
ferrofluid lubricants inside large pipes using magnetic forces [17,18]. In simple terms, the 
magnetic force holds a layer of ferrofluid in place, over which the transported liquid flows. 
Thus, the absence of the solid wall of the pipe leads to reduction of friction. Here we review 
how optimization of magnetic force fields can stabilise small fluidic tubes, aiming to scale 
fluidic circuity down to micro- and nanofluidic sizes. Shear forces, which are a key bottleneck 
for handling delicate biological objects [19], are minimised by this approach. It therefore 
opens the possibility to realize robust pressure-controlled microfluidic devices down to the 
smallest sizes.  
This work is based on our initial findings of the use of a quadrupolar field to stabilize 
microfluidic channels and the observed large reduction of friction  [20,21]. Our aim is two-
fold: first specify the physical properties that govern size and friction of a transported fluid 
and then provide direct experimental insight by imaging a fluidic circuit and its velocity profile 
characteristics. We show that channels of size below 10 µm can be obtained and a nearly 
constant (plug-)flow velocity profile can be reached in this liquid-in-liquid design. In the last 


2 

 

section, we propose insights into a novel fluidic behaviour that can be observed when the 
cylindrical symmetry of the system is perturbed.     
 
2. Magnetic Force Field Design 

In the presence of a non-uniform magnetic field 𝐻⃗⃗ , a material with uniform magnetization 𝑀⃗⃗ , 
small enough to neglect its generated demagnetizing field, experiences a Kelvin force: 
 

𝐹 = µ0(𝑀⃗⃗ ∙ ∇⃗⃗ )𝐻⃗⃗ 
(1) 

 
where µ0 is the permeability of free space. The direction of this force depends on the 
magnetic susceptibility of the material, negative for diamagnetic materials and positive for 
paramagnetic or ferromagnetic ones, i.e. diamagnets are repulsed from regions of highest 
magnetic field, while the reverse is true for paramagnets and ferromagnets. 
All the fluidic circuits presented here are based on the use of a pseudo-quadrupolar magnetic 
field source generated by commercially available N42-grade NdFeB permanent magnets of 
magnetization µ0𝑀𝑟 = 1.2 T. These magnets are arranged to generate a negligible field at the 
geometric centre of the assembly while radially increasing outward. Fig. 1 shows cross 
sections of the two magnetic designs used for experiments, with the white arrows indicating 
the direction of magnetization of the magnets. Fig. 1a) illustrates the generated nearly 
axisymmetric magnetic field [20,21] which in cylindrical coordinates can be approximated by 
a magnetic field H with a constant gradient: 
 

𝜕𝐻(𝑟)

𝜕𝑟
= 4𝑀𝑟 

𝜋 𝑤  
(2) 

 
where the magnetic stray field H is related to B via B = µ0H, r is the radial distance from the 
centre, and w the gap between magnets with the same magnetisation (Fig. 1). When a 

Fig. 1. Magnetic design cross section: a) Magnetic field generated by four magnet arrangements with white 
arrows showing their magnetization direction, 𝑊 = 6 mm. The flow is in z direction (normal to the plots) b)
Magnetic arrangement for the velocimetry experiments, with 𝑊 = 1.5 mm, 𝑡 = 0.7 mm.


3 

 

paramagnetic or superparamagnetic liquid (i.e. a ferrofluid) is inserted in the region between 
magnets (Fig. 1a), it is attracted to the high field regions, displacing and encapsulating any 
diamagnetic or weaker paramagnetic liquids which are then confined to the low field regions. 
The resulting liquid-in-liquid tube, or ‘antitube’ [21], adapts a nearly circular magnetic cross-
section.  
 
3. The Static Case (No Flow) 
At first let us consider a system without flow in order to test the hypothesis of a cylindrical 
enclosure for the transport of the liquid of interest, to determine the smallest possible 
diameter that can be reached. The strong optical absorption of ferrofluids complicates 
imaging, making the use of X-ray imaging the most appropriate tool, with synchrotron 
beamline facilities being necessary for micron-range resolution. Fig. 2 shows the experimental 
X-ray absorption contrast image using 2D radiography slices and 3D reconstruction from 
synchrotron tomography imaging. Fig. 2a) reveals the antitube as brighter region in the 
centre, of average diameter 80 ± 2 µm, surrounded by the darker ferrofluid, with Fig. 2b 
showing the circular cross-section of the antitube in a vertical slice. Fig. 2c) confirms the 
cylindrical geometry in the reconstructed data, where the antitube and surrounding 
ferrofluids are coloured in yellow and blue respectively.  

  

Fig. 2. Imaging of the encapsulated antitube. a) X-ray absorption  contrast image , 2D radiography of an 
antitube [21], the brighter central part is water encapsulated by darker surrounding ferrofluid, b) cross 
section of Fig. 2a) where the brighter central part is the transported liquid surrounded by a darker ferrofluid. 
c) Synchrotron X-ray 3D tomographic reconstruction of a water antitube (yellow) with diameter 80 ± 2 𝜇m, 
surrounded by ferrofluid (blue). Reproduced with permission from [21]. 


4 

 

In the static case, the balance of Laplace pressure (i.e. surface tension), magnetic pressure, 
and magnetic normal traction at the magnetic non-magnetic interface result in a 
minimum/equilibrium antitube diameter, 𝑑𝑒𝑞. To begin with, the Bernoulli equation with 
magnetic pressure is given by: 

𝑃′ + 𝜌𝑔ℎ + 1

2 𝜌𝑢2 − 𝑃𝑚 =  constant
(3) 

 
Since the magnetic force is considerably larger than the gravitational force, and we are in 
static case, we neglect the gravity and velocity terms giving: 
 

𝑃′ − 𝑃𝑚 =  constant
(4) 

 
Eq. 4 is the governing equation valid at all locations, where 𝑃′ is the local pressure and 𝑃𝑚 =
 ∫ 𝜇0𝑀 𝑑𝐻

𝐻
0
= µ0𝑀̅𝐻 is the fluid magnetic pressure, M is the magnetization of the ferrofluid, 

𝑀̅ is the field averaged magnetisation of the ferrofluid under external magnetic field 𝐻. 
A general boundary condition to solve Eq. 5 is: 
 

𝑃′ + 𝑃𝑛 = 𝑃0 + 𝑃𝑐 
(5) 

 
where 𝑃0 is atmospheric pressure.  𝑃𝑛 = 

1

2 𝜇0𝑀𝐼

2 and 𝑃𝑐 =

𝜎

𝑅 are the magnetic normal traction 

and Laplace pressure respectively,  is the surface tension, and R the radius of the antitube. 
𝑃𝑛 and 𝑃𝑐 act at the magnetic–nonmagnetic interface and at the interface with a nonzero 
interfacial tension respectively. In our work, both act at the boundary between antitube and 
ferrofluid. Hence, at the centre of the antitube (location 1), 𝑃1

′ = 𝑃0 and at the magnetic-

nonmagnetic interface (location 2), 𝑃2

′ = 𝑃0 + 𝑃𝑐 − 𝑃𝑛. Since Eq. 5 is valid at all the locations 

we can write: 
 

𝑃1

′ − 𝑃𝑚1 = 𝑃2

′ − 𝑃𝑚2
(6) 

 
as at centre of the antitube, H = 0 (see Eq. 2), hence  𝑃𝑚1 = 0 and Eq. 6 results in: 
 

0 = 𝜎

𝑅 − µ0𝑀̅𝐻𝐼 − 1

2 𝜇0𝑀𝐼

2 
(7) 

 
Eq. 7 depicts the balance between surface tension (Laplace pressure), fluid magnetic pressure 
and the magnetic normal traction, where 𝜎, 𝐻𝐼 and 𝑀𝐼 are surface tension, magnetic field and 
ferrofluid magnetisation at the magnetic-nonmagnetic interface respectively. Rearranging 
Eq. 7 gives the equilibrium diameter of the antitube (𝑑𝑒𝑞 = 2𝑅) given by  [21] 
 

𝑑𝑒𝑞 = 
4𝜎

2𝜇0𝑀̅𝐻𝐼 + 𝜇0𝑀𝐼

2  
(8) 

 
Eq. 8 shows the relative contribution of interfacial tension and magnetic properties 
respectively. For a fixed magnetic design, it is clear that 𝑑𝑒𝑞 can be reduced by increasing the 
magnetic field amplitude at the interface (increased when decreasing the distance between 
source magnets), increasing the magnetisation of the ferrofluid, or reducing the interfacial 


5 

 

tension. Fig. 3a) summarizes how the antitube diameter varies with magnetic separation and 
the choice of ferrofluid [9], with Fig. 3b) we illustrate the experimental visualization by a 
brightfield optical microscope of a small diameter antitube, using the magnets design of 
Fig 1b) and a water+surfactant antitube with MD4 ferrofluid and Tween20 as a surfactant. 
The annotation MD4 S denotes the ferrofluid MD4 and S the surfactant in the water antitube 
used to reduce the interfacial tension. Inset in Fig. 3b) show the gradual increase in ferrofluid 
volume to reach equilibrium diameter. Reduction in the equilibrium diameter was possible by 
using ferrofluid with higher saturation magnetization (EMG900) giving larger magnetic 
pressure. The ferrofluid EMG 900 (Ferrotec) is commercially available. Here EMG900 2S 
indicates EMG900 ferrofluid with a double surfactant use in water and in ferrofluid  [21]. A 
resulting 𝑑𝑒𝑞 = 13 ± 0.5 𝜇m was obtained, shown in Fig. 3c). Reduction of 𝑑𝑒𝑞, can also be 
obtained by decreasing the size of the cell. Bringing the magnets closer (increasing 𝑀𝐼 and 𝑀̅) 
increases the magnetic pressure and further reduces the static diameter (𝑑𝑒𝑞). The 
experimental cell with four magnet arrangement resembles Fig. 1b) with distance between 
magnet pair down to 150 𝜇𝑚. Fig. 3d) shows the experimental image of cross sections of the 
antitube (bright central part) and surrounding ferrofluid EMG S. EMG S denotes the ferrofluid 
EMG900 with surfactant (Tween20) in water to reduce the interfacial tension.   
 

 

Fig. 3. Measurements of the static antitube minimum size. a) Equilibrium diameter 𝑑𝑒𝑞 (Eq. 8) as a function of 
width W between the magnets, for several ferrofluids and antitube fluids (for abbreviation details, see  [21]). b) 
optical microscopy image of the antitube along the (yz) plane with MD4 ferrofluid. The inset shows the gradual 
filling of the cavity by the ferrofluid, reaching the data points shown in purple in a) and c) image of the antitube 
with EMG900 ferrofluid with added surfactant and water antitube with added surfactant, in the so-called double 
surfactant (EMG 2S) configuration, with data point in red in a). X-ray tomography circular cross sections shown 
in d) and e) are (xy) cut images of a water antitube in EMG900 ferrofluid with added surfactant, (single surfactant 
EMG S), with related green encircled data point indicating the smallest measured of 6.7 𝜇m in a). Fig 3a is 
modified from the figure published in  [21], with permission. Fig. 3d and fig 3e were obtained using the X02DA 
TOMCAT X-ray beamline of Swiss Light Source (SLS) at the Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen , Switzerland. 
 
The minimum diameter of the antitube is 6.7 ± 0.2 µm, measured using synchrotron X-Ray 
tomography with 0.1 µm resolution. The antitube diameter data point is presented in Fig. 3a) 
along with the data obtained by Dunne et. al. [21] Our data is encircled (green) in Fig. 3a) 
along with the data corresponding to Fig. 3a) and Fig. 3b). Experiments agree well with the 


6 

 

model curve  [21]. LM and FM denotes the linear model and full model respectively. The linear 
model, LM (𝑀 = 𝜒𝐻) is valid at small magnetic field whereas the full model considers the 
nonlinearity in the ferrofluid magnetization curve [21]. Note that antitubes larger than deq are 
always possible to make, by injecting less ferrofluid volume. As such, deq is a lower limit of 
practical use for the antitubes. 
 
In summary, the stability of such cylindrical antitube is governed by the relative strengths of 
the destabilizing Laplace pressure and the stabilizing magnetic pressure. Since, the Laplace 
pressure is given by the ratio of interfacial tension and diameter of the flow channel, 
increasing when the size of the fluidic circuit decreases. It therefore sets the limit for smallest 
achievable diameters when it exceeds the magnetic pressure. The latter depends on the 
magnitude of the applied local field and the magnetic susceptibility of the ferrofluid material. 
A suitable design of the magnetic field and the appropriated choice of intrinsic properties of 
the ferrofluid make possible the stabilization of minimal antitube size (𝑑𝑒𝑞). In a nutshell, one 
needs to maximize the magnetic susceptibility of the ferrofluid and minimize its interfacial 
surface tension with the enclose liquid forming the antitube fluidic circuit. Our experiments 
show that diameters below 10 µm can be realized, with possible smaller values requiring 
further miniaturization of the source magnets (for increasing the local magnetic field) and 
optimization of the ferrofluid intrinsic properties. Fig. 3 indicates that the latter is possible, 
but imaging resolution issues make the observations of diameters below 1 µm elusive.  
 
4. The Dynamic Case (Under Flow) 
In the dynamic case, we detail the hydrodynamics resulting from the motion of the 
transported liquid. The conceptual difference between the standard flow (Poiseuille flow) and 
the proposed flow (antitube flow) is illustrated in Fig.4.   
A standard Poiseuille flow in Fig.4 (top) is defined as a viscous flow with zero velocity at the 
confining wall (no-slip condition). This gives the well-known parabolic velocity profile with 
maximum velocity at the centre of the tube. In the proposed antitube flow with ferrofluid 
lubrication, the confining wall is a liquid (ferrofluid) shown in Fig. 4 (bottom). Since at the 
liquid-liquid interface, the velocity has to be unique (no slip condition), the confining liquid 
(ferrofluid) also moves along with the transported liquid. This makes lubricated flow, a system 
with moving wall. For small enough flow rates, the magnetic force field holds the ferrofluid in 
place, avoiding its shearing out. The resulting volume conservation of ferrofluid implies a 
recirculation of the ferrofluid, depicted by the reverse flow in the darker region of the 
ferrofluid in Fig. 4. This proposed flow design results therefore in:  

1. a finite velocity at the confining wall 
2. a reverse flow path of the ferrofluid. 

These two distinct features lead to spectacular high drag reduction values, measuring the 
reduction of friction forces, up to measured values of 99.8% for viscous liquids  [20], or nearly 
frictionless flow. Fig. 4 (middle) compares the flow velocity in the cross section for Poiseuille 
flow (left) and antitube flow (right). For the antitube, the velocity of flow is of nearly uniform 
amplitude across the flow channel, depicting near zero shear. The velocity profile (arrows) 
presented in Fig.4 bottom is a result of solving the Navier-Stokes (N-S) equation with 
appropriate boundary condition, under the hypothesis of non-deformation of the cylindrical 
liquid-in-liquid flow, as observed experimentally for low enough flow rates. 
 


7 

 

 

Fig. 4. Differences between Poiseuille flow and magnetically confined flow channels. Top: Poiseuille flow through 
a tube of diameter d, with flow rate Q, and the parabolic velocity profile showing zero velocity at the flow wall. 
Bottom: Magnetically confined flow channel (antitube) with transported liquid in antitube and ferrofluid 
encapsulation. The flow wall (between antitube and ferrofluid) has finite velocity. Ferrofluid exhibits a counter 
flow circulation. D is the flow cavity. Middle: Comparison of cross section of flow for the two flow systems. 
Almost constant velocity (ideal flow) for magnetically confined flow compared to a uniform velocity gradient 
over the cross section for Poiseuille flow. 
 
In Fig. 4 (bottom), the interface between antitube (bright central part) and ferrofluid (darker 
encapsulation) is the liquid-liquid interface. The outer boundary of the ferrofluid is the solid 
boundary of the plastic cavity. A flow rate 𝑄 through a channel of width 𝑑 is imposed for the 
transported liquid with the ferrofluid lubrication thickness being 𝑡𝑓. 𝐷 is the width of the 
microchannel cavity. Since the Reynolds number is small (<1), we can neglect the inertial 
terms in the N-S equation and the flow is viscous dominated, modelled and explained by the 
Stokes equation [20]. The wall velocity is given by [20]: 
 

                                                                          

𝑢𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑙
𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑥 =

𝛽0−1

𝛽0+1                                                            (8) 

 

                                                              𝛽0 = 1 + 4𝜂𝑟 ln(1 + 0.8tf

⋆)                                       (9) 


8 

 

 

where, 𝛽0 is the simplified drag reduction factor [20] and 𝜂𝑟 is the viscosity ratio of the two 
fluids. The normalized thickness of ferrofluid is described as tf

⋆ =

𝑡𝑓
𝑑. The wall velocity depends 

on the relative coverage of the ferrofluid (𝑡𝑓

⋆) and the viscosity ratio (𝜂𝑟). As expected, 

increaing the relative amount of ferrofluid improves the lubrication. Inversely, if the viscosity 
of the ferrofluid increases, the systems is more and more resembling to a solid wall boundary 
condition, therefore detrimental to lubrication.    
Velocimetry experiments require no obstruction to the incident light (no ferrofluid in the path 
of light), hence a planar flow equivalent, slightly deviating from axisymmetric encapsulation 
of the transported liquid, is required. In this case, the ferrofluid covers the side of the flow 
channel, keeping the light unobstructed (See Fig. 5c).  
 

 

Fig. 5. Experimental set up and direct measurement of velocity profile. a) Optical system for µPTV 
measurements, b) microfluidic channel without ferrofluid, c) microfluidic channel with ferrofluid, d) brightfield 
image of region of interest under microscope, e) fluorescence particles signal. Inset in Fig. 5a) shows the 
schematic of microchannel and magnetic arrangement.  
 
We restrict ourselves to measure the flow profile away and equidistant from the two non-
lubricated surface to minimize the solid walls influence. Inset in Fig. 5a) show the schematic 
of the magnetic and flow arrangement, with a cross section view of the four magnets in the 
quadrupolar arrangement and a top view showing the imposed flow rate 𝑄 along the length 


9 

 

of the microchannel. The magnetic field generated by the arrangement is shown in Fig.1b). 
The four white arrows in the cross section show the direction of magnetization of the magnets 
and the red line along the flow depicts the liquid-liquid interface. As required, the ferrofluid 
(colour grey) only covers the two walls and hence facilitates the transmission of light, 
essential for flow visualization.  
We measure the velocity profile in the antitube directly using µPTV. We use glycerol 
(𝜂𝑎 = 1.1 Pa.s) as antitube transported liquid and ferrofluids APGE32 (𝜂𝑎 = 1.7 Pa.s) from 
Ferrotec  [22]and a biocompatible ferrofluid (𝜂𝑎 = 0.144 Pa.s) from Qfluidics [23] for testing 
the flow behavior with different viscosity ratios, 𝜂𝑟 = 

𝜂𝑎
𝜂𝑓. The antitube and the microchannel 

cavity width are 𝑑 = 0.5 mm and 𝐷 = 1.5 mm respectively. The ferrofluid coverage is 
maintained at, 𝑡𝑓= 

𝐷−𝑑

2 . We begin by mixing glycerol with fluorescence 4 𝜇m size particles 

(FluoSpheres™). The excitation and emission maxima for the particles are 580 nm and 605 nm 
respectively. We use a source of light with a bandpass filter (572/25 for excitation and 629/62 
for emission). Fig. 5a) shows the schematic of flow setup used for the velocimetry 
measurements. Fig. 5b) and Fig.5c) show the microfluidic channel before and after inserting 
the ferrofluid. Fig. 5d) shows a magnified brightfield image of the region of interest for PTV 
measurements and Fig. 5e) shows particles under fluorescence in the micro channel.  
The depth of field at this magnification is 3 𝜇m, below the chromophores diameter (4 𝜇m). 
This makes possible recording images with minimum contribution from the off-focus particles 
(below or above the imaging plane). The time elapsed image frames are recorded with Zeiss 
Axio zoom V16 microscope and a Phantom v2511 camera. The exposure time is 400 µs. The 
images are analysed by tracking differences in positions of particles in consecutive frames 
using FIJI TrackMate [22]. Data is then analysed in Python to bin the data for different heights 
and calculate the standard error for each bin height. Fig.6a) and Fig.6b) show the analytical 
Poiseuille flow and antitube experimental velocity profile using µPTV measurements. Markers 
are experimental and solid line stands for predicted analytical velocity profile  [20]. Black lines 
denote the Poiseuille flow. The errors correspond to the standard deviation of velocities 
measured over 10000 image sequences. The antitube lies between y/d = [− 0.5 0.5]. The 
Poiseuille flow shows the zero velocity at the wall coordinates, y/d = 0.5 and y/d = −0.5. 
Experimental markers in Fig.6a) show that for 𝜂𝑟 = 0.65 with APGE32 as ferrofluid, the wall 
velocity at the liquid-liquid interface is large enough, up to 60% of the maximum velocity. This 
wall velocity reaches almost 85% of the maximum velocity for 𝜂𝑟 = 7.64 as seen in Fig.6b) for 
a bio-compatible ferrofluid. The ferrofluid coverage is slightly asymmetric for 𝜂𝑟 = 0.65, as the 
ferrofluid thickness are a bit different between left and right. For 𝜂𝑟 = 7.64, the ferrofluid 
coverage is symmetric. The increase of wall velocity with increase in 𝜂𝑟 is also forecasted by 
the analytical predictions.  
Fig.6a) and Fig.6b) show direct evidence of large wall velocity with a magnetic fluid lubrication 
as previously predicted by some of us  [20,21]. The increase of wall velocity with increase in 
𝜂𝑟 is also foreseen by the analytical predictions and relates to the expected enhanced 
lubrication. The wall velocity values predicted for APGE32 (fig.6a)) and the bio compatible 
ferrofluids (fig.6b)) given by Eq.8 are 32% and 90% of the centre velocity maximum 
respectively. 
 
 


10 

 

 

Fig. 6. Comparison of experimental velocity profiles (markers) with Poiseuille flow (Black line). a) For APGE32 
ferrofluid with viscosity ratio 𝜂𝑟 = 0.65 and b) for biocompatible ferrofluid with 𝜂𝑟  = 7.64. Lines are the analytical 
model solution of Stokes equation, red line for the antitube, green and blue line for the ferrofluid. 
 
The experimental and analytical predictions agree with some deviations. The experimental 
measurements might differ from that theorized in literature [20] due to presence of two solid 
walls, which is not taken into account in the analytical modelling [21]. Nonetheless, the direct 
measurements do confirm the presence of large wall velocity at the liquid-liquid interface 
which were only indirectly claimed earlier [20,21]. We have limited ourselves here to the 
regime of low flow rate, to avoid capillary instabilities that can develop at higher flow rates. 
This may result in deformations in the magnetic-nonmagnetic interface, large enough to 
result in shearing of the ferrofluid or shear failure of the lubricated flows. More sophisticated 
analytical approach and numerical simulations are necessary to extend this simple model to 
include liquid wall deformation or to understand flow behaviour at the extremities of the 
circuit, beyond the scope of the present work. Instead, we focus on testing how solid cavity 
design changes can impact the antitube flow profile, with an example discussed in the next 
section.  
 
5. Beyond a simple cylindrical symmetry 
We argue that the symmetry of the flow can be broken by implementing deformations all 
along the chamber walls (i.e., only in contact with the magnetic fluid). One possible 
implementation is to define a threaded screw profile along the cylindrical circuit length 
(Fig. 7a)), where a small rectangular section was left free, to allow for proper imaging using 
confocal microscopy. The magnetic design is given in the inset of Fig. 7a). Fig. 7b) illustrates 
the occurrence of a vortex flow profile resulting from the screw-shaped solid walls boundary 
conditions. The prediction of fluid motion with complex fluid interfaces poses a challenge. 
Here, we qualitatively explain our experimentally observed flow in screw wall device using a 
forced vortex model. A forced vortex in two dimensions (2D) implies the occurrence of an 
azimuthal velocity 𝑉𝜃

⋆ of simplest expression  [25]: 

 

                                                                      𝑉𝜃

⋆ = 𝜔⋆𝑟⋆                                                               (10) 

 
stating it is proportional to the radial position 𝑟⋆ = √𝑥2 + 𝑦2 through the angular velocity 
𝜔⋆, with all variables non-dimensionalized by their values at the magnetic-nonmagnetic 
interface (flow wall). 


11 

 

 
 

 

Fig. 7. Vortex flow in antitube. a) Screw walled device for vortex flow design, inset shows configuration of 4 
magnets in the design with yellow central part depicting the antitube, b) vortex flow observed by velocimetry, 
c) forced vortex model and experimental data, inset show the axial velocity (𝑉𝑧) in the direction of flow with 
respect to the radial coordinate and d) experimental vorticity Γ⋆(= 2ω⋆) as a function of reduced radial length. 
 
Fig. 7c) shows the azimuthal velocity with respect to radial coordinate. It can be seen from 
Fig. 7c) that the experimental data obtained for azimuthal velocity matches well with the 
theoretically predicted fit for 𝑟⋆ > 0.5, with flow similar to a forced vortex. The inset in Fig. 
7c) shows that the axial velocity (𝑉𝑧)  (in the direction of flow) decreases sharply after 𝑟⋆ > 
0.45. This reduced axial velocity makes a 2D model, implicit in the Eq. 10, relevant.  Indeed, a 
key signature of a forced 2D vortex flow is the constant vorticity given by, Γ⋆ = 2ω⋆. Fig. 7d) 
shows the vorticity plot, illustrating the transition from a 3D to a 2D behaviour when 𝑟⋆ 
reaches 0.5. The blue highlighted region in Fig. 7c) and in the inset show the change in 
behaviour of azimuthal velocity and axial velocity respectively with 𝑟⋆, confirming the change 
of behaviour at 𝑟⋆ ≈ 0.5 highlighted in Fig. 7d).  We therefore find that the flow has two 
distinct behaviours; the flow is 2D dominated when 𝑟⋆ > 0.5 (lower axial velocity) and 
possibly 3D augmented for 𝑟⋆ < 0.5. 
 
6. Conclusions 
Ferrofluid encapsulation of liquid circuits opens new possibilities for microfluidics and fluidics 
applications [21].  Stabilizing an encapsulated cylindrical ‘antitube’ of dimensions below 10 
µm is achieved. This size value is governed by the liquid-liquid interface surface tension, as 
well as the scale of the surrounding assembled magnetic force field sources and the magnetic 
properties of the ferrofluid. Values below 1 µm are possible, however very challenging to 
image. Magnetic forces keeping the lubricating magnetic liquid in place mitigate the 
fundamental issue of stability of a liquid-in-liquid flow [15]. This makes possible to extend 


12 

 

achievable drag reduction, resulting in remarkably large values, possibly exceeding 99% [20]. 
A direct measurement of velocity profile using the 𝜇PIV confirms the occurrence of liquid-
liquid wall velocity as large as 85% of the maximum velocity. This value increases with the 
increase in viscosity ratio between transported liquid to the lubricant. The experimental 
observations are supported and predicted by an analytical modelling using the Stokes 
equation. Such low drag flow channels enable microfluidics applications that require reduced 
operating pressures, specifically needed in microchannel flow of concentrated solution or 
variable viscosity solutions. Drug delivery and shear control on delicate cells also falls in the 
gamut of possible applications. The magnetically confined flow channels open therefore new 
possibilities in the field of microfluidics for shearless transport, for a wide range of biological 
and technological applications. Beyond a simple flow profile (Poiseuille like parabolic profile), 
complex flow profiles can be obtained by tuning the design of the cavity used for the flow. 
We have shown that a screw pattern on the inner boundary of the cavity results in the swirling 
motion of flow about the central axis. The flow resembles a forced vortex flow with constant 
vorticity and deviates as we approach the centre of the flow, away from the screw design. 
These examples provide insight into the possibility to design and investigate novel flow 
patterns, otherwise not possible when using the solid walls that constrain the flow of the 
transported liquid.  
 
Acknowledgements 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement MAMI No 
766007 and QUSTEC No. 847471. We also acknowledge the support of the University of 
Strasbourg Institute for Advanced Studies (USIAS) Fellowship, the Fondation Jean-Marie Lehn 
and the Interdisciplinary Thematic Institute QMat, as part of the ITI 2021 2028 program of the 
University of Strasbourg, CNRS and Inserm, was supported by IdEx Unistra (ANR 10 IDEX 
0002), and by SFRI STRAT'US project (ANR 20 SFRI 0012) and EUR QMAT ANR-17-EURE-0024 
under the framework of the French Investments for the Future Program. We acknowledge the 
Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland for provision of synchrotron radiation beamtime 
at the TOMCAT beamline X02DA of the SLS and would like to thank Dr. Anne Bonnin for 
invaluable assistance." 
 
 
References 
[1] E. Karatay, A. Haase, C. W. Visser, C. Sun, D. Lohse, P. Tsai, and R. Lammertink, Control of 

Slippage with Tunable Bubble Mattresses, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, (2013). 

[2] W. Brostow, Drag Reduction in Flow: Review of Applications, Mechanism and Prediction, 

J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 14, 409 (2008). 

[3] K. Watanabe, Y. Udagawa, and H. Udagawa, Drag Reduction of Newtonian Fluid in a 

Circular Pipe with a Highly Water-Repellent Wall, J. Fluid Mech. 381, 225 (1999). 

[4] H. Hu et al., Significant and Stable Drag Reduction with Air Rings Confined by Alternated 

Superhydrophobic and Hydrophilic Strips, Sci. Adv. 3, e1603288 (2017). 

[5] D. Saranadhi, D. Chen, J. A. Kleingartner, S. Srinivasan, R. E. Cohen, and G. H. McKinley, 

Sustained Drag Reduction in a Turbulent Flow Using a Low-Temperature Leidenfrost 
Surface, Sci. Adv. 2, e1600686 (2016). 

[6] K. Holmberg and A. Erdemir, Influence of Tribology on Global Energy Consumption, Costs 

and Emissions, Friction 5, 263 (2017). 


13 

 

[7] K. Sayfidinov, S. D. Cezan, B. Baytekin, and H. T. Baytekin, Minimizing Friction, Wear, and 

Energy Losses by Eliminating Contact Charging, Sci. Adv. 4, eaau3808 (2018). 

[8] J. Keeling and N. G. Berloff, Going with the Flow, Nature 457, 7227 (2009). 
[9] A. Keerthi, S. Goutham, Y. You, P. Iamprasertkun, R. A. W. Dryfe, A. K. Geim, and B. 

Radha, Water Friction in Nanofluidic Channels Made from Two-Dimensional Crystals, 
Nat. Commun. 12, 1 (2021). 

[10] 
H. M. López, J. Gachelin, C. Douarche, H. Auradou, and E. Clément, Turning Bacteria 

Suspensions into Superfluids, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 028301 (2015). 

[11] 
Enhancing the Injectability of High Concentration Drug Formulations Using Core 

Annular Flows - Jayaprakash - 2020 - Advanced Healthcare Materials - Wiley Online 
Library, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adhm.202001022. 

[12] 
T.-S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Y. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal, and J. 

Aizenberg, Bioinspired Self-Repairing Slippery Surfaces with Pressure-Stable 
Omniphobicity, Nature 477, 7365 (2011). 

[13] 
B. R. Solomon, K. S. Khalil, and K. K. Varanasi, Drag Reduction Using Lubricant-

Impregnated Surfaces in Viscous Laminar Flow, Langmuir 30, 10970 (2014). 

[14] 
Lord Rayleigh, On the Stability, or Instability, of Certain Fluid Motions, Proc. Lond. 

Math. Soc. s1-11, 57 (1879). 

[15] 
A. S. Utada, A. Fernandez-Nieves, H. A. Stone, and D. A. Weitz, Dripping to Jetting 

Transitions in Coflowing Liquid Streams, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 094502 (2007). 

[16] 
J. S. Wexler, I. Jacobi, and H. A. Stone, Shear-Driven Failure of Liquid-Infused 

Surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 168301 (2015). 

[17] 
M. S. Krakov, E. S. Maskalik, and V. F. Medvedev, Hydrodynamic Resistance of 

Pipelines with a Magnetic Fluid Coating, Fluid Dyn. 24, 715 (1989). 

[18] 
V. F. Medvedev, M. S. Krakov, E. S. Mascalik, and I. V. Nikiforov, Reducing Resistance 

by Means of Magnetic Fluid, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 65, 339 (1987). 

[19] 
A. Blaeser, D. F. Duarte Campos, U. Puster, W. Richtering, M. M. Stevens, and H. 

Fischer, Controlling Shear Stress in 3D Bioprinting Is a Key Factor to Balance Printing 
Resolution and Stem Cell Integrity, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 5, 326 (2016). 

[20] 
A. A. Dev, P. Dunne, T. M. Hermans, and B. Doudin, Fluid Drag Reduction by 

Magnetic Confinement, Langmuir 38, 719 (2022). 

[21] 
P. Dunne et al., Liquid Flow and Control without Solid Walls, Nature 581, 7806 

(2020). 

[22] 
Ferrotec | Manufacturing Advanced Material, Component, and System Solutions for 

Precision Processes, https://www.ferrotec.com/. 

[23] 
Qfluidics – Continuous flow chemistry reactor manufacturer, 

https://www.qfluidics.com/. 

[24] 
D. Ershov et al., TrackMate 7: Integrating State-of-the-Art Segmentation Algorithms 

into Tracking Pipelines, Nat. Methods 19, 7 (2022). 

[25] 
S. I. Green, Fluid Vortices, 1st ed. (Springer Dordrecht, 1995). 

 
  


