Secure quantum imaging with decoy state heralded 
single photons

SIDDHANT VERNEKAR1,*ANDJOLLY XAVIER1,*

1SeNSE, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, India
*Corresponding author: idz20228534@iitd.ac.in , jxavier@sense.iitd.ac.in

Weak coherent source (WCS) and spontaneous parametric 
down-converted heralded single photon pairs have found 
applications in quantum key distribution (QKD) and quantum 
imaging (QI) experiments. Decoy state methods have also been 
used to enhance the security for QKD and QI. We study quantum-
secured imaging with the decoy-state heralded single photon 
source (HSPS). The HSPS’s superior performance in low-photon-
number regimes makes it an ideal candidate for integrating 
quantum key distribution protocols to reduce measurement 
uncertainty and ensure secure QI. Furthermore, our results also 
infer the influence of the decoy state WCS, due to its higher 
operating speed than decoy state HSPS, would be effective in 
conditions that allow higher mean photon numbers for 
quantum-secured imaging.

Keywords: 
Quantum Imaging, 
Spontaneous 
parametric 
down 

conversion, Heralded single photon source, Weak coherent source,
Single photon sources, Quantum-secured imaging

Ubiquitous quantum properties of nonclassical light sources and 

their possibility of being integrated into systems for advanced sensing, 
imaging and secured information processing have been the focus of 
research and technological revolution in the recent past [1–3]. Weak 
coherent source (WCS) and spontaneous parametric down conversion
(SPDC) based heralded single-photon sources (HSPS) have found 
applications in quantum key distribution(QKD) [4–6] and quantum
imaging (QI) experiments [7–10]. The Decoy state method is helpful in 
practical situations when the source is not an ideal single-photon source 
but could alsobe embedded with multiple photon components in the
transmitted information [11]. It is a technique used in QKD to improve 
the security of information transmitted. The secure key rate, R is given 
by[11]: 

𝑅 ≥ 𝑞[𝑄1[1 − 𝐻2(𝑒1)] − 𝑄𝜇 𝑓(𝐸𝜇)𝐻2(𝐸𝜇)]

Where q is a parameter depending on the QKD protocol, 𝑄1is the 

gain of single photons, H is the binary Shannon entropy, 𝑒1is the error 
rate od single photon states, 𝐸𝜇 is the overall quantum bit error rate,
and 

𝑓(𝐸𝜇) is the error correction efficiency. This calculation ensures that a 
secure key is generated, accounting for the presence of multi-photon 
states. The decoy state method has been applied with WCS for QKD
and QI experiments and also with HSPS for QKD implementation [12-
14].

Correlated photon pairs from SPDC significantly enhance the signal-

to-noise ratio, especially in scenarios with low light levels[15], and have 
been the basis of several advanced QItechniques[16–18].An essential 
advancement in this field came with the realization that immediate 
detection of the idler photon, followed by correlating it with the 
returning signal later can be highly effective. This enhancement stems 
from the fact that the correlated photons in SPDC are generated 
simultaneously and maintain a time correlation [19]. A single-photon 
imaging experiment based on an SPDC source [10] has been recently 
implemented. A polarization-time correlation-based quantum-secured
imaging (QSI) approach has been recently proposed [20] as an 
alternative to QKD-based imaging methods to counter intercept and 
resend attacks [13]. However, in the experimental realization [13], the 
Digital Micromirror Device (DMD) introduces global phases to the 
prepared quantum states. This can satisfy the phase randomization
condition even without using a phase-randomized laser [21]and, when 
combined with a low average photon count can enhance security 
against such intercept-and-resend attacks
for QKD-based imaging 

methods.Furthermore,the concept of quantum ghost polarimetryhas 
been introduced [22 -23]. This theory, relying on different polarization 
states, promises to enhance imaging quality significantly. Given these 
advancements, it is vital to compare single-photon source-based QKD 
protocols [12, 24–26], which can utilize various generated polarization 
statesfor improved  imagingquality. Such comparisons are essential for 
secure imaging applications, highlighting the need for a detailed 
understanding of these different approaches and their implications.

We propose QSI with decoy-state HSPS and carries out a 

comparative analysis of WCS and HSPSwith decoy states. Weevaluate 
HSPS and WCS sources based on their statistical properties, similar to 
recent experimental demonstration [27], which have characterized
their sources based on theirstatistical properties. The study is based on 
the assumption that achieving maximum accuracy and no compromise 
on the same is of utmost importance for sensitive imaging applications.


Fig. 1.  The 3D plot of absorption uncertainty in relation to the Fano 
factor and mean photon number, here absorption factor 𝛼 = 0.5 is 
taken as a fixed value

Figure 1 illustrates a graphical representation of the relation among

the uncertainty in absorption of a material, the Fano factor, and the 
mean photon number. The absorption uncertainty is crucial when 
dealing with the accuracy of measurements in biological samples or 
stealth imaging systems. Absorption uncertainty is given by the 

equation Δ𝛼 = √

𝛼(1−𝛼)+𝐹(1−𝛼)2

⟨𝑛̂⟩
; F is the Fano factor, ⟨𝑛̂⟩ is the 

mean photon number and 𝛼 is the absorption factor [28]. When we 
have a lower mean photon number and if value of F is less than one, 
like in the sub-Poissonian statistics photon sourcelike HSPS, uncertainty 
is lower than higher Fvalues such as in thePoissonian source like WCS 
with F=1.The calculatedvalue of F estimated by [29], F=⟨𝑛⟩[𝑔2(0) −
1] + 1 for mean photon number 0.3 are 0.7015, 0.714 and 0.85 for 
g2(0)= 0.005, 0.05 and 0.5, respectively. Similarly, the F values for 
mean photon number 0.05 are 0.95025,0.9525 and 0.975 for g2(0)= =
0.005, 0.05 and 0.5, respectively. Furthermore, if the mean photon 
number can be increased to a favorable limit, it will also reduce the 
uncertainty in measurements with the WCS where F=1. This 
relationship is beneficial for applications that demand high levels of 
accuracy, such as biological imaging, where minimizing the exposure to 
light is crucial to avoid any potential harm to the samples. Stealth 
imaging, which aims to evade detection using low photon quantities, 
also benefits from a lower Fano factor.

The equation that describes the photon number distribution for a 

weak coherent source (Poissonian) is given by 𝑃𝑘,𝑥

𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑘 =

𝑒−𝑥∗𝑥𝑘

𝑘!
, and

for a SPDC based HSPS(thermal) is given by [26],
𝑝𝑘,𝑥

𝐻𝑆𝑃𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑟 =

𝑥𝑛

(1+𝑥)𝑛+1 ∗

(1−(1−𝜂𝐴)𝑘+𝑑𝐴)

𝑃𝑥

𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡
where 𝑥 is the mean photon number, k  is 

number of photons. 𝜂𝐴 represents the detection efficiency at the 
source end, 𝑑𝐴 is the dark count rate for Alice detector, 𝑃𝑥

𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡 is the 

post-selected probability. Figures 2a-b illustrate the comparison of 
single-photon contributions from two types of photon sources HSPS 
and WCS. It shows that in the area where the mean photon number is 

low, HSPS has a much greater chance of emitting a single photon. 
Additionally, HSPS exhibits sub-Poissonian statistics (variance less than 
the mean for photon numbers). Nevertheless, as the mean photon 
number rises closerto 0.6, the probability of single photons originating 
from both sources becomes similar. This is evident from the green 
curve (representing the heralded source) and the yellow dotted curve 
(representing the WCS) seen in Figure 2b. To guarantee security, the 
prevalence of single-photon events over multi-photon events is 
essential in QKD. The graph given in Figure 2 is a reference for 
determining optimal mean photon number of these sources. To 
minimize multi-photon occurrences, having a maximum mean photon 
number of around 0.2 for HSPS is preferable. Conversely, using WCS 
this numerical value may be increased to around 1.

Fig. 2.  Quantitative Analysis of Single-Photon Emissions from SPDC 
based HeraldedSingle Photon Source (HSPS)and Weak Coherent single 
(WCS) photon source: Implications for QSI.(correlation probability=0.7, 
𝜂𝐴 = 0.5 and,𝑑𝐴 = 10−5)a) for mean photon number 0 to 0.1. b)for 
mean photon number>0.1 to 1.

Figure 3a shows plots illustrating the relation between the secure 

key rate and lossin a QKD system with WCS and HSPS, considering 
different mean photon numbers with 𝑑𝐵 = 10−6 as the dark count 
rate at the receiving detector. The figure displays a series of curves 

b)

a)


representing the different mean photon numbers of 0.01, 0.05, and 
0.1with combined decoys as 0.001 and 0. Each curve shows a 
noticeable decrease in the key rate as the distance increases. The figure
3a illustrates variations in the secure rate at lower mean photon 
numbers for WCS, indicating a less stable QSI performance across 
distances at these photon levels with WCS as compared to HSPS.
Conversely, Figure 3b corresponds to higher mean photon numbers 
0.2, 0.25, and 0.3 with combined decoys as 0.1 and 0. The curves are 
densely clustered and demonstrate a steady decrease for WCS. This 
suggests that the secure rate stays relatively constant across distances 
at higher mean photon numbers with less variability for WCS. This 
implies that it is advantageous to maintain a greater mean photon 
number for QSI with WCS since it leads to a more stable and reliable key 
rate than HSPS for the considered mean photon number regime. The 
comparison between the two plots highlights that lower mean 
photon numbers are more vulnerable to rate fluctuations for 
WCS than HSPS, which could impact the effectiveness of QSI 
with WCS. On the other hand, a larger mean photon number 
provides a more stable key rate, which can be advantageous for 
sustaining QSI across longer distances with WCS compared to 
HSPS.

Fig. 3.  Influence of mean photon number on the robustness of secure 
key generation rate in QSI with WCS and SPDC based single photon 
source at 𝑑𝐵 = 10−6 ,.a) For low mean photon numbers. b) For higher 
mean photon numbers.

We have assessed the widely prevalent two photon sources 

WCS and HSPS by considering their reliance on crucial factors such as 
the absorption uncertainty relation, distribution of photon numbers

based on their statistics, and the secure key rate. Our technique 
involves a thorough analysis of the photon number distribution 
properties of both sources and the attainable secure key rate under 
QKD protocol implementation situations. HSPS decoy source (thermal 
photon number distribution statistics)display less fluctuation than WCS
decoy in a low mean photon number region. On the other hand, WCS
decoy (Poisssonian distribution statistics of photon number) would 
benefit in situations that need a larger mean photon number by 
implementing appropriate solutions against intercept and resend 
attacks[30,31]. The secure key rate for HSPS-decoy is higher than WCS-
decoy at loss of 10 dB by an order of magnitude, and this advantage 
increases to 1.5 orders at greater loss (30dB), assuming optimal 
performance from both. However, the repetition rate for HSPS is in the 
MHz range [32]. In contrast, WCS operates in the GHz range [33], 
suggesting that WCS might generate more secure photons with current 
technology when the overall figure of merit is considered.

Moreover, the SPDC-based HSPS source is potentially valuable for 

biological imaging and stealth quantum secure satellite-based imaging 
applications due to its sub-Poissonian characteristics. HSPS alsoinclude 
a higher contribution of single photons and reduced fluctuations in 
secure key rate at low mean photon numbers with its thermal mean 
photon number statistics. Our case involves transmitting and detecting 
a signal after reflection from a target, resulting in a more significant loss. 
However, with a reconstruction algorithm, it is estimated that an image 
can be discernible with as few as 7000 photons [34].The operating 
speed of spatial light modulator  or DMD could further limit the overall 
system operation speed. Therefore, instead of using it at the source 
end, as in computational ghost imaging, using it at the receiver end 
might be more effective, similar to a single-pixel camera setup, to 
ensure meaningful photon counts from both sources when operating 
speed is a priority[10].HSPS mean photon number statistics could also 
be changed to Poissonian from thermal by adjusting the pulsed laser 
duration with respect to the coherence time of the laser to reduce the 
multi photonscontributionandmatch with the WCSstatistics[35].The 
emerging domain of QIhas great potential for advancing biological and 
stealth imaging, particularly in scenarios where minimizing the photon 
exposure is essential to prevent harm and detection.

In conclusion, two types of single-photon sources SPDC as well as

WCS have been investigated under low-light conditions. The SPDC-
based HSPS decoy state source have the advantage of having sub-
Poissionian statistics and quantum correlations to improve 
measurements and suppress background noise [9]. However, it is also 
to be noted that the SPDC photon generation rate is comparatively 
lower than the WCS-decoy version while considering theoverall figure 
of merit with current technology.This in turn demands further research 
for new materials or techniques for the improvement in much more 
efficient SPDC photon pair generation. The present study has also 
significant implications for the QI domain since integrating the single 
photon sources with single-pixel imaging techniques is expected to 
improve the quality of images by using polarization states while also 
assuring quantum-secured imaging. Moreover, the presented 
evaluations shed light into right choice of single photon sources for 
quantum-enhanced imaging applications, especially in strategic or 
sensitive realms where security is a matter of great concern. Future 
investigations based on the current research would also involve the 
study of channel characteristics and the robustness of quantum 
imaging techniques to environmental conditions to quantify the details 
of imaging results based on the source parameters.

a)

b)


Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References

1. 
J. Xavier, D. Yu, F. Vollmer, C. Jones, and E. Zossimova, 
Nanophotonics 10, 1387 (2021).

2. 
M. Genovese, J. Opt. 18, (2016).

3. 
P. A. Moreau, E. Toninelli, T. Gregory, and M. J. Padgett, Nat. Rev. 
Phys. 1, 367 (2019).

4. 
C. Gobby, Z. L. Yuan, and A. J. Shields, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 3762 
(2004).

5. 
T. Kimura, Y. Nambu, T. Hatanaka, A. Tomita, H. Kosaka, and K. 
Nakamura, Japanese J. Appl. Physics, Part 2 Lett. 43, (2004).

6. 
M. Schiavon, G. Vallone, F. Ticozzi, and P. Villoresi, Phys. Rev. A 93, 
1 (2016).

7. 
M. Malik, O. S. Magaña-Loaiza, and R. W. Boyd, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
101, (2012).

8. 
S. Johnson, A. McMillan, C. Torre, S. Frick, J. Rarity, and M. Padgett, 
Opt. Contin. 1, 826 (2022).

9. 
J. Kim, T. Jeong, S. Y. Lee, D. Y. Kim, D. Kim, S. Lee, Y. S. Ihn, Z. Kim, 
and Y. Jo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, (2021).

10. 
J. Z. Yang, M. F. Li, X. X. Chen, W. K. Yu, and A. N. Zhang, Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 117, (2020).

11. 
H. K. Lo, X. Ma, and K. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 15 (2005).

12. 
Y. Zhao, B. Qi, X. Ma, H. K. Lo, and L. Qian, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 1 
(2006).

13. 
Y. B. Zhao, W. L. Zhang, D. Wang, X. T. Song, L. J. Zhou, and C. B. 
Ding, Chinese Phys. B 28, (2019).

14. 
T. Horikiri, Y. Takeno, A. Yabushita, H. Wang, and T. Kobayashi, 
Opt. InfoBase Conf. Pap. 6 (2006).

15. 
G. Brida, M. V. Chekhova, G. A. Fornaro, M. Genovese, E. D. 
Lopaeva, and I. R. Berchera, Phys. Rev. A - At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 83, 
1 (2011).

16. 
T. B. Pittman, Y. H. Shih, D. V. Strekalov, and A. V. Sergienko, Phys. 
Rev. A 52, (1995).

17. 
E. D. Lopaeva, I. Ruo Berchera, I. P. Degiovanni, S. Olivares, G. 
Brida, and M. Genovese, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 1 (2013).

18. 
T. Gregory, P. A. Moreau, S. Mekhail, O. Wolley, and M. J. Padgett, 
Sci. Rep. 11, (2021).

19. 
M. J. Brandsema, R. M. Narayanan, and M. O. Lanzagorta, Radar 
Sens. Technol. XXIV. Vol. 11408. SPIE, 2020. 35 (2020).

20. 
J. Heo, J. Kim, T. Jeong, Y. S. Ihn, D. Y. Kim, Z. Kim, and Y. Jo, Optica 
10, 1461 (2023).

21. 
Z. Cao, Z. Zhang, H. K. Lo, and X. Ma, New J. Phys. 17, (2015).

22. 
M. Curty and N. Lütkenhaus, Phys. Rev. A - At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 71, 
1 (2005).

23. 
S. Magnitskiy, D. Agapov, and A. Chirkin, Opt. Lett. 47, 754 (2022).

24. 
Q. Wang, X. Bin Wang, and G. C. Guo, Phys. Rev. A - At. Mol. Opt. 
Phys. 75, 1 (2007).

25. 
Q. Wang, W. Chen, G. Xavier, M. Swillo, T. Zhang, S. Sauge, M. 
Tengner, Z. F. Han, G. C. Guo, and A. Karlsson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 
1 (2008).

26. 
S. Wang, S. L. Zhang, H. W. Li, Z. Q. Yin, Y. B. Zhao, W. Chen, Z. F. 
Han, and G. C. Guo, Phys. Rev. A - At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 79, 1 (2009).

27. 
C. Jones, J. Xavier, S. V. Kashanian, M. Nguyen, I. Aharonovich, and 
F. Vollmer, Opt. Express 31, 10794 (2023).

28. 
I. R. Berchera and I. P. Degiovanni, Metrologia 56, (2019).

29. 
and P. L. K. Gerry, Christopher C., (Cambridge university press, 
2005).

30. 
H. Ko, B. S. Choi, J. S. Choe, and C. J. Youn, Quantum Inf. Process. 
17, 1 (2018).

31. 
L. A. Lizama-Pérez, J. M. López, and E. D. C. López, Entropy 19, 1 
(2017).

32. 
J. Schneeloch, S. H. Knarr, D. F. Bogorin, M. L. Levangie, C. C. Tison, 
R. Frank, G. A. Howland, M. L. Fanto, and P. M. Alsing, J. Opt. 
(United Kingdom) 21, (2019).

33. 
Y. Li, Y.-H. Li, H.-B. Xie, Z.-P. Li, X. Jiang, W.-Q. Cai, J.-G. Ren, J. Yin, 

S.-K. Liao, and C.-Z. Peng, Opt. Lett. 44, 5262 (2019).

34. 
P. A. Morris, R. S. Aspden, J. E. C. Bell, R. W. Boyd, and M. J. 
Padgett, Nat. Commun. 6, 1 (2015).

35. 
Y. Feng, S. Lee, S. Kim, S. Kim, and K. Kim, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 49, 
0544011 (2010).


