1

Title: Mixed equilibrium/nonequilibrium effects govern surface mobility in 
polymer glasses

Authors: Jianquan Xu1, Asieh Ghanekarade2, Li Li1, Huifeng Zhu1, Hailin Yuan3, Jinsong Yan3, 

David S. Simmons2*, Ophelia K. C. Tsui3,4*, Xinping Wang1*

Affiliations:

1School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Key Laboratory of Surface & Interface 
Science of Polymer Materials of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 
310018, China. 

2Department of Chemical, Biological, and Materials Engineering, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, United States.

3Department of Physics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region 999077, China.

4William Mong Institute of Nano Science and Technology, Hong Kong University of Science 
and Technology, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 999077, China.

*Corresponding authors. Emails: dssimmons@usf.edu (DSS); okctsui@ust.hk (OKCT); and 
wxinping@zstu.edu.cn (XW). 

Abstract: The temperature at which supercooled liquids turn into solid-like glasses (Tg) can 
change at the free surface, affecting the properties of nanostructured glasses and their 
applications. However, inadequate experimental resolution to determine the Tg gradient and a 
longstanding debate over the role of nonequilibrium effects have hindered fundamental 
understanding of this phenomenon. Using spatially resolved Tg measurements and molecular 
dynamics simulations, we reveal a crossover from equilibrium behavior to a new regime of near-
surface nonequilibrium glass physics on cooling. This crossover causes the form of the
nonequilibrium Tg gradient to change, highlighting the need to include these physics for rational 
understanding of the properties of realistic nanostructured glass-forming materials. They also 
potentially recast the interpretation of decades of experimental data on nanoconfined glasses.


2

Introduction

Since the 1990s (1, 2), it has been well-established that the glass transition temperatures (Tg) of 
organic and polymer glass-formers change upon confinement in nano-scale domain size (h).
These alterations have garnered significant attention. On the one hand, they play a central role in 
determining diverse properties of nanostructured materials, such as viscosity (3), dielectric 
response (4), thermal expansivity (5, 6), and heat capacity (7). On the other hand, the observation 
of broken-symmetry or finite-size alterations in the glass transition has long been anticipated to 
shed light on the nature of glass formation itself—a longstanding problem in condensed matter 
physics. However, it remains unsettled how the surface-induced alterations in dynamics and Tg
propagate into the material over distances of 10 nm (8, 9) to 1 m (10-12), which is far greater 
than the propagation of alterations in thermodynamics and structural properties (8, 9).

Over the past decade, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have revealed a coherent 

picture of alterations in dynamics near interfaces under equilibrium
conditions. This 

understanding suggests that the relaxation time () of glasses exhibit a double exponential 
gradient over 10 nm from the surface (9, 13-16), and the associated equilibrium dynamical Tg, 
denoted as Tgeq, takes on an exponential gradient form (15). Experimental confirmation of these 
gradient has been suggested as a critical indicator of the nanoconfinement effect and could 
potentially reveal insights into the mechanism of the glass transition (15). However, there have 
been concerns about whether these gradient forms obtained from simulations (which have
relatively short timescales of ≤ 1 s) persist at experimental timescales (which are typically 
100 s at the glass transition). But several results suggest that this should be a significant issue.
For instance, simulations by Kob et al. (13) and Hocky et al. (14) showed that the double-
exponential mobility gradient saturates rather than continuing to evolve with increasing 
simulation times. Recent experiments by Li et al. (17) and Zhang et al. (18) also support the 
double-exponential form of the gradient of surface diffusivity in organic glasses and relaxation 
time in a colloidal glass, respectively. To confirm if the exponential form of Tg gradient found in 
simulations is also present in experiment, we conducted measurements using three surface 
techniques with different probe depths to determine the local Tg as a function of depth (z) in 
various polymers. Our results show that the Tg(z) gradients are linear in z. It is important to note
that the experiments by Li et al. (17) and Zhang et al. (18) were conducted at temperatures (T) 
above the bulk Tg (Tg,bulk), while ours were conducted at or below Tg,bulk, making our experiments 
more susceptible to nonequilibrium effects. 

Experimental studies typically define Tg by observing a gain (or loss) of equilibrium 

during heating (or cooling). Since these studies necessarily involve the system in a 
nonequilibrium state before (or after) the glass transition, we refer to this Tg as the 
nonequilibrium Tg (Tgne). In contrast, typical simulations as discussed above (8, 9, 13, 15) and 
some experiments (3, 4, 19) measure viscosity or  at a fixed temperature under equilibrium or 
during a slow temperature scan (20). These studies investigate equilibrium dynamics and the 
equilibrium Tgeq and are commonly used to gain insights into the physics of glass transition. The
difference between Tgne and Tgeq in terms of the involvement of a nonequilibrium state during the 
glass transition have sparked a long-standing debate on whether nonequilibrium effects may 
impact common experimental measurements of Tg (20, 21). This highlights the potential 
necessity of considering nonequilibrium effects when interpreting experimental results.


3

To gain a better understanding of our experimental result and the potential influence of 

nonequilibrium effects on the glassy dynamics of nanoconfined glasses in general, we perform 
MD simulations on the near-surface dynamics of long-chain polymers, incorporating extrinsic
nonequilibrium effects, associated with an initially nonequilibrium chain conformational state, 
and intrinsic nonequilibrium effects, which refer to the unavoidable loss of equilibrium at Tgne, to 
the systems. The results from these simulations not only explain the observed Tg(z) gradient in 
our experiment, but also shed light on the puzzling “onset behavior” observed in experiments,
where the temperature dependence of  of polymer nanofilms qualitatively changes just below 
Tgne.  Our findings suggest the presence of new nonequilibrium physics that transforms the 
magnitude and basic form of near-interface alterations in dynamics and Tg relative to the purely 
equilibrium limit. This provides valuable insights into the dynamics of nanoconfined glasses and 
highlights the importance of considering nonequilibrium effects in future studies.

Results

To measure the Tgne(z) profiles in cyclic PMMA (c-PMMAm) and linear PMMA (l-PMMAm) 
with varying degrees of polymerization (m), we have used a method we developed recently (22, 
23). This method involves labeling the polymer with a fluoro-tracer and determining the 
temperature at which it gains mobility on heating, which is used as the Tgne. By using a 
combination of water contact angle measurements, sum-frequency generation vibrational 
spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to finely adjust the measurement probe 
depth, z, we obtain the local Tgne at varying z with nanoscale resolution.

In Fig. 1, we present the Tgne(z) data for the studied c-PMMAm. The results indicate that 

beyond a depth of 1–2 nm from the surface, Tgne (z) increases linearly with z until it reaches the 
bulk Tg,bulkne. The penetration depth, ht (= 7.8 nm) at which Tg,bulkne is recovered is independent of 
molecular weight, consistent with previous findings on the near-surface relaxation time of linear 
polystyrene (l-PS) (24). The observed linear gradient is also consistent with our l-PMMA data 
(see fig. S1) and published data for l-PMMA (22) and l-PS (23). Our findings demonstrate that 
the experimentally measured Tgne(z) differs from the exponential form observed for Tgeq(z) in 
simulations (15). 

To determine whether this difference arises from nonequilibrium effects, we conduct

simulations of glass formation in freestanding long-chain polymer films and their bulk 
counterpart upon incorporating both extrinsic and intrinsic nonequilibrium effects. To
incorporate extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, we perform melt-quench simulations in which long-
chain conformational statistics begin and remain modestly out of equilibrium, which 
qualitatively mimics the effect of trapped nonequilibrium chain configurations commonly 
produced during fabrication of polymer films. To investigate intrinsic nonequilibrium effects at 
simulation versus experimental timescales, we devise a simulation protocol to analyze changes in 
Tgne (z) as the simulation time scale (tANN,max, the maximum annealing time applied to the system) 
increases. By comparing these results with Tgeq (z), we evaluate if nonequilibrium effects can 
explain the experimentally observed linear Tgne (z).

To control the nonequilibrium effects, we employ a two-step protocol in our simulations. 

First, we subject the system to a high-temperature configurational annealing, where we control 
the extrinsic nonequilibrium effects. Then we thermally quench it to various measurement 


4

temperatures (T) and perform an isothermal (segmental) annealing for a maximum duration of
tANN,max to control the intrinsic nonequilibrium effects (see Supplementary Simulation Method).
Consequently, the system falls out of equilibrium when bulk—the relaxation time in the middle 
of the film, which resembles bulk behavior—exceeds tANN,max.
Therefore, Tg,bulkne is 

approximately the temperature at which bulk = tANN,max. To maintain consistency, we define 
Tg,bulkeq as the temperature at which bulk equals tANN,max under equilibrium. In our simulation,
tANN,max is initially set to 106 Lennard-Jones time (τLJ). We measure  at z from the intermediate 
scattering function of the polymers at z (Supplementary Simulation Method). Fig. 2A displays
the  data obtained at several z’s near the surface and in the middle of the film plotted versus 1/T. 
Solid lines are fits of the equilibrium data, employing the vertical dotted line as a cutoff (which 
warrants that  << tANN,max) to a validated functional form for the temperature dependence of 
equilibrium dynamics (25). At lower temperatures, we continue to employ these fit curves
(colored solid curves) to extrapolate the equilibrium dynamics at all the depths examined, as 
validated previously (26). Inside the mid-film, which emulates bulk behavior, the data (orange 
squares) closely obey the equilibrium line down to temperatures where  is greater than tANN,max, 
showing that Tg,bulkne  ≅ Tg,bulkeq, as found before (20). In the near-surface region (z  3.0625), 
however,  increasingly deviates from the equilibrium curves with decreasing z for T < Tg.bulkne, 
suggesting that intrinsic nonequilibrium effects are more effective in altering dynamics closer to
the surface. 

Similar to Tg,bulkne  and Tg,bulkeq, we determine Tgeq(z) and Tgne(z) by finding the 

temperatures where the equilibrium curves and nonequilibrium data, respectively, intersect the
dotted line representing  = 106 τLJ (= tANN,max) in Fig. 2A. The fractional change in Tgne(z) and 
Tgeq(z) relative to Tg,bulkeq is compared in Fig. 2B. As one can see, Tgeq(z) (filled squares) exhibits 
an exponential gradient, while Tgne(z) (orange circles) exhibits a linear regime at the surface. 
When we decrease tANN,max to 105, which is equivalent to decreasing the degree of supercooling 
or increasing the effective cooling rate q (= 1/tANN,max), the linear regime of the Tgne(z) gradient 
(green diamonds) penetrates less far into the films, while Tgeq(z) (open squares) remains 
unchanged. In this simulation,  = 106 τLJ corresponds to 1 s and the length scale of the bead-
spring potential,   1 nm. Since the penetration depth of Tgne(z) grows with supercooling, a 
modest naïve extrapolation suggests that the entire gradient would plausibly be linear by the 
experimental timescale at Tgne, which is consistent with our experimental results. 

Our findings above provide insights into the source of the nonequilibrium effects. First, 

they cannot arise purely from extrinsic nonequilibrium (chain conformation) effects because 
nonequilibrium chain conformations exist above Tg,bulk, and yet our Tgeq(z) data continue to report 
an exponential gradient like that in prior simulations of short chains possessing conformational 
equilibrium (15). We further show in figs. S2 and S3 that improving chain equilibrium weakens
but does not eliminate deviations of  from the equilibrium curves in the vicinity of Tgne. 
Therefore, it appears that the nonequilibrium effects found here are causally driven, to leading 
order, by the intrinsic loss of equilibrium near Tgne.

We have observed that the “onset behavior”, a long-standing anomaly of nanoconfined 

glasses, is also found near Tgne. In this behavior,  begins to exhibit an Arrhenius T-dependence 
at low temperatures (as opposed to the Vogel-Fucher-Tammann T-dependence commonly 
exhibited by glasses), which has been previously observed (7, 27, 28). We explore whether the 
same intrinsic nonequilibrium effects can explain this onset behavior. In Fig. 3A, we


5

demonstrate the onset behavior in our experimental l-PMMA173 system through the data of 
log(q) versus 1/Tgne of nano-films determined by ellipsometry (various symbols). Here, Tgne

denotes the mean-film Tg measured on heating the films at rate q. The data shows that the various 
film thicknesses exhibit Arrhenius T-dependences that extrapolate upward to a point (open 
circle) on or near the bulk curve (solid line). To gain insight into this observation from our 
simulations, we extrapolate the simulated Tgeq(z) and Tgne(z) gradients to longer timescales and
average them over supported films (on a dynamically non-perturbing substrate) of comparable 
thicknesses to yield the mean-film values of Tgeq and Tgne (see Supplementary Simulation 
Method). The result, shown in Fig. 3B, reveals that the logarithmic rate vs 1/Tgne data (dashed 
curves) exhibits an upward concavity that is absent in the equilibrium Tgeq data (dotted curves). 
Mathematically, this is a qualitative consequence of the growing range of the linear 
nonequilibrium regime with increasing tANN,max (or 1/q) (Fig. 2B). Practically, this leads to the 
emergence at low temperature of a regime of nearly Arrhenius dynamics. If we infer data points 
from these extrapolations over a timescale range and resolution comparable to various cooling-
rate-Tg experiments (shown as solid circles in Fig. 3B), the results essentially replicate the onset 
behavior reported in Fig. 3A. Specifically, Arrhenius fits to these data (colored solid lines)
extrapolated upward towards a convergent point close to the equilibrium bulk curve (black solid 
line). In contrast, the Tgeq (dotted) curves do not exhibit this convergence, but is projected to 
continue following the fractional power law decoupling behavior (29) previously reported in 
simulation and predicted in theory. While these curves find an appreciable departure from the 
bulk curve, it is much weaker than that observed for the nonequilibrium curves. These 
observations show that the low temperature experimental onset behavior results from a linear 
gradient in Tgne caused by intrinsic nonequilibrium effects. The fact that the onset  behavior has 
been observed in small molecule glasses (28), which lack the long-ranged conformational modes 
present in polymers (27), indicates that extrinsic nonequilibrium effects are insignificant in the 
onset behavior. Furthermore, this behavior is found whether Tgne is obtained by heating (Fig. 3A)
or cooling (27, 28), which further reinforces the interpretation that intrinsic nonequilibrium 
effects are the main contributing factor to the onset behavior. 

Discussion and Conclusion

Our observations suggest a unified picture of altered dynamics and glass formation near a free 
surface. In equilibrium, surfaces induce an exponential Tgeq gradient along with a weak long-
ranged tail, which is consistent with the simulation literature (15) and experiments(17, 18).  
However, as the system falls out of equilibrium on cooling through Tgne, intrinsic nonequilibrium 
effects qualitatively modify and enhance the surface-induced gradient in Tg. A linear 
nonequilibrium gradient progressively grows inward from the surface with increasing 
equilibration timescale (or equivalently decreasing thermal quench rate), leading to an onset of 
much stronger and more Arrhenius (log q vs 1/Tg) average-Tg shifts. It is this average-Tg shift 
that is probed in many experiments that report the onset of a new regime of behavior at low
temperatures and rates. Besides this onset behavior, several other anomalous experimental 
observations, such as extraordinarily long-ranged Tg gradients at polymer-polymer interfaces 
(11) and reports of two-distinct Tg’s in some thin films systems(30), also emanate from Tgne

measurements that we now know are susceptible to nonequilibrium phenomena. This may 
suggest a new foundation for understanding these remarkable observations by adding 
nonequilibrium effects into consideration. Results of this work and two recent experiments (17, 


6

18) suggest that the interfacial dynamical behavior observed in previous computer simulations 
(9, 13-15) likely represents the genuine equilibrium dynamical situation extended to 
experimental timescales and can be used to validate extant theories of glass transition (15) and 
shed light into the nature of the glass transition. 

However, the mechanism by which intrinsic nonequilibrium effects produce deviations of 

ne from the equilibrium counterpart (Fig. 2A) is unintuitive. Specifically, the deviations are
more pronounced closer to the surface even though the relaxation time in that region is shorter
and equilibrium can be attained more rapidly. We suggest that intrinsic nonequilibrium effects 
may be driven by a non-local effect, which originates from a nonequilibrium density profile
((z)) that emerges near the surface below Tg,bulkne (31). Using simulations, we have obtained one 
such profile and presented it in Fig. 4A. This profile displays a peak near the surface (at z = 0) 
when the temperature falls below Tg,bulkne (the density data as a function of temperature can be 
found in table S1). The underlying cause of this phenomenon can be seen in the temperature 
dependence of the equilibrium (liquid) and nonequilibrium (glassy) densities shown in Fig. 4B. 
When the temperature falls below Tg,bulkne, the mid-film that resembles the bulk starts to follow 
the weaker temperature dependence of glass density (blue dashed line), reflecting a 
nonequilibrium decrease in density due to the vitrification of this bulk-like part of the film. As
cooling continues below the bulk Tg, the density peak near the surface becomes more prominent.

This nonequilibrium effect cannot impact the mid-film Tg, because it emerges below the 

mid-film Tg (upon cooling) as a result of the loss of equilibrium at Tg,bulk. However, as shown in
Fig. 4A, at their local Tgeq, molecules just beneath the surface are sandwiched between the 
surface and a counterintuitively less dense and thus softer vitreous underlayer. Prior theory (32), 
experiment (11, 33), and simulation work (34) have indicated that nanoscale proximity to a soft 
domain tends to enhance dynamics. Therefore, in addition to the equilibrium effect of a 
dynamical enhancement by the free surface, these molecules also experience a nonequilibrium 
enhancement of dynamics by their proximity to a softer underlayer. Consequently, Tgeq is further 
suppressed beyond what would be expected from equilibrium dynamics. Moreover, since the 
relative softness of the underlayer driving this effect increases as the system is cooled more (see 
Fig. 4B), this additional dynamical enhancement is more pronounced for material closer to the 
surface, which has a lower Tg even under equilibrium conditions. This explains why the 
nonequilibrium enhancement in dynamics is most prominent near the free surface as shown in 
Fig. 2. In essence, this nonequilibrium effect amplifies the equilibrium dynamical gradient with 
an additional dynamic-enhancing mechanism. However, because this mechanism is based on the 
underlying equilibrium dynamical enhancement present at the free surface, it would not occur 
without the underlying equilibrium effect in the first place.

Collectively, our results indicate that nonequilibrium effects play a central role in 

mediating the thermal and dynamical properties of thin films and nanostructured glasses. 
Furthermore, those properties can be modulated both by tuning the thermal pathway (and hence 
Tgne) or trapping nonequilibrium molecular conformations at high temperatures. These 
possibilities allow for new strategies to rationally control the properties of diverse nanostructured 
materials. In contrast, most current theories of altered dynamics near interfaces focus on purely 
equilibrium systems. Given the envisaged opportunities, extending these theories to account for 
nonequilibrium effects should be a priority in future work.


7

References and Notes

1.
J. L. Keddie, R. A. L. Jones, R. A. Cory, Interface and Surface Effects on The Glass-
Transition Temperature in Thin Polymer Films. Faraday Discuss. 98, 219-230 (1994).

2.
C. L. Jackson, G. B. McKenna, The glass transition of organic liquids confined to pores. 
J. Non-Cryst. Solids 131-133, 221-224 (1991).

3.
Z. Yang, Y. Fujii, F. K. Lee, C.-H. Lam, O. K. C. Tsui, Glass Transition Dynamics and 
Surface Layer Mobility in Unentangled Polystyrene Films. Science 328, 1676-1679 
(2010).

4.
K. Fukao, Y. Miyamoto, Slow dynamics near glass transitions in thin polymer films. 
Phys. Rev. E 64, 011803 (2001).

5.
S. Kawana, R. A. L. Jones, Character of the Glass Transition in Thin Supported Polymer 
Films. Phys. Rev. E 63, 021501 (2001).

6.
T. Miyazaki, K. Nishida, T. Kanaya, Contraction and reexpansion of polymer thin films. 
Phys. Rev. E 69, 022801 (2004).

7.
S. Gao, Y. P. Koh, S. L. Simon, Calorimetric Glass Transition of Single Polystyrene 
Ultrathin Films. Macromolecules 46, 562-570 (2013).

8.
Y. Zhou, S. T. Milner, Short-Time Dynamics Reveals Tg Suppression in Simulated 
Polystyrene Thin Films. Macromolecules 50, 5599-5610 (2017).

9.
W. Zhang, F. W. Starr, J. F. Douglas, Activation free energy gradient controls interfacial 
mobility gradient in thin polymer films. J. Chem. Phys. 155, 174901 (2021).

10.
V. M. Boucher, D. Cangialosi, A. Alegria, J. Colmenero, Enthalpy Recovery in 
Nanometer to Micrometer Thick Polystyrene Films. Macromolecules 45, 5296-5306 
(2012).

11.
R. R. Baglay, C. B. Roth, Local glass transition temperature Tg(z) of polystyrene next to 
different polymers: Hard vs. soft confinement. J. Chem. Phys. 146, 203307 (2017).

12.
H. Yuan, J. Yan, P. Gao, S. K. Kumar, O. K. C. Tsui, Microscale mobile surface double 
layer in a glassy polymer. Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5295 (2022).

13.
W. Kob, S. Roldán-Vargas, L. Berthier, Non-monotonic temperature evolution of 
dynamic correlations in glass-forming liquids. Nat. Phys. 8, 164-167 (2012).

14.
G. M. Hocky, L. Berthier, W. Kob, D. R. Reichman, Crossovers in the dynamics of 
supercooled liquids probed by an amorphous wall. Phys. Rev. E 89, 052311 (2014).

15.
K. S. Schweizer, D. S. Simmons, Progress towards a phenomenological picture and 
theoretical understanding of glassy dynamics and vitrification near interfaces and under 
nanoconfinement. J. Chem. Phys. 151, 240901 (2019).

16.
Z. Hao et al., Mobility gradients yield rubbery surfaces on top of polymer glasses. Nature
596, 372-376 (2021).

17.
Y. Li et al., Surface diffusion in glasses of rod-like molecules posaconazole and 
itraconazole: effect of interfacial molecular alignment and bulk penetration. Soft Matter
16, 5062 (2020).

18.
Q. Zhang, W. Li, K. Qiao, Y. Han, Surface premelting and melting of colloidal glasses. 
Sci. Adv. 9, eadf1101 (2023).

19.
P. G. Santangelo, C. M. Roland, Molecular weight dependance of fragility in polystyrene. 
Macromolecules 31, 4581-4585 (1998).

20.
R. D. Priestley, D. Cangialosi, S. Napolitano, On the equivalence between the 
thermodynamic and dynamic measurements of the glass transition in confined polymers. 
J. Non-Cryst. Solids 407, 288-295 (2015).


8

21.
M. D. Ediger, J. A. Forrest, Dynamics near Free Surfaces and the Glass Transition in 
Thin Polymer Films: A View to the Future. Macromolecules 47, 471-478 (2014).

22.
B. Zuo et al., Depth Profile of the Segmental Dynamics at a Poly(methyl methacrylate) 
Film Surface. Soft Matter 9, 9376-9384 (2013).

23.
C. Zhang et al., Chemical Structure Dependence of Surface Layer Thickness on Polymer 
Films. J. Phys. Chem. C 124, 12448-12456 (2020).

24.
K. Paeng, S. F. Swallen, M. D. Ediger, Direct Measurement of Molecular Motion in 
Freestanding Polystyrene Thin Films. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 8444-8447 (2011).

25.
B. Schmidtke, M. Hofmann, A. Lichtinger, E. A. Rössler, Temperature Dependence of 
the Segmental Relaxation Time of Polymers Revisited. Macromolecules 48, 3005-3013 
(2015).

26.
J.-H. Hung, T. K. Patra, D. S. Simmons, Forecasting the Experimental Glass Transition 
from Short Time Relaxation Data. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 544, 120205 (2020).

27.
Z. Fakhraai, J. A. Forrest, Probing slow dynamics in supported thin polymer films. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 95, 025701 (2005).

28.
Y. Zhang et al., Long-range correlated dynamics in ultrathin molecular glass films. J. 
Chem. Phys. 145, 114502 (2016).

29.
D. Diaz-Vela, J.-H. Hung, D. S. Simmons, Temperature-Independent Rescaling of the 
Local Activation Barrier Drives Free Surface Nanoconfinement Effects on Segmental-
Scale Translational Dynamics near Tg. ACS Macro Lett. 7, 1295-1301 (2018).

30.
J. E. Pye, C. B. Roth, Two Simultaneous Mechanisms Causing Glass Transition 
Temperature Reductions in High Molecular Weight Freestanding Polymer Films as 
Measured by Transmission Ellipsometry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 235701 (2011).

31.
J. H. Mangalara, M. D. Marvin, D. S. Simmons, Three-Layer Model for the Emergence 
of Ultrastable Glasses from the Surfaces of Supercooled Liquids. J. Phys. Chem. B 120, 
4861-4865 (2016).

32.
A. D. Phan, K. S. Schweizer, Theory of the spatial transfer of interface-nucleated changes 
of dynamical constraints and its consequences in glass-forming films. J. Chem. Phys.
150, 044508 (2019).

33.
R. R. Baglay, C. B. Roth, Communication: Experimentally Determined Profile of Local 
Glass Transition Temperature across a Glassy-Rubbery Polymer Interface with a Tg 
Difference of 80 K. J. Chem. Phys. 143, 111101 (2015).

34.
R. J. Lang, W. L. Merling, D. S. Simmons, Combined Dependence of Nanoconfined Tg 
on Interfacial Energy and Softness of Confinement. ACS Macro Lett. 3, 758-762 (2014).

35.
L. Wang et al., Fabrication of polymer brush surfaces with highly-ordered perfluoroalkyl 
side groups at the brush end and their antibiofouling properties. J. Mater. Chem. B 3, 
4388-4400 (2015).

36.
J. N. Hoskins, S. M. Grayson, Synthesis and Degradation Behavior of Cyclic Poly(ε-
caprolactone). Macromolecules 42, 6406-6413 (2009).

37.
L. Zhang, R. Elupula, S. M. Grayson, J. M. Torkelson, Major Impact of Cyclic Chain 
Topology on the Tg‑Confinement Effect of Supported Thin Films of Polystyrene. 
Macromolecules 49, 257-268 (2016).

38.
J. A. Opsteen, J. C. M. van Hest, Modular Synthesis of ABC Type Block Copolymers by 
“Click” Chemistry. J. Polym. Sci. A Polym. Chem. 45, 2913-2924 (2007).

39.
C. J. Duxbury, D. Cummins, A. Heise, Glaser Coupling of Polymers: Side-Reaction in 
Huisgens “Click” Coupling Reaction and Opportunity for Polymers with Focal 
Diacetylene Units in Combination with ATRP. J. Polym. Sci. A Polym. Chem. 47, 3795-
3802 (2009).


9

40.
K. Matyjaszewski, Y. Nakagawa, S. G. Gaynor, Synthesis of Well-Defined Azido and 
Amino End-Functionalized Polystyrene by Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization. 
Macromol. Rapid Commun. 18, 1057-1066 (2003).

41.
S. Gagliardi et al., On the Difference in Scattering Behavior of Cyclic and Linear 
Polymers in Bulk. J. Chem. Phys. 122, 064904 (2005).

42.
G. M. Whitesides, P. E. Laibinis, Wet chemical approaches to the characterization of 
organic surfaces: self-assembled monolayers, wetting, and the physical-organic chemistry 
of the solid-liquid interface. Langmuir 6, 87-96 (1990).

43.
J. Xu et al., Probing the Utmost Distance of Polymer Dynamics Suppression by a 
Substrate by Investigating the Diffusion of Fluorinated Tracer-Labeled Polymer Chains. 
Macromolecules 50, 5905-5913 (2017).

44.
Y. Tateishi et al., Local conformation of poly(methyl methacrylate) at nitrogen and water 
interfaces. Polym. Chem. 1, 303-311 (2010).

45.
R. F. Roberts, D. L. Allara, C. A. Pryde, D. N. E. Buchanan, N. D. Hobbins, Mean free 
path for inelastic scattering of 1.2 kev electrons in thin poly(methylmethacrylate) films. 
Surf Interface Anal 2, 5-10 (1980).

46.
R. D. van de Grampel et al., Surface studies of partially fluorinated polymethacrylates: a 
combined XPS and LEIS analysis. Prog. Org. Coat. 45, 273-279 (2002).

47.
K. Dalnoki-Veress, J. A. Forrest, C. Murray, C. Gigault, J. R. Dutcher, Molecular weight 
dependence of reductions in the glass transition temperature of thin, freely standing 
polymer films. Phys. Rev. E 63, 031801 (2001).

48.
G. S. Grest, K. Kremer, Molecular dynamics simulation for polymers in the presence of a 
heat bath. Phys. Rev. A 33, 3628-3631 (1986).

49.
M. E. Mackura, D. S. Simmons, Enhancing heterogenous crystallization resistance in a 
bead-spring polymer model by modifying bond length. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 52, 
134-140 (2014).

50.
S. Plimpton, Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics. J. Comput. 
Phys. 117, 1-19 (1995).

Acknowledgments

JX, XW, OKCT, DSS, and AG would like to express their gratitude for the funding 

support received for their research. JX and XW were supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (grants 22161160317, 22203075, and 22173081). OKCT received support 
from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (grant N_HKUST623/21). DSS and AG were 
supported by the United States National Science Foundation CBET Program (grant 2208238).

Supplementary Materials

Materials and Methods

Figs. S1 to S8

Tables S1 to S3

References (1–60)


10

Fig. 1. Experimental depth profiles Tgne(z) taken at the surface of various c-PMMA 
polymers. Dashed lines are the best fits to a linear gradient with details of the fits reported in 
table S2.


11

Fig. 2. Simulation results revealing intrinsic nonequilibrium effects on near-surface (z) of 
long-chain films. (A) Segmental relaxation time τ vs. inverse temperature for various segmental 
layers at different distances z/σ from the surface ( is the length scale of the bead-spring
potential). The dotted lines represent the low-temperature cutoff for inclusion of equilibrium 
relaxation time data and τ = tANN,max = 106. The curved lines show fits of the data to an 
established model for equilibrium dynamics (26). Deviations from the curved equilibrium lines 
to the right of the vertical dotted line indicate intrinsic nonequilibrium effects on the near-surface 
relaxation time near and below Tg,bulkeq. (B) Normalized alteration gradients of Tgeq and Tgne

relative to bulk for systems with tANN,max = 105 and 106 (inicated in the legend). The solid line 
show a fit of Tgeq (z) to an exponential gradient form to the Tgeq data, while the dotted lines (in 
corresponding colors) represent linear fits to the surface region where Tgne deviates significantly 
from Tgeq.

-0.3

-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

0
5
10

(Tg(z)/Tg,bulk
eq) - 1

z

Series1
Series3
Series2
Series4

Tg

eq; tANN,max = 105

Tg

eq; tANN,max = 106

Tg

ne; tANN,max = 105

Tg

ne; tANN,max = 106

(b)

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5

log τ(z/σ)

1/T

0.4375
1.3125
2.1875
3.0625
Midfilm

(a)

A

B


12

Fig. 3. Experimental and simulation data showing the onset behavior of log(1/) vs. 1/Tgne in 
polymer nanofilms (A) Experimental analysis of mean-film Tgne for l-PMMA173 films of 
varying thicknesses (indicated in the legend) and heating rates (q). The red lines represent fits to 
Arrhenius rate laws, extrapolating upwards to an intercept (open circle) near the equilibrium bulk 
curve (solid black line), similar to prior Tgne measurements conducted during cooling. (B)
Simulated results on mean logarithmic relaxation rate log(1/τ) for a supported film on a 
dynamically neutral substrate plotted vs. 1/Tg, for comparison to experimental data. (See 
supplementary Simulation Method for details) Dashed lines show predicted behavior for mean-
film Tgne with different thicknesses (h = 20 σ, 30 σ, 40 σ, 60 σ, and 75 σ—top to bottom), while 
dotted lines show predicted behavior of Tgeq for the same systems. Points represent “pseudodata” 
mimicking Tgeq data that could be obtained in experiment, along with solid lines passing through 
them representing Arrhenius fits. These lines extrapolate upwards to a point near the equilibrium 
bulk curve. 

B


13

Fig. 4. Illustrating the proposed relationship between nonequilibrium density gradient 
effects and nonequilibrium Tg gradient effects. (A) Nonequilibrium glassy density (blue 
diamonds) and equilibrium liquid density extrapolated from high-temperature melt data (orange 
circles) vs. distance (in units of ) from the film surface at a simulation temperature of ~0.35, 
below the system’s bulk Tg (which is ~0.4). Dotted lines are guides-to-the-eye. The 
nonequilibrium suppression in Tg in the vitreous interior is posited to serve as a soft, Tg-reducing 
underlayer at lower temperatures, where the near-surface material in the local Tg maximum 
vitrifies. (B)  Temperature dependence of the extrapolated equilibrium density (orange line) and 
of the nonequilibrium, glassy state density of the film interior below the bulk Tg (blue diamonds 
and dashed guide-to-the-eye line). The vertical dotted lines correspond to nonequilibrium local 
Tg values at distances from the surface, as labeled at the top of the panel. The length of the 
arrows in panel A, showing nonequilibrium suppression in density in the film interior, 
corresponds to the difference between the two lines in panel B. This difference grows on cooling, 
resulting in a larger difference at the local Tg nearer the surface. Consequently, a relatively softer 
(and more Tg-suppressing) underlayer material is present nearer the surface.    

1.24

1.25

1.26

1.27

0
5
10

ρ

z

(a)

0.44
1.3
2.2
3.1 3.9
10

1.25

1.26

1.27

1.28

1.29

0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.4

ρ

T

(b)

Tg

eq at z =

A

B


1

Supplementary Materials for

Mixed equilibrium/nonequilibrium effects govern surface mobility in polymer 

glasses

Jianquan Xu1, Asieh Ghanekarade2, Li Li1, Huifeng Zhu1, Hailin Yuan3, Jinsong Yan3, David S. 

Simmons2*, Ophelia K. C. Tsui3,4*, Xinping Wang1*

Corresponding authors: David S. Simmons, dssimmons@usf.edu; Ophelia K. C. Tsui, 

okctsui@ust.hk; Xinping Wang, wxinping@zstu.edu.cn

The PDF file includes:

Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S8
Tables S1 to S3
References (1–60)


2

1. Materials

Methyl methacrylate (MMA, 99%), toluene (anhydrous, 99.8%), 2-bromoisobutyryl bromide 
(BIBB, 98%), N,N,N',N'',N''-pentamethyl diethylenetriamine (PMDETA, 99%) and triethylamine 
(TEA, 99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co., USA. 2-perfluorooctylethyl methacrylate 
(FMA, 97%) and Benzotrifluoride (BTF, 99%) were purchased from J&K Scientific Ltd. 3-
(trimethylsilyl)-2-propyn-1-ol (TMS-C≡C-CH2OH, 98%), Copper(I) bromide (CuBr, 99%), 
Copper(II) bromide (CuBr2, 99%) and tetrabutylammonium fluoride (TBAF, 1.0 M in 
tetrahydrofuran) were acquired from Aladdin Chemical Co., Ltd. Prior to polymerization, MMA 
and FMA were purified by passing them through a basic alumina column (100-200 mesh) and 
dried over CaH2. BTF was also dried over CaH2 and then distilled under reduced pressure. CuBr 
was purified by an acetic acid (aqueous) solution. All the other reagents and solvents, such as 
tetrahydrofuran (THF), dimethylformamide (DMF) and sodium azide were analytical grade and 
used as received.

1.1. Synthesis of the linear and cyclic PMMA with a fluorinated group label

Linear (l-) and cyclic (c-) PMMA labeled by the fluoro-group FMA were synthesized by 
combining atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) (35) and copper (I)-catalyzed alkyne-
azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) “click” reaction (36, 37). Figure S4 shows the detailed synthetic 
route, where the serial numbers 1-6 denote the different intermediate chemical products produced 
at different stages of the route as discussed below. 

The alkyne functionalized initiator, TMS-C≡C-CH2OOCC(CH3)2Br (2), was synthesized 

as published in reference (38). A 50 mL of THF solution with BIBB (5.6 ml, 50.6 mmol) was 
added dropwise to a solution of TMS-C≡C-CH2OH (1) (5 ml, 33.7 mmol) and TEA (7ml, 50.6 
mmol) in 90 ml THF, while maintaining the reaction temperature at 273 K. After all the solution 
had dripped off, the reaction solution was stirred for another 5 h at room temperature for the 
reaction to complete. The triethylammonium salt was removed from the reaction solution by 
filtration then the solvent was removed by using a rotary evaporator. Afterwards, the crude product 
was dissolved in CH2Cl2 and washed twice with saturated solution of NH4Cl and twice more with 
distilled water. The resulting organic layer was dried with anhydrous MgSO4 and subsequently 
purified by column chromatography (petroleum ether/ EtOAc 95:5). The final product looks like 
a colorless oil and confirmed by 1H NMR spectra. Owing to the protection of the neighboring TMS 
group, complexation of the alkyne group in the initiator by the copper catalyst and side reactions 
such as Glaser coupling (39) were circumvented.

The macroinitiator l-TMS-C≡C-PMMAm-Br (3) and fluoro-tracer-labeled linear PMMA 

(l-TMS-C≡C-PMMAm-b-FMAn-Br (4)) with different molecular weights were synthesized by 
ATRP similar to our previous work (35). But here, we used Cu (II) as catalyst (which was reduced 
by MMA to Cu(I)) rather than Cu(I) directly (which is insensitive to moisture and oxygen) to yield 
lower molecular weights and narrower molecular weight distributions. The number of FMA groups 
introduced to each chain is 1~2, as confirmed by 19F NMR using an internal standard method with 
trifluorotoluene as the internal standard substance. After obtaining l-TMS-C≡C-PMMAm-b-
FMAn-Br (4), azide reaction was executed (37). Three grams of l-TMS-C≡C-PMMAm-b-FMAn-


3

Br (4) was dissolved in 10 ml of DMF in a 50 ml three necked flask equipped with a magnetic 
stirrer. NaN3 (10 equiv.) was added to this solution and the mixture was stirred for 24 h at 298 K. 
Then the polymer was precipitated in cryogenic methanol. Thereafter, 2g of l-TMS-C≡C-
PMMAm-b-FMAn-N3 (5) was dissolved in 10 ml of THF in a 50 ml three necked flask with 1.5 
equiv. of TBAF and stirred for 24 h at 298 K (40). Then l-C≡C-PMMAm-b-FMAn-N3 (5) was 
precipitated in cryogenic methanol. The cyclic PMMA was synthesized by copper (I)-catalyzed 
alkyne-azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) “click” reaction (36, 37). A 0.2 mM solution of l-C≡C-
PMMAm-b-FMAn-N3 (5) in toluene (100 mL) was added in three freeze / pump / thaw cycles in a 
250ml flask. In another 500 ml flask, PMDETA (100 equiv.) was dissolved in toluene (200 mL) 
and degassed in three freeze / pump / thaw cycles, then Cu(I)Br (50 equiv.) was added 
immediately, followed by two pump-and-thaw cycles. Upon thawing, a syringe with pump was 
employed to transfer the solution of l-C≡C-PMMAm-b-FMAn-N3 (5) to a rapidly stirring solution 
of Cu(I)Br/PMDETA in toluene at room temperature at a rate of 8 µL/min. After the addition of 
the polymer solution was completed, an additional 2 h was allowed to stir the solution. The final 
product, c-PMMAm-b-FMAn (6), was purified by neutral aluminum oxide to remove the copper 
salt, followed by precipitation in n-hexane and drying in vacuum. FTIR, 1H NMR, and GPC were 
employed to check that the “click” reaction occurred successfully (figs. S5A and S5B) and the 
product was c-PMMAm-b-FMAn (fig. S5C). 

1.2. Film preparation

Silicon (100) wafers covered by a native oxide layer (SiOx, ~2 nm) were cut into 1.3 cm × 1.3 cm 
slides and employed as a substrate. The slides were cleaned by a freshly prepared piranha solution 
(H2SO4:H2O2 (v:v) = 3:1) at 363 K for 30 min. The cleaned substrates were coated by gold by 
sputtering in a sputter Q 150T S (Quorum, U.K.) under an argon atmosphere. The thickness of the 
gold layer was about 140 nm, as determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Thin films of c-
PMMAm-b-FMAn films with different thicknesses were obtained by spin-coating solutions of the 
polymers in cyclohexanone at various concentrations onto the gold-coated substrates. Afterwards, 
the films were dried in vacuum at 318 K for 72 h to remove the residual solvent. The film thickness 
of was determined by an EP3SW ellipsometer (Accurion GmbH Co., Germany). Before taking any 
measurements, the films were annealed for a period of 24 h at each measurement temperature.

1.3. Sample characterization

The molecular weight distributions of the polymers were determined by GPC (Waters-150C, 
USA). Solutions of the polymers in THF at a concentration of 1 mg/ml were injected into the GPC 
at 313 K at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) (Q2000, TA 
Instruments, USA) under a nitrogen environment was used to measure the Tg (Tg,bulkne (DSC)) of
the c-PMMA bulk polymers. During measurement, the sample was first heated to 453 K and held 
for 5 minutes to eliminate thermal history. Then it was cooled to 323 K at the fastest rate and kept 
at 323 K for 1 min. Afterwards, the sample was heated at 2 K/min to 453 K during which 
Tg,bulkne(DSC) was obtained. The radii of gyration (Rg) of the c- and l-PMMA polymers were 


4

calculated by Rg = (Nlb2/12)1/2 and Rg = (Nlb2/6)1/2, respectively (41) (where lb is the average 
statistical segment length, which is 0.69 nm for PMMA, and N is the degree of polymerization). 

2. Methods

2.1.
Experimental Methods

2.1.1. Method for measuring depth profile of Tgne(z)

We employed a method that we recently developed (22, 23) to measure the depth z profile of Tgne

for fluoro-labeled c-PMMAm-b-FMAn and l-PMMA173-b-FMA1 polymers with varying m and 
corresponding number-average molecular weights, Mn = 12.9–27.9 kg/mol. This method involves 
three surface-sensitive techniques—water contact angle measurement (WCA), sum-frequency 
generation vibrational spectroscopy (SFG), and angle-resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
(XPS)—which have different probe depths of 0.5 nm (42), 1 nm (35), and 2.3–9.0 nm (22, 23), 
respectively.  

Because the fluoro-labels have a lower surface energy than PMMA, they tend to migrate 

to the free surface. At a given temperature T between the Tgne at z = 0 and the bulk counterpart 
Tg,bulkne, this migration process is halted for z > z*, where z* is the position for which Tgne(z*) = T. 
This occurs simply because the local Tgne(z) deeper in the film than z* are greater than the 
experimental temperature, and so the segmental dynamics (which are the main dynamics that 
govern the glass transition in polymers) are frozen in the glassy state. Therefore, the temperature 
at which the fluoro labels within depth z begins to enrich on heating (because of migration of the 
fluoro labels from the region immediately below) is taken to be the local Tgne at z. By exploiting 
the fact that the different surface techniques have different probe depths, Tgne(z) could be measured 
from z = 0.5–9.0 nm. In all our measurements, a 24-h waiting time was allowed upon each stepwise 
increase of T for the sample to stabilize. The resulting Tgne determination is akin to a devitrification 
temperature measurement because it probes the temperature at which degrees of freedom at a given 
depth z are liberated on heating.

Figure S6A shows a schematic of the experimental method. Fig. S6B displays 

representative data from WCA measurement and SFG (I2910/I2950) plotted as a function of T. As we 
can see, the WCA (solid squares) stays constant at low T then begins to increase with T, indicating 
an increase in the hydrophobicity of the film surface when T exceeds 356.0 K. This is understood 
to be caused by migration of the fluoro groups to the free surface when the lowest near-surface Tg
(namely, Tgne (z = 0)) was surpassed (23, 43). Because the probe depth of the WCA measurement 
is 0.5 nm, we assigned Tgne(z = 0.5 nm) to be 356.0 K. For the SFG measurement, we assessed the 
local glass transition by using the ratio of the SFG peak heights at wave vectors 2910 and 2950 
cm-1 (I2910/I2950), which originate from the C-H symmetric stretching vibrations of the -CH2- groups 
in the backbone and the ester methyl (-OCH3) groups in the side chains of PMMA, respectively 
(44). The data (open circles) shows that I2910/I2950 is constant, equal to the maximum value at low 
T, but begins to decrease with T from 355.9 K (fig. S6B). The steady decrease seen in I2910/I2950
with T indicates that the polymer backbones have rearranged and so we infer that devitrification 
has occurred. Because the probe depth of SFG is 1.0 nm, we assigned Tgne(z = 1.0 nm) to be 355.9 
K. The XPS data, represented by the ratio of the F and C content (F/C), are shown in fig. S6C. In 


5

all these data, F/C is a constant at low T, but begins to increase with T at an onset temperature that 
increases with the XPS probe depth (z = 3λ sin θ, where θ is the take-off angle measured from the 
sample surface as illustrated in fig. S6A, and λ = 3 nm is the mean free path for inelastic scattering 
in PMMA with an Al Ka X-ray source of energy 1253.6 eV(45)). We similarly assigned the onset 
temperature for F/C to increase to be the local Tgne at z. 

To carry out WCA measurements, we used a Krüss DSA-10 CA goniometer (Hamburg, 

Germany). In each measurement, a 2 μl drop of deionized water was dispensed onto the sample 
surface. After a waiting time of 3 s, the contact angle of the droplet was measured. 

Sum frequency generation (SFG) spectra were collected by using a custom designed SFG 

spectrometer (EKSPLA, Lithuania). During measurement, the incident angles of a tunable infrared 
(IR) laser beam and a 532 nm visible laser beam were fixed at 50° and 70°, respectively, to generate 
sum frequency (SF) signal in a second-order nonlinear optical process. The ssp (SF/s, visible/s, 
and IR/p) mode and IR/p polarization sum-frequency signals were collected at a frequency of 4 
cm-1, where s (p) represents the polarization normal (parallel) to the plane of incidence. Fig. S7
displays a typical series of ssp SFG spectra taken of a c-PMMA173-b-FMA1 film surface at various 
T across the Tgne (= 355.9 K) within the probe depth of SFG. It shows that the peak intensity at 
2910 cm-1 (I2910), originated from C-H symmetric stretching vibrations of the -CH2- groups in the 
backbone, gradually decreased with T from 353 to 393 K. At the same time, the peak intensity at 
2950 cm-1 (I2950), originated from the -OCH3 groups in the side chains of PMMA (44), was 
relatively unaffected. Therefore, the steady decrease seen in I2910 (relative to I2950) with T above 
~353 K indicates that the polymer backbones have rearranged, and so kinetic freezing has occurred. 

Angle-resolved XPS spectra were conducted by using a PHI5000C ESCA system with an 

Al Kα X-ray source (1253.6 eV) operated at 250 W and 140 kV. The analytical depth (z) of the 
XPS analysis was estimated by z = 3sin (46), where  is the emission angle of the photoelectron 
to the surface plane and  is the mean-free-path for inelastic scattering, which is 3 nm for 
PMMA(45), allowing for varying probe depths of 2.3–9.0 nm.

Next, we analyze the Tgne(z) data of the c-PMMAm-b-FMAn films, shown in Fig. 1. It is 

noted that Tgne (z) remains constant for z < 1.0–2.0 nm. Beyond this depth, Tgne (z) increases linearly 
with z until it reaches the bulk value at Tg,bulkne. The profile of Tgne (z) can be mathematically 
described by

𝑇𝑔

ne(𝑧) =

{
 
 

 
 
𝑇𝑔

ne(0)
𝑧 ≤ ℎ𝑡,0

𝑇𝑔

ne(0) +

𝑇𝑔,𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘

ne
−𝑇𝑔ne(0)

ℎ𝑡−ℎ𝑡,0
(𝑧 − ℎ𝑡,0)
ℎ𝑡,0 < 𝑧 ≤ ℎ𝑡

𝑇𝑔,𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘

ne
𝑧 > ℎ𝑡

(S1)

where ht,0 and ht is the depth where the linear dependence of Tgne(z) begins and ends, respectively 
(Fig. 1). By fitting equation S1 to the Tgne(z) data in Fig. 1, and using the value of Tg,bulkne

determined by ellipsometry (as described in the next section), we infer the values of Tgne (0), ht,0, 
ht, and [Tg,bulkne – Tgne (0)] / [ht – ht,0], which are presented in table S2.

We have also conducted similar measurements on l-PMMA films with various degrees of 

polymerization. The Tgne(z) gradients in these films also show a linear increase with z. However, 
unlike Tgne(z) of the c-PMMA films, these data do not reach Tg,bulkne, and therefore, the full profile 


6

of Tgne(z) cannot be determined. Nevertheless, our simulation data in Fig. 2B demonstrate that the 
profile of Tgne(z) develops a linear portion near the surface, which penetrates further into the film 
with increasing degree of supercooling. This suggests that the full profile of Tgne(z) would possibly 
be linear under experimental conditions.

2.1.2. Method for measuring the mean-field Tgne by ellipsometry

To determine the mean-film Tgne for films of varying thicknesses, h, we conducted experiments 
using an EP3SW ellipsometer (Accurion GmbH Co., Germany) to measure the ellipsometric 
angles, Delta and Psi, while increasing the temperature T at a steady rate. Then we fitted the data 
using the method reported in Ref. (47). Similar to the Tgne(z) study, the films were not subjected 
to thermal annealing before mean-film Tgne measurement. 

To determine Tg,bulkne, we conducted mean-film Tgne measurements on films with a bulk 

thickness of 106 nm. To ensure consistency with the Tgne(z) study, we adopt the same thermal 
scheme, allowing for a 24-hour waiting time between temperature changes. We found that the 
Tg,bulkne value determined for the c-PMMA173 films with a bulk thickness of 106 nm (~387.5 K; 
fig. S8) was the same as the corresponding value obtained by XPS at z = 7.8 and 9.0 nm (~387.8 
K; fig. S6C) within experimental error. Furthermore, this value of Tg,bulkne is 6 K lower than that 
obtained by DSC (~393.4 K; table S3), attributable to the slower measurement rate used in the 
Tg(z) measurements compared to the DSC measurements. For other c-PMMA’s, we found that the 
relation, Tg,bulkne = Tg,bulkne (DSC) – 6 K also holds for Tg,bulkne determined under the same thermal 
scheme as in the Tgne(z) study. 

2.2. Simulation Methods

2.2.1. Model

Molecular dynamics simulations employ an attractive variant of the bead-spring model of Kremer-
Grest (48), which has been employed in our prior work probing thin-film dynamics and glass 
formation behavior in simulation. We primarily focus on chains comprised of 400 beads, although 
below we also include a result from a 1000-bead chain. 

Within this model, non-bonded beads interact via the 12–6 Lennard-Jones potential, with 

energy and range parameters of ε = 1 and σ = 1, respectively, and with a cutoff distance of 2.5 σ. 
Bonded beads, on the other hand, interact via the Finitely Extensible Nonlinear Elastic Potential,

2

2
12
12
6
6

0

0

1
ln 1
4
2

b
b
b
b

r
E
KR
r
r
R



−
−








= −
−
+
−











(S2)

with K = 30, R0=1.3, εb = 1.0, and σb = 0.8. These bond parameters are slightly different from the 
standard values, and yield a shorter bond length that has been shown to better suppress 
crystallization without significantly altering segmental dynamics (49).

Simulations are performed in the LAMMPS molecular dynamics package (50). We 

simulate the polymers in both a freestanding thin film configuration and a bulk system to compare 


7

their behaviors. For the film simulation, we use a nominally NVT ensemble, but due to the 
presence of free surfaces, the pressure is practically constant at P = 0 within the film. For the bulk 
simulation, we use an NPT ensemble at P = 0. To control the pressure within the film, we use the 
Nose-Hoover thermostat implemented in LAMMPS, while for the bulk simulation, we use the 
Nose-Hoover thermostat/barostat pair, also implemented in LAMMPS.

2.2.2. Analysis for estimating the relaxation time  from simulation

Translational relaxation dynamics are quantified via the self-part of the intermediate scattering 
function, computed at a wavenumber of 7.07, approximately equivalent to the first peak in the 
segmental structure factor. To extract the relaxation time, , from these functions, the long-time 
portion of the time dependence is fit to a Kohlsrauch-Williams-Watts (KWW) stretched 
exponential function, which allows us to smooth and interpolate the data. The relaxation time is 
then determined as the timescale at which this function relaxes to a value of 0.2. This method 
yields a value similar to the zeroth moment of the long-time  process, over the set of stretching 
exponents β encountered in this polymer. These conventions are commonly used in simulation 
literature (51-54). We perform this analysis at a local level by sorting beads into bins that 
correspond to a layer thickness  based on their distance from a free surface. From these data, we 
extract the equilibrium and nonequilibrium glass transition temperatures for each bin. 

2.2.3. Thermal protocols producing extrinsic nonequilibrium effects 

We generate initial randomized configurations using the Packmol package and subject them to a 
high temperature isothermal annealing procedure at a reduced Lennard-Jones temperature T = 1.5 
for varying durations of 5 × 105 τLJ, 2.5 × 106 τLJ, or 5 × 106 τLJ. It is worth noting that the initial 
anneal occurs at a temperature ~4.4 times the experimental Tg of the polymer models in this class, 
which is around T = 0.34 on the 100-second timescale. This initial annealing period serves to 
alleviate unfavorable chain configurations associated with the initial state, similar to what is 
observed in many thermally quenched experimental systems. To track the evolution in chain 
conformational statistics, we compute the mean end-to-end distance of the chains after these 
distinct annealing periods. The root-mean-square end-to-end distance is computed as 20.1 σ, 22.5 
σ, and 23.5 σ after annealing periods of 5 × 105 τLJ, 2.5 × 106 τLJ, and 5 × 106 τLJ, respectively. 
These results suggest that chain conformations are modestly removed from equilibrium for the 
shortest annealing periods and evolve towards it with increasing time. Throughout this paper, we 
use the term “extrinsic nonequilibrium effects” to describe the presence of out-of-equilibrium 
chain conformations. 

In addition to the above protocol, we also present results using 1000-bead polymer chains. 

In this case, we employ the hybrid molecular dynamics / Monte Carlo chain-rebridging protocol 
of Sides et al (55) during the high-temperature chain configurational annealing procedure. This 
protocol allows for a much faster equilibration of chain conformational modes. We anneal the 
system while employing this algorithm for 109 timesteps, which is equivalent to 5 × 106 τLJ. 

As demonstrated by figs. S2 and S3, the presence of extrinsic nonequilibrium affects the 

system dynamics only when intrinsic nonequilibrium effects are also present. Furthermore, their 


8

degree of influence correlates with the strength of the extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, resulting 
in a greater deviation of relaxation time from the equilibrium relaxation time (eq).

2.2.4. Thermal protocols to produce systems without intrinsic nonequilibrium effects 

Unlike extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, intrinsic nonequilibrium effects are governed by 
segmental equilibrium. Our prior work (56) showed that subjecting the system to isothermal 
annealing at a specific temperature T for a duration of 10 times eq is more than enough to establish 
segmental equilibrium within the system at T. Based on this finding, we have devised a thermal 
protocal to introduce intrinsic nonequilbirum effects to the system. But first, we outline the 
protocal for creating systems at segmental equilibrium that are free of intrinsic nonequilibrium 
effects. 

Following the initial chain conformational annealing procedure, we subject the systems 

to thermal quenching from the high temperature using the Predictive Stepwise Quench (PreSQ) 
algorithm, which we developed earlier (56). This algorithm employs an iterative quench-and-
anneal process to gather relaxation data as the targeted in-equilibrium relaxation timescale is 
approached. To achieve segmental equilibrium at a lower temperature T, the system undergoes an 
initial quench from the conformational annealing temperature, with the configurations periodically 
saved at temperatures along the quench. Subsequently, the configuration at temperature T is 
subjected to an isothermal anneal for a duration of 10 eq(T). However, because the simulated 
chains are quite long, these post-quench segmental anneals are generally not long enough to allow 
for re-equilibration of whole chain conformations. Thus, the whole chain conformational state, and 
any associated extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, are largely set by the initial high-temperature 
anneal. Following segmental annealing, dynamical data are collected at each T from a data 
collection run.

2.2.5. Protocol to introduce intrinsic nonequilibrium effects to the system and determination of 
Tg,bulkne, Tg,bulkeq, and Tgne(z)

In our simulations, we set a maximum limit for the segmental annealing time, denoted by tANN,max. 
In our primary simulations, this limit is set to 106 τLJ, where τLJ is the Lennard-Jones time unit. 
Above T*—the temperature at which eq(T) = tANN,max—we subject the system to annealing periods 
of 10eq, which would allow the system to attain segmental equilibrium. Below T*, the system is 
permitted to deviate from segmental equilibrium according to the following protocol. Starting from 
T*, we quench the system to a lower temperature while saving its configurations at regular 
temperature intervals. Each configuration is then subjected to a fixed isothermal annealing period
of tANN,max. Because τeq exceeds tANN,max below T*, T* is assigned to be Tgne. The timescale for the 
nonequilibrium glass transition to occur is tANN,max as it is the relaxation time value ne at Tgne.  

To compare the equilibrium and nonequilibrium Tg’s, we also use tANN,max as the timescale 

for the equilibrium glass transition to occur. Using this criterion, we can similarly determine the 
equilibrium bulk Tg (Tg,bulkeq). To determine the local Tgne at a given depth z, we assign it as the 
temperature at which the local segmental relaxation time at z exceeds tANN,max. 


9

2.2.6. Controlling the effective quench rate by adjusting tANN,max

The effective quench rate for each simulation is controlled by the inverse of the maximum 
isothermal segmental annealing period (1/tANN,max). Our longest-time simulation employs a 
maximum segmental annealing time of 106 τLJ, resulting in the lowest effective quench rate and 
the deepest supercooled state achieved. To investigate the influence of the depth of supercooling 
on the Tgne gradient, we conduct simulations using the PreSQ protocol to maintain equilibrium 
only down to the temperature at which the bulk relaxation time is 104 or 103 τLJ. Correspondingly, 
we lower tANN,max to 105 or 104 τLJ, respectively, which is equivalent to increasing the quench rate 
by a factor of 10 or 100, respectively. These changes lead to a loss of equilibrium at a higher 
temperature, and an increase in Tgne.

2.2.7. Extrapolation of low-temperature behavior and construction of Fig. 3B in the main text

To determine the extrapolated low-T simulation behavior shown in Fig. 3B, we follow the 
procedure below. We compute the extrapolated in-equilibrium eq and nonequilibrium ne data at 
low temperatures for a film supported on a dynamically neutral substrate, which provides a 
reasonable qualitative basis of comparison with our experiments. To accomplish this, we begin 
with the observed equilibrium gradient of eq at the simulated film surface, which has a double-
exponential form:

ln (

𝜏bulk(𝑇)

𝜏eq(𝑧,𝑇)) = 𝐴exp (−

𝑧

𝜉),                      
(S3)

with parameters A = 0.19 and ξ = 3.2, as determined by simulations in the thick film limit. Although 
our simulations involve freestanding films, we can predict the behavior of supported films by 
averaging over a single gradient and truncating it at the second surface. This approach was 
validated in our recent work, which examined equilibrium dynamical gradients in supported films 
on dynamically neutral substrates (57). In this study, we calculate the mean film equilibrium 
relaxation time (h,T) for a film of thickness h by computing the linear arithmetic average over the 
film relaxation time gradient as follows:

𝜏eq(h, 𝑇) =

1

h ∫ 𝜏eq(𝑧, 𝑇)dz,

h
0
(S4)

with eq(z,T) being given by equation S3.  Prior studies have shown that the equilibrium gradient’s 
A and ξ values are insensitive to film thickness and temperature (at low simulation temperatures) 
(15, 29, 32, 58-60). Therefore, we can use a combination of equations S3 and S4 to estimate the 
shift in relaxation time relative to bulk at temperatures beyond those accessed by simulation. The 
only additional requirement is to extrapolate the bulk relaxation time to lower temperatures. To 
accomplish this, we employ the Cooperative Model of Schmidtke et al. (25). As discussed in the 
main text, we previously employed experimental data over a broad range of timescales to show 
that this functional form provides excellent extrapolations of bulk equilibrium relaxation times 
from simulation timescales to experimental timescales (26).

Using the above protocol, we generated the dotted lines for the equilibrium relaxation times 

in Fig. 3B. To obtain the extrapolated nonequilibrium relaxation times (represented by the dashed 


10

lines), we employ a simple extrapolation of the behavior reported in Fig. 2B. In this figure, the Tgne

gradient exhibits a linear regime near the film surface, which recovers the Tgeq gradient at large z
and penetrates more deeply into the film with increasing tANN,max. Therefore, we model the 
nonequilibrium ne gradient as follows:

ln (

𝜏bulk(𝑇)

𝜏ne(𝑧,𝑇)) = {

𝑏 − 𝑚𝑧
𝑧 < 𝑧∗

𝐴 exp (−

𝑧

𝜉)
𝑧 > 𝑧∗,
(S5)

where z* is defined as the intersection point of the low-z linear and high-z exponential regimes of 
ln.(bulk(T) / eq(z,T)). Here, A and ξ employ the values reported above. Fits to the linear regime of 
ne(z) suggests that m ≅ 0.06 is essentially temperature-invariant for this system. The growing 
penetration depth of the linear regime with increasing tANN,max (or bulk) is driven by a growth of 
the parameter b with increasing supercooling at Tgne. However, with only two data points of 
tANN,max (Fig. 2B), we cannot confidently assess the form of this dependence. To provide a leading-
order qualitative extrapolation, we treat b as linear in tANN,max which yields b = −0.069 + 0.058 
ln(tANN,max).

To obtain the extrapolated nonequilibrium behavior, we combine equation S5 with the 

average provided by equation S4, which yields the dashed lines in Fig. 3B. The upward concavity 
of these lines is a direct qualitative consequence of the growth of b with increasing tANN,max
(corresponding to decreasing Tgne). While the assumption of a linear dependence of b on tANN,max
is relevant to the precise quantitative shape of this turnover, its qualitative presence is expected to 
be relatively insensitive to the functional form of this extrapolation.

The black solid line in Fig. 3B is the equilibrium bulk curve (eq vs. 1/T). To obtain the 

other (colored) solid lines, we select 5 points from the dashed lines (nonequilibrium extrapolations) 
for each film thickness. These points are chosen to span +/− one decade in relaxation time around 
the typical experimental 100-second timescale for Tg, with a resolution of ½ decade, which we 
choose to match the typical timescale range and resolution of cooling-rate Tg experiments that have 
yielded similar data. Then, we fit these five points to an Arrhenius functional form, which provides 
a reasonable fit over this limited temperature range. The colored solid lines represent the 
extrapolation of these Arrhenius fits to higher and lower temperatures. 


11

References (1–60)

1.
J. L. Keddie, R. A. L. Jones, R. A. Cory, Interface and Surface Effects on The Glass-
Transition Temperature in Thin Polymer Films. Faraday Discuss. 98, 219-230 (1994).

2.
C. L. Jackson, G. B. McKenna, The glass transition of organic liquids confined to pores. J. 
Non-Cryst. Solids 131-133, 221-224 (1991).

3.
Z. Yang, Y. Fujii, F. K. Lee, C.-H. Lam, O. K. C. Tsui, Glass Transition Dynamics and 
Surface Layer Mobility in Unentangled Polystyrene Films. Science 328, 1676-1679 (2010).

4.
K. Fukao, Y. Miyamoto, Slow dynamics near glass transitions in thin polymer films. Phys. 
Rev. E 64, 011803 (2001).

5.
S. Kawana, R. A. L. Jones, Character of the Glass Transition in Thin Supported Polymer 
Films. Phys. Rev. E 63, 021501 (2001).

6.
T. Miyazaki, K. Nishida, T. Kanaya, Contraction and reexpansion of polymer thin films. 
Phys. Rev. E 69, 022801 (2004).

7.
S. Gao, Y. P. Koh, S. L. Simon, Calorimetric Glass Transition of Single Polystyrene 
Ultrathin Films. Macromolecules 46, 562-570 (2013).

8.
Y. Zhou, S. T. Milner, Short-Time Dynamics Reveals Tg Suppression in Simulated 
Polystyrene Thin Films. Macromolecules 50, 5599-5610 (2017).

9.
W. Zhang, F. W. Starr, J. F. Douglas, Activation free energy gradient controls interfacial 
mobility gradient in thin polymer films. J. Chem. Phys. 155, 174901 (2021).

10.
V. M. Boucher, D. Cangialosi, A. Alegria, J. Colmenero, Enthalpy Recovery in Nanometer 
to Micrometer Thick Polystyrene Films. Macromolecules 45, 5296-5306 (2012).

11.
R. R. Baglay, C. B. Roth, Local glass transition temperature Tg(z) of polystyrene next to 
different polymers: Hard vs. soft confinement. J. Chem. Phys. 146, 203307 (2017).

12.
H. Yuan, J. Yan, P. Gao, S. K. Kumar, O. K. C. Tsui, Microscale mobile surface double 
layer in a glassy polymer. Sci. Adv. 8, eabq5295 (2022).

13.
W. Kob, S. Roldán-Vargas, L. Berthier, Non-monotonic temperature evolution of dynamic 
correlations in glass-forming liquids. Nat. Phys. 8, 164-167 (2012).

14.
G. M. Hocky, L. Berthier, W. Kob, D. R. Reichman, Crossovers in the dynamics of 
supercooled liquids probed by an amorphous wall. Phys. Rev. E 89, 052311 (2014).

15.
K. S. Schweizer, D. S. Simmons, Progress towards a phenomenological picture and 
theoretical understanding of glassy dynamics and vitrification near interfaces and under 
nanoconfinement. J. Chem. Phys. 151, 240901 (2019).

16.
Z. Hao et al., Mobility gradients yield rubbery surfaces on top of polymer glasses. Nature
596, 372-376 (2021).

17.
Y. Li et al., Surface diffusion in glasses of rod-like molecules posaconazole and 
itraconazole: effect of interfacial molecular alignment and bulk penetration. Soft Matter
16, 5062 (2020).

18.
Q. Zhang, W. Li, K. Qiao, Y. Han, Surface premelting and melting of colloidal glasses. 
Sci. Adv. 9, eadf1101 (2023).

19.
P. G. Santangelo, C. M. Roland, Molecular weight dependance of fragility in polystyrene. 
Macromolecules 31, 4581-4585 (1998).

20.
R. D. Priestley, D. Cangialosi, S. Napolitano, On the equivalence between the 
thermodynamic and dynamic measurements of the glass transition in confined polymers. 
J. Non-Cryst. Solids 407, 288-295 (2015).


12

21.
M. D. Ediger, J. A. Forrest, Dynamics near Free Surfaces and the Glass Transition in Thin 
Polymer Films: A View to the Future. Macromolecules 47, 471-478 (2014).

22.
B. Zuo et al., Depth Profile of the Segmental Dynamics at a Poly(methyl methacrylate) 
Film Surface. Soft Matter 9, 9376-9384 (2013).

23.
C. Zhang et al., Chemical Structure Dependence of Surface Layer Thickness on Polymer 
Films. J. Phys. Chem. C 124, 12448-12456 (2020).

24.
K. Paeng, S. F. Swallen, M. D. Ediger, Direct Measurement of Molecular Motion in 
Freestanding Polystyrene Thin Films. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 8444-8447 (2011).

25.
B. Schmidtke, M. Hofmann, A. Lichtinger, E. A. Rössler, Temperature Dependence of the 
Segmental Relaxation Time of Polymers Revisited. Macromolecules 48, 3005-3013 
(2015).

26.
J.-H. Hung, T. K. Patra, D. S. Simmons, Forecasting the Experimental Glass Transition 
from Short Time Relaxation Data. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 544, 120205 (2020).

27.
Z. Fakhraai, J. A. Forrest, Probing slow dynamics in supported thin polymer films. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 95, 025701 (2005).

28.
Y. Zhang et al., Long-range correlated dynamics in ultrathin molecular glass films. J. 
Chem. Phys. 145, 114502 (2016).

29.
D. Diaz-Vela, J.-H. Hung, D. S. Simmons, Temperature-Independent Rescaling of the 
Local Activation Barrier Drives Free Surface Nanoconfinement Effects on Segmental-
Scale Translational Dynamics near Tg. ACS Macro Lett. 7, 1295-1301 (2018).

30.
J. E. Pye, C. B. Roth, Two Simultaneous Mechanisms Causing Glass Transition 
Temperature Reductions in High Molecular Weight Freestanding Polymer Films as 
Measured by Transmission Ellipsometry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 235701 (2011).

31.
J. H. Mangalara, M. D. Marvin, D. S. Simmons, Three-Layer Model for the Emergence of 
Ultrastable Glasses from the Surfaces of Supercooled Liquids. J. Phys. Chem. B 120, 4861-
4865 (2016).

32.
A. D. Phan, K. S. Schweizer, Theory of the spatial transfer of interface-nucleated changes 
of dynamical constraints and its consequences in glass-forming films. J. Chem. Phys. 150, 
044508 (2019).

33.
R. R. Baglay, C. B. Roth, Communication: Experimentally Determined Profile of Local 
Glass Transition Temperature across a Glassy-Rubbery Polymer Interface with a Tg 
Difference of 80 K. J. Chem. Phys. 143, 111101 (2015).

34.
R. J. Lang, W. L. Merling, D. S. Simmons, Combined Dependence of Nanoconfined Tg on 
Interfacial Energy and Softness of Confinement. ACS Macro Lett. 3, 758-762 (2014).

35.
L. Wang et al., Fabrication of polymer brush surfaces with highly-ordered perfluoroalkyl 
side groups at the brush end and their antibiofouling properties. J. Mater. Chem. B 3, 4388-
4400 (2015).

36.
J. N. Hoskins, S. M. Grayson, Synthesis and Degradation Behavior of Cyclic Poly(ε-
caprolactone). Macromolecules 42, 6406-6413 (2009).

37.
L. Zhang, R. Elupula, S. M. Grayson, J. M. Torkelson, Major Impact of Cyclic Chain 
Topology on the Tg‑Confinement Effect of Supported Thin Films of Polystyrene. 
Macromolecules 49, 257-268 (2016).

38.
J. A. Opsteen, J. C. M. van Hest, Modular Synthesis of ABC Type Block Copolymers by 
“Click” Chemistry. J. Polym. Sci. A Polym. Chem. 45, 2913-2924 (2007).


13

39.
C. J. Duxbury, D. Cummins, A. Heise, Glaser Coupling of Polymers: Side-Reaction in 
Huisgens “Click” Coupling Reaction and Opportunity for Polymers with Focal Diacetylene 
Units in Combination with ATRP. J. Polym. Sci. A Polym. Chem. 47, 3795-3802 (2009).

40.
K. Matyjaszewski, Y. Nakagawa, S. G. Gaynor, Synthesis of Well-Defined Azido and 
Amino End-Functionalized Polystyrene by Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization. 
Macromol. Rapid Commun. 18, 1057-1066 (2003).

41.
S. Gagliardi et al., On the Difference in Scattering Behavior of Cyclic and Linear Polymers 
in Bulk. J. Chem. Phys. 122, 064904 (2005).

42.
G. M. Whitesides, P. E. Laibinis, Wet chemical approaches to the characterization of 
organic surfaces: self-assembled monolayers, wetting, and the physical-organic chemistry 
of the solid-liquid interface. Langmuir 6, 87-96 (1990).

43.
J. Xu et al., Probing the Utmost Distance of Polymer Dynamics Suppression by a Substrate 
by Investigating the Diffusion of Fluorinated Tracer-Labeled Polymer Chains. 
Macromolecules 50, 5905-5913 (2017).

44.
Y. Tateishi et al., Local conformation of poly(methyl methacrylate) at nitrogen and water 
interfaces. Polym. Chem. 1, 303-311 (2010).

45.
R. F. Roberts, D. L. Allara, C. A. Pryde, D. N. E. Buchanan, N. D. Hobbins, Mean free 
path for inelastic scattering of 1.2 kev electrons in thin poly(methylmethacrylate) films. 
Surf Interface Anal 2, 5-10 (1980).

46.
R. D. van de Grampel et al., Surface studies of partially fluorinated polymethacrylates: a 
combined XPS and LEIS analysis. Prog. Org. Coat. 45, 273-279 (2002).

47.
K. Dalnoki-Veress, J. A. Forrest, C. Murray, C. Gigault, J. R. Dutcher, Molecular weight 
dependence of reductions in the glass transition temperature of thin, freely standing 
polymer films. Phys. Rev. E 63, 031801 (2001).

48.
G. S. Grest, K. Kremer, Molecular dynamics simulation for polymers in the presence of a 
heat bath. Phys. Rev. A 33, 3628-3631 (1986).

49.
M. E. Mackura, D. S. Simmons, Enhancing heterogenous crystallization resistance in a 
bead-spring polymer model by modifying bond length. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 52, 
134-140 (2014).

50.
S. Plimpton, Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics. J. Comput. 
Phys. 117, 1-19 (1995).

51.
J.-H. Hung, J. H. Mangalara, D. S. Simmons, Heterogeneous Rouse Model Predicts 
Polymer Chain Translational Normal Mode Decoupling. Macromolecules 51, 2887-2898 
(2018).

52.
R. J. Lang, D. S. Simmons, Interfacial Dynamic Length Scales in the Glass Transition of a 
Model Freestanding Polymer Film and Their Connection to Cooperative Motion. 
Macromolecules 46, 9818-9825 (2013).

53.
P. Z. Hanakata, J. F. Douglas, F. W. Starr, Local variation of fragility and glass transition 
temperature of ultra-thin supported polymer films. J. Chem. Phys. 137, 244901 (2012).

54.
T. Rahman, D. S. Simmons, Near-Substrate Gradients in Chain Relaxation and Viscosity 
in a Model Low-Molecular Weight Polymer. Macromolecules 54, 5935-5949 (2021).

55.
S. W. Sides, G. S. Grest, M. J. Stevens, S. J. Plimpton, Effect of end-tethered polymers on 
surface adhesion of glassy polymers. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 42, 199-208 (2004).

56.
J.-H. Hung, T. K. Patra, V. Meenakshisundaram, J. H. Mangalara, D. S. Simmons, 
Universal localization transition accompanying glass formation: insights from efficient 


14

molecular dynamics simulations of diverse supercooled liquids. Soft Matter 15, 1223-1242 
(2019).

57.
A. Ghanekarade, D. S. Simmons, Glass formation and dynamics of model polymer films 
with one versus two active interfaces. Soft Matter 19, 8413-8422 (2023).

58.
A. D. Phan, K. S. Schweizer, Influence of Longer Range Transfer of Vapor Interface 
Modified Caging Constraints on the Spatially Heterogeneous Dynamics of Glass-Forming 
Liquids. Macromolecules 52, 5192-5206 (2019).

59.
D. Diaz Vela, A. Ghanekarade, D. S. Simmons, Probing the Metrology and Chemistry 
Dependences of the Onset Condition of Strong “Nanoconfinement” Effects on Dynamics. 
Macromolecules 53, 4158-4171 (2020).

60.
A. Ghanekarade, A. D. Phan, K. S. Schweizer, D. S. Simmons, Nature of dynamic 
gradients, glass formation, and collective effects in ultrathin freestanding films. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118, e2104398118 (2021).


15

Supplementary Figures and Tables

Fig. S1. Experimental depth profiles Tgne(z) taken at the surface of l-PMMA polymers with 
degrees of polymerization of 279, 225, 173, and 129. Dashed lines are the best fits to a linear 
gradient.


16

Fig. S2. Simulated surface relaxation times (z = 0.4375 σ) with longer initial chain 
conformational annealing periods but same maximum segmental annealing time—
equivalent of Fig. 2. The orange points correspond to those shown in the main text, while the 
other data sets correspond to longer annealing periods. The solid black curves represent fits to the 
equilibrium data, as described in Supplementary Simulation Methods. The straight lines in colors 
matching the data sets are Arrhenius fits to the data deviating from the equilibrium curve. 
Systematic downward deviations of these data from the equilibrium curve at large  indicate 
nonequilibrium effects, which are not removed by longer chain conformational annealing. The 
dashed line represents the equilibrium line for bulk polymer.

2

3

4

5

6

7

2.5
3
3.5
4

log τ(z = 0.4375σ)

1/T

5.0E5

2.5E6

5.0E6
(c)

5x105

2.5x106

5x106

-1

0

1

2

3

0.5
1.5
2.5

log τ(z

1/T

2.1875
3.0625
Midfilm

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.5
1.5
2.5

log τ(z = 0.4375σ)

1/T

5

4

3

106

105

104

-1

0

1

2

3

0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5

log τ(z

1/T

Series14
Series15

(a)

3.0625
Midfilm


17

Fig. S3. Figure equivalent to Fig. 2, after subjecting the system to a highly efficient chain-
rebridging annealing protocol bringing chain configurations closer to equilibrium. 
Logarithmic relaxation time (in units of Lennard-Jones time τLJ) plotted against reciprocal 
temperature (symbols) for a 1000-bead chain film after an equivalent high-temperature annealing 
time of 5  106 τLJ or longer, at various distances from the free surface (indicated in the legend). 
The solid lines represent fits to the equilibrium data with segmental annealing times ≤ 105 τLJ, as 
described in Supplementary Simulation Method. Systematic downward deviations of the data from 
the equilibrium solid lines near the surface at large  indicate nonequilibrium effects, which are 
not eliminated by improving the chain configurations towards equilibrium with the rebridging 
protocol.

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5

log(τ)

1/T

0.4375
1.3125
2.1875
3.0625
Midfilm


18

Fig. S4. Schematic illustrations of the synthetic route for fluoro-labeled l-and c-PMMA. The 
reagents and reaction conditions used in various steps of the process are: (i) THF, TEA, BIBB, 
273 K; (ii) CuBr2, PMDETA, MMA, 353 K; (iii) CuBr2, PMDETA, MMA (a little), FMA, BTF, 
385 K; (iv) a. NaN3, DMF, 298 K; b. TBAF, THF, 298 K; (v) CuBr, PMDETA, toluene, high 
dilution, 298 K. The intermediate products are labeled 1-6, with product 5 being l-PMMAm-b-
FMAn and product 6 being c-PMMAm-b-FMAn.


19

Fig. S5. Representative characterization data of the l- and c-PMMA polymers. (A) FTIR 
spectra (B) 1H NMR spectra and (C) GPC spectra. The polymers are l- and c-PMMA173-b-FMA1.


20

Fig. S6. Schematic and data illustrating our method of measuring the depth profile Tgne(z).
(a) This schematic illustrates the investigation depths of the WCA, SFG and XPS techniques used 
in this study, along with the chemical structures of c-PMMAm-b-FMAn. (B) & (C) Temperature 
dependences of the WCA and I2910/I2950 (by SFG), and the F/C ratio (by XPS) of c-PMMA173-b-
FMA1 bulk films. The data were obtained at various take-off angles, which correspond to different
probe depths, z. 

IR

Substrate

Vis

SFG

1.0 nm 

2.3 nm 

4.5 nm 

7.8 nm 

9.0 nm 

XPS
Contact angle

15 °

30 °
60 °

90 °

A

B

C

m

O
O
O

7

O

F
F

F F

F

n

l-PMMAm-b-FMAn

O
O

m

O
O

N
N
N

n

O

O

7

F
F

F F
F

c-PMMAm-b-FMAn

Or


21

Fig. S7. Representative SFG spectra obtained at various temperatures across Tg. ssp SFG 
spectra of c-PMMA173-b-FMA1 obtained at various temperatures, as indicated. The probe depth 
was set at 1.0 nm, where the corresponding Tg is 355.9 K, as shown in Fig. 1.


22

Fig. S8. Determination of mean-film Tgne using ellipsometric data. Evolution of the
ellipsometric angle, Delta, with temperature for a 106-nm-thick c-PMMA173 film supported on 
silicon, using a heating scheme that includes a 24-h waiting time after each temperature change.
Error bars are smaller than the size of the symbol.


23

Table S1. Raw results of simulated density data as a function of reduced Lennard-Jones 
temperature.

Distance z from the surface

Temp
0.4375
1.3125
2.1875
3.0625
3.9375
4.8125
5.6875
6.5625
7.4375
8.3125
9.1875
10.0625

1.600
0.680
0.900
0.961
0.971
0.973
0.973
0.974
0.974
0.974
0.974
0.974
0.972

1.580
0.722
0.917
0.968
0.975
0.979
0.978
0.977
0.977
0.979
0.978
0.977
0.976

1.560
0.699
0.912
0.969
0.981
0.980
0.984
0.982
0.981
0.981
0.981
0.981
0.982

1.540
0.680
0.912
0.972
0.985
0.986
0.988
0.987
0.986
0.986
0.987
0.985
0.984

1.520
0.733
0.934
0.984
0.990
0.992
0.991
0.989
0.990
0.991
0.990
0.991
0.989

1.500
0.705
0.925
0.984
0.993
0.995
0.996
0.997
0.996
0.994
0.996
0.996
0.993

1.480
0.757
0.948
0.992
0.999
0.999
1.000
0.999
0.999
1.002
1.001
0.999
0.999

1.460
0.746
0.954
0.996
1.003
1.004
1.004
1.004
1.003
1.004
1.001
1.004
1.002

1.341
0.783
0.991
1.026
1.029
1.030
1.027
1.033
1.029
1.031
1.027
1.029
1.026

1.223
0.799
1.016
1.056
1.058
1.054
1.055
1.058
1.052
1.058
1.056
1.056
1.055

1.104
0.835
1.053
1.081
1.081
1.083
1.081
1.082
1.081
1.082
1.079
1.078
1.089

0.986
0.894
1.088
1.106
1.109
1.108
1.110
1.112
1.113
1.107
1.109
1.108
1.109

0.867
0.961
1.120
1.136
1.137
1.140
1.137
1.135
1.135
1.139
1.136
1.142
1.132

0.749
1.018
1.151
1.166
1.163
1.169
1.166
1.163
1.162
1.166
1.164
1.165
1.163

0.630
1.064
1.178
1.195
1.200
1.190
1.195
1.188
1.198
1.196
1.195
1.192
1.201

0.611
1.087
1.186
1.198
1.201
1.193
1.202
1.199
1.201
1.197
1.196
1.201
1.196

0.591
1.067
1.185
1.205
1.205
1.201
1.202
1.208
1.204
1.209
1.202
1.202
1.205

0.571
1.041
1.196
1.210
1.208
1.206
1.214
1.206
1.208
1.210
1.209
1.207
1.209

0.552
1.116
1.203
1.211
1.214
1.217
1.216
1.211
1.214
1.213
1.213
1.216
1.216

0.532
1.109
1.206
1.217
1.216
1.221
1.220
1.219
1.215
1.221
1.218
1.218
1.220

0.512
1.111
1.207
1.222
1.230
1.220
1.224
1.221
1.223
1.226
1.228
1.227
1.222

0.503
1.118
1.214
1.225
1.226
1.227
1.228
1.223
1.229
1.226
1.229
1.224
1.228

0.494
1.159
1.221
1.229
1.228
1.233
1.221
1.232
1.225
1.229
1.227
1.231
1.230

0.485
1.161
1.222
1.229
1.234
1.233
1.230
1.230
1.233
1.229
1.232
1.235
1.229

0.476
1.160
1.222
1.233
1.230
1.235
1.238
1.234
1.233
1.235
1.233
1.233
1.234

0.467
1.151
1.226
1.237
1.238
1.239
1.234
1.234
1.238
1.235
1.235
1.237
1.235

0.458
1.149
1.228
1.238
1.239
1.236
1.237
1.243
1.237
1.240
1.236
1.237
1.240

0.449
1.144
1.231
1.241
1.239
1.241
1.239
1.239
1.244
1.237
1.238
1.240
1.242

0.446
1.134
1.229
1.240
1.242
1.240
1.243
1.243
1.241
1.243
1.242
1.239
1.241

0.442
1.159
1.234
1.241
1.246
1.241
1.240
1.244
1.244
1.240
1.247
1.241
1.245

0.438
1.155
1.230
1.245
1.245
1.246
1.243
1.247
1.240
1.246
1.244
1.243
1.242

0.435
1.205
1.236
1.246
1.248
1.247
1.247
1.243
1.243
1.244
1.244
1.248
1.245

0.431
1.210
1.238
1.246
1.245
1.245
1.250
1.251
1.244
1.246
1.246
1.247
1.245

0.427
1.205
1.239
1.249
1.248
1.248
1.245
1.250
1.247
1.245
1.244
1.256
1.243

0.425
1.208
1.237
1.251
1.248
1.248
1.251
1.248
1.246
1.247
1.246
1.252
1.244

0.422
1.202
1.238
1.251
1.246
1.250
1.249
1.246
1.247
1.249
1.250
1.251
1.244

0.419
1.201
1.241
1.248
1.252
1.252
1.248
1.249
1.245
1.249
1.252
1.250
1.249

0.417
1.204
1.242
1.249
1.253
1.249
1.250
1.249
1.253
1.247
1.250
1.249
1.251

0.414
1.209
1.240
1.251
1.253
1.253
1.249
1.252
1.249
1.249
1.248
1.251
1.249

0.412
1.193
1.242
1.251
1.256
1.249
1.253
1.250
1.249
1.253
1.250
1.254
1.249

0.409
1.197
1.243
1.254
1.246
1.254
1.252
1.251
1.254
1.253
1.253
1.255
1.248

0.407
1.196
1.242
1.252
1.254
1.253
1.253
1.253
1.254
1.250
1.256
1.252
1.250

0.390
1.192
1.244
1.255
1.259
1.256
1.261
1.261
1.250
1.262
1.257
1.255
1.256

0.380
1.205
1.249
1.260
1.266
1.264
1.263
1.253
1.256
1.259
1.263
1.258
1.251

0.370
1.263
1.259
1.265
1.275
1.265
1.267
1.263
1.256
1.243
1.273
1.250
1.259

0.360
1.186
1.256
1.266
1.259
1.271
1.265
1.269
1.250
1.266
1.257
1.270
1.248

0.350
1.255
1.263
1.264
1.275
1.269
1.275
1.255
1.258
1.262
1.267
1.260
1.253

0.340
1.256
1.263
1.265
1.274
1.278
1.274
1.249
1.265
1.257
1.271
1.257
1.265

0.330
1.260
1.264
1.271
1.283
1.275
1.263
1.261
1.266
1.257
1.269
1.262
1.261

0.320
1.249
1.276
1.272
1.276
1.278
1.262
1.263
1.268
1.262
1.278
1.253
1.274

0.310
1.243
1.266
1.274
1.271
1.270
1.263
1.274
1.270
1.256
1.261
1.269
1.265

0.300
1.251
1.278
1.279
1.261
1.274
1.265
1.282
1.258
1.258
1.262
1.279
1.269

0.290
1.229
1.282
1.275
1.269
1.263
1.275
1.268
1.276
1.258
1.276
1.270
1.272

0.280
1.247
1.278
1.282
1.265
1.271
1.273
1.271
1.267
1.258
1.269
1.284
1.263

0.270
1.248
1.278
1.282
1.262
1.281
1.270
1.272
1.274
1.258
1.274
1.278
1.271

0.260
1.231
1.275
1.281
1.269
1.275
1.275
1.273
1.273
1.260
1.268
1.280
1.271

0.240
1.250
1.275
1.284
1.264
1.278
1.275
1.270
1.271
1.269
1.262
1.284
1.264

0.230
1.233
1.269
1.291
1.262
1.278
1.268
1.278
1.279
1.258
1.272
1.288
1.269

 


24

Table S2. Summary of fit results for Tgne (z) data in Fig. 1 using equation S1.

Sample
Tg,bulkne

(K)
Tgne (0) (K)
ht,0 (nm)
ht (nm)
[Tg,bulkne – Tgne (0)] / 

[ht – ht,0] (K/nm)

c-PMMA129
387.1
352.1 ± 2.0
1.0 ± 0.2
7.6 ± 0.7
5.32 ± 0.31

c-PMMA173
387.5
356.0 ± 2.0
1.5 ± 0.2
7.7 ± 0.8
5.13 ± 0.43

c-PMMA225
388.0
362.8 ± 1.5
1.6 ± 0.2
7.9 ± 0.8
4.00 ± 0.21

c-PMMA279
388.0
369.9 ± 1.5
1.8 ± 0.2
7.8 ± 0.8
2.99 ± 0.10


25

Table S3. Material characteristics of the polymers used in this experiment.

Sample
Mn (kg/mol)
PDI
Tg,bulkne 
Rg (nm)

c-PMMA129-b-FMA1
12.9
1.20
393.8
2.26

c-PMMA173-b-FMA1
17.3
1.18
393.4
2.62

c-PMMA225-b-FMA2
22.5
1.16
393.8
2.99

c-PMMA279-b-FMA2
27.9
1.18
394.2
3.33

l-PMMA129-b-FMA1
12.9
1.18
388.9
3.20

l-PMMA173-b-FMA1
17.3
1.16
392.1
3.71

l-PMMA225-b-FMA1
22.5
1.17
393.9
4.23

l-PMMA279-b-FMA1
27.9
1.15
393.9
4.71


