1

Deep Learning-based Kinetic Analysis in Paper-based Analytical Cartridges 

Integrated with Field-effect Transistors

Hyun-June Jang1,2‡, Hyou-Arm Joung3‡, Artem Goncharov3, Anastasia Gant Kanegusuku4, Clarence W. Chan5, 

Kiang-Teck Jerry Yeo5,6, Wen Zhuang1,2, Aydogan Ozcan3,7,8,9*, Junhong Chen1,2*

1Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

2Chemical Sciences and Engineering Division, Physical Sciences and Engineering Directorate, Argonne National 

Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA

3Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

4Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153

5Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

6Pritzker School of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

7Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

8California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

9Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

‡These authors contributed equally to this work

*Correspondence: ozcan@ucla.edu, junhongchen@uchicago.edu

Keywords: FET Biosensors, Paper Cartridge, Dry Chemistry, Deep Learning, Cholesterol


2

Summary

This study explores the fusion of a field-effect transistor (FET), a paper-based analytical cartridge, and the 

computational power of deep learning (DL) for quantitative biosensing via kinetic analyses. The FET sensors 

address the low sensitivity challenge observed in paper analytical devices, enabling electrical measurements 

with kinetic data. The paper-based cartridge eliminates the need for surface chemistry required in FET sensors, 

ensuring economical operation (cost < $0.15/test). The DL analysis mitigates chronic challenges of FET 

biosensors such as sample matrix interference, by leveraging kinetic data from target-specific bioreactions. In 

our proof-of-concept demonstration, our DL-based analyses showcased a coefficient of variation of < 6.46% and 

a decent concentration measurement correlation with an r2 value of > 0.976 for cholesterol testing when blindly 

compared to results obtained from a CLIA-certified clinical laboratory. These integrated technologies can create 

a new generation of FET-based biosensors, potentially transforming point-of-care diagnostics and at-home 

testing through enhanced accessibility, ease-of-use, and accuracy.


3

INTRODUCTION

The landscape of scientific research and technological innovation has witnessed an extraordinary 

convergence of diverse disciplines, fostering profound advancements across an extensive spectrum of domains.

In this dynamic milieu, the emergence of machine learning methodologies heralds a transformative epoch that 

fundamentally reshapes the contours of medical diagnostics. What is particularly remarkable is the far-reaching 

impact of this paradigm shift, transcending customary boundaries of laboratory environments to encompass at-

home testing, point-of-care (POC) diagnostics, and a broad array of real-world applications. Advanced machine 

learning methods such as neural networks have been recently emerging in clinical diagnostics with applications 

in histology, biosensing technologies, and serodiagnosis of cardiovascular diseases, among others.1-4 Neural 

networks can learn from highly multiplexed and non-linear responses of POC sensors and accurately quantify 

analyte concentrations despite cartridge-to-cartridge variations and the noise present in biological samples (e.g.,

matrix effect).5,6

Traditional biomedical disciplines have extensively relied on the foundational principles of optical 

detection techniques and bioimaging, capturing the light signals associated with targeted biomarkers.7-9 Real-

time bio-signal measurements and bioimaging technologies offer distinct advantages, including internal quality

control through data-driven image analysis1, improved precision and accuracy2, 4-5, and expedited detection 

capabilities.9 Despite their elegance, optical methodologies are partially encumbered by inherent limitations, 

particularly in the context of POC and at-home testing scenarios. Some of these limitations include high reagent 

costs and the need for trained experts/users, instigating an exploration of innovative alternatives in diagnostic 

platforms.10

Field-effect transistors (FETs), originally designed for electronic circuitry, have undergone a remarkable 

evolution, transforming from conventional electronic components into highly sensitive transducers capable of 

real-time and label-free detection of a diverse array of analytes with unparalleled sensitivity.11 Despite decades 

of research, FET-based biosensors remain in the proof-of-concept stage, lacking successful market products.12,13

The realization of their commercial potential, however, has been hindered by a myriad of challenges: batch 

variation (i.e., reproducibility)14, sample matrix effects10, and packing requirements associated with wet 

environments on the sensing surface15, as well as susceptibility to risks such as leakage and contamination of 


4

the sensing zone16. Recently, a set of FET-based sensor designs has exhibited promising results in overcoming 

matrix effects and batch variations in sensing metal ions14,17,18 by leveraging machine learning. However, these 

approaches have not been extended to sensing within complex testing environments, such as human blood or 

plasma, which includes divergent patient-specific proteins, cellular compositions, and ion variations.

While the conventional real-time FET detection captures a snapshot of a bioreaction via monitoring 

continuous changes in drain current (ID) at a fixed gate voltage (VG) application or threshold voltage (Vth), its 

advantages in terms of accuracy and precision have not been thoroughly elucidated as the gate-dependence of 

the kinetic data is not captured. Additionally, these FET biosensors mandate the incorporation of additional 

reagent control mechanisms to address issues related to the Debye length19,20 for physiological media (e.g.,

capture-release method21 associated with reactions, washing, and measurements under controlled buffers),

often facilitated through microfluidic systems for better usability. However, the fabrication of such microfluidic 

channels frequently encounters challenges, including time-consuming and labor-intensive manufacturing 

processes, diminished yield and the intricate nature of configuring microfluidic setups involving pumps and 

valves.22-24 These constraints can complicate operations, contradicting the convenient and straightforward use 

of POC diagnostic tools, such as lateral-flow assays (LFAs).24-25

In this manuscript, we embark on an exploration of the synergism between FET biosensors, paper-based 

analytical devices, and the computational power of deep learning (DL). We first demonstrate the integration of

a porous sensing membrane (PSM), a key component of LFAs, with FET sensors. The platform features a one-

step operation for sample injection, a disposable cartridge for introducing plasma samples (cost < $0.15 per test), 

and reusable FET sensors. The PSM incorporates dried sensing components that produce electroactive 

enzymatic signals, such as protons specific to the target biomarkers in plasma. The FET sensor characterizes 

all-encompassing, target-specific kinetic data occurring within the cartridge through FET transfer curves. Finally, 

the DL-based analysis of the obtained kinetic data effectively addresses issues related to sample matrix effects 

and varying rates of chemical reactions from test-to-test, and accurately quantifies the target analyte 

concentration from the captured data.
We showcased a proof-of-concept operation of this platform for 

cholesterol testing with patient plasma. Cholesterol concentrations blindly predicted by DL exhibited a correlation 


5

(r2) of > 0.976, with a coefficient of variation (CV) of < 6.42%, when blindly compared against results obtained 

from a CLIA-certified clinical laboratory for the same samples.

RESULTS 

Operating Principle. Our innovative diagnostic platform employs a new dry chemistry approach for FET 

biosensors.
The paper analytical cartridge, housing the desiccated sensing components in the PSM, is 

electrically connected to the FET (Figure 1a). This synergetic integration offers several advantages: 1) imposing 

higher sensitivity to paper analytical devices empowered by electrical measurements, 2) enabling the 

measurement of kinetic data, 3) eliminating the complexities associated with laborious wet chemistry procedures 

for functionalizing biomolecules on the FET sensing surface, 4) removing the need for traditional microfluidic 

systems to regulate reagents, 5) facilitating cost-effective testing (~$0.15 per cartridge, Table S1), 6) mitigating

sample matrix effects, 7) achieving easy miniaturization, and 8) ensuring a prolonged shelf-life (the shelf-life of 

LFAs is up to 2 years25). 

As a proof-of-concept demonstration for our diagnostic approach, we selected cholesterol, a standard 

biomarker in annual blood testing at clinics. The PSM was desiccated with enzymes such as cholesterol esterase 

(COE), cholesterol oxidase (COx), and peroxidase (POx), along with surfactants, stabilizers, and buffers, 

eliminating the need for additional functionalization steps (Figure 1b). An ion-sensitive sensing electrode (SE), 

such as indium-tin-oxide (ITO), was positioned beneath the PSM within the cartridge, with ~50 µm of physical 

spacing. Injecting 20 µL of plasma into the cartridge's inlet established a connection between the ITO and the 

FET gate (Figure 1a). Once the plasma contacted the PSM, surfactants broke down lipoproteins, and a series 

of enzymatic reactions produced protons released into the physical spaces between the PSM and ITO. The 

real-time release of protons resulting from a series of enzymatic reactions specific to the cholesterol 

concentration in the plasma was continuously recorded in FET transfer curves repeatedly measured over 5 

minutes (Figure 1c). These transfer curves were transformed into a 2D heatmap, encapsulating all enzymatic 

kinetic details characterized in the sum of transfer curves. The DL analysis further optimized the subset of kinetic 

signals carrying concentration-specific data to quantify cholesterol concentrations in patient plasma samples 

(Figure 1c).


6

Proton Specificity. Proton was the target signal of interest in response to cholesterol. The intrinsic ITO

exhibited a Nernstian response of 52.8 mV/pH with an r2 of 0.997 and CV < 1.3% (Figure S1a) without any 

changes in the transconductance (Gm) value over all pH ranges (Figure S1b). Due to the significantly higher 

input impedance of the FET compared with that of an ITO remote gate module26-28, there were no changes in Vth

with increasing contact areas as a result of increasing media volume size (from 20 to 100 µL) on the ITO surface

(Figure S1c). An insignificant drift of 8 µV/min, measured over 30 minutes (Figure S1d), suggested that the ITO 

sensing electrode was highly stable for translating enzymatic reactions specifically.

FET Data.
Upon injecting human plasma into the cartridge, distinct real-time signal patterns were

observed in response to varying cholesterol levels, as indicated by changes in the Vth (∆Vth) relative to the Vth of 

lipoprotein-free cholesterol plasma (Figure 2a). The protons generated by each electroactive enzymatic reaction 

decreased Vth levels of n-type FETs due to the positive surface potentials applied on the ITO from protons. The 

initial Vth of the cartridges was largely influenced by the pH and ion concentration of human plasma, as well as 

batch variations in cartridges, along with diverse proteins and components in plasma that could cause non-

specific binding on the ITO surface.  Despite injections of different plasma samples, the initial Vth values tended

to overlap (Figure 2a). This could be attributed to our cartridge design, which incorporated a ~50 µm air gap 

between the PSM and the ITO electrode (inset of Figure 2a). The presence of this air gap played a pivotal role 

in facilitating the mixing process between the PSM and plasma samples. It ensured that the mixing process 

occurred before the original plasma came into direct contact with the ITO electrode (inset of Figure 2a). As a 

result, any sample matrix effects were significantly diluted by the potent buffer components that were already 

desiccated within the PSM. Consequently, the PSM efficiently transmitted purified electroenzymatic signals to 

the ITO surface.

Figure 2b further supports the fluidic dynamics in the cartridge described above by demonstrating the 

controlled initial Vth of each cartridge after the injection of different random human plasma samples using various 

buffer solutions, such as phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), piperazine-N,N′-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid) (PIPES), 

and PIPES/PBS (5:5 ratio), dried onto identical PSMs, with the remaining PSM components being consistent.

Small variations in the initial Vth levels are shown for each group of cartridges dried with PBS, PIPES/PBS, and 

PIPES (CV < 10%). Even lipoprotein-free plasma samples with a pH of 5 tend to be controlled by the buffer 


7

solution in the PSM of the cartridge (Figure 2b). For subsequent experiments, we selected PBS (pH 7.4) as the 

buffer component for the PSM to minimize the pH disparity between plasma (pH 7.35 to 7.45) and the dried 

buffers.

We further optimized the concentrations of COE, COx, and POx for the PSM by evaluating correlations 

between the enzyme concentrations and the cholesterol signals (Figure S2).
Concentrations of enzymes 

exceeding 200 U/mL displayed saturated correlations, leading us to choose 300 U/mL enzyme concentrations 

for COE, COx, and POx in all subsequent experiments.
However, without the POx enzyme, no correlative 

sensing signals were obtained, implying that POx played a critical role in producing electroactive enzymatic 

signals such as protons (Figure S3). It is noted that the enzyme solutions lacked long-term shelf life without 

drying them on the PSM, as shown by a large drift in the initial Vth levels of the enzyme solution over time (Figure 

S4).

We further discovered that the use of bovine serum albumin (BSA) coating on the ITO electrode 

significantly mitigated sample matrix effects without compromising the detection signals (Figure 2c). In contrast, 

bare ITO electrodes without BSA coating exhibited larger shifts in electroenzymatic signals, even for free 

cholesterol plasma samples. This might be due to the remaining proteins and ions in lipoprotein-free plasma 

causing non-specific signals by interacting with the bare ITO surface.

The LOD achieved by our detection platform was assessed in Figure 2d using diluted clinical plasma with 

lipoprotein-free plasma, ensuring controlled conditions. The estimated LOD for cholesterol is determined to be 

28.5 µg/dL (737 nM). This LOD range is exclusively demonstrated by conventional electrochemical detection 

methods employing sophisticated and complex device fabrications, including the utilization of nanomaterials and 

mediators.29 The highly sensitive attribute of FET sensors extends this remarkable LOD range to paper-based 

analytical devices, highlighting the efficacy of the platform even without the need for functionalization.

Lastly, in Figure 2e, we present the distribution of ∆Vth values for cholesterol concentrations measured 

from patient plasma samples across 178 cartridges produced during 15 different sub-batch fabrications. Notably, 

when enzymes were absent from the PSM, no correlated detection signals were observed, leaving sample matrix 

effects the only reason for minor variations in ∆Vth (Figure S5). While there was a degree of correlation between 


8

cholesterol levels and ∆Vth values, relying solely on ∆Vth (which is conventionally used in FET sensor analysis to 

determine target-signals) as the sensor readout presented major challenges. When applied to our dataset, this 

standard approach displayed a low r2 of 0.808 (Figure 2e) and a large CV of up to 22.8% within a clinically 

relevant range (i.e., 100-150 mg/dL, Figure 2f), confirming the challenges of FET biosensor performance on

physiological samples, despite optimizations of the diverse fabrication factors listed above. 

The conventional FET analysis, focusing solely on ∆Vth (Figure 2e) by considering the endpoint and initial 

point, falls short of providing a comprehensive understanding of variations during enzyme reactions influenced 

by the time-dependent enzyme reaction rate (Figure 3a) and sample matrix effects. Moreover, the real-time FET 

measurement (Figure 2a), capturing a cumulative representation of specific snapshots at particular moments 

over time, also offers limited information about enzyme reactions. For instance, the Gm values, which cannot be 

obtained from real-time measurement approach in Figure 2a, exhibit significant variations during reactions 

(Figure 3b). These variations are influenced by factors such as the rate of enzyme reactions, the mixing process 

within the cartridge, and the presence of sample matrix effects. Interpreting these dynamic behaviors for each 

specific case can be challenging, underscoring the need for more advanced data-driven analytical techniques, 

such as DL, to comprehensively capture and interpret the dynamic nature of these biochemical processes, as 

detailed in the subsequent sections.

Design of DL-based Signal Analysis. DL benefits from the universal function approximation power of

neural networks to harness the complex non-linear kinetic data from the FET sensor to measure the analyte 

concentrations. Here, we employed DL-based analysis and neural networks for two key objectives: 1) optimizing 

the subset of kinetic signals carrying concentration-specific information, and 2) quantifying the target analyte 

concentrations in patient plasma samples. The DL models were structured as fully-connected shallow networks 

with three hidden layers, utilizing continuously measured FET transfer curves as input data. Both the kinetic data 

input and the network architecture underwent optimization through a 4-fold cross-validation on the validation set 

of plasma samples (refer to the Data Processing and Deep Learning Analysis section for detailed procedures). 

The optimized network was subsequently tested on 30 additional samples from the testing set, never used before.


9

For DL analysis, transfer curves measured over 5 minutes for each plasma sample were transformed 

into a 2D heatmap (Figure S6). This heatmap for each test visually represented all enzymatic kinetic details, 

encompassing characteristics observed in the sum of raw transfer curves (Figure S6a), such as potential drifts

during the measurement, initial Vth, and changes in Vth, electronic mobility, and Gm due to enzyme reactions

(Figure S6b). Notably, our preliminary observations underscored the significance of subtracting the initial transfer 

curve data from the raw heatmap in Figure S6b. The initial transfer curves typically serve as a baseline for 

conventional FET analysis to measure the relative change in target-specific signals, which could be significantly 

affected by pH, ion concentrations, and sample matrix effects. Thus, the raw heatmap (Figure S6b), after 

subtracting the initial transfer curve properties and referred to as the signal heatmap (Figure 3c), encapsulated 

pure kinetic information primarily associated with enzymatic reactions, and remained, by and large, unaffected 

by interference from varying pH levels in plasma samples. Using this signal heatmap as input resulted in a 

substantial improvement in the neural network inference, reducing the CV from 20.1% to 8.5% and increasing 

the r2 from 0.698 to 0.904 (see Figure 3d).

DL was further applied to optimize the subset of kinetic signals containing concentration-specific 

information within the signal heatmap. This optimization considered both the size of the VG window (i.e., within 

the 0-3 V range, Figure 4a-c) and the time window (i.e., within the 14-343 s range, Figure 4d-f). The selection of 

the optimal model was based on achieving the lowest mean square error (MSE) and the highest r2 values when 

comparing predicted and ground truth cholesterol concentrations for samples from the validation dataset, with 

variations in the sizes of VG windows. Consequently, the optimal VG window was identified to be between 1.15 

V and 2.45 V (Figure 4b). The predicted concentrations within this optimal VG subset still exhibited a high CV of 

20.7% and a relatively low r2 of 0.907. With a fixed VG window, an optimal time subset was determined to be 

within the range of 91-119 s (Figure 4e). The network utilizing the optimized subset in Figure 4e demonstrated 

improved quantification performance on the same validation set in Figure 4c, achieving an r2 of 0.954 and a CV 

of 11.4% (Figure 4f). This final optimized network was further utilized to generate blind testing results using 

plasma samples never seen before, which will be detailed in the next section.

Blinded Testing Results. The optimized neural network model, incorporating the optimal architecture 

and refined kinetic data input (refer to the Data Processing and Deep Learning Analysis section of the Methods


10

for detailed model architecture), underwent blind testing to quantify cholesterol concentrations across 30 clinical 

plasma samples from three distinct testing batches (Figure 4g). For each of the three testing batches, we trained 

optimized models separately using samples from the same batch to minimize inter-batch variability. The blind 

testing predictions exhibited a high correlation with the ground truth cholesterol values, with an r2 value exceeding 

0.976 for all three batches (Figure 4h). Additionally, the neural network models’ inference results demonstrated 

low variations in predictions, with a maximum CV of 6.46% over different cholesterol concentration ranges 

(Figure 4i). Importantly, blind testing predictions from the models using the optimal subset in the signal heatmap 

(Figure 4g) outperformed other models, including the model that used the entire raw heatmap (Figure S7a), the 

model with a 2x larger window size than the optimal subset in the signal heatmap (Figure S7b), and the model 

using the optimal subset in the raw heatmap (Figure S7c). Therefore, this optimized concentration inference 

method not only better utilized the enzymatic reaction kinetics of our FET-based sensor but also improved the 

robustness of the network predictions, making them more resistant to variations induced by sample matrix effects. 

For the same blind testing set, a single model trained on samples from all three baches (Figure S8) had 

inferior accuracy (r2: 0.886 excluding outliers) and precision (CV of 10.85 %). Higher variations of this single 

neural network model between different batches originate from additional variabilities in PSM and reagent 

batches used during different testing days.  In future iterations of assay development, incorporating batch-

specific information along with the sensor data can be used to create a more robust inference model that 

generalizes to different batches with the same superior performance.

Scalability to Immunoassay. Our detection platform has the potential to be adapted for immunoassays, 

which holds significant promise in a wide range of biomedical applications. To illustrate this adaptability, we 

conducted a proof-of-concept experiment involving electroactive enzymatic signaling on our platform (Figure S9).  

In this experiment, we utilized the interaction between horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled anti-mouse IgG 

(Ab-HRP), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and 3,3',5,5'-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) — a combination that has long 

been established and widely used in conventional enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) for detecting 

biomarkers in sandwich immunoassays using the resultant colored product of TMB.30 TMB and HRP reactions

also produce protons31, which serve as a target signal in our detection platform. This phenomenon is depicted 

in Figure S9, where increased concentrations of Ab-HRP decrease Vth levels of the FET upon the injection of 


11

H2O2 (Figure S9a) or TMB (Figure S9b). TMB and HRP signaling can be integrated into the LFA framework, 

complemented by zones dedicated to capture antibody, detection antibody, and chemical substrate. This design 

could be particularly beneficial for immunoassays that require high sensitivity, such as troponin I and metabolite 

assays, as well as for the rapid detection of infectious diseases.

DISCUSSION

Our integration of an LFA component, specifically the PSM, with a FET yields synergistic benefits and 

multiple advantages, effectively overcoming limitations inherent in each of the two components when used 

individually as diagnostic platforms.
The FET sensing mechanism can potentially be used to enhance the 

sensitivity of paper-based analytical devices and enable the measurement of kinetic data within the PSM. On 

the flip side, the intricate surface chemistry required for FET sensors to immobilize biomolecules like enzymes 

and antibodies is replaced by the straightforward dry chemistry of the LFA technology. Furthermore, building 

upon the utilization of an electroactive enzymatic signal, such as protons, as opposed to label-free FET detection, 

our approach eliminates the requirement for conventional microfluidic systems to regulate reagent supply to FET 

sensors, effectively addressing Debye length issues. This strategic choice enables a simplified operation down 

to a single sample injection step, eradicating the need for a complex microfluidic system. This integration goes 

a step further in mitigating critical commercialization risks associated with FET sensors, including shelf-life, 

production costs, and contamination of the FET sensing surface, all of which have hindered the widespread 

adoption of FET biosensors in the market.

Despite effectively addressing the aforementioned risks, some challenges still persist, particularly in 

terms of reliability, impaired by sample matrix effects and batch-to-batch variations. The enhanced sensitivity of 

FET sensors, advantageous for detecting target signals, introduces susceptibility to interference from non-

specific binding or unintended interactions, which can complicate the interpretation of results and impact the 

accuracy of the sensor. Various strategies, such as surface modifications, advanced coatings, or the use of 

blocking agents, have been explored to enhance the specificity of FET sensors. However, the translation of their 

performance from laboratory-scale studies to practical applications remains a challenge.


12

Our DL-based analysis, coupled with a meticulous optimization process, proves instrumental in mitigating 

variation issues arising from sample matrix effects and reaction rates. This approach enhances the ability to 

discern and interpret complex interactions of the testing environment within the DL model, allowing for a more 

precise analysis of the intricate but insightful kinetic FET data. While our DL techniques showed competitive 

cholesterol quantification in samples within the same batch (i.e., models for each of the three batches were 

trained independently), the scalability of our DL-based FET sensor between different batches was limited (i.e., a 

single model trained on all three batches showed inferior performance, r2 < 0.9) due to additional factors affecting 

inter-batch repeatability. These factors include the varying properties of ITO used in different testing batches, 

variations in enzyme and reagent concentrations due to handling issues, limited control over environmental 

factors such as temperature and humidity, variability between reagent batches, residual non-specific binding of 

proteins in plasma on the ITO, and varying enzyme activity influenced by the pH or ion concentrations of plasma 

samples. These factors can be addressed in future iterations through quality controls implemented in the 

fabrication and assembly processes. Additionally, assay and environmental factors that have a direct impact on 

the captured data can be added to the input of future inference models to improve the generalizability of the 

concentration inference model to different batches.

The potential incorporation of our platform into immunoassay technology will open up a myriad of 

biomedical applications, including disease diagnosis, biomarker detection, and therapeutic drug monitoring. The 

demonstration of electroactive enzymatic signaling between anti-HRP and TMB (Figure S9) underscores the 

versatility of our platform in LFA-based immunoassay techniques. Measuring electrical signals of the commonly 

used clinical immunoassays by our FET biosensor offers significant advantages, such as high sensitivity, 

enhanced accuracy through kinetic information, and data-driven analysis. Expanding on the potential benefits, 

the ability of FET sensors to conduct multiplexed immunoassays could be a critical advancement, enabling the 

simultaneous detection of multiple biomarkers within a single sample input.
This capability is essential for 

achieving comprehensive disease profiling, providing a more nuanced understanding of an individual's health 

status. By facilitating the detection of a spectrum of biomarkers within a single diagnostic measurement, our 

platform, once fully developed, might contribute to more holistic and efficient diagnosis and monitoring of various 

diseases.


13

CONCLUSION

Our research showcased a seamless integration of FETs, paper-based analytical devices, and DL 

methodologies, effectively addressing persistent challenges associated with FET sensors, such as sample matrix 

effects and variations in reaction rates, while simplifying operational complexities. The inclusion of a PSM in the 

FET sensing zone streamlined the sensor operation into a single-step, cost-effective testing process. The 

synergistic interplay between FETs' kinetic data and DL methodologies was further demonstrated through 

quantitative diagnostics, notably in the proof-of-concept quantification of cholesterol concentration in patient 

plasma samples. For blinded cholesterol tests, this approach yielded a high precision (CV < 6.46%) and a decent

accuracy (r2 > 0.976). The integration of immunoassays into our detection platform could potentially achieve a 

significant advancement in medical diagnostics, promising improved healthcare outcomes.


14

EXPERIMENTIAL PROCEDURES 

Sensing Solution Preparation.  A sensing solution included enzymes, a stabilizer, and buffer solutions.  

300 U/mL cholesterol esterase (Toyobo, COE-311), 300 U/mL cholesterol oxidase (Toyobo, COO-321), and 300 

U/mL peroxidase (Toyobo, POX-301) were dissolved in PBS, piperazine-N,N′-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid) (PIPES), 

or PBS/PIPES (45/55% ratio) buffer solution, respectively. Triton X-100 (Sigma Aldrich, SLBM3869V), tween 20 

(Surf’s Up surfactant Kit, K40000), and 10% BSA (Thermo Scientific, WL335677) were mixed with the enzyme 

solution at a 0.5% (v/v) for each. 

Cartridge Fabrication.  ITO (Sigma Aldrich, 639303) cleaned with isopropanol for 20 min was utilized 

as the SE.  ITO was further incubated with 10% BSA solution for 4 hours to achieve a blocking layer on the ITO 

surface.  The final sensing solution described earlier was fully spread over each PSM made of an asymmetric 

super micron polysulfone membrane (Pall, T9EXPPA0045S00M) with a 0.45 µm average pore size and a 

nitrocellulose membrane with a 0.22 µm average pore size (Sartorius, 11327-41BL).  Each PSM was fully dried 

for 20 min using nitrogen gas and stored under silica gel for 2 hours.  Dried PSM was sliced to a 6 mm diameter 

circle for the cartridge component.  The ITO was taped on an acrylic sheet substrate (1 mm-thick, 1.5 cm by 1.5 

cm) using double-sided tape.  Another double-sided tape (50 µm thickness) was mounted on the ITO with an 

opening window for PSM placement.  PSM and chamber were sequentially added on the top of double-sided 

tape.  The ITO electrode was connected to the gate of MOSFET using an alligator clip for electrical 

measurements.  All components, including ITO, acrylic sheet and double-sided tapes, were fabricated by a laser 

cutter (60 W Speedy 100 CO2 laser, Trotec, USA).

Electrical Measurement System. The ITO of the cartridge was connected to the gate of a commercial 

n-type metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) (CD4007UB) using an alligator clip. The 

same MOSFET was used over all measurements consistently. A 20 µL volume of plasma was injected into the 

inlet of the cartridge.  An Ag/AgCl reference electrode contacted the plasma, applying the VG in a range from 0 

to 3 V for all measurements. All transfer curves were measured using a Keithley 4200A semiconductor analyzer 

with a source-drain voltage set at 50 mV, and the VG fixed in the double-sweep mode. Transfer curves of the 

FET were repeatedly measured for 5 min under each plasma sample.
The Vth was calculated as the VG

corresponding to an ID of 1 µA in each transfer curve. Standard pH buffer solutions were used to evaluate the 


15

pH sensitivity of the ITO in Figure S1. Each solution was removed by pipetting after each measurement. For 

HRP response tests in Figure S9, 10 mM H2O2 in PBS was mixed with IgG-HRP (Southern Biotech, 1030-05)

on the bare ITO surface, sequentially, with increasing concentrations of IgG-HRP in a range from 16 ng/mL to 

50 µg/mL in PBS. Also, TMB (Thermo Scientific, 34028) was added to goat IgG-HRP solution in a range from 

16 ng/mL to 10 µg/mL in PBS before testing.

Clinical Sample Tests. Lithium heparin plasma from leftover patient samples collected at The University 

of Chicago Medical Center with cholesterol concentrations ranging from 100 to 300 mg/dL were de-identified 

and stored at -20 °C until use.  Samples were collected under a quality assurance protocol, which qualified for 

an institutional review board waiver and no patient identifiers were collected. Cholesterol concentrations were 

quantified using the Roche CHOL2 enzymatic colorimetric assay on the c701 module of the Roche Cobas 8000 

analyzer system (Indianapolis, IN, USA).  After thawing, the samples were stored at 2–8°C for up to seven days.  

Lipoprotein-free human plasma was purchased from Kalen Biomedical, LLC as control. In order to evaluate LOD 

(Figure 2d), 312 mg/dL clinical plasma sample was diluted by lipoprotein-free human plasma. The CV values 

(Figure 2e) were obtained from at least 3 testing cartridges for the same human plasma sample. 

A total of 179 plasma samples were tested within 3 testing batches, including 86 plasma samples in the 

first batch, 57 plasma samples in the second batch, and 36 plasma samples in the third batch. In the first testing 

batch, 61 plasma samples were used for training, with 17 samples for validation and 8 samples for blind testing

of the deep learning model. In the second batch, 42 samples were allocated for training, with 15 samples for 

blind testing, and in the third batch, 29 samples were reserved for training, with 7 samples for blind testing. This 

split was dictated by the uniform coverage of cholesterol concentration (in 100-300 mg/dL range). 

Data Processing and Deep Learning Analysis. For each sample, the transfer curves of the FET sensor 

were repeatedly measured over 49 cycles with 7 sec per cycle (i.e., a total of 343 s period). Before applying DL-

based analysis, the first captured cycle was subtracted from all 49 cycles within the raw heatmap (Figure S6b),

yielding 48 cycles within the heatmap, termed signal heatmap (Figure 3c). For DL analysis, the signal heatmap 

was converted into a 1D array and input into the processing neural network. The neural network architecture 

was optimized through a 4-fold cross-validation on the validation set, and the optimal model represented a 

shallow neural network with a fully-connected architecture with 3 hidden layers (128, 64 and 32 units), each 


16

followed by batch normalization and 0.5 dropout.  All three layers used ReLU activation functions and L2 

regularization. The loss function (L) was MSE compiled with Adam optimizer, a learning rate of 10-3, and a batch 

size of 5, i.e.,

𝐿 = 1

𝑁 ∑(𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦′𝑖)2,

𝑁

𝑖=1

where yi are the ground truth analyte concentrations, y’I are the predicted concentrations, and N is the batch size.

The input signals into the neural network were further optimized by selecting a subset of current values 

from the total operating range (i.e., 14-343 s time range and 0-3 V VG range). The optimization was done in two 

steps through a 4-fold cross-validation (see Deep learning-based optimization of the kinetic data for more details) 

on 17 samples from the validation set (see Clinical Sample Tests section for more details). This optimized model

architecture (i.e., the model with optimal input subset and architecture) was further used at the blind testing 

phase.

The blind testing set included 30 samples (not seen during network optimization) from three different

testing batches. For each batch, the final optimized models were independently trained using samples from the 

same batch (see Clinical Sample Tests).
Training times for batches 1 to 3 were 113 s, 143 s, and 145 s, 

respectively. Irrespective of the batch number, blind testing of the trained model averaged 110 ms per sample 

for a batch size of 1, and this time decreased to 35 ms per sample when using a batch size of 10. Data 

preprocessing and training/testing of neural networks were performed in Python, using OpenCV and TensorFlow 

libraries. Training/testing of the neural networks was done on a desktop computer with a GeForce GT 1080 Ti 

(NVIDIA).

Deep learning-based Optimization of the Kinetic Data. The neural network input optimization process 

was performed through a 4-fold cross-validation on the validation set and was conducted in two steps: first, 

optimizing the VG subset within 0-3 V range (Figure 4a-c), and second, optimizing the time window within 14-

343s range (Figure 4d-f).  In each step, the optimal model was selected based on the MSE and r2 values between 

the predicted and ground truth cholesterol concentrations for 17 samples from the validation dataset (see the 

Clinical Sample Tests subsection for further details on the split between training, validation, and testing sets).  


17

At the first step, the optimal VG operating range was determined to be between 1.15 V and 2.45 V centered at 

1.8 V (Figure 4b).  The predictions generated by the model with the optimal VG window exhibited a strong 

correlation with the ground truth with an r2 of 0.907, however a CV of 20.7% was still high (Figure 4c). To further 

enhance the performance, we determined the optimal time range for a fixed optimal VG window by evaluating 

MSE and r2 maps generated on the same validation dataset with 17 samples (Figure 4d). The optimal time range 

based on lower MSE and higher r2 was selected between 91 s and 119 s centered at 105 s, reducing the overall 

assay operation to < 2.5 minutes (Figure 4e). The predictions of the model with optimized VG and time subsets 

on the validation set showed an r2 value of 0.954 and a CV of 11.4% with respect to ground truth measurements 

(Figure 4f), and the model with this input subset was further used during the blind testing stage.

Author Contributions

Electrical measurements, device fabrication, and interpretation of data were carried out by H.-J. Jang, W. Zhuang, 

and H. Joung. Computational analysis was carried out by A. Goncharov. The manuscript was prepared by H.-

J. Jang, H. Joung., A. Goncharov, A. Ozcan, and J. H. Chen. Plasma samples were prepared and evaluated by 

A. Kanegusuku, C. Chan, and K.-T. J. Yeo. All authors edited the manuscript and commented on it. The project 

was supervised by A. Ozcan and J. H. Chen.

Declaration of interests

The authors have a pending patent application on the presented technology.

Acknowledgements

This work was financially supported by a University of Chicago Faculty Start-up fund and the US National Science 

Foundation (NSF) PATHS-UP Engineering Research Center (Grant #1648451).


18

Figure captions

Figure 1. Schematic images of (a) the diagnostic platform combining the FET detection system with an actual 

photo of the components of a single-use paper-based analytical cartridge.
(b) Detection mechanism of 

cholesterol around PSM and SE within the cartridge. (c) Overview of DL signal processing framework.

Figure 2. (a) Representative real-time Vth curves in response to enzyme reactions based on the cholesterol 

concentrations in human plasma. (b) Initial Vth distributions of cartridges dried with different buffer components 

such as PBS, PIPES/PBS, PIPES. CV values of initial Vth were compared. (c) ∆Vth variation of the cartridge with 

bare ITO and BSA/ITO for the injection of lipoprotein-free plasma. ∆Vth was defined as the difference between 

the initial Vth and Vth for a specific time of each cartridge. (d) LOD evaluation measured by using a diluted clinical 

plasma sample with lipoprotein-free plasma. (e) ∆Vth distribution of 178 testing cartridges with plasma samples 

of varying cholesterol concentrations. (f) CV values of ∆Vth in Figure 2(e) calculated from at least 3 repeated 

tests for the same plasma.

Figure 3.
(a) Schematic of transfer curve changes over different stages of the enzymatic reaction on the 

cartridge.
(b) Representative Gm variation over the enzymatic reaction. (c) Transfer curve heatmaps after 

subtraction of the first cycle signal. (d) Comparison of cholesterol concentrations predicted by the neural network 

using the pure signal and raw heatmap.

Figure 4. (a) MSE and r2 maps for the validation dataset from models with different VG subsets; (b) Optimal VG

subset selected as a local extremum on MSE and r2 maps. (c) Predictions on the validation dataset for the model 

with the optimal VG subset; (d) MSE and r2 maps for the validation dataset from models with different time subsets.

(e) Optimal time subset within VG subset selected as local extremum on MSE and r2 maps. (f) Model predictions 

on the validation dataset for the model with optimal VG and time subsets. (g) Final model predictions on the blind 

testing dataset composed of 30 clinical samples from 3 different testing batches. (h) r2 values expanded over 3 

testing batches for models with different input subsets.
(i) CV values for the optimal model expanded over 

different cholesterol ranges for blind tests.


19

Figure 1


20

Figure 2


21

Figure 3


22

Figure 4


23

References

1.
Rivenson, Y., Wang, H.D., Wei, Z.S., de Haan, K., Zhang, Y.B., Wu, Y.C., Günaydin, H., Zuckerman, 
J.E., Chong, T., Sisk, A.E., et al. (2019). Virtual histological staining of unlabelled tissue-autofluorescence 
images via deep learning. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 466-477. 10.1038/s41551-019-0362-y.

2.
Goncharov, A., Joung, H.A., Ghosh, R., Han, G.R., Ballard, Z.S., Maloney, Q., Bell, A., Aung, C.T.Z., 
Garner, O.B., Carlo, D.D., and Ozcan, A. (2023). Deep Learning-Enabled Multiplexed Point-of-Care 
Sensor 
using 
a 
Paper-Based 
Fluorescence 
Vertical 
Flow 
Assay. 
Small, 
19, 
2300617. 

10.1002/smll.202300617.

3.
Ballard, Z., Brown, C., Madni, A.M., and Ozcan, A. (2021). Machine learning and computation-enabled 
intelligent sensor design. Nat. Mach. Intell. 3, 556-565. 10.1038/s42256-021-00360-9.

4.
Ghosh, R., Joung, H.A., Goncharov, A., Palanisamy, B., Ngo, K., Pejcinovic, K., Krockenberger, N., Horn, 
E.J., Garner, O.B., Ghazal, E., et al. (2023). Single-tier point-of-care serodiagnosis of Lyme disease. 
bioRxiv. 10.1101/2023.06.14.544508.

5.
Ballard, Z.S., Joung, H.A., Goncharov, A., Liang, J., Nugroho, K., Di Carlo, D., Garner, O.B., and Ozcan, 
A. (2020). Deep learning-enabled point-of-care sensing using multiplexed paper-based sensors. NPJ 
Digit. Med. 3, 66. 10.1038/s41746-020-0274-y.

6.
Joung, H.A., Ballard, Z.S., Wu, J., Tseng, D.K., Teshome, H., Zhang, L., Horn, E.J., Arnaboldi, P.M., 
Dattwyler, R.J., Garner, O.B., et al. (2020). Point-of-Care Serodiagnostic Test for Early-Stage Lyme 
Disease Using a Multiplexed Paper-Based Immunoassay and Machine Learning. ACS Nano 14, 229-240. 
10.1021/acsnano.9b08151.

7.
Ochoa-Ruiz, A.G., Parra, G., López-Espinoza, D., Astudillo, P., Galyamin, D., Sabaté, N., Esquivel, J.P., 
and Vallejo-Cardona, A.A. (2023). Electrochemical Immunosensors: The Evolution from Elisa to EμPADs. 
Electroanal. 35. 2200053. 10.1002/elan.202200053.

8.
Yang, M.W., Huang, J.G., Fan, J.L., Du, J.J., Pu, K.Y., and Peng, X.J. (2020). Chemiluminescence for 
bioimaging and therapeutics: recent advances and challenges. Chem. Soc. Rev. 49, 6800-6815. 
10.1039/d0cs00348d.

9.
Meng, X.D., Yang, F., Dong, H.F., Dou, L., and Zhang, X.J. (2021). Recent advances in optical imaging 
of biomarkers in vivo. Nano Today 38. 101156. 10.1016/j.nantod.2021.101156.

10.
Tu, J.B., Torrente-Rodríguez, R.M., Wang, M.Q., and Gao, W. (2020). The Era of Digital Health: A Review 
of Portable and Wearable Affinity Biosensors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30. 1906713. 10.1002/adfm.201906713.

11.
Dai, C.H., Liu, Y.Q., and Wei, D.C. (2022). Two-Dimensional Field-Effect Transistor Sensors: The Road 
toward Commercialization. Chem. Rev. 122, 10319-10392. 10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00924.

12.
Jang, H.J., Zhuang, W., Sui, X., Ryu, B., Huang, X., Chen, M., Cai, X., Pu, H., Beavis, K., Huang, J., and 
Chen, J. (2023). Rapid, Sensitive, Label-Free Electrical Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Nasal Swab 
Samples. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15, 15195-15202. 10.1021/acsami.3c00331.

13.
Jang, H.J., Sui, X., Zhuang, W., Huang, X., Chen, M., Cai, X., Wang, Y., Ryu, B., Pu, H., Ankenbruck, N., 
et al. (2022). Remote Floating-Gate Field-Effect Transistor with 2-Dimensional Reduced Graphene Oxide 
Sensing Layer for Reliable Detection of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Proteins. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14, 
24187-24196. 10.1021/acsami.2c04969.

14.
Bian, L., Wang, Z.H., White, D.L., and Star, A. (2021). Machine learning-assisted calibration of 
Hg2+sensors based on carbon nanotube field-effect transistors. Biosens. Bioelectron. 180. 113085. 
10.1016/j.bios.2021.113085.

15.
Makowski, M.S., and Ivanisevic, A. (2011). Molecular analysis of blood with micro-/nanoscale field-effect-
transistor biosensors. Small 7, 1863-1875. 10.1002/smll.201100211.

16.
Sun, J., and Liu, Y. (2018). Matrix Effect Study and Immunoassay Detection Using Electrolyte-Gated 
Graphene Biosensor. Micromachines 9. 142. 10.3390/mi9040142.

17.
Maity, A., Pu, H.H., Sui, X.Y., Chang, J.B., Bottum, K.J., Jin, B., Zhou, G.H., Wang, Y.L., Lu, G.H., and 
Chen, J.H. (2023). Scalable graphene sensor array for real-time toxins monitoring in flowing water. Nat. 
Commun. 14. 4184. 10.1038/s41467-023-39701-0.


24

18.
Xue, M.T., Mackin, C., Weng, W.H., Zhu, J.D., Luo, Y.Y., Luo, S.X.L., Lu, A.Y., Hempel, M., McVay, E., 
Kong, J., and Palacios, T. (2022). Integrated biosensor platform based on graphene transistor arrays for 
real-time high-accuracy ion sensing. Nat. Commun. 13. 5064. 10.1038/s41467-022-32749-4.

19.
Jang, H.J., Lee, T., Song, J., Russell, L., Li, H., Dailey, J., Searson, P.C., and Katz, H.E. (2018). 
Electronic Cortisol Detection Using an Antibody-Embedded Polymer Coupled to a Field-Effect Transistor. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 16233-16237. 10.1021/acsami.7b18855.

20.
Jang, H.J., Ahn, J., Kim, M.G., Shin, Y.B., Jeun, M., Cho, W.J., and Lee, K.H. (2015). Electrical signaling 
of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays with an ion-sensitive field-effect transistor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
64, 318-323. 10.1016/j.bios.2014.09.020.

21.
Stern, E., Vacic, A., Rajan, N.K., Criscione, J.M., Park, J., Ilic, B.R., Mooney, D.J., Reed, M.A., and 
Fahmy, T.M. (2010). Label-free biomarker detection from whole blood. Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 138-142. 
10.1038/Nnano.2009.353.

22.
Carlborg, C.F., Haraldsson, T., Cornaglia, M., Stemme, G., and van der Wijngaart, W. (2010). A High-
Yield Process for 3-D Large-Scale Integrated Microfluidic Networks in PDMS. J. Microelectromech. S. 
19, 1050-1057. 10.1109/Jmems.2010.2067203.

23.
Halldorsson, S., Lucumi, E., Gómez-Sjöberg, R., and Fleming, R.M.T. (2015). Advantages and 
challenges of microfluidic cell culture in polydimethylsiloxane devices. Biosens. Bioelectron. 63, 218-231. 
10.1016/j.bios.2014.07.029.

24.
Pullano, S.A., Critello, C.D., Mahbub, I., Tasneem, N.T., Shamsir, S., Islam, S.K., Greco, M., and Fiorillo, 
A.S. (2018). EGFET-Based Sensors for Bioanalytical Applications: A Review. Sensors 18. 4042. 
10.3390/s18114042.

25.
O'Farrell, B. (2009). Evolution in Lateral Flow-Based Immunoassay Systems. Lateral Flow Immunoassay, 
1-33. 10.1007/978-1-59745-240-3_1.

26.
Jang, H.J., Song, Y., Wagner, J., and Katz, H.E. (2020). Suppression of Ionic Doping by Molecular 
Dopants in Conjugated Polymers for Improving Specificity and Sensitivity in Biosensing Applications. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 45036-45044. 10.1021/acsami.0c11125.

27.
Jang, H.J., Wagner, J., Li, H., Zhang, Q., Mukhopadhyaya, T., and Katz, H.E. (2019). Analytical Platform 
To Characterize Dopant Solution Concentrations, Charge Carrier Densities in Films and Interfaces, and 
Physical Diffusion in Polymers Utilizing Remote Field-Effect Transistors. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 4861-
4869. 10.1021/jacs.8b13026.

28.
Jang, H.J., Wagner, J., Song, Y.J., Lee, T., and Katz, H.E. (2020). Carboxylic Acid-Functionalized 
Conjugated Polymer Promoting Diminished Electronic Drift and Amplified Proton Sensitivity of Remote 
Gates Compared to Nonpolar Surfaces in Aqueous Media. Adv. Electron. Mater. 6.  1901073. 
10.1002/aelm.201901073.

29.
Amiri, M., and Arshi, S. (2020). An Overview on Electrochemical Determination of Cholesterol. 
Electroanal. 32, 1391-1407. 10.1002/elan.201900669.

30.
Fanjul-Bolado, P., Gonzalez-Garia, M.B., and Costa-Garcia, A. (2005). Amperometric detection in 
TMB/HRP-based assays. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 382, 297-302. 10.1007/s00216-005-3084-9.

31.
Bhalla, N., Di Lorenzo, M., Pula, G., and Estrela, P. (2014). Protein phosphorylation analysis based on 
proton release detection: Potential tools for drug discovery. Biosens. Bioelectron. 54, 109-114. 
10.1016/j.bios.2013.10.037.


