arXiv:2402.03143v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  5 Feb 2024

Scanning tunnelling microscopy and X-ray photoemission studies of NdNiO2
infinite-layer nickelates films

Martando Rath1, Yu Chen1, Guillaume Krieger2,3, H. Sahib 2, Daniele Preziosi2 and Marco Salluzzo1∗

1CNR-SPIN Complesso di Monte S. Angelo, via Cinthia—I-80126 Napoli, Italy and
2Universit´e de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPCMS UMR 7504, F-67034 Strasbourg, France†

(Dated: February 6, 2024)

We report scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) and x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS)
measurements on uncapped and SrTiO3 (STO) capped NdNiO2 realized by pulsed-laser deposition
and topotactic reduction process.
We find that untreated NdNiO2 surfaces are insulating and
contain Ni mostly in a nominal Ni2+ oxidation state. Room temperature STM shows signatures of a
striped-like topographic pattern, possibly compatible with recent reports of ordered oxygen vacancies
in uncapped nickelates due to incomplete oxygen de-intercalation of the upper layers. A metallic
surface and a full Ni1+ oxidation state is recovered by ultra high vacuum annealing at 250 ◦C, as
shown by STM and XPS. STO-capped NdNiO2 films, on the other hand, show Ni mostly in Ni1+

configuration, but Nd 3d 5/2 core level spectra have a relevant contribution from ligand 4f 4L states,
suggesting the formation of a NdTiNiOx layer at the interface with the STO. By in situ unit-cell
by unit-cell Ar-ion sputtering removal of the STO capping and of the non stoichiometric interface
layer, we were able to address the surface electronic properties of these samples, as shown by high
resolution valence band photoemission spectroscopy. The results provide insights in the properties
of infinite-layer NdNiO2 thin films prepared by the CaH2 topotactic reduction of perovskite NdNiO3
and suggest methods to improve their surface quality.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Rare-earth nickelates RNiO3 (R= rare-earth) have
been the leitmotiv of intense theoretical and experimen-
tal research efforts towards the realization of novel high-
Tc superconductors mimicking the electronic structure of
cuprates, as suggested by a seminal work [1]. The quest
for Ni-based superconductivity has eventually led to a
successful fabrication of superconducting Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2
thin films deposited onto (001) SrTiO3 (STO) with a
Tc = 15 K, obtained after topotactic reduction of per-
ovskite NdNiO3 grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD)
[2].
More recently, infinite-layers nickelates were also
realized by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), using an
in situ thermal hydrogen cracker [3] or a redox-process
through a metal overlayer to reduce the perovskite phase
[4, 5], as in the case of MBE-grown superconducting
Nd1−xEuxSrNiO2 samples capped by an Al film [5].
While superconducting infinite-layer nickelates were also
successfully synthesized without any capping layer [6],
superconductivity was found particularly robust in films
protected by STO, which might have an important role
in the reduction mechanism during the topotactic pro-
cess. In particular, recent studies demonstrated that the
last few surface unit-cells of uncapped NdNiO2 (NNO)
films might not be fully reduced, with excess oxygen ions
arranged in a (short range) ordered pattern character-
ized by 1/3 reciprocal lattice units in plane periodicity
[3, 7], possibly explaining some of the earlier evidence of
charge order by resonant inelastic x-ray scattering mea-

∗ marco.salluzzo@spin.cnr.it
† 3present address:Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box
513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands

surements [8–10].
From these studies it emerges that the intrinsic elec-
tronic properties of nickelates cannot be easily accessed
by surface-sensitive techniques, in particular, angle-
resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and scan-
ning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS). It is then quite cru-
cial to establish methods to restore the surface properties
of these compounds in order to fully study their electronic
properties. Among the important questions to be undis-
closed, we cite the need to establish the role of rare-earth
5d-electronic states[11], the classification of the parent
compounds as charge or Hubbard insulators [12], and fi-
nally a clarification of the magnetic properties that might
or might not be significantly different from cuprates [13].
Here, we report a thorough study of the surface elec-
tronic properties of STO-capped and uncapped undoped
NNO films realized by CaH2 topotactic reduction of the
perovskite phase. We studied films realized at the CNRS-
IPCMS in Strasbourg by the PLD technique followed
by the topotactic reduction, and then introduced from
the ambient atmosphere into surface analysis set-ups:
lab-based x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and
scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) at the CNR-SPIN
Modular Oxide Deposition and analysis (MODA) Facil-
ity, and high-resolution valence band (VB) photoemission
spectroscopy at the Cassiopee beamline of the SOLEIL
synchrotron radiation facility.
We show that as received uncapped samples have insu-
lating surfaces, which contain a substantial fraction of Ni
in nominal Ni2+ electronic configuration, while in capped
NdNiO2 Ni is mostly in Ni1+ valence state.
However,
the unit-cells at the interface with the STO overlayer of
capped NdNiO2 are also not ideal, with some Ni in higher
valence state and surprisingly Nd 3d5/2 core level spectra
having a relevant contribution from ligand 4f 4L states,


2

thus differing from ideal Nd3+.
A metallic state with a robust Ni1+ valence in un-
capped NNO is nevertheless achieved by ultra high vac-
uum (UHV) annealing at 250 ◦C, while the removal of
the STO-capping-layer and of the interfacial NNO-layer
by unit-cell by unit-cell Ar-ion sputtering in capped NNO
gives rise to a metallic surface state and a substantial
recover of Nd 3d5/2 spectra towards ideal Nd3+. The re-
sults provide insights into the properties of infinite-layer
NdNiO2 thin films prepared by the CaH2 topotactic re-
duction of perovskite NdNiO3, and suggest methods to
improve their surface quality.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

Perovskite NdNiO3 (NNO3) thin films of 10 nm in
thickness were grown onto STO single crystal by PLD
as described in Refs.
[14, 15].
In this work, the cap-
ping layer was composed of 3 STO unit cells in situ
grown epitaxially on the NNO3 film. Both capped and
uncapped NNO films were then realized by topotactic
reduction processes using metal hydride (CaH2) as a re-
ducing reagent [15]. The surface/interface valence states
of uncapped and capped NNO were studied at room tem-
perature by XPS (Scienta Omicron) using an Al Kα x-ray
source (hν=1486.6 eV), and a hemispherical energy ana-
lyzer, operated in large area mode with a pass energy of
50 eV. The angle between the source and the analyzer was
45◦. In most of the measurements, the sample surface-
normal was at 45◦ to the source and the analyzer entrance
slits, to maximize the intensity. Binding energies were
determined by using Carbon-1s core-level as reference.
The XPS spectra were corrected by a Shirley background
and fitted using pseudo-Voigt functions by CASA-XPS
software [16].
Room temperature UHV-STM was car-
ried out in situ using a Scienta Omicron VT-AFM, using
electrochemically etched tungsten and iridium tips. The
samples were also studied after in situ UHV ( pressure
< 5× 10−10 Torr ) annealing at 250 ◦C for 12h.
Fi-
nally, we studied the valence band of STO-capped NNO
samples by photoelectron spectroscopy at 20 K at the
SOLEIL Cassiopee beamline after removing the capping
layer by Ar+ ion sputtering.
Before the introduction
into the UHV photoemission system, the sample surfaces
were cleaned by oxygen plasma to remove the adventi-
tious carbon layer. In order to minimize sample damage,
Ar-implantation and off-stoichiometry, we employed low
energy accelerated Ar+ ions of 800 eV, Ar-pressure of
10−6 mbar and ion current of 40 mA. Each cycle time
was about 10 minutes. After 6 cycles, the 3 unit cells of
the STO capping layer were completely removed and the
underneath pristine infinite-layer nickelate was exposed
at the surface. The VB spectra were acquired using hor-
izontal polarized 600 eV photons at an incident angle of
20◦, with the sample in the vertical plane, and an energy
resolution of 50 meV. The Fermi energy was calibrated
by using a reference gold sample.

FIG. 1. STM measurements on uncapped nickelates: (a) a
large area STM image acquired on uncapped NNO showing
step-terraces (Vgap= 1.5 V Itunnel=0.5 nA); (b) typical local
STM spectroscopic I-V data of the as-grown infinite layer un-
capped NNO thin film;(c) high resolution image showing the
presence of atomic rows (Vgap= 1.0 V Itunnel=0.5 nA). The
inset in (c) is the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of the image;
(d) Averaged profiles along (100) and (010) directions of the
square-root FFT magnitude shown.

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

To study the surface structural properties of NNO
samples, we performed UHV-STM measurements on un-
capped samples. In Fig. 1, we show a large area STM im-
age acquired on the uncapped NNO. Without any surface
treatment, stable tunnelling conditions could be achieved
only by gap voltages larger than 1 V and tunnelling cur-
rents below 1 nA. This result alone suggests that the
surface layer is not metallic, as confirmed by local tun-
nelling spectroscopy showing semiconducting I-V spectra
(Fig. 1b). The large area STM image in Fig. 1a) shows
hints of step-terraces, in agreement with previous AFM
data on similar samples [15].
On the other hand, the
STM data, taken in constant current mode, show also
the presence of elongated islands within each terrace, i.e.
the surface is not atomically smooth. To better visualize
any possible periodic pattern we show a high resolution
topographic image in Fig.
1c, its Fast Fourier Trans-
form (FFT) ( inset of Fig. 1c) and the averaged profiles
along (100) and (010) directions of the square-root FFT
magnitude (Fig. 1d) . High resolution topography shows
locally on top of most of these islands, and in-between
them, a periodic pattern along the (001) direction with a
spacing between consecutive rows of 0.38±0.01 nm, while


3

880
870
860
850
1012
990
968

Satellite

C

B

(f)

(e)

(d)

(c)

(b)

Capped

  NNO

Uncapped

   NNO

Perovskite

Ni 2p

1/2

Ni 2p

3/2

Nd 3d

3/2

Nd 3d

5/2
(a)

A

Intensity (arb.units)

Binding Energy (eV)

 

 

Perovskite

Uncapped

   NNO

3d

9

4f

 4

L

3d

9

4f

3

 

Binding Energy (eV)

Capped

  NNO

FIG. 2. Core-level Ni 2p and Nd 3d XPS spectra after sub-
traction of a Shirley background: (a) and (d) Perovskite; (b)
and (e) uncapped NNO; (c) and (f) capped NNO. Features
A, B and C in the 2p3/2 spectra are described in the main
text. Dashed vertical lines (a)-(c) and (d)-(f) are guides for
the eye showing how the main 2p3/2 and 3d 94f 3 peaks shift
going from the perovskite to the infinite-layer nickelate sam-
ples.

along each row (010 direction), ordered atomic lines are
unclear, and atomic-resolution 1x1 unit-cells are only lo-
cally observed. The FFT shows indeed that the surface
lattice does not have a 1x1 long range order, while hints
of a 1/3 pattern is also observed, suggesting a link with
the HRTEM reports in refs [3, 7]. This result was found
in several areas of the sample, and on different uncapped
NNO realized using the same method.
To get insight into the electronic properties of infinite-
layers nickelates, and the effect of the topotactic process,
in Figure 2 we compare core-level Ni 2p and Nd 3d XPS
spectra of as-grown perovskite NNO3 (Fig. 2a,d), un-
capped (Fig. 2b,e) and capped (Fig. 2c,f) NNO samples.
The core-level Ni 2p spectra consist in 2p1/2 (∼ 871 eV)
and 2p3/2 features (∼ 855 eV), composed by a lower-
binding energy main peak and a higher energy satellite.
The high energy satellite (labelled C) is due to final states
related to fully unscreened 2p5 core-hole. The main peak,
on the other hand, is related to final states where the 2p5

core-hole is screened by electrons belonging to neighbour
ligand oxygen ions, or by electrons coming from neigh-
bouring clusters [17, 18]. As a consequence, the 2p3/2
XPS spectra are decomposed in two peaks labelled A
(non-local screened final states) and B (local screened
final states).
The fitting analysis shows that for the
reference perovskite NNO3, local and non-local screen-

ing channels have similar spectral weights in good agree-
ment with previous reports [14, 19]. Since the perovskite
NNO3 is regarded as a negative charge transfer system
according to the Zaanen-Sawatzky-Allen scheme, at room
temperature the ground state has mainly a 3d8L configu-
ration (L denotes a ligand hole), with nominal Ni valence
close to Ni2+ [20]. In infinite-layer nickelates, substantial
changes in the energy and the spectral weights of A, B
and C features were expected, in particular a shift of the
main peak towards lower binding energy due to the lower
overall oxidation state. However, in uncapped NNO, very
surprisingly, the XPS Ni 2p core-level looks very similar
to the perovskite (Fig. 2b), with only a few differences in
the A/B ratio. This result suggests that, within the prob-
ing depth of 1.5 nm, uncapped NNO are barely reduced
compared to the perovskite. On the other hand, capped
NNO shows a clear shift towards lower binding energy
of all features and substantial changes in the relative in-
tensities (Fig. 2c). Additionally, the unscreened satellite
peak (C) is characterized by a substantial decrease of
spectral weight and shifts toward lower binding energies
as-well, which indicates a lowering of Ni valence towards
Ni1+ [19, 21]. The differences in the surface and interfa-
cial Ni-valence between uncapped and capped nickelates
confirm earlier X-ray absorption spectroscopy data [8].
While a full understanding of the core-level Ni 2p spec-
tra is beyond the scope of this work requiring sophisti-
cated theoretical calculations, due to the formal Ni 3d9

ground state configuration of infinite-layer nickelates, it
is reasonable to look for analogies between XPS Cu core-
level data of undoped cuprates and those of the capped
NNO sample. The latter exhibit a valence closer to Ni1+,
thus a Ni 3d9 configuration similar to Cu2+ in the CuO2
planes. In cuprates, the features B and A in the 2p3/2
core level XPS have been interpreted as 2p53d10L local
screened, and 2p53d10Z non-local screened final states,
where Z stands as Zhang-Rice Singlet (ZRS) [22].
In
the photo-excitation process, ZRS is an energetically
favoured bound state between non-local electron screened
hole and the pristine hole in neighbour clusters. Multiple
cluster calculations are able to catch some general charac-
teristics of the cuprate core-level spectra and in particular
the relative intensities of features A and B [23]. It turns
out that in cuprates the low-energy feature A dominates
over feature B as a consequence of the low charge transfer
energy, which favours the formation of ZRS bound states.
On the other hand, since the charge transfer energy in
infinite-layer nickelates is inherently larger, it is unclear
if ZRS bound states are effectively stable or energetically
favourable. As a matter of fact, the ratio between A and
B spectral weights shown in Fig. 2c (bottom panel) in
capped NNO is opposite to that of undoped cuprates,
i.e. the low binding energy feature A has lower spectral
weight compared to feature B. This result was also ob-
served at the bare surface of NNO single crystals in refs.
[19, 21]and interpreted as a further indication that NNO
is indeed a Hubbard and not a charge transfer insulator.
In order to get more insight into the electronic prop-


4

erties of as-grown capped and uncapped NNO, we per-
formed core-level XPS Nd 3d measurements and com-
pared the results to perovskite NNO3 samples, as shown
in Figures 2d-f. The main core-level peaks at ∼ 982 and
∼ 1004.2 eV correspond to Nd 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 states,
respectively, and reflect the Nd3+ oxidation state. Per-
ovskite and uncapped NNO3 are characterized by sim-
ilar Nd 3d core-level features, slightly shifted to higher
binding energy by 0.9 eV in the case of uncapped NNO
in good agreement with previous report on NNO single
crystals [19]. On the other hand, capped NNO shows a
very different Nd 3d5/2 feature, with 3d94f 3 final state
reduced in comparison to uncapped NNO, and a strongly
enhanced 3d94f 4L final state. This result shows that few
NNO unit cells (1 or 2) at the interface with the STO cap-
ping layer are not ideal. There could be several reasons
why the upper NiO2/TiO2 interface cannot be intrinsi-
cally sharp and ideal.
For example, it is known that
a NdTiNiO3 intermixed phase is created at the inter-
face between NNO and the STO-single crystal substrate
due to the atomic reconstruction that compensates the
interfacial polar discontinuity, as demonstrated by com-
bined high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
(HR-TEM) and ab-initio calculations [24]. As a conse-
quence, it is not inconceivable to expect that a similar
intermixed phase, maybe just including the interface, is
created at the top NNO/STO interface.
Furthermore,
we do not exclude a possible accumulation of hydrogen
at the interface after the topotactic process, which might
help in explaining the anomalous Nd3+ core-level spec-
trum in as-received capped reduced nickelate films.
From the STM and XPS studies of untreated (un-
capped and capped) NNO samples it clearly emerges
that their surface and interface unit cells do not have
an ideal NNO structure and stoichiometry, thus any sur-
face/interface probe of their electronic properties would
not be able to provide accurate insights about the differ-
ences between cuprates and nickelates. In the following,
we suggest possible directions to address this problem.
First, we studied the non-ideal and barely reduced sur-
face of uncapped NNO. To reduce excess oxygen and the
amount of adsorbed species due to the ex-situ exposure
to the atmosphere from the surface unit cells of uncapped
NNO, the films were annealed in situ in UHV at 250 ◦C
for 12h, as described above. Figure 3 shows XPS Ni 2p
core-level spectra (Fig. 3a before and Fig. 3b after an-
nealing). We do see pronounced changes in the core-level
spectra: first, the main core-level features in the annealed
sample shift by 0.9 eV towards lower binding energy; sec-
ond, the spectral weight of the non-local screened feature
A becomes (much) lower than the local screened final
state B; finally, the intensity of the unscreened satellite
peak (C) is strongly suppressed after annealing [19, 21].
The results suggest the reduction of the Ni2+ valence of
as-grown uncapped NNO surface towards Ni1+ in UHV
annealed NNO. At the same time, we find that the sur-
face is characterized by a metallic surface state, as shown
by in situ STM local I-V spectroscopy (inset in Fig. 3b).

Current (nA)

Bias Voltage (V)

B

C

(d)

(c)

(b)

Ni 2p

1/2

Ni 2p

3/2

Satellite

(a)

A

Uncapped

   NNO

Intensity (arb.units)

Binding Energy (eV)

 

Binding Energy (eV)

Capped NNO

 after sputtering

 

 

Capped

  NNO

3d

9

4f

 4

L

3d

9

4f

3

Nd 3d

3/2

Nd 3d

5/2

FIG. 3.
Ni 2p XPS core-level spectra of (a) as-grown and
(b) UHV annealed uncapped NNO. The black dashed line
indicates the position of the core-level Ni 2p peak shifted to
the lower binding energy after vacuum annealing.
Inset in
Fig. 4(b) shows STM local I-V spectroscopy of the uncapped
NNO after annealing (Vgap=0.2 V Itunnel=1 nA). Further
high resolution XPS main-line Nd 3d spectra of (c) As-grown
NNO samples with STO capping layer and (d) After etching
the capping layer by Ar+ sputtering with low energy of 800
eV with different cycles for 1h inside the analyzer chamber.
The black dashed line indicates the enhancement of 3d 94f 3

compared to 3d 94f 4L peak in the sputtered nickelates sample.

It is worth noting that local superconducting gap features
in uncapped Sr-doped NNO were measured in uncapped
samples after UHV annealing at a slightly reduced tem-
perature in ref. [25]. However, annealing in UHV, while
capable of recovering a metallic surface state and a Ni1+

oxidation state, is unable to change the overall morphol-
ogy and to create a long-range ordered surface lattice.
The irregular morphology on top of the terraces could not
be modified substantially by the low temperature UHV
annealing process.
We now go back to the capped NNO samples. To in-
vestigate the NNO electronic properties in capped NNO
samples, and to possibly remove the non-ideal interfacial
layer, we used gentle Ar+ ion-beam etching at the Cas-
siopee beamline, as described in the experimental details
section. In Figures 3c,d we show the effect of Ar+ ion
etching removal of the STO capping-layer on the Nd 3d
spectra, comparing XPS data acquired before (3c) and
after (3d) the capping removal. We can see that after
etching, the NNO-surface state shows a Nd3+ spectra
characterized by a substantial reduction of the promi-
nent 3d94f 4L final state feature observed before Ar+ ion
etching.
This result confirms that some kind of inter-
mixed phase was formed at the NNO/STO interface. At
the same time the Ni 2p spectrum (not shown) is essen-
tially not affected by the Ar-ion etching process, i.e. the


5

30
20
10
0
-10

Sr 4p

 

Binding Energy (eV)

 as grown

 

 0

th

 

 1

st

 

Intensity (arb. units)

 2

nd

 

 3

rd

 

 4

th

 

 5

th

 

 

 6

th

O 2s

Nd 5p

O 2p

Ni 3d

FIG. 4.
High resolution Valence Band spectra of capped-
NNO after different cycles of Ar-ion etching obtained at the
Cassiopee beamline. The spectra show, together with the VB
region, core-level Nd 5p, Sr 4p. The VB spectra (EF to -10
eV) are composed of O 2p, Ni 3d and Ti 3d contribution.

surface of the NNO sample after capping removal keeps
the overall Ni1+ valence state.
Figure 4 shows the valence band (VB) spectra of the
capped NNO sample acquired with an incident photon
energy of 600 eV and a resolution of 50 meV, includ-
ing the VB (EF to -10 eV), core level Nd 5p and Sr 4p
features after different cycles of Ar+ sputtering. In the
pristine state, the spectrum shows mostly the O 2p VB
of the topmost STO, with possible traces of in-gap Ti 3d
and Ni 3d features below EF. Moreover, the Sr 4p peak
is well visible around 20 eV of binding energy. After a few
cycles of Ar+ ion etching, and at the end of the 6th cycle
of sputtering, the Sr 4p (as well as all core levels related
to Ti and Sr ions, not shown) is gradually suppressed, a
Nd 5p feature around 18 eV binding energy appears, and
the VB changes substantially. At the end of 6th cycle,
the STO capping is removed together with the first in-
termixed NNO-STO unit cell. At the same time, the O
2p VB changes completely in shape, with a peak located
between 6-8 eV, and Ni 3d states crossing the Fermi level

show up. The final VB spectra after Ar+ sputtering have
similarities with that one of uncapped PrNiO2 measured
by soft X-ray photoemission spectroscopy, showing the
appearance of Ni 3d states crossing the Fermi-level [26].
On the other hand, the VB peak is more intense than the
Ni 3d feature. This can be possibly related to the con-
tribution to the VB of Nd 5d and Nd 4f states together
with O 2p states. From the data, we can tentatively esti-
mate the differences in binding energy between O 2p and
Ni 3d electronic states (EO2p-ENi3d), which is found to
be 2.72 eV, matching the values reported for PrNiO2 in
ref.[26]. However, the contribution to the VB from states
other than O 2p makes this estimation somewhat uncer-
tain. Assuming the value of (EO2p-ENi3d) found correct,
following ref. [26] the result suggests a Hubbard energy
U lower than the charge transfer energy ∆ (U≤ ∆).

IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we investigated the surface/interface elec-
tronic properties of uncapped and capped infinite-layer
nickelates.
The experimental results of our combined
STM and photoemission spectroscopy studies show that
the surface and interface unit cells of uncapped and
capped NNO are not ideal.
While uncapped NNO is
characterized by an insulating surface state and a Ni-
valence remarkably similar to reference NNO3 perovskite,
capped NNO shows mostly Ni in Ni1+ configuration. On
the other hand, at the interface with the STO capping
an intermixed non-ideal layer, presumably of NdTiNiOx
composition (and possibly excess hydrogen), is formed. A
metallic surface with a Ni1+ valence state was restored
via annealing in UHV at 250 ◦C in uncapped NNO, while
an Ar+ ion sputtering process was necessary to access the
electronic properties of capped NNO samples by remov-
ing the STO layers and the interfacial (non-ideal) unit
cell. In this way, we could provide an experimental study
of the VB of Ni1+ NdNiO2 nickelate and access the near
Fermi level electronic properties, giving further support
to the classification of these oxides as Hubbard or inter-
mediate between Hubbard and charge transfer insulators.
Our work represents a step towards the goal of cre-
ating an ideal NdNiO2 surface state, which could allow
deep investigations by surface spectroscopy methods like
angle-resolved photoemission. While annealing in UHV
and ion-sputtering are not yet sufficient to establish long-
range atomically flat ideal NiO2 surfaces on samples pre-
pared by ex-situ CaH2 topotactic reduction of perovskite
NdNiO3 samples, their opportune combination and opti-
mization are promising for future studies aimed at pre-
serving not only the stoichiometry but also the long-range
surface structural order. These methods combined with
the novel in-situ approaches of realization of infinite layer
nickelates, like hydrogen thermal cracker technique [3]
and metal overlayer deposition [4], or the investigation
of other epitaxially-grown capping-layers seem promising
in the direction to improve the surface quality of infinite-


6

layer nickelates.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the European Union’s
Horizon 2022 research and innovation programme un-
der the Marie Sklodowska-Curie project MODERN,
grant agreement No.
101108695, and by the Ministry
of University and Research project PRIN QTFLUO
No.20207ZXT4Z. This work was funded by the French
National Research Agency (ANR) through the ANR-
JCJC FOXIES ANR-21-CE08-0021. This work was also

done as part of the Interdisciplinary Thematic Institute
QMat, ITI 2021 2028 program of the University of Stras-
bourg, CNRS and Inserm, and supported by IdEx Unis-
tra (ANR 10 IDEX 0002), and by SFRI STRAT’US
project (ANR 20 SFRI 0012) and EUR QMAT ANR-17-
EURE-0024 under the framework of the French Invest-
ments for the Future Program. The synchrotron experi-
ments were performed at SOLEIL under proposal number
20220304, and the staff of Cassiopee beamline is acknowl-
edged for their technical support. We acknowledge Prof.
G. Ghiringhelli for the discussions on the physics of nick-
elates.

[1] V. I. Anisimov,
D. Bukhvalov,
and T. M. Rice,
Phys. Rev. B 59, 7901 (1999).
[2] D. Li, K. Lee, B. Y. Wang, M. Osada, S. Crossley,
H. R. Lee, Y. Cui, Y. Hikita,
and H. Y. Hwang,
Nature 572, 624 (2019).
[3] C.
T.
Parzyck,
N.
K.
Gupta,
Y.
Wu,
V.
Anil,
L.
Bhatt,
M.
Bouliane,
R.
Gong,
B.
Z.
Gre-
gory,
A. Luo,
R. Sutarto,
F. He,
Y.-D. Chuang,
T. Zhou, G. Herranz, L. F. Kourkoutis, A. Singer,
D. G. Schlom, D. G. Hawthorn,
and K. M. Shen,
Nat. Mater. (2024), 10.1038/s41563-024-01797-0.
[4] W. Wei, K. Shin, H. Hong, Y. Shin, A. S. Thind,
Y. Yang, R. F. Klie, F. J. Walker,
and C. H. Ahn,
Phys. Rev. Mater. 7, 013802 (2023).
[5] W. Wei, D. Vu, Z. Zhang, F. J. Walker, and C. H. Ahn,
Sci. Adv. 9, eadh3327 (2023).
[6] S. W. Zeng, X. M. Yin, C. J. Li, L. E. Chow, C. S. Tang,
K. Han, Z. Huang, Y. Cao, D. Y. Wan, Z. T. Zhang, Z. S.
Lim, C. Z. Diao, P. Yang, A. T. S. Wee, S. J. Pennycook,
and A. Ariando, Nat. Commun. 13, 743 (2022).
[7] A. Raji, G. Krieger, N. Viart, D. Preziosi, J.-P. Rueff,
and A. Gloter, Small 19, 2304872 (2023).
[8] G. Krieger, L. Martinelli, S. Zeng, L. E. Chow, K. Kum-
mer, R. Arpaia, M. Moretti Sala, N. B. Brookes, A. Ar-
iando, N. Viart, M. Salluzzo, G. Ghiringhelli,
and
D. Preziosi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 027002 (2022).
[9] C. C. Tam, J. Choi, X. Ding, S. Agrestini, A. Nag,
M. Wu, B. Huang, H. Luo, P. Gao, M. Garc´ıa-Fern´andez,
L. Qiao, and K.-J. Zhou, Nat. Mater. 21, 1116 (2022).
[10] M. Rossi, M. Osada, J. Choi, S. Agrestini, D. Jost,
Y. Lee, H. Lu, B. Y. Wang, K. Lee, A. Nag, Y.-D.
Chuang, C.-T. Kuo, S.-J. Lee, B. Moritz, T. P. Dev-
ereaux, Z.-X. Shen, J.-S. Lee, K.-J. Zhou, H. Y. Hwang,
and W.-S. Lee, Nat. Phys. 18, 869 (2022).
[11] M. Hepting, D. Li, C. J. Jia, H. Lu, E. Paris, Y. Tseng,
X. Feng, M. Osada, E. Been, Y. Hikita, Y.-D. Chuang,
Z. Hussain, K. J. Zhou, A. Nag, M. Garcia-Fernandez,
M. Rossi, H. Y. Huang, D. J. Huang, Z. X. Shen,
T. Schmitt, H. Y. Hwang, B. Moritz, J. Zaanen, T. P.
Devereaux, and W. S. Lee, Nat. Mater. 19, 381 (2020).
[12] J. Karp, A. S. Botana, M. R. Norman, H. Park, M. Zingl,
and A. Millis, Phys. Rev. X 10, 021061 (2020).
[13] J. Fowlie, M. Hadjimichael, M. M. Martins, D. Li,
M. Osada, B. Y. Wang, K. Lee, Y. Lee, Z. Salman,

T. Prokscha, J.-M. Triscone, H. Y. Hwang, and A. Suter,
Nat. Phys. 18, 1043 (2022).
[14] D. Preziosi, A. Sander, A. Barth´el´emy,
and M. Bibes,
AIP Advances 7, 015210 (2017).
[15] G. Krieger, A. Raji, L. Schlur, G. Versini, C. Bouil-
let, M. Lenertz, J. Robert, A. Gloter, N. Viart,
and
D. Preziosi, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 56, 024003 (2022).
[16] N. Fairley, V. Fernandez, M. Richard-Plouet, C. Guillot-
Deudon, J. Walton, E. Smith, D. Flahaut, M. Greiner,
M. Biesinger, S. Tougaard, D. Morgan,
and J. Baltru-
saitis, Appl. Surf. Sci. Adv. 5, 100112 (2021).
[17] M.
A.
van
Veenendaal
and
G.
A.
Sawatzky,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2459 (1993).
[18] M. van Veenendaal, Phys. Rev. B 74, 085118 (2006).
[19] Y. Fu, L. Wang, H. Cheng, S. Pei, X. Zhou, J. Chen,
S. Wang, R. Zhao, W. Jiang, C. Liu, M. Huang, X. Wang,
Y. Zhao, D. Yu, F. Ye, S. Wang, and J.-W. Mei, (2020),
arXiv:1911.03177 [cond-mat.supr-con].
[20] V. Bisogni,
S. Catalano,
R. J. Green,
M. Gibert,
R. Scherwitzl, Y. Huang, V. N. Strocov, P. Zubko, S. Ba-
landeh, J.-M. Triscone, G. Sawatzky,
and T. Schmitt,
Nat. Commun. 7, 13017 (2016).
[21] K. Higashi, M. Winder, J. Kuneˇs,
and A. Hariki,
Phys. Rev. X 11, 041009 (2021).
[22] M.
Taguchi,
A. Chainani,
K.
Horiba,
Y. Takata,
M. Yabashi,
K. Tamasaku,
Y. Nishino,
D. Miwa,
T. Ishikawa, T. Takeuchi, K. Yamamoto, M. Mat-
sunami, S. Shin, T. Yokoya, E. Ikenaga, K. Kobayashi,
T. Mochiku, K. Hirata, J. Hori, K. Ishii, F. Nakamura,
and T. Suzuki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 177002 (2005).
[23] M.
A.
van
Veenendaal
and
G.
A.
Sawatzky,
Phys. Rev. B 49, 3473 (1994).
[24] B. H. Goodge, B. Geisler, K. Lee, M. Osada, B. Y. Wang,
D. Li, H. Y. Hwang, R. Pentcheva, and L. F. Kourkoutis,
Nat. Mater. 22, 466 (2023).
[25] Q. Gu, Y. Li, S. Wan, H. Li, W. Guo, H. Yang,
Q. Li, X. Zhu, X. Pan, Y. Nie,
and H.-H. Wen,
Nat. Commun. 11, 6027 (2020).
[26] Z. Chen, M. Osada, D. Li, E. M. Been, S.-D. Chen,
M. Hashimoto, D. Lu, S.-K. Mo, K. Lee, B. Y. Wang,
F. Rodolakis, J. L. McChesney, C. Jia, B. Moritz,
T. P. Devereaux, H. Y. Hwang,
and Z.-X. Shen,
Matter 5, 1806 (2022).


