High-temperature growth of GaN nanowires by molecular beam epitaxy: 
toward the materials quality of bulk GaN

J. K. Zettler,a) C. Hauswald, P. Corfdir, M. Musolino, L. Geelhaar, H. Riechert, O. Brandt, and S. Ferna´ndez-Garrido
Paul-Drude-Institut für Festkörperelektronik, Hausvogteiplatz 5–7, 10117 Berlin, Germany

(Dated: 9 December 2014)

In molecular beam epitaxy, the spontaneous formation of GaN nanowires on Si(111) substrates at elevated tem-
peratures is limited by the long incubation time that precedes nanowire nucleation. In this work, we present three 
unconventional growth approaches to minimize the incubation time and thus facilitate significantly higher growth 
temperatures (up to 875◦C). We achieve this by: (i) using III/V flux ratios larger than one to compensate for Ga des-
orption, (ii) introducing a two-step growth procedure, and (iii) using an AlN buffer layer to favor GaN nucleation. 
The GaN nanowire ensembles grown at so far unexplored substrate temperatures exhibit excitonic transitions with 
sub-meV linewidths and the low-temperature photoluminescence spectra are comparable to those of state-of-the-art 
free-standing GaN layers grown by hydride vapor phase epitaxy.

In crystal growth, the concentration of points defects as 

well as the incorporation of impurities decrease with increas-
ing growth temperature. The optimal growth temperature of 
III-V compound semiconductors has been theoretically pre-
dicted to be close to half of their melting point.1,2 In plasma-
assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PA-MBE), however, the 
maximum achievable temperature for the growth of GaN 
films is limited by thermal decomposition because this mate-
rial is thermodynamically unstable at pressures typical in the 
molecular beam regime (< 10−4 Torr).3,4 Furthermore, to 
promote step-flow growth and obtain smooth GaN films, the 
maintenance of a surfactant Ga-adlayer on the surface is re-
quired.5–7 Due to the exponential increase of Ga desorption 
with substrate temperature, this requirement implies an addi-
tional temperature limitation. For these reasons, the typical 
substrate temperatures reported for the growth of GaN films 
by PA-MBE are around 700◦C. This value is well below half 
of the melting point temperature and approximately 300◦C 
lower than the optimal temperatures used in other epitaxial 
growth techniques, such as metalorganic chemical vapor de-
position (MOCVD) or hydride vapor phase epitaxy (HVPE). 

Unlike GaN films, the spontaneous formation of GaN 

nanowires (NWs) in PA-MBE does not require the presence 
of a Ga-adlayer because these nanostructures form only un-
der N-excess.8,9 In addition, the N-rich environment allows 
for a significant reduction in the effective GaN decompo-

sition rate. In fact, GaN decomposition has been found to 
be negligible during NW elongation up to at least 835◦C.

Therefore, the growth of GaN in the form of NWs instead of 
films does not only allow for the growth of single-crystalline 
GaN on dissimilar substrates but also for the use of signifi-
cantly higher (> 100◦C) substrate temperatures.

In this context, it is worth noting that recent experiments 

demonstrated that the maximum achievable substrate tem-
perature for the growth of GaN NWs on Si(111) substrates 
is not limited by the elongation stage but by the long delay 
time that precedes the spontaneous formation of GaN NWs 
in PA-MBE.10 This delay time, known as incubation time,

a)Electronic mail: zettler@pdi-berlin.de

strongly depends on the impinging fluxes as well as on the 
substrate temperature.10 Thus, the key to achieve even higher 
growth temperatures consists in reducing the incubation time 
as much as possible.

In this work, we introduce three different growth ap-

proaches conceived to decrease the incubation time and 
thereby enable the growth of GaN NWs on Si substrates at 
so far unexplored substrate temperatures (up to 875◦C ). The 
first approach consist in leaving the commonly used growth 
regime of nominally N-rich growth conditions, i. e., a ratio 
between the impinging Ga and N fluxes lower than one. In-
stead, we use nominally Ga-rich growth conditions (i. e., in 
terms of the impinging fluxes) to compensate for the high 
desorption rate of Ga adatoms at elevated substrate tempera-
tures. In the second approach, we use a two-step growth pro-
cedure. There, a lower substrate temperature is used during 
the first step to favor NW nucleation. Finally, in the third ap-
proach, we enhance GaN nucleation by introducing an AlN 
buffer layer. Independent of the growth approach, we found 
that the low-temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra of 
these high-temperature-grown GaN NWs is comparable to 
those of state-of-the-art free-standing GaN (FS-GaN) layers 
grown by HVPE.

All samples were grown on 2ff Si(111) substrates in a 

MBE system equipped with a radio-frequency N2 plasma 
source for active N and solid-source effusion cells for Ga and 
Al. The impinging Ga and N fluxes were calibrated in equiv-
alent growth rate units of nm/min, as described in detail in 
Ref. 6. A growth rate of 1 nm/min is equivalent to 7.3 × 1013
atoms/cm2. The substrate temperature was measured using 
an optical pyrometer calibrated with the 1 × 1 to 7× 7 surface 
reconstruction transition temperature of Si(111) (≈ 860◦).11
The as-received Si substrates were etched using diluted (5%) 
HF. Prior to growth, the substrates were first outgassed at 
885◦C for 30 min to remove any residual SixOy from the 
surface. Afterwards, the substrates were exposed to an ac-
tive nitrogen flux of ΦN = (11.0 ± 0.5) nm/min at the growth 
temperature for 10 min, except for those samples prepared 
on AlN-buffered Si. Details about the preparation of the 
AlN buffer layers can be found in Ref. 12. All samples 
were grown with ΦN = (11.0 ± 0.5) nm/min. Continuous-


2

FIG. 2. Bird-eye scanning electron micrographs of GaN NW en-
sembles prepared on Si at elevated substrates. In (a) we use a two-
step growth scheme and in (b) we introduced an AlN buffer layer 
nucleation to enhance GaN nucleation.

FIG. 1. (a)-(e) Bird-eye scanning electron micrographs of GaN 
NW ensembles grown on bare Si using different temperatures and 
III/V flux ratios. The NW ensembles shown in (a)-(c) were grown 
using N-rich growth conditions while those shown in (d) and (e) 
were grown using nominally Ga-rich growth conditions. (f) Plan-
view optical microscope image of the sample grown at 875◦C with 
III/V= 2.3. The inset shows a bird-eye scanning electron micro-
graphs taken on one of the dark spots observed at the optical mi-
croscope. The scale bar of the inset corresponds to 1µm.

wave µ-PL experiments were carried out using a He-Cd 
laser (λ = 325 nm) with a power areal density of less than 
150 nW/µm2. The luminescence was dispersed by an 80
cm Horiba Jobin Yvon monochromator and detected by a 
charge-coupled device detector. The spectral resolution of 
the system is ≈ 250 µeV. More details on the PL measure-
ments can be found elsewhere.13

Figures 1(a)-(c) show scanning electron micrographs of 

GaN NW ensembles grown on bare Si at substrate tempera-
tures between 785◦C and 835◦C. These three samples were 
grown using the conventional growth approach, namely, a 
constant III/V flux ratio lower than one. The growth time 
for the samples grown at 785 and 815◦C was ≈ 4 hours. In 
contrast, for the sample grown at 835◦C, we needed to in-
crease the growth time up to 7.5 hours to obtain NWs with

an average length comparable to that of the sample grown 
at 815◦C. As discussed in Refs., the extra time was needed 
to compensate for the exponential increase in the incuba-
tion time caused by the higher substrate temperature. Con-
sequently, for the III/V flux ratio used in these two samples 
(0.5), growth at even higher temperatures becomes unfeasi-
ble.

Figures 1(d) and (e) illustrate the results obtained when 

the substrate temperature is increased by using the first 
growth approach proposed in this work, i. e., the use of nom-
inally Ga-rich growth conditions. As can be seen in the fig-

ures, this growth approach allow us to grow GaN NWs at 

substrate temperatures as high as 875◦C in reasonable times 
(the growth times for the samples grown at 855 and 875◦C 
were 7 and 8 hours, respectively). As obvious from the mi-
crographs shown in Fig.1, these GaN NWs ensembles are of 
similar density and morphology as those grown under N-rich 
growth conditions at lower temperatures. We stress that, de-
spite of the large III/V flux ratios (up to 2.3) used to induce 

the formation of GaN NWs at 855 and 875◦C, the growth 

still takes place under N-excess because of the high desorp-
tion rate of Ga adatoms. Otherwise, as explained in Ref., a 
compact layer would have formed due to NW radial growth. 
Interestingly, at growth temperatures above 850◦C, we ob-
served that Ga reacts with the Si substrate. This phenom-

ena, known as ”melt-back etching”, is a well-known problem 
for the growth of GaN on Si at high-temperatures by other 
epitaxial growth techniques.14 As shown in Fig.1(f), the ef-
fects caused by Ga-induced melt-back etching can be seen 
in both optical and scanning electron micrographs. At the 

optical microscope we see a high density of dark spots that, 
as shown in the scanning electron micrograph, correspond to 
the formation of holes in the Si substrate. These holes can 
be as deep as a few hundreds of nanometers and their size as 
well as density increase with the substrate temperature and 
the impinging Ga flux. As can also been seen in the inset of 
Fig.1(f), the holes leads to the tilting and clustering of the
adjacent GaN NWs.

For the growth approach introduced above, the maximum 

achievable substrate temperature is still limited by the long 
incubation time that precedes the spontaneous formation of


3

eGa

eba

81.0
81.2
81..
81.6
81.8

81..
81.6
81.8
81.8

TETeg eTVa

GaN NWs. Our second growth approach aims at reducing 
the incubation time by using a two-step growth scheme. In 
the first step, conventional growth conditions, i. e., a moder-
ated substrate temperature and a III/V flux ratio lower than 
one, are used to keep short the incubation time. Once the 
formation of the first GaN NWs is detected by reflection 
high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED),15,16 the growth 
temperature is increased for the second step of the growth. 
For this final stage, the III/V flux ratio can be kept constant. 
However, the use of nominally Ga-rich growth conditions at 
this stage allows for the use of even higher substrate tem-
peratures. Figure 2(a) presents a scanning electron micro-
graph of a GaN NW ensemble prepared using the two-step 
growth scheme. For the first step, we used the conditions 
employed for the growth of the sample shown in Fig. 1(b). 
After observing the onset of NW formation by RHEED, the 
substrate temperature and the III/V flux ratio were increased 
up to 855◦C and 1.5, respectively. The total growth time
for this sample was ≈ 6 h, i. e., 1 h less than for the sample 
shown in Fig. 1(b). Nevertheless, despite the shorter growth 
time, both the morphological properties (average length and 
diameter, number density and coalescence degree) and the 
low-temperature PL spectra (not shown here) of these two 
samples are basically identical.

Our third growth approach exploits the fact that the incu-

bation time does not only depend on the growth conditions 
but also on the type of substrate.12,17–19 For instance, it has 
been shown before that the introduction of an AlN buffer 
layer favors GaN nucleation on Si substrates.12,17,18 There-
fore, for a single-step growth approach and identical imping-
ing fluxes, one would expect to achieve higher growth tem-
peratures on AlN-buffered Si substrates. Figure 2(b) demon-
strates that this is actually the case. As can be seen in the 
figure, the introduction of a 26 nm thick AlN buffer layer en-
ables the direct growth of GaN NWs at temperatures as high 
as 875◦C under N-rich growth conditions (III/V = 0.9). Of 
course, combining this approach with the use of nominally 
Ga-rich conditions facilitates even higher growth tempera-
tures.

The results presented so far show that, by using non-

conventional growth approaches, it is possible to grow GaN 
NWs at significantly higher temperatures than those previ-
ously reported in the literature. The high temperature growth 
of GaN NWs is, however, accompanied by Ga-induced melt-
back etching of the Si substrate. This phenomenon locally 
influences the morphology as well as the orientation and dis-
tribution of GaN NWs. The melt-back etching is more pro-
nounced in those samples grown under nominally metal-rich 
growth conditions but still present in all other NW ensem-

FIG. 3. (a) Normalized and vertically shifted low-temperature
(10 K) PL spectra of GaN NW ensembles grown on bare and
AlN-buffered Si substrates at different temperatures. (b) Low-
temperature PL spectra of the near band-edge region of GaN NW
ensembles grown at 875◦C on bare and AlN-buffered Si. The inset 
shows the variation in the linewidth of the (O0,XA) transition with 
the growth temperature for the GaN NW ensembles prepared on 
bare Si. For comparison purposes, the PL spectrum of a state-of-
the-art FS-GaN layer is also included in (a) and (b). The horizontal 
dashed line in the inset of Fig. (b) indicates the linewidth of the 
(O0,XA) for the FS-GaN layer.

bles prepared at substrate temperatures above XXX◦C. In 
the following, we examine the influence of the growth tem-
perature on the optical properties of GaN NW ensembles by 
low-temperature (10 K) PL spectroscopy.

Figure 3(a) shows the near band-edge PL spectra of GaN 

NW ensembles grown at different temperatures on either 
bare or AlN-buffered Si substrates. For comparison pur-
poses, we also included the PL spectrum of a state-of-the-
art 500 µm thick free-standing GaN (FS-GaN) layer grown

-GN NW sA N

GN

GN

870
880
880
880

e(ºa

-GN NW sA N

GN

)P LintinLnt y(ab .iLnnX
)P LintinLnt y(ab .iLnnX

y(OlX X ymteX

A

y IlXX

yAOlX X

A

y(OlX X
)X
A

y(LOlX X
A

y(OlX X
B
yAOlX X
A

y(OlX X
X

y(OlXAX

A

B
XA

XB


4

by HVPE. The dislocation density of the FS-GaN layer pro-
vided by SINANO is of the order of XX×10x cm2. As can be 
seen in the figure, independent of the substrate temperature, 
the PL spectra of the NW ensembles are dominated by the 
donor-bound exciton transition (D0,XA) at 3.471 eV. For the 
samples grown at temperatures up to 835◦C, this transition is 
accompanied by a feature-less exponential tail toward lower 
energies. Besides the (D0,XA) transition, we also observe
in all samples the unknown exciton (UX) transition [at the 
same energy as the two-electron satellite (TES) peak in the 
FS-GaN] as well as the (I1,X) emission from stacking faults 
(SFs). For the samples grown on bare Si, we found that
the SF-related luminescence monotonically increases with 
increasing substrate temperature.

Figure 3(b) shows, in more detail, the PL spectra around 

the (D0,XA) transition of the GaN NWs prepared at 875◦C
as well as the one of the FS-GaN layer. For all samples,
the (D0,XA) transition is so narrow that we can distinguish, 
without deconvoluting this line, the individual contribution 
of neutral O and Si donors, i. e., the (O0,XA) and (Si0,XA) 
transitions. Apart from these lines, we also observe the 
donor-bound exciton (D0,XB), the free-exciton XA and the 
acceptor-bound exciton (A0,XA) transitions at higher ener-
gies. All these lines can be easily resolved in these NW en-
sembles because the PL transitions become narrower with 
increasing substrate temperature. For instance, as can be 
seen in the inset of Fig. 3(b), the linewidth of the (O0,XA) 
transition for the NWs prepared on bare Si monotonically 
decreases from 2.2 to 0.5 meV when the substrate tempera-
ture is increased from 785 to 875◦C. The linewidth at 875◦C 
is thus comparable to the 0.3 meV measured in the FS-
GaN layer and much lower than the values reported in the 
literature for NW ensembles grown at lower temperatures 
(1 − 3 meV).

The narrowing of the PL lines with increasing substrate 

temperature is accompanied by a change in the intensity ratio

NW ensembles which exhibit unprecedentedly narrow donor 
bound-exciton transitions as well as unintentional doping 
due the to the melt-back etching of the Si substrate.

If the contribution of surface donors to the photolumines-

cence of our high-temperature GaN NW ensembles is neg-
ligible, the PL-spectra must resemble the materials quality 
of the NW cores. When comparing the PL spectra of the 
NW ensemble grown on bare Si at 875◦C with that of the 
FS-GaN layer (see Fig. 3), we observe that both the posi-
tion and linewidths of the bound- and free-exciton transitions 
are quite comparable. Therefore, despite the large lattice-
mismatch between Si and GaN (16.9%), these ≈ 2 µm long 
GaN NWs are free of homogeneous strain and of similar op-
tical quality as 500 µm thick FS-GaN layers. In addition, 
due to the better light extraction efficiency for the NW mor-
phology, we found that the integrated PL intensity of the NW 
ensemble is one order of magnitude higher. Thus, the fabri-
cation of GaN NWs at until now unexplored substrate tem-
peratures along with the likely ionization of surface donors 
caused by unintentional Si doping have resulted in NW en-
sembles with unprecedented optical properties. Neverthe-
less, further studies are needed to disentangle the influences 
of the substrate temperature and unintentional doping on the 
PL spectra of high-temperature GaN NW ensembles.

We would like to thank Anne-Kathrin Bluhm for pro-

viding the scanning electron micrographs presented in this 
work, Hans-Peter Scho¨nherr for his dedicated maintenance 
of the MBE system, and XXX for a critical reading of the 
manuscript. Financial support of this work by the Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft within SFB 951 is gratefully ac-
knowledged.

1W. K. Burton, N. Cabrera, and F. C. Frank, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
A. 243, 299 (1951).

2A. Ishizaka and Y. Murata, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 6, L693 (1994).
3N. Newman, J. Cryst. Growth 178, 102 (1997).

between the (Si0,XA) and (O0,XA) transitions [see Fig. 3(a)].

4S. Ferna´ndez-Garrido, G. Koblmu¨ller, E. Calleja, and J. S. Speck, J. Appl.
Phys. 104, 33541 (2008).

Namely, the higher the substrate temperature, the larger the 
ratio. This fact indicates that Si incorporation is thermally 
enhanced. As none of these samples was intentionally Si-
doped, we attribute Si incorporation to the melt-back etch-
ing of the Si substrate. Since the presence of Si adatoms
20,21

5T. Zywietz, J. Neugebauer, and M. Scheffler, Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 487
(1998).

6B. Heying, R. Averbeck, L. F. Chen, E. Haus, H. Riechert, and J. S.
Speck, J. Appl. Phys. 88, 1855 (2000).

7G. Koblmu¨ller, S. Ferna´ndez-Garrido, E. Calleja, and J. S. Speck, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 91, 161904 (2007).

decreases the formation energy of basal plane SFs,
the

melt-back etching may also explain the monotonic increase 
in the intensity of the (I1,X) transition with the substrate tem-
perature.

The linewidth of the excitonic transitions in semiconduc-

tor crystals scales with the materials quality. In GaN layers, 
the linewidth of these transitions is determined by the pres-
ence of point as well as structural defects. However, in GaN 
NWs, there is an additional broadening mechanism, namely, 
the energy dispersion of donor bound-exciton states result-
ing from their varying distances to the NW sidewall sur-
faces.22,23 Interestingly, it has been recently proposed that
n-type doping levels on the order of 1016–1018 cm−2 may 
lead to the ionization of surface donors and thereby dimin-
ished surface induced broadening effects.13 We believe, that 
this may be actually the case for our high-temperature GaN

8M. A. Sanchez-Garc´ıa, E. Calleja, E. Monroy, F. Sanchez, F. Calle,
E. Mun˜oz, and R. Beresford, J. Cryst. Growth 183, 23 (1998).

9R. Calarco, R. J. Meijers, R. K. Debnath, T. Stoica, E. Sutter, and H. Lu¨th,
Nano Lett. 7, 2248 (2007).

10S. Ferna´ndez-Garrido, J. K. Zettler, L. Geelhaar, and O. Brandt, XXX

XXX, XXXXX (2014).

11T. Suzuki and Y. Hirabayashi, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 32,

L610 (1993).

12M. Musolino, A. Tahraoui, S. Ferna´ndez-Garrido, O. Brandt, A. Tram-

pert, L. Geelhaar, and H. Riechert, Nanotechnology XXX, XXXXX
(2014).

13P. Corfdir, J. K. Zettler, C. Hauswald, S. Ferna´ndez-Garrido, O. Brandt,

and P. Lefebvre, Physical Review B XXX, XXXXX (2014).

14D. Zhu, D. J. Wallis, and C. J. Humphreys, Reports on Progress in

Physics 76, 106501 (2013).

15V. Consonni, M. Knelangen, L. Geelhaar, A. Trampert, and H. Riechert,

Physical Review B 81, 085310 (2010).

16V. Consonni, M. Hanke, M. Knelangen, L. Geelhaar, A. Trampert, and

H. Riechert, Physical Review B 83, 035310 (2011).


5

17K. A. Bertness, A. W. Sanders, D. M. Rourke, T. E. Harvey, A. Roshko,

J. B. Schlager, and N. A. Sanford, Adv. Funct. Mater. 20, 2911 (2010).

18T. Schumann, T. Gotschke, F. Limbach, T. Stoica, and R. Calarco, Nan-

otechnology 22, 095603 (2011).

19M. Sobanska, K. Klosek, J. Borysiuk, S. Kret, G. Tchutchulasvili, S. Gier-

altowska, and Z. R. Zytkiewicz, J. Appl. Phys. 115, 043517 (2014).

20J. A. Chisholm and P. D. Bristowe, Appl. Phys. Lett. 77, 534 (2000).

21P. Corfdir, C. Hauswald, J. K. Zettler, T. Flissikowski, J. La¨hnemann,

S. Ferna´ndez-Garrido, H. T. Grahn, and O. Brandt, Physical Review B
XXX, XXXXX (2014).

22P. Corfdir, P. Lefebvre, J. Ristic´, P. Valvin, E. Calleja, A. Trampert, J.-D.

Ganie`re, and B. Deveaud-Ple´dran, J. Appl. Phys. 105, 013113 (2009).

23O. Brandt, C. Pfu¨ller, C. Che`ze, L. Geelhaar, and H. Riechert, Physical

Review B 81, 45302 (2010).


