Enhancement of the catalytic activity upon the surface of strongly disordered

hollow Pt nanoparticles: a First Principles investigation.

Olivier Le Bacq1 

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, SIMaP, F-38000 Grenoble, France

date: 11/24/23

A series of First Principles calculations is undertaken to characterize and explain the

enhancement of the catalytic activity of oxygen on top of very disordered nanomaterials

of Pt. As the adsorption of OH fragment on top of the surfaces is known as the limiting

factor  in  the  Oxygen  Reduction  Reactions  (ORR)  process  in  these  systems,  our

calculations propose to determine the influence of the local geometry of the various

sites on the adsorption energy of OH  in order to discover a simple  descriptor allowing

to predict the reactivity at these surfaces as a function of their morphology and strain.

For this purpose, the geometry of Pt slabs with various thickness (3, 5 and 7 atomic

layers) including a large number of point defects are optimized in order to generate a

very rich catalog of inequivalent sites of reactivity on both surfaces of the slabs. Given

the very large distortion of the geometry of the sites, these latter had to be categorized

into  several  classes  for  which  the  behavior  with  respect  to  catalytic  activity  is

determined. A new descriptor taking into account the distortion of the geometry of the

sites is introduced, allowing to recover the  linear dependence of the adsorption energy

of OH with respect to the effective coordination number of the sites, as observed in

highly symmetric and planar surfaces of Pt.

1 Corresponding author: olivier.lebacq@grenoble-inp.fr


Introduction.

Electrochemical storage and conversion systems such as electrolysers and fuel cells will be major

actors. They can store electrical energy into chemical energy via water electrolysis (for example

into the H-H bond of the H2 molecule), and convert back this chemical energy into electrical energy

via a fuel cell when needed[1]. A major challenge in these systems is to find highly active and

stable materials to sustainably catalyse the electrochemical reactions[2]. 

The research in electrocatalysis has focused on binding electrochemical reactions intermediates in

a balanced way  (that is neither too strong nor too weak). A prominent example is the oxygen

reduction reaction (ORR), the cathodic reaction in low temperature proton-exchange membrane

fuel cells (PEMFCs). Weakening the chemisorption energies  of the ORR intermediates (OHads,

OOHads and Oads), and thus enhancing the overall kinetics proved experimentally possible  on

platinum (Pt, the most active pure catalyst for the ORR in acidic media at medium temperature T ~

353 K) surfaces alloyed with an early[3] or late  [4] transition metal (referred to as M in what

follows). The findings made on extended surfaces were then transposed on nanometre-sized

particles, and led to the emergence of different catalyst’s architectures including pure PtM alloys

[2.a-5],  Pt  skin/skeleton  PtM-type  catalysts[6],  Pt-monolayer-type  catalysts,[7] dealloyed  PtM

nanoparticles,[8] preferentially-shaped  nanoparticles,[5.b-9] nanostructured  thin  films[10],  and

porous PtM catalysts[11] .

 In this context, we pursue our investigation of distorted Pt surfaces as an elementary

model for the walls of the Pt nanomaterials. Following a detailed analysis of the geometry of these

systems that can be found in Ref. [12] and an outlining of the role played by the surface distortion

(Ref. [13]) as a unifying descriptor,  the present work tries to determine an implicit descriptor taking

into account the local geometry of the catalytic sites that could allow to rationalize the behaviour of

ORR process on the distorted surface of the nanomaterials. Following the works of Calle-Vallejo et

al. (Ref. [14]), we consider the adsorption of the OH fragment, occuring in  the electrochemical

reactions intermediates of the ORR, as the limiting factor, mainly piloting the efficiency of the

catalytic activity: a too binding OH fragment located on a specific surface site will poorly contributes

to the ORR since its inability to leave that site. To the opposite, a local geometry presenting an

unfavourable situation for OH adsorption will hardly allow OH to adsorbate on the surface. Here,

we propose to calculate the adsorption energies of OH for a large variety of local distorted

geometries in order to find a descriptor allowing to classify the sites with respect to the catalytic

activity. 

After relaxation of the slabs, DFT calculations permit to access the full distribution of

distances around every surface sites. This work aims to use this knowledge to form a geometry-

dependent  descriptor, capable  of predicting  the adsorption energy of OH  without having to

consider the impossible DFT calculation of all the adsorption energies on every sites. For this

purpose, we realized that the sites  could be recast into families or types  that shall be describe in


details in paragraph 2.a. For selected sites of these families, a series of DFT calculations of the

adsorption energy of OH were operated  and stored in a data base. This allowed an acceptable

and feasible amount of calculations permitting to fit the behaviour of this energy with respect to a

suitable  variable, representing the aspect of the local geometry of the site on which the adsorption

is considered. We establish this law of behaviour in paragraph 4 before illustrating its scope.

1.
Methods.

a.
Strategy of calculation. 

Although made of an assembly of fcc nanocrystals of Pt, orientated both [111] and [100] in

order to close the nanoparticles, our first investigation of their wall will focus on the most stable

[111] surface (hexagonal symmetry). Slabs of 3, 5 and 7  8x8 layers involving 200 to 448 atoms

were prepared (see Fig. 1). The modeling of the step-by-step elaboration of the nanoparticles

being out of reach by means of our DFT calculations, we have mimicked the effects of such an

elaboration by introducing an inhomogeneous density of points defects in the wall as suggested by

the experimental mechanisms of elimination of particles of substrate (Ni) during the gradual making

of the nanomaterial. The vacancies are introduced at random in the slab with the constraint to be

found in larger amount in both first layers defining the surface than deep inside the wall (one layer

for the 3 and  5 layers slab and 3 layers for the 7 layers slab since two surfaces have to be

considered). This latter point, suggested by the experiments,  conveys that atoms of substrates are

more easily evacuated at the surface, leaving points defects in this later during the process, than

inside the wall under self-construction, in which Ni atoms are  extracted too, but in a lower extent,

while a fraction of them remain trapped (about 12%).  In the present study, the Ni atoms are

considered as fully evacuated and will not be taken into consideration.

As the amount of vacancies involved in the process of elaboration of our nanoparticles is

unknown, the number of point defects we introduced in the slabs were considered as a variable in

our problem : for this purpose,  in the case of the 5 layers slab which is considered as our

reference, , the density of vacancies, denoted ρv in the followings, were varied from a low value of

30 % to the upper limit of 50 %, by successive increase of 5 %. Below 30 %, the phenomena of

reconstruction of surface were found similar to the one encountered in the 30 % case and 50 %

found large enough to explore all the variety of morphologies made possible by the massive

introduction of vacancies in these systems. 

Such a procedure led after relaxation to the determination of the equilibrium structure

(surface and inner structure) of the walls of the Pt nanoparticles for various thickness, obtained

under varying conditions: the larger ρv, the more our model of wall is supposed to represent an

actual wall resulting from a large and penetrating diffusion of atoms of the Ni substrate during its


elaboration. Low densities of defects could result from a slow and moderate diffusion of Ni inside

the Pt multilayers under forming. 

Figure  1: Typical geometries obtained after relaxation of our 5, 3 and 7 layers slabs. For each line, a

perspective view as well as the view of the top and bottom surface of the slab is shown.

b.
Settings of the calculation.

To compute structural and electronic properties of our slabs,  we applied the projector

augmented wave (PAW) method [14] as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package

(VASP) program [15]. The method, based on the density-functional theory (DFT) is an all-electron

method allowing a correct description of the valence wave functions and its nodal behavior without

any shape approximation on the crystal potential. Calculations were carried out using the general

gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional [16].


Numerical integrations in the Brillouin zone were performed by means of the Hermite-

Gaussian method. A single k-point mesh (Γ point) was found enough for total energies of the

investigated compounds to be converged within 10-3 eV. To optimize the geometry of cells, we

have performed a volume optimization of the computational cell as well as internal relaxations of

the atomic positions using the Hellmann-Feynman theorem. Since the large amount of defects we

introduce at random in the slab is expected to break the overall symmetry, this later were switched

off in order to allow the forces on the ions as well as stress tensor to be calculated without the

constraint  to  follow  the  space  group  operators  imposed  by  the  initial  geometry.  We  have

considered the atomic coordinates are fully relaxed as the size of the individual forces were less

than 0.001 eV/Å. We applied a residual minimization method for this purpose.

A series of brief first principle molecular dynamics simulations aiming at heating the so-

obtained equilibrium geometries until 700 K and immediately followed by a quench (relaxation at

0K of the heated conformation) were performed in order to check the stability of our structures.

2.
A specific study case: 5 layers of Pt orientated [111] with ρv=40% .

This paragraph is devoted to the detailed study of the slab made of 5 layers of Pt and ρv=40%.

This particular slab, selected among all the ones we have investigated will allow us to extract and

comment the major features of our Pt nanoparticles. It has to be viewed as a reference and starting

point from which further studies can be carried out. Indeed, this slab were selected because it

presents the advantage to display a rich variety of surface geometries. Moreover, the acceptable

number of atoms it contains  (380 atoms) allows  to perform the large number of very time-

consuming calculations needed to get a first valuable insight into the physics and chemistry of our

compounds. Our results will be generalized and augmented in section 3 by making use of the data

of our whole set of slabs of lower (3 layers) and upper (7 layers) dimensions.


a. Categorization of the sites.

Despite all the sites of surface are found non-equivalent due to the strongly disordered

character of the surface and inner structure of our compounds, a categorization of these sites into

groups of similar behavior has to be attempted in order to get a clear picture of their space

distribution into the surfaces (are the sites distributed at random or in domains) as well as their

response towards the ORR activity. To achieve our goals, a series of variables defining such a

categorization has to be chosen: these variables have to permit to recast the sites into classes of

atomic sites of similar structural parameters, and, here, hope is at this stage, that each class will

display a similar behavior regarding ORR activity. The analysis of the local geometry of numerous

sites of surface belonging to slabs of Pt of various thickness and densities of defects (see Figure 2-

h/ for a typical example and figures  of Ref.  [12]  for additional examples)  makes appear that,

whatever the coordination number of the site maybe, some sites display a character of moderate

symmetry (the first neighbors interatomic distances are tightly gathered  around their average

value, λ, and some others present a wide distribution of interatomic distances around the average

value (very disordered situation).  From these observations, we found it legitimate to categorize the

sites for each CN according to their average first neighbor distance, λ, and the width of the

distribution of interatomic distances, δ, defined by the difference of the shortest distance with the

longest one, enclosed in a sphere of radius 2.9 Å around the considered site (Figure 2-h/ displays

a graphical representation of these variables). However, local geometries are so various that a

mere plot of the points representing the sites in the (λ,δ) map is found insufficient to extract

efficient  classes  of  sites  displaying  similar  structural  parameters;  and  we  had  to  introduce

acceptance limits on both λ and δ  to neatly separate distinct classes of behavior among the sites.

These latter are 


Figure 2: Distribution of surface sites in the (λ,δ)  map resented for each CN for the  bottom surface of the 5

layers slab with ρv=40%. A final plot shows a superposition of them allowing to compare their relative location

in the  (λ,δ) map. Besides, we provide a graphical definition for λ and δ (see text for further explanation).

incorporated  by  replacing  the point  of  representation  of a  given  site  in  the  (λ,δ) map  by  a

normalized Gaussian function of both λ and δ variables for which full width at half-maximum


coincides with the acceptance limits. This way, a distribution function is postulated in the (λ,δ) map.

i.e.

ρ (λ,δ)=∑

i=1

N
1

N 2π σ λσδ

e

−(λ−λi)

2

2σ λ

2

e

−(δ−δi)

2

2σ δ

2
                                     
(1)

where σλ  and σδ  are the acceptance limits corresponding to the discrete values of the average

first neighbor distances, λi,  and spectral width, δi of site i as obtained by our DFT calculations,

respectively. N is the number of sites in the surface. Figure 2 shows the function ρ(λ,δ) for three

values of  σλ =σδ = 0.001, 0.007 and 0.02 Å. The lowest value (red dots in Figure 2) separates too

much the sites and does not allow to define any category. With an increasing σ, domains start to

develop (blue area) and for  σ=0.02  Å, well defined classes of site can be observed (green area).

These plots of density in the (λ,δ) map reveals that:

 i/ Most of the surface sites display a CN of 6, 7 and 8. The sites with remaining CN (3,4,5

and 9) can be considered as negligible with respect to the previous ones. As we shall see in the

followings, these latter account for the very extreme local geometries (sites located deep inside

holes and at the top of hills). 

ii/ for a fixed CN, the average first neighbor distance hardly varies from one site to another. 

iii/ two types of population are obtained for each sites of same CN: one with small values of

δ  (rather ordered sites) and one with larger values of δ  (rather disordered sites). We have fixed at

δc=0.2 Å, the critical value of δ separating both these distinct populations. This choice may appear

quite arbitrary but was actually motivated by the very clear frontier obtained graphically in Figure 2

for CN=6 and 8, also observed on density plots of the other slabs for the same and others CN (not

represented).

 iv/ the average first neighbor distance increases together with the CN of the site, as

revealed in the plot of Figure 2 displaying the superimposition of all the densities in the (λ,δ)  map:

despite an unavoidable overlapping, distinct colored strips are clearly noticeable.  This result was

actually expected: the more numerous the neighbors are, smaller their input of charge must be to

close the electronic shell of the central site: they have to move away to achieve it, so that their

average neighbor distance increases.

Thus, and from now on, the various sites may be considered as belonging to distinct

classes of atoms and the following color code has to be kept in mind to distinguish in between

them in the continuation of this paper: sites with CN=5 will be plotted in violet, CN=6 in green,

CN=7 in red and CN=8 in blue. The atoms circled in black will reveal the more ordered character of

the site (δi < δc), the most disordered sites will not be circled: thus, a sub-categorization is operated

for each value of CN. In the rest of this paper, we shall denote sites with δi < δc  as S-site (fcc-


symmetry) and sites with δi < δc as D-sites (Disordered geometry). Fig. completes to illustrate these

notations.

b.
A first insight into the dispatching of these categories within a surface.

Here, we are studying both surfaces of one particular single slab. These results will be augmented

in section 3 by studying the additional surfaces obtained by the variation of the slab thickness and

density of defects initially contained in this latter. 

Figure 3 presents the morphology, the inner strain cartography as well as the distribution of

the sites according to the class they belong  on the surface  of the  Top surface of the 5 layers slab

with ρv=40%. In this very flat surface, in which some point vacancies are however noticeable, we

realize that the surface is essentially made of two dimensional (2D) nano-domains with CN=7 (in

red, that we shall denote in the followings as 7-domains) separated by linear chains of sites with

CN=8 (blue, denoted as 8-chains), accommodating in between 2D 7-domains. The core of the 6-

domains is composed of S-sites while D-sites (here in very negligible amount) are located at the

vicinity of the point defects, these latter introducing a more disordered geometry. Sites with CN=6

and below are also observed close to these disturbed areas.  

Figure 4 shows the second surface of the slab for which a more corrugated geometry were

obtained. In such a situation, despite the 2D 7-domains are conserved, sites with CN=6 see their

population increase to the detriment of the 7-domains (even if we cannot talk yet about 2D 6-

domains  for  this  particular  slab).  8-chains  are  still  observed  and  the  role  they  play  as

accommodation  pattern  is  confirmed:  they  separate  7-domains  between  each-others  and  7-

domains with 6-sites. Notice that S-sites essentially concern regions located in between (or far

away from) the surface defects while D-sites constitute the periphery of the 7-domains, close to the

defects, these latter gathering sites with more extreme and isolated CN (grey, violet and brown).  


Figure 3: In the first layer, sites of the surface are represented according to the category they belong (see

text),. In the second layer, we display the morphology of the surface and in the last one, the cartography of

inner strain. All these data correspond to the Top surface of the 5 layers slab with ρv=40%.

Figure 4: same as Figure 3 but for Bottom surface. 

c.
Electronic structure.

Figure 5 and Figure 6 report the projected density of states (DOS) of the surface sites of the top

and bottom surfaces, respectively. If some noticeable discrepancies are observed between them

due to the fine details of their local environment, two major classes of DOS are obtained for each

CN. This point justifies a posteriori our sub-categorization of the classes of atoms in section  by


operating a mere splitting twice of the population above and below δc=0.2 Å. For the Top surface,

essentially made of 7-domains of S-sites, one type of DOS is recovered for CN=7. 

For these latter, found in majority, the typical triangular shape of the DOS of the perfect Pt

fcc-surface is identified. It is also the case for half the 6-sites (Figure 5-b): they correspond to S-

sites. In Figure 5-a, the DOS of Disordered 6-sites are characterized by the development of a peak

below the Fermi energy whose exact location depends on the exact local geometry of the distorted

environment they undergo. Due to charge conservation, the appearance of such a peak close to

the Fermi energy must be accompanied with an emptying of bands of lower energy, so that this

type of sites rather bring a destabilization energy to the overall system. However they are found to

be a natural option chosen by the system to adapt to the peculiar geometry imposed by the initial

distribution of defects. 

Regarding 8-chains, the more rectangular shape of the DOS of the D-sites (Figure 5-d)

confirms the rather amorphous character of the 8-sites, identified, in the previous paragraph, as

accommodation sites. The less numerous S-sites display more formed peaks due to the higher

symmetry. However, the shape of the DOS is found in neat discrepancy with the one of perfect Pt

surfaces, confirming the very particular status of these 8-sites, capable of absorbing the strain and

accommodating between domains. Notice that it is made possible by the development of peaks at

the bottom of the DOS of the S-sites, bringing stabilization energy to the system.

Figure 6 provides the DOS for the more defective bottom surface. Similar results are

obtained. We nevertheless add them to evidence that a more defective surface presents the same

patterns and fundamental characteristics: only the fraction of sites in each category varies. 


Figure 5: Site-projected density of states of the surface sites belonging to the Top surface of the 5 layers slab

with ρv=40%. According to our color code, green curves correspond to CN=6, red to CN=7 and blue ones to

CN=8. Ef  is the Fermi energy. It is considered as an absolute reference and fixed at 0 eV.


Figure 6: DOS of the Bottom surface.

3.
Generalization to any morphology.

Let’s now incorporate all the material acquired by the optimization of geometry of all our slabs

involving 3, 5 and 7 atomic layers with various densities of defects (30%, 35%, 40%, 45% and

50%).  The question we address here is  how do  these new  surface morphologies  affect the

population in the various classes  that we have determined for the 5 layers slab  with ρv=40%.


Before investigating the evolution of the distribution of the domains as the thickness and amount of

defects are varied, let’s turn first, with Table I, to the change in the occurance per type of the sites

in our new slabs.

 ρv (%)
Surf.
CN
Aspect
Plots

4
5
6
7
8
9
10

[111] 5 layers (8x8 surface)

30
top
0
1 
7
45 
36
6
1

bottom
0
4
22
41
22
6
1

35
top
0
2
15
48
28
5
0

bottom
2
3
18
45
22
7
0
Figure 7-c

40
top
1
2
2
53
32
6
0
Entirely flat
Figure 3

bottom
2
6
13
42
24
9
1
Flat + humps
Figure 4

45
top
0
6
24
39
21
7
0
Figure 7-a

bottom
0 
4
13
40
29
11
0

50
top
2
5
17
48
24
2
0

bottom
0
3
11
55
27
1
0

[111] 3 layers (8x8 surface)

40
top
8
10
23
47
8
1
0

bottom
4
10
31
39
13
1
0
Figure 7-b

[111] 7 layers (8x8 surface)

30
top
1
7
23
35
20
7
2
Figure 7-d

bottom
2
4
14
39
25
12
0

Table I : The number of surface sites having a given CN is reported for the three thickness we have considered  and

the initial  density of defects introduced in the slab. As all the slabs are made of a 8x8 [111] surface, the number of atoms

in a surface is approximately the same for all the slabs. Approximately since the reconstruction of the surface combined

with the density of defects may allow some initial atoms of surface to deep into a bulk layer.

The first observation is that the number of sites with CN=7 remain majoritary whatever the slab

may be. Their number vary slightly but quite probably as an effect of the initial implementation of

the point defects made at random. Populations with CN=6 and 8 comes in more or less in the

same proportion as our previous reference, the slight differences arising from the same reason as

for CN=7.  In general, it appears that the same phenomena of reconstruction are observed for our

slabs, justifying a posteriori our focus on the 5 layers slab with  ρv=40% to draw the main trends

More interestingly, Fig. 7 displays the geometrical arrangement of the sites per type for four

selected  slabs.  The  most  striking  point  stands  in  the  shrinking  of  the  2D  red  domains

corresponding to CN=7, even if they subsist in small domains. This phenomena has to be related

to shape or morphology of the surface. In Fig. 3, these domains match with flat regions which is not

the case for our new cells due to the implementation at random of the defects.  Thus, it appears

that the size of the area of 2D domains strongly depends on the shape of the surface induced by

the reconstruction, and that this latter tends to be shrunk as the surface bends. Sites with CN=8

(blue) conserve their linear arrangement and still accommodate between the regions of different


nature. Regarding the sites with CN=6 (green)  the already observed trend to create slim 2D

domains  intensifies. They grow proportionally to the shrinkage of the bent 7-domains. This is the

option found by the surfaces to compensate the inability of the 2D 7-domains to persist when the

surface is corrugated in a stronger manner.

Figure 7: I same as Figure 3  but for a selection of new slabs among the ones we have investigated .


4.
Adsorption energies of OH.

a.
An apparent chaotic behavior, but a linear dependence revealed by the local geometry.

In their original paper [14], Calle-Vallejo et al. already demonstrated that a clear 

dependence of the adsorption energy of OH on flat facets of Pt belonging to small clusters  as a 

function of the coordination number of the site couldn’t be achieved. The introduction of an 

effective coordination number were found necessary to recover a neat and linear dependence of  

the adsorption energy of OH. The type of effective CN (noted cn) relying only on the influence of 

the number of atoms in the second shell of neighbors scaled by the maximum CN were found 

suitable in their study case, given the highly symmetric clusters they studied and consequently the 

negligible distortions of the sites. 

In order to adapt such a procedure to our distorted surfaces, an implicit usage of the

distribution of distances all around the central site has to be imagine in replacement of the cn.  In

our study case, these distributions are wide and  their analysis shows that no frontier could be

drawn between the first and second neighbors, rendering impossible the counting of the number of

first and second neighbors. Figure 8.a shows, as in the case of clusters, the impossibility to extract

a clear law for our systems as far as the coordination number is considered. Our only option is to

award an appropriate weight for each atoms belonging to the sphere of neighbors. The radius of

such a sphere has to be determined. This latter does not really necessitate to reach distances

generally  encountered for the second neighbors since the effects of these latter is indirectly

included in the shape of the distribution of distances of the closest atoms. The radius has to be

fixed so that any atoms actually influencing the energy of adsorption be selected, leaving the

spectra of neighboring distances  makes the job to fix the value of the weight. A value of  2.9 Å

were found the appropriate choice. A lower value were found ineffective, a larger value bringing no

improvements. 

The  choice  of  the  function  defining  the  local  geometry  variable  as  a  function  of  the

interatomic distances  were essentially driven by its upmost transferability or ability to recover a

linear dependence of energy of adsorption as a function of this latter with a minimum of fitting

parameters. Our choice turned to

                                                             cni=α∑

j=0

n j

e

−λ dij

a
                                                             (2)

where cni is our effective coordination variable centered on site i, alpha and lambda our fitting

parameters, dij
the interatomic distances between the selected site, i, and its neighbors, j, n j

the number of atoms included in the sphere of coordination and, a, the average lattice parameter in

the  surface  plane.  This  latter  scaling  parameter  for  the  interatomic  distances  were  found

mandatory to recover an acceptable linear behaviour for the energies as a function of cni . The


result of this fit is displayed in Fig 8.b. The introduction of the a parameter as well as the combined

usage of the exponential function appears to be crucial to reduce to allow a similar weight for the

atoms whose distances are close below and above the average average inner latice parameters,

to bring a strong weight to the neighbors with very small interatomic distances and gradually

attenuate the influence of the most distant neighbors.

Figure 8: In a), we display the adsorption energies of OH on selected surface sites of both bottom and top

surfaces of the 5 layers slab with ρv=40%  as a function of  the coordination number (CN) of the site. In b)

they are plotted as a function of our effective parameter, ηi, taking into explicitly consideration the local

environment of the site, namely the data of the interatomic distances between the neighboring atoms and the

considered site within a cut-off of 2.9 Å (see the title of the present plot for the expression of ηi)


Fig. 9 : in the top layer we present  the absorption energy surface (in eV) calculated by means of  the law

of paragraph 4. This latter is only computed by the data of the interatomic distances obtained after 

relaxation of the slab. The morphology of the surface (middle layer) is added as well as the distribution 

per type of the various sites in the bottom layer.


Conclusion.

In this work, we made intensive use of DFT calculations to rationalize the catalytic activity

of  very distorted surfaces of Pt nanomaterials. Our investigations led us to realize that the various

inequivalent sites of such surfaces may be classified into families according to their coordination

number. Such a classification allowed us to determine that a specific role could be awarded to

each family as far as the morphology of the surface is considered : 2D domains and rather flat

regions concern the sites with a CN=7, while sites with CN=6 or 8 are found to arrange under the

form of linear chain, accommodating in between the 2D domains. The other sites appears as

isolated and sacrificed  as far as we consider the crystallographic point of view. Let us recall that

the size of the area of 2D domains strongly depends on the shape of the surface induced by the

reconstruction, and that this latter tends to be shrunk as the surface bends.  This step were found

mandatory to select specific sites to study the reactivity of the surfaces : a reasonable number of

sites had to be considered to provide a representative panel of behavior by means of a minimum of

these  very  time-consuming  calculations.   From these  data, a  law  piloting  the values  of the

adsorption energies of OH as a function of the local geometry has been derived. Relying on two

single fitting parameters and matching the DFT points with  exactitude, a great confidence seems

to be awarded to this latter to predict the energies of adsorption by the single knowledge of the

distributions  of the interatomic distances of the catalytic sites.  We provide in Figure 9 a typical

example based upon one of our slab. The major result is that the most active reactivity at the

surface area (green region)  gathers sites of various CN and, in that sens, does not superimpose

with the cartography of the site types. Here, we argue that the fine step by step arrangement of the

interatomic distances when the surfaces are reconstructed plays the key-role to determine the

reactivity of the sites. Even if sites present a different CN, the fine local geometry of neighboring

surface sites tends to accumulate their effects and create large regions of similar reactivity.   This

behavior was a-priori not expected. 

Acknowledgment.

We acknowledge GENCI under Project N° INP2227/72914 as well as PHYNUM CIMENT for

computational  resources.  This  work  was  performed  within  the  framework  of  the  Center  of

Excellence of Multifunctional Architectured Materials "CEMAM" n°ANR-10-LABX-44-01 funded by

the "Investments for the Future" Program.

Bibliography. 


[1]
I. Katsounaros, S. Cherevko, A. R. Zeradjanin, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53,
102-121.

[2]
a.  L.  Dubau,  L. Castanheira,  F.  Maillard,  M.  Chatenet,  O.  Lottin,  G.  Maranzana,  J.  Dillet,  A.
Lamibrac, J. C. Perrin, E. Moukheiber, A. Elkaddouri, G. De Moor, C. Bas, L. Flandin, N. Caqué,
Wiley  Interdiscip.  Rev.:  Energy  Environ.  2014,  3,  540-560;  b.  C.  Spoeri,  J.  T.  Kwan,  A.
Bonakdarpour, D. Wilkinson, P. Strasser, Angewandte Chemie 2016, DOI: 10.1002/anie.201608601.

[3]
a. I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, U. Grønbjerg, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ.
Sci. 2012, 5, 6744-6762; b. M. Escudero-Escribano, P. Malacrida, M. H. Hansen, U. G. Vej-Hansen,
A. Velázquez-Palenzuela, V. Tripkovic, J. Schiøtz, J. Rossmeisl, I. E. L. Stephens, I. Chorkendorff,
Science 2016, 352, 73-76.

[4]
a. T. Toda, H. Igarashi, M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1998, 145, 4185-4188; b. T. Toda, H.
Igarashi, H. Uchida, M. Watanabe,  J. Electrochem. Soc.  1999,  146, 3750-3756; c. T. Toda, H.
Igarashi, M. Watanabe, J. Electroanal. Chem. 1999, 460, 258-262; d. V. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K.
J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. M. Markovic, J. Rossmeisl, J. Greeley, J. K. Norskov, Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 2006, 45, 2897-2901; e. V. R. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K. J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. M.
Markovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 8813-8819.

[5]
a. H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli, F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal. B 2005, 56, 9-35; b. H. A.
Gasteiger,  N.  M.  Markovic,  Science  2009,  324,  48-49;  c.  F.  Maillard,  L.  Dubau,  J.  Durst,  M.
Chatenet, J. André, E. Rossinot,  Electrochem. Commun.  2010,  12, 1161-1164; d. L. Dubau, F.
Maillard, M. Chatenet, L. Guétaz, J. André, E. Rossinot,  J. Electrochem. Soc.  2010,  157, B1887-
B1895; e. L. Dubau, F. Maillard, M. Chatenet, J. André, E. Rossinot, Electrochim. Acta 2010, 56,
776-783;  f.  L.  Dubau,  J.  Durst,  F.  Maillard,  L.  Guétaz,  M.  Chatenet,  J.  André,  E.  Rossinot,
Electrochim. Acta 2011, 56, 10658-10667; g. L. Dubau, J. Durst, F. Maillard, M. Chatenet, L. Guétaz,
J. André, E. Rossinot, Fuel Cells 2012, 12, 188-198; h. J. Durst, A. Lamibrac, F. Charlot, J. Dillet, L.
F. Castanheira, G. Maranzana, L. Dubau, F. Maillard, M. Chatenet, O. Lottin, Appl. Catal. B 2013,
138–139, 416-426; i. M. Lopez-Haro, L. Dubau, L. Guétaz, P. Bayle-Guillemaud, M. Chatenet, J.
André, N. Caqué, E. Rossinot, F. Maillard, Appl. Catal. B 2014, 152-153, 300-308; j. J. Durst, M.
Lopez-Haro, L. Dubau, M. Chatenet, Y. Soldo-Olivier, L. Guétaz, P. Bayle-Guillemaud, F. Maillard, J.
Phys. Chem. Lett. 2014, 5, 434-439; k. P. Malacrida, H. G. Sanchez Casalongue, F. Masini, S. Kaya,
P. Hernández-Fernández, D. Deiana, H. Ogasawara, I. E. L. Stephens, A. Nilsson, I. Chorkendorff,
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2015,  17, 28121-28128; l. A. Velázquez-Palenzuela, F. Masini, A. F.
Pedersen, M. Escudero-Escribano, D. Deiana, P. Malacrida, T. W. Hansen, D. Friebel, A. Nilsson, I.
E. L. Stephens, I. Chorkendorff, J. Catal. 2015, 328, 297-307; m. S. Mezzavilla, C. Baldizzone, A.-C.
Swertz, N. Hodnik, E. Pizzutilo, G. Polymeros, G. P. Keeley, J. Knossalla, M. Heggen, K. J. J.
Mayrhofer, F. Schueth, ACS Catal. 2016; n. L. Dubau, M. Lopez-Haro, L. Castanheira, J. Durst, M.
Chatenet, P. Bayle-Guillemaud, L. Guétaz, N. Caqué, E. Rossinot, F. Maillard, Appl. Catal. B 2013,
142-143, 801-808.

[6]
a. S. Chen, W. C. Sheng, N. Yabuuchi, P. J. Ferreira, L. F. Allard, Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C
2009, 113, 1109-1125; b. C. Wang, M. Chi, G. Wang, D. Van Der Vliet, D. Li, K. More, H. H. Wang,
J. A. Schlueter, N. M. Markovic, V. R. Stamenkovic, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 21, 147-152.

[7]
a. R. R. Adzic, J. Zhang, K. Sasaki, M. B. Vukmirovic, M. Shao, J. X. Wang, A. U. Nilekar, M.
Mavrikakis, J. A. Valerio, F. Uribe, Topics Catal. 2007, 46, 249-262; b. K. Sasaki, J. X. Wang, H.
Naohara, N. Marinkovic, K. More, H. Inada, R. R. Adzic, Electrochim. Acta 2010, 55, 2645-2652; c.
R. R. Adzic, Electrocatalysis 2012, 3, 163-169.

[8]
a. P. Strasser, Acc. Chem. Res. 2016; b. S. Kühl, P. Strasser, Topics Catal. 2016, 59, 1628-1637; c.
B. Han, C. E. Carlton, A. Kongkanand, R. S. Kukreja, B. R. Theobald, L. Gan, R. O'Malley, P.
Strasser, F. T. Wagner, Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci. 2015, 8, 258-266; d. Q. Jia, J. Li, K.
Caldwell, D. E. Ramaker, J. M. Ziegelbauer, R. S. Kukreja, A. Kongkanand, S. Mukerjee, ACS Catal.
2016,  6, 928-938; e. C. Baldizzone, L. Gan, N. Hodnik, G. P. Keeley, A. Kostka, M. Heggen, P.
Strasser, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, ACS Catal. 2015, 5, 5000-5007.

[9]
C. Chen, Y. Kang, Z. Huo, Z. Zhu, W. Huang, H. L. Xin, J. D. Snyder, D. Li, J. A. Herron, M.
Mavrikakis, M. Chi, K. L. More, Y. Li, N. M. Markovic, G. A. Somorjai, P. Yang, V. R. Stamenkovic,
Science 2014, 343, 1339-1343.

[10]
a. D. F. Van Der Vliet, C. Wang, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, X. F. Zhang, M. K. Debe, R. T.
Atanasoski, N. M. Markovic, V. R. Stamenkovic,  Nature Mater.  2012,  11, 1051-1058; b. F. T.
Wagner, B. Lakshmanan, M. F. Mathias, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2010, 1, 2204-2219.

[11]
a. J. Snyder, I. McCue, K. Livi, J. Erlebacher, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 8633-8645; b. S. J. Bae,
S. J. Yoo, Y. Lim, S. Kim, Y. Lim, J. Choi, K. S. Nahm, S. J. Hwang, T. H. Lim, S. K. Kim, P. Kim, J.
Mater. Chem. 2012, 22, 8820; c. J. W. Hong, S. W. Kang, B.-S. Choi, D. Kim, S. B. Lee, S. W. Han,
ACS  Nano  2012,  6,  2410-2419;  d.  L.  Dubau,  M.  Lopez-Haro,  J.  Durst,  L.  Guetaz,  P.  Bayle-
Guillemaud, M. Chatenet, F. Maillard,  J. Mater. Chem. A  2014,  2, 18497-18507; e. L. Dubau, T.


Asset, R. Chattot, C. Bonnaud, V. Vanpeene, J. Nelayah, F. Maillard, ACS Catal. 2015, 5, 5333-
5341; f. L. Dubau, M. Lopez-Haro, J. Durst, F. Maillard,  Catal. Today  2016,  262, 146-154; g. L.
Dubau, J. Nelayah, S. Moldovan, O. Ersen, P. Bordet, J. Drnec, T. Asset, R. Chattot, F. Maillard,
ACS Catal. 2016, 6, 4673-4684; h. T. Asset, R. Chattot, J. Nelayah, N. Job, L. Dubau, F. Maillard,
ChemElectroChem 2016, 3, 1591-1600; i. B. Geboes, J. Ustarroz, K. Sentosun, H. Vanrompay, A.
Hubin, S. Bals, T. Breugelmans, ACS Catal. 2016, 6, 5856-5864; j. R. Chattot, T. Asset, P. Bordet, J.
Drnec, L. Dubau, F. Maillard, ACS Catal. 2017, 398-408.

[12]
O. Le Bacq et al., « Effect of Atomic Vacancies on the Structure and the Electrocatalytic Activity of 
Pt‐rich/C Nanoparticles: A Combined Experimental and Density Functional Theory Study », 
ChemCatChem, 9 (12), 2324-2338, 2017

[13]
Raphaël Chattot, Olivier Le Bacq, Vera Beermann, Stefanie Kühl, Juan Herranz, Sebastian Henning,
Laura Kühn, Tristan Asset, Laure Guétaz, Gilles Renou, Jakub Drnec, Pierre Bordet, Alain Pasturel, 
Alexander Eychmüller, Thomas J Schmidt, Peter Strasser, Laetitia Dubau, Frédéric Maillard , “ 
Surface distortion as a unifying concept and descriptor in oxygen reduction reaction electrocatalysis”,
Nature materials, vol. 17, no 9, p. 827-833 , 2018/9.

[14]
Federico Calle-Vallejo, David Loffreda, Marc TM Koper, Philippe Sautet ,”Introducing structural 
sensitivity into adsorption–energy scaling relations by means of coordination numbers ”,Nature 
chemistry, vol. 7, no 5, p. V, 2015 

[15]
G. Kresse et J. Furthmüller, « Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using 
a plane-wave basis set », Phys. Rev. B, vol. 54, no 16, p. 1827-833 

[16]
G. Kresse et D. Joubert, « From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented-wave 
method », Phys. Rev. B, vol. 59, no 3, p. 1758, 1999.

 


