Combining genetic algorithm and compressed sensing for features and operators

selection in symbolic regression

A. Mazheika1, S.V. Levchenko2, and L.M. Ghiringhelli3,4, 

1) BasCat – UniCat BASF JointLab, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany

2) Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia

3) Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-

Nürnberg, Germany 

4) Physics Department and IRIS-Adlershof, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Germany

Abstract

Symbolic-inference methods  have recently found a broad application in materials science. In

particular, the Sure-Independence Screening and Sparsifying Operator (SISSO) performs symbolic

regression and classification by adopting compressed sensing for the selection of an optimized

subset of features and mathematical operators out of a given set of candidates.  However, SISSO

becomes computationally unpractical when the set of candidate features and operators exceeds the

size of few tens. In the present work, we combine SISSO with a genetic algorithm (GA) for the

global search of the optimal subset of features and operators.   We demonstrate that GA-SISSO

efficiently finds more accurate predictive models than the original SISSO, due to the possibility to

access a larger input feature and operator space. GA-SISSO was applied for the search of the model

for the prediction of carbon-dioxide adsorption energies on semiconductor oxides. The obtained

with GA-SISSO model has much higher accuracy compared to models previously discussed in the

literature (based solely on the O 2p-band center). The analysis of features importance shows that,

besides the O 2p-band center, the contribution of the electrostatic potential above adsorption sites

and the surface formation energies are also important.


Introduction

Symbolic inference (therein including regression and classification tasks) is a class of

statistical-learning methods  in which explanatory  models for a given data set are learned as

algebraic  or Boolean  expressions containing  data features,  mathematical  or logical  operators,

functions, and coefficients [1,2]. In contrast to other popular machine-learning methods such as

artificial neural networks, linear regression, or tree-based methods, symbolic inference does not

have any predefined model class, i.e., the functional form for the learned model is searched together

with the fitting parameters [1]. Symbolic inference (SI) found its application in physical sciences

and in particular in materials science, since it provides interpretable mathematical  models, which

can be easily analyzed. In materials science, SI provides the model for a target materials property as

function of so-called primary features, i.e., materials-related properties. The primary features that

are selected to be part of the SI-learned model, can be interpreted as the material’s genes [3] that

trigger, facilitate, or hinder the target property. SI found its application in the prediction of the

crystal structure of solid materials [6], lattice parameters and bulk moduli [7], superconductivity [4],

topological insulators [5], Gibbs free energies of inorganic materials [8], adsorption properties of

hydrogen [10] and other molecules [9]. 

Recently,  some  of  us  developed  a  method  which  combines  symbolic  inference  with

compressed sensing – the Sure-Independence Screening and Sparsifying Operator [6,11]. SISSO

expresses its learned models as linear combinations of generated  features. Generated features are

nonlinear functions of the input (primary) features, i.e. they are combinations of input features and

mathematical operators (summation, multiplication, powers, exponentials, etc.). The maximum

number of unique primary features, which a generated feature can contain, is the complexity (Ω) of

the model. In the so-called feature-creation step of the SISSO algorithm [12], the construction of

the generated features is done recursively, so that at each step more complex features are built from

a pool of less complex features generated at all previous iterations including primary ones. Next, in

the descriptor-identification step the SISSO model is created as a linear combination of selected

generated features. The learning of a SISSO model is done via minimization of the (square)

difference between actual target property (y) and its SISSO counterpart (ySISSO). For imposing the

sparse solutions a l0-regularization parameter is introduced, which is equal to the number of linear

terms, i.e., the dimensionality (D) of the model. Since the number of all possible complex features

grows combinatorially, it becomes impractical to consider all possible combinations, even for

relatively small sets of primary features and SISSO hyperparameters (D, Ω). To enable the model

identification a sure-independent-screening (SIS) approach is used [13]. The algorithm is iterative,

and the number of iterations is equal to the dimensionality D. SIS implies that at first iteration only

a set of M most correlated complex features to the target property is selected, and on next iterations


– M correlated features to residuals “target property - model obtained on a previous iteration” are

selected. After such selection at Dth iteration least-squares fit is done for all D-nomial sets out of

U

i

D

M i complex features, and the one with lowest training error is selected. In the SISSO algorithm

a model is selected based on the training accuracy, and the assessment of the prediction ability of

the model is done through the cross-validation (CV) procedure. The prediction accuracy depends on

hyperparameters. Besides mentioned above dimensionality (D) and complexity (Ω), the sets of

primary features and of mathematical operators are also the hyperparameters in the SISSO method

that need also to be tuned. For given D and Ω, the maximum number of primary features per model

is at most D times Ω. If the overall number of all primary features n is larger than the number of

features in a SISSO model D·Ω, then the number of all possible combinations of size up to DΩ

grows again combinatorially: n!/((DΩ)!(1-DΩ)!). So, far not always features selection can be done

in a straightforward way. The other point is that, a too large set of primary features and operators

inside the learned model might lead to overfitting; and in contrast, a SISSO model obtained with a

poor set of features and operators might be not flexible enough for accurate predictions – the

underfitting. We note that, mainly due to memory restrictions, when Ω > 4 and the number of

primary features is more than ~25, it becomes hardly possible with nowadays available machines to

run SISSO “in one shot”, because the number of generated features explodes is unmanageable. To

address the above challenges, we have introduced a stochastic algorithm to search for the optimal

subset of primary features and mathematical operators, out of the initially given set of both entities.

The search for the optimal parameters D and Ω is usually done on a grid. For selection of

features several schemes have been proposed. Among them variable importance measure of random

forests [14], LASSO [15], minimum redundancy – maximum relevance [16], etc. More recently

Regler et.al. proposed total cumulative mutual information estimator [17]. This method is non-

parametric and it identifies the sets of primary features which are statistically related to the target

property. Guo et.al. developed a variable selection method where at each iterative step a set of

features is randomly selected and added to the set of features with best prediction performance

obtained so far [18]. This method converges quite fast even for relatively big features sets, but the

procedure can easily get stuck into a local minimum.

Also recently another way for tackling the problem of a combinational growth of the number

of generated features was proposed. Foppa et.al. developed a hierarchical symbolic regression

approach – hiSISSO [7]. There SISSO models are obtained in a cascade-like way. At first step a

SISSO model with lower complexity is obtained. At the second step this model is used as an input

feature in addition to other features to obtain a final SISSO model with higher complexity. This

approach addresses the problem of a large number of complex features, but not the primary features


selection for generation of these complex. Below we apply this approach, and herewith we define

the complexity and dimensionality of the model-input feature obtained at the first step as DhiSISSO

and ΩhiSISSO, and for more complex expression at the second step – D and Ω as usual.

In this work, we present a method for selection of primary features and mathematical

operators based on genetic algorithm (GA), and its particular application for SISSO. Genetic

algorithm is a natural way of the search for optimal strings of biological genes in nature. It has

found broad application in materials science as a tool for global minimum/maximum search for

atomic systems [19,20], in machine learning [21], etc. The main idea is that the selection of parent

strings with “good” features (genes, atomic environments, etc.) can deliver new strings containing

these fragments so that they can even outperform the parents in terms of the target performance.

Sequential generation of new strings follow at some point finding of the one with the best possible

performance. In our method, dubbed GA-SISSO, the genes are primary features and mathematical

operators. Each set of features and operators forms a  string with certain SISSO cross-validation

root-mean-square error (CV-RMSE). GA algorithm explores the space of features and operators

searching for a  string with lowest CV-RMSE.  In our implementation, we generally follow the

scheme previously proposed by Bhattacharya et.al. [19,22]. Crucially, in order to avoid getting

stuck in a local minimum, we do not preserve the generations. Selection is done for the whole pool

of strings dependent on a fitness function which is related to CV-error value. The validation of our

method was done for a set of bulk perovskite materials in particular for prediction of the lattice

constant [7]. 

As novel application, we apply GA-SISSO to the prediction of carbon-dioxide adsorption

energies on semiconductor oxides. Carbon dioxide is nowadays considered as a gas playing the

main role in “green-house” effect. It is released first of all by the chemical industry and during

energy production (for example coil burning, etc.). The decrease of its concentration in the air or at

least reduction of its emissions is a central societal issue today. One of such ways is its conversion

to fuels or other useful organic chemicals. For this reason different chemical reactions of CO2

reduction are intensively studied by many researchers around the world. The adsorption energies of

CO2 play in such processes a central role because of Sabatier principle which states that carbon

dioxide should not be bonded too strongly in order the surface of a catalyst was not poisoned, and it

should not be bonded too weakly because otherwise the CO2 molecules would easily desorb without

undergoing chemical transformations. The influence of bonding energies of carbon dioxide on

reaction performance was found to play a major role also in reactions of methane oxidation where

carbon dioxide is actually an unwanted byproduct [24,25]. In other chemical processes, the role of

CO2 is to hamper the aggregation of surface cations into metallic nanoparticles, that promotes the

selectivity [26]. Thus, predictions of CO2 binding energies with underlying surfaces are important in


the search for new catalytic materials enabling fast screening of materials in a high-throughput way

[25]. Using GA-SISSO we find the models that are significantly more accurate than models fitted to

previously proposed popular descriptors [27,28,29].

Results and discussion

Tests of internal GA parameters

The choice of features has significant influence on prediction ability of the SISSO model. In

material science for predictions of quantitative or categorical properties the features are often the

atomic properties, properties of bulk materials, their surfaces etc. Dependent on a sampling the

number of features can range from several ones to hundreds or even thousands. Although the SISSO

algorithm does selection of primary and generated features during the SIS and following SO steps,

this choice reflects only the training accuracy, and is not responsible for prediction ability of a

corresponding model. The choice of mathematical operators is also important since some operators

can follow failures in prediction. For example square root or division do not make sense if features

or their combinations are negative or equal to zero. Similar to other hyperparameters selected sets of

features and operators have to satisfy the bias-variance trade-off – compromise between under- and

overfitting. In the Data Science this compromise is often searched through the cross-validation

procedure (CV) with respect to hyperparameters. There are several CV schemes. Quite popular is

the k-fold CV. Here a data set with N data points is split k times into two subsets of the size N/k and

N(k-1)/k, so that there is no overlap between subsets. Next, the models obtained for bigger size

subsets are tested on smaller sets providing the overall CV-RMSE. For small size data sets, often

the leave-one-out CV is used, in which N-size sampling is split N times, and for each left sample the

model obtained for the rest N-1 sampling is tested. These methods have been implemented in our

algorithm, and we used leave-one-out CV for the data sets of size of tens samples and k-fold CV for

hundreds of samples. For data sets with thousands data points one can test prediction ability

splitting the data into a bigger training and a smaller validation subsets. However, in this work we

did not use this way since our data sets do not exceed the size of five hundreds data points.

GA-SISSO is performed for fixed D and Ω, and includes several steps:

(0) Generation of an initial pool of strings with randomly chosen features and operators and

the calculation of corresponding CV-RMSE. The size of this pool is at least equal the overall

number of primary features implying that probability of each feature to appear in any string within

this pool is close to one. Before the actual calculation of CV-RMSE values we adopt a preselection

step: single standard SISSO job is done for a given string, and next CV-RMSE is calculated for a

truncated set of features and operators – only for ones which are selected by single SISSO, i.e.

appear in obtained model. Also after this single SISSO the parameter  M (the number of most


correlated complex features to the target property or to the residuals) is reduced to  the highest

ranking number of any complex feature in the model of single SISSO job. This results in significant

reduction of the space of complex features  ¿ D

i Mi at SO step of SISSO during CV runs. This

preselection procedure of features and operators and reduction of M provide significant reduction of

computational time needed for running k jobs in the case of k-fold CV or N jobs for N-size

sampling in the case of leave-one-out CV.

(1) Selection of two strings according to their fitness function with certain probability of

fitness-function inversion inv (see below).

(2) Random selection of a half of features and a half of operators from each string selected

on the previous step, followed by the combination of these two subsets into a new string (so called

crossover).

(3)  Mutation step: certain percentage of features and operators is removed from a new

string;  and  at  the  same  time,  some  new  features/operators  are  added.  The  amounts  of

removed/added features/operators are defined by corresponding probabilities – two parameters for

features mr

f and ma

f , and two for operators mr

o and ma

o (Table 1). At the same time, the maximum

number of possible features in a string L is fixed in order to prevent potential “explosion” if the

overall number of features is pretty big.

(4) We check if the new string is already in the pool of previously considered strings. If not

the case, the CV is run for it in the same way as for randomly generated  strings at the step 0

including single SISSO job in the beginning. Next, the pool of all considered strings is extended,

and the fitness functions are updated.

Table 1. GA and some SISSO internal parameters and their acronyms.

acronym
description

D
SISSO descriptor dimensionality

Ω
Complexity: maximum number of distinct features per dimension

M
The amount of most correlated generated features to the target property or to a residual 
selected at the SIS-step in SISSO algorithm.

inv
Probability of fitness function inversion

mr

f
Feature removal probability from a string

ma

f
Feature addition probability to a string

mr

o
Operator removal probability from a string

ma

o
Operator addition probability to a string

L
Maximum allowed number of features in a string


For the fitness function (fi) we used in this work a quadratic dependence of sorted samples

according to the rank:

f i=((Nall−rank i)/(N all−1))

2

(1)

here Nall is the size of the pool with all strings, and ranki – position of ith string in the list of strings

sorted in ascending order according to CV-RMSE. In such a way, all strings in the pool have the

values of fitness-function in the range [0, 1]. This fitness-function gives more priority to strings

with lower values of CV-RMSE. In the literature quite often the fitness function is used with CV-

RMSE instead of rank. In our case, however, the presence of the division operator in operators set

results sometimes in huge relative values of CV-RMSE for  strings which contain samples with

features with close to zero values. This results that corresponding fitness function with CV-RMSE

acquires very “skewed” shape (Figure S) that is less suited for operating with random numbers,

since the majority of strings has relatively close values of fitness function in contrast to discussed.

Selection of parent strings is done as follows: a random string is picked from the pool, and if its

fitness-function is higher than a random number uniformly selected in the range [0, 1], it is selected

for the next steps. Otherwise the procedure is repeated. We also adapted here the inversion of the

fitness function as defined in Ref. 22, so that fitness functions for all strings fi are inverted to (1 – fi)

with a certain probability inv. This guarantees selection of “bad” strings that prevents getting stuck

in a local minimum. Fitness-function (1) depends on the pool of strings. So, after adding a new

string into the pool, the fitness-function is updated for each of them. 

For crossover features and operators are randomly chosen. Their number composes 50% of

each parent string if the overall numbers are even. In the case if parent strings contain odd numbers

of features (l), then from a string with higher value of fitness-function (l+1)/2 features are chosen,

and (l-1)/2 otherwise. The same was implemented for operators.

The performance of our algorithm was tested for a set of bulk ternary perovskites ABO3 with

lattice constant as the target property [7]. This data set contains 504 materials where A elements are

chosen among  s-elements Li-Cs, Be-Ba,  d-elements Sc, Y,  f-elements La-Sm.  B  elements:  d-

elements Ti-Zn, Zr-Cd, Ta, W, Pt,  p-elements Al, Ga, Ge-Pb, Sb, Bi. The  primary features set

includes atomic properties of gas-phase atoms A and B: radii of valence and of s-orbitals, atomic

numbers,  HOMO  and  LUMO  values,  ionization  potentials,  electron  affinities  and

electronegativities, number of valence electrons in atoms A – overall, 17 features. Here we use this

set for benchmarking our GA algorithm.

First, to test the  internal parameters of GA with reasonable computational expenses we

randomly  selected  a  subset  of  30  materials,  and  benchmarked  our  method  for  SISSO  two-

dimensional models with Ω = 4 using 10-fold CV. The baseline in these tests was a model obtained

on top of SISSO CV done with all seventeen features and all mathematical operators (CV-RMSE =


0.057 Å). In GA search we restricted the maximal number of candidate features in a single string to

eight (L = 8), since this is the maximal possible number of unique features for D = 2 and Ω = 4. For

each set of parameters we performed 2-3 GA runs. The conclusion that the GA is converged was

made when the number of GA iterations done after finding a string with lowest CV-RMSE was

about twice as large as the number of iterations needed for finding this string. We note herewith that

this criterion requires a lot of computational time, and we used it only for benchmarking tasks.

Alternatively one can stop GA at the point when desired RMSE is achieved.

By setting inversion and all mutation probabilities in GA to zero, not a single  string

corresponding to the baseline is found (Figure 1a). This shows the need of setting non-zero values

at least for some of these probabilities. In the next steps, we tested probability of the fitness-

function inversion, as well as probabilities of mutation of features and operators. These tests were

done for each parameter separately with the values 0.1, 0.25, 0.5 and 1.0 keeping the other

probabilities equal to zero. As it is shown in Figure 1b, the best results in terms of finding lowest

CV-RMSE string were obtained for  inv = 0.1, mr

f = 0.1-0.25, mr

o = 0.5-1.0, ma

f  = 0.25-1.0, ma

o = 0.5.

These settings allow to obtain the  strings with CV-RMSE close to or even outperforming the

baseline. Regarding inversion probability inv, in the study of Bhattacharya [22] the same optimal

value was found. Larger values result in too frequent selection of “bad” strings, which destroys the

idea of genetic algorithm turning it into a random search. The same is true for high probabilities of

selected features removal  mr

f. At the same time, we observed that the probability of features

inclusion into a new  string ma

f  is very important. This means that dealing with features that are

selected only via crossover does not guarantee finding the strings with lower CV-RMSE. Addition

of remaining features (up to a predefined maximal number of features L) is necessary for perturbing

the system  in order  to  go beyond these  limitations.  Regarding  mathematical  operators,  both

exclusion of selected and inclusion of remaining ones (mr

o,ma

o) are important and provide significant

improvement of obtained strings in terms of CV-RMSE. So, update of operators is very important

for preventing getting stuck in a local minimum string.


a)
b)

c)

Figure 1. GA performance in terms of CV-RMSE (relative to baseline) dependence on GA steps for

SISSO models of lattice constant in perovskite materials. a) Case when all internal GA probabilities

are zero. b) Inversion probability or one mutation probability is changed whereas all others are fixed

to zero. c) Combinations of different values of ma

f , ma

o and mr

o with fixed mr

f = 0.1 and inv = 0.1.

On the basis of these results, we next tested the combinations of mutation probabilities.

Here, we fixed the probability of removal of selected features to 0.1, and the same value for

inversion of fitness-function was fixed. The other probabilities were changed according to the

observation described above. Besides outperforming the baseline, we have taken into account in

how many iterations the minimum can be found. As one can see in Figure 1c, fixing mr

o at 1.0 and

ma

o at 0.5, while changing only the probability of features addition ma

f , does not always result in

finding better models than the baseline one. At the same time, reduction of mr

o to 0.5 improves the

GA performance. Fixing ma

o and ma

f  at 1.0 yields the best performance with almost no dependence

on probability of the selected operators removal. We also note that the same tests have been carried


out for the same dataset but for different dimensionality and complexity of descriptors: D = 1 and Ω

= 6 (see the SI). We observed very similar trends that indicates that the “rule of thumb” in our GA

is to set probabilities for selected features removal mr

f ~0.1, for unselected features addition ma

f  1.0

(with certain limit of the maximum number of features in a  string L), for removal of selected

operators mr

o in the range 0.25 to 0.5, and for addition of remaining operators ma

o = 1.0. 

The described above tests were done for a relatively small set of primary features (17). To

check the performance of GA algorithm for larger features sets, we have chosen a larger dataset

with 100 randomly selected perovskite samples, and extended this dataset with “synthetic” features

consisting of random numbers with a uniform distribution. The range of these random numbers was

from zero to the rank of a feature in sorted list of these features starting from one. We considered

sets of 24, 30, 40, 50, 70 and 100 features. Corresponding tests were performed 2-3 times for each

set, all for SISSO models with D = 2 and Ω = 4. In Figure 2, the number of GA steps needed to find

the SISSO model with lowest CV-RMSE for the different numbers of features is shown. We

emphasize here that for each set of features GA-SISSO found always the same model with lowest

CV-RMSE despite the “noise” from synthetic features. We clearly see the growth of the number of

steps needed to find the searched model with respect to the number of features. The reason is that

since the maximal number of considered features per a trial string L is limited (in this case L = 8),

larger numbers of strings need to be considered for larger sizes of features sets. However, we can

conclude that for the data sets with up to seventy features about two thousands GA steps are enough

for finding the model with the lowest CV-RMSE.

Finally we have performed the GA search for SISSO models of a lattice parameter in ABO3

perovskite materials for all 504 materials for different complexities as in the study of Foppa et.al.

[7]. We considered GA-SISSO models with D = 5 and Ω = 2, 4. And in addition, we applied the

hiSISSO approach with D = DhiSISSO = 5, Ω = 4 and ΩhiSISSO = 2, but in contrast to original work both

models at first and second steps were obtained with GA-SISSO. Basically the aim was to compare

the results of GA to what is obtained using all 17 features for a single SISSO job and hiSISSO as it

was  done  in  the  original  study.  Here,  we  used  the  5-fold  cross-validation  procedure.  The

distribution  of  absolute  CV  test  errors  for  the  best  models  obtained  via  GA  and  for  the

corresponding single SISSO jobs are shown in Figure 3. The models obtained with GA in all

studied cases outperform the ones obtained from single SISSO runs. In the cases of Ω = 2 and 4 the

improvement in terms of CV-RMSE was 9 and 6% respectively, in terms of CV mean absolute

error (CV-MAE) – 8 and 7%, and CV median absolute error (CV-MedAE) – 9 and 12%. In the case

of hiSISSO, where the GA-SISSO model of higher complexity contains a GA-SISSO model of

lower complexity, the improvement is pronounced even more significantly – CV-RMSE for 21%,

CV-MAE – 22%, and CV-MedAE – 25%.. The corresponding models are shown in the SI. By the


way, the CV-RMSE improvement for about 20% was also observed for described above 30 samples

data set shown in Figure 1c.

We  conclude  that  GA  provides  SISSO  models  with  consistently  improved  prediction

accuracy compared to simple SISSO.

Figure 2. The dependence of the number of GA steps needed to find a string with lowest CV-RMSE

on the number of primary features for a set. All sets of primary features include 17 common

features and the rest are randomly generated numbers. For each set of features the distribution

obtained from several GA runs is shown.

Figure 3. The distribution of absolute test errors for SISSO 5D-models of perovskite lattice vector

[7] obtained during 5-fold CV. All models in upper row are obtained applying single SISSO run, in

bottom row – using GA-SISSO. In the left column models with complexity Ω = 2 are shown, in

middle – Ω = 4, in the right – hiSISSO models with Ω = 4 and an input-feature GA-SISSO model

with DhiSISSO = 5 and ΩhiSISSO = 2. Green histograms – densities of samples, black boxes – 0, 25, 50,


75 and 95 %, red – median.

Applications of GA-SISSO for predicting CO2 adsorption energies

We now present the results of GA-SISSO search for predictive models of carbon dioxide

adsorption energies. In several studies, the center of O 2p-band (PC) was considered as a descriptor

for adsorption energies on oxide surfaces [27,28,29,30], similarly to d-band center for transition

metals and alloys. However, analyzing the data set we discuss below, we found that the lowest 10-

fold CV-RMSE in the polynomial model containing only PC was observed for the power degree 4 –

0.47 eV (Figure S). Evidently, prediction accuracy for the model containing only PC is not very

high. The reason is that the energy of O 2p-band levels is not the only actuating mechanism

responsible for carbon dioxide activation. As we have shown in our previous study [23], quite often

CO2 molecules are additionally bonded to surface cations – with one or several in the neighborhood

of oxygen atoms. This results in low prediction accuracy of the adsorption energy when a model

contains only the O 2p-band center, and suggests that the properties of surface cations may  also

have to be taken into account for obtaining accurate prediction models.

To obtain the GA-SISSO models of CO2 adsorption energies on semiconductor oxides, we

have used the same training set as in our recent study [23]. It contains 255 samples with CO2

molecules on binary and ternary oxides of Li-Cs, Mg-Ba, Al-In, Si-Sn, Sb, Sc-V, Y-Nb, La and Zn.

The range of adsorption energies is quite wide: from very weakly bound molecules with -0.1 eV, to

strongly bound CO2 (-3.6 eV). The set of primary features included properties of gas-phase atoms

(ionization potentials, electron affinities, etc.), surfaces (formation energies, work functions, band

gap, conduction band minimum and surface O-atoms above which CO2 molecules are activated and

surface cations (geometric properties, projected density of states moments, etc.) – overall 46

features [23].

To define optimal dimensionality and complexity {D, Ω} we performed a grid search in the

range from 4 to 7 for dimensionalities and 4 to 8 for complexities. Two subsets of primary features

have been selected for these jobs. The first one contained sixteen randomly selected features, and

the second one composed of sixteen most correlated features to CO2 adsorption energy. For all these

sets we performed 10-fold cross-validation jobs with all mathematical operators (Table 2). Because

of the reasons discussed above, the dependence of CV-RMSE on D and Ω is not smooth. Moreover,

for several grid-points we observed the CV-RMSE divergence (mathematically undefined values),

and in quite many cases the errors exceed the one observed for polynomial fit of PC indicating the

overfitting. Thus, next we performed the search for best SISSO models for those sets of D and Ω

which were found to have lowest CV-RMSE’s dealing with any of considered features sets, and


those which can finally deliver low CV errors according to expected trends disregarding grid-points

where the error divergence had been observed. Relatively low CV-errors were obtained for lower

complexities (4 and 5), so we considered the following {D, Ω} sets for genetic algorithm search:

{4,4}, {4,5}, {5,4} and {5,5}.

Table 2. 10-fold CV-RMSE (in eV) obtained for single SISSO runs for different dimensionalities

(D) and complexities (Ω), for two subsets of primary features: randomly selected and correlated

ones to CO2 adsorption energy.

D
4
5
6
7

Ω
4
5
6
7
8
4
5
6
7
8
4
5
6
7
8
4
5

correlated 1.25 0.48 4.77 0.66 undef. 0.53 0.51 0.55 0.71 4.05 0.57 0.98 undef. 1.25 1.83 0.51 0.55
random
0.61 0.53 1.57 1.11 0.60 0.69 1.23 1.90 0.82 0.87 1.14 2.12 2.22 2.25 3.52 0.88 1.27

As we show above, the inclusion of GA-SISSO models obtained for lower complexity as

input features into GA-SISSO jobs done for higher complexity (hiSISSO) improves prediction

accuracy (Fig. 3 right). So, we applied this methodology also in the search for models of CO 2

adsorption energy. In all discussed cases we included GA-SISSO models with DhiSISSO = 4 or 5 and

ΩhiSISSO = 2 as input feature into GA-SISSO models with D = 4 or 5 and Ω = 4 or 5. Applying

genetic algorithm, the GA-SISSO model with the lowest 10-fold CV RMSE was obtained for D = 5

and Ω = 4 (with DhiSISSO = 5, ΩhiSISSO = 2). Its fitting RMSE is 0.33 eV, CV-RMSE and CV-MAE are

0.35 and 0.28 eV respectively  (Figure 4 top). So, the expression for prediction  of the CO2

adsorption energy is:

Eads=0.63+1.01⋅10

− 5αmax⋅ Δ⋅CBm

3+76.30⋅(αmax⋅U )

−1−0.083⋅|Δφ⋅ U−φ1.4⋅E1|

−0.0013⋅αO⋅ φ2.6⋅U

3−1.12⋅||φ1.4−E1|−|φ1.4||
(2)

with  αmax – polarizability of surface cations, maximal among all surface cations species, αO –

polarizability of surface O-atom above which CO2 is adsorbed, Δ – band gap, CBm – conduction

band minimum, U – highest energy of 2p-band of O-atom, φl – electrostatic potential above O-atom

at the distance l = 1.4 or 2.6 Å, Δφ – difference of electrostatic potentials at 1.4 and 2.6 Å above O

atom, and E1 equal to:

E1=2.38−0.37⋅(r max

LUMO+d1)+0.03⋅ d3

3−15.44⋅ Eform/r max

LUMO+0.60⋅|rmax

LUMO−d1|+7.62⋅ d3/PC     (3)

here rmax

LUMO is radius of LUMO of a gas-phase cationic atom, maximal among all cationic species,

dl – distance from O-atom to the nearest lth cation, Eform – surface formation energy. The 10-fold

CV RMSE for E1 model is 0.40 eV which is larger than for model (2).


Figure 4. (top) Distribution of 10-fold CV absolute errors for SISSO model (2) for CO2 adsorption

energy; significance of primary features and operators (insets) according to GA performed within a

hiSISSO approach: for GA-SISSO models obtained at the second step with  D = 5 and Ω = 4

(middle), and for the first step GA-SISSO models with DhiSISSO = 5 and ΩhiSISSO = 2 (bottom).

Model (2) contains five terms. Among them, the one which explains the most of the


variance of the adsorption energy is the last one: ||φ1.4 – E1| – |φ1.4||. Its R2 coefficient in fitting the

adsorption energy is 0.74, much higher than for all other terms which are 0.21, 0.001, 0.05, and

0.03, respectively. This term besides  E1 contains also the electrostatic potential at 1.4 Å above

surface O atom. 1.4 Å is also the maximal C-O bond distance between chemisorbed CO2 molecule

and the underlying surface oxygen atom. The  electrostatic potential above surface O atoms is

typically positive. This means that attraction of positively charged species such as carbon atom in a

CO2 molecule is favorable. Indeed, there is a certain relation between φ1.4 and CO2 adsorption

energy (Figure S), although the corresponding R2 correlation coefficient is only 0.36. The latter

clearly indicates that attraction of positively charged carbon atom to surface oxygen is by far not the

only factor influencing the CO2 binding. As mentioned above, a very important role is played by the

interaction of O atoms in CO2 molecule with surface cationic atoms.

In the case of E1 model, the main term is the ratio d3/PC. The role of O 2p-band center is

clear – the less negative its value is, the more charge is transferred to adsorbate molecule, the more

negative is the bonding energy. Regarding the distance from surface oxygen to a third nearest cation

(d3), its larger values promote the strengthening of bonding. The reason is the ionicity. Larger

interatomic distances in oxides imply larger radii of cations which in turn implies smaller values of

absolute ionization potentials. Therefore, oxygen atoms in the neighborhood of such cations are

expected to accumulate more charge density which can be further transported to a molecule

adsorbed above. In other words, surfaces with larger oxygen-cation distances are more ionic, and

this promotes the strengthening of bonds with CO2.

For assessment  of the  importance  of  other  features  in  description  of CO2 adsorption

energies, we performed the analysis of all SISSO strings in the whole GA pool that where generated

during the run. In this analysis, for each primary feature k we calculated the so called significance

(weighted frequency of appearance of a given feature or operator in the models along the GA):

sk=∑

i

Nall

f i⋅1 {k ∈i}

(4)

here 1{} is the indicator function which is 1 for True and 0 otherwise. 

As expected, the most important feature is E1 (Figure 4 middle). Among other features, the

electrostatic potentials above oxygen atom at 1.4, 2.6 Å and especially their difference have highest

significance. The difference  Δφ = φ1.4  – φ2.6 defines the direction of the electric field above the

adsorption site, and in most of cases it is directed towards the surface. In cases where it is directed

away from the surface, or towards the surface but has relatively small value, chemisorbed CO 2

structures have very weak binding energies, or even they are less stable than the physisorbed CO2

structures. In general, there is certain relation between CO2 adsorption energy and Δφ, although the

R2 coefficient in this case is relatively small 0.43 – even less than for PC (0.58).


Since E1 was obtained also on top of the same set of primary features as the model (2), and it

encloses some of them, we have also done the same analysis for GA run for DhiSISSO = 5 and ΩhiSISSO

= 2 (Figure 4 bottom). Here two most significant features are O 2p-band center and surface

formation energy (Eform), also φ2.6 and minimal Hirshfeld charge of surface cations (qmin) have

relatively high significances. The PC and Eform were found to be less significant in the case of the

second step of hiSISSO for D = 5 and Ω = 4 (Figure 4 middle), and they are not present in model

(2). The reason is that on one hand they are already incorporated in E1, and on the other hand PC

and Δφ are correlated between each other (R2 = 0.82). So, PC is in some sense switched off in the

second step of GA-hiSISSO. The surface formation energy should be related to adsorption energy

in a way that less stable surfaces contain larger amount of chemically unsaturated atoms following

stronger binding with adsorbate molecules. Despite that, we do not observe any correlation between

Eform and CO2 adsorption energies (Figure S): the R2-coefficient is 0.001. We have analyzed about

thirty ΩhiSISSO = 2 top strings in GA pool with lowest CV errors including the best one E1, and we

observed that Eform appears in most of the cases during the second SISSO iteration while fitting the

residual between the adsorption energy and the first term which contains  PC. Thus,  Eform plays

complementary role to PC in the fitting CO2 adsorption energies.

Regarding mathematical operators (insets in Figure 4), in both cases their significances sk

according to (4) are always very close, with no evident outstanders in contrast to features. This

suggests a weak dependence of final results on the operators sets. However, since studied operators

set contains two different kinds of operators – unitary (powers, roots, absolute value) and binary

ones (‘+’, ‘-‘, ‘*’, ‘/’, ‘|-|’), this requires probably another way of operators analysis with separation

into two categories. This will be investigated later.

The SISSO model (2) appeared in 60 % of the cross-validation iterations. Although some

terms inside this models are more persistent: the most important term ||φ1.4 – E1| – |φ1.4|| was selected

in all CV cases, the terms (α0·φ2.6·U3) and |Δφ·U – φ1.4·E1| – in 90%, and the term (αmax·U)-1 – in 70

%. With that we conclude that the found model is quite stable.

The prediction accuracy of the SISSO model about 0.3 eV is obviously larger than the

accuracy of the used DFT approach for generation of the training set (~0.1 eV), and it is larger than

one would need for example for predictions of catalytic materials in methane oxidation (0.2 eV)

[25]. This is explained by the fact that applied approach provides a universal model which covers

all possible mechanisms of CO2 activation – by means of charge transport from underlying oxygen,

and via one or two additional chemical bonds with surface cations. For establishing of more

accurate models one can apply for example the subgroup discovery [23,31], or other alternative

machine learning approaches which in turn might require the generation of a larger data set [32].

Also for some particular tasks active learning can be applied [25].


Conclusions

In this work we have developed a method for selection of primary features and mathematical

operators in symbolic regression SISSO. The choice of an optimal set is important for avoiding the

underfitting  and  overfitting  of  the  obtained  model.  This  features-selection  method  is  genetic

algorithm, and it deals with strings consisting of subsets of features and operators. We tested it for

the set of perovskite materials with lattice vector as the target property [7]. We observed that for

outperforming the model which is obtained while treating all features and operators simultaneously

(in cases when it is not restricted due to computational limitations) in terms of prediction accuracy,

important is the mutation of unselected during crossover features and operators as well as the

inversion of the fitness-function. We found that this improvement is robust, i.e., it does not depend

on the dimensionality and complexity of the SISSO model. Compared to SISSO models obtained

from all features and operators we observed the improvement of prediction accuracy by 10 to 20 %.

Next we have applied our GA algorithm for the search of the SISSO model for prediction of

CO2 adsorption energies on semiconductor oxides [23]. The model obtained in this way has

prediction accuracy about 0.3 eV that is much better than prediction accuracy of discussed in the

literature models containing only O 2p-band center. The analysis of obtained GA-SISSO model as

well as of the GA performance showed that the main factors influencing the strength of CO 2

binding are electrostatic potentials above the surface oxygen atom, their difference, O 2p-band

center and surface formation energy. Although the latter has low correlation with adsorption energy,

its role lies in fitting the residuals between CO2 adsorption energies and O 2p-band center. The

analysis of mathematical operators showed a weak dependence of GA results on the operators sets,

although this might need further investigations.


References

1. Y. Wang, N. Wagner, J.M. Rondinelli. MRS Commun. 2019, 9, 793–805.
2. D.A. Augusto, H.J.C. Barbosa. Proceedings - Brazilian Symposium on Neural Networks, 

IEEE Computer Society, 2000. 173.

3. L. Foppa, L.M. Ghiringhelli, F. Girgsdies, M. Hashagen, P. Kube, M. Hävecker, S.J. Carey, 

A. Tarasov, P. Kraus, F. Rosowski, R. Schlögl, A. Trunschke, M. Scheffler. MRS Bulletin. 
2021, 46, 1016.

4.  Xie, Stephan R., Gregory R. Stewart, James J. Hamlin, Peter J. Hirschfeld, and Richard G.

Hennig. "Functional form of the superconducting critical temperature from machine 
learning." Physical Review B 100, no. 17 (2019): 174513.

5.
Cao, Guohua, Runhai Ouyang, Luca M. Ghiringhelli, Matthias Scheffler, Huijun Liu, 
Christian Carbogno, and Zhenyu Zhang. "Artificial intelligence for high-throughput discovery
of topological insulators: The example of alloyed tetradymites." Physical Review Materials 
4, no. 3 (2020): 034204.

6. Ouyang, R.; Curtarolo, S.; Ahmetcik, E.; Scheffler, M.; Ghiringhelli, L. M. Phys. Rev. 

Mater. 2018, 2, 083802.

7. L. Foppa, T.A.R. Purcell, S.V. Levchenko, M. Scheffler, L.M. Ghringhelli. PRL 2022. 129, 

055301.

8. C. J. Bartel, S.L. Millican, A.M. Deml, J.R. Rumptz, W. Tumas, A.W. Weimer, S. Lany, V. 

Stevanović, C.B. Musgrave, A.M. Holder. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 4168.

9. M. Andersen, S. Levchenko, M. Scheffler, K. Reuter. ACS Catal. 2019, 9, 4, 2752. 
10. Han, Z.-K.; Sarker, D.; Ouyang, R.; Mazheika, A.; Gao, Y.; Levchenko, S. V. Nat. 

Commun. 2021, 12, No. 1833.

11. R. Ouyang, E. Ahmetcik, C. Carbogno, M. Scheffler, L.M. Ghiringhelli. J. Phys.: Mater. 

2019, 2, 024002.

12. T.A.R. Purcell, M. Scheffler, L.G. Ghiringhelli. J. Chem. Phys. 2023, 159, 114110
13. J. Fan, J. Lv. J.R. Statist. Soc. B. 2008, 70, 849-911.
14. C. Strobl, A.-L. Boulesteix, T. Kneib, T. Augustin, A. Zeileis. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9,

307.S

15. L.M. Ghiringhelli, J. Vybiral, S.V. Levchenko, C. Draxl, M. Scheffler. PRL 2015, 114, 

105503.

16. C. Ding, H.C. Peng. J. Bioinf. Comp. Biolog. 2005, 03, 185.
17. B. Regler, M. Scheffler, L.M. Ghiringhelli. Data Min. Know. Disc. 2022, 36, 1815.
18. Z. Guo, S. Hu, Z.-K. Han, R. Ouyang. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2022, 18, 4945.
19. S. Bhattacharya, S.V. Levchenko, L.M. Ghiringhelli, M. Scheffler. PRL 2013, 111, 135501.
20. X. Zhao, X. Shao, Y. Fujimori, S. Bhattacharya, L.M. Ghiringhelli, H.-J. Freund, M. Sterrer,

N. Nilius, S.V. Levchenko. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 1204.

21. D.E. Goldberg. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning. 

Addison-Wesley, 1989.

22. S. Bhattacharya, S.V. Levchenko, L.M. Ghiringhelli, M. Scheffler. NJP. 16 (2014) 123016.
23. A. Mazheika, Y.-G. Wang, R. Valero, L. Ghiringhelli, F. Vines, F. Illas, S. Levchenko, M. 

Scheffler. Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 419.

24. Wang, H., Schmack, R., Sokolov, S., Kondratenko, E., Mazheika, A., Kraehnert, R. ACS 

Catal. 2022, 12, 15, 9325.

25. A. Mazheika, M. Geske, M. Müller, S.A. Schunk, F. Rosowski, R. Kraehnert. 

ArXiv:2211.08014. 

26. M.-M. Millet, G. Algara-Siller, S. Wrabetz, A. Mazheika, F. Girgsdies, D. Teschner, F. 

Seitz, A. Tarasov, S.V. Levchenko, R. Schlögl, E. Frei. JACS 2019, 141, 2451.

27. L. Giordano, K. Akkiraju, R. Jacobs, D. Vivona, D. Morgan, Y. Shao-Horn. Acc. Chem. 

Res. 2022, 55, 298.

28. C.F. Dickens, J.H. Montoya, A.R. Kulkarni, M. Bajdich, J.K. Nørskov. Surf. Sci. 2019, 681,


122.

29. A. Grimaud, K.J. May, C.E. Carlton, Y.-L. Lee, M. Risch, W.T. Hong, J. Zhou, Y. Shao-

Horn. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2439.

30. A. Maibam, S. Krishnamurty, M.A. Dar. Mater. Adv., 2022, 3, 592.
31. C. Sutton, M. Boley, L.M. Ghiringhelli, M. Rupp, J. Vreeken, M. Scheffler. Nat. Commun. 

2002, 11, 4428.

32. V. Fung, G. Hu, P. Ganesh, B.G. Sumpter. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 88.


