1 
 

Controllable Freezing Transparency for Water Ice on Scalable Graphene 

Films on Copper 

 

Bernhard Fickl,1 Teresa M. Seifried,1 Erwin Rait,1 Jakob Genser,2 Thomas Wicht,1 Jani Kotakoski,3 

Günther Rupprechter,1 Alois Lugstein,2 Dengsong Zhang,4,* Christian Dipolt,5 Hinrich Grothe,1,* 

Dominik Eder,1,* Bernhard C. Bayer1,* 

 

1Institute of Materials Chemistry, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), Getreidemarkt 9, 1060 

Vienna, Austria 

2Institute of Solid State Electronics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), Gußhausstraße 25-25a, 

1040 Vienna, Austria 

3Faculty of Physics, University of Vienna, Boltzmanngasse 5, 1090 Vienna, Austria 

4International Joint Laboratory of Catalytic Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Advanced Special 

Steel, Innovation Institute of Carbon Neutrality, Research Center of Nanoscience and Technology, 

Department of Chemistry, College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China 

5Rübig GmbH & Co KG, Schafwiesenstraße 56, 4600 Wels, Austria 

 

Corresponding 
authors: 
bernhard.bayer-skoff@tuwien.ac.at 
(Bernhard 
C. 
Bayer), 

dominik.eder@tuwien.ac.at 
(Dominik 
Eder), 
hinrich.grothe@tuwien.ac.at 
(Hinrich 
Grothe), 

dszhang@shu.edu.cn (Dengsong Zhang)  

 

 
 


2 
 

Abstract 

 

Control of water ice formation on surfaces is of key technological and economic importance, but the 

fundamental understanding of ice nucleation and growth mechanisms and the design of surfaces for 

controlling water freezing behaviour remain incomplete. Graphene is a two-dimensional (2D) material 

that has been extensively studied for its peculiar wetting properties with liquid water incl. a heavily 

debated wetting transparency. Furthermore, graphene is the parent structure of soot particles that are 

heavily implicated as nuclei in atmospheric ice formation and consequently graphene is often used as a 

model surface for computational ice nucleation studies. Despite this, to date experimental reports on ice 

formation on scalable graphene films remain missing. Towards filling this gap, we here report on the 

water freezing behaviour on scalably grown chemical vapour deposited (CVD) graphene films on 

application-relevant polycrystalline copper (Cu). We find that as-grown CVD graphene on Cu can be 

(as we term it) “freezing transparent” i.e. the graphene’s presence does not change the freezing 

temperature curves of liquid water to solid ice on Cu in our measurements. Such “freezing transparency” 

has to date not been considered. We also show that chemical functionalization of the graphene films 

can result in controllable changes to the freezing behaviour to lower/higher temperatures and that also 

the observed freezing transparency can be lifted via functionalization. Our work thereby introduces the 

concept of freezing transparency of graphene on a metal support and also introduces scalable CVD 

graphene/Cu as an ultimately thin platform towards control of ice nucleation behaviour on a 

technologically highly relevant metal. 
 


3 
 

Introduction 

 

Environmental ice formation from freezing of water on materials can critically impact on their operation 

performance, safety and running cost in many application fields.1 For instance, ice build-up can result 

in structural vulnerability in large metallic structures such as overhead power line cables made from 

uncoated steel/Cu/Al threading, degraded energy efficiency in appliances by blocking of metallic heat 

exchangers in, e.g., refrigerators, or functional failure in control and lift surfaces in aerospace structures. 

Therefore, solutions to control ice nucleation on materials are highly sought after.1 

 

To date, the control of ice formation is often an active process where materials are either heated, sprayed 

with anti-icing chemicals or mechanically de-iced.1 These measures always come at a cost of energy 

and time, which is why a great deal of research is currently focused on creating surface treatments or 

extraneous coatings with the ability to passively control ice nucleation.1 In this context, the desired 

passive control of ice nucleation on the one hand often includes “anti-icing” capabilities i.e. lowering 

of the temperature of ice formation on a given surface below its operation conditions. On the other hand, 

sometimes however also controlled “icing” at pre-determined, operationally safe locations can be 

desired. 

 

The formation of ice on a material is however a highly multifaceted and as of yet not sufficiently 

understood process. For heterogeneous ice nucleation it is intricately linked with a material’s surface 

energies, nano-morphologies and wettabilities.1 Most current solutions to passive “anti-icing” surfaces 

include fabrication of nm/µm hierarchically structured superhydrophobic surfaces incl., e.g., slippery 

liquid infused porous surfaces (SLIPS).1 Such surfaces are however hard to produce at scale, prone to 

damage by wear and can under certain conditions even detrimentally increase ice nucleation (e.g., 

droplet impingement vs. water condensation “frosting”).1 Therefore new materials/surfaces/coatings 

that can control ice build-up remain highly sought after. Likewise insights into the mechanistic 

processes of water freezing, heterogeneous ice nucleation and ice growth and how they are linked to 

given surface properties are still highly desired. 


4 
 

 

A multi-functional class of novel materials that has been under intense investigation over the past years 

are atomically-thin, two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene, a monolayer of sp2-bonded 

carbon. In particular, the peculiar liquid water wetting behaviour on graphene incl. existence of a highly 

debated “wetting transparency” of graphene coated onto metals has recently been extensively studied 

and discussed.2–9 Wetting transparency is defined as the case when the presence of graphene does not 

change a surface’s wetting behaviour (mostly measured via contact angle) compared to the bare 

underlying support.2–9 The occurrence of wetting transparency is commonly suggested to be linked to 

monolayer graphene’s atomic thinness by which the surface properties of the underlying substrate 

emanate through the in comparison chemically inert graphene monolayer, thus still determining the 

surface’s overall properties irrespective of graphene’s presence.2–13 

 

Despite this huge interest in graphene wetting, astonishingly practically no experimental work has been 

done to date on water freezing and ice nucleation on scalable graphene films on metals.14,15 This is even 

more so a curious gap in literature since a sizeable number of computational studies have used graphene 

layers as model systems for computational ice nucleation investigation.16–21 The lack of experimental 

work on ice nucleation on graphene films is furthermore surprising, since atmospheric soot composed 

of 2D nanocarbons, which are in first approximation nanoscopic graphene fragments, are well known 

nuclei for heterogeneous atmospheric ice formation, with strong (and often conflictingly observed) 

dependencies of ice nucleation properties on the soot’s/nanographene fragments’ defect levels/chemical 

functionalizations.22–31 

 

In turn, from an application perspective, the related question arises if (functionalized) graphene on 

metals could be advantageously utilized to control the heterogeneous ice nucleation behaviour on metal 

surfaces? Such use of graphene would have high application relevance: Industrially scalable chemical 

vapour deposition (CVD) of graphene on a large variety of metals has been developed32 and thus CVD 

graphene as a potential ice-control coating platform could be scalably employed on a range of 

application-wise important metals. 


5 
 

 

Despite this, the fundamental water freezing and ice nucleation properties of scalable graphene films 

have not been experimentally assessed yet and investigation of the exciting potentiality of scalable CVD 

graphene on technologically important metals as an ice nucleation control coating also remains 

underexplored. 

 

Only two prior reports investigated changes in ice nucleation from graphene coatings, albeit both grown 

under non-scalable ultra-high-vacuum (UHV) conditions and not on a scalable metal, but on 

prohibitively expensive Ru/sapphire and Ir/sapphire single-crystal models.14,15 From the literature on 

graphene’s wetting transparency it is well known that there exists a key substrate-dependence on 

graphene’s wetting properties.6,24 This suggests that ice nucleation studies conducted on UHV single-

crystal models may have limited applicability when it comes to making predictions about graphene-

covered metal surfaces at a scalable level. 

 

Towards filling these critical gaps in the literature, both in terms of experimental study of fundamentals 

of water ice nucleation on graphene as well as assessing scalable (functionalized) graphene as a 

potentially ice-control coating, we here report on the water freezing behaviour on scalably grown CVD 

graphene on application-relevant polycrystalline Cu. The employed Cu supports are hereby not only the 

most widely used support to produce CVD graphene32,33 but Cu is also a highly important metal with 

respect to desired ice control due to Cu’s widespread use in, e.g. overland power line threads or 

appliance heat exchangers. 

 

We show in this report that non-treated, as-grown CVD graphene on Cu can be (as we term it) “freezing 

transparent” i.e. the graphene’s presence does not change the freezing temperature curves of water to 

ice on Cu in our measurements. Such “freezing transparency” has to date not been reported, and thus 

also not been considered in the many computational studies that used graphene as model system for ice 

nucleation surfaces. Furthermore, we investigate how functionalizations to the CVD graphene 

(incl. -oxygen-containing, -F and -polymethylmethacrylat (-PMMA) via plasma and liquid phase 


6 
 

treatments) can result in controllable changes of water freezing curves to lower/higher temperatures and 

how also the freezing transparency can be lifted. We also explore extrinsic factors necessary for 

observation of this freezing transparency such as storage time of our samples in ambient conditions and 

thus linked adventitious hydrocarbon adsorption levels. Our work thereby not only introduces the 

concept of freezing transparency of graphene on a metal based on first experimental observation, but 

also introduces scalable CVD graphene as an ultimately thin platform towards control of ice nucleation 

on a technologically relevant metal. 
 


7 
 

Results and Discussion 

 

For our ice nucleation measurements we prepare a homogeneously covering, high-quality 

polycrystalline monolayer graphene film on Cu foils (25 µm thickness) by CVD (graphene/Cu).34 For 

comparison we also produce bare reference Cu foil samples (Cu) with the same Cu microstructure by 

annealing under the same conditions as used in CVD but without the hydrocarbon exposure/graphene 

growth step. This similarity in Cu microstructure between CVD graphene/Cu and bare reference Cu 

samples is essential to allow us to attribute changes in ice nucleation temperatures solely to the presence 

of the CVD graphene (i.e. differences arising from Cu microstructure are thereby excluded). 

Microscopic and spectroscopic characterisation of the graphene/Cu and bare Cu samples is shown in 

Supporting Figure S1. Additionally, we investigate the effect of several functionalization treatments to 

the graphene/Cu stacks (and the bare Cu references). First is exposure to an air plasma (2 s), resulting 

in physical damage to the graphene and covalent bonding of oxygen-containing groups to the graphene 

defects from subsequent air exposure (Supporting Figure S2). Second is exposure to an SF6 plasma (2 

s), resulting in damage of the graphene and covalent formation of fluorographene (also known as “2D 

Teflon”, Supporting Figure S3).35 Third is functionalization of the graphene with polymeric PMMA 

particles via deposition and subsequent removal of a drop cast PMMA layer on the samples, which is 

known to result in persistent PMMA nanoparticle contamination of CVD graphene (Supporting Figure 

S4).36 Samples are stored in ambient air after fabrication. The state of samples is investigated by optical 

microscopy, Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) in parallel to ice 

nucleation measurements. Unless otherwise stated, ice nucleation measurements are always performed 

after ~24 h after the last fabrication step in order to ensure a comparable level of inevitable adventitious 

hydrocarbon contamination adsorption from ambient air storage accumulated on the samples.5,6 This is 

key as prior work on wetting transparency of water on graphene has shown that different adventitious 

carbon contamination levels can significantly alter graphene’s wetting behaviour, making comparison 

for non-ambient-exposure-time controlled samples difficult.2–6,8,9 For selected samples in our study also 

the time evolution of freezing behaviour as a function of storage time in ambient (2 h to 1 month) and 

corresponding hydrocarbon contamination is assessed in order to disentangle the effect of the inevitable 


8 
 

hydrocarbon adsorption. Further details on sample preparation and characterisation can be found in the 

Supporting Information. 

 

Ice nucleation measurements37 on these various samples are performed in an optical cryo-microscopy 

setup (schematic in Figure 1a),38 consisting of a cryo-cell containing a Peltier element (Quick-cool QC-

31-1.4-3.7M) that can cool down to –40 °C through thermoelectric cooling and is temperature controlled 

via feedback from a K-type thermocouple mounted directly on the sample stage. The cryo-cell has a 

glass window and is mounted directly on an optical light microscope stage, so that the freezing of 

individual water droplets can be observed as a function of temperature in the optical microscope. The 

freezing stage is housed inside an air tight cell at atmospheric pressure, which is purged with dry N2 gas 

before ice nucleation measurements. This results in a low humidity atmosphere inside the chamber and 

thus suppresses secondary water droplet formation from condensation during cooling runs.14 As the 

water reservoir for freezing, each sample is sprayed with ultra-clean water (MiliQfi 18.2 MΩ·cm) at 

room temperature before being inserted into the freezing cell, leading to a distribution of water droplets 

on the sample surface (example in first frame in Figure 1b). We thermally contact the Cu foil backside 

to the stage with a small amount of paraffin oil to ensure thermal contact between Peltier stage and Cu 

samples. During the freezing experiments, the Peltier element is cooled at a steady rate of 10 K/min. 

Concurrently, optical microscope images of the water droplets are recorded at a rate of 20 images/s 

during cooling incl. a temperature stamp in each recorded image. The freezing of an individual droplet 

can readily be detected in the optical microscope image sequences by a change in optical appearance 

whereby the water droplet changes contrast upon freezing (Figure 1b).14,39 The freezing event of a given 

water droplet is therefore here assigned to this change in optical appearance of a given water droplet, in 

line with prior literature.14,39 We note that freezing of small water droplets is a fast process occurring 

over a timescale of fractions of a second.14,39 Since our cooling rate of 10 K/min is on a much slower 

timescale, we can assign the temperature at which this freezing event is observed as the freezing 

temperature of this given water droplet. An exemplary freezing series incl. temperature stamps is shown 

in Figure 1b. As the contrast change upon freezing can be quite subtle, a freezing event can be further 

accentuated by employing image difference calculations (Figure 1c). Using the optical microscope 


9 
 

image sequences, we thereby manually and with help of a custom-programmed image analysis 

algorithm (see Supporting Information) measure freezing temperatures (and diameters) for multiple (10 

to >40) water droplets per individual sample from such freezing optical microscopy video series. 

Multiple individual samples are measured per every sample fabrication run. This data is then presented 

as freezing curves for each sample condition (e.g., Figure 2), showing the number fraction (in %) of 

frozen water droplets (frozen droplets fraction) versus temperature. The here presented freezing curves 

all consist of data from repeated runs and plot interpolated, averaged curves (detailed explanation on 

data treatment in Supporting Information). We emphasize that to date no experimental work has studied 

such ensemble freezing curves for water on graphene films.32,33 Estimated uncertainties (based on 

standard deviation) to the freezing curves and extracted values are presented throughout the manuscript 

and Supporting Information. For applications the onset temperature of freezing for a macroscopic water 

deposit is often important. To extract a simple comparative estimate for such onset of freezing for a 

given droplet ensemble on a macroscopic sample we extract from our freezing curves a T10 value at 

which 10% of water droplets have frozen for a given sample. Likewise, we also extract T25, T50 and T75 

values at which 25%, 50% and 75% of droplets have frozen, respectively. We tabulate these temperature 

values for the various studied samples conditions in Table 1 and Supporting Table S1. Further details 

on the freezing experiments and their analysis procedure can be found in the Supporting Information. 

 

 
 


10 
 

 

Figure 1. (a) Schematic illustration of cryo-microscopy setup (1: microscope objective, 2: Peltier 

cooling element, 3: copper foil sample, 4: in-/outlet for N2 purging, 5: in-/outlet water-cooling). (b) 

Optical micrograph series, incl. temperature-stamps, depicting sample region before (upper frame) and 

after multiple exemplary freezing events of the marked (blue circles) water droplets. (c) Image 

difference calculations based on the data presented in (b) accentuating the freezing event of the marked 

water droplets for easier detection. 

 

Freezing on as-grown graphene/Cu. Figure 2 compares freezing curves of the CVD graphene/Cu stack 

(solid black line) compared to the bare Cu reference (dashed black line). The freezing curve data shown 

in Figure 2 shows averaged freezing fraction curves of >20 separate runs for each sample type with 10 

to 30 droplet freezing events in each run and also includes uncertainty bands (shaded bands, calculated 

from standard deviations). What is strikingly apparent from Figure 2 is that no significant difference in 

the freezing behaviour between CVD graphene/Cu stacks (solid black line) and bare Cu references 

(dashed black line) is observed. For both sample types, little freezing is observed before reaching –25 

°C, with then a small increase in frozen droplets between –25 °C to –30 °C and then rapid freezing 

starting at around –30 °C and ending with all droplets frozen around –34 °C. For comparison, 

homogeneous ice nucleation temperature of water in the absence of a heterogeneous surface to nucleate 

is commonly reported at –36 °C to –38 °C.40 The data shows that under our measurement conditions 

both graphene/Cu and Cu allow significant undercooling of water droplets below 0 °C before 

heterogeneous ice nucleation occurs. Importantly, comparing graphene/Cu and Cu, we neither observe 


11 
 

differences in the onset temperatures of freezing, nor significant differences in the further freezing 

fraction evolution upon further cooling. This suggests that non-treated, as-grown CVD graphene on Cu 

is (as we term it) “freezing transparent” compared to bare Cu references at our measurement conditions. 

We here introduce the term “freezing transparency” in analogy to the prior studied “wetting 

transparency” of graphene2–9 and define it as the case when the presence of the graphene on a given 

support does not change the freezing temperature evolution of water compared to on the bare support. 

The freezing transparency behaviour of the graphene on Cu in our measurements is also reflected in the 

calculated T10, T25 T50 and T75 values in Table 1 and which are identical within our error margin for 

Cu/graphene and the bare Cu reference. We note that we do not evidence a distinct difference in water 

droplet sizes for graphene/Cu stacks and bare Cu, as both show largely similar droplet size distributions 

(Supporting Figure S5). Within the respective size distributions we find a weak trend of larger droplets 

freezing at higher temperatures similarly for both samples (Supporting Figure S6), which is well in line 

with general heterogeneous ice nucleation theory, where a larger contact area from a larger water droplet 

is related to a larger propensity for ice nucleation.41 

 

 


12 
 

 

Figure 2. Freezing curves of non-treated, as-grown CVD graphene/Cu stacks (solid black) and bare Cu 

references (dashed black). Curves are averages of >20 separate runs for each sample type with 10 to 30 

droplet freezing events in each run from multiple sample preparations. Shaded areas represent standard 

deviation bands to the freezing curves. 

 
 


13 
 

Table 1. T10, T25 T50 and T75 values and their standard deviations (ΔTxx) for our various samples for 

graphene/Cu and bare annealed Cu as fabricated and after the various functionalizations (all measured 

24 h after last fabrication step). 

 

 
 

T10/°C
ΔT10/°C
T25/°C
ΔT25/°C
T50/°C
ΔT50/°C
T75/°C
ΔT75/°C

Graphene/Cu as-

grown 

–30.1
± 2.0
–31.6
± 1.1
–32.4
± 0.8
–33.0
± 0.7

Graphene/Cu air 

plasma  

–30.9
± 1.7
–32.3
± 0.7
–33.0
± 0.5
–33.4
± 0.5

Graphene/Cu 

PMMA 

–26.4
± 3.2
–28.4
± 3.5
–29.3
± 3.5
–32.1
± 0.5

Graphene/Cu 

SF6 plasma 2 s 

–30.4
± 0.6
–31.1
± 0.5
–32.4
± 0.3
–33.1
± 0.3

Graphene/Cu 

SF6 plasma 10 s 

–15.5
± 2.5
–17.6
± 5.2
–20.6
± 6.3
–23.8
± 7.9

Cu annealed
–30.5
± 1.4
–31.6
± 1.1
–32.3
± 0.9
–32.9
± 0.5

Cu air plasma 
–30.4
± 4.0
–32.1
± 2.0
–33.3
± 0.4
–33.8
± 0.4

Cu PMMA
–26.9
± 3.8
–30.4
± 4.3
–33.9
± 0.3
–34.2
± 0.2

Cu SF6 plasma 

2 s 

–9.6
± 2.2
–9.6
± 2.2
–9.6
± 2.2
–9.6
± 2.2

Cu SF6 plasma 

10 s 

–13.8
± 5.1
–13.8
± 5.1
–13.8
± 5.1
–13.8
± 5.2


14 
 

To date a freezing transparency of graphene to water ice, as observed here, has not been reported in the 

literature. We therefore now first discuss our here reported observation of freezing transparency of 

graphene for water ice in light of the existing and related literature on the wetting transparency of 

graphene for liquid water.2–9 

 

Wetting transparency of graphene is defined as water having the same wetting behaviour (defined 

typically by contact angle) to a given substrate even if a monolayer of graphene is sandwiched between 

the water and the given substrate (i.e. analogous to our above introduced definition of freezing 

transparency).2–9 Across a series of reports, graphene has been reported to be fully wetting transparent, 

partially wetting transparent or not wetting transparent at all.2–9 Full wetting transparency is said to occur 

when the contact angle of the graphene/substrate stack is the same as of the bare substrate, partial wetting 

transparency when the measured contact angle is between freestanding graphene’s and bare substrate’s 

respective contact angles and no wetting transparency when the measured contact angle is the same as 

on freestanding graphene irrespective of its substrate. The disparities in literature regarding presence, 

partial or absence of wetting transparency have emerged to be related to several factors contributing to 

the wettability of graphene incl. not only i. graphene’s intrinsic wettability but also ii. environmental 

factors. 2–9 In terms of environmental factors in particular a. adsorbed adventitious carbon contamination 

build-up and b. the type of substrate underneath the graphene have been identified to play key roles in 

graphene’s wetting transparancy.2–9 An emerging consensus in the literature is that graphene can be at 

least partially wetting transparent when i. the graphene is monolayered, ii. the graphene’s interaction 

with its substrates is weak (i.e. the substrate does not strongly alter the graphene’s electronic structure) 

and iii. the graphene has only low levels of adventitious carbon adsorbate build-up on top.2–9 Cu, as used 

in our study as substrate, is such a weakly interacting substrate for graphene.6,33 Consequently, for fresh, 

monolayered CVD graphene on Cu (partial) wetting transparency has been experimentally observed.2,6 

In contrast for strongly interacting Ni no wetting transparency of monolayered CVD graphene was 

observed.6 Notably however, the observed wetting behaviour of graphene/Cu showed a significant time 

dependence for samples stored under ambient conditions, with over time changing presence or absence 

of (partial) wetting transparency over timeframes from h to years.5,6 This has been shown to be related 


15 
 

to adventitious carbon contamination from ambient building up on all samples over time, which with 

long enough storage time in ambient leads to the adventitious carbon contamination’s wetting properties 

completely overshadowing the sample’s wetting properties.5,6 

 

To ensure a constant level of adventitious carbon contamination in our sample series,5,6 all above 

presented measurements have therefore been acquired ~24 h after sample fabrication. To further explore 

the evolution of the freezing behaviour on our samples as a function of longer storage time, we present 

in Supporting Figure S7 freezing curves for storage in ambient until 1 month. We find that after 1 week 

freezing curves on Cu are similar to the ~24 h measurements, while for graphene/Cu after 1 week a shift 

of the freezing curve to slightly higher temperature is observed. This suggests that the freezing 

transparency has been lifted by the longer ambient air storage. After 1 month of storage the onset 

temperatures of freezing for Cu and the entire freezing curves for graphene/Cu have shifted to higher 

temperatures. Importantly, also after 1 month the curves for graphene/Cu and Cu do not overlap any 

more i.e. freezing transparency has disappeared (Supporting Figure S7). We suggest that this upshift of 

freezing temperatures and disappearance of freezing transparency is related to the massive adventitious 

carbon contamination build-up from extended ambient storage.5,6 Importantly, the 1 month data in 

Supporting Figure S7 thereby also shows that the freezing transparency at shorter storage times is not 

only a result of adventitious carbon contamination, since such contamination would be most dominating 

for the 1 month sample, where freezing transparency was however lifted. 

 

On the other hand, in Supporting Figure S8, we probe the freezing behaviour of our graphene/Cu and 

Cu samples after shorter storage times of only ~2 h in ambient. Based on prior literature,5,6 we know 

that for these samples the adventitious carbon contamination levels will be as low as technically possible 

for our measurement facilities (given how fast we can reliably bring samples from fabrication to ice 

nucleation measurements). We find that for such samples the onset temperature for freezing and entire 

freezing curves are significantly shifted to higher temperatures. Also, the freezing curves for 

graphene/Cu and Cu do not overlap perfectly any more for the ~2 h stored samples, indicating an at 

least partial absence of the freezing transparency of the ~2 h stored samples. 


16 
 

 

Combined, Supporting Figure S7 and S8 therefore indicate that the freezing transparency for 

graphene/Cu and graphene is only observed for intermediate storage time in ambient (~24 h). We 

suggest that this is linked to the medium adventitious carbon contamination levels after ~24 h in 

ambient. We emphasize however that for massive adventitious carbon build-up (after 1 month) the 

freezing transparency vanishes, which in turn suggests that the observed freezing transparency is not 

just an effect of freezing on substrate-independent adventitious carbon. In fact, combining Figure 2 and 

Supporting Figures S7 and S8 suggests that in order to establish the here observed freezing transparency 

not only the graphene in the graphene/Cu vs. Cu systems is necessary but also a mediating level of 

adventitious carbon on the graphene. This conclusion is reminiscent of the findings in the prior wetting 

transparency literature,2–9 suggesting that similar underlying mechanisms are at play in the case of 

freezing on graphene films. 

 

Freezing on functionalized graphene/Cu. So far, we have investigated the freezing properties on as-

grown graphene on Cu, which displays the here reported freezing transparency and elucidated its time 

dependence on inevitable adventitious carbon contamination. In order to test if the graphene’s freezing 

behaviour on a metal can also be controlled in a deliberate fashion beyond storage time, Figure 3 

compares droplet freezing curves for graphene/Cu stacks and bare Cu references that additionally 

underwent deliberate functionalization treatments before the ice nucleation measurements. For 

comparison, the non-treated, as-grown graphene/Cu and bare Cu freezing curves from Figure 2 are re-

plotted as solid and dashed black lines, respectively. All measurements in Figure 3 are taken after ~24 

h storage in ambient conditions after the last fabrication/treatment step to ensure a fair comparison to 

the data in Figure 2. 

 

 
 


17 
 

 

Figure 3. (a) Freezing curves for air plasma treated samples (x-axis scale –18 °C to –36 °C). (b)  

Freezing fraction curves for SF6 plasma treated samples (x-axis scale –5 °C to –36 °C). (c) Freezing 


18 
 

curves for PMMA treated samples (x-axis scale –18 °C to –36 °C). Graphene/Cu samples are 

represented by solid lines and Cu samples by dashed lines, respectively. All diagrams include freezing 

curves of untreated, as-grown graphene/Cu (black solid) and Cu (black dashed), replotted from Figure 

2. All curves are averages of several experimental freezing runs; a version of this figure with uncertainty 

bands included is shown in Supporting Figure S9. 

 

The first treatment we investigate is covalent functionalization of the CVD graphene with oxygen-

containing groups by air plasma treatment (2 s) (Figure 3a, red solid and dashed curves). As shown via 

Raman spectroscopy in Supporting Figure S2, such air plasma treatment incl. subsequent ambient air 

exposure results in severe damage to the graphene lattice and thus covalent defect functionalization of 

the graphene with oxygen-containing functional groups.42 A similar state of samples has prior also been 

labelled as “graphene oxide”-like.15 Such treatment is motivated by prior observation of freezing 

behaviour changes in atmospheric soot by different oxygen-containing groups.22–31 Notably, we find in 

Figure 3 and Table 1 that such air plasma treated graphene/Cu (red solid curve) does show freezing at 

slightly lower temperatures (by around –1 K) compared to non-treated, as-grown graphene/Cu (solid 

black) for the same ambient air storage time. Importantly also, between air-plasma-treated graphene/Cu 

and air-plasma-treated Cu little difference is observed, i.e. both Cu/graphene and Cu are similarly 

shifted to slightly lower freezing temperatures. We note that measured water droplet size distributions 

are not significantly different for air-plasma-treated Cu/graphene and air-plasma-treated Cu (Supporting 

Figure S10 and S11) compared to their non-plasma-treated counterparts (Supporting Figure S5 and S6). 

This suggests that it is not a different water droplet size distribution that is indirectly responsible for the 

slightly lower freezing temperatures, but rather suggests that the introduced oxygen-containing groups 

on the air-plasma-treated surfaces chemically mediate the freezing behaviour to slightly lower 

temperatures. The oxygen plasma experiments show that functionalization of graphene (here with 

oxygen-containing groups) can downshift the freezing temperature curve on graphene to slightly lower 

temperatures. 

 


19 
 

The second treatment we investigate is covalent functionalization of the graphene by F i.e. formation of 

highly hydrophobic fluorographene or “2D Teflon”.35 This is motivated by hydrophobicity often being 

linked to lower freezing temperatures.1 We fabricate this material by exposure of graphene/Cu and bare 

Cu references to a SF6 plasma (2 s and 10 s). Supporting Figure S3 confirms that this results in strong 

damage to the graphene lattice and covalent functionalization of the graphene with F towards 

fluorographene for the 2 s SF6 plasma.35 The corresponding freezing curves in Figure 3b of the 2 s SF6-

plasma-treated sample shows for graphene/Cu (solid light blue curve) a surprisingly similar freezing 

behaviour as on non-treated, as-grown graphene/Cu (solid black curve). This result in turn shows that 

even with a covalent functionalization the freezing behaviour of graphene does not necessarily change. 

This is quite noteworthy, as in contrast the 2 s SF6-plasma-treated Cu reference (dashed light blue curve 

in Figure 3b) shows a drastically different freezing behaviour with a very much higher freezing 

temperature interval already between –10 °C to –15 °C. Similarly, the 10 s SF6-plasma-treated 

graphene/Cu (solid dark blue) and the 10 s SF6-plasma-treated Cu (dashed dark blue) samples show 

drastically upshifted freezing behaviour. Based on XPS in Supporting Figure S3, we attribute this high 

temperature onset of freezing on SF6-plasma-treated Cu (2 s and 10 s) and on SF6-plasma-treated 

graphene/Cu (10 s) to formation of CuF2. Notably, CuF2 formation also results in a drastic change in 

water droplet sizes (Supporting Figure S12). The presence of comparatively still intact graphene during 

SF6 plasma (2 s) prevents formation of CuF2, while for longer SF6 plasma (10 s) treatments the graphene 

has been strongly destroyed, making room for CuF2 formation. The SF6-plasma experiments show that 

functionalization of graphene (here for F, 2 s plasma) can also leave the freezing temperature curve 

unaffected compared to untreated graphene. 

 

The third treatment that we apply to the graphene is wet chemical, non-covalent functionalization with 

PMMA particles that are persistently anchored onto the graphene.36 We achieved this by drop-casting 

and hot plate-hardening of PMMA in anisole on the graphene/Cu and bare Cu reference samples, 

followed by subsequent removal of hardened PMMA in acetone/isopropanol. This is well known from 

prior work to lead to persistent contamination of the CVD graphene with PMMA microparticles and 

nanoparticles, while the graphene lattice remains structurally perfectly intact (see also our 


20 
 

characterisation data in Supporting Figure S4).36 In the corresponding freezing data in Figure 3c we find 

that for such PMMA-functionalized graphene/Cu (solid green curve) this translates to a significant 

fraction of the water droplets already nucleating at between –25 °C and –30 °C, which is at a 

significantly higher temperature than for untreated, as-grown graphene/Cu (solid black curve). This is 

also reflected by the higher T10 temperature for PMMA-treated graphene/Cu compared to as-grown 

graphene/Cu (Table 1). We attribute this to the persistent PMMA particles to act as preferential 

nucleation sites for ice nucleation, as compared to the comparatively atomically smooth, chemical inert 

basal plane of non-treated, as-grown CVD graphene. This is also reaffirmed by the freezing data on 

PMMA-treated bare Cu (dashed green curve) which also shows a higher temperature onset of freezing 

(albeit less pronounced than for the PMMA-treated graphene/Cu). The PMMA experiments thus show 

that functionalization of graphene (here with PMMA particles) can also lead to a higher onset 

temperature of freezing compared to untreated graphene. 

 

Combined, the results in Figure 3 indicate that the here first observed freezing behaviour of water on 

graphene on a metal surface (Figure 2) can be modified by functionalization treatments. While for 

addition of oxygen-containing groups we observe a slight down-shift of freezing temperatures (air 

plasma in Figure 3a), for addition of polymeric residues we observe an up-shift of freezing temperatures 

(PMMA in Figure 3c). The former down-shift is suggested to be related to a change of chemical 

interaction of water with the introduced oxygen-containing groups, while the latter up-shift is suggested 

to be related to polymeric particles acting a preferential nucleation centres for ice nucleation. 

Interestingly for functionalisation with F, the freezing behaviour on graphene is not affected while on 

the Cu substrate it is strongly changed (SF6 plasma in Figure 3b). The observation that introduction of 

oxygen-containing groups (Figure 3a) can decrease freezing temperatures is in line with a prior paper15 

that reported a lower freezing temperature for oxidized graphene vs. pristine graphene on UHV Ir single 

crystals (note that possible freezing transparency between graphene/Ir vs. Ir was not studied in this ref. 

15). The results in Figure 3c on the effect of deliberate PMMA contamination to alter freezing behaviour 

via increased ice nucleation, links well with prior work on PMMA residues (and similar polymer 

residues) to have an significant effect on graphene wetting.8 Also, the results in Figure 3b regarding SF6 


21 
 

plasma (flourographene) are interesting compared to prior literature: While in our experiments we do 

not evidence any significant change in freezing behaviour for the fluorinated graphene on Cu, in contrast 

a prior study14 reported a lower freezing temperature for flourographene vs. pristine graphene on UHV 

Ru single crystals (note that possible freezing transparency between graphene/Ru vs. Ru was not studied 

in this ref. 14). This discrepancy suggests that substrate effects (Ru vs. Cu) could be important in the 

freezing behaviour of graphene, which is also in line with the importance of substrate effects in wetting 

behaviour of graphene.6,8 

 

We also want to discuss the limitations of our here presented study. We report hitherto not observed 

water freezing transparency of graphene/Cu vs. Cu under our conditions. We emphasize however that 

presence or absence of such freezing transparency is suggested to be contingent on several factors. As 

already shown here, a key factor is storage time in ambient and its linked adventitious carbon 

contamination build-up. We further however suggest that the type of substrate will be key to the 

observed freezing behaviour. While here freezing transparency on weakly interacting Cu is observed, 

more interacting substrates such as Ni6 or Fe as supports may result in different freezing behaviour on 

such supported CVD graphene. Furthermore, in comparison to wetting experiments, freezing 

experiments also have a much wider parameter space in terms of environmental conditions and 

experimental approaches.1 While wetting experiments almost exclusively use contact angle 

measurements, for freezing experiments the experimental pathways to bring the water to surface and 

induce its freezing are much more varied: We here employ freezing of pre-supported water droplets in 

a dry atmosphere. Freezing experiments can however also include other water delivery pathways such 

as condensation freezing from a highly humid atmosphere or droplet impingement freezing on pre-

cooled surfaces.1 The type of droplet delivery and cooling pathways have been prior shown to 

significantly alter freezing behaviour on various surfaces incl., e.g., widely studied SLIPS.1 

 

We therefore emphasize that our reported findings here are a first experimental impetus to explore the 

currently critically under-investigated experimental freezing behaviour on scalable graphene and other 

2D materials films, incl. the here found freezing transparency, in a similar fashion as wetting behaviour 


22 
 

of graphene and other 2D materials has been extensively studied in the recent past.2–92–6,8,9 We also note 

that such experimental investigations will provide key feedback to all the computational work that 

currently uses graphene as model surfaces for fundamental investigation of ice nucleation and on the 

hitherto overlooked freezing transparency.  

 

We also note that the here introduced freezing transparency concept not only links to prior work on 

wetting behaviour/wetting transparency of graphene, but in a wider realm also to other phenomena 

which rely on substrate properties to emanate through atomically thin graphene/2D materials:13 These 

include, e.g., graphene-substrate-assisted growth modes of extraneous films on graphene from vapour 

phase techniques10,11 as well as “remote” epitaxy in which epitaxial relations between a substrate and a 

deposited film are kept despite the presence of a sandwiched graphene interlayer.12 These processes 

similarly rely on a phase transition of an extraneous material (here water/ice) on an atomically thin 2D 

material sandwiched between the extraneous material and a bulk support, as explored here for water 

freezing on graphene/Cu. 

 

Conclusions 

 

In summary, we have experimentally studied the water freezing behaviour on scalable CVD graphene 

films on application-relevant Cu. It was found that as-grown CVD graphene on Cu can be “freezing 

transparent”, which is a term that we introduce to describe the phenomenon when freezing curves on 

graphene/Cu vs. bare Cu reference samples are identical i.e. the presence of graphene does not change 

the water freezing behaviour compared to on its bare underlying substrate. We explored the conditions 

in which such freezing transparency can be observed and also explored how chemical functionalization 

of the graphene films can result in changes to freezing evolution to lower/higher temperatures. Our 

work thus introduces the concept of freezing transparency of graphene on a metal based on the first 

experimental observation and also introduces scalable CVD graphene as an ultimately thin materials 

platform for control of ice nucleation and water freezing behaviour on a technologically relevant metal. 

 
 


23 
 

Author Contributions 

 

B.C.B. conceived the idea and supervised the work. Samples were prepared by B.F. and B.C.B. Freezing 

measurements were done by B.F. and T.S. on a set-up developed by H.G. Freezing data was analysed 

by B.F., T.S. and B.C.B. with assistance from E.R. Authors J.G., T.W., J.K., G.R., A.L., D.Z., C.D. and 

D.E. assisted with sample preparation, sample characterisation and data interpretation. The manuscript 

was written by B.F. and B.C.B. with input from all authors. 

 

Acknowledgements 

 

B.C.B., D.Z. and C.D. acknowledge funding from the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) 

under project 879844-HARD2D. B.C.B. also acknowledges partial funding to the work from the 

European Research Council (ERC) under project 101088366-HighEntropy2D. 

 
 


24 
 

References 

 

(1)  Kreder, M. J.; Alvarenga, J.; Kim, P.; Aizenberg, J. Design of Anti-Icing Surfaces: Smooth, 

Textured or Slippery? Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 1, 15003. 

(2)  Rafiee, J.; Mi, X.; Gullapalli, H.; Thomas, A. V.; Yavari, F.; Shi, Y.; Ajayan, P. M.; Koratkar, 

N. A. Wetting Transparency of Graphene. Nat Mater 2012, 11, 217–222. 

(3)  Shih, C.-J.; Wang, Q. H.; Lin, S.; Park, K.-C.; Jin, Z.; Strano, M. S.; Blankschtein, D. 

Breakdown in the Wetting Transparency of Graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 176101. 

(4)  Raj, R.; Maroo, S. C.; Wang, E. N. Wettability of Graphene. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 1509–1515. 

(5)  Li, Z.; Wang, Y.; Kozbial, A.; Shenoy, G.; Zhou, F.; McGinley, R.; Ireland, P.; Morganstein, B.; 

Kunkel, A.; Surwade, S. P. Effect of Airborne Contaminants on the Wettability of Supported 

Graphene and Graphite. Nat. Mater. 2013. 

(6)  Aria, A. I.; Kidambi, P. R.; Weatherup, R. S.; Xiao, L.; Williams, J. A.; Hofmann, S. Time 

Evolution of the Wettability of Supported Graphene under Ambient Air Exposure. J. Phys. 

Chem. C 2016, 120, 2215–2224. 

(7)  Prydatko, A. V.; Belyaeva, L. A.; Jiang, L.; Lima, L. M.; Schneider, G. F. Contact Angle 

Measurement of Free-Standing Square-Millimeter Single-Layer Graphene. Nat. Commun. 2018, 

9, 4185. 

(8)  Belyaeva, L. A.; Schneider, G. F. Wettability of Graphene. Surf. Sci. Rep. 2020, 75, 100482. 

(9)  Snapp, P.; Kim, J. M.; Cho, C.; Leem, J.; Haque, M. F.; Nam, S. Interaction of 2D Materials 

with Liquids: Wettability, Electrochemical Properties, Friction, and Emerging Directions. NPG 

Asia Mater. 2020, 12, 22. 

(10)  Dlubak, B.; Kidambi, P. R.; Weatherup, R. S.; Hofmann, S.; Robertson, J. Substrate-Assisted 

Nucleation of Ultra-Thin Dielectric Layers on Graphene by Atomic Layer Deposition. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 2012, 100, 173113. 

(11)  Bayer, B. C.; Aria, A. I.; Eder, D.; Hofmann, S.; Meyer, J. C. Resolving the Nucleation Stage in 

Atomic Layer Deposition of Hafnium Oxide on Graphene. arXiv:1909.00712 2019. 


25 
 

(12)  Kim, Y.; Cruz, S. S.; Lee, K.; Alawode, B. O.; Choi, C.; Song, Y.; Johnson, J. M.; Heidelberger, 

C.; Kong, W.; Choi, S. Remote Epitaxy through Graphene Enables Two-Dimensional Material-

Based Layer Transfer. Nature 2017, 544, 340–343. 

(13)  Kong, W.; Li, H.; Qiao, K.; Kim, Y.; Lee, K.; Nie, Y.; Lee, D.; Osadchy, T.; Molnar, R. J.; 

Gaskill, D. K. Polarity Governs Atomic Interaction through Two-Dimensional Materials. Nat. 

Mater. 2018, 17, 999–1004. 

(14)  Akhtar, N.; Anemone, G.; Farias, D.; Holst, B. Fluorinated Graphene Provides Long Lasting Ice 

Inhibition in High Humidity. Carbon 2019, 141, 451–456. 

(15)  Kyrkjebø, S.; Cassidy, A.; Akhtar, N.; Balog, R.; Scheffler, M.; Hornekær, L.; Holst, B.; 

Flatabø, R. Graphene and Graphene Oxide on Ir (111) Are Transparent to Wetting but Not to 

Icing. Carbon 2021, 174, 396–403. 

(16)  Lupi, L.; Hudait, A.; Molinero, V. Heterogeneous Nucleation of Ice on Carbon Surfaces. J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 3156–3164. 

(17)  Lupi, L.; Molinero, V. Does Hydrophilicity of Carbon Particles Improve Their Ice Nucleation 

Ability? J. Phys. Chem. A 2014, 118, 7330–7337. 

(18)  Zhang, X.-X.; Chen, M. Icephobicity of Functionalized Graphene Surfaces. J. Nanomater. 2016, 

2016. 

(19)  Bi, Y.; Cabriolu, R.; Li, T. Heterogeneous Ice Nucleation Controlled by the Coupling of Surface 

Crystallinity and Surface Hydrophilicity. J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 1507–1514. 

(20)  Wang, Y.; Guo, Y.; Guo, W. Screening Effect of Monolayer van Der Waals Crystals on Surface 

Deicing: A Molecular Simulation Study. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2020, 22, 27873–27881. 

(21)  Jiang, B.; Shen, Y.; Tao, J.; Xu, Y.; Chen, H.; Liu, S.; Liu, W.; Xie, X. Patterning Configuration 

of Surface Hydrophilicity by Graphene Nanosheet towards the Inhibition of Ice Nucleation and 

Growth. Coatings 2022, 12, 52. 

(22)  Kimmel, G. A.; Matthiesen, J.; Baer, M.; Mundy, C. J.; Petrik, N. G.; Smith, R. S.; Dohnálek, 

Z.; Kay, B. D. No Confinement Needed: Observation of a Metastable Hydrophobic Wetting 

Two-Layer Ice on Graphene. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 12838–12844. 


26 
 

(23)  Xu, K.; Cao, P.; Heath, J. R. Graphene Visualizes the First Water Adlayers on Mica at Ambient 

Conditions. Science 2010, 329, 1188–1191. 

(24)  Feng, X.; Maier, S.; Salmeron, M. Water Splits Epitaxial Graphene and Intercalates. J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 5662–5668. 

(25)  Zheng, Y.; Su, C.; Lu, J.; Loh, K. P. Room‐Temperature Ice Growth on Graphite Seeded by 

Nano‐Graphene Oxide. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 8708–8712. 

(26)  Whale, T. F.; Rosillo-Lopez, M.; Murray, B. J.; Salzmann, C. G. Ice Nucleation Properties of 

Oxidized Carbon Nanomaterials. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 3012–3016. 

(27)  Singla, S.; Anim-Danso, E.; Islam, A. E.; Ngo, Y.; Kim, S. S.; Naik, R. R.; Dhinojwala, A. 

Insight on Structure of Water and Ice next to Graphene Using Surface-Sensitive Spectroscopy. 

ACS Nano 2017, 11, 4899–4906. 

(28)  Biggs, C. I.; Packer, C.; Hindmarsh, S.; Walker, M.; Wilson, N. R.; Rourke, J. P.; Gibson, M. I. 

Impact of Sequential Surface-Modification of Graphene Oxide on Ice Nucleation. Phys. Chem. 

Chem. Phys. 2017, 19, 21929–21932. 

(29)  Häusler, T.; Gebhardt, P.; Iglesias, D.; Rameshan, C.; Marchesan, S.; Eder, D.; Grothe, H. Ice 

Nucleation Activity of Graphene and Graphene Oxides. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122, 8182–

8190. 

(30)  Tamtögl, A.; Bahn, E.; Sacchi, M.; Zhu, J.; Ward, D. J.; Jardine, A. P.; Jenkins, S. J.; Fouquet, 

P.; Ellis, J.; Allison, W. Motion of Water Monomers Reveals a Kinetic Barrier to Ice Nucleation 

on Graphene. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 3120. 

(31)  Sacchi, M.; Tamtögl, A. Water Adsorption and Dynamics on Graphene and Other 2D Materials: 

Computational and Experimental Advances. Adv. Phys. X 2023, 8, 2134051. 

(32)  Lin, L.; Deng, B.; Sun, J.; Peng, H.; Liu, Z. Bridging the Gap between Reality and Ideal in 

Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of Graphene. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118, 9281–9343. 

(33)  Kidambi, P. R.; Bayer, B. C.; Blume, R.; Wang, Z.-J.; Baehtz, C.; Weatherup, R. S.; Willinger, 

M.-G.; Schloegl, R.; Hofmann, S. Observing Graphene Grow: Catalyst–Graphene Interactions 

during Scalable Graphene Growth on Polycrystalline Copper. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 4769–4778. 


27 
 

(34)  Fuchs, D.; Bayer, B. C.; Gupta, T.; Szabo, G. L.; Wilhelm, R. A.; Eder, D.; Meyer, J. C.; 

Steiner, S.; Gollas, B. Electrochemical Behavior of Graphene in a Deep Eutectic Solvent. ACS 

Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 40937–40948. 

(35)  Robinson, J. T.; Burgess, J. S.; Junkermeier, C. E.; Badescu, S. C.; Reinecke, T. L.; Perkins, F. 

K.; Zalalutdniov, M. K.; Baldwin, J. W.; Culbertson, J. C.; Sheehan, P. E.; Snow, E. S. 

Properties of Fluorinated Graphene Films. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 3001–3005. 

(36)  Kratzer, M.; Bayer, B. C.; Kidambi, P. R.; Matković, A.; Gajić, R.; Cabrero-Vilatela, A.; 

Weatherup, R. S.; Hofmann, S.; Teichert, C. Effects of Polymethylmethacrylate-Transfer 

Residues on the Growth of Organic Semiconductor Molecules on Chemical Vapor Deposited 

Graphene. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 106, 103101. 

(37)  DeMott, P. J.; Möhler, O.; Cziczo, D. J.; Hiranuma, N.; Petters, M. D.; Petters, S. S.; Belosi, F.; 

Bingemer, H. G.; Brooks, S. D.; Budke, C.; Burkert-Kohn, M.; Collier, K. N.; Danielczok, A.; 

Eppers, O.; Felgitsch, L.; Garimella, S.; Grothe, H.; Herenz, P.; Hill, T. C. J.; Höhler, K.; Kanji, 

Z. A.; Kiselev, A.; Koop, T.; Kristensen, T. B.; Krüger, K.; Kulkarni, G.; Levin, E. J. T.; 

Murray, B. J.; Nicosia, A.; O’Sullivan, D.; Peckhaus, A.; Polen, M. J.; Price, H. C.; Reicher, N.; 

Rothenberg, D. A.; Rudich, Y.; Santachiara, G.; Schiebel, T.; Schrod, J.; Seifried, T. M.; 

Stratmann, F.; Sullivan, R. C.; Suski, K. J.; Szakáll, M.; Taylor, H. P.; Ullrich, R.; Vergara-

Temprado, J.; Wagner, R.; Whale, T. F.; Weber, D.; Welti, A.; Wilson, T. W.; Wolf, M. J.; 

Zenker, J. The Fifth International Workshop on Ice Nucleation Phase 2 (FIN-02): Laboratory 

Intercomparison of Ice Nucleation Measurements. Atmos Meas Tech 2018, 11, 6231–6257. 

(38)  Häusler, T.; Witek, L.; Felgitsch, L.; Hitzenberger, R.; Grothe, H. Freezing on a Chip—A New 

Approach to Determine Heterogeneous Ice Nucleation of Micrometer-Sized Water Droplets. 

Atmosphere 2018, 9, 140. 

(39)  Jung, S.; Dorrestijn, M.; Raps, D.; Das, A.; Megaridis, C. M.; Poulikakos, D. Are 

Superhydrophobic Surfaces Best for Icephobicity? Langmuir 2011, 27, 3059–3066. 

(40)  Murray, B. J.; Broadley, S. L.; Wilson, T. W.; Bull, S. J.; Wills, R. H.; Christenson, H. K.; 

Murray, E. J. Kinetics of the Homogeneous Freezing of Water. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2010, 

12, 10380–10387. 


28 
 

(41)  Pruppacher, H. R.; Klett, J. D.; Wang, P. K. Microphysics of Clouds and Precipitation. 1998. 

(42)  Bianco, G. V.; Sacchetti, A.; Ingrosso, C.; Giangregorio, M. M.; Losurdo, M.; Capezzuto, P.; 

Bruno, G. Engineering Graphene Properties by Modulated Plasma Treatments. Carbon 2018, 

129, 869–877. 

 


S1 
 

Supporting Information 

 

Supporting Methods 

 

Graphene CVD 

 

We employed 25 µm thick Cu foils (Alfa Aesar Puratonic 99.999%) as catalysts for graphene CVD in 

a custom-made hot wall tube furnace at reduced pressure (base pressure ~10-3 mbar), based a prior 

reported CVD recipe.1 The Cu foils were first pre-treated at 960 °C in 2000 sccm flow of Ar with 5% 

H2 resulting in ~14 mbar pressure in order to facilitate Cu grain growth and reduction of Cu-oxides 

from foil storage in ambient air. For graphene growth 50 sccm CH4 were added for 7 min, increasing 

the total pressure to ~15 mbar. After growth, the Cu foils were left to cool in Ar/H2 atmosphere by 

sliding the tube furnace’s hot zone from the samples. This recipe results in a closed film of high-quality 

graphene on Cu.1 Graphene-free reference Cu samples with the same Cu grain structure were prepared 

using the same processing with the exception of the CH4 exposure step. 

 

Functionalization treatments 

 

Air plasma. Samples were air plasma treated in a commercial plasma chamber (Atto from Diener 

electronic GmbH & Co KG, Germany). A plasma (at 50% power level of 40 kHz 0-200 W; 13.56 MHz 

0-300 W) was struck in ~0.5 mbar air with exposure of the samples to the air plasma for 2 s. 

SF6 plasma. For SF6 plasma treatment a PlasmaPro 100 Cobra (OXFORD Instruments) system was 

used with a pressure of ~0.05 mbar, a SF6 gas flux of 40 sccm and a bias of 21 V with RF = 18 W. 

PMMA. PMMA functionalization of graphene/Cu and annealed Cu samples was done by drop casting 

PMMA photoresist (200K, AR-P 642.04, Allresist GmbH, Germany) onto the foil samples and curing 

the PMMA on a hotplate at 100°C in air. Samples were subsequently put into acetone for 2 h and rinsed 

with DI water and isopropanol to remove the PMMA film, which is however known to be an imperfect 

process, resulting in persistent decoration of the graphene with PMMA micro- and nanoparticles.2 


S2 
 

 

Samples were stored in ambient air. 

 

Materials Characterisation 

 

Optical Microscopy and Raman Spectroscopy.3,4 Optical microscopy and Raman spectroscopy were 

conducted using a WITec alpha 300 RSA+ system with laser wavelength 488 nm, laser power 10 mW 

and spot size ~2 µm and in a NT MDT Ntegra Spectra system with laser wavelength of 473 nm. 

XPS. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed with a Specs XR50© 

high intensity non-monochromatic Al/Mg dual anode and an X-ray source Phoibos 100 energy analyzer 

(EA) with multichannel plate. The spectra were obtained at room temperature, an emission angle of 0°, 

a pass energy of 20 eV and using an Al anode with Kα radiation at 1486.6 eV. Data analysis was 

performed via CasaXPS. Calibration of the spectra was deemed unnecessary, as due to the high 

conductivity of the copper foils minimal sample charging was anticipated. All spectra were analyzed 

with an energy step width of 0.1 eV, though only every third data point is shown in the figures for 

improved clarity. 

 

Ice nucleation measurements 

 

Samples are measures ~24 h after the last process step unless otherwise stated. Samples are sprayed 

with MiliQfi (18.2 MΩ·cm) water by hand, using a spray bottle and fine nozzle creating a mist of fine 

droplets. This results in reproducible droplet sizes and densities on the samples overall. The samples 

are mounted onto a thermoelectric cooler (TEC; i.e., a Peltier element Quick-cool QC-31-1.4-3.7M) 

with a drop of paraffin oil for optimal thermal contact. The cooler sits directly on a water powered heat 

exchanger and is enclosed in an air tight container with a built-in glass window for samples observation 

with an optical microscope (Figure 1a). Temperature is controlled via a K-type thermocouple mounted 

directly onto the cooler surface with thermally conductive adhesive. The housing of the cryo-cell5 


S3 
 

allows for atmospheric control via two gas connectors which are used to flush the cell volume with dry 

nitrogen before every experimental run, substantially decreasing humidity. During a freezing 

experiment the Peltier element cools the sample at a steady rate of 10 K/min to –40 °C, at which all 

droplets have undergone freezing. Temperature and video are recorded via LabVIEW VI (virtual 

instrument) and stores as Video with temperature- and timestamp, plus a separate temperature log file 

for data processing.  

 

Freezing Data Processing 

 

Freezing experiments are recorded as video (20 fps) with temperature- and time stamp and separate 

temperature log file. Temperature is recorded in ~0.15 K steps, which is therefore our limit for 

temperature resolution in our measurements. The video is then analysed, either manually with the help 

of image processing software (ImageJ/Fiji6,7) by converting the video to an image stack and running an 

image difference operation (“stack difference”) before going through the stack frame by frame to extract 

individual freezing events, or with the help of an automated Python script. The algorithm in a first step 

extracts the drop location and size (diameter) from the first frame of the video. As the drops appear 

much darker than the copper background, only simple image processing is needed to extract this 

information. First, the image is converted to greyscale, blurred slightly to remove any contrast from the 

texture of the copper sheet and a threshold is applied to convert the image to a binary black-white image. 

In this state, only the drops should appear as black blobs while the copper sheet should be mostly white. 

To further isolate the drops, a morphological erosion operation is performed and the connected black 

regions that are large enough (in the number of pixels) are retained and assigned a label. From this the 

diameter and position is computed, assuming spherical drops and a region of interest (ROI) is drawn 

for each drop. At this point the user gets to check if the drop assignment was done correctly before the 

freezing event detection resumes. To detect freezing events the algorithm analyses the change in 

brightness between 2 subsequent frames. If inside one ROI, which was computed as previously 

described, a large enough absolute change in brightness occurs, this is detected as a freezing event. 

Together with the temperature log file the freezing temperature for individual freezing events is 


S4 
 

recorded. The output is then manually checked for irregular or double detection of freezing events as 

contrast change upon freezing may happen over a timespan of more than one frame. This raw data in 

form of droplet freezing events is converted to freezing fraction curves (0% to 100%) and interpolated 

between 0.1 K temperature steps with the condition that the freezing fraction is considered constant 

between freezing events. This results in freezing fraction curves that show a stepwise increase with 

decreasing temperature. These freezing fraction curves of different experimental runs are then averaged 

to give the displayed average freezing curves. A visualization of this process is shown in Supporting 

Figure S13. It should be noted that not all average freezing curves contain the same number of 

experimental runs and freezing events and therefore vary in their statistical significance which is 

reflected in the difference in standard deviation (error bands). T10, T25 T50 and T75 represent the 

temperature at which 10%, 25%, 50% and 75% of the droplets are frozen, respectively. The temperature 

values are extracted for each experimental run and then averaged to obtain the values in Table 1 and 

Supporting Table S1. The error values represent the standard deviation from the mean value. 

 

 

 
 


S5 
 

Supporting Figures 

 

 

Supporting Figure S1. (a) Optical microscopy and (b) Raman spectroscopic characterisation of 

as-deposited graphene/Cu (top) and annealed bare Cu (bottom) samples. The Raman spectrum in (b) 

clearly confirms that our CVD graphene films on Cu are almost exclusively monolayer and of high 

quality.1,3 Additional transfer experiments of the monolayer graphene films from the Cu to SiO2(90 

nm)/Si wafers (not shown) allow us to confirm via optical microscopy8 that the coverage of the Cu 

samples with monolayered graphene is >99% areal coverage. Raman also confirms the bare annealed 

Cu sample to be void of significant carbon deposits (beyond adventitious hydrocarbon adsorbates).3 

 


S6 
 

 

Supporting Figure S2. Raman spectra of graphene/Cu samples after 2 s air plasma, confirming plasma 

induced damage to the graphene via appearance of a pronounced defect-related D peak (~1350cm-1).3 

These defects are known to be readily decorated with oxygen-containing groups during the air plasma 

and when exposed to ambient air.9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


S7 
 

 

Supporting Figure S3. (a) Raman spectrum of graphene/Cu sample after 2 s SF6 plasma treatment, 

confirming plasma induced damage to the graphene via appearance of a pronounced defect-related D 

peak (~1350cm-1) and suppression of 2D peak (~2700cm-1).3 (b) Cu2p and (c) F1s X-ray photoelectron 

spectra of graphene/Cu (“Gr/Cu”) and bare annealed Cu samples after 10 s plasma (top) and 2 s plasma 

(middle) compared to as deposited graphene/Cu and bare Cu samples (bottom). See discussion 

paragraph below for XPS and Raman data interpretation. 

 

SF6 plasma treatment discussion. The Raman spectrum of graphene/Cu sample after 2 s SF6 plasma 

treatment in Supporting Figure S3a confirms plasma induced damage to the graphene via appearance 

of a pronounced defect-related D peak (~1350cm-1) and suppression of 2D peak (~2700cm-1)3 in line 

with partial formation of fluorographene.10 In Supporting Figure S3 panels (b) and (c), for all samples 

the Cu2p region consists of a doublet at around 932.4 eV and 952.2 eV matching with either Cu0 or 

Cu+. Indeed, the Cu LMM region (not shown) contains two peak maxima at a kinetic energy of 916.5 eV 

and 918.3 eV pointing to the presence of both Cu species.11,12 While all non-SF6-plasma-treated samples 

are void of any F signal, the SF6-plasma-treatment leads to formation of an organic fluoride species 

~688.5 eV (likely C-F) in the F1s region.10,13 For the graphene/Cu samples this is related to graphene 

reacting with F towards flourographene. For the Cu samples adventitious hydrocarbon deposits react 

with the F. Moreover, SF6-plasma treatment results in formation of CuF2, as evident from both the 


S8 
 

presence of a metal fluoride species ~684.5 eV in the F1s region and by the Cu2+ doublet and satellite 

feature.13,14 That said, the graphene layer appears to present a barrier against the fluorination of copper 

as the amount of CuF2 present in graphene/Cu SF6 10s is significantly lower than that of Cu SF6 10 s. 

In summary, the XPS data is consistent with the Raman data in showing incorporation of F into the 

graphene layer for SF6 plasma 2 s towards formation of flourographene.10  

 

 
 


S9 
 

Supporting Figure S4. (a) Optical micrographs of graphene/Cu (top) samples decorated with PMMA 

functionalization via deposition and subsequent removal of a drop cast PMMA layer.2 Large persistent 

PMMA deposits are visible on the surface in addition to the well-known nanoscopic residual PMMA 

nanoparticles from this treatment.2 Reference bare Cu (bottom) shows a similar amount of macroscopic 

PMMA residue after PMMA drop cast and removal. (b) Raman spectrum of graphene/Cu (top) sample 

decorated with PMMA, confirming the presence of PMMA functionalization on the CVD graphene and 

reference Raman spectrum of PMMA film15 (bottom). PMMA peaks visible in graphene/Cu Raman 

spectrum are marked with ‘*’. We note that the PMMA signal overlaps in the region of the D peak of 

graphene (~1350cm-1), therefore complicating interpretation. It is however well known that graphene 

does not structurally degrade from such PMMA functionalization.3 

 


S10 
 

Supporting Figure S5. Histograms of water droplet diameters for graphene/Cu (left panel) and bare 

annealed Cu (right panel). 

 

 

Supporting Figure S6. Dependence of freezing temperature on droplet diameter for as deposited 

graphene/Cu (right panel) and bare annealed Cu (left panel). Linear fit and slope (k) as guide for the 

eye. 

 
 


S11 
 

 

Supporting Figure S7. Freezing curves on (a) graphene/Cu as deposited and (b) Cu annealed as a 

function of storage time in ambient conditions from ~24 h to 1 month (24 h data replotted from Figure 

2). Panels (c) and (d) show respective plots of (a) and (b) with error bands representing their standard 

deviation. 

 


S12 
 

Supporting Figure S8. Freezing curves on (a) graphene/Cu as deposited and (b) Cu annealed as a 

function of storage time in ambient from ~2 h to ~24 h (24 h data replotted from Figure 2). Panels (c) 

and (d) show respective plots of (a) and (b) with error bands representing their standard deviation. 

 

 

 


S13 
 

 

Supporting Figure S9. Replot from Figure 3 with uncertainty bands from standard deviations as shaded 

areas added. (a) Freezing curves for air plasma treated samples (x-axis scale –18 °C to –36 °C). 


S14 
 

(b) Freezing fraction curves for SF6 plasma treated samples (x-axis scale –5 °C to –36 °C). (c) Freezing 

curves for PMMA treated samples (x-axis scale –18 °C to –36 °C). Graphene/Cu samples are 

represented by solid lines and Cu samples by dashed lines, respectively. All diagrams include freezing 

curves of untreated, as-grown graphene/Cu (black solid) and Cu (black dashed), replotted from Figure 

2. All curves are averages of several experimental freezing runs. 

 

 

Supporting Figure S10. Histograms of water droplet diameters for air-plasma-treated graphene/Cu (left 

panel) and air-plasma-treated Cu (right panel)  

 

 
 


S15 
 

Supporting Figure S11. Dependence of freezing temperature on droplet diameter for air plasma treated 

graphene/Cu (left panel) and air plasma treated annealed Cu (right panel). Linear fit and slope (k) as 

guide for the eye. 

 

Supporting Figure S12. (a) Histograms of water droplet diameters for SF6-plasma treated (2s top 

panels and 10s bottom panels) graphene/Cu (left panels) and bare annealed Cu (right panels). Showing 

very few and large diameter droplets for bare Cu SF6-plasma treated samples. 
 


S16 
 

 

Supporting Figure S13. Visual depiction of our method of freezing curve average calculation 

exemplary for the dataset for graphene/Cu SF6 plasma treated samples. For all four freezing curves 

(thin, faint curves), we average the frozen fraction value for each temperature value, resulting in our 

freezing curve average (thick, black curve). Individual freezing curves are calculated by interpolating 

between single droplet freezing events with a temperature step of 0.1 K. The freezing fraction is 

considered constant between freezing events in order to more accurately depict the actual measured 

datapoints, which leads to the stepwise increase of the freezing fraction with decreasing temperature. 

 
 


S17 
 

Supporting Table S1. T10, T25 T50 and T75 values and their standard deviations (ΔTxx) for graphene/Cu 

and bare annealed Cu samples after various storage times in ambient. 

 

 
 

T10/°C
ΔT10/°C
T25/°C
ΔT25/°C
T50/°C
ΔT50/°C
T75/°C
ΔT75/°C

Graphene/Cu as-grown
–30.1
± 2.0
–31.6
± 1.1
–32.4
± 0.8
–33.0
± 0.7

Graphene/Cu 2 h
–25.6
± 2.6
–28.1
± 1.7
–30.6
± 1.0
–31.8
± 1.2

Graphene/Cu 24 h
–29.8
± 0.6
–31.0
± 0.4
–31.8
± 0.6
–32.6
± 0.6

Graphene/Cu 1 week
–30.1
± 1.1
–31.0
± 0.7
–31.6
± 0.5
–32.2
± 0.3

Graphene/Cu 1 month
–28.9
± 0.6
–29.6
± 0.5
–30.6
± 0.5
–31.3
± 0.5

Cu annealed
–30.5
± 1.4
–31.6
± 1.1
–32.3
± 0.9
–32.9
± 0.5

Cu 2 h
–23.4
± 5.5
–28.1
± 1.3
–29.6
± 0.8
–30.4
± 0.7

Cu 24 h
–28.9
± 3.7
–31.4
± 1.2
–32.4
± 0.6
–32.9
± 0.3

Cu 1 week
–30.7
± 0.6
–31.9
± 0.9
–32.4
± 0.7
–33.1
± 0.5

Cu 1 month
–29.2
± 1.8
–31.2
± 1.5
–32.2
± 1.5
–32.9
± 0.7


S18 
 

Supporting References 

 

(1)  Fuchs, D.; Bayer, B. C.; Gupta, T.; Szabo, G. L.; Wilhelm, R. A.; Eder, D.; Meyer, J. C.; 

Steiner, S.; Gollas, B. Electrochemical Behavior of Graphene in a Deep Eutectic Solvent. ACS 

Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 40937–40948. 

(2)  Kratzer, M.; Bayer, B. C.; Kidambi, P. R.; Matković, A.; Gajić, R.; Cabrero-Vilatela, A.; 

Weatherup, R. S.; Hofmann, S.; Teichert, C. Effects of Polymethylmethacrylate-Transfer 

Residues on the Growth of Organic Semiconductor Molecules on Chemical Vapor Deposited 

Graphene. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 106, 103101. 

(3)  Ferrari, A. C. Raman Spectroscopy of Graphene and Graphite: Disorder, Electron–Phonon 

Coupling, Doping and Nonadiabatic Effects. Solid State Commun. 2007, 143, 47–57. 

(4)  Sadezky, A.; Muckenhuber, H.; Grothe, H.; Niessner, R.; Pöschl, U. Raman Microspectroscopy 

of Soot and Related Carbonaceous Materials: Spectral Analysis and Structural Information. 

Carbon 2005, 43, 1731–1742. 

(5)  Häusler, T.; Witek, L.; Felgitsch, L.; Hitzenberger, R.; Grothe, H. Freezing on a Chip-A New 

Approach to Determine Heterogeneous Ice Nucleation of Micrometer-Sized Water Droplets. 

Atmosphere 2018, 9. 

(6)  Abràmoff, M. D.; Magalhães, P. J.; Ram, S. J. Image Processing with ImageJ. Biophotonics Int. 

2004, 11, 36–42. 

(7)  Schindelin, J.; Arganda-Carreras, I.; Frise, E.; Kaynig, V.; Longair, M.; Pietzsch, T.; Preibisch, 

S.; Rueden, C.; Saalfeld, S.; Schmid, B. Fiji: An Open-Source Platform for Biological-Image 

Analysis. Nat. Methods 2012, 9, 676–682. 

(8)  Blake, P.; Hill, E. W.; Castro Neto, A. H.; Novoselov, K. S.; Jiang, D.; Yang, R.; Booth, T. J.; 

Geim, A. K. Making Graphene Visible. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2007, 91, 063124. 

(9)  Bianco, G. V.; Sacchetti, A.; Ingrosso, C.; Giangregorio, M. M.; Losurdo, M.; Capezzuto, P.; 

Bruno, G. Engineering Graphene Properties by Modulated Plasma Treatments. Carbon 2018, 

129, 869–877. 


S19 
 

(10)  Robinson, J. T.; Burgess, J. S.; Junkermeier, C. E.; Badescu, S. C.; Reinecke, T. L.; Perkins, F. 

K.; Zalalutdniov, M. K.; Baldwin, J. W.; Culbertson, J. C.; Sheehan, P. E.; Snow, E. S. 

Properties of Fluorinated Graphene Films. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 3001–3005. 

(11)  Miller, A. C.; Simmons, G. W. Copper by XPS. Surf. Sci. Spectra 1993, 2, 55–60. 

(12)  Vasquez, R. P. Cu2O by XPS. Surf. Sci. Spectra 1998, 5, 257–261. 

(13)  Struzzi, C.; Scardamaglia, M.; Reckinger, N.; Sezen, H.; Amati, M.; Gregoratti, L.; Colomer, J.-

F.; Ewels, C.; Snyders, R.; Bittencourt, C. Probing Plasma Fluorinated Graphene via 

Spectromicroscopy. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2017, 19, 31418–31428. 

(14)  Vasquez, R. P. CuF2 by XPS. Surf. Sci. Spectra 1993, 2, 155–159. 

(15)  Polymethyl Methacrylate Raman Spectrum, https://ramanlife.com/library/pmma/ 

 


